READABLE DATASET
================================================================================
Original file: book_1969_liewellyn_a_to_z_horoscope_maker_and_delineator_kp_red_it.json
Dataset number: 34 of 455
Format: valid JSON
Structure: Object / structured dataset
Original size: 1,415,431 bytes
Top-level fields: 11
Title: Book_1969_Liewellyn_A To Z Horoscope Maker And Delineator_KP red it
Creator: —
Date: —
Description: —

CONTENT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
METADATA AND OTHER FIELDS
  • title: Book_1969_Liewellyn_A To Z Horoscope Maker And Delineator_KP red it
  • creator: —
  • date: —
  • description: —
  • subject: —
  • identifier: —
  • source_folder: Surya Siddhanta XML
  • total_pages: 798
  • total_words: 230343
  • text_quality:
    • ocr_word_validity_score: 0.911
    • quality_tier: good
    • note: —

FULL TEXT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
A to Z
Horoscope ^Maker
and
Deliheator
By LI JOWELLYN GjSORGE
AN* AMERICAN TEXTBOOK
of
OENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
NEW DELHI #
SA^AR- PUBLICATIONS
Vc'<i Mansion : 72vJanpaih

Astrology is the Study of Life's Reactions
• tn Planetary Vibrations. — Lietvellvn' (ti-oree. ww
A4f tights reserved
Printed under arrangement -
with Llewellyn Publications
Libraiy of Congress Catalog (.lard Number: '**4-1 3 1 7
Ffcst Edition niO
Second Edition 1913
Third Edition 1923
Fourth Edition 1928
Fifth Edition 1935
Sixth Edition 1937
.Seventh Edition 1939,
Eighth Edition 1913
Ninth Edition 1946
Tenth Edition 1950
Eleventh Edition 1954
1 Twelfth Edition 1960
Published by N. K. Safer, Vir, Safer Publications New Berfii *
Reprinted by Hindustan b*tsei Prs.t, Delhi-7.

Editor and Publ'sher ol
VTHE A£T$OIXX*IGAL BULLETINA" since 1908
*» (Discontinued) ** *
and Author of the following standard worjts on astrology:
"A to Z HOROSCOPE MAKER AND DELINEATOR"
•Practical astrology* for everybody"
“The! ASTPpiOGER'S SEARCHLIGHT"
"YOU AND I ADD THE STARS"
“HOW PLANETS AFFECT YOU"
‘ASTROLOGICAL LECTURES"
"ASTROLOGICAL CALENDAR"
“ASTROLOGICAL CHAT^"
“MOON SIGN BOOK"
“ASTRO-ANALYSIS" ,
"POWERFUL PLANETS"
“ASTROLOGIAN OUTFIT"
“THE SKY IS tHE LIMIT"
"PLANETARY HOUR^BOOK".
"|TUDENT CHART READER”
‘‘MECHANICAL ASPECTARUfN
J'^TTAINMENT THROUGH 95>SM1C VIRRATtoSfS"
“GOLDEN BOOK t>F ItfceS^NSTRUCpON LETTERS”- j

Our Solar Systein
Relative Size of the Planets ojk! Thetr Orbits

INTRODUCTION
INTRODUCTION
NOW thatThe New Era is at hand — ihe dawtning of
the Aquarian Age — thousands under t.lje general title Of
Advance Thought are begiijuiing to respond actively to
the influence of “the water-bearer," and because this
advance guard of the Army ofjtTruth and I’eace requires
insight to the mysteries of Nature in order to best promote-'their cause of enlightenment', we take this opportunity to preretit for consideration and study the highest of all sciences, astrology. Highest, because when
rightly understood, it opens <the way clearly to an understanding of the manifestations of Nature through human
and mundane affairs.
The science of astrology is not confined to those of
technical training, for much of it can be learned by persons of ordinary education. But astrology is best acquired by those who have an inborn love of mystical
subjects, and who at "he same time possess an active
sixth sense faculty, that of intuition. A peculiar temper-,
ament like ’that of the metaphysically inclined, rather
than extraordinary schooling, is the particular requisite
of those who would become adepts in this branch of
useful investigation.
Astrology is taken from the Records of astral phenora-
.ena anji reduced to a science by observing the effects of
planetary influence, commencing with the history of man;
these observations being conjpiled andjrecordoJ bj some
of the brightest intellects ktrt>wn, both ancielit and modern. To test its reliability, its truths, and the advantages
it offtVs, requires dnly earnest, uhprejiidiced investigation. By it the ^equalities of humanity arc explained
and much.light is shed upon the path leading to improvement of conditions for all living beings.
.^Astrology was tbs first science known tp'man and' the
present age is beginning tti resize that it is fhS greatest,
.this parent of them all, Wjjh a knowledge of astrology
muqh of. the unknown becomes known, the mysterioPS
becomes plain and new, light J is shed in all directions.

QENKTHLIACfAt ASTROLOGY
Anyohe with ordinary* ability can Jearn much «f astrdP
<5gy„ It is no longer a difficult £tudy. ^Nothing.out of
the ordinary isr required to become acquainted with it.
With proper instruction 'and a rfcasoflable amount *of
effort one ctin learn to cast^a horoscope and read it so
that it becomes a guide regarding changes, health, mar-«
riage, business and all important affairs of.life.
There is not only pleasure but' also satisfaction’and
profit in the knowledge which altjologjf "gives. * Evfcn
a slight investigation of the science tends to make people
’broader in their views and more charitable toward their
fellow beings. Astrology is a subject which becomes
’•more and more scientific with age. As the number of
earnest investigators increases so does more and mere
conclusive evidence of its usefulness accrue. New facts
are constantly being presented for unbiaseS, truth-seeking minds to review, and if occasion offers, to use with
advantage. Nobody can rigfitly claim to possess ^
propef understanding* of astrology until they can cast
and delineate the horoscope of birth, and erect and read
a progressed chart.
The term ‘Ihoroscope” *is derived from the words,
‘•flora,” an hour, and “scopS,” to view : a view of the ,
heavens for a certain hour, especially, an hour as measured by the Sun. Formerly the word referred only to
the Ascendant, or rising degree in a chart, but now its
meaning is more general and has* reference Vo a"whole
figure or .map of the heavens at birth lime and is frequently referred to*as a nativity. A horoscope is correctly drawn only when erected in accordance with the laws
of Astronomy geocentrically applied? and such a {.chart
drawn by an astrologer is practically identical, from a
mathematical standpoint, with one erected from^he saftie
data in agy astronomical observatory in the world, but
its significance is egneeatad from all 'except Jfhose who atre
faifiijiar with the precepts of astrolegyi
The purpose of Astrology is not .to shodlder dff> re-*
SDpnsibilities to a -planet but,>qn the contrary, to learn Hy.<
planetary indi«ations»as they were affectipgtthe Earth*
and its atmosphere at the time of'birth (i. e., the fiaturc.

IMTEODIICrflON
.of •i'ibratfgns inbreathed by a riewl'y-born bate which
endow the tendencies' of character it will manifest)
whether undesirable traits and circumstances will result
from these influences, and to endeavor to develop in this^,
nature qualities which will insure an ex’hlted expression
o( life. Thus' we bring about' conditions and consequeift
events in harmony with the best testimonies contained
in the' native’^ horoscope, and ‘'through knowledge and
effort” consciously applied, improve the manifestation of
Nataire.»
• In’this forward movement for enlightenment astrology,
as of old, maintains a place in the front ranks of progress
as an agent for development. Through improved methods#for making>observations and more accurate systems
of calculating planetary configurations, astrologers are
able' to give better delineations and more useful advice
and information than ever before. More is now known
of -planetary influence and- human response because of
the greater number of .qualified investigators and finer
facilities for compiling and disseminating the facts.
* “To atop shott In any research that bid* fair to wffiea the gate*
of knowledge, td recoil from feac/if difficulty or adverse criticism,
Ig to bring reproach upon sciotoe."
•**-Slr William Crodks. ■

GENETHLIAfCAL ASTROLOGY
itUTSTRAfiONS
Ephemeris of the Planets’ Places* for
January 1821 ....
September 1884
December 1907
December 1910
Horoscopes ,
No. 1, Delineating the Chart 128
No. 2, Nativity of W. H. Chaney .... 132
No. 3, Natal Figure (The ftadix) .... 1^0
Not 4, lTogressed»Horoscope » 171
No. 5, Locality Chart (Change of Residence) . 607
Figure 1 : The 1947 Rose Bowl Classit *. - . £47
Figure 2: Heavyweight Championship* Prizefight,
Louis wersus Maurfello . .... 749
Figure 3: Heavyweight Championship Prizefight, •
Louis versus Walcott .... . 750
Figure 4: Fourth Race — Del Mar Turf . . 756
Relation of Signs and Houses 37
Retrogradatton
Illustrating the apparent, backward Movement of
the Planets . t1 57
Solar System, our
Tables oj Houses L
"Latitude 40, deg. north
Latitude J1 *ieg. north

INTRODnesriON
INDEX to' Eleventh -Edition
This hook is arranged in five parts, the ‘advantage of
this' division being obvious. Advanced students save-’
time in beingj able to turn at once to parts necessary fcr
reference without searching through the whole book, as
each hart is complete in itself.-: The subjects follow in
' logical sequence, enabling students to assimilate the
essential principles and’ methods, in the orderly manner
neci'ssai'y for practicaj "results, with the least expenditure,of time and effort.
New students should find the arrangement advantageous in that it conduces to concentration on one part of
the subject and the mastery of it before proceeding to
the next, thus making assimilation of each section easy
and interesting. The five steps constitute a complete
method of Practical, Modern Horoscope Casting and,.
Delineating.
Page
• INTRODUCTION 9 to 22
PART I: The Natal Horoscope 23 to 156
Philosophy and Technic erf Horoscope Making
with detailed Examples and Illustrations. A simplified, scientific, practical Method for casting the
Nativity. ,
PART II: The Progressed Chart . . . 157 tq 228
How to progress the Nat*} Horoscope for any
desired Year of Life to ascertain the Conditions
of.Li^e during that -Period. Application of Transits
to both Natal and Progressed Horoscopes. Illustrated by working Examples.
PART III: Delmeatio.ns for Horoscopes . 229' to 506
More than 506 Readings which^include the Indications of Planets, by Aspect, Sign and'House
Positions, Ikfth for Natab an& Progressed Horoscopes. -Special Attention if given to the ascendSign ^as related to- ''Personality, Physical .
° Appearance and Me,t\Vil Tendencies, to assist

OENBTHHACAL ASTROLOGY
Students in determining tlfs true Ascendant 'of
uncertain Birth Times. A large. Chapter -on the'
' Influence of Transits.
'PART IY : Rectification qf the J3irtK Time •. 507 to 531
For rectifying Approximate Birth Times* For UnKnown Times. Tables and Examples for simplifying the Process of Ratification.
PART V : Important Subjects for Additional Stuay,
Parts I, II, III and IV form a comprehensive
Treatise on Genethliacs. Part V is a "book in
itself, containing matter not generally included in
such texts, along these lines: Symbology of the
Planets, Astrological Vocabulary, Attributes of
the Zodiacal Signs, Dictionary of Astrological
Terms, Your Best Location, Twins, Sow to Use
the Midnight Ephemeris,.Time Factors (explain-,
ing the different kinds of Ijme), Countries and
Cities (list of) as Influence* by the Signs, Partiling Aspects, Their date and time in horoscopes,
Time Key or Measure of Time, Crificaf Degrees
and Exaltations, and-r-
"The Pre-Natal Epoch”. 679 to 701
Research MetHods for Astrological Students: An
Introduction to the -Principles of Statistical Analysis as Applied to -Astrological Resesfich, by
Donald A. Biadlley . . . .... 704 to 732
Picking. Winders : A Test of Astrological Skill.
The Principles and Practice of Contest Analysis;
by Donald A. Bradley ...... 7^3 to 755
TABLE OF CONTENTS: . . .» 791
In addition to the Indexes at beginning of each
Parf, a detailed TaWe of Contents isjisted alpha*
,be ically.for immediate reference..
Illus^aiicms . * 12

INTRODUCTION
PREFACE
' The ’ word, astrology, is derived frcpn two Greek
words, “astra,” ? star, and "logos,” logic or reason. Jt
literally implies the doctri; e and law as shown by the
stars or planets. Astrology* is the science which defines
the action of celestial bodies upon animate and inanimate
objects, and their reaction to such influences. It is the
parent of astronomy. Originally, all who studied
th;; sta/s werp astrologers. The antiquity of astrology is
such as to place it among the very earliest records of humaft learning. Later, astrology and astronomy were onescience, but the latter now treats only of distances, magnitudes, masses, compositions, motions, speed, etc., anc
is founded upon observations made with various instruments; therefore astronomy may be termed a purely objective science, concerned as it is with the outer expressions of other worlds, (with their form or body,)
while astrology may be considered as subjective, dealing
with the influence of ,the life within the form and its
effect upon surrounding bodies, the Earth and its inhabitants in particular and so may properly be termed, Th£
Study of- Life’s„Reactions to Planetary Vibrations. The
making of a horoscopal figure is an astronomical process ;
the reading of the chart is astrological.
Astrological science is generally broadly divided into
five great branches, namely: Medical Astrology, or
- Astro- Pathc logy, is devoted to diagnosis, healing and
prevention of physical and mental ailments by knowledge gained from a horoscope. HippocrateS,* who has
been justly named the Father of Medicine, declared, “A
physifian cannot safely administer medicine if he be unacquainted with astrology,” which simply means that in
the absence of kndwledge of first principles for guidance,
the application, pt remedies, however good thev may be,
is flpt to be guesswork. Fortunately for the public at
large, there are many, of the new, ^chool of physicians and
sergeons v/ho do understand astrology and who, are using
this knowledge with, gratifying results,

GENETHLIAEArL ASTROLOGY
Astro-Meteorology is fhe art of predicting the* weather*
ffrom planetary aspects. This branch is "again "becoming
a popular stu^y and haS been “reduced t<a a ma’rvelous*
4“gree “of accuracy by a number. of’ Researchers. It is
not at all associated with tlse methods used in common
alTnanacs and by the Government Weather*Bureau. It
is only a matter of time, however, when nations generally will recognize this information and ‘incljide ■ it in
their present calculations, thus. making their system
more practical, serviceable and efficient.*
* Judicial Astrology relate^ to the forecasting of' the
principal events which will come to pass in a country
■, and conditions which will prevail in the land. For instance, the financial panic in the fall of* 1907 was predicted by the progressed Moon in the U. S. Government’s
horoscope coming by progressed motion tc^an opposition
of the radical and progressed Uranus, the Moon being
in the house of money in thd national chart. Students
of State Astrology, gs this branch is sometimes called,
not only foresaw but expected a financial panic. Here
■"is another instance concerning the use of Judicial Astrology: The Japanese were very proficient in thte brafich
when they h;d official Court astrologers, and, in connection with the war against Russia (1904-5) while gen^
erals and statesmen everywhere were predicting success
for the Russian arms, astrologers unanimously declared
that Japan would be successful. The Japanese, themselves, through their knowledge of astrUogy," never*
sought, a battle except on a day that Would be good for
them witfi’tjie restth’that tlgey were astoundingly victorious in spite of superior forces. The Japanese government then used astrology as a necessary feature bin the
successful administration of its affairs, but soon afterward abolished court astrology. It & only a question
of time yhen the*United States and other nations will
find astrology indispensable for art order, ly arrangement
artd^ conduct of affairs in harmony .with natural laws.
Rapid advancement is bsingf made in this’ branch ttf thb
science, and through it the S^flus.ice of ati’intra'-Meroqc*.
i&f planet (already ^named Vulcan) is Ijeipg. felt eand u
recognized. Astronomers* have«*iot yet been successful

INTBOPPgriON
IT.
in locating Vulcan with.the telescope, nor die} ostronpmy
• for'that matter locate the planet Uranus until long after
•its influence h^d jseen learned by astrologers, and .it was
eventually found in the exact degree of the zodiac as
predicted lay them. Likewise id the discovery of Plutd?
At about th># same time thaf.astronomers were noticing
the perturbations of Neptune by means of its variations
on th^ir photographic charts, Astrologers were noticing
otherwise? unaccounted for influences in charts which
seemed to focus^at abo'yt the center of the sign Cancer.
HowevCr, the *positioji of the big, fixed star, Wasat, in
(hat. location complicated the investigations of astrologers by causing peculiarities^ to be assigned to it, in absence of ocular proof of the presence of another body
there. In fact,. it is strange that Pluto was not “discovered” before March 12, 1930.
Horary Asteology predicts events ana conditions as
they are foreshadowed by a map of the heavens at the
tirile a question of serious import is submitted to ■ ad
astrologer; or the timta when a clearly defined e$ent,.
thought, idea or inspiration occurs to a person ; .or the
1 time when a proposition is advanced to them and they
are*earne5tly desirous of knowing what the outcome will
be.
Genethlialogy, or Natal Astrology, is directly concerned with the bir^h of a beiijg into physical expression. Froi» a chart of the planetary system cast tor thd
tnomenti dat4 and plactf of birth, can be read the character, temperament, mental tendencies, physical peculiarities and ailments, together wjth much »ther information .
relating to the person and events which will affect the
life to jiny important extent.
It. is to this last-named branch of astrology, through
the Geocentric ^ystem now generally used, that we
direjt the attention of students through, the pages of
this bdok.
.^"his^is a tftpst important*part of Astrology and should
be nfastesed before the other* brashes are attempted.
Tty-become thoroughly faTninar with the effect of plane.-*
%ry InQudhdfcs'upon hurpan beings ^pne rrfbst test the*

18 € GENETHLIAC/.L ASTROLOGY ‘
rultfs given by applying them to his own experience?, or
t<j the events which transpire in the lives of others who
are well known. In this way only, can we decide for
»ourselves whether or not the claims of astrology agree
with conditions and. occurrences which are known to be
undeniable facts to us. '
Eventually astrology 'will render valuable aser /ice in
the important matter of human procreation. „
The few opponents of this science are invariaoly persons who know practically nothing of it and cannot prove
any of their arguments by ftie science itself, while on the
other hand, those who advocate its . study have made investigation and are prepared to demonstrate the proofs
of their claims not alone by word of mouth, but in black
and white, mathematically.
, As editor of “The Astrological Bulletins” magazine for
mojt than thirty years, I am in position to sfate
from daily experience that astrology is making rapid
strides forward. More and more it is being added to the
curriculum of progressive business and professional people. The time has arrived for the masses as a whole to
take an inteYest in the subject seriously and practically.
Astrology has a grander, greater, nobler mission now
than ever before in history. It ser.ves, not as a means
for escaping or evading undesirable conditions, but to
shed light and inspiration on life, its bea8ty and its
possibilities. It is an aid in facing condinons torrectly
and making proper adjustments, not according to material appearances, but with,1; a higher concept based upon
knowledge of spiritual values.
As to the method to pursue in ^his study, I would
suggest that you become thoroughly familiar with the
symbology befobe attempting the protsess of erecting a
chart, .otherwise you '-(fill be in the dilemma of knowing
•hpw to majee a chart but unabl* to. read it. After one
has leatji^d f:he symbols of the signSj placets 'and aspects,
and understands their tcndlncies.and characteristics," it
is then proper to cast your>my« hojoscopt, studying‘i.t.?s
u whole, lo^g and ^arefully/By so doing^cyi will bg able
to judge whether br no ( you have made any errt>r in the

INTRODUCTION
is
■york, judging by the knowledge of your 'own ‘experiences. Mathematically, astrology is a science, . arftl
therefore if yoi t have made no*mistakc in»your hOroscopal
calculations th® resalts obtained will agree in a vary
astonishing manner with the facts aS von -know them.
Frocure the birth date offthose whose lives present
some special feature; note birth dates from biographical
slgftches of persons celebrated for various gifts or
achievements* take the nativities of your relatives and
friends, as they are all valuable examples lor comparison
and study. You will be surprised (at first) to find hoi^#
the life story of every being corresponds to the positions
and relations of heavenly bodies at time of birth.
The real secret of successful horoscope reading depends not less on the correct casting of a chart than
upon the ability to judpe the testimonies therein by
having first become familiar with the nature of all !he
elements. The charsctcristics <*f a planet must be
blended with the nature of the house and tendencies of
the sigp it occupies, in relation to the quality of th#
aSpect ft beholds so that the combination will reveal the
truth. It is the purpose of thfe book to assist the investigator to read a horoscope dorrectly, as well as to cast«it
properly.
We aK "free” according to our wisdom, and we are
"fated” in* proportioft to our lack of understanding.
Astrology teaches when to expect changjng. circumstances in life and their natjre; by itftrne may prepare to
manipulate, transform and improve so-called "adverse”
conditions before «they appear <end manifest better responses than otherwise. Our object as to present the
subject of astrology in such a manner that many of the
valuable truths contained within it? vast domain may
take a useful* active and pre^hinenj part in assisting
those who are participating in the present forward njdve-
*went, thils njakinf for still greater advancement toward
individual ‘excellence, cfevelhpment and expansion-^
materially, rftenta!|w and jfhysically — through conscious
co^operatian .with Natural Law indicated by the •safersysteih. That law creates conditions which provide

QENETHLIAC^L ’A8TBOLOGT
opportunities for us to ‘rise above the common illusions
of life by spiritual interpretation and finer reactions.
5f from these pages the'reader guns but a small part
of the pleasure and practical ‘benefit the author has derived from the study of astrology, I will feel well repaid
for thus presenting the results of investigations and
practice which have extended over many yehrs.
Jk
1 — Llewellyn Grorgt.
' No man la worth his salt who is not ready at all time* to rlitt
his Mody, to rlsB hla weTl-belnj, to risk his life, In A great cause.
•»* —Theodore Boofcvett .

INTRODtlCTION
A,&T R O L 0 G Y
Astroldgjf Ifl The Science of Life'o Reactions
To Planetjiry Vibrations
Astrology, as the interpreter of Nature, shows that
the world is conducted according to a well defined plan,
tlytt everything is arranged with wonderful 'order, duly
timed with marveloui precision and effected with unerring accuracy. Nothing happens by chance; there are no
accidents in the divine plan; and in reality there is no*
discord, for Nature recognizes no distinctions and works
only for progress through a refining process which some*
tjmes destroys only to reconstruct with improvement.
As students advance in the study of astrology they realize that we .ire here for certain, definite, natural purposes,
each in his place, according to an orderly or cosmic plan ;
With opportunities to produce certain results, but it
remains for us to determine the quality of those results
by refining our reactions to planetary influence.
* Thus? it is seen that although we are subject to the
various seasonal changes and are affected by planetary
influences, yet we are ndt altogether and absolutely
creatures of predestination or fate, 'for it remains with
us to improve or neglect our, , opportunities ; to manifest
the influence in a coarse or in a refined manner.
Therefore, it Behooves us to study Nature that, we may
consciously co-operate wi{h her in* ordes to produce
higher and finer results from the various causes set in
motion through ust.
We do not change the law: we do^not hold Nature in
abeyance nor «have it at our beck and call as* may suit
oar personal fancies, but we ca*' improve our manifested
response to it byimproving oui* thinking, our ha offs an'd
Id t tons.
w nether you have a<so-rfalled fortunate or unfortunate
planet for*your significator, %ou will have opportunities
for expression in yoifff^particular environment which no

genethliacal' astrology
pther individual will hltve, and if we t wish to make the
world a. better place to live in, we, must begin by refining
our own everyday expressions, or response to urges
frCm withinj whicji owe their . origin to 'planetary vibratiocs.
The study of astrologyvshows us when fertain influences are operative, but our own reactions, mentally,
physically and spiritually, determine to a large extent
the quality of the results as affecting us abd our inimPd-
,iate surroundings. Thus astrology becomes the mpst
' important of all studies, and its precepts should lie
% taught in every school.
Ever consider this L'nlven*' as “One ,ltvlng Being. wifh.one
materia! substance and one spirit^
Contemplate t$e fundamental causes, stripped of ^11( disgujses.
Consider well the nfiture ‘of things, distinguishing between
matter, cjusfe. purpose. — MnrcuB 'Aurelius.

■ART I, THE hUTAL CHART J8
A to Z Horoscc/pe Maker and Delineator
PART I
77/E NATAL CHART
,“The highest of ail learning is the knowledge of the'
stars. To trace their course is to untangle the threads
of the mystery of life from the beginning to the end*
If we. could follow them perfectly nothing would be
hidden from us.v — Henry Van Dyke.
(Prom page 21 of “The Story of the Other Wise Man")
Ipdex to Part I on nejtt pag$.

24 GENETHUACAL ASTROLOGY
INDEX to Part ,1
Page
Aspects 88
•Analyzing Them, 88; Adverse Aspects Not Always
Detrimental, 112; In Relation to the Natal Chart,
103; Solar Aspects, 105; Lunar Aspects, 10, S;
Inter-Planetary (Mutual) Aspects, 106; Tables of
Aspects, see Tables, 712 and Illustrations, 12.
Chart of Birth (Natal Horoscope) 53
Casting the Chart, 53; Pl&cing the Planets in the
Chart, 80; Studying the Horoscope, 120.
Houses of the Horoscope . • 32
Nature of each of the 12 Houses and Things They
Represent, 33; Relation of Signs and Houses, 37.
Logarithms, Explained and Illustrated ... '82
Noon Marks, A simplified Method for Finding
Planets’ Places at BirtH Timj . _ 75 '
Orbs, Planetary-Showing Degree of Influence
Illustrated by Tables . 95
Planets, Their Astrological Nature and Influence . 42
Pars Fortunae, (The "Part of Fortune”) '. . ' , 8/
Reading the Horoscope * ...... 123
The Tendencies They Bestow; Their Planetary
Rulers; Influence in the Horoscope.
Time Changes, Necessfcry in HoroscopecWork 66
Zodiac, jDsfiried and Illustrated *1$

• PABT 1, THB NATAL CHART 25
THE ZODIAC
The Zqdiac is.a circle of space surrounding tfic Eai$h.
It may be imagined as albeit in the* heavens about 15
. degrees wide in which the {fianets travel. It is the Sun’s
apparent path, called the ecliptic. The zodiacal circle is
divided. into' twelve; parts, each part containing 30 degTfjfcs oi opace called, the Signs of the Zodiac. Thus a
sign ^ a one-twelfth 'division of the zodiacal circle and
is defined as containing 30 degrees of celestial longitude:
* 12 signs each measuring 3Q degrees constitute the circle*,
of the zodiac or 360 degrees. In this circle the planets
travel each in its own orbit, one outlying beyond the.'
ot^hcr. The zodiac, then, is a circle divided into twelve
signs through which the planets travel or transit from
west to east, going through one sign after another in
their order from Aries to Pisces. Although the zodiac
is generally referred to as a circle it is, in fact, elliptical.
Note the illustration op page 8. ,,
Each sign possesses a certain specific influence of its
own.
, The motion of the Earth' around the Sun once a year
causes the Sun to appear to pass through one of the 12
.signs each month! Its influence, according to location,
determines not alone the seasons but the general n attire
1 and character of persons born at that time.
The planets also, as they travel around '‘the’ Zodiac,
exert an influence according to their separate natures
and ip accordance .with the quality of the aspect* which
they form.
Zodiacal Signs
Note : When’ placid
in a chart these signs
are always opposite
t^> each’ other, # as
shoj^p here.'
Libra
.Scorpio ®l
Sagittarius t
Capricorn, VJ
V Aries
X • Taurus
’H Gemini
3> Cancer
SI Leo .
* Vifgo

OENETHLIA(3aL astrology.
Symbols of Sign* and Their .Planetary Rulera
There is a corresponding vibration, .a harmonious condition, as it werg, existing between the zodiacal signs
aryl the planets. Each sign,*is, therefore, given a planet
which is termed its “ruler." Mars, Venus and Mercury
each rule two signs. Study the following .table :
4 Mars rules _ V Aries and - "I Scorpio
9 Venus rules S Taurus add ...... ** Libra
t> Mercury rules II Gemini and "I Virgo
1 Moon rules S Cancer
O Sun rules £1 Leo
M Jupiter rules t Sagittarius
b Saturn rules VJ Capricorn
V Uranus rules — jVquarius
V Neptune rules M Pisces
Ct North Node ; U South Node; © Pars Fortunae.
The sign ruled by Pluto is not yet scientifically determined. Although several signs have berti progosed for
consideration, Scorpio mgets most of the requirements.
, Although tlie Moon is a satellite, revolving around
the Earth, in astrojogy it is spoken of and referred to as*
a planet to avoid making the distinction every time it
id referred to along with'the other planets, aipd because
its rays are extremely important.and strong in addition,
to its power of collecting the vibrations of other planets
and reflecting them to the Earth. Likewise, for convenience the Sun is termed a*planet although it does not
traverse the.zodiac iij .the same mapner as the planets.
The Sun may bg called the center or pivot of this* (our)
planetary system for in actuality each planet has an opbit
of its ov^n in which it travels and circle^ the Sun. (See
the diagram'on pa^e 8.$t
The panels have chiracteristicd*^hich are^known by
the effects Ihdr vibration| produce on the human, ajiim^l, •
vegetable and mineral kingdoms. * As eaplt planet- has
mjalities which agree or comciUe with those of one*of*
moiC of the %igns, for convenience they «rt ealjed- the**
“rulers” of those signs. “*

PART I. THE tJATAL CHART
"She planets are no*, arbitrarily 'allocated to signs as
.“rulers’.’ but are in each, case sq designated by virtue. of
similitudes. Vo? instance, although the Moon ig but a
satellite oS the Earth,11 it possesses powers ^sufficient £b
dignify it by the name of planet. Its own inherit
influence is found to be such that the Moon is termed the
’’ruleW’ of the, sign Cancer whxh is credited with influence^that coincide with those of the Moon. Thus it is
seen»that the word “ruler” although a convenient term,
is it misnomer: “What is really implied is that the influences of a certain planet harmonize or coincide with
those of one or more of the signs which afford a freer
medium for its expression.
r. Difference Between Signs and Houses
On erecting a chart or horoscope, we draw a circle
and divide it into 12 spaces : These spaces are termed
htftues upon which we write the signs and place tKe
symbols of the planets- 'according to their location’ at a
specified time.
Each house has a distinct nature with which the stu
dent should become thoroughly familiar.
The houses are numbered from or\e to twelve. Th<
first one jsjpcated ^ust under the Eastern Angle (wher
facing soufh) or left hand side of the chart, and the aigk
that is put on it is called the Ascendant or Rising Sign
This is because the Earth appears to be stationary anc
the signs seem to revolve abound it from eaSt to west
A new degree of the zodiac appears to ascend on th«
easterq horizon eve/y four minutes and a. new sign tc
rise every two Hours.
The Ascendant
Although thl: signs,are apparently Constantly ascendirqj, the houses neyer change their locatiofls. »The first
one js*always*just under the Eastern Angfe ofjhe chart
regardless of what sjgn tjnaybe passing over it.
_ A” most important pyt of the 3rork it? astrology fs
locating the Ascendant (rising sign and degsee). The

OBNBTHLllCgtL ASTBOLOQ?
Rising Sign and its* Ruler, together yith apy planets,
w.hich may be in the Fjrst Hopse, have an influence oij
the nijnd and reveal to some extend th< characteristics
«*f the native, and the general irsiications of. the life..
The ascendant is always that point on the eastern
horizon where the Sun ^appears to rise in the rooming.
It is the point where the signs and degrees of .the zodiac
appear to rise or ascend in their sequence. Prd^erly,
the ."ascendant” is that particular sign ind degree 'exactly on the eastern horizon in the* latitude of the birth
place at the moment for which the chart is. cast. *
This apparent rising of the signs is due to the Earth’s
rotation on its axis at a rate of speed which causey one
degree of the zodiac to appear to ascend to the eastern
horizon every four minutes. As there ane 30 degrees to
a sign, it requires approximately two hours for a complete sign to pass the horizon, to be followed in this
order by each of th« succeedingosigns until in a complete
day of 24 hours every degree of the zodiac will have been
momentarily on the ascendant. By th* use pf Sidereal*
Time, (into, which terms birth time converted),* and
"Tables of Houses, the eiact degree and sign passing the
ascendant may be ascertained for any latitude.
, By what has been said concerning the rising of a
zodiacal degree every four minutes, the necessity of
correct birth data becomes strikingly apparent:
By careful study of tjie foregoing it will become
evident that because Aries is the first sign of the zodiac
it is by no iheans always on the firs* cusp of a chart# The
signs are apparently constantly, revojving, and at different times of theaday, different signs and degrees are on
the ascendant ana other house cqsps, hence the necessity
of knowing the«birtl%time. The chapter on "Sickreal
Time” will. explain how to find*the ascending sign in
Tables of .Houses and wher^ to plaSe caqh -sign gropfrly
in every chart.
'* The influence of* plaints in the zodiacal signs affert
character principally, accordin£*to which signs ’thqy oc-

‘ PABT L THE NA7AX, OHABT
fcupjed oh' date of birth. ^Knowing, the characteristics or
what the hatural tendencies will be, as shown thereby,
gives one the opportunity to improve weak traits, or to
eliminate undesirable ones as the, case requires. TO learn
which sign ^ach planet occupied at bhrth, it is necessary to refer to an EphemeriS (a record of the planets'
daily positions) for that date and time.*
WWm a child is born the magnetic currents set in
motion by that particular Ascendant, stamp themselves
on (he individual by setting a definite trend to the chemical and cellular activities, and throughout the whole life
the qualities of that Ascend&nt will be seeking expression. You will find people looking out of their particular window, as it were : An Aries person will look out on
the 'world from an Aries standpoint, the Taurus individual .will see things according to his sign, and so on
through the twelve divisions.
in a general sense, it may be considered that the pirtb
month sign (or Sun sign) denotes tlvl individuality, while
the Ascendant denotes the personality.
Individuality, «as indicated by the Sun Sign, consists
of inherent tendencies, capacity and abilities or thos£
inner qualities by which the individual knows himself. ‘
Personality may 6e considered as the external expressions whiqh characterize the person ; that which dis1iinguishes hitn from ethers and identifies him.
By what you have just read abou? the birth-month
sign (Sun sign) and the Ascending sign, you are aware
that they provide tvgo ways of studying people. Neither
one alone completely or accurately desgribes a person.
There are approximately two hours every day (about
sunrise) when the birth month sign is Tin the Appendant,
thus giving a Rouble influence <jh that sign, showing a
pronounced blend of individuality and personality. *
.^ReagHng* flje chapter entity, "Influence of the Sun
in tWe Twelve .Signs’" shows Jhat people born in*different
* Full Informs tl«n of Ephemerides and 'Sables ofaBouaea will %e
found in* the Catalogue of Llewellyn Publications, Ltd.

OKNETHUACAL ASTROLOGY
months differ considerably as individuals. Reading thd
"Influence of the Ascending Sign!” givtfs information of '
how people igould exprtss themselves, according to the’
%jgn ascending at birth.
•The Sun requires one month to apparently transit
through the 30 degrees of a sign ; during that time the
earth has made 30 rotations on its axis. Zt is onlV as a
matter of convenience that astrology places th£ eatth in
the center of a chart and assume^’the Sup to be transiting
in the earth’s orbit.
Let us consider that period from March 2’lst to April
19th when the Sun is said to be transiting through Aries:
All persons bom in that period are Arians, but as the
earth rotates on its axis each day a new sign appeart on
the Ascendant every two hours, consequently some
Aries-month individuals are born at a tinfc of day when
^ries was ascending (which .would increase their Arian
qualities) while others born two hours later would* be
Arians with Taurus ascending*' those born two hours
after that would be Arians with Gemini ascending; and
so on. Each person looks out on the* wcJrld through *
different colored windows, as it were? Thaf we *see
things from a'different angl(e” is an astrological aphorism.
You may learn, a great deal about any one just by
studying their birth datq sign (Sun sign).
You may acquire additional information 3'f (hem by
study of their ascending sign. ,
You may learn* still morf about that person when you
read the influence of the planets as they were located
in the different signs at time of birth. t •
The house positions of the planets kt the time of Jrirth
will provide further revelation of eventj and their mundane interests and conditions.
* The prfoclpal, difference between the diagram on page 8 an* a.
horoscope, Isr that the Son n.d file Earth are transpose*!. The
Barth being pictured In the center, the Son apparently traitytlng
the Earth's true path through One 'sign, each month. With tht)
Barth lo center rotating oiv Its axis, the relation of the. eigne,
around It are easily ascertained by weans of a Table of Bouses ,

PART 1. THE y/VTAL CHART
All the signs of the zodiac? are' good; one sign is
squally a., good as .•\nocher.
The progressive student will do well to i emember that
‘destiny” properly m&ms whatever is possible unto ui,
and “fate” ’leans the external circumstances which appear in our pathway to be manipulated and eventually
overcame through effort and • nderstanding. "He who
wouH slay dragons must first learn their habits.” To
ove tome fate we must first know our fate. Astrology
points the way to that desirable information.
« Astrology is not a doctrine of fatalism. It provides
us with an inventory of the working materials with
which we were endowed at birth in the form of tendencies, mental capacity, physical endowments and abilities;
but how we use or neglect to use the tools remains within our own jurisdiction. "Wisdom puts an end to pain.”
Through astrology we learn how to improve our workmanship on the wheel of life and consequently to improve
our fate by complying, consciously with Nature’s* laws
instead of violating them.
. This system of astrology is known as the modernized
Arabian Systefh, the oldest known, but revised an.i
adapted to present conditions and peoples. Correspond-
“ing to and harmonizing with astronomy, it is necessarily
geocentric in its methods (“geo” meaning earth, and
"centric” meaning center) ; in other words, recognizing
<the Earth^as a center of influence and observation.
Placing the Earth in the center of a chart (in place
of the Sun, see page 8) mafe it easy' to visualize how,
by the turning of the Earth on its axis from west to east,
the- Signs appear tc ascend at the- eastern ’ horizon and
descend on the western. 0
Astrology is .a language of symbols, hence the first
step toward its mastery is a thorough knowledge of its
symbology. Before attempting. to erect a horoscope,
bfcome perfectly familiar with tne characteristics of*the
planed, the’ ikndencjes bestowed by the sighs, and the
.nature of the houses. TJienf4earn which planets rule the
^different signs and practice making ,the symbols of
and'plene’ts.

OENBTHLIACAL ASTHOLOQY
S2
THE HOUSES -OF A .HOROSCOPE
The twelver houaee of the horoscope should hot be
ernfused with the twelve signs of the zodiay, because
to(a student the tWelve houses are divisions ^in a map or
chart and always occupy tfie same place therein, whil^
the aigna are sections ip the zodiac, and due tb the
Earth’s motion on its axis, they apparently'are gonitantlv revolving from east, over the .meridian to the i^est.
Later on we will learn just what* signs arq passing oyer
^the various houses at 'any given birflb time.
The houses relate particularly to the material interests
, and conditions, while the signs tell us more of the spiritual qualities which manifest as character, temperament
and tendencies. *
Inasmuch as parts of the human body tfre concerned,
the signs and houses are identical in influence, that (js,
the first zodiacal sign Aries rules the head and face as
does also the first hfeuse in a chart. The sign Taurus
■ rules the throat as does the second house, and so on.
Each house has a specific value and quality* oj its qwn
and these characteristics, should be leaftied thoroughly
l)y the student who hopes tp read a horoscope well.
For instance: *fn addition to the influence already
assigned to them on other pages, the houses are known
as Angular, Succedent and Cadept. The angtes are the
four cardinal points in a horoscope, i. e., Ae 1st, 10th,
7th and 4th houses, known respectively as the Ascendant,
Midheaven *(MC. — MediumSCceli or Meridian), Descendant, and ‘the .Nadir or lowest point. These are the most
important places to cbfisider when judging a horoscope.
When a planet Is in an angular house it is then termed
"accidentally digqified,” if cadent, "accidentally debilitated." ‘
•'Jhe succejlent ’house# are thos% which*follow or succeed the\angles and are next in power. T,hey are -the .
2nd, 5th^8fh and 11th house#.
•.Cadent houses are those *wMch fall from the angle#
and* any placets fofind therein^are said«tcf be .weakly*1

'PART I, THE KAtAL CHART
^osijed in’ the ch^rt. T^fle 3rd, dthf 9th and 12th hofises
are cadent *
Nature <jf the Housug and Things They Represent •
#lst House — Kuies the personality, natural aisposition
and temlencies, self-interest an<V worldly outlook generally. /'h<* parts of the body represented are the head
and f*fce.
2nd House — Financial affairs, monetary prospects
(Jain* or loss according to the nature of the planets
therein, and how the ruler of this house is aspected and
where posited in the chart. Represents throat and ears.
3r3 House — Brethren, short journeys, writings,
studies, mcntaUinclinations and ability. Denotes shoulders, arms, hands, lungs, collar bone and nervous system..
4th House — Father, borne, environment, domestic
affairs, and general condition at close of life. The outJook regarding aiincs, lands, property and the end of
undertakings. Rples the breast, stomach and digestive,
organs.
*5th House — Children, love affairs, pleasurable emotions, speculations. *Rules the heart, sides and upper
half of the back6th House — Sickness, servants or employes, service,
work, food, -hygiene, clothing»and small animdls. * Denotes the solar-plexus and bowels.
7th‘Ht>use --Unions,* partnerships* marriage, contracts,
lawsuits, open enemies, dealings with ofhers and the
public* generally. Parts denoted are »reins, kidneys,
ovaries and lower half of the back^
8th House— Legacies* the monef or goods* of pthers,
de^A] apd all* matters conn^pte^ with the dead* astral
experiences Financial* affairs *of the partner, be'ng the
seeaifd house of the partner. {Seventh house represents.]
the partner’s fir* house.), Rules the* muscufar systerti,
bladder1 and sex organs.

GENETHLI AXIAL ASTROLOGY
9th House — Long journeys, . foreign countries and
places remote from birth; dreams, visions, psychic experiences, education, intuition and higher development ;
scientific, philanthropic, philosophic ana spiritual tendencies. Partner’s brothers or sister, being’ the third
house from the seventh. Signifies the live, and thighs.
10th House — Profession, occupation, honor, fany, promotion, mother, employer; affairs of the cGunl^y or
government. Rules the knees.
11th House — Friends, associations, hopes and wishes;
indicates the financial condition of the employer, being
the "second” house from the tenth. Rules the ankles.
1 2th House — Unseen or unexpected troubles;- restraint, limitations, exile, seclusion, secret sorrows, sjlent
sufferings and woe, self-undoing, secret1" enemies, hospitals, large animals; occult «r hidden side of life. Rifles
the “feet.
Fourth and Tenth Houses
In Relation to Father and Mother^
Reference* to twelve of#the leading astrological textbooks, published during the past three hundred years,
shows the tenth Tiouse ruling the mother; fourth house,
“the father. Only one <Jf the early writers reverses this
indication, while another, whe leans tctfvffrd^ Eastern
methods quotes the tenth house as puling father in the
horos'copb of females, mo^ier in male charts; the fourth
ruling mother in the horcftcope of females, the father in
male charts. My owp experience confirms the teachings
of the twelve older* writers. It is an invariable rule in
Horary Astrology to use tenth hoftse for mother and
fourth, for father in all cases.
If your own ftorostjope is correct, thaft is, based "upon
a' known time of birth. and then corrected J>y the .ryles
of recriJidatfon, it shouUbbwan easy matt^i* to determine
the rulerships of these houses by" observing the tf^psits
of^ planets through^the tenth and faurth houses and Mating the effect upon parent^ Aspects of* paogVessit^

•PABT I, THE NAXA.L CHART
planets tothose cusps are* also significant. I£ one ofgthe
'parents is •deceased,, transits or progressed aspects to
either house jviJI indicate corresponding reactiorfs
by the remaining parent, due to J:he fact that one "house,
opposes the’ other. In life tlyere is a natural or psychic
sympathy beflveen the parents and when aspects affect
tHfe houAe of one parent the thoughts or external conditions of the other are likely to b t disturbed. Hence, the
studeg. in* studying this matter for his own satisfaction
needs be very observant rfind analytical to determine the
posifion'of the forces which characterize the phenomena
under, consideration.
Logically it would seem that the fourth house should
rule the mother as it corresponds to the domestic sign,
CanAr, which is ruled by the Moon, both of which are
termed “feminine.”
Oil the other hand the home and domestic life is*
largely influenced by the father, his temperament, health
and general success.
Again, Gapricorn the natural tenth sign is termed
feminine, and it is mainly the mother’s influQice in early'
life which directs the tendencies and aspirations that .
afterwards determine the worldly outlook, the honor,
credit, esteem and position achieved.
• Much soul d* be reasontd on both sides of this topic,
but proof of the argument rests with that which is
shown by actual horoscopal demonstration. Jhis ‘must
be determined by practical students, as no amount of
reasogir^, theorizing ,or arguing cag substitute the actual operation of cosmic vibrations.
However, time^are changing. Domestic relations and
conditions have undergone great .fhanges in England,
and America particularly, and it m^- eventually be deter-’
mined through care fed investigation by competent researched, that these changes' '•are portrayed by I reversal
of.pj*-entarindic?itions.sinQ: tljl time of the ancients, and .
tfcgit the. nejv.ogder requires a new allocation of thgpe*.
ie^tures Joncerning the f^trth.and tenth houses.

OENETHLIffCAL ASTROLOGT
Ninth house Influence
Canada la ^t> the United1 States 'a foreign country,1 and vice
versa, iftasmuch as they nr^ under dif^ereift (forma of government.
A Canadian, who wrahes to enter the civil service of' this country
Ir- obliged to take out naturalisation papers Just i.ss do English,
German, French, Italian, Spanish, or any foreign born person.
Duty la charged on new gpods coming or going into ft. S. or
Canada, and Just as strictly' on the border as In the Interior.
Although Alaska for years past hsts belonged to the U. S„ It
strikes one forcibly that It must hea’r a nlnfn .house re’athyi to
persons whose home is remote from it. *For instance, many have
gone there and prospered, not suffering any particular discomfort
from the cold, and other adverse elements, while a young man
whom we know, fortunate In many respects, but with Saturn In
ninth, went to Alaska and nearly froze to death. He suffered
many other hardships besides. So the ninth house roust represent
foreignness In every sense of the word.
The ninth house of a horoscope not only rules long Journeys,
foreign affairs, foreigners and foreign countries, but also places
remote from that nf birth regar’ileas of whether actually under
another ting, that la, to peraona borj in the U. S., Alaska or the
Philippines would be ‘*ioreign” places. A person born In the U.
S„ near the border of Mexico, upon crossing the border, even but
u short distance, would technically be In a frteign country. AstrologlcaHy, the mere fact of his crossing over the llite woulU not
•entitle the acU to ninth house consideration because the customs,
^climate, etc., would all remain the same, and no radical change
is apparent nor foreign elements to contend with. But, of courdu
Judgment must be Exercised on such questions aa these, for circumstances alter cases, for Instance, had this hypothetical
American formally cast off his allegiance to the U. ^ and adopted
Mexico as hla country and entered* Into active* Interest In the
affairs of that country, then It would be a ninth house matter,
for while distance did not make It a foreign affair, it was made
so by the circumstances, conditions and the new elements and
activities 'encountered.
Due to the earth's rotation the Sua seems to rise on the eastern
horizon each mornVig, passing through the 12th and lHh iiouaea
and arriving at caap of 10th house a,t noon.* At aunset It la on
the descendant, or 7th cA^i after which during ^he night It lasses
through the 6th, 5th, 4th, 3rd and 2n$ houses to arrive (by tha
eaVth'a axial ‘rotation) on tjie flrat cuap fgnln at qnnrlae. . r
The other planets likewise appear to bourse through the houses,
c but It should he remembered that the t^tual nfotlon of the ‘plau-
• m*!d their oiblts is Jnst the reverse, that Is, tlysy i-ictually Jrau^Jt
from Arles to Taurus; to Gtmlnl, aed so on.

ST
?ART X. THE WA*TAL CHART
The $elatiop'of Signs and House*
ntDMCAVCN
Explaining ‘distinction between a "house” and a “sign.”
Signs are the twelve divisions of the, zodiac.* *
Houses are twelve segments of spaces between the
Earth Jhd the Zodiac. (Considering the earth as in the
center for convenience.)
Planets travel 'in the zodiacal circle, but for convenience in making'and riding a clArt th% planets are in*
served in th# houses, A line is fun from eaih planet to
the sign it occupies on the .data for which *the ’chart is
tna^p.' (See Example ’Charts.)

GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
THE ‘’ZODIACAL .SIGNS
Ruling Planets
*T Aries ruled by £ Mars IjIlm a ruieu \ty f veuus
S Taurus ruled by 9 Venus n\ Scorpio ruled by &\ Mars'"
II Gemini ruled by 0 Mertury t Sagittarius,, by U Jiloiter
SZ Cancer ruled by J Moon VS Capricorn ruled by V Saturn
SI Leo ruled by © Sun z; Aquarius ruled by W Uranns
UH Virgo ruled by S Mercury X Pisces rulekl by V N4p'tuue
Triplicities
The zodiacal signs are divided into four groups called
“triplicities,” and in their order they represent tha four
elements, fire, earth, air and water. (See chapter on
“Triplicities” in Part V.) «•
Fiery Triplicity is composed of Aries, Leo, Sagittarius.
Earthly Triplicity: Taurus, Virgo, Capricorn.
Airy Triplicity: Gemini, Libra, Aquarius.
I v 1
„ Watery Triplicity: Canqer, Scorpio, Pisces.
Classification?
Movable or Cardinal sign?— Aries, (Ta'nccr, Libja,
Capricorn.
Fixed signs— Taurus, IJ.'eo, Scorpio, Aquarius.
Common or Flex.ed signs — Gemjni, Virgo, Sagittarius,
Pisces. ,
Fruitful signs— Cancer, Scorpio, Pisces.
Barren signs-r-Gehjini, Leo, Virgo. ,,
' Maatulide signs — Aries, Gemini* Leo, Lijjra, Sagittarius, Aqiidrihs.
Feminine signs — Taurus, • Caecer, “Virgo, Scbrpio, .
C‘apricorn,*Pisces.‘
. Northern signs are, tjje’ first six beginning with’ £.ries.

PART I, THE TJATAL CHART
Southern siggs are jfhe remaining six beginning "with
Libra. .(Sun is in Sogth Declination when in these
signs.)
Signs of short ascension-yCapricorn, ‘Aquarius, Pisces,
^\ries,. Taurus, Gemini. Thdse are the signs which will
someismes be omitted from the Ephemeris and are
themmrj “intercepted" between two cusps in a chart.
Signs of long ascension — Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Libra,
Scttrpio, Sagittarius, These are the signs which will
.sorgetimes be found entered twice in the Ephemeris, and
therefore stretch across two cusps in the chart, thus
making some signs “intercept.”
pi-corporeal or double-bodied signs— Gemini, Pisces
and first half of Sagittarius.
Equinoctiaf signs — Aries and Libra.
'Tropical signs — Cancer and Lapricorn.
Human signs — Gemini, Virgo, /fquarius and first part
of Sagittarius.* i
Bestial signs?— Aries, Tauru$, Leo, Capricorn and la$t
half of Sagittarius. *
Signs of voice— -pemini, Virgo, Lilira, Sagittarius and
Aquarius.
Mute signs — Cancer? Scorpio, Pisces.
Features of thft ZodiacaWSigns
And Zones of the Human Body Ruled by the Signs
Aries — Movable or cardinal, fiery, masculine, ruled by
Mars. It governs the head and face.
Tqjurus — Fixed, earthly, feminine? semi-fruitful.' ruled bv
Venus. Gclvfrns tjiroat and fleck.
flemjni — Common* or flexed* airy, barren, /hasculine,
ruled by iClercury. GoVei’ifs hands, arms, shoulders,
.. •collarbone,' 'lungs^and.neqvous system.
Catice*-— ‘Movable or cardinal.. wateflry, verj? fruitful, «fe’iTi__ joine, ruled by the Moon. -Governs breast arid stomach.-

QENETHLIj CAL ASTROLOGY
Leo— Fixed, fiery, barren, masculine, ruled by the ,Sun'.
Governs heart, sides and uppek portion of the back.
VirgO; — Flexed or common, earthly, barren, feminine,
' ruled by Merpury. Governs solar plexus and bowels.
£ibra — Movable or cardinal, airy, semi-fruitful maserline, ruled by Venus., Governs kidneys, loin, 'ovaries
and lower portion Of back. ‘ v
Scorpio — -Fixed, watery, fruitful, ferpinine, ruled by
Mars. Governs the bladder and sex organs. 1
Sagittarius — Flexed or common, fiery, masculine, ruled
by Jupiter. Governs liver, hips, thighs and condition
of the blood.
Capricorn — Movable or cardinal, earthly, semi-fr tful,
feminine, ruled by Saturn. Governs kn,ees and spleen.
Aquarius — Fixed, airy, masculine, barren, ruled by
Uranus. Governs calves, ankles, distribution of bodily
fluids and intuition.
Pisces — Flexed or common, watery, fr,uitfpl, feminine. •
Governs feet and psychic faculty.
Cardinal, Fixed and Common Signs
The cardinal s’igns may be likened to the cardinal
points of a compass, t. e., east, west, nqrth, south.
Zodiacally expressed: Aries, east; Libra, west Cancer^
north ; Capricorn, south. These signs, Aries, Cancer,
Libra ‘and Capricorn are railed cardinal signs, because
of the change of seasons therein : Aries, spring ; Cancer,
summer; LUira, fall ;c Capricorn, wipter. These cjiajnges
of season are due to the Sun’s apparent change of declination, or, in reality, to the obliquity of the Earth aepording to its locationrin its orbit.
Fixed signs may be likened unto the huddle of a season, th^re being thrdte signs trf e^ch season. If , Jhe
cardinal sign* brings us ipfo change of season then the
fixed sign sees us firmly cantered 6r set ip that sests^n.
Common signs are the third or last months pi the fou?
seasons. We have become Well acquainted with the

PART 1, THE NATAL CHART
season throughout the 'cardinal' aijd” fixed morfths and in
the" comnfon sighs we tinish up the duties which arc common to ‘such season and* begin to prepare fy>r the change
to the next quarter.
, Peryjns iJorn during the 'reign of cardinal signs ate
said to be versatile, adaptable j.nd readily capable of adjusting themselves to changing conditions as they occur.
.those who are born fn fixed signs are more set in their
ways and more fixed in their views than those born in
Cardinal or common signs. They are likely to have more
continuity and be more difficult to move, change or
sway. They do not so readily change their minds ; are
no£ so quick to adjust and adapt themselves.
Those born in common signs have more or less the
attributes of both cardinal and fixed and can adapt
themselves to the natures of both those signs, consequently, to the natives«of the othgr signs, those of the
common signs, seem to be mutable or unstable.
Ih Hofary j^trology a planet posited in an angular
house is said to be “accidentafly'’ dignified ; if in a suc-
(Cedent house it is not accidentally dignified neither Ts
it debilitated, but if posited in a cadent house it is accidentally debilitated. The angular, succedent and cadeqt
houses correspond in nature with cardinal, fixed and
commoh signs. First House, angular; second house, succedent; third hotlse, cadent. Repeat %around„tha circle.
. “Ignocanee Is the night of the mind, btt a night without Wtm
or star. —Confucius "

genethliacAl astrology
PLANETS
Their Astrological Nature and Influence
Moon
1> The Moon’s influence is said to be cold, moist,
phlegmatic and feminine. She is fruitful and convertible
in nature, being fortunate or unfprtunafe, accoldiflg to
her position (by house) in a chart and her aspects and
location in the zodiac (by sign) at that time. Her influence in a horoscope is of utmost importance. Her proximity to the Earth and rapidity of motion render her a
powerful significator in all branches of astrology. 1 She
makes a complete transit of the zodiac every 27 d^ys, 7
hours and 43 minutes. *
She rules liquids, fresh water, milk, public commodities such as groceries, fish, brinks, etc.; also sailing,
brewing, nursing and females generally. She denotes
trades people like delivery men or those engaged ip occupations where they .meet the general public. The
.Moon influences growth oj all plant life. She governs the
brain, stomach, breasts, left eye of the male and right ejfe
of the female. Her day is Monday. Metal, silver. Colors,
•pale yellowish white, a silver shade and pale_green. The
Moon rules the sign Cancer.
Mercury
9 The influence pf the planet Mercury is neutral,
dualistic, cold^ moist, sexless and convertible.* It expresses according to position, aspect* and location in the
zodiac^ good when in favorable aspec^ to other pfancts
and malefic when adversely arspected. Mercury, can
rarely be seen ’frith tfie naked ^ve, as It is never more
than 2&deg(f’ees from thp Sun and consequently can.qply
come inta Aspect of a« conjunction, parallel, vtgintile,
quindecile and semi-sextilt with that luminaiy. \\hen
‘ yithin Sl/i degrees of the Sin Ae aspect is adverse, being
%“combust” or burnt up* and Jpses a gfeat 'deal bf itfs
ability, The influence #is best when leaving the Sun#

* PART I. THE I?ATAL CHART
rulas that»pajt <af the intellSct which is susceptible
to cultivation through, study,, precept, observation .and*
imitation. Mercury influences the nervous system, solar
plexus, btiwels, arms, “mouth, tbngue, §ense of sight, j^rception, understanding, interpretation and expression.
*It deals with traveling, teaching, clerkship, speaking,
writing, printing, publishing; literature, stationery, secretaries, Bookkeeping, letters, mailing, etc. Its day is Wednesday ; its metal is lyquid metal or quicksilver. Colors
a M ature bide and dove ; also spotted mixtures. Mercury
. rules the signs Gemini and Virgo.
Venus
•8 Venus is termed a feminine planet. She rules the
se/ise of touch and to a great extent the disposition. She
inclines to all that pertains to the higher attributes of the
rgind : music, poetry, painting, singing, drama, opera jnd
all refined amusements and adornment. Her influence
is expressed as generofls, kind, go«sd-humored and loving.
She is considered benefic, warm, moist and fruitful.
Venus is thfc brightest plaint in the solar system. IJer
orbit being smaller than thjt of the Eartfi, she can never
be more than 48 degrees distant from the Sun, consequently can only come into aspect df conjunction, parallel, vigirytile, quindecile, semi-sextile, semi-quintile and
semi-squar* with that«luminary. She governs the throat,
kidneys, reins and ovaries. Her day is Friday. Metal,
copper. Colors are turquoise and pisk. Vemus*rules the
signs Taurus and Libra.
Sun
t) The Suq in nature is hot, dry? masculine and lifegiving. He possesses the powewof absorbing the nature
and influenceof any#planet wifhin afl orb of 8J4 degrees
•f his copiunctioi*. A planet situated is tewned wcombus^' as tin? Sun apparently appropriates inequalities.
’ Repres^pts healfh, tfie tfital principle, general prosperity, bigH office, positions of *rankl and title, govertinftnt
gffairs and officials ; new undertakings, publicity, popu-

OBNBTHLIAOAL ASTROLOGY
larity ; superior or preua and haughty persons. Governs
the sides, upper portion of the back, heart, right eye of
the male and left eye of the female. H:s day is Sunday.
Metal. 'gold. Color, orange. The Sun rules th<; sign Leo.
Mars
a Mars is significant^ strength, force, energy, courage and activity. It is called a hot, dry, masculine planet,
and has much to do with the arpjntionsj desires and animal nature. His manifestation is. constructive >or de-
, structive, according to what use the individual mak?s of
the vibrations, as indicated by the position, aspects and
location in a chart. He governs the sex organs, bladder,
' muscular system, head, face, left ear and the sense of
taste. Also cuts, burns, scalds, etc. Rules iron, steel,
surgery, chemistry, military matters and war; policerpen,
surgeons, dentists, butchers, chemists, those of quick
tamper and reddish complexion. Day, Tuesday. Co^or,
red. ,Mars rules the signs Aries and Scorpio.
Jupiter
* I t
U Jupiter, by the ancients termed Jo^e, is t&e greater
fbrtune, and is said to be hot, moist, sanguine, temperate,
social, expansive, masculine? and moderate. He governs
the blood, liver, .veins, arteries and thighs. Rules
higher education. Signifies judges, councilors, bankers,
brokers, theologians, philanthropists; also science, law,
reason and comparison. Rules fihancial dealings; specu-'
lations,. shipping business and foreign affairs. Day,
Thursday. " Metal* tin. Cojbr, green. Jupiter rules the
sign Sagittarius.
Saturn
t> Sometimes symbolized as Father Time. In olden
days Safer, or Satan^ was its name *nd it signified
(d)evil, darkness* secrecy, loss and misfortune. ‘Its
nature is cold, dry, phlegmatic, mdancholic, earthly and
masculine. tMJhen Saturn*^ well pi a Ad or, aspecte^i. tfle.
person is*grave, profouncf, jjAdent,* cautioifb aqd o£ excellent organizing and executive ability. Hut when hf*is"
w>&k or afflicted, theynative is apt to be bigoted, a^eqaisi- <
tive, irritable, discontented and complaining. He governs.

gABT I, THE ~ViVrAL CHABT ' 45
/the ,teetlf, bones, spleerf," knees,' right ear, anti sense of
hearing. Rules bricklaying, pottery, masonry, plumbing
and other laborious or "Uncongenial employment. Denotes aged^.persone," thin, nervous, dark, seclusivet Al$p
farmers; miners; coal, junk or produce "dealers, property
tjwner^f It rules land, property, mines, lead and dealings
in real estate. Day, Saturday. Metal, lead. Color,
black. Sj^turrt rules the sign Capricorn.
.Uranus
W Formerly calleft Herschel in honor of him whose
work stands high in the pages of astral science. Its
nature is cold, dry, airy, positive, electro-magnetic, eccentric, occult and malefic. It governs the organs of
curiosity, inventions and investigation ; genius and personal magnetism; also all things of a curious or wonderful ‘nature. It precipitates sudden, unexpected events.
It denotes astrologers, inventors, eccentric persons, and
haC rule over astrology, metaphysics, psychical research,
telepathy and occult subjects. It jjas rule over electricity and electrical appliances, telegraphy, telephouey,
radio and "electronic devices, airships, airplanes and
aeronautics, vehicles, dynamos, phonographs, etc. It
rules the ankles and intuitive "intellect. Its metals ai^e
•platinum and aluminum; also uranium, radium and tftte
radio-active elements. Its colors are checks, plaids,
mingled shades and changeable colors. Uranus rul$s
,the sign A^jtjarius.
Neptune
V The Greek name wa$ PoseidCn, “ruler of the
waters.” Neptune seems to be yet in a nebulous condition and its influence is more pajtchic than physical or
material. It represents inspiration, psychometry, mediumship and the inner or spirit feeling. It rules things
and conditions t>f a mysterious oj hidden nature, secret
affairs, detective work, divers, (Submarine vessels, etc.;
also silence meetings %nd spiritualistic investigation.. Its
pSt'urj is dold, moist, neutral and the expr^ssjad depends
upon th{ location, aspect aVifT position, 1. e., it as benefic
•wflen in goo8 aspect with other planets, but maleic
.when adversely aspected. It h^s to»do witl* the receptive
and. psychic faculties ; rtles the feet. It is not known to

GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
rule any njineral* metal or other .material substance, as
do the other planets. ‘It rules arwesjhetccs, opiates, *in-
* toxicating beverages, and,probahly gas and drugc which
produce, unconsciousness. Denotes pcyihTcs, detectives,
mjsteries; the dq,ep sea,* kelp, urtder-£ea growth, voyagfs, oil, fish ; also fraud an,rf deception. It» color is an
intensified turquoise and the colors of the ocean.' Nep-1
tune rules the sign Pisces.
Note: To learn further of these nine planets, how
they apply to the personality, affAt character, etc., refer
to their reading when in the First House of a chart.
Pluto
'• (To date no symbol has been officially assigned to
Pluto. So it is designated by e.)
e In mythology a planet named Plutq is described
in a manner which leaves little doubt that it is being
designated as the ruler of the ^gn Scorpio. Astrologiool
researchers are now checking up.on the influence of the
recently discovered pfiinet, given the name of Pluto, to
■ascertain whether or not it is the planet pf ancient lore.
It is probable that in the course of timg other planets
wMl be located.by telescopes so that eventually there will
be>one planet allotted to each sign. In our present state,
of development the.present allocation of planets fits the
consciousness of the inhabitants of this world very well,
bu^ as we acquire the ability to discover new pAanets our
consciousness is likewise broadefied and etevated and
becomes. receptive to higher vibrations, making necessary
the allocation of neVly discc^ered planets to appropriate
signs in order to interpret correctly the expressions of
advancing picntality. S«e Pluto, pages 324 to 334. t .
Planetary Dignities
As the planets afe constantly moving, they are ofttn
in Signs whiclj they do «ot rule, although they may be
powerful V wfak therein,* ^according *to how they,haA _
monize wiih*the sign.
such locations tjjey are *terfhed*“exalte4,” in their"
"fall," or in their "detrimefit,” as»the case may*be*

» PART I, THE NATAL CHART
It should be understood that -the p'anet itself does not
•so become, strong or w^eak, but that our responses to its
influence,are stronger or weaker
A planet.is said- to br in its detriment when located in
the sign opposite to the ore it rules. Thus, as Mars
relies //ries, it is in its detriment when located in the
opposite sign, Libra.
Ajdarffet’s fall is the sign opposite to its exaltation.
Thus, Mars is exalted'. in Capricorn; his fall is in the
sigfl'opposite, Which is Cancer.
Tfic signs of exaltation are as follows:
Sun in Aries.
Moon in Taurus.
N». Node in Gemini.
Jqpiter in Cancer.
Neptune in l^co.
tyfercury in Virgo.
Saturn in Libra.
Uranus in Scorpio.
S. Node in Sagittarius
Mars in Capricorn.
Uranus in Aquarius.
Venus in Pisces.
It will be noticed t^i«t Mercury, rules Virgo and is
exalted in Virgo; likewise, Uranus rules Aquarius and
is exalted in /bquarius, thus giving the planet double
digflity w4icn in* these signs. The dignity of Uranus in
Scorpio is not yet altogether established.
* There is some doubt as to the exaltation of Uranus
being in Scorpio; it*might be exalted in Virgo, which is
a mental, scientific sign, or exalted in Gemini, an airy,
•mental sign wiled bv Mercury. However, Uranus is said
to have a double dignity in Aquarius, so alike or harmonious is it with that sign. The dignities and debilities of
Neptune by sign are also yeP in doubt. See'chapter on
“Ocja^es” in Part V.
The Moon’s Node is not a planet buf a point in the
heavens where the Moon crosses the ^liptic from north
latitude to soutlf latitude and vice#versa. It is dbmmonly Itnown as th< “Dragon’s Head* and *Tail.” The North
Njde or Head is considered beneflc, but the«SouJh Nod’e,
opposite point or T*ail, is njalffic. Its zodiacal- place on
anv 'date, is shown in the tphemeris. Its influence is
described in Part IJI. *Seo Dictionary of Astrological
%Terms^n P&rbV, also page 185.

GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY.
' Dignities "apd 'Debilities of Planets *
Chart illustrating the table on page S0.«
Geocentric Motion of the Planets
The plane*ts in the proper order of their speed through
the zodiac are: Moop, Mercury, Venus, Earth,, M.ars,
Jupiter, Saturn,, Uranus, Neptune an<J Pluto.
The Moon mates a complete transit through the
zodiac every 27 days, 7«hours and 43 minutes; her afferagb.daily mqfion is absut 13 degrees; the speed varies
between 12 aijd IS degrewfirregularl^. Wherf her,spet<j
is 12 degrees per day, moliorfis 30 minutes* of longitude
ui hour; when going 13 qpgrfes jn a day, motion* is1
St*/,, minutest an hour; w,hen traveling 14 degrees in a#
day, hourly motion is 35 mijiutrt; and when at the rate.

PART I. THE NAtAL CHART
.of IS degrees in, a day,^iourly mcftion is 37p2 miruftes.
To find tjie motion of any plane^ in one day subtract its
place indicated *irf an Ephemeris on one da«r from that
given on the next?
•Mercery, Venus and Sun make the circle of the zodiac
in an average .of one year. Mercury never being more
than 28 degrees from the Sun, and Venus never more
than '48 degrees from S'un. Mercury moves between Hi
and»JOO,minutes of loogifude per day on an average The
average daily motion of Venus is between 62 and 82
minutes of longitude; the Sun’s motion is about * -*jo
degree per day, or 2-4 minutes an hour.
Mgrs traverses its orbit in nearly two years, or aht ut
22 months on an average; its daily motion being from
31 to* 44 minutes of longitude. Jupiter requires 12 voars
to transit the entire zodiac, going through one sign each
yeaf and traveling about 2*4 degrees per mouth 04 between 5 and 15 minutes per day. Sflturn 1 o-.-.pletes the
^circle in about 29lA years, going through our sign in
about two .arid Jhe-half years, or at the rate of about )
degree per'montii. Uranus requires about 84 years to,
go through the entire zodiac, jeven years to go through,
ofie sign, and travels at the rate of about 4T4 degrees
per year, or approximately one minute fler day. It takes
Neptune about 165 years to go completely through the*
zpdiac, or ttirpugh one .sign in about 14 years, and it
travels about 2 degfees in one year. Pluto requires about
248 years to make a complete ^circuit of.the zodiac!
The planets often complete the cireuit in more or less
time ’thin given in the foregoing, dwing to retrograde
movement, but this Is the average time Sun and Moon
are ndver retrograde. • ,
Ii» .connection with Planetary, dignities see also the
list of Exaltatkm Degrees or, pare 678.

GENETHLKtCAL ASTROLOG,
.. Table of the Dignities and Debilities of Planet^
(According to the .generally accepted allocation.)
Sign Ruler Detri. * Exalt Fall
( Arles Mara .... Venus . . . Sun "Saturn
Taurus .... Venua . . . Mars .... Moon .... Uranus
Gemini .... Mercury m. Jupiter . . N. Node . . . S. Node
Cancer .... Moon . . . Saturn . . . Jupiter . . . Mara
Leo ...... Sun .... Uranus ' . . Neptune . . . Uranus
Virgo Mercury . . Neptune . . MeVcury . . . Venus
Libra Venus . . . Mars .... Saturn .... Sun
Scorpio .... Mars . . . Venus . . . Uranus . . . Moon
Sagittarius . . Jupiter . . Mercury, . S. Node . . . N. Node
Capricorn . . . Saturn . . . Moon . . . Mars Jupiter
Aquarius . . . Uranus . . Sun .... Uranus . . . Neptrne
Pisces Neptune . . Mercury. . Venus .... Mercury
Nature and Correspondences
t
Th2 Influence of the Moon, Venus, Sun and Jupiter is considered
good. The influence c* Mars, Saturn and Uranus is known as
maieftc. The influence of Pluto is not yet definitely determined.
Mercury and Neptune are neutral. 1. e., theR' influence is good
when in good aspect to other planets hut is adverse* when evilly
aspected. Jupiter is called' the "greater fortune" and Veous the
“lesser fortune." :
^ When a plancf is at home (in its own sign,) exalted,
dignified by position in the chart (in angles or being the
planet most elevated or nearest the midheaven,) or well
aspected by beneficent planets, it manifests its highest
qualities, that is^ the native is inclined to react wisely
or favorably.
''When a "planet is, out of dignity (out of home "sign,
exaltation, out«of angle, etc.,) and debilitated by unfavorable sign position or aspects, especially by malefic planets, the lower skfe ofjts nature is more likely to be prominently manifestfd.
If a planet should recai;/e a good aspect from ajt>ene(jc
and an gdVerse aspect froi^ malofic, the'planjt in-question will manifest both siijes pi its nattire — the higher
»nd the lower — when influenced by direqti&ng and. trap
sits, and in accordance with the nature of such ‘aspects.

1PART I, THE NATAL CHART
SI
• 'Fhe delineations. following, concerning the nine planets, will*be helpful in understanding the principal expressions of each planet when dignified by sigrt, house position or good aspects as compared with* their expressions
when ^U-dij*nified, that is,* .debilitated by sign, hot»se
position or adverse aspects.
Moon
Dignified— Reflective* receptive, pliable, variable,
refined, domestic, public, maternal, productive, adaptable.
Debilitated— Frivolous, passive, weak, conceited, common, nonsensical, personal, childish, changeable, luny.
Mercury
Dignified — Perceptive, observant, intellectual, accomplished, clever, skillful, vigilant, adroit, fluent, lucid, expeditious, studious, conc^ntrative, possessed of good
mental ability and memory.
Debilitated — Careless, protuse, “indecisive, imitative,
i shiftless, desultory, embarassed, nervous, rambling, unpoiced, uginformed, forgetful, diffusive. Shrewd, crafty,
artful, untruthful.
Venua
Dignified — Affectionate, harmonious, chaste, sympathetic, contented, cheerful, graceful, humane, compassionate, refined, companionable, artistic.
Debilitated — Immodest, disorderly, lewd, emotional,
indolent, loud, untidy, thoughtless, gaudy, extravagant ;
excessive love of pleasure and ease.
Sun
Dignified — Ambitious, honorable, lofty, dignified,
loyal, faithful, distinguished, gallapt.
l5ebilitated-1-'Disdai{iful, proutfl domineering, despotic,
arjogant, authoritative, haughty.*
Mars’
% Dignified-.-(^ourageous, venturespme, stjong, daring,
aggressive, energetic, attive, fearless, constructive, passionate.

GENETHLIAQAfc ASTROLOGY «
Debilitated — Bold,* jofttemptJ»us, violent, writable,
coarse, audacious, forceful, impufsiw, iVnpatient, ctfmbative. destructive, sensual.
^upi^er
f
Dignified — Benevolent, philanthropic, generous, truthful, honest, moral, since/e, charitable, reasonable, compassionate, impartial. .
Debilitated — Prodigal, wasteful, extr&vagant, pretentious, improvident, dissipated, hypocritical, thriftless,,
unjust, dishonest.
Saturn
Dignified — Prudent, contemplative, cautious, responsible, precise, persistent, persevering, industrious, provident, patient, economical, reserved, serious, resolute, considerate, mathematical, temperate, chaste, executive. •
t.
Debilitated — Skeptical, melandnolic, deceitful, incompetent, exacting, avaricious, perverse, indifferent, laborious, impotent, repining, acquisitive, secrefive, suspicious
fearful, slow, callous, lew,d, pessimistic, finreliable.
Uranus
• Dignified — Original, inventive, ingenious, progressive,
reformative, intuitive, social, talented, metaphysical,
unique, unconventional, clairvoyant, magnetic, premonitory, constructive..
Debilitated — Abnormal, fantastic, extreme, roving,
eccentric, abfupt, repcflant, erratic, grotesque, precipitate, prematur, destructive, radical.
» Neptune
Djgnified — Psychic, inspirational* idealistic, psychometric, impnessipnable, mystical, spirit-jfercentivd, poetical,,
musical. .
‘ Pebilitated— Vaguq, emotional indulgent, .supersepsitfVe, 'deceptive, dreamy, vk^illatiog, scheming, obsessed.

EABT I, THE NATAL CHART . 33
THE $IA»TAL HOROSCOPE
.Casting the Chart
The Epkemeris
After the signs and planets*and their symbols have
beeg leaTned, continue the investigation by procuring a
geocentric Ephejneris for the year of birth.
. In the Ephemeris tor the birth year on a line with the
date of birth will be found figures expressing the “Sidereal Time” for noon* on that day in hours and minutes.
(In some Ephemerides the seconds are also quoted. Disregard the seconds until the rules have been learned.)
Sidereal time is the Sun time when it is noon at any place
on Earth. In \he Ephemeris, Sidereal time is usually abbreviated S. T. Note the Si T. in the following specimen
An Ephemeris is a publication uflhich shows the S. T.
at noon eaqh (Jay in a certain year, and among other
things, thfe sign and degree of the sign occupied by the
planets at noon*each day at Greenwich (England). It i£
necessary therefore to refer t« an Ephemeris for the ye»
in which birth took place, and in it reference is made to
the birth month afid date. This will then show the
zodiacal petitions of the planets on that day. There are
<welve signs,*and thirty* degrees of celestial longitude to
each sign. The planets are constantly moving frqm one
degree to the next, passing through orte sign, and entering the next sign, except when retrograde. (Apparently
moving in reverse order.) You way know when to consider a planet retrograde or direct in motion by the
letters R or D in the planets’ longitude columns of the
Ephemeris. See* illustration of page ffom l‘*10 Ephemeris where you.jvill see that Satugn wa* retrograde during the month of Deiember. Note that ijs longitipft
gTifthiiyiy decreasedeand that it^ retrogressed .from* Taurus
to Arjes.
* Soule ephemerae* are based on midnight Instead of 'noon.

GENETHLIA^A.L ASTROLOGY
«5PECIMfc.N
Ephemeris of the Planets’ pieces •
Calculate^ for M-ean Noo'n at Greenwich
December, 1910. * \
Longitude of the Planets „
dTST
IT
l»
Retrogradation
*When a p^inet appevs to begirt to move backward in
the’ordeKof the signs it kft usually (but not always)- tienoted by. ad R marked witn^ifs degrees in fhe Ephemeris.
\Vhen it apparently turns 4*rc^ inA motion it is usually
i/itlirated by« D at that tdate. A planet, is** $aid to b^
stationary when neither moving direct nor retrograde.

* PART I, THE NATAL CHART 65
’ TJie path or orbit of dVe ry planet is more of 4n ellipse
than a circle. No two planets perform a complete revolution in’the same period of tim’e. Owing tp the differences in their speed there is cpntinual change In th^
zodiac .75 vi^ved from the oarth, one fflanet overtaking
^id passing another, then apparently slowing, stopping
and beginning to move backward. The apparent stopping is a, "stationary” position ; the apparent backward
movement is termed "retrograde.” However, although
eacji.planet mpvos more quickly at certain points of its
orbit (the earth’s moAon varies between 59 and 61 miniftes’of longitude per day), no planet actually becomes
stationary or retrograde, only by appearance, caused by
the combined motions of the planet and the earth and
their positions relative to the Sun. (See illustration on
page 57.)
When you find in the F.phemeris that the longitude of
an) planet is increasing be’tween one day and the next
you may know such pla:*et is direc^in motion. If longitude decreases, the planet is retrograde.
We bellfeve tint influence of benefic planets is weakened^
when they are retrograde. The condition iff retrogradation is contrary or inharmonious to the regular directiofi
of actual movement, in the zodiac and*is in that respect
evil ; hence, when malefic planets arc retrograde theij
jnalefice is*ir^creased. Aspects, whether radical or progressed,’ that are thrown to a retrograde planet rob the
premittor of its efficacy, what it promises falling short
in actual results. Should hotfi the planets be. retrograde
the things indicated by the aspect would be deficient or
disappointing, hence retrogradav’ion is considered a
debility.
The effect of J planet is usually #cry strong w'len it is
stationary upon the ^lace of a»radictd or progressed
planet or in aspect to such. For’instance, Satufn is retrograde fo’r 140 days, and stationary approximately five
days’beftwe and after 'retrograOation.
* Jupiter <s* retrograde 120 days afid is stationary «ap-»
proximately five days before .and after.

QENETHLIA.CAL astrology *
Mars is retrograde for°80 days>and is stationaly two or’
three <teys before and after.
Venys is retrograde 42 days and is stationary approximately two day$ before and after.
Mercury is retrograde 24 days and is stationary approximately one day before and after. (The Sun and
Moon are never retrograde or stationary.) •
The favorable influence of a gl>od aspect forme^d by a
planet during retrogradation is considerably debilitated
and falls short of its efficacy in the good results which
would otherwise be indicated.
The adverse influence of an adverse aspect formed by
a planet during retrogradation is considerably accentuated. (Please see page 222.) ,
Tha 'illustration of Mara Retrograde and accompanying exp'arjatlon are reprinted froVj "Astron-Imago,” by courtesy of •b->
author, J. P. Hennings.
The “Illustration of a Retrograde Plaratt" shbws what
happens if Mars becomes,“retrograde.”
The diagram sljows the actual relative position of
Earth, Sun and Mars at the beginning of 1933.
The inner solid circle represents the orbit bf the Earth. 1
The second solid circle represents the orbit of Mars. The
outer broken-line circle represents the Zodiac.
On the 31st of January, 1933, the Earth is in position
A, and from our point of vision we see the Sun in 11
Aquarius. We see Mars (represented by a small splid
black do{) in 19 Virgo. <
By the end of February, 1933, [>oth E'a'rth and Mars
have moyed forward in* their respective orbits, and tlce
Sun is now, seen against ,lhe .background el 10 Pieces. ■
Mars, however, does not pio\ie s q fast as the Earth;*
the consequence th^t its relative position is seen (
further back in the Zodiac. . If tve draw a straight line

PART I, THE N.VTAL CHART
Illustration of Mars 'Rrtroerade
from B to the sec6nd position of Mars and through to
the zodiacal background we f$id that we now see Mars
in 11 Virgo. Mars has retrogressed from 19 to 11 Virgo.
By the end of March 1933 the Earth his advanced to
position C, and we see the Sun in 10 JKries.
M&rs likewise -has advanced on i*s orbit but not so fast
as Jhe Earth, and our line of vision Earth-Mar^ plane's
Mars i* Vifgo .1.
••Ill, order not' to confuse the picture with too many*
lines we skiff a ■•month, and by the efld of Mty, 1933, <we»
find the Earth in position *D and Mars in positiop d. We

QENETHLTAQAL ASTKOLOQY
see, Mais in 12 Vii;g6, in other words, it lias turned
“direct” and has advanced frorrt'2 to 12 Virgo.
By< the £nd of June 1933 the Eartfi is in position E
‘and Mars in position e. We see Mars in 27 J7irgo.
Anyone can complete the picture and he will find that
Mars will stay direct Until a relative position similar to
A B is reached. In other words, Mars appears ajways
retrograde shortly before and ijiter its opposition to the
Sun. — Astron-Imago. , ' ’
Sidereal Time — How to Use It
For P. M. Births
When a birth occurs in the p. in., add"the time of the
event to the S. T. given in ,the Ephcmeris for that date
and .the answer will be the S. T. at birth. If the sum
exceeds 24 hours (a full astrological day) subtract 24
and use the remainder as the S. T. at birth. This figure*
is then used as a starting point in the Tablesiof Uguses
,as shown in the next chapter.
For A. M. Births
, When a birth occurs in the a. m, (between midnight
and noon), the method differs sjightly fro® fha^ of p. nv
births.
Foi an a. nt. birth subtract the time of the event from
noon (12 m. or 11 :60) and then subtract the remainder
from the S.'T. giver> tn the Ephcmeris for that datt and
the answer is' Che S. T. at birth. This figure is then used
as a starting pijint in the Tables of Houses. If you
should find the S. T.tas given in the Ephcmeris too small
to be subtracted fronf, add 24 hours to 'it, then do the
.s*ui>tracjing.and the remainder is the S. T. at birth.,
for an "example, to Tl\i;!trate the different rules to
follow, we will use the dale Dec^nber 4th, 1910, iVotv
^Voj-k City. • Birth at 11, a. m. mean local time (1-houa
before noon).

PART I, THE NATAL CHART
' S. T. 1(J.49 at noon (Ak given in. the EphemOris Dec.
4th) *minus" 1 hour, birtn before noon, (i. e., 11 a. m.,)
gives S. T. 15. 40 at birth* Find this figure (S. T. 15.49)
in T. of H. of the latitude for which the chart is to be.
erected.
Note: Had the birth time been 1 p. m. (or one hour
after noon) we- would simply ha>c added 1 hour to the
given.S. T. for noon, and the sum would be used as the
starting point in the T. ot,H. which will Show what signs
and degrees are passing over cusps of houses in the horoscope at birth time in the latitude of the birth place.
Tables of Houses — How To Use Them
Have at hand a horoscope blank such as is used for
the Example Chart further on in this book. Turn to the
back»part of Raphael's Ephemeris and find New York
T. of H. as this birth occurs near New York City which
is irf Latitude 40° 43' north.* In the S. T. columns look
for the S. T. nearest that jvhich we have just worked out
of the foregoing example, 15.49. Th? nearest S. T. given
In the tablesds b5.47. Take that as our starting point:
In the nej#t naryiw column, on the same line, we find
the figures 29 and farther up the same column is the
symbol of the zodiacal sign, Scorpio, and right above iv
the figure 10. This means that the 29th degree of the
sign, icoipio, snouiif be placed on the cusp ot the tenth
house in o*r chart. The other five narrow columns
should be treated in the hame manner.
It will be noticed that th«* tables give the sigh and
degree for only six houses in bur chart, but a*s we have
already learned in a preceding chanter, which, signs must
always be opposite to each other we fill iij the other six
cusps.of the chart in their proper order, using the same
number of degrges. In so doing the example chart
should work outjike this:
29* fl on Tenth eusp, opposite IS* d on Fourth,
21* J on I-.levpnvh cusp, opjxh^te 21* II on Flf)ht
M* VJ on*Twelfth tusp, oppMlte 11* So od Sirthr
7* 46' ~ I?lrst cusp, opposite 7* 46' SI on Seventh.
2G* K «o4 9econd cusp, opposite 25* HR on Sflghth.
. 8* d on Third cusp, opposite 3* 1>l on Ninth.

GENETHLfAOAL ASTROLOGY
Be very careful t6 copy from the tables the correct
fign. Sometimes the sign shown a't the top of a column
completes *he 30 degrees comprising one sign and the
sign next in order begins lower down. In that case
/■eject the sign 'at top and use the one .ihow.i nearest
above the Sidereal Time at Birth.
The degrees given may vary slightly if other than
Raphael’s Tables are used, duetto slight difference in latitude, viz., from 40" 43' to 41V*
Looking around our chart it will be noticed that the
sign Aries and its opposite sign (Libra) have been left
out. Place them in center of the houses where they would
naturally fall in the regular order of the signs, i. a, between second and third , cusps for Aries, and between
eighth and ninth cusps for Libra.
Oftentimes it will be found that one sign extends over
two cusps and thu^, causes another sign to be crowded
out ; therefore, always look the chart over carefully and,
see if all the signs are there and in the'proper sequence.
JSigns thus left out and, so inserted, as in the example,
"are called "intercepted” signs.
If the example data called for birth in 40 degrees only,
no minutes of latitude, there would be a slight difference.
Just to illustrate what difference a few nairlutes of latitude makes in some cases, note the list of cusps following, taken from, Simplified Scientific T. of H., latitude
41 deg. north.
List from page 34 of T. of H. 41* north *•
VP’ Scorpio on 10th cusp.
20* Sagittarius on 11th cukp.
11* Capricorn on 12th cusp.-
7* 34“‘ Aquarius on Is/ cusr
26* Plsce»'.‘on 2nd cusp.
3* Taurus' on 3rd etisp.
'Note last'line of table following:

PAET I, THE NATAL CHART
An Illustration
From ^Simplified Scientific Tables of Houses
uauiuuc sx tn/iui
In recertt years, beginning about 1898 or 99, most of
Raphael’s EphemerideS contain three T. of H. ; for London, Liverpool and New York City. -
For Births iR South Latitude
To use tiortft , of Ef. for south'. latitude, you- must add
twelve hours to the S. T. at bttti, then use the degrees
shofl»n*in the T. of H., ‘but’tho opposite signs^ because
sigas of* short Stseension in north 'latifude are" signs of
ong ascension in south latitude, and vice versa. * ,

GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
Then note the time of Noon Majrk for the longitude of
that, birth place and correct the planets’ places for the
^amount of time born before ort aftej Noon Mark; enter
' them in the chart in The usual manner as instructed in
•this lesson.
interception
Due partly to the latitude for which a horoscope is
cast, as well as to inequality in the shape of the Earth,
it sometimes appears that a sign is intercepted between
the cusps of two houses yet not on either of them1. However, if the conventional form of horoscope blank is replaced with a chart on which the 12 signs and 360 degrees are shown,* the house cusps marked in Ly the
student as indicated by the T. of H., will readily show
that interception is an appearance only when viewed
from certain latitudes on the Earth. At the equator all
the, signs rise in regular rotation, but as we proceed to
south or north latitude an -Inequality in their rising
occurs. In other words, there is no interception in the
zodiac. It appears only in charts.
It will bi seen that aq intercepted sign is one which
has all of its thirty degrees contained within the confines
of one house of* a chart, whereastordinarily a sign has
some degrees above a cusp and the remainder below it.
The fact that a sign is intercjpted in a ,hflros.cope dqes
not seem to alter its influence. In. other words, interception neither ^increases nor decreases the force of the
tendencies bestowed by «hat sign. However, the influences of a house which is host to such entire sign may
be “stepped up" sft*that planets therein may' seem to
possess monf potency than if posited there when not
intercepted. However, that this is more or less conjecture is indicated b f tne fact that the“findings of astrologers are not ifi agreement on ^his poY.it of accelerated
iicfluence. There may^be some occult influence associated
with or* indicated by intercepted signs and in solne cases
it may manifest physically. Th<! older astrologers held
.that the most important purt ’of a'house was its cusp.
A blfmk such as used iCjth the “Mechanical Aspectarlan.”

PART r, THE NA*TAL CHART
IThe. stucfejit should remember tlfat if the T. of H.
shows a sign covering two cusps# the opposite sign of'
the zodiac will HTcdwi^e do so and, consequently, some
other sign.and its opposite will b£ intercepted.. In the
high northern latitudes it is n&t uncommon to find two
signs intercepted in Tine house and of course the two
» opposite signs wjll be intercepted fn the opposite house.
(See .Intercepted signs, Chart 3, p. 170, and note on p. 77.)
Co/rectiorv to Sidereal Time
To the earnest student who is desirous of being accurate in details connected with the proper construction
of a chart, we offer a consideration which should be dealt
with iq all cases when the birth time is presumed to be
reasonably correct, and that is a correction between the
mean focal time«of birth and S. T. at noon. That is,
noting the difference in tim& between birth time and
noon, Correct the Sidereal Time quoted for that birth day
at the rate of 10 second^ tor every h*ur of such difference. The "Table of Correction to S. T.” on page 64
makes the operatiofi simple for parts of an hour.
S. T. increases from the first <jay of spring at the rate
of approximately 4 minutes per day of 24 hours ; 2 minutes in 12 hours; 1 mijiute in 6 hours, of about 10 seconds in 1 hour.
If birth Occurred before ‘noon subtract the necessary
correction from the S. T., as shown in gphemeris.* If
birth was after noon, add to th&S. T. the correction of
• 10 seconds for every hour after.
Thus: For a birth, occurring 4:00 p. m.’mean local
16 :49 :41 S. T. alt’ noon tjiat date *
add. ;40 Correction fcor 4 hours* (Birth occurred.4 hrs.‘
affei* npon.)
16:42:81 t»ansf<ym 81' seconds to I minute and 21
secorfds, making the S. *T. 1I5:S©:21 aftgr correction be-,
tween mfean afta ST T. To this wehow add the 4 hours,
makitjg the S. T. at birth 20:50:21.

qenethlIaCal astrology
Table of Correction to Sidereal Tim<
For Farts of An Hour
Ten seconds is the approximate correction’ per hour;
technically it is 9.856.
seconds correction,
seconds correction,
seconds correction.
seconds1' correction,
seconds correction,
seconds correction,
seconds correction,
seconds correction,
seconds correction,
second correc'ion.
This table will help in risking correction to S. T.( as
given in Ephemeris, for longitude of birth place, and
also the correction'lietween mean and S. T.
Correction to Sidereal Time for Longitude of Birth Place
* Another factor necessary to consider in an effort
towards accuracy is a correction to S. T. for the longitude of any place in question.
Change the longitude into lime by multiplying it by
4 minutes, and divide the product by 60 minutes (to get
hours an/1 minutes) or 60 seconds if less than 15 degrees from Greenwich, and get minutes and seconds :
the answer is the time distance from Greenwich. For
every hour Of this time allow 10 seconds, and for parts
of an hour in proportion.
See above "Toble of Correction to Sidereal Time.”
' If the longitude of tbe place is> east, (of Greenwich)
subtract‘10 seconds fdi*e'-ery ht?ur east/- from the S. T.
at noon.
"If the place is west longitude, add 10 seconds for evtry
hour .west, to the S. T-

*P\RT I, THE NATAL CHART
• Followirfg is an examdle which fcalfes into ccfnsideration fhe necessary corrections between standard and
mean local* time, 4he correction between mear^and S. T.i
and also the .correction between £y T. and the longitude,
of the birA pljce.
Birth at Salem, Oregon. Longitude 123 degrees west.
December 4, 1910, 4:12 p. m., staiWard or ordinary clock
time. . At Salem the difference between standard time
and mean time is 12 minytes, subtracted (as per lesson
on to Cohvert Standard time into Mean time,”)
thus leaking the true or mean time of birth 4:00 p. in.
add :40 correction for 4 hours after noon.
add^ :82 approximate correction for 123 deg. west
longitude.
16:49:163 transpose the 163* to equal 2’ and 43” and
add it to the S. T., making
1651:43 the corrected S. T. at noon.
4:00:00 add, birth tim« after noon.
20:51 :43 corrected S. T. at birth.
Salem, Oregon,*at 123° west, *is about '8, hours and '
12,minutes west of Greenwich, «o the correction to S. T.«
for longitude is approximately 82 secondj, plus.
Of course, for birtft dates before standard time was .
adopted, (Not. ^8, 1883, at noon) arid when nearly every
place had" its own local time, and when the birth hour
also is only vaguely known, these detailed corrections
may be omitted. But for charts crecfed fos Horary
astrology and for children born since 1883 whose births
were lawfully tifned, these rules should always be observed, especially th® correction between Standard and
local time, described in the next chapter..
The»table give^on page 64 will bg flantjy for determining how many sdconds t# use for pjrts of an hour.
Ncfte : » It should he reniemt?ered that great .care is
required to ascSrtain the correct "hour of birth* because
in cfyfcnt years some jjlacqs tute Daylight Saving (also
cabled “Sumip»r J"ime” and “Wat; Time”), which is oije'
hour in advance of regular Standard time.

GENETHLI ACAL ASTROLOGY
TIME CHANGES
t.
An Important Lesson For Students
r Standard Time as used 'in the United "States, Canada
and Mexico, is the term employed to designate that all
the clocks in each tim_ zone register the same time, regardless of whether a place is east or west of the center
of a zone. Standard time is therefore an artificial method
of time and for horoscopal work the standard time should
always be changed to mean time.
Mean time, sometimes called local mean time, mean
Solar time, civil time, or true local time; all of which
titles are intended to designate the real time of a place
as distinguished from its standard or artificial clock time.
The birth time given for horoscope work should always
be reduced to this mean time which is then changed
intc Sidereal Time to determine the S. T. at birth.
How to Convert Standard Time Into ,Me^n Local TimFor Any Place in America
On November 18, 188$, at noon, a change was made
from local to standard time, therefore, for all birth times
and for all charts to be cast for any year since that date,
in America,* calculation should be made to convert
standard time back into mean local time, and the true
time used as th.us founds For instance, in Salem, Ore.,
standard; or city clock tione, is approximately 12 minutes
faster than mean, or true, time. To find what the difference is between standard and mean time for dny other
place in America, observe the following rule :
America is divided into five "hour zones,” each one
15 degrees of longitude in width. Tile center of each
r.one is a dividing line. Places east of center need something added to clock *me ; places west, of ceifter need
something suBtracted from clock time.
* Also for using the “Improved Perpetual Planetary Hour Book.”

FAST L THH WaJaL fiWART
I Add four minutes to, clock tim<? for every degree of
longitude, a place may be situated east of the "center?*
of a rone. The* rfe suit is Mean Local Time from .which
one hour/is to be Subtracted if Daylight Saving time i 3
in use.
'Subtract four minutes from clock time for every degree
of longitude a place may be situated west of the "center"
of a time zone. The result is Mean Local Time from
which one hour is to bet subtracted if Daylight Saving
tim£ fs.in use. ’
Time Zone Divisions
The first zone has “Inter-Colonial,” or "Atlantic" time
as it is more generally called. It extends from 52)4 degrees west longitude to 67)4 degrees west longitude.
(This space of IS degrees includes Novia Scotia, the
Bermudas, the Lesser Antilles and British Guiana.) The
center of this zone is the 60th degree of west longitude.
T^e second zone has “Eastern" time. It extends from
67)4 degrees west longitifde to 82)4* degrees west longitude. The centrjjr of this division is 75 degrees west
longitude. •
The third zone has "Central” 'time. It etetends from*
8 1'/i degrees west longitude tb 97)4 degrees west long-*
itude. The center of this division is ,90 degrees west
longitude. * t
The fourth {one has "Rocky Mountain” time. It extends fro In 9 7)4 degrees west longitude to 112)4 degrees
west longitude. The center of this division is 105 d agrees
west longitude.
The fifth zone has “Pacific" time. It exjends from
U2)4’d£grees west longitude to 127% degrees west longitude. The center of this division is 120* degrees west
longithde.
Orvthe center o! a division, i. e.,6 (T, 75, 90, 105 and 120
degrees west 16hgitud«« "standard” time and "mean".
tim» arj even. But*as one proceeds east oi' west of 'a
center a difference between st?*f*iard and trtit* time occiys*at' the* rate cf four minutes for each degree of longitude, which jnust be bdded tb or sut>tracted,from yous *
clbck in ordfer to get true time. Then subtract one hour *
if Daylight Saving Time is in iiset

genethliAcal astrology
Note: When it is’ found by reference to a reliable
atlas that the place of residence is very near the limit of
a zone, i. et, near 6 7%, 82%, 9 7%, 112% degrees west
longitude, great care should be taken to ascertain what
standard of time is in use ,ac that place, i. ,e., what zone
time. The foregoing rules also apply to Canada. '
No other corrections to clock time are necessary, except to deduct one hour from clock time when Daylight
Saving time is used. The daily newspapers announce
the dates for beginning and ending of the Daylight Saving periods. Unfortunately all places do not begir. and
end on the same dates, nor do all places use it. Astrologically speaking, we wish there were no such thing as
Daylight Saving Time because it contains liability of
serious errors. 1
Examples
No. 1 : Find the necessary correction between stand
ard a'nd mean time for a birth at Salem, Oregon.
Rule: Salem, Oregon, is at 123 degrees west longitude. That city is, therefore, in the Pacific zone, and is
located 3 degrees west of the center (i, e., 120 degrees
west longitude). Four minutes to each degree equals
four times three degrees or 12 minutes. Being west of
the center, subtract 12 minutes from clock time for that
, place for data since Nov. 18, 1883. Thus: When it is
10 o’clock standard time at Salem, the me?,n or true time
at that place is 12 minutes to 10 a. m., i. e.% 9:48 a. m..
and tl.e correction to time should be used for astrological
purposes rn Salem, Oregon.
Example No. 2. , Find the necessary correction between standard and mean time for Boston, Mass.
Process: Boston is on the 71st degree of west longitude. That city is, -therefore, in the eastern zone. It is
located 4 degrees east of the cpnter (it e., 75 degrees
west longitude,) and 4 n\inutes for each decree of lpngitude equals 4 times 4eslegree5, or 16 rpinutes.1 Being
east of' the'center, add 16 minutes to all clock times for
that place, since 1883. Thus : If. a time is given as 1
o'clock at Boston, the mean time at that plarce is 1 :46. Be
sure to note whether J}ayKght“Saving time is in use. (

PART I, THE NA*TAL CHART
Montana in Mountain Time
The entire atatg of Montana waa (laced la standard Mountain
time June 1, 19)9, a ru^ng issued by the Interstate Commerce
Commission. However the Zone Tim£ Map afcowa by the red lint
juat east of a portion of the wefrern boundary that Ihe railroads
^ft a amall section <*f Montana In the Pacific zone. Par births
in places where zone time changes ^re not definitely known It
wili be necessary to ascertain carefully what standard Of time la
used there. For this Information write to the Railway Station
Agent.
lWs*ls an important notice to horoscopa! students, as it means
that hereafter ail charts made for places in Montana west of
112^ degrees of longitude must be corrected to Mountain time.
Heretofore that portion of Montana waa In the Pacific time zone.
The new ruling affects all towns in Montana between 112% and
116 degrees west longitude. Henceforth, to convert Mountain
clock time Into true mean (horoscopal) time for Butte subtract
30 minutes from dock time. For Missoula, subtract 36 minutes.
Ail Other towns* in this portion of Montana accordingly. Study
the following rules and make note of this new time factor for
future reference. • ^
Idaho likewise, practical’*' the entire state, except the Panhandle, haa been placed in Mountain tiuffe.
Time in Detroit
Tiie Detroit News gives the following statistics* regarding time
Detroit, Michigan:
A number of propositions regarding time Change were voted on
In Detroit between 1905 and 1010. The first time was the spring
election nf 1605, when the voters favored central standard time
by a large majority.
In 1907 three propositions were voted on, Central standard.
Eastern standard and Sun time.^ The biggest majority waa in
favor of Central standard. In the fall of 1908 a similar vote was
taken. In the spjing of 1911 the proportion to chauge to Eaatern
standarS was defeated by just a bare majority. In August 1916
the proposition to change to Eaatern standard (assed by a large
majority, and Detroit has had Eastern standard ever aince.
Recegt Changes in U. "time Zones
From the National Bureau of Stpndtfrda we hava the .following
bulletin*:
"The Interstate Commerce haa ordered a change tn the northern
portion of the boundary line btgween the Eastern and Centra*
.Time .Zones .sd as to include the whple of the lowtfr peninsula T>f.
Michigan and the entire state of Ohio In the Eastern Time Zone.
This 'change Is effective Sept. 27, 193ft”

GENETHLIACAL astrology
Daylight Sawing
Daylight Saving offers many advantages in the commercial world as well as to individuals, but intends to
complicate", the ‘‘time factors” for studentSe of astrology
in that if the rule comes into general practice in th-;
United States it becomis incumbent upon astrological
practitioners and students to make allowances for that
advanced hour and subtract it 'from all given Horary
chart times as well as for the Uirth times of infants ; in
addition to making the usual correction bctweeiV mean
and standard time as always, since noon November 18,
1883, when Standard Time was adopted.
In other words, it must be plainly understood whether
any certain given time is Daylight Saving time or not ;
if so, subtract one hour from it, then make the usual correction from standard to mean time, for all astrological .
purposes. •"
To convert standard clock time into mean local time,
add or subtract the number of minute^ given to clock1
,(ime at the various places as shown in t(ie tables on next
page. Your clock recording standard time may be faster
8r slower than mean time.1
The following list is based on thcpreceding rules conterning the time zones but in actual practice the railroads do not adhere rigidly to them but device the zones
where best suited to their terminals. This list is figured
from a Standard Zone Time Map. It illustrates the
deviations “from rule, as bfcforementioned.*
* See descrlptlonuof Zone Time Map In the Astrological Catalogue
Issued by Llewellyn Publications, Ltd.
•• By courtesy of Irene Hume Taylor, Co-4dltor with the late
George Leo Curran, of "World Daylight Saving Time” — We are
enabled to glye the following specific fJata relative to temporary
Chicago "time change. Otherwise add If minutes, to clock/- In
Chicago fore correction to Ortrpl Standard Tlmy : 1
“Chicago’s City Council voted to place Chicago ,on Eastern
•Standard Time throughout then entire year. Thla was effective
i from March 1936, at 2:0Q a. m„ Central Standard Time, until
November 15th, 1936, 2:00 a. m.. Eastern Standard Time Although
(Continued on page 72.)

fART I. THE NATAL CHART
, Examples jf Time Changes <o Convert Standard into Mean Time.
Eastern Standard lime ,Central Standard Time ,
Center of zone ft «75tji deg. Center of zone «ta 90th deg.
I81n. * MUa
Albany, N. T. •. . . add 5 Baton Rouge, La. . sub. 5
Atlanta, Ga. . . . . aub. 38 Birmingham, Ala. . . add 12
Augusta, Me. . . . add 21 Burlington, Iowa . . sub. 5
Boston, Mass. ... "16 Council Bluffs, la. . sub. 24
Baltimore, Md. . . aub.* 7 Davenport, la. . . . " 2
Buffalo, N. Y. . " *16 Des Moines, Iowa "13
Charleston, S. C. . . *"20 Dubuque, Iowa ... " 3
Charleston, W. Va. . " 27 Fargo, N. D "27
Charlotte, N. C. . . "23 Ft. Wayne, Ind. . . add 19
Cincinnati, Ohio . . " 38 Ft. Worth, Texas . aub. 29
Cleveland, Ohio . . "27 Houston, Texas ... "21
Columbia, S. C. . . * 24 Indianapolis, Ind. . . add IS
Coluthbus, Ohio . . "32 Jackson, Miss. . . . sub. 1
Concprd, N. H. . . . add 14 Kansas City, Mo. . . "18
Dayton, Ohio . • . . aub. 37 Leavenworth, Kan. " 20
Detroit, Mich. ... "32 Lincoln, Neb. ... "27
Ft. "Myers, Fla. . . " 28 ‘ Little Rock, Ark. . . . " 9
Galveston, Texas "20 Louisville, Ky. . . . add 17
Grand Rapids, Mich. . " 43 Madisan, Wise. ..." 3
Hartford, Conn. . . add 9 Memphis, Tenn. . . " 0
Lansing. Mlclf- .* . sub. 38 Milwaukee, Wise. . . " 8
Monfreal, Can. . , . add 6 Minneapolis, Mtnn. . aub. 13
Newark, N. J. . . . " 3 Nashville, Tent* . . add 13
New Londoi Conn. . " II "New Orleans, La. . . " 4)
New York City . . " 4 Omaha, Neb. . . . sub. 24
Palm Beach, Fla. . . sub. 20 Sioux Falls, S. D. . . "21
Philadelphia, »Pa. . . ” I St. feouls, Mo. ..." 1
Pittsburgh, Pa. *. . . " "20 Springfield, III. . . . add 1
Portland, Me. . . . add 19 St. Paul, Minn. . . aub. 12
Providence, R. I. . . "14 Topeka, K£n. . . . * " 23
Richmond, Va. ... "10
Rochester, N. Y. . . . "10 *• Soe, Note on page 70.
Savannah, Ga. ... "24
Springfield. Mass. . .* add 10
Syracuse, N. Y. . . aub. 5
Toledo, Ohio .... "34
Trenton, N. J. . . . adfl I , •
Utlaa, N. Y. . . . «sub. 1 t In actual practice time does
Washington, D.. JC. . " 8 01* change exactly -at the asQuebec, Canada . . add 15 * “'ened center of zona line, bot
• • * a sometimes a little on either
aide because standard tltfte la ready railroad time agd It general)/
thangta In ench ’zone where the railway has Its “division* or»
terminal. Therefore It la always well to Inquire of .the native
wlfat standard of yme la In local use at the birth place. '

72 GENETHLlkcAL ASTROLOGY
Examples rtf Time' Changes' to Convert Standard into .Mean Time.
, Mountain Standard Time P&cific Standard Time
Center of z«ne is 103th deg. Centef of tone is 120th deg.
U. S. Territories and Insular Possessions
Standard time is also used in the Territories odtside of the
Continental United States. The placets and Vhe time used are
given below: c
Alaska (Central) approx 10 hours slower than Greenwich.
Guam 0 Vi hounf' faster than Greenwich.
Hawaii . # lO1.^ hours slower than Greenwich.
Panama (lanut Zone ... *. . .» hours shnvtr i^.nt Greenwich.
Philippines 8 hours faster than Grdhnwicli.
Puerto Jtico 4 hours slower than Greenwich.
Samoa f ' ill hours slower thars Greenwich.
Virgin Islanfis ... 4 4 hours slower than Greenwich.
(Note: Effective AprV 1, llJ32, all of Mexico, excepting the
northern territory of Lower California, lakes the time of the
ninetieth meridian west. 6 hours slower than Greenwich, which
is Centra! Standard time. Prior t-.> that date this section was
In Eastetn Standard tiwe.) *•
„ (Contifiued from [\age 70.)**
It might 'havcf worked on? bcttfer to have.Chlcago and New ^ork
City on T)fogsitfiie time, the pleasure was oefeattyj by jKjptilar vote
ut the pods on election day November *3, 1036. *Thls makes considerable confusion in accurate time,, because many of*the sufcjytos
a#id surrounding ci ties ^adopted ^Eastern time at tly? same time as
‘Chlfcago did. but have left if and returned to edhtrai’ time frithottt
following 4he Chicago datej” ('rhe book from which this is .quoted
ia temporarily out of print.)

PART I, THE N/TAL CHART
.Time. Changes Necessary in'Horoscope Work
When a hor^stope is to be erected for a*plactj which
is east c,f the center of*a standard tim^ zone, count ho'w
many degrees of longitude ft is east, multiply that numSer by four minutes and add the result to the birth time
given by the clock; then proce&l to erect the chart with
the true time thus found. (See Note concerning Daylight Saving time on p\ges 65 and 68.)
If the place of birth is west of a center in one of these
zone's, count how many degrees it is west, multiply the
number by four minutes, then subtract the amount from
the time given and proceed to erect the chart in the usual
manner. (See Note concerning Daylight Saving time on
pages 65 and 68.)
[n other words, allow 1 minute for each J4 of a degree
of Jongitude from a center in any zone, adding to the
time given if the place ij east, and subtracting frciin it if
the place is west of the center. .Portland, Oregon, is
• approximately ^ degrees west of center in the Pacific
zone; therefore^ 12 minutes should always be subtracted
from the standard time to make mean local time.
Special attention should be given to the rules in connection with Horary Astrology and Mundaine Astrology
and in the use of Planetary Hour Tables. ,
In calculatfng the nativity, however, the efforts toward
accuracy should not end here, for the horoscope should
be corrected or “rectified” by "Are of .Events” before an
attempt is made at figuring fhe progressed chart. Very
few, people know more than the. approximate time of
their birth, and for that reason extra effort should be
exerted to make tlie data as correct as possible before
erecting a chart.
Vfyhen very 'particular work is*requfred, that is, when
precise, scientific results are,deflred (dates and nature
of evelits, ct(j.) the data must, be corrected.irv & scientific
miyifier. .
Ope of the. mosf accurate and, reliably methods. Is
given in Part IV in this volume : A process of calculations deducted .from prominent’dates in the lffen These

OENETHI.IACAL ASTROLOGY
rules, however, come* under the«highe* branches of as-*
trological work and should be undertaken only. when the
studenjt is fStniliar with the science generally.
Tjme Scandar&s ir^ Foreign Countries
A few worda regarding other standards of time will not be
amiss right here. The careful student win remember to Investigate the dates received fdt births In foreign . countries before
erecting the horoscope. Many nations have standards of time all
their own and, therefore, great caution should be exercised.
In Russia, for instance, they fised the Julian calendar
(until February 14th, 1918 when the Gregorian calendar
was adopted), and in the nineteenth century their dates
differed from ours (i. e., Gregorian, adopted in England
in 1752) by 12 days, and in this twentieth century by 13
days. When it is September 5th by our calendar Jt is
August 23rd by theirs. The Gregorian calendar, adopted
February 14th, 1918, was superceded by /he Soviet’ calendar October 1st, 1929. By it five days comprise each
weekend six such weeks comprise each of the twhlve
months, leaving five (in leap )«:ar six) surplus days to
be accounted special *festivals.
, Throughout England, Greenwich standard time is
used (except* in Canterbury and Ipswich, where local
time is kept) and to find the mean time of any placi
there add 4 minutes for every degree of longitude eaat
of Greenwich, and subtract 4 minutes for each degree
of longitude west. ’ t
Another Kind of Time)
When* the railroad extended Jts line to X .... , and adopted
Mountain time for Its official purposes, the little town waa thrown
Into confusion. Since earliest times the townsfolk had used
Central Standard time. , Ealka went to church. by It, wer& baptized, married aryl burled by Central time, and the old sexton
could not be induced to change his habits. * Now, in order not to
miss being at the station to see the trains come in. they* were
obliged tfl keep two clocks, one timed to Cditral, the other to
Mountain. Soon theicltlzegs split into two factions: '‘Mountain"
and "Central” and there 'Via much arguing of the prosand cons.
Unde Ezra listened but sold nethlng. and gfter considerable .cogitating he decided to use a Wtne Just half way between 'Central
and Mountain, so as “not to liuft any one’s feelings.’’ •
ft It Illustrates the*lw
time blftbs or events
hgve moved from* birth place?
and cannot «lve definite Information on auch matters, write to the
station agent or county dark foi; authentic data •of time changes.

PART I, THE NAl'AL CHART
noi5n marks
Noon Mark is tlje me^n local time at birth-place whep
it is nooif (12 m.) at Greenjvich* England. .
•Because Greenwiih, England, represented 0* 0' of terrestrial longitude at the time of Bbilding the Observatory
there, most Ephemerides are calculated from that point.
This is very convenient .for Britishers and in the early
day:? Astrological History in the United States calculations for correcting the planets' places for a chart were
made by adding to or subtracting from Greenwich time.
But for American students and those born other than
at Gseenwich that cumbersome and unnecessary method
should be substituted by one more up-to-date and in
keeping with actual geographical conditions.
The method of Noon Marks for such calculations is
the logical process.
* Noon Mark is-Hhe mean, local time at the birth place,
wherf it is noon vat Greenwich, England. It is simply a
time equivalent, or to state ^another way:'
t r
Noon Mark is the mean, local time .corresponding to
the time the planets are inserted in the Ephemeris. The
ephemeral place of the planets must be corrected for the
amount of time one is bom before or after the Noon
Mark. < Compare the birth time with the Noon ..Mark
and the difference between the'jji will inaicate the amount
of correction necessary to the given longitude for each
planet, before inserting them in the horoscope.
The following illustrations will show how to do so
correctly. There* is nothing complicated about this
methbd ; on the, .contrary, it is simpler and more logical
than the old way, especially by using the “Table of Nopft
Maflcs”»on pages 78 ‘hnd 79.
Cparecting the” Planets’ places for the Time of Birth ,
•We" have* now finished .with the T. of H., so turn” to ’
th» Ephemeris for the example >date of birth ’(Dec. 4,

GENETHLfACAL ASTROLOGY
1910) and take a gh.nce at the^planets’ places, a% they
are given by sign and degree of longitude. . (Latitude
and declination we will not use at present.) The plane-
•tary locations are calculated for each day «,t noon in
Greenwich, England. (See specimen of .an Ephemeris
on page 54 for December, 1910.) < »•
For persons born right in Oreenwich it is Only necessary to make a correction to the planets’ places, as they
are found in the Ephemeris fol noon, for the amemot of
their motion in the time between 'birth and noon',’ adding
if born after noon and subtracting if before noon. -
The Moon, being swiftest in motion, is the principal
planet to correct. Its approximate motion is about )4
degree of longitude per hour. (Its motion varids between 30 and 37)4 minutes of longitude per hour of
time.)
BSt for births occurring in places other than Greenwich it is necessarjvto work ifi a slightly different manner to find the planets’ correct places in the zodiac at
the moment of birth. First find the time (called .Noon
* Mark) at tb,e place of birth when it is nSion in Greenwich
<and correct the planets' given ephemeral places according to their motion in the amount of time that birth occurred before or after the Noon*Mark of that place,
'adding the motion if .born after the Noon ll^ark and subtracting if born before the Nosn Mark
TIoon Marie for Any4Place — How to Find It
Here is_a simple rule for finding any Noon Mark:
Refer to an atlas and’find the longitude of the birth" place,
multiply the longitude by 4 minutes, divide by 60, subtract t|ie remainder from 11 :60 (12 m.) if it is west longitude, and the ansvfler is the a. m. time (Noon Majk) in
/he place of bir?h wH%n it is no*>n in Greenwich.
If the |ougitude is e^st multiply*it byt 4, "divide by 60
and the answer is the p. In. (Noon Mark) time* in the
. birth place when it is nc*>n in Greenwich. Whe/btfhe
sum canntft be divided «by 60 the sum it6elf.is the Noijn
Mark in minutes of tijne -p. nT.

PART I. THE NA*AL CHART
*. For example, w.e find tfiat New York City is in approximately 7\ degrees West longitude.
Subtracting tlys amount from.noon (11 :60) leaves 7 :04 a.
n\, as the Noon M^rk for New York City, which is the
same as saying that the planets’ places are shown in the
Ephemeris for 7 :04 a. m. in New York City instead of
for Greenwich noon.
Nbfle; The “Table o[ Noon Marks” on pages 78 and 79
obviates the necessity of the foregoing calculations.
Our example native was born at 11 a. m., therefore,
approximately 4 hours after the Noon Mark (7 :04 a. m.)
so di^e allowance must be made for the planets’ additional progress through the zodiac in the 4 hours. As the
Mood’s motioncis approximately degree per hour, in
4 hours after the Noon Mark it would move forward in
the ‘zodiac about 2 degrees’'. Add this to the Moon’s
place as given in the Ephemeris for Dec. 4th, 1910;
.Moon’s longitude, 10:02 in Capricorn, plus 2 degrees
motion in 4 hourt> equals the Moon’s longitude, 12:02 in
Capricorn, at moment of birth.
, Note : If the person had befcn born 4 hours before the
Noon Mark (about 3 a. m.) the 2 degrees motion of the
Moon would be subtracted.
The other planets move so slowly that by beginners
they need not be calculated down any finer than their
places given for the day in thf Ephemeris. HoweVer, if
desired, it can be done by logarithms, but often the
equation can bet performed mentally.
Interception
One 'cannot be too cantioua In the matter -of making, op tike
chart,, of zodiac aa given in T. of H. for M T. at birth, because
not only la It possible for one or two sfjns to'’he Intercepted, bnt
also two signs Intercepted to one house.. Take for Instance, 3. T.
at Wrth, 19:56 In latitude 54’ N. : Here we find tables giving
Capricorn 27“ ojp 10th cusp; Aquarian 20“ on 11th ; ^Places, 28*
on 12th ; Gamin!, 2 :22 on Ascendant Note the omtaaloh of two
slftna, Arles and Taurus,, which must both be placed Intercepted,,
In twelfth house. , This makes Gem,!n! end Csncrtr, and tl)efr
dbposltes, crossing two cuspa each, and puts IJbra and Scorpio'
Intercepted in 6ih.

T8
QENBTHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
Table of Noon Marks — How to Use
’ Noon Mafk is simply the mean local tiane at birth place
when it is noon (12 m.,) at Greenwich, England.
Rule : To find the Noon Mark look irf an atlas and
note the longitude of birth place. Then consult the following Table of Noon' Marks, find that degree in the
column of longitude and the figpres next to it show the
time of Noon Mark. Look to *he left side of longitude
column when birth place is east of Greenwich rntf the
time given as p. m. For places west of Greenwich look
on right side of longitude column and time given as a. m.
Table of Noon Marks
Times equivalent to Greenwich noon.

PART I, THE NATAL CHART 79
Table of Noon Mark*
Another point which sometimes contuses the new
student is that of finding the correct amount of time
betweeif Noon Mark and birth time ■flrhen l^irth is in p. m.
and Noon Mark in a! m. In such cases subtract the Noon
Mark from noon {11 ;60) and add the result to the birth
time.Jthe answer is amount of time born ^fter Noon Mark.
TUs can /dso be ascertained by counting arpund 6n
the facl of a jvatch from time designating *N«on Mark
to tlje 'birth tim$. If Noon Mark is 4:00 a. m. and birth
8:1)0 p. m., the amount of firm: born after Ncy>n Mark i*'
16 hours.

GENETHIAOAL ASTROLOGY
Placing the Planets in a Chart
"Remembe*- that the zodiacal signs are^apparently rising
from the eastern horizon (cusp,,of hrst house i and ascending over thfc top of the chart (called Midheaven)
and setting in the west.
The actual motion of the planets is, therefore, just the
reverse, r. e., they are moving under the eastern horizon,
on through the Nadir (cusp of fourth, hopse, the lowest
point in the chart), up and around the map through" the
western half, except when marked R in Ephemeris,
which means retrograde. But apparently the planets are
carried around with the signs. Right now we are concerned with the actual planetary motion.
When placing the planets in a chart use the degree of
the sign on the cusp of a house as a guide: When a
planej has approached to within 8 degrees of the degree
on the cusp its influence begin^to operate in that house.
This should be indfcated by running a ray from the
planet to the number of the house as !*hown in our example charts. To insure getting the olanefs properly
inserted it i» a good plan to imagine the signs and de-
{(hees on house cusps as £ast or stationary and that ?t
birth the planets were moving toward, or have just
passed them, as the case may be.
A Mental Ecfuation
To Find and Correct Planets’ Places for the Amount
of Time Born Before or After Noon Mark.
The Moon’s*motion varies between 12 and IS degrees
per da£ The average daily motion is about 13 degrees.
To fina its actual mbtion on any date, 'Subtract its given
ephemeral place Sn onS day from,that of "the next, if Dorn
after Noon Mark, but%ub$ract from day preceding bjrthday if bbiyi .before Noof Mark. The answJr is* motion
in one day.
. 4 Multiply^he degrees qf the answer by 60,*«yfd the minutes if there are any, diyidc thtf sum by 24, and you have

PART X, THE NATHL CHART
the kjoon’s motioji per Ijour. This»amount is tKen used
to correct Moon’s givfn eghemer^ place on date pf birth
according to the^amojint of time Dorn before <*r tir the
Noon Marft.
•Note: When the* figures of Moon’s given ephemeral
place are too small to be subtract*! from, add 30 degrees
to it and then do the subtracting.
Moon mores '12’ pel* day Its speed Is 30 ' per hour
When Idoon moves 13’ *per day Its speed Is 32%' per hour
When Moon moves 14" per day its speed Is 35 ' per hour
When Moon moves 15* per day Its speed is 37%' per hour
The other planets’ places are usually easy to correct
by mental calculation similar to the above, but for more
precise work it *s advisable to correct the planets’ places
by logarithms.
Longitude
60 seconds* (“) make 1 minute — marked
60 minute? (') make 1 degree — marked
30 degrees (*) make 1 sign — marked S
12 signs (or 360”) make 1 circle or Zodiac.

OENETHLjACAL ASTROLOGY
LOGARITHMS
.Correcting Planers' Place* frorp Noon Mark
to Their True Places fit Tittle of Bifth
When very precise and accurate Work is required the
planets’ correct places ‘should be found by means of logarithms. a table of which may Ije found in this book and
in back of Ephemeris for any year. The proper rule by
which to use them is as followsi
Add proportional logarithm of the planet’s daily motion to logarithm of the amount of time born from Noon
Mark (these two logs, must always be added) and the
sum will be the log. of the motion required. <
Add this derived motion, in terms of longitude, to the
planet’s given ephemeral place if born after Noon Mark,
but ^ubtract if born before Noon Mark, and the itisult
will be the planet's true place^at moment of birth. Reverse the above prefcess for retrograde planets.
Example — Person born December 3rd, 1907, 4 hours
rand 30 minutes after Noon Mark:
Moon 28:30 Scorpio ori Dec. 4
Moon 14:11 Scorpio on Dec. 3 ,
Log. for 4:30 after N. Mk. .7270
0.9515 is nearest logarithm that can be found in table
of logs, which shows' at top of column 2‘degrees‘; bn side
of table we find 41 minutes; Mooli therefore moves 2
degree^ and 41 minutes in the 4 hours^and 30 minhtes of
time born after N<5on Mark, and this amount rmtst be
^dded to Moon’s ephemeral play:e on bTtth, thus:
*Moot\ 14:11 Scorpio
*2*41 motion in’ 4* hrs. ar.d 30 mihs. on this date
,fdoon 16:52 in Scorpio, correct piace.at'tjme of birfh
and is so entered in ttys hirth'chart.

P/RT I. THE NATAL CHART 8S
The motion of frepeune, Uranus and Saturn js sometimes so slow that jt cannot be computed by logarithms,'
but mental ^quatioi* is sufficient.
•How to Correct a Planet’s Place by Logarithms
Rule: Add proportional logarithm of the planet’s
daily motion (distance traveled between two days) to
the logarithm of. amount <}f time born from Noon Mark
(these tft'o logs must aRvays be added) and the sum will
be the log. of motion required. Note the degrees and
minutes represented by this logarithm, then add this
derived motion, in terms of longitude, to the planet’s
given ephemeral place if born after Moon Mark, but subtract if born before Noon Mark, and the result will be the
planet's true place at moment or birth. Reverse this
process for retrograde planets.
“Man's reactions to planetary stimuli qualify his every expression o' life. This Is %fact known to all astrologers ; but when It Is
brought to the? attention of those who are engaged In the held of
Social Economics It becomes a revelation of striking effect. Man’s
reactions to planetary stimuli qualify his every expression of life.
Thoy give vent to hla every Impetus, plan or decision, and consequently they guide his actions. Planetary stlmuji are the most important factors of man’s experience, whether he is aware of it or
not. Most people do not realize this and so they blunder on from
day to day, frdjtwitly making the same mistakes over and over.
Therefore, (1 Is vitally necessary that man should understand the
nature nf the urges whldh animate his being; learn how to iqpdlfy
or accentuate his response to the planetary vibration* and so profit
by Intelligent use of these mighty foAes of Truth and Reality.
“Knowledge of astrology makes man awarg of the time and character of the operations of Nature and so provides him the opportunity to think and plan, before It la time to act; and to use discrimination lu hla reactions to planetary aspeets, In accordance
with the extent of hls*awarenese and ability to control and determine his actlons."-»STom “lectures on Astroldjfy” by Uewellyn
George.

GENKTHlhACAL ASTROLOGY
Proportional Logarithms
J
Degrees or Hmjra. *
0 3.1684 1.3802 1.0782 9031 7781 8812 6021 6351 4771 4260 8802 338R 0
1 3.1684 1.3730 1.0768 9007 7763 6798 6009 63*41 4762 4262 3796 3382 1
2 2.8573 1.3680 1.0720 89ft* 7746 6784 6997 6330 4763 4244 3788 3376 3
3 2.8812 1.8590 1.0686 8959 7728 8789 6986 6320 474* 4238 3780 3363 3
4 2.6563 1.3622 1.0649 8936 7710 6766 6973 5310 4736 4228 3773 3882 4
6 2.4694 1.3454 1.0614 8912 7692 6741 ^61 5300 4728 4220 3788 3366 6
6 2.3802 1.3388 1.0680 8888 7674 6726.5949 5289 4717 4212 3769 3349 6
8 2.2653 1.3268 1.0611 8842 7639 6698 5922 5259 4699 4198 3746 9 336 8
9 2.2041 1.3196 1.0478 8819 7622 6684 5913 5259 4690 4188 3737 3329 9
10 2.1684 1.3133 1.0444 8796 7804 6670 6902 6249 4682 4180 3730 3383 10
11 2.1170 1.8071 1.0411 8773 7687 6666 6390 6239 4673 4172 3723 3318 11
12 3.0792 1.8010 1.0378 8761 7570 6642 6878 5229 4664 4184 3718 3310 12
13 2.0444 1.2960 1.0345 8728 7652 8628 5866 6219 4665 4156 3709 3303 13
14 2.0122 1.2891 1.0313 8706 7536 6614 5866 5209 4646 4148 3702 3297 14
15 1. 98234*2833 1.0280 8683 7618 6600 6843 5199 4638 4141 3695 3291 16
16 1.9542 1.2776 1.0248 8661 7601 6687 6832 6189 4629 4133 3688 32fft 16
17 1.9279 1.2719 1.0216 8639 7484 6573 6820 6179 4620 4126 3681 3278 17
18 1.9031 1.2663 1.0185 8617 7467 6559 6809 6169 4611 4117 3674 3274 18
19 1.8796 1.2607 1.0163 8695 7451 6546 5797 5159 460a 4109 3667 3286
20 1.8573 1.2553 1.0122 8573 7434 6632 5786 5149 4594 4102 3660 3258 lo
21 1.8361 1.2499 1.0091 8562 7417 C619 6774 6139 4586 4094 3669 3262* ii
2rf 1.8159 1.2446 1.0061 8530 7401 6505 5763 6129 4577 4088 3646 3246 If.
23 1.7966 1.2393 1 0030 8609 7384 649) 5752 6120 4668 4079 3839 3238 2S
24 1.7781 1.2341 1. 000(^:8487 7368 6478 6740 5110 4569 4071 3632 3233 24
26 1.7804 1.2Z89 0.9970 8466 7351 6465 6729 5100 4651 4063 3625 3227 26
26 1.7434 1.2239 0.9940 8445 7336 6451 6713 5090 4T42 4055 3818 3220 26
27 1.7270 1.2188 0.9910 8424 7318 6438 6706 6081 4634 4048 3611 321j4 27
28 1.7112 1.2139 0.9881 8403 7302 6425 6695 5071 4526 4040 3604 3208 28
29 1.6960 D2090 0.9862 8382 7286 6412 6684 5061 4616 4032 3697 3201 29
30 1.6812 1.2041 0.9823 8361 72?0 6398 5673 6061 4608 4026 3690 3196 30
31 1.6670 1.1993 0.9794 8341 7264 6385 6662 6042 4499 4017 3683 3189 32
32 1.6532 1.1946 0.976S 8327 7238 6372 5651 5032 4491 4010 3676 3183 32
33 1.6398 1.1899 0.^737 8300 7222 6359 5640 y>23 **82 4002 3570 3176 33
34 1.6269 1.1852 0.9708 8279 7206 6.746 5629 501.3 4474 3994 3663 3170 34
38 4.6143 1.1806 0.9680 8259 7190 6333 5618 5003 4466 3987 3656 3164 35
36 1.6021 1.1761 0.9662 8239 7174 6320 6607 4994 4457-397;! 3649 3167 36
37 1.6902 1.1716 0.9S26 8219 7159 6307 (.596 4984 4449 3972 3642 3151 37
38 1.6786 1.1671 0 9697 8199 7143 6294 5586 4976 4440 3964 3536 3146 38
39 , 1.5673 1.1627 0.9570 8179 7128 6282 5574 498k 4432 3967 3529 3139 39
40 1.5683 1.1684 O' 9542 8159 71 >2 6269 5563 4966 4424 3949 3522 3133 40
41 1. 54fif 1.1540 0.9516 8140 70^7 6256 5652 4947 4415 3942 3516 3126 *1
42 1. 5351 1.1498 0.9488 8120 7081 6243 5541 4937 4407 3934 3S08 3120 42
43 1.62t9 J. 1455 0.9462 8101 7066 6231 5531 4928 4399 3927 3601 3114 43
44 1.6149 1.1413 0.9435c$081 7050 6218 5520 4918 4300 3919 34903108 44
46 1.6061 1.1322 0.9409 8062 7036 6205 5509 4909 4382 3912 3438 3102 46
4« 1.4956 1.1331 0.5)383 9043 7070 6193 5498 4ft>0 4374 3906 3481 3066 *6
47 1.4863 1.1290 0 9368 8023 7005 6180 5488 4890 4366 3897 3476 30C9 47
48 | 4771 1.1249 0T933O 8004 6990 8168 5477 4881 4367 3890 3468 3083 48
49 1.4682 1.1209 0.9308^7935 6976 6166 5468 4872 4349 3882 3461 3077 48
50 1.4894 1.1170 0.9279 7268 8960 6143 5456 4863 43|J 3875 3454 3077 80
51 1.4508 1.1130 0.9254 7947 6946 6131 6f15 4863 4333 3888 3448 3065 61
6Z 1.4424 1.1091 0.9228 7^29 8970 6118 6438 4844 4324 3860 3441 3058 62
53 1.4341 1.1053 0.9203 7910 6916 6108 6424 4C36 4318 386C 3434.3063* 63
54 1.4260 1J 015 0.9178 7891<.7900 8084 6414 4628 4308.3846 2428 3047 6*
56 U4180 1.0977 0.9153 7873 688916081 5408 4*17 4300 3838 3421 80*1 65
58 1.4102 1.0939 0.9128 7864 8871 6069 5393 4808 4292 8831 9416 308*> 6ft
67 1.4026 1.0902 0.9104 7836 686f 0057 5382(1798 4284 3824 8408 3026 *67
56 1.8949 r. 0866 0.9078 7818 694T 6045 5372 4789 *276 3917 3*01 8012 51
'59 1.3876 1.0828 0 9056 7800'6827 603^6861 4780 4268 88W 3186 8016 89'

GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
EPHEMERIS
Longitude of ‘the Planvie
fjecember 1907
Planets’ Plac|s are for any Noon
ark.
a
"i
U1
'i

PAST I, THE NaAl CHART
J’ARS, FORTUN.SS
fiart of Fortune)
The Part o f Fortune Is a zodiacal point which la equally distant
from the Ascendant as fhe Moon Is from the Suo In longitude. It
benefits the house .In which It Is locntej at birth.
The place of Moon's node and the ten plsnets for any date
may be readily obtained by 'referring to an Ephemerls, but the
place ,o{ the Part .of Fortune’must be calculated from the horoscope Itself. It la used a tea In Horary Astrology, and lta place
In either a natal or horary chart may be found as follows:
Rule: Add the longitude of the Ascendant to the Moon’s longitude from which sum subtract the longitude of the Sun, and the
remainder will be the place of the Part of Fortune.
August 23, 1884, 0:46 A. M„ Elkhart, III. The “Horoscope
Illustrated" (chart No. 3) shows the Ascendant to be Cuncer 4"
18', which equals 3 whole algns 4 degrees 18 minutes from the
first point of the zodiac (0*00' T).
Thij Moon Is 29” 52' In Virgo, -or 5 whole signs 29 degrees 52
minutes from the first point of the zodiac (0'00' T). '
Add these two positions In* terms of longitude, and from the
£um subtract the place of the Bun. The result will be longitude
of the Part of Fortitae ®.
Transpose the 33 degrees hy writing them 1 sign and 3 degrees
and the snswer \#I1I read 4 signs 3 degrees 41 minutes from first
Find that place In the chart and juter the symbol. It Will fall
In the second house. If the work has been correctly performed
It will prove the rule, nnmely, that © will be distant from the
Ascendant the same number of degrees wtych the Moon Is distant
from the Sun. Test It. The Moon Is 29* 23' frogi the Sun. The
© Is 29* 23' from the Ascendant.
Be careful not to tpake an error when crjpntlng from Hast point
of Ari£s.
For Instance:
Ar*es ip" la.O :IP.
Tnurua 15* ls.l, whole sign and 1R» degrees.
Gemini 15.' Is 2 whole 4lgns anil 15 degrees.
Cisflcer 15" Is 3 fcliole %lgns,and,15 degrees. .
In other wqrfis, one whole sign froip th^ first polrft of Arlea A
ttfe 1st point of Taurus. (Infhiencg of, Pars Forturae Is described
in Fart III.)

GENBTHHACAL ASTROLOGY
' ZOD.IACAL ASPECTS
A most 'vifailing experience of "the excitement o’f sublunary
natures, by the conjunction and asaects' of the ptaVets, has Instructed and compelled my unwilling belief. — Kepler
Aspect Defined
An aspect is a certain angular distance between
two points in the zodiac; from one planet to ahother
or from a planet to a point in the chart, as for instance,
a house cusp. Certain distances produce effective angles
which are appropriately named. Astrology uses 16 aspects, including the Conjunction and Parallel.
An aspect is the angle between two planets at some
time and place in their established onbits, and ‘their
angular relation to the earth, the influence of which is
registered or received by those individuals who are receptive or keyed to those partisular vibrations, according
to the impress or iifipulse given their being at the moment of their birth by the planetary vibrations prqvail-
,ing at that time and place.
It has been observed that students just beginning th’e
study of astrology usually find it difficult to master the
.subject of planetary aspects and orbs. Because this is
a basic feature in hor'oscopy, it.should ba f&lly, comprehended. That its importance may ,be realized, extra
effort'is here ma^le to familiarize students with each detail that each step shall be thoroughly understood and
the aspect6< correctly recorded.
It makes arf immense difference whether an aspect is
applying or separating, that is, forming or waning.
Aspects are divided* into two glasses, 'harmonious' and
inharmonious, according fo the nature of the actior^ or
the responses, they produce. Harmonious dspedts may
be thougflt of as pacifying* or mollifying, while the inharmonious aspects may bf considered al stimulating-br
ilrjtating. ‘The stimulating effect of the iViharmoniouf
aspects is often seen i? the horoscopes of persons, who

PART I. THE NATAL CHART «
have "made their ,mark”. or achieved distinction by vigorous efforts. On the’ other hancV in the horoscopes o.f
persons wijji a preponderance of harmonious/aspects we
find they h'ave attained saccess no* so much by the vigorous prosecuticyi of business efforts as by apparent "good
luck" or fortunate circumstances. They “get the breaks.”
For instance, the old homestead which the folks acquired
from the Government at $2.00 per acre and on which
they worked hard for years to clear and cultivate, is at
last willed to a nephew who finds that a town has grown
up aroflnd the old place and it is now, without labor on
his part, worth a fortune when divided into city lots.
Not every one with a preponderance of good aspects
is “successful” in life; some may be too easily satisfied
or contented. Nor does every one with a preponderance
of inharmonious aspects achieve "success” through stimulating effort; they may be too easily irritated and develop obstacles in their path through enmities, injuries,
etc.
* So it wiU be ^en that aspects are the modifying influences in a horoscope. Unless aspects are properly
computed the necessary modifications canhot be read
ahd the delineations not properly made. The influence
of a planet in a “hguse” is qualified by the aspects it
beholds.
Much ’of the skijl and art in reading horoscopes depends upon the correct recording of aspects and knowledge of their influence. The »rst requisite is*the ability
to calculate and collect the facts about aspects. Although
such bdbks as the "A to Z Horosc&pe Maker and Delineator” give the text of the influence of each planetary
aspect, the saying of Ptolemy should bcobserved ^“Judgment must be regulated by thyself af well as by the
science.’
Consider 'th,e, different applications of the. same aspect
in s^veraNsuch cases as a man in the penitentiary, or one
lying ill in a hospital ? a youth off on his vacation ; a matt
ki charge of a flourishing business; a woman chitfly.
concerned with her family of- children.

OENETHLIACAL ASTROLOOT
A physician does n«t <liagnosetuntil He is familiar, with'
the history of the case ; ^likewise an 'astrologer jhould not
render judgment until he is !amiljar»tvith ,his client’s
statiorf in life, his condition and actitites, in'order that
he may property anticipate the nature of the person’s
response to the vibratory action of- an aspect. To do
this correctly he must iiave made no mistake about the
aspect.
In fact, the aspect must first te diagnosed along»these
lines :
1 — Quality of aspect (good or adverse)
2 — Platlc (wide orb) or partlla (exact aspect)
3 — Forming or waning
4 — Is the nspecting planet sinister or dexter? How many degrees away from the aspected planet is the one which Is doing
the aspecting? How mnny degrees plus or minus the exact aspect?
5 — Is the aspecting planet angulaif succedent or cadent?
6 — Is the aspecting plaDet In a cardinal, fixed or. movable sign?1
, 7 — Is the aspecting planet lo a fruitful or hprren sign?
«S — la the aspecting planet 0 so-called benefle or mnlefic?
9 — What house oi the horoscope doeg the aspecting planet
occupy ?
10 — Does the aspecting*planet have any nthea a'spects at the
same time? If so compare them una decide whether one accentuates iy modifies the other. *
11 — What -la the nature oft the aspected plaDet, malefic or
benafle?
12 — What liousg does tTie aspected planet occupy? Is It elevated
above the aspecting planet, or below It ln*the chart?
13 — Are either oi* thgse planets In their signs of dignity or
debility?
— Is either of them rttroarade?
The most siinportant of these questions are: <J) What Is the
nature ofHhe aspect?: and (3) fa it applying Of separating?. To
determine these points correctly, on* should study the Dlagrammtfdf Illustration of Aspects, on page 102.

PART I, THE NATAL CHART
■Table of the Sixteen Flaperary Aspects
d CoDjsnctlon— Same degree of longitude; g<x^ or .adverse,
according ip os tun? of: plaoeta. „
P Parallel — Same* degree of declination ; «ood or adverse, according to nature of planets. *
Vlgintile — 18 degrees apart, slightly good.
V Qclndeclle — 24 degrees apart, Slightly good.
X Seml-seztile— 30 degrees apart, slightly good.
I Decile — 36 degrees afiart, slightly good.
6 Semi-square — 45 decrees apart, slightly adverse,
sf: textile — 60 degrees apart, good.
Q Quintile — 72 degrees apart, slightly good.
□ Square— 90 degrees apart, adverse.
? Tredecile — 108 degrees apart, slightly good.
Trine — 120 degrees apart, good.
# Sesquiquadrate — 135 degrees apart, slightly adverse.
±* Blqulntlle-,'144 degrees apart, slightly good.
0 Quincunx — 150 degrees apart, slightly adverse.
$ Opposition — 180 degrees apart, adverse.
The parallel, complete when planets a.'e In the same degree and
minute of declinatjpn, begins one degree from point of aspect when
applying, and ends one degree past It. The degree of declination
of planets may d>e found In the Ephemerls. Do not confute
declination with longitude
Memorize the Symbols of "Aspects
Those giveji in this table are the ones mainly used.
Conjunction • <5 Seml-sextile , X
Parallel Par. or P ^Semi-square , t
Opposition 8 Quintile Q
Trlse* m A Sesquiquadrate * #
Square -. r. □ Bl-quintlle .• ±
Sexjile >f: Quincunx 0
Nate: These are the aspects to be considered in the reading
of n natal chart, *rhe othe^ (■*■ Vlh are so slight In Influetjce
that they are not ger^rally used, texedbt In ihe progressed horosc<^>e, ar In "other finer calculations..

GENETHLIAOAL ASTROLOGY
Zodiacal Order and Natu/e of Aspects”
Same deg.— ^ Conjunction' unifying, binding; •
Same deg.— P Parallel, s^ne aa a conjunction In elfecl
18 deg.—- *- Vlgfntlle, slightly good, harmonlzlgg
24 deg.— V Qulndeclle, slightly good, harmonizing
30 deg— X Seml-sextllqg slightly good, harmonizing
36 deg— 1 Decile, slightly good, harmonizing
45 deg.— L Semi-square, moderately evil, disintegrative.
60 deg— ^ Sextlle, favorable, creative.
72 deg— Q Quintile, slightly good, harmonizing *
00 deg— □ Square, disappointing, rejectlve, obstructive.
108 deg— f Tredecile, slightly good, harmonizing.
120 deg— A Trine, fortunate, constructive, harmonious.
135 deg.—# Seaqulquadrate, slightly evil, provoking.
144 deg— ± Bl-quintile, slightly good.
150 deg— 0 Quincunx, slightly evil, Indiffeient, Indecldlve
irritating
lSO^leg— 8 Opposition, separative, extreme, opposed, tiestructlve.
Relative Power of Aapect%
6 Conjunction.
P Parallel
S 180* Opposition
A 120* Trine
□ 00* Square
* 60* Sextlle
L 45* Semi-square
X 30* Seml-sextlle
® 150* QuinJonx
Q 72* Quintile
# 135* Sesqnlquadrate
± 144* Bl-qulntlle
18* Vlglntile
V 24* Qulndeclle
i «36* Decile •
* 108* Tredecile
The strongest aspect is here shown at top of list; the
parallel is sajd to be as strong as a conjunction. The
other aspects are listefi in the order of fheir sti^rfgth.
The weakest (Tredecile) is at end oHist.

Past i, the n/tal chart
Major Aspects
3)c Sextlle — Complete at 90 degrees'apart Its lnjffience' la good.
□ Squall — Complete at* 80 degri^s apart Ita Influence It
adverse. •
A TrtDe — Complete at 120 degrees apart Ita lDfluence la good.
S Opposition — Complete at 180 degrees apart. Its Influence Is
adverse. *
d Conjunction— A term used to signify that twp or more
planets are In the aame decree of longitude When one planet la
wltids Its orb ol the body of another planet, or with the ensp of
a house, It la said then*to be In conjunction with that planet or
cusp. The effect of thla position la good or adverse according to
the nature of the plaoets.
Allow the full orb of a planet to form a major aspect.
P Parallel — MeaDS equal distance from tf>e celestial equator,
north or Bouth, or one stellar body north and the other south of
It A parallel of decllnatloo has the same effect as a conjunction.
Allow an orb of^ooly one degree to form this aspect. The declinations of planets are to be found In an Ephcmerls for date, of
blr\ji.
Strength or Power of Major Aspects
1st — Conjunction and Parallel.
2nd — Oppositions 180 degrees apart.
3nd — Trifle, 120 degrees.
4th — Square, 9# degrees.
5th — Sextlle, 60 degrees.
Minor Aspects
Vlglntlle — 18 degrees apart, slightly good, has ao orb of -*2
degrees.
V Qulndeclle — 24 degrees apart, slightly good, has an orb of 2
degrees.
X Seml-sextlle — 30 degrees apsgt. slightly good ; baa an orb of
4 degrees.
1 Osclle — 36 degrees apart, slightly, good, hag an orb of 2
degrees. #
£ Semi-square — 45 degrees apart, slightly adverse; haa an orb
of 4 degrees. *
QvQulntlle — 72 degrees apart, slightly gosd: has aD orb of 4
degrees. ** ,
J Tredeclle — 108 degrees apart* slightly good, haa an orb of 2
degrees* * * *
# Sesqulquaflf a te — 135 degrees apart, slightly Jdtferje; has an
<yb«of 2 dbgrees.
“± Bl-quintlle— 144 d^reerf apart, slightly good; /as an orb„«f
0 Quincunx— 150 degrees* apart, slightly adverse; jias an orb
* 2 ‘degrees.

GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
Foregoing are the minor afpects commonly used In iatal charts.
The minor Aspect! all hare about ttie same relative 'amount of
power o' strength. The semi-square seems to'be the More powerful of the minor as^ecta - s o
An Orderly Tabulation of ‘Aspects
Always count the shortest way through the zodiac in
the chart, either forward or b^dk, to figure an aspect.
When a benefic planet is found to bfe retrograde (marked
R in the Ephemeris,) its power for good is weakened.
When a malefic planet is retrograde its malignancy is
magnified.
When figuring the aspects for a horoscope always start
with the Moon. Being the swiftest in motion she can
apply to and form aspects with all the father planets.
Then take Mercury, it being next in speed. Find the
distance between it and all the remaining planets in tlTeir
order and see if any aspects aYe formed and carefully
tabulate them. Then* in the same manner take up the
aspects of Venus, Sun, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, 'Uranus £nd
Neptune. Pljito being slowest and lasfr in order, can
apply to none.
When cheeking tip aspects do the*work in this order:
8 Mercury .!. S 0 J 5 9
9 Venus to 0 3 U b V B
O Sun to „ $ U b V V e
3 Mars to U b V V B
U Jupiter to' .*..... 1? P
b Saturn to .Jr. — » W W E
U1 Uranus to V- B
V Nepftine to 1?. _ .-. &
E Pluto to none. ' **

PJtRT I, THE NA’fAL CHART
PLANETARY ORBS
The orb 6f a placet or, the orb pf an aspect is ifs surrounding circle of influence. .Eight degi^es forward and
ba#ck of a planet constitute its orb. This amount of distance in longitude applies to all rfhe planets except the
Sun and Moon. (See "Orb of Influence Explained.’*) The
Sun's orb is 12 degrees .when applying (forming) to a
major aspect, agd 17 degtees when leaving it (separating) passed tht? point of aspect. This rule applies
particularly to the Sun’s conjunctions, as it is likely that
its orb (in major aspects) is perceptible to the senses
only 12 degrees before and after an exact aspect.
The Moon’s orb is 8 degrees when approaching a
major*aspect, and 12 degrees when leaving it.
Thfe rule applies particularly to the Moon’s conjunctions, as it is likely that iif actual practice its orb of perceptible influence is 8 degrees applying to and separating from major aspects.
When the Moon, for instanse, is traveling toward 3
plAiet in question, the sextile (>k) begins its influence
when Moon is 68 degftes distant and increases in power
as Moon draws up to the exact degree of aspect (60 degrees H<) after which its power wanes with constantly
diminishing influence until Moon reaches 48 degrees
distance or 12 degrees past th^actual dfegree pr sextile
aspect.
Example — Moon in, Leo 10 degrees, Vehus in Libra
18 degrees — sextile beginning; Moon in^Leo 18 degrees,
Venus m Libra 18 degrees = sextile e.<act ; Moon in Leo
30 degrees, Venqa in Libra 18 degrees — end of sextile^
”, l*en the Moon, tcA- instance, is traveling jvjray from
a plane; in question, the* sextile aspect begins to form at
52 degrees aistance,^pd i|s influence will increase In
power to the 60th,degree (exact degree" of sextiffe aspect*).*
Fitsm 60 to 72 degrees awajrfrom the planet the power of
the aspfect wanes, yith constantly diminishing influence.

GENETHLlhCAL ASTROLOGY
Example — Mercury 13 degree1', in Scorpio, Moon 5 degrees, in iRisces = trine beginning; Mercury ,13 degrees
in Scorpio* Moon 13 degrees in Risers = 4,rine exact;
Mercury 13 degrees in Scorpio, Moon 25 degrees in
Pisces = end of trine.
The applying planet comes into aspect and that aspect
begins to operate as soon as the planet's orb reaches the
degree constituting the aspect./ It remains effective until
the planet has passed out of its .range (>f orb.
The quality of this influence is determined by the nature of the aspect, i. e., whether it is a good or an adverse
one.
O
Suppose that Mars is approaching Jupiter: When Mars
gets within 8 degrees of the place in the”zodiac occupied
by Tupiter the influence, of conjunction begins, the
strongest point being where the two planets would occupy the same degree of longitude, beyond which the
influence of the aspect decreases in power and ceases a,*
8 degrees past the place of Jupiter.
c Example — Mars 1 degiee in Leo, Jupiter y degrees in
Leo = Conjunction forming; Mars 9 degrees in Leo,
Jupiter 9 degrees in Leo = Conjunction exact; Jupiter
9 degrees in Leo, Mars 17 degrees in Leo = end of Conjunction.
These rules apply to a'l of the aspects and should be
thoroughly mastered in order that the student may determine with accuracy whether an aspect is forming or
separating. .It is very important to know whether an
aspect is applying or waning, il the three foregoing
examples are sfud:ed until perfectly understood fhe subject of planetary aspects becomes quite simple, aitd predictions may be made more cdrrectly. ’ For instance, in
the branch known as Horary Astrology it is pot do be
prediejefi {hat an event will occur from on aspect that is
PjMt.
The influence of ap aspeot that is forming is mere
powerful than that of an" aspect which js separating As

PAlST I, THE NATAL CHART
tTie aspecting planet draws near the'culminating degree,
the aspect grows^stronger.but, asisoon as the^fculmina--
ting point isepassecf and the planet begins to leave it, the
power wanes, and after tlfe planet lirrivesiat the limit of
the orb, the influence of the ispect becomes practically
imperceptible.
In the orb of aspect with the Sun or Moon the. line of
demarcation between the s^xtile and quintile, particularly, setrf^s obscure, but ^hat is of little moment because
both aspects are of the same quality, i. e., good.
Note : This same “overlapping of orbs" occurs between the vigintile, quindecile, senii-sextile and decile
aspect* if an orb of 4 degrees is used for minor aspects;
hence, in actual practice it is probably more practical to
use an orb of but 2 degrees for these aspects.
It appears that the ancient rule for the Sun of l^degrees applying, and 17 dejfrecs leaving an aspect, must
rent be too strictly#adhered to. For instance, when Sun
is leavjng a trine aspect and proceeding away from the
aspected planet tlfe orb of 17 added to 120 =i 137, or 2
decrees past the sesquiquadratc aspect of 135” !
Likewise, Sun leaviifg sextile, and drawing away from
planet 60 b 17 = 77°, or 5 degrees pa.st the quintile, 72° !
In such cases drop, the diminishing aspect and record
the next as soon as within 2 or tf degrees of same, as the
case requires.
’interception in Relation to ‘Aspects
Npte* When locking up aspects i» horoscope recollect ethat each sign contains 30 degrees, land remembei
to count from one'zodiacaf sign t|) aqpther, including the
interc«ptegi signs. N4t from one house to anotljer, a*
the houses seld»m contain exactly 30 degrees, ^some
houjc% havhig lass and some more especially those
house's which contain afi intercepted ^jgn, as tite whole
30«degrees of the* intercepted sign^is therein as well as
those degrees of <ji,e other sign, as shown by the Jusps.

98 . GENETHlllACAL, ASTROLOGY
Count the number of degrees between planetr from
.sign to thgn regardless of whether or not a sign may be
intercepted. Interception makes na difference when figuring aspects. Interception is 6nly ah appearance, while
longitudinal distance is a 'fact.
Orb off Influence Explained
Students sometimes wondeo how a planet’s orb of
influence became known, tha*t is, the range in .dfgrees
where an aspect begins to manifest prior to the kctual or
partile aspect. For instance: The orb of Jupiter is said
to be 10 degrees; the orb of the influence of Mercury,
Venus, Mars, Saturn, Uranus, Neptune is 8 degrees,
while the orb of the Sun is 12 degrees; the l^oon 8
degrees.
One. of the interesting ways in which the extent of orbs
is ascertained, is by watching in an Ephemeris, the approach of two planets to a conjunction and noting by
newspaper reports'the beginning of events which coincide with the nature of such conjunction.. Observations
of such phenomena began long before^ there were' newspapers; loTig before printing was invented, which is of
‘comparatively recent origin. In fact, the inventions of
writing was iat^ely the result of ^he need to adequately
record celestial phenomena with relation to seasons for
planting, hunting, fishing, warnings qf floods, famine
or pestilence.
Probaply th£ reason t,hat Jupiter has a larger orb than
the other planets (excepting our satellite the Moon, and
the Sun) 'is because it is by far the largest among those
planets.
Jupiter, the *gkmt planet," is (excepting the Sun), the
largest body iA ourtsolar system. It j? more thah three
times as large and«abqut thrde times as massive as all
\he other planets put together. Yt*t, such io th* preponderating'mass of our Sun that Jupiter is less than onethousandth part of our central luminary.
Returning to the subject -of range of orb, it is noticeable that the great Mississippi River floods begah about

PAST L THE NATSL CHART
Xpril ,17th, ,1927, .when jjranus was in Aries O’degrees
56 minute^, and Jupiter exactly ten degrees hpfore the
conjunction/withf it; Jupiter being in Pisces 2u degrees'
56 minutes.
Uranus has to do with distribution of fluids and gases
in the human body. The pictureof its sign is a spilling
water pot; the symbol of its sign is
Jupiter is the planet of bountiful supply, but when
conjoined with an erratic planet like Uranus, it produces
excess; especially when in Pisces (the sign of the seas)
does it tend to produce floods. So we observe that, while
the conjunction was yet in process of forming, that is,
as soon as Jupiter came within ten degrees of Uranus,
the influence became manifest.
It is noticeable that Mars entered Cancer at the same
time. Cancer is a watery sign, ruling fresh water. fNeptune denotes salt water.)S Mars in Cancer caused the
^reat amount. of loss, damage and strife. Uranus denoted
the <jynamking <Jf the levees, while Jupiter's influence
is seen in the gm_-at philanthropic movements to aid the.o
flgod sufferers.
Another way for students to study thb length or range
of plane taryt orbs is by noting in(their own horoscope*
the distance irt degrees from an aspect when events
transpire of its coinciding nature, by the movement of
transiting planets.
In qng chart pnder observation the Sun is, eleven degrees lacking partite opposition to Saturry ruler of the
house- of sickness in that chart. The Sun’s apparent
motion by transit Js one degree per dyy»and it is .noticeable that the native feels physic^Jly iAdisposed eleven
days before the* squares and pppositions made by th{
Suns By "the time that the Sun maxes the partile aspeet.
the native has»become.adjusted to the influence, but on
the^day of partile the influence is again strongly felt.
• Because the native has* a knotyledge of planetary In- •
fluenc’es, she is able to "discount" or minimize tftc effects

OENETHmACAL ASTROLOGY
of that • influence 'through the'warning which astrology
provides, by careful attention *to. prdper pvophyfactics,
■hygiene, Vijiiet, exercise, recreation, relaxation and constructive, optimistic mental attitudes.*
It is at eleven degrees prior to, tne aspect tnat tne
effect of Sun adverse rSaturn becomes noticeable, but it
is quite likely that the indisposition has been forming for
twenty-dour hours previous to its being consciously
noted, that is, one degree previous, mpking an, orb of
influence with a total range of twelve degrees.
However, it is biblically stated that in "those days”
(the Aquarian age) the times shall be shortened ; hence,
it will make interesting study for students to observe
events, conditions or states of being associated* with
planetary aspects, and make a record of Jthe observations
so that the tabulations can be compared with the records
of ojhcr students, to determine whether in these strenuous times the orbs have been,“shortened.”
Aspects Applying or Separating, *
* Application : (a) When a planet direct in course applies to an aspect with another planet or cusp; (b) whtn
a planet retrograde applies to an ^ppect; (c) when both
planets are retrograde and one overtakes the other.
Separation: Moving away from the partile; a diminution, of influence because of dissolution of the aspect.
In Horary astrology it indicates events just past, or that
the matter inquired after will not occur.
The" conjunctif n^ind parallel, strictly speaking, aje not
aspects but position#. Howevjr, for convenience they
kte usually referred fo a# aspects, j
Platic aspects are those which lire not exact, but yrith-
,in orb either applying or separatimg.
Kartilf aspects are trfose wh*ich are exact.

PART T THE NATAL CHART . * 101
Planetary fcspecfs ane tontinualjy occurring^usually
there are a dumber of them'in operation each dry. Every
aspect has its own. ffartktular influence while it Also
assists in making up the genei^l tendcnci!s in combination with the other aspects that may also be in operation.
The various aspects derive their names from the angular relations which planets.form one with another in their
transit through the zodiac * the earth in each case being
the focafr point of the Ays. The aspects which are in
operation at the time of a birth are of particular significance to that individual. Their vibrations motivate and
cast the tendencies of metabolism and other bodily functions which find physical and mental expression that
identify the personality, qualify the actions and largely
determine the environment and experiences.
To Figure ‘Aspects
Always go the shortest way througti the zodiac in the
c&art, either jforwaed or back, to figure an aspect.
The following diagram is a sample illustration of as- (
pects. It is intended only to help portray the idea of
how the Moon, for ii^tance, might form aspects with
other planets. For convenience every aspect is here
shown as beiil^vxact or partile. (An aspect which is
not exact is platic.)
1'lanetary vibrations operate according to the grade of Intelligence, whether It be through the seed, the animal or t£e. human.
The humhn'has the 'advantage of being affle to accept, modify,
amplify, diminish or transform the effect of planetHry vibrations
through conscious exercise of his faculties. Man Is frpe within
the confines of Oosmic^.uw ; the degree of freedom he manifests
being largely dependent upon what use he maMbs of his Intelligence. Hence the stertiy of pliyietary aspeAs Is Important.

GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
Diagrammatic Illustration di Aspects
UIDHEAVEN„ • '
tef/CLvt. \
NADIR
Dexter or Sinister Aspects
Reniem&er that InHstroiogy,
the top of chat t represents
south; therefore the t/foon Is
•'dexter” (at right of) and
travelling away from ;
Pluto X = seml-sextlle
V * = sextlle
iO[- square >
t> A = trine
K'B = quincunx
The iMoon Is “sinister” (to
the left^. of) and travelling
•toward : '
fi X = seml-saxtlle,
0 * = sextlle 1
9 0 = square
,>0 A = trine
As the Moon Is exactly 8 $ It Is neither dexter nor sinister.

PART I. THE natal CHART
* Ex^eptiftg the exact opposition, fdl'aspects are either
dexter or sihister* Tha^is, an a^pecting planet is either
at the rigfhj (dexter) of the ltfft (sinister),/of .those
planets with whicK i t m,iy be making aspects. In»other
words, it is qjther travelling away from, or travelling
toward those planets. In the foregoing diagram the
Moon is travelling away from ajl those planets which
are above the horizon ; the Moon is to the right of them
and consequently forming dexter aspects. The Moon is
approaching all, the planrts under the horizon, is to the
left of°them and thenjfore forming sinister aspects.
Dexter and sinister positions also have significance in
that the influence of the rays of an aspector planet must
necessarily be of somewhat different quality or effect
when it is moving away (dexter) from the aspected
planet, comparsd with when it is approaching (sinister)
such planet. But this difference is not sufficiently perceptible to define its effect ift nativities.
, The two words therefore designate relatively the kind
or position.of an Aspect (whether approaching or leaving
the Body of another planet) rather than describing differ^,
ent influences. Sinister aspects are sonflewhat more
ffowerful than dexter aspects. *
The positions “dexter” and “sinister” of the aspecting
planet ate n^it«particularly significant in natal astrology.
They are mentione,d here simply as information and not
as a feature to be stressed.
^Aspects' in Relation to the Natal Chart
Note:
1-r-The orbs given here pertain to fh$ natal chart only.
l^-O/bs ,of progtfssed hordscope are tully explained
in Part II under heading, "The Progressed .flotoscope."
3 — In Hotary Astrtilo^ (see Dictionary of Astrolop
4cal Terms in” latter pjges) ^nly' aspects which •are.
applying, or forming, are expected to produce events or

OENETHLUCAL ASTROLOGY
conditions ; aspect^ iyh?ch are separating, or diminishing,'
indicate past condition, s. e , *
4— Aspects both forming and Separating are to be
recorded in the 'natal chart., ,
In the orb of aspec^ with the Sun or Moon the line
of demarcation between the Sextile and Quintile, particularly, seems rather obscure,* but that is of little moment because both aspects are'of the same quality.
Parallel, complete when in the same degree of declination, begins 1 degree away when applying and ends 1
'degree past. The degree of declination of planets may
be found in the Ephemeris. (
It is well also to note the house ruled by the aspecting
planet for its tendency is to manifest qualities of such
house* through the aspect.
Note : In Horary* astrology any planet conjunction
with the Sun is adverse, being "combtfit," 'burnt up, or
jfs influence appropriated by the Sun. fn which case it
would seem better in a natal chart, also, if a planet were
nflt closer to the Sun than»}4 degrees.
Rule: To find the aspects in your own or any horoscope for the time of birth, count how unlmy degrees
there are between the planets in the zodiac and then
refer t« the following tables to learn whether or net that
number of degrees constitutes an aspect.
Note: The three ’tables following show the number
of degrees wh\ch constitute the limits of orb of each
aspect as used in ^ctual practice, showing also the aspects most generally used in relation to the natal chart.

PA*RT I. THE NATAL OHART
Solar Aspects*
The tabI*e<giveh.below shows the name ot each aspect
and the number of*degr£es constituting Jt when formed
by the Sun: • •
•Vigintile, 16 to 2Cf degrees apart. slightly good
Quindecile. 22 to 26 degrees apart slightly good
Semi-sextile, 26 to 34 degrees apart slightly good
Decile, 34 to 38 degree* apart slightly good
Semfr-square, 41 to 49 degrees apart—.slightly adv.
Sextile, 50 to 68 degrees apart Good
Quintile, 68 to 76 degrees apart slightly good
Square, 78 to 107 degrees apart Adverse
Tredecile, 106 to 110 degrees apart slightly good
Trime, 109 to 133 degrees apart Good
Sesguiquadrate, 133 to 137 deg. apart.... slightly adv.
Biquintile, 142 to 146 degrees apart....slightly good
Quincunx, 148 to 152 degrees apart—.slightly adv.
Opposition, 168 to 197 ^egrees apart Adverse
Conjunction, 12 degrees approaching a planet or
' point in the.zotyac, and 17 degrees when leaving it.
Lunar Aspects
The table following shows the name of each aspect
and the number of degrees constituting’it when formed
by the Moon : .
Vigintile, 1% to 20 degrees apart slightly good
Quindecile, 22 to 26 degrees apart slightly gqpd
Semi-sextile, 26 to 34 degress apart... .Slightly good
Decile, 34 to 38 degrees aparf. slightly good
Semi-stjuare, 4J to 49 degrees ap^rt— .slightly adv.
Sextile, 52 to 68 degrees apart •. Good
Quintile, 68 to 76 efegrees apart slightly good
Square, 82 to ICC degrees apart £..* Adverse
Tredecile, 106 Jo 110 degrees apait slightly good
Trine, 112 to 1J2 degre'es apart — ■ Good
Ses^uiqp'adsate, 133»to 137 deg. apart... .sligljtlyadv.
Bi-quintile, 142 to 146 degrees apart—.slightly good
Qjtiscunx,* 148 to 152 degrees, apart slightly adv.
Opposition, 272 to 192 degrees apart Adverse*
Conjunction, 8 f degrees »approaxhing a planet or
point 'in the zodiac, and 12 degrees wh$n leaving it.

GENETHU'ACAI, ASTROLOGY
Inter-Planetary (Mujual)) ^Aspects
Thp table given below shows fhe, name^'of aspects,
their nature aiyl their orb of influence in degrees when
formed between any of 'the seven placets, Mercury,
Venus, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus and Neptune.
Aspects among these planets are termed inter-planetarv,
or mutual, aspects. The orb of Pluto has not been
definitely ascertained. m*
Vigintile, 16 to 20 degrees apart slight!/ good
Quindecile, 22 to 26 degrees apart slightly good
Semi-sextile, 26 to 34 degrees apart....slightly good
Decile, 34 to 38 degrees apart slightly good
Semi-square 41 to 49 degrees apart slightly adv.
Sextile, 52 to 68 degrees apart Good
Quintile, 68 to 76 degrees apart ^..slightly good
Square, 82 to 98 degrees apart Adverse
Tredecile, 106 to 1 10 degrees apart.... slightly good
Trine, 112 to 128 degrees Cpart Good
Sesquiquadrate, 133 to 137 deg. apart....slightly adv. (
Bi-quintile, 142 to 146 deg. apart..' Slightly good
Quincuny, 148 to 152 deg. apart i .....slightly Jadv.
Opposition, 172 to 188 degrees apart Adverse
Conjunction, within 8 degrees approaching or leading a planet or point in the zodiac.
In following Nature’s urge we not only feel good during good
aapedta but we cypress our feelings In pleasant thoughts, words
and acta, hence, we are aptt^o do aod say the right things at the
right time which produce results In kind, that Is, we are lnclinedi
to do the things whlclj.hr! ng pleasure, happiness, good( fortune and'
productiveness
On the other hand, we are apt during adverse aspects to feel
Inhanbanlous andjtfeact likewise, brlngln^displeaanre, Opposition,
etc., which produce obstacles, limitations and tronhle. Bjit as we
progress along the scale of understanding through the study of
Nature's laws we give*the 'laws better .Interpretation and expression, serthat each and every "aspect” Will benefit U8 Ip soiue way.
— the so-tailed adverse as well as the so-called, good. We will not
Interfere with Nature’a operations through misinterpretation but
will be enabled to co-operate wltti Nature to our general idiance- l
rfient Astrology points fhe way.

PART I. THE NitTAL CHART
PARALLELS OF DECLINATION
t
Parallel : Equjl ‘distance frojn the celestial Equator,
north or south ; or one stellar body noTth and the other
jouth.
The declinations of Neptune, Tjranus, Saturn, Jupiter,
Mars, Venus and Mercpry are given at top part of page
in Raphael's Ephemeris, »but be careful not to use latitude
whtclj is given there also, as it is not used in these
calculations.
Where declinations of planets are given for every
third day, if your required date is one not shown, remember to make the necessary correction by subtracting
one declination from another on the two given dates
between which your desired day falls. The result is
motion in 3 days ; if you need to go 1 day farthy, take
one-third of this motion, or for 2 days take two-thirds
of it and add or subtract it from^date preceding birth
, date according to whether the declination was increasing
or decreasing. Raphael's Ephemeris for later years gives
declination every other day. In Part II of .this book ar'e
two pages of Ephemerides showing the declination *of
planets.
In the Simplified Scientific Ephemeris the dedinatiorfe
are given dh eight hand page, and in the Astrologer’s
Ephemeris at bottom of page, for alternate days.
Beginners need not try to*reduce ttie declination ot
the above named planets to the hour and minute of birth,
as it fs %uff iciertt now to record it fbr the^day only.
Declination for the luminaries is eiv/m for ev^ry day,
in the Ephemeris* and their true declination at birth time
should be ascertained yi the samt manner as obtaining
longitude, except where decHnatton is decreasing betwren <Jhe day and fhe next when it should b^tVeated as
though rejroglade, i. e., add instead of subtract; or vice
verdh, as the caSe requires.
• To find wheJher or not any planets are parallel, (P) ’
make’s note of the declination of each planet as given

QENBTHMACA1, ASTROLOGY
in the Ephemeris for d?te of birth under that heaaing.
Work out Moon’s declination to date and a(so to time
of birth, and then comoare then ail.. If you find any
planets within oAe degree of each other, tjhey are said
to be parallel. N. or S. (north or south) that is, one
north and the other south, or both north or both south,
makes no difference. The object of working on the declinations is to compare them one with another to ascertain if any are in parallel ; i.e.', in the same degree or
within one degree of being the same. Parallels so ‘found
are recorded in the list of aspects, as illustrated later on,
because the effect of a parallel is of similar nature to a
conjunction.
We are very much Inclined to give the name “good” to those
feelings and sensations which register In our nVnda as pleasant,
that la, when sensory nerves receive a stimulus, which, when
transmitted to the brain and there reacting In the attitude w.blcb
we call pleasure, the resulting motor discharges and the chemical
activity coincident thereto produce wuat the world chooses to call
“good feeling," hence, pltmetary angles which produce this character of results are known by the general term. of “good" or
“favorable” aapects.
On the other* hand, the vibrations of planetary anglea which
give our sensory nerves a stimulus that causes an attitude of
dlspleaaure are called “adverse aspects,” because the unpleasant
mental attitude thus aroused produces motor discharges In the
mind and body which register an unpleasant feeling. Planetary
angles or aspects are one 'of the chief Influences ,wltich direct the
matabollstlc processes of the body. Anabollstlc action reglstera
aa pleasant and la produced by “favorable” aspects; catabollatlc
action registers as unpleasant .and Is produced by “adverse” aspects. Hereto lies the crux «f how planets affect people. We
And planetary vibrations giving direction to metabolism (expanding, contractlhg and otherwise changing the quality «f .bodily
fluids), the Incoming stimuli producing chemical changes noticed
as feelings which induce attitudes of mind,— the attitude determining the gourse or character of our acts, which in turn alsd moke
up our enrironmenti
•Planetary vlhratlona act cblgfly upoB the nervona system, which
asttnloglcally is governed liy, responsive crt related to, the plpnet
Mercury, '‘tjie* Messenger of the Gods.” The nerv&ua system la
the messenger of the mind and through the ml nd 'are J transmitted
the intelligent Impulses which know%hov^ to direct the actloas of
the .various organs of Vie body* so as to bring abqpt appropriate
responses In tbe organs seated amj the functions Involved.
'(Continued on page 122.)

PART I. THE NATaI CHART
pOltfjUNCTION&' AND PARALLELS
Moon
w
Good — Conj. P with Mefcury, Venus, Jupiter.
Adverse — Conj. or f with Mars, Saturn, Uranus.
Doubtful — Conj. or P with Sun* Neptune or Pluto.
The exact conjunction of Sun and Moon is good except when beset by unfavorable aspects, although it
tendj to weaken the health, especially in a female.
Mercury
Good — Conj. or P with Venus, Sun, Jupiter.
Adverse — Conj. or P with Mars, Saturn, Uranus.
Doubtful — Conj. or P with Neptune or Pluto.
Venus
Good — Conj. or* P with Sun, Jupiter, Neptune.
Adverse — Conj. or P with Mars, Saturn, Uranus
DoulJtful — Conj. or P with Pluto.
Sun
Good — Conj, or I* with Jupiter.
Adverse — Conj. er P with Mars, Saturn, Uranus.
Doubtful — Conj. or P with Neptune or Pluto. •
Mars
Good — No Conj. or P with Mars is considered good.
Adverse — Cogj. or P with Jupitef, Saturn, Uranus,
Neptune or Plufo.
* Jupiter
Good — Conj. or P Neptune.
. Adverse — Conj. or P with Saturn, Uranus.
DoubtfalA-Conj. t>r P with Pluto.
* Saturn
Good — Itfo Conj. o»P with Saturn is cSnpidered good.
Adverse — Conj. pj; P with Uranus, <Neptune or Pluto.
• Uranus
Good— N6 Cotij^or P with Uranus is consider** good.
Adverse — Conj. "or P with Neptune or Pluto.
Neptufie — Pluto
The conjunctions and parallels ,offNeptune and fluto
are inchulcd in the foregoing paragraph^.

GENETHLIACAL ASTHOLOGY
ANALYZING .. PLANETARY ASPECTS
The Importance of planetary aspects eapnot be over emphasised.
To assist earnest students to give full consideration to the matter
of aspects, we reprint the following chapter from “The Astrologer's Searchlight."
During the course of correspondence between Sir Isaac
Newton and Edmund Halley the latter took occasion to
speak disparagingly of the astrological infli^rfces of
planets and their aspects, whereupon Newton rebuked
Halley by saying, “I have studied these things; you have
not.”
In the Jan. -Feb. -March issue of “The Astrological
Bulletina,” 1933 (out of print), I gave a brief but significant biography of the great Kepler Whose voluminous
writings portray his vast, labors in the interests of both
astrology and astronomy. Kepler very carefully pursued
Genethliacal astrology and compiled a diary of the events
in his life which coincided with the aspects both in nature and time. Were there not truth in -astrology and
were the* practice of it a fraud, as ‘its enemies would
have us believe, a man bo scientific and honest as Kepler
never would (jave practiced it nor spent valuable time
and labor in the compilation of Almanacs and Ephemerides. A scientist .of his ability cannot, be classed as
“either a fool or a knave.” If astrolbgy were false he
wcwld have discovered it and proalaimed it to be so. In
their aqxious ^endeavor* to disparage astrology (without
proper examination of its doctrines) critics often appear
to be heedless of whose reputatioq they gnjiy injure
through hasty and unfounded condemnation. They
praise Kepler,for his astronomical findings and^ condemn
his ‘astrologiqilVesearches.
“There is no gr«yter.bar to*progress' than that principle
of conduct which condemns a thing prior.to ijs investigation.”* *
Kepljr's definition of an. aspect itf, “An angltf,f©rmed#
‘on the earth by the $>eams (rays) of two planets.” That
there would be no misconstruing of the facts as he tried*
and proved them he further says, ,

PART I. THE NATAL CHART
"A* most unfailing Aperienca 'of the excitement of
sublunary "natures by the*conjunfition and aspects of tlie
planets, has inserted, and compelled my untvilling
belief."
'This is the language of one of Jhe world’s great scientists. However, it is unnecessary to make discussion of
a matter which anyone, .honestly seeking truth,- may decide by actual experiment. In the textbooks a full account,is given of the jules necessary for computing and
recording the aspects to determine their strength and
influence indicated by horoscopes.
Planetary 'aspects are the potent influences which
motivate the world. It is the aspects which mainly
direct metabolism, produce chemical changes, develop
moods, instigate states of mind, determine actions and
events. Hence aspects become the most important factor for the consideration of astrological researchers.
t Ptolemy, justly termed “The Fa*ther of Modern Astrology,” in. the fllhst of his hundred aphorisms gives the
following admonition to students :
•"Judgment must be regulated by thyself, as well as
by the science, for it js not possible thaf particular forms
of events should be declared by any person, however*
scientific, sirfce, human understanding conceives only a
certain general idea of some sensible event, and not its
particular form. It’ is therefoje necessary for hirri who
practices herein to adopt inferonce. They only who are
inspired by Deity can predict particulars.”
In other words, the student should Compare and
analyzg all the elements involved in %n aspect ^before
making deduction* as to the conditions^ may develop.
Besidts this, tfie channjl for its %nanifestation should
also be observed for.it would Be absurd to believe that
the fam® 'aspect whAher radical, progressed, qp ‘transitory, will be expressed in the same identical reactions by,
for* instance, a rrfiner, #n ^viatpr, a prisoner, a broker,
clerk or a child, , The mistakes ^vhith are occasionally
ntade are not because of fault In the principles of astrology but in their -faulty application.

GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
~By this, we see that qgain Ptcderpy was right: “Judgtiienf must be regulated by thyself, as well as by the
science." When studying a horpscop$ or when comparing two charts, students will find it very helpful in “regulating their judgment” to consider capacity, experience
and opportunity. For instance : The amiable dry gooas
salesman, although a good salesman and possessing good
aspects both natal and progressed, would hardly be
chosen to head a business of- nation-wide activity in
preference to a man who had Irsser good aspect’s in
operation but who had acquired several university degrees, was a traveller and lecturer and an officer in various lodges, etc. The inference is obvious. . A man who
has acquired several degrees has exercised his inherent
abilities; travelling and lecturing have brought experience; contact with officials gives him opportunity. He
knows how to utilize knowledge and is Capable of large
responsibilities with possibility of great achievement,
therefore even with fewer good aspects than the worthy
clerk he can accomplish more.
Adverse Aspects Not Always Detrimental .
'Adverse aspects are not always detrimental; the feelings of discomfort or dissatisfaction which their stimuli
produce frequently develop determined effort to improve
the lot in life through initiative and work, regardless of
difficulties and disappointments. By this the individual
may oreate capacity, experience and opportunity leading
to achievement. ' Many accomplished persons and many
who are performing signal public service have achieved^
not because of the good aspects in their cherts, but
despite those'which are commonly called "adverse.”
A pteponderapdfe of “good” aspectr gives tendencies
to pleasure, comfort, - ontentment, sociability, tranquility
Iqd “good luck.” Some*years ’ago, I knew a lady who
had only good aspects in her natal chart.* She W&s a
good seuf, generous, kind, sociable and contented ; had a
(good husband with a fqir yicopie. But she entirely
micsed thd zest in life jvhich is experienced through desire far, accomplishment .and <-in the inspiration accompanying(the effprts to achieve. She missed the thrill of

PART I THE NATjtL CHART
Becoming victor over obstacles and Unfavorable environment or circumstances.'She,missedUhe joy of enthusiasm
and zeal in pursuing a .purpose or of helping to make the
world a better place? for afl people to live in. Therefore,
a mixed chart seems best, ond containing good and advei«e aspects, thus affording both satisfaction and in-
> centive.
The fifth arcane of the -Tarot says, “Before you may
tell a man whether he is happy or unhappy you must
find out what use he lias made of his will-power, for
every man is created in the image of his own works ”
. Scientific Deductions
A fundamental value of astrology is embraced in the
fact that it, better than any other means, explains the
operation of natural laws as registered through planetary
vibrations, and proves its hypothesis by the corresponding conditions and events which are everywhere evident
and continually transpiring.* Through the study of astrology in relation to celestial and physical correspondences, or reactions* to planetary vibrations, a trained
studenf is enabled to make logical deductioms and to
develop his skill to a point of aecuracy where it enters
the fealm of science. In fact, he may do sqwith a degree
of accuracy which compares favorably with the percentage of deductions that are derived from other branches
of science. The student may so intelligently develop his
faculty for deduction that in many cases he can as unerringly predict forthcoming conditions as *n astrpnomer
predicts the time of the next eclipse.
In the- flevelopifient of that Ptolftnaic ‘.‘inference”
through the exercise of good judgment in the use of
aspects, it is necessary to consider then* in relation to
planet, sjgn and hoiTse. In other wprds.’an aspect is
never ju*dged of itself alone, but , always in connection
with thf planet, sign aryd house from which it emagates
and to whidh it'is.projected.
Modifying Influences
Tfce square is thfe most emirgizjn^ of the aspects^. It
’tends to friction, controversy, action, struggle, hostility.

114 OENETHLtAQAL ASTROLOGY
abrupt ‘expression, .positive assertions, discontent, restlessness^. Whether thege attributes wifi be over-expressed
' and • used destructively, or modified and used constructively, is largely dependent ,upcfh ,how t'he signs and
houses are agreeable or, otherwise to the planets involved, especially to the more ponderous planets. If .the
square is between planets whose adverse natures are
similar to a square, such as Mars, Saturn or Uranus, the
undesirable features will be accentuated, and still more
so if the planets involved are in angular houses of the
chart and in signs in which they are not dignifi&f The
foregoing would be greatly modified and would be much
less malefic if the planets were Mars in Aries and Saturn
•in Capricorn (signs in which they are dignified) and if
they were in the least expressive houses (cadent) of the
chart. Here we see how an adverse aspect may^exhibit
its most malign influence and how that same aspect may
be greatly modified according as it was contacted by sign
and' house and the nature "of the planets involved..-
The same premises may be applied to the favorable
aspects. If the good aspect is formed by benefic planets,
from signs in which they are dignified and' from nngular
houses, its best and strongest influence will be expressed.
But if those planets are in signs not agreeable to their
nature, and in* cadent houses, the opportunities for the
benign expression of the good aspect is greatly lessened.
In these two illustrations the student is examining the
actual elements in a chart upon which to base the judgment and is hoing so,hi the same scientific manner in
which researchers in other branches of science proceed
to makd their deductions or conclusions. <The astrological stuflent goes a step further however, and does
not stop at judging the extent or the power of an aspect,
but "is to adojft inference as to its mode of expression; a
factor which is determined (Iarge!y .by the channel or
, medium for the expression of a^i aspect, which is the
individual's own condition, his stSte of mind amd dhvironment. " The inference is obvious of htrtv differently the
same aspect could operate r upon one man in a Ojospital
und anbther, the active manager of a manufacturing’
industry. • '

PART I, THE NATAL CHART
Not «Law Evasion
The studint of* astrology is not seeking to evade natural law, nor to avoid responsibilities ; «n the contrary,
he is studying to analyze anS understand them in order
tfl acquit himself ihore creditably and satisfactorily in
his own conscience and at the same time be in a position
to point the way to others who are seeking light. Although not neglecting reasonable and necessary precautions m the erriergencjes of life, he is able to appraise
or evaluate conditions and circumstances at their trie
worth from the standpoint of spiritual unfoldment and,
consequently^ is frequently able to discern the good in
seemingly adverse aspects. The mere interpretation of
a horoscope is insufficient ; indeed it may prove discouraging or hurtful unless astrology is understood to be the
means of pointing out the problems of life to be encountered and that planetary influences should be manipulated in a hopeful and intelligent manner. In connection
with astrology the study of metaphysics will assist in
developing those attitudes which realize joy through
visioij of eternal verities by controlling and directing ,
the reactions tcf planetary aspects, thus transforming
adversity into blessings.
For further discussion of this topic read the chapter
in Part III,, entitled, “Planetary ‘Aspects. ” Also the
chapter in Part' V, entitled, "Astrology — Is It Science
or Religion?”
The eminent Henry Ward Beecher, when asked hia opinion about
aatrologjr published, this reply, "The practical application of
astrology should interest every human being who cares to rise
above the common level of humanity. Its value la In the fact that
It does for the human race what no other sclgiwe pretenda.to do,
and that la. to ahow mto his proper place in life?’ In these words
that famous preact^T struck the keynote*of astrology. It shows
man his proper place In life, %ud, by* meups of aspects. It points *
out aqpplcljms dates and;per(ods for bis more Important, efforhf

116 OENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
COMBINED’ INFLUENCES Of HOUSES
aspects' AND. PLANETS
The influence and effect uf planets in a horoscope depend largely upon their aspects, and .an aspect, favorable
or unfavorable, to any^planet will alter its indications in
the chart as judged without an aspect. The reading
given for a. planet in a house must be modified or arranged to coincide with the asp*ects to the planet iv qrder
m delineate a horoscope correctly!
For instance: Mercury in third house unaspected gives
mental perception, mental activity ; learns 'much by observation ; ability in matters of speaking, writings or
commissions.
/ Mercury in third house well aspected/for instance by
Jupittr, gives a jovial mind with very good judgment.
Ability for collegiate studies* inclination to medicine,
law or philosophy. «Success in writings, travel and professonal matters. Gain through brethiwn a>nd neighbors.'
y Mercury hi third house afflicted, for instance by Mars,
{fives clever, sharp, shrewd, active mind. Quick tempered,
sarcastic, resentful, impatient, impulsive and forceful in
.speech. Difficulty through writings and trouble with
brethren or neighbors. Careless with fa^tsiand hasty in
drawing conclusions.
Thus it, is essential not* only to render judgment on a
planet in .a house according to the quality of its aspect,
but also by nature g& planet with which it is aepected.
First house rules health and the*pr«ence of a malefic
planet* therein Jeads to disturb the Jiealth, and' if the
planet is evilly aspeqted it affects the health still ■more,
and vice-versa.
Saturn* in the second house is not necessarily an indication \hat the native will be poverty stricken* all hij life,
ipr if Saturn is dignified by* sigh or wel^ aspected'by
other planets, the nativfe may accumulate money by careful or economical methods in such things as Saturn ruJes.

PJlRT I, THE NaAl CHART
A planet in a bouse skews certain indications according to the .nature of that. house, and the charAteristics
of the plamft, The .aspect shows you how to modify
those indications.
*As a planet often has more than one aspect it is sometimes necessary to make a combination judgment, especially where one aspect is good and the other adverse.
Saturn in second house ir^ good aspect to Jupiter and in
evil aspect to V?nus w^uld show success where property,
land and investment were concerned, but loss through
women or through excess of pleasure.
Therefore, learn well what each house governs, the
characteristics of each planet and how to calculate the
aspects quickly and correctly. Then the matter of judgment and the reading of a horoscope will be easy.
The principal aspects to he considered in a nativity
are the major aspects, i. c* Conjunction, Parallel, Opposition, Trine, ^Squ^re and Sextilc.
In a progressed horoscope (treated later «on) all the *
aspects, major, minor, parallel? and declination, must b*
carefully computed and considered in tlje judgment.
Astrology is notfa doctrine of fatalism; It la a herald of Opportunity: Opportunity to ljve, learn and conquer 90-calIed adversities.
The ‘‘common herd” so-called, are those who live In Ignorance of
the streams of planetary energy tfyat incline them to feel and
think In given waya. They give responsive acts In accordonce
with the!r*ignorance, their race beliefs, cufUoms, religion and their
kind of ‘training. They follow the lead or the hynd leading the
blind. For them the astrologer can very accurately read wlmi
they will do; what will happen to them, an^jyhen It wl 11^ occur.
Awakened Individuals, however, (those who Wave become aware
of the mighty powers In whi<th they live and move and have tli^lr
being 1 can greatly modify that which wc#ild surely come to pa§s
If the$ lacked the Information which astrology supplies. -In other
words. It la uxloimitic that the conscious response giten to planetary vjbrstloM is qualified by the grade of consciousness and whal
use » made of It. • • . M m 1

tig OENETHLfckCAL ASTROLOGY
STRENGTH OF. PLANET IN ANY CHART
How *to Determine It
A planet is at its best vAien located in its own home
sign, as Saturn in Capricorn, or Mercury in Gemini 6r
Virgo. It is next best when located in the sign of its
Exaltation, as Sun in Aries, or Moon in Taurus. It is
not so strong when in the sj£n of its Detriment, as
Venus in Scorpio or Aries. It ij most ‘weakly fooated
when in the sign of its Fall, as Mars in Cancer, or Jupiter
in Capricorn.
When a planet is neither in its Home Sign, Exaltation,
Detriment or Fall, its strength is judged according to
its position by house in the horoscope, whether Angular,
Succedent or Cadent. If Angular, its strength is the
same as though in home or Exalted sign; if in a Succedent house it is the same as though in sign of Detriment ;
if in a Cadent house it is the same as though in sign of
Fall.
m The good or evil qualities of a planet^are accentuated
by the aspects it may receive from other planets.
Jupiter, for instance, in its own sign, angular and well
aspected, may bring the native great good fortune, whenever well aspected by favorable "directions” or transits.
But if in its fall, cadent and adversely aspected, it has
little 9r no power for good and the native may suffer lack
of favorable opportunities (at needed times) and discredit and loss when Jupiter is evilly aspected by
rection's. . +
Ruling Planet#
The ‘planet g&fferning the Ascendant is termed the
Significator.
The other rulers are;
Ary planet which may be in the first 'house or even
•within 12 degrees above the first cusp, ’i. e., any pfadet
within 12 ‘degrees kbove to 20 degrees *below the firs#
cusp, especially when in the sdme sign.

PART I, THE NATAL CHART
The* planet ruling tfye sign the £un is in.
The planet* with which the Sun is in closest mynber
of degrees of an asp’ect, especially applying to the aspect.
The planet strongest, most prominent, or highest it
elevation in the chart. •
Sun, Moon and Mercury are always co-significators.
The Order oPMaking the Horoscope
1 — Make the correction to the Given Birth Time* for
the difference- between Standard time and Mean Local
Sun time for the place of birth, that is, if the birth occurred since November 18, 1883.
2 — If birth occurred in A. M. find the number of hours
and qjinutes it lacks of noon, and subtract that anjount
from the S. T. of the desired date. The result will be the
S. T. at birth.
If birth occurred in P. M., simply add the birth time to
the S.* T. of the desired date. •
2 — With the sum thus gained enter an appropriate T*.
of H. (for latitude nearest that of the £>irth place) and
locate the S. T. whidh corresponds nearest to that required. Fill in the signs and degrees as given therein. *
Fill in the remaining six cusps of the chart with the
opposite signs and degrees.
4 — Find the Noon Mark for She place of birth.
5— Find how much time birth occurred befole or after
the Noon Mark.
6— Find how far, the Moon would travel in zodiacal
longitude at the _rate of approximately one-half degree
per hour, in theTength of time between birth and Noon*
Mark* ■ Itbirth occurVed before Noon Mark subtract th’e
amount of Moon’s motion from the longitudinal^ place
giv?n,for it'in thu Ephemcris of that date, and enter this _
corrected Moon’s place* in the horoscope.
* Remember to mbtract ooe flour from clock time If Daylight
Saving, or War Tltfie, was In use.

GENETHLJACAI, ASTROLOGY
If birth occurred atter Noon'Mark ^dd the amojmt of
distance ^he Moon would travel, at l/i degree per hour,
{in the time between Noon MSrk and Jairth jL, 'to its place
as giCen in the Ephcyieris tha* day,* and then enter its
corrected placd*as thus found in the horoscope.
The foregoing mental equation for Moon’s place is
sufficient only if the time of birth is uncertain.
If the time of birth is knows to be nearly correct then
the Moon’s place should be corrected by 'logarithm? The
places of Mercury, Venus, Sun and Mars should also be
ascertained by logarithms, if time of birth is known.
7 — Reference to the Ephcmeris for the required date
will show that Neptune, Uranus, Saturn and Jupiter
move so slowly that it is only necessary to enter them to
the nearest degree of longitude. Mars, Bun, Venus and
Mercury can be placed correctly by mental arithmetic.
If yoti need to move the planets forward or back about
one-half a day, divide the mofion for a day by 2; if for
6 hours (one-fourth' of a day), divide the motion of a*
day by 4; for eight hours (one-third *of a' day), dtividc
• the motion for a day by 3; and for 4 hours (one-sixth of
a, day), divide the motion, for a day by 6.
8 — Figure the aspects and tabulate them in order.
9 — Make a list of the ruling planets.
Studying the Horosdope
(For readings refer to Part III. "Delineations For
Horoscopes.”)
10 — Begin to study the chart by reading the influences
of Sun according to the zodiacal sign yi which it may be
located.
'.11— Read the delif.eatfon of the, influence «f th$ as
cending'sjg/i.
12— Read the influence of the tyloon according t</.,to-
'dr-a^pal sign.
13 — Read the influence of Mercury according to sign.

PART I. THE NATAL CHART
14 — .Read ,the influence of the SJgnificator and other
co-rulers according to' the, signs *p which they’ may bo
located. » ,
15 — Read the aspects to tHe Significator and to the
co*rulers. <
Note: In reading the aspects keep in mind whether
or not the planets in question are in their home sign,
exaltation, detriment or fall, and regulate the delineations Stcordingly. 1
16 — By this time you will have gained a fair idea of
the power of each planet in the chart, and keeping that
in view proceed to read the planets according to their
positions in the chart houses, being careful to adjust the
delineations as conditions require, which will not be
difficult when you are familiar with the nature o^ the
planes, signs, aspects and houses. Remember that no
science or art can be mastered in a short time, but, the
elements having been learned, their* correct application
Brings accurate results. After the chart has been studied
as outlined in lO.to 16, prepare to write a dejineation as 1
suggested in the following chapters.
Some can read a chart more readily than others, but
anyone, who desires to do so, can acquire the knack, on ’
the same principle as acquiring musical ability; i. e., the
elements having beeq learned, practice brings proficiency.
The same rule applies to astrology inasmuch as the elements having been mastered, their correct application
brings accurate results. After the^ system .has been
learned* the quickest way to further development and
understanding along fhese lines is through casting and
reading horoscopes,
A great deal of information c*an be gleaned from thp*
life chart, try, using the different rules as given -in the
various books dealing with Horary Astrology* for answering questions. Us^ th^ life horoscope (if it has been ,
rectified,) as though it were a horary chart, for ho matter*
when a question of momint i> asked, and no ,matter
what its nature .may be, if the querent is serious and

GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
casts a horary chart fqr it an<Hn^erpttts the chart correctly, there will be ncv deviation from the answer which
the life chart would return if tl^e sarr^ question and rule
were applied t» it. However, it is wise not to attempt
the Horary Branch until the Natal and Progressed horoscope system has been#mastered. itiis system embraces
the fundamentals necessary for the successful undertaking of any branch of astrological research.
For questions which arise within yourself regrfding
yourself, look into the life chart (the radix) ; for questions arising as the result of propositions or suggestions
made to you, look to the horary chart. .To ascertain
when certain conditions will occur refer to the progressed
horoscope.
(Continued from page 108.)
Thus we see that the planetary aspects, of themselves, are
neither good nor adverse, they are elmply operation, differentiated
principally according to the angles formed and the character of
their product. It must be remembered that jve are not conscious
of all our bodily reactions to stimuli, nor Is every stimulus .trans-
•formed Into conscious thought ; In fact, most of our bodily reactions are performed unconsciously.
Solar, lunar and planetary quivers supply the cells, through the
media of the sensory nerves, their motility; the Inherent and
•acquired knowledge of the cells endows them with the ability to
manifest their lotelllgenfe and so we have a yvltig organism or
body through which and by means of which we can dxpress life.
Different planetyy aspects .or angles provide different sensory
stimuli sccerding as their yjnratlons differ In wave. Intensity,
frequency and duration; or whether they are direct. Indirect,
curved, straight, long y short vibrations. Iqpludlug the; aspects
which Kepler discovered, astrology uses sixteen planetary aspects
or sngles. Some are termed favorable Htod some unfavorable, according to whether ihelr effects give us pleasure or displeasure.
The aspects are 1 1 So named according ta their difference In
strength of influence.

PA&T I, THE NATAL CHART
HOROSCOPE DELINEATION
Tile Knack of Doing It Correctly
It has been observed that many who learn to erect a
horoscope are “all at sea” when it qpmes to delineating it.
For that reason I am here giving my own method used
effectively for many years.
Th(-.<ecret of horoscope delineation lies in the preparation. That is, before commencing to delineate a chart
make careful preparation by compiling a table of notes
for guidance. .The more complete the memoranda, the
simpler becomes the work of delineation. In the table
of memoranda outline the elements to be considered and
make notes with each element to be featured. The
orderly table of dements, the notes you make in connection ijith them, together with references to "Delineations For Horoscopes” in .Part III, will enable you to
modify or adjust the readings to suitlhe particular horodtope under consideration. Once more let me impress
the student Vith the fact that the secret of success in
delineation lies largely in the preparation* In other
wqfds, make your table of Tnemoranda outline the
features to be considered.
JPeatures of The Horoscope
The teatures are usually taken in this order :
Individuality — Personality
Finance .
Journeys, Mind
Home Life
Pleasures *
Health, Sickne£6, Occupation
Marriage, Partnerships
Legacy"
Voyages, 'Science
Hohors
Friends
Restrictions

GENETHLfACAL ASTROLOGY
This order may vliry in sorne cases; for. instance, if
there w^ e no planets .in the ^ntlf house an4 its planetary njler were cadent or unaspected, ne particular honors
are indicated; consequently thaf feature could be omitted.
A table of the desired features should be outlined and
used as a guide, in connection with the compilation of
notes necessary to delineate the JioroscOpe as shown in
the following memoranda.
Example For Compiling Memoranda
In Preparation for Delineating a Natal Horoscope
(See "Additional Aid to Horoscope Reading,” page 145.)
To, gather memoranda for each feature refer to the
section of this book entitled^ “Delineations For Horoscopes ”
Individuality
, Read the* description of sign occupied by the Sun.
Read the house occupied by the Sun. Note which hoitee
the Sun rules irPthe chart and re^i its influence. Note
•which cusp Leo occupies, as the Sun is ruler of that particular house.
Make notes qn the infjperice of the major aspects to
the Sun. •
Notice:" \yiien referring to the delineations for the
foregoing remember to make notes’of the readings which
relate to the ind^duality.
In the same manner trpat thft remaining features.
Have* tfgard to each feature under consideration (When
referring to the various delineations ^and make jiotes
• ^iat appropriately ^relate 4o it.

PART I. THE NATAL CHART
Personality
Read the "influence of the ascending sign.
Read the sign occupied* by the planet ^hich rules the
sign on cusp of first house. *
Read the major aspects to that planet. If any planets
are in the first house read their influence by house and
sign.
Read1 the influence <Jf the Moon by sign, house and
principal aspects.
In compiling notes from the “Delineations For Horoscopes” you may at first experience difficulty in defining
individuality as differentiated from personality, in which
case reference to the definitions on page 29 will be helpful.
Finances
. Note which sign occupies cusp of Second house. Read
its influence, and that of its ruling planet by sign and
house* and its principal aspects.
Should any planet occupy ttie second house, read its
influence by sign and Jiouse it occupies, then by sign and
house it rules in the chart.
In making relerence to the chapter of “Delineations
For Horoscopes" remember to keep your notes to the
subject of finances.
The temaining.features should be treated in the same
manner as outlined fof finances. It will bee noticed that
just as finances relate to the second house of a chart so
are the other features related to the hofi^es in sequence.
‘Mentality — Jeurnpys
Third House influence : Relates to brothers anal sisters,
journeys, studies writings, mental inclinations and
abilities. For,compilin£ ncrtes from chapter of,‘‘Delinea*
tions For Horoscopes” follow the* procedure outlined in

GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
'Home Life
Fourth house influence: Relates tp father, property,
environment, domestic or home life ( latter years.
Pleasure — Speculation
Fifth house influence: Relates to pleasure, sports,
speculation, love affairs and children. (See also chapter
on Children.)
Health — Occupation
Sixth house influence : Relates to sickpess and occupation. (See also the chapters entitled, "Health, Physical Ailments, Parts of the body ruled by the zodiacal
signs. Ailments denoted by the ascendant, Accidents
Occupation.) *
* Marriage c
Seventh house influence: Relates to marriage, part*
nerships, enemies, law suits. (Also see chapters entitled,
. Marriage, Description of Marriage Partner.)
to
Legacies
i Eighth house influence : Relates to legacies, bequests,
money received through insurance, and snaVters connected with the goods or property of the dead. (See also
chapter entitled, Kind of^Death.)
Voyages — Education
Ninth house influence: Relates to long journeys,
voyages, foreign countries ; dreams, visions, prophetic or
intuitional experiences ; psychic and* spiritual development; higher education, academic achievement; invention, scientific attairunertts.
Profession — Honors
• Tenth house influence : . Relates to profession, honors,
fame, mother and kffairs of the country or govemmeivt.
(Regarding profession, also see Occupation.)

PAST I, ■ THE NAT/.L CHART
Friends
Eleventh .house influence: Relates to friends*; also td
the hopes and wishes.' »
Restrictions
Twelfth house influence: Relates to unseen or unexpected troubles, secret enmities, secret sorrows, self-undoing, jails, hospitals ; secaet or occult side of life.
Finances : Delineation Illustrated
To illustrate the advantage of compiling memoranda
on the various features of a horoscope, let us take for
instance the subject of finances. Read the rule already
given, then use the following chart for reference and
compile memoranda relating to the financial prospects.
The* student who has thoroughly learned tfee influence
or nature of planets, houses, signs and aspects, and wh®
follows the preceding outline, should become an excellent
horoscope reader.

PART I, • THE NATAL CHART
12ft
Example Reading Regai'dipg* Finances*
Saturn conjunction with* second*cusp (same as Saturri
in second house) *jn ‘opposition to the Moon, ruter of
second house is an unfavorable ’indication concerning
monetary affairs. 1^ denotes delay, hindrance, disappointments and losses through laj)c of money. It indicates danger of severe losses through dealings with
others, partners, matters relating to land and products
of the earth. 4s Saturn eis conjunction with ruler of
fifth f»iuse (Venus) speculations and games of chance
would also be a source of loss. As the fifth house rules
love affairs there may also be monetary loss through
such or through lawsuits (Moon opposing Saturn from
seventh house) resulting from fifth house matters.
Neptune in second house: Neptune is in adverse
aspect with Jupiter posited in the eleventh house, which
indicates loss through fraud, plots, schemes or treaohery,
the failure of banks or bursting of speculative bubbles.
Danger of loss through advice of friejjds or by entrusting
money to theiji. ganger of loss through lawsuits concerning business enterprises. Jupiter ruler of seventh, t
Neptune ruler of tenth house: Business partnerships
ha^ best be avoided, also financial transactions with
friends.
Sun sextile .Neptune : Sun is in twelfth and is ruler *
of third house, indicating that money may be gained by
obscure and patient endeavor through writings, science,
large institutions and matters relating to the sea.
Neptung in Leo: Neptune is ruler of tenth hpuse, that
of professions or ‘government appointments* but should
the native essay to ruif for political office his opponents
would be likely to win while he would ijnd the venture
very costly: Jupiter, ruler house of. opponents (7th) in
adverse aspect tef Neptuna Taken alone, Neptune in Leo.
in second j»ouse denotes gain by turning his skill to mat*
ters of pleasure, jport, music, art, poetry, painting, 'opera,
dram^or healing institutions.
It is not lik?ly>that he will be able'to acquire a coh
siiferablp amount of monetary wealth ; what he does ac

QKNETHMACAL ASTROLOGY
ISO
quire he will earn anil be in ‘danger of losing if used
.speculat'vely. His wealth is in -the mental realm — his
reward in what he achieves, ‘discovers and disseminates
for the benefit of the world. < * i
Makd Your Own Chart
Make your own horoscope^ (or a study chart you may
prefer to use instead of your own data), embracing and
showing all the conditions referred to in the first part
of this lesson by the numbers 1 to 9, in chapter on
‘‘Making the Horoscope.” Then study it as outlined in
10 to 16, finally making a Memoranda as Shown for each
of the features, to be followed by a complete delineation.
Take plenty of time on this study. Work out one point
at a^time and do it thoroughly and completely. When
delineating your own chart do not read it simplj from
what you know of yourself, but hold fast to the principles and procedure' already outlined.
In the preceding chapters you acquireci information
,of the various elements, constituting a horoscope. You
learned of the tendencies bestowed by the signs, of how
the planets bestir those tendencies into characteristic
action, and how their indications are modified according to the house occupied, by dignity o.‘ debility, and
especially by their aspects. You learned what matters
are ' embraced in each o(f the twelve houses of a chart;
how the zodiacal sign/; add their special influence to
house -and planet. In the Table of Memoranda you were
shown h‘ow( to correlate these elements practically, preparatory to delineating a chart. If you find it difficult
to compile thft notes in the Table of Memoranda for
each element to be considered (the' notes which are to
guide you in bringing put the features of the chart and
. to help ^ou stress Ur modify certain points as you study
the vinous readings in "Delineations For Hotoscopes"),
the difficulty encountered is evidence that at this stage
of your study where yoy should possess a fund of. information of the elements before-mentioned, your trouble
is due to deficiency in that respect.

PART 1, THE N>,TAL CHART J81
Fortunately, this difficulty dar^ Be overcome. Turn
back to the prSced'yig* chapter* and study gverything
related to ^he influences and indications employed in
horoscopfe readirfg, is before mentioned.
, The process of erecting a chart is not difficult, neither
is the reading when approached by the method provided
in this chapter. It may be properly stated that the secret
of correct horoscope delineation lies in the compilation
of memoranda .for referearce and guidance.
No instructor or book can give the student the ability
to synthesize, but the proper procedure can be outlined
to develop this needed faculty. The art of synthesis is
like good judgment or intuition: it cannot be handed
from one to another; it is a growth within the person,
an expansion or extension of knowledge, as a result of
careful study ftf authentic texts, assimilation of the information thus acquired and application of the prkiciples
thus learned.
> But if the fundamentals have b%en correctly assimilated ; if the stutfent has paid the necessary attention to
the initial steps of study and thereby thoroyghly learned
Sie characteristics of the planets, their dignities and
ebilities ; the tendencies and properties of signs and
houses; the quality ond influence of aspects; and if the
various elements of the chart h^ve been properly cob
lated so .they Can be readily analyzed by means of the
Table of Memoranda, the student should be able to combine these various elements with logical judgment* in the
form of a delineation embracing the salient "features of
the horoscope.
In the next chapter will be tound a natal chart with the
principal calculations for its erection forked out in sequence to serve as an example of what has been taught
jn previous chapters concerning fhe making of a natjd
chajt,
The calculations are followed by a delineation which
is’iiftended to show bow /he reading may be condensed
instead of treating each feature, separately a's was Put- .
fiijed jn this, chapter.

GRNKTHI/n¥CAL ASTROLOGY
HOROSCOPE' NO. 2
Nativity* of W. H. Chaney
Chesterville, Franklin Co., Maine
Latitude 44° No.; (Longitude 70° West.
sas
This is the Ixfeoscope of Professor( Chaney, inserted
here in appreciation his valiant service to astrology:
one of the brave pioneers of istrotogital work in the
United States.

PART I, THE NATAL CHART • 133
Explanation ,of 'Example Chart No. 2
Data: Male, bdtoi January 13, 1821; 44“ N. Lat», 70*
W. Long.
Corrected mean loeal tinte of birth is 11 :32 p. m.
Correction for 11)4 hours after noon at 10
seconds per hour + .01:55
Correction for 4 hours 40 minutes west of
Greenwich (70 degrees west longitude) + .00:47
Transpose the 136 seconds, making 2 minutes and 16
seconds, thus giving 19.33:16 as corrected S. T.
Jdus 11.32:00 = (afternoon)
30.65 :16' transpose the 65 mil*. and
we have 31.05:16. Subtract 24 hours
less 24.
defer to T. of H. for latitude 44 degrees nortn, ant)
place cusps of houses in chart accordingly, after which
turn to the EphemeriS and from it make a correction to
planets’ places (pr the amount of time born after Noon
Mark. THe Noon Mark for 70 degrees west is 7 :20 a. m. ;
native was born 11:32 p. m., which is 16 hours and 12
minutes after Noon Mark.
Thus* V :20 a. »m. Noon Mark subtracted from 11:60
(noon) gives 440 added to 11 :32 p. m. givfcs 16.12 after
Noon Mark, and the constant logarithm for this is .1707.
For the benefit; of thosg who migiit like to rectify this
native’s birth time by the rules givon elsewhere we givtf
the Allowing information: Father’s death by accident,
March 2, lg30, lat which time the native was ST ygars, 1
mon,th and 19 days old- fylart in the fourth ‘house was,
chosen as pit>rqgator of event. (See Rectification %<Jf
Birth Time in Part IV.)

SSSSSlEKBSSSSIS
CjENETH LIACA,L ASTROLOGY
$to_
me
lb
SO
aal
Longitude of V is 1° 24' VS, oh Jan. 13

ggsggiaggjsas
J’kKT l THE NATlL CHART
1MI.] uraAr/s jaBggMPO| gngigM*.
JAKPABY*XXX1 DAYS.
D | Mart. •[ V^nus. | Mercury.
) h 7$. <f 9 $ M ritual Lunar Aspects.
L jggfr Long- Long- Long. | Aspta. OlWj hi VltTljM _gl
rnsir
12 5 12)11 «lBsO0ifhif A
Declination of V 22:20 south on Jan. 13
gjiwglggfca

GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
Correcting The Planets) Loiigitudd
.For 16 Hours 12 Minutes After. Noon Mark
Moon’s Correction
Jan. 14, 1821, Moon on Gemini 7 degrees 49 min. (Add
30 degrees to this, making it 37.49, so as to subtract correctly.)
37.49 Moon's place January 14th.
— 24.10= Moon's Place on January 13th (in Taurus)
13.39=daily motion = logarithm .2451 •
+ .1707 constant log.
motion in the 16 hrs. 12 min. born after Noon Mark.
Moon 24.10 January 13, 1821
•As there are only 30 degrees in a sign we drop 30 ayd
use the remainder which shows that Moon left the sign
Taurus and entered Gemini by 3* 23'. Enter it so in the
'chart.
Sun’s (Correction
Sun 24.06 Capricorn January 14
Sun — 23.0^ Cppricofn January 13
1.01 = mo|.wn in 1 day=logarithm 1.3730
constant logarithm .1707
Sun 23.05 January 13
+ (7.41 {notion in 16 hrs. 12 min. after Nc Mk.
23*46’ = Sun in Capricorn at Dirth’time.

PART I, THE NATAL CHART
Mercury’s Correction
Mercury 7.3/ Caflficorn^January 14
Mercury — 6.09 Capricorn January*13
1.28 = motion in ^ne day, log. 1.2139
+ constant logarithm .1707
MerciJry 6.09 January 13
+ 0.59 motion in 16 hrs, 12 min. after N. Mk.
6.68 transposed gives 7° 08’ Mercury in Capricorn at time of birth.
Venus’ Correction
Venus 22.31 Sagittarius January 1^
Venus — 21.17 .Sagittarius January 13
1.14 = motion in one day = log. 1.2891
+ constant logarithm .1707
Venus 21.17«January 13
21.67 transposed gives*_22‘ 07' Venus. in Sagittarius at time of birth.
Mars’ Correction
Mars 23.29 Capricorn, "Januafy 1$ (to make the sub.
tractton aksily, transpose these figures by taking 1 degree and adding it to the minutes) thus givifij*
hjars' place on January !$■ — 22.43.
9.46 = motion in »ne dav.

OBNETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
logarithm ,,1.4956
+ constant logarithm .1707
Mars 22.43 Capricorn January 13'
+ 0.31 motion <n 16 ftrs. 12 mins.
22.74 transposed gi\ ?s Mars' place at birth time
as 23* 14' Capricorn.
Without working by logarithms we can place
Jupiter in Pisces 20.12 at time of birth.
Saturn in Aries 7.52.
Uranus in Capricorn 0.24.
Nfcptune in Capricorn I. '24.
Note : To find daily motion of planet in a nativity
where birth is after Noon Mark, always subtract planet's
place on birthday from that of the next day. If birth
occurred before Noon Mark subtract longitude of day
previous from that of birthday. This rule applies only
to the nativity,.for in a progressed chart we must always
subtract place on birthday from that of the next day in
advance, regardless -of whether born before or after Noon
Mark.
A'fter having erected “a map and placed the planets
therein, 'the next step ifi to make a list of all the planetary a'spocts for future reference.
Planetary Aspects in Horoscope No. 2
Moon is 146* from : ± sep., slightly good.
136* f£om 0: A separating, good.'
130* from S : A separating, good.
73* from 21 : Q. separating, slightly good.
56* from 6 : $ applying, good.
15V from V : No sspect. *
152* from B separating, slightly ptfverse.

PABT I, THE NATAL CHART
Mercury la 13* from 9: No aspect
16* from ©: tt< ) aSpect
16* from 3 : No aspect
, 73* from U : Q. applying, slightly good.
90* from b : □ adverseT\ #
7* from W : 6 separation, adverse.
6* from V : 6 separating, adverse.
Venus Is 31* from Q: X forming, slightly good.
31° from 3 : X forming, slightly good.
88" from If : □ separating, adverse.
105* from b : No aspect
8* from V : 6 applying, adverse.
9* from If? : No aspect
O
Sun is 0* 31' from 3 : 6 separating, adverse.
57* from 21 : % separating, good.
t 74° from b : Q. applying, allghtljs good.
23* from 4? : No aspect.
22* from If? : No aspect.
Mars Is 57* from H : separating, good.
74* from b : Q. applying, slightly gootf
23* from,!? : No aspect.
22* from ^ No aspect
y.
Jupiter la 17’ from b : No aspect
80* ^rom bf : No aspect.
79“ from If? :* No aspect.
Saturn Is 97’ from 1? : □ separating, adversl.
90’ from tfV.D separating, adverse.
(Jranus la 1’ frqpi If? : <5 applying, adverse
Ifl this table ‘rappl/ingv and "separating” refer tij ^he
degree which constitutes ^he aspect,' not that the planets .
ai^ applying to or separating from each other in the
zodiac.

GENETHLIAOAL ASTROLOGY
In finding the distance bctween^planets it is sufficient
to use degrees only ; the minutes of longitude may safely
be omitted at this time.
Sun and Venus are about 1 degree from equal declination, thus constituting a mfrallel* We have already
noted an aspect between thjfm by semi-sextile, but this
parallel makes the aspect stronger and more favorable.
As Venus and Mars are pah^lel. this statement applies
to them also.
Venus and Neptune are parallel. Mercury is parallel
Uranus. Sun is parallel Neptune.
Condensed Delineation of A Natal Horoscope
(See Chart No. 2, page 132.)
Ruling Planets: Venus is significafor because she
rules ihe ascending sign. Saturn is a ruler by virtue of
ruling the birth month or Sun sign, Capricorn; Mars,
because in closest number of degrees of any aspect with
the Sun ; Moon, because she is highest in the map. *
' Physical ^Description is derived from the combined
influences of the ascending sign, planet ruling the Ascendant and the sign in which it is here located, together
with its principal aspects and the planets which may be
'in the Ascendant. T^his combination is usually so difficult to delineate correctly that the average student had
best omit it. In this chart, however, the following indications are apparent. Libra rising with the planetary
siguificatoV, Venus, Ioc*ed in Sagittarius shows the
native to be above jjverage height and heavy, f.s Venus
is in the expansive Jupiter’s sign and also in’ aspect
to that planet, which is located in Pisces, another sign of
weight and the Ixaltation of Venus. 4iJie sign Libra on
the Ascendant usually gives a good-looking countenance,
hut here, Saturn opposing the Ascendant, ‘gives a serious,
stfern arjd forbidding appearance.
Individuality (inner qualities) is shovtn by the location of the ‘Sun by sign and aspect. Here we find..Sun
in Capricorn, conjuhctien Mars, sextile Jupiter. The conjunction. makes the native self-confident, positive, p^fsevering.and brave. The sextile with Jupiter makes him

PART I. ' THE NAHAIj CHART Ml
‘very philosophical, and fhe Sun* in Capricorn lidds reserve and nfethodf.
Personality, or *^xtern|l expression, is designated by
the Moon’s location in the zocfiac arid its principal
aspects. Here we find Ivfoon in Gemini and sextile to
Saturn. In the presence orauch a person we would feel
impressed with his conversa|ional*ability, his knowledge
of general public affairs, Dractical ability, ingenuity,
versatility and strong character.
Mental Quality and tendencies are denoted by Mercury
and the sign in which it may be located, the Ascendant
and aspects to ascending degree, also the Moon and its
sign and aspects, and any planets which may be in the
third house. Libra governing the Ascendant gives perception, comparison, order and harmony. Venus its ruler,
posited in third 'house, gives good mental quality of fruitful or abundant nature with ? love for cultural art%, such
as literature, science, etc. Mercury in Capricorn adds
calculation, caution and dfepth to the mind, and serious
contemplation. Its adverse aspect*to Saturn, however,
indicates discontent, sarcasm and worry. Moon in the
scientific sign, Gemini, and in orb of conjunction with"
ninth cusp inclines the mind to religion, law and science,
adds also perception and ability for expression. Uranus
in third house conjunction with NepAine gives much
mental originality, unique ideas, inventive and intuitive1
faculty and anility for study of occult science.
Disposition is governed b^ the ascending sigh, its
ruler, the sign it is in and its aspects; also by* the Sun’s
sign anc^ aspects. Here we find the disposition is inclined to be pleasant, amiable, jovfttl an<b kind, due to
Libra rising and Venfis in Sagittarius. Sun in conjunction with Mars, however, gives a fiery&nature, forceful,
aggressive and inclined to stubbornness, while the good
aspect to Jupiter modifies the violence and adds highqr
ritotiges .and^ charitableness. Satufn opposing the Arscendantshows him to be his own worst enemy by always
showring his worst side first and impressing strangers
Unfavorably. # To'reallJ know Shis man we must Cultiy^elys acquaintance; then we 'will admire his mental capacity and respect him for fiiS many good qualities.

QENETHLJ A CAL A8TSOLOGT
Health and Sickness are determined by the Ascendant
its ruler and their aspects, and any planets therein
likewise consider the sixth house. ' The signs and houses
occupied by the malefics also indicate parts of the body
affected, and particularly so if the malefics are affected
by aspect or debility. In this chart Libra on the Ascendant shows that the native would at some time be
affected by kidney complain!;, especially as 'Venus is adverse to Jupiter in the sixth. Saturn in Aries would
give tendency to colds in thl*head and near-sightedness,
deafness, headaches, etc. ; its square with Mercury would
cause decay of teeth and bowel trouble, and the latter
planet being in Capricorn gives a tendency to rheumatism and stiffened joints, especially the knees. Uranus
and Neptune in third would affect the sight, likewise the
Sun afflicted in an angle. (His eyesight entirely failed
in later years.) Mars and the Sun in Capricorn incline
toward accidents to the knees, and being in the fourth
houses indicate spells of stomach disorder. Hoyyever,
while this conjunction is conducive to feverish complaints it should be remembered that any aspect of Sun
to Mars strengthens the constitution and, increases the
vitality to throw off and overcome illness. Although the
Sun is not hyleg, yet the afflictions of Mercury, Mars
ai;d Sun in fourth house show the latter part of life to
be beset with many troubles. The good aspects to Jupiter show that in sickness he would be benefited by
‘neighbors and would, never be entirely without comforts.
Note: The Sun or Moon is hyleg or "giver of life” if
posited between the Sth degree above or 25th degree below Asceridant ; 5 degrees below to 25 dgrees above cusp
of seventh, house; or between 5 degrees below cusp of
ninth to 25 degrees below cusp of the eleventh house. If
neither Sun nor Moon are in one of these places then the
ascending sign fend degree are hyleg. When the hyleg
is afflicted by directions there is danger to life and health.
‘ .Business or Profession is governed by the tepth house,
its ruler apd aspects and any planets which1 may be
posited- therein. In this horoscope we ‘have no planet
in the tenth, so we look, to the culer thereof, which is
tfwf^Moon, located '’in the scientific sign Gemini and in
conjunction with cusp of ninth, also a scientific, house.

PAgT I, » THE NAT4L CHART
This would indicate a traveler, safilor, publisher, •preacher, lawyer, ssientisft. Venus, ruler, of Ascendant,, inclines
the mind toarj, or artistic application of intellectual mat-'
ters ; to sports and* literary efforts relating to sports, adventure or travel. Jupiter, ruler o? third, »in sixth shows
professional service and jt indicates that professional
occupations would be morXto his liking and more fortunate than business or a tmde. ^foon, ruler of tenth,
shows his vocation would Jiring him a great deal of
publicity.
Financial Indications* are judged by the location, position and aspects of the benefics and also the ruler of
second house, and any planets which may be posited
therein. Here we find both the “fortunes” cadent and
also in adverse aspect to each other ; the Sun is afflicted
by Mars and the Moon is going cadent in a common sign,
all of which is very unfavorable for money getting. To
make the indications still worse we see Saturn opposing
the /fscendant, which gives ‘long periods of adversity.
Mars, the ruler of second house, in conjunction with
Sun and sextile Jupiter, shows ability to earn money by
dint of hard .effort* in professional service, but it is spent
as soon as earned. There are no testimonies for wealth *
or accumulation of property. Ruler of first inlhird shoves
th? native's mind to be taken up with study and science
in which he is highly .proficient, especially in the occult.
Marriage ir» tlje noroscope of a male is judged by the
Moon prirfcipally, with Venus as a co-prorogator. Here
we find Venus, ruler of the Ascendant, parallel with and
applying to a semi-sextile of lJj,ars, ruler of thp seventh
house, thus showing that the native is inclined to partnerships lind unions. Moon in Gemini, sextile to cusp
of seventh house, shows more than one unibn, especially
as it is in favorable aspect of Saturn. However, Saturn
in adverse aspect «f Mercury and it ruling the house of
sorrow (twelfthX indicates deafh iff first wife. Saturn
afflicting the seventh, while also afflicting the ascending
degree; testifies agafhst harmony or good Jesuits, although majriage may help him in publishing? etc;, as
Satnfl* is in good aspect jvith. Moon on cu^p of ninth.
Venus applying, to conjunction yrith Uranus indic$tls
separations and divorce. ■

QENETHLJACAL ASTROLOGY
Children: Barren si£ns on t'usps of fifth and eleventh
houses and the rulers ^hereof not in fruitful-signs, Moon
hot in a fruitful sign “the Ascendant not fi fruitful sign,
its rtiler not in a fruitful sign, and pC> fruitful planet in
fifth or eleventh, are “indications of no children.
Summary: We have her</a strong, forceful character,
a man who never forgets a Throng and always appreciates
a kindness. His early environment will be restrictive,
but his thirst for knowledge ‘^will resulHn high intellectual attainments and he will render the scientific-bccult
public valuable service. Marital and legal difficulties
will interrupt his progress and he should avoid such matters as much as possible, and concentrate upon his financial affairs, thereby conserving his forces, physically and
materially, to withstand the adversities of his later days.
We have now illustrated the method of delineating a
chart and shown in their logical order the points generally of most interest. In ordinary practice the “physical
description" may be omitted. However, to. make a reg-
* ular study of a chart we would proceed to look up the
influence of all the aspects, all the planets by sign, all
the planets by house, and the rulers of all the houses as
they are positeddn the various houses of the chart. Study
• of the nativity does not end here as transiting planets,
(shown in current year Ephemeris) are traversing
through different houses in the natal chart and constantly fobming aspects with .ylanets in the radix thus bringing up new events, new conditions, new states of being,
and as the student watches these he will realize, at times
with awe, the stupendous working order of the- laws of
nature.
Further research is made by means of a yearly chart
or Progressed Horoscope in which the monthly aspects
of the Moon indicate the trend of affairs, and mutual
aspects between the planets designate the ‘quality of the
year as a whole, whether the lesson to“be learned will
be through pleasure or , limitatiAns. ‘These points are
funy covered in chapters on Aspects, Orbs’, Transits and
The Progressed Horoscope. 1

PAHT I, 'THE NATAL CHART
ADDITIONAL AID TO HOROSCOPE READING
In relation ttf the.“Ejcample lor Compiling Memoranda
in Preparation for Rtadin^a Horoscope" t Jje topics listed
in that chapter are herein given special treatment to be
considered in connection wl^i Part III on “Delineations
for Horoscopes” as an aid\n making deduction? and
forming correct judgment of the horoscope.
House Cusps
This is a matter that cannot be confined to set rules,
as the “cusp” or dividing line between the houses is a
mundane thing; in reality there are no dividing lines in
the heavens. In fact, it should be treated as a psychological influence and has a close relation to the entire
chart.
In the ancient texts on astrblogy it was generally admitted that when the Sunjiad reached 28 degrees of a
sign its influence was mainly in the aext sign. By way
ot example, if the Sun is in 28 degrees of Virgo we use
Mercury as the ruling planet, although the characteristics
of Libra \yould be very noticeable in that per^bn’s mak^
up.»
Judging the Mentality
The mental rulers are the Sun, Moon and Mercury,
although all of the planets have an influence on the njind,
especially the ruler of the AsceiMant, rulers of third and
ninth houses. Also Saturn and’Uranus if in aspect to
the mental ruler?. Read their delineations according
to the aspects they may. behold.
Health
In speaking of'Health, ldok to the ^un for a male, and •
to theaMopn fpr a feniale.
Sun in good aspect to Moon, Mars or Jupitef is a
favofirole testimony for*heakh and a strong constitution
wijh an abundanre of vitality, especially if the Sun is in
the p rst.fhouse.

GENETHIJACAL ASTBOLQQY
Sun afflicting Urantfs : Denrotes suicides and accidents
rather than ill health.
•Sun afflicting Saturn : Poo^ health, long and serious
illness, especially wlifcn either planet is occidental.
Sun afflicting Jupiter: /indicates liver complaints,
blood diseases, apoplexy add pleurisy.
Sun afflicting Mars : ^lengthens the constitution,
but inclines to accidents, cuts, burns, scalds and •Vevers.
Sun and Moon in adverse aspect: Weakens the constitution, lowers '.the vitality and seldom gives long life.
Sun or Moon in the sixth house is not good for health ;
Uranus there indicates peculiar and complex disorders,
although there should be a chance of recovery by employing methods harmonising with the nature of Uranus
such as electric, magnetic, mesmeric treatments, etc.
Oriental positions of the planets signify, short, suddeh,
sharp attacks of sickness, but occidental positions produce serious, long, lingering sickness and chronic
diseases.
Remember to look to the Mood and her aspects when
judging the health .of a female. If the Moon is in adverse aspect to Venus, it weakens and deranges the constitution, and indicates annoying periodical sickness.
Particular Ailments
The physical ailments to which one is liable are
judged by fhe ascending sign and by the signs occupied
by the malefic planets, especially if' any of them afflict
the Sun or Moon; also judge ,by the sign which the Sun
• or Moon is in when so afflicted. .The ruler qf the sixth
house, and its afflictions, or anf planet* in ’the1 sixth,
should be* considered.
♦'♦‘Planets in cardina] signs indicate t}rarn fever, headaches, _ fits, disorders of the stomach, cancer, kidrtey

PART I. THE NATAL CHART
troubles, colds, rtfeum^tism, injuries to the hcjad and
knees. Functional disorders.
Planets in fixed signs indicate dTseases*of the throat,
dipjitheria, bronchitis, asthma, heart troubles, defective
circulation, spinal complaint's, trouble with the bladder
and urinary organs, injuries jto the sides, back, secrets
and ankles. Organic trouble/.
Plarfcts in common signs indicate tendency to tuberculoses, weak chest and lungs, bowel complaints, blood
disorders, dropsy and spasms; injuries to the hands,
arms, collar bone, thighs and feet. Nervous disorders.
The cardinal signs (Aries, Cancer, Libra and Capricorn) rule the head, breasts, stomach, ovaries, kidneys
and knees.
The fixed signs (Taurus, .Leo, Scorpio and Aquarius)
rule the throat, heart, bladder, generative system, calves,
aftkles and distribution of bodily fluids.
The common signs (Gemini, Virgo, Sagittarius and
Pis*es) rule the lungs, nervous system, solar plexus,
bowels, liver andTeet.
For Zones o£»the Human Body Ruled by the Zodiacal
Signs, see “-Features of the Zodiacal Signs.”
Ailments Denoted by (he Ascendant
Fiery sj^hs ascending predispose tha native to inflammatory conditions of the. system, to fevers anti to sudden
illnesses generally, acute out of short duystion.
Airy signs rising denote a tendent^ to nervous troubles, debility and hllnesse^ arising fjorn over-exertion, •
exhaustion, .letc.
Watqpy signs nsipg give liability of tumors, aancerous
^growths, mucous discharges,* colds andt moist humors**
' Earthly signs rising denote rheumatism, gout and flat
ulence, with a tendency toward chronic disorders.* .

GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
Accidents
Oriental positions of the pjanots show accidents; occidental positions incline mostly to sickness.
Sun afflicting Pluto or/a'Jeptifne : Danger throftgh
robbers, drugs and poison/
Sun afflicting Uranus^ Accidents by machinery,
electricity, vehicles, railroads, air planeS, etc.
Sun afflicting Saturn : Falls and bruises.
Sun afflicting Jupiter: Danger through fire.
Sun afflicting Mars: Severe cuts, scalds, wounds by
firearms.
Sun and Moon in adverse aspect: Danger on water.
Venus and Mercury r»le only minor accidents,
scratches, etc.
Adverse aspects between Moon, Uranus, Saturn, Jupiter or Mars when oriental produce effects much the
same as the Sun afflicted. *
Kind of Death
The time or date of death is a difficult thing to ascertain definitely, and evjn if knotfn it is seldom wise
to announce it, hut thg kind of death is often signified
by the -Sun, Moon, ruler of the Ascendant, sixth and
eighth hbusjes.
If these planets are afflicted by malefics in orient,
violent or sudden death is denoted. •
, Occidental planats and aspects point more to death by
sickness.. The lights afflicted anB the malefits efevated
above them show violent death. Sun*or fyloon in conjunction Vith Mars in {jrst, .sixth, eighth or tentW..house ,
indicates sudden»def>th. especially if JJranus or Saturn
add a, testimony of affliction. Death is usually cau&ed
by a qpmbination of aspects. * *

PART I, THE NATAL CHART
Neptune indicate# a mysterious deith, by gas, drowning, drugs, poisons. Urapus shcpvs strange Heaths,
usually sudden* and unexpected, through inventions,
electricity, lightning, railroads, vehicles* explosions,
travel or suicide.
Saturn denotes colds, conscvnptiov, dropsy, spleen disorder and chronic diseases. Jilpiter shows death by liver
troubles, blood disorders, apoplexy, inflammation of the
lungs. ,
Mars indicates fevers, smallpox, bladder troubles,
erysipelas, bursted blood vessels, hemorrhage, miscarriage, abortion, strangury, cuts, burns, scalds, and
wounds. Death is usually the result of a short, sudden
attack of sickness.
Sun shows heart troubles, fevers or constitutional
weakness.
Venus shows kidney or functional derangement.
‘Mercury indicates brain, nervous or intestinal disorders.
AJoon inclines to stomach troubles, public death, by*
drowning, etc., according to the aspects.
It is generally good policy not to attempt to tell people
how or when tftey, are likely to die. '
• Occupation
It is difficult to designate th# exact occupation, for
several rpJtsons. Some persons have* no choice in the
matter, their parents having decided their wofk for them,
and they follow their parents’ will ofttimes in direct
opposition to their «own desires. In this respect the
tenth house may .be regarded as designating the ideal or
self-chosen occupation or profession, and the sixth house,,
work, Service, drudgery carried on under dislike, distaste,
protest or force of circumstances. On the otnef hand,
.many jfhoose* a line of wprk,. not .because of an£ particular likmg for it, but for monetary gjpn,*thereby bringing*
their occupation largely uraier the rule of the %pcond
houdte.

ISO
OENETHLIACAL AS'TROr^GY
Any 'planet in the tenth house will show in what direction the natural desiris may lead, by blending the nature
of the planet with the nature of the sign* it' occupies and
the aspect which it qiay behold •
The nature of the planet and th« quality of its aspects
will determine the benefit /or difficulties of the occupation. It is necessary also fo note the strongest planet in
nativity by house, sign anl^aspect.
With most of the planets in tlie map below the earth,
or weak, or mostly in common signs, the native should
be in the employ of others. If above the earth, strong
or well aspected, the native may be the employer of
others. If the majority of planets are in airy signs, a
profession should be chosen, but if in earthly signs, a
business would be best.
The Sun and its aspects are very important <n this
matter.
Mercury in conjunction with the Sun inclines to sutcess in bookkeeping, accounting, clerking, secretarial and
Jiterary wdrk.
Venus in gqod aspect to Sun inclines to success as
jeweler, musician, artist, actor, photographer, etc.
Sun in good aspect to Mars inclines to success in military; affairs, work with iron and steel, dentist, barber,
butcher, surgeon, chemitt or agent. In good aspect to
Jupiter, Inclines to suedess as lawyer, clergyman, physician, banker, judgj or senator; in goo<j aspecUto Saturn,
inclines to 'success in mining, agriculture, real estate,
property, lead. coal and other minerals ; in good aspect to
Uranus, inclines to success in public or governmental
positions or as engineer, electrician, inventor, astrologer,
• also as reporter oq progressive papei's*; in good aspect
fo Neptune, inclines to success a»a druggist^. oil dealer,
detective,1 speculator, or success in som£ occult, inspirational and unusual pursuit. . * , ,
Moon in good aspect to S^n, inclines to success wjth
the general public in liquids, comn^on commodities;

PAftT I, THE NATAL CHA.BT
hawker, cat} man,* expressman, policeman, oyjterman,
laundryman, dairymari, milkman,* sailor, fisherman or
traveler.
If many planets are in.one sign, things signified by
thfc sign and by the* house 'they occupy will attract attention, but whether it will W fortunate or not depends
upon the nature of the combination and the aspects.
Tha most success w^ll come through things indicated
by the planet best aspected and in connection with the
sign and house it occupies in the chart.
Sun and Moon in good aspect : Business and employment come readily and benefit through them ; the adverse
aspect of Sun and Moon has a reverse effect.
Moon afflicting Saturn : Likely to lose in bujiness
through financial slumps and 'depressions, and when out
of employment have a ha%d time getting started again.
• Sun and Mars in good aspect are very favorable for
employment' and business, denoting rapid advancement;
Sun afflicting Mars, disagreement with employers aq,d
' larger of accidents.
Marriage
"€hqpse not alone a proper mate,
• But proper time to marry." — Cowper
Ptolemy says in his “Tetrabihlos,” book iv, chapter v,
“Whenever both nativities, viz., that of the husband and
that of thfc wife, may exhibit the luminaries cohfigurated
together in concord, that is to say either in*trine or sextile to each other, the cohabitation will ,ihost usually be
lasting, especially if the said concord exist by means of
an interchange, pj by mutual reception; but its duration^
will also be much more securely established provided the
Moot? in the husband's nativity should correspond with
the Sun in the wife’s nativity. If, however, the relative
positions of* the luminaries.be ip signs inconjlinct (l JjQ*
apart,) or in opposition, or in quaptile, the cohabitation
will be speedily dissolved* upon slight causes, and the
totll separation of {he parties will ensue.

genethiAacal astrology
"And should the configuration of the luminaries, when
made in concord, be ^well) aspecfed by the .benefics, the
cohabitation will continue in respectability, comfort and
advantage; bul, on Ae other* hand,' it will abound in
strife, contention and misfortune if the malefics be in
(evil) aspect to said confieuttftion.”*(Words in parenthesis by L. G.)
Here is a simple but accd^te rule which needs for its
practical application the two maps of' the heavens at
birth, a comparison of which will give a reliable decision
as to whether any particular couple are well or ill suited.
Moon and Venus rule the attractions in-a male chart;
Sun and Mars in a female chart.
The partner is described by the planet to which the
Moon or Sun first applies, to any aspect, after birth, in
the rddix. Aspects that are just past do not couet. If
the first applying aspect is of, adverse nature the result
of the attraction is jinfavorable, i. e., there will be trouble and difficulty. If the aspect is a good one, the result?
are likely to be favorable.
*If the Moon and Venus (or the Sun and Mars in a
female chart) arp strong and free from affliction especially by Saturn, the native has an eaVly attraction.
Sun or Moon in the fifth or seventh hduse and aspected
to seycral planets causes an early attraction.
Fruitful signs on thc«.cusps oi the htth and seventh
houses ar^ favorable for an early union. .
When Satdrn afflicts Sun or Moon it delays marriage
and should thes^ planets be weak and Saturn strong, and
barren signs on the cusps of the firrt and fifth houses,
the native is not likely tp marry.
"If tfye Sun or Moon applies to more thqn tine. aspect
it signifies Imore than one union ; two aspects, two unions;
three aspeats, three unions, etc.
Astrology showS the union ot attectums regardless of
whether the unions are madi legal or not according to
the (pwt of the land.

PART I, THE NAl'AL CHART , 158
I£ the Sup or Moon be in Gemijii* Sagittarius or Pisces
more than pne union 'is denoted. .
If Saturn afflicts* the Shn or Moon death of the partner
is signified, or coldness develops between them.
Description of |Iarricge Partner
In a man's horoscope, if the Moon applies to a good
aspect of Mercury the wife will be clever, perceptive,
sensible, active and agood talker; if in adverse aspect,
critical and complaining.
In good aspect with Venus she will be beautiful, loving, accomplished and refined; in adverse aspect flirtatious and extravagant.
In good aspect to Sun she will be generous, noble,
sympathetic, straightforward and magnanimous. Adverse : proud, domineering
* In good aspect, to Mars : active, energetic, brave. In
adverse aspect : bold, refractory, quick-tempered and
headstrong.
In good aspect to Jupiter ; just, kind, charitable, philosophic, cheerful and*of good disposition. Adverse: extravagant.
In good aspect tp Saturn : grave, serious, steady, attentive to duties, painstaking and frugal. Adverse:
melancholy, sickly, mercenary.* ’
In good aspect to Uranus she will possess many peculiarities, somewhat’ impulsive and independent, but
enterprising, progressive and original. ^Adverse : eccentric, impulsive. The adverse aspect usually indicates
separation or divorce.
In' good aspect to 'Neptune she will be medipinistic or
psychic, fond o'f music and the mysteries of nature. Advei’st?: vague, indefinite, negative.
For a female chart take the Sun’s aspects apd apply
tlfem as indicated, above.

GENETHLlKCAL ASTROLOGY
In a female chart* if the Sun is afflicted by Uranus
she is liable to go astray. Saturn 'afflicting ^he Sun the
husbayd may be miserly, gloomy, etude, urtfortunate and
somewhat sickly. Mays afflictifig Suit the husband may
be hot-tempered, coarse and harsh. Venus afflicting
Sun, a passionate partner. ^Vfoon* afflicting Sun, *a
changeable partner. Jwpiteriafflicting the Sun indicates
a partner liable to financial fosses.
In a male chart when the Moon aspects Uramis.men
cohabit with married women ; if Venus aspects Uranus
they cohabit with single females. In either chart, male
or female, if Uranus, Neptune or Saturn be in either
first, fifth or seventh house it is seldom that the native
leads an entirely chaste life.
Jupiter or Venus in the seventh gives domestic felicity
and comfort; well aspected, gain by marriage.
Sun or Moon in the seventy is favorable, but much
depends upon the assets and the dignity by sign.
Moon (in male chart) afflicted by Uranus, Saturn or
Mars, indicates heavy misfortune for the wife through
aedident, sickness or operation and danger of her demist.
Sun (in female cjfiart) afflicted in a like manner affects
the husband.
Neptune in affliction with Venus indfbates deception
in courtship and marriage. Uranus in adverse aspect
with Venus indicates misttust, separation and danger of
scandals. Saturn in adveftse aspect with Venus indicates
delays, trouble, soryaw and disappointment. «Mars in
adverse aspec* with Venus indicates suspicion and irritability. Very little happiness, comfort or prosperity is
experienced if Uranus, Saturn or Jlars occupy the
seventh house (unle^ they be well dignified and aspected) and if they qre afflicted thereiri the union will
prbve a. very unfortunate event.
Children
The nature of sign occupied Dy the Moon, and her
aspects, are to be considered carefully^* this qutstkfti.

PART j, THE NAffAL CHART
The Moon in Cancer, iScorpio,’ Pisces or Taurus makes
the native ’fruitful, and if in gOod aspect to Jupiter or
Venus it usually gives a large family. Moon angular (in
first, fourth, seventh' or -tenth hoyse) increases the number of children. Moon, Jupiter or Venus in fifth or
eleventh house is ,a favorable testimony for children.
The Sun in the fifth in a fruitful ,sign, and well aspected
by Moon or Venus is a testimony for children.
Consider the- fifth and eleventh houses. (The eleventh
because it is the fifth house of the partner.) Fruitful
signs covering these cusps are favorable and increase
the number of children.
A fruitful sign ascending or the Sun in a fruitful sign
is favorable for children.
Barren signs on the cusps of the first, fifth or eleventh,
or Che Sun in a barren sign, lessen the chances for
children.
The Moori in ’Aries, Leo or Sagittarius, the nature is
inclined to barrenness; and if the Moon is afflicted by
Uranus, Saturn, Mars or Sun there is little chance»for
iny children.
Uranus, Saturn, Mars or Sun in fifth or eleventh house
denies childfen«or destroys them, according to the nature
of the sign, the aspects and the dignity of the planet.
Mercury and Neptune depend upon the Aspects received qjid the nature of the sign occupied. ,
When the testimony is for children and the cusp of
the fifth is covered by a feminine sigh and its ruler a
feminine planet, Inost of the children will be girls.
Whemthe sign aryl its ruler are ftiasculine, most of the
offspring w*U be boys.
*l1ie fifth house shbws'the'first child; seventh i-^use
the second child; nintfy house; tHird child; eleventh
hpuse, fourth <;hild; first house, fifth child; third house,

QENBTHLIAMAL astrology
sixth child; fifth house, seventh "child, a,nd so on around
the circle.* By childreji* is me^nt not alone 'those who
live to Jbe born and reared, but all conceptions.
If the fifth house shows children and the eleventh
house denies them, or vice ver^tf, some will live and some
will die.
If the malefics occupy thcVseventh house the second
child may die; and so on. If the ruler of one o£ these
houses is heavily afflicted there is ‘danger of losing that
child.
Difference In degree of development or understanding determines, to a large extent, the difference In human response to
planetar; aspects. One who is Ignorant of Natural Law will
blindly follow hia own Imperfect conceptions of hla feelings, urges
and conditions, and then rant shout his "bad luck.” Another
Individual, under the same planetary Influence, who understands
the workings of Cosmic Vibrations, is apt to be much less disturbed and n great deal more fortunate.* The one follows “fate"; the
other anticipates It and profits to the degree of hla knowledge in ,
the refinement of his response to planetary vibrations. In other
words. Ignorance Impels people to do many regrettable things
which the appllpntlon of wisdom transcends.
No one should feel discouraged because they find a number of
adverse aspects in their horoscope. They are in every horoscope,
and for a purpose. They remind us that fftere la work to be done,
bottles to be fought and wfon, difficulties to be overcome— and that
In victory over self Ilea sweet reward, tn othets wflrds, weakness
and faults denoted by adverse aspects should not be ateepled as
a handicap, but rather regarded as a challenge to develop latent
powers and faculties.
By usin^ adverse uapecta, instead ot being Mused Dy tnem, man
may win Tils 'battle of life through sheer merit of persfctent, determined effort, aicournged by the wlsdojn of the ages, astrology.
The horoscope of many successful men and women show that they
won success, not because of good aspects, but because they overcame nnd utilized the so-called "adverse" aspects.
Jhe aspects are perfect, but man'# responses ‘are mostly poor
or fmperfect, and the p<ftr responses to the aspects aooil opportunities for perfect happiness; and so ne brings* hlrtself Into
conflict, carter than into harmony with Nature* and does so to
hla ow;; detriment *
•V

PART 'll. THE PROGRESSED CHART ,
A to Z Horoscope Maker and Delineator
PART II
THE PROGRESSED HOROSCOPE
For I .have laid upon thee the years of their
iniquity, according to the number of the days.
... I have appointed thee each day for a year. •
. . . The vision that he seeth is for many days
to come and h^ prophesieth of tne times that
are far »ff.— Ezekiel, Chapters 4 and 12.
Are thy day% as the d^ys of man? Are thy
years as man’s days? — Jol* 10, S.
I have conside/ed the days of old,* the years
of ancient times. — Psalm 77, 5.
Index to Part II on' next page.

GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
INDEX to Part II*
Page
Aspects in the Prog. Chart, delineated . 182 — 185
“Directions” .... 2215
Eclipses, how they affect the^Horoscope 224
Ephemeris tor September, 1884 . «1£2 — 3
Ephemeris for August, 1910 ... 209
Favorable Days in Relation to Your Horoscope, 215 — 220
Lunations, how They Affect Individuals . . 213
Moon, How to find its Longitude each month during
Progressed Year 176
Table of its Monthly Position * 178
Aspects delineated . . . 179 — 182
Natal Horoscope illustrated (No. 3) • 170
Parallels of Declination, of Planets and House
Cusps 186—200
Progressed Chart, Theory and TeclTnic of 159, 226
Process of casting »Prog. Chart illustrated 165
Progressed Birthday, how to find . * . . • . 169
Prog. Xlhart illustrated (No. 4) 171
Pars Fortunae (Part of Fortune) ... 223
Recapitulation* a condensed Guids for casting and
delineating thsj Progressed Horoscope . . 225
Retrogradation 222
Solar Periods (annual) good and adverse 221
Tables of Jiouses for Latitude 40* (section) . 175
Transits, D?finition, Duration, Influence . ' 201-^15
Table showing Geocentric Period of Transits . 205
Transit Table for Use with ftogressed Aspects . 210
lExampJe of Transits in Natal and Prpgt Charts, 2ll-f3

PART II. THE PROGRESSED CHART
THE PROGRESSED pOROSCOPE '
Thr.ory and Technic
The Progressed Horoscope is a chart made for any
year after Birth, in which one m^y read the conditions
of that period, according to astrology.
The horoscope of birth and the progressed chart may
be likened unto ’a boolj of information. The index tells
what the volume contains and the chapters give the details. The birth chart is like an index, the progressed
chart like a chapter; and as a book contains only that
which was in'dexed, so from a progressed chart should
be read only that which is indicated at birth.
From the location of the planets in the zodiac at birth,
their aspects and the positions in the horoscope, «n influent is exerted throughout the whole life. This fact
can easily be discerned fry watching the transit of a
planet over natal positions for over*the cusp of a house
in the natal .charts, although the planet itself may long
since have moved away from the original place.
The reason for the permanent influence of the planets
is, as one writer says^ “Because these influences are inherent in the very structure of the physical body. All
atoms and mokecyles of the physical ’plane, and all material combinations, whether solid, liquid, gas or ether, are
classified in terms dt planets gnd zodiacal signs. ' The
physical body has been built up of these combinations,
and it forms a highly complex whole, which exactly
corresponfis in composition to the sffellar positions (locations and aspects) at birth, and responds to their
vibrations. The horoscope, therefore, is registered in the
body itself, and lasts as long as life endures." (See chapter in Part V entitled, “Change *of Residence.’’)
As Ahe birth map may be considered permanent because it represents the structure and compositirfh.of the
bodjj (the physical vehicle and individuality),* so ntfcva
’ systeih of "progression* considered valid because^ it
represents the clfanges taking place in the living being
within the limits.imposed at birth. ,

ISO
genethl£a.cal astrology
The twelve zodiacal figns apparently rise and set during the twenty-four hours of each day. The planets
continually traveling through the zodiac change their
relation one to-anothcr and also to the places held at
birth. For instance, if the Sun were in the first degree
of a sign at birth and Jupiter in the' twentieth degree of
the same sign, the Sun would arrive at the place held by
Jupiter in the nineteenth dad’ after birth.
With regard to the conjunction used 'as an example:
Jupiter being a benefic and the conjunction a good one,
the effects would be very favorable but if Jupiter had
been heavily afflicted at birth no great good results
would occur. (See "Progressed Horoscope Aspects” in
Part III.)
The changes among the signs and planets after birth
are classed under two heads:
First : The rotation of the earth on its axis apparently causes the signs t» move at the rate of approximately
l degree every 4 minutes, so in the course of 24 hours
the whole zgdiac of 360 degrees has crossed over the horizon of every point on the earth. In those 24 hours the
earth has also moved forward in its orbit approximately
one degree and 4)y so doing it consumes approximately
4 minutes of time more than 24 hours. Reference to the
S. T. column in an Iiphemeris shows that 'Sidereal Time
advances about 4 minutes per day in accordance with the
earth's daily orbital progress of one degree.
The 'Midheaven progresses uniformly, but this is not
true of the qfher Hbusc cusps due mainly to inequality
in the shape of the earth, except at the equator. Therefore, each day Shunted forward in the Ephemcris to represent one year of life changes the ‘Midheaven one degree each day. Th^otlfcr cusps changa in their proper
sequence as indicate by the Tables of Houses.
The«original places of the planets in. the natal chart
an^hangdd by this motion,, but not* their longitudinal
places. For instance,, if* a planet were, in conjunction
with the degree on the cusp*of the first house at birth,
every fqur minutes (every year) that^ degree and planet

PART. II. THE PROORE8SED CHART
will appear t6 be carried up one cftpree into the ‘twelfth
house and ifs distance. from the horizon and meridian
would change. The planet just jnentioped woulS be
exerting a twelfth house influence and would, sooner or
latar, form aspects of sextlle, semi-square, semi-sextile,
conjunction, etc., with what was the degree constituting
the Midheaven (meridian orcqsp of tenth house) at birth.
The sefond change which takes place is caused by the
planets' actual movement in the zodiac. In this way a
planet may move away from its location in the zodiac
at birth and form new aspects to other planets; also to
its original place in the radix. The measure of time for
a chart made by this seeming movement is one day for
each year of life, i. e., the aspects formed during the first
day indicate the events of the first twelve months of life ;
the next day represents the next 12 months, and so on.
The elements taken into account by "direction” ar$ the
places of Sun, Moon, placets and house cusps. The
Ascendant and Midheaven are of moje importance than
tBe other cusps. Aciy of these may progress to an aspect
of any other, or to an aspect of its own place in the birth
chart.
l&e use the word "position” for place in the chart, and
the word “location” foi* place in zodiac. '*
The word "ridiac” means root or beginning, and since
after birth 'the signs and planets all move away from
the places occupied irf the birth .chart, and because they
all move at different rates, they .form new aspocts, not
only to thg various fixed places in the birth horoscope,
but also among themselves as they advance.. Therefore,
a distinction must be made between any planet or cusp
as it exists in the map for birth, and the .same one as it
is placed after having moved away from the place at
The*Word “radix” is used to designate planets or cusps
in the birth cha#, and the term "progressed” 1rtdj,cates
,the places arfd condition^ in the progressed chart.
Such a directional aspect as the one tised for example
(Suq conjunction, Jupiter) would be registered in this
way: Prog. Sun conj. Jupiter radix, (P © 6 V Radix)

genethiIacal astrology
meaning that the Sun py its progressed motion had come
•to a conjunction with the plyce t>f Jupiter, in the birth
chart.
Jupiter would also have moved away from its radical
place, and as the Sun moves faster than Jupiter, it wotild
in a few years (days^ catch up to Jupiter and form another conjunction. This ^pect being due to the progressed motion of both planets is termed a “progressed
mutual aspect” and would he written 'thus: Pvog. Sun
conj. Jupiter prog. (P O d U P, or P O d P y.)
A planet which had progressed to a square or other
aspect of its own place in the radix would be entered
thus: Prog. Moon square Moon radix; or Prog. Moon
sextile Ascendant radix; or Prog. Moon sextile Ascendant Prog.
Thus it will be seen that the directional aspects are
divided into two general classes:
First, directions from progressed Janets or cusps to
radical planets or cusps.
" Second, directions from progressed planets or cufcps
to progressed pjancts or cusps.
The motion of the Moon is approxima^ly 13 degrees
per day (per year by progression), consequently it will
require about 2'/ years to progress through one sign of
the zodiac. Thus in approximately 28 years it will progress completely around the circle and return to the place
it originally held jt birth. The Moou’s aspects formed
as it progresses from house to bouse through both the
natal and progressed charts is very important and indicates most of fhe conditions and events encountered in
life. This will be fpprfciated by noting its various ini’ fluences as indicatfd by the houses i*c ’ traverses, all of
Nvhicl\ are accentuated in accordince with the Aspects
which tht Moon may form. In fact, in, the course of its
apnr.’rent i28 year circle of the signs. and hbuses .it. will
wm every possible aspect fn tlie natal chart and'practically every possible aspeqj in the progressed chart.
One df the main features connected . with progressed

PAST II. THE PROGRESSED CHART
horoscope week is*to record the monthly place. of the
progressing Morjn and tabiflate the* month and year of
. the various aspects tyhith if will meet.
When the Moon is in the tenth, or ruler ot it (radix
or f5rog.) the aspects* formed by it have reference to
business affairs, occupation, professkm and mother; the
eleventh house to friends; the twelfth house to restraint,
limitations, difficulty, sorrow; the first to health and personal affairs; the second<to money matters; the third to
brethren, neighbors, short journeys, writings ; the fourth
to property, domestic affairs, father (parents) ; the fifth
to speculation, pleasure, love affairs, children ; the sixth
to sickness, employees, small animals, food, medicine,
clothing; the seventh to marriage, partner, opponents,
opposition, lawsuits; the eighth to deaths, legacy, gain
through money of others ; the ninth to long journeys,
voyages, visions, dreams, psychic experiences, spiritual
tendencies.
The aspects formed by any of the pljnets to the degree
constituting the. cusp of a house are important, provided
the exact time of birth was known and used, in which
case the degree on the house cusps would bte correct^
But«if only an approximate birth time were used, then
the degrees on the house cusps would be.only approximately correct and, consequently, it would be uncertain
when a planet «vopld arrive at a conjunction with the
actual, or cofrect, degree ruling a cusp.
Jupiter or Venus conjunction, <rine or sextile to Midheaven (sign and degree of tenth tusp) is a very 'fortunate indication for ljusiness affairs, honprs, etc.;. but the
amount of good they >111 bring depends *tpon their
power for good in the radix. If either plaaiet is heavily
afflicted in the radix.its power for good By direction is
correspondingly weakened.
Any jif the planets cpruing to a corfjunction, parallel, •
opposition, trinl, square, sextile, etc., with the sign* and
degree on thecusf) of a house will bring infiuencf tof*car
according to the nature Of the house, and in proportion,
to the planet’s power in the radix by essential dignity,
"aspect, location and, position.* The conjunction, however,
• is of most importance.

OENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
For rnstance, suppose Mars, by its progressed motion,
comes to a conjunction with the cusp of -the' fourth house
in either radix or prpgrcssed chart, »it would bring trouble, controversy, loss and difficulty with regard to property, father and domestic 'affairs. And if Mars was
much afflicted at bi^th it would make the evil so much
the worse, whereas, if it had been well aspected and dignified at birth the evil woJld be much lessened. And so
on in like manner with the other plarwets and.th.e other
cusps. The conjunction of a j/.anet to a cusp i!> more
important than the aspects to it, i.e., more important
than the sextile, square, trine, etc. The more a malefic
is afflicted in the radix, the more adverse is the nature
which it carries with it by progression. The same rule
holds hoth ways, i.e., the more a planet is dignified and
well aspected in the radix, the more beneficent is the
nature which it carries with it by progression. The influence of minor aspects tb cusps is almost imperceptible.
Aspects to cusps should be within two degrees, forming.
Aspects past (completed) do not count, as conditions
they represent have passed, so are nt>t tabulated.
Take tl\e progressed planets one by one and enter them
<n the birth chart, with colored ink for distinction,, and
note if from their progressed places in the zodiac they
form any aspect to the planets'as they were at birth,
allowing two degrees orb to make an aspect. Only the
forming aspects are to be tabulated fo'r delineation.
Lay out five columns^for aspects, and head them thus:
(1) Progressed aspect^ to radix, (2) Progressed mutual
aspects, (3) Transits over progressed aspects to radix,
(4) Transit^ over' progressed mutual -aspects)' (5) Parallels of declination.
Aspects to Aisps of houses, either radical or progressed need not be con^idejed unless the birth time is known
i to be correct, or corrected by* a reliable1 system of rectifi-
‘ cation, as a difference of every fqur minujes*jn llie birth
time changes the cusps one degree, while a difference of
tm*r' miuutes or so does not perqpptibly chapge the
•Janets’ location in the* zodiac. ‘Therefore, pay most attention' to aspects between the planeSs. Of aspects to
cusps: the conjunction is of most importance; especially
with 1st, 10th, 7th and 4th radix ami progressed.

PART U, THE PBOQRBB8ED CHART
Illustrating* the Process 'of
.Casting the Progressed Chart
Progressed Birfhday, 'Sidereal *Time And Signs
'to erect a "progressed” chart, refer to an Ephemeris
for the date and year of birth, and count each day after
birth as one year in life, i. e., a chart made for the first
day after birth would show (by planets’ positions, aspects, .etc*,) the conditions to operate between one year
and two years of age; a chart cast for the second day
after birth would show the conditions for the twelve
months followjng the second anniversary, and so op
through any number of years.
If you wish to erect a chart for the twentieth year of
a person born on the first day of the month, count
twenty days after birthday, and it will take you t» the
twenty*first day of that month. A chart made in the
usual way for the time of bfrth will show the conditions
f<jr the twelve months following.
Example
4:3d a. m., August 17, 1909, present birthday.
•1876, birthday.
33 years old,
which is equal to 33 <Uys after birth. Thirty-three days
added to birthday (Aug. 17) brings us to Sept. 19, 1876,
as the progressed birthday for Vhich a chart is then
iqade in th* usual yay.
After counting forward in the Ephemeri^ the required
number of days (for the age desired), you»then make the
calculations to S. T? for this date in exactly the same
manner as when "making the birfh horoscope, i. e., you
find thg S. JT. of birth .according to hbw much time the'
birth occurred ’before or after noon. Then tum.to the
same latitude in'the Table of Houses as wa% usWJn
makirtg* the birth chart,’ find this last named S. T. :H
birth and copy out the signs and degree’s for the various
*houys in,to a circular blank* chart.

GKNETHLIACAL ASTROIiOGT
MS
Latitude and L'orvgitude of the Progressed Chart
' f t
The progressed chart is always erectett for the latitude
of birth place. The* progressed chdrt is a projection of
the birth chart. The latter is based upon zodiacal conditions affecting that particular latitude (latitude ofthe
birth place) which'are “cast" in the individual born
there at that time, and throughout the life there is an
Intimate relation to the conditions so cast. See chapter
on "Change of Residence” in Pjirt V.
Placing the Planets
Having placed the signs and degrees in the chart from
the Table of Houses, turn to the Ephemeris and copy the
planets’ places into the horoscope, first taking care to get
their correct locations according to the time of birth, by
how, much time birth occurred before or after the noon
mark of birth place.
The goon’s Monthly Motion
Before proceeding to figure out *the 'various aspects
between the planets, find the motion of the Moon on the
Progressed birth date by counting how many degrees
and minutes of longitude it will travel between its given
place on this 'day and its given, place on the next day.
Then change this a, mount of Moon’s motion from degrees
and minutes to all minutes by multiplying the degrees
by 60 and adding the minutes to this sum. Dividing
the total by 12 shows <hc rate at which the Moon will
move, forward in the zodiac through the chart in each of
the twelve months during this progressed yepr. Adding
this amoKnC of Moon's monthly motion twelve times td
the place of Moon at birth hour'on this progressed birthday will short in what degree the Moon will be each
month during the /touting twelve months.
• The average motion of the Moon is about thirteen degrees p« r year, which is equal 'to 1* 5' longitude per
mqrth by progression. In locating the degree occupied
My the Moon each mpnth,. begin /our count fvpm the
actual hirih rtutnth. and date, because the progressed
birthday represents the real1 birth date. In the foregoing’

PART II. ThE PROGKES8ED CHART
example, for instance, Sept. 19, l&76f represents Alig. 17,
1909; because August. 17 was the? actual birthday.*
Thi; Aspects *
After having made a column ot hgures by adding the
Mbon’s monthly morion twelve times to its place at birth
time on this day, and also having varitten the name of the
month beside each addition so that a glance will show
which degree the Moon occupies each month, you may
begin to* look up the aytects which the Moon forms during the year; that is, see if it will form any aspects from
its place the first month of this progressed year, and if
so mark them down. Then look for' the aspects formed
in the second’ month if any, and so on throughout the
twelve months. Remember to allow an orb of but two
degrees. (See illustration on page 178.)
These are termed Lunar Aspects and they are very important. By working in the foregoing manner on? may
readily see in which month during the year an aspect
will become complete, ana thus prepare to take advantage of, or offset, its effects according to its nature,
whether goo’d or adverse. Remember that an aspect by
this progressive direction has an orb of only two degrees.
AH aspects, however, whether major or minor, should
be regarded, but tjreir influence is to be jjtdged according
to their power and tfieir indications in the radix. For
instance, if the progressed Moon farmed an adverse aspect with 'Venus, you should not predict anything bad
unless these two were in adverse aspect at birth ; although it would not be a gootf month to press matters
relating to courtship, marriage, etc.
The other planets move so slowly by direction that it
is not necessary to find their monthly motion, as we do
• In conoecttoo with “progressions, or “jjtrections” as they are
sometimes called. tables on pages' 092 and 003 may be esped-,
itlouslv used. For instance, if a birth dat* is December 20th and
a progbesseS chart is to*be made for 40 years later :
December tj)th is the 334th day of year (See table, page4j92-3).
+ 40 days for, progression *
394tti Any or January 20th of the following year.

GENETHLLACAL ASTROLOGY
with tht Moon. 'TJie 'Lunar progressed aspects require*
very clqse attention because they show the nature of
things and conditions signified by the house the Moon
occupies in the progressed chart, and the house it rules,
as well as the».house*lt may be wording through in the
radix when placed in it from Jthe progressed chart.
After all the aspects between the planets in the progressed chart have been recorded, copy the progressed
planets according to their sign and degree into the radical chart, with colored ink foi; distinction, dnd, note
whether from their progressed places in the zodiac they
form any aspect with other planets, or their own pk. es,
as held at birth. Pay particular attention to the aspects
which may be formed by the Moon and Sun.
It makes no difference in the nature of an aspect
whether it be in the radix or in the progressed char> ,
that is, the square will always be adverse, the sextile
always good, etc. It should be remembered that tfie orb
of aspect by progression is bdt two degrees.
It is considered that the Sun, Moon, Mars, Jupiter,
Saturn and, Uranus, in particular, passing in aspect by
direction to the places of the planets at birth, or passing
their own radical places, or passing progressed places
of the planets, are very important and bring about events,
especially if the planets were in an aspect of similar
quality at birth. Mercury, .Venus, Ndptune and Pluto
are important also, but to a lesser extent.

PART II, THE PROGRESSED CHART
PROGRESSING THE, 'CHART
It is pre^um-ed thaf the student’ now understands how
to erect and read a natahchart (tfce radij) so we turn to
Chart No. 3 which is the radix of the progressed chart
we are about to make. The latter is illustrated in Chart
• No. 4. It is advisable to read thi» process over carefully
and then with pencil and paper work the entire example
out, two or three times if necessary, until your work
corresppnds with the illustration. By doing this it will
be fftund that the wcfrk is not at all difficult. Anyone
with ordinary education and persistence can learn to
perform it correctly.
Progressed Birthday — How to Find
August 23, 1910=year for which a chart is desired.
August 23, 1884=birth date.
26 years. Jfhis is equivalent to 26 days
after birthday; 26 days added to#the birthday equals
^September 18, 1884, and a chart made as though the
native were "born on this date at 0:45:46 a. m., will represent his 26th year from August 23, 1910, td Augusts,
Note: When counfing the number of*days after birthday, remember not to count the day of birth as one year,
for the child is riot a year old until 12 months after birth.
A chart made for the date and time of birth shows the
conditions for the child for th% ensuing twelve months.
A chart made for one day aftei* birth represents the life
between «he first and second anniversaries. Likewise a
chart made for 26 days after birthday represents the life
between the 26th and 27th birthdays, jThe table on poke 692 Is very hBndy foj finding the date representing the, progressed jjpar. For instance, in above example 28
daya after ‘the "birth date (August 23) Is September JStli.
August 23 Is 235th day of year (see table).
' ’ + 28 days for progression
281ft day of tile year or September 18tb>.

no
oenethi./acal astrology
Horoscope No. 3. Natal Figure.
AFMJCANT FII.L IN THI« KOIt'l ArfTHOLUOtK
JSxUn-sl
(OLOGLK K:i L »N T»q* F.if.M
itv« m!
Kmjur/f/^ rti* UiXiUr [fin* bu^mut It laJd) ^ ^ ^
OwMr Huif XlJrival time at Unit
CrtwnlbMf Pa****** Now. m«h «. WHl. fb«
MIOKCAVCN
The ‘position of Pluto *tn this chart is in the 12th house
The sidereal time at noon is. 10.08:44, minus V 53”
correction for'Jl hours 14 minutes born before noon,
plus 60 seconds for the longitude ivest of Greenwich,
gives 10.07:51 as corrected sidereal time. Transpose it
"to 33:67.51 to simplify the subtraction! of 11 hours 14
minutes ^4 seconds, amount of titne born, bdfore'noon.
Pag«S 172 and ITS are Inserted to enable students to check the
following example by the use of Raphael’s •KplieinA-ls. "Wig preceding examples in,t|ps course eirfployed the Simplified Ephhmerls.
Tliese two ephemerhles liave heen most commonly used by students. some preferring Slmpllfled* on account of its large print
Howpveis there are now othar ephemerldes^af all able. ‘ *

PART II, THE PROGRESSED CHART
Horoscope No. 4. Progressed Cha$t.
APPLICANT FILL IN UMIf FORM J AiTHOLOOtft PII.L IN THU FORM •
/f NuMl &■*££?.'. .(>lnkbr* Mrk Wiser MsMbt) 11.14 j!4
PlirfC/4^M^r , link hew mark *h*r (add) 0 00 00
0— «y »or« SXC. .. lilesiMftfc 00.38:07
*»«.. ,Orr«j*|n»X^' A'# ’ iLsthad* jkaji/. i.. imM.
Erected for September 1'8, 1884 (26 days after birthday, as per data in Horoscope No. 3), which represents
the year beginning August 23, 1910, aktd ending August
Reference to tfle Ephemerls oo folkwing pages shows tfiat
Mei-Sury llecognes retr<«rade ( R ) on Sept 6th. The symbol was
inadvertently omitted from chart of progressed horoscope on this
page. Pleivse irtsert the symbol R opposite MerguryTS position
foi* jAiur convenience when checking the following elements.
Likewise, you *111 note thg symbol 'D In Mereury’s column opllpslte September, 28th, Indicating the date when ilertury again
assumes direct mottpu.

GENETHLIA GAL ASTROLOGY

PAflT 11, THE PROORE83EP CHART
1884.] , km lAiz't irrmoifoMtcAL mwirni. 18
SEPTEUBEB XXt DATS.
D V i ? 9 Mntnal Lnnar Aspect.,
Long. Long. Long. Long. Long. |Aspt* ©|W|^|»|<f |9^| 9
'a
t L ?
satis
flu
afD s
i g H
O V
a
\a
fa

GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
Progressed Horoscope — How to Erect It
11.50:74 Transposed to make subtraction easy.
00.01:53 Subtract for correction Jo S. T. (11 hrs. 14
mins, born before noon.)'
00.00:60 Add for correction to Longitude (89)4* W. =
5 hrs., 58 mins, from Greenwich.)
, Reduce the 81 seconds to minutes and we have
11.50:21 corrected S. T.
These two corrections are explained in Part I under
chapters headed, "Correction Between Mean and Sidereal Time,” and “Correction to Sidereal Time for Longitude.”
f
From the corrected S. T. we now subtract the amount
of time born before noon:
r
ll.SO^l^Corrected S. T.
— 11.14:14— Amount of time before noon (0.45:46 a. m.)
Enter a Tables of Houses for nearest latitude to birth
place, and copy signs and degrees for the' various cusps
from the nearest figure to 0.36:07. (See section of Tables
on next pagg.)
Now we are ready fc> correct the planet^’ given, places
for the amount1 of time born fronj Noon Mark, after
which we enter them in the chart.
Planets' cProgressed Places
Born in longitude 89)4 degrees west, Noon Mark- is

PART M, THE PROGRESSED CHART 175
A Section From the Tables of Houses,,
Latitude 40" North

QEyETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY,
This is termed the constant logarithm, because used constantly in correcting the planets’ places.
One example will suffice here; the other planets’ correct places may be seen in Horoscope No. 4.
We will correct given ephemeral place of the Moon
Moon 15*02' Virgo Sept. 18, lSS1* (prog, birthday).
13*05'=daily motion.
* To find the planets’ daily motion in the progressed
horoscope, always subtract place on progressed birthday
from that on next day in advance (adding 30 degrees to
it if necessary) regardless of whether born before or
after Noon Mark. Adhere rigidly to this rule.
Logarithm for 13*05' is .2635
Constant logarithm .6587
.9222=2*52' to be subtracted
fr<bm Moon’s given ephemeral place on progressed birthday.t
Moon 14*62' Virgo transposed from 15*02'
12*10' Virgo is Moon’s correct place at birth time.
Enter it lo in the chart. * Work remaining planets in like
manner and check up your results by referring: to their
places as giwn in Horoscope No. 4.
t Had native 5«een born after Noon Mark this amount
would be added. Ifjplanet be retrograde reverse the rule
Jby subtracting where you would otherwise add.
* Moon’s Longitude Per Montlf — How to-Find
Moon* 28*W Virgo Sept. 19, 1884.
U*.05'= Motion in one day or bne year' by progression Change J3*05’ to minutds of longitude by

PART it, THE PROGRESSED CHART
multiplying ^he 13* degrees by 60 and adding the.5 mins.
Dividing the, result by* 12 ^ives the Moon’s motion per'
month, thus :
72 Moon’s motion per
month in this year.
5-12=25 seconds (onetwelfth is 5 seconds.)
Add ‘this 1’05'2S" twelve times to Moon’s place at
birth time on the progressed birthday (12*10' Virgo) as
billows'
Moon 12*10' Virgo at birth time on Sept. 18, 1884,
which represents the real birth date, August 23rd, anil
the progressed year between August 23, 1910, and
August 23, 1911. To 12*10' Virgo add Moon’s monthly
motion twelve times to find its longitude each month,
from which, we nlake note of all aspects that may be
formed with planets (p the radix and in the progressed
chart, and record them beside tfre month in which they
fall due.
Mark a ray from eacl\ aspect to the monfh in which
the aspect will become complete, but be sareful not to
mark it after it is complete. It is important to note the
aspects as they are forming.
Read»the influence ofithe various aspects thus recordec
in “Delineations For Horoscopes” in Part III.

GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
Moon’s Longitudinal Position
.1 Each Month During This Progressed Year
The actual birthday of this progressed year and Moon’s
monthly position therein are:
+ 1.05 :25 (*See note below.)
July 23, I9IA, Moon Virgo 24.09:35 — 5 X y Prog,
•uSft % L *
‘ or HadtraJ fht.ti
p— Progressed.
-rfarf to ,A„ ot Birth.

PART*!!, THE PROGRESSED CHART .
The foregoing* column ot ngujes is added correctly it
when the fop figures ar; subtracted from the bottom
(add 30 degrees to the latter when necessary) the remainder equals tile Modn’s motion in progressed year.
1910 to Aug. 23, 1911.) Example is correct.
Aspects by Direction in the Progressed Chart
The next step l§ to find and tabulate the Moon's aspects month
by ujontfi. It cnn be dpne easily and quickly If you use an
uspectarian blank and disc.
In a blank aspectarian (a circular chart containing the
twelve signs 'and the 360 degrees marked therein) pisce—
the planets from the radix and the progressed charts
against the proper sign and degree. Attach the cardboard
disc, turn the arrow to Moon’s progressed place on first
month of pro g. year and make note of what aspects, if
any, ere pointed out. Move arrow forward one degree
(representing the Moon’s* motion in one month) and
^again note the aspects, and so o« for the remaining
months of t(ie ye£r.
Place the arrow against each of the progressed planqts,
irp their order of speed, and note any aspects which may
be forming within two degrees to either radical or progressed planets. Aspects just past do not count. Allow
but two degrees* orb applying for *a major aspect ; one
degree orb for a minor aspect.
It is well to insert the radical places in black and the
progressed in red for distinction. Also mark the Ascendant 2nd M. *C. of the radix and* progresstd charts.
Aspects of the Progressed Moon
The following is* a list of aspects. formed by the progressed Moon *as it advances frojn Virgo 12*10 to»
Virga 25*15’ ,iri the twenty-sixth year.
Aug. 1910, Mbon opposition M. C. R. at 12*.— aTNerse.
Se*pt., no aspects formed?
Oct., no aspeef formed. .
Nov., 'Moon qdiqtile Asc. R..at 16*18’ — slightly good.

GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
Dec., Ijdoon semi-sextile Mars R. at *-16*31'- — sli. good.
January, 1911, no aspect. • „
February, Moon sextile Venvs radix at 18*42' — good.
Feb., Moon semi-sextile Jupiter R. at 18*58’ — sli. good.
March, no aspect.
April, no aspect. *
May, Moon square Saturn radix at 22*33’ — adverse.
June, Moon trine Nep. Pr. at 23*12' and R. 23"21’-good.
June, Moon square Saturn prog*, at 23*57’ — adverse.
July, Moon semi-sextile U prog, at 24*27' — good.
July, Moon semi-square 9 prog, at 24*41’ — sli. adverse.
August, Moon conjunction O prog, at 25*43’ — good.
Delineating the Moon’s Progressed Aspects
Notfc: Delineations are made according to whether
the aspect is formed with planet in radix or progress d
chart. For instance, if the aspect is to a planet in radix,
consider the house it rules in the radix and the house it
occupies, in addition to its own inherent characteristics,
the nature of the aspect and matters indicated by the
house in which the aspecting planet is posited. T,he
following delineations illustrate this, as they are derived
from these elements. *-
August, 1910: Moon opposition radical Midheaven
from its place in third house of progress. Worry and
anxiety or discontent art likely to result in some discredit or setback in business. An unfavorable month in
which to .make any changes or attempts for promotion.
The mother’s health may be adyersel'y affected. Sign
no contracts, agreements, securities, etc.; in fact, enter
iqto no obligations in which there may be an element of
risk or chance of failure, or where failure would mean
loss of position antj damage to the repiltation. Do not
travel.. As there is no aspect operating ip S.eptecnber,
this aspect may have ail influence in that montft slso.
As the native’s birthday is on 23rd of the month, we
quote month of 'August for the aspect, because the aspects usually begin to manifest a littje prior ,to their
culmination.

PART *11, THE PROGRESSED CHART .
Novembqf, 19K): Moon quintile Ascendant, radix, is
favorable for dealings with brothren and neighbors,
short journeys', commissions and writings. Mafes the
mind unusually ‘active * and cofrect ih observations.
Brings some favor and gain in a general way.
December, 1910: Moon semi-seAile Mars radix, brings
new friends or acquaintances, much pleasure and also
activity and industry. Slight business or financial gain.
It adds*to the iouragp and ambitions. There being no
aspect operating in January, this one may affect that
month somewhat.
February, 1911: Moon sextile Venus radix, and also
semi-sextile to Jupiter radix. Very favorable for peace
and pleasure. Chance of financial gain through some
speculation or investment. If wife’s nativity shows in
dications for children she may give birth in this ftionth.
It is Slso an auspicious time for a child to be conceived.
On the whole the native Vill meet with pleasure, progress and gain. This aspect may alsti affect March somewhat. • " *
JMay, 1911; Moon square Saturn radix, lowers fhe
vitality and afflicts the health, especially as Moon is
ruler of the Ascendantfin radix. Being in the third house
of progress, it,depresses the mind and leads to gloom and
anxiety. Saturn* ruling seventh house of radix makes
this aspect detrimental to the wife and her health, as
Saturn is posited in the twelftlf, which is sixth, house of
partner. This is an unfavorable? time to start new business, to invest, b„uy or seek advancement. The watchword should be conservation of energy arfd protection
of general interests.
June, 1911: Moon’ trine Neptune radix and progressed,
relieves some ofttie adverse influence of last aspect, buj*
is notaso frtropg as itamight be, as Neptune was cadent
at birth, and while Moon is leaving the aspect *o1 square
Saturn radix it fs forming square Saturn progressed and
therefore the indications foV Juhe are. almost the same
as for May.

GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
July, 1911: Moon scmi-sextile Jupfier progressed is
slightly favorable in offsetting eickhess and conducing to
gain financially. Moon semi-squa«re Venus progressed
is slightly unfa*, orabl? for domestic a'tfairs and dealings
with friends and the oppositp sex. This aspect will
hardly be noticeable as Moon was "in slightly good aspect to Venus at birtfi, and more especially as it is surpassed by the growing influence of the more powerful
aspect of Moon conjunction with progressed Sun, following.
August, 1911 : Moon conjunction Sun progressed : This
conjunction is not favorable for health and in this chart
— iTui-curs in the third house, ruling the mind. As Uranus
is also in close proximity it will create intense mental
activity, which will be a disturbing factor unless controlled. It causes danger of accidents on journeys and
through railroads, electricity, etc. Otherwise it is conducive to enlightenment, progress and gain.
Importance of Aspects
The aspects of progressed planets to the radical chart
are very important, especially to the radical Sun, Moon,
ruler of the Ascendant, ruler of the birth month sign.
Midheaven, an4 ascending degree.
In forming judgments by means of progressed aspects
be governed by the testimonies of the faaix $nd remember that "figs do not grow of thistles,” or vice versa. Do
not promise or predict anything by progressed indications which is not substantiated by indications in the
radix.
It will be Ijpund that a practical application of the
method outlined in this lesson will account for every
Important event in the native’s life/ and does so in the
.natural order of planetary .sequences without recourse to
theoretical, hypothetical or artificial procedures: a record
’that chtj he achieved by no other Single system.
Progressed Aspects to Radix
• ft
Sun^conjunction with Uranus (PQ D R >?).
fylereury retrograding.to conj. UrapuS (P S B' 6 R'$).

PART It. TflE PROGRESSED CHART
Mercury retrograding ft) conj. its pface in radne (PS
Mars trine' Ascendapt (P 4 A PTAse.).
Uranus applying*to cortjunction.Moon j(P V 6 R D).
Mutual Progressed Aspects
Sun sextile Ascendant (PG^ I* Asc.).
Sun applying to conjunction Uranus (P 0 d P *).
Mercury retrogrades to conj. Uranus (P 8 R d P W).
M.C. has just passeH a trine with progressed Venus,
so we do not record it. (It would be recorded thus :
P M.C. sep. from APS.)
Delineating the Progressed Aspects
P O * P Asc. and P 0 d P I.
Sun is progressing through third house and is ruler of
progressed second; natal Uranus is in fourth, progjessing
the third: Tends to domestic infelicity, trouble over
property, change of residence, financial difficulties. Also
inclines to journeying. Apt to disturb the health and
produces nervoud? excitable, radical or rebellious states
of mind. Sun sextile the ascendant gives interest in
studies of a progressive nature.
P 8 B d P and R #. ,
Inclines to intense mental activity, which, if rightly
directed, may develop into clairvcfyance. It will make
the native' keenly intuitive and he will know and understand things before they arg spoken or before they
happen. This activity must be^rightly directed and controlled or it will cause mental disturbance. The native
should carefully* consider stfdden idtlas and plans before
operating them. ■
When a planet progresses to, an aspect of its own radical place the tendency is to excite or set into motion ijs
indications in the biyth chart, accoitiing to the nature-of
the aspect whether good or adverse. The conjunction
to its own.plaCe intensifies the activities of a^plaftet very
sitfiifar to what might be. considered a double influence
of that planet.* In this case the.prdgtessed Mercury is
retrograding towards a conjunction with its radical pldce.

OENETHIVACAL ASTROLOGY
Radical 'Mercury is on fourth house wljile the progressed
Mercury is in P. third', thus intensifying conditions relating to 4th and at the same' time activating 3rd house
influences.
Pi A R Asc.
Mars progressed trine Ascerfdant vadix : As Mars is ’in
the progressed fourthi house this aspect will particularly
affect affairs ruled by that house, as well as those things
which are designated by the Ascendant. As Mars rules
the progressed fifth and tenth houses the matters which
are ruled by them will also be affected. As Mars is a
very active planet, the native will be actively concerned
in affairs relating to his parents in a beneficial manner.
».^>s- ;s likely to make changes and improv'ements in his
home. As Mars rules the fifth house this aspect will promote interest in sports and amusements. A child may
be conceived or born during this aspect. It may also
inclin^ to gaming or speculation, or perhaps the purchase
of property as the ascendant is in S>, a fourth house
sign (property). The nativf’s business will prosper
through his own activities, and he will be accorded soma
public credit or honors. (Mars, rulef of ’tenth ; Moon,
ruler of himself and also a general ruler of the public.)
You will notice that the progressed Uranus in 28:22
Virgo has moved to within 1 deg. 30 mins, of radical
Moon. These planets are in conjunction* at birth and
reference to the Ephemeris on Sept. 18, 1884, 3hows that
it will require more than twelve days’ (years) movement
forward iji the zodiac before Uranus actually reaches
29:52 Virgo at which point the conjunction is partile.
The effect of this progressed aspect is* to gradually increase the influence of the natal conjunction.
Delineating the Mutual Progressed Aspects
The progressed Sufi sektile progressed Ascendant conduces to health of body, peace of mind, tavor ft;om Jhose
’The terms* natus, nativity and radix are used Interchangeably
tn theirJffpplication to the Birth Chart, Justus hataband radical
also refer toVie horoscope of blrtfc. Progressed and progres'slve
likewise are used to designate the Progressed, Horoscope, While
' directional" and "by direction” alse refer to the progressed chart
aid progressed aspects.

PART H, THE PROGRESSED CHART
in authority, new friends, some elfvition in rank according to the dative's social jjosition^and in proportion to
the Sun’s power in r^dix. In this chart Sun occupies
third house in Virgo in i«dix and, holds ^he same place
in progressed chart. The progressed Ascendant is still
in»the sign it held at birth, Cancer, but has progressed
from 4" 18' to 25“ 57', which bring* a new influence into
the life, namely that of the planet ruling this decanate *
of Cancer, Neptune, in addition to the influence of the
Moon, significator of radix.
Delineation of the remaining Mutual Progressed Aspects is included in Progressed Aspects to Radix, pages
INFLUENCE OF THE MOON’S NODES
The motion is retrograde*at rate of about three minutes
of longitude per day. The Nodes ye of some value in
Natal astrology a»d useful in the Horary branch. For
the benefit of those who might wish to investigate the
subject for themselves, we give what is considered tlyeir
influence. (See also page 47.)
The Moon’s North Node passing the place of or forming a major aspect with the radical place of Jupiter,
Venus, Sun, Moofi or Mercury is said to indicate benefits
to the native. Passi.ng in sextile or trine to the radical
Neptune, Uranus, Saturn and ‘Mars is also said to be
beneficial. Its square and opposition to the henefics,
conjunction, square and opposition to the malcfics, portend evil according to tjie houses occupied by it and the
nature of the planet afflicted. The MooVs South Node
crossing over any planet is evil for things ruled by the
house occupied an3 the planet thus afflicted. As the
Nodes doubtless 'have perceptible influence, these same
testimonies njust hold true also in relation to the progressed horoscope. Refer to chapter under thlsf Reading
in Pptit III”
• See “Decans” in Dictionary of Astrological Terms ; alsq chapter
on •Decarts in Part *V, pages 572-3. #

OENETHH1CAL ASTttOLOflY
• PARALLELS' OF DECLINATION
Tha next step is to work up ti\e decimations to nnd
whether any parallels ,are formld during this progressed
year.
Declination of planets may be found at top of page in
Raphael’s Ephemeris and is given for every second or
third day, except Sun and Moon, which are given for
each day on lower part of left hand page. In the American Ephemeris (Simplified) the 'declinations are given
on right hand page. The Ephemeris usually gives the
latitude of planets also but the calculations for this pro-
“sTCSTaed horoscope work do not require latitude.
To find whether or not progressed Moon will come to
a parallel declination to its own radical place in declination, jor to the radical or progressed declinations of the
other planets during the progressed year, proceed as
follows :
When two or more planets have t(je same degree of
declination they are parallel ; whether north’ or south or
onj north and the other south is immaterial, for if they
arc equal distance from the celestial equator they are
parallel and the,effect is the same as though the planets
were in conjunction.
Parallels may be found not only belween .planets as
they were located at birth, but also as they may progress
and come to the degree t>f another planet’s declination
in the ratfix or in the progressed chart.
As the Moen is likely to move.several degrees in declination any da^ (equal to a year in progression), she is
liable to form Several parallels in the course of such a
period. The influence pf a parallel* is likely to begin
when within one decree of being complete, but is most
afit to operate when the parallel b^omes exaot.
The^alqjulation and tabulation of c^ecMnations for the
progressed thart are identical in method to those *et the
radix but we go' sf step further when the Moon is concerned.* The Moon’s declinafion is treated similarly.to

PART U. THE PROGRESSED CHART
its progress in lopgitude* month by* month in odder to
ascertain whether it will come tnto parallel with the.
declination ot any planet in* either tfte natal or progressed
charts during that year. When it does cijme into a parallel the effects are similar to a conjunction between the
same planets and should be delineated in the same terms
as a conjunction.
To find Moan’s declination each month in the progressed year, proceed as follows : Refer to Ephemeris
for desired date" and (nake note of Moon’s declination
for that day and the day following. Subtract one from
the other to find the distance traveled, reduce this
amount to all. minutes by multiplying by 60, divide the
result by 12 to find the motion per month, then adcf’this’
amount twelve times to Moon’s Declination at birth time
on progressed birthday if the declination is increasing
in size of degrees, as per Ephemeris, but subtract this
amount if the declination in Ephemeris is decreasing.
When the motion of M®on in declination is less than
pne degree for any year (as will sometimes be the ease)
multiply the 'givtf.i minutes by 60, thus reducing the
motion to seconds. Divide the seconds by 12 and we
have the number of seconds of declination Moon moves
per month. Divide the seconds by 60 to transform the
figure to minutes anc^ seconds of motiem in declination
and then add or subtract this amount from Moon’s place
in deelinatiorf ait birth time c.n progressed birthday,
according to whether Moon is increasing or decreasing
in declination.
After having made the column of figures showing
Moon's dfegree af declination each month, compare its
declination each month with the degrees ftf declination
of other planets in both the radix and/the progressed
charts to ascertain.in which months the parallel aspects
will be formed, that year. It Is qtiite possible that in
some years therd will he no parallels in operation. t*
When the' Ephemeris shows that declination will
charme from north to south or vice versa, between the
two*dates, add (instead of ^subtracting) to find the daily
(yearly) niotiotf. Then from it? place on progressed
birthday subtract the monthly motion until it is*reduced

GENETHLlACAL ASTROLOGY
as small as possible; after which add the monthly motion
for remainder of the, year.
To Find Declinatiop of the Cusps for Either Radix
or Progressed Horoscopes
The cusp of a house (sign and degree) has the same
declination as the Sun when it is in that sign and degree.
Use the Ephemeris for the progressed year, i.'e., if you
are making a chart for the 26th birthday which falls in
1910, use the 1910 Ephemeris for reference regarding the
_Sun’j declination or any particular degree in the zodiac.
The progressed chart has 25’ 57’ of Cancer on the
Ascendant. Look in the 1910 Ephemeris and find when
the Sun will be in that sign and degree, which is July
19th, .and its declination is 20:59 North. This is the
declination for the cusp of the Ascendant in thfe progressed chart. Put the samfc figures on the opposite
cusp, i. e. ; cusp of seventh house, and so on in like man
ner with all the other cusps. The fifst, tenth, seventh
and fourth cusps are most important in both radix and
pr«gressive charts.
The declinations of cusps are pot to be used except
when the time of birth is known to be absolutely correct
or proved so by a reliable method of rectification. Every
four minutes of time change the cusps one’ degree in
longitude and consequentjy the declination changes also.
When .you have found all the declinations and made a
list of the? parallels mark them in the list of aspects beside the month in which they fall due. After this has
been accomplistied give a delineation of the elements.
Make a note of plariets* declinations from places shown
hi Ephemeris, for »both radix and progressed charts.
JEfquata places of Neptune, Uranus, Saturn, Jupker, *Mars,
Venus. a"h<l Mercury by mental arithmetic on date of
birthday, bpt find exact places of Sun and Mo’on foa^ birth
time by use of logarithms. Also work-out Moon’s’ declination for each month in that year. In this figure
(Horoscope No. 4) the progressed declinations’ are till

PART II. THE PROGRESSED CHART
taken from September 18, 1884, a^ representing the progressed birthday, August 23, 1910.
The most importsnt'pawllels are those which may be
formed by the Moon in its monthly motion or place in
progress. Parallels jmong the other planets bear an
influence upon the whole year. Record only those parallels which are forming.
As most students like to examine examples in detail,
we herewith give" the pfocess complete :
Approximate Declination of Planets in Radix
(Horoscope No. 3) and Progressed (Horoscope No. 4)
(Calculated by mental equation, except Sun and Moon.)
Radix. Progressed.
Uraq,us 1*.56'N. lM^N.
Venus i 17M3'N. 1S*.41'N.
Moon IMO'S. . 4*.27'N.
So there wil\ be no doubt in the student’s mind as to
the procedure for finding Moon’s declination for moment
of birth, we give an example from the progressed chart :
(Note: When the declination changes between two
days from.south to north or north to south, as in this
case, we do not subtract one from the 'other ^o find daily
motion,— we add them.
3'.33'N. = Moon’s declination Sept. 18, 1884.
+0\35' S.= Moon’s declination 3ept.» 19, 1884.
4’.0y=d4ilji motiot? (,or motion for the 26th year by.
4*.08,=t logarithm .7639 progress.)
of time b’orn before ^Noon Mark.

GKNETHfaACAL ASTROLOGY
As Moon’s declination was decreasing on this birthday
we must reverse the usual prociss for finding its place
at birth time, 5 hours 16 minutes *before Noon Mark, and
must add the®0”.54' Instead of subtracting it.
Moon 3*.33'N. declination on Sepf. 18, 1884.
+0\54’=motiofi in time born before Noon Mark.
4' .27' = Moon’s declination at time of birth.
r
Moon's Monthly Motion in Declination
To find Moon’s "monthly motion in declination we proceed in a similar manner to finding it in longitude, except
that when the declination is decreasing its monthly motion must be subtracted twelve times from its place at
birth time. When increasing, the motion is added twelve
times.
In our example we found ‘Moon’s daily motion, or motion for the 26th yVar, 4”.08' and it is decreasing.
Multiply 4* by 60', add the 8' and divide by twelve
12) 248' (.20' :40" = monthly motion of Moon.
8-12=40” (one-twelfth of a minute is S")
As the declination was deceasing on September 18,
1884, we subtmet this 20' :40” twelve times from the declination at birth tiyie ^4\27'N.) as "follows:
Example
McfSn’% declination at birth time on September 18,
1884, represents its place or* the actual birthday ibd 26th
year, from August 23, 1910 to August 23, 1911. As the
declination is decreasing at 'rate ol 020' :40” per mqnth, '
we. find its monthly olaee as follows.:

PART II, THE PROGRESSED CHART
Moon’s Declination Each Month in 26th Year
(Transposes from 4\27"
for convenience.)
Equivalent to 3’ 65' 80"
5 P prog. 10th cusp
Equivalent to 3* 24' 60"
Equivalent to 2* 63' 80"
Equivalent to 2’ 22' 60"
J> P B Prog. ,
Equivalent to 1* 61' 80”
JPK RaHix IPO Prog.
Equivalent to 1**20' 60"
D P V JVog. 5 P # Radix
♦J P 5 Radix
Equivalent »to 0* 59' 80"
North Declination.
Proof : The foregoing column is forked correctly if
the difference between declination at top and declination
at*bottom of column is equal to*the Daily Motiorf (4'.08’).

QEJJBTHL1ACAL ASTROLOGY
When, declination ist decreasing, as -in this case, subtract lower figure from that at top of column.
— 0*.19' at bottom of column.
4\08'=equal to Daily Motion as previously found; our
column is therefore correct.
When the declination is increasing, subtract upper
figure from the lower one to firid sum equal to Daily
Motion.
— The parallels formed by the Moon with other planets
or house cusps in the various months should be recorded
beside the month in which they fall due.
Declinations of House Cusps
To find declinations of cusds in the radix look through
the birth year Ephepieris at Sun's declination. The cusp
of a house has the same declination as the Sun woulu
have in that same sign and degree.
t
■to find declination of cusps in the progressed chrrt,
look for Sun's declination in the current year, i. e., in
this case use the 1910 Ephcmeris, as the 26th birthday
occurs in that year.* When any planet has declination
equal to that of a cusp it is parallel therewitlnand affects
it with an influence similar to a conjunction.
Unless’Tables of Houses for the exact latitude of hirth
place wese used i*i erecting the char), and birth time
known to be* exact, it is useless and perhaps misleading
also to attempWo use cusp declinations. For this reason,
and also others* it is extremely difficult to get the declinations absolutely *exaet and hence to state just when
an event would occpr, indicated by an ®dcoming parallel,
except, to state it in terms of a oertain njonlh or year.
However,* a parallel usually takes about a year to complete ("excepting those of Moon) and while' the parallel
is on it influence# matters tonnected with that house.
Such a(S Saturn parillel cu^> of secohd house, which
(Please turn to bottom of page 194 /or continuity.)

PART If, THE PROGRESSED CHART 183
Radi? Cusp Approximate! Declinations
Without enfering into intricate calculations of prqportionals, b,ut taking the neaaest giveq Sun declination for
cusps of houses, we find the approximate declinations to
be as follows for our Radix Horoscope No. 3, using the
1884 epherrieris.
Ascendant 4“ 18' Cancer = Dec. about 23*23' N.
2nd House 24* Cancer = Dec. about 21*16' N.
3rd House 16° "Leo , = Dec. about 15*58' N.
4th House 12* Virgo = Dec. about 6*57' N.
5th House 16* Libra = Dec. about 6*32' S.
6th House 27’ . Scorpio = Dec? about 19*38' S.
7th House 4*18' Capricorn = Dec. about 23*23' S.
8th House 24* Capricorn = Dec. about 21*00' S.
9th House 16’ Aquarius = Dec. about 16*00' S.
10th House 12* Pisces = Dec. about 6*56' S.
11th House 16’ Aries = Dec. about 6*20*N.
12th Ho\ise 27’ Taurus = Dec. ahout 19*29' N.
Jt will be noticed, by reference to F^rhemeris, that the
declination of pne cftsp is approximately the same as on
opposite cusp, therefore, when a planet comes to a parallel of one cusp it is also parallel with the opposite cusp,
hut ft affects that house more which is on same side of
equator as itself by nortji or south declination.
Progressed Cusp Approximate Declinations
For the progressed cusps we proceed in the same
manner as before, but *use Ephemeris for the year 1910
in which the 26th birthday occurs. (See Horoscope # 4)
Ascendant 85*57' Cancer •= Dec. «about 20'59' N.
2nd House 16* Leo • -- Dec. about* 16*03' N.
3rd House 10’ Virgo — Dec. abglit 7*47' N.
4th House 10* Liljra = Dec. about 4*07' S.
5th House 17* Scorpio = *Dec? about 16*59' S.
6th House 24* ‘Sagittarius = Dec.» about 23*20' S. .
7th Hdfcse 25*57' Capritorn = Dec. about 21!03; S.
8th House 16* .Aquarius = Dec. about 16 (JO* S.
9th House 10‘ Pisces = Dec. about <2* 49' S.
10th House 10° Aries = "D«;c. about 3*55' N.
J 1th House 17’ Taurus • = Dec. about 16*54' N.
12th Housd 24* Gemini = . Dec. about 23*29' N.

QENETHLtACAL astrology
Table of Declinations
Planets
EtPfbliiSC may be calculated by mental equation ; G S by logarithms.
Progressed <•
Neptune 16“S2' N.
Uranus 1*17' N.
Saturn 21°52'N.
Jupiter 14*03' N.
Venus 15'41' N.
'Mercury 2*14' N.
Radix
Neptune 16*55' N.
Uranus 1*56' N.
Saturn 21*50' N.
Jupiter 15*46' N.
Venus 17*13' N.
Mercury 1*06' S.
House Cusps
Progressed
1st House 20*59' N.
2nd House 16"p3' N.
3rd House 7*47' N..
4th House 4*07' S.
5th House 16*59' S.
6th House 23*20' S.
7th House 21*00' S.
8th House 16*06' S.
9th House 7*49’ S.
10th House 3*55' N.
11th House 16*55' N.
Radix
r 1st House 23*23' N.
2nd House 21*16' N.
3rd House 15*58' N.
4th House 6*57' N.
5th House 6*32' S.
th House 23*23' S.
th House 21*11' S.
9th Hotfse 16*00' S.
11th House 6*20' N.
In practical work declinations are arranged In ^wo columns,
one for the gadlx and the other for progressed, on one aheet of
paper for convenience In comparing them for checking off parallels.
Do not cornpare,decllnatlons of house cuspa with each other. Compare planets’ declinations with the declinations of cusps to find
parallels. -
(Continued from page 192?)
would depress finances and prtvent the native from
accuffimating an over-suppiv of money .that year at least,
and, if cfther directions for financial reversed were shown,
this parallel wault^ indicate heavy financial stringency
whet} the aspect was on, or when p planet in transit,
came .to a parallel witfy this afflicted cusp.

PAST II. THE PROGRESSED CHART •
•Comparisons and Cc/hsiderations
With tables like the foregoing, wc are ready:
1st — To compare the progressed planets’ declinations
with those of radix.
2nd — Compare the progressed* planets’ declinations
with each other.
3rd — Compare progressed planets’ declinations with
house cusp declination in both radix and progressed.
4th — Compare Moon’s declinatioq each month with
planets and .cusps in both radix and progressed, and
make note of month in which the parallel will be complete.
Note : Do not compare progressed cusps with radix
cusps, nor a progressed major planet with its radical
placet
A planet is in influence of parallel with another planet
tis soon as within,one degree, regardless of whether both
are north of south or one north and the other south.
.When a planet is parallel with a cusp and also its Opposite cusp, delineate the parallel in terms of the house
which is in same diraction (N. or S.) Sf declination as
the planet.
Declinations must be within one degree of being equal
in order to be parallel.
When a planet appears to be within parallel of another
or with a«cusp, examine the Jiphemeqis and your figures
carefully to see whether the parallel is fortning, or has
already been formed and is separating^ past; in the
latter case we do .not tabulate it. Record only those
which are applying or formirtg. Observe whether a
planet’s declination is increasing or .decreasing in ordef
to determine, if it is ‘approaching or separating from a
parallel.
Scfme near parallels are never actually completed, or
not for many years, becausf of the slow motion in declination. Take, for* instance, the progressed Neptune parallel radical Venusr Neptune is 16*52' N., Venul 17. 13',

genethlia'cal astrology
hence the, distance between them is but 24' of declination,
but reference to the Ephemeris, for several months in
advance reveals the fact that Neptune will never reach
the exact declination of Venus in this' native’s lifetime.
However, as there is always an, orb of parallel between
them, the effect of the parallel will be active when some
planet by transit comis to a point between these two
declinations and by “translation” unites Neptune and
Venus by parallel of declination. The parallel of these
two planets is not particularly important. We deal with
, it here as an illustration.
First Estimate1 Table of Apparent Parallels
(Subject to revision.)
Prog. Neptune P. Venus radix.
Prog. Neptune P. cusp of ninth house in radix.
Prog. Neptune P. cusps of 2nd, 5th, 8th, and
1 1 th progressed. ,
Prog. Uranus P. Mercury and Moon radix.
Prog. Saturn P. 2nd and 8th cOsps’ radix.
Prog. Saturn P. 1st and 7th cusps progressed.
Prog. Sun P. Uranus progressed. ,
Prog. Venus P. Jupiter R. and 3rd house R.
Prog. Moon P. tenth cusp Prog, between September 23r(3 and October 23ni. 1910.
No. 10. Prog. Moon P. Mercury progressed between
Feb. 23rd and March 23rd! 1911
No. 11.. Prog. Moon P. Uranus radix between March
No. 12. Prog.' Moon P. Sun progressed between March
23rd ’qnd April 23rd.
No. 13. Prog. Moon P. Uranus progressed between May
No. 14. Prog. Moorf P. its own radical place, between
.May 23rd and June 23rd, ‘1911. ‘
No. 15. Prog. Moon P. Mercury radix 'between May
Wher\ comparing our declinations ^s directed, we
makei a list such as the preceding whigh indudes'all the

PART. II. THE PROGRESSED CHART
1OT
near parallels. J»Ve then examipe %ach one carefully to
see if it becomes complete in this year of thfc native's
life, and also to reject tho'se which* are past. We s&e that
Neptune never reaches »the exacf declination . of Venus,
during the life of this native, so we omit No. 1 from our
aew list.
Reference 10 it-pnemeris for declination of radix ninth
cusp (Aquarius 16*) shows that the declination (approx.
16*00' S.) is detreasing each day in advance and although
Neptune's declinatioft is also decreasing it will never
reach the exact parallel with ninth house. Omit No. 2
from our new list.
Parallel No. 3: Examining the Ephemeris, we find
that Neptune's parallel with cusp of second and eighth
houses will not be complete during his life, so omit them.
The parallel with cusps of fifth and eleventh houses is
past*
, No. 4: Uranus’ declination revgals that it will not
come into exact ‘parallel with Moon’s radix declination
for about six days (years), and with Mercury’s declination in radix for about eight days (years), so* omit it from
the new list.
No. S : Cusp of radix second house is Cancer 24*, declination is 2K16J. Ephemeris shoiVs that this figure decreases as the days (years) advance. Saturn therefore
does not complete 'this parapet so we must reject it.
Likewise the cusp of eighth house.
No. 6:* Cusp. of first house in progressed chart is
Cancer 25*57', declination is about 20 59*. Ephemeris
shows this is decreasing so Saturn do?s not make this
parallel and is rejected. Likewise the seventh cusp.
No. 7: Reference to Ephemeris for September (8,
1884,* shotvs ihe Sun«hastening to a parallel with .Uranus
and is complete during this 26th year. .List it Vt>.
hlo* 8: Jupiter’s declination fn radj^ .is 15*46 . Venus
in progressed is*15* 41', decreasing’, so the parallel is past
by Venus’ declination drawing away from that of’Jupiter.

OENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
toe
Nos. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14 and 13 are formed at the period
stated, sb place them on your list. .
Revised Ljpt of Parallels Formed in 26th Year
1. — Prog. Uranus P. Sun progressed.
2. — Prog. Moon P. tepth cusp progressed between Sept.
23rd and October 23rd, 1910.
3. — Prog. Moon P. Mercury progressed between February 23rd and March 23rd.
4. — Prog. Moon P. Uranus radix between March 23rd
and April 23rd, 1911.
5. — Prog. Moon P. Sun progressed between March 23rd
and April 23rd, 1911.
6. — Prog. Moon P. Uranus progressed between Af y
23rd and June 23rd, 1911.
7. — Prog. Moon P. its own radical place between May
23rd and June 23rd, 3911.
8. — Prog. Moon P. Mercury, radix between May 23rd
and June 23rd, 1911.
Delineating the Influence of Parallels
1. — Progressed Uranus and progressed Sun parallel:
As both these planets are in third house and rule eighth
and second houses, respectively, it will cause the mind
to seek change and improvement, especially where salary
or finance is concerned. As Uranus usually acts prematurely, the native is cautioned not to make changes except aftei careful and deliberate judgment. This will be
an excellent period for the native to study the occult,
astrology^ ipventidhs and progressive matters' generally.
He will be very intuitive. Danger in travel.
2. — Moon parallel cusp of tenth house between September 23rd and October 23rd, 1910. Some changes in his
'husiness will occu-, necessitating short journeys and
much correspondence. As Moon is 'his ruler, it will' prove
beneficial and result in favor, popularity and advancement. °< r *
3. — Moon parallel Mercury, Progressed between February £5rd and March 23rd. If the Student will enter

PART U, THE PROGRESSED CHART
this parallel at February 23rd, you. will note fllat the
Moon is at the same tijne makingother favorably aspects
to Venus arfd Jupiter, thereby designating this parallel’
of Moon and progr^ssdd Mercury as a favorable influence.
,4. — Moon parallel Uraeus radix between March 23rd
and April 23rd, 1911, causes long journeys concerning
railroads, inventions or such things as Uranus rules.
Very intuitive. Strange or prophetic dreams and intuitions. Danger in travel. Difficulty in domestic affairs.
Changes concerning parents.
5. — Moon parallel Sun progressed between March 23rd
and April 23rd, 1911: Favorable fo^ advancement and
popularity, short journeys, good for dealings with Srethren and neighbors and matters of correspondence.
Mental illumination. Good financial conditions.
6. — Moon parallel Uranus progressed betweerv May
23rd Jnd June 23rd, 1911, inclines to changes, investigation, interest in occult and ill progressive matters. Makes
the mind very alert, intuitive and incentive. Interest in
affairs of brethreif and neighbors. Danger in travel.
7. — Moon parallel its own radical place between May
23Vd and June 23rd, 1911, tends to publicity, changes
and advancement. Inclined to read and.study. Domestic changes.
8. — Moon parallel Mercury radix between May 23rd
and June 23rd, 191 1, conduces tp business activity and to
changes and removals, as Mercury was in fourth house
in radix. Inclines to interest in property.
Just as aspects in longitude are delineated, thus also
are parallels read from the houses occupied and ruled
by the planets in the radix or progressed, according to
which chart the, aspect or parallel affects.
.Notes on Zodiacal Parallels
Wlmn finding the motion of Sun and Moot* in declination nn a progressed chart* always use the ‘date in advance of the progressed birjh date, regardless of whether
born before or after the Noon Mark.

GENETHMACAL ASTROLOGY
When the decliriatym is decreasing between date of
. progressed birthday, and the next day, treat it as you
would a retrograde planet.
It is not absolutely necessary to work out exactly what
day or date the parallel falls ‘due, ^because its influence
extends over an uncertain period, varying according to
its motion in declination, and it may begin to exert a
perceptible effect several weeks before birthday to several weeks after. Some declinations change so slowly
that when a parallel begins, by orb, it may be many
days (years by progress) before it becomes partile and
therefore show upnn as many years’ progressed charts.
Parallels seem to affect conditions which the native
will find it necessary to meet, and these conditions are
accompanied by events, more or less radical, according
to the native's plane of progress or state of consciousness.
For instance, Moon parallel Mars would produce a feverish, passionate, rash disposition in an undeveloped type
living on the purely animal plane, which would lead to
accidents and quarrels, while to an‘ advanced, refined
being this same parallel would produce added energy
resulting in constructive activity. In the one case the
influence is apparently evil, in the other the effects “are
good, the difference being not iry the planets but in the
state of understanding of the being through which the
influences operate. In other words, the sort of reactions
which an individual makes to an aspect largely determines the results of the*.influence. * Some people make a
bad aspdet worse by the way they think and act. Others
greatly piodify an adverse aspect by their, intelligent
response to (planetary influences. "

PART il, THE PROQBB88ED CHART
TRANSI1)S
The transit of £ pianjt is its passage by ephemeral
motion, in the current year as shewn by’the Ephemeris,
oyer some important place in the chart, either radix or
progressed ; or its aspect to such points.
In a progressed chart the effect of a transit over (conjunction) the degree of Midheaven, Ascendant or any
planet, is more effective than an aspect thereto.
In a nativity, transits by either conjunction or aspect
are noticeable, the major aspects more particularly than
the minor.
There is little difference between the effect of a transit
and the same aspect by direction, the difference being
rather in time of duration than difference in influence,
although, because aspects by direction last longer than
those by transit, the latter may seem different. For instance, Saturrj conjunction cusp of fllh house by direction
might last elver a year, during which time, unless offset
by other testimonies, it would likely produce physical
disability, obstructions, limitations and restricted action,
which might result in serious illness; gvhile the transit
of Saturn over sixth tusp or over planet in sixth house
might cause a»severe cold or an attack of "flu,” but comparatively-speaking, its effects would soon pass. If the
nativity indicated much ill health, the native would likely
suffer frequent spells of indisposition during Jhe whole
period of its passage through the sixth, which is the
house of Sickness, and the person would feel* especially
indisposed on the days when the Moon shown in
current Ephemeris) passed through thi^*house and over
Saturn therein.
To study the* effect of transits, learn the effect of as’-
pects'by Siraction, but modify the delineations because
of the shorter, duration, and never predict s&nething
from * trarfsit which is not promised by sort*? configuration *at birth. If a person has ? good horoscope for
health, finance qr marriage, there is no use predicting
trouble ’because of a malefic, transiting through first.

202 OKWETHI/JACAL ASTROLOGY
second or seventh -hqpses, because nothing more than
slight a'nnoyances are likely to occur.
When looking up transits, the declinations of the
transitor should not be overlooked, for when it compares
with the declination of any planet or cusp in the horoscope it constitutes a parallel and" has an effect like a
conjunction c
Duration of Influence
The duration of the effects of transits depends upon
two things.
First, note whidh planet is doing the transiting, for
each planet moves through the zodiac at its own rate of
motion, the Moon being swiftest and Pluto slowest.
Their order of speed is : Moon, Mercury, Venus, Sun,
Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, Neptune, Pluto.
Second consideration : Does the transitor turr retrograde before it gets out of <vb of aspect with the transited? Frequently f. transiting planet reaches a certain
point, turns retrograde and recrossec that point ; then,
turning direct in motion, crosses it for the third time
thws affecting that place or planet much longer than
usual. Look in the current Ephemeris and count How
many days it requires the transjtor in question to traverse 8 degrees preceding the exact aspect. After the
aspect is complete, 'the effect quickly (diminishes, unless
the transitor becomes retrograde and goes back over the
aspect. It takes Neptune several ytiars to form and complete am aspect, while Venus or Mercury would cover
the same amount of longitude in a few days. During a
period of gpod directions' the potency of good transits
is enhanced apd the adverse trahsits diminished in influence ; and vice* versa.
A progressed or* directional aspect is technically due
' {o operate when the aspect is exactly ndmplete,* but the
.transit of a planet over the place<of a directional* aspect
which'ls 'still forming (within a degree or so) may excite
it into action prematurely. To illuotrate, iuppqs? that
Saturn by its progressed rfiotion is close to forming a
* See chapter In Part V, How to Calculate Exact Date of Aspect

PART H, THE PROGRESSED CHART
'conjunction with Uranus* in the'.bintfi chart, and that
Mars by transit during the coming year will cross over
Saturn’s progressed place, "it would then excite into action the conjunction between Saturn and Uranus, whereas, without such excitement it wohld ha\fle been a year
or .two, maybe (according to number of degrees apart,)
before the conjunction would become complete and operate by itself. Therefore if you find a directional aspect
forming, look carefully through the current Ephemeris
and note when t!je Sun or any of the planet's (the major
planets more especially) will cross over the critical point,
and record the date when the effects will be felt.
Future Conditions at a Glance
In every month the transits of U, S should
be noted to see if any of them cross over the planets in
the radix, or form major aspects to them. Or if they
cross over or form major aspects to some planets fti the
progrelsed chart which are themselves in aspect, as in
that case the transit sets tile progressed aspect into activity during the period of the traifcit. But generally
speaking, transits through the radix are the most important.
fhe transit of the Sun through the radix is important.
The good and adverse* aspects which it ‘forms to radix
planets indicate the favorable and, unfavorable Solar
periods in ejeh yeir. The Sun moves forward about one
degree each day, hence, it is twelve days applying to an
aspect. Do not seriously consider the minor aspects.
The transits of Mercury and Venus are not very important unless thfty are rulidg planefs. They concern
the minor details of life, when considered as transits,
yet in the lives of people who are concerned mostly with
ordinary matters th<*se two are quite^ important. In the
lives of those who are concerned with larger things,,
business and public .affairs, the l&rger planets are
more importaht. The transit of the natittete-v ruling*
planets (one.rulmg birth month and the one which rules
the attending sign at birth) are very^imporlant. The
aspects formed by rulers in.transit, ‘which coincide with
aspects they held’at birth, are very powerful compared

aO« OENETgLIACAL ASTROLOGY
with' other aspects {they mky form. For instance, if
Mars 9s a ruling planet and was in opposition to Jupiter
at birth, then the adverse transits of Mars to the radix
Jupiter wou(d be v^ry strong, while its good aspects to
Jupiter would bring but little benefit.
Look in a curre it Ephemeris and take note of the
various planetary positions, then compare their ephemeral places with radix planets to see if any aspects are
formed. Note the date in Ephemeris when the transiting
planet begins the aspect (allowing an orb of eight degrees applying) and the date when the aspect is complete (exact). This will show the length of the period
of fne influence.
The influence of transits should be judged according
to their radical indications, i. e., if a planet is in adverse
aspect to another at birth its adverse aspects to that
planet by transit are of more significance than its good
aspects. In other words, ,ts adverse aspects being in
accord with the original indication would stir up corresponding conditions; whereas its good aspects being
contrary ,fo the original indications would not have the
power to produce any particular or noticeable advantages. To illustrate an Adverse Transit over a good
Progressed A'spect, let us consider Venus progressed
sextile Sun progressed and an adverse jransit would be
the coming of Saturn to a conjunction Venus, but Saturn
would at the same time be in sextile to Sun, which is a
good aspect. This transit would have the effect of delaying for the time being the influence of the good aspect
between Venus ..and Sun, as set down in the regular
canons of astrology and would, produce disappointments
in matters ruled by the house then occupied by this
transiting Saturn. The good aspect of Sun standing by
would prevent any very serious results from the transit
of Saturn over Venus. The good aspect of Saturn to
"the progressed Sun would tend *o benefit matters ruled
by the nouse occupied by Sun. On the other hand, a
good transit over a good direction would accentuate the
favorable vibrations 6f the direction and it would be
especially noticeable on the days wheh the Moon also by
transit formed good aspects to this combination. »

PART II, ’ THE PROGRESSED CHART
Aspects by .transit which coincide with the original
(radical) indications wilt aot directly upon the native
and in his affairs. Aspects which do not coincide will
act indirectly : not ujon the native and hiu own affairs
but more upon other people whom he is contacting during such transit. All aspects operate in some manner,
but whether directly on the native hr on others about
him depends upon the original (radical) indications between the two planets in question. If in adverse aspect
at birth the good aspect jjy transit is not likely to bring
the native any particular benefit but he will see others
benefiting in a manner coinciding with the nature of this
aspect as related to its transiting hous*e and sign. For
example : If the aspecting planet is transiting through
seventh house in the sign, Scorpio, forming a good aspect to the radical Moon with which it was in adverse
aspect at birth, it might benefit his partner or his wife.
If he happened to be engaged in a lawsuit at that (lime
it woula benefit the opponent and if the Moon at birth
ruled the third house and w%s posited in the eleventh,
then that good transit would also benefit his brothers,
sisters, neighbors and his friends. On the other hand,
if that good transit concerned planets that haij been in
good, aspect at birth then the native would benefit direct
ly through the matters and people mentioned above and
might also be in a position to help them.
The following* table provides helpful information in
connection w'ith transits as it shows the approximate
period which would bfi required rfor a planet to transit
from its radical position through the twelve signs and
return to its(original place in a chart.
Geocentric Period* of Planetary Transits
Through the Zodiacal Signs *
I transits the,12 signs In 27 days, 7 rfours, 43 mins.
0, O .transit the 12 signs in approximately 1 year
g transits tba 12 sighs In approximately 22 months '
K transits the, 12 signs In approximately 12 yean '
t>> transits the 12 feigns In approximately 29% years
V transits the 12 signs la approximately* 94 years
V transits the 1 £ signs In approximately 165 years ,
*e transits the 12 ^Igns In approximately 248 years •

qenetAiacal astrology
r i
As Venus never is more than 48 degrees distant from
the Sun, and Mercuvy never more than 28 degrees, their
peri'od is similar to that of fhe Sup, namely, one year.
However, dtfc to Stationary and retrograde positions
these periods are only approximate. For accurate horoscope work the transiting aspects of planets to points in
.a chart require reference to an Ephemeris. *
Usually, in compiling a list of transits, Venus, Mercury and Moon are omitted when dealing with major
influences as they are chiefly indicative of favorable and
unfavorable days„,while the more ponderous and slower
mojdng planets mark the periods. However, all transits
are important and delineation of their effects should be
made in terms of the directions in operation. Transits
aid in determining the dates when a given direction (progressed aspect) is most likely to become operative.
Tratfsits to the Part of Fortune and the Moon’?, Nodes
should also be observed, especially the conjunction.
How £o Find and Use Transits
, An easy way to find transits and record them is as
follows :
From the birth chart make a fable for permanent use,
showing for each planet the degree of the zodiac which
is in exact aspect of conjunction, sextile, square, trine
and opposition. Then look in current Ephemeris and
note when any planet vfill pass through the degrees you
have, recorded. In that way you will know the dates
when your radix*, is affected by transiting planets and
thus be enabled to prepare yourself according to whether
the aspect foiWd is good or adverse.
For example: Suppose at birth' you had Mercury in
Aries 26 degrees, the sextile to that is pemini 26 degrees,
Aquafius 26 degrees ; the square* is Ganger -26 degrees,
Caprioorn 26 degrees ; the trine is Leo 26 degrees, Sagittarius 26-cdegrees ; the opposition is Libra 26 degrees.
* An effective way of using transits for a definite purpose may
be found outlined In the book "Astrologer’s Searchlight” In chapter headed. How to Find Bast Dates for Conception

PAST li, THE PHOGRliSSED CHART . 2OT
(The place of conjunction is, of coirse, Aries 26 degrees.)
Referring to J910 Ephtmeris, we find that Mars, for in-'
stance, will be in conjunction with the radical Metcury
on January 16th, Mars being ther.» in Aries 26 degrees.
On April 25th Mars will.be sextile to this Merdury as
it is then in Gemini 26 degrees ; on June 13th it is square;
July 31st it is trine; November ls*t it is in opposition.
These are all the major aspects the transiting Mars will
form to Mercury that year. The parallels should also
be considered. The effect of a transit begins about eight
degrees prior to actual completion with major aspects,
and about four degrees prior with minor aspects. The
influence of a .transit expires quickly after culmiijgtion
of the aspect.
Note by the Ephemeris when each planet forms aspects to all the planets in your chart, as illustrated above
by Mars to Mercury.
Those who wish to be very exact can amplify their
t^ble, or aspect reference sheet, by firyding also the points
of minor aspects rttd it' is then useful to watch aspects
from planets in the progressed chart, as affecting the
ooints of aspect in the radix.
The transits of planets over minor aspects are hardly
perceptible, but the transits over major aspects are important while they are forming. A'transit of Sun over
the conjunction, square or opposition of the radical Saturn causes mental and physical depression, and such
periods are very unfortunate for beginning any new or
important undertaking. The Sun’s orb of aspect is
twelve degrees applying and -as it mtAres a^out one degree per day, the unfavorable period continues for twelve
days and then begins to wane. Even though there be
favorable directional aspects operating, these twelve
days should be jivoided tor important affairs. ,
* Those who poAess the "Improved Mechanical Aspect* nlan” can
And all the points, of aspect ro planets In either radix or progressed chnrt in a rerf few minutes by merely placing arrow of
revolvin'* dial In contact with iny pfanet of the chart and the
lines running from it show all.tbe degrees and signs in aspect
Reimrd these In table form ana turn arrow to next planet, end
so . on. Once the table la made It la good for all tlm*. *

GENE THL Ik CAL ASTROLOGY
But when favorable transits occur during favorable
directional or progressed aspects it may be depended
upon hs a fortunate period, apd especially those days
when the Modn also'1 forms good aspects by transit.
Transits are as important as progressed aspects but their
effect is not so lasting^, i. e., the period of their operation
is shorter.
A Transit Illustrated
Transits over the places of planets in a natal chart or
forming aspects with them are very effective and likewise so in the progressed chart.
Transits to the place of planets which are forming a
progressed aspect are very important. To illustrate this
latter point, turn to Example Horoscope No. 4 and note
that the progressed Mars is forming a trine to the radical
Ascendant. Read the delineation of this aspect (page
184) which will be effective 1 from August 23, 1910 to
August 23, 1911. However, during the year other proT
gressed aspects also operate, some of Ivhicb are of contrary nature, consequently, the effect of the progressed
Mats trine Ascendant radix will be most noticeable when
the aspect is supported or accentuated by transits of
similar nature, that is, good aspects.
To calculate such supporting transits’ make note of the
signs and degrees which favorably aspect the place of
Mars and the Ascendants Example': The Ascendant, 5E
4’ is 8 4*, A H 4‘, TO 4’, A 4*. The points which
Mars favqpably aspects from ”1 4’ are W 4°, ^,4”, TO 4*,
So 4*. Therefore, any planets which transit through the
signs and degi-ees just shown must necessarily form
favorable aspects to the progressed influence involved,
i. e., Prog. S A Ascendant radix.
•Before consulting'ihe Ephemeris for 1910 to find which
planets'jpnay transit those favorable degrees, condense
them into one little table like this: 4' So,M, TO, VJ, X, 8,
and then by observation you will readily see that VJ
would be in opposition the ascendant, although sextile
to Mara. Capricorn 4’ is noif a wholly favorabje point
so it. is 'eliminated. Likewise 8 4' is opposition Mars

PART II,
THIS PROGRESSED CHART 20#
Mthough trine the Ascendlnt, butyls -it is not a wholly
favorable poirrt, it is rejected. This leaves 4° S>, HR® "l, X.
But another fa’ct to remembbr is that' no planet conjunction Mars is favorable, so »this eliminates "l 4°, leaving
4° ?o, nj x. Again must discretion* be use*d for not all
planets coming to cogjunetion with the Ascendant are
favorable. Mars, Saturn and Uranu% transiting over the
ascending degree are disturbing; Sun, Venus, Jupiter
are favorable ; Moon and Mercury are considered good
also. Neptune’s influence is doubtful. Therefore, be
Longitude of the Planets for August, 1910
(Adapted from a page of Raphael % Ephemeris.^

GENETHHACAL ASTROLOGY
careful' in judgiug effects of, planets which may transit
the Ascendant.
yowever, transiting bodies crossing over the horoscopal placej; of otl\er bodies' or over important places in
the horoscope such as sextile, square, trine or opposition
to any planet, have a very Sensible effect regardless of
whether or not there may be any directional aspect in
force at the time. *
By the Ephemeris page you may, trace any planets
which transit the signs and degrees involved, namely,
4’ 5>, 02, K during August, 1910. Make a list of such
transits and recocd the date. Reference to the Ephemeris
page shows the following transits:
Transit Table
In the foregoing we have an illustration of transits to
a progressed aspect, together with the dates of the exciting influences for one month. In actual practice the
student would proceed in like manner from month to
month in thtf Ephemeris for the entire year of progression.
Transits exert a more or less powerful influence according to whether qr not other influences of similar
nature, are in operation. To illustrate this point clearly,
turn to the Lunar Progressed Aspects where they are
listed On page 178, and .you will sec that ih November,
1910, the progressed Moon will favorably aspect the
Ascendant rqdix. This supports the aspect of progressed
Mars trine Ascendant radix in 1910; also the transit*
which occur in November. In December it will be noted
that progressed Moon is in favorable aspect with Mars
radix. # This harmonizes with the aspect of progressed
* Although some of the, transits mentioned occur on dates prior
to birthday, (Aug. 2g, 1910), they ere used to demonstrate the
process of checking transits. • t.

PART II, THE PROQRESSED CHART
Mars trine Ascendant radix, aid will accentuate or increase the'power of the poinciding transits in December.
Thus it is seen that a directional aspjct is not noticeable continually throughout the year; its influence may
be accelerated or .diminished according to the transits.
This phase of transits, relative .to exciting progressed
aspects, affords very interesting study and is also a valuable feature connected with the Progressed Horoscope
indications. Only because it requires some detail work
is it generally negletted. But it should never be neglected. It is not difficult to understand and I urge students to study this matter carefully because of its importance. It- will be noticed that attention is givdff mainly to major aspects, as minor aspects by transit are
usually evident only in minor or commonplace matters.
Summarizing
Progressed Mars trine Ascendant radix in 1910: Study
the delineation of this influence in Part III. The Transit
’Table shows, when this aspect will be excited and on
those dates 'the native has the opportunity to work with
Nature by concerning himself with the things indicated.
It the progressed aspect had been malefic instead of
benefic the dates of the transits to observe would be
those when the progressed aspect was evilly excited by
squares and opposition. They wodld thus forewarn the
native and enable him to so conduct his affairs as to
avoid much of the disturbances which would otherwise
arise at the times indicated.
Example of Transits in a Nfatal Cjhaft
To illustrate the transit of a planet aspecting tlje radical planets, refer tp the Ephemeris for 1910. Note that
the Sun is transiting the sign Leo iff August. The radi$
shows U 18*58T #n £1. Ephemeris shows that the Sun
will transit this degree on August 12th. The, yrfluence
of the Sun conjunction Tupiter is very benefic. Reference
to thft Tradsit ’Table show^ that on August»*12th there
is alsd a favorable transit of Mars .operating to the progressed Mars trine ascendant Radix, thus making the
day doubly benign^

GENETHLIJCAL ASTROLOGY
Referring again to‘ thl Ephemeris, it. is observed that
Mars enters Virgo on .August Qth at which ti'me it must
transit? over the place of ratal Sun at 0"29' TO. Mars
crossing place «f Sun js very altivatirog and disturbing.
It inclines to feverishness and to accidents. As Mars
will be in the third house of Ra&ix it? will tend to excessive mental activity, haste, force, aggressiveness, contention and accidents on short journeys.
Reference to the Ephemeris again shows Mercury and
, Moon also entering Virgo on August 6th. This makes
a combination of three planets all crossing the radical
Sun on that day. The conjoined influence of the Moon
and Mercury is favorable but their conjunction with
Mars is not. Hence, these mixed or contrary influences
should produce a hectic day for this individual — a day
in which he should exercise the utmost moderation, discrimination and tact, being extra cautious in writings,
agreements, promises and short journeys. ■
Reference to the Transit Table shows that on the same
day a favorable transit occurs which will be helpful and
tend to modify these indications somewhat. Provided
with this information, the native is enabled to act guardedly and thus avoid much of the difficulty indicated by
the triple conjunction mentioned.
Ex*ample of Transits^
Reference to the Aug*ist Ephenferis shows the Sun
transiting Leo. Chart No. 4 shows two planets in Leo:
Venus' 9 41', Jupiter 24*27’. The Sun will cross these
degrees on Augusf 2nd and 18th.
Venus is transiting Cancer until August 19th when it
enters Leo. Venus crosses the progressed Ascendant in
.Cancer 25*57' on Aligust 15th. Venus crosses the progressed Venus between August 26th ani 27th.
The transit of each planet in August should be traced
to find transiting aspects to planets in' the progressed,
chart and, whether gdod dr adverse; they shoQkl be*
recordpd, after which the same procedure js employed
for each succeeding month. For instance, it wiH be seen

PART II, THE PROGRESSED CHART ■
that Satucn begins to retrograde from the 6th. degree of
Taurus in* August dnd as Chart* No. 4 shows Mars in
Scorpio 3* 41' it is evident that Saturn by retrogfadation
will transit to an opposition of Afars.
‘ The transit over" or to a point affected by a progressed
aspect will accentuate or precipiftte its effects, provided
the transit coincides with the nature of the progressed
aspect. If of contrary nature, however, its power will be
checked and the direction delayed in its action.
A strong conjunction or opposition of two transiting*
planets occurring in a critical or'sensitive place in a
horoscope is always important and affects things ruled
by the houses in which they are transiting.
Transits begin to operate about eight degrees prior to
the aspect and their influence is mainly felt on thgse days
during their formation when other aspects of similar
nature come into actios, especially if the transiting
planet is in any way affected similarly on the same date.
In a case like this of Saturn applying to opposition of
Progressed Mars during June, August, September and
October, 1910, its malign effect will not be notioeable
#very day, but especially on those days when the Moon
crosses those first ffw degrees of Tasrus and Scorpio,
occupied by Saturn and Mars, or square to those points,
that is, in Lfeo and Aquarius. *
Once again let me remind t^ie student that the subject
of transits is important and well worthy of aaseful study.
It is treated in detail here to enable you to grasp it correctly ahd apply it practically. In’actuaJ ptactice you
will find it far less edmplicated than it»may seem now.
Additional information on Transits will.be found. in Part
V under subhead* "Transits apd Change of Residence."
Lunations
Does the Monthly New Moon Affect Individuals?
3<fme New Moons (lunation^ are very important, depending upon whether orjiot the luminaries at their conuinction form Lny important aspects to planets in the
individual's nativity. When* the lunation occurs, in a

oenethlia<3al astrology
favorable place in the horoscope and in ‘good, aspect to
some of the radical planets it betokfens that the month,
summed up in a general way, will be fortunate especially if no strongly malign aspects" testify otherwise, but
even then such lunation will teryl to mitigate the evil.^
The contrary is to be judged when the lunation occurs'
in adverse aspect to plrfhets in the radix, the evil being
magnified should the lunation be an eclipse. The New
Moons may be applied to the progressed horoscope in
like manner.
The results of a lunation (good or adverse) are detvmined by the combined influences of the house in whi h
it occurs, the houses occupied by planets aspected bv
the lunation, and the houses these planets rule. Fc*i
instance, the second house relates to finances; eleventh
house to friends, etc.
As the Lunation, or New Moon, is virtually a transit,
the sign and degree of its occurrence each month in the
zodiac should be correlated to both the, natal and progressed charts. Reference to page 209 shows that the
Moon will meet the Sun in conjunction on August 5th
in the”12th degree of Leo. Inspection of the progressive,
chart shows that this point falls between Venus and
Jupiter, thus forming a very fortunate indice for the
month generally, taker as a whole, and tljis influence
therefore tends to offset the forementionfed triple transit
over the radical Sun on August 6th. (Page 212) As the
lunation falls near the place of Jupiter in the radix and
sextile to, litars this further accentuates its benign influence due to.its beneficent aspects in both .charts.*

PART II. THE PROPHESIED CHART
FAVORABLE DAYS
In Relation to Y cw Own Horoscope
How to Find Them
Favorable and unfavorable days are indicated by the
dates when Moon (as shown by her place in current
Ephemeris) crosses over or aspects important places in
the nativity. *
The Moon’s aspects are the most important factor of
all in determining the daily events in one’s life. Observing students will soon learn how to apply these to their
own horoscope, as the Lunar transits are all of monthly
occurrence.
Look in the current Ephemeris at the Moon’s lcmgitude on ’the first of the month. Find that place in your
own Radix chart, then note'what aspects it will form
to .your Radix planets during the da^ considering that
it will move forwaref in the zodiac about thirteen degrees
in the next twenty-four hours.
THe Moon’s place as listed in the Ephemeris is its
position at the time of ^toon mark of tho place where
you now reside. After noon mark, the Moon will advance at the rate of. about one degred every two hours.
Noon Mark is the mean time for which the planets’
locations are inserted for each dsfy in the Ephemeris at
some particular place. It is the equivalent to noon in
Greenwich. For instance, on April 6, 1934, the Ephemeris
shows Venus in 0*06' of Pisces at noon, Gr^edwich. At
120' W. long, that is the position of Venus.at 4:00 a. m.
In other words, the (loon Mark for places situated at
120' W. long, is 4 a. m. on any date.* (Noon Mark is
defined in Part I.)
The Moon transiting a trine or sextile with thte»place
of the Sun in.yoflr Radix is generally an indication of
one of'ttie best days in the month in ^ business way,
provided at the satpe time ttye Moor / does not form an
adverse aspect with some other planet, and particularly
with malefic planets in the radix. •

GENETBJLIACAL ASTROLOGY
The» Moon conjunction with your Sun. is good also,
providing the Sun «at birth was unafflicted. The conjunction is good for business, but not as good physically,
as it sometimes tends to lower the' vitality. When the
Moon is forming adverse aspects to your Natal Sunvthe
day is adverse for new undertakings or for dealings with
people of high position, and is especially adverse for
asking favors.
The Moon in good aspect to. your Jupiter is next in
power to her good aspect with the place of the Sun.
Including the conjunction and parallel, the good aspects
to Jupiter are considered among the best which occur
monthly. These aspects favor general business and
social activity.
The adverse aspects to Jupiter are not to be considered a's very malign, yet they incline to misjudgrpent, excess, extremes, extravagance or over-estimation in business calculations or decisions.
The Moon’s good aspects to Venus are "next in power.
T.hese, as? with Jupiter, include the conjunction and
parallel. On the days when this aspect occurs, it mukes
one feel happier, more optimistic, more sociable and
more inclined to entertainment than usual. Very good
for visits and dealings with the femjniire sex. The adverse aspects to Venus are not very important, but still
they disfavor the things just mentioned.
The Moon transiting an adverse aspect with your
natal Ntptune, ISranus, Saturn or Mtrs are all unfavorable indications, the worst orte being the aspect with
Satu,rn. No pew business should be undertaken when
the Moon is in adverse, aspect with the place of Saturn
at birth, if it can Be avoided, for its tendency is to bring
disappointments, < loss, hindrance, delays, vexations,
anxiety.. The good aspects to 'these planets tend to
benefits through the things which they ruje.
The Moon’s' aspect to Mercury or to its own place in
the Radix, is not very important. However,, wheij as-'
per.tinjj Mercury, it inclines the mind to excessive mental .

PART II. THE PROGRESSED CHART . 217
activity, and peiTiaps causes the' native to be given more
to talking and reading than usual. The aspects to the
Moon incline to changefand a desire to be on th£ move,
especially if the Moon is in a movable %ign.
The most important indications by this monthly
transit of the Moon are shown wfien it* aspects the ruling
planets of the horoscope, that is, the planet which rules
the birth month sign and the planet which rules the ascending sign, or any«planet which may have been in the
ascendant at the time of birth.
In other words, on a day when the transiting Moon
favorably aspects a planet is a good time for matters
or things indicated by that planet; on the other hand,
it is unfavorable for those things when that same planet
is afflicted by the Moon. As stated before, the most
important of these to consider are the ruling planets.
Note the house of the $adix through which Moon is
transiting.
The good transits of the Moon will be more powerful
in th e months when the Moon by its progressed position
i% forming favorable aspects. Or at the time when there
is a favorable transij of some other planet operating at
the. same time, or during the period of a favorable lunation, that is, tjie sign and degi^e in which the New
Moon occurs as related by house and aspect in your
nativity. The Moon’s favorable transits will be much
weaker in the months when the Moon is atKerscly aspected Ijy its progressed position. The Moon’s good
monthly transit" aspect to a planet Vill ayaif little if in
the same month the progressed Moon is adversely afflicting that particular planet, and especially so if the previous lunation occurred unfavorably in the horoscope.
Moon’* Transit Through the Houses of a Nativity
The advantage of knowing Moon's place ^nd aspects,
as trftnnected witli your nativity, lies in thfc fact that it
has much dominion over the generJI’daily affairs. Its
influence is important because it goes entirejy around
your chart each month, through each house, and,forms

GENETHLufcAL ASTROLOGY
every aspect to all the planets. Look in curre-.it Ephemeris and note its place, then find' that place in ^our chart.
When we see the Moon forming a certain aspect we
judge its effect, “and knowing in advance what causes
and effects will be in operation, gives ,us the opportunity
to decide a course of action in keeping with the indications.
The house through which the transiting Moon is passing in the Radix is important, as ft helps to color the
•aspect with the nature of things ruled by that house.
For instance, if the Moon is passing through your second
house ar;d forming a good aspect to your natal Mercury,
that would indicate a good day for dealing financially in
matters connected with literature, advertising, printers,
publishers; for visits, neighbors, kindred, etc. Usually
when tlje Moon passes through the sixth house of the
horoscope, the native does not feel quite up to his .normal physical stamina. Should the Moon meet with heavy
afflictions when passing through the sixth house, naturally it would indicate sickness or physical indisposition
of the kind indicated by the planets aspected.
If the Moon is making a good aspect in your Radix^
but on the same day is making adverse aspects in the
zodiac, the good influence is weakened, and vice versa.
It is presumed that you are thoroughly familiar with
the characteristics of the zodiacal signs and the influences
of the planfets, as well as things signified by the houses.
This knowledge should enable you to interpret correctly
the influence of the aspects fdrmec^ by th*e daily transits
of the Moon in ytrnr horoscope at birth. In this matter,
it should be renumbered you are to use the current
Ephemeris, not that ok the*birth year of progressed year.
If you will make if a point to note thfe Moon’s daily
position and aspects in your natal chart day f>y day, regularly foi asfew months, you will soon lfcarn whaft to
expect of each aspect as it oceurs. This will be found
of inestimable value irt helping to determine the best
course o^ action, especially on days when important
business matters should be* transacted.* Read the Influ-

PART II, THE PROGRESlED CHART
ence of Moon .Transiting the Twelve Houses, as shown
in "Delineations For Horoscopes,” in* Part III.
baily Transits
By daily transits we mean those transits which occur
each day in the zodiac among the planets themselves
without reference or application to the chart of any individual, although, in a general sense they may be so
correlated. •
* An Epbemeria and the “Moon Sign Book'fc record the Moon’a
dally position tn the zodlac.t It requires no great amoua? of
horoscopal knowledge to be able to tell by these means just
what bouse the Moon may be transiting in the individual natal
chart and the principal aspects formed, and thus keep in touch
with the changing influences, to great advantage in numerous
ways. Observations of thla nature provide the best proofs of
Lnnar influence, for, as the Moon goes from one house to andther
and form£ the various aspects, events wilt be seen to occur and
feelings to change correspondingly*
We have here been sneaking of the translflng Moon as applied
to the natai chart, and, were it not for certain modifications, the
same conditions, events, etc., would reoccur with monthly regularity, except that the date of the phenomena would differ. Tlte
modltfbation is that of the Moon’s daily “aspects” to planets in
the zodiac which establish the general nature gf the day and
those horoscopes which corrtspond to that general condition are
the ones' which most strikingly feel the effects of Lunar influence
for that day. And*hersin lies the value of noroscopal knowledge
In that respect,* for it will be readily seen that if the general
conditions are excellent on a certain date, bnt sn individual’s
horoscopal conditions vary adverse, tile oative need no£ expect
much of either testimony; whereas, without being abie to note
the contrary testimonies, that Is, If the native based his judgment
of the day upon the one set of Influences without cox^iderlng the
other set he might at Borne tlftie, sooner or later, disappointed
In results expected.
Compared to one persoif who can thus*rea<Lthe horoscope, there
are thousands who csjmot, many of whom desire to take advantage
of a source of Information which may aid in their progress. For .
this latter class tjie ,fMooit Sign Book” Is especially prepared,
and is truly a “Planetary Dally Guide for AH” as It antitos the
dates when your»p!atfetaiy ruler la favorably or adversely aspecteff. This Jnethod la very efficacious, aa shown by testimonials
from people who make & practice of careful pbsorvatlon year after
year.
t The Bulletins was discontinued in 1993.

GENETIfLIACAL ASTROLOGY
Following is a list ’of the aspects tkken from the Planetary Time Tables in the "Bullelina” for March 10, 1933,
whfch is the date of the earthquake which shook up
Long Beach/ Los Angeles and surrounding towns.
Planetary Time Tables for March, 1933
Note: Foregoing Planetary Time Tables for March, 1933, ware
t^ken from “The Astrological Bulletins, " then a quarterly magazine. Beginning with Issue No. 21)1 the Bulletins became an Arnual.
The Planetary Time Tahles are published for one year In advance. We have ao named them because they show in' orderly
sequence the time when aspects become pa/tlle'in the zodiac. (In
Pacific Standard Time.) The nature of each aspect la also Indicated. The time atuted Is tlie moment of maximum Influence, after
which the Influence diminishes.
You- will find it very helpful to study the Planetary Time Tables
from da) to day and their delineations, headed “Favorable and
Unfnvorahle*Days” In the “Itulletfna Annual.” It will help you to
determine the mfluence of aspecta and show how to combine their
Influences when* several nre in operation at practically tha same
time. Many persona depeqd upon these tally Indications for guidance who have no knowledge of their own horoscope and, of course,
.It la better to have, some guidance than none at all. However,
‘atudegts who are familiar with operations lb their Own chart may
use thw Planetary Time Tables more effectively. For Instance,
If the Time Tables show a preponderance of adyerse aspects on
the same day your horoscope I; afflicted,' you are aware that fer
you the unfavorable conditions are accentuated. If your horoscope la afflicted and the Time, Table Indications are good, then
the adverse Indications of your chart will not be so manifest The
rule bolds good both way*.

PART H, THE PROGRESSED CHART
* SOLAR 'PERIODS '
Good' and Adverse
As the Sun in its apparent daily motion transits
through the zodiac it movds away from the place it held
on your birthday, passing through one sign each month
and at the end of a year returns to place of birthday.
In the sixth mopth from your birthday the Sun comes
into opposition of your zodiacal sign of birth and its own
place in your nativity, and tends to produce a trying
time generally. Not a good time to m^ke any important
move or ask favors. In the third and ninth months it
forms a square to your sign which is also an unfavorable
period.
Your Adverse Solar Periods Each Year
(Approximately)
From 78 to 95 days after birthday.
From 168 .to 185 days after*birthday.
From 258 to 275 days after birthday.
This seventeen day period, which occurs three tinffcs
each year, is not a good time to make important moves
or ask favors. The "atKcrse” days in thdse periods are
apt to'be more jo than usual, while tjie ‘‘good” days are
less favorab(e. OtT your “Astrological Wall Calendar”
make a list of these periods for use with your good and
adverse days.
Your Gofd Solar Periods Each Year
(Approximately)
From 48 tp 65 days after birtfiday.
From 108 to 125 days a'fter*birthday.
From 228 to 245 days after Jjirthday.
From. 288 to <05 days after birthday.
In these four good.periods aim to extend your.interests
and advance your business.* Your good day! in these
good periods are apt to be more favorable than at other
times, while your adverse Jays are usually less severe.

GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
'SPECTkTJAf' SHOWS DIFFkSENCE
‘‘Science and Invention”’ for May, 19^2, published a
diagram showing Sun, Ventfj and Earth with lines indicating reflection of Vight. When Venus is receding from
Earth, lines are displaced to'ward red end of spectrum;
when moving toward Earth, lines are toward the opposite or violet end of spectrum.
This may be interesting to researchers in the field of
color. *
The subject of’Retrogradation, in relation to the horoscope, is treated on pages 54 to 58.

PART II, <THE PROGRESSED CHART
INFLUENCE OF PA^IS, FORTUNlE
Rule for ’finding place 'of Part 'of Fortune is given in
Part I, and its influence in the twelve houses is described
in Part III.
Apparently it has no influence on the character or
health, but is said to benefit any house in which it may
be posited at birth by gain in things ruled by such house,
subject to the quality of aspects it receives.
Benefic planets by progressed motion or by transit'
passing over or favorably aspecting the radical Part of
Fortune are a favorable influence.
Malefic planets in like manner passing over or adversely aspecting it foreshadow loss.
As, shown by the method of computing its place, its
position depends partly qj> location of Moon, and as the
Moon in the progressed'chart is constantly moving for-
'ward and travels* about thirteen degrees during the year,
it follows that the place of Pars Fortunae in progressed
chart would likewise be constantly changing. Due tothis there is likelihood of error in placing it, so it may be
omitted, if preferred; in fact, like the Moon’s Nodes,
many astrologers do not use it at all, except in Horary
astrology. We .mention these pftints in order to aid
those who desire to make practical research into the
matter. In our own experience we have found these
factors important and deserving of serious attention.

OENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
f
E/JLIPSES
Are Eclipses Effective Only in Natal Charts,
or Do They Also Affect the Progressed Chart?
Eclipses affect that chart most in which they form the
strongest aspects. Generally speaking, the natal chart
is more responsive to New Moons, eclipses and transits
than the progressed horoscope. For instance, if an
eclipse occurred in such sign and degree that it formed
no aspects in either natal or progressed charts, its influence would be felt through its house position in the natal
chart tr^re than by its house position in the progressed
horoscope.
A New Moon, an eclipse, or a transit may cause an
aspect forming in the progressed chart to be "set off”
prematurely if they come into a like aspect with that
formed by the planets. However, there is really nothing
premature in Nature. If the eclipse, New Moon, or
transiting planet shduld form an aspect contrary to a
progressed aspect in process of forming (coming to completipn) it would tend to retard the latter or modify its
influence during the time such transit. New Moon cr
eclipse would bq effectively in operation.
A chapter 91 14 pages entitled, "Eclipses," will be fot,nd In
“Powerful Planets. ”• In tJie same book a chapter of 20 pages la
devoted to “Comets,” which gives dates of che appearance of
famous cdfueta and the effects of their visitation.

PART H, THE PROGRESSED CHART . 228
RECAPITULATION
The Progressed Horoscope is a chart made fot any
year after birth to'show the natuie of conditions which
will affect the life during .the twelve months of that year.
Each day after birth is equal to one year in progression.
In the birth year Ephemeris count forward as many
days after birthday as, you need to equal the year desired. Having found the desired date for progressed
year, cast a chart as though you werj born oh that day,
using birth time and same T. of H. used in makjgg the
natal chart.
Correct the planets' places by logarithms, using their
longitude on day for which chart is made and next day
in advance, regardless of whether birth occurred Ijefore
or aftep Noon Mark.
List the aspects, remembering to reject all those which
hjive passed the point of completion* and allow two degrees for orb .of aspects between planets ; one degree for
the minor aspects.
Calculate the declinations and record all parallels. Allow 1 degree for orb.
Record the important transits for the year of progression, using Ephemdris for that year instead of birth year
Ephemeris. Allow 8 .degrees for orb of transit aspects.
List all the influences, favorable and unfavorable, by
aspect, parallel, transit and Moon’s monthly position in
longitude. '
Delineate each influence separately in terms ot position,
location and dignity of the planets concerrted, and weigh
their strength and piJwer.
State the outstanding influences, wither favorable ot '
unfavorable.*
Synthesize ,the.horoscope by condensing your.analyses
into a<pncise judgment of tl;e year as a whole. Do not
predict anything from the progressed Chart that is not
indicated in the natal chart. Remember— "The »Stars
inclfhe ; they do not qompel.”

GENETHUACAL ASTROLOGY
THEk AND NOW
Primary and Secondary Directions
#rhe Progressed Horoscope
Wilson’s Dictionary of Astrology, “In which the various systems and opinions of the most approved authors
are correctly defined” (1885, p. 356), quotes an example
in the nativity of Charles V, Emperor of Germany, by
i the renowned astrologer, Placidus. Herein Placidus
demonstrates the importance of the influence of the
following, in the “day for a year” progression :
Progressed planets forming aspects among themselves.
Progressed planets forming aspects to planets in Nativity, (Sun- is classed as a planet.)
Progressed Moon from itr monthly position forming
aspects to both najal and progressed planets.
Progressed declination of Moon and planets forming
parallels among themselves and with planets in the radix.
Transits as affecting radix and progressed positions.
Declinations of transiting planets forming parallels to
radix and progressed declinations.
Lunations as affecting radix and progressed charts,
both in longitude and declination.
Placidus did not outline them in this order but in his
example every one of the foregoing was pointed out,
while Wilson adds the general opinion that the progressed planets should be observed as they aspect the
places of the angle:, in the radix (cusps of 1st, 10th, 7th
‘and 4th houses). , ‘
Placidus used these progressed features in connection
with another method of directing .(primary) by{ said
that unless one Qf these prbgressed directions occurred
at the same time, th£ primary direction would be of little
or no Importance.

PART II, THE PROGRESSED pHART , , 227
Which gives rise to the belief that it is these progressed influences, considered and applied in the m&nner
enumerated and tafaght, ?hat are, »after all, of primary
importance.
The late Alan Leo, famous English astrologer, said,
"This method of progressing the horoscope not only
includes the Primary and Secondary Directional Systems
within itself, but also adds new factors of vital interest.”
This method in olden days was called "secondary,”
but it has beer\ so improved by modern researches? that
it has assumed a place of primary importance, and is
now generally termed The Progressed Horoscope.
Here let me give students a friendly warning not to
be in the least disturbed by two statements in a recent
(1931) astrological treatise’ (1) “Progressed planets do
not aspect each other," and (2.) "Like progressed planets,
transiting planets aspect the radical planets of the natal
chart.”
TJie second statement means that transiting planets
do not aspect progressed planets. But every experienced
astrologer knows otherwise.*
u Progressed planets do not aspect each other ?” (1) It
is unthinkable! To omit the influences of the progressed
aspects one with another in the progressed chart, would
be omitting valuable information which should be in
possession of the client by means of which he may plan
accordingly before it is time to act. Imagine how you
would feel if you paid an astrologer to m»ke your progressed horoscope a 13d he omitted all mention of the
progressed Moon’s aspects to all the* other progressed
planets, progressed Ascendant and JVIidheaven, pro-.
• The rules aiul example* given In "Practical Astrq)ogy For
Everybody” or the “A fo Z Hory scope. Maker," wheh put Into
practice, will be convincing proof of the ppwer and Influence of
both motions referred to, and wllk place the student In a position
to s«r that anyone who says otherwise reveals their lack of
petuaf experience In horoacopy, or a disregard for complete computations and accurate analyst*

228 QENETH^IACAL ASTROLOGY
gressed. Part of Fortune, progressed' declinations, and
the mutual aspects • among the 'planets on progressed
birthday. (2) Picture the further deficiency in the Progressed Horoscope if# the Transit aspects to Progressed
Planetary Aspects were omitted! You would feel that
you had received but half a delineation. Without these
features the Progressed Horoscope delineation would
be misleading because incomplete, thus failing to indicate many important conditions which would eventuate
in that year, and therefore not .truly 'representative of
the values which astrology has to offer when rightly
practiced.
Another Method of Bringing Out "Directiona"
If your nativity Is very “radical” (much as having the majority
of the planets In angles or cardinal signs,) then the directions of
Midheaven and Ascendant to radix of these planets are very
Important.
To get this direction yon slmoly move the cusp of the tenth
house forward one degree far each year, bnt leave the planets
as they were at birth# ,
In a “radical" nativity the transits of planetar over the radix
ar$ very Important
If the nativity la not radical, the progressed cusps to the 'progressed planets' .places are most Important, and the transits of
ruling planets over these progressed places.
for instance : If yotf wish to direct cusp? to radical planets for
twentieth year, move the tenth radix cusp forward 20, then And
this new M. C. In Table of Bouses for the same latitude as birth
place, and arrange other cusps as shown therein from that M. C.
Insert planets In the same signs and degrees of longitude as at
birth fthe house positions of some will be changed,) and note If
any planets are crsaslog or qspectlng cuspp of- 1st,' 10th, 7th or
4th house pdtthmlarly, aod Judge accordingly. To Illustrate: We
will suppose that Uranus was 20* beyond fourth cusp at birth.
By moving tenth cusp forward 20* (one degree for each year)
which automatically move? the fourth cusp likewise, It will bring
the fourth cusp to a tonjunctlon with the radical Uranus, Indlcatlog a sudden change, of residence or demise of a parent
Varfqps other methods of “directing" ex/st, such as the Trigonometrical method, directing the Prenatal Epoch, Solar Revolutions, The .Radix System, etc. The method giveo»In this book Is
the one most universally used, for when all Its elements dre utilised, as outlined Serein, It renders reliable Information for all
practical purposes by embracing all active zodiacal influences, as,
enumerated In Mack type on page 228. <

PART III, DELINEATIONS 70S HOROSCOPES 229
j.
■ i i
A to Z Horoscope Maker and Delineator
PART III
DELINEATIONS for HOROSCOPES
, "To everythin* there i* a season. an£ a time to every
purpose nodet the heaven :
A time to be born and a time to die; a time to plant and
a time to plnck np that which is planted; • ,
,A time to kill and a time to heal ; a time to break down
and a time to bnlld up ;
A time to weep and 4 time to lao*b; a time to mourn
. and a time to dance;
A time to cant away stones and a time to gather stones
together; a time to embrace and a time to refrain
from embracing;
A time to get and a' time to lost; a time to keep and a
time to cast away ; •
A time to rend and a time to sew ; a time to keep alienee
and -a time tp speak ; • •
A time to love and a time to* hate; a time of* war and
a time of peace.” — Ecc. Ill, 1-&
Indent to Part JII on pige’231.

OENBTHLIACAL A3T.ROLOQY
PLANETARY INDICATIONS
IT IS PRESUMED that these Who undertake to apply
the information given in Part III have mastered the
necessary steps of htroscope making and are familiar
with the various elements related to the natal and progressed horoscopes.
The degree of success acquired in horoscope reading
is exactly in proportion to your knowledge of the foregoing steps. It is essential, for, accurate delineation,
that the student be familiar with the tendencies of the
zodiacal signs, the characteristics of the planets, the
nature^ of the houses, and the quality of the aspects,
before 'attempting to delineate a horoscope.
The birth chart (radix or nativity) is like a panoramic
view of the life as a whole. The indications conta ed
therein give insight to the character, disposition and
tendencies of the individual and what may be expect 'd
of that person. The progrAssed chart, containing the
directional aspects, presents a sectional view of the biitx
chart and shows the conditions of that particular period
and the tinges when directional aspects will culminate.
Life brings conflicting experiences to some persons
and when reading the indications in a horoscope the
astrologer sees these, conflictions. For instance, a planet
in one sign might give contrary testirrfony to, that of another planet in a different sign. One planet signifies a
certain condition, the other planet seems to deny it or
testify to1 the opposite. These two apparently contradictory ’ ifldication% do not nullify each other, for the
testimony oi each planet will manifest when brought
into action by* a directional aspect or a transit. Some
influences are rifet brought into play until the latter part
of life. Every testinony in the bi tff chart, whether by
planet, location, aspect or position, regarding character
or* circumstance, will in its own .time become active.
This is-jJIhinly foretold in Ecc. Ill, 1-8:

PART III, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES 231
JNDEji to Part III
Part III treats in detail all the features connected with
the interpretation *of horoscopes. • The delineations are
given in an orderly and joncise manner, in non-technical
terminology, in order to simplify the process for new
investigators, as well as to provide a practical reference
work for advanced students and for teachers in class or
private instruction.
ASPECTS, Philosophy of 419
The Influence of the SUN in the fodiacal Signs
Nature and rulerahlp of the Sun — 8
Sun iu Aries . . . 238 Sun in Libra . 241
Sun in Taurus . . . 239 Sun In Scorpio . . . 241
Sun in Gemini . . . 239 Sun in Sagittarius 242
Sun in Cancer . . . 240 Sun In Capricorn . . 242
Sun in Leo .... 240 Sun in Aquarius . . 243
Sun In Virgo . . . 240 Sun In Pisces . . * 243
Influence of Sign Ascending at Birth Tirae
The Ascendant : A general description of the Zodiacal Sign
ascending at tlnje of birth t ... . 244
Taurus 245 Scorpio ..... 250
Gemini 246 Sagittarius .... 351
Cancer 247 Capricorn .... 252
Leo 248 Aquarius 253
Virgo 249 Pisces 254
INFLUENCE OF TljJE PLANETS IN THE ZODIACAL SIGNS
Difference Between Signs and Houses 258
The Influence of the MOON In the Zodiacal Sip*
Nature and rulerehip of the Moon 258
Moon in Aries , . . 259 Moon ip Libra . . . 283
Moon in Taurus f . 280 • Moon In Scorjpo ’. . 263
Moon in Gemini . . 280 Moon in Srglttarius . 284
Moon In Cancer . , 261 Moon in Cppricorn . 284
Moon in Leo ... 261 Moon in Aquarius . • 285
Moon In Virgo . . 282 Mooc.in Pisces ... 288
The Influence of MERCURY in the .Zodiacal Signs , *
Nature and rplerthip (K Mercury . * 28T .
Mercury in Aries . 288 Marcury In Libra . 270
Mercury In ^Taurus , 289 Mercury In Scorpio . 271
Merciry In Gemini . 289 . Mercury In Sagittarius 271
Mercury In Cancer . 289 Merpury in Capricorn 271
Mercury in Leo . . 270 • Mercury in Aqcariuf . 272
Mercury In Virgo . . 270 Mercury in Places • . 272

GENETHLIACAL ASTitOLOGY
T
f ve:
*Th« Influence of VENUS i h the Zodiacal Signs
The Influence of MARS
Nature and rulerablp of Mara
Mars In Arles . . 282
Mars In Taurus . . 283
Mara In Gemini . . 284
Mars in Cancer . . 284
Mars in Leo . . . 285
Mars & Virgo . . . 286
in the Zodiacal Signs
Msrs in 'Libra . . 287
Mars in Scorpio . . 288
Mars in Sagittarius . 288
Mars in Capricorn . 280
Mars in Aquarius 290
Mars in Pistes . . 291
The Influence of JUPITER
Nature and ruierahlp of Jupiter
Jupiter in Arles . . 294
Jupiter in Taurus 295
Jnpiter in Gemini . 295
Jupiter in Cancer . . 296
Jupiter In Leo . . 296
Jupiter in Virgo . . «.297
in the Zodiacal Signs
Jupiter in Libra . . 297
Jupiter in Scorpio . 298
Jupiter in Sagittarius'. 298
Jupiter in Capricorn . 299
Jupiter in Aquarius . 299
Jupiter In Pisces . . 300
tHie Influence of SATURN in the Zodiacal Signs
Nature and 'ruierahlp of Saturn
Saturn in Arles . . 302
Saturn in Taurus . . 303
Saturn in Gemini' . . 303
Saturn in Cancer . . 303
Saturn in Leo . . . *303
Saturn in Virgo . . 304
Saturn in Libra . . 30#
Saturn In Scornlo 304
Satarn in Sagittarius . 305
Saturn Id Capricorn . 305
Saturn is Aquarius . 306
Saturn in Places' . 306
The Influence of ORK3US
Nature. and rulership of Uranus
Uranus in Arles . . 309
Uranus iif Taurus 310 >•
Uranus in Gemini 310
Uranus in Cancer . 311
Uranus in Leo . . . 311
Uranus in Virgo . . „311 •
in the Zodiacal Signs
Uranus in Libra .. . 312
UraDua lb Scorpio . 312
Ufanus in Sagittarius . 313
Uranus in Capricorn . 313
Uranus in Aquarius . 314
UrsouS in Pisces . . 314
* The Influence NEPTUNE
.Mature, and rulership of Neptune
Neptune Tfl Aries . . 318
Neptune in, Taurus . 318
Neptune In Gemini . 319,
Neptune In Cancer *. 320
Neptune Id Leo . . 320 ‘
Neptun^Jn Virgo . . 321
In the Zodiacal Signs
Neptune ,n Libra . 321
Neptune Id 'Scorpio . ( 321
NeptUDe in Sagittarlne 322
Neptune in Capricorn . 322
Neptune in Aquarius . 323
Neptune in Pisces . 323'

PART III, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES 233
INFLUENCE OF. PLANETS IN THE ’MUNDANE pOUSES
How to judge tbelr Influence 335

GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
Planets in 11th Hotee
Planers in 12th House
Venus 302
Mars 393
•Jupitpr 394
Saturn 394
Uranus 395
Neptune 395
HOUSE RULERS, Significance of a Planetary House
Ruler when posited In Another House . ’ . . 396 — 412
ZODIACAL ASPECTS DELINEATED
Favorable and Unfavorable Aspetfs of ail the Planets
With Reference to the Natal Chart
(See "Conjunctions and Parallels" gn page 421.)
Moon
Favorable Aspects
Mooo to. Mercury . 423 *
Moon to' Venus . . 424
YAwsu Vj ftua . . . 425
'Mron.V&'Vta.tl . ' . 42ft
Moon to Jupiter . . 425
Moon to Saturn . . 428
Moon to Uranud . . 429
Moon to Neptune 430
Unfavorable Aspects
Moon to Mercury . 423
Moon to Venus . . 424
l&oon Vo Suu . . . 425
V&oon Vo»Uma . . . 42ft
Moon to Jupiter . . 422
Moon to Saturn . . 428
Moon to Uranus . . 430
Moon* to Neptune , 430
Favorable Aspects Mercury '
Mereilry, to Venus
Mercury to Sun .
Mercury h* Mars .
HE? to Jupiter
iyto Saturn'
Uranus
MelcnrW to .Venus' . 433
Mercury to Sun . . 438
Mercury tb Mura .. 434
Mercury to Jupiter I 43S
Mercur* to Saturn .< 437
Mercury to Uranus . 438
Mercury to Neptons . 438

PAST III, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES 235
Venue '
Favorable Aspects
Jupiter to Saturn *. . 455
Jupiter to Uranus . 456
Jupiter to Neptune . 45T
Jtiplter
Unfavorable Aspects
Jupiter to Saturn . 456
Jupiter to Uranus 45?
Jupiter to Nejftune . «458
Saturn
Favorable Aspects • Unfavorable Aspects
Saturn to Uranus . 458 Saturn to Uranus . 458
Saturn to Neptune, . 459 SatSrn to Neptune . 459
Uranus
Favorable Aspects Unfavorable Applets
Uranus to Neptune . 460 Uranus to Neptune . 460
Neptune
Aspects of Neptun<? are covered In the foregoing.
Pluto
For Pluto's aspects see p»ge 824.

PART III, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES 237
.INFLUENCE OF TftE SUN
IN THE TWELVE ZODIACAL SIGNS
fThe Sun
The Sun apparently passes through all the signs of
the zodiac in one year, leaving one sign and entering
the next about the 21st day of each month. The Sun
is always on tKe ecliptic, therefore, void of latitude. It
rules the sign Leo and has but one sign for its "home.".
The warmth which we commonly experience is not
the heat of the Sun, as is usually supposed, but is due
to a cool, positive magnetic wave meeting one of negative quality from the Earth, thereby developing both
light and heat and affecting all other planets likewise,
in proportion to their mass and density, but varying in
intensity according to the^position as related to the solar
orb and other stellar considerations.
If not hampered by unfavorable aspects from other
planets, and dignified by position in the horoscope, it
bestows a nature which is ambitious, proud, (but seldom
admitting it) magnanimous, frank, generous, humane,
firpj and honorable. * Leo natives aspire to positions of
rulership and. by ^heir earnest nature inspire others with
a respect for their abilities, so they usually attain positions of trust, responsibility and honor where they are
perfectly at home and capable of practical execution to
a very satisfactory degree.
But when the Sun*at birth is unfavorably aspected
and otherwise undignified the native ie inclined to be
too forceful, lordly, domineering, positive, arrogant and
extravagant, inclining, also, to sickness of a feverish,
inflammatory nature, eye afflictions»and heart disorders,
as well as losses of position, credit or esteftfrt due to
impulsiveness^
All the adverse testimonies, particularly those owing
their origin to the mind ind physical condition, can be
corrected and greatly improved by study of psjrchqlogy.

GENETHLI^GAL ASTROLOGY
and by taking a deep interest in advance thought
subject^ with a view "to unfolding latent qualities, developing self-control and harmonizing the environmental
conditions. Thfe early morning sunshine should be
sought, the heat of day avoided. V'hen making conscious effort along constructive lines, Leo people will
find frequent strolls on the hills and in the woods conducive to inspiration, vigor and harmony. Many important events of life will occur on Sunday.'
* Things Ruled by the Sun
The Son by nature is hot, dry, masculine and lifegiving. It has much to do with health and the vital
principle. It has dominion over the individual progress
and social success. It rules positions of rank and title
and high office generally. In the human anatomy it
governs the sides, back, heart, right eye of the male and
left eye of the female. >
Occasionally the Sun may enter the sign a day earlier or later
than the dates quoted In this chapter. If a person Is born od
one of jthe dateu given as the change from one sign to another
It becomes necessary to note carefully the Sud's place given li.
birth year ephemerls to determine whether or not It had changed
signs at time of birth. An ancient rnlevwaa to the effect that
when a planet reached the 28th degree It began to Influence the
next sign.
The planet which rules the sign the Sun occupies at birth la
known as a "ruling" planet and throughout life the aspects
of the ruling- planet, whether by transit or by progression, are
Important. factors in producing events and changing conditions.
Sun is in ArieS between March 21* and April 19 Yearly
O T
In Aries the Sun gives much mental enetgy and quick
wit.* Natives of this‘sign are natural leaders, ‘more or
less headstfftng or impulsive, ambitious, fill of enterprise
and new ide*§. They do not like to be tfnder the direction of a master apt} are inclined to be fiery and quicktempered, quick to resdnt abustt or imposition but forgiving and, do not hold a grudge long. Their great love
of freedom and justice, coupled with ‘their enthusiasm

PART in, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES 239
and self-will, makes them liable ’to go to extremes
through indignation, hasty speech, or lack of discretion.
They possess penetrating will-power, are persistent,
determined and not casiljf discoursed, /ire philosophical by nature, admire scientific thought, and are at their
best when at the'heaS of things, such as director,
instructor, superintendent or manager.
Mars is the planetary ruler of the sign Aries.
Sun is in Taurus between April 20 and May 20 Yearly
In Taurus the Sun makes the native self-reliant, determined, persistent, stable, firm, careful and cautious.
Taurians fear pain. They seem patient and will wait
a long time for their plans to mature; gentle whfn unprovoked but furious when angered and then headstrong
and unyielding; secretive aad reserved with latent energy
^nd mental power; practical and constructive. Lovers
of nature, art; mtisic, literature and amusement. Are
usually capable of becoming psychics, mediums and
healers. Make good public servants, officials *and
spfcn did executive workers.
Vqnus is the planefary ruler of the sign Taurus.
Sun is in Gemini between May 21 and June 20 Yearly
O n*
In Gemini the Sbn makes the native ^sympathetic, kindhearted, affectionate, fend of home and Children and
easily influenced by kindness, at times t<j his detriment.
Is sensitive, intuitiqpal, idealistip. Fond of science and
as a rule studious and usually endoVed with great im;
aginative ability. Possesses an active mind and can be
relied upon tg act quickly in an emergency. I? 'an experimenter and investigator, quick reasoner,^ generally
.a good writfcr; lilJei to be busy and can engtfge in two
or more occupatipns at once but .must be allowed to
work in his own way. Changeful, inquiring, doubtful
nature, hard to understand, but versatile, alert, dixterous

240 GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
f
tt ,
t
and skill|ul. Is ambitious, aspiring and loves change
and diversity.
Mercury is the planetary rul?; of the sign Gemini.
Sun is in Cancer between June 21 pnd July 22 Yearly
In Cancer the Sun gives a quiet, reserved, retiring sensitive disposition, yet inclined to publicity. Versatile,
.changeable; with many "ups and downs," changes of
occupation and position, but desires to stick to his own
course. nPossesses a fertile imagination and dramatic
ability, loves nature, adventure and strange experiences.
Is mediumistic, receptive and influenced greatly by
surroundings. Industrious, prudent, frugal and very
conscientious. Has a retentive memory. Loves approbation, sympathy and kindness; fears ridicule. Fruitful
and reproductive, patriotic; attached to home" and
family.
The Moon is the planetary ruler of -the sign Cancer.
Sun is in Leo between July 23 and August 22 Yearly
o a
In Leo the Sun gives an active mind, good nature,
generosity, many friends. Is a natural leader, ambitious, independent, determined, persistent, industrious,
honest and very conscientious; philosophical, philanthropic. Quickly angered but quickly appeased. Has a
sunny disposition, is frank,, outspoken, candid, forceful
and greatly appreciates affection ‘in which he is usually
ardent and sincere. Magnetic, intuitive and inventive ;
fond of children, sports, drama, honors and high office.
The Sun is the planetary ruler of the -sign Leo.
Sun is in ‘Virgo between August 23 anc'l Sept. 22 Yearly
In Virgo the Sun makes the native modest, thoughtful, serious, contemplative and industrious with desire

PART III. DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES 241
to refine the mind and acquire knowledge.. Learns
quickly, is ‘philosophical,, a good .reasoner and usually
has a good command of language. It gives good endurance, reserve itarce, q'uick recuperation and as a rule
Virgoans do not show their age. Quick-tempered
but not a fighter Is Virgo prefers arbitration. Loves
order, beauty, art and literature. Not easily discouraged
or kept down, although somewhat given to worry. Is
idealistic yet practical, frugal yet speculative, ingenious,
careful, cautious' and usually endowed with good forethought. Very active and seldom contented long at a <
time. Desires wealth but not able, 3s a rule, to acquire
wealth easily. Interested in hygienics, diet asd labor
conditions.
Mercury is the planetary ruler of the sign Virgo.
Sun is in Libra between Sept. 23 and Oct. 22 ¥early
In Libra fhe Sun gives love of justice, peace and
harmony. The native is courteous, pleasant, agreeable
and as a rule even tempered, affectionate, sympatHetic
anti sensitive to surroundings and conditions of friends.
Is a natural peacemaker, just, kind, atftiable and generous. Modest, neat, particular; loi^es art, refined pleasure and amusements; artistic and dislikes unclean work.
Is intuitive and has objective foresight. Usually marries
young and generally more thati once.
Venus is the planetary ruler of the sign Libra.
Sun is in Scorpio between Oct. 23 and Nov. 21 Yearly
In Scorpio the Sun gives strong eharacteristics and
shrewd, keen judgment. The Scorpion native is»cKtical,*
suspicious, ^kepttal but enterprising, reserved, tenucious,»determineq and seergtive., Fond of luxuries but
economical and calculating; restless, rtidrgetic, fond of
travel especially on water 4nd admires grandeur *in naturV Attends to own affairs in .business but in matters

GENETHLIACAL ASTRbLOGY
of duty1 may make trouble for bthers. , In speech plain,
blunt, sarcastic and forceful ; in politics 01 law very
aggressive. At best, 'original, 'scientific, sagacious, daring and creative, capable of much success through bold
enterprise. Pine engineers, contractors, surgeons,
chemists, detectives and sheriffj are. born in this sign.
Mars is the planetary ruler of the sign Scorpio.
Sun in Sagittarius between Nov. 22 and Dec. 21 Yearly
O t
In Sagittarius tho Sun gives a jovial, bright, hopeful,
generous and charitable nature : self-reliant, active enterprising, frank, outspoken, honest, ambitious, persevering and not easily discouraged. Loves liberty, freedom and out-of-doors sports; dislikes a master and will
not be^driven. Generally has a strong will and is sincere, honorable, earnest, aspiring, energetic, and * what
he says goes right to the mr.rk. Shows reverence for
philosophy and science, has good calculation and fore-,
sight arid is usually prophetic as to* the .outcome of
movements or enterprises.
Jupiter is the planetary ruler of the sign Sagittarius.
Sun is in Capricorn between Dec. *22 and Jan. 19 Yearly
O v?
In Capricorn the Sun 'gives a quiet, thoughtful, serious nature, deep mind and good reasoning ability; generally practical, economical and given ( to investigation.
Capricornians act with dignity and ' self-esteem, are
somewhat particular, ambitious and persevering; never
entirely discouraged although often disappointed:
thorough and hard <workers. Careful, cautious, frugal,
tfnd make the most of opportunities. * Usually me^t
with spme heavy obstacles in the path of desires and
progressfyet by dint of persistent, pajient' and concentrated _efFo-t often butt their way threjuffh a*nd triumph
over circumstance**-
Saturtj is the planetary ruler of the sign Capricorn.

PART III, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES 243
Sun is in Aquarius between Jan. 20 and Feb. 18 Yearly
In Aquarius the Sun gives a* quiet,* patient, determined, unobtrusive. an4 faithful nature, as a rule. The
Aquarian is refined, pleasant, friendly, generous, charitable, dignified and humanitarian; fond of art, music,
scenery and literature; cautious, steady, intelligent,
intuitive, discriminative, concentrative, studious,
thoughtful and philosophical. Good reasoner, practical
as well as theoretical; strong likes and dislikes and*
often with very radical and advancal ideas; is cheerful,
sincere and honest, easily influenced by kindnPss, slow
to anger, but will not be driven ; loves liberty and is
fond of occult research.
Uranus is the planetary ruler of the sign Aquarius.
Sun is in Pisces between feb. 19 and March 20 Yearly
O X
In Pisces the Sun generally gives a kind, and losing
nature, confiding, honest, amiable, sympathetic and
especially kind to dumb animals or people in distress.
Neat, particular and a? lover of order an*d completeness;
modSst, often timid and lacking self-confidence. As a
rule Pisceans are Industrious, methodical and logical in
their conclusions; idealistic, imaginative, inspirational;
often gifted with mediumistic faculty and usually fond
of secret, occult or psychic investigation.
Neptune is the!* planetary ruler of the sign Visces.

OENETHLIAOAL ASTROLOGY
THE ASCENbANT,
. A General Description' of the. Influence
of the Zodiatal Sigf. Ascending at tTime of Birth
The followlog delineations of the effect of Ascending Signs
are for the signs alone without aDy planet In the First Honae.
If any planet be therein It will modify these testimonies. A
fortunate planet will Increase the good and diminish the adverse
qualities; vice versa tf the planet be malefic. >
♦ The physical descriptions denoted by the sign ascending may
be termed the ideal, or normal, which may be expected from
each sign. In actual pVnctice, however. It will be observed that
they frequently vary from the normal In aome ‘respects. The
variations are mulniy due to the effect of the sign In which la
located the planet ruling the ascending sign; whether It be In one
of similar or contrary nature ; the nature of the planets strongly
aapecting that algnlflcator, etc. Racial characteristics, hereditary
peculiarities, early training, environment, occupational traits,
and geographical Influences, all have some effect tn moulding the
physiognomy.
The planets which may occupy the First House also have thelr(
share in determining tlfe appearance: Jupiter Inclines to overweight, Saturn to underweight; Mars Inclines to develop the
muscular system; the Sun's influence Is somewhat similar to
that of Mars but less florid and more dignified; Venus denotes
graceful form and pleasing appearance; Mercury, tall to medium
height, perceptive •faculties prominent, , restless activity; Moon,
rather plump, medium height, pale complexion; Uranus, physical
peculiarities, unusual characteristics, odd, Impulsive actions;
Neptune frequently Indicates some physical defect, pale or transparent compiexloo, something noticeable about the eyes or mouth.
Saturn ascending usually makes the hair, eyes aDd complexion
darker than otherwise Indicated. If It Is In adverse aspect to
one of th£ rnlera algnlflcator It tends to make the body
shorter.
Mars on the Ascendant operates to produce red hair or sandy
mustache, ruddy complexion and gray eye8.
(Uranna, Saturn or Mars ascending usually gives a mark or a
scar about the head or face, also on that part V the body ruled
b/ the qlgn the planet la In.
Uranua alone In the Ascendant conduces to length of Umb,
(lender fornf.and peculiar or odd expression, add usually p large
J
The pljinet ruling hour of birth ‘also baa considerable efTect on
the physical and mental make-np of a native. *

PART III, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES 245
Aries Ascending
Personality: Those who are born at a time when the
sign Aries is rising ar £ at thei? best prhen they can
guide, control and govern themselves or others, as they
have the ability toTdan'and map out the future and lay
out modes of action. They are lovers of independence,
fond of their own way and happy only in activity and
command. The desire is to be at the h'ead of things
and leaders in thought and action. They are enterprising and ambitious, quite versatile and usually rather,
headstrong and impulsive ; forceful and determined in
effort and expressive in speech ; intense when interested,
vehement when excited. Somewhat inclined to be fiery
or quick-tempered and ready to resent abuse or imposition and although liable- to go to extremes through indignation, they do not hold a grudge for any great
length of time. They admire scientific thought £nd are
quite ’philosophical ; do not become discouraged easily
as they possess a sharp, (ftnetrating will power. They
do best in vocations requiring qiyck action, decision,
executive or* mechanical ability and responsibility.
Motive temperament. The planetary sgnificadtor is I^ars.
Physical Appearance: Middle stature or rather above
it, spare body, long face and neck, ruSdy complexion,
head broad at the temples and narrow at the chin, thin
features, mark or”scar on head or temples; bushy eyebrows, sharp sight, eyes gray to grayish brown ; rough
or wiry hair but sometimes line in youth, varying in
color from dark to sandy, sometimes going bald at the
temples, sandy vthiskers.
Mental Tendencies: Ambition, activity, energy, courage, enterprise, impulsiveness, ajrdor^ combativeness and
ingenuity.
Taurus Ascending
. Personality : * A self-reliant, persistent nattflte capable
of wofking hard pnd long tn order to accomplish their
purposes. Gentle' while unprovoked, but “matf as a
buU” when really angered and when opposed ate stub-

GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
born and unyieldifig. Usually quiejt, dogmatic and
somewhat secretive or reserved cqncerning their affairs.
They .have a great deal of endurance, latent power and
energy; are practical ^nd have V>rganiring ability; usually sincere, reliable and trustworthy. They are fond of
pleasure and love beauty in nahure; art, music and literature; are influenced greatly by sympathy. Possessing a magnetic quality, they are able to benefit those
who are irritable or nervous. They are careful, steady
and able to carry to completion the projects they under-
, take. Have the ability to earn money for others and
are good at all executive work. Matters connected
with the earth anti its products succeed under their
supervision ; vital temperament. The planetary significator is Venus.
Physical Appearance : In stature short to middle
height* inclined to plumpness and often stoop-shouldered; square face and square build of body, short, -strong
neck, full forehead, nose, lip?, cheeks and mouth; heavy
jaw; dark eyes; haii; wavy, dark and sometimes curling,;
round and prominent eyes; hands {ilurfip, short and
broad. ,
Mental Tendencies: Persevering, constant, conservative, determined, obstinate, proud and ambitious of
power, yet sociable^ affectionate and loving, but can
also be very unreasonable, prejudiced and stubborn as
a bull. When angry will not stop at anything. Usually
slow, but good, steady worker. The undeveloped types
are sometimes very indoleut and sensual.
Gemini Ascending
Personality:* Ambitious, aspiring, curious and given
to inquiry, investigatioh and experimenting; also apt,
ftexterous, active and capable of engaging in two or
piore pursuits at fhe same time.. The natifre is sympathetic*and sensitive, the mind is intuitional, perceptive and imaginative, also quite idealistic snd Ipnd of,
all mental recreation. • There is a liking for pleasure,
adventure, science and educational pursuits. At times
restlessf anxious, high-strung and diffusive, mentally

PART III, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES 247
timid, indecisive, irritable and excitable. L<jve change
and divefsjty and must be constantly busy to be happy,
because inactivity creates impatience. As a rule Geminians are very clever %s they aje progressive, inventive,
mechanical, ingenious and possess inherent conversational and literary ability. They do best in occupations
where there is variety of activity, where the mind and
hands can be engaged in several different things. The
literary and educational world is their best outlet.
Mental temperament. The planetary significator is
Mercury.
Physical Appearance : Tall, sl?nder, erect but lithe
figure; quick, active walk; long arms and fingers; thin
features, long face, nose and chin; sanguine complexion;
hazel or gray eyes; quick sight; dark hair, usually
brown.
Mental Tendencies: Quick at learning, fond of reading and writing, inquisitive, capable of acquiring a good
education; dexterous, lively, ingenious, quick-witted;
inclination, and ’admiration for music, drawing, painting,
languages, dancing, travel and inventiorv Sometimes
^hy or retiring, good disposition, humane. Nervous and
restless.
Cancer Ascending
Personality: Changeable, sensitive and retiring disposition with many changes fend ups and downs of position and occupation. They have a fertile imagination,
are somewhat sentimental, sympathetic and talkative.
Fond of home* and family ; have a tenaeious memory,
especially for family or historical events; industrious,
frugal, economical and anxious to acquire the goods of
life. Fear of ridfcule or criticism* makes them discreet,
diplomatic and conventional. They appreciate approbation dnd are ctwily encouraged by kindposs. The
emotions arc strong and they delight in beautiful scenery ,and m romantic or strange experience# and adventured. They hive psychfc and mcdiumistic faculty, are
very conscientious, receptive to new ideas, an<^ have the
ability to adapt themselves to environment. 'They are

OENBTHLLACAL ASTROLOGY
adapted 'to pursuits .of a fluctuating nature, such as
catering to public needs and desires. Vit&l temperament.
The planetary significator is the Moon. •
Physical Appearance: Not usually' above average
height, tendency to stoutness, sometimes an awkward or
heavy gait; round face, full cheeks, tendency to double
chin, short nose sometimes prominent at the tip; gray
or light blue eyes, pale complexion, wide chest, hands
and feet small; uses crab-like positions and motions of
the arms.
Mental Tendencies: Fond of novelty, change and
traveling,^ yet usually attached to relatives, and home;
inclined to public life. Desirous of possessions, cautious, prudent, careful with money yet often impo. :d
upon ; sympathetic and changeful. As a rule some
psychic or occult faculty manifests.
Leo Ascending *•
Personality : Good-natured philosophical, generous,
kind-hearted, noble disposition'. Leo natives, are frank,
free, outspoken, independent, impulsive, forceful and
demoitstrative in manner. Their nature is electric ant}
inspiring. They have great hope, faith and fortitude;
are energetic and lavish in the expenditure of energy
and vitality when their sympathy or interest is aroustd.
In affection they are ardent, sincere 'and passionate.
They are philanthropic, charitable, loyal, aspiring, conscientious, adaptable, invetitive and intuitive; are imperious and fond of power and command ; usually popular and’ leaders in jheir social sphere. #They are generally good-tempered, though high-strung and quick to
anger, yet are very forgiving and do not hold a grudge
for long; high ideals. They receive and grant favors
readily and are usually foVtunate in th'e long run. They
sutceed best where they have authority Or hold some
high or responsible position in managing or Executive
departments. Motive temperament. Th*e significator is
the Sun.
Physical Appearance: Broad shoulders, large bones
and muscles, tall, upper part of body better formed

PART III, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES 249
than the lower, thin waist, prominent knees’ upright
carriage ; hair soft and wavy, usually light in £olor with
tendency td baldness; Head full-sized and round, gray
eyes, ruddy or flprid complexion.
Mental Tendencies : t Ambitious, generous, honorable,
frank, warm-hearted, self-confident, fearless, impulsive,
determined, persevering and conscientious; fond of
power and distinction; liking for art; cheerful, optimistic
disposition.
Virgo Ascending
Personality; Modest, conservative, thoughtful, contemplative and industrious. Virgoans have a desire for
wealth but require extra effort to save money; are very
active, not easily contented, and learn readily and
quickly ; have good endurance and do not show their
age. Of a speculative tuiy and often give way to worry
and over-anxiety; are sensitive to surroundings and to
■the conditions o& others. They ai% quite discriminative
and carefur of details. Cautious regarding their own
interests and will not neglect the interests bf othess, being diplomatic, tactful and shrewd. They are prudent,
economical, practical and usually act with forethought.
The Virgo native should avoid drugs and animal foods
as much as possible, and study hygiene in connection
with diet to maintain health. Commercial and business
affairs and matters connected with the earth and its
products succeed under their careful supervision. Usually mental-motive temperament. The planetary significator is Mercury.
Physical Appearance: Average heTght or a little
above, moderately* plump, well fonmed; oval face, dark
hair, eyes and. complexion ; straight nose ; active walk.
Mental Tendencies: Fond of learning, aclive mind,
good, mental tihilities, critical, thoughtful, »«methodical,
ingeifious; sometimes rather undecided, but usually precise though nervous and. lacking self-confidence ; perceptive and somewhat intuitive.

GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
Libra Ascending
Personality: Love justice, rfeatness and order, peace
and harmony, and are usually very courteous, pleasant
and agreeable ‘persons ; although quick in anger, are
easily appeased. They are fondlof boauty in all forms:
in nature, art, music, literature, etc., and can enter with
zest into refined and cultured pleasures and amusements
and greatly enjoy the company and society of brave,
happy, sunny and mirthful people. They are affectionate,
sympathetic, kind, generous and compassionate; idealistic, artistic, adaptable, constructive, intuitive, impressionable and inspirational. They admire modesty and
refinement; are ambitious but dislike uneldan work and
all discord. The best outlet for their talents is in the
professions, and they have ability for lines requiring good
taste, artistic touch and fine finish. Mental-vital temperament. .The planetary significator is Venus.
Ck
Physical Appearance: Well-formed body, tall, slender
in youth but tendency to stoutness in middle age; hair
smooth, brown to black, blue or brovm eyes, Grecian*
nose, round or oval face, features regular," often have
dimples, gocai looking, youthful appearance, good complexion.
Mental Tendlncies: Good mtntal abilities, keen
sense of perception w;th foresight and good comparison,
imaginative or artistic; good-natured, hopeful, cheerful,
genial, humane, just, orderly; usually amorous, loving
but changeful, fond of sdciety and amusements. Like
to “go .places and do things," be in style or up-to-date.
Fond of fine clothes and jewelry.
Scorpio Ascending
Personality: Resrt-vetf, tenacious* determined and
secretive, somewhat# inclined to be suspicious or skeptical and stingingly sarcastic. Ttey are guifck-witted,
quick in speech and action, alert, forceful and positive.
They are aften blunt, brusque and aeenlingly fopd of
contest; nevertheless ^thfcy irfake staunch and spfendid
friends. They possess grit and enterprise that will en
able them to reach high attainments. They accomplish

PART III. DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES 251
their purposes by subtlety and strength of frill, or by
force if • necessary. They have mechanical skill and
much conStructive'(or "destructive) ability. They enjoy
travel, are fonjl of investigating mysteries and things
occult. Although appreciating luxi/Vy, can be very
frugal and economical. They are natural detectives,
sheriffs, bailiffs, chemists, surgeons and contractors, and
gifted in accomplishing things requiring muscular skill
or aggressive enterprise. Motive-vital temperament.
The planetary significator is Mars.
Physical Appearance : Average height or slightly
below, tendency to stoutness or ,-yt least full form, often
square type of face and build of body; thick, dark hair
curling or wavy, sometimes crimpy or frizzy; prominent
brows and perceptive faculties, aquiline or Jewish type
of nose and profile, dusky complexion.
Mental Tendencies: Quick, keen, shrewcf, critical,
penetrating mind and keen judgment. Strong will and
determination ; self-reliant, bold, fixed views. A subtle
1 mind hard Jo ipfluence, not easily imposed upon, willful,
courageou’s, energetic and active when interested but
at other times indolent. Sarcastic or impulsive a#id very
•angry when provoked. Frequently interested in some
form of occult or chemical research apd fond of mystery.
Spnie are very practical, matter-of-fact, executive, good
business men, contractors, etc. They make good officers,
naval men, workers with or dealers in liquids. Inclination to surgery or some practical scientific research or
pursuit. •
Sagittarius Ascending
Personality : Inclined to be jovial, bright, hopeful,
generous and charitable. Love libt?rty and .freedom,
are very independent, dislike'a raster and will allow no
one to order. or drive them about, but are usually goodhumored and honorable. In disposition, franfc, fearless,
impulsive, ‘demonstrative, outspoken, nervotfsly energetic, ambitious, sincere and quick to arrive conclusions.
Thiy are sympathetic asd loving, possess good calculation and foresight, are jntuitive’ and prophetic, and, al-»
.though often appearing blunt or abrupt, yet .they rarely

GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
miss .the 'mark in their deductions. At times they are
restless, cArer-anxious and high-strung. They respect
religious^ customs, enjdy outdobr s'ports, a/e fond of
animals and interested in traval, law, medicine and
philosophy. In 1:he professions or commercial world
Sagittarians are generally aggressive,, progressive and
aspiring, quick to see and take advantage of opportunities and to consummate business arrangements definitely. In speech they go straight "to the point," and aim
directly at the mark. They like wholesale, "big business”
and large financial undertakings. Motive-mental temperafhent. The planetary significator is Jupiter.
PhysicaUAppearance : Tall, slender, well-made figure
inclined to stoop ; generally long or oval face, rounded
forehead, expressive blue or hazel eyes, clear complexion, hair brown or chestnut inclining to baldness especially near the temples; tendency to stamp or scrape the
feet. *
Mental Tendencies: Generous, good-hearted, goodtempered, just, frank? free, cheerful, .charitable and
friendly; active and enterprising; sympathetic, humane
and somewhat impulsive. Inclination for philosophy,
law, medicine or religion ; fond of traveling, voyaging?
and out-of-door sports and exercise^.
Capricorn Ascending
Personality: Serious, quigt, thoughtful, contemplative
nature, possessing dignity and self-esteem enough to
look well- after their interests. They are cautious, prudent, econoViigal anil practioal, and usually act only
after due premeditation. They are ambitious and persevering, and can ‘work hard and long without becoming discouraged. Capable of much 'endeavor where
opportunity is afforded, especially in business. They
possess organizing ability and, beirjg determined and
per&istent, tdso cautious and calculating, of profound
thought and ^oncentrative ability, they, are. able to plan
and carry out* schemas of considerable magnitude. They
• are not demonstrative • in feelyig and do not readily
show theih sympathy ; they prefer ideas to words and.

PART III, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES 253
acts to promise#. They are industrious, self-reliant and
thrifty; rtspect religion, are givten to investigation, interested in’ theology and become very profound in any
subject or scienee undJrtaken. ,If Saturn, the significator, is much afflicted in the horoscope, they meet with
many delays and«-disAppointments, and are inclined to
give way too readily to adverse circumstances ; also restricted by poor health. Otherwise they do well in
matters connected with the earth and its products, and
with large corporations and public utility concerns.
Motive or motive-mental temperament. ,
Physical Appearance: Stature Average to short; generally defeefive walk and liability to rheumatism in the
joints or marks and scars about the knees; sometimes
thin and bony; prominent features usually long and
thin; long or prominent nose, thin neck, long chin, hair
dark or black, not over plentiful, thin beard; usually not
ver/ handsome.
, Mental Tendencies: Self-willed, strong in purpose,
ambitious, .itesePved, pensive and secretive. In disposition quiet, cold, sometimes despondent, ^much mental
ingenuity and fertility, changeable, capricious, Conniving and determined. A great desire for wealth, power,
position and tendenoy to look out for themselves. Ability
for managing and organizing. They succeed by per
severance and forceful, steady action, rather than by
spasmodic effort.
Aquarius Ascending
Personality :* Detesmineti, quiet, patient, unobtrusive
and faithful nature as a rule. Aquarians are philosophical, very humanitarian and usually refined ; fond of art,
music, scenery arid literature. 'In disposition reasonable,
thoughtful, discriminative. Have^ good memory, ^re
clear rea'soners and, very capable of dealing #wath fac.ts.
Everything* in the mental world appeals to them and
they.are sincere and practical, fond of honoi*and dignity,
active in reforms, progressive in ideas and- possess a
sympathetic, good-hearted, pleasant, generous nature.
Have strong likes and dislikes, usually sociable and of

GENETHLIACAL astrology
large acquaintance; intuitive, fond of occult research;
peculiar, radical or eccentric in fomc ways, .They succeed in pursuits where steady application of mind and
concentration of fhought are necessary, *or where sociability and friends are required. They have inventive
genius and literary ability. Mentaf:mofive temperament.
Uranus is the planetary significator.
Physical Appearance: Middle stature, .full or square
build of figure, strong, well formed, tendency to stoutn*ss in middle age; good, clear complexion, oval or long,
fleshy face; hair varies from light to dark, flaxen, brown,
etc.; usually good-looking, friendly countenance.
Mental Tendencies: Intelligent, good memory and
reasoning faculty, very capable of dealing with facts;
possess good concentration and appreciate knowledge.
Kind, humane, self-controlled, constant, persevering,
happy disposition ; ingenious, ijiventive, sometimes incline to psychic or socialistic matters; love for humanizing influences, pursuits and occupations} ,often become physicians; have many friends.
Pisces Ascending
Personality : Kind, Moving, trustful, confiding, sympathetic nature. The disposition is courteous, affable,
hospitable and methodical. Pisceans are idealistic, imaginative, impressionable, emotional, mediumistic, receptive and quiet. Apt in detail and orderly in manner.
Quick to observe deficiencies .in others or lack of completeness in anything. They are usually lacking in confidence and self-esteem, are modest and timid and hesitate about putting themselves forward. At times they
are inclined to be over-anxious and become disheartened,
indeysive and lacking in life and energy. Capable of
developing jine psychometric, telepafthic, intuitive and
inspirational faculty. They love music, scenery and
animals, and tfsually succeed inoccupations that reqpire
industry, discretion and, power to make the best of circumstances, and in any employment that brings some
kind of chsfnge, or where attention to details and com- ‘

PART III, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES 255
pleteness is necessary. Vital temperament. TJie planetary signiftcator is Neptune.
Physical Appearance .* Middle, to shqrt stature with
short limbs, inclining to corpulence especially in later
years; full or fleshy fale, pale complexion, tendency to
double chin ; full eyes, wide mouth, plentiful hair, dark
brown to black, small hands and feet.
Mental Tendencies: Quick in understanding, inspirational, versatile, easy-going, good-natured, uncertain,,
changeful, psychically receptive, emotional and fond of
music; passionate, affectionate, charitable; sometimes
reserved, secretive or mysterious in their way of doing
things
"Astrology Is astronomy brought to earth and applied to the
affairs of man.”— Emerson.

QKNBTHL1ACAL ASTROLOGY
INFLUENCE OF THE PLANETS
Ilf THE TWELVE ZODIACAL SIGNS
Difference Between Signs and Houses
r
One of the stumbling blocks in the path of the beginner in delineation is to differentiate properly between the influence of a planet by sign and house.
Mediaeval astrologers frequently spoke of the “houses
of the zodiac,” a term confusing to students, as there
are no houses in the zodiac, — the signs constitute the
zodiac.
A "house” is one of the twelve pyramidal shaped
divisions of the horoscope, which seem to have their
apex oi\ earth and their outlet in the zodiac. The influence of a planet passing through any one of these
divisions is colored both by the nature of the house
and sign; consequently it should be read both “on earth
and in heaven."
Thft houses deal with things, mundane and material;
with the objective mind and environmental affairs. Thu
signs govern the (Subjective states of mind, metabolistic
processes, feelings, tendencies and consequent mertal
attitudes, originating Within the depths of our being and
which may or may not manifest outwardly on ’the plane
of action.
This- chapter deals with the influence of planets by
sign only. • The suggestions , given at the beginning of
the chapter entitled, "Influence of Planets in the Mundane Houses,” page 113, should be carefully read and
applied "here. The first and most important step is to become thoroughly familiar with the intrinsic nature of the
signs. A planet naturally partakes to some extent of the
nature of the sign in which it is located, which influence,
added to its own individual characteristics, produces a
“blend” calling for fine discrimination in its analysis.
For inftance: The active, enterprising Mars when in
Capricorn; takes on some of the condensing, combining.

PAST III, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES 2ST
* organizing influence of that sign. The energy of Mars
is toned do wo by the reserve of Capricorn; the reticence
of Capricorn is stimulated by the enthusiasm of Mars.
Hence we see a good friend of influence resulting in
the ability to organize and execute matters in a practical manner.
Mars in Libra, however, would not make such a good
blend of influence. Here Mars is in his detriment. The
peace-loving, passive Libra, sign of unity and dealings
with others, would be disturbed by the aggressive, positive Mars, indicating ardent, rash, impulsive love affairs,
difficulty in marriage, strife in partnership and open
enmities.
If the nature of each planet and sign is well learned
there will be little difficulty in reading a horoscope.
“BTWy new discovery to physics, cheifllstry* metaphysics or
astronomy, simply further astr logfses scientific though t/'j**- From
"Ho# Planets Affect Too.”

GENETHLIACAL ASTKOLOGY
MOON
Her Influence In the Twelv'e Zodiacal Signs
The Moon Rules the Sign Cancer
People ruled by the Moon are usually sensitive, emotional and domesticated, possessing a love for home and
kindred. They usually are posted regarding the family
tree, are very patriotic and have a good memory for
events in history. They are interested in public conditions of some sort or other. They are very sympathetic
and the, women are easily led to tears. Having a fertile
imagination and being also very conscientious, they meet
with many ups and downs in life. They are quite receptive or mediumistic and frequently possess musical
talent. They like water and natural beauty and should
never live for long in a dry, barren place.
When undeveloped, that fs, unenlightened, they may
be either too “easy (going” and given go s.elf-gratificatio'n
and over-indulgence in eating, drinking or pleasure, or
are, too chungeable, negative and uncertain.
The developed Lunar individual has passed from the
brooklet stage to that of "still waters running deep,”
capable of assisting'in floating mighty affairs for public
need and good.
As is •the case with Wtercurial and Neptunian persons,
so should Lunarians abstain from animal flesh as food,
and especially when physically indisposed. The Moon
represents ‘the stomach and when afflicted leaves its
natives liable do diseases incident thereto, and as it is
said that many of( the- animals slaughtered for market
,are diseased, they may be a menace people with a
sensitive stomach) as have those ruled by- the Moon.
. Physifcians say that plenty of wholesome fruit and vegetables will do much to banish worry and .maintain health.
For employment <they do^well as nurses, cooks, confectioners, grocers, gardeners, matrons, dealers , in

PART III. DBI/fNEATIONS FOB HOROSCOPES 259
liquids, stewa*rds^ clerks, companions and other "Occupations of a common, public or fluctuating nature.
In astrology we refer to the Moon as being cold,
moist, feminine, fruitfuf and convertible in character,
that is, being fortunate or unfortunate according to its
position and aspects insthe horoscope.
It nrf«s public or common commodities such as groceries, liquids, etc., that pertain to the domestic side of
life. Monday is* the day of the Moon. Metal, silver.
Astrologically Considered
The Moon exerts considerable influence over#the general or ordinary and common affairs of daily life. It
makes a complete transit of the zodiac every 27 days, 7
hours and 43 minutes. In other words, it makes one
complete revolution through the horoscope of every
individual in that length of time. As it passes through
the various "houses” and forms the different “aspects"
to the planets' places at birth, it produces conditions,
events, feelings arjd states of mind <*r health accordingly.
As no two ‘horoscopes are exactly alike, the Moon’s
monthly transit produces all manner of varying cpnditians.
Things Ruled by the Mqon
The Moon in ancient times wa^s called Isis, Essqs,
Luna, Eleusis and the Virgin Mere. She has dominion
over the ebb and flow of the tides and clear, virgin pure
water. She is significant of* things of a constantly
changing or fluctuating character; is feminine, nocturnal, cold, moist, phlegmatic and fruitful. She jrules the
breast and stomach, left eye*of a male and eight eye of
a female. The Moon rules the public in general, liquids,
public commodities such as groceries, kitchen utensils;
fresh water fish, laflndry,' baking, nftrsing, bathing, sailing, brewing, and females generally.
iStoon in Ariel
j
Strong irnagining faculty, positive, forceful, masterful,
independent, self-reliant, courageous and practical. En-

QENBTHLIACAL ASTRO LOOT
thusiastic in whatever line is of interest 'at that time;
changeable, restless, uneasy and dislikfes to .be ordered
about or held to any one line. Generally quick-tempered,
incline'd to be persistent, impulsive and aggressive. Imbued with activity, energy, enterprise, originality and
inventive ability. Fond of traveling and of original and
independent ventures. Will attempt to hew out a path
of their own and apt to be at the head of some undertaking or in some way prominent in their sphere of influence. If afflicted, some danger of, drowning and
trouble through women, changes of occupation and
^position. Indicates aches or pains in the head.
Moon in Taurus
This bestows a courteous and affable disposition inclined 'to friendship, love and marriage. Determined,
and not to be thwarted in their aims. The nature is conservative and resists forced 'changes or outside influences. Hopeful, ambitious and desirpus , of excelling.*-
Good hearted, sympathies easily aroused. Tends to the
acquisition of friends, possessions, houses and lands.
Favors occupations connected with the earth and its
products and a}l dealings in such things; success in
chemistry or hygiene, in business and in places near, the
water; sometimes assistance in a financial or business
way through the opposite sex. Intuitive and as a rule
has good judgment.
An -inclination for pleasure, luxury, music, singing and
the good things of fife. Gives friendships of quality and
good positioYi.
Moon in Gemini
n
, 'This location of the Moon gives the subject an agreeable, warm-hearted, sympathetic, humane, progressive
and ingenious nature, with the capacity' of being very
reserved in some sna^tefs, sufch as personal or domestic
matters,, but fluent concerning local or national affairs.

PART Ilfr DELINEATIONS FOR BOBOSCSOraa 261
Strengthens and enlivens Ahe intellect, inclines to literature and gains pleasure fjom books or scientific pursuits.
Gives an active Body and a versatile, receptive mind,
responsive to new ideas £nd capable of following artistic,
literary, or professronal ‘occupations.
Dislikes quarreling and warfare. Subject to many
changes and some journeys. Through lack of caution,
discretion or prutlence apt to be drawn into embarassing
or difficult positions.
Moon in Cancer
I S
This indicates one whose desire is to work along lines
of least resistance; friendly, sociable and domestic in
manner and usually much attached to his own ; feeling
and emotion are active and> usually for good. Somewhat
changeable, influenced greatly by the surroundings and
is sensitive to .outside influences; in*other words, senses
conditions psychically (consciously or unconsciously).
The native is kind and agreeable to all, sympathetic
and humane. Sometimes allows imposition without an
act of resentment; sometimes is elected to posts of
honor. Good, conscientious, sensitive, superior nature;
hard struggles, great obstacles, voyages. Loves traveling, also home ; attraction to the mother. It favors
dealing with the public in liquids, chemistry, catering,
shipping and a residence near the water. Fond of the
occult, antique and curious things.
There is some ability for acting and expressing the
thoughts or emotions of others, ,and usually for poetry
or music also.
Moon in Leo
j a
This 'makes one ambitious, self-confitleht, self-reliant,
loyal, honorable, generous* in money matters^ highmiftded, magnanimous, candid . and warm-hearted; a
persevering, lively and penetrating mind; organising

QSNETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY •_
ability ; generally a leader among bis associates ; popular
with 'the opposite sex; sincere love; fond of home and
honor; particular in dress and very Orderly in conduct.
It favors intuition and genius £nd gives a free-hearted
nature with a love for pleasure, music, art, sports.
This location of the Moon has a tendency to uplift the
native, mentally and socially, and place him in positions
of trust, respect and responsibility or in control or
' management of enterprises.
Moon in Virgo
Good mental ability, receptive mind, good memory
and ability to learn easily; capable of following some
intellectual pursuit. Fondness for science in general
and things occult. Often has clairvoyant, psychometric
or intuitive faculty.* The native is usually quiet, unostentatious and unpretentious, though talented and quietly ambitious, preferring to earn his way through merit
of mental ability; fertile imagination, fondness *for
change, travel .and investigation,
Although somewhat reserved, has many friends, especially of the opposite sex ; usually has secret sorrows
through marriage. Trouble with stomach and bowels
until proper discretion is observed in diet.
There*' is likelihood of many short journeys and
changes. This location favors a variety of occupations
in literature oi as teacher, secretary, bookkeeper, clerk,
messenger, traveler, chemist, druggist, confectioner;
sometimes success with the earth and jts products, but
more .especially when the subject has an earthly sign
*rising at birth, or the planet rulin'g the Arcendant in an
earthly sign.
This location' of the Moon makes a good, trustworthy
servant, and the native is' usually fortunate through
those who serve under. him, unless a malefic be in the ,
sixth house.

PART III, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES 263
Moon in Libr^
This location of the Jdoon, taken alone, favors or inclines to unions, partnerships and general popularity.
Fond of pleasure, society and amusements and the company of young people. The native is affectionate, goodnatured, agreeable, courteous, warm-hearted, affable
mirthful, inclined to love and marriage; kind in manner
and makes friends easily. Liking for fine clothes, adornment, luxury, approbation and all refining and harmonious influences.
The life is considerably affected by other people and
the Libran usually prefers, to work in association with
another.
Appreciation for music, painting, scenery and all the
fine arts generally ; considerable skill and ingenuity
^long these lines if Mercury is in good aspect.
Moon in Scorpio
j ra
Inclines to vigorous activity. The native has enterprise,' will, determination, practical ability ; is firm and
self-confident enough to push forward and gain success
in undertakings and take care of his own ; somewhat
abrupt and impulsive. It gives a fondness foii pleasure,
comfort and desire to satisfy the tastes. The nature is
energetic, forceful, independent, masterful, aggressive,
courageous and positifre ; will not toleratd imposition.
nor be swerved from his purpose by opposition, yet will
often sacrifice a great deal in return for kindness j’sometimes quick-tempered. It inclines to interest in tl)e
occult or mysterious in nature, and, if there are any conforming aspects, will advocate and assist in. darrying
out revolu^onary changes, employing sarcasm or satire.
Taken alone the location signifies .attachments or
attractions and difficultie* with fhc opposite sex and
irtharmony in the marriage state. Dangers ^through
voyages. To women, it inclines to dangerous childbirth.

QBNETHLIACAL ASTROLOOT
Moon in Sagittarius
Shows the native to be generous, benevolent, humanitarian, charitable, kind-hearted, ‘sociable, good-humored,
jovial, sometimes quickly angered but forgiving, of
ready promise, hopeful, frank and free; shows love of
beauty, harmony and sports.
- Usually has a quick, restless and unsettled manner,
either in mind or .body, and often both. Inclines to
travel or, change the place of residence frequently; active, never averse to physical exercise, a quick walker
and worker; fond of children, pets and sports; some inclination for the investigation of religion, philosophy,
law, commerce and foreign affairs generally. A natural
teacher*; very philosophical and often has something of
the prophet in his nature, usually being correct in judgment regarding the outcome of movements or enterprises.
Ingenious, talented ard has ability for science. *
Thjs location of the Moon tends to bring one out before the public in some manner and he may assist in
carrying on grfat religious, educational or political
reforms. Benefits through women. It is somewhat
significant of inheritance if Sagittarius occupies the cusp
of the eighth house.
f
Moon in Capricorn
Tends to bring one before the public in some manner,
but whether beneficially or otherwise, depends upon the
other indications in the chart.
• If the* Moon is well aspected at* birth, especially by
the Sun, m$y attract attention as a prominent aijd re- ,
spectable person. Jf the environment has been good it
may manifest as rulership, generalship and administrative ability.

PAST HI, DELINEATIONS FOB HOgOgCOPga 266
If the mental rulers (*) were afflicted and the early
training neglected it gives a vague, indeterminate mind,
lack of creative energy although , ambitious ; misfortune
through women and lax control of the appetites. Usually has enemies whotherMnerited or not, and some drawback or difficulty attached to the occupation or reputation of the native. If the aspects in the chart are
generally good it indicates honors and prominence; the
native has ability to interest others and inspire confidence; a good organiser and welfare worker.
This location is also indicative of 'care and caution in
money matters. The nature is often too cold ahd calculating and at times too regardless of the feelings of
others.
Moon in Aquarius
J ss
Active, intuitional, agreeable, friendly and courteous
disposition. .The ’’native is sociable? and sympathetic in
manner; broad, humane, independent an<J somewhat
unconventional. Gives liking for the strange and curious
with an inclination for subjects that are unusual, original or eccentric; inventive ability.
It tends to political, educational' and scientific work,
interest in • astrology, occult matters generally, secret
societies, etc. It gives a good faculty for image-making;
mental sensitiveness; sorrow and changes occasioned
by friends.
Troubles through women and liability to sorrow and
wandering life, if badly aspected.
, Moon in Piscea *
J X
Kind, benevolent, quiet, retiring, sympathetic, fond of
luxury? comfort, diversity, ahange, beauty and harmony.
Meets with many misfortupes and bbstacles which tend
* Son, Moon, Marcary and ruler* of third and ninth cuspy.

QE.NFTHLIACAL ASTBOLOGY
to make the native ^eel irresolute, inert, .downhearted
and eisily discouraged at timps. It gives a taste for
reading and keen perception of romance, having a
powerful and fruitful imaginatipn. As speaker, writer
or composer he is copious, fluent, earnest and very correct in details.
Inconstancy is indicated in the love affairs; generally
has a hard time saving money. If the ’Sun also is in a
'watery sign or a watery sign ascending the native is
likely to grow corpulent.
r
With the Moon in this location, the native is often
very receptive, mediumistic or inspirational and responsive to psychic conditions generally. Suffers both physically and mentally through adverse environment, uncongenial surroundings and misunderstanding.
"To deny the Influence of the etere le to deny the wledom and
providence of God.” — Tycbo.Brahe

PART HI, DELINEATIONS FOR gOROSCOPgS 28T
MEpCURY
Influence <in the* Twelve -Zodiacal Signs
Mercury rule* two signs : Gemini and Virgo
• In astrology the influence of the planet Mercury is
known to be variable, convertible, neutral and dualistic.
That is, it expfesses a nature in accordance' with the
character of the planet which it aspects: benefic when'
with fortunate planets or when in favorable aspect, and
malefic otherwise.
Mercury lias particular influence over the nervous
system, bowels, hands, arms, shoulders, collar-bone,
tongue, sense of sight, perception, understanding, interpretation and expression.
Persons who respond to Mercury as a ruling planet
are active minde4, quick to discern, eager to acquire
knowledge, fond of investigation, inquiry .“research, exploration and are usually much given to ' reading. If
Mercury is well placed in the horoscope at birth they
make good linguists, orators, writers, reporters, teachers, .secretaries, etc., being fully capable of maintaining
any position where adaptability, dexterity, perception,
skill, quick wit, imagination and good memory are required. They usually conduct, their work in an orderly,
methodical, systematic and handy manner, being adept
at simplifying arrangements.
But when Mercury is ill placed at birth ana amictea
the native has the same inclinations as those just mentioned but not the- expert power o$ execution and they
do better as clprks, printers, bookkeepers, typists, eta.,
carrying out ideas rather than creating them.
When hfercury is afflicted it inclines to excessive
’ nervoas activity both of bo,dy arjd mind, andninless controlled by will power the tendency Is ’to worry, haste
and irritability, which inclines to mistakes, forgetfulness
and controversy. There is alv> a consequent effect on
the health, detrimental to the ^operation of the bowels

GBNgTHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
and other organs previously mentioned as being under
this planet’s dominion. At suth times it will be noticed
that speech is impedejl by lack* of ability for ex;,- csion
while those w'ho are given to stammering will notice
added impediment.
The influence of the afflicted Mercury may be much
improved by cultivating continuity, concentration, deliberation and patience.
Among the ancients, Mercury was known as Thoth,
Hermes, and “The 'Messenger of the Gods.” Its speed
in orbit ft approximately 95,000 miles per 'hour. It was
usually portrayed as a youth, flying with wings at his
heels, bearing a caduceus made of olive wood about
which were twined two serpents, the rod being surmounted with a pair of wings. This symbol well represents the essential qualities of the planet, duality,' speed
and wisdom. It is noticed that Mercurial people have
a youthful appearance.
Thing* Ruled by Mercury
Mercury rules^ that part of the intellect which is susceptible to cultivation ; it also rufes the sense of sight
and understanding. It governs the solar plexus, bowels,
lungs, hands, arms, tongue and the nervous system
generally. Its colors are blue-gray and dove, also spotted
mixtures.. Its nature is 'neutral and dualistic. Metal,
quicksilver.
Mercury* in Aries
-Impulsive and fiery, quick in thougot and speech,
good in repartee at argument and often contentious,
antagonistic and disputative ; expressive, 'earnest and
demonstrative; apt to enlarge or exaggerate uncon- (
sciously, bpt is liberal, inventive, unique, interesting and
clever.
Fond of reading, writing, literature and literary people. fnclined to enter qaickly into projects and given

PAjrr hi. D»uJfnTKM<g rom horoscopes
to change of opinions. 'The faults ure want of mental
continuity, lack o*f order and method, and general restlessness, althfough a ’friertdly aspect from Saturn will
largely correct thqpe and* give mujh more stability.
Mvcufy in Taurus
Pleasant and happy disposition, fond of the opposite
sea, pleasure, recreation, music, art and intellectual or
refined amusement. Very practical and determined
mind, especially where mental development is concerned.
Good reasoning and judgment, persevering and somewhat obstinate; however, discreet and diplomatic although of fixed opinions and strong likes and dislikes;
desirous of acquiring money, possessions and an established income.
ft
Mercury in Gemini
Quick, ingenious, clever, inventive and resourceful
mind. Sympathetic, unbiased, very seldom prejudiced,
usqplly good-humored and generous. Perceptive, observing, shrewd and executive in detail; good, orator, lawyer
or business man. Informed on topics of the day.
Fond of travel, change, novelty, speculation, reading,
literature, science and the acquisition of knowledge,
especially of the occult.
Mercury in Cancer
Diplomatic, tactful, discreet,, faithful and goodnatured. The intellect is clear and reasonable with-,
retentive powers.* Readily adapt themselves to surrounds
ing conditions and capable of changing their opinions <
quickly; sociable disposition. Fond of pleasure, picnics
apd fanyly reunions.
Very impressionable and sensitive* Easily influenced
■by Jcindness and encouraged by approbation.

GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
The ‘ mind is somewhat restless anti requires an
abundance of material for reflection. Usually spiritually
inclined and interested in psychic Investigation. Appreciation for the poetry of motiop or of rhyme and music;
liking for joueneys water and public entertainment.
Mercury irf'Leo*
tf a
Denotes an ambitious, confident, persistent, determined, lofty mind, fiery, quick-tempered. Kind-hearted
and sympathetic; dignified and aspiring; intuitive intellect and high, noble ideals; will seldom stoop to low
actions. 1 Positive mentality and governing, controlling
or organizing ability. Will-power of progressive- and
expansive development; concentration. Fond of children,
pets, music, singing, drama, fine arts, sports, pleasures;
tendency to self-indulgence. Danger through drugs, etc.,
which affect the heart action. <•
Mercury in Virgo
8 IK
Good intellect: comprehensive, cautious, prudent, discriminative, practical, versatile, inventive, intuitive, perceptive and possesses ability for *study and memorizing.
Power of persuasiop ; a good scholar or linguist"; fluency as a writer, well informed, capable in detail,
sequence and expression ; innate love for mystery or for
occult investigation.
Quiet .or somewhat serious nature but at times critical
and skeptical ; must see, kitow and understand thoroughly before convinced. Taste for mathematics or literature ,' capable of undertakings that require ability, planping and dexterity.* Interest in hygiene, prophylactics,
qursing, healing oj chemistry.
Mercury in Libra
A refined, good and broafl mind; quiet, just, tender,
dispassionate disposition ; fond of comparison, capable •

PART III, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES 271
of judgment "and reason. Taste ?or mental pursuits,
often musical, splendid natural abilities, aptitude for
delicate mathematical wrtrk or invention. Very .favorable location for jll intellectual development. Good for
club, fraternal, or social welfare work.
Mercury in Scorpio
A bold and sbmewhat obstinate, sarcastic,' forceful,
positive and reckless nature, but ingenious, keen, shrewd*
and desirous of gaining knowledge ^and mental ability.
Often has troublesome friends, relatives and nsighbors ;
fond of the opposite sex and partial to company and
pleasure-seeking; many disappointments. Fond of occult and mystical subjects and the different "ologies”
and “isms” ; very careful of personal interests ; somewhat critical, curious, suspicious and mistrustful. Mesmeric Ability, suggestive mental healing qualities, mental
resourcefulness, fertility ^atfd practical utility.
hfercury in Sagittarius
The nature is ambitious, sincere, just,* generous, very
independent and often rebellious, with some tendency
towards rashness or impulse. The* mind becomes prophetic, wise- and philosophical, inclining to freedom of
thought and speech. Very actitK mentally or physically,
somewhat changeable but progressive. Appreciation for
the beautiful in nature, fond of change and travel, also
of home and fatrftly; lijces authority, also likes sports
and animals. Inclination toward mental development
through philosophy, religion, science, la-& or medicine.
.Mercury in Capricorn
8 YJ
Acute, sharp, .penetrating, tactful, curious, diplomatic
and critical. Somewhat suspicions, ^peevish, fickle, discontented or restless, Caneful, economical ant^ pain1 stajcing, especially towards perfecting the intellect. Con-

QENBTHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
stantly busy about something. Interest and ability for
literature, science, chemistry, philosophy aqd'the occult.
Influenced only through kindness. Serious, thoughtful
contemplative and practical nature. Observant, discriminating; organizing ability.
Mercury in Aquarius
The mind is refined, comprehensive, critical, original,
‘penetrative, observing and keen in judgment of human
nature, possessing «good reasoning and concentrative
powers. 'Makes acquaintances readily.
Fondness for science generally, also the occult and
metaphysical. Apt in study, mathematics, invention,
busine^ methods, political or lodge work.
Great readers, deep thinkers, sociable and kinVl; expounders of humanitarian {Ainciples. Delight in and
seek the company o{ intellectual and elderly persons. ,
Mercury in Pisces
The intellect gains in knowledge not so much by deep
and profound application to study, as by intuitive perception. Possess an understanding not acquired from
books; know things in a peculiar manner; rarely at a
loss to ejfjplain any condition and are often called "walking encyclopedias."
The mind is imaginative, impressional and quickly
adapted to then requirements of the moment; possess
great absorptive capacity and the power to memorize.
Tends to psychic or mediumistic qualities but attended
with some danger pr inconvenience through over-receptivity in. nature. Fond of pleasure, recreation and
traveling, especially on the water. Numerous abilities,
often change employment, good judge of hufnan nature.'
Analytical, diplomatic," cautious, just, good-humored,
versatile,, ingenious and dextirous. Interest in hygiene,
prophylactics, nursing, ljealing, hospitals.

PART III, DELINEATIONS FOR JtQROSCQFTIS 273
. VfNUS .
Her fnfluenae in tfie Twelve Zodiacal Signs
Venus rules *two*«igns : Taurus and Libra
.Venus is fruitful and productive, and is called a feminine planet as she governs the gentler and more refined attributes. * Men and women ruled by this planet
are noticeably kind or sociable.
When well . aspected in a chart Venus endows the
native with a pleasant or handsome countenance, symmetrical form and graceful manners. Inclines to harmony, and as she rules the sense of touch, favors art,
music and decoration. By their pleasing personality
the subjects of Venus are natural peacemakers; their
refined'naturcs soften the ruffled feelings of friends and
convert anger to pleasure. As Venus is the promoter
of pleasure th^se people are splendid entertainers and
excellent hosts.
When adversely aspected in the horoscope of birth
she bestows less beauty and the native is apt to cultivate the social and pleasure-giving tendencies to an extent which is detrimental to other Interests, for when
living too much on the personal plane the real, or finer,
attributes are submerged and tbe emotions dominate.
When afflicted Venus produces unsatisfactory domestic conditions, anxiety in lQve, difficulty with friends
or through finances. She rules the skin, throat, reins,
ovaries and internal generative organs, Jnd these *are
adversely affected by over-indulgenc* in amusements, ^
eating and drinkiqg.
Venus aids tlje facultfcs of comparison and perteption
as related to order, form, size, weight, color, j^ine and
time. Also acts on conjugality, aruativeness, friendship,
mirthfulness and agreeableness. On tTie days when
yenus is well aspected by the Moon or other pldnets,
the Activities of those faculties .are accentuated and
Manifest the best of which the native is then capabip,

GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
according to the moral status or soul unfo'dment, and
they ,are conversely affected In the same ‘manner when
Venus is afflicted by transit or by directions in the progressed horoscope.
The law of the universe is in operation continually
and manifesting largely through the planetary system
with both positive and negative forces, which we term
good and adverse, and it requires effort to maintain
equilibrium in the counter-balancing elements, but it is
the effort that brings progressive development. Venusians particularly require that effort to keep their finer
sensibilities attuned.
Things Ruled by Venus
Venus is feminine in nature. She rules the sense of
touch and has much to do with the disposition. She
inclines to all that appertairl: -to the higher attributes of
the mind : music, ringing, poetry, painting, drama and
all refined amusements and adornment. She is beneficial
and fruitfal and expresses through the character of an
individual by generosity, good humor and love. Colors
are all the pasgtel shades and especially the clear blue of
turquoise ; some also give to Venus the clear red of
crimson. Metal, cepper.
Ve(nus in Aries
Fondness for travel, nussic, painting, sculpture, decor1
ative art, singing, poetry, romance, theatres, entertainment and all genteel muscular and mental recreation.
The nature is ardent, affectionate, demonstrative,
’generops in the bestowal of affection, fond of love and
admiration, warm-hearted, passionate and attracted to
friends &f the opposite sex.
This location of Venus ^inclines to popularity, many
friends and, if other testimonies in the chart warrant, an
early or hasty marriage. However, there are usually

PART III, DELINEATIONS FOR qnROSrnP^g 275
many inharmonies in Jhe marital relation. The disposition is charitable and the feeling and sympathies quickly
respond to appeal^for worthy assistance ;#free and generous in gifts and expenditures.
Venus in Taurus
This location of Venus endows the native with deep
feelings ami lasting emotions; an affectionate and faithful love nature. Precise, careful ^and correct with
regard to form, and custom in connection with pleasure,
sociability and friendship. Fixed and stable in feelings,
decided and tenacious in opinions. Fond of money for
the pleasure and comfort it brings and generous with
it in that respect.
Venui in Taurus is generally favorable for money and
possessions gained by the *native’s personal efforts in
business or profession and by the occupations of Venus.
If other testimonies in the chart warrant, it assists to
gain by legacy, partnership or marriage. The location
inclines to marriage, but it is sometimes delayed.
Ven&s in Gemini
The native may find pleasure^and profit from travel
and Mercurial pursuits. Money is gained from more
than one source; several occupations. If Mercury is in
good aspect, or the education complete, much ban be
accomplished through wrftings* speaking, music, art and
drama. This location of Venus tends to refine the fpelings and intellect, giving clear ideas, jptuition, originality, inventive ability, good humor, frendliness, sociability and keep appreciation for all light, airy, m,ental ■
recreations.
Dual Jpve kffairs, inconstancy or tendency 'to flirt,
likelihood of several love affairs, ong with a relative;
many loving friends. Venus fn Gemini inclines ^•marriage, and- if other testimonies in the chart permit, more
Hian one union.

QBNETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
If unafflicted, much good-will between brethren,
cousjns and neighbors. Spiritual tendencies of a progressive or mystical nature. ,
Venus in Qanc<jr
This location gives love of home, domestic attractions,
strong "affection for the mother. The nature is sympathetic, kind-hearted, loving, receptive, imaginative
and quickly responsive to the emotions. Several love
affairs, secret attractions, union with one of occult
tendencies or with considerable difference in age.
Venus in Cancer is not wholly fortunate for marriage,
as it indicates obstacles, either on account of parents,
money or occupation; unforeseen difficulties. Friendships among inferiors and connection with seme obscure, unpopular or plebiait occupation.
Ability in occultWts, psychic research .and in matters
connected., with the unseen world; love for mystical
religion. Gain by matters associated with water, refreshments and, if other indications in the chart show it,
gain through 'houses, land or parents. Mediumistic gifts.
Venus in Leo
The nature is sympathetic, charitable, kind-hearted,
free add generofis. Earnest, sincere and ardent in affection. The native is attracted'to the opposite sex, fond
of .social display, pleasure, friends, entertainment and
amusements of ajl sorts. There may be real talent for
something signified by Venus: music, poetry, singing,
actiqg, art, etc.
Gain .through young people, superiors, those of good
position1 and social s^andiqg. If other testimonies in the
chart warrant, ‘the native wjll gain by judicious investment, speculation, inheritanc and by occupations connected with pleasure..

PART III, DELINEATIONS FOR HOflOSCORE!? 277
Venus jn Virgo*
3 TIR
Venus in Virgo h<j§ a, tendency to endow the native
with a quiet nature and a deep sympathy seldom expressed. Some delay and disappointment in love, secret
or ‘dual attachments, union with one of a different
station, possibly ay employee, invalid or a doctor.
Money is gained through servants or subordinates or
by the native himself occupying such positions; gain by
matters connected with drugs, medicine, nursing, food,
farming, gardening and through vocations associated
with the earthly elements. If other testimonies in the
chart permit, gain by careful speculation, investment
and through the partner.
Venus iit Libra
8 es
Contributes to kindness, sympathy, pure and refined
affections and rich love nature. It conduces to marriage,
friendships, sociability, popularity, a fruitful union and
talented offspring.
Venus in Libra gives a love for fine arts, music, poetry, singing, p'ainting, drama, ojjera and all refined,
cultured amusements and social functions.
Preference for friends and associates* among philosophical people and ’those of gcTod social standing, also
affection for cousins or relatives.
The native may earn money througtf the things signified by Venus, and, if other testimonies in the chart
permit, will gain through marriage and partnership.*
.Venus in Scorpio
*The native is free, generous ant} even lavish in expenditures. Money may be earnedvhrough the watery*.

GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
elements, catering to the tastes or by ’matters connected
with- the dead and* if other testimonies in the chart
warrant, gain by gifts, legacy; partnership or marriage,
but there wifi be some delay or trouble in connection
with them.
This location of Venus increases the passions and
emotions and gives a love of sensation, luxury dnd
pleasure; ardent in love, demonstrative in affection. It
attracts to the opposite sex and brings trouble, disappointment, delay or loss in courtship or marriage, sorrow through disagreement or jealousy, attacks upon the
honor, death of partner.
Trouble or failure in social affairs ; friends with mystical or occult tendencies, also friendships with some of
doubtful repute. If Venus is much afflicted, liable to
death by poison or by suicide due to unhappy alliances.
Yenus in Sagittarius
This location of Venus refines the nature, making the
native light-hearted, impressionable, intuitive, imaginative, prophetic, generous and ofloyal intentions, fond of
beauty, fine arts, traveling, voyaging, romance, animals,
and all out-of-door sports and amusements. It inclines
to charity, benevolence and justice; to religion of a
mystical or spiritual nature ; to respect for literary and
intellectual work, philosophies, philanthropy and all lines
leading to harnfony and involving the higher attributes
of the mfnd.
Money may b«^ gained from two sources and through
things signified by the sign Sagittarius, also through
horsps, shipping, traveling, sports, etc., and if other
testimonies in the chart agree, 'through speculation, investment, legacy and partnership.
The love nature is suspectible and attracted to the
opposite sex. This location inclines to more than one
union and affection fpr a foreigner or one from a* con-

PART III, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES 279
siderable distance. Gives many friends, some of good
position and social standing. Friendship with partner's
relatives and friends among educators, scientists, ministers and marintrs.
Vent* in Capricorn
This location .tends to uplift the native and'place him
in positions of trust, responsibility, authority and profit,
giving the favor of employers, superiors and elders.
It inclines- to business, commerce, banking, investments, stocks, shares and executive positions which
bring contact with many, also to affairs connected with
the earthly elements. It conduces to social and business
popularity, friends of high standing with gain and advancement through them.
The love nature is ambitious, diplomatic and careful
of honor. Marrihge is usually tSr convenience or for
social purposes. There is disappointment »in love, domestic unhappiness, coldness or indifference on the part
of the partner. If other testimonies in the chart agree,
marriage is delayed fbr reasons arising out of age, parents; money or occupation. Either the native or the
partner is likely to be older, more serious, calculating,
wealthy, or’of a different position in life, or hold a different and maybe an indifferent Attitude.
If Venus is afflicted here it gives liability to* business
treachery through associated; loss and troiAle through
alliances with inferiors or those of doubtful repute.
Venus in Aquarius
This location of Venus gives fondness fty pleasure
Und social life.’ The nati\te makes fpeyids easily and
readily forms acquaintances with • strangers. Friends
among inferiors and also with those of weaifth and
refinement.

GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
The nature is intuitive, philosophical, generous, reserved in opinions and,sincere in convictions; liking and
ability for fine arts and all cultured and intellectual pursuits. Fond of, romance and pleasure, friends among
the opposite sex, faithful and earnest in affection, secret
alliances, remarkable or strange, duddfcn and unexpected
experiences or events in love, union with one of Uranian
nature ; possibly marriage in middle life or later years,
and to one of different age.
' Indicates gain financially through friends, societies
and public enterprise^. If other testimonies in the chart
agree, it signifies gain through partnership, association,
companies and firms, also through speculation, investment and inheritance. Many hopes and 'wishes realized.
Venus in Pisces
Venus in Pisces bestows a nature that is charitable,,
philanthropic, easily moved to sympathy', ■ inclined to
relieve suffering and to assist the weak or afflicted; interested in work connected with institutions. The nativ,e
is compassionate, sensitive, psychic, mediumistic, emotional, idealistic and inspirational. f
Fond of all things beautiful : poetry, musi.c, painting
and fine arts generally. Cheerful, genial, hospitable,
fond of society and friendly intercourse ; desirous of
peace, ease, comfort and luxury ; at times indolent.
Money is gained through friend!;, charity, gifts, Venusian occupations or through obscure, subordinate or
plebian pursuit. Tljere .is apt to be more than one
murriage and the native may be careless or fickle in
matters, of affection. Attraction to an mferijor; secret
alliance, df Venus is much afflicted’ here thje native may
have a ha^i time gaining money, or if he possesses it
will lose heavily through frayid, deception and unccrup-"
ulous methods and maybe by{his own action. Difficulty,
detrimeiV and loss through intrigue ; obstacles, delays
and trouble in marriage..

PART III, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES 281
MARS
His Influence in the Twelve Zodiacal Signs*
Mars rules two signs: Aries and Scorpio
Mars is significant of energy, the form that energy
assumes depending upon its position, aspects and location in the horoscope. Manifests as hot, dry ^nd masculine and has nfuch to do with the ambitions, desires
and animal nature.
People ruled by Mars are noticeably ambitious, positive and fond of leadership. Being quite inventive and
mechanical they become good designers, builders and
managers and usually make their way to the front in
whatever they undertake.
Being averse to the dictatorship of others and unhappy in subordinate positions, they usually find the
best outlet for, their special abilities when in business
for themselves or in positions where they can direct the
work of others.
On the undeveloped jplane they are tho cruel boss, the
domineering husband or the masculine wife. But when
intelligently enlightened and spiritually inclined they
are excellent healers and teachers and may be found at
the foremost of movements fpr the advancement of
public welfare.
For best results'they jequise a great deal gf fresh air,
plenty of water, rest, sleep, music and abstinence from
highly seasoned foods or stimulating beverages.
Mars ruled the first month of the Roman yeaT
(March), also the eighth month (October), at .which
times certain days weft given over to Martian Ceremon-’
ies of variouj nature. Until the time of Augustus, Mars
Iftd but two temples at Ronje, and both yvere connected
with war-like operations, Qne of these was originally
.only an altar. It was in the Campus Martius, tlft exercising ground of the army. The other was outside the

GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
Porta Caperna, the gate through which the army marched on its way to campaigns.
Every IS yatrs Mars reached its least distance from
the Earth, i.e., about 36,000,000 miles, when it shines
with a splendor like that of WaufiYul Venus. In the
summers of 1924 and 1939 it reached this proximity.
Nicolo Marconi, Italian inventor, some years ago
stated that he had reason to believe th&t messages were
•being sent to us from Mars. While making experiments
out on the Mediterranean Sea, his instruments repeatedly received a peculiar call from a wave Jength 150,000
miles duration — much larger than any of our instruments were capable of transmitting at that time.
Things Ruled by Mars
O
Mars rules strength, force ,and courage. Its manifestation is constructive or destructive, according to the
nature of the aspectjand what use an individual makes
of the vibrations as compared to his desires, the
natufe or quality of effort and degree of his understanding.
Anatomically considered. Mars governs the external
sex organs, muscula*r system, head, face, left ear, sense
of taste and the bladder, and these parts are the most
readily affected with disease when the health has been
abused or neglected. Mars predisposes one to injuries
through , accidents and hurts by cuts, burns, scalds,
surgery, firearms, etc., and to ffverisfi or inflammatory
complaints. Metals governed by Mars are iron and steel.
Mars in Aries
Gives f^rce, positivity, self-assurance, ; combativeness,
activity, industry, entejpris^ originality 'and meqhanicat
ability.
The native is enthusiastic, electric and inspiring. *

PART HI, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES 283
Philosophic *and idealistic in spirit and so frank and
free that* bp usually mqets wth poor success in concealing anything. Very independent and often act’s hastily
and forcefully an impulse.
Possesses a keeh sense of enjoyment, a love for sport,
pleasure and adventure. Has a strong dislike for all
• bonds, limitations and restrictions, preferring to be free
to explore and pioneer into all new lines of thought
and activity. '
Self-interest is strong and the native will usually push
his affairs forward with very little outside., encouragement, sometimes without any, and in the face of discouragement. Mars in Aries increases the vitality but
makes the native subject to danger by fire, surgical
operations, fevers, inflammatory and mental complaints,
accidents, wounds and scalds.
If Mars is afflicted it 'gives hasty temper and trouble
through the h§ad, face and ejjps. It usually gives a
mark or sdar of some kind on nead or face.
Mars in Taurus
Gives practical qualities, quiet ambition, quick wit
and foresight, good executive power, ability to organize
and direct: a good manager capable of carrying plans
and ideas into practical materialization. Not usually
deterred, nonplussed or thwarted1 by obstacles, and
works determinedly Aid persistently wherfc self-interests
are concerned, gaining the desired ond through tact,
diplomacy and sheer strength of .internal force or confidence. This location of Mars indicates good earning
powers, free expenditures and pleasure as wefl as gain
through thp occupAion.
If«Mars is unafflicted tjae native usually Sandies much
money and gains by legacy. But* if Mars is afflicted the
native will be liable to loss of money, property and
‘slumps in finances. The temper, during the period of

GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
affliction, is hasty and violent, native is irritable, acquisitive, and when arfgry he is “mad as a* bull” and
quite apt to act "bull-headed.” This position of Mars
also indicates powerful opponents and legal difficulties,
loss of legacy, unfavorable unions, some scandal and
monetary difficulties.
In either case this location inclines to marriage, but
trouble through it and also through the .opposite sex.
Mars in Gemini
Sharpens the insight and perception, giving acute,
keen, quick intellect; mentally combative and forceful,
plain spoken; desire for educational attainments; active
and nimtfie.
If Mars is well aspected the rfktive can write or speak
well and is fond of reading, lectures, travel, science, law
or chemistry. PossessA a mind that is 'mechanical, inventive. and ingenious. In manner is practical, apt,
quick to make deductions and to arrive at conclusions..
If Mars is afflicted, often disagree'able and forceful jn
speech, satirical, fault-finding and critical. Trouble
through neighbors, relatives and inferiors, also through
writings, letters, education and traveling; difficulty, estrangement«or separation from brothers or sisters. The
mind is restless, indecisive and lacking in concentration.
Pains in thd lungs arfd injuries to hands, arms, shoulders
and collar bofte.
Mars in Gemini tentjs to- more than one union, to two
attachments at the same time or affection for a relative.
Mara in Cancer
Makes the native bold, fearless, ambitious and industrious, wifii sudden outbursts of temper and irritable «
tendencies; when offended,', likely to nurse ill-feeling for

PART III. DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES 285
a considerable1 time; fond of luxury and somewhat
sensuous.
The subject original, independent Aid rebels against
authority. Give% fitness for medicine or surgery, gain
through enterprising ‘business journeys and voyages,
public concerns and through physical effort. Somewhat
‘changeable and lacking in continuity. Possesses some
domestic tastes, and liking for occult, mystical, psychical
and metaphysical subjects.
If Mars is afflicted, it indicates early death of mother,
separation from or disagreement with her;’ trouble in
home life and a discontented marriage partner; many
worries, annoyances, sorrows and changes of residence.
Trouble through lands, property and inheritance; accidents to home, such as fire, storms, earthquakes, theft,
etc. ;. danger through the watery elements; many difficulties at close of life unless poise and harmony have
been developed. Indisposition through the stomach
'and some trouble concerning thq> sight.
Mars in Leo
s a
The native is candid, free, fearless, independent, enterprising, honest and very conscientious. He is active,
industrious and capable of rising to positions of responsibility, trust, authority, management and corftrol. During good "directions” to Mars, suejess and .good fortune through pablic appointments, goverrynent affairs,
gain by speculation, investment, keen judgment in stock
exchange matters, insurance and industrial concerns,
and through those in high rank. Sociable, fond of company, friendship and esteem ; warm-hearted, ardent *in
affection, .love and pleasure; often hasty and impulsive
in love and sometimes too unrestrained in thd1 emotions
and passiops. .At times very forceful, positive, militant,
’aggressive or defiant in manner, .stroqg jn argument and
likely to arouse opposition and open enmity; but very
magnanimous, generous, philosophical, reasonable ; enthusiastic, broad, liberal, possessing a keen sense of

> GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
justice and a determined will, and does not hold a
grudge for long. FonJness for Strenuous sports, adventure, risky enterprises, hazardous occupations and for
occult phenomena.
Taste for inventions and music with some real mechanical ability and musical skill. Mars in Leo tends,
to financial gain in later life. Increases the muscular
strength aftd vitality, but indicates liability to Martian
diseases, feverish complaints and accidents.
If Mars is afflicte€ it threatens disappointment and
sorrow in fove, death of a loved one, separation or some
irregularity in the union, death of a child. Trouble
through superiors and also through inferiors; loss
through speculation. Peculiar ailments of an inflammatory or tumerous character, difficulty through accidents
and fires and trouble with sides and back. A responsive
nature, amorous, forceful, boid and contemptuous of
danger, quick in anger, though idealistic and fond of
hazardous or strenuods pursuits.
Mars in Virgo
4 UK
Makes the native quite original and interested in
bold and scientific enterprises in which he ‘is usually
successful, yet he has idany struggles of a peculiar
nature as this location of Mars puts difficulties in the
way of the ambitions and desires for flower and fame,
helping to bring reversal, downfall, obstacles and continual annoyance or opposition. It favors profit through
trading in common things and foreign produce, and general business enterprises. The native is a good worker
in pmploy, but usually follows his own Will quietly, being mentally very active, quick-witted, shrewd and
somewhat acquisitive; tactful and discriminative ; possesses resei^e force and energy. Mars in' Vifgo adapts i
one for science, ’and js 'somewhat related to medicine,
surgery, . chemistry, pharmacy, hygiene, healing, 'and
food products. It gives power to resist disease by study
of hygiene and care in dipt, but the nervous system and

PART III, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES 287
bowels are* likely to suffer from complaints brought on
or aggravate!! by Mars. • There are also apt to .be numerous ties, uniojis with inferiors, death of friends and
helpers or parting from them through quarrels or
misunderstanding.
If Mars is afflicted in the horoscope it will, at times,
rftake one quite irritable, hasty, proud, obstinate, reserved, secretive, and revengeful. Suffers from loss of
friends, servants, subordinates, co-workers and false,
associations. Liability to accidents and sickness from
overwork, and trouble through labor difficulties and
strikes.
Mars in Libra
Promotes development of the faculties of perception
and ooservation. Gives £lear vision, refined tastes,
idealistic temperament, an intuitive mind of a speculative nature. The iiativeds enterprising and often placed
in a position’ where he rules others. Love of sciences
in general, and fond of refined occupations,* business or
professional. This location of Mars is good for a lawyer or surgeon. It also indicates many friends among
scientific, philosophic, religious, legal or business people.
In the business world the native* meets with trouble
through competitors but survives enemies. Trouble also
comes through other people;. he meets with rivalry,
opposition, enmity and criticism both open and secret.
Troubles and sadness concerning deaths, and Josses of
those related to fhe fayiily circle.
Mars in this location inclines to an ardent, raslj, impulsive or passionate love. The opposite sex usually is
a great attraction and exercises much control over the
native. Hp is hpt to become detrimentally entangled
through the affection?, causing much suffering? grief or*
trouble. Other testimonies concurring, it pauses an
early njarriige hnd quarrels, with, the partner. Usually,
however, a disappointment, in love .delays marriage.
£The experiences gathered through business, nlarriage,
etc., lead the native, in later ye<rs, to a still higher edu-

288 GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
cation and unfoldment which produces fine judgment.
Mars in Libra is a testimony for offspring and they
are usually endowed with superior intellect.
If Mars is afflicted, particularly by Uranus, there are
many separations, broken ties and difficulties between
native and partner, friends, associates and relatives.
Mars in Scorpio
This gives a practical nature with the capacity to
work hard and accomplish much. There is good executive power, mechanical and inventive ability. In character the native is firm, positive, determined and forceful, with matter-of-fact manner and a seemingly cold^or
unconscious disregard for the feelings of others. Somewhat selfish, rash, revengeful and passionate. Thj; mind
is acute, sharp, keen and diplomatic, native is quick and
capable in government office, in secret missions and
work of a peculiar n^ure in connection with the reguiai
employment or with confederates or associates. This
location is ftvorable for a chemist, surgeon, assayer or
any other profession or occupation which involves the
use of liquids aad tools. The nat’ve usually enters into
projects with intensity of purpose and action, his motto
being, "Produce results. ” Fondness for hazardous enterprises, liable to accidents and a sudden or violent end.
Liking to investigate things mysterious and at some
time ljkely to become engaged in psychical research.
There is likelihood of gain by marriage; romantic courtship experiences ; long journeys and voyages.
If Mars is much afflicted in Scorpio, it tends to express
as unsociable, ungrateful, quarrelsome, revengeful, overbearing and selfish, with scant regard for the rights of
others. Trouble through employees, severe , illness, accidents aed operations.
Mars in Sagittarius
t
Makesf the native free, frank, generous, enthusiastic,
ambitious and at times jpipulsive in speech and action.

PART III. DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPBS 289
The mind is acfive and although fond of argument
is usually gdod humored, original and independent
in thought, morally and mentally brave, daring and
fearless of the opinions of others; firm, hxed and positive in his ideas and<freqq,ently at variance with accepted
opinions. Fond of travel and adventure; favorable
results from investigation of the occult, particularly
where the inspirational, prophetic and intuitional tendencies are concerned This location gives good mechanical
ability, foresight and ingenuity; also good for lawyers
and surgeons, evangelists and explorers. It gives a love
of pleasure, especially strenuous spbrts and athletics
carried on out "of doors. Conduces to a liking for military tactics, and if the chance offers will hold military
and naval positions. If Mars is not afflicted it signifies
gain through marriage, associates, legacy and social
means: likelihood of more than one union, and concern
regarding health of others in the domestic circle.
If Mars is afflicted it signifies danger through journos and traveling* possible loss ?f legacy and loss
through legal decisions; unfavorable employment and
some risk therein. Liable to trouble through too much
risk* over-estimation, miscalculation or exaggeration.
Not favorable for brothers, sisters, cousihs and neighbors; disagreement with them, or one or more will die.
Difficulty with religious persons or* through religious
or skeptical and unorthodox ideas and beliefs. In the
early part of life the native is likely to be indisposed,
and at the close meets with dual experiences.
Mars i? Capricorn
S VJ
Gives courage, self-reliance and assurance, a nature
that is brave, bold and not at all avejse to adventure
and excitemeht ; often i» very heroic. Due to disregard
of danger may fheet with accidents, especially to lower
lin^s. Ij ambitious, enterprising, industrious find acquisitive. • Capable of much responsibility* ahid endeavor;
possesses good executive and 'organizing ability. Qesire
for public life and in lines allowing plenty of scope for
action. Being energetic and willifjg to assign* respoo-

GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
sibility, attains positions of authority and prominence;
friends among powerful people and occult students.
In acquiring education the intellect is slow, but is sure
in the assimilation of knowledge. The mind is subtle
and gains much by intuition. Theie is some speculative tendency or liking for risks and a desire to acquire
wealth. The native becomes a lover of duty, has good
business ability, gains through commerce and science,
also through industrious employees, travel, foreign affairs and products of the earth. Honor and fame in profession ; a successful sales-manager, general manager,
agent or, real estate broker. Marriage produces an important change in life, greatly affects the close of life
and may bring gain socially. There is likely to be an
early affair of the affections with an inferior or an elderly person.
If Mars is afflicted it indicates difficulties (hrough
friends and acquaintances; conflict with people in authority, superiors and those of high4ranjc. The native
at times is irritable, quick in temper and passion. He
may arouse rivalry, opposition and criticism and is likely
to suffer in honor and credit. This is rather an unfortunate location of Mars for a,, parent (probably the
father) as there may be a disagreement or separation
between the native and a parent or between the parents
themselves or one of them may die prematurely.
Mars in Aquarius
hfakes a good reasoner who usually takes some
unique, original apd ualooked for point from which to
•reason. As a speaker he is a ready debater, forcible and
convincing ; he sums up facts and arguments clearly and
often arrives at conclusions quickly. He is intellectual,
prudent, quick-witted and scientific. There is some impulsiveness in manner an^ speech and at times he <is
rash, head-stroitg ,md abrupt. The native is ’ humanitarian.,and interested in reforms for public good. He is.
fond of literature and philosophy, occult studies ind

PART III, DELINEATIONS FOB HOROSCOPES 291
science generally. Mars in Aquarius makes one ambitious, enterprising and independent. His opinions may
be fixed and not readijy changed by others; when he
makes a change it is usually a complete *one and undergone quite suddenly or abruptly. The native is original
and unique in many things, inventive and fond of machinery, electrical and aerial matters. This is a good
lacation of Mars for medicine or surgery, hospital, philanthropic or welfare work. Makes a good director and
responsible official in connection with public companies
or in governmental, municipal and fraternal office. Gains
by the professions, and financial success comes through
public work. He is sincere and has refined tastes; makes
friends readily through merit and ability.
If Mars is afflicted it indicates that at times the native
is apt to be too independent, abrupt and blunt in speech
and manner; apt to act hastily without realizing the
consequences. This is likely to result in separation from
friends and associates, and suffering through opposition
and hostility. .Trquble occurs in connection with firms,
companies, associates, societies and partners. It is
thought also to indicate the death of a frienH, estrangement from one or suffering through a false friend, and
early death of a pareryf or separation from them. The
nativ? may be “rough and ready,” faithful in affections
and capable in an emergency.
Mars in Pijcea
t X
The native is fjenerqus ajid free with iponey, yet
anxious to accumulate wealth; somewhat timid or cautious but if angered or aroused becomes nold and audacious. In nature the person is 'sympathetic, receptive^
affectionate and sensitive to imposition. Sometimes the
native is quiet and retiring, easily depressed and gloomy", ,
somewhat prone to indolence, vacillation, irresolution or
indecision, and tpo open to the influence of others, while
at* otherttimes he accomplishes mach quietly. Is desirous of popularity although *may nof gain much of it;
•enejpavors to avoid conflicts and tries valiantly to surjnount difficulties and misfortunes. Apt in details and

i m
GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
successful in ordinary occupations and with the middle
class of people, also with pursuits in confection with
public or private institutions. ^Mars in Pisces gives
ability as a detective, inspector, jailor, "warden, hospital
worker, sailor, marine engineer, fipherrnan, hotel keeper,
and in occupations requiring uniform. Friends among
powerful people; help and gain financially from friends.
There rqay be some tendency to dissipation or passion,
or over-stimulated emotions, and danger through water
and liquids generally; from drowning, scalding, poisons,
food in liquid form, k also through gas, anaesthetics and
opiates. This location of Mars also tends to disappointment in love, to two attachments and delay in marriage.
Accidents and trouble to the feet.
If Mprs is afflicted it shows that the native will meet
with many heavy misfortunes and difficulties; will suffer
from secret enmity in various forms, such as theft,
scandal, slander, false reports, false accusations, etc.,
whether deserving it, or not. He ma,y be involved ins
trouble through lack of candor, truthfulness and honesty, 'and this may be due either directly or indirectly
to his own fault. It shows many changes in plans,
views, disposition and occupation.,
"Brothers behold! The stars are fit forever.” i
—John Galsworthy

PART III, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES 293
JUPITER
His Influence in /he Twelve Zodiacal Signs
Jupiten rule? the sign Sagittarius
• Typical Jupiterians are usually termed jovial owing
to the fact that Jupiter gives such characteristics as
sociability, hope, benevolence, veneration, compassion,
justice, honesty, spirituality, also well developed faculties of proportion, calculation and location. The Jupiterian is usually quick to hit the mark, as his 'symbol is
The Archer, and they love out-of-doors exercises; in
fact, they require considerable of such recreation if they
would overcome uneasiness and develop poise.
In the business world they become interested in large
popular enterprises and jleal much in matters related
to lawyers, judges, bankers, brokers and physicians.
•Science and medicine, insurance a.nd commercial traveling often engage their attention, also affairs of philanthropic, charitable, religious or benevolent impcfirt, as
well as other matters in the professional world.
Jupiter is termed “the greater fortune,” and indeed,
he seems well named, for, unless Jupiter is ill placed in
the horoscope, he bestows a considerable amount of
what appears to be good luck upon natives of that sign,
who are usually fitted for positions of dignity* trust or
power in business and social circles.. Having /i logical,
broad mind, considerate self-possession, self-confidence
and determination, they usually inspire^confidence and
attain responsible positions.
If Jupiter is not dignified or if adversely aspected in
the horoseope it causes restlessne^b and uncertainfyv
giving liability to losses through misjudgmeflt, unfortunate .speculation, investments and trust*. In the
human, organism it rules the thighs and blood and frequently causes trouble in tvarious Vays through blood
impurities. To overcome these tendencies, us? care in
diet. Dandelion or angelica leaves made into tea is said

GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
by physicians to be beneficial for allaying the effects of
such disorders, but to* get at the cause one ‘must improve
the state of mind by banishing ivorriesj and partaking of
mental relaxatfbn. In ancient times physicians invoked
the aid of Jupiter for the cure of disease by administering medicine in the “planetary hours” ruled by Jupiter.
Modem physicians, while they have lost the true astrological import, still invoke Jupiter’s influence by marking its symbol at the top of their prescriptions, although
they have changed it somewhat by now making it B
instead of if as formerly.
Things Ruled by Jupiter
Jupiter in nature is said to be warm, moist, sanguine,
temperate, social, expansive, masculine and moderate.
Has deminion over the blood, liver, veins, arteries and
thighs. Rules higher education and philosophic reasoning. If in a person’s birth cfiart Jupiter is unafflicted,
the native will be a good, sound and correct reasoner,
whereas, if it is ill-dignified or badly aSpec'ted, will often
exhibit poor, uncertain and unreliable judgment.
Much depends upon what house this planet occupies In fha
horoscope. If above the earth nt birth >ta Influence will manifest
earlier than when It is found below. It la said that Jnplter’a
Influence does oot affect <the life with appreciable power until the
fortieth year snd after, but we notice that a person born with
Jnplter nnaffllcted, rising, or If he Is one of the rnlers, Is fortunate and lucky generally, especially In the things indicated by
the algn Jupiter occupies. Jupiter has to do particularly wltb
the social standing and the refined domestic element.
Jupiter 'in AHes
y <T>
Usually signifies, a progressive person, ambitious, aspiring, generous, candid, high-m/nded, ardent, philosophical and reasonable. Success is largely due to personal merits and through domestic relationship,, social
standing and influential frielids. The native is capable
of holding positions of 1 esponsibility, government
offices, etc., and where he has authority over others;
military honors. He usually changes his pursuit some-

PART III, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES 296
time in li£e and* has two occupations. Strong liking for
literature, science, study, philosophy, traveling and all
that appertains to cultivation of mind. Shipping, voyaging'. horses, shorts and out-of-door Exercises attract
the attention. Usually respected and generally fortunate;
a pioneer, in a way, and ambitious of advancement.. An
advocate of new ideas for improvement, and whatever
the religious views may be, is sincere, earnest and progressive therein. This location tends to henefit and
gain through intellectual friends and^ acquaintances,
shipping, travel, law, religious associates, children,
young people, foreign securities, speculation and insurance.
Jupiter in Taurus
Jupiter in Taurus gives love of justice. The nature is
affectionate and generous, peaceful, reserved and firm.
Has great love for home and not much given to change.
' Seldom travels axcept for definite purposes such as relate to health, business or learning.
A patron of philanthropic movements and philosophy;
fixed in religion and, views generally.
This location is favqrable for* benefit through the
opposite sex, sociability, church, philosophy and matters
connected with the higher attributes of the mind, also
for the things signified by tfie sign Taurus *and ninth
house affairs. If other testimonies in the chart permit,
it tends to gain through gifts and legacies, investments,
speculation, children, young people, marriage and partnership. If Jupiter is afflicted there* will be .losses
through these things.
Jupiter in Gemini
u n
Gives a nature which expresses sympathy, charity,
benevolence and humanitarian tendencies. The disposition is friendly, courteous, truthful and trustworthy.
Fond of novelty, traveling and mental recreation. The

290 GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
tendency is to intellectual development. ' The mind is
lofty and aspiring, and although at times there seems
to be Restlessness and feelings “of uncertainty or changeability, yet there is good comparison, or mathematical
faculty; also ability for literature, occult investigation,
psychic unfoldment and prophecy-A It indicates the
possibility of an attraction to a relative or some one
closely associated, and two marriages. There may b.e
some difficulty in marriage through relatives, wrings
or travel." It inclines to success in literature, bt .efits
through inventions, with large corporations, mail order
business and publishing. If afflicted, sudden difficulties
or opponents; unplofitable or unpopular professions;
difference's or separation from relatives; trouble thrcuyh
publishing or publications.
Jupiter in Cancer
n s
The native is ambitious, enterprising, good-humored,
humane, charitable, benevolent, sympathetic, kind and,
sociable ; popular among his fellows, w*ith friends among
inferiors an^ also among those of good position. It
tends to an intellectual view of life, intuition, useful imagination and fondness for all fine arts and cultured
amusements ; patriotic, interested ’In public welfare and
investigation in the occult and psychic fields. It shows
a fondness for home and mother, also for voyages and
travels for pleasure, health or learning. It inclines to
gain in public work through mental ability, and if other
testimonies in the chart agree, through investment, inheritance, property or marriage. A peaceful, honorable
end abroad or far from the- placu of birth.
Jupiter in Leo
U SI
, Makes ,the native good-natured, noble and loftyminded, magnanimous, loyal, courteous, generous, compassionate,'* benevolent and prudent. This location"
strengthens the ’constitution,^ increases the vitality and
favors hj-rth of children. Th6 love nature is deep, sincere and honest; the subject is endowed with wisdom,

PART III, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES 297
'good judgment'atui will power, capable of holding positions of trtisj; and responsibility. Enjoys prestige,
honors, grandeur and gre’at undertakings. The *mind
is intuitive, diplomatic afld inclined to higher sciences,
philosophy, fine arts, religion and culture generally.
Favors government dihplby and positions of prominence.
Gain through judicious investment and speculations.
Benefit through long journeys especially in connection
with sports, education or diplomatic affairs.
Jupiter in Virgo
y tij
This increases the mental inclination in all directions
toward an intellectual or even somewhat materialistic
view of things. The nature is cautious, not easily imposed upon, discreet, prudent and discriminative and
therefore the native has ability for practical scientific
and philosophical investigation and study, the mind
being analytical, critical, and matter-of-fact, possessed
ot wisdom, knowledge, honesty and ability for the study
of natural laws. Careful in choice of acquaintances,
friendships among occult students. Rises above* his
sphere in life, has foreign associations and travel due to
business. Marriage is irksome way peculiar and possibly
to a social inferior. If well aspected^or unafflicted, success in business or professional pursuits; gain by employees, literhture, investment, commercial and speculative dealings. It tends to the occupations oj Virgo
and Sagittarius. If afflicted, loss and trouhle through
these things and disturbances of the bl»<?d, liver, bowels
and hips ; lack of application, method and concentration.
Jupiter la Li\jra
y
The disposition is nfild and temperate, sincere, earn- ■
est, kind, socjable and obliging. The native is fonscientidus, compassionate, imaginative £nd [perceptive; loves
peace, justice, mercy and hafmony. *Charitable, philanthropic, fond of travel, music, art and all intellectual
.and cultured entertainment. Bepefit from the opposite

GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
sex, powerful friends and through those who are scientific, philosophical or spiritual. If well aspected or unafflicted, gain through commerce, , employees, science,
medicine, law, professional associations, public institutions, theatres, hospitals, asylums, etc.; a happy marriage, fruitful uniqn and good children ; honors and
esteem. If afflicted, trouble through legal difficulties,
open enmity and opposition and through treachery from
women-, friends or associates.
Jupiter in Scorpio
y m.
This gives powerful will, deep emotions, ardor, enthusiasm, perseverance, ambition and generosity. The mind
is active, resolute, self-confident, fruitful, subtle, analytical; lofty, proud, aggressive, both constructive and destructive; fond of chemical and mechanical experiments
or occult and psychical rCsearch and all things of a
mysterious nature. Association with governmental
officials or connection with the government; power
ampng associates and societies; professional secrets and
information affecting the honor of others ; friendships of
a peculiar nature or open to criticism ; intrigues with
superiors; long voyages and strange adventures abroad.
If well aspected or. unafflicted, gain through occupations
of Scorpio, by litigation, arbitration, death of partner,
legacy and public investments. If afflicted, jealous and
powerful enemies; loss through questionable or unsound
speculation and securities, etc.; death of child, danger,
misfortune and-Iiability to death through water and voyages ; daftger through sbcial 'or political connections ;
liability to suffer from hereditary diseases, blood poisoning'or heart disease. Liability to quarrels and litigation;
■ difficulty with those engaged in law, science, religion or
.medicine.
Jupiter in Sagittarius
y t
Th^ native is endowed with a courteous, affable, toll
ceierant, humorous, kind,t generous, sympathetic, loyal ‘and
;ble nature. The mjkd is broad, just, liberal, merciful)

PART III, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPliS 299
compassionate, humanitarian, sincere, prophetic and
philosophical.’ Jupiter in 'Sagittarius tends to good fortune and general success The native is usually successful in his enterprises, often receives hdhors and is a
leader among his associates. It is favorable for matters
connected with sports, horses, shipping, literature, and
learned, scientific, philosophic or religious bodies. If
other testimonies in the chart concur, it tends to gain
through speculation, marriage, legacy and voyages. If
afflicted, troublesome social affairs, difficulty through
sports and loss by speculation or gambling.
Jupiter in Capricorn
U VJ
A mind that is serious, deliberate, thoughtful ^nd ingenious. The nature is constructive, capable, creative
with organizing ability. Ig ambitious and attains some
degree of popularity, power, credit and esteem. Tends
to economy,' feugsjity and the acquirement of practical
education, tak’ing part in the advancement of scientific,
philosophic or spiritual knowledge, industriaf or political
economics. It inclines to general success in occupation,
especially where the r^tive is in authority over others,
or engaged in some public or governmental career. The
tendency is to gain through commercial or foreign
affairs, and if other testimonies in the chart concur, gain
through money or legacy from, father or superiors. It
is said to indicate a long journey or voyage and* that the
marriage is affected by the parents, also that the native
is concerned witfi th^ sorrows ana" misfortunes of
friends. If afflicted, it manifests as parsimony or inactivity; an unorthodox nature; trouble, ’ difficulty, and
obstacles in occupation ; some discredit.
Jupfter in Aquariutf
MakeS the native cheerful, go’od,-hdrrfored, obliging,
.just, merciful, compassionate, sympathetic, philanthropic
and congenial, disliking discord and inharmony. The
"mind is prophetic, intuitive, g’gnteel, refined, liberal,

GENETHLIACAL ASTBOLOGY
broad, philosophic, humanitarian and given to the investigation of new though^, social, spiritualistic and
refoi'm subjects. Inclines to fondness for and pursual
of out-of-the-ordinary, occuft, curious and mystical
studies. Jupiter in Aquarius gives original, independent
and progressive views ; often indifferent to the ordinary
affairs of life; favors development of the higher attributes of mind through hygiene, philosophy, science, 'literature, music, classical and ancient arts. It gives pleasure and benefit through good and sincere friends who
are gained by personal influence. Pleasure and interest
in congressional activities, public institutions and public
work. Gain and benefit through profession and, if in
good aspect to ruler of eleventh house, gain in employment with societies and associations or the government.
Psychic and occult experiences; peculiar conditions and
experience brought about by associates and friends.
Acquaintances among foreigners and political executives.
Jupiter in Pisces
V K
Gives strong ideality, interest in all philanthropic
affairs; increases the emotions apd imagination generally, adding to the intuition, spiritual perception, and
psychic impressions. The native receives benefit from
pursual of investigation along lines of occult and psychical research in general and will experience some
remarkable phenomena and prophetic dreams or visions.
The -native is studious, hospitable, quiet, unassuming,
sociable* kind, cHaritable, fond of animals, sympathetic,
always reSdy to help the sick and unfortunate, and
possessed of ifiany good talents. It disposes somewhat
to traveling, especially “by water. It inclines to honors,
gain, favors and high occupations through associations,
oompanies, friends, mining and shipping .affairs, and
‘ institutions such as hospitals, sanitariums, laboratories,
etc. If afflicted, loss through speculation a,nd deception.
The native is liable to, become at times too unambitious,
changeable, overly *fond of* ease and pleasure, indolent
inert, inactive or restless, unsettled, undecided and easily
influenced.

PART HI, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES J01
SATURN
His Influence in the twelve Zodiacal Signs •
Saturn r.ules the sign Capricorn
The influence of Saturn is commonly called evil, and
in this respect he is much maligned, as in reality there
is no evil, since all things work together for good
ultimately. Saturn' acts as a deterrent and because he
brings denial and necessity into some lives, has been
considered an oppressor, a Satan. “He that filleth with
pride will suffer a fall," for Saturn wilt bring hirp to his
knees, humble his nature, and by means of restrictions,
limitations and adversities, will cause the individual to
ponder, study and seek to find the source of woe, that
in future it may be overcome. Thus, while Saturn is a
destroyer (of false ideals), he is also a redeemer, in’that
he brings the mind to a state of introspection and stimulates effort toward perfection and victory.
Persons born’witfi Saturn well placed and aspected in
their horoscope have a serious and practical nature ;
thej* are wisely economical, prudent, conservative, executive and profound, b^eing good organisers and managers. , Their special ability depends upon which planet
most strongly and favorably aspects Saturn in the chart,
which might briefly be stated as follows: Moon to Saturn, successful agriculturists, dealers in land, animals or
products of the earth ; Mercury to Saturn, good writers,
teachers, scientists; Venus to Saturn, success with large
corporations, fine property, hi^h-bred stbck; Sun*to Saturn, municipal or government positions, tfrganizers,
managers of large concerns ; Mars to Satitrn, engrayers
of metal, masons, contractors, builders, lawyers, surgeons, surveyors^ engineers; Jupiter to Saturn, gain*
through societies, large companies, ^religion, science,
political office^, banks? or by speculation in land or
mines or as .a physician; Uranus to Saturn, practical
octult science learnings, as .mental healing, telepathy,
osteopathy and drugless methods 06 healing, business
■connected with railways, geology, astrology or <>hrenplogy; Neptune to Saturn, through unusual vocations.

GENETHLIACAI. ASTROLOGY
secret service, occupations connected With liquids and
oils, gains through stocks and speculation:
Saturnian children are extremely ^sensitive, but they
hide their feelings and emotions under a mask of reserve. If frequently censured they withdraw from
association and their progress and development are much
delayed.
When, adversely aspected in a chart, Saturn does
indeed seem to produce a train of adversities, for delays,
restrictions, disappointments and sorrow are plentiful
and usually these lead to misery, poverty and ill-health.
Saturn governs the knees, teeth, spleen and bones,
and these parts are most readily afflicted when any
inharmony prevails. . As his influence is cold and dry,
heat and moisture are the antidotes. For the native of
Saturn, critical and important years are those ip which
Saturn will transit in adverse aspect to his radical place,
that is, between the years 14 to 15, 21 to 22, 29 to 30,
undertakings during these periods, rest as much as
possible, seek the society of cheerful people and live in
a light, airy, new place. Persistent metaphysical treatment, cheerful associates and environment will do much
to overcome the adverse effects of Saturn’s influence.
Things Ruled by Saturn
Saturn’s influence is heavy and binding and produces
lasting effects. Its nature is cold, dry, phlegmatic,
melancholy, earthly and masculine. It governs the teeth,
bones, spleen, knees and the sense of hearing.
Sathm in Aries
Resolute, determined, ambitious for success. Prosperity though industry and perseverance. Contemplative, good reasoning faculties, easily angered, not at all
averse to argument and contentious when opposed. At
times reserved and acquisitive. Jealous partner and

PART lit, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES 303
.probability of difficulties* through marrikge. Obstacles
and troubles, in first half of life.
Saturn fn Taurus
b a
Thoughtful, kind,* -quiet but sometimes quick-tempered, stubborn, resentful and not easily appeased.
Economical, prudent, diplomatic and somewhat reserved
over personal affairs, especially finances. Fondness for
botany, horticultui'e or stock breeding. Sorrow knd loss
through relatives; unfortunate domestic experiences;
gain through thrift, economy and judicious investment.
Saturn in Gemini
b n
An observant, ingenious nature. Ability for scientific
occupation in connection with literature, mathematics,
etc. Adaptable and resourceful. Trouble and sorrow
through relatives. Unfortuaate legal affairs. Liable to
f^lse accusation, restraint or limitation through some of
the kindred os'neighbors. Interest in current and advanced thought ; ability for profound intellectual attainments.
Saturn in Cancer
b S
Dissatisfied feelings causing many changes of residence and pursuits. Changeable moods ; somewhat fretful, discontented or jealous. Domestic troubles ;.anxiety
and sorrow through attachments, parents, home and
children. Affected psychically by adverse conditions
surrounding others. Pleasure* through occult.investigation and psychic sources ; interest in domestic economy
and public welfare. An industriqjis partner. Difficulties
toward the close of life unless the native endeavors tci
develop and apply his highest qualities.
Saturn in Leo
Generous but quick-tempfered, cahtious yet bold in
'spirit, determined, ambitious and strong-willed. ^Spirit-

GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
ual tendencies. Troubles and secret enmity through
inferiors. At times receptive to psychic conditions, consciously or unconsciously, which affect the health.
Danger through accidents and1 overwork or over-exertion. Sorrows through love affairs and children.
Saturn in Virgo
b ns
Reserved, discreet, cautious, prudent, frugal, serious,
quiet and intuitive. Somewhat worried, anxious doubtful
or mistrustful. As times very gloomy, depressed and
easily discouraged. Inclination for investigation of the
mysterious; fond of the occult and profound or scientific
studies. Gain by careful investment. Troubles and
misfortunes through marriage and partnerships; difficulties, st-uggles, obstacles and sorrows in first half of life.
Liability to mental disease, headaches and bowel weakness. Troubles in employment and through servants.
Saturn in Libra
Refined tastes, respect and foqdness for science, intellectual tendencies; somewhat given to debate or .controversy. Generally have open or female enmities,
sorrow through loss of one of deep attachment ; separations, broken contracts and domestic difficulties; troubles and opposition in employment. Often Saturn raises
one to high position only to drop the native into severe
disgrace 'or misfortune later. As it ..ends toward the
necessary mental qualities, this is a good location for
lawyers, doctois and scientific men generally. In a
female chart it often bestows great beauty of the brunette type. Tends to delay marriage ?nd to produce
coldness on the pa.t of partner.
Saturn in Scorpio
b m.
r
Sudd€Vi resolutions, violent temper, passionate, seKwilled, acquisitive, jealous, independent, resourceful and

PART III, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPE!
cautious; shrewd ‘mind rather than profoundly intellectual. Sorrow .through love affairs* secret alliances, intrigues or domestic difficulties. Psychic ability and
fondness for occult investigations, chemistry or geology.
Success through pefsistfnce and cleverness after many
difficulties, obstacles and trials especially if necessary
attention is given to development along the higher lines.
Saturn in Sagittarius
Frank, fearless, philosophical, kind and obliging; humanitarian views and ever ready to assist in the advancement and promotion of domestic conditions or
political economy. Occult tendencies, intuitive understanding, prophetic insight with regard to future w.elfare
or scieytific development. Opposition, antagonism or
reproof and censure hurt deeply, and by resenting such
the native often prevents his own elevation or honors,
of makes it difficult to attain desired position, otherwise,
it gives the power to create his own dignity through
merit of ability. Trouble through public affairs, hbnor
and reputation. Sagittarians often engage in more than
one occupation ; gain by careful and judicious investment.. Danger of nervous breakdown at close of life
unless effort is made to safeguard th4 health by building
up the system.
Saturn in Capricorn
VS
Makes the native melancholic, serious, ^apprehensive,
cautious, suspicious, discontented and acquisitive ; deep
thinker, good reasoner and grave or reserved in demeanor. Ambitious, very anxious to rise in life, ana
through tact, diplomacy or persistenfce generally sucr >
ceeds. Liable to inferior attachments, unreliable’ friendslyps, sorrow through marriage and domestiif affairs;
chronic ailments and possibdity of some. mental affliction through worry, dissatisfaction, restricted pleasure
ind recreation, or repression. Success followed by
failures.

GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
Saturn in Aquarius
A courteofcs, affable disposition ; “a thoughtful, well
disposed, humane, grave, reserved, serious nature. Penetrating intellect, good rcasoner and deep thinker; deliberate in action and very impressive in speech when
interested; sociable, friendly and usually unresenttul.
Generally become quite profound in. what they undertake in the arts and sciences, refining the mind through
study, observation and experience. As a rule, gain good
financial prospect), through employment or profession
by practical application, quiet determination and faithfulness. Form many acquaintances and some romantic
or lasting tie. The latter years are usually more fortunate than the beginning of life.
Saturn in Pisces
If afflicted, the subject suffers losi, hindrance, delays,
deception, , slander and discredit through friends and
acquaintances and meets with many sorrows and disappointments in life, most of which he bears secretly and
attempts to present the best side of things.
Circumstances often decide his mode of procedure,
and compel the native to cope with lines of action, entirely unexpected and undcsired. He often reaches
positions of honor or dignity but has difficulty in maintaining ..them.
Misfortune,chard luck and disaster usually mark attachments, or unfavorable ties are formed which severely handicap, retard or sadden the life. Sorrow, romance
and tragedy arc elements which accompany the affecYional experiences. The sympathetic and emotional
nature is strong and the native is, himself, often the
cause of' his misfortune and difficulty; desire is prominent but hope, firmness and continuity need developing.
Thet native is ingenious and aspiring but lacks sufficient application, opportunities and favorable conditions.

PAST III, DELINEATIONS FOB, HOROSCOPES 307
The health often adversely affected by psychic conditions, tolds and troubles' through the feet, consumptive
tendencies and lingering illnesses. Regvds money only
as a means of acquiring the necessities of life and often
seeks relief, understanding and success through an investigation of psychic and occult affairs which usually
cause retirement and seclusion, the enlightenment proving somewhat beneficial.
Good aspects to Saturn in Pisces tend to mitigate the
severe testimonies and assist the, native to improve
himself through steady, persistent effort and.by means
of psychical and occult research or large institutions.
It gives practical execution, deep intuition, perception
and some mediumistic qualities.
‘Give me the way of waodering'atars to know.”— -Virgil

OENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
URANUS
His Influence in the Twelve Zodiacal Signs
Uranus rules the sign Aquarius
Those who are born during that period of the yea/
ruled by .Uranus, or who have Uranus strongly posited
in their horoscope, are usually attracted to some form
of occult research, in fact, they are reformers and
pioneers in advanced lines of thought. It often makes
one appear odd, eccentric or peculiar and said to be living ahead of their time. It attracts one to such subje ts
as astrology, phrenology, occultism, mesmerism, magnetic healing, telepathy, electricity, inventions, Free
Masonry, etc.; in fact, it predisposes to the antiquated,
curious, new, odd, and everything out of the ordinary.
When Uranus is well aspected by other planets in the
nativity, it endows the native with strong .intuitive tendencies, giving also metaphysical and inventive ability.
With' keen foresight they can predict the outcome of
business or the results of action quickly and with ccfiisiderable accuracy in a manner net dependent upon the
reasoning process, but by knowing. They have strong
and constructive imagination and can see a way to improve upon almost everything. Their premonition and
intuition guide them in 'the path of progress and freedom..
When Uranus is adverse'y aspected in the horoscope
it gives all the, aforementioned intuitive activity and inventive genius, but it inclines to make one overforceful,
abrupt,, brusque, erratic, willful, sarcastic and easily
offended and the native is liable to accidents through
.explosions, electricity or vehicles ,-of transportation. All
the mental malformations can be improved'and accidents
avoided by those who firmly unite effort with aspiration.
Great aid in this matter may be obtained by finding the
dates on which Uranus is adversely aspected and care
then taken to maintain poise and self-control and <o
avoid risks with the things which Uranus rules.

PART III, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES 309
Uranus stands for liberty and equality. The solar
system is nojv entering the influence of the constellation
Aquarihs by precession and marks the beginning 6f the
Aquarian Age, which ^ill last for 2,16(1 years.* r
The planet Urahlis ‘makes a complete transit of the
zodiacal circle every 84 years. It requires about seven
years for Uranus to pass through each sign. It was
passing through the sign Aquarius during the 1914-18
great European Var. Its influence will be strongly felt
in world events every time it transits through this sign
during the Aquarian Age.
Progress in all lines of thought and achievement will
'.be very marked and rapid in the New Age. Recent
developments in aerial navigation arc but a slight suggestion of the remarkable conquests to come over air
'and spirit. Spirit communion will become a mechanical
as well as a scientific fact. Only a few years will elapse
before power for all purposes will be derived directly
'from the air. ,
Things Ruled by Uranus
The nature of Urargus is cold, dry, air^r, positive, magnetic, strange, occult and malefic. It inclines to acts
without premeditation. It governs the faculties of curiosity, invention and investigation and all things of a
curious or wonderful nature; /nodernistic art. It rules
the ankles and the intuitive intellect. Its rftetals are
platinum, aluminum, uranium, radium, and also has
dominion over wirelesj and< radio-active elements.
Uranus in Aries
(P T
This location of Usanus gives ? love tor tndgpendenc?
and freedom* positiveness, force and impulse. It insreases th« mental vigor, producing activity, energy,
• In the book. “Pnwerfiri Planets,” a chapter Is devofed to explaining the difference between “Slgna and Constellations.’*

GENETHLIACAL ASTRdLOGY
resource,' originative and inventive ability. Fond of
machinery, electrical devices, and possesses mechanical
ingenuity. Likes travel and often changes the residence.
At times is abrupt, brusque, blunt or radical in manner,
disregarding tact and self-control ; often impulsive in
speech without intending to be ,uo. - "Disputes and estrangements are frequent. Interest in children from a
mental or intellectual standpoint. ,
Uranus in Taurus
Makes the native determined and headstrong, but
when confronted with obstacles can usually extricate
himself with resource and ingenuity. The native is
naturally intuitive and can become an adept in occultism. It is a slightly evil location for marriage, causing
jealousy on' the part of the partner. r
It causes ups and downs in ‘financial affairs and some
sudden losses. If well aspected, it signifies gain through
partnership, marriage, associations, ‘inventions and
original enterprise.
Uranus in Gemini
V n
Endows the native with versatility, and indicates
some eccentricity in friendship and in expression. It
increases 'the mental power through originality, intuition and ingenuity. The native loves science and invention, feels favorable toward new ideas, reforms and
out-of-the-or'dinary subjects.
t
It i$ a favorable location for the study of electricity,
aerodynamics, astrology, metaphysics, mesmerism, etc.
Lilcing for travel aqd friends among litefary and scientific people. Telepathic or clairvoyant faculty.
If Urantts is afflicted : Liable to estrangement from,
brethren, cousins, .neighbors, >and some trouble in education, examinations,' letters find journeys; unfavorable
criticism'.-

PART III, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES 311
'Uranus in Cancer
Gives rriediumisfic abifity, the feelings *and emotions
being sensitive and^asity touched; at times this makes
the native eccentric, cranky, restless, impatient, peculiar
or radical.
Some domestic troubles or estrangement, although
the native loves home and children. Loss and difficulty
through the dwelling, land or property. Stomach troubles. The native is patriotic, loves traveling and is original in ideas and in expression. Interest in rpunicipal
or legislative activities.
Uranus in Leo
¥ SI
A mentality which is extremely industrious in its aspirations, yet the native m<fy be physically disposed to
gteat moderation. It makes the person, at times, headstrong, fiery, forceful and eccentric, displaying a disregard for conventionality, a somewhat rebellious disposition and often incurs the disfavor of others. Cannot
tolerate being ordered about or contradicted. Great love
for freedom, independence and for daring or exciting
adventures; strange aversions and attractions. Odd
experiences in connection with the affections and in love
affairs, and some danger of sorrow or estrangement
therein. Obstacles in the home fife in youth and loss or
difficulty in some way through the father. Some hindrance and annoyance in social affairs and through children, and probably suddert loss’ of a child. *
If Uranus is well aspected it indicates occult abifity,
success with electricity, machinery and inventions, and
is good for a public or professional career of unique or
distinctive rfature.
Uranus in Virgo
• The mind is subtle, independent and originals The
native is quiet, eccentric, stubborn, fond of curiosities

GENETHLIACAE ASTROLOGY
and science generally, especially the occult in which he
meets with great success. It makes a good mechanic or
teacher and gives success in employment of others,
especially in , connection witlf electricity, electronics,
dietetics, chemistry, metaphysics, or science.
It increases the intellectual ability and the desire for
healthful comforts, also to make the most of the productive capacity in manufacturing and other enterprises
in which the native is likely to have interest.
If well aspected it denotes gain through public occupations associated yvith the government or municipality.
If afflicted, it indicates many difficulties, disappointed
ambitions, trouble through employees, or through employment, and restrictions connected with the occupation. Strange or sudden bodily afflictions.
Uranus in Libra
If
Makes the native a good reasoner; fond of traveling,
eccentric, ambitious, quick-tempered, restless and the
possessor of good imagination, taste, intuition a.nd
aesthetic faculties. This location favors scientific, artistic, literary or ‘judicial professions, gives telepathic and
inventive ability and much personal magnetism. Interest
in aerial affairs.
Sometimes it leads to, a hasty engagement or marriage
but brirfgs danger of separation, estrangement, divorce
or death of paitner. Unless well aspected it is not good
here fo l partnership. If afflicted, it" is likely through
some peculiarity of manner, to produce lack of sympathy
or affection, also to arouse enmity, rivalry, opposition,
criticism. Indicates broken friendships and trouble
through schemes, politics and strange actions of partner.
Uranus in Scdfpio
V m
Gives the native strength 'of mind, will, determination,
persistence, power of concentration and a spirit which
cannot be broken by resistance.

PART III, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPE
At times the native is bold, stubborn, sharp-spoken,
shrewd, acute, reserved, secretive,* aggressive, forceful
and rebellious; frequently at variance with other people
and with accepted opinions. Uranus in .Scorpio inten
sifies the activity fpwar^i self-advancement and personal
gain. It gives a love far things mechanical and an inventive nature. There is mesmeric power, ability for
practical occultism, industrial chemistry and drugless
healing methods. ,
If Uranus is afflicted there is danger of sudden accidents, falls, wounds by firearms, explosions, electrical
devices, and trouble on water.
Uranus in Sagittarius
. This location of Uranus increases the imagination and
inventiveness; it favors dreams, visions, intuition, premonition and traveling. *
* The native .loves science in general and takes an
interest in afl passing events of a scientific nature,
especially inventions connected with locomo\ion add all
means of travel.
Uranus here assists other influences that may be
present in the chart to develop the higher side of the
mind in alqjost any line where wide cultivation and
higher education or understanding give scope. The
native is progressive, daring, adventuresome, generous
and extremely fond of liberty of action and speech ;
enthusiastic in bejiefs and undertakings whichf are not
always orthodox or alt<%ethdr free from risk* or danger.
If much afflicted, strange difficulties arise through
these things and possibly some trouble through the partner's relatives and through religious or scientific people;
also through foreign affairs and journeys.
Uranus in Capricorn
VJ
> .Gives good reasoning faculties and -generally^ a pro
. found, penetrating mind. It disturbs the seriousness,

GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
reserve and conservatism of the sign Capricorn ; assists
in intensifying the ambition, perseverance,’ executive
ability and independence. It tends toward bold enterprise and radical departures fr6m established systems
or accustomed methods, initiating innovations of progressive nature. Foresight, intuition; business "hunches"
and the faculty of prevision often assist the native to
anticipate public trends, conditions or needs. Unique
or original undertakings, and progressive or equitable
attitude toward patrons or employees. It is a good
location for success in governmental or public occupations; or t«iose connected with special lines like
electricity, manufacturing, machinery, radio and transportation ; also municipal offices, positions of power,
authority or responsibility.
There are times, when Uranus is disturbed by transits
and dirbctions, that the native feels restless, uneasy and
acts eccentric, radical, stubborn or headstrong.
If Uranus is afflicted, it indicates some family discord,
or trouble in early life, loss of father, 'separation or
estrangement from him, opposition from those of authority, reversals or difficulty in occupation ; incurs tlje
disfavor of superiors and severe public criticism.
Uranus in Aquarius
Uranus in Aquarius increases the mental ability, giving originality, ingenuity, resourcefulness, inventiveness,
comprehensiveness, strong- intuition and imagination.
The native isipeculiar and eccentric in beliefs, fond of
novelfy, science and unusual pursuits, possessing great
love of freedom. The disposition is pleasant, humanitarian, sociable, obliging and gains marly fripnds some
of whom .are very peculiar or engaged in extraordinary
occupation The native usually succeeds in anything
of a scientific or mechanical nature, also in 'association
with others and In public life, municipal offices) large
companies, railroads, radio, airway concerns ; fraternal
societies and social movements.

PART III, DELINfeATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES 315
, If Uranus is*afflicted ?t brings difficulty and inharmony through friends and partners and danger in travel.
Uranus in Pisces
Gives a peculiar nature, fond of all occult investigations, mysteries and psychical research.
It usually endowS the native with some occult faculty
and expresses in dreams, visions and strange experiences.
It gives far-seeing, but not always on the brightest
side of things ; friends among occultists and those connected with public and private institutions. May be
capable of originating formulas for medication or commercial chemistry or inventing useful methods of tjeatmfcnt.
If afflicted, it brings trouble, difficulty, estrangement
from friends and, public, lack of sociability or sympathy;
opposition, hostility, criticism and scandal coupled with
unexpected misfortune and reversals. • •
.“Are the star* your servants? Yes, if you obey the lasf that
they loo obey." — Cleopatra, by Mun'dy.

GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
NEPTUNE
Its Influence in the Twelve Zodiacal Signs
Neptune rules the sign, Pisces
The influence of Neptune upon human kind is that of
a mcdiumistic order and those who are responsive1- to
the vibrations of this mysterious planet are often subject to queer and indefinable feelings, sensations and
emotions.
At times it produces negative states in which the
subject takes on the influence of surrounding conditions
either consciously or unconsciously and acts or feels,
for the time being, in harmony with the nature of persons pontacted.
When this planet is well aspectcd in a horoscope, the
native is endowed with aspiration and correct premonitions and is apparently often directed to do just t,he
right thing, or to be in just the right place at opportune
times.
Such persons are frequently clairvoyant and have
feelings about* things which should be carefully analyzed
as Neptune gives psychometric faculty which can be
developed to so fine an order that its subjects can give
truly interesting facts through the senS?1 of touch and
feeling, when handling'an article for that purpose. They
can .also very correctly interpret dreams if they make
a careful study of that subject. It usually bestows some
artistic gift, which is 'susceptible to 'high development.
In fact, briefly stated, Neptune represents inspiration,
psychometry, mediumShip and inner feeling, as Venus,
'its octave, rules touch or outer feeling. It rules things
or conditions of* a mysterious, hidden nature, such as
seanced", “silence" meetings or affairs of a secret order.
Its influence is considered neutral, because the character
of its expression is dependent upon the quality of ‘the
aspects made with- other planets and its position in sign
and Bouse of the- horoscope. It represents the feqt ir,
the human organism, but in its esoteric sense it governs

PART III, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES 317
the very base of understanding and knowledge of things
as they are ami not as they seem *to. be.
When Neptune »is foifhd adversely located and aspectad in a chart, ^t leads to over-receptivity, inertness
an<t states too negatiVe and passive, which result in various ills or defects of character, allowing weakness to
temptations when strength and resistance are most
needed. The emotions seem to predominate, which, if
allowed to run info extremes, produce unnatural appetites changefulness, uncertainty, indolence, vague imagination, intrigues and confusion, fringing troubles
through schemes, plots, deception and secret enmities.
When well aspected Neptune bestows some gift, but
when afflicted it gives some weakness which should be
discovered early in life and properly transmuted. With
Neptune afflicted, the native, being quickly affeettd by
the environment mentally and physically, should investigate the philosophy of ah things mysterious before
trying the phenomena. He should avoid all such places
as hospitals, pfisonl, slaughter-houses, etc., or any place
where the influences are contaminating. Hu would do
wc^i to take frequent and regular treatments of autosuggestion to become firm, positive and energetic, as
the catse may require, and he may be assisted by others
who are capable and who have themselves reached a
high plane of. spiritual development; because, as before
stated this is a neutral planet and its influence, or rather
the responses made by the individual, may be transformed and improved.
There are days when people ruled by Neptvne should
have nothing to do with occult phenomena, seances,
medicines, narcotics, anaesthetics, etc.; then again there
are days when they should strive to develop their artistic
or occult faculties and these times are the planetary
hours of Venus on thewdays when the Moon is>in good ,
aspect to Nepiune
Things Ruletyby Neptune*
* The planet Neptune seems to be in a nebulous state
•and its influence appears to be more psychic than phys-

GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
ical or material. It represents spirit feeling, sensing, or
inner perception'. It governs the recept'ive faculties. Its
nature is neutral and spirituLl (no£ necessarily from a
religious standpoint). It is not known to rule any metal,
mineral or other material sjlbstafnce as do the other
planets, but is related to gas, drugs, chemicals and
anaesthetics. It is dualistic in character; on the .one
hand it may represent chaos, and on the other fine,
spiritual insight. It has affinity for oil, liquids, beverages, tobacco and the sea ; impressionistic art.
Neptune in Aries
V T
If well aspected, the native will take leading parts in
mystical or secret societies and push forward popularity
of plychic research.
It intensifies the feelings, demotions and senses, softening or elevating the disposition through sympathy, benevolence, spirit perception orjnner 'understanding.
If give? a love of traveling, also some mystical experiences and original ideas with regard to religiouk or
spiritual mattsrs, and naturopathic methods. It confers
vivid impulses toward the correction of human dlls or
conditions, the reform of existing institutions and an
incentive toward a national, political or public career.
If afflicted, it gives peculiar feelings, aversions, premonitions and usually inclines to some habit for the
gratification of the senses, such as smoking, or excessive
use of stifnulants.
Nep{une in Taurus
If wall aspected, it assists ofher testimonies in the
chart fo^ financial gain, especially through speculation,
business and secret pr private organizations. , *
It gjves a love for occi/ltism, the old, curious and.
mystical ; in fact, it increases the aesthetic taste and atlds
a spiritual touch to tljt nature.

PART III, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES 319
It denotes enthusiasm in beliefs, a companionable disposition, usually patient and gdod-humored, and although rather quick it^ temper, soft-hearted. A favorable location for friendship and marriagd. It contributes
an active desire *,t<5 disseminate scientific knowledge,
simplifying it as far as possible, and popularizing the
truth. It gives an insight to natural and psychic phenomena and a desire to undo the doctrines of materialism.
Bestows a nature which senses mental achievements,
seeing human progress years in advance of the times.
In business or profession it seeks*to simplify methods
for practical • application. The native is likely to be
seclusive and lack certainty or persistence in acquiring
the common pleasures of life, and to disregard the conventional or business trend of the present.
If afflicted, it adds to the sensuality and increases the
alimentiveness and desire, for stimulants. It tends to
negative and psychical states, receptivity without executiveness, and.^ decided inclination toward-imagination,
mysticism and luxury.
Neptune in Gemini
rr
Well aspepted, increases the mental sensitivity, giving
imagination, impressions, musical taste, prophetic and
symbolic dreams. It gives great linguistic or tonversational capacity and an interest in the drama, poetry,
philosophy and occultism.
It tends to sympathy and geniality. • Favorable for
quick perception, science, mathematics, invention or anything requiring mechanical ingenuity or fine handiwoilr.
If afflicfed, it inclines to excessive geniality and.
romantic friendships, mental restlessness or diffusion,
livelihood «f complications or misunderstanding with
brethren, cousins or neighbors, afid difficulty or anxiety
through too great mental receptivity. Deception in
promises or agreements ; misunderstanding of reports or
rumors.

GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
Neptune in Cancer
V S*
Well aspected, adds delicacy, refinement and idealism
to the spiritual faculties. Increases -strength of imagination, adds power to the impressions and intensifies the
emotions. It conduces to love of nature and natural
science, love of home and domestic comforts, although
likely to bring some important changes in residence and
some peculiar or mysterious experience or development
therein. It gives sympathy (especially for mother),
inspiration and psychic or mediumistic faculty. Fondness for traveling, especially by water.
If afflicted, gives a highly impressionable and sensitive nature ; restlessness, discontent and strong desire
for change are prominent. Indisposition through stomach and by receptive, passive or negative states and
inner nervousness or anxiety. Some complications or
peculiar conditions in connection with home or domestic
affairs.
Neptune in Leo
v a
If well aspected, indicates an ambitious, quiet; dignified, benevolent and warm-hearted disposition; much
sympathy, charity and generosity coupled With intuitive
foresight.
The higher emotions are intensified giving keen and
accurate* interpretation of human feelings. It bestows
a high quality to the faculties of mind as expressed in
spirituality and conscientiousness.
♦ Fond of refined sports, pleasure, society and of the
fine arts such as poetry, music, painting, the opera and
•drama. .Peculiar sensations or feelings; mysterious or
unconventional conditions arise through matters of
affection; likely to suffer severe heartache through disappointment relating to the affections.
If afflicted, likely to give too much love of . pleasure
and trouble of some kind through allowing the senses.

PART m, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES 321
feelings and emotions to sway the reason ; also difficulty
through too lavish expenditure of energy, impulsive
sympathy and generosity.
Neptune in Virgo
V "I!
ilf well aspected, gives an intellectual trend to the
spiritual faculties; a rather reserved nature, capable in
mathematics and profound in the investigation of psychical phenomena; mediumistic tendency.
It adds gentleness, constancy and patience tq the disposition. The' native may be unusual in some way and
entertain peculiar ideas with regard to medication, hygiene, diet and labor conditions.
. It inclines to gain through employment in clerical
work, pharmacy, chemistry, nursing, etc. Love of
flowers; herbs, shrubs, fish. and small animals.
• If afflicted, .it tends to selfishness and deceit, and
indicates danger through the use of drugs, medicine,
beverages and trouble with the bowels.
Neptune in Libra
If well aspected, adds tenderness and compassion to
the nature, increasing the imagination and giving poetical, musical and artistic appreciation. It tends'to general popularity, love, friendship and marriage. It gives
a love of science, especially the occult, interest ifl magic
and motion pictures, socTal an’d economic equity.
If afflicted, mav give too much sympathetic emotion,
easily moved to tears, too great an attraction toward the
opposite sex. Mysterious conditions apise out of unionsj
and associations with ethers.
Neptune in Scorpio
V ftl
y well aspected, intensifies the feeling and emotions
.and gives greater scope to the inventive ability ; adds a

GENETHLIACAL ASTItOLOGY
love for secret arts such as chemistry and also for the
recondite sciences. To the nature it 'lends persistence,
reserve, secrecy and quick .temper. It . also tends to
practical mediumistic or occult experiences and assists
any other testimonies in the chart fer gain by legacy.
If afflicted, likely to lead to 'too great a love for sensation, luxury or beverages, and may often be given to
slander or rebuke and loss of legacy through treachefy.
Neptune in Sagittarius
i V t
If well aspected, it adds reverence, reason, determination and ambition to the nature. It gives a love (or
traveling and much of it. It denotes farsightedness,
dreams, visions, inspiration and mystical experiences
Prophetic insight with regard to business, art, .science,
religion, foreign affairs, liteeature and psychic research.
If afflicted, likely to give too great a love for change
and travel and over-sensitive emotions: vague, indefinite
feelings such as strange and annoying dreams or visions
and psychical states; afflictions in foreign lands; trouDle
through religidus or political sentiments.
Neptune in Capricorn
V V3
If w^ll aspected, strong faith and good reasoning
powers ; geculia'r or psychic business insight ; careful
and cautious cbut fearless when convinced, indicates
seriousness or spells of depression and also trouble or
sorrow in family affairs during youth, especially in connection with the father. It gives interest in psychical
Affairs and profif through art, fmusic, large business
enterprises and public and private institutions.
If afflicted, it .will tend t« make the nature somewhat
indefinite and secretive. May indicate peculiar family
relations and cause complications or scandal in business.'

PART III, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES 323
Nepturfe in Aquarius
If well aspected, inci*eascs the intuition and inner
perception, gives love of nature, friendship, popularity
and sociability. Tfie •native is independent and original
in religious and scientific views. Interest in social welfare, clubs and congressional activities. Expansive, progressive, sympathetic and humane.
If afflicted, the native is likely to be too independent
and eccentric. Apt to suffer from disappointment in
love and scandal with regard to Social and marital
affairs. Involved in the difficulties of friends.
Neptune in Pisces
V K
If we*ll aspected, it lendg dignity to the nature and
gives ability for quiet, serious, profound thought and
contemplation. It .is good for the inspirational faculty
and intensifies' the mediumistic and psychical qualities,
usually conferring some occult ability and fondness for
thednvestigation of mysticism and the recondite sciences.
Th^ native is usually broad-minded, sympathetic,,
domestic and charitable. Benefits ^through help and
charity both .given and received. It gives a love for
travel especially by water, and gain through occupations
connected with shipping, etc.
If afflicted, the native is likely to suffer in health from
psychic conditions and ’meet* with losses arftl ill luck
through thwarted schemes and often by ainaccountjble
circumstances.
, “They fought from heaven; the stars In their course* fought
agatust Stsera."— Judges V-20

GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
PLUTO
At the present time very little is yet known of Pluto’s
influence upon human affairs. ' Considering Uranus and
Neptune (the former discovered in, 1781, the latter in
1845) and the length of time which elapsed before mankind began to give visible demonstration of their influence in affairs of the world, it is not unreasonable -to
believe that it will be some years before mankind will be
able to demonstrate the influence of Pluto in daily life.
About thirty-fivp years ago astronomers, noting the
unusual perturbations of Neptune, surmised that a body
in an orbit beyond it must be causing the disturbance
of Neptune. A concerted effort was begun to locate the
disturber. Dr. Percival Lowell built an observatory and
a 13-inch telescope at Flagstaff, Arizona, especially to
seek out the planet hitherto unseen by mortal means.
Unfortunately, he did not live until the planet was
photographed by a studenf astronomer, W. C. Tombaugh, who located it at last near the fixed star Delta
Geminorum, that in ancient times was known as Wasat
and characterized as being of similar nature to Saturn.
The new planet was therefore in the seventeenth degree
of the sign Capccr, in the constellation Gemini at time
of the announcement of its discovery, March 12, 1930.
At about the same time that astronomers were noticing the perturbations of Neptune by means of its variations on their photographic charts, astrologers were
likewise noticing otherwise unaccounted for influences
in chart's which<Ieemed to focirs at about the center of
the sign Cancer. In fact,' it is ‘surprising that a planet
was, not discc/vcred there before that time, as it must
have appeared on scores of astronomical photographic
[Hates. However, the position of the big, fixed star,
Wasat, in that direction complicated the investigations
of astrologers by causing peculiarities to be assigned to
it in absence of ocular proof of the presence of another
body there.
This? in effect, was parallel to the procedure followed'
by astronomers. They, noted the behavior of Neptune,

PART. Ill, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES* 325
in their charts ancf plates and from the influence exerted
upon it from some mysterious soui'ce- within the solar
system they realized thye must be another body beyond, which causdld the disturbance. This was when
Neptune was near'iije eodiacal conjunction with the
unseen stranger.
It is gratifying that astronomy has verified the anticipations of astrologers that a planet would eventually be
photographed in the Cancer sign of the zodiac.
It is not taken for granted that th» planet is a newcomer in our solar system any more than Urafaus and
Neptune were newcomers at moment of their discovery.
Mythology provides plenty of references to justify a
belief that the ancients were long aware of their presepce. Likewise there are references to ultra-Neptunian
bodies and an intra-Mercurial body named Vulcan.
Vulcan, however, probably sever will be photographed
by present-day methods because it is in a spiritualized
condition with .rarified rays of vibration which do not
photograph. It has probably passed through all the
stages of evolution which the other planets are now
undergoing and is preparing to enter the "bosom of the
father” i.e., return into* the Sun, after w*hich Mercury
will ir r turn succeed to its state as will all the other
planets in the course of time. A noteS astrologer, L. H.
Weston, has tomputed the ephemeris of Vulcan and
many have tested its influence to their satisfaction. Astronomers must develop better means of photography
before being able to “discover” Vulcan, .but the foldings
of astrology are a flgnifioant indication that eventually
it, too, will be "discovered.”
Pluto’s Eflfect on Astrology
Because its position if now accurately, determined, it’
will stimulate the older researchers to greater activity
and will encourage many new students to undertake a
study of its eflfects in horoscijpes. -Knowledge concerning the character or quality of its vibrations will ^eventually determine as to whith of the twelve zodiacal
signs it most closely corresponds, or resembles, and

GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
PLUTO
At the present time very little is yet known of Pluto’s
influence upon human affairs. ' Considering Uranus and
Neptune (the former discovered iij.1781, the latter in
1846) and the length of time which elapsed before mankind began to give visible demonstration of their influence in affairs of the world, it is not unreasonable to
believe that it will be some years before mankind will be
able to demonstrate the influence of Pluto in daily life.
About thirty-five years ago astronomers, noting the
unusual perturbations of Neptune, surmised that a body
in an orbit beyond it must be causing the disturbance
of Neptune. A concerted effort was begun to locate the
disturber. Dr. Percival Lowell built an observatory and
a 13-inch telescope at Flagstaff, Arizona, especially to
seek 5ut the planet hitherto unseen by mortal means.
Unfortunately, he did not live until the planet was
photographed by a studenf astronomer, W. C. Tombaugh, who located it at last near tjie fixed star Delta
Geminorum, that in ancient times was known as Wasat
and characterized as being of similar nature to Saturn.
The new planet was therefore in the seventeenth degree
of the sign Capcer, in the constellation Gemini at time
of the announcement of its discovery, March 12, 1930.
At about the same time that astronomers were noticing the perturbations of Neptune by means of its variations on their photographic charts, astrologers were
likewise noticing otherwise unaccounted for influences
in charfc which*seemcd to focus at about the center of
the sign Cancer. In fact,' it is ’surprising that a planet
was, not discc/Vcred there before that time, as it must
have appeared on scores of astronomical photographic
[Hates. However, the position of the^ big, fixed star,
Wasat, in that direction complicated the investigations
of astrologers by causing peculiafities to be assigned to
it in absence of ocular proof of the presence of another
body there.
This> in effect, was parallel to the procedure followed*
by astronomers. They, noted the behavior of Neptune,

PART. III. DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES? 325
in their charts ancf plates and from the influence exerted
upon it from some mystenious soui'ce* within the solar
system they realized th ye must be another body beyond, which caustfd the disturbance. This was when
Neptune was near*ilje «odiacal conjunction with the
unseen stranger.
It is gratifying that astronomy has verified the anticipations of astrologers that a planet would eventually be
photographed in the Cancer sign of the zodiac.
It is not taken for granted that th» planet is a newcomer in our solar system any more than UraMus and
Neptune were newcomers at moment of their discovery.
Mythology provides plenty of references to justify a
belief that the ancients were long aware of their presence. Likewise there are references to ultra-Neptunian
bodies and an intra-Mercurial body named Vulcan.
Vulcan, however, probably pever will be photographed
by present-day methods because it is in a spiritualized
condition with .rarified rays of vibration which do not
photograph. It has probably passed through all the
stages of evolution which the other planets are how
undergoing and is preparing to enter the “bosom of the
father” i.e., return into* the Sun, after -wfhich Mercury
will in> turn succeed to its state as will all the other
planets in the course of time. A noted astrologer, L. H.
Weston, has tomputed the ephemeris of Vulcan and
many have tested its influence to their satisfaction. Astronomers must develop better means of photography
before being able to "discover” Vulcan, .but the findings
of astrology are a lignifioant indication that eventually
it, too, will be “discovered.”
Pluto’s Effect on Astrology
Because its position if now accurately, determined, it'
will stimulate the older researchers to greater activity
and will encourage many new students to undertake a
stucly of ks effects in horosccjpes. 'Knowledge concerning the character or quality of its vibrations will#eventlially determine as to which of the twelve zodiacal
signs it most closely corresponds, or resembles, and

GEVETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
consequently of which it may be termed h "ruler” for
want of a better term.
There will be no new immediate effect except to stimulate investigation as to its influence upon the human,
animal, vegetable and mineral kingdoms. The stranger
may have been but recently discovered but it has pot
just arrived. It has long been circling its orbit just as
the other planets. But when man developed to the place
in his unfold mcnt where he could think and believe
there were bodies beyond his sight, he also acquired the
skill to .find them. That does not mean, however, that
he suddenly becomes capable of registering and manifesting the influence of its rays.
Uranus and later Neptune were "discovered” when
the mind became sufficiently keen and capable of searching for them successfully. The subconscious fatuity has
always been aware of their existence and has always
been susceptible to their influence. But only recently
has the mass of mankind begun to ‘respbnd consciously
to those rnys. Humanity in general is but beginning to
exercise the real force. of Uranus. In astrology Uranus
is said to rule, the air, aerial navigation, electricity, wireless methods, radio-active elements. Is this not the age
of man’s conquest, of the air? Neptune is said 'to rule
beneath the waters and in conscious response to the influence of its rays mdn is exploring the underseas. In
the World War, Uranus and Neptune were prime factors- in the great conflict through the use of airplanes
and submarines?
It did not.take very long after the exact location of
Uranus was discovered for astrologers to classify the
• nature of its vibrations, by associating its "aspects" with
, mundane events^ or conditions and “then finally learn
that its "home” sign was Aquarius. Contiguous observation establishes this allocation as correct, since its rediscovery in 1781 by William Herschel, ^English court
musician and? aVn^teilr asUpnomer — the first nmn actually to^'discover” a planet with the telescope, but he was
by no means the first to know about undiscovered
pjanets! Only now jdthe world of humanity beginning

PART III, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES 327
to react tp the ’vibrations of Uranus, the harbinger of
the n tyf age. of the brotherhood ef .man. Only a few,
comparatively speaking, have thus far been able adequately to respond to its influence, such.as Lincoln and
Edison, emancipator ajid inventor.
k
Neptune, known to ancient astrologers by various
names, but mostly as Poseidon, was located through
telescopes simultaneously on September 23r$, 1846 by
U. J. Le Verrier, in Paris and J. F. Galle, in Berlin. Its
influence differs considerably from that of Uranus, the
upheaver, the revolutionizer. It imparts a more psychic
or subtle vibration to which as yet few are able to
respond in true measure. Sir Oliver Lodge and Conan
Doyle have sensed something of its influence as haye
some other sensitive souls who seem to be gifted with
, super-normal sense.
O
Fewer still, then, must; there be at present who can
register and reflect the influence of an ultra-Neptunian
planet. Horoscopes which in the past have been erected
for individuals, by those proficient to do the work correctly according to the usual rules, are n6t wrcftig because Pluto was not included in the charts. But as
interest in the planet grows, as information concerning
it is tabulated, children will be born endowed with all
which that interest , and information implies and their
reactions can be read in their horoscopes. In the meantime its influence will be observed in mundane, or state,
astrology and in the field of astro-meteordlogy, and
eventually its “home” in the zodiac wjll be located. Much
may also be leaftied by students who* secure an ephemeris of Pluto and insert its place in known horoscopes,
and, noting its house position and aspects (especially
progressed aspects to Pluto) And conditions and events
corresponding jto those indications which cannot at Ihe
same time be logically attributed tcf other sources.
I’luto ^classical mythology was the god of the outer
Vegion^, the rfiler of the dead. He was. a son of Cronus
and Rhea, a brother of fceus (Jspiter) and Poseidon
fNeptune), and at the partition of the world <he kingdom of the shades fell to him.. He married Persephone

GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
(Proserpina). By the Greeks h'e was generally called
Hades and by the Romans Orcus, Tartarus and Dis
Pater. As in the oasfc of all pagan deities; the accounts
of Pluto vary with different wrjters and periods. The
worship of Pluto was extensively spYead among the
Greeks and Ramans. The cypress, .thu box, the narcissus, and the plant adiantum (m&iden-hair) were sacred
(ruled by) to him; oxen and goats were sacrificed to
him in the shades of night, and his priests were crowned
with cypress.
He is represented in gloomy majesty, his forehead
shaded by his hair, and with a thick beard. In his hand
he holds ar two-forked scepter, a staff or a key ; by his
side is Cerberus. He is often accompanied by his wife,
Persephone. (Cerberus, the dog-monster of Hades is
described as having three heads, a serpent’s tail, and a
mane o / snakes. It was subdued by Heracles (Hercules, •,
son of Zeus) in the twelfth labor. The twelve labors of
Hercules are believed by man}; writers to represent the
course of the Sun through the twelve signs of the zodiac.,
In the study of mythology it becomes apparent that
the ccfrruptidns of time distorted the original meaning
and indications of the myths. Where originally they
bore significance^ the heavenly bodies and their movements, their later treatments and interpretations became
distorted to suit theological notions. Some careless
writers confused Plutus, (sometimes picture'd as a boy
with a cornucopia) the Greek god of riches, with Pluto,
the god of the dead whose oldest name was Hades — "the
unseen..” #In their, pure rendition the myths were of
astrological ^igniffcance.
Th^sons of Oonus and Rhea, that is, Zeus (Jupiter),
Poseidon (Neptune) and ’Pluto, having deposed Cronus,
ca£t lots for the kingdoms of the heaven, the sea and
the outer regions. ’Jupiter won the heaven,' Neptune
the sea, and Pluto the outer or infernal regions, which,
from the original name of their ruler, w^re afterwards,
known as Hade%. ,To some the "house of Hades” was
at dark and dreadful hbode or, spirits deep down in the
earth, ftit according to another view the “house of

PART III, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES 329
Hades” was a* land in the far west, which to the Greeks
was always* thp region of darkness and death; to the east
was attributed light and life.
In the oldest Grpek jnythology the House of Hades
was a place neither 'of reward nor punishment; it was
simply the home of the dead, good and bad alike, who
led a dim or shadowy reflection of life on earth ; akin to
what is now termed the astral plane.
Pluto was simply the ruler of the house of death; in
no sense was he depicted as a tempter or seducer of
mankind, like, the devil of Christian theology. Pluto
was certainly depicted as stern and pitiless, but he was
only so in discharge of his duty as custodian of the dead.
, As it is so evident that mythology has drawn upon
astrology for its references to the planets, including the
Sun and Moon, it will be amiss for astrology to
draw upon mythology Concerning "the unseen” planet.
Oranus, under favorable conditions, could be seen with
the naked eye; Poseidon could be seen wjth a small
glass or other means available to wise men of old* ; but
Pftrto, inhabitant of the “outer regions” was Hades or
“the unseen.” In fact? so inconspicuous* is it that modern astronomical phonographs recorded it many times
before astronomers recognized it and realized that it
was a planet of the "outer region,” that is, a wanderer
in an orbit farthest from the Sun.
Pjuto's Sign Rulership
One of the questions arising since the* rediscovery of
Pluto is, “What house does Pluto rule? Mythology
plainly says in no uncertain terms, “The house of Had£s
(Pluto) is the hdme of the dead.” In. astrology this can
refer to but one house — the eighth. Th*e eighth* "house”
in the natural or universal zodiac corresponds t* Scorpio.
The theological notion plt&ed the home" of Hades deep
down in the earth and called it Hell. Mythology designated it “in the far west. Astrologically the eighth

CENETHLIACAI, ASTROLOGY
house is in the west (west by south). ' Astronomically,
the constellation Scorpio is the> abode of the many headed monster.*
The three headed dog is usually pictured with Pluto;
said dog is actually pictured in tsbe constellation Scorpio.
See the three-headed monster above the tail of scorpion
in the large pictorial diagram (Star Map) of the heavens
attached (o back part of this volume. Pluto is “ruler of
the dead.” In astrology Scorpio and the eighth house
rule the dead and matters relating to the dead.
Pluto is usually pictured with a woman; Scorpio is
termed a feminine sign. Cerberus is depicted variously
as having three to one hundred heads, and body covered
with snakes. Scorpio rules stagnant water and such
places as are inhabited with scorpions, vipers, etc.
Pluto — Scorpio
Until better- evidence is found or better reasons advanced we believe Pluto rules Scorpio. This displaces
Mars as ruler of one of the signs to which he has commonly been* assigned. Mars is considered hot, dry,
active ; Scorpio, cold, moist, sluggish. While it requires
some stretch of*imagination to reconcile the two, there
are characteristics in common between them sufficient
to use Mars as rulef of Scorpio, and we may still continue to do so until more is definitely known of Pluto.
The New Deal, which started shortly after the advent
of Pluto, indicates the death of many old systems, political and ‘economic?. In fact, thousands of banks failed
in 1932-3, Necessitating a ‘complete shut-down of the
remaining banks and for that period they were "dead.”
Scorpio, as the eighth sign, is also “ruler of other peoples money,” thus banks come under eighth house influences. The Blue Eagle insignia, adopted, by the N.
•R. A., looks strdngely like the fantastic bird pictured
by the ancients as the ruler of Scorpio.
• Id Part V of the “A Z Horodfcope Maker and Delineator” are
twelve clwpters dealing with Mythological and Biblical References ,
to the Zodiacal Signs. In the chapter on Scorpio the "dog of heH”
(Cerberus) Is associated wlfh the scorpion.

PART III, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES 881
Astrologers deed not hesitate to make necessary adjustments from time to.time; modern science is continually forced to make adjustments in keeping with latest
discoveries. Ccfpernicus for instance, made discoveries
which exploded >\he then prevailing science of astronomy. He changed the’ science completely from a heliocentric to a geocentric system; from a belief that the
Sun rolled around the earth to a' knowledge that the
earth travels around the Sun. That change did not
revolutionize astrology because it did not alter the influence of the Sun. Astronomers today are not ashamed
of that change in the system — they are mighty glad it
was discovered.
There was a time not so long ago when, in the absence
of better evidence, Saturn, like Mars, was given rule of
two signs. But when Uranus was ''discovered”. Saturn’s
rulership of Aquarius was dropped while Uranus was
assigned its rulership. Subsequent events and research
prove the wisdom of that change in the system of
modern astrology.
Jupiter, from time immemorial was called the 'ruler of
both Sagittarius and Pisces. Upon the "discovery" of
Neptune, and the making of its ephemeris, Jupiter’s
allocation to Pisces was dropped and Neptune assigned
to rulership of Pisces. Nothing has since developed to
impeach that rulership; rather, much has occurred to
substantiate the claim.
Now astrology is provided with ppportunijy to make
another improvement, and in keeping with other scientific researches, does not hesitate to do so.
Horoscopes Without Pluto Not Wrong
A fakir who had been eking out h Jiving selling ready
made "horoscopes” at one of the beach reSorts, when
Pluto was "discovered” told a reporter, “I ■fcm quitting
the astrology business £nd going, into real estate.
“Why,” inquired the scribe? "Well, you see,” he replied,
“I’ve sold thousands of Uproscopes (!) and asPluto was
left out of all of them, they’rp all wrong and I’m afraid

GJSNETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
my clients will want their money back.’' (Af 25 cents
per "horoscope” that meant a tremendous refund !)
Astrology is delighted to be rid of him although we feel
sorry for the realty business!
Man has only just now becoihe keen and capable
enough to "discover” the pla’net and it will be some time
yet before he becomes physically and mentally attuned
sufficiently to manifest any reactions to the influence ol
its vibrations and in the course of time these will develop the ability to respond to its influence. In the interim
researchers will be learning something about Pluto by
means of analogy, thJLt is, study of resemblance of properties or relations; similarity without identity; reasoning in which from certain observed and known relations
or resemblances other are inferred ; reasoning that proceeds from the individual or particular to a co-ordinate
particulaV, thus involving both induction and deduction.
In other words analogy is specifically a resemblance of
relations, a resemblance that rrtay be reasoned from, so
that from the likeness in certain respects vye may infer >
that other and perhaps deeper relations* exist. In fact,
that is ;ust what we have been doing in this article —
comparing the known factors of Pluto with its myth-*
ological features and deducing its yilership of the sign
Scorpio. It may 'be called masculine, stern, somewfiat
inscrutable, not itself .malignant but dealing with high
potencies ; invoked by or responsive to music, especially
the kind of music characterized as “jazz.”
Scorpio is a Good Sign
Scorpio is equally as good and as desirable for a birth
month sign as aijy other. Each sign has its favorable
and unfavorable indications and in that respect Scorpio
is npt different from the others. Because it was necessary to mention things in relation to Pluto and Scorpio
that” might tend to place th’e sign in an unfavorable light
to new students and to new readers it is only just to
present sonfe of its better indications.
Scorpio usually gives strong characteristics, keen
judgment .‘"is shrewd, critical, sceptical, tenacious, enter-,
prising and energetic. Not easily fooled or offended,

PART 111, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES 333
but positive,4sd,f-confident, brave and daring. In business, politics or law Scorpions are ,very aggressive. They
are sagacious and determined. Make good engineers,
mechanics, contractors; oil workers, dentists, druggists,
detectives, lawyers, soldiers, policemen, sheriffs, jailors,
etc. As surgeons’ ■ or’, chemists, they can hardly be
equalled. Nor need natives of the sign Scorpio feel
jbashed because Cerberus is in their constellation for it
should be recalled that Hercules is also there, he who
labored his way so successfully through the obstacles
of all the signs, his conquests in every instance being of
benefit to humanity. (See Hercules in the Star Map.)
Things Related to Pluto
Pinto rules the underworld, that la, the subconscious workings
of the body. The fluxing Influences, the contest between acid and
alkali; the fuzing actions ; burning out of dross material; all
those processes whose transmuting actions tend to regenerate the
body; * sustain, repair, renew or perpetuate It through the burning up and casting out of der<i material — from death to life. It
also rules conscience, that Inner prompter which helps 11s Judge
Tight from wropg, subconscious activities, the underworld, stern,
incorruptible judges. Without Pluto there would be no subconscious functions to keep the subtile fires within oui« being yorklinc.
even while we sleep, for our daily repair, renewal, regeneration
alid perpetuation; no conscience to give us hell when we do wrong!
However, this deeper significance of the influegee of the planets Is
not always readily discerned.
About 175 miles south of Cairo on thh site of the ancient and
aaered city of "Herraopolls a tomb was recently discovered In
which had heen painted scenes depicting the abduction of Froserpinn by Tluto, with Hermes driving the chariot. ,In modern
days this act of Pluto “ruler of the underworld" finds counterpart
In the acts of “vice barons” taking their ybosen victims “for a
ride" In a gasolines chariot. In ancient mythology Pluto Is referred to as the god of tile underworld, yet a Just* and Incorruptible Judge. He passes sentence which gives five sorrow or suffering that is due ench soul. The sentence and discipline are Intended
to result in strength and purification. Thua death becomes both
liberator and regenerator. Analysis of the myth leads to the i?onclualon that It points to Pluto as “ruler gf the house of death,”
I.e., the natflral eighth sign of the zodiac— Scorpio. , ,
Marvelous as may seem the strides during the dry, Uranian
age, they will by-comparison be/dwarfed Into lnalgolficance by the
greatly • preponderant advance undek (he- Influence of Pluto.
Through comparison and analysis correlating planetary Influences
and whnt bus gone before In delation to the development of man
utid his environment, we are arawn logically to the conclusion

GENETHLIACAL astrology
that tha Influence of a new planet would ultlmst'ly be Indicated
by regeneration as the key word of what It can Imply to the
present limitations of mind. Through its rayg njan'wlll be able
to renew and perpetuate his mind ahd body until he la ready for
new experiences and life on other pie Dots, The potent Influence
of vltamlnes to the human body became known and applied beneficially aoon after the advent of Pluto. . Gradually man will learn
to demonstrate the spiritual values of levitation, transformation,
materialization, metamorphosis, transfiguration, — regeneration.
Good Aspects of Pluto
Its good aspects favor the discovery of error, detection of Injustice. Revitalizing Ideas and Incidents which tend to promote
health, preserve life sijd encourage freer expression of the subconscious activities are probably due to Piuto’a vibrations: also
beneficial financial prospects, favorable astral or dream experiences. Good for matters pertaining to healing, cauterizing, pasteurization, fumigation, pest control, surgery, taxes. Insurance,
legacies or affairs connected with the goods or property of the
deceased. Washing, steaming, steam-baths, preserving, canning,
banting, •- embalming, creosotlDg, painting, purifying, burning
debris, beneflceDt auto-suggestion, reproduction, overcoming habits
or faults and Imperfections.
Adverse Aspects of Plpto .
The tdverse* aspects to Pluto Incline to Inversion of Its better
qualities, low morality, lack of conscience. Indecency) disrespect
of law, underworld proclivities. Immersed In bondage to appearance we fall to see the realities or Truth ; liable to detection In
error, misdemeanor or crime. Violation of spiritual laws and
subsequent retribution ; liable to get "atung,” “burnt,” “skinned”
or apprehended. Possibility of trouble through political connivances, tax evasions, misuse of funds, contagion, Infection. Unfavorable for matters mentioned under the head of good aspects. Much
depends upbn which planet Is adversely aspectlng Pluto. In this
paragraph some of Its worst expressions are described, or rather,
the worst human reactions to Its vibrations, .all of which Is subject to modification, and little o/ It may be manlfe&TM by those
who are making conscious and well directed efforts to convert the
dross of self Into fhe gold of Reality.
‘■“I am part of the sea and stars ,
And the .winds 1 of the Sonth and North ;
Of mountains and Koon and Mars,
And the age* sent me forth 1”
— Ety/ard H. 8. Terry

PART III, DELINEATION'S FOR HOROSCOPES 335
INFLUENCE* OF THE PLANETS
IN -THE MUNDANE ‘HOUSES
These interpretations are for the planets by their
positions in the houses’ -only, unaspected, unless otherwise stated. If a planet is aspected its delineation by
house, as herein given, is subject to modification correspondingly.
Before taking literally, word for word, the delineations following, note whether the planet in question is
in dignity or .debility; whether in good or bad aspect,
nature of aspecting planets and from what houses; then
modify the reading accordingly.
For instance, Saturn in the fifth house; Del^y, disappointment and sorrow through love affairs, affections
and pleasures; incapacity £or obtaining real enjoyment;
loss through speculations and investments.
However, if Saturn were in Capricorn, the sign it
rules, and well aspected or free from afflictions, it toould
b»not nearly so bad, showing an attraction for a serious,
elderly person ; quiet enjoyment ; success by investment
in lauds, mines and property, lead, coal and such things
as Saturn rules.
By using the foregoing suggestion as a guide, and
givifig your own modified interpretation,— qflalifying.
amplifying or moderating your deductions to#conform
with the astrological testimonies, you irtifold ^rour latent
faculties of perception and ekpression, besides developing judgment and intuition. Thus you justify the science
by proper application of its principles. Consider tjie
nature of the planet and the nature of the sign in which
it is located; note whether it is at home, or at ease therein; then tabulate and study its aspects. With the testimonies thu^ gathered you ye now ready to Mend and
mbdify Jhe indfeations and form your judgment.

GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
Recapitulation :
1 — Consider the nature of the planet, whether benefic,
malefic, neutral, warm, moist, 'cold, {jtc.
2 — Note the nature of the sign ift'which it is posited;
whether fiery, earthly, airy, watery, cardinal, fixed, common, fruitful, barren, positive, negative, masculine, feminine, northern, southern, human, bestial, mute,
voiced, etc.
3 — Note whether, it is at home, or debilitated therein.
4 — Then calculate its aspects and study each one
separately. Note the good as well as the adverse aspects.
5 — £Jow you are ready to blend and modify the indications according to the testimonies thus gathered and
form a synthesis delineated according to the house
position.*
Planets by house position are indications only and do
not give continued success or continued difficulty.
t
For example,. Jupiter in the second or tenth house,
in good aspect to one or more planets, would give long
periods of success and prosperity ; but if Jupiter were
afflicted there would be spells of favorable periods,
followed by difficult and troublesome times. Just when
these different conditions would manifest, may be
judged from the transits and the horoscope by direction,
i.e., the "Pragresced Chart.
If a planet ic in good aspect to one planet and in adverse aspect to another, it indicates success through the
one and misfortune through the other. The two aspects
do not neutralize each other. Every aspect operates in
due tim?.
* In connection with the, foregplng five points, please refer to
the following dekflptSons of Influence of the Planets In the
Mundane Homes of a Horoscope,- pages 337 to 418, and Influence
of the Planets in Each of the 12 Zodiacal Signs, pages 258 to 334. 1
Also see pages 38 to 46.

PART III, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES 337
FIRST HOUSI?
Influence of thf Planets in the Mundape Houses
of. the Horoscope
Moon in First House
Change in fortune, residence, occupation and employment; sensitive, intuitive and receptive mind; fruitful
imagination and nature ; ambition, activity and an inclination for publif life ; refined, ingenious, observant and
considerate.
In a common or cardinal sign it denotes flexibility,
inconstancy, often timidity, and great desire for cjiange
or roaming. In the fixed signs the nature is firmer, less
changeable and more contented if employed in some
ordinary or popular occupation connected with the
general public...
The tendency in the First House is to elevate* the
native in life and bring benefits and advantages from
the public through so«ial life in which, the domestic
interests largely enter. Dream and astral experiences.
The Moon is an important influence in a woman’s
horoscope, as she rules the periodical functions and
shows health or illness according to the aspects*
Afflicted in a wtftery ^ign, shows danger from water
and liquids.
Mercury in First* House
Mercury ij neutral, sexless and convertible, its nature,
being such that it absorbs much of the Character of the
planets with jwhich it comes in contact or aspect ; consequently close 'attention mist be. pai<J to the sign it
occupies in addition to the aspect it receives, thus: Mercury assisted By Moon is good for commissions; by
Venus, good for music, singing, art; in favorable connection with the Sun, good for business and responsibly

. GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
positions; in good aspect to Mars, mechanical and constructive ability; if‘ Jupiter assist, a gcod theologian;
Saturn, a good statistician ; Uranus, an originator and
inventor; Neptune, foresight, prophecy, power for psychometrizing and clairaudience,
Mercury gives adaptability, fertility of resource, an
inquiring mind always on the alert for new informatidn,
quick comprehension; fondness for literature, writing or
speaking, and for books, reading and learning.
Perceptive, studious, logical, sharp, persuasive and
expressive; fertile imagination. Many changes, journeys, spells of restlessness and anxiety. Quick in speech,
thought and action.
Venus in First House
Denotes an amiable, trustful, cheerful, sympathetic
and affectionate disposition, responsive to the love and
emotional side of the nature. Fond of company, enjoyment, society, and likes to make others in the environment' happjh It gives an appreciation of art and beauty
and a fondness for pleasure, music, singing, drama,
opera. It shows a refined, generous, just nature, one
who is usually much admired by the opposite sex.
U
The nature is fruitful. The tendency of this position
is towards good fortune. If in aspect to Mars, the native
marries"early. If in adverse aspect to Saturn, it delays
marriage.
Bad aspects to Mars, Saturn, Uranus or Neptune
indicate much' discord and trouble in married life ; afflicting Jupiter, much generosity, free and careless with
money, yet fortunate in getting it.
Note ’carefully the influence or nature of the sign
Venus occupies: Taurus, Gemini, Libra, Aquarius and
Pisces are th$ best dor tfjis. position. ' The nature of
Venus is feminine,1* so look to her aspects and note the
tendencies. Inspiration fo^ art comes from Neptune,
but it requires a good aspect of Venus to manifest it as,

PART III. DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES* 889
Venus governs . touch. This planet ijiles the groins,
kidneys ipd ovaries; also the throat, chin and cheeks.
£pn in First House
Frank, free, generous, outspoken; ambitious, proud,
firm and stable; humane; strong, moral nature; quick
perception and constructive faculty which bestows a
certain appearance 6f dignity and strength that impresses
others. It gives an independent, combative and defensive ambition, coupled with hope, confidence, love of
power and authority that results in the native rising
above his sphere in life and into positions of trust, influence and responsibility. It strengthens the constitution
and adds to the vitality. Tends to honor and general
success, advancement and good will of superiors. Lofty
nfotives.
If afflicted by Mars, Satarn or Uranus, it indicates
heavy, sharp attacks of sickness; i.e., fevers, inflammation and eye affectidhs; also losses and reversals through
impulsiveness.
Sun rules vitality and indicates the strength of constitution. When afflicted, especially b/ Saturn, the
recuperative power is not good.
Mars in First House
Ambitious, confident, enterprising aspiring, skillful
and assertive. Usually create a great dejd of thair own
fate by impulse ana strong desire nature. Have good,
practical, executive ability ; love of liberty and independence; free, audacious, courageous, combative and' positive, scorning defeat and reckless of danger. Somewhat,
fiery, amorous, aggressive and defensive ; at times rash,
headstrong, forceful and impatient.
A< great deal depends uponithe sign Mars ocCupies.
By nature Mars is masculine, both* constructive and
destructive ; usually causes i mark or scar about the
hea (3 or face and one on that part of the body represented
by the sign occupied.

GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
Danger of cuts, burns, scalds, falls, L bruises and other
accidents. Look to'the aspects carefully." A good aspect
to Saturn is very beneficial to Mars.
Mars rules the muscular system and urino-genital
organs, feverish and inflammatory troubles.
Jupiter in First House
Optimistic spirit; cheerful, hopeful, jovial disposition;
generous, faithful, just, prudent and noble nature; sincere, humane, coufiteous and amiable; pleasant manners.
The influence of Jupiter is always more or less fortunate. It gives executive ability, power and dignity
and fits the native for leading positions in social, educational and business circles.
Its tendency is toward good reasoning, a . logical,
broad mind, self-possession,, confidence and determination.
If unafflicted, it indicates one of fiigh standing, such
as bankers, judges, doctors, lawyers, professors, theologians and government officials. Business connected
with shipping,, long-distance transit, wholesale business
or commerce on a large scale. When afflicted: .clerk,
assistant, clothier,' draper, cashier, etc. Note carefully
the sign Jupiter occupies and the aspects for judging
wealth, station and ability.
Jupiter as related to the body brings on disease resulting, from iippure blood, plethora, gout, liver complaints, excessive stoutness, vaftcose veins, etc., according to the sigv occupied; super-abundant action of parts
when afflicted by Mars, or Sun, or defective action when
afflicted by Saturn.
.Saturn in Pint House
When* well placed by wign and aspect it denotes
thoughtfulness and tonsicKration for the welfare of
others: contemplation, discretion, prudence, system, diligence, economy, respect a rfi careful attention to affairs'
generally. t .

PART m, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES 341
• The disposition is calm, serious, grave. The' desire
is to attain* prominence as the result, of merit and to
that end" they labor with rfiethod, industry, perseverance
and steadiness, ryely entering into any project that is
not premeditated and planned. Progress and success
may be slow, but is ‘sure* to bring good reputation, honor
and credit through persistence, practical ability, worldly
wjisdom and continual effort.
‘When weak or .afflicted it indicates liability. to colds
and trouble to that part of the body ruled by the sign
it is in. Bruises to the head. The nature is faithful,
chaste, reserved; thoughtful, mistrustful, subtle, acquisitive, penetrative and careful of personal affairs; secretive and given to periods of gloom and discontent.
Loss and misfortune through negligence, habits, lack
of opportunity, or fateful events and delays.
It also indicates many sorrows and disappointments,
sometimes poverty, and are uphill road generally.
Saturn rul?s the bones, teeth, right ear, knees and
spleen. Gives liability to suffer from colds, chills and
poor circulation, also through constipation, rheumatism,
stone, gravel, obstructed growth; usually they are deficient in Phosphate of Calcium.
Uranus in First House
Uranus signifies originality of thought, independence
of mind, inventive genius, intuition, intellectual and
metaphysical ability. It inclines t(J the occult, the antiquated, curious, new arjd the odd ; in fact to everything
out-of-the-ordinary.
It attracts toward such subjects as astrology, octultism, mesmerism, hypnotism, Spiritualism, psychic research, drugless healing, telepathy^ psychism. Free
Masonry, inventions, electricity.
It makes ene appear odd, peculiar, eccentric tfhd many
years ahead of "the time.
It is significant of many changes in residence and
occupation and is usually At good here for marriage,

T
OENBTHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
bringing about peculiar, unfortunate conditions, diffi-,
culties and separations.
It is Uranus manifesting wl]ich makes one independent and revolutionary, apt to change ‘the mind and position radically and suddenly, forming his own opinions
regardless of what others may“think of them. Estrangement from parents and kindred.
Uranus stands for freedom, equality, progress, and its
natives can always see how conditions may be improved
even when they are good enough in the opinion of others.
They are nearly always on the opposite side to things
that are popular, formal or limited, preferring expansion
and upheaval, and therefore take the side of the unpopular in public movements, studies, sciences, religion, etc.
They are often called cranks, but invariably their crar.ky
notions become accepted facts after a time. They arc
usually forceful, npt particularly quarrelsome or antagonistic, but are vigorous in >the cause of the oppressed
They are not at all oppjsed to discussion or debate and
seldom become angry in it; detest limitations and can
not stand control or dictation.
Uranus rules the originating or creating faculties:
phrenological!)* expressed, the faculties of comparison
and causality, without which there can be no invention
or science. *
Although Uranus gives originality and individuality
of thought, and one may be fairly running over with
good ideas, unless Mercury assist he cannot utter them
satisfactorily. Mercury gives th? ability to learn, understand, interpret, expound and express*
The enlightened Uranian gives all the freedom possible to those around him, knowing that his liberty is
increased correspondingly. However, just how fine the
* In Ex. I V we learn that Uosen (Oranus) told Aston (Mercury)
ell the words of, the Lord wbo\bsd sent him, end elL>the signs
which he had commanded him. .... and Aaron spoke all the
words (expressed the knowledge) which the Lord bad spoken .
onto Hoses, and did the signs ftx the sight of the people.) '

PART III, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES 343
native will manifest or* interpret the ray frojn 'Uranus
depends up®n the* quality of the aspects to it in the birth
chart.
Uranus afflicted shows quickness of ‘mind, mental
impulsiveness, orifjinalit}’, independence and self-will.
Makes the native changeful, impulsive, abrupt, erratic,
eccentric, willful, brusque, sarcastic, critical and easily
ofrended. Gives inventive genius.
It gives ability to develop thought-reading and transference, clairvoyance, crystal-gazing, etc.
Danger through lightning, electricity and hurts by
machinery, inventions, engines, explosives and vehicles
of travel. Gives an interest in all occult affairs ; rules
the aura and the personal magnetism; strange happenings.
Neptune in First House
The influence cA this planet is always more or less
mediumistic and the native will either consciously or
unconsciously take on the conditions of the surroundings
and of those with whom he comes in contact. Being a
neutral planet, it depdhds upon aspects ‘for the manner
in which it will manifest.
It represents inspiration, trance, dreams, weird feelings, thoughts and experiences; romance and pmotion;
visionary or idealistic trend of mind.
When well asp’ected' it gives good inspiration and
spirit perception. It denotes far-seeiyg, ability to
estimate quickly and accurately. It attracts on£ to
peculiar people, psychic centers and mysterious, strange
places.
It gives ability to cultivate, psychometry, clairaudience
and mediurilship.
It exalts the artistic tastes, giving a love fort beauty
in* form, color and sound. is also related to matters

344 GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY i
connected with- the sea, water and liqqjds in general,
also mediumship and Spiritualism. When it is weak or
afflicted it seems, to open an avenue of temptation that
appeals to the passional, sense-loving and emotional side
of the nature, bringing uncertainly and confusion
through instability, indolence oj; laejt of energy. Danger
through plots, schemes, enmities and deception.
Although it indicates inspiration, enthusiasm and ptr-
.eption, yet it denotes a receptivity to psychic conditions thit might run td extremes, allowing the feelings
to get the upper hand of the judgment. Tendency to
excitability, changefulness, morbid imagination, strange
or unnatural appelites, intrigues, acts of indiscretion,
deception, presumption, love of luxury; wandering disposition, many journeys, changes, ups and downs. Being
readily affected both mentally and physically by the
psychic conditions of the environment, individuals with
Neptune in this house should investigate the philosophy
of all things mysterious rather than the phenomena.
There arc times when people who are, strongly influenced by Neptune should have nothing to do whatever
with ,any ofcult phenomena, seances, drugs, medicines,
gases, etc.; on the other hand, there are days when they
should strive tc develop their ogcult faculties. These
times are when other planets come into aspect. with
Neptune, particularly the Moon.
"Come clear the way, then, clear the way :
Blind creeds and kings have had their day.
Break the, dead branches from the path,:
< Our hojfe Is In the aftermath —
,Our hope Is In heroic men.
Star-led to hujld they world again."'
—Edwin Markham

PART HI, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES 345
SECOND HOUSE
Moon in’Second House
Gain by employment through public affairs and occupations, by dealing' with liquids, commodities and the
wants of the common people generally. Money obtained
through females or the mother, or matters related to the
domestic life. Good for things ruled by the Moon and
the sign she occupies.
If well aspected it is favorable for financial success,
although somewhat variable.
Mercury in Second House
Denotes gain by letters, writings, speaking, traveling,
•teaching, clerical occupations, commissions and ordinary
business and commercial affairs generally; also through
study, advertising, distributing, stationery, books, etc.
Gain through any occupation corresponding to the
nature of the’plafict in closest good aspect.
Venus in Second House
By fortuitous circumstances, good Vill and favors
fronf others, money usually comes, readily. It may be
gained through artistic pursuits, music, pleasure, social
affairs, friendships, societies, marriage, jewelry, millinery, hotels, confectionery and wearing apparel., A good
deal of money is spent on adornmnnt, luxuries, pleasure,
friends and social.interests ; nevertheless, they acquire it.
Sun in Second House
Money obtained by industrious effort and through 5he
father and superiors; gain by affairs of government or
through holding official appointment, or other respon;
sible positions. Benefit through superiors and persons
of rank. T?he .nature of th^ occupations depends much
upon what sign the Sun occupies.’ Xhe native is inclined
to generosity in money • matters, sociai intercourse,
pleasure, luxury and sportsx.

GENETHLIAC AL ASTROLOGY
flifl
no ^
Mars in Second House
Good earning powers but Usually extravagant, overgenerous or 4careless regarding the( accumulation of
wealth, and money runs quickly through the fingers.
It denotes gain by the native's own energy, activity,
skill and strength ; by stock farming, iron, steel, chemicals, timber, business enterprise as agent, salesman pr
promoter'.
When well aspected to the ruler of the eighth it denotes money by legacy ; to ruler of the seventh, by
marriage.
If Mars is afflicted, heavy losses, expenditures or
extravagance, and trouble, strife and contention over
finances.
Jupiter in Second House
Increases the chances for success, wealth and general
prosperity. It has to do with government and responsible ^business affairs, and tends to gain through law,
insurance, banking, religion, science, education, literature
and travel. Money acquired through things indicated by
the house which Jupiter rules in the chart and by the
sign he occupies.
Saturn in Second House
Saturn, unless well aspected, tends to make an uphill
struggle*and much work for little gaiq. The person may
see many opportunities, but is 'Seldom in a position to
take advantagei of them.
•At times things run along apparently well and smoothly and then take g turn and go persistently wrong or
•suffer delay; lack of money. With this position of Saturn one %)iould become thoroughly acquainted with the
directions operating in the\chart to avoid failures and
to increase cha'ndea. for suctess in land, property, produce, mines, storage, investments, coal, lead, building ,
labor, etc.

PART III, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES 347
When weA aspected or favorably located by sign:
prudent fihanpial ability, thrift, economy and solid, conservative investments bring steady but slow returns.
Gains by father pr employer.
Urahu^jn Second House
. Many changes in fortune; financial affairs very uncertain; ups and downs. Uranus has affinity for unique
occupations, affairs and employment of all ‘kinds, especially those of a curious or mental character and
which require great ingenuity.
Gain through inventions, mechanisms, railroads, electrical affairs, occultism, astrology, extraordinary composition and sometimes music, especially when well
aspfected with Venus. Money is gained through, friends,
’ associations or the government.
Neptune in Second House
Neptune gives liability of financial affairs becoming
much involved and loss through fraud and* schemes.
Neptune rules hospitals, asylums, institutions, secret
sendee, the sea and its various industries, navigation,
baths, public establishments, Spiritualism, mediumship,
mystical and secret societies.
If Neptune is well aspected the native <will gain
through these things, but if it is weak or afflicted, will
lose by them.
• “God (are man an upright countenance to survey the heavens,
and to look Upward to the staJs.”-j-Ovld

GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
THIRD HOUSE
Moon in Third House
Many changes of pursuit and occupation ; desire for
publicity of some sort ; curious, active and inquisitive
mind ever alert for new information and generally possessing a fund of knowledge regarding public conditions
and the personal affairs of celebrities. Many journe/S
and changes; desire for new surroundings, new conditions and new material for thought and action.
Usually there is not sufficient continuity; unfinished
education or accomplishments. An unfavorable position
for peace of mind, if afflicted.
Welt aspccted : Good for learning and mental attain-,
ments along popular lines. Short studies of domestic
science or social welfare and .short journeys prove beneficial.
Mercury in Third House
Many short journeys, much activity and writing. "
The mind inclines to investigate whatever tends to
enlightenment: to intrcase the consciousness and broaden the understanding; fond of reading, study, speaking,
teaching, lectures, literature, new thought, science, news.
The mentality is t^uick and perceptive and usually
interestefl in or anxious regarding relatives and neighbors.
Wfien Mercury is afflicted the native is inclined to
excessive worry or anxiety. It is said that the mind
reacts on the bowels which is likely true pnough, as
Mercury • represehts both, ruling Gemini and Virgo.
Trouble through letters, promises, agreement^ or reports.
When well adpdcted? successful travels, mentaT development,*accomplishments, and gain through third house
affairs.

PART III. DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES 349
Venu* in Third House
The mental quality js good. Strong inclination and
liking for fine Arts, music, singing, opera, paintings,
light literature and all ,that tends to uplift or refine the
mind and give pleasure.’ The mind is cheerful, fruitful,
optimistic, bright and desirous of peace. It denotes
favorable relatives or neighbors and aid or gain through
them.
It is a good position for pleasure trips or pleasure and
gain through journeys and successful travels, in fact, it
is good for all things ruled by the third house. Pleasant
correspondence, many social acquaintances.
Sun in Third House
• It is good for all things ruled by this house, ft tends
to respect, good will and benefit from relatives and
neighbors ; successful travels for business and pleasure.
The mind fs resourceful, creative, magnanimous and
ambitious of success artd honor through mental qualifications; the desire is to uplift, enlighten,* benefit and
aSsist others mentally. Afflicted : trouble with some of
the kindred or neighbors and through* proud, haughty
states of mind. Discredit through letters, promises,
agreements or false reports. 1
Mars in Third House
Liability to danger and accidents by journeys, trouble
through travel, relatives, neighbors, writings ahd litigation. The mind is alert, enbrgetic, keen, forceful, combative and likely to get out of control eafeily. The native
is quick and prompt in speech* and possesses executive
power in literary or educational directions. At some
time may Lie troubled with brain fever or deliriousness,
and if Mars is afflicted by Saturn, Uranus or 'Neptune;
shows thoughts of suicide jr violent tendencies.
The'best sign for Mars* in this Liduse is Capricorn,
and the best aspects are ’the good ones to Saturn or
Mercury, although a good, one to Uranus will give
genius in some line and inventive ability.

GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
Jupiter in Third House ‘
Gain in all things ruled by thi,s house. The mind is
optimistic, philosophical, refined, cheerful and sympathetic. Kind, thoughtful, just and considerate in all matters of correspondence, publication or exchange of
thought; sincere, earnest, courteous, sociable and rea;
sonable. in speech and writing. Capable of adapting
himself to. conventionalities of thought prevalent and
popular. Benefits through education, literature, publishing, traveling, brethren and neighbors.
Saturn in Third House
Trouble, loss, disappointment, annoyance, hindrance
and delays in connection with education, writings, relatives, neighbors, traveling and changes. Coldness between brethren nr sorrow through their demise.
The tendency of the mind is toward gloom, caution,
acquisitiveness, worry, restlessness, anxiety and misgiving, especially in youth. The mental condition improves
with age and is much better in later life, becoming more
contemplative, thoughtful and capable of concentration
on serious or prdfound subjects.
If Saturn is ill-aspected or afflicted by the^un, Moon
or Mercury, the melancholy expression is liable to run
into extremes, despondency, morbid tendencies or mental
afflictions.
When wey aspectea it dfnotes responsibility, tact,
diplomacy, thought power, steady thinking, concentration and mental control, orderly reasoning; philosophic
mind with ability for profound studies or writings.
Uriufus in Third House
Denotes Estrangements fro^n kindred and tieighbors.
and strange experiences through them; suddetr and
unexpected news, journeys and -changes, odd happenings,
meetings, adventures and occurrences through travels.*
The native is peculiar or jtcrentric in some things, but

PART III, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES! 351
usually intellectual and possesses ability to develop clairvoyant, plairaudient or telppathic faculty in addition to
magnetic healing. The mind is curious, inventive, ingenious, unconventional and fond of the occult, mystical,
new, extraordinary. t profound, ancient or unpopular
studies, social and mental reforms ; intuitive perception
and understanding with regard to things occult. If
Utanus is afflicted by Saturn or Mars, it shows danger
of* accidents, wrecks or explosions on journeys , through
vehicles of travel or treachery on the part of relatives
or neighbors.
If afflicted b.y Moon or Mercury, the native may incur
severe criticism on account of his ideas, projects and
mental attitude, and is subject to spells of nervousness,
irrational thought and speech.
Neptune in Third House
Denotes psychologica^ faculties, spiritual perception ;
fruitful, inventive *mind, given to the investigation of
spirit phenomena and matters pertaining to tfce occplt or
mysterious; inspirational ideas.
Produces weird feelings or experidhees. Signifies
journtys, peculiar difficulties with^ relatives, schemes,
plots, deceit, etc. Changes in name; nick-name, nom de
plume or alias.
If Neptune is weak or badly asp^cted it disturbs the
mind with hallucinations, morbid fancies, imbecility,
weak intellect or depravfcd tastes.
When well aspected it gives .artistic taste or appreciation of an exalted order through a peculiar blending
of the feelings and intuition, and ability to contact the
artistic realfn inspirationally; possibility of independent,
or automatic writings
VTha stars above us govern onr conditions.”
X-Rfng Lear, act IV, scene 3.

GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
FOURTH HOUSE
' Moon in Fourth Hous;
Well placed or aspected, it shows gain and benefit
through the parents, home and domestic life; favors
from the opposite sex; some chance of inheritance.
Publicity , or popularity through the parents ; many
changes in residence and fluctuation in affairs toward
the close of life. If well dignified here it shows ultimate
rise to success and independence through possessions,
property, lands, farms, or orchards.
If Saturn afflicts the Moon much disappointment will
be encountered in desired success; in fact, great difficulty tp keep from poverty and sorrow due largely to
family affairs. Afflictions by Mars, Sun or Mercury
denote loss by theft, fraud or deception. Jupiter adverse
denotes lack of opportunities and limitations through
environment. Uranus adverse: sudden, changes ; difficulties with home affairs ; estrangements from or loss of
parents, probably the mother; loss through unexpected
reversals and changes. Neptune adverse: mystery or
complications concerning home affairs and property.
Mercury in Fourth House
Inconstancy in affairs generally; change of residence
through Inatters connected with business. Often the
subjeet h^s no fixed abode ; many traveling men have
this position.
Worry and dnxiety regarding disturbance in home
affairs.
Good position for proprietors of private schools or
other stationary places where literary or clerical work
is carried *n, such as land, m:ne and real estate agencies,
registry offices, newspaper offices, libraries, pubjishers,
etc., or for business' carried bn in the home.
In bad aspect fo Uranus l unexpected difficulties and
disturbances toward the*close of life or sudden end.

PART III, DELINEATIONS FOB HOROSCOPES S53
Saturn adverse: denotes loss through deception, fraud
and theft.
Mars adverse: loss through imposition, controversy
or fire.
Sun, Moon or Jupiter a'dverse : lack of opportunity or
limitations and numerous losses.
Uranus in good* aspect: unexpected gain in* possessions; occult investigation and enlightenment before the
close of life.
Saturn or Jupiter in good aspect : steadier, more satisfied and studious; inclines to success, opportunities
and inheritance.
, Sun, Moon or Venus in good aspect: activity, popularity and success before the close of life.
Venus in Fourth House
Indicative of favorable domestic affairs and happiness
through the parents; love of home and country. Chance
of, gain by inheritance, parents, houses or property and
investment ; peaceful, comfortable conditions at the close
of life." Sun, Moon or Jupiter in gocjd aspect is exceedingly fortunate, bringing general affairs to a successful
issue.
In good aspect to Uranus or Saturn : success in old
age. Benefit by p^ision or legacy.
The adverse aspects of Sun, Moon, Merwiry or Jupiter
are not particularly evil, but affect the finances through
extravagance or misjudgment.
Mars adve*rse : difficulty through generosity, careless- .
ness or extravagance toward .the close of life. „
Saturn^Uianus or Neptun* advrts^: sudden, peculiar
losses, disappointments and -sorrows toward the ^nd of
life*

GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
San in Fourth House
A chance of honor in declining years, successful ambitions, hopes arfd wishes realized. Good for houses,
land, property and occupation^ connected with them.
Gain or chancC of inheritance by or thfbugh the parents;
fortunate heredity.
In good aspect to Moon, Venus, Jupiter, Saturn or
Uranus: gain through property or inheritance, financial
success. .To Neptune, it inclines to secrecy or investigation of occult or spiritual affairs; some psychic experiences in the home.
If afflicted: obstacles, limitations, troubles and sorrows through the parents and home life; liability to loss
and difficulty by living beyond the means or through
heavy obligations. Weakens the constitution at the close
of life.-
Mars in Fourth House
Domestic unpleasantness and much .misunderstanding,
inharmony or quarrels in the home life, especially if
Mercury afRicts. Losses by theft, fire and accidents in
the dwelling place; early death of parent. Many difficulties, disappointments and obsttcles. Physical indisposition caused by bad digestion and acid condition.
Liability to trouble over property, loss through speculations in property, lands and mines. If Neptune, Uranus
or Saturn afflict: mental distress, suicide or liability to
sudden end by accident; unfortunate in the place of
birth. The good aspects give much energy, force,
activity And entei prise in the acquisition of possessions.
•Jupiter in Fourth House
Tends to satisfactory, comfortable and peaceful domestic affairs ; successful home life and family- surroundings; gain- and f&vor through parents; benefit through
land and possessions; good position and success toward
the close of life.

PART III, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPE'S 355
If unafflictAd :.a fortunate, easy life; success at the
place of birth, ^successful terminatian /to business enterprises and affairs generally.
Jupiter afflictecf gives trouble through the parents or
their affairs, and CTctrat^gance; hereditary limitations.
Sun or Moon adverse : liability to sudden heart trouble
of apoplexy. Mars adverse: danger of loss by fire.
Mercury adverse : danger of lawsuits over property or
inheritance and if both afflict the ruler of the fourth,
law with or through the parents. Alars or Saturn in
good aspect: a religious or satisfactory end. Uranus
favorable: occult tendencies, long life. The luminaries
favorable : overcomes many adverse testimonies in the
chart and shows a rise in- life to opulence and popularity.
Saturn in Fourth House
Difficulties and trouble through property, inheritance
or mines. Sorrow through parents, probably the father.
Acquisitiveness. Unsatisfactory domestic or home life.
Much work, heavy responsibilities and grea*t difficulty
to ‘succeed. Unfortunate in the place of birth. Seclusiveness at close of life* However, if Satarn is dignified
and well aspected it signifies acquisition of property;
gain through produce or mines.
Uranus in Fourth House
Unsettled residence; many changes; a ch/ckered
career. Unfortunate in.place^. of birth. * Estrangements
from parents; domestic troubles and family affairs.
Exceptional domestic experiences. Loss of inheritance,
if one is expected. Many ups and downs and tastes of
poverty through peculiar circumstances.
Mars or Saturn adverse: danger of vfolence; liability
to accidents Jn the home, l^eptune adverse: threatens
loss through ‘theft, fraud and deception, .and accident by
flood or ‘action of the elemdhts. Jupiter adverse: loss
through impulsiveness or misjudgment, law, stofms or
by lightning.

GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
Neptune in Fourth House
Changes of resider.ce. Voyages. Peculiar domestic
and family affairs, some secrets or mystery regarding
the home life; schemes, fraud ‘and rpisunderstanding,
afflicting the parents in some way, affects the native.
Much depends on the aspects. Ihe luminaries in affliction denote weakened vitality and poor health. Mercury
adverse : peculiar nervous disorders in later life. Abideu
in unusual or peculiar conditions. Neptune is neutral,
consequently, good aspects would show benefits through
property and parents, according to the nature of the
aspects.
Note: The house posltlOD of planets Is mainly 'dependent upon
the time (boar and minute) of birth. When the time la only
approximately given, the position of planets In a chart la likewise
Indefinite, especially those near the cusps, when a difference In the
time might change their position from one house to another.
Therefore, pay particular attention to the authenticity of the
given time of birth. If the time Is wrong, the readings for planets
in houses will be Incorrect.
» "It la nat the purpose of astrology to evade any situation, or
to shoulder ^ofit responsibilities to the planets, or to use them ae
an alibi for our shortcomings. Oh the contrary, astrClogy teaches
how to foresee conditions -as they really are, for what Ahey ere
worth, and to asalat tin to act In conscious harmony with the
Law of Nature for best results.”— From "Powerful Planets”

PART III, DELINEATIONS FOR ‘HOROSCOPES ,357
FIFTfl HOUSE
*Moon in Fifth House
Public success in connection with places of amusement, playgrounds, bathing resorts, or with women,
children and young people; fondness for pleasure and
tne society of children and the opposite sex. Strong
tendencies toward speculation or games of chance. Much
activity and change in all enterprise; changeable affections (except in fixed signs,) yet the heart may be given
to one who least deserves it and thus the affection
changes to aversion, coldness or indifference.
It is indicative of a child who achieves fame and popularity, if well aspected ; also that the native Vill in
some manner be closely connected or drawn to a child
or young person. Several offspring. (If Moon is in a
fruitful sign.) If Neptune is in good aspect, may adopt
a child.
If the Moon is afflicted it brings loss through speculations and danger or sorrow and trouble through love,
children and morals.
Mercury in Fifth House
Refines the pleasures and makes them morj mental
than muscular, more of the mind, than of the senses,
and is good for occupations connected with entertainment, schools or travel.-
This position denotes worry, anxiety and sorrow
through objects of affection, children and their affairs.
A good aspect of Saturn or Jupiter much improves the
position and brings success arid gain through these'
things and, also through .^peculation or investment.
Lnmin^ries favourable: indicates success, in connection
with traveling for public amusement’ and with children.
■ Mars, Uranus or Neptune adverse: denotes troublesome
love affairs, scandal, sepaiftijms, divorce, lawsuits.
’Losses through speculation.

■ GENETHUACAL ASTROLOGY
Venus in Fifth House
A fruitful union and beautiful children who may be
endowed with artistic or musical Ability ; happiness,
comfort and gain through offspring,' which are usually
or mostly girls.
This position denotes gain and success through love
affairs, friendships, etc., ability to entertain others atid
enjoy success through all manner of social intercourse,
pleasure and amusement.
It indicates gain through speculation, investment and
general enterprise, also through theaters, singing, music,
painting, children, schools, playgrounds, parks or summer resorts.
If Venus is much afflicted, it gives liability of injury
to the health through over,-indulgence in pleasurable
gratification. Saturn adverse : sorrow and disappointment through love, speculation, children. • Mars, Uranus
or Neptune adverse: trouble and danger through the
opposite sejt, and careless, rash, indiscriminate or unconventional bestowal of affection.
Sun in Fifth House
Honorable and successful attachments. Gain through
speculation, investment, enterprise, children, pleasure
and places of amusements. Small family. This position
often depies children and inclines to difficult or dangerous child-birth. 1 However, this depends on the nature
of the sign on the fifth cusp, whether barren or not, etc.
If the Sun is afflicted here it causes loss through speculation, troubles and jealousy in courtship, and sorrow
through love, pleasure and pride; trouble with children.
Mars in Fifth House
Pleasure thraugh^tlfe strenuous sports, athletics, muscular exercise. Impulsive, rash and unfortunate attractions towards the opposite sex. Sensual emotions ‘or
over-ardent affections, jai/d too much indulgence in •

PART IH, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES 359
pleasure, and amusement, results iVi physical, financial
and social loss; danger^of accident to first child. In a
woman’s horoscope this position showsf difficult and
dangerous childbintji, ^oss by speculation, gaming, extravagance, pleasure artd excess of feeling. Trouble
with or through children.
•Neptune, Uran*is, Saturn, Jupiter, Sun, Moon or
Venus adverse: threatens danger of ruin or disgrace
through the opposite sex; loss through risky speculation.
Well aspected: gain through occupations and enterprise connected with pleasure and investment corresponding to the nature of Mars.
Jupiter in Fifth House
Good and dutiful children, who will be a help and
comfort to the native. Success, happiness and gain
through love 'affairs and the opposite sex. Pleasure,
success and gain in connection with places of amusement, theaters, social functions, schools. A good position for gain through speculation, investment and financial enterprise, more especially if Mars of Sun is in good
aspect. For a female it usually denotes attraction to
professional men, wholesale merchants, or those in good
financial or s'oeial position. Increases the number of
children and is fortunate for them. If Jupiter is^afflicted
the good influences are modified, giving the same desires
but trouble, losses and obstacles, according to, the nature of the afflicting planet #and house occupied.
Saturn in Fifth> House
Denotes disappointments, delays, hindrance and sorrow in connection with love affairs; Attraction Jo those ,
who are older or more serious in dispositioij. For a
female it uiualjy denotes aif attachment to an elderly
gentleman or widower or Jo ond1 qf ’religious nature.
Loss of child, troubles and unhappiness through children.
Loss by speculation, investfciejBt and games of chance.

GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
Danger from animals while on pleasure. ■ Danger of
drowning if Saturn 'is in Scorpio, and Of heart trouble
if in Leo. If Saturn is well aspected by either Sun or
Moon and not otherwise afflicted, it ?s a good position
for investment in lands, minesnand 'property and such
things which Saturn governs. If afflicted by Sun, Moon
or Jupiter, take no speculative chances of any kind.,
Uranua in Fifth House
Unconventional ideas with regard to sex union ;
strange, romantic, 'inconstant, secret or impulsive love
affairs. Social vexations, scandal.
Loss of first child through some sudden or extraordinary manner or separation, anxiety and trouble through
children; difficulty through child birth. Difficulties in
domestic life and love attachments. Loss through speculation, risks, chances. Likfng for odd, new, da; ng
pleasures or unusual places of amusement.
Neptune in Fifth House
Strange and peculiar experiences in connection wiih
the feelings, emotions and affections ; abnormal conditions relating to sex matters. Sensuous pleasures, seduction. If afflicted it denotes trouble, faithlessness or
confusion and sorrow in love affairs and loss through
lax control of the desires and appetites; losses in speculation through deceit or treachery. If well aspected
the native will be assisted in self-cjevelopment by a
fortunate association with <jne of- the opposite sex; gain
by investment in oil, shipping and such things as
Neptune rules.
“He telleth the Dumber of the etara; He calteth them all by
thftr, names." — Psalm 147-4. *"

PART III, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES 361
* SIXTH HOU§E,
JMoon'in Sixth House
Uncertain health, especially in a woman’s horoscope;
much sickness and danger in infancy. Desire to serve
the public in some professional capacity. The subject
has better ability .and opportunity of getting good results
from serving others than from others serving him. Many
changes among servants or employees. Success in
domestic service or in catering to public desire for
necessities, food stuffs, drinks, etc.
Good aspects to the Moon help the health and indicate
success with small animals, servants and through some
• subordinate position connected with the occupations
ruled by the sign the Moon occupies. Moon afflicted
gives poor success with employees, treachery and dishonesty among them; poor success with small animals,
poultry, etc. ; ^weakness in the part of body ruled by the
sign Moon occupies.
* Afflicted in a common sign : danger from lung trouble
and chronic diseases.* Fixed sign : bronchitis, gravel or
stonfe. Cardinal sign : nervous derangements and stomach trouble. .
Moon afflicted by Mercury : indigestion, ach^s in head
and teeth, bowel troubles.
Moon afflicted by Venus^ functional or skin trouble.
Moon afflicted by Mars: inflammatory complaiilts.
Moon afflicted by Jupiter : liver and blood trouble.
Moon afflicted by Saturg : chronic disease^ poor circulation.
Moon afflicted by Sun; Uranus or Neptu»e: weak
vitality, indigestion, indisposition through psychic conditions. ^ 1

GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
Mercury in Sixth House „
Many small, vexations through servants ; journeys on
account of health. Good position frg- the study of hygiene, medicine or chemistry. Gain in subordinate positions, through writings, clerical work and Mercurial
affairs generally.
Active mentality, but liable to become overstrung or
impaired through anxiety, worry or overwork, causing
dyspepsia or a tendency to become easily affected by the
surroundings conditions.
Any afflictions to Mercury here are unfavorable to the
health through the mentality and nervous system.
Afflicted by Uranus: liable to abnormal mental states;
suicidal tendencies due to illness.
Afflicted by Saturn : danger of seriqus iJIness through
despondency or worry.
Afflicted by Mars: mental derangement or excitability;
surgical operations.
Afflicted by Sun, Moon or Neptune: fevers, stomach
trouble ; indisposition through psychic conditions.
Venus in Sixth House
Favorable to health, but ^omrrvjn sense and discretion
should be Exercised to keepC from excesses of all kinds,
especially with regard to eating and drinking. Gain in
the employ of others. It is favorable for success and
benefits through servants, hygiene, medicine, nursing,
and by clothing,, small animals, poultry, etc. People
with Venus here often take up work for the pleasure it
gives therti and the interest it creates. Love for pets,
fine clothes and .adornments. If afflicted 'it shows trouble to the health thfough indulgences, and to that part
of the bbdy ruled by the sign Venus is in or by the
afflicting planet ; skin diseases, kidney or ovarian trouble
Health usually improves* after marriage.

PART III, DELINEATIONS FOR. HOROSCOPES 363
Sun in Sixth Housp
This is a cadent hquse, therefore the Sun, ruler of
vitality, placed here is not in a very gdod position for
health, as it may»siigbtly weaken the constitution. If
afflicted by Neptune, Uranus or Saturn, the recuperative
power is not good, and it indicates a great deal of indisposition; liability to contagious diseases and danger from
Epidemics.
When the Sun is well aspected the native seems to
understand intuitively how to safeguard the health and
in that way avoids illness.
Any aspect of Mars strengthens the constitution. A
good aspect of Mars, Jupiter or Venus would show
.success and gain through servants and service rendered;
success, promotion and fortunate conditions in employments that benefit other*, such as healing, chemistry,
hospital work, etc. In fact, the Sun well dignified or
aspected herd indicates that the native can do a great
work in assisting to relieve the sufferings .of hupianity,
' Sun afflicted in a fixed sign: quinsy, bronchitis, asthma, diptheria, gravef, heart trouble, -&eak back, sides
and 'nervous disorders; organic troubles. Afflicted in
a common sjgn : chronic diseases ; troubles with respiratory organs, liver complaints. Afflicted in a cardinal
sign : nervousness, weak chest and stomach, rheumatism.
Also liable to some permanent injury; functional derangements.
Mars in Sixth House
Disputes, quarrels, losses and theft through servants
or employees and much difficulty and annoyance by their
taking liberties and advantage of the* native. The native
is usually an active, energetic and enthusiastic worker
;pid liable to overdo himself, especially in the employ of
others'."
• Mars rules the tastes and this position of Mars tends
to impair or injure the rteadth and cause suiting

'GENgTHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
through excesses^ ^cts of indiscretion, Carelessness,
extravagance and by accident."
Its position here is usually significant of incision with
steel to that part of the body rydetMJy the sign it is in;
surgical operations.
Mars afflicted; inflammation or accidents to that part
of the body ruled by the sign occupied; difficulty in
employ; danger, loss and trouble through employees,
animals, poultry, pets.
Mars gives a tendency to inflammatory 'complaints in
the bowels and troubles in that part of the body represented by the sign occupied about the same manner
as does the Sun when in sixth house and in a like sign.
(See Son in sixth house.)
Saturn adverse ; danger of death due to operations and
injuries by animals.
Uranus adverse: danger of fatal accident or suicide.
Neptune adverse: danger of foul play, accidental
poisoning, etc.
Jupiter in Sixth House
Gives health, but if indisposed the subject receives
kind treatment, good attention and many comforts, in
fact, is likely to gairf through sickness. The native's
care and "presence would be beneficial and healing to
others in distress.
If the person should become a physician, likely to be
successful financially and with the patients.
, Gain and profit through employment, especially in
high circle; also through servants and inferiors, and
through religious, philanthropic and social tendencies*
Success with domestic animals, poultry, etc. If afflicted
the health will suffer from ovCr-indulgence or intemperance in diet; difficulty with the chest, bowels, liver*
blcxjd^and digestive orgarfs.^

PART III, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES 8«5
Saturn «n Sixth House
Denotes fhucji sickness through oxpesure and circumstances over which the subject has little control; neglect,
privation, sorrow, 4 disappointment. Many Jost opportunities through the state of health. Troubles according to
the nature of the sigh Saturn occupies; somewhat similar to Mars in sixth house.
A
.Not a good position for employment or success with
servants or inferiors, denoting loss and trouble through
them.
Ill success and loss with small animals, etc.
Afflicted by Uranus : incurable diseases.
Afflicted by Mars: dangerous illness, accider\£s and
Operations.
Afflicted by Sun, Moon or Neptune : chronic ill health,
poor circulation and recuperation, colds, rheumatism,
psychic and heavy ills. Notice the part of the body
represented by the sign on the sixth cusp.
Saturn denotes poo* digestion, constipation, obstruction, poor circulation, debility. When ill, seek the services of a doctor and accept the benefit of such aid by
whatever method best suits the case: medicinal, surgical,
mechanical, dietary, color, light, etc.
If Saturn is dignified or well aspected it denotes benefit through laborious or. sedentary occupations T mining,
masonry, sculpture, cefnent*‘work, plastering, plowing,
excavating, etc.
Uranus in Sixth House
Troubles through peculiar nervous disorder?; neurosis. Sicknejs which is puzzling or not well understood.
If* much afflicted the sicknesses are strange or incurable;
liability " to mental derangement; 'danger of illness
through the employment and sudden events.* Not a

GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
good in dice for success, harmon^ and happiness in employment, service, or with servants, employees, poultry,
and similar lines. '
Treatment by electricity, radium, hypnotism, etc., is
apt to prove detrimental if Uranps js.ufflicted, but beneficial if well aspected, and a c&reful study of the diet
and environment should be made.
Uranus yules the aura and sometimes the native ft
very sensitive to environmental conditions and should
refrain from eating when tired, nervous, excited or angry.
If Uranus is well aspected here it may bring some
unexpected or unique opportunity to perform exceptional service and obtain good results. Uranus well placed
may give success as a metaphysician, mesmerist or electricianand through occult, electric or drugless treat- .
ments.
Neptune in Sixth House
Threatens some chronic, incurable disease, atrophy,
inertia, wasting sickness, some inherited or psychopathic
tendencies. Danger of some deformity through illness.
If much afflicted it shows severe sickness and trouble
from gratifying tke tastes or desire*, especially if afflicted by Mars. Should carefully avoid narcotics and opiates
and if any medicine is*taken use only the simplest kind.
Neptune rules the mediumistic faculty and this house
rules clothing, food, etc., consequently, the native should
not take food into the stomach received from a sick
person or'^one of undesirable habits, nor should any
apparel be worn once used by another. Use only the
freshest and ‘purest food obtainable and little or no animal matter.
Generally no success with poultry and other things
ruled by this house." Theft, schemes, plots, deceit, or
loss and difficulty through employees.
This position pf, Neptune may keep the native in’
seclusion, retirement br servitude. If well aspected the
native has ability to develop fine psychometrizing.

PART III, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES 367
powers, especially for sensing surrounding conditions.
He should always pay attention to his own intuition in
regard to food,, clothing, environment/ Neptunian people need to exercise great care regarding the physical
condition and habits ot their associates* or of those
whom they engage,.Jo treat them. Being very receptive
they absorb what others'are throwing off and often this
proves detrimental rather than beneficial, although the
intentions may be good. People who indulge in tobacco,
liquors, or who engage in vivisection or cruelty in any
form, should not be allowed to treat the body of an
indisposed Neptune person. Kindly suggestions, verbal
and mental, and natural methods, seeyi best for them.
Notice: In this chapter, pertaining to the sixth house of nativities. no Intention Is made to indicate remedies In an advisory
capacity. Bodily Indisposition, as well as mental disturbance,
should he remedied as soon as possible. Health Is Important to
efficiency and happiness and should not be neglected. Therefore,
when indisposed, it is wise to seek the aid of those who are trained
In the art of healing and by whatever method of treatment aeems
best, atrive to reestablish physical and mental equilibrium.
“Be giad"*of life hecanse it givejf you the chance tn lov^and to
jvork and to look up at the stars.”— Henry Van Dyke

GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
SEVENTH HOUSE
Moon in Seventh House
In a female chart it indicates a unitjn with one whose
affections are variable, fond of change and travel, of
unsettled nature and engaged in public work. If well
aspected it favors an early marriage, partnership, public
favor, popularity and social success, also money or property by marriage. Unless the Moon is well aspected
and located this is not a favorable position as it indicates
death of partner, public opposition, unpopularity, female
enmity, trouble ana loss through litigation ; changeful
relations with the opposite- sex and with partner and
associates.
If th{ Moon is well aspected and to the ruler of the
first house it helps to offset the adverse testimonies and
magnify the good ones. In bad aspect to Mars: discord,
discontent, hasty speech and action ; enmities, assaults.
Saturn adverse: disappointment, loss and sorrows
through unions. Uranus adverse : separation, estrangement, peculiar experience in connection with the unions;
unexpected enmities or attacks.
Mercury adverse: lhatrimonial and business worries.
If the Moon is applying to any aspect of Uranus the
native is likely to marry suddenly and meet another to
whom affection is given afterwards. Taken alone: inclines to *ourney£ and rempvals- .(especially when in a
movable sifn) in the interests of business for others.
Mercury in Seventh House
The native usuaKy carries on Mercurial pursuits in
partnership or association with others and is fortunate
or otherwise thereby, according to the aspects.
Unsettled married life; many inharmonies; the partner
is quick in thought and action and if Mercury is afflicted.

PART III, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES 860
sarcastic, untruthful and hasty tempp re/J ; if well aspected, shrewd, active, clever and progressive. The partner
is usually younger and oftentimes is an employee or is
related in some w^y. Marriage is generally the result
of writings or travtfing ,and is more of the mind than
of the senses or emotions.' If Mercury is much afflicted:
many small strifes, worries, vexations through writings,
speech,- contracts, traveling, legal affairs, and business
dealings with othei'S. ’
Venus in Seventh House
With marriage come social axd financial pleasures.
The native usually marries early and enjoys much happiness; love of offspring; successful partnerships; peaceful termination to strifes and success in public relations.
If badly aspected it shows delay and sorrow in marriage; probably a dissipated partner; loss through litigation and partnerships.
Sun in Seventh House
If well aspected, success and rise in» life after or
through marriage; a proud but magnanimous, warmhearted partner, firm and lasting attachment, happiness.
Good for partrfership and general popularity, especially
with business people and superiors.
Difficulties averted by arbitration or mutual cpnsent;
gain through business, contracts and associations.
If afflicted: delays, opposition, disappointment, loss,
etc., according to the nature of the aspecting planet.
Mars in Seventh House •
If afflicted! injpetuous in love, an early or.ra’sh love
affair or* -union, possible separation through excessive
demonstration of affections and combative or forceful
nature of partner. Death of partner; troublesome
opponents. \ 1

GENETH LIACAL ASTROLOGY
In a female chart : danger of sudden death of husband
or severe accident- to him. If Mars he in Cancer or
Pisces he is apt to be worthless through dissipating
habits.
In a male chart : The partnfi it industrious but assertive, positive or masculine.
Loss through litigation or partnership ; business enemies; much strife, sometimes resulting in violence; criticism and opposition are frequently met. When Mars
is well aspected or located by sign much of the above is
modified, the native may marry a Martian person and
benefit thereby.
Jupiter in Seventh House
If well aspected: success, gain and happiness through
marriage, the partner being faithful and good.
The partner is usually of good social and financial
standing; usually older, more patient, profound or religious than the native. Success in partnership and in
dealing cooperatively with others; friends and popularity with and through business people; gain through
litigation or legal affairs. Jupiter is weak in Virgo and
Capricorn.
If afflicted by Uranus or Mars: loss through litigation.
Saturn or luminaries adverse: marriage is delayed or
indicates marriage, to an unfortunate person, or to a
widowtor widower.
Saturn in ‘Seventh House
, Well aspected or iri Libra: gives a sincere, prudent,
faithful and well-disposed partner, or union with one
'older and more. Serious than the native, ndt demonstrative or emotional, but stable in affections, possessing
property or children.
If afflicted :' gritef, sorroilv, death or enduring coldness
on th^part of the partner, who may be of Saturnine dis‘
position and habit, aepording to the sign and aspects.,

PART HI, DELINEATIONS FOR .HOR6SCOPES 371
Ruin by“ contracts and partnerships' persistent opponents, litigation, business ‘enmities and treachery. Marriage about the £ge of* twenty-eight or a/ter, incompatibility with the marriage partner.
Uranus in Seventh House
.Well aspected: union with one of genius, m intuition,
ability or an unusual character.
A romantic, sudden, impulsive, .secret or irregular
union with likelihood of inharmonious results.
If afflicted: hasty or impulsive union or attachment
followed by unhappy results; misunderstanding, separation, estrangement, scandal or death of partner
Loss through strangers^ partnerships, law, contracts,
opponents, willfulness, opposition, open enemies and
public contests. Unexpected opposition. Conflict with
municipal or federal authorities.
Neptune in Seventh House
Threatens domestic troubles, jealousy, scandal, death
of partner, or marriage to a deformed or deceptive person; much sickness; peculiar affairs. Not a good position for partnership and public dealings unless well
aspected. When afflicted : some nwstery, confdsion and
deceit in connection with unions. Two engagements or
marriages.

.GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
EIGHTH HOUSE
Moon in Eighth House
Well aspected: gain in public riffairs and finance
through the business or marriage partner and the
mother; gain by inheritance or goods of the dead,
probably through mother's connections; natural death.
Taken alone : ability to develop latent occult tendencies for practical results; astral plane experiences.
In a female chart it tends to increase the number of
children, but signifies ihe death of some, especially <f
afflicted.
The%native’s mother is likely to die early; in a maie^
chart also the wife.
If afflicted: unsettled fortunes after marriage; death
of a public nature, accident, drowning, etc.
Neptune adverse: death by treachery, drugs or water,
or hy ‘obscure or infectious complaint.
Uranus adverse: extraordinary! peculiar, sudden or
accidental death.
Saturn adverse : demise through slow of chronic disorder.
Mars adverse: violent or sudden demise.
Sun adverse : tfreak vitality and serious sickness, but
death usua'ily in the presence of others.
Venus adverse : urinary troubles.
Mercury adverse: stomach, bowel or lunar trouble.
Mercury in Eighth House
In a female .ch^rt:- trouble, quarrels, dissension and
difficulties with the* partner ‘regarding money; worry in
connection with the financial affairs of partners ard
others.

PART III, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES 37&
The native" inquires into occult subjects, literature,
lectures. an8 meetings regarding the Continuity of life.
The mind is conscious and active at time of death.
Death of brother, sister, cousin, employee or neighbor
causes much grief**ahd *>jiental anguish. A journey on
account of death.
*If afflicted, indicates liability to brain or nervous
disorders, which in some way are related to desth.
Venus in Eighth House
Gain in financial affairs through marriage or partnership. Gain by legacy or through goods and affairs concerning the dead. Denotes a natural, peaceful or easy
demise.
If afflicted death may be caused by pursuit of pleasure;
kidney, bladder or functional derangement; death of
marriage partner, loss, grief and disappointment in love.
Sun in Eighth House
Steady fortunes after marriage; gain by marriage,
partnership or inheritance. Fame often comes at death
which should have come before, or the end may be due
to self-sacrifice or heroic deed. The'Sun in this position
tends to increase vitality and prolong life.
The foregoing is to be considered when the Sun is
well aspected.
Taken alone; about *the fprty-hfth year qiay be a
critical period. Death may be due to heart affectioh or
constitutional weakness, due to spme honorable everft or
there are honors connected with passing. The tendency
is to gam through death and through the partner, who
is apt to be* over-generous and extravagant.
If afflicted; likelihood of premature, sudden cfl- Violent
end; the, father may expire before the. native; in a
woman’s chart the husbatid^nay die jirst, vice vgrija, in
•a ipale’s. chart. Sharp' attacks of sickness during transits
.and directions afflicting the Styi4 bring danger of death.

GENETHLIACAL ASTRbLOGY
Mars in Eighth House
Trouble regarding ‘financial affairs aftef marriage; the
partner is usually extravagant and spends the money of
the native if rfdowed to do so. Difficulties concerning
legacies or property of deceased peroetfis. Death usually
comes quickly as the result of 'short sickness, shock or
accident.
If affliqted: liability to violent or sudden death, loss
of legacy, financial loss through partner. If Mars is in
a watery sign, danger of death by drowning; if in airy
sign, mental afflictions or aerial accidents ; in a fiery
sign, by fire, accident or violence; in an. earthly sign,
heavy sickness, inflamifiatory complaints ; if Mars is
ruler of the fourth or afflicts Jupiter, danger of loss by
fire and theft.
Jupiter in Eighth House
If unafflicted: marriage bridgs prosperity; the partner
is or will be well off financially. Gain by legacy, affairs
of the dead and through occupations denoted by this
house .and sign; also through the handling of other
people’s money.
Success in the investigation df the occult, happy
dreams, natural and peaceful death.
If afflicted : denotes heart trouble and dartger of blood
poisoning, foul growths or consumption.
Saturft in Eighth House
The mar/iage partner is a^pt to be poor, financial difficulties after marriage, no gain through business partnership or legacy, delay and disappointments with regard
to goods of the dead. Restrictions due to lack of Capital.
. If well.aspected : moderates all the above and denotes
long life, death from natural causes.
If afflicted or-wc^k:’ lingerjng or slow death resulting
from some chronic ailment; distressing dreams although
not always remembered ; death of father.

PART III, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES* 37S
If Saturn is* in, a watery sign, danger 'of drowning.
When afflictingt'Mars, Uranus or Neptune, danger of
fatal accidents.
Uranus in Eighth House
Well aspected: sud
gains through the Itiai nagc ui uusmcss jmiuici aiiu
inventions.
Taken alone: difficulties in financial affairs after marriage, sudden losses through partner and through the
financial losses of others, trouble through legacy; sudden, unexpected or peculiar dearth ; interest .in occult
affairs and subjects dealing with the continuity of life;
peculiar psychic, dream and astral experiences.
• If afflicted : worry and annoyance regarding legacies
or goods of the dead; unexpected conditions arising in
connection with deaths and* through financial affairs.
Liability of ’death through some extraordinary or
sudden event ; violence, heart disease, epilepsy, paralysis
or some uncommon nervous disorder; by electrical
devices, explosion, or vehicles.
Neptune in Eighth Hjuse
Well aspected : ability to enter upon spirit planes and
gain knowledge through the experience; gains ip peculiar manner through others and possibly through the
partner.
Strange psychical and drea’m experiences ; ‘desire to
investigate Spiritualism and other mystical subjects;
peculiar death. Danger of deafh on water. Dangey
through poisons, opiates and anaesthetics.
If afflicted: trouble in money matters’after marriage, •
loss through complicated money affairs of otheus, fraud
and deceit regarding legacy; partner is>usua^y careless
in money’ matters. Nightmares, strange cireams, weird
feelings,- trance conditions, astral experiences. Peculiar
death.

GENETHLIACAL ASTUOLOGY
NINTH HOUSE
Note: Planets In H airy sign In the nir.th house Indicate
interest In aerial matters.
Moon in Ninth Hsuse
t
Well aspected: an ingenious mind; inventive, progressive, penetrative, reflective, fond of investigation ;
gives a Jove for traveling and indicates benefit or ’fnprovement through change. Keen imagination and high
ideals. Interested in inventions of a public nature,
especially modes and means of travel and learning.
Benefits through relatives by marriage.
Taken alone: signifies voyages, life in foreign lands;
legal or clerical inclinations ; keen, romantic, fanciful
and idealistic mind.
Remarkable dream or psychic experiences. Fond of
change, diversity and noveuy. Publicity of some sort
regarding science, religion, philosophy, traveling or
mysticism.
Sun adverse: over-enthusiastic in religion or unorthodox, probably both, at some time. Saturn adverse:
sorrow and difficulty through religion, travel, publications and partner’s relatives. Uranus adverse: romantic,
eccentric, fond of adventure ; liberal religion.
Mercury in Ninth House
Well ?spcted:,a keen, clever, ingenious, studious mind;
literary ability, taste for-, art, science and all higher
educational or enlightening subjects; love of knowledge.
Success in journeys, clerical or legal affairs and publishing.
. Taken alone : a- busy, active mind; danger of legal
• worries* taste for reading, science, literary pursuits and
every folm of knowledge*. Desire for life in foreign
countries or travpls to and knowledge of distant. places.
Mercury in a movable sign is a sure indication of travels.
In an &iny sign, interest in aerial affairs.

PART III, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES 377
Afflicted: tendency to worry and scatter the*forces by
engaging in numerous activities instead of concentrating on 'one thfng until completed ;* too much doubt, not
enough decision; difficylties with clerical or legal affairs;
fruitless and trifublisome journeys.
Venus In Ninth House
Kind, sympathetic, helpful, gentle disposition and
dhltured intellect*; philosophical, optimistic ; appreciation
for every form of mental improvement. Fond of fine
arts, music, operas, high-class literature, lectures, social
intercourse and literary persons. ‘Favorable for social
and domestic welfare interests.
Benefits from relatives by marriage, pleasant journeys,
success abroad. Venus here will modify many adverse
testimonies regarding mental qualities and hflps the
native to avoid trouble.
Indicates marriage abroad, or to a foreigner, or to one
of a spiritual, scientific, literary or artistic disposition.
If Venus is the highest planet in the map it is a
splendid position, denoting honors, success, godd marriage and good fortune generally. If Venus is afflicted
it gives longing, higlf ideals and desires* hard to materialize *and disappointments through their unattainment.
Sun in Ninth House
Success or honors in connection Avith churfih, universities or law, also through travW *and social intercourse;
desire to investigate* science and philosophy to find
truths worthy of giving orft to benefit others. Dignity
or success abroad, or residence in foreign countries ;
faithful, earnest, sincere, consistent and constanj in
religidus beliefs whether orthodox or liberal.
Ambitions, firm, self-reliant and confident. .Taste for
fine arts, music, science* literature and ^intellectual
development. •
Mars or Uranus afflicting: extreme, enthi^iastic or
peculiar in religious beliefs; trouble in foreign countries,

GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
also with 'legal affairs and partner’s relatives; accidents
in travel.
Jupiter adverse: unsuccessful ,in, legal or clerical
affairs. Trouble in foreign lands amd through educational affairs or publishing.
Saturn adverse : hindrance through perversity, pride,
etc.; unsuccessful in clerical or legal affairs. Losses in*
foreign lands.
Jupiter favorable: siacess and honors through popular
reasoning, in science, religion, literature or philosophy;
a good counselor ; favor of partner’s relatives ; international recognition or honors.
Saturn favorable : love of justice, ability for profound
or responsible undertakings; philosophical.'
Mars f&vorable : patriotic, courageous and vigorous in
defense of justice.
Mars in Ninth House
Much ftrife, generally through legal or religious matters; danger of violence in foreign places; trouble
through journeys and wife’s relatives,; distressful dreams
or fancies.
Enthusiasm or imphlse in religion or philosophy;
liberality and freedom of thought ; forceful in beliefs.
If afflictad: forceful, fanatical, irregular or skeptical
ideas regarding religious matters; preconceived or early
religious teachings* are overthrow^; many troubles,
litigation, disputes ; danger while ’traveling, disagreement with some of the relatives, changes in religion or
indifference.
Well aspected : active in defense of his rights; successful in law; enterprising in self-development.
Jupiter in Ninth House
Well aspected: good intuition; clear foresight; success
and honors in religious, collegiate, legal, philosophic or

PART 111, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES 379
philanthropic affairs; favorable for travel and •success
abroad; prophetiji faculty and prophetic, dreams ; peaceful, logical and optimistic disposition ; international
interests.
Mars adverse : dagger of shipwreck, fire or accident
on journeys; liable to goto extremes in religious matters or trouble through them.
«^ranus adverse ^ unexpected loss, difficulties^ and experiences through journeys, religion, law, philosophy,
relatives.
Mars or Uranus favorable : inclination toward occult
philosophy, higher science, originality of thought, invention and means of travel.
Saturn in Ninth House
Well aspected: The mental attitude is scientific and
philosophical, the nature Is studious and meditative,
given to the investigation of law, geology, mineralogy,
metaphysics, psychic and occult subjects generally.
Sun in good aspect: denotes a very faithful, devotional
or religious spirit. Interest in geology, archaeology or
political economy. "
Taken alone or afflicted : troubl’e in foreign lands,
dangerous voyages (especially if in a watery sign) ; loss
through legal affairs, troubles through relatives Jjy marriage; self-deception, lack of comprehension of the profound or higher sciences or philosophies, likelihood of
religious bigotry and mental ^.afflictions.
Mars adverse : perverse mind, danger of mental, derangement or accidents in travel!
Uranus in Ninth
Trouble iw foreign lands or* through relatives* by marriage; .peculiar," unexpected, adventurous, dangerous
voyages; taste for philosophy, occult, metaphysical or
uryjsual knowledge.

GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
Origirtal, inventive, peculiar, eccentrjc 6r reformative
and progressive Heaj. Desirous of traveling and investigating. Prophetic intuitive • faculty and sometimes
engaged in antiquarian, Uraniani oi£ aerial research.
Neptune in Ninth Ktftise
Clairvoyant or other psychic faculties; a highly inspirational nature; strange dreams, feelings and experiences,
Astral experiences.
Psychic studies or investigation of Spiritualism,
psychic phenomena* and philosophy. Voyages if in a
movable or watery sigij.
If afflicted: distressful dreams; ominous forebodings;
trouble through travels; legal involvements; complicated
affairs 'with wife's relatives. Adverse psychical exper-'
iences; impressionable and simulative nature.
"Follow but thy star,
Thou caust ogt miss at last a glorious haven.” — Dante

PART III, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES 381
TENTH HOUSE
Moqn in Tenth House
Inclines to public J;fel changes in business, occupation
and employment, instability of position and popularity,
rise in life followed by reversal or downfall. Voyages
if. connection with business, if in a cardinal sign.
^Vomen influence the position in some way according
to the aspects; strong attraction to mother. If well
aspected by Sun, Venus or Jupiter : /avors success, popularity and prosperity. Indicates carefulness in money
matters and usually gain in pitiperty and possessions.
Public business ; catering to the masses.
Mars adverse: public scandal, notoriety or discredit,
bbstacles in business. Taken alone it gives ability and
tendencies to employment of a changing nature, such as
shipping, voyaging, traveling, dealing in public commodities, novelties, etc. ; affairs connected with common
people and women generally, also with things ruled by
the sign occupied.
Mercury in Tenth House,
The honors and success in businoss or occupation depend upon the sign and aspects, Mercury being neutral.
Good position for public service or for holding responsible positions under superiors.
The vocational tendencies,* and abilities m»y be seen
by delineating the planet in most powerful aspect to
Mercury, as though the planet ip question were actually
in the tpnth house, thus: ’
Uranus ihost strongly aspecting: rtoyelists, reporters, ^
lecturers, teachers, traveler^ electricians, railroad employees, occult professions generally, psychologists,
dealers- in occult literature, ^ntiqvfitips, inventions.
.Taken alone it gives a taste for literature* several
professions, occupations or undertakings; mercantile

• GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
work, commissions, agencies. If in an* airy* sign, retentive memory and fluent speeoh, used effectively in business activities. If much afflicted by Mars or Saturn:
a restless nathre, subtle and deceptive'; impulsive speech
or untruthfulness; trouble in business or failure.
Signifies an active, able, penetrating, adaptable mipd
used resourcefully in husiness.
Venus in Tenth House
This position frfVors honors, popularity and friendships; the native has, merit and ability; possesses an
agreeable and pleasant manner; usually marries above
the station in life and enjoys success in dealing with
women.
Generally well disposed and of good moral stamina,
dislikes quarreling or trouble1 of any sort and delights in
all that is social, pleasant and harmonious.
It /avors gain through the parents (probably the
mother), general prosperity and artistic or musical
pursuits.
This position is ^irtunate for parents and home life
or for the occupations of Venus and those designated
by tfee sign she occupies. Preference for business that
is beautifying, harmonizing, comforting or entertaining.
If well aspecte/i by Sun, Jupiter or.Moon, the subject
meets witb social distinctiton, honors and financial success, and the favor, good will and support of those in
good position, government officers, superiors and responsible persons, especially in social or entertninment
lines.
When ,afflicted indicates limitations, and, the native
suffers lack of opportunities to manifest* his abilities or
may occupy a totfly position in high-class undertakings.
The occupations of Venus are those which deal with
artistic, refined and ent«rjpinment matters; all business <

PAfiT III, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES 383
directly conneAed with females;, adarnment, jewelry,
finery, luxury, 'beauty, amusement.
If in good asf>ect\with Mercury it m’akes fine musicians, artists, painters, speakers, writers, librarians,
speculators, actors, sin'gers, stage directors, band or
choir masters, bailiffs and other political officers, secretaries, printers, decorators, housekeepers, carpenters,
liSuggists, confectioners, dyers, and good* character
readers; public work in professions which require considerable traveling or which takes one into contact with
many people; influential posts; positions of trust and
refinement.
The nature of the profession depends largely upon the
nature of the sign in which Venus is located.
Sun in Tenth House
Well aspccted: honor and success, distinction, authority, independence, prosperity, high patronage and favor
of those in power and good position. This position
usually indicates good birth and favorable parental
influences.
The native’s success is generally steady in whatever
business, profession or occupation he adopts; positions
of trust, responsibility, honor or governmental office;
good vitality ; high moral standards ; favorabltf environment.
If afflicted: love of power; dignity, pride,' opposition,
reversals. Although the Sun in the tenth is always
beneficial in some respect, yet "great difficulties will.be
met according to the nature of the affliction.
Mars in Tenth House
Unlasa Mars is in the sign Caprieorn, impulse and
feeling are likely to predominate, reason and intellectuality often being overridden by the passional or forceful
side of the nature. •

384 OENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
The native !7ieets with much tui<noil , and strife
through excessive ambition, independence, domination
or force and aggressiveness.
A spirit of freedom and desir,e .ipE conquest spur the
subject on, at times to his detriment. It is significant
of extravagance or extremes in some form. Scandal,
discredit and disrepute, whether deserved or not. Death
of parent? or disagreement with their.
The native has plenty of courage, energy, enterprise
and force, consequently, capable of being in business for
himself, but will succeed best in the occupations corresponding to the nature' of Mars and "the planet which
best aspects Mars.
Well aspected : gain and promotion through business
acumen, salesmanship, bravery and industrial pursuits ;
benefit through the father and also by legacy.
Mercury in good aspect indicates the engineer, carver,
sculptor, draughtsman, designer, athlete, mechanic,
soldier, sailor, officer, dentist, surgeon, surgical instrument maker, hardware dealer and all lines where courage
or daring is necessary, or where Ucill is combined with
muscular energy and the use of tools, such as iron or
steel instruments an8 machinery.
If Merpury afflicts : mason, laborer, iron worker, tanner, cattleman, butjher; bath, lavatory or laundry
attendant; worker in metal and where there is an element of rjsk and danger.. Satbrn adverse : laborious
employments and likelihootf of failure in business.
Jupiter in Tenth House
‘Usually indicated good birth, help from relatives or
those in fhigh position. T,he native has good moral
standards and will occupy secure influential or important
positions at some 'period.
Gain through the occupation, marriage, sports and
public or political office;

PAST III, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES 38 S
This is 9 goqd position for rise in life, honors, favor
of supesiors, public appointments, dignities, esteem, good
will, social, political* and financial success.
Uranus adverse-wr^v^rsals of fortune, difficulties.
Saturn adverse: downfalls, obstacles, losses.
•"^uminaries adverse : difficulty in social , life and
through changes and travel; unfavorable publicity.
Mercury favorable : good judge, minister, ambassador,
philosopher, banker, merchant, government official,
town councilor, stock broker, twstee, etc., and is good
for positions of distinction, honor, responsibility, trust
and social welfare.
• If Mercury afflicts : minor or laborious government
offices, bank clerk, clothier, upholsterer, draper, provision dealer or catering to the public; liability to loss
or discredit through dishonesty.
Saturn in Tenth House
A great deal depend^ upon the sign and aspects. When
well aspected : ambition for power and aSvancement, the
native rises above his sphere in life, by steady, persevering industry.
When afflicted by aspect* or weak by sign : /ise and
success is followed by downfall or *idversity. The subject is usually persistent ind has ability, but lacks opportunities and meets with obstacles, delay, dpll periods
and disappointment. In business, financial ruin is
threatened ; in professional life, dishonor and failures
whether,, deserved or not ; in political matters, defeat.
Public affairs fail and bring loss and discredit. These
take place during adverse transits ancf directions. If the ,
native has a good situation he had best keep ifc and not
branch out “into new undertakings which entail heavy
liabilities' or great responsibility.
(Mercury in good aspect helps to improve the conditions and denotes government^ officials, land surveyors

GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
-and dealers, migagers, organizers, solicitors, stationers,
binders, lawyers,' scientists, geologists, i^rchitecfs, contractors, builders, mining engineer^, coal dealers and
other employments where care’atfd skill, patience or
organized and concentrated efforts: a,rp required; diplomatic occupations. If Mercury/afflicts : miner, printer,
bookbinder, bricklayer, coal handler, grocer, gardener;
general and practical work connected with the earth an<£
its products; country preacher, notary public, nigh*
watchman, etc.
Urapus in Tenth House
A strange and eve» tful career; many important
changes of position and credit.
Originality is a marked feature. The native is unique
in that he originates new lines of activity for himself,
follows uncommon lines of thought and employment
and establishes customs and Codes of his own, apart and
opposite to the conventional.
All .effort is made for freedom and to undo and overthrow all bonds of limitation. Very independent,
erratic, eccentric and unconventional. Difficulties with
employers; opposition from public functionaries or governmental bodies. ^Threatens discredit and reverses,
extraordinary experiences in public or business career.
In a common sign: two simultaneous occupations are
indicated. Estrangepient from parents and kindred,
unless good planets occupy the fourth house, not necessarily through trouble unless parcntal’ruler afflicts.
In> good aspect to Mercury, fits the native to reconstruct the old, undertake new and improved methods,
create new professions, new plans of work and follow
uncommon pursuits; investigator, explorer; reformer,
teacher, 'inventor, flier, metaphysician, electrician, astrologer, psychologist.
If Mercury afflicts: novelist, reporter, hypnotist, occult student, antiquarian, dealer in curiosities aq/i
antiquities, lineman, dynamo tender, engineer, motor-

PABT III, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES 387
man, employee tfaving to do with transi^and mechanism,
people of peculiar genius, and extraordinary or hazardous employment.
N<9t<inea in Tenth House
A highly inspirational nature, capable of attaining
honor or position through some unique achievement.
*$t$>fessional peopje become municipal officer^ of sanitary, hygiene, health or hospital boards. A chance of
honor in some artistic or scientific field. The subject
becomes interested in the mysterjpus in nature and
seeks to arrange deductions for practical application.
This position endangers the life of one of the parents
while the native is yet young, but if well aspected may
bring inheritance from a parent or gain through some
“pursuit connected with psychism, liquids, health springs,
hospitals or sanitariums. Taken alone, it signifies all
occupations where mystery, secrecy, inspiration, a nomde-plume 01 Utl,’ are employed ; the sea and the various
industries connected with it; secret service; inspirational
writing, singer, actor, musician, artist, medium, psychic,
diver, fisherman.
Being a neutral planet, the occupation indicated
depehds on the planet in closest or strongest aspect.
Neptune here in the sign Taurus, trine to Mercury,
gives an active desire and ability to simplify science, to
popularize it as far as possible and present it in Ihe most
reasonable and practical manner. Also to investigate
and carry on occult, philosophical and “spiritual philosophies of \ life. Useful inspirational ideas; unique
distinction.
If urrfavorably aspected it indicates a strange and
peculiar career, some disgrace or soandsl whether deserved or not; peculiar circumstances,* separation from*
the parents, unfortunate business or professional complicatiqns.
If Neptune is well aspected it reverses the anfavor
able indications and the native gains through mediumistic or spiritual friends. 1

QENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
ELEVENTH HOUSE.
Moon in Eleventh House
r f r
Large circle of acquaintances; unreliable friends, few
lasting attachments, unless in a fixed sign and well aspected; success in dealing with ladies, children and
young people.
Well aspected ; gain through acquaintances and hopes
realized; good for social life and popularity; friends
among women and celebrities.
If afflicted, especially by Mars or Uranus: troubles,
sorrows and losses through friends, disappointing friendships; sudden changes among friends and separation
from tfiem. Saturn adverse: sorrow, loss and delay cr'
limitations occasioned by friends or through legislative
enactments.
Mercury in Eleventh House
Many acquaintances but few lasting friends; some
association witty literary or scientific people and with
those who are younger. Well aspected: inspiration,
mental development .and gain through friends. Afflicted :
unreliable and troublesome acquaintances: If Uranus,
Saturn or Jupiter is adverse the native should in no way
rely or depend upon friends for assistance or go security
or bonds for them, is they will cause worry, anxiety,
trouble and loss through wrong advice, and carelessness
in handling facts or the tfuth, or their circumstances
will so change that their promises cannot be kept.
Venus in Eleventh House
" Gain hnd happiness through friends who desire to
forward the interests of the native; social success and
popularity.
Favors from women, socialty inclined; friends are
usually of an artistic na.ture ; fruitful marriage.

PAST III, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES 389
Saturn adverse: unfortunate friends >hose advice, if
followed, leads %to trouble, loss and* scandal; disappointments and delays in hopes and wishes. Mars adverse:
possibility of traublo through excess of 'pleasure with
friends. Uranus c£ fjfeptune adverse: unreliable, eccentric or seductive friends..
Sun in Eleventh House
definite and lofty ambitions and desires; respect for
dignitaries or superiors and those of loyal mind, honesty
of purpose, self-respect, dignity, worth. Association
with those of .power and good position; gain in reputation, honors and esteem through* friendships; Successful,
ambitious, well regulated hopes; firm, honorable and
constant friends ; social success.
Mars in Eleventh House
Disagreement with acquaintances, some social unpopularity, contention, alienation and deaths among friends
and troubles with others in social life; few real friends;
friendships are likely to lead the subject into t/ouble
through impulse or some form of extravagance.
Saturn or Mercury in affliction : violation of friendship or treachery among friends.
Jupiter or Sun adverse: difficulty through^ wrong
advice, law troubles, financial losses, rash men, etc.
Venus or Moon Adverse : over-indulgence with* friends.
Uranus adverse : disaster, extraordinary events -and
attachments; trouble with legislators.
Neptune .adverse: losses and unfortunate complications through unreliable friends.
Jupiter in Eleventh House.
.True and fortunate friends; associations with prominent persons, legislators, sen | tors, judges, bankers

„ OENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
doctors, professors ; gain through acquaintances of good
position ; social success, popularity and credit. Ambitions are often attained and hopes brought to a successful issue, dur: to the instrumfcrtality of powerful or
influential friends. The marriage ^arjtner will be fruitful.
In a cardinal sign: executive ability, progress.
In a fixed sign : jealousy or pride ^mong friends.
In a common sign : scientific or religious friends.
Saturn in Eleventh House
If Saturn is exalted or well aspected : few friends ; gain
through acquaintances who are older, profound, scien'ific
or serious.
Taken alone or afflicted: false and deceitful friends,
or unfortunate acquaintances by whom the subject is
liable to care, sorrow, loss and ruin, especially if in a
cardinal sign. Friends among the lowly, ill or unfortunate.
In a fixed sign : delay and hindrance through friends.
In a common sigh : hopes are likely to be unachieved
and ambitions often frustrated; sorrow through friends.
Uranus in Eleventh House
This ris the natural house of 'Uranus but whether his
presence therein will benefit the native or not depends
upon his aspects. Well aspected: friends among occult
or peculiar people, unusual or extraordinary acquaintances, geniuses, inventors, writers, government executives, ^tc. Unexpected benefits from friends ; progressive hop^s and wishes. Tajten alone or afflicted : peculiar
or remarkable friendship, eccentric or unreliable acquaintances; sudd,en,. unexpected estrangements, impulsive attachments often ending in coldness; peculiar hopes
and wishes, strange and romantic attachments.

PART III, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES 391
Neptune’ in Eleventh Hotjse
If adversely aspected : unfavorable attachments, unsatisfactory friendships, strange and unaccountable
attractions and* associates, seductive friends and alliances, treachery “among supposed friends, unreliable
advisors and losses antf troubles thereby ; complications
,£mong friends.
•If Neptune is ’well aspected it reverses these indications, and gives friends among mystics, psychics, poets,
musicians, swimmers, yachtsmen, night-club workers.
Gain through mediumistic or spiritual friends.
"Thanks to my stars, 1 have not ranged about tffie wilds of
•life ere I could And a friend."— Addison

382 I GBNETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
, TWELFTH HOUSE _
Note: If a planet la Vlthln twelve degrees above the ascending degree, consider It as affecting the Attendant
Moon in Twelfth K otse
Love of mystery, occultism, secret arts or romanc?.
Liability of the senses dominating the reason, causing
indiscreet «fove affairs, sorrow and loss thereby.
Hindrance and limitations are prominent, but benefit
is indicated in out-cjf-sight work, in occupations which
require seclusion rather than publicity, in hospitals, institutions Or in isolated positions, in remote, quiet,
obscure places. Voyages. Mystery.
If the Moon is not in Scorpio or Capricorn and well
aspected it shows development and progress, particularly
through the occult.
Well aspected: success with large animals; ability for
occult arts.
Afflicted : lacks firmness and stability and is led into
acts of indiscretion, resulting in worry, trouble, secrets
and female enmity. Liability to restraint, enforced retirement or sickness in a hospital ; fanciful fears.
Mercury in Twelfth House
Fond of investigating occultism, chemistry, medicine
or secret arts and for risks and adventures of a secret
or dangerous nature ; for unusual lines of thought generally. Love of mystery; petty worries and annoyances;
many^small enmities, frequently caused by writings or
scandalous reports. The subject possesses ability but
lacks power or opportunities to manifest. Well aspected :
tepds to success , ultimately. Benefit through rest,
quietude and secltfsion.
Venus in Twelfth House
Inclines to romance and "adventure; love for the
mysterious in nature, for investigating the secret arts;

PAST m. DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES* 388
medicine, cheiAistry » pleasure and success with’ horses
and other animals.
Gain by an obscure or.plebian occupation also benefit
through charitable* or public institutions; enjoys peaceful or voluntary seclhsioi^
Secret love affairs or intrigues leading to enmity of
* women; an early union (especially if Mars is in aspect),
affection for anothef after marriage and if SaturA afflicts,
separation or divorce and sorrow or disappointment
through the opposite sex.
Scorpio, Capricorn or Cancer we the worst-signs for
Venus here, giving too great love for physical and
emotional pleasures ; detrimental to -the native because
of excess.
Sun in Twelfth House
Occult and psychic tendencies, uncommon tastes and
inclinations. Success over enemies and success in medicine, chemistry, occult affairs, in some quiet, socure,
obscure or unpopular occupation, or in connection with
hospitals, prisons or other institutions; seclusion. Life
in places far from birth. Help and charity received
when needed.
If in a watery sign : strong mediumistic faculty.
Well aspected: self-sacrificing, enduring and rises out
of seclusion, obscuiity or difficulties by- his owif efforts
after the first third of life haS passed.
Afflicted: sorrow and misfortune through things indicated by .the sign occupied : inflammatory conditions.
Mars in Twelfth House*
Danger of injury, slander, scandal, lqss of reputation
or treachery from enemies os misplaced afaectionj grave
.trouble through impulse, lack of frankness or candor;
liability to imprisonment.

GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
Unfortunate adventures, secret epertiies, danger of
injury througn la.>-ge animals and byrglars; death in
seclusion or restraint. The partner is subject to feverish
complaints.
If Mars is in Libra or Piscett denotes poverty or
limitations and privation.
Saturn adverse: injuries or imprisonment, illness requiring'hospital service; labor troubles.
Jupiter adverse: financial and social ruin.
Luminaries adverse : distressful circumstances.
The good aspects of the Sun and Venus, or the sign
Capricorn here improve this position of Mars.
Jupiter in Twelfth House ,
Success in medicine, chemistry or occult studies ;
respect for ancient wisdom and teachings; success
through asylums, hospitals or public institutions,
through benevolence and philanthrophy, in places remote
from birth, in quiet places and with animals; charity
given or received; the native readily helps others.
The subject prevails over enemies. They become
friends and he eventually gains through them; reversals
followed by success.
Peculiar experience in connection with the affections,
religious, collegiaU, political or foreign affairs, which,
however, may result in ultimate benefit.
Aid frbm friends and dthers quietly or secretly; success about the middle part of life.
Saturn in Twelfth House
Well aspected: success in seclusion or in quiet or
laborious occupations.
Unaspectetf: setret enemies who work for t"he native's
downfall; losses and bruises through animals. The
nature is acquisitive, reserved and inclined to solituda;

PART III, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPE!? 395
desires to woA secretly, unobserved, and-live peacefully
or alonp. "Secret sorrows, fear and 'disappointment;
liability to false accusations and even imorisonment or
confinement.
Uranus adverse "unexpected or strange enmities, disgrace, loss of credit and honor; labor troubles.
■ Mars adverse : danger of violence, robbers or suicide.
Mercury adverse : mental disorders, hallucinations,
severe sickness ; loss by theft.
Luminaries "adverse : tendency to despondency, melancholia ; sorrow through death of loved ones.
Uranus in Twelfth House
Estrangement from one’s native state or kindred;
difficulties with animals; secret, romantic, mysterious
affairs and attractions ; occult investigations ; psychic
and mystical experiences.
Afflicted: eccentric, peculiar, violent tendencies;
threatens disgrace and troubles from psychic and occult
sources; mysterious <md unexpected misfortunes; restraint in public institutions; strange and unexpected
enmities; eccentric people perplex &nd annoy by underhanded actions. Sudden illness.
Well aspected: success through occult affair^, institutions and extraordinary, secret or out-of-sight avocations.
Neptune in Twelfth House
Well aspected : success in ' mediumship, psychical
research and occult investigations; through secret, secluded an<f quiet methods, detective \vprk or laboratory
research; benefit through large institutions.
Afflicted: dinger from psychic sources and through
deception, schemes, fraud,, 'secret enemies, scandal, disgrace and secret sorrows. Vague or weird apprehensions. Sickness necessitating hospitalization.

386 ' GKNETHHACAL ASTROLOGY
HOUSE RULERSr
Significance of a Planetary' House Ruler
When Posited in Anqfther' House
In the old days delineations such as these were used
principally for Horary astrology, but if understood and
used correctly they may be used to bring to light many
points in the birth horoscope which might otherwise
remain unnoticed. They are suggestions only as to the
possible effect of the natural house rulers posited in other
houses, regardless 'of aspects. The influence of aspects
to each house ruler should be considered 'as a qualifying
factor.
A planet is considered in a house as soon as it approaches within eight degrees of the degree on thejrusp.
This is true of all the houses except the Ascendant as
when a planet has arrived within twelve degrees of the
ascending degree it is read as though in the first house,
more especially if it be in the same sign?
Illustration : As an example of this procedure refer
to Chart No. 3 on page 170. There it will be seen that
5 ruler bf 1st house is in the 4th house
1) ruler of 2nd house is in the 4th house ‘
O ruler of 3rd house is in the 3rd. house
9 ruler of 4th house is in the 4th house
% ruler of 5th house is in the 1st house
S ruler of 6th house is in the 5th house
44 ruler of 6th house is in th$ 3rd house
t> ruler of 7th houje is in the 12th house
b ruler of 8th house is in the 12th house
V ruler of 9th (rouse is in the 4th house
If ruler of 10th house is in the 12th hou,se
g ruler of 11th house is in the 5th house
3 ruler of 12th houseis in the 1st fiouse
9 .ruler of 12th house is in the 4th house
These delineations of circumstances, Events .and conditions j»re given because thVy have a deep significance ;
each' one points to certain affairs through which we receive a lesson, an opportunity for development, a test of

PAST; III, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES 397
our true sejfhood. We suffer mostly from ourselves
because we ha vs not learned how best to respond or
react to planetary stimuli. The overcoming of obstacles
or rising equal to and abbve conditions is progress. We
view all things according to our state of development;
we interpret and color them in conformity to our understanding, our character and disposition.
"“'Ve are constantly building character; each. day we
are moulding the future by our reactions to planetary
conditions, It is the effort to refine and improve our
reactions which determines our rate of progress and attainment of happiness. Know Thyself: Wisdom puts
an end to pain. *
First House
• Ruler of First House when posited in First: Bestows
power to create conditions and own dignity; power over
enemies. Well aspected : a long fortunate life, good
health, harmony, triumph over difficulties. Judge the
contrary if afflicted or 'combust.
t
In Second: Much work and time given to the effort to
obtain money. Benefit , through industrious activity. If
weak or afflicted : losses and wants. ’
In Third: Mental development; voluntary short journeys; association and affairs with brethren or kindred;
opportunities delayed. Afflicted : restricted development
or education; troublesome relatives,* journeys and writings.
In Fourth: Gain through lands, mines, inheritance
and possessions; home connections and affairs with ’the
father. ^Success late in life; occult investigations. Afflicted: difficulties through the above and demise in home,
land.
In Fifth: * Delight in pleasure, amusements, sports,
speculation and children, tendency to success
through these. Afflicted : losses through the abote, few
'children and difficulty through them.

.GENETHL1ACAL ASTROLOGY
In Sixth: Atgood healer; gain through hpmanitarianism, food, clothing, ‘employees and sma>ll animals. Afflicted by the luminaries: much siokness and short life.
If planet be Mars, a surgical operation on part of body
ruled by sign on the cusp. Fondness for pets, small
animals and work.
In Seventh: Partnerships and close association with
others; fondness for the opposite sex.,. Afflicted: tenjjottcy to act in opposition to own best interests ; loss and
trouble through law, unions and open enemies. Marital
unhappiness.
In Eighth: Concern ‘over affairs of the dead and with
money of partner and finances of others. Death through
irregularity; occult experiences; mediumistic. Afflicted:
disappointment over legacy, trouble in financial matters.
The luminaries adverse, tends to shorten the life.
In Ninth: Long journeys; religious or psychic experiences; liking for science, invention, law, philosophy and
all matters connected with the higher mind; prophetic
drearts or visions; gain through partner’s relatives.
Afflicted: trouble with foreigners and religious, legal or
educational affairs, fruitless anti dangerous voyages.
Experiences in foreign lands.
In Tenth: Merit, honor, preferment • and success;
rises to high social and professional position. Afflicted :
incites displeasure of superiors or those in power; suffers
indignities, limitations and because of rights withheld;
liable ttf slander«and dishonor; loss of« parents or trouble
by them. <
In Eleventh: Large circle of friends, assistance to and
fr6m them; much pleasure in life; hopes and wishes often
attained; gain by success of employer. Afflicted: Friends
. are a detriment ? hopes often defeated.
In Twelfth: Fear of imprisonment; seclet unhappiness; enmities t native is often cause ol own -undoing;
gain and benefit through understanding of the occult.
Afflicted : imprisonment or restraint unless in its ou>n '
$jgn ; secret sorrows, suffering and misfortune. Well .

PART JII, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES 389
aspected : gain through occult affairs and secret missions.
Success m middlo/life.
* Second Hcii'e
Ruler of Second House When posited in First : Money
comes readily. Afflicted: obstacles and difficulties
though money which may be hard to accumulate.
I i* J
In Second: Money through personal ingenuity and
industry. Naturally interested in financial affairs.
Afflicted: much work for little gain; Iteavy losses.
In Third: Gain through education, writing, brethren,
neighbors and short journeys. Afflicted: losses through
these things.
In Fourth: Estate or benefit through parents; gain
through household goods, lands or mines. Afflicted:
loss by investment in property and mines.
In Fifth: Gain by speculation, investment, pleasure,
entertainment, young people and children. If afflicted:
loss and trouble by such.
In Sixth: Gain through interiors, small animals, poultry, etc., or by .humanitarianism, hygiene and services
rendered. Fondness for pets and animals. Afflicted:
losses through sickness, etc.
In Seventh: Gain by marriage, contracts, business
and dealing with Others,' especially with women. If
afflicted : trouble in unions an*d through open enemies,
competition and theft.
In Eighth : Gain by legacy and goods of the dead or
through mon<*y of the partner. Afflicted :,loss of lpgacy, *
loss of money through the financial losses of others, such
as bank failures, etc.
In Ninth; Gain by books, triding at sea, long journeys,
jjhijpsophy, religion, science and wife’s kindred. If
^Dieted : loss through these.

QENSTHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
In Tenth: -.Gain by occupation, profession, merchandising, government', wife’s parents. Afflicted: financial
loss through mother or employer/etc.
A i
In Eleventh: Gain or loss by fi'ends and accidental
fortune.
In Twelfth: Gain by affairs of secret nature, through
hospitals, sanitariums, occult investigations and by Jarfce
animals.
Third House
Ruler ©f Third Hour* when posited in First: Journeys
and removals; concern with affairs of brethren and
neighbors ; writings, learning and accomplishments.
In Second: Money through educational affairs, sho.-t
journeys, writings, music, etc. Afflicted : trouble with
kindred over money matters.
In Third: Benefits through learning, accomplishments,
writings, short journeys and brethren.
In Fourth: Traveling and writing in connection with
home affairs and property. Afflicted : trouble with
brethren over same.
In Fifth: Pleasure journeys; mental pleasures through
children, brethren, reading, study, accomplishments and
travel to pleasure resorts.
In Sixth: Sickness or injury through journeys; difficulty through brethren ; interest in study and methods of
healing or social economy.
, In Seventh: Marriage as a result of journeys, writing,
or to one of kin*. Afflicted : The union will be unfortunate; danger of robbery while traveling.
In Eighth: ’Sickness and death of brethren'; journeys
on ’account of trouble, {als’e accusations, or trouble on
account of death or bequests. '*

PART III, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPtia 401
In Ninth :*Lpng journeys; gain through philosophy,
publishing* and^science ; brethren aie likely to journey to
foreign parts and marry.
In Tenth: Professional or nonoraDlc journeys and
gain through then! ; lionprs or renown through writings
or other accomplishments. Journeys with the mother.
If afflicted: The native's brethren cause mental anguish.
in Eleventh : Friends through journeys, or vice.versa;
fortunate conditions through brethren. Correspondence
with friends. Hopes and wishes accomplished through
progressive studies.
In Twelfth : Great sorrow through brethren ; secret
suffering; occult learning; seclusion or estrangement
from brethren or kindred and difficulty through some of
•them. Danger of enmities and imprisonment while
traveling.
Fourth House
Ruler of Fourth House when posited in First: Fortunate inheritance; gain through land, property or parentage. Interest in domestic science.
lit Second: Gains by deals in land and property and
by the estate or condition of the parents.
In Third : Gain through brethren : if afflipted, the
father is put to sorrow or difficult}} by one of them. May
reside and travel with relatives. m ,
In Fourth: Gain in property and through' old people
or antiquities; assistance of the father. Benefit and
profit ip the place of birth. Loss through storms, floods.
In Fifths Gain and pleasure by father's good, fortune;,
possessions descend to children. May reside near a
school, puBliptpark, play-ground or theatre.
In Sixth: Loss of possesions through sicknesst servants or small animals. Well, aspected : gain through
sickness, service, etc. May bujld his own house, etc .

GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
In SeVenth:. Property by marriage: gain by land and
women generally. /Afflicted: loss of pjopeity through
marriage or partnerships.
In Eighth: ‘ Gain by legacy or estate'. Afflicted : death
of father, danger to mother during dunfinement; loss of
property inheritance.
h
In Ninth: Gain in possessions through science, relig-^
ion, long' journeys and wife’s relatives. Afflicted : •toss
of foreign property.
In Tenth: Gain* in possessions by trade, profession,
public or government Vfprk, or by fruits of the earth.
In Eleventh: Hopes come to good conclusions: gain
through friends. Many hopes and wishes attained in
old agfc. . r
In Twelfth: The native’s health is considerably affected by the parents taking a long journey; he suffers sorrow through one of them; loss of possessions through
treachery. End of life in seclusion or devoted to the
study ‘of occult subjects.
Fifth House
Ruler of Fifth Refuse when posited in First: A propensity to pleasure through gaming and children. Many
love affairs.
In Second: Gain "through investment, pleasure and
children.' The Native’s children, gain in possessions
which he fcnjoys. Afflicted; his possessions are diminished by speculation, pleasure or young people.
fn Third : Journeys with or through children dr young
people. Pleasure through some of the kindred. Liking
■for travel, sports' drama and adventure.
In Fourth: Estate or possessions through discovery,
gaming or parehts in latter part of life. Well aspected,
the -native’s children profit' through gifts from thejf
grandfather. Love of h<jme.

PA8T III, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES 403
In Fifth.: *Mi}ch pleasure; love affairs'and adventures;
speculations oV investments; prosperous children and
pleasure through therm
In Sixth: Sicl*ne*,s among children. Money through
careful speculation or tfy children’s earnings. Pleasure
in hygienic methods, through pets and hobbies.
Jn Seventh: Pleasure, close association .or understanding with the partner, but discord with children.
Loss by theft. If afflicted : trouble and loss through love
affairs.
In Eighth: Suffers througfl children who may die
before the native. Loss through speculations or gaming.
In Ninth: Dutiful children who travel and gi\*e pleasure and learning to the native. Offspring become preachers, scientists or explorers. Pleasure in foreign lands.
In Tenth: "Honorable children; renown in speculation,
business enterprise or in the theatrical world, ^ell aspected : pleasure or honor through wife’s father or
through his own mo^ier.
In Eleventh: Great attachment between the native
and his children, friends through them, happy conclusions to hopes and wishes, friends through speculation
or pleasure and among legislators, ambassadors and
sportsmen.
In Twelfth: Children c^use secret sorrow; speculations cause ruin ; pleasure through investigation of
rhings of mysterious or research nature. If afflicted :
danger °f imprisonment through gaming.
Sixth House
Ruler of Sixth House when posited in First: Sickness through irregularity 4 or lax attention to laws of
hygiene. Fondness for pets. Afflicted : servants and
%tnall animals prove troublesome or unprofitable.

GENETHHACAL ASTROLOGY
In Second : fosses and limitations financially through
sickness, servants ard animals. Well ^.spec'ted, money
through service, employees, healing 'and small animals.
In Third : Sickness of some of the brethren or kindred ;
journeys on account of sickness, Snd vice versa. Interest
in studies and methods of healing and industrial economy.
Likelihood of mental disturbance when sick. »
In Fourth: Sickness of father thrbugh changes Sind
worry; sickness of the native through anxiety and troublesome home or domestic affairs. Trouble through
servants in the homb.
In Fifth*: Sickly children ; illness through pursuit of
or over-indulgence in pleasure or sports.
In Sixth: Some severe illness. If well aspected, usual-,
ly has good health ; success in service and with employees, poultry, medicine, healing or social service.
In Seventh: Quarrels or law with servants; difficulties
with disreputable women and sickness. Trouble with
employees or physicians.
In Eighth: Ijangerous illness; death of servants, animals, poultry, etc. Financial rewards for faithful service.
t
In Ninth: Sickness abroad, at sea or while traveling;
illness of wife’s relatives; danger through over-study.
Work in* connection with foreign affairs or universities.
In Tenth: Sickness through dishonor; sorrow or
affliction op account of mother dr wife's father. Well
aspected : honors through service and healing or through
munitipal or national activities.
t
In Eleventh: Sickness among friends and family.
Hopes depend too much upon acquaintances. Interest in
legislative activities, political and social welfare.
In Twelfth : Imprisonment or private enemies .through
servants,' animals or method! of healing. Sickness or
work'in some large institution. Work of secret or my*-
terious nature. Interest ip archeology or submarine life.

PAST III, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES 406
Seventh House
Ruler of Seventh ttouae when' posited in First : Public
enemies, unions, partnership, love of women and benefit
through them. Connection with the processes of the law.
In Second: Gain by marriage. Afflicted : loss of money
„thrt>ugh unions, partnerships, contracts, lawsuits, public
e'henjies. Loss thsough women ; death of partner and
public enemies.
In Third: Enmities with some <»f the brethren or
neighbors ; marriage with someone of kin or to a neighbor; difficulty through writings ir contracts. 'Legal or
religious disputes, trouble on short journeys.
< In Fourth : Property by marriage ; a chaste partner
and happy ending to wedded life. Afflicted : litigation
over property, robbery of household goods.
In Fifth: The native marries one younger than himself and enjoys much pleasure thereby, but has troubles
and enmities with children. Loss by speculation or
gaming.
In Sixth: The native marries below his station mentally or socially, has sickly wife and Evilly disposed employees. Trouble over small animals.
In Seventh: Success in lawsuits, marriage ih good
family; a prepossessing partner, tfut likely one who
grows cold or proves unjrue or hostile.
In Eighth: Money or property by marriage; deatij ot
partner; some inheritance but .difficulty over it. Jf
afflicted:. loss of money through marriage and partnerships.
In Ninth: Marriage to a stranger from afar; gain by
partner’s relatives. Partner journeys to foreign lands.
Afflicted ^contentions with rjligious or 'scientific. people.
* In Tenth: An honorable partner beneficial to the pro-
/essional career. Afflicted : troitfile by rivals through.

GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
som<! office, honor or employment. Pybljc disgrace or
scandal through a union or enemy.
In Eleventh: Friends become public opponents or
enemies. Mafriage to a widow or widower with children,
but liable to trouble through th*m.'
In Twelfth: Unhappy marriage, secret sorrows, jealousy, vexation, sickness. Partner or opponents cause^ '
imprisonment or fear of it. Danger of 'death at the hands
of enemies if the ruler of the eighth afflicts.
Eighth House
Ruler of Eighth House when posited in First : Legacies
and money through affairs and matters connected with
the deceased; assists in the accumulation of money and
business of others. Afflicted : trouble through the above
and through the losses of others; death by irregularity.
In Second : Gain in finance by the money of the partner and money of others. Fortunate in collecting debts.
Gain through the deceased. If afflicted: loss and trouble
through all such matters.
In Third : Danger of death on short journeys. Unfortunate brethren and death of same. Investigation regarding death and {he continuity of life. . Psychic and
mysterious experiences.
In Fourth: Gain,in property through the deceased,
probably by the. death of parents. "£he native dies at
home unless this planet is an conjunction with the ruler
of ninth, tfien abroad. Afflicted : death of parents, danger
through falls and falling buildings, floods and storms.
Trouble over inheritance, land and property.
• In Fifth: Unfortunate children or death of some.
‘Dahger through excessive pleasures, speculation, children
and theii* affairs.
In Si$*h: Dangerous siclwiess. Death of pets, small
animals or servants. Loss of money earned by ertroloy.-
ment, and through thosg in whose keeping it may be.

PART III, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES 407
In Seventi/k: .A rich partner or one ?o whom money
comes .unexpectedly. Afflicted : death of partner and
public enemies. Danger of death by violence, suicide,
accident or war..
In Eighth: Gain by tjie dead ; a natural death ; a comfortably fixed partner. Interest in matters relating to
future life. Spiritualistic experiences.
Vi Ninth: Thtf partner has trouble with relatives over
money matters. Death in a distant land. Danger of
death by drowning or while on voyages.
In Tenth: • Death of mother and employers. Danger
of violent death probably through discharge of government order or through war. Business through matters
connected with the dead. Well aspected: rise to high
.position through an inheritance. Other persons will gain
dr lose money by him, according to the planet’s aspects.
In Eleventh: Death among friends. Well aspected:
gain and legacies through friends.
In Twelfth: Difficulty over inheritance. Death of
secret or private enemies. Great sorrow, fear or anxiety
concerning death or imprisonment. D^ath while in an
institution. If afflicted by ruler of seventh: death or
imprisonment through enemies.
Ninth House
Ruler of Ninth House when pceited in First: Long
journeys, learning, wisdom, prudence ; fortunate with
strangers, foreigners, tvife,s.*relatives and vqyages. Interest in science, invention, law, philosophy or political
economy. . ^
In Second: Money gained by foreign merchants or
the sea, science, learning, publications, travel, ^nvenji&n
or banking.
In Third: "Journeys and removals .on account of
beliefs and convictions. Liarning, accomplishit*ents and
Ijrogress through research, travel, investigations, explorations, travel or writings.

OENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
In Fourth: Ecclesiastical or scientific inheritance.
Possessions through partner’s relatives. 'gravel on account of family affairs or wife’s mother. Journeys home
to die. c ,
In Fifth: Liberal or unconventional ideas in regard
to union. Free living. Child by itrange consort, journey
on account of children. Pleasure journeys. Takes pleasure in science, philosophy, voyages, air flights, sports,
foreign investments or speculation.
In Sixth: Sickness through traveling or vice versa.
Study of hygiene, medicine, healing, etc. Difficulty
through work in foreign lands, or in connection with
exporting.
In Seventh: Public enemies through religious, scientific, or, seafaring people. Marriage to a stranger of
education or refinement whose relatives may be opposed'
to the native.
In Eighth: Persecution regarding religious, scientific
or educational convictions, also through publications.
Gain by long journeys concerning legacies or goods of
deceased persons. Death of partner’s kindred. Psychic
experiences.
In Ninth: Traveling for education, scientific or religious purposes. Prophetic dreams. Many fine qualities.
Splendid possibilities through culture and development.
In Tenth: If a benefic: honor, credit and esteem
through, science, literature or travel; success in foreign
affairs. Xhe reverse if a malefic unless well aspected.
In Eleventh: Suffering on account of religious or other
convictions. Fortunate friendships on voyages and
friers among foreigners t(nd in foreign lands. Acquaintances among travelers, scientists and legislators. ’
. In.Tweifth: Difficulty and sorrow through religion,
science, journeys. If a writer or inventor, h,as a hard
Tifite to complete his work and get it to the public. In
middle or latter j>art of life sqtks seclusion for development, •occult learning, etc., and takes long journeys for
same. '

PART in, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPE^ 409
Tenth House
Ruler of Tenth H»ute when posited in First: Preferment and dignities, ionors through merit, success
through industrious effort, high ambitions* gain through
mother and governftehtai, affairs.
Jn Second: Gain in money by industry, through trade,
nrofession or government office.
In Third: Respect among kindred and neighbors. Gain
in honors and advancement through partner’s relatives.
Honors through short journeys, writings and accomplishments ; business trips, governmental commissions.
In Fourth: Gain and honors through parentage, lands
and property, success at close of life. Interest in reclamations, colonization, co-operative movements, herticultifre, mining, architecture or archaeology.
In Fifth: The native’s children suffer from sickness,
but rise to honors. Gain and honors through speculation,
pleasures, young people, sports or the stage.
In Sixth: Modest worldly position, gain and honors
through service, employment, the practice of healing or
army, and navy affairs
In Seventh: Gain through lawsuits and dealing with
the public generally. Honors and reputation assisted by
honorable marriage and partnerships in responsible concerns. •
In Eighth: Gain and honors in handling tfie estate
and money of others, also through lawsuits, legacies, inheritance, insurance, etc., of deceased persons. •
In Ninth: Honorable voyages, professional journeys;
honors through .learning, writing, publishing, research
or philosophy. A religious or intellectual mother r#ith’
many fine qualities. *
In Tenth: Gain and honors through profession, honorary office or government employ. Success aidtfd by
rfiother’s care, training and effects.

GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
In Eleventh: . Eminent friends among; legislators and
those in high goVermpental or professional positions ; an
honorable fortune. The native is helpiul t'o his ass'ociates
and others. Ambitious ideals.
In Twelfth: Loss of office yr honor, dignity, etc.,
through business associates who’ become secret enemies.
Unfortunate environments and conditions. Professional
secrets. Difficulty in employment. Limitations relieved
by the study of recondite sciences or metaphysics.
Eleventh House
Ruler of Eleventh House when posited in First: The
native meets with real friends and supporters ; can overcome enemies and obstacles through the support of acquaintances. Many hopes are attained ; fortunate actions.
In Second: Business and money by means of friends
and acquaintances, through legislative interests or
through development of his own creations.
In Third: Friendship among kindred and neighbors;
friends through writings and journeys.
In Fourth: Inheritance through friends ; fortunate in
property. Love for father. Friends reside in the hojtne.
In Fifth: Much happiness and pleasure in-life through
children, friends and beneficial circumstances.
In Sixtli: Friends jmong working people and those
in army,' gavy or air service ; concerned with sickness
among friends; faifhful servants, interest in social welfare.
In/Seventh: A loving 'partner with desirable friendships and social connections. Success in law suits'.
•In 'Eighth: Death of friends; gifts or legacies from
friends. Ah easy demise.
In Nintij: Gain land success through long journeys.
Friendships through travel and learning. Friends among,
educators, ministers, writers, explorers, inventors.

PART III, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES 411
In Tenth tj friendship among those <jf good’ position.
Gain and honofs through those of high standing in social,
business or governmental circles.
In Eleventh: * Many friends and beneficial acquaintances; well defined* hopes and wishes; friends among
unique, ingenious, original or radical people.
* In Twelfth: Deceitful friends who may cause much
suffering. Sorrowful friends. Good friendship among
occult people. Pleasure in peaceful, quiet, harmonious or
secluded places.
Twelfth Mouse
Ruler of Twelfth House when posited in First : Animosities difficult to overcome; heavy troubles; secret
sorrows; limitations; all are lightened, however^ by oc-
* cult, or New Thought studies. Danger of imprisonment
or disablement requiring hospitalization.
In Second Gain through secrecy and the occult, also
through large animals, if well aspected. Afflicted: loss
of money through enemies and generally unfortunate
conditions.
In Third : Disappointment, sorrow and trouble through
some of the kin, friends or neighbors. Troublesome
short journeys and writings; occult learning.
In Fourth: Loss or great difficulty through, involved
property. Trouble through father or wife’s’ mother.
Secret suffering, jestrictions or limitations at epd of life.
In Fifth : Secret sorrow# and difficulty through love,
speculation, children or gaming.
In Sixth: Difficulty, trouble and loss through small
animals ; trouble through employees^ Limitations on
account of sickness.
In Seventhi Trouble through deceit and treachery
concerning unions, partnerships, contracts and^awsuits.
Sickness, discord and opposition of partner; tthuble
through women generally.

OENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
In Eighth : Ar>. unsatisfactory end, many misfortunes,
secret enemies die, troubles over inheritance.
In Ninth: If .afflicted : ship wreck or isolation. Difficulty with relatives, men of science or religion. Long
journeys, secret missions. Investigation, exploration,
secluded research. Sacrifice for science or religion.
In Tenth: Liability to disgrace, discredit and persecution from superiors, government, or' those in offite
above the native which is likely to result in a long journey or retirement anji seclusion. Government employ
in the interest of large institutions. Sorrow through the
mother or trouble with partner’s parents.
In Eleventh: Unfortunate undertakings; peculiar
hopes; great disappointments and obstacles; deceitful
friends and losses through advice of acquaintances.
In Twelfth: Occult abilities, powerless enemies,
secret investigations, fondness for animals. Limitations,
afflictions and adversities prove to be blessings in disguise by, developing inner growth and understanding.

PART m, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES 418
INFLUENCE OF PARS FORTUNE
AND t MOON’S NODES IN
xnE TWELVE MUNDANE HOUSES
<1 Moon’s North Nrfie : Dragon’s Head or Caput
Draconis.
U Moon’s South Node: Dragon's Tail or Cauda
* Draconis.
© The Part of Fortune : Para Fortunae.
The point in the zodiac where a planet crosses out
of south into north latitude is called the North Node;
the opposite point is the Soutlf Node.
Some writers believe that the Nodes, and particularly
the Moon’s Nodes, have no influence in astroljgy and
•need not be used, but we have observed many cases
where the influence of the Nodes was marked. It has
been observed in progressed horoscopes that when the
North Node seached a conjunction with a benefic planet
in the natal chart benefits of the nature of the house
occupied were experienced. On the contrary, the South
Node, or Dragon's Tail, produced the opposite effect or
unfavorable conditions.
Id Astro-Meteorology the changing node of a superior
planet, such as Saturn, from north* to south or south to
north, produces marked changes in the weather; that is
to say, had the planet been indicating wet weather it
then indicates dry weather, and vice versa.
It requires nineteen years, according to its faction of
approximately three minutes per day, for The Moon’s
Node to complete the circle of the twelve zodiacal signs.
It is very interesting to observer the effects of the Ncde’s
influence in nativities, as they transit to a conjunction
with the Various planets in the chart. This frequently
corresponds with important conditions and* circum1
stances that cannot be accounted for in any dther way.
’ © The Part of Fortune : Pars ‘Fortunje
» The Part of Fortune is not a planet. It is a place in
the horoscope equally distant ftom the Ascendant as the

•GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
Moon is from 'the Sun at time of birth. f It represents
worldly success as ’indicated by tlv' house and sign it
occupies in the nativity.
It has been said that it is influenced only by conjunctions and its house position, But in our experience we
have found a number of cases where directional aspects
both good and adverse to Pars Fortunae distinctly,
affected ‘matters ruled by the house" it occupied.
In one interesting case a lady’s natal chart showed
absolutely no solaf indications for marriage, according
to the regular rules, yet^she was married to a gentleman
described by the sign in which Pars Fortunx was
located; and the Part of Fortune was the only point in
the chart aspected by the Sun.
(The following readings, based upon the Influence of Pars
Fortunae and the North and South Nodes, are liberal transcriptions from The Doctrine of Nativities, by John Gadbury, 1658.)
In First House
North Node in the Ascendant inclines to honors,
wealth and favors through religious, educational or
scientific affairs. It adds power to the personality and
gives opportunity fo'r self-expression.
W South Node in Ascendant inclines to tribulations,
loss and" scandals ; endangers the face and eyes and is
one tes’tvnony of. a short life.
© Part o*f Fortune in the 'Ascendant portends gain and
happiness by the native's own industry, especially • if
Jupifer or Venus behold it by friendly aspect, bu{ Saturn
or Mars unfavorable to it do much lessen .its benign
.significations.
In Second House
Narth^Node operates to remove want ana to dcsiow ,
affluence; fortunate heredity or gain by legacy and giftd;
gcitj by science and learning; increases the possessions. ■

PART III, DELINEATION’S FOR HOROSCOPES 415
South Node inclines to misfortune in ’finances, indebtedness, loss ail'd damage to estate; sorrow, fears and
worry concerning money matters.
Pars Fortunae: happiness and gain through property,
and profit by employment and business ; protection and
promotion through business friendships.
In Third House
North Node adds quality to the mentality and conduces to interest in spiritual or educational matters and
gives preferment in such ; gains through brethren, neighbors and journeys, writing or publishing.
South Node: mental anxiety, trouble with brethren
and neighbors; unprofitable journeys.
Pars Fortunae: 'profitable journeys; gain through intellectual affairs, also by means of amiable and honest
kindred.
In Fourth House
North Node augurs gain by means oS property and in
somewhat unexpected manners; fortunate in discovery
or in findings. Ancestry noble, long-lived and trustworthy.
South Node: loss or confusion ^with land jfnd buildings; waste of patrimony; jeopardizes the esteem and
credit; turmoil iifthejfves qf ancestors; family discord.
.Pars Fortunae: gain through property, treasure or
other hidden things and products of the earth, mineVals,
metals,* etc. Aids any other testimony for gain by
inheritance; stable patrimony.
In Fifth House
North* Node frees the native from many **trovbles,
ailamities and dangers. It is favorable for children who
live long and are fortunate. ;The native gains soipe

QENETHLIACAX, ABTBOLOGI
public employment or office and is fond cf civil recreation, pleasure and sports.
South Node denies issue or «lse portends their destruction suddenly or violently ; inclines them to adversity while they live and makes them cross or disobedient
to the native. Excessive or irregular pleasures produce
much harm.
Pars Fortunas : If ill aspected shows much loss and
damage to the native through pleasure and speculation;
crosses and losses in his estate by means of children.
If well aspected, £ain through fortunate investments
and children, young peqple and ambassadors. A goodly
portion of pleasure in life and prosperity for the
offspring.
In Sixth House
North Node favors the health and strengthens the
body. Faithful and honest employees; gain through
service; fortunate by means of father’s kindred and by
small animals.
t
South Node: The native suffers because of various
physical afflictions; is crossed and deceived by servants
and suffers loss through small animals. Danger of illness through bites by insects, reptiles or animals.
Pars Fortunas : It denotes happy and prosperous uncles
and aunts who may benefit the native. It gives gain in
employ and by meafis of those whom the native may
hire, alsfl profit by small animals, and. other things ruled
by this house.
In Seventh Houae
North Node lessens the number of enemies, increases
.profit through dealings with others and portends delight
and gain through women whose influence may benefit
the native. It is a testimony for a wise and wealthy
partner.
South Node: many oppressors, calumnies raised 'by
ejiemies or competitor^ contention and .difficulty .with

PART III, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES 417
partner, but it aiso portends the death or destruction of
enemies.
Pars Fortune • inclines to success in dealings with
women and in marriage or partnership; gain through
bargains, contracts and dealings with others ; victory
over enemies and gain in conquest. If evilly aspected
here, produces the contrary.
In Eighth House
North Node: promotes health and conduces to longevity; testimony for gifts and legacies and gain by those
deceased.
South Node : loss of goods through deception ; sudden
or violent death.
* "Pars Fortunae : if unafflicted signifies gain by inheritance; gain by means of those deceased, also through
the use of other people’s money.
In Ninth House
North Node: improves the mental qualities and gives
success in educational, legal or religious^studies ; favorable for voyages and foreign affairs ; true dreams and
prophetic intuition.
South Node: afflicts the faculty of faith and portends
miserable or unfortunate voyages ; curious dreams, unreliable premonitions ; trouble and danger of imprisonment in foreign laryls.
Pars Fortunae: inclines to Tong journeys; success pertaining to churches or educational properties and’Jjy
means of foreigners, invention or books.
In Tenth House
North Node : native achieves honors, credit afnd high
position^ by merit of industry and ability.
South Node : loss of position through deception,
’treachery and adverse public conditions such as sudden
.depressions, changes or failures.*

QENBTHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
Pars Fortunae: favorable circumstances and "lucky"
events assist the native to rise to Honor in his sphere,
also by mean^ of business asset?.
In Eleventh Mouse
North Node: meritorious friendships, acquaintances
assist in the realization of hopes and jvishes.
South Node: undesirable associations, loss of opportunities and frustration of hopes; wrong advice and false
friends.
Pars Fortunae : pleasure and gain through friends in
good position, realization of hopes and wishes.
In Twelfth House
North Node: gain by secret methods or in seclusion;
success in occultism.
South Node : frequently harassed by the machinations
of secret enemies ; liability to imprisonment or restraint
and restrictions r unfavorabl . to h£ alth ; inclines to selfundoing.
Pars Fortunae: afflicted, property losses through the
wiles of secret enemies; unafflicted, gains from unexpected sources. Wejl aspected, gain from quiet and
secret, sources ; accumulation of possessions develops
with age!
“To everything there I* a aeason, and a time to every purpoe*
uijder the heaven.” — Eccl. Ifl-l.

PAftT III, DELINEATIONS FOR BOmSsfiOPTCR
PLANETARY ASPECTS
“There la nothing either good or bad.
Bat thinking makes It so." — Shakespeare.
Truly it is said, “Each star has its own glory.” For
convenience the influence of planets is termed “good”
°r *^verse” according to the nature of the yibrations
as they harmonize or conflict with our ideas of what is
good and what is evil.
In reality there are no malefic planets or adverse aspects. All things work together for good' but our
response to planetary vibrations, our manifestation of
the influence of some of the planets is adverse due to
.our limited understanding.
The planets are all heavenly (spiritual) bodies and
their vibrations manifesting through the various aspects
commonly tertned “good” and "evil” are interpreted by
us through our understanding of those terms, which are
but relative.
For instance, the Influence of Saturn usually called
"the 'great malefic,” is cold, binding and retarding. Most
people, when he aspects them adversely, become impatient at the delays encountered, grow worried or nervous
and are disappointed to the extent of depression, gloom
or melancholy, and as these attributes are the* reverse
of what the normal being desires, he terms them
“malign" and decides th’at Saturn is an* evil planet.
.From different angles (aspects) the nature pf a
planet's vibrations manifests 'differently, the W^ve
lengths "being shorter or longer, making direct or indirect
contacts ; Hence, some are pleasing to, our sensibilities
and some are agitating and tend to arrange the dhemfcal 1
constituents of the body accordingly. The mifld senses
(usually .subcohsciously) these bodily changes and conditions, and translates them in terms of thought, hence
v*e are oftentimes mentally elated or depressed without
realizing the cause, there being apparently no reason for
the condition.

GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
The human bfedy is a highly sensitive instrument and
subject to rapid changes. It is esp£cii,lly sensitive to
atmospheric changes or disturbance. The atmospheric
conditions are caused by solar, lunar and planetary activity. When we stop to consider hqw^often we breathe,
how much air is taken into thaMungs daily, that there
is a pressure of air on the body of approximately fourteen pounds to the square inch, all of which is in vibratory activity from planetary sources, we no longer
wonder at the responses we make and the manifestations we give vent to accordingly and in keeping with
our control (or lackpf control) of mind and body when
we are in such close and constant touch, with cosmic
forces.
The difference in degree of development or undft
standing determines, to a large extent, the difference ir.
our response to planetary aspects. He, who is ignorant
of Natural Law, will blindly follow his own imperfect
conception of conditions and then rail at his "bad luck,"
but another under the same influence, who sees above
and beyond the common acts of daily life, is apt to be
less unfortunate. The one follows “fate,” the other
anticipates it and profits thereby to the degree of his
understanding avd refinement of his reactions to planetary vibrations.
Adverse Aspects Not Evil
During*- adverse aspects we are more apt to see and
feel the necessity for action to overcome old difficulties
and obstacles in tKe path of pur progress; apt to feel the
urge so strfingly that a real* anxiety develops to be up
and doing to safeguard our interests and forestall th*
threatened troubles. Th'is feeling often becomes nervousness and worry, a form of expression which should
be-cast aside at oijce as it is a woeful waste of force and
1 loSs of'^ower.
The first essential, then, to transcend adverse vibrations tis te> calm the mind with the assurance that "all
things work together for good.” Adverse planetary*
aspects viewed from the; standpoint of those who are

PART HI. DELINEATIONS FOE HOROSCOPES 421
consciously, ntalang effort at self-improvement, are considered •helpful, *£>eopuse their driving force produces an
added urge to press on hardef and faster towards the
goal of enlightenment hnd achievement.
It is better to have squares and oppositions in a nativity, than to have no aspects, as the square and oppositidh certainly give progressive persons great energy and
ambition, and develop determination to »vercome
obstacles and difficulties.
By acquiring the right spirit toward life, the right
philosophy regarding its privileges and opportunities, a
person may become successful with malefic planets in
the ascendant. Although beset by strife and difficulty,
especially in younger years, he may overcome them after
griddle life.*
Aspects considered favorable are:
Those considered unfavorable are:
The conjunction (d) and parallel (P) are favorable
or unfavorable, according to the nature of the planets
aspected, as shown in the following list:
Conjunctions and Parallels
D Good: iJ or P S } 21. •
Adverse: 6 or P i t> V.
Doubtful: d or P© V B.
The enact conjunction of Sun and Moon is considered
good, except*when beset by unfavorable aspects, althoughit tends to weaken the health, especially in a feihale.'
• To help transcend the so-called adverse aspects, to help Improve the quality of our response to planetary Influences, V course
of lessons In book form has been published entitled, "Attainment
Thfough Cosmic Vlbratlona." In the Astrologer’s Searchlight*-
is a lengthy chapter on “How to Overcome Adverse Aspects.” . •

GENETHLLACAL ASTftOLOOY
0 Good'. d or JP 9 O U.
Adverse: <5 or P g b ¥.
Doubtful: d or P ^ 9.
9 Good: d ofPOUIf.
Adverse: d or P g b f.
Doubtful: d or P 9.
© Good : d or P y.
Adverse: d or P g b
Doubtful: i or P If B.
g Good : No <j or P with 3 Is considered good.
Adverse: dorPifbWVB.
y Good: d or P ip.
Adverse: d or P b V.
Doubtful: d or P B.
b Good: No d or P with b Is considered good.
Adverse: d or P f f 6.
V Good : No d or P with V Is considered good.
Adverse: d or P IP 9.
Ip 9 Tbe d and P of Neptune and Pluto are Included In tbs
foregoing paragraphs.
Note: The d oreP of U with IP is generally considered
good, especially for matters relating to V, although it
may produce a tendency to go to extremes or to overindulg&ice in eating, drinking or pleasure; or to become
involved in doubtful financial ventures.
The following chapter '(lelineates the influence of aspects, including conjunctions and parallels. The aspects
o£» Pluto to other planets are not given because such" influences can be reliably determined only after Jong and
.careful research. The general influences are given on
* Statements concerning Pluto’s Influence must necessarily be conJecturalvfor many years while ^capable Investigators are making
research concerning Its effects and have time to correlate and.
check their findings. 1

PART III, DEtlWBATlONS FOB HOROSCOPES 428
THE ZODIACAL ASPECTS DELINEATED
• With’ Reference to the Natal Chart
Planetary Aspects of the Moon 7>
The Moon is usually considered cold and moist, feminine, negative, receptive, reflective, magnetic, fruitful,
plastic and changeable. She has a strong influence over
the»stomach and ’digestion, absorption, nutrition, glands
and their secretions, the womb, the feminine functions,
child-bearing, lymph, fat, and the breasts. Also rules
the brain matter.
She has to do with occupations and pursuits connected
with water and liquids generally; such as sailors, fishermen, brewers, liquor dealers, vessel owners, travelers;
• with common pursuits and the common classes ; also
nurses, midwives, female servants, women generally,
female relatives and the mother more particularly.
Moon in Favorable Aspect to Mercury
Indicates that the native is quick in wit, perceptive,
ingenious, comprehansive, reasonable^; has splendid
mental abilities, keen and penetrating, productive, versatile, expressive, fluent and copious* in speech or writing.
If any of the -airy signs ascend it gives admirable elocution and ability to acquire languages with ease.
The mind responds readily to new ideas and is fond
of change and variety,; optimism, imaginatios and intuition are increased, also qiental sympathy, receptivity
and adaptability. Fond of art, music, pleasure, literature and journeys.
It indicates success with letters, advertising, mail
order business, and with the business world generally.
Moon jn Unfavorable Aspect to Mercury
Anxiety, worry, quick, sfaarp, turbulent and’*sarsastic
states of' mind, Impressionable, mutable, imaginative,

GENETHLIACAI, ASTROLOGY
indecisive, speculative and over-sensitive. Tendency to
change, not enough continuity, fixity; ‘irtnness and
stability of mental Attitudes. Poor; mttaory for dates
and facts in history. Nevertheless, dexterous, ingenious
01 clever, and* possesses many gjood qualities.
Temporary derangements of-'the health through the
nervous system, stomach or bowels. Unsuccessful or
unpopular writing; public criticism. Business lossds,
litigation..
Moon in Favorable Aspect to Venus
Good-natured, kind and cheerful ; neat and tasteful in
dress and 'pleasing in nianners; fondness foi the beautiful in nature, music and all things artistic; taste for
pleasure, light literature, drams and public functions;
fruitful-nature, good intellect.
Gentle, refined, agreeable, affectionate and attractive;
sociable, maternal and sympathetic.
Endowed with respecl and company of the opposite
sex ; epjoys sociability, friends and general popularity.
General public or business success through engaging
personality and #cheerfulness.
Profitable employment in connection with the common
classes. Assistance or approval of parents.
This aspect, is favorable for money and possessions,
for second, fourth a»d seventh house affairs, and the
things ruled by the house which Vejius occupies. It
tends to success and frugality.
Gjtin through catering> to public tastes and necessities
in confectioneries, bakeries, restaurants, hotels, boarding houses, etc.; also through dealing in houses’, lands
arid, the /ruits of*the earth.
Nfoon in Unfavorable Aspect to Venue
It ^indicates over-indulgencfe in pleasures, a tendency
to carelessness in habits and manners; changeful affec*

PAkT 111, DELlMEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES’ 425
tions, usually amorous; losses and difficulty in’connection with .mbniy, property and. possessions, or in
business’ pursuit’s.
Trouble in partnerships, love or marriage; disapproval
of parents or maf suffer unpopularity, slander and
scandal, whether deserved or not.
To a female it threatens ill health periodically.
Moon in Favorable Aspect to Sun
Sincerity, energy, will, loyalty, alYibition and adaptability. Strengthens the constitytion of both male and
female; indicates success in life, rapid promotion, pros
perity and assistance from influential persons; seldom
has difficulty in obtaining employment and usually
receives a good salary. Gain through speculation, investment, enterprise and responsibility. With a good
aspect of Jupiter also, it indicates the accumulation of
great wealth and fortunate, congenial marriage.
The exact conjunction of Sun and Moon is ^often
adverse, especially when at the same time in ill aspect
to the malefics, the nature of which will signify the
difficulty, but of itself the conjunction fs apt to make
the ndtive mutable, inert, indifferent^ lethargic, sensitive,
volatile, irresolute, self-centered but harmless, and may
experience a lowering of vitality every month when the
conjunction occurs.
Moon in Unfavorable Aspect to Sur
Ambitious, venturesome, egotistical, irresolute, sensitive, compelling and immoderate.,
Difficillty in financial affairs, accumulating money, or
in obtaining' and keeping employment; loss by speculation, ill health, inferiors, disappointment and cyrer-confidence; misfortune or poor success with those of high
position; .weak 'constitution, and if Saturn be in affliction, long and serious sitkness; difficulty Mirough
'women.

QENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
Moon in Favorable Aspect to Mars
The subject is ambitious, energetic, fihn, brave, ardent
and resolute.
This aspect in the chart tends tq offset many testimonies regarding sickness or weakness.' It gives strength
to the whole system, muscular and circulatory; increases
the activity, force and vitality. It is a good aspecffor
those wjiose work requires strength for occupations
carried on out of doors.
Success and promotion through resourcefulness and
enterprise in business, personal affairs or employments
of responsibility and publicity. Results are largely
accomplished through quick action, energetic, common
sense methods and hard work which inspire confidence
and- trust from others.
If any testimony of legacy is shown this aspect
strengthens it and brings benefit, possibly through
mother’s connections.
It p good for things ruled by the house the Moon
occupies, also for fourth house affairs, property, timber,
commodities, etc.
Moon in Unfavorable Aspect to Mars
Brave but headstrong; inclined to acts and words
which a^e indiscreet or rash, causing regret, humiliation
and sorrow.
The temper is quick, resulting in disputes, strife and
difficulties*. Self-confident* egotistic, domineering, daring‘and venturesome. , The desire is for freedom and
liberty of expression ; obstacles and opposition or lack
of opportunities cause fits of passion. Apt to suffer
f’rqm disregard »of regulations, carelessness of consequences,. through appetites, sex impulse jnd through
scandal, criticism and enmity.
Aji i/fifortunate aspect fcfr domestic happiness; indicates loss of legacy, sorrow through mother, difficulty ‘

PART III, DEMNEATI0K8 FOB HOROSCOPES 427
over propertyand in Swelling place, loss through partnership and •thfcft. Not favorable for health showing
liability of trouT5le*.to the sex orgahs, head, eyes, breast
and stomach, sometimes causing indigestion and nervousness. Danger through excitement, • fevers, operations, accidents, raptured blood vessels, fire and water.
The native should avoifi low, swampy or stagnant districts and beware of danger on water. In a female’s
horoscope it threatens ill health, annoying periods and
many difficulties.*
Moon in Favorable Aspect to Jupiter
Increases the imagination, intuition and appreciation
for beauty; indicates clear, soTmd and usually correct
judgment and reasoning. Strengthens the vitality, fertility and resourcefulness. Inclines to honesty, justice,
.benevolence, compassion, sympathy, friendliness and
sociability. Jovial, generous, humane, hopeful and
popular.
Success in ' literature and general affairs, especially
those things ruled by the houses these planets occupy,
and also the fourth and ninth houses, if they arfe unafflicted. This is one fil the good aspects that assist in
the acquisition of possessions, happiness* in marriage and
good health. Gain and development through the occult,
spiritual and. educational affairs find publishing; also
through mother and family, especially if tenth and
fourth houses are unafflicted.
Moon in ^Unfavorable Aspect to Jupiter
Unfortunate for speculations, games of chance and
risky ventures. Loss through misplaced confidence,
loans, Reception, dishonesty, excess, lack of candor, concealment ,of motives, irresolution, wrong judgment,
either of self or by others.
Trouble ‘through changes and voyages; likelihood of
slander and false accusations. Severe illness, misunderstanding or separation f»m the mother. Rfcthyr an
adverse aspect for health generally, giving liability to

genethliacal astrology
derangement of the stomach and liver, bliod disorders
and tumorous growths. An unfo^upate aspect for
health in a woman’s chart.
Moon in Favorable Aspect tp Saturn
Denotes a thoughtful, conservative, prudent, sober
and contemplative mind; not much given to gaiety, bat
provident, careful and attentive to bijsiness and affairs
generally.1
Popularity, credit^ respect, esteem ; diplomatic, selfreliant; systematizing, organizing and constructive
ability; accomplishes mast by subtlety, tact and method
rather than by force.
Favorable aspect for occupation, public advancement
and attainment to positions of trust and responsibility
through persistent effort ; approval or benefit through
parents, friends, elders and employers.
Gain in business and by such things as Saturn rules:
mines, lands and produce. If Jupiter is also in favorable
aspect it leads to the acquisition of great wealth. If the
Sun is in good aspect it denotes rise in life to very prominent and distinguished position through perseverance.
Moon in UnfSvorable Aspect to Saturn
Indicates that the person is poor, or loses his money
and becomes so, and bas a hard struggle to make both
ends meet.
He is earnest and ambitious, but his plans do not
materialize as expected; a hard worker but generally
receives little gain ; usually fails in business though
careful and persevering; unlooked for obstacles, delays,
disappointments, Rebuffs and reversals constantly arise,
Coupled \Vith lack of opportunities and unfavprable circumstances at the critical or needed times.
It is ap unfortunate aspect, for marriage, yet if the
planets are in common signs, usuallv marries more than ,
once.

PART III, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROgCOPES 429
A bad aspect £or speculation and such 'things as Saturn rules by nature? also by sign and house it occupies
in the chart.
The native meets.with persecution, slander or scandal;
disapproval of seniors, parents or employers; difficulties
and sorrows through parents, property and possessions.
Sorrow through death of young people and mother.
Temporary derangements of the health, colds, falls
and accidents. The native should refrain from strong
physics and employ healthful exercises
This aspect affects the dispositTon, causing the subject
to become somewhat selfish, subtle, careful of his own
interests, given to periods of worry, anxiety, doubt, mistrust in self, gloom and despondency. A good aspect of
fstfn, Jupiter, Mars or Venus will help to offset the
severity of the above.
Moon in Favorable Aspect to Uranus
The native is active, firm, enterprising and scientific.
Fond of friendship and the opposite sex.
Success and gain through the occult, and through
original, inventive and progressive pfeople.
The aspect tends to awaken the imaging faculties,
quickens the thought and intuition, Jeads the mind into
original lines and ^ives interest in new^methods, inventions, curiosities, etc.,* giving mesmeric and psychic
faculty; good for healing and'telepathy. Benefft through
business and novelties. A good, aspect for an electric
expert or worker.
Inclination for and benefit through astrology.
Advantageous changes and removals, f avors traveling and* if either planet be in the third efr ninth house,
,many journeys. If in the ffturth house, many changes
*of«residence.

OENKTHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
Moon in Unfavorable Aspect tij Uranus
Unfortunate charges, journeys and removals.
Impulsive, sarcastic, abrupt peculiar, electric and
independent; danger on or hear the water; trouble
through the opposite sex, difficulties, annoyance qtid
possibly separations ; troubles through occult affairs and
unreliable friends.
Not good for health, tending to upset the stomach and
digestion, causing mental disturbance of different kinds,
sudden or peculiar changes in feelings, emotions, likes
and dislikes.
Restless, active mind, ever desirous of new scenes,
new working material and surroundings ; cannot stand
limitations. It usually produces extremes and reversals.
Moon in Favorable Aspect to Neptune
Inclines to success in things ruled by Neptune and as
indicated by the sign and house it occupies; good for
boating, swimming, shipping, dea'ing in liquids, choice
food stuffs, canned goods, delicacies and things calculated to please the tastes of the public.
Strong inspirational and imaging faculty ; mediumistic
qualities: fond of investigating Spiritualism, psychism
and the mysterious*' in nature, or some form of the
occult. .Would .make a good, psyc,hometrist, having
active emo.tions and impressionability. If Venus or Mercury is also in good aspect it shows inspiration for art,
music, singing, writing,, speaking or acting.
Moon in Unfavorable Aspect to Neptune
Threatens fraud, deception or slander ;( difficulties
through things ruled by the house Neptune occupies;
misfortqpe through the opposite sex, delays or bUstacles
in regard to marriage in a rAale chart; desire to gratify .
the tastes which leads tq injury of the health, especially
if either is in a watery'sign. •

PART. Ill, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES 481
Strong inspirational, psychic, emotional and imaging
faculty; Subtle fedliifgs, quick impressions and eccentric,
undefined or inexplainable acts. It attracts to peculiar
people, exquisite fastes, luxuries, odd colo'rs, odors and
Bohemianism or unionvegtionality.
Impulse is liable to predominate over reason, or
through over-enthusiasm the feelings may get the upper
hand of judgment, teading to acts of indiscretion. Quick
respoibe to environmental influences. It affects the
nervous or mental health through bodily disorder.
(Notice the signs they occupy.)
In common signs it affects the<brain and nervous system ; in fixed signs, the glandular and secretory processes ; in the cardinal signs, the circulatory and absorptive systems.
0 Planetary Aspects of Mercury 0
Mercury is sexless, active and changeable.
It furnishes the merttal force necessary, to a great
extent,, for business life.
When rising or in the tenth house, it indicates skill
in language and ability for public speaking; also indicates the native to be inventive, ingenious, of qujtk wit,
argumentative, imaginative and fonfl of novelty.
Mercury corresponds to' mind action, resulting in perception, thought and the merttal power or intelligence
to analyze conditions and develop, adaptability to environment; also to arrange details to suit personal needs
and requirements. Through the nerves it influences,
that part of ’the body signified by the sign it occupiedIt relates to the tongue and hands as agents .for the
expression of* mind.
Mercury’ and Venus are neyer very far from the Sun.
Mercury can never be more than 28 degrees in dexter
or linister position with Sol; Venus never more than 48,

GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
degrees dexter or sinister. As it is possible for Mercury
to be 28 degrees on one side of the Sun and Venus 48
degrees on the other side, the extent of their possible
distance being 76 degrees, Mercury can form only the
following aspects to Venus in a .nativity : conjunction,
parallel, vigintile, quindecile, semi-sextile, semi-quintile,
semi-square, sextile and quintile, all of which are considered good except the semi-square.
The relation of Mercury to Venus at birth may be
such that in a progressed horoscope Mercury could progress to several otiier aspects with the radix Venus in
their sequence, if the ijative were long lived.
By transit each year, Mercury and Venus making a
complete revolution of the zodiac, would form every
known aspect to the radix Mercury and Venus.
Mercury in Favorable Aspect to Venus
The mind is intuitive, cheerful, merry, witty, mirthful,
good (tempered and hopeful. This aspect gives a sociable, friendly nature, amiability and general popularity,
especially with the opposite sex. .fondness for pleasure,
refined entertainment and recreation, also for all the fine
arts and sciences gr anything requiring finish, touch,
daintiness, color and culture. It tends to mental
pleasures, harmony and mirth.
It favors gain in money, property and possessions.
Indicates marriage, friendships and associations.
Gltentimes it indicates that the native has two attachments, two marriages, partnerships, or marriage to some
gne of kin.
It is good for employment and money ejyned by the
wits, speaking, writing, art, manual dextjrity, entertainment. ^eat, artistic touch.
If Mercury is more prominent than Venus, third ard
Kxfh house (Mercurial^ affairs are favored ; i.e., gain

PART III, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES 433
through mental*, accomplishments, writing, speaking,
designing, short joifrneys, clerking, advertising, publishing, science, commercial affairs, commissions, kindred,
neighbors, businAs, literary and professional people.
When Venus is more ‘‘prominent, it favors pleasure
and profit through talents, accomplishments, refinement
and good taste; all things luxurious, pleasurable and
beautiful; music, singing, poetry, painting, art, theaters;
dealiffg with women and children, doctors, nursing; also
in confectionery, stationery, jewelry, fancy work, millinery, dressmaking. Fortunate for things ruled by the
house Venus occupies.
Mercury in Unfavorable Aspect to Venus
4 The only adverse aspect they form is semi-square.
This aspect is not very malignant or important. It
gives fondness or desire for all the aforementioned, but
not so much abjlity for their execution, and some minor
obstacles and hindrance in Venusian and Mercurial
affairs.
Mercury and the Sun
Note! In nativities Mercury can form only the following
aspects with the Sun: conjunction, parallel, viglntile, quindeclle,
and within two degrees of a senil-sextile.
Mercury never moves more than 28 degrees away
from the Sun and is best when more than 8 decrees in
advance of that luminary. Under the ‘latter influence
the native will be ambitious, aspiring, quick-witted,
intuitive, thoughtful, intelligent, ingenious, adaptabje,
studious, observant and capable. Good business ability;
learns with facility and ease.
If Mercury is in Pisces the mind should receive careftll
but gentle training. In Scorpio it tends to make fine
physicians or surgeons. Mercury in exaot conjunction
with the Sun is not considered favorable for tilt jb$st
reasoning and business judgment, unless located in a
fa/orable or scientific sign, or in; good aspect to other ,
planets.

GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
Mercury in Favorable Aspect -tot, Mars
Makes the native quick, lively, bright, alert, witty,
humorous, satirical, constructive, ingenious, practical,
skillful, dexterous and businesslike.
Enthusiastic, fluent, animated and magnetic when
interested. It shows a great deal of energy, activity,
force and enterprise; splendid mental abilities.
Inclination or ability for drawing, music, carving,
designing, chemistry, medicine, engineering, surveying
and science; inclines toward investigation and application of npw practical methods in commerce and industry,
mechanics, literature or business.
It favors association with or development through
literary, educational or professional people and those
connected with the practical sciences.
Mercury in Unfavorable Aspect to Mars
Good intellectual powers; the mind is acute, shrewd,
clever and sharp. The disposition is impulsive, forceful,
quicli-tempered, sarcastic, argumentative, resentful and .
impatient; the mind is fired with desires, but has not
enough contirwity, the aspect being separative rather
than unifying.
The subject possesses great mental activity and is
therefore liable to brain troubles through over-work,
exciteiAent or lack of suitable opportunity for expression
of his particular ability, which results in irritability and
period^ of weariness or exhaustion, und disorganization
of the stomach and diges‘ive organs.
rfpt to create enmity, opposition and disagreements
tfirough sharp, critical statements or impulsive actions.
JLikely to meet with difficulty through relatives, superiors, servants ‘and neighbors. Losses through theft,
risky enterprises, correspondence, contracts, litigation,
carelessness with facts, hasty conclusions and criticism.
Panger through traveling, tools, machinery, instruments and electrical contrivances; also drugs, operations, wounds from irvsects, reptiles and small animals,

PART III, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES 435
This aspect indicates difficulties, obstacles and disorganization through'things ruled by*the signs and houses
occupied by Mars especially. Trouble through neuralgia,
headaches, accidents. *The aspect is wordfe from watery
signs, usually shijwsng ^tendency to drink and other
ruinous habits.
Mercury in Favorable Aspect to Jupiter
Inclines to general success in life through the houses
they occupy, especially if unafflicted. Denotes a broad,
philosophical mind with ability to tfiink clearly, deeply
and seriously; and to develop good judgment through
comparison and learning; capability for collegiate
studies.
The mind is versatile, vigorous and creative, combining conscientiousness with hope, good cheer, good
nature, contentment and joviality.
The disposition is generous, kind, candid, humane,
honest, sincere, liberal and fruitful. Indicates beneficial
changes, journeys ; inspirational ideas, thought^ and
conclusions.
Success with literature, accomplishments, science and
in professional lines. Good aspect for mail order, governmental, law- or church affairs. To occult students it
is good for visions, psychic and inspirational experiences,
independent and automatic writing.
With Mercury it* an £iry sign it gives discrirrtlnation,
discernment, understanding, /knowledge, appreciation,
perception, compassion, sympathy and forbearance. -
Mercury in Unfavorable Aspect to Jupiter
Obstacles and difficulties arise regarding matters
ruled by the, houses they occupy, Mercury mortf particularly, through unfinished education or accpmplishments.
It shows liability to deceit or poor judgment leading
Vo (changes, journeys; unreliable, ideas, wily thoughts,
dissension, disagreements and sometimes legal troubles.*

GENETHUACAL ASTROLOGY
Misfortune and difficulty through investments, speculation, contracts, agreements (especially verbal), writings,
church affiliations, social affairs, foreign and financial
matters.
Liable to suffer from scandal, slander or false reports,
«pid accidents in travel.
The mind is active, keen, alert and impressionable,
but not sufficiently steady or confident. Unfavorable
changes, travels and letters. It tends to weakness in the
parts of the body ijpled by the signs occupied by Mercury and Jupiter.
Mercury in Favorable Aspect to Saturn
Good intellectual abilities: memory, order, method,
reasoning and judgment. The mind is contemplative,
substantial, practical, studious and fond of science
generally.
Success with teaching hygiene, or as a physician,
mentai! healer, or in any capacity with large corporations,
especially railroads, mining, produce and commission
concerns.
Gain through tac). diplomacy, caution and perseverance.
The aspect inclines to the study of geology or mineralogy: ft favors trtivel in connection with business;
some association or business with father or brethren,
probably .both ; may gain some prominence through
societies, church, or established concerns, as agent,
secretary, representatitw.
. If Mercury be in first, third or ninth house it is very
good for scientific or intellectual pursuits, writings, publishings,* lecturing, traveling.
Denotes stre'ngth of will, steady persistence and determination ; good memory* strong, sensible, practical
and sound judgment. The native has ability for politics,
public appointments, official positions of all kinds, large .

PART III, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES 437
public undertakings, brokerage, speculative, commercial
or financial affairs, *and business where much prudence,
caution and sobriety of judgment are required. Mercury
in conjunction wffth Saturn (if not otherwise afflicted)
gives a very comprehensive and profound mind, capable
of achieving much in whatever direction it is turned.
Mercury in Unfavorable Aspect to Saturn
Th? subject has great ambitions and desires for activity, success and mastery in lines coming under the
third, sixth and tenth house affairs, *but his efforts are
attended with delay,’ disappointments, obstacles and
limitations, and in some cases he meets with criticism
and opposition, open or secret, and his efforts are frequently thwarted and hindered or his plans overthrown.
* Encounters difficulty in acquiring an education and
in all matters pertaining to books and studies.
The retentive or memorizing faculty needs developing
even though memory of events is strong.
t
The aspect signifies great sorrow through death of
brethren or father, prpbably both, or their ill health,
separation or estrangement from them, although not
necessarily through quarrels, but mgie as the result of
circumstances. •
Trouble is occasioned through slander, false teports,
forged letters or documents, unfriendly writings, delayed and misunderstood letters, and the subject may
himself cause difficulty through these things. The effect
on the nature is to make one Sarcastic, bitter, impulsive
and.somewhat dissembling with periods of gloom, pessimism or exasperation, grave anxiety, worry, constant
disturbance of the mind, errors of judgment caused by,
fear, circumstances, lack of initiative, ‘procrastination
and continuous restriction of actions. This leads the
mind to meifitate and endeavor to discover the reason
for these undesirable manifestations, and 'from (Jjis attitude one may be prone, to Seek recourse in the study
bf«occult subjects and spiritual philosophy, and thus
improve his responses to the aspect.

.GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
If either planet be in or rule the third <fi ninth house
it gives an inclination for science and-occult learning,
which considerably improves the reactions to this aspect,
but still there is liability to loss* through failures, theft,
fraud and deception; difficulty or loss in employment or
through lack ol employment, poor health often interfering; troubles through neighbors, servants, societies, associations, messengers, travelers, and by things ruled, by
the sign, and house occupied. This ,'s a bad aspect for
the teeth, causing decay, also causes slow or poev circulation or digestion, resulting in dog-hunger, bowel
affections, weakness, obstructions and constipation.
People with this aspect and annoyed with these latter
troubles should avoid itrong drinks or highly seasoned
foods.
Mercury in Favorable Aspect to Uranus
Intuitive perception, inventive ability, original and
eccentric nature. Fond of old and curious things, occult
scieAce, astrology and advanced thought generally.
Ga/n through invention, originality, speculation and
unique enterprises. If either be in the first, third or
ninth house, or is ruler thereof, , it promotes success in
literature and the ability to become a great scholar,
excelling in the arts and sciences; fine comprehension.
Good character reader; sucessful in connection with
electridj.1 affairs as salesman, telegrapher, bookkeeper,
stockkeeper, etc., fdr electrical, aerial or transportation
companies. Much ingenuity ard unique enterprise.
Successful advertiser, publisher, writer, inventor, resfSrcher or explorer.
Mercury c in Unfavorable Aspect to Uranus
Active mentality; impulsive, irregular end sarcastic
turns of mind; very observant, ingenious and critical;
unsuccessful in literary pursuits; public criticism probably through the press; difficulty through societies,,
friends and kihdred. Skeptical and peculiar; a reformdFs

PART III, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES 439
spirit and ejjtr*me or radical* ideas; Constant desire
for new .fields or’fnodes of action ; sudden and unexpected
adverse changes and removals. Restless, dissatisfied,
discontented, dating, audacious, defiant, .adventureous.
Subject to accidents, especially in travel.
Mercury in Favorable Aspect to Neptune
Fertile imagination ; practical, quick, sensitive and
resourceful mind; versatility of genius; receptivity to
new ideas and methods. Gives ability to develop
mediumistic and psychic qualities,* clairvoyance, psychometry, crystal gazing, automatic writing, trance and
inspirational speaking.
The native is attracted to psychic centers and people,
spiritual investigations, unconventional healing and
hygienic methods or hydrotherapy, and success with
same. It gives visions or prophetic dreams.
The third ar\d ninth houses are the best for the foregoing.
Improves mental receptivity, psychic understanding
and adaptability. Occult experiences.
It favors matters relating to liquids, chemicals, oils,
drugs, beverag.es, canned goods, fisfi, the sea( hospitals
and private institutions.
If Venus also is in good aspect, tjie subject will have
remarkable faculty for music, poetry, art, literature;
inspiration.
. Mercury in Unfavorable Aspect to Neptune
Conduces to interest in all the above, but attended
with 'unreliability, obstacles and misfortune.
The memory is apt to be poor, the mind vacillating
and somewhat unpractical, affected by -spells or periods
of mental'aberration, abstraction, lack of concentration,
.absentmindedness, dreaminess, or irresqlution. It tends
to* nervousness, sensitiveness, ^restlessness, changes,.

GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
and liability tc trouble ^through slander, deception, imitation, fraud, intrigue, bribery. Dapger fhrough drugs
and poisons.
Difficulties through changefulnesS, unexplainable
psychic conditions, lack of cautious self-control and the
liability to be led by the impulses, sensations, appetites,
emotions, sympathy, and by the ideas, thoughts and advice of others, resulting in nervous, restless excitabilffy,
which exhausts the vital processes. -The native should
benefit through study of dietetics.
9 Planetary Aspects of Venus 9
Note: As Venus 1b never more than 48 degrees away from the
Son, the only aspects she can form to Sol In nativities are as
follows: conjunction, parallel, viglntile, qnindeclle, seml-sextiie,
semi -quintile and semi-square. . ,
Venus in Good Aspect to Sun
Fondness for company and hospitality; delighting in
sociability, pleasure, ease, luxury, comfort and places of
entertainment.
The nature is generous, warmohearted, sympathetic,
courteous, amiable, kind, affectionate, impressionable
and cheerful.
The aspect is fruitful and creative, good for gaining
money .through business, profession, speculation or
public .occupation ; it.shows popularity and promotion in
employment, an<} preferment ip social affairs. Liking
for music. opera, the fine arts generally, and some ability
along these lines.
3*he conjunction leads to warm attraction, love affairs
and marriage of affection, even when there are ‘adverse
testimonies denxing union.
Venus in Unfavorable Aspect to Sun
As V^nus is never more than 48 degrees front the Sun,
the ‘■"combust” and semi-square are the only adverse ,
aspects Venus can form to Sol.

PaWt III, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES* 441
Neither is $ very important aspect of itself, but at
times may make the native extravagant, overfond of
pleasure and luxury, amorous and mutable in the
affections.
Some delay or mfsfortu»e in love affairs and in dealing
with the opposite sex. Loss through speculation and
extravagance, or carelessness.
Venus in Favorable Aspect to Mars ’
Fond of pleasure, adventure and t|je opposite sex; aspiring, ambitious, confident, amorous, affectionate and
demonstrative.
Gain through enterprise, pleasure, sport, practical
artistic ability, music and matters requiring artistic and
mechanical skill.
It is a good aspect for money, not for saving it (that
requires a good aspect of Saturn, acquisitiveness) but
for getting it, earning it through energy, activity, ingenuity, responsibility and business instinct, and through
things ruled by the house Venus occupies and rules. The
native is free and generous in money matters, a cheerful
spenrjer; in business, for advertisement,* show and display; in social life, for pleasure, adprnment, music and
entertainment.’
If the chart shows any indications for inheritance this
aspect strengthens it. The aspect also shoe's social
popularity and indicates, marriage either early .or suddenly.
Venus in Unfavorable Aspect to Mars
Very • fond of pleasure; impulsive and amorous;
difficulty through excesses and the opposite sex.
Loss thrqugh over-liberal tendencies or carelessness
and extravagance; also through fires, partnerships and
too frefcl? entering business or speculative enterprises.
#At times the social popularity or standing will be
adversely affected; danger through dishonesty or loss*

GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
opposition through friends or jealousy( ^paration and
enmity. Trouble through marriage can'd partnerships.
If Venus or Mars be in a watery sjgn, the tendency
is to gratify the tastes and pleasurable emotions in
dissipating habits.
Venus in Favorable Aspect to Jupiter
Strengthens the imagination, ideality and poetical
side of the nature, giving a keen appreciation for beauty
in form, color, soupd and touch. High motives, ambitions and aspirations.
It gives social and general popularity, preferment,
esteem and respect.
Inclines to acts of charity and sympathy. The nature
becomes generous, kind, thoughtful, amiable, loving,
sociable, hospitable, philanthropic, liberal, talented,
good-humored and optimistic; fond of pleasure and
elegant, dainty and costly surroundings.
Gaifi through refinement, accomplishments, social
intercourse, traveling, foreign affairs, influential persons,
companies, associations and corporations. A good indication of fortunate events, love and marriage; favors
success, gain and general good fortune. Generally is
associated ‘with wealth and culture, and handles considerable tponey or other valuable assets.
Fortunate for things governed by the houses they
occupy and also' those hopses' whicW they rule in the
nativity. •
Venus in Unfavorable Aspect to Jupiter
• Strong desire {or grace, refinement, talent, 'beauty and
luxury, ‘but forced to be content with these to an ordinary or limited extent and satisfied with thd best show
or substitute possible.
Unless other testimonies offset this, it is not a good
suspect for the accumulation of money, as a great deal

PaRT hi, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES 443
is spent fqr appearances in dress, ornaments, luxury;
inclines' to easy gdbd nature and fftndness for pleasure,
producing lack of accurate business instinct, resulting in
loss through carelessness, fraud, deception, desertion,
separation, prosecution, speculation, and unsound investments or securities. Difficulty in love and marriage
through faithlessness or misrepresentation. Liable to
overdo in the gratification of desires for pleasure and
amusements; apt* to be overliberal, extravagant and
amorous. Blood or skin disorders; loss through floods.
Venus in Favorable Aspect to Saturn
Sympathetic, modest, prudenF, chaste, frugal and sincere. It favors success in courtship and marriage ard
steady attachment to partner and family. Faithfulness
fin love and friendship.
The tendency is toward thrift, economy and accumulation of money. It endows the native with capacity
for business:* tact, method and system, and ability to
make the most of opportunities. Much good luck, good
will and many presents.
Gain through elders, superiors in position and by
investments, associations, banking, lands and solid,
secure methods.
Venus in Unfavorable Aspect to Saturn
Disappointment and trouble in courtship and, marriage
or partnership ; censufe, unpopularity, disapproval, interference, reversals, or misfortunes through elders, parents
or relatives. Danger through (Jeception, avariciouSness,
sensuality, jealousy and theft.
Sorrows* and difficulties through Ute opposite sdxj
marriage probably delayed until the twenty-ejghth year
or after; trouble through difference in age, social or
pecuniary affiirs or illness.
Diplomatic nature ; 'liability to business losses; also
"through speculations, investments, lands, mines, coga-

GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
panics, banks, d'rought, depressions or ep'dgmics; loss of
accounts or salary,
Venus, in Favorable Aspect tOrUranus
Fondness, desire and ability /or thd line arts, leaning
toward new or extraordinary conceptions, radical and
progressive departures from the usual interpretation *of
art.
Attractive, magnetic personality that gains many
friends and acquaintances and good fortune or success
through them. A fbrtunate business aspect.
Bright, quick, intuitive, inspirational mentality.
Benefit and gain through fraternal, social and progressive societies.
Success through such things as Venus and Uranus
rule ; gain by- peculiar or unexpected circumstances and
through strangers ; favorite with the opposite sex.
Friends among artists, inventors, congressmen and
extraordinary persons.
Venus in Unfavorable Aspect to Uranus
t
Trouble and jealousy through courtship and marriage;
difficulty through the opposite sex. Unconventional ;
liable to hasty, impulsive marriage leading to divorce.
The mind is imaginative, curious, alert and hastily
influenced by unrestrained feelings, which make the
native liable to be ‘led astray; troubles ‘oy broken promises and scandal; separations, estrangements and diffisxito} IvAwk. Ihtough s,\iddtt\ and vmcv
pected circumstances. An unfortunate aspect for matters
connected with the opposite sex. Loss through" unre-
"entUres" S' asswciatcs or partners, and through risky
Venua int Favorable Aspect to Neptune .
Tncfmes to fondness for art, rriusic, singing, drama,,
it aeautv^in all forms.,. This aspect has a tendency

pAtT III, DELINEATIONS POR HOROSCOPES
toward benefit a/id pleasure through frierfds, associations
and acquaintances. %
The feelings quickly respond to kindness, sympathy,
love and appreciation. Inspirational, ardent and attracted to the opposite'*sex. Good aspect for benefit
through mystical interests and success in speculation or
as*an actor if either be in the fifth house, especially in
connection with the cinema.
It is a fortunate aspect for making money out of large
combines, trusts or institutions; also for matters related
to shipping, liquids and amusement resorls, especially at
places by water.
Venus in Unfavorable Aspect to Neptune
Disappointments, complications, deceit and danger of
scandal in love or marriage; instability, and liability of
fraud and deception on the part of the partner, especially
if either planet be in the fifth, seventh or twelfth house.
Strong desires, with probability of injury and danger
through catering to the gratification o^ the tastes, or
throqgh lack of proper emotional expression.
Caution should he observed with diet and* beverages.
There may be danger from ptomaine poisoning through
wrong food combinations or impure substance/
Guard against 4oss.afid theft, misplaced confidence
and secret organizations and.‘affairs. Beware of financial
/05s through schemes, trusts, cliques or rackets.
0 t Planetary Aspect* of the Sun ©
Sun in Favorable Aspect to Mara
Tend* to strengthen the constitution and givy energy,
vitality, determination' enterprise, vigor, animation
confidence and courage.

OENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
The nature Is frank, outspoken, assertive, aggressive,
ambitious, venturesome, progressiva Slid generous.
The native has ability to command ?nd control ; gives
power of leadership through intensity of purpose, enthusiasm, activity, faith and strength of will.
Capacity for games and sports where strength and
muscular exertion are depended upon. If Mars or Sun
is in an airy sign, powerful intellect avid much wilMorce.
If either planet is angular it denotes great executive
power and leadership.
The native has quick perception and possesses practical, constructive and 'engineering ability; meets with
favor, promotion and cooperation.
Sun in Unfavorable Aspect to Mars
Many ups and downs and obstacles in the path of the
desires. Impulse, pride and anger cause many difficulties; deaths, separations, litigation and enmities; hasty,
fiery temper, though not lasting; ambition, love of enterprise 6ut not enough continuity of application, confidence, faith and patience.
Outspoken, assertive, aggressive, combative, defepsive,
impulsive, forceful, overbearing, destructive, self-willed,
headstrong, audacious and sensual. Loses the esteem
of superiors and those in high position.
Dangef through impulsive action, assaults, quarrels,
accidents, fires, fevers, inflammatory complaints, surgical
operations, short, sudden,, sharp* attacks of sickness;
cuts, bums, scalds. '
If Mars is in Capricorn or the Sun dignified it lessens
the tendency to rashness, etc.
Sun in Favorable Aspect to Jupiter
t
This increases the chances for success and rise ,in life ;
even with bad aspects from other planets it still indicates
some good fortune, because it finds toward far-seeing, '
bfoad outlook and souqd judgment.

PA*RT III, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES 447
The native i$ honorable, humane, benevolent, sympathetic, kina, philanthropic, charitable, generous, sincere, frank, candid, hopeful, social, genial, popular,
executive, reliable, honest and fond of sports.
Indicates influerftial friends and assistance or benefit
through them. Inclines somewhat to religion or spirituaV investigation. Appreciation of social life and its
functions with a desire for the good opinion $nd favor
of thv»se in good position. The subject is usually “correct” with regard to fashion and customs and careful
not to overstep the limits of good f®rm.
Inclines to good health and abundant vitality. With
a female, this aspect assists to a successful love or
marriage.
* ‘Fortunate for those things ruled by the houses these
planets occupy, especially Jupiter. If Uranus also be
in good aspect, it signifies gain and the acquisition of
wealth through railroads, inventions, government office,
speculation, investment, banks, large theatrical enterprises, sports, transportation, publishing, and things
electrical and political
If Saturn assist: gain through investment and solid
financial deals, government affairs,* inheritance or gold
mines.
Mars also in good aspect : although not detrimental
to the acquisition of wealth, is not* good for the saving
of it on account of geneitosity and lavishness. It favors
industrial success. Venus in." good aspect: gain through
refinement, pleasure, music, entertainment and general
good luck. Mercury in good’ aspect gain through
science, *art, traveling, writings and publishing. Moon in
good' aspect: gain through dealing wit$) the public and
possibly through shipping and public utility coftcerrfs.
.Sun in Unfavorable Aspect to Jupiter
a
Threatens business ahd financial loss through investments, speculations, loans, errors, miscalculation, etc. ,

448 OKNBTHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
Danger of difficulty through wrong advice, extravagance, legal or social affairs. A good' as'pect of the Moon
will help to modify these financial testimonies, but, in
any event, it .shows ill luck, probably through misjudgment, false “securities,” pride, lacjc cf careful reasoning
or forethought.
The tendency at times is to be bombastic, irritable,
haughty, egotistical, mistrustful, fond of display, pleasure and comfort.
In a woman’s horoscope, it indicates a good but somewhat unlucky husband.
There is tendency toward Sun and Jupiter diseases
during the latter part of life and weakened vitality.
Sun in Favorable Aspect to Saturn
This aspect is such that it aids general success and
rise in life through the native’s own efforts and meritorious qualities, and the ability to concentrate, appraise,
organize and coordinate the efforts toward a definite
objective.
Makes the native sincere, considerate, conservative,
methodical^, responsible, discreet, discriminative, serious,
confident and capable of sustained effort.
The personality is strong and not easily affected by
the opinions or protests of others ; the mentality is contemplative# and practical, authoritative and capable of
organization. If assisted by any other good aspect, it
tends to gain and success through lands, mines, investments and industrial enterprises.
’ If th$ Moon i» in good aspect, the native gains municipal or .other political honors and appointments.
Sun in Unfavorable Aspect to Saturn
Indicates derangements of the health, the nature cf
the, illness threatened chn be seen by the signs which

P&RT III, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES 449
the Sun an<f Saturn occupy. It is bad for business
affairs, especially cf the kind signified by the two planets.
Obstacles, limitations, hindrance and, delays, cause
disappointments, sorrows and' losses. The ambitions
are thwarted, sonfetimes>the native seems to be getting
along splendidly, success seems close and sure, but suddenly inevitable conditions and reverses arise, resulting
in downfall and .loss. The native incurs opposition,
enmity, jealousy and public disfavor.
All of these things indicate a tendency to become
unsympathetic, careless of the feelings of others, selfish,
pessimistic, skeptical, or disinterested in social and
economic welfare.
It indicates death of the father, disagreement or sep-
"aVation from him; enmity or disfavor of superiors, employers or those of high position ; unfortunate marital
affairs.
In a woman’s horoscope this aspect signifies a denial
of marriage or delay. Also indicates death of the husband or marriage to a widower. These marriages are
seldom happy ones, the husband usually being domineering, exacting, selfish, or inclined to illness and
misfortune.
If Saturn is in a watery sign, the partner is liable to
be given to drink or other dissolute habits.
Sun in Favorable Aspect to .‘Uranus '
Penotes talent, perception, intuition, independiyice,
originality and enterprise. It indicates success through
invention, public or governmental employ. Also a good
aspect for ' connection with societies, , associations or
brotherhoods ; research, exploration, adventure,’ trafisportation, aerial and electrical matters. ‘
Tends to preserve the health in old age and lengthens
life. Friends among government executives and extraordinary persons.

GENETHEIACAL ASTRbLOGY
Benefit through the occult; from metaphysical, electric
or magnetic healing; by strangers,, el Jelly people or
occultists. (Many successful public astrologers have this
aspect.)
It excites to strong attachments- av>id generally to an
early union. Interest in fraternities, reforms and progressive movements.
Sun in Unfavorable Aspect to Uranus
Unfortunate for marriage, causing inharmony, separation, broken vowsxind ties generally. Tends to make
one impu|sive, rash, spasmodic, erratic, radical and unconventional; inclined to leap before looking ^precipitate,
fond of risky ventures, enterprises and romance. It is
worse in a woman’s horoscope, indicating danger of
scandal, disgrace and unlucky unions. , ,
Denotes a quick, intuitive, perceptive and original
mind, always alert for change, liberty, freedom, novelty
and new opportunities.
It gives interest in occult affairs, but denotes liability
to losses and danger through unreliable friends, disasters, calamities, enmity, opposition, love affairs, partnerships, strangers,' societies, intrigue, estrangement, independence and impulsiveness. It tends to upset the
health and .indicates accidents, possibly through engines,
inventions, vehicles, airplanes, explosions, storms, and
things electrical. A good aspect from other planets helps
to modify these extreme indications.
Sun in Favorable 'Aspect to Neptune
Gi^es an inspirational nature, and an inclination for
phitosophy, religion, science, psychic research,' photography, motion pictures. Interest in modern 'sanitation,
.hygiene? natureo^athy, sun bathing, swimming, yachting, motor-boat racing, etc. If Mercury be near the
ascendant, angqlar or in good aspect to. these planets
the native i^ usually inspirational in speaking of writing
and can develop considerable musical skill, especially in
connection with stringetj instruments. 1

PARl' III, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES 451
The t^ndendy 'of «the aspect is to. refine the feelings
and emotions, giving a keen appreciation for the beauties
of nature and art^or music in its highest fprms; love of
refined pleasures, concerts, yachting, sojourning at the
beach, traveling ar/5 ill ^pe luxury or elegance. The
native is sympathetic, kind and generous and usually
benefits through mystical and spiritual subjects.
» Sun in Unfavorable Aspect to Neptune
Signifies that the person is liable tp be the victim of
fraud, and alsg scandal, whether deserved or not; unstable or involved affairs general^; unfortunate' for the
things signified by the house which Neptune occupies.
Creates desire for mysticism, romance, gratification
of .abnormal tastes and inclines in some way to lax
morality, Bohemianism and seductive alliances.
The native is usually mediumistic and subject to weird
dreams, feelings and desires. It usually indicates peculiar or irregular love affairs, some difficulty wit^i or
through children, and loss through speculation, gaming
or deception concerning securities and_ investments.
Inclined to suffer from illness requiring hospitalization, and which is difficult to diagnose; fronj psychic
conditions, fraud, enmity and conspiracy. It is wise in
such cases to study the philosophy of all things mysterious or occult rather than the phenomena.
S Planetary Aspect of Mars S'
•Mars in Favorable Aspect to Jupiter
Frank, free, generous, straightforward, just, active,
ambitious, enterprising, self-reliant, original antt constructive. Any -course of action decided on is entered
into witA vim, confidence, determination and» practical
execution. A good manager or leader; capable. of creating enthusiasm and action in others. Liberal concepts, ,
Broad views, capable of large and responsible undertak-

452 GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY f
ings, especially in wholesale, industrial an'd commercial
affairs. Always ready to help thoso wh<5 are grilling to
help themselves. If the chart shows indications of
legacy this aspect tends to strergtheq it.
Fond of all legitimate sport, travel, exploration, mechanical, professional and industrial activities. Gain, by
personal industry, enterprise and the exercise of good
judgment.
Fortunate for those things ruled by the house which
Jupiter occupies.
Mars in Unfavorable Aspect to "Jupiter
Indicates excessive or impulsive generosity; careless
regarding the accumulation of money and apt to suffer
from the dishonesty of others.
Difficulty through and with religion, religious or
political people. Loss through speculation and games
of chance.
Suffers from indiscretion, dishonesty, deceit, treachery,
broken contracts, desertion, misrepresentation and
quarrels. ■
Often the subje«t is directly or indirectly the cause
of misfortune through hasty judgment, impulsive action,
extravagance, dissipation or through carelessness, overconfidence, miscalculation, anger.
Dangerous or difficult journeys, , trouble in foreign
places and through legal affairs.'
Feverish complaints, blood and liver disorders ; danger
and loss through firej and accidents, and if Uranus is
adverse, through lightning, electricity, floods Or explosions.
* Mara in Favorable Aapect to Saturn
Confident, ambitious, determined, energetic, desirous
of leading and ruling, a pioneering nature. Courageous,'
self-reliant, daring, somewhat overbearing and forceful.

PaAe III, DELINEATIONS FOR HOBOSOOPBS
reckless of danger jor defeat, capable of obtaining marked
results through concentrated or sustained action. Reserve force, muscular endurance, strong bones; active
mentality, capability, vigilance, skill in execution. Rises
to prominence or p rtver but usually attended by danger
of some kind ; would make *a good military, state or city
offifcial ; also practical lawyer, civil and mining engineer, * surveyor, construction contractor, manufacturer,
fanner, etc. Favorable aspect for legacy from father.
Mars in Unfavorable Aspect to Saturn
The mind and senses act in cqnfliction, causing discord, selfishness, quick temper, violence; rash, hasty,
impulsive acts; deception, resentment, cruel, hard or
revengeful feelings when opposed.
*l'rouble with parts of the body denoted by the signs
occupied by the afflicted planets. Feverish complaints,
wounds, falls and accidents ; danger of violence through
enemies, reptiles*, animals, riots, strikes, uprisings, revolutions, accident, war or state. Notoriety, reversals,
criticism, opposition, enmity, scandal, discredit; oBstacles and difficulty in occupation, danger of loss and
failure in business.
An unfortunate aspect for parents, denoting death,
separation or disputes ; bad for legacies ; difficulties with
companies, partnerships or in marriage. Liabje to
imprisonment.
If either planet i» well aspected and Well located by
sign, much of the above is mitigated, , but notice the
hou^ps which they occupy, as they indicate trouble for
the things ruled thereby.
• MarS in Favorable Aspect to Upanus
The subject* comes before the public in some ca’pacity
through thq talents. The mind is very alert, quick to
act and inventive; the nature*is positive, self-Conftdeqjt,
enterprising, original, expressive, energetic, impulsive,
ambitious, resourceful and practical; possesses practical <

GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
business intqition, talent and intellectuality. When
once a course of action has been decided, upon, it is followed with a good' deal of originality or independence
and determination, which is difficult to thwart or turn
aside, for the subject generally gets his own way; he is
usually generous and has occult sympathies.
Gain through invention, electrical engineering, construction, transportation, or industrial research, unique
achievements, municipal employ, government positions,
progressive professional pursuits, psychology, psychoanalysis, suggestive therapeutics, metaphysics, astrology.
Also through travel, exploration, investigation, the
antique ^and curious generally.
Mars in Unfavorable Aspect to Uranus
The subject has most of the aforementioned traits and
qualities, but is somewhat over-forceful, restless and
unsettled ; hasty and erroneous in judgment, quick in
opposition, resentful, irritable, erratic, .radical, imprudent, defiant, odd, eccentric, ungovernable, rebellious,
fanciful, excitable, enigmatical. Sometimes violent or
revolutionary, seeking to throw off all bonds of limitation, restraint, custom and conventionality.
An unfortunate aspect for affairs ruled by the signs
and houses occupied. Danger of imprisonment and
liability to violence, accidents, wounds and trouble
through firearms, explosions, lightning, fire, wrecks,
machinery, vehicle*., of transportation and electrical
devices.
It denotes sudden and unfortunate events which upset
prearranged affairs, reversals of plans and change' of
objective.
Mars in Favorable Aspect to Neptune
Gives a fondness for curiosities and travel,. for occult
and mtfaphysical subjects. • Favors marine activities and
aquatic sports.

PART III, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES 455
Increases th<i generosity, emotions and enthusiasm,
and the: liking ft>r*mysticism, romance, adventure.
A good aspect for those connected with the water or
with liquids, beverages, oils, drugs, chemicals, anaesthetics, hosp'tals, sanitariums* or the sea, and with the occult
in. a practical way.
Mars in Unfavorable Aspect to Neptupe
Gives a fondness for curiosities and travel ; inclines
to self-indulgence and feelings of s?lf-sufficiency.
Liable to trouble arising froih relations with the opposite sex, also through scandal. Somewhat vague,
indefinite or mysterious, obscure and secretive. Danger
of loss and accident on or by water or liquids; through
poisons, drugs or habits; also through thieves and acts
of Nature. Trouble through duplicity, deception, fraud,
imitation, racketeering, bribery, false accusation, arrest.
To psychic pvrsons it gives liability to distraction oi
obsession (possession) and produces derangements,
hallucinations and strange ideas. If Mars or Neptune
is well aspected or otherwise dignified, these testimonies
are considerably modified.
U Planetary Aspects of *Jupiter , H
Jupiter in Favorable Aspect to Saturn
A fortunate asjfect for thqse affairsf occupations and
pursuits ruled by these planets and for thingt ruled by
the houses and signs which they occupy, especially
Jupiter.
Good mdntal ability, capacity for d<;ep or collegiate
learnings ; strength of character and power to oVercotne
obstacles; serious, profound, philosophical or scientific;
succeeds in favor of elders and those oi good position
generally! Power of review, appraisal, compariSbn, concentration, synthesis and arbitration. This aspect
strengthens the credit and refutation; giVes justice.

GENETHLIACAL ASTRtSLOGY
contemplation, ‘meditation and practical benevolence;
indicates sincerity, ljonor, esteem, honesty, thrift and
general prosperity.
Practical finnncial and executive ability ; good judgment. Gain through father, friends, iong journeys, investment, religion, science, publications, societies, companies, associations and political offices; also through
religious, medical or scientific institutions. If the plandts
are in angles or cardinal signs, he acquits himself worthily wherever located and his work is of a beneficent and
public nature.
Favorable for money and possessions, gain through
the father* and by legacy* if the fourth and eighth houses
are unafflicted. If in fixed signs, they endow power for
conducting affairs of great weight and importance.
The trine and sextile are better than the conjunction ,
Jupiter in Unfavorable Aspect to Saturn
Losses through litigation, trustees, bahks, etc. An
unfortunate aspect for money success in business or
occupation ; threatens trouble, pecuniary or otherwise,
through the father, neighbors, companies ; downfall or
setback by loss of money, property and credit; through
miscalculation, poor judgment or speculations; trouble
in connection with education and travel. Impressionable,
indecisive find mistrustful ; not sufficient hope, confidence aqjd self-will ; inclined to give into circumstances
and environments t^o readily ; possibly through ill
health. Danger of opposition, limitations, enmity and
treachery; subject'to charity, or imprisdnment. Difficulty
through or' on account of dishonesty and misrepresentation/; danger through floods, earthquakes, epidemics. .
Jupiter in Favorable Aspect to Uranus ■
* fit fortunate aspect for the things indicated by the two
planets ahd especially in connection with the; sign and
house occupied Jby Jupiter.
It *flenotes broad scope of mind and originality of
thought with interesting, surprising or unique logic and

PAUT III, DELIlteATIONS FOB HOROSCOPES 457
manner of reasoning. It is an indication of ‘benefit
through > legacy and general success; gain through
Uranian occupations or studies, fraternal societies, foreign travel, means^of ccynmunication, transportation and
learning, law, higher science, philosophy, publishing,
religious or educattonil movements, research, exploration, invention, speculation, political office or governmental position.
The pature is just', refined, sociable, humanitarian and
progressive; intuitive, prophetic and usually correct in
foresight.
Jupiter ‘in Unfavorable Aspect to Uranus
The tendencies are the same as the above, but attended
by unexpected difficulties, obstacles and limitations.
* Loss through impulse, unwise judgment and imprudent action, risky ventures, unpremeditated acts.
Through unfortunate decisions, changes and events
the subject is hindered and delayed, or denied the
achievement of his highest ambitions.
Troubles and losses by litigation; annoyance and difficulty pver inheritance or property.
It threatens sudden, unexpected a*nd heavy losses by
acts of Nature, through friends, governmental or legal
decrees, misinformation, wrong advice, misjudgment.
Jupiter in favorable Aspect tofNeptune.
Improves the artistic and ffbetic qualities; refines the
imagination and strengthens thj social, philanthrSpic
and emotional side of the nature. Denotes honor, benevolence* courtesy, candor and sympathy. Favors travel;
ing, psychic experiences, remarkable dreams and lfisioqs.
The subject.js inspirational and given to the investigation of psychism from a religious or scientific standpoint.
Becomes popular and successful in secret or tpystical
.societies. Beneficial fon matters relating to the «ea,
hospitals, sanitariums, clubs or pleasure resorts.

GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY t
Jupiter in Unfavorable Aspect to Neptune
Difficulties and troubles through the aforementioned
affairs and things indicated by £he h(ouse occupied by
Neptune.
Losses through speculation, fraud and treachery;
secret sorrows. Peculiar religious beliefs, emotional
disturbances, uncertain health, danger from deceit and
dishonesty, trouble through water, liquids, drugs, oils,
chemicals or beverages. Danger at sea or pfeasure
resorts.
it Planetary i Aspects of Saturn b
Saturn in Favorable Aspect to Uranus
Increases the strength of mind, giving thoughtfulness,
seriousness, ability to plan, control, systematize and
organize, and adds concentration, intuition, perception,
penetration. Tends to success in undertakings due to
resourcefulness, practical foresight, fixity of purpose
and determination. Inclines to interest in occult affairs
and some occult faculty, such as telepathy or mental
healing, and success through them. If the aspected
planets are well placed, it favors success in investment
with or through latge enterprises connected with the
railroads, steam or electric, or in dealing with aluminum,
platinum, lead, coal and inventions ; also through large,
solid public institutiqns. If one or both of the luminaries are in good aspect also, it tends to conserve the
vitality knd prolcfng life.
Saturn in Unfavorable Aspect to Uranus
The tendencies and desires are the same as' before
mentioned, but the subject has not the capacity and
•ability tr> direct the forces to the same successful results
and meetfe with general misfortune through things mentioned and indicated by the houses these planets occupy
This aspect has an injurious effect on the health at
some time, weakening tl^e parts of the body denoted b^

PiART III, PElflNEA'PIONS FOR HOROSCOPES 489
the signs occupied, especially by Saturn, producing a
heavy, complicated and serious sickness, either long
drawn ‘out or else incurable. Liability to accidents by
falls, falling objects, collisions, acts of Nature, riots or uprisings and disregard for the rights or feelings of others.
Mentally it givis singular, imaginative, eccentric and
peculiar attitudes, sudden temper, impulsive, aggressive
arts. Radical or destructive tendencies.
In.a very weak or adverse chart, may invert the
abilities and become thoroughly bad, treacherous, violent, or the aspect may manifest indolence, idleness, with
an improvident nature, satisfied only in catering to the
tastes and emotions. Disrespect for laws.
Saturn, in Favorable Aspect to Neptune
t Gives inspirational ideas, intuition, concentration,
clairaudience, depth and clearness of thought and favorably affects those feelings which tend toward the mystical, weird and psychic. Interest in industrial chemistry,
oil, refining, mineral waters, refrigeration, preserving or
fishing.
Good-hearted ; deep sympathies. Success and benefit
through the occult, advanced studies, investigation and
self-development ; also through serious and elderly people, unusual occupations connected* with liquids, oils, or
the sea. When well placed it favors success'and benefit
through property, investments, shares, stocks and
legacies.
Saturn in Unfavorable Aspect f.o Neptune
Loss and difficulty through plots, treachery and failufes, improperly timed activities, insufficient action, piisinformjtion, misunderstanding, confusion or lack of
co-ordination. • Distressful psychic conditions. Complicated financial affairs; loss through* speculation and*
difficulty through things indicated by the hotfses these
planets occupy. Weird feelings. Liable to scandal,
discredit1, disrepute, criticism. Doubtful tast£S, 'improper
diet, inadequate health measures and accidents ai'fc apt
to require hospitalization.

OENBTHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
V Planetary Aspects of Uranus V
Uranus in Favorable Aspect to Jfeptune
Gives intuitive understanding, unaccountable attractions and aversions, peculiar attraction to psychie
centers, curious feelings, impressions and inspirations.
Liking for journeys, curiosities, exploration, experiments, investigation, secret missions and adventure.
Interest in occult affairs and mystical or secret societies, metaphysics, mental ■healing, transcendentalism and
new thought. The aspect indicates interest in unusual
subjects, occupations and experiences. The native will
have success in the development of any occult faculty
he may possess and will also benefit through these
things and through occult people. Inspirational ideas
will present themselves and also some marvelous psychic experiences. Favorable for matters relating to the
sea, large institutions and federal affairs.
Uranus in Unfavorable Aspect to Neptune
This is not a very serious affliction ; it gives the same
quick, keen intuition and faculty for the curious, with
attraction foe and desire to investigate the mysterious
and things occult, but indicates obstacles, difficulties and
danger in' following extremes, in the foregoing. The
person is subject to psychic conditions, consciously or
unconsciously, therefore, may be influenced by surroundings and environment to his detriment. Many inexpressive moods and emotions will be felt, such as from
trance, ecstasy and bliss to vague, semi-hysterical states.
Subtle attractions and revulsions. Should exercise ‘great
discrimination in choice of friend, confidante or confrere.
Nate: 'The aspects of the planets to Pluto are not Included as
Its discover; la too recent to permit authoritative Information of
Its (tracts. See footnote on page 422, and pages 324 to 334.

PhBT III, DELINEAl'lONS FOB HOHP8QOPB8 461
INFLUENCE OF ASPECTS BY TRANSIT
‘(See also Pagea 472-3)
General Indications <jf the Good Aspects of the Moon
Significant of favorable conditions in matters ruled by
the Moon. (See page 2 Sft). Also for changes, journeys
bjjVater, new acquaintances, gain by females, increase
of trade and favorable domestic conditions.
Adverse Aspects of the Moon
Tend to losses through the things mentioned in the
foregoing paragraph, also to* disappointments, grief
through females and public unpopularity. It conduces
to disagreeable changes and ill health. To females it
inclines to sickness.
it t
General Indications of the Good Aspects of Mercury
Correspond/ look after accounts, write, study, attend
to educational and literary matters, read, make speeches
and attend lectures. Deal with commission and business men, also messengers, distributors, advertisers,
publishers, editors, reporters, printers, book and stationery concerns, bookkeepers, architects, teachers, students,
notaries, lawy.ers, scientists and yoting people.
When the planet is well aspected, it will be noticed
that the mind is keen, alert, penetrating, ingenious, comprehensive, reasonable and versatile. The good aspects
increase the intuition, Imagination, mental sympathy,
receptivity and adaptability. It stimulates the mental
activity, gives ready response to new ideas and gives
clear perception, as it acts directly on the perceptive
faculties. Makes one quick, active and businesslike.
Things of’ a minor commercial character are accomplished with dispatch. Thoughts come deafly ind *
speech or pen are fluent in expression. A good time in
which .to. attend to educational matters, ‘advertise, draw
up contracts and seek information. Good for all affairs
requiring a quick mind, fluent speech, nimblenesa and
dexterity in execution. Good for making minor change^

GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
short journeys, dealing with neighbors,, kindred and
business people generally. The mind is turned into
an optimistic channel and finds pleasure and recreation
in conversation, music, art, literature, novelty and
change. Deal with books, manuscripts, lessons, etc.
Adverse Aspects of Mercury
Keep from petty worries and ovCr-anxiety, t^ke no
notice of trifling annoyances. Set a guard on the speech,
act with prudence, write no letters, sign no contracts or
agreements, make fio important journeys, changes or
removals? Take no medicine. Avoid friction with
brethren, cousins, neighbors or employees.
The adverse aspects to Mercury produce unfavorable
conditions and tend to disturb the stomach, bowels and
nervous system generally. The mental activity is intensified and one is unconsciously on a high tension
leading to worry, anxiety, and turbulent or sarcastic
states of mind.
It dreates uncertainty, indecision and sensitiveness.
One is apt to indulge in controversy and criticism or
to say and do things which we do not really mean, and,
in turn, we are likely to hear unpleasant news and *meet
with conditions which tend to disturb the mental equilibrium. During this aspect one had best not have anything to, do with litigation or new business. Misunderstandings* and annoyances are apt to appear. Special
attention should be given to keeping in mental harmony
and in a pleasant' state of mind, for in that way much
of the aspe'ct is overcome; at least, that part of it which
depefids upon you for its manifestation.
general Indications of the Good Aspects of Venus
A good time for all refined entertainment, pleasure
and amusement, also for courtship, love, marriage, social
and getv<ral prosperity and popularity. Buy and don
new .clothing (especially li'hem the Moon is new).
Cultivate new friendships with the opposite sex, 'seel,
the, favor of ladies, visit 'friends, hold parties, musicales,

PART XII, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES 403
etc. Deal with confectioners, hotelkeepers, housekeepers,
restaurant ma'Viafei^, milliners, dressmakers, clothiers,
tailors, artists, singers, actors, musicians, drapers, jewel
ers, decorators, florists *and nurses. Make* collections.
When this planet is in good aspect, it will be noticed
that the mind strikes a lighter vein than usual, the feelings and emotions are easily aroused and the desire is
to respond readily ,to affection with perfect sympathy.
The aspect tends to elevate, improve and refine the mind,
making it clear, bright, hopeful, cheerful, peaceful,
gentle, kind and mirthful. The natwe is good-natured
and genial and more than ever inclined to neatness in
dress and good manners. Gives appreciation for the
beautiful in Nature, art or drama, and inclines to general
public or business success through agreeable, attractive
and engaging manners and sociability. Personal benefit
and financial gain may be derived from dealings with
things which please the public’s taste for delicacies,
amusement or adornment, and through people connected
with those things ; also through matters associated with
houses, lands and fruits of the earth. One should strive
to make the most of this planetary influence fof improvements in all affajrs in either business, social ot
domestic life.
Adverse Aspects of V'enus
Avoid the opposite sex. Be moderate and .refrain
from excesses of all kinds, but especially with* regard
to eating, drinking and amusement. Not a good time to
obtain favorable results* in matters of affection ^r pleasure, or in fact any of the thii/gs mentioned in the foregoing paragraph.
To females this aspect sometimes denotes physical
indisposition! It*r«nds to produce trouble through over-"
indulgence or carelessness in habits and manners. It
indicates a liability to disappointment or disagreement
in matters of affection and the feelings or 'emotiqijs generally. It is likely to upset and disarrange doihestic conditions. Attachments and social affairs are app to cause
anxiety and also matters associate^ with the occupation,

. QENBTHLIAOAL ASTROLOGY
finances, property, possessions or partnership. The
native is liable to be sensitive and easily wounded. During this aspect one had best not engage in social affairs
or new undertakings (of the kind this planet rules as
stated previously), nor will it be, wise to cultivate new
attractions. Quietly attend to present duties and associate with old and tried friends; shun speculation. In
this way very much of the adverse nature of the aspect
may be .mitigated.
General Indications of the Good Aspects of the Sun
Ask favors of those in good position and authority,
also of those in government office. Seek employment;
try for promotion ; give presents ; seek that which is lost ;
make public announcements and advance notices. A
good aspect for spiritual unfoldment and for the society
of sunny, optimistic and prosperous people.
The good aspects of the Sun promote loyalty, sincerity, ambition, energy, will power and adaptability;
strengthen the constitution of both male and female.
They tend to success, advancement, prosperity and
assistance from powerful, influential or superior persons;
also to popularity, progress, hotjor, esteem and friendship. Gain through enterprise and responsibility and
through good-hearted, generous and radiant manhers.
Adverse Aspects of the Sun
AvoiJl. persons of wealth, position and authority; also
those in government office. Do nothing of importance;
do not ‘disclose your intentions; keep your own counsel.
Begin only thosp things which are to be kept secret,
private or obscure; avoid being overheated or becoming
e»cited. The adverse 'aspects of the Sun tend to make
one over-ambitious, venturesome, egotistical, irresolute,
proud, haughty, yet sensitive, compelling, immoderate,
oVer-cflnfident, somewhat domineering and quick to take
offense. Likelihood of difficulty in financial affairs
through business or employment. The aspect also conduces (6 less by speculation or through ill health and
inferiors. Disappointment, misfortune or poor success
twith those of authority and high position.

PAflT III, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES 468
General Indications of the Good Aspects of Mars
Study, investigate or attend' to business connected
with chemistry, jsurgnry, assaying, construction and
mechanical affairs , generally. Deal with animals by
training, buying, 6elfing , or transportation. Conduct
business matters associated with engineers, contractors,
structural iron workers, sewer builders, scavengers, carpenters, lumbermen, machinists, smiths, barbejs, hardware dealers, agents, police, soldiers, stockraisers, butchers, dentists and surgeons. Practice muscular development. Solicit, canvas.
The good aspects ot Mars te'hd to make the native
more than usually ambitious, energetic, firm, brave,
ardent and resolute. It gives “tone" or strength to the
whole system, muscular and circulatory; it increases
the activity, force and vitality, and is a splendid aspect
for work requiring great strength in occupations carried
on out of doors. Its tendency also is towards success
and promotion' through resourcefulness and enterprise
in business and personal affairs, or employments of responsibility that owe their existence mainly to push,
pluck and perseverance, and in which results are largely
accomplished through’ quick energetic,, commonsense
methods and hard work, which inspire confidence and
trust from others.
Adverse Aspects of Mars
The adverse aspects of Mars are a troublesome influence, and unless exceeding care is exeihised it is likely
to lead to accidents and injuries on jourpeys and difficulties, or obstacles and much hard work in connection with
changes and removals. While the aspect is in operation
be temperate in affection and .avoid excessive demonstrations ; cultivate ‘no new acquaintances pnd beware of
contentions with friends; avoid all disputes and(cbntr6versy. Utilise the mental and physical force equally,
i.e., be c^rjful not to overdo in muscular effort, conserve
the energy, restrain the passions, avoid hasty, "Jorce/ul
actions aqd impulsive speech, beware of accidents, cuts,
scalds, burns and bruises, be carefril of the diet. Do n^t »

OENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
buy clothing, have no dental or surgical work performed.
An unfavorable aspect for affairs connected with iron,
steel, hardware, machinery or construction. Have no
dealings with engineers, contractors, iron workers, surgeons, dentists, agents, police, etc., as mentioned in the
foregoing.
The adverse aspects of Mars have a tendency to make
one brave but headstrong, inclined to acts and words
which aje indiscreet or rash and likely to cause regret,
humiliation or trouble. The temper is apt to bt quick
and the speech hasty, causing strife, difficulty or opposition from others., It tends to make one feel very selfconfident, somewhat egotistic, domineering, daring and
venturesome, but easily annoyed and irritated and apt
to suffer from disregard of regulations or carelessness of
consequences and through sex impulse or through scandal, criticism or enmity. It is an ill aspect for domestic
happiness, and it often produces trouble in the dwelling
place and also with regard to property.
General Indications of the Good Aspects of Jupiter
The good aspects of Jupiter vibrate a fortunate or
benefic influence, and during the aspect is a good time
to open shops^or places of business, begin new undertakings, ask favors, speculate, sell ; providing however,
that there is not ori at the same time a malefic counteracting influence such as an adverse aspect of Mars,
Saturn^ or Uranus. Take counsel or conduct matters
associated with judges, lawyers, bankers, merchants,
brokers, commercial men and physicians. Attend to
affairs 'connected with education*, colieges of law, business, science and medicine; also with matters related to
philanthropic, charitable, religious or benevolent organizations. Make effort's for health or learning, study
philosophy or healing. Conduct or ajten^l important
and formal social functions.
A gobd aspect of Jupiter conduces to clean-, sound and
usually correct judgment; inclines more than ever to
honesty, t,ruth, justice, benevolence, compassion, sympathy, friendliness and sociability. It increases the

P>.RT m, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES 4g7
vitality and adds fertility and resourcefulness to the
mental processed* It tends to make ,one jovial, generous,
humane,' hopeful and popular.
Adverse* Aspects of Jupiter
Avoid law or dealings with lawyers, judges, bankers,
treasurers, cashiers, bondsmen, stock and sharesellers,
speculators, brokers and woolen merchants. Have no
dealings with philanthropic, charitable, religious or benevolent affairs. Shun speculation and investment. Sign
no bonds, bails, guarantees or securities.
This is an "unfortunate aspect f°r risky ventures or
games of chance of any kind, as it is apt to lead to loss
through misplaced confidence, dishonesty, excess and
wrong judgment either in self or in others. The aspect
tends to disturb the liver, and to women it is not good
for the general health.
General Indications of the Good Aspects of Saturn
Deal with plumbers, shoemakers, hamessmakers, hide
and leather dealers, miners, masons, potters, excavators,
gardeners, florists, farmers, agriculturists, landlords,
coal and land dealers. Build, repair, dijf and deal with
land. Converse with and seek the fai^or of elderly people.
Practice concentration, auto-suggestion and mental healing. Study organization and economics
The good aspects to Saturn tend to produce a
thoughtful, conservative, prudent, sobi;r, contemplative
and diplomatic mind, and help to make one provident,
careful and attentive to business affairs generally., Increhse of credit, popularity and esteem ; gives s^lfreliance, systematizing and organizing ability, constructive execution ; the aims of the native are advanced by
subtlety, tact and method rather than ’by force* The
aspect favor? occupation and attainment to positions of
trust and responsibility; the progress may be slow, but
started under this aspect it tis more secure and' fasting.
,The good aspects to Saturn are favorable for matters
connected with property, leasing, beginning a building,.

GENETHLIACAL. ASTROLOGY
and other long-time projects. It tends to gobd, discriminative, conservativef judgment in buyi*& generally.
Adverse Aspects of Saturn
The adverse aspect to Saturn is1 ati unfortunate influence, therefore make no changes, removals or journeys,
start nothing new, ask no favors, seek not to gain ; r^st,
avoid worry, do not let any discouragement or melancholy feelings gain possession, guarfl the speecty. Do
nothing of importance; it will pay to wait. One’s judgment is apt to be very poor or warped during this aspect.
Deal carefully with* elderly people ; keep away from old
buildings, dark cellars and gloomy districts; beware of
falls, safeguard the health ; guard against taking cold,
seek optimistic and cheerful people, places and things.
Eat lightly, abstain from flesh foods, take plenty of
sleep. Do not invest, buy or exchange ; have no dealings,
with landlords, builders, buildings, lands, mines, coal or
lead.
This aspect interferes with good concentration and
has aji adverse bearing on the physical condition, so the
native will do well to guard against exposure and also
depression, doubt, fear, gloom or dissatisfied feelings.
It is an exceedingly unfortunate aspect under which to
be married. Any n/:w undertakings commenced during
its activity usually live long enough to cause regret, and
eventually create a great deal of impatience through
delays, 'hindrance, limitations, reversals, lack of suitable
opportunities, and * train of other unfavorable circumstances^ in fatt, ^he fates seem tQ dis/avor anything important spt into operation at this time and especially
those things whidn require 'quick consummation for their
success. °
General Indications of the Good Aspects of tfranua
Othen aspects permitting, this is a good influence for
traveling in t£e interests of business <jr science, also
good for leaking changes and removals. Keep the mind
active, study new thought 'ideas, astrology and inven-,
tions, as the vibrations of Uranus have affinity with

PART III, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES MB
things .of thit thkracter. Investigate all things new,
odd, unique, original, curious and mysterious; experiment ; practice telepathy, suggestive healijig, etc. Work
for social reform.^ and humanitarian principles. Take
electric and magnetic treatments. Deal with reformers,
electricians, railroad people, aeronauts, chauffeurs, inventors, metaphysicians and experimental scientists.
Take interest in Masonic, occult and new thought affairs.
The good aspects of Uranus tend to make one active,
firm, independent, enterprising anc^ businesslike. This
influence conduces to fondness and friendship for the
opposite sex, and also to gain’through the occult and
through advanced thought people. It tends to awaken
the imaging faculties, quickens the thought and intuition,
and leads the mind into new, original lines of interest
•atid investigation. It adds to the mesmeric and metaphysical faculty in a manner beneficial for healing and
telepathy.
Adverse Aspects of Uranus
This is not a good aspect in which to travel, change
or. remove. Exercise* extra caution in connection with
engiijes, cars, autos, airplanes, electric conveyances,
electricity, machinery, inventions a*id explosives. Avoid
the opposite s'ex, do not confide in strangers»or in aged
people, restrain impulse and hasty speech. Enter into
no contracts or partnerships or associations; op t is very
likely to use strange, unusual or Unexpected judgment
during this aspe«t, change their ideas suddeifly from
what they had originally intended and afterwards wish
tf\ey had not. Avoid electric, X-ray, radium or jnagnetic treatments under this aspect.
The ad vferse “aspects of Uranus act as a separative or
explosive quality and tend to the unexpected *and* to *
extremes. They often affect the health, interfering with
the aura, the .stomaqh and the digestic taction, causing
mental* disturbance of different kinds, sudden oI*peculiar
changes in the feelings or emotions; oppositions, £versions, repulsions and strange .attractions. ’Unless re*
straint is practiced, the native will be impulsive, sardas-

IjENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
tic, abrupt, peculiar odd, eccentric,* tfery independent
and subject to separation, estrangement or misunderstanding. The aspect also operates »to increase the
activity of mind, making it restlesf, easily annoyed,
romantic, venturesome, unconventional, daring, radical,
rebellious of limitations and desirous of new scenes, and
surroundings, and change of work.
General 'Indications of the Good Aspects of Neptune
Attend to business affairs connected with shipping,
chemicals, perfumes, brewing, deep-sea fish, oil, paints,
mineral avid charged waters, and liquids in general. Take
journeys by water, take baths and oil rubs. Sit for
psychic development, inspirational ideas, hold seances,
visit psychics, practice psychometry. Attend secret
orders. i .
The good aspects to Neptune incline to success and
benefit through choice foodstuffs, canned goods, delicacies and things calculated to please the tastes of the
public. Thev render active any latent emotions for
romanle and mystery and conduce to the reception of
useful impressions and pleasant psychic influences.
Adverse Aspects of Neptune
r
Guard against fraud and deception", beware of
schemers, do not invest or buy. Observe well the psychic conflitions and be careful regarding the cleanliness
and purity of people and things you may contact; avoid
hospital^, prisons' and slaughter-houSfes. Be cautious
with gas, ether, apaesthetics, fetid odors and poisonous
liquids; use extra caution with canned or bottled foodc;
keep away from the waters. Drink no oils, restrain the
desires, shun psychic phenomena, hold no seances'. Enter
into no partnerships, associations, nor cultivate any new
or doubtful friendships.
The adverse t aspects of Neptune tend to produce
seductive ‘influences and confusion; likely to intensify
any psychic emotions, bring subtle feelings and indefinable sensations. It leads to a desire for luxuries and’
to- gratify exquisite tastes. Attractions to peculiar or

PART III, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES 471
mysterious people* to changeable , colors and strange"-
odors, sounds, etc. It leads to impressionability and
psychic perception, but not of a desirable *or satisfactory
nature.
fluto
fJot enough is known of Pluto’s influence at this time
to warrant definite and particular delineation of transiting aspects to its 01ace in the zodiac. Students will do
well to enter it in every horoscope, and note carefully
the conditions and events that may consistently be ascribed to its influence. In a preceding chapter is given
information o'f its nature. An Ephemeris of Pluto will
show its location by sign and degree monthly. By
keeping a daily record of findings on Pluto, you will
be enabled to form some opinion and judgment of its
.influence.
The following -chapter relating to the Influence of the Moon aa
she transits through the twelve houses of a chart la given as an
example for deducing the Influences. The same method or style
should be employed when treating thd house transit influence of
other planets, based upon their dellnentions given In previous
chapters. In other worn's, the Influence of planets by transit In
houses is similar to the delineations given previously for the natal
house’posltlons.
The Moon transits through ail the houses of a nativity In about
twenty-seven and one-third daya.
Atl the plnneta alfect the house of one'p nativity through which
they may be transiting.
The Influence of Transits thropgh the nalul chart is usually
more pronounced than through the progressed chart. ■
Mercury, Venus and Sun require about a month to go through
one houae; Mars about seven weeks, Jupiter about one y&ar;
Saturn dbout two and one-half years; Uranus about seven years;
Neptune requires ’fourteen years lo go through one house. Pluto
requires approximately twenty years to pass through o house. '
Owing to various reasons the planets may require m«e or less
time than atated. If an Intercepted sign la Id any house, the usual
time may be neifrly doubled.

flENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
THE TRANSITING MO.OJJ
r
Influence of the Moon in the Twelve Houses
(Regarding the nature ot sign occupied by Moon from
day to day, please refer to note at bottom of page 336.)
When the Moon is in the Ascendant, or First Hofise
of your nativity, it affects the personality and brings
matters of self into consideration. It brings desfte for
a change and overcomes conservatism by inclining to
sociability or publici ty. Increases action of moisture in
head an<( face.
In the Second House : Matters of finance will attract
attention and it is a good time in which to plan methods,
ways and means of increasing or conducting monetary
considerations, especially those matters which involve*
dealings with the public or with commodities of a
changeable nature. Good for vocal exercise.
In Third House: Inclines to short journeys, dealings
with neighbors or kindred and correspondence. If you
make up your mind about something when Moon is in
the third house vou are very apt t6 change it, especially
if not in a fixed1 sign. Good for study of public affairs,
matters of mental enlightenment and breathing exercises,
as it affects the lungs ; favorable for practice requiring
dexterity of hands and fingers.
In Fourth House:' Arouses interest in the home, the
place of «abode and family or domestiCcaffairs ; also matters connected with land ot property. This location of
the Moon conducts to thoughts of change, if only Jo
chapging things about the house. It affects the breast
and stomach and one should be careful in eating and
drinking.
In Fifth House: Giyes a speculative tendency, an
inclination to take chalices, to favor romance, gaiety and
the society of ydunger people. It conduces to happiness,
mirth, a sense of freedom and , increase of affections.
Favorable for attending places of amusement. '

pXkt hi, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES 473
In Sixth Hoiise s Conduces to masters of employment,
employees, labor, food, clothing, animals or sickness. It
inclines to physical indisposition so that care should be
given to hygienic methods. ' Overwork *or over-indulgence in any way }s likely to result in sickness affecting
the stomach and bowels. *
In Seventh House : Awakens interest in matters connected with partn'ers, associates, marriage, opponents
and dealings with others. Unions, partnerships, etc.,
undertaken when Moon is in this house are subject to
changes and therefore care should be taken not to bestow too much confidence in the* steadfastness 6f others,
or continuity of deals transacted at this time.
In Eighth House: With the majority of people the
fr^nsit of Moon through their eighth house is not very
perceptible in effect, but it inclines to attention of monetary affairs or financial conditions of others, or the
money of partner or associate, and causes the mind to
revert to those who are deceased. It is a good time to
enter silence for the purpose of psychically communing
with those in the spirit world. (Choose the planetary
hoqrs of Moon or Ve:tus.)
In Ninth House: Turns the attention to higher channels of thought, matters of education, spiritual or psychical unfoldment and thoughts of journeys or reminiscence of distant scenes. Impressive dreams, wheh Moon
is in this house, are usually prophetic.
In Tenth House: Inclines to business activity in a
professional way or with professional people. It condudes to change in business methods or pursuits a«d
brings tyi matters connected with honor, credit or advancement. • Interest in mother’s welfare and also that
of the Government or President.
In Eleventh flouse : Usually brings one into contact
with othei’s in a social way, creates feelings oS sociability
.and interest in friends. ’It usually produces new hdpes
and wishes and revives old ones..

GENETHL1ACAL ASTROLOGY
In Twelfth House: Gives interest1 irl' occult affairs or
matters of a secret or mysterious nature, and hospitals
or other largennstitutions. It is apt to,bring to the fore
many restrictions or delays which an/ioy the native, but
by withdrawing the mind f^om' external things and
silently communing with the inner self, while the Moon
is here it is likely to shed light into the deeper recesses
of the mind so that the way may be seen to extricate
one’s self from difficulty and find release from bondage.
The fqregoing delineations are the combined influences
of the Moon and the house it is transiting through without consideration for any aspects which may be formed.
An aspect would modify or accentuate the conditions as
stated, according to whether it is favorable or adverse.

PART HI. DELINEATIONS FOR HQROSCOPE3 475
PROGRESSED HOROSCOPE ASPECTS
The following* delineations have reference to all progressed aspects, whether formed to planets in the radix,
in the progressed ‘chart, or between one planet in the
radix and the other in the progressed chart. The interpretations are general indications only and subject to
modification and change according to the strength of the
aspect* i. e., whether major or minor, the position of the
aspected planets in the chart, whether angular, succedent
or cadent, and the strength by digmty or weakness by
debility according to the signs occupied.
In reading these aspects keep this fact constantly in
mind, that by direction a planet can only bring to bear
the influence it indicated in the radix, whether good or
■otherwise, and in proportion to its power by house, sign,
aspect, etc., in the radix. For instance, do not predict
birth of children if the radix denies them.
It is necessary to understand thoroughly the planet’s
indications in the radix or its action by direction dannot
be correctly interpreted.
Properly speaking, directions are not for the purpose of
showing what will occur, but whin it will occur, as
nothing can happen except what the radix indicates.
If the foregoing is strictly adhered to, directions may
be easily and coirectly read.
It should be remembered that mutual aspects may be
brqught into manifestation by Transits, by Lunar "progressed aspects and by Lunations.
The delineatidns given for the progressed aspects will
also serve as readings for transit aspects and, tor the
influence of 'parallels of transiting planets.

'GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
SOLAR PROGRESSED ASPECTS
(For Sun in Favorable or Unfavorable,, Aspect to Moon,
see Moon to Sun.,1
Sun in Good Aspect to Mercury
Excites the mind to great activity .and gives an inclination for books, study, literature, writing and sometimes
journeys if either planet be in the third or ninth. Honor
and promotion through Mercurial affairs ; increased
business activity.
Sun Adverse to Mercury
Brings losses and annoyance through writings, publishings, letters, agreements and possibly journeys,' if
either planet be posited in third or ninth. Adverse
criticism ; loss of position.
Sun in Good Aspect to Venus
Honor and preferment in a social way and much
pleasure in refiped amusements. ‘Gain through business,
profession, speculation, public occupation; it produces a
generous, harmonious state of mind. Good for health;
conducive* to love affairs and marriage; indicates gifts,
honors and promotion ; inclines to the purchase of jewels,
adornment, objects of art, furniture.
Gun Adverse to . Venus
Causes extravagance or excess of pleasure; grief
through the offsprings misfortune in love affairs and
dealings with the opposite sex; an amorous nature and
mutable in the affections. Loss through ‘ speculation.
Social* rebuffs;* difficulty through matters related to
beauty ind adornment; lack of funds and ell health.
Sun in Good Aspect to Mars
Denotes changes, activity, preferment, honor, ■ health
add strength. The mirfd is alert, quick in anger but soon*

P^RT III, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES 477
appeased, 'the nature is frank, free, generous, candid,
ambitious, progressive, venturesope, confident and
aggressive. The native is inclined to active or strenuous sports; possesses^ contractive qualities and selfassurance; meets favor, promotion and success in
Martian affairs; inprehsed business activity and responsibilities. With females it conduces to marriage but
usually of somewhat discordant nature.
Siln Adverse to Mars
Denotes sharp, acute attacks of sickness; accidents,
cuts, burns, bites and danger from all inflammatory
diseases and sicknesses, such a<* smallpox, fevers, cholera, fluxes, etc., according to the sign occupied by Mars.
In a female horoscope, danger in childbirth. Under this
direction one is liable to suffer loss by fire if either planet
is in a fiery sign, inclined to fighting, anger, quarrels;
dagger of violence and robbery. A watery sign conduces
to drunkenness and excesses, if the nativity shows such.
Suti in Good Aspect to Jupiter
Exceedingly good for honor, wealth, health, ifame,
law and general success in all lines. If the radix indicates iti the native may expect advancement, preferment
and honors through influential friends and gain according to the house in which Jupite*- is posited. Very
favorable for marriage, speculation, expansion,* extension
of interests and general prosperity.
Sun in Adverse Aspect ito Jupiter
Very bad for ifioney matters, law/ speculation and
health. It denotes liability to apoplexy, pleurisy, bursting-blood vessels and general derangement of the system
if the Sun is hyleg or Jupiter ruler of the sixth house.
Do not buy,, loan, speculate or invest during this aspect.
Loss through misplaced confidence, miscalculation _or
poor judgment.
Sun in Good Aspect to Saturn
Denotes substantial gain, public approval, honor, 3uc-
'cess in mines, lands and things of a Saturnine nature;,

GENETHLIACAI, iVSTRCLOGY
-I
preferment and 'advancement through those in authority
and also through the( native’s own effort^. < The mind is
dignified, lofty and austere, favored with concentration,
confidence, goed calculation, estimation and appraisal.
The native is 'quiet, patient and persevering. A good
period in which to make long-time, investments, for
building and buying.
Sun Adverse to Saturn
Very adverse for health, wealth and social standing.
The native suffers ljjss of business, or credit and bankruptcy if the afflictions occur from the second or eighth
house; sitkness from thk sixth or twelfth, and possibly
death from the eighth. The native incurs opposition,
enmity and public disfavor. The mind may become unsympathetic, without regard for the feelings of others,
selfish, calculating and pessimistic, ft threatens the,
demise of the husband in a female horoscope. Very inauspicious time for new business, risky ventures, expansion, buying, investing, changing position or traveling.
> Sun in Good Aspect to Uranus
Gain through the talents, inventions, public employ,
popularity, fraternal societies and voyages. The mjnd is
active and enterprising. Beneficial changes brought
about suddenly and unexpectedly. Good for health and
general welfare. Advancement in occult science. Journeys, if 'npt in fixed signs. New interests, friends, undertakings and businesi improvements.
Sun Adverse to Uranus
Sudden and unexpected losses, calamities, accidents,
enmities; loss of honor, public favor, friends and patrons.
Uranus is separative in nature and causes tfouble from
any house in which it may be posited or may rule. Bad
health, dausing a disturbed, nervous, excitable, radical
or rebellious state of mind ; very unfavorable for marriage a's' it tends toward, separation, estrangement,
divdrce or incompatibility.

PART III, DELINEATIONS FOR HOBOSCOPES 4T9
’Sun in Good Aspect to Nept'une
The jnind is sympathetic, kind and generous. Gain
through the occult and spiritual sciences ; inclines to
pleasure and benefit through the artistic faculties and
traveling; by things of a hidden or secret nature and
those of authority anti government employ. Harmonious,
constructive or enlightening impressions. Favors matters related to liquids, chemicals, drugs, oil, anaesthetics,
beverages, the sea and large institutions such as theatres,
sanita-iums, hospitals.
Sun Adverse to Neptune
Loss through fraud, scandal, v schemes and intrigues.
Loss of standing with those of authority. Disadvantageous changes and loss of occupation. Bad for health;
annoying psychic conditions. Danger through drugs,
narcotics, beverages or the sea.
The Progressed Sun in Good Aspect
to its own Radical Place
Honor, esteem, popularity, promotion, progress, success in business, general prosperity, improved health
and many pleasures.
Progressed Sun in Adverse Aspect
to its own Radical 1^1 ace
Loss in matters mentioned above and a trying time
generally.
As the progressed Sun moves about one degVee per
year, its aspects cover a period of about three years, two
years (degrees) applying to aspect an^ one year oi> the
aspect; it does not maintain a -constantly perceptible
influence during that period but it colors the general
trend, of conditions, its influence being particularly
noticeable when transits or other progressions of“ a like
nature occus.
■ During iavoiable Solar aspects the influence *of other
good directions is augmented and the effect of unfarora^le directions is somewhat diminished; and vice versa. t

GENETHLIACAMASTRGLOGY
LUNAR PROGRESSED ASPECTS
Moon in Good Aspect to Mercury
Makes the mind active, studious ■ana creative. Inclines
to success in journeys, writings, publishings, law, adver
tising or business, and general prosperity; changes and
activity with inclination to read and study.
Moon Adverse to Mercury
Tends to anxiety, restlessness, nervous disorders and
slander. 'An adverse jteriod for lawsuits, publishing,
letter writing, signing of contracts, journeys and general
business affairs.- Friction with kindred or neighbors.
Moon in Good Aspect to Venus
A happy, peaceful, healthful, prosperous and fortunate
period. The native inclines to the pleasures of - Venus
and it is strong testimony for courtship and marriage,
especially the parallel or conjunction. With the married
it indicates social and domestic pleasures, and the probable birth of a qhild, if such is indicated in the radix. .
Moon Adverse to Venus
Losses, disappointment, bereavement among friends
and sorrow in love and domestic affairs; extravagance,
illicit relations, scandal or quarrels with the opposite
sex, excesses' according to the sign Venus is in ; often
indicates the loss of a chilq. To females, ill health and
disappointments in -all Venusian affairs.
Moon in Conjunction or Parallel with Sqn
fJot "good for' health, especially in a woman's horoscope, producing an inert, lethargic, indifferent condition, resulting /in feverish complaints apd in ailments
similar to an adverse aspect to Mars, which planet the
Sun1- closely resembles in aspects. Otherwise the mind
js free, generous and open. It brings changes, honoi,

PART III, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES 481
gain in business, marriage and public favor with both
male and female.
Moon Trine or in Other Good Aspect to Sun
Good for both'seXes. Produces honors, popularity,
promotion, influential friendships, gain through superiors and parents; good health; the mind is dignified,
lofty, ambitious ; good for speculation, marriage, fame
and business. Success generally, especially in dealing
with women and the common people, as well as with
those in high office.
Moon Adverse"-to Sun
Unfortunate for all affairs of life. Denotes ill health,
bereavement, loss of honor, fame, office, business,
friends, support of superiors or parents and a very trying
time generally. From watery signs the native may take
to drinking, and is inclined to company beneath his own
station; from the twelfth house, danger of imprisonment.
With a female it affects the health particularly.
Moon in Good Aspect to Mara
Good for business, health, journeys, new enterprises,
and success generally. Shows gair; through activity in
Martian affairs; courage, generosity, a desire. for active
sports and exercise. Gain by military men, doctors,
surgeons, etc., as denoted by Mars. Not so good with
females, inclining to the society of the opposite sex;
amorous and impu’sive courtship and marriage, although
good otherwise for activity and new projects.
Moon Adverse to Mars
Inclines the mtive to rashness, quarrels, extravagance,
recklessness, disputes and litigation. He Suffers discredit,
slander and dishonor. Danger of fevers, smallpox and
other Martian inflammatory disorders. Liable to
wounds; bites, kicks, broken bones and accidents when
traveling. If Mars is strong in the first, secondJ or
seventh house, he may lose by theft, fire or robbery. In }

gENETHLIACAI/ASTR^LOGY
fiery signs, danger of high fevers, accidents t>y firearms,
hurts by human hands; in earthly sighs* falls, hurts from
animals, bites, etc.; watery signs, scalds, danger of
drowning, from drink, or excesses. .This is a very
critical period for women when undgr this aspect, as it
signifies ill health, slander, discredit, .attacks or trouble
through moral indiscretions.
Moon in Good Aspect to, Jupiter
An especially good direction for wealth, health and
attachments. Conduces to gain, fame, honor and success
generally; inclines to marriage, social advancement and
voyages. Very good fdr health with females. A good
period in which to start new business or make investments.
Moon Adverse to Jupiter , .
Bad for business. Trouble through law or the church.
Losses in dealing with landlords, politicians, lawyers,
magistrates, or in speculation, through poor judgment
and miscalculation. The disposition is free, extravagant
and profligate; the associates impose upon the generosity of the natiye, causing him to make bad loans and
Squander his money. It disturbs the health by impurities
of the blood, headaahes, stomach and liver disorders.
Moon in Good Aspect to Saturn
Success in busihess, especially through, elderly persons add Saturnine things, popularity, new friends. The
mind is active, patient, contemplative, serious, dignified
and.carcs little for society but is attentive to business;
deep and profound with good organizing ability. Good
for matters relating to land, property, producf, mines.
Also beneficial for things indicated by 'the house occupied by^ Moon.
> Moon Adverse to Saturn,
Direful results; loss of friends, business, money, and.
, danger of' failure or bankruptcy, especially if either 'is

8PART III, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES 488
posited in qr*nuter of the seconder tenth house. Dishonor, losses, grief, disappointment and bereavement;
morbid, melancholy, anxious state of mind ; the health
suffers from c?>ld, lingering disorders; ‘aches and pains
according to the*sign Saturn occupies. Unfavorable for
the commencement of anything new. Very bad period
for buying, investing or assuming heavy liabilities.
Moon *in Good Aspect to Uranus
Produces pleasant journeys, advantageous removals
and changes that are beneficial though sudden and unexpected, ar»d according to the»house in whiclvthe Moon
is posited. Especially good for the above from first,
third and ninth houses. It sharpens the mental faculties
and makes the mind curious, fanciful, eccentric, inventive and inclined to the investigation of the occult; to
* fesearch, exploration and travel. Brings new friends;
correct intuition. The nature is romantic and fond of
adventure. It inclines to society of the opposite sex.
Moon Adverse to Uranus
Causes sudden, unexpected, disastrous changes, journeys and removals.* Brings trouble through females,
loss^of credit or position, danger of accidents, slafRler,
and disgrace ; worry, anxiety and restlessness. The mind
is sarcastic, bitter, obstinate, rebellious, haSty or irrational, and the actions indiscreet. Happening in the
seventh, discord in marriage; in tjic fifth, illicit attractions, danger of loss in speculation ; sorrow , through
children.
Moon in Good Aspect to fteptune
Gain through the mediumistic, inspirational and artistic faculties^ also through schemes, secret alliances
and secret orders. Rise through the influence of women
Enemies are subdued and existing evils brought to light
that were designed to discredit the native. The mind
is restless, emotional and given to pleasure, Prophetic
impressions and premonitions. Favors matters relating
to liquids, chemicals, oils, anaesthetics, beverages an<^
&e sea.

GBNETHLIACAL a'strology
Moon Adverse to Neptune,
Produces secret enmities or intrigues against the
native. Deception, fraud, plots and. schenes which tend
to bring him into disrepute. The mind is uneasy, worried and burdened with fear ,or s'trange forebodings.
Seductive friends or associates. Bad for health, causing
a negative physical condition; danger of ptomaine
poisoning and danger on water. Confusion, indiscretions
or complications.
Moon in Good Aspect to Her Own Radical Place
Changes, journeys, gain by females, new friends,
increase in business. Inclines to female society.
Moon in Adverse Aspect to Her Own Radix Place
Loss, disappointment, unfavorable changes, bereavement, unpopularity. To females it brings ill health.
Note: It should he remembered that these delineations for the
progressed aspects as they are formed by planets In the progressed horoscope among themselves art; also applicable to tbe
aspects they may make to planets In the radix horoscope.
“Yp atari, which are the poetry of Heaven I
It In your bright leaves, we would read the fate
• Of men and empires, ’tip to be forgiven." — Lord Byron

g^RT HI, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES 485
MUTUAL PROGRESSED ASPECTS
(See chapter “Then and Now,” page 226)
B* JKercury B
(For Mercury in Favorable or Unfavorable Aspect
to Mqon, see Moon to Mercury.^
Mercury in Good Aspect to Venus
Not of great importance, but* increases interest in
literature, music, dress and cbmforts. Pleasure in the
fine arts, new friends and female acquaintances. Tends
to refined society; adds a charm to the personality. The
conjunction and parallel incline to amusements, and
/social affairs.
Mercury Adverse to Venus
•Reverse to the foregoing.
(For Mercury in Aspect to Sun, see Sun to Mercury,
Mercury *n Good Aspect ta Mars
Increases the activity of both mind and body, thereby
adding new stimulus to business and gain therein. Resourceful, industrious, mechanical, constructive, enterprising, confident, practical, executive and expressive.
Mercjury Adverse to Mars
Inclines to low company* loose mbrals. Acting upon
mind, it inclines to quarreling, thieving, forgery,
scandal, etc.; a sarcastic, suspicious mental attitude;
!iable*to engt^ge in law and disputes and may commit
violence on impulse. Worried, anxiofts states of mind,,
trouble in business or employment and with relatives.
Mercury in Good Aspect to JfupiteB ,
Strengthens the mind and gives good business ' judgment and foresight. Denotes jjopularity oromotion.aitd

GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
success in things ruled by these planets ( according to
their indications in the nativity; good 'f dr things ruled
by houses occupied. Also for literary efforts, new
studies, publishing, advertising and travel,.
Mercury Adverse to Jiipiter
An unsettled mental condition. Losses through poor
judgment jjnd writings. If Mercury is not strong it
inclines to trouble through forgery, libel, perjury, lqans,
misstatements, miscalculation, misplaced confidence, extravagance, excesses, ,legal violations and journeys.
Mercury in Godd Aspect to Saturn
Gives a patient, persevering, systematic, studious,
grave, dignified, practical mind; conduces to gain
through discreet and prudent management of business ^
affairs. If Mercury is in the first, third or ninth, it gives
success in intellectual pursuits, writing, publishing,
traveling, lecturing, teaching. Favors matters related
to land, property, produce, mines, science, geology, etc.
Mercury Adverse to Saturn
Trouble through slander, forged letters or documents
and things ruled by Mercury. The mind is sarcastic,
gloomy, bitter and given to much worry. Not good for
health as it tends to poor circulation, indigestion, constipation irjd obstruction, and general nervous derangement. Usually indicated trouble with landlord^, tenants,
employees, parents, or other relatives. , Loss by small
animals, property, mines or1 lack of employment and
illness., Hindrance/delays, disappointment and a trying
time .generally.
Mercury in Good Aspect to Uraliua '
If from 'first, third or ninth, or either planet the ruler
thereof, inclines the mind to study and travel and gain
thereby. Under this direction the mind is activfc, Witty
and original ; gain through invention, electrical, aerial or
transportation companies,, publishing, advertising, writ- '

PART III, DEfjNEAf IONS FOB HOROSCOPES 487
ing, radio, electronics, research, exploration, risky ventures and suth fh’ngs as are ruled* by these planets.
Mercury Adverse to Uramjs
Unsettled, sarcastic, impulsive, radical, rebellious,
chaotic states of mind; difficulty with friends, kindred,
ciyil service or municipal officers. Unsuccessful in literary pursuits; press criticism. Trouble through writings, fither letters or documents. Great inclination to
travel and sudden changes, or upheaval in plans and
affairs. Danger on journeys ancj through electrical
contrivances,, autos, engines, airplanes, etc.
Mercury in Good Aspect to Neptune
If occurring in the third or ninth house, and the nativity so indicates, it strengthens the mental qualities
‘and psychic nature, producing automatic writing, trance
and inspirational speaking. Useful mental impressions
and premonitions. Favors matters relating to food,
hygiene, liquids, oil, beverages, the sea, and educational
or healing institutions.
Mercuryj Adverse to Neptune
Defective memory and tendency to mental confusion,
nervousness, restlessness, over-sttasitivencss, lack of
self-control and liability to be led into dissolute habits.
Deception and loss in business affairs and through things
ruled by these planets. Misunderstanding, < misstatements, consealment of facts, lack of proper information,
perjury, forgery, Jnortymity are likely *to lead to distress
and trouble.
9 Venus ' 9
(.For Venus in*Aspect to Sun, Moon and Mercury, see
preceding p(ages.)
Venus in Good Aspect to Mars
Inclines to the society of the opposite sex and gefteral
good time. Incites to love and. marriage. The native

GpNETHLIACAL XSTRO'lOGY
is daring and free, delights in and gains, through Venusian affairs. Good tor acquiring money through, things
ruled by these planets. Not good for morals, as no aspect between Mars and Venus tends to» strict morality.
r
Venus Adversq to Ildars
Inclines to low company, loose morals, scandal, debauchery,, loss through speculation qnd extravagance ;
trouble with partners or associates. Especially bad for
females, and particularly so if Mars be in the fifth,
seventh or tenth at birth, or in the progressed chart.
Venus in God'd Aspect to Jupiter
Good for the things governed by the houses occupied
in progressed chart or in the nativity and also houses
which they rule. Inclines to refined society and amuse
ments and gain thereby ; social activity, gain in business,
finances, new adornments, furnishings; travel for
pleasure, education or business.
Venus Adverse to Jupiter
Losses through speculation and t tendency to extravagance through ' overdress, females and social amusements. Luxurious tastes, excessive pleasures, expensive
undertakings. Liability to loss of money through loans,
legal decisions or gaming.
Venus in Good Aspect to Saturn(
A modest, chaste, frugal, sincere state of mind; favors
steady attachments in love and friendship. Gain by
elders, superiors and solid business investment. Much
good luck of a substantial quality. Favors masters of
practical, artistic value, also land, property, riiines.
Venus Adverse to Saturn
Lax mergls, bereavements, death of offspring; business'.Josses, trouble in courtship and marriage, not good
for speculation, investments, lands, mines, leasingsi

PjRT III, DELINEATIONS FOR HOBOSCOPES 489
companies or hqnjes. Tends to delay, disappointment,
restriction, lAss of business or imployment and ill
health.
Venuk in Good Aspect to Uranus
Gain in such things a% are ruled by the planets in
question. Inclines to the company of the opposite sex.
Romance, new friends, increase in business, new facilities, improved methods, new and pleasant experiences.
Venus Adverse to Uranus
Unfortunatp for matters concerning the opposite sex.
Extremely unconventional ana' indiscreet, liability to
scandal and discredit thereby. Sudden and unexpected
losses and estrangement from friends. Not good for
speculation or risky ventures.
Venus in Good Aspect to Neptune
Promotes success through speculation, shipping,
liquids, oils and the occult sciences ; pleasure and benefit through friends, associations and acquaintances. Gain
through secret organizations, by quiet, secluded efforts
and things of artistic/ pleasurable or comforting nature.
Venus Adverse to Neptune
Financial loss through schemes, plots, theft and trouble through secret organizations, friends and ‘associations; scandal and misrepresentation. Misunderstanding
in love affefirs, or^financial loss from qonfusion, ‘impractical procedure and* vague, indefinite or involved
ventures. Betrayed, fooled, ‘duped, tricked or cheated.
S Mars 4
(For Mars in 'Aspect with Sun, Venus, Mercury and
Moon see preceding pages.)
Mars in Good Aspect to Jujhter
Good for things indibated, according to the pos/tion
erf Jupiter in the nativity and .(by place of 'Jupiter ( ir*

GENETHLIACAL fc.STRO'LOGY
progressed chart. Tends to activity, determination and
vim ; gain through personal effort. EfevatSs the desires
and aspirations, increases business interests; promotion,
expansion, success through practical endeavor, good
judgment and active execution.
Mars Adverse to Jupiter
Indicates losses and trouble according to the nature
of the two planets and their indications in the nativity
according to the houses occupied ; possibly through law,
foreign travel, religipn or competition, misplaced confidence or dishonesty. The subject may himjelf cause his
own misfortune through*hasty, impulsive action or extravagance, carelessness, hasty judgment, miscalculation
or dissipation. Danger through fires if these planets are
in fiery sign. Subject to accidents, feverish complaints
or strain. '
Mars in Good Aspect to Saturn
If one or both planets are prominent, denotes activity,
steadfastness and credit through some courageous acts
and well regulated business activity of practical, conservative nature. Good for building, repairing, improvements; constructive, mechanical or industrial activity;
manufacturing, engineering, excavating, mining.
Mars Adverse to Saturn
Especially unfavorable if from the first, ^eventh or
tenth house. Inclines to quick, v.iolert temper which
leads to quarreling, fighting,*jealousy and perhaps crime.
Danger of accident and broken bones ; loss in business
or occupation; thefts; nervous apprehension and irritability; liable to sudden, sharp, serious attacks of .illness.
Mars ’in Good Aspect to Uranus
Quickens the, mind and increases povyer; indicates
gain throfigb invention, engineering, construction, contracts, exploration, investigation, energetic activity,
qnique enterprise and extension 'of activities.

PART III, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES 491
f—
Since both’are malefics, they usually produce no appreciable good, •» extent through new, , active methods or
plans arid aggressive business enterprise, personal
industry and progressive business acumen.'
Mars^ Adverse to Uranus
From the first house, increase of temper, jealousy.
From the seventh, intensifies and causes troubje with
partners,; divorce or separation.
From the tenth, unexpected and sudden calamities
and disgrace. Municipal or political enmity.
Otherwise trouble through rash, hasty, forceful and
erratic expressions, premature speech and action, sudden
radical changes and accidents.
Mars in Good Aspect to Neptune
Creates activity and enthusiasm in the investigation
of occult subjects and secret missions and gain through
matters connected with liquids drugs, oils, bevenyjes,
chemistry, the sea or large institutions.
Mars Adverse to Neptune •'
Danger trom psychic conditions' and phenomena.
Tends to trouble by fraud, deception, scandal^ bribery
and mental disturbance; loss or accident on or by water,
oils, liquids, poisons, drugs, thieves and habits.' Avoid
damp, unhealthy, foul or ill-smelling places wherg disease or noxious inflilencles may, lurk. ’
U Jupiter - V
(For Jupiter' in ‘Aspect with Moon, Mercury, Venus,'
Sun and Mars, see preceding pages.)
Jupiter in Good Aspect to Saturn
Good for legacy, gifts or promotion. Honors through
science or law, gain through lawsuits and ail things

GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
ruled by the planets and the houses they occupy, especially Jupiter. Substantial increase in general affairs,
land, property, possessions, business, credit. Favors
large and permanent undertaking's. Benefits the health.
Jupiter Adverse to Srtum
Loss through law, business, educational institutions,
religious bodies and all things ruled by these planets.
Loss of honor and credit, bad for health, peace of mind
and business generally. Unfavorable for new or important undertakings or assumption of heavy liabilities.
Jupiter in. Good Aspect to Uranus
Gain through legacy, law, gifts of money, Uranian
occupations, foreign travel, higher science, publishing,
and religious or educational movements. Favors inventions, research, exploration, new studies, business expansion; interest in government and public welfare.
Jupiter Adverse to Uranus
Tendency the same as the good aspect, but attended
by unexpected losses, obstacles and difficulties. Much
annoyance and trouble over lawsuits, inheritance and
financial affairs. Unfavorable for new undertak-ngs or
risky ventures.
Jupiter in Good Aspect to Neptune
Favors traveling,1 dreams, visions, psychic conditions
and hGnor through the investigation- of religion from a
scientific or occult standpoint; popularity and success
in secret societies and through achievements in scientific
research, medicine, chemistry, publishing, or large
institutions.
Jupiter Adverse to Neptune
Losses through speculation, fraud, imposture, cheating, tpeachery; discredit through religious matters,
secret societies or foreign affairs. This aspect tends to
disturb thje health, necessitating care in diet, caution in
use of stimulants, beverages, etc.

PAST III, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES 493
$ Saturn
(For Saturn in Aspect with other planets see preceding
pages.)
Saturn Good Aspect to Uranus
Quickens the nfind an<5 tends to a thoughtful, profound and penetrating attitude; success through determination and fixity of purpose in the investigation of
the occult on a mental plane, such as telepathy, mental
healing, suggestive therapeutics, etc.; also through inventions, vehicles of transportation, railroads, either
electric or steam, and mining of lead*, coal, platinum and
aluminum. A great inclination* for knowledge of the
secrets of nature.
The aspects of these planets are more potent when
occurring from the first, third, ninth or tenth. From the
tehth are considered not so good since neither planet is
entirely favorable in that house.
Saturn Adverse to Uranus
Unfavorable generally; unexpected obstacles and disappointment. Accidents. This is one of those aspects
which ’last over a long period and is felt when excited
by transits of adverse nature, and usually affects the
health.
From the tenth, loss of business, ill fame and disgrace.
Saturn in Good Aspect to Neptune
Gives deOp, clear, concentrated, inspirational thought
and practical benefits through the psychical nature and
the occult sciences generally also benefit through elderly
ptbple, secret service organizations, investments, property, legacies and large institutions.
r
Saturn Adverse to Neptune
Loss through plots, treachery, failures, speculation,
and difficulty over legacies, business, e.tc. May suffer
from psychic conditions. Health may be disturbed by
improper diet, beverages, insufficient exercise or excessive nervousness, anxiety, fear and discontent.

GENETHLIACA^ ASTllOLOGY
W Uranus V
(For Uranus in Aspect with other planets see preceding
pages.)
Uranus in Good Aspect to Neptune
Increases the intuition and psychic ability; inclines to
journeys, explorations, investigations, interest and gain
in occuh. affairs, secret societies and progressive matters
generally. Inspiration for writing, healing or social
welfare.
Uranus Adverse to Neptune
Gives .intuition and the same interest in the occult
and mysterious, but investigation of such matters is
accompanied by obstacles and difficulties; tendency. to
nervousness or vague apprehension.
Note: When planets come Into aspect with their own natal
place Chey tend to express what they Implied In the radix. They
influence affairs indicated by the house through which they are
passing by progression nr transit. Wlv'n a progressed of transiting planet aspecto Its own radical place, insert It in the radix
chart and note which honse therein it is now Influencing, and
make delineation according to the houses occupied/
Progressed planetary aspects have an orh of only two degrees,
therefor^ the ascending degree (the degree on cusp of first house)
must be known to be correct, else the progressd planetary aspects
will not be effective at'the period (year) expected, The transiting planetary aspects have an orb of eight degrees to either
radix or progressed planeta, on house cuspa.

PART III, DEIflNEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES 495
PROGRE^SEp ASPECTS TO THE ASCENDANT
. Of the Progressed or the Radix Chart
\loon to the Ascendant '
Conjunction . or Parallel
Change of residence and travel by land or sea ; social
or business preferment if the Moon be fortunate by sign
or aspects. Otherwise adversity, Lunar disease or accidents and danger by water. Increased interest in public
and local affairs.
Sextile or Trine
Active employment, friendship of ladies in authority
or in social position; popularity, favorable publicity,
general prosperity, marriage or birth of a daughter,
,apcording to the circumstances surrounding the native.
Desire for change and travel.
Square or Opposition
Controversies, strife or disputes with women ; conjugal misery, divorce, discord, jealousy, unpopdlarity,
ill-health, intemperance, etc., according to the position
of *the Moon in the tadix. An unfavourable period for
traveling by land or sea. Restless and anxious concerning changes.1
Mercury to the Ascendant
Conjunction or Pryallel
Change of residence, a journey, active Business; a
propensity for study, invention and writing, the results
of^ which will be fortunate &r unfortunate according to
the indications of Mercury in radix.
If Mercury be very much afflicted at birth, an accident
or serious siclcness is threatened ; many worries and
annoyances; Trouble with neighbors or relatives.
Sextile or Trine
Prosperity, active employment, traveling; gairt by
Hterary work, teaching or by speculating, if ’Mercury is

GENETHLIACAI, ASTEOI/OGY
in the fifth house and well placed in Gemini or Virgo.
May indicate birth of a child (nephev/ or niece), change
of residence, new acquaintances.
Square or Opposition
This influence gives a disinclination for study, failure
to pass examinations; mischief by writings, promises
or agreements, or through the press; overwork; disease
of the niture of Mercury and the planets with which it
may be configurated ; troubles with children and young
persons, scandal, slander or discredit. To children this
aspect often brings whooping-cough, bronchitis and
convulsions, attended with danger.
Venus to the Ascendant
Conjunction, Parallel, Sextile or Trine
This aspect brings pleasure, gain, new friends, courtship, marriage, birth of children ; purchase of articles of
luxury, furniture, clothing, ornaments, etc., according to
circumstances.
If Venus be afflicted (especially in a watery sign) the
conjunction may incline to dissipation or extravagance.
Square or Opposition
Is not important unless Venus be very much afflicted,
arid then it will manifest according to the nature of the
afflicting planet. It usually produces excess. of pleasure,
eating, cirinking, ‘etc., and ill health, ^accordingly ; also
extravagance an<J useless ‘ expenditure. To women it
sometimes disturbs the generative system; to men
danger of venereal diseases.
. Sun to the Ascendant '
Conjunction or Parallel
If thq Sun bte strong and fortunate, in Aries, Leo or
Sagittarius," and has no advtrse aspects, gain by public
favors from powerful people, advancement, employment,

F*YRT III, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES 497
increase of rffJotation and credit ; but at the same time
liable to ill health through inflammatory complaints. To
military men great preferment is indicated.
If the Sun be Sfflicted by the malefics, danger to life
is threatened and trouble through the head, eyes and
hijart especially.
If the Sun be in conjunction with Mars, danger by
fire ot firearms and accidents of a Martian nature.
Sextile or TrinS
Health of body, peace of mind, favor from persons in
authority, new friends, some elevation in rank, according to the native’s social position. Women usually
aisiry or have a son under this aspect, or receive social
distinction.
Square or Opposition
Piseass according to the position of Sun. Envy and
enmity of persons in power; loss of employment and
credit,; danger to the father and in some cases danger of
imprisonment, if Sifn was heavily afflicted at birth.
Traveling, changes, speculation, risky ventures, excitement and over-exertion should bt? avoided during this
aspect.
Mars to the Ascendant
ConjSnction, Parallel, Square or Opposition
Tends to over-positivity, » rash, hot-headed, sarcastic
eftmbative attitudes.
Accidents or disease, according to the position of Mars.
If Mars be in a fiery sign, acute fever* or accidents by
fire; in eafthly signs, danger of suffocation, especially
if in bad aspect to Saturn in radix; in Taurus, small-pox
or diphtheria; in the human signs, danger of -homicide,
or of being killed in a qifarrel or battle; *n a wjtery
;»ign, danger of a fall from a height, or ^cute fever.
Women will be in danger through the opposite sex. , *

OENETHHACAL ASTROLOGY
Of course, if Mars was well placed iri tfie radix and
had no bad aspects'very little of the foregoing would
transpire.
Sextile or Trine .
This inclines the native to {ravel, sport, health exercises; to enter the army or navy, study medicine, svrgery or chemistry or become an engineer, according to
the radix*! Women sometimes marry under this influence. Benefits the health, strengthens the constitution,
increases the passions. The native assumes new res^ >nsibilities, enters into new projects. Very active.
Jupiter to the Ascendant
Conjunction, Parallel, Sextile or Trine
Stimulates growth and increases size or weight of the
body. This is fortunate for health and all affairs, prosperity, conviviality, new friends, advancement, favors,
marriage, birth of children, inherited property, according
to condition of the radix. Gives interest in travel, foreign
affairs* education, philosophy and philanthropy.
Square or Opposition
An indifferent stay; of health, often due ,to plethora.
If Jupiter.be afflicted by Mars, danger of measles,
scarlatina, small-pox, pleurisy, etc. A bad time to deal
with lawyers, bankers, brokers or speculators. Extravagant expenditure, tfarelessness, conviviality, misjudgment. Loss throygh loans, indebtedness, heavy liabilities or excessive overhead. *
If The radical Jupiter was in conjunction with ascendant,* or afflicted, it maj bring serious illness (but not
necessarily fatal), arising from some disease 'of the
lungs, liver, blood or hips.
Saturn to the Aicendant
Conjunction, Parallel, Square or Opposition
If 'Saturn be Oriental (in the eastern half of the chart,,
between the cusp of ti?e tenth and fourth houses,) a

tPART in, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES 499
serious accideijt^ or a broken limb ; if Occidental (the
western haif of chart between ftfidheaven and Nadir,)
danger of severe illness. In some cases this indicates a
heavy cold with danger of fatal results ;*in others, melancholia and st^cidal mania. Depression, restriction,
delays, disappointment and many annoyances.
To women, dangerous 'internal diseases, possibility of
disappointment or disgrace in love or matrimony.
Sextile or Trine
Gain by elderly persons, legacies, mining, building,
purchase or sale of lands, houses. Benefits the health,
strengthens the constitution and produces many satisfactory conditions. Inclines to peace of mind, rest and
feelings of security.
Uranus to the Ascendant
Conjunction, Parallel, Square or Opposition
This sholvs sudden losses (probably by railroads,
airplanes, large corporations or inventions), disappointments, and if Uranus be afflicted, injuries; sudden journeys (if in a cardinal or common sign), and changes of
bccupation. Estrangement and domestic difficulties.
Strange feelings, thoughts and desires; rebellious, eccentric, radical, impulsive, spasntodic and given to sudden resolutions or changes in plans. Unexpected personal affronts.
Sextile or T(ine
Gain of a totally unexpected nature; fortiftiate journeys, removals, active business, also a desire to study
•or investigate occult science. Increases the intuition
and inventive faculty. Favors telepathy, clairvoyance
and *lsot new friendships; changes, reforms, -improvements and new interests.
Neptune to the Ascendant
Conjunction or Parallel
If adversely configurated in the radix, it now inclines
to produce indescribable feelings and emotions, queer

PEjNETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
likes, dislikes, attractions and aversion* Interest in
things of a mysterious or psychical nature. Desire to
travel.
Sextile or Trine
Pleasant and peaceful conditions. Interest in art(
music, drama and psychical affairs. Correct premonitions, impressions or dreams. Gain bjr means of travel
or liquids, oil, drugs, the cinema and things of a mysterious nature.
Squire or Opposition
Affects the health adversely and produces negative,
lethargic states. Danger through liquids, drugs, anaesthetics and psychical affairs. Liability to domestic complications, also to deception, misunderstanding or fraud. v
Danger on voyages.
Note: ^If the approximate time of blrtn Is not known, do not
direct planets to the Cusps of Houses, hut watch for events and
conditions by the transits of planets to the planets' places of
birth, and to the place (conjunction) or* to the aapeet of progressed planets when*such are themselves engaged In some aspect.
"Fnll often learn the art to know
.Of future weal, or future woe.
By word, or aftn, or star.” — Scott

PART III, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPBa 801
PROGRESSED ASPECTS TO THE* MIDAEAVEN
Of the' Progressed or the .Radix Chart
’Moort to the Midheaven*
Conjunction or Parallel
•If the Moon be strong and fortunate at birth : honor,
renown, advantageous changes, traveling an^ popularity. JVfen usually marry under this influence. But if
the Moon be weak and adversely configurated in the
radix, losses and unproductive journeys or voyages
result, and the wife or mother ^suffers. Public.disfavor.
Sextile or Trine
Increase of substance, popularity, honors, gifts, favors
from women. Active business and traveling are indicated, if from movable signs. To men it may mean marriage, or increase in business, improvement of position.
Square or Opposition
This brings unpopularity, scandals, quarrels with
women, suffering of wife or mother, public discredit and
family disputes, according to the position of the Moon,
“whether in^'the seventh, first or feurth.
Note: The Moon brings the foregoing into action in
accordance with its aspects, dignjty, etc., in. the radix,
and in proportion to its natal strength.
Mercury to tfe Midheqven
Conjunction or, Parallel
If. hJerchry Jbe strong, (in Gemini or Virgo, or fn- a
cardinal house) gain by literary pifrsuits, traveling, «
teaching, etc.
If Mercury’ be afflicted, (in the prog’fessfd*or radix)
libel, legal difficulties, .unfortunate trading, many iusitiess worries and annoyances.

GENETH LI AC AL ASTROLOGY
Sextile or Trine , ,
Preferment, honor and increase of business, according
to the strength and situation of Mercu-'y in the radix.
Children are often first sent .to school and young people to college or honorary degrees are granted under this
influence. It usually produces a change of residence ®r
travel in .connection with business.
Square or Opposition
Troubles and losses are indicated, also danger of lawsuits, unjust sentences," libels and false accusations.
Death of a child, cousin or neighbor frequently happens
under this influence. Trouble through writings, promises or publishing.
Venus to the Midheaven
Conjunction, Parallel, Sextile or Trine
This brings mirth, gaiety, pleasure-seeking, renewal
of furniture, clothing, free expenditure, advancement in
artistic pursuits, the birth of children and general prosperity. Love affairs commence and marriage often takes
place under this influence. Indicates social distinction,
honors and, favorable publicity.
Square or Opposition
Indicates scandal or annoyance on the part 'of women ;
loss of credit or reputation, extravagance, and, in some
cases, dissipation.1 The mother, wife or sister suffers in
heajth or other inconveniences; business and financial
troubles.
,.Sun to the Midheaven '
Conjunction or Parallel
Honors', advancement and increase of substance. To
unmfarried women it usually indicates marriage. But if
.the Sun is adversely configurated with the malefics, or it:

PART III, DEJLI NEAyiONS FOR HOROSCOPES 503
conjunction with fixed stars of a violent natifre, it will
bring dispufej* and possibly - misfortune of a public
nature ; danger to the mother. Otherwise it denotes
distinction.
Sextile or Trine
.This is an elevating ‘influence, and if the nativity
promises it, brings renown, great advancement, honors,
popularity, credit^
It ‘also benefits the native’s parents. Public offices are
often gained under this influence. To women it brings
marriage or employment of a public nature, and social
advancement.
Square or Opposition
This often brings loss of office or employment, bad
trading, disgrace and sometimes bankruptcy and imprisonment. One of the parents suffers or may die.
Married women may lose their husbands under this
influence.*
Mars to the Midheaven
< Conjunction, Parallel, Square or Opposition
This is an adverse influence as it denotes quarrels,
losses, firps, thefts and fraud. STo military men and
surgeons the’ conjunction brings advancement, but it is
attended with some danger. The parents suffer in some
respect.
Misfortunes are sure to result if changes and speculations be made while this Martian aspect is in operation.
Sextile or Trine
This signifies an active and prosperous period; especially for Martians. Busy, industrious, constructive. .
• Note: Denoisp rarely bccurs by one direction alone. It requires
several directions tailing at the same time, or ,a Very malign
transit to the direction while "the hyleg Is afflicted, of the horoJcope under consideration.

GENETHLIACAL ,ASTROJ.OGY
Military and naval men, surgeons, dentists, police, etc.,
gain preferment. Generally a journey-is %aken and new
business plans arranged of an aggressive order. '
•Jupiter to the Midheaven
Conjunction, Parallel, .Sextile or Trine
Preferment, honors, increase of wealth, benefits frofn
persons jn power, general happiness and prosperity.
Social advancement, business expansion.
Single women usmlly marry under this aspect. To
merchants it brings increase of trade ; to the clergy, preferment; to lawyers, advancement and high repute. A
good time to begin new undertakings if no other testimonies conflict.
Square or Opposition
This chiefly brings heavy expenses and disputes with
professional persons ; nothing very adversfe unless Jupiter be much afflicted in the radix, which gives tendency
to los? through banks, speculation or risky enterprises.
Not a good time to loan money or sjgn bail bonds.
Saturn to the Midheaven
f
Conjunction, Parallel, Square or Opposition
This ihcjjcates family troubles and losses or death of
a parent or employer, ‘loss of reputation and credit, theft,
fraud arty unpopularity; merchants- and tradesmen lose
heavily in speculative transactions and through general
depression and limitations.
Sextile or Trine
This shows pecuniary gain by farming, mining, building, legates, favor and friendship of old people. Business and domestic conditions become mor.e secure and
favorable.*

PART lit, DELINEATIONS FOR HOROSCOPES 505
Uranus to the Midheaven
• Conjunction, Parallel, Square or Opposition
This is often attended by a sudden d^ath in the family;
pecuniary loss^and troubles of a strange nature; disappointment in lpve and marriage; separation or estrangements. Peculiar mental condition and impulsiveness.
Great desire for change, unexpected opposition, governmental interference, business changes, discredit.
Sextile or Trine
Sudden and unexpected gain; sudden changes or
traveling of an advantageous nature; favor ‘and friendship of Uranian persons. Promotion and business advancement. Benefit by municipal or progressive affairs.
Neptune to the Midheaven
Conjunction or Parallel
If badly afflicted in the radix, it brings on peculiar
difficulties, discredit, deception and business complications. But if well aspected in the radix, it will operate
much the same as the sextile or trine.
Sextile or Trim.
Increase' of trade, benefits through voyages, shipping,
liquids, oils, drugs or psychical affairs. Credit and
esteem through progressive or peculiar achievement.
Square or Opposition
Danger of loss, disdredit, business comp.lications,
scandal, misunderstanding, deception, fraud and .treachery, especially in connection with things mentioned in
the preceding paragraph.
Pluto to the Midheaven
What h&s previously been said concerning the effects
of Pluto's influence also’ applies here. (See pages, 422 and

SOS
QENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
Note: A'lthougfi the foregoing delineations ’indicate
the influence of progressed aspects, they’alsp serve to
delineate the aspects df transiting planets. Allow an
8-degree orb for jnajor aspects by transiting planets.
When a planet progresses or transits rto conjunction
of Midheaven, it is then also irr opposition to cusp of
fourth house, and square to ascending and descending,’
cusps providing there are no intercepted signs. Consequently, a judicious interpretation is required of each
indication suitable to that particular individual’s nature
and environment, in order to form a correct judgment
of the combined influences.
PROGRESSED OR TRANSITING ASPECTS
TO RADIX PLANETS OR CUSPS
A planet may progress to an aspect of its own place
in the radix as illustrated and delineated on fiage 183.
To illustrate, suppose that Jupiter is progressing or
transiting through the fourth house when making a sextile to its own radical place. We know that the sextile
is a benefic aspect ‘and that the fourth house has to ^o
with the domestic life, land, property and mines, therefore the aspect would indicate a good period for matters
relating to those things. If the aspect had been a square,
instead of k textile, then of course matters relating to
those things would provfc unfavorable. ,
It should be remembered that if a transiting or progressing planet is forming an aspect with a radical
planet €tfie delineation should be based upon the influences of the house positions of these two in the radical
chart, ■
'But'K sifeh planet is forming an aspect to a progressed
planet, the delineation should be based upon the houses
occupied by tjie aspfccting planets in the progressed chart.
See nete on page 494.

SOI
PART 1?. RECTIFICATION
A to Z Horoscope Maker and Delineator
PART IV
RECTIFICATION of BIRTH TIME
"When the planets
In. evil mixture, to disordor wander,
What plagues ! and what portents ! "what mutiny !
What raging of the sea ! shaking of the earth !
Commotion of the winds !i’ — Shakespeare
Index to Part IV on next page.

QENETHLIACAL ASTROLOpY
irflDEX to Part XV
Page
Approximate Birth Times, How to rectify 509
Fractional Degrees of Latitude, How to interpolate
the common Tables of Houses *to find Equivalent
of Longitude for parts of a degree . . 526 — 527
Minutes of Longitude, Nearest, How to Correct the
Ascendant 526
Rectification of Birth Tillies, Suggestions . . 509
Aspect to»Midheaven, for Planet East . . 512
Aspect to Midheaven, for Planet West . . . 515
Midheaven, Conjunction of Planet with; for
Planet East 510
Midheaven, Conjunction of Planet with ; for
Planet West 510
Nadir, Conj. of Planet with: for Planet East . 511
Nadir, Conj. of Planet with : for Planet West . 511
Seconds of Time, Nearest, How to correct the Birth
time to * 523
Time of Birth, To find 514
Unknown Birth Times, How to find Them , V . 527
Illustration fbr erecting Chart when Birth Time is
Unknown 530
Tables
Longitude to S. T. Approximate Relation of . 524
R. A. with corresponding S..T., Aries to Virgo . 518 — 19
R. A. .with corresponding S. T., Libra to Piscfs . S20-i-2)
Right Ascension to Sidereal Time, Relation of . 523

PART IT, RECTIFICATION
RECTIFICATION OF THE BIRTH TIME
Approximate Birth Tiipes
These rules are for rectifying a given or approximately
t known birth time by rfteans of events, to find the exact
•zodiacal degree ascending in the natal chart and to obtain
the correct time of birth.
ft the approximate time of birth is known, erect a
chart for that time and from it cljoose the planet to work
with which rules the house signifying the event or the
person, as' for instance: Rtlier of the sevefith for the
partner (marriage, business, or any other form of partnership) ; ruler of fourth for father, ruler of tenth for
mother, ruler of third for brother or sister, ruler of
sixth for sickness and accidents of the querent, etc.
Abbreviations: M. D., meridian distance; A. E., arc of
event ; R. A- M., right ascension of Midheaven ; M. C.,
medium coeli or longitude of Midheaven; R. A., right
ascension ; S. T., sidereal time.
Use events whit h occurred before the age of thirty
"and always the first and most pronftunced in its effect
orf the native. When the event is death of a parent and
Saturn is" found near the cusp of the tenthfor fourth, use
it (Saturn) as significator of the event instead of the
ruler of the parent’s house, or if cither Uranus, Saturn
or Mars be in eighth house, use it. When the event is
a long /burner and change of residence and Uranus is
found near cusp of" fourth Jiousc, try it as the significator.
’ Next find the A. E. as follows :
Fformthe^year, month and date of the month in* which
the event occurred subtract the date of birth, Convert
the answer into degrees and minutes by allowing one
degree for each year, five minutes for each month, and
one. minute for each six days over a ’month.

OENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
Example
This answer converted would be 15* 12* A. E.
Next find ‘the R. A. (irrespective of the latitude) of the
planet by which you wish to rectify. (Refer to Tabic of
Right Ascensions on pages 518 to 521.) The R. A. of a
planet in the 7th degree of the sign Leo is 129* 24'. The
R. A., or arc of a planet, is- its distance from the 1st degree of Aries measured along the equatorial circle.
If the planet in question be situated from the M. C.
about an equal number of degrees to those constituting
the arc of event then work it to a conjunction with the
upper meridian.
Conjunction With Upper Meridian
Planet East
If the planet is east of the upper- meridian, subtract
the A. E. from the'R. A. of the planet, and the remainder
will be the rectified R. A., or arc of Midheaven. Find this
figure of R. A., or arc, in the Tables of Right Ascension
and note what zodiacal sign and degree of longitude it
represents! then enter an appropriate Table of Houses,
find that sign and degree on cusp of tenth house and fill
in the othfer cusns of the chart from tbe table in the
usual way.
If the R. A. of the planet is too small to be subtracted'
from, add 360 to it, then subtract the A. E. and use the
remaihder, which is the R. A. M.
Conjunction With Upper Meridian
Planet West
If the planet is west of the upper meridian, add the
A.. E. to the planet’s right ascension, and the sum will

PART IV. RECTIFICATION
be the rectified R. A. M. Find this figure of R. A. in
the -Tables of Right Ascensions »and note what zodiacal
sign and degree of longitude it represents, then enter an
appropriate Table >of Houses with th?.t sign and degree
on cusp of Tenth, House and fill in the other cusps of
the chart from, the tabjes in the usual manner.
If after adding the A. E. to R. A. of the planet the
sum comes to more than 360 (a complete ^circle), subtract 360 from it and use the remainder, which is the
Conjunction With the liower Meridian
If the planet in question is in the third, fourth or fifth
house (providing it is nearer to the cusp of fifth than to
cusp of sixth), it should be worked to a conjunction with
the lower meridian.
Planet East of Lower Meridian
If the planet is east of the lower meridian, add the A.
E. to the R. A. of the planet, then add 180 to, that and
th^ sum will be the rectified R. A. M.
If after adding, the sum exceeds «360, then subtract
360 from it and use the remainder, which will be the R.
Find this figure of R. A. in the Tables of Right Ascensions and note what zodiacal sign and degree it represents; t^ien enter an appropriate Table of Houses with
that sign and degree on cusp of tonth house and fill in
the other cusps of the chfcrt from the table in the usual
manner.
Planet West of Lower Meridian
" If the planet is west of the lowe» meridian, subtract
the A. E. from the R. A. of the planet, then adtf 180 to
that ana the sura will be the rectified R. A. M.
It tlie R. A. of the, planet is too small tt> be subtracted
from, add 360 to it, then subtract the A. E. To’ the remainder add 180 and if the stjm exceeds 360 subtract 360

GENETHLIACAL ASTBOLOGY
from it. Find this last result in figures of R. A. in Tables
of Right Ascension ana- note what zodiacal sign and degree of longitude jit represents; then enter an appropriate
Table of Houses with that sign and degree on cusp of
tenth house and fill in the other cusps of the chart from
the Tables of Houses in the usual manner.
When your work is complete and the rectified chart
made by either of the above processes* the “Meridian
Distance" of the planet must be equal to the A. E.,-> regardless of whether the planet was east or west of the
lower meridian.
“Meridian Distance" is the distance between the R. A.
of the meridian (R. A. M.) and the R. A. of the planet.
Subtract one from the other and if the remainder is equal
to the A. E. the work has been done correctly. Do not
direct to the lower meridian with any aspect but the
conjunction.
Rectification by ASPECTS to the Midheaven
If you find, by the position of the planet in the approximate chart, that the event was not caused by a conjunction to one of the meridians, but by an aspect, count the
number of degrees the .planet is from the M.-C., make
note of this figure and call it the meridian distance, or
Note: Count the nurilber of degrees the chosen planet
is from thfc M. C., make a note of the figure and call it
the M. D. ; next jot down the figure of the A. E., then
refer to.the Table of Right Ascensions and find the R.
A. of the planet which rules the house of the matter in
the approximate chart and jot it down with the other
two* ’You now have the necessary element? with which
to begin the operation.
Rule for Planet Blast : If the chosen planet is east of
the M. C., (between second and tenth cusps on left hand
side of j:hart) Subtract the A. E: from the M. D. (When
the A. E. canjiot be subtracted from the M. D. the rule
mdst.be wqrleed by conjunction instead of by aspeet.)

PART IV, rfECTIFIOATION B18
Then take the de,gfees of an aspect nearest to this number, (when this figure comes very c(ose to a tie between
two aspects, try the rule to both aspects and decide on
the one which i.earest answers to the requirements of
the case) and add them to the A. E. Then subtract the
sum from the R. A. of th^ planet. The answer will be
the R. A. M. Now turn to the Table of Right Ascensions
an8 find what sign and degree of the zodiac this derived
R. A. M. represents.
When once you know what sign and degree are to go
on the Midheaven, the rest of the#work is quite easy.
Just enter a Table of Houses for the proper latitude, find
that desired sign and degree on*the cusp of tenth house
and then fill in the other cusps of the chart from the
Table of Houses in the usual manner.
Example For Planet East of Midheaven
The following elements are presented as an example
to illustrate the method of procedure when the chosen
planet is east of the Midheaven :
Native born Oct. 27, 1862, about 6:35 a. m., ‘mean
local time, in lat. 41 N., long. 82 W. (£l 12° on M.C., the
Right Ascension of wffich is 134° 28'). T^he event is marriage at age of 22 years and 8 months which is 22° 40* arc
of event. (Married June 27, 1885.)
Taurus will be found governing the cusp of seventh
house (house of marriage) in the approximate,cffart and
as Venus rgles this sign it is the cflosen planet. Venus
is approximately «13 degrees in Libra, whose R. A. is,
therefore, approximately 201® 16' See page 518.
Elements :
R. Ar of .Venus 201°16' approximately (S in =* 2$°)
M. D. of Veribs 66°48' approximately
44°08' for indicating the aspect.

GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
The nearest Uspect to this figure is the semi-square,
i. e., 45°, so 45 plus 22°40' equals 67°M¥; which is to be
subtracted from the,R. A. of Venus, viz.,
201° 16' approximate R. A. 9
Reference to the Table of Right Ascensions will show
that this is approximately Leo 11 degrees.
Turn to the Tabic of Houses for latitude 41 N., find
Leo 11 pn cusp of tenth, house and fill in the remaining
cusps of the chart in the usual manner.
To ascertain the time of birth, note the S. T. given in
the Table of Houses when Leo 11 is on cusp of tenth,
take note also of the S. T. given in the Ephemeris for
noon on the day of birth and follow this procedure
always :
To Find the Time of Birth
Rule: From ,thc S. T. at birth1' always subtract the
S. T. as per Ephemeris at noon (adding the circle of 24
to S. T. at birth if neoessary) and the answef will be the
time of birth in p. m.; but, if the answer is more than
12 hours, subtract 12 from it and the remainder is the
time of fiirih in a. m.t
Note:‘The Sidereal Time at noon is ‘that given in the
Ephemeris on your birthdajb
The S. T. at birth is that given in the Table of Houses
(latitude of birth place) when your corrected sign and
degfee are on the M. C. according to R. A. M.
In this* case the S. T. at birth is approximately 8.54
when £1 11° is qp the M. C.
S. T. at noon on birthday is 14.22= Oct. 27, 1862.

PART* IV. I&ICTIFICATION.
Add 24 hours. tp#8:54, which equals 32.54
(so as Co subtract the 14 :22 •— 14.22=S. T. noon.
Corrected mean local time of birth, 6 :32 a. m. To reduce such birth time to the nearest second, proceed as
shown in example iollowing under the taole, ‘.Relation
of Sidareal Time to Right Ascension," page 523.
Planet West of Midheaven
When the chosen planet of the event is west of the
M. C. (between tenth and sixth cusps on right hand
side of chart) the process of working the rule is the reverse to the method just given for a planet east.
Rule: Find the R. A. of the planet; find the M. D. of
the planet ; find the A. E. Add the A. E. to the M. D.,
choose the aspfcct nearest this figure, subtract the A. E.
from this chosen aspect and add the remainder to the R."
A. of the planet. The answer will be the R. A. Jt. If
the suin comes to m^re than 360, subtract that circle
from it and use the remainder as the R. A. M.
Enter a Table of Right Ascension Vith this last named
figure and find what sign and degree of the* zodiac it
represents, then find that sign and degree on qusp of
tenth house in appropriate Table qf Houses and from
that point in»the tables cast the chart in the usual qjanner.
To ascertain the time of bis'th, note tjie S. T. given in
tht»Table of Houses, note tfie S. T. given in the EpHemeris on birthday and with these fwo follow instructions
as given»in tjhe example preceding headed, “To Find the
Time of Birth.”*
Example For Planet West of M. C.
Example' for correcting a birth time by evfnt of marriage at age of 26 years: Born July 10, 1878, about 9:30
a.* m., lat. 45 north.

GENETHLIACAL. A3TR0LOGY
An approximate chart will show Pisces 'on cusp of
house of marriage (seventh house). 'Ne’p^une, the ruler
of Pisces, is in 9 degrees of Taurus = 36’ 36* R! A.
Elements :
R. A. Neptune 36.36
M. D. Neptune about... .33.
33. M. D. of Neptune.
59. nearest aspect to this is. sextile, i. e.,
60 degrees.
This is the R. A. M. Reference to the Table of Right
Ascension shows that 70.36 represents Gemini 12* d‘.v
cusp of tenth house. Turn to Table of Houses for latitude 45* N., find Gemini 12" on cusp of tenth and fill in
the other cusps in the usual manner.
To*find the time of birth, note the S. T. as given in
the Table of Houses, (4.42) note S. T. as giyen in
Ephemeris on birthday, (7.13) subtract the latter from
the former according to rule given in preceding example
headed, “To Find the Time of Birth," and tfje answer is
9:29 a. m.j in fact, the given approximate "time had been
recorded by the parents as 9:30 a. m.
Note: ’Actually the above R. A. M., 70* fWS’ = n 12*
07' because R. A. Table sfcpws 70* 29' t H 12'". In other
words, the R. A. M. derived is seven minutes more than
show/i in R. A. Table (7O**20’)f hence the M. C. is increased by seven minutps
As the M. C. was increased by 7 miijutes thh S. T.
should be increased correspondingly. (See table on page
523*headed, "Relation of S. T. to R. A.” by, which you
will see that 7 minutes increase in R. A. increases the
S. T. 28 seconds: 4' to each T of R. A. • Consequently
the #S. T. dt birth is increased. 28 seconds more than
shown in the table : ,

pabt’iv, rectification .
S. T. Birth 4.41:59 (See Table of Houses)
pluS :28 (See R. A. Table, page 523)
4?42 :2?=*corrected S. T. for*n 12*07’ M.C.
The S. T. given, for noon in Ephemeris, July 10, 1878
9.29:21 a. n>. = time of birth.
By correcting the R. A. M. and the S. T. correspondingly, as shown in this example, the birth time is corrected to the nearest second.
Experiment with scores of known birth times proves
(as in one example given herein) that Uranus and Nep- *
tune rule Aquarius and Pisces, respectively, and' that
Satum'.and Jupiter do not, as some authors would have
us believe. Investigation shows, also, thjt the tredecile,
aspect. (108 degrees) though much neglected, is important and should be observed not alone in this work, but
also in directions. Likewise the other minor aspects.
(Continued on page 522.)
The R.»A. ft a planet varies slightly In accordance with the
planet’s latitude. For Instance, Page 513 glve&9 R. A. 201* 16’.
If the latitude of Venus on that date was 1 21 K. the equivalent
R. A. would he 201* 45’. For simplicity Id these examples the
planets’ R. A. Is given without, or regardless qf, their latitude.
The tables of R. A. on pages 518 — 21 quote R. A. "without latitude.
Midheaven degrees have no latitude Those who deSlre to work
, these rules with greater precision will find In the book “Rectlflcatlan of The Horoscope,” by DeLuce, tables of R. A, tor latitudes

GENETHLIACAIi ASTROLOGY
Table of Right Ascensions
With Corresponding Sidereal Time

PARt IV, hECTIFICATIOIf
T
30 degrees haa the same R. A. and 4 T. as 0 degrees of the
succeeding signs.
Explanation
.The first column on the* lift designStes the degrees of
zodiacal signs. On the same line.with the zodiacal degree
in the six columns, will be found figures of sidereal time.
Directly undesneath the sidereal time are the figures of
corresponding Right Ascension, or Arc, as it is sometimes
called. The last figure in the R. A. refers to lenths of
a minute, i. 6 seconds of R. A. A pltyiet in 2 degrees
of the' sign Taurus would, have R. A. 29.49 ;(W. When
2 degrees of the sign Taurus are culminating on M. C.

QBMETHLIACAL .ASTRQLOOY
Table of Right Ascensions
With Corresponding Sidereal Time
0 degrees has the same R. A. and S.'TI as 3(/' of the preceding
sign.
Dag. Libra. Scorpio. Sagltt.« Capri. 'Aquar. Placaa.
t

PAJyr IV, .RECTIFICATION
D*g. * Libra. Scorpio. Sagltt. Capri. Aquar. * Plaeaa.
Explanation
The first column. on ttysJeft designates the degrees of
iodiacal signs. On the same line with the zodiacal degree, in the six columns, wilf be found the figures of
sidprtfal time. Directly underneath the sidereal time .are
the figures of* corresponding Right Ascension, or Arc, as,
it is sometimes called. The last figure in the R. A. refers
to tenths of a minute, i. e., 6 seconds o.f R. A. A planet
in 2°. of. the" sign, Scorpio, would have R., A. 209.49 :04.
When 2* of the sign, Scorpio, culminate on M. £. the

GENETHLLACAL ASTROLOGY
(Continued from page, 517.()
When in an approximate chart you find a planet
posited in the hquse ruling the event, it i§ better to take
that planet as the ruler of the event rather than the ruler
of the sign on the cusp, providing- of 'course that the
planet ruling the sign is posited in somfc other house. If
the correction is to be made by event of death and yoi.
find Saturn in the eighth house, take it as the planet to
work by rather than the planet which pules the house of
the person. In the case of event of sickness, and Saturn
is found in the house of sickness, take it rather than the
planet which rules tHfc house denoting the person. If
several planets are in the «house ruling the ihatter, take
the one which best describes the matter or the one having strongest dignity therein, if the ruler of the sign
itself is not there.
Remember that the time derived from either of these
processes is mean local time, i. e., real or Sun time, and
not standard or clock time. There is a difference from
one to thirty minutes between mean and standard time
iifthe various hour zones in this country, as can readily
be seen by reference to a Zone Time Map.
The aspects that can be used are the vigintile, 18 degrees; quindecile, 24 degrees; semi-sextile, 30 degrees;
decile, 36 degrees; senti-square, 45 degrees; stextile, 60
degrees; quirttile, 72 degrees; square, 90 degrees; tredecile, 108 degrees; trine, 120 degrees; scsquiquadrate, 135
degrees; bi-quintile, 14-^ degrees ; quincunx, 150 degrees;
and the 'exjunction. The opposition aspect is^not employed. The aspects are always directed to M. C., but
conjunctions may be; used on either M. C. or Nadir.
A Note in Connection with Chart No. 33 on page 170.
The given birth time was “about 1 a. m.” Rectification
by event t>4 demise of brother at the native’s ^ge of 10
years, 7 months and 6 days, gives 0.45:46 a. m. as the
corrected mgan lorfal time of birth.

PART IV, » RECTIFICATION
Relation o{ Right Ascension to Sidereal* Time
The Above Table is Especially Useful in Reducing the
Birth Time Derived Through the "Arc of Event”
Method of Rectification to the Nearest Second of Time.
Illustration : Take the Example for Planet East of
Midheaven (on page 514) in which the derived R. A -M.
is 133* 36'. Reference to the table of R. A. shows the
neat -st to this is 133* 27' 30" which corresponds to Leo
11*. In other words, these figures need to be increased
to /reet our larger R. A. M.
, .08' 36' = amount of increase
in R. A. necessary. Add 8' 30' to, given lorfgitude for
Leo 11*08'30" = correct M. C.
To ascertain how much to change' the given fudereaj
make it correspond to 133* 36’ in example, the difference
(8y?) Is used to enter above table of ■'Relation of Right
Ascension to SidereAl ’Time” wherein it is shown that
8J4' increase in R. A. at rate of 4' to eaeh T of R. A.

GENBTHUtACAL ASTROLOGY
equals 34' to be added to the given S. T. 8.53 :50
at birth which corresponds to the require! R. A. 133*36'.
8.54:24 S. T. (Transposed to 32.54:24 by adding
6.3203 a. m. = time of birth corrected to the nearest second;
Table of the Approximate Relation of Longitude
to Sidereal Time
1' of Long. = 4 s of S. T.
2* of Long. = 8 s of S. T.
& of Long. = 24 s of S. T.
W of Long. =£ 40 s of S. T.
If of Long. = 56 s of S. T.
l& of Long. = 64s'or 1 m 4 s of S. T.
30f, of Long. — 120 s or 2 m of S%T.
60'jof Lofig. = 240 s or 4 m of S. T.
On page 64 is a Table of Correction to Sidereal Time
for Parts of an Hour.

PAST IV, • RECTIFICATION 525
The foregoing table is useful for correcting the midheaven degree to the nearest minute of longitude. Charts
made' for time of New Moons, Eclipses, Solar Ingresses,
etc., in which ^he exact M. C. is not ascertained by means
of “rectification" sh'ould show the M. C. in degrees and
minutes if careful calculation is required. As the Tables
of Houses quotd the M. C. by sign and degree only, this
lable and the following example will serve to find the
necessary minutes.
Example
Chart desired for September 26th, 1884, at 0:58 a. m.,
— 1 :50 correction for 1 1 hrs. before noon.
+ :80 cprrection for 120* West longitude.
— 11.02:00 amount of time born before noon.
» Reference to the Table of Houses f^r 40* N. Latitude
(psige 175) shows the nearest Sidereal Time to this is
1.21 :20 which gives M. C. T 22*» As the T. H. gives a
larger S. T. 'than desired the given M. C. will also be in
excess. Therefore :
Less S.*T. at Ijiirth^ 1.20:17
0.0J ]03 = excess amount qi S. T.
Reference to the foregoing table of "Relation of Longitude^ to Sidereal Time” for lm03s of S. T. shows.it to
equal 16' of Longitude. Therefore subtract that amo’unt
from the M. C. given in the T. H..
T 21*44'00* = corrected M. C.

GENETHLIACAL ASTROIsOGY
This 16' of excess longitude on the .M. C. may not
appear important in most cases but in a Solar directional
aspect to the M. C. it might cause a prediction to be
about 3 months ki error. , ,
Thus it is seen that the table "ReJatL/n of Longitude
to Sidereal Time" is used only for correcting Midheaven
degrees.
How to Interpolate a Correction to the
Aacendint Longitude Given in a Table of Houses
The ascendant is to be corrected an amount calculated
by the rule of proportionals. In this case the Table of
Houses gives the ascendapt as St 4' 51'; the correction
to it in proportion to 16' subtracted from the given M. C.
would be 12' 36”, which, when subtracted from the given
T. H. asc. SI 4” 51' = St 4° 38' 24' as the corrected ascendant for Latitude 40“ North.
The process is as follows: (see page 175.)
H M S
For convenience let us say :
3m 45s of S. T. is Equivalent to 45' of long, on Asc.
(3m 45s reduced equal^. 225 seconds)
(45' reduced pquals 2700")
225s of S. T. is equivalent to 2700' of longitude.
That is, one second of §. T. is equivalent to 12" of long.
1 K)3 (The equivalent of lm3s of S. T. is to be
subtracted from the T. H. Asc. longitude a 4* fl’)
lm3s (63s) X 12* = 756" or 12’ 36’ to be subtracted
from’tho given ascendant, thus:
a 4* 51*00" Asc. as per Table of Houses,
a 4* 38’ 24" = corrected ascendant.

PABJ1 XV, RECTIFICATION
Correction to Latitude of T. of H.
Exacting students will have noticed that, because the Tables of
Houses give values only to the even degree,. It almost always
becomes necessary*, In using them, for an astrologer to Interpolate
for the odd minutes of latitude for birth place.
We have heretofore, for simplicity and convenience, used exactly 40 degrees of latitude, but as before said, the exactly even
degrees of latitude are rarely found In any case; therefore an
Interpolation for the ’odd minutes of latitude should ITe instituted.
SupptAc the latitude had been 40° 28' instead of exactly 40°.
Then we would take the nearest tubular value of 40° and find out
how much the ascendant Increases at 41^of latitude. In this case
the difference Is 29'. (Using Simplified Tables of Houses.) You
merely multiply the excess minutes of latitude and tabular
differences (of longitude) together and divide by 60,* the quotient
being the extra minutes and seconds required, thus: 28 multiplied
\jy 29 equals 812, divided by 60=13' 32" to be addedt to the
* Ascendant previously corrected to 4' 38' 24", which gives 4' 51’ 56"
of Leo ascending at time of birth, in 40° 28' of latitude.
* (When the multiplication provides a figure less than 60 It la the
answer in desired number of seconds for correction.) — ...
t (It was added In this case because the ascendant 1c» desired
latitude la greater or advanced ; that Is, the ascendant degrees in
next Satitude (41°) are larger. But had it been less, the correction would be subtra?ted.)
Unknown Birth Times
One way to discover a person’s Ascendant* at birth:
Rule: Take note of the time when a persen’asks for
a horoscofjp of himself, refer to “Tfie Improved Perpetual
Planetary Hour Book” and notice which planet rules the
hour in which the question Is asked, fa) It usually rules
tfce sign ascending at thefr*birth; (b* it is in a sign on
birth day which should ascend, at birth time; (c) or it
rules the sign which at birth was on cusp of house of
matter inquired about, as the sixth hoi^se in question "of
sickness.
For instance, a lady inquired aDout sicicness, i nursday,
August 3rd, 1922, at 2.05 p. m., in north latitude 34 degrees. Reference to the Hour Book shows this time to
be ruled by the planet Jupiter, hence, Sagittarius (ruled

GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
by Jupiter) should be on the cusp of her natal sixth house.
This is correct because in this case her biith time was
known and she did have the 20th degree of Sagittarius
on sixth cusp at'birth. It is interesting tc note that twothirds of the planetary hour of Jupiter Ijad passed at the
time of the question, and at birth two-thirds of the sign
Sagittarius had passed the cusp of the'sixth house.
The use of this plan in birth time rectification requires
that the house ruling the question be >correctly chosen.
When the planet ruling the hour is ruler of two zodiacal signs, a little study will show which of the two signs
to choose as they give decidedly different descriptions.
Of course, 'this rule holds good only when the individual
calls or asks in accordance with their own uninfluenced
impressions; if they had a Planetary Hour Book and
chose an hour from that in which to call, this rule could
not then be used. If the request is by mail, take the time ■
you read the letter but preferably the time when the
letter was written if it has been stated by the writer.
Another Rule which may often be applied : Take the
planet ip a man's horoscope which the Moon first aspects
after birth. That planet will almost invariably rule the
sign rising in the wife’s horoscope a* her birth. To make
a chart for her take about the middle of the sign answering her description, which is ruled by this planet, and
you will have a very close approximate chart with which
to apply the rectification rules in order to derive the
exact minute of birth.
In a'woman’s horoscope take the planet whioh the Sun
first aspects after birth, in the same way, and it will
usually rule the husband’s rising sign. If married more
than once take the next planef aspected, as above, and sc
on according to the number of unions.
When none of the foregoing methods are possible we
jarocped js follows*;
Procett when Birth Time it Unknown
When thi hour of birth is unknown we must work to
get the right zodiacal sign on the Ascendant. One way
tp do this is to refer to. "Description of the Ascend-

PAST IV. RECTIFICATION
ant" in Pa'rt III. Study each sign carefully and select
the one which’ be^t describes the native. Erect an approximate chart with about the •middle of that sign
ascending. Take the ruler of the house .which governs
the event, or the persbn’, and use it to work out the rules
relating to “Arcs*of Events" method given in preceding
pages. •
^Another method is to cast a chart for noon on birth
date, study it in connection with the kind pf events
furnished by the native as to sickness, accidents, etc.;
turn the chart around and put each sign successively on
the Ascendant, noticing each time if«the position of chart
then gives testimonies by planetary house position which
tally with the nature of events as known.
Perhaps two or more signs ascending seem to fulfill
the requirements, in which case further study of sign
> characteristics is necessary to determine which best fulfills all conditions. Naturally, there is a chance here to
err in judgment by attributing wrong virtues or influences to planets in the various houses, but a correct
knowledge of the influences of each planet, together witb„
the ability to combine the house and planet influences
will do much to obviate the likelihood of mistakes.
For instance, Saturn ascending would signify a deep
and sensitive nature introspectively trying to fathom the
mystery of Ufe.and improve natural Qualities ; attempting
to ascend above the many limitations, restrictions and
delays encountered on the way. Uranus and Mars in
conjunction in the ninth house woyld signify* accidents
to legs in rugion of ankles or thighs, which would agree
with limitations also signified by Satufn in the first, as
before mentioned. These twp planets ip the ninth would
also give radical experiences and injury in lands foleign
o that of birth; would endow thfc native with great zeal
in the studies of the higher mind, astrology, etc., a«d
would lead himf far from the orthodox, sonventional religions. The sign Gemini on the Midheaven weuldJbestow Mercu'rial proclivities and also incline to business
life.
The instance just mentioned is actual. Saturn •debribes the native’s disposition ; Mercury describes his #

GENETHLIACAL , ASTROLOGY
business) Mars and Uranus in ninth house describe his
scientific and religious tendencies and" also the accident
which maimed his limbs’ in a foreign land/ The "data is
as follows •
Illustration for Erecting Chart
When Birth Time is Unknown
Male, born at Greenwich, England, April 5th, 1863.
Time of ‘birth unknown. Event: Long journey from
England to America on September 5th, 1883. Make a
chart for noon on thf birth date as before explained ; turn
chart around from sign to sign and you will find that
when Virgo 15” rises it 'will nearly place the planets as
desired, i. e., Saturn ascending, Mars and Uranus in
ninth, but Cancer will be on the tenth cusp and we want
Gemini there to correctly describe his business. (Mercurial) However, if you inspect the Table of Houses at th.<*
point of Virgo 15” ascending, you will see that a chart
regularly made at this point with Gemini 11* on M. C.,
would put Mars and Uranus in the tenth, house and we
vvant them in the ninth. Mars and Uranus are in the
17th and 18th degrees of Gemini and to get them in the
ninth house we must make the tenth cusp about 24* II.
Now look in the Table of Houses at the place '•where
Gemini 24” n <*n cusp of tenth. Note the S. T. there
given is 5.33:51, and from it subtract the S. T. at'noon
on birthday, 0.53:10, which equals 4.40 :4L, time of birth
If this dnswer hadtbeen more than 12 hours, we would
subtract 12 hours from iChnd the result is £ m. time of
birth.
Now make a chart for the time thus derived and c’all
it the estimate chart. r Then the approximate time of
binth must be further rectified by the reguiar lules as
given in the first chapter of Part JV. As the event is
thaWf r. long journey, we look to the ruler of the ninth
house, which is Venus. Its longitude at the approximate
'time is about Taurus 12” 57' and the right ascension of

PART IV,* RECTIFICATION
Year Mo. Day
Dat$ of event'. 1883 9.5
Date of birth 1863 4 5
Venus’ M. D! is about 42* west of M. C.
62* 25’ nearest aspect is the sejptile, or 60*.
(The sextil'e aspect of 60* transposed = 59* 6C?.)
80. 05=R. A. M. or Gemini 21* and the S. T. wfc*".
Gemini 21" is on the M. C. is 5.20=S. T. at births
-^-0.53 =S. T.-at noor on birthday.
4.27 p. fa. as correct time of birth.
A chart made in the usual manner for 4:^7 f>. m. will
g've us the testimonies desired, i. A, Saturn in Ascendant,
emini oil M. Q, |apd Mars and Urapus in nirith house,
although, of course, being so close to the tenth cusp they
would be read as influencing that hcAtse also- ,
It may be interesting to note that the client for whom
this, chart ’was made afterward became an accomplished
student of astrology and his studies Verified this, time ,
exactly. ,
(In connection with the use of symbols representing longitude
•and Sidereal Time, please refer to p_sge 548.) ’

QENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
FOR THE STUDENT’S NOTE ^OOK
An Astrologies1 day begins at midnight and is counted
from the first to the twenty-fourth hour.
A Planetary-Hour day begins^ at sunrise.
An Astronomical day begins at midnight and is 1
counted from the first to the twenty-fourth hour.
A Civil day begins at midnight and is counted from
the first to the twelfth hour, and repeats for twelve
hours.
A Nautical day is twenty-four consecutive hours, reckoned from noon to noon.
A Calendar month varies from 28 to 31 days.
A Sidereal or Lunar month is 27 days, 7 hours, 43
minutes, 11 and one-half seconds.
A Synodical month is 29 days, 12 hours, 44 minutes,
2.8 seconds.
Solar year, or the transition from one Vernal
Equinox to another, consists of 365.24244 solar days or
365 days, 5 hours, 48 minutes and 49.536 seconds.
A Julian year is. 365 days; a Gregorian year is 365.2425
days.
Every year, the nurtiber of which is divisible by four
without a remainder, is a leap year, except the last of
the Century, which is a leap year only when divisible by
four hundred without a remainder.
The month of February, 1886, was in, one respect the
most remarkable in the world’s history. It had no full
moon., January had two full moons, and so had March,
but February had none. This had not occurred since
the creation of the world, and it will not occur again,
according to the computation of astronomer^, ,for
, 2.5QO$Op years. r
At the time of a New Moon ( 1> dO) the Part of Fortune (©) is alwttys on the ascendant of a chart made for
that time. ‘ At Full Moon ( 3> 50) the Part of Fortune is
always on the descendant of a chart made for time of
Full Moon. •

SS3
PABt V. ADDITIONAL STUDIES
A to Z* Horoscope Maker and Delineator
PART V
IMPORTANT SUBJECTS
for
ADDITIONAL STUDY
"The dawn of man is breaking.* Be in hope;
All stars are gathered in ^is horoscope.
The brute man of the planet he will, pass.
Blown out like forms of vapor on a glass;
And from this quaking pulp shall risj *
The superman, child of tla; higher skies.
Ufifettey:d he will break the, ancient bars,
Laugh and reach out his hands among the stars.”
. • * — Edwin Markham.
Index to Part V'on next pagj.

QENBTHLIACAL ASTBOLtfoY
INDEX to Part V
Page
Arabic Part*, Tber — How to find . . . 702
Astrology, Is It Science or Religion? . . 53S
Change of Residence, How it affects the Horoscope . 601
Countries and Cities are Influenced by the Signs . 671
Critical Degrees ■■ . 678
Dictionary of Astrological Terms .... ^67
Exaltation by degree ' 6 8
Locality C*hart . 607
Measure of Time or Time Key 675
Midnight Ephemeris, How to use 668
Partiling Aspects, Date and Time in Horoscopes . 675
Pertinent Points 565
: Decans, 572; Fixed Stars, 580; Geo'-entric Astrology, 565, Horary Astrology, 569; Octaves, 576;
. Planets in Business, 570; Signs and Constellations,
579; Stars and Planets, S78.
Picking Winners: The Principles and Practice of •
Contest Analysis^ '■.... 733 .
Pre-Natal Epoch, The 679 — 701
Research Methods for Astrological Students: An Introduction to the Principles of Statistical Analysis
as Applied to Astrological Research . . . 704
Sidereal Time, defined < 668
Symholisnf 541
Symbols and Abbreviations * 548
There Are No Evil Planet* '. *• 759 ,
Time Factors explained •• 663
Trigpns, Triplicity of Sign and House . ... t581
Twins, JV^hy different? Why alike? . . * . . 59l
Your Gfest Location, How to Find It 601
Universe Makers: Biographical Sketches . . . 540
Vocabulary, Astrological . ‘549
Zodiacal Signs: Anatomical, Biblical, Dietetic, Geographic, Mythological, Psychological Attributes, 611

PART V, ADDITIONAL STUDIES 586
ASTROLOGY
Is It Science or Religion,?
D me 'astrology is both. I love the scientific
featutes connected with the making of horoscopes based upon the rules and findings of
astronomy. I revere the "voice” (vibrations)
of the’planets. They are God’s rrtessengers
and Speak in His language ; they give us His “word.”
Astrology is also a philosophy as, it explains many of
the paradoxes of life. It is something you can live by
as regards daily conduct, anti with the stars *as your
guide your thoughts must be attracted upward with
greater reverence and inspiration. It turns one from the
sordid to the sublime ; from the world of mistakes and
false appearances to spiritual reality.
"The Stars Incline; They Do Not Compel.”
Ignorance impels us to do many things which wisdom
transcends. The Bible tells us, "Ye shall kngw tne
Truth, and the Truth shall set you free,” but man will
not t>e "free" so long as he permits himself to be in the
bondage of fear and dread of material appearances. Not
until he begins to realize the Truth concerning the
realities of li/e and its unseen influences can he begin
to loosen the fetters one by one and exercisfe his divine
attributes.
Those \sho are seeking relief fro’m the troubles, strain
and strife of life»will find renewed courage amf inspiration for higher development, as David did, through his
vjery significant and enlightening Psalm.
We suffer mostly from ourselves and mainly through
incprrict or imperfect expression of planetary vibrations.
Each ray (aspect) has a mission, a iflessage, a, divine
purpose, but oh! how far short do we fall in ftirtrnlitcrpretation or expression, and yet each ^aspect is potent
with magnificent possibilities.
There are no evil aspects; there are only adverse
’reactions. Misinterpretation of ^he meaning and purport?

OgNETHLIACAL ASTRO’LOQY
of planetary aspects or entire ignorance of them, is the
cause of most of our .misery and troubles. 1
The true putpose of astrology .is to1 bring us into
conscious relation with great kingdoms: the kingdom
of the Heavens and the kingdom of Gpd within. They
are not separate; they are one, a universe.
By lifting up our eyes to the "heavenly hills," (the
stars, plailets and the signs), a revelation of their significance appears. The thrill of new knowledge enfolds
us in loving embrace, when we realize the magnificence
of those wonderful words of the XIXth Ps^lm :
“The heavens declare the glory of God; and the firmament sheweth His handiwork.” (Solar, planetary and
starry systems arranged and motivated under divine
direction for the benefit of all life.)
Astrology is the connecting link between the human
and the divine. It is a spiritual science couched in finite
words for the understanding of mortals who need to
'learn t{ie lessons of this sphere through the experiences
of daily life.
There are No Evil Planets — There are No Evil Aspects
This is the ringing 'message of astrology Which leads
one at last to realize that God in love leads us through
every experience for our good progress. Every aspect
is a blessiitg in disguise. Wise indeed are they who
bless every incident in their life, even those Which have
the appearance of evil, for they are good'servants leading
us to higher understanding, greater appreciation and
better' conditions. Therefore, watch your aspects and
see how much benefit you can in reality derive from
them.
Thc.cffort to make practical response to the urges,
generated by solar, lunar and planetary r^ys is the most
important .effort.'of daily life. Upon our ability to harmonize with' the desirable or constructive vibrations,
and our power to transcend or transform those of undesirable nature, mainly .depend happiness and success.

... PA Bf V, ADDITIONAL STUDIES
The determining point in attainment is the place
where we' are required to act upon the urges generated
within. The various daily planetary aspects provide
changes in tAe delicately arranged elements of the body ;
the chemical Changes which result correspond to the
nature or quality of an- aspect and transmit to the mind
urges, attitudes, moods, desires, aversions, etc. Therefore it is readily seen that the reaction which we give
to these urges largely determines the quality and nature
of the resulting experience.
“Life is What Wd Make It”
This old astrological aphorism assumes its right meaning when it is associated with those operations of Nature
which animate our being and give opportunity for the
expression of life. It calls attention to that highly significant and important point in our daily life where we
are called upon to give conscious response or outward
expression to the animations generated through planetary-chemical activities.
Joy, success, knowledge, attainment and every other
experience are largely the result of the nature and
quality of the reactions we make, to planetary rays
which daily, hourly, constantly impinge our being and
impart the, power of thought a'hd action.
An All Wise Creator has provided the vehicle, the elements and the power necessary for our Spirit to manifest lifeJand has also given us a great measure of choice
as to our conduct. Hence, we are responsible to a large
extent for our present conditions. Nature has provided
us with a personal workshop, tools and material, most
of which we have used unwisely. Who would not do
much better if we had the opportunity to live oyr life
again ? ’
However, our faults and failures are not usually Wilful
or .deliberate inversions and we can* bujld better when
working in conscious * harmony with Natural Laws
Astrology points the way.

QENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
Start Life Anew Daily
"I die daily,” §aid the apostle Paul, exulting in the
opportunity to go forward each da^ more courageously,
more nobly, because of the efforts and tht; experience of
yesterday made in harmony with Divine .Direction.
Let us draw strength and inspiration from that glorious and vnonderful statement made by the inspired
David in Psalm XIX : •
“The heavens declar# the glory of God; and the firmament sheweth His handiw. rk.
"Day unto day uttereth speech, and night unto night
sheweth knowledge.
"There is no speech nor language where their voice
is not heard.
"The law of the Lord is perfect, converting the soul;
the testimony of the Lord is sure, making wise the
simple.
“Moreover by them is thy servant warned; and in'
keeping of them there is great reward.”
Each planef is a teacher, sending its message through
vibration wito marvelous instruments, — human bodies.
Here it is received, transformed, transmitted to the mind
and becomes manifest in the activities of life. Gbd made
those starry messengers through whose celestial instruments He speaks to us daily. Jn%"the secret place of the
most high” we receive promptings concerning every 1
situation that arises, gfeat or small. So let us
cease, to respond dumbly, foolishly or ignorantly. »Let
us see the "light”* of each new day and* know that
in it voice of Gad. Let us "lift up our eyes” and
see •in the starry portents the promise of guidance and
* (The entire psalm Is astrologlcally Interpreted In “Astrologer's
Searchlight" which also contains a chapter on “How to Overcome
Adverse Aspects.") .*

PABT t, ADDITIONAL STUDIES
strength. Let *i'S answer the call of the heavens with
joyous gestures, let our reactions be inspired to bring
from the depths within the nobility of„our soul to impress its inherent greatness and beauty upon every passing word and deed. .Let astrology help us and then help
ourselves by aiming to glorify the word of God in every
passing day.
“Know the Law and the Law Shall Set You Free”
This means Celestial Law. Conscious effort, rightly
directed in keeping with the changing aspects, opens
one door after another in ou-, consciousness, revealing
new heights to ascend, and developing zest, courage and
power. Knowledge of the daily indications helps us to
keep in time with the rhythm of the daily cycle of aspects. It helps you and me to work in conscious harmony
with Natural Law when we plan our work and work
our plan consistently.
Synchronizing as much as possible our daily efforts
with the changing operations of Nature, aidsi us to
keep abreast the progressive elements of the universe
and must eventually result in understanding of spiritual
realities, as well as mental and physical development.
Dante expressed this truth whrti he said —
“Follow but thy star; ,
Thou canst not miss at last a glorious hjtven.”

04 0 QJCNETHLIACAL ASTHdLOOT
UNIVERSE MAKERS’
A few years ago a well-known editorial writer published a list of notables whom he termed "Universe-Makers,’’
because of their outstanding aohiefcements. Among
them were the names of six history-makers known to the
astrologically-minded as great astrologers. As the ptfrcentage of astrologers in the list of Great Ones pointed
significantly to the far-reaching, constructive influence
of astrology’s power in the making of worth-white history, we give a few highlights from their lives. The six
mentioned are Aristotle, Copernicus, Galilei, Kepler,
Ptolemy and Pythagoras.' He might well have included
Hippocrates (460 B. C.) Generally referred to as the
"Father of Medicine,” disciple of Plato and Aristotle,
author of many treatises. The Encyclopedia Brittanica
says of him, “One of his great merits is that he was the *
first to .disassociate medicine from priestcraft, and to
direct attention to the natural history of disease. . . We
find in his works evidence of the acuteness 'of his observations.by the manner in which the occurrence of critical
days in disease is enunciated." (The critical days in
disease are enunciated by the Moore’s phases and aspects
with other planets, in relation to the patient’s horoscope.)
Hippocrates is quoted as saying, "A physician cannot
safely administer phySic (medicine) if he be unacquainted
with first drinciples.” The "first principles” were those
of natural law, especially those exerted by the Moon and
planers upAn the progress of disease.
Pythagoras, whb lived 60p years B. C., was fully conversant with astrplogy. He advocated the idea of the
earth ' being spherical and deduced that all the other
zodiacal bodies were gldbular.
Biographical Sketch of Astrologers Keptei and Galilei

PART Y. ADBITIONAL STUDIES
Ml
SYMBOLISM
This chapter Is reprinted from a paper on “Symbolism” by
Mrs. Mildred Kyje, originally published In the October. 1617
Issne of “The Astro! oglcal Bnlletlna."
[Astrology may rightfully be termed a language of
symbols, hence the first essential step is to become perfectly familiar with its symbology, otherwise it. is impossible Jo read a horoscope after having made it?
Symbolism may be called a coumon language. By
this is meant that certain concrete forms are employed
to represent abstract ideas, which, presented to the view
of one versed in the form, convey to the mind of that
person a definite idea; just as numbers in arithmetic each
embody some idea, but if the number be expressed in
<vords the spoken word will differ according to the language used.
It matters not in what age we live or what language
we speak, symbols tell the same story: It is the language of the initiates, and through such means one initiate ;speaks to another though long cycles of time may
separate them.
O The /circle is one of the rjdest symbols in the
world, and if'taken alone, signifies the incomprehensible
unity that underlies all manifestation. If applied to the
whole vast universe, it stands for the Absolu,te,'God unmanifeste4, all inclusive, without beginning or end. In
another sense, it represents our Solar Logos, •'or God,
and the enclosing circle shows the extent of His limitation as differentiated front the Cosmos, but He is all
inclusive within that limitation ; He, himself, being without bringing or end.
When the circle is used in astrology it signifies .the
Sun, whioh is the physical symbol 'of our Soraa^Sa^os,
or God manifested in our solar system. When it is usdd
for man -it symbolizes the immortal spirit jor the inner
celestial man, who is God’s representative on earth ; always it symbolizes that wbfch, like itself, has neither

OBNKTHLIACAL tVSTRQLOGY
beginning nor erill. It is a symbol of ( life in contradistinction to form; it has no limits either In* ^pace or time
and enters into no relations, yet the circumference suggests limitation, so we read this message into it : The
One Eternal Life is manifesting ‘itself jn various ways
through one limiting avenue of form.
Through the symbol of numbers, this will be naugltt
(o) ; in that of light and color it will be darkness ; and
in that of«sound and music it will be silence.
G The circle without the dot represents life or spirit
unmanifested; with the dot it shows manifestation. All
life begins to manifest fro(tn this central point. Wherever
we see that point we know that it is a nucleus of life
which will manifest as soon as it is given the proper conditions, as for instance, in the egg and all cellular formation.
® Let us draw a line through the circle, which gives
us two half-circles. We will examine this symbol and,
learn the’ story it holds for us. When used ki an abstract
m sense it signifies that the Great Life is manifesting the
two polarities of spirit matter, not separated in two extremes, of spirit on one hand and matter on the qther,
but held together in one, a duality vtith unity underlying
it; that duality is'the root of all the dual forces we ipeet
in life, and we meet it^ everywhere ; there is p,pt a thing
without its, opposite in all this manifested universe.
When used in terms of consciousness it is the subjective
and objefctive mind, or the consciousness turned within
toward -the spirit and furned outward toward {he world,
but whetf we are using the objective mind we are only
using one-half of our real consciousness, the rest is subjective,,or latent fof the time 'using.
When used in terms of astrology, it is the Moon, and
represents imperfection, because of its limitation.' We
,mu^ remember that the circle symbolizes the whole
' half circle bnly half of the real man( and that
halt the material, side of him, or that which helongs to
form. Or agjin ft tells us that only half of the «spiritual
man gan express himself thrdugh form, and the dual
nature of mtyt has its root here in the Moon’s fortes. ,

PART V, APDITIONAL STUDIES 543
When the conjunction of the Sun anr/ Moon. takes place,
it symbolizes the union of the individual and personal
man; the hjgher and lower self. • The opposition of the
two luminaries, symbolized by the full, Moon, represents
the personality illanfinated by the Sun, or Spirit, and
throwing its Isorrqwed light upon the Earth, or our
physical consciousness. ,
* © Let us draw another line through the circle at
right angjes to the first, and we have a cross within the
circle. This is & very old symbol ; its origih is lost in
the*night of time, and like all other symbols has many
meanings. It implies complete manifestation and incessant activity, for it cannot be formed until, the dual
forces have become fully polarized, active and passive,
positive and negative, each acting upon the other and
each reacted upon by the other. It is the unfolding, of
the evolutionary scheme of things. First we have the
two halves, then the four quarters, which form the root
of all quadrate things on Earth, such as the four seasons,
four corners of the Earth, the four elements, etc. Astronomically, it is the symbol of our Earth ; and it symbolizes differentiation, activity in matter, the material
body and material masses, being astrologically the symbol«of Pars Fortunae (The Part of Fortune).
+ When the circle has been removed and only the
four arms are left, it would signify that the spiritual side
had been*'fqrgotten and only the* material consciousness
was manifesting itself. From this symbol has been
evolved the well known Christian cross, which did not
originate with Christianity, but ip as old as'the language
of symb»ls. The symbol of the cross represents spirit
and matter wfdded togelhcr in art indissoluble union
throughout the ages of tlje life of a, Universe, ajid none
*can wrench them apart. The vertical line represents
spirit, while the horizontal lirte symbolizes matter. The
spiritual. forces are said to play through the spinal, column, and a» man stands upright he as the verticaj line
and to that extent spiritual. The animal’s spige^.a.'borif
zontal, a*nd that fact relates him to matter and Hhlds
him,to the .vibration of the animal kin'gdom.. Man is not
yet wholly spiritual his. bodies are composed of, matter
so he is under the necessity of spending at least one-third

GKWBTHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
of his time in the horizontal position when asleep, while
his spirit slips away to its own plane.
Astrologically, ,the vertical line of the cross symbolizes the Sun, while the horizontal line represents the
Moon, or, again, life and form. It is the great loom of
life on which all the fabrics of form are woven ; all the
garments with which the spirit of man is clothed are
Fashioned and framed by the operation of these dualforces. The. Universal Mind is the Great Weaver, love
and life are its threads.
The symbol of the cioss dates back to the period of
the third pace or the Lemu^ian period, when the human
soul fell into generation, or when the division of the
sexes took place. It was then that the divine in man
became crucified, for as long as matter (which is the
horizontal line of the cross) lives on the borrowed light
of the spirit, the spirit is held to the plane of generation
and can only use its creative powers in a material way,
while it might, if freed from the limitations of matter,
create like the Christ by the power of its own divine will.
To this extent the cross symbolizes generation.
From the foregoing we see that the symbols for 'all
the planets contain, one or more of three elements: the
circle which denotes spirit, the cross which denotes matter, and the half-circle 'which denotes the intellectual
aspect of the Soul or mind. By this knowledge we can
determine from the symbol of each planet whether the
forces which 'emanate from it be spiritual, mental or
material: for the planets themselves are centers-of great
Cosmic forces which ' enter into the composition of every
earthly as well as eyery celesfial object, and the intermingling* of these forces in tfie’’ combination of man’s
various bodies — physical, emotional and mental — decides
the temperament of the personal man. If they are harmonious we have a. pleasing personality; if they are inharmdjjjpaSj we have the reverse. The symbol of the
plau'Jcwift also tell us which one of our bodies is
affected for good or ill.

PART Y, ADDITIONAL STUDIES
Mercury
8 -Let u| begin with the planot Mercury. 'Here we
find the cross, the circle and also the hal^-circle, showing
that Mercury Represents body, soul and spirit, the threefold division of ‘map. Hence we may deduce the fact
that Mercury is«pre-eminently the planet dealing with
i*an, the thinker. It is spirit and matter with added
faculty of mind. Persons who have given any study to
astrology know t/ut Mercury represents the> mind, or
rathra- the inner understanding and is that connecting
link that runs through the consciousness of man all the
way from matter to the highest spfrit. It is the link between spirit -and matter, hence* we see all three symbols
joined together to represent the type of energy sent out
from that planetary center.
Mars
S In Mars, from the symbol of the circle and the
cross, we see a diflferent form of energy working throughout nature, entering into the composition of the material
and emotional bodies, but not the mental, as we see no
semi-circle in connection with this planetary symb61, but
the cross placed above the circle showing that the Mars
farce works almost ’entirely with material conditions.
Its work is to energize that side of nature which, at the
present tim", obscures the spiritual. For instance, the
Mars force is- predominant in the animal kingdom and
in the merely animal man, and is not directly connected
with mind, but with sensations Its work with man is
to spur hiry to action, and finally knowledge comes as
the result of his activities.
Venus
8 But after man has grown into a thinking and reasoning being and has begun to refine this wonderful Martian
energy, we haVe what is called the reversing p^tbe
spheres of <jur being, and then you will find thtf
of Venus with the circle above the cross, the explosive^
and blustering- energy of Mars has become the rtiythmical and harmonious force- of Venus, which brings beauty,
sweetness and love, and which, while it does pot directly

GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
work with the mentality of man, yet it ^modifies the type
of mind we express. For instance, if Veriuk find Mercury
be in conjunction, the' result will be a beautiful and harmonious exprescion either in speaking or, writing; it will
be rhythmical and poetical. An overabundance of Martian
force energizing a man would make him a warrior by
choice, the same amount of ‘force of 'the Venus type
would present us with an actor or a dancer, something
which would express rhythm of motion and beauty.
While th<: force of Mars energizing in a working man
would make him a blacksmith, the same amount of
Venus force would njake him an artistic craftsman. We
see in the Venus symbol the circle above the cross,
showing that the Venus^force works with' the spiritual
side of man and deals directly with the apprehension of
beauty by the human soul.
Saturn
b In Saturn we have only the cross and half-circle
showing its relation to the mind in connection with matter. It has heen said by some astrologers that we do not
touch the higher side of Saturn, that “we do not reach
Saturn above his helt.” In other words, humanity at
the present time can only respond to a limited range of
the Saturn vibrqtion. Saturn's special work in nature, is
to crystallize, to make stable, so a harmonious aspect to
the planet Mercury x/ould tend to make tlxg mind ’more
material, to make it one pointed and more'stahle, so that
the ego^can get better control of it and turn it to detailed
study. We must always keep in mind that our relation
to Saturn is purely 'material, and if he toujph Our consciousness, it is only to materialize it. t.
Jupiter
Just the opposite ’is the force which emanates from
tht lordly planet Jupiter. Here we find the "mint! or the
h^Llf^circle placed above the cross, reve&ling to u's the
^■^tiaA though rdind and matter are still conjoined the
mind, is above, the purely "material side of the man’s
nature ant^cart expand into the plane of pure .reason, for
Jupiter is expansive, in nature and his work is' to unfold,
to throw from the center outward, just as it is the nature

PART V, ADDITIONAL STPDIE8 547
of Saturn to from the circumference to the center.
The type ofrmind dominated by Jupiter would-be broad,
comprehensive and benevolent. An over-abundance of
the Jupiterian .force., would cause the mind to be too general to apply itself to detail work, it would ever be dealing in glittering generalises, while the same amount of
Saturn force energizing the mind would make it painfully detailed. Jupiter deals more with the etheric than
with the physifal brain, for it holds within it J:he higher
powers of the softl to a far greater degree than can be
manifested through the physical brain today.
Uranus
V In the symbol of Uranus we find a combination
of the Mars and Moon symbols, as the half-circle is on
each side of the cross and circle. This shows that while
spirit is still working through material conditions it is
•Completely controlled by mind; not only is the symbol
of the intellectual aspect of the soul, the semi-circle, on
one side of the cross, but on both sides, showing the
working of the higher and lower mind as one. When
two or more forces are working together they result in
a new property showing itself, which was not possessed
by either of the constituents working singly. Hence we
fipd with Uranus that a new note is struck which directly
affects the super-mind in man. It is the great synthesizer! and \ye might say that it gathers up the various
aspects of intelligence symbolized by all the planets and
weaves them into a synthetic whole, and from th^t comes
the fully individualized man, the complete, man, the
Master.
Neptune
The symbol of Nepftifie, showing as a tridefit, indicates that it is more directly related to the three-fold
spirit in mjm, and only those who have entered into a
greater spiritual consciousness can comf directly under
its very subtle and intangible influence. Negative^ -IjKis
manifests mainly as psychic disturbances, which, acting,
through the emotional nature, produce Strange; physical
disorders difficult to diagnqse and yet more 'difficult to
overcome. At the same time its influence produces genius
of an exceptional nature.

548 GRyETHLIACAL. ASTROLOGY
SYMBOLS AND ABBREVIATIONS
"■Long.
Lat.
Decl.
Northern
Southern
Longitude
Latitude
Declination
) Latitude
) or'
) Declination
N North (ern)
E East (ern) •
S South (ern)
W West (ern)
max. MaxiVnum
approx. Approximately
© New Moon (Beginning to increase.) In first qtr.
D In Second Quatter (Increasing in light and power.)
© lit Third Quarter (Full Moon, beginning to wane.)
S In Fourth Quarter (Waning Moon — Dark.)
>0 Eclipse of Moon; Eclipse of Sun
D* Occultation bv 'Moon. M.I..T., mean local time.
■Ct Caput Draconis, Moon’s (North) Ascertding1 Node
V ,«Gauda Drafconis, Moon’s (South) Descending Node
, ” Retrograde. R,A. Right Ascension.
S or Stat. Stationary. S.T. Sidereal Time.
D Direct0Motion. G.M.T. Greenwich Mean Time.
N. iMk. or Noon Mark = time equivalent to Greenwich
. " . noon.

PART»V, ADDITIONAL STUDIES 549
ASTROLOGICAL VOCA6ULARY
"How forcible are right words!" — Job 8, 25.
Zodiaaal Personality and Key Words
Adventurous. ‘Aries says, “I am.”
Thrifty Taurus says, “I have."
Diversified Gemini says, "I think.”
Careful Cancer says, “I feel.”
Lordly Leo says, "I will.”
Vigilant Virgo says, “^analyze.”
Loving Libra says, “I balance.”
Strenuous Scorpio Uays, "I desire.”
Sportive Sagittarius says, ”1 see.”
Cautious Capricorn says, “I use.”
Altruistic Aquarius says, “I know.”
Poetic Pisces says, "I believe.”
It is interesting to note that in everyday affairs we
unconsciously employ astrological terms, as all words
are originally the attempt to communicate in definite
terms human urges or reactions to planetary influences.
TKis desire and weed for a means of communication
to convey thought and feeling in a morV permanent form
thaii that of sound (the spoken yord), led to the first
crude picture language which gradually cwolved into
alphabetical order and subsequent segregation of words.
Today we have a language offering a wifle range of
choice for<itness of expression, and students of astrology
have the added Advantage pf being aide to select those
terms which serve to intqruret our reactions to celestial
phenomena. *
Realizing the importance of such selection, we have
carefully gathered a number of words ipto the following
vocabulary, chosen for their relation tin some fofnj l^The
planets, of to signs which they rule. Only the moto
commonly used words have been allocatvd, therefore the
list is by ho means complete and subject to amplification.
The words arc arranged alphabetically for convenience
•and the sagacious student will.jind among •these "kfy”»

OElfETHLIACAL ASTROllOQ*
words many which may be used effectively in horoscope
delineations.
I Moon » U
Adaptable, affable, aqua, agreeable, alternate, alluring.
Baby, baker, bakery, baptize, bar-maid, bathing, bathhouses, beating, boat-houses, boundless, ^ brood, brook,
breasts, brew, brewery, beaming, buttfcr. '
Cabbage, canal, capcer, caterer, cauliflower, change,
changeable, cheese, chicken, chinaware, cisterns, clam,
cleaning' common, comihonplace, conception, Cosmic
Mother, crab, crescent, cress (water), crying, candle.
Dairy, Daisy, damp, Diana, dilution, docile, docks,
domestic, domicile, dough, dreamy, dropsy, drowsy,
ducks, Delilah. s
Ebb, eel, Eleusis (Heavenly Mother), emetic, emotional, evening.
Fair\t, faint-hearted, family, fecundity, female, feminine, fermentation, fickleness, fishing, fisherman, flow,
foam, fountain, frivolous, frog, fruitful, fertilize. :
Gabriel, geese, ’generative, gestation, glass, glass-ware,
goose, gosling, gourd, groceries, gastric, germinate.
Habitation, harbor, hen, home, house, household,
housewife, housework, huckster, hydrant, hydro, hatch,
hotel.
Infant, inconstant, imbue, immerse, iris, Isis.
Janitors, juice. 1
Kitchen, kitchenware,’ kale.
'Lachrymose, lactic, lady, lake, laundry, latindry-men,
lailryivy-tub, lettuce, lil'es, liquid, lobster, Lucy, luminj*fy' (lesser luminary), Lurta, lunatic, lunation, luny,
lymphatic, luncheon, light-house.
Moist, mamma, mammal, mammary, Marie, maritime,
marine, mqtrix, the masses, maternal, Maya, melons,
mfnses, , menstrua’ mjdw:fe, milk, milkmen, mobile.

PART V. ADDITIONAL STUDIES
Monday, moopy,« month, mother, mushrooms, mutable,
mutation, mood, moon-stone.
Naval, navigation, night, nocturnal, novelties, nurse,
nursery, nursing, nocturnal, nuptial, nutrition.
Otter, owl, oyster’ obstetrics, omen.
* Pacific, pacify, pale, pale-ale, passive, peaceful, personality, phlegmatic, plastic, pliable, pollywog, ponds, ports,
the public, purftpliin, pumps, phase, phantom.!
Queen, quiet, queer.
Rambling,, receptive, relinquishing, removing^ reproductive, restaurant, restless, retiring, river, rover, roving,
rabbit, reflector, repast, reside.
Sailors, saloon, sap^, scrubbing, scrub-women, sea-fowl,
jeamen, shell-fish, shrimps, silver, sleep, slumber, serene,
‘snails, spring, squash, stomach, stream, skiff, spree.
Tender, tides, timid, tortoise, turtle, tavern.
Una boat, tlniversal Mother, unrest, umbilical.
Vacillating, variable, voyage, vulgar.
Waiters, washings washerwomen, water, water lily,
weak, week, wet, white poppy, willows, winter-green,
wonfb, women, wane, wake, watchjnan.
Young, youngster.
9 Mercury 9
Accounts, aciynen, adroit, advertising, agreements,
alert, amalgamation, analytical, -ants, anxious, aping, aptitude, architect, arms, »r»ful, asthmatic, astronomer,
attentive, author, azure-blue, au.tograph, ask, acoustics.
Bees, books, bookkeeper, bowels, bronchial, brothers,
breath, Buddha, busy, babbler, barometor, bargain, bookworm.
Caduceus, calomel, cereal, Ceres, certificates^ cheating,
cinnab&r, cleric, clever, collarbone, communication, comprehensive, convertible,* correspondence, cousins, crtlden-
•tials, checks, critical, cunning, changeable, Cain and Abel.

Q^NETHLIAOAL ASTROLOGY
Debating, deeds, (legal), deceiving, delineate, delirium,
dexterous, devices, dictation, diction, diffusive, , diplomatic, discuss, distributor, double, diet, debate, diary.
Education, effervescent, elocution, eloquence, employees, entry-clerk, errand, essay, epistle, edict.
Facile, fanciful, falsity, filing-clerk, fingers, flexed,
fluent, forgery, forgetfulness, fox, fidgeting, fable.
Gemini^ greyhound, grocer, garrulotos,’ gibe, grumble,
governess, graphology, glib.
Hands, handy, he'rald, hermaphrodite, Hermes, hygiene, harbinger, hurry-scurry, hound, hare;’ herald.
Illegible, illiterate, illusions, imagination, imbecile, imitate, inconstant, indecision, information, ingenious, inquisitive, intellectual, interpret, interview, inquiry, imply.
Jack-of -clubs, journeys (short by air or land), jesteri
juvenile, jobbing, juggle, jabber, jargon, journal.
Knowledge, knack, kernel, kin, knave.
Language, Lavandula vera, learning, lecturing, letters,
libel, lilac, licorice, linguist, literature, lively, loquacious.
Magazine, ma.il, mail-carriers, rfianuscript, meddling,
mediator, memorizing, mental, merchandise, merchant,
Mercredi, messages, 'messenger, mimicry, lpirror, mischief, megaphone, monkey, mentor.
Neighbors, nerves, neurasthenia, neurotic, neutral, nervous system, newspapers, nimble, nomadic, notary, nonsense, novel, notify, numbers, name. 1
Observation, oratorical, oscillation, opinion.
Pair, paper, papyrous, parrot, perceiving, pen, pencil,
perception, periodicals, perjury, persuasive, perverting,
petty, petty thievery, pilfering, postal, practice, prattle,
profuse, printer,, publisher, plagiarism, parsley.
..•Quack, query, question, quibble, quickly, .quicksilver,
'quivering, quandary, Quan and Habel (Chaldean).
Rabbi, Raphael, reaction, reading, records, teflex, relatives, repeating, reporter, reports, respiration, response,
restless, repartee, reply, .rumor, reckon, relate.

PAST V, ADDITIONAL STPDIBB
Secretaries, seeing, sensitive, shifting, shoulders,
shrewd, short journeys (land or air), shorthand, signing,
sisters, simulate, skillful, slander, speaking,' speech,
speedy, squirrel, stamjnering, stationers, stenography,
stool-pigeon, stoje-keeper, studying, subtleness, swift,
sylph, school, script, Student, statement, suggest.
•Talking, talkative, tell-tale, teacher, telegrams, tennis,
tennis-court, theft, thinking, thought, tittle-tattle, tongue,
tongue-tied, translator, transposing, transient, .transmit,
travel* treaties, trembling, tricks, trifling, twin, two, typewriter, thermometer, testimony, theory, topic.
Understanding, utterance.
Voluble, variable, versatile, vibrating, virgin, verbal.
Wednesday, wheat, winged-messenger, witty, writers,
writing, wit, words, Writ.
Youthful, youths.
9 Venus 9
Admirable, adolescent, adorn, adulterous, affectionate,
affiance, agreeable, amiable, amorous, amusement; Aphrodite. artistic. Astarte, accord, appease, approve.
Beautiful, beauty-shops, bed, bedfbom, beneficent,
benign, brass, bridal-chamber, bronze, boudoir, balm.
Calf, candy) cheerful, cleanly, clothing, clubs (social),
compassionate, concerts, confectionery, con jugal, connubial, cooing, copper, consort, coral, t courteous* courtship,
caress, calm, compatible, cozy, comfort, cordial.^
Dancing, decorate, decorum, deer, delectable, delicate,
delicious, delightful, dimple, dining-room, dissolute, dolphin, dove, draper, drama, dressmaker, dude, debauch.
Easj, elegant, embellishment, emerald, entertainment,
entertainers, erotic, effeminate, engagement.
Fair, fajr-play, feminine, festivals, finely , Jffirtfng,
floral, florist, Frega, Friday, fruitful, furnishings, furniture, frivolous, fondle.
Gaity, garden, genteel,’ gentle, graceful, grasious,
gnome, gallant, gem, gown, garment, genia}.

QENBTHLIACAIl ASTROLOGY
Haberdasher, (lair-dresser, handsome, harmony, Hathcr, hawthorn, Hesperus, honeymoon,” Ropey, hostelry,
hotel-kdepers, hussy; hurdy-gurdy, Hymen, horticulture.
Immaculate/ immodest, immoial, inddlent, indulgent.
Jewelry, joyous, jaunty, jocular, just.
Kidneys, kind.
Ladies, laughing, lazy, lechery, leisurely, lenient, lewd,
licentioui, likeable, lingerie, loins, loVely, loving, luxurious, lymphatic, levity, lace, lavish, lass, leisure.
Marriage, mate, matrimony, milliner, mirthful, modest,
money”, musicales, myrtkj, mannerly, maiden, matinee.
Navel, neat, nice, nourishing, nurturing, nutritive,
neck, nosegay, normal, nector, natty, negligee.
Opalescent, orchestra, ornaments, ovaries, ovum, opera
singers, oblige.
Party, partridge, pastime, peaceful, perfumed, pheasant, picturesque, pink, pleasing, pleasure,' poetical, popular, pretty, pulchritude, picnic, plum, plump, posy,
preseftts, pennyroyal, peach.
Queenly, qualify, quinsy. ,
Rabbit, reins,1 refined, rejoicing, renal, rose, reconcile.
Sapphire, sensual, "singing, slothful, sociable, society,
songs, soothing, stylish, swan, sweet, symmetrical, shiek,
slip-shqd, smooth, sympathetic, scarf, sofa, soft.
Tailors, tactile, tender, theatrical, throat, thrush, touch,
tune, ritnsy, tame, thanks, tidy, tint, tqnsil.
Undies, unify, united, untidy, upholstery.
Venal, venereal, Venetian, Venusian, verbena, volu'ptuous, vacation, violet, vocalist, vineyard.
•Wanton, wardrobe, warm, wedding, wedlock, wine.
Yofi^h/ul, yarrow, yielding.
O Sun O
Apollo, ardent, ardor, arrogant, Aum, authority, absurd, aggrandize, aloes, amber, ambitious, animation^

PART V,. ADDITIONAL STUDIES
aplomb, affirm,. ablaze, august, alive, animate.
Ball-room, 'boastful, bombastic, ■, boss, bright, bluff,
bounty, bestowal, brilliant, biology.
Cardiac, charitable, circle, circumference, coliseum,
commanding, compelling, co-operation, candor, condescension, celebrated, central, conscience.
Dignity, desert, despotic, dictator, disdainful, diurnal,
domineering, dr/, dynamic, David, dawn, dayl^ht.
Energy, egotistical, encourage, elevate, enliven, exalt.
Faith, famous, favors, flames, fire, firefly, flaxen, foreman, frankincense.
Gaudy, games, glory, gifts, gold, gold leaf, gold stone,
gorgeous, grants, gracious, glow, grand, glare.
.'Heart, heat, haughty, healing, health, honor, honorable,
hope, hopeful, hot, helium, halo, helio-centric.
Individuality, imperialistic, imperious, inflammatory,
indignity, insult, influential, illuminate, illustrious.
Jacob, Judah, joy, juniper.
Kind, kindhearted, Jcing, kingly, kingdom.
Lavish, leader, light, lion, lionize, ibrdly, luminary,
luminous, hsnx, loyalty, living, lustrous.
Magnanimous, majestic, magnificent, mar/sion, monarch, myrrh, manfully, Mithra, mid-day, marigqjd.
Noon, nucleus.
Orange, optimistic, Osiris, omnipotent, omniscient,
omnipresent.
•Palace, playground, parks, peacock, proud, pinnacle,
pompous, prince, presents, prominent, pride, president.
Quality, quejn, quintessence.
Ra, radiant, radiation, recuperation* regal, resplei) daVit,
royal, ruler’ rank, respect, -ruddy, rosemary.
Sol, rspij'it, Solarium, sovereign, sunburn, stimulating,
Sunday, sunny, sumpnlous, stately, starfish, sunstroke,
sunflower, scrupulous. Sabbath, Samson, salamander. ,

GENETHLIACAL ASTBOLOQY
Theatre, torrit], throne.
Vigor, vitality, vifile, vivifying, vitalize.-
Warmth, wasteful, walnut.
Yellow.
Zealous.
3 Mars 3
Antagonize, aggravate, aggressive, agony, accident,
abusive/ angry, athletic, action, ardent, attack, agent,
assayer, audacious, augment, acute, awful, armor-plate,
armored car, assailapt, artillery, arena, army, armaments.
Bully, bold, breakage, battles, brutal, boastful, bile,
burns, bruises, butcher, blister, burglar, bladder, boilermaker, bootlegger, barber, belligerent, brave, builder,
brazen, bellicose, battleship, Bellona (goddess of war).
Courage, constructive, compelling, choleric, cuts, f ’•inVe,
canvasser, carpenter, cutler, crow, chimney, contagion,
cutlery, centrifugal, caustic, cannon, combatant, coarse,
cayenne, combustible, conquest, cutlas, e'eaver.
Destructive, damaging, disruptive, dentist, daring,
defiant, dreadful, danger, dart, dogger, disturbance.
Energetic, executive, engineer, exciting, eagle, efTo’-t.
Forceful, fiery, furious, feverish, fighter, fireman, feat,
furnace, forge, foundries, fibrous, frightful, ferocious,
fire-eater, firecrackers, fighting-cock, fever, friction.
Gall,* game-cock, garbage, garlic, gunner, gash, gauntlet, general, guard, gladiator, guns, gun-powder.
Headstrong, Hydro-powgr, hardwaVe, hawk, hectic,
hoodlum, house, burly-burly, ^torse-radish, hostility.
Injury, inflammable, .invincible, industrious, iron, intense, intrepid, implement, inflict, impulsive.
■Jostle, jack, jailor, jacknife, javelin, jolt, joust, junk
Kee«^kick, knife* kindle. ,
Locksmith, lumberjack, lancer, lamb, loud, lusty.
Ifechanical, muscular, machinery, machinist, manufacturer, motion, marauder, mustard, missile, measles. ,

PART V. . ADDfTIONAL STUDIES
Noisy, navy, .nettles, nail, needle, notfch.
Oppressive,* obstinate, obscene, operations, onions.
Painful, policiman,. perjurer, positive, panther, prizefighter, pestilent, goignant, pyrotechnics, pugilist, pugnacious, provoke, pointed, puncture, perpetrate.
Quarrelsome, quick.
Resentful, ra^h, . ravish, rape, ruddy, red, reckless,
rifles, Resourceful, rolling mills, rival, rough, rage, rowdy,
ruffian, rascal, ribald, ram, rambunctious, rampage, rampart, ramrod, radish, rhubarb, razor; regiment.
Sharp, scar, scalds, soldier, s'aw-filer, sinewy, Scavenger, scissors-grinder, stock-raiser, strong, strenuous,
steam-engines, salesman, surgeon, sensual, scorpion,
slaughter house, smelters, stimulate, scarlet, steel.
• "'Taste, torment, troublesome, turbine, tiger, turbulent,
terrific, temerity, temper, Tuesday, torture, thistle.
Uncouth, uproar, urgent.
Violence, vile, violation, vulture, valiant, venturesome,
victorious, veteran, vixen, vaunt, vex, vivisection.
Warlike, wolf, wotinds, wilful, wounding, wrestler,
wreck, wrench, wedge, whittle, weapon,' ’war-ship.
U Jupiter U
Absconding, abscesses, ample, abundant, ambassador,
affluence,’ adipose, academic, advisor, auspiciousf aiderman, apoplexy, aristocrat, archer, adjudicate, appraise.
Blood poison, big, bandog, bonds,, bishop, banquet,
benevolent, boils, barrister, behemoth, bilious, bounteous.
Careless, .costly, cashier, customary, convivial, charitable, • collegiatq, carbuncle, comfortable, complacency,
corpulent, capitalist, commerce, correct, ceremonyr ,
Dull, disorders of liver arid blood, development, doctor,
diplomat, ^ecvnp, default, defray, disburse.
Excessive, extravagant, erroneous, expensive, extensive, expansive, exaggerated, embezzle, exchequer, ex- ,

OENETHLIACAL* ASTROLOGY
orbitant, elepharfr, embassy, emolument, pndowment.
FesteVing, formal,* finances, faro, formafity, fortunate,
fruitful, fat, flaurishing, formality, finanpier.
Gluttonous, gambling, growing, jgolter, growth, galore,
game-cock, gaming house, grandiose, ^irth, good-will.
Hazardous, huge, honest, hunter, hospitable, handsofoe,
hearty, humor, hips, hams, heir, honorary, hale.
Illegal* immense, illicit, interest, inflated, indemnity,
indolent, indulgent, insurance, important, income, inherit.
Jovial, judicious, just, judge, jubilant, judgment, jocose, jaundice, jocund, jury, justice, jockey, jubilee.
Knowledge.
Liver, large, legal, lawyer, litigUnt, litigation, leisure,
law-suit, lucky, lucrative, luxury, lavish, legacy.
Misjudgment, miscalculation, momentous, magnate,
magnificent, magistrate, maximum, millionaire.
Noble, nourishing, nabob.
Official, opulence, orderly, opportune, ordain.
Prevaricative^ profligate, philanthropic, philosophical,
pageant, palatial, peaceable, pelf, plutocrat, prpstige,
professional, physicijn, precious, profit, prosperity.
Quantity, quality.
Reckless, rich, rotund, respectable, rational, recompense, redundance, ftligious, remuneration,, Republican,
rubber,' race horse, ransom, regain, right, replete.
Spendthrift, sporting, speculating, shares, stocks,
sportsman, surfeit, satiated 'scholarly, serene, shekel,
smell, smooth, supply, surplus, suppurate, success.
.Thriftless, tumorous, truthful, tact, fallow, thigh, tin,
thrivf, thunder, Thursday, tours, tout, treft, turf, treasury,
trust, temperate, tihie, truth, ^tremendous.
Uniformity, .unadulterated, unharmed, unimpeachable.
Vpyages’ value, venerable,- vetacity.
Wealth, ivart, wholesome, whale, wager, winnings. .

PART V. , ADDmONAL STUDIES 558
J? Saturn
Austere, ascetic, avarice, astringent, apprehensive,
affliction, aged, afraid, aggrieve, ailing, animus, Annie,
acquire, adhere, adhesive, amass, avaricious, atrophy,
ash, acoustic, agriculture, asphalt, attach, abnegate.
Bitter, brick, bones, binding, ballast, Beelzebub, begrudge, belittle, Belial, bankrupt, bereave, bemoan, basic.
Carbon, calculating, calamity, callous, crystallization,
congeal, colds, centripetal, cartilaginous, chronic, cemetery, coal-miner, cold, contained, c#lm, caves, cement,
contemplative, clay, concentrative, conservative, ephere,
contractive, continuity, concrete, collective, chronometer, coagulate, clock, calendar, condensed, Chronos, cell.
Doleful, dry, decay, disintegrate, devitalize, discretion,
deficient, deteriorate, diminish, discontent, dissatisfacti&n, deny, detain, deafness, decrepitude, depression,
drudge, dutiful, destroy. Democrat, doom, disaster, debt,
delay.
Envy, economical, excavator, emaciation, ephemeris,
expiation, earth, earthly, equipoise, establish, embafgo.
Fear; farmer, firm, foundation, funeral, frigid, frugal,
frafnework, fiost, fortitude, famine, faithful, fatality,
failure; fixture, flint, fatigue, fortitude.
Garter, glue, 'gravel, graphite, grudge, glum* grievous,
grasping, gather, gasket, goat, galena, grindstone.
Hide, heap, heavy, hard, hearing* hireling,* haggard,
harsh, hour-glass, harness, hate, hearse, hold.
Inert, impede, introspective, immovable, immobile,
intfopuisive, ic«, indomitable, Wcsome, inscrutable, irftide.
Jealousy, join, jackass, junction; jeer.
Kne.cd’, kilf-joy, knell, keep, kill, kink, knot, knarry.
Late, loss, leather, lack, lead, limitation, lime, laljotfoul,
limestone, lament, land, labor, laggard, languor, Lticifer.
Mercenary, malevolent, materialistic, matrix,' misfortune, malign, malicious, mistrtist, monument, melancholy,
mortuary, mines, minimum, morgue, morose, qjethodical,

GENETHLIACAL AS’
mortar, mend, mason, mortification, ,miserly, mortgage,
meager( mum, mummy, mule, malice, malformation.
Needy, necessities, nonchalant, no, nuhnery, Nanny,
neglect, Nick, negation, Negro, necessity.
Obloquy, obnoxious, obstruct, old, drdeal, opaque.
Past, patience, poor, profound, prudent, plebian, pottery, prison, priest, practical, punctual, paralysis, petrify,
poverty, pessimistic, prudery, parsimonious, permanence,
peevish,* penurious, perpetual, prohibit, pernicious, Peon.
Quarry, querulous, qualm, quash, quell, quit, quiet.
Restrain, retain, retrench, rheumatism, reticence, repose. ranch, reduction, realistic, ruin, recluse, refrigerate,
resistance, retard, routine, regular, rocks, remorse.
Sedative, saturnalia, stoic, skinflint, sepulchre, Styx,
secretive, subjective, sickening, scarce, suspicious, scrupulous, sour, sober, sordid, spleen, sexton, stiff, splenic,
subdued, stones, space, sot, set, suppression, sand, skin,
snow, soot, starve, shabby, senile, scant, silence, shade,
scapegoat, spoil, sad, sediment, shale, • skeleton, substance, substantial.
Tanner, taint, tan, tank, tar, task, tense, terror, thin,
thrift, tight, tile, tired, toil, tomb, tragedy, tranquil, tale,
time, thickening, tardy, teeth, tedious, threadbare, tenacity, timekeeper, taciturn, temporize, terminus, trench,
thwart.
Urn, undertaker, unity, underneath, uphold.
Vicissitude, valley, vested, vault, vulcanize, vow.
Wosry, wedge, weary, wall, weight, wintry, woe.
Yesterday, yore, yoke, yeoman, yokel.
V Uranus ¥
.Adventurous, aversion, abnormal, auto-mechanic, antiquarian, astrologer, airplane, automobile, ankles, air,
a‘er-dtfaqtics, airdsome, aura, abrupt, abortion, acute,
aerial? alarmist, anarchist, antipathy, antique, apostasy,
appalling, arbitrary, astonish, audacious, alarm, amazing.
Battery, bicycle, broadcast, brotherhood, brusque,
bomb, bizarre.

PART V,- ADDITIONAL 8TUyBB
SSI
Contrary, clajry&yant, co-operative, (/tank, commoner,
communistic," comrade, catastrophe, colonize,, crisis,
cyclone.
Divorce, distributor, distribution of bodily fluids, disorder, drugless, (fefia.ice, dire, discard, disrupt, drastic,
dynamic, disaster, 'dynamite, disapproval, detour.
Explosive, electric, electrician, eccentric, erratic, extremist, extra -ondiqary, estrange, expurgate, emancipation, ejrant, experiment, earthquake, electron.
Fraternal, flying, fanatic, frenzy, fitful, freakish, freedom, free-thinker, filibuster, freelance, fire cracker
■ Cases, garrish, gamin, grotesque, garage, generator.
Humanitarian, hangar, hobo, hazard, hurricane.
.•Ingenious, irregular, illegitimate, improve, invent,
’intuitive, informal, indiscretion, incompatible, incongruous, intermittent, innovate, intrepid, irrepressible, independent, illegal, inversion, insurgent, impromptu.
Kinetic, kilowatt.
Lineman, liberal, liberty, lightning, lawless.
Miscarriage, motorman, magnetic, metaphysician, modern, mutiny, madcap, maneuver, mettlesome, motley,
mixed, microscope, metamorphosis, (hiracle, meddlesome.
Nomadic, notorious, novelty, now, non-conformist.
Out-break, outlaw, obstreperous, outrage,* o&trude,
overturn, oblique, originality, oscillate, oust.
Premature, progressive, paradoxical, piquant, pioneer,
poignapt, precipitate, prodigy, process, peculiar, panic.
Queer, quaint, quizzical, quandary, quiver, quest.
Repellant,, rejecting, repulsing, reversing, revolt, rebellion, radical, revolutionizing, reform, raving, radio, radium, radio-active, rapid, Russia, revulsion, roving.
Spasmodic, shock, strange, satire, saucy,, schism, scapegrace, sedition, separation, socialism, specta'culv, seismic.
Transposing, telepathic, telegrapher, trespass, trenthaat, turbulent, tantrums, telescope, tornado, tractor.

562 OB.VETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
Upheaval, unconventional, unusual, utopian, uranium,
unruly, Unexpected, upset, ultra, uncertain, usurp.
Vibrant, vagkbond, virulent, vupor, variation, volt.
Whimsical, whim, wayward, whiuk, whirlwind.
X-rays, machines and xray photos.
Zealot, zigzag, zoo.
V Neptune V
Absorb, aquamarine, asphyxiation, aesthetic, adulteration, anaesthetic, assuming, abstract, abstruse, accomplice, adaptable, addict, adoration, alcohol, alchemy, alibi,
amethyst, astral, aqueduct, ambiguous, artifice, adrift.
Beryl, bogus, bath, bathometer, beach, befog, beguile,
bewilder, bootlegging, bribery, billowy, Bohemian, ben- '
zine.
Clairscientient, coma, cataleptic, conspiracy, confusion,
eajolery, chaos, cheat, chicanery, clandestine, collusion,
canal' counterfeit, confound, camouflage, communism.
Dreamy, delusion, deception, distraught, doubtftil, debauch, defile, dike, dive, dilute, dissolve, dupe, dual.
Emotional, elusive, exceptional, enchanting, enervating, enigmatical, entice, engulf, evade, exotic, ether.
FandifuJ, fantasy, fake, fraud, finesse, fascination, feet,
fairy, formidable, fawning, fiddle, fishy, filmdom.
Glamour, graft, gullible, guile, gasoline, gelatin.
Hallucinations,* hazy, hysterical, half-wit, hypodermic,
harem, hoax, hydraulics, hydrotheraphy, hydrogen.
, Imaginative, idealistic, immaterial, impalpable, indefinite, inveigle, indulgent, incomprehensible, incense,
intrigue, inflate, irfundation, irrigate, illimitqjtde.
Kelp, kerosene.
lethargy, latency, liquid, limpid, lave, lure.
( Mediumistic, mystical, mysterious, morphine, morori,

.. PAST T*. ADDITIONAL STPPIBS 568
mountebank,, rtia'wkish, misrepresent, ^mobile, mermaid,
marine, melodious, maroon, mythology.
Nebulous, nlive, namby-pamby, narcotic, nautical,
naval, nymph, necromancy, nudist, navigate.
,Ocean, obscure* obsession, oversees, opiates, oil, oracle.
Psychic, psychometric, poetical, pretense, plotting,
Poseidon, poisoniijg, pervert, precarious, pliant, placid,
pollute, pool, putrid, presume, prophecy, prescience.
Questionable, quandary, quack# quiescent, quintessense, quixotic.
Recondite, revery, reverence, rendezvous, receptive.
Scheming, simulative, swindling, siren, spiritual, seer,
sea-faring, sea-green* seduce, somnambulism, stupor,
seraphim, sublimity, submarine, skulk, strategy, scandal,
scurrilous, subterfuge, seclusion, sorcerer, swim.
Trance, tenderness, transcendentalism, trident, tranquility, tangle, theurgy, tobacco, toxic, transfigure, tea.
Uncanny, urbanity, undine, undulating, untnask,
Utopia.
Vague, vacillating, volatile, vapor, visionary.
Weird, wsves, wade, wet, whimsfcal, wile.
Yacht, yeast, yogi.
Pluto
In mythology, Pluto is spoken of as the brother of
Jypitor and Neptune and ibis easy to see that the present
day gangster and racketeer is associated with financial
rake-offs, legal technicalities and gambling (it), narcotics
and li(fuor*(V). Mythology describes Pluto in eighth
house language, terms and similes, ^ With word}, that
describe Scorpio as his “home” or abode. PluMys well
described in "From Pioneer To Poet (T to K) in the
chapter on Scorpio, which gives a lengthy aiyd ’excellent
description of the virtues dnd talents of that sign.. In
observing the tendencies of the influence of [Pluto the 1#
vices are more in evidence than ‘its virtues, as sfipwn fcy

OENBTHLIACA.L ASTROLOGY
the following list V>f words. In the unupvploped type of
humanity the constructive and beneficial attributes of
Pluto are submerged and its vibrations are given a low
form of expression. That the expression ig'largely violent
bespeaks the strong power for good whif-h it may liberate
when people who are responsive to it exercise better selfcontrol and consideration for the rights and privileges of
others.
Vocabulary of Pluto
Abyss, adulterate, ambush, antichrist, alibi, alias', amnesia, annihilate, anonymous, atomic, atrocity, abduct,
accomplice, atom-bomb.
Betraying, bad, blase, baffle, bootlegger, booze, brimstone.
Callous, criminal, contempt, corrupt, convict, chasm,
conscience, covert, calamity, crematory.
Dross, defile, defiance, degradation, demon, depraved,
detective, degenerate, dice, dfevoid, death-rays, destroyer.
Evolution, embalming, eradicate, expunge, erase, enigma, evil.
Foul, fetid, filth, felon, fiendish, flaunt, fumigate.
Grave, ganglafid, guilty, Godless, gunman.
Havoc, hoodlum, hades, hell, hag, holocaust, horrible.
Infernal, inscrutible, immoral, impellent, impure, indifferent, intemperate, immortal, insatiable.
Kidnap-er-ing.
Lawlessness, lobt, lust. <
Meaace, malefattor, miscreant, mire, marsh, monster,
Mephistopheles, mustard-gas, moll, metamorphosis,
magic.
’Nudism, nullify, nefarious, Nihilist, nulj,
"Obfiferate, odiouS, obscene, outrageous.
Purify, putrid, perdition, pollute, pungent, passionate,
perpetratbr, prostrate, prostate, psychoanalysis; petpetuation; purgatory.
(Continued on page 590.)

PART V. ADDITIONAL STUDIES
see
PERTINENT POINTS
Geocentric Astrology
Geocentric Astrology is the oldest known system of
astro-science, being ’the <jne originally used by the an-
<^ents. •
When Copernicus discovered that the Sun was the
center of our solaf system, many who did not imderstand
the jfrinciples presumed his discovery would “explode”
astrology, and those who voiced fchis idea but revealed
their lack of correct information. As the masses.are not
generally familiar with the principles of astrology, that
incident has been incorrectly used by its opponents in
an effort to discredit the science.
The wisdom of ancient “wise" men was such that we
find to this day all of the astrologers of renown using
the same geocentric methods, but with many improvements, which conduce to greater accuracy through the
invention and use of various tables.
Ptolemy, (Claudius Ptolemoeus, Alexandria, Egypt,
second century A. D.) who is termed the "Father of
Rlodern Astrology," was a noted mathefnatician so highly skilled that many of his ideaj are incorporated in
present day astronomy. He made diligent research into
ancient writings on astrology and then compiled a celebrated work entitled, "The Tetrabiblos, or Quddre-partite,” being four books on the influence of stars and
planets. *
In .his gre^t work, “Th* Almagest,’* Ptolemy contributed to science the theory of. the movements of the
planets (geocentric.) His illustrated circles gave to the
Arabians great stimulus for further interest in fhis
science and it Is said they brought its predictive side up
to the highest art. The Arabians were noted f#r their
wonderful learning, their “observatories. . inventions and
the development of trigonometry. They ’substituted our
present numeral system fdr the old ponderous Raman
.numerals.

see
GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
JL
In the '19th century, 'Napier, a noted scientist, invented
the tables of logarithms to facilitate, Ijis astrological
researclv Only a few years ago Joseph G. Dalton, an
astronomer at one time connected with the Naval Observatory at Washington, D. C., Arranged a set of tables
called, “The Spherical Basis of Astrology,” (being a
Table of Houses for places b,etwefen 22 and 56 degrees
north latitude) as a contribution to the science of astrology for geocentric use, — that of finding the relation of
the earth in its axial rotation to the ascendant, midheaven, <fnd other points in the zodiac, which not only
makes it possible to appoint the signs and degrees around
the Earth as they actually are at any certain moment,
but al%o makes it possible to place planets in a chart in
their true zodiacal relation to the Earth.
Geocentric Astrology bases its calculations on planetary aspects or upon the distance between planets i"
connection with their angular relation to the Earth. The
angles (aspects) formed with Sun as center (heliocentric)
are altogether different from those with Earth as focusing point. We live on the Earth, — not on .the Sun. The
angle formed upon the Earth by two planets 60 zodiacal
degr«s apart is altogether different from angles made
by planets 90 or 120 degrees apart, each angle producing
a difference in vibration. Thus rome angular aspects
are benign, cohtsive or uniting in their nature, such as
the sextile aspect of 60 zodiacal degrees, whi(e the square
or right apgle aspect is disruptive or disintegrative.
Thus it is seen that Geocentric Astrology considers
these impirtant principles: The relation of the planets
to each other; the angles formed upon the EaVth by those
relationships ; the1 relation <)f the Earth by axial rotation
to pojnts of the r.odiac ancj ^o planets, producing their
.actual “house" positions in charts madef for different
latitudes.
' Copernicus did not "explode" astrology. Man; discovering something which he did not know before, does
not change any law of Natuie. The laws of Nature are
'eternal apd regain unchanged by man’s changing; ideas.
Whether dne thinks the Sun njoves around the Earth,
or {hinks the Earth revolves around the Sun, does not

PART V. ADDITIONAL STUDIES
change tl;e influence'of the Sun \ipofi the Ear,th, and it
is planetary influence shed upon the .Earth with which
astrology is ,rdo^t concerned. Therefore, no “explosion"
occurred, except in the minds of tllose who were unduly
perturbed by heing unaware of these fac'js.
Heliocentric /fstrcdogy was the outcome of Copernicus’ calculations ;„i. e., observations of the planets’ relation to the Sun. And Helio (Sun) centric (center)
methods are entirely correct for those beings who may
reside upon tho Spn. However, there are soiree features
of astrological research which may properly and beneficially use helio-centric positions, such as Astro-Meteorology.
Geo (earth) centric calculations have been found to be
more applicable for the inhabitants of the Earth, and as
before stated all astrologers of renown, both ancient and
modern, favor the geocentric system in the erection of
charts for interpreting planetary influence in relation to
human life and its affairs. That is, for convenience they
place the Earth in the center of a chart, and consider the
Sun as though traveling in the Earth’s orbit.
As in every four minutes of time the Earth turns one
degree, making a complete rotation of 360 degrees in
twenty-four hours, and as each degree rising on the
Ascendant or eastern horizon, gives a different influence,
it is’ readily seen why persons differ so, although thousands may' be born on the same dhy. This difference is
further multiplied by the twelve signs of the zodiac,
being traversed by the Earth during the year, and each
day rotating on its axis, while at the sarife time the
planets ar8 also moving in their orbits, changing aspects
between themsefves and thg Earth.
,, A ‘chart of> the heavens' g'eocentricafly made foi* a certain moment, for any certain place, will show the particular influences in operation which will affect the individual torn’ at {hat time and place.
If two individuals are b^rn at the same time dad place,
they will have similar characteristics, tastes and experiences, differentiated according to their different environment and heredity, and their stage of evolution.

568 GENETHLIACAL ^ASTROLOGY
A historical case in. Europe is cited, (of a pfince and a
peasant who wer# born at the same moment in the same
locality.' They looked very much alike, .Were ill of a
similar malady^at the same time, were .married on the
same date, and when the prince ascended the throne the
peasant opened a shop. They dietf or; the same day.
By taking geocentric motion into account, difference
in terrestrial latitude makes a difference in rising degrees, hence, two horoscopes made for, the same time and
date, but6 for different latitudes, would show difference
in the individuals. The importance of geocentric methods
is inestimable where'it is necessary to take into account
all of the various phenomena connected with the movements of the planets and their relation to the Earth,
including its own axial rotation.
Some have tried mixing heliocentric planetary positions with geocentric methods of casting a chart, but •
helio (sun) centric positions are planets in their relation
to the Sun, consequently, such method is not advisable.
Astrology from the time of the ancients to the present
is scientific in its principles. Various attempts have been
made to omit the scientific element and devise means of
character delineation without the use of much figuring,
but they are only partly successful. It is obvious tljat to
secure all information possible concerning the planetary
influences on which all life is dependent, it is necessary
to use ?U available means to interpret those influences,
hence, the*Earth being the vital center of influence for
its inhabitants, it is essential to notice its angular relation to planets, (by means of aspects) r.s well as its own
rotation whereby we find Us relation to points of the
zodiad for any location at aity' given time. >
however, with present day facilities in t,he form of
astrological schpols, classes, textbooks, correspondence
courses jind magazines, it is no longer a tedious or difficult matter to learn to cast -end delineate a horoscope,
and the knowledge acquired through the study of such
a chart is tff inestimable value.

FART V. ADDITIONAL STUDIES
* Horary Astrology *
One branch of astrology called "Horary” relates to
the word "horfis" meaning hour. It is a 'system of divination based upon a chart cast for a certain hour and minute, pertaining to a thought, question or event.
Horary Astrology bears out wonderfully the idea of
celestial correspondence to mundane affairs, exemplifying the sympathy existing between the operations of
mind* and planetary vibrations. Through the positions
and aspects of planets chemical changes occur in the
human organism which have,, an important bearing on
metabolism, and to a great extent determine the anabolistic and catabolistic activities. These subjective states
lead people to think of and ask questions of importance
at times when the planets bear definite relation to the
origin, nature and termination of the matters involved.
In Horary Astrology very much depends upon whether
an aspect is applying or separating; whether planets are
angular, succedent, cadent, dexter, sinister, etc. A number of considerations not usually employed in. Natal
Astrology are used in Horary, such as collection of light,
combustion, disposal of, frustration, reception, refranation, translation of light, void of courite, etc.
To become proficient in Horary1 Astrology one should
first become very familiar with Natal Astrology, especially as regards the casting of horoscopes, loqal time corrections, the nature of signs, plantts, houses and aspects.
This branch of astrology, is useful for answering specific .questions which arise as the result of sickness, accidents, journeys, news, reading.a letter, receiving a proposition and other matters which give a desire for information regarding the outcome.
Several .textbooks are available for the study of this
subject.

GENETH LIACAL ASTROLOGY
* Plariets in Business *
The commercial world is divided into “nine general
divisions, each ,ruled by a planet in the fallowing order:
Oil and fishing industry represented* by Neptune.
Railroads, aerial and electric industries by Uranus.,
Mining, farming and cement work by Saturn.
Manufacturing, building and munitions by Mar|.
Religious, legal an^ financial affairs by Jupiter.
Government represented by the Sun.
Entertainment, art and social functions by Venus.
Schools, intellectual affairs and publishing by Mercury.
Common employments represented by the Moon.
The influence of Vulcan and Pluto is not sufficiently
known to be classified in this manner. »
Each division is subject to nine sub-divisions which
in turn are ruled by the nine planets. Take the yil industry for example: The first division is ruled by Neptune itself, and fhe first impression is that this industry
is a "trust,” a vast, intricate, complicated scheme whereby the people represented by every othei planet down
the scale are frequently deceived and robbed, and the
power to jdo this is gained through secret intrigues,
lobbying interests anti other underhand and put-of-sight
methods. This represents Neptune’s vnfavorable influence; more correctly speaking, a gross interpretation or
manifestation of its influence, r The influence of a plangt
remains the same but otjr expression of it is modified m
various ways, that is, the awakened soul expresses (acts)
for' the good of all, while the unawakened (thorfe -on a
purely.material filaije) express the influence in selfishness
regardless of the welfare of osiers.
The second division of the industry under consideration »is ruled by Uranus, the' enlightener. (Oil is used

PART V, ADDITIONAL STDDIE3
for light and power.)" This planet governs the -transportation facilities connected therewith. ,The next division
is rulqd by Saturn and represents thfe oil well.diggers,
drillers, pipemen, etc. Jupiter represents the numerous
legal departments, )h$ financiers and 'Cashiers. Mars
represents the agents, contractors and the construction
departments. Sun governs the various directors and
fugh officials. Venus, being the octave of Neptune, in
this case expresses some of the latter’s subtleness by
extending and maintaining the influence and prosperity
of the industry through social intercourse at'» banquets
and either such functions given for the purpose of influencing various dignitaries in power, to gain desired ends.
Venus, therefore, rules the social and entertaining elements connected with the ente?prise. Mercury rules the
clerical forces, the advertising and the press agents
which it maintains. The Moon rules the teamsters and
other common employees and also the masses who buy
and consume the product.
Thus each of the general divisions first named is susceptible to subdivision, and, although in this example
we have brought out the faults rather than the virtues
of this particular industry, it is by no means without
virtues, for while there is room for vast improvement
in its methods and conduct of the business yet it provides employment and is a means of livelihood for many
thousands of men and women.
As yet this industry is expressing the influence of
Neptune in a very low manner but all these phases gradually evolve to a finer or more perfect order in- proportion
to the development or unfoldment of all the individuals
connected therewith: the employer, employee and consumer.
Of course, the foregoing allocations of planetary rulerships in business are general considerations. When we
say, for instance, that the Moon rules liquids, we mean
that it has dominion over the neutral or basic -humor
which, speaking physiologically, acts as a medium
whereby certain substances can act and react, or by
which they may be carried to various parts of the body
to be dissolved, resolved or expulsed.

GHNBTHLIACALr ASTROLOGY
The Moon is said to rule milk. Milk has a watery
basis (as many \uilkmen know !) represented by > ; it
has fatty constituents, V ; caseine and extractive -matter,
©; and salts, Therefore, when we,. say "the Moon
rules milk,” it is a general statement referring to its
fluidic quality, and not to the specific forms constituting
milk.
In the elementary study of astrology general terms
are popular but when approaching the science of astrology the ‘constituents, or elements, are specialized , by the
planetary, or sign, rulership.
Therefore, let us, as students of Nature (as interpreted
by astrology) endeavor to learn everything possible regarding the influence of the planets, and to express those
influences in the finest or highest manner of our understanding, thus setting a standard 'by our example that
others will be anxious to follow. ’■ ■
* Decans *
In Vecent years the word decan (dekan in ancient terminology) has been applied to a one-third division (ten
degrees) of the,zodiacal signs but research shows that
originally decans, and faces as they were also called, had
reference to the constellations.
Albumazer (Abu Masher) a noted Arabian physician
and astVoqomer who lived about one thousand years ago.
and whose writings tiave been commented (jn as of the
highest authority, by such men as Abgn Ezra, refers to
"the Decans and their houses (signs), according to
Babylonians, Egyptians and«Rersians,” sayjng,
"Here follow the Decans, which the Arabs call 'faces.’
They are three to each sign of the Way (zodiac).".
The'sa Decans of Faces, belonging to any^one particular sign, could easily be distinguished when they came
along the meridian coincident with or clo.se along with
the,aign to which they belonged. (They do not now
coincide.)

PART V,' ADDITIONAL STUDIES 578
The "terms” -as- given by Ptolemy ar^; the special divisions of the signs ; the “faces” (pictures) and “decans"
(side pieces) ar^the constellations, thirty-^ix in number.
To illustrate the importance given the decans or constellations by the ancient^, I have referred to many of them
in the twelve chapters on "The Zodiacal Signs,” in latter
pages of Part V.
However, in modern astrology the word Decan or
Decanate now has reference to the one-third division of
each sign. The original significance and beauty behind
the meaning of the divisions of the*constellations is almost lost, although all classical mythology and »every
religion are based upon their indications. But so far
have modern creeds departed from the parent meanings
that they actually deny their source when they deny
astrology
A decanate now consists of ten degrees or one-third
of a sign, hence there are three decans in each sign,
thirty-six in the zodiac. Two methods have been in use
for allocating the planetary ruler of each decanate.
The Oriental system names the ruler of decanates in
th^ order of the triplictties thus : First decanate of Aries
ruled by Mars, second by Sun, third by* Jupiter. This
seems 'to be tjie popular method. Tfce principle concerning decanates is that while a planet rules its^sign as a
whole and especially the first decanate (as Mars rules
Aries and also the first decanate of Aries), the other two
divisions of the sign each expresses a sub-influence of
the nature of the planets which rule the»remaining! signs
of the same triplicity. To illustrate: in the. case of Aries,
the Sun because ruling themext sign of’the fiery tripjicity, Leo, and Jupiter .because it rples the following sign
of the fiery triplicity, Sagittarius, are decanate co-rulens.

' 574 Oe'nfTHLIA.CAL ASTROLOGY
The following ta4je illustrates this arrangement.
The foregoing is the modern adaptation but one ancient system allocated the rulers of decans not by triplic- *
ity sign-rulers, but in the same order as the planetary
hours thus : Aries — Mars, Sun, Venus ; Taurus— Mercury,
Moon, Saturn ; Gemini — Jupiter, Mars, Sun ; and so on
in this order through the twelve signs. The term "face"
is sometimes incorrectly used to designate decan.
The use of the decanates in natal astrology is applicable principally to the ascending sign. By noting which
decanate is on the first cusp, gives an ideit' of how the
native is particularly expressing that sign, or rather, what
particular part of the sign he is expressing; this being
mainly, interpreted im terms of the planet which rules
that dacanate. For instance, if Leo is ascending the general significator of the pci^on is the Sun. If the 22nd
degree of Leo is. on the fir^cusp the personality is in
general described by the Sun, with Marses a sub-influence, thus adding to thd Leo-Sun tendencies more action,
force, desire and execution. In other words^in tiiis case
• Note If the planet discovered in 1930 and glvep the name of
Pluto proves to be the Pluto of the ancients, then, according
to mythology lt*fs ruler of the sign Scorpio. The decanates of
the watery Signs would consequently be srranged atf follows :
Cancer — Moon, Pinto, Neptune
.Scorpio — •Pinto, Neptune, Moon
•Pisces * — Neptune, Mood, Pinto

PAST V.~ ADDITIONAL 3TpblE3 575 '
Mars becomes* ah auxiliary ruler, of/ about tlje same
sta.tus is the planet which rules the'bfrth hour as shown
by planetary ho*ir tablef. The planet ruling the decanate
ascending should be given attention along with the other
planets which ar£ rulers in the horoscope
Progressed Decanates
In the progressed horoscope decanates crossing the
ascendent with the passing of years produce noticeable
changes in the temperament and characteristics of the
native. The year in which the degree beginning a new
decanate comes to the ascendant usually marks the beginning of new moods, inclinations, desirss and interests,
according to the nature of the planet ruling it and in
accordance with the ppsition and aspects of that planet.
Influence of Decanates
A very good idea of the influence of the decan may be
obtained by referring to a delineation of the planets by
signs and reading the planet which rules that dec;tn as
though it were in that sigh. For instance, if the progressed ascendant is Y*rS° 25th degree, it is in the Taurus* decanate, and as Taurus is ruled by Venus, read
“Venus in Taurus” t<5 obtain an idea of the influence
of that decaift
It is said by some who have studied the doct/ine of
karma in connection with astrology^ that you* Sun sign
in this incarnation will be your ascending sign.in the
next, that is, your<present individual or inherent qualities
will then manifest outwardly as personality ; it follows
tlytrefere, that the present* ascending sign was thd Sun
sign in the previous incarnation.
Wheft th8 Sun sign and Ascendant are the same," It
indicates that tlte individual is repeating experiences, and
will continu» to repeat until»the lessons of life are Jieeded
and utilized as a step in "Jacob's ladder" to ascend
’ towards the higher realms of expression.
Jacob represents the Sun ; his ladder with twelve steps
Are the signs ,of the zodiac. Thp signs are 'alsp repit-

GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
sented by his twelve sons, by the twelve tribes of Judah
and the twelve apq?t(es. The labors of Hercules denote
the Sun’s transit through the twelve zodiacal signs, Hercules representing the Sun. Sainpson also represents
the Sun ; his long hair, the sunbeams.
It is not the purpose of this work to enter into a detailed exposition of what is implied and expressed in the
various symbols of signs, stars and constellations, but
simply tocshow that what was written in the Scriptures,
as well as in allegory and mythology, is likewise written
in the skies, illustrating the axiom, “As above, so below,”
and shewing that the Bible contains much of astrological
significance.
Whatever is written in the stars above will be enacted
in events below. The references given in this book do
not come near to exhausting the subject ; they are but
a few of the many that could b« cited and are offered
with the hope that other researchers will complete the
chain of connecting links between celestial indications
and their terrestrial correspondences. The Old Testament ,was written long before the birth of Christ and its
references to the signs are often indicative of what was
yet to come; while the New Testament refers to what
did eventually happen to fulfill prophecy, in accordance
with those signs.
* Octaves *
(Planetary Relationship)
Venus and Neptune
Venus, ruler of the signs, Taurus and Libra,_ sometimes called "the love pair,” calls forth response from the
finer attributes of -the being, inclining to beauty, harmony, Sociability, gaiety and popular music.’ She gives
appreciation or.ability for art, for developing fine pictures
and producing beautiful music 'through skillful' touch.
Vibrations of Venus are affiliated with the sense of feeling.

PART V, ADDITIONAL STUDIES
Neptune is tarmed the octave of Vrnus. It reveres
beauty in its broader, deeper or universal aspect, "in contradistinction to personal appearances. Neptunian people are Bohemian rather than just sociable. They love
the weird more than .popular music. Venus may be said
to represent the cultivated musician; Neptune the inspired. Venus produces a realization of the nature of
objects by physical contact because it rules the sense of
touch', by which its ciualities may be observed. Neptune
can produce sensations without contact, by rrfeans of
inner or psychic feeling. Neptune rules the psychometric
faculty by which otherwise unknovfti qualities may be
described through the sense of fueling, ruled by Venus.
Venus and Neptune arc natural complements. Venus
is “exalted” in Neptune’s sign, Pisces. It may be noted
that from time immemorial a great number of people
have observed Friday (Venus day) as “fish” day. Students who use the “Improved Perpetual Planetary Hour
Book” are aware that Neptunian events almost invariably
occur in an hour ruled by Venus.
Between the personal interpretation of love, as symbolized,-by Venus, and the universal love of Neptune,
Jupiter, "hail fellow \$cll met," or "thc^ pillar of the
church,” stands as a bridge over which the love-seeking
Venusian musV.pass into an understanding of divine love.
It is significant that, until the discovery of Neptune,
Jupiter was assigned the rulership of both Sagittarius
and Pisces.
NIercury and Uranus
In the natural zodiac Mercury is ruler of the mental
signs, Gejmini, and Virgo. ■ .
Mercury rules ordinary mental piocesses through
which one acquires knowledge by observation, perception, reading, writing, speaking, listening.'
, Uranus is termed the octave of Mercury. It rules a
mental sign, also, Aquarius. It gpverns that' phase oL

578 QENETHLIACAL' ABTfiQLOGY
mind which is not dependent upon the ordinary 'perceptive processes. Mercury rules those ’things which describe a picture dr 'place, but Uranus rules the' things
which take yau there. Mercury repterents knowledg
we acquire through present conditions; Uranus represents accumulated wisdom gained through previous experiences manifesting as intuition.,. Mercury is the
learner; Uranus' is the knower. They are natural complements of which Uranus is the higher octave. Mercury
rules sifjht ; Uranus rules clairvoyance. ‘
Students who use^the “Planetary Hour Book” regularly are aware that events of Uranian nature occur almost
invariably in the planetary hours ruled by 'Mercury.
In Exodus 4, 14-16, the relationship between Mercury
and Uranus is clearly indicated where the Lord says to
Moses, "Is not Aaron (Mercury) thy brother? I know
that he can speak well And thou (Uranus) shalt
speak unto him and put words in his mouth.”- (Inform
him what to say.)
Saturn, ruler of Capricorn, was by the ancients given
the rulership of Aquarius also, thereby forming the connecting link in this mental chain ,from the objective, reflective qualitias of Mercury, through the profound, persevering, reasoning processes of Saturn to the lightninglike flashes of Urani'an intuition.
Stars and Planets
The word planet means “wanderer,” that is, a body
which travels (transits) jn, a particular orbit .in the
zodiac within a certain period of time. Its speed being
known, calculations are made astronomically (see
Ephemeris) which show the date when it will transit
through the Various signs and degree? of the zodiac;
also \}rtien it will 'be in conjunction or other aspect with
other 'planetary bodies. The calculated positions and
aspects .ape uSed by astrologers to deduqe t^ie influence
of .such configurations in, atcordance with the accented
rules of astrology.

PAltT V, • ADDITIONAL STUDIES
To a casual observer the principal difference between
a star and a planet is in the fact tljat/the star gives a
twinkling light' while a planet shines with a steady glow.
Through a telescope thtf planet appears as a disc. The
light shed from aspl^net is largely a reflection of that
received from the Sun.
Stars are often referred to as "fixed” because they do
not traverse the signs of the zodiac as do the "wanderers.” Some of th*e largest stars are thought to lie great
suns possessing their own systems.
Natal astrology is more concerned with planets than
with stars. Planets travel in the. zodiac which is a* belt
of space on both sides of the ecliptic witjiin which are
the orbits of the planets. In other words no stars are
located within the boundaries of the zodiac. The stars
are out in the constellations beyond the zodiacal circle.
The boundary of the zodiac, as at present known, extends to approximately eight degrees beyond the orbit
of Pluto.
Signs and Constellations
The constellations have the same names as the signs:
Aries, Taurus, etc., and at one time the signs and constellations of the same pame were side bjf side, but due
to a cohtinual shift the signs and constellations do not
now coincide. The "shift” is at the rSte of approximately fifty seconds of longitude per year, or one degree in
about Seventy-two years. That is to say, ouj Vernal
equinoctial point, Aries 0 degrees 0 ‘minutes, moves in
backward order so Jhat it passes the constellation Pisces
29th degree to 28th degree, and so on. At present (1944)
the 0 degrees Ojninutes of th« sign Aries is at about 10
decrees of the constellation Pisces, astronomers assert.
In 10 degrees more the beginning of the sign Aries will
reach the redr of the constellation Aquarius. At therate of approximately one degree in 72 yeaYs it will rj> n-»
tact Aquarius in about 720 \cars.
* As the.orb of the Sun is 12’ the equinoetial^point at
10' X indicates' that the Aquarian Age began to dayjn
, (by orb of influence) about ISO years ago, or at the time
of* our Declaration of Independence for the fusedom ofc

GBWBTHLIACAfc ASTROLOGY
the nation. Note that the words, •independence and
freedom, belongyo Aquarius.*
However, so far as the student is concerned in 'the
making of a horoscope, he need dob concern himself about
the forementioned movement of tjif v. hole solar system
through the constellations, as that factor does not enter
into the calculations for the birth cha’rt of an individual
in which are considered mainly the movements of the
bodies ip the zodiac, although it is accounted for in the
influents attributed to the signs, as shown in an article
entitled, "Signs and Constellations” in the book, ‘Towerful Planet's."
The, Fixed Stars
The zodiac '.nay be pictured as comprising our solar
system ; stars are objects of other systems. Stars are so
remote from the earth that their distance is best expressed by the term "light-years” to state the number t>f
years which light, traveling at the rate of 186,000 miles'
a second, would require to reach our globe. Planets are
so close, relatively, that their distance is but a few lightminutes. For instance, the Sun is approximately
93,000,000 miles away but its light-distance is approximately only five minutes.
Remote though some of the ^xed stars are, their
influence is near at hand, especially those which, are of
great magnitude arvl not too far north or south of the
zodiac. Although astrologers pay more attention to
planets, the influence of the principal fixed stars is by no
means neglected for their influence is important in a
horoscope when in the same degree of longitude as one
of the planets, especially if in one of the angles. For
instance, the life of Empei'or Franz Josef of Austria was
a succession of disasters mat.y of which ivere explained
as attributable r.ot alone to the conjunction of Sun,
Moon and Saturn, but to the fact that they were_ in conjunction with “Alphard” whose influence is a mixture
of Saturn and Vepus.
• A Hfcdu system of Astrology /which uses the “fixed zodiac" or
constellations, puts the equinoctial at 8* of Pisces.
Hots: An Important treatise on ““The Fixed Stars,” by L. H.
Weston. Is obtainable In a new, revised and enlarged edition.

PABT V, » ADDITIONAL STUDIES
TRIGONS
Triplicity of Sign
The four triplicKic$.of signs manifest in humanity as
four specific temperaments.*
The Fiery Triplicity is represented by the choleric or
bilious temperamenj, exhibiting a rash, feverish* easilyexcited. or impulsive nature with inflammatory and
bilious affections, sudden illness generally acute, but
usually of short duration. *
The fiery signs icpresent the vital spipt, the bodily
heat with its elements of combustion, all of which incline
to activity: political, military and speculative interests.
To this triplicity of fire and spirit belong the little
nature spirits commonly called Salamanders.
The Earthly *Triplicity is represented by the nervous
temperament more especially noticed through Virgo and
Capricorn, exhibiting alert, restless, .worried, agitated,
neurasthenic characteristics, with predisposition to rheumatism and chronic disorders. The earthjy signs represent thp physical or temporal states all of which produce
artistic, imaginative, studious and organizing tendencies.
"Little folk of the hills and vales,” or Gnomes, as they
are usually called, have especial affinjjy for the triplicity
of earth.
The Airy Triplicity is represented by the sanguine
temperament, exhibiting acrtv* circulation, plump body,
good complexion, genial nature, .cheerful anticipation,
good fellowship and general dexterity. The airy signs,
are said fo represent the relative or connective conditions
both within and without the body. For.instance, Qetfiini "
rules the nervous system whi#h connects the entire body ;
it also rules those of kin, ds brothers, sisters, pousins
and even" neighbors, with whom the native is associated.
In this airy family we finS another "relative” not ordifi-
'arjly included in that category, — Sylphs.

OENETH LIACAL ASTROLOGY
r ' f
This trigon expresses as active, scientific and industrial.
Has tendency taward illnesses arisin'g 'irpm exhaustion
or ove’r-exertion\
The Watery Triplicity is represfcnted by the lymphatic
temperament exhibiting as languidrafiaemic, pallid, weak
pulsed, lack of red corpuscles in the ,b!ood and deficient
vascular action'." The watery trigon represents the fhutational and propagative conditions. Cancer: milk, digestive juices, gastric juice, ptyalin, pSncreatic diastase,
saliva, chyme and albumen. Scorpio: excrementitious
fluids, urine, mense^s, perspiration. Pisces: pleural, peritoneal and synovial serums, intestinal mucus. This
triplfcity is known as emotional, plastic, contemplative.
Sprites of the waters, the Undines, find their best expression through the watery signs,.
By what has been said it will be noticed that the bilious
and sanguine act; the nervous and lymphatic think and
feel. When a physician determines the temperament o,
a patient he is aware to some extent of the type of disorders likely to eventuate, as distinguished from those
habitual to the other temperaments. This diagnosis is
furthered by inspecting the natal chart indicating other
tendencies, while the progressed''horoscope reveals ,the
present indications of disorders. -•
Trigonal Description of Houses
Note : r. By careful attention and study of the house
trigonals, the stude'nt will be better enabled to read or
delineate horoscopes. This triune association of houses
helps to correlate kindred "Subjects and makes the matter
easifcr to comprehend and» remember than if the house
indications are merely memorized in rotation or in a disassociated manner.
< It will be re‘me,mbered that the houses indicate (show
direct^&n), the planets influence, and the signs with
their degrees bestow and measure the spiritual or inherr
ent qualities. In other words : The houses indicate certain
things; a planet in a house irffluences or activates the
things indicated by it in accordance with the nature of

PART V,. ADDITIONAL STUDIES
the planet. The signs measure the planets’ aspects and
bestow other, Influences according to the nature and
quality' of that sign. To get an idea tif^iow planets affect
each house, refer to the,chapter headed, ‘IHouse Rulers,
Significance When Located in Other Houses,” in Part
The’First Trigon of Houses
first — Fifth — Ninth
The'First House, space or segment of a chart is referred to as the Ascendant. Due teethe line of its angle
being level wjth the horizon, and due also to the garth's
rotation from west to cast, planets ascending from
under the Earth become visible as they* appear at this
line called the Cusp of First House.
The zodiacal sign and degree passing over the cusp of
First House at moment of birth bear a very important
influence upon the native’s life, health, disposition, tendencies and personality, according to the nature of the
sign occupying this cusp, much of which may be determined by referring to the chapter headed, "Influence of
Ascending Signs,” in Part III.
’The First House has more influence tlfen any other on
the pdrson or "mask.” It largely determines the various
changes constantly taking place in Ae health ;jnd constitution, also the mental and emotional states, causing
reflexes and reactions according to the nature <jf the sign
and any planets which may be in that house.
Any planets occupying that space designated as the
First House also have a sv<yig influenee on the life, according to their nature. Likewise, do such other elements as prominent fixed stars, the Moon’s Nodes and
Pars Ffcrtuflae.
It is therefore very important to nave the' Accurate
birth time in order to ascertain correctly, what sign and
degree <are. parsing over this critical angfe. ^There is a
vast difference between’ the endowments of the twelve
jigns.

OENETHLIACAI, ASTROLOGY
i i f .
As tht First House, or Ascendant, has such a ^marked
effect upon the life of the native, it is evident that the
other houses of tAe (jhart which perpetuate' and enlighten
life, should be considered in connection with it.
As children, or the native’s offering, perpetuate life
in the world (Fifth House), And as knowledge sustains
it progressively. (Ninth House), so 'the houses which
contribute these blessings to the life already given are
joined in an harmonious trine with the. First, making a
three-fol^. channel of influence which’ has a strong bearing on the life.
Th^ Fifth House indicates our children or the lack of
them, according to whether the sign and planets having
dominion over It are fruitful or barren ; our loves, pleasures, passions, sports and hazards or speculations. The
Fifth House, reckoned from the Fourth as the Seconal,
would then indicate what monetary gain we might or
might not make by dealing in real estate, property or
mines, which the Fourth House designates.
The Ninth House denotes our mental offspring, inventisn, discovery, exploration ; the degree of knowledge
we may develop, whether collegiate, academic, philosophical, legal, religious, scientific, artistic or literary. This
house has to do ‘with dreams, visions, spiritual impulses,
voyaging and foreignf affairs. The Ninth Hpuse indicates
publishing, especially volumes of intrinsic value, relating
to religion, science, law, medicine, travel, foreign affairs,
philosophy, textbooks, permanent records, statistics and
education, in contradistinction to the opposite or Third
House ‘which indicates lighter reading, 0news and matter
of ephemeral nature. Beirrg the Third, reckoned from
the Seventh, it denotes the partner’s relatives or brothers,
sisters and cousins. If {he planet in the Ninth, or ruler
of it, is in affliction with the planet ruling the Ascendant
or 'planet in the Ascendant, the native has’ lessons to
learn , through friction with the partner’^ relatives and
would jlso be liable to trouble in foreign lands; all in
accordance with the nature of the afflicting planet.

PART V, ADDITIONAL STUDIES
The ^Second Trigon of Houses
Second — Sixth — .T'jnth
As the first frigon of houses embrace* man’s life, his
children, his GofJ or philosophy, and his learning, the
second trigon consisting of the Tenth, Second and Sixth
Rouses appertains to the second stage, of his existence
embracing his actions or'honor, his sickness or servants,
his wealth or possessions. These houses are situated in
trine to each otfiei’, the Tenth being angular, tVe Second
succedent and the Sixth cadent.
Tenth House : The idea of this trigonal connection
is to illustrate worldly attainment through honors, wealth
and servants, the highest worldly attaimnents being indicated by the highest house (Tenth) in the scheme of
life portrayed in the .horoscope : honor, reputation, popularity, dignity, office, authority, power, advancement,
preferment, or by any conditions through which he acquires superiority or affluence, as in -the professions, by
elections or appointments, or through the mother. Because these things represent material or earthly dignities
they correspond with the earthly signs: Tenth House,
Capricorn; Second, Taurus; Sixth, Virgo. The Tenth
House also has reference to the government, the president or monarch, party in power, royalty; eminent, distinguished or famous persons; also national trade, credit,
popularity o j power; the mothefr, father-in-law, the
fathers and property of persons ruled by tfie Seventh
House; the first child of tenants or servants.
Sixth Hojise : The second degree or phase of jvorldly
attainment is conneived to arise from servants, domestics,
employees, tenants, by mean* of small^animals or fowls,
fyam native's. own work belabor, or* through services
performed in matters of hygiene, sanitation, dietetics,
herbs, nursing, doctoring. This Sixth House has also
some- connection with the civil service, .army and navy
affairs, public* health and sickness* food, prpvenddr,
uncles and aunts from the father’s side, being the Third
House, counting the Fourtll as First.
Second House : The tfiird phase of worldly attainment
by honors, matter material and animated, is by means of

QENETHLIACAL 'ASTROLOGY
possessions of extrinsic value such ar, money or those
things held to represent money in vlli&l>le effects as
jewelry, 'precious Rories, bonds, securities, shares, ’stocks,
notes, mortgages, the bank balance, on other movable,
exchangeable, negotiable assets held as representing
wealth. The Second House has ok;o* some connection
with the national wealth, the exchequer, revenue, taxation and bank?; death of wife, husband, partner br
public enemy, being the Eighth House, counting the.Seventh as first. (Turning a chart aroilnd so that the
Seventh House is the First, makes this Second »House
occupy the Eighth spface; hence the reference to partner’s
demise.)
Tlje Third Trigon of Houses
Third — Seventh — Eleventh
The third trigon embraces the Seventh, Third and ,
Eleventh Houses which are, respectively, angular, cadent, succedent, and are in same respect similar to the
airy triplicity of signs: Libra, Gemini, Aquarius. This
trigon pertains to worldly connections. As the first
trigonal referred to man, his offspring and his knowledge,
the second to his honor, work and wealth, the third
represents his connections whether by marriage', consanguinity or fri'endship. In this respect man is joined in
a three-fold tie or obligation : in body, in blood, in friendship. ,
Sevefith, House: He is joined in body by the most
important of earthlj ties, — matrimony, wherein he is
sanctioned to "increase and multiply.’, This important
feature is ruled by the Sevorrth House, which also designates* the business partner* and others with whom he
deals or consummates contracts; also those with whom
he comes into conflict 'through arguments, duels, lawsuits (open enemies) or robbery, particularly "holdups,”
as burglars or sheak thieves are indicated'by the Twelfth
House. 1 This house (Seventy) may also be said to indicate divorces, .partings, runaways, fugitives, fines, con- ,
tests, battles, his third brother or sister, ,hi& physician,
grandfather, his second child'; children of brethren being
the Fifth counting the Third as First. In the branch of

PART V, ADDITIONAL STUDIES 587
astroVJgy called .“Mundane” the Seventh House relates
to forejgn affairs, relations with other powers whether
friendly or Jiostile, political or commercial. *
Third House: ThS second phase of man’s worldly
connections is siershy the Third House which deals with
his kindred or family relations : brothers and sisters in
general, but the first brother or sister in particular;
cousins, friends of children, children of friends; private
enemies of faihef, being the Twelfth House from the
Fourth; the sickness of the mother, being the Sixth from
the Tenth. The Third House also refers to neighbors
and messengers, news of transit,*short or inland journeys, postoffices, letter boxes, betters, rumors, news, publications such as newspapers and magazines, means of
information, messages, telephone, telegraph, radio reports, air-mail, air-way travel, auto trips, bus and street
.car travel, including river transportation and traffic;
neighboring counties and nations and treaties with them;
libraries, bookstores, bridges.
Eleventh House : The Third phase of man’s worldly
obligations is denoted by the Eleventh House, "the
house of friends." Friendships may be the "medicine of
life'Vor the “bane of existence,” according to the testimonies of this house and how the native reacts to them.
It indicates those who are allied to him by likeness or
sympathy <jf interest in lodges, societies, conventions,
communities, brotherhoods, co-operations ;• adherents,
supporters, colleagues; acquaintanceship, fellowship and
fraternal sympathies. It has much to do with his hopes
and wishes, especially where they are allied wi^fi or dependent upon friends. It bears relation to the senate,
congress, house of represerltatives, the town or county
hoards of commission erst aldermen and civic organizations. Being the Second, counting the Tenth as First,
it denotes.the emoluments of office. It denotes the fifth
brother or sister, the fourth child. It sljpws the termination of a will*or legacy, being the Eourth, couptmg the
Eighth as First.

GENETHLIACAL XSTBOLOOY
The Fourth Trigon of Houses
Fourty • Eighth — Twelfth '
The fourth trigon includes the Fourth, Twelfth and
Eighth Houses, which are respectively,rangular, cadent
and succedent, and are in some respects similar to the
water signs Cancer, Pisces and Scorpio.'
Fourth House: The lower angle or Fourth House is
called the" bottom of Heaven, the depth of nighf, the
grave, the den or cave of the planets. As the opposite
house shows what ma'.i may rise to in the world, this, on
the contrary, shows whaf and when shall be his fall,
decrepitude and<decay. This house bears significance
to the termination, conclusion or end of every undertaking. It denotes elderly people, the father, wealth of
first brother or sister, the private enemies of children,
the profession of husband or of open enemies, the sickness of friends, the friends of servants or employees.
This house denotes matters relating to land, property,
houses, foundations, mines, buried treasure; homesteads,
real estate, farms, ancient dwellings, gardens, orchards,
fields, pastures, sheep folds. In the purchase of ground
it shows whether it is fruitful, barren, stony, hilly,
marshy, etc.
I once greatly surprised a client, who was asking a
question about some land, by telling him that at times
it was as much as four feet under water. This was
shown in the Horary chart by four degrees of Cancer on
Fourth'Cusp, Moon in'Fourth adverse to Mars. Investigation proved the. land subject to backwater from the
tides. He did not purchase. 1
Twelfth House : The second in order of human affliction is the Twelfth House, representing tribulation, sorrow and self-undoing, arising either from treachdiry or
persecution by sehref enemies, from the bofids of restriction, or .from want, poverty, ignorance or disease. It
indicates such things as kidnapping, poisoning, bootlegging, opiuSn, tra'de, smuggling, blackmailing. It -rules
such ‘places as jails, hospitals and other institutions of
correction or detention, or any enclosure where liberty is

PART V, ADDITIONAL STUDIES
curtailed. T^is *is the Fourth from the Ninth House
which Irelatis to the higher mind ; it is fouy houses
from the Third which relates to ftye lower or ordinary
mental processes ; theaefore, this Twelfth House relates
to the occult or jecret workings of the mind and denotes
also schemes, plots,* frauds, swindles, intrigue, cabals,
conspiracy, or obsession. * ,
I-once shocked a client, when after looking a^t his natal
chart, I said, “Yoti have suffered greatly through fear of
imprisonment due to having shot and killed a man in a
public house." He paled and admitted that it was so,
happening in a saloon brawl but done in self ejefense.
_The Moon, hiler of the Twelfth, was in the First (fear
"of imprisonment; (Moon rules public plates, also houses)
located in Leo right between Mars and Saturn. Mars
conjunction Saturn indicates violence. Mars rules fire-
,krms and shooting; Saturn rules death. Leo being masculine indicated that the victim was male. The client had
the Sun in the Ascendant sufficiently far enough away
not to be afflicted by these planets, and Sun being the
“dispositor” of them all, was king in his own domar
consequently, he was never found out; i. e., it was«nev«.r
discovered who did the shooting.
• Eighth House : The last phase of man’s experience
is that of death : his transition or his rebirth into another
state of manifestation, the Eighth* House denoting disincarnation as the First House denotes incarnation. It
represents dissolution or the chemistry denoted by the
words, “ashes to ashes, dust to dust,” concerning the
body, per^rn or mask. It indicates the kind »f death
whether public, 'priVate, glprious, ignominious, sudden
or slow, due to chronic disease, drowning, fire, poison or
Suicide. This house is said*to rule wills, legacies, insurance policies or possessions of the deceased. It denotes
the tqpney of husband, wife or partner, (the Eighth
House being tfie Second, counting the Seventh as First)
substance or wealth of a third brothel- or sister psitkness
of first brother or sister; t Ac pleasures or speculations of
father ; the profession or honor of friends; the religion
of secret ehefhies (if any) ; in speculation, the'end cr^outcome being the Fifth, counting from the Fourth as First.

GENETHLIACAL ASTBOEOGY
Taking the horoscope of the notorious Hickman as a
study of house triganals, we find that Jupitt-r rufed the
Twelfth and First Houses; it was posited jn the Eighth';
he caused his own undoing by means of kidnapping,
schemes and plots. Mars was on cusp« of the Fourth,
square to Uranus and Neptune, denoting imprisonment.
Moon was in his Ascendant in Capricorn, its detriment, -
showing publicity of undesirable or shameful nature. It
will be noticed that Uranus in Ascendant was opposition
Neptune, representing an abnormal creature. Gemini
was on Seventh Cusp .... twins caused his public open
enemies. Mars afflictftd on Fourth Cusp indicates unfavorable parental and environmental conditions. Birth
data: February 1st, 1908, about 4:30 a. m. (reported
time) ; latitude 34 degrees north, longitude 118 west.
In treating these trigons, terms usually used only in
connection with Horary Astrology, such as "wealth of’
partner, being the Second, counting Seventh House as
First,” have been included because the sagacious student will be enabled to employ many of them in natal
interpretation and read more from charts than otherwise
were these little side-views not introduced.
Pluto
(Continued from pagd 564.)
Reproduction, ravage, reprobate, rogue, ransom, rubbish, rotting, relentless, reversion, racketeer, regimentation, renewal, regenerate readjustment, recuperation,
reincarnation.
Superphysical, se'ptic, sewep, steel, ‘scavenger, sardonic,
sedition, slime, sadistic, slough, severe, sinister, sooil,
stoic, stoolpigeon, scorn, smut, swamp, sexual, sulphur-'
ous, siren, swag, subnormal, subconscious.
Terse, toxemia, ^terrible, taciturn, tapeworm, treachery,
tr^nsforn^er.
Underworld, unknown, unscrupulous, ungodly.
Vanish, "vindictive, victim, violent, vampire, vermin,
venorti, virus.
Wicked, wretch, waste, (See also pages 333-4.)

PAST Vf ADDITIONAL 3 TOD IBS
By Way of Interesting ‘Research
Let Us Investigate^ the Intriguing Subject of Twins.
Not long ago a jvell-knoWn Sunday newspaper devoted
aft entire page to featuring a discourse on this subj'ect by
a noted writer who skillfully analysed tendencies, traits,
“accidents,” heritage, and whatnot in an effort to account
for tvuins, but finally admitted the futility of his effort.
However, before letting the subj’egt fall negatively flat
he made the remark, (by way of apology, I suppose) :
"Even astrology offers no solution!”
But astrology does offer a solution. At least if astrological principles ara not taken into consideration, the
subject of twin births remains very puzzling. Sometimes
• twins look alike ; sometimes they do not. Sometimes they
are of the same sex ; sometimes opposite.
What woulcl be more natural than to surmise, when
born very near the same time, that twins should look
very much alike? But often they do not. To the contrary,'‘"often when b<vn with the lapse of an hour or so
between, they look very much alike, when in such cases
it would seem that they should appear dissimilar.
By way of illustration let us consider a case which
came under my observation, — a very unusual oase and
one very difficult to explain satisfactorily ’except by
means of ifctrology. I spent twenty years in the city
where these twins weVe bori\ and had the opportunity of
watching their development from birtja to maturity.
The case surely proved interesting, because, although
born tyrt four minutes apart, the boy and girl grew* to
manifest very dissimilar characteristics in addition to being quite different in appearance.
* Due to the earth’s rotation on its axis*, .making a complete tftrn tvery twenty-four hours, a new degree of the
zodiac appears on the eastern horizon every four miifutes
.and a new sign appears every two hours. .Astrological 1

OENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
researchers are very particular as 'to the; time of a birth,
in order to determine exactly what degree a. id sign were
on the eastern horizrn when the blessed event occurred.
"Each star has its own glory,” quoje^, the Bible. Astrologers have determined that each of the twelve signs
has its own distinctive qualities which are bestowed
upon individuals according to their birthday. In fact,
during the long ages in which some of the brighcest
minds of the world have given attention to the influence
of the signs of the zodiac, it has developed that each of
the 360 degrees, constituting the zodiacal circle, has a
specific, influence, and i^ various ways tjiey express
themselves in individuals in whose life they have association through relationship at time of birth.
At the moment of birth one of the twelve signs of the
zodiac, and one degree out of the thirty degrees constituting that particular sign, are ascending on the eastern
horizon, and these largely determine the personality and
characteristics of the individual.
It is^ obvious that, as the earth turns one degree in
four minutes, thirty degrees or one sign will appear and
pass up over the horizon every two hours; while during
the twenty-four hours of one day all the signs and degrees will have passed the horizon. Consequently, it
would seem that during the day (and night) there would
be born twdlve types (signs) of characters, with thirty
variations (degrees) in each sign-type. By this is seen
one reason tvhy humans differ, instead of being all alike,
when bom on the same day. To accentuate this dissimilarity among thos£ closely related in point of time (but
disassofiated in point of space) we have also to consider
such elements as race, caste atid hereditary- strain.
However, we are mainly concerned with potent astrological influences.^ If the earth’s rotation ori its axis were
the only factor involved, we would have the comparatively limited number of 360 chi racters representing 360
zodiacal degrees. differentiated’^!1 groups of thirty) by
the twelve signs. But in reality, this number is augmented
by the fact that during rotation on its axis in one day
.he earth is ?lso transiting one degree along its orbit,

PART Y< ADDITIONAL STUDIES
thereby each^c^y ‘giving a new variety to the types and
the 360 Variations, of those born ir^ that rotation. This
variety multiplies for approximatelyythirty days during
which time the’earth, v*ill have traversed thirty degrees
in orbit and will ih^n enter the next sign of the zodiac,
to repeat the daily variations with a different lot of
individuals under » new month-sign. The orbital transit
from one sign to another determines the type of individuality while, as before stated, the rotation on a?is determines the type of personality. Thus, people hotm in the
same Wrth-month sign inherently possess similar individualities, but the date of the month»and the time of day
both operate to provide different personalities. •
Astrologically the individuality is designated by the
apparent zodiacal position of the Sun ; personality is
designated by the ascending degree and sign due to the
relative axial position of the earth as indicated from any
•certain latitude.
Individuality may he considered as inherent qualities,
tendencies and* latent powers. Personality may be regarded as the style or nature of expression.
Individually he is what he knows himself to be; by
his personality (expression) he is known to others. (Personal meaning mask.) It has been said Itv esoteric students t+iat your ascending sign in this birth was your
Sun-sign in i>,ie preceding incarnation; what, is your
Sun-sign now will be your ascending sign in the next life.
If your Sun-sign and your Rising-sign are now tpe lame,
you are repeating because having failed to express properly or fully'in your previous incarnationTo recapitulate, we may arrange the factors as follows:
Axial Rotation of the Earth in 24 Hours;
Shows ^a ne.w ascending degree every 4 minutes;
Shows a new A>diacal sign every 2 hours;
Shows 12 signs of 360 degrees every 24 hours.
Produces 360 variations jier. day (axial) multiplied Ity
365 days- per year (orbital) equals 131,400 variations of
personality yearly.

QEPETHLIACAL 'ASTRQLOGYOrbital Revolution of the Earth:
Transits through ,one degree (approximately) each
day; V
Transits through one sign each month, giving Sun’s
appearance of passing through a si^n each month.
Transits throdgh whole zodiac in one year.
Equals 360 variations of individuality yearly.
Adding the variations produced by these Earth . movements, we have a t<jtal of 131,760 astrological types.
To1 this great variety of differences manifested in
human beings, ^other astrological factors must be reckoned. Among a few of those which make considerable
difference might be mentioned: The Sun either above or
below the horizon at moment of birth ; the Moon above
or below; the Moon’s distance from the ascendant; any
planets (or none) in the ascendant; the location and
position of the planet ruling the ascendant; the location
and position of the other planets by sign and house, the
latitude and longitude of the place of birth ; etc. All
these factors act to produce the innumerable specimens
of humanity.
f
It is amusing to hear people say, “I do not believe in
astrology, because if it were true all those born "on the
same day, would be "alike.” This simply siiows that such
persons are basing a belief on something they do not
understand, or have not investigated. In the foregoing
it is clea‘rly shown i-that astrology, probably better than
anything else, accounts for the difference in people, not
only in nations 'and races,, but alio fot the differences in
members of ou» own families.
In most cases where people oppose astrology, it is
.their own erroneous opinion to which they qbject. They
lack correct knowledge of the factors involved and try
‘to find fault with' a subject because, either through misinformation or insufficient knowledge of thte subject, the
concepts which they hold are objectionable. <
•When the foregoing element's involved in a natal horoscope are reviewed, it takes us back to the first premise :

PART V, .ADDITIONAL STUDIES _ 596
That in*astrdlogy we shall find elements which 4ogically
account for the difference in twins* >
Let it be eveg Remembered that when speaking of
planetary vibrations We must needs include the Earth,
for it, too, is a planet traversing its cwn orbit in the
zSdiac, in common with the other planets which circle
about the Sun, each in its own prescribed patji.
In (geocentric astrology an important factor is the
Earth’s axial rotation, because the ^irth time calculated
with sidereal time, determines the relation of the hjrizon
to the zodiac.* That is to say, the birth time reveals what
zodiacal sign and degree were on the ascendant at
moment of birth, "the star in the east,” as it were, when
you were born.
The rotation of the Earth on its axis from west to east
is of a speed which causes a new degree of the zodiac
to appear to rise over the eastern horizon every four
minutes, thus, *on an average of every two hours a new
sign appears on the ascendant : 30 degrees multiplied by
4 minutes equals 120 minutes or 2 hours. As the Earth’s
circumference is approximately 24,000 (plus) miles it is
obvious that its axial speed is about l,000«miles per hour,
while yi orbit it is traveling at a rate of approximately
eighteen milcr,per second and thus itransiting from one
degree to another in its zodiacal path, it travels about
1,500,000 miles per day; a great journey of* over
500,000,000 miles around the Sun yeailyThese astronomical figures are given to»stress the timevalues in horoscope work. Whtn these Earth movements
ar^ considered, especially th» rotation on axis wherein
for two hours the ascendant or eastern horizon is going
through the same sign, it will be seen that at the end of.
each 30th degree the sign changes and the.next in order_
begins to rise.
^wins Born Four Minutes Apart Were Very Different
We spoke of the twins' born but four minutes apart
•who were so different in every way, while it wpuld seem,
tjiey should look exactly alike. •

OEMETHLIACAL ASTROEOOY
I was well acquainted with the prospective father and
urged hitn to secure the exact time A. each birth: .1 say
“each” birth bepausv about six months previously when
there were indications of a family, increase, he asked
about the matter and a horary chaft,made for the time
of the query clearly indicated that his wife was "enciente,” and because Mercury and Vt'nus were in thp
same degree in Gemini in the eleventh space of the chart,
it was easy to predict twins : a boy and a girl. Mercury
in Gemini, masculine; while Venus furnished the feminine indication. The Moon being in a position 'which
designated months, t'ne number of degrees and minutes
required for Luna to make an aspect to th^ two planets
told of the week in which the births would occur; a cab
culation which subsequently proved correct.
In the horary chart mentioned the sign Leo was on
the ascendant or first house cusp. Leo is the fifth sign
of the zodiac and has reference to children. Very significant that of his own free will he should ask the question about progeny when the sign denoting such was on
the ascendant. As he was in reality asking on behalf of
his wife, we turned the chart half around; (placing the
seventh house where the first had been), thus giving
Aquarius as the ascendant. (The planets which were in
the eleventh htmse now occupy. the fifth house, — the
house of her children.) To those not versed in horoscopy
these correspondences seem astounding, bfct’to the practitioner they arr- not unusual for he expects, nay, demands? tjjat the testimonies rendered by celestial phenomena coincide exactly with the facts, events or conditions. *‘NevertheJess it is almost uncanny Sbmetimes to
see how the indications of a horoscope* exactly tally with
known facts and*with events jvhich afterwards transpire.
Horary is a branch of astrology which has been much
abused, because misused in trying' to find .answers for
commonplace or impossible matters; but when* applied
to strious and important matters such ‘as before mentioned* it becomes a valuably adjunct to the researcher.
It provfs that nothing happens by chance, that order,
rujis through all things, and that there is a1 law of correspondences constantly at worV. The rules for answering such questions are well defined in works dealing with

PART*V. additional studies
Horary astrology, but require great discrimination in
application.*
The eventfuf day arrived. The clock time was carefully
recorded for eacji Jiirth and after the proper. adjustment
was made between ’the standard clock time and mean
[ime for that longitude, it was found th*t they were born
just as the sign on the ascendant was changing. The boy
was born wheq the last degree of Virgo was .ascending
while the girl borfi four minutes later had the beginning
of Libra rising.
The planetary significator of the boy was Mercury;
that of the girl, Venus. In childhood the boy was shy
•and retiring; the girl enjoyed readily made friendships.
In youth the boy was quiet, studious and frugal ; the girl
was sociable, dressy ;tnd extravagant. He was dark and
slender; she was fair and plump. The youth became a
“messenger,” then a clerk, then owner of a grocery store.
Note that Mercury indicates messengers and clerks, while
Virgo indicates foodstuffs. The girl took music lessons,
became a milliner and dressmaker; all Venusian occupations. In fact, they were just as different as could be,
and as they should be, according to astrology, being born
with different signs syscending though only four minutes
apart.
Twins Born £n Hour Apart Were# Alike As Two Peas
Another case which came under my observation of
twins who looked as alike as two peas : These two young
men were the bane of their friends, with their poetical
jokes of substituting for each other. No one could tell
which was which. They cortfided in me that one often
v^ent out witlj the other’s ‘girl just for* a lark, until the
young ladies were in despair and perplexity. Not only
did they look alike but their habits were the same: they
dressed* aliUe, wore each other’s clothes, had the same
likes and dislikis, were ill at the same .time, they jvorked
in the same store and the girls they were in loue with
were sisters.
With" all* th'ese similar tfaits it would naturally'be
supposed that they were born at very nearly the same
time. But strange to say, thqy Were not. Yet astrology

,*>98 GEfjETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
better than anything else, logically accounts for the facts.
They w^re born in the month of Gemini, symbolized by
the Heavenly Twinf.'and of that sign they were typical
specimens as individuals. They ,,were born one whole
hour apart, but at a time when the sign Gemini was on
the ascendant at each birth. It will-be recalled that each
sign of the zodiaj rules the ascendant tor an average of
two hours daily; in twenty-four hours all of the signs
will have risen over the eastern horizon, — the most critical or important place in a horoscope*
Perhaps it might £e argued that in large hospitals
where births are occurring every few minutes, children
born nearly at the same-time do not always resemble
each other, although some have the same sign rising.
In such instances it should be remembered that although
born at the same place and at nearly the same time,
coition and conception took place at different times >, >d
at different places, with gestation in entirely different
environments, therefore the subject of Twin-Births must
be considered further in relation to the Pre-natal chart,
also to heredity, environment and other factors involving
physiological and psychological principles. Recently a
metropolitan daily newspaper carried the following item ;
0Stars Affect Here&ityl
"Savants Find Stajs Affect Heredity," is the basis of
a report by the Associated Press, which goes on to say,
"A possibility that stars affect heredity slightly is shown
in measurements of cosmic rays announced by two
University of Denver physicists. Many scientists believe
these invisible rays come from the stars. The Denver
men, J. C. Stearns and Wilcox Overback, compared them
with fadium rayrf and found striking similarities. Heredity comes into the picture because one of the latest discoveries of science shows that radium rays can affect
heredity, even creating new species.'
Referring to the newspaper story beforementioned,
which failed tq -account satisfactorily for "twins,” it now
becomes’obvious that any such research, by any means
whStsoever, must necessarily bfe incomplete and faulty
unless the astrological factors are also taken into account.

PART V, ADDITIONAL STCDIES 899'
Universe makers
iKepler, Johann, a fatuous astrologer ;knoWta aa one of the
founders of modern astronomy. Horn December 27, 1571, at Well,
In the duchy of Wjirtpnjberg, where hla grandfather was burgomaster. A theological occupation was selected for him and In
1584 he entered the seminary at Adelberg and two yeara later
entered that of Maulbroou where he brilliantly acquired degrees
This wod him admittance to the university of Tubingen, where
he imbibed a store, of classical erudition, which in those days waa
thoroughly impregnated with aatrological lore. Through the
private instructions of hla teacher and life-long friend, Michael
Maestlin, a mathematical astrologer, he jearoed the principles of
the then new Copernlcan system. His classical erudition bad led
him through the Ptolemaic aDd Aglstotllan Ideas. ThI4 astromathematical training and the new system caused him to turn
aside from a career In ministry to that of Science, aa the old
theological concepts did not fit well with the new discoveries of
the heavens.
Early In 1594 he accepted the chair of science at Gratz. Of
Gratz, the Encyclopedia Brltanolca states that Kepler taught In
the Paradise or Lutheran school where Charles II had burned
20,000 Protestant books and through oppressive measures the city
again fell under the authority of Rome. But in Kepler'a time It
had been restored to Lutheran regime.
Kepler's engagement at Gratz ended In 1598 when the archduke
Ferdlngnd, oo assuming the government of hla hereditary dominions, issued an edict of banishment against Pmteetant preachers
and professors. Kepler Had with others to the Hungarian frontier,
but by* favor of the Jesuits was recalled to hla chair. However,
conditions red- ined unfavorable and uniettled so h{ applied to
his Alma Mater for a place on the faculty, but upon hla refusal to
subscribe unconditionally to the formula adopted by the>theologlans at Tubingen, the doora were closed against him. >
The flrat wjrk completed by Kepler at Prague was an Itnposing
treatise oo Aatrology*entltted, “De fundaments' Astrologies CertlorIbus" (1602), In which he stressed'the Importance of the InQuence
of planetary aspects, adding elghf. new ones tt> the science which
n&lntaln a placd among the sixteen planetary aspects in use by
astrologers of today. IJ waa Id this 'book he made a atatement
that has glveji psuse to many a skeptic, a quotation which hits
become famous with the passing of time, one, which has withstood every assault by critics of astrology ; for when Ije “wroth
It he wns speaking aa the result, of actual, practical observation,
research and Experience, while /hose who have .attempted to discount the value of what he found, spoke only on the basis of what
they thought or what they believed, unsupported by rfny evidence
which would Invalidate Keplbr’s findings. He atood on the solid
ground of knowledge gained by Investigation. Here la the stateqient which no amount of heckling can, gainsay : * , *,

GEKETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
“The planets forming angles (aspects) upob the earth by their
luminous ^eams, of strength to stir up the virtue of sublunary
things, have compeUed^tny unwillingly belief."
Limitations of space permit only a al.etphy outline of his work,
but hla life merits detailed study. He was attacked by fever and
died Nov. 15 (N. S.) 1630, In hla flfty nlut/i' year.
He was an Indefatigable worker In the development of the new
branch of science for he saw that through the establishment of
astronomy, the older science of astrology to which he .gave
allegiance would accordingly advance. His, idea of the universe
was essentially Pythagorean and Platonic; the basis of his at,*.;
logical knowledge was Ptolemaic, hut hl3 method of computation
was Copernlcnn, and thus geocentric, considering the earth aa a
(not the) center of influence. His extensive literature still exists.
It waa 'collected and secured; by Catherine II, In .1724, and long
Inaccessibly deposited In the observatory Pulkowa, but at length
came to light and was ahly edited In the first complete edition by
Dr. Ch. Frisch (Frankfort 1858-71, 8 volumes.) A careful biography is appended, founded mainly on Kapler’s private notes and
other authentic documents. Various other later editions of h(.s
works were compiled by different authors, but each succeeding
biographer omitted a little more of Keplcr’a astrological knowledge and teachings, being concerned mostly In advocating hla
Copernlcan system of astronomy, until now the biographers omit
all hla astrological matter. *
Galileo Galilei, bom February 18, 1564, at Plaa, Italy ; characterized by modern biographers as, “one of the greatest' of the
early experimental philosophers." At the age of eighteen he
entered the univerAty of Pisa and upon attendance at the lectufes
of the celebrated physician and hntaols’t. Andrea Cesalplno.
At tlint time medicine and botany, as taughi In universities,
were according tu the astrological doctrines of Hippocrates and
Galen, 'l’helr prescriptions were Invariably prefaced by a large
symbol of Jupiter as a silent Invocation to the healing Influences
of that | planet. Indeed, the symbol prevails and vis In use by
physicians of the present day, although. In the course of time aa
flrat principles became neglected, the symbol became perverted
from y to S and t'.ta aacient significance no longer understood.
Galilei, with hla accustomed zeal, also wrote an exposition
favoring the new Copernlcan, as opposed to the older Arlstotllan
system, for which he waa cited to Rome by the Inquisition, where,
on the 221111 of Jhne 1033, In the church of Snntn Marla soprn
Minerva/ lie wus ccdipelled to recant on threat of tnrture, and
sentenced to spend the remalnlngVyears of hla life lit strict retirement. He died qn the 8th of Januu.y 1642 closing a long life of,
triumph ahti humiliation. It took a brave mun to.be, un vp-to-date
astrologer In those days.
Biographical Sketch ot Astrologer Ptolemy on Page 60S.

PAST* Y. ADDITIONAL STUDIES
YOUR BEST LOCATION
' How Cliaqge of Residence Affects Jhe Horoscope
Now and then a Student inquires whether it is proper
to make the progressed chart from Tables of Houses for
native's present place of abode instead of for the place
of .birth.
It is not practical to substitute house cusps of present
abode for those of place of birtfi, because the further
away the native has removed the larger the number of
degrees difference it would mSke on the house cusps, and
when tabulating aspects in the progressed chart it must
be borne in mind that each degree is equal to one month
by the Moon's motjon ; and one degree is equal to one
year in the Sun’s motion. This process of changing cusps
would, therefore, change Lunar aspects to these cusps by
several months. Solar aspects by several years, making
the aspects fall due earlier or later, according to whether
the native had removed north or south of birthplace;
that is, according to whether there would be a larger or
smaller number of degrees on the cusps by the change.
If "the native has^ioved from the bifth place, making
fhe chart for latitude of present residence changes Lunar
aspects to, cusps by several months, whereas, in reality
the person nfay be but a few hours time distance removed
from place of birth.
Using the radical latitude, or that of birth p^ace, makes
a different in the falling due of aspects of only a few
hours ; i. e., the difference in time between place of birth
and present residence; th^ time would'be earlier or later,
According to»whether native had moved east or west of
birthplace. This difference of ’a few hours is of slight
imporjanc* when one considers that it is a very difficult
matter to set % particular day for the operation of, a progressed aspect, especially those whdse influence lasts a
month or more, such as Moon conjunction Ascendant, or
Sun sextile the M. C., as such influences’ begin to exert
an effect froln four to -eight weeks prior to the actual
completion of the aspect, by the Moon, or many months .
by the Sun, v.iz., 2* orb = 2 years with the1©. . ’>

GEN^THLIACAX ASTROLOGY
The progressed chart requires the natural progress of
the house0 cusps, just ts it does of the planets. At the
moment of birth ,*he planets have house poritions according to the latitude of the birth place * At the first independent indrawn breath of the babe, fhb prevailing vibrations "cast” or set the tendencies of the body according
to those house positions, as well as by 'the aspects and"
the signs occupied by the planets. Those particular house
positions of the planets at that time ar.e “time markers”
of when ce’rtain conditions will appear in the life of tfia..
individual. Thus : if b is 3* below the ascending degree
and it is ruler of 6th h&use, its position in relation to the
Ascenddnt denotes that vhen the Ascendant has advanced 3* it will be in conjunction with the place of Sat- .
urn, denoting illness.* That is, due to the planetary
rays as affecting that particular latitude at that birth
time certain forces were timed for manifestation, and.
those times can only be correctly calculated by use of •
the original latitude from which the native received its
"cast.” Planets thus affecting the “angles” of a chart
are said to be more productive of manifestations than
those Jo other cusps, because the angles are more “active”; producing more noticeable and quicker action than
other cusps.
Although it is not practical to substitute house cusps
of present abode for those of place of birth, >it may be
well to use ‘the cusps made for the present abode as a
supplement for investigation, (assuming you have moved
from the -birth latitude), to see whether or not in such
chart tl\e indications to cusps in any way coincide or
conflict with the testimonies indicated by house cusps of
the original progressed chart latitude.
For instance : Suppose a child were born in latitude
52*<north with II O’ 27’ on the Ascendant; b in 3* 27' II;
* Note: foe midheaven changes At approximately, 1* per day
(or year lb progression), but the Ascendant does not change with
such unltormtty. 'In this case, the Ascendant was changing at
more than a degree per day or year, goosequeotly-the Ascendant
6 b would occur 2 days or years after birth (between the child’s
second and third year.) Daltoo’a Tables of Houses were used In
the»foregoing Illustration. ,* . ,

PART -V, ADDITIONAL STPDIE8 608
S in *20* 17' 8r It is seen that when the Ascendant
movesa3* it-is 6 h. Now, just about that time the parents decide1 to move south to a' place which has 40*
north latitude’ Remember that the Progressed Chart
made with the original latitude (52‘N.) shows II 3* 27'
ascendant 6 h. A chart made for same year but using
latitude 40' north shows 20' 17' b on -Ascendant, which
would be d 8. Evidently, this would have been a bad
move for the child as the 5 influence operative at this
latitude would accentuate the adverse ascendant <5 h
influence timed (at birth) to operate at this period.
To continue this example, let us suppose that- if had
been at this’period in II 10’ 43', and the parents instead
of moving south of birth latitude to 40" H. as before illustrated, moved to a place in the opposite direction, that is,
to 56’ north. (4’ north of birth place at^52’.) A chart
made for this latitude would show II 10' 43' ascending
which would be d U. Evidently this would be a good
move for the child as the beneficial influence of V operative at this latitude would tend to offset the adverse
influence of Ascendant d h timed (at birth) to be operative now.
In other words, moving from the original latitude does
not change or negate the indications as timed or measured from birth, but a change of residence to another
latitude may create other conditions which tend to accentuate or modify those which are denoted by the original birth place latitude.
The New Locality
The foregoing comments on change of residence are
concerned with the reasons for not substituting the latitude of the usual progressed horoscope for that of a
new latitude to which the native may have removed. ’
We cannot evade the duly timed operations ofiNature,
which were "cast” or timed at birth to manifest-’ at cer-
• tain periods of life, but removing to a more suitable environment tnay help to improve our expression of ,the
influence of aspects as they occur, so that one place may
^eem to be "luckier" or more fortunate tham another. >,

QENgTHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
The usual procedure in the case of removal ' is as
follows :
Note the amount of time difference between the birth
place and new abode. Add this amount of time to the
birth time if the removal is to the' east of birth place;
subtract the amount if removal is west.-
With the new time thus derived make a chart in the
usual way using the latitude of new afcocfe for the hoj;^*-
cusps, but insert the planets in the same signs and degrees occupied at the original birth time. This will change
the planets to new house positions. It is these house
positions of the planets that are of particular significance
in the new environment. As the houses show the direction in which zodiacal tendencies and planetary influences manifest, the importance of the changed house
positions is obvious. For instance, if Jupiter is thus
moved into the midheaven the new environment is likely
to improve the honors, credit, prestige and profession of
the native; if Saturn has become tenant of the sixth
house the native's health is apt to be impaired.
How to Find the Best Location
In the effort t6 choose a better location several charts
should be made according to the foregoing rijle, eaCh for
a locality the native has reason to believe’Nvould be advantageous as regards climate, chances for successful
operation pi his particular kind of work, etc., and from
them choose the locafiity" indicated by the be^t chart.
As before stated, removal only* changes the time of
day when progressed aspects, or transits, culminate;
which is a minor matter considering that when they
actually begin is not definitely known, and for various
reasons they are often set into operation earlier than the
exact, moment df becoming partile. r
In other words, changing fhe natal chart house cusps
and positions of planets as regards their original house :
positions (but not changing* planets’ sign' and degree)
to conform with the amount of time difference and the
npw latitude, provides a chart which shows the trend of

PART y, ADDITIONAL STUDIES 00|
changes to ,bf experienced in the new place and the conditions to be met through the ability and characteristics
with which' the native was originally endowed; that is,
the radix planetary influences are expressed through
different circunvstjnces and environment. For example:
if Jupiter was originally in the tenth house and removal
.took it into ther eleventh, there would be tendency to
carry on the profession more through social endeavors.
If Jupiter were, carried into the ninth house, the tendency
^jgBuld be to change the profession to embrace publishing,
foreign affairs, law, science or religion.
One of the rules to be observed is to avoid taking your
ruling planel into the twelfth or sixth houses; the former
'implies limitations ; the latter, illness.
As an example suppose the native represented by
/Horoscope No. 3 (born on August 23rd, 1884, at 0:46 a.
' m. in latitude 40° N„ 89 )4° W. longitude) removed from
the birth place to Los Angeles, California, in latitude 34°
N., longitude.il 8* west.
Difference between 118° W. long and
, 28)4 degrees difference
X 4 minute^ for each degree
114 minutes or 1 hr. 54', amount
of time difference to be subtracted (because traveling
west) from the birth time.
Birth time 0?16 a. m., August 23rd.
10:52 p. m., Aug. 22nd = Time of new .locality chart.

GENliTHLIACAL ASTROIaJGY
S. T. at noon on August 22nd, 1884 is
+ :109" Correction to S. T. for lOh. 57' after noon.
+ : 79" Correction for 1 18“ 'W. long, or 7 h. 52’ W.
■ of Greenwich. *
+ 10.32 :00 p. tn., time of new locality chart.
20.59:08 = S. T. with which to enter
Tables of ' Houses for latitude 34* N. (Lat. of L5C
Angeles.) Place house cusps as the T. H. indicated but
enter planets in same sign and degree as they were at
birth. This changes only their house positions and is
supplementary to.reading of the regular progressed horoscope.
Having established a new location the same locality
house cusps which were used to insert the natal planets
are used for the insertion of the progressed planets. That
is, after the regular progressed horoscope has been made
and read in the usual way, the planets may be inserted
from it into the Locality Chart. Their changed house
positions will give added information to the Progression
as to the things which the various aspects will affect.
A chart made according to the foregoing rule and calculations is shown on,pext page. ,
(Observe caution in making calculation for the amount
of time difference when removal crosses the time meridian of Greenwich, that'fs, Irom east to west longitude or
vice versa. For "Instance removal from 5’ east longitude
amount of time difference.)
Comparison of Locality and Natal -Charts
Comparing thi£ Locality Chart with the Natal Chart
on page f70, it is readily seenthat no particular advan-;
tage would be gained bjy such removal.
The beneficent Venus which occupied the important
.first house in the radix char^ is now reduced to a cadent
position, which would certainly “cramp his, style.”

PART.Y, ADDITIONAL STUDIES 007
HOROSCOPE NO. 5
Locality Chart,
Chart fpr determining the advisability of changing residence from
Chicago to I»os# Angeles. He did not make the contemplated
removal.
* Table for changing terrestrial longitude. Into time: *
*==degree; h=hour; m=mlnntd
• The Idea of time conversion ftfr new locality was pohlisbed by
Elizabeth Aldrich, editor "The New York Astrologer,” apd Henry
V. Gordon. H.D., author of “Rectification of Uncertain Slrth Hours
With the Aid bf Individual Delineation of the Rlelng Degree and
Midheaven Degree.” My own application of the method seems to
confirm their findings. . * #,

GBNETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
Saturn affecting the first and second houses would
cause concern over financial affairs.
Mars near the'sixtK cusp would cause Vrouble in employment, serious illness and surgical operation.
Jupiter and Sun have left the natal third house and
entered the new fourth. This change offhouse position
is neither advantageous nor detrimental.
Uranus, Mercury and Moon have departed the -natal
fourth and occupy the locality fifth, which might shift
home and domestic interests to interest in sports.
The fact is, thfc native early moved to Chicago, which
has Leo ascending, and as he has Jupiter in Leo he has
fared very well in honors, position and family life.
Transits and Change of Residence
A student having moved from birth place on the
Atlantic coast to present residence on the Pacific coast,
wants1- to know whether it will have any effect on the
aspects of transiting planets.
Although eastern time is three hours in advance, i. e.,
later in the day than Pacific time, that makes practically
no difference in the effect of transits. Whjle the change
of residence altered the clock time in its relation to that
of birth.place, it does not noticeably alter anything concerning anr aspect itself, except that it appears to begin
and to manifest at an earlier hour. However, the time
of the beginning »of an aspect is an intangible matter,
and e^en if knowp exactly would be of little importance
because the inception of its influence is so subtle and
gradual that some time must elapse before it produces
any recognized or appreciable significant influence on
either body or mind.
For instance, the Sun’s apparent movement in the
zodiac is .a transit of approximately one degree per day .
and, it has lan orb of influence of 12 degrees, therefore,
when approaching a planet in a nativity it begins the
conjunction at some time on the twelfth day prior to its.

PART V, ADDITIONAL 3 TODIES
actual •c'bnjunctiol), regardless of where the native may
then be residing. ‘That beginning of the aspect, is imperceptible, but -day by day its influence grows in power
and its expression becomes more noticeable until the day
of its climax (pajtije), after which its influence rapidly
diminishes.
*When the Sun reaches the final degree constituting
the conjunction it transits through it during the whole
^and in a nativity it would indeed be difficult to
nvne what time of that day the influence would be
most strikingly manifest, although) it would be but a
simple problem in arithmetic to calculate the exact, time
of the conjurtction, which of bourse would occur at a
tfme that is three hours earlier on the Pa'cific coast than
clocked in Eastern time.
• While, as hefore stated, removal from one place to
* another does not alter the influence of a transit aspect,
per se, there is a difference but it is psychological rather
than astrological. That difference is in the human response to environment. In other words, a person’s
reaction to a planetary aspect when he is in Alaska
will be quite different from his expression of the same
aspect*'if he were res-iding in Florida, because environment determines much of the nature anc> quality of human activity. The channels for the manifestation of that
aspect woulS be altered by the difference in climate,
clothing, food, occupation, opportunities, personal contacts, mental attitude, etc. Physicians often wisely suggest “a change of climate” to patients, but unfess they
understand astrology are not always able to suggest the
place best suited t5 the* purpose.
UNIVERSE MAKERS
Ptolemy (Claudius Ptolemieus) was a Greek astrologer, astron-.,
omer and geographer of the second century, A. D. Ptoletoy’s
great work entitled, Megaie Syirtaxis tes Astronomias, Jy more
popularly known by the Arabic title, “Almagest,” -wfhich associates
astrological and astronomical mattera. His distinctly (Astrological
book is known aS the “Tetrabiblos or Quadripartite,” being four
books on the Influence of the stars (planets). His system of
astronomy was finally superceded by that of Coperplcua. (Seq

eio
GENETHLIACAL ' ASTROLOGY
Astronomy — Ptolemaic system In the encyclopedia.) 'fhei' adoption
of the Copernican system by modern astronomers in no Way Invalidated cthe astrological Information complied by Ptolemy from
the Arabians, Persians. 'Greeks and Egyptluna. While he taught
that the earth wis rornd and turned on Its axis, he took the
apparent movement of the Suo around' the earth Into his calculations Instead of the earth's motion around 1he,-Sun. The influence
of the planets per ae remains the same fegardiess of whether one
uses the former or the latter method, that Js, Saturn la always
binding, cooling, solidifying, congealing, retarding.
There are many points In which modern sciences, and medern
astronomy (*ln particular, hare reaped loca'cutabie benefits from
the labors and researches of this great scholar. He not
transmitted to us the observations and principal discoveries of
remoter periods, but haS enriched and augmented them with hla
own. Ha corrected Hipparchus’ catalogue of fixed stars, and
formed tables for the calculation of the motions of the Sun, Mo n
and planets. He was, in fact, the first who collected the scatter. J
or detached observations of Aristotle, Hipparchus, Posidonius nmi
others on the economy of the world, and digested them Into i\
system, which he set forth in a work oft thirteen volumes, known
as “The Great Construction.”
It has been truly said, "Ptolemy’s order, inexact as It was.
enabled subsequent observers to derive a piausihle account of the
motions of the planets, to foreteii eclipses and to improve geography.” That ia to say: Ptolemy's system represented the actual
phenomena of the heavens as they really appear to a spectator
on tlfe earth. It Is dear, therefore, that Ptolemy’s astrology la
just aa applicable to modern astronomy as It was to hia time.
Thla conclusion cannot be invalidated by the objection which, is
frequently urged against astrology that the signs are contiouaily
moving from their ancient positions by the precession' of the
equinoxes. The objection Is Ill-founded In that Has no relation
to the factrf. Ptolemy was aware of this movement of the signs,
and has fuiiy provided for it In the first book of the'Tetrublblos
where ft is made clear that the respective Influences ascribed to
the signs Were considered b§- him to be appurtenant to the places
they oocupied, and not to the stars which might Be within their
spaces. He clearly states that the point of the vernal equinox
Is always the beginning of thfe zodiac and that the 30 degrees
following that poltft always retain tha virtues attributed to tha
sign Aries although the stars originally in Aries ‘may hare shifted
from those degrees. Ptolemy is so explicit on this matter that It
appears he anticipated such objection and took pains to show the
argument had novfoundation In fact He waa considered' the most
distinguished scientist of hia day.
Biographical' Sketch of Astrologer Copernicus on page 691.

PAST V, . ADDITIONAL ST1
THE* ZODIACAL SIGNS
Their' Anatomical, Dietetic, GA> graphic, Biblical,
Mythological and Psychological Attributed.
Id relation to the Are'va chapters concerning the attributes of
the signs I gratefully acknowledge research facility to the followln&,named books. Although most of them areonow out of print
(OP) so far as I am aware they may still be available for reference lit the larger public libraries or the libraries of astrological
societies.
“The Gospel of the Stars,” by Dr. Joseph A. Selss, 1900 (OP).
“Astrology of the Old Testament,” by Kail Anderson, 1892 (OP).
“New Light Fr6m the Great Pyramid, ’’ by Albert Ross Parsons,
“A Plea for Urania,” 1854, anonymous (OP).
"The Science of the Stars," Alfred J. Pearce, 1881 (OP).
• “’The Chemistry and Wonder of the Human Body,” by Dr.
George W. Carey, 1921 (OP).
“Ptolemy'a Tetrgblblos,” J. M. Ashmond's translation (New
Edition).
“Medical Astrology," Heinrich Daatl), 1914.
“The Witness of the Staja," by Ethelbert Bulllnger, D.D.
“Mazzaroth or the Constellations,” by Frances*Rolleston.
Note: In thS Hollowing twelve chapter# the word, #decan, la
used In Its original sense, that la, In naming or describing the
three constellations or “side pieces,” now more or less i^mote
from the signs with which they are related. Refer to po^es 512-3
for ancient and modern usage of the vAord ,*docan.

QJSNBTHLIACAL ASTgOLOGY
T ARIES V
Aries is called fi‘ery, hot, dry, inflammatory, choleric,
sterile, violent, bestial, intemperate, equinoctial, eastern,
cardinal, movable, positive, masculine, mental-motive,
and of short ascension.
Aries is the "first, or head sign, of the zodiac, and is
known to have influence upon the head and face. The
Sun enters this sign on or about the 2ist of March each
year, constituting the Vernal Ingress. While it is ‘nr vuis
eastern sign we celebrate Easter, and it is usually observed by wearing new headgear. So, although they may
not be aware of it, every one who follows the fashion of
donning a ne>v hat at this time is paying homage • to
astrology of the ancients.
The Gospel says, “I have exaltfd thee, O Father,” and
in this sign the Sun is exalted, particularly in the 19th
degree. It is the fall of Saturn (Satan) for the Lord ot
Hosts is exalted. It is the detriment of Venus, being a
lustful sign. Aries has been represented by the cock,
denoting boastful or fighting qualities, but is more generally symbolized by the ram, being in nature rash,
hardy, springy, lascivious and combative. Aries represents the gate of gold (or) on the east, therefore called
an or-ient-al !<ign, denoting the, beginning of right ascension (R. A. = Ra) or the original first Right Ascension
Midheayen, R. A. M., (ram.)
In ithe New Testament it probably answers to Mark,
(Mar kl) The ng^ne , ascribed to the eastern angle, or
angel, is Malchidial, while of the twelve prophets it is
said to represent Malachi ; of the twelve apostles, Matthias.
Stars in Aries constellation are Shedar, "the freed";
Jluckbah and Dat al Cursa, “the enthroned, the seated.”
•The first decan is Cassiopeia, a beautiful, enthroned
■ wopian, at vtfhoge right hand is a star crowned king
(Cepfieus) holding his sceptre toward her. Ancient writings Account .her as his wife and she is referred to as
"the btide, the lamb's wife.” Cassiopeia is represented
as the mother of Andromeda' who constitutes a nearby
constellation ; the broken chains represent deliverance.

PART V, ‘ADDITIONAL STOlJlES
Cetus, #a msrvstor constellation to the south of the
ecliptic,, represents the second decan* It is “Levfethan”
of Job and Is*ai%h It is a gigantic* scaty beast with
enormous head, mouth Ind front paws, with the body
and tail of a whale? Jn mythology it is the creature
which the sea god sent to devour Andromeda. It is a
downward (southern) constellation, bordering on what
was called the lower regions. Mira, one of its stars is
variable, typical ef the deceived ; its name means "the
r £.■!/* Cetus is bound (bridled) to the two fishds while
the Larflb holds the reins with one front foot or hand.
Meokar, another star, means "the chained enemy," while
Diphda, in the; tail, means "the .overthrown, the thrust
doivn.” Read Job 41, and note in 13th vgrse the reference to the double bridle, then see the star map. See
also Isaiah 27, 1. These references are quoted to show
that there is much of Astrological interest in the Bible.
Perseus represents the third decan (side piece) or constellation. It is the figure of a vigorous, strong man,
with one foot in* the Milky Way, both feet having winjp,
a helmet on his head, holding high a great sword while
carrying away the blood dripping head of the Gordon.
Perets was the original name for Perseus, meaning “the
breaker*" mentioned id Micah 2, 13: "The breaker is
come up before them ; .they have broken* up and have
passed through the gate (Aries?) and are gone out by
it; and their kitfg shall pass before them, and the Lord
on the head (V) of them." The star in the left foot of
Perseus is Atik, "he who breaks.” *
The bones "indicated f>y Aries are thqge of the 'skull
and face, except perhaps the nasal, which may be subrulfd bjt Scorpio. The muscles indicated are the frbntales, occipitals,* attolens ana deprimens articularum,
zygomaticus, temporalis and buccinator. Arteries: tern-,
poral and irfternal carotids. Vein: cephalic. Morbid'
action is shown through various kinds <jf e’ruptive m$\a- •
dies affecting, head and faeje : whelks, pimples, ringworms, polypus, neuralgia, headaches, migraine, cerebral
congestiqn, alopecia, phrenitis, vertigo, encgflhalitis,
smallpox and perhaps haiflip.' •

<73NETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
Worry, anxiety, excitement or anger .produce overstrain rof the brain iind tend to upset the ^geneial health.
Aries people frequjre plenty of rest aqd sleep, peaceful
and harmonious surroundings; They should partake
freely of vegetables and brain fo,od“, avoiding stimulants
and partaking lightly of meat Herbs belonging to this
sign are mustard, eye-bright, bay and others of pungent
nature.
The 'principle characteristics of 'desirable natm r .-f-jr
cultivation are expressed as enterprising, activfe, ambitious, courageous, irdent, industrious, generous, pioneering,practical, constructive, leadership. Undesirable
characteristics for correction are denoted by the words
belligerent, headstrong, excitable, audacious, impatient,
irresolute, imprudent, insubordinate, quarrelsome, foolhardy, selfish, disregard, disrespect, jealousy. All undesirable traits can be corrected by proper mental thera;
peutics.
Some of the popular expressions associated with this
sign are, "All het up,” "Mad as a March hare,” “Buttinski'/’ "Ram it home,” "Out of the frying pan into the fire,”
“Gabby," “Up and doing,” "Strong as iron,” "Where did
you get that hat?” "A bee in his bbnnet,” "Right between
the eyes,” "Fighting mad,” "In like a lamb and out like
a lion," “Mad as a hatter,” "God tempers the wind to the
shorn lamb,” "My Hat is in the ring,” "G6ne to his head,”
"Shearing the lamb.”
Wor<fs associated 'With Aries : Ash-Lesh (flaming
star)* Tuesday^ fighting cock, Srpith.^Samael, ram, lamb,
Headen, Mark, Mars, March, Malchidial, Malachi, Matthias, Melchisetlec, Sang (Herb,) Taleh (sacrificial lamb,)
Ramah (exalted place.) Ramesis (the be^t in the land of
Egypt,) Ramadan (Mussulman feast in spring,) Benjamin, Rachael, Amroo.
Arks indicates sandy, frilly, dry or father barren
places; places where sheep are kept, lime or brick kilns,
fireplaoes, ceilings, plaster, tool houses, fijrgej. ' Locations: prominent corner buildings facing 4ast, east corner
rooms.

PART V, ADDITIONAL BTTOIE8
a TAURUS 8
Taurus' is called earthly, fixed, cold, moist, semi-fruitful, bestial, femininf? melancholy, of short ascension.
It is the second sign cff the zodiac, the Sun beginning
its apparent yearly transit through it oh or about April
20tl\. It is the middle, or fixed sign, of the spring quarter
%and is symbolized J>y a bull with unusual horns on head
aim Toes, appearing in a rage, crouched to rusfl forward
with fierce energy ; representing a stubborn and tenacious nature.
. Taurus is one of the four fixed sign^ comprising the
Cherubim. It was the original Bull, or Baal, of the
Assyrian religious rites, sometimes referred to as "The
§acred Bull” or "Th*e Golden Calf,” emblematic of the
period a few thousand years ago when the solar system
was precessing through that constellation. Our May
day festival with its may pole and garlands are the remains of the 'ancient Egyptian festival celebrating the
entrance of the Sun into Taurus.
The Gospel apparently alludes to Haggai as a prophet
and Thaddeus as an»apostle of this sign, and the name
of this angle, or- angej, is Asmodeus. Ephraim (said to
mean'heifef) in Hebraic mythology refers to the sign
Taurus. EphVaim was Joseph’s Second scyi. Joseph
seems to be connected with this sign. In Genesis 49, 22
we read, “Joseph is a fruitful bough (vine), by ft well.”
Other translations read, "a sorfof»a cow” (a*bull.) A
well is an £ye. (g bulj’s eye?) A “fruitful bough” may
be represented by the garland usually pictured around
tjie bull’s neck.
There is an analogy Detweerr tne buii, Apis, Keem,
Aurochs, Unicorn, pictured as enraged and irresistible,
and the biblicgl description of the wrath of the Lord:
" in the day of His fierce angtr ewdVyone
shall be thnist through.” — Isaiah 13, 13-15. •
In th*e firisfdecan of tlje Taurus constellatidh is Orion,
to the south of the ecliptic but very beautiful and mentioned by lob, Amos and Homer. It is th$ figure 0^ a

OEgtETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
mighty hunter with a huge club in one'hand and'tfie skin
of a slayi lion in the other. His foot is’ raised astif in the
act of crushing an efiemy; directly under it is the’tortuour river, Eridtnus,’ coursing downward Snto the regions
of darkness in the underworld (soytfy of the celestial
equator.) Orion wears a starry girdle or belt, to which
is fastened a sword, the hilt ot which is the head of p
lamb. In this constellation is Betelguese meaning "the
Branch coming." Rigel, another brilliant star therein,
means “fhe foot that crusheth.” Bcllatrix is another -
signifying “coming suddenly or suddenly destroying.”
The Arabs call A1 Qjauza, the Branch; A1 Mirzam, the
Ruler ; A1 Najed, the Prince ; thus associating the idea of
vengeance with the horn of the fierce Reeni or Aurochs.
The second decan shows the constellation Eridanus,
the river of the Judge, analogous tp a fiery stream flowing into the underworld.
Auriga is the third constellation associated with this
sign. It is above the others and is typically gracious or
evangelic. In Noetic, Auriga means shep'hcrd, — a good
shepherd. He holds a mother goat in his arms with
little' kids in his hand. Capella is the bright star there
(she-goat,) while a star in the right arm is Menkalinon
meaning a band of goats or ewes.'’ This picture in the
heavens bears relation to Psalm 3>, 37-40; also to , Isaiah
40, 10-11. In the Zodiac of Dendera, Aturiga holds a
sceptre on> the upper part of which is a' lamb, on the
lower a cross.
In Taurus are Pleiudea, a cluster of seven stars whose
"sweet' influences" are referred to with the “band of
Orion." In mythology they were the seven daughters of
Atlas, the upholder of heaven, and earth, noted fot theif
mutual sympathy and affection ; also as thd seven virgins
and the seven lamps.
Taurus is rulpd by Venus. It is the exaltation of the
Moon ^particularly in the third degree,)' and the detriment of Mars who is not at fcase in the hoirfe of Venus.
Tauruy $ug^ests energy, reserve force, endurance and
stability. An energy devoted t<5 stable things insures a
firm foundation and an enduring structure .

PART T, .ADDITIONAL 3 TOBIES
This Sign istsaid*to include under its domain the neck,
throat, #etirs, pharynx, eustachian tubes, uvula, tonsils,
upper portion*of the oesophagus, pdlate, thyroid gland,
parotids and vofal cord«s. The zone? of influence cornmenses behind at Jh« termination of the occipital portion
of the cranium, and in* front under the lower maxillary,
aryl it includes the cerebellum and base of the brain. The
principle bones ruled by Taurus are the cervical vertebrae. • Muscles are the sternohyoid, mastoid, trapezius,
sternqmastoids> cesophagoeus stylopharingaeus, '^plenius
and cortplexus, longus, scalenus, biventres, cervicis, spinales cervicis. Arteries : external carotids and basilar
artery. Veins: occipitals, jugulars and the veins of the
thyroid gland.' Morbid action Manifests as sore throat,
glandular swellings in the neck, quinsy, troup. mumps,
goitre, wens, polypus, abscess, bronchocele, suffocation,
strangulation, angina gangrena, scrofula, apoplexy. By
rjlflex action from Leo and Scorpio the heart may be
’affected, also the excretory system, giving rise to piles,
fistulas or bladder trouble.
Usually, fattening foods should be used in moderation
as this sign increases the appetite, tends to obesity ^nd
to fondness of ease. Moderate and regular exercise is
essential as well as moderation in food and drink. Because of failure to observe these essentials, rheumatism
is prevalent among Ta’urians. Herbs belonging to this
sign are groiind-ivy, deadly night-shade, vervain.
The principle characteristics of desirable nature for
cultivation are expressed as trustworthy, steady, persevering, enduring, persistent, composed, self-reliantj, constructive, practical humorous, kindly, sympathetic, magnetic, careful, fearless. The principle characteristics for
ctfrrection are ^denoted by 'these words’: stubborn,' un-
' " w_ domineering, exacting, obstructive, stolid,
brusque, dqgmatic, ‘conceited, self-centered, covetous,
amorous, lazy. It is said that their accusers are seldom
forgiven and thit they retain the memory of an^injury*
for a long tifne, yet are very patient and forbearjng.
This second, sign is akin to the second house Vith its
relation to money, finances and movable effects of extrinsic value.

G15NETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
Some of the popular expressions associated with this
sign are: “Too bull-Jieaded," “Mad as a btlll," A bull in
a china shop,” “Bully!”, “Stubborn ap a bull,” “The
cow jumped over tfie moon" (referring to Moon’s exaltation in Taurus,) “Take the bull by ‘the horns,” “On the
horns of a dilemma,” "A rubber-neck,” "Too stiff-necked,” “A neckert” “Beauty and the beast," “Deep as: a
well,” "Round as a bull’s eye.”
Names associated with Taurus : B"aal, Bull, Asrrwdstfs
(angel of the angle,) Astarte, Haggai (prophet,) Thaddeus (aspostle,) Atjftir (Arabian name for Taurus,) Apis,
Mneves, Aleph, Reem (ati animal resemblipg the bull but
fiercer,) Aurochs (similar to Reem,) Unicorn (same as
Reem,) Hunter, Capella (star,) Menkalinon (star,) A1
Debaran (star,) Atlas, Pleione, Pleiades, particularly the
seven sister stars named Maia, Electra, Taygeta, Alcyone, Celaeno, Sterope and Merope. • ,
Places represented by this sign are banks, cash boxes,
money drawers, jewel cases, stables for* cows, dairies,
places where harness and farming implements are kept,
harness shops, pastures, feeding places, shady places as
under trees some little distance from the house^wheat
or corn fields. In the house it represents middle roojms
or places in middle of the block. It also represents round
things such as castors, rings, watches, ear-rings', noserings, mqney, insulators, cart wheels, 'bonnets, hats ;
shoes, leather, leather pocket-books, purses or traveling
bags ; 1 necklaces, garlands, may-poles, canes, altars,

PART T. ADDITIONAL STUDIES 81#
.'n gemini n
Gemini is called airy, barren, sanguinejcommon, flexed,
double-bodied, du^l; human, masculine, violent, positive,
of short ascensi&n.
• The Sun enters this sign on or aDOut May 21st ana
apparently transits through it by June 20th. It is symbolized as the pwips, the portals, a monkey. It-is biblically i'e^erred to as Cain and Abel, and in GeneSis 49, 5-6,
it says, “Simeon and Levi are brethren ; instruments of
cruelty are in their habitations (hands;) be not thou
united, for in their anger th*y slew a man." This is
interesting in view of the fact that Castor and Pollux
hold in their hands instruments of cruelty in the form of
a great club and a b<jw unstrung. They also have a harp.
.Eros and Anteros, Gog and Magog, Romulus and Remus,
'are other names ascribed to them. In the Zodiac of Dendera the picture is of a man walking hand in hand with
a woman, having some relation to Adam and Eve. The
old Coptic name of this sign was Pi Mahi, signifying
"the united, the completely joined." It was common to
take serious oaths in their name, which habit still maintains'vulgarly as, “IJy Gemini, " also in the form of oaths
sworn before a notary ( B .) In the Babylonian calendar
they .are the “Two Gbds of the Door." According to the
Chinese, the.Gemini as two gianV brothers have power
over disembodied spirits. (Hence the harp*) St. Paul
sailed in a vessel named Castor and Pollux andjt is said
that flames of fire were seen flaying about their heads
and when *this occurred the tempest which -wa.% tossing
the ocean ceased and«calm ensued.
The monkjy is associated with Gemini by the Chinese
among whom it is also related -to the afternoon between
three and .five o'clock. To this day they depict it as*the
thre« graces symbolized by the three little monkeys with
hands over eyres, ears and mouth, symbolical of -that hfjjh
state of SfAritual developthent wherein we “Sec no evil,
hear no evil, speak no evil.” Gemini is- also .related by
the AVyjfrts -or ancient, Hindus to Buddha *or Krishna.
The name of this angle, or an§;el, is said to be Ambriel;
prophet, Zachariah ; apostle, Simeon. , , 1
t

820 GENETHLLACAL A3TROBOGY
In the Zodiac of Dendera where Gemini, is pictured
as a man* and woman, walking hand in harfd, the .male
has an appendage which signifies "the Cpming One”—
a Messiah Prince and his bride.*’ (/‘The bride of the
Lamb,” — Apocalypse. "The marriggfe of the lamb is
come.”) Horus is described ini an Egyptian hymn as
“the son of the Sum.” ‘
This wedding refers to the union betwpen Christ dnd
the Churcb’— not necessarily the visiblfc edifices but 4he
spiritual invisible church within ; analogous to a cofivenant between the conscious and unconscious mind, where;
in man, begins consciously( to do right for light’s sake,
sacrificing old desires, which is true righteousness (right-,
us-ness.)
In the first decan south of the ecliptic is Lepus, the
hare, in Arabic called Arnebeth meaning “enemy of the'
coming.” In the Persian and Egyptian zodiacs it is a
serpent. It is also called Bashti-Beki, "the offender confounded.” The hare is close to Orion, the. hunter, and
it is also seemingly being chased by Sirius, the great dog
(canis .major which constitutes the second decan or "~ide
piece,”) the natural enemy of hares. In Egyptian
zodiacs it is an eagle or hawk, the natural enemy of'serpents. Sirius is dsrived from Sir or §eir, meaning prince,*
guardian, victorious ; connected with Naz-Seir or Nazir,
meaning "sept Prince.'* The rod promised tti come forth
from the stem of Jesse is called Netzer (branch, scion.)
These art closely allied to Nazareth or Nazseirene, NazSirius. "HI came and dwelt in a city called Nazareth,
that it might be fulfilled which was spoken bjr the prophets; He shall be called a Naz-Seir-ene.’* Matthew 2, 23.
The stars in this constellation, are Mirzam, the rjiler;,
Muliphcn, leader, chieftain; Vtasen, shining1, illustrious;
Adhara, glorious. These of course have scriptural reference' rather than being cognomens for a dog. 1
The ‘third decan ‘also shows a wolf or dog (canis
minor,) somewhat smaller and behind the firs’t one. In
the Egyptian zodiac this is a human figure wi^h an
eagle’f head' called Sebak, "conquering or 'victorious.”
Procyon and A1 Gomeiza, two prominent stars, signify
’‘redeemed" or, "redeeming."

PAST ,V, ADDITIONAL STUDIES
In Gemini th£ Moon’s North Node is said to be exv alted;«t is '.the detriment of Jupiter; the home of Meroury.’ Gemini inclines to tall, upright body, long arms,
hands and fett short; a quick walker with swinging
arms, open hands,* fingers spread apart slightly, hands
usually long; piercing eye, quick sight; keen mentality.
• Gemini rules fhe nervous system bywhich all parts of
the body are brought into communication, giving it sensation and flexibility. It is a moist, air sign and through
* respiration furnishes the two lungs with water from the
air vJhich normally bathes them and from which they
extract material for oxygenating the blood. Nervous
disorders are liable through vaorry, anxiety, mental overstrain, restlessness and excessive actiyity. The lungs,
shoulders, arms and hands are subject to affections and
accidents. Tubercular tendencies, or disorders of the
.respiratory organs may develop. Gemini indicates such
• disorders as asthma, bronchitis, pleurisy, pneumonia and
corrupted blood. The bones included in this sign are
the metacarpal, carpal, ulna, radius, humerous, scapula,
clavicle and tipper ribs. The veins ruled by Gemini are
most likely those of thymus and mediostinum, the pulmonary, subclavians, basilic and azygos. The a’rteries
most* likely involved are right and left bronchials, intercostals, brachial, suSclavians, radials and ulnars.
This mental-motive sign requires attention to proper
breathing," light out-of-door exercises and vgalking with
long, deliberate steps. The chest and lung era should
be given protection and rubbing. Particular caPe should
be given to diet ; cereals and n<!Cve*foods beinj essentials.
Desirable ch*'act<?ristics# for cultivation are denoted
by the words : intellectual, "expressive^ eloquent, Jdealis-
*tic, studious^inquiring, aftibitious, resourceful, dexterous,
courageous, tolerant, responsive, generous, sympathetic,
temperate, broad, liberal. Undesirable characteristics for
correction may be described in these, words: restless,
variable, verbose, effusive, tricky, shifty, diffusive, inflictive, diffident, waywara, improvident, impulsive, exaggerated, theoretical, lack of concentration.,
Familiar quotations *or sayings relating to this* sign
are : “Alike as two peas,” "Killing two birds with one*

OENBTHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
stone," “Two of a kind,” "A pair of old cronies,” “HandyAndy,” "The light-fingered, gentry," ‘“Full,‘of monkey
shines," ‘‘‘Has a bagful of tricks,” “Soon gets his hand in,"
"Quickly turns bis hand to anyth'ng,” "Way up in the
air," “Come down and out of it,” “Te’l it to the judge,”
"United we stand, divided we fall," "From pillar to post,”
“As busy as a cranberry merchant," “His tongue runs
away," "In an off-hand way,” "Two is company, three is
a crowd," "Too many irons in the fire," “A tongue
hinged in ‘the middle,” "On the fence," "Between two
fires." '
Words associated with Gemini: Mercury, Castor,
Pollux, twins, Ambriel (angel of this angle;) Zachariah
(prophet,) Simon (apostle,) Simeon and Levi (“twins,
cruel in their wrath,") Thaumin (Hebrew name for
Gemini meaning united,) hound, hare, Anubis, Hermes,
Buddha, Messia, messenger (wandering teacher.)
Places indicated by Gemini : where hay or straw is
kept, graneries, grain elevators ; coffers or chests with
doors, pillared buildings, doorways, walls, wainscoting,
upper. back rooms, bookcases; hills and mountains of
barren nature ; things made or sold in pairs as pepper and
salt shakers, etc., ruling the dual nature rather than- the
material.
The third sign of the zodiac (II) has things in common with tfie third house, in that they both indicate letters, communications, messengers, news, inquiries, information, trumors, newspapers, magazines, neighbors,
relatives; short journeys, lecturing, debating, teaching,
advertising, clerical work, reporting, stcfl-y-writing, merchandising, printing, education.

PART V, ADDITIONAL STUDIES
25, CANCER 25
Cancfcr' is called movable, watery* fruitful, maternal,
domestic, feminize, tropical, solstitial* mute, cold, moist,
phlegmatic, cardinal, bf long ascension.
The Sun enters Cancer bn or about June 21st, and apparently transits through the sign by July 22nd. Reference to any Ephemeris will show that the Sun apparently
teaches its highest point of north declination (23#degrees
2/ minutes) and remains in it for three days, apparently
standing still, after which it slowly smarts, crablike, backward toward its south declination. The middle djy of
the three mentioned is therefor! the longest day of the
year.
The crab represents possession and retention; it carries its house on its back. The symbol is drawn from
•tfie human breasts, emblematic of motherhood, to nurture, cherish, to ripen, to carry, to bear. Although it has
land-travel facilities, the crab is a creature born of water.
The Egyptians represented this sign with the Scarabasus
which apparently lives underground as a grub, then
emerges, spreads wings and flies through the air, emblematic of the soul’s, incarnation, experiences and release. The Egyptians made much of this emblem, not
becauso of its beauty, 6ut because it was a figure of the
zodiac, a stai'-sign of perfected being* symbolical of progress from darkness to light, from bondage to freedom,
from death to resurrection, from the vicissitudes of time
to secure possession of the treasure^ of eternity.
Within the coniines* of thf constellation Cancer is
Prsesepe, the manger or "mare’s nest.” .The word indicafes offsprings the youngr the innumerable seed, the
multitude. In modern astronomy it is often pictured as
a beehivjt. Originally it was "an ass between two buA»
dens" — between two partitions forming a manger or crib;,
a place where asses were fed,fa fold, staff, stable, a fiaven,
a place of rest, an inn, a house, a home.
In the "Gospel, Genesis 49, 40-11 and 14-15, Ilsachar.is
likened to .a strong ass which reclines between two folds

GRNETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
or resting places. Seeing that the rest was good, and the
land pleasant, he was bowing his shouluers to, bear and
become a servant -under tribute. The ass was at one
time the symk ol ok the sign Carjcer. If. mediaeval times
a curious survival of tradition in connection with the ass
was the buffoonery of arraying -an ass in ecclesiastical
robes and conducting the beast to an ajtar on April Fool’s
Day, from which performance still maintains the expression, "a silly ass." The Egyptian name for this sigp was
Klaria, the folds, the resting places. ‘ Moderns call it
Cancer,— crab. Khan means traveller’s resting place,
while ker or cer means embraced or held within encircled
arms, just as might be indicated by the symbol 5>. Cancer, therefore, means rtst secured, holding, possessing,
retaining. TIk characteristics indicated by these woids
are quite prominent in the people who are born in this
zodiacal sign. It is said that Capcer also refers to the
prophet Amos; to the apostle John; to the angel Muriel.
The first decan is modernly called Ursa Minor or Little
Bear. It contains the pole star. Ursa Major or great
bear (the big dipper) is the second decan. Named by
the Arabs, Annaish, the assembled, a community or a
flock. The third decan is Argo, the heavenly ship, whose
main star is Canopus.
Cancer is the exaltation of Jupiter (15th degree,) the
detriment of Saturn and the home of the Moon. Moon
is Mot, Maya, motfier, motter, mutter, mater, mamma,
ma, mamere (ma mere) and relates to pure, undefiled
water, virgin mere, holy water used in ceremonies of
Isis 'and those of the "Catholic Church. The Sanscrit
name*for the sea is mcr; Latin, mare. Modern names
which might be related to this sign are May, Mae, Mat,
Luc?, John, Ben, Clara, pob, “dub,” Dober, Dipper,
Arthur.
Cancer has dominion over that zone of the body containing the bfeasts, chest and stomach and therefore
related to axillae,1 lacteals, pancreas, thoracic duct and
epigastric regipn. The bones indicated are sternum, ribs
which ar^ neirest the stomach, ensiform cartilage. The
muscles are intercostals ahd diaphragm. Arteries are
diaphragmatic, oesophagian, axillary, posterior medias-

PART V, ADDITIONAL STUDIES
tines. are>> mammary, gastric, gastro-epiploric,
diaphragmatic. i Ailments usually associated with this
^ign ate\lropiy, cancer, gastric catarrh, cardialgia, digestive ailments, ’ajughs, chlorosis.
Cancer is said to preceptive, transforming, metamorphic, nurturing, fructifying, but lacking in vitality. The
stomach being tfte principle source of( affection, it is
essential that foods taken into it be pure, undefiled, or
whicli will not enuse fermentation. Foods should be well
looked, stimulants avoided. Especial care is “required
when rhe Moon is transiting through Cancer or Capricorn. Guard against colds or chills; avoid imagining
diseases; avgid worrying about finances. Frequent
changes of scenery are beneficial. ,
Words which describe characteristics for cultivation
arc; patient, tenacious* conscientious, economical, domestic, maternal, kind, devotional, versatile, sociable, adaptable, sympathetic, patriotic. Characteristics requiring
correction are described as follows: timorous, variable,
vain, fanciful, imaginative, untruthful, changeable, sentimental, touchy, grasping, proud, unadaptable, disorderly,
resentful, indolent.
Familiar quotations delating to this sign and its ruler:
“What is home without a mother?” “Tfiere’s no place
like h inie," "A regular home body,”," A burden bearer,”
“Burdened witTi domestic responsibilities,” “Cribbed,”
"Crabbed,” “Confined," “'Tis time to crab,” “Clings like
a crab,” “A fish out of water,” “Draws into hif shell,”
“A night mage,” “Inconstant as tfle jSoon,” “A heu with
a brood of ducks,”, “By, the light of the, silvery Moon.”
“The ox knoweth his owner, “and the ass his master’s
erty.” — Jsaiah 1^ .3.
Places indicated tty Cancer : lakes, rivers, brooks, _
springs, *<tnarSh grounds, places where rushes or vegetables grow, homes, stalls, mangers, shgepfolds, taverns,*
public houses»or laundries, wash houses, kitchens, 4water
t^nks and bottles, cellars, corner houses facing north.

GEKETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
SI LEO SI
Leo is called fiery t hot, dry, eholeric, b^rre'n, masculirie,
positive, bestial, fixed, northern, 6f long ascension. Some
of the older authors add : commanding, fortunate, feral,
broken, strong, bitter.
The Sun enters Leo on July 22nd. It is universally
symbolized by a lion, whose nature ij represents. It
symbolizes the fervid heat of July and August when the
Sun has attained its greatest power. It represents a
type of the electric, fiery mind whose expression is often
destructive, whose energy is often rapacious and daring,
kingly, commanding yet generous. The Sun is ruler pf
this sign. It is the detriment of the recalcitrant Uranus
who will bow to no king, and exaltation of the inspirational Neptune. Its colors are oratfge, yellow, flaxen and
golden.
Leo is represented by the ancients as the Nemean
Lion, which leaped down from the skies and was killed
by Hercules. Leo is the emblem of violence and fury in
the ' hieroglyphical writings. Properly, its destructive
force is to destroy His enemies: darkness, evil and
ignorance. In the ancient maps the lion is shown just
above Hydra, fne great dragon, viith his claws about to
rend the serpent. It also properly means to bring salvation (tft bring light) to His people. Re&el, or Regulus,
a mighty fixed star in the heart of the Lion (now about
29“ in I^eo) just above the mighty paws, refers to "the
feet that crush.” It i# said of the Messiah, "He shall
tread ‘upon the ^serpent, and trapiple the dragon under
His feet.”
Feasts and sacrifices formerly celebrated during the
Sun’s transit through Leo, in honor of the Sun, were
termed Leonitiea, while the priests who performed the
.rites were cafled( Leones. Among thei> Persians these
celebrations were called Mibhra. ,.
Leo is .said to correspond to the prophet .Hosca. The
name of this angle or angePis Verchiel, arid is one of the
beasts of the cherubim, Jacob assigned this sign to the

PABT X, ADDITIONAL STUDIES 627^
tribe of'Judah (Gen. 49, 8-10) and the subsequent warlike and victorious energy of .the tribe proved th^ allocation torrectf likewise the same *received remarkable
fulfillment in David, id whom the •lion-tike nature was
strikingly exhibited: The sacred writings abound in
references to this king of beasts among which is the
battle between Sajnson and the lion. "Samson” is Hebrew
for solar; Delilah, his mistress, means "ruler of the
night,” — the Moon. By the Hindus Leo is represented
•as rending a stbna pillar asunder, as Samson '/the Sun
in Leg) pulled down the temple of Baal. Michael is
the archangel of the Sun : angle or grc of Leo where Sun
pOurs down his greatest heat. This is indicated jn the
esoteric significance of Jacob’? struggle with the angel
of the Lord. The Sun’s heat is intense rfnd in the struggle his legs bend, he wearies and his thighs give out;
the allegory of smitir^j on the thighs. "As he passed over
Penuel the Sun rose upon him, and he halted on his
thigh.” A mode of salutation is symbolic of this even
now among the Obitnen and Bushmen of Africa, also the
Arabians.
Hydra forms the first decan. It represents corruption
in the. world. Hercules could destroy it only by means
of firfc- — just as gold»is purified of dross. The second
ddcan is Crater, the Cpp (of wrath). "Upon the wicked
He shall rain burning coals, fire and brimstone, and a
fiery tempest •.•this shall be the portion of thqir cup.” —
Ps. 11 :6. Corvus, the Raven, constitutes the third decan.
“A destroyer of the enemy.” The star Algorab i?of the
nature of t b, according to "Tl* Fixed Stars In Astrology”
f The. heart, indicative oft vital power? ardency, Interchange and generation, as well. as the spinal marrow,
nerves and fiber, are represented by Leo. The bones
influenced By this sign are the dorsal vertebrae. Muscles are interspinalis, transversalis, , longissimus. and
latissimus dersi. Arteries : »aorta, anterior and posterior
.coronary. Veins : vena cavae, coronaries.. . Physical disorders »f Laeo manifest in the various forms 'of heart
disease, palpitation, fevefs, spinal meningitis, locomdtor
ataxia, aitgina pectoris, aneurism, syncope. Heat exhaus-

GENETHLIA'CAL ASTROLOGY
tion, sun, -stroke, pestilence and inflammations. are other
sources of disorder.
As this is a vital and motive sign, ruling the heart,
temperate living is essential. Harmony, drder and moderation in all things should be cultiv^t(ed, excitement and
haste curtailed. Heating and stimulating foods or beverages should be avoided, but nutritious, blood building
food is necessary!
Words describing desirable characteristics for further
cultivation are : loyal, outspoken, ardent, kindly, tolerant,
generous, philanthropic, inspirational, inspiring, magnetic, aspiring, hopeful,' chivalrous, industrious, fearless,
philosbphical, magnanimous, idealistic, sincere, hospitable, intuitive, comprehensive. Words describing characteristics for correction are : arrogant, dictatorial, overbearing, condescending, impetuous, ^pompous, domineering, sensitive, convivial, promiscuous, prodigal, easyT
going, gullible, fussy, shirking, over sanguine, hot-'
headed.
Familiar quotations related to Leo aVid its ruler:
"Hope deferred maketh the heart sick,” “Let not your
heart be troubled,” "There is no 'new thing under the
Sun,” "All is fair in love and war,” "Bearding the lion
in his den,” “Born to the purple,” "Brave as a lion,” "A'l
that glitters is not gold,” “The smile that won’t, come
off,” "Vacations days under sunny skies, "^“Boaring like
a lion,” “Lion-hearted,” “Love me, love my dog,” "A
merry Jieart maketh a cheerful countenance.” — Proverbs
15, 13., “A merry heart doeth good like a medicine.” —
Proverbs 17, 22.
Places described by this sign and its ruler: high,
round’-topped hills, places .inhabited by wild beasts
deserts, fens, forests; hard, stony, gravelly fways or hills;
castles, forts, royal palaces, social club houses, theatres,
childrens’ playgrounds, gambling pavilions, dancer-halls,
ballrooms, places where amusements, sports, betting,
speculation or games of chance are carried on for pleasure and' excitement rather than as a business of earning
'money; dojngs in high society and. aristocratic -formal
social functions ; fireplaces, fdrnaces, stoves, ovens, solar-

. PART V. ^ ADDITIONAL STUDIES
•iums,. sfin-pdrches, therapeutic lamjis. It also Indicates
round, glistening golden articles as gold patches, breastpins, emblems, engagement and wedding rings, amber,
golden and bright yellow stones or flowers, "myrrh,
frankincense and aloes” > gold coins, gold mines.
Names ruled by the sign are: Adam, Abraham,
Abrams, David, Jacob, Esau, Israel, Hercules, Samson,
Juda, Judy, Joseph, Elohim, Helios, Osiris, Leonidas,
Leoni*, Leona, Richard (the lion-hearted,) Alphard,
Alfred, Lea, Lee.
It is important to know wha t things are ruled by signs
afnd planets and the places which they ’describe, as the
knowledge is valuable in reading horoscopes, natal and
horary, particularly. •
1 To illustrate: A lady once said to me, “I have lost an
article of value. Can astrology give me any aid toward
its discovery?” I took the time when the article was
missed and m*ade a horary chart for that date. As the
Sun was in the second house I said, “The article.was
round and golden.” "Yes it was my watch.” The ruler
af sev'enth house (thf thief) was the Moon and it was
ir> the fourth house. So I informed h»r; "The person
who took it was a wofnan and is right now in the building where you, reside. She is dressed in white, (Moon)
s a common sort of person, perhaps a servant or houseceeper; the Moon is in aspect to Uranus, therefore she
s not young and is peculiar in yamg ways; th<f Moon is
n Aries, therefore she is of fair complexion; her part of
:he house should* be the tof) and corrter room; as the
•uler of the Ascendant (h) is in good aspect to Uranus,
filer df the second (the valuable in question,) you can
ecover it by adopting unusual methods.” The lady
ecognized *>ne of the maids from this description wfio
.lad a corner, attic room, was middle-aged and quitj
eccentric. Instead of accusing her of fheft the lady’said,
"I left my w&tch on the table ; I presume you put it away
•for safe keeping?” The woman was speechless for a
momenf the’n-said, “Yes. ma’am, I took it upstairs »nd
put it on.the top shelf of my closet where no one could
see it.” This incident proves -the practicgl vplue
•astrological knowledge.

GEffETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
TO VIRGO to!
tt
Virgo is called fltxcd, earthly, cold, dry, melancholy,
barren, nocturnal, northern, femininfcf. common, scientific,
human, maternal, negative, of long'asce'nsion.
The Sun appears to transit Virgo between August 23i‘d
and September 22nd. Mercury, ruler of Virgo, is. also
exalted in this sign. It is the detrimpnt"of Neptune and
the fall of Venus. Virgo is known to have a bearing on
matters pertaining sickness, hygiene, clothing, food,
cereals, employees, servants, service, work and domestic
animals. Mercury is a messenger, Messiah, A-Rab, or
wandering teacher.
In some of the ancient zodiacs this sign was symbolized as a virgin lying prostrate; in one hand she hold: .a
"spica” (seed wheat,) and in the other a “branch” (oft,.fi i
referred to as a bough, sprout, plant, root, tree, ster.-.
rod.) The rod is sometimes referred to as blossoming.,
as Aaron’s rod. The tree is referred to "as the tree ol
life jin the Garden of Eden (Virgo.) The prostrate virgin
lies at David’s (SI) feet, i. e., at 30 degrees of Leo, at the
foot of Leo. The Sphynx of EgypJ:* seemingly is‘? combination of Lep and Virgo, half woman, half lion; the
union of spirit and matter; the vitkl rays of the St)n uniting with the natural or earthly body ("l} the virgin) to
bring fort’n fruit from the overshadowing of the Lord of
Hosts,; sometimes related to Joseph (Guiseppe) and
Mary ; Allam and Eye (Q and TO;) the tree in the garden
of Edjtn (TO.) (In a planisphere. Hydra, the water serpent, extends thvough the rneridir.ns of the sign, Virgo.)
Virgo, bearing the sheaf,”was called t‘‘the house ‘of
corn" or Beth-lehem. '(Jesus was born in Bethlehem.)
This constellation rises at the hour' of midnight, December 25th, at the period of winter solstice, nxecf'by the
* A. R.» Parsons says, "In the Great Sphynx, the lion's body has
the head. of, not'Virgo, but OslrIa=Horus on the horizon, victor
lous over Yyphon. The Algonqu'u ijsme Cor the Sen wAs Gheiis:
thd’Sphynx of Horua, Sun of Righteousness, stands at Ghlzeh. The
.flight of Gezu (Jesus) Into Egypt fulfilled the saying, “Out of
JSgypt have 1 called my £on."

PART '{. ADDITIONAL STUDIES
i • g
church "for tbe date of the Nativity of the Son (Sun) of
■•*the Virgin. .The’ first degreo of the sign Libra )S on the
Eastern horizoy. *
The capital oj France still retains its name of Paris
(Para Isis, under the’protection of Isis-Virgo.) Its great
cathedral bears tihe name Notre Dame^fOur Lady.) The
architecture of the building represents the signs of the
zodiac on the sides of the northern entrance, while the
> Virgin, to whom the edifice is dedicated, is ta^en out of
its place in the succession of the signs and set over the
center of the door, with the child, .Jesus, in her arms, and
under her feet a serpent twisted round a tree : TJie tree
with twelve'branches bearing’fruit, namely, a sign each
month is an ancient celestial figure Representing the
entire zodiac.
• In the first decan of Virgo, as shown in the Zodiac of
’Dendera, is Coma, a virgin nourishing an infant boy, the
child's name in Hebrew being Ihesu, with the signification of Ieza (i in Hebrew being our j) which in Greek
is called Christ. Coma means “the desired, the longed
for.” Haggai speaks of Christ as "the desire pi all
nations.” The second decan is Centaurus, the despised,
or the pierced. The.orincioal stars in it are Buneula and
Agena.
Bootes, is tjie third decan of thi<^ constellation : A man
holding in one hand a staff with a crook, and a sickle in
the other : a shepherd, a gleaner or great harvester.” The
bright star in Bootes, Arcturus^ is a "ruler orjguardian.”
Prominent fixfd st?rs in the constejlation Vifgo, and
near the ecliptic, are Caphir, "an atonement offering,’1
f'subrpissive one,” and Spica (Arista or Alpha Virginia)
meaning “seAl.” “Lo, the Al Mah is conceiving and is
bringing. forth a son.” — Isaiah, 7, 14. (Almah, meanjng
a bundle of sheaf of grain, an unmarried female, concealment, secret chambers, arched and> vaulted, made of
stones and closely bound together.) Almahs were’maiptained in the temple of Isis, and like the.DevadiSi (given
to God) of India,, were set apart for high{r’ purposes
(learning.) Gal. 1, IS; Jer.'l, S. Alma Mater to thisrday
means af fostering mother, an institution of learning.

GE&ETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
In the anatomy and functions of the body Virgo has^
an important bearing; its domain is the bowels 6r-abdn:
men. It indicates t{ie disorders jncidenSj such as colic,
obstructions, coldness, worms, dysentery, diarrhoea,
cholera, enteralgia, peritonitis, constipation, malnutrition
and affections of the intestinal regions. f
Virgo affects the nervous system considerably. Mercury, “the messenger of the Gods,” is rqler of this Sign
and Merqliry’s influence over the nervous system is an'
astrological fact. Mercury rules the action of the* mind,
hence, disorders of tire bowels react on the mental condition; likewise, disturbed mental states, business or
domestic worries reflect adversely on the bowels, thcre,-
fore Virgo people are benefited by paying attention to
diet, hygiene, sanitation and mental poise. Hypochondria is characteristic of this sign, while absorption, assimilation, selection and utilization are Virgo functions'..
Its action is chylifactive. It is associated chiefly with
the duodenum, jejunum, ileum, mesentery and peritoneum; with obliquus, pyramidalis, rectus and transversalis
of abdomen muscles; with gastric, superior and inferior
mesepteries arteries; with portal, hepatics, umbilical and
intestinal veins.
Diet is an important factor to Virgo people. Meal's
should be regular and food well mhsticated. Foods, especially cereals, which regulate the bowels properly
should be dhosen. It is said that a vegetarian diet, well
proportioned, is favorable. Strong drinks or condiments shotild be avoided,.
The irrincipal fharacteristics of, desirable nature for
further cultivation arc described hy the words; thoughtful, active, serious, concise, dircreet, sensitive, intvitiveb
efficient, cautious, intellectual', perceptive, contemplative,
domestic, prudent, provident, industrious, methodical,
thrifty. ' *
Undesirable characteristics for correction ar,e expressed
as follows: calculating, mercenary, selfish, anxious,
worried, irritable, apprehensive, discontented, secretive,
critical, skd^itical, cold, unresponsive/'inconsistent, indecisive, quick-tempered, timid, backward, lacking sclfcoqfidence.

PART V, ADDITIONAL), STUDIES
"..Words* associated with the .sign are: Astrea, Athene,
Belli, Bess, Bethula, Bu!a, Buhah* Coma, Elizabeth,
Celeste, Stella, Kdorah,, Sarah, Virgin, Virginia, _Mary,
Cyril, Branch, Blaftiih, Rod, Rodney, Spica, “spike,”
Durga, Adrenedeft, Adrene, Eve, Eva, Mona, Madonna,
Phirko, Phirpo, Portenas.’Paris, Notre Dame, Gene.
Familiar quotations: “An apple a day keeps the doctor
%way,” “He serv*es >most who serves best," “Tjke care
of the pennies and the dollars will take care of themselves,” “Careful and troubled atyiut many things,”
“Turning over a new leaf,” “Throw physic to the dpgs,”
"To the pure’ all things are pifre,” "Virtue is its own
reward," “She looketh well to the ways of* her household,
and eateth not the bread of idleness.” — Proverbs 31, 27.
“Is there no balm iu Gilead? Is there no physician
there?” — Jeremiah 8, 22. “Gather up the fragments that
•remain, that nothing be lost.” — John 6, 12.
In Mundane Astrology the sixth sign has special reference to public health, general conditions of working
people and of poultry and domestic animals. It ^lso
indicates matters relating to municipal or national service, ai'my or navy, departments of labor, horticulture,
agriculture, agrostology, medicinal herb.** prophylactics,
Red Cross, humane and relief societies.
Virgo signifies gardens, corn fields, wheat fidlds, granaries, malt houses, grain elevators, pantries, restaurants,
commissary departments, places^whfre fruit ajd vegetable are kept and where hay, wheat, barley, cheese or
butter are stored, «or places where book?, papers, maps,
charts, plans or medicines are* closeted gr kept. ,
It is said that Boston, Mass.; is ruled by the sign
Virgo, alse .the east side of Los Angeles, particularly
around the commission houses, farmers’ market and industrial district.* The west s.ide is ruled by Leo, enpocially the Wilshlre, Hollywood' and Beverly Hills sjetions:’
On the date of the incorporation of Los 'Angeles the O
was 12* "IS’ Itv Virgd. P/obably thousands of* places, in
the Unite.d States come under the domain of this sign,
but as yet have not been discovered or allocated^

GCNETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
=== LIBRA f=
Libra is sftoken, of as cardinal, movable, equinoctial,
western, airy, hot, moist, semi-fruitful, humane, scientific, masculine, sanguine.
The Sun appears to enter Libra, September 23rd and
to transit that sign until October 22nd. Venus is ruler
of Libra, which is the exaltation pf Saturn, detrimeyt
of MarS and the fall of the Sun.
It is symbolized fiy the apparently commonplace scales,
but the arms of that tiltrng beam react out into eternities.
The position of the attached bowls, which a feather’s
weight may change, indicates the destinies of ages, the
fortunes of empires, the estates^ of immortality. The
equipoise of the beam marks the adjustment of mighty
feuds internal and external. It bespeaks the eternal
justice which presides through changing relations
throughout the universe, which might coarsely be illustrated by the saying, "Every dog has his day.”
2uben al Genubi, meaning "the insufficient price,” a
star formerly in Libra (the south scale, a Librae), having
the combined pature of Saturn and Mercury was malevolent; Zuben al Schemali (north scale, b Libra^) meaning "the full pric^.” was highly benefjeent, similar in
nature t(i Jupiter and Mercury combined. These two
stars .were (in 1937) in Scorpio about 14° 11’ and 18° 32'
respectively. In Arabic the name of this sign is Al Zubena^ meaning purihase, redemption, gain.,. The symbol
of this sign is largely associated with the ethical impersonations of Astrea and 'Athene of Greek and Roman
mythology, whb were the jpttrons of righteousness, justice, order, government and the institutions and powers
®f the state, by which rights were' protected, justice administered, aryl general equity secured. The srftne symbol .instill connfcted with buildings where courts are
held, where causes (cases) 'are tried, where accusations
and disputes, are weighed and settled, and the awards of
justice declared and given.. Most ftate c^pitol 'buildings
add courthouses are made wit'h a dome in the center so
that the general structure answers to the symbol *a*.

. PART V,* ADDITIONAL STUDIES
Therfi is some analogy between this sign of the zodiac
attd its. symbol with reference to divine adjudications and
adjustments rfel^ting to defaults, defects and accusations,
involving penalties, prises, payments. Especially when
these ideas are appfied to a continuation of the story of
the Seed of the Wom’an,sthe divine Son of the Virgin,
pjomised or appointed to lift the fallen, Recover from the
serpent’s power (Hydra, the serpent, extends through
the meridian of this sign also) and bring men to the safe
pasturages on the heavenly hillsides. In which'.case we
are confronted with eternal justice weighing the demerits
and penalties of sin on one side and the price paid for
redemption on the other side. “Thou art weighed in the
balances, and' art found wanting.” — Daniel 5, 27.
There is another interesting analogy in the fact that
on the south of this*sign is the first decan, Crucis, or
<;tux, meaning cross; on the north of Libra is the third
decan, Corona Borealis, the crown. Between these two
and close to Libra was what is now called Lupus, the
wolf, but with.no ancient authority for such. In fact, it
was referred to as “the victim,” Sura, a sheep or lamb.
The Arabs give it a name which means, “the slain one,”
which .seems to connect up with the saying in the ApocalypsS that Christ is ‘‘the lamb slain from the foundation
of the world." (Foupdation is a word 'frequently used
in relation to the zodiac ; world means whirl, whorl,
circle or cycle*) In some of the Coptic an4, Egyptian
representations this victim is a naked youth with his
finger at his mouth, representing Horus, the beloved son
of Qsiris and the Virgin. In d’hcanician this/ youth is
called Harjfocrates, meaning the victim of justice. The
cross has ever repVesenled atonement ; tfie crown, reward.
* Lib fa is a ..crossing plaoe or meeting place of the
ecliptic and equator, the autumnal equinox. The Sun
passes ,oves from north to south declination at the first
point of Libra and on that date the day and night are of
equal length — ’they weigh, evenly, are balanced. •> This
has been celebrated by Passover feasts. (St. Itfark 14,
1-12-13-14-15-22) The old Mexicans at certain of their
holy feasts ’made a' cross, composed of maizS flour „and
the blood of a victim offered in sacrifice, which they first
worshipped, tjten broke into pieces and atq in token ,of

GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
union,, equity and brotherhood. (The hot cross buns or
modern times arc a symbol of the eastern crossing or
vernal equinox.) The Egyptiar-s also had a sacred cake
with the form of a cross on it, which they ate in holy
worship, entertaining the idea 01 salvation through the
cross. < ,,
As Aries represents the head, the first point of-right
ascension, the positive period or birth of the natural year
and the Sun’s ascension northward, so Libra represents
the negative or d^cension : loss of strength, vitality,
collapse. (Sun's fall is in Libra.) Here the Sun crosses
or is +ified; stretched upon the center ot the cross the
rays shine only part way in the northern hemisphere and
partly in the southern. Divided thus on the — equator,
the summer solstice is on one hand (5») and the winter
solstice (VS) on the other, both "thieves,” for when tije
declination is highest in S>, June 22nd, he begins to lose
in length of days and on December 22nd (VS) he has lost
all and is in lowest declination.
blames associated with this sign are: Justice, Justine,
Justin, Justina, Justus, Zuben, Ruben, Ruby, Corona,
Grafias, Sura, Lupus, Lupe, Luka, Harpocrates, rlorus,
Charles, Balan, Beam, Cross, Scale.
Libra rules the lumbar region in general and the kidneys in particular. Its zone of influence includes the
loins, javaries and the medullary and corticle substance
of th’e kidneys. Lijjra represents equipoise, distillation,
sublirpation and filtration. The lumbar vertebrae is the
principal bone. The muscles include the quadrati lumborum, and sacrolumbares. Arteries: suprarenal, renal
ano lumbar. Veins: renal, lumbar. Librjn disturbances
manifest through Bright's disease, nephritis, suppression
of urine, neuralgia of kidneys, weak low<y«ba^ck, etc.
Pains in the lq,wer part of back are symptoms (signals)
Svhitji ^should be given attention. A wfll balanced diet
between acid and starchy foods is necessary. Plenty of
fresh air, hanrfionious surroundings and mild exercises
are essential. Attention should be given to' proper diet,
especially concerning liquid foods, as the kidneys are the
chief organs affected.

PART V, ADDITIONAL STUDIES
Wordst describing: characteristics for further cultivation arec ’thoughtful, impartial, unprejudiced, conciliatory, foresight1, justice, judicial, gracious, modest, decorou5j refined, artistic, adaptable, persuasive, affectionate,
peacemaker, cheerful, sympathetic, forgivkig, generous,
idealistic, tactful, weS'balanced. Words describing characteristics for corfecticm are: indecisive, uncertain, extreme, reckless, temporizirtg, hesitating, susceptible, impressionable, illusive, pedantic, over punctilious, vain,
aloof, .shirking, careless, vascillating.
* It is said that Libra people usually make good'buyers
for large concerns, having good discrimination and intuition regarding what to buy that can be sold readily,
especially in seasonable goods and quickly moving iffems
suqjh as novelties, fancy goods, perfumes, apparel, jewels.
They are also good as court attaches, bailiffs, clerks,
justices.*
familiar quotations related to this sign or its ruling
planet are “Tell it to the judge,” "In all things observe
moderation,” “The bed of justice,” “A soft answer turneth away wrath,” “Blessed are the peace makers,” “In
union there is strength,” “Handsome is as handsome
does,” "Blessed are the joy makers,” "When in doubt, *be
silent,” “The truth is always the strongest argument,”
“Measures the water in- the hollow of his hand,” — Egyptian: hieroglyphics. »
Libra represepts places near wind-mills, straggling
barns, where coopers work, where wood is cut or piled,
saw-pits, harbor for ships, where boats are made or
launched, dry-docks, tops of mourtfaiqs, mounds 6r hills,
trees, ground* where hunting or hawking is practiced,
golf links, sandy a»id gravelly ^places, tops of buildings
with cupolas or domed buildings like statfhouses, rourthofises. *Also u^per 100ms ifl houses, garrents, lofts, roof
gardens, one room within another as in antechambers of
court room«% closets," guest chambers, boxes without*,
hinges, fiianos, tables, upholstered furniture, scales,
weights or measftres, tops of_ dressers, wardrobes, ^ewel
cases.
* Occupations of. each Sign are 'related In the bool, "AgtrpAnalysls.”

QgNETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
”1 SCORPIO *"1
Scorpio is called watery, fruitful, fixed, feminine, cold,
phlegmatic, nbcturt.al, southern;- negative, reproductive,
violent, mute, of long ascension. The Sun appears to
transit this sign yearly between October 23rd and November 21st.
Scorpio is ruled by Mars ; it is the fall of the Moon,
the detriment of Venus. In ancienc tables of dignities
and debilities Scorpio was left blank as to exaltation.
No planet was exalted in Scorpio, but some mod.ern
tablets assign it as the exaltation of Uranus. However,
there is doubt as to the accuracy of this allocation; it
might be exalted in Gemini ! Pluto doubtless has strong
affinity with the sign Scorpio, and, according to mythology, was the ruler of this sign.
In the three decans, or "side pieces” — parts outside
the zodiac in the constellations which in older days corresponded with the longitude of the sign — we see pictured in the star map the serpent ("Ophiuchus wrestling
with the serpent so that it is unable to sear the crown”)
and above these, Heraklcs (also called Hercules) wounded in the lifted heel, the other foot over the dragon’s
head; holding in left hand the branch of Golden Apples
and the three-hcaded dog (Cerberus) of bell, while in
the other, hand he ‘holds an uplifted club. Beneath all
these is the scorpion. These recall the words of Jesus
in Luke, 10, 19: “Behold, I give unto you the power to
tread on1 serpents avid Scorpions, and over all the power
of tht enemy: (dog of hell?) and nothing ‘shall by any
means hurt you.”
Scorpio in Arabic and Syriac is A1 Akrab, meaning
founding, conflict, war. In Coptic it is Isidis: attack
of the enemy, oppression from deadly fetes. '.Antares
..(Shiloh) was then the principal star in Scorpio, meaning,
it te'atk, rends, clbaves. It also denotes ruptures, burstings, o-evasses and falls. “Now this man purchased s;
field with thb reward of his iniquity, and .falling headlong, he burst asunder in the 'midst and all his bowels,
(TiE,e,tn.) gushed out." — Acts 1, 18. (Speaking of Judas

PABT V, .ADDITIONAL STUDIES
Iscariat,.flre disciple indicated by Scorpio.) It should be
remembered tfca't the constellations of old do not bear
their salne relations to the signs today, consequently, it
does not mean tftat Scoi^io people ase Judases. While
the scorpion and thfe" serpent were in Scorpio, so also
above them were \3phhichus and Herakles, the former
destroyers, the latter saviours, denoting the great heights
to*which Scorpio people can attain. Their surgical and
healing ability is well known.
In tire Hebrew Zodiac Scorpio was ascribed to Dan.
Dan was “a serpent by the way (ngar the zodiac) and
an adder in the path.” (Path is the zodiac.) The serpent was evil or d-evil, or the dt'stroyer. The banner of
the* tribe of Israel was originally a scorpion, but afterwards an eagle. Serpens, the serpent in first decan.
Ophiuchus grasps the serpent firmly, and although
efle heel or foot is stung or hurt, the other crushes the
scorpion’s head. This is represented as Krishna in sculptured figures in one of the oldest existing pagodas in
Hindustan. In* some of the old Egyptian spheres the
picture is that of a man enthroned, wearing the head, of
an eagle (the enemy of serpents) and given a Coptic
name signifying "the .chief who cometh.” An Arabic
word or name, ^Esculapius, figures in the myths as a
great physician and on£ of great achievements, and who
though wounde^ was, nevertheless, raised to glory.
Hercules, in Egyptian hieroglyphics is named, "Him
who cometh to bruise the serpent’s head and destroy the
works'of the devil.” The bright s'lar m this constellation
is Ras el Gethi, meaning; "head of him who bruises.’5 The
star in the knee means, “the branch kneeling." It is said
that th« Phoenicians worshipped this mSn five generations before the1 time of the Greeks and honored him as
representing a saviour'. There seems to be much in these
figures (3f heaven which are analogous ^ith our own'
present day religious beliefs. Hercules, is 3rd decap., ’
Another point for interesting study: Virgo and 2torpio
were originally one sjgn ; Libra did not then ejeist, (notice the similarity betweeh tire signs TO and TO) making
but ten signs, namely: T b II S SI (TO-TO) t V5 —

GENETHLIACAI ASTROLOGY
Much was made of the figures 1 and 0, indicating the
generative principle in nature and the sex of male and
female.. This combination of signs in the serpent
woman or Androgyne man ("male an^l, female created
He them”) signified a garden (T^with the tree (— ) of
life in the midst thereof, symbolized by a serpent ("l)
climbing the tree. But afterwpra' the helpmeet (=2= as a
room within a room) for Adam was treated, that is — ,
the womb-man (woman.) Libra was early indicated as
a naked woman, hence, the "fall” of map. The Sui. (O)
has its fall in Libra; the fall of the year is in Libra. And
the serpent (that which beguiles or leads astray). became
the eighth sign, rulirg the ninth month, Novo or November, counting from Aries (March) as the first month.
Thirty pieces of silver J S ) correspond with the thirty
days of a lunar' month. (Synodical revolution.)
Cherub in Hebraic means serpent. The cherubim had
the head of a bull (8,) the head of a lion (SI,) and the
head of an eagle (ttl.) Remember that the banner of
the tribe of Dan was changed from a scorpion to an eagle
with the head of a man. "And he rode upon a cherub,
and did fly: yea, he did fly upon the wings of the wind.”
Psalm 18, 9th verse represents — ; 10, "l; 14, t ; IS, V3 ;
Names associated with Scorpio are: Dan, Isidis, Isidor,
Frons, Antares, Shiloh, Ophiuchus, Rasalhague, Lesuth,
Yed, Judas, Aquila, -tTlsculapius, A1 Akrab.
Scorpio is concerned with both the reproductive and
destructive processes, procreation and readaptation, exercising special influence over the generative ‘organs. The
parts of the body coming withirf its Hone are : bladder,
ureters, pelvis of kidney, urethra, prostate gland, groins,
gall, rectum and the colon- ' Bones : symphysis pubis,
brim of pelvis, tuberosity of ischium. Muscles involved
are: sphincter of bladder, sphincter and levatores jini, and
the erectores. *The internal iliac is the Scorpio artery,
■&hils tfce veins arc: the mesenteric, sperffiatic cholic and
haemor^hoidal. Physical disorders manifest1 as ruptures,
fistulas, piles, gravel, stone and affections associated with
the^ generative organs, including injuries to'the ‘groin.

PART V, ADDITIONAL STODIES
Desirable characteristics for higher cultivation may be
• expressed in \h'e words : energetic, active, intrepid, positiw, fdarless, tenacious, penetrating, “thoughtful, optimistic, pleasant, Eloquent* devoted, dauntless, patience,
ambition. Words describing undesirable characteristics
requiring correction art: : severe, callous, caustic, sarcastic, suspicious, destructive, vindictive, dogmatic, shrewd,
pSrsimonious, blunt, tyrannical, passionate.
• Scorpio indicates* success in positions requiring patience, perseverance and concentration, and produces
good surgeons, chemists, detectives* researchers, and in
lints where courage, strength and personal effort are
necessary.
Familiar quotations : “Hold fast that which thou hast
that no man take thy «rown.” (See crown and Ophiuchus in the star map.) "Speaks with the sting of sarcasm,"
•‘iGets into hot water,” "The eye of an eagle,” "Gets boiling mad," "The strong, deft healing touch of a surgeon,”
"O death, wheje is thy sting?” — 1 Cor. 15, 55. “Be ye
therefore wise as serpents” — Matthew 10, 16, "Still
waters run deep."
It signifies low gardens, vineyards, muddy, sluggish
streams, ill smelling ponds, quagmires, slaughter houses,
meat markets, operation rooms, lavatories, sinks, cess
pools, places'wfyere junk or old iron 4s stored, tanneries,
incinerating plants, chemical laboratories, crematories.

GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
SAGITTARIUS
Sagittarius is called flexed, common, pery, masculine,
southern, hot, '"dry, choleric, positive, double bodied (bicorporal: 1* to IS* human; 16* to iO". bestial,) motive,
bilious, of long ascension. The Sun appears to transit
this sign between November 22nd arid December 21st,
yearly.
Sagittarius is pictured as half man,' half horse, the man
an archer with bow and arrow : a Centaur or Cenfcaurion.
This sign is ruled bjP Jupiter; it is the detriment of Mercury,"the exaltation of Moon’s South Node (in the third
degree particularly,) fall of the North Node. As Libra
may be said to be seeking balance, Sagittarius, although
good at shooting a mark, seeks variation, i. e., many
things to “shoot” at. It gives interest in hunting, sports,
law, religion, philosophy, science and medicine. Somewhere in the Bible it says, “Gad is an archer.” That
being so we can understand the term, "a gad-about,” in
relation to “variation.” ' "
The symbol of Sagittarius (/) is pictured by a sharp
instrument like an arrow or spear; an armed horseman
or warrior represents this fiery sign. (The fiery Stream
or scat of the spirit is the blood.) Sagittarius is fiery and
Jupiter is said to rqje the blood, generally speaking, t
is joined to or blended with nl, a watery &ign. It was in
the si<le that the “crossed” one ( + ) was pierced and
blood anji water came forth. Sagittarius is a southern
sign and therefore '’looks up to the -fing place (■-5’) in
north ‘latitude, r.o the rays must,, pierce from the south
to the north and reach no further than the tide or groin
of th*e crossified one. Sagittarius rules the groins, hips,
thighs ; in surgical operations incisions* in the groins
releases blood and water mixed. “As above, .so below,”
said the masters of old. Here we have movements in
the solj^r system indicating events which should come to
.pass below, on earth.
John, Ii?. his visions of the future,, beheld ”... a white
holse; and he that sat on him had a bow ; and he went
forth conquering and to conquer.” (The heavenly cen-

• * PART V, ..ADDITIONAL STUDIES 643*
faur.) »The ‘Greeks called him Chieron, "the- righteous-
(fralirig chief centaur." With Chiefon everything good,
just and nobit was associated, indudiflg dignity and
power; a combinatidn of greatest beneficence and goodness with strengtn and majesty. A song of Chieron runs
thus :
.“Midst golden stars he stands refulgent now,
And thrusts tjie scorpion with his bended. bow.”
So the arrows of the divine heyo are “sharp in the
hsart of the King’s enemies.” Chieron was sometimes
portrayed as occupying Apollo’s throne, recalling to mind
from Revelations that when the King of kings comes
forth to the battle of that great day to overwhelm the
beast and the false prophets and all their armies, He
comes in the form of a man sitting on a white horse, in
righteousness judging and making war on the King’s
enemies, the same as depicted in Sagittarius. “And in
Thy majesty ride prosperously, because of truth and
meekness and Righteousness ; Thine arrows are
sharp in the heart of the King’s enemies.” — Psalms. 45,
J.n the first decan, *or side piece, in tjje constellation
then cqrresponding to this sign, was Lyra, the harp, the
oldest of stsinged musical instrumests, the invention of
which the anwents ascribed to the gods. OVphcus, a
legendary Thracian musician and hero, was often identified with Apollo in cla. sical myjhojogy. Orpheus was
called the fisher of songs. He was a helper of tlje Argonauts seeking the Golden Fleece. His art is always
associated with religion, prater, prophecy, sacred, services and the ioyous element in holy tffings. In other
words, the harp in the first decan .of Sagittarius connects
the archer, with superior joy, delight, gladness and
praiseworthy action, all typical of the characteristics of
the advanced sons of Jove as we know them today.
, In some of the old uranographies this .constellation
was portrayed, with * ha^vk. the enemy of the serpept,
who darts from the sky with swiftness and power. Consequently* many of the more modern star atlases represent this constellation with *an feagle abreast 4, harp*

QET&TH1JACAL ASTROLOGY
expressing the idea of triumphant song .of praiie and
gladness through the, power1 of the eagle ovei the serpent;
the higher piind over the lower. Yega, meaning
victory, the brightest star in the' northern skies and of
the nature of Venus and Mercury, tyas ir Lyra ; the name
signifies, "He shall be exalted, the warrior triumphant.”
In the second decan qf Sagittarius was Ara, called by
the Arabs, A1 Mugamra, f‘the completing, the finishing,
making an end of what was undertaken.” The Greeks
used the name of this decan as an imprecation • bane,
ruin, destruction T?iey personified the name as a goddess of revenge and destruction. It is associated with
the Hebrew Mara and Aram, meaning utter destruction.
In the latitudes in which these constellations were originally formed, Ara was on the other side of the ecliptic,
on the lowest horizon to the south, ‘with its flames burning downward towards the dark and hidden abyss, th^
bcfttomless pit, the lake of fire. In the Dendera Zodiac
this decan was pictured by a throned human figure
yielding a flail over a jackal which was often identified
with a dragon. Hence, though the symbols differ, the
idea'or meaning was the same. The throned figure had
a name which signified, "the coming One.”
In the third <decan we see Draco, the dragon, "the
trodden on.” Its chief star, once the pole star (four to
six thousand years ago) had several namps as A1 Waid,
"who is to be destroyed Thuban, "the subtile A1 Dib,
"the reptile.” Other stars in Draco are Etanin, long serpent; Gramian, the<decfiver ; El Athik, the fraudful; El
Asieh,* the humbled, the brought down ; Cianser) the
punished enemy.'” Draco evidently represents great evil :
D-evil or Satan„who is to be vanquished. “In that day
the Lord, with his great an-i strong sword shall ‘punish
leviathan the piercing serpent ; and he shall slay the
dragon that is in the sea.” — Isaiah 27, 1. Joai^h calls
rn the peoplc to aing and rejoice when that day comes.
Apocalyptic visions John, saw a great:' dragon whose
'tail wax drawn along a third of the stars of the heavens.
It stood before a woman eager to devour her child as
soon as b6m, but the child was. caught away to God and
to his throne ; then a great voice of song was heard in
Jvtaven, because the adversary was east down. These

PABT f, ADDITIONAL BTOPIB8 Wf
referenpes to •the1 Bible are given to illustrate the fact
l-Jjat it Contains much that can be understood only in the
light of astrology.
Jove, Jupiter, ‘Jehovah, the saving one. In Medical
Astrology, in the^chart df decumbiture, if Jupiter casts a
favoring ray there is reason to belief the life of the
ailing one will be saved.
* Gemini might be considered as limited to tHat which
is within reach of the hands, while Sagittarius, being
connected with locomotive factors provides an extension
or variation, in expression aad sensation, beinjf thus
epabled to transport the body or travel to relatively
foreign places. It is identified with the reins, hips and
thighs. Its zone includes the liver and it has much to
do with the condition of the blood stream. It is noticeable that Sagittarians are susceptible to felons (paronychia,) or whitlow, abscesses, superations, septic inflammations, as well as injuries through horses and falls. As
horses are disappearing we may expect the “winged
Pegasus” to meet these experiences via air planes. It is
noticeable that the first hero of aeronautics, “Lindy,”
has Sagittarius rising. Being opposite to Gemini, the
sign Sagittarius also* is given to affections denoted by
that sign, i.e., lung and nerve troubles.
The bones indicated by this sign are: ilium, femur,
coccygeal and sacral; muscles: iliopsoas, iliacus, pectinaeous, sartorius, rectus, extensor quadriceps, anjj buttock
glutaeus muscles ; arteries are : %ac?al, femoral* and external iliac ;* vein^: iliac and verna sacra. Disease may
manifest as enteric disorders, "sciatica, rheumatism, gout
cpxalgia or dislocations of hip ioint, feverish ailments,
blood disorder*, cuts and wfcunds, lung, nerve and volitional disturbances. -On the front cover of old almanacs
will be*se£n St. George on a powerful horse, slaying a
dragon with a %pear. symbolizing the ^urative properties
of medicine in overcoming ^disease.
This jjign gives tendency to over activity : "too many
irons in the fire” is frequently one of their failings, therefore moderation and deliberate action are essential when
ailing. The "great wide opqn sjjaces” is tjjeir sphere;

GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
the out-of-doors with sports, physical ^exercises and
hiking. •
Words describing 'characteristiis favorable for further
development are : sincere, honest, franjf, just, generous,
foresight, prophetic, persevering, 'dependable, buoyant,
genial, jovial, hopeful, logical, charitable. Words describing characteristics for correction are: boisterous, overconfident, rash, changeable, blunt, brusque, aggressive,
defiant, uncompromising, prodigal, independent, specula-'
live, sportive.
Familiar sayings : “A sure shot," "A good sport’,"
"Straight as an arrow," *Swift as an arrow,” "A horse,
a horse, my kingdom for a horse !” “Riding rough shod’,”
"Kicking over the traces,” "A white elephant,” “For he’s
a jolly good fellow,” “Hail, fellow well met,” “Only one
string to his bow,” “Taking a sporting chance," "Up tq
the mark,” "Hitting the bull’s eye,” "O ! many a shaft, at
random sent, finds mark the archer little meant.”
h
Words associated with Sagittarius are: Jove, Jehovah,
Centaur, Centaurion, Pimpernal (herb,) Zephaniah (prophet,) Adnachiel (angel of this angle,) Vega, Tprebellum, Archer, Bowman, Piercer, Chieron or Cheiron, St.
George, Swift, Orpheus, horsemap, victory, obelisk, A1
Mugamra, Ara, CEdipus, Mara, Draco, LeviathUn, A1
Waid, Tlqiban, A1 Dib, Rastaban, Etanit, Grumian, El
Athik, El Asieh, Gianser, Cadmus, Victor.
• Places'Vep resented bj Sagittarius : highest placps in
the latid, hills, ground that rises higher tlfdn the surrounding country, the topmost room fn a house, places
near fire or where it has beeq stables for war horses qr
racers; also long, slim, pointed things as r.rrows, spears,
syords, needles, obelisks, poles, ^sticks, canes, rope,
chisels, crowbars, drills, tooth picks, hat. pWs ; rncense
burners, harps,’ race horses.

PART Y« ADDITIONAL STUDIES
CAPRICORN
Capricorn is called cardinal, movaDie, tropical, solstitial, earthly, feminine, 'cold, dry, ltfelancnoly, southern,
quadrupedal, serving, negative, of short ascension.
• The Sun apparently transits Capricorn between December 22nd and January 19th. It is ruled by Saturn,
is th*e exaltation of Mars, the detriment of the Moon and
\he fall of Jupiter.* Capricorn in modern astrology is
symbolized by a goat, but in ancient uranographies it
was portrayed as half goat with th8 tail of a fish.
Jn early religious history the goat vyas a sacrificial
animal, and to this day popular sayings like "He was the
goat," and "the scape-goat,” carry out the same idea of
sacrifice. God comrfianded the children of Israel in
, Leviticus 9, 3 : "Take ye a kid of the goat for a sin offering.” The goat was pictured as falling down, in the
attitude of dying; one leg is doubled under the body, the
head is droopiftg, but the body of the dying goat terminates in the body and tail of a vigorous fish. It is often
•referred to as the fish-goat. It is interesting to recall
that the word Jesus means fish. This goat-fish symbol
is.associated with various biblical references: "Thus it
is written, and thus it behoved Christ fo suffer, and to
rise from tfce dead the third day, that repentance and
remission of sifts might be preacheain His name among
all nations.” — Luke 24, 46-47. It is typical of goinjj down
and coming up, — resurrection.
Pagan mythology tetys the story that ..Pan or Bacchus,
a divine personage, was feasting with other gods on the
bank qf a river, when the fearful Typhon came 'upon
them suddenly* compelling ftiem.to assume other shapes
in order t<^ escape him. Bacchus took the form of a goat
and plunged into the stream, that part of his body which
was under wat»r assuming the form of a fish. To com*
mcmorate the event before dll nations, Jupiter place! hirq
.in the heavens (zodiac) in his metamorphosed srtiape.
The Philistines connected Dagon, the half-fish-gbd,
with Caifricornus, and embodied it with the original idea.

0BNETHL1ACAL ASTROLOGY
Dagon means fruitfulness, fulfillment. Eusebius said
that Djgon was the god of husbandry, tfie' god/of seeds
and harvest. Dagofi has been likened to Horus, a m«ek
and silent sufferer from whom Cannes the horn of plenty,
the cornucopia. Divide that word ihfthe middle, reverse
the two parts and note how it reSembfes Capricorn.
The Babylonians connected the half-fish-god, Oannes,
with Capricornus. Berosus mentions Oannes as .half
man ancj'half fish. In some of the ancient pictures Oani
nes was a tall, dignified man standing inside a gi;eat fish
with one hand uplifted and the other holding a basket
filled, with treasure, fabled as arising out of the sea 'to
teach the secrets of wishom, especially thfe elements of
civilization, culture and law, organizing them into a prosperous commonwealth.
This sign of the sea goat plainly represents the death
of the lower mind and the birth of the spiritual. The
planet ruling Capricorn is the much, maligned Saturn,
whose period of labor or revolution is thirty years, representing one, who if he has received illumination through
experience, “commences his (Father’s) work” understanding^ or seriously.
In what was then the first decan of Capricorn is Sagitta, a heavenly arrow speeding to its aim. Its shooter
is not visible but the execution of which it is capable is
shown by the dying go!at. It has felled cthe goat but it
speedy on past as an agent of divine justice which kills
out the wickedness of ignorance from the redeemed soul
of marr.
The second decan shows^Aquila, the pierced and falling
eagltf. Its principal star is AtTair meaning "the wounded." The other three stars Rad names wlfichi meant “the
thorn,” "the wounded heel,” "the covered wjth blood.”
All these seem to be associated with ■ the plomised
Saviour’s deat’n. "As an eagle stirreth up her nest,
.fluttferlth over her young, spreadeth abroad her wings,
taketh*them, beareth them on her wings, so the Lord,
alone did)ead him.” — Deut. 32, 11. , "Ye h^ve seviri what
1 did unto the Egyptians, and how I bare you on eagles’
wings and brought you unto myself.”— Exoduk 19, 4.

PART V,. ADDITIONAL 8TPDIES
The third dejan to this sign was a beautiful cluster of
sfars najtied’.Delphinus or Dolphin, a vigorous fish
springing upward. The Dolphin Was considered most
sacred; its name was associated with Aptfllo, because in
the form of a dolpjnn’ he showed the Creton colonists the
way to Delphi, the celebrated place in the Grecian world
which was the seat of the famous oracle, hence the
"Delphian Oracles.” When the physical or carnal mind
is overcome, transcended or transmuted, the spiritual
mind springs up.
From* an astronomical standpoint; the Sun is seen to
come yearly to the lower part of the great cross ^tvthe
winter solstice in Capricorn V3 reaching its lowest point
in southern declination (23"2 7’), called "the grave,” on
December 22nd, remaining in that degree for three days,
a’fter which on December 25th it ascends out of “the
grave,” like a new birth or a resurrection. This coincides
with the words of Matthew in 12, 38: "Certain of the
Scribes and of the Pharisees answered, saying. Master,
we would see a sign from thee.” (12, 39) “But He^ answered and said unto them. An evil and adulterous generation’ seeketh after $. sign ; and there shall be no sign
given to it, but the sign of the prophet Jonas.” (12, 40)
“For as Jonas was tHVee days and three nights in the
whale’s belly, sp shall the Son of M,>n be three days and
three nights in the heart of the earth.” (Cap’ricorn, an
earthly sign.) Thus it is seen that the movements of
Osiris, the Sun, coincide with t{je sjory of the-death of
Christ and the resurrection. At the birth of Chsist on
December 25th the SuA is in Capricoril, "the manger,”
the place where goats are kept, while at midnight the
fiVst degree of Libra riseS ,on the eastern angle overshadowed by the constellation Virgo, the virgin ; hence
the Sun and, Christ are both said to be “born of a virgin?.”
Here are some other interesting items relating^to this
sign, as food>for thought and further research : The cross;
was set up in Calvary (meaning place of «; skull,' ) grave
yard (VJ.) The veil. of the temple (zodiac) ryas rent in
twain from top to bottom, from 25 to VS, so the + is ’set
up ; the © carried the cross to Golgotha (W.) Lots were

QEHBTHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
cast and the garments divided into four p^rts. The robe
without a seam is the zodiac. "The earth did qjuake and
the graves were opehed." — Matthew 27, ^>l*-52. “For the
angel (angle) 'of the Lord descended from heaven and
rolled back the stone.’’ — Matthew 28/ 2f Capricorn rules
stone, rock, primitive earthy riionasteries, convents,
churches, also gates and hinged things, while the gre^t
south declination (23‘27’ S) was referred to as the great
pit, lake of brim-stone or hell. Matthe.w 16, 18: "Thou
are Petef (petre or rock salt,) and upon this rock I will
build my church; and the gates of hell shall not, prevail
against it." Mark 1/5, 5: "And entering into the sepulchre they saw a young man .... clothed in a long white
garment.” The O entering V5 marks the beginning
(young) winter’season with its garments of white, clothing the rocks, stones or boulders, caves and other earthly
things with shiny, glistening garments so bright as to
almost blind the eyes, as that angle (VS) appears. Dark,-
ness spreads over the earth from December 22nd to 25th, '
as these are the shortest days of the year; in other words,
the nights (darkness) predominate.
V/ords associated with this sign or its ruler: Messiah,
mediator, atoner, sexton, set, stone, priest, Winters, Calvary, Golgotha, St. Peter, Simon .Peter, Petre, ChuTch,
Vatican, religiop, cross, Gates, Groves, Graves, Goatts,
Jan. Janus, Nahum, (prophet,) Naphtali (son of Jacob,)
dock (herb,) A1 Tair, Gedi, Gedi-Kid, (stape goat,)
Dabih, Pa'n, Bacchus, Father Time, King Winter, Jack
Frost, , cornucopia, Charon, Dionysius, Caper, Dolph,
Adolph. .•
The*two words, catabolism any! metamorphosis, adequately describe decay, death and rebirth, attributes of
Capritorn, which also signifes contraction, limitation,
dry epidermis, nucleolatjon, induration. The joints come
under Capricorn’s influence, particularly thqse of the
knee and the patella bone, as well as the body structure
or skeleton generally, as indicated by Saturn. Muscles
yidiedted are the patellar ligaVnent and poplkeus. Nerve:
intemahpopliteal. Artery: popliteal and a portion of the,
external lljac. Veins: external or short saphennus and
the*popliteal. As Capricorn governs the epidermis, morbid action registers in skin diseases such as eczema, im-

# „ PABT V, » ADDITIONAL 8TTJBIB8
.petigo, pruritus,, urticaria ; falls, bruises and dislocations
are indicated, also hysteria, rheumatism and colds. Because of the fervency of this sign toward depression,
melancholia, despondency, discontent, woVry and nervousness, special attention should be given to transcending these tendencies. CHeefful company and comfortable,
cqpgenial surroundings are helpful. Hefting and stimulating foods are usually required as well. as those which
are laxative. A f*ir amount of physical exercise is benefltial.
Words describing characteristics for further development: dignity, prudence, caution, reverence, practical,
thoughtful, particular, diplomatic, profound, positive,
magnetic, ambitious, organizing, concentration, service.
Words describing characteristics for correction : nervous,
limited, conceited, jealous, selfish, discontented, capricious, suspicious, authoritative. Saturnine, gloomy, depressed, avaricious, impatient.
Familiar sayings: “Watching and waiting," “A
watched pot never boils," “In a brown study,” “They
also serve who only stand and wait,” “Procrastination
is the thief of time,” “What is worth doing is worth doing well," “It is always darkest just before dawn," “No
resA for the wicked,” “Getting his goat," “Weak-kneed,”
“Of the' earth, earthly, “From top to bottom,” “The initiate must ride the goat."
Capricorn signifies such places as jails, cells, vaults,
sepulchres, tombs, cemeteries, mcrgu*s, mortuaries, mangers, goat-p&is, corrals. or barns where ^cattle arc > kept,
barren and thorny* ground, cellars, deep pits, dark holes,
frozen places, fallow groiytd, dungeons, convents? old
churches, cavesi thick, dark forests.
Thing? ifljletf by Capricorn: ice chests; leather for
harness, belts and shoes ; logs, old trees, .lumber, gates,^
hinges, door-kndckers, coffin?, ashes, stones, tile, cement,"
lime, brick, mortar, plaster, tomb-stones, dirt, ice^ snow,’
•frost, winding sheets or grave clothes, brimstone, rock
salt, goats, bones, skeletons,- knees, horns, quihee, hejnlock, dock-

OtaNBTHLIACAL ASTictOLOGT
= AQUARIUS “
Aquarius i$: called fixed, airy, moist, ‘sanguine, masculine, human, scientific, electric, serving, eloquent, intuitive, of short ascension.
The Sun appears to transit through this sign between
January 20th and February 18th. Aquarius is ruled by
Uranus and is the detriment of the Sun. It is symbolized
by the tnan emptying a waterpot. (It is noticeable that
in some of the zodiacs he holds a rod, branch or wand
in one uplifted hand.) In some of the older zodiacs
Aquarius is pictured as U woman. This is interesting in
connection with the prevailing thought that this is the
"woman’s age” or era, associating the idea of the ascendancy of woman with the dawn of. a new era. The solar
system is now at about the tenth degree of Pisces, by
precession of the equinoxes, is receding toward the first
degree of Pisces and, consequently, to the thirtieth degree of Aquarius, which, at the rate of one degree in
seventy-two years, it should actually contact in 10 x 72
or 720 years. The interim is the “dawn” or the period
of gestation, the birth taking place at about 720 + 1928
or the year 2648. If we allow the. usual orb of influence
(12 degrees for the Sun,) then the influence began- to
operate about two degrees ago, i.'e., 2 x 72 or 144 years
ago, — at about the time of our Declaration of Independence (freedom of a nation,) an epoch making event. It
is recalled that in America Edison developed the incandescent .light and the practical use of electricity ; Ford
developed the automobile and tractor; the Wright
brothers developed the airplane! Forrest perfected the
features which made possible a radio m every home.
Each* of these innovations rqltd by Uranus are heralds of
the airy, Aquarian age which will havd a duration of
about 2,160 years.
■ Always associated with Aquarius is the urn, or the
.cupbearer. The Hebrew name for Aquariui was Delphi,
or "water urn,v signifying a pouring out or baptism, re-‘
lated to atonement, the risen, Surf or Sob, thfi living
wafer, spirit. Ganymedes of the Greeks was carried on
to Olympus by an eagle to be a cupbearer. Olympus is

FAST T. ♦ADDITIONAL BTUETBg
.the heavens or j>ky, where dwelt twelve of the higher
gods. This means that he was to be the distributor of
watfers between fyeaven and earth; hence the connection
with the myth of Mt, Olympus in Thessaly, Greece. In
Biochemistry Aquarius is the distributor of water and
gases throughout the micrpcosmic man. Aquarius is an
ai*-water sign, the* waters on the earth ^being lifted in
vapor to the air. This work is the office of Aquarius,
providing the liquid in air which we breathe and in which
tile lungs are bathed (baptised,) thereby proving our
salvation for otherwise they would quickly dry and burn
UPXhis is one of four fixed signs constituting the Cherubim mentioned in the scriptures, i. e., d'Sl ft =. It is
believed that it corresponds with Jacob’s son, Reuben,
whom he calls his first? burn, as Aquarius is the first sign
entountered after the resurrection, signified by Capricorn.
'‘Unstable as water, thou shalt not excel; because thou
wentest up to thy father's (VS) bed; then defiledst thou
it ; he went up to my couch.” — Genesis 49, 4. This refers
to the January thaw; Capricorn is the father just as
Saturn is referred to as “Father Time;” the couch is the
bed of .snow. When the Sun goes into Aquarius the
thaw turns (defiles) She snowy bed into rivulets (=.)
AqViarius is also associated with the Greek Jean Baptiste
(water ’gate,} or John, the Baptist. In a Hindu zodiac
Aquarius is pictured with a head set* on a sort of couch.
The waters poured by -the heavenly man are the
"waters of life ;” the beneficence of fresh, sparklihg water
to parched Mankind on .earth is beyond compare ; dying
life recovers, strerfgth ftturns, perishing’ Nature revives
and new delights are awakfned., "If an^ man thirst, let
him come untoiMe, and drink." — John 7, 37. In the star
map we see a large stream flowing from the urn ; it flows
eastward alii westward and enlarges as it proceeds, while
a large fish, (fislj representing multitudes) -Piscis Australis or Austrjnus, eagerly drinks. The symbolism ot’
^Aquarius is, therefore, verjr beautiful in both its jsoteric’
‘and exqteric, sense, indicating air-water as’ necessary to
the needs of -physical man,- and assurance of spiritual
supply to> regenerate man.

Q&NETHLIACAL A3TROLOGT w
4K
In the first dccan was The Southern Fich, Piseis Aus-.
trails .or Austrinus. In ‘the second decfrn, Pegasus, a
great horse rushing forward with huge wings at his
shoulders. Ift the Noetic, Pegsf menus chief ; sus means
swift as a horse coming or returping.t It was sometimes
referred to as “the horse of tl?e gushing fountain." The
associated idea, was a chief coming fdrth in victory with
good tidings, with blessings; hence we find Aquarians
very humane. The stars in this constellation are Markab, “thf' returning;" Scheat, “he who goeth and retumeth Enif, "the branch ;" AI Genib, "who carries ; Homan, "the waters ;"»Matar, "who causeth plenteous overflow.” The third decan if that of a beautiful swan, which,
though injured, circles and mounts the' Milky Way< it
lies in the midst of the great Galactic Stream of nebulous
stars. The principal stars in it form a beautiful cross.
The swan was a sacred creaturd of matchless beauty,
purity, dignity and grace, bearing aloft a cross and cir-,
cling over "the waters of life” (= ;) hence, our modern
though sad, "The Song of the Dying Swan.” Its brightest stars are Deneb, “the Lord Judge tb come;” Azel,
"who goes and returns;” Fafoge, "glorious, shining
forth;" Sadr, “who returns in a circle;" Adige, “flying
swiftly;" Arided, "he shall come down."
Words associated with Aquarius are The Cup, urn,
water ewer, water pot. Delee, the Water Bucket', Ganymedes. Waterman, fcan Baptiste, John the Baptist, swan,
Ganesha, ‘Pegasus, fountain, Bellerophon, Pega, Pacha,
chief, *Cygnus, Cygni, Habakkuk (prophet,) Matthew
(apostle) Reuben (iton»of Jacob,) Cambiel Rangel «>f the
angle^ The curative plant is called pragonwort. Anthon, interpreting Ganymedes (Aquarius) of the Greeks,
says,. “His being the cup beajer means that he was the
distributor of the waters between the heiven and earth,
and consequently, a distinct personification of that attribute of Jehovah which is signified by the epithet Pluvius."
• Aquarius rules the calves and ankles; tibfa and fibula.
Soleus, gastrocnemius, tendo Achillis, tibialis antjeus and*
personaeus. tertius are the -muscled involved, also the
tibihl artery and the internal saphenous vein. Aquarius
inclines to falls, sprained, broken or swollen ankles,

PAM y, . ADPtnOHAL trpsi&a
anaemia,. Spasmodic* and nervous diseases, blood poison-
*ing, hay fever*,, Heart weakness*, cramps.
_ As Aquarius It as muqh to do with the, water in the
blood stream, the bldod should be kept in good condition
and any sign of impurity given prompt remedial attention. Fresh air, good Water, with plenty of vegetables
and fruit are necessary, as well as music «nd harmonious
surroundings. Brain and blood building foods are required, but stimulants and fat or greasy foods should be
avoided. The eyes should be given proper care!
Familiar sayings: "I love not man ^he less, but Nature
more.” — Byron; "A stranger ip a strange land;*'* "It
never rains, but it pours , "On the water wagon." It
was no doubt Aquarians to whom the following verses
refer :
."The proper science and subject for man’s contemplation is man himself.” — Charron.
"Man is his qwn star, and the soul that can render an
honest and a perfect man, commands all light." — John
Fletcher.
"We are coming we, the young men,
Strong of heart and millions strong ;
We shall work where you have trifldd,
Cleanse the temple, right the wrong,
Till the land* our fathers visioned
Shall be spread before our ken,
We are through with politicians;
Give us AJAN! Give u$ MENf’ —Arthur Gulterman.
"Man is all symfiietri<^,
.Full of proportions, one^imb to anoth.er,
And "to all tlje world besides ;
Each part may call the farthest, brother;
For bead. with foot hath private amitie,
And both with moon and tides.” • — Herbert.
"Limited iif his nature, infinite in his desires, Man is*
a fallen god who remembers the heavens/’.— Laptartine.
"Before man made us citizens, •
Great Nature made us men."
— Lowell.

OHHgTHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
"God gave us an upright countenance to survey the
heavens, and to look upward to the stars*."— Ovid.
“Men at sone tirqe are masters of th£ir fates :
The fault, dear Brutus, is not in ‘our stars,
But in ourselves, that we are undtrlings.”
, — Shakespeare.
t
“His life was gentle, and the elements
So mixed in him that Nature might’ stand up.
And say to all the world, This was a man!”
— Shakespeare.
Words describing characteristics for further development: leader, truth seeker, scientist, sincere, earnest,
refined, humane, co-operative, sociable, service, considerate, unbiased, patient, steady, incentive, philosophical,
intuitive, pleasant, progressive, cosmopolitan. Words
describing characteristics for correction : radical, scattered, irrational, skeptical, anxious, agnostic, sentimental,
gullible, easily imposed upon with “hard luck” stories.
places indicated by Aquarius and Uranus: hilly and
uneven places where rivulets run, near springs or conduits, vineyards, roofs of houses, eaves, highways. Things
indicated are ,cups, vases, buckets, pitchers, smoke,
steam, vapor, rain, liquid air, ferries, bridges (especially
suspension,) railways, roundhouses (raijroad,) automobiles, sprinkling wagons, buses, airplanes, airships, airports,,, hangars, gas, gasoline or electric motors, dynamos, -telephone centrajs, telegraph offices, radio sets,
broadcasting stations, electric power houses hydro-electric power houses, garages, batteries,' sleds, steps, ladders,, stairways, fibrous things, wool, fleece, hair.

•■•PART V, ADDITIONAL STUDIES . 857
K PISCES X
Pisces is called fle^ed.’common, w4tery,'cold, moist,
fruitful, lyrtiphatic, feminine, negative, psychic, emotional, inspirational, bicorporal , of short ascension, serving,
southern, (i. e., Sun«is in south declinatioB when in this
sign, in fact, it is south from Libra around to Aries as
can be*seen by tracing its declination through an I^phemeriiB from month to mbnth.)
The Sun appears to transit Pisces between February
19th "and March20th, annually. £t is ruled by Neptuhe,
is the exaltation of Venus (Neptune’s octa.ve,) and the
detriment of Mercury. (Read chapter on “Octaves” in
preceding pages of Part V.)
Risces is pictured by two fishes, one headed toward
tne north, the other parallel with the path of the Sun.
They are some distance apart but bound together with
an undulating bahd which falls upon the neck of Cetus
and under the leg of the Lamb. In Arabic, Greek, Hebrew, Latin and English the name of this sign means
fishes. |n Syriac it is Nuno, “the prolonged or lengthened fishes.” This is investing in connection with the
scripfures where Jesus fed the multitude wifh five loaves
and two fi*shes„and twelve basketfuls \yer e left. (Mark
6, 38-41-43) It is*noticeable that all miracles of supply
relate to water and fish. (See John 2, 1-11; Luke 5.,4;
Matthew IS, 33; Matthew 18, 27; John 21, 6. ^fhese
refer to water converted into wine ; )®eteV’s net filled with
an immense draught.of fi«Ji ; five thousand-»men besiaes
women and children fed with lohves and two fishes ; ,a
fish furnishing tribute money f a great haul*of fish. Man
is born in water dnd after birth is dependent upon the
water in the air to prolohg his life. The two lungs, like
fish, must »be! constantly bathed in water;#air carries
water to the lungs. In the Hebrew language Je^us
means fish.
ifhe relation of Venus* and§ Neptune has already been
noted in the chapter on "Octaves” and in mythology we
find them refated. It is said that one day when Venus
and^Cupid were playing on the byik* of the Eelphrdfes

GENETttLIACAL ASTROLOGY
they were surprised by the giant Typhon. To avoid the
monster, they plunged into the river and were saved (by
water) by being transformed into fishes, whereupon
Minerva, the goddess of wisdom identified with the
Greek Athena, patroness of arts whose attributes were
the serpent, owl and egis (aegiss shie’d) placed the two
fishes among the stars (zodiac.) Cupid is not Neptune,
but was the god of love, an attribute of Venus, and the
connection is in the idea that Venus (ordinary love) was
saved, transformed, transcended through the elements
of Neptune, — water. Neptune represents spiritual love
and higher art.
The first dccan is the constellation named, "the band,”
the ancient name being' Al Risha, the band or bridle. By
this band, and the fish being bound together, they coincided with the idea of limitation or restriction, indicated
by Pisces as the twelfth sign. The band is in contact
with Cetus, referred to as Leviathan, Dragon, Serpent,
Satan, Devil. (See “Twelfth House” pages 34 and 395.)
The band is also in contact with the Lamb who is above
Cetus. (See star map.) Tn scriptures the Lamb is the
Redeemer or Saviour.
The second decan is the constellation Cepheus, the
figure of a king seated in repose in the attitude of’ power
with one foofoon the pole star; as in one hand he hfjlds
aloft a sceptre or branch, in the other he grasps the
ribbons, thereby vshowing its relationship to Pisces
through' the bands or ribbons. On his head is set a
crown of seven stars. The star in the right shoulder is
A1 Desamin meanjjig ^‘quickly returning.” In the girdle
is AI Phirk meaning "the Redeemer.” Tn the leit knee
is another whose name meads "the Shepherd.” The
Egyptian name for this royal figure was Pekuhor, “the
Ruler that cometh.” Cepbdus means "t,he royal Branch,
the King.”
The north fiih reaches right over into the th'ird decan
o. constellation Andromeda, a woman in chains, but the
chains broken. 'The name means “man-ruler,” coinciding
with ,the idea that woman will break all bonds of past
limitations and take over the reins of government. Man
v/as the first ruler, woman will be the last; “The first

PABT V. •ADDITIONAL STUPES ^59
^shall be tlaSt ar\d Jhe Jast shall 'be first.” (This fish is go-
*ing to the lap of the unbound woman.) Fishes are
associated witH ryultitudes, as schoofs of fish, hosts of
people. In mythology Andromeda *was promised to
Phineus id marriage, much to her dislike. Neptune,
resentful at Cassiopeia* Andromeda’s mother, at the
instance of Juno (Jupiter’s consort) sent, a flood and a
sea monster (Cetus) to ravage the country; the god
would? be appeased only when Andromeda was chained
to»a rock near Joppa tn Palestine and exposed to the sea
monster, J)ut Perseus, returning from victorious conquest
of the Gorgons, rescued her and mad# her his bride.
Knowing thk't Pisces represents a body, of water, we
now" follow the idea that Capricorn represents death,
Aquarius a ferry, Pisces the waters of Styx, Saturn
(Charon) ferrying the dead over to Aries, the region of
warmth, light, resurrection, — the exaltation of the Sun.
The elephant (If) mask worn by Charon indicates benevolent malevolence, that is, good in the ultimate, or
whatever IS is right, “is” being used in its cosmic sense,
as through darkness we comprehend life, through death
wp are born into light ; all wonderful promises engrossed
in the sky. In this sign Christ is biblically represented
as going; over the waters to rising ground or mount-ains
(‘T’,)* to supply (feed) thp multitude on twt> fishes, after
which there still remained twelve (signs) basketfuls.
The following verse is associated witn tne spiritual
meaning of Pisces; “Ye which have followed me, in*the
regeneration when the Son of man shall sit in the throne
of his ^lory, y« also shall sit upon twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribute of Israel. Matthew 19, 28. See
Cepheus in the star map seated in the center (glory) ‘of
the celestial circl^surroundecfby twelve thrones orgjgns
Two thousand years ago the solar system was just ente(- ,
ing the si^n.t^i^ces, having precessed or crossed 1+ )
from Aries, the burnt offering sign, and coiflcidently we
have Jesus (fish,} Christ (csossed,) twelve fishertnen
(of men) aposfles, and many beautiful and significant
references which seem aptly to bear out the Vise statement, “As**above, so b£low.”

QBNETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
The feet and toes come under the domain -of Pisces
which is also said to be aplastic, lyrtiphafic, hu-mid, torpid and cold-blooded (fish-like) sign. It- is p’ro'ductive
of much mucus an4 phlegm arid has a' softening or relaxing effect upon the tissues. Its principal 1 ones are:
tarsus, metatarsus and phalanges. Muscles ai e the abductors, extensors and flexor^ of the, toes. Arteries indicated are 1 11 sal, metatarsal and the plantars. The
veins are those of the feet. Physical disturbances manifest through deformities of feet and. toes, bunions, gou*,
colds contracted because of wet or chilled feet, mucus
discharges, dropsy, glandular softening, defluxion of
hunjors, lung trouble, bowel troubles; danger through
contagious diseases and through the use "of drugs.
As the recuperative power may be weak, attention to
the rules of hygiene, diet and sanitation is necessary.
There may be a tendency to take too much liquid ; stimulating beverages should be avoided. It is said that the
dandelion is very beneficial because of its tonic effect.
Words describing desirable characteristics for further
cultivation : inspiration, idealism, concentration, hospitality, service, peace, refinement, purity, perception, psychometry, order, method.
Words describing undesirable characteristics for Correction : negative, diffident, dreamy, lethargic, eareless,
indolent, indecisive,, easy-going, improvident, apologetic,
submissive, variable, self-depreciation, inferiority complex,, timidity, sensitiveness, self-pity, loyalty, critical of
the short-comings /ir deficiencies of others.
Familiar sayings associated Vith Pisces are “Follow
me and I will make you fishers of men," "Like a fish out
of water,” “Over the bounding main,” "A daughter 'of
Neptune," “Poor Fish !” "A fish story,” ‘’Ships that pass
in the night,” “Men that go dowri to the sqa in ships,”
“Twenty-thousand leagues under the sea'.” '■
"One ship sails east, another sails. west
With the self-same winds that blow ;
'Tis hot the gale, but the,set of tjie sail
Which determines the way they go."
— Ella Wheeler Wilcox

PART V, •ADDITIONAL STUDIES
, WordS associated with Pisces are Fish, Barchiel
(angel of’the atigle,) Ephraim (son of.Israel,) Jeol* (prophet) the youngor James (apostle,) Nuno,,Picot, Okda,
A1 Samaca. Sethites,»Shefnites, Cepheus, A1 Deramin, A1
Phirk, Pelfuhor, Aadronjeda, Piscina : holy water usually
found in 'the vestibules of Roman Catholic churches
wfcose adherents dbserve fish day — Friday, ruled by
Venus, octave of Neptune — as a holy day. Aphrodite,
identified with th» Phoenician "Astarte” and the Roman
“Venus” was fabled 'as being born of the foam'of the
sea; Robinson Crusoe and his man “Friday.” (Friday is
rul^l by Venus.)
PJaces indicated by Pisces and Neptune* oceans, fishing places, fish ponds, fish canneries, grounds overflowed
with water especially water from the sea or a lake;
damp, wet, boggy places; places formerly under water
but made into new land by filling; oil fields, oil tanks,
spiritualistic churches, seances and “materializing circles.” It indicates such things as fish, fish nets, fishing
boats, aquarium%, submarines, deep sea divers; the feet
and toes.

(WSNETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
UNIVERSE MAKkR^,
Copernicus (or Koppernigk ) , Nicolaus: boro oo February 18th,
1473, at Thorh (tlu*a lo Poland.)" Attended the nnlTerslty of
Cracow, studying mathematical science and devotln)' spare time
to painting. At the age of twenty-three he' proceeded'.:-to Bologna,
attending the lectures of Dominion Marla Novarra, professor of
astronomy. He »lso spent some years at fadua where he applied
himself to the study of medicine, taking the degree of doctor lo
1499. In the year 1500, at Borne, he enjoyed the friendship of
Regiomontanus (Johann MuUec), a great astrologer who waa educated af Leipzig, studied mathematics at Vienna ntid accompa ed
Cardinal Bessarlon to Rome, where Beza gave him further Instructions tn Greek literature, which enabled him to complete a, new
abridgment in Latin of the “Almagest" of Ptolemy. Reglomoo
tanus returned to Rome at the invitation of Sixtus IV, who employed him in the reformation of the calendar '
His wide researches gave Copernicus the material for compiling
a logical treatise entitled, “De Orbluro Cselestlum Revolutionibus
Llbrl VI.," a work which occupied him betweeo 1507 and 1530,
and which it, wll I be seen, embraces the main theory of Pythagorean astrologers, although all works of preceding masters contributed valuable matter which he skillfully chose or discarded as
needed to conform with his own Ideas of a ^rational, workable
system.
Aowever, It was not until Just before hs died on May 24, 154,3,
(at the age of seventy) that he saw the frulta of his labors In
published form. In those days It took brave men to (ircmulgate
a new idea. After finishing his treatise In 1530 he delayed Its
publication nearty thlrteeo years belpg content to defer the popular outcry which Inevitably would occur against Uim.'whlch, as
sponsor of troths hitherto unknown to science^and as an assailant
of tlme-hbnored dogmatism, he mnat endure. He was not excommunicated on account of it 1 In fact, his work became the basis
of thfe present day system of astronomy, just aa the Tetrablblos of
Ptolemy became the kasls of present day astrology. Occasionally
we meet someone not very well Informed on the* history and development of astrology and the chkractes of lta sponsors, who
claims with a loud voice thkt the Copernlcan theory “exploded
aatr'ology,” which shows they d<£ not understand that the fundamentals of astrology are based upon the Infltgtnce of the planets
and are not dependent upon a theory of whether the planets go
'aronnd the Sun or the Sun around the planets. Changing of man’s
theory does not change the established influence’ of the planets,
and nativities are calculated In accordance with present-day
astsoiforalcal rules.* The so-callsd "explosion" obliterated the then
prevailing theory of astronomy, — not astrology.

PAST V, ’ADDITIONAL STUDIES
TIME FACTORS
The following* explanations will give an idea of the
time-mea|ure distinctions and define why one sort of
time, ratfer than Another, is used in astrology, in order
that calculations n^ay be Utilized which synchronize with
future's movements.
, There are four'kiqds of time : astronomical, apparent,
mean and sidereal, (Standard time is treated separately.)
but theit are only two measures of,time and these are
called the Mean Scale and the Sidereal Scale.
Astronomical Time is measured from midnight to midnight since January 1st, 1925. Prior to that the astronomical day began a£ noon. The astronomical day is
reckoned as 24 hours continuously, therefore no A. M. or
•P. M. is mentioned. For instance when a civil clock
shows 1 1 p. m. the astronomical time is 23 o’clock. This
time is measured on the mean time scale. However, it
is not employed in the erection of horoscopes.
Apparent Time or apparent Solar time: (The word
apparent is here undystood to mean clearly perceived
or perceivable, evident, obvious, manifest.) At the middle
of every day at every place on earth the Sun will reach
its meridian.* The moment of this elimination is known
as apparent noon. The interval of time between two
successive apparent noons is an apparent Solar day. The
Sun moves daily at a rate varying between 57) 10" to
1" T 11". Although the apparent Solar day is a natural
day, its varying duration renders it unsalable for civil
purposes, hence it is not used for clock time. As ,it is
alVays longer than a sidereil^day it is not* used for erecting horoscopes.’
Mean* Tirie/ mean Solar time, civil tipie, true local
time: Because, as seen by the foregoipg paragrajh, an’
apparent Sol* day is not o! uniform duration, the Idea i
has been conceived of using an imaginary mean Sun
which ia’assimted to tnov^ a( the uniform rate ioF 59’ 8",
this being the average motion of the apparent Sun. Whin
this mean Sun reaches the meridian of any place it is

GENETHLIACAt ASTROLOGY
mean noon. The interval between any tw/5 successive
mean noons is always the same and is lyiown a£ a mean
Solar .day. In other words, it is simply air average
apparent day, but ‘because of its uniformity is suitable
for civil time measurement. It in nothing but clock time,
that is. Mean local clock time. It has .become \cnown by
various names: A mean Solar day, mean time, t.ivil time,
mean local time. Its duration is uniformly 23 hrs.
mins. 60 sec. or 24 hours, and constitutes the civil day
beginning at midnight. The 12 hours before noon are
called A: M. (antemeridian), and the 12 hours after mea'i
noon are P. M. or postmeridian. (Note: Wherp Standard time is used, as*n the U. S., it is necessary to reduce
the Standard time to terms of the Mean local time for
place of birth in horoscope work.) As the mean So.lar
day is always l&nger than a sidereal day by approximately 3 minutes 55.91 seconds, the Mean local time of birth
is always changed to terms of Sidereal time for erecting
horoscopes.
Sidereal Time
Sidereal Time: Expressed in hours, minutes and
seconds at any moment is the angular distance of the
firsf point of Aries from the meridian of any place. Right
Ascension of the Meridian (R. A.tM.) is practically the
same thing but is expressed in degrees and minutes,
instead of hours, minutes and seconds. Sidereal time is
that shown by an .astronomical clock ■jyhich indicates
twenty-four hours in 23 hours 56 minutes 4.090 seconds
of Mean Solar time which is civil or ordinary clock time,
regar<ftesg of Standard, time. Sidereal time therefore
increases over Mean time at the rate of approximately
3' 55.9l" seconds per day and is counted straight through
from 0 hr. 0 min. to 24 hrt. 0 min. without considering
A. M’ or P. M. ‘as with civil ‘clocks. Th^ Sidereal time
at noon for any place is shown daily in the ephemeris.
From the fact that Sidereal time is the measurement of
the angular distance of Aries O' from the meridian of
any pl^pe, it is readily seen that Sidereal time is in reality
astrological time; hence the mean, mean Solar, civil or
ordinary clock time of birth is always converted into
terms of Sidereal time for horoscopai purposes.

PAST V, ADDITIONAL SXPDIES
Collection to Sidereal Time
Beoause, gjs before stated,' Sidereal time advances or
increases at the rate of approximately four minutes per
day, (Refer to Sidereal time in an" ephemeris and note
how it advances from noon on one day after another until
in 365 trays it has gone through the 24 hours and begins
»t 0 hours again *on or about March 21st each year.) a
correction to it should be made at the rate of 10 seconds
jto be added for 'evqry hour that birth occurs after noon ;
subtracted from it if born before noon. If a “Midnight"
type of Ephemeris is used the correction is for the
amount of time birth occurred after midnight.
Correction to Sidereal Time for Longitude
Another factor necessary to consider in an effort
towards accuracy is a correction to S. T. for the longitude of any place in question.
Change the.longitude into time by multiplying it by
4 minutes, and divide the product by 60 minutes (to get
hours and minutes) or 60 seconds if less than 15 degrees
from Greenwich, and get minutes and seconds: the answer is the time distance from Greenwich. For every
hour of this time allow 10 seconds, and for parts of an
hour in proportion.
See “Table of Correction to Sidereal Time," page 64.
If the longitude of the place «is aast, (of Greenwich)
subtract 10«seconds for every hour east, from the S. T.
at noon.
If the place js west longitude, add 10 seconds for every
hour west, to the S. .T.
.This correction applies in the same VS'ay to SidereaJ
Time in a “tyfidnight" ephemeris.
A special polumn ^s devoted to Sidereal" time at noon
daily in all ephemerides (pronounced ef' i mer' i doez)
except the midnight ephemeris, in hours and minutes of

866 GEKETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
the Mean time scale, dn some of tfye very old ephemerides the Sidereal time was given in apparent, time,
consequently an “equation of time” was then necessary.)
The foregoing explanatory remarks Are give^ for the
benefit of those students whosare desirous of knowing
the different kinjls of time in use, and which kinds are
used in astrology. Mean time and Sidereal time are the
principal factors. However, if at this moment the 'stu-^
dent feel?* he does not entirely comprehend these various*
times he need feel no concern about the matter* as the
remarks are explanatory only. The instructions for using Sidereal time and M?an time (local clqck time) are
simple and are appropriately applied in various previous
chapters and examples.
Standard Time'
However there is a factor which must be considered
for all horoscope work and that is the difference between
Standard time and Mean local time. In Sbme cases the
difference between these two amounts to half an hour.
Unless Standard time is fonverted into Mean local time,
(the time used astrologically) errors will occur in the
signs and degrees occupying the twfclve houses in a horpscope. As you have already learned that a degree, of the.
zodiac crosses the niidheaven every four minutes, in the
half hour mentioned ibove the discrepanc/ would amount
to seven and one-half degrees error which might cause
the wrting sign to be placed on the ascendant and make
the chart misleading* Vi would be well fordhe student
to spend all the time necessary tcyundcfstand the principles of the use of Standard time and how to convert it
into Mean local time for astrological uses. Standard time
is the common clock time in ’use in the U.*S. Except in
thpse places which are right on the center of ^ standard
time zone, where clock time and Mean loc'al timd' correspond, all other*places will need a correction from their
clock'titne to Mean local timd. That is, when a birth is
stated iq clock time that clock time must bejgnored and
the equivalent' Mean local time used in the 'calculations
for erecting the horoscope.

PART V, ADDITIONAL STUDIES 867
Summary
For astrological purposes the entire matter concerning
the kinds and the .measures of time may* be summarized
as folloArs:
Standard Tim* as us£d in the United States, Canada
*and Mexico, is the term employed to designate that all
th» clocks in e^ch time zone register the same time, regardless of whether a place is east or west of the center
of a zone. Standard time is therefore an artificial method
of time and for horoscopal work th* standard time should
always be changed to Mean time, sometimes called local
mean time, 'mean Solar time? civil time, or true local
time; all of which titles are intended ‘to designate the
real time of a place as distinguished from its standard or
artificial clock time.* The birth time given for horoscope
^ork should always be reduced to this mean time which
is then changed into Sidereal Time to determine the S. T.
at birth. See page 67 for rule converting Standard time
into mean tiipe ; pages 63, 64 for making corrections to
Sidereal time.

GEKETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
SIDEREAL TIME
an8 the
Midnight Ephetmris
A civil day is measured from midnight to next midnight by two revolutions on our comhion clocks of 12
hours.
An astronomical day was formeriy measured from
noon to noon by an astronomical clock having 2 A hours
marked on its dial, to register one complete revolution
of the* Earth on its axis.
This Sidereal 'Time clock was set at the moment of
Vernal Equinox, that is, when the Sun reaches the zodiacal sign Aries, 0” 00' 00", the hands of the clock are set
at OH 0 M OS noon. When the sun arrives at midheaven next day, due to Earth’s revolution, the hands
of the clock have traversed over the entire 24 hours, but
as the Sun has traveled one degree, apparently, in its
orbit, the Earth must turn one degree more before Sun
is actually on midheaven again. This turn requires approximately 4 minutes, consequently the clock shows 0 H
04 M, or 4 minutes more than 24 , hours for the Sun's
culmination. On.the following day it registers OH, 8 M
at Sun's culmination, and so on each day the clock registers approximately 4 minutes later until f.he"next entry
of Sun into’ Aries one year later.
Thus’ at, this rate each month during the year the
clock's hands register'2 hours more past 0’.OQ!:00" nOon,
when the Sun culminates at civil ttoon. .Referring to an
Ephemeris, which gives S. T. for every day in the year,
we fintl, for instance, that on»September 1st, 1910, at’
civil noon anywhere, S. T.., as ’shown by the’ astronomical
* Beginning with January 1st. In the 1925 issue,' the American
Nautical Almanac, Issued by the Government, begf,n to quote S. T.
for mldnlfeht, instead Of noon as formerly. Since then an astrom&nlcai day is reckoned from midnight to midnight as Is the civil
day.
Some of thS newer Ephemerldes quote S. T. for -midnight, but
mainly it is quoted for noon and because of simplicity textbooks
use It for noon.

PART VT ADDITIONAL STUDIES
clock. Is ‘10 H, 39^1, 05 S at which time it is shown that
the Surr.is irv Virgo 8" 09' 15”. Reference to any T. of
H. wAl shov/ yirgo 8‘ on the Midheaven at that S. T.
'How Tq U”se Midnight Sidereal Time
To enect a chart by an Ephemeris which quotes S. T
and planets’ places at midnight:
Simply change tile midnight S. T. to noon by adding
12 H, plus 2 M (or 120 S) correction for the 12 hours
elppsed, and append the correcticrti for distance from
Greenwich and the correction ^or amount of time'- born
before or after noon. When thus provided with the
cdrrected S. T. at noon add or subtract the amount of
time born after or before noon and you then have the
S. T. at birth with Vhich to enter a T. of H. for the
appropriate latitude to insert the house cusps as usual.
How to Correct Planets’ Places In a Midnight Ephemeris
Simply change the midnight recorded places of the
• planets to noon* and then correct the places to Wrth
time.in the usual way for the amount of time born before or after noon mihrk.
* Note the .recorded places at midnight (OH 00 M 00 S
a. m.) of the daSe desired, and their places next. midnight.
One half their distance between is their place at noon.
Most of this is easily done by mental equation. Some of
the “anidnigjit" Ephemerides alsd qiAjte the Modn’s position for noon.
Sinci the Nautical Almanac and Ephemeris, issued by
the Government of several countries, changed their astronomic^ figures to read foT midnight instead of noon, the
makers of astrological Ephemerides find it easier t* quote
for- midnight because nearly all their calculations are*
1 transpositions from ,the governmental observatory records quoted In such works as the “American Nautical
Almanac!"

GEN3THLIACAL ASTROLOGY
Although the midnight astrological Ephemeris is 'easier
for the compilers, it complicates matters for students of
horoscopy. For instance, for births in places west of
Greenwich the time equivalent to midnight is in the day
previous, because Greenwich time is in advance places
in west longitude.
To illustrate: A' birth in Los Angeles on January 1st,
1935, (or any year since the beginning of 1925) at 9.30
Los Angeles being J 18* west longitude, or 7 H 52 M
earlier, than Greenwich time, the time equivalent to
Greenwich midnight (OH 00 M 00 S on January 1st,
1935) is 4:08 p. m. on December 31st, 1934. The difference between 4:08 p. m. on one day and 9:30 p. m. on
next day being 29 H 22 M makes it oLvious that although
birth occurred on January 1st it is necessary to use the
Ephemeris for January 2nd.
Therefore, we discard the foregoing and proceed to use
the planets’ places as recorded in the ephemeris for, Jan.
2nd. .The time equivalent being 4:08 p. m. on January
1st and birth at 9:30 p. rfi., Jan. 1st, it is evident, that
birth occurred 5 H 22 M after the lime for which the
planets are recorded in Ephemerjs on January 2nd,
which it should be understood is midnight of January
1st or 0.00:00 a. m. of January 2nd. Th’ planets are
therefore corrected for their motions in 5 H 22 M beyond thpir places shown as of January 2nd.
When using a midnight ephemeris remember that time equivalent is really the midnight mark for any place’ other than Greenwich. T[ie midnight mark for Lois Angeles Is approximately 4 :08
p. m. It Is the time equivalent to the- next midnight for all births
which occur after 4 :08 p. m. ; or for the previoun midnight for
births which occur before 4:08 p. m. in Lcj Angeies. On pages
78-79 Is a table of NOON marks; by adding 12 hou,-» to,, them
you acquire the midnight mark.
However, students working with the ‘midnight”
Ephemerif for yrest longitude charts can eliminate the
complication? by simply changing the S. T. and The
planets’ places to noon, as shown in the rule given on
"page 669.

PART y. ADDITIONAL STUDIES
COUNTRIES AND CITIES ARE INFLUENCED
BY THE *SIGN£
Suppose* that au Individual suffering 'severe afflictions were
told to gc.'jway fo» hla (jealth. That person could be correctly
advised tl'go to some place vghlch was under the benign influence
of Jupiter, whereas ^otherwise, he might unfortunately go to a
[fiace under the Influence of Murs or Saturn,' and become worse
off than before. This, providing the Sign Rulerahip of placea waa
definitely known. The entire subject of Sign Ruiership calia for
Serloua reaearch and dfkcusslon.*
In A 1 if n Leo’s manual devoted to the subject of Mundane
Astrology we find the following list, but we question a few of the
assignments and believe they are gpen to further Investigation.
For instance, Chicago Is given under Leo, but we believe It should
bel further Investigated, as some students believe that it cornea
under the dominion of the sign Cancer.
Again, the people of Wfales do not look or act like Gemini ;
they much more resemble Taurus. Detroit, the home of that
Great Aquarian, Henry Ford, probably comes under the Influence
of Aquarius ; during the transit of Uranus in Aquarius Detroit
became the recognized center of the automobile Industry. (BePortland, Oregoo, Is divided In two by the Willamette river.
.The east side for many blocks back from the river was formerly
awampy# or hoggy, (now nicely filled) the location of many machine ish’opa and lumber nallla ruled by Mars. (Mara rules Scorpio.)
The Influence of Scorpio Is seen on the west.bank of the river
also, expending along FroAt Street particularly, where we aee the
junk dealers ynd the machinery houses ruled by Mara.
The remainder of the Weat Side is evidently governed by Sagittarius, judging by the topography, aa It rises steadily iijfo high
hills, where the majority of the wealthiest people have located
and hullt fine residences. (Jupiter, i%Ier*of Sagittarius.)
When Uranus trstfislted through the sign Sagittarius, the old
cable car on the "Heights” wits discarded and the electric
UJranua) system Installed ovej a new route. Also, the work waa
planned .and begun of alnlclng qft the top of Willamette Heights
for the purpose of locating Westover Terrace, the present site of
the most magnificent homes (Jupiter). (Continued on next pagfl.)
• those who wlsll to maka a study of this subject will Oa<\ helpful suggestion* in Raphael's “Mundane Astrology" or Leo’e
“Mundane or National Astrology;” also "Geographic Astrology,"
’by Paul jCounqll ; “Tbe»Stars, How and Where they Influence,”
"Ruling 'Degree of Cities," • by L. E. Johndro, ana "Mundane
Astrology, " by C. C. Zaln.

m
GENBTHLIACAL ASTBOLOOY
Some years ago when Mars was transiting tho stgn Scorpio, a
huge wat^r main on the Eaat Side burst and Inundated a, large
portion of that district — a Martian manifestation. Thus, when we
refer to Portland'* sign we need to designate {he East Side as
Scorpio, and the West Side (west of Front -Street) as Si glttarlus.
Countries and Cities
According to Their Sign Rulershipa
(Subject to revision.) '
The following list is useful in connection wiih Ingresses. Eclipses and New Moons in relation to Mundane
charts,' helping to determine where the influences will be
operative.
Aries
Countries : Burgundy, England, Denmark, Germany,
Palestine, Syria.
Towns: Birmingham, Blackburn, Oldham, Leicester,
Brunswick, Capua, Cracow, Florence, Marseilles, Naples,
Saragossa, Verona.
Tjturus
Countries : Asia Minor, Caucasus, Cyprus, Georgia.
Grecian Archipelago, Ireland, Persia, Poland, White
Russia.
Towns: Ashton-under-Lyne, Dublin, Ceipsic, Mantua, Parpa, Palermo, Rhodes, St. Louis.
Gemini
Countries: Northeast Coast of Africa, Armenia, Belgium, Brabant, Lower Egypt, Flanders, Lombardy,
Sardinia, Tripoli, Wales, Western part of England.
Towns : London (17" 54',) Plymouth, Weanesbury,
Wolverhampton, * Melbourne, San Francisco, Bruges,
Cordov#,«Louvaine, Metz, Nuremburg, Versailles.
Cancer
Countries : Africa North and West, Holland, .Isle of
Mauritius, Paraguay, Scotland, New Zealand.

PART V.» ADDITIONAL STlgblES
Towns': St. Andrews, Deptford, Manchester, Rochdale, Yyk, 'New 'York, Algiers, Amsterdam, . Berne,
Cadiz, Cansffanjinople, Genoa, Ltibeck, Magdeburg,
Milan, Stockholm, JTunn;, Venice.
Leo
• Countries: Alps* Apulia, Bohemia, (Shaldea, France,
Ital^, Ancient Phoenicia near Tyre and Sidon, Northern
^.ou mania, Sicily^.
Townj : Bath, Blackpool, Bristol, Portsmouth, Taunton, Philadelphia, Bombay, DamascA, Prague, Ravenna,
Rome. (Chicago and Los Angles are believed by Aany
to JiaVe Leo ascending.)
Virgo
.Countries : Assyria, Babylonia, Brazil, Crete, Turkey,
•Thessaly, Crotia, Greece, The Morea, Mesopotamia from
the Tigris to the Euphrates, Silesia, Switzerland, Virginia, West Indies.
Towns : Bury, Cheltenham, Maidstone, Norwich,
Reading, Todmorden, Boston, Brindisi, Corinth, Heidelberg, .Jerusalem, Lyons, Paris, Strasburg, Toulouse,
Log Angeles, inaugurated when Sun was in Virgo.
Libra
Countries: Austria, Argentina, Burma, the borders of
the Caspian, China, especially the northern provinces,
parts of India near China, Upper Jigjjpt, Japan, Livonia,
Thibet, Savoy.
Towns: Leeds, Middleton,* Nottingham, Antwerp,
Charleston, Copenhagen, Frankfort, Fribourg, Gaeta,
Johannesburg, Lisbon, Placefiza, Spires, Vienna.
Scorpio
Countries: Algeria, Barbary, Bavaria, Cappatlqcia,
Catalonia, Judea, Jutland, Morocco, Norway, Queensland, Syrja, Transvaa^
Towns ; Dover, East ferinstead, Glossop, Halifax,
Hull, Liverpool, Newcastle, Stockport, Worthing, Balti-

GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
more, Cincinnati, Fez, Frankfort orj OfJec, Milwaukee,
Messiifa, New Orleans, St. John's, Newfoundland, Valentia, Washington, Portland, Oregon, (East Side.)
Sagittarius
Countries: Arabia Felix, Australia; Dalmatia, France
between the Seine and the Garonne to Cape Finisterre,
Hungary, Istria, Madagascar, Moravian Provence, Sdavonia, Spain, Tuscany.
Towns: Bradford, West Bromwich, Nottingham,
Sheffield, Sunderland, Avignon, Buda, Cologne, Narbonne, Rotenburg, Stuttgart, Toronto, Toledo, Portland,
Oregon, (West Side).
Capricorn ,
Countries : Albania, Bosnia, Bulgaria, Macedonia,,
Illyria, Styria, Thrace, the Morea, parts of Persia about
Circan and Maracan, Khorassan, India the Punjab,
Afghanistan, Hesse, Mecklenburg, Southwestern Saxony,
Romandiola in Italy, Mexico, The Orkney Islands.
Towns : Oxford, Salisbury, Keighley, Brandenburg,
Brussels, Port Said, Prato in Ti-scany, Constanz, Fay-
:nce in Prover.’ce, Tortona.
Aquarius
Countries: Abyssinia, Arabia Petrea, Circassia, Lithuania, Bfredmont, part Poland, Prussia, Russia, Sweden,
Tartary, Wallachia, Westphalia. t
Towns: Brighton, Salisbury,' Bremen, Hamburg, Ingolstad, Salzburg, Trent.
Pisces
Countries :• Calabria, Galicia in Spain, Normandy,
Nubfe, Portugal?
Towns: Bournemouth, Christchurch, Cowes, Farijham, (Jntmsby, Lancaster, .King’s 'Lynn, Prest6>n, Southijort, Alexandria, Compostefla, Ratisboh, Regensburg,
Seville. Worms. Chicago, — have Sun in Piscel.

. PART V, , ^DDITIONAJL STUDIES OT5
DATE Alttrt time of partiling aspects
^N HOROSCOPES
In ccjinection with’ tlje aspects that may be formed
jmong planets ir.*a Progressed Chart, i?r aspects of progressed planets to radix planets, it may be of interest to
students to have a simple rule illustrating the method
*>f calculating the ‘date and time when the influence
reaches, its maximum oc peak, or in other words, the
d^te and' time an aspect becomes pbrtile.
TIME KEY or MEASURE OF TIME
24 hours = 1 diy, or 1 year by progression
2 hours motion = 1 month (30 days)
1 hour motion = '/i month (15 days)
4 minutes motion = one day (24 hours)
1 minute motion = 6 hours 04 day)
10 seconds motion = 1 hour of time
1 second motion = 6 minutes of time.
Usfc 'the above table to determine date and time for
sueh calculations as are shown in following examples.
Note : The resultant time of day derived through use
of the following methods must be approximate, and not
exact, due to various technical factors involving flight
irregularity in motion of the planets^ etc., which.for the
sake of simplicity are omitted. However, the variation
is slight and so will rafely cause your answer to vary
more than a few minutes in tifne and therefore for practical purposes may be considered correct. •
To Calculate the Time Required for a Progressed Aspect
•to isecbme Partile with a Natal Planet
Example
Birth on Oct. 11, 1937; 4 a. m., Los Angeles, Cfclif.
Suppose; a. Datum for chart is Nov. 10, 1937, repre-
• senting the 30th progressed birthday, at 4
a. m., Los Angel #5.

GENgTHtJACAL A8XR0L0GY
b. Progressed Mpon 7‘27'16" ~ a't bii;th time
c. Nital S«n 17“45'09” ^ at4birth time (4 a.m.)
d. Progressed Moon motion is 12*2V40” per
day (year)
Question
When .will J reach the A Q radix?
- P. S 7 27 16 » on prog, birth date
(Note: These two logs, always to be subtracted.)
Logarithm .0812 = 19h 53m.
19h 53m after birth time is required for J to A O radix.
1 month = 2h ) 19h
91/, months = 9 mos. 15 days + Oct,
~t3}4 = 13 days 6 hours + July ?6th =
, August 8th 4- 6h

PART y, ADDITIONAL STUDIES
t>. Processed Moon 16°55'16" * at birth time
■ a.' m.) on November 28th, 1937.
c. ."Progressed Mercury 22“09' i at birth time
(4 a,m.)#on November 28*h, 1937.
d. Progressed Motion of Moon is 1 2“ 1 1 ' 1 5"
e. Progressed Motion of Mercury is 1°28'00”
Question
When will )>ro^re--.ed Moon reach the B progressed?
.acceleration j!S 45 If. r- i,Jt, 3.5(i! —
.3113 — lih 43m past bi-ili time when l1 E 4< P B .
1 monti. ■' ?h ) llh
ijj — ■ E rnos, and 15 days f Oct*. 11,
April 5th. 1<£58.
Anstvci'
P*E * I* 0 April 5th, 1938, at 10 p. fn„ therefore:
Native born October 11, 1937, at 4 a. m. in Los Angeles.
* November 1J8, 1937 will*u.‘present native's 48th to 49th
year, or + 48

QENETHLIAOAL ASTROJ^OOY
Exaltation Degrees '
As shown by reference to Dignities and Debilities on
pages 46 to SO, planetp are exalted, wh^n in certain signs.
The following list shows the degree wherein thd dignity
is strongest. The points of greatest dttrimentHre the
opposite degrees.
Critical Degrees
Signs Degrees
» a m s »v 2i’
These sensitive or critical degree's were given consit)-
erable importance by the ancients.' A planet’s strength
or power in the horoscope is believed to be increased
when in ar.y of these degrees, or within an orb of 3* of
the critical degree. A planet dignified by sign or house,
or strongly aspected, receives still greater power and one
weakly "placed or poolly aspected receives help from cuch
location. Students may wish to ,obser^e these criticaldegree influences in horoscopes, as well as in horary
charts and planets by transit over them. For instance
Mars in T 13* or 26*
Arabic Parts
A ehhpter, listing the Arabic Parts, whl ,be found on
page 70^.

PART V,« ADDITIONAL STfflDlES
THE* PRE-NATAL EPOCH
A Review of Its Development
The If w pertaining .to the Pre-Natal Epoch is based
upon thj: observed relationship between the Moon and
the asc<fidant of £ horoscope.
Since Ptolemy in the “Tetrabiblos” propounded the
Ancient doctrine which has become known as “The Animodar pf the Tetrabiblos,” the subject has been dealt
wi.th by such eminent authors as, CWey, Gadbury, Wilson and L. H. Weston. Heyflen treated the doctrine
upjdei* the title, “The Truitine of Hern^es.” Sepharial
anti E. H. Bailey have modernized the rules for presentday appljeation. Originally, its purpose was its use as
a means of correcting given birth times; modern exponehts apply it for that purpose and also for study of the
* pre-natal chart, even going so far as to "progress” it.
The entire subject is rich in interest and possibilities for
research and tor that reason let us start back with
Ptolemy and review the subject to its present day development, as regards its value as a birth time corrector.
It is especially valuable in that respect for correcting the
horoscope of infants Who are as yet too young to have
ha'd any-striking events by which to rectify the time as
shown "by the chapter on “Rectification By Arcs of
Events,” in Pari IV.
In the following excerpts from "Ptolemy’s Tetrabiblos”
it wil.l be noticed that he makes *it % point to stress the
importance (Jf the value of the natal chart in these words
particularly, “An<f, although the birth should in strictness be called the secondary beginning, #while the ‘conception *might ^e insisted oij as the primary beginning,
it is still found to be equal to’the conception in its
efficacy, ami njuch more complete.”
Ptolemy gays?
“The actual moment in which human gen,eratiop commences «, intact, by»nature.the moment of thf conception itself; but, in efficacy with regard to subsequent
events, it Is the parturition or birth.

GBNETH IjJ AiJAL ASTROLOGY
“But, if the time of conception qannpt, be precisely
made out, that of tly: birth must be received at Abe original date of generation ; for it is virtually,, the most important and is in no rfspect deficient _ifn comparison with
the primary origin by conception, except in one view
only ; viz, that the origin by conception affords the inference of occurrences which take effect* previous!!' to th,c
birth, whereas the origin by birth can of course, be
available only for such as arise subsequently. And,
although the birth should in strictness be called till;
secondary beginning, while the conception njiglit be
insisted on as the pfimaty beginning, it is still' found, to
be ec|ual to the conception in its efficacy, and much more
complete, although later in time. For the conception
may. in fact, be said to be the generation <>f mere iiunian
seed, but the birth that or man himself; since i,lu infant
at its birth acquires numerous qualities which it would
not possess while in rite womb, and which arc urope/
to human nature alone; such, for instance, as the panic- 1
ular action of the senses and the movement of the body
and limbs. Besides, even ;t the position >* f the. Ambient,
actually existing at the birth, cannot be considered to
assist in forming and epgendciing the particular shape
and qualities of the infant, it is nevertheless still auxiliary
to the infant's entrance into the tvorld: because nature,
after completing the formation .in the womb, always
effects the birth in immediate obedience to some certain
position of the Ambient, corresponding and sympathising
with the primary position which operated the incipient
formaticyi. It is therefore pcifectly admissible, and consistent‘with reason*' tlfut the configuration of the.stars,
as it'exists at .the time of birth, altlymgh it cannot be
said, to possess any share of the creative cause, should
still be consider- act in jignification, as fully as the
configuration at ti. time a. conception ; becaus'e it has,
of necessity, a pow orresponding to that configuration
whic; actually possessed the creative cause/'
i "To proceed methodically Auk' in due order, it is proper
to commence by investigating such general events as arf
open to consideration, and liable t<3 have happened, or to
happen, at the actual origin by birth; since, from that
tprigin( all things necessary to be investigated may be

PART V,» ADDITIONAL STM'IKS
gathered; as before stated. Yet, if a previous inquiry,
by means of* *1116 primary origin by conception^ should
nevertlieless be ^lesired and undertaken, such an inquiry
may still jjn some dlgreo assist prognostication ; although
only in vgard to.prftperties and qualities dispensed and
imbibedjit the time of Conception.”
ftf a book published in Portland, Oregon, in 1908, (long
Since out of print! fntitled, "The Astroliie," the author,
L. II. \y.cs ton, quotes t?*e "Auimodar” as follows, with
-ojne clarifying interpolations :
The Animodar of the Tetrabiblos
"In Ashmanil's tianslatiou of the Tetrabiblos we have
vvh.it is known as rtolemy’s Animodar. given in Book
(Jl, Chapter 3, of that work. It. begins with the title,
The Degree Ascending, and is verbatim as follows,
Aabrn.ind’s footnotes being here run in between brackets:
"There frequently arises some uncertainty as to the
■precise time of birth and sopie apprehension leitt it
should- not be accurately noted. In most cases the actual
minute of the limit at which the birth happens can only
be ascertained by making a scientific observation at the
time with a, horoscopical astrolabe, (It is, perhaps, needless to remark rtiat modern improvements in science have
superceded the use of this, and other ancient instruments
here mentioned.) for all other instruments errjpldyed in
ascertaining the hour are almost always fallafious, although used by, many persons with .much cafe and
-attention. The clepsydra (Although the clepsydra or
tvater-jlock was commonly used among, the ancients for
various purpoifcs, it appearsf from Martian, a Latin writer
who lived about A. D. 490, that there was also a cle.p-
• sydra In special use as an astrological engine.) for instance, is subject to error because the flow of water will,
from varibus causes, proceed irregularly; and tTi® suiy
, dial is often incorrectly placed, and its gnompn often
distorted from the true meridian line. To gb'viate the
difficulty arising from fhe’ inaccuracy of these instruments, if seems highly necessary to present some method

GB1TETHLIACAL ASTHQLOGY
by which the actually ascending ddgree of tKe. zodiac
may be easily ascertained, in a natural' alid cpnsistent
manned.
"And in order to attain this essential point it is necessary first to set down the ordinary degree which, by the
doctrine of ascensions (‘The doctrinq of ascent ions,’ is
allusion to the method of calculating the actual' positicfii
of the ecliptic.) is found near the ascendant at the„pre*
sumed hour. After this has been dpnc, the new or full
Moon, Whichever it may be, that may take place next
before the time of parturition, must be observed * and if a
New, Moon it will be necessary to mark exactly the degree of conjunction of the two luminaries; but if a Full
Moon the degree of that luminary only which may '.be
above the earth during the parturition. (Note by Weston
— This means that whichever luminary was above the
earth at the Full Moon in the longitude of birthplace is
to be taken. This passage is unintelligible under any >
other construction, for about one-half the people are born
with both the Sun and Moon either above or below the
horizon.)
"After this it must be observed which planets have'
dominion over the said degree ; a^ d their dominion depends always oq the five following prerogatives, namely,
on triplicity, house, exaltation, tedms, and phase .or configuration (‘Phase ,or configuration,’ or 'holding ar.
authorized aspect to the degree in question.) that is to
say, a, planet, eligible to dominion, must be connected
with the ‘degree in pueftion either by one, or more, or
all of /hese prerogatives.
o
"If,, therefore, there ma‘y be found any one planet'
properly qualified in all or rtost of these prerogatives,
the exact degree which it occupies jn that sign in which
it*may be posited during the parturition is_to .be remarked, and it is then to be inferred that a degree of the same'
rlumerkal denomination was, actually ascending at the
precise time of birth, in that sign which appears by the
doctrine*. of asc'ensions to be nearest to the ascendant1
(or,on the*ascendant).

PART V. .ADDITIONAL STUDIES
"But jHijeil two planets or more may be equally qualified in the manner prescribed, it must be seen which of
them maj^tranjit, during the paVturition, a degree dearest
in number to the»ordinary degree shown by the doctrine
of ascensitfos to be tnen ascending ; and that said degree,
nearest in number* is to be considered as pointing out
'the numerical denomination of the degree actually ascending. | And when the degrees of two p’anets, or more,
may closely and equally approximate in numerical denomination to the'ordinary degree found by the doctrine
of ascensions, the degree of that planet which possesses
further ckyms, by connection with the angles and by its
own condition, is to Tegulate the number of the actually
ascending degree.
“It must, however, be observed that if the actual distance of the degree, iij which the ruling planet may be
posited, from the ordinary degree ascending, be found to
exceed its distance from the ordinary degree of the midheaven, the numerical denomination, found in the way
above mentioned, is then to be considered as applicable
to the actual degree in culmination, and the other angles
are to be arranged in conformity therewith. (The precepts delivered in this chapter have obtained the name of
Ptolemy’s Animodar. .The term is probably Arabic, if
it is not a corruption of the Latin wor^s animum, or
animam„dare, 'giving animation or life;’ yet this meaning seems scarcely close enough.)"
In the same book (The Astrol^e) ,Mr. Westdn gives
what is believed to be the most succinct description of
the ancient “Truititie of Hermqs" as foltolvs:
yhe Truitii&.of Hermes
"The png^sh astrologer Heydon, who flourished in’
Eoqdon during the 18th century, t is known to have
taught a sy^tsm* of rectifying the estimated time* qf a
birth by a prenatal epoch plan which he called The
Truitine pf Hfrmes. .Whether or not Heydon’s -flan is
the real Truitine of Hermts Trismagestis, the haythic*!
Greek philosopher, cannot at this time be determined,

GSNETHL1ACAL ASTROLOGY
but it is quite certain, nevertheless, that of the
modern prenatal method? for correction pf the birth are
based on Hevdon‘3 rules, and so far as -we can gather
that teacher really /lid secure then) froth ancient sources.
“A full history of this prenatal rectification system of
Hevdon has never been written and i,ts real origin is lost
in the night of ancient times. Comparatively!) recently,
however, a wntei under the pseudonym of Sep^iarial
brought forward this very ancient, plan under a slightly
changed form.
"In 1891 an English magazine printed some of, the
rules of this system, aii^J previous to that time they had
been printed more or less completely in other publications. Again in 1907 The Astrologer’s Magazine printed
these same old ryles, and thus they have been reprinted
in various publications from tiine'to time.
“The Truitine. as we thus have it, is based upon tht
proposition that the true hour of birth is already certainly known to very nearly the exact nvnute, for in any
case where the hour cannot at all be estimated to almost
exactly the truth this Truitine plan is manifestly useless.
Indeed, the very first article of the rule is that an estimate
figure must be erected and used as a basis of the Calculation, hence whenever this estimate is impossible ’the
whole plan is also impossible. IT in the estimated figure
you change the v.-.lues a few degrees .it vf'ill produce a
change in your results, hence we see that it is the estimate which actually decides the result, and the rectification-is thus manifestly a mere result of the estimate and
not <o( anything else whatsoever.
"But since the Truitine really preserves a concealed
truth, and als« because it hao long been the prenatal correction method, I here give the ancient fules:
The Eight Rules of the Truitine
t. Erect an estimate map of the nativity.
2. Oompdte the oblique ascen-ion of ascerdant and
oblique aescension of 7th ;‘also Moon’s oblique ascension
or descension, under latitude of birth place.

PART V, ’ADDITIONAL STUDIES
3. If the Moc« is .under the earth take ob. asc. of ascendant from l.fer ob. asc. or ob.'dcc., t.he remaindev being
Moon’s distance (from the ascendant. If Moon is above
the cartli ■•hen subtract tfte ob. dec. of* the 7th for Moon’s
, distance from 7th.*
.4. Wit|n value ohdistance so obtained enter the following table and take out the number of 'days answering
thereto, taking fyam the column above or below earth,
according as the Moon is above or below.
5. Count backwards from the date of birth the number
of days thus found and it will bring you to the approximate day of conception, on which day if you find that,the
Moon is in the same or opposite sign to that which was
ascending at the estimate time of birth, choose it as the
da’te of conception, or choose the nearest date to it upon
which the Moon really is in either the ascending or descending si&n (ji the estimate char*. The time of the
rising, on this day of conception, of that degtee of the
ecliptic occupied by the Moon in the estimate figure is
also .the time of day of the c»nc£ption, confuted as
follows :
■ 6. Subtract 90“ from "the oblique ascension of the Moon
3s in the estimate figure and from the remainder subtract
the Sun’s righ? ascension oil the .day of conception. This,
converted into time, is the hour and minute of conception.
■7. For the date and time of conception»thus found calculate the«Moob’s longitude, and it is the longitude of the
ascendant or the 7th cusp at birth.
5. Bjr the’tables if hgustes find the cusps*of all the
other hquses by this ascendant, and also the hou# of
birth.”

QENETHL1ACAL ASTROLOGY
Mr. Weston sums it up thus:
Review qf These Ancientr- Methods,
"Here, then, we have the famous Ammodar of Ptolemy
and the celebrated Truitine oi’ Hermes both depending
entirely upon an estimated map of the horoscope and an
estimated degree that is presumed to hpve possibly-been
on the ascendant at a birth-time v'hich is in question,
using what is almost certainly, an erroneous map and a
false ascendant. They both propose to rectify an estimated ascendant to the true degree by shifting its position from an inexact aspect to one that is exact, for if
the estimate hid accidentally fallen at the exact aspect
no shift and no correction would be necessary. They
make an estimate ascendant to shift to an exact aspect
with some Promittor which they elect by a set of rules
presumed to be competent to give such election.
"The Truitine takes the Moon’s longitude at the moment it is on the rising horizon first previous to a prenatal epoch, and elects that degree of longitude as the
Promittor to which the Ascendant must be shifted.
"The Animodar, by means of certain rules, elects the
longitude of some planet as a Promittor to which the
ascendant must be aspected in terms of duodecimal segments. '
“The. One supreme principle which renders the, Animodap at all possible is the shift to an authorized aspect
(the authorized aspects ar ft the duodecimal divisions of
a circle, being 30, 60, 90, 120, 150 and 180 degrees) anfj"
if there is any (ruth at all ip ‘this famou^ plan it surely
must be the truth that the duodecimal divisions of a
circle of Life Rays are eternal points of spepific . energy
or efficacy. •
• ' “If any truth at all is in the Truitine it is that a prenatal epoch is* Useful for finding theorising degree at any *
bir$ and that it is the Moon which brings on the effect.
Upon these ancient authorities and with these broad
hints, let us take one step forward toward- the light."

. PART V, » ADDITIONAL STtfolES
.MODERN VERSION
of’ the pre-nAtal- EPOCH
Elements For Rectifying
A Oiven Birth Timi By The Pre-natal Epoch
Make a horoscope for the given birth time and note
which of the following elements apply:
Elemdilt No. 1 :
A. -When the Moon at birth *is increasing in light and
abibve the horizon the period is less than ten lunar
months.
. B. When the Moon at birth is decreasing in light and
, below the horizon the period is less than ten lunar
months.
C. When the moon at birth is increasing in light and
below the horizon the period is more than ten lunar
.months.
D. » When the Mootj at birth is decreasing in light and
above the horizon the period is more than ten lunar
months.
Element No. *2:
A. When the Moon is increasing at birth, it. will be
found on tire epoch day in the sign which is rising at
birth, i. e., the eastern horizoq or cusp di the first house.
• B. When the Moon is decreasing at birth, it will be
found on the *poch day in»the sign which is setting at
birth.
Element No., 3:
, That day approximately ten lunar months previous to
birthday on -which *>he Moon transits the’ ex^cl degree
of 'the ascendant at birth* (or its opposite), is the daj of
the Pre-Natal Epoch.

GEAETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
A. If the Moon is increasing at birth, its ptacx -d birth
will be rising at the time .of the epoch on epoch day.
B. If the Moon is decreasing at birth, its place at birth
will be setting'at the time of epo’ch on epoch d^y.
To Find The Day Of Epoch'
Count ten lunar months or 273 days backward from
the date of birth and note the date on 'which the Moon
is in th«‘ sign it held at birth, or the sign opposite, as
may be required by the foregoing elements. (If the birth
took place earlier than September, it will be necessary
to procure an ephemeris-for the year preceding that of
birth.) Having found the lunar place, count forwSrd-or
backward, as the case may require, until you come to the
day when the Moon is in the sign ascending at birth, or
descending at birth, according to the rules. Take that
day on which it transits the exact degree on the horizon
at birth. Call this the Epoch Day.
To Find The Time Of Eponh
1. Ascertain where the mother of the native was residing on the day of epoch, and refer to the Tables of
Houses for the latitude of that place.
2. In that Table of Houses bring the Moon's longitude at birth to the .ascendant or descendant, as the case
requires, find note the Sidereal Time in“hours, minutes
and seconds. This will be the Sidereal Time at Epoch.
3. From the ephemeras take the Sidereal Time at’noon
on the day of epoch. The difference between the Sidereal Time at noon, and the S. T. at the epoch will give the
correct time before or after -noon at which the epoch
occurred; therefore subtract the S. T. at noon from the
St T. of the epoch. If the answer is less thap 12 hours
it is in P. M.; if the answer is more than' 12' hours subtract 1? from it apd the answer is A. M time of epoch.
.(Note: A chart made for the time thus found is the PreNatal horoscope.)
4? Find the Moon’s longitudfi for this, derived time "on
the day of epoch, and it will represent the degtee to be

PART V,* ADDITIONAL STufalES
on the-ascentJagt or, descendant at birth, as the case may
require. •
To* Fim^The True Time Of Bjrth
When the ascepding degree has been found, find that
• degree ascending in a T^ble of Houses for the latitude
?;f the place of birtfi. Note the S- T. given^or that degree;
rom it Subtract the S. T. at noon on the birthday. The
result will be the time of birth. Should these figures be
less than 12.00:00 it-’is P. M. time of birth; if msre than
12.00 .-OOj subtract 12 hours from it and the remainder is
the time of birth in A. M.
The foregoing is a brief review of the main rules for
finding the Epoch Day, and the corrected time of birth,
as given by Sepharial in "The Manual of Astrology.”
The text' goes on giving sex degrees, etc, E. H. Bailey
has published an excellent volume treating the entire
• subject entitled, "The Pre-Natal Epoch.” It presents
the philosophy, theory and practice, the complete modern
doctrine in interesting form, including examples of various variations from normal to "irregular” epochs.
My own application of the preceding rules in many
yearsrof practice has bfen quite satisfactory. In addition
to -using them for the correction of birth time for infants,
I often used them to check the time derived by the "Arc
of Events” method, and, when they, differed slightly, I
preferred the tiAic derived by the A. of E. method. The
following examples from my note-book should ajd in
illustrating the method of using tlje pre-natal epoch rules.
An Example Illustrating the Manner ot Birth Time
Rectification by the Pre-Natal Epoch Method -
The object of*this method Is not to find unknown birth
times, but tp rectify £irth times that have been recorded
with sofrie degree of. certainty so as to be able to erect
a reliable chart, «instead of otherwise using one which is *
only, approximately correct.
This it a method ot rectification resorted to especially
in fhe case ofi children, when as yet no events have <fccurred in hheir lives by which their true birth time could

GBNETHLLACAL ASTROLOGY
be derived by the other process measuring froin'arc of
events. r '
'Data For The Rectification
Male, born February 16, 1921, at a given time of
approximately S ;56 p. m., 42* N. Latitude ; 86* \y. Longitude; Noon Mark 6:16 a. m. An estimate chart njade
for this data shows "I 2* 26’ ascending (approximately),.
O 27" 48* = in 6th house. Moon 13° 12’ II in 10th house.
tr
Element No. 1, A: Moon increasing and above the
earth'' = less than 10 Lurvtr months.
Element No. 2, A : Moon increasing at birth = Moon
to be on Epoch Day in the sign that was rising at birth
Element No. 3, A: Moon increasing at birth (in II 13*
12’) to be rising at time of Epoch on Epoch Day.
NOTE
If the S. T. at noon 4.07 :0PT (page 694) were corrected for 86°
W. Long. •— 57" plus; and also correeted-for 5.12:48 a. m., which
la 6.47:12 before noon = 68" minus, these corrections would
change the derived’epoch time from 5.12-:48 a. m. to 5.12 -.59 a. m.
If the 3. ,T. at noon '21.43:44 (page 696) were to be corrected
for 86° W. 'Longitude = 57" plus; and also corrected for 5:30
p. m. = 55" plus, these corrections would change the derived time
If tho 3. T. at noon on epoch day (page 698) were to be corrected for 86° W. Long. = 57" plus; end a 1st) corrected for 8:07
p. m. =r 81" plus, these corrections would change the derived time
If the 3. T. at noon 21.43 :44 (page 700) were to be corrected
for 86° W. Longitude = 57" plus ; and also corrected forw6.12 :54
p. m. — 62" plus, , these corrections would change the' derived time

PART Y, APDITlONALt STUDIES
S»J
PftOC^SS POR "REGULAR” EPOCH.
Hoi> To Find The Epo(h Day
To facilitate the work of c minting back to find the Epoch Day,
a table of the number of days between two dates la given on
fallowing (pages, by which we can 3ee that:
February 16th,.1921, is 412 days in table of dates.
Subtract 273 days = 10 Lunar months.
. 139th day* In the table dates
this is May 19th, 1920, but El^pient No. 1, A says’the
peijotf is to be less than 273 days ; howevv, refer to this
dafe in 1920 ephemeris. There we find the Moon in
Gemini, ljut according to Element No. 2, A we want it
in the si^n that was Ascending at birth, Virgo, approximately 2' 26' and, in looking down the column, every
*day making the period less, we see that the Moon will
cross over 2*‘26' Virgo on May 24th. This date is therefore the Epoch* Day and it makes the period less than
273 days as required by Element No. 1, A.
Call the birth day the 412th day.
Call the Epoch Day «— 144th day (See Date Tables)
268 days period of gestation.
Element No. 0, A: Refer to Tables of Houses for
the Latitude of Mother’s residence on Epoch Day, which
in this case is Latitude 42” N.; find 23 13* 12' orvthe ascendant, as that was the Moon’s si%n Snd degree af birth.
(See No. 2 Simplified Tables of Houses, page 37). *
' T. H. show n 13'40' ascending as nearest our desired
. 0”28' too much long. Therefore, the
Sidereal Time in T. il. shown for 13’ 4C* will also be
excessive aq s^mhunt corresponding to 28' of longitude.
In the “Table of Relation of Longitude to Sidereal Time
(appended to .this chs^pter) it is seen that 28' of ‘longitude is equivsjent to lm 62s of Sidereal Tim?, which
amount must be ‘deducted from the excessive Sidereal
Time given in the Table of Houses.

Useful ip Pre-Natal epoch ivork for finding the date 273 days before birthday.
GBIOETHLIaCAL ASTROLOGY
TABLE OF DAYS BETWEEN TWO DATES
(Sfe examples on pages 767-109 for using thsse tallies.)
A-Tablg of the Number of Days <
Between Any Two Dates Within One Year

PART V, ADDITION 1L STUDIES
TA^lIk OF. DAYS BETWEEN TWO DATES
(See'examgles on pages 167-1S9 for uglng these tablSs.)
A Table .of the Number t>f Days
KH
n> to
o a*
g SI:
O
Ui “
P
*-n re
rp m
n C/5
sv?
p
P°*wre
P
v;
P
e
a*

QSMBTHLlflCAL ASTROLOGY
• Minus 1 52 th£ excess S. T. (correfctkm for
II is on the ascendant, and this ;s thn Sidereal Time at
Epoch. i ‘
Ttf Find The Time of Epoch (
Take from Raphael’s Ephemeris* the Sidereal Time
on the, Day of Epoch. The difference between it and
the S. T. at Epoch will give t|te time of the Epoch. In
other words, when 'the S. T. of the desired asddhdant of
Epoch is found, as above, from it always subtract the
S. T. at noon on Epoch Day as given in epHemeris. Thus :
21.19:55 S. T. when II 13’ 12' is ascending.
— 4.07 :07 S. T. noon May 24, 192p, the Epoch Day.
17.12:48 When this result is over 12.00:00, then 12,
hours must be subtracted from it, the remain-
’der being the time in A. M.
f 5.12:48 A. M. is the time of Epoch. The Moon’s
place at this time will represent the degree ascending at
BIRTH.
r
How To Find Moon’s Place at Moment .of Epoch
The next problem is “how much before or after Noon
Marl: did Epoch occur, and where was the Moon at that
moment?"
* Raphael's Ephemerla was used lo till a example because It quotes
the Seconds of Sidereal Time as, well aa the seconds of Moor's
Longitude. The 'Simplified Ephemeris does the aame commencing
t If we had desired to study the horoscope of the Pcfe-Natsl Epoch,
the time Just derived would be tbe approximate time to use for
Its enaction, subject to a alight adjustment 'due to the Moon's
changed place caused by the corrected time of' birth. In thla
example we have no need for auch horoscope and we nse th?
derived time only for the purpose of finding the, Moon!; place at
that momfcnt, because It is the degree to place on the ascendant of
the birth chart

PART V* ADDITIONAL STUDIES * 666
6:16> A. *M. is Ifoon Mark for 86* West Longitude,
(presuming “tyiM tht mother yvas there 10 Iunar(months
beforS birth) t call it
6.15 :db A. M. noon mark.
— 5.12:48 tipie «9f Epoch.
• 1.03^12 = Amount of time Epoch occurred before the
No(jn Mark. Omit the 12 seconds, call it lh 3m and turn
jt into logarithrrt 1.J590.
Now ,fjnd motion of Moon on Epoch Day:
i' ns 11"38’S4" on May 25, 1920; change it to
I • 41 *38'54" then subtract Sosition on May 24
13*27’08" = Moon’s motion = logarithm .2515.
To this log. always add the previously found log.
1.6105 = 0* 35'. This amounp is minus because in*this
exagiple Epoch occurred before the Noon Mark, therefore subtract the amotint from Moon’s place in Ephemeris
on Epoch Day, May 24, 1920.
5 28"H'/t6" in Leo on Epoclf Day.
. 27°36'46" I in St at tiifce af Epoch. This position of the Moon^at time of Epoch represents the degree,
minute and second to put on. the ascendant of the birth
phart. In other words, il; is the corrected ascendant of
the narivity.
But ,we gerpeive that, it will not do in this case, as the
given time of birth supposed to have beer* observed fairly
correctly, ,a% indicated in .the estimate chart, calls for
"S 2* 26' (approximately) as being the degree ascerfding*
But let.us proceed wjjth the example and 'find tha time of
day wfien St '27* 36' 46" is ascending, which iS intended,
ordinarily, to’ berthe rectified time of birth.

OI$METHLlftCAL' ASTROLOGY
Refer to No. 2 Simplified Tables of Houses, nage 28,
gives S3 27" 41' ascending in latitude 42* -N:, which is S’
of longitude in exce.ss of v<hat is desired (27* 36').' The
table of “Relation of Longitude to Sif’erual Time,” page
697, shows S' of longitude in excess .would be equivalent
to 20 sec. of S. T. in excess. The .Table of Houses show
S. T. 3.14:15 when SV 27* 4l' ascends
For convenience change S. T. 3.13:55 to be suitable for
subtraction by adding the circle of 24 hours and transposing the minutes. 1 ’
minus 21.43 :44"=S.T. noon on birth
5.30:11 P. M. should represent the corrected time of birth.
5.55:60 P. M. = observed birth time.
— 5.30:11 = time of birth as calculated.
0.25 :49 difference. This discrepancy is too great, and,
furthermore it places the wrong sign on the birth ascendant, i. e., S3 instead of TO. The difference is further
increased by the fact that in places at 86" West Longitude the clocks are 16 minutes slow. Pience, when a
given or observed birth time is stated as 5 :56 p. m. it
must be adjusted to 5 :56
6:12 pi m. as the mean local given
time. Consequently the pre-i.atal calculations jhould'
derive a time close to this figure. In this case the difference is 6.12
, .. 0.42 minutes difference. The pre-natal calculations should always provide a corrected birth time close
to the estimated mean local time. Otherwise (as°in this
cas€) they show that it is not a 'Tegular” epoch and must

PART V, t ADDITIOlflL STORIES
be disoeadefl and new calculations made involving an
“irregula/” epoth. 'The operations are similar, except
that the Moon's sign at birth fn in this case) should be
reversed jmd tffh «ppo§ite sign ( us<*d instead, as
shown in the example on next page.
Table of T^he approximate Relation of Longitude
To Sidereal Time
1' of Lon\j. = 4 S of
3' of Long. = 12 S of
5’ of Long. = 20 S of
6' of Long. = 24 S of
8' of Long. = 32 S of
9' of Long. = 36 S of
1 M of S. T.
t M 16 S af S. T.
8 M of S. T.
• Note: The example on paoe 695 for flndln? motion of Moon
on Epoch Day, ?tfiould more properly have used May 23rd and
24th, because epoch time* (5.12 :48) occurred before the Noon Mark

GBIVETHLIJ'.CAL ASTBOLOGY
PROCESS F0R1"IRREGULXR" EPOOH
Use all the same'Elements as in the previous example
and work aloilg in the same manner* except that we use
the sign and degree opposite to the tyrth Moon for determining the time of Epoch.
5:56 p. m. given (clock) time. Noon Mark is 6:16 t. m.
Feb. 16 is 412th day
139th day = May 19 but the period is to be
less than 273 and on Epoch Day 1> is to he in sign ascending at birth (tnt 2 26’ approx.). On May 24 '
crosses "5 2* 26’, so it is the Epoch Day.
Element No. 3, A is to be reversed, that is, the 2> sign
at birth (II) should be setting instead of rising, at time
of Epoch, and the sign opposite 5 at birth ( / ) will be
rising at exact time.
Element No. 3, A: This regularly calls for the increasing Moon's place at birth (n 13* 12') to be rising'
at time of Epoch. But for an "irregular” Epoch use the
sign and degree opposite ( l 13* 12?) to be rising at tiipe
of Epoch. Or, ir. other words, instead of J> place jit birth
rising at time of epoch, it will be setting.
Refer td No. 2 T. H., page 33, Latitude 42" and note
that t^je nearest ascendant is given as t 13* 17’ which is
5 minuter more than that required ; hence the corresponding S. T. 12.14:41 must be reduced an equivalent "to 5
minutes. The table of “Relation pf Lortgitude To Sidereal Time” (page 697) shows that 5m of longitude is equa\ '
to 20s of S. T. ; so
less 20
Epoch day. May 24, 1920
minu^ 4.07 <'07 = S. T. at noon oq. Epoch ,Day.,
8.07 :14 P. M. = time of Epoch!

PART V, ADDITK^AL g'BqPIES • 699
ThaModn’s plafe on Epoch d\y calculated to this time
(8.07:14 p. m.y will, represent the degree to be ascending
at the corrected time of birth? , *
(Note* If a chart df the Pre-Natal F^roch is desired
for some other purpose, this is the approximate time,
8.07 :14 P. Mt, May 24,* 1$20, by which it should be made,
.subject to a slight adjustment due to thg Moon’s changed
place caused by the corrected time of birth.)
. The next problejn is to find how much after Noon
Mark is 8.07:14? Noon Mark is 6.16 A. M., thence to
noon i»6h 44m to whicfi is added (fie 8.07:14 p. m.
. — "6.16 Noon Mark.
5.44 to noon.
+ 8.07 :14 time of Epoch.
13.51 :14 = amount of time Epoch occurred after
Noon Mark. Call it 13.51. The logarithm for which is
Next, correct Moon’s place in ephemeris on Epoch /iay>
May 24, 1920, for the amount of its motion in this length
of time.
> H* 39' TO May 35, 1920, add 30 decrees and
13.27 = logarithm .2515. Always add tills log.
to the one previously found.
.4903 = /‘46’ to be adSed to Moon’s place on Epoch
Day (added .because Epoch occurred after the Noon
Mark).
.5 28*1 2' tl on Epoch D’ay.
+ 7*46' = 5 motion in 13h 52m since .N. MJc.

GERferHLlV^AL astrology
It is seen that the Moon has left St and has gW?e into
TO S" 58' and this position of Moon represents the rectified ascendant at bifth.
It now remains to find the time of day when 5* 58’ TO
ascends, as that will be the corrected birth’time. T. H.
No. 2, page 29, latitude 42’ N. shows th’e nearest ascend-,
ant as 5" 40' TO, which is 18 minutes less than required.
Consequently, the corresponding S. T. must be advanced
the equivalent of 18 minutes of longitude. The table of
“Relation of Longitude to Sidereal time” shows this
equivalent as lm 12s; to be added to the given S. T.
S. T. 3.55:26 when 5J< 40’ TO ascending,
plus 1 :12
S. T. 27.55 :98 is 3.56 :38 transposed for convenience,
minus 21.43:44 = S. T. at noon on birth day, Feb.
6.12:54 P. M. = corrected mean local time
at birth and is to be used for making the natal chart.
Recollect that the given birth time was said to be observed as 5.56 I’. M. But clock time is 16m slow in longitude 86* W. Hmce the observed time, 5.56 plus 16m
would make 6.12 as the mean local time at the corrected
observed or given time. It will be noticed that the correction by "irregular” Pre-Natal Epoch rules makes the
actual time as 6.12:54 P. M., or only 54 seconds later.
r
Rem/arks: I have noticed many titles that when
Uranus is near the ascendirg or descending degree the
Epoch ‘is more apt to be "irregular” than regular; this
being another interesting cast; of that sort as W is in
5*, that is, opposite the ascending degree at birth. If the
period is known to be but 7 months (Solar measure)
count back 212 days from birth day to locate Epoch Day,
instead of 273 days normally. •
In the foregoing examples, properly the corrections to
Sidereal Tilhe should have been employed, but for simplicity of illustration they were here omitted. See p. 690.

PART V* ADDITIONAL STtfPIBS
In £cfual ^rjctice students will find there are several
other, vviatians of 'the "irregular” epoch which, reverse
or interchange ^:he regular rules. But the one adopted
must be«that whicn at ‘Epoch renders a Sex degree conforming to the gender of the native. This is a feature
not within the scope *of#this review but is given treatment in the books previously mentioned.
It is hoped tjiat this brief survey of the Pre-Natal
Cpoch will emphasize the value of this very irtferesting
subject and serve as an introduction to its application.
. FOR TECHNICAL STUDENTS
iA a we have shown on page 696, given time 6! birth 5:56 p. m.
= 6:12 p. m. Mean local time. Estimate chart tor this time (with
correction, added for time and long.) shows tij 6° 6' ascending:
S II 13’ 2V.6 lat. 3* 3f S. which is equivalent to "R. A. Long.”!
fl 13’ 47'. This is the accurate Descendant for the ‘‘Irregular’'
Epoch calculated on page 698; 1 13° 47’ ascending. This gives
S. T. 12.17:04. And 12.17:04 minus S. T. Noon May 24th minus
cor. for time and long. = 8.07 :40 p. m., accurate time of Epoch.
The Moon’s plane at the time of Epoch as shown on page 699 is
ng 5° 58' iat 4’ 56’ S„ which is equivalent! to hi 4° 1'.5, the
accurate value for Rectified Ascendant of Birth. By using method
'ahown in thla article (and applylng.cor, for time and long.f the
rectified mean local time of birth is easily found.
t “Some investigations have indicated that thq exchange between
thf Moon and Horizon plknes takes place strictly on the basis of
the Moon’a "Right Ascensional Longitude"; that Is, the longitude
of the point wher% R. A. Plane, passing ttfrough 5, Intersects the
ecliptic. This "R. A. Long.” is found with facility by the uae of
Tables for Right Ascension with Latitude. The method i»: Find
the R. A. of I at its actual latitude, then i find Long, oftjiat point
on ttft ecllpti# (l.e.» with iat. O’) having *the same R. A. (as the
S at Its actual latitude). This Long, of the point on the Ecliptic
Is the desired “R. A. Long.’»to be used in all+t Epochal calculations
In place of I ’a Zod. Long, calculated from the ephemeriS. For
Illustration R. A. II 13’ 21 '.6 lat, 3’ 31' S. is found from Tables
to be 72’ 24'.2. ?t la then found from. Tables that 72’ 24'.2 is the
R. A. of II 13’ 47' lat? O’. Therefore II 13" 47' is the “B. A.
tt* For dotermlniag in what se* area the 5. lies remember to use
the. Zodiacs! iAng. strictly.

GENETHLl/CAL ASTROLOGY
THE ARABIC PARTS*
'Che Several Part*) Proper to the Twelve Houaet of the Horoscope
According to the Historical Records of the Old Works,
Featured in “The Doctrine of Nativities,” by Jojin Gad bury.*
Watch the progressions and transits over these Points), the nsJ
pects giving significance of benefit or anxiety concerning such
matters signified by the nature of the aspects, (Whether favorable
or unfavorable.
t
How tn And the Arable Parts
The .Part of Life is taken bv day and night from the degree of
the preceding conjunction orxoppositlon of the Lights unto the
Mooq In the Nativity, and accounting from the Aacendant, thur :
Part of life Ascendant + D — New or Full Mooo nearest before
birth. (“By day” and "by night” has reference to th« time of
birth, “by day” meaning from sunrise to sunset, “by night” from
sunset to sunrise.)
Example: In the Nativity following, n new Moon (conjunction)
preceded it, in 16 degrees of Capricorn, according to Origannus.
Tome II.
Therefore the Part of Life la In V3 5° 53
THE ft ARABIC PARTS «
Parts Proper to the First House
1. Part of Life Asc. + I — Neve or full moon nearest before
birth
2. ' Part of Understanding Asc. + 3 — S
3. Part of Spirit 2 sc. + Q — J ‘
Parts Proper to the" Second House
4. Part o{ Fortune Asc. + I — ©
5. P^rt of Goods Asc. + cusp of 2nd ,■ — lord of 2nd
• This book Is out of print

PART V, * ADDIT stuAies
Parts Proper to the "rtiird House
6. Part of. Brethren By day: Asc.ef 2f — ^
’ . By night : Asc. + — 2f
7. Part of, the Love o7 Brethren A sc. + — £)
Parts, Proper to the Fourth House
' 8. Part of the father Asc. -V G - ^
8. Part of Fortune iA Husbandry Asc. + b -j- 9
. Part of Inheritances and Possessions Asc. -f- J — r>
Parts Proper to the Fifth House
11* Part of Male Children Asc. + 2 f — 5
12. Parroi.Female Children Asc. +2 — D
13. Part of Plays Asc. + 9 — S
Parts Proper to the*Sixth House
It. JPart of Sickness Asc. + g — *>
15. Part of Slavery and Bondage Asc. -f 5> — Disposltor of }
16. Part of. Servants As<\ + j — g
Parts Proper to the Seventh House
•17. Part of Marriage Asc. + cusp of 7th — 9
18. Part of Discord and Controversy Asc. + U — S
Ports Proper to the Eighth House
19. Part of Death Asc. + cusp of 8th — 3)
20. Part of the Perilous and Most Dangerous Year Asc. + ibrd
of 8th — b *
Parts Proper to the Ninth House
21. Part of Faith Asc. -f g — 3>
22. Part olf Journeys by Water Asc. + 15’ 3> —
23. Part of TrAvels,by Land Asc. + cusp uS 9th — lory of 9th
Parts Proper to the Tenth House
24. Part of ‘the Mother Asc. + 5 — 9
25. Part of Nobility pud Honor By day, Ate. + 19” T — O
By night, Asc. -y- 3” 8 —
26. Part of Sudden Advancement Asc. + © — (If b Is com-
■ bust substitute If) '
2"i* Part of Magtstery and Profession Asc. + i • — ^
28. Part of Merchandise Asc. + © — .Part of Spirit
( Parts Proper to the Eleventh House
5®. Part of FrfenSs Asc. rt- 5 — W
30. 'Part of Honourable and Illustrious Acquaintance
By night: Asc. + © — ©
.• Farts Projfer to the Twelfth House
at. Part of Imprisonment, Sorrow, and Captivity Asc. + © — V
32. Part of Private Enemies Asc. + cusp of 12th — lord of 12th

, 704 GfaNETHL? VCAL ASTROLOGY
RESEARCH METHODS
FOR ASTROLOGICAL STUDENTS
An Introduction to the Principles of 'Statistical
Analysis as Applied to Astrological Research
Studehts of astrology are increasingly aware sf the
need and value of tfce statistical method as an erganized
treatment of whatever branch of our science they are
studying. They realize Kiat the future of astrology rests
in our ability to demonstrate its validity with data which
will withstand scientific tests of significance. More and
more, astrologers are coming to, recognize that their
science will he awarded the approval of universitatus
just as soon as their claims are even partly proven coirect by methods acceptable to scientists. It will teach
us much to review in our minds a brief history of modern psychical research.
The past few decades .have seen a complete turnaboutface on the question of psychical phenomena. But i* was
not the many independent test-condition experiments,
the vast well-avtthenticated literature on the subject, nor
the roll-call of famous personages and intellectuals convinced of its reality, which wrought this academic revolution. The respect of the erstwhile materialistic school
of thought was given only after many years of patient
and exhaustive resfcarch into extra-sensorv perception
proved the reality of transcendentals The results of
this research were reported to the world in terms of
statistics. Rigid statistics tested for significance anj
proved significant are .the prroving-ground for -scientific
acceptance
. The subject of astrology is now aioout to undergo this
same sort of status reversal. The name of astrology will
stand for all that is admirable and worthy of acceptance
in American education. The great popularity of the subjedt, the roll-call of 'intellectuals interested .in it, and the
practicable worth of applied horoscopy to individuals,

PART V,» ADDITIONAL 3TUJIE8 708
however^ will not tiring about thl recognition and attention whiph aStyfllogy deserves, however. Only systematic
research 'by astablished, rigid statistical methods will
win for qpr cosfhic? science the station in ‘education we'
seek for it.
Many statislical^techniques are elaborate and rigorous
to appl^. This fact has discouraged nany ambitious
students of astrology who are willing to engage in orderly research. Arfothpr deterrent to more wide-spread
enthusiasm has been the total lack of any available, simple set oSt instructions describing hrjw the less difficult
methods of analysis may be adapted and applied to
astrolpgy in particular. Astrological research is subject
to "numerous peculiarities of approach not shared by
research in the other social sciences. Elementary textbooks on -statistical analysis have confined their instructions and examples to social problems, economics and
.biometry. And advanced textbooks are usually unintelligible to the individual without a prerequisite mastery of
higher algebra gnd the calculus.
Astrological students are constantly aware of the potential contribution to scientific, progress that lies unorgaryzed in their files and notebooks for the reasons
staged. Even the beginner often possesses a wealth of
raw, information (birth and inception data, historical and
casA notes, etc.) that he has compiled in the passing of
time. If collated and treated, this refined information
may be of great value to astrologers and astrology as
well as the ijvorld as a whole.
^ests of Significance
• It is our 'aim in this article to introduce to students
tlfe general nature of statistical analysis and to present
the more common and doubtfess most valuable methods
for determining whether the daia one has collected is
significant from a seientific viewpoint. Any analytic
method in research is ordinarily called « test of significance. A test Of significance may be defined as a determination .whether or pot a measure of unusualress is
greater than can Reasonably be attributed to' chance
alone. In standard laboratory practice it is assumed that

OEHETHLl/lCAL ASTROLOGY
if the characteristic in Question actually is found to occur
a certain number of times more than ifcs probability of
occurrence, it has a corresponding degree of unusualness
'and is therefcye significant.
In statistical terminology, the probability of its occurrence is known as its theoretical frequency or its expec- 1
tation. The actual number of its occulrences is called its
observed frequency or its incidence.
For example, in tossing a coin forty’times, the theoretical frequency of its turning up heads is 50% of the
time, or twenty times. But suppose that actuifhobservation, by counting the number of heads and tails in the
series of forty tosses, Shows that heads appeased 23
times and tails only 17 times. The actual, observed frequency, then, differed from what we might expect. It
then behooves the coin-tosser to subject this situation to
a mathematical analysis, to learn whether 23 heads could
reasonably turn up by chance alone. The steps to take'
are very simple. In our illustration here, it is found that
there was nothing unusual about the higher percentage
of heads, because, according to probability theory, it is
nqt unusual when between 14 and 26 items occur out of
40 if their probability *of occurrence is 50%. We will
learn shortly how to reckon these margins of allowance
for chance-occurrence.
How might thi| scientific theory ot probabilities be
applied fo astrological research? Let ds take sign-positions °f the Moon as an example. The probability of
any.eyent or individual’s birth with the Moon in a given
sign is l/12th of the time, or 8.333%‘of the time. For
mathematical ‘reasons we state that < the probability is
.08333, or, writing it, we' say, P = .08333. Suppose wc
collected one ‘ hundred birthcharts of persons .suffering
from a 'specific disease or possessed of common trait.
•And that twenty, rather than eight, of .these persons
were born with the Moon in one sign, while only two of
the hundred hav« their nata,l Moons in another sign. ‘We
refer to the tally of 100 Lunar positions as a frequency
distribution 1 <
« It is Spparent, then, that the observed frequency for
one sign is 20% while we should expect only.8.333% of

PABT*V, ADDITIONAL 3TUDIE8 7 «T
the tfhftrts to show the Moon so situated. And that only
2% .o£. the.cnarts show the Moon in the other sign,
whereas, if th^re,was nothing to tfie astrological theory,
we should anticipate the birthdatcs in Question to have
the Moon fairly evenly distributed among the zodiacal
sectors. It «behoove^ ug, however, to test the signifiance
of the observed «frequencies before we can be justified in
assuming that the uneven distribution found did not occur by chance..
In making this test,, it is important that we proceed
on thefthypothesis that the observed distribution of the
Moon among the signs actually did take place by chance
alooe and that there are no ‘grounds for a belief in an
Astrological explanation of the deviations. In other
words, we must try to disprove astrology, rather than
nurture any bias in* favor of an astrological tenet. Every
test of significance is made in an effort to prove that
chance and nothing else accounts for the discrepancies.
In standard statistical practice, we call this negative
approach a tyill hypothesis. Then, if the data under consideration passes the test of significance, we will be forced
to reject the null hypothesis and concede that there actually is an influence or conditioning factor in the
M«ofl’s position whif h accounts for the variations noted.
Statistical Indilction: The Sampling Theory
Let us now learn the rudiments of the metfiod by first
considering the scientific theory underlying probability,
and give the reader simple directions how to*make the
test* of significance in sign-positions of faster-ipoving
celestial bodies, und other important asfrological factors.
The basic principle involved is universally known -as the
'samplipg theory. A simple comprehension of the sampling theory ft essential fdr proficiency in any handling
of data by statistical techniques. In order to give the
reade/ an appreciation and adequate description of the
sampling , thepry, let us. dramatize* its purpose ana
practice.
It wsould surely bfc an impossible task to ooihpile,the
bitthdata of. every victim of a given disease. The mass
of data Would lie too great to handle in its entirety even

GENKTHLIACJAL ASTROIfOGY
if it were possible to oi/tain. Should an entbmofoeist
wish to accurately determine the wing-spafi ,df th? adult
gall wasp, it would be foolish for him to even dttdmpt
the capture and*biomqtry of every. adult gMl wasp in the
world. The average of his measurements of the wing
spreads of several thousarrd specimens'' ■ gleaned from
their habitats everywhere, however, would be nearly or
exactly the same'as the average spread of every gall
wasp in th world. In preparing his scientific report, .he
could confidently state .the wing-span of mature gall
wasps. Or should a botanist wish to mention in his
textbook the structural characteristics of a particular
species of swamp fern, he would undertake the careful
study of a large number 'of representative’ specimens.
Averaging the measurements of their fronds, the size ot
stomata and other constitutional features, he could
authoritatively describe the characteristics df that
species of fern. In other words, definite information
about an entire species can be arrived at through statistical analysis of a sample number of representative
items.
The entire mass of data relating to one characteristic
is called a universe, inasmuch as it represents the total
population of the data concerned. The attribute of the
population which is being estimate?! from the study i$
termed a parameter. The items selected from tha.t population as representative of its whole are Referred t'o
collectively as the sample. Finally, the results from study
of the sample are expressed mathematically and are
called statistics. It is important that the student learn
the meaning of these* terms and to use Jhem^in praatice
if he fs intent upon appreciating and becoming deft in
statistical procedures.
The term “population” has^a special and frequent use'
in statistical analysis. We speak of a< "population” whenever we are referring to an aggregate. T,be raggregate
ijnay be of persons, things, individual measures, or simply anj‘ class of objects or subjects which ljav,e in common 'certain characteristics or causes. The word may
be used ivhere we mean the parent population of yrhich a
given sample is held to be representative.' Or It may
designate a purely hypothetical population ' from which

PART'V. ADDITIONAL STUDIES 700
- Vi
the sampl# n»ay or may not have been taken. Hence, in
statistical IJterature, we read of q, population «of pumpkins, a population of deaf mutes, a population of ccmr
modity^prices, ad infinitum.
We understand no’wjthat a sample of the total population of anything-, a cross-section of its universe, enables
us to«genej:aIize concerning the universe from which the
sdmple is drawn. The sampling process is itself a
special problem, as it becomes the duty of the investigator to see to it that the variates (individual cases)
composing his cross-section are selected at random and
are therefore truly representative of the wholes The
process of "random sampling in some pases has become
•itself an art within science.
In astrological research, however, we are seldom confronted with this problem of random sampling, by virtue
of the fact that the human race is so immense numerically and births are nearly continuous (one baby born every
thirteen seconds in the United States alone), that any
ordinary compilation of birthcharts will meet the requirements of true randomness of selection. Nevertheless, even in a sample array erf birthcharts, break-downi
art; often necessary, A break-down is a further arrangement of the items in the array by natural classifications
inherent in the sample itself. For instance, in any fine
analysis, the charts of males and females should be dealt
with separately at first, then combined in the final interpretation. Age, occupation, social class, educational
level, marital status, nationality, ^nd even religion, are
cultomarj* brefck-downs. Why such stratificatipns are
desirable and tfften ijecessa/y in an astrological project
should be obvious even to the layman.
In ‘order to make as comprehensive an analysis as
possible, tlje number of variates in the sample should* be
as large es *possib!e without its becoming too bulky to
handle convejiientfy. Furthermore, Jhis sample^nust be •
a selectlbn* without bias’ or prejudice for preconceiv*d
ideas or notions. /Vtrological workers .should not be
jjuiltjf of rejecting from their sample cases whfch on the
surface appear, to be contrary to their beliefs, or of using #
only ca'ses which they believe will corroborate their con-

GENISTHLIAC^Ll ASTROLOGY
cept. It will harm more tfian help the causq o{ ast'rology
if the sample is deliberately misrepresented. On, the
other hand, it is wise to reject cases whjch are questionable in authenticity or whose inriusion will bring adverse criticism for slip-shoddiness by scientists who
doubtless will check the validity and accuracy of the
data used after it has been published. Arrecent problem
of this nature presented itself in an analysis of Stockmarket fluctuations during a fifty-year period for whidh
daily records are available. It was decided to exclude
from the project any items which represented market activity during the first few months after expiration of the.
bank moratorium of 1933. , Rates of increase in stock
prices were so heptic and rapid, inclusion of that action,
in a market analysis would so distort arithmetic means,'
et cetera, it would be foolishness, even a scientific
"boner," to do so.
According to theory, a random sample of thirty or more
cases will serve to give reasonably accurate results from
a study of frequency of distribution. Because of the
great number of variables comprising an astrological distribution (12 in the case of signs, 36 in the case of decanates, 4 in the case of Lunar quarters, 144 in the case of
dual sign combinations, etc.), it is wige to establish minimum sample sizes in accordance with the number of
variables in question. A sample of *100 cases would bfca confident minimum tfor truly valid results fOr a sign
analysis; 306 should be quite adequate for decanate analysis. Where Lunar quarters are entailed, 36 are sufficient. The* size of the adequate sample obviously 4epends upon the number of variables and^upol, the size
of the universe. For instance, an analysis of factors in
the charts of American Presidents will be made of the
total population of Presidents t6 date, and the issue of
sample size does not enter.the problem. But "if the Lunar
positions of infantile paralysis victims are ,te /be tabulated, no less thay one hundred cases ishould be considered with confidence,
Probability and the Standard Deviation
This is not the place to engage in a lengthy discourse
1 on the technical phases of probability theory, but we are

.. PART V* ADDITIONAL STUDIES " Til
obligated to. make mention of certain facts which the
student 'should always bear in mind. The- mechanics of
probability are ca*her simple, as was suggested by the
coin-tossfrig illustration? The mathematics, however, are
quite complicated, which limits the average student to
the lone responsibility «f becoming familiar with the
aise of tables anti the elementary arithmetic required
for their use. The purpose of this article is purely to
introduce the subject and instruct in the use of the
Simplest tests of significance. We wish to show you
how to determine whether an observed incidence of an
astrological factor varies enough fr<?m evenness to have
a significant .degree of unusu?Jness.
• The expected frequency of a Lunar sigh transit in any
birthchart or given moment of time is l/12th of the time,
or 8.333%, as we have stated. But we also learned that
.it is not unusual to find more or less than .08333 of birthcharts in a sample to have the Moon in any given division of the ecliptic. In other words, there is a definite
“margin for error” around the exact figure of the theoretical frequency, in which a factor might fall and continue to be classed as normal. The standard deviation
is a mathematical device which* defines the limits of this
allowance. The value for the standard deviation of any
sampling distribution depends upon the probability of
occurrence of the parameter, the probability of its not
occurring, land the numerical size »f the sample itself.
For instance, tne standard deviation of a sample of 100,
where the probability of an occurrence is .08333, is. 2.764.
This tells us that we can always anticipate the ’observed
number of irials*in a series of 100 to lie within 8.333 plus
and minus 2.764,' 'or 5.569 and, 11.097. In actual practice,
.this means that it is normal, that, out of 100 items, 8
items will have a particular characteristic, and we may
reasonably suppose .that no significance shojild be attached to She .series if between 5 or 11 actually are foun’d
possessed of it.
The odds are even (“50-’50”) that the distribution oc-i
curbed by chance alone when the obsep'etj frequency is
0.6745 "the aihount df the. standard deviation. » If the incidence .is equal to the standard deviation, the oads
against the disproportion occurring by chance alone are

GE?NETHLl/.CAL ASTROLOGY
2.15 to 1. If the incidence is twice the siye pf tfte*standard deviation, the odds are 21 to 1 against' this.'happenipg by chance alone*. When the incidence is 3 times the
standard deviation, t.he odds amcfunt to 369 to T that the
deviation found existing might have taVen place by pure
coincidence.
TABLE I
Significant Levels of the Normal Distribution
’’ In Ratios to the Standard Deviation
* Tablf I accompanying this article shpws what a're
the odds for various ratios of the observed' de'viation to
the standard .deviation. This table is one of the ipost
important instruments a research wbrker includes in his
simple regalia. Its use, however, is a later stept to venture, for one must learn how to figure this ratio. The

PART V.* ADDITIONAL STORIES
student ifhould £rst determine wliat the standard deviation o£ tfis parameter is, either by calculation or «by reference to a table, Table II tabulates 'the standard devia^
tion for tile expectation^ in samples <of
TABLE II
(Expected Frequency and Standard Deviation Under
. Lunar Transit for Samples of Various Size.
various sizes for which the probability iij exactly l/12th.
It&’use'is readily mastered. The first column lists the
sample size.* The second column shpws what 1/1 2th of
this number is. The third column gives the’ standard
deviation for the theoretical frequency shown in cplumn
two. Table II applies, in precision jvork, only tq Lunar
sign-positions, of to elements where the hypothetical
frequency is a twelfth of the time.
The values listed in tht first column ,of Table I are
usually* referred to as levals of significance, for they
represent (Jefinite, discrete probabilities so small as to
•immediately riveal a measure of unusualness. Unusualness may be stqd to begin where the cxjds^are 10 of more
to 1 againlt fchance occurrence for the noted deviation,
, In tji.ost scientific work, the .05 level (ratio, = 1.96, odds
20 to I? is gfinerallyuconsid?red to be the lineiof demarcation between .normalcy and abnormalcy. Where astrological projects are concerned, unusualness should

GENETHLJACAL ASTROLOGY
begin at the .10 level, due to the myrir.dr of variables
which are the components of every birthcjiart. .*In other
.words, one's attention should be arres-ted by the unusualness of any situation in an astrological array ot adequate
size where the ratio exceeds 1.64. Ary scientist would
agree to our establishing the. boundary df normalcy at'
this point. Whenever a ratio exceeds' 1.64, we state that
the statistic lies in the region of rejection. The term
rejection here means that we have a value which departs
sufficiently from the norm (or, mean) of expectation that
we are behooved to reject the f.ull hypothesis \ve started
with, as discussed Earlier.
Use of Table II may be illustrated for the benefit of
the reader. Let us say that we have on hand a sample
of 200 birthcharts of ence halitispatients, and that 27 of
these are found with the Moon in'Sign X. Normal expectation has it that 16.667 of these should have the ,
Moon so posited by sign. The standard deviation for
this size sample is 3.909. The difference between expectancy and incidence is 10.333, the ratio of which to
3.909 is 2.64. Entering Table I with this ratio, we see
that it is greater than 3-58 which marks the .01 level of
significance. This tells us that the odds are greater, than
100 to 1 that the incidence should' so greatly exceed t,he
expectation by 'chance alone. The ratio found, lies far
into the region of rejection, so we must desert the null
hypothesis and confede that Lunar occupancy of Sign X
is associated with the disease in question.
The ‘simplest test of* significance, tlj.at which w: are
describing, is usually called the u-testL- to distinguish it
from other tests. In order to outline the subject for the.
reader, let us piake use of abbreviations which come it.
handy in actual fieldwork. Let P stand for the jfrobabili£y of a given event occurring, and "Q for the probability
that the event will not occur. Q is always (A-P)T or the.
•difference between the decimal P and unity (1.0000. .••).
cThep fa will be the number 6f items (variAtel., cases) in
the sample. M is the number pf items in the sample,
which *riy share in this event (attribute, position, characteristic, nature, etb.) if the distribution is normal. ‘ M
therefore is the theoretical frequency, or expectation.

PART V. 'ADDITIONAL STPPfBS
Expressing f as a decimal at alf times, multiply N by
P to find i.e., M = NP. Then multiply M by Q, or,
expressing it otherwise, N times P times Q. The standard deviation ia the aquafe root of NPQ. None of this
procedure is at all. difficult, for simple multiplication is
all that is necessary up'tq the point where one wishes
to. derive the square root of NPQ. The square root is
most easily found in a table of square robts, familiar to
everybody. Where no such table is available, logarithms
art* handiesj, five-pla« logarithms sufficing in« every
case. In fact, logarithms will shorten the process of the
earlier rmJtliplication itself.
In order to figure the ratio of the observed deviation
to tJie standard deviation as computed, simply find the
difference between the incidence and the expectation.
Incidence may be symbolized by the letter F, and the
standard deviation by the letter S. The difference between F and M may be abbreviated as X. The all-important ratio is therefore: (F-M) divided by S, or, better,
X divided by S i There is nothing in any of these steps
that is formidable or rigorous from the viewpoint of
■wjork. The u-test is the easiest, as well as the most prolific, test of significance at the Command of an astrologer.'
Astrological Probabilities *
Table II Was presented as a probability table for the
Moon’s position among the signs, for samples of various
size. That is, the theoretical frequencies (M) and standard deviations (S) for different Samples have already
been computet! for convenience. The othet planets, however, do not have ’probabilities, of exactly l/12th. The
Sqn’s sign-positions vary because the earth, revolving in
its elliptical or^it, attains perihelion in'* January and
aphelion in July, causing the Surf to apparently transit,
the “summer, ■feigns" in greater lengths of time than it
o’ccqpies the “winter signs." The other planets, in relation to the oanth; under similar variations in the lengths
of time spent in each (“tropical") sign. Tables III, IV
2nd V- give the sign-prtJbabilities of the Suti, ^ftrcury,
and Mars, respectively, and are offered for their serviceability to «tudenfe who might like to try their hand at

GENETHL1ACAL ASTROLOGY
t r r
TABLE 111.
Norn^il Frequency:
Solar Transit *
actual experimental work along analytical lines. Notice
the surprising range of difference between Mars’ positions in various parts of the zodiac, being found in Leo,
for instance, nearly one-tenth of the time. Similar tabler.
for Venus cannot be computed, due to pecularities in its
cycle. For measuring significance of yenus’ sign-positions, one must balance the observed frequency against
the percentage of time that planet is found in each space
dhring the'period covered by the birthdata one is working with.
Almost every astrological ele m‘e n t
.has its distinct probability of occurrence ;
the LunaV quarters
have each ? P of
0k(J5 a tld a Q of 0.7S,
with PQ together
equal to 0.1875. Even
t h a mean* amounts
of time when planets
are foiftid in retrograde motion, are
conSt&n? values (see
„ Table VI). Thp
probability *of finding two celesti&l bodies within orb of
aspects (for the oi*bs of varibus sizes) have been calculated.

PART V, (ADDITIONAL STUDlBS
'TABLE VI'i
Probabilities That Two Pljmeta
Majj Be Within Various Orbs of Aspect.
Thble VII gives thesp values for orbs pf 5°, 10° and
15°,<for the major aspects separately and in combination.
Ambitious sfudepts.may perform a* great service to
themselves and their colleagues by undertaking the computation of various unavailable probability tables* for
specific conditions which may beamed in general .horoscopy. When workers have the proper tpols, true progress is made. In the fheantifne, little can be accompltshpd by careless methods* as unscientifi* reports cannot be accepted by the editoft of scientific journals. In
everyday lifenftid in the regular application of astrology
to daily affairs, we are’prone to overlook thi fact that we
are in a poSitibn to give th*e world something of’tjue
tgortl^ . something which# will solve many thprny social
problems?* and something which may ope day be regarded
as the salvation ofr man from his own undoing.

(i&NETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
ResearCh Work Illustrated '
Sun-Sign and Vocational Aptitude : A'n excellent way
to excite interest in the statistical side of astrological
work is to show a bona fide example of some sort in which
the u-test is used with highly satisfactory results. For
our illustration, our two arrays consist of the tabulated
sign-positions jit the birthdates of 2f492 eminent clergymen, and of 621 notable male artists. Our samples are
made up of every individual in these two categories
whose- full birthdate is given iri the 14th edition' of
WHO’S WHO Ibf AMERICA. We could hajje selected,
say, 400 of each profession by random sampling in -that
sotirce-volume and obtrined similar if not nearly identical results. - As preliminary steps, we computed the
theoretical frequencies and standard deviations in the
manner prescribed for our two samples (cf differing
size), the probabilities being the same. Our aim was to
determine whether there was anything unusual about the
distribution of the Sun’s position through the signs at
the births of men in these two somewhat divergent fields
of activity and thought. Our arrays and primary data
took shape as follows :
Clergymen Artists
By finding the differences between the tallied numbers
of clergymen and artists born with the Sun located in
the various signs, it becomes apparent that a measure of

PART V, , ADDITIONAL STCTtfES
unusualness .is actiAlly exhibited in the array— an unusualness* which exceeds the .OS level of significance in
five instances, Jtwo among clerics, anji three amcaig artists. Five factors«in the arrays are foun^d with u-testj
ratios in ttie region of rejection beycAid the point where
the odds against chance, explanation are 20 to 1 or more.
•You will recalf tflat it is* customary and rational in scientific procedure to feject null hypotheses^when the ratio
of the standard deviation and departure from true normalcy exceeds 1.96. When the ratio exceeds 2.58, the
odds are mere than TOO to 1, and there is little probability that t^ie variation may reasonably be relegated to
"coincidence.”
It is noticeible from the outlet that the Sun prefers
to avoid the sign Cancer at clergymen’s birthdates, while
enjoying a distinct preference for Aquarius. As instructed, we computed the ratio of X to S, and have the
following to report:
Sun in Cancer: X/S = — 2.83 ; Odds 215 to 1.
Sun in Aquarius: X/S = 2.50 ; Odds 81 to 1.
Why should the Sun in Cancer be so scarce a component in the birthcharts of eminent clergymen? And
why shpuld it be found an occupant of the sign Aquarius
so fftquently? Surely? one cannot read the delineations
for* Sun in Cancer aryl Aquarius given in Llewellyn
George’s' masterly "A to Z Horoscope Maker and Delineator” witho'ut being impressed by the deliberate mention of traits and general qualities associated with these
positions -’as parts of the psychological apparatus Of individuals with strong religious inclinations, or lack of
them. Ever f student of astrology is well aware of* the
spiritual prowess *and metaphysical inclinations of natives with the Sun in Aquarius.
Three 'factor^ in the array of 'artists’ Sun .positions
stand out wjth.significant ratios. These are the prefer-’
tntial ot Sof in Aquarius, and its avoidance of Scorpio
and" Capricorn, , The ratios .read :
Suii in Scorpio: X/S — — 3.48 ; Odds, 2000 to 1.
Sun* in.* Capricorn : X/S = — 2.07 ; Odds 2& to 1.
Sufi in Aauarius: X/S — ' 2.45 *; Odds 70 to I*.

GP1JETHLIACAL ABTFOLOOY
According to astrology, Scorpio and C-pri,corn are
essentially “coarse” signs, falling, as they do under the
rulerships of Mars, and Saturn, respectively. -'Hence it
<is no surprise, that these sign^ register lowest as producers of artistically inclined individuals. Aquarius, the
introvert, the harmony-lover, witji Prcipethean farsightedness and Uranian appreciati&n of subtilities, stands out
with both artists and clergymen, corroborating the astrological theory. Simple little research projects prove
astrology, vindicate the wisdom of its scholars, and serve
to enrich the fund of our knowledge.
Mars and Major' Marine Disasters: Making use, of
the Mars sign-probability table, we tabulated the positions of that planet for tli’e dates of the 339 major marine
disasters since 1833 catalogued in the 1947 World Almanac and Book of Facts. More than 82,000 persons lost
their lives in these tragedies on the high seas. No positive ratios found in the array exceeded the .05 point, but
two negative ratios are 50 to 1 that the abnormalcy can
be accounted for by chance. Mars avoids the signs Capricorn and Pisces so frequently at the eventuality of
marine risasters, that the odds are 63 and 65 to 1, respectively, that the observed frequencies are so sparse
by chance. That Mars in Capricorn should be a negative
factor is understandable, for that position is a soit of
damper on the trouble-making influence associated with
that planet. Why Mars in Pisces is the rarest component is not quite clear to the writer; theories advanced
by thoughtful students will probably prove enlightening
as well as interesting. In passing, it is well t» mention
that the frequency of Mars in airy signs for these marine
disasters is significant. This is fascirtating in the light
of the mundane astrological viewpoint which relates airy
signs to the earth’s atmosphere. With Mars as the di^,-”
turbing factor,’ little wonder is it that the vast .majority
of marine disasters, quite naturally, are the dismal results of storms and other bad atmospheric conditions.
Coalmine disasters and Sun-square-Mars: The U.
S. Bureau of Mines published a list of the dates, localities and casualty tolls of the 14d worst mine disasters in,
Ameridaw history (in which 20 or ifiore meh were, killed).
We decided to tabulate the longitudinal differences be-

•♦ PART T, ADDITIONAL J3TUDIE8
tween the Sun and Mars for these dates, to determine
whether Unfavorable aspects Were more frequent' than
might reasonably ascribed to coincidence* We learned
that 34 of these 143 infamous days found the Sun and
Mars within 1^° -dl a square aspect, of which 24 quadtatures were within an orb of 10°. Making use of the
values given in Table VII, we discovered that this excess gf square aspects over the expected mean was too
significant to £e sheer, coincidence. The u-test rafio for
the 15° orb squares was 2,24, for which the odds arc 40
to r against chance. The b-test ratio >for the closer 10°
orb<square aspects was 2.16, for which the odds amounted to 32 against 1. Surely, astro/ogers for ages have not
beetj mistaken in their interpretation of the changing
relationships between the heavenly bodies as viewed
geocentrically.
The Chi-Square Test of Significance
It matters very little to the scientist and statistician
whether the odc^s against chance-occurrence are 100 to
1 or 1000 to 1, so mastery and use of probability calculation is not essential to skill in statistical an.fi sis. It)
practical worth, to demonstrate that a deviation has a
measijre of unusualness^ beyond the .10, .05 or .02 levels
of significance <s all that is required under most circumstances. ,
A simple, yet extremely useful, test teasily adapted to
the analysis of arrays in astrological research is commonly known as the chi-Bquare test. It is so named becafise
the critical factor used in making tfie jest is conventionally abbreviated by* the small Greek letter, chi, with tan
exponent of ?, meaning that the’value of chi is squared.
Cqj -square is a measure of discrepancy between observation and hypothesis. The value chi-square reveals the
magnitude of departure'between numbers in an observed
fr^quencj* distribution and what these numbers actually
should be if the distribution were nonnal. The hypothesis, as always itf such tests t>f significance, states that
the distribution is norma] and that any deviations odsdhved* ares* the product of chance conditions.
To every ,valOe of chi-square there is a corresponding
probability rating. When any computed value of phi-

GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
square equals or exceeds the .05 level, we, are' behooved
to. attach significance to the data under test. .Naturally,
when the computed chi-square equals pr exceeds the .05
point, the distribution under ’inspection obviously departs far enough from normalcy to Reserve further attention. The significance of„a 'calculated chi-square is
evaluated by its size as compared with what the valye
should be if the distribution in each category were normal, or within reasonable proximity to normalcy.' This
evaluation is made by reference to a table of chi-square
values for the various levels ,of significance at different
class intervals. Tne class intervals used mo'sc often in
astrological research ar^ the twelve zodiacal signs (n =
12), the lunat quarters or sign-triplicities (n = 4),, and
fourfold groupings of the signs (n = 3). The lettersymbol n is used to distinguish this factor, and is usually
called the number of degrees of freedom, for it tells in
how many ways an item may vary in the scries under
scrutiny, i.c., the number of classes it can fall into.
Chi-square may technically be defined as the sum t f
the squares of observed deviations from an expectev
rpean or means. It is readily apparent from this definition that the chi-squaVc analysis is but another form c:
the simple u-test already treated with one important
difference. This difference is that the u-test treats' the
class intervals singularly in the search for significance,
while the chi-squarc test deals with the distribution as a
whole.
In plactice we wish, to know whether the class interval
portions of a platlet in the cases making ,-ip our ‘sample
vary significantly from that of a normal distribution. If
our calculated chi-square exceeds the chi-square value in
the table at selected levels, Shen we must reject the, original null hypothesis and concede. that the observed distribution of the planet among the signs (i^. such that it
cannot be rationally imputed to qhance aldne. ' •
T&ble VIII Jjives the Corresponding ‘values for chisquare at three levels of significance for numbers of degreesiof freedom most often encountered in astrological
lesearch. Its use' will be explained shortly, if it is not
already apparent to the reader.

PART V. « ADDITIONAL STUDIES
TABLE .VIII
Table qf Chi-Square far Numbers pi Class Intervals
The column hidings are selected levels of significance. Figures in the* table are chi-square values
at thesb levels. The stub of the tab!$ gives n, the
numbir of degrees of freedom (class intervals).
Inspection o{ the table shows that, in order to be of
any true significance whatsoever when dealing with projects where n = 12, thg computed fhi-square*mus^ be at
least .21.026. When the class .intervals are four Sn Mm*
ber (as with projects analyzing possible significanVP»
variations under the four Lunar quarters, quadrants, or.

GKNETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
signs grouped by fours), the computed ihi-square must
equal or exceed 9.488 in order to have meaning. '
Handled systematically, calculation of the chi-square
for an array of data is rather simple am} should offer no
difficulties if the directions are followed faithfully. In ’
ordinary problems, such as testing sign-positions of a
planet, the work is arranged into steps through, six
columns.
Step 1. Let column (1) be a listing of class intervale.
Step 2. Tabulate the incidence figures in column (2), ’or
the number of times the planet irf question occupies the class interval in each row. i
Step 3. Column (3) should be a luting of the- expected
number of times the planet occupies each respective class. This step is undertaken by multiplying the probability of the position and the
number of variates in your sample. (The number of variates is N, the number of cases in your
sample, and is not to be confused with n which
is the number qf class intervals.) Under ordinary circumstances, give the figures of theoretical
frequency to hundredths, or two decimal places.
Step 4. Column (4) is a tabulation of the differences in
each row nf the observed and theoretical frequencies. Successively subtract the values given
fin column (3) from the values given in column
(2), entering them in (4).
Step 5. Square* the values in column (4) and enter
them in (5).
Step 6. Column (6) is a series of valuer derived by ’successively dividing the valties in column (5) by
the values in column (3).
Step*7. Total the values in column (6^., »ui5a it
chi-square.
<■ Knowing the chi-square ^alue^of the ‘array1, consult
Table VIII, entering the column giving the value of chifquare at the .OS level for the number of class intervals

PART V,* ADDITIONAL STUfilES
•THE CHI-SQUARE TEST:
Zodiacal Distribution of the Sun
At fitrtlhdatee of 2492 CJergytfien
If the tabulaV val^e is greater than the computed value,
then the null hypothesis must’be accepted and we conclude that the observed deviations do not \ary sufficiently from normal la have significance. If the tabular value
is smaller than, the cdmputea value, the null hypothesis,
qiust be»rejc$fed in favor of some other explanation than
chapce, for the odds ife too great that the discrepancy is
coincidental ‘ *
• If the a<hi-square test*is passed and we ate obligated
to append genuine significance to the uneven ‘distribation,- we are further obligated to seek a possible explana-

GRNETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
tion for the discrepancy elsewhere tnan in aur primary
data. In other words, we are still unjustified in assuming that astrological influences account ,ior the deviations. We iqust first demonstrate tL'al factory intrinsic
to our primary datk are not to blame for the apparent
abnormalcy. However, this condition, applies mostly
to tests of significance in Solanpositions, and seldom will
we have to make extra demonstrations in support cf
astrology when our analysis treats of other than Sjolar
factors. Deviations found in arrays of Solar data might
be otheiwise accounted for in normal seasonal variations.
To show our readers what the worksheet for an average* chi-square test looks like, following the directions
just given, we present herewith a chi-sq“uare table .of
six columns for the Solar distribution among signs at the
birthdates of 2492 eminent clergymen (the same array
dealt with earlier from the u-test a'ngle). The chi-square
is most valuable, probably, for the reason that it reveal,?
whether the departures from normalcy in the individual
class intervals, as shown by the u-test ratios, are compensated for in the over-all distribution. In other words,
a significant ratio from the u-test is "cinched” as scientifically valid if the chi-square test shows the over-alj
distribution sufficiently disrupted by normalcy in any of
its class intervals. In preparing -.a conclusive scientific
report on any astrological research project, it is a scholastic obligation to state the chi-square value for-.the
whole distribution -whenever an array is u-tested.
< In, our summation of the 2492 clergymen’s natal Sun
positions, the calculate}! chi-square is found to be 25.800,
which' exceeds both' 21.026 at the .05 level. /tnd 24.054 at
the ‘.02 level. Hence, we must reject the null hypothesis
and admit that the placements of the Sun in -the array is
sufficiently abnormal to be -an influential factor intfre
psychic make-up of religious leaders. The non-uniformity found demands another hypothesis to, explain itself.
The logical li/ie of reasoning leads, directly <o the astro<
logic?! theory which claims, evidently w^th good reason,
that the Sun is the primary differentiator' of personality
types. In turn, individual differences of temperament
and behavior-patterns are influential in Vocational aptitude or selection.

PART V, ' ADDITIONAL STUDIES
Hen<?e,»we see from the foregoihg outline example the
lines of proce'dure and thoughj which every astrqjogical
student and reSearc^i worker must foiibw in order to test
his data and evaluate his findings. The chi-square test*
is a method rich^ in opportunities for establishing as
scientific fact snony of the tenets and theories we ordinarily taka for granted.
Correlation of Attributes*
,The analysis of* degrees of correlation between ^ny two
sets of items or information is one of the more elaborate
brahches,*of statistical method. Hswever, one doing
astrological research will not have frequent need for finding correlation coefficients of tills complex sort taught in
th<s‘ textbooks, except in certain instanced. There is a
simple test of significance, though, which makes use of
the chi-square principle in order to prove or disprove the
existence of any correlation between two sets. This
.system makes use of what is known as a 2-by-2 classification, in the form of a fourfold table, for which reason it
is often called jthe fourfold test. Its technical name is
generally termed the correlation of attributes.
, This test finds a wide variety of applications in astrological .work. Because it is but* another adaptation of
the ^hi-square analysis? it is easily comprehended by studertts who have assinjilated the fundamentals of the
common ’tests already discussed. Again, simple arithmetic is all that js required, and thosJ processes may be
greatly simplified by the use of logarithms in performing every "step but the preliminary addition. The>ac*ompanyiijg figure is a standardized ‘bojc-diagram with its
various portions' labelled by letters. Stpdy the figure
briefly and _you w*I! quickly asrive at an understanding
of the entire procedure. The data used in every fourfold
test-mus*. be put into a form in which two groups of data
are possessed of common atfributfes in different proportions. That* Is? speaking conveniently, Category A is
possessed by Conditions X and Y, and Category B also
share in X and V. However, the proportions of X and
Y in' either Category are different. The fQurfold test is
devised Jo learn how»aJtually different, frofn Jh* "significant” point of view, are'these proportions in the twt>
sets.

QBNETHLIACAL ABTF-OLOOT
THE FQURFOLD 1 ABLE
Standardized Working Form
For Correlation of Attributes
Solution ,of the fouifold test
nets a value of chi-square for the
data. Table IX shows the chisquare values for various levels
of significance. Ip working with
a fourfold table, any resulting
value must be in excess of 3.841
in order to be in the region oi
rejection beyond the .05' point.
(Remember, all tests of significance used in statistics are njpde
under a null hypothesis which
claims that variations from normalcy are chance phenomena.
,The tests merely reveal how
great are the odds that the deviations observedr are coincidental.
When the odds are high" enough to one, it -is assumedthat the deviations are genuine events and therefore, th'e
hypothesis must be wrong.)*
In actual fieldwork, Categories f or Condition^ under
consideration* ar$ interchangeable. For, instance, either
Categories or Conditions may be: retrograde* and direct,
masculine and feminine signs, , northern and southern,
dedinatipn, two zodiacal elements, fertile ancl barren
factors, waxing and waning' moon, or just two signs

PART Vt ADDITIONAL STUDIES
alone, Non-astrol5gical factors which might be* chosen
to ihak<? up. either .Categories or Conditions might be:
male arfd fenfale, Catholic and Protestant, scientists and
clergymen, whited or colored, or what-have-you. Tlye
adaptability of the fourfold test is its 'most valuable
asset for reseayeh work. Another advantage of great
worth is the*fact that ib subjects to testing many categories of conditions which cannot be actually measured.
Therefore, the attributes used may be: athletic and nonathletic, urban and rural, introvert and extrovert, short
2nd tall, light and heavy, ad infinitum.
In tfad working form shown, a, b, c and d are understood to be the actual, counted numbers of items in the
various categories, while the purpose o^the column and
row headed "total" is self-evident. To solve the problem
.of the fourfold table, the following steps should be heeded:
• Step 1. Multiply a and d together, and b and c together.
Find the difference between these products by
subtracting be from ad. Square the value of this
difference.
, Step 2. Multiply the result in Step (1) by n (the g^and
total found in the lower right-hand corner of the
box) .
Step 3, Multiply all dour sums in both Categories and
Cqnditions together.
Step 4. Divide th*e result in Step (2) by the result in
•Step (3). This quotient is the sought-fer chisquare value,
The foregoing instructions may be codified as follows :
Chi-square = ,
(dd — be) (adw-bc) (n) -H,(a+b) (a+cj (b+d) (b+c).
Haying .tbps found chi-square, determine whether br
not it is significant by the values given in.the small Table
IX for s^eef levels.
To depict and dramatize the utility of the fourfold test,
let' us*emple>y imaginary situations. Suppc#e* that^ we
wished to determine whether the time of adolescence in

780 GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
boys of a particular social class is hastened 'or rdtlayed
by the fact that they were born under two different astrological categories. ThC'se categories could* be the
waxing and waping periods of thf Moo‘h,'or othyr breakdown of the birthdath. The astrological components of
the situation we shall designate as Categories A and B.
Knowing that the mean time of adolescence fort the entire population of. boys in the social class concerned is ’
13.7 years of age* we list the number (262 in all) According to Category and under Condition^ X’and Y. X wil^
stand for'earlier adolescence than the mean, and Y, later
adolescence than theraverage for the population;,.
FOURFOLD TABLE
Time of Adolescence and Birth Factors
Solving for chi-square, in accordance with instructions,
Because* 6.164 is in , the" region of rejection beyond.the
.02 poipt, our derived value for chi-squafe' is highly significant. The odds are morq than SO to f that the difference in the proportions of the two attributes in our sample of 262 boys tould have been so unusqal by eoincldence. Quy conclusion is naturally* to reject the null
hypothesis and accept the evidence that .Bifth tender
either Category tested is a factor with very real properties exercising an influence on the psychosexual* development of males in a special class.
Ajothef yiustrationc might be Jielpful. Lef us imagine
that we have measured the physique indexes of 1,16 men

PART Y| ADDITIONAL 3TTg)IE8
who were (born under either of two astrological categories, signified by A and B. The physique index used
is the-rdiio of; the shoulder-breadth tp the pelvis-breadth.
The meaji of the population is known to {>e 128, i.e., tbe
average ratio of shoulder to pelvic widths is 128%, or
1.28 for American adult males. (It is also established
• that this ratiS is correlated with male virility, as shown
ph a Hafvard University report.) Condition X will be
called “'rectangular” and includes all those whose ratios
are less than 128.00, while Y is the “triangular” group of
tliose individuals wilh an index higher than the'average.
FOURFOLD TABLE:
Male Physique Indexes and Birth Factors
Wording out chi-s<5ptare, we find it to" be 4.342, a truly
significant yalue, inasmuch as it exceeds 3.841 (Cf. Table
IX). It must tiaw be admitted thSt hjving*been born
under ekher of the two Categories has a bearing uppn
one’s bodily build. Birth undqj- Category A .conduces
toward a qjore Rectangular physical type, whtfe Category B has a decided inclination toward broader Shoulders and -more narrotv hip?. This illustration serves
•welt to indicate the sort »f valuable and.beneficial work
wfiich fnight be accomplished by a progressive student
of astrology.
All scie8ce^*and studies,' 'it is plain, ^iave receive^ nev»
and modern interpretations in this Twentieth Century,
in Veering tvith tHfe intellectual temper oi the <Jay.
Astrology is npw restating ' its fundamentals in terms

732 QiBfflBTHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
understandable to modern scholarship and i? st/tbilizing
the stand it is now making by doing so. *> The past two
decades 'have seen the greatest revival of public’irrterest
iij astrology ip. the history of the stafrj' scienfe. It is
fast engaging the attention of more and more intelligent
seekers after knowledge found wanting .elsewhere. Its
followers are in every walk of 'life an$ its students are
legion. The ultimate recognition of astrology as a valid'
science by our educators is inevitable, for the puVsuit of
facts is fast carrying them to its portals?
It will not be long before we will have reached that
rainbow’s end. Each and every student of astrology is
spiritually obliged to contribute his intellectual efforts
toward that end. Man will finally lift his eyes heavenward, knowing at last what the stars mean to him and
his — and why.

PART V, ADDITIONAL STUDIES
PIGKING WINNERS
A“ Tpest of Astrological Skill
The.Principl^s and Practice of Contest Analysis
• In spite of certain philosophical objections tp the use
of^astrology as a helpmeet in speculation, training in the
technique of predicting Ihe outcome of contests is part
add parcel of every astrological curriculum. It must be
conceded by’all that our scieffce stands or falls with its
capacity for describing trends or indicating qualities at
particular points on a time scale. This being so, it follows that the outcome of a competition, all entries being
.equal naturally or by handicap, is predictable with the
same degree of certainty to be relied upon in any other
type of astrological judgment.
Contest analysis is an art embraced by that branch ot ’
our study known as horary astrology, but calls into consideration all of the information and artifices glea'ned
fryn *a mastery of jjoth natal and horary techniques.
Hence, more than a cursory knowledge of astrology is
n^gessary for proficieficv in genuine contest analysis, for
familiarity«with astrology as a whoje is an absolute prerequisite. Readers delving into this article, attracted by
its title, and in high hopes for a sure-fire formula for
riches, should therefore be discouraged at this* outset of
our discussion..
Contesbanalysis was an important share of profession- ,
’al .astrology in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries
of our era, judging hy the sumerous elaborate techniquesand divinajorw methods which were in vogue And treated
upon St length in tlje literature of those Junes. Then, in
the ninet^entlj century, with the advgnt of new, canons
of .spiritual tnought, astrological literature lost its.cryjy
tic„ Icabbalistic savou* The new trend, .which carried
ovpr into the’ early decadfs ,of the twentieth century, ^vas
characterized by a Victorian dogmatism strangely mixed
with occult precepts of Oriental origin. The leading

GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
astrological authors breathed new life into, tine stellar art
and maintained a high deg'ree of consistency despite the
curious viewpoints which crept into every textbook and
thesis. The new attitude, however, was more religious
than scientific, and it became a heresy to insist upon an
astrology divorced from mysticism. It was held that to
use astrology as(1a means toward profit was a perversion
of the divine science.
The s;me attitude gained ground among astrologers
in the United States, but American astrology ,was destined to become scientific and practical. A few ‘eminent
astrologers freed themselyes from the stereotype of a
mystical basis fcor their subject and produced a worthy
literature which reduced astrology to its workable essentials. Countless individuals now benefit daily from a
practical application of astrological information. Our
literature now has a minimum of metaphysical conjecture. In the place of literary abstractions rising as a
morbid derivative of astrolatry, we now read the philosophy of astrology. That philosophy is the natural
philosophy of modern man in quest for security, discovery .and peace of mind.
There are a number of excellent books on the rules {or
analyzing horary charts of the usual kind, i.e., the simple
inquiry concerning decisions or ventures, or the request
for information not evident on the surface of a situation.
Every student should attempt to perfect himself in simple hoyary techniques, with the old texts as guidance
material und actual experience as the final authority.
Restricting oneself to genethliacs always p:oves to be
a deterrent to full appreciation of astrological inference.
Horary astrology is the natural complement or expansion of natal techniques, for through horary procedures
one becomes adept at recognizing the expression of planetary influences in “the little things’- of life/v/hich ordinarily escape attention.
t This thesis is confined to a generalization of horarv
procedures as, they relate to contest analysis. Proceeding on the assumption that it is possible to predict correctly the results of af contest via horary methods, let us
devote our consideration to the sufficiencies ana limita-

PART V, ADDITIONAL STUDIES • 735
tions of«con^es^ anajysis, outlint? the traditional rules for
makipg*judgments, and relay, to our^readers what experience has taught tis to be valid in th'e way of interpretation.
a
The traditional rules for making sound judgments appear to«be simph; when we integrate in our minds the
"scattered directions for delineations gVen in the textboftks. Actual, fieldwork, nevertheless, always proves
much more complicated than expected due to the endless
stjeam of contradicting; factors, modifying conditions
and ovaftones of influence that onc*despairingly finds in
almost every horary chart. Even more discouraging to
tfce novice is the seeming irrationality pf the theory itself, it being replete with loopholes often irreconcilable
.with a logical view of the matter. By this we mean that
the customary ruleV for delineation arc often such far-
, flung departures from seeming common sense that the
intelligent student is destitute of any self-confidence.
Confidence in one’s ability to arrive at a stable conclusion is a requirement for all successful application of
astrology. It is our purpose in this paper to integrate ’
.the time-proven but ill-preserved precepts regarding,this
problem, and restate them in' modern and applicable
te<rms for the benef* of students who realize that this
reformulation is desijable.
"Yhe acme of contest analysis would naturally be a
system in whicli the prediction is based, upon *an exhaustive examination of the birthcharts of all the contestants
involved. Such action, however, is well nigh improbable
in most ciyum^fances and impossible in many, due to
the difficulties «ne would face in compiling the* data,
erecting and rectifying the cifarts, and making an assem-
•bly-line study of each by »progression and transits, etc.
If this could be ddne, though, the elements to watch jn
, every»chaijt *would be the vitality, alertness and momen-
’ tvy temperament eff the players, individaally and in thf
aggregate*. fBhe reason for isolating’these four ‘factory
shbuld be obvious to even the layman, inasmuch ai they
a r< thj chief ingredients in the recipe f of achievement
through ardor. A point-value system offers the best procedure for evaluating these factors in a long series of

GENETHUACAL ASTROLOGY
charts. Vitality is relegated to the Sun, Mocn and Mars.
Alertness is usually determined by Mercur* and 'Uranus,
'fhe psychological index (whether optimistic or pessimistic, ebullient or depressive) is a powerful determinant in the outcome of a contest. This -index of the immediate temperament of the contestants" is estimated
from Venus, Jupiter, Saturn and Neptune. ’
Certain types of competitions are in all probability
immune to the indications of the ordinary sort encoun
tered in contest analysis, and must receive special consideration. We refer to contests often descVibed as
“battjes of wits,” where preparation rather than luck decides the outcome. Thik would include information
quizzes, certain card games, and chess games. The outcome of a chess contest is probably dependent upon
individual nativities ojF the opponentu, although the usual
contest chart set for the commencement of the game
would naturally be examined in the light of the birthcharts involved.
The How and Why
A, horary chart for the time and place of the occasion
— be it a football, basAall, basketball or ice hockey
game, boxing or tennis match — will usually suffice to
reveal the winner,, independently of.the personal fortunes
of the players. The skeptic may well ask, “Why, ar.d
in what manner, d,oes such a horoscope indicate the
winner of 'an as-yet-unplayed game?'" Let us answer
that question.
It is bur firm corfviction, based upcgi.the combined
principles of astrology and social psychology, that the
outcomes of competitive spArts ev?nts, publicly attended,
are surely more amenable to accurate prediction than are
individual affairs. This is true because, psychologically
speaking, the "collective mind” is far more, (susceptible
to planetary influences (indeed, to alj external stimuli in
genera)^ than tne singular mind of ah individual.
* This is true also because the student’s mind is focussed
on one affair' and its specific outcome. The affair4 is
restricted to a knowtf set of "variables” and proper allocation of planetary and zodiacal “rulerships” is elemen-

PART V,' ADDITIONAL STUDIES
tary. • 6j» copipjjrison, it is difficult . to make a specific
prediction, about the actual jneans through which a
transit or aspect ,iw an individual radix will work itself,,
out. A tihnsit of Mars dver natal Me rcurjl may have a
multitude of expressions ranging all the way from fire
in one’s waste^a{>er baSkeJt to nervous inflammation.
'The individual psyche possesses a high degree of resistance to outsid^ influences, a resistance rooted in what
is., commonly mis-called “free will." The collective
psyche is far less differenfiated than the individual and
is therefore more vulnerable to on-the-spur reactions to
outfer stimuli.
J^Iodern scientific research' has proven that mass psychology, pendulum-like, oscillates from one end of the
emotional 'spectrum tr\ the other, between optimism and
pessimism, laxity and tension, mania and depression, etc.
.This oscillation is traceable to causes variously known as
“extra-terrestrial influences,” “sidereal radiation,” “the
diurnal bio- electric potential” — all roses by another
name, the mother flower being astrology, pure and simple. Modern astrological research corroborates these
fihdings and, furthermore, possesses the key to prediction of' sociological trends (as witness, for example,
stor.k-market activity as related to long-term and middleterm influences of the planetary aspects).*
Developing on thi^ theme, we migh? even go so far as
to suggest that the’ reason why the planefary configura-M
tions at the time are such strong determining fagtoft in
the gene’s progress may lie far d^epar than sheer ‘influence on the feamj themselves. Perhaps .the public ‘attendance of fans, team-like oppssed between themselves,
is,a major rfeterminant. Aryl that what thj chart shows
is the psychological index of the vast throngs of people
gathered together with a common focus of their attentions— cm thsjflntcome of the game. The chart discloses,
it thjs is true, which “Side" will be on the upswing of the
psychologic*! «f*ndulum. Psychologists tell us that
sport's events, particularly of the rough or combatdnt
Sort, are civilization’s besft by-paths for vicarious aggression. • Aggressjon is a natural' instinct*but we must cur6
our aggressiveness in order to, survive in society. This

CENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
instinct is therefore "repressed” into the subconscious,
and seeks outlets in our activities which' Will relieve the
pent-uf) pressure yet not’ tarnish our conscience'". The
human being -therefore finds in fports*attractio>”s a splendid vicarious outlet. That is why audiences project
themselves so intensely, almost as th'pugh hypnotized,
into the course of a prize-fight or other contest. This
psychic projection is spoken of as a "cartharsis” — an experience intimately felt by proxy. The results of? this
cartharsis by rooters of either side js doubtless what the
chart indicates. Such an explanation is in keeping with
both the astrological and psychological theories underlying our subject.
Charting the Game
Where analysis of the actual event is concerned, a
chart for the time and place of the game’s inception is
expedient. In football, this would be kick-off time at
the stadium, while a race should be charted for its post'
time. A prizefight chart should be calculated for the
beginning of the first round. The inception of any competitive or combatant athletic event is the critical moment. In most cases, this moment is predetermined by
schedule; a slight delay of a few minutes at actual game
time should make little or no difference in the analysis
if the chart is “radical.”
In agreement with the horary tradition, a, chart fdr an
inquiry ao to the dhtcome of a game often identifies the
pinner. We discourage this practice, however, except
wheffe the querent has only a temporary and ‘relatively
intense interest in the 'particular even^, for^all questions
amenable to horary analysis should stem directly from a
“personal equation.” Wf>y this \s so should be apparent
to all student^ of astrology. .Unless a personal stake is
involved, it would be rathc^ unreasonable to expect' the
, horoscope of an individual's passing curjpsity to reflect
the fortunes of two opponents or teams, as ?vell “as their
emotional impacts on two vast throngs of fans. A horary fijgure, to be'valid, must be based oii‘th€ significant
motnent of a crisis in experienep.
v Approximately one out of every ten charts is”‘not. radical. The best way to decide whether the cfcart of an

PART V, ADDITIONAL STUDIES
inquiry i<e radical is to determine if the chart describes
the querent's focus of attention on .the matter* asked
about. Then, if «t!te chart has c annotation of a sports
event, it will be safe to tfeat it as an index of the contest
itself, the ascendant identifying the team favored by the
■querent who hhs*the aforementioned personal or important connection with the issue.
At bottom, thf^ rules for horary analysis of a contest
arf quite simple, therfub of the matter lying in the frequent contradictions one will find in the average chart.
The’contgadictions are to De eliminated by careful study
and evaluation. Only astrological skill can accomplish
this, which is ‘why we stated dkrlier that^proficiency in
astrology as a whole is necessary for successful use of
the science in contest prediction.
The first step in analysis is to ccfnsign the teams in
question to their correct houses and planets, a not-toodifficult task if certain circumstances are observed. The
home team (playing at its own stadium) is allocated to
the first house, *the ascendant. The visiting team is described by the seventh house, or descendant. In boxing
or tennis matches, or similar spores in which a rival challenges the title-holder, the defendant or champion is signified by the ascendaflt, while his opponent, the challenger ist ascribed to the descendant. •
Needless to mjntion, exhibition matches of any kind
should never be subjected to analysis, inasmuch* as there
is no stake involved in the outcome. A special set of*
circumstances also surrounds the atstro-analysft f of a
tourrufment or -» tnack-meet, the ordinary rules of inception and interpretation pot applying to luch an interhacking series of contests. *
F6r convenience in instruction, let us call the team
represented bylhe asfendan? as Alpha and that by the
descendant at ‘Omega. All planets and elements descriptive jof the Alpha teanf may also be called Alpha for simplicity. In &ct&&l practice ohe substitutes the names of
the teams for these terms, although personal bias nfay
faint *the.*interpretatioits through that remarkable trick
of tht mind called wishful thinking, if* one thinks repetitiously of*the teams in themselves and apart from the

figHETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
chart. (Favoritism is, the professional Nemesis' of the
statistician, the judge, and ofttimes, the''astrolqger.)
. The twelv$. houses ot a contest chart are allotted to
the two teams by the following connotations:
FIRST: •
SECOND,:
THIRD :‘
F{FTH :
TENTH :
TWELFTH :”
SEVENTH :
EIGHTH:
NINTH:
ELEVENTH;
FOURTH :
SIXTH :
The Alpha Team "
Alpha's Fans and Odds
Alpha’s Coach or Captain
Alpha's Game
Alpha’$ Score
Alpha’s Penalties
The Omega Team ,
Omega's Fans and Odds
Omega’s Coach or Captain
Omega’s Game
Omega’s Score
Omega’s Penalties
We relegate “fans and odds” to the rdipective second
houses of the two groups because these sectors of a chart
show the support and assets of the teams and the box
office intake which in’ some instances determines the
odds. The third houses represent the coach or captain
through whonnthe progress of the event is directed' by
means of pep talks, messages and signals. The 'fifth
houses s^ow the actual operations, ,th« performance of
the team in attion, and the morale or “fitness” of the
players.^ The tenth houses naturally indicate scoring,
inasmuch as points ^re‘credits and honors, while thp ultimate score miyors the comparative ichie^ement. The
twelfth houses arc the obstacler confronting the teams,
from the very outset and throughout the event, so arc’
taken to represent the disadvantages, setbacks and penalties suffwed. A truly “clein gamts” has a minimum of
'twelfth-house overtones; there are few fotilji an«l errors
,in such instances.
■ The houses have further significance in that they
often, though' not always, dessr&e the.stagej ofc the*
game. *Ifi football, ,for instance, the first four houses of
the wheel describe Alpha’s performance anti trends dur-

PART V, ADDITIONAL STUDIES
ing the four ‘successive quarters'of the game. By the
same.tokfen, tHfc seventh, eighth, ninth and tenth houses
suggest the circiAn^tanc^s to be experienced by Omega*
as the game proceeds. In boxing matches, the rounds of
the bout run frotp»the fy'st house onward for the defender, and from tffe seventh house around the wheel for the
challenge?. Innings in baseball, sets in Jennis and similar periods of every contest follow this’ same scheme.
Too great significance should never be attached to this
scheme, however, unless the trends in each peilod arc
conaistent^for both teams." That is, tj;e second period of
a game ntight have favorable indices for both teams^ in
which case the indications are (invalid. But should the
second period have excellent portents for'one team and
adverse indications for the opposite, then confidence may
be placed. in the fulfillment of this condition.
<It is quite noteworthy that games of standard length
oisually have a specific number of periods, which when
imposed on the chart in this way, brings the ending of
the game or bo«t to significant points in the chart. To
illustrate : The four quarters in official football bring the
“game” to the fifth and eleventh cusps, while the nine
innings in baseball bring both dubs to the tenth and
fourth cusps. The fifteen rounds in a standard-length
boxing match, counted around the chart from their two
starring points, finish a*t astrologically significant points
— the fourth*and ^tenth cusps.
There are ten all-important circumstances to be con-,
sidered in’every chart as indices of the "gain or Voss*’ of
both teams. The chart should be carefully scrutinized
in search for ihesef indices. The team with the greatest
pumber of favorable indices isolated to win; few modifying elements can alter, Of even modify, .for that matter, these* indications.
yhe Alpha Team Will Win If:
1. Alpha's jjl^pft is *n the, midheaven, unafflicted* and
direct.
•2. The ftloon applies f sAorably to Alpha.
3. The Xfoon applies adversely to Omega.
4. The Mbon separates favorably from Omega.

•afeNETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
5. The Moon separates adversely from Aiplvi. '
6. The Sun applies favorably to Alpha'.
7. The Sun applies adversely to OtJiega
8. The Sun separates favorably from Omega.
9. The Sun separates adversely front .Alpha.
10. The fifth house is better %nd stronger thqn the
eleventh. •
The Omega Team Will Win If :
1. Omega’s planet is in the jmdheaven, unafflictedi and
direct.
2. *The Moon applies f^yorably to Omega.
3. The Moon applies adversely to Alpha.
4. The Moon separates favorably from Alpha.
5. The Moon separates adversely from Omega.
6. The Sun applies favorably to Omega.
7. The Sun applies adversely to Alpha. '
8. The Sun separates favorably from Alpha.
9. The Sun separates adversely from Omega.
10. The eleventh house is better and stronger than the
* fifth.
A “void chart” is one in which? the last three degree:
or first three degrees of any sign are found on the 'ascendant. A “void-of-course Moon” means that' our satellite is .within the last three degrees .of any sign and
makes no further aspects before its egress from that
^igm pither of these' conditions often has a' complete
nullifying or reversing effect on the remaining chjrt indications, so tfiat the least-favored team ‘"wins or the
game is tied at its finish. Hence, it is never wise to
work with such a chart, 'for it is, to use a familiar astrological phrase', "not fit to be judged.”
• Although infrequently encountered, omj ,-ijay find that,
because the ifioon is within a few jninutes df arc of par4
tile aspect, interpretation pf the propep circumstance
(numbers 2 through 5 in the above list of testimonial circumstances) is debatable. Lunaj parallax ma^y deflect,
the appatent longitude of the .Moon past the partite point
and hence change the interpretation frpm ■''applying” to

PART V* ADDITIONAL STUDIES
"separating.”. This problem call* for a further calculation tcj learn -which is the casg. In most cases, calculation Is unnecessary, as the hemispherical placement of
the Moorf in the chart Will tell at a.glancfc whether th?
displacement is t^ckward or forward in longitude, and
.approximately* htow great, this deflection is.
• "Too great stock should never be laid on the importance of the slower-moving planets (Jupiter, Saturn,
Uranus, Neptunfe aijd Pluto), especially in connection
with periodically recurring events, such as a Reason’s
regtilar schedule. Their Bouse positipns will be repeated
too often during a season’s series; but their aspects,
involying rapidly moving bodies, particularly the Moon,
a^f all important. The Moon’s Nodes add Part of Fortune are not of sufficient weight to have an impact on
the chart; and, therefore, it is ambiguous to include them
ii> most cases. The Nodes sometimes, however, represent a sort of catalysis on the final conclusion, especially
if their alignment is near an angular axis of the chart
(meridian or h.orizon)
The "strength” of the significators is often modified
or enhanced by their sign positions; so the traditional
doctrine about "debilities and dignities” should be borne
in mind and brought «to bear on the analysis, especially
if fhere is any uncertainty about making a conclusion.
Scoring is hard to reckon, almost impossible under
ordinary conditlbnst. But the general m^gnitade of the
scoring, yvhether high or low, is often discernible in comparing the tenth and fourth hpuses for Alpha’s and
Omega’s probabilities, respectively* A very ‘Active”
chart (one in which there are a host of "maturing of approaching.-aspects, especial ly*»by the Moon) indicates
either extremely fast and* high scoring pr a neck-andneck rade for points..
Because lbe.*collective psyche seemingly does not re:
spond so readily to»the more subtle vibrations of the.
"outer plaaeta”* (Uranus, Neptune and- Pluto), it is cus-*
tomary to consider Saturn the ruler of. Aquarius, Jupiter*
of Piscas, an4 Mars, of Scorpio. This preblem of corulershfp has caused muoh grief tq young sfudents *of
astrology* to ’whom this admonition was not made.

IBNETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
Annual events, such as holiday games, which are
played year after year 'at the same, houn, approximate if
not same date and, locality, will usually be' founh to have
£he same planetary rulers every tim£ With a .similarity
in house cusps and placement of the Sun and slowmotion planets. Greater weight shouC^ be attached to
the Moon and transient planets as was jdst pointed out'
as advisable in all instances.
The Current Aspects,.
Sometimes the current aspects alone, as given in an
aspectarian, suffice, to indicate' the outcome of.^n evtent.
This is notably true in the case of championship prizefights, which seem to be f'he most vulnerable of all contests to the influences prevailing during the fight itself.
Very rarely will the outcome of a boxing match (excluding exhibition bouts) run counter ,to the indications of
the aspects in operation at the time. If the aspects are
distinct in their connotations, no chart is really necessary, although, for obvious reasons, it is desirable that
a chart be drawn up for every event, despite one’s confidence that the aspects point firmly to a* conclusion.
In brief, the following are basic interpretations as they,
apply to all sports events in general and those combative in nature particularly. We« have taken litertry
license in “nut-shelling” them for ^convenience.
Favorable Sun: The champ maintains his title.
* The team favored by public and
experts wins as expecte^l. Good
jportsmanship and succe s s f u 1
showmanship.
Afflicted Sun: < The champ loseu his title. Poor
sportsmanship, while -the event
itself is a flop as a spectacle. ,
Favorable Moon: The public * is satisfied. Event
< ‘ has great audience?, Appeal,
Afflicted Moop: Dissenting public opinion. ,A
restleso audience. » • *•
•Favorable Mercury: Game fast with high scoring.
Clever plays. Much dexterity
and nirfibleness displayed.

PART ADDITIONAL STUPES
Afflicted Mercury ;
Favorabfe Venus:
Afflicted Venus:
Favorable Mars:
^ffli’cted Mars:
‘Favorable Jupiter:
Afflicted Jupiter:
Fivorable Saturn:
Afflicted Saturn : * '
Favorable Oranijs
Afflicted Urarius:
Favorable,N^un«
• Afflicted Nepjtune :
Game esratic with unbalanced
scoring. Penal ties apwlenty.
Spectacular plays. Speed.
’^he younget wins. Fairest pig-
, ment is favored. Good sportsmanship. Coldbful, fraternal atmosphere.
The younger loses. Fairest pigment disfavored. Poor; sportsmanship. Jealousies evident.
Action galo?e. Game fast and
vigorous. •
Action galore. Game fast and
reckless. Injuries to players. Bad
, sportsmanship. Unruly audiences.
Bully tactics employed.
Justified optimism. Good sportsmanship. Show of fair play. High
scoring.
Undue optimism. Poor teamwork, co-ordination. Foul play.
‘Numerous penalties imposed.
The elder is favored. Game slow
* and steady. Titles maintained.
Energy economized.
The elder , at & disadvantage.
Game slow, delayed. Injuries, upsets, revtVsals. ,»
Possible change ’in title (hbuses
•permitting). Exciting plays. Surprises. New tactics employed.
, The, champ loses. Eccentric scoring and spectacular plays. Disputes among judges.
Smgoth-running game. Much
superficiality.
, *Conlusion. Possible injustice or
fraud. Unfair advantages ‘or
penalties.

gAnethliacal. astrology
Favorable Pluto : Excitement prevails. Highly coordinated teamwork or.1 s Jc ill.
Public pleased tvfch outcome.
Afflicted Pluto: * Players and audience restless.
Disorganized tedipwork. Lack of
skill but “much ^orce.
Examples of Contest Analysis
Now familiar with the broad background of our subject, let us observe the principles discussed in real practice. We have chosdu three typical rather than Strikingly obvious cases to illustrate the analyses of their events.
The first of thesp is a competitive sport; the others, Combatant matches. The cases are representative of the ordinary problems an astrological student may f^.ce if he
should choose the fascinating practiA of contest analysis
as a favorite diversion. The astrologer often finds contest analysis to be a welcome and refreshing pasttime;
it is an intellectual thrill to have “called the turn” beforehand.
The Rose Bowl Classic football game of New Year’s
Day, 1947, offers an instance where the entire course of
the game fell under the aegis of a yoid-of-course Moon,
separating from a trine with Mercury, the Alpha planet.
Alpha in this gridiron attraction wsfs the Bruins, team 9f
the University of California at Los Angeles. With
Gemini rising anji VVgo on the fifth ousjS, Mercury was
the significator of the* Southland team. Omega jvas the
Illini, /team of the University of Illinois, who had received aVid accepted the traditional W^st-Eqst bid 'and
challenge from the Uclans. Jupiter was the significator
of the mid-western team, v»hat wifn Sagittarius. descending and Pisces cpi the eleventh cusp.
Neptune, severely aspected by a d6se an^ approaching
square with the Sun, occupied the fifth houh£, denoting
Alpha’s “game.? The Sun may also be taken to represent tht favored team of UGLA which tsents proved
lftd become overly confident of success. The Sun was
also overtakirtg Mars, which aufu-ed trouble fpr the
California boys. Mars in turn was separating from
quadrature with Neptune which is associated with Pisces

PART V, ADDITIONAL STUDIES
.THE 1?47 ROSE BQWL CLASSIC
January 1, 1947 — Pasadena, California.
as. an overtone-index *>f the Illini “game.” The chief indication in the chart, 3s we said, was the Lunar separating.trin'e with Mercury. Even one inexperienced in delineation can* proyiptjiy see that the jManetary *>dds were
stacked up ponderously against thf Sodthlanders. Tlje
Bruins, iMercury-lubricated, did put on quite ? rtcordsma^hing show of speed and ldng«runs; but the boys
from Illinois piliJd up score upon scor^ with ridiculous
ease, to win the game at 45 to 14. The stars were with
^he Illini 'all the way. TJie iflini twelfth house, or the
chart sixth, fyeld both Venus and Jupiter free from
afflictions, wlych inflicatetf that any disadvantages endured fcy tlfat*team would become assets in the long run.
On the other hand,«the Uclan twelfth hctuse was, occu-*
pied by the vaid-of-course* Moon.
Ipcidjntally, becau^rathe Rose Bowl Classic is played
evej-y year at the same time and plape, the cuSpi remain
the same for th£ annual inception of the game. It will

GANETHLIACAL ASTRoioGY
teach the student a great deal through very'little efforr
to checlf with his ephemeris for years 'back witfo the
history of the gamek played yearly in ihf Rose BovU at
Pksadena. Tht; outcome of every game invarisfoly concurs with the indications of the planets jyhich are placed
in this permanent-cusps chart. ‘Mercury .signifies the
western team and Jupiter the invited eastern team every
year.
Our fifst combatant example is the chart for the Joe
Louis versus Tami, Mauriello* championship ,fight ro(
September 18th, 1946, which lasted but one round. Ia
this chart, Uranus is fouicd in the ascendant, witlj no
planets above the horizon. The above-horizon housds
represent Mauriello’s first six rounds, which didn't
materialize.

partV, additional studies
’ LOUIS versus MAURIELLO
. ^Heavyweight Championship Prizefight.
Septernbe* f8, 1946 — New York, I^ew York.
That the incomparable "Bomber”*was to maintain his
title as Heavyweight Champion (if the World is plijin
throughout the chart, what with his ruler,. Mercury
(Gejnini rising, Virgo on fifth cuep), dignified in the
fifth. The*Suh^lso resided in the fifth and was Separating from a square with Uranus. Mauriello’s patron,
► Jupiter, was being closed in upon by Mars in the sixth
hduse, .denoting overwhelming defeat. Venus in the
sixth was closely square Pluto, and this alsonvas a distinct Jiabiltt^.* Mauriello’s performance is shown by the
empty eleventh, ruled by Neptune whiA occupied the
fifth and Rra^elosely squared by the Moon. (Theldoon’f
Nodes, with the north rising and south setting, were an
additional testimony^ although they are seldcyr^ of sufficient power to offer any* strictly safe indication.) 'the
bout wdtked ont as pre-described by this chart.

GfiNETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
LOUIS versus WALCOTT .
•Heavyweight Championship Prizefight ■
June 24 1948 — New Yprk, lieW York
The event which will probably be remembered by ring
fans as the putstanditig prizefight of all time was fought
between Joe Loiiis apd "Jersey Joe” Walcott on June
25ih, 1048, This fight was a re-match by public demand
for a technical settlement of a dispute rising over. the
fairness of the judge's decision after thf- fifteen-rounder
of these boxers on December 5th, >1947. This "battle of
the century" was necessary in.order to appease a vast
proportion of the public who contended .that Walcott
should rightfully have been iccorddd the. coveted title
held so long by the great Bomber.
•The Moon wls rjsing in Aquarius when this, fight got
underway. Showing an intense public catharsis as well,
the Moon here signified the champion Louis (born with
Canper arcending, incidentally),. Tae imniediate'ly oncoming aspect was a Lunar trine with fifth-house .Uranus
which also ruled the ascendant. The “return match” was

PART V, ADDITIONAL STUDIES
aptly’descrlbed by conjoining Mercury and Venus, both
retrograde, In the fifth house. Because Leo was setting,
Wakbtl" was'siggified by thd Sun, also in the fifth and
heavily afflicted by Saturn and Neptunt. Saturn add
Pluto in Leo suitably described the disgruntled Walcott
.who claimed #tteft the .public, or masses, recognized him
as the Jrue titltvholder* dubbing himself for publicity
• purposes as "the People’s Champ.” ''Walcott’s "game”
is shovPn by the Sagittarian eleventh house, occupied by
retrograde Jupifter -which was being squared by Mars,
fivery testimony in the chart spoke favorably for Louis.
Tht fight ended sudden/V (Moon tjine Uranus, Uranus
ruling ascendant and in fifth) in the eleventh round, by a
knockout of -Walcott. The eleventh house in this chart
fought the fight to a clirtiax under thd pivot of Marssquare-Jupiter in Louis’ series, while the eleventh sector
around the wheel fijom the seventh in Walcott’s series
Carried the fight to a rapid finish under the four fifth-
‘house planets which included Walcott’s afflicted significator. Hence we see how completely faithful the chart
indications proved in subsequent events. Astrology
pointed out tne winner. Cosmic tides in the affairs of
human beings are as constant and inviolable as the ocean
‘tides which obey no Canute or yvould-be gods.

GbNETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
ABOUT tflORSERACINC-
< Having covered the gamut of published and quasibonded "systems” for playing the ponies star-wise, we
have come to the conclusion that ^hey ar: as groundless
as their originators are poundless. We have found no
foundation in statistical fact for the persistent belief in
a numerologicaf system. We have failed to find anything significant in the (pseudo- Pythagorean) numerical
values of the horses' names, their post positions, handicap numbers or dat$s of triumph, singularly or, in combination, to provide reason for any belief in a numerological system. Evidently- the equine species does not
believe in, or is not beholden 'to, modern numerology.
On the other hand,, the so-called “kabbalistic” scheme
of numerical values and phonetics (rather than letters of
the alphabet) is promising, although we have not tested
it thoroughly enough to be emphatic. This system, almost unknown andiwidely divergent from ordinary num1 erology, is based upon assigned values to the nuances of
the voice. In other words, the sounds rather than letters
of a‘ name are used. There is a definite astrological tieup in this method, which is often fascinating along certain lines of interpretation.
The kabbalistic theory is a derivative, of Tarot philosophy. It*claims to identify every thing and subject in
existence by classification in one or more of twenty-two
categoric termed Arcanu by its exponents. The twentytwo basic nuances of fhe voice are also distributed appropriately in these 'categories, which are qualitatively defined by association with an astrological factor (sign or,
planet). Exposition of this scheme would require a complete articlf in itself, if not a volume, so we shall forego
all but the rudiments of the theory '?
' For the benefit of readers who like to pursue- such docttinest for either intellectual edification or simply as diversion, we give the following tabulation of the twentytwo' categories with their supposed allocations to sounds
and astrological correlation.

PART t?, ADDITIONAL STUDfES
The simple arithmetical total is said to give the “vibration” or qualitative content of the worth which is "kabbalised. Totals exceeding 22 are added cross-wise to
reduce the final *'ajue to a term belovt22. Wa offer this
tally, not as a criterion of truth, butfinly ^or what it may
be worth' to readers who feel th^t there must be ?ome
rational basis for the age-old companion of astrology —
the belief ex'pressfd in the ancient adage^Omnia in lfum-
,eris sita sunt, “Everything lie** veiled in number.” Personally, we are convinced.of tfic value o^ this doctrine,
by Virtus of its«harmonics, its origin in antiquity, and its
seeming correlation with mSdern scientific taxonomy. ,
Returning' to strictiy astrological essentials, we might
male menWon»*>f the interesting rules* given us ib the
old horary texts respecting "probable namgs signified by
•the planets." JVhethqr%uch rules are valid for^he flamboyant monikers of racehsrses is sojnething to tonjufe
with. The Sun, ^Mars and Jupiter are said to denote

GEJiETltLIACAL ASTROLOGY
short Aames, while Venus and Saturn denote, long pames.
The Sun by itself suggests a name derived, from nature
or royalty, but Jupiter mj.y also signify z royalistic or
Biblical name. Mercurial names are1 common, cohvenAonal names. While the Moon ha's rule over family names
of the more rural variety, suggesting simplicity, domesticity or collectivism. Venusian "names 'ate the euphonious, musical or ornate names pleasa'nt to the ears or
suggestive of gjrmour. Martian names are concise, blunt,
militant names popular among fiction writers as typical
names qf heroes. Saturnian names "arc those suggestive
of dignity, tradition, or history, Uranus seems to ipdicate unusual, startling names either ultra-modern or
archaic, while Neptunian names are those which lend a
note of mystery to the imagination. Pluto’s namete are
those associated with the underworld -or politics. . ’.o
hard and fast rule can be offered concerning this, question
of planetary name-cues. 0
By far the best "system" we can proffer at this time is,
in reality no "system” at all — just simple astrological
correspondence which works out sufficiently well by
percentage to warrant attention and our pointing it out
to others. Put briefly, we have noticed that the current
aspects in operation, or .angular placements of the planets, at the track during post time qften give a clut as to
the name-content of the winning or runner-up horses.
Hence, it is not surprising that "More Wine” won during an opposition c*f the Moon and l^eptune.’ Neptune,
as even the ndvice, knows, is associated with wines,
lftjuo»s, intoxication, etc. Even plainer is thd win of
longshot "Wheatfieljl" \vhen the highlighted Moorv was
in Virgo, traditjonal sign-ruler of whtatfiefds, the harvest, and so forth. That "Cut. Up" Lshould win and
“Fiery Shower" should showjn the same race’ is not as.
tonishing, bec#use Mars in Cancer was <pxactly on the
descendant at post time (Mirs beihg fiepr and cutting,
and Cancer, watery). When the- Moon w«fs* within one
degree of the aadir, we looked for domestic connotatipns
in the*names of the horses entered iti th*‘raee. "Curds
*n Whey" impressed us as the hor& with suitable connotations. A longshot, he romped ?®win, and we Romped
fof joy.* “iron Heart,” also a longshot, won when*the

A PART V, ADDITIONAL STUDIES ■ .755.,.
Moo ft apd ^ars were in square aspect, with Mars on the
seventh cus’r.
One Afternoon (Sepfember 19th,' 1947* Del Mar, California), the Suj was square Uranus, pointing to a long-
•shot winner,* the typfcaj “surprise, reversal” manifestation of this aspect (which also showed that favorites or
'"champions" were not favored). Th$«Moon was also
sektile Venus within the hour of the race under considaration (the second), which suggested amoroas connotations in the winner’s njime. Mars was on the descendant agaiji, maturing a trine aspect td Jupiter in the tenth
house. Such a circumstance^ implied that the lorfgshot
winner woufd have both Yenusian and»Martian characteristics in his name.
A glance at the program repealed that “Love’s
.Arrow" fitted the circumstances. "Love’s Arrow” galloped to win with little effort, despite high odds. (For
our kabbalistically minded readers, it will interest them
to know that* the numerical value of the day was 13, ,
which resolves into a 4, the number of Scorpio, which
.sign was on the midheaven. The name of the hijrse
phonetically resolves itself into* a 13 and then a 4 also.
Ite post position waS #5, the number of Jupiter, which
was in Scorpio and the tenth house.)

GFNETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
FOURTH RAC$ — DEL MAR TURF
September 6, 1947 — Del Mar, California^
A* favorite instance in rupport of this method was the
very profitable selection of "George McManus” td win,
even though his odds were 26 to 1 in the mutuels. T fe
reason for such a choice and confidence was the impressive connection between a chart cast for post time at the
Del Mar Track asd the name of the horse. Mercury was
sen tile Jupiter that afternoon, with the Greater .Benefic
in the Midheaven. Uranus was in the fifth, indicating
that a ldngshot could easily take the rai;p (although this
sort oY indication' cannot be safely regarded as sure, unless other circumstances iff the chart permit ^uch certainty). Examination of the iracing program showed
that the only horse with prQper Mercury-Jupiter midheaven cohnotations was "George McM^rms,” named
after the famed cartoonist. Cartooning is a profession
most certainly ' unjier the jurisdiction of Mercury and
Jupiter (commercial artwork lacking Venusian esthetic
armlmy). T|ie cue and clue for tjie selection was t^en
froip thiS(,charted circumstance — and "George McManus”
took the race.

... PABT V„ ADDITIONAL STUDIES . 757
Lfcst ire mi^ui'de our reader®, let us point out quite
implicitly thfjt this “aspect-association” system has
many loopholes* and is not sufficiently trustworthy thjit
one should place faith4 in its workability to any great
extent. It stands merely as an attestation to the astrological truisnl fhat terrestrial things have a correlation,
, however* subtle, with things celestial. Nothing less than
sheer practice-made-keener skill is neeMed to make the
proper associations.
It may be farfetched to rationalize the association system in this manner: Th£ planetary vibrations conducive
to a particular thought pattern are stimulating to every
relevant subject within the rati ge of that pattern. Therefore, when the same vibrations said to "fule” cartoonists
are especially predominant, it is quite natural that a
stimulus should be .directed toward an object (a horse
in this case) whose name or nature when contemplated
•produces a similar thought pattern. The mental associations in our example run somewhat like: George McManus .... th^ comic artist .... Mqrcury - Jupiter ....
cartoon - evoking vibration .... racehorse .... "George
McManus” .... the man’s equine namesake.
Thet name of anything calls to mind, by the process of
sqggestion, a series p f mental associations. The name
“Wheatfield” therefore stimulates typical Virgo thought
patterns, while "Iron Heart" stirs up characteristic Marslike imagery. "Love’s Arrow” conduces toward Venusian association^, *Mth Martian overtones: loVe and the
arrow. Because of the current plahetary configupitiorfs,
there is a strong disposition in the “air” totvprd the
forrrfation cl these impressions. It* is another factor in
the wondrous mastery of mass psychology not even adequately explained by occultisms, let alone those trained
in .the workings of the grdup psyche. •
From an ortjrodox ’astrological point of viewf it is wisp
to point oflOthat a horary question answerable by a
sirpple negative or •affirmative is the oitly dependable
guide to Speculation like betting on Horses. Th£ ques-,
tion, for safety’s sake, should be phrased somewhat on
the*o'r<ter of, VWill thi4 particular horse win the race in
question?” Better still, ptrhaps, “Will I profit lay paying the Horses topiorrow ?”

GFNETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
A question should noj be charted unless It is unpremeditated and intercepts one’s thinking process quite inadvertantly or under impertinent circumstances. AU the
standard rule? of horary interpretation should be
brought to bear in analyzing the chart. If the question
was not framed about a specific horse, 'and the chart is
encouraging to gain, selection cf the horse' or horses is
a matter for one’s own good judgment or intuition
(“hunch”), or beSt, by aspect-association in the manner
just roughly outlined.
The best and most important, tip for the bettor is the
exhortation never to' gamble unless the birthcHort permits of it, i.e., if the radix is eminently favored at the
time. If we were asked for oqr most effective "system,”
our reply would always be : play your luck aspects. Tht
best transient luck-factor in the horoscope would be a
transit of Venus oven radical Jupiter, with the Moon on
an auspicious point in the birthchart. But nothing
should be overlooked in evaluating the current luck factors in the horoscope — not even one’s progressed map,
in which a lunar aspect in maturation can make or break
the indications of every transitive factor. (The very fact
that, one is momentarily incited toward speculation might
be his personal response ‘to influences conducive to extravagance, and thence to waste or ,'oss.)
A wise use of astrology may be highly profitable, but
other than thorough-going and masterful study of every
relevant element „is hever wise where- dollars and cents
ar( at stake. Astrology as an instrument for speculation,
too, is* limited by the lajvs of probability and averages.
But if used skillfully,- astrology portendj tha^, one’s Tortune iw all probability will be far above .average.

.. PART V, .ADDITIONAL STUDIES
• ' TjHERE ARE NO EWL PLANETS
“To him thfotywercometh ^ill I give to eat of the
tree Bf life, which is»in the midst of the paradise
, • During the operation of so-called adverse aspects we
are more apt to see and feel the necessity for action tc
overcome difficulties and obstacles in the path of our progress ; apt to feel thd urge so strongly that a rea> anxiety
develops to be up and deing to safeguard our interests
aijd overtome the threatened troubled. The feeling within often becojnes ncrvousness,and worry, a form of expression or manifestation which should be cast aside at
ohee as it is a woeful waste of force, causing loss of
power, yid leaves us less able to be up and doing those
things which will offset the undesirable conditions.
, * Therefore, the first essential necessary to transcend
adverse vibrations is to calm the mind through affirmations of a hoppful and j)ositive nature*; in other words,
self-treatment. Remember that the Kingdom of Heaven
is within ourselves and out of heaven all good things
come forth. The way, the avejnie of their coming, is
through harmony wijhin ourselves. The price of succels is harmony, hope, cheer and honest-to-goodness
faj;th in.yourself.
The undesirable mental effects of .any adverse aspect
can be transcended1 by this metaphysical method.
Do nol sentence yourself to dpom by saying, "r cannot do it." .You can. Every normal being is bofn with
that power morij* or less latent and it» expression^ can
. be developed. The development of harmony, hope,
“sheer and- faith in yoursijlf means the development of
your suscess, progrejs, health and attainment.
Adverse planetary aspects, viewed from tlie stand*
•point of thdse who ^re consciously making this delightfubeffort, jre Jjoked upon as helpful forces because their*
frequent occurrence produces an added urge to presy /on*
• harder, ,faster#towardfethe goal of achievement.
Well organized concents employ, a gang of ‘men *to
tear dowVi old bujldings and remove the debris to make

OpN^THLIACAL ASTROLOGY
•way for new structures. When this t seeming "destruction” is finished, construction begins on the' new edifice.
So, in fehe human fnind aad body the^, ad\fervsc‘ aspects
tfar down the tissues and change or destroy mental conceptions. The purpose is to make way for new material.
The disturbance (inharmony) whiph tht .adverse aspects,
create within us is due to our improper responses to the
stimulative vibrations; we misinterpret their meaningand "sin” accordingly (fall short, exhibit our shortcomings) by expressing worry, anxiety, impatience, anger
or melarfcholy. Whereas, we should Be glad that changed
are taking place that make poscible the repair, "renewal
and perpetuation of the body. In other words' the destructive activities (adverse aspects) are just as necessary to our well-being as are constructive activities
(good aspects). Disease is largely due to lack of understanding of Nature’s laws or our conscious and uncon-'
scious violation of them and the way we misconstrue,
the real purport and purpose of every inner urge.
Astrology, the Solvent
r As we feel so we think; as we think so we act. The
underlying cause is mainly planetary influence. We feel
strdng or we feel weak,, brave or fearful, ambitious or
content; and we act accordingly wit{i results corresponding to the nature, influence and time of the act. Tlie
quality of results‘may be improved'by knowing the best
times to act, just as the farmer produces best cesults by
planting atlproper seasons.
Study of Astrology, and of oneself, opens the vision to
wisdom. in thought ,in<f action despite, or in keeping
with, £he feelings, as influenced by plane^ry aspects.
Of course we may experience surprising everfts due to „
no apparent cause of our own,*but a study of th,e birth *
chart reveals the nature of these events, whether favorable or otherwise, while the progressed chiyt .designates
the time of thejr occurrence.
Begiflners in Astrology soihetimes strips ‘■'adverse”
aspects and anticipate them in the^progressed horoscope
with unnecf.ss&ry alarm. One beginSier wrefte to ife that
astrology* is "just one d * aspect after, another!”

PART fr, ADDITIONAL STUDIES
Farfhwith* he gave away al! his books. Later he came
across,The’ pflapter in “How Planets Affect You” entitle*d, "'EffAtg «of Planetafy Aspects Upon Mind and
Body,”*changed his viewpoint, began alt over again 2nd
made rapid prqgress in his studies.
, Justus advesse aspects (so-called 'for want of better
terminology) should not be emphasi^d, neither should
they be underestimated. Rightly unflcrstood, adverse
' aspects are tfle vibrations that direct the catabolistic
activities of the body and are therefore just as necessary
and as. important to obr well-beieg as the "good” aspects mat direct the anabolis’tic processes. Thp processes evoked by “good” aspects result in pacifying the
/nind, while the "adverse?” aspects proVoke reactions of
a disturbing nature.
It is not the aspect which is "bad,” but our reactions
or manifestations of their influence which are imperfect,
hence produce disturbed states of mind. This is largely
due to the fact that our educational institutions omit the
highly important instructions concerning planetary vi-.
brations and their effect upon the human body and mind.
Adverse aspects suggest catytion, moderation, discrimjpation and deliberation in all affairs during the period of
their operation, and also that we brirjg to the fore our
powers of poise from the treasure-house within, should
we notice ourselves giving way to,distress. ^
Adverse aspects, aside from thoir physiological action
in so far as they disturb the nynd, may be looked upon
as cross-examinations, tests of faith, knowledge, ’strength
and ability. Each "examination” successfully pasSed endows us* with added capacity for achieving greater
conquests.
Ho\g to Overcorile "Adverse" Aspeets. ,
The wlv of attaining the necessary, knowledge and
power tq gqip strength and to surmount obstatles and
unfavorable tendencies is twofold : within and without.
Iq thg silence withipawe need to develop 'genuine goodwill ind be able to speak a benediction all. ®We
should Jearn 1 9 say truthfully every day, “Good morning '

792 . . GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
everybody. I love you alfc” Even as the Surv shpds its
rays beneficently upop all, sp should we c^H by. ‘name
those who have wronged us and vibrafe* the thought,
“I love you and'forgive you. I pray that you may be
blessed and enjoy all and more than I desire for myself.”
Forgiving one’s enemies, slanderers, or* those who are
disloyal, who speak, well to your face and try to discredit
you behind your back, and those who "condemn with
faint prais^,” is not an easy undertaking, but it is the
injunction of the Master, “Love ,one another.” Those
who do such unlovely things do not really har fei one
whose thoughts are turned toward the Lord, but they
do hurt themselves immeasurably. Therefore' when We
can silently “speak the word” of love, forgiveness and
benediction to those who try to harm us, and can pray
for them as earnestly for ourselves) without reservation, we shall have won a great spiritual victory and attained much power in the way of improving our reactions to "adverse” aspects of all kinds.
.Demonstration of this attainment comes through the
practical experiences in life. It is in the activity of
everyday affairs that this, strength and attainment is
won. The changing planetary configurations bring' us
opportunities for expression in the various daily experiences. If we remain ignorant of the'beauties of silence
and meditation, if we remain ignorant of the working?;
of planetary wibratipn<£ we are apt to thmklife treats us
vilely or that we are a "failure.” The truth is that Qivine
Love and Wisdom are awaiting our awakening and recognition. If we are to become truly- happif. peaceful aird
serviceable we need to lift our eyes, turnrour thoughts
starward, raise our consciousness tcf Spirit, Reality and
Truth so that ou£ reactions to aJl conditions are a re- ,
flection of the "kingdom of heaven within" ■and ad expression of true nobility. Astrology is intend^ to help
us attain that consciousness.
The disharmonies,* discomforts and trials* 6f fife are.
largely due to incorrect interpretation and lowly expression of planetary vibrations. The Wind, tht imagination, iS dist&rted and warped. Bjf not realizing the true'
and higher purport of every aspect (especially tke /-evil”

PART V, ADDITIONAL STUDIES 768
onesj, we "‘miss the mark” and fall short of perfection.
If, however, tve learn to know and realize that life is
good" anti that it grows better and brighter as our understanding’ broadens and our application of Truth Increases, we aim more zealously to bring our life into
alignment w/th’* the true indications of planetary configurates.
fc
Serious Responsibility of Astrologers
The fine, spiritual significance of Astrology'is defiled
by. thosg who make a bugbear of “adverse” aspects and
"evil" planets, for in reality “th'ere is no evil but, thinking makes it so.” Those interpreters who lay undue
stress on the so-called "adverse aspects”’ not only pervert
fhe purpose and value of Astrology but often do actual
harm to the one who receives such a horoscope by arousing unnecessary fear and thus reducing the moral stamina through dreadful anticipation. Long before the
aspects actually culminate the native is bereft of the
resistance and resourceful power necjsssary to meet and
handle the situation successfully. Usually when the ad->
verse conditions actually manifest they are not so "bad"
as predicted nor so dreadful as the native anticipated,
therefore the client is worse off'than before the "reading"
because he was not properly informed.
t I
• Ifime and again I have received letters from those
who had been, given horoscope readings w,hich struck
terror in their minds, asking if I thought it was going to
be as ,;bad” as predicted. Their "reading” was' doing
more harm than good. A beai/tifi'l opportunity to render'* uplifting service through Astrology had been lost
because the principles of ^stro-science had hot been
properly -interpreted.
In reading the delineations of planetary aspects, natal,
progressed, transitory, it should always be remembered that they refer 1,0 "tendencies” in the, native to react
in- the described.* The expression of a tendency
is its reaction to circumstances, and the reaction^ will
be, of jralue according to our knowledge -of controlling
and directing ourselves .wisely. "All thing's -work' together for good to those who love the Lord.”

.764 . GEPteTHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
Adverse Aspects as: Blessings in Djsguis^.
TherefoVe Astrology teactes that adverse* aspects', are
good to spur us. to extra effort tojvard spiritual growth
and attainment through self-control, meditation and
prayer and the "stepping up” of any adv£ss^ tendencies.
It is through neglect of these efforts, through putting
"trust in chariots and in horses” (Ps. 20, 7) that is,
through trusting ‘personal finite powers and apparent
knowledge that man puts himself, in consciousness, out-,
side the recipience of God’s love and protection, leaving
himself receptive to thp play of ufttransmuted influences.
Only when man thus puts himself outside the region of'
all that could help and blew him, are adverse aspects<
evil. Life apart from the consciousness of God’s love,
and power is a frightful strain. Nothing is obtained
except by great effort, struggle and .combat, and even
what is achieved may b*e likened to life in a desert where
no nourishment abounds. Leaving God out of the calculations when embarking upon new enterprises is the
same as refusing a bussing. Suffering and^ disorder in
life are multiplied immeasurably if experiences (planetary aspects) are met without understanding of their
meanlhg and importance.
Some times it is long before the lesson is learned that,
things are not always what they seepi ; that the easy or*
pleasant periods denoted by "good” aspects ard n«t*
necessarily a^ good as.they appear to be{ ar^l thdt apparently "bad” times* denoted by "adverse” aspects may
aftef all^irove to be not evil, but a form of good, — *a period of awakening to neyr Truths.
Ther£ is much food for thought in Romans 6, 13-14:
"....yield yourselves unto (Sod, as* those that a*e alive
from the dead .(awakened), and your members,
(thoughts) as instruments of righteousness unto "God.
Por.sin (fallitig short) shall not have, dominiop.over you :
for (then) ye are not under the law, but un<xr grace
(love, biasings, ftisp)ration).”
All •experiences, or aspects are good or adverse to us
according to Jhe’manner in which w#neet and u»e tfeerrr.
If met in a *spirit of courage, good-will, co-operation and
desire to learn, they becoipe , stepping-stpnes 'to tetter

PART V, ADDITIONAL STUDIES 765
things. But if met in the wrong attitude of fear, resentment, opposition and rebellion, they are apt to develop
into’serious burdens. Shakespeare* wrote : "The fault is
not in our stars, but in-ourselves that we^are underlings.”
Every Effort Counts.
Jesu$ taught s "Avenge not yourselves Bless them
that persecute you : bless, and curse npt. ... Be not overcome of evil, but overcome evil with good.” Read St.
Paul’s Epistle'to the Romans, Chapter 12, verses 14-21.
It requires more thamjust a sudden resolution to transmute ^sublimate) adverse aspects. It calls for understanding, effort and courage ; the courage to arise and
try again bravely after every apparent failure or setback, for it is in the trying, the effort, that strength and
wisdom are acquired. So do not be dismayed when an
“aspect” gets youf Remember that evil happenings are
but teachers of life, awakening us to better things. Arise
always, with courage renewed and say with David of
old, "With Elohim God I shall do valiantly.” David
knew and practiced Astrology, as did all the inspired wise
men of old. His 19th Psalm proclaims the value of
Astrology, but he also knew the value of mortal alchemy,
the sublimation of gross tendencies into spiritual expression. He knew tha. many of the influences were beyond
nis skill and strength and therefore wisely called upon
the Lord in the "kingdom of heaven within” for aid and
protection. PJacing himself and h.s affairs “lovingly in
the hands of the Father.” he arose from a lowly sheep
herder'to the kingship of a nation. He became a metaphysician. Turning to JehovSh for counsel' guidance,
assistance? substance and protection ip all the problems
of life, failing again and agayi when acting upon his own
purely human impulses, but 'always retrieved by returning to, the kingdom within, for “God’s' mercy endureth
forever,” he ’was, inspired to leave for posterity those
potent prayers which for thirty centuries have been
sacred affirmations, among the wise. On« of his greatest,
riiost comprehensive and> potent psalms is the 121st and
it; too, has important astrological significance, as1 will
be seen by the follcjs'ing liberal translation ;

GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
For Guidar>ce and Inspiration '
1 “f will lift up mine eyes unto the hills, from
whence.cometh my help. . “ *
2 “My help cometh from the Lord, who made
heaven and earth. . ,
3 “He will not suffer my’ foot tc be moited ;
he that k^epeth me will not slumber.
4 “Behold, He that keepeth. Israel doth neither
slvmber nor sleep.
5 “Jehovah is my protector; He is the shade
upon my right hind. '
6’ "The SUN shall nofc SMITE me by day, nor.
the MOON by night. •
7 “The Lord doth preserve me from ALL evil ;
He doth preserve my soul. . •
8 “The Lord shall preserve (guard) my going
out and my coming in from this time forth,
and even for evermore.”
„ In the first four verses David affirms and acknowledges the immanent presence of God, His power and protection. In the remaining, four verses he voices his need
of that protection from adverse planetary influences, so
that the Sun and Moon shall not SMITE him; that hi;
may be preserved* from all evil aspects, that is, tye able
to transmute and transcend them successfully. To designate clearly ..that he *s referring to astrolegical matters,
Dayid first specifically. refers to the heavens (planetary
system? apd the earth. .This 121st Psalm is therefore
especially intended fo* the use of those earnest students
who are seeking to interpret Astrology jn its true and
spiritual sense, and live bydts precepts. It is. a psalm
for daily use, guidance and “inspiration.
David’s beautifully significant and 'potenf prayer may
be 'ours also. Therefore, repeat this 'psalm* reverently
and sacredly un^jl its deepest spiritual meaning becomes
impressed both upon your mortal and your .subconscious,
mftid; until its outworkings bring continual blessings of
harmony, happiness, progress and achievement into, your
daily* life, you learn to discasd the dross and realize
•the good to be found in every aspect. _ „ »

PART fr, ADDITIONAL STUDIES 767
EWCTIONARf OF ASTROLOGICAL T&RMS
$fffittion-*-A«dverse aspects between plandts or between % planed and a«house cusp. A debility. >>
Alpheta — Gwer of life. The alphetical places are the
same as the places fif ^lyleg. The bylegical place of a
• planetr particularly the Sun or Moon, is the same as
Hyleg hence the two terms are used epterchangeably.
Anareta — A* term applied to that planet which is believed to terminate the life, i. e., that afflicting* and malefic planet which may be in conjunction or adverse asnect
.to thenHyleg.
. Angles — -The four anguldt positionst of a chart, viz.,
• First, Tenth, Seventh and Fourth Houses. They are the
most important houses of a horoscope : Ascendant, Midheaveri, Descendaat, Nadir.
Animoder of the Tetrabiblos — A method of birth time
rectification presented by Ptolemy (now obsolete), sometimes referred to as the “Sun-rise method.”
Antipathy — Inharmonious relation oi planets. /\ver-.
sions between people are caused by antipathies in their
nativities.
, Antiscian — See Mundane Parallel, also Parallel, Zodiacal.
•Apheljpn — The place in a planet’s orbit which is farthest from the Sup. See Perihelion. * *
Apogee — That part in the orbif of a planet whereih it
is at its greatest distance from^the^ Earth. Set .Perigee.
Apparent Motion — The Earth apparently rotatos from
east to west ; its real motion.is the reverse. The celestial
bodies apparently travej frofti east over the meridian to
west;.their ®:al motion is west to east. ‘The signs of the
zodiac apparently rise af the Ascendant, pass over the
meridian set in the west; in reality they do not move,
but the axial rotation of the Earth frAm west to east
causes the signs to appear to ascend, culminate>and sjt.
Application — The^ approach of one planet to aftother,
to the degre’e constituting an aspect, or to th^ cusp»of a
house.*

GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
Arc — Distance as measured along a circle.
Ascendant — The sign and degree or cusp ct First
Heuse. Any pjanet between 12 degrees above and 20
degrees below the ascending degree is read as influencing
the first house. A planet is ascending ‘when between
Fourth and Tenth *Cusps. See Descending.
Ascension — (Signs of long and short ascension.) See
Long and Short.
Aspect — Certain angular distances between planets or
between planets and nouse cusps. The conjunction and
parallel are included in the term for convenience. See
Zodiacal Aspects
Asteroids — Numerous planetoids whose orbits lie between those of Mars and Jupiter. Not used in horoscopes.
Barren Signs — Gemini, Leo and Virgo. If on the 5th
or 11th cusp they tend to reduce the number of offspring
of the native. Unfavorable for planting; good for tilling.
Benefics— Jupiter and Venus.
Bicorporal Signs — Gemini, Sagittarius and Pisces.
Double bodied. They denote dual experiences. Twins, etc.
Birth Time — Exact moment of first breath; very important for erecting a correct nativity.
Bi-quintile— One of Kepler’s minor good aspects, 144
degveesy. - •
Cadent1 — The housei. which follow “fixed” Jiouses-of
a chart, viz., the third, sixth, ninth and "twelfth houses
are cadent and planets posited theiein are weaker than
if in other houses, except those which naturally rule
those houses, as Mercury in 3rd or 6‘h; Jupiter in 9th;
Neptune in 42th.
Cardinal Sign^ — Aries, Cancer, Libra and Capricorn;
so'called because of the change of the seasons- therein
dtfe to Sun’s apparent change of declination, or in reality,
to the 'obliquity of the Earth and l<s location in orbit.
Cardinal seghs on thei angles of a chart tend to great
Activity, publicity, fame or notoriety.

• .» PART V. ^PPITIONAU STPDIE3
Collection of tight — When a pllnet receives aspects of
any two fathers, wljich are of themselves not in aspect.
CombuSt — Within 8 degrees 30 minutes1 of the Sun;
a detrimental configuration.
Common Signs— Gemini, Virgo, Sagittarius, Pisces.
Conjunction — When planets, or the cusp of a house
and.a planet, occupy the same degree oflongitude they
ar^ in conjunction. , ,
Constellations — A circle, outside or beyond the zodiac
havirtg sections bearing the same names as the signs, also
containing groups of fixed stars suitably named, yet’ all
generally referred to as ‘‘constellations.!’ In ancient
astrology there were originally forty-eight constellations
but modern astronomy has added many more for convenience in locating and flaming stars. Planets, only, travel
in- the zodiac; the fixed stars occupy the constellations.
•There are no fixed stars in that portion of the heavens
called the zodiac. See Precession.
Converse — Inffplies a motion contrary to the natural
course of the planets through the signs Aries to Taurus,
etc. The signs are naturally turned from east to we3t
over th» M. C., but converse is the reverse. A system of
“Directions” employs ftiese converse features.
Qo-significator — Any*planet which is naturally associated with another in the rnlership of some faculty or
matler under consideration. The planet ruling the
ascending.sign is significator of the cBart. Any planet in-'
the ascendant (1st house) is a co-#ignificator, as Is, likewise tfie plaret ruling the sign occupied by the Sun}at
birth. Because of»the Moon’s great influence it, too, is
termed a sijjnificator, of iTifluencn by sign and house. The
pTHi^et ruling the sign occupied by the Sun* is the birthmonth ruling pliPnet. Of the njind Mercury is significator,
Uranus, co-sijg*i/ficatflr i£ that it rules the higher attri- 1
butes of the wind, intuition and telepathy. ,In the subject *of marriage the "Moon, is significator (in a -wale
natus) and Venus is co-significator.
• Critical Degree — See»fage 678.
Culbniiiaje— (a) Culmination of a pllnet: To arrive at
cusp of Midheaveti«(M. C.) cusp of tenth house, (b) Cul-^

GENETHLIAOAL ASTROLOGY
mination of an aspect. The time of the completion' of an
aspect is commonly termed its culmination, .regardless
,,of the M. C.
Cusp — The beginning or edge of a .house in a chart.
The sign on the, cusp of any house and tbe planet ruling
the sign are the rulers of that house. Planets near the
cusp are more .important than otherwise.
Debility — The power of a planet located in a sign of
dissimilar nature is said to be weakened, viz., Mari, a
fiery planet in Tj.urus, an earthly sign. See table of
“Dignities of Planets’' in Part I.
Decan or Decanate — Pertaining to the division of the
signs into three equal parts of 10 degrees each. See pages
Decile — A minor favorable aspect of 36*. Sometimes
called semi-quintile.
Declination — The distance of any planet from the
equator, either north or south. Thus: Erery part of the
ecliptic, except the beginning of Aries and Libra, ’'as
declination because the plane of the ecliptic is not parallel with that of the equator and they meet at those two
points. The Sun is never more than 23 degrees 28 minutes in declina*ion, which it reaches in the signs Cancer
(North Dec.) and Capricorn (South Dec.) due to the
earth’s inclinatiom in orbit. See Parallel.
< Decreasing in Light — When a planet, particularly the
Moon,<has passed thes opposition of the Sun it is weaker
in power compared with when it was increasing in light.
The Moon decreases from Full to Ne-v, i. e., during 3rd
and 4th quarter.
Degree— The zodiac is divided into twelve ^jgns of 30
degrees, each, the whole constituting a circle of 360 degrees. A degree contains 60 minutes and each minute
60 seconds of longitude.
, Descendant — The seventh cusp or house space between
the seventh and eighth cusps. . ,
1 Descending — On account of the Earth’s axial rotation,
the planets appear to be descending betwetn cusp of

PART y, ADDITIONAL STUDIES
tenth, hfciise, nia Jhe descendant, to ousp of fourth, after
which t^ey asifend. Qampared with e»ch other, tHe
latter positions are considered stronger than the former.
• Detriment-*A planet i$ in its detriment when found
"in the sign opposite the one which it rules, for instance,
*Venus in Aries and Scorpio. See "Digiflties of Planets”
in Part I.
bexter Aspect — When jthe aspecting planet is moving
from the planet being aspected in .a fliart. See Sinister:
moving toward a planet.
Dignities, Essential and Accidental — Certain locations
wherein planets are said to acquire strength, either for
good or evil, according to their natugt. "Accidental dignity” has reference to a planet's position by house, as
angular, succedent or cadent. Other conditions are also
considered such as — well aspected, unafflicted, swift in
motion, increasing in light, diurnal, etcf The reverse of
dignities are debilities. “Essential dignity" has reference
to a planet’s location by sign, as — home sign, exaltation,
dr triplicity. Accidental is the more important dignity.
A malefic is usually fetter disposed when in dignities
tha^ otherwise, yet in a contest between Saturn and
Jupiter, £or instance, ift a natal or directional figure, if
Satlirfi wer^ dignified above Jupiter tjje evil threatened
by Saturn would ‘predominate. But, generally speaking,
dignities bring out the better attributes.
Direct in Motion — Proceeding in th» order of the signs,
from Aries tCwarcJfTaurus, etc.
. Directiongr— ' The aspects between planets in a progftsjed horoscope, alsa'thefc aspects to. tho’be of the nativity, meisured'for the purpose of finding when, certain
influences wil^efjteratd an^J produce corresponding results.
Btolemaic and Placidian systems of direotions based
their .time measurements on a degree for*a year. Mo8ern
Progressive directional charts are based upon a day fpr
a,year system, as taught, in this volume. (Seetquptations
Dispositdr — ’A pJyiet is disposed of by another when it,
occupies that planet’s sign; thus(Venus in SagittariijS is

GgyETHtlACAL ASfjfiQLOQY
disposed of by Jupiter, tfye ruler of that.sigiC •„ Jupiter
then being termed the dispositor. Disposition by a,benefic is very favorable* and the mdre so if the di£j>ositor is
elevated, i. e., in the 10th house or higher than the deposited. This often has bearing in nativities and progressions but always has in Horary questions..
Diurnal — Above the horizon, between cusp of first. and
seventhocusps, as distinguished from nocturnal or below
the horizon between first andrseventh cusps.
D,onial dignity — A planet in its own sign.
Double-bodied signs — 6erpini, Sagittarius and Pisces.
Each sign is pictured as of two distinct parts; Gemini,
twins; Sagittarius, horse and archer; Pisces, two fishes.
They incline to duality.
Dragon’s Head — Caput Draconis, or Moon’s North
Node. Its place is the sign and degree occupied by the
Moon when she crosses the ecliptic from south to north
latitude. Considered a beneficent degree. The Dragon’s
T^il (Cauda Draconis) is the opposite point and considered malefic. ,.
Earth — Sometimes called Terraj It is a planet whose
orbit lies between that of Venu? and Mars. It has an
axial rotation complete in 24 hours producing diurnal .and
nocturnal phenomena. This rotation from west to east
,gives the appearance of the Sun, Mbon and stars rising
in the ,/east and setting in the west, while actually the
reverse is true as (he$ in reality proceed in the direction
of the order of.the signs, from Aries to Taurus, etd. The
earth’s passage through, the zodiac id' which it revolves
around the Sun in approximately 365% days causes the
Sun to appear to .be transiting through the opposite $;ghs
to those through which thesearth CourseS, hene'e the term
Sun in Aries, Sun in Taurus, efc. 'Whdtn-the Spn seems
to be in Aries between March 21st and April 19th tke
cartel is in the opposite sign, Libra, but the astrological
fn/luence ancj position is designated as of Sun in Aries.
* Eaijthfiy Signs — Taurus, Virg6, Capricorn.
Earthly Triplicity or Trigon — Taurus,' Virgo, Capri
•corn.

PART V* ADDITIONAL STUtHES 778
Easter — [AS eastre, pi. ejstron (akin to German
ostern,), >ron\ flame of old Teut. goddess of sptjng, AS'.
Eastrje; ikin tb §ki, usra dawtf, and ET. east.] 1. An annual
church celebration commemorating. Chrises resurrectidh.
The early churtdi was divided as to the nature and the
;time of this celebration. Some communions (see Quarto-
"deciman) were influence® by the coincidence of Christ’s
'death with the Jewish Passover; othys, especially in
Gaul, placed Ejister always on the 25th’ of March, the
Vynal equinox (in the Julian calendar,) the day of the
resurrection of the vegetjtion god Attis. Uniformity was
established by the first Nicene Coumfll, which determined
that Easter is always the first Sunday after the first full
•mpon after the vernal equindk (March Jlst in the Gregorian calendar.) (Note by L. G. : If the full moon happens on Sunday then Easter is the Sunday after.) The
date of the full moon is ascertained. according to certain
calendar rules, and may differ from that of the actual
’(astronomical) full moon. These rules include as preliminaries the finding of the golden number, epact, and
dominical letter. These data, and the dates of Easter
The dates ot^ other movahle leasts depend on that iff Easter. •
Eclipaes-^-Solar ai*d Lunar eclipses are* important in-*
dices. Sotar saclipscs are *the more ifnportant a£ their,
effects are more noticeable and of longer .duration. .The
aspcctyin operation alfthe time of an eclipSe, well as
• From Webster’s, New International Dictionary.

GRNETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
the signs and degrees in which the ellipse 'occurs, are
an important factor in rfiaking the judgment.' They are
particularly used fonjudging world events and conditions
but when an eclipse is referred t# a natil or progressed
horoscope the eclipsed luminaries must form some aspect
therein to be significant.
Ecliptic — The Sun's apparent path in’ the orbit of thd
Earth, but in reality it is the path of the Earth around
the Sun. Its name is derived from the fact that eclipses,
occur therein. The belt of zodiacal Signs through whidh
the Sun appears to make a complete circuit once a ypar.
Measurement on th*e ecliptic is by longitude, r.. e., by
signs'and degrees.
Election — Pertaining to the selection of auspicious,
times for particular purposes, such as turning first sod,
laying a cornerstone,, time of marriage, entering a new
house, etc., according to the rules of Horary Astrology.
Elevated — A planet posited above another in a chart.
The most elevated, position is at the cusp of the tenth
house. The higher the elevation, the more power or
strength to the planet, especially when ascending.
Elongation — The dista'nce of a planet from the Sun.
Mercury cannot acquire greater Elongation than 2ff,
Venus 48‘. It isdielpful to remember this when figuring
their aspects to the Sun in natal charts. In a progresse'd
chart, as the native* grows older, Mprcvry and Venus
n^y progress to' greater distances from the radical Sun
and ftlrrq larger aspects such as sextile, square or trine.
By transit, in common with the other planets, they may
formtall aspects to the natal Sun. But !j,trictfy speaking,
elongation has reference .to the^ greatest distance in
zodiac (and consequently hi nat^ivitk.es) which the inferiorplanets may travel from the Sun.
' Emersion — A planet coming (rorti unoevr the Sun’s
beams so as tq.be seen. A term us^d chiefly "in connection with eclipses and occultations. See Immersion. ‘
Ephemeris-^— An almanac of the (olanets’ places for any
certain year;' necessary to ascertaih their locations and
positions? for a horoscope. The astrological eph^merides

« .. PART V. .ApPITIONA^, STUDIES . TO
are cbmpi'^ed* mostly from the "Nautical Almanac” issued
by the'Qliverntneiyt.
I 9 H
EquatoT — The celestial* equator is the projection of the
Earth’s equator imon the celestial sphere. Measurement
along the celestial equator is by the 360 degrees only and
i‘s.called Right Ascension. * A planet north or south of the
equator is said to be in so much "Declination.” Two or
more planets wijh the same amount of declination are
ptujdlel— a position aqual in power to the conjunction.
The terrestrial equator is q circle or belt around the earth
midway between the north and sguth poles and which
divides it into the north and south hemispheres.
Equinox — Equal night. "That time, of place, in the
ecliptic where the days and nights are of equal length
which happens twice^yearly when the Sun enters Aries
(Vernal equinox) ana Libra (auturrfnal equinox), from
whence these signs derive the term, equinoctial signs.
Exaltation — An essential dignity of a planet next in
power to being»irt its own home sign. ’See page 678.
Face — Faces are one-sixth divisions of a sign, thus :
is said *that the face rising in a nativity affects the disposition according to its nature. However, as various
different ^descriptions have been assigned*to the faces the
sub’jett is qonfusing, especially since the discovery of
Urcfnus, Neptuno»apd Pluto, therefore *‘£apes” dire almost
entirely ignored by modern practitioxe; •
Fall — A planet is in its fall wheft iy the sign opposite
to the’sign of its exaltation. , »
. Familiarity— Any kind* of aspfcgts or reception between
tire planets.'
Fiery Sighs — *^\rie^, ’Leo, Sagittarius.
Figure — A« chart, horoscope, scheme, natality or map
Fixed HohseJ»-2nd, 5th, 8th, 11th houses.
Fii(ed Signs— ;Taurusy*Leo, Scorpio, Aquariu|.
Fixed Stars — So called because they do not traverse
the eclipti? as' do.ftlanets. Those stars near the ecliptic

. Hi
(&NETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
and of large magnittgle have considerable influence.
Fixed §tars are not within the confinesr of tlfe, zpdiac ;
they are all out beyond it/'in the constellations.* PJanets
<Jnly transit debits ip the zodiat. Next to thd® Sun the
nearest fixed star is Alpha (a) Centaupi, (Bungula) 0-1
magnitude, Right Ascension (1936) 14h.'3fm. 12s. (R.A.;
218*48'), Declination 60*34' S., 'Latitude 42°43’ ,S., Longitude 28*44' Scojpio, distance 4 1/$ light-years, or about 25'
trillion miles. ' (The Sun’s distance frpm the earth is
approximately 93 million miles or light-distance 8 mjn’-
utes.)
Fortunes — Jupiter and Venus, also the Sun and Moon
when free from affliction.) Mercury and Neptune, ljeingr
of neutral nafaVe, are also fortunate when without affliction and in good aspect to Jupiter or Venus.
Fruitful Sign3 — Cancer, Scorpio, "Pisces.
Frustration — A term used in Horary Astrology. When'
a planet is applying to another by aspect, but a third
interposes before,the aspect is complete, ,thus deflecting
the influence of the aspecting planet.
Genethliacs — (jen-eth li aks — noun) Pertaining to na-.
tivities or their calculation ; showing position of s.tars at
one’s birth. Genethliacal, adj. — -(jon eth li a kal)
Geniture — Thfe birth chart is sometimes referred to. as
the geniture or Ge#nesis. Also natus, nativity, radiS.
t Geocentric — Geo, jearth; centric, center; the Earth as
a center of observation and influence. All astrological
aspects are geocentric as they relate to the Earth. „
Hfeliocentric-<-Having the Sunior a center and viewing
the planets from that standpoint, which n.iakes their
positions appear different thrn rfchen vieweef from th(e
Earth. A method not used by modern "astrologers tor
. nativities.
Herschel — JThe planet Uranus is often referred to as'
c Herschel in honor of its modern discoverer, Sir William
* Herschel. Uranus was discovered March 13, 1781, when
it tfras in the 25th degree of thi.<sign Gemini, whic,h is
the Amta'rius decanate of that. sign. It was also* at .first
called Georgium sidps.

PART V, ADDITIONAL STUBIES
Horary ^Astrology — One of ,the branches of astroscience * Used* for answering questions pertaining to any
impqrtaht m&ttyfc through a* chart Erected for the time
when tlte querent’s mind is seriously agitated about the
impending matter or the result of an undertaking.
' House — Tfie »ne-tweWth division dr segment of the
heavens* as viewed from the Earth. From the outer field
of. the zodiac the houses converge, fuflnel-shaped, until
•their points foJus on the earth. The twelve spaces of a
cTiart; each has affinity for or “rules” certain ’things or
affairs.
IJyleg — The planet or pla<^ which is giver of lif8. The
Sun or Moon is hyleg if either is in tfee Ascendant between the Sth degree above to the 25th degree below
' the rising degree, or in the place opposite as related to
the seventh house; or between the*5th degree below the
ninth cusp (through and including the tenth house) to
25 degrees below the eleventh cusp. If neither luminary
is in one of these hylegical places, Jhen the ascending
degree is th^ hyleg. When the hyleg becomes afflicted .
there is danger to life accordingly. Sometimes called
the Alpheta. •
m Immersion — Implies the entering of Sun or Moon into
eclipse, or the beginning of an occulta^ion. Emersion is
thg opposite, the coming out or leaving.
• Impedited— *A. planet is impeded *in Jts natural action
when adversely aspected by others, especially by the
malefics, Mars, Saturn, Uranus, and perhaps Rlutb.
fmum Obeli; It C. — The lower heaveq or cusp of fourth
house. The N&dir 05 north.angle in astrology.
' # Inconjunct — A tei|fn meaning a planet having no aspect
or parallel vrtth an/thcr.
In«reasihV>n Light*— A planet increases in light when
it clears the Sun's,beams until reaching* the opposition,
alter whtch «ks light decreases. A tferm used mainly jn
relation to the Moon.
.Increasing in Motion^— A planet moving ‘faster than _
on theaiay previous.

GSftETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
Inferior Planets — Thos; whose orbiti ar“ between the
earth and, the Sun, namely, Venus, Mercery and Vulcan.
kifortunes — Uranus, Saturn and Mars. Also the neutral planets, Mercury and Neptune if wholly afflicted.
Pluto is believed to be an infortune also. ■
Ingress — The entrance of a planet into a sign. Refers
mostly to Sun's, c.nnual ingress into the four cardinal
signs dividing the seasons.
Intercepted — A sign is intercepted when it lies between
two cusps without touching either, an appearai ce due
partly, to the inequality'in the shape of the Earth and
most noticeable as one proceeds either north ’or south of
the equator. An appearance which occurs only in charts.
There are never any intercepted signs in the zodiac.
Joys — Certain place's in the zodiac where the planets .
are harmoniously located and therefore have some dignity therein. Seldom used by moderns.
Latitude, Celestial — The measurement of distance of
any planet or star north or south of the ecliptic. The
Sun <never has any latitude as it is never out of the
ecliptic. The greatest latitude of the 2> is 5° 18'.
Latitude, Terrestrial or Geographical — The degree oi
distance of any place north or sduth of the earth’s,
equator. A degree of geographical latitude is equivalent
to 68.704 statute tpil^s at the equator, and’69.407 at the*
polgs. Latitude is termed north or south as the place
may be* in ziorth or south, .hemisphere.
Lights — Sun an<J Moon. Also called Lumirfaries.
Logarithms, Proportion al '-Tables by which . when a
planet’s motion ij known its1 positioned a given time may,
be easily ascertained.* \. * . •
Long Ascension, signs — Cancer, Le'o, Viego, Libra,
Scorpio and Sagittarius; so called because' they take
longer time to ascend than others antf ofter^rfjcoupy tw6
cusps in a chart, which is due to mundane rather than
zodiacal causes, *
( Lcftigitude, Celestial, — Measurement along the ^clipttc
in terms of signs and degrees, from the first point of the

PART V? ADDITIONAL STUCflBS
zodiac, T 0| O' 0".. The longitu^f of a planet in the 95th
degree pl*the.zt>diac is 25 5°.
Lotigkude, Terrestrial or Geographical*— The distarifce
of any place east or west of Greenwich (England). It
.is measured jn. geography in degrees, minutes and seconds; by astronomers mostly by hours, minutes and
seconds, ‘thus : Washington, D. C., 5h 08m 15s W. Long.
. Lunation — A* lunar period. The period of time when
tlte Moon separates'from a given point until site arrives
there again, requiring 23 days, 7 h(jurs, 43 minutes. A
tfrm alsfc used to signify the different aspects of Moon
to the Sun .wherein her pluses change. A syn&dical
ltfnation (also called an embolismic lunation) is from
tfie time Luna quits the Sun until she overtakes him
•again, requiring 29 days, 12 hours, 44 minutes. A chart
made for the moment when the Moon conjuncts the Sun
, Is often referred to as the Lunation or New Moon Chart.
Malefics — Same as infortunes : Mars, Saturn, Uranus.
Masculine Planets — Uranus, Saturn, Jupiter, Mars and
Sun. Feminine: Neptuhe, Venus and Moon. Mercury
’is convertible; masculine wheq with masculine planets
and feminine when with those of the opposite sex. When
irpaspected its sex is determined by the sign in which
it is located. Masculine and feminine ^nay also be consM#red as# referring respectively to: active and passive,
positive and negative, dry and mois£ JJy th<s it is seen
that the terms do not relate exclusively to gender. •
Masculine Signs — Aries, Gemifii, JLeo, Libra, "Sagittarius, ’Aquarius ; the others are feminine. , »
Matutir\e— The star* or plJnets which rise before the
Sun in th'e morning a/e called matutine. See Vespertine.
Mean oh Aijeragp Daily 'Motion of Planets-»-N eptunf ,
M6on, 13M0V6" per day.' When traveling less tfcey.arg
“slow in motiort”; when traveling more, .they are “jswift
in motion.” . m
Mean.Time, True Local Time — She pages 66, 663.

GniJETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
Medium Coeli — Midheaven or meridian. M. C. The
meridonial or southern point of a chart.
^feridian Distance — Measurement alcx.g the celestial
equator betweeli any point and trie upper or lower meridian. It is usually expressed in degreen of time. It is
a portion of the semi-arc.
Metonic Cycle — Meton of Athens, is credited with
discovering the. 1-9 year cycle at the end of which the
conjunctions of the Sun and Moon begin to occur successively ' in the same places in the zodiac as during
previous cycle. c
Midheaven — Cusp of tenth house. Meridian, or M. C.
Midnight Mark — The time at any place that is equivalent to midnight at Greenwich, England.
Movable Signs — Aries, Cancer, Libra, Capricorn.
Mundane Astrology — That branch which deals with
the effects of Ingresses, Lunations, Eclipses, Great Conjunctions or Comets as indicative of conditions affecting
nations, states or communities.
Mundane Parallel — -Equal distance of two planets from
any « angle. A planet on cusp of ninth is in mundane
parallel with another on cusp of eleventh, being at equal
distance from the meridian. (These are not zodiacal
parallels.)
Mutable Signs — Gemini, Virgo, Sagittarius,, PisceA
Mutual Reception — See Reception. ‘ *
Nadir — -.Cusp of fourth .house, Lower Meridian,' I. C.
Nativity — The instant of drawing first b'eath ; >the
chart fnade for mbmet of birth. (Genitvre, Natus)
Neomenium — The change of the Moon to New Moon,,
especially that Vvhich occurs neares^ Vernal Ingress. •
.Nocturnal Arc — The distance or space tkrough which
the Sun or a planet passes through the nighf*. A136 the
time it Jakes in*passing under the horizon.
•-Nodes — The point of the zodiac where a planet crosses
out of south into north latitude is galled the Nortf\ Node
and<- vice flvfcrsa. The motion of the Moon’s Node 'is
retrograde, about 3’ f)er day. See Dragon’s Head. 1*he

PART V| JL0DITIONJLL STUDIES
north nodft is» called the ascending, the south, the descendifig node. ,The Sun, ne,ver crossing the eoliptic, has
no /lode; likewise thj Earth which is considered, as
moving in the same plane as the Sun. The nodes of the
planets increaje in longitude. The nodes of the planets
are approxitftatejy :
Noon Ma'rk — (N. MK.) Mean local time at birth-place
when it is noon at Greenwich, England. (See page 75.)
Northern Signs — Ajdes to Virgo are signs in which
the Sun has N. dec. from March 21 to Sept. 23.
Occidental and Oriental — From cusp of tenth house,
•westward to fourth is occidental. The opposite half is
■Oriental. Planets ar.e sometimes refeyed to as being oriental *or occidental of the Sun. A planet is oriental when
rising after tjje Sun; occidental wien setting before the
Sun. If a horoscope is turned so as to place the Sun on
the M. C., it is readily seen which planets are ^>ri<tatal
aiyl occidental. There may bi* some occult Significance
between <he 'eastern and westeri? positions, just, as the
influence of thh Sun during,its ascension in the morning
, is different from thTafterncpn during its descension; or
-the difference in it/infltience during Spring and Summer
to that during Fart and .Winter. Ptolemy says, "When
oriental, 4h< influence is masculine; when occidental,
femininet” The difference is 'too vague to be given
definite «distyiction in nativities.
Occultation — During their transit .in orbit jjlanets
dcca^ionallyf obscuft other planets or stirs, temporarily.
The J^oon transiting a variable orbit frequently does sc^
This phenomenon is termed occultation by way of dis-

GENETHIJACAL ASTROLOGY
tinction from eclipses. ‘They may be c6nsideced .as a
powerfuPtotal or psrtile conjunction. ‘fTb be 'actually
partite these bpdies should at the time have the same
degree of latitude and longitude.) Occultations are
symbolized as * in the Time Table of Planetary Aspects
in the “Astrological Bulletina Annual."'
Opposition — diametrically opposite or 180 degreps
apart; an adverse aspect.
Orb—1 1'he distance in longitude within which the influence of a planet a.- aspect operates, usually ^••ithih 8
degrees. '
Oriental — See Occidental. \
Parallel, zodiacal — Equal distance from the equator.
Planets having the ,same declination either north or
south, are parallel. Bears an influence similar to that of
conjunction. The parallel is stronger when both planets
are on the same side of the equator, i. e., both N. or both
S. Declination.
Pars Fortunae — The Part of Fortune. The zodiacal
point which is equally distant from the Ascendant as the
Moon is from the Sun in longitude. Benefits the house
in which it may be located at birth. *
Partite — An aspect is partile when it falls in the "exact
degree and minute cqnstituting the aspect^
Pprigee — The part ofca planet’s orbit where it is nearest the Earjth. See Apogee.
Peregrine — A pljnet is peregrine when located where
it is void of essential dignitjes. Np planet is reckoned
peregrine if it be in mutual cecejjtioft. with anotHer.
Perihelion — That pnint of its ellipse or oi*oit where a
planet is nearest to the Sun. See Aphtlion.
Planetary Hours — The hours of the«days are ruled by
planets ifi their order from Saturn inward tot thfc Moon.
fcHie ‘Improved planetary Hour Book” gives tables and
instructions for*their use.
c Platic — Wide. An aspect not exact as to the decree,
but yet within the orb of influence.

PART V, ADDITIONAL 3n!BlE3 -78&
Polar Elevator* — A body in the heavens a certain elevation • J^om-.the meridian toward^ the horiaon. The
latitqde.for wh’jch chart is cast.
Polarity — Pole of the horoscope is the latitude of the
. place for which* chart*is cast.
i * Ponderous Planets — Pluto, Neptune, Uranus, Saturn,
Jupiter and Mars. So called mainly because their orbits
.are beyond the earth’s orbit, and therefore require
gteater lengths of tftne to circuit the zodiac.
Precession or Precession of the Eifuinoxes — The movement of*the equinoctial point (T 0*) which causes the
' zpdiac to paSs backward in fts relation Jo the constellatfons at the rate of approximately 50" per year. Due to
.the pole of the equator revolving around the pole of the
ecliptic* The present position of, the vernal equinox
{T 0") is approximately the 10th degree of the constella-
' tion Pisces. {In 3rd deg. according to Hindu astrology.)
It makes a complete revolution passing the twelve constellations in .a grand cycle of 25,920 ^ears or 2160 year
through one constellat^n.
• Prenatal Epoch — The astrological moment of conception, about nine months before birth, but not necessarily
coinciding with the *actual time of physical conception.
Hie Moon’s place, or.its opposite, on epoch day becomes
ertlter the ascending or descending sign and degree at
birth. Set chapter on this subject, page 679.
Primary Directions — A system of directing basec^upen
the calculation of a degree for ?»year. •
Ptogressed Horoscope — A chart computed for as piany
days after birth %s the native #is years of age from which
.deductions are made/by the*, positions of planets and
‘agpects as related thzreirf and also their relations to the
natal chart.
Promittof— Promissor. That which signifies certain
events, as'in a horyy question of marriage the Jord of
thi seventh isyhe promittBr.
Prorogator— *rhe algheta ; planet which upholds life.
proper Motion — The direct motiop through*tj»e zodiac
in order»of.the signs, (from west over M.C. to east, so

CtENETHl^IACAL ASTROLOGY
called in contradistinction to the planets’ apparent diurnal
motion from east tp west,. over the diie; to the
earth’s axial rotation.
Quadrants — The four quarters in a chart or the four
seasons of the year or zodiac.
Quadrate, or Quartile — The adverse square aspect of
ninety degrees.. •»
Quadratures — Moon’s dichotomes : changes, phases or
quarters. Frequently referred to as the square aspect.
Qujncunx or Quadrcsextile — An aspect five signs cr
150 degrees apart. Slightly adverse in natal astrology.
It has a sort of sixth house effect.
Quindecile — Another of Kepler’s minor aspects ; 24
degrees, slightly good.
Quintile — A slightly favorable aspect qf 72”. One
fifth of the circle. Its influence is associated with, or
similar to, 5th hot.se matters.
Radix, Radical — Root. Having reference to the natal
chart. In Horary Astrology it implies that certain
requirements prevail which make the chart fit to be
judged.
Rapt Motion — The apparent diuinal motion from east
to west caused by the earth’s rotation the other way?
Rapt Parallels — Equal distances from the meridian
formed bv rapt motion or the motion of the Earth on its
axis.- (Wot zodiacal. 1
Ra^s — Beams or aspects.
Reception — Planets whiph may Sc in each other’s dignities act as though in good as{ftct Vo each other. Planets
in each other’s debilities act a^ though in adverse aspect
tb each other, unfriendly or hostile. This jn?tter "should
be carefully n^ted when comparing the horoscopes of
fwo persons. < t •' ,4 , .
Rectification-7-The process of correcting the given
birth* time fo true time by comparing the nature anddate
of striking events yrith aspects which signified same.
Also by means of Pre-Natal Epoch rules. ■ ®

» PART V. ~At)DITIONAg STUDIES
1 TBS
Ref raqq£ion;-?I f two planets are applying to an aspect
of each other jfn^*one turns rrtrograde before the aspecf
is cOrrfpldte, it is said to Refrain, signifying that the effect
indicated by the approaching aspect will not materialize.
• Retrograde— A «backwa»3 motion which the planets
^sometimes appear to have, mainly in consequence of the
relative position and motion 01 the Earth’. 3 It is denoted
by R next to eath sqch planet in the Ephemeri^ When
direct again it is denoted by D. The Sun and Moon are
never, retrograde.
Revolution, Solar Revolutio^or Solar Return — A chart
tnadtf for the Sun’s return to the exact sign, degree, minute and second of longitude that it occupied at birth.
' Right Ascension — Measurement along the equator, by
degrees only, from the first point of Aries. The longitude
#3nd latitude being taken, the Right Ascension will be
found in the common angle. Astronomically a position
in right ascensjpn is usually expressed in, time at rate of
24 hours to the circle of 360 degrees, which is four minutes for each degree. Tfie R. A. of a planet which has
sbme N. or S. latitude will differ slightly from the R. A.
of its longitude. Tables of R. A. with latitude are used
to determine this.
Riaing'Sign or Ascendant — That sign which occupies
the«cusp of first fcou^e on the eastern horizon at the time
and place for which* a horoscope is ejected.
Satellite — An attendant body, revolving about a larger
one, its primary.. JThe Moon is a satellite of the Earth
but because of it* powerful influence it' is classed or
termed a planet for conufenience’jn astrology. Astrologicdlly, the Sun also is t/rmeti a planet. In icality all the
planets are satellites of the §un. 8
Satellftium— A group » of planets. In nativities it
causes stirring events»according to the cothbinatio-j of
influences. Alstjtermeil steHium.
, Secondary Di;ectionss>So called to distinguish them,
from 5 s/stem named Primary Directing. The Secondary
Directional chart is now referred to as the Progressed
Horoscope and it_ embraces many more elements tj}arr

• TOS tiENBTgLtACAL ANTHOLOGY
formerly, making it the most complete method of forecasting based upon the nativity. It is fhe„syst6ni taught
is the "A to Z Horoscope Maker and Selineatpr.’.’ Because the mei'hod of using "a day for a year" was; first
illustrated in ancient Arabian works,, it is frequently
referred to as "The Arabian System.", The Arabs wen;'
considered the best prognosticators.
Semi-decile-*-A minor aspect of 18 degrees of longitude,
slightly .good. Also termed Vigintile.
Semi-quintile — Decile. 36 degrees. One of Kepler’s
aspects. A minor or jveak, good aspect. ,*
Separatior -Moving awiy from the partile ; a diminution of influ nee because of dissolution of the aspect. In
Horary Astrology it indicates events just past, or that
the matter inquired,after will not oecur.
Seaquiquadrate — A minor adverse aspect of 135 degrees of longitudinal distance.
Semi-square, Slmi-quadrate — 45 degrees;. One of Kepler’s aspects. Slightly adverse,
*Semi-sextile — A wea|f or minor benefic aspect of 36
degrees of longitude.
Short Aacensipn Signs — Capricorn, Aquarius, Pisces,
Aries, Taurus and Gemini; they are often found intercepted in ^loroscoyes. Interception is neither a digqity
nor a debility. ' For places in the southern hemisphere
fiie signs long and sfiort must be reversed.
Sidereal Time — Right ascension of the meridian at
merth noon. The angular distance of* the first point of
Aries, or the true vernal «equinoK quoted in hours, min-,
utes and secopds. Birth* tim^is \onverted irito Sidereal’
Time for reference to a Table of Houses £or thg latitude
.of the bhrth place, in order t*o ascertain the house cusps.
Significatoij — In Natal Astrology, the planet which
* rules*the Ascendant. In Horary Astrolpgy, the planet
which rules the house that governs the.rfiatter or person
inquired about.
‘Sinister Aspect— rWhen thrf' swifter planet is approaching a planet slower in motion and applies to srfme aspect

t PAST y. IPDITIONAL STUDIES
it is.tarnied •j'sjnister aspect. Sinister and Dexter are
term} to denote on which s'tde of a slower planet the
swifter body is when leaking an aspect.
. Slow in Course— -A planet moving slower than its
■piean mption. Sfce Mean Motion.
Solar Revolution — A chart made for fti» moment when
•the Sun returns exactly to the longitude it hejd in the
nativity. Because of irregularity in the Sun’s apparent
motion ^t seldom return? to its radix place at the same
time as that of birth. A chart made for the time and
. date of Solan return (using latitude of present residence
for Table of Houses) is indicative of the course of events
cfuring the ensuing year. The position and aspects of
‘the planets are considered similar to their use in a nativity, especially the aspects of or to fKe Sun. The transits
•of planets (including those of the Sun) over these posi
tions are used to time (date) the events indicated. The
positions of planets in the solar return are compared with
those in the nativity to determine the aspects and to
judge accordingly whether the succeeding year is indicated as mainly good or adverse, and in what respects.
.Solar System — Tht Sun with the group of celestial
btfdies which revolve, about it. This group, so far as
knojyn, ’comprises 9 planets, attended by 26 satellites,
aivi about 1200 ^steroids or planetoids (which. revolve in
an orbit between that of Mars and Jupiter) also comet?
and meteors.
Solstitial fiigna— Cancer and Capricorn, which in contradistinction to equinoctial signs, have {he longest summer days £nd the longest winter nivhts.
Southern Signs — Libra, Scorpio, Sagittarius, Capricorn, Aquarius^ Pisoes. In these signs the Sun Has south*
/leclindtion.,"
Sfjeculunl — \ table' relating to a horoscope which cqp- •
tains the principal data concerning the plartets, etc., spch
’as tjie Jongitude, latiMMe, declination, right ' ascension,
meridian distance, semi-ari, ascensional difference, etc.,
to which the •student of mathematical astrology may have
recourse in calcujdting various directions.

(jKNETHLIAOAL astrology
Speculum of Aspects —A table matte to show every
degree in a horoscope tha| may be in aspect Vith the
pbnets thereii\. Very useful for ^ascertaining at, a glance
the aspects formed by transiting planets.
Square — A strong or major malefic aspect of 90 degrees. Tetragonous Trimorion."
Standard Time*— See page 66.
Stationary — A planet in its station apparently standing still between Retrograde and Direct; it is an appearance largely due t'd the Earth’s relative motion and
position. Sun and Moon ^re never stationary as far as
the Earth is concerned. See Retrograde.
Stellium — See Satellitium.
Succedent — Those houses of a chart situated between
the angles and cadents ; second, fifth, eighth and eleventh
houses are succedent. They correspond to fixed signs in
strength and nature.
Superior Planets — Pluto, Neptune, Uranus, Saturn,
Jupiter, and Mars. So called because their orbits lie
beyond that of the Ea>-th from the Sun. Ponderous’
planets. The orbits of the inferior planets, Vulcan,
Mercury and Venus, are between the Earth and Sun.
Swift in Motion — A planet moving faster than its mean
motion.
•■Sypodical Lunatioif — The time consumed by the Moon
after leaving the Sun until she joins it again in 29 days,
12 hours, 44 minutes, 3 seconds.
Syzyges — Refer to conjunctions, and oppositions.
Table of Houses— Tables giving the signs and degrees
to be placed on cusps of houses in a horoscope appropriate to the latitude of thte birjh place, 'h: accordance
with the siderpal time at birth.
, Terms — Certain degrees of Signs in whiefii planets have
an essential dignity. Planets may be dignified in this
order of potency: by sign, exaltation, triplicity,' terms,
faces. The table of terms used by the ancients is thrbwn
into discard by modern students since, the advent of

PART VP ADDITIONAL STUlftBS
ie»
Pluto, Nejftung and Uranus, w»ch, of course, were not
include*!*
TeAtiftiony — Refers ft) configurations, "positions, efc.,
which indicate certain things.
. Tetragonous^-The squsfre aspect.
Transit — The passage of a planet by ephemeral motion
(ste an Ephemeris) subsequent to birth over or in aspect
’to, the radical positions or cusps; or over and An aspect
to the progressed chart, planetary positions and cusps;
or their «jurrent aspects to each othCT in the zodiac.
Translation of Light — When a planet separates from
one that is slower than Itself and while yet in platic
aspect forms a conjunction or aspect to another, thus
forming1 a chain of, influence between the three. Used
mostly in Horary Astrology.
Tredecile, fTrecile or Sesquiquintile — One of Kepler’s
aspects: 108 degrees. Slightly favorable. The minor
aspects such As these are of little importance in Natal
Astrology but in the progressed horoscope they must be
.considered
Trine — A major g§od aspect of 120 degrees.
Triplicity, Trigon— An equilateral , triangle at the
points of which are sig;ns of the same nature, thus there
arp four triplichies which represent the elements of fire,
earth, air and *w*ater. Fiery : Aries, Leo, Sagittariuj .
Earthly > Taurus, Virgo, Capricorn. Airy : Gemiiji, laibra,
Aquarius. Watery: Cancer, Scorfiofc Pisces.
Tropical Sigris^-Cancer and Capricorn. Sol + sidtere,
statum, to stand still. The point in the ecliptic at which
the Sun id farthest fiom, the Equator, nprth or south,
namely ; .first <ioint of the signs Cancer and Capricorn,
the former being the sunwner solstice, the hitter the»
winter* solstfid, as seen in the northern latitudes. At
these points the Sunjhas reached its greatest declination*
in<f for thite dfcys seems tb stand still m its northern .ore
southern declinsition. This is readily seen by reference
to an'qphemerts for tHfe Sun’s declination on»June and
December 22nd. The summer and .winter seasons are
reversed In the .southern hemisphere.

GjfflETHLIAOAL ASTROLOGY
Under the Sun’s Beams — Within 17 degrees of the
Sun. A planet so situated is weak but more 'so if combust, i. e?, within 8 degrees. 30 minutes. These dre not
given particular notice in natal astrology1. • •
Vespertine — A planet setting in the evening after
Sun-set. See matntine.
Verticle — The prime verticle or circle of observation
is the circle in- which an observer stands when facing
south. This circle divided into 12 equal parts comprises
the 12 houses through which the signs and planets seem
to pass obliquely in .Jheir apparent diurnal motion from
east to west, due to the rotation of the earth from west
to east.
Vigintile, Semi-decile — One of Kepler’s minor aspects ,
18 degrees, slightly good.
Void of Course — When a planet forms no aspect dur-.
ing the remainder of its course through the ijign wherein
located. Refers chiefly to the Moon in Horary Astrology,
wherein it shows that nothing will come of the matter
in question. A testimony that the horary chart is not
radical.
Watery Signs — Cancer; Scorpio, Pisces.
Zenith — Actually it is the point directly overhead.
Often incorrectly referred to as the midheaven.- Note
that the Midheaven ^s south of this point at the ecliptic.
Zodiac — A beltf or jring around the heavens between
IS and 1$ degrees widq_ divided into twelve signs each
containing 30 degrees o'f longitude, through which .the
planets transit, each in an orbit of its own.' "
Zodiacal Aspects — Aspects in thj zodiac measured by
sign and degree. Major aspects are: conjunction, parallel, opposition, trine, square and textile.’' The minor
aspects of favorable quality are i vigintilei. J8 degrees;
quindecile, 24 degree; semi-sextiie, 30 degrees; decile,
36 degrees; quintile, 72 degree,?; tretlecile.,108. degrees ;
bi-quintile, 144 degrees. Minor aspects of adverse quality:
semi-square, 45’ degrees; sesquiquadrate, ,135 degrees;
quincunx, F50 degrees!

TA^US OF CONTENTS
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Pag*
Abbreviation*, of Astrological Terms 548
Accidents 148
‘Aid to Horoscope Reading,* Additional 145
fAHments, Indications of 146, 147
Anatomy related to zodiacal signs 39, 611
Aquarius, eleventh ^ign of the zodiac 25
^Acending In the horc&cope * . 253
Attributes of . . 611, 652
BlbHcal *references to • .... * ... 652
Classification • ,88
Deqanates of -and their planetary rulerahlpa . . . 674
features of .... a 89
*Mxed sign, nature of 40, 41
Personality 253
Physical Ailments natural to 854
Ruling planet * 88
'Symbol of 26
Tendencies bAtowed upon those born when Sun Is In this
sign (see Signs) 243
Trlpllclty . 38
Vocations suited to 243, 253, 656
Worda related to 560, 654
Zodiacal personality 549
Arabic Parte
Arc of Event (A E) . * 509
Aries, flrqt sign of the zddlac 25
Ascending in the horoscope 245
Attributes *of ^ 611, 612
Biblical references l4 * . 612
Cardinal sign, nature of fp, 46
Classification a....*. 38
Dedicates of, and their planetnry ru’erstjpa .... 574
Personality . ? 245
Physical ^1 meats natural to . * 613
•Ruling 38
Symbol of . _ 26
Tendencies bestowed upon thc^e born when Sun is to this
sign (see. Signs) * 238*
Trlpllclty .....*..* 88
Vocations suited to » *. . 238, 245*
Zodiacal persnnaMty 549
Ascesd&qt. (See first HoA&e) *. , . ' f
A general description of the Influence of _the Zodlacal^SIgn
asceidlng at time of birth ' 244

OBNRTHLIACAL ASTROLOGY1*
Ailments denoted ty ■, 147
Aspects to 495
Importance of . r s. ... 28
Personality of . . •. 29
Planets In (See First House'/ r
'Sun In. Influence of. .(See First Hxtse) .
Signs, Influence of the twelve
Aspects , 88
Analysis and Philosophy of , 118. 419
“Adverse" not always detrimental 112
Applying , 100 ,
Calculating the ,...., 101
Defined 83
Delineated (See Delineation)
Dexter (Illustrated) , . . . 102
Example for finding » 95
Importance of 182 •
Influences, Combined, Modifying . . .» . 113, 116
Judging tha effect of 90
Lunar, Degrees constituting m. 105, 480
Major, Degrees constituting 93
Minor, Degrees constituting 93
Mutual (Inter-Planetary) 106, 485 ,
Natal 103
Nature of . . ‘ 92
Orb of Influence .' 95
Order and Power( of 92
Philosophy of "overcoming” adverse Aspects . . . 759
Progressed (See Progressed Horoscope) ‘
Sinister . . * 102
Symbols/ of ... a 91
Tabulations of, orderly . . « . 04
Transiting (See Transits) t
Aspects, Delineation of, , t ^ '* >'
Ascendant, to * . , 493
Cusps of Houses, to t 500
Lunar (Moon) 423, 472
> Midheaven, te
Mutual (Progressed) . 485
Neptun^

TtfBLB OF CONTENTS* .
Progressed, (Directional)
Prqgrwped to, Ri}dlx
Saturn* . * .
Soltfr v Son )
Transiting
Uranus . • . .
• Astrology*
Defined; Its various branches . . t .. . 15
la it Science or. Religion ? 535
* JPhe Science of Life's Reactions to Planetary Vibrations . 21
Astro-Meteorology (Weather 1 Forecasting), (See Astrology)
Astro-Pa&ology (Medical Astrology), ISee Astrology) ,
• Biblical, Relationships to Zodiacal Signs ...... 611
Birthday, Progressed ; How to Find 169
■ Birth-Tiipe, Important to record ail births exactly;
Approximate times, fectifled . 509
. Determines the xodiacal sign and degree ascending in the
horoscope 244
Rectification of 509
Unknown Times, found .......... 527
Body, parts of, ’related to Zodiacal Signs 39
Business, Planets in . * 570
’Calendar Change, Russian . . 74
Cancer’ fourth sign of the zodiac 25
'.Ascending in the horoscope 247
•Btbllcil references to 623
.Cardinal “alga, nature of . . » . . . 40, 41
Classification *'.**. » . . . . 38
Decana.tes of and their planetary rnlerSblps , 574
Features of a 39
Personality a 247
Physical Ailment?, natural to . .
Ruling planet » 38
• • Tendencies bestowed upon those born when Bjio is In this
. Blgn, (See Signs) * 240
Tripiiclty* , 38
Vocations sn|t#d to ' 240, 247
Words related to . . * . 550, 625
Zodiacal personality * . * . . » 649
Capricorn, tenth 'sign of the zodiac • 2fP
Ascending in the horoscope . , 252
Bydlcul references to . f ^ . 647
Cardinal sign, nature of 40, 41

m
QFNETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
us.
Classification 38
Decanates of and their planetar; rulershlps . * . . . 574
Personality • 252
Physical Ailments natosal to . . * • 850
Killing planet 38
Symbol of . . , . 28
Tendencies bestowed upon those t/ogn when .Sun Is In this
sign, (See Signs) • . 242'
Trlplidty 38
Vocations suited* to 242, 252
Words related to 1 . . 559, 050 '
Zodiacal fiersonallty 54S
ft
Central Standard Time Corrections . • 67
Children < 154
Chart. (See Horoscope) *
Circle, The, Symbology of 541
Clock Time, How to change to true Sun time .... 86 '
Comparisons and Considerations of Parallels .... 195
Conjunctions, degrees of, favorable or unfavorable* . 109, 421
Constellations • .579
Copernicus, Biographical sketch of 662
Corrections, necessary In horoscopes. * .
Clock time 66
Longitude, (Terrestrial) 64
Sidereal Time „ . *03
Countries and 'Cities •Influenced by the signs . . 671
Crltical*Degrees . . . % .678
Cross, The. Symbology of 543
Cusps of houses, bow found f . 37, 59, 145
Aspects to ' . . \ . 164
Declination of , . * . * * . 192 '
Daylight Saving Time . • . «. . .*'t . 70
Ddath, Nature of, indicated by horospope . 148
Deearis, Defined, Influence explained, Progression of . 572
Declination, Parallels of ., , . V . . * . *167
'Delineations' for Horaecoi>es, (See Part HI, page 229) •

TABLE OF CONTENTS j
Dcxt«' aspects _ 102
Directions, (See Progressed Horoseopi)
Dignities and DebiHties of the plahets 47 to 60
Diectidn, (See Progressed Horoscope)
Another method for bringing out 228
• Primary and <6*condary* .„ ........ 228
.Dissimilarity of Twins 596
Do^ The. Symbology of 542
Easter dates . . . . _
Eastern Standard Time Corrections . . ’ .
^Eclipses, In relation to natal aDd •vogressed charts .
Education, as shown In the horoscope
Eighth House
Illustrated ...
Ituler* of,
(L'ranslttng Moon In
Eleventh House
fllaatrated
Its Influence when posited tn other houses .
Matters related <lo . *
Planets’ lnlluence whenpo sited In the eleven* house of a
horoscope —
ice ■ when posited in oflier houaes .
fluler o(, Its Ipflueu
Transiting Motjji'ln ...» >.
Ephemetfs, Defined . . * . !
See Illustrations for specimens of epIietnerlHea used In ~ .
connection wftit Instructions * 54
Midnight Eplieinerla, hojr to use . . , t 868
Exafyatlftn of planets . . • . . _ . . * ^7, 48, &78

QEfrBTHLIACAL ASTROLOGY
flmnUt Dtys
How to find and use " .
Io relathfa to your horoacope , . . . • . •*.
Fot&er
la relation to fourth and tenth houses
Features of the zodiacal alias, (Sue PltysloinoAj*)
Of the horoscope . . * , 123, '
Fifth House
Illustrated . *
Hatters related to .
Planets' influence when posited In the fifth house of a

TASIjS OF CONTENTS'
rot
Ruler of, dts Influence when poslt<td in other houses . 401
Transiting Moon in f 472
Fractional Degree! of Latitude, (See Latitude) ,
Friends 127
Future At a dunce (coa’dltlcyus) 208
ualilel, Llographical sketch of 800
Gemini, third algn of the zodiac . . . . < . , . . 2S
Ascending in tAe horoscope 248
Attributes of . . J 611, 819
Biblical references to . 819
Classification . . ’ * 38
Commoii sign, nature of ... i 40, 41
Dpca nates of and their plane'ary rulerahlpa . . . 574
1 Personality 248
Physical Ailments natural to 821
Ruling planet . 38
Symbol of ' 28
Tendencies bestowed upon those born when Sun Is in this
sign (S#e Signs) 239
Trlpllclty 38
Vocations autted to • . . . 289, 248
Words related to 551, 622
Zodiacal personality . . 549
' Genethllacal Astrology, defined "17
Geocentric astrology * 665
'.Geocentric motion of planets 48
Geocentric period of planetary transits .*.... 205
Haft-CIrciet The, Symbology of 542
Herbs appropriate to each sign 61^ to 881
Heredity afljjcted by the stars .* 598
Hippocrates, Biographical sketch of ..*.... 540
H<ane Llfty, . . *. t 128
Honors t . * 128
Horary Astrology, defined, Illustration of Its use . *17, 569, 839
Horoscope, defined . * 10
Condensed reading 04 ♦ . . ■ . 140
Illustrated . • 128
Natal, (radix). casting Jhs chart
Order of making *119
Progressed . 157 *
Reading, How to prepare It , 123

SENETHUACAX AS?T&)LOGY
Horoscopes, Five example coarts (See Uluftratiias)' 12
Houses ofcthe horoscope (twelv.3)
Combined Influences of house, sign, Cl a net and aspect' ^ 116
Description of 32
Different from signs 27
For Planets' influxes In each j)f the twelve iiouses, aee
First House, Second House, etc. '
House Holers, when posited In another house . . . 396
Illustrated 37
Hatters related to 33.
Rulers a 13)6
Transiting Moon In relation to the 217, 472
Trigonal description c.* . . ' . . 682
Individuality, defined . *. ' 29, 12*4
Variations of, produced by orbital revolution of earth . *594
Interception 62, 77, 97
Inter-Colonial Standard Time Corrections . 67
Inter-Planetary aspects -fmntual) 106
Imum C«ell (See Nadir or Fourth House)
Joint Influences of houses, planets and aspects .... 116
'Judicial Astrology (State or Mundane^ defined .... 16
Jupiter, ruler of the zodiacal algn Sagittarius
Ailments of .... * 645
Aspects of (degrees) ....... 93
Aspects delineated 456
Characteristics of, -nature and correspondence . 44, 52
Conjunctions and Parallels of ' . 4109
Dignity and Debility .of . ' 47, 48. 50
Health related to y - ,s . . 145
House occupied In char; (See Houses)
LunaF Aspects to (See Aspects)
Occupations of (Jnpltgr as ruling planet) . 149, 242, ,642
Orb of Influence . . . . * 96
Progressed Aspects of (See Direction!) -
Symbol of, Symbology ^ . 546, 548
Things ruled by . . . « t- . 294 •
Words related to (vocabulary) . . . . . 557
Zodiacal sjgns, Influence of Jupiter In (See Signs) - ■*
Kepler, Biographical sketch of . ... .*.*•. .* 599
Key Woijla to zodiacal signs . 549
Ltftitvde, terrestrial . *
Correcting It for fraction of degree of birth place to the
. Natal chart, of * ‘ . *59
Progressed charts, of ‘ • . 166
South, How to erect a chart for . . 61

Tap OF CONTENTS »
Law Evasion, q^trdlogy Is not US
Legates ? 33? 128
Leo, the fifth sign of t|>e zodiac 25
Ascending Hi *the horoscope • 248
Attributes of .... . 611, 626
Biblical references to 626
Classification 38
Decanates of and their planetary rulerahlpa .... 5T4
Features of .• • . 89
Fixed sign, nature of .. 40, 41
Personality ..»....• 248
Physical Ailments natural to 627
Ruling plaqet , . . . , 38
Tendencies bestowed upon those born when Sun Is In this
sign, (See Signs) 240
Trlpltclty 38
Vocations suited to •*.... 240, 248
Words related to 554, 627
Zodiacal personality 549
Libra, the seventh sign of the zodiac . 25
Ascending la the horoscope 250
Attributes of 611, 634*
Biblical references to 634
Cardinal sign, nature of 4t), 41
Classification • 88
Decanates of and their planetary rulerahlpa 574
Features of 39
Personality . . • 250
Physical Ailments natural to 636
Ruling filanet P . ..... 38
Tendencies bestowed upon those borfl when Son la In tfila*
Trlpllclty • 88
vocationtPsulted.to 241, 250
Words related to . 558, 637
Zodiacal personality « * 549
life la what we make , 537
LoeatlonT'Pour best , . • *..691
How to fld6 ft .... 604
Locality Chart (Change of Residence) . . . *. . . • . 607
Logarithms .*• • ft
Correcting the planets to their true place* at time of birth . 82
__ Jablfk of logarithms • . ... • wh 85
Lortgitudf
Moon, progressed, each month 178

300 6ENETHUACAL ASTROLOGY
Natal chart, of, bow to find » . 170
Nearest ulnntes of, to And, for correcting Ascendant 526
Progressed chart of ... ' 166
lama (See Moon)
Bow they affect Individuals . V. . . ‘ . . 213
Major aspects 9S
Marriage 126, 151
Description of marriage partner T8B
Mars, ruler of the zodlrcal signs Aries and Scorpio.
Ailments of 282; 613, 64C
Aspects of (degrees) .‘ . 03
Aspects delineated ‘ 451
Characteristics of, nature and correspondence . 44, 51
Conjunctions and Parallels of 109
Dignity and Debility of 47, 48, 50
Health related to . ‘ 145
House occupied In chart (See Houses)
Lunar Aspects to (See Aspects)
Occupations of (Mara as ruling planet) . 149, 239, 612, 638
Orb of influence 95
Progressed Aspects of (See Directions)
Symbol of, Symbology 545, 548
Things ruled by 282
Wbrds related to (vocabulary) 556
Zodiacal signs, Influence of Mars In (See Signs)
Mean Time 66
Measure of Time, tbe key to ((75
Medical Astrology (Astro-Pathology), (See Astrology) J
Mealuin Cecil, (Ses Midheaven)
Memoranda," Importance of.'Mn preparation for reading the
horoscope . . ®. 124
Mentality ^ ... 125
Mercury, ruler of the zodiacal signs Oetulnt and Vlrgc,
Aspects of (degrees) " . 98
.Aspects delineated ... r .... t . > 481
Characteristics of, nature and correspondence - . 44 51
Conjunctions and Parallels of 109
Dlgnltjeaod Debtllty-of w . . . :4T, 48, 60
tHe«lth related to 145
House occupied In chart (See Hemes) 1
Lnptfr Aspects’ to (See 4*P®**»> ^ « „ ' •
Occupations of (Mercury as ruling plmast) . 140‘. 290-40, 619, 680
Orb of Irffluenee 9
Progressed Aspects of (See Directions)
