READABLE DATASET
================================================================================
Original file: bphs_1_rsanthanam.json
Dataset number: 38 of 455
Format: valid JSON
Structure: Object / structured dataset
Original size: 702,907 bytes
Top-level fields: 11
Title: BPHS - 1 RSanthanam
Creator: —
Date: —
Description: —

CONTENT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
METADATA AND OTHER FIELDS
  • title: BPHS - 1 RSanthanam
  • creator: —
  • date: —
  • description: —
  • subject: —
  • identifier: —
  • source_folder: Brihat Parashar Hora Shastra Books-XML
  • total_pages: 482
  • total_words: 128413
  • text_quality:
    • ocr_word_validity_score: 0.857
    • quality_tier: good
    • note: —

FULL TEXT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Brihat Parasara
Hora Sastra
Of
MAHARSHI PARASARA
ft*T *TT*5m
VOL I
English translation, commentary,
annotation and editing
by
R. SAN THAN AM
Rahjan Publications
1 6 Ansari Road, Darya Ganj, - j
New Delhi- 1 10002 (India ),'
.. Au

CONTENTS
Ch. Details , page
Preface by translator 10
1, THE CREATION 17
2, GREAT INCARNATIONS (OF THE LORD) 22
3 PLANETARY CHARACTERS AND DESCRIPTION 24
Names of planets, benefics and malefics, planetary
. governances, cabinet, complexions, deities, sex, compounds, castes, description of planets from Sun to
Ketu, Saptba Dbatus, Ritus, planetary tastes, strengths, trees, Dhatu, Moola & Jeeva divisions, exaltation and debilitation, additional dignities, natural
relationships, temporary relationships, Upagrahas,
effects thereof, calculation of Gulika etc., Gulika’a
exact position, Pranapada, etc.
4. ZODIACAL SIGNS DESCRIBED 48
Importance of Hora, Names of signs. Limbs of Kalapurusha, classification of signs, 12 signs described,
and Nisheka Lagna,
5. SPECIAL ASCENDANTS 62
Bhava Lagna, Ghatika Lagna, Hora Lagna, Use of
special ascendants, Varnada Dasa and effects of
Varcada.
6. THE SIXTEEN DIVISIONS OF A SIGN 67
Names of the 16 vargas, Rasi and Hora, Decanate,
Cbaturthamsa, Sapthamsa, Navamsa, Dasamsa,
Dvadasamsa, Shodasamsa, Vimsamsa, Siddhamsa,
Bhamsa, Trimsamsa, Chatvarimsamsa, Akshavedamsa, Shashtiamsa, Varga classification, etc.

7, DIVISIONAL CONSIDERATION 91
Use of the 16 divisions, Hora, Decanate anu Trimsamsa effects, Vimsopaka strength, Vimsopka proportional evaluation, other sources of strength, Dasa
effects with Vimsopaka strength, names of bhavas,
indications from houses, etc.
8. ASPECTS OF THE SIGNS 105
Sign aspects, planetary aspects, aspectual diagram etc.
9. EVILS AT BIRTH 109
Short life combinations, evils to mother, evils to
father, and about parents.
10. ANTIDOTES FOR EVILS 118
1 1 . JUDGEMENT OF HOUSES 120
Indications of houses form 1st to 12th, prosperity or
annihilation of a house. .
12. EFFECTS OF FIRST HOUSE 126
Physical comforts, bodily beauty, other benefits,
coiled birth, birth of twins, to be nurtured by three
mothers, Moon equated to ascendant, decanates and
bodily limbs and affectation to limbs.
1 3. EFFECTS OF THE 2nd HO USE 1 32
Combinations for wealth, and for poverty, loss of
wealth through the king, expenses on good accounts,
fame, effortless acquisition, eyes, truthlessness.
14. EFFECTS OF THE 3rd HOUSE 1 37
Female and male cobom, number of brothers and
sisters, adverse planets.
15. EFFECTS OF THE 4th HOUSE 142
Housing comforts, miscellaneous, relatives, longliving mother, happiness to mother,' quadrupeds,
dumbness, conveyances.

16 . EFFECTS OF THE 5th HOUSE 145
Happiness through children, no offspring, death of
first child, difficult progeny, adopted issues, 3
mothers and 2 fathers, many children, obtaining
daughters, questionable birth, mean children, child
at the age or 30, 36, 40, 32, 33 and 56 and number of
children.
17. EFFECTS OF THE 6th HOUSE 152
Ulcer/bruises, relatives affected, facial diseases,
leprosy, diseases in general, timing of illness, unfortunate years, loss through enemies, inimical sons and
fear from dogs.
18 . EFFECTS OF THE 7th HOUSE 160
Sick wife, excessive libidinousness, death of wife,
many wives, miscellaneous matters, worthy spouse,
evils to spouse, loss of spouse, lack of conjugal
felicity, time of marriage, timing of wife’s death,
three marriages and shortlived wife.
19 . EFFECTS OF THE 8th HOUSE 169
Long life, short life, Saturn and 10th lord in longevity.
20. EFFECTS OF THE 9th HOUSE 173
Combinations for fortunes, fortunate father, indigent
father, long living father, wealthy and famons father,
virtuous and devoted to father, fortunes, inimical to
father, begged food, combinations for father’s death,
fortunate periods, lack of fortunes.
21 . EFFECTS OF THE 10th HOUSE 178
Paternal happiness, performing religious sacrifices,
royal patronage, carnal pleasures, ornaments, cessation of duties, learned, wealthy, lack of virtuous acta,
obstructions to activities, combinations for fame.

22. EFFECTS OF THE 1 1th HOUSE
Many gains, income in Nishkas, no gains, wealth
through coborn.
23. EFFECTS OF THE 12 th HOUSE 1 86
Expenses on good account, beautiful houses and bed,
begetting a spouse, planets in visible and invisible
halves, going to hell, final emancipation, wandering
in the country, earning through sinful measures,
expenditure on religious grounds.
24. EFFFETS OF THE BHA VA LORDS J 89
Effeet* of the 12 bhava lords in various houses (total
144 combinations), clues to sort out mutually contra*
dictory effects.
25. EFFECTS OF NON-LUMINOUS PLANETS 236
Dhuma in various houses, Vyatipala in various
houses, Paridbi in various bouses, Chapa in various
houses, Dhwaja in various bouses, Gulika in various •
house, Pranapada's positional effects with
reference to natal ascendant.
26. EVALtJATION OF PLANETAR Y ASPECTS 254
Planetary aspects, aspectual evaluations, Special rules
-for aspects of Saturn, Mars and Jupitor.
27. Evaluation of strengths 263
Sthaana bala, Sapthavargajabala, Ojhayugmarasiamsabala, Kendradibala, Drekkaoa bala, Digbala,
Kaalabala, Paksba bala, Tribhagabala, Varsha-MasaDina-Hora bala, Naisargika bala, Ayana bala,
Motional strength of Sun and Moon, Dfigbala,
planetary war, motional strength for Mars etc.,
Bbavabalas, Shad bala requirements, Bhava effects,
Eligibility to issue predictions.
28. ISHTA AND KASHTA BALAS 289
Exaltation rays, Cheshta Rasmi, beneficial and malefic

fays, benefic and malefic tendencies, nature of effect*
due to digbala etc., Saptavargaja bala and ishta
kashta, effects of a bhava.
29. BHAVA PAD AS
Method of Pada calculations, special exceptions,
Padas for planets, Pada and finance, Pada and
financial losses, Gainful sources, 7th house from Pada,
General.
30. UP A PADA
Upapada calculation, effect of 2nd from Upa pada,
wife from the 2nd of Upapada, about sons, obtainment of many sons and many daughters, coborn from
Lagoa Pada, other matters from Lagna pada.
31. ARGALA OR PLANETARY INTERVENTION
Formation of Argala, Argala effects.
32. PLANETARY KARAK ATW AS
Atmakaraka defined, importance of Atmakaraka,
other Karakas, Yogakarakas or mutual coworkers,
house significance.
33. EFFECTS OF KARAK A MS A
Karakamsa in various signs, effects of planets in
Karakamsa, Rahu-Sun in Karakamsa, Gulika in
Karakamsa, effects of aspects on Ketu in Karakamsa,
effects of 2nd from Kaiakamsa, 3rd from' Karakamoa, 4th from Karakamsa, 5th from Karakamsa,
6th from Karakamsa, 7th from Karakamsa, 8th from
Karakamsa, 9th from Karakamsa, 10th from Karakamsa, 1 Ith from Karakamsa, 12th from Karakamsa,
planets in 5th from Karakamsa.
34. YOGA K ARAKAS
Nature due to lordships of planets, natural benefice
and malefics, angular and trinal lordships, angular
lordship, Rahu and Ketu, Planets & Aries ascendant.

Taurus ascendant, Gemini ascendant. Cancer ascendant, Leo ascendant, Virgo ascendant, Libra ascendant, Scorpio ascendant, Sagittarius ascendant,
Capricorn ascendant, Aquarius ascendant, and Pisces
ascendant, General,
35. NABHASA YOGAS 357
Formation and effects of Rajju, Musala, Nala, Maala
Sarpa, Gada, Sakata, Vihaga, Sringataka, Hala,
V^jra, Yava, Kamala, Vapi, Yupa, Sara, Sakthi,
Danda, Nauka, Koota, Chatra, Chapa, Chakra,
Samudra, Gola, Yuga, Soola, Kedara, Pasa, Dama
undVeena Yogas.
36. MANY OTHER YOGAS 366
Subha, Asubha, Gajakesari, Amala, Parvatha, Kabala,
Chamara, Sankha, Bheri, Mridanga, Srinatha,
Sarada, Matsya, Koorma, Khadga, Lakshmi,
Kusuma, Kalanidhi, Kalpadruma, Trimurthi, and
Lagnadhi Yogas.
37. LUNAR YOGAS 384
Adhiyoga from the Moon, Dhana Yoga, Sunapha,
Anapha, Duradhura and Kemadruma Yogas.
38. SOLAR YOGAS 386
Vesi, Vosi and Ubhayachari Yogas, effects of these
Yogas.
39. RAJA YOGAS
Kingly Yogas forming in various manners.
40. YOGAS FOR ROYAL ASSOCIATION
41. YOGAS FOR WEALTH
Yogas for affluence, effects of angular lord’s divisional dignities, effects of 5th lord’s divisional dignities, effects of 9th lord’s divisional dignities, angular

and trinal lords related, effects of divisional dignities
of the two planets related.
42. COMBINATIONS FOR PENURY 413
43. LONGEVITY 416
Pindayu, rectifications, deductions for planets in the
visible half, malefics in ascendant, ascendant’s contribution, Naisargayu, Amsayu, ’ongevity for other
living beings, full life span of various living beings,
choice of longevity, doubtfbl cases clarified, other
clues to longevity, further clarifications, rectifications,
special rules for Saturn and Jupiter, increase and fall
in class of longevity, limitless longevity, supernatural
longevity, living till the end of yuga, living the life
span of a sage.
44. MAR AKA (KILLER) PLANETS 440
Marakas based on lordship, maraka dasa, star groups
related to death, Rahu-Kctu as Marakas, 3rd house
and death, occupants of the 8th house, fate of the
corpse, serpent decauates, prenatal abode, asceut after
death,
45. A VASTHAS OF PLANETS 448
Infant state etc,, Awakening, dreaming and sleeping
states, Deepta and other 8 states, Lajjitadi avasthas,
calculation of Sayana and other 1 1 Avasthas, effects
of Cheshta ete. effects of Sayanadi Avasthas for
planets from the Sun to Ketu.
ERRATA

Preface
Presented herewith with pleasure is the first-ever English
translation of the full text of the available version of Maliarshi
Parasara’s Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra. But for the blessings
of Lord Ganesa this would have been as uphill task forme.
Sri Maha Vishnu is the god f gods. So is ParasaraHora—
the book of books in the field of astrology.
The work is in the form of a carritch between sage Parasara
and his disciple Maitreya who later himself became a worthy
sage. Parasara belonging to Vasishta’s lineage was Veda Vyasa’s
father. As could be seen in the course of progressing thorugh
the text, sage Saunaka was the preceptor of Parasara in the
inatter of astrology. Saunaka was one of the earliest sages and
was Garga's disciple.
The date of Parasara could be attributed to be roughly the
efa of Dharma Raja of Maha Bharata. This can be understood
when the sage states “in the present Yuga, Dharma Raja is bom
with the combination of...” He further states that Salivahana
'will be born with the same combination...’ Further, the reader
could find statements relating to the horoscopic yogas of Maha
Vishnu, Prajapati, Swayambhu Manu etc. which statement
could possibly be made by no ordinary mortal.
Varaha Mihira in Brihat Sambita, Kalyana Varma in
Saravali and many such other illustrious authors gave references
Of Parasara’s astrological statements.
Parasara Hora finds its translation in Bengali, Malayalam
etc. which translations however have not been seen by me. I
have with me the following versions.
1. Sri Venkateswata Press, Bombay, partly rendered in Hindi.
For a majority of slokas, one can find Sanskrit commentary only.

2. Hindi translation by Siiarara Jha. (Master Khelari Lai,
Varanasi edition)
3. Hindi translation by Devachandra Jha (Chaukambha
edition)
4 . Hindi translation by Ganesa Datta Pathak (Thakur Prasad
edition)
After scrutinizing critically the four manuscripts, I have
for reasona of more credibility chosen the Sanskrit version
rendered by Sitararm Jha. The Chaukambha version is almost
the same as that of Khclari Lai’s.
Other versions that I have come across are :
1. Tamil translation by C. G. Rajan— for only 36 chapters,
without Sanskrit verses.
2. English translation by N. N. K. Rao for only 25 chapters,
without Sanskrit slokas.
Thus, I have felt a need to make the original version
available in English to the fullest possible extent. Our version
has 97 chapters containing English translation and exhaustive
annotations and examples.
To handle the publication easily, we have divided the work
in two volumes. The present Volume— first volume— contains 45
chapters while the remaining 52 chapters have been put in the
second volume.
Chapter 1 and chapter 2 give some preliminary extraastrological information. From chapter 3, the astrological
information begins, ■ In this chapter, planetary descriptions,
benefics and malefics, planetary deities, complexions, sex,
primordial compounds, seasons, relationships, dignities etc- are
given. Methods of calculating the 5 Upagrahas like Dhooma
and Muhurta Velas like Gulika are given. These are totally ten
and have their own say on a nativity, as the other nine main
Grabas have. So to say, these Upagrahas and Muhurta velafc
can alter in suitable proportions the effects due to Nava Grahas.

In the matter of calculation of Galika, a different concept comes
to light from this oldest work. The later authors have given an
altogether variable in knowing Gulika’s position whereas
Parasara advised that it should be cast for the beginning of
Saturn’s Muhurta. Whereas some suggest that it should be for
the ending Muhurta of S3turn.
In chapter 4, each Rasi is described from various angles.
Slokas 25-30 are the climax of this chapter. An unerring
method to find out the Nisheka Lagna (or the moment of
fatercourse causing conception) from the time of birth is outlined.
Though the process of calculation is as simple as a school
student’s mathematical quiz, it has great truth in it which even
modern science could not discover. To prove the truth of the
statement in the sage’s instruction, a practical example has been
given by me. An assumed example cannot better solve the
problem. A practical case where the time of coitus is astrologically chosen is taken in hand; time of birth has also been got
accurately noted. From the time of birth, the time of Nisheka
(or of coitus) is traced whieh is not in variation, even to the
slightest extent, with the originally noted Nisheka time. Again
from the time of Nisheka, the birth time is traced in a forward
manner using only traditional rules of astrology. This exercise
proves three important points, viz1. The point of M.C. is to be found out in the natal horoscope and houses intersected accordingly. This is popularly
called Sripati Paddhati- Originally Parasara advocated this
system.
2. Gulika’s position should be found out for the beginning of
Saturn’s Muhurta only.
3. Lahiri’s Ayanamsa is the first best. The reader will find
that we have used Moon's exact longitude in the above
process. Simple angular distance by any Ayanamsa will
not alter the solution, but a slight change in Moon’s
position will take us far away from the truth. With Lahjri’s
Ayanamsa, we can safely work out even Nadiamsas, which
change fast.
u

The method given by me in working out the future birth
time from the time of coition can very well help the astrologers
to foretell the exact moment of birth from the time of query.
Reseaches reveal that time of query has a perfect alignment with
the time of Nisheka.
Chapter 5 touches various special Lagnas, like Ghatika
Lagna, Hora Lagfla and Bhava Lagna. The importance of these
ascendanss cannot be underestimated. A final Bhava chart can
emerge after merging the different bhava charts caused by these
various special ascendaDts. This final bhava chart can only
reveal the extent of planetary effects when considered housew.je
whereas the bhava chart exclusively prepared on natal ascendant
alone can sometimes mislead. This is what the sage emphasises
In sloka 9.
Cpme to chapter 6. The zodiac is divided in to sixteen
Vargas or divisions. These are called Shodasa Vargas. How to
find out such Vargas and their use are fully explained. These
are from Rasi down to Shashtiamsa. In the classification, the
vargas are made in four groups, i,e. 6 vargas, 7 Vargas, 10 Vargas
and 16 Vargas and special technical names have been given for
the total number of desirable vargas a planet attained for easy
identification. For example if a planet is said to be in Golokamsa, it indicates that out of 16 Vargas, it is in 15 good V igas.
These technical names appear in the gradation of Raja Yogas.
Each Varga finds a certain specific use in preference to a
planet’s Rasi position. For example, without considering the
Dvadasamsa chart no tangible resuits due to the native’s parents
can be known. In deciding one’s career, the Dasamsa positions
of the planets are of supreme importance. These are highlighted
in chapter 7. In this very chapter the sage enunciates what is
called Vimsopaka strength of a planet. He assigns a maximum
of 20 points taking again differently the four Varga classifications,
viz. Shadvarga, Sapta Varga, Dasa Varga and Shodasa Varga.
The consideration here is whether a planet is placed in own sign,
friendly sign, enemy’s sign and the like in the concerned Varga
scheme. Then an evaluaton is done to get Vimsopaka strength.
This strength enables us decide the extent of auspicious effects a
planet will be capable of revealing in a dasa.

Chapter 8 deals with what is called Jaimini aspects on Rasi
basis. Maharshi Jaimini was the sage who expanded these
Parasari principles very extensively m Sutra form for easy
memorization and successful applicability. The original concept
is however from the pen of Parasara.
Childhood evils are discussed in chapter 9 whiie chapter 10
prescribes planetary combinations to combat such possible evils.
Basic information about the 12 houses could be found in
chapter 11 while specific attention may be given to slokas 14-16.
These 3 slokas serve an important key in knowing how a Bhava
is going to give effects under various circumstances.
Chapters 12-23 give a variety of information and instructions in analysing the 12 houses of a horoscope in a systematic
manner. A close study of these rules will tame one’s mind to
scientifically approach the horoscope for fruitful resuts.
Chapter '24 is again one of the most important chapters.
Here, the various effects of a Bhava lord being in a specific house
are given. All the 12 lords are fully covered. How to sort out
a situation in case of contrary indications is given in slokas
The bhava effects of Dhooma, Vyatipata, Gulika etc., are
narrated fully in chapter 25. Pranapada Lagna’s position vis-avis natal ascendant also reveals certain special effects as could be
seen in this very chapter.
Shadbala calculations, Ishta and Kashta phalas and other
related mathematical aspects are elaborately laid down in the 3
chapters, viz. 26, 27 and 28.
It is not in order if planets are studied with reference to
mere natal chart. Padas for various houses will further alter the
planetary effects. This is what is taught in chapter 29. Raja
Yogas, inter alia are best analysed through Arudha chart or Pada
chart. The sage suggests Graha Padas as well, but unfortunately he leaves it at that without adding much information.’
For still deeper research, Upapada will be more effective.
This area will give more clues particularly about marriage, finance
and diseases. See chapter 30.
Chapter 31 entitled ‘Argaladhyaya’ though brief has worthy
information on planetary interventions, obstructions and effects
thereof.

Significance of planets is treated in chapter 32.
Karakamsa is the Navamsa Rasi occupied by Atma
Karaka. Plenets forming a certain relationship with Karakamsa
and their effects are narrated in chapter 33 extending to 99
slokas.
Chapter 34 is again one of the most instructive. Planets
assume a certain tendency by virtue of owning a certain house.
The sage elaborately touches such roles for various planets for
all the 12 ascendants. He decides on such principles the Yoga
Karakas, Voga Bhanga, Karakas and Marakas for each ascendant.
This will enable us understand whether planet will give beneficial results or adverse effects. Death dealing planets or Mrakas
allow us to guess the period of one’s death.
As the name implies, chapter 35 lists Nabhasa Yogas which
are available In most standard texts. Many new Raja Yogas
could be found in chapter 36, like Khadga, Mridanga, Chamara,
Kahala etc. .
Chapters 37 and 38 deal with Lunar and Solar yogas which
are popularly known. Raja yogas in chapter 39, Yogas for
royal association in chapter 40, and financial combinations in
chapter 41 deserve "Special mention, containing a variety of
authoritative information.
Maraka or death dealing planets bave a say on the finances
of the native apart from causing his end. These are tersely
enlightened in the 42nd chapter.
The chapter on longevity, bearing No. 43, is among the
most important ones. PindayU, Naisargayu, Amsayu and the
like, and computations based on ascendant/planetary pairs
linking with movable, fixed and common signs contain instructive information. In the notes, I have taken Pindayu calculations
and worked out a fullfiedged example touching all aspects of
computation. I have adopted a scientific method for deductions
for planetary contributions arising by placement in bhavas 12
to 7. I have simply not considered bhava positions
in these deductions but degree-wise positions of the various
planets. I have given one common formula covering the six
bhavas and the reader can work out the exact loss of longevity.
This can be usefully extened to any loss of years as far as

bhavasl2to7 is concerned in other systems as well. Other
longevity calculations have been suitably annotated by me.
The reader will also do well to study chapter 44 concerning
Marakas before he takes a decision on longevity. Rahu/Ketu
have also been assigned Marakatwa roles.
The concluding chapter of Vol 1 is the 45th dealing with a
number of kinds of Avasthas of the planets. Out of these, the
12 Avasthas, known as Sayanadi Avasthas are of supreme importance. If one tries to interpret these Avasthas in proper spirit,
he will be able to detect the diseases the native will suffer. I
have supported my views with the help of information from
Adbhuta Sagara of Ballala Sena and Hora Ratna of Balabhadra.
For example, if Mars is in Agamanavastha, one will suffer from
deep ear pains. , In the normal parlance, we consider only Jupiter
in the context of ear defects. Diseases of hand and foot are
assigned to Venus in Agamanavastha. If one conducts a scientific research in the matter of diseases with the help of planetary
Avasthas, viz. Sayanadi Avasthas, one is bound to reach many
brilliant clues.
The present work offers a vast scope for success in predictive astrology. One can build up his own applied astrology
instead of theoretical astrology if he works on the lines suggested
by Maharslii Parasara.
A word of caution is necessary for the benefit of the reader,
In order to understand the hidden aspects of the various rules
given herein, what is required is a thorough understanding of
these principles. Skipping over fast to an ensuing chapter may
not convey the real idea of a ‘present’ chapter. To make the
reader’s Job easier, I have explained every difficult aspect as
clearly as I understand based on my own experience and study of
other authoritative texts,
In the end, I would like to mention that my attempt to
translate this great work and annotate may not have been wholly
successful. I surely would have left some shortcomings unnoticed and unrectified. From the readers, I can only expect the
affection of forgiving me for any innocent lapses.
New Delhi R. Saothanam
Vijaya Dasami 1984

to:
Stq
BRIHAT PARASARA
HORA SASTRA
[trffiffff wrwT fe li rqa 1
OTi^cf qmfa
r prostrate before the lotus-feet of Lord Vighneswsra,
the offspring of Uma, the cause of destruction of sorrow,
who is served by Bhuta ganas (the five great elements cf the
universe) etc; who has the face of a tusker and who consumes
the essence of Kapiththa and Jambu fruits.]
II? II
Chapter 1
. The Creation
fa-TTOST I
ll?ll
5^*r pi* ^r^gtTtrir i
TT^fq fqq ^bst ! I
eq^ri fw m *r wY! \\\\\
' qrq Hfefrq 3TTHT 3PlrTC^ ?fq: ? I
• tSFTRT ^f fN’dKT ‘q q* fiR^TTTrf ? HVtl
1-4. Offering his Pbeisance to all-knowing sage Parasaru
and with folded hands, Maitreya said, “O Venerable, Astrology,
the supreme limb of the Vedas, has three divisions, viz. Hora,

Brihat Porasara Hora Sastra
Ganita and Samhita. Among the said three divisions, Hora or
genethliac part of astrology is still more excellent, I desire to
know of its glorious' aspects from you. Be pleased to tell me,
“How this Universe is created ? How does it end ? What is the
relationship of the animals born on this earth with the
heavenly bodies ? Please speak elaborately”.
Notes : Maitreya was Parasara’s ardent disciple. Sage
. Parasara was the illustrious father of Bhagawan Veda Vyasa.
Parasara Smriti, Parasara Samhita and the present work Parasara Hora are some of the immortal contributions made by
our sage.
Parasara’s preceptor was sage Saunaka, the reputed author
of Rigveda Pratisakbya and other vedic compositions, from
whom he took instructions in astrology. Saunaka was taught by
Narada, son of Lord Brahma Pitamaha in the matter of astrology and others. Narada got direct instructions from Pitamaha.
These details are stated by sage Parasara in the concluding
cnapter of the present work.
The sage predicts in the course of his treatise that Salivatuna will be born In a yoga caused by relationship between an
angular lord and a trinal lor as both are in Simhasanamsa, vide
ch. 41 sloka 32. While the technicalities of the astrological
part of this statement will be understood by the reader as he
progresses with the study of this work, it will be evident that
Parasara was much before Salivahana. The era of Sallvahana
commenced in AD 72. Since Veda Vyasa is reverentially referred
as Parasaratmaja, meaning the offspring of Parasara, Sage Parasara lived during Maha Bbarata era.
Sage Maitreya’s name appears in Veda Vyasa’s Srimad
Bhagavata Parana. Maitreya was sage Kusaru’s offspring. Sage
Maitreya achieved a great deal of knowledge in spiritual and
other topics. Vidura abandoned his kith and kin and met sage
Maitreya to achieve religious merits.
As can be seen, our text is in the form of a carritch
between sage Parasara and Maitreya. the Master and the Disciple
respectively.
Astrology has three divisions, viz. Hora, Ganita and
Samhita. Hora deals with genethliac part while mathematical
aspects like planetary movements, strengths etc. are taught by
the Ganita branch, Samhita means a collection or compen-

Chapter 1
dium of law, code and digest of any branch of learning. These
are like Rig Veda Samhita. Charaka Samhita, Vasishta Samhita
etc. Thus Samhita is not an original work.
tfT? qisj ^qr fqq J 1
TTflT g*: IIX.lt
TTc^T tfjnrFcT ^nif?<Tf?TVTWI (
*f*tT It^ll
WT^rnT g^wrnr i
anffensra srrtrT^t crt: fwmOr hum
'T qrfn^TTT TrfeT^|i4 5T5TTJ 31 |
f:ST JTT’sr UcU
5-8. Parasara answered, ‘O Brahmin, your query (so to say,
the desire to know of the intricacies of astrology) has an auspicious purpose in it for the welfare of the Universe. Praying Lord
Brahma and Sri Saraswati, His power (and consort), and the
Sun God, the leader of the planets and the cause of Creation,
I shair proceed to narrate to you the science of astrology as
heard through Lord Brahma. Only good will follow the teaching
of this science to the students who are peacefully disposed, who
honour the preceptors (and elders) who speak only truth and
who are God-fearing. Woeful for ever doubtlessly will it be to
impart knowledge of this science to an unwilling student, to a
heterodox and to a crafty person.
rsrwnTTTfa: \
tftaTfrrftrfnem ga i w; i
‘ ^f^cT cTrSnrm ^ H5T5175T
fawj: JlfagTOTfacr:

Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
-9-12. Sri Vishnu who is the lord (of all matters), who has
undefiled spirit, who is endowed with the three Gunas although
he transcends the grip of Gunas (i.e. Gunatita), who is the
Author of this Universe, who is glorious, who is the Cause and
who is endowed with valour has no beginning. He authored
the Universe and administers it with a quarter of his power.
The other three quarters of Him, filled with nectar, are knowable to (only) the philosophers (of maturity). The Principal
Evolver who is both perceptible and imperceptible is Vasu Deva.
The Imperceptible part of the Lord is endowed with dual powers
while the Perceptible with triple powers.
ufarfacftqi m 5TTOTT ?I>HTWT \
ttaqiinN t
?W:WqTsff^m ftrwpti: H^TWTf^Ttr:
13-15. The three powers are : Sri Sakti ( Mother Lakshmi)
with Sattwa Guna, Bhoo Sakti (Mother Earth) with Rajoguna and
Neela Sakti with Tamoguna. Apart from the three, the fourth
kind of Vishnu, influenced by Sri Sakti and Bhoo Sakti, assumes
the form of Sankarshana with Tamo Guna, of Pradyumna with
Rajoguna and of Anirudha with Satwa Guna,
SBhI <*W1 JWctJTSpras: 1
arpTWRT WTcft 1
*nrj wuifcrw qa: n^n
16-17. Mahattatwa, Ahamkara and Ahamkara Murthi,
Brahma, are born from Samkarshana , Pradyumna and Anirudha
respectively. AH these three forms are endowed with all the
three gunas, with predominance of the Guna due to their origin.
TJ^TT
mforqrt tps mi*

Chapter 1
fclT * |
cTTfsr Sltffa WW i fidfi l: Hgfc||
18-19. Ahamkara is of three classes, i.e. with Satwik,
Rajasik and Tamasik dispositions. Divine class, sensory organs
and the five primordial compounds (air, earth etc.) are
respectively from the said three Ahamkaras.
sftwrem *f$?ft fetur: htt qrrf?r * * ?** *■ i
wnwn fwdsFfT%i^oii
20. Lord Vishnu coupled with Sri Sakti rules over the
three worlds. Coupled with Bhoo Sakti, He is Brahma causing
the Universe. Coupled wtth Neela Sakti, He is Siva, destroying
the Universe,
wyj ** aft** ttmiwi i
w ftr rffer ft** ftr
. sft** ft*R§r'*5*
{aftrowarf *TT*T*Tftn>: ftt* ||^||
^ * *5*: qTBTe*rftw>rftm:u^^n
flf**f* tT*ft*mftnrft!T: ftwm: i
*T«TTf W*r sfamwifilWl: (I^Vll
21-24. The Lord is in all beings and the entire Universe
is in Him. All beings contain both Jeevatma and Paramatma
Amsas. Some have predominance of the former while yet some
have the latter in predominance. Paramatmamsa is predominant
in the Grahas viz. Sun etc. and Brahma, Siva and others. Their
powers or consorts too have predominance of Paramatmamsa.
Others have more of Jeevatmamsa.

3roremw*pns*roi: i R n
Chapter 2
Great Incarnations (Of The Lord)
fofa Pctt ffc gftwc lutii
1. Maitreya : “O sage, are the incarnations of ViBhnu, viz.
Sri Rama, Sri Krishna etc. endowed with Jeevamsa ?
TTO: ywrew fas ! I
^ ^ffaelTCR^ sffafalfilffacTTt IRII
2. Parasara : “O Brahmin, the four incarnations, viz.
Rama, Krishna, Narasimha and Varaha are wholly with
Paramaimamsa. The other incarnations (than these, out of the
ten) have in them Jeevamsa too.
{il'jRtf tWIiW: I
gffaRt ^TRqRTsrt , srcre^ 11311
tWRi ^'TITTW l
HHHP T T RT'qfa UglMTKH: RRT: OTltf UYH
3-4. The Unborn lord has many incarnations. He has
incarnated as the planets {Nava Grahas ) to bestow on the living
beings the results due to their Karmas. He is Janardana. He
assumed the auspicious form of Grahas to destroy the demons
(evil forces) and sustain the divine beings.
TmtRmr: vsw iijsnw: \
ijfoyiw ye,: vutii
fadU^Of ^FTSrt *TT*Nr? ^ I
a ** s^Tfatn: \m\

Chapter 2
5-7 From the Sun God the incarnation of Rama, from the
Moon that of Krishna, from Mars that of Narasimha, from
Mercury that of Budhdha, from Jupiter that of Vamana, from
Venus that of Parasu Rama, from Saturn that of Koorma
(Tortoise), from Rahu that of Varaha (Pig) and from Ketu that
of Meena (Fish) occurred. All other incarantaions than these
also are through the Grahas. The beings with more Paramatma -
msa are called divine beings.
l $ SWffafTT: I
lie; 1 1
TWfcMIW*: # I
mw ^ 3^: tntifm onueii
5fhrr?if^:H?Tr^T wmi i
^sftr ?rN f^n^oij
W fa* ! m JTf^R ^f^i
weTTOfa wErarfcr g rawnn Ed rrfe*: imn
fTTT cTj^qrt^f 5TT^ ST*?*tf?T 1
YJgTWV f%9T^cT: ll^||
lit ?TT: Wlfdtt Sr*l f^ld |
?RW»‘ ^Rp^rirfrT ll?^H
8-13. The beings with more Jeevatmamsa are (mortal)
beings. The high degree of Paramatmamsa from the Grahas, viz.
Sun etc, did incarnate as Rama, Krishna etc. After completing
the, mission, the Paramatmamsas (of the respective) Grate again
merge (in the respective) Grahas. The Jeevatma portions from
the Grahas take births as human beings and live their lives
according to their Karmas and again merge in the Grate.
And at the time of Great Destruction, the Grahas as well merge
in the Lord Vishnu. One who knows of all these, will become
versed in the knowledge of the past, present and future. Without
a knowledge of astrology these cannot be known. Hence every-

Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
one should have a knowledge of Astrology particularly the
Brahmin. One who, devoid of astrological knowledge, blames
this science will go to the hell called ‘Raurava’, and will be
reborn blind.
3TO ttfWans'TTsam: Il3ll
Chapter 3
Planetary Characters And
Description
fait 11 ^ it
1. Maitreya : "O Sage, you have affectionately explained
about the planetary incarnations. Now kindly detail their characters and dispositions.”
*jpjj finr ! ywrifa qfrftqfhq i
3TIVTT? mfH 11^11
^ »wrw?nfq q^Trrrfq 1
pnfq twwwifa tnfa $11311
2-3. Parasara : “O Brahmin, listen to the account of placement of the heavenly bodies. Out of the many luminous bodies
sighted in the skies, some are stars; yet some are planets (i.e,
Grahas). Those that have no movements are the Nakshatras (or
asterisms).
Notes : Placed in the firmaments are many stars among
which we have, for astrological purposes, 27 stars and 7 planets.
Rahu and Ketu though recognised as planets /or astrological
delineations are shadowy. These two are nodes of the Moons

Chapter 3
and are exactly apart 1 80 degrees mutually. Their positions are
formed when the Moon crosses the ecliptic from northern latitude
to southern one and vice versa.
*Tlff*cT ?RTcT ^ 3 ^ l
imi
srfffgt TTCTO: «ff?r II *11
imnta sifanm t
qrff ikii
4-6. Those are called planets (or Grahas) that move
through the Nakshatras (or asterisms) in the zodiac. The said
zodiac comprises of 27 asterisms commencing from Aswini.
The same area is divided in 12 parts equal to 12 Rasis (or signs)
commencing from Aries. The names of the planets commence
from the Sun. The sign rising is known as Lagna (or the
ascendant). Based on the ascendant and the planets joining
and departing from each other, the native’s good and bad effects
are deduced.
Notes : Planets move in the zodiac through stellar mansions pr Nakshatras. The names of the 27 Nakshatras are :
1. Aswini 2. Bharani 3. Krittika
4. Rohini 5. Mrigasira 6. Arudra
7. Punarvasu 8. Pushyami 9. Aslesha
10. Makha 11. Poorva Phalguni 12. UttaraPhalguni
13. Hastha 14. Chitta 15. Swati
16. Visakha 17. Anuradha 18. Jyeshta
19. Moola 20. Poorvashadha 21. Uttarashadha
22. Sravana 23. Dhanishta • 24. Sathabhishak
25. Poorvabkadra 26. Uttarabhadra 27. Revati
The names of the planets are given in sloka 10 of this
chapter.
The ascendant is a very importat point in the horoscope.
It is the sign that rises in the east, on the latitude of birth. The
apparent rising of a sign is due to the rotation of the earth on its
own axis at a rate of motion causing every degree of the zodiac

Brihat Parasara Bora Sastra
seems to ascend on the eastern horizon. Approximately, two
hours are required for a sign to pass via the horizon, thereby
every degree taking four minutes to ascend, This duration
however, is actually dependent on the concerned latitude.
Actually the Sun has no motion. His is an apparent one
rodT^^ 0111 -^"^^ 11 - ° ther pianets including the
oHhe nhn r C - T ^ ° f m0ti0n ’ Tte aVerage dai 'y motions
of the pianets, which are not, however standard, are as follows :
The Sun
The Moon
Mars
Mercury
Venus
Jnpiter
Saturn
Node
l c
With ! i e mot !° ns ’ a P ]a °et forms various aspects
With others These aspects through longitudinal distances have
a great deal of utility in astrology. This is what the sage suggests to be considered. &
TOTT &TT: HHTTfimiPRf.' 1
7. Details (of astronomical nature) of stars be understood
by general rules while 1 narrate to you about the effects of
planets and signs.
Notes : Planetary movements can be fully understood from
astronomical literature ahd Samhitas. Narada Samhita, Varga
Samhita, Vasishta Samhita etc. are hinted at by Parasara by
“general rules” or trntR This may well mean other
ordinary literature devoted to stellar movements.
*Tf?*R VTvt SRT: I
rTcT ||t;||
srr^ ^ar^Tf

Chapter 3 ;
8-9. The positions of the planets for a given time he taken
as per Drikganita. And with the help of Rasi durations applicable to the respective places, the ascendant at birth should be 1
known. Now I tell you about the castes, descriptions and
dispositions of the planets.
3PT t?T£T I
Tgv. trsnwTtUou
10. NAMES OF PLANETS : The names of the nine
planets respectively are : the Sun, the .Moon, Mars, Mercury,
Jupiter, Venus, Saturn, Rahu and Ketu.
Notes : in the Sanskrit literature on astrology, the planets
are denoted by different names. Please see. ch. 2 of my English
translation of Horasara, for additional information in this .
regard.
*TT:, **>*<ft WETMI'*"
11. BENEFICS AMD MALEFICS : Among these, the
Sun, Saturn, Mars, . decreasing Mood, Rahu and Ketu (the
ascending and the descending nodes of the Moon) are malefics
while the rest are benefics. Mercury, however, is a malefic if he
joins a malefic.
Notes : That decreasing Moon and increasing Moon are
.respectively a malefic and a benefic is the view conveyed by the
sage. Yet some exponents and commentators hold the following
view :
When the Moon is ahead of the Sun but within 120°,
she has medium strength. Between 120° to 240’ she is very
auspicious, see atfavpTSlff. From 240° to 0° she is bereft of
, strength. This is Yavanas’ view, vide P. 70 of my English
Translation of SaravaU. This view is, however, related to theMoon’s strength or otherwise, while waning Moon (Krishna
Paksha or dark half Moon) is a malefic and waxing Moon
(Sukla Paksha or bright half Moon) is a benefic.
Should the Moon be conjunct a benefic or aspected by a
benefic, she turns a benefic, even if in a waning state.

_ Brihat Parasara Hora Sastrn
Parasara 'Zit h,1VC c,ear from
rarasara, that he becomes a malefic if he joins a malefic If
V^wamng Moon and Mercury are together, both are benefics.
?a: «ra> Tritaron;: u^u
5TT^g^> ijg*rf!jsi<n*rer: i
STT^: *tafW|Mig§f* |:**; 11**11
soul of 2 ;,? rif£ rARr GGVERN ^ES : The Sun is the
soul of all. The Moon ,S the mind. Mars is one’s strength
hfnifn? 1S v PC£C1 ' g,Ver While Jupiter confers Knowledge and
happiness. Venus governs semen (potency) while Saturn denotes
Notes : The degree of bencfic effects of the indications
mentioned above will be commensurate with the strength of the
concerned planet If the Sun is strong, one will have a matured
nenl a fh W “ a w Undant Spifitual progress - Knowledge and
genera 1 happiness will be well acquired if Jupiter is well-disposed
Grief will not be there, if Saturn is bereft of strength.
5 ttsth^ jfar 1 tJTTctrsr: i
^ garafttil'YII
'?**** * ft* •' qpKN sTftrf^5Tii ?stl ,
14-15 PLANETARY CABINET : Of royal status are the
Sun and the Moon while Mars is the army chief. Princeapparent is Mercury. The ministerial planets are Jupiter and
Venus. Saturn is a servant. Rahu and Ketu form the planetary
forTeffoft tftTnTtft : \
TOKraT||{^||
gift mgft fj3meW ! ll^n
!• Leader of elephants, animals etc.

Chapter 3
16-17. PLANETARY COMPLEXIONS : The Sun is
blood-red. The Moon is tawny. Mars who is not very tall is
blood-red while Mercury’s hue is akin to that of green grass.
Tawny, variegated and dark are Jupiter, Venus and Saturn in
their order.
frsojfafar: *rf^7T fgT^r ! \
18. PLANETARY DEITIES : Fire (Agni), Water
(Varuna), Subrahmanya (Lord Siva’s son following Ganesa).
Maha Vishnu, Indra, Sachi Devi (the consort of Lord Indra)
and Brahma are the presiding deities of the 7 planets in their
order.
Notes : The deities or Adhidovatas of the planets as given
above may be invoked to get the respective planets’ afflictions
cured. For example, evils indicated by Mercury can be brought
under control by offering prayers to Sri Vishnu Bhagawan.
The names of the planetary deities are additionally emp-'
loyed by Varaha Mihira in selecting a name for the child. The
consonants and vowels are attributed to the seven planets as
: The Vowels (12 in number from sr to 3ft)
: Semi Vowels viz. q-, x, ^ and ?
: Sibilants viz. ijr, and
: Aspirate viz. ^
: Guttural viz. w, q, ^ and ^
: Palatals viz % 3, 3T and 5T
Mercury : Cerebrals viz. z, 5 , z, % and *r
Jupiter : Dentals viz. q, «r, q, h and q
Saturn : Labials viz. 7 , q, vr an d q
The name of the child can be selected with an initial letter
as above based on the stronger of the two, viz. natal ascendant
lord and Navamsa ascendant lord. For example, if Mars is
stronger, the name can have a guttural in the beginning appropriate to the presiding deity. In this case, Subrahmanya is the
deity and the name can be Kumara (jFR) or Guha (gf).
Similar deductions can be suitably made in other cases. If the
under.
^fctuMutMoon
. Mars
St-tLVenus

30 Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
initial letter belongs to a planet without dignity, it will bring bad
luck.
Likewise, the Nakshatras too have presiding deities. Any
' affliction caused to natal star by way of malefic occupation or
by eclipses at birth or in a future date, can be warded" off’ bv
suitable propitiation to the deit y concerned. The 27 deities are
denoted below :
Aswini
Aswini Kumara
Bharani
Yama
Krittika
Agni
Rohini
Brahma
Mrigasira
Moon
Arudra
Siva
Punarvasu
Aditi
Pushyami
Jupiter
Aslesha
Rabn
Makha
Sun
Poorva Phalguni
Aryama
Uttara Phalguni
Sun
Hastha
Viswa Karma
Chitta
Vayu
Swati
Indra
Visakha
Mitra
Anuradha
Indra
Jyeshta
Niruti
Moola
Varuna
Poorvashadha
Viswadeva
Uttarashadha
Brahma
Sravana
Vishnu
Dhanishta
Vasu (wf)
Sathabishak
Varuna
Poorvabhadra
Ajacharana
Uttarabhadra
Ahirbudhanya
Revati
Poos ha
A malefic nlanet in a particular star will yield its evil
effects in the Pasa related to that star. For example, if Ketu
is in Krittika in the 9th house, the evil effects due to father will
be given by Ketu in Sun’s dasa (related to Krittika). Hence
propitiation of Fire god will counter the possible evil.

Chapter 3 31
Alternatively, Lord Ganesa representing Ketu may also be
pleased suitably.
?rt: faw psmiittn
19. SEX OF THE PLANETS : Mercury and Saturn are
neuters. The Moon and Venus are females while the Sun, Mars
and Jupiter are males.
' ^FTf * rTrSTHtfiT
20. PRIMORDIAL COMPOUNDS : The Pancha Bhootas,
viz. fire, earth, ether, water and air are respectively governed by
Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus and Saturn.
ftlSOTV $*T*V I I
tnfa: ! ir?ii
21. PLANETARY CASTES : Jupiter and Venus are
Brahmins. The Sun is a royal planet while the Moon and
Mercury belong to commercial community. Saturn rules the
Sudras (4th caste).
?Tiig*-tJTT33ft STO-Wfifotf ! H^ll
22. Satwik planets are the luminaries and Jupiter, Venus
and Mercury are Rajasik while Mars and Saturn are Tamasik
planets.
Notes : The Satwa, Rajas and Tamasik natures of planets
will have a say on the disposition of the native. For further
information, see my notes, vide P. 51 of Saravali.
23. DESCRIPTION OF THE SUN : The Sun’s eyes are
honey-coloured. He has a square body. He is of clean habits,
bilious, intelligent and has limited hair (on his head).

Brihat Parasara flora Sastra
Notes : Much additional details could be gathered from
my notes in ch. 4 of Saravali and ch. 2 of Horasara. The native
will be influenced in appearance, disposition etc. by the strongest
planet or the ascendant lord or the Navamsa ascendant lord.
SfffTrWq;: ’ RWW'ift ff rfd jf g S T 1 1
24. DESCRIPTION OF THE MOON : The Moon is
very windy and phlegmatic. She is learned and has a round
body. She has auspicious looks and sweet speech, is ficklcminded and very lustful.
c* rs
25. DESCRIPTION OF MARS : Mars has blood-red
eyes, is fickle-minded, liberal, bilious, given to anger and has
thin waist and thin physique.
tj: I
fqxRR SRiffR faff! ffT^ffffcUSTffT IR^II
26. DESCRIPTION OF MERCURY : Mercury is
endowed with an attractive physique and the capacity to use
words with many meanings. He is fond of jokes. He has a
mix of all the three humours.
g^T¥PJT \
qPSfffrfa^ afaTR ?fa*n*fffaOTTff:
27. DESCRIPTION OF JUPITER : Jupiter has a big
body, tawny hair and tawny eyes, is phlegmatic, intelligent and
learned in all sastras.
gsifaHt *T*T>: gcT: \
ffTffnfafffftsfa?n?lTT ffffRSTIT: u^ll
28. DESCRIPTION OF VENUS : Venus is charming,
has a splendorous physique, is excellent or great in disposition,
has charming eyes, is a poet, is phlegmatic and windy and has
curly hair.

Chapter 3
Notes : The word gtrV in the text has many purports like
happy, virtuous, charming etc. Since Venus is a charming
planet, the said meaning 'charming’ has been used. However,
I do not imply that Venus is not a virtuous planet etc.
ff^T^cT^: wfYfr: fq^f^qfqsrrrqqr: i
q»T: *m>q*P*> frq !
29. DESCRIPTION OF SATURN : Saturn has an emaciated and long physique, has tawny eyes, is windy in temperament, has big teeth, is indolent and lame and has coarse hair.
srsrord rWh jq-HRtsfq i
fw) ll^oH
30. DESCRIPTION OF RAHU AND KETU : Rahu has
smoky appearance with a blue-mix physique. He resides in
forests and is horrible. He is windy in temperament and is
intelligent. Ketu is akin to Rahu.
srftq 7q=TTrT*rr R33TT ?qq RSTT
qiRTR Rtrf?q> f^q !
31. PRIMARY INGREDIENTS (OR SAPTA DHATUS) :
Bones, blood, marrow, skin, fat, semen and muscles are respectively denoted by the planets from the Sun etc.
Notes : The Sun and others upto Saturn rule the Sapta
Dhatus or primary ingredients of the body, as denoted above.
Their strength or weakness indicate safety or otherwise to the
Dhatu concerned. For example, if the Sun is afflicted at birth,
the native is liable to suffer disorders of bones, breakage of
bones, and the like. The native will incur disorders of blood if
the Moon is primarily ill-disposed. Similarly other aspects of
the Dhatus may be considered.
rirt: Rqfeq: qRTTcT ll^U
32. PLANETARY ABODES : Temple, watery place,
place of fire, sport-ground, treasure-house, bed-room and filthy
ground : these are respectively the abodes for the seven planets
from the Sun onward.

34 Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
Notes : The abodes denoted have varied uses, particularly
in horary astrology. If, for example. Mercury is related to the
recovery of a lost article, it will be near a sport-ground. If it
is Venus, it is in the bed-room, and so on and so forth.
faforer frita* hi^u
33. PLANETARY PERIODS : Ayana, Muhurtha, a day
(consisting day and night), Ritu, month, fortnight and year :
These art the periods allotted to the planets from the Sun to
Saturn.
Notes : The durations cited can be related to the maturity
of an event, particularly in horary astrology and in Dasa bhukti
judgements. Should the Sun, for example, be related to the
fruition of an event, it will be in about six months.
Ayana is the time taken by the Sun to complete one
course — northern or southern in the zodiac. This is about six
months. The Moon indicates Muhurtha, which is equal to
48 minutes. Ritu is approximately two months or the time
required for ths Sun’s transit of two Rasis.
The period indicated by Rahu is 8 months and Ketu
3 months (vide sloka 46 of this ch.). Also see sloka 18, ch. 4 of
Saravali which states further use of these indications.
^ NE$A R Y TASTES : Pungent, smine, bitter,
mixed, sweet, aciduous an& astringent are' respectively tastes
lorded by the Sun etc.
Notes : The strongest planet will give the native a penchant for the particular taste ruled by it. Alternatively, one may
like the taste denot ed by the ?.nH inrfl or the planet conjunct the
2nd lord . The plane t in the 2nd too has a say in the. matter.
If many are thus related, the strongest one prevails.
cTCtrR 113 X 11

Chapter 3
ff*3T Svft ^q> fe% yt^t fjjsfhnr !
^ 3f?R: %TJI «)*?TT *1aSRn: f*TH I
*rfar<#s> qt=i> qi T qiq ^sqT: ll^vall
«rqm?n^ki'n1 qwirt sifvR*?^ i
tn^frarraT sfri*raTT: u^u
35-38. PLANETARY STRENGTHS : Strong in the east
are Mercury and Jupiter. The Sun and Mars are so in the south
while Saturn is the only planet that derives strength in the west.
The Moon and Venus are endowed with vigour when in the
north. Again, strong during night are the Moon, Mars and
Saturn while Mercury is strong during day and night. The rest .
(i.e. Jupiter, the Sun and Venus) are strong only in day time.
During the dark half malefics are strong. Benefics acquire
strength in the bright half of the month. Malefics and benefics
are respectively strong in Dakshinayana and Uttarayana. The
lords of the year, month, day and Hora (planetary hour) are
stronger than the other in ascending order. Again stronger than
the other in the ascending are : Saturn, Mars, Mercury, Jupiter,
Venus, the Moon and the Sun.
Notes : Indicated in the first instance are directional
strengths or digbala. The following are the directions related to
a horoscope.
East : ascendant £4
North : 4lh house or the Nadir 5* &
West : 7th house or the descendant'^’
South : 10th house or the meridian
These are to be reckoned only from the ascendant and not
from the Moon.
Jupiter and Mercury have Digbala in the ascendant. The
Sun and Mars acquire this strength in the 10th house; Saturn does
so in the 7th. The 4th gives directional strength to the Moon
and Venus. The planet gets no Digbala if it is. in the opposite
sign with reference to its Digbala house. For example, Saturn
has no Digbala if he rises.
The use of Digbala is : T jte otanet with Digbala wi ll
direct the native fruitfully in its Dasa periods to the respective

Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
direction lord ed by it, If Jupiter is in tne ascendant, the periods
of Jupiter will give success in north-east, the direction ruled by
it. The directions of the planets may be understood as under :
The Sun
— east
Saturn
■=— west
Venus
— south-east
The Moon
— north-west
Mars
— south
Mercury
— north
Jupiter
— ■ north-east
Rahu
— south-west
Conversely, if one undertakes living in or journeyin g to
th e direction denoted bv a planet without directional streng th,
th ere will be obstructions and losse s.
To understand other strengths, the reader is referred to
Saravall, Part I, my English translation and notes thereof in
this context.
W*TOf?l CTWCT \
TO: U Ull
^3*?* q* wm: mj fe* ! uvoii
39-40, RELATED TO TREES : The Sun rules strong
trees (i.e. trees with stout trunks). Saturn useless trees, the Moon
milky trees (like rubber yielding plants). Mars bitter ones (like
lemon plants), Venus floral plants, Jupiter fruitful ones and
Mercury fruitless ones.
Note : Much information can be seen in Brihat Jataka
and Sarcvali in regard to birth of trees.
ffar 1%T3ftrT*T ! infill

Chapter 3
$rh ■rhn^T fasr ! sfttf cT«fa ^ \
^qtwrfar ^Tf^Tf^T wWftefaar] iiv^n
fawr ?TOTRfft?f 5 T w<ffW ysrtu * \
*** f*nr *r%fasr ! TOT*?* !iqq ^iiyvm
wll! . 1i^ 4 - OTHER MATTERS : Rahu rules the outcaste
while Ketu governs mixed caste. Saturn and the nodes indicate
anthills. Rahu denotes multi-coloured clothes and Ketu raes
Lead and blue gem belong to Rahu and Ketu. Jupiter Venus'
the Sun, the Moon, Mercury, Mars and Saturn in their order
govern saffron, silken, red silken, white silken, black silken, red
and multi-coloured robes,
. Not ®f : “ Cha ^a!a” is translated as outcaste, though it
additionally means one cruel in deeds (like a butcher for
instance). It further means a person illegally born to a Sudra
( ih caste in Hindu tradition of ancient days) father and
Brahmana mother. Ketu denotes a person born through an
intercaste marriage. . 6
robes S ° me aUth0rUieS hoId the lowing view about planetary
The Sun-coarse, the Moon-new, Mars-burnt, Mercury
water soaked, Jupiter— of recent origin but not new. Venusdurable, Saturn— torn, Rahu— multi-coloured and Ketu— much
torn.
***** srqf f^RT ?T«n fa*
farfatf fa* ! \
aroit %'Ttof'rra fan ! uv V i
45-46. PLANETARY SEASONS : Vasanta Greesh™
Varsha Sarad, Hemanta and Sisira are the six Rims’ respectively
Mars, Moon, Mercury, Jupiter and Saturn
Rahu and Ketu denote 8 months and 3 months respectively.
„ t N °‘ es Si ° ce the Sun is the cause of the seasons, he is
ruler o7r^ h a T dany SeaSOn ' However > the Sun is a coruler of Greeshma Ritu apart from Mars.

Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
The durations of Ritus or seasons are as follows :
Vasanta — 20th March to 19th May
Greeshma — 20tb May to 19th July
Varsha — 20th July to 19th September
Sarat — 20th September to 19th November
Hemanta — 20th November to 19th January
Sisira — 20th January to 19th March
But in the matter of lost horoscopy, a different nomenclature is followed by many to ascertain natal Sun’s placement
by Ritu. For details, please see page 12 of my English rendering of Nashta Jataka.
3FTTT sfteriiPST:
47. DHATU, MOOLA AND JEEVA DIVISIONS : Dhatu
planets are Rahu, Mars, Saturn and the Moon while the Sun and
Venus are Moola planets. Mercury, Jupiter and Ketu rule Jeevas.
Notes : The divisions of Dhatu (metals), Moola (roots,
vegetables etc.) and Jeeva (living beings) have a great use in
horary astrology, particularly to know the unexpressed query. If,
for example, Rahu is in the ascendant or is a significant planet in
a horary chart, then the query relates to a metal. For a fuller
appreciation, see Bhuvana Deepaka of Padma Prabhu Soori.
RgRRH SSTfa feURrTR ! trtfqll
48. SATURN : Out of all the planets Saturn is the eldest
(i.e. with the highest age). He bestows maximum number of
years in Naisargika Dasa.
ftat I
R1RT ^TTT tv Wlfapnfoein RfacTT I
u*ou
49-50. EXALTATION AND DEBILITATION : For the
seven planets from the Sun on, the signs of exaltation are respectively Aries, Taurus, Capricorn, Virgo, Cancer, Pisces and Libra.

Chapter 3
The deepest exaltation degrees are respectively 10,3, 28, 15, 5,
27 and 20 in those signs. And in the seventh sign from the said
exaltation sign each planet has its own debilitation. The same
degrees of deep exaltation apply to deep fall.
Notes : Each planet assumes significance in a certain sign
In the opposite sign therefrom, it is debilitated. Even in the
exaltation sign or the debilitation sign, it is very highly favourable
or highly detrimental as the case may be, in a certain degree.
For example, the Sun is exalted in Aries and is the most
powerful on the 10th degree therein. In Libra he gets debilitated and if be in 10th degree of Libra, he is worst affected.
Similarly suitable deductions be made for other planets.
As for the exaltations and debilitation of the nodes, there
are different views. Please see page 20 of my English translation
of Horasara for necessary information.
?TcT: \
R»THHJ(YU
51-54. ADDITIONAL DIGNITIES : In Leo the first
20 degrees are the Sun’s Moolatrikona while the rest is his own
house. After the first 3 degrees o f exaltation portion in
Taurus, for the Moon the rest is her hTooIatrikona” Mars~ has
the first 12 degrees in Aries as Moolatrikona with the rest therein becoming simply his own house. For Mercury, in Virgo the
first 1 5 degrees arc exaltation zone, the next 5 degrees Moolatrikona and the last 10 degrees arc own house. The first one third
of Sagittarius is the Moolatrikona of Jupiter while, the remaining part thereof is his own house. Venus divides Libra into two
halves keeping the first as Moolatrikona and the second as own
house. Saturn’s arrangements arc same in Aquarius as the Sun
has in Leo.

Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
gif?) ftq*N3T^ 11X9111
55. NATURAL RELATIONSHIPS : Note the signs which
are the 4th, 2nd, 12th, 5th, 9th and the 8th from the Moolatrikona of a planet. The planets ruling such signs are its friends,
apart from the lord of its exaltation sign. Lords other than these
are its enemies. If a'planct becomes its friend as well as its enemy
(on account of the said two computations) then it is neutral or
equal.
Notes : A simple formula is given in this sloka to compute
planetary relationships. From the Moolatrikona sign of a planet,
the 2nd, 4th, 5th, 8th, 9th and 12th lords are its friends. The
rest viz. 3rd, 6th, 7th, 10th and 1 1th lords from Moolatrikona
are its enemies. The exaltation sign’s lord is always friendly
even if he owns the 3rd, 6th, 7th, 10th or the 11th from Moolatrikona. If, however, friendship and enmity occur simultaneously none prevails but equality or neutrality.
Take for example the case of Mars. The Moolatrikona
for him is Aries. The 1 1th lord from there is Saturn and hence
he is inimical. But he is as well a friend, as he is the lord of
exaltation sign of Mars. Since wc get enmity on one count and
friendship on the other, Saturn becomes equal to Mars. Take
again the relationship of Venus. He owns the 2nd and 7th from
the Moolatrikona of Mars, thus becoming friend and enemy
respectively. Hence he is neutral to Mars.
See table below for an easy grasp of relationship :
Planet
Friends
Enemies
Equals
Sun
Moon, Mars, Jupiter
Venus, Sat
Mercury
Moon
Sun, Mercury
Mars, Jup,
Venus, Saturn
Mars
Sun, Moon, Jupiter
Mercury
Venus, Saturn
Mercury Sun, Venus
Moon
Mars,J upiter
Saturn
Jupiter
Sun, Moon, Mars,
Mercury, Venus
Saturn
Venus
Mercury, Saturn
Moon, Sun
Mars, Jupiter
Saturn
Mercury, Venus
Sun, Moon, Mars Jupiter

Chapter 3
The Moon does not consider anyone as her enemy as per
the following statement of Parasara (Benares edition by
Chaukamba "TOST srrfY mi: iWTOTOT: meanning
meaning further that the Sun and Mercury are Moon’s
friends while others are her neutrals. Saravali also has an
identical view.
As for Rahu and Ketu, the following may be of additional
interest.
Rahu : The Sun, Moon and Mars are his enemies.
Jupiter, Venus and Saturn are his friends. Mercury is his
neutral.
Ketu : The luminaries are his enemies. Mars, Venus and
Saturn are his friends, while Mercury and Jupiter are his
i neutrals.
56. TEMPORARY ( IIO RO SCO PIC) RELATIONSHIPS:
The planet posited in the 10th, 4th, 11th, 3rd, 2nd or the 12th
from another becomes mutual friend. There is enmity otherwise,
(This applies to a given horoscope).
Notes : The hints given in sloka 55 are to understand the
constant relationship among planets. In the present sloka we
are advised of planets having a certain relationship based on
their positions, i.e. for given moment. If two are mutually in 4th
and 10th, or in 3rd and 11th or in 2nd and 12th, they become
temporarily cordial to each other. Should they be otherwise,
there prevails mutual temporary enmity. This rule is very simple
and needs no explanation.
ir? gftrTiiKcii
57-58. COMPOUND RELATIONSHIP : Should two
planets be naturally and temporarily friendly, they become
extremely friendly. Friendship on one count and neutrality on
another count make them friendly. Enmity on one count

Brihat Parasara If ora Sastra
combined with affinity on the other turns into equality.
Enmity and neutralship cause only enmity. Should there be
enmity ,n both manners, extreme enmity is obtained. The
TcZ C °" Sid “ thCK “ d d “ kre effect
Notes ; The final relationship, as a result of natural and
~ ^positions is called 5-fold relationship, or
tfTd. The same is shown below in an easy form :
Speculum of Compound Relationships
One
relationship
Another
relationship
Net relationship
Friendship
Friendship
Extreme inendship \
Neutrality
Friendship
Friendship
Enmity
Enmity
Extreme enmity
Neutrality
Enmity
Enmity
Enmity
Friendship
Neutral
It is understood that if there is friendship with enmity
then also neutrality will prevail.
Rtfs* 5
^ 16 ? JlhrT STR I
5RTC RcEf^T fegspjT:
59-60. RATIO OF EFFECTS : A planet in exaltation gives
fully good effects while in Moolatrikona it is bereft of its auspic,ou S effects by one four,h. II is half beneficial in its own hoi
Its beneficence ,s in one fourth in a friendly sign. In an equal’s
sign one eighth of auspicious disposition is useful. The good
are ml in deb,lltation or enemy’s camp. Inauspidous
effects are quite reverse with reference to what is stated.
rfc; ,
^ TO *T5T«V: tt^n

Chapter 3
EPfft tpiSrRT: stag: I
sqcftalfl: qfrWtsfiretaEtj n^^u
gtqg: I
fa^T^fe^TfllS^^N: %5^S5Tff: ll^ll
tTqj^lfsftiJH: %g: SFSTTO^ l
3ispn?rq*n^ qrn gtasgi: uv*n
61-64. NON-LUMINOUS UP AG RAH AS (SUBPLANETS) : Add 4 signs 13 degrees and 20 minutes of arc
to the Sun’s longitude at a given moment to get the exact
position of the all-inauspicious Dhooma. Reduce Dhooma from
12 signs to arrive at Vyatipata. Vyatipata is also inauspicious.
Add six signs to Vyatipata to know the position of Parivesha.
He is extremely inauspicious. Deduct Parivesha from 12 signs
to arrive at the position of Chapa (Indra Dhanus) who is ‘
also inauspicious. Add 16 degrees 40 minutes to Chapa which
will give Ketu (Upaketu) who is a malefic. By adding a sign to
Upaketu, you get the original longitude of the Sun. These are
planets devoid of splendour which are malefics by nature and
cause affliction.
Notes : The Aprakasa G rah as or upagrahas are to be
calculated as under based on the above four verses :
1. Sun
= Dhooma
2. Dhooma
= Vyatipata
3. Vyatipata
= Parivesha
4 . Parivesha
— Indra Cahpa
(Indra Dhanus)
5. Chapa
— Upaketu (Sikhi)
Upaketu, if
increased by 30 degrees, will reach the Sun’s
exact .position at a given moment.
Let us assume that the Sun is in Taurus 10 degrees and
Calculate the 5 Upagrahas, as under :
Vyatipata (226 <, 40 , )+180" — Parivesha ~ ^^MO')
Parivesha
Chapa
Upaketu

Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
It may be seen that by adding 30° to Uoaket.. ♦»,. t *
«£.$<, snraiifBBURi? i
»fir ffmfoitorot frofe „„„
EFFECTS OF SUB-PLANETS • if -
r,rtr^ -
., Notes : If the Sun is afflicted by one of these- IT™ v
life win con* ,o pa s . The Mo™ toX‘ grip of*"' If "T
W'll cause menial afflictions. Though L toen^,
conjunction’ of an Upagraha with the Ln u denotes
£sc:."triS
Wraa;5*>ft I
TTfsrc^^T wrami H ^ u
srM T^i: „^ u
'fTRm> 3egTrr?e<r> g**[> inririev: |
liNW, IW «WW>VW: to: II hi,
66-69< CALCULATIONS OFOrn r/fj p Tr . ^
enua! parts. Thc'ctght t^SZSJTV?. '“° ^
S wlTt’ 0 WhlT" Pla "" S — ^omThe
» UI be -" . e gia

Chapter 3
tion into eight equal parts and distribute these commencing
from the 5th weeklord. Here again the eighth portion is lor dle ss while Saturn’s portion is Gulika . T he Sun’s portion is
Kala (^rrer), Mars’ porti on is Mrityu,. Jupi ter’s portion is Yama -
gRantaka and Mercury's portion is Ardha Prahara. These
(cTurations) differently apply to different places (commensurate
with variable day and night durations).
Notes : Ardha Prahara, Yamaghantaka, Mrityu, Kala and
Gulika are the 5 Kala Velas, suggested by the sage. The day
duration according to latitude is divided into eight equal parts*
The eighth portion is unlorded. The first portion is allotted to
the week day lord. Other portions follow in the order of week
day lords. We consider 5 planetar y portions ignoring tliat of
the Moon and Venus. The portions of the \Sun7Mars, Mercury,
J upiter and Saturn are respectively called Kala, Mrityu, Ard haprahara, Yamaghantaka and Gulika.
In the case of night, the durations or l/8th parts are allotted
in a different order. The first portion goes to the planet ruling
the 5th weekday lord counted from the day in question. The
others follow in the usual order. Here again, the 8th part is
lordless. The planetary portions from Kala to Gulika are the
same in nomenclature, in the night also.
Guliks and Mandi are one and the same and not different.
This is borne by the statement of Parasara (vide Brihat Parasara
Hora Sastra, ch. 4, sloka 15, Benares Hindi edition of Chaukhambha Sanskrita Sansthana), viz. “Namantaram tu tasyaiva
Mandi rityabhidhecyafe”. This quarter is not available in our
version. In this connection, please refer to Prasoa Marga and
Jataka Parijatha.
KeeranUru Nataraja of Jatakalankarain (Tamil version)
gives signs of dignities for these Upagrahas and Gulika etc.
The same is as under :
Upagraha Exaltation Dehilitation Swakshetra
& Gulika etc. (own sign)
Dhooma Leo Aquarius Capricorn
Yyatipata Scorpio Taurus Gemini
Parivesha Gemini Sagittarius Sagittarius (7)

Brihat Parasara if ora Sastra
Indrachapa Sagittarius Gemini
Upakctu Aquarius Leo
Gulika *
Yamaghatitaka ..."
Ardhaprahara
Cancer
Cancer
Aquarius -
* Sagittarius ■
Gemini
Kala
Mrityu
Capricorn
Scorpio
From the Sun to Saturn, no one is exalted in the abovementioned exaltation signs, nor debilitated in the above
mentioned debilitation signs.
y Out of the 5 Kalavelas, viz. Gulika etc. four except Kala
I (related to the Sun) have own sign system in the respective signs
I ruled by their fathers. Gulika, son of Saturn, has Aquarius as
own house. Jupiter’s son, Yamaghantaka, has it in Sagittarius.
I Ardhaprahara, Mercury’s son, is in own sign if in Gemini.
Mrityu, son of Mars has Scorpio as own house. It is not known
why Kala, a son of the Sun shifted to Capricorn, a sign of his
brother (Saturn) leaving his father's Leo. Obviously, Saturn
has given his Moolalrikona to his son Gulika while he gave
Capricorn (a secondary sign) to his ‘brother’ Kala.
70. GULIKA'S POSITION : The degree ascending at tne
time of start of Gulika’s portion (as above) will be the longitude
of Gulika at a given place. Based on this longitude only, Gnlika’s
effects for a particular nativity be estimated.
Notes : The day duration or night duration as the case
may be for calculation the five Kalavelas, viz. Gulika etc. be
considered for the latitude of birth. Some authorities suggest
to use the end of the period for ascertaining longitudes of these.
Sage Parasara’s view is correct in this respect, as exemplified in
the notes for slokas "25-30, ch. 4 infra. “Mandi” and “Gulika”
are interchanged in our own text to mean one and the same.
vfaqTl umiH \
sun? fj?

Chapter 3
^TT*T%*me«Ts^ *n?ft ^ g^n\9^u
**RJ STFl'RT^ RevTR 5TR fe*ftvTO ! 1
hihr %*f^w ^ td^ sn’JTRR a<n n^^n
*T*T fRSTR^rra^R^RTTSrq ^ l
?rrt ern rIr m'xw
71-74. CALCULATION OF PRANAPADA : Convert the
given time into vighatikas and divide the same by 15. The
resultant Rasi, degrees etc. be added to the Sun if he is in a
movable sign which will yield Paranapada. If the Sun is in a
fixed sign, add 240 degrees additionally and if in dual sign add
120 degrees in furtherance to get Pranapada. The birth will be
auspicious if Pranapada falls in the 2nd, 5th, 9th, 4th, 10th or
11th from the natal ascendant. In other houses, Pranapada
indicates an inauspicious birth.
Notes : The calculation of Pranapada Lagna is exemplified
below, as per the above slokas :
Assume birth is at 16gh 25vi. When this is converted into
vighatikas, we get 985. Divided by 15, this yields 65.66. Rasi
which means 65 signs and 20 degrees. Expunging the multiples
of 12, we have 5s 20° or 170°.
The next step is to add this straightaway to the Sun’s
longitude if he is in a movable sign. Suppose the Sun is in
Aries 15 degrees, we get 170+15=185 or Libra 5 degrees as
Pranapada ascendant.
In the same example if the Sun is in a fixed sign, say Taurus
15 degrees, we have to add another 240 degrees. So to say, 45
(the Sun)+240 + 170=455 or 95 degrees (Cancer 5 degrees) as
Pranapada asceadant.
Again, alternatively if the Sun is in a dual sign, say Gemini
15°, we have to add only 120 degrees in place of 240 degrees.
That is 75 (Sun’s longitude) + 120+ 170=365=5° Aries is Pranapada Lagna.
Dear Reader
We are glad you are reading
this Unique Book. Some other
remaining chapters, which
contain very Important
material, are given in its
Ilnd Part. Please write

3*^ Trfsr^fqTSJfftr: IIVII
Chapter 4
Zodiacal signs Described
3T^tTT^F7 ^tnsqffjTCTl^ I
mi fa5rH»TT*«T sTra^'r^r ^ni?n
feta fi ^TTT^if^^mTT: ii^t)
1-2. IMPORTANCE OF IiORA : The word Hora ( ? >a)
is derived from Ahoratra (a^hT^) after dropping the first and
last syllables. Thus Hora (ascendants) remains in between
Ahoratra (i.e, day and night) and after knowing Hora, the good
and bad effects of a native be known. Sri Vishnu, the Invisible,
is Time personified. His limbs are the 12 Rasis commencing
from Aries.
** f«m: trift^r: i
tafcTrT:
3. NAMES OF SIGNS : The 12 signs of the zodiac in
order are : Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Libra,
Scorpio, Sagittarius, Capricorn, Aquarius and Pisces.
cTRT STjjJ feta^fff3*cT!T: (
angtpt £ ?htt uyu
cT*TT ifalcT ta: yfttatT: \
4-4J. LIMBS OF KALAPVRUSHA : The time personified
has his limbs as under with reference to the 12 signs respectively : Head, face, arms, heart, stomach, hip, space below navel,
privities, thighs, knees, ankles and feet.
Notes : The limbs of Kalapurusha or Time Personified are
divided treating Aries as ascendant. For an individual, the
ascending sign will denote head, 2nd sign face and so on and so
forth. See the diagram given below in the case of a Scqrpio
native, for an easy grasp.

Chapter 4
Stomach
Hip
Below
navel
Privities
Heart
Thighs
Anns
Knees
Ascdt
Face
head
Feet
Ankles
The use of the above is to know of the planetary influences
on the concerned limb. In the above case, if Rahu is in Scorpio
ascendant, there will be a scar etc. on the head. Or when his
Dasa starts, if he is afflicted at birth, he will cause danger to
head. The limbs related to matefics will suffer defects and
adversities while the ones related to benefics will be beautiful,
strong and immune to danger. These are sthoola (broad)
scheme. For Sookshma (minute) scheme of limbs, the 36 decanates are resorted to.
»»xu
5-5 J. CLASSIFICATION OF SIGNS : Movable, Fixed
and Dual are the names given to the 12 signs in order. These
are again known as malefic and benefic, successively. Similarly
these are male and female. Aries, Leo and Sagittarius are
bilious. Taurus, Virgo and Capricorn are windy. Gemini,
Libra and Aquarius are mixed while the rest are phlegmatic.
Notes : The 12 signs are divided into movable, fixed and
dual. Movable are Aries, Cancer, Libra and Capricorn. The
signs Taurus, Leo, Scorpio and Aquarius are fixed or immovable.
Gemini, Virgo, Sagittarius and Pisces are dual or common.

Brikat Parasara Horn Sastra
Aries, Gemini, Leo, Libra, Sagittarius and Aquarius are
m ale signs- These are also known as malefic or cruel si gns.
Taurus/'Cancer, Virgo, Scorpio, Capricorn and Pisces are female
signs. These are beneficial or soft signs. "
Aries and its trines are bilious. Taurus and its trines are
windy. Gemini and its trines have a mix of all the three temperaments, viz. bile, wind and phlegm. Cancer and its trines are
phlegmatic.
The temperaments of the signs have a specific use in
medical astrology. If, for example, a phlegmatic sign happens
to be the 6th house and is occupied by an afflicted planet with
phlegmatic temperament, tuberculosis, severe cough and other
pulmonary disorders will crop up. If a windy sign is afflicted
by a windy planet, rheumatism, colics, paralysis etc. will trouble
the native. When a bilious planet affectr a bilious sign, one will
be liable to premature grey hair, yellowish body, secretion of
bile, jaundice etc. If a mixed sign gets affected by Mercury, the
native will be predisposed to suffer many imbalances. The
planets have been described as windy, phlegmatic and bilious
as could be 6een in ch. 3 supra.
tjcstoft w ysirftw h^ii
6-7. ARIES DESCRIBED : The sign Aries is blood-red in
complexion, it has a prominent (big) physique. It is a quadruped sign and strong during night. It denotes courage. It
resides in the east and is related to kings. It wanders in hills
and predominates in Rajoguna is the second of the three
constituent qualities and » the cause of great activity in living
beings). It rises with its back (a Prishtodaya sign) and is fiery.
Its ruler is Mars.
vmrt ugh
8. TAURUS DESCRIBED : Its complexion is white, and
is lorded by Venus, It is long and is a quadruped sign. It has
strength in night and resides in the south. It represents villages
and businessmen. An earthy sign, Taurus rises with its back.

Chapter 4
Si
SPR * 1
srfmT iwfymr ifassft qFnr^ftsfjffft utn
mmY" ^rryqff «pifti'?:i
9- 9 J. GEMINI DESCRIBED : The sign Gemini rises with
its head and represents a male and a female holding a mace and
lute. It lives in the west and is an airy sign. It is a biped sign
as well and is strong in nights. It lives in villages and is windy
in temperament. It has an even body with greengrass hue. Its
ruler is Mercury.
**t*t*V * wnp^iV faftr wW*r^n$oii
WFTTfinf ilfoUftNfti: f»JT: [\\\\\
10- 11. CANCER DESCRIBED : The sign Cancer is palered. It resorts to forests and represents Brahmins. It is strong
in nights. It has many feet (i.e. it is a centipede sign) and has a
bulky body. It is Satwic in disposition (seen in gods) and is a
watery sign. It rises with its back and is ruled by the Moon.
fai*: ^rrfa'T; Hrtft ^ '
«jRnT*:qr>J: wqiqqin lit 311
12. LEO DESCRIBED : Leo is ruled by the Sun and is
Satwic. It is a quadruped sign and a royal sign. It resorts to
forests and rises with its head. It has a large, white body. It
resides in the east and is day-strong.
tb'rUHWr TlftrlTWMlfaaT \
wWfem * TTKirtTrr fgqrsn«?Trn * m 111311
ft qrerejPTT \
jnrct emm m*n
13-14. VIRGO DESCRIBED : This sign is a hill-resorter,
and is strong in day-time. It rises with its head and has a
medium build. It is a biped sign and resides in the south. It
has grains and fire in its hands. It belongs to business community and is variegated. It relates to hurricanes “

52 Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
a Virgin and is Tamasa (a disposition of demons). Its ruler is
Mercury.
part I
iffVTt srnft JJlt »Teq?igf5qT^ II? *11
ywsfateq ^gTi^yr^ft f^ft i
fe w l t tfre fWft II
15-16$. LIBRA AND SCORPIO DESCRIBED : Libra is
a Seershodaya sign rising with its head and is strong in day time.
It is black in complexion and is predominant with Rajoguna.
It relates to the western direction and resorts to land. It is
destructive or mischievous {qxf^). It represents Sudras or the
4th Varna and has a medium build and is a biped sign. Its
lord is Venus. Scorpio has a slender physique and is a centipede
sign. It denotes Brahmins and resides in holes. Its direction
U north and is strong in day time. It is reddish-brown and
resorts to water and land. It has a hairy physique and is very
sharp (or passionate). Mars is its ruler.
ysstaft m U?VS>U
f<PTWt TITO: wfoft fa’TW, I
*n*nr?lr *ig*n*: SRnuft vgrcutcu
17-18$. SAGITTARIUS DESCRIBED : The sign Sagittarius rises with its head and is . lorded by Jupiter. It is a
Satwic sign and is tawny in hue. It has strength in night and
is fiery. A royal sign, Sagittarius is biped in first half. Its
second half is quadruped. It has an even build and adores
an arch. It resides in the east, resorts to land and is splendorous.
♦^ i fi i MW E fl q \\\v\
ijGStapft I
l^oU
19-20, CAPRICORN DESCRIBED : Capricorn is lorded
by Satun^and has predominance of Tamoguna (a disposition

Chapter 4
Been in demons). It is an earthy sign and represents the
southern direction. It is strong in nights, and rises with back.
It has a large body. Its complexion is variegated and it resorts 1
to both forests and lands. Its first half is quadruped and second
half footless moving in water.
Wf; iNttit
STff: q fwiUaw WmV ¥*[?T: 1
21- 2IJ. AQUARIUS DESCRIBED: The sign Aquarius
represents a man holdig a pot. Its complexion is deep-borwn.
It has a medium build and a biped sign. It is very strong in
/day time: It resorts to deep water and is airy. It rises with
its head and is Tamasic. It rules Sudras, the 4th Varna and
the west. Its lord is Saturn, the Sun’s offspring.
sntf frst: t
amt iraAg} ^ grirftvft ii^in
*m>rt *if*m g>n: i
* iiwi
22- 24. PISCES DESCRIBED : Pisces resembles a pair of
fish, one tailed with the head of the other. This sign is nightstrong. It is a watery sign and is predominant with Satwa guna.
It denotes resoluteness and is a water-resorter. It is footless
and has a medium build. It rules the north and rises with both
head and back. It is ruled by Jupiter. This is how the 12 Rasis
each of 30 degree extent are described to evaluate gross and
specific effects.
srm: !
eswpnfw i firatw »
TOUnmi f*ro*
qftsR Wfr N-4WW I
?T R TWFm'tiT iftwf TTWTft ii^ii

Brihat Parasara tiora Sastro
<ronft mi nwra: vnt fsrww i
u^cii
hf<n^ Hm^Kwef *ihi^ ^^iSH *
'niww fastan: u^tu
wrwjii fq^f^rr R*ui m\ i
W *ron mi Hw*Hm n3»«
25-30. NISHEKA LAGNA : O excellent or tbe sages,
explained now b a step to arrive at the Nisbeka Lagna when the
natal ascendant b known. Note the angular distance between
Saturn and Mandf ( Gnllha). Add thb to the difference between
the ascendant Lagna bhava (Madhya or cusp) and the 9th Mtava
(cusp). The resultant product in Rasis, degrees etc. will represent
the months, days etc. that elapsed between Nisbeka and birth.
At birth If the ascendant lord b in the invisible half (i.e. from
ascendents! cup to descendental cusp) add the degrees etc. the
Moon moved In the particular Rasi occupied by her to the abovementioned product. Then the ascendant at Nisbeka can be worked
ont and the good and bad experienced by the native in the womb
can be guessed. One can also guess, with the help of Nisbeka
Lagna, effects like longevity, death etc. of the parents.
Notes : If birth time is accurately noted, we can trace
out the correct time and date of coitus that caused the conception in question. Adhana Lagna or Nisbeka Lagna means the
ascendant that prevailed at tbe time of coitus and not the one at
conception. The Sanskrit word ‘Adhana’ or ‘Nisbeka’ means a
sexual cohabitation. (Some texts call the first union between a
couple as ‘Adhaana’ and the later ones in the usual course as
*Nisheka\)
As per our present verses, we consider the birth chart of a
male child bora on Friday, the 17th February 1984 at 22h 35m
1ST at New Delhi. The birth time has been correctly noted
with a special request to the attending doctor. The time of
coitus was astrologically chosen and promptly noted down in
the records. And hence this case will serve as a foolpro of
example. The natus as per Lahiri Ayanamsa (i.e. 23° 37' 51")
is given below :

Chapter 4
The longitudes of required planets and important cusps
are as given below :
Ascendant Cusp j 182° 23' 06" 9th cusp : 64° 03' 13"
Sidereal Time at birth : 8h Im 21 s
The longitude of Gulika is cast for the beginning of
Saturn’s Muhurta, as suggested by the sage in ch. 3 supra.
With the above data, we should be able to trace back the
Adhana date and time. The formula is :
Adhana Lagna=Date of birth and time minus “x”
where "X” is obtained thus= A+B + C
Now A, B and C are explained. “A” is the angular distance between Saturn and Gulika at birth. * B” is the distance
between the cusp of the ascendant and that of the 9th house
counted in a direct order (i.e. via 4th and 7th cusps). “C” is
required if the ascendant lord is in the invisible half (i.e. ascendant and descendant intersected by the nadir). Otherwise, “C"
is not required. In the example case, these are :

BrtfuU Parasara flora SastrO
It wilt be noticed that 1 degree is treated as one day in the
above computation. That is, these are Savanamana (360 days
per year). To apply this to Gregorian Calendar (NS), we must
reduce this duration into Sauramana. Such tables are given in
my English translation of Hoiasara. From there we take the
correction figures so that we obtain an equal Sauramana duration. Those corrections are meant to know the difference between
Savanamana and Sauramana. When we reduce the correction
factor from Savanamana to obtain Sauramana, the figure so
obtained shall have to be increased by the correction factors
excessively considered in the first mentioned correction factors.
A reader even with average intelligence will appreciate this
exercise. From the tables referred we obtain correction factors
Jor 26td 43gh 35vigh as under :
d
gh
vigh
Lip
Vilipta
200 days :
60 days :
1 day :
Correction :
We can take the above figure to be 3d 49gh 23 vigh as a
round figure for convenience sake. When this correction factor
is deducted from 261d 43gh 35vigh, we get 257d 54gh 12 vigh.
This needs a slight increase due to excessive correction contained
by the above correction factor, 3d 49gh 23vigh. From the same
table, we get a factor of 3gh 22 vigh which should be added to
257d 54gh 12vigh. Thus we get 257d 57gh 34vigh. That is, the
Adhana ought to have been so many days behind the birth date
while the birth is on 17th Feb 1984 at 22-35 hrs. The time of

Chaptet 4
Adhana as noted is : 4th June 1983 at 10.40 PM, 1ST, at New
Delhi. (The last menses period, or LMP date, as recorded is
31-5-1983.) The duration between the two is shown below
month by month.
Month
Days
Hrs
Min
June 1983
July 1983
August 1983
September 1983
October 1983
November 1983
December 1983
January 1984
February 1984
Total gap
59gh.
47.5 Vigh
The above duration in June 1983 devoid of 3d 22h 40m as
Adhana took place on 4th at the said hour. Similarly, in
February 84, the duration is considered only upto the moment
of birth. For calculation of ghatis, 12 midnight is treated as the
starting point as English dates begin at 12 midnight.
The reader will note that we got the actual duration between birth and coitus counted backwards as 257 59gh 47 5Vigh
whereas with the help of the rules, we could get 257d 57gh
34 vigh, having a difference of less than 2.5 ghatis. This
difference is not inexplicable. We have considered the longitudinal difference of 1 degree equalling a day (of 60 ghatis). This
means one minute of longitude is one gh&ti. Since the birth time
and coitus time have been perfectly noted, the difference could
be attributed to not considering the fraction of second of arc in
the various longitudes. Thus 2.5 gh difference m eans 2.5 minutes
of arc. Please note that we have totally used the longitudes of
five positions, viz. ascendant, 9th house, Gulika, Saturn and
Moon. A small fraction of seconds of difference at every stage
can well cause some difference.

Brihat tarosara Hdra Sastra
Albeit the time of coitus (or Adhana) has been recorded
properly and albeit we got the same by reverse process with the
help of birth time as per Maharshi’s principle, one may be yet
wondering whether it is a coincidence. To allay such a misconception, we make again an exercise to arrive at the birth date
and time in a forward manner with the help of coitus time
indicated above. In such a process, we consider only classical
rules as per standard books on Hindu Astrology, ignoring any
suggestion from any ambiguous quarter.
Stage 1 : Firstly we find out whether the . delivery should
be before 273 days or after 273 days from Adhana. The relevant
principle is from my translation of Na&hta Jatakam which
principle owes its acknowledgment to Manushya Jatakm and
Jataka Sagaram. 273 days is the basis as the Moon takes 273.2
days to complete ten zodiacal revolutions The Adhana chart is
as per the time 22 40 hours 1ST for June 4, 1983 at New Delhi.
The Adhana Moon is waning in state and is in the invisible
half of the zodiac. Should the Adhana Moon be waning and be
in the invisible half, or with increasing rays in the visible half,
then the birth takes place before 273 days from Adhana. So to
say, the transit Moon will not complete ten revolutions. Adhana

Chapter 4
Moon with increasing rays in the invisible half or Adhana Moon
with decreasing rays in the visible half will cause the birth only
after 273 days. To wit, she will in transit exceed ten revolutions
of the firmaments. In the Adhana chart before us, the Moon is
decreasing (i.e. approaching the Sun) and is in the 2nd house
(i.e. invisible half). Hence it suggests a possibility of delivery
before 273 days. The answer is known to the reader in the *
affirmative.
Stage 2 : It is not enough if we state that the delivery will
be before 273 days. We must narrow down the period still
briefly. The Sun’s position at Adhana will tell us the possible
month of delivery. One of the rules in this context Is from
Snka Jataka (vide p. 49 of my English translation of Hora Sara
stating that deilvery will be in the 9th, 10th or 1 Itb month according to the Adhana ascendant being in a movable sign, fixed
sign or common sign . In the case cited by me, Capricorn, a
movable sign, is ondhe east suggesting delivery in the 9th month
(i.e. between 240-270 days).
Stage 3 : After the above step, our job is to dig out the
possible Moon sign at birth. According to Kalyana Varma’s
Saravali (ch. 8, Verses 46-47), the natal Moon will be either in
the 7th or in the 10th from her Adhana position. In the Adhana
chart before us, the Moon is in Aquarius and hence the natal
Moon should be Leo or in Scorpio. The reader will observe the
natal Moon in Leo.
Stage 4 : Leo, as any other sign, is 30 degrees in length.
Then where should the Moon exactly be ? Is her birth position
justified vis a vis Adhana position ? This is known by the ascendant at birth. t 4- 7 41 7 1 °
The signs Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Sagittarius and
Capricorn are nocturnal signs as these are strong during night
time. The other six, viz. Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpio, Aquarius
and Pisces are called diurnal signs being strong during day time.
— If the Adhana Lagna is a nocturnal sign, birth will be in a
day sign. If birth occurs in a night sign, then the ascending
sign at Adhana should have been a day sign, (fn the Adhana
chart given, the ascendant is Capricorn — a nocturnal sign and
hence birth in Libra— a diurnal sign, is justified.)
Stage 5 : Nocturnal sign can ascend in day time as well.
Similarly diurnal sign can ascend in night time also. If the

Brihat Parasara Horn Sastra
Adhana Lagna is a night sign, birth will be in day time and in a
diurnal sign. If the said Lagna is a day sign, birth will occur
in night time in a nocturnal ascendant. The fraction of sign
natally ascending w i ll correspond to the T racti on pa<:t in ^ th*
Adhana Lagna.
In the Adhana chart given, the ascendant is Capricorn and
portion past is 10° 20'37". We convert this longitude into
seconds of arc to have accuracy* The longitude thus is 37237".
Similarly, 30 degrees make 1,08,000 seconds of arc. The night
duration at birth in our example is !2h 30m 48s as the Sunrise
on 17.2 1984 is at 6h 59ra 58s and Sunset 18h 9m 10s, for
New Delhi. Nqw see the process as under :
108000 seconds (30 deg.) — 46248 seconds of time
. = 15945.711 seconds of time
So to say, 4h 26m have past from the Sunset, i.e. from
18h 9m 10s. This denotes 22h 34m 55s which should be the
birth time. And we have the birth time recorded as 22h 35m.
This cannot be a coincidence or manipulation for a serious
Student of astrology like me, but a meaningful and scientific
astrological process.
When the Adhana Mdon’s Dwadasamsa is known correctly, the natal Moon can be well checked. She, at birth, should
be in the same Dwadasamsa as she was at Adhana. Please note
this agreeability — Adhana Moon as well as natal Moon being
In Capricorn Dwadasamsa similarly. Hence our natal Moon is
just the correct one.
Another verification factor, which however need not exist
if the Moon’s Dwadasama coincides, is : Whatever the angular
distance is between Adhana Moon and Adhana I will
prevail between the natal Moon and natal ascendant. In our
example, the difference between Adhana Moon and Adhana
Lagna is 48°44' whereas natal Moon and natal ascendant are
49°6' apart.

Chapter 4
The curious reader may note one thing. There are many
rules to note the birth month, natal Moon, natal ascendant etc.
with the help of Adhana (or prasna). And the correct ones
bringing the various possibilities to a coincidental manner should
be correctly judged without rushing to conclusions simply
theoretically.
Thus the reader will be convinced of the fact that Adhana
time noted is correct as we got hack to the birth details from
Adhana and vice versa accurately without any ambiguity whatsoever.
From the said two processes based on accurately maintained
records for purposes of scientific research, I, rather we, firmly
can conclude the following without a shadow of doubt :
1. Gu lika’s longitude will correspond to the beginning of
Saturn’s Muhurta only, as suggested by the sage, irrespective of
any other authority stating that it should be for the end of
Muhurta ruled by Saturn. In fact, I have not come across any
sage’s work stating contrarily to what Parasara stated in this
regard. Suppose we have calculated Gulika for the given
birth chai;t for the end of Saturn’s muhurta, the longitude of
Gulika would have advanced by 24 degrees. That would put
the Adhana still 24 days behind the noted date. Please note that
we have exactly reached the Adhana date as per the record
maintained without any variation. This proves that Gulika
should be at the beginning of Saturn’s Muhurta.
2. Accurate Ayanamsa is only that of Lahiri and that accurate it is as to the seoond of arc. This contention is proved by
the fact that we have made use of the Moon’s longitude. Other
4 longitudes used by us in the process of getting back to Adhana
are simply angular distances which will not be affected by any
Ayanamsa. But the Moon’s longitude will vary plus or minus
according to the Ayanamsa, and Adhana time will be minus or
plus according to the variation. Whereas with Lahiri’s position
of the Moon, we did not experience any anamoly in the Adhana
computation. Similarly in progressing towards the birth date
from the Adhana date, Moon’s longitude played a significant
role. If for example with another Ayanamsa, the Moon goes to
Pisces in the Adhana, her natal position, will yet be in Leo but
inconsistent with Adhana position. Hence Lahiri Ayanamsa has
all the perfection required for calculation of even the Nadiamsas.

3f«T ftRfcra«TTsqre: MUM
Chapter S
Special Ascendants
3T*TT5 a«tn? fgTOI'H*! I |
1. Oh excellent of the Brahmins, I explain below again
some special ascendants, viz. Bhava Lagna, Horn Lagna and
Ghatika Lagna.
flpfo* STOTT** qfaPTCt § «TTOT1
innfcT 'SF^mJcT Tn*«»W afci igiwi
1*5 qaTOlfes qqfaqfftpjf wr 1
qtsqttfhltrfc TJ* ' T T WHH vzi * 7f?( ll^ll
2-3. BHA VA LAGNA : From Sunrise to the time of birth
every 5 ghatis (or 120 minutes) constitute one Bhava Lagna.
Divide the time of birth (in ghatis, vighatis etc.) from Sun-rise
by 5 and add the quotient etc. to the Sun’s longitude as at Sun
rise. This is called Bhava Lagna.
Notes : To work out the various ascendants, assume that
the birth is at 12gh 30vi and the Sun’s longitude as prevalent at
the time of Sun rise is 4s 12°. Find out the Bhava Lagna in the
first instance, as under :
When birth time is divided by 5 we get 2.5 signs or 75°.
This is to be added to the Sun’s longitude as given which is
132°. We get 207° or Libra 27° as Bhava Lagna.
srofa <ttoto $rm«T tmi
fs^f WWJ* tnfep * ** \
TOT*V $TOP«! FTO f$ rT*

Chapter 5
4-5. HORA LAGNA : Again from Sun-rise till the time
of birth, Horn Lagna repeats itself every 2$ ghatis (i. e. 60
minutes). Divide the time past upto birth from the Sunrise by
2J and add the quotient etc. in signs, degrees and so on to the
longitude of the Sun as at the Sunrise. This will yield Horn
Lagna in Rasi, degrees etc.
Notes : Let us find out the Horn Lagna for the same example.
Birth time is to be divided by 2.5. When done so, we get
5 signs or 1 50 degrees. Add this to the Sun’s longitude as at
sunrise (i.e. 132 plus 150=282°). We thus get Hora Lagna as
Capricorn 12°.
•hWlfa oshw fgJUUWT 1 I
tmirvq wa its,u
trarffr snfwR t
^ qrfaET ?nT*Tf*fa: uvai»
*prft rTET UqU
6-8. GHAT/ LAGNA ( GHATIKA LAGNA ) ; Now listen to
the method of working out Ghatika Lagna. This Lagna changes
along with every Ghatika (24 minutes) from the Sunrise. Note
the birth time in Ghati and vighatis. Consider the number of
ghatis past as number of Rasis or Ghatika Lagnas. The Vighatis
be divided by 2 to arrive at degrees and minutes of arc past
in the said Ghatika Lagna. The product so arrived in Rasis,
degrees and minutes be added to the Sun’s longitude as at
Sunrise to get the exact location of Ghatika Lagna. So say
sages like Narada.
. Notes : Let us find out the Ghatika Lagna in the above
example case.
Birth time is 12 ghatis which gives 12 Rasis. Vighatis left
are 30 which are to be divided by 2 and treated as degrees.
30 divided by 2 yields 15, i.e. 15°. Thus, we note 12 signs

Brihat Parasara Hon Sastra
15 degrees to be away from the Sun (as at rise of the day).
When 12s 15° or 375° are added to the Sun (132°), we get 50 T
which after expunging 360° results in 147° or Leo 27° as Ghatika
Lagna.
i* mi w a* ?t FTFm lien
9. USE OF SPECIAL ASCENDANTS : Keeping the
planets at birth as it is, prepare various Bhava charts with respect
to each special ascendant and analyse as done for the natal
ascendant.
Notes : This is a very important clue given by the sage.
We get the longitudes of the three special ascendants, viz.
Bhava Lagna, Hora Lagna and Ghatika Lagna. Apart from the
natal ascendant, the planets will remain in different bhavas
according to the special ascendant being considered. Thus we
get four different Bhava charts. If a planet remains in the
same bhava in all the four bhava charts, it will specially reveal
the bhava effects due to it. Otherwise, its effects are proprtionately altered in respect of that bhava.
The Benares edition (Chaukambha series) has the following
special hints in this chapter respecting planets and bhavas,
thus : The planet on the cusp of a house will give full effects due
to the bhava concerned. The one in Bhava Sandhi (end of
house) gives no results due to that bhava. (This does not mean
that the planet is wholly ineffective. It is, suffice to say,
ineffective as far as that bhava is concerned.) If a planet is ahead
of the Bhava sphuta (longitude) of the various Lagnas (i.e. Natal,
Bhava, Hora and Ghatika Lagnas) but within 15°, its effects due
to the Bhava concerned start diminishing. Conversely if it is
prior to the cusp but not beyond 15°, the effects proportionately
increase- Needless to mention that on the ‘cusp’, the effects are
more revealed- This gives us a clue that longitude arrived in
the case of Bhava Lagna, Hora Lagnaetc and Ghatika Lagna are,
the center points of those Lagnas, just as for the natal ascendant.
HFT fadMHTTJI <EvHni?oll
L L \

Chapter 5
r
*T>nt*TO«IcT: 11^11
«n*Tcn»n?tf *ivi<Jfd i
n^ifaf^n fr=r: 'Ttr
3TV^H *nfcfcf H 3 TT?fft life i
trfjj jftwkl #5TTc^ forfeltall^ll
'R’arraV TrfVr: *r 5 1
I0-13J. YARN ADA DAS A : I now detail Varnada Dasa
just by knowing which, one can deal with the longevity of a
native. If the natal ascendant is an odd sign count dirctly from
Aries to natal ascendant. If the natal ascendant is an even sign,
count from Pisces to the natal ascendant, in the reverse order.
Similarly, if the Hora Lagna is an odd one, count from Aries to
Hora Lagna in direct order. If the Hora Lagna is an even one,
count from Pisces to Hora Lagna in the reverse order. If both
the products are odd signs or even signs, then add both th^
figures. If one is odd and the other is even, then know the
. difference between the two products. If the latest product, in
this process, is an odd one, count so many signs from Aries in
a direct manner; if an even one, count so many signs from Pisces
in reverse order. The sign so known will be the Varnada for
the ascend ant. ~ *
Notes ; Take the case of a native who has Libra (an odd
sign) as natal ascendant and Scorpio (an even sign) as HoraLagna. When we count from Aries to Libra (odd sign — hence
direct), we get 7. Again from Pisces to Scorpio (Hora Lagna, an
even sign — hence reverse) we have 5 signs. We have to add these
two figures, as- they are of the same class, i.e. odd. We get 12.
This product is an even one. Hence we have to count 12 signs
from Pisces in a reverse manner to get Varanada for the Lagna.
Thus we get Aries. This is the Varnada Rasi for natal ascendant.
There is a suggestion from one quarter that longitudes
of natal ascendant and Hora Lagna be also taken into consideration. In that case, the counting when done from Aries, is to
be done from zero degree. And from Pisces, it is from the last
degree of Pisces, i.e. the 30th degree of Pisces is the starting
point.

Brikat Parasara ffora Sastra
*torto?t tot uf*u
TO?t STRIcT cTtTr^^rnr.^T cT l
tot fiTRtsr-jjnrtft nun
14*15. EFFECTS OF VARAN ADA : Now listen to toe
use of the above. Out of the two, viz. natal ascendant and Horn
Lagna, whichever is stronger, from there Varnada starts. If the
natal ascendant is an old sign, the counting of Dasas is clockwise. Otherwise anti-clockwise. The Lagna dasa years will equal
the number of signs intervening between the natal ascendant
and Varnada. Similarly for other houses.
trr^fte: to?** i
**icT af? crerfiFiqw a** sit*?
qtifaw i fa froH qmn%n?v3n
TOrorfq fa* l i
**TOT *RTtTT? VTT*T*fafaFefa? \\\*U
I»» 1 4V 1R TO ** ?cft*T? **tTO: 1
gcTF* fa^T?m^*?fTOR?: mtn
fa?** ?tot? ttrttojt* faf*?fa? i
W*nf?ITOT*t * STTOTMWr<W«h*T \\^o{\
IN
16-20. Should a trine from the ascendant’s Varnada be
occupied or aspected by a malefic, the native will live only upto
the Dasa of the said Rasi.' Just as the Rudra planet in Soola
Dasa is capable of causing evils, the above mentioned planets
related to Vamada’s trine be treated. The Varnada Lagna be
considered as natal ascendant while the 7th from Varnada will
denote the longevity of the spouse, the 1 1 th longevity of elder
brothers and sisters, the 3rd longevity of younger brothers and
sisters, the 5th the longevity of sons, the 4th longevity of mother
and the 9th longevity of father. The dasa of the Soola Rasi will
inflict greater evils.
Notes : Rudra planet is the one which has more strength
when the lords of 2nd and 8th are considered. The planet with

Chapter 6
Rudra designation normally features in Soola Dasa to know the
possible time of death. The Dasas of the Rasis are calculated in
direct or reverse order according to the natal ascendant being
odd or even,
Soola Dasa calculations are akin to that of Sthira Dasa.
But in the case of Sthira Dasa, Rudra 's counterpart is Brahma
Graha. The two Dasas are discussed in ch. 46 of the 2nd part
of our treatise, among various Dasas.
qR (P*nfkirraT*Tt vcNtt trt i
^ rr ^Rt n strtrrr n??n
rrrt rr TTsn>rt rrrt ^r?rr i
JMMfflT TTf*TR?lf RiRTRRTRRT R^RU^U
q^R^RTRlfR R y<RT ?*R R^R I
RRTSRrRiRR^R
WFRtvtRRR RtR RfRSPRfR^Rq^ I
RIR^UlfiHMMi RRRR RRpPRf IRYII
21-24. Similar assessments be made with reference to the
Varnada of each Bhava commencing the first and the evils and
goods due to a nativity be known. These Varnada Dasas ar e
only for Bhavas (Rasis) and not their occupant s. The sub period
51 each Dasa will be one twelfth of the Dasa and the order will
also be clockwise or anti-clockwise as explained earlier. The
natal ascendant is to be calculated according to birth place while
Bhava Lagna, Hora Lagna etc. are common to all places.
aw ii^ii
Chapter 6
The Sixteen Divisions Of A Sign
»RRT R^R’JTT^rBSTRT TTfSHTO I
afaTfR^lfR RTRTBt R*T*R1R frqtR RT llfll

Brihat Parasara Hora Saslra
1.0 sage, I have known from you about the planets, signs
and their descriptions. I desire to know the details of various
divisions of a sign, which please narrate.
wnfa i
WKWllfq 44q ! Wimfafil M3U
$TT *
HqffT: ttfrofTTV: II ^ It
<a4dt4tSW^Ktll: qcCTT WTq eTeT: <R*T 1 1 VII
’N
2-4. NAMES OE THE 16 VARGAS : Lord Brahma has
described 1 6 kinds of Vargas (Divisions) for each sign. Listen
to those. The same are : Rasi, Hora, Drckkana, Chathurthamsa,
Sapthamamsa, Navamsa, Dasamamsa, Dvadasamsa, Shodasamsa, Vimsamsa, Chaturvimsamsa, Sapthavimsamsa, Trimsamsa,
Khavedamsa, Akshavedamsa and Shashtiamsa.
ernW nm *mtff mi 1
i Tm> *4 iiitu
I*t: ^fa?n: i
tnU* 'r^tt ?*;m u
amt iftcmt qftqfwq *to{iwi
W>. RASI AND HORA : The Rasi owned by a planet is
called its Ksbetra (one sign). The first half of an old sign is the
Hora ruled by the Sun while the second half is the Hora of the
Moon. The reverse is true in the case of an even sign. Half
of Rasi is called Hora. These are totally 24 counted from
Aries and repeat twice (at the rate of 12) in the whole of the
zodiac.
Notes s The names of planets lording over the 12 signs
have been given earlier. The following table throws light on
lordships of Horas (15° each) of the 12 signs.

Chapter 6
Speculum Of Horas
Sign
Hora lord
Hora lord
Aries
Sun
Moon
Taurus
Moon
Sun
Gemini
Sun
Moon
Cancer
Moon
Sun
Leo
Sun
Moon
Virgo
Moon
Sun
Libra
Sun
Moon
Scorpio
Moon
Sun
Sagittarius
Sun
Moon
Capricorn
Moon
Sun
Aquarius
Sun
Moon
Pisces
Moon
Sun
^RqRr^lf IIV9U
^ TTlOdl SFTJTTO ^ I
H I <4 t-snf^f^ Ifn IBVWJdJWORiJ llsll
7-8. DEC AN ATE : One third of a Rasi is called Drekkana
(decanate). These are totally 36, counted from Aries (to
Pisces), repeating thrice at the rate of 12 per round. The 1st,
3th and the 9th Rasis from a sign a;„ its three decanates, and
are respectively lorded by Narada, Agasthya and Doo.vasa.
Notes : Each Rasi has three decanates or Drckkanas. The
first one is ruled by the lord of the very sign. The second one

Hrihat Parasara Hora S as tret
TO
belongs to the planet that rules the Sth from the sign in
question. The lord of the 9th from the sign in question is the
lord of the 3rd decanate. Each decanate is 10 degrees in length.
The 3 decanates along with the signs in which they fall are as
per table given belaw :
Speculum Of Decanates
(Note : The signs in this and other tables are indicated by
numericals, e.g. 1 is Aries, 2 is Taurus & C.)
Sign
] st decanate 2nd decanate 3rd decanate
Aries
Taurus
Gemini
Cancer
Leo
Virgo
Libra
Scorpio
Sagittarius
Capricorn
Aquarius
Pisces
tww CTGff:iltll
9. CHATURTHAMSA : The lords of the 4 angles from a
sign are the rulers of respective Chaturthamsa of a Rasi commencing from Aries. Each Chathurthamsa is one fourth of a Rasi.
The deities respectively are Sanaka, Sananda, Kumara and
Sanatana.
Notes : Each Chaturthamsa is one fourth of a sign or
7° 30'. The 1st, 2nd, 3rd and 4th Chaturthamsas are ruled
respectively by the same sign, the 4th, 7th and 10th signs therefrom. See the table given below ;

Chapter 6
n
Speculum Of Chaturtbamsas
Example : The four Chaturtbamsas of Aries are respectively ruled by Aries, Cancer, Libra and Capricorn.
^ Wg'iivUfis^lT: U?tll
10-11. S A PTH AM AMS A : The Sapthamamsa (one
seventh of a Rasi) counting commences from the same sign in
tlie case of an odd sign. It is from the seventh sign thereof while
an even sign is considered. The names of the seven divisions in
odd sings are : Kshaara, Ksheera, Dadhi, Ghritha, Ikshu Rasa,
Madhya and Suddha Jala. These designations are reversed lor an
even sign.
Notes : Each sign is made in 7 equal parts of 4 17 8.57
which is called Saptamamsa. As far as odd signs are concerned,
the Saptamamsas fall in the successive signs commencing from
the odd sign in question. The counting in the same manner is
from the 7th sign thereof for an even sign. Example : E or Aries,
these divisions are Aries, Taurus Gemini etc., while for Taurus
these are Scorpio, Sagittarius, Capricorn etc. See the table
given below :
Speculum Of Sapttaamamsas
Signs 1
D
I 1 st Dvn 1
V 2nd Dvn 2
o
I 3rd Dvn 3
A
S 4th Dvn 4
I 5th Dvn 5
O 6 th Dvn 6
N -7th Dvn 7
S

Brihat Parasara Hora Sastfa
cF^MlfacT: |
far^ruh n
fciT qciwnw wiit^u
12. NA VAMSA: The Navamsa calculation are for a movable sign from there itself, for a fixed sign from the 9th thereof
and for a dual sign from the 5th thereof. They go by designations
Dcva (divine), Manushya (human) and Rakshasa (devilish) in a
successive and repetitive order for a movable sign. (Manushya,
Rakshasa and Deva are the order for a fixed sign while Rakshasa
Manushya and Deva are a dual sign’s order.)
Notes : Navamsa is l/9th part of a sign or 3° 20'. The
9 Navamsas in order commence from the same sign for a movable
sign, from the 9th for a fixed sign and from 5th for a dual sign.
For example ; the Navamsas of Aries are counted from Aries
itself; from Capricorn for Taurus and from Libra for Gemini.
Ihese are fully shown in the table below :
Speculum Of Navamsas
D 1st
I 2nd
V 3rd
I 4th
S 5th
I 6th
O 7th
N 8th
S 9th
wnrtwr: i
FST-sfrT-RR-TRTOT: l|^||

Chapter 6 73
13 - 14 . : Starting from the same sign for an
odd sign and from the 9 th with reference to an even sign, the 10
Dasamsas each of 3 ° are reckoned. These are presided over by
the ten rulers of the cardinal directons viz. Indra, Agni, Yama,
Rakshasa, Varuna, Vayu, Kubera, Isana, Brahma and Anantha
in case of an odd sign. It is in the reverse order that these
presiding deities ore reckoned when an even sign is given.
Notes : In the case of an odd sign, the Dasamamsas
( 3 ° each) are successively counted from the same sign. The
counting is from the 9 th in case of an even sign. See the table
below :
Speculun Of Dasamsa
Signs
1st
D
2nd
3 rd
4 th
5 th
s
6th
7 th
8th
N
9 th
S 10 th
Example : For odd sings, the Dasamsas are the 10 signs
counted successively therefrom. For even signs, these fall in
10 successive signs counted from the 9th thereof.
ttaTHtfoiT; swwl ipNnsfwnrrsm: huh
15 . DVADASAMSA : The reckoning of the Dvadasamsa
(one twelfth of a sign or 2£ degrees each) commences (rom the
same sign. In each sign the presidentship repeats thrice in the
order of Ganesa, Aswini Kumara, Yama and Sarpa for the 12
Dvadasamsas,

Brihat Barasara Bora Sastara
Notes : Each Dvadasamsa is 2° 30' and the 12 divisions
fall successively in the successive 12 signs from the sign in question. The following table will show the details.
Speculum Of Dvadasamsa
It
Z,
J
j
T
2nd
D
3rd
4th
5th
6th
s
7th
8th
IB
o
9th
N
10 th
s
1 1th
12th
Example : The Dvadasamsas in Aries in order arc : Aries,
Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo Virgo, Libra, Scorpio, Sagittarius, Capricorn, Aquarius and Pisces. Similarly, for other signs
these be known from the Table.
3ESf-faG«JT ^7: ^
16. SHODASAMSA : Starting from Aries for a movable
sign, from Leo for a fixed sign and from Sagittarius for a dual
sign, the 16 Shodasnmsas (16th part ofa sign i.e. of 1°52' 30") arc
regularly distributed. The presiding deities of these repeat in the
order Brahma, Vishnu, Siva and Sun four times in the case of an
odd sign. It is reverse in the case of an even sign that these
ruling deities are understood.
Notes : Each sign is made into 16 equal parts of Shodasamsas of 1' 52' 30". The 16 divisions for any movable sign

Chapter 6
commence from Aries and are distributed successively. Similarly
from Leo for all fixed signs and from Sagittarius for all dual
signs. See the table given below :
Speculum of Shodasamsas (or Kalamsas)
Signs
Aries, Cancer
Libra & Capri
Taurus, Leo
Scorp &
Aquarius
Gemini,
Virgo, Sagi &
Pisces
Ist/13th
Aries
Leo
Sagittarius
2iid/14th
Taurus
Virgo
Capri
3rd/ 15th
Gemini
Libra
Aqua
D
4th/I6th,
Cancer
Scorp
Pisces
5th
Leo
Sagi
Aries
s
N
6th
Virgo
Capri
Taurus
7th
Libra
Aqua
Gemini
s
8th
Scorp
Pisces
Cancer
9th
Sagi
Aries
Leo
10th
Capri
Taurus
Virgo
11th
Aqua
Gemini
Libra
12th
Pisces
Cancer
Scorpio
Example : The 16 Shodasamsas for Aries or Cancer, or
Libra or Capricorn (movable signs) are distributed to the 1 6 signs
(12 + 4) commencing from Aries. Similarly for fixed signs fron
Leo and for dual signs from Sagittarius as shown in the above
Speculum.
fa*T%'RT»TPTmfs<TT \

Brihat Parasara Bora Sastta
ifrft 3TOT fatTHT )
cnrr ^facfr sRRngtjft iuj^h
sTc^r^rr sraft ft aft w^t to toti
firgTT gg^V $fir qftfafa^r nt&u
TOTT?ft ^7T ^EJT fg^sfaf fwnfvfy \
a[*TO(ft 5f *TO^y vmt TO-SWMvU ll^oll
stri *rcnft ’i'rn'y froi i
^ *rjpn ii^ii
17-21. VIMSAMSA : From Aries for a movable sign,
from Sagittarius for a fixed sign and from Leo for a common
sign this is how the calculations of Vimsamsa ( 1 /20th of a
sign or 1 30 each) are to commence. The presiding deities of the
20 Vimsamsas in an odd sign are respectively : Kaali
Gnuri, Jaya (sm), Lakshmi, Vijaya, Vimala, Sati, Tara, JvalaMukhi, Sveta, Lalita, Bagala-mukhi, Pratyangira, Sachi, Raudri,
Bhavani, Varada, Jaya (^r), Tripura and Sumukhi. In an even
sign these 20 deities respectively are : Daya, Megha, Chinnasi,
Pisachini, Dhoomavathi, Matangi, Bala, Bbadra, Aruna, Anala,
Pingala, Chuchchuka, Ghora, Vaarahi, Vaishnavi, Sita (fwrr),
Bhuvanesvari, Bhairavi, Mangala and Aparajita.
Notes : There are 20 Vimsam sas at the rate of 1°30'
degrees in the whole of a sign. See the speculum of Vimsamsas
given below :
Speculum of Vimsamsas
Signs Aries, Cancer, Taurus, Leo Gemini,
Libra & Scorp&Aqua Virgo, Sapi
Capri & Pisces
D
j
Ist/I3th
Aries
Sagi
Leo
s
j
2nd/14th
Taurus
Capri
Virgo
3rd/ 1 5th
Gemini
Aqua
Libra
o
M
4th/16th
Cancer
Pisces
Scorp
s
5th/17th
Leo
Aries
Sagi

Chapter 6
6th/18th
Virgo
Taurus
Capri
7tb/19tb
Libra
Gemini
Aqua
8th/20tb
Scorp
Cancer
Pisces
9th
Sagi
Leo
Aries
10th
Capri
Virgo
Taurus
11th
Aqua
Libra
Gemini
12th
Pisces
Scorp
• Cancer
EXAMPLE : For Aries and other movable signs, the
20 divisions are in order distributed from Aries; for fixed signs
from Sagittarius and for dual signs from Leo as could be seen
from the Table.
F«R> F>F: FJFTtT II
wW FFH 11^ ;}ll
22-23. SWDHAMSA : The Siddhamsa (l/24th part of a
sign or 1°15‘ each) distribution commences from Leo and Cancer
respectively for an odd sign and an even sign. In the case of an
odd sign the ruling deities repeat twice in the order of Skanda,
Parsudhara, Anala, Yiswakarma, Bhaga, Mitra, Maya, Antaka,
Vrisha-dhwaja, Govinda, Madana and Bhima. Reverse these
from Bhishma (to Skanda) twice to know the deities for the
Siddhamsa in an even aign.
Notes : Siddhamsa is also called Chaturvimsamsa, each
being of a length of 1°15\ (24 in number in the whole of a sign).
The successively distributed Siddhamsas commence from Leo
for any odd sign and from Cancer for any even sign, as per the
Table :

Brihat Parasara Horn Sastra
Speculum of Siddhamsa
Signs
Odd
Even
1st/ 13 th
Leo
Cancer
2nd/ 14th
Virgo
Leo
3rd/ 15th
Libra
Virgo
D
4 th/ 16th
Scorp
Libra
5th/ 17th
Sagi
Scorp
J
6th/ 18th
Capri
Sagi
O
N
7th/ 19th
Aqua
Capri
S
8th/20th
Pisces
Aqua
9th/21st
Aries
Pisces
10th/22nd
Taurus
Aries
1 lth/23rd
Gemini
Taurus
12th/24th
Cancer
Gemini
Tr*wfeTT: n^vn
ddl^itr^Kfu: yn «t<T sr<pH?f?Tr: i
^ar^TTr^T *rirr*n ii^ii
24-26. BHAMSA (NAKSHATRAMSA OR S APT A VIM SAMSA ) : The Bhamsa lords are respectively the presiding deities
of the 27 Nakshatras as under : Dastra (Aswini Kumara), Yama,

Chapter 6
Agni, Brahma, Chandra, Isa, Aditi, Jiva, Ahi, Pitara, Bhaga,
Aryama, Surya, Tvashta, Marut, Sakragni, Mitra, Vasava, Rakshasa, Varuna, Visvadeva, Govinda, Vasu, Varuna, Ajapa, Ahirbudhanya and Pusha. These are for an odd sign. Count these
deities in a reverse order for an even sign. The Bhamsa distribution commences from Aries and other movable signs for all
the 12 signs.
Notes : One Bhamsa is of 1° 6' 40" of arc and there are
27 such divisions in a sign. See the speculum given below :
Speculum Of Bhamsa
Signs
if
lst/13th/25th
D
2nd/14th/26th
3rd/I5th/27th
4th/ I 6th
5th/17th
s
6th/ 18th.
7th/ 19th
o
8th/20th ■
N
9th/21st
s
10th/22nd
12th/24th
The Bhamsas (or Nakshatramsas or Sapthavimsamsas) are
distributed from Aries for fiery signs, from Cancer for earthy
signs, from Libra for airy signs and Capricorn for watery signs.
I have on P. 31 of my English translation of SARAVALI given
different calculation for Nakshatramsa. That source obviously
is defective and I would prefer Parasara’s version as given in our
present text.
faqSf qprPPfosT’fTTffST: I
M l W IT q ^ IRV91I

Brlhat Parasara Hora Sastra
sr%: * a?rd
^UTT^?r^n: ?T*TTPfft famiMTfl H^elt
27-28. TRIMSAMSA : The Trimsamsa lords for an odd
sign are Mars, Saturn, Jupiter, Mercury and Venus. Each of
them in order rules 5,5, 8, 7 and 5 degrees, The deities ruling over
the Trimsamsas are respectively, Agni, Vayu, Indra, Kubera,
and Varuna. In the case of an even sign, the quantum of
Trimsamsa, planetary lordship and deities get reversed.
Notes : For Trimsamsa divisions, see the table given below :
Speculum of Trimsamsas
Signs
and 1 1
Signs
D
T
First 5°
Aries
First 5°
Taurus
Next 5°
Aquarius
Next 7°
Virgo
S
T
Next 8°
Sagittarius
Next 8°
Pisces
O
N
Next 7°
Gemini
Next 5°
Capricorn
S
Next 5°
Libra
Next 5°
Scorpio
5T*n: *^Tfa<TCmfNrTT: H^£ll
ETTcTT fsfRtTfer: |
mit TTvft
29-30. CHATVARIMSAMSA (l/40lh part of a sign ) : For
odd signs count from Aries and for an even sign from Libra in
respect of Chatvarimsamsas (each of 45' of arc). Vishnu, Chandra, Marichi, Tvashta, Dhata, Siva, Ravi, Yama, Yaksha, Gandharva, Kala and Varuna repeat successively as presiding deities
in the same order for all sings.
Notes : Chatvarimsamsa or Khavedamsa is a fortieth part
of a sign or 45’ of arc. These are successively distributed in the
various signs from Aries in case of any odd sign, and from Libra
in case of any even sign. See the table noted below :

Chapter 6
Speculum of Cbatvarimsamsa
Signs
1st, 13th, 25th, 37th
D
2nd, 14th, 26th, 38th
3rd, 15th, 27th, 39th
4th, 16th, 28th, 40th
5th, 17th, 29th
S
6th, 18th, 30th
7th, 19th, 31st
o
8th, 20th, 32nd
N
9th, 21st, 33rd
S
10th, 22nd, 34th
11th, 23rd, 35th
12th, 24th, 36th
As regards ruling deities Vishnu to Varuna repeat 3 times
while in the 4th round the rulersbip is only upto Tvashta.
fWrT I
fwrsirerg^esT fasur%3TT: ft^T fH \
^t: q^?TP?Tin ftr?rm ! n^ii
31-32. AKSHA VEDA MSA {l /45th part of a sign) :
Aries, Leo and Sagittarius are the signs from which the distributions respectively commence for movable, immovable aid
common signs. In movable signs, Brahma, Siva and Vishnu;
in immovable sings Siva, Vishnu and Brahma and in common
sings Vishnu, Brahma and Siva repeat 15 times the presidentship over these Akshavedamsas.
Notes : Each Akshavedamsa is of 40' arc as a sign is
divided into 45 equal- parts. Aries is the starting point for all
movable signs, Leo for all fixed signs and Sagittarius for all dual
signs. The distribution is through in successive signs in each
case. See the Tabic given on the next page :

Brihat Parasara Horn Sastra
Speculum of Akshavedamsa
TTCT>T
cTCTWRT: HJcTT: ll^u
TTWT> t*: |
TO: JSTEift 113*11
gfaqft sreTfrrqfafljw: 113^11
H 3 V 3 II
tffrrTFTlfviy: |
5 ^*jf?RtT?T: flfar: 5 pT>sfh?f>fTRr>S^cT; |
'Rtr^JT’JlT^t ^ 113 £||
^ ^ sRftfiiw; \

Chapter 6 83
AfT: STW 5 !*?!: I
?R<7^>m^i?cTT rrm^far ts ra T l r°Tt nygn
33-41. SHASHTIAMSA {lf60ih part a of sign or half-adegree each) : To calculate the Shashtiamsa lord, ignore the sign
position of a planet and take the degrees etc. it traversed in that
sign. Multiply that figure by 2 and divide the degrees by 12. Add
1 to the remainder which will indicate the sign in which the
Shashtiamsa falls. The lord of that sign is the planet ruling the
said Shashtiamsa. In odd signs, the names of Shashtiamsas are :
I. Ghora, 2. Rakshasa, 3. Deva, 4. Kubera, 5. Yaksba,
6. Kinnara, 7. Bhrashta, 8. Kulaghna, 9. Garala, 10. Vahni,
II. Maya, 12. Purishaka, 13. Apampathi, 14. Marutwan,
15. Kala, 16. Sarpa, 17. Amrita 18. Indu, 19. Mridu,
20. Kornala, 21. Heramba, 22. Brahma, 23. Vishnu, 24. Mabeswara, 25. Deva, 26. Ardra, 27. Kalinasa, 28. Kshiteesa,
29. Kamalakara, 30. Gulika, 31. Mrithyu, 32. Kaala,
33. Davagni, 34. Ghora, 35. Yama, 36 Kantaka, 37. Sudha,
38. Amrita, 39. Poornachandra, 40. Vishadagdha, 41, Kulanasa,
42. Vamsakshaya, 43. Utpata, 44. Kaala, 45. Saumya,
46. Kornala, 47. Seetala, 48. Karala Damshtra 49. Chandramukhi, 50. Praveena, 51. Kalapavaka, 52. Dandayudha,
53. Nirmala. 54. Saumya, 55. Kroora, 56. Atiseetala, 57. Amrita
58. Payodhi, 59. Bhramana, 60. Chandrarekha (Indurekha). The
reverse is the order for even signs insomuch as these names are
concerned. Planets in bcnefic Shashtiamsas produce auspicious
results while the opposite is true in case of planets in malefic
Shashtiamsas.
Notes : The method of calculating the ruling planet for
each Shashtiamsa (or 1 /60th pat of a sign or 30' of arc) is
advised in sloka 33 above. Assume that Venus is placed in
Capricorn 13° 25'. To find out the Shashtiamsa lord, ignore the
sign position and multiply the degrees and minutes by 2. Hence
13° 25' X 2=26° 50'. The degrees i.e. 26 (ignoring minutes) be
divided by 12. The remainder is 2 which should be increased
by 1. Thus we get 3. Count 3 signs from Capricorn. The
resulting Shashtiamsa position is Pisces whose lord is Jupiter.
These positions can also be marked in a zodiacal diagram for
the planets and ascendant for an easy grasp.
The order of Shashtiamsas along with the meanings of

Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
their designations are denoted below. These will be very helpful in delineation and to know whether a particular Shashtiamsa
is benefic or malefic in nature, (as marked against each Shashtiamsa).
Odd sign
Even sign
1. Ghora (M)— aweful, violent.
2. Rakshasa (M)— demoniacal.
3. Deva (B)— divine, spiritual side.
4. Kubera (B)— celestial treasurer.
5. Yaksha (B) — celestial singer.
6. Kinnara (B) — a mythical being IT -IT 30'
with a human head in the form
of a horse, a bad or deformed man.
7. Bhrashta (M)— fallen, vicious.
8 . Kulagbna (M) — ruining a family.
9. Garala (M)— poison or venom.
10. Vahnl (M)— fire, gastric fluid,
digestive faculty, appetite.
1 1 . Maya (M) — deceit, jugglery.
12. Purishaka (M)— dirt.
13. Apampathi (B)— the ocean,
Varuna, (the rain god). .
14. Marut (B)— the wind god.
1 5. Kaala (M)— dark blue colour,
weather, Time considered as one
of the nine dravyas by the
Vaiseshikas, a person who
distils and sells liquor, Saturn,
Siva, a personification of the
destructive principle.
16. Sarpa (M)— snake.
17. Amrtta (B)— immortal, nectar.
18, Indu (B)-— Moon, the number 1,
camphor.
19. Mridu(B)— moderate, soft.

Chapter 6
io°3o'-ir
20. Komala (B)— tender, agreeable. 20°-20°30'
21. Heramba (B)— Ganesa, (the elep- 19°30'-20°
hant faced god), a boastful hero,
buffalo.
22. Brahma (B)— the Universal Father, 19°-19°30'
a missile, sacred knowledge.
23. Vishnu (B) — ' the second deity of
the sacred Triad, name of Agni,
name of a lawgiver (author of
Vishnusmriti), a pious man.
24. Maheswara (B) — the third deity
of the Triad entrusted with the
task of Great Destruction, also
name of Vishnu, a 'great lord
(sovereign).
25. Deva (B)— same as S. No, 3
26. Ardra (B)— moist
27. Kalinasa (B) — destruction of
strife (according to some, this
is a malefic Shashtiamsa)
28. Kshiteesa (B)— ruler of the earth
29. Kamalakara (B) — a lake full of
lotuses, an assemblage of lotuses.
30. Gulika (M)— Saturn’s son
31. Mrithyn (M) — son of Mars, death. 14 30-15
32. Kaala (M)— same as S.No. 15 14M4°30'
33. Davagani (M) — a forest confla- 13 30-14
gration.
34. Ghora (M)— same as S.No. 1
35. Yama (M)— death personified
36. (M)— thorn, any trouble- 12°-12°30'
some fellow to the state and
enemy of order and government.
37. Sudha (B) — nectar, ambrosia, name 11°30'-12°
of the Ganges.
38. Amrita (B) — same as S.No. 17 ll°-ll o 30’
39. Poornachandra (B) — Full Moon. 10°30'-11°

Prihat Parasara Hora Sastra
1 9®30'-20° 40. Vlshadagdha (M)-destroyed by 10°-]0°30'
venom, consumed by grief.
20°30'-2r' 42. Vamsakshaya (M)— descent not 9 o -9°30’
growing further.
21 -21 30 43. Utpata (M) — a portentous or 8°30'-9°
unusual phenomenon . boding
- calamity, any public calamity
like an eclipse, earthquake & C.
22 -22 30 45. Saumya (B) — relating or sacred to 7°30'-8°
the Moon, handsome, auspicious.
23 -23 30 47. Seetala (B) — cold, Moon, camphor, 6 o 30'-7°
turpentine, sandal.
23°30'-24° 48. Karaladamshtra (M)— frightful 6 o -6°30'
teethed
24“'-24°30' 49. Chandramnkhl (B)— having the 5 t ’30'-6°
beauty of the Moon.
24°30'-25’ 50. Pravecna (B)— clever, versed in. 5°-5°30'
25 -25 30 51. Kala Pavaka (M) — the destructive 4°30'-5°
fire at the end of the world.
25°30'-26° 52. Dandayudha (M)— the staff held by 4°-4°30'
an ascetic (or by a Brahmin).
26 o -26°30' 53. Nirmala (B) — resplendent, sinless. 3°30'-4°
stainless, virtuous.
27°-27°30 55. Kroora (M) — pitiless, mischievous, 2°30'-3°
bloody, disagreeable, terrible27 30 -28° 56, Atiseetaia (B) — very cold. 2 o -2°30*
28 30-29 58. Payodhi (B) — Ocean. l^^SO’
29 -29 30 59. Bhramana (M) — wandering. 0°30 , -l°
29 30-30 60. Chandra Rekha (B) — the digit or 0°-0°30'
streak of the Moon.
With the above interpretation of the names of the Shasht-

Chapter 6
iamsas, we will be wellguided in the matter of predictions. For
example, if a benefic planet i: in the 3rd house identical with a
benefic’s Rasi in ‘Yaksha’ shashtiamsa, the native will have high
musical achievements. If Jupiter or the 2nd lord be in ‘Kubera’
Shashtiamsa, one will be very affluent. If a planet in the 8th is
in ‘Payodhi’ shashtiamsa, fear from water may be expected. If
the 10th lord occupies ‘Dhrashta’ shashtiamsa, the native will be
wretched in profession. In this manner, many incidents can be
clearly estimated which may not be ‘visible to ordinary eye
from the horoscope.
Now, we have before us the details of all the 16 divisions
as dealt with by sage Parasara. One more minute division, the
minutest in Hindu Astrology, is Nadi Amsa or 150th part of a
sign which will complete the system of Divisionalisation. For
details, please see my works “Doctrines of Suka Nadi — Retold”
and “An Epitome of Nadi Granthas”.
5T«lf fastfRTOT ^ UY^ll
^ 3 * qssqfsrcq ^ i
f'JSvrqtq: UYYIl
^c^fg-rfsq qif^ITTrTTf^HJf^rT: I
qilrsmi iivnn
cT^Tl
'«%ff q3faqq?lte ^ STRfa: IIY^Ii
fefitq: q>3$iqq% UyvjII
tfcqj fafa: *qT?T I
^afaqfngtq qqfa: liven
V|%cT q^fa: *TRfa: I
qqfa; iiYtii

Brihat Parasara flora Sastra
*TTR ?5t£I^tTfV^lcT l
qjfww ny.oii
w%fa>NfM ¥rai*ffaW i
>sftt»e*T*n*iT WT?*lf ^t^lfcTT: nn?a
fq't'«H*T?rf^fj)ui^qv(q^Tfuq^; ?T?n: J
C% o
WT^8ld *nf m^n: gsftem nx^n
arftincn ^ijfsRTr ?f^nn 5^1 ^ 1
WRTfaffrfW^WI 3PT?5TT irtrRnFWT: 11*311
42-53. VARGA CLASSIFICATION : Maitreya, explained
now are the sum effects of classifications of different divisions
(or Vargas so far narrated). These are four kinds, viz- Shad
Varga (6 divisions considered), Saptha Varga (7 divisions considered), Dasa Varga (10 divisions considered) and Shodasa Varga
(all the 16 divisions considered). In the Shad varga classification,
the Varga designations arc Kimsuka, Vyanjana, Chaamara,
Chatra and Kundala according to a planet being in 2 to 6
combinations of good Vargas. Next is the Sapt avarga in which
these classifications continue in the same manner upto six
combinations of good Vargas, the 7th additional Varga getting
classified as Mukula. In the Dasa Varga scheme, the designations
commence from Parijata etc. such as 2 good Vargas — Parijatha.
3. Uttama, 4. Gopura, 5. Simhasana, 6. Paaravata, 7. Devaloka,
8. Brahmaloka, 9. Sakravahana and 10. Vargas— Sridhama.
In the Shodasa Varga scheme the combinations of Vargas
go with designations thu9 : two good Vargas— Bhedaka,
3. Kusuma, 4. Nagapushpa, 5. Kanduka, 6. Kerala, 7. Kalpavriksha, 8. Chandana Vana, 9. Poornachandra, 10. Uchchaisrava,
11. Dhanvantari, 12. Suryakanta, 13. Vidruma, 14. Sakrasimhasana, 15. Goloka and 16. Vargas— Sri Vallabha. In these
divisions, the divisions falling in the planet’s exaltation sign,
Moolatrikona sign, own sign, and the signs owned by the lord
of an angle from the Arudha ascendant are all to be considered
(as good Vargas). The divisions of a combust planet, defeated
planet, weak planet and a planet in bad Avasthas like Sayana be
all ignored to be auspicious, for these destroy the good yogas.
Notes : Four kinds of summary of the Vargas or divisions
are suggested thus ;

Chapter 6 89
(a) Shadvarga (considering si* Vargas) viz. Rasi, Hora,
Decanate, Navamsa Dvadasamsa and Trimsamsa.
(b) Sapta Varga (seven Vargas) adding Saptamamsa to the
Shad Varga.
(c) Dasa Varga (ten Vargas) adding Shodasamsa, Dasamamsa and Shashtiamsa divisions to the Sapta Varga.
(d) Shodasa Varga (all the 16 Vargas so far narrated by
the sage).
The groups as above are as per slokas 17-20 of ch. 7 infra.
The Vargas to be considered (as good) are :
1. Exaltation divisions.
2. Moolatrikona divisions.
3. Own divisions.
4. The divisions of the owners of the four angles counted
from the Arudha Pada or Pada Lagna.
The first three are clear. The fourth one needs a clarification. Insloka 52 above, the word ( Swarudhath ) has
been used which means from the Arudha Pada or Pada Lagna.
Hence the lust quarter of stoka 52 hints at the ' divisions of the
lords of angles from the Arudha Pada”, (Similarly “Swamsa” or
T3ff9T means the Navamsa occupied by Atma Karaka i.e. Karakamsa ascendant, vide ch. 33, infra.)
The sage suggests that the signs owned by the lords of
Arudha Lagna and of its angles are considered good for Va^ga
Division. This will bring many signs— sometimes as many as 8—
in the purview of this rule. It has been felt necessary to bring
this liberal approach contained in the sloka to the attention of
the reader. In my opinion, the truer strength of a planet lies
in its Moolatrikona, exaltation and own sign positions.
For the sake of brevity, the good Vargas in number in the
context of Shadvarga through Shodasa Varga are given special
designations as detailed below :
If Shadvarga scheme is considered two or more such good
Vargas are known thus :
2. Kimsuka 3. Vyanjana 4. Chamara 5. Chatra 6. Kundala.
If Sapta Varga scheme is used the same names upto six
good Vargas apply while seven good Vargas go under the name
Mukuta.

Brihat Parasara flora Sasfra
If Dasa Varga scheme is resorted to, the good Vargas in
number are called thus :
2. Parijata 3. Uttama 4. Gopura 5. Simhasana 6. Paravata
7. Devaloka 8. Brahmaloka 9. Sakravahana 10. Sridhama.
The author of Sarvartha Chintatnani designates 8, 9 and 10
respectively as Amara, Iravata and Vaiseshikamsas. In fact,
these three are popularly known with these names viz. Amara
etc. rather than with the ones given by Maharshi,
When Shodasa Varga scheme is wholly considered, the
number of good divisions are known as :
2. Bhedaka 3. Kusuma 4. Nagapushpa 5, Kanduka
6. Kerala 7. Kalpavriksha 8. Chandanavana 9. Poornachandra
10. Uchchaisrava 111 Dhanvantari 12 Suryakanta 1 3. Vidruma
34. Sakrasimhasana 15. Goloka 16. Sri Vallabha.
It may be noted that most of even the hoary authors have
not gone beyond Dasa Varga scheme. The sage has fully explained all the 16 Vargas involved so that a planet’s actual disposition is properly known.
As far as Hora or half of a sign is concerned “good
Vargas” should be flexibly used as except the Sun and Moon,
none has rulership of Hora. Jupiter is in exaltation Varga if in
Moon’s Hora. Then, for Jupiter in Sun's Hora, and for other
four in any Hora, how do we classify the Varga? In my opinion,
we have to follow the hint given in sloka 13 of the next chapter
that Jupiter, Sun and Mars give effects if in Sun’s Hora (as far
as Hora is concerned) and the rest of the planets except Mercury
in Moon’s Hora. Mercury is good in both the Horas. So to
say, these are good Horas for the concerned planets. ll follows
that Jupiter and Mercury are good in any Hora for Varga
classification. (There are further hints about Hora, vide ch.7,
sloka 13 onwards.)
Nextly, a brief clarification is required htadut the Sun arid
Moon not having own Trimsamsas. The Sun can occupy Aries
in Trimsamsas and the Moon can be ih Taurus iti Venusian
Trimsamsa. They cannot be ih Leo or Cancer in Trimsainsa
charts. Hence only exaltation will apply to them in Trimsamsa.
Now, coming back to the Varga names, we Will take up
some for clarifications. The word “Suryakantamsa” denotes

Chapter 7 ^
that the planet or the ascendant, as the case may be, has obtained 12 good Vargas in the Shodasa Varga or 15 divisions.
Similarly "quHniwi” or Paravatamsa indicates six good Vargas
in Dasa Varga scheme. One can understand these terms on these
lines.
3 T«T qnfqqqrnsmtr; iivsi |
Chapter 7
Divisional Consideration
farm? iftTim u?n
cT I
# fo?r?r trcranri? ii^ii
ftqqiqf **TOm I
{H^tST cT^T qK r ?TT?1% l|^||
gqTsgsrcti fonqr q i
3'n*nnm fwN smij ftrofowrit iiyii
P mnn msr
i?T ^TSyjvqiT 1 1 <01
^cffq'^sfqqrfhTtlcT i
fqrfq flr$TF3: \i\\\
fHr ?T q«TT I
fa f^Tfa qrsni?T: ^m?nfaqf?T: *pr: n^a
fa qqf^hrt q«n |
tf?T *>cvnmfof srfimfen: item.
1-8. USE OF THE 16 DIVISIONS : I now explain tbe
vise of these sixteen divisions. The physique from the ascendant,
wealth from Hora, happiness through coborn from decanate.

Brihat Parasara Hora Sastrti
fortunes from Chaturthamsa, sons and grandsons from saptha*
msa, spouse from Navamsa, power (and position) from Dasamsa,
parents from Dvadasamsa, benefits and adversities through
conveyances from Shodasamsa, worship from Vimsarosa, learning from Chathur Vimsamsa. strength and weakness from
Bhamsa, evil, effects from Trimsamsa, auspicious and inauspicious
effects from Khavedamsa, and all indications from both Akshavedamsa and Shashtiamsa : these are the considerations to be
made through the respective Vargas or divisions. The bhava
whose lord is in a malefic Shashtiamsa will diminish, so say
Garga and others. The bhava whose lord is in a benefic Shodasamsa (or Kalamsa) flourish. This is how the 16 Vargas are to be
evaluated.
Notes t The Shodasa vargas, apart from giving clues as to
the dignity of a planet, can be used to delineate various Bhava
effects. The proper instruments are :
J. Ascendant for the wellbeing or otherwise of the
physique.
2. Hora for wealth.
3. Decan ate for happiness through coborn.
4. Chaturthamsa for fortunes.
5. Saptamamsa for dynasty (i.e. progeny etc.)
6. Navamsa for spouse.
7- Dasamamsa for power and position (i.e. livelihood etc.)
£. Dvadasamas for parents.
9. Shodasamsa for conveyances and related happiness.
VO. Vimsamsa for worship, spiritual progress, religious
activities etc.
11. Chaturvimsamsa for academic achievements.
12. Bhamsa for strength and weakness.
13. Trimsamsa for evils.
14. Khavedamsa for auspicious and inauspicious effects.
J5. Akshavedamsa for all general indications.
16. Shashtiamsa for all general indications.
Vfiiz-n for example, considering the academic achievemen ts
o f* thrive, take thTlnd and 4th lords, it these occupy tajp ura file Chaturvimsamsas, the subject will progress with educatio n
unhindered! Or if the Dasalord related to education is digni-

Chapter 7 93
fled in Chaturvimsamsa, he will confer wide learning. Similarly
the other events be delineated accordingly.
Slokas 6-8 need a clearer approach. Take a bhava owned
b y a planet. If the said planet is in a malefic Shashtiamsa ,
then the bhava in question suffers a dcfecy Good and b ad
S hashtiamsas have been specified earlier .
Another clarification is about the lord of Shodasamsa being
benefic. If a planet is in the Shodasamsa (Kalamsa) of a benefit, then the house owned by the first- mentioned flourishes.
The word means “benefic” without reference to “good
Vargas” vide sloka 52 of the previous chapter. Why the sage
chose these exceptions is inexplicable.
*r*i*ta t
areicr: t
9-12. After assessing the 20 point strength of the ascending
degree, other houses and the planets, the good and bad efiects
be declared. I explain below the method of knowing the Vimsopaka strength (20 point strength) just by knowing which an idea
of the results of actions of this birth and of former birth will
clearly emerge. The planets from the Sun on get full strength
when in exaltation or in own sign and are bereft of strength when
in the 7th (from exaltation). In between, the strength be known
by rule of three process. In the case of a planet owning two
signs, distinction of placement in odd/cven sign identical with
own sign be made.
Notes : The method of calculating Vimsopaka strength is
given in slokas 1 7-27 of the present chapter. The sage instructs
that this strength will be highly suggestive.
Other sources of strength are suggested in slokas 11-16.
These are related to assess a planet’s proper disposition.
A planet in exaltation is fully powerful while in debilitation
it is devoid of Vigour. If it is descending, i.e. leaving the exalt-

Brihat Parasara Iiora Sastra
ation and transiting towards debilitation, degree by degree, its
strength diminishes and the planet becomes fully void in the
debilitation sign. Again when it climbs from fall to exaltation,
gradually it gains arid becomes fully potential in exaltation.
It is also stated that planets in own signs get full strength.*
Here a distinction is to be noted. Male planets in male signs and
female planets in female sings get full strength. Mars and others
each have two signs. Mars, a male planet, in own sign if in
Aries is better than Mars in Scorpio, a female sign. Venus in
Taurus is better placed than in Libra. Such inference may be
wisely made. These details are elaborately discussed in the relevant chapters in the matter of calculation of Shadbala etc.
3 St Id I
T*: f*T7»7* II
* 73*77 3*s77*Tfa whnwPi WH7 Ilf *11
VTTOvf *77*7*** f*7TT*f77: I
13-16. HORA, DECANATE AND TRIM SAMS A EFFECTS : Jupiter, the Sun and Mars give (pronounced) effects in
the hora of the Sun. The Moon, Venus and Saturn do so when
in Moon’s hora. Mercury is effective in both the Horas. In
the case of an even Rasi the hora of the Moon will be powerful
in effects while the Sun’s hora in an odd sign will be so. Full,
medium and nil will be the effects respectively in the beginning,
middle and the end of a hora. Similar applications be made for
a decanate, Turyamsa, Navamsa etc. As for Trimsamsa effects
the Sun is akin to Mars and the Moon is akin to Venus. The
effects applicable to Rasi will apply to Trimsamsa.
Notes : The three male planets in Sun’s Hora will be revealing while Venus, Moon and Saturn are good in Moon’s Hora.

Chapter 7
Here again. Sun’s Hora of odd signs and Moon’s Hora in even
signs are given preference. Now from this, it emerges that Sun,
Mars and Jupiter are highly powerful in the first half of an odd
sign and Moon, Venus and saturn are very revealing in the
second half of an even sign. Mercury is powerful in any Hora
whether an odd sign or otherwise.
The effects due to a Hora will be derived fully if the planet
is in the first one-third part of the Hora. The effects will be
medium or nil according to the placements being in the second
or third part of the Hora.
?ftT \
fanfares
^ farcin: qgr Htaw ut«u
w. HI® SET I
FTar ^ ^ ’GWWV rTHTSH ^ ilHKIR: U'&ll
17-19. VIMSOPAKA STRENGTH : The Shadvargas (six
divisions) consist of Rasi, Hora, decanate, Navamsa, Dvadasamsa and Trimsamsa. The full strength, for each of the divisions
respectively are 6, 2, 4, 5, 2 and 1. This is the Vimsopaka
strength relatihg to Shadvarga division. Adding the Sapthamamsa to the Shad Vargas, we get Sapta Varga, the Vimsopaka
strength for which is : 5, 2, 3, 2{, 4i, 2 and 1. These are gross
strengths while subtle ones should be understood by exact
positions.
Notes : Vimsopaka strength is the 20 point strength obtained by a planet in continuously occupying own Vargas etc. in
the various schemes like Shad Varga to Shodasa Varga. For
fuller appreciation, see the notes given under slokas 26-27 of the
current chapter.
^ n^on
20. Add Dasamsa, Shodasamsa and Shastiamsa to the said
Saptha Varga Divisions, to get the scheme of Dasa Varga (10

gg Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
divisions) The Vimsopaka strength in this context is 3 for Rasi,
5 for Shashtiamsa and for the other 8 divisions, each.
flrf^T'TT: TTTPnf fqjqqn: I
qtjq fgjjrgfli get
sprra q)s*raqfai effqrqtai qq* i
WRRU
q>?Tt?T^ FT wq q7?T?iqiFI q I
q fqqq #*t: tosmiuct f|[ ‘Wi
3T^qsJ q grot era aq i
yjf fq^qqr fq^ft tjfq: *gnrfafqq% \\y*\\
faq qgarTT jftw H*r q^r srqftfaqqi
qraTfemqt g qqfgsftqqj wt«i»wi
21-25. When the 16 divisions (Shodasa Varga Scheme) are
considered together, the Vimsopaka score goes thus : Hora 1
Trimsamsa V, decanate 1, Shodasamsa 2, Navamsa 3, Rasi 3^,
• Shashtiamsa 4, and the rest of the nine divisions each a half.
The Vimsopaka strength remains as 20 (in the above computations) only when the planet is in own house Vargas. Otherwise
the total strength from 20 declines to 18 in extreme friends
Vargas, to 15 in friendly Vargas, to 10 in equal’s divisions, to 7
in enemy’s Vargas and to 5 in sworn enemy’s Vargas. (These
figures are called Varga Viswa.)
q-qfqsgt: ^qfqi^vqT: qqiqinfaqtfsraT: l
farrqTqi^qqttq qrag> q f^u^ii
faiqa sfaq qq
26 - 27 . VIMSOPAKA PROPORTIONAL EVALUATION :
Multiply the figure due to full strength for the division by the
Varga Viswa and divide by 20 to get the exact strength of the
planet. If the such total is below 5 the planet will not be
capable of giving auspicious results. If it is above 5 but below
10, the planet will yield some good effects. Later on upto 15 it
is indicative of mediocre effect. A planet with above 15 will
yield wholly favourable effects.

Chapter 7 gj
Notes ; Vimsopaka or 20 point -strength is calculated for
Shad Varga, Saptha Varga, Dasa Varga or Shodasa Varga, whichever is being considered by the astrologer. These Vargas are
detailed in the earlier slokas. By being in own Vargas a planet
gets full points of strength allotted to it in the concerned scheme'.
These are tabulated below for easy grasp :
Varga
Shad
Varga
Saptha
Varga
Dasa
Varga
Shodasa
Varga
Rasi
Hora
Drekkana
Navamsa
Dvadasamsa
Trimsamsa
Saptamsa
Dasamsa
Kalamsa
Shastiamsa
Vimsamsa
Chatur Vimsamsa
Bhamsa
Turyamsa
Khavedamsa
Akshavedamsa
Total

Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
The figure against each individual division is called
“Swaviswa". For example, in Rasi Division under Shodasa
Varga, you find 3.5 which is the Swaviswa.
Varga Viswa is the total strength as shown in sloka 25 for
the various dignities like placement in own house, extreme
friend’s house etc.
If a planet is continuously in own Vargas in the whole
of Shad Varga scheme or any other, it gets all the 20 points
or full of Vimsopaka strength. This is always not possible. By
virtue of a placement in other than own house, the points
diminish. In this context, Panchadha Sambandha or compound
relationship is to be considered, as learnt by us from slokas 5758 of ch. 3, supra.
To arrive at the net Vimsopaka, note the following
formula :
Swaviswa X Varga Viswa
Now see the following horoscope of a native born 'em
17-2-1984 at 2235 hrs. 1ST at New Delhi.
Rahu
Sun
Venus
Mercury
Moon
Jup
Ketu
Lag
Sat
Mars

Chapter 7
Let us consider the Vimsopaka strength for the ascendant
lord Venus. His Varga dignities and his relationship with each
of the Varga Lords is noted simultaneously along with Vimsopaka. The longitude ,of Venus is 9s 4° 32' 30".
Division
occupation
Lord
Relationship
SV VV vs
Rfisi
Capricorn
Sat.
Adhimitra
Horn
Cancer
Moon
Adhisatru
Drekkana
Capricorn
Sat.
Adhimitra
Navamsa
Aquarius
Sat.
Adhimitra
Dvadasamsa
Aquarius
Sat.
Adhimitra
Trimsamsa
Taurus
Ven.
Own
In the above table, SV=Swavisva, VV=Varga Vlswaand
VS— Vimsopaka strength.
The rest of the points will be clear to the reader from the
above calculations. And the Vimsopaka strengths be estimated
accordingly.
Maharshi Parasara fixes broad guidelines to know the use
of this strength as under :
5 points : Inauspicious results (or neutralisation
of good effects)
5-10 points Some good effects
10-15 points : Mediocre effects
15-20 points : Wholly favourable effects.
In our example, Venus gets 16.8 points and hence he should
confer wholly favourable effects when Shad Varga scheme is
considered. I would, however, prefer use of all the 16 Vargas
for a truer picture.
Minute evaluations of Vimsopaka are given on p. 101 for
a better understanding.
sruTSrmfa f femru i
yfavi 35: f*3rTT: IRqll
fq'JiinUiri ^4 I
*T6lTayucnri {£^4*1 Hdfa Hi") 44N i : ll^ll
28-29. OTHER SOURCES OF STRENGTH ; Maitreya,
there are other kinds of sources as I explain below. Planets
in the 7th from the Sun will be fully effective. One with an

Brihat Parasara Hera Sastra
identical longitude in comparison to the Sun’s will destroy the
good effects. Rule of three process be applied to the planet in
between these positions.
Notes : A planet away from the Sun is immune to loss of
rays, and can express itself fully. This need not be literally
misinterpreted that the one not being in the 7th from the Sun
will be ineffective. For example, we have Ubhayachari and
other yogas in which case, a planet other than the Moon is
related to the Sun by close positions. This does not mean that
these yogas will not fructify. If a planet is eclipsed in the Sun,
it proves impotent. This applies to Venus and Saturn as well,
against the common belief that these two do not lose rays even
if combust and hence are free from Astangata dosha. This
suggestion is only for Ayurdaya calculations and rectifications
of planetary rays (or Graha Kiranas). Please see the following
table for degrees of combustion.
Planet
Combustion In direct
motion
Combustion in (R)
motion
Moon
Mara
Mercury
Jupiter
l? a
ir
Venus
Saturn
Rahu and Ketu should not be treated as combust although
they may be longitudinally close to the Sun. For they are only
mathematical points. On the contrary, they eclipse or obstruct
the Sun. A basic phenomenon in combustion is the planet
combust does not heliacally rise during the period of combustion
but is set.
^ erpfrci iv^oh
ffifagW WT5T HJcTR I
tnww fr w

Chapter 7
30-32. DAS A EFFECTS WITH VIMSOPAKA STRENGTH : Maitreya, after assessing the Vimsopaka strength through the various divisions, the rising and setting of the planets be
considered. The Vimsopaka strength is classified as unaer :
Poorna, Atipooma, Madhya, Atimadhya, rteena, Atiheena,
Swalpa and Atiswalpa, Thus should be classified the Vimsopaka
strength and the Dasa period results declared accordingly.
Notes : The sage uses 8 distinct terms to classify the effects
of Vimsopaka strength. I have used ihe Same original terms for
the sake of identity while the table given below with percentages
of effects due to the various gTades will enlighten the student as
to what these terms imply.
Grade
Atipoorna
Poorna
Atimadhya
Madhya
Swalpa
Atiswalpa
Heena
Atiheena
Vimsopaka points Beneficial effects doe
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
The percentages given by me are numerical assignments for
a comparative study so that an idea is gained of the gradations
originally suggested.
sr«f i
^sn^tRTTwffnr fVmmuuk f?ru^u

Brihat Parasara Hot a Sastra
33-36. ANGLES, TRINES ETC. DEFINED : O Maitreya,
listen to other matters which 1 am explaining. The Kendras
(angles) are specially known as ascendant, the 4th house the
descendant and the mid-heaven (the 10th house). The 2nd,
5th, 8th and the 11th are Panapharas or succedents while the 3rd,
6th, 9th and the 12th are called Apoklimas or cadents. The 5th
and 9th from the ascendant are known by the name Kona or
trine. Evil houses or Trika houses are the 6th, 8th and the
12th. Chaturasras are the 4th and 8th- The 3rd, 6th, 10th and
1 1th houses are Upachaya.
Notes : The 12 houses including the ascendant are classified into various groups which are as under :
Kendras or angles : Ascendant 4th, 7th and 10th
Panapharas or Succedents : 2nd, 5th, 8th and 11th
Apoklimas or Cadents : 3rd, 6th, 9th and 12th
Konas or Trines '• 5th and 9th
Trikas or evil houses : 6th, 8th and 12th
Chaturasras *> 4th and 8th
Upachayas ; 3rd, 6th, 10th and 11th.
37-38. NAMES OF BHA VAS : The 12 houses are : Thanu,
Dhana, Sahaja, Bandbu, Putra, Ari (srfc), Yuvati, Randhra,
Dharma, Karma, Laabha and Vyaya are in order the names
of houses. 1 explained these briefly and leave it to you to grasp
more according to your intelligece. As delivered by Lord
Brahma, some further information is added thus (i.e. in the
following verses).
Notes : Each house is given a special name for easy
identity. The indications are known thus :
Thanu : physique
Dhana : wealth
Sahaja : younger brpther/sister

Chapter 1
Bandhu
: relatives
Putra
: progeny
Ari
; enemies
Yuvati
: wife
Randhra
: longevity
Dharma
: religion
Karma
: acts (or livelihood)
Laabha
: gains
Vyaya
: expenditure
■‘‘baadhra’* actually means a vulnerable or assailable point
A planet in the 8th becomes vulnerably placed. The various
houses in a nativity are related to various spheres of life. Ch. 1 1
deals with the houses in this context.
fagsrf* \
ufojiw * m \
*1M1^ ?T?^ilin(a^Sf»a5IM I
^otct md u*?u
3**iT ^ grt: 5^, 5TRWT: flWt: I
SftzqCT cqtppnfq qTTPtJfjft f^TT U
tl^T^rac^H fare*I JRt^rRT?^* f^: I
Were* qjtfcTfe 5T?T faired
39-43, INDICATIONS FROM HOUSES : The 9th from
^he ascendant and the 9th from the Sun deal with one’s father.
Whatever effects are to be known from the 10th and 11th
counted from ascendant be also known- from similar houses
counted from the Sun. Whatever results are to be known from
the 4th, 1st, 2nd, 11th and the 9th should also be known from
the 4th of the Moon, from the Moon sign itself and 2nd, 1 1th
and 9th from the Moon respectively. Whatever has to be known
through the 3rd from the ascendant be also analysed through the
3rd from Mars. The 6th from Mercury be also considered in .

104 ' ferihat Parasara ft or a Sastrd
regard to indications derivable from the 6th counted from
the ascendant. The 5th fr om Jupit er, theJ7tkJl©m_Vcnufi.and
both the 8th and~l25 Tfrpm Saturn stand for consideration
re soectivefvln resppet of offspring, sp ouse and death. The lord
of fee Bhava is equally important when estimating the indications
of a particular Bhava (house).
Notes : We get important clues from the above five verses.
It is, not enough if the house concerned as counted from
the ascendant is strong and well disposed for the prosperity of
the house. Such a bouse from the signifying planet should also
be strong. For example, one will enjoy paternal happiness if the
9th from the ascendant and the 9th- from the Sun are both well
disposed. The 9th from the Sun if occupied by a debilitated
planet or if the 9th lord from the Sun is weak, then the good
indications through Pitro Bhava are neutralized. Now see &■
gist of the slokas :
* (a) Father to be considered from the 9th both from the
Sun and Lagna.
(b) 10th from Lagna to be correlated with the 10th from
the Sun— for patrimony, paternal rites etc.
(c) 1 1 th from Lagna to be correlated with the 11th from
the Sun for gains (and for father’s longevity— as the 1 1th |s the
3rd from the 9th.)
(d) The 4th from the Lagna and from the Moon are
related to mother.
(0) The ascendant and the Moon sign relate the physical
felicity of the native, and general strength of the radix-
(f ) The 2nd from the ascendant and from the Moon be
investigated about one’s sight, speech, learning, wealth etc.
(g) The 11th from ascendant and from Moon for gains,
elder brothers, friends etc.
(h) The 9th from ascendant and from the Moon for
general fortunes, religion, meritorious activities etc.
(1) The 3rd from Mars and from the ascendant be seen for
coborn, courage etc.
(j) The 6th from ascendant and from Mercury for
diseases, debts, enemies, cousins and the like.
(k) The 5th from the ascendant and from Jupiter for
obtainment of progeny, their well being, their prosperity etc.

Chapter 8 IU \
(For a female the 9th from Lagha and from Jupiter in connection with children are to be scrutinized.)
(l) The 7th from Lagna and from Venus for marriage, its
nature, consequences, duration etc.
(m) Both the 8th and 1 2th . from both the Lagna -and
Saturn for death.
From this it will be seen that each of the 12 houses is
related to some specific planet apart from the ascendant. These
rules are very highly suggestive.
3t«t llsll
Chapter 8
Aspects Of The Signs
aw H mft c ro tat wnfRi 'jsw «
q ftZW f SW*nf*l % T ,1 J I
tnwt s fi wg fa* ! sw? i
tpqT
fwfiTss^n^ <
qfetTHT nm¥rT«TTU^l
1-3. SIGN ASPECTS : O Maitreya, now detailed are the
aspects emanating from the signs Aries etc. Every movable
sign aspects the 3 fixed signs leaving the fixed sign adjacent to
it. Every fixed sign lends aspect to the 3 movable signs barring
the adjacent movable sign. And a common sign aspects the
other three common signs. The planet in a sign lends the same
aspect as the sign (in which the planet is) does.
Notes : Apart from usual aspects of planets, Maharshi
Parasara deals with Rasi aspects or sign aspects. These are also
used by sage Jaimini fa discipie of Vedavyasa and author of
Poorva Meemamsa etc.) and this system came to be known as
Jaimini system though the original propounder is Parasara.

Brifiat Parasara Hora Sastfa .
Jaimini Maharshi is also an equally worshipped authority on
astrology. He mainly uses Rasi aspects, Rasi Dasas apart from
many other Dasas, Arudha Pada, Atma Karaka etc. by longitudes, Karakamsa etc.
The current 3 slokas throw light on the sign aspects. Each
ipovable Rasi aspects 3 fixed signs, leaving the nearest fixed sign.
For example, Aries — movable sign- — does not aspect Taurus but
Leo, Scorpio and Aquarius. Taurus— a fixed sign aspects
3 movable signs, viz. Cancer, Libra and Capricorn but does
not aspect Aries, the nearest movable sign. Gemini’s aspects
are on Virgo, Sagittarius and Pisces. The planet in assign
aspects similar signs as above and also the occupant thereof.
Hence, in these aspects, longitudes of the aspector and the
aspected are ignorable.
The following table will represent the aspects detailed
above :
Sign/oecupant
aspecting
Sign/occupant
aspected
Aries
Leo, Scorpio and Aquarius
Taurus
Cancer, Libra and Capricorn
Gemini
Virgo, Sagittarius and Pisces
Cancer
Scorpio, Aquarius and Taurus
I.eo
Libra, Capricorn and Aries
Virgo
Sagittarius, Pisces and Gemini
Libra
Aquarius, Taurus and Leo
Scorpio
Capricorn, Aries and Cancer
Sagittarius
Pisces, Gemini and Virgo
Capricorn
Taurus, Leo and Scorpio
Aquarius
Aries, Cancer aud Libra
Pisces
Gemini, Virgo and Sagittarius

Chapter 8 107
nr* *
feqhi ^ qrofcr ^#?raRiwn
fltlferT 'TWP^WWft^rTR I
faqfET*f ftRT ^?v: q W t fc qBPTTnR: UV.U
4-5. PLANETARY ASPECTS : A planet in a movable
sign aspects the other 3 fixed signs leaving the fixed sign
next to it. A planet in a fixed sign does not aspect the next
movable sign but the remaining 3 movable signs. The one in
a common sign throws aspect over the remaining 3 common
signs. Simultaneously a planet in the aspected sign is also
subjected to the aspect concerned.
Notes : The idea conveyed in the two verses can be well
conceived from the notes given for the first three slokas above.
With the help of these five slokas, one can deduce the following
from the horoscope given as example below :
Mars
Ven
Sun
Lagna
Merc
Ketu
Rasi
Jup
Sat
Rahu
Moon
(a) Mars aspects Saturn, Moon and the nodes.
(b) Venus, the Sun and Mercury aspect none.
(c) Jupiter aspects the Moon, Ketu, Sun and Venus.
(d) Saturn and Rahu aspect Mars.

brihat Parasara tiora Sastrct
(e) Moon aspects Mars and Jupiter.
(f) Ketu aspects Mars and Jupiter.
In the above, we considered only planet to planet aspect
so that we know the difference between this system, of aspects
and the usual one.
Hit'll ST^na^U^tt
snfa i
fasr ! ^ n\sn
f vr— rT ftpjHI qrqsq Vfiwf fT«n i
*re£?qi ^TTtnf^q W«f f?P#rT licit
^ ^^J^TT^TT €TT <
qfq^Fqsf 115.11
6-9. ASPECTUAL, DIAGRAM ; As depicted by Lord
Brahma, I now narrate the aspectual diagram so that aspects are
easily understood by a mere sight of the diagram. Draw a
square or a circle marking the 8 directions (4 corners arid 4
quarters thereof). Mark the zodiacal signs as under : Aries
and Taurus in east, Gemini in the north-east. Cancer and Leo
in the north, Virgo in the north-west, Libra and Scorpio in
the west, Sagittarius in the south-west, Capricorn and Aquarius
in the south, and Pisces in the south-east. The aspects (as per
the earlier slokas) can be shown in a square diagram or circular
diagram (as per convenience).

sPTlftssTsnPT: llfcll
Chapter 9
Evils At Birth
arraV sTfirr^Tt <%sr ! f^rrsfro \
3ttcwrt <f?t ti;n
1. O Brahmin, first of all, estimate the evil6 and checking
factors thereof through the ascendant and then declare the
effects of the 12 bhavas.
Notes : The ascendant is the most important in the matter
of causing eVils or counteracting evils till a native is 32. Hence,
the sage refers to the ascendant specifically in the matter of
Balarishta or infant mortality and cautions (in the next sloka)
that upto the age of 24, no definite assurances about longevity
be made.
The Moon becomes important in the matter of evils and
checking factors for longevity from the age of 32 upto 64th year.
And the Sun is the centre in this respect from the age of 64,'
This does not mean that the evils from the Moon do not operate
till the 32nd year of age, and so on and so forth.
2. Evils causing premature end exist upto the 24th year
of one’s age. As such, no definite calculation of life span should
be made till such year of age.
Notes : While the sage declares that upto the 24th year, it
will not be possible to declare definitely in the matter of longevity. Other works like Horasara, Jyotisharnava Navaneethamu
(Telugu version), Sarvarfha Chlntamani, Jatbaka Parijatha
Phala Deepika etc. say that longevity calculations will be futile
till the 12th year of age.

Brlhat Parasara Hora Sastra
4tZw utfsitT: i
*HcflFU *J?UU: ^refacT: \\\U
frfiWFRf^i: ?ft«Tnr#5^T: URUtfWTT: i
ftrcftuftm imi
®RU 5T?ufa EfaqT: UUWf^$UTUaT: I
itft umr srf^ft u wim <u faau uv.ii
ufafarut «[?ft u>ut u»uut u nute i
ijnj^c^H^Isfa ulTUIUTO UT UU: ll^ll
3-6. SHORT-LIFE COMBINATIONS (upto sloka 23) :
Should the Moon be in the 6th, 8th, or the 12th from the
ascendant and be in aspect to a malefic, the child will die soon.
If in the process there be a benefic's aspect, it may live upto 8.
If a beneflc is retrograde in the 6th, 8th or the 12th being in
aspect to a malefic, death will occur within a month of birth.
This is true only when the ascendant is unoccupied by a benefic.
Should the 5th be occupied by Saturn, Mars and the Sun jointly,
(early) death of mother and brother will come to pass. Mars
placed in the ascendant or in the 8th and be conjunct Saturn or
Sun or be in aspect to a malefic, being bereft of benefic aspect
will prove a source of (immediate) death.
Notes : Here a pertinent query may emerge as to why the
sage mentions combinations for premature death while longevity
cannot be decidedly declared upto the 24th year of age as per
his own statement. These yogas will guide us to detect the
immediate defects for longevity and resort to remedial measures
like fire sacrifice, prayers, donations, medicine etc. and save the
from Akala Mrity.u or premature death, vide ch. 5 of Horasara.
The Moon in an evil house at birth and in aspect to a
malefic will cause early death. Even a benqfic’s aspect on the
Moon, in the said Yoga, will cause the end at the age of 8,
suggests the sage. If she is increasing, this need not be feared
Ufa I
tffauWwi W* Wfat U sffafa HV»U
fcuH: Hlfa: tpmfafa: I
fisrfau: uurrcufa ^ urn frnrftiusit

Chapter 9
*ra*rcg*r* fto =rf^ i
«fta: *r *Tfa m*ihP<4<h util
fftoroi i
tT y p iw y?: *T*to * U?oH
fajfa M i mafd *r *r^6ito
7-11. If Saturn and Mars aspect the ascendant as the
luminaries join Rahu (elsewhere), the child will live only for a
fortnight. Immediate death of the child along with its mother
will occur if Saturn is in the 10th, the Moon in the 6th and
Mars in the 7th. One will immediately go to the abode of Yama
(the Hindu god of death) if Saturn is in the ascendant while the
Moon and Jupiter are in their order in the 8th and the 3rd.
Only a month will be the span of one’s life who has the Sun in
the 9th, Mars in the 7tha nd Jupiter and Venus in the 1 1th. All
planets (i.e. any planet) in the 12th will be source of short life,
specifically the luminaries, Venus and Rahu. But the aspect of
one of these four planets (on the 1 2th) will counteract such
evils.
Notes : One of the 4 planets among the Sun, Moon, Rahu
and Venus in the 12th will contribute to premature end. If there
is aspect of one of these on the 12th, the evils for premaiure
death are checked. (This goes to prove that Rahu has aspects.)
The Su n, however, in the^ l 2th for Libra ascendant will confer a
life sp an of 100 years, vide sloka 16, ch To, in fra
qunfto: a* afsn
STM TOW ftmt:
12. The Moon is capable of causing early end if she is
with a malefic in the 8th, 7th or the ascendant and unrelated to
a benefic.
into* ton* * i
*r*«p ^nnt: wifswwn
13. Early death will come to pass if there be a birth in the
morning or evening junctions or in a hora ruled by the Moon

112 ■ Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
or in Gandanta while the Moon and malefics occupy angles from
the ascendantNotes : There are three yogas denoted for premature
death :
(a) Birth in Sandhya (as defined in the next sloka).
t/ (b) Birth (i e. asendant) in a Hora ruled by the Moon.
(For Hora, see slokas 5-6, ch. 6.)
^ (c) Birth in Gandanta.
Tn each of the three yogas, it is a prerequisite that the
angles from the ascendant be captured by the Moon and malefics.
Ganaanta : The last Navamsas of Cancer, of Scorpio and
of Pisces are called as Gandanta. According to a host of
authors, mere Gandanta Lagna or the Moon in Gandanta will
cause premature death,
W* HEBI fBBTfW 1
ppqtrnsktTTB STB: faBlfoVT «»?*!»
14. DEFINITION OF SANDHYA : 3 Ghatikas before
the sight of the semi disc (half ) of the rising Sun and a similar
duration following the Sun set are called as morning twilight
and evening twilight, respectively.
Notes : Morning twilight (or Pratah Sandhya) lasts for
72 minutes in the morning oefore the sight of the Sun’s disc
(locally) and evening twilight for a similar duration after the Sun
set. This definition of Sandhya by the sage is for deciding evils
to longevity in childhood.
In the context of Kala Dasa, Sandhya is defined differently
by the sage, obviously with a purpose, vide ch. 46 of Vol. II.
faER BlfB BTSBVTBt faBTTBl
15. EARLY DEATH : Should all the malefics be in the
oriental half while benefics are in the occidental half, early death
of one born in Scorpio will follow. In this case there is no
need of any rethinking.
Notes : The area of the horoscope from the 4th cusp to
the 10th cusp via the 7th house is known as occidental (or
western) half while the rest half is oriental for eastern) half.

Chapter 9 1 *3
One born in Scorpio ascendant with malefics in the
oriental half and bhenfics in the occidental half will face immediate death. This yoga is called as Vajra Mushti yoga by
Yavanacharyas. as quoted by Kalyana Varma. The Moon
should be in the occidental half if she is a betysfic or be in the
.oriental half if she is a malefic. If Mercury remains unafflicted,
by a malefic, this yoga will not come to pass.
16. Malefics in the 12th and the 6th, or in the 8th and the
2nd while the ascendant is hemmed between other malefics will
bring early death.
'TT*T> f
q*T sn%f%Tcf: tl^U
17. Malefics occupying the ascendant and the 7th while
the Moon is conjunct a malefic with no relief from a benefic will
also cause premature death.
H> sntft faro I ?T mw: lifcU
18. Early death will be inflicted on the native if decreasing
Moon is in the ascendant while malefics capture the 8th and an
angle. There is no doubt about that.
afiTwriftnHWi: i
tft «n?f: s Iifm*tT<rniv£u
19. The Moon in the ascendant, 8th, 12th or the 7th and
hemmed between malefics will confer premature death.
^ TO: ftm: IRoU
20. Should the Moon be in the ascendant hemmed between
two malefics while the 7th or the 8th has a malefic in it, the
child will face immediate death along with its mother.

Brihat Parasara Hora S astro
w4^'hfEt*TT»h| lit 3ffiit fatRiTcT: h^M
21. Should Saturn, the Sun and Mars be in the 12th, 9th
and 8th without benefic’s aspect, the child will face instant
death.
xf mf*T^ ITFT fHl^l^t |
22. With a malefic in the 7th house or in the rising
decanate while decreasing Moon is in the ascendant, death will
be experienced early.
qWTCT qT f^TTfT qT dWW: Hq *1$?^ II ^ 3 II
23. The life span of the child will be either 2 months or
6 months only, if all planets devoid of strength are relegated to
Apoklima houses (i.e. 3rd, 6th, 9th and 12th.)
ftrfq: «Hqq$ : SP3*TT lift 1
irnprmt q%riiq q%q ii^yii
24. EVILS TO MOTHER ( upto sloka 33) : The mother
Of the native will incur evils (will die soon) if the Moon at birth
is aspected by three malefics. Benefics aspecting the Moon will
bring good to the mother.
10% Ttgtfsi: ip: «tft: *nif q^T faq: I
cfFI fatlft ismift 11^ SOI
25. Should the 2nd be occupied by Rahu, Mercury, Venus,
Sun and Saturn the child’s birth has been after its father’s death
while even the mother will face early death.
qftrfa: 5IRT1 qqfa HRJ^TU^^U
26. If the Moon is in the 7th/8th from a malefic, be herself with a malefic, and be aspected by a strong malefic, predict
mother’s end to be early.

Chapter 9 115
*rm sfarcu: tfwrrqt cmrfa: i
qrrf^Ht anrrart<»T sftafa \\^m
27. The child will not live on mother’s milk but on that of
a she-goat if the Sun is exalted or debilitated in the 7th.
Notes : For an Aries native, if the Sim is in the 7th in
debilitation, or in the 7th in exaltation for a Libra native* it
deprives one of mother’s milk. The 7th rules the 4th from the
4th and hence the 7th is referred to,
Saturn in the 4th house will al?o deprive one of mother’s
milk.
Atmakaraka in Scorpio Navamsa will produce similar
effects. For a definition of Atmakaraka, see ch. 32, infra.
Tpft tnr
fqfa faiqfa ipit IRftll
28. Should a malefic be in the 4th, identical with an inimical sign, counted from the Moon while there is no benefic in an
angle, the child will lose its mother in a premature manner.
JTTST IRT , I
29. Malefics in the 6th and 12th will bring>evils to mother.
The child’s father will receive similar effects If the 4th and 10th
are captured by malefics.
%x\ unit * 1
C\ *N
VK: qfLqKWWT: ll^oll
30. Mercury in the 2nd while malefics occupy the ascendant, 7th and 12th : this yoga will destroy the entire family.
^ TTTTFFTT d^hl »T ll^ll
31. Jupiter, Saturn and Rahu respectively posited in the
ascendant, 2nd and 3rd will cause mother’s death early.

Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
*rrcn»ifaq$iwwf <namrr^r n Ann: h^h
32. Doubtlessly the mother will give up the ^hild if it has
matches in trines counted from the decreasing Moon. No benefic
shall be in conjunction with the said malefics.
^Invent mr jrt i
nfnfcnr»nft nt flrr fg^rjwrf ;r afhrfan^u
33. If Mars and Saturn are together in an angle with
reference to the Moon and occupy one and the same Navamsa,
the child will have two mothers. Yet it will be short-lived.
nnft niturt a \
sfn pfpr fannwn sfafn n^vn
34. EVILS TO FATHER ( upto sloka 42) : One’s father
will incur early death if Saturn, Mars and the Moon in tbeir
order are in the ascendant, the 7th and the 6th.
fan 5 Any nw itaw fwy<3 fan ii^xti
35. The native will at the time of his marriage lose his
father if Jupiter is in the ascendant while Saturn, Sun, Mars and
Mercury are together in the 2nd.
t ifaf wwl |nm yrontun: i
n^nm: wcflfi fajytrt n^u
36. Early loss of father will take place if the Sun is with a
malefic or is hemmed between malefics as there is another malefic
in the 7th from the Sun.
IJtf: ffJTFht IjfaFIA: |
a fan Vt&T
37. Remote will be the possibility of one’s father sustaining
if the Sun is in the 7th while Mars is in the 10th and Rahu is in
the 12th.

Chapter 9 til
mn hTh: \
f*m SCFf 3TTWPI facTT *fcl‘ H
38. Early and doubtless will be one’s father's death if
Mars is in the lOkh identical with his enemy’s sign.
Notes : Mercury is the sole enemy of Mars, vide ch. 3,
verso SS. Mercury’s camps are Gemini and Virgo. Hence, for a
Sagittarius native or for a Virgo native, Mars in the lOih (alone)
will cause early death of father.
farff aw *r afafallHU
39 . The Moon in the 6 th, Saturn in the ascendant and
Mars in tjfee 7t^ : this array of heavenly bodies at birth will not
ensure a long span of life for the father.
Hpft sifRRT h foftfeR# \
g mreHft PlT^H^fsfa faw: U* °U
40. If the Sun is aspected by Saturn and be in Aries/Scorpio Navkmsa, the father would have given up the family before
the birth of the child or would have passed away.
f flit Rltf JTOti H HRI fFRrft I
fq^r hi ar 5<Tr frmfmHTT hSrt n*tn
41. If the 4th, 10th and 12th are all occupied by matches,
both the parents \vilj leave the child to its own fate and wander
from place to place.
Notes : Also see sloka 8 , ch. 10 infra.
HISH 1
42. The father will not see the native ti|i his (the native’s)
23rd year if Rabu and Jupiter are together in an inimical sign
identical with the ascendant or the 4th.
Notes : The inimical signs for Jupiter are that of Mercury
and Venus. Rahu is inimically placed in Cancer, Leo, Aries and
Scorpio. Jupiter is friendly in these signs. It is hence implied

U" Brihat Parasara Hota Sastra
that these two should join in obe of these signs as 4th or the
10th so that the father cannot see the native till the latter
However, the rule needs a cautious approach in view of the
clash between inimical places for the two plahets. Mercury is
Rahu’s neutral. Hence if Mercury is temporarily inimical for
Rnhu, then Rahu’s placement (along with Jupiter) in Gemini or
Virgo as the 4th or the ascendant will cause the event. In other
cases, this will have to be wisely interpreted.
Wig: fam Wt RTcTT ^ 1
qn^fe^riV *ng; qmtamritafq
fqqfriy fa r ftqdq I
HFrt: wwww: qri: rita qrfiwfi rri: \
gsnnqqriqfsfq frofr^r frifrifaria iivvn
t?q frqri: toMfl qjtri \
qs^ qt HVltll
43-45. PARENTS : The Sun is 4J*e indicator of father for
all beings while the mother is indicated by the Moon. Should
the Sun be aspected by malefics or be hemmed between them
will cause evils to father. Similarly the l^foon be considered in
respect of mother. Malefics in the 6ih, 8th or 4th from the Sun
will brfyg inauspicious results about the father. Malefics in such
places from the Moon will be adverse for the mother. The
strength or otherwise of the occupants concerned be suitably
estimated.
ll?°u
Chapter 10
Antidotes For Evils
jjqfw hri sitas q>*ari \
qil HRTrftari 5 TTcTRt f^nrsfreri Ilf 11

Chapter 10 119
1, Those are the evils (due to a native). I now narrate the
antidotes for such evils as jvell, which will be helpful to assess
the extent of inauspiciousness.
Notes : The antidotes mentioned here are in the context
of short life. While some may carry with them the concept of
fortunate yogas, every principle does not.
qibfo aft t
siftcs fafttsi fafa* srrcqJTt w irii
< 2. Should one among Mercury, Jupiter and Venus be in
an angle from the ascendant, all evils are destroyed as the Sun
eliminates darkness.
tTSfj ftceaoaa i
ifa qma wn smm s* iru
3. Just as a single reverential obeisance before Lord Siva,
the Trident holder, frees one from all sins, a single but strong
Jupiter in the ascendant will waTd off all the evils.
Notes : In the case of Capricorn ascendant, Jupiter therein
should be exceedingly strong by other virtues, as otherwise
he can lead to short-life. For, sage Bhrigu specifically hints at
Madhyayu or medium span of life with Jupiter in the ascendant
identical with debilitation or inimical sign or malefic’s sign.
q* OrTTfftcT: |
ftftlH faoret qOT II VII
4. The ascendant lord is singly capable of counteracting
all evils if be is strongly placed in an angle just as Lord Siva,
the bolder of Bow, destroyed the three cities (built of gold,
silver and Iron by Maya for the demons).
sr<n3F*T aV a fo ftftra i
ftqffet tfwm iik.ii
5. All evils are destroyed if a benefic aspects the ascendant
of one bom during night in the bright half. Similarly, a malefic’s
aspect on tbc ascendant of one bora during day time in the dark
half.

Brihat Parasara Mora Sastra
Notes : The second statement does not imply evils to
longevity if a benefic aspects the ascendant for a day-birth in
Krishna Paksha (or dark-half). That is howevbr not enough', if
exists, but a malefio’s aspect is required.
to ^ sroh
6. The Sun in the 12th will confer a hundred-year life span
on one bom in Libra ascendant.
to
^ IIVSII
7. It will prove auspicious for the mother as well as the
native if Mars joins or is aspected by Jupiter.
•TFT: *ftrn*rs$ qqr I
f^: *nfr: Vfjf5Wt«t*T: llsll
8. Though raalefics in the 4th/10th are a source of evil for
the father, they turn auspicious if hemmed by benefics or if
benefics are in trines or in angles.
JTnfR^sf^cjr q {|£||
9. If malefics are surrounded by benefics while angles/
trmes are themselves benefic-occupied evils disappear soon Not
only this, evils will not follow from the bhavas concerned
arq mqf?nN>THroi: a??n
Chatter 11
Judgement of Houses
TO |
TOM TO fa fa fTOqfald ? qq )|?||

Chapter II
Hi
1 . O sage, I have come to know of the evils and antidotes
thereof as well from you. Please tell me, what is to be deduced
from each housB,
*5 ^ ’tsr «i?nsef*u
gw fprounfofaiihi ik^u
2. INDICATIONS OF THE FIRST HOUSE : (The sage
replies) : physique, appearance, intellect (or the organ of intelligence, i.e. brain), complexion of the body, vigour, weakness,
happiness, grief and innate nature are all to be guessed through
the ascending sign.
Notes : We ar tersely told here of the prime indications to
be deduced from each house. There are many matters related to
each home which I have listed rather exhaustively in my English
translation of Horasara, See pp 183-187 ibid.
3. SECOND HOUSE : Wealth, grains (food etc.), family,
death, enemies, metals, precious stones etc. arc to be understood
through the 2nd bouse.
fipfNf »re*r iftwrrs 1 * fartwfcj tmi
, 4. THIRD HOUSE : From the 3rd house, know of the
following : tilour, Servants (attendants etc.), brothers, sisters etc.
Initiatory instrucitons (-J^r), journey, and parent’s death.
5. FOURTH HOUSE : Conveyances, relatives, mother,
happiness, treasure, lands and houses are to be consulted through
the 4th house.
frqr fawt 1
q?rmtn^ h^u

Brihat Parasara If ora Sastrti
6. FIFTH HOUSE : The learned should deduce from the
5th house amulets, sacred spells, learning, knowledge, sons,
royalty (or authority), fall of position etc.
wrwhrRri *Tfa ii^ii
7. SIXTH HOUSE : Maternal uncle, doubts about death,
enemies, ulcers, step mother etc. are to be estimated from the
6th house.
8. SEVENTH HOUSE : Wife, travel, trade, loss of sight,
death etc. be known from the 7th house .
an*j tjerqtf i
*iwgqsTfav utu
9. EIGHTH HOUSE : The 8th house indicates longevity,
battle, enemies, forts, wealth of the dead* and things that have
happened and are to happen (in the past and future births).
qtqqr^nfqqr tri II foil
10. NINTH HOUSE : Fortunes, wife’s brother, religion,
brother’s wife, visits to shrines etc. be known from the 9th
house.
TTsq fr§^r«n i
yqiftfd n??)i
. 11. TENTH HOUSE : Royalty (authority), place, profession (livelihood), honour, father, living in foreign lands and debts
are to be understood from the 10th house.
Notes : “Father” is to be studied through the 10 house,
as per the above sloka. The sage obviously refers to the 10th in
this content as the 10th is the 7th from the 4th. Western astrologers too follow this view.

Chapter 1 1
Here we need some elaboration. The status of the father,
his family (i.e. consisting of the native’s mother etc.), and the
final rites the native will perform to his father will all have to
he known through the 10th hohse. The father as an individual
and his well being etc. be examined from the 9th house. The
sage also discusses the father with reference to the 9th house in
one of the ensuing chapters.
Thus it follows that both the 9th and 10th are primary
houses related to father.
anti ^
12. ELEVENTH HOUSE : All articles, son’s wife, income, prosperity, quadrupeds etc. are to be understood from the
11th house.
sqti W qfc<ini?rT-fT for ^«n \
fa 5nn«nfnf?T
13. TWELFTH HOUSE : From the 12th house, one can
know about expenses, history of enemies, dne’s own death etc.
n art i
SI^ TT5tTF*T: J7mft*TSfa ^fat'll? vii .
trcr
14-16. PROSPERITY OR ANNIHILATION Op A
HOUSE . Predict prosperity of the house which is conjunct or
is aspected by a benefic. Also when its lord is ia Yuvavastha or
in Prabuddhavastha or in Kaumaravastha or in the 10th house,
the bhava’s wellbeing is indicated. The bhava which is not aspected by its lord or whose lord is with a malefic planet or with one
of the lords of evil and such other houses (i.e. 3rd, 6th, 8th, 11th
and 12th) or is defeated in a planetary war or is in one of the

124 Brihat Parasara Hora Sastrd
three Avasthas, viz, Vriddhavastha, Mritavastha and Suptavastha.
Notes : The prosperity or wellbeing of a house is assured
under the following conditions :
(a) The house that contains a benefic.
(b) The house that js aspected by a benefic.
(c) The house whose lord is in Yuvavastha or in Kumaravastha. These two Avasthas are among the 5 Avasthas, viz. Baala,
Kumata, Yfefi&na, Vriddha and Mrita by being in 6° portions
respectively. This is for an odd sign placement. It is reverse in
the case of an eveii sign. Aslo see ch. 45 infra.
80 to say if the lord of a bouse is in 6° to 18° of an odd
sign, he will be in one of the two Avasthas required. Alternatively, it should be between 12° and 24“ of an even sign. (If a
planet Is debilitated or is combust, the goods cited are void).
(d) Pmbuddhavastha is another name for Jagradavastha,
meaning a state of awakenness. This applies to a planet in own
sign or in exaltation sign. The bhava owned by an exalted planet
or placed in own sign flourishes. Except the luminaries, the other
five own each two houses. It is fVue that a planet owning two
houses if placed in own house, it predominantly acts, on
behalf of that house occupied by it. Simultaneously, its another
house also gets strengthened by virtue of such a placement. For
example, Saturn owns the 3rd and 4th for Scorpio ascendant
and if he is in the 4th, he will mainly give good effects of the 4th
(his Moola-trikona house). This does not mean that the 3rd
house is left uncared by him.
(e) The house owned by a planet placed in the 10th from
the ascendant will produce good results. I would prefer it to be
closely related to the 10th cusp (or meridian) for it is the most
effective point of the natus. For details, see notes for rule 1, ch.
2 of my work, “Doctrines of Suka Nadi— Retold.”
Next we are told of the conditions under which a house
suffers annihilations which are :
(a) The bhava unaspected by its lord does not flourish.
Each bhava cannot be under the aspect of its lord. Then this
does not mean that the bhava suffers annihilation. It may be
construed that in tne absence of such an aspect, the bhava can

Chapter 1 1
look upto alternative sources as mentioned earlier. If a malefic
relation is there for a bhava, its lord's aspect on it is an
antidote.
(b) The lord of a bhava joining a .malefic is a disadvantage
for the bhava. If the said malefic is a friendly planet to the bhava
lord or if they join in favourable houses, then the evil is minimized. Even if it is an exalted malefic, then also good effects may
be expected.
(c) The lord of a house in conjunction with the lord of
6th/8th/12th cannot be . productive of good. If he himself is an
evil lord, then some relief can be expected. This is mainly from
a yoga point and not in all respects.
(d) If a planet is defeated in planetary war, its bhava’s
potence is void.
Normally, we are taught that when two planets are on the
same degree there occurs a war and the one with lesser longitude
is declared winner. The luminaries do -not enter into war.
In this connection, please refer to ch. 79 (Vol. II. of our
present work).
The late C. G. Rajau has a detailed and elaborate account
of planetary war. According to him if two planets have identical
longitudes to the minute of arc there is a planetary war, (This
does not involve luminaries). He adds that they should be on the
same latitude, i. e. both northern or both southern. The one
with higher latitude is declared winner. He gives an example
involving Saturn and Mars as under, for 0347 hrs on 15th
December 1925 :
Longitude Latitude
He declares Saturn as the winner as he has advanced
latitude.
We need not rush to the conclusion that Mr, Rajan’s version is contrary to Parasara’s. We should appreciate the pains
taken by Mr. Rajan in throwing more light on the subject. He
gives more advanced and sound arguments which are not being
reproduced here for the sake of achieving brevity.

126 ' Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
For practical purposes, we are well guided by the elaboration of Mr. Rajan.
(e) The house whose lord is in Vriddhavastha (i.e. of an
ady flpced age ) becomes ineffectiv e from the view point of good
results. A planet in the area of i'8°-24 t ' of an odd sign or between
6° and 1 2° of an even sign is said to be in such an Avastha.
(f) If a planet is in Mritavastha. (in extremis ) its bhava
wi|jj?r destroyed. This state occurs to a planet in the first 6° of
an even sign or in the last 6° of an odd sign.
(g) Lastly, a planet in Suptavastha neutralis es the effect
t he bhava owned by it . This Avastha is due to a debilitated
planet or the one in an inimical camp.
The reader will thus see the significance of the present t\yo
slokas.
Hemaprabha Suri, a Jain astrologer of eminence, enumerates a principle in his work “Trailokya Prakasa” (edited by Ram
Sarup Sharma, Lahore) that the bhava occupied or aspected
by the Moon undergoes good or bad effects. That is, if the Moon
is increasing, good effects will increase; otherwise effects will
diminish.
Chapter 12
Effects Of First House
5THT: ^fwhJR*iT waT: \\^\\
1-2. PHYSICAL COMFORTS : Should the ascendant lord
be conjunct a malefic or be in the 8th, 6th or 1 2th, physical
felicity will diminish. If he is in an angle/foae jfyere will be at

Chapter 12
a ll times comforts of the body. If the ascendant lord is in
debilitation, c ombustion or en emy’s sign, there will be ~5isfeases .
“ With a beneric m an an g le or trine, all diseases will disappear .
Notes : The ascendant lord going to an evil house together with a malefic is a dire defect in the matter of not only
health but also luck and progress. If the ascendant lord in the
process is a benefic or is exalted, then some relief in the course
of time can be hoped.
The ascendant’s angles (i.e. 4th, 7tb or the 10th) or its
trine (5th/9lh) containing a benefic is a powerful remedy for all
ills related to behlth.
3. There will not be bodily health if the ascendant or the
Moon be aspected by or conjunct a malefic, being devoid of a
benefic’s aspect. '
sW qOT: WTfT ^ \
4. BODILY BEAUTY : A benefic in the ascendant will'
give a pleasing appearance, while a malefic will make one bereft
of good appearance. Felicity of the body will be enjoyed if the
ascendant is aspected by or conjunct a benefic.
giTcft Tnrerevm: nuu
STRTtT 9TSfq TRSTSFrotltT: |tv»ll
5-7. OTHER BENEFITS : If the ascendant lord, Mercury,
Jupiter or Venus be in an angle or in a trine, the native will be
longlived, wealthy, intelligent and liked by the king. Fame,
wealth, abundant pleasures and comforts of the body will

Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
be acquired it the ascendant lord is in a movable sign and be
aspected by a benefic planet. One will be endowed with royal
marks (of fbrtune) if Mercury, Jupiter or Venus be in the
ascendant along with the M|oon, or be in angle from the
ascendant.
Notes : “Rajalakshana” means mark of fortune. There
are 32 Lakshanas of major category in Samudrika Sastra or
physiognomy. Some of these could be found in ch. 81 of our
present work (vol II).
If Mercury, Jupiter or Venus be in 4th, 7th or l Oth from
the ascendant, or be in the company of the Moon in the ascendant, the native will enjoy royal fortunes.
grit
m3 ?T 5fT?ft llqll
8, COIL&D BIRTH : If there be a birth in one of Aries,
Taurus and Leo ascendants containing either Saturn or Mars,
the birth of the child is with a coil around™ The corresponding
limb will be in accordance with the Rasi or Navamsa rising.
Notes : This rule applies to only three ascendants, viz.
Aries, Taurus and Leo. Mars or Saturn should be in the
ascendant. The limbs indicated by the Rasis are shown in sloka
4-4 £ of ch. 4 supra. These apply to the Navamsas as well. The
limbs denoted in slokas 12-15 of the present chapter have a
different use and should not be mixed for the purpose of coiled
birth, which will be simply obvious to the reader.
q g m m i d) mg: «r$ i
mat mrmfsrfa fafamnieu
9. BIRTH OF TWINS : The native, who has the Sun in
a quadruped sign while others are in dual signs with strength, is
born as one of the twins.
Notes : Quadruped signs are : Aries, Taurus, Leo, first
half of Capricorn and second part of Sagittarius. If the Sun is
in a quadruped sign while all others are in dual signs — Gemini
and its angles — the native will be one of the twins. The other
six planets be endowed with strength.

Chapter 12 129
^ MwW: fqsrT ^ q>fa?T: u^oii
10. TO BE NURTURED BY 3 MOTHERS : If the Sun
and the Moon join in one and the same bhava (house) and fall
in one Navamsa, the native will be nurtured by 3 different mothers for the fiirst 3 months from its birth and will later on be
brought up by its father and brother.
Notes : In my opinion, the Vargothama position of the
luminaries in conjunction seems to be excepted. They should be
in the same quarter of a constellation and will naturally be in
one Navamsa, This combination obviously implies loss of
mother within the first three months.
STT5T apart from meaning a brother calls for interpretation
is a near relative in general.
3Tq ?Rf^Tfqqr
i 11 IMPORTANT : The learned in astrology should base
the effects on the Moon also as arc applicable to the ascendant.
Now explained are clues to know of uffcers, identity marks etc.
on one’s person.
Notes : This wellknown rule is a speciality in Hindu
Astrology and has the sage’s sanction. The Moon is given a
significant status equal to the ascendant for she rules one’s mind
and the mind in turn functions according to one’s Karma, see
Budcihih Karmanusarini.
faft q>*rY qifafc ^ vqhqqit \
qeqf cqrFiq ^ waft rf^n \
?TTfaTtf?r qqTqWT ll^ll
arf^Tvr^gl arnr
12-14. DECANATES AND BODILY LIMBS : Head,
eyes, ears, nose, temple, chin and face is the order of limbs
denoted (by the various houses) when the first decanate of a sign

”0 Brihat Parasara II ora Sastra
ascends. In the case of the second decanate ascending, the order
is : neck, shoulder, arm, side, heart, stomach and navel. The
order for the third decanate ascending is : pelvis, anus/penis,
testicles, thigh, knee, calf and foot. The portion already risen
indicates left side of the body (while the one yet to rise — i e.
invisible half— denotes right side of the body).
Notes : The portion that has already risen is known as
visible half of the horoscope. From the cusp of the ascendant
to the cusp of the descendant counted backwards (i e. via the
10th cusp) is visible half. The rest is invisible half. Visible
half represents the left side of the body while invisible half right
side of the body.
The limbs suggested by the 2 slokas in three different
orders are shown in the three diagrams for an easy grasp. The
assumption is that the first decanate, second decanate and the
third decanate of Aries rise in the respective cases :
A
Vo“«<
flostril

Chapter 12
Shoulder
(left)
ir~ :
Neck : Neck
(left) : (right)
Shoulder
(right)
Arm
(right)
Arm
(left)
A
Aries ascendant
second decanate
Right
side of
trunk
Left
side of
trunk
Right
side of
heart
Left side
of
heart
Left side
of stomach
Left side
of
navel
Right
side of
navel
Right
side of
stomach
Anus /
penis
(left)
Left side
of
pelvis
Right
side of
pelvis
Anus/
penis
(right)
Right
testicle
Left
testicle
Aries ascendant
third decanate
Right
thigh
Left
thigh
Right
knee
Left
knee
Left
calf
Left : Right
foot : foot
Right
caif

Brihat Parasora Hora Sastra
The above three diagrams are made for the three decanates
of Aries ascendant. The reader can change, the sign positions
according to the ascendant and its decanate as prevailing at
birth. The two halves in the ascendant and 7th may please be
noted attentively.
The corresponding part for female is ovary as against
male’s testicle. Similarly female’s privity prevails in exchange of
male organ. Pelvis is made into two parts, viz. false pelvis and
true pelvis. The true pelvis is denoted by the portion of the
zodiac yet to rise while false pelvis by the half of zodiac already
rose.
four: <TTq> cfq i
15. LIMBS AFFECTED : The limb related to a malefic
by occupation will have ulcers or scars while the one by benefic
will have a mark (like moles etc). So say the learned (in
astrology).
Notes : Also see sloka 6, ch. 4 of Saravali, which states
that a malefic or a benefic if be in own Rasi or Navamsa, the
effects will be right from birth. In other cases, it will be in the
course of one’s life that these effects will come to pass.
Chapter 13
Effects of Second House
aqtnqqivf qfcrr sm frswrm ! \
tnrero a% ?fNr: <tpt> tRf*nrm?*T n^ii
1-2. COMBINATIONS FOR WEALTH : O excellent of
the Brahmanas, listen to me speaking on the effects of the 2nd

Chapter 13
house, If the lord of the 2nd is in the 2nd or is in an angle or in
a trine, he will promote one's wcalth(or monetary state). Should
he be in the 6th/8th/I2th, financial conditions will decline. A
benefic in the 2nd will give wealth while a malefic instead will
destroy the same. '
Not es : Venus or Merc ury in the 2nd will be favourable
for weal th .W hfle Jupiter ajll not be wholly auspicious Tf 10 wever, Jupiter is in the 2nai ruling the 2nd7then financial aspects
will be smooth. That is why the sage specifically mentions this
fact in the next sloka. It does not mean that Jupiter, otherwise
in the 2nd will be wholly harmful. This denotes a problematic
situation in money matters. Various authors have given different views in their works for a summary of which the reader
may switch over to p. 491 of my English translation of Saravali.
afjwit srefa setoh sr ?rc& 11311
3. One will be wealthy if Jupiter is in the 2nd as the lord
of the 2nd or is with Mars.
Notes : There are two independent conditions in this verse
denoting wealth. Jupiter, if in the 2nd, should be the ruler of
2 nd for the native becoming wealth y. This applie s, to Scorp io
ascendant and Aquarius ascendant. In that case” his lonely
position itseTnn the 2nd will confer wealth rather abundant
wealth. Whether or not Jupiter owns the 2nd, if be conjunct
Mars, wealth will be acquired by the native; the house occupied
by them not standing for consideration.
viren n tni
n tun
4. If the 2nd lord is in the 11th while the lord of the 11th
is in the 2nd, wealth will be acquired by the native. Alternatively these two lords may join in an angle or in a trine.
Notes : The 1 1 th lord has a say in financial matters apart
from the 2nd lbrd. One’s gains are indicated by the 11th lordIf he is in exchange with the 2nd lord, the native will be wealthy,
These two planets joining in the ascendant, 4th, 7th, 10th, 5th or
9th will also lead to financial gains.

*34 Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
<TfNw>lifr I
pwWl ^5 i>kii
5. If the lord of the 2nd is in an angle while the I Ith lord
is in a trine thereof or is aspected by or conjunct by Jupiter and
Venus, the supject will be wealthy.
Notes . The lord of the 2nd should be in the ascendant,
or 4th/7th/10th house. The 1 Ith lord should be in the 5th/9th
counted from the house occupied by the 2nd lord. Alternatively
the 2nd lord should be related to Jupiter (and) or Venus by
conjunction or by aspect. Both the combinations are for
gaining wealth.
trcirnTTfsqrefrft i
*F*TSmf?TCTftaii f%T«TT^=f qT: Iball
6-7. YOGAS FOR POVERTY : One will be penniless if
the lord of the 2nd is in an evil house while the 11th lord is also
so placed and the 2nd is occupied by a malefic. There will be
penury right from birth and the native will have to beg even for
his food if the lords of the 2nd and the 11th are both combust
or be with malefics.
Notes ; The lords of the 2nd and 11th can be jointly*in
the 6th/8th/l 2th or individually disposed in any two of the said
three houses. Simultaneously the 2nd house needs a malefic in
it. Thus there are afflictions from three directions which will
make the native extremely poor. Even food is denied to one
having combust 2nd lord and combust 11th lord. Alternatively
the 2nd lord may be with a severe malefic while the II th lord is
also similarly placed. The conjunction of the 2nd lord with a
Yogakarka, although a malefic, will not be adverse in the
matter of finace. On the contrary it will prove very auspicious
For example, Mercury, the 2nd lord, joining Saturn in the case
of a Taurus native, will make financial prospects superior.
Sim 8% TTj? TT5T^T9 llq||

Chapter 13
8. LOSS OF WEALTH THROUGH THE KING : Should
the lords of the 2nd and 11th be relegated to the 6th/8th/l2th
(jointly or separately) while Mars is in the 11th and Rahu is in
the 2nd, the native will lose his wealth on account of royal
punishments.
Notes : This combination will cause financial losses
through penalties, fines etc. imposed by the government, in the
modern context, Monetary deficiencies will as well persist
throughout.
vTTW sftt tx^ l
ue.n
9. EXPENSES ON GOOD ACCOUNTS : Jupiter in the
11th, Venus in the 2nd, and a benefic in the 12th while the 2nd
lord is conjunct a benefic there will be expenses on religious or
charitable grounds.
! II? oil
10. FAME ETC. : If the 2nd lord is in own sign or is
exalted the native will look after his people, will help others and
will become famous.
Notes : Our text requires the 2nd lord to be in exaltation
or in own sign so that the native will look after his people & C.
It has been practically seen that the 2nd lord’s dignity is
essential for one to be helpful to others and be dutiful towards
his family members. Chaukhamba edition has almost a different
condition in this place : It states that the 2nd lord should be in
deep exaltation or in own sign and be in aspect to Jupiter. The
net result given therein is “fame and liked bypall”. The condition of ‘deep’ exaltation seems to me to be somewhat in excess
of the requirement while a simple own sign position is given as
an alternative. As such, I feel mere exaltation of the 2nd lord is
enough for obtaining the said results.
5TTO%ll??||

Brlhat Parasara Hora Sastra
11. EFFORTLESS ACQUISITION : If the 2nd lord is
conjunct a benefic and be in a good division like Paravatamsa,
there will be all kinds of wealth in his family effortlessly.
Notes : “Paravatamsa” denotes six good Vargas out of
Dasavarga scheme (vide ch. 6, supra). “Paravatamsadau” of the
text denotes Paravata or such other higher Vargas. To wit, the
2nd lord should be in Paravatamsa or in Dcvalokamsa, Brahmalokamsa, Sakravahanamsa or Sridhamamsa in the Dasavarga
scheme. The corresponding superior Amsas whcm the entire
Shodasavarga scheme is used should be above Poornachandramsa. In the Dasavarga scheme, why the sage fixes the minimum Varga as Paravatha is obvious. This varga denotes 6 good
divisions in Dasavarga scheme i.e. above 50% of good
divisions.
The 2nd lord being endowed with such a Varga dignity and
conjunct another benefic brings in effortless wealth and wealth
of all kinds. It follows that the 2nd lord’s disposition (or the
disposition of Jupiter) will decide the financial status of a native,
12. EYES : If the 2nd lord is endowed with strength, the
native will possess beautiful eyes. Should the said planet be in
the 6th, 8th or 12th, there will be disease or deformity of eyes.
Notes : “Netresa” denotes the lord of the 2nd, i.e, significator of eyes. This does not mean that the 12th lord has nothing
to do with eyes. Precisely, 2nd lord and 12th lord respectively
lord over right eye and left eye respectively. This is from the
health point of view of eye. However, when the beauty of the
eyes is to be known, it is from the 2nd house only. Jupiter
well placed in the 2nd, or the 2nd lord in exaltation, or
with a bcnefie will give one beautiful eyes. While Venus in the
2nd or Full Moon in the 2nd will not deprive one of beautiful
eyes, defects of sight at an early stage will result from the said
position. Mercury in the 2nd will have a say on the speech
rather than on the sight. Hence Jupter’s position in the 2nd is
a safe bet for strong sight and beauty of the eyes, if the planet
is not with evils of fall and the like.

Chapter 14
SR7T TNHml 3^ qi ^f^ I
fqff^SH ^ Taricft % qirTEtnfatfqfcrrT: II \ \ II
13. UNTRUTHFUL PERSON : If the 2nd house audits
lord are conjunct malefics, the native will be a tale-bearer, will
speak untruth and will be afflicted by windy diseases.
Notes : The 2nd house and its lord are referred in the
matter of windy diseases. Gastric troubles, rheumatism and
the like are classified under windy disorders. If the 2nd house
or its lord is associated with Saturn or Mercury it will cause
rheumatism and such other disorders. If Jupiter in affliction is
so related, gastric troubles will come to pass.
Chapter 14
Effects Of The Third House
sfrsnyrceS smw firauftTCUtu
I. O Brahmin, I now tell you about the 3rd house. Should
the 3rd house be conjunct or aspected by a benefic, the native
will be endowed with.co-born and be courageous.
Notes : ‘Bhratru’ in Sanskrit simply means a brother.
Proper adjective is to be added, viz. Jyeshta for elder and
Kanishta for younger, to the word Bhratru. The 3rd house
specifically deals with the after-born while the 1 1th house deals
with preborn. This can be seep from sloka 32, Ch. 32 infra.
In the said chapter the sage instructs us to consider Mars for
the 3rd bhava and Jupiter for 11th bhava.
Younger sister is denoted by the 3rd house and Mars while
elder sister by the 11th house and Jupiter.

Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
WRTSTSRrft qisfa ll^ll
2. If the 3rd lord along with Mars aspects the 3rd house
the native will enjoy good results due to the 3rd house. Alternatively these two planets may be in the 3rd itself.
Notes ; Mars alone in the 3rd, except in Capricorn or in
Scorpio or in Aries, is not conductive to brothers. The form of
our sloka is different in that the 3rd house be jointly aspected or
occupied by Mars and the 3rd lord for the prosperity of coborn.
3- Destruction at once of coborn will come to pass if the
said 2 planets are together with a malefic or in a sign owned by
a malefic.
Notes : “The coborn will not live long” is the hint given by
the phrase “ Sadyo nihantarau ” Mars and the 3rd lord joining
in a malefic’s sign or joining a malefic is said to be adverse for
the longevity of coborn. Similarly Jupiter and the 11th lord in
such a state is adverse for elder brothers and elder sisters; Venus
and the 7th lord so placed for the spouse, Jupiter and the 5th
lord so placed for progeny; Sun and the 9th lord so placed for
father, the Moon and the 4th lord so placed for mother, and so
on and so forth. So to say the significator and the lord of the
concerned house together in a malefic’s sign or with a malefic
(or in an evil house) will bring harm to the said relative.
SUTcT eT^T 'SMcTT qf* U*U
4- 4$. FEMALE AND MALE CO BORN : If the 3rd lord
is a femaie planet or if the 3rd house be occupied by female
planets, one will have sisters born after him. Similarly male
planets and male signs denote younger brothers. Should it be of
mixed nature, coborn of both sexes will be obtained. These
effects be declared after assessing the strength and weakness of
the concerned.

Chapter 14
Notes : Saturn and Mercury are termed as neutral planets,
Rahu and Ketu are shadowy ones. In the matter of deciding
the sex of coboru or progeny, Saturn and Rahu be treated as
males while Mercury and Kctu are females.
(Trailokyaprakasika vide sloka 12 treats Ketu as a female
and Rahu as a eunuch. Daivagnabharana vide ch. I, s. 14-15
considers the reverse of this at one place and imediately quotes
a different school of thought, thus : Rahu is a male planet and
Ketu a eunuch.)
All odd signs are male signs and all even signs are female
signs. Male signs exclusively occupied by male planets will cause
birth of brothers. Converse is the case with female signs occupied by female planets. This should be known from the 3rd
house being male or female sign & C. If the 3rd house is
occupied by a male planet as well as a female planet, there will
be brothers and sisters as well. The contribution will come to
pass if the contributor is strong. For example, Jupiter in the 3rd
in a male sign if strong will cause the birth of a brother. If he is
weak, acquisition of brother through Jupiter will not be fruitful.
Then one has to look upto alternative sources whether the native
will have a brother or not.
IIVJ(
faftrfejnr ii^ii
5-6. Should the 3rd lord and Mars be together in the 8th,
destruction of cobom will result. Happiness in this respect
will come to pass if Mars or the 3rd lord is in an angle or in a
trine or in exaltation/friendly divisions.
Notes : The suggestions given in the notes for sloka 3
about spouse, elder brother, mother etc. may be suitably
extended in this respect with the help of the present verse. For
example, if Venus and 7th lord are together in the 8th, the
native’s married life will be short (and in bad taste.)
Similarly, their conjunction in an angle or in a trine will
confer Jonglasting benefic effects.
Further hint that can be taken from the verse in question
is : If a significator and house lord join together in a sign which
is identical with debilitation/inimical sign for one of them, the

Brihat Parasara ffora Sastrd
significance of the planet is lost. If they join in a sign which is
exaltation/friendly sign for one of them, then the significance of
the planet gains prosperity.
artwork i
C -o -w- O
tf>TT% ^ftT^TUcT> Hull
*mt ^3 I
tf>TT% TTgtPgtf fl^SI § JfWt Hell
<T?sn 3 i? g eic^ ^31
It;? «rarfsw>*pt lieu
af \ *rf^ . star sr*t *farT: i
ct^t sifrsg-tr 'eissraiTfwrs^ qrftasni n? on
*T f cTO WI SR £RST ^ 3?T ^3 1
5T^T: ffgtan: «TS £ itaSfWsrtanT: II? ?ll
7-11. NUMBER OF BROTHERS AND SISTERS : If
Mercury is in the 3rd while the 3rd lord and Moon are together
as the indicator (Mars) joins Saturn, the effects are : there
occurred the birth of an elder sister and there will be younger
brothers. Further the third brother will die. Should Mars and
Rahu be conjunct while the 3rd lord is in his sign of debilitation,
there will be loss of younger brothers/sisters while 3 elder
brothers/sisters were attained by the native. If the 3rd lord is in
an angle while the significator is exalted in a trine and be in the
company of Jupiter, 12 will be the number of total coborn. Out
of these 2 elders and the 3rd, 7th, 9th and 12th of younger
coborn will be shortlived while six of the said twelve will be
longlived.
Notes : The word ‘Karaka’ or significator in sloka 7 etc.
should be wisely noted as Mars only and not as Jupiter, which
is borne by sloka 11.
In the context of indication of one’s having 12 coborn,
this may be taken in the present age to be a number of coborn,
if not literally 12. Mars exalted and being in the company of
Jupiter is denoted w'hich means Jupiter will be in fall. Some of
the coborn will die obviously because of Jupiter’s debilitation
taking away some potence of exalted Mars.

Chapter 1 4
g^<HT 5fT |
?lf?Tq% 57% J
^TTrfTy qfar: ^ H
12-13. There will be 7 coborn if the 12th lord (some texts
read as the 11th lord) joins Mars and Jupiter while the 3rd is
occupied by the Moon. If the Moon is lonely placed in the 3rd
in aspect to male planets, there will be younger brothers while
the aspect of Venus denotes younger sisters.
3HT STlrf TfaffcT «f*5 5fTrT \
3TO5r TK33T !JTTgcT:n?Y||
14. ADVERSE PLANETS : The Sun in the 3rd will
destroy the preborn. The afterborn will be destroyed if Saturn
is found in the 3rd. In the same situation Mars will destroy
both the preborn and later bom.
Notes : Sage Bhrigu also opines that the Sun in the 3rd
house will not allow the native to retain his elder brothers.
This position will affect one’s relationship with brothers and
sisters. Regarding Mars in the 3rd, Garga Maharshi states
that the native will obtain two brothers and two sisters all the 4
of whom will pass away early. The placement of Mars in the
3rd has also adverse say on the native’s character. For further
details, see my detailed notes in the chapter “Effects of Planets
in Bhavas”, of Saravali.
fas l crriiRf i
srfireHi en snrWTtr n?vtn
15. After estimating the strength and weakness of such
yogas, the effects related to brothers and sisters be announced.

3FT HOWHCfiffTSirm: II? *11
Chapter 15
Effects Of The Fourth House
3*5T !|5TltT«iraflT U?T WWft SRTI
pTO ^ts«t T«mrr»r fjsftrrc ! imt
1. O excellent of the Brahmins, thus have been briefly told
about the effects of the 3rd house. Now listen to the results
related to the 4th house.
epffot cT^sfa \
2. HOUSING COMFORTS : One will have residential
comforts in full degree if the 4th is occupied by its lord or by
the ascendant lord and be aspected by a bertefic.
irfa i
gt? ii^ii
3. MISCELLANEOUS Should the 5th lord be in his own
house, or in own Navamsa or in exaltation, the native will be
endowed with comforts related to lands, conveyances, houses
etc. and musical instruments.
fcnr
3373 ^ uxii
4. HOUSING COMFORTS : If the 10th lord joins the
4th lord in an angle or in a trine, the native will acquire beautiful mansions.
5. RELATIVES : Should Mercury be in the ascendant
while the 4th lord being a benefic is aspected by another benefic,
the native will be honoured by his relatives.

Chapter 15
vit% gggggd 'n , 9ffafroft&; u^ii
6. LONG-LIVING MOTHER : If the 4th house is occupied by a benefic while its lord is in his exaltation sign as the
indicator of mother is endowed with strength, the native will
have a Jong-living mother.
Notes : The stronger among the Moon and Mars is
denoted as the significator of mother, vide slokas 18-19 ch. 32,
infra. There are still many more views about the karakatwas for
parents given by various authors.
cT«TT vpi: )
»ng: 5<if ws g^g n\3ii
7. HAPPINESS TO MOTHER : The native’s mother
will be happy if the 4th lord is in an angle while Venus is also in
an angle as Mercury is exalted.
gtf Tfsnj# gmma gfa t
8. QUADRUPEDS : The Sun in the 4th, Moon and
Saturn in the 9th and Mars in the 11th— this yoga will confer
cows and huffaloes on the native.
wtffanr SITRtfg *T»en*l 1 1 til
9. DUMBNESS : Should the 4th house be a movable one
while its lord and Mars are together in the 6th or the 8th house
the native will be dumb. ’
gtarrfirit t
srr^ gr^^g gtcr i
^t^>i gg ?rrfgVr gr^g *rgg i

Brikat Parasara Horn Sastra
5TT^^ g^TlfsiW g^?T TO^II^II
£H$T *c*TC STP^ smft vkt{ 1
wr *3^ qrcc% TOPwrauitYii
10-14. CONVEYANCES : If the ascendant lord is a benefic while the 4th lord is in fall or in the 11th and the significatoi
(Venus) is in the 12th, the native will obtain conveyances in his
12th year. Should the Sun be in the 4th house, as the 4th lord
is exalted and be with Venus, one will acquire conveyances in his
32nd year. It will be in the 42nd year that one will be endowed
with conveyances if the 4th lord joins the 10th lord in his (4th
lord’s) exaltation Navamsa. An exchange between the 11th
and the 4th lords will confer conveyances in the 12th year. A
benefic related to the 4th house (and to its lord) will bring with
him auspicious effects while a malefic will produce only malefic
effects (in respect of conveyances).
Notes : It is not known why the 4th lord should be in fall
for early obtainment of conveyances. This condition seems to
be the result of defective text as the next line adds that the 4th
lord may be in the 11th. To me it occurs that the correct version should read as : If the ascendant lord is a benefic while the
11th is tenanted by Venus and the 4th lord, early obtainment of
conveyance (around the 1 2th year) will come to pass. Another
rule given by the sage to get similar effect is an exchange
between the lord of 4th and 11th.
Should a benefic be in the 4th, aspect the 4th, or is conjunct with or aspect the lord of the 4th house, then the native
will be happy with conveyances and be free from accidents and
dangers, A malefic replacing the said benefic will cause losses
concerning vehicles and reduce one to severe accidents.
Dear Reader ,
We are glad you are reading
this Unique Boole. Some other
remaining chapters, which
contain very important
material, are given in its
ITnd Part, Please write
for your copy of the same.
R AUJ AN RJBLI CATIONS

ara q^^nTTsrTJsus^ro: u ? \ 1 1
Chapter 16
Effects Of The Fifth House
3T«T qb-c|H?TTgT^ Vmilfa fg^T ! I
grrm^t g?r^ * 11
TT ^ *^cn
g g?mfrfr ngwu^i
gNfcrrn^ ^tsPt qn?T*F% ■*
3TT*^ 3^t ^TTcft ^T faraS wqg u^h
1-3. 0 Brahmin, now I tell you the effects related to the
5th house. IF the lords of the ascendant and the 5th are in their
own signs or in an angle or in a trine, one will enjoy thorough
happiness through his children. Should the 5th lord be in the
6th, 8th or 12th, there will be no offspring, Should the lord of
the 5th be combust or be with malefics and be weak, there will
be no children; even if per chance issues are obtained they will
only quit the world soon.
Notes : “Suta” in Sanskrit used in compound word or as
an adjective does not exclude a female issue for it means “begotten”. There are however specific occasions where the expression
“son” is exclusively denoted by this term. A logical approach
according to circumstances is needed in interpreting such expressions.
The conjunction of the 5th lord with the ascendant lord in
a good house will ensure early obtainment of children apart
from happiness through them. If they join in an evil house,
they will prove a defect in this respect.
gcTToWJ i
fcnxn srsmitr-tr ^
4. If the 5th lord is in the 6th as the ascendant lord is conjunct Mars, the native will lose his very first child whereafter his
female will not be fertile to yield an offspring.

Brihat Parasura Hora Sastra
scru^issTtsiTr^FT: i
5. Should the 5th lord be in fall in the 6th, 8th or the 12th
while Mercury and Ketu are in the 5th, the dative's wife will
give birth to one child only.
q^r HrRq'R h «rcqfh i
fT? ^qicTt II^M
6. If the 5th lord is in fall and be not in aspect to the 5th
while Saturn and Mercury are in the 5th, the native’s wife will
give birth to one child only.
qrfasreff $<r iftafivfin
^ *wr mi fqfqf??TrT utsii
7. Should the 9th lord be in the ascendant while the 5th
lord is in fall ano Ketu is in the 5th along with Mercury, obtainment of progeny will be after a great deal of ordalium.
Notes : The very presence of Mercury, or Ketu, or Saturn
in the 5th will present a doubtful picture of progeny. If two of
them join in the 5th, then there will be KakavanJhya Dosha
(obtaining only a single issue) for the wife of the native, or even
childlessness.
37 3T *mTf?PT: 1
8. If the 5lh lord is in the 6th, 8th or the 12th or be in an
inimical sign or be in fall or in the 5th itself, the native will beget
issues with difficulty. ;
g*: i
qtfaq# cT37 TTtH: ll&tl
9. Should the 5th house be owned by Saturn or Mercury
and be occupied or aspected by Saturn and Mandi, one will have
adopted issues.
Notes : “Mandi” is the word used in the text which means
Gulika. This identically has been narrated in a previous Chapter.

Chapter 16
Aspect of Mandi is suggested by the sage. Though there is no
authentic information on aspect of Mandi (and other Upagrahas), it may be said that itaspeets the 7th house.
The rule as per the sloka applies to Aquarius, Taurus,
Virgo and Libra. In the case of the latter two Lagnas, Saturn
though rules the 5th is helpless obviously because of affliction
by Gulika. Otherwise Saturn related to the 5th house as its
owner will not deprive one of progeny, making him go in for an
adoption.
fainafaTflt «TT5I fgfnTSfa w RtfarT: II? oil
10. Should the Sun and the Moon be together in a Rasi
and in the same Navamsa, the native will be brought up by 3 .
mothers or 2 fathers.
Notes : The luminaries should be in the same Rasi and
same Navamsa. As a result of this yoga, the child will be
brought up by 3 females equal to mother or two men as father
(i.e. paternal reatives etc.). This obviously hints at the possible
loss of mother or father soon after birth.
5 #eT eT^T 3x7*7^^ IIH"
11. Adopted issue is indicated if the 5th is tenanted by
six planets while its lord is in the 1 2th, and the Moon and
ascendant are endowed with strength.
srafjcT 9^: g^T: fjf wnfNtfUSVl
12. There will be many children if the 5th lord is strong
while the 5th is aspected by strong Mercury, Jupiter and
Venus.
1 • is another leading which includes placement in the
5 th.

Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
wSif eR#c*r®prasfii t
fnrr f$ qraraitafa: sw^ 113 ijii
13. If the 5th lord is with the Moon or be in her decanate,
the native will beget daughters, so say astrologers.
Notes : The 5th lord’s joining the Moon will confer daughters (rather more daughters) than sons. The Moon is a planet
of multiplicity and hence there will be a number of daughters.
An alternative suggested by the sage is that the 5th lord
should be in a decanate owned by the Moon. The Moon’s decanates are : the first ten degrees of Cancer, the second ten degrees
of Pisces and the third ten degrees of Scorpio. If the 5th lord
occupies a degree as above, he will fall in the Moon’s decanate
Then the native will obtain daughters.
Tlg^TT falft l
«n3TRT
14. If the 5th lord is in a movable sign while Saturn is in
the 5th, as Rahu is with the Moon the child (so born) is of
questionable birth.
Notes : There are 3 conditions denoted so that the owner
of the horoscope is an illegal product. These are : (a) The 5th
lord should be in a movable sign, (b) The 5th house should be
occupied by Saturn, and (c) The Moon should be with Rahu
(anywhere).
The combinations indicating illegal birth get nullified
under certain conditions. For details see p. 55 of my English
translation of Horasara also.
9*1 9*IT|6dR*T I
nvrat 9 vim: ii { xii
15. Undoubtedly the native is born of other’s loins if the
Moon is in the 8th from the ascendant while Jupiter is in the 8th
from the Moon. Malefic’s aspect/a&sociation is essential in
this Yoga.
SWTmgqfa

Chapter 16
16. If the 5th lord is exalted or be in the 2nd, 5th or 9th
from the ascendant or be conjunct or aspected by Jupiter, obtainment of children will be there.
Notes : Anyone of the following 3 states of the -5th lord
will ensure birth of children :
1. The 5th lord in exaltation.
2. The 5th lord in the 2nd/5th/9th house.
3. The 5th lord related to Jupiter by aspect or conjunction.
Even though Jupiter may be the ruler of the 6th or 8th or
I2tb, his association with the 5th lord will ensure obtainment of
children.
*tanfa** ;ft****ft ii^ii
17. One will obtain children that will indulge in mean
deeds if the 5th is occupied by 3 or 4 malefics while the 5th lord
is in fall A benefic (including Mercury) in the 5th is excluded
in the said combination.
imfocuteti
18. If the 5th is occupied by Jupiter while its lord is with
Venus, one will obtain an offspring in his 32nd/33rd year.
<rcf5UT fafafatfs u?en
19. Should the 5th lord be in an angle along with Jupiter,
the Karaka, one will beget a child at the age of 30 or 36.
3ft*l^ *rnPT$ ipft I
20. If Jupiter is in the 9th from the ascendant while Venus
is in the 9th from Jupiter along with the ascendant lord, one will
beget a child at the age of 40.

ISO
Brihat Parasara Hora Sastrd
gsresrR *T^ TT$ ?R>*r qmtm 1
^taTrftmcft sNt sif^rf gsp??qq: iit^u
21. The native will at the age of 32 lose his child if Rahu
is in the 5th, the 5th lord is conjunct a malefic and Jupiter is in
debilitation.
qt$ vTKTTrT q I
qjfatf * qtrfifqtf 5rTWtr: ll^^ll
22. There will be loss of children at 33 and 36 if a malefic
is in the 5th from Jupiter while another is in the 5th from the
ascendant.
^ gqrifaqqifH: ii ^ ^ u
23. Should Mandi be in the ascendant while the ascendant
lord is in fall, grief on account of loss of child at the age of 56
will come to pass.
Notes : Mandi and Gulika are one and the same as
described supra. The placement of Gulika in the ascendant while
its lord is in debilitation will cause death of an offspring at the
native’s age of 56. Similarly, the debilitation of Gulika’s
depositor will cause harm to the bhava concerned, i.e. the bhava
occupied by Gulika.
*5* qcsqtf ?Tqq f 5 1
|| ^ VII
fftr% qrcremg gq*: i
Sift 1 U%TT TTgqqq l|^S(.U
'qpqiTtjqq qq $qq: I
gWniiT# • sift *jq?T *<TOqq u^^ll
qtqwrqrq q*jq>rn?§ \
q^qqifl q?% qq*q ^ qqfcq? (1=^(1
gqq: qtqqwq %qq qqttf q|q |
fq^r q^q?qi% qq*q ^ sjqrfaq u^etii

Chapter 16 151
afa *04 Id 4^*1 if *inl ll^&M
qmrqro 5^r fafafevhr i
«r^Jr IJITO^ 3fT SfoTrT ^SWT ipftu^oll
g^TT'fi <*^nm s RT*T i
qygir sfanri ’Ts^rn ^ i\\\\\
STC^FTC't gdtft *farcf^T: I
5H?i 5TTrT finr^cT Stefan *5?J II^U
24-32. NUMBER OF CHILDREN : There will be 10 sons
if the 4th and the 6th are occupied by malefics while the 5th
lord is in deep exaltation joining the ascendant lord as Jupiter is
with another benefic. Nine will be the number of sons that one
will beget if Jupiter is in deep exaltation as Rahu is with the
2nd lord and the 9th is occupied by its own lord. There will be
eight sons if Jupiter is in the 5th/9th while the 5th lord is endowed with strength and the 2nd lord is in the 10th. Saturn in the
9th from the ascendant while the 5th lord is in the 5th itself,
will give 7 sons out of which twins will be born twice. If the
5th lord in the 5th in conjunction with the 2nd lord, there
will be birth of 7 sons out of which 3 will pass away. Only one
son is denoted if there be a malefic in the 5th from the ascendant while Jupiter is in the 5th from Saturn or vice versa. If
the 5th house has a malefic in it or if Saturn is in the 5th from
Jupiter, the native will beget offspring only through his 2nd or
3rd wife. Should the 5th be occupied by a malefic while Jupiter
has Saturn in the 5th as the ascendant lord is in the 2nd, and
the 5th lord is with Mars, one will live long but lose his children
one after the other as they are born.
Dear Raader,
irfe are glad you are reading this Unique Book*
Some other regaining ch apters, which contain ve
Important material, are given In Its Ilnd Part.
Please write for your covy of the same.
RAN JAN PUBLICATIONS

sm ii^ii
Chapter 17
Effects Of The Sixth House
am foj ! ^ \
TVm®irer wtt
1. O Brahmin, following are the effects produced by the
6th house, relating to diseases, ulcers etc. Listen to the same
attentively.
?nn ^Tif^T*nr«tw ll^lt
2. ULCERS/ BRUISES : Should the 6th lord be in the
6th itself or in the ascendant/Sth, there will be ulcers or bruises
on the body. The sign becoming the 6th house will lead to the
knowledge of the concerned limb.
twrftK^fnwTft qfaimi
nqmfr qrornfaw q ftnchR* \
|5|qT If gq SR qTftnj IIVII
ijw qrftrvwt * q% t
SlfolT TlgHT 59ft %gqT ■q ?RT TOtT U10I
3-5. RELATIVES AFFECTED : The Karaka of a relative
or the lord of such a house joining the 6th lord or being in the
6th/8th house indicates ulcers/bruises to such a relative like
father. The Sun with such lordship and in such a house
denotes such affectation of head, the Moon face. Mars neck,
Mercury navel, Jupiter nose, Venus eyes, Saturn- feet and the
nodes abdomen.
Notes : In these three slokas, we are instructed to know
of the possible afflictions to the native’s relatives and to the native
himself — both from the horoscope of the native.

Chapter 17
Firstly a certain significator or a certain bhava lord should
join the 6th lord or be in the 6th/8th house so that the relative
signified by the said Karaka incurs ulcers, bruises etc. For
example, in a Sagittarius Lagna horoscope, the 6th lord is Venus.
The 6th is Taurus and the 8th is Cancer. Suppose the 4th lord
Jupiter or the Matrukaraka Moon (signifying mother) joins
Venus or is in Taurus. (Cancer though the 8th house, the
Moon therein should not be deemed harmful in this regard and
Jupiter in Cancer will not also afflict the mother as he is exalted
there and protects the 4th by aspect.) As a result, the mother
will incur ulcer, bruises etc.
The relatives signified by planets and Bhavas are denoted
in ch. 32, infra.
The second clue is to know the possible affliction, to the
native, of a particular area in the body. If the Sun is the lord of
the 6th house or is with the 6th lord or is in the 6th/8th, the
native will be apt to incur affliction of head, and so on and
forth. As regards, Rahu and Ketu, they do not own any house
in the normal context. Hence their position in the 6th/8th or
goining the 6th lord need only be considered. Rahu or Ketu in
the 6th/8th will cause stomachial disorders.
Ufa I
6. FACIAL DISEASES : Should the lord of the ascendant be in a sign of Mars or of Mercury and be aspected
Meniry, there will be diseases of the face.
Notes : The lord of the ascendant should be in Aries,
Scorpio, Gemini or Virgo and be aspected by Mercury. Even
IF Mars, ruling the ascendant, is in Gemini or in Virgo and is
aspected by Mercury, the native will suffer facial diseases. The
occupation can be in any bhava.
As regards Aries Lagoa and Scorpio Lagna a different look
be given to the placement of Mars in own sign. For Aries Lagna,
Mars in Scorpio or for Scorpio Lagna, Mars in Aries and
aspected by Mercury will not produce the said adversity, unless
Mars is seriously afflicted otherwise.

] ^ Prihat Parasara Horn Sastra
ansTTfatf ^?iq nfe tfijrfh
' , g w, T ^?TT TTT5 cTST fVf%f?VT?T ltV»ll
faflT ^ ff^rnRrTfTOT STSft <
***$** cRT f^Tf^S ^ TTffRT TTjT llcll
TfeTf^S ?<TTtTvTN fir^RlfcTHeln
7-8J. LEPROSY : Mars or Mercury having ownership of
the ascending sign and joining the Moon, Rahu and Saturn,
will cause leprosy. If the Moon is in the ascendant which is not
however Cancer and be with Rahu, there will occur white
leprosy. Saturn in place of Rahu will cause black leprosy while
Mars similarly will afflict one with blood-leprosy.
Tf^piiT nfe n&n
33RW: 5 % TifafT: *T?7?rqir«nrq qri
fqcf *1*11*1* iigoii
^or, nfinj *t**tt Tfqcft *fi i
*1«IWT01T5TTT> ?rm> **:*§*# tfUHT U??H
^ fa*rfem*t cTricqiR^rkcT: it?^n
»T>^ cfqf qtftfijfVr: u^u
9-1 2i. DISEASES IN GENERAL : If the ascendant is
occupied by the lords of the 6th and 8th along with the Sun, the
native will be afflicted by fever and tumours. Mars replacing the
Sun will cause swelling and hardening of the blood vessels and
wounds and hits by weapons. Mercury so featuring will bring
in billious diseases while Jupiter in similar case will destroy any
disease. Similarly Venus will cause diseases through females,
Saturn windy diseases, Rahu danger through low-castemen
and Ketu navel diseases. The Moon in such a conjunction will
inflict dangers through water and phlegmatic disorders. Similar
estimates be made from the respective significators and Bhavas
for relatives like father.
Notes : The hints given above can be summed up as
under :

Chapter 17
Lords of the 6th and 8th
in the ascendant being
with the Sun
: Tumours, fever etc.
Mars
: Diseases of blood vessels,
hits, wounds etc.
Mercury
: Bilious disease (like
: jaundice).
Jupiter
: Freedom from diseases.
Venus
: Diseases caused by sexual
union.
Saturn
: Windy diseases like rheumatism, artheritis,
paralysis etc.
Rahu
: Danger from the so called
low-caste men.
Kctu
: Diseases of the navel.
the Moon
: Drowning, cough, tuberculosis,
asthma and other lung
disorders.
Replacing the ascendant with a certain bhava, these afflictions to the concerned relatives be predicted. For example, if
the 6th and 8th lords join the Moon in the 3rd bhava, danger
to coborn by drowning, lung disorders etc. be known. Should
Venus join the 6th and 8th lords in the 11th house, an elder
brother of the native will incur venereal diseases.
Thus the clues given by the sage should be extensively and
effectively applied in regard to diseases for the native and his
relatives.
The afflictions to be caused by the planets, signs etc. have
been rather exhaustively given in the notes in ch. 47 of my
English translation of Sara vs It. Though it was in the context of
death, the same may be carefully used in knowing diseases as
well. The reader may accordingly consult the said Notes.
Dr, H. L. Cornell, M. D., in his ‘Encyclopaedia of Medical Astrology* enlists some important diseases under different
planetary captions. By way of adding useful information for
the benefit of the inquisitive reader, I quote some as below :
The San : diseases of the nerves of the brain, cellular
excitation, blood affliction, weak constitution, dryness, apoplexy,

Brihat Parasara Rora SaStra
diseases of arteries, bowel disorders, pimples, skin and throat
affliction, chronic inflamation, conjuctivities, diphtheria,
dizziness, dropsy (Hindu astrology relates dropsy to Jupiter),
fever, fistula, giddiness, glaucoma, violent pains and headaches,
organic heart troubles, palpitation disorders, hyperanaemia,
afflictions to excretory and generative systems, measles, obstruction in the stomach, quinsy, scrofula, scurvy, sharpness of urine,
smallpox, disorders of spine, strangury, sunstrokes, swellings in
neck or feet, tremblings, tumours, venereal distempers etc.
The Moon : gaseous distention of abdomen, abscesses,
diseases of alimentary canal, disorders of bladder, blindness,
disorders of bowels, disorders of the brain substance, bronchial
disorders, cancer, carditis, catarrh, cellular zymosis, worms in
children, colds, conjuctivitis, rotten coughs, delirium fRahu is
the main planet for delirium according to Hindu astrology),
diarrhoea, irregular menses, menstrual disorders, dyspepsia,
effusions, epilepsy, eruptions, disorders of eyes, gout in feet,
osmosis, leucorrhoea, diseases of genctals, defects in haemoglobin, hysteria, mental ill health, stone in Kidneys (also Venus indicates this disorder), scrofula, disorders of larynx, disorders of
breasts, diseases of mucous and serous membranes, miscarriage,
obstruction of bowels and lungs, phthisis, premature births,
profluvial effusions, thin blood, disorders of uterus, vomitting
etc. She will also cause liver defects for women (while Jupiter
afflicts the male’s liver).
Mars : death by abortions, disorders of vessels, bleeding,
excessive menses, boils, affections and pains in breasts, burns,
bruises, carbuncles, chickenpox, cholera, congestion of blood,
consumption, contagious fevers, cutaneous eruptions, fatty
degeneration of the heart, dysentery, epidemics, fractures and
falls, disorders of geneto-urinary system, gonorrhoea, haemoptysis, hernia, hysteria, itches, loss of blood, hemorrhage of lungs,
malaria (also under Rahu), ulceration of penis, perityphlitis,
piles, semitertial fevers, syphilis, extreme heat in throat, tonsils,
vascular excitement, abscess of vulva, yellow jaundice etc.
Mercury : nervous complaints, asthma, apoplexy, impure
blood, disorders caused to brain by overwork, rapid breathing,
shortness of breathing, colic in the bowels, cramps in the arms,
shoulders, legs and feet, dumbness, falling fits, flatulent colic,
gastro abdominal troubles, hyperasthesia, insomnia, neuralgia

Chapter 17
in and obstruction of kidneys, paralysis of the nervous system,
pulmonary diseases, quivering, griplings in stomach, suppression
of urine, heart tremours, lowering or exhausting of the vital
fluids of the nerves, worms in bowels etc.
Jupiter : Jupiter will not cause any disease by himself
but when afflicted in the figure by adverse heavenly bodies.
Such are : Adiposis (excessive formation of adipose tissue),
disorders of adrenals, diseases from corrupt air, alterations in
the red blood particles, disorders of arterial blood, disorders in
the back and of backbone, stone in bladder, cancer of the breast,
cerebral congestion, digestive disorders, dropsy, affections of the
ear, eczema, tumour of kidneys, disturbances of milk glands,
fatty degeneration of muscles, plethoric and sthenic distentions,
potato like cancer, thoracic diathesis, pains in vertebrae, diseases
of viscera, liver and spleen.
Venus : comedo, disorders of bowels (like distempers,
flux and mucus in bowels), breathing disorders (caused by tight
lacing and indiscretions in dress), Bright’s Disease, poor circulation of venous blood, clogging of the system, disorders caused by
wrong use of cosmetics, diabetes, diphtheria, enlarged tonsils,
humorous discharge from eyes, skin eruptions and diseases in
feet, bilious flatulency, hysteria, diseases of kidneys. King’s Eyil,
diseases of matrix, Night Losses (discharge in sleep), venereal
disorders, disorders of thorax. Typhus Fever, urine infection,
etc.
Saturn : antiperistalsis, arthritis, artieular rheumatism,
black jaundice, fractures of and pains in bones, chronic bronchitis, impotence, club feet, colds, deafness, dyspnoea, typhoid,
disorders of foetus and troubles during conception, narrowing
of passages heart affected by poison, depression in skull, lumpy
and hard stools, ablation of tonsils, dental diseases etc.
How to apply these diseases is entirely a different matter.
The reader will have to make judgements of his based on his
own experience, and from various angles.
ratal
lit YI1

Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
site *Rniyin*xM
gifs^'tafasrsst ^vstM fafafavfa \
T>^«TT?T T(cTt Tig: fcfff 11
nfair »iwTTTfii^ «r»ftr.¥f wurfaan
stfa^ Tt*mfilf <5 ?RV?T «raTlftftll?Ull
fairgtfspfa** 5?»iT>i fafsifasT<n
ftg*srcn^ 'Effg jiSri ?fa^ sfau^n
tTS^SS^RRsttJ TWJG3 fafafaffa I
Hfa5T ^TTftlT’T *ffa TOISPTfafa IIKN
qv>rafsz*qF 3 *TrTTfaifarft *faa u HiU
13-19}. TIMING OF ILLNESS : The native will be
afflicted by illness throughout life if Saturn is with Rahu while
the 6th lord and 6th house are conjunct malefics. One will
suffer from (severe) fever at the age of 6 and at the age of 12 if
Mars is in the 6th while the 6th lord is in the 8th. If the Moon
is in Sagittarius/Pisces while Jupiter is in the 6th from the
ascendant, one will suffer from leprosy at the age of 19 and 22.
If Rahu is in the 6th, ascendant lord is in the 8th and Mandi is
in an angle, consumption will trouble the native at the age of 26.
Spleenary disorders will be experienced at the age of 29 and 30
if the lords of 6th and 12th arc in exchange of their signs.
Saturn and the Moon together in the 6th will inflict bloodleprosy at the age of 45. If Saturn is with an inimical planet
while the ascendant lord is in the ascendant itself windy disorders
(like rheumatism) will trouble the native at the age of 59.
TCTVT ftlTlfirf^ 5psraft*R>H^oU
o
xTj »j»TRwro i
STTcTR 3r?«cft fan ! ^ facffa% I
cTF7 fan"? <lf3fata*nTJ
20-22. UNFORTUNATE YEARS : Should the Moon be
conjunct the 6th lord while the 8th lord is in the 6th and the

Chapter 17
12th lord is in the ascendant, the native will be troubled by
animals at the age of eight. O Brahmin, if Rahu is in the 6th
while Saturn is in the Sth from the said Rahu, the child will
have danger through fire at the age 1 and 2 while in the 3rd year
birds will bring some evils.
?TWTgT STTW gjW: 1
TRW rRW TRTiW’T I
JTfawSCTTSW TW U^X.M
23-25. UNFORTUNATE YEARS (continued) : Danger
through water will have to be feared during the 5th and the 9th
years if the Sun is in the 6th or 8th while the Moon is in the
12th from the said Sun. Saturn in the 8th as Mars is in the 7th
will cause small-pox, in the 10th year and 30th year of age.
If 8th lord joins Rahu in an angle/trine from the 8th house and
be in the Sth in Navamsa, the subject will be troubled by
swelling of blood vessels, urinary disorders etc, during the 18th
year and the 22nd year.
Notes : The evils narrated above relating to the 18ti./22nd
year of age need some clarification. The 8th lord should be
conjunct Rahu in the 2nd, 4th, 5th, 1 1th or 12th from the
ascendant. The said 8th lord should simultaneously be in the
8th place from the Navamsa ascendant (i.e. in the 8th in
Navamsa chart). As a result, the native will incur urinary and
blood vessel disorders in 18th/22nd year of age.
WTWW T>TW WTR7lf?HT I
26. LOSS THROUGH ENEMIES : Loss of wealth will
come to pass during the 31st year if the 11th and 6th lords
exchange their Rasis.

j gg Brihal Parasara Hora Sastra
fTq'flrSR^ *'S*T 1
sq^Tt flRUT^ OFT faj^rni^U
27 INIMICAL SONS : One’s own sons will be his enemies
if the 5th lord is in the 6th while the 6th lord is with Jupiter.
Simultaneously the 12th lord should be m the ascendant.
28. FEAR FROM DOGS : There will be fear from dogs
during the 10th and 19th year if the ascendant lord and the 6th
lord are in exchange.
spsj n^'<
Chapter 18
Effects Of The Seventh House
sntn'ffra'Rvf w fs^raxm ! <
jrunfa^wl^ ^ 9T*nWI?i \\\\\
1 O excellent of the Brahmins, listen to me detailing the
effects of the 7th house. If the 7th lord is in his own sign or in
exaltation, one will derive full happiness through his wife (and
marriage),
f*Rt 1
ftfrrn! f ^ T u ^ 11
* 2 SICK WIFE : Should the 7th lord be in the 6th, Sth
or the 12th, the wife will be sickly. This, however, does not
apply to own house or exaltation placement as above.
Notes : The placement of the 7th lord in the 6th/8th/12th
will cause a sickly wife. (Similarly Venus in an evil house). If
the said house happens to be exaltation or own sign, then this

Chapter 18
need not be feared. For example, Saturn in Capricorn for a
Leo native or Venus in Pisces for an Aries native.
<TFT<^
3. EXCESSIVE LIBIDINOUSNESS! DEATH OF WIFE :
If Venus is in the 7th, the native will be exceedingly libidinous.
Venus joining a malefic in any house will cause .loss of wife.
<5TTEfTtffan 37 *
^ Wpll 5 ^ 3T
a?n ifti *mrf wg*n*if ^ uviu
4-5. THE 7TH LORD : Should the 7th lord be endowed .
with strength and be conjunct or be aspected by a benefic, the
native will be wealthy, honourable, happy and fortunate.
Conversely, if the 7tb lord is in fall or is combust oris man
enemy’s sign, one will acquire sick wives and many wives.
Notes : Plurality of wives and sickness to them will
come to pass with the 7th lord’s occupying his sign of debilitation or having got combust or inimical placement There is
more to the 7th lord for plurality of wives than what it stated,
as it will be evident from practical experience. However, this
affliction to the 7th lord will cause delays and disappointments
in respect of marriage apart from sickness to spouse. If the
7th lord is in an enemy’s sign, the native’s wife will scarcely
honour him.
g sigwif ? rft
6. PLURALITY OF WIVES : If the 7th lord is in a sign
of Saturn or of Venus and be aspected by a benefic, there will
be many wives. Should the 7th lord be particularly in exaltation, the same effects will come to pass.
'WFft l

Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
TO %^ZTT * * wfapp m I
q?r ^ tun
^ gfamt H ? ^TTg i R^f)^T : \
7-8 1 . MISCELLANEOUS MATTERS ; The native will
befriend barren females (for sexual union) if the Sun is in the
7th. The Moon therein will cause association with such females
as corresponding to the sign becoming the 7th. Mars placed
in the 7th will denote association with marriageable girls (or
those with menses) or with barren females. Mercury indicates
harlots, mean females and females belonging to traders’ community. Wife of a Brahmin or a pregnant female will be in the
native’s association if Jupiter is in the 7th. Base females and
females having attained their courses are denoted by Saturn/
Rahu/Ketu in the 7th.
Notes : Any planet in the 7th (including the 7th lord, vide
ch. 24, sloka 79) is normally indicative of absence of sterlingness in character in the mattet of sexual union.
If the Sun is in the 7th in a horoscope promising lose
character, the native will seek pleasures from females who are
barren. As regards the Moon, the kind of females to sexually
intercourse with, will correspond to the sign becoming the 7th
house. For example, when Virgo becomes *he 7th house the
female is a virgin; Libra prostitutes, Gemini a house wife and
so on and so forth. Mars in the 7th denotes a female that
has come of marriageable age or one who is in her monthly
course or one devoid of conceiving ability. Similarly, in other
cases. Jnpitcr in the_2lh is also no exception.
The above results should be declared, only after ensuring
that the native is primarily disposed to go out of the way for
sexual union, with the support of other horoscopic indications.
9-9$. Mars denotes a . female with attractive breasts.
Saturn indicates sick and weak spouse. Jupiter will bring a
spouse with hard and prominent breasts while Venus will bring
one with bulky and excellent breasts.

Chapter 18 ^
Notes : Though tihereisoo specific word in the abovr
lines to mean "spouse”-* these planets plated to /Shihotise bj:
occupation, aspect or ownership) willcawsfi: obtaidwentiOf^UCt
wives. These can also indicate the kind of females .thatetMto
sexually unites with. -nimH m ugluhni tliw sviiaci udT X
>.-- r ■■ >f r. . • -^r ra y T; oiemst
U$sM. to <d
WfjfcTW: TOTfijfa t sdt ni alidad
infa$ j ‘ ot
STSfafro WtfrTHSWXj niw svilsn
^TTWWfn^ 1 1 % n ^UL r;maid
qrr tpn^
g * fj^^ncvdU|-| T3 ^ B
10-13J- Malefics in the 12th and 7th while decreasing
fcloon is in the 5th denote that the native will be controlled by
his spouse who will be inimical to the race (or family). If the
^th house is' Occupied or owned by Saturn/Mars, the native
Will beget a harlot as his spouse of she Will be attached tp Othfer
men illegally. Should Venus be in a Navamsa of Mars of in a
Rasi of Mars or be in aspect to or conjunct Mars, the native
Will “kiss” the private parts of the femalc.,^|f Venus is sQ
related to Saturn, the native will “kiss” the j private parts of
the male. niv c gailtugsd avitn/s udi io 1 triisani «i
]. }0 Notes ; There arc four hints given in ?the above; verses^
under : .v,?*jn.'V;d ton u oi. ■■■
1. The Moon with decreasing, rays in the 5th house while
the 12th and the 7th are occupied by '-malefic P§n*ts the
spouse will be high-handed and >wiH be at loggerhead* -yith the
family members of the native. j . - ■
2. Saturn or Mars in the 'tfh house,' OroWhirtg the 7th
house * the spouse will be of questionable character/ * While
the placement of Saturn (and) of : Waii fe the 7th hodse fs bad
for the character of the spousp. Mars gtf .Spturn ruling the 7th
house should not simply lead to the fruition of the said effect.
Cancer, Leo, Taurus and Libra or such ali&hdanls have the
' 7th . lordship ,of,. Satura.jor c ? se of
ilX orfj 11 70 , fill I aril to dt8 .dtd wii ot bs>iss&I« ei bnn tilsnai ! ■

Brihat Parasara flora Sastra
these four ascendants, there must be severe affliction to the
7th from other sources so that the spouse is not chaste in
character.
3. The native will indulge in kissing the privities of the
female if Venus is in a Rasi or Navamsa of Mars, or is aspected
by or in conjunction with Mars. That is, he will have unusual
habits in the matter of sexual gratification from the female.
4. Venus, ^related to Saturn and his divisions instead of
to Mars and his divisions as stated in point 3 above, the
native will have ugly relations with another male, for subduing
his mad lust.
Tifst u;yii
rrawirf n?*ti
14-15. WORTHY SPOUSE : The native will beget a
spouse endowed with (the seven principal) virtues who will
expand his dynasty by sons and grandsons if the 7th lord is
exalted while 'the 7th is occupied by strong ascendant lord and
a benefic.
Notes : The above verses hint at the possibility of the
native obtaining children (and grandch ildren) if the ascendant
lord with strength is in the 7th with a benefic as the 7th lord
is disposed in exaltation sign. The combination in question
is meant for the native begetting a virtuous wife as well. The
mere exaltation of the 7th lord is capable of bestowing a virtuous
wife, if not progeny.
*Tfq i
16. EVILS TO SPOUSE ,* If the 7th house or its lord is
conjunct a malefic the native’s wife will incur evils, especially if
the 7th house or its lord is bereft of strength.
HfaTTfwft STTtmi 11^1911
17. LOSS OF SPOUSE : If the 7th lord is devoid of
strength and is relegated to the 6th, 8th or the 12th, or if the 7th

Chapter 18
lord is in fall, the native’s wife will be destroyed (i.e. she will die
early).
*Fir train gmfofipfr i
VTTVt 3TR5ETN*? !T faint II ?<;l|
18. LACK OF CONJUGAL FELICITY : If the Moon is
in the 7th as the 7th lord is in the 12th and the Karaka (indicator
Venus) is bereft of strength, the native will not be endowed with
marital happiness.
Notes • The Moon referred to here should obviously be
decreasing. The Moon increasing, while although the other part
of the planetary conditions as stated in the sloka is fulfilled, will
stall the adversity and improve the situation.
Tl'TST 'TTlTTf^ 1
VS3|*«<WM ^ t
T?ernfil^
Rite# i
3TT*T St^RM^pRd: ll^ll
19-21. PLURALITY OF WIVES : One will have two
wivts if the 7th lord is in fall, or in a malefic’s sign along with a
malefic while the 7th house or the 7th Navamsa belongs to a
eunuch planet. If Mars and Venus are in the 7th or if Saturn is
in the 7th while the lord of the ascendant is in the 8th, the native
will have 3 wives. There will be many wives if Venus is in a
dual sign while its lord is in exaltation as the 7th lord is endowed
with strength.
Notes : For a dual marriage, the 7th from the natal ascendant or the 7th from Navamsa ascendant should be owned by a
eunuch planet. So to say, Gemini, Virgo, Capricorn or Aquarius
should be the 7th as above. While this is fulfilled, the 7th lord
(from natal ascendant) should be in his sign of debilitation or in
a malefic’s sign along with a malefic.
. The other two yogas are simple and need no elaboration.

166 ‘ Brlhat Parasara flora Sastra
sib iliw s cTf! oi) b^cr?5.^h f»i lllv • '
W’Trft 1JH: \
43-t**} 5^35% Jg snmft U^U
22. TllilWoF MfRRlFGE (upto sloka 34) : If the 7th
-ord is iHaibyn^ftc’s hofSe (5Fin the 9th as subha Rasi so means)
tyhik Yequpj i& exata^H ^8 in own sign, the native will marry
rilt// marriage indicated in the text will not
be practical in all cases in the modern social conditions. These
^ <^p^ ^)pfnl in knowing of early and belated marriages.
J^^ejt^jpplj^ .the present sloka should tell us of the possibility of
jt^riag^ jf n<^ literally at the age of 5 or 9.
23,J£lteSun is in the 7th while his depositor is conjunct
Venus, tfiefe will be marriage at 7th or 11th year of age.
i i\
j snmft irvu
2^Ycs' ! jus * n l ^ e 2nd while the 7th lord is in the 11th will
give marriage at the age of 10 or 16.
owl avail
a rili^ ^RTlftT^ t
sn^ f^TTti HTt 11^*11
Marriage will take place during the 11th year if Venus
is in an angle from the ascendant while the ascendant lord is in
(Capricorn/Aquarius.
ipS m\ i
* n ”, gwfaffrfrti * SUNT* lAqil^ll
2U p 26. The native will marry at 12 or 19 if Venus is in an
bugle from the ascendant while Saturn is in the 7th counted
from Venus.
JTF^ feSTt* *x: ll^vslk
27. Should Venus be in the 7th from Moon while Saturn
is in the 7th from Venus, marriage will be in the 18th year.

■Chapter 18 167
sntf ?n'RTrf?i^ \
31^ iTy*3FT 5IT^ FTFT^ m: IRcll
28. Marriage will be in the 1 5th year if the 2nd lord is in
the 11th while the ascendant lord is in the 10th.
Q^FI ^TT’fRTftl?# fllM SRTTftm I
3is| ^5?FT
29. An exchange between the lords of the 2nd and the
11th will bring marriage 13 years after birth.
^sarnsiTfasT'T \
£Tf%FT Fraf%FTS& far^T5 5TT: ll^oll
30. One’s 22nd/27th year will confer marriage if Venus is
in the 7th from the 8th house (i.e. the 2nd from ascendant),
while his depositor is conjunct Mars.
Notes : The Yogas given from this sloka through sloka 34
will delay one’s marriage as could be easily understood.
^H-TT*T TT^F^T l
sretfsrFi *T3?5fFf faii ftfr* imu
31. Should the 7th lord be in the 12th while the natal
ascendant lord is in the 7th in Navamsa, marriage will be in
23rd/26th year of age.
Notes : The ascendant lord (in Rasi chart) should be in
the 7th sign in Navamsa chart while the 7th lord in Rasi is in
the years 1 2th in Rasi to give marriage at 23/2 6 of age.
F*STFT FT^tFT l
32. Either the 25th year or the 33rd year will bring
marriage jf the Sth lord is in the 7th as Venus is in Navamsa
ascendant.
FT* TlfFT^ 1
qvfgrFTTc^fF^rFT TTTsTHF f%fHf?FT<T II ^ 11
33. Should Venus be in the 9th from the 9th (i.e. in the

Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
5th house), while Rahu is in one of the said houses (i.e. in the
5th/9th), marriage will take place during 31st or 33rd year.
Hcnf<rai«l ftrsTt? rt: u^yii
34. The native will marry at 30 or 27 if Venus is in the
ascendant while the 7th lord is in the 7th itself.
snarerr srrtchr 113*11
strut fefafwra ii^it
JSWTCTO»T> TTf: I
qtnjfa: U^\3ll
?nrtrFWwT^ TR^nf fafafawg n^u
Bt%Vf f^TBR i
TOtatf 5 Rfmr%?r»^u
35-39. TIMING OF WIFE'S DEATH : Loss of wife will
occur in the 18th year or 33rd year of age’ofthe native if the
7th lord is in fall while Venus is in the 8th. One will lose his
spouse in his 19th year if the 7th lord is in the 8th while the
12th lord is in the 7th. The native’s wife will die within three
days of marriage due to snake bite if the native has Rahu in the
2nd and Mars in the 7th. If Venus is in the 8th while his
depositor is in a sign of Saturn, death of wife will take place
during the native’s Pth or 21st year of age. Should the ascendant lord be in his sign of debilitation as the 2nd lord is in the
8th, loss of wife will occur in the 13th year of age.
TO TOT^rfR^rf 1
jrt«t iiyou
jTfatft m fs-rfttf ^ t
fast? SHR* *TTlf RTS^T *rqf faTO*TUIY$jl

Chapter 19
40-41. THREE MARRIAGES : Should the Moon be in the
7th from Venus while Mercury is in the 7th from the. Moon and
the 8th lord is in the 5th (from the ascendant), there will be
marriage in the 10th year followed by another in the 22nd year
and yet another in the 33rd year.
^5 ^ TTfHfpifa: I
42. DEATH OF WIFE : If the 6th, 7th and 8th are in
their order occupied by Mars, Rahu and Saturn, the native’s
wife will not live (long).
3R 3TTn*tfa<T;?tismtt: iiKii
Chapter 19
Effects Of The Eighth House
1. LONG LIFE : O excellent of the Brahmins, listen to
me speaking on the effects of the 8th house. If the 8th lord is
in an angle, long life is indicated.
3ngPTFnfQ«r: <rmr: awr rifera:!
911rf 5n%$TtSCinT IRII
2. SHORT LIFE : Should the 8th lord join the ascendant
lord or a malefic and be in the 8th itself, the native will be shortlived.
t»?r r? ^if^FTT «prof mfNm: i

Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
3. SATURN AND TENTH LORD ABOUT LONGEVITY :
Similarly consider Saturn and 10th lord in the matter of
longevity.
Notes : To get the actual import of this verse, we should
read it in the context of the previous verse. So to say, short
life will come to pass if :
1. The 8th lord is in the 8th along with a malefic or along
with the ascendant lord or
2. Saturn joins a malefic/ascendant lord in the 8th house
or
3. The 10th lord is in the 8th along with a malefic planet/
ascendant lord.
sHtrnj: uvii
tpTfrttg' 3^: I IV, II
srnS ^r^cTTfrTg'? u^n
JTffam fgg-^Tgqfrn; Srvt^RTT: 1
eft ^^T^nsgHiTT^TgTrf^TcT ntaii
4-7. LONG LIFE : There will be long life if the 6th lord
is in the 12th or if the 6th lord is in the 6th as the 12th lord is
in the 12th or if the 6th lord and 12th lord are in the ascendant
and the 8th. If the lords of the 5th, 8th and ascendant are in
own navamsas, own Rnsis or in friendly signs, the native will
enjoy a long span of life. Should the lords of the ascendant, 8th
and 10th and Saturn are all disposed severally in an angle, in a
trine or in the 1 Ith, the subject will live long. Like these, there
are many other yogas dealing with the issue of longevity.' The
strength and weakness of the planets concerned be estimated in
deciding longevity.
Notes : In sloka 4, we have three yogas for long life.
These are :
1. The 6th lord in the 12th.

Chapter 19
2. The 6th and 12th lords simultaneously in the 6th and
the 12th.
3. The 6th lord in the ascendant while the 12th lord is in
the 8th.
The combinations given in the other two verses are quite
clear.
WWTfU'Ieft 1
ftmsqfGtral sftt* ?lf^«T7*nfq*nit;U
W3*T Util
sqt* *fcm^ni*ou
qroi: spri: nfe i
5ITH: *Rlt »Jeft *T^cT II \\\\
qiqtfg^ i
Ttqqt*f<il* ?*rciimg: q^m^ii^u
T?W9T T?CT7Tf?Tf$ WJ qmqfN^ I
8-13. SHORT LIFE : One’s span of life will be between
20 and 32 years if the ascendant lord is weak while the 8th lord
is in an angle. The native will only be short-lived if the 8th
-lord is in fall while the 8th has a malefic in it and the ascendant
lord is bereft of strength. Death will be instant at birth if the
8th house, 8th loi;d and the 12th house are all conjunct malefics.
Malefic in angles/trines and bencfics in 6th/8th while the ascendant has in it the 8th lord in fall : this yoga will cause immediate end. If the 5th house, 8th house and the 8th lord are all
conjunct malefics, the life span will be very brief. Within a
month of birth, death will befall the child if the 8th lord is in
the 8th itself while the Moon is with malefics and be bereft of
beneficial aspect.
Notes : If the 8th lord is in an angle, the native -will be
long-lived, according to sloka 1 of the present chapter. The
ascendant lord bereft of strength, in such a case, will reduce the

brlhat Parasara Bora Sasira
life span as per verse 8 above. Hence it follows that the 8th
lord s good disposition is alone not enough, but the power of
ascendant lord is a simultaneous need, for a long life
Insloka 12 it is stated that 8th lord should be in fall in
the ascendant. For no ascendant, the 8th lord is debilitated in
falTthe'm'rqth^ 13 ^ r ib,e Wheaon, y ‘he 8th bhava
bilily of the 8 t h cusp fai.in* £ C L
Venus cau be debilitated in Virgo, the ascending sign', Othert
wise, by signs it is not possible.
Hpnnt S , h0U ' d ; he u 8th lord be ia 8th, long life to the native is
malei J u u simultaneous| y the Moon is captured by a
mlefic and be without any help from a benefic, then early evils
to life span will have to be predicted, vide sioka 13 above.
m «r««r: itfvu
fw: tank* ^ot:i
tR: xwjt: ?rru sprain
•udlongliS’ ' " m ' Xn “ 6 virtuous
Notes : Even if Jupiter is lonely well-placed in the fiih
the"™’ U l adS t0 “ l0ng Span ° f Iife If he is further helped by
the Moon being, a the 11th house and by the ascendantWH
exaltation, doubtlessly the life will be exceedingly 1^
CLASSICS (Text
with English Translation
V NIDHI
Volumes set) _
- Hama Dayalu
Kalyanavarma

3T*T tfnuoTra'lSSTTSqR: ll^oll
Chapter 20
Effects Of The Ninth House
5 T«T STFtTSrm f% 5 T ! <Rvf cT^TS^: i
tfTSRt’RT*^ 'ffT^STTcft wrr^r^cft Tff%cTH$n
w«Hr*<H«i% 30% treta! %^srffqr% i
^T?T ^TTFfPTcft WT ll^tt
1-2. COMBINATIONS FOR FORTUNES ": O Brahmin,
now listen to effects of the 9th house. One will be fortunate (or
affluent) if the 9th lord is in the 9th with strength. Should
Jupiter be in the 9th house while 9th lord is in an angle and the
ascendant lord is endowed with strength, one will be extremely
fortunate.
Notes : “Bhagyasthana” is a name given to the 9th house.
“Bhagya” denotes fortunes, affluence etc. Hence from the 9th
house, one’s capacity to retain the wealth earne d should be
studied.
fqrTl STRT?mf^?T: |^||
3. FORTUNATE (AFFLUENT) FATHER : If the 9th
lord is with strength as Venus is in the 9th while Jupiter is in an
angle from the ascendant, the native’s father is fortunate.
fqrTT t^rf^H^ll
4. INDIGENT FATHER ; If the 9th lord is debiltated
while the 2nd/4th from the 9th is occupied by Mars, the native’s
father is poor.
Notes : It is stated that Mars in the 10th or 12th from
the ascendant (i.e. the 2nd or the 4th from the 9th) while the

Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
9th lord is in debilitation denotes poverty of wealth for the
father. Even if there be some wealth of the father, Mars in
the 10th/12th (not being in own house or in exaltation) will
make the native disinherit patrimony or enter into litigations.
Soto say, such patrimony will not come to the hands of the
native, that too easily.
?rf^TT ifhnforc: 11*11
5. LONG LIVING FATHER : Should the 9th lord be in
deep exaltation while Venus is in angle from the ascendant and
Jupiter is in the 9th from Navamsa Ascendant, the father of the
native will enjoy a long-span of life.
wafqen qr^qqti) ttut st wra \\\n
6. ROYAL STATUS FOR FATHER : If the 9th lord is
an angle in aspect to Jupiter, the native’s father will be a king
endowed with conveyances or be equal to a king.
7. WEALTHY AND FAMOUS FATHER : Should the
lord of the 9th be in the 10th while the 10th lord being aspected
by a benefic the native’s father will be very rich and famous.
qq^TrfTeq: fqtTmrft V&TXX: ||e;ll
spqTfawWi *?q i
gw af?# fqmrfaeremffqH: ntu
8-9. VIRTUOUS AND DEVOTED TO FATHER : Should
the Sun be in deep exaltation as the 9th lord is in the 11th, the
native will be virtuous, dear to king and devoted to father. If
the Sun is in a trine from the ascendant while the 9th lord is in
the 7th in conjnction with or in aspect to Jupiter, the native will
be devoted to his father.

Chapter 20 175
WTTqTrf^ l
firwr^TTcTt qTR *>feHT«R: 11? oil
10. FORTUNES ETC. : Aquisition of fortunes, conveyances and fame will follow the 32nd year of age if the 9th lord
is in the 2nd while the 2nd lord is in the 9 th.
s^ifrqph: jfemt q|?ui??n
11. INIMICAL TO FATHER ; There will be mutual
enmity between the father and the native if the ascendant lord is
in the 9th but with the lord of the 6th. Further, the native’s
father will be of contemptible disposition.
H%T> fsrc^mtsfa fafo: i
qinrot qtn> fwTFRsra: u?^n
12. BEGGED FOOD : If the 10th lord and 3rd lord are
both bereft of strength while the 9th lord is in fall or in combustion, the native will go abegging for his food.
STR 1
JTpftr eTTqnfaisq qt5?T f?*R ll?3H
3ncTPq SRtTTe^q 3R*?q FfcTF^rT I
gif qrmTRThi?vn
STTeTR SJSRlsi 3 fq^HT^rnTf^IrT 1
5qt>*T qTRTTftTfq H>^Nt ll?V.U
fleffa m 3Rfi?q I
a t N
?T^Tr JTTTPrTfVlFq T?sNt
fScftd 5R*T qq fagqWTTfesfa I
qTRTJFETtR TT^y qTRRqF*FR *qhl?UU
til *yi jKttttt qq qfqqqq i
TTgWT Hq qfJTT^Fqqq *R* ll?5i|
cTTcfFT *TTq £R*T 1
srn^sT sqqrrf?T?^ qnqrif^rr u?s.u

Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
fagiT^^PTTfa*frT I
^ sp^ir TOniqa iRou
JTTif fa§: |
t^gf^PTlfu^ *Tf3f^JTOTTf^^ U ^ ? II
'T^^TTTIc^T 5TTC# 5H*7f?J *TfcTO3rT I
*mUTcT *T<?m q5 ^nqfftcraTOPT: IR^U
ncssst Ts^fa^rr^ fag*hqmfa7TT t
T*R3Ufa^>T *Ft qKfT^nfaW'T T3> U^ll
ssfatf sr^ nfirtan'
H C s
ITT^ST rTC^T *WTOf?m 113*1)
WfrjrSi* fa^WTlfesirr \
3* 3TT?mi 5TTRT f^^finirT ll^SOI
13-25. COMBINATIONS FOR FATHER'S DEATH : The
father of the native would have passed away prior to the native’s
birth if the Sun is in the 6th/8th/12th as the 8th lord is in the
9th, the 12th lord is in the ascendant, and the 6th lord is in the
5th house. Should the Sun be in the 8th while the 8th lord is in
the 9th, the native’s father will pass away within a year of his
birth. If the lord of the 12th is in the 9th while the 9th lord is in
debilitation Navamsa, the native’s father will face his end during
the 3rd/16th year of the native. Death of father will occur in
the 2nd or 12th year if the ascendant lord is in the 8th as the 8th
lord is with the Sun. Should Rahu be in the 8th from the 9th
(i.e. 4th from the ascendant) as the Sun is in the 9th from the
9th (i.e. 5th from the ascendant), death of father will take place
in the 16th/ 1 8th year of the native. If Saturn is in the 9th from
the Moon as the Sun is with Rahu, the native’s father will die in
the 7th or the 19th year of the native. The native in his 44th
year will lose his father if the 9th lord is in the I2th as the I2th
lord is in the 9th. If the ascendant lord is in the 8th as the
Moon in the Sun’s Navamas, the native in his 35th/41st year
will lose his father. One will lose his father in the 50th year if
the Sun, being the lord of the 9th, is conjunct Mars and Saturn.
If the Sun is in the 7th from the 9th (i. e. 3rd from the ascendant) as Rahu is in the 7th from the 3rd (i.e. 9th from the

Chapter 20
ascendant), the 6th/25th year of the native will be fatal for
father. If Saturn is in the 7th from the 8th (i. e. 2nd from the
ascendant) as the Sun is in the 7th from Saturn (i.e. 8th from
the ascendant), the ages of 30, 21 or 26 will be fatal for the
father. If the 9th lord is in debilitation while his depositor is
in the 9th, the native will lose his father at 26 or 30. Thus the
astrologers may know the effects (of the 9th house).
q^-^TTO t
^ srfag# wf'fnmTfinfl tot ii^ii
26. FORTUNES : One will enjoy abundant fortunes if
Venus is in deep exaltation and be in the company of the 9th
lord as Saturn is in the 3rd.
g^TT TO# rTT^?T I
wnroftisr i
TOfTOTTO qr TO Tgm«T fa fa fa TO
27-28. FORTUNATE PERIODS : Abundant fortunes
will be acquired after the 20th year if the 9th has Jupiter in it as
its lord is in an angle from the ascendant. Should Mercury be
in his deep exaltation as the 9th lord is in the 9th itself, abundant
fortunes will be earned after the 36th year.
*TTOTrfVlT# TOTTO# I
to# g#
29. Should the ascendant lord be in the 9th as the 9th lord
is in the ascendant, and Jupiter is in the 7th, there will be gains
of wealth and conveyances.
ITTOTqTOTOTt f#ER *1# I
*TTOTt;: II ^ oil
30. LACK OF FORTUNES : If Rahu is in the 9th from
the 9th (i. e. 5th from the ascendant), as his depositor is in the
8th from the ascendant and the 9th lord is in fall, the native
will be devoid of fortunes.

Brihat Parasara flora Sastara
srftpn ^ qrr fc gfl \
*T^7Tftl^ f^r^TT?ft ^ ||^ ||
3t . FOOD BY BEGGING ; Should Saturn be in the 9th
along with the Moon as the ascendant lord is in fall, the native
will acquire food by begging.
Wm-fl fffST ! awnra vf^ff tTtTT \
vrtmun HIM til fwwrsarefo
32. O Brahmin, these are the effects related to the 9th
house. I have explained (these) briefly. These may be (further)
estimated with the help of the state of the lords of the ascendant
and 9tn and in other manners as welj.
3T«T fnf*TT^5tTSqra: l|^?U
Chapter 21
Effects of The Tenth Mouse
*TU W^r-TTffff^wrf^^ || ^ti
hi now explain the effects of the 10th house. Listen to
these, O Maitreya, in the words of Brahma, Garga and others
Notes : Statements like “Brahma Gargadi Bhashitam” go to
prove that sage Parasara, had access to such expositions of
Lord Brahma wh,ch would not be possible to an ordinary
mortal. The history of Parasara has been explained in the notes
for the initial slokas of ch. I supra and ch. 41 infra.
sr*rffT%?r 1
and h 2 ‘ PAT l RNAL HAPPINESS : If the 10th lord is strong
and be in exaltation or ,n own Rasi/Navamsa, the native will

Chapter 21 lJg
derive extreme paternal happiness, will enjoy fame and will
perform good deeds.
Notes : Though the word “Karma” means deed, it
actually in the context of astrology denotes one's profession
job, livelihood etc. The 10th house rules one’s patrimony’
paterna 1 happiness, last offices to father and such other matter
while the 9th house, as explained earlier deals with one’s father
3. If the 10th lord is devoid of strength, the native will
face obstructions in his work. IfRahu is in an angle or in a
trine, he will perform religious sacrifices like Jyotishtoma.
Notes : Should Rahu be strongly disposed in an angle or
in a trine, the native will perform “Jyotishtoma." This is Soma
sacrifice deemed as a whole class of sacrificial ceremonies
consisting of sixteen vedic rites. To wit, the native will be
extremely religious and meritorious.
^ ^ rTRT I
4. If the 10th lord is with a benefic or be in an auspicious
house, one will always gain through royal patronage and in
busmess. In a contrary situation, only opposite results will
come to pass.
Notes : Should the 10th lord be with a benefic or in a
benefic’s Rasi, the native will ever gain in his undertakings with
the king (i.e. in his calling). "3Fipm,-zpsn-” means that if the
10th lord is with a malefic or in a malefic’s Rasi, the native will
be a loser in his calling and will not serve the king (or a worthy
person). The short and the long of the verse is to convey the
idea that the 10th lord should be related to a benefic’s sign for a
happy and prosperous calling. Connections with a malefic will
cause grief.
tin* tphtto* HHT qpmnfntfh

Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
5. Should the 10th and 11th be both occupied by malefics
the native will indulge only in bad deeds and will defile his own
men.
tflWfAlrf TTg«TT ?T«tT I
6. If the lord of the 10th is relegated to the 8th along with
Rahu, the native will hate others, be a great fool and will do
bad deeds.
Notes : The 8th house occupied by Rahu in the company
of the 10th lord will spoil professional happiness of the native
apart from making him perform questionable and foolish deeds
as well as incurring misconceptions with one and all
ffTFtUT'HiqoT: u^h
7. If Saturn, Mars ana the 10th lord are in the 7th as the
7th lord is with a malefic, the native will be fond of carnal
pleasures and of filling his belly.
Notes : The effects for the combination as above are
described by the words “Sisnodara Parayana “ (fsiWftr^TCHP’T: )
and as far as I understand, the meaning is as above. (Sisna=
male organ, Udara—belly.)
fRinfacn pstjfr i
*TPTWfsi?TmW lletll
vs
«nf*r gw«n^*nii4i ^ ntii
?n* frvnr: 11 \o\\
8-10. Should the 10th lord be in exaltation and be in the
company of Jupiter as the 9th lord is in the 10th the native will
be endowed with honour, wealth, and valour. One will lead a
happy life if the 11th lord is in the 10th and the 10th lord is iD
the ascendant or if the lords of the 10th and 11 th are conjunct

Chapter 21
in an angle. Should the 10th lord in strength be in Pisces along
with Jupiter, the native will doubtless obtain robes, or nam ents
and happiness.
*T«'*rm* t
***** Vh^ssvti n^ii
11. Should Rahu, Sun, Saturn and Mars be in the Uth,
the native will incur cessation of his duties.
Notes : The 4 planets, viz. the Sun, Mars, Rahu and
Saturn joining in the 11th house will ensure that the native will
not be successful in his performance. As a consequence, he will
not have a happy calling or profession worth the name, and
will gain nothing.
12. One will be learned and wealthy if Jupiter is in Pisces
along with Venus while the ascendant lord is strong and the
Moon is in exaltation.
Notes : stst means learning in the normal context.
Apart, this denotes sacred knowledge derived from meditation
on the higher truths of religion and philosophy which instructs
the seeker how to understand his own nature within him and to
reunite with the Almighty avoiding reincarnation. This »
taught by jTRrfPr (Gnana yoga). Jupiter and Venus joining in
Pisces (the terminal house, denoting final emancipation) will
endow the native with such supreme knowledge. The lord of
the ascendant simultaneously joining the exalted Moon renders
the mind fertile enough to produce knowledge of one's own self.
For one cannot attain the Lord without first knowing what he
himself is. Material wealth will also come to the native as a
by-product of the planetary configuration in question. So to
say one will be spiritually and materially wealthy.

182 Brihat Parasara tiora Sastrd
13. Should the 10th lord be in the 11th while the 11th
lord is in the ascendant and Venus is in the 10th, the native
will be endowed with precious stones.
Notes : To wit the planets so disposed as mentioned in
the sloka will confer a huge influx of material wealth on the
native.
14. If the lord of the 10th is exalted in an angle or a
trine and be in the company of or in aspect to Jupiter, one will
be endowed with (worthy) deeds.
srnrqiisr^ a«taT?r
15. Should the 10th lord be in the ascendant along with
the ascendant lord as the Moon is in an angle or in a trine, the
native will be interested in good deeds.
16. If Saturn is in the 10th along with a debilitated planet
while the 10th from Navamsa ascendant is occupied by a
malefic, the native will be bereft of (virtuous) acts.
fPRTT HTYKlflU^ I
|R5lf faTrft
17. One will indulge in bad acts if the 10th lord is in the
8th while the 8th lord is in the 10th with a malefic.
W.WK iftaTTfilW <TTW^f I
U?i;U
18. Obstructions to the native’s acts will crop up if the
10th lord is in fall, as both the 10th house from the ascendant
and the 10th from the 10th (i.e. 7th from the ascendant) have
malefic occupations.

Chapter 22 1 I £3
vjf crdtf I
Nnrgw ^efcji^on
*»»««*iHfifii^ ^%?t *nro>j^ 1
5Tnn 5 *T5^TT*T ^f£ ^JJki'twT *T> Htfa ll^$l»
19-2 L COMBINATIONS FOR FAME: One will be endowed
with fame if the Moon is in the 10th while the 10th lord is in a
trine from the 10th and the ascendant lord is in ascendant’s
angle. Similar effects will come to pass if the 1 1th lord is in
the 10th while the 10th lord is strong and be in aspect to
Jupiter. Fame will come to the native if the 10th lord is in
the 9th as the ascendant lord is in the 10th and the Moon Is in
the 5th from the ascendant.
v star fNhroh
22. O excellent of the Brahmins, thus have been told about
the effects of the 10th house in a brief manner. Other related
effects be guessed by you based on the relationship of the lords
of the ascendant and of the 10th,
3t«r 5rm*rFTO?TTstTnT: ir^u
Chapter 22
Effects Of The Eleventh House
Ttwfa %3TtfT* Jl
«J5?TT 3TTcT^ ?fr% Am
1. O excellent of the Brahmins, I now explain effects
relating to the 1 1th house, the auspiciousness of which bhava will
make one happy at all times.

Brihat ParasQra Hora Sastra
*RT cTT^ f?fc&T %f5fq^tnqt: |
IgtTTW CRT $qff5% $qf?rnbfq srril^ll
2. Should the 11th lord be in the 11th itself or be in an
angle or in a trine from the ascendant, there will be many gains.
Similarly if ihe 11th lord is exalted, though in combustion,
there will he many gains.
Notes : The second line of the above verse deserves a
proper approach, means “although in combustion or
having lost rays in the Sun”. The word “srfir” meaning
“although” in this context deters the otherwise possible interpretation as “Sun’s Navamsa or Sun's Rasi” which of course will
be an extreme rendering. To wit, the correct import is that even
though the 1 1th lord is combust but be in exaltation the native
will gain abundantly.
P«tt jrih fcftfaicui^u
3. If the 11th lord is in the 2nd while the 2nd lord is in
angle (from the ascendant) along with Jupiter, the gains will be
great.
qjfspq STRT *nr^mf?T<S4>TTRJ ||V||
4. If the 11th lord is in the 3rd while the 11th is occupied
by a benefic, the native will gain 2000 Nishkas in his 36th year.
Notes i means in the Bhava or house in question,
i.e. the llth bhava and not the 3rd bhava. Since already
prececds, to mean “in the 3rd house” will be redundant.
(Nishka) though meaning a gold coin was generally
taken to indicate one Karsha or Su varna of 16 Mashas. This
also denotes a certain weight of gold in the hoary days. The
sage thus obviously hints at the opulence of the native in varied
measures by quantifying the resultant Nishkas according to the
merits of the planetary formations at birth.
%Rf*qrN»T *IT*RT*T ^TTTT i r fRcf I

Chapter 22
5. If the 1 1th lord is conjujct a benefic in an angle or in a
trine (from the ascendant), the native will acquire 500 Nishkas ■
in his 40th year.
gw u* i
6. The native will own 6000 Nishkas if the 1 1 th is occupied by Jupiter while the 2nd and 9th are respectively taken over
by the Moon and Venus by position.
fPraTOTftw UVSII
7. Should Jupiter, Mercury and the Moon be in the 11th
from the 1 1th (i.e. 9th from the ascendant) the native will be
endowed with wealth, grains, fortunes, diamonds, ornaments etc.
5Tm?T WKTTWW |
5 VRH Hell
8. One will gain 1000 Nishkas in his 33rd year if the 11th
lord is in the ascendant and the ascendant lord is in the 1 1th.
targrroam fnTif%5rr?T ntn
9. If the nth lord is in the 2nd as the 2nd lord is in the
11th, one will amass abundant fortunes after marriage.
^tlr!'fn3i4nMin<ir<c^n^7*n^^T: 11^ oil
10. If the 11th lord is in the 3rd as the 3rd lord is in the
11th, one will gain wealth through co-born and be endowed
with excellent ornaments.
OTTTOT cfT fs% <n«i*rofa& l
to ii^ii
11* There will be no gains in spite of numerous efforts if
the 11th lord is in fall, in combustion or be in the 6th/8th/I2th
with a malefic.

Chapter 23
Effects Of The Twelfth House
ou^nnTT ««t fg*rh
*1*1**# .pftlTOtsfq 9111(11
^ ^ ST'fTRtjq^ *J9¥T9 JMAtfdi! I
5wfa«ft tm?rmR*9<T tffcmiRii
^=6^ fastfST 9r m*TU*rfc*T^T?I% 1
foqmiTTfiratf^v u\u
<TTruiTTT’»!> |
qTf«4fimflqeft f%5Tt fa^Tfa ST1J: IIVII
1-4. 0 Brahmin, now I tell you about the effects of the
12th house. There will be expenses on good accounts if the J 2th
lord is with a benefic, or be in own house or be exalted or if a
benefic occupies the 12th. One will own beautiful houses
and beds and be endowed with superior scented articles and
.pleasures if the Moon happens to be the 12th lord and be
exalted or be in own sign/Navamsa or in the 1 lth/9th/5th in
Rasi/Navamsa. The said native will live with rich clothes, and
ornaments, be learned and lordly.
tFqwftamssCTm i
flfrsRT: STTcf HUH
«JtnfawrfT*vir?T i
R fj! *999 h^h
5-6. And if the 12th lord is in the 6th/8th or be in enemy's
Navamsa, debilitation Navamsa or in 8th in Navamsa, one will
be devoid of happiness from wife, be troubled by expenses and
deprived of general happiness. If he be in an angle/trine, the
native will beget a spouse.

Chapter 23
«ft?rrf^iTT%q srices nvsii
7. Just as these effects are derived from the ascendant in
regard to the native, similar deductions be made about co-born
etc. from the 3rd and other houses.
Notes : Hints arc given here to know from the native’s
horoscope the effects related to his co-born, uncles etc. For
example, brother’s finances from the 4th house (2nd from the
3rd), brother’s marriage from the 9th house (7th from the 3rd),
father’s health from the 2nd house (6th from the 9th), mother’s
health from the 9th (6th from the 4th), wife’s spending nature
from the 6th house (i.e. 12th from the 7th) and so on and so
forth. Proceeding on these lines, we can see the possibility of
predicting many important events for other relatives from the
native’s horoscope itself.
t&ST: qfftff FRrTT: Hell
8. Planets placed in the visible half of the zodiac will give
explicit results while the ones in the invisible half will confer
secret results.
Notes : Visible half is the half of the zodiac within s range
of 180 degrees from the ascendant’s cusp seen backwards. The
other half is invisible.
A planet in the visible half of the zodiac will be more
potential in effects while in the invisible half it is less potential
and unmanifest.
TrTff tq&T ||£||
9. If Rahu is in the 12th along with Mars, Saturn and the
Sun, the native will go to hell. Similar effect will occur if the
12th lord is with the Sun.
Notes : The 12th house relates to one's fate after death.
Whether he will reincarnate, or attain infernal region or the
Lotus Feet of the Lord will have to be studied from the 12th
house. In this connection, refer to ch. 26 of Horasara also.

Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
cnfNi
|& *ter: fui?fTT5r tm*: m<>n
10. If there is a benefic in the 12th while its lord is exalted
or is conjunct or aspected by a benefic, one will attain final
emancipation.
*rf«£ frnf*n;?T7
11. One will wander from country to country if the 12th
lord and 12th house are with malefics and be in aspect to
malefics.
*rwi^»r
12. One will move in his own country if the 12th lord and
12th house are with benefics and be in aspect to benefics.
Notes i In the previous sloka and the present one, clues
are given to know as to whether one will be in his own place or
outside the native place. If the 12th house and its lord are
connected with benefics, one will progress in his own place while
he will wander hither and thither f without progress) if 12tb lord
and 12th bouse are spoilt by malefics.
*T**rfa*i^ tfRfaR* i
13. Earnings will be through sinful measures if the 12tb is
occupied by Saturn or Mars etc, and be not aspected by a
benefic.
14. If the ascendant lord is in the 12th while the 12th
lord is in the' ascendant with Venus, expenses will be on religious
grounds.

ST«T *TIsrei<PfTSJT?!T: IP? VI l
Chapter 24.
Effects Of The Bhava Lords
f^rmf <re»ftsfa *ttu?u
1. EFFECTS OF ASCENDANT LORD IN VARIOUS
HOUSES (upto sfoka 12) : Should the ascendant lord be in the
asecndant itself, the native will be endowed with physical
happiness (i.e. good health) and prowess. He will be intelligent, fickle-minded, will have two wives and will unite with
other females.
Notes : The position of the ascendant lord in the
ascendant itself will make the native fearless and longlived.
er*t vtnptpt i
s o
2. If the lord of the ascendant is in the 2nd, he will be
gainful, scholarly, happy, endowed with good qualities, be
religious, honourable and will have many wives.
Notes : The native having the ascendant lord in the 2nd
house will face obstacles in obtaining progeny and thus he will
be left with a longing for issues. He will further become wealthy
through his own efforts.
tffpT STTcT: 1
*TRt wsfhi^u
3. If the lord of the ascendant is in the 3rd, the native
will equal a lion in valour, be endowed with all kinds of wealth,
be honourable, will have two wives, be intelligent and happy.

Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
Notes : Should the 3rd house contain the ascendant lord,
one will be equal to a king, respected by others and will indulge
in unnatural methods of sexual gratification.
’jq^WTfarrT; IIVII
4. If the ascendant lord is in the 4th, the native will be
endowed with paternal and maternal happiness, will have many
brothers, be lustful virtuous and charming.
Notes : With the ascendant lord in (he 4th house, the
native is of a noble descent. He will prosper by his own efforts.
He will be ambitious and beautiful. Prosperity will come to
him easily. He will ever enjoy physical felicity.
STWPTrqqTVT: qqfaq: UX.U
5. If the ascendant lord is in the 5th, the native will have
mediocre progenic happiness, will lose his first child, be
honourable, given to anger and be dear to king,
qesq 3TTrrt I
qtqi^ vnjrT: . qteT
6. If the ascendant lord is in the 6th and related to a
malefic the native will be devoid of physical happiness, and will
be troubled by enemies if there is no benefic aspect.
Notes : The ascendant lord going to the 6th house will
mar the prospects of health. However, for Scorpio and Taurus
ascendant, it will be a felicitous augury for freedom from
diseases.
The 6th house position of Lagna Lord in general will give
abundant wealth and respect apart from royal status. There is,
however, a possibility of more than one marriage or losing the
spouse early.
<tt^ qrof ftft q sftefa i
qr ST ;jqtefq trmoii

Chapter 24
7. If the ascendant lord is a malefic and be in the 7th the
native’s wife will not live (long). If the planet in question be a
benefic, one will wander aimlessly, face penury and be dejected.
He will alternatively become a king (if the said planet is strong).
^TTrT: fegfirsufeSTR^t I
^ «1T^RTT: tic 1 1
8. If the ascendant lord is in the 8th, the native will be an
accomplished scholar, be sickly, thievish, be given to much
anger, be a gambler and will join others’ wives.
Notes : The only good effect of the ascendant lord being
in the 8th house is one’s academic accomplishment. This
position will cause Balarishta or child mortality. The native’s
health will be poor. He will be a repository of misfortunes.
He will sec many deaths in the family to his grief. His married
life will be a hell. He will be a profligate and will incur illfame and disrepute. Penury will ever be after him.
In case of Aries and Libra ascendant, this approach for
evil results should be avoided and results declared after further
scanning the radix.
smtTir sTtcft i
9. If the ascendant lord is in the 9th, the native will be
-fortunate, dear to people, be a devotee of Sri Vishnu, be skilful,
eloquent in speech and be endowed with wife, sons and wealth.
Notes : One will gain abundantly from his father. Every
undertaking of his will be fruitful. He will be well-disposed to
his co-born, These are additional results of the ascendant lord
occupying the 9th house.
vT'%9T 371^ 3TTcT: |
5 T% sum: RfTfafTRit T 113 oil
10. If the ascendant lord is in the 10th, the native will be
endowed with paternal happiness, royal honour (or patronage),
fame among men and will doubtlessly have self-earned wealth.

Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
Notes : The 10th house occupied by the ascendant lord
denotes obtainment of co*bom. The native "will possess ambitions and will prosper in his pursuits.
mmt «hri: wnnrnfanKi
11. If the ascendant lord is in the 1 1th, the native will
always be endowed with gains, good qualities, fame and many
wives.
II^D
12. If the ascendant lord is in the 12th and be devoid of
benefic aspcct/conjunction, the native will be bereft of physical
happiness, will spend unfruitfully and be given to much anger.
Notes : If the ascendant lord is in the 12th, the native’s
life will not be prosperous. He will be addicted to gambling,
thieving, debauchery and other vices. He will expend
wastefully.
»TRT: V
13. EFFECTS OF 2ND LORD IN VARIOUS HOUSES
(upto sloka 24) : If the 2nd lord is in the ascendant, the native
will be endowed with sons and wealth, be inimical to his family,
lustful, hard-hearted and will do others’ jobs.
Notes : One will be fraudulent and will face financial
upheavals with the lord of the 2nd occupying the ascendant.
These evil effects will not wholly apply to Capricorn ascendant,
but with some modifications.
*ra**a: i
14. If the 2nd lord is in the 2nd, the native will be wealthy,
proud, will have two or more wives and be bereft of progeny.

Chapter 24
sriHt toft »rf?r*rf5f ^ \
vruTvihft ^qrn^t nt mi
15. If the 2nd lord is in the 3rd, the native will be
valorous, wise, virtuous, lustful and miserly— all these when
related to a benefic. If related to a malefic, the native will be a
heterodox.
Notes : Should the 2nd lord be in the 3rd house, t'ie
native will be ill-related to females and will earn through pro*atutes. If a malefic is related to the 2nd lord in the 3rd, the
person concerned will not be God-fearing and will have dirty
conduct.
gv»n
16. If the 2od lord is in the 4th, the native will acquire all
kinds of wealth. If the 2nd lord is . exalted and be conjunct
Jupiter, one will be equal to a king.
Notes : The placement of the 2nd lord in the 4th will also
produce a heterodox and one of questionable character.
The exaltation of the 2nd lord in the 4th applies only to
Libra ascendant Obviously the sage suggests that the exaltation
of Mars in the company af Jupiter (in debilitation) in the 4th
house will prove extremely favourable for a Libra native conferring near-re galhood. It is also not unmeaningful to conclude
that the 2nd lord exalted and joining Jupiter becoming a good
omen for any ascendant.
srni^
17. If the 2nd lord is in the 5th the native will be wealthy.
Not only the native, but also his sons, will be intent on earning
wealth.
Notes : The 2nd lord going to the 5th house will make
one resort to trickery. His family life will not be happy. He
will not be kind to others. He will be very lustful and will be
prone to lose a child prematurely.

Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
ftgiwnp$ o?nji
18. If the 2nd lord is kx the 6th along with a benefic the
native will gain wealth through his enemies; if be with a .malefic,
there will be loss through enemies apart from ihutilation of
shanks.
Notes : There will be severe loss of wealth through thefts
and servants. He will have defects of privities. These are
further effects of the 2nd lord occupying the 6th house.
aim: 'TTSRTRt l
cTFi *rrcf * oifinnfoftiiKti
19. If the 2nd lord is in the 7th, the native will be addicted
to others* wives and be a doctor. If a malefic is related to the
said placement by conjunction or by aspect, the native’s wife
will (also) be of questionable character.
Notes : The 2nd lord in the 7th house and related to a
dire malefic will render the mother of the native being of
questionable character according to some hoary authors. However, the 4th house and its lord deserve a special attention in the
context of mother’s disposition.
prc* ^ n^oii
20. If the 2nd lord is in the 8th, the native will be
endowed with abundant land and wealth. But he will have
limited marital felicity and be bereft of happiness from his
elder brother.
Emtqrn^ tRiwuft <T£ <
ne* cftftwscnfsrfa; 113*11
21. If the 2nd lord is in the 9th, the native will be wealthy,
diligent, skilful, sick during childhood and will later on be happy
(i. e. healthy) and will visit shrines, observing religious code etc.
jTRfT 3im: qfarT: I

Chapter 24 1V5
22. If the 2nd lord is in the 10th, the native v/lll be
libidinous, honourable, learned, will have many wives and much
wealth but be bereft of filial happiness.
CritafrPTtft HTtf vtfdiTTH 5Tra% TO 113 W
23. If the 2nd lord is in the 11th, the native, will have all
kinds of wealth, be ever diligent, honourable and famous.
Notes : The native will undergo miseries due to ill-health
during childhood and with the march of time he will be
endowed with health throughout, if the 2nd lord is in the 1 ltli
house.
ITT mUKeftWH jrfjr n^u
24. If the 2nd lord is in the 12th, the native will be
adventurous, be devoid of wealth, and be interested in •ther’s
wealth while his eldest child will not keep him happy.
Notes : According to the saying "facets sJpriNrfo trjtwMeaning that if the 2nd lord is in the 12th house wi two
or more (favourable) planets, the native will be exl cmcly
wealthy. This is found to be a sound clue in actual cases.
However, the 2nd lord lonely in the 12th is bad for riches,
except in the case of Aries ascendant with Venus in the 1 2th in
high dignity.
%^T5T: 3TT<Tt f5WT|[Htsfq ^f^TFT IRltb
25. EFFECTS OF 3RD LORD IN VARIOUS HOUSES
(upto sloka 36) : If the 3rd lord is in the ascendant, th native
will have self-made wealth, be disposed to worship, be wlorous
and be intelligent although devoid of learning.
Notes : One will have a lean body with the as^ndant
having the 3rd lord in it. He will have such sexual lirtthat
cannot be subdued. He will be short-tempered and ill-disposed
fo others.

196 Brihat Parasara Hot a Sastra
fipfft qgani ftft r^pnf^r: i
wircwft wat* 113 v*
26. If the 3rd lord is in the 2nd, the native will be
corpulent, devoid of valour, will not make much efforts, be not
happy and will have an eye on others’ wives and others’ wealth.
Notes : Should the 3rd lord be in the 2nd house, one will
resort to unnatural sexual means of gratification. He will not
show enthusiasm in his undertakings.
27 If the 3rd lord is in the 3rd, the native will be
endowed with happiness through co-bom and will have wealth
and sons, be cheerful and extremely happy.
nfasr pT «:ircu
28. If the 3rd lord is in the 4th, the native will be happy,
wealthy and intelligent but will acquire a wicked spouse.
TTitri aw
29. If the 3rd lord is in the 5th, the native will have sons,
and be virtuous. If in the process the 3rd lord be conjunct or
aspected by a malefic, the native will have a formidable wife.
30. If the 3rd lord is in the 6th, the native will be inimical
to his co-boro, be affluent, will not be well-disposed to his
maternal unde and be dear to bis maternal aunt.
Notes * The student’s attention is drawn to the statement
of the text, v/z. mgtTPfV ftzfr TC which been without any
misconception, rendered to denote the native’s being ‘dear to
his maternal aunt”. At the same time, Sanketa Nidhi while
commenting on the 3rd lord’s placement in the 6th house gives

Chapter 24
an overt clue to the native being fond of physicallp matiny with
his maternal aunt. One wonders whether sage Parasara covertly
points out to one and the same thing. Possibly so, for the Sanskrit expression is so flexible.
5:5ft q^ft^r^ft srmft trotcuHH
31. If the 3rd lord is in the 7th, the native will be interested in serving the king and be not happy during boyhood but
at the end of his life.
Notes : It is not a favourable indication to have an independent profession or business when the 3rd lord is in the 7th
house. The 7th denptes one’s public relationship, business
prospects etc. and an evil lord is not welcome there. As a
result, the native will be destined to be in the employ of others.
Further, this position will give a tendency to steal. The
native will incur a legal award like death.
*ranrs>nft*ft * h^h
32. If the 3rd lord is in the 8th, the native will be a thief,
will derive his livelihood serving others and will die at the gate
of royal palace.
rnrft wfsnoVft ftg: i
33. If the 3rd lord is in the 9th, the native will lack
paternhl bliss, will make fortunes through wife and will enjoy
progenic and other pleasures.
Notes : Although one may have fortunes and progenic
happiness, one will unendingly feel miserable if the 3rd lord
occupies the 9th bouse. His father will be a contemptible
person.
vTTcT: I
Tfl: 11 ^ VII

{£8 Brthat Parasara flora Sastra
34. If <he 3rd lord is in the 10th, the native will have all
kinds of happiness and self-made wealth and be interested in
nurturing wicked females.
mmt qff n ki m mpnT hst i
35. If the 3rd lord is in the 1 1th, the native will always
gain in trading, be intelligent although not literate, be advcnturous and will serve others.
Notes : One will have an emaciated body with the 3rd
lord’s position in the 1 1th house. He will incur misunderstandings with others and will not be a worthy friend.
fan ?!FT WH
36. If the 3rd lord is in the 12th, the native will spend on
evil deeds, will have a wicked father and will be fortunate
through a female (or wife).
Notes : The 3rd lord going to the 12th will bestow every
happiness in life. Yet the native will feel highly miserable.
This view is held by Ramadayalu.
This placement will further spoil the prospects of eo-born.
If Mars also joins the said 3rd lord, sustenance of co-born will
be doubtful.
r<re r^ fr * rf q?T: »
mg: u^n
37. EFFECTS OF THE 4TH LORD IN VARIOUS
HOUSES ( upto sloka 48) : If the 4th lord is in the ascendant,
the native will be endowed with learning, virtues, ornaments,
lands, conveyances and maternal happiness.
Notes ; As a result of the 4th lord coming to occupy the
ascendant, the subject will acquire incomparable, learning in
various branches. However, there is an element of risk of
k«cing deprived of one’s ancestral properties. After leading
xiarritd life for some time, the native will give up worldly life
ad may turn into an ascetic.

Chapter 24 *99
5TTfft 'Rtnt «4uni['wd: \
fg *g q % Tt *TPft $tsmiP4d. U^clt
38. If the 4th lord is in the 2nd, the native will eryoy
pleasures, all kinds of wealth, family life and honour and be
adventurous. He will be cunning in disposition.
Notes : Tho 2nd house tenanted by the 4th lord will
bring abundant gains from mother and maternal relatives. The
mother of the native will be able to receive great help from her
brothers 'and sisters. The subject will join evil company and
face some risks. He will -build up self-earned wealth and his lust
for lucre will never be subdued.
fe'w*
39. If the 4th lord is in the 3rd, the native will be valorous.
He will have servants, be liberal, virtuous and charitable and
will possess self-earned wealth. He will be free from diseases.
gg*: tnsft siftcvt livon
40. If the 4th lord is in the 4th, the native will be a
minister and will possess all kinds of wealth. He will be skilful,
virtuous, honourable, learned, happy and be welldisposed to his
spouse.
g**nar^ ^ i
faCTHWeft T** ^ u*s»i
41. If the 4th lord is in the 5th, the native will be happy
and be liked by all. He will be devoted to Sri Vishnu, be
virtuous, honourable and will have self-earned wealth.
^trtsTvwTTj * 5*n: \\^\\
42. If the 4th lord is in the 6th, the native will be devoid
of maternal happiness, be given to anger, be a thief and a
conjurer (or magician), be independent in action and be illdisposed.

Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
Notes ; The native will be brought up by another female
in the place of his mother. He will be careless about his own
matters. He will have litigations on account of properties.
His mother will be sickly in constitution and be a source of
worry to the family members. He will not be welldisposed
toward his mother. These are additional effects for the 6th
house placement of the 4th lord in a nativity.
SfTcft fasmmfaa: I
fnwri *r«ra? 11*311
43. If the 4th lord is in the 7th, the native will be endowed
with a high degree of education, will sacrifice his patrimony and
be akin to the dumb in an assembly.
Notes : When the 4th lord occupies the 7th house, the
person concerned will not enjoy paternal properties. He may
either lose or sacrifice the same. He will not be a householder
for a long lime aqd will give up his family burdens sooner or
later as a husband and as a father. Though he will achieve a
great degree of education, he will be unable to express himself
before a group of men.
5TRT; wfcni**U
44. If the 4th lord is in the 8th the native will he devoid
of domestic and other comforts, will not enjoy much parental
happiness and be equal to a neuter.
Notes : The 4th lord’s relegation to the 8th house will
affect the progenic ability of the native and he will not be able
to carnally satisfy his spouse. His happiness in household life
will not be appreciable; some problem or the other will accost
him. His education will face many an obstacle. His childhood
will be with many difficulties.
45. If the 4th lord is in the 9th, the native will be dear to
one and all, be devoted to God, be virtuous, honourable and
endowed with every kind of happiness.

Chapter 24 201
TtsnrRft RTt 'r#?t i
qwM fsRtfoR: irv^u
46. If the 4th lord is in the 10th, the native will eqjoy royal
honours, be an alchemist, be extremely pleased, will enjoy
pleasures and will conquer his five senses.
Notes : One will be professionally happy and prosperous
with the 4th lord in the 10th house. He will have abundant
jelf-made properties. He will, however, lack maternal happiness
if the 4th lord in the said house is not happily placed.
?TTWT STTrft gccrOiTTOTfJSrT: \
TTCTT TrTMOfvaU
47. If the 4th lord is in the 1 1th, the native will have fear
of secret disease, be liberal, virtuous, charitable and helpful to
others.
Notes : Some say that the 1 1th house having the 4th lord
will ensure freedom from diseases while our sage attributes secret
diseases (like venereal affliction or any other diseases caused by
physical union). Apparently the sage does not prefer the 4th
lord (lord of happiness) getting relegated to the 11th (the 8th
from the 4th),
graft *T?: M*«; 11
48. If the 4th lord is in the 12th the native Will be devoid
of domestic and other comforts, wiJ 1 have vices and be foolish
and Indolent.
Notes : Complete absense of happiness, particularly
paternal, will come to pass. One will be bereft of masculine
vigour. His mother is of doubtful character. These are
additional effects for the 4th lord being in the 12th house,
according to classical works.
qlttf sraft faffFJ gSRSTTfaR: I
qqfaRITO TOWRTO: inf£U

Rrihat Parasara flora Sastra
49. EFFECTS OF THE 5th LORD IN VARIOUS HOUSES
(upto sloka 60) : If the 5th lord is in the ascendant, the native
will be scholarly, be endowed with progenic happiness, be a
miser, be crooked, and will steal others’ wealth.
\ Notes : The native having the 5th lord in the ascendant
will be of unsteady disposition. Though progenic happiness is
denoted by our text, there are other exponents warning of an
unpleasant situation in respect of one of the native’s sons.
Qdlf'Tfl: I
gtWTT HKoll
50. If the 5th lord is in the 2nd, the native will have many
sons and wealth, be a pater familias, be honourable, be attached
to his spouSe and be famous in the world.
Notes : Maharshi Parasara praises very highly the placement of the 5th lord in the 2nd house and attributes worldwilde
fame for the native. It is actually true in the case of Smt.
Indira Gandhi, Prime Minister of India, whose map of birth is
furnished below : born on 19th November 1917 (Monday) at
2317 hrs 1ST at Allahabad, &1E54 25N28.
Jup (R)
Ketu
£asi
Moon
Mars
Rahu
Merc
Sun4-04

Chapter 24 203
Note the lord of the 5th Mars occupying the 2nd house in
Leo. The nativity has a number of splendid planetary influences
apart from this. As indicated by sage Parasara, the 2nd house
position of the 5th lord gave her a world-wide position and
honour for a very long number of years.
One can notice that the native will have ample opportunities of shining brilliantly, whether or not on a world level,
with the 2nd house placement of the 5th lord in strength and
dignity. Should there further be sufficient Raja Yogas etc. as
in the case of the example chart given, the native will be sure to
hit the headlines of the world press.
The position of the 5th lord in the 2nd will further cuase
asthma and catarrh and the native will have infected lungs. He
will become proud owing to his possessions.
*nq vrfidH stsrfiro \
51. If the 5th lord is in the 3rd, the native will be attacho
ed to his co-bom, be a talebearer and a miser, and be always
interested in his own work.
Notes : The native will further be an imposter. He will
not be helpful to anybody in any manner.
mqfcjw *J*f3*^ TT5ftsm?sis«WT *T5: 11 * 31 !
52. If the 5th lord is in the 4th, the native will be happy,
endowed with maternal happiness, wealth and intelligence, and
fce a king or a minister or a preceptor.
Notes : A very long life will come to the native’s mother.
The native will start acquiring prosperity, right from his youth.
He will also own a posh or beautiful house. These are additional
effects that will come to pass with the 4th house having the 5th
lord in it.
*I*TT** XK: \
53. If the 5th lord is in the 5th, the native will hava
progeny if related to a bencfic; there will be no issues if malcflc

Brihat Parasara Mora Sastrd
is related to the said 5th lord placed in 5th. The 5th lord in 5th
will, however, make one virtuous and dear to friends.
*Knqccfts3i*T srat roftmnftsqwniioui
54. If the 5th lord is in the 6th, the native will obtain such
sons who will be equal to his enemies or will lose them, or will
acquire an adopted or purchased son.
Notes : Maharshi Parasara enunciates four different possibilities if the 5th lord is in the 6th house.
1. Obtaining sons that will be inimical to the native : The
' 6th house denotes one’s enemies. The planet occupying the 6th
will signify the class of enemy. 5th lord indicates sons, 9th lord
indicates father, 4th lord indicates mother and so on and so
forth. Such relative will be inimical .to the native corresponding
to the rulcrship of the occupant of the 6th house.
2. Loss of children : The 6th is the maraka sthana for
children as it is the 2nd from the 5th. Hence loss of progeny is
denoted.
3. Obtaining an adopted issue : Normally this occurs
when one is unable to have progeny of his own loins, or falls to
have living children. Point 2 above answers thp circumstances.
4. Purchase of a child : This is also like adoption. Hence
it follows that the situation of the 5th lord in the 6th house
is not very desirable, of course excepting Saturn for Virgo
ascendant.
It is also not advisable for a female to have her 9th lord
in the 10th house from the point of view of filial happiness.
qNt t
IIXXM
55. If the 5th lord is in the 7th, fhe native will be
honourable, very religious, endowed with progenic happiness
and be helpful to others.
Notes : With the 5th lord going to the 7th house, the
native will be tall in stature and will speak only truth. He will
honestly serve his employer, and his dealings will be honest. He
will be firm in disposition.

Chapter 24
* ^sqfaci: ast^U
56. If the 5th lord is in the 8th, the native will not have
much progenic happiness, be troubled by cough and pulmonary
disorders, be given to anger and be devoid of happiness.
*mq»r *r i
?n a fasma: j^w iiit'sn
57. If the 5th lord is in the 9th, the native will be a prince
or equal to him, will author treatises, be famous and will shine
in his raceNotes : The placement of the 5th lord in the 9th house is
a good augury for writership, authorship, editorship and the
like. See the following horoscope of the most venerable
Jagadguru Adi Sankaracharya.

Brihat Barasara Hora Sastra
sitions in an endeavour tore-stand Hinduism on firm grounds
are of perennial importance and his horoscope should serve a
perfect example of our above rule.
I have given another horoscope dealing with authorship on
page 88 of “Doctrines of Suka Nadi— Retold” which is as
under :
Born on 21.5-1944 at 1902 hrs War time, 13N40, 79E20.
Merc
Ven
Moon
Sun
Sat
Rasi
Rahti
Mars
Jup
Ketu
A sc
The native has authored a number of books on a subject
dear to his heart. Mark the 5th lord Jupiter in exaltation in
the 9th.
Apart from the 5th lord being in the 9th for fame via
authorship, the 7th house having the 5th loni will equally
contribute to such achievements. See the horoscope of late
Sri C. G. Rajan on the next page.
The birth data are : bom 5th July 1894 AD as taken from
his preface given to ‘Cancer Ascendant Volume* of Saptarshi
Nadi series of Madras Govt. Publications. Sri C. G. Rajan
did a g r eat service to the lovers of astrology by bringing out
dozens of volumes on astrology in Tamil and English. He had

Chapter 24
Mars
Rahu
Jup
Ven
Sun
Rasi
Moon
Merc
Asc
Sat
Ketu
also edited a couple of volumes in Tamil of Saptarshi Nadis on
behalf of the Oriental Manuscripts Library, University of
Madras. He had as well produced a couple of astronomical
treatises like Siddhanta Raja Siromani (Graha Karanam) containing planetary tables from 3200 BC to 3100 AD. Note the 5th
lord in the 7th in his natus along with Venus.
TROTHS fj? StTUft I
58. If the 5th lord is in the 10th, the native will enjoy a
Rajayoga and various pleasures, and be very fhmous.
Notes : For enjoying a superior degree of material benefits like wealth, position, fame etc. the 5th lord is the best
placed in the 10th house than elsewhere. This one position
with sterling qualities will equal many Rajayogas. It is a prerequisite of course that in such a placement the 5th lord is
very close to the meridian, if not exactly on the meridian,
preferably with exaltation or such other dignities. If he is placed
in an enemy’s house or such other afflictions tormenting him, he
will prove rather adverse than a Rajayoga maker.

Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
Hi’fnr swft ftrarrn swrevre: t
sW to? ?T5R«> 5|5^ennff?RT: iixtu
59. If the 5th lord is in the 11th, the native will be
learned, dear to people, be an author of treatises, be very
skilful and be endowed with many sons and wealth.
Notes : The 5th lord’s station in the 1 1th house will keep
one free from misfortunes and unhappiness. He will be of
helping nature. His academic achievements will be abundant.
He will be happy in respect of his children, but the said 11th
house should be a friendly sign for the 5th lord ( vide rule 48,
p, 96 of Doctrines of Suka Nadi— Retold). If the 5th lord is
inimically placed in the 1 1th house, for example the Sun in
Aquarius in the 11th in the case of Aries ascendant, the progeny
will be inimical to the native. However, obtainment of progeny
will not be obstructed in that case even.
Mi aiRT: l
jfaiynfNsftswr t^°n
60. If the 5th lord is in the 12th, the native will be bereft
of happiness from his own sons, will' have an adopted or
purchased son.
Notes : The placement of the 5th lord in the 12th in
terminal house will cause various kinds of miseries in the matter
of children. One may not obtain a child at all, or may incur
inimical relations with his own child. Adoption will surely
dome to pass if Saturn or Mercury ruling the 5th is in the 12th.
In other cases, the disposition of Saturn/Mercury/Jupiter will
have to be seen while the 5th lord is in the 12th. Further
grave defects with the 5th lord in the 12th are difficulties in
digestion and abdominal disorders.
STTcft \
to iiwi
61. EFFECTS OF THE 6TH LORD IN VARIOUS
HOUSES (upto sloka 72) t If the 6th lord is in the ascendant,
the native will be sickly, famous, inimical to his own men, rich,
honourable, adventurous and virtuous.

Chapter 24 209
Notes : The 6th lord in the ascending sign will bring various
diseases to the native. He will incur adverse effects in the matter
of acquisition of progeny.
Venus in Taurus ascendant will particularly give benefic
results in full measure as stated. He will also not stall obtainment of children. There will, however, be more daughters than
sons, while the first child will be a male.
TTtjft ^rTT ?T?T II^^M
62. If the 6th lord is in the 2nd, the native will be adventurous, famous among his racemen, will live in alien countries
(or places), be happy, be a skilful speaker and be always
interested in his own work.
Notes : The native will further be skilful in dealing with
hoary lore. His financial position will be somewhat shaky. He
will enjoy good health.
fTjni: 3TRT: 'SpM f^5*nrfairr: \
WrTT VlaKiHttlCT ||^||
63. If the 6th lord is in the 3rd, the native will be given to
anger, be bereft of courage, inimical to all of his co-born and
will have disobedient servants.
Notes : The 3rd house containing the 6th lord will not
serve the native with intelligence at all times. To wit, he will
be partly deprived of benefits due to his intelligence. He will
also not be steady in disposition.
m3: gtafofaa: \
fimm »I^*U
64. If the 6th lord is in the 4th, the native will be devoid
of maternal happiness, be intelligent, be a talebearer, be jealous,
fickle-minded and very rich. '
gmft am am Ercifom i
33ft mrof mrfma: ii^sui

Brihat Par asm a Hora Sastra
65. If the 6th lord is in the 5th, the native will have
fluctuating finances. He will incur enmity with his sons and
friends. He will be happy, selfish and kind.
ftjwwrt a * i
*t«t trcifoim u^n
66. If the 6th lord is in the 6th, the native will have enmity
with the group of his kinsmen but be friendly to others and will
enjoy mediocre happiness in matters like wealth.
Notes : The native will enjoy happiness of conveyances
and be free from diseases. His life span will also be considerably lengthy. These are additional effects for the 6th lord in
the 6th itself.
Tirg^tfriTcT: i
un^ct: iiv»h
67. If the 6th lord is in the 7th, the native will be deprived
of happiness through wedlock. He will be famous, virtuous,
honourable, adventurous and wealthy.
Notes : Apart from denying marital happiness, the 6th
lord’s occupancy of the 7th house will dissatisfy the native
in the matter of progeny. His own spouse will be his sworn
enemy.
68. If the 6th lord is in the 8th, the native will be sickly,
inimical, will desire others’ wealth, be interested in others’ wives
and be impure (or degraded).
Notes : It is not good for one’s purity of character if the
8th house is occupied by the 6th lord. The native will be ever
incurring enmity with others and be not happy. He will have
a green eye on others’ learning and an eye on others’ wealth.

Chapter 24 2 \ \
69. If the 6th lord is in the 9th, the native will trade in
wood and stones (qiinur also means poison), and will have
fluctuating professional fortunes.
Notes : The Maharshi seems to suggest that one wilt deal
in building construction material by sa>ing that one will sell
wood and stones with the 6th lord in the 9th. It will further
cause ups and downs in one’s livelihood.
70. If the 6th lord is in the 10th, the native will be wellknown among his men, will not be respectfully disposed to his
father and will be happy in foreign countries. He will be a
gifted speaker.
Notes : One will be greatly valorous and learned in Sastras
(or ancient lore). There will be litigations on account of
ancestral properties. Dutifulness and living in foreign place
will also come to pass. These are in furtherance to the sage’s
views for the placement of the 6th lord in the 10th house.
71. If the 6th lord is in the 1 1th, the native will gain
wealth through his enemies, be virtuous, adventurous and will
be somewhat bereft of progenic happiness.
Notes : One will, to some extent, be happy and to yet some
extent be unhappy if the 6th lord occupies the 11th house.
This is in regard to progeny. There is also a view that this
position can wholly deny acquisition of a child.
cRTT: iha^n
72. If the 6th lord is in the 12th the native will always
spend on vices, be hostile to learned people and will torture
living beings.
Notes : The native will be of questionable . morality and
will ever be mtent on deriving sexual pleasures from other
females as well.

Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
3TRT: *TMR3 I
5^ jnft ^RR^nfRcT u^Hii
73. EFFECTS OF THE 7TH LORD IN VARIOUS
HOUSES (upto sloka 81) : If the 7th lord i9 in the ascendant,
the native will go to others' wives, be wicked, skilful, devoid of
courage and afflicted by windy diseases.
Notes : The native will not be firm in his words and
actions. He will impart courage in others although he himself
will be bereft of courage. So say learned astrologers in the
context of the ascendant being occupied by the 7th lord.
SRH 3T!rft 1
^ HFR: II'SYU
74. If the 7th lord is in the 2nd, the native will have
many wives, will gain wealth through his wife and be procrastinating in nature.
Notes : This position will further give corrupt character
making one addicted to many women. He will lose his wife
early. His prosperity will ascend with his marriage.
3TT7T STTeft ffl I
gsft jkhr g^sfq sfafa uv»xu
75. Jf the 7th lord is in the 3rd, the native will face loss
of children and sometimes with great difficulty there will exist a
living son. There is also the possibility of birth of a daughter
(who will sustain).
Notes : Three salient features in regard to progeny arc
denoted by sage Parasara for the 3rd house placement of the 7th
lord. Firstly, loss of children in general. Secondly, possibility
of (rarely) acquiring a daughter. Lastly, no possibility of having
a living son. In fine, probably a female child will live long to
keep the native happy, while male children will pass away as
they are born.

Chapter 24
76. If the 7th lofd is in the 4th, the wife of the native
will not be under his control. He will be fond of truth, be
intelligent and religious. He will suffer from dental diseases.
Notes : A disobedient wife follows the 4th house position
of the 7th lord. This is Maharshi’s instruction. However,
Ramadayalu states in this context thus, c rrfo^ff?*TTf*Trrr
meaning that the native’s wife will brilliantly shine with chastity
or devotion to husband. Lord Rama’s sacred horoscope is a
classic example having Cancer ascendant with Saturn, the 7th
lord, in the 4th— of course in exaltation. I do not possess
even the slightest competence to say that the Maharshj's view is
untenable.
In this context, however, I quote a horoscope from
“Saptarshi Nadi” (Volume for Tcurus ascendant). The whole
Nadi was a product of intercourse between four groups of sages,,
each group having seven great sages, in the benign presence of
Parvati, a consort ot Lord Siva. In the seminar on Taurus
ascc..dant, Parasara was also a participant. The horoscope in
particular (bearing No. 25 in the original volume) was analysed
by Parasara himself as one of the seven Rishis in dialogue. See
the nativity :
Jup
Saturn
Ascdt
Ketu
RASI
Merc
Sun
Ven
Mars
Rahu
Moon

Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
Dealing with the above horoscope, Parasara describes
the native's spouse thus : “she will be somewhat shorttempered. She will deliver auspicious words. She will be dear
to her husband. She will live begetting fame from all the four
directions. She will be fortunate. She will be free from any
blemish (or Dosha). She will be dark in complexion. She will
feed the needy. In beauty, she will be akin to Rathi (the
extremely charming spouse of the extremely charming Cupid,
the Hindu God of beauty and son of Maha Vishnu), She will
possess many ornaments and be intelligent. She will be modest
and will not have any desire for other men (than her spouse, i.e.
the native in question).” This is how sage Parasara describes
the wife of the native in question in verses 27-29 ibid. Though
no direct reason has been attributed for the chastity of the
spouse, we cannot ignore the disposition of the 7th lord, particularly with debilitated Moon in the 7th. The 7th lord is in the
4th giving the native a spouse who would be extremely devout
proving an asset to the husband. As such the view of our
present sloka in regard to the spouse is at the outset defective.
Thus the wife cannot be out of the control of the native. The
Chaukambha edition also clearly states that the native’s wife will
not be chaste, see ^TTfr^^rRrSTjrr and hence the version of our
sloka is also rightly interpreted.
tnrvr sraynfNRr: i
77. If tne 7th lord is in the 5th, native will be honourable,
endowed with all (i.e. seven principal) virtues, always delighted
and endowed with all kinds of wealth.
Notes : I have observed two salient features in the 7th
lord’s getting into the 5th house. These are : (1) Delay and
disappointments in married life. The conjugal life seldom proves
happy. (2) Severe affliction to progenic indications. Either
there will be unhappiness on account of children or loss of
children.
The effects mentioned by the sage, viz. virtues, wealth,
honour and (general) happiness will also come to pass. The
happiness about marriage and progeny will visibly be absent.

Chapter 24 * 215
This will further give rise to the native’s association with
great people. He will be endowed with boosted spirits.
78. If the 7th lord is in the 6th, the native will beget a
sickly wife, be inimical to her, given to anger and devoid of
happiness.
Notes : The 7th lord in the 6th will reduce the general
happiness of the native apart from severely inflicting his conjugal
bliss. His own health will be poor while his wife will be weak
in constitution. She will equally have adverse health conditions
The native will coaleasce with harlots.
s it«t *rcgsnfs*?r: i
ttftt STK PflqqH Hvsfcll
79. If the 7th lord is in the 7th, the native will be endowed
with happiness through wife, be courageous, skilful and intelligent but only afflicted by windy diseases.
Notes : By usiog the word in the text meaning
“only”, the sage hints that the only possible defect in the 7th
lord's placement in the 7tb itself will be troubles from windy
diseases (like rheumatism, artheritis etc.).
One undesirable quality will, however, be found in the
native, contrary to no adverse indication in the text, and that
is his addiction to other females. This is an exception to Venus
occupying the 7th house identical with Taurus or Libra.
trrcg*Ttf*5tcT: 1
m qfcf q tVwkttsfi |:tftensfq n vgm ucou
80. If the 7th lord is in the 8th, the native will be deprived
of marital happiness. His wife will be troubled by diseases, be
devoid of good disposition and will not obey the native.
Notes : As the 7th lord goes to the 8th house, the native’s
spouse will be liable to incur afflictions to her longevity.
However, marriage may bring some pecuniary gains for the
native.

5 16 Brihat Parasara Horn Sastra
?7T*T u4*l *TFTT**>fa: ^RTW: I
5nm?rcPrn sncft jr:hc?u
81. If the 7th lord is in the 9th, the native will have union
with many women, be weli-disposed to his own wife and will
have many undertakings (or assignments).
qj4*n**$ imn smgni \
prcr Effort iu^ii
82. If the 7th lord is in the 10th, the native will beget a
disobedient wife, will be religious and endowed with wealth,
sons etc.
trtn *R*«ra*rnm: i
^ 5p|: lie: ^ II
83. If the th lord is in the 1 1th, the native will gain wealth
through his wife, be endowed with less happiness from sons etc.
and will have daughters.
Notes : If the 7th lord is in the II th house, there is a
possibility of the native losing his children to his grief. He will
obtain (more) daughters. His own sons will be hostile to him
and will cause him no happiness. Living son also seems to be
very remote a probability.
TTT^T vfri: ^7 \
nmfsfa *T*Tsfatt *TOI Me: VI I
84. If the 7th lord is in {the 12th, the native will incur
penury, be a miser and his livelihood will be related to clothes.
His wife will be a spendthrift.
Nrat ipjrt^cT: u^km
85. EFFECTS OF THE 8TH LORD IN VARIOUS
HOUSES (upio sloka 96) : If the 8th lord is in the ascendant,
the native will be devoid of physical felicity and will suffer from
wounds. He will be hostile to gods and brahmins (or religious
people).

Chapter 24
«R 5T^T H vHRft UcVl
86. If the 8th lord is in the 2nd, the native will be devoid
of bodily vigour, will enjoy a little wealth and will not regain
lost wealth.
’Sngwtej *T I
*11^^ 9tn<<rnri: llc'all
87. If the 8th lord is in the 3rd, the native will be devoid
of fraternal happiness, be indolent and devoid of servants and
strength.
HcctU
88. If the 8th lord is in the 4th, the child will be deprived
of its mother. He will be devoid of a house, lands and
happiness and will doubtlessly betray his friends.
Notes : Maharshi Parasara uses the word “fspjj” meaning
child. Hence it is apparent that the native will lose his mother
in the very childhood if the 8th lord is in the 4th house.
¥[?nn*F<R ST^TTERt \
^Tsr«> Safari: He; tn
89. If the 8th lord is in the 5th, the native will be dullwitted, will have limited number of of children, be ldnglived
And wealthy.
Notes : One’s financial acquisitions, though abundant,
will hot be steady and be subjected to fluctuations. Though his
intentions and aetions will be bona fide, they will go unrecognized. He will not be steady in disposition and will off and on
change his line of thinking. He will not enjoy filial bliss.
These are additional hints for the 8th lord’s stationing in the 5th
house at birth.
^ttvir stor ntoii

Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
90. If the 8th lord is in the 6th, the native will win over
his enemies, be afflicted by diseases and during childhood will
incur danger through snakes and water.
„ Notes : The position of the 8th lord in the 6th house is a
sureshot of success over enemies and in litigations. The native
will be reduced to danger through snakes, scorpions etc. during
childhood. Afterwards he will be free from such calamities.
However, this portion is not very favourable for one’s health.
This also indicates a long span of life.
qrcmspq wntoi tort i
siiqiT *
91. If the 8th lord is in the 7th, the native will have two
wives. If the 8th lord is conjunct a malefic in the 7th there
will surely be downfull in his business (qr livelihood).
Notes : The 7th house being occupied by the 8th lord is a
forerunner of difficulties in married life. There will be want, of
understanding between the native and his spouse. The constitution of the spouse will be quite weak and she will always be
subjected to uncertainties or dangers.
Outwardly the native may pose to be God-fearing, But he
will not be sincerely devoted to the Almighty. He will be an
expert in stealing others’ things.
tJcJTHW* TfldT qtqftjqT I
92. If the 8th lord is in the 8 th the native will be longlived. If the said planet be weak being in the 8th, the longevity
will be medium, while the native will be a thief, be blameworthy
and will blame others well.
Notes : In remaining in the 8th itself, the 8th lord should
be quite strong in Shadbala, so the native will be long-lived. If
he is bereft of strength, the native will not enjoy full span of
life.
The 8th house in occupation by its own lord will give a
spouse with questionable character. However she will be a
source of financial help to the native by her own earnings or

Chapter 24
properties. The native will inherit ancestral properties as well.
The evil effects cited above will not come to pass for an Aquarius
native having Mercury in exaltation in the 8th in Virgo. He
should be within the first half of Virgo to stall the said evils.
In the later portion of Virgo his potence considerably decreases.
93. If the 8th lord is in the 9th, the native will betray his
relig on, be a heterodox, will beget a wicked wife and will steal
others’ wealth.
Notes : The native will suffer frequent misfortunes and
downfalls. His prosperity will not be unobstructed and he will
find it difficult to cope up with professional adversities. His
father will suffer a cut in longevity. His understanding with his
father will be deficient. Progenic happiness will not come to
him in full measure. His wife will be of “questionable birth”.
She will go to other men and beget progeny. The native himself
will be addicted to others’ housewives. These are additional
effects of the 8th lord occupying the 9th house in a nativity. In
the case of a Gemini native, Saturn occupying the 9th house (his
Moolatrikona) will not produce these malefic effects. But his
benefic tendencies will be quite meagre.
94. If the 8th lord is in the I Oth the native will be devoid
ol paternal bliss, be a tale-bearer and be bereft of livelihood.
If there is an aspect in the process from a benefic, then these
evils will not mature.
Notes : There is a school of thought to say that the 8th
lord occupying the 9th house will cause the deaths of parents
right in ihe native’s boyhood. Apparently one will not enjoy
parental happiness for a long duration.
This placement of the 8th lord will produce all kinds of
miseries in livelihood, fortunes, fame, properties and the like.
According to Maharshi Parasara, if the 8th lord in the 10th
house is (well) related to a benefic, no evils will come to pass.

Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
?ttt^ smfsnr i
ZT&i f^Tcf 5TOTfa^ 1^5(11
95. If the 8th lord along with a malefic is in the 11th, the
native will be devoid of wealth and will be miserable in boyhood
but happy later on. Should the 8th lord be in conjunction with
a benefic and be in the 11th, the native will be long-lived.
Notes : The 8th lord in the 1 1th house, unless related to a
malefic, particularly by conjunction, will not deprive the native
of financial benefits. If he is alone in the 11th, he will not
prove that bad in this respect. Moreover, for Taurus ascendant,
Jupiter in the llth house is not baneful. And for Scorpio
ascendant, Mercury in the 1 lth will prove a highly favourable
bargain in the matter of wealth, fame, knowledge etc.
SWTTTOT sTjiTfter 1
96. If the 8th lord is in the 12th, the native will spend on
evil deeds and will incur a short life. More so, if .there be additionally a malefic in the said house.
5TTcft |
Safari: Retail
97. EFFECTS OF THE 9TH LORD IN VARIOUS
HOUSES (up to sloka 108) : If the 9th lord is in .the. ascendant,
the native will be fortunate (or prosperous), will be honoured by
the king, be virtuous, Charming, ; learned and honoured by the
public.
Notes : If the 9th lord is in the rising sign.ithe native will
hold a very high position which will bring him wealth and fame.
He will be free from enemies. A female .having the said
position will prove a worthy housewife and be rid Of afflictions
from other planetary sources. [(These effects .will not be enjoyed
by a Scorpio native.)
'TfrSrft STd^FrTVl: I
»im^ u$.mi

Chapter 24
98. If the 9th lord js in the 2nd, the native will be a
scholar, be dear to all, wealthy, sensuous and endowed with
happiness from wife, sons etc.
snrft \
c a o
99. If the 9th lord is in the 3rd, the native will be endowed
with fraternal blies, be wealthy, virtuous and charming.
TftfffT: l|? o oil
100. If the 9th lord is in the 4lh, the native will enjoy
houses, conveyances and happiness, will have all kinds of wealth
and be devoted to his mother.
g^facTTeft uftt 0*T?e*TT HT: H?c?(|
101. If the 9th lord is in the 5th the native will be endowed with sons and prosperity, devoted to elders, bold, charitable
and learned.
*TT3pTTf3*J^§fa: srefa: qtff'T: HIT It? o^(|
102. If the 9th lord is in the 6th, the native will enjoy
meagre prosperity, be devoid of happiness from maternal
relatives and be alw-ays troubled by enemies.
qftfanilMTfa fSMtiTlH; ll?o^H
103. O Brahmin, If the 9th lord is in the 7th, the native
will beget happiness after marriage, be virtuous, and famous.
Notes : One will further be able to achieve success in all
his undertakings. His prosperity will pick up after marriage.
The native will be not well disposed to his father. These are
additional effects due to the 7th house placement of the 9th
lord.

Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
TTR*TT*1fI qR> W%rT l
cft*T ^TrTfir 5TTq^ II 9 o ifll
104. If the 9th lord is in the 8th, the native will not be
prosperous and will not enjoy happiness from his elder brother.
Notes : Having got the 9th lord relegated to the 8th
house, one will be devoid of fortunes. He will face failures in all
his undertakings. He will not achieve professional and financial
stability. His father will primarily incur a cut in longevity.
The native will be a source of miseries to his elder brothers/
sisters.
A blessing in disguise with this position is a probable
inheritence of patrimony by the native.
105. If the 9th lord is in the 9th, the native will be endowed with abundant fortunes, virtues and beauty and will enjoy
much happiness from co-born.
Notes : Should the 9th lord be in the 9th itself, one will
obtain fraternal bliss. His co-bron will amass fortune. The
native himself will own properties in a large scale. He will
achieve easy success in each and every undertaking. His father
will play a significant role in his (i.e. the native’s) progress.
The native’s mother will be free from diseases. The native will
be nurtured by his maternal grand parents.
3fTrft 1
106. If the 9th lord is in the 10th, the native will be a king
or equal to him or be a minister or an army chief, be virtuous
and dear to all.
Notes : The sage suggests that with the 9th lord going to
the 10th the native will be either a king or a minister or an army
chief. Apparently, if the 9th lord is prepotent, one will enjoy
royal status. The strength proportionately falling down will
make the native enjoy comparatively lesser positions.

Chapter 24
wnft * t m wim * «R*mft faft i
Weft tJTpjRTfiT ^ gitT*Wffa II?o\3J|
107. If the 9th lord is in the 1 1th, the native will enjoy
financial gains day by day, be devoted to elders, virtuous and
meritorious in acts.
Notes : The native who has the 9th lord in the 11th house
will see increasing phases of fortunes and prosperity. The 9th
lord indicates one's prosperity and the 1 1th house gains. Hence
the said position is extremely favourable for material upliftment. This will, however, not apply to Gemini ascendant having
Saturn, the 9th lord, in the 11th house. On the contrary it
will prove highly detrimental for the prosperity of the native.
Additional effects due to the 9th lord’s placement in the
11th house (excepting of course Gemini ascending), high
honours, spiritual success, metaphysical achievements and gains
through father.
wfttft aurHwtwft mnrfrrfiwft wim i
WTOTZT ttftft fact? 11? o ell
108. If the 9th lord is in the 12th, the native will incur
loss of fortunes, will always spend on auspicious acts and will
become poor on account of entertaining guests.
Notes : The 9th lord in the 12th is said to cause lo&sof
wealth on account of entertaining guests. In the modern
.context lavish parties will take this role. The native will land in
financial difficulties on account of throwing parties and the
like.
This position is not also auspicious for the happiness of
elder brothers and sisters.
'juot tj^Tlrft H*ft vftff l
STcft fftft JTSft 'TTOT? U?o£U
109. EFFECTS OF THE 10TH LORD IN VARIOUS
HOUSES (upto sloka 120) : If the 10th lord is in the ascendant,
the native will be scholarly, famous, be a poet, will incur
diseases in boyhood and be happy later on. His wealth will
increase day by day.

Brihat Parasara Hora Sasfra .
Notes : The 10th lord occupying the ascendant is very
.favourable for riches giving a royal status to the native. The
following figure belongs to Sarabhoji Maharaja of Tanjore,
Rahu
Moon
Sat
RASI
Jup
Ven
Ketu
Mars
Ascdt
Sun
Merc
In the above chart, the lord of the lOih is Mercury who is
in the ascendant in own sign. The 2nd lord Venus is in the
company of exalted Jupiter. The native amassed a vast
kingdom and wealth. He established the Tanjore Saraswati
Mahal Library which is a treasure-house of literature of ancient
lore.
The ascendant having the 10th lord in it will contribute to
the native’s becoming well educated and learned. It will also
make one widely famous.
If there are no Balarishta combinations and if the 6th lord
is sufficiently favourable, then the position of the 10th lord in
the ascendant will not cause diseases in boyhood.
Trntji TOT* \
T HU R ft aRTFUra f'HTfeg’SSTSRT: 11?? oil

Chapter 24 225
110 Tfthe 10th lord is in the 2nd, the native will be
wealthy, virtuous, honoured by the king, charitable and will
enjoy happiness from father and others.
Notes : The placement of the 10th lord in the 2nd will
give immeasurable financial success through one’s own profession
or calling, apart from a large scale patrimony. (This will be
more effective for Gemini ascendant having the 10th lord
Jupiter in the 2nd in exaltation). His fame will spread in all
comers, according to other classical ^exponents.
The horoscope of Mr. Morarji Desai, an erstwhile Prime
Minister of India, as given below, is a perfect example to depict
professional fame etc.
Born on 29.2.1896 atl258 hrs (LMT) in Bulsar(Gujrat).
Asc
Sun
Rahu
RASI
Jup
Mars
Merc
Venus
Moon
Ketu
Saturn
The 10th lord is in the 2nd house speaking for the wide
political fame he earned through a number of years. He also
occupied the coveted position of Prime Minister. He has been
a successful person both financially and professionally. The
exaltation of Saturn in a trine, and of Jupiter in the 2nd have
been key factors in the native's success. The 11th house
receives its own lord’s aspect from exaltation sign giving gains in
a better manner.

Brihat Parasara flora Sastra
Also refer to the birth chart of Mrs 'indira Gandhi,
where Mars ruling the 10th house is in the 2nd house.
Except for a brief period, she continues to ' be the Prime
Minister from 1966 onwards. Her fame has spread in all
corners and she is considered to be one of the most skilful
administrators.
snffy i
N « c o
fsreuft g«nFq;;r:
111. If the 10th lord is in the 3rd, the native will enjoy
happiness from brothers and servants, be valorous, virtuous,
eloquent and truthful.
. 'tfHTT TcTM
yrsTR n^rrftr 1 1 ? \ ^ 1 1
112. If the 10th lord is in the 4th, the native will be happy,
be always interested in his mother’s welfare, will lord over
conveyances, lands and houses, be virtuous and wealthy.
WIT SROTT gjRRfq|l??3U
113. If the 1 0th lord is in the 5th, the native will be
endowed with alt kinds of learning, be always delighted and be
wealthy and endowed with sons.
Notes : The lord of the 10th house occupying the 5th
house will prove a great asset for the native bestowing abundant
wealth which will never leave him. He will have a number of
children. There will seldom be filial grief for him. He will
always move among wealthy people. In the matter of learning
and education, sky is the limit in his case. He will be very
truthfully disposed and command all material comforts of life.
Dr. Rabindranath Tagore's natus is given below which will
describe his radiant intelligence, brilliant learning and unparalleled poetic abilities. Birth data : born May 7, 1861 at 3.15 AM
Note the 10th lord Jup'ter in exaltation in the 5th obtaining
a potential status over other planets in the horoscope. Jupiter’s

Chapter 24
Moon
Ascdt
Sun
Merc
Venus
Mars
Ketu
RASI
Jup
Sat
Rahu
powerful aspect on his depositor, the Moon, lent that tremendous mental impetus to the native that he was a preeminent poet with a matchless learning. Mercury ruling the
4th house is unaffected by the Sun, being 16° apart.
sifTtsfq snrfa: qfcftflff: n ^ ; VII
114. If the 10th lord is in the 6tb, the native will be
bereft of paternal bliss. Although he may be skilful he will be
bereft of wealth and be troubled by enemies.
Notes : The 10th lord going to the 6th house is a dire
blemish for professional and monetary stability. One will
undergo frequent changes in his calling and will - suffer losses
therein. His financial growth will be severely paralyzed. He
will have a number of enemies contributing to his decline. He
will incur lasting diseases. An advantage, however, will come
to him in the form of extreme intelligence.
yJTTR WFift
115. If the 10th lord is in the 7th, the native will be

228 Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
endowed with happiness through wife, be intelligent, virtuous,
eloquent, truthful and religious.
wtrt: qtfrr5mitr>T: nnv*
116. If the 10th lord is in the 8th, the native will be
devoid of (good) acts, longlived and intent on blafting others.
Notes : The 10th lord’s placement in the 8th house
denotes potence of longevity. The 10th lord is the indicator of
one’s Karmic credit and his strength or his position in the 8th
house will contribute to great longevity. That the 10th lord
should be considered akin to Saturn in the matter of life span is
a fact tanght to us by Maharshi Parasra, vide sloka 3 in ch. 19.
The rule as per the present verse will, however, not apply to
Gemini ascendant horoscope having Jupiter in the 8th (in fall)
.which will in fact adversely affect longevity. And a Leo native
will be a significant beneficiary with Venus in the 8th in
exaltation and will enjoy a considerably long span ol life.
FTTnm *n?ft XRIT I
117. If the 10th lord is in the 9th, one born of royal scion
will become a king whereas an ordinary native will be equal to a
king. This placement will confer wealth and progenic happiness
etc.
qnFpft TRlHiraW |
118. If the 10th lord is in the 10th, the native will be
skilful in all jobs, be valorous, truthful and devoted to elders.
TTiW WmTOVi aiTcft I
<jV|qlKWlfM HftTTOTT ?TTT || ^ 5.U
119. If the 10th lord is in the 11th, the native will be
endowed with wealth, happiness and sons. He will be virtuous,
truthful and always delighted.

Chapter 24 ~ ^
if?? ®*W: I
f5T??T ^TWTfa fwfeRCIJt3*U
120. If the 10th lord is in the 12th, the native will spend
through royal abodes (i e. kings), will have fear from enemies
and will be worried in spite of being skilful.
Notes : Expenditure through royal abodes possibly indicates that the native will lose on taxes, fines etc. to the
government as the 12th house is involved. Otherwise, this can
mean luxurious political expenses. This placement will cause
troubles in financial matters through the Government.
mrot arrcr; srfNtf i
Jpftrafaft HTT 5Tm-**rfo?r: at tin
121. EFFECTS OF THE 11TH LORD IN VARIOUS
HOUSES (opto sloka 132) : If the 1 1th lord is in the ascendant,
the native will be genuine in disposition, be rich, happy, evensighted, be a poet, be eloquent in speech and be always endowed
with gains.
Notes : When the 11th lord is in the ascendant, the native
will always befriend the virtuous and reject evil associations. He
will be extremely prosperous after marriage.
* tTTRTT *TTcf: 1
122. If the 11th lord is in the 2nd, the native will be endowed wkh all kinds of wealth and all kinds of accomplishments,
be charitable, religious and always happy.
HTH*! 3TRT: \
spfl tsnggwrtcT:
123- If the 11th lord is in the 3rd, the native will be
skilful in all jobs, wealthy, endowed with fraternal bliss and may
sometimes incur gout pains.
frmfi qismprcsT i
3TT?ft n^ftT^rrf^: lit
124. If the 11th lord is in the 4th, the native will gain

Brihal Parasara Hora Sastra
from maternal relatives, will undertake visits to shrines and will
possess happiness of house and lands.
125. If the 1 ltn lord is in the 5th, the native’s children
will be happy, educated and virtuous. He will be himself
religious and happy.
WPTOT fHrAT^i 5TTtft 1
Jwr«t ^ qfttffar: nt^u
126. If the 11th lord is in the 6th. the native will be
afflicted by diseases, be cruel, living in foreign places and
troubled by enemies.
Notes : The placement of the 11th lord in the 6th house
will augment the chances of ‘acquisition’ of diseases. The
native will incur defects of hearing organ. (In Aquarius, the
11th lord will particularly afflict a Virgo native . with dire
deafness.) The native will be so selfish that for his own happiness he will leave his family members and live away from his
home or hometown. Servitude will befit him rather than an
independent profession. He will often undergo financial
reversals.
in faq ig n :
127. If the 11th lord is in the 7th, the native will always
gain through bis wife’s relatives, be liberal, virtuous, sensuous
and will remain at the command of his spouse.
Notes : Should the 7th house be occupied by the 11th
lord, the native will always look upto and receive help from his
wife’s relatives. He will be quite affluent as well. He will lack
In wisdom. Judgement will lack in him in the matter of
expenses and he cannot make out where to spend and where not
A strong urge to seek union with others’ females will
always be prevalent in him but none will bother for him. Even
|iis own spouse wiil boss over him.

Chapter 24
vfliWr i
xmw* SHUT *TT»f fcrant^H
128. If the Ilth lord is' in the 8th, the native will incur
reversals in his undertakings and will live long while his wife
will predecease him.
Notes : The 1 1th lord in the 8th house increases the
native’s longevity. The geniture given earlier of Sri Morarji
Desai having Mars in the 8th being the 11th lord bears an ample
testimony to this effect. However, this rule should not be
applied to Leo ascendant having Mercury, the 1 1th lord, in the
8th house in debilitation.
mqqret * trcrfuq: n^tii
129. If the 11th lord is in the 9th the native will be
fortunate, skilful, truthful, honoured by the king and be affluent.
gunP^: i
fasrattrHt atanr
130. If the 11th lord is ih the 10th, the native will be
honoured by the king, be virtuous, attached to his religion,
intelligent, truthful and will’subdue his senses.
Note's : with the 11th lord occupying the 10th house, one
will be primarily intent on public welfare and redemption. He
will delve deep into the core of his religion and bring out myriad
truths to educate the public. He will create an epoch of his
own which will go into the pages of history. The sacred horoscope of Sri Bhakti Vedanta Swamiji is a fitting example as given
below. He was born on September 1st, 169G AD, at 1530 hrs
at Calcutta.
In this chart, the i 1th lord Venus is in the 10th in debilitation and in the company of the 10th lord Mercury in
exaltation. The Neechabhanga occurring to Venus enhanced his
merits and took him to matchless heights. Swamiji had many
other brilliant features in his horoscope, viz. Saturn in peak in
the Ilth house, the 3 important planets— the Sun, Ketu and
Jupiter — all effectively joining in the 9th house (and being in one
and same Navamsa) and so on and so forth. He founded Hare

Brihat Parasara Nora Sastra
Moon
Mars
Rahu
Sun
Jup
Ketu
Lagna
Sat
Merc
Venus
^ name or Lora Krishna
to the West. He brought out in print his commentaries on Vedas
G.ta etc. in uncountable volumes. Above ail, he is a magic
word on the bps of millions. 15
It is my experience that a planet with cancelled debilitation
would give such splendid results keeping other planets behind
and make the world conscious of such a native. It is of course
a prerequisite that the ascendant lord should primarily be strong
enough. In the case of Swamiji, the soul stands well-fortified
and robed with identity with the praise-worthy Lord Mark the
prepotent 9th house containing ascendant lord along with the
Sun and Kelu.
The reader can always note that if the 1 1 th lord is well
disposed in the 10th house, the native concerned will dedicate
his life for others and be devoid of desires to meeting personal
ends. That is the moral we learn from the_Swamiji’s radix,
fito: *rar<r 4^3 <
it U- I3 *j the Ilth lord * s in thc Hth, the native will gain in
all his undertakings while his learning and happiness will be on
the increase day by day.

Chapter 24
*T?m«5r mui:
^5S}««WTW: <l?^n
132. If the 11th lord is in the 12th, the native will always
expend on good deeds, he sensuous, will have many wives and
will befriend barbarians (or foreigners in general).
WTeft s*T«mlert \
133. EFFECTS OF THE 12TH LORD IN VARIOUS
HOUSES (upto sloka 144) : If the I2th lord is in the ascendant,
the native will be a spendthrift, be weak in constitution, will
suffer from phlegmatic disorders, and be devoid of wealth and
learning.
Notes : Phlegmatic disorders relate to breathing troubles,
lung disorders, tuberculosis etc. With the 12th lord going to
the rising sign, the native will always suffer from one disease or
the other. He will ever be in the grip of fear of death. He
will acquire many vices. His undertakings will not yield
success.
aifaur: fsnreT?> * g«ra^mfar?r: u^yh
134. If the 12th lord is in the 2nd, the Dative will always
spend on auspicious deeds, be religious, will speak sweetly and
be endowed with virtues and happiness.
, ,. l35 ‘ Ifthc 12th lord is in the 3rd, the ^native will be
devoid <*f fraternal bliss, will hate others and will promote selfnounshment (i.e. be quite selfish).
devn ; ! 36 ; If the J 2th ilord is in the 4th the native will be
devoid of maternal happiness and will day by day accrue losses
in respect of lands, conveyances and houses.

Brihat Parasara Mora Sastrd
olj^?T Hrrm^ HrTfagTfqqfam: I
o -a
* sturcercn rflqfeq<T*t tcii^oii
137. If the 12th lord is in the 5th, the native will be bereft
of sons and learning. He will spend as well as visit shrines in
order to beget a son. '
arm: TOPHkgRlI
^ "rcsrranmt ?tt:
138. If the 12th lord is in the 6th, the native will incur
enmity with his own men, be given to anger, be sinful, miserable
and will go to qthers’ wives.
aqtrt 5R$5f: *RT I
?r*q wrftnsr q* TOjtaTf'mftRi: iiikn
139. If the 12th lord is in the 7th, the native will incur
expenditure on account of his wife, wilt not enjoy conjugal bliss
and will be bereft of learning and strength.
sqSrtf armt srTVHf^: rmi \
fwnT N H?VoH
140. If the 12th lord is in the 8th, the native will always
gain, will speak affably, will enjoy a medium span of life and be
endowed with all good qualities.
Notes : By ‘medium life’ it is meant to denote a span of
life of 60 years. So to say the 12th lord in the 8th will not be in
a position to contribute to higher bracket of longevity.
141. If the 12th lord is in the 9th, the native will dishonour his elders, be inimical even to his friends and be always
intent on achieving his own ends.
cqNr TT'i’qqmrq sqqt \
.femtsfa Htpr rT?q f| 3TRT^ ll^ll
142. If the 1 2th lord is in the 10th, the native will incur
expenditure through royal persons and will enjoy only moderate
paternal bliss.

Chapter 24
wjitfr $rrfa: srarnrih
q*®T Tfwf E*q qr5Tf^o*TO?l qr:tl?v^h
143. If the 12th lord is in tha 1 1th, the native will incur
losses, be brought up by others and will sometimes gain through
others.
Notes : One will face obstacles in begetting a child if the
12th lord occupies the 11th house. He will at last adopt
a child.
nTtm ^mrrfsppf »
q SRtrsnsi mu
144. If the 12th lord is in the 12th, the native will only
face heavy expenditure, will not have physical felicity, be
iritable and spiteful.
^ qjfaa fan ! *srTq>*pn
tircnufftn|ii tviiii
fgTPTTftlPI qriFI fqfqcqtqqqT q«W»
^jqq^qVsqtahr: snmrihiwit'
fqficrTTOftg T,?Tidfid: snfarq^CTqq (
3qri qTqffqrTRT ^ ^i^vimt q*T qqru?v<;u
145-148. MISCELLANEOUS : O Brahmin, those are the
effects of house lords which are to be deduced considering their
strengths and weaknesses. In the case of a planet owning two
bhavas, the results are to be deducted based on its two lordships
(for the same placement). If contrary results are thus indicated,
the results will be nullified, while results of varied nature will
come to pass. The planet will yield full, half or a quarter of
the effects according to its strength being full, medium and
negligible respectively. Thus I have told you about the effects
due to bhava lords in various bhavas.
Notes : We get important and key clue to analyse the
effects of a bhava lord placed in a certain bhava. Except the
Sun and the Moon, the other 5 planets own two bhavas each. In

Brihat Parasara flora Sastra
the case of the Sun and the Moon, the results cited will come to
pass. (Here also one should give due consideration to various
other relative factors. Simply applying the effects without
checking othet sources will lead to pitfalls.)
When a planet owns two signs, its placement in a certain
bhava is affected by its two lordships. For example, take the
case of Saturn in the 5th house for a Pisces nptive. His position
in the 5th as the 11th lord will give children and happiness
through them. And as the 12th lord, he will deny progeny so
that the native resorts to visiting shrines etc. in a bid to
obtain a progeny. In such a contrary situation the different
results mentioned for Saturn’s position in the 5th should not be
straightaway declared but alternative sources like Jupiter (the
significator of progery) and the Moon (the owner of the 5th
house) should be looked upto.
Next we are clearly instructed in regard to results of
mutually different spheres. For example again take the same
care of Pisces ascendant having Saturn in the 5th house. Other
results mentioned for the 1 1th lord being in the 5th house are :
native being religious and happy. As the 12th lord in the 5th,
the result mentioned is that the native will be devoid of education. After sorting out the controversy about progeny, it should
be declared that Saturn in the 5th will deprive the native born
in Pisces ascendant of learning (as due to 12th lordship) and
will make the native religious and happy (as the 11th lofd).
WTsa^Tsnt^Twnit.* ii^vui
Chapter 25
Effects Of Non -Luminous Planets
ate# tun \
srsrarronifTOf * u;ti
1. Thus I have explained the effects of the seven planets
viz. the Sun etc. Now I tell you about the effects of nonluminous planets.

Chapter 25 •
fimvftsrtCT: ffiqft: t?R: 1
U*HTa ^ ffT: TTCT 1RM
rv rs '
2. EFFECTS OF DHIFMA. IN VARIOUS BHAVAS
(upto sloka 13) : If Dhuma is in the ascendant, the native wjil
be valiant, endowed with beautiful eyes, stupefied in disposition,
unkind, wicked and highly short-tempered.
Notes : Before declaring results due to placements of nonluminous planets (i.e. Dhuma etc ), the student will do well
to refer to the sage's instruction in the concluding verses of the
present chapter.
I have given in my notes for slokas 66-69 in ch.3 details
of ownership, exaltation and debilitation signs .for the 10 Upagrahas and Muhurta planets as culled out from Kecranuru
Nataraja’s Jatakalankaram. These will benefit the reader to
consider lordships (or secondary lordships) of these also for each
sign. For example, Gulika is ‘lord’ of Aquarius. Hence in
the case of a Cancer native, he is the ‘§th lord* apart from
Saturn’s candidacy for 8th lordship. Of course primary importance be given to Saturn and he should not be underrated in
that case. *
The results due to Dhuma, Gulika etc. will mature in
the Dasa periods of their depositors. For example, if Gulika
is placed in Virgo, the effects due to Gulika will come to pa^s in
the major and sub periods of Mercury.
In giving effects Gulika is compared to Saturn, Kala to
Rahu, Ardha Prahara to Mercury and Yamaghantaka to Jnpiter.
The first two aje malefic in nature while the lajter two are
benefics. Of all, Gulika is the most powerful in adverse
results while Yamaghantaka (son of Jupiter) is the mighty
benefic.
aft frvrft
3. If Dhuma is in the 2nd, the native will be sickly,
wealthy, devoid of a limb, will incur humiliation at royal level,
be dullwitted and be a eunuch.

Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
*tRwh 5^arf%cT: fsTtfa^: i
3THTSq> *%t[||Yir
4. If Dhuma is in the 3rd, the native will be intelligent,
very bold, delighted, eloquent, and be endowed with men aod
wealth,
fat* I
^5^ *T*5TT^ IIK.II
5. If Dhuma is in the 4th, the native will be grieved on
account of being given up by his female but will be learned in
all sastras,
ERffat art \
6. If Dhuma is in the 5th, the native will have limited
progeny, be deviod of wealth, be great, will eat anything and be
bereft of friends and Mantras.
ar^ ^ fr^TTW^ \
t^IrT: flYT Ttnfa^filcT; tbdtl
7. If Dhuma is in the 6th, the native will be strong, will
conquer his enemies, be very brilliant, famous and free from
diseases.
fatR: Hrfci qrirft 'FttTT'l I
^TrT> fafNl: *RTT SRcHmil
rs %
8. If Dhuma is in the 7th, the native will be penniless, be
ever sensuous, skilful in goining to others’ females and be always
devoid of brilliance.
iftrUW: I
srfsnft f^5T: rorof aft *r?q»r^ nfa n$n
9. If Dhuma is in the 8th, the native will be bereft of
courage but be enthusiastic, be truthful, disagreeable, hardhearted and selfish.

Chapter 25
M £R*t Tjpft ?qrf?=RT: |
fcq% q* w^rfj 3?a3ca*T: n$oii
10. IfDhumais in the 9th, the native will be endowed
with sons and fortunes, be rich, honourablo, kind, religious and
well disposed to his relatives,
*>*T*«i aft *T?qqqf?*m: n??n
11. If Dhuma is in the 10th, ’the native will be endowed
with sons and fortunes, be delighted, intelligent, happy and
truthful.
UR a ^qqfTO q?TTfqcT: \
12. If Dhuma is in the 11th, the native will be endowed
with wealth, grains and gold, be beautiful, will have knowledge
of arts, be modest and be skilful in singing.
qffKT: <rm*rf * o^r i
13. If Dhuma is in the 12th, the native will be morally
fallen, will indulge in sinful acts, be interested in others’ wives,
addicted to vives, unkind and crafty. ■
^ 'Tift ^ HFSJFft 3TTcTqr> fttqlqlffrT: I
q»qf fii
14. EFFECTS OF VYATIPATA IN VARIOUS HOUSES
(upto sloka 25) : If Vyatipata (also known in short as Pata)
is in the ascendant, the native will be troubled by miseries be
cruel, will indulge in destructive acts, be foolish and will be’illdisposed to his relatives.
f^r^fhfafqrHTFT qTrRi5T% I
ffffTr*TT qR^rPTf II
^ 1 H 5 -J7r ipata -^ 1 ' n . the2nd ’ the native wiI1 be morally
crooked be bilious will enjoy pleasures, be unkind but grateful
be wicked and sinful. s

Brihat Parasara Ilora Sastra
fNrcsrsft T^i> stctt TT^t-nr: i
^stt^ 71 % ^TT'it?f>
16. IfVyatipata is in the 3rd, the native will be firm in
disposition, be a warrior, be liberal, very rich, dear to king,
and be head of an army,
?REr5tnf{JHTTTOSrT: HrTfltWRqqfe I
ttt 7T3RRI ^TRTfsr^r ^:u?\su
17. IfVyatipata is in the 4th, the native will be endowed
with relative* etc. but not sons and fortunes.
•o
*7rf7tfT0m«yrcft f?R777: 11^711
18. If Vyatipata is in the 5th, the native will be poor, be
charming in appearance, will have imbalances of phlegm, bile
and wind, be hard-hearted and shameless,
wgcsro tfqfrTFTf «T l
fq^T: TTHtT: 7T& *177% ^rf?T
19. IfVyatipata is in the 6th, the native will destroy his
enemies, be physically rn'ighty, skilful in use of all kinds of
weapons and in arts, and be peaceful in disposition.
g:R%JTcT: I
7T% 7ivT7^ 7>T7t f%vTI*T: 'TOft^U^oll
20. If Vyatipata is in the 7th, the natiue will be bereft of
wealth, wife and sons, will subdue to females, be miserable,
sensuous, shameless and friendly to others.
fTVHieftt f7^7*^ |%7> (
7c7f%7% fp*% 7T% TWTtSTTfT'RrT:
21. If Vyatipata is in the 8th, the native will have deformity of eyes, be ugly, unfortunate, spiteful^, to Brahmins and be
troubled by disorders of blood.

Chapter 25
wH 'trmI ^ f^tfsnTT^ fs«r?r*: 113311
22. If Vyatipata is in the 9th, the native will have many
kinds of business and many friends, be very learned, welldisposed to his wife and be eloquent.
'TTrRfsf f^r *n?urr?ft l^rem: 113311
23. If Vyatipata is in the 10th, the native will be rich,
religious, peaceful, skilful in religious acts, very learned and
farsighted.
smaunwH nvft wwul
3ITT^> »TT^ ^T*HT^ tffo U^VII
24. If Vyatipata is in the I Ith, the native will be extremely
opulent, be honourable, truthful, firm in policy, endowed with
many horses and be interested in singing.
* sqprqfstft ajift err i
ir m?? fajq) 113 x 11
25. If Vyatipata is in the 12th, the native will be given to
anger, associated with many activities, disabled, irreligious and
will hate his own relatives.
flRTrT: TTRft ER3FT I
TfTtrt 3T?TT 3JTOT gRRH: \\^\\\
26. EFFECTS OF PARIDHI (OR PARIVESHA) IN
VARIOUS HOUSES ( upto sloka 37) : If Paridhi is in the
ascendant, the native will be learned, truthful, peaceful, rich,
endowed with sons, pure, charitable and dear to elders.
frert ^ HHTTm: i
Tfrtft wTTcT: SR*T*rf?T R5Wll3ttH
27. If Paridhi is in the 2nd, the native will be wealthy,
charming, will enjoy pleasures, be happy, very religious and be a
lord.

Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
fStora?*?: frlWSH Knw: 1
■o
qfrat n^cii
28. If Paridhi is in the 3rd, the native will be fond of his
wife, be very charming, pious, well disposed to his men, be a
servant and be respectful of his ciders.
qfra> fafwf r*for<T*mi
f*ni 5^ »r>T*tfq<f*T iihm
29. If Paridhi is in the 4th, the native will be wonderstruck, helpful to enemies as well, kind, endowed with everything and be skilful in singing.
TOtfaFT vOflIM VTJfTtfsnWTJT HWrflvl: \
qfrtft *sfHf *r*f?r u^ou
30. If Paridhi is in the 5th, the native will be affluent,
virtuous, splendorous, affectionate, religious and dear to bis
wife.
«reft s< i g*qrrj qfN> xz: \
qfrot R^'Hi«(fq qr: >»W
31. If Paridhi is in the 6th, the native will be famous and
wealthy, be endowed with sons and pleasures, be helpful to all
and will conquer bis enemies.
WeMWcH: gWjjfrft gfacST: 1
qfoft aonfere* wnnhiw
32. If Paridhi is in the 7th, the native will have limited
number of children, be devoid of happiness, be of mediocre
intelligence, very hard-hearted, and will have a sickly wife,
3TWH?*lfaRW: fTRTt ^W5T: I
tnwfnr qfcft twvMiiw
33. If Paridhi is in the 8th, the native will be spiritually
disposed, peaceful, strong-bodied, firm in decision, religious and
gevtie.

Chapter 25
STTeft ERTCqt |
<TfTeft ER** *TRt II^YII
34. If Paridhi is in the 9th, the native will be endowed
with sons, be happy, brilliant, very affluent, be devoid of
excessive passion, be honourable and be happy with even an iota.
|nrc?nc: \
qfirtrt srqfr qqqirqmreq: 113101
35. If Paridhi is in the 10th, the native will be versed in
arts, will enjoy pleasures, be strong- bodied, and be learned in
all sastras.
gurqnrqq qfoqnT i
qfra> sucft q^fa^qra^ 113^11
36. If Paridhi is in the Ilth, the native will enjoy pleasures
through women, be virtuous, intelligent, dear to his people and
will suffer disorders of digestive fire.
qfra> 5iTcT> wmfq mqq: *rt i
g:qrqnT 1131911
37. If Paridhi is in the 12th, the native will always be a
spendthrift, be miserable, firm and will dishonour elders.
KWR 1
38. EFFECTS OF CHAPA (INDRA DHANUS OR
KODANDA) IN VARIOUS HOUSES (upto . sloka 49) : If
Chapa is in the ascendant, the native will be endowed with
wealth, grains and gold, be grateful, agreeable and devoid of all
afflictions.
faqqq: qq?qi^q> fqqfcft fsTOOTSfarT: 1
q ^qqR aqcKq*: iih»
39. If Chapa is in the 2nd, the native will speak affably, be
very rich, modest, learned, charming and religious.

Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
fTST I
ergfa ht^ ^rrp^ *rara>*p: uyoii
40. If Chapa is in the 3rd, the native will be a miser, be
versed in many arts, will indulge in thieving, be devoid of some
limb and be unfriendly.
wwt nhRQFmW I
waGtj 5 Ktftoi) erg atraftnv^u
41. If Chapa is in the 4th, the native will be happy,
endowed with quadrupeds, wealth, grains etc , be honoured by
the king and be devoid of sickness.
*ifaiTR I
Wl* ^CTcfr f^J?: Hthnf^ Mv^n
42. If Chapa is in the 5th, the native will be splendorous,
far-sighted, pious, affable and will acquire prosperity in all his
undertakings.
IRJRTlsftttraw *jf%: l
*|ootMM«i^ UY^li
43. If Chapa is in the 6th, the native will destroy his
enemies, be happy, affectionate, pure and will achieve plentifulness in all his undertakings.
3«rci*y>f: fsrer: \
^ *T STOT: tlXXII
44. If Chapa is in the 7th, the native will be wealthy,
endowed with all virtues, learned in sastras, religious, and
agreeable.
TOiRTtT: ^r?:: TTTTTTmEPn: |
3?c?tTf«n^ farvmw; uvstu
45. If Chapa is in the 8th, the native will be interested in
other’s jobs, be cruel, interested in other's wives and be defective
limbed.

Chapter 25 245
?TcT^T?fl ffTffr fiTSHTTSfo^*: I
a4** ^ sfarfasra; UV^M
46. If Chapa is in the 9th, the native will perform, penance,
will take to religious observations, be highly ' learned, and be
famous among men.
nW^rf^TFr ir^t i
uvv9U
47. If Chapa is in the 10th, the native will be endowed
with many sons, abundant wealth, cows, buffaloes etc. and will
be famous among men.
^m*T W ^ virfffifrft 1
c s
48. If Chapa is in the 1 1th, the native will be gainful,
free from diseases, very fiery in disposition, affectionate to his
wife and will have knowledge of mantras and weapons (or
missiles).
fasfa: liven
49. If Chapa is in the 12th the native will be wicked, very
honourable, evil in disposition, shameless, will go to other’s
females and be ever poor.
TOfasrra srsft sn^ftgor; fsw i
?Rt *T53U?r: Vf%cT IlltoH
50. EFFECTS OF DHWAJ A (i e. SIKHI OR UPAKETU)
IN VARIOUS HOUSES (upto sloka 61) : IfDhwajais in the
ascendant, the native will be skilful in all branches of learning,
be happy, efficient in speech, agreeable and be very affectionate.
tWRTRtT^ Mf3T l
Tfo^eft WTfFnforT: US* $11
51. If Dhwaja is in the 2nd, the native will be a good and
affable speaker, be splendorous, will write poetry, be scholarly,
honourable, modest and endowed with conveyances.

Brihat Parasara Hora Sastret
q?5l}: WTVclf ^ SR^facT: t
3 fnftrfjf cfarVflf H3TTO^ MX^II
52. If Dhwaja is in the 3rd, the native will be miserly,
cruel in acts, thin -bodied, poor and will incur severe diseases.
g ftrfafa *rt 11x311
53. If Dhwaja is in the 4th, the native will be charming,
very virtuous, gentle, interested in Vedas and be always happy.
'frVft vaifas* \
gfawt qfitmjj g^*Tfai-T?wfR?T: morn
54. If Dhwaja is in the 5th, the native will be happy, will
enjoy pleasures, be versed in arts, skilled in expedients, intelligent,
eloquent and will respect elders.
*rEJT««TiT*T: SgSTFa*: I
, frgprft v*dt sn^ *tt: *trt> fagsro: moot
55. If Dhwaja is in the 6th, the native will be ominous for
maternal relatives, will win over his enemies, be endowed with
many relatives, valiant, splendorous and skilful.
nr* g fettfjj*: mt^n
56. If Dhwaja is in the 7th, the native will be interested in
gambling, be sensuous, will enjoy pleasures and will befriend
prostitutes.
OtRP: *RT I
RrfWT% 53% jjf% TcTR^m'TSTV: UXVsU
57. If Dhwaja is in the 8th, the native will be interested in
base acts, be sinful, shameless, will blame others’ will lack in
marital happiness and will take others' side.

Chapter 25 247
fay n fl srosmm tw: i
irotf f?T%fa 5 tf% a4in#i| tMw; mtmt
58. If Dhwaja is in the 9th, the native will wear (religious)
badges, be delighted, helpfully disposed to all and be skilled in
religious deeds.
«fnfcRtaT ^
^IcTT %3I ! 1IV.6.II
59. O Brahmin, if Dhwaja is in the 10th, the native will be
endowed with happiness and fortunes, be fond of females, be
charitable and will befriend Brahmins.
faTfafa gf^RT: l
CRISTC WHT: *TT: HtTSKTailfa ll^oll
60. If Dhwaja is in the 11th, the native will ever acquire
gains, be very religious, honourable, affluent, fortunate, valiant
and skilled in sacrificial rites.
mq<b*UrT: *TT: l
61. If Dhwaja is in the 12th, the native will be interested
in sinful acts, be valiant, untrustworthy, unkind, interested in
others’ females and be short-tempered.
STrTcT «nqTe*Tfa*T?f: *151 1
gftT% 5iH: ^m'RT^sTaiifetr: nw
62. EFFECTS OF GULIKA IN VARIOUS HOUSES
(upto sloka 73) : IfGulikaisin the ascendant, the native will
be afflicted by diseases, be lustful, sinful, crafty, wicked and very
. miserable.
Notes : Out of all the non-luminous planets, Gulika
deserves a special consideration in natal horoscopy as well as
horary astrology. This is also a very important factor in birth
rectification, and such other important calculations.
If Gulika is in the ascendant, the native will incur severe
defects of ejes. He will take to bad acts like thieving. He

248 brthat Parasara If ora Sastrti
will disregard religion, be deprived of progeny and be
dullheaded. His longevity will incur a severe cut.
As already stated, in the case of each Upagraha and
Muhurta Vela, the depositor should invariably be considered
before coming to a conclusion.
63. If Gulika is in the 2nd, the native will be unsightly in
appearance, miserable, mean, given to vices, shameless and
penniless.
•ii f N °i. teS ^ Sh ° U d Gu,ika ** inthe 2nd house, the native
will further be unfortunate. His learning will be obstructed off
and on. He will have speech defects, be harsh in speech, will
live away from h» people, will not have family happiness, be
untruthful, will involve in a scandal, be unfit to move among
Zln?d?*tl w Da “ periods of ,tc 2od lor<i face ,roub,es
gum**??;
^5^ 5^% «TTfT> HPret TTS^fstrT:
64. If Gulika is in the 3rd, the native will be charming in
appearance, will head a village, be fond of virtuous men and be
honoured by the king.
Notes : With Gulika in the 3rd house, one will face
destruction of co-born. Though fairly rich, he will feel
distressed.
65. If Gulika is in the 4th, the native will be sickly
devoid of happiness, sinful and afflicted due to windy and
bilious excesses.
Notes : The native will not befriend anybody but be
inimical to others inclusive of his relatives. He will be devoid
Of conveyances or will face risks through conveyances. He will

Chapter 25
not have a good house to live in. His last days will be
miserable and death will be painful after a long confinement,
3f?T% *TcT*n3FT ?TrfecF?i> ^cT \\\\u
66. If Gulika is in the 5th, the native will not be praiseworthy, be poor, short-lived, spiteful, mean, be a eunuch, be
subdued by his wife and be a heterodox.
Notes : The native’s virility or . progenic ability will be
significantly affected by Gulika's occupying the house of
progeny. He will not be in a position to obtain issues unless
Jupiter and the 5th lord are favourable, Gulika in this house
will make one devoid of God-fearing tendency and be at the
disposal of his wife. His personal disposition will not be
agreeable,
SHTHT: g>c*TT£ :
67. If Gulika is in the 6th, the native will be devoid of
enemies, be strong-bodied, spfenorous, liked by his wife, enthusiastic, very friendly and helpful in disposition.
Notes : When Gulika is in the 6th house, the native will
be interested in controlling evil spirits and make a livelihood
from such achievements. He will obtain children. He will be
very courageous. There will be freedom from diseases if the
6fh hou^e containing Gulika is a benefic sign.
«IPTfr^3TR: (
wtfarr: gf?r% *rer»rfN* ut-cn
6,8. If Gulika is in the 7th, the native will subdue to his
$pouse, be sinful, will go to others’ females, be emaciated,
qevoid of friendship and will live on wife’s (or a female’s)
wealth. 7
Notes: Gulika occupying the 7th house, will make the
native thrive on a female’s wealth or through the contributions
of his own spouse. His conjugal life will not cause him any
happiness. He will possibly have more than one marriage.

Erihat Parasara If ora Sastta
His knowledge will not be quite much. In relation to public
dealings, he will incur misunderstandings and enmity.
T?CT*I gorafacr: uhn
69. If Gulika is in the 8th, the native will be troubled by
hunger, be miserable, cruel, very much short-tempered, very
unkind, poor and bereft of good qualities.
Notes : The native will find it difficult to get even a
square meal. His face will be ugly. His eyes will be diseased.
His teeth will be yellowish. He will be quite short in stature.
These are additional effects as due to the 8th house position of
Galika, son of Saturn.
gftrfc smn n^oii
70. If Gulika is in the 9th, the native will undergo many
ordeals, be emaciated, will perform evil acts, be very unkind,
sluggish and be a tale-bearer.
Notes : If Gulika is in the 9th house one will be devoid
of paternal bliss and good fortunes His father will pass away
in the native’s childhood itself. None of the native’s undertakings will bear fruits.
tfrisnrffaci:
71. If Gulika is in the 10th, the native will be endowed
with sons, be happy, will enjoy many things, be fond of worshipping gods and fire and will practise meditation and religion.
Notes : The placement of Gulika in the 10th house, will
prove favourable for Yoga, Meditation and such other achievements. The native, at one stage, will turn into a heterodox and
discard his religious code.
STHRT ^ Tel: \
gf?r% fftarg: itv^u

Chapter 25
' 72. If Gulika is in the 1 1th, the native will enjoy women
of class, be a leader of men, be helpful to his relatives, be short
in stature and be an emperor.
Notes : If Gulika is in the 1 1th house, the subject will be
in the company of many females. He will be devoid of good
character. He will enjoy progenic happiness, wealth status etc.
and be charming in appearance.
5^ TfcWUVs^ll
73. If Gulika is in the 12th, the native will indulge in base
deeds, be sinful, defective-limbed, unfortunate, indolent, and
will join mean people.
Notes : Gulika's tenancy in the 12th house at birth will
bring innumerable misfortunes and cause loss of wealth on evil
missions. One will, however, enjoy progenic happiness.
effwft fWt Wf?T 1
s ppfr re ft $*1^ fW ll»YU
74. EFFECTS OF PR AN A P ADA'S POSITION WITH
REFERENCE TO THE ASCENDANT (upto sloka 85) : If
Pranapada is in the ascendant, the native will be weak, sickly,
dumb, lunatic, dull wilted, defective-limbed, miserable and
emaciated.
Notes : Pranapada is a special ascendant. How to calculate this special sensitive point could be found on p. 47 supra.
Pranapada will fall in a certain degree and its relation
with referance to natal ascendant will portend many an event as
tersely shown in the present 12 verses.
ageTRft wgroft l
IHsHU
75. If Pranapada is in the 2nd, the native will be endowed
with abundant grains (rice, wheat etc.), abundant wealth,
abundant attendants, abundant children and be fortunate.

Brihat Parasara flora Sasira
fersft *T9*rqTg<?dl i
76. If Pranapada is in the 3rd, the native will be injurious,
(or mischievous), proud, hard-hearted, very dirty and be devoid
of respect for elders.
STR: HfirqTg \
gtf TTPm: srpir q fl?!Rc<TT: |(vs\9||
77. If Pranapada is in the 4th, the native will be happy,
friendly, attached to females and elders, soft and truthful,
WtSr?TT** [
sml qqfTTqqqf^: llvsctU
78. If Prartapada is in the 5th, the native will be happy,
will do good acts, be kind, and very affectionate.
qes ft at fqrrTlJjqigTq wnvstu
79. If Pranapada is in the 6th, the native will be subdued
by his relatives and enemies, be sharp, vyili have defective
digestive fire, be wicked, sickly, affluent and shortlived.
sn^rr* irrcreq; ^fcqRimoii
80. If Pranapada is in the 7th, the native vyili be greeneyed ever libidinous, fierce in appearaqpe, be not worth respect
and be ill-disposed. * “ *
«T>fsq:
. .. 81, If P fan apada is in the 8th, the flgtive wi|| be afflicted
by diseases, be troubled and will incur misery on apcoqnt of the
king, relatives, servants and sons.
ERqPTR: fifqjjta I'
STW ?WS|8 ft fro"*: „ c?l ,

Chapter 25
82. If Pranapada is in the 9th, the native will be endowed
with sons, be very rich, fortunate, charming, will serve others
and be not wicked but be skilful.
tftifa-FT i
llc^u
83. If Pranapada is in the 10th, the native will be heroic,
intelligent, skilful, be an expert in carrying out royal orders, aDd*
will worship gods.
sirafr lifter |
srm iiqvn
84. If Pranapada is in the 11th, the native will be famous,
virtuous, learned, wealthy, fair-complexioned and attached to
mother.
jfljrrgft fsffqt f^si^tjt
^ 5TTWT TTpjft
85 If Pranapada is in the 12th, the native will be mean,
wicked defect^e-hrahed, will hate Brahmins and relatives and
will suffer from eye diseases or be one-eyed.
a«TT tJTft ST^TTOFIT
fnf^T cfdn
*RtfW*T Mc^ll
8 ^’ 87 - 0 Brahmin, these are the effects for Dhooma etc
(and Pranapada ascendant). Before declaring these results,
effects of the Sun and other planets should be wisely
conceived by their positions, relations and aspects apart from
their strength or weakness.
^e are advised to look upto the Sun and others
while declaring the effects due to Dhooma, Gulika etc. So to
say the depositors of Dhooma etc. Should be scrutinized to
know the extent of effects. For example if Gulika is due to
give bad effects, but his depositor is well-aspected, well-placed or
well-related, the evils are minimised. Conversely if favourable

‘ Drihat Parasara Ilora Sastra
effects are due to Gulika etc. the weakness or adverse placement of the respective depositor will not allow maturity of such
good effects.
Another hint we take from these two verses is : We should
balance the results due to Dhooma, Gulika etc. with the
results due to the planets from Sun to Saturn (and of course the
nodes). For example, Gulika is in the llth and good effects are
due. If a planet posited in the same llth denotes contrary
results, then the strength of the two will lead to correct
estimation of the situation.
3T«r IR^II
Chapter 26
Evaluation of Planetary Aspects
! s>f?T0T ct*jt i
sfa ^ II
1. O Glorious, it is said that aspects (of planets) and
strengths are to be known in deciding the effects. How many
kinds are these ? Please clarify my doubts.
tn*T TtftTWTJ 3 ft?: ^5^5TT ^HI%5TI
F’EIT cTt IRII
fWl 9 ^ ^ I
STmfcT rT*TT \\\n
imi
*f?T ^jgiif: SlfcTffTfeTT l
FfigRrercrra T ^ sfc - : uurdwfi mnnxu
2-5. PLANETARY ASPECTS : O Brahmin, I have earlier stated aspects based on signs. The other kind is between

Chapter 26
planets which I detail below. 3rd and 10th, 5th and 9th, 4th
and 8th and lastly 7th — on these places the aspects increase
gradually in slabs of quarters i.e 1/4, 1/2, 3/4th and full. The
effects (due to such aspects) will also be proportionate. All
planets aspect the 7th fully. Saturn, Jupiter and Mars have
special aspects respectively on 3rd and 10th, 5th and 9th, and
4th and 8th. The ancient preceptors have explained these which
are ordinary (arising by mere sign positions). By subtle
mathematical calculations, these aspects will have to be clearly
understood as under.
factor ICJR ^Tf*rR>5fa?RFcRIT 1
risfclT tTiT«T»TT 1 1^11
*j7TT^ wni sfe, fWfu% m\\
r rwf vmi fsrragri i
5^fo% ft faftT ^rfVr WT^TfofagftT*ft*TT l|t;U
6-8. ASPECTUAL EVALUATIONS : Deduct the longitude of the aspected planet (or house) from That of the
aspecting planet. If the sum exceeds six signs (or 180 deg)
deduct the sum again from 10 signs (or 300 deg). Con ert
the latest sum into degrees and divide by two. The resultant
product is Drishti Kona or aspectual angle. If the difference
(between aspector and aspected) is in excess of 5 signs, ignore,
signs and multiply the degrees etc. by 2 which is the aspectual
value. If the difference 19 in excess of 4 signs deduct it from 5
signs (or 150 deg) and the resultant degree etc. beeome Drishti
value. If the difference is in excess of 3 signs deduct it from 4
signs (or 120 degress) and halve the product to be increased by
30 to get Drishti value. If the difference is above 2 signs
ignore signs and add 15 to the degrees etc. to get Drishti value.
If it is in excess of one sign, ignore Rasis and divide the degrees
etc, by 2 to get Drishti value.
faftT tt^t wit j[*t iRtfcf i
q* fear! nett

Brlhat Parasara Nora Sastara
wn *r>nn i
tsrfcr^tq tjrrfrrg*! srffT:u$oii
9-10. SPECIAL CONSIDERATION FOR SATURN’S
ASPECTS : O Brahmin, if Saturn is the aspecting planet find
out the difference between him and the aspected planet; if the
sum is above 1 sign, multiply the degrees etc. (ignoring sign)
by 2 to get Drishti value. If the sum is above nine sings, the
degrees to elapse be doubled to get aspectual value. If the sum
is above 2 signs, the degrees etc. (in excess of 2 signs) be
halved and deducted from 60. If the sum exceeds 8 signs, add to
the degrees etc, a figure of 30 to get Drishti value. In other
cases, the sums be processed as explained earlier.
forcT* a bWtto smtfiraT i
11. SPECIAL CONSIDERATION FOR MARS’
ASPECTS : Deduct the longitude of Mars from that of the
planet aspected (by Mars). If the sum is 3 Rasis & c or 7
Rasis & c, the degrees etc. (after ignoring Rasis) be reduced
from 60. If it is above 2 Rasis, the degrees etc. be increased by
half of it (i.e. add 50%) and superadd 15. If the sum is 6
signs, one Rupa is the value.
fWrTIT 3 WOW I
feyTRT ll^ll
TOST |
«n«TFri ^TRT^TO BT^cT ll^ll
12. SPECIAL CONSIDERATION FOR JUPITER’S
ASPECTS : Deduct the longitude of Jupiter from that of the
planet aspected by him. If the resultant sum is 3 Rasis & cor
7 Rasis & c, halve the degrees etc. (ignoring Rasis) and
increase it by 45. If the sum is 4 Rasis & c or 8 Rasis & c, the
degrees etc. (ignoring Rasis) be subtracted from 60. This
will be the aspectual value. The sum being in conformity with
others than these be treated as stated earlier.
Notes : Throughout this chapter and others related to
calculation of strengths of planets and houses, the term .‘Virupa*

Chapter 26 257
has been used which denotes ‘Shashtiamsas’ or ‘Kalas’. 60 such
units make one Rupa.
The planet that aspects is Drisbti Graha or the aspector.
The planet that is aspected is known as Drisya Graha
or the aspected. The longitude of ‘the aspected’ is to be
deducted from that of the aspector. If the longitude of the
aspected is lesser than that of the aspector, increase the longi*
tude of ‘the aspected* by 360 to facilitate deduction, which will
yield the aspectual or Drishti angle.
After finding out the Drishti angles, the various quantities
will have to be processed as under with the relevant principles :
Rule 1. When aspectual angle is between 30 and 60
degrees, reduce 30 degrees from the resultant aspectual angle
and divide by 2 to get aspectual value.
Rule 2. If the aspectual angle is above 60 but below 90
degrees, reduce 60 from the aspectual angle and add 15 to get
aspectual value.
Rule 3. In case the aspectual angle is above 90 but less
than 120 degrees the aspectual angle be reduced from 120, then
halved and then increased by 30, to get aspectual value.
Rule 4. If the aspectual angle is between 120 and 150
degrees, reduce the angle of aspect from 1 50 to get aspectual
value,
Rule5. If the aspectual angle is between 150 and 180
degrees reduce 150 from aspectual angle and double the
resultant sum to get aspectual value.
Rule 6. When the aspectual angle is above 180 but below
300 degrees deduct the aspectual angle from 300 and halve the
resultant sum, to get aspectual value.
Needless to mention there is no aspectual value if the angle
is between 300 and 30 degrees.
■ For house in aspect, consider the cusp of the house, akin
to a planetary degree.
In the case of aspects from Saturn, Mars and Jupiter, the
following additions may be noted as a simple formula.
A) Mars : When the aspect angle is 90-120 degrees or 2 IQ249 degrees, add 15 Virupas to the value obtained from
the speculum.

2^8 Brihat Parasara Hora S astro
B) Jupiter : When the aspect angle is 1 20- 1 50 degrees or
240-270 degrees increase the speculum value by 30
Virupas.
C) Saturn : When the aspect angle is 60-90 degrees or
270-300 degrees and 45 Virupas to the value obtained
from the speculum.
Without undergoing these ordeals, the student can easily
find out the Drishti values on the above lines from the Speculum
of Aspectual Values given below :
Speculum of Aspetual Values (Computerized)
Deg:Mn Vlrupa Deg:Mn Virupa Deg:Mn Virupa

Chapter 26
Deh:Mn Virupa Deg;Mo> Virupa Deg:Mn Vinpa

Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
Deg: Mil Vfrnpa Deg:Mn Virupa Dcg:Mn Virupa

Chapter 26
Deg:Mn Vimpa Deg:Mn Virupa Deg:Mn Virnpa

Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
DqpMn Vlrupa Deg:Mn Virnpa Deg:Mn Virop*

Chapter 27
Deg:Mn Virupa Deg:Mo Virupa Deg:Mn Virupa
an* sqcsfsnsnuT m^vjh
Chapter 27
Evaluation Of Strengths
sfNft *ntrffav f^yfta^cT u?n
fafaifai mayumti
1-1J. STHAANA BALA (upto sloka 6) FIRSTLY
UCHCHA BALA Now about the strengths by classes positional,
temporal etc. (Firstly, Ucbchabala forming part of positional

Brihat Parasara Hora Sastrd
strength or Sthaana bala), Deduct from the longitude of the
planet its (deep) debilitation point. If the sum is less than 6
signs, consider it as it is^ if it exceeds 6 signs, deduct the same
from 12 signs. The sum si> got be converted into degress etc.
and divided by 3 which is the planet’s Uchchabala or exaltation
strength (in Virupas).
Notes : These strengths are called Shadbala. These
consist of the following ;
1. Sthaana Bala (or positional strength)
2. Dig Bala (or directional strength)
3. Kala Bala (Temporal Strength) inclusive of Ayana Bala
(or equinoctial strength)
4. Cheshta Bala (or motional strength)
5. Naisargika Bala (or natural strength)
6. Drik Bala (or aspectual strength)
These strengths are computed for the seven planets from
the Sun to Saturn. The nodes are not considered.
Firstly explained is Sthaana Bala due to a planet’s position.
This strength comprises of the following considerations :
1. Uchcha Bala (or exaltation strength)
2. Saptavargaja Bala (or strength accruing out of positions
in Rasi, Hora, Decahate, Saptamamsa, Navamsa,
Dvadasamsa and Trimsamsa).
3. Ojhayugmarasiamsa Bala (strength acquired by placement in odd/even Rasi and in odd/cven Navamsa),
4. Kendradi Bala (due to placement in angle, or
succedent or cadent house).
5. Drekkana Bala (due to .placement in first, second or
third decanate of a sign).
In the present verses under comment the sage explains the
method to know the Uchchabala of a planet. To find out this
strength, we need two things. Firstly the planet's actual
longitude. Secondly its debilitation point which is constant for
all horoscopes. The deep debilitation points of the 7 planets
are noted on pp 38-39 supra.
For example, assume the Sun’s placement in a given case
is Pisces 12° 15’ (or 342° 15'). His deep debilitation point is
Libra 10° (or 190°), Hence :

Chapter 27
(Sun’s position' — Deep debilitation point) H- 3
If the sum before division by 3 is in excess of 180 degrees
deduct it from 360 and then divide by 3 which will be the
planet’s uchcha bala in Virupas. Maximum Uchcha bala is
always 60 shashtiamsas or 1 Rupa.
[PtM ll^ll
«jht: ii^ii
fiwtoai
2-4. SA PTA VARGAJA BALA ; If a planet is in its
Moolatrikona Rasi, it gets 45 Virupas, in own Rasi 30 Virupas,
extreme friend’s Rasi 20 Virupas, friend’s Rasi 15 Virupas,
neutral’s Rasi 10 Virupas, enemy’s Rasi 4 Virupas and in
extreme enemy’s Rasi 2 Virupas. Similarly these values occur
for the other 6 divisional occupations, viz. Hora, Decanate,
Saptamamsa. Navamsa, Dvadasamsa and Trimsamsa. When all
th-^ are added together the planet’s Saptavargaja Bala emerges.
Notes : Next step is to find out the Saptavargaja bala of a
planet. The tables of various Vargas as well as the compound
relationships of the planets, are given in the previous pages. The
compound relationships of two given planets, vide P. 42 supra
(including Hora lordship etc.) be seen in the Rasi chart only
and not in the concerned divisional chart. Then the strengths
in Virupas for each of the Sapta vargas be found out and added,
which is then called saptavargaja bala of the planet.
4J. OJHAYUGMARAS1AMSA BALA : Each of Venus
and the Moon in even Rasis and others in odd Rasis acquire a
quarter of Rupa (i.e. 15 Virupas). These are applicable to such
Navamsas also.

Brihat P&raSara Horn Sastrd
Notes r Each of Jupiter, the Sun, Mars, Mercury and
Saturn get 35 Virupas if they are placed in odd Rasis. Venus
and the Moon get similar strength for placement in an even
sign. Similarly for placement in such odd or even Navamsas.
The strengths acquired by Rasi and Navamsa positions be added
together to know the Ojhayugmarasiamsa bala. (Male and
neutral planets get this strength in male Rasi/Navamsa.
Female planets get such strength in female Rasi/Navamsa.)
fr?TTf*ijf?*RTT: n X.U
5. KENDRADI BALK : A planet in an angle gets full
strength while one in succedent house gets half and the one in
cadent house gets a quarter (of Rupa) (as Kendradi bala).
Notes : Kendradi means angles etc. This denotes three
groups of four Rasis each. These are angles, (i.e. 1st, 4th, 7th
and 10th) succedents, (i.e. 2nd, 5th, 8th and llth)and cadeDts,
(i e. 3rd, 6th, 9th and 12(h). The following are the Kendradi
balas : 1
(1) Planet in angle— 60 Virupas
(2) Planet in succedent=30 Virupas
(3) Planet in cadent=15 Virupas
fPTeTT: ^Trf I
6. DREKKANA BALA : ^fale, female and ijctinaphrodite planets respectively get a quarter Rupa according to
placements in the first, second and third decapates.
Notes : This strength is acquired by a planet with Reference to its decauate position being in the lst v 2pd, or 3rd part of a
sign. Male planets are : the Sun, Mars, and Jupiter. Female
planets are Venus and the Moon. Saturn ^nd Mercury are
eunuch bodies. A Drekkona bala of 15 Virupas will be acquired
by planets as under :
Male planet in 1st Drekkana.
Female planet in 2nd Drekkana,
Eunuch planet in 3rd Drekkana.
For calculations of Drekkana, see Speculum of Drekkanas,
supra. Needless to mention that if the Drekkana position is

Chapter 27 267
other than what is required, then the strength on this count is
nil. This strength is also called Linga Bala.
The Balas so far acquired, viz. (I) Uchcha bala, (2) Saptavargaja bala, (3) Ojhayugmarasiamsa bala, (4) Kendradi bala and
(5) Drekkana bala be all added together to get net Sthaana bala
or positional strength. These are in Virupas and hence be
divided by 60 to know the strength in Rupas.
3T¥T»T ^ f?r*T flfaUvall
7-7$. DIG BALA OR DIRECTIONAL STRENGTH :
Deduct the 4th house (i.e. Nadir) from the longitudes of
Sun and Mars; the 7th house (i.e. descendant) from that of
Jupiter and Mercury; the 10th house (i.e. meridian) from that of
Venus and the Moon; and lastly the ascendant from that of
Saturn. If the sum is above 180 degrees deduct the sum from
360. The sum arrived in either way be divided by 3 which will
be the Digbala (or directional strength ) of the planet.
Notes : As seen earlier, Jupiter and Mercury have Digbala
in the ascendant. Venus and the Moon have this bala in the
4th house (i.e. Nadir), Saturn in the descendant and the Sun and
Mars on the meridian. These strengths are full on the cusp of
the respective house and nil on the cusp of the opposite house.
Hence note down the longitude of the concerned planet and the
cuspal degree on which it is bereft of directional strength.
Deduct the latter from the former. If the product exceeds 180’
deduct the same again from 360. The sum so arrived at be
divided by 3, which will denote the Digbala of the planet in
Virupas. The directional strength acquired by a planet when it
is on fts most powerful point is I Rupa or 60 Virupas. For
example Saturn exactly on the 7th cusp gets 1 Rupa, and exactly
on the ascending degree gets zero Virupa as directional
strength.
fflHHhslJn dflR ||c;M
ataw fallen

Brihat Parasara Hora Sastrd
8-9. KAALA BALA OR TEMPORAL STRENGTH
(upto sloka 17) : Firstly NATHONNATHA BALA. Find out
the difference between midnight and apparent birth time which
is called Unnata. Deduct Unnata from 30 ghatis to obtain Nata
(-FT). Double the Nata in ghatis which will indicate identical
Natha bala for the Moon, Mars and Saturn. Deduct the Natha
from 60 to know the Unnatha bala of the Sun, Jupiter and
Venus. Mercury, irrespective of day and night, gets full
Nathonnatha Bala (i.e, of 1 Rupa or 60 Virupas).
Notes : Kaala Bala (or temporal strength) comprises of
the following sub divisions : .
1) Nathonnatha Bala (diurnal and nocturnal strengths),
2) Paksha Bata (Paksha=fortnight).
3) Tribhaga Bala (strength due to day/night being made in
3 parts).
4) Varsha-Masa-Dioa-Hora Bala (Varsha— astrological
year, Masa=month, Dina=week day and Hora—
planetary hour).
5) Ayana Bala (equinoctial strength).
6) Yudhdha Bala (strength due to partaking in planetary
war).
Though Naisargika bala discussed in between in sloka 14,
this is an independent source of strength without reference to
Kala bala.
Firstly Nathonnatabala, Moon, Mars and Saturn get this
strength in the night. The Sun, Jupiter and Venus get diurnal
strength or strength in day time. The same Virupas of strength
will be identically held by all the planets of each group. That
is whatever will be the Sun’s Nathonnata strength will be
identically held by Jupiter and Venus. Similarly the other
group.
Formula : Natha ghatis (apparent) x 2=Natha bala for
Moon group.
60— Moon’s Natha Bala— Bala for Sun group
Mercury always gets 1 Rupa as Nathonnatha bala irrespective of the birth being in day or night time.
Another simple method is as under :
Natha Bala = Brith time in degrees
— 180 Minus birth time in degrees
Unnatha Bala

Chapter 27 269
For this purpose count from apparent midnight to birth
time at the rate of one degree per minute of time, or 15° per
hour. This will convert the birth time into degrees etc.
«w tow fareihw *1
faWt wrote; u ? on
«n f TRt «TWHWT U??ll
10-11. PAKSHA BALA : Deduct from the Moon’s longitude that of the Sun. If the sum exceeds 6 signs, deduct the
same from 12. The product so obtained be converted into
degrees etc and divided by 3 which will indicate the Paksha
bala of each of the benefic planets. The Paksha bala of benefic
should be deducted from 60 which will go to each malefic as
paksha bala.
Notes : Paksha bala is decided on the following basis :
Paksha bala for benefic — Moon minus Sun
Paksha bala for malefic =60 minus benefic’s Paksha bala,
‘Benefics form one group and each of them will get the
same figure of Paksha bala. (Mercury is to be treated as a
malefic if he is conjunct a malefic. The Moon in dark half is a
malefic.) The bala of benefics should be deducted from 60 to
get a malefic’s Paksha bala. If Moon— Sun is above 180, deduct
it from 360.
Whether the Moon is in a group of benefics or otherwise,
her Paksha bala is always doubled just as the Sun’s Ayana bala.
12. TRIBHAGA BALA : One Rupa is obtained by
Mercury (if birth is) in the first one third part of day time, by
the Sun in the second one third part of the day and by Saturn in
the last third part of the day. Similarly, the Moon, Venus and
Mars get full strength (of one Rupa) in the first, second and
last one third parts of the night. Jupiter gets this strength at
all times.

Brlhat Parasara flora Sastra
Notes : This strength goes to one planet only, as I rupa.
Jupiter, however, gets 1 Rupa irrespective of birth time.
The day duration or night duration according to birth
being in day or night must be divided by 3. With the foIlQwing
table, Tribhaga bala can be known, according to the birth
being :
in 1st part of day— 1 Rupa to Mercury
in 2nd part of day=l Rupa to the Sun
in 3rd part of day=l Rupa to Saturn
in 1st part of night=l Rupa to the Moon
in 2nd part of nighj— 1 Rupa to Venus
in 3rd part of night= 1 Rupa to Mars
atanytime=l Rupa to Jupiter
Thus two planets will get 1 Rupa of Tribhaga bala. That
is 1 Rupa to Jupiter and 1 Rupa to the respective planet in
whose part the birth occurs. The other 5 planets do not get any
Tribhaga bala.
flfow g*T lit 311
13. V A R SHA-MA A 5.4 -DIN A- HO R A BALA : 15,-30, 45
and 60 Virupas are in order given to Varsha lord, Maasa lord
Dina lord and Hora lord. Naisargika bala (or natural, strength)
has already been explained.
Notes : Under this heading, four different planets get
certain Virupas. These strengths are :
Varsha (Abda) lord = 15 Virupas
Masa (month), lord 30 Virupas
Dina (day) lord = 45 Virupas
Hora (hour) lord = 60 Virupas
How to decide the said lordships is explained as under.
Varsha lord : Astrological year is different from other
measures. The day on which the astrological year begins can
be found out from the Speculum of abbreviated Aharganas,
vide p.272. To know the Varsha lord we should first ascertain the
number of days past from the beginning of Creation. This is a
very tedious process and hence we are concerned with the
abbreviated Ahargana (or the number of days past from

Chapter 27 271
Creation). According to late Rev. Ebenezer Burgess, who
translated Surya Siddhanta in English, as on January 1, I860,
the number of days past from the beginning of Creation are
To know the day on which the astrological year in which
birth took place began adopt the following formula. Divide the
number of days past from the day of Creation till the day of
birth by 160. Reject remainder and multiply the quotient by
3. Increase the post-multiplied product by I and divide by 7.
The remainder will indicate the week day on which the astrological year giving birth to the native opened. Remainder 1
indicates Sunday, 2 Monday and so on and so forth.
Assume that birth took place on June I, 1984. Locate
from the Speculum of Abbreviated Aharganas for January O
date 1984 as 65142. Add 153 being the number of days upto
the day of birth (inclusive the birth date). Thus we get abbreviated days past from creation to birth as 65295. This product
when divided by 360 yields a quotient of 181. Remainder is to
be rejected. 181 multiplied by 3 indicates 543. Increased by 1,
this gives 544. When 544 is divided by 7, the remainder is 5.
That is, the astrological year of birth for one born on June 1,
1984 began on a Thursday. Hence this strength or Varsha
bala goes to Jupiter, the ruler of Thursday.
Masa Lord : Divide the same Ahargana by 30 and the
quotient (devoid of remainder) indicates months passed from
Creation to birth. The completed months be multiplied by 2
and increased by 1. The latest sum should be divided by 7 and
the remainder indicates on which the birth month began.
Continuing with the same case, we divide 65295 by 30.
Quotient is 2176. This sum multiplied by 2 and increased by
1 denotes 4353. Dividing 4353 by 7, we get a remainder of 6
denoting Friday. That is, the month of birth began on Friday
and the Masa bala goes to Venus, the lord of Friday.
Dina lord : Though the week day of birth can be known
from ephemeris or perpetual calendars, we better adopt the
method prescribed which will confirm if the Ahargana followed
is correct or is otherwise. The number of t*'ys as arrived above
indicating Ahargana be divided by 7 and the remainder will
indicate the week day of birth. In the example case 65295

Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
divided by 7 leaves a remainder of 6. That is June 1,1984 is
Friday. Hence the Ahargana followed by us is correct. While
considering Dina bala, the birth should be treated from sunrise
to sunrise.
Hence in this case, the Dina bala goes to Venus, ruler of
Friday.
Hora$aIa : Hora means planetary hour. Each day from
sunrise to sunrise is divided into 24 equal parts of one hour or
2.5 ghatikas. These Horas are ruled by the 7 planets from the
Sun to Saturn. The first Hora of the day is ruled by the lord
of the week day. The 2nd one is ruled by the lord of the 6th
week day counted from the first ruler. The 3rd Hora is ruled
by the lord of the 6th week day counted from the 2nd Hora
lord. Similarly it proceeds in the same manner till the first
Hora of the next day is taken over by the lord of that day
himself. Whichever planet rules the birth Hora gets the Hora
Bala. Horas are to be calculated for mean local time and nqt
standard time of birth.
For easy reference, consult the Speculum of Horas
Vide infra.
Speculum of Abbreviated Ahargana for January 0
Yr. Ahargana Yr. Ahargana Yr. Ahargana

Chapter 27
Yr.
Aiiargana
Yr.
Ahargana
Yr.
Ahargana
oo
oc
O

Brihat Parasara Horn Sastra
Yr.
Ahargana
Yr. Ahargana
Yr.
Ahargana
• Leap years.
Common Years — Days for Zero Dates of Months
Date
Days
Date
Days
Date
Days
Jan- 0
May 0
Feb. 0
June 0
Mar. 0
July 0
April 0
Aug. 0
Leap Years-
—Days for Zero Dates of Months
Date
Days
Date
Days
Date
Days
Jan. 0
May 0
Sept 0
Feb- 0
June 0
Oct. 0
Mar. 0
July 0
Nov. 0
April 0
Aug. 0
Dec. 0

Chapter 27
Speculum of Horas
Hora
Sun
Mon
Tut
Wed
Thu
Fri
Sat
Sun
Moon
Mar
Merc
Jup
Ven
Sat
Ven
Sat
Sun
Moon
Mar
Merc
Jup
Merc
Jup
Ven
Sat
Sun
Moon Mar
Moon
Mar
Merc
Jup
Ven
Sat
Sun
Sat
Sun
Moon
Mar
Merc
Jup
Ven
Jup
Ven
Sat
Sun
Moon
Mars
Merc
Mars
Merc
Jup
Ven
Sat
Sun
Moon
Sun
Moon
Mars
Merc
Jup
Ven
Sat
Ven
Sat
Sun
Moon
Mars
Merc Jup
Merc
Jup
Ven
Sat
Sun
Moon
Mars
Moon
Mars
Merc
Jup
Ven
Sat
Sun
Sat
Sun
Moon
Mars
Merc
Jup
Ven
Jup
Ven
Sat
Sun
Moon
Mars
Mere
Mars
Merc
Jup
Ven
Sat
Sun
Moon
Sun
Moon
Mars
Merc
Jup
Ven
Sat
Ven
Sat
Sun
Moon
Mars
Merc
Jup
Merc
Jup
Ven
Sat
Sun
Moon
Mars
Moon Mars
Merc
Jup
Ven
Sat
Sun
Sat
Sun
Moon
Mars
Merc
Jup
Ven
Jup
Ven
Sat
Sun
Moon
Mars
Merc
Mars
Merc
Jup
Ven
Sat
Sun
Moon
Sun
Moon
Mars
Merc
Jup
Ven
Sat
Ven
Sat
Sun
Moon
Mars
Merc
Jup
Merc Jup
Ven
Sat
Sun
Moon Mars

Brihal Parasara Hora Sastra
eRTT* l
wHV fra! ii^ii
14, NAISARGIKA BALA (NATURAL STRENGTH) :
Divide one Rupa (or 60 Virupas) by 7 and multiply the resultant
product by 1 to 7 separately which will indicate the Natural
Strength due to Saturn, Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus, the
Moon and the Sun, respectively.
Notes : As per the above rule, the Naisargika Bala in
Rupas are indicated below so that the reader need not calculate
himself.
Sun — 1. 000 Rupa
Moon— 0.857 Rupa
Mars — 0.286 Rupa
Merc = 0.429 Rupa
Jup =: 0.571 Rupa
Ven = 0.714 Rupa
Sat = 0.143 Rupa
This strength is acquired by a planet due to its luminosity.
The brightest gets the highest Naisargika Bala while the least
bright gets the least Naisargika Bala. The Sun is the brightest
among the 7 planets while Saturn is the darkest. The brightness
of the planets can be guessed from the above figures.
This is an independent strength and has nothing to do with
Kala Bala, and is constant for all nativities and for ever. Hence
no individual calculations need be done.
Naisargika Bala has a significant use in the Shadbala, If
two planets are of equal Shadbala, then the one with higher
Naisargika Bala prevails over the other.
mmHC KT: tsrowfalT: I
« i UH»j^ i rvi qgira^f<reT m \\ un
fJHIledliytldT $PTT: I
str tott i
fafawr

Chapter 27 277
15-17 AY AN A BALA : 45, 33 and 12 are the Khandas
for calculating Ayana Bala. Add Ayanamsa to the planet (for
which Ayana Bala is required) and find out the Bhuja (distance
from the nearest equinox). Add the figure corresponding to the
Rasi (of the Bhuja) to the Bhuja. The degrees etc. of the Bhuja
(devoid of Rasi) be multiplied by the figure corresponding to the
higher of the left out Khandas and divided by 30. Add the
resultant product to the sum obtained earlier. Convert this
into Rasi etc. If the Moon and Saturn are in Libra or ahead
add to this 3 Rasis, and if sn Aries to Virgo reduce from 3 Rasis.
Similarly it is reverse for the Sun, Mars, Venus and Jupiter, (i.e.
addition or deduction is converse). For Mercury 3 Rasis are
always additive. The resultant sum in Rasi, degrees and minutes
be divided by 3 to get the Ayana Bala in Rupas.
Notes : Ayana Bala can be found out on the following
simple formula.
Ayana Bala — 23 27 + Kranti v
=(23 0 27' plus or minus Kranti)x 1.2793
The following points have to be remembered in respect of
of Krantis. When the Moon or Saturn have Southern Kranti or
when the Sun, Mars, Jupiter or Venus have Northern Kranti, take
plus. In a contrary situation in respect of these 6 planets, take
minus. As far as Mercury is concerned, it is always plus
whether he has Southern Kranti or Northern Kranti. Krantis
(or declinations) can be ascertained from standard modern
ephemeris.
The Sun’s Ayana Bala is again multiplied by 2 whereas for
others the product arrived in Virupas is considered as it is.
The following speculum will help the reader to easily work
out the Ayana Bala, when the Kranti of a planet is known.

ttrihat Parasara Hora Sastra
Speculum of Ayana Bala
Kranti
Ayana
Bala
Kranti
ft *
l 1C
Ayafta Kranti Ayana
Bala + Bala

Chapter 27

Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
Kraoti Ayana Kranti
+ Bala +
Ayana Kranti Ayana
Bala + Bala

Chapter 27
Kranti
Ayana
Bala
Kranti
Ayana
Bala
Kranti
Ayana
Bala
o t

Brihat Parasara Bora Sastra
Kranti Ayana Kranti A) ana Kranti Ayana
+ Bala + Bala + Bala

Chapter 27
Kranti
Ayana
Bala
Kranti
Ayana Kranti Ayana
Bata +. Bala

Brihat Parasara Bora Sastra
fait: *TR<J rTfars^R^' **J?Rll$e;li
18. MOTIONAL STRENGTH FOR SUN AND MOON :
The Sun’s Cheshta Bala (or motional strength) will correspond
to his Ayana Bala. The Moon's Paksha Bala will itself be her
Cheshta Bala.
Notes : For the Sun and the Moon, there is no separate
method of Cheshta Bala computation. The Sun’s Ayana Bala will
itself be his Cheshta Bala (or motional strength) while the Moon’s
Paksha Bala is her Cheshta Bala. For the other 5 planets, the
method is described in slokas 24-25 infra.
•CT'Tf’PTKtfH ?fzn \
19. DRIG BALA (ASPECTUAL STRENGTH) : Reduce
one fourth of the Drishti Pinda if a planet has malefic aspects on
it and add a fourth if it is aspected by a benefic. Super add the
entire aspect of Mercury and Jupiter to get the net strength of a
planet.
3T*T eTIT&tTT'tTT § t
20. PLANETARY WAR : Should there be a war between
the starry planets (i.e. between 2 planets from Mars to Saturn, in
a given horoscope), the difference between the Shadbalas of the
two should be added to the victor’s shadbala and deducted from
the Shadbala of the vanquished.
TTRI HBT I
*TT StTSfr^TT %frT ^TOimcjQT *lfall^H
ttfarfWiMew i
qTd t
21-23 PLANETARY MOTIONS (MARS TO SATURN) ;
Eight kinds of motions are attributed to planets. These are Vakra

Chapter 27
(retrogression), Anuvakra (entering the previous sign in retrograde motion), Vikala (devoid of Motion or in stationary position), Manda (somewhat slower motion than usual), Mandatara
(slower than the previous mentioned motion), Sama (somewhat
increasing in motion as against Manda), Chara (faster than Sama)
and Atichara (entering next sign in accelerated motion). The
strengths allotted due to such 8 motions are : 60, 30, 15, 30, 15,
qyinfsw SgcT IRYII
ITFftfief faftfWT fofa \
24-25 MOTIONAL STRENGTH FOR MARS ETC. : Add •
together the mean and true longitudes of a planet and divide the
ame by two. Reduces this sum from the Seeghrocha (or apogee)
of the planet. The resultant product will indicate the Cheshta
Kendra (or Seeghra kendra) of the planet from 12 signs. The Rasi,
degrees and minutes so arrived be converted into degrees, minutes
etc. and divided by 3 which will denote the motional strength of
the planet. Thus there are six sources of strength called Sthaana
Bala Digbala, Kaalabala, Drigbala, Cheshta Bala and Naisargika
Bala.
Notes : Take the average between a planet’s mean longitude and true longitude (i. e. Mars to Saturn). Deduct this
product from its Seeghrocha which will be its Cheshta Kendra.
If this exceeds 180 degrees deduct again from 360 degrees.
Divide the Cheshta Kendra by 3 which will be the motional
strength of the planet.
sitanra sro i

Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
tf^rcrjjcT Far^^fagrmffsrwiT i
Sfa RT^vT TW HTRFtj r? g*)fRT»T u^tu
26-29 BHAVA BALAS ; Thus I explained about the
planetary strengths. Deduct the 7th house (longitude of descendant) from the bhava if the bhava happens to be in Virgo,
Gemini, Libra, Aquarius or the first half of Sagittarius, if Aries,
Taurus, Leo or first half of Capricorn or the second half of
Sagittarius happen to be the bhava, deduct the 4th house (Nadir)
from it. Should the Bhava be in Cancer or in Scorpio deduct
from it the ascendant. And deduct the 10th house (meridian)
from the bhava happening to fall in Capricorn second half or
Pisces. Convert the product so obtained (in the respective case)
into degrees etc. and divide by 3 to get the strength of the bhava.
If the balance in the process of deducting the Nadir, Meridian,
ascendant or descendant exceeds 6 signs, deduct it again from 12
signs before converting into degrees and dividing by 3. The
product after division should be increased by a fourth if the
bhava in question has a benefic aspect on it. And a malefic’s
aspect will entail one fourth reduction. If Jupiter or Mercury
aspect a bhava, add that planet’s aspectual strength also. And
then SLperadd the strength acquired by the lord of that Bhava.
This will be the net strength of that Bhava.
gflJcTH H^oU
tftqfoit ms: msmmgmites: i
faf?T «TTSfa<T
30-31 SPECIAL RULES . The bhavas occupied by Jupiter
and Mercury will each get an addition of 1 rupa while each of
the bhava occupied by Saturn, Mars and the Sun suffer 1 rupa
reduction. 15 virupas will have to be added to the bhavas falling in Seershodaya Rasis if birth happens to be in day time, to
the bhavas falling in dual (or common) Rasis if birth happens to
be in twilight and to the bhavas falling in Prishtodaya Rasis if
birth be in night.
TOUT T>< Pfl'iJcC |
ffsrms: gnfWm s?wgfmTT: tort u 3^11

Chapter 27
ct?t gqfaq) *mr: »
arfej^r ^JT^fZTR ^t=f qqqfaq> feq ! n^n
32-33. SHADBALA REQUIREMENTS : 390, 3*0, 300,
42C, 390, 330 and 300 Virupas are the Shadbala Pindas needed
for the Sun etc. (upto Saturn) to be considered strong. If the
strength exceeds, the planet is deemed to be very strong.
Notes : The minimum Shadbala requirements of the
planets are as under ;
The Sun — 6.5 Rupas
The Moon— 6.0 Rupas
Mars — 5.0 Rupas
Mercury = 7.0 Rupas
Jupiter = 6.5 Rupas
Venus — 5.5 Rupas
Saturn = 5.0 Rapas
If a planet has the required shadbala, it will prove favourable to the native by virtue of its strength. However, Saturn’s
exterme strength will give long life as well as miseries.
STOTcnfa ^T-qfttgSJFPTT:
?rqq 11^ nil
qeqrfTVrq qta-qr*q>; qutjjq spqrq i
! Il^ll
34-36. Jupiter, Mercury and the Sun are strong if each of
their Sthaana Bala, Digbala, Kaalabala, Cheshta Bala and Ayana
Bala are respectively 165, 35, 50, 112 and 30 Virupas. The same
required for the Moon and Venus are 133, 50, 30, 100 and 4a
For Mars and Saturn these are 96, 30, 40, 67 and 20.
Notes ; Even if the Shadbala Pinda is short of the sums
stipulated in the previous two slokas, certain minimum requirements of the constituent strengths will make the planet considerably favourable. For this purpose, Jupiter, Mercury and the Sun

Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
can be put in ‘A’ group. The Moon and Venus form ‘B’ group
while Mars and Saturn ‘C’ group. The constituent Balas in
Virupas that should be minimum are :
Type
Group ‘A'
Group ‘B’
Group ‘C’
Sthaanabala
DigbaLa
Kaalabala
Cheshtabala
Ayanabala
Ayanabala
has been separately shown
above. It is
normally a practice to include Ayana Bala in the Xaalabala itself. In that case, Ayanabala should be separately seen apart
from seeing the rest of the Kaalabala, as per the requirements
denoted above.
tjj fie^T 1 I
^ u^vsn
tftM&Sltfcj 5H?tf?TcTT II^cII
37-38. BHA VA EFFECTS : 0 Brahmin, thus the various
sources of strengths be gathered together and effects declared.
Whatever yogas or effects have been stated with respect to a
bhava will come to pass through the strongest planet,
nfriita srrWt a: i
TO 1 Hebert STfa * tffTOmfoll
39-40. ELIGIBILITY TO ISSUE FRUITFUL PREDICTIONS : O Maitreya, the words of one who has achieved skill in
mathematics, one who has put in industrious efforts in the
branch of grammar, one who has knowledge of justice, one who
is intelligent, one who has knowledge of geography, space and
time, one who has conquered his senses, one who is skilfully
logical (in estimation) and one who is favourable to astrology,
will doubtless be truthful.

STWWTsmir: II ^cll
Chapter 28
Ishta And Kashta Balas
3r«T g y^ii l
n^avnvd yq-c'^f^d u^ii
1. Now I narrate the benefic and evil tendencies of the
planets based on which the Dasa effects — good or bad— can be
decided.
FiKKtft y?r i
2. EXALTATION RAYS : Deduct Le planet’s debilitation point from its actual position. If the sum exceeds 6 sings,
deduct from 12 signs. The said sum should then be increased
by I Rasi. The degrees etc. be multiplied by 2 which when
considered along with Rasis will indicate the Uchcha Rasmi of
the planet.
?refVtf »
faiRtaf *uit irii
«rcST%7JT T^TT? 1 ? Tmfs% Ill'll
3-4. CHESHTA RASMI : Cheshta Rasmis are to be calculated from Cheshta Kendra similar to Uchcha Rasmi computations. The Cheshta Kendras of planets from Mars to Saturn
have already been explained. Add 3 Rasis to Sayana Sun (i.e.
Sun with Ayanamsa), which will be the Cheshta Kendra for the
Sun. The sidereal longitude of the Sun should be deducted
from the Moon to get the Moon’s Cheshta Kendra. If the
Cheshta Kendra (for any planet) is in excess of 6 signs, deduct it
from 12 signs. Add 1 sign and multiply the degrees etc. by 2
which will indicate the Cheshta Rasmi of the planet.

Brihat Parasara.Hora Sastra
f^slsqrawn??qrq qraKtuitti
5. BENEFICIAL AND MALEEIC RAYS : Add the
Uchcha Rasmis and Cheshta Rasmis together and divide by two.
The result will be auspicious rays (Subha Rasmis). Deduct
from 8 the Subha Rasmis to obtain inauspicious rays (or
Asubha Rasmis).
«^TR 5 q>5f^?T I
BTOfaWTOI wnr <Tcqft7cI*xqcTq ll^ll
6. ISHTA AND KASHTA (BENEFIC AND MALEFIC
TENDENCIES) : Reduce 1 from each of Cheshta Rasmi and
Uchcha Rasmi. Then multiply the products by 10 and add
together. Half of the sum will represent the Ishta Phala (benefic
tendency) of the planet. Reduce Ishta Phala from 60 to obtain
the planet’s Kashta Phala (or malefic tendency).
^HTTcf ||V3|t
TT*n: 1
3^ ^ VPtt 9 <T^lic;M
qfe?r: Tf^Rf TOsjq * qmj* n| \
wq faa I trrwrs^T?m utn
. 7-9. ISHTA KASHTA SAPTAVARGAJA PHALA : 60,
45, 30, 22, 15, 8,4, 2 and 0 are the Subhankas (or Subha Griha
Pankthis or benefic points) due to a planet’s placement respectively in exaltation, Moolatrikona, own sign, extreme friend’s
sign, friend’s sign, equal’s sign, enemy’s sign, bitter enemy’s sign
and debilitation sign. If Subhanka is deducted from 60,
Asubhanka (or Asubha Pankthi or inauspicious points) will
emerge. O Brahmin, in other Vargas, these are halved.
qrciTfl qq 5TcT: 7TTT 1
3TTjq fqq fa?Nfqf?T
10. A planet is considered auspicious in the first five of the
said places. In the sixth place it is equal, i.e. neither good nor
bad. And in the other three places it is inauspicious.

Chapter 28 291
cnit: w4 stem**
$T^sfa% *T*T rsrarfcsfsrfc \
*m <b% *tr>t** ?i«n n uqwi frrluwt
11-12. NATURE OF EFFECTS DUE TO DIGBALA
ETC : The directional strength of planet is itself representative
of the effects due to the direction and Dinabala itself is indicative of effects due to day. Whatever quantum of Digbala etc. are
obtained by a planet will be the extent of auspicious effects
acquirable on account of that strength. Deducting those figures
from 60, the extent of inauspiciousness is known. If auspiciousness is more in the case of planet’s strength, the Dasa and
Bhavas related to that planet will be auspicious; And these are
converse if inauspiciousness is predominant.
srt: qirfa: i
*j*TTf% f ii^ii
jT'fl , m<T>vrrwri ^ i
13-14. SAPTAVARGAJA BALA AND ISHTA KASHTA
( Continued ) : The various strengths (i.e. the other 6 vargas
vide slokas 7-9 supra) be multiplied by the respective planet’s
shadbala pinda which will indicate the auspiciousness of the
varga concerned. Auspicious or inauspicious aspect will be
obtained by multiplying the Subha or Asubha Pankthi. Similarly
auspicious or inauspicious effects will be known by multiplying
the auspicious or inauspicious strength by the respective
Pankthi.
?n*HT * ^ sw \
rrcft nun
Suitor rWTTl
!155llT|vWfir*T ^ SlW I * I I
qf stitot 4TWW wfci n?v»«

Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
0TBS3PTOW f<sn% * VT^SfiWT I
*1% TOTRfsq^: fwil^ll
gqWTfa fo UTaFTTO: snftfaci: I
rfctf*TT% ^ <T«m% erapf! WM4M V$R 11$ $.11
tfifrsti f^Rw^rrcrr «b^*j i
?P#J*TRRT 9>H fttj WTTSSpTTT l|^o||
15-20. EFFECTS OF A BHAV A : The strength of a Bhava
and its lord have already been explained. The actual effects
will be a combination of bhava strength and its lord’s strength.
If there is a benefic in the bhava add the same to the auspicious
effects and deduct from inauspicious effects, which will denote
the net auspicious or inauspicious effects. If a malefic is in the
bhava, reverse the process, i.e. add inauspicious effects and
deduct auspicious effects. Similarly aspects and strengths. If a
planet is exalted or with such a dignity, add auspicious effects
and reduce inauspicious effects. For debilitation etc. it is converse. In Ashtaka Varga, add Bindus (auspicious points) and
deduct Karanas (inauspicious points). If a bhava extends to two
Rasis, the rectification will be done as per both the lords. In
that case whichever Rasi has more Bindus that Rasi will yield
more favourable results concerning that Bhava. If both the
Rasis have more auspicious Bindus take the average. Thus the
auspicious and inauspicious effects of a bhava be understood.
3P*q3TSUm: IRfcll
Chapter 29
Bhava Padas
dfavta'bsr srnj sit? n$n
affW TTg fiW TNft eiRFU <Rg«rihl3lt

Chapter 29 453
*W*T*T<T fr*l ! I
fliJtTm* ?TS ^OT *?«rN faf: 11311
1-3. METHOD OF PAD A («k) CALCULATIONS : O
Brahmin, I shall now tell you about the Padas (or Arudhas)
for bhavas and planets as well, as laid down by the earlier
great sages. The Pada of the ascendant will correspond to the
sign arrived at by counting so many signs from the ascendant
lord as he is away from the ascendant. Similarly Padas for other
nouses be known through their lords. The word “Pada” exclusively denotes the Pada for ascendant (or Lagna Pada).
Notes : Maharshi Jaimini (author of Poorva Mimamsa)
extensively dealt with this system of astrology as given in ch. 2933 hereof. Though sage Parasara has originally sown seeds, later
on Jaimini delved deep and located many pearls out of his great
wisdom and intuition. Thus it has become to be known more
by the name Jaimini astrology rather than Parasari.
To work out the Padas etc. enunciated in these chapters,
we shall consider a nativity as indicated below calling it the
standard nativity.
Date of birth : May 21, 1944 at 1902 hrs (War time)
Merc
Ven
Moon
Sun
Sat
Rasi
Mars
Rahu
Jup
Ascdt

Brihat Parasara flora Sastra
Sun
Ketu
Jup
Navamsa
Ascdt
Mars
Merc
Moon
Ven
Sat
Rahu
Longitudes
Planet
Deg
Min
Sec
The Sun
The Moon
Man
Mercury
Jupiter
Venus
Saturn
Rahu
Ketu

Chapter 29
In calculating the Arudhas for the various houses, we have
to proceed as under. First of all we understand the 12 Arudhas
thus :
1 . Lagna Pada (or simply Pada)
2. Dhana Pada
3. Vikrama (Bhratru) Pada
4. Matru (Sukha) Pada
5. Mantra or Putra Pada
6. Roga or Satru Pada
7. Dara Pada (Kalatra Pada)
8. Marana Pada
9. Pitru Pada
10. Karma Pada
11. Labha Pada
12. Vyaya Pada
: Arudha of
: Arudha of
: Arudha of
: Arudha of
: Arudha of
: Arudha of
: Arudha of
: Arudha of
: Arudha of
: Arudha of
: Arudha of
: Arudha of
1st house.
2nd house.
3rd house.
4th house.
5th house.
6th house.
7th bouse.
8th house.
9th house.
10th house,
ltth house.
12th house.
In calculating the Arudha Pada for a house, note the
number of signs its lord moved away from that particular sign.
Count so many signs from the lord in question. The sign so
arrived will be the Arudha for the sign under consideration.
In the standard nativity, Scorpio is the ascendant and its
lord Mars is 9 signs away from the ascendant and is in Cancer.
Arudha Chart
KII

Brihat Par osar a ft or a SaStrd
Hence we count 9 signs from Cancer and get Pisces. Pisces is thus
the Arudha or Pada of the ascendant (i.e. Lagna Pada). Now see
the Arudha chart for the said nativity on p. 295. (The figures
MPad2 j“ R ° man nUmbers denotc the Bhava for which it stands
In the said chart, for example, Scorpio has the Mantrarudha (5th), Vikramarudha (3rd) and Labharudha (Ilth). Sagittarius has none. Thus, one sign may contain more than one Arudha
while another sign may not be an Arudha at all.
aft** qnjliYH
*WI |
4-5. SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS : The same house or the
7th from it does not become its Pada. When the Pada falls in
the same house, the 10th therefrom be treated as its Pada.
Similarly when the 7th becomes the Pada of a house, the 4th
from the original house in question be treated as its Pada. If the
ruler of a bhava be in the 4th from the bhava, then the very
house occupied be noted as the Pada. 3
Notes : In these two slokas, exceptions to the earlier rules
in calculating Arudhas are outlined. These are :
1. If the lord of a house is in that very house, then the
Pada for the time being falls in that house itself. In that case
as per the exception, we have to count ten signs to get the actual
Pada. For example, Sagittarius is certain Bhava having Jupiter
therein, with the Pada having ‘fallen’ in Sagittarius itself
Instead of treating Sagittarius as the Arudha, we count 10 signs
from Sagittarius and reach Virgo. Thus Virgo is the Pada for
Jupiter having been in Sagittarius.
2. If the lord of bhava is in its opposite house, then for the
time being the 7th itself becomes Arudha. Instead of treating
that 7th house as Pada Arudha, we have to count 10 signs from
the said 7th house which will indicate the 4th from the original
Bhava in question as Arudha. For example, Aquarius is the
ascendant having Saturn in the 7th in Leo. Counting 10 signs
from Leo, we reach Taurus. Hence Taurus is the Arudha for
Aquanus ascendant having Saturn in Leo.

Chapter 29 297
* 3. If the lord of a bhava is in the 4th from the bhava, no
counting is required. The house occupied by the lord itself (i.e,
4th from the bhava) is the Arudha. For example, Leo ascendant having the Sun is the 4th sign in Scorpio gets Scorpio itself
as Arudha Lagna.
TTf*T WKN
qtf fa* | HrT^TflT ||\3|t
6-7. PADAS FOR PLANTES : Note the position of a
planet and see how many signs away is its own sign with reference to its position. Count so many sign from the said own
sign and the resultant sign will become the Arudha of the
planets. If a planet owns two Rasis or if a Rasi is owned by two
planets, consider the stronger and declare effects accordingly.
Notes : Here we are taught of what can be called as
Graharudha or planet’s Arudha. From a perusal of the above
verses, we can take it to mean that there are 9 planetary
Arudhas. Since the sage uses “Rasi owned by two planets” he
obviously hints at co-rulership of Rahu and Ketu. Rahu is a
co-ruler of Aquarius while Ketu shares ownership of Scorpio
( Vide sloka 157, ch, 46 infra).
Assume that the Sun is in Capricorn. Counting from Capricorn to Leo we get 8 signs. Again from Leo we count 8 signs
and reach Pisces which is the Arudha for the Sun. The exceptions stated for Bhavarudhas do not apply to Graharudhas.
In case of other 5 planets (Mars to Saturn) each owns two
signs. Then the counting of planet’s Arudha in such a case is
with reference to the stronger of the two signs. For deciding
strengths of signs and planets one has to use his wise judgement
apart from consulting hints given in ch. 46. However, we do not
have any authentic information available as to how to use Graharudhas. Either we have to work on experience or keep silent on
this issue. The literature available on Jaimini system being
limited nothing more can be said about this.

Brihat Parasara flora Sastrd
3T*m5 qsmfsr?*? m forf**rc fe* I
f |e; it
. ^ItTFcHTT ^tgCtHTfaRT: I
g^Tnq sjqrf^r: 'TTTtfts^T nen
tRfT SffJT ^VjyfHJnf^T^T: I
^|OT 3fT*T^ ?TT?Tt SfOT * *JWf»m:U$oH
'T^TF^IVTtJ^ ITFq q^f^cT H^?TT U^T: |
thtt st Ti^r§ctr> <sn?ft ^ htot:ii??u
8-11. PAD A AND FINANCE (upto stoics 15) : O Brahmin,
I now tell you of some effects of planets based on Pada. If the
1 1th from Lagna Pada is occupied oraspected by a planet the
native will be happy and rich; wealth will come through virtuous
means if a benefic is related as above. A malefic will confer
wealth through questionable means. If there be both a benefic
and a malefic, it will be through both means. If the planet in'
question (i.e. the one so related to 11th from Lagna Pada) be in
exaltation or in own sign etc., there will be plenty of gains and
plenty of happiness.
srnr^ fssrcrat? Iii^h
12. O excellent of the Brahmins, if the 12th from Lagna
Pada is unaspected as the 11th from Lagna Pada is being aspected by a planet, then the gains will be uninterrupted.
%$rj i
^rfq toifq sr|jq*mmn% n??u
fsrq ! fT5n<fs*q^TJT^ \
fTH’HFqrfMfa It f VII
STItT^q ?TFW^q ftfefl f fr OyUH I
snssi A*
13-15. O Brahmin, the quantum of gains will correspond
to the number of planets in or aspecting the 1 1th from Lagna

Chapter 29
’ Pada. If there is Argala for the said 1 1 th there will be more
gains while a benetic Argala will bring still more gains. If the
said benefic causing Argala be in his exaltation, the gains will be
still higher. If the said 11th is aspected by a benefic from the
ascendant* the 9th etc. gains will increase in the ascending order.
In all these cases, the 12th from Pada be simultaneously free
from malefic association.
Notes : From the Arudha ascendant, the 11th house is
important in deciding the financial gains to be enjoyed by the
native. Simultaneously the 12th from Arudha Lagna should be
free from malefic relationship. If the planet related to the 11th
from Lagnarudha is stronger than the one related to 12th from
Lagnarud ha, even then there will be gains. If more are well
related to the 11th gains will be still more.
For Argala, see ch. 31 infra
A benefic placed in the ascendant aspecting the 1 1th from
Arudha Lagna will be still beneficial. If the aspect is from the
9th from Lagna.it will confer much more gains. The 11th
Arudha aspected by a favourable planet will also confer abundant
gains. In the standard nativity, Jupiter is in the 9th in exaltation
and aspects the 1 1 th house from Arudha Lagna and also the
11th Arudha (i e. Labharudha). Hence in Jupiter’s Dasa, the
native can hope for abundant financial and professional gains.
aiqaigcdfiFtN fawftammrr .
gJTltfoT jpunfa I
ftp* fasFFSf virFftsfa CTTOhllUll'
16-17. PADA AND FINANCIAL LOSSES (upto sloka 21) :
If the 12th from Lagna Pada is aspected by conjunct both benefics
and malefics, there will be abundant earnings but plenty of
expenses. The benefic will cause through fair means, malefic
through unfair means and mixed planets through both fair and
unfair means.
Notes : In the standard nativity, the 12th house from
Arudhapada is aspected by Mars (8th aspect). Hence the expenses
are equally high.

300 Hrihat Parasara Horn Sastra
awt ^r^ara;*<sr*n firifonuteu
18. If the 12th from Lagna Pa da is conjunct the Sun,
Venus and Rahu, there will be loss of wealth through the king.
The Moon aspecting (the said trio in the said house) will specifically cause more such losses.
qtrrcspi suit afrit
f*Tc*T 'TFRST U££ll
19. If Mercury is in the 12th from the Lagna Pada and be
with or aspected by benefic similarly there will be expenses
through paternal relatives. A malefic so related to the said
Mercury will cause loss of wealth through disputes.
<rciq: grraur aftfw* t
*T7RS1R sqjft %3I¥r^nT ! U^oU
20. O Brahmin, if Jupiter is in the 12th from Lagna Pada,
aspected by others, the expenses will be through taxes and on
one’s own.
stojt tmgita *ig?h
fa* !
21. O Brahmin, if Saturn is in the 12th from the Lagna
Pada along with Mars and is aspected by others, the expenses
will be through one’s co-born.
arrwr^ s mi ^ star; «sfaar n*n \
fTmq>nvrn=ci«n 113311
22. GAINFUL SOURCES .- Whatever sources of expenses
are indicated above with reference to the 1 2th from Lagna Pada,
gains through similar sources will occur if the llth house so
features with reference to Lagna Pada.
mre gi a *r«T*r sf^r:
ffa a ggn g ? ft ftrfsRT *r 113311

Chapter 29
23. THE 7TH HOUSE FROM PAD A (upto slaka 27) : If
Rahu or Keiu is placed in the 7th from Lagna Pada, the native
will be troubled by stomachial disorders, or by fire.
24. Should there be Ketu in the 7lh from the Lagna Pada
and be with aspect to or be conjunct another malefic, the native
will be adventurous, will have (prematurely) grey hair and big
male organ.
qqrri n^-*Tq:-fq*TT*7T: t
qqt srqqqqftsfi? m:
25. Should one, two or all the three of Jupiter, Venus and
the Moon be in the 7th from Lagna Pada, the native will be very .
wealthy.
WZ: Wfft qrsc q^ W: qqirT I
*frnq tftefq fg^r ! \\\%\\
26. Whether a benefic or a malefic if be exalted in the 7tb
from Lagna Pada, the native will be affluent, and be famous.
ifr cftm: *qr% qqrcqf qrfq?n q*n i
^ q>lT %effasfq HS»T %5T 1 ||^\s||
27. O Brahmin, these yogas as narrated by me with reference to the 7th from the Lagna Pada be also considered from
the 2nd of Lagna Pada.
3WIW> SI sftsft tfT*pfi qqtlTl
28. Anyone of Mercury, Jupiter and Venus be exalted in
the 2nd from Lagna Pada and be with strength, will make the
subject rich.
qfarcsr qt w>m% nfcn qqr \
& iftqi: 'nHt'iTtsfq from qttwfaim:

Brihat Parasara Hora Saslra
29. The yogas so far stated by me with reference to Lagna
Pada be similarly evaluated from Karakamsa as well.
Notes : Karakamsa is the Navamsa occupied by Atmakaraka. For more information about Karakamsa, see ch. 39
infra. Atmakaraka fete, are discussed in ch. 32.
3n<*ST^ OTrTW fM ^ |
trf? wt h faritr ^ernf% t^du
3TT^STeT TRTl fj3T It
«nfa fratra^tfgthi^tu
3!iq^ trr fatRTfFTOFT I
H^ll
*T?T^?TTqt fcif ^ I
»T%^r fa% if ffypr: \\^\\
vi^T'RT^ fasr I c mTfyrt i
fa’nfa^ f%3fHl?nerTrfrmm\ u^xm
for ! ftra: ufa |
fasTrwtfF^'H eftqi TVHT HTlffm: ||^||
^ D'Hlffftjl fg^i ! i
f^R?ST snrPPftT q>vf U^U
30-37. GENERAL : If Mercury is in the 2nd from Arudha
Lagna, the native will lord over the whole country. Venus in
the 2nd from Lagna Pada will make one a poet or a speak er.
the Dara Pada (i e. the Pada of the 7th house) falls in an angle
or in a trine counted from the Lagna Pada or if the Lagna Pada
and Dara Pada both have strong planets, the native will be rich
and be famous in his country. If the Dara Pada falls in the 6th/
8th/J2th from the Lagna Pada, then the native will be popr.^If the
Lagna Pada and the 7th therefrom or an angle/a trjne/an upachaya
therefrom be occupied by a strong planet, there will be happiness
between the husbahd and wife. If the Lagna Pada and Dara Pada
are mutually angular or trinal, there will be amity between the

Chapter 30
couple; if these be in mutually 6th/8th/12th, doubtlessly mutual
enmity will crop up. O Brahmin, similarly mutual relationship
or gain or loss through son et c, be known based on Lagna Pada
and the relative Bhava Pada. fifthe Lagna Pada and Dara Pada
are mutually angular or 3rd and 11th or trinal, the native will be
a king ruling the earth. Similar deductions be made with reference to mutual positions of Lagna Pada and Dhana Pada.
STsfbmisum: ll^o ||
Chapter 30
Upa Pada
M hst* n?ti
fVsr ! sran \
stngqr?* cti^ u?it
fliWWqq ?rr«T ?Tm jfhm i
c w
yjf 3TPTrT ! |
a* qrq$ iivii
SjgpJr^ *T ?R: 1
^q^qiftq<T> q>tW 3RHI¥I«: 11*01
tftRfara TR: ?qpT |
qyq qq f| 11^11
1-6. O Brahmin, now I tell you about Upa Pada, the
auspiciousness of which will confer on thenative happiness from
progeny, wife etc. The Pada of Lagna (i.e. Arudha Lagna)
explained earlier is (of course) of prime importance. Upa pada is
calculated for the bhava following the natal ascendant. This
Upa Pada is also called Gauna Pada. O excellent of the Brahmins,

Brtfiat Parasara Hora Sa stra
if Upa Pada is conjunct oraspected by a benefic planet, one will
obtain full happiness from progeny and spouse. Should the
Upa pada be in a malefic’s sign or is aspected by or is conjunct a malefic, one will become an ascetic and go without a wife. If (in the said circumstances) there be a benefic
aspect (on upa pada or the related . malefic), or conjunction,
deprival of spouse will not come to pass. In this case, the Sun if
exalted or in a friendly sign, is not a malefic He is a malefic if
in debilitation or in an enemy’s sign.
Notes : Regarding Upa pada calculations, there are more
than two views on the same sloka of Parasara or an identical
Sutra from Jaimini. In our text, the word "3ppp:” (Anuchara)
is used which denotes “the house following the ascendant at
birth”. Some interpret this as the 5th from ascendant while I
feel it should be the house succeeding the natal ascendant, which
is the 12th house in normal sense.
However, when we study other commentaries on Jaimini,
(for example Chaukamba Hindi edition), we are taught that it is
the 12th house from natal ascendant in the case of an. odd sign
ascending and it is the 2nd house from natal ascendant in the
case of an even sign ascending. This argument, meseeitis, is
more sound. Accordingly the Pada for the 12th or the 2nd from
Lagna is called Upa pada. In calculating Upa pada, the rules
mentioned in verses 4 and 5 of the previous chapter be kept in
mind.
Now take the standard nativity. The ascendant is Scorpio,
an even sign. Its 2nd house is Sagittarius whose lord Jupiter is
8 signs away from Sagittarius. Hence we count 8 signs from
Jupiter (in Cancer). We so reach Aquarius which is the Upa
pada in this case.
TT'q’J^Plf I
wto ^ safari ^
STTrPPt ^ Hell
ST fT«IT \
Wlfo 3TTT Util

Chapter 30
fgcftq r fkv*t ^fin ""
?pt farsc ! «g?r<g?rt nfcnudi
fgrffrsfa I
**3ut rTPTcft ^nfa jrt 5 ^-rfa *rgr H ? t u
itr -j'I'mPi tft’nrVsrr h fRt ! I
3TKRfa f?Rk> *Rr3ta *T II
7-12. EFFECT OF 2ND FROM VP A PADA : If the 2nd
from Upa pada is a benefic sign or is aspected by or conjunct with
a benefic, the same good results (as for wife and sons) will come
to pass. If there be a planet in the 2nd from Upa pada in
debilitation sign/Amsa or be conjunct with a debilitated/malefic
planet, there will be destruction of wife. If the said occupant
be in exaltation sign/Navamsa or be aspected by another planet,
there will be many charming and virtuous wives. O Brahmin, if
Gemini happens to be the 2nd from Upa pada, then also there
will be many wives. O excellent of the Brahmins, if the Uparudha or the 2nd therefrom be occupied by its own lord or
if the said lord is in bis other own house, the death of wife will
be at an advanced age.
Notes : In the example case, the Upa pada is in Aquarius,
a malefic’s sign and is powerfully aspected by malefic Mars and
is without benefic’s aspect. However, the 2nd from Upa pada is
well fortified as its lord Jupiter is exalted and aspects the said
2nd house. Hence the native is happily married and endowed
with progenic happiness.
Loss of wife is to be expected if the 2nd from Upa pada is
occupied by a debilitated planet, or the occupant of the said 2nd
is in debilitation Navamsa, or is conjunct a debilitated planet (i.e.
a banefic debilitated joining a malefic in the 2nd from Upa pada)
or a benefic joining a malefic in said 2nd house.
Taurus becoming the Upa pada is said to give many wives
or plurality of marriage.
Although there may be combinations for early loss of
spouse if the 2nd lord from Uparudha (or Upapada) is in the 2nd
itself or is in his other sign, it will considerably protect the native
from such a calamity. And the spouse as a result will live udto
an advanced age.

Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
RTT*i> facUT^ I
gvTTtufa fosfal u mru: n^ii
ft-M (f^l fTWt SU 5T I
fawTi?ui?YU
fgflfa UT 5J*m*SIUrTt fg^T ! \
*tww g?yft *rraf tout ^g^rrfN’cTT u\w
13-15. WIFE FROM THE 2ND OF UPAPADA (upto
sloka 22) : If a planet being constant indicator of wife (i.e. 7th
lord or Yenus) is in own house, there will be loss of wife only at
a later stage. If the lord ofUpapadaor the constant significator of wife is in exaltation, the wife will be from a noble family;
reverse will be the case, if he is debilitated. O Brahmin, if the
2nd from Upapada is related to a benefic, the wife will be beautiful, fortunate and virtuous.
^ TlfaTTjl fFUrft Ufa 1
3TOUTOT5J fowRumt ’TOT* UT fjpT ! Il^ll
16 Should Saturn and Rahu be in the 2nd from Upa pada,
the native will lose his wife on account of calumny or through
death.
fatft) UT farfaTCTJil U*T ftUrft I
TWaUTOuirTf fBFU U?\9U
17. The native’s wife will be troubled by disorder of blood,
leucorrhoea {JKT.) etc. if Yenus and Ketu are in the 2nd from
Upapada.
f faUrft fTU rTUTSfau^lUttUfTT I
cfUfUT:
18. Mercury with Ketu in the 2nd from Upapada will cause
breakage of bones while Rahu, Saturn and the Sun will cause
distress of bones.
utmgwri^wrfuf fasftrre ! \
iihii

Chapter 30 307
5T*T ! I
a^TfcTTTfO cT^ W%WTTftw IRo«
cT=srr;?n^t> faq ! fareft im i
1151 ^iprf^-^jq) ^rm? WWfNcTTU^n
STfaTTj? Fffasra q^^^^nf^cTT \
%fer q^r aq farfNrarimii
19-22. Mercury and Rahu in the 2nd from Upapada
will give a stout-bodied wife. If the 2nd from Upapada
happens to be a sign of Mercury and is tenanted by Mars and
Saturn, the wife of the native will suffer from nasal disorders.
Similarly a sign of Mars becoming the 2nd from Upapada and
occupied by Mars and Saturn will cause nasal disorders to one’s
wife. Jupiter and Saturn will, if be in th6 2nd from Upapada,
cause disorders of ears/eyes to the wife. If Mercury and Mars
be in the 2nd from Upapada other than own signs or if Rahu is
with Jupiter in the 2nd from Upapada, the native’s wife will
suffer from dental disorders. Saturn and Rahu together in a
sign of Saturn which is the 2nd from Upapada will cause lameness or windy disorders to the native’s wife. These evils will not
come to pass if there be conjunction or aspect from a benefic
(or from another bencfic in the case of affliction being caused by
a bencfic himself).
tft.Urt q) TTftl: ! \
r^^TrfipT: #TTcT fgqftrPTl U^ll
23-23 O Brahmin, all these effects be deduced from the natal
ascendant, Lagna Pada, the 7th from Upapada and the lords
thereof. So say Narada and others.
qqJrfqq! 5Tfqq?srqHTT qfttl^ll
3rgw gw »
fira: gq>
^ Wik t ^V h gq> qhfsramnr I
sr^fq^rqt fqq ! iir^U

Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
Bifa p^h^sii
^ TTJfft *§1*^ BT: I
TJFqi'Tc*?: pit rreft *rra^ fffsrcrap ! u^u
25-28. ABOUT SONS : If Saturn, the Moon and Mercury
are together in the 9th from one of the said places (sloka 23),
there will be no son at all while the Sun, Jupiter and Rahu so
placed will give a number of sons. The Moon so placed will
give a son while a mixture of planets will delay the obtainment of
a son. The son caused by the conjunction of the Sun, Jupiter and
Rahu above will be strong, valorous, greatly successful and
will destroy enemies. If Mars and Saturn are in the said 9th,
there will be no son, or a son will be obtained by adoption or
brother’s son will come in adoption. In all these cases, odd
signs will yield many sons while even sign will cause only a few.
fasr ! i
srFTJpftSB qwrat PTB:
fpTOT»tTf?WR^RT i
t^tf fsmf^Tf’^TPrf'T trVi farfvB^ii^oii
29-30. MANY SONS AND MANY DAUGHTERS : O
Brahmin, if Leo happens to be Upapada and is aspected by the
Moon, there will be a limited number of children. Similarly
Virgo will cause many daughters.
^rfarTf? fanipW) tbib 'sngfe^TVT'fil i
31. CO-BORN FROMJL4GN A PAP A (upto sloka 36) :
Rahu and Saturn in th(T3r^ lthfrom LagnaVada will destroy
the co-born of the native— in the 11th elder brothers/sisters and
in the 3rd younger ones.
BP FT BTTTt PprfjTcTFI P 1
BTfa qt Tfd frBTPTET^fe^

Chapter 30 309
32. If Venus is in the 3rd/llth from Lagna Pada, there would
have been an abortion to the mother earlier. Same is the effect
if Venus is in the 8th from natal ascendant, or from Lagnarudha.
cm* i
ddlq m wft frg ! n^n
ami**: i
*rft**Fm %3f !
htt hhwi; mrrm *s*far rifaTi: i
cTclftvimTf *£* U^H
33-36. These are the'cffects, O Brahmin, as stated by venerable sages for the 3rd and the 11th from Lagna Pada. Should
the Moon, Jupiter, Mercury and Mars be in the 3rd/l Ith from
the Lagna Pada, there will be many valorous co-bom. Should
Saturn and Mars be in the 3rd/ II th from Lagna Pada or lend
aspects thereto, younger and elder coborn will respectively be
destroyed. If Saturn is alone in one of the said houses the native
will be spared while the co-born will die. Ketu in the 3rd/ 1 1th
will give abundant happiness from one’s sisters^
armsr* *bbht**^ spmfafa i
sttcto: n^n
37. OTHER MATTERS FROM LAGNA PADA (upto
sloka 43) : If the 6th from Lagna Pada is occupied by a malefic
and is bereft of conjunction/aspect of a benefic, the native will
be a thief.
\r
38. If Rahu is in the 7th/12th from Lagna Pada or aspect
one of the said houses, the native will be endowed with spiritual
knowledge and be very fortunate.

Brihat Parasara Hora SastrQ
* *pt% »HM
39. If Mercury is in Lagna Pada, the native will lord over
whole country while Jupiter will make him a knower of all
things Venus in this context denotes a poct/speaker.
Note : Also see verse 30, ch. 29.
^mfaFft eOh Izrail fearer tm hr 6 u
40. O excellent of the Bahmins, ifbenefics occupy the 2nd
from the Upapada or from Lagna Pada, the native will be endowed with all kinds of wealth and be intelligent.
t3TT¥ST^SRFJ>?T fg rT ta ’ ff g Rfc qfr I
qiw^H^ =afVxt fafroa*nnrsn
41. One will surely become a thief if the lord of the 2nd
from Upapada is in the 2nd house (from the natal ascendant),
and be with a malefic planet.
frc tFa tpigT afr i re tt§\ first ! i
5<sfi^R sm: nv^n
^'T: fgtftarr \
<f*t f*r«r HsrTfajfonnr^u
42-43. O Brahmin, if Rahu is in the 2nd from the lord of
7th counted from Upapada, the native will have long and projected teeth. Ketu so placed will cause stammering, and Saturn
so placed will make one look ugly. Mixed will be the effects if
there are mixed planets.
TftNT CLA5SI CS (Text With English Translation)
AVALI (2 Volumes set) -Kaly anavarma
KET NIDHI - Rama Dayalu
for Detailed list : RANJAN PUBLICATIONS
l6, Ansar i Road, Darya G^nJ
NE W DELHI*- 1 10002 (INDIA)

srsTTS’faTfarro: 113(11
Chapter 31
Argala Or Planetary Intervention
iqn^T I sftwT TRmstRT i
sts$ ssstitort 5%!u?ii
1. O illustrious sage, you have told of (some) auspicious
effects related to Argala. Kindly narrate its conditions and
effects.
! wisst sm hht *3S i
fm v miS STS3ST ^wdfrsqT IRH
^ a% vim £st crassn
ef^TSMU: ^21 rW^SSSUwT: I^D
m^ssm 3T ^Ter^T A? ^T«TcTT: i
<v
<Tcftf sinrsmT: <TTOT S3f S^T ! TOWTi Imt
ci’srrf'T *tn fasten ! i
cmTf«T ^SSRRT 'K^t»nifFtcT fa§: II V. 1 1
^TifvirmR 5rfg^U^tT I
ST ^ wRiraiw sira^ %*t ! ii^ii
qqttJ^T ST fgTf^T SttRT ¥S3T \
SSvfT rsfa'Sft'TRT q»f«R>SST MVSlI
trfss> S^fmrfa fasHT fefaSTTSqST l
fqgfafTT TjqivRT f^TOST ^ SSTSVTUe;H
IR TfJfft ^T2R™T ’TT^TteR *RT 1
a fm s fafa?w fs^ss ! »»€.»»
2-9. FORMATION OF ARGALA : Maitreya, I explain
below Argala to know definite effects of houses and planets.
Planets in the 4th, 2nd and the 11th (from a house or a planet)

Brihat Parasara flora Sastra
cause Argala while obstructors of the Argala will be those in the
10th, 12th and 3rd. If the Argala causing planet is stronger than
the obstructing one, the former will prevail. Or if the number
of Argalas are more than the obstructing planets, then also the
Argala will prevail. If there are 3 or more malefics in the 3rd,
they will cause Vipareeta Argala (more effective intervention)
which will also be harmless and be very favourable. The 5th is
also an Argala place while the planet in the 9th will counteract
such Argala. As the nodes have retrograde motions, the Argalas
and obstructions be also counted accordingly in a reverse
manner. Sages say that the Argala caused by one planet will yield
limited effects, by two medium and more than two excellent
effects. Argalas should be counted from a sign or a planet as the
case may be. The Argala unobstructed will be fruitful while the
one duly obstructed will go astray. The Argala effects will be
derived in the Dasa periods of the Rasi or planet concerned.
Notes : ‘Argala’ in Sanskrit is figuratively used to denote
an impediment or obstruction. Arga'a is calculated from a
house or from a planet. The 4th, 2nd and 11th house occupants
cause Argala for a bhava or a planet. A planet in the 10th
(from where the Argala is calculated) will obstruct the Argala
coming from the 4th. Similarly a planet in 12th will counteract
Argala emanating from the 2nd while the one in 1 1th will impede
the Argala from the 3rd. Some suggest that the Argala obstruction places are countable from the Argala places instead of from
the origional place or planet. This is not logical and a glance
into Gochara Vedha (or obstructions during transits) will confirm our findings.
Just as we mark the Gocnara Vedhas along with benefic
places, let us have the Argala and their obstructions as under :
Now see a hypothetical geniture given on the next page for
an easy grasp of the Argala scheme.
The ascendant in the hypothetical chart is Aries. Mars
in the 4th, Sun and Mercury in the 2nd, and Jupiter in the
1 1th cause Argala for the ascendant. (An Argala by benefic goes
under the name ‘Subhargala’ and is deemed favourable. But we
will confine ourselves to the extent of Argala in simple sense).

Chapter 31
Ven
Lagna
Sun
Merc
Moon
Jup
Mars
Sat
Ketu
The Argala of 4th house Marais countered by 10th house Saturn,
that of Sun-Mercury in the 2nd by Venus in the 12th and that of
Jupiter jn the 1 1th by Moon-Rabu in the 3rd.
As far as the nodes are concerned these are calculated in a
a reverse manner. From Rahu, the 2nd house counted in
reverse order contains Sun- Mercury causing Argala to Rahu
which is, however, obstructed by Mars in the 12th from Rahu
(counted in reverse manner), similarly in all cases these be
properly understood.
By way of additional information, see Gochara Vcdha and
benefic places for example for the Sun which will prove that our
interpretation of Argala obstructed is correct :
In the above figures, the upper ones denote the Sun’s
favourable transits from the Moon and the lower ones denote
obstructive forces in such houses from the ftoon. For example
the Sun in the 3rd house from the Moon during transit will be
favourable. But his favourable disposition will remain curbed
if simultaneously the 9th from the Moon is transited by another
planet (than of course Saturn, which is an exception). Again just

Brihat Parasara Bora Sastrd
as there is Vipareetargala (or Argala itself eliminated), there is
also Vipareeta Vedha. Vipareeta Vedha will prove auspicious
eliminating the Vedha or obstruction. Suppose the benefic effects
of the Sun in the 3rd from the Moon are being obstructed by
another in the 9th from the Moon. The moment another planet
joins the Sun in the 3rd from the Moon, the Vedha in the 9th
from the Moon is off and the Sun in the 3rd proves auspicious
till he has a companion.
In the matter of Argala and its obstruction, also see the
following verse.
3pfat I
fort fof! forPTfefff *trFT u^oll
SPECIAL : The Argala caused by placement of a
planet in the first one fourth part of the Rasi is countered by
another placed in the 4th quarter of the respective obstructive
Rasi. Similarly 2nd quarter’s Argala is eliminated by the 3rd
quarter placement.
Notes : We have learnt that an Argala, for example in the
4th from a bhava or a planet is eliminated by another placed in
the 10th house from the original planet/house. Here, the rules for
obstruction of Argala are still narrowed down. Accordingly,
there are only two circumstances of Argala getting nullified.
Make the sign in which the Argala occurs into four quarters, (of
V 30' each). Similarly the sign where obstruction occurs is also
made in four quarters. If the Argala causing planet is in the first
quarter (or first 7° 30' of the sign) while the obstructing planet is
in the 4th quarter (i.e. 22° 30'— 30°), the obstruction indeed will
come to pass. Otherwise not. So to say Argala will operate
and the obstruction will fail. Likewise while the Argala planet
is in the 2nd quarter of the sign (i.e. T 30' — 15°), the obstruction
(planet in 15°— 22° 30' i.e. 3rd quarter) will combat the Argala.
arrfa farrffim'Tvrr *r?r i
cT«T
jm <rra: sift \
fa safari cpH

Chapter 3 1 -
ST1T% * 9^ fa* ! tFT9Tftra*TrrgcT: I
«llTWW Hfftfafa: 1 1 ? * II
<r^*r 5^5rir^q?0 u?*u
cms farro, *jtt% 9 ^re %3T srg i
3TCjir ^C?r gg Wlitoft ^cHIU^
TT^T^H <?TTO vTTWlf^: \
sttt^ ^ £9$ ft? ! ewftm snsn^i* ii^ii
^TVfpfcnin 5 9§fa9 ’Jwn
^ f»r«immf<T qfcwguttsu
11-17. ARGALA EFFECTS : Should there be Argala for
the Arudha Pada, for the natal ascendant, and for the 7th from
both, the native will be famous and fortunate. A malefic or a
bencfic causing unobstructed Argala aspecting the ascendant will
make one famous. Similarly aspect on the 2nd house denotes
acquisition of wealth and grains, 3rd house — happiness from coborn; the 4th house — residences, quadrupeds and relatives; the
5th house— sons, grand sons and intelligence, the 6th house — fear
from enemies; the 7th house— abundant wealth and marital
happiness, the 8th house— difficulties, the 9th house— fortunes;
the 10th house — royal honour; the 11th house — gains, and the
12th house — expenses. The Argala by benefics will give various
kinds of happiness, while bencfic effects will be meddling with
malefic Argalas. Argala by both benefics and malefics will yield
mixed results.
Notes : For our own benefit we should understand the
word ‘Argala’ in a suitable manner apart from the manner the
Argala functions vis-a-vis Argala elimination.
1. Argala can be caused by a benefie which is known as
Subhargala. This Argala can be from a malefic also, so that
the benefie causing Argala stalls the malefic role going against
the native. If the benefic’s Argala is obstructed by another,
then the benefie will become ineffective in Argala and the firstmentioned malefic will operate freely.
2. Argala can be by a malefic with reference to a benefie
so that the native does not enjoy good effects due to the benefie.

Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
This is Papargala (or malefic Argala) If the Argala is eliminated
by a benefic or a malefic, then again the first mentioned benefic will be at liberty to act according to his own disposition.
3. Argala is operable with reference to Bhavas (or houses)
as well.
Other relative rules need be well understood before application of the Argala.
snara ttwt turoaT* arr* error: utmi
18. Should there be (unobstructed) Argala for the ascendant, the 5th and 9th the native will doubtlessly become a king
and fortunate.
Chapter 32
Planetary Karakatwas
(Indications)
arorcs tfpswtnfa i
roarstifaretrerm \\\\\
«Nt: S> r^T^rT rRT I
1-2. I now detail below Atmakarka etc. obtainable from
among the 7 planets viz the Sun to Saturn. Some say that Rahu
will become a Karka when there is a state of similarity in terms
of longitude between (two) planets. Yet some say that the 8
planets including Rahu will have to be considered irrespective of
such a state .
3 T!c*TT gqffttSSFTt fHlrfinit »
3T?TCfP$ JmiftlWTeT rlcSF^ fafT?T[fen*T: II 3 II

Chapter 32 ■** '
TTfaFTHTfsHFTTR RTj|l> ^SfTcWlTV. I
aT^itfa^: *tn5c'rRFitsFWT*: imi
*nirr?rt a ^ f? i
fa^HRH^riZT^tTtrtT: *iHm: tsraf^cf: \\w
^VIRiHTCU^S^FSIjqTPsRT: R>TTRT Wf^T \
soft fg^r! H^U
q itr faita"* fgRWtW ! »
qqr 5T%3[taftrT fRT^t ftprfsWTeWt H'sU
qqqTrrffawrd * 5Ftr$nrtaR?i ^ \\*u
3-8. ATMA KARAKA DEFINED : Among the planets
from the Sun etc. whichever has traversed maximum number of
degrees in a particular sign is called Atmakarka. If the degrees
are identical, then the one with more minutes of arc and if the
minutes are also identical then the one with higher seconds of
arc will have to be considered. In that case, these three are
called Anthyakaraka, Madhyakarka and Upakheta. In the case of
Rahu, deduct his longitude in that particular sign from 30. The
Karakas will have to be decided as above and as per further
rules given below. Out of these Karakas, Atmakaraka is the
most important and has a prime say on the native just as the
king is the most famous among the men of his country and is the
head of all affairs and is entitled to arrest and release men.
qqT TFSTGRIT fast ! 1
qqqf sffaifiTcfa N€.U
3n?qTgqt5^nR 'RRfel RFTRRW 1
sif?TR>^r ! II ? o II
'^nq q^cqiviT *1 f? I
rTqTSS?RRTR% ^ HTS^q fSJPWTRRR V*
StgRivT ^ R£rT qqSRTFTRRt %3T ■ 1
qmi s«»
9-12. IMPORTANCE OF ATMAKARAKA : O Brahmin,
just as the minister cannot go against the king, the other
karakas, viz, Putrakaraka, Amatyakarka etc. cannot predominate

Brihat Parasara flora Sastra
over Atmakaraka in the affairs of the native. If the Atmakarka
is adverse, other karakas cannot give their bcnclic effects (fully).
Similarly if Atmakaraka is favourable, other karakas cannot
predominate with their malefic influences.
'STTcTT ll^lt
CN ft C ' ^
5T^T*T: ftmierctnSeqTO: gflWTTV l
SfTT^R'Pt ^eft frfasf?: ! 1
^TP^ITHT ^facTT: gTT U^X<<
gcrenwr t
vitqt ^trr ! »
f^tn^^TrlFT £*T ?TmS7nf*r 11^11
13-17. OTHER KARAKAS : The planet next to Atmakaraka in tcrm$ of longitude is called Amatyakaraka. Similarly
follow one another in terms of longitude are Dhratru Karaka,
Matru karaka, Pitru karaka, Putrakaraka, Gnati karaka and
Streekaraka. These are chara karakas or inconstant significators.
Some consider Matrukaraku and Putrakaraka as identical. If
two planets have the same longitude, both become the same
karaka in which case there will be a deficit of one karaka. In
that circumstance, consider cons tant significator in the context
of benelic/malefic influence for the concerned relative.
Notes : A total of eight Chara karakas (inconstant or
variable significators) are suggested as under :
1. Atma Karaka (highest in longitude devoid of Rasis)
2. Amatya Karaka (next to Atma Karaka in longitude)
3. Bhratru Karaka (next to Amatya Karaka in longitude)
4. Matru Karaka (next to Bhratru Karaka in longitude)
5j Pitru Karaka (next to Matru Karaka in longitude)
6. Putra Karaka (next to Pitru Karaka in longitude)
7. Gnati Karaka (next to Pitru Karaka in longitude)
8. Stree Karaka (next to Gnati Karaka in longitude)

Chapter 32
The sage also suggests a school of thought which considers
only seven significators, treating Matru Karaka and Putra
Karaka as identical. This section thus counts only 7 Karakas.
Since some advocate the use of 8 karakas, Rahu is also
added to the seven planets from Sun to Saturn. The degrees
traversed by Rahu should be counted from the end of the Rasi
he is in. In the standard nativity (ch. 29) the following are the
karaka planets. We take 8 Karkas into consideration.
Karaka
Planet
Longitude
Atmakaraka
The Moon
Amatyakaraka
Venus
Bhratru Karaka
Jupiter
Matru Karaka
Rahu
Pitru Karaka
Mercury
Putra Karaka
The Sun
Gnati Karaka
Mars
Dara KarakaSaturn
If two planets have the same longitude identical to the
second of arc, both of them will be qualified for that particular
karakaatwa or significatorship. In that case, there will be
shortage of planet for Dara Karakatwa. The constant indicator
Venus should then be considered in the matter of marriage etc.
as coming under Dara Karaka.
3TU/U f**RTSRFI \
P tit gvf)
SRt HTfTtpRap |
gppftfJifq itf 6.11
RFtIRT: I
SptfTcT qfa:, gsr: SR^ITlcT 11^ o|(
faRF^RlfaR: RcF) fq?R> rRT I
■o
fpRqrrcqrT UR? II

Brihal Parasara Hera Sastra
18-21. CONSTANT SIGNIFICATORS : I narrate below
the constant significators as related to the planets. The stronger
among the Sun and Venus indicates the father while the stronger
among the Moon and Mars indicates the mother. Mars denotes
sister, brother-in-law, younger brother and mother. Mercury
rules maternal relative while Jupiter indicates paternal grandfather. Husband and sons are respectively denoted by Venus
and Saturn. From Ketu note wife, father, mother, parents-inlaw and maternal grand father. These are constant significators.
Notes : The above planetary significance can be tabulated
as under :
Planet
Karakatwa
Sun/Venus
Stronger of the two indicates father,
Moon/Mars
Stronger of the two indicates mother.
Mars
Sister, brother-in-law, younger brother
and mother.
Mercury
Maternal relatives
Jupiter
Paternal grand-father
Venus
Husband
Saturn
Sons
Ketu
Wife, father, mother, parents-in-law,
maternal grand father.
The above may be linked with the views expressed in verses
occurring in the rest of this chapter.
Tfor: gram u^n
f 5TTrT tjeftaeft ^ *TTgvT: I
g*t vrvre*
22-24. HOUSES RELATED : These constant significances
are derivable from the Bbavas counted from the said constant

Chapter 32 M|
signifiiatQrs. The 9th from the Sun denotes father, the 4th from
the Moon mother, the 3rd from Mars brothers, the 6th from
Mercury maternal unde, the 5th from Jupiter sons, the 7th
from Venus wife and the 8th from Saturn death. The learned
should consider all these and declare related effects accordingly.
Notes : From these three verses, the constant Karakas
emerge as under as normally discussed in standard literature on
astrology :
— father
— mother
brothers (and sisters)
— maternal relatives
Sons (and daughters)
— wife (or husband)
death (or longevity)
The Sun
The Moon
Mars
Mercury
Jupiter
Venus
Saturn
fawsf faq; 1
*PTfar fonquT ^ £ fpr^TT: u
TO *ffg«w*qs^ stsfc t*nr«F tjqqa h^ii
rft^T?qqsfq eft 3fTTT: fq?HTT% g bftt% \
*T>sfq TPd+iWt fqq ! srqqR gsr*r$?T: || ^ td
TT3rar*rag?q?3ft mn *rcrf?T fffrqrrm i
^ «R%wi: Urt q^' 11^ oil
n r h 5 " 30 ' Y0GAKARAKAS (OR M VTUA L CO WORKERS ) •
o Brahmin, I make below a passing reference to Yogakarakas
(or mutual co-workers). Planets become Yogakarakas if they
are m mutual angles identical with own signs, exaltation or
friendly sign. In the 10th house, a planet will be ,£££^
‘ ^ h an ®* S,n \ ply (l e - not in friendly & C) in the ascent, the 4th and 7th do not become such yogakarakas, Even if

Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
they be placed in other houses but with such dignities as mentioned shall become yogakarakas. With such planets, even a person of mean birth will become a king and be affluent. One bom
of royal scion then will surely become a king. Thus the effects
be declared considering the number of such planets and the
order the native belongs to.
Notes : Role 1 : If two planets are in mutual angles from
the ascendant and be with dignities like exaltation, own sign or
friendly sign, they act on behalf of each other and are known as
Paraspara Karakas or co-workers. If one of the occupants is in
the 10th house, the effects will still be pronounced. This is not
to be considered from the Moon.
Rule 2 : Even though the condition of mutual angularity
is fulfilled, if the two planet9 do not enjoy one of the three
dignities required, then there is no correlationship between
them.
Rule 3 : If two planets are mutually angular, both being
endowed with dignities like exaltation, own sign or friendly sign,
they will become coworkers although not placed in angles from
the ascendant.
These rules are exemplified in the undemoted charts, with
reference to the said three rules.
Sat
CO
Sun
Ascdt

Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
In chart 1 , Saturn and the the Sun are in mutual angles
from the ascendant and in their own signs. Hence they will act
as co-workers casting away mutual enmity. And Saturn although
a dire malefic for Scorpio ascendant will become a Yogakaraka
by virtue of mutual angularity with the Sun having fulfilled
dignity requirements.
In chart 2, Mars and the Sun are in mutual angles from
the ascendant but do not posses any dignity like exaltation, or
own house but are debilitated. Hence they will not act as Yoga
giving planets.
In chart 3, both Jupiter and Saturn are not angular from
the ascendant but are invested with exaltation positions. Hence
both the planets will mutually represent and beeome favourable
in their Dasa periods. Also, see the chart of Sri Morarji Desai
under sloka 110, ch. 24 in which Jupiter, Saturn and Mars play
as mutual co-workers.
It is specifically stated that the 1 0th house position for one
of the planets in the circumstances becomes exceedingly favourable. In the example chart 1, the Sun is in the 10th withParaspara Yogakaraka qualification in opposition to Saturn. Hence the
Sun will exceedingly reveal beneficial results. Devoid of Saturn or
any other co-worker, the Sun in the 1 0th will not be that powerful. In other words, by virtue of co-workership, the Sun’s role
gets immeasurably fortified.
There are some schools of thought which do not consider
coworkership as given in rule 3 above.
JlrT ll^tH
TJfFTTTTSTM'IdW rjrifa 5
faSTRtalrT TtHT I
a: ?UTcT Tftsfa 3WR* ll^ll
$trf fm: 1
srWt 'hn^kvt:
31-34. HOUSE SIGNIFICANCE : I now narrate the
significance of the houses. The first house denotes the soul (and

Chapter 32
self), the 2nd house wife, the 11th preborn, the 3rd younger
brothers/sisters, the 5th progeny and the 7th house wife. It is
also said that a planet in the 5th becomes a karaka for wife. The
significators of the house in order are : the Sun, Jupiter, Mars
the Moon, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, Saturn, Jupiter. Mercury’
Jupiter and Saturn.
. Notes : The karakatwas of each house are better signified
id ch. 1 1 supra. The reader may consult the said chapter as well.
Certain indications are additional in the present case.
The significator of each bhava is enunciated in sloka 34
above. For an easy grasp, these are :
: 1st house (self, soul, constitution etc.)
: 2nd house (family, finance, wife etc.)
: 3rd house (courage, later-born etc )
: 4th house (mother)
: 5th house (progeny)
: 6th house (enemies)
: 7th house (wife, conjugal bliss etc )
; 8th house (longevity)
: 9th house (fortunes, religion etc.)
: 10th house (honour)
: 11th house (pre-born)
: 12th house (expenditure)
1 The Sun
2. Jupiter
3. Mars
4. The Moon
5. Jupiter
6. Mars
7. Venus
8. Saturn
9. Jupiter
10. Mercury
11. Jupiter
12. Saturn
Although we have stated the significators of the bhavas to
be certain planets, each bhava signifies more than what is stated
above. In that case the significator can also be different. For
example, Jupiter is karaka for the 9th house which means that
he is holding the portfolio of the native’s fortunes When the
question of father arises from the 9th house, the significator then
“ * he SUI L 0r (ake the ““ of 12th bouse. The significator is
Saturn. The 12th house indicates final emancipation as well for
which Saturn is not the indicator but Ketu. Thus a detailed
approach to significance through bhavas is required.
HRl: TTHTSmun
vimgcfaft 113101
^ tfftgr: ?TrTit=H(cit: ^TTWT I \

Brihat Parasara Hdra Sastrii
vnm «wtwt ^anwr: vfarstft
|T*t Hnt'TOT*' 1 ! ^TJJiTtsfa
35-37. O excellent of the Brahmins, after knowing the
merits of the 1st house etc. the good and bad effects be declared.
11th, 3rd, 8th, 6th, 2nd and 12th are malefic bhavas. Association with these houses will inflict evils. Angles and trines are
auspicious bhavas, the association with which turns even evils
into auspiciousness.
Notes : The 6 bhavas viz. 11th, 3rd, 8th, 6th, 2nd and
12th are adverse. A planet owning or occupying one of the said
houses will become a functional malefic and hence adversary.
The other 6 bhavas, viz. ascendant, 4th, 5th, 7th, 9th and
10th are good houses. Planets associated with these houses will
prove favourable although by nature evil or adverse.
Also see ch. 34 for more information.
Chapter 33
Effects Of Karakamsa
ifaifa-TTfifa nnro* ii?ii
1. o Brahmin, as laid down by Lord Brahma, I now tell
you about the effects of Karakamsa identical with Aries etc.
Notes : Karakamsa is the Navamsa occupied by the Atma
Karaka planet. The Atmakaraka is the one who traversed the
highest number of degrees etc. (devoid of Rasi), among the 8
planets, from Sun to Rahu. These have been explained in the
previous chapters.
to* w n ra T fan ! fMfaa: n^u

Chapter 33
gscran «igwRT: i
fa^qwrqi* trftqq jniYqTfotnfErcrov: \\\u
wNr * srtiwHs: i
*F?qfar rf^f qf^qnJTRqqtj uyii
5?tNt * qfiriT srrH> q^T fafafa cfl qr: i
q**sT m§: qqtar 11y.11
SfT3T qiqR^rrT q*FI qt^iwfq I
*NRm throrani^ir
wq-qqcTT-qqrararrWt 'qq% i
qt*qt*T W fRTqTfq-qrRV> m*&( 3 R: llvsll
q>rm ^ncrV *jfa?roT»j fj^rw ! i
sttshw ¥T*nfai£ q ?m qmHwhtcu
2-8. KARAKAMSA VARIOUS SIGNS ; If Atmakaraka
be in Aries Navamsa, there will be nuisance from rats and cats
at all limes. A malefic joining will further increase the nuisance.
Should Atmakaraka be in Taurus Navamsa, happiness from
quadrupeds will result. Should he be in Gemini Navamsa, the
native will be afflicted by itch etc. If he be in Cancer Navamsa,
there will be fear from water etc. If he be in Leo Navamsa,
fear will be from tiger etc. If he be in Virgo Navamsa, itch,
corpulence, fire etc. will cause trouble while in Libra Navamsa,
the Atmakaraka will make one a trader and skilful in making
robes etc. Scorpio Navamsa holding the said planet will bring
troubles from snakes etc. and also affliction to mother's breasts.
There will be falls from height and conveyances etc. if it is
Sagittarius Navamsa that is occupied by Atmakaraka. Capricorn
Navamsa in this respect denotes gains from water-dwelling
beings and conch, pearl, coral etc. If it is Aquarius Navamsa
holding the said planet, the native will construct tanks etc.
And in Pisces Navamsa the Atmakaraka will grant final
emancipation. A benefle’s aspect will remove evils while that of
a malefic will cause no good.
tfr iT q. 1^ fqq ! oTRttf \
ami* FT3TT qqf?r fafcqfl; tte.ii

Brihat Parasara tiora Sastra
feff ^ut ?n qmfen: \
TO-fa«TTOl *TOt f*T^rf*T ‘ST'TI^T ^fll?oU
W. f^nr-sT ! f^S5T-*TO-ST*t$ft I
•TFR’TTf^flr 5TTS?c^ fafSTTO 11^ II
9-11. O Brahmin, if there be only benefics in the
Karakamsa and the Navamsa of Lagna and be aspccted by benefics, the native will undoubtedly become a king. Should the
angles/trines from the Karakamsa be occupied by benefics devoid
of malefic association, the native will be endowed with wealth
and learning. The combination of benefic and malefic will in
this context yield mixed results. If the Upakheta (or upagraha,
vide sloka 5 ch. 32) is in its exaltation sign, or own/frienly sign,
and is devoid o f malefic aspect, the native will go to heavens
after death.
«F3RSTTOTO*«r <TTT3TfT-S: I
faqtfofctreT TO <*** TO
12. If the Atmakaraka is in the divisions of the Moon,
Mars or Venus, the native will go to others’ wives. Otherwise,
the contrary will prevail.
^TTTTJT T*ft 3TO> TXSTTTOTft %3T ! |
*>TOR ^TT'T faTOcTtll^U
^ «nsfq TTOTSt ^ TOH* 11**11
gg prttf vHrrfTcTfrowiT: i
^fs-r^TTOffgcT: II * *h
^ffacT ?wtto jjt\i
TTTOfcft *T%MT: (1*^11
toV sgfTOcf TOT: sg$atfgclTO$cT I
TT^ OIfcqf?> STfiftST vT>j?tTO$tT H*vsll
f^TOatSTOT fro ! 5TO^ ?rrsg HTO: l
srosrft TOn^rf iiv^u

Chapter 33
13-18. EFFECTS OF PLANETS IN KARAKAMSA : O
Brahmin, if the Sun is in the Karakamsa, the native will be engaged in royal assignments, ff the Full Moon is there, he will enjoy
pleasures and be a scholar; more so if Venus aspects. If strong
Mars is in Karakamsa, he will use the weapon spear, will live
through fire and be an alchemist Should strong Mercury be
in Karakamsa, he will be skilful in arts and trading, be intelligent and educated. Jupiter in Karakamsa denotes one doing
good acts, endowed with spiritualism and Vedic learning. One
will be endowed with a longevity of 100 years, be sensuous
and will look after state affairs if Venus is in Karakamsa. Saturn
in Karakamsa will give such livelihood as due to the native’s
family. Rahu in Karakamsa denotes a thief, a bowman, a
machinery maker, and a doctor treating poisonous afflictions. If
Ketu be in Karakamsa, one will deal in elephants and be a thief
TfaRT$ «RT SHTPR* I
^ ?rti
as >9 s
afopR ssifa et sffpit qg 113*11
im gw 1
19-22. RAHU-SUN IN KARAKAMSA : Should Rahu
and the Sun be in Karakamsa there will be fear from snakes; if a
benefic aspects the said combination there will be no fear but a
malefic aspects will bring death (through serpents). If Rahu
and the Sun occupy benefic Shadvargas, being in Karakamsa,
one will be a doctor treating poisonous afflictions while the
aspect from Mars on the said combination denotes that the
native will burn either his own house or that of others. Mercury’s
aspect, instead of that of Mars, will hot cause the said effects. If
Rahu and the Sun be in Karakamsa and be in a malefic’s sign in
aspect to Jupiter, one will burn neighbouring house while the
aspect of Venus will not cause such an event.

330 ftrihat Parasara Hora Sastra
■jfqfcq q;^ qtfafr 1
qftf cTUfft ^FT: *qq qVtsqqi U%iT ll^ll
Hirt?f% fqqq> «fT fqqf 3r: I
qaqfff q<raqta> RSq HTOTm^vn
23-24. GULIKA IN KARAKAMSA ; Should the Full
Moon aspect the Karakamsa-placed Gulika, the native will lose
his wealth to thieves or will himself be a thief. If Gulika is in
Karakamsa but is unaspected by others, one will administer
poison to others or will himself die of poisoning. Mercury’s
aspect in this context will give large testicles.
*rTT*tji q TOJce' fg^rm I 1
qntRWt qT si5TTq^ ||^||
qqqqfa% qfftR sftfaeft 3TTqq 3R: l
Warfare faqfqf 3nq£ qTffqt CTqtTll^ll
ctftqq qrcftgq: snrra^ l
gqqqTipft qTsfq qrq% qTsq miq: n^vsll
*Tfq3T qTR- qeqtsqqi ¥T%rT I
C X
eTft*R *rteT: q^lfa^qqR ll^ell
q%FT TT^sfcqt 5R> qtcT I
sihq fgq'uHii
25-29. EFFECTS OF ASPECTS ON KETU IN KARAKAMSA : If Ketu is in Karakamsa in aspect to a malefic, one’s
ears will be severed or he will suffer from diseases of ears.
Venus aspecting denotes one initiated into religions order. One
will be devoid of strength if Mercury and Saturn aspect. If
Mercury and Venus aspect, he will be the son of a female slave
or of a female remarried. With Saturn’s aspect one will perform
penance or be a servant or will be a pseudo-ascetic. Venus and
the Sun together aspecting will make one serve the king. Thus,
O Brahmin, are told briefly the effects of Karakamsa.
q srqqrqq 'mgifrq;: i
a^ r nq>ra> aqfaqqmq q^rcu^oH

Chapter 33 33 1
cT<SlfcR?Sl: HU3
^TSqfa3%: ?3R tPRStfSTR %cfaq 11^ ? II
30-31. EFFECTS OF THE 2ND FROM KARAKAMSA :
If the 2nd from Karakamsa falls in the divisions of Venus/Mars,
one will be addicted to others’ wives and if Venus or Mars
aspect the said 2nd, the tendency will last till death. If Ketu is
the 2nd from Karakamsa in a division of Venus/Mars, such
addiction will not prevail while the position of Jupiter will cause
such an evil. Rahu in the said case will destroy wealth.
R ig I TcT rjrfain 3TR: SR: SRHWR I
ciftrR srmil sir: qnrRt risrc; n^w
32. EFFECTS OF THE 3RD FROM KARAKAMSA :
A malefic in the 3rd from Karakamsa will make onh valorous
while a benfic will make one timid.
PITSTR^STTt § *R*r**%f«?h
^fefj fsi %5«st sr* u\*n
tTR 3 Tf9Rl SftR fesi ! I
33-35. EFFECTS OF THE 4TH FROM KARAKAMSA :
If the 4th from Karakamsa be occupied by Venus and the Moon,
one will own palacial (or large) buildings. Similar is the effect of
an exalted planet in the said 4th. A house made of stones is
denoted by the occupation of Rahu and Saturn. Mars and Ketu
indicate a house made of bricks while Jupiter denotes one made
of wood. The Sun so related will give a house of grass. If the
Moon be in the 4th from Karakamsa, one will have union with
his wife in an uncompounded house.
«p3R1g*qf SRTt'lRT tflR: 1
TlfsRT&T S'GCTRt SRtT3% 11^11
*f3RG^ H 3TRFI pR^Tfe^Rt I
3 aFRtqVlWT f^ST ! n^vall

Brlhat Parasara Hora Sattra
erafarafairtnT «
msnrorihitmi
5TTH: JRTnjtft R^?T I
snt 5TR> TljO ^ u^tu '
^ trfffqtrqrqft qinRt Tfil ! \
RTff% § qrfqRfrtft ^ToqvU 5TR# 3R: ||*oH
36-40. EF I tCrS OF THE S HI FROM KARAKAMSA :
IfR ahu and Mars are in the 5th from Karakamsa, one will suffer
from a pulmonary consumption, more so if the Moon aspects
them. The aspect of Mars on the said house will bring boils or
ulcers. Ketu s aspect on the said house will cause dysentery and
said diseases caused by (impure) water. If Rahu and Gulika be in
the house there will be fear from mean people aud poison.
Should Mercury be in the said house, the native will be an ascetic
of the highest order or one holding staff. The Sun and Mar„ in
the said house respectively denote one using a knife and spear.
Saturn denotes a bowman in this context. Rahu and Ketu in
the said house respectively denote a machinist and a watch
maker. Venus in the said house will make one a poet and an
eloquent speaker.
qnfa RrJjqrrqT ^ |
piTT flfqr£?T rT«7T 1
i^^T'cifsr^Tfa, *r ^T«it ny^n
TlfaffT TfR^IT UY^tl
%3 ; TT Rt«IcT5ftSflT' Tl^RTSpT cI?N R[ IIWU
fafg: *RlrT gwqfufft fgaT j I
fffclltTfTt IIVKII
41-45. EFFECTS OF KARAKAMSA AND THE 5TH
THEREFROM : If Jupiter and the Moon are in Karakamsa or
the 5th thereof, the native will be an author. Venus in the said
wrrffff?r% ^

Chapter 33
place will make one an ordinary writer while Mercury will give
still lesser effects in this respect. Should Jupiter be alone in the
said house, one will be a knower of everything, be a writer, and
be versed in Vedas and Vedanta philosophy, but not an otatorian
or a grammarian. Mars in this respect denotes a logician. Mercury
a Mimamsaka (follower of Mimamsa philosophy, one of the six
-chief systems of Hindu philosophy), Saturn one dull-witted in
the assembly, the Sun a musician, the Moon a follower of
Sankhya Philosophy (of sage Kapila enumerating 25 true
principles with emphasis on final bliss), and versed in rhetorics
and singing, and Ketu or Rahu an astrologer. Should Jupiter
be related to the said positions (caused by others than him), the
effected stated will effectively come to pass. Some say that the
2nd from Karakamsa be also similarly considered.
TOTJTTcT 3R: I
pnratiYVt
46. EFFECTS OF THE 6TH FROM KARAKAMSA ; If
the 6th from Karakamsa is occupied by a malefic, the native will
be an agriculturist while he will be indolent if a benefic is there.
The 3rd from Karakamsa be also similarly considered.
EPF* mqf \
er* *rsjs,
o o
Hi * Wg % * 1 ^ srifa WTtsfWT \
47-48. EFFECTS OF THE 7TH FROM KARAKAMSA ;
If the Moon and Jupiter are in the 7th from Karakamsa, the
native will beget a very beautiful wife. Venus in the said house
denotes a sensuous wife while Mercury indicates a wife versed
in arts. The Sun so related will give a wife confining domestic
core while Saturn denotes a wife of a higher age bracket, or a
pious/sick wife. Rahu in this context will bring a widow in
marriage.

Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
49. EFFECTS OF THE 8TH FROM KARAKAMSA ; If
a benefic or the planet owning the 8th from Karakamsa be in the
8th from Karakamsa, the native will be long-lived while a malefic
so placed will reduce the life span. Aspect/conjunction of both
benefics and malefics will yield a medium span o£iife.
HrqSTRt gtf iqaqftRcit 5R: tllfoH
*qi?TRq qqtf «flt qTTOgqttwt 1
fasqrqTqt q MV. ? M
qqq ePHT^farr^ 9Tfq-TTgq^rei^ I
qiq: swqq fqqsft 11*311
qrrc^TiTrsq i
cRTSfq 5^3rV^t TO pqiqq q
'PTTqrtJRq l
wqnffaqiqft g qTRlftgR UV.VH
STRSfarreq qq^ ! I
«R?qt r^qR>Tr!> qqfa Sjqq 11**11
qq*t %q%^ g^tgf q^f«# U
q fr rqi g ft fqqqY qq qTq?hl*$H
50-56. EFFECTS OF THE 9TH FROM KARAKAMSA :
If the 9th from Karakasmsa is aspected or occupied by a benefic,
the native will be truthful, devoted to elders and attached to his
own religion. If a malefic is so related as above, one will be
attached to his religion in boyhood but wifi take to falsehood in
old age. If Saturn and Rahu are so related as above, one will
betray his elders and be averse to ancient learning. If Jupiter
and the Sun are so related as above, one will betray his elders
and will be disobedient to them. Should Mars and Venus be so
related as above, and joining in six identical vargas, a female illrelated to the native will die. Mercury and the Moon so related
will cause imprisonment of the native due to association with a
female not of his own. If Jupiter is alone related to the 9th
from Karakamsa by aspect or by conjunction, the native will be
addicted to females and be devoted to sensual enjoyments.

Chapter 33
•o sp
falTfavft 3TSlt tRtfftt 3vT3f3*TtH nnv»u
'S
«qFTTT 3TTO% j?Tfa: gfa<T: llXdl
3?T^ STTT^tars^ «OTT?OT?tf9^ l
sqrTTT SfStWR *v. II1L&II
»K»i yn^r \
fsn* ! 5TT?Wt TTS^UT \\\o\\
57-60. EFFECTS OF THE 10TH FROM KARAKAMSA :
If the 10th from Karakarasa be aspected or conjoined by a benefic, the native will have firm riches, be sagacious, strong and
intelligent. A malefic so related will cause harm to his profession and deprive him of paternal bliss. Mercury and Venus so •
related will confer many gains in business (or profession) and
will make him do many great deeds. The luminaries so related
to the 10th from Karakamsa and if be in aspect to or conjunct-
, ion with Jupiter the native will acquire a kingdom.
-a
WtfteTOcft 3Tvf: vTTflffT US,?!!
tin I') 5 I
ftnaft 3nt^ ?rr^T ?nnr: \\\ r\i
61-62. EFFECTS OF THE 11TH FROM KARAKAMSA :
If the 11th from Karakamsa be aspected by or conjunct a benefic,
the native will enjoy happiness from coborn apart from gaining
in every undertaking of his. If a malefic is in the said llth the
native will gain by questionable means, be famous and valorous.
fr iT fr lyire srcserat
amsnrifts^ srift ^ stow 11^311
vrcqrimq; sqsrpiTfr i
cT^I UVfll
?rt 3 *rfa?r: ^nwmm^Mra n^sui

Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
anrfa sirrimr! sqft \
TT'flwi?? ^?!m»TrcginTT n^tn
^ fcfft q-pR^fwlfa 3TT I
?T 5TTT aTTJ^T gfetT: STSTOfai ^ q*qf?T 1|^||
Tf^m trg^ fccft ^nr^t ?ng «nrfc*rit i
ftra^facnr^q^T faf*w>j nfwftrR • H^«5U
*>rr*?i*ng i
*iW ^fatT^rlTO *TTficI*>> 3ITq£ JR: U^&ll
?iq# %cft VR^iriR sqjrfcn^ I
W*=qf 1^ftfT3T?d«P> H»jf5*TR (l^oll
qf^rq't qjTfftfrvqf ftRvtfteRR iivatM
tt|«tt |tt! STJOtsrmq i
*rfw: RT^R jjhOR ftlf^RT %^T^TU\3^n
5^ tfVfr: qiqmft to *tiR i
PRTsfq srst^ftT 'fffwfn fT THRHlV^lt
qrowfq TTfft w% ?RTsfq SJsNqr: |
aRRWTWd q'S^q^er HR qtallWII
63-74. EFFECTS OF THE 12TH FROM KARAKAMSA :
If the 12th from Karakamsa has a bencfic, the expcnsess will be
on good account while a malefic will cause bad expenses. If the
said 1 2th be vacant then also good effects (in respect of expenses)
will follow. If there be a benefic planet in exaltation or m own
house in the 12th from Karakamsa or if Ketu is so placed and
aspected by or conjunct a benefic one will attain heavens after
death. One will attain final emancipation if Ketu is in the 12th
(from Karakamsa) identical with Aries/Sagittarius and is
aspected by a benefic. If Ketu in the 1 2th from Karakamsa
and be with aspect/conjunction of a malefic one will not attain
final emancipation. If the Sun and Ketu are in the said 12th the
native will worship Lord Siva. The Moon and Ketu in the
said 12th denotes a worshipper of Gauri (a con-sort of
L°rd Siva) Venus and Ketu in the said 12th denotes a

Chapter 33
worshipper of Lakshmi (a consort of Lord Vishnu) and a wealthy
person. Mars and Ketu in the said 12th denotes a worshipper
of Lord Subramanya (an offspring of Lord Siva). Rahu in the
12th from Karakamsa will make one worship Durga or some
mean deity. Ketu alone in the said 12th denotes Subramanya’s
or Canesa’s worshipper. If Saturn is in the said 12th in a
malefic’s sign one will worship mean deities. Venus and Saturn
in the said 1 2th in a malefic’s sign will also make one worship
mean deities. Similar inferences can be drawn from the 6th
Navamsa counted from Amatya Karaka’s Navamsa.
«FTT*Ti7TTrT qTWJgtf ! [
fnsq
frq sriwr i
75-76. MISCELLANEOUS MATTERS (upto sloka 84) .*
O Brahmin, if there are two malefics in a trine from Karakamsa,
the native will have knowledge of Mantras (sacred spells) and
Tantras (mystical formularies for the worship of deities for attainment of super-human powers). If a malefic simultaneously
aspects the said yoga, the native will use these learnings for
malevolent purposes while a benefic’s aspect will make him use
the same for public good
foot TFRrft i
gtq qpwfaqqfr
gt# t
q^Jrqrsfj? famt TTg-jift qfe ii\$eu
sqhnngtq neon
fqsqnf?vf%?T ?r?ti rrcr tVtI htr; i
far# trfaiictn

Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
?T* Mfcft fw^Tf^rT: 1
Fmn^rTrr iu^u
«gftrenfa*T ^t?tt ?r asm: i
if %*% 3* qfe^TJ3fT^TT^>: ll^U
f5 'TTfl^Tt *r mt RHS: I
ff m TT^T, ^¥iT£R>^rTUq>m
^ $% cTf StlrR ffrTTFWlT*: I
77-84J. If the Moon is in the Karakamsa in aspect to Venus,
the native will be an alchemist and if be in aspect to Mercury he
will be a doctor capable of curing all diseases. If the Moon is in
the 4th from Karakamsa and be in aspect to Venus, the native
be afflicted by white leprosy; if in aspect to Mars blood and
bilious disorders, and if to Ketu black leprosy. Should Rahu
and Mars be in the 4th or 5th from Karakamsa the native will
suffer from pulmonary consumption and if there be Moon’s
aspect simultaneously this affliction will be certain. Mars alone
in the 4th/5th from Karakamsa will cause/ulcers. If Ketu be in
the 4th or 5th from Karakamsa one will suffer from dysentery and
afflictions due to (impure) water. Rahu and Gulika in the 4th/5th
from Karakamsa will make one a doctor curing poisonous afflictions or will cause troubles through poison. Should Saturn be
alone in the 4th or 5th from Karakamsa, the native will be skilful in archery. Ketu lonely placed in the 4tb/5th from
Karakamsa will make one a maker of watches etc. Mercury so
placed will make one an ascetic of the highest order or an ascetic
holding staff. Rahu, Sun and Mars respectively in these places
denote a machinist, a knife user and spear/arrow user.
Wttf m Item
iphinc^n
85-86. The Moon and Jupiter in the Karakamsa or the 5th
therefrom denotes a writer well-versed in all branches of learning.
The grade of writership will comparatively descend in the case of
Venus and further in the case of Mercury if so placed as above.

Chapter 33
sra jnrrr^ \
^f^W> y^iMd Hd^H
TOfsrTOif??re>t ^ ^ *TOTfor \
*^5^ fTO$«T #3?TTr^facT framiscll
mrr^?> *{TO ^Tfr ^cTFTRtR I
*fat?PS> TO Uc&ll
**TCT **T teffo STIrTt I
=3 flt?TO>tT3T: HTfjJcTOTO ll£o||
**V W^RTfq^TO TftcTrT?^ J^TITO I
^tTfalrRT: fR<r«^;*TTPffTOR*: ll£{lt
*T*UTR*tT ?Tf«f4ih?|Ti;acft *TTO I
frorcitauevi*
’flit «wp sort amw?** ^ srtq i
87-92 J . PLANETS IN 5TH FROM KARAKAMSA : Should
Venus be in the 5th from Karakamsa, the native will be a poet,
be eloquent and be a poet- Jupiter replacing denotes that he
will be an exponent and be all-knowing but be unable
to speak in an assembly. He will be further a grammarian
and a scholar in Vedas and Upanishads. Saturn in this context
will make one ineffective in an assembly, while Mercury will
make him a skilful in Meemamsa (one of the six chief Darsanas).
Mars in Karakamsa or the 5th therefrom will make one Justice
while the Moon denotes a Sankhya Yogi, a rhetor or a singer.
The Sun in the said 5th will make one learned in Vedanta and
music. Ketu in the said 5th will make one a nathematician and
skilful in astrology. Should Jupiter be related to the said Ketu,
these learnings will be by inheritance. AH these as well apply to
the 2nd/3rd from Karakamsa and to the Karakamsa itself apart
from applying to the 5th from Karakamsa.
3T ejefft frTSSTTOT It^ll
fa?R«Jr RT^reft I
93-93£. Should Ketu be in the 2nd/3rd from Karakamsa,
the native will be defective in speech, more so if a malefic
aspects Ketu as above.

Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
wfsiiiHHM qqrctmrq nevu
qrq*m<* q?spfc<rt fa^taer: i
ararstan^ q ^ qt^T: qtfacrr tnrruestit
q>lWq?TTcrT^ ??qi: sq 'ft&Rl: i
^ qmq*TCTqfecftqi^q^fjj5T ! U^H
q faffqt qtff: |
qmqiwuw^ HfTRFj qra^3 q^iq iisasii
^ qfqqrfq qtntsq qiqqtwteq^Rql: i
qq cRnfq'flrqRl gqistat
?TnnR-MW3«KWT q^i qTsq farqfsqm i
5% Hwqq: start qrTT^mq^ qqni£€.n
94-99. If malefics be in the Karakamsa, Arudha Lagna and
the 2nd and 8th from these places, there will be Kemadruma
yoga; the effects of which will be still severer if the Moon’s aspect
be there. The effects due for these yogas will come to pass in the
Dasa periods of the Rasis or planets concerned. Kemadruma
Yoga will operate additionally if there are malefics in the 2nd
and 8 from the Rasi whose Dasa will be in currency. The
results of such yoga will also be inauspicious. If the 2nd and
8th in the chart cast for the beginning of a Dasa have malefics,
then also Kemadruma prevails throughout the Dasa.
atq iftn*>rcq>T«rnT: 113x11
Chapter 34
Yoga Karakas
VK<m*iqitnS«»‘ q*f Sfafi rrqi ! \
1. O Brahmin, thus I have told you about the effects
derivable through Krakamsa. Now listen to the effects arising out
of planetary house lord ships.

Chapter 34
%*5Trsrowi?: hWt q fenfar
flnfrnniwi
%'£fqqft«Tc3Tq fawfo Jjwrqqq |
qs^*i qqrj fasfrra^TO^tl?! u^ll
q^TPf 4* fq?Tqg^g^ |
fqq^mifaqr: flq q$T: qrTOvfT: ?qm: liVII
sqqfjrfl^^fn: ST^qqfa q?5TirqT: (
?qT?Ti*tTTrgffara j^wt^tT OtRB itx.li
sn^q^9rc37ir;CT?lt q sjqqq: |
faq?iqrfaq?^sq> fftoiq?# g n^u
^tqq g?ft q>q> fairer qqraq?: t
?r 7?w*ic?nftq>sq gqfcFjnwfortcT nvati
2-7. NATURE DUE TO LORDSHIPS OF PLANETS :
Benefics owning angles will not give benefic effects while malefics
owning angles will not remain inauspicious. The lord of a trine
will give auspicious results. The lord of the ascendant is specially
auspicious as the ascendant is an angle as well as trine. The 5th,
and 9tb houses are specially for wealth while the 7th and 10th
are specially for happiness. Any planet owning the 3rd, 6th, or
the 1 1th will give evil effects. The effects due to the lords of the
12th, and 8th will depend on their association. In each group,
the significance will be in- the ascending order. The 8th lord is
not auspicious as he owns the 12th from the 9th. If the lord of
the 8th simultaneously owns the 3rd, 7th or 11th, he will prove
specifically harmful while his simultaneous ownership of a trine
will bestow auspicious effects. The planet owning a predominant
house will stall the effects due to another owning a less significant house and will give his own results. The 8th lordship of
the Sun and the Moon is not evil.
Notes : The rules given in this part will help us to decide
the good and bad planets for each ascendant based on lordships.
A summary of these rules is given below to enable use of
suitable application of lordships.
1 . Kcndradbipatya Dosha : This blemish goes to natural benefics by virtue of angular lordship. For example, for Gemini ascen-

Brihat Parasara flora Sastra
dant the ownership of 4th and 7th goes to Jupiter and hence he
is not a benefic for this ascendant, Lagna lord owning an angle
i.e. 4th/7th/10th, shall not prove inauspicious. (Even if he owns
an evil house, he is not classified as a malefic.) Natural benefics
are increasing Moon, Mercury, Jupiter and Venus. Their angular
lordship blemish will be in the ascending order. That is the
Moon is the least malefic and Venus is the most malefic by such
ownership.
2. Malefic as owner of angle : If a malefic owns an angle
he will not be inauspicious. This docs not mean that he will
become auspicious. (The sage has cautiously worded his verse.)
To be auspicious by virtue of angular lordship, the malefic should
simultaneously own a trine. If he docs not own a trine, he will
be neutral by mere angular lordship; neither he will be disadvantageous. For Libra ascendant. Satrun is classified as unsullied
yogakaraka because he owns the 4th (an angle) and the 5th (a
trine). The Sun s beneficence to Taurus ascendant cannot be
compared to Saturn’s for Libra, because the Sun has only one
house which is angular to the ascendant. For. Leo ascendant Mars
becomes a top rank benefic as he owns an angle (4th) and a trine
(9th). Similarly for Cancer ascendant. The same Mars for Capricorn ascendant by virtue of angular lordship is not that superior
because he does not simultaneously own a trine. Similarly his role
for Aquarius ascendant. Weak Moon by virtue of angular lordship remains just neutral.
3. Primarily wealth-givers are the lords of 5th and 9th. The
lords of 7th and 10th contribute to one’s happiness. Each of
them should be individually wefldisposed. Trinal lordship to
Jupiter will enable him give wealth abundantly and uninterruptedly. Venus becoming lord of 7th or 10th will give general
happiness if the occupies an angle or a trine.
4. Lords of 3rd, 6th and 11th are classified as evil planets
while the lords of 2nd, 12th and 8th will act according to association. If these lords simultaneously own such another
house, they will be significantly harmful. If such a planet simultaneously own3 a trine he will be favourable. For example, Jupiter
is doubly evil for Libra ascendant as he owns the 3rd and 6th.
Saturn, though owning the 8th, will be favourable for a Gemini
nativity as he is the lord of the 9th as well. In considering two

Chapter 34
lordships in any context, the Moolatrikona house has prime
importance as against the other ordinary house. The Moolatrikona lordship will reveal itself effectively rather than the other
own house.
5. When two planets are involved in a context, the one
with good lordship will stall the evil effects of another planet
owning a less powerful house. To wit, if the 9th lord and the 8th
lord are both involved in a yoga, the 9th lord will give his good
effects obstructing the evils due to the 8th lord.
6. We have the following two sets of good houses, (a) 1st,
4th, 7th and the 10th. (b) 5th and 9th. In each group the benefic
disposition will ascend from house to house. That is, 7th lord
is more powerful than the 4th. The 9th lord is so as against the
5th lord
7. Similarly two sets of evil houses are before us; (a) 3rd,
6th and 11th. (b) 12th, 2nd and 8th. Here again the maleficence
will move in the ascending order. To wit, the 1 1th lord is the
most evil in his group while the 8th lord is so in his group.
8. The summary of points 6 and 7 is t the 10th and 9th
lords are the highest benefic planets while the 1 Ith and 8th loros
are the most adverse. Thus, the 10th lord's counterpart is the 1 1th
lord and the 9th lord's counterpart is the 8lh lord. (If we consider Saturn for Aries ascendant, he gets one best house and one
worst house, i.e. the 10th and 1 1th houses. The 1 Ith house being
his Moolatrikona, he is predominantly the I Ith lord rather than
the 10th lord and hence very evil. Similarly his role for Gemini
ascendant in which case the 9th lordship prevails over his 8th
lordship and so he is not evil but favourable.)
9. The roles of various planets are generally based on these
grounds and what we have had so far is a rough frame-work.
However, no decision should be taken at one single point. For
actual picture, the sage classifies the planets further in the succeeding verses.
10. As far as Rahu and Ketu are concerned, they act
according to their position, association and depositors, vide verse
16 infra.
TTRfrff ^tflcl: TFTT Uq||
*• cs

Brihat Parasara Bora Sastra
ST9«1T ^rTTt?(T*T \
wlwf^rffr^rg^T: ueit
fcaifu'Twg'Wt it: mini ^r«RT> m i
^srsrg^TTsniiri sr^ri^mV^iT \\\o\\
8-10. N ATURAL BENEFICS AND MALEFlCS : Jupiter and
Venus are benefics while the Moon is mediocre in beneficence.
Mercury is neutral (i.e. a benefic when associated with a benefit
and a malefic when related to a malefic). Malcfics are the Sun,
Saturn and Mars. Full Moon, Mercury, Jupiter and Venus are
stronger in the ascending order Weak Moon, the Sun, Saturn
and Mars are stronger (in malefic disposition) in the ascending
order. In revealing maleficence due to angular rulership, the
Moon, Mercury, Jupiter and Vemis are significant in the ascending order.
Notes : Jupiter and Venus are first rate benefics while the
Moon is next to them. The Moon’s variable dispositions have
been given in the earlier pages. Mercury is neutral, i.e. a benefic
in relation to a benefic and is a malefic in relation to a malefic.
He has no disposition of his own. If he is alone, he will be
favourable. Considering the Moon and Mercury in benefic classes
the four planets viz. Moon, Mercury, Jupiter and Venus are*
superior in the ascending order. That is Mercury is more beneficial than Moon, Jupiter is more beneficial than Mercury and
Venus is the highest benefic. However, some exponents hold the
view that Jupiter is the highest benefic, see “Subhanampatih”
As regards malefics, the Sun, Saturn and Mars come under
this class when the nodes are excluded for they do not have
their own disposition. Here again, the Sun is the least malefic,
Saturn is more malefic than the Sun; and Mars is the highest
malefic as against the Sun and Saturn.
frff jrtnmffr 'TTtMHI'ft'Hfl |
shrank ?raT r
3ift% *rrt fasirrcft *tt srrt
1 1-12. ANGULAR AND TRINAL LORDSHIPS : If there be
an exchange between an angular lord and a trinallord, or if these

Chapter 54
two lords join in an angle or in a trine, or if a trinal lord is in
angle or vice versa, or if there be full aspect between them, they
cause a yoga. One born in such a voga will become a king and be
famous.
Notes : The following permutations will emerge from these
two verses which yogas will make the native famous giving royal
status. These are :
(1) exchange between an angular lord and a trinal lord.
For example Gemini ascendant having Mercury in Aquarius
and Saturn in Virgo.
(2) angular lord and trinal lord in a trine, whether they
own or not.
(3) angular lord and trinal lord in an angle, whether they
own or not.
(4) trinal lord in an angle, whether he owns or not.
(5) angular lord in a trine, whether he owns or not.
(6) angular lord and trinal lord in mutual opposition (as
full aspect is required), particularly in good bhavas.
stvfcr ^ \
13. If one and the same planet gets the lordships of a trine
as well as an angle or if a planet is in an angle or in a trine, it
will prove specially a yogakaraka.
TRFTf HT sfaflT l
st n?*n
14. ANGULAR LORDSHIP : It has been said that a
malefic owning an angle will become auspicious which is true only
when it simultaneously lords over a trine and not by merely owning an angle.
Note : This aspect has been clarified in the initial verses
of the present chapter.
ep?jfspttriTfaTl%^ 'TTR^FTTfU'ft q*T I
c!7T>: SR: U$SU1
15. If the lords of an angle or a trine owns simultaneously
an evil house, he(i.e. the angular lord or the trinal lord)does not

346 Brlhat Parasara Bora SastrQ
cause a Rajayoga by mere relations stipulated (as per slokas 1 1
and 12 above).
Notes : In this context, if the evil house is Moolatrikona,
that evil lordship will prevail. Alternatively if the angle or trine
is Moolatrikona, the evil lordship is suppressed so that the good
lordship shows up. Here such angular lord and such trinal lord
by mere relations (as per verses 11 and 12) do not become
Yogakaraka or status makers.
16. RAHU & KETU : Rahu and Kctu give predominently
the effects as due to their conjunction with a house lord or as
due to the house they occupy.
Notes : As already stated, Rahu owns Aquarius and Ketu
Scorpio. Still they do not have a disposition of their own in
the matter of giving particular elferts. (In point of fact, these
ownerships are for calculation of some of ‘Jaimni’ dasas etc. and
not in a common context.) Inasmuch as they do not have a
sign of their own, they have also not been specifically classified
as malefic or benefic for the various ascendants as could be seen
from the rules enunciated by sage Parasara in the current
chapter. Hence it is suggested that the results to be given by
Rahu and Ketu will depend on their association with other lords
and occupation of houses. So to say, if they are related to good
lords they will reveal effects favourable to the native, otherwise
not. Alternatively they should be in favourable houses like
angle, trine etc, so that good effects follow their position.
qf? fireW 37 I
37 ll^ll
17. If a node is in an angle in aspect to or association with
a trinal lord or be in a trine in similar relation with an angular
lord it will become Yogakaraka.
Notes : Two important positions are indicated for a node
becoming Yogakaraka for a native. It should be in an angle in
relation to a trinal lord or be in a trine in aspect to an angular

Chapter 34 34?
lord. In such a situation Rahu or Ketu will become a
Yogakaraka.
* ^51 tfttWiRTi: I
■^TS^a^T: tffST: $qqi q* % ! II? ml
18. O Sage, please narrate according to the signs rising as
to which planet is a yogakaraka and which is inauspicious.
U«IT 'JCZ f^Tl fa* I rT#n^of ,
qtqtffctrftTcn: qwr: tjsfcrarT^ »
* *T*T iftn^T^oi n^ o| ,
TO *QT?*TTWt%?T ^ferT: ||? ?n
q^RETtsfq 5?cnft *l%g: qTfiqt t^T: I
^^*WFW q>5T f^flrTR !
19-22. PLANETS & ARIES ASCENDANT : O Brahmin,
listen to these with examples. Even though Mars is the lord of
the 8th, he will be helpful to (other) auspicious planets. Saturn,
Mercury and Venus are malefics. Auspicious are Jupiter and
the Sun. The mere conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter will not
produce auspicious effects (although they own a trine and angle).
If Jupiter is at the disposal of a malefic, he will surely give
inauspicious results. Venus is a direct (or independent) killer.
Saturn etc. will also inflict death if associated with an adverse
planet (i.e. Venus). That is how the effects will be derived by
an Aries native.
Notes : For Aries ascendant Mars is the ruler of the 1st and
the 8th. The ascendant is his Moolatrikona sign while the 8th
is his secondary sign. He will hence predominantly be favourable
He cannot be independently auspicious but can help another favourable planet like the Sun or Jupiter or even the Moon through
whom he will reveal his good qualities. It is also not illogical to
conclude that if Mars is well related to Jupiter or the Sun or the
Moon and is in good bhavas, favourable effects will come
through him.

Srihat Parasara Horn Sastra
As regards other unsullied benefic planets for this ascendant
we have only two. These are Jupiter and the Sun. Even if
Jupiter is captured by another adversary, his good results will be
stalled. Saturn, Mercury and Venus are malefics and will cause
harm. Venus will prove a killer as he is the 2nd and 7th lord.
Saturn and Mercury will also inflict death if related to Venus.
The Moon’s role is not discussed by the sage. The Moon will
give mixed results according to association etc. as she is an
angular ruler.
An association between Jupiter-Sun, Jupiter-Mars or
Mars-Sun will be highly favourable for the ascendant in question.
Jupiter-Saturn association will not prove to be helpful although
they own the 9th and 10th. It is because, Saturn is 1 1th lord
with prime emphasis on his Aquarius ownership,
qnu: STfafeqFITTt I
qqentftewqsr u^YII
23-24. FOR TAURUS ASCENDANT : Jupiter, Venus
and the Moon are malefics. Saturn and the Sun are auspicious.
Saturn will cause Rajayoga. Mercury is somewhat auspicious,
Jupiter etc. and Mars will inflict death. These hints are for a
Taurus native.
Notes : Jupiter is a malefic for Taurus ascendaut and will
avail of the first opportunity to inflict harm as he owns the 8th
and IJth houses both of which are evil. He is the first-rate
adversary. The Moon being the 3rd lord is not auspicious.
Venus is also classified here as an evil planet and a maraka
planet. The words '‘afhjrcqY’ (Jeevadayo) indicate the Jupiter
group, i.e. Jupiter, the Moon and Venus. According to the
following words of Susloka Sataka — srsff ^ ?T
— for Scorpio ascendant there is no blemish (to Mars) of
the 6tb lordship and also for Taurus ascendant (in the case of
Venus). Sage Parasara apparently took into serious consideration the 6th lordship (Moolatrikona) of Venus and calssified
him as an adversary. Though there are some more exponents
to favour Susloka Sataka’s line of thinking, Parasara being an

Chapter 34
undisputed authority should be given more weight. The Sun
and Saturn are benches. Saturn owns the best trine and best
angle and hence he will bestow kingly status on the native. The
Sun though a malefic by virtue of owning an angle proves
auspicious. The rule that a malefic owning an angle should
own a trine also, so that he becomes a Yogakaraka (vide sloka
14 supra) is naturally not applicable to the luminaries as
they own only one sign each. As regards the role of Mercury,
he is only of mixed nature for Taurus ascendant and he is not
an excellent benefic by virtue of owning a Maraka house in
addition to a trine. The 5th is his Moolatrikona and exaltation
sign, If Mcreury joins Saturn/Sun, he will act more effectively.
Mars is classified as a killer apart from Jupiter, Venus and
the Moon. Mars is a killer for he owns the 7th and 12th. The
role of Jupiter and VeDus as killers is also understandable.
Though the Moon is said to be a killer, she cannot independently do so for she is only the 3rd lord which is the least
malefic among 3rd, 6th and 1 1th. The luminaries are considered
not inauspicious even by ownership of the 8th house; as such
the 3rd house lordshsp of the Moon in the ease of Taurus be
leniently viewed from the point of wiew of inflicting death. Her
connections with Jupiter or Mars can empower her to inflict
death on the Taurus native.
^*r5T>TTt^n: 'TNT: WR; 1
sftepi tfWV Illicit
25-26. FOR GEMINI ASCENDANT : Mars, Jupiter and
the Sun are malefics while Venus is the only auspicious planet.
The conjunction of Jupiter and Saturn is similar to that for
Aries ascendant. The Moon is the prime killer, but it is
dependant on her association. Thus have been explained by
the scholars the effects for Gemini ascendant.
Notes : The three planets, viz. Jupiter, the Sun and Mars
are adverse for Gemini ascendant. There is no hint on Saturn’s
role except that Saturn-Jupiter conjunction does not yield a yoga
just as it does not do so for an Aries native. Saturn owns the

Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
8th and the 9th while the 9th is his Moolatrikona. Jupiter owns
the 7th and IOth. It is my personal feeling that an exchange
between Saturn and Jupiter in the 9th and 1 Oth or their placement in conjunction in the 9th/ 10th, or Saturn in the 9th as
Jupiter is in the 10 will prove a very favourable point. (This
line of thinking cannot be extended to Aries ascendant, i.e.
exchange between 9th and 10th lords & C for Jupiter will be
in fall in the 10th in a key house.)
For Gemini ascendant, Mars owns two evil houses, the 6th
and 1 1th and hence he is a malefic. The Sun owning the 3rd
will not be helpful.
Venus, the lord of the 5th and 12th, is declared to be
highly favourable, as the 5th is his Moolatrikona. In view of
the friendship between Venus and Mercury, the 12th lordship
of Venus is not seriously considered adverse. On the same
lines, Mercury for Libra ascendant is considered favourable
although he owns the 12th, which is his Moolatrikona and
exaltation — thus a predominant house.
*TTiT^grff qrft SJSIT: \
HTvTSpf: Duvall
sita-i ircii
27-28. CANCER ASCENDANT : Venus and Mercury
are malefics. Mars, Jupiter and the Moon are auspicious. Mars
is capable of conferring a full-fledged yoga and giving auspicious
effects. Saturn and the Sun are killers and give effects according
to association. These are Cancer ascendant’s effects.
Notes : The role of the Sun is compared to that of Saturn
as a killer. The Sun is the lord of the 2nd and Saturn rules the
7th and 8th for Cancer ascendant. Both the houses of Saturn
are inauspicious and hence he is classified as a killer. However,
they are not independently capable of doing bad or good but
act as per their relationship with others.
Venus is inauspicious by virtue of angular lordship
(4th house — Moolatrikona) and the 11th lordship. (The 11th
lord for a movable sign is a malefic, i.e. Saturn for Aries,
Venus for Cancer, the Sun for Libra and Mars for Capricorn

Chapter 34
ascendants.) Thus Venus gets a dual role to do evil tor a
Cancer native. The 3rd and 12th lordship of Mercury will
inflict harm and hence he is inauspicious.
The best planet for this ascendant is Mars as he owns a
trine as well as an angle. The 10th lordship will prevail much
more favourably as the 10th is the best of the 4 angles and
Aries is the Moolatrikona sign of Mars. The other two
favourable planets are Jupiter and the Moon. Jupiter is the
lord of the 6th and 9th. Though 6th is his Moolatrikona, the
sage has given preference to the 9th lordship for obviously two
reasons : firstly the 9th is best of the two trines and Jupiter is
a close friend of the Moon, the aseendant lord. The 3rd
favourable planet is the Moon who is the ascendant lord. The
order of preference is Mars, Jupiter and the Moon, i.e. benefic
tendency will descend from one to another and hence the Moon
is the least benefic. If Mars is well related to Jupiter, the Moon
or to the Sun, he can do wonders for a Cancer native, The best
place as far as Saturn is concerned is Capricorn in the company
of Mars or the Moon.
TNT: l
n^eii
mtTieg I
ll^oH
29-30. LEO ASCENDANT : Mercury, Venus and Saturn
are malefics. Auspicious effects will be givin by Mars, Jupiter
and the Sun. The conjunction of Jupiter and Venus (though
Kendra Kona lords) will not produce auspicious results. Saturn
and the Moon are killers who will give effects according to
association. These are the effects applicable to Leo ascendant.
Notes : Just as the Sun is noted as a killer for Cancer
ascendant, the Moon is similarly classified as a killer for Leo
ascendant as she is the lord of the 12th house. This killer-role
has not barred the Moon from becoming a Yogakaraka or an
auspicious planet for Leo ascendant as per our experience.
Saturn's adverse role is because of two prime reasons— firstly
he is a sworn enemy of the ascendant lord and secondly he is the
7th lord apart from being the 6th lord. Mercury’s role is

Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
equally ominous as the 2nd and 12th come under his regent. The
3rd and 10th lordship (a bad house and an ancle respectively)
makes Venus unreliable.
Mars is again the best planet for Leo ascendant followed
by favourable roles to be enacted by Jupiter and the Sun, Mars
rules the 4th and 9th; Jupiter the 5th and 8th and the Sun
ascendant. Here again, the Sun is the 3rd in order.
qm: qti-TTqft \
qtrqftsfq qrfgr:, nq: m^qqj^mq: l
ll^ll
31-32. VIRGO ASCENDANT : Mars, Jupiter and the
Moon are malefics while Mercury and Venus are auspicious.
The conjunction of Venus and Mercury will produce yoga.
Venus is a killer as well. The Sun's role will depend on his
association. These effects are for Virgo ascendant,.
Notes : Mercury ruling the ascendant and the 10th house
and Venus lording over the 2nd and 9th are classified as
favourable planets. Venus by virtue of owning the 2nd will
act as a killer also. (Mars ruling the 8th can also act as a killer.)
Jupiter rules two angles— the 4th and the 7th— while the Moon
is the Ilth lord. For these reasons, these two are considered
inauspicious. The Sun will be good if he joins good planets
in good houses, for example in the 10th along with Mercury.
There is no hint in the text about Saturn’s role. By virtue of
the 5th lordship and good relationship with the ascendant lord
Mercury, he will prove auspicious. But the stain due to 6th
lordship will cause a change in his disposition and he cannot be
counted as an invariable dependent.
attarv'flTCTrTT: qxqi: i
fv *0 O -O
WTt TTStqtq^q VTTqft
55ft father sfarai: qjqT *nr^ivr^n*TT: i
q^TFqq fqwfa 113*11
33-34. LIBRA ASCENDANT : Jupiter, the Sun and
Mars are malefics. Auspicious are Saturn and Mercury. The

Chapter 34 353
Moon and Mercury will cause Rajayoga. Mars is a killer.
Jupiter and other malefics will also acquire a disposition to
inflict death. Venus is neutral. Thus should be known about
Libra ascendant.
Notes : Although Venus is the ruler of the ascendant, he
owns 8th as well, and hence the sage term him as neutral,
Dire malefic is Jupiter, the lord of the 3rd and the 6th. The
ruler of the 2nd and the 7th, Mars, is equally inauspicious
while the Sun ruling the 1 1th will act as an obstructing force.
These three planets, viz. Jupiter, Mars and the Sun are more
malefic if mutually related but unrelated to Saturn, Mercury or
the Moon, On the other hand, Mars or the Sun will act as
primary benefics if they join Saturn, Mercury or Venus according
to one school of thought.
TFIT: ST'fft I
tftwrcqft 113101
j fi wi auM tftt wwpi: 1
^ U3Vi
35-36. FOR SCORPIO ASCENDANT : Venus, Mercury
and Saturn are malefics. Jupiter and the Moon are auspicious.
The Sun as well as the Moon arc Yogakarakas. Mars is neutral.
Venus and other malefics acquire the quality of causing death.
These are for a Scorpio native.
Notes : Just as Venus is a neutral planet for Libra
ascending, Mars is also neutral for Scorpio ascendant. Mars
owns the ascendant and the 6th, the latter being his Moolatrikona. The Sun (lord of the 10th) and the Moon (lord of the
9th) are termed the best yogakarakas. Jupiter though ruling
the 2nd (and the 5th), is auspicious just as Mercury for Taurus
ascendant ruling the 2nd and the 5th. (of course Mercury’s
Moolatrikona is the 5th ) Venus, Saturn and Mercury are
malefics as well as death-dealing planets. Saturn can be
practically auspicious if he is in the 5th/9th, being lord of an
angle, from the point of view of status, finance etc.
tis? <rsr «nq: i

Brillat Parasara Hora Sastra
^TT?T: Split mT‘fr<T$T'Jr: |
qv?r asr nscii
37-38 SAGITTARIUS ASCENDANT : Only Venus is
inauspicious. Mars and the Sun are auspicious. The Sun and
Mercury are capable of conferring a yoga Saturn is a killer.
Jupiter is neutral. Venus acquires killing powers. These effects
are for Sagittarius ascendant.
Notes : Venus is a first-rate malefic for Sagittarius
ascendant as he owns the 6th and 11th. The sage hints that
none is akin to Venus in giving malefic effects for this ascendant.
Saturn is straightaway a killer, ruling the 2nd and the 3rd.
Venus can also become a killer (if related to Saturn). Though
Mercury rules two angles— the 7th and 10th— he is declared
auspicious whereas for Virgo ascendant as well as Gemini
ascendant, Jupiter is considered inauspicious. This supreme
role of Mercury is possibly because of his ownership of the 10th
house (moolatrikona and hence predominant against 7th house
ownership) whereas Jupiter does not own Moolatrikona identical
with the 10th house — best of the angles— for an ascendant ruled
by Mercury. If the Sun (ruler of the 9th) joins Mercury, both
of them will confer still superior Yoga for Sagittarius natives.
Mars gives primarily his 5th house effects (moolatrikona)
shedding his 12th lordship and hence is a favourable planet.
Jupiter is neither a first-rate benefic nor an adversary for he
owns the 4th (angular lordship’s blemish). The Moon ruling
the 8th cannot be a powerful Yogakaraka unless well-related
to Mercury, the Sun or Mars. An association between the
Moon End Jupiter can confer a yogH psr excellence*
qr«n: |
t$Ti( qnTT;
5PT; «*svhcT: 5ftecT; I
u*oii
39-40. CAPRICORN ASCENDANT *• Mars, Jupiter and
the Moon are malefics, Venus and Mercury are auspicious
Saturn wiil not be a killer of his own. Mars and other malefics
will inflict death. The Sun is neutral. Only Venus is capable

Chapter 34
of causing a superior yoga. These are the effects applicable to
Capricorn ascendant.
Notes : The sage has- listed Mars in the first place while
mentioning adverse planets for Capricorn ascendant as Mars rules
the 4th and 11th. Jupiter is lord of the 2nd and 12th, the latter
being his important house. The 7th lord Moon is not quite a
favourable planet.
Saturn and the Sun are neither very favourable nor very
adverse. Saturn will reveal killing powers if he joins Jupiter,
Mars or the Moon. While Venus and Mercury are both
auspicious in their own way, the former is the best yogakaraka
for this ascendant, for he is the lord of the 5th and 10th,
ffTTT: STsft \
41-42. AQUARIUS ASCENDANT : Jupiter, the Moon
and Mars are malefics while Venus and Saturn are auspicious.
Venus is the only Rajayoga causing planet. Jupiter, the Sun
and Mars are killers. Mercury gives meddling effects. These
effects are described by the learned for Aquarius ascendant.
Notes : The 2nd and lJth lord Jupiter is a dire malefic
followed by the Moon (the 6th lord) and Mars (ruling the 3rd
and 10th). While Venus and Saturn are both auspicious for
Aquarius ascendant, Venus is the only planet that can be
considered to have been vested with powers of Rajayoga. Saturn
is not compared to Venus as he owns the 1 2th simultaneously.
Venus is the lord of the 4th and the 9th. As the 9th is the best
trine, he is relieved of blemish due to angular lordship. The
Sun is termed as a killer as he rules the 7th, a maraka house.
(Saturn plays a similar rol£ for Leo ascendant owning the 7th
in Moolatrikona). Jupiter ruling the 2nd and Mars owning the
3rd are also killers. Out of the 3 killers, Mars is the last in
order. A strong relationship between two or all of these three
killers will affect the longevity to decline severely. Mercury
ruling the 5th and the 8th will give mixed results. If Mercury
joins an adverse planet, he will be essentially adverse while in

356 Brihat Parasara ttora Sastra
joining Venus or Saturn, he can considerably improve. Alone
in bad houses, he will be evil and in good houses he will be
favourable. This is how Mercury’s role for this ascendant need
be understood.
<TTVT \
43-44. PISCES ASCENDANT : Saturn, Venus, the Sun
and Mercury are matefics. Mars and the Moon are auspicious.
Mars and Jupiter will cause a yoga. Though Mars is a killer,
he will not kill the native (independently), Saturn and Mercury
are killers. Thus should be judged the effects for a Pisces
native.
Notes : Saturn owns two evil houses for Pisces ascendant.
Hence he will reveal himself most awefuily. Venus rules the
3rd and 8th— again two evil houses. And hence he is not a
favourable planet. The Sun ruling the 6th will prove adverse
though he has good terms with the lord of the ascendant, Jupiter
Mars is the lord of the 2nd (Moolatrikona) and the 9th (the
best of the trines). Inspite of owning a killer-house, he has been
specifically exempt from acting as a killer independently and
placed in the yogakaraka list. To be a killer. Mars must be
instigated by another killer, viz. Saturn or Mercury. Jupiter is
a very favourable planet (of course next to Mars) owning the
ascendant and the 10th. Though there is no specific mention
of Venus becoming a killer in such role can be seen in him as he
owns the 8th house.
*J*Tt*«T*TO?* *
45-46. GENERAL ; Thus the auspicious and inauspicious
effects derivable through the planets due to their lordships
according to the rising sign be estimated. Apart, the effects

Chapter 35 357
due to Nabhasa yogas etc. be also known which I narrate as
under.
Notes : The good disposition, bad disposition and killing
powers of the various placets are assigned by the sage on a
particular understanding of lordships etc. for each of the 12
ascendants. From the current two verses, we take an important
clue about the final role of a planet. To wit, if a planet is
constituent of a favourable yoga, like, say, Daamini Yoga (one
of the Nabhasa Yogas'), his original malefic tendency of being
an adverse planet for a particular ascendant, he will give the
effects of Daamini yoga and thus will become a Rajayogakaraka.
Conversely, although a planet assumes good role by lordship,
if he is involved in a bad yoga, like, say, Sarpa yoga (one of the
Nabhasa yogas again) there will only be adverse results and not
favourable results due to lordship. These causes should be
properly estimated and effects denoted suitably. A killer is a
killer irrespective of his having become a Rajayogakaraka or so.
Killer and Yogakaraka should not be mixed together in respect
of one and the same planet.
spt jwmuhnsura: i»3*u
Chapter 35
Nabhasa Yogas
^rtrai iftai: fssrarUT ! i
ifttn UcHId gti |
STTffafarcfff: ?T^ir: ?FcT tftm: U^ll
1-2. O excellent of the Brahmins, explained below are 32
Nabhasa yogas which have a total of 1800 different varieties.
These consist of 3 Asraya yogas, 2 Dala yogas, 20 Akriti yogas,
and 7 Sankhya yogas.

Brihat Parasara Mora Sastra
Notes i No additional notes and explanations are being
given in the present volume on the following chapters :
Nabhasa yogas (ch, 35)
Lunar yogas (ch. 37)
Solar yogas (ch. 38)
These have been fully discussed and annotated in a cleat
manner in my English translations of Saravali and Horasara.
The reader may refer to the said works.
«ITf'T^q^ a VII
a?OT?3f§ * *rg??#f?T fanfir uxu
IWI-¥e^V*TR-qW-%*T*-5T?Tq>T: \
g*r> n>nra gqm ^trfaen ! n^n
3-6. NAMES OF NABHASA YOGAS ; Asraya yogas are
Rajju, Musala and Nala yogas. Dala yogas are Maala
and Sarpa. The twenty Akriti yogas are : Geda, Sakata,
Sringataka, Vihanga, Hala, Vajra, Yava, Kamala, Vaapi, Yupa,
Sara, Sakthi, Danda, Nauka, Koota, Chatra, Dhanushi ''or
Chapa), Ardhachandra, Chakra and Samudra yogas. The seven
Sankhya yogas are Vallaki, Daama, Paasa, Kedara, Sooia,
Yuga and Gola yogas. Thus these are 32 in total.
^ *tjcn: uvsu
7. RAJJU, MUSALA AND NALA YOGAS : All the
planets in movable signs cause Rajju yoga. All the planets in
fixed signs cause Musala yoga. All the planets in dual signs
cause Nala yoga.
^HT?*n?rnj3tnT^ft vpmnnRTsNt usu

Chapter 35
8. MAALA AND SARPA YOGAS : If 3 angles are
occupied by benefics Maala yoga is produced while malefics so
placed will cause Bhujanga or Sarpa yoga. These yogas respectively produce benefic and malefic results.
Sit+d ?P f »T'»l Hill
tftn: *n?II?«T5T?PI:folS: 1
3T ^iTRia faqftiTW It; oil
5PH3nmft«I#: ffM 1 : «ITqn^: |
rftrft TOfro: Slt^rT: n?<u
9-11. GAD A, SAKATA, VIHAGA, SR1NGATAKA , II ALA,
VAJRA AND YAVA YOGAS : If all the planets occupy two
successive angles, Gada yoga is formed. Sakata yoga occurs
when all the planets are disposed in the ascendant and the 7th
house. If all confine to the 4th and the 10th, then Vihaga yoga
occurs. All planets in the ascendant, 5th and 9th cause
Sringataka yoga while all planets are in the 2nd, 6th and the
10 th or in the 3rd, 7th and 1 1th or in the 4th, 8th and 12th
cause Halayoga. Vajra yoga is caused by all benefics in the
ascendant and the 7th or all malefics in the 4th and 10th. In a
contrary situation, i.e. all benefics in the 4th and the 10th or all
malefics in the ascendant and the 7th, Yava yoga is generated.
12. KAMALA AND VAPI YOGAS : If all the planets are
in the 4 angles, Kamala yoga is produced. If all of them
be in all the cadent houses or in all the succedent houses Yapi
yoga occurs.
q-qt i
13. YUPA, SARA, SAKTHI AND DANDA YOGAS : If
all the 7 planets are in the 4 houses commencing from the ascendant they cause Yupa yoga. If a similar occupation commences

Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
from the 4th house Sara yoga, from the 7th bouse Sakthi yoga
and from the IOth house Danda yoga are formedS’RTH qqrqq?i> VI STPUT: I
qqfinlq qri q^qR wqq: II?V||
14. NAUKA, KOOTA, CRATRA AND CHAPA YOGAS :
If all the planets occupy the seven houses from the ascendant,
Nauka yoga occurs. Koota yoga, Chatra yoga and Chapa yoga
occur respectively when the commencing houses are the 4th, 7th
and 10th. Here again the planets should occupy seven
continuous houses.
q^qqsqqigsqjl |
Hgs: TOq^lfaq \[\V\
15. CHAKRA AND SAMUDRA YOGAS : If all the
planets occupy six alternative signs commencing from the
ascendant, Chakra yoga is formed. Samudra yoga is produced
if these occupy similarly six alternative signs commencing from
the 2nd from the ascendant.
qTTTffifawnfsft gqmt feqqftqq: i
f?TRiT: sfhRT: q^qq: ||{^||
trmr q^q^xf^q: 1
“fan qq*qq; qqfq^Tqqfsftfrqiq n^n
16-17 SANKHYA YOGAS : If all planets are in one
sign Gola yoga is formed. Similarly if all are in 2 signs, Yuga
yoga, 3 signs Soola yoga, 4 signs Kcdara Yoga, 5 signs Paasa
yoga, 6 signs Dama yoga and 7 signs Veena yoga is produced.
None of these seven yogas will be operable, if another Nabhasa
yoga explained earlier is derivable.
• SreqfqqT: <Rtq?qT?*qqTfqqt qf^T: l
%X1: Rq*qqrqT q*T qrfqi-n:
18. EFFECTS OF NABHASA YOGAS (upto sloka 50)
RAJJU YOGA : One born in Rajju yoga will be fond of wandering, be charming, will earn in foreign countries, and be cruel
and mischievous.

Chapter 35 36l
*?iHsnHU5ira«f*RTT imfwn: ?urai: i
■o rs
^«TT: forcfartt t^FRTHgcTT ?RT: 11^11
19. MUSA LA YOGA : One born in Musala yoga will be
endowed wiih honour, wisdom, wealth etc., be dear to king,
famous, will have many sons and be firm in disposition.
u^ou
20. NALA YOGA : One born in Nala yoga will have
uneven physique, be interested in accumulating money, very
skilful, helpful to relatives, and charming.
fact? g^TSlUT^T 1
fjPrTT graftal *rmmf ^snjeu: *5: ir?ii
21. MAALA YOGA : One born in Maala yoga will be
ever happy, endowed with conveyances, robes, food and
pleasures, be splendorous and endowed with many females.
faqrrr: awi 1
nqawi twfar *ttt: u^n
22. SARPA YOGA : One born in Sarpa (Bhujanga) yoga
will be crooked, cruel, poor, miserable and will depend on
others for food and drinks.
inSTH: 1
HgWcTT *TT*WT TORT g H ^ ? 1 1
23 GAD A YOGA : One bom in Gada yoga will always
make efforts to earn wealth, will perform sacrificial rites, be
skilf ul in Sastras and songs and endowed with wealth, gold
and precious stones
TtlUrl; JTOl ijtsf: I
TPfJ STItTI 11^*11
24. SAKATA YOGA : One born in Sakata yoga will be
afflicted by diseases, will have diseased or ugly nails, be foolish,

362 Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
will live by pulling carts, be poor and devoid of friends and
relatives.
qR^fsnrrcsr far* 5fim:iRK.n
25. VI HAG A YOGA : One born in V hag a yoga will be
fond of roaming, be a messenger, will live by sexual dealings,
be shameless and interested in quarrels.
fsmsTST: fon t: *T*Tf:<W: 1
31TW gq%|cin: *Z^fTSqR*W II^N
26. SRINGATAKA YOGA : One born in Sringataka yoga
will be fond of quarrels and battles, be happy, dear to king,
endowed with an auspicious wife, be rich and will hate women.
sngifsRl *frsT: i
RW: qcqt: W gw: ll^ll
27. II ALA YOGA : One born in Hala yoga will eat a lot,
be very poor, be a farmer, be miserable, agitated, given up by
friends and relatives and be a seryant.
aTHFrTsmtgteR: 5TTT: fPTl faf^rTT*: 1
28. VAJRA YOGA : One born in Vajra yoga will be
happy in the beginning and at the end of life, be valorous,
charming, devoid of desires and fortunes and be inimical.
3RK: f freffr rTT qwftnTOT: *RT §W: 113 £11
29. YAVA YOGA : One born in Yava yoga will observe
fasts and other religious rules, will do auspicious acts, will
obtain happiness, wealth and sons in his mid-iife, be charitable
and firm.
farqfTpiTSsn: gw: fegsrwfcfajrST: l
URSTIRT: RW faRtf ll^oH

Chapter 35
30. KAMALA YOGA : One born in Kamala yoga will be
rich and virtuous, be long-lived, very famous, pure, will perform
hundreds of auspicious acts and be a king.
fafaqrrvr fagurfam fartmqsmgm i
mttqarorg 6?r ttsth: it 3 \ t a
31'. V API YOGA : One born in Vapi yoga will be capable
of accumulating wealth, be endowed with lasting wealth, and
happiness and sons, be free from eye afflictions and be a king.
f?*UT g<T: 1
5Krf?ra*RcT*Tgnft ^ snat faf fere yg n^n
32. YU PA, YOGA : One born in Yupa yoga will have
spiritual knowledge, be interested in sacrificial rites, endowed'
with a wife, be strong, interested in fasts and other religious
observations and be distinguished.
sgtnn *im*T i
33. SARA YOGA : One born in Sata yoga will make
arrows, be head of prison, will earn through animals, will cat
meat and indulge in torture and mean handiworks.
JW: i
JUcUi 3M: mrtTT: H^n
34. SAKTH / YOGA : One born in Sakthi yoga will be
bereft of wealth, be unsuccessful, miserable, mean, lazy, longlived, interested and skilful in war, firm and auspicious.
^ faf «TT: i
35. DANDA YOGA : One born in Danda yoga will lose
his sons and wife, be indigent, unkind, away from his men,
miserable and will serve mean people.
§t2T: I
f*T*TT JTfvHT HTOT WHi: gwf:

m
Brihat Parasara Hora Sastrc
36. NA UKA YOGA : One born in Nauka yoga will derive
his livelihood through water, be wealthy, famous, wicked,
wretched, dirty and miserly.
fafafJSitiTT: *T5T: ^TT: \
wrf^cT faftgifaifirsft nfsnru^u
37. KOOTA YOGA : One born in Koota yoga will be a
liai, will head a jail, be poor, crafty, cruel and will live in hills
and fortresses.
pj3f!TT«ItT> |
51^5^ *T3TOT?T WRJ Instil
38. CHATRA YOGA : One bom in Chatra yoga will help
his own men, be kind, dear to many kings, very intelligent, be
hapny at the beginning and end of his life and be long-lived.
^Tcn tRTiqf^^T: «TOt*Tti* HH<1
39. CHAPA YOGA : One born in Chapa yoga will be a
liar, will protect secrets, be a thief, be fond of wandering in
forests, be devoid of luck and be happy in the middle of his
life.
jTRnntor g^fsrm i
*fav5T*rijti'»Tg?n *r«rfai ifrfcsTOtsihiYon
40. ARDHA CHANDRA YOGA : One born in Ardha
Chandra Yoga will lead an army, will possess a splendorous
body, be dear to king, be strong and endowed with gems, gold
and ornaments.
h*?ii
41. CHAKRA YOGA : One born in Chakra yoga will be
an emperor at whose feet will be the prostrating kings’ heads
adoring gem-studded diadems.

Chapter 35
aTSFTfaHT: flgfn 1
stfercrgwT: ^qr: ft«Rf*wn: my^h
42. SAMUDRA YOGA : One born in Samudra yoga will
have many precious stones and abundant wealth, be endowed
with pleasures, dear to people, will have firm wealth and be
well-disposed.
fsnnffcnj?*wrarT fNg«n: i
*Tf ^falTST qftfaeTT: piJT: ||Y^||
4.3 VEENA YOGA : One born in Veena yoga will be
fond of songs, dance and musical instruments, be skilful, happy,
wealthy and be a leader of men.
*t^r: stira: \
44. DAAMINI YOGA : One born in Daamini yoga will be
helpful to others, will have righteously earned wealth, be very
affluent, famous, will have many sons and gems, be courageous
and red-lettered.
q|Tnftrjfl faritaT qggem: tFga wm uykii
45. RASA YOGA : One bom in Pasa yoga will be liable
to be imprisoned, be skilful in work, be deceiving in disposition,
will talk much, be bereft of good qualities and will have many
servants. •
frijtaRT: Hrtrcrf^T: am: I
CTgrilSM'1¥'tvn3T BRiJwt: IIY^M
46. KEDARA YOGA : One born in Kedara yoga will be
useful to many, be an agriculturist, be truthful, happy, fickleminded and wealthy.
CTcprar htt: inrvsn

Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
47. SOOLA YOGA : One born in Soola yoga will be
sharp, indolent, bereft of wealth, be torturous, prohibited,
valiant, and famous through war.
ST OST%TT ST sf^Cf^TT vftfc I
^tTSTSSinTTf^rTT gTTtfW ^ STT 3TTST: ItYcll
48. YUGA YOGA : One born in Yuga yoga will be
heretic, be devoid of wealth, be discarded by others, and be
devoid of sons, mother and virtues.
SHTTfScTT fS3ST fSOTfSjTTSSf^ *Tf?TST I
fSrS g:faSS>ST *T?rf?rT ?TCT: I ITT £.11
49. GOLA YOGA : One born in Gola yoga will be strong,
be devoid of wealth, learning and intelligence, be dirty, sorrowful and miserable.
Hsfesfa ^vTsifsH: i
srrfaHTfafo fs^sr: srssf?cT hsumt: niton
50. Ancestors say that the results due to the said (Nabhasa)
yogas will be felt throughout, in all the Dasa periods.
frfarataTRrra: u^n
Chapter 36
Many Other Yogas
$ 71 % !?TTT*T% JTt*T: W 'TPTg^SST'fT: (
STTtTfStT: *HT: 'TTC: ST?TTSTFT?fhl?ll
=TF*ft ^TTTtvT^r^r^: |
qrw»rf tRnrgsft u?u
1-2. BENEFIC & MALEFIC YOGAS : If there be a benefic
in the ascendan*. Subha yoga is produced while a malefic therein

Chapter 36
causes Asubha yoga. Similarly benclics in both the 12th and the
2nd cause Subha yoga. Malefics in both the 12th and the 2nd
also cause Asubha yoga. One born in Subha yoga will be
eloquent, charming and virtuous while his counterpart will be
sensuous, will do sinful acts and will enjoy (or swallow) others’
wealth.
Notes : Subha yoga is of two kinds. It can be formed by
a single benefic in the ascendant. It can also be formed by a
benefic in the 2nd and by another simultaneously in the 12th.
Obviously the latter Subha Yoga is still superior. (Needless to
mention that if the ascendant, 2nd and 1 2th are simultaneously
occupied by 3 benefics, even then Subha Yoga of a very great
order is established.) This yoga gives physical beauty, excellent
virtues and eloquent disposition. Though the text does not
mention, additional effects are : a happy life, health, wealth,
longevity, fame etc These additional effects will not fully mature
by a single ordinary benefic in the ascendant.
A malefic or malefics in these places will produce
Asubha Yoga or inauspicious yoga. Each yoga is increasingly
malefic. As a result, the subject will be libidinous, will indulge
in unethical and sinful deeds and be capable of bracketing
others possessions. While a single malefic may not give so
bad results, two or three in such positions will indeed produce
most unfavourable results, apart from affecting health, longevity
etc. adversely.
Needless to mention that in analysing the results due to
good or bad combinations, one should take the planet’s dignity,
strength, relations with other planets and many such other
factors into consideration. A malefic yoga can be nullified by
other compensating factors while a good yoga may not be
productive of expected good results when involved in adverse
circumstances. For example, assume that for an Aquarius
Mercury is in the 2nd house while Jupiter is in the 12th house. It
will be detrimental to rush to the conclusion that the ascendant
is surrounded by two benefies, and that Subha yoga results will
improve the native. Conversely, this is worse than a typical
Asubha Yoga.
Again take Asubha Yoga. Assume Virgo rises while
Saturn is in exaltation in the 2nd and the Sun is in Leo in the

Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
12th. This need not be dubbed as Asubha Yoga. These two
maiefics have their own merits and will prove favourable to the
native.
This extension may wisely be made for every yoga— good
or bad— and in every context throughout the analysis of the
geniture. Only then will an agreeable picture emerge.
*T*r%*Tt u^n
3***^ TT^firwd lt*U
3-4. GAJAKESARI YOGA : Should Jupiter be in an
angle from the ascendant or from the Moon, and be conjunct or
aspected by (another) benefic, avoiding at the same time debilitation, combustion and inimical sign, Gajakesari yoga is caused.
One born in Gaja Kesari yoga will be splendorous, wealthy,
intelligent endowed with many laudable virtues and will please
the king.
Notes i The Parasari type of Gaja Kesari Yoga is
constructed on a different footing. That Jupiter-Moon should
be in mutual angles is a normally accepted yoga under this name.
In my opinion this kind of angularity cannot yield supreme
effects. The case of mere of Jupiter being in exaltation in a lunar
angle can better be known as Paacha Maba Purusha Yoga,
specifically Hamsa Yoga. In other cases the angularity between
the two need not be given the name Gaja Kesari. In point of
fact, the Moon-Jupiter mutual angular placement is called as
simply Kesari Yoga, vide Phala Deepika, Ch. 6, sloka 14 etc.
The effects given are : “The native will destroy the band of his
enemies. He will be a lofty speaker in an assembly and will
serve a king. He will 1 e long lived and famous. He will be
intelligent’’.
Referring to Jataka Parijata, there are two kinds of Gaja
Kesari yogas mentioned therein. The first kind is formed by
Jupiter being in an angle from the Moon. This is the common
type of Yoga. Second alternative is : The Moon should be
aspected by Mercury or Venus or Jupiter while the aspecting
planet is free from debilitation and combustion.

Chapter 36
Kumara Swameeyam a popular Tamil classic Pas this yoga
stating that the Moon should be increasing (i.e. waxing) while
Jupiter should be in the 4th or io the 10th from the said Moon.
This comes to pass when a constituent is in Taurus, Pisces
Aquarius or Sagittarius. To wit, Gaja Kesari Yoga is applicable
to only four placements That is, Jupiter should be in Aquarius
while the Moon is in Taurus, or vice versa. Alternatively the
Moon shoud be in Sagittarius while Jupiter is io Pisces, or vice
versa. Please note that even Cancer is omitted which is
exaltation sign for Jupiter and own sign for the Moon. In
making such a specific statement, the author of Kumara
Swameeyam must obviously have possessed an unparalleled
authority.
Then we come to the Tamil translation of Parasara Hora
by C.G. Rajan. His version states that the Moon and Jupiter
should be in mutual angles, but the Moon should not have
Mercury in the 5th from her, nor should she be in aspect to
Mercury so that the Yoga obtained is not simultaneously given
annulment. Further the Moon should be free from combustion
and debilitation.
The Sanskrit edition of Parasara Hora of Sri Venkateswara
Press, Bombay, has it in such a manner making it clear that
Vaidyanatha of Jataka Parjjata did take these verses from
Parasara. (In fact many of the Raja Yogas given in our current
chapter have been used by other works like Phala Deepika,
Kumara Swameeyam, Sata Yoga Manjari, Jataka Parijata etc ).
Coming back to Gaja Kesari yoga given by the Bombay series,
we find that the Jupiter-Moon mutual angularity finds place in
the first kind of yoga as given by Vaidyanatha while the second
version of Vaidyanatha occurs in the Bombay series in a different
guise. It is stated there that Mercury aspecting or joining the
Moon, not placed in debilitation nor being combust causes this
yoga. In the second yoga, Venus and Jupiter are not given any
place.
However, the two yogas given by Vaidyanatha are exactly
identical with the ones given in Parasara Hora of Thakur Prasad
Pustaka Bhandar edition from Varanasi.
The Chaukambha edition does not differ from our version.

Brlltat Parasara Hora Sastra
Thus, I have placed all the different versions of Gaja
Kesari Yoga before the reader. Though the name does not
deserve any special consideration as for Gaja Kesari yoga, I
would give less importance to the mere angular positions of
Jupiter-Moon. From other formations, we may understand that
Raja Yoga results will prevail in the following conditions in a
descending order.
1. As given in Kumara Swanteeyam.
2. As given in Chaukambha edition and our edition.
3. The second kind of yoga given by Jataka Parijata.
4. The second kind of yoga given by Bombay edition of
Parasara Hora.
But, we do not understand the basis of C.G, Rajan why
Mercury should not aspect the Moon or be in the 5th from her.
Contrarily when Jupiter and the Moon are in mutual angles.
Mercury in the 5tb from the Moon will be an impetus to
Gaja Kesari rather than becoming an impediment.
Gaja Kesari yoga formed in any of the four manners
suggested above will give wealth, fame etc. in the Dasa periods
of Jupiter, Moon and planets related to them. There is also a
school of thought that one bom in Kesari yoga will be rich in
the dasa of Venus.
m fr tffwwn i
qOltKM'dciKtf uy.li
mOm«iO srefan \\\\\
5-6. AMALA YOGA : If there be exclusively a benefic in
the 10th from the ascendant or the Moon, Amala yoga exists.
Amala yoga will confer fame lasting till the moon and stars exist
and will make the native honoured by the king, enjoy abundant
pleasures, be charitable; fond of relatives, helpful to others,
pious and virtuous.
Notes : The 10th house from the Moon or from the
ascendant should contain a benefic and be without a malefic
occupation. If a malefic joins in the 10th simultaneously, the
efficacy of the yoga will be void. A pure Amala Yoga gives
name and fame lasting for decades and decades. Wealth is not

Chapter 36
indicated as a result of the yoga by the sage. Phala Deepika
for example denotes wealth for this position.
It may be noted for what it is worth that the yogas
mentioned by Bhava positions should be reckoned with reference
to Bhava chart while dignity of the participant planets will
depend on their sign position. An example chart for Amala
Yoga is given below whose owner was born on 16th May, 1959
Ketu
Merc
Sun
Mars
Ven
Rasi
Asc
Moon
Sat
Jup
Rahu
This horoscope of a female was given by me in Doctr ines
of Snka Nadi-Retold on p. 37 in different context. There is a
clear cut Amala Yoga caused by Mercury in the 10th from
ascendant. Note that there is no planet accompanying Mercury,
nor is there any adverse aspect on him. Further, there is an
exchange between Mars and Mercury. This augurs the good
effects of the yoga in the matter of wealth. As stated in
Doctrines of Suka Nadi-Retold, the native started a business in
the United States in sub period of Mercury during the major
period of Venus. She has a well-settled show making steady
progress.

Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
4RTT * *TTC*fiRT I
^TFnfs»*ft dTTpft ^ forest 5T?IT«W>: Hml
7-8. PARVATA YOGA : Benefics in angles will produce
Parvatha yoga, as the 7th and 8th are vacant or are occupied by
only benefics. One bom in Parvatha yoga will be wealthy,
eloquent, charitable, learned in Sastras, fond of mirth, famous,
splendorous and be the leader of a city.
Notes : This yoga is formed at least in many ways according to different classical authors.
1. According to our version, there need be benefics in
angles while the 7th and 8th are unoccupied or be in occupation
hy benefits alone. Then the yoga formed is known as Parvataa
yoga.
2. The Tamil edition of Parasara Hora (translated by C.G.
Rajan) has this yoga in two manners : That is, Benefics in
angles and 6th and 8th. Alternatively benefics should be in
angles and 9th.
3. The Sanskrit edition of Sri Venkateswara Press gives this
yoga again in two forms thus ; (I) As per our version. (2) The
lords of the ascendant and of the 12th in mutual angles and be
aspected by friendly planets. These two are exactly followed by
Sata Yoga Manjari (English translation by Prof. B. S. Rao).
4. Whereas the Sanskrit text of Sata Manjari Raja yoga
(Hindi translation by Pt. G.K. Ojha) puts it thus : The
depositor of ascendant lord should be in his own sign or in his
Moolatrikona sign which is identical with an angle or a trine
reckoned from the ascendant. Pbala Deepika exactly describes
this yoga in this very manner.
5. Coming to Jatakadesa Marga, we find yet another
version thus : If the ascendant, 4th, 7th and 10th are occupied
by planets while the 8th and 12th are unoccupied, Parvata Yoga
occurs. There is no mention of benefics or malefics in angles.
That is these houses should remain occupied. Horasara (p. 233)
has an identical version.
6. Chaukambha edition has it as given by C G. Rajan's
first mentioned yoga.
7. The edition of Thakur Prasad Pustak Bhandar describes
this yoga as per our version.

Chapter 36 373
8, Now see Jataka Parijata. It has again two forms of
this Yoga. The first one is formed in a manner identical with
one mentioned in the Tamil version of P&rasara Horn. The
second type is formed as per the second yoga related to Bombay
series of Parasara Hora. However, the Tamil version of Jataka
Parijata (1926 edition by Sastra San ieevani Press) has it as our
text has.
9. A version of Yavanas forms this yoga thus : The
ascendant, 7th and 10th be occupied by benefics. So simple and
no more pre-requisites. Note the 4th among angles is omitted
by Yavanas. Thus there are so many varieties of Parvata Yoga.
When we consider the version given in our text, the
maturity of this yoga will be during the Dasa periods of the
beDefics in the angles.
neu
bwdiuiR moll
9-10. KAHALA YOGA : Should the 4th lord and Jupiter
be in mutual angles while the ascendant lord is strong, Kahala
yoga occurs. Alternatively the 4th lord being in his own or
exaltation sign should be conjunct the 10th lord, in effect, the
native will be energetic, adeventurous, cunning, endowed with a
complete army consisting of chariots, elephants, horses and
infantry and will lord over a few villages.
Notes : This yoga is given identically in the other three
versions of Parasara Hora, viz. Veokateswara, Chaukamba
and Thakur Prasad editions. Still others define this in different
ways.
1. The first type of Kahala Yoga according to the Tamil
version translated by C G. Rajan is formed when the lords of
the ninth and fourth are in mutual angles as the ascendant lord
is endowed with strength. The second type of yoga mentioned
by him is formed if the 4th lord is in his own sign or in exaltation
in conjunction with or in aspect to the 10th lord. The aspect of
the 10th lord is an addition in the Tamil version whereas in our
version only a conjunction is noted. The native being foolish is

374 Brlhat Parasara Bora Sastra
mentioned in the Tamil issue and Bombay issue, when giving
effects of Kahala Yoga.
2. Mantreswara has it entirely differently thus : The
dispositor of ascendant lord’s depositor should be in exaltation
or own sign identical with a trine or angle reckoned from the
ascendant. The effects mentioned are : prosperity, nobility,
auspiciousness, benevolence and kindness.
3. Jetakadsa Marga mentions it in the same way as per
C. G. Rajan's first type of yoga. Jataka Parijata follows
Jatakadesa Marga while it adds the second version of Kahala
Yoga given by our text.
lit tH
TT^fT «fT 91 9 *lfa2tT: I
11-12. CHAMARA YOGA : If the ascendant lord is exalted
in an angle and be aspected by Jupiter, Chamara yoga is formed.
This yoga also occurs if two benefits are in the ascendant, or 9th,
or 10th or 7th. The effects of Chamara Yoga are : the native will
be a king or honoured by the king, long-lived, scholarly,
eloquent and versed in all arts.
Notes : While most texts are identical with our version,
Phala Deepika puts it in a different way, viz. the ascendant be
occupied by a benefic while the ascendant lord is in a good
house or in exaltation. The effects attributed by Mantreswara
are ‘. long life, prospering like increasing Moon, fame, virtue and
leadership. These are comparable [to what is generally statedfor Chamara Yoga.
13-14. SANKHA YOGA : If the ascendant lord is strong
as the lords of the 5th and 6th are in mutual angles, then what
is known as Sankha yoga is produced. Alternatively if the

Chapter 36 375
ascendant lord along with the 10th lord is in a movable sign as
the 9th lord is strong, Sankha yoga is obtained. One born with
Sankha yoga will be endowed with wealth, spouse and sons,
be kindly disposed, propitious, intelligent, meritorious and longlived.
MXt W\: l
asrSr *r aft \\\w
5fT^T7^lR W>»ft 'RTNft't ^rl II
15-16. BHERl YOGA : If the 12th, ascendant, 2nd and
7th are occupied as the 9th lord is strong, the native obtains
Bheri yoga. Again another kind of Bheri yoga is formed if
Venus, Jupiter and the lord of the ascendant are in an angle
while the 9th lord is strong. The results of Bheri yoga are the
native will be endowed with wealth, wife and sons, be a king, be
famous, virtuous and endowed with good behaviour, happiness
and pleasures.
IRvf ^ I
snefto tijtfi *r
17. A 1R1DANGA YOGA : If the ascendant lord is strong
as others occupy angles, trines, own houses or exaltation signs,
Mridanga yoga is formed. The native concerned will be a king
or equal to a king and be happy.
ippnrt wuimMh i
Ul»T: 3TTeT: IPWTCt iff: 11*511
18. SRINATHA YOGA : If the 7th lord is in the 10th
while the 10th lord is exalted and be in the company of the 9tb
lord, Srinatha yoga takes place. The native with this yoga will
be equal to lord Devendra (the god of gods).
Notes : For Sagittarius ascendant, this yoga is simply
formed if the Sun and Mercury are in the 10th in Virgo. But
it is to be ensured that Mercury is in the first half of Virgo.

376 Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
VflW gmr m %
vHt gT> w 5% ?rm ■er *rrc?: ii^h
trofsw I
rT'TF-qt WR% 5fTOt 5PT: M^oU
19-20. SARADA YOGA .‘ Should the 10th lord be in the
5th while Mercury is in an angle as the Sun with strength is in
Leo, Sarda Yoga is formed. This will again obtain if Jupiter or
Mercury is in a trjne to the Moon, while Mars is in the 1 lth.
One born in either kind of yoga will obtain wealth, spouse and
sqns, be happy, scholarly, dear to king, pious and virtuous.
*n* * cftntsir Ha-imsw: i^?u
*er *r?FnfttT fjj u^n
21-22. MATSYA YOGA : Benefics in the 9th and the
ascendant, mixed planets in the 5th and malefics in the 4th and
8th — this array of planets at birth will produce Matsya yoga.
In effect, the native will be an astrologer, be a synonym of
kindness, be virtuous, strong, beautiful, famous, learned and
pious.
Notes : While our version and that of Chaukambha
mention that the ascendant and the 9th be occupied by benefic
planets, the versions of Sri Venkateswara Press, Thakur Prasad
Pustaka Bhandar and C. G. Rajan stipulate that malefics and
not benefics should be in the ascendant and the 9th. Jakata
Parijata has the same view as given by the latter group requiring
malefics in the 9th and in the ascendant.
That it is benefics that should be in the ascendant and the
9th is obviously correct as three groups are selected by Parasaa
for this yoga, thus : Benefics in the first group, malefics in the
second group and both (i.e. mixed) in the 3rd group.
f*HT*JhPT*n: TITT: U^U

Chapter 36
^ ITsft *IRSRniV:
23-24. KOORMA YOGA : If the 5th, 6th and the 7th
are occupied by benefic planets identical with own house or
exaltation or friendly sign while malefics are in the 3rd 1 Ith and
the ascendant in own house or in exaltation, Koorma yoga is
formed. The results of Koorma yoga are : the native will be a
king, be courageous, virtuous, famous, helpful, happy and be
leader of men.
CT¥*Tzrfrr: ft II ^ V.M
tSTHtftri BRwmig^TfjarfT: t
25-26. KlIADGA YOGA : Should there be an exchange
of signs between the lords of the 2nd and the 9th as
the ascendant lord is in an angle or in a trine Khadga yoga is
obtainable. One with Khadga yoga wiil be endowed with
wealth, fortunes and happiness, be learned in sastras, be
intelligent, mighty, grateful and skilful.
^mr[ wit ^55^-ERTff^r: i
tnraft EnTFFTW) 5I5*lhft«T wlFrt ll^ctU
27-28. LAKSHM1 YOGA ; If the 9th lord is in an angle
identical with his Moolatrikona sign or own sign or exaltation
sign while the ascendant lord is endowed with strength, Lakshmi
yoga occurs. The native with this yoga will be charming,
virtuous, kingly in status, endowed with many sons and
abundant wealth, be famous and be of high moral merits.
*7 flight m iwt an: \
$**3^ u^oii

Brihat Parasara Bora Sastra
29-30 KUSXJMA YOGA : Venus in an angle, the Moon
in a trine along with a benefic and Saturn in the 10th— these
planets thus cause Kusuma yoga for one born in a fixed sign
ascending. Such a native will be a king or equal to him, be
charitable, will enjoy pleasures, be happy, prime among his
race men, virtuous and red-lettered
fgrfft 1
W* cTSte? II^II
5n?ft asrf^mRf^cr: ii^n
31-32. KALANIDHI YOGA : Should Jupiter be in the
-2nd or the 5th and be aspected by Mercury and Venus, Kalanidhi
yoga is caused. In effect, the native will be virtuous, honoured
by the kings, bereft of diseases, be happy, wealthy and learned.
%nr vWwfjf 113311
*Tafaqqq?T> vjcft U*T?f*n SRWtJcT: l
iTTftsn^ nrt
33*34. KALPADRUMA YOGA : Note the following four
planets : (a) the ascendant lord, (.b) the depositor of the
ascendant lord, (c) the depositor of the planet at "b”, (d) the
Navamsa depositor of the planet at “c”. If all these are disposed
in angles and trines from the ascendant, or be exalted, Kalpadruma yoga exists. One with this yoga will be endowed
with all kinds of wealth, be a king, pious, strong, fond of
war and merciful.
Notes : Kalpa Druma yoga is also known as Parijata
Yoga. Kalpa Druma denotes the Celestial Tree while Parijata
denotes the Celestial Flower. Both of these are known to
grant any boon to the possessor who is said to be Devendra,
the god of gods.
In the obtainment of yoga, there are four participants.
This yoga can be noted in the following chart.
Born on July 23, 1856 at 0612 hrs at 18N32 73E57.

m
Brihat Parasara Horn Sastra
Now see how Kalpa Drama yoga is formed in the chart
The constituents of the yoga are :
(a) The ascendant lord Moon.
(b) The ascendant lord’s depositor Jupiter.
(c) Jupiter is in own sign and hence no dispositor.
(d) Jupiter’s Navamsa dispositor is Jupiter himself as he
is in Sagittarius Navamsa.
All the above are in a trine from the natal ascendant
who clearly form Kalpa-druma yoga. The effects mentioned
by the sage were obtained by the owner of the chart, Bala
Gangadhar Tilak, including fondness for war to get the country
freed from foreign rule. 1
tot: t
STTff: ll^||
35-36. TRIMURTHI YOGAS : Counted from the 2nd
lord if benefics occupy the 2nd, 12th and 8th, Hari yoga is
formed. If the 4th, 9th and 8 th with reference to the sign
occupied by the 7th lord are occupied by benefics. Ham
yoga is obtainable. Brahma yoga is generated if, counted from
the ascendant lord, benefics are in the 4th, 10th and 1 1th
signs. One born in anyone of the said three yogas will be happy,
learned and endowed with wealth and sons.
Notes : There are actually three different yogas given in
the present two verses. These are Hari Yoga, Hara Yoga
and Brahma Yoga. This represents the trinity of Hindu Gods
and hence is known as Trimurthi yogas jointly. Some interpret
this as one yoga knowing it as ‘Hariharabrahma yoga’ which
is however incorrect.
For formation of Hari Yoga the 2nd lord’s position is
to be noted firstly. From the said position of the 2nd lord,
each of the 2nd, 12th and 8th be occupied by benefics individually. See the chart on the next page.

Chapter 36
Merc
Jup
Sat
Hari
yoga
Asc
Ven
In the above case, the 2nd lord is Saturn. Note from
Saturn, the 2nd is occupied by Venus, the 12th by Mercury
and the 8th by Jupiter.
Sat
Jup
Hara yoga
Asc
Merc
Ven
The second yoga is Hara Yoga (Hara denotes lord
Siva.) See the chart given above for an easy grasp fulfilling
the conditions laid down by Parasara.

Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
fn tile above case, Saturn rules the 7th house and is
placed in Pisces. From him the 4th, 8th and 9th are
respectively occupied by Jupiter, Venus and Mercury. Thus
forms Hara Yoga.
Lastly Brahma yoga. This is formed if the 4th, 10th and
11th from the sign occupied by the ascendant lord are
tenented by benefits. Note this yoga from the following
chart.
Mars
Merc
Jup
Ven'
Brahma yoga
Asc
In the above example, the ascendant lord Mars is in
Aries. Note that the 4th, 10th and 11th from Mars are
occupied by Jupiter, Venus and Mercury in order.
In each yoga, three houses are mentioned, i.e. 2nd 12th
and 8th on the one hand; 4th, 8th and 9th on the other' hand
and the 4th, 10th and 11th in the third instance. This takes
care of possible maximum elongation between Mercury and
Venus. The Moon can also be considered in replacement of
one of the said benefics if she is in waxing state. The Sun
should not participate in these houses just like any malefic.
If these Moon is herself a malefic her presence is also excluded
in these yogas.

Chapter 36
^TRT^ZtT: flVrq’: I
Ci >
^^rrfaift^sf^R *r^T?*n sm^rfor u^vsti
37. LAGNADHI YOGA : Should bcnefics be in the 7th
and the 8th counted from the ascendant and be devoid of
conjunction/aspect of malefics, Lagnadhi yoga is produced
making one a great person, learned in Sastras and happy.
Notes : Sage Parasara does not include the 6th house
from the ascendant for Lagnadhi yoga. Only two houses are
suggested, viz. the 7th and 8th from the ascendant. This
is so given in the versions of Chaukamba, Sri Venkateswara
Press, Thakijr Prasad Pustaka fihandara and C G. Rajan as
well. The last three versions have an additional condition
that the 4th house from the ascendant should at the same
time be vacant. In Cbandradhi yoga, the sage has included
the 6th house, see ch.37 infra.
After a study of the various texts, we can conclude to
the following effect : The 6th, 7th and 8th be occupied by
benefics in any manner, i.e. the three benches, viz. Jupiter,
Mercury and Venus may be disposed in one, two or three
houses in 6th, 7th and 8th. No other malefic should be in these
houses nor aspect the occupants. The 4th from the ascendant or
from the Moon, as the case may be, should remain unoccupied.
Then Adhi yoga is obtained. The benefics mentonied should
also be free from combustion and debilitation. If the yoga is
formed in the above conditions, the native will be highly
learned, wealthy and be among the most supreme men on
the earth.
The best Adhi yoga is, however, with Mercury in the 6th,
Jupiter in the 7th and Venus in the 8th house.
rftgt SRtrptTlsVt,
faaH 'TTTFH* ^Nit^ h-^T^T: |
tsricft 113s.11
38-39. EFFECTS OF ASCENDANT LORD’S DIVISIONADIGNITIES : The ascendant lord in Parijathamsa will make
one happy, in Vargothama immune to diseases, in Gopuramsa

384 Brihat Parasara ttora Sastra
rich with wealth and grains, in Simhasanamsa a king, in Paravathamsa a scholar, in Devalokamsa opulent and endowed
with conveyances, and in Travatamsa famous and honoured by
Icings.
Notes : The dignities mentioned above could be found
on p. 90 supra. Vargothama indicates a planet occupying the
same Rasi and the same Navamsa.
am wnmfrrtmra:
Chapter 37
Lunar Yogas
I. If the Moon with reference to the Sun is in an angle,
Panaphara or Apoklima, one’s wealth, intelligence and skill
will be respectively little, meddling and excellent.
fPRrr* fcrct srefh
gtsin a* sn?i> 113 tt
?T5T STTcft II^M
2-4. In the case of a day birth if the Moon, placed in
own Navamsa or in a friendly Navamsa, is aspected by Jupiter,
one will be endowed with wealth and happiness. One bom
in night time will enjoy similar effects if the Moon is in own
Navamsa or in friendly Navamsa in aspect to Venus. In a
contrary situation, the aspect of Jupiter or of Venus on the
Moon will make one go with little wealth or even without
that.

Chapter 37 38?
a^Trsn xc drorfriwi iiioi
5. ADHI YOGA FROM THE MOON : If benefics
occupy the 8th, 6th and 7th counted from the Moon, Adhi
yoga obtains. According to the strength of the participating
planets, the native concerned will be either a king or a minister
or an army chief.
gT«ri m\ tr%?ns^£Rt ^nv>
6. DHANA YOGA : Should all the (three) benefics be
in Upachaya (i.c. 3rd, 6th, 10th and 11th) counted from
the Moon, one will be very affluent; with two benefics so
placed he will have medium effects in regard to wealth. If a
single benefic is there, the wealth will be negligible.
fa'll *
stuo^i: nun
TpjfT l
WtStR 5fl Tt 7T5 ?flvi«il'i l
3cqR <K5W T 5RT I
frcmtil tjR l^aTT^ra: u?on
7-10. SUNAPHA, ANAPHA AND DURADHARA : If
there is a planet, other than the Sun, in the 2nd from the Moon
Sunapha yoga, in the 12th Anapha yoga and planets in both
places Duradhara yoga are caused. One with Sunapha yoga
will be a king or equal to a king, endowed with intelligence,
wealth, fame and self earned wealth. One born in Anapha yoga
will be a king, be free from diseases, virtuous, famous charming
and happy. One born in Duradhara yoga will enjoy pleasures,
be charitable and endowed with wealth, conveyances and
excellent serving force.

Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
fRrc<traeRiswHO fan *tr * i
??iT5Tfirn^i u??n
ntn: %TT5[*j> 5TTO W* ^I cftsGf Tr f^ : |
n^u
frf^T ^3TTN) fajfacT: I
M4<t l?Hfd mcmT? tig ^lt
11-13. KEMADRUMA YOGA : Excluding the Sun, should
there be no planet with the Moon or in the 2nd/ 12th from
the Moon or in an angle from the ascendant, Kemadruma
yoga is formed. One born in Kemadruma yoga will be very
much reproached, be bereft of intelligence and learning and
reduced to penury and perils.
Chanter 38
Solar Yogas
srafcr fimr vrf fsrTftfa: i
^ ?ctncT »*«
I. VESI, VOSI AND UBHAYACHA RJ YOGAS : Barring
the Moon, if a planet among Mars etc. be in the 2nd from the
Sun Vesi yoga, in the 12th Vosi yoga and planets in both the
2nd and the 12th Ubhayachari yoga are caused.
ticket qwt tfW^mtssmRrfiT \
start * rtrg«rt *i?n trortfsrerrarerrefNr: i
®rcrt **«rt *r am*: 113 n
2-3. EFFECTS OF THESE YOGAS : One born in Vesi
yoga will be even sighted, truthful, long-bodied, indolent, happy

Chapter 39
and endowed with negligible wealth. One bom with Vosi yoga
will be skilful, charitable and endowed with fame, learning
and strength. The Ubhayachari native will be a king or equal to
a king and be haopy.
sVr g imi
4. Benefics causing these yogas will give the above
mentioned effects while malefics will produce contrary effects.
3T*T TT3nfoTT«tW: IIHH
Chapter 39
Raja Yogas
SptTTSrT: qESWfrq i fa Mwi ! t
^ qt»TT: sftaTT: §TT I
1-2. O excellent of the Brahmins, I now narrate below
the Rajayogas making one entitled to royal honours. These
were told to Parvati by Lord Siva once upon a time, the
gist of which is as follows :
PaFtT^tT ipTT«Fftf ?TT 5tgvf»%S«rqT ! I
'CMifl<l«0 ^ SRc^Trf: 1131k
fllcH*R*bgqivqf q>qiR5 I
cPfo fe5RRnT ! kMt
SRRTCT qi <TR q'UrfgflRd: kl*kt
3-5 These yogas are to be known from the Karakamsa
ascendant and the natal ascendant. On the one band the

Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
pair of Atmakaraka and Putrakaraka and on tbe other hand
the natal ascendant lord and the 5th lord be considered.
The effects due to such association will be full, or a half
or a quarter according to their strengths.
Notes : Raja Yogas giving status can be formed with
Karakamsa Lagna as the reckoning point. Similarly the natal
ascendant is also another center wherefrom such yogas emanate.
(Karakamsa Lagna is the Navamsa occupied by the Atma
Karaka planet.)
If Karakamsa ascendant is oeing considered in evaluation of Raja yogas, the status of Putra Karaka is also
to be taken into account. Here Putra Karaka is Chara
Karaka. He is the 6th in status in the Atma Karaka scheme,
as explained in slokas 13-17 of ch. 32 supra. On the other
hand if natal ascendant is being considered the 5th lord from
natal ascendant should also be scrutinized in terms of dignity,
so that the real clues to the yoga are made out rightly. The
5th lord has been given a very important position in the analysis
of Raja Yogas by the sage equating him with the 9th lord
or even more, vide slokas 33 and 34 of the current chapter.
We shall now take an expanded clue of the two hints
given in the present verses about the evaluation of Raja
yogas.
There are certain Raja Yogas formed with reference
to Karakamsa ascendant, Atma Karaka’s position in the Rasi
chart, Amatya Karaka, Upapada, Arudha pada etc.— so to say
in the Jaimini style — as can be seen in our present text. For
example take the rule given in sloka 22 of the current chapter
where it is stated that Atma Karaka in benefic’s Rasi or
Navamsa will make one wealthy. In the chart given in
ch. 29 (sloka 1-3), we have Atma Karaka Moon in Jupiter’s
Navamsa So as per the rule the native should become
rich. To strengthen this argument, we find Jupiter in exaltation. Putra Karaka (Chara scheme) for the said horoscope
in the Sun. He aspects the ascendant. In the Navamsa chart,
the Sun is placed in the 4th from Atma Karaka. All these
indicate that the native should be wealthy. If Putra Karaka
(Chara) and Karakamsa Lagna are not well related, the yogas
related to that scheme will be futile.

Chapter 39
Next take the natal ascendant lord and the 5th lord from
the natal ascendant. In assessing the Raja yogas strength ralated
to the natal ascendant, the strength 'and relationship between
these two lords should be correctly understood. In the example
chart cited above, the 5th lord is Jupiter who is exalted and is
endowed with a Shadbala of 9.32 Rupas and Mars 7.32 Rupas.
Their Vimsopaka strengths.are respectively 16.45 and 16.80
points making them extremely well disposed to cause vigour to
any Raja yoga in the horoscope.
Hence it is apparent that the sage correlates the Chara
Putra Karaka with the Karakamsa ascendant (or Atmakaraka)
and the 5th lord from natal ascendant with the lord of the
natal ascendant itself.
fast ! forTU^t
**>3% *** STSfa I
srfiTSJTRT: l|v»||
6-7 MAHA RAJA YOGA : Should the ascendant 1 ord
and the 5 th lord exchange their signs or if Atma karaka
and Putra Karaka (Chara) are in the ascendant, the 5th,
exaltation sign, own sign or own Navamsa in aspect to a
benefic, Maha Raja yoga is produced. The native so born
will be famous and happy.
Notes : An exchange between the ascendant lord and
the 5th lord will bestow a supreme Raja yoga on the native.
For example in the case of a Pisces-born, Jupiter in the 5th
and the Moon in the ascendant.
In the second stage, the A tma Karaka and Putra Karaka
(Chara) are brought in the picture. They can be jointly in
the 5th or in the ascendant (or in Karakamsa Lagna and
the 5th from there) or separately in these places. Alternatively,
both of them should be in their respective exaltation signs,
or in own signs, or in own Navamsas and be related to a
benefic by aspect. In this respect, the horoscope of Mrs
Gandhi will serve us with a perfect example. Her chart can
be found with reference to sloka 50 in ch. 24 supra. The
Atma Karaka is Saturn (21° 50') while Putra Karaka is Mercury

Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
(13° IT). It may be noted that Saturn is in the ascendant
while Mercury is in the Sth lifting the native to Himalayan
heights through the said Maha Raja yoga. Atma Karaka
Saturn is in his own Navamsa and Merury is in the 10th from
Karaka msa Lagnn.
fTT^VT: VTTfft q? I
qnwftn m i drfl imn
8. If the ascendant lord and Atmakaraka are in the
ascendant, 5th or 7th in conjunction with or in aspect to a
benefic, there obtains a Raja yoga.
Notes : If the ascendant lord himself becomes theAtmaKaraka his mere placement in the ascendant itself or in
the 5th/7th from the ascendant in association with a benefic
will cause a similar Raja yoga. In the case of Mrs Gandhi,
the Atma Karaka is in the ascendant while the ascendant
lord Moon is in exchange with him in the 7th. The Moon is
favourably aspected by yoga karaka Jupiter from the llth
house speaking for the native’s high and successful political
career.
§q q qsqr* i
snift TTsn
tjrifo qc$q rTT^TT I
srRTt mn *%tq fro qtci u$oii
9*10. Should there be benefics in the 2nd, 4th and 5th
counted either from the ascendant lord or from Atmakaraka
sign, one will become a king. Similarly malefics in the 3rd
and 6th from the said places.
wttfr qr q*qtf 1
*pqq^ qTsfq Tiqqqf nMrcuttu
11. One will be related to royal circles if Venus is in
the kafakamsa, or in the 5th therefrom or in the ascendant
or in Arudha ascendant in aspect to or in the company of
Jupiter or the Moon.

Chapter 3 $.
Notes : The planet Venus should be in one of the four
places, viz. Karakamsa ascedant, Arudha ascendant, natal ascendant and in the 5th from Karakamsa ascendant. (Arudha ascendant is also known as Arudha Pada, vide ch. 29 supra.) Being
placed so, Venus must be related to the Moon or Jupiter by
aspect/association.
Taking the example chart given in ch. 29, we find Venus
is in the Karakamsa ascendant along with the Moon (the Atma
Karaka). The native is thus related to people with high social
status through his professional sphere.
‘bMefUltf fcjTfarT |
12. Even if a single planet aspects the natal ascendant
or Hora Lagna or Ghatika Lagna, the native will become a king.
Notes : Hora Lagna and Ghatika Lagna are narrated
on page 63 supra. If a planet aspects one of the three
ascendants, viz. natal ascendant, Hora Lagna and Ghatika
Lagna, in becomes a Karaka planet .or significator giving status
etc. to the native.
ii^ii
qrcscz qRt7>tTft?rcT sN u
13-14. If the six divisions (shadvargas) of the ascendant
is occupied or aspected by one and the same planet, a
Raja F yoga is doubtlessly formed. According to the aspect is
full, half or one fourth, results will be in order full, medium
and negligible.
Notes : Rasi, Hora, Drekkana, Trimsamsa, Navamsa
and Dvadasamsa constitute Shadvarga or six divisions. If a
planet occupies the ascendant in all these 6 charts it causes
a powerful Raja yaga. Aspects are referred to in the divisional
charts here. I am unable to fully conceive the logic in aspects
in divisional charts for the sage himself referred to longitudinal
aspectual evaluations in an earlier chapter. Without commen-

Brihat Parasara Bora Sastra
ting further on this controversial aspect I leave it at that,
accepting my limitations to explain this fully.
WZ TT3T OT«? 1
15. If the 3 ascendants (i.e. natal ascendant, Hora Lagna
and Ghatika Lagna) are occupied by planets in exaltation/own
sign or if the natal ascendant, Drekkana ascendant and
Navamsa ascendant have exalted planets. Raja yoga is formed.
n tsrgtf ?rsn i
16. If the Moon and a benefic are in the Arudha Lagna,
as Jupiter is in the 2nd from natal ascendant and both the
places are aspected by planets in exaltation or in own sign, there
will be a Raja yoga.
^ *?3 SfT'ft TT3?T 5?T cT<:??q>Sf<T STT I I^U
17. If the ascendant, 2nd and 4th are occupied by
benefics while a malefic is in the 3rd, one will become a king or
equal to a king.
*ar>5T^> in q* *t I
*? am? mv: fan fenfa n?m<
18. The native will be wealthy if one among the Moon,
Jupiter, Venus and Mercury is exalted in the 2nd house.
in q^T: |
^ vjnrift TT WmW : 1 1 \ £| |
19. If the 6th, 8th and the 3rd are occupied by debilitated planets as the ascendant lord is exalted or is in (his
other) own house and aspects the ascendant, there is a Raja yoga.
CfC3TSC£*T WmotolT ftgiTSScPTr: 1
TT^: H^oll

Chapter 39
20. Again a Raja yoga is formed if the 6th, 8th and
12th lords are in fall or in inimical signs or in combustion
as the ascendant lord placed in his (other! own sign or in
exaltation sign aspects the ascendant.
SJHT: TT*?*T: ?TrS3 fl'nq: IR?U
21. If the 10th lord, placed in his own house or in
exaltation, aspects the ascendant, a Raja yoga is formed.
Similar is the case if benefics are in angles.
<TTST%*£<T 5T* ijjf ^I5TT TOTlft'lt^U
22- If the Atmakaraka is in a benefic’s Rasi/Navamsa,
the native will be wealthy. If there are ^enefics in angels from
Karakamsa Lagna. he will become a king.
5171? fa«l: f^irf nf* I
favTP* *T fccWr fraTTPSTT ST TVWT: M^||
23. If the Arudha Lagna and Darapada are in mutual
angles or in mutual 3rd/llthorin mutual trines, the native
will doubtlessly become a king.
Notes : Arudha Lagna is the Pada fer the natal ascendant while Dara Pada is the Pada for the 7th house. (Chapter 29
may be referred in the context of such calculations.)
These two Padas should mutually be well placed, i.e. in
mutual angles, mutual trines or mutually 3rd and 1 1 th so that
the native will enjoy a royal status.
Should there two Padas be in mutually 6th and 8th signs
or 2nd and 12th signs, one will suffer from poverty not receiving
the effects of the Raja yogas in the horoscope. The good
relationship between Arudha Pada and Dara Pada is one of
the essential pre-requisites for maturity of Raja Yogas.
24. If two or all of Bhava Lagna, Horn Lagna, Ghatika
Lagna are in aspect to exalted planets, a Raja yoga is formed.

394 Brlhat Parasara Hora Sastni
<ixi 4 GVFJTtffsirrw ttxJtxtrsttPi I
JTffT TrfVt^Wrwri ^RTS'EET 3 IRS^II
25. If the said 3 ascendants, their decanates and Navamas
or the said ascendants and their Navamsas or the said ascendants and their decanates are aspected by a planet, a Raja yoga
is formed.
qt f^XT^rT: i
w g^-xj^Ttnn n^n
TtsraVft sr xixre: i
xjm^ rT*niRV3ii
26-27. If Arudha Pada is occupied by an exalted planet
particularly the Moon in exaltation or by Jupiter/Venus (with
or without exaltation) while there is no Argala by a malefic,
the native will become a king. If the Arudha Pada is a benefic
sign containing the Moon while Jupiter is in the 2nd house,
the same effect will prevail.
aqxqfai
eiqTsfa TPfftftq: smfefa xftr ! ircii
28. Even if one among the 6 th, 8 th and 12th lords being
in debilitation aspects the ascendant there will be a Raja >oga.
•qg^qxnTTqfq-qfir?^ i
3 xr^ir xro n^n
tt3tt *t cif<rq> qrfq srTriqft srrt^ »qx? i
-a V
qxqfa cnTTH^o'l
gifhirrmq frnf qrofa ?rqT i
*T«TTXT%^q XT IT fqV^I^q^R: U^H
29-31. The native will become a king if a planet ruling the
4th, 10th, 2nd or the 1 1th aspects the ascendant, while Venus
aspects the 1 1th from Arudha Lagnaas Arudha Lagna is occupied
by a benefic. The same effect will be obtained if a debilitated
planet aspects the ascendant and is placed in the 6 th or the 8 th.

Chapter 39 395
Again similar result will prevail if a debilitated planet placed
in the 3rd/ 1 1th lends aspect to the ascendant.
*TTSi^ifa toj t
*5T«it ii^n
32. I now tell you of the Raja yogas based on the planets
with different dignities and on the aspects and conjunctions of
the planets.
n^u
If* eft *nfa fMKrenft 1
T H re gTfl ^ l 5Tvft ll^VU
33*34, The 9th lord is akin to a minister, and more
especially the 5th lord. If these two planets mutually aspect,
the native will obtain a kingdom. Even if these two are conjunct
in any house or if be in mutually 7th places, one born of royal
scion will become a king
^fSQ’ftfa'ITVqt 3
35. The native will attain kingdom if the 4th lord is in
the 10th and the 10th lord is in the 4th and be in aspect to
5th and 9th lords.
gcT^-ggeSTTdTOT sumgaT: I
tm sjqtaft tfftcHf S*n<ft 11^1'
36. If the lords of the 5th, 10th, 4th and the ascendant
join in the 9th, one will become a ruler with fame spreading
over the four directions
gsnrsrffgqY srrfa riq?ft t
enfirrfcr *t »roft
37. Should the lord of the 4th or of the 10th join either
the 5th lord or the 9th Lord, the native will obtain kingdom.

Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
Notes : There are four Raja yogas mentioned in the above
verse which can be understood as under :
(1) 4th lord joining the 5th lord.
(2) 4th lord joining the 9 th lord.
- (3) 10th lord joining the 9th lord.
(4) I Oth lord joining the 5 lord.
It will be still superior if the 4th lord joins both the 5th
lord and the 9th lord, or if the 10th lord joins the 5th and
9th lord. It may be noted that this is a yoga caused by an
angular lord joinig a trinal lord.
fNft sTTeft *nrt h^h
38. If the 5 th lord is in the ascendant, 4th or the I Oth in
the company of the 9th lord or of the ascendant lord, the native
will become a king.
*r srrenNrfa? nun
39. Should Jupiter be in his own sign identical with the
9th house and be in the company of either Venus or of the 5th
lord, the native will obtain kinghood.
*prr fTf Tmr *r n^cii
40. Two and half ghatis (i.e. 60 minutes of time) from
mid-day or from mid-night is auspicious time. A birth during
such an auspicious time will cause one to be a king or equal
to him.
Notes : Though mid-day and mid-night are denoted in
the translation for Dinardfaa and Nisardha a clarification is
essential in regard to the implications of these. Mid-day simply
denotes 12 Noon while mid -night zero hour as per common
use. But what the sage implies is somewhat different.
Dinardha means half of the day while Nisardha means half of
the night, keeping in mind the Sun rise and Sun set at a given
place. The verse has a yoga to indicate that if there is a birth

Chapter 39
within an hour of the said Dinardha or Nisardha, the native
will be a king. I shall illustrate this with a practical case.
Take for instance a birth on 15th February 1947 at
Jodhpur 73 E 2 and 26 N 18. The local sun rise is at 0638 hrs
and sun set at 1749 hrs. Hence for this latitude and date,
the day duration is llh 11m and night duration 12h 49m,
Divide the day duration by two to get Dinardha which indicates
5h 35m. Similarly dividing night duration by 2 wc get Nisardha
as 6h 24m. Add 5h 35m to Sun rise which will give half the
day duration. Thus by adding 5h 35m to 6h 38m, we get
12h 13m. Similarly in the case of night, the night duration
of 12h 49m be halved and the figure arrived at is to be added
to sun set. Thus wcget Oh 13m (i.e. 13 m later than the
usual mid-night).
From the above we may understand that by simply taking
12 noon as mid-day and 0 hour as mid-night it will not serve our
purpose in the context of the yoga suggested by the sage. Needless to mention that LMT is to be used for these calculations.
Uttar a Kalamrlta has two yogas in this respect, viz,
Koteeswara yoga and Lakshadhikari yoga (vide ch 4, sloka 30).
According to its author if there be a birth within 2 ghatikas (i.e.
48 minutes as against Parasara’s mention of 60 minutes) of
Dinardha and Nisardha, a king is born who will conquer his
enemies and observe religious rules of conduct and be learned.
He further adds that if in the said case an exalted planet is ia the
2nd house, in aspect to another exalted planet, a Koteeswara is
born. If the aspectig planet is in its own house (instead of being
in exaltation) the native will then be only a Lakshadheewara.
Suffice it to say that there will be relatively less riches in the
second case.
f*T*u Twfa TFsnrtir
41. Should the Moon and Venus be mutually in the 3rd
and 11th and be in aspects, placed elsewhere, a Raja yoga is
obtained.
1 Nofes : As P er the sloka in question, we find two conditions under which two Raja yogas form. In the first instance
the Moon and Venus should be in mutually 3 and 11.

Brihat Parasara Horn Sastra
In the second instance, the Moon and Venus can be anywhere but should mutually aspec*. This type of yoga is found
in many standard texts.
?r tit 3n?r:ii Tnrr ew
42 Should the Moon, endowed with strength, be in
Vargothamsa and be aspected by four or more planets, the native
will become a king.
u^Vsfa 3 im; stefa nv^u
43. One will become a king if the ascendant in Uttamamsa
is aspected by four or more planets out of which the Moon
should not be one.
TT a ifv tft EW^rT: IIVVU
44. If one or two or three planets be in exaltation one of a
royal scion will become a king while another will be equal to a
king or be wealthy.
ttsit *T*f?r fafroti: uvstu
45. If 4 or 5 planets occupy their exaltation signs or
Moolatrikona signs, even a person of base-birth will become a
king.
^ TFT-^>TT 5RT f ^ xT H J UV^U
46. If 6 planets are exalted, the native will become an
emperor and will enjoy various kinds of royal paraphernalia.
^ $tft *t wt mifind : <
fcji TTUT m ?Tf?nT> IlVVdll
47. Even if one am one Jumter. Venus ana Mercury is in

Chapter 40 399
exaltation while a benefic is in an angle the native will become
a king or be equal to him.
fctftqq: qtqra fjmm: I
ifaqqtsfq 5TRT: <T Tm qqfa SWJ UYttU
48. If all benefics are relegated to angles while malefics
are in the 3rd, 6th and 1 1th, the native, . though may be of mean
descent will ascend, the throne.
ar«T nvon
Chapter 40
Yogas For Royal Association
awTfuqrrcSpinfq sraR?$ qqrq$fn$u
1. If the 10th lord from the ascendant is conjunct or
aspected by the depositor of Amatyakaraka or even conjunct or
aspected by Amatya karaka himself, the native will be a chief in
the king’s court.
Notes : Amatya karaka is the immediate successor of
Atma karaka as we have seen earlier. The lord of the sign
occupied by Amatya Karaka should aspect or join the 10th
lord counted from the ascendant; the native will then enjoy a
high governmental position. The Amatya karaka taking the
role of his depositor in the above case will as well yield similar
effects.
The yogas given in the chapter should be related to one’s
serving the government in various capacities depending on other
combinations in his horosope.
qni ’ i
?TC1 fa* ! SOFIcq U^ll

Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
2. Jf the 10th and 11th are devoid of malefic occupation/
aspect while the 1 1th is aspccted by its own lord, the native will
be a chief in the king’s court.
Notes : This verse is open to another interpretation thus :
the 1 Ith be devoid of malefic aspect/occupatio.n and be aspectcd
by own lord while the 10th house should also be aspccted
by its lord and the 10th is also disposed in the same manner.
That is, the 10th house should also be aspected by its lord and
should be free from malefic aspect/occupation.
S3
ll^ll
3. Should Amatya karaka and the dispositor Atma karaka
be together the native will be endowed with great intelligence
and be a king’s minister.
Notes : Karakendra is interpreted here as the dispositor of
Atma karaka. Similarly Amatyesa means the dispositor of Amatya
karaka.
fa* ! l
4. If Amatya karaka is strong and be with a benefic or if
Amatya karaka is in own house or in exaltation, one will surely
becomca king’s minister.
TliRWft TOTOtra: I IK. II
5. There is no doubt in one’s becoming a king’s minister
and famous if Amatya karaka is in the ascendant or the 5th or
the 9th.
3TTF*rerrc^5rT: disnTcd'nK^' I
6. If Amatya karaka or Amatya karaka be in an angle
or in a trine from the ascendant the native will beget royal
mercy, royal patronage and happiness thereof.

Chapter 40
fesrsem ! i
cjcffa spss^T rtr: rtRTufaT: Jisrra^ ii^u
7. Should malcfics be in the 3rd and 6th from Atma
karaka or Arudha Lagna or the natal ascendant, one will become
an army chief. _
’RTrtl^T ^ 7T3RT!ft Rtifa He; ||
8. If Atma karaka is in an angle or-in a trine or in
exaltation or in own house and be in aspect to the 9th lord,
the native will be a king’s minister.
RHT% SJrXRpyft^x SPRH TT'RfTR^ |
rth%rts?i ntn
9. Should the Moon sign lord become Atma karaka and
be in the natal ascendant along with a benefic, the native will
become a king’s minister at his advanced age.
RTSfa HR TT5nW5 RRtJ||?oU
10. Should the Atmakaraka be in the 5th, 7th, 10th or the
9th and be with a benefic, one will earn wealth through royal
patronage.
Rrnrwm^ vmr RRirsfa rt i
TT31RTRftm>T>s?T fafasiiff fipfteTO ! ||g^||
11. Tf the Arudha of the 9th house be itself the natal
ascendant or if Atma karaka be in the 9th house the native will
be associated with royal circles.
mR'HTRSR i
HTOtTRT 5JRT?TRTRH^U
12. One will gain through royal association if the 11th
house is occupied by its own lord but be devoid of malefic
aspect. The Atma karaka should at the Same time be conjunct a
benefic.

Brlhat Parasara Hora Sastara
snrcft <M^4»a-^n>sa qfrvtfwcf: u?3u
13. An exchange of signs between the 10th lord and the
ascendant lord will make the native associated with the king in
a great manner.
frrcfrm ftrfcff frsrcmq l i
TO TOf?l HMfclj UtYll
14. If Venus and the Moon are in the 4th from Karakamsa
Lagna, the native will be endowed with royal insignia.
qisfq qwNiq
qfri qrW fart irfoR THffa* n\w
15. Should the ascendant lord or the Atma karaka be
conjunct the 5th lord and be in an angle or in a trine, the native
will be a king’s minister.
3jq f*OTOTq>TTSsqTiT: »*?n
Chapter 41
Combinations For Wealth
3iqT3?r: flSmqTfa CfflqW l
Ufapf qft fqfmrft BTO *$<T U ? II
1. I now tell you of special combinations giving wealth.
One born in these yogas will surely become wealthy.
IJiJsnS* tTftqq ^"1 I
Frr3 tffcm *gff*TO ll^ll
2. YOGAS FOR GREAT AFFLUENCE (upto sloka 8) :
Should a sign of Venus be the 5th house and be occupied
by Venus himself while Mars is in the 11th house, the native
will obtain great riches.

Chapter 41
Notes : This yoga applies to Capricorn and Gemini ascendants alone. For Capricorn ascendant, Venus will be in the
5th in own house while Mars jvill be in the 1 Ith in own house.
Similarly for Gemini ascendant. So to say for these two ascendants, the 5th and 11th lords in own houses will confer abundant
riches.
grir tftfr shut: 113 n
3. Should a sign of Mercury be the 5th house and be
occupied by Mercury himself as the llth house is occupied
by the Moon, Mars and Jupiter, the native will be very affluent.
Notes : This yoga applies to Aquarius ascendant and
Taurus ascendant for which Mercury will be in the 5th in own
house. It is quite superior for Taurus ascendant keeping
Aquarius native in the next place. In both cases, Jupiter ruling
the llth will be in own house along with his friends — the Moon
and Mars.
^ rTfoig |
?TR Sjpparcq UVII
4. Should Leo be the 5th house and be occupied by the
Sun himself as Saturn, the Moon and Jupiter are in the llth,
the native will be very affluent.
Notes : Here features Aries ascendant having the Sun in
the 5th in Leo and Saturn, Jupiter and the Moon in the llth
in Aquarius. Please note Saturn occupies the llth as its
owner.
g rrfag sift*?* sfa i
sim sgsstrej qnw?: 11*11
5. Should the Sun and Moon be in the llth as Saturn is
in the 5th identical with his own house, the native will be
very affluent.
Notes : Saturn will be in the 5th in Capricorn for a
Virgo native, and in Aquarius for a Libra native. The Sun and
the Moon are required to be in the llth. While being so, Cancer
or Leo will be the 1 1th house as the case may be.

Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
5 9^* 5^^ tffaf I
6. Should Jupiter be in the Sth identical with his own
house as Mercury is in the 1 1th, the native will be very affluent.
Notes : Jupiter rules the Sth for Leo ascendant and for
Scorpio ascendant while Mercury is the 1 1th lord for these two
ascendants. Thus the $th and 11th lords will be in own
signs.
wmF? *193* 9 ■prow to*: u\sii
7. If a sign of Mars be the Sth with Mars therein as
Venus is in the 1 1th, the native will become very affluent.
Notes : Cancer and Sagittarius ascendant will attract this
rule. Mars will be in own house in the Sth while Venus will be
in the 1 1th in own house for these two ascendants.
c hn^ 5 flfii i
vrrtw: iinii
8. If Cancer be the Sth house containing the Moon therein
at Saturn is in the 1 1th, the native will become very affluent.
Notes : Here Pisces ascendant is considered with the
Moon in the 5th and Saturn in the 11th.
Thus from slokas 2 to 8, the formula that stands for basic
consideration is that the 5th lord should be in the 5th while
the 11th lord is in the 11th itself. Only in case of the rule
given in sloka 3 for Taurus and Aquarius ascendants, two more
planets have been added for the 1 1th house position.
3*F»!T il&ll
9. YOGAS FOR WEALTH (upto sloka 15) : Should the
Sun be in Leo identical with the ascendant and be conjunct
or aspected by Mars and Jupiter, one will be wealthy.

Chapter 41 405
g^JTT q«T 1*2 3TTtft SPft lt?o(|
10. Should the Moon be in Cancer identical with ascendant and be conjunct or aspected by Mercury and Jupiter one
will be wealthy.
Tt rhiihii
1 1. Should Mars be in the ascendant identical with his
own sign and be conjunct or aspected by Mercury, Venus and
Saturn, the native will be rich.
fl fatrfc p K T wTTcft IRcTU^H
12. Should Mercury’s sign ascend with Mercury therein
and be conjunct or aspected by Saturn aud Jupiter the native
will be rich.
psfatR erf?** ?ri* I
garffagrf to* tjqgrrH?:: u^n
13. Should Jupiter be in the ascendant identical with
his own sign and be conjunct or aspected by Mercury and Mars,
the native will be rich.
crf?*g *f?i i
*> TO: * UfYII
14. If Venus be in the ascendant identical with his own
sign and be conjunct or aspected by Saturn and Mercury, one
will be wealthy.
*rf*tft?m^ afro *rfro srfai
rftfm ^ to* ri$Riiiui
15. If Saturn is in his own sign identical with ascendant
be aspected by or conjunct Mars and Jupiter, the native will be
wealthy.

4w Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
ara*aNi«ft & arwrt sctt i
nfs* spT*T ?ns?r ii{\n
16. OTHER QUALIFIED PLANETS : The 9th lprd and
th 5th lord are capable of bestowing wealth. Similarly planets
conjunct such a lord. There is no doubt that these planets will
give wealth during their Dasa periods.
Notes : The 5th lord and the 9th lord are primarily
wealth-givers. If they are well placed in a horoscope, the native
will become wealthy. If a favourable planet joins the 5th lord
or the 9th lord, that planet will also become a significator of
wealth.
17. The yogas mentioned above (upto sloka 16) should be
delineated after knowing favourable unfavourable dispositions of
the participant planets and their strength and weakness.
STcTf 1
3tT*T fTtpft 5T3T *T>37
flqTSSWt »5IfT>P II
18-19. EFFECTS OF ANGULAR LORD’S DIVISIONAL
DIGNITIES : If the lord of an angle is in Parijatamsa, the native
will be liberal, in Uttamamsa highly liberal, in Gopuramsa endowed with prowess, in Simhasanamsa honourable, in Paaravatamsa valorous, in Devalokamsa head of an assembly, in Bra hm a,
lokamsa a sage and in Iravatamsa delighted and be celebrated in
all quarters.
Notes : From verse 18 to verse 34 of this chapter, the
sage instructs us on the dignities of the 4 angular lords and two
trinal lords.
The treatment is based on Dasa Varga divisions. For
meanings of Parijata and other Amsas, sec ch. 6 supra. Shodasa

Chapter 41 407
Varga sdheme also can be applied to the rules given herein with
suitable modification proportionately.
Lords of angles are those ruling the ascendant, the 4th,
the 7th and the 10th. Their- divisional dignities are discussed
in the present group of verses. One of the said rulers having
various dignities will yield following effects.
Farijatamsa
Uttamamsa
Gopuramsa
Simhasanamsa
Paravatmsa
Devalokamsa
Brahmalokamsa
Jravatmsa
liberal
highly liberal
endowed with prowess and manliness
honourable (prominent etc.)
valorous
head of men, leadership, high position etc.
sagely (spiritual achievements etc.)
delighted, ever happy etc. and be
a celebrated personality from all
viewpoints.
Here we must note the implied difference between the four
lords ruling the various angles. The angular lords are powerful
and more important in the ascending order. That is, the 4th lord
is more powerful than the ascendant lord, the 7th lord is so
against the 4th lord, and the 10th lord is the most powerful
among the four lords. So the effects will also increase in the
same order.
•TTf^sn# foen
sftvmT tfin 113 oil
quiqd * Prom ! iiqtu
20-22. EFFECTS OF 5th LORD'S DIVISIONAL
DIGNITIES : If the 5th lord is in Parijatamsa, the native will
take to the branch of learning befitting his race, if in Uttamamsa
he will have excellent learning, if in Gopuramsa he will receive world-wide honours, in Simhasanamsa he will be endowed

Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
with ministership, in also paaravatamsa endowed with
knowledge of Supreme Spirit; in Devalokamsa he will be a
Karma Yogi (i.e. a performer of actions, worldly and religious
rites), in Brahmalokamsa devoted to the Lord and in Iravatamsa
pious.
Notes : While the four angular lords are treated in one and
the same breath, the sage gives special importance to the 5th
and 9th lords individually. The effects may suitably be understood based on the explanations given for angular lords above.
*ftgT nwwif h 5P*Tf?n
flfqqitf faf^ffjrq: lie's’ll
qfoqsq qjqtmifaiT: t
qerbp n tow: i
wqRT? ?r?qTs*^uqr*nt^ii
rT Gmforr COT? flfactrfai
q«n sneft %3Ttri*r! ii^vsii
23-27. EFFECTS OF 9th LORD'S DIVISIONAL DIGNITIES : If the 9th lord is in Parijatamsa, the native will visit holy
places, if in Uttamamsa he had done so in the past births as
well, if in Gopuramsa he will perform sacrificial rites, in Simhasanamsa he will be mighty, truthful, be a conquerer of his senses
and will concentrate only on the Supreme Spirit giving up all
religions, if in Paaravatamsa he will be the greates of ascetics,
if in Devalokamsa he will be an ascetic holding a cudgel
( HTTrt ) or a religious mendicant that has renounced all mundane
attachments and carrying three long staves tied together in his
right hand and if in Brahmalokamsa he will perform
Aswamedha yaga (Horse Sacrifice,) and will attain the state of
Lord Indra (god of gods). If the 9th lord is in Iravatamsa the
person bom will be a synonym of Dharma or virtues just as
Lord Sri Rama and Yudhishtira (the eldest of Pandavas).

Chapter 4l 4 O 9
Notes : The 5th lord has been used in spiritual and material planes as well. Whereas the 9th lord is solely related to one's
spiritual achievements as could be seen by the treatment given
by Maharshi Parasara in the above 5 slokas.
The word Tridandi has been translated as above in the
context of relating the native to a Sansyasi as these slokas
exclusively concentrate on the spiritual achievements of the
native, ‘Tridandi’ also means one who obtained command over
mind, speech and deed- Without ‘Trikaranh Suddhi’ or purity
of these three it will not be possible for one to achieve divine
bliss. One who thinks bad in his mind though good in the other
two spheres, viz. speech and actions cannot be called a pure
character. Or one who thinks of good and speaks similarly but
acts in a contrary manner cannot be a successful spiritualist.
Lastly one who speaks undfesirablc words though good in thinking and acting cannot also reach self realisation. Hence it is
evident that one should be a ‘Tridandi’ or endowed with
Trikarana Suddhi, so that he locates the Almighty at every
point of space and time.
We have so far seen that 5th and 9th lords are primarily
wealth givers. The sage also denotes the 5th and 9tb lords as
lords of‘Lakshmi sthanas*. Lakshmi though normally means
wcalth.further conveys a meaning splendour (our lustre). This
relates to divine splendour acquired by a person through his
spiritual merits. If a person is splendorous, we see in him what
is called Brahma Varchas or the splendour making him look
like God, free from any material attachment. In this context
we cannot but recall great personages like Rama Krishna
ferama Hamsa, Maharshi Ramana, Sankaracharyas of various
S rders and periods, Sivananda and so on ahd so forth. In all
lese cases, the 5th and 9th lords and 5th and 9th houses
enabled them earn that splendour. The wealth they earned is
such that it cannot be exhausted even after many centuries,
i e. divine status.
28. ANGULAR AND TRINAL LORDS RELATED : The
angles are known as Vishnusthaana (i.e. houses of Lord Vishnu)
while the trines are called Lakshmi sthaanas (i.e. houses of

410 Briha t Parasara Hora Sastra
Lakshmi). If the lord of an angle establishes relationship with a
trinal lord, a Rajayoga will obtain.
Notes : The 4 houses, viz. the 1st, 4th, 7th and 10th are
known as Vishnusthaanas while the 5th and and 9th are Lakshmisthaanas. In Hindu mythology, Lakshmi is a consort of Lord
Vishnu, the supreme god. A relationship thus between an angular
lord and a trinal lord is capable of causing a superior Rajayoga,
just as one having the blessings of Sri Vishnu and His consort
Lakshmi will be endowed with permanent wellbeing.
The kinds of relationship between planets that will be
favourable are :
1. An exchange between these two lords.
2. Mutual aspects between these two lords.
3. Conjunction of these two lords.
4. Mutual angular placement existing between these two.
5. Mutual trinal placement between these two.
The first three kinds of relationships are more powerful
while the last two cannot be equally powerful but in a lesser
degree.
A sixth kind of relationship can also be extended in this
context to Navamsa positions though 1 have no specific classic
sanction for this. For example in a Capricornian’s case, Mars in
the Navamsa of Venus and Venus in that of Mars will confer a
superior Raja yoga. This form of relationship will be eqally
superior like the first 3 relationships mentioned by me in the
earlier paragraph.
After seeing such a relationship between an angular lord
and a trinal lord, their dignities like Parjjata etc. will have to be
seen to decide the extent of effects due as could be seen in the
following six verses.

Chapter 41
thtt gfafor: \
*rfgr?n ffacranr 1. 113311
•TTTT^rlf 1(1 41^4 'HlcH *T'-ill<»M«nTT I
fgfBTift: msmim* 113311
^ 5r^rnn fWv^ivwT: i
29-34 EFFECTS OF DIVISIONAL DIGNITIES OF THE
TWO PLANETS SO RELATED : Should an angular lord
and a trinal lord having such a relationship (vide above slokas)
be in Parijatamsa, the native will be king and will protect men,
if Uttamamsa he will be an excellent king endowed with elephants, horses, chariots etc , if in Gopuramsa he will be a tiger of
kings honoured by other kings, and if in Simhasanamsa he will
be an emperor ruling over the entire earth; with the said Rajayoga relationship of the said planets in Simhasanamsa were born
Harisehandra, Manu, Bali, the Fire god (Agni Deva) and many
other emperors. In the present Yuga so born is Yudhishtira (or
Dharma Raja of Malta Bharata). Salivahana’s birth and that of
others will also come with this yoga. With these planets so related
and in Paaravatamsa, Manu etc. were born. The Incarnations of
Lord Vishnu took place when the said planets, being so related,
were in Devalokamsa; and in Brahmalokamsa Lord Brahma
and in Iravatamsa the Swayambhu Manu (the first of the 14
Manus identified as the second creator who produced the
Prajapatis and to the said Manu the code of laws viz. Manusmriti is ascribed) were born.
Notes : The two planets, viz. an angular lord and a trinal
lord with such a relationship, should be simultaneously in
Parijatamsa. One in Parijatamsa and the other in a still higher
Amsa will yield still better effects. The reader can intelligently
manipulate the effects according to such Anisas.
When studying these slokas, we reach a crucial point as
to the period of Parasara. There are baseless arguments that
Parasara, author of Brihat Parasara Hora, could not be a sage
that lived thousands of years ago; but a very recent author tnat
should have lived after Varaha Mihira, Bhattotpala, Kalyana
Varma and so on and So forth. This misconception does not

Brihai Parasara Hora S antra
deserve an answer at all and is worth being brushed aside as an
idle gossip. The holders of such opinion may advance a million
arguments in their own favour. Our query to them is: which
exponent referred to the horoscopic positions of Lord Vishnu,
Harischandra, Manu, Bali Chakravartbi, Agni Deva, Swayambhu
Manu and last but not the least the Creater Brahma himself?
Is it humanly possible, but for a sage, with divine contacts,
to produce combinations existing in the sacred horoscopes of
Vishnu, Brahma etc.? Also note with specific attention the statement of Parasara that “Dharma Raja (the eldest son of king
Pandu, of Maha Bharata) of the present age, has this yoga”.
Does this not stand as an indisputable testimony of Parasara
having lived in the Maha Bharata era ?
Yet, another clue about Parosara is served when in the
above lines we find his prediction that Salivahana and others
“will be born” with this yoga. The verb used is bhavita in
future tense. That conveys that Parasara was a predecessor of
Salivahana and not a successor of Bhattotpala etc.
Maharshi Jaimini, author of Poorva Mimamsa and propagator of Jaimini Astrology was a disciple of Parasara. If Parasara
lived in the 17th century, what about Jaimini ?
Specific attention of the reader is drawn to the statement
of Parasara in "sloka 32 above, to the effect that “in the present
Yuga” Dharma Raja is born with such a yoga. This is an ample
proof that our sage was in Maha Bharata time and was the
illustrious parent of illustrious Veda Vyasa.
Lastly, the following popular quotation enlists Parasara
among the 18 exponents of Jyotisha :
gif: anfft Tfwtsfa TOSTT : |
ifnpTTl TTTSt *pff ||
it
This is again a proof that our sage was indeed a sage of
Mahabharata era and is an authority with crown for Kali yuga
astrology.

Chapter 42
Combinations For Penury
EH3T iftm «JdT*d*Tt) wu g% ! I
«ftrrPT $<im wrqj* SJtR> ! U?ll
1. O Lord, you have stated many yogas rnlated to acquisition of wealth. Please tell me such yogas causing utter
poverty.
fNehft TITO TCMI^II
2. The native will be penniless if the ascendant lord is in
the 12th as the 12th lord is in the ascendant along with a
Maraka lord (death inflicting planet) or be in aspect to such a
planet.
SP%71 q'ESTf 1
spt5>t: ii^n
3. The native will be penniless if the ascendant lord is in
the 6th while the 6th lord is in the ascendant with conjuntion
or aspect of a Maraka lord.
fcr grreft wrtnmi
4. Should the ascendant or the Moon be with Ketu whih
the ascendant lord is in the 8th, the person cencerned will b<
penniless.
TT3l^tftfsq f?TERt II SOI
5. If the ascendant lord along with a malefic is in the 6th,
8th or 12th while the 2nd lord is in an enemy's sign or in debilitatton, even a native of royal scion will become penniless.

Brihat Farasara 11 ora Sastra
'TT'retS »
fTORV ?R: 11^11
6. If the ascendant lord is conjunct an evil house lord (one
of the 6th, 8th and 12th lords) or Saturn and be devoid of benefic
aspect the native will be penniless,
SPTfTm^ ^*TTrT I
%7RRifl7R f?TSR> 3n^ ?R: livsll
7. Should the 5th and 9th lords be respectively found in
the 6th and 12th and be in aspect to Maraka planets, the native
will be penniless.
7THrotTffuqt fa;u! \
*TRTFSm£ 3 TTtT: RlfrTEfot italic;!!
8. If malefics, excepting the lords of the 10th and 9th, be
in the ascendant in association with or aspect to Maraka planets,
one will become penniless,
fa^tTTT m STTSTFIT ^RT^mf^f^cTT: 1
qprarciTrTT 31vft fatH: Util
9. Note the planets ruling the signs occupied by the lords
of 6th, 8th and 12th, If the said depositors are in such evil
houses in turn and be associated with or aspected by malefics,
the native will be miserable and indigent.
TOraffiRTOKft *TR^*WcT> qfe I
*lfsq STTef^S^T 5R: II? oil
10. The lord of the Navamsa occupied by the Moon
joining a Maraka planet or occupying a Maraka house will make
one penniless.
Ufa I
if cat sTTcfterit ^ninii
11. Should the lord of natal ascendant and that of Navamsa ascendant be conjunct or be aspected by Maraka planets,
one will be penniless.

Chapter 42
■ff Wm F HW T: 'Tl'H: W: \
-f?T5rT> snq<T aqififT: ii^ii
12. If inauspicious houses are occupied by benefics while
auspicious houses are occupied by malefics, the native will be
indigent and will be distressed even in the matter of food.
t* faqm: sfaciT s^i; \
$ S* **?*mft% *»JcTT:H^U
13. A planet associated with one of the lords of the 6th,
8th and 12th, being bereft of a trinal lord’s aspect, will in its
Dasa periods cause harm to the native’s financial aspects.
farnqp? sri
14. If the 8th/1 2th from Atmakaraka or from the natal
ascendant be aspected by Atmakaraka Navamsa lord and the
natal ascendant lord, the native will be bereft of wealth.
cqtr S^TcT actZR |
15. The native will be a spendthrift if the 12th from
Atmakaraka is aspected by the depositor of Atmakaraka or
if the 12th from the natal ascendant is aspected by the ascendant
lord.
a* t»?V3l»
q^TtJfTtJrT OTTCT \
16-18. Now I tell you some yogas for poverty along with
conditions of their nullifications. Should Mars and Saturn be
together in the 2nd house, the native’s wealth will be destroyed.

Brihal Parasara Hora Sastra
Should Mercury aspet the said two planets in the 2nd, there will
be great wealth. There is no doubt in it. The Sun in the 2nd in
aspect to Saturn will cause penury while the Sun so placed if
be not aspected by Saturn will give riches and fame. The same
effects (i.e. poverty) be declared if Saturn is in the 2nd in aspect
to the Sun.
sranrcfaiHTra: n*3ii
Chapter 43
Longevity
'JTTTarmnr^ sth *>*to?* hi?u
1. O Sage, you have dealt with combinations for wealth
and poverty. Kindly detail methods of ascertaining the life span
of human beings.
'JGC r*nTT feq ! ^ f^^qi [
yqqn-q Tqtft ST?T qg gTTfa ll^ir
&qf STTTT*nTT5Tq Siq^Tfa rT^TSUcT: ll^ll
2-3. O Brahmin, for the benefit of mankind I narrate
methods of ascertaining longevity, as knowing longevity is difficult even for gods. Many exponents have laid down various
methods of longevity calculations. Following is the summary of
such schools of thoughts.
Notes : Slokas 2-15 deal with Pindayu system of longevity
calculations. After dealing with translation of these 14 slokas,
the entire system of Pindayu is being fully explained by me with
a practical example so that the reader follows the calculations
involved thoroughly.

Chapter 43 417
$51 3*Tg;snntr*T: i
Hwsrrfar ttott: kivii
fqw?Ta: ttt <T* ^rft«rfcra?rrqw i
TiWfa fgrr«?5S ! «r»T 6 ^PTqTTHH: II HU
Timer grffttr^T 1
T^'<?T?msTfwfmmitST;f: *TC?*T: ll^ll
5T£e*ft fr?rf5T*m*TT 3nmfT®«T: SWptmtff: I
sftaTfc^ereijs:^ ?N m^i^TRWt llvsll
fT^amst T*?: JTVm TT'KI^pT) *PT®3<TTrT I
re fq^gfc Kft smt mfmrFta «nm:iicii
4-8. PINDAYU : The planets contribute longevity according to their being in exaltation or debilitation, and also based
on their strengths and weaknesses and positions in Aswini
etc. and in the various signs. First of all Pindayu, based on
the planetary positions. O brahmin, listen to what I say, with
singlemindedness. 19, 25, 15, 12, 15, 21 and 20 are the numper
of years contributed by the planets from the Sun etc. when in
(deep) exaltation. Thesr are half of the above in (deep)
fall, and if the planets are in between exaltation and fall, rule of
three process should be used, Deduct the actual position of
the planet from its deep exaltation point. If the product is less
than 6 signs, deduct it again from 12 signs. The product concerned be multiplied by the number of years allotted to the planet
and divided by 12 to get the planet’s actual contribution.
9. RECTIFICATIONS : Excepting Venus and Saturn,
the contributions made by others should be halved, if they are
eclipsed, by the Sun. One third should be reduced if the
planet is in its inimical sign. This does not apply to the one in
retrogression (see vakra charam).
mmg m ftmr: tit) ?rr?r sr^*?

Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
g wgtWit ssft *r§: >
•ITS^T wfaTFT ^S<R7 TRc^ gfafa; FtJePT 11 1 ? 11
10-11. DEDUCTIONS FOR PLANETS IN VISIBLE
HALF : Full, half, one third, one fourth, one fifth and one
sixth are the deductions of contributions made by maiefics
placed in the visible half of the zodiac. Benefics in such cases lose
only half of what maiefics lose. Should there be more than one
planet in a house, the deduction due to the strongest will only
prevail and not due to other planets in that particular house.
Waning Moon is a benefic for this purpose. '
HRtfrfafawT jrron sifW f^m^T i
ritaifcj H^il
aw ! n^n
12-13. MALEFICS IN ASCENDANT : In case the ascendant is occupied by maiefics, adopt tbe following procedure :
Convert the ascendant’s sphuta into minutes of arc and multiply
it by the years etc. contributed by the occupant and divide by
21600. The years etc. so arrived be deducted from the respective
contribution which will be the net span donated by the planet.
If there is benefic’s aspect on the ascendant containing maiefics,
then the loss is only half (obtained through these calculations)
tTraifolfT t'TiRFJ: fcsfa jitfaST: ll^ Vti
TTftrgeti ^ II It XI I
14-15. ASCENDANT'S CONTRIBUTION : The number
of years contributed by the ascendant will correspond to the
number of signs it gained (from Aries) while the degrees the
ascendant gained in the particular sign will alsocorrespondingly
donate (i.e. 30 degrees— 1 year). If the Navamsa Ascendant
lord is stronger than the ascendant lord, then the contribution
be computed only based on the Navamsas gained (from

Chapter 43 419
Aries), otherwise the computation will be for the Rasi ascendant
only.
Notes : The seven planets from the Sun to Saturn respectively contribute 19,25,15,12, 15, 21 and 20 years when on deep
exaltation degree. The contributions are just halved when these
are on deep debilitation degrees. The deep exaltation degrees for
the 7 planets respectively from the Sun on are : Aries 10°,
Taurus 3°, Capricorn 28’, Virgo 15°, Cancer 5°, Pisces 27°
and Libra 20°. By adding 180°, to the said degrees, we get
deep debilitation points for the concerned planets. After finding out the individual contributions of span of longevity, the
same are to be rectified which method is being explained in
appropriate place in the following paragraphs. To work out
the longevity through Pindayu method, we will take up the
horoscope of a male bom on 21.5.1944 at 19h 01m 1 5s (WT) at
13N40 79E20. The Rasi and Bhava charts as reuqired for our
purpose are :
Merc
Moon
Ven
Sun
Sat
Rasi
Mars
Jup
Rahu
Ketu
Asc

Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
Merc
Moon
Ven
Sun
Sat
Bhava
Mars
Rahu
Ketu
Jup
Asc
The planetary longitudes in tht respective signs as per
Lahiri Ayanamsa (23-4-12) are : The Sun 7-12-18, the Moon
Venus 27-17-50, Saturn 3-9-41 and ascendant 0-48-34. The bhava
starting points are : 1st — Libra 15-48-1 5, 2nd — ScoTpio 15-48-15,
3rd— Sagittarius 15-47-39, 4th— Capricorn 15-47-2, 5th — AquariTaurus 15-48-15, 9th— GemiDi 15-47-38, 10th — Cancer 15-47-1,
Based on the sage’s instructions, we may device the following simple and common formula to know the number of years
contributed by any of the 7 planets. (All concerned longitudes
should be converted into decimals. The minutes and seconds be
also considered. For example, 21° 32' 49" is converted into
21.547 degrees for easy calculation.) The formula to find out
the basic planetary contribution is :
1. If “d” is less than 180°, then “c”
2- If “d” is above 180° X f -

Chapter 43
Where “d” is distance between the planet’s deep exaltation degree and its actual placement; "f” is the full number
of years grantable by the planet and V is the basic years
actually granted by it due to its placement.
Take Saturn’s case as an example. He can at best contribute 20 years. In the horoscope under evaluation, he is
223.1613 degrees away from his deep exaltation (Libra 20°).
Hence to find out the basics ontribution of Saturn, we use
rule 2 above, thus i
12.3979 years
On this basis, we have for the example nativity, the following basic donations of years by the 7 planets :
The Sun : 17.5642 years
The Moon : 24.6247 years
Mars : 8.4036 years
Mercury : 6.9968 years
Jupiter : 14.1200 years
V Venus 19.2327 years
Saturn : 12.3979 years
These basic contributions will undergo the following
reductions, as applicable.
I. Astangata Harana'2. Satru Kshetra Harana 3. Vyayadi
Harana 4. Kroorodaya Harana. These may be understood from
the following paragraphs.
1. Astangata Harana : If a planet is combust reduce
the span by half. However, this docs not affect Venus and
Saturn in combustion.
2. Satru Kshetra Harana : If a planet is in its enemy’s
sign, reduce one third of the basic years and take only two
third. An exception is that a retrograde planet, although
placed in inimjeal sign, does not incur this liability. ‘Vakrachara’
is the expression made by Maharshi Parasara and hence it
excepts a retrograde planet. Mars also does lose in an enemy’s
sign. Needless to mention, a planet in netural’s sig- , (or in
friend’s sign) is not subjected to this reduction.
3. Vyayadi Harana : Planets entail reduction if placed anywhere between the 12th and 7th (reckoned in descending order).

hrihat Parasara Hora Sasira
This need not be mistaken to be Drisyardha Hani. Drisyardha
means that half of the zodiac which is visible. Hence it is 180°
behind the ascendental cusp, i.e. upto descendant via meridian.
Vyayadi Harana figures are : full, half, 1/3, 1/4, 1/5 and l/6h
according to the planet being in 12th, 11th, 10th, 9th, 8th and
7th. These are for malefic planets while a benefic in this connection loses only half of what is noted for a malefie. The
Moon is ever a benefic for longevity calculations, as . per
Maharshi Parasara. (Mercury although joining a malefic be
treated as a benefic only, for all longevity calculations.) We
find here that there is harmonic progression in these deductions
and hence we ought to have a scientific and logical approach to
the quantum of correction, rather than resorting to a flat check
arbitrarily. There is no justification in straightaway eliminating
the whole, for example, for a malefic in the 12th not giving heed
to his actual degreewise placement. It should be full at the 12th
bhava ending point, poroprtionately less on the 12th cusp and
still lesser on the beginning point of 12th bhava or 1 1th bhava
ending point. That is, starting with a 100% less on the 12th
bhava ending we gradually arrive for a 50% reduction at the
point where the llth bhava ends. Thus it will be one sixth
reduction at the end of 7th bhava while it will be l/7th at the
beginaing of the 7th bhava (or end of the 6th bhava). The
reduction obtained by this method should bo half in the case of
a benefic (i.e. Jupiter,' Venus, Mercury and the Moon). Without going through any difficult process, for each bhava, a
common formula is given with which one can rectify the basic
contributions of a planet in one of these houses.
The formula is :
(14-House)- (DP ~RL) =loss of * ears
(DP=Distance of planet from bhava start; BL=Bhava
length and ‘House’ is the bhava occupied by the planet under
rectification.
To understand this formula, we will rectify Saturn’s
contribution He is in the 8th bhava and hence attracts
this reduction. He is in Gemini 3-9-41 while the 8th house
begins in Taurus at 15-48-15 and ends at 15-47-38 in Gemini.
Thus the length of the 8th bhava is 29-59-33 or 29.9925 degrees,
which is ‘SL* for our purpose. The basic contribution of

Chapter 43
Saturn is 12.3979 years. He is 17.3572 degreer ahead of the
8th bhava beginning. Therefore, his reduction is
Thus, on account of Vyayadi Harana, Saturn entails a
check of 2 2869 years. In the example horoscope. Mercury is
not liable to this reduction as he is quite prior to the beginning
of the 7th bhava. Others that attract this check are : The Sun,
the Moon, Venus, Mars and Jupiter. The figures for these
planets based on the present formula are :
Venus
The Sun
The Moon
Saturn
Wars
Jupiter
(7th bhava)
(7 th bhava)
v 7th bhava)
(8th bhava)
(9 th bhava)
(10th bhava)
1.4533 years
2.7939 years
1.8636 years
2.2869 years
1.9472 years
1.9314 years
4. Kroorodaya Harana : Only malefics (i.e. Saturn, the
Sun and Mars) entail this check if in the ascendant.
Mercury, though joining a natural malefic will not be liable to
this reduction. We do not require this reduction to any planet
in the example horoscope, as there is none in the ascendant.
Here the ascendant means the area between the starting and
ending points of the sign rising. To find out this reduction,
the ascendental cusp in degrees, minutes and seconds be
multiplied by the number of basic years donated by the malefic
concerned and divided by 21600. The divider is 21600 as these
are the total minutes of arc in the zodiac. The figure so arrived
should be reduced from the said malefic’s basic contribution.
However, if a benefic aspects the said malefic, reduce only half
of the figure so suggested.
5. We have thus seen four types of reductions. At every
stage the reduction should not be done instantaneously. After
obtaining the reduction figures, wherever permitted, check up
if there is more than one reduction for one and the same planet
under various headings. The following may be remembered in
this connection.
(a) If a planet attracts more man one reduction, the
highest reduction is only to be done ignoring the others. For

424 Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
example, assume Mercury attracts a reduction of 7.5 years due
to rule 1, followed by 2.3 years due to rule 2 and 4.35 years
due to rule 3. The highest reduction is due to rule 1 and
hence only 7.5 is to be deducted and the other two figures be
ignored in toto.
(b) In case of Vyayadi Harana (rule 3), two or three
planets may be in one bhava. In that case, the strongest loses
and the other (or others) will not lose.
Not only the planets, but the ascendant also grants a
certain number of years. This figure should also be found out
before adding to the planetary contributions. To know the
the number of years granted by the ascendant, firstly note the
number of signs intervening between Aries and the sign before
the ascendant. That is, if Sagittarius is the ascendant, count
upto Scorpio beginning from Aries. This denotes 8 years.
The degrees in the ascendant be also proportionately converted
into years treating 30 degrees as one year, or 2.5 degrees as a
month. The contribution of ascendant will be so calculated if
the ascendant lord is stronger than the Navamsa Lagna lord.
In case the Navamsa Lagna lord is stronger than his
counterpart, a different computation is to be resorted to, thus.
Count from Aries till you reach a sign before Navamsa Lagna.
In the case under study, the Navamsa Lagna lord. Moon, is
stronger than the ascendant lord. Hence we compute Navamsa
Lagna’s contribution for our own use. The Navamsa Lagna is
Cancer. Hence from Aries to Cancer we have three completed
Navamsas which give 3 year. The ascending degree is 0-48-34
whereas one Navamsa is 3° 20*. Proportionately thus we get
another 0.2428 years and have the total contribution of 3.2428
years as Ascendant’s contribution. In case of Navamsa treat
3° 20' as one full year. - The ascendant’s contribution undergoes no check.
Now wc are ready for final reductions. There are
3 planets in the 7th house, viz. the Sun, the Moon and Venus.
The Sun is the strongest and henee Vyayadi Harna (rule 3)
applies to only the Sun while Venus and the Moon are rid of
reduction on this score. The Sun is in enemy’s camp and on
this score he loses a third of 17 5642, which reduction is equal
to 5.8547. This figure is higher than the one obtained for the

Chapter 43
Sun as per rule 3 (i.e. Vyayadi Harana). Hence his final
contribution turns to be 11.7095 years (i e. basic years minus
Satru kshetra Harana). In the matter of Vyayadi Harana
(rule 3) there is no other bhava where there is more than one
planet.
Though the Moon has not lost on account of rule 3
(Vyayadi Harana), she is liable to reduction on account of her
combustion (rule 1). Thus when her basic contribution (24 627)
is halved, she is left with a net donation of 12 3124 years.
Except the Sun, no other planet is in enemy’s sign. So,
Satru Kshetra Harana (rule 2) does not apply to others. Now
the final contributions may be noted as below :
Planet
Basic yrs.
Reduction Reason
Net yrs.
Sun
l/3rd Rule 2
Moon
1/2 Rule 1
Mars
9th bhava Rule 3
Mercury
Nil
Jupiter
10th bhava Rule 3
Venus
7th bhava exempted
Saturn
8th bhava Rule 3
Lagna
Total :
These years are in Savanamana (360 days a year) as we
have used 360° of the zodiac. To apply this to Gregorian
calendar, we have to convert the same into Sauramana. By
simply multiplying the said figure by. 0.9856034, we can get
Sauramana. Thus in the case of our example, we arrive at a
net longevity in Sauramana as 8 1 .06 years.
The dasa period so obtained are Pinda Dasa of the
7 planets and the Lagna. II the Sun is strongest in the horoscope,
effects can be worked out on Pinda Dasa method.

Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
str ft* ! fawn?*: \
t*R>5RRRtm CTr€|: fifcT: RRT?T*R fjl I
^TfRRrERTR R>RT3T 5TRT R$Tn ; RRTT fRTTRSIT: II ^ V9) 1
16-17 NISARGA YU : O Brahmin, now I tell you about
Nisargayu 1> 2, 9, 20, 18, 20 and 50 are the years allotted to the
Moon, Mars, Mercury, Venus, Jupiter the Sun and Saturn from
the period of birth.
Notes : Except giving the number of years applicable to
Naisargayu, there is no other mention about rectification etc. in
our version as well as in that of Chaukambha Sanskrit Sansthana.
However, we have some more instructions in the version given
by Thakur Prasad Pustak Bhandar. The relevant portion is as
under :
tr<r fan fanifPr ii
This conveys to us that the years dehoted for the planets
are when they are in deep exaltation. These are halved at-deep
debilitation. Then the rectifications are the same as applicable
to Pindayu. So to say, the four kinds of reductions suggested
for Pindayu be performed for Nisargayu as well. Ascendant
also contributes in Nisargayu. The method of its contribution
in Nisargayu is also the same as seen in Pindayu scheme.
3T*Tis?TTJT tftRRTRt t&JRT RrRm*R$tT I
'Rife t?TT WT: HRj?RT tT^*T f T«rTf4'?i*{ \
^RTSRTjTfqei 5flR«RTO?TTJjR: U? 6.11
18-19. AMSAYU : Now about Amsayu contributions by
the ascendant and planets. The years correspond to the number
of Navamsas counted from Aries. Multiply the longitude in
question by 108. If the product exceeds 12, expunge multiples
of 12 and consider the final product in Rasi, degrees etc. as
years, months etc.

Chapter 43
Notes : The 7 planets and the ascendant contribute to
longevity as per Amsayurdhaya method based on the Navamsas
covered. 3® 20' longitude equals one year. Thus the basic
contributions can be worked out as per the example given for the
Lagna’s longitude in thePindayu scheme. Similar understanding
can be extended to planetary longitudes. The basic contributions
thus found out be rectified in the same manner as explained for
Pindajayu. The sage puts forth a different suggestion as
enunciated by another school of thought in regard to rectification of Amsayu, in the following slokas :
3T^TSTTt IRoll
fgTTof [\R\n
sntf t
sjfaw n^n
20-22. Tlie same* reductions as per Pindayu apply to
Arnsaju a& well; i e. half for a combust planet, one third for
in ; mical placement and the ones due for placements in the half
of the zodiac counted from the 1 2th backwards. Some scholars
suggest further corrections for Amsayu, viz. to increase threefold the contribution of a planet in exaltation or in own house
and double the contribution if the contributor is in his own
Navamsa Or in own decanate. If doubling and trebling is
warranted, only trebling be done. In case of reductions also,
only halving is to be done if both halving and reducing a third
are required. That is how the final life span of men be
understood .
Notes : Rectification of Amsayu be done, taking the basic
contributions as detailed below.
(a) Treble the basic years if the planet is exalted or in own
sign.
(b) Double if in own Navamsa or own decanate.
(e) Among ‘a’ and ‘b\ if both are needed only ‘a* is to be
effected.

Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
(d) No clear instructions are found about halving the
contribution or casting off a third Halving, however, obviously
applies to a debilitated planet while loss of a third part applies
to a planet in inimical sign. In the matter of deduction also,
only halving is to be effected if both reductions are required
for one and the same planet.
tmf TOIRT *RRT Rjj *T%<T II ^ }|| /
23. LONGEVITY FOR OTHER LIVING BEINGS : For
other living beings as well such computations be made. The said
figure be multiplied by the figure corresponding to its full span of
life and divided by the figure corresponding to Tull span of life
for human beings
3Tsntr: 'R* HRRifoTgtrsR* i
3rrwr Nrhi^Wt ^ fjTsftfPT i u^yii
9^-3Rr-'<Tc<RTR03 , CRT $R^tR
c TBT?T§rK7R TTSRRT 5Rf)f?R14 \
JTtmri <t«iti«^ii
grF^srr^ i
fa?TRRtRTP>JT ^ q't^I I
^ fa'FRT §-RWT«*!R: n^cll
’TTTRcTRT B , $4J£RT ?RTW4>*T I
f?RT3<r?3TRT 'BT TTR: ?TfRf?nT: |)
24-29. FULL LIFE SPAN OF VARIOUS LIVING
BEINGS : J now tell you the full lire span figures for various
hvmg beings. Gods and sages enjoy endless lire span (i.e. in
astronomica! proportions as against ordinary mortals). The
lull life span of eagles, owls, parrots, crows and snakes is one
thousand years. Falcon, monkey, bear, and frog-tne full span
ofhfem these cases is 300 years. Demon’s life span in full is
150 years while it is 120 years for human beings. 32 years for

Chapter 43
horses, 25 years for donkeys and camels, 24 years for oxen and
buffaloes, 20 years for peacocks, 16 years for goats and rams.
14 years for swans, 12 years for cuckoo, dog and dove, 8 years
for hens etc, and 7 years for birds etc.— these are full life spans
for various living beings.
H&TSfHT sffcei ! 1
« C N
Tth frotari *T§r* wfoii ?nn u*?u
30-31. CHOICE OF LONGEVITY : I have narrated
3 different methods of longevity. Listen to me about the choice
among the three systems. According to the ascendant, the Sun
or the Moon being stronger than the other two, Amsayu,
Pindayu or Nisargayu be respectively chosen.
snmri iM. ffritawl n^»
32. DOUBTFUL CASES : If 2 among the ascendants the
Sun and the Moon gain equal strength, then longevity be worked
out as per both systems and the average of both (final) be considered. If all the 3 are equally strong, the average of the 3 be
considered.
Notes : In slokas 30 and 31 above, we are asked to select
one among the 3 systems, viz Pindayu, Naisargayu and Amsayu
according to the Sun, the Moon and ascendant being the
strongest. If two among the three have equal Shadbala, then
the average of the respective systems will be the final longevity.
If the three are of equal strength, the average of three systems be
taken to be actual life duration of the native.
Take for example where the Sun and the Moon are equally
strong and assume that Pindayu indicates a life span of 52.5 years
while Nisargayu gives 40.7 years. The average of these two,
i.e. 46.35 years will be the actual longevity.
Similarly assume that the luminaries and the ascendant are
equally strong, and contribute 62.9 years Pindayu, 25.5 years

Drihat Parasara Hora Sastra
Nisargayu and 12.8 years of Amsayu. The average of these three,
i,e, 33.73 years will be the actual longevity of the native,
q$qTfq 'T’T ! I
q^§*qf ?rqq
?fTvrat^at^ppirt ST^rcTtTiT 1
JTrI vpTTIwthllwji tftqifqr fafqqpta HVStl
%qtq q?*rP2T?qf IThf q^ %3T>TTq 1 »
rrq^tTlfqvPqi^lf <Jcftq qftfq^rT n^V.M
folcft ft =trT rRt ?*HgqTfrT*T ►
fr^Tsqfr g 73 ^hTqrq^Tqifq fg 113411
ffqtsf£R^cT tUT q^qg^T^q I
qT5 ; ? fFqrftfqq ! qtqqTq^^TTfq q U^U •
rr^^Rsqft rs j> qr fwqrft enrt \
3TTcT^q cRTS?qpj?fqqq fesftrTq ! 113*11
*>qqq"T qfqrfqf f?T5 qi^q ^ 1
tftti^rfqqqi^ iq^TTfq^er: ii^ii
qT qT^r’ q^|?TRTqT \
tjferq mzm fqfirsn qqqr q£; u*e n
33-40. OTHER CLUES TO LONGEVITY : O excellent
of the Brahmins, I give you details of other methods in the
matter of longevity as under : This is based on the positions of
the ascendant lord, 8th lord, Saturn, the Moon, natal ascendant
and Hora ascendant (Hora Lagna). These six are grouped into
three groups thus : the lords of the ascendant and of the 8th
on the one hand, Saturn and the Moon on the other hand, and
the natal ascendant and Hora ascendant on yet the other hand.
Out of a group, if the two are in movable sign/signs long life is
denoted. One in fixed sign and the other in a dual sign will
also bestow long life. One in movable aign and the other in
fixed sign will give medium life. If both are in dual sign then
again medium life will be obtained. Short life is denoted if one
is in a movable sign as the other is in a common sign, or if both
are in fixed signs. The type of life denoted by three or two

Chapter 43
groups be only considered. If (he three groups denote different
scales, then the one indicated by the pair of natal ascendant
'and Hora aseendant be only considered. In case of three
different indications if the Moon fs in the ascendant or the 7th,
then the one indicated by Saturn-Moon pair will only come to
pass.
Notes : Three groups are considered here for this system
of longevity calculations. Following are the three groups, each
group consisting two of the six.
1st group — natal ascendant lord and 8th lord from the
ascendant.
2nd group — Saturn and the Moon.
3rd group — natal ascendant and Hora Langa. (For Hora
Lagna, see p. 63).
Thus two planets in one group, two planets in another
group and two ascendants in yet another group are selected.
Now their positions will denote the basic longevity. Note the
position of each of the constituent in each group thus :
1. Long life : If both the constituents are in movable signs
(jointly or separately), long life will come to pass. One in fixed
sign and another in a dual sign will also give same scale of
longevity.
2. Medium life : One in movable sign and another fixed
sign will give medium life. Both in dual signs will also give same
effects.
3. Short life : One in movable sign and another in dual
sign will indicate short . life. Both of them in fixed signs will
produce again short life.
Thus, all the six possible positions of a pair are covered.
Which group is to be considered for arriving at life span and
in what circumstances be understood thus.
4. Out of the three groups, the scale of span (viz. long,
medium and short) indicated by two or three be considered.
Suppose two groups indicate medium life while another
short life, then take medium span as. the basic one. Alternatively
if three indicate identical scales, i e. long, short or medium,
consider that as the case may be. It is also possible that one
group denotes long life, another medium life and yet another
short life. In that case follow point 5 given below.

Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
5. If 3 groups denote variable spans, the group of natal
ascendant and Hora ascendant will have a say on the indication.
Whatever this pair denotes will be the basic span in case of
three different indications.
6. Rule 5 has also an exception, thus. That is, in the case
of three different indications (i.e. one long life, another medium
life and yet another short life), see the position of the Moon in
the natal horoscope. If she is in the ascendant or in the 7th,
then the indication given by the pair of Hora-natal ascendants
be ignored and the indication of Saturn-Moon be alone
considered. If the Moon is neither in the ascendant nor in the
7th, then follow the indication of Hora-natal ascendants as given
in rule 2 above.
q**T*TT TfffaWTi I)*?!!
ffW . HYRII
HiSRTO: 5THTH^cT IIVVII
41-44. FURTHER CLARIFICATIONS : If long life is
denoted by all the said three groups, the span is 120 years, if
by two groups it is 108 years and if only by one group it is 96
years. If medium life is arrived at. by three groups, it is 80 years,
by 2 groups 72 years and by one group 64 years. If short life
is denoted by the said three groups it is only 32 years, if by two
groups 36 years and by one group 40 years. These are rectified
as under.
Notes : Again, the sage fixes the quantum of years for long,
short, and medium life spans, thus.
Long life : by 3 pairs — 120 years (harmonic reduction of
12 years)
2 pairs — 180 years
1 pair — 96 years

Chapter 43
Medium life : by 3 pairs — 80 years (harmonic reduction of
8 years)
• 2 pairs — 72 years
1 pair — 64 years
Short life : by 3 pairs — 32 years (progressive increase of
4 years)
2 pairs — 36 years
1 pair — 40 years
The indication has to be selected as per rules 4 to 6 given
in the notes for slokas 33-40.
We will now work out the basic contribution of longevity
for the same example as given for Pindayu calculations. The
chart may be understood from Pindayu example, while Hora
Lagna is Taurus 20° 32' 12".
The first group — ascendant lord is in a movable sign and
the 8th lord is also in a movable sign. Hence long life.
The second group — Saturn and the Moon are respectively
in dual sign and movable sign. Hence short life.
The third group — Hora Lagna and the natal ascendant are
both in fixed signs. Again short life.
Two groups indicate short life. Hence we are left with no
dilemma but to select the indications given by the two groups,
i.e. short life. Two pairs indicate short life, hence 36 years will
be the basic longevity.
This basic longevity will have to be rectified further as per
the instructions given in the following verses.
TTCtTjfcti llTfinHi»S3«TT?T(T: I
HTOqqffefofft StTOTW IlY^U
45-46. RECTIFICATIONS : If the contributor is in the
beginning of a sign, his dotation will be full and it will be nil
if he is at the end. For intermediary placements, rule of three
process will apply. Add the longitudes of the contributors
(devoid of signs) and the sum so arrived at be divided by the
number of contributors. The latest product be multiplied by the

434 Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
number of basic years and divided by 30. This will yield the
net longevity.
Notes : If the contributor is in the zero degree of the sign,
his share will be full and if be is at the end, it will be zero. In
between, his .contribution j s proportionately known. The
longitudes of the contributors, according to beiiig 2 or 4 or 6 as
the case may be should be added together, devoid of signs.
The resultant product be divided by 2 or 4 or 6 depending on
the contributors. This figure should be multiplied by basic
years and divided by 30 which will be net span of life. Basic
years will also depend on whether one, two or three spans are
being considered. When we are considering short life by 3
pairs, such figure will be 96 (i.e. 32 X 3) or when medium life by
2 pairs are being considered it will be 144, (i.e. 72x2) and so
on and so forth.
In -the example horoscope, we have short life contributed
by 2 pairs and hence basic years for the time being be taken as
72 (i.e. 36 plus 36). The contributors are Moon, Saturn, Mars
and Mercury. Their longitudes devoid of signs added denote
51° 58' 26”. This is to be divided by 4, as there are 4 contributors Thus we get 12° 59’ 37”. This is to be multiplied by
72 (basic years) and divided by 30. The net longevity in this
process is 31.18 years.
Though Pindayu applies to the said horoscope, we have
simply taken the same as an example in regard to the application
of the current system.
si uvvsu
47. SPECIAL RULE FOR SATURN : Should Saturn
be a contributor, the class of longevity declines. Some advocate,
contrarily, an increase of class in this context. If Saturn is in
own sign or in exaltation, change in class will not occur. Even
if he is aspected by or conjunct only a malefic, no change
occurs. ■ . "

Chapter 43
q»fa<npjr*w> rsrsr l vwrefis: srsmHl iiycsii
48. SPECIAL RULE FOR JUPITER : If Jupiter is in
the ascendant or in the 7th house, and be aspccted by or
conjunct only benefics, the class of longevity will increase.
qH tfqfgnhGftsftrci? HY5.ll
t^rctn; #qOc^57 tot tu°u
49-50. INCREASE AND FALL IN CLASS OF
LONGEVITY : From very short life to short life, from short
life to medium life, from medium life to long life and from long
life to extremely long life are the increases in the classification
of longevity when Jupiter warrants an increase. The reverse is
true if Saturn warrants a fall in the span of life.
anqqt agur tfan *rqmsa?n «
qrfatn *TT HSLf II
51. (Maitreya says) : You have narrated various kinds of
longevity computations. Please favour me by denoting subtle
classes there of and poor and long life spans.
gtnifbwi ****** *N**» i
fs«j #qT$fa?i nx^ti
52. (Parasara replies) : These are seven-fold, viz.
Balarishta, yogarishta, short, medium, long, super-natural (Divya)
and illimitable.
UMiPire 5 t*tt tfttnfw ■at ¥%^rfw: i
q^TTT 315^ ggcqftarg IIX^II
fwifa*rc?T i
USOfll
53-54. The life span in Balarishta is 8 years, in Yogarishta
20 years; in short, medium and long lives 32, 64 and 120 years

Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
in order are the spans. Super natural life span is for 1 000 years.
Above this supernatural life span of 1000 years it is Amifayu or
illimitable longevity which can be acquired only by Merits.
an* «rpnfr*u: wrr 3ifa?Tro5a5T unnu
55. LIMITLESS LONGEVITY : Should Cancer ascend
with Jupiter and the Moon there in while Venus and Mercury
are in angles and others are in 3rd, 6th and 11th, the native will
obtain limitless longevity.
fcsifaisVifsn': 'nmtsqiSTfrnn frail
jnrenit nn^u
56. SUPER-NATURAL LONGEVITY: One having benefics
in angles/trines as malefics are in 3rd, 6th and 1 1th will obtain
super-natural life span (one thousand years). The 8th house
in this case should be one of benefic-owned signs.
^ «irTT3f?rfaiSi t
fSTCfW f?5I 1 ll^ll
57. LIVING TILL THE END OF YUGA : One born in
Cancer ascendant will live till the end of the yuga if Jupiter is
in an angle and be in Gopuramsa while Venus is in a trine and
be in Paaravatamsa.
gtV iixdi
58. LIVING THE LIFE SPAN OF A SAGE : Jupiter in
Simhasanamsa being in the ascendant, Saturn in Devalokamsa
and Mars in Paaravatamsa— if these are so, one will enjoy the
life span as due to a sage.
^n*j: ?f*n i
345ft q>TT?ni ^ until
59. Good yogas increase the life span and bad yogas
decrease the same (as arrived by mathematical means). Hence

Chapter 43 437
I tell you such yogas as to know of full, medium and short span
combinations.
* 7r?nferdf i
^^JTT arrsftf yFIJTWfcT?!
60. If an angle contains a benefic while the ascendant lord
is conjunct or in aspect to a benefic or Jupiter in particular, the
native will live a foil span of life,
eTfVUt ^rsftf ytftTT^ f^vld 11$ $11
61. Should the ascendant lord be in an angle in conjunction with or in aspect to Jupiter and Venus, full life span
will result.
'Tl'Tgft * g^Tl^fiirftfktfcT II^U
62. If at birth 3 planets are exalted, out of which the lords
of ascendant and 8th are inclusive, as the 8th is devoid of a
malefic tn it, full life span will result,
*it<ni$3ii
63. Long life is denoted if 3 planets are in the 8lh, in
exaltation, own/friendly divisions while the ascendant lord is
strong.
%*ufi wfaRT: i
aspsa^sfr: u$xit
64. If Saturn or the ascendant lord is conjunct with any
exalted planet, long life will result.
fafrmn#: %r«fsnFt«nT: i
65. Long life will be enjoyed if malefics are in 3rd, 6lb
and 1 Ith while benefics are in angles.

Brihat Parasara Hora Sastrn
farfttj * «n^
66. If the 6th, 7lh and 8th are occupied by benefics while
malefics are in 3rd and 11th, full life span will follow the birth.
Mini 1
tfifi?* * T?rin: ^w g wra i ft f$
67. If the 8th lord is friendly to the Sun while malefics are
in the 6th and 12th as the ascendant lord is in an angle, the
native will live the full span of life.
3TT*J: gq wfcW T: «mT: n*T I
tihfmij f*K*i i u^n
68. O excellent of the Brahmins, if a malefic is in the 8th
while the 10 lord is exalted, one will be long-lived.
wHrrrfaf^
69. Long life will follow if a dual sign ascend at birth while
its lord i 9 in an angle oe in exaltation or in a trine,
raw *i w i$ wvwgrnfj i
l> qrtf if* frmV *W*ngw*T uv»oii
70. Should a common sign ascend while two malefics are
in an angle with reference to strong ascendant lord, long life is
indicated.
IT. STS# I
tr$
*ftefarg: im* n^u
fsrWmsfw*^ ?rfar%ai u^n
71-73. The stronger among the ascendant lord and the
8th lord if in an angle will confer long life and if in Panaphara

Chapter 43
(2nd, 5th, 8th or 11th) medium life. If the said planet be in
Apoklima (3rd, 6th, 9th or 1 2th) short life will come to pass.
According to the ascendant lord being friendly, neutral or
inimical to the Sun, long, medium or short life will result.
areal*! weimg: snropcHwni
74. Should Mars and the 3rd lord, or the 8th lord and
Saturn be combust or (two of either pair) be conjunct malefics
or aspected by malefics, there will be short life.
sera viAvl I
•iraptTT'Tetit *T lt\9HU
75. If the ascendant lord is in the 6th, 8th or 12th in the
company of malefics and be devoid of conjunction/aspect of a
benefic, short life will come to pass.
'TT^ I
76. If malefics are in angles devoid of conjunction or
aspect of bencfics while the ascendant lord is not strong, only
short life wiil result.
77. O excellent of Brahmins, if the 12th and 2nd are
occupied by malefics and be devoid of benefic aspect or
company, the native will be short-lived.
faspftirs* iivsqii ,
78. If the lords of the ascendant and the 8th are bereft of
dignities and strength, short life will come to pass If they
are helped by others while being so, medium life will come
to pass.

aw mwfarwira: ttwn
Chapter 44
Maraka (Killer) Planets
«J«rt qTTV$*n* ||?U
]. O sage, you have mentioned a lot about longevity. Be
kind enough to throw light on Marakas or killers.
qritagg* T *q rTmq:f«yH' ss fj* ! i
anrv «i(aimwiH fefW a«n ti^ti
2-5. O Brahmin, the 3rd and 8th are the two houses of
longevity. The houses related to death are the 12th from each
of these, i.e. the 2nd and 7th are Maraka houses.
Notes : The 3rd house is also a house of longevity as it is
the 8th from the 8th. The 2nd house — 12ih from the 3rd— and
the 7th house — 12th from the 8th — are two principle Maraka
houses. The lords of these houses will also acquire such
qualities giving life or taking away life.
?T* *Tm: «Ttfq^!T b‘^TT: II VI
* $ar: qrf*R*$ * *w qrcrcrewT: i
fttH ^Taj iivii
smwfas tflWT I
famr jtw mxv qftfqRpfc; ny.ii
3. Out of the two (i.e 2nd and 7th) the 2nd is a powerful
Maraka house (as against the 7th) The lords of the 2nd and the
7th, malefics in the 2nd and the 7th and malefics accompanying
the 2nd and the 7th lords are all known as Marakas. The major
and sub periods of these planets will bring death on the native
depending on whether he has a long life, medium life or short life.

Chapter 44 441
Notes : The 2nd and 7th are denoted as Maraka houses.
But the 2nd is given a more important place to kill than the 7th
house. For the 2nd house acquires an additional qualification of
being in the 7th from the 8th house. Thus, the 2nd is 12th from
the 3rd, and 7th from the 8tb.
If there is a malefic in the 2nd or in the 7th, he will be a
prime killer while a benefic will not be so. The Dasa periods of
such planets will inflict death.
^ u\u
* 'TPTRt *?TTg faSR wfafT 1
9&fori tirwRUTOft nun
6-7. The Dasa of a benefic planet related to the 12th lord
may also inflict death. End may descend on the native in the 8th
lord’s Dasa. The Dasa of a planet which is an exclusive malefic
(i.e. first-rate malefic) may also cause death.
Notes : The 12th house is also a house of death, for it is
the terminal house. Malefics related to 2nd, 3rd, 7th and 8th
will cause death while or not a benefic related to 12th will do so.
The Dasa of a malefic, whether or not he is a lord of one of these
houses, will also prove harmful for span of life. However, for
Saturn, a different approach is recommended.
The rules given are just general and are hints to decide
death givers. The life span should be ascertained through other
Ayurdaya calculations, and the exact dasa periods be decided
only later on. Simply saying that the 2nd lord’s dasa will bring
in death and so on and so forth will be a misnomer. The sage
suggests that the occupants of the 3rd*also will cause death.. Thus
the 8th and the 3rd, though known as houses of longevity, are
simultaneously capable of causing death. For the information
of the reader, the Maraka planets in the ascending are : occupants of or lords of 12th, 3rd, 8th, 7th and 2nd. The lords/
occupants of 6th and 1 1th are second grade killers. The last
group consists of occupants/lords of 5th, 9th, 10th, 4th and 1st.
They are the least marakas. However, these can also become
Marakas depending on the clues given in slokas 15-21 infra.

Brihat Parasara tJora SastrO
A difficult subject like longevity cannot be fully explained
in a chapter like this. The reader may take basic guidelines
from the present work and other standard works before forming
an opinion on longevity.
SRttfq TOR I
*mq>: ucu
8. The dasa of a malefic will not cause death in the Antardasa (sub period) of a benefic planet, although the former, is
related to the latter, but in the sub period-.pf a malefic planet
though not related.
Hqfa * Hfw: ucu
9. Shold Saturn be ill-disposed and be related to a maraka
plt^net, he will be the first to kill in preference to other planets,
a^Ts^f^i *$qTfa fesr ! i
fqfqaiT^rqqt qtfiT: ^?qiqqe.tRtTTRT: II? oil
^flR.qUJRt-ITqR^: 'TTH \
*gcqG^TT: gT?tTTH | ctaf ^qg*^* II? ? II
!3WRTg: VTrTTjeq HTHsq ! 1
q fRUH 11?^ II
fwa fqaqti*q n^u
fqrf^tftqr^q fafatlT qTrPfeqq: l
5RT: qr quiTqrqtf'qq^ feiUrni ! H?VH
10-14. O Brahmin, I tell you further about Marakas.
Narrated earlier are three kinds of life spans, viz. short, medium
and long. Short life is before 31 years, later on upto 64 it is
med um life and from 64 to 100 it is long life. Beyond 100 the
longevity is called supreme. O excellent of the Brahmins, it is
impossible to decide upon longevity till the native is 20 year old.
Till such year the child should be protected by sacred recitations,
religious offerings (of ghee etc. to consecrated fire as prescribed

Chapter 44
by Vedas etc.) and medical treatments, for premature death may
descend on the child due to sins of father or mother or of its
own (in the previous birth).
«pit nufwsw? i
^ n?v.u
sTHirt i i
*«TR 3 qf<W#<T II? VI
em ^rifaiPTfuq: \
3rraPtfT> ■ar farerift f^r ! i
mrqft qmrjV a) ii^u
tsrc3Tfaq^uqf ^ ’fnt ffrcRH^q: i ;
n?en
*7irqrT qter sfa i
tT?T^?TT?rTT fa* I Ttn^C3“rf%H^T^: ll^oll
S^rTT ^ anw^tj HTSvft g^REP: I
crew tm i y i R gr *1% *t qjtsmfasfcr ir?ii
15-21. I further mention about the Maraka planets.
One bom with short life combinations may face death in the
Dasa denoted by Vipat star (3rd from birth star); one of medium
life may die in the dasa denoted by Pratyak star (5th from birth
star). In the dasa denoted by Vadha star (7th from birth star),
one with long life may obtain his end. The dasa of the lord of
22nd decanate or the one of 23rd, 3rd, 5th or 7th asterisms may
also cause death. The lords of the 2nd and 1 2th counted from
the Moon sign may bring death, this is true when the said ruler
is a malefic and if he be a benefic there will be (only) diseases
(but not death). Death may come to pass in the dasa of the 6th
lord and in the sub periods of 6th/8th/12th lords. Should there
be many Marakas (endowed with the power of killing) and be
strong, there will be diseases, miseries etc. in the respective
major and sub periods. Thus these are Marakas (as above) and
are primarily related to descend death upon the native. According to their dispositions there may be death or difficulties.

Brihat Parasara ffora Sastra
Notes : The Maraka power of a planet may be correlated
to the span of life arrived by other calculations. If both
coincide there will be death. If there is a variation, there will
not be death but difficulties equal to death like miseries, diseases,
poverty etc.
qisfa tfq<r: n^n
q q fq^q: RR?nqR?iRqfa i
qfiR% 5If»T *TgRRq qfaqq: ll^tl
^csisc?fTE<ntr> q%w \
q 5RT WfFqq: tl^vil
22-24. RAHU AND KETU AS MARAKAS : If Rahu or
Ketu be in the ascendant, 7th, 8th or 12th thereof, or be in the
7th from a Maraka lord or be with such a planet, they acquire
powers of killing in their major or sub periods. For one born
in Capricorn or in Scorpio, Rahu will be a Maraka. Should
Rahu be in the 6th, 8th or 12th, he will give difficulties in his
dasa periods. He will not, however, do so if aspected by or
conjunct a benefic.
Notes : Important places for Rahu/Kctu to acquire power
of killing are the aseendant, 7th. 8th or 12th. The 2nd house is
naturally added as another node will be in the 2nd when one is
in the specified 8th house. They will not be Marakas if they
are in the 3rd, 9th, 5th and Jlth houses. If a node joins a Maraka
planet tor is in the house of a Maraka planet) it will act as a
Maraka. Rahu is termed as a primary maraka for Capricorn
and Scorpio ascendants. If he is in one of the adverse houses
for these ascendants his dasa will bring death or intolerable
difficulties.
g qfaqr Tfw q^ \
qT q$RHIT qfa: 1
q^^qTf«T-3T*[isr*rr»T u^u

Chapter 44
cTcift ¥TpT-TTi»qf ?^sfq ST f§«r ! \
e Woe
ftrufaert tjfasfcqi stotst s%ste?n?T irvsii
Strfp^KT SScTST^ 5 PU 5 TT? ST »jfcTS%?T I
q?ffa crowfovzri ^ 9T slfaj^ fa^T H^ssll
tfa f sa TfssT ars rt^s <r^fa i
a?ffa vqtfnft slfa^ sift ita * ircii
5ST*l rRuf 3^7 fifflS ! I
orffa gs®TT ijs^ 113 ©11
q?fcr ^fir: i
?rf%R^T s§tf*msT qffc-mtu
25-31. THIRD HOUSE AND DEATH : O excellent of
Brahmins, if the Sun, being with strength, is in the 3rd house
from the ascendant, one will obtain his death due to a king (or
legal punishments). The Moon in the 3rd will cause death due
to tuberculosis while wounds, weapons, fire and thirst will cause
death through Mars in the 3rd. If the 3rd be aspected or
occupied by Saturn and Rahu, death will be through poison,
water or fire, or fall from heights or confinement. Dearth will
surely come to descend through insects or leprosy if the Moon
and Gulika occupy or aspect the 3rd house. Mercury aspecting
or occupying the 3rd will bring death followed by fever. Jupiter
in the 3rd or aspecting the 3rd witl cause death by swelling or
tumours. Urinary diseases will cause death if Venus is in the 3rd
or aspects the 3rd. Many planets aspecting or occupying will
bring death through many diseases.
Notes : The sage brings in the 3rd house in the context of
death. According to the planets related to 3rd house by conjunction or aspect, death will descend on the native through the
following causes.
The Sun — lfcgal punishments, death-awards etc. (also
cardiac problem)
The Moon — tuberculosis (lung disorders etc.)
Mars — ■ Wounds (accidents etc.), weapons (encounter), fire (also electricity) and thirst.
Saturn/Rahu — poison, water, fire, confinement, foils etc.

Brihat Parasara flora Sastra
Moon and Gulika
Mercury
Jupiter
Venus
Mixed planets
— insects (scorpion, bees, snakes etc.) or
leprosy.
— severe fever (typhoid etc.)
— swelling, tumour, etc. (also jaundice,
dropsy etc.)
— urinary disorders (kidney troubles, venereal
diseases etc.) (for females leucorrhea).
— various reasons
KrTtq H 1
32, If the 3rd house is occupied by a benefic, death will
be in an auspicious place (like a shrine) and if by a malefic in
sinful places. Mixed occupation will yield mixed results in this
regard.
srr^r * i
qfasfqT ! U^U •
33. Consciousness will prevail at,, the time of death if
Jupiter or Venus be in the 3rd. With others therein, there will
be unconsciousness before death.
faretrift ^ qfq ! ii^ vii
34. According to the 3rd house being a movable, fixed or
dual sign, death will be in a foreign place (other than native
place), in one’s own house or on the way.
fMqxi 'pfqq qu: 1
gqs^sffcTfl) Jjwr-S ^ U^XII
vnt- qr ^ sjrtst 5* * T>qra wtn qqV i
fqqraqr W\\ q<qfq^q> HmUtR ! ii^u
35-36 : OCCUPANTS OF THE 8TH HOUSE : Note the
occupant of the 8th house from the ascendant. If it is the Sun,
death will be through fire, the Moon water, Mars weapons,
Mercury fever, Jupiter diseases, Venus hunger and Saturn thirst.

Chapter 44
arestt snfo ■q >
?ftq *|fa*eiqT 5HT 'nq^^f^PIT qfa: ll^\9ll
37. Shou d the 8ih house be occupied or aspcctcd by a
benefic while the 9th lord is conjunct a benefic the native will
die in a shrine. If malefics take the role of benefics as above,
death will be in a place other than a shrine.
*TcJJ*T r *nfca: i
qfbiIT*T: Siq*qT$q W^W
TO re’FTTeTTSTC q: li^ll
38-39. FATE OF THE CORPSE : Should there be a
bcnefic’s decanatc in the 8th (i.e. the 22nd decanate being so),
the corpse will be burnt in fire (as prescribed in Sastras); if a
malefic's decanate be there, the body will be thrown away in
water. If the decanate in question is owned by a mixed planet
the dead body will only dry up. If it be a serpent decanate, the
body will be eaten away by animals, crows etc.
wr# - qwjqtsqircq *f*^pra%?ftaq5y i
qftsffqqftsrRTtrsq cqrqsmf: st^ftrai: HVoii
• 40. SERPENT DECANATES : The 2nd and 3rd Jecanates in Cancer, the initial one in Scorpio and the last one in
Pisces are designated as serpent decanates.
tro>*ra Ararat faqqt f^rnr ! w\\\
qvgt: fqtjqfaTxT k
qfjrs^qfq^iN ^HfiTviR q&T gsft: WRW
41-42. PRE-NATAL ABODE : O excellent of Brahmins
the stronger of the luminaries occupying a decanate of Jupiter
denotes descent from the world of gods. If the said decanate be
of Venus or the Moon the descent is from the world of the
Manes, if be of the Sun or Mars it is from the world of the dead
(of Yama) and if be of Mercury or Saturn it is from the bell.

Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
OTnfrft qqra*m \
t^lpira^WnT Hq^ilKTTftTfPRT: UY^ll
W CT5T TTOTfoq*HT«ni>: l
?r f!T3f rffal l IIYYI1
tmr w>5^if?-?rf^cm^qtmssiTT: 'wh i
fRTF^t^Sfa tii-'nifll ! HYX.U
43-45. ASCENT AFTER DEATH : According to the
following planets in the 12th, 7th, 6th or the 8th, the native will
attain such worlds after death: Juriter — heaven, the Mooo or
Venus— the world of Manes, Mars/ Sun— earth (i.e. rebirth),
Mercury/Saturn — hell. Should the said houses be not occupied,
the native will go to the world as indicated by stronger of the
decanate lords related to the 6th and the 8th. The relative
planet’s exaltation etc. will denote the high, medium and low
status the native will obtain in the said world.
fff^T ! 1
tCTmTOrafta tfwfastnfa pra ! nv^u
46. Other planets and Rasis becoming Marakas are being
discussed in the chapter related to Dasas.
sre jgTTOnHTra: uvstn
Chapter 45
Avasthas Of Planets
qq ^TTSqpn gfqtqcs! ^f?TllT %ftr qr*qen^l II ? M
1. o sage, you have earlier stated that the Avasthas (states)
of planets be considered in the context of planetary effects. Be
kind to tell me about the same.

Chapter 45
«rT?cT^riif fejTsffrrTiT I i
*n?cng ^nrrarccn arerwr^ m^ii
2. O excellent of Brahmins, various kinds of planetary
Avasthas have been expounded. Out of these, I tell you the
summary of infant and other states (in the first instance).
3T?r: g^r *j?t: t
^37: f^rafiTRf ll^tl
3. INFANT STATE ETC : Infant, youthful, adolescent, old
and dead are the states of planets placed in the ascending order
at the rate of six degrees in odd signs. This arrangement is
reverse in the case of even signs.
Notes : These 5 Avasthas are known as Baaladi Avasthas.
For odd signs, the placement concerned will denote the Avastha
as under :
Infant state (Baalavastha) — 0 to 6°
Youthful state (Kumaravastha) — 6 to 12°
Adolescent state (Yuvavastha) — 12 to 18°
Advanced state (Vridhdhavastha) —18 to 24"
In extremis (Mritavastha) — 24 to 30°
The above order is to be rdversed for placement in an even
sign.
qrcfarT ^ |
gfa it fl^snrimi
4. RESULTS : One fourth, half, full, negligible and nil
are the grades of results due to a planet in infant, youthful,
adolescent, old and dead states.
*nrgj|?¥rti>: snjw'tairb \
5. AWAKENING, DREAMING AND SLEEPING
STATES : If a planet is in its own sign or in exaltation it is said
to be in a state of awakening (or alertness). In the sign of a
friend or of a neutral it is in dreaming state while in enemy’s
sign or in debilitation it is in a state of sleeping.

Brilmt Parasara Hora Sastra
ffTHT ff«U I
g Riff ^JF*j faffR fgWWH ! ll^H
rt. According to a planet being in Awakening, Dreaming .
or Sleeping states, the results due to it will be full, medium
or nil,
*>?t: srgfer: *TTOt tfoVr : »
ffff: ritsRVffiRFn RffaisRTr: nun
7. OTHER KINDS OF STATES : There are nine kinds
of other states, viz. Deepta, Swastha, Prarm-dita, Santa, Deena,
Vikala, Khala, and Kopa.
‘ff: SffFftsfafaff $ |
gftfft ffTff: ffff* 5ft*l 11*11
flff$ Jtffffl: jfaff* fa*ff: Rtqfffaff: I
ffff: 3ffi$ ff>: WTWWJeftHeu
ff ffTOT^ q: mzt ff^ff I
JTRff ffFI ’flTRFt Riffg|l’ 5 U?°H
8-10. If a planet is in its exaltation sign, it is in Dceptavastha, in own sign Swastha, in thick friend’s sign Pramudita,
in friendly sign Santa, in neutral’s sign Deena, in the company
of a malefic Vikala, in an enemy’s sign Khala, and in being
eclipsed by the Sun— Kopa. Depending on such a state of the
planet, the house occupied by it will obtain corresponding
effects.
g^ntjFTff: i
ffisfq faRfftrsfa ffffcjff: t
JTfaff: fftsfq Tlfafft ftfaff* ! tl^tl
ff ff faffs: fffaflfft WW ffRT ll?vti

Chapter 45 451
STT: ^TS^HtforT: I
o
ST^T ?T T7J?% tffatT: *T 3?T|pT:
fH^TT^V faspjTdt fa^"T * \
gw ?r?g gfer: s snOfatr: u^n
Tf^TT 3TT* 'TT'TT qwf^T I
sftfaej <r f^Fftzirssi^T nfk nton
«7fi?rT: eftfacft mfa 'f^tTPIMftrcnR: II fell
11-18. YET OTHER AVASTHAS ;. Lajjita, Garvita,
Kshudita, Trushita, Mudita and'Kshobhita are the other kinds of
(six) states due to the planets. Placed in the 5th house if a
planet is associated with a node or with the Sun, Saturn or
Mars, it is in Lajjitavastba. If a planet is in exaltation or in
Moolatrikona, it is Gamtavastba. The avastha is Kshudita
if the planet is in an enemy’s sign, or conjunct an enemy
or aspected by an enemy or even be in conjunction with
Saturn. If a planet is in a watery sign and be in aspect
to a malefic but not a bcnefic, the avastha is called Trushita.
If a planet is in a friendly sign, or conjunct or aspected
by a benefic or is conjunct Jupiter, it is said to be in
Muditavastha. If a planet is conjunct the Sun and is aspected by
or conjunct a malefic or is aspected by an enemy, it is said to
be in Kshobhitavashta. The houses occupied by a planet in
Kshuditavastha or Kshobhitavastha are destroyed.
^4cT5q: n;£l<
<T9T STfa: M^o(|
srfaeT: ^rfq tr n^?u
5cT5F«IT^ Hfs^rfr ^ liq 9 1
gercrcft aqn ii^u

Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
tnpcr hi \
f WT% HTO HTCt H TOTHTg%3fRT*T ! IR^II
19-23 The learned should estimate the effects due to a
house in the manner cited above (i.e. with the help of various
kinds of avasthas), after ascertaining the strength and weakness
(of the various planets). Weak planets cause reduction in good
effecs while stronger ones give greater effects. If a planet posited
in the 10th house is in Lajjitavastba, Kshudhitavastha or
Kshobhitavastha, the person w 11 always be subjected to miseries.
If a planet in the 5th house is in Lajjitavastha, there will be
destruction of progeny, or there will be only or e surviving child.
Surely the wife of the native will die if there is a planet in the
7th in Kshp&titavastha or in Trushitavastha.
T*?* VHTOJtH fararfa TOTH I
’OTTTOTH <TO OfacTFJ tRttll
fTOHTOHTOTHfHHtHTO hV?TO \
WSTHTOfTOTHt HfTOItTRHTHt
ffefTOTfHVTTT: lRV.lt
HfTOHHTTOHTlfH faTOTTHHftT I
5?nTTOTTO HTO T>f5TV e TTfH^fH H |R^||
'TO JHffT H t
fqrvjTTOfCTHTllf IR\9||
TfHTfq fr^ft^THqniT fTTFlTHftTOTOrf*TTta> fTOTTOT IRqlt
n sfwnft qcaqrmffuqnT: t
■fHHHfTqfTHRTTO^TfH:
^HfrFiqfTOtqy hto iRtti

Chapter 45
24-29. EFFECTS OF GAR VITA VASTHA ETC . : A planet
in Garvitavastlia will cause happiness through new houses and
gardens, regalhood, skill in arts, financial gains at all times, and
improvement in business. A planet in Muditavastha will give
residences, clothes, ornaments, happiness from lands and wife,
happiness from relatives, living in royal palaces, destruction of
enemies and acquisition of wisdom and learning. A planet in
Lajjitavastha will give aversion to God, loss of intelligence,
loss of child, interest in evil speeches and listlessness in good
things. A planet in Kshobhitavastha will give acute penury,
evil disposition, miseries, financial debacles, distress to feet and
obstruction to income due to royal wrath. A planet in Kshudhitavastha will cause downfal due to grief and passion, grief on
account of relatives, physical decline, troubles from’enemies
financial distress, loss of physical strength and an eclipsed mind
due to miseries. A planet in Trushitavastha will cause diseases
through association with females, leading over wicked (or evil)
deeds, loss of wealth due to one’s own men, physical weakness
miseries caused by evil people and decline of honour.
iwtfwt tputi^n
fan ^ 4f^ifa fraifas; n^u
IT I
faq>3faH U^II
cTTT ^ET; 1
Tfaf^ 'fffa Vrof 4>m fatftsfacT n
•usrfaqi^sTRfajT g?r: i
TfafafeltT: II^VH
?PTT 1
^ tffa faiftifa<T n^icii
5^ stot: sfatrmr *n»fa i
4RV *Wi> Wrs^gsstm U^II

454 Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
vrcrtv: m ^*Tcn i
BrfeZ^GST fWCT ^ q>q*n*0*5*T II^WI
30-37. CALCULATION OF SAYAN A AND OTHER
AVASTHAS : I now tell you of the avasthas viz. Sayana,
XJpavesana, Netrapani, Prakasana, Gamana, Aagamana, Sabha,
Agama, Bhojana, Nrityalipsa, Kautuka and Nidra, and the
Chesthas of such avasthas. Note the number of the stars (from
Aswini) occupied by the planet for which Avastha is to be
calculated. Multiply that number by the number denoted by
the planet (Sun l, Moon 2 etc.). The figure so arrived at be
again multiplied by the number of Navamsa the planet
is in. Add to this the number of birth asterism, the number
of ghatis of birth and the number of signs the ascendant
gained from Aries. This figure be divided by 12 and the
remainder will indicate the corresponding Avastha of the planet.
The sub state in the said Avastha can be found out thus :
Multi ply the figure denoted by the Avastha concerned (i c.
Sayana 1, Upavesana 2 etc) by the same figure and increase it
by tbe figure denoted by the Anka value for the first syllable of
the native’s personal name. Divide the product so obtained
by 12. . The remainder there of be further increased by constant
planetary additamehts, thus \ Sun 5, Moon 2, Mars 2,
Mercury 3, Jupiter 5, Venus 3, Saturn 3, Rahu 4 (and Ketu 4).
(Here the planet means the one for whom the sub state is being
known.) The product so arrived at be divided by 3. In th
process if the remainder is I, it is Drishti; if 2 Cheshta and if (,
Vicheshta.
Notes : So far narrated arc three different groups of
Avasthas. The present Avasthas are called Sayanadi Avasthas.
These are of supreme importance as compared to the other kinds
of Avasthas.
• The following formula may be adopted to know about the
planet’s Avastha (Sayanadi) at birth.
(sxpxn) + (a+g +r) = Avastha
Where as ‘s’ denotes the serial number of. the star occupied
by the planet, counted from Aswini at birth; ‘p’ denotes the

Chapter 45
status of the planet counted from the Sun (i.e. Sun 1, Mercury
4 etc; ‘n’ denotes the planet’s Navamsa position (i.e. I to 9
Navamsas'l; ‘a’ denotes Janma Nakshatra (or ruling star, i.e. the
one occupied by the Moon); ‘g’ denotes the ghati in which birth
took place (i.e. 20gh 2 vigh is 21gh) and *r’ denotes the
ascendant's order counted from Aries (i.e. Cancer 4, Leo 5, so
on and. so forth).
In place of ‘n’ given above, some translators interpret the
word ‘Amsa’ as degree occupied by the planet which is obviously
not correct. In this connection, the reader’s attention is drawn
to Balabhadra’s Hora Ratna, ch 3 wherein the author
Balabhadra himself gives an example for the Sun being in the
7th Navamsa of Leo and thus he considered only 7 as multiplier.
He has not taken in to account the Sun’s degree. He quotes
Adhbhuta Sagara as his authority for calculation of Sayanadi
Avasthas. It will thus be clear that \Amsa’ is Navamsa and
not degree in this context.
. Also please note that Aagamanavastha (the 6th one) is
known as Gamanechchavastha by some exponents.
Take a case now as an example with the following data.
The Sun in Krittika Nakshatra, 3rd Navamsa of Taurus (i.e in
T 12* Taurus), birth star Krittika, birth at 30gh 33vigh, and
ascendant in Scorpio. With these we produce following
information, keeping the formula given above.
Hence to find out the Avastha,
=remainder 3
With the help of remainder 3, we count three Avastnas
from Sayana. This indicates Netrapani Avastha for the Sun.
Similarly for 9 planets, such Avasthas be found out. In
a given horoscope, the factors V, ‘g’ and V will be identical
for all the 9 planets while factors ‘s’, ‘p’ and ‘n‘ will be
variable.
After knowing the Avasthas of various planets, we have
to find out the sub state of each Avastha. The formula for
knowing sub-state is made in two stages, as under.

Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
StaS c , ; <AXA) + R
Stage 2 : (R-fpa) 3 — sub state
Where ‘A’ is Avastha, ‘fs’ is first syllable’s value with
reference to the native’s personal name, R is remainder in
stage 1, and ‘pa’ is planetary additament denoted in the above
slokas, such as Sun 5, Venus 3 etc. The remainder at stage 2
will denote sub state such as 1 is Drishti, 2 cheshta and
0 vicheshta.
We need information about Anka value or value for first
syllable of the name of a person. These arc :
1 for *r, 'S, y, £T and ^
2 for 3T, sf, and ?T
3 for *T, It, <T, "T, and *T
4 for tj, q, J, «r, % x and *T
5 for sfl, % 5, T, it and ^
Now with the above data, find the sub state for the Sun
id Netrapani Avastha as per the example given supra. First
syllable of the name is "Sa” (?r). Hence,
Stage 1 . ~~ yy~ — Remainder 1
Stage 2 : = 0
Remainder zero indicates sub state as Vicheshta, in Netrapani Avastha.
Uvi fq|:
winsfTBt g srqrssnTq i
WWbT q*T qq: n n „
38-39. EFFECTS OF CHESHTA ETC. : If the sub state
is Dnshh m an Avastha, the results being stated for the Avastha
will be medium, full in Cheshta and negligible in Vicheshta.
The good and bad effects of planets be deciphered based on the

Chapter 45
strength and weakness of the planets. In exaltation, the planets
reveal effects in a pronounded manner due to (good) avasthas.
Notes : If a planet is in good Avastha and is in Cheshta
(sub state), the good effects will be full. If the sub state is
Vicheshta, the good effects are neutralised. If the sub state is
Drishti, good effects will be feebly felt. A planet in exaltation
will give the good effects due to a particular Avastha in a fuller
measure.
If a planet is in bad Avastha with Cheshta as sub state,
the evil effects will be less. With Drishti, evil effects will be
visibly felt. If Vicheshta is sub state, bad effects are neutralized.
In debilitation, the evil effects due to an Avastha will be
pronounced.
Each planet gives different effects — good or bad— according
to the Avastha. No constant evaluation be made just with the
name of an Avastha. This is what is conveyed in the following
slokas.
qjf-IT HTTHT \
zm 5 ^ qqftqqTg: qqq sunn:n*cii
*fT2eTrffKfa$IT*ITvft faqrqfesTfqTrft HT. I^lrT l
^5>TfaTcl: SR qcjfqq: ^TI q$q%?iq?q: U*?tl
5TT: fqtqft 'TT>T?PR> I
3?TTfqvT: qfTgqfqrt: qqR qq?TT \
q^rsq* qfqfq qr^qftq ntf^u
qqT§T: fqqqTf^qrfaqiq qq?I q^tq: uwu
qr^ITTcft qqqiTf^cf) q£ sqqq^ qqqifq^fq: I
qfqq> fqqqTfaqcft qgq: fqfq: fqq: UViUl
qqjq^ qr; qdqqnTeRqT:
qqrqTrq^feiV fqqwT gqisrc i
q5?tITTqqiqTTqqTf?qq> q^Rqt
fqfqqfqqq<qq: $qTqRraT: qt:

Brlhat Parasara Mora SastrA
Wtfacft *T*T I
a[4wfT%!t qqtajcTSqTq^ - f^H4d1 cRT ?RT U'tf'aU
^ 4 1 apwwt
^^r^rcr: q| q| qqr qqr f^ \
3ra?q<TT fsR>qqT cT*TT qqT^q>3R
TqiqtfpRqufa: jmqmfqqt *T% UYqU
fafSTvft^: *RT qf^rT: qfecT: iPFqfqgTqqaqvTiqTforr: I
Tt^q> ekitt^ qrfqq^fiq^ luen
STHqTJf q^af smsftrcrcqftqq: \
q^aTSTl^n? fqFFT: ^Toq^israiq't gqj qtlgfc || J( o |<
fqTPRTITqqfjm q^rTT fqSTR^ ? fl qqqsrg^ \
Tq> fqtVT qqfrpq ".?q qnfqaTqqNi: MH$||
40-51. EFFECTS OF THE SUN'S AVASTHAS AT
BIRTH : If the Sun is in Sayanavastha, the native will incur
digestive deficiency, many diseases, stoutness of legs, bilious
vitiation, ulcer in the anus, and heart strokes. If the Sun is in
Upavesanavastha, the native will suffer poverty, will carry loads,
will indulge in litigations, be hard-hearted, wicked, and will lose
in his undertakings. If the Sun is in Netrapani avastha, the
native will always be happy, wise, helpful to others, endowed
with prowess and wealth, very happy, and will gain royal
favours. If the Sun is in Prakasanavastha, the native will be
liberal in disposition, will have plenty of wealth, be a significant
speaker in the assembly, will perform many meritorious acts, be
greatly stroDg and be endowed with charming beauty. If the
Sun is in Gamanavastha the native will be disposed to live in
foreign places, be miserable, indolent, bereft of intelligence and
wealth, be distressed due to fear and be short-tempered. If the
Sun is in Agamanavastha, the native will be interested in others’
wives, be devoid of his own men, be interested in movements,
skilful in doing evil deeds, be dirty, ill disposed and be talebearer. If the Sun is in Sabbavastba, the native will be disposed
to help others, be always endowed with wealth and gems, be
virtuous, endowed with lands, new houses and robes, be very

Chapter 45
strong, very affectionate to his friends and be very kindly
disposed. If the Sun is in Aagamavastha, the native will be
distressed due to enemies, fickle-minded, evil-minded, emaciated,
devoid of virtuous acts' and intoxicated with pride. If the Sun
is in Bhojanavastha, the native will experience pains in joints,
will lose money on account of others' females, will have strength
declining off and on, be untruthful, will incur head aches, will
eat remnant food and will take to bad ways. If the Sun is in
Nrityalipsavastha, the native will be honoured by the learned,
be himself a scholar, will have knowledge of poetry etc., and be
adored by kings on the earth. If the Sun is in Kautukavastha,
the native will always be happy, be endowed with spiritual
knowledge, will perform sacrificial riles, will move amidst kings,
wilt have fear from enemies, be charming-faced and be endowed
with knowledge of poetry. If the Sun is in Nidravastha, the
native will possess eyes laden with sleepiness (i.e. be always
drowsy), will live in foreign (or distant) places, will incur harm
to wife and will faee financial destruction.
Notes : Balabhadra gives some additional information in
regard to planetary Avaslhas based on ‘Adbhuta Sagaram’.
The same is correspondingly added for the benefit of the reader,
along with my comments, avoiding repetition of the views of
Parasara.
The Sun in Upavesanavastha will make one an artisan,
black in complexion, devoid of learning, miserable and serve
others In Netrapani Avastha— all kinds of happiness, if the
Sun is in the 5th, 9th and 10th or 7th house. In other houses,
this Avastha of the Sun will give eye diseases and enmity with all.
If in Prakasanavastha, the native will be meritorious, religious,
liberal, will enjoy pleasures, be equal to a prince and enjoy the
status of Kubera, the Hindu god of wealth. However, the said
Prakasanavastha of the Sun placed in the 7th or the 5th house
will cause loss of the first child and will produce many litigations. If the Sun is in Ga.nanavastha, the native will incur
disease of the feet and be very mean. If in Agamanavastha, the
Sun in 12th or in 7th will destroy progeny and will give very
limited wealth. If in Aagamavastha, the Sun will give many
miseries, ugly appearance, and foolishness. However, he will
give wealth. The Sun in Bhojanavastha in the 9th house will

Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
cause many hindrances to spiritual and religious undertakings.
In other houses, this position will cause head and ear diseases]
apart from joint pains. Though Parasara states that the native
with the Sun in Kautukavastha will have fear from enemies
Balabhadra exempts such evil effect for the 6th house position!
The Sun in Kautukavastha in other houses will give a number of
daughters, two wives, itch, excellence, liberality etc. If the Sun is
in Nidravastha, the native will be predisposed to incur piles and
elephantasis, be absolutely very peaceless and will be liable to
lose his first child.
fsrafqqmqr: listen
dmfTcft *TgST: qP5>Tt |
<TTf^R> «qi*t UX3II
tarauft ^qrqrq qft i
3R?q3Tvqq?> ara: fq^Tf^er: usmi
qqj ncTqfcT ^
fqqrm: i
qf^m
fqqrqT qtqrf^: gtqqgfqrf rftqqrRq UXXII
fa&TC qTqqcft fqmqR fo?he|: *i) TT%<fT I
?RTf«^q: qf>q'hrcmR> SR«sq«" qq* WTT§T:' ns^ |
*th> qr*r>q> ;r> (
»jviqw-trt> *Nt qftmtqfqqfstrT: uxv»||
ifaMTdtf HqrrfR: Wf%frcqnf*RfrTT*T I
^TTrTgrq *rot%
qTqffrfoftfafaqft 5«T5I: IIXcll
fqaRTqq^r *Tcqf qiRTvft I
fT€<iR^ %*nq: |i)(fc||

Chapter 45 461
3UrRtfrT gfanTHBT^ ?T STR*T U^oh
5jeqfaqrR^ g^RK^R: |
nWt f$ gm*> mgcni^n
ncwfcT ^ srgfa gqrg gr sm?gtT \
*nrr 5*ra?g gTRnrcfeTRiwigiT n^u
*THgnt gr^TraT ^gir i
^%s^Tmf5 :: g?Tfgfmm: f?igT^ tffa fgfggtj^4: u^n
52-63. EFFECTS OF THE MOON'S AVASTH AS AT
BIRTH : If the Moon is in Sayanavastba, the native will be
honourable, sluggish, given to sexual lust, and will face financial
destruction. If the Moon is in Upavesanavastha, the native will
be troubled by diseases, be dull-witted, be not endowed with
mentionable wealth (i.e. will have only negligible wealth), be
hard-hearted, will do unworthy acts and will steal others'
wealth. If the Moon is in Netrapani avastba, the native will be
troubled by great diseases (long lasting in nature), be very garrulous, wicked and will indulge in bad deeds. Should the Moon
be in Prakasavastba, the native will be famous in the world, will
have his virtues exposed through royal patronage, be surrounded
by horses, elephants, females and ornaments and will visit
shrines. If the Moon is in Gamaiiavastha, with decreasing rays,
the native will be sinful, cruel and always troubled by afflictions
of sight; if with increasing rays, the native will be distressed due
to fear. If the Moon is in Agamanavastba, the native will be
honourable, will suffer diseases of feet, will secretly indulge in
sinful acts, be poor and devoid of intelligence and happiness. If
the Moon is in Sabbavastha, the native will be eminent among
men, honoured by kings, and kings of kings, be very beautiful,
wills ubdue the passion of women, be skilful in sexual acts and
be virtuous. If the Moon is in Agamavastba, the native will be
garrulous, and virtuous and if the said Moon is of dark fortnight
the native will have two wives, be sick, highly wicked and be
violent. If the Moon is in Bhojanavastha, the native will be
endowed with honour, conveyances, attendants, social status,

Brihat Parusara Hora Sastra
wife and daughters, provided she is Full (tpjf qvjj; if she is in
dark fortnight these auspicious effects will fail to come. If the
Moon is in Nrityalipsavastha and be endowed with (fortnightly)
strength, the native will be strong, will have knowledge of songs
and be a critic of beauty of things; if the said Moon is of dark
fortnignt, the person will be sinful If the Moon is in Kautukavastha, the native will attain kingship, lordship over wealth and
skill in sexual acts and in sporting with harlots. Should increasing Moon conjunct Jupiter be in Nidravastha, the native will be
quite eminent. Devoid of Jupiter’s conjunction, if the Moon is
in the said A vastha, the native will lose his wealth on account of
females, and female jackaJs will be crying around his abode (as
though if were a cemetery).
Notes : With the Moon in the ascendant in Sayanavaslha,
the native will incur diseases of rectum, be poor and highly
irritable. In other houses, this condition will not give these
defects so specifically. If weak Moon be in this Avastha (in any
house), the right side of the native’s body will incur damages
caused by fire. There will be damage to teeth if the Moon is in
Dpavcsanavastha. The Moon in Netrapani Avastha will bring
eye diseases, elephantasis, etc. and will mtfke the native
garrulous. If the Moon is in Gamanavastha, it will cause
diseases of the head and brain. There will be two wives and many
daughters if the Moon is in Agamavastha. Bhojanavastha of the
Moon will bring fear from snakes and water. The Moon in
Nrityalipsavastha will give a very lean body and lasting sickness.
Kautukavastha of the Moon will confer many sons. If the
Moon is in Nidravastha in the 10th, the native will undergo
miseries on account of his progeny. The Moon in the 5th or
the 7th with the same Avastha will bring all kinds of auspicious
effects. Should she join Rahu in the 5th or 7th, herself being
in Nidravastha, everything of the native is destroyed and he will
be laden with a thousand blemishes.
srgtrr uv*n

Chapter 45
*WT ftfagrft ^ITfag'TTiRT: 1
SforTT ?T?T ?TiR*lcTT \\%%\\
SFf>m tRTsftsm??: fRUTR^fis: I
4 O C
9^ 9,# gswFcnf^ft^ft *r<h> =tt fw?r: n^vaii
*T*ft n*R g^sgfM goi^mift ^facTT^g: I
«gtg*v«3W agarr srgaTcRft ^g^Tta^r: n^cn
aipnft afaamkT iRmwouft i
<rrH^m ftg?p?n aftaaanfcnq^R^> tfft ii^u
I'W S^^warcsJrofr farti:
wrVr afag^ aaigaa^ fa^Tfaffia: gaTa \
sh^a^aiaasa*aTTasaiaat ag aal *nft a sna'V sr: iivsoii
mft aafa afa*r ^at aafra^fgat aaig^: <
Ta^aga^aftaat^a snarafa: fa^at uva^u
faesahft a aa% aa^ f% i
ataaaaRt ^rar agat aiaafaa; u\s^u
afafaRan^ ag^ ^ff*Pnfaf73TRTftRT*nfcT gglft: i
yaa<a r ^ m a : aaT afrsaT araarar a^Fif a%iaaaT \vs^\\
ai^taafa ^g% j% aa: i
^aaa aafa^tgaPisa: qfaeft aaataareR: iivsvn
fasTa^at *ft aft astft ataaafaa: i
aaf aaafrai^ agtft aaatfaa: uvskm
64-75. EFFECTS OF AVASTHAS OF MARS AT
BIRTH : If Mais is in Sayanavastha, the native will be troubled
by wounds, itch and ulcer. If Mars. b'. c Upavcsanavastba, the
native will be strong, sinful, untruthful, eminent, wealthy and
bereft of virtues. If Mars be in the ascendant and be in Netrapani Avastba there will be penury; in other houses this state will
confer rulershipof a city. Should Mars be in Prakasavastha,
the native will shine with virtues and will be honoured by the

Brihai Parasara Hora Sastra
king. Mars in Prakasavastha in the 5th house wifi, however,
cause loss of children and of wife. If Mars is in the said state
and be with Rahu, a severe (positional) fall will descend on the
native. Should Mars be in Gamanavastha the native will be always
roaming, will have fear of multiple ulcers, will ineur misunderstandings with females, will be afflicted by boils, itches etc. and
will incur financial decline. If Mars be in Agamanavastha, the
native will be virtuous, endowed with precious gems, will adore
a sharp sword, will walk with the (majestic) gait of an elephant
(imparting surprise in the onlooker), will destroy his enemies and
will remove the miseries of his people. If Mars be in Sabhavastba and be in exaltation the native will be skilful in conducting
wars, will hold the flag of righteousness aloft and be wealthy; if
Mars be in the said state in the 5th or 9 th, the native will be
bereft of learning, if in the 12th childlessness and no wife and no
friends will result, and if Mars be in other houses than these in
the said Avastha, the native will be a scholar in a king’s court
(i.e. be a poet laureate), be very wealthy, honourable and charitable. If Mars be in Agamavastha, the native will be devoid of
virtues and good deeds, will be distressed by diseases, will acquire
diseases of the root of the ears tK: & C TRTTtT
etc.), and severe gout pains, be timid and will befriend evil lot.
If Mars be with strength while in Bhojanavastha, the native will
eat sweet-food and if be devoid of strength, the native will
indulge in base acts and be dishonourable. If Mars be Nrityalipsavastha, the native will earn wealth through king and will be
endowed with fullness of gold, diamonds and corals in his house.
If Mars be in Kautukavastha the native will be curious in disposition and be endowed with friends and sons, if Mars be simultaneously exalted, the native will be honoured by the king and
the virtuous and be himself virtuous. If Mars be in Nidravastha,
the native will be short-tempered, devoid of intelligence and
wealth, be wicked, fallen from virtuous path and troubled by
diseases.
Notes : If Mars is in Sayanavastha at birth, the native will
be libidinous, learned, intelligent and irritable. Should this
Avastha in particular occur in the 5th or in the 7th, the native
will lose his first wife and first child as well. If Mars in 5th
being in Sayanavastha is related to Saturn or Rahu, the native’s

Chapter 45 465
head will be severed while with other malefics related to Mars
in the said state ears/hand will be cut off.
Should Mars be in Upavesanavastha in the ascendant, the
native will be extremely sinful, will incur several diseases, indigent and most unpeaceful. If the said Avastha occurs for Mars
in the 9th house, the native will lose whole of his wealth apart
from his wife and progeny. Mars in Netrapani Avastha in the
ascendant will give poverty and will destroy the native's wife and
progeny; in other houses this confers on the native all kinds of
wealth and happiness from wife and children. However, the 2nd
house position or the 7th house position of Mars in Netrapani
Avastha will cause fear from lions and snakes apart from giving
earniDgs from lands. Further the native's wife will predecease him.
Should Mars bein Prakasanavastha in the 5th or in the 7th house,
the native will lose his wife and all children. Placed in the 5th
houie in Prakasanavastha if Mars is conjunct Saturn, the native
will kill co' vs. Should Mars be in Gamanavastha, the native will
be active in his assignments, will incur diseases of the joints,
burning pains in eyes, dental afflictions and the like, will have
fear from dogs and will adore the guise of a female. These
effects are for the placement of Mars in the ascendant. In other
houses, Mars in Gamanavastha will bring royal favours, leadership and luxuries of the life.
Shifting over to sloka 69 of our text, in the context
of Mars being in Agamanavastha, the sage uses "rpjqpaT"
which has been, however, interpreted as ‘elephant killer’ by
some commentators. It is actually an indeclinable particle and
conveys the meaning that the native will walk with the majestic
gait of an elephant (imparting surprise in the onlookers
Mars in Agamanavastha will cause piles and diseases of
rectum.
If Mars is in Bhojanavastha or in Sayanavastha in the 5th
house, or in the 8th house, there will be untimely death for the
native. In other houses, Bhojanavsatha of Mars will confer
wealth. Should Mars , be in Nrityalipsavastha and be in the
ascendant, 2nd, 7th or 10th, the native will receive all kinds of
happiness; there will be miseries galore if Mars is in the 8th or
9th a part from incurring untimely death. In other houses, this
state of Mars will make the native akin to Kubera. Mars in the

Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
7th or in the 9th in Kautukavastha will give several diseases and
death of first child and wife. In other houses, this state will
confer scholarship, various kinds of wealth, two wives and more
female children. In Nidravastha, Mars in the ascendant, 2nd,
3rd, 9th, 10th or 11th, will give scholarship, foolishness and
poverty. The 5th house or 7th house placement of Mars in
this Avastha will give many miseries and many male children.
Should Rahu join Mars in Nidravastha in any house the pative
will have many wives, be miserable, and will suffer from some
diseases on the surface of feet.
BTeff tTfST: g£ ll\3$ll
wtaWt g«iTTfoi<jq: \
trgcq: iivs\3U
ga < K vH gtaff 'PJTTTsnn wtpt: n^cii
sim swig*. srg gtrcf^Tctf fwT*r% trgcg: \
»qpn \
■ * ftrfawi tw ftrf^ g** 3rg;*m* fa?mg neon
qrfti ittffe «ww ig^tr
URtfgfe: I
g n qfi wnm T *r gron tifam *it
gfawfw lie? II
srgfti gjf^rct n*r *rcf?r i
g*g«T?n arrfH^T ’trafa *n*rcrftwT iic^u
■gr^T 3TfTf?n% trrr 5TffHHl*T'4^Tf?T: tm i
•ronton n 'snm n 'rongror ue^n

Chapter 45
ijraftrarraft *rg?r: j
fa^g^TSIBN; ^nTT'TfasrT: *Tl<ra STTSHTTTcft llcVM
^3^ ^nr*in^ ^cTfirarsfwgr 'r^t i
^3% 5R^em Tfa: 'T'RIW g*Efg*m *T%: llcstn
fajifa^ ?r ?m ^rftratnfenihT: i
S{fc«IW*I5WTRWNt <%»R SiSft Hq^ll
76-86. : EFFECTS OF MERCURY'S A VASTHAS AT
BIRTH : Should Mercury in Sayanavasfba be in the ascendant,
the native will be lame and will have reddish eyes (like the
black bee); if Mercury be in the said Avastha in other houses,
the native will be addicted to licentious pleasures and be wicked.
If Mercury be in Upavesanavastha in the ascendant, the native
will possess (the seven principle) virtues; if aspectcd by or conjunct malefics, penury will result and if by benefics financial
happiness will follow. If Mercury be in Netrapanl Avastha, the
native will be devoid of learning, wisdom, wellwishers and satisfaction but be honourable; if Mercury be in the 5th house in the
said Avastha, the subject will be bereft of happiness from wife
and sons, be endowed with (more) female children and will gain
abundant finance through royal patronage. If Mercury be in
Prakasavastha, the native will be charitable, merciful, meritorious, will cross the boundaries of ocean in respect of many
branches of learning, be endowed with great faculty of discrimination and will destroy evil people. If Mercury be in
Gamanavastha the native will visit the court of kings on many
occasions and Goddess Laksbmi (denoting wealth) will dwell in
his abode. If Mercury be in Agamanavastha, the same effects
due to his being in Gamanavastha will fructify. If Mercury be in
Sabhavastba. and be in exaltation, the native will be affluent and
meritorious at all times, be equal to Kubera (the lord of wealth
in Hindu mythology) or be a king or a minister, be devoted to
Lord Vishnu and Lord Suva, be virtuous and will attain final
emancipation. Should Mercury be in Agamavastha, the native
will serve base men and gain wealth thereby and will have two
sons and one fame-bringing daughter. If Mercury be in
Bhojanavastha, the native will face financial losses through litigations, will physically lose on account of fear from king (i e. will

Brihat Parasara llora Sastra
become thin due to royal wrath), fickle-minded and will be
bereft of physical and conjugal felicity. If Mercury be in
Nrity ali psa ynstba, the native will be endowod with honour, cenveyances, corals (i.e. gems etc ), sons, friends, prowess and
recognition in assembly due to his scholarships if with the said
state Marcury be in a malefic’s sign the native will be addicted to
prostitutes and will long for licentious pleasures. If Mercury
be in Kautukavastha, and be in the ascendant, the native will be
skilful in music; if be in the 7th/8th with the said Avastha one
will be addicted to courtezans and if in the 9th, the native will
be meritorious and attain heavens after death. If Mercury be in
Nidravastba, the native will not enjoy comfortable sleep, be
afflicted by neck or neck joint (Hmfk) diseases, be devoid of
coborn, afflicted by miseries galore, will enter into litigations
with his own men will lose wealth and honour.
Notes : If Mercury is in the ascendant in Sayanavastha,
the native will be a eunuch lacking productivity and will be
devoid of a limb (whereas Parasara is specificly stating that the
native will be lame), In other houses, this Avastha of Mercury
will produce abstract penury. Should Mercury be in his own
sign in Upavesanavastha, the native will be endowed with all
kinds of happiness, be meritorious and liberal but will incur
diseases of the sight. If Mercury is in Prakasavastha, the native
will be interested in Vedic lore and will continue to be rich
although he may be very charitable to give away anything.
Gamanavastha of Mercury, will cause fear from snakes and water.
Aagamanavastha of Mercury will bring many kinds of miseries
and a wicked wife. Mercury in the 5th or in the 12th in Sabhavasha will give many female issues; in the 7th it will make the
native black hi complexion. Mercury in Agamavastha will cause
urinary disorders. Bhojanavastha of Mercury gives poverty and
many diseases at the time of one’s end. If Mercury is in Nrityalipsavastha, the native will have five sods, 4 daughters and 2 wives.
Mercury in Kautukavastha will cause piles and skin diseases.
Mercury in Nidravastha will curtail longevity if the position is in
ascendant or in the 10th house, whereas in other houses, this
Avastha of Mercury will give abundant wealth.

Chapter 45 w
g Sfgsrqfc ^TT^: \
wfanh?Tg:«RS*tf?3: wErcwfWfa^ft iqr. i\*m
^ q%yf *TcT^% qfi( I
%n<nf®i strnsif^Pn i
nteHfqfra: *rg*: H*n
gnrnmR^ fa*ra«raw>*^ w«g«
« 5 T ct«C:g^3f qsiqfafq^q «(dwg i
s<sm ^gq*Rft ^m^5ij^cw Ht^nt tnqfmmcq cT^^rm it ton
*TT«wt nqfaqFW H4T fqqqn^jfaft 5 ?T I
qfr^Y firfiraf^Rf^ Sqfcraf? gtf n*r *i* ue * n
snnn% jHcTr qpsnqT q?q srgsnri ^fr^n^n i
g^wfa tsgtf qfoKqfTOT nt^u
HTgwqqqni 5TWgq5ffwr3 , q:
nqfq q»it fq^qTf^qq*rR: i
irsTgmrqnS'Tt ^Tot«T»j^
srjfa 'fqfqafqsMfasft qiqq: uw
qnnq i^Mmws^hiW goqrq%
g cmMrUy ?Tqrqgrwg^ fasar>*i«<UT \
w>Aq^ ^MH g n qq^ ^Tstfq 5 m qfa:
yt aiH^f a: htt %rnfa: e** wvtu
iq*f?T Iq^rgrt ^ tjWl^g \
nq Tqpni trar qiPwrc^v^w *if' , «fl | * IIWU
q?qfa*«nT^ TMHpft H*ft tomftWW ***T I
y qf q ? T t ggiffiflff: qfacT: ^rsqfqWFra^ft fjj Hlft ®Ri M€.^n
*ra$\g% qsnsrct 3Rt ?RT
ar 'fnwr: yqiqtm^: qsft »

470 Brihai Parasara flora Sastta
g?ft QTrTu^5¥R*Tqfir5rr: n^n
5^ faring ^ nfaiifi T i
TfTScTTTfT^T*?! *1^ H£qjj
87-98. EFFECTS OF JUPITER'S A VAST!/ AS AT
BIRTH : If Jupiter is in Sayanavastha, the native will be strong
but will speak in whispers, be very tawny in complexion, will have
prominent cheeks, and will have fear from enemies. If Jupiter
be tn Upaveaanavaslha, the native will be garrulous, very proud
be troubled by king and enemies and will have ulcers on feet*
shanks, face and hands. If Jupiter be in Netrapani Avastha*
the native will be afflicted by diseases, devoid of wealth, be fond
of music and dances, libidinous, tawny in complexion and be
attached to other castemen. If Jupiter be in Prakasavastha, the
native will enjoy virtues, be happy, splendorous and will visit
places holy to Lord Krishna; if Jupiter in the said Avastha is
exalted, the native will attain greatness among men, be equal to
Kubera— the lord of wealth. If Jupiter is in Gamanavasiha the
native will be adventurous, be happy on account of friends
scholar y and endowed with various kinds of wealth and with
Vedic learning, If Jupiter be in Agamanavastha, serving force
excellent women and the goddess of wealth will never leave the
native’s abode. If Jupiter be in Sabhav.istha, the native will
attain comparability with Jupiter (the God of speech) in the
matter of speech, be endowed with superior corals, rubies and
wealth, be rich with elephants, horses and chariots and will be
supremely learned. If Jupiter be in Agamavastha, the native
will be endowed with various conveyances, honours, retinue
children, wife, friends and learning, be equal to a king, extremely
noble, fond of literature and will take to virtuous path. If
Jupiter be in Bbojanavastha the native will always beget excellent
food and horses, elephants and chariots while Lakshmi, the
goddess of Lucre, will never leave his house. If Jupiter be in
Nrityalipsavastha, the native will receive royal honours be
wealthy, endowed with knowledge of moral law (stf) and Tantra
(a branch of learning dealing with magical or mystical formularies
to attain superhuman powers), be supreme among the learned
and be a great grammarian. If Jupiter be in Kautukavastha, the

Chapter 46
native will be curious ip disposition, very rich, will shine like the
Sun in his circles, be exceedingly kind, be happy, honoured by
the kings, endowed with sons, wealth and just disposition be very
strong and be a scholar in the king’s court. If Jupiter be in
Nidravastha, the native will be foolish in all his undertakings,
will suffer irredeemable penury and will be devoid of righteous
acts.
Notes : If Jupiter is in Sayanavastha, the native will be fair
in complexion but will suffer from colic pains. This Avastha of
Jupiter placed in the ascendant, 7th or 10th will, however, give
wealth and scholarship. Being in Upavesanavastha, if Jupiter
occupies the 2nd, 3rd, 11th or 12th, the native will be virtuous
and learned. In Netrapani Avastha, Jupiter will give head
diseases and destroy the undertaking of the native. The native
will be ever of doubtful disposition. If Jupiter is in Prakasanavastha in a house other than the ascendant and the 10th, the
native will incur diseases of privities and rectum. Jupiter in a
house other than the 2nd, 5th, 7th and 10th, in Agamanavastha
will bring fear from snakes. Sabhavasthh of Jupiter will make
the native rich through others’ wealth. Should Sabhavastha
occur to Jupiter in the 8th or in the 12th, the native will lose
everything in his life. If Jupiter is in the asscendant in Bhojanavastha, the native will be fond of flesh, be eloquent, libidinous
and be happy in every manner. In other houses than the
ascendant, 5th and 1 be 9th, this state of Jupiter will produce
many diseases. In Nrityalipsavastha, Jupiter placed in the
ascendant, 5th, 9th or 10th will give abundant wealth while in
other houses this cannot be expected of him. In Kautukavastha
he will give wealth if in the ascendant, ICth or 7th only. Jupiter
in Nidravastha will make one miserable, suffer eye diseases and
wander all over. If he is in the 12th with this Avastha, there
will be riches while this Avastha of Jupiter in the 5th, 7th or
10th will destory the native’s wife and children.
TOIcT I
srcidf tittu
U\oo\\

Brihat Parasara flora Sastra
qqt qtqilr [qiqq q^q fTW grqq l
WIFfPR qRTq ^"RTqTTvTT ferotTHT q*te H?o$U
wraft qqq fqq»J qnr% qnqTqrrq>fn:»jsnr<ft qq: i
*J5&*§cq qq JWnf *iq VT^rfqoTiTf^T^g^ *f)qfqq \\% 0 ^h
n*T% 5R^ qq tTFI *TTrU *t sftqfa \
^Tfutftift fqtftqTO 3RmTHf^r?(W: II
arm* qqqfq famqft qgq: I
mf qqqqrat ^TtfcaTtnt qii ; o*n
sRTqr^TW qqfa inffr qgqi
qqewkw: qqfa ynfqar: *rq) i
qqTqmnntf f^fqqf^m uqqq:
wq?q qf qRTC qq§Tq*FcTr «Rqr: ll^o xil
m*T** irnt% qmq> qf«TqTqqTmTraTtftq tq%: |
gq7TcT> fqqrq> qqMTqfoqrRiqtfci: fjrqmtq^Tfqq^i u^n
W«n§^ «!TTf^fqqtfs?T: Wq%4T«mfqqqTfi?eTCq |
qqtq?T ^5nr*t gq?qr q^qV qfasqqfbaqsq u^o^u
T^qfqfnqqfn * qfq: qq*r qfqfqcqiq^ qiqq \
qqq>n»jqqirq*fHtqrqqT?Rg«q*>am foitaft: ||{oc||
V^pqqq qqqfq qqi qqsqfq qqfq q^qq I
£in fatrr qfqfa q gq: qqqj fqqqfq qqqrcr: n$o£ll
•R^qTTWt fq?q fqSTgqqq qsft I
qrfq*qiqrt qhft qrorat iaq£ qjftq H;tou
99-110. EFFECTS OF AVASTHAS OF VENUS AT
BIRTH : If Venus be in Sayanavastha, the native although
strong will incur dental diseases, be very short-tempered, bereft
of wealth, will seek union with courtezans and be licentious. If
Venus be in Upaveaanavastha, the native will be endowed with
multitude of nine gems (^qqfwr and golden ornaments, be
ever happy, will destroy enemies be honoured by the king and
will have highly increased honours. If Venus be in Netrapanl

Chapter 45
Avastha in the ascendant, the 7th or 10th, there will be loss of
wealth on account of sight afflictions (i.e. heavy medical
expenses due to severe eye diseases) and if the said Avastha
occurs when Venus is in other houses, there will be large houses
owned by the native. Should Venus be in Prakasavastba in
own sign, exaltation sign of friendly sign, the native will sport
like a lofty elephant, be equal to a king and be skilful in poetry
and music. If Venus be in Gamanavastha, the native will not
have a long living mother, will lament over separation from his
own people and will have fear from enemies. If Venus be in
Agamanavastha, the native will command abundant wealth,
will undertake to visit superior shrines, be ever enthusiastic and
will contract diseases of the hand and foot. IfVenusbein
Sabhavastha the native will cam eminence in the king’s court, be
very virtuous, will destroy enemies, be equal to Kubera in
wealth, charitable, will ride on horses and will be excellent
among men. If Venus is in Agamavastha, there will be no
advent of wealth but troubles from enemies, separation from
children and relatives, diseases and lack of pleasures from the
wife. Should Venus be in Bhojanarastha, the native will be
distressed due to hunger, diseases and many kinds of fear front
enemies and if the said planet is in Virgo in Bhojanavastha, the
native will be very rich and will be honoured by scholars. If
Vepus be in Nrityalipsavastha, the native will be skilful in
literature, intelligent, will play musical instruments like lute,
taber etc., be meritorious and very affluent. If Venus be in
K ntukavastha, the native will be equal to Lord Indra, will attain
greatness in the assembly, be learned and will have Lakshmi
always swelling in his abode. If Venus be in Nidravastiia, the
native will be interested in serving others, will blame others, be
heroic, garrulous and wandering all over the earth.
Notes : Venus in Sayanavastha in the ascendant will confer
riches; if in the 7th or in the 1 Ith in the said Avastha, the native
will be endowed with all kinds of happiness, will never face
shortage of money and will have 7 sons and 5 daughters. In
other houses than the ascendant, 7th and 11th, Venus in Sayanavaslha will destroy the progeny of the native. If Venus is in
Upavesanavastha, the native will have a defect or injury on the
right side of the body. He will suffer from pains of joints as

Srihat Parasara Hora Sastra
well. Should Upavesanavastha occur to Venus in exaltation
or in own sign, the native will be endowed with all kinds of
happiness. There will be sure loss of eye sight if Venus is in
Netrapani Avastha. The 10th house placement of Venus in
Netrapani Avastha is not praiseworthy for riches while in other
houses than the ascendant, 7th and 10th this will bring abundant
wealth apart from giving two wives. Prakasana Avastha of
Venus placed in the 2nd, 7th, 9th or the ascendant will give
wealth and sterling disposition. And if he be in the 10th or in
exaltation or in friendly sign, the native will occupy a high
position with the king. In other houses than these, Prakasavastha of Venus will give many diseases and miseries. If Venus
is in Sabhavastha the native will receive royal favours and be
akin to Kubera in wealth. Should Venus be in Sabhavastha in
an enemy s sign or in aspect to an enemy, it will destroy
everything. Nrityalipsavaslha of Venus will confer a high degree
of learning while Nidravastha will cause litigations, diseases,
disputes and poverty. Kautukavastha of Venus will give
abundant riches, wife and numerous children.
faster: fltpT l
eTcft l|g l til'-
HA 1
srtpmfar*m qwnr tw \
iittvu
an*TR^ rr5*T*regq?T: farmer: i
31^ far*? spiffa SR^JT I
fHdw yff it* t^u

Chapter 45 475
q ?7 cTTT I
qqq aTT^qf^TfaTf^cn *lf?T: TOT III {ell
tfqf* siffa *ng?P5q ■vjt^ *RrfcT *frsN th; i
*Tq?T HmiWcTT clcTT *ft^rTI*T^cfv,rl rf^rTT *T%: $£ 1 )
q?qfaeqPT?* 0 *rf?*TT fq^far: I
?rd aKt qfrfftf u^«n
*T?f?T q^gqrmw^'nn^ Tfqtf^ ^UTqtfqftrT: I
sifaFrcft H^^nqqfTrT: rt: h^*ii
faffing srraTqrqg# art* ?rt t
q CTqaft ^f«nRT$^TT ^qRq>Fcn^RTcTfq 5 T: 11^3^11
n 1-1 22. EFFECTS OF SATURN’S AVAST HAS AT
BIRTH : If Saturn is in Sayuimvastha, the native will be troubled
by hunger and thirst, will incur diseases in boyhood and later on
will become wealthy. If Saturn be in Upavesanavastha the
native will be troubled greatly by enemies, will contract
dangers, will have ulcers allovcr the body, be self-respected and
be punished by the king. If Saturn be in Netrapani Avastha, the
native will be endowed with a charming female, wealth, royal
favour and friends, will have knowledge of many arts and be an
eloquent speaker. If Saturn be in Prakasavastha, the native
will be very virtuous, very wealthy, intelligent, sportive,
splendorous, merciful and devoted to Lord Siva. If Saturn
be in Gamanavastba, the native will be very rich, endowed
with sons; will grab cnemie’s lands and be a scholar at royal
court. If Saturn be in Agamanavastha, the native will be akin
to a donkey (i.e. foolish), bereft of happiness from wife and
children, will always roam pitiably without anybody's patronage.
If Saturn be in Sabhavastha, the native will have surprising
(i.e. great) possessions of abundant precious stones and gold,
be endowed with great judicial (or political) knowledge and be
extremely brilliant. If Saturn be in Agamavastha, the native
will incur diseases, and will not be skilful in earning royal
patronage. If Saturn be in Bhojanavastha, the native will enjoy
tastes of food, be weak-sighted and be fickle-minded due to
mental delusion. If Saturn be in Nrityalipsavastha, the native

Brihat Parasara flora Sastra
wil! be righteous, extremely opulent, honoured by the king,
brave and be heroic in warfield. If Saturn be Kautukavastha
the native will be endowed with lands and wealth, be happy,
endowed with pleasures through charming females and learned
in poetry, arts etc. If Saturn be in Nidravastha. the native will
be rich, endowed with charming virtues, valorous, will destroy
even fierce enemies and be skilful in seeking pleasures through
harlots.
Notes : If Saturn is in Sayanavastha in the 5th house, the
native will be endowed with progeny and be happy in all
manners; if in the ascendant, 6th or 8th, the native will live in
alien places, be very poor and peaccless. This Avastha to Saturn
will also cause diseases of the rectum (i r respective of the planet’s
placement). Saturn in Upavesanavastha will ever cause difficulties from the government and destruction of wealth. Saturn
placed in the 10th or in the ascendant with Netrapani Avastha
when unchecked will cause miseries in livelihood; in the 5th/7th
there will be destruction of wealth, wife and progeny and in a
house other than 1st, 5th and 7th, this Avastha of Saturn will
give wealth and happiness from all sources. If Prakasanavastha
occurs to Saturn while being in the 7th or the 9th, the native
and his entire Tacc will be “destroyed’*. Should Sabhavastha
occur to Saturn in an enemy’s sign or with an aspect from an
enemy, there will be absolute destruction of the native’s
possession, Bhojanavastha of Saturn will cause digestive difficulties, piles and eye defects; if Saturn is in simultaneously
exaltation or in own sign, the native will enjoy all kinds of
happiness and be ever devoid of diseases. Kautukavastha of
Saturn in the 5th/7th/9th will destroy everything and will leave
the native with diseases alone. Should this Avastha occur to
Saturn in another house than 5th/7th/9th, the native will be
favoured by the king, will be very rich, meritorious, skilful,
happy, learned and adorable. If Saturn is in Nidravastha, the
native will be opulent, learned, will have two wives and many
male issues and be very honourable for his sterlingness Should
Nidravastha occur to Saturn in the 1 0th house, there will be
penury, diseases, living in alien places and obstruction to
undertakings at every step If he is in an angle or in a trine
or in exaltation, these evil effects will not come to pass.

Chapter 45
q*T*T*rt q?q TT?ft ^^TTfij^caf SSTd I
q$sq qt^sfa ^ sRUTOTm:
s qfry refi qy qarqfa ^ qftcFrr: i
*7*raqm?ft fqrrqtqq s*r Tf^r; ?qi?u?^i
gcgsq H i r T^KFit qq q?q «nrcw nwn
Jmw STATOR frqfo: frfo: ?t«t q®rt I
A^rf^nterfa: qqr fqqrqmfq^ \
tJTTFa'nfsrqTlfCrn q?lVcTT tfcTT
THql'H^Tar Ifrf =1^9 left l>HV'
TTTT# ^ qqr TT^ qf^iM^FSTT:: »
crfiscft er«tr *Tm TT^qsrft ?rd qtq u?^u
qt^nrqq *rqT qhiddfiid: i
prq: qnql q7^ ^qfa qqqiH^cii
qmqdt qqT Tif : qf^: fq^it qr: \
faxT ste*KHTfaRf: 1 1 H €.1 1
wyqiqrqq q?q jtt^ ct^t sqi^rq tf4KTfawt?qT tqqq t
q^44^uqi4t 3RT5TT fqqicft *15?* M o I)
jft aFta ref fq’PHt q%qj
R^qqf^: fqsqrqta: :
^ trfTEmfafqq;?^ i
%V>qt frqHffegqaq^ fn* \\\\v\
qrsRT?^ fa?q qr^rfm^iTVi u?^^m
fq5Tq?qf TT^\ 5"TOWfa> ^ i
qnqn H»di qq cq qf^rt qgfadqH n?^vu
123-134. EFFECTS OFRAHU’S AVASTHAS AT BIRTH :
If Rahu be in Sayanavastha, the native will experience miseries

Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
galore; but if Rahu in the slid Avastha be in Taurus, Gemini,
Virgo or Aries the native will be endowed with wealth and
grains. If Rahu be in Upavesanavastha the native will be
distressed due to ulcers, be endowed with royl association, highly
honourable and ever deviod of financial happiness. If Rahu
be in Netrapani Avastha, the native will be troubled by eye
diseases, will have fear from wicked people, snakes and thieves
and will incur financial decline. If Rahu be in Prakasavastha,
the native will acquire a high position, will perform auspieious
acts, will obtain elevation of financial state, be highly virtuous,
be a chief in the king’s court, be charming like freshly formed
clouds (that Will cause soon rain) and be very prosperous in
foreign places. If Rahu is in Gamanavasfha the native will be
endowed with numreous children, be scholarly, wealthy, charitable and honoured by the king. If Rahu is in Agamanavastha
the native will be very irritable, bereft of intelligence and wealth
crooked miserly and libidinous. If Rahu is in Sabhavastha the
native will be scholarly, miserly, and endowed with many virtues,
wealth and happiness. If Rahu be in Agamavastha, the native
wfil be always mentally distressed, will have fear from enemies
and litigations with enemies, be bereft of his own men, will face
financial destruction, and be crafty and emaciated. If Rahu be
in Bbojanavastha, the native will be distressed without food
dull-witted, be not bold in his acts and be bereft of conjugal and
progemc happiness. If Rahu be in Nrityalipsarastha, the native
will contract a great and unsubduing disease, will have afflicted
eyes and fear frorp enemies and will decline financially and
righteously. If Rahu be in Kautukavastha, the native will be
devoid of a position (or a place), be interested in others’ famales
and will steal others' wealth. If Rahu be in Nidravastha the
native will be a repository of virtues, be endowed with wife’and
children, bold, proud and very affluent.
Notes : If Rahu in Sayanavastha is in Leo, Virgo or
Taurus, there will be all round happiness whereas in other signs
he is adverse with this Avastha. Rahu’s Upavesanavastha will
destroy ones wealth and will cause difficulties in day-to-day
affairs. His Netrapani Avastha in the ascendant or in the 7th
will bring many evils and miseries while in other houses it will
bring danger from animals. Rahu in Prakasan avastha in Leo

Chapter 45
or in Cancer will cause amputation of head; in other signs it
gives wealth and royal service. Rahu’s Sabhavastha in the 5th/
lOth/lst will destroy the native’s progeny and spouse and will
make hint fickle-minded. This Avastha in other houses will give
virtues, scholarship and wealth. With Rahu in the 10th or in
the 7th Bhojanavastha the native will ‘kill’ his wife or he may
abandon her or may not be happy in married life, and be
irreligious. Nrityalipsavastha of Rahu in the ascendant will
deprive the native of his progcnic ability while in other houses
this Avastha will give two wives and all kinds of happiness.
Should Rahu be in Kautukavastha in a house other than 5th/
7th/ 10th, the native will incur many kinds of miseries and be
bereft of spouse and progeny. Nidravastha of Rahu will inflict
utter poverty and make the native wander all over the earth
aimlessly.
trr ^ mi
EPTfnrfe: ww-titR
3Tft®neFWqi?TsrtTWT flRhHd: 1 1 \ ^ 1 1
5T^T?Td HTOFT STrfa«fi: Ml
Bereft n^cll
*t?tt ii'^eu
anmR w mi fcgqfarcltrt mm: \
faTR: ll^tfoU
qRmt qgqfar: 1
srrTfonfcwrc*: n$v?u
*wi«l% HW5%§: gqTrqTMqnfrrW I

Brlhat Pcrasara Hora Sastra
5 ant 0=r?*r wram ’Tfr'ftferT: \
Sf73> T>THrT^T: %rft ^fcT 11**311
sjcsrfa'ar^ %ff> sulfur fspFvft si^r \
ITTOtff £J<TfS5T«f*T> *T: II? WH
sftfsKV ^g% %rft ?T£siT*TRfrTfsro: I
^^FT^os^t ?fra> 'sre^ TT^n?^nn
fa?T3PIT ^ %rft ?FTUI-iiyW XT^cT I
^PpifaHt^T <FTvI> Slfa^m U**V>
135-146. EFFECTS OF KETU’S A V AS WAS AT BIRTH :
If Ketu is in Sayanavastha in Aries, Taurus, Gemini or Virgo,
there will be plenty of wealth while in other signs increased
diseases will follow. If Ketu be in Upavesanavastha the native will
suffer from ulcers and will have fear from enemies, windy diseases
snakes and thieves. Should Ketu be in Nelrapani Avaslha, the
native will contract eye diseases, and will have fear from wicked
people, snakes, enemies and people of royal family. If Ketu be
in Prakasanavastha, the native will be wealthy, righteous will
live in foreign places, be enthusiastic and genuine and will serve
the king. If Ketu be in Gamanavastha, the native will be
endowed with many sons, abundant wealth, be scholarly,
virtuous, charitable and be excellent among men. If Ketu be
in Agamanavastha, the native will incur many diseases, will face
loss of wealth, will hurt (others) with his teeth (^^Tfavr), be a
talebearer and will blame others. If Ketu be in Sahhavastha,
the native will be garrulous, very proud, miserly, licentious and
skilful in evil branches of learning. If Ketu be in Agamavastha,
the native will be a notorious sinner, will enter into litigations
with his relatives be wicked and troubled by diseases and
enemies. If Ketu be in Bhojanavastha, the native will always
be distressed with hunger, penury and diseases and will roam
allover the earth. If Ketu be in Nrityalipsavastha, the native
will be distressed due to diseases, will have a floral mark on the
eye (i.e. white of the pupil), be impertinent, wicked and
will plan evils. If Ketu be in Kautukavastha, the native will
seek union with dancing females (i.e. prostitutes), will suffer
positional displacement, will take to evil paths and will roam

Chapter 45
all over. If Ketu be in Nidravastha the native will be endowed
with wealth and corns, be virtuous and will spend his time
sportively.
f?nS5f?rT ?TTtf^T: I
factf ?!TO WRO* ftfawp ^ sa:u?vv»|t
147. GENERAL EFFECTS (up to sbka ljj; ; O Brahmin,
if a benefic planet is in Sayanavastba, there will be benefic effects
at all times according to the learned.
?WT qqfajTmsfa ^rr*¥? faRTTtin U^Ve;H
148. If a malefic is in Bhojanavastha, everything {related
to the house concerned) will be destroyed and there is no need
of a second thought.
fasrot q zreT «tit> qrinpn# i
of? ^ sn* * vffTqqnmn
149. Should a malefic in the 7th be in Nidravastha auspicious effects will follow, provided there is no aspect from another
malefic.
fpid: TBTt faawl rortsfa HT I
?RT TTH ^rTP7 ITO* VTHf f^Umi
150. Declare without a second thought auspicious effects
following the location of a malefic in the 5th but with Nidravastha or Sayanavastba.
fasnrf *r i
?ri apnsqijw: wwwn: TCremnitxtii
15 1. Untimely death due to royal wrath will come to
pass if there is a malefic in the 8th in Nidravastha or Sayanavaetha.
ym qttaf nfk jtfm: \
g aw * fintqir:

Brihat Parasara Hora Sasfta
152. If in the above case there be a benefic aspect or
conjunction, the said (untimely) death will be in the river
Ganges, i e. Gangetic belt, shrines etc.
*rt qw. tRhr^sPi «rr <
cm tpirftwwt: II m < »
153. If there be a malefic in the 10th house in Sayana or
Bhojanavastha, the native will face many miseries on account
of his own deeds.
Pin MW: n SWT4Tn 1
TrsnfrT: frsthiH utwi
154. O excellent of the Brahmins, doubtlessly a Rajayoga
Will come to pass if the Moon is in the 10th in Kautukavastha
or Prakasanavastha.
q* t&h
155. Thus the good and bad effects be guessed assessing
the strength and weakness of the planets concerning all the
Bhavas.
I To be concluded]
«ar Reader,
e are glad you are reading this Unique Book,
one other remaining ch apters, which contain ver
raportant material, are given in Its Ilnd Part,
lease write for your cony of the same. '
RANJAN PUBLICATIONS
l6,Ansarl Road, Darya Ganj,
New Delhi-11 0002 (INDIA)

fiBRAfA
Page
Line
For
AD 72
257 59gh 47 5Vigh
4h 2m
tilour
physicallp matiny
downfall
blies
co-bron
progery
vives
spleoorous
Geda
Jakata
these
If Arnatya
another
432 last but one 180
Vikala
stars
T and *r
if
Read
AD 78
257d 59gh 47.5 Vigh
valour
physically mating
downfall
bliss
coborn
progeny
vices
splendorous
Rahu in Gemini
(in the charts
Gada
Jataka
the
If Atma
another in
Dukkhita, Vikala
star,
Tand ?r
it
A Glimpse of
KERALA ASTROLOGY . o. P. Verma
The present work A G//mpse of Kerala Astrology is
condensation of three recognised Kerala classics Kerala
Jvotisha, Kerala sutra and Gopala Ratnahara which are unique
in their own way & speak out the essential, principles of Kera la
Astrology. We suppose our readers will be enlightened by these
illuminating pearls of KERALA ASTRO LOGY. Rs.
■w I
