READABLE DATASET
================================================================================
Original file: brihat_jataka_of_varaha_mihira_ed_by_venkata_raman_trans_by_surya_narain_rao_1957_bangalore_raman_publications.json
Dataset number: 44 of 455
Format: valid JSON
Structure: Object / structured dataset
Original size: 878,498 bytes
Top-level fields: 11
Title: Brihat Jataka Of Varaha Mihira Ed By Venkata Raman Trans By Surya Narain Rao 1957 Bangalore - Raman Publications
Creator: —
Date: —
Description: —

CONTENT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
METADATA AND OTHER FIELDS
  • title: Brihat Jataka Of Varaha Mihira Ed By Venkata Raman Trans By Surya Narain Rao 1957 Bangalore - Raman Publications
  • creator: —
  • date: —
  • description: —
  • subject: —
  • identifier: —
  • source_folder: Brihat Jataka-XML
  • total_pages: 648
  • total_words: 163227
  • text_quality:
    • ocr_word_validity_score: 0.882
    • quality_tier: good
    • note: —

FULL TEXT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
i CO; (0. In Public Domain. Digitized ae Trust and eGangot
ARAHAMIHIRA S :
| 3 “BRIHAT J JATAK
[ s o : tee j "7
4 NR Me (Sar WA 2
E- - EXP SH "TRANSLATION?
ES eS at j
Ra A WITH Cue 2 AS IN DEMAKAGARI
pi. * D Ns
m EN) .
E e
1 B. SX zara
im
This is a monumental work written by Varahamihira
the versatile genius of the first century B.C. and deals with”
the entire science of astrology in a masterly way. Brihat®
Jataka, £s the author rightiy asserts, is intended as a boat
for all tho? who at first get despirited at the sight of the
vast ocean of astrological knowledge but who wish to cross
SUE the’ same, i A
B D tt
Dg JEhe«&ook contains the invaluable commentaries of,
È Bhattotpala which have made clear many of the obscure
assages. Prof. Rao has given copious notes in his ^own
iori style which facilitate casy Somipreheh
Naah
FOURTH E Su
See LR A i ree
E
UP. State Museum, i

CRBS 4S AATVA S TTT AMARA NA MAA RARA WV VUE 3
- Works by B. V. RAMAN
$ EDITOR, THE ASTROLOGICAL MAGAZINE
Cal
iy
‘J. ASTROLOGY FOR BEGINNERS—Teaches Astrology
pwithout effort. “The best boak for beginners. 10th Edition.
2. A MANUAL OF HINDU ASTROLOGY—Gives a clear and
concise account of the essefitial principles of Astrology. ‘Sth
Edition. Rs.4]8 or Sh. 9. ‘A Masterpiece within its restricted
Scope". —Times OF CEYLON.
: 3. BHAVARTHA RATNAKARA—English Translation with
original slokas in Devanagari, exhaustive notes and illustrations.
3rd Edition. Rs. 5/4 or Sh. 10/6.
4. HINDU BREDICTIVE ASTROLOGY- Confainséa clear exposition of ali branches of Astrology a graduated form—casting the Horoscope, finding Dasas, Predicting all events correctly,
Medical Astrology, National Astroloty, Horary, Transits, etc.
i Full Cloth Bound, 444 Pages. 6th Edition. Rs. 9 or Sh. 18.
a
AY EAA A LSS PLP SPL
/5. GRAHA AND BHAVA BALAS—A Guide to Predictive
Astrology. 6th 'Edition. Rs. 3/12 or Sh. 7/6. “A unique
treatise for measuring strengths of planets and houses numerically’ . ,
$ i — CEYLON Darcy News, COLOMBO.
$ 6. VARSHAPHAL OR THE HINDU PROGRESSED .
e A HOROSCOPE—
$ Gives an easy method for decipherin Yearly results scientifically.
$ 6h Edition. Rs.3or Sh. 6. ‘‘£ntirely departs from convene tional methods". —AMRITBAZAR PATRIKA.
$ T. -HOW TO JUDGE A HOROSCOPE—2 Parts—Deals ex-
$ pansy with practical Astrology. Cloth Bound, Rs. 10/8 or
Beak
fy 8, AYURVEDA OR THE HINDU SYSTEM OF MEDICINE—
Gives an idea of the grandeur and importance of Ayurveda.
4th Edition. Re. I or Sh. 2.
; 9. ASTROLOGY AND MODERN THOUGHT—The truth of
Astrology has been statistically proved. 3rd Edition.@Rs. 2/4
10. ELECTIONAL ASTROLOGY OR MUHURTHA—Enables
you to make use of astrology in day-to-day affairs. 240 pp.
! 11. STUDIES IN JARMINI ASTROLOGY—Presents the
' complicated principles contained in the four chapters, calculation
and interpretation of Dasas suggested by Jaimini in a simple,
SORT and attractive manner with suitable illustrations,
TABLE HOROSCOPES contains the horoscopes, of ie
Sri Krishna, a Buddha, Sankara- Christ, etc. Cloth. Bound.
MAN. PUBLICATIONS
Jawan PRP II A AA SUA NU Po Ay Ala uS PR WAVY

st and eGangotri ;
ee M E
Peers MM Ven E :
“UP State Ñ um, Lucknow. =
$ RASI o
M

Bango
angotri
e
J i A
«CC-O. In Public Din e by Sarayu Trust and e
IN ot
Seg jag
—— Mà

Y m -
N Pee chert ee
— ooo ~>
SREE
VARAHA' MIHIRA'S
; BRIHAT JATAKA
ENGLISH TRANSLATION
WITH ORIGINAL SLOKAS IN DEVANAGARI |
BY
BANGALORE SURYANARAIN, RAO
** REVISED BY»
uma B. LAKSHMINARAIN RAO,
Cage Mysore Educational Service (Retd.) 5
e EDITED BY i
? BANGALORE VENKATA RAMAN,
EDITOR,$ THE ASTROLOGICAL MAGAZINE
A t (FOURTH EDITION)
EUER. PUBLICATIONS »
. © Sri Raieswari ”, BANGALORE 3
L3 QS
s e per Copy : 5
ae Sh. 2: | All Rights Reseried a Borago
or $ 6/- VA
2 ri
e ai.
i e Av Stes
P

CC-O. In Public Domain. e ug by Sarayu Trust and eGangotri
a

E ou F
4 A 2 FOREWORD
KAN ; - "cnt t
sp This translation of Brihat Jataka by my
J | ` revered father, the late Prof. B. Suryanarain Rao,
was commenced as early as ‘1908, when I was in.
5 the College classes and it, was given as a. suppleii. ment to The Astrological Magazine and then got
up in a book form. It was not till 1918 that ma
the first edition was issued and owing to change:
| of residence and settlement at a village, many of
the books were lost ard a second edition was
a issued by about,1921. It was also sold out and.
4 excumstances did mot pefmit the issue of the
third edition immediately. When my. nephew,
^ “> ^ Prof. B.V. Raman had established The Astrological
A Magazine on a sound basis and began the reprint
of some of my father’s works like ‘ faimini Sutras A f
Y
Y
HA
* Streg Jataka °, etc., he asked me to revise * Brihat /
Jataka’ so that a third edition of the book
; | may be placed before the public. What with the -`
"^|. Scarcity of paper, printers; and war conditions,
X". thé bOok is seeing the light of the day in 1948, .
|^ "after a lapse of more than 25 years. I have care- 9
fully revised the translation and have added many »
j "concrete examples while discussing the Yogas.and “>
| Bhavas-and have tried my best to make it ds in- >.
|| telligent as possible to a layman who takes 3t up °c;
4 - for the first time to study. Brihat Fataka from |
|. time immemorial has been @nsidered as the <7
Wa standard»text-book" on^Astrology ans all ogee * |
| works like Jataka Chendrika, SarviTseha Chintá- E
a
esa Oo. "d ^ ^ne D [ui = ^" o7 EN EU:
e CIS “UP State Museum, Lucknow A ~
mec L6 Á a A

re ee eRe eT wee,
É | n D UMS
i»
S Civ)
mani, etc., come only next to Brihat Jataka. More
than the text, the còmmentaries by Bhattotpala
have made Brihat Jataka immortal and aStandard
work. A brief summary of Bhattotpala’s life, is
given under Chapter IV on page 119 of this work.
The Astrological Magazine has also devoted many
pages to his work and times. This English versiea
of Brihat Jataka by my father is nota mere tránslation as is found in the other editions of Brihat. .
Jataka but the ripe experience of Mr. B. Suryanarain Rao for over 60 years in the field of
Astrology and his sound judgment on doubtful
points with «s clear and as convincing language
as ever written in astrological literature and to
which standard very few have come up so far as
my humble knowledge goes. As one who satat — |
his feet and learnt a few invaluable gems of as- `.
trologicai principles. 1 have placed this fourth
edition, through the kind solicitude of my nephew M.
Prof. B.V. Raman. The inclusion of the original |
. slokas in Devanagari, will it is hoped appeal toa Ac
wider circle of astrological students.
B. LAKSHMINARAIN RAO, B.A.
: ^ Tet
BANGALORE, f
cand © à Gum | :
^ UP State Museum, kücknow ss MN tang -

^ PREFACE
In presenting the English translation of
E:ihat Jataka, to the educated. public of the world,
I make no appeal, for.their indulgence. This is a
‘monumental work,. were the difficulties in
translating a beautiful, technical and suggestive
work in Sanskrit had to be surmounted by hard ~
labour, profound research, want of adequate expressians in a poor and non- -constructive language
like the English by the selection of the most comprehensive expressions and by laborious mental
~enalysis, which would have tendency to minimise
4 ' the linguistic incongruities so difficult to reconcile.
| ~ How far I have succeeded in my attempfs to simplify the technicalities by my notes is a matter
for decision by the succeeding generations. — -
fn my introduction to the English translation
LR of Sarvartha?Chintamani I have plainly referred _ >
mE to these difficulties and doubts and would refer
"k'-- the readers to that work for greater explanations.
| ° The priceless commentaries of Bhattotphala in œ»
| Sanskrit on Brihat Jataka, have been fully utilised a
-. by me in the course of my work and if I am to ~,
express my sense of gratitude to anybody 5 have .
. to do so to him. “Most of the English wosks on ..
astrology are sorry performances ané.no reliance `
7 can be placed upon them. If Warahamihira is to so
be fespested as the author of Brihat,Jataka—hispos commentator deservéseyen greater "id
^ Dad on 2 OCC t
UP State Museum, Lucknow

v Y a
^ a : AEN Lae F,
p eu) ~
credit for the splendid way in which he has not
only made clear many of the obscure passages
but also for the valuable quotations he fas given
so copiously and so aptly in the course of his work.
Envy and meanness are the index of lower minds
and appreciation and generosity are the indica- 1
tions of a nobler psychic development. I, shell Ws
close this preface with a simple request to" my |
readers that when they read through my notes |
they cart never complain of wasting their time. i
Their intellects will be sharpened and their know- n
ledge will be expanded.
iHunsomaranahalii, $ è |
Mysore Province, ES ova |
: mos ~ B.SURYANARAIN RAG.— |
§ dams ‘| é h f |
^ UP State Museum, -Cucknow” à i ; e |i
t E ear

it
: CONTENTS
Chap.
| I. EXPLANATION OF TECHNICALITIES USED 600
a E The Glory of the Sun—Astrology defined—
Hora, its Conception—Time Personifled—Cóhsti-
: x tution of the Zodiac—Signs and human organs—
Physical nature of Rasis—Planetary Ownerships— Vargas or six-fold divisions of a rasi and
their lords—Derivation of Sanskrit terms—Signif fication of Rasis—Different opinions about
| Hora and Drekkana—Exaltation dad Debili-
| tation points—Vargotiamamsa—Significations of
|| houses—Measurement of signs and when they
MA become powerful—Colou’s of the signs—
DNO Houses, what they denote.
Il. GRAHAYONI PRABHEDA OR PLANETARY
Tabs e NATURES, ETC.
o ance of Seven in Nature—Power of the Mind—
Planets and colours, castes, and sexes—Seasons
and flavVours—Aspecting angles or Drishti—
E Friendship and Enmity—Temporary relations—
y ' 7^ ^ Sthanabala—Digbala—Chestabala — Kalabala—
E o ^? Sik sources of strength and their results.
JII. VivoNI JANMA ADHYAYA OR MANIFOLD BIRTHS...
: _ Clues for the differentiation of species other
j -fhan human—Animal births and their organs—
Birth of Birds and Plants. , 9
*o ego. ^a S pene.
À * - IV. NISHEKA OR CONSUMMATION 07 MARRIAGE
2 The part played by Mars and thé Moon ez |
- menstruation—Forms of sexualHicnion—Wben »
or
iP Bai us
| Li UP State Museum, Lucknow
y i
Page
Political divisions among planets—Signific- `

E A
me (viii)
S
Chap. Page
IV.—(cont.) A ^ f
conception takes place—Effect of Birth time on
and pregnancy—Birth of Eunuchs—Birth of
Triplets, etc.—Sex determination—Process leading to pregnancy—Development of the foetus in
by, choice—Malfornfations—-Dumb,* dwarf, deaf,
cripple children—Duration of gestation.
n
V. JANMA KALA LAKSHANA OR PECULIARITIES OF
BIRTH A
Father’s whereabouts at birth—Unnatural
births—Illegitimate birfhs—Divination of. the
nature of the place child was born in—When the
child is forsaken by its mother--«Birth rectifications—Lying-in Chamber described—Divisions
of the human body—Organs affected by evil
conjanctions.
VI. BALARISHTA OR EARLY DEATH
of early death—Yogas killing mother as well as
the child—Quick death—Death within one year—
Time of death—Importance of Jupiter in Arishta
Bhanga—Antidotes for early death.
VII. AYURDAYA OR LONGEVITY
Number of years shared by each planet—
Reductions—Different views— Period contributed
hy Lagna—Drisyardha Harana—Kroorodaya
x Harana—Sathrukshetra Harana—Moudhya Han ` rana—Longevity- of Animals—Combinations
[^ produci;g ful loigevity—Conflicting theoriesand
rs their recouciliat‘on—Jeevasarma and his school.
^ 57 —Sathyacharya and Lagna Ayus—Excertions
rae r
4^ UP State Museum, Lucks ^ &
en
Elders—Abortion and easy delivery—Solar rays |
the womb— Planetary influences by stages—Sex, ^
ec
Combinations for immediate death—Period '
.to the apalicability of ,Avurdaya calculations, .

jd
a
Page
DASANTARDASA— PERIODS AND SUB-PERIODS ... 242
Determination of the ruling Dasa “and the
succeeding onés—Rules allocating sub-periods
among other planets—Purna, Rikta, Arohini and
Avarohini Dasas—Dasas producing mixed results—Peculiarities of Lagna Dasa—Naisargika
"Dasas—Results of the Sun's Dasa—Results of
the Moon's Dasa--Resufis of Dasas of other
planets—How results are determined—Results
enjoyed in dreams and thoughts—Some salient
points in judging Dasas.
ASHTAKA VARGA E. pugnet .. 279
Ashtakavarga and its relation to transits or
Gochara—Benefic dots of different planets—Importance of AshtakavargsC-Interpretation of the
dots and their application—Nature of results.
KARMAJEEVA OR PROFESSION af ... 294
Determination of the source of livelihood— ^
Inherited wealth—Legacies through friends or
women—Combinations for becoming a dealer in
perfumes? bullion, drugs, agriculture, minerals,
etc.—Yogas indicating an author, a mathemati-
^cian, poet, priest, etc.—Combinations to bring
money by various means.
RAJA YOGA OR COMBINATIONS FOR ROYALTY
. Cruel planets and Kingship—Combinaticas
“for political poyer— Illustrations of Raja Yogas—
Petty and mighty kings—Kings and character—
Combinations showing elevation, tc-Boyalty— '
Weak Raja Yogas— Time of pscencancy to the”
throne—When ‘kings surrender—Combinations. re
for Bandits. A we de 5
^5 Š ^ ^ men pine
Yos f. :
. UP State Museum, Lucknow

Chap.
ars
NABHASA Yooas x oreet 1832 id
Varieties of Nabhasa Yogas—Asraya Yogas < |
and their results—Akriti Yogas and results—, Ah.
Certain improbabilities—Speculations on the 3
pre-historic planetary set up—lIllustrations on |
Akriti Yogas and Sankhya Yogas—Merger, of . M.
different Yogas—Individual results produced by
various Yogas—Nabhasa Yogas compared with |
other Yogas. :
CHANDRA YOGADHYAYA—RESULTS FROM |
LUNAR POSITIONS AND CONJUNCTIONS 42961. c
Mvon's angular positions and, resuks— |
Adhi Yoga—Sunapha--Quotations on the can- |
cellation of Kemadruma—Importance of Navamsa—Yoga permutations—Dhurdhura Yoga— _,
Great wealth—Results of benefics in Upachayas illustrated. 2
DWIGRAHA YOGADHYAYA—RESULTS FROM THE > cys
CONJUNCTION OF Two PLANETS ... 380
Results of the Sun’s conjunction with otber " A
planets—Lunar conjunctions—Mars with others
— Mercury and Jupiter—Venus and Saturn.
PRAVRAJYA YOGA—RENUNCIATION OF TE^" Me.
WORLD OR SANYASA Lee ...^388 - |
, Concentration of planets in a single house
desirable—Varieties of Sanyasa or asceticism— ^ .
- Planets in combust and sanyasa—Royal ascetics ;
*—Time of Renunciation. => J
RIXSHASILADHYAYA—INELUENCES OF CoNSTELLAT;ONS.. :
~~ Tbe 27. constellations and the peculiar mental
. and phys/zil characteristics produced on man.
a
^ UP State Museum, Lucknow‘ SA ;
a A ^

Or è
F = (xi) b>
o F a
Ni Chap. Page
id XVII. RASISILADHYAYA OR THE LUNAR EFFECTS IN
a TÉE VARIOUS SIGNS ... B ... 401
2 | E he The Moon in 12 signs—The Moon in Aries,
3 Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, etc.
m XVIII, RASISILADHYAYA—THE RESULTS OF PLANETS
^ IN VARIOUS Rasis — ...^ ae ... 409
Du I ra »
| Solar results—Mars in Aries, etc.—MerA cury’s results—Jupiter, Venus, Saturn in Aries,
| ' etc.—Results of the Ascendant—Hints for judgb^ ing the influences.
| XIX. DRISTI PHALADHYAYA—RESULTS OF PLANET-
| ARY ASPECTS d ism ... 426
oa The Moon in^Aries,.cic., aspected by other
planets—The significance of special aspects—AsSENS pects from planets in fall and exaltation—Aspects
producing Astrologers, Kings, Barbers, father
> ° of twins, thief, commander, washerman, gold-
. smith, etc.—Importance ôf the Moon and the -
- ,aspecting planet residing in the same Hora—
~ Aspects on the Moon by its Drekkana lord—The
Moon's Dwadasamsa—Aspects on the Moon's
Navamsa— When results will be full, moderate
EC. PU ao 40r meagre—How to reconcile conflicting results
EE 7^ ə —Rasi and Amsa results weighed—Aspects on
: the Sun and Lagna Navamsa.
XX. BHAVADHYAYA—PLANETS IN Houses ^... 439
' '^' Bhava defined—The Sun's results—Evil planets in the 6th house—Confusion clarified—Tho
Moon in houses—Stress laid on tte inherent
4 . Strength or weakness of the planet concerned and’ um
iterelation to the rasi occupied—Mars, Mercury .' ^
and Jupiter in the 12 houses-; Vejus in Bhavás;
LU MC k ne UP State Museum, Lucknow Q
LJ

Chap. ;
XX—(cont.)
XXII. PRAKIRNADHYAYA OR MIXED RESULTS sn 469 |
(xii) a
Page
—The controversy over Venus, in 12th or Meena
analysed—Saturn’s results—General Hints.
Varaha Mihira’s writings and certain apparent
contradictions—When planets give full and nil
results.
ASRAYA YOGADHYAYA—CERTAIN SPECIAL
COMBINATIONS n 24 ... 455
Planets in their own houses or friendly
houses—Aspects on Exalted Planets— Results of
exaltation and debilitation—Evil nature of Kumbha—Pianets in Solar and Lunar Hosas—Mioon
in Decanates—Significdnce of Navamsas falling
in Aries., etc.—Vargottamamsa and Dwadasamsa results—Máàrs, Saturn, Jupiter, Mercury e
and Venus in their own Thrimsamsas— The Sun
and Moon in the Trimsamsa of Mars, etc. x
What are Karaka planets—Karaka illustrat- f
ed—Reference to Sri Rama's Horoscope— |
Planets in Ambara and Ambu—Some excep- |
tional cases—The Karaka applied to Horoscope |
as well as Travel—Importance of Mutual Aspects «^ ver.
—Jupiter in Kendra—Time at which a Dasa^ . ` 4
commences and the Rasi occupied by the Dasa : J
lord, at the commencement—Planets functioning
in the beginning, middle and end of a Rasi.
Te
XXIII.. ANISHTADHYAYA OR MISFORTUNES - .. 479
. Prcspezity ^or adversity of Bhavas determined—Twelve-kinds of children—Considera- b
~ tion ofthe houses of chifdren and wife—Legiti-
„mate -andjlegitimate children—Adopted son— n
a UP State Museum, Lucknow” A) [LLL NS mE

Chap.
XXIII—(cogt.) 2
Importance of ,Chandra Lagna—Combinations
^*for Polygamy—Determination of number of
wives—Status of the wife—Character of wife—
Loss of children and wife—Combinations show-
| * ing violent or unnatural death to wife—Deformj ^ity in wifg—Barren women—Adultery—Late
| | marriage—Fam?ly extinction—Indications ‘for
: some nasty diseases—A.bdominal diseases—Con-
. sumption, Asthma, etc. —Deafness and decomposition of teeth—Man possessed of devils—
Blindness —Insanity — Slavery—Baldness — Hysteria—Combinations for Imprisonment-—Nature
| of confirement. oe
z b
wit ^
e.
XXIV. STREE JATHAKA. ADHYAYA— FEMALE Horoscw COPY dus ao x
Page
5 Results common or applicable to both men -
and women—Feminine peculiarities—8th and 7th
house functions in a female. horoscope—Modest
^ females—Analysis of the Trimsamsa in a girl's
v B choroscope—Indications for Adultery—Divorce—
Early widowhood—Immorality—Loving hus-
| band—Ceuses for sexual incompatibility—Need
| for reference to astrological principles—Physical
j ^^^ eatures of the husband— Planets giving profici-
? x ^ ency in fine arts—Determination of the age at
which widowhood comes—When wife predeceas-
< es husband—Janma Rasis productive of few
3 children— Planets for a Vedantini.
| XXV. NIRYANADHYAYA—DEATH |
Determination of the kind of disczse which”
4 . may prove fatal—The organ likely to be affected
t —Piace of Death—Unnatural Death-zDarger-
. when Moon is subjected to Panakaithari Yoga—
"ES CT n - UP State Museum, Lucknow

Chap. Page
XXV—(cont). í n
The time of Death —The Fate of the dead body—
The past and future existence of the Soul. re
XXVI. NASTA JATAKA OR UNKNOWN HOROSCOPES ... 549
How to construct a horoscope based oif
question time— Fixing-Jupiter's'position—Season
—Lunar Day—Birth in-daytime or night—Time
of birth—Other methods to fix the lunar month,
lagna, constellation, etc.
XXVII. DREKKANA ADHYAYA vto ^. 580
Description of 36 Drekkanas— Their nature,
special characterisfies—Masculine or feminine— e
Quadruped or Bird—Serpent or Rope—Drekkana lords—Use of Drekkanas especially in
cases of theft, travel, etc.
XXVIII. 'UPASAMHARA ADHYAYA OR CONCLUDING ‘
CHAPTER ... zt : S
Recapitulation of chapters—Enuineration of
chapters of Varaha Mihira’s other works—
Vivahajataka or work on marriage—Grantka =“
samuchchaya or house building—Skandatraya or ^
, astronomy, astrology and natural Phenomena—
) Brihat Jataka—A summary of works by Maha
m Rishis—Errors from time and copyings—Varaha
ES Mihira’s Parentage and place of birth—Aditya
Dasa his father—Kapitha his native village—
Aevantica (Malva) his country—Pruthuyasas—
è Shatparetasat—Purvacharyas—Mangala or InS. vocations ^-Vasishta —Bharadwaja —Parasara —
E. Vyasa zVivrithi — Chintamani — Anusta p-^The
"date and year of the commentaries of Bhattot- .
e UP State Museum, Lucknow 5,
Gyo a

Chap. Page
XXVIII—(cont.) A c
Gi
pala—Bhaskaracharya—Nripasaka—Salivahanaa .Saka—The time and date of the completion of my
. translations and notes on this work—Place of
my residence in retirement—My invocation to
God—tThe astrological diagram at the time of
-conclusion and date and time—My prediction
about the future. prosperity” and success of my
work—The grandeur of Aryan sciences and literature—My genealogy, names and dates—My
father Gopala Row's horoscope—My own
horoscope—Early predictions about my future
greatness—My dream in infancy and its strong
influence on my character—My early ducation
and indifference to studies—My spirit of independence—My first production in Astrology—
My family and “children—A¢ppreciations of my
capacity by the public—My successful National
and Individual predictions—My prediction about
the present Great War—Invocation and Conclusion.
e
Sce ;
UP Stâte Museum, Lucknow

PRINTED AT
RAMAN PUBLICATIONS’ PRESS, ““ SRI RAJESWARI ", BANGALORE-2 ..
N
UP State Museum, Lucknow
ÉD

a a
BRIHAT JATAKA
m ENGLISH TRANSLATION
BY
Próf. B. SURY AN ARAIN ROW, B.A., M.R.A.S., F.R.H.S.
(Fourth Eulition)
INTRODUCTION
I propose to give a very liberal translation of this
famous work gn horoscopy written by the iearned Varaha
Mihiracharya, a native of Kafpitha village, in the country of
Avantika. His father was Adityadasa and both, father and,
his illustrious son, seem to have had very comprehensive
. intellects. In my translation of this ancient Sanskrit work .
I have tried my best to keep to the spirit of the illustrious
aüthor more than to his letter, and in this particular, I gm
yery ably supported by the immortal commentaries of
‘Bhattotpala, but for whose special labours in this field,
the works of Varaha Mihira probably would not have _ a
attained to such wide celebrity and to have been so
usefyl ds they have been now. Dr. H. Kern in Biblio-
“theca Indica (Brihat Samhita, p. 61, Preface) thus ob- o
serves on the merits of this great commentator. * We owe ê
the knowledge of nearly all the particulars about the pre- Ta
decessers of Varaha Mihira to Bhattotpala. This astronomer
seems to havė earned his great reputation, less by hi$ origi- sae
nal compositions than by his comment&rjës on Varaha
Mihira. An original work af his is Baattotpala Horasastra; - ;
a
a on ^
^ UP State Museum, Lucknow
^ A n a
A c a

18 BRIHAT JATAKA
a very short treatise in 75 stanzas. A greater reputation
has been earned by him in his capacity of commentator.
The merits of Bhattotpala as a commentator are held high
and methinks deservedly so. To an unusual knowledge of
the astronomical and astrological writings before his time,
he had the acquaintance with some authors in other branches
of learning like Charaka: With a stupendous memory, he
combines judgment. Where he knows hir deficiency hv tells
us so with a candour, rarely’ met with'among persons of his
class. So headmits for instance, that he is only superficially
acquainted with the technicalities of perfumery (Gandhayukthi). With a profound reverence for his author, whom
he considers tc- be an incarnation of the Sun, he-earnestly
endeavours to explain and (o elucidate the text without
taking it as a mere pretext for pouring forth his own wisdom.
When a passage is ambiguous, he has recourse to the sound .-- |
method of comparing the words of Varaha Mihira, with.
those passages of more ancient authors, whom he thinks him
to have immediately imitated. This method has the additional value, that thereby precious fragments of authors now
utterly forgotten, and perhaps never to be recovered, have
been preserved."'* a
The principal works of Varaha Mihira are: (1) Panchasiddhantica, (2) Brihat Samhita, (3) Brihat Jataka, (4) -.:*-
Laghu Jataka, and (5) Yogayatra.
Bhattotpala has written commentaries on all of these
works as well as on Shat-Panchasika, the author of which
Prithuyasas was the son ofthe famous Varaha-Mihira.
a
’ * The lifé—t Va-ahamihira by Prof. B. S. Rao has b blished
recently and throws much light on the life o een publishe
_ in any book published su far. a liferor the author rarely. found
UP State Museum, Lucknow
j

e
INTRODUCTION 19
e
K The original text in Brihat Jataka extends over 407 stanzas
and upon these Bhattotpala has written 7,500 (slokas) stanzas
as commentaries in the Anustap, excluding the vast number
of quotations which may be taken td be at least, not less
than one thousand.” Thus, for about 400 stanzas of the
original text, this illustrious commentator has given
more than 8,500 slokas, or for every verse in the original, he has given* more than 21* verses in his cammentaries by way of explanation and illustration, Brihat
Jataka contains 27 Chapters aad the Sanskrit used therein
is flowing, graceful and highly expressive of astrological ideas. "
With the help of the learned commentaries of such a.
profound scholar as Bhattotpala, the translation of Brihat:
Jataka, becomes a possibility withthe present generation of*
astrological scholars. Being thoroughly technical, and highly
> compressed in Sanskrit, the translation becomes’ extremely -
difficult, even with the advantage of possessing these full commentaries and when the Sanskrit words admit of two or three
friffereat interpretations it is really difficult to say what was
^ the exact meaning which the author of Brihat Jataka
attached to it himself.
: > These difficulties will be pointed out in their suitable
` . places in the course of this book. I shall now give the names
of the Chapters contained in Brihat Jataka before I begin to
translate the stanzas themselves. The First Chapter is called
Rasiprabhadodhyaya, or that which explains technicalities of
the suBject and it contains 20 slokas (stanzas). The Second
Chapter is called Grahayoni Bhedadhyaya, or that which
explains many of the peculiarities of the planets, their sexes,
chardcteristics, positións, the senses they control, their,
- 5 UP State Muséam, Lucknow e
^ e s E

e
M
20. BRIHAT JATAKA
metals, qualities, different names, natures, the places they
command and so forth; This contains 20 stanzas.
The Third is called Viyonijanmadhyaya or'the combinations of planets which produce insects, birds, trees and so
forth.
This contains only 8 stanzas. This seems to have been
a very important subject which, in my humble opinion,
required more elaborate, freatment, than that which Varaha
Mihira has given to it in his Brihat Jataka. The births of
animals, birds and vegetabíes are certainly more numerous
than those obtained among the human species and although
they may not be so important as man is, still, the subject
required fuller ‘explanation to prevent ordinaty students from
falling into hopeless confusions when making predictions in
the different bhavas. It ® now difficult to say why the learaed author has not written more than 8 s/okas forit. Even
Bhattotpaia is not so explanatory as one might expect on
such an abstruse and difficult subject as the horoscopy.of
arimals and vegetables." In the course of his commentaries in this chapter he quotes only a few slokas from.
Saravali which seems to have been a work of great merit
before his time.
Then in Fourth Chapter he treats of Nisheka Asjhyaya,
or the attainment of puberty, appearance of menses, séxual.
connection, conception, and so forth and this contains 22
Stanzas. In the Fifth Chapter comes the Janmakala
Lakshanadhyaya or the relation of marks, moles, cowls, peculiarities i in birth, chastity and vicious nature of the mother,
etc., and this extends over 26 stanzas. A description of the
nature of the hause where the birth takes place, peculiarities
- of delivezy,. aud; the Character and position of «he females
E UP State Museum, eee p
— ae

mang aaa
INTRODUCTION *21
e . D
who collect at the critical time, are also given with a view to
correct the inaccuracies of» birth time, with reference to
actual surrd'undings on that important occasion: The Sixth
Chapter is called the Balarista or the treatment of planetary
conjunctions for early deaths, and those peculiar positions
of the planets which prevent early death and prolong the
life to, greater periods. This chapter is very important.
The age of the chjid is first, to*be determined afd then
only, other events should be‘consulted. If good pcriods or
conjunctions of planets come after the man’s death they
serve no earthly purpose and therefore Varaha Mihira, first
gives the, principal combinations for early death, after an
examination of Which, if the ghild is found to possess long
life, he asks the readers to read the other chapters and ascripe the principal events to their Proper periods and subj periods. This important chapter contains 12 stanzas, but the
learned commentator has added very valuable and extensive
quetations, which would be of great use to the students of
astrology. The Seventh Chapter is called Ayurdayadhyaya,
gnd it treats of the terms of life, which each planet is able to
give at the time of, birth, by its position, direction, collateral
strength, exaltation, retrogression, etc., and how to find out
the-tata‘snumber of years of the life of man whose horoscope
formsthe subject of examination. This contains 14 stanzas, but
the commentator has given a very elaborate account, wbich
clearly and definitely explains, what must be considered the
most important part of the man's horoscope. In the Eighth
Chapter the subject is called Dasantardasa Adhyaya, and it
treats of the major and minor periods.of planets, with the
influences they are capable of exerting during their controlling times. *This contains 23 stanzas, and kas tæn largely ^
Y ^ M
a UP'State Museum, Lucknow `
^ e aree ^
a p a
ile

22 BRIHAT JATAKA
commented upon by Bhattotpala. In the Ninth Chapter, he
treats of Ashtakavarga or the relative strengths of the planets
and the rising sign (Lagna) by their occupation of peculiar
positions, and the extent of good and evil they are capable of
producing while they are moving by gochara in the various
signs. Thisisa sort of balance sheet of the planetary influences, which should be carefully studied by the astrological
readers, as it would enable them to measure the quantity of
good which may be expected from the planetary positions
during the future career of the native. This extends over
8 stanzas but is full of technical language.* The Tenth
Chapter goes under the name of Karmajiva Adhyaya and is
one of the most imporant in the field of astrology, as it
determines the means of livelihood and what will be the
success of the man in nis eartüly career. This chapter
contains only 4 slokas which are very suggestive and which,
when properly understood, give the astrological adepts a
good clue to the finding out of the avocation or line of bvsiness which would best pay a man and the extent to which
he can hope to inherit any property. But I must say tha*
Varaha Mihira, could have, with greater advantage, written -
something more about a matter, which is of -paramount
importance to all terrestrial creatures, like men. — Venkatesa,
on the other hand, in his Sarvartha Chintamani expanüs his
observation on this subject and takes the readers to great
many details which are of the utmost value to the reader’of
astrology. Chapter T Eleventh gives combinations for
. * This may be studiec with advantage with the help of the latest
publication ón this - subject, viz. Hindu Predictive Astrology by B.V.
t Readers are’advistd to go through the II and X Chapters of
© Sarvartha Cuiramani, English translation by Prof. B. Sutyanarain Rao .
e
UP State Museum, Lucknow
r ake p
r
oa
[ES

tna
Be
ae
ERES v a
INTRODUCTION 293
e LÀ D
Rajayogas and hence it is called Rajayogadhyaya. These
are all combinations, which give men Political or kingly
power, and as such, have little significance for: the ordinary
masses, most of whom even in their wildest dreams, do not
aspire to royal position or power. But this chapter is very
important for all theselambitious souls-whether born in royal
familje’ or not—who have a great desire to become political
leaders, and who aspise to become Chiefs or Kings in course
of time. This chapter contains 20 slokas, ané is well
worth a careful study. There are Neechabhanga Rajayogas,
and Rajabhanga Neechayogas. In the first case, there
are some men, who have humble birth, and subsequently rise
to the kingly power. Hitlery Napoleon and Hyder afford
examples for these kinds of luck. The second contains
,, cwmbinations, where mighty Kis loose their power and'
become humble men. History gives many examples, where
` rulers have lost their territories, and have sunk to the level
of ordinary men or pensioners. :
æ » Then we have Chapter Twelve, called Nabhasa YogaJern in which according to various permutations and
combinations of planets and their relative positions towards
each other, about 1,800 varieties of conjunctions have been
shown«o be possible by Bhattotpala in his commentaries.
* This extends over 19 stanzas. The Thirteenth Chapter is
denoted as Chandrayoga Adhyaya, and explains the results
of the position of Moon from the Sun, the position of
benefigial planets with reference to Moon and the occupation
of the 2nd and 12th houses from the Moon and this contains
9 stanzas. The Fourteenth Chapter goes, under the name of
Dwigrahayogadhyaya ar the. results ta be ascertained when
two or thrée planets join together in a house. This comprises”
z ^ UP'State Museum, Lucknow `
a a b
^ LJ

24° BRIHAT JATAKA
only five slokas. The Fifteenth Chapter is called Pravarrajja
Yoga Adhyaya, in wbich combirations are sketched out for
giving great religious merit, and explaining the various
Sanyasa (ascetic) yogas. This contains four stanzas.. The
Sixteenth Chapter bears the name of Rukshasiladhyaya and
explains the principal characteristics, which result in the body
and mind of man by the influences exercised by thé rising
constellátion at the time of birth. The Seventeenth Chapter
takes the-reader to the influences resulting from the position
of Moon in each of the twelve zodiacal signs and is called
Rasisiladhyaya. The former contains 13 slokas while the
latter counts 12 stanzas one for each house occupied by
the Moon. The Eighteenth Chapter is also Called Rasisila,
from the fact that it explains the results of the occupation of each of the houses (7asis) bythe Sun, Mars, Mercury,
Jupiter, Venus and Saturn. This is an important chapter
and extends over 20 stanzas. The Nineteenth Chapter —
goes under the name of Dristi Phaladhyaya and it explains
the results of the planetary aspects upon each other and
upon the lagna and other houses. This contains 9 s/okas.'
N
The Twentieth Chapter is called Bhavadhyaya, and contains
explanations for finding out the results of the planets occupying the different bhavas or significations from the birth or
rising sign and this contains 11 stanzas. Chapter Twenty-one
is called Ashrayayogadhyaya, and contains directions to
estimate the relative position of the native, both with reference te, his own community and that of the society, where
he lives Ten stanzas compose this ckapter. Twenty-second
Chapter goes-urder the name of Prakeernadhyaya and explains the Karaks of cach of the planets, in their positions
"relative "to "tk cthers and contains 6 stanzas.” Chapter
JA
A
z UP State Museum, Lucknow | «
€ Ls
r a
p Z

JE ?
INTRODUCTION :25
Twenty- ahred is called Aristadhyaya or that whiçh explains
combinations for all misforżunes, that humanity is subjected
to and contains 17 slokas. Chapter Twenty-four goes under
the name of Streejatakadhyaya and treats of the special
combindtohsl which affect the feminine classes. Here the
author gives some combinations, which are peculiar to females, and which cannot be applied to males. Pregnancy,
chastity, certain bodily pecüliarities, etc., can only be attributed to females and they arevall given here. This chapter
extends over 16 stanzas. Theh we have the important
Chapter Twenty-five which is called Niryanikadhyaya which
explains the combinations of planets for death, mode of
death and other circumstances connected with that final
event of human existence on this earth. This contains 15
| Stenzas. Chapter Twenty-six isequally important. There `
are many who have no horoscopes and who are anxious to
‘know their future in the light of astrology. This is called `
Nsstajatakadhyaya and gives directions to find out the year,
ftanzas'are devoted to explain these principles for finding
out lost horoscopes. Chapter Twenty-seven is devoted to
the explanation of the Drekkanas which are 36 in number
and wese knowledge will be useful for various astrological
-purposes. This contains 36 s/okas. Chapter Twenty-eight
is called Oopasamharadhyaya and contains enumeration of
the twerity-seven chapters the author has written, and also
the contents of the chapters, he has explained in his Yatra,
a work on the solution of questions put and predictions
based upon the time at which they are „moed » Rememberp date and time of the person's birth. Seventeen
ing all these chapters and the contentsgthey, Speak of I shall,
now take amy readers to a liberal translation of she Stanzas ^
M UP" State Mus@um, Lucknow
a e a ^

26: BRIHAT JATAKA
in Brihat Jataka, dwelling particularly at considerable length
where the meaning is obscure, CT difficult, and where without explanations the spirit of the author cannot be properly
grasped. The last Chapter contains ten verses and the total
therefore exceeds a little more than four hundred s/okas.
The work is very suggestive and requires very high intellects
to properly understand it. The translation simply‘ speaks
of the original stanzas as I „havè grasped them and therefore, may not correctly represent the true meanings of tlie
author. Inall works of translation from one language to
another, readers should specially remember that the translation gives the-purport as understood of the original by the
translator and not perhaps as the original’ author meant.
This work of translation becomes extremely difficult, when
one has to present his"ideas from a richer constructive
language like Sanskrit, in a progressive and yet imperfectly E
formed language like that of English. The compounding '
of words, their abbreviations, the various meanings into
which words are capable of being interpreted, and the short,
pithy and suggestive Sutras, which are in the Sanskri?works;.
can never be appropriately represented ima poor language ^
like the English. Added to this the extensive developments
in Astrology, Vedantha, Yoga, Sankhya and M^ómamsa
philosophies, which the ancient Sanskritists had made" dur-«
ing their earliest periods of existence, throw considerable
obstacles in the way of good and appropriate English translation, for the fact that in the English language, most of
those ideas, are absent and such of: those which ane just
now beginning: ta be introduced, are done so in their original forms for want of.proper English words and syllables.
- We have nothing like Sutras in the English lahguage and
A UP State Museum, Lucknow < a 3 :
r
n n e
r
ee}
tse),
si

"m
INTRODUCTION 2
so long as it remains in its present form itis not possible
to conceive that any Sutras, can possibly be spun out of it.
The word Hari in Sanskrit has about 20 different meanings,
and so also many other words. So'far as I have known
of the English language, there is hardly any word which,
with the same spelling, has even four different meanings.
The , Adhyaharas (words, sentences, verbs or ideas to be
understood) are mang im the otiginal Sanskrit, and they
cannot be properly represented by any suitable words in the
English language. Under thtse linguistic, shastraic and
sutraic difficulties it is absolutely impossible to either
properly understand the original Sanskrit texts, or to put
them before the intelligent public in a way that would be
free from faults or criticism.
Ld `
EE.)
kl
D
a
a o A g ae
^ te x9 DNE S
^ > UP State Museum, Lucknow s
LI a ^ *

A
a ^n
E
E
t
bes c) Ü
he
5 K A
D e T Cr m
TRI et
he E ^s
c 3 A e
UP State Museum, Lucknow ,
W n 5
hy

PEJ
LJ
+ oft ORTI FA: N
"T IS ST TAHA N
BRIHAT JATAKA
WaT ASST:
HTT RERI: qut TANSAHA
WAAL RIA Asai secet |
aaa AON FATA 3: sat
ME EE TRAIAN TA: NRN
2 CHAPTER I
50 EXPLANATION OF TECHNICALITIES USED
J Stanza 1. —The Sun, who is one of the Ashta-
^ Murthies of Siva, who forms the path for those who
go to Moksha, who represents Atma for those who
.are^well versed in Atmavidya, who accepts the
results of the sacrificial rites, who is the master of
Amaras and Jyotishas ; who destreys, creates. and
proteats the Lokas, who is praised in the Vegas i in
various forms, who is Possessed. of many rays’ and
who is the lamp of the three worlds; may he grant
us speech’? 9. Sait? oin e
z a? is) e
*. UP Stotd Museūm, Luck (pe
- ^. 4 UP State Museum, Lucknow a

3C - BRIHAT JATAKA [Ch. I, St. 1
4 NOTES
The amplification of these passages will take us to any
extent as Varaha Mihira has condensed in the course of this
stanza, a world of scientific ideas which it would be impossible to explain in brief notes. Usually all Hindu works
are addressed to Brahma, Vishnu, Maheswara, or to any
one of the three grandest forces in Nature, Saraswathi,
Lakshmi or Parvati. Tks learned author takes a departure
from this usual custom, and justifies in this stanza, his
choice of the glorious Sun, in whom all the greatest visible
and invisible agencies, are combined for creation, protection
and destructicn of the worlds. The Ashta (8) Murthies of
Rudra are—(1) Surya (Sun), .(2) Jalam (Water), (3) Mahi
(Earth), (4) Vayoo (Air), (5) Vahni (Fire), (6) Akasa (Sky),
(7) Yayajuka (Sacrificial Ye*former) and (8) Soma (Moon).
These are the principal agencies in the formation of the
worlds. The first part also means with a slight variation
from Sasi to Sasa that the Sun gives light to the body of the
Moon, asit is composed of water and will otherwise be
lustreless. Sasi Brit will mean Siva as he is represented as
bearing the Moon on his head ; Sasa Brit means who bears
arabit-like shade in his globe. Bhattotpala, the learned
commentator of Varaha Mihira’s works, considers §asi Brit
as the (Sadhu) approved reading. Moksha is the emancipation from all future births, and final incorporation with
the Supreme Intelligence. Atma represents the essential
principle in man roughly translated into soul. Atmavidam
are those who are acquainted with the knowledge relating to
sou! ana who are after Para Brahma. Amaras are those
“who have no Marana or mortis (death) hence the Devatas
-~ of the Hiada philosophy. Jyoitisham represeat the stars
UP State Museum, Lucknow

my coo
(t
LJ
? Ch. 1,St0.29 Public DonSA CREPTCY ATR TAY eGangotri
‘and planets, who are shining with light (Jyoitis). Yajats
are those who perform Yagnas or sacrificial rites according
to the dictg contained in the Vedas ; for those sacrificial
rites, the presiding deity is the Sun as all Ahuits or offerings
are tà be made to him (Fire is another form of the Sun) and
he distributes their fruits among the various Devatas to
whom „they are offered. Lokas are fourteen in number :
(1) Atala, (2) Vitala, (3) Sutala, (4) Mahatala, (5) Talatala,
(6) Rasatala, (7) Patala, (8)* Bhuloka, (9) Bhuvarloka,
(10) Suvarloka, (11) Mahaloka,, (12) Janoloka, (13) TapoJoka, and (14) Satyaloka. Vedas are four: (1) Rig Veda,
(2) Yajur Veda, (3) Sama Veda, and (4) Atharvana Veda.
The Sua is called Sahasra Kirana (Thousand rayed).
Thrilokas are: (1) Swarga,*(2) Martya and (3) Patala.
Varaha Mihira invokes the help o$ the glorious and mighty ;
Stn to grant him speech to coniplete his work without any
. difficulties and breaks. He uses the editorial (we) in his.
book.
WMT ATT WES: WAY RN |
DUTA WRTTHITIHÉ
Ve mAai TATA ATT HU I
» Stanza 2.—Although there are great many
works ably written by intelligent men is accordance with excellent literary style, many
people get dispirited in trying» to.¢ross the wast
ocean of horoscope knowledge; to'such I offer.
"o A e *
© UP State Museum, Lucknow 2
e e
° y e

. - PE Y a
a small boat, constructed with metre of various
kinds, short but very suggestive and full of instructive ideas, to enable them to cross this o€ean.
NOTES ` UE
Varaha Mihira here tries to justify his publication. He
admits the existence of grand and elaborate works before
his time, but thinks that from their colossal nature, many
who approach them (oceans of science) get dispirited when
they look to the vast ocean of Astrological science, which
they want to cross. The works which were before him
were those composed by Vasista, Gargi, Parasara, .Vyasa,
Badarayana, Chanikya, Mandavya, Pulisa, Romaka, Surya,
Brahma, Soma, and Kasyapa. The most versatile
works on horoscopy „were those. of Gargi, Badarayana, Satyacharya, Maya, Yavana and Vishnugupta Gr
CC-O. In Public po RIHAT JATARA ^ and Sqengour St. 2^
Chanikya. He also declares, that his work is short but very .
suggestive and written in such varied and rich Sanskrit
prosody (metre) that the readers of his work will find it highly
interesting and instructive. I do not know how far “ths
statement of Varaha Mihira can be supported by actual facts.
On the other hand, Varaha Mihira’s boast that Swalpam
vritta vichitra martha bahulam may most advantageously
and appropriately be attributed to the Sutras on astrology
composed by Maharishi Jaimini, who was the disciple of j
Veda Vyasa and the author of the immortal Purvamimamsa.
But we are not to find fault with his motto. There is no
doubt’ whatsoever that his Sanskrit metre is excellent, his
ideas grand and his language as concise as possible, which
mav‘ be classitied’ in’ merit inferior only to the Sanskrit
Sutras. . ck wm -
r yee b y
UP State Museum, Lucknow

Ch. I, St. 3] INFLUENCE OF TIME 32893
e LJ 9 x
RIANA TST TAS TTT |
FA TIAA alle FAA qfi TATA NAN
** Stanza 3.—The science of astrology is called
Hora Sastra from the compounding of the two
words Aho and Ratri and the dropping of the
first and last letters; and it speaks `of the
results of the good and bad deeds done by men
in their previous births.
NOTES
AG in ‘Sanskrit means day and Ratri means night.
The author here syggests that „this Hora Sastra or the
,o, ‘fluence of time is indicated by the positions of planets.
at the time of birth. i
3 The words, horoscope, horologue (clock) and hour are
derived from this Sanskrit root and signify the influence of
me on men and objects. Some people, not understanding
the original word Vanchanti properly, think that Varaha-
^" mihira borrowed this science from the Greeks where Hora
means a portion of time as also in Latin. They cannot commit
a greater mistake. I have shown by elaborate and irrefutable
^ arguments that asttology was far more ancient than the
age ascribed to Grecian and Roman civilisation, that the
Egyptians, Assyrians, Chaldeans and Abyssinians had
borrowed their civilising influences from the Aryans cf India
in remote antiquity arfd that many thousands of years before
Varaha Mihira appeared, the science of -astrotogy had. beën
perfected and left to the,succeeding generations for study and
guidance." Parasara and Vyasa are well Knowr Máharishis
2 a (dye Statà Muséum, Lucknow

„work i in aiy,.giver direction:
34 BRIHAT JATAKA [Ch. I, St. 3
and if Vasista was the Purohit of Sri Rama, Parasara was
the grandson of the venerable sage. Vyasa was the son of
Parasara and Vyasa plays an important part in fhe Mahabharata. It was he who composed it, and brought the Vedas’
together which had been probably gathered and collected by
Garga, also a famous astronomer and astrologer. Parasara
must at least be more than 5,000 years old. The" word
Horasastia was applied to his astrolegical works and we
are now mostly guided by Parasara Horasastra. Therefore
Vanchanthi used in this stanza which means they say,
should not be taken in a contemptuous sense. Varaha
Mihira pays profound respect to Garga, Parasara, Vyasa
and Suryasiddhantas, and when he uses “they say pene
simply means that the greatest men in the field of astrology
derived the word Hora by*Ahoratsi being cnmpounded ang
the first and last syllables dropped out. Bhattotpala explains
that the zodiac and all its divisions are enclosed in the Womb
of Time and the word Hora therefore means the influence
of ime as indicated by the planets, zodiacal divisions
and the stellar influences at the time of birth of any `
person or object. In the “Introduction to the study of
Astrology ” I have clearly stated about the theory of Karma
and the indications of the Karmaic results by the planctary
conjunctions and aspects at the time of bitth. I refer^my
readers to my other works for a very full explanation of
thisallabsorbing topic. Hora in Sanskrit is compounded o£
two letters Ho and Ra, the former implying the earthly
attractions and the latter indicating, the solar influences.
Thus Hora means and iacludes all terrestrial and planetary
influences and tke : results which one can predict from their
Hora also means iu ghaties
e n
A
UP State Muséum, Lucknow.

a
; Ch. I, St. 4] REMEDIAL MEASURES "35
or 1/24th of a day (sunrise to sunrise) as the Hindu day is
divided info 60 equal divisions called ghatikas. Hora further means one's personal influence or magnetism as we say,
ané the way in which it works. All these definitions are
correlated, and signify more or less the influence of time
upon men and their careers here and hereafter.
Bhattotpala raises the vital question about the use of
this knowledge of our past aad future and says that by
knowledge of the future we will „be able to read the existing
evil influences and we can bg adopt remedial measures
recommended in the shastras, to alleviate the miseries. He
clearly indicates that astrology has no fatalism about its
doctrines. It ‘simply reveal? the penalties for breaches of
prope conduct in the previous states of births, and that it.
ið in a man's power to know thé evil, and nip it in the bud
| before it takes root and produces miserable results.
Rg gamag zA wat
GREATS A TATA |
PTAA AAA CAAT TTA
UBT wad STAT: 18 N
Stanza 4.—In the celestial Chakra (globe) the
signs commencing with Mesha and Aswini, are
each formed by nine padams (quarters) of; stars
and govern the following organs of Kalapurusha,
namely, head, face, chest, heart, bety, waist, lower
belly, sexual organ, thighs, kcees? ‘buttocks and
[i HESSEN Rasi, Kshetra, Gribé, Ruksha,
9 < UP State ‘Museum, Lucknow
Te

36 BRIHAT JATAKA [Ch. I, St. 4.
Bha and Phavana refer to and signify the zodiacal signs. í "
NOTES
This stanza is beautifully expressed in the original
Sanskrit and cannot be so concisely put into English.
Varaha Mihira says begin with Mesha and the first „nine
quarters of constellations from Aswinkto form each of the
twelve houses of the zodiac. This celestial circle is divided
into 360 equal divisions called Bhagas or degrees, 30
degrees make a rasi and 2i constellations one zodiacal
house. These twelve rasis from Mesha to Meena govern
the following organs of Kajapurusha (Time and Space
Personified).
There are twenty-seVen, constellations named in the
astrological works and each of these is divided into four
quarters or padams. We get therefore 27 x 4—108 Nakshatra padams. These divided by the twelve zodiacal
houses give nine quarters for each rasi or house and therefore each padam of a star will roughly comprise 34 degrees \
of the zodiacal circle. The following are the constellations :
and signs named in ancient works and Garga and Vyasa
give correct definition of them. -
CONSTELLATIONS
(1) Aswini, (2) Bharani, (3) Krittika, (4) Rohini.
~ (5) Mrigasira, (6) Aridra, (7) Punarvasu, (8) Pushyami,
(9) Asiesha, (10) Makha, (11) Pubha, (12) Uttara. (13)
Hasta, (14) Chitta, (15) Swati, (16) Visakha, (17) Anuradhi, (18) 3yésLta, (19) Moola, (20) Poorvashada, (21)
Uttarashada, Q2) Simvana, (23) Dhanishta, (24) Satabhisha, (25) Pirvabhadra, (26) Uttarabhadra, (27) Revati.
UP State Museum, Lucknow
r

e Ch. T ^st ADAC Domain, bi tized py Wak: IGNS and eGangotri 37
ae ZODIACAL SIGNS
1. Mesha ode Aries , .. Ram
2. Yrishabha ... “Taurus E Bull
3. Mithuna .. Gemini * ... The twins
QU or couple
4. Kataka of Cancer ih Crab
e 5. Simha ae Leo a Lion
“6. Kanya» . Virgo 00 Virgin
7. Thula he, Libra" zh Balance
8. Vrischika ... Scoppio .. Scorpion
9. Dhanus "t Sagittarius... Centaur
19. Makara... Capricorn... Crocodile
lle Kumpbha .. Aquarius... Wateri o bearer
12. Meena ^... Pisces af The fish
* The English equivalents of'the constellations have been
. given in my * Astrological Mirror, to which I refer my,
kind readers. Mesha is always considered as the first
Zodiacal sign in Hindu Astrology and Aswini as the first
cortstellation for all calculations. When a house is equal to
nine quarters of constellations and each constellation furnishes four padàms or quarters, it is easily seen that each
house is measured with reference to 21 stars. Thus Aswini
(4 quarters), Bharani (4 quarters) and the first quarter of
Krittika making nine quarters compose the first sign of the
Zodiac, Mesha or Aries. Then proceeding further it is seen
that Vrishabha (Taurus) is composed of the remaining three =
quarters of Krittika, the four quarters of Rohini and the .
first two quarters of ^Mrigasira or,3 4-4 + 2—9 quarters.
Mithuna (Gemini) is composed of the swo last quartets of
PiSee also Hindu Predictive Astrology Uy B.V, Raman. i
D E ^ up State Museum, Lucknow
s

33 BRIHAT JATAKA (GR St. 4
: si
Mrigasira, the four quarters of Aridra and the first three
quarters of: Punarvasu .or 2+ 4 + 3—9 quarters of the
constellations, Kataka (Cancer) is composed of the last
quarters of Pünarvasu, four quarters of Pushyami and the
four quarters of Aslesha or 1 + 4+ 4=9 quarters. Thus
in nine constellations we get naturally four houses and the
rest of the houses must be similarly treated with reference
to the remaining constellations. | ° f
The different organs of the body dre given here :
Aries-governs 4: . The Head
Taurus n Face
Gemini TT Chest ^
Cancer on Heart. z ^
Leo to belly,
Virgo Wes WaistLibra m Lower Belly (that part óf
the stomach which lies
below the navel and
above the sexual organ).
Scorpio .. X Sexual organ CES:
Sagittarius T The Two Thighs
Capricorn ^s The Two ‘Knees
Aquarius ME The Buttocks
Pisces The Two Feet
Bhattotpala quoting from *Saravali (a learned astrological work) says that those organs of the Kala-
: purusha which are occupied by evil planets indicate want
of devélopment or deformity or total loss or absence
while tose houses which are occupied by benefic planets
e
2 * The English AT aton of this f.
[ais = is famous wo o Ws
"S is under preparation: D ` BRI JENA Raman
LP)
XU :
H
Tu
UP State Museum, Lucknow
Di

. cher SU gp D" OD IA HUMAN BODY 9^ ^39
indicate good development, beauty, health and strength ^
to the organs governed by theme Mesha indicates head.
Sani in it without beneficial aspects will be debilitated. He
represents evil influences and is ealled a malefic. The
pér$on who has this combination will have some disorder
in the head, according to the intensity of the strength of
the evil planet who occupies it. The disorder may be
giddiness, paratysis, wounds, scars, derangement, idiotic
_traces, brain fever, '"Imonomaffia, peevishness, stupidity and
so forth. If Sani joins Kujg in Mesha, then the combination indicates complicated complaints in the head.
Suppose a person has Sani and Kuja in Vrischika and
without any good aspects, the result will be deformation in
the sexual organs, disease, impotency, or something abnormal and unpleasant. If Kuja and Sani occupy Cancer
e. "without good aspects or conjunctions then there will be
irregular development of the heart pain or disease there
.and some chest disorders which trouble the man. The
six sources of strength of the signs as well as the planets
* Who gre there, must be taken into consideration and if the
balance is evil, then the organ suffers much or will be
marked by its absence or rottenness.
= Meat TS TATA GT AAT
ath AAA TTT TAT: |
* qi ARTE FAT FT FA z
AT: eame: ATA Wd lY UI z
Stanza 5.—Meena is represeited’ by Roches SE
lying close to each other witi their heads pointing
DAN 9 ^ 2 o
^ o UP State Museum, Lucknow

40 BRIHAT JATAKA
-` jn opposite directions; Kumbha is shown by'a `
person bearing a water pot ;, Mithuna is indicated
by a man with a club anda woman with? a lute,
in close embrace; Dhanus is: described as, a
Centaur with the hind part resembling that of a
horse and the front of an archer; Makara bears
the representation of the face of a deer with the
hinder part of a crocodile ; Thila represents the
appearance of a man siu a balance in hand;
Kanya is shown by a virgin seated in a boat Sub
a crop in one hand and with a light in the other,
and the other signs are represented by their names
and move in places congenial to their nature.
e^
NOTES i
Pisces is formed of one fish with its tail against the head.
of the other and vice versa.^ The sign will be later on called.
Ubhayodaya or that which can rise either way, for we,see a’
head and a tail on each side of the figure. Kumbha
.in Sanskrit means a pot and Makara means a crocodile.
Thula means balance and Kanya means a virgin. Dhanus
means a bow and the rest are easy tounderstand. The places
most congenial to their natures will be controlled by them and
_they also have a great likeness for such regions and the pro--
ducts of-those regions. Watery surfaces are liked by fish and
crab, ordinary jungles and grassy plains are for ram and Dull.
Deep forests and caves ar? for tion. Streets i in the cities are
for balances. TowaSare for men and women or the couple.
Military grounds arẹ for archers. = ^ ^
UP State Museum, Luckriow 5
ES ^ £N

en Sed disa by Saray 2
| Crocodiles are fond of watery places. Scorpions are fond
» of underground crevices and holes. The representations of
these creatures are very familiar to our readers to require any
inse explanations.
É ARa Para arahen:
; TARNA TTET: |
aa iTA- :
L AAAA: ATERRAT: dU N
Stanza 6.—Kuja, Sukra, Budha, Chandra,
Ravi, Budha, Sukra, Kuja, Guru, Sani, Sani and
Guru are respectively the Jords of the signs and
their divisions from Mesha; the navamsas com-
“ mehce from Mesha, Makara, Thula and Kataka,
etc., Dwadasamsas commence from the “houses
themselves.
KESA NOTES
This*is an important stanza and requires explanation.
. The whole celestialacircle is divided into 12 equal parts each
composed of 30 degrees. A sign or such division of 30
ye >. degrees isycalled a zodiacal house, Bha, Bhavana, Ruksha,
F agna? Rasi, etc.
. When this is divided into 2 equal parts each part is
called a hora (15 degrees). When it is divided into 3 equal
parts each part is called a Drekkana or decanate (10 degrees),
4 when a house is divided into 9 equal divisions each is called
a navamsa (34 degrees), when a rasi is ‘divided into 12 eqhal
divisions each is called a Dwadasamsa Qi degrees). Whena
P house is divided into 30 equal divisions. egchsie.called, a:
` * UR State ‘Museum, Lucknow >
eim
ZODIACAL DIVISIONS 4l

è
Ch. I, St. 6
42 BRIHAT JATAKA
Trimsamsa (1 degree). There isa beautiful order given for
navamsas. As there san be no break in the counting of
the zodiacal circle we must reckon always continually
round, Divide Mesha into 9 parts each of which isa
navamsa of course. Du
Taking the divisions regularly we have the 1st navamsa
of Mesha owned by the lord, Mars. The second is.governed
by the lord of the 2nd heuse fram Mesha, viz., Vrishàbha or
Venus. Then the third i is governed by the lord of Mithuna
or Mercury, fourth by mel Moon, fifth by the Sun, sixth
by Mercury, seventh by Venus, eighth by Mars and the ninth
byJupiter. Thus we have had the nine divisions »f Mesha
regularly governed by the lords of the houses, consecutively
from it. After the completion of Mesha we begin with
Vrishabha and as Makara commences after Dhanus the | last
navamsa of Mesha, the first navamsa of Vrishabha Twill >
be begun by Makara, 2nd by Kumbha, 3rd by Meena,
4th, 5th, 6th, 7th, 8th and 9th by Mesha, Vrishabha, Mithuna, Kataka, Simha and Kanya respectively. The
rulers of these houses are also the lords of their riavamsas. Then the last navamsa of Vrishabha ends with Kanya _
and the first navamsa of Mithuna should commence with -
Thula. From Thula we take the 9 houses respectively as .
navamsas of Mithuna and the last navamsa of it-will be
Mithuna itself. Then for Kataka we begin with itself and
its ninth navamsa falls in Meena. Then for Simha we have
to -begin the first navamsa again from Mesha. Thus for
Mesha, Simha and Dhanus begin the navamsa from Mesha.
For "rishabha, Kanya and Makara begin with Makara ; for
Mithuna, Thula and Kumbha from Thula and for Kataka,
" Vrischika arid Meena begin with Kataka. The.six divisions,
cy
UP State Museum, Lucknow — -
^ s a
t
CaaS

CN
LJ
Ch I SO gr Public Domain. Digi ized ADASAMSA and eGangotri 7
Rasi, Hota, Drekkana, Navamsa, Dwadasamsa and Trimsamsa constitute Shadvargas or six-fold divisions. For
Dwadasams¢s, the process is easy. Divide Aries into 12
parts and the first Amsa is governed by*Mars, the second by
VenuS;'etc. till we getto the 12th, i.e., Pisces and this will be
governed by Jupiter. Take Taurus. The 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th,
5th» 6th, 7th, 8th, 9th, 10th, 11th and 12th are respectively
governed by Venus? Mercury, the Moon, the Sun, Mercury,
Venus, Mars, Jupiter, ‘Saturn, Saturn, Jupiter and, Mars.
For Mithuna it begins with Mithupa and ends with the 12th
house from it, namely, Vrishabha. The other divisions are
detailedein the next few verses.
Varaha Mihjra seems to follow Satyacharya. Parasara,
Gargi and Badarayana considerably differ from him and his
great teacher. There*are some other writers in astrology
. who have given Shodasavargas or 16 divisions for each
house, and base their results on the relative strength which -
these divisions of time furnish the planets. Each planet
seems to possess a peculiar body whose composition differs
froin ‘those of the others and which possesses peculiar properties of attracting and repelling the component parts of
the solar rays. The solar ray seems to contain all the ingredients humanity wants but in its radiation and reflection
it seems to undergo material changes and often produces
Tesults which are quite antagonistic in their nature to their
parentalrays. Take the pure solar ray as opposed to the
ray which is reflected by the body such as Saturn. In. the
first casa, the ray produces biliousness, energy, generosity
and good health. But when the samesray is reflected by the
body of Saturn, it becomes darkish in velour, produces
inactivity and peevishness, misery and darksOme thoughts ”
. A ` UR State Museu, Lucknow

44 BRIHAT JATAKA [Ch. I, St. 6
and an indescribable abhorrence for all good works. Take
the 5th degree of Aries as the birth time. Then we get the
following Shadvargas for this lagna. Mesha «is governed
by Kuja. The lord of lagna is therefore Kuja I. The
birth has taken place within the first half of Mesha.' It is
an odd sign and the first half of Hora in Mesha is governed
by Ravi. The lord of the Hora is therefore Ravi II. The
birth degree falls within the first 5 degrées of Mesha and
therefore the lord of the 1st Drekkana is its own lord Kuja.
The lord of the Drekkana, is therefore Kuja III. The navamsa of Mesha extends over 34 deg. and therefore the birth
has fallen in Taurus governed by Venus. The lord of the
navamsa is Sukra IV. The birth isin the 5th degree. Each
Dwadasamsa will be 23 degrees. The birth has taken place
. in the 2nd Dwadasamsa. The lord of the Dwadasamsa has
fallen in the 5th degree. The lord of the Dwadasamsa is: ^
Venus V. In odd signs the first 5 degrees in the Trimsa4msa
are governed by Mars and therefore the lord of Trimsamsa
is Kuja VI. ?
Thus summarised we get the following results in” the
Mesha Shadvarga :
Lord of Rasi is Kuja, lord of Hora is Ravi, lord ;
of Drekkana is Kuja, lord of Navamsa and Dwadasamsa is Sukra and lord of Trimsamsa is Kuja. . Thus
in the Shadvarga or six-fold sources of energy 3 divisions are governed by Kuja, one by Ravi and two,by
Sukra. The evil predominates and results must be judged
as such. 3
iro The lord of the <Trimsamsa is Kuja as Mesha is an odd
sign, and as tho birth has fallen within the first 5 Bhagas or
nd degrees, it ig governed by Kuja as will be stated in tne next
^ UP State Museum, Luckfiow « H

tpe
a
Ch. I, St. 7] TRIMSAMSAS 45
stanza 6. The “sik sources of strength for a lagna that fall
for example in the fifth degree of Mesha are: I House lord
is Mars; II Hora lord is the Sun; III Drekkana lord is
Mars. IV The Navamsa lord is Venus ; V The Dwadasamsa lord is Venus; and VI The Trimsamsa lord is
Mars. Analysing we find three sources are governed by the
house lotd which is good, two sources are governed by
Venus, a benefic, this is also good but Venus is inimical to
the lord of lagna, Mars and one source is governec by the
Sun, which is bad, but as the Sur" is a friend of Mars the
evil is partly mitigated.
MEE IEEE EISE EIE tl 9 Ul
Stanza 7.—Mars, Saturn, Jupiter, Mercury
and Venus govern five, eight, seven and five
Bhagas (degrees) respectively in the Trimsamsas
ofthe odd signs while the order is reversed in
. those cf the even signs. The last part of Cancer,
Scorpio and Pisces goes under the name of Rikshasandhi (junction of two rasis or constellations).
NOTES : E
Trimsamsa implies in Sanskrit 30th division. When a
house of the zodiacal circle is divided iato 30 equal divisions
the exatt sources of strength are discussed in Graba agd Bhava Balas:
by B. V. Raman. 4^ > fs
^ .^ UPState Museum, Lucknow -
de
*This is ‘only a rough classification. The methods for finding .

D
46 BRIHAT JATAKA [Ch. I, St. 8
each is technically called a Bhaga or degree of the Western
astronomers. In odd signs like Mesha, Mithuna, Simha,
Thula, Dhanus and Kumbha the arrangementis as follows :
Mars, Saturn, Jupiter, Mercury, Venus,— 30 degrees.
In evensigns like Vrishabha, Kataka, Kanya, Vrischika, Makara and Meena this is reversed, viz. :—
Venus, Mercury, Jupiter, Saturn, Mars, —30 degrees.
The learned Bhattotpala refers to the last navamsaof Kataka, Vrischika and Meena as Rikshasandhis,
and children born during these junctional periods
hardly live unless powerfully aspected by or joined with
energetic benefics. o s
Riksha means in Sanskrit both a zodiacal house Rin ^
and also a constellation (Nakshatra).
As already explained, the end of Kataka is completed
by the last padam (quarter) of Aslesha, the end of Vrischika
by the last padam of Jyeshta and the end of Meena bythe
last padam of Revati. Thus the double signification of
Riksha is most appropriately used by Varahamihira. Ina `
future chapter the author gives sandhis as dangerous to the
prolongation of a child’s life.
Gramang anama ake |
dim ARR TATA Te de N
“Stanza 6. —Kriya, Thavuri, Jitheema, Kulira,
“Laya, Pathone, Jaka, Kowrpi, Thaukshika, Ako-
“kero, Hridioga axd Anthya are names for Mesha,
Vrishabha, Mithuna, Kataka, Simha, : Kanya,
UP. State Museum, Luckhow e

` Ch L St. 8] ` CRUDE THEORIES Ade
te Piui. Vrischika, Dhanus, Makara, Kumbha and
Meena respectively. .
NOTES
VERE in the first chapter has given some curious names occurring in astrology and which are not usually
found in the ordinary Nighantus or dictionaries. This
simple fact seems to have been taken advantage of by some
ignorant and ill- informed “Astrologers, Translators and
Orientalists and several crude theories have been advanced
_with the object of showing that Vatahamihira borrowed his
astrologico-astronomical knowledge from the Greek and
Chaldean works. This is an important question which
cannot be solved‘In a few sentences devoted to the explanatory notes of an English translation.
_ ®I have already pointed dut the merit of Bhattotpala, the
creditable commentator of all the works of Varahamihira in
THE ASTROLOGICAL MAGAZINE, Vol. VIII, but for whose
valfiable explanations, quotations, criticisms and collections,
the werld should have known very little of Varahamihira,
and what’ is more fortunate, the works of a host of most
^ eminent astrologers who preceded Varahamihira, in this
noble science. Parasara, a voluminous writer on astrology
. and'othe? shastraic works in Sanskrit, was the father of
Weda Vyasa, and he must have been at least 5,000 years old
as we find Vyasa figuring prominently in the war of Mahabharata and the subsequent horse sacrifice performed by the
victorious Pandus to exculpate themselves from the famous
butchery we seein the wars between the Kurus, and the
Pandus. Mahabharata was written by Vyasa.” Apart from
this we have now a few Copper plate;gaants, made to Brah- :
mins by the Emperor Janamejaya and these hayen thé Kaliysga’
5 “= UP State acct Wee E e

48 BRIHAT JATAKA [Ch. I, St. 8
year clearly given on them, thus placing their own venerable
age beyond the least shadow cf doubt. These are more than
4,000 years old. Chidambara Aiyar, B.A., who made a
hasty and ill-digested translation of BrihatJataka in 1885
was neither a good Sanskrit scholar, nor a good astrologer.
He possessed considerable capacity in real mathematics and
English translation of Varahamihira’s difficult and technical
works. Under notes to this stanza he thus observes—*‘ All
the above names, excepting Kulira and Antyabha are evidently Greek names—a circumstance clearly indicating that
the intercourse between the learned men of India and Helias
was more than superficial". If a reader “carefully peruses
the commentaries of Bhattotpala re. this stanza, he is struck
with the absence of any reference about these terms ei*her `
to the origin of Greek or Persian astrological sciences.
This famous commentator was no way inferior in capacity or astronomical ability to Varahamihira. He is
original and to a critical mind he even shows greater
acumen and comprehensiveness of this difficult subject than
his author. If really these terms were of Greek origin, he
would have made a note of these significant facts in his
excellent commentaries. Laya is purely a Sanskrit-word for
Lion and the Latin word Leo (Simha) probably derived itc
form from the more perfected sister Sanskrit. Then again
Chidambara Aiyar is entirely wrong when he says that Hrid
Rogr isa Greek term. Hrid or Hridaya refers to heart in
Sans:rit and Roga means disease. This is specially applied
to Kumbha, wkose lord Saniis also the lord of the 12th
house Makara from.it and a child born in Kumbha suffers
from heat rt disease. The term Kriya refers to a goat or
Š D D
z UP State Museum, Lucknow ~
with the help of Sundaresa Shrouti, he began his work of '

o
Ch. I, St. 8] SANSKRIT TERMS 49
s9
* sheep i in Sanskrit and it is a great pity that even a Brahmin
gentleman, through ignorance, shoukd have run away, in these
philological matters, on wrong lines like those of his less
informed brethren, . the orientalists engaged in such
works.
In Chapter VII.—Varahamihira clearly refers to Maya,
Yavana, Manitha and Parasara and Bhattotpala says that
Yavdna was a leafned Mlechha (Mussalman). Thequestion
here naturally arises whether Mlechha can be interpreted
as a mussalman since the datg of Varahamihira is first
century A.D. or prior, he being one of the nine gems of
Vikransaditya’s Court (B.C. 57) vide life of Varahamihira by
me and Mahargud’s date is 6th century A.D. I think that
the word Yavana may be taken to mean as a person belonging to Ivan (Persid) Wherever there was a necessity toacknowledge the source of information, these authors did so
with a grace and frankness which is simply -admirable.-
There is no use of passing off-hand remarks and we cannot
so easily accept foreign origin for Sanskrit words as Col.
Todd could do in his Rajasthan for, he confounds Hercules
with Harikulas (from his own imagination) and Maharishi
Atri with the Greek Artius. Such hasty conclusions are
dangerous: and are greatly misleading. Helios or Hellas
was the name for the Sun God and He is styled in Sanskrit
"as Heli. The Egyptians and Greeks, who borrowed their
civilisation from the ancient Hindus, must have necessarily
taken large number of their words and scientific ideas and
the true explanation for these similarities seems to lie in the
fact that the tide of civilisation which flowed froh, the-Ẹast
to the West, also carried many words and "ideas which were
incorporated (with such local modifiAtiors a; ag was needed) n
4 D ba ^
` P As ^
O 9 ^ UP State Museum, Lucknow

50, CC-O. In Public Domajpigitiged by Saray yT ast and eGanedi' I, St. 10
in their religious and philosophical works. Hora itself has
been beautifully deriveé by Varahamihira and his predecessors, in the science and the whole of Parasara’s vork in this
branch is called Parasara Horasastra. ,
PEACE CCUREICHIRE TAC |
i a Tee aT D ETT Sa TAMA Ul S UI
Stanza 9.—If a planet is in its Drekkana,
Hora, Navamsa, Tritasamsa, Dwadasamsa and
Rasi, it is said to be in its Varga.
NOTES á
The six sources of strength seem to be only for lagna
- and not for all the planets. For Kuja; Budha, Guru, Sukra
and Sani there is no lordsnip in ‘hora. Ravi and Chanara
command no Trimsamsas. Varahamihira here means that
when a planet is in its above divisions it occupies a Varga
and obtains great strength. Hora means a Lagna as well a as
half of it as explained in stanza 6.
Tea: ea Fares:
wien fsa: ara wa |
sieur fare wafer Sa
CA AAAI: TATA || Lo |i
‘Stanza 10.—Vrishabha, Mesha, Dhanus,
Katzka, Mithuna and Makara are Ratribala Rasis
or signs powerfub during night. With the excepE tion of Mithuna Geese same rasis are called Prustoz
fy
D)
= UP State Museum, Lucknow £ à -
DEP

BARES |
Ch, I, St. 11] PRUSTODAYAS .61
ə
dayas. The other rasis, viz., Simha, Kanya,
Thula, Kumbha and Vrischika are called Dinabala Rasis. These with Mithuna are called
Sirshodayas. Meena is called Oobhayodaya.
NOTES
Pyüstodayas are those which are supposed to rise with
their Prusta or tail and'Sirsliodayas are those which rise with
their sirus or head. Oobhayodaya is that which rises both
with head and tail. Meena is répresented as composed of
two fishes one with the tail of the other towards its head.
Thus, in either way, in Meena there will be one head and
one tail on each side'of it. he zodiacal signs are all not
uniformly strong at all times and these timely influences are
inslicated in this manner*by explanation with a view to”
' help the student in judging of the powers of planets and
" houses in their future predictions. i :
. pu diez: aN A RT: i
mis: FERR: AAT |
miaa sep AAT A ne
FORT: E: errata || $2 Ul
Stanza 11.—The signs are cruel and beneficial
régularly, they are also masculine and feminine,
the same are also movable, fixed and common ;
the lords of the cardinal points are theylords Of eae
the triangular houses from Miestia, Vrishabha, ^.
Mitlunaeand Kataka. In odd signs; thefirst hora, |,
a
E
P)
a
^ S ^ UP State Museum, Lucknow e
"e NORIS

52. rc UU BRIHAT JATAKA [Ch. I, St. 11
is governed by Ravi and the second hora by
Chandra and the reverse holds good in the even
signs. The lords.of the Drekkanas are the lords
of the Ist, 5th and 9th in a rasi. E
NOTES
The stanza is very suggestive and confirms the declaration made by the author in stanza 2, wz., that he would
write little and suggest much, The first words krura (cruel)
and soumya (beneficial) in&icate that the Ist, 3rd, 5th, 7th,
9th and 11th signs are cruel and the rest 2nd, 4th, 6th, 8th,
10th and 12th are beneficial. Then again, he says áll these
are regularly masculine and feminine. All cruel signs therefore become masculine, and all beneficial signs become
` feminine. The same rasis again become movable, fixed
and common or double bodied. Mesha, Kataka, Thula and
Makara become movable signs. Vrishabha, Simha, Vrischika
and Kumbha are fixed signs. The rest Mithuna, Kanva,
Dhanus and Meena are’ common or double-bodied signs.
Mesha, Simha and Dhanus represent East; Vrishabha,
Kanya and Makara represent South ; Mithuna, Thula and
Kumbha indicate West ; while Kataka, Vrischika and Meena
show North. . All the twelve signs are odd and even. In
Mesha, Mithuna, Simha, Thula, Dhanus and Kumbka the.
first hora (or the first half of the sign) is governed by the
‘Sun and the second by the Moon. In even signs Vrishabba,
Ae, Kanya, Vrischika, Makara and Meena the first
hora is governed by the Moon while the second nora is
governes. by the Sun.
When a sigh is divided into 3 equal parts (each part
gets therefore aBout 10 degrees) each part is called a" Dreka UP State Museum, Lucknow ^
r
ER e |

ə
an I, St. 12] DIFFERENT VIEWS «93
o
em The first Drekkana in a sign is governed by the lord
who rules that sign. The second párt is under the control
of the lord of the 5th house from it and the master of the
y 3rd Drekkana is the lord of the 9th house from it. If we
. take "Mesha and divide it into 3 equal divisions then we get
3 Drekkanas. The first Drekkana is governed by Mars the
x lord of*Mesha. The second is governed by the Sun the lord
of the fifth house and ‘the third i$ governed by Jupiter the
lord of the 9th. Similarly for: ‘Vrishabha, Venus, Mercury
and Saturn are the lords of the Pst, 2nd and 3rd Drekkanas
respectively. For differences of opinion on these points see
my elaborate notes on the English translation of Sarvartha
Chintamani. ® : è
OX ACOA
, afr End sania ested TATAG |
esed auafe eager] BL
^ Stanza 12.—Some writers on astrology say
that the first hora is governed by the lord of tHat
house while the second hora is governed by the
lord of the eleventh from that house. They further
|. say that the lords of the Drekkanas are: (1) the
1° '.]lord of the first, (2) the lord of the 12th, and (3)
the lord of the eleventh houses respectively.
NOTES $
The author Varahamihira, whose reading seems s have
extended to all the extant works of, astrology ` Hurirfg, his
time, here and there uses the word Kaychit, which. means
some othérs, etc. He appears ton attath esomé sort of,
e^
^ ^ UP State Museum, Lucknow e
^ As " Y
E AMEN CC

54: BRIHAT JATAKA [Ch. I, St. -12
contempt, but at the same time he seems to admit that they
were men of great reputation from whom quotations by him
were not considered disgraceful or beneath his dignity as a
writer of great merit. The commentator Bhattotpala,
occasionally puts in the names of Yavana, Manitha and
Yavanacharya for this term. This shows that in the opinion
of this great and learned commentator these abovenamed
writers existed before Varahamihiracliaarya and attained to
great reputation as astrological writers. This is also confirmed by Varahamihira's ówn verse in Chap. VII of Brihat
Jataka. These writers were therefore in the field of astrology
long before Varahamihira, and were authors of no despicable
reputation, to have been quoted by him as authorities, and also
by his illustrious commentator the learned Bhattotpala. But
some of the views expressed by them were not in agreement
with those of the author of the book, who seems to have held
the Rishies of India in the highest esteem and regard. The first
hora, according to these authors, is governed by the lord of
the house itself. Here there seems to be a great divergenos. in
views which it is difficult to defend or reconcile. * While
Varahamhira and his school of astrologers give the lordship
of horas only to the two planets, the Sun and the Moon, the
other school of astrologers give these lordships tc all the
seven planets. In the above instance of Mesha, the first hora :
would be governed by Mars while the second hora is ruled by
Saturn the lord of the eleventh house. The Drekkanas of
Mesh-then would be governed (1) by Mars the lord of the
first house, Mesha, (2) by the lord of the 12th house Jupiter,
and (3) by the lord of the eleventh house Saturn. It is really
difficult to reconcile these theories and it is more difficult to
-offer, any epiaion upon a matter like this, where modern
r
UP State Museum, Lucknow '

o
Ch. I, St. 13] PLANETARY INFLUENCES 55
astrologers of whatever fame and name they may be, have no Š
data known to them by whjch they tan examine these planetary influeéhces and say thus or thus in contradiction to or in
confirmation of, thewviews held by the different schools of
ancient astrology promulgated by the Indian Maharishis.
Experience along, must be, our test and basis ; it confirms
morg of Varahamihira's views than anything else. The readers are quite welcome to take or &gcept any theory &hey like:
[My father's experience, Of nearly 60 years ip the field
of astrology, specially with regard to predictive and remedial measures and his study of thousands of horoscopes, and °
wide fravel and discussions, have enabled him to give sound
and valid judgments in al] cases, where doubts arise and
it is this aspect of his translation of original works that have
enhanced his reputátion as an astrologer. As he says
Varahamihira's views seem more valid re. Drekkanadhipathis
than the other verisons.] e
U aat a RaR gR | ;
A CO E N
TIRAIRE ATA- :
. reae sada d $3 N
à Stanza 13.-Aries, Taurus, Capricorn, Virgo,
Cancer, Pisces and Libra are signs of exaltation ,
for the Sun, etc., respectively. The 10th, 3rd, 28th,
15th, 5th, 27th and 20th degrees of the above.
signs are deep exaltations ior the Sung, etc, res- ^.
pectively. The seventh from' these are the signs |
and degrees of debilitations for those planets.: — ,
e. e
e
UP State Museum, Lucknow ©
o
e

56,, BRIHAT JATAKA [Ch. 1, St. 13
NOTES
The Sun is exalted is Mesha and his Paramoccha will
be the 10th degree or Bhaga there. The Moon is exalted
in Vrishabha and his deep exaltation falls in its 3rd degree,
Mars is exalted in Makara and his deep exaltation occurs in
its 28th Bhaga (degree). Mercury is exalted in Kanya and
has his deep exaltation in its 15th degree. Jupiter has his
exaltation in Kataka and his highest elevation falls in the 5th
degree. Venus finds his exaltation in Meena and has the
highest elevation in its 27th degree. Saturn is exalted in
Libra or Thula, and gets his deep exaltation in the 20th
degree there. If Aries is the exaltation of the Sun, the
seventh from it will be Libra and it becomés his sign of
debilitation. The exact seventh house or division of a house
of a planet or sign will be the 180th degree of the positiom
he or it occapies. If the Sun is Paramoccha in the 10th degree
cf Aries thei his Paramaneecha or greatest fall will be in the
10th degree of Libra. A few facts require some explana-*
tion. Exaltation is different in its results from deep exalta- .
tion, the last being the most powerful position for a planet
to occupy. Rahu and Kethu are not mentioned here. It
would be interesting to know why their exaltations and debilitations have not been mentioned by Varahamihirae This
author mentions Rahu twice only in his book (Stanzas3and 5
of Ch. IT) and Kethu only once in Stanza 3 of Ch. IL and in the
latter part of this verse he refers the readers to other well-'
known works on astrology, for more detailed information.
The general consenses of opinion aboyt Rahu and Kethu
shows that F.ahu is exalteG in Taurus or Vrishabha and Kethu
in Scorpio or Vrischika. Bhattotpala quotes Maharishi Gargi
€ [ri Š
on the uses ‘of these exaltations df planets, viz., the^Sun and
UP State Museum, Lucknow “

Ch. L St. 14] VARGOTTAMAMSA Sh
the Moon. “If the Sun and the Moon occupy exaltation the
person becomes rich and fameus." He also quotes Yavaneswara to the same effect. In dealing with this verse, Bhattotpala pgints outa grammatical inaccuracy of the author, when
he says Dasa, ten, instead of Dasama the 10th. Sikhi (fires)
three instead of the 3rd and so forth. Of course if we take
the authór as he hgs put it, then the words may be interpreted to mean that the first TO degrees in Mesha are Odchha
for’ Ravi (Sun) and so on.’ The commentator quotes
Yavaneswara on this point, where that author clearly says
Dasama the 10th degree as the deepest exaltation for the
Sun. Varjous other authors have also been distinct upon
this point and Várahamihira in his anxiety to be brief, has
introduced for metrica] purposes shorter forms, which, to
alees cultivated mind, may appear to be misleading ora
little against the grammatical rules.
RUTTEN RTAPAT: YAR ATA: |
Ral qw: gengt
gereret ated FATA UL UI
e Stanza 14.—The first navamsa of movable,
the middle navamsa of the fixed and the last
navamsa of the double-bodied signs are technically
called eVargottama. , Leo, Taurus, Aries, Vifgo,
Sagittarius, Libra and Aquarius are Modlatheikonas for the Sun, Moon, Mars, Metéury, J upiter; ;
Venus and'Saturn respectively. ^ iar dee 2
e
a m ^
e UP State Museum, Lucknow a
e A

58 BRIHAT JATAKA [Ch. I, St. 14
A NOTES
We have already seen that when a zodiacal sign is
divided into nine equal divisions, each is calléd a navamsa,
Allthe navamas do not seem to possess the same efficiency.
Later on certain combinations of planets are given by this
authorin which he lays great stress and value upon the
Vargottama navamsa. Varga means divisions of a sign and
Oottama means best. ‘This siñply means the best among
the divisions in a sign. The signs of the zodiac have: already been divided into Chara—movable, Sthira—fixed, and
Dwiswabhava—common or double-bodied. In Mesha,
Kataka, Thula and Makara, the first navamsa goes under the
name of Vargottama. The-middle or the’ Sth ‘navamsa of
Vrishabha, Simha, Vrischika and Kumbha becomes Vargottama, and the Anthya or the 9th navamsa of Mithana, _
Kanya, Dhanus and Meena goes under the name of Vargottama. Thus on a careful examination it will be seen
that if the navamsa of a sign becomes the same as the sign
itself, itis called Vargottama. If Mesha navamsa rises in
Mesha Lagna, if Vrishabha navamsa rises in ‘Vrishabha
Lagna, if Mithuna navamsa comes ir. that lagna and if
Katakamsa fallsin Kataka Lagna they become Vargottamas.
This will be so in all the signs. Satyacharya says-that those
born in Vargottamamsa will attain to the chief pósitiors
among theiricommunities. Therefore if the navamsa is the
same as the rasi, then it becomes Vargottama and this' can
easy be identified. Thrikona means the angles of an
equizateral triangle. Moola means original orjfinal. Probably
this rdéake in. power next to exaltation for the planets,
. Simha for the Sun, Vrishabha fọr the Moon, Mesha for
- Mars, 'Kanja | "for Mereury, bhanus for Jupiter, Thula for
UP State Museum, Lucknow $ ; [2
a

Mo
x vs
r
Ch. I, St.14] EXALTATION OF PLANETS 59
Venus and Kumbha for Saturn are considered as Moolathrikonas. A few facts require moré clearer explanation:
Varahamihifa in his over-anxiety to express ideas briefly
sometjmes, does not give all the information, which he ought
to give, to clearithe doubts of his readers. If he simply says
that Leo is the Moolathrikona for the Sun the reader is
misdirected, for he has already been told in a previous
verse, that Leo is owned by the Sun. Are we to take Leo
as his own house or Swakshetra or his Moolathrikosa or as
both, and if the latter, what portion of Leo will be his own
house and what portion of it should be classed as his
Moolathrikona. Then again take Mercury. Virgo has
Mercury as its“lord; then again it becomes his sign of
exaltation, and yet again he also has his Moolathrikona
there. The different degrees of Virgo which go to constitute
“exaltation, Moolathrikona and own house, have not been
detailed here and the beginners will get not a littlé confused '
over such apparent misdirections. Take Taurus. The Moon
is exalted there and he has also his Moolathrikona. But
Varaharfihira has explained these clearly, in his Laghu
Jataka from whicb»I shall give the details, to avoid confusion
to my astroJogical readers. The Moon has the first 3 degrees
as exaltaeion in Taurus and the remaining 27 degrees form
-his Moolathrikona. Venus has the first 10 degrees in Libra
as his Moolathrikona and the rest as his own house. The Sun
has the first 20 degrees in Leo as his Moolathrikona and the
remaining 10 degrees form his own house. Saturn has the first
20 degfees as his Moolathrikona, in Acquarius, while the
remaining 10 degrees form his own rasi. Marsha? thefhirst
18 degrees in Aries as his Moolathrikona and the remaining ,
12 degrees form his own hóuse. Jupiter “has the first 13 ,
A ^ D e
a ^ UP State Museum, Lucknow e
A > A

D
BRIHAT JATAKA Ch. I, St. 15
degrees in Sagittarius as his Moolathrikona while the next
17 degrees form his own house- (Swakshetra.) Mercury has
his Moolathrikona in Virgo from the 16th to Z0th degrees,
inclusive, his exaltation in the first 15th degrees and the
remaining degrees, viz., 21st to 30th inclusive form his own
sign. Butthe author of Saravali, a valuable astrological
work of old reputation, gives a different version.
In Aries, Mars has*his,Moolathrikona in the first 18 degrees and the last 12 degrees form his own house.
In Sagittarius, Jupitér has the first 10 degrees as his
M.T. and the rest as his own house. à
In Libra, the first 15 degrees form his, M.T. for Venus
and the rest his own house. ^ ;
NGT MENGA ^
TATA BATISTA: |
emer. 8
Beer a AAR ee
Stanza 15.—The twelve houses from lagna
have been given the following names: (1)-Thanu,
(2) Kutumba, (3) Sahotha, (4) Bandhu, (5) Putra,
(6) Ari, (7) Patni, (8) Marana, (9) Shubha, (10)
Aspada, (11) Aaya, and (12) Ripha. The Oopachayas are the 3rd, 6th, 10th and 11th houses
from lana, while,the rest are Apachayas. Some
say that these should not be taken as permae Bent. '&» ^ RN Paradis
UP State Museum, Lucknow c $ r
n E n

ta. 1, SOT "tere OE HOUSE" gy
: NOTES
The first house or lagna is cald (1) Thanu—body,
(2) Kutumb&—family, (3) Sahotha— brother, (4) Bandhu—
relation, (5) Putra—child, (6) Ari—enémy, (7) Patni—wife,
* (8) Marana—death, (9) Shubha—happiness, (10) Aspada—
state, (11) Aaya—gain, and (12) Ripha—loss. Oopachaya
meàns improvement or increase but there seems to be some
difference of opinión on this point? Bhattotpala verysclearly
tries to justify his author but I myself see that his -justification is a poor apology. Some say that Oopachaya houses or
planets in them do not always give increase but only indicate infprovement under certain definite conditions. The
6th house, for enstance, is an Oopachaya. It denotes debt,
enemy and disease. A good planet in any Bhava increases
that significance, whilé a had planet destroys it. In the 6th
'* house, Saturn, for instance, destroys its significance, viz.,
-enemy, debt and disease. Forany man a planet, that
destroys the above three dire misfortunes in this life, becomes the most auspicious ; for which of us does not feel
exhiliraded by the destruction of our enemies, our debts and
our diseases? ‘{Thus, there is improvement in a man’s
position says the commentator.” But if good planets
occupy the 6th, they increase the Bhava (significance) and
. therefore there is improvement to the 6th house. Thus in the
case of evil planets, there is improvement in the man’s
future and health while in the case of good planets there is
improvement of the sign itself and hence its signification."
This oks to me morg a quibble that cannot be justified,
than a real explanation which offers eatisfactory salutien by
a learned scholar. But Bhattotpala is a Sreat commentator
a a . e c .
and 1 leave the readers to draw their Own *nferepces. Some,
. e M
AN ^
a
^ ^ UP State Museum, Lucknow e
n
a

t
CC-O. In Public Domai RKT NUNAN Trust and cep", St. 15
plead that when evil planets or those who are inimicable to
the lords of the Oopachayas combine or aspect them, they
cannot give improvement and therefore the Copachaya is
not a permanent signification, but changeable with the
condition of the houses and planets in them. This view is
supported by the quotation of Bhattotpala from Gargi.
But Varahamihira and his great authority Satyacharya
consider that these four houses are Oopachayas, irrespective
of their conjunctions or “aspects, and this view is also
supported by quotations from Yavanacharya. Here Bhattotpala cleverly escapes from a dilemma where his own view
was generally expected. With due deference to Varahamihira,
Satyacharya and Yavanacharya, I beg to ciffer from them
and say with Bhagavan Gargi, that some modifications must
be made with the condition of houses and those of fhe
planets who occupy or aspect them. Take an example.
Suppose 4 man is born in Meena. Then the 11th from it
will be Makara. If it is occupied by Mars, he will,be exa!ted and will be in an Oopachaya. Suppose Kanya ig the
Lagna of a man and Kuja is in Kataka. He will a/so be in
the 11th from it and therefore in an Oopachaya. Suppose
in the first case he has the aspect of Guru in the 7th house
occupying Kataka, where he is exalted, and in the second
instance Guru is in Makara debilitated and aspects Kuja in.
Kataka ; what would be the results in these two Oopachaya
cases? Varahamihira and his school of astrologers would
bavesus believe that the results which Kuja would give in
his ogcupation of an Oopachaya Rasi will be sinfilar or
same inZóofh, these gases? Gargi and his school on the
other hand, teil’ ^is to differentiate between these two sets of
. Oopachaya, combinations and‘ ascribe good results to the
a" z
UP State Museum, Lucknow 1 i a
n

€. I, SE] "ciet RR PN Su O
first, “where the planet is exalted and aspected by anode
benefic, also in exaltation, while in the second set, much
less good shguld be ascribed ‘on account of the debilitations
of planets and their mutual aspects. e
@démmon sense and general principles of astrology
revolt against the first explanation while the second set,
stands to reason and rhyme. There may be truth in both.
PTN ANG TAHAN | ;
Co PIC EC AAN
TA MATTE GIRATA || R N
Stanza 16.—Kalya, wa, Vikrama, Griha,
Pratibha, Kshata; . Chitthotha, Randhra, Guru, ,
~. Mana, Bhava, Vyaya are rames of birth, second,
third, etc., houses, respectively. The fourth and ,
eighth from lagna are technically called Chaturasra, the seventh goes under the name of Dyuna
and the tenth is Agnya.
5 NOTES
Birth house (Lagna) is called Kalya denoting strength,
Swa meges wealth, Vikrama indicates courage, Griha shows :
. house, Pratibha means intelligence, Kshata denotes wounds
or sores, Chitthotha signifies cupid, or that which is born
of mind, Randhra means accidents, or breaks in life, Guru
denotes preceptor, Mana indicates respect, Bhava shows
domestic concerns, and Vyaya indicates loss. A
The fourth and eighth together, technically 4 3go “under
the name of Chaturasra and Dyuna eee ihe seventh ‘and
the t@nth house shows Agnys or comfhand, *
. e o
A a x o ^
^ ^ UP State Museum, Lucknow e
ee SSS ardua adapt e M a L

64 CO. In Public Domaingetiaed ty $arsp RUA and eGafbhi, T, St. 1)
qu AMSAT dere ANTA: TITA 12 li
Stanza 17.—Kantaka, Kendra and Chatustaya _
denote quadrants and these are Saptama (7th),
Lagna (1st), Chaturtha (4th) and Kha (19th)
Bhangm Rasis (signs). The Nara Rasis (masculine
signs) are Mithuna, Kanya, Thula, the first half
of Dhanus and Kumbha and these are powerful
when they happen to be birth signs. The Jalachara Rasis (Aquatic) are Kataka, Meena, the
second half of Makara, and these become powerful in the fourth. Kita Rasi (Vrischika) becomes
powerful in the 7th, and Pasu Rasis (quadruped)
Mesha,' Vrishabha, Simha, the 2nd half of
Dhanus and the Ist half of Makara become potent
when they become the 10th houses.
NOTES
If we draw a square in the zodiacal circle, it will have
angles of equal dimensions and each of them: is called a
quadrant. Thus the Ist, 91st, 181st and 271st degrees
become the kendras or angular points or if we take the
0, 90, 180 and 270 degrees they indicate kendras for any
house or signification. The lst, 4th, 7th and 10th houses
are technically called kendras and they have other,, names
like Kanfaka (enemies, or pticks) and Chatustaya meaning
four places. The:cthe.s are denoted here witha view to show
-the technicalities whish are used in the astrological „orks.
s
UP State Museum, Lucknow

Ch. I, Sts. 18 & 19] PANAPARAS 65
Sa WTR TA TÀ- $
afr RIRI ae pw |
a Ja C
NGU TATA "essi ZA
* Stanza 18. — Those houses next to kendras are
called” Panaparas and those ‘next to Panaparas
are designated Apoklimas. Hibuka, Ambu, Sukha
and Vesma denote 4th house, Jamitra denotes
7th, Suthabham, Thrikona shows 5th, Meshurana
and Karma are names for Dasama (10th).
E NOTES
Further on we kaye Badarayana stating that quad-
„ranłs are the most powerful, the next in strength are
the Panaparas and the least powerful are Apoklimas.
Panaparas as being next houses to the kendras will be the
2nd, 5th, 8th and 11th houses from Jagna. Apoklimas will
then» be their next houses or the 3rd, 6th, 9th and 12th
houses. The other names are some of the technicalities which
occur in the astrological works quoted here for reference.
areata aera MA
Wegen PTN Si AR D AN p anga |
Agi aee: BM Al AA F acri wed qua aM sapi PRT qq I Il
Stanza 19.—If the lord’ of jhe birth, Jupiter
Or Mercury occupy or aspect lagna’ (birth) it becomes most powerful: If other than«these planets; 3
ate
5 à c
a
^ " ^ UP State Museum, Lucknow e

ER oo PUN Donal Racer xk TARAS and str! T, St. 19)
aspect or occupy it, it will not be so. All signs
in kendras are powerful. Signs in Panaparas
are of moderate strength while signs in Apoklimas
are powerless. Biped signs are powerful during
day, Quadruped signs in the night and Kita Rasi
during the two twilights. The measure of the
rasis from Mesha to Kanya inclusive is 5-6- 7-8-9
and 10 multiplied by four, respectively, the other
half from Thula to Meéna in the reverse order.
Sahaja (3rd) is called Duschikya, Navama (9th)
is denoted as Thapas and Trikona.
NOTES o
The most important question here dealt with by Varaha
Mihira is his statement about the measurement of .the
zodiacal signs. But for the invaluable services of collection,
collation’and explanation offered by Bhattotpala, the stanza
should have been very obscure, as it makes no reference.to
any division of time, beyond the suggestion offered by him
to multiply 5-6-7-8-9 and 10 by four. But what these
20-24-28-32-36 and 40 could mean it would not have
been easy to say. Quoting Satyacharya the commentator
makes a distinction between a Bhaga of a rasi, asd its equivalent of the Chashakas. Thus the Bhagas of the rasis
multiplied by 10 will give the extent of the rasis in vighatikas
or 1/60th of a ghatika, which in itself would be 1/60th ofa
day: or 24 minutes of English Time. Mesha and Meena
would get 200 v.ghts. or 34 ghts.; Vrishabha and Xumbha
wil meásure 4 ghts.,or 240 v.ghts.; Mithuna and Makara
get 280 v.ghts.' or 44 ghts.; Kataka and Dhanus would get
"320 y.ghts..on 5% ghts.; Sinha and Vrischika would get
UP State Museum, Lucknow

Ch. 1, St. 19) MEASUREMENT OF RASIS OP
360 velita or 6 ghts.; and Kanya and Thula would get
400 y.ghts. or 6% ghts. This makes the zodiac as of oval
shape, with one end sharpened while the other end is
broadened. The measurements given here must not be mistaken for those which actually represent their durations or
extension. For it would be absurd to suppose that a profound mathematician like Varaha Mihira would arbitrarily
fix the measurements of the rasis *(igns) when they are
certainly changeable with the latitudes and longitudes of
places, whose knowledge can be defermined by the works on
Jyotisha Siddhantas. The learned commentator explains
that the author has given these Manas (measurements) with a
view to enable th? students to find out the proportions of the
limbs of persons born in the different signs and of the dis-
.tanaes to which stolen articles have, been removed from their
proper places. Whichever organ or part of the „body i is
occupied by the longest sign will be longer and whichever
is occupied by short signs will be proportionately short.
If it ig of middle size then the organ will also. be similar."
The author of Saravali says Meena, Vrishabha, Mesha and:
Kumbha, are Hraswa Rasis or short signs. Mithuna,
Dhanus, Karki and Makara are Sama or moderately sized.
: > Vrischika Sanya, Simha and Thula are Dirgha Rasis or
leng signs. These measurements must only be employed
to find the proportions of the bodily organs, distances and
the sizes of the stolen articles, etc., and not for measuring
the extent of the zodiacal signs. This part of the work
should Be entirely learnt from the mathematical portion of
astrology or Ganitha Skanda. Dwipada (bi ipeds? R&sis are -
Mithuna, Thula, Kumbha, Kanya and, the. "fest half of
Dhanus, 5; Gliatustipags (Sues) Rasis are Mesha Vrisha- * o
2 ^ e Lal e
e £ 5 UP. State Museum, Lucknow e

68 BRIHAT JATAKA (Ch. I, St. 20
bha, Simka, the first half of Makara and the second half of
Dhanus. Kita denotes in Sanskrit insects and these are
Vrischika, Meena, Kataka and the second half of Makara.
Varaha Mihira has omitted the name of an important
planet Sukra (Venus) as giving great strength to the lagna
by hisconjunction and aspect. Other writers including
Gargi and Badarayana clearly give him great prominence
when Venus occupies lagna or ‘birth.
A great point of interest here, is the quotation he gives
from Brahmagupta, who is titled here as a Bhatta and who
certainly preceded as a famous astrological writer, Bhattotpala. Bhattotpala finished his priceless commentaries of
the Brihat Jataka in the Sal’vahana Saka 888, to which we
have to add 78 years to bring it on to the Christian Era.
[Vide Chapter on Bhattotpala]. Thus we see that Bhatiot- .
pala, completed his important commentaries in 966 A.D.
He must have been in the prime of life and not much advanced in years and probably was born about the early part
ofthe tenth century. Varaha Mihira’s works were already
eleven hundred years old, and they must have been’ the most
famous during Bhattotpala's time, whicli remained without
suitable commentaries until this erudite writer took up the
difficult task of writing commentaries. This disideratum .'
he supplied with a knack, erudition, comprehensiveness and
diligence, which entitle him to our greatest respect and love.
vw: PRU TRS Test quum:
Pup mem eme: fug: aea;
T: MS ARATA qui: Yast
Ea Rama T IRE M Ro N
UP State Museum, Lucknow:

|. *opr,sc20] COLOURS OF SIGNS 9.
Stanza 20.—Blood-red, white, green, whitish
red, smoky, variegated, black, golden, reddish
yellow, whitish yellow, darkish white, and fish '
tint are the colours of Aries, etc., respectively. The
signs of planets get Plava in the direction of their
: lords.. The second from the Sun becomes Vasi.
: ° NOTES., :
Bhattotpala has here exhibited great depth of, knowledge and gives long commentaries. The coloursare:
1. Mesha .. blood-red
* 2. Vrishabha ... white
*3. Mithuna ... green, parrot colour
4. Kataka ... whitish red i
š 5. Simha' * ., smoky white c
6. Kanya .. vatiegated or many coloured
4 7. Thula .. black °
© 8. Vrischika ... golden
, 9. Dhanus .. reddish yellow d
' 10. Makara .. whitish yellow
11. Kumbha ... darkish white
12. Meena .. the colour of the fish
^ : Thig“may be of many colours but generally the fish
- ' . coloar may be yellowish dark. For aught we know, it may
| also mean all the colours which may be seen among the
| finny tribe. Plava means hollow or pit. Mars owns Aries
| and Scorpio and he governs south. In the south, therefore,
these two signs Aries and Scorpio get the technical nême of
Plava. Sukra rules Taurus and Libra and his Cjrectien is
Son-East. So these two rasis are Plava for S.E. Budha rules
Gemini ard Virgo and these are Plavüs fog Worth. Jupiter
LJ
O * UP State Museum, Lucknow o
LEO

70 BRIHAT JATAKA [Ch. I, St. 20
rules Sagittarius and Pisces and these are P/avas for N.-East,
Saturn rules Capricorn and Aquarius—these are Plavas for
West. Ravi rules Leo and this is Plava for Eást. Kataka
is ruled by Chandra and he governs North-West. „In this
direction the sign Kataka gets the Plava technicality. This
technicality will be useful for giving the directions taken
by thieves and missing articles. Also this will be useful for
conquering enemies, if the kings or their generals follow in
the direction of P/ava, for that means hollow and the opponents will be cornered anc conquered there. As regards the
colours of the signs, the use will be, with reference to the
identification of the colours of animals and planets in dealing with, the Viyoni janmas or those: which are not born
through the human sexual organs. The 2nd house from the
Sun is denoted as Vasi and thislagna is recommended for
all travelling purposes. If that is adopted then the Sun wijil
occupy the 12th house. If this house is also occupied bya
good planet, it denotes fortune to the Native. In closifig
this first Chapter the clever commentator thus summarises
his remarks which may be quoted here for ready rtference,
as they clear many doubts and difficulties in the path of
progress in the astrological studies. In this first Chapter,
which goes under the name of Samgnyadhyaya ( s3pter on
Technealities) many names are given, some of which * have:
root meanings, while others simply convey a technical symbol. The following are mere symbols: Hora for Lagna ;
Duschikya for 3rd; Hibuka for 4th; Trikona for 5th;
Dyunam for 7th; Meshurana for 10th: Ripha for
12th; Cbàturasrva 4th and 8th ; Kantaka, Kendra, Chatustaya for Ist, 4ta; 7th and 10th; Panapara for 2nd, Sth,
8th and‘ Lith; and Apoklimé for 3rd, 6th, 9th and 12th.
UP State Museum, Lucknow

T
Ch. J, St. 20] SIGNIFICATION OF HOUSES FA
a
The first sign is called Tbanu and Kalya and from
these the body and health ofthe man must be consulted.
The second is denoted as Kutumba and Swa—and
from $kis must be examined the condition of the general
family and wealth. id
. The third goes under the names of Sahaja and Vikramathe physical strength ane brothers. must be examined from
this sign. S J
The fourth has the names -— Bandhu, Vesmi and
Sukha—and from this must be known relations, houses and
happinegs of the person.
The „fifth denotes Putra and Buddhi and reveals the
state of children and intelligence.
The sixth has the names of Ari, Vrana and Kshata and
. gives clue to enemies and wounds or sores. ; $
. The seventh is called Dara, Chitthotha and Jamitra and |
therefore denotes wife, passions and marriage.
° The eighth denotes Marana and Randra or death and sins.
. «The ninth is called Shubha, Guru and Thapas.
Shübha means Dharma or charities, Guru means
parents, preceptor, etc., and Thapas denotes rituals and
religious contemplation.
$ All hese items have to be examined with reference to
^ the ninth. 3
The tenth house iscalled Aspada, Karma, Agnya or 4
residence, profession or calling, and command or authority ^
respectively. 3
The eleventh house is called Bhava and Aaya? The a
first means education, character, etc.^ The second signifies
gains or pecuniaty earnings. ^ a
. The, twelfth is called Vyaya and signifies Sanio ^ A
O * UP State Museum, Lucknow
a a
AJ .

.I would ask patience. a
. Students’and readers, to dispel these doubts. E
72 BRIHAT JATAKA [Ch. I, St. 20
The 3rd, 6th, 10th and 11th houses are termed Oopachayas for their power of improving men’s fortune. In these
houses even evil planets give good results. ‘he benefics
increase the events or objects indicated by the houses except
in the 6th house, where they produce the reverse effect, viz.,
they destroy or suppress the events indicated by that Bhava.
The evil planets destroy those events signified by “the Ist,
2nd, 4ih, 5th, 6th, 7th end 9th houses and increase the results in the rest of the houses, namely, 3rd, 8th, 10th, 11th
and 12th. Thus it will be seen that benefics as well as malefics in the 6th produce good, because both of them there,
destroy the results indicated by that house. 6th indicates
debts, enemies and diseases. The good planets cut these
short as also the evil planets and a man who has less or
none of these three significations, certainly will be a vary
happy man. The names of the Bhavas are indicative of
the results. The 3rd house is called Parakrama or strength
and courage and planets increase that Bhava ; 8th house
denotes death and sins and that is increased by evil and
beneficial planets and so also the twelfth. This is 5supported by a good quotation from Sri Devakirthi. These are the
general principles. But when any special combination or
result therefrom is foretold or mentioned, thes do aot
interfere with such special cases, and the readers are warned:
not to think they are contradictions in astrology. For
beginners in astrology, almost all points appear debatable
and contradictory. One planet is said to give gold, while
another is said to take itaway. Even the broad principles
of this science often appear to be confusing. ` All this disappears Befcre the dawn of knowledge and experience and
pplication -and diligence. from the
UP State Museum, Lucknow

e
e g
e CHAPTER II
e. GRAHAYONI PRABHEDA
ee TEATS SEAT:
iem PASATAN; wei mem sou
SHAT aA Raa wes me RATTE: d
carat Tahan PA sat TANT TH
afia abet tem: weary Ut N
Stanza 1.—The Sun repes the Atma, the.
*. Moon mind, Mars ‘strength, Mercury speech,
Jupiter wisdom and happiness, Venus passions,
and Saturn sorrow, of Kalapurusha respectively.
The Sun and the Moon are Kajas, Mars is Coramandér-in-Chief, Mercury is Yuva Raja, Jupiter
and Venus are ministers, and Saturn is the
Sonya
NOTES
The movable and immovable universe has been
répresented to be the organs of Kalapurusha or Time
Eternal personified in the shape of zodiacal signs an@-.constellations. .From this it will be seen, that the planets
form part of His body and therefore the different characteristics of that Divine hody are now enumerated or indicated
by die heavenly planets. Nd š
. * “UP State Museum, Lucknow

TA. BRIHAT JATAKA [Ch. II, St. 1
When there are many planets, it may be pertinently asked why Varaha Mihira, a great Astonomer and Mathematician, should have taken the influence of only seven planets.
I beg to refermy readersto my lengthy and learned-dissertations upon these points in THE ASTROLOGICAL MAGAZINE
published by me. In Vols, II and III, the matter has been
discussed at full length and in the Bhoutika Kalanidhi-which
was being published in 1910, 1911 and 1912 a lengthy article
appeared in its columns. Thesutra says ‘ Grahaparam Kotayaha, Mukhya Sapta’, meañing that there are millions of planets, but the chief ones are only 7. Seven seems to be a very
important number in human affairs, beginning with.the seven
Stages, seven-ten span of life, seven dhatus and seven sorrows
(Sapta Vyasana). Sun is composed of seven colours. We
have seven worlds, seven seas, seven kulachalas (mountains),
seven days, seven Maharishis, seven secred cities and so.on.
Hence probably the conception of seven important planets
and the days of the week in their names. As only seven principal planets have been known to exercise direct and tangible
influence on the earth and its numberless phenomena, the
ancient astrologers confined their researches to them. The
Sun represents the soul or vitality of the Kalapurusha,
Moon represents his mind, Mars indicates physicai? Strength,
Mercury the power of speech, Gno is Budha, while Gna is^
knowledge; Jupiter, knowledge and happiness arising from
that knowledge, Venus denotes sensual pleasures and Saturn
represents sorrow. As allcreation is embedded in the womb
of tir, and as its influences on phenomena aze detailed in
theastrofogica! works” under the guise of planetary bodies,
„the author calls, the- Sun Kalatma. or the soul of the Kala-
- purusha. ^ Readers have to be careful in differentiating
UP State Museum, Lucknow 2 9
tL:
es

ce |
1- Ch, IL, St. 1] MINISTERIAL INFLUENCE 275
e
between knowledge and wisdom. Knowledge may be proud
that it knows so much whilewisdom is humble that it knows
. so little. Budha represents knowledge while Guru denotes
. wisdom. G
‘le The various characteristics indicated here for the planets
show their influences on men born under their direct control
and their strength,or weakness will be a guide to judge of
the strength or weakness of the bodily organs as weil as the
characteristics enumerated above pertaining to men. “In
the case of all the planets” says the author of Saravali
X when they are strong, they produce strength in the results
indicated by them, and when they are weak, they produce
weakness in such results. Buf with Saturn the results must
be reversed." The Sun and the Moon represent royalty or
, protective agency, Mars indicates the military power, Mer- è
cury the power wielded by heir-apparent or Yuva Raja, Jupiter
“and Venus indicate counselling or ministerial influence and -
Saturn represents menial services. This affords some clue
to the means to be employed in securing power or advantage.
Whichéver planets occupy the Oopachayas, at the time of
birth, the personages, indicated by those planets, would
become instrumental in furthering the interests of the individual ord will be successful in life, if he makes applications «
D
ce n to them. Suppose, Mars powerfully occupies one of the a
Oopachayas, then the man will be patronised by military é
aüthorities or he should attempt to push on his interests >
through such commanders. It is well known thftjwhile .
some patronise people others without any ostenible season, Br
throw obstacles in their way. This i$ due, to such planets
| occupying unfavourable, positions in the hórüscope without — «^
"E power and' against Oopachaya planc m ee E PU o
‘e e LJ
| o ® UP Vu Museum, Lucknow ^
o?

76 CC-O. In Public PRIH in RT FRA ga Trust eng, “TES. 2 & 3
tie: marem AATST fas THERE: |
ANT DE: SECO WAIT:
BUY Wen: ae ae Teal
Stanza 2.—Heli and Surya are names for
the Sun. Chandrama and Sitarasmi stand for
the Moon. Hemno, Vit, Gno, Bodhana and
Induputra are names „for Mercury. Ara, Vakra,
Kruradrik, Avanaya denote Mars ; Kona, Manda,
Suryaputra and Asita stand for Saturn.
Masa: sarati
: Ra MEN |
TGS RAR a a!
TATAHAN Ts SAT U 3 |
Stanza 3.—Jiva, Angira, Suraguru, Vachasampathi and Ijya are terms for Jupiter. <
Sukra, Bhrigu, Brigusuta, Sita and Aspujit
are names for Venus.
a
Thamas, Agu and Asura are names for Rahu.
Sikhi stands for Kethu.
Their other names must be learnt from wellknown works in the world.
pee NOTES a i 3
~ Amara Kosha gives 37 names to the Sun and these are
_indicative of the varigus phenomena he causes. The author
- gives only a few * ‘names here, ‘not much in use, and desires
e
UP State Museum, Lucknów ? yk ^
nm
c F

eae ire tds
erm:
Ch. II, Sts. 2&3] INFINITE INTELLIGENCE hl
the readers to learn the rest from well-known works in Sanskrit. Rahu is called Agu and Bhattbtpala derives it as one
who has a fo and gu bright rays. This means Rahu has no
bright.rays. Varahamihira, his predecessors and Bhattotpala speak of Rahu as a planet who has dark rays. The
discoveries of modern science are yet in their infancy, and
the medns, which are at their command are certainly composed of glasses by whose: medium they do their work of
examining the planetary phenomena. On the other hand,
the ancient Rishis claim great mental development and they
have recorded in technical language what they actually saw
with superior sight. All discoveries are made with the help
of instruments: constructed by the development of mind.
Mind is constructed by the invisible energies in the
atmosphere as fecundated. by the rays ofthe Sun. Telescopes and microscopes, spectroscopes and helioscopes,
cannot penetrate certain objects when they offer resistance -
vr obstruction. Mind, the most subtle and invisible energy
yet discovered in nature, can conceive of no objects through
which 9t cannot pass, and can imagine no obstacles which
it cannot surmount. In fact, when it is purified from its
gross earthly surroundings, when it is elevated by the study
of subl&Ze subjects like astromy, and when it is ennobled
and expanded by deep contemplation and concéntration on
the Infinite Intelligence, it becomes the grandest power.
Mahatma or expanded atma or soul will acquire a power
before which, the word impossible, in the physical or planetary planets, would be found meaningless. Therefore we
have two sets of philosophers. Those who „expand “their
intellects with reference to external_eartlily, phenomena by
the construction and use of Terrestrial mavhiaery "and thase,
* ^ UP State Museum, Lucknow ^
ee

78 i CC-O. In Public BE Aas VN V Trust — St. A
who have gone into the very root and cause of mind, and
who consequently soar:far higher than the first set can ever
hope to do. The first set can only see through what it
arranges in the shape of machinery. The second, more purified, will soar far higher and see the very essence of all phenomena. If some theories are explained here against the
accepted views of modern sciences, the readers are:not to
run away prejudiced, and shelve the older theories as antiquated; on the other hand, the modern views must be
accepted with the greatest suspicion, forthey are highly
tentative and at best in an experimental stage, liable to be
frequently modified. These views of modern astronomers
are being so rapidly replaced by their. own: admirers and
students that people are in great bewilderment as to what
would be the fate of the today theories ten years hence. The
ancient theories have been uniformally recognised and
respected by the succeeding generations so much so, that -
even today they comprehend all the latest discovered facts
and fancies and still leave ample room for contemplation
and original research. c
CENE TNT Fg- à
siga entes TH | s
erem ST TRACT:
TATA VAT WER HE div di
Stanza 4.—The Suh is dark-red, the Moon
white,” Mars blood- Ted, Mercury green, Jupiter
yellow or goldér, Venus neither white nor black,
Saturn black, «^ o
e
S r ,
UP State Museum, Lucknow 2 - ^
e E e

IT^
Ch. I St. 5] In Public Des irc SH ERS hv Ot OU "QUE and eGangotri
Lan NOTES
The use for these colours will be found in fentifying
the thieves, etc., in questions affecting lost persons or articles.
As there is some difference in the colours attributed to the
planets they may be noted here for the information of my
readers. The Sun has copper colour, while Mars has
purple sed. Moon and Venus are represented by some
to be pure white, while Jupiter is given a deep golden golour.
miaa NGA ARGA PAGA frat :
TETAP ANANA: ARA RTA |
mig TATA: dga:
Ask gak; WT TAIT I Y di
as
_ © Stanza 5.—Copper colour is governed by the *
Sun, while white by the Moon, blood-red by
Mars, green by Mercury, yellow by Jupiter,
variegated colours by Venus and black by Saturn.
The Ssin has Agni as adhidevata. The Moon
Ambu, Mars bas Kumara, Mercury has Kesava,
. Jupiter has Indra, Venus has Indrani, and Saturn
has Kefía. The east, etc., is governd by the Sun,
* Venus, Mars, Rahu, Saturn, Moon, Mercury and
Jupiter respectively. Waning Moon, Sun, Mars,
Saturn and Mercury in conjunction with them,
are malefics.
o Bota
NOTES . 9 6 T
e^ a
In the preceding and this stanza, à distinction is made.
There thescolours of the *planets are Biven fo identify
LJ ^
a ^ UP State Museum, Lucknow

a)
80 BRIHAT JATA IT, St. 5
persons, etc., and in this to identify the objects, etc. Also the
gains and losses of objects with the colours above named,
during the periods and sub-periods of planets and the
flowers to be used in the worship of planets* in the remedial
measures adopted for lessening the evil influences of planets.
In the invocation of planets the Gods and Goddesses
named for them, should be worshipped. Yavaneswara
says to the same effect. ‘When a thief takes away an article,
his name will be one of the names of the God or Goddess
who governs the planet cf the rising sign at the time of
question. In travelling, a person is advised first to worship that diety which governs the planet who is the lord
of that direction. Saravali says to a similar effect. The
directions given about the cardinal points, enable a person
“to find out which side, the door of the room of confinement
* Vide *ntioduction to the Study of Astrology.
UP State Museum, Lucknow

LJ
e IL St. ur Domain. ADHI DI EVATAS Trust and eGangotri a
faced, at the birth of a child. The Sun, Venus, Mars,
Rahu, Saturn, Moon, Merqury and Jupiter indicate the
East, SouthsEast, South, South-West, West, North-West,
North and North-East, respectively. ° i
Moon when full is a benefic. When weak (as on
Amavasya day) a malefic. Mercury is good when in good
conjunction and evil when he joins evil planets. The
commentator says that -Chandra is Kshina weak)
from the 8th lunar day of .thé dark half to the 8th day
of the bright half of the lunar menth and that he will be
Poornima (Full Moon) on other days. This is for general
considerhtion. But for Ayurdaya (longevity), the Moon will
be Kshina (leameor pawerless) from the end of the 13th day
of the dark half of every lunar month to the end of
Amavasya, till he has rfot passed the solar globe. Yavane- °
swara maintains that the Moon is never a papa or malefic
planet. He says that the Moon is moderately strong from
the Ist to the 10th day of the bright half of the lunar
month, from the 10th of the bright ‘half to the Sth of the
dark half of the lunar month, he is Full Moon or very
powerful, and from the 5th to the last of the dark half of
the lunar month, he is powerless. But he is never a malefic.
The use,&7r this knowledge is, that if evil planets pre-
.dominate, the man becomes evil natured; and when the
benefics are powerful, he becomes good and with the
mixture of good and evil planets the nature of the man
will also be mixed. o
The question of Devatas and Adhi Devatas js an
important one. A full discussion of this, here is ouv, of
tune in a short note like this. Devatas may be explained
as the essence of events of objects; and Adhi : ‘Devatas E
a ^ UP State Museum, Lucknow a

82 CC-O. In Public Dagan, Digeep Ar RRA Trust and EROP, St: 6
are the adjunctional energies which help the essentia
forces. There is a difference between active forces and
passive energies. The active forces are called Gods
while the passive ones are styled Goddesses. Agni is the
essence of fire and controls the solar disc. Ambu is
water and the Force representing it governs Moon.
Kumara or Shanmukha is the reputed son of Siva and
represents the essence ef martian strength. He governs
Mars. _ Kesava represents «he. protective agency or energy
and governs Mercury. . Indra represents the Devata
energy, and he controls Jupiter. Indrani or Sachi is the
feminine energy of Indra and this Goddess rules. Venus.
Kaha is Brahma and he represents the creative energy.
Saturn is under his control. . Saturn represents life, means of
livelihood and death and he is aptly placed under the creative force designated Brahina. The above are agencies of
. the several planets to whom remedial measures must be
dedicated in our attempts to soften the rigour of evil infinences.
TIEN rae TAA gadi ae A: |
farfengere treat att fter: BAT t
Stanza 6.—Saturn and Mercury sre impotent, Venus and Moon are females and the
rest are masculine. Fire, earth, sky, water and
air are ruled by Mars, etc.
E NOTES
- Éunuchs are those who have no potency to copulate
with the oppesitu sex, On account of some defect in the
/ organs ar whose. sexual orgars are not capable of having
UP State Muséum, Lucknow

Ch. II, St. 7] NATURE OF PLANETS 83
any intercourse. Persons who have Saturn or, Mercury
aspecting the body or in its conjunctioh will have this defect.
Powerful Mbon and Venus give the feminine sex and the
Sun, Mars and Jupiter represent masculine power and make
the person male and manly. By this the sex of the thieves,
etc., can also be ascertained. Mars rules the fire, Mercury
rules the earth, Jupiter the sky, Venus the water, and Saturn
the air. Varaba Mihira has not admed the lordship “of the
Sun and the Moon. But that the Sun rules the fire asd. the
Moon the water, has already beer stated by the author in
Stanza 5. In the periods of the planets the colour of the
person ‘will be predominated by the influence of the
planet and thg° corresponding Mahabhoota. (See St. 21,
Ch. V HI.)
"feno: ER ss aly AAS AMAT |
i "SPORTAL STRAY HSA TATE ARIA Iho
. „Stanza 7.—Sukra and Guru represent Vipras,
Kuja 4nd Ravi Kshatriyas, Chandra Vaisya,
Budha Sudra, “and Sani represents Antyajas.
Chandra...Ravi and Guru represent Satwa, Kuja
` and Sani Thamasa, and Budha and Sukra represent Rajasa.
x NOTES
This is a very difficult stanz2 for translation as it qpparently deals with the different castes found in the Indian
Peninsula and also as it refers to th® charaetesistics most
famously known as Satwika, Raj jasa and Thainigsa. If astro.
logy i is to _be taken as a universal science," tlfeneit may be | k
^ ^ UP State Museum, Lucknow s

84 BRIHAT JATAKA [Ch. II, St. 7
questioned that in this verse it betrays a narrowness of
vision that would quite unfit it to be a comprehensive Science, applicable to all nations. Like medicine, astrology
has its universality as well as its particular locality.
Itisin thisway. When Guru and Sukra are called
Vipras, they represent Brahmins in India and when these
are powerful the horoscope may be attributed as belonging
toa Brahmin in India: i But when Guru and Sukra are
strongin the horoscope of an African, an American or an
European, where the particular kind of castes found in India
are not existing, how should the astrologer be guided in his
prediction about the caste of the native? The answer is
simple. Vipra in Sanskrit means one who ‘is pure, that is
one who is entirely devoted to the service of God. In countries where Brahmins as a caste, do not exist, then it app*es ,
to all those persons who devote their time to the contemplation of God, and who are priests of real merit and pious
living. When there is no caste as Kshatriya, the plancts
include all men who pass muster under the military orders.
Vaisyas are to be similarly interpreted. All those who have
mercantile instincts and who depend upon commerce for
livelihood may be called Vaisyas, Sudras are agriculturists,
servants and industrial men. Antyajas are thos-- who» are
pariahs or outcastes in India and in other parts who follow
pariah occupation of killing and removing dirt. Principles
of science are always applicable to all countries and all
natipns alike, but with local or general modifications. A
man«may be called a king in one country, a president in
another and a dictator in the third. Functions’ performed
by them will almost. be similar, and a real adept in any sci-
“ence looks rzore to the spirit of the verse than to its letter ;
UP State Museum, Lucknow
TAN IR

Sy o
Ch, ll, St. 7] SATWA, RAJAS & TAMO GUNAS -85
= LOIS over technicalities without catching their
spirit, will be like nursing a body whén the soul has passed
away. $ ‘
; The following are characteristics for Satwa.
; À man, who has Daya (kindness), Sthiratwam (fixed
purpose), Satya (truthfulness), Arjava (straight-going),
: Brahmana and Deva Bhakti (regard and respect with faith
in good people and Gods.) ` eite ^
Rajas—one who performs sacrifices, who is fond of
poetry and general literature, af women and possesses
courage. :
a A
Thamas—deceitful, stubborn, lazy, cruel, revengeful
and sleepy. °° 9 5
In Bhagavadgita, a work of immortal merit for which
. the greatest Adwaitha Philosopher Sankaracharya has °
' written invaluable commentaries as also the other famous
"Acharyas, we have a clear description of what these charac- `
teristics denote, what acts constitute them and what results
could be produced by adhering to' them. (See Bhag. Chs.
XIV, stánzas 6, 7 and 8 and XVII, stanzas 20, 21 and 22.)
Thec reative energy of Brahma called Prakriti, has given
three principal characteristics to humanity called Satwa, >
. ^. Rajas an% Thamas and with these binds, the permanent
eAtmas, a ray of Para Brahma or Supreme Intelligence.
Satwa is pure and causes light to others. It gives happiness
and wisdom to mankind. Rajas denotes desire for objects, bw
and binds the Atma by the eropes of Karmaic results. — <
Thamás is „denoted eby ignorance, makes the people E
passionate and avaricious, and cau%gs laziness, sleepiness P
and negligence in doing good work, Satwa gives moral | ACs
happiness, "Rajas makes him do Karma anti Themas causes , M
ls " E
s 2 AN 2 R
e ^ UP State Museum, Lucknow s
e a

86 BRIHAT JATAKA [Ch. II, St. 7
him to do,bad work. When Satwa supercedes and controls
Rajas and Thamas, then he» will be elevated and will,
therefore, be able to see the grand and glorious bliss of
Para Brahma. When a person dies, when Satwa predominates, he gets into heavenly bliss; when Rajas prevails
atthe time of death, he will have Karma and get birth
again under Karma conditions ; and when Thamas' prevails
at the ‘time of death, ‘the, person will take births again in
lower crders of creation. :
Actions done when “Satwa predominates, result in
knowledge and happiness. Deeds done when Rajas prevails
result in sorrow and misery and acts done under the control
of Thamas result in producing ignorance and debasement
of mental faculties. 1
Men, with developed Satwa; attain to blissful regions,
men with development of Rajas take birth as mortals and
men whose Thamas predominates go down to infernal
regions or lower orders in creation. Satwikas worship ör
satisfy Devatas or higher forms of beneficial energies,
Rajasas worship Rakshasas and Yakshas while Tnamasas
worship the Devils and low Spirits» Under these,
therefore comes, the classification of food so necessary to
man but so prejudicial to him when prom:scuously
consumed. People seem to laugh at the idea when:
Vedantists lay down rigorous restrictions on the food we
consume, the clothing we wear, and the surroundings we
select. This is a grand mistake, the neglect of which,
leads men to most injurious results. The composition of
different ‘vegetables end animals differs most radically,
in the various species and genera , and to say that men get
-the same blood and flesh, same energy and mental strength,
UP State Muséum, Lucknow

o
Ch. II, St. 7] TYRANNICAL SOVEREIGN 3d
same morality and nervous capacity, without reference to
the various kinds of foods used, “would be asserting
a principle flore stupid than which we can hardly conceive
anything in the logic of any nation. j
Worship includes contemplation and concentration.
These powers produce result as per objects upon which
they wdrk and this distinction must be kept clearly
under our vision. An executioner ‘and a highly developed
Yogi are both capable of great concentration. A beneficient
King and a tyranical sovereign® possess great power of
concentration, but with different results. The first concentrates his thoughts upon the minutest details of bad
administration “And grants redgess to them and thus benefits
humanity and gets merits.
e The second bestows great attention upon the very same °
' details with a view to extortion from the people under all
circumstances and introduces misery and ruin to his nation `
ahd indirectly to himself. It should be the noble attempt of
eyery man to select the best place, the best clothing, the best
climate,” the best subject for contemplation, and direct his
best energies to attain good name here and eternal salvation
in the life beyond. Therefore at the time of birth, planets
. indicate ‘sie nature of the child, and it is for the parents
eand guardians to afford it all the facilities to suppress evil
propensities and to increase good tendencies. Man is a most
cutiously formed compound, where the component parts,
while under some dominating, uniting power, are stijl possessed"of various degrees of independence, and capewity to
act on their own responsibility. Thigysa Nedaatié question
ofthe greatest importange and cannoj be fully discussed i in,
this note. a be gk cx e sont
A LJ e
on a UP State Museum, Lucknow

Ww
[s u Trust and eGan Seu
88 BRIHAT JATAKA [Ch. Il, Sts. 8 to 11
TIANGE peru: fure ATETEA: |
TIAR ATT: mqa A agak JATE ie N
RE: RR: gA: SATA |
TROSE ARRERA | 6 N
TS: ARONA seid: OE REEE: |
ug: ee Tarra: HATE MATT
TARA: HIER Sup
equis: ANSASEN |
ACTA DRT
ASSLT TAT: 2
Stanzas 8 to 11.—The Sun has a well proportioned body, is bilious and possesses pingaig
eyes, has short hairs, coloured eyes.
The Moon has a well rounded body, aa
wind and phlegm, intelligent, sweet speech and
good eyes.
Mars is youthful, liberal, bilious, fickleminded and possesses a thin waist. i
Mercury has gurgling speech, fond of joking
and has a mixture of air, phlegm and bile.
Jupiter has a corpulent body, golden locks
and § eyes, moral and is phlegmatic.
; Venus is fond, of happiness, i fine
eyes and black ringets and a temperament
-compounded of wind and phlegm.
UP State Museum, Lucknow

Ch. II, Sts. 8 to 11] CHARACTERISTICS OF PLANETS 89
b [X]
Saturn is lazy, has yellowish eyes, lean
tall body, stout teeth ard rough hairs. He is of
a windy temperament. Saturn, governs nerves,
the Sum rules bones; the Moon controls the blood,
Mercury the skin, Venus the sperm, Jupiter the
brain, and Mars the marrow.
: NOTES. "o .
The characteristics of «the planets are givem here
and there is some difficulty. A question may be asked as
to whether the planets really possess these characteristics,
Or whether they influence the persons to assume these
varieties when tffey are under fhe strong control of these
planetary influences. Astrology is a science which deals with
men and their surroundings being directly influenced by the
"planets and so we are not much concerned as to what the plaBets may be really in their own places, but are highly concerned with their direct influences on men and their environments. We haveto understand these characteristics as being
possessed by men who are born under the direct influences
of the several plansts. Furtheron, we have Varaha Mihira
speaking to the same effect (Ch. V, Verse 23). The characteristics of a man may be determined either by the lord
eof the navamsa rising in lagna or by the most powerful
. planetin the horoscope. The last portion of the stanza is
also very important. Men have good or bad health. When
evil planetary periods and sub-periods come iD, gsuch
diseases may, be predicted which arise from the Dhatus
(nerves, blood, etc.), directly controlléq by the eyil planetLor
planets as the case may be. In questions affecting loss of -
persons or ‘properties the rising sign and ^its»lozd: furnish >
a
o ^ UP State Museum, Lucknow e

90 BRIHAT JATAKA [Ch. II, St. 12
details for their identification. So also in questions about
diseases, the lord of the navamsa rising in the lagna may
determine the kind and extent of disease by whith the person
suffers at the time.
For a careful observer of human nature, these verses are
of immense value as furnishing landmarks in the science
of astrology by which they will be able to. identify
the people of all grades and place them under the control
of the particular planet whose special characteristics, he most
possesses. Thus if a man is ordinary in height, fair in
complexion, royal in nature, bilious in temperament, having
short hairs and honey-coloured eyes, an astrologei at once
places him under the presidency of the Sun, That is, the man
will be born in the lagna ruled by the Sun or occupied or
aspected by him or he may be thc iord of the navamsa,
which rises at the time of‘ his birth. Where a man is all
bristly with stout bones and teeth generally lazy in habits,
dark in complexion and prematurely old in appearance.he
may be placed at once under the influence of Saturn. n
Td TATANG TA vé eser
TA AHMAR Gm d
desi: ffe TEREE qr tud
Stanza 12.— The Sun controls Devastana,
the . Moon watery place, Mars the fire place,
Mergury the gaming place, Jupiter the treasury,
Venus the bed rogm, and Saturn the heap of dirt.
The Sun’governs rough cloth, the Moon rules
z new clothez, Mars Controis burnt clothes; Mercury
UP State Museum, om
E

Ch. IL St. 12] PLANETS AND SEASONS 91,
ules soaked clothes, Jupiter controls neither old
nor new clothes, Venus controls strong clothes, and
Saturn rules rags. Sun governs copper, Moon
' precióüs stones, Mars gold, Mercury bellmetal, etc.,
Jupiter silver, and when he is in his own house
he governs gold, Venus pu and Saturn governs
iron, lead, etc. . - .
Saturn controls Sisira, Venus Vasanta, Mars
Grishma, Moon Varsha, Mercury Sarat, Jupiter
Hemanía, and the Sun Grishma. These seasons
may also be isdicated by the lord of the Drekkana
rising in the lagna at the time of question or
consultation of lost horoscopes.
> NOTES
The Sun governs all places of worship in a house or
elsewhere and by this the birth place,may be identified, The
Mooi controls bath rooms, wells, tanks and all watery
places, while Mars rules over fire places (kitchens, furnaces),
Mercury controls playgrounds, Jupiter rules over treasure
rooms.
"Venus control places of sexual enjoyment and bedtooms, and Saturn rules over heaps of dirt and filth. These
“ two chapters are the keys tothe whole study of astrology
and acareful analysis of the various planetary characteristics
is needed to indicate the results, which a man enjoys ufder
their periods and sub-petiods. The different kinds of cl$thes
governed by the planets are named hére, gud during their
periods and ‘sub-periods the man either,weays “such clothes
or deals with them. The metals serve the same purpose."
s
a
e UP State Museum, Lucknow e
e

CC-O. In Public Dori RIHAT J by Sarayu vas and eGangotri
JATA [Ch. II, St. 13
The Hindu astronomers have divided the cyclic year into 6
divisions called Vasanta (Chaitra and Vaisakha)—April
and May, Grishma (Jyeshta and Ashada)—Jiéine and July,
Varsha (Sravana' and Bhadrapada)— August and Sep.
tember, Sarat (Aswija and Karthika)—October and November, Hemanta (Margasira and Pushya)—December and
January, and Sisira (Magha and Phalguna)—Febiuary and
March. As lunar and, English months differ, I have given
the seasons roughly in English months. Occasionally
there may beslight differences. First refer to the planet in
the lagna for predicting the Ruthu or season, if there are
more than one planet in the rising sign the season must
be determined by the most powerful among them. If there
is no planet in the lagna then the planet which governs
the rising Drekkana in the lagna determines the season.
Bhattotpala quotes Manitna on this subject. The commentator points out an omission of the author here in nct
stating the divisions of the Vedas called Sakhas (branch).
He quotes from Varaha:Mihira’s Laghu Jataka about this.
Rig Vedais governed by Guru, Athar Veda is ruicd by
Budha, Sama Veda is controlled by Kuja and Yejur Veda
is ruled by Sukra. When plantes are powerful they give the
native inclination in their own Sakas and these are also useful in remedial measures where evils indicated by planets
must be averted by those mantras (incantations) which are
found in the Vedas ruled by them.
TATA NATAH
“TANG Tai; L. DANS
“TSS wu
mw Bar Rew fash: $305 — C
UP State Museum, Lucknow

ch. IL, St. 14] PLANETS AND FLAVOURS 93,
‘Starnes 13.— Planets aspect + 2,4 and, full in
the 3rd and 10th, in the 5th and Oth, i in the 4th and
8th and in the 7th respectively. Saturn, Mars and
Jupiter have special sights and are powerful in
aspecting 3rd and 10th, 4th and 8th and Sth and
9th respectively.” |. :
o
NOTES,
These planetray aspects have been very minutely described in THE ASTROLOGICAL MAGAZINE as well as in my translation of Sarwartha Chintamani to which I refer my readers.
All planets aspect the 7th house in full. But the aspecting of
Sagi is the most powerfulin,the 3rd and 10th houses from
"him. Mars aspects most powerfully in the 4th and 8th
houses and Jupiter in the 5th and 9th houses. Theiraspecting -
iseconsequently not so powerful in the 7th house. In the
case of other planets 7th aspect is tHe best for them. D
KATANG wmm pU TERR] |
spes HMA TIGE a ur zerfa t vll
. Stanza 14.—An Ayana, a Kshana, a Wasara,
- a Ruthu, a Masa, an Ardha and a Sama will be
the time allotted to the Sun, etc., respectively, for
the fylfilment of any act or deed indicated án a
question. ‘Pungent, salt, bitteg, mixture, sweet,
sour wand acid are the tastes attributed to the Sun, ,
etc., , respectively. "n
e e
s A
e UP State Museum, Lucknow
Gal ^

94 BRIHAT JAT TER II, st. 14
NOTES
" Ravi— Ayaria—6 months.
Chandra—Kshana—minute or short time.
Kuja— Wasara—week.
Budha—Ruthu—two months.
Guru—Masa—one month.
Sukra—Ardha—half of a month—a fortnight.
- Sani—Sama—one full year.
Find the lord of the navamsa at the time of the
question and also calculate how many signs he is from his
navamsa. This number denotes the Ayanas, etc., according as the navamsa lord is the Sun, etc. Take an example.
In Mesha atthe time of question, rises "ihe navamsa of
Thula. The lord of this is Sukra. Suppose Sukra is in
Meena in the navamsa. Thea from Thula he is 6 signs
from himself. For Sukra the time allotted is a fortnight.
Thereforé the success of an enterprise, if it is so, must be
predicted within 6 fortnights or about 3 months from tie
cate of question. Suppose a man is sick and a question
is putto an astrologer about the patient. After proper
calculations he fixes the lagna and the navamsa and by
their strength, etc., he says either the man dies or lives
as the case may be. The next question would be if he lives,
when will he be cured, if he dies within how many months
ordays orhours he dies. To such questions this stanza
will give a clear explanation; and so also for the recovery
of stolen articles, for the rcturn of lost or missing persons
and so forth. Some astrologers say (Manitha) that the
Ayanas, etc, will haye to be determined by the number of
_ the navamsa Which rises at the time of GBCHB GS The tastes
. here given. aroS—
UP State Museum, Lucknow
Aa.
HJ
LR

C-O. In Public Domain. Di Nee Sarayu Trust and eGangotri
Ch. i, Si 15] RECOVER TOLEN ARTICLES 95."
J Ravi—pungent. DP
Chandra—salt. a è Y
Kuja—bitter.
,Budha—mixed taste. "
Guru—sweet.
Sukra—sour.
, Sani—acid.,
According to the sirength of tlie planets at the time
of birth will be the tastes of the man or when a powerful
planet rules he will introduce his own taste to the man a
under his, control. (See also Bhavartha Ratnakara, English
Translation by B.V. Raman. )
sit staat Ramet saat fedi: em Eee o
Vez Raza ge: diera Wu |
ei gece: `
nagan Ta AT | OU I,
Stanza 15.—According to some, Sun has
Jupiter, Moon has Mercury and Jupiter, Mars has ^
_, Menus and Mercury, Mercury has all except the
“Sun; Jupiter has all except Mars; Venus has all
- except the Sun and the Moon; and Saturn has all
except Mars, Moon and the Sun as friends. But
according to Satya from the thrikona ofe ‘the .
planet the 2nd, 12th, 5th, 9th, the lord,of his —
exaltation, 8th and 4th lords, are “fiends. The
rest are not friends. 9*5. IM à
e ^ UP State Museum, Lucknow ^
m a
a MÀ ÁÀ

Wg BENUR? ERINA JATARA ^ ^ [CB- Suis
NOTES
The first part of the verse contains the Matam (doctrine) of Yavaneswara.
Bhattotpala observes rightly that according to Yavaneswara there are only friends and foes but not neutrals or
acquaintances. According to Satyacharya, whom the author
of Brihat Jataka holds in great admiration and respoct, all the
various shades of friendship and enmity are clearly traceable.
The commentator here gives lengthy explanations with a
view to simplify matters. :I may quote here one or two cases
so that the rest may easily be grasped. The Sun has his
Moolatrikona in Leo. The 12th from Leo is Cancer. Its
lord isthe Moon and as he owns only che house he becomes the best friend of the Sun. The 4th from Leo
is Scorpio, and 9th is Aries: their iord is Mars. The $un
is exalted in Aries. Therefore Mars is a friend of the Sun.
The 5th and 8th from Leo are Sagittarius and Pisces. Their
lord is Jupiter. Therefore Jupiter is an intimate friend
ofthe Sun. The 2nd and 11th from Leo are Virgo and
Gemini. Their lord is Mercury. The 2nd rasi is mentioned but the 1lthis not named, therefore Mercury is a
neutral of the Sun. The 6th and 7th from Leo are Capricorn
and Aquarius, and as both of those houses are not mentioned
in the rule, their lord Saturn is a bitter enemy of the Sun
The 3rd and 10th from Leo are Libra and Taurus. Theit
lord is Venus. Both of these houses are not mentioned- in
the "Sutra, and therefore. Venus isa bitter enemy of the
Sun.c Take now Moon. His Moolatrikona is in Taurus.
The 4th'is Leo, its lo¢d is tbe Sun, and therefore he is a friend
of the Moon. The 2nd and 5th houses from Taurus are
"Gemini end Virgo. Mercury is their lord. Therefore he
UP State Museum, Lucknow

s
Ch. II, St. 16] FRIENDSHIPS AND ENMITIES 2?
is a friend of the Moon. The 7th and 12th from Taurus are
Scorpio and Aries. Their lord*is Mars, 7th house is not mentioned but the 12th is named. Mars therefore is a neutra. of
the Moon. The 8th and {1th from Taurus are Sagittarius and
Pisces. Their lord is Jupiter, as the 11th is not mentioned
but the 8th is named and therefore Jupiter becomes neutral
to the Moon. Moonis exalted in Taurus. The 6th from
it is Libra, its lord is Venus. - The, 61H is not mentioned and
therefore Venus becomes a neutral of the Moon. The 9th
and 10th houses from Taurus are Capricorn and Aquarius.
Their lord is Saturn. 10th is not named and therefore Saturn
becomes a neutral of the Moon. For Mars, Aries is Moolatrikona. The fourth from it is Cancer, with Moon as its lord.
He owns only one house and therefore Moon is the friend of
Mats. The 5th from Aries'is Leg. Its lord is the Sun,
he owns only one house and as it is named the Sun becomes
the friend of Mars. Similarly find out for all the planets
from their moolathrikonas. There are planets who own two
house» while the Sun and the Moon own only one house
each. If the planet owns two houses named in the sutra
(text), then he becomes a friend. If he owns two houses
but one of them falls in the numbers named above and the
. other does not, then the planet becomes a neutral. Butifa
planet owns two houses and none of them is named in the
> sutra then he becomes an enemy.
ag wed mus fre Rnf dn uso
AMAHA enl AT: aa: ata |o
AGUA: FAT Teal TSH qul C
RP wüRR quer ftm Tas duram IL TE Ur -
e or A ^ .
^ i a x
a ^ UP State Museum, Lucknow e
Cal a
a

BRIHAT JATA
KAE and FEP", St. 19
a) daha Aga AAS Tara
dai get ant ANG peer À |
SHA aee mw: TTS! SLT TAS
aire ARTA YAS UI
UIA || 29 N
Stanzas 16 and 17.—
PLANETS FRIENDS NEUTRALS | ENEMIES
Sun . | Moon, Mars ari | Mercury ^... (Saturn & Venus;
Jupiter.
Moon .|Sun&Mercury...|Mars,,Jupiter, (None.
Satuin and aP
Venus.
Mars jopiter Moon & |Saturn &Venus... | Mercury.
un.
Mercury . | Sun and Venus... |Saturn, Mars and | Moon. E
Jupiter.
Jupiter b Suo, Moon and |Saturn . |Mercury &Venus
ars. :
Venus .| Mercury and Mars & Jupiter... Moon and Sun,
Saturn.
Saturn . | Mercury & Venus Jupiter . Mars, Moon and
Sun.
NOTES
This is the purport of what is stated in the previous
stanza, as the results of the Sutraic information contained
in Verse 15. Varaha Mihira summarises ihe purport of
Satya'e doctrine in clear language here. As l have given
. the friendship; etc., in a tabular form further notes will be
~ ` Quite unnecessary.
UP State Museum, Lucknow

ch. II, St. 18] TEMPORARY RELATIONS 99
AANA AATE- ,
WHS GK CHIEUesc STET |
Arama TEMA kAHIS FT A avisa RETA tel
Stanza 18.—The planet in the 2nd, 42th,
11th, 3rd, 10th, or 4th from any other planet at
the time of birth, becomes his temporary friend.
Some say the‘lord of the house in which a planet
is exalted also becomes his friend. The rest:
` (unnamed here) are enemies The lords of two |
houses, the lord of one house named and the. -
lotd of house not named become friend, neutral,
and” enemy, respectively. These relations) ,
(temporary) myst be taken along with the
Nisargika (permanent) relations named in the 2
.'' previous stanzas and then friendship, etc., must
_ be finally determined. a
NOTEŞ : S
A few examples will determine these results and-bring M
home the processes easily before the teadeystanding of the.
readers. Take a horoscope. e e ure ae ©
"Uo.
om s T E ^ e . ə
^ ^ UP State Museum, Lucknow e
Mim a kaine a akan com emm rr sc n

0 CC-O. In Public Domnain, AFP RRA Trust and eqemir. St. T
According to Nisargika
BirtL | Saturn| relationship Mars is the
friend of Jupiter. But
Sin | according to the Tatkalika
Jupiter | (temporary) Jupitei is in
Mercury RASI the 5th house from Mars in
Diagram the horoscope given bere.
| Thus 5th house is not
) À named as friendly in St, 18
Mas | ` | and therefore Jupiter beKethu | comes an enemy of Mars.
Again take Jupiter. Marsis
‘his friend in the Nisargika. But in the present diagram
Mars is in the 9th house from Jupiter. 9ià is not named
asfriendly. Therefore Mars becomes an enemy to Jupiter.
The result is that according to the Nisargika, Mars and Jupt:er
are friends. Butin this horoscope, both of them, by their
unnamed positions to each other, have become enemies. In
the one case both of them are friends. In the other both 'of
them become enemies. The result is they become nevitrals
and much good ought not to be expected from them. Thus
seven states of relationship are mentioned and they show the
delicacy of mutual feelings which men entertain towards
one another.
Moon
Rahu
Venus
The perfections of a scienceare only known when we
tead its literature and apply its rules to the existing order of
human relationships. This will be a very good lesson for the
Western presumptious astrologers to learn. What do we
find in their works, so much boasted of by tuem and pretended to have ben ‘written by the Chaldeans, vins they
Are so proneros worchip without rhyme or reason? Are
UP State Museum, Lucknow

Ch. IL, St. 19] PLANETARY STRENGTHS 105
there any grounds given for the friendship and enmity among
their works, if so they mays bring forth their authorities.
Varaha Mihi?a borrows his ideas from the illustrious predecessors in this field of research.
The seven states of relationship are :—
b” Mitra—friend.
2. Adhi Mitra—intimate friend.
3. Sama—neutral or acquaintance.
4. Samasatru—less than feutral and better than
enmity. ub
5. Satru—enemy.
6. Adhi Satru— bitter enmity.
7. Sama Mitra;—better than acquaintance, but less
e than real friendship. ,
| Raga ri: CHAS EANTA |
fug nios vnda eae
Raar sU 2 UI
Stanza 19.—By Swochha, Suhrut, Swa
Thrikona,.Navamsa, the planets get Sthanabala.
"In the East Jupiter and Mercury, in the North the
.Sun and Mars, in the West Saturn, and in the
South Venus and Moon get Digbala.
o
D , NOTES G3
Planets have four sources of energyer bala, , Yiz., Sthang,
Dik, Chesta and Kala, and in this verse "he hemes the first
two sofirces ef strength or power for thé planet. NS planet: :
LJ ^
^ LÀ
CERE >
A
e UP State Museum, Lucknow *
Lal 2

«102 BRIHAT JATAKA (Ch. IL, St. 19
in exaltation, in a friendly house, in his own house, in his
Thrikona, in his navamsa gets what is called Sthanabala or
strength from the locality. The birth sign represents the
East and Jupiter and Mercury are powerful there. The
North represents the 10th house and the Sun and Mars are
powerful there. The West represents the 7th house and
Saturn is powerful there, and the South represents the 4th
house and the Venus and the Moon are powerful there. This
is calied Digbala or strength arising from the direction of the
planet. A general principle by which the astrological readers
are to be guided is that all planets become powerless in
the 7th house from that in which they are held to be mos
powerful. 5 z
Aries is the house of Mars and he attains some power
as heis in his own house. The seventh from it will be
Libra. Here he loses that power which he is given in
Aries. Mars is exalted in Capricorn. The 7th from itis
‘Cancer. He loses in Cancer that power which he attains
in Capricorn. The rules must be similarly applied with
reference to all other planets. Planets in signs between
their power and debility, must be given such quantity of
strength, which they get by simple rule of three. Thus
the Sun attains his highest elevation in the 10th degree of : i
Aries and his lowest debilitation in the 10th degree of
Libra. Suppose he is in the 20th degree of Cancer. Then
what strength does he get there? If the highest elevation
is represented as X then the lowest debilitation wil! have to
be represented by a.zero. This he attains in 180 degrees,
. the distance'between the 10th degree of Aries and the 10th
- of Libra, Bu the 20th degree of Cancer is the 10th degree
T
UP State Museum, Lucknow

Ch. IL, St. 19] KALABALA 103
RM his highest elevation in Aries; therefore if the
Sun had full strength in the-10th degree of Aries he will
have. @
1- 22 of that energy = 4/9th in the 20th degree of Cancer. This holds good in all their positions and must be
careful'y, worked out by simple rule of three. Suppose
Jupiter^s in the 2nd house from lagna in a horoscope. We
are tempted to say that he will give great wealth. That is
what astrology says. If that 2nd house becomes Cancer
and Jupiter occupies the Sth degree in it then he gives 2
great wealth provided he has no evil conjunctions or
aspects. ‘But suppose he is in Capricorn occupying the
5th degree there. The weaifh that he gave in Cancer,
will not find place 1n. Capricorn and the man loses his ,
„wealth or will be a pauper, because Jupiter has there zero
strength. But if he isin the 10ih degree of Scarpio and ,
that happens to be the second house, then what wealth
he gives there (Scorpio) would bein proportion to that
whith he,gave in Cancer. The 10th of Scorpio is the 125th © =
degree from the 5th of Cancer. The distance from Jupiter’s
greatest elevation" "n his lowest fall is 180 degrees. There- >
fore he gives 1— 122th part of the wealth he would have
` given in Cancer. The rule of proportion must be carefully '
worked out. Suppose in Cancer he gave the unit result, «
equivalent to say about 100 rupees. Then the wealth he Ne
would give in the 10th degree of Scorpio would be
travelling, 125 degrees from his Bxeatgat e elevation * he
e
p LJ A a e
^ nS a G
A ^ a UP State Museum, Lucknow A
a a 4

04 BRIHAT JATAKA [Ch. II, St. 20
But the supposition here is subjected to various other
calculations arising from other sources of strength and
therefore ought not to be literally taken. This is given as
an example to work out the method. Besides, any planet
does not give a zero result at any house as he is subjected
to so many other influences all of which have to be taken
into consideration in determining his strength. o 4
Similarly work out for other planets according to their
falls or elevations from places of strength.
Seer Taal RAT: TRAT: |
yea gA arrearage: eT o li
Stanza 20.—Ravi and Chandra have chestabala in Oottarayana.: The rest will have chestabala when they have Vakra or Samagama:
Those who are in the North of the planetary
fight, and those whose rays are bright also possess
chestabala.
NOTES
Months from Capricorn to Gemini constitute
Oottarayana. The Sun here attains his northern
most elevation. Months from Cancer to Sagittarius
inc: usive compose Dakshinayana when the Sun attains his
highest southernmost elevation. The Sun and the Moon
are, Possessed of chesta (action) ~ bala (power) ‘during
Oottarayand. . Fbis Will be generally from the 13th or 14th
‘January to zabout 14th or. 15th of July. _The> Sun
UP State Museum, Lucknow ~

en. ff St. 20] BIGBALA 105
E
attains peculiar power here and it is considered good
for doing all beneficial work. The severse holds good in
Dakshinayang. The other planets, viz., Kuja, Budha, Guru,
Sukra and Sani, get Chestabala when they are retrograde
(Vakrd)' or when they are joined by Moon (Sumagamoa).
Vipulakara or brightness in rays comes to these planets
befote they get retrograde, and when they get retrograde, and
when they are Sigrakendras, Bhattotpala quotes. Acharya
Vishnu Cnandra, who says—tlzt planets with the Sun
are Astha (combust), with the Moon Sumagama (lunar
conjunction) and, Kusutadinamyuddham and the rest of
planets with each other get into planetary fight.
*When the Moon is with tire Sun he gets no Astha, and
when the Sun is with the Moon there is no Samagama. In
fact, Astha and Samagama ate only states for other planets.
North should be interpreted as full of lustre and that planet _
\ whose rays are full is to be considered as victorious in the
planetary fight. When two are more planets join, he who.
hiss the most southern position there, who shakes, who
appears small and whose rays are lustreless, and who has
deviated from hi$ orbital line and whose color has:
changed, is said, by astrological adepts, as the planet who
has'suffered defeat in the planetary conjunction. When
‘the reverse is the case the planet must be considered as
victorious. Pulisacharya says that Venus even when he is
in the South, may be victorious.
— NAMM a
*The method of finding the numerical strength of planets “and
houses and the Shadbalas have been fully eiabordtel in Graha and
Bhava Balas by B. V. Raman- £ ES
m
q c “UP State Museum, Lucknow

106 BRIHAT JATAKA [Ch. II, St. 21
fafar TERA: ada AISA Wey
TEMA g: STAT HAT |
SATAR: BISA
regan Isat Trae Ul Vz Ul
Stanza 21.—The night gives Moon, Mars
and Saturn Kala Bala. Mercury has it always,
The Test are powerful during the day. Benefics
3 have Kalabala during the bright half of the lunar
month, while malefics get it during the dark half.
The lord of the year, of the day, of the hora, of
the masa also gets Kalabala.. Sa, Ku, Bu, Gu,
Su, Cha, Ra, are respectively stronger than eách '
other. . i
NOTES
Kala means time, and Mars, Saturn and Moon are
strong during the nights. The Sun, Jupiter and Venus are
ust strong during the day while Mercury has this time-influence
always. The lord of the year will be the planet, whose ,
week day commences pn the Ist of that cyclic lunar year, '
^ During Parabhava (1906 and 1907) the lunar year com- -
Cfr menced on a Sunday and this is controlled by the Sun. .He
gets kalabala. This is to be applied to the lord of the year
durifig which a person is born. The lord of the day is so
well known that it,requires no explanation. The hora
x refers to that division of the time (measuring 24 ghaties)
` which rjses aĝ tke tire of birth. On Sunday a child îs born
A
A
A
n
a
UP State Museum, Lucknow ^.
M bs.

a
Ch. II, St. 21] MAS ADH PATHI and eGangotri
ec
at 12-30 p.m. The horas for a day are 24 (corresponding
to exact English hours) and ,on Sunday the first hora is
governed by? the Sun, the 2nd by Venus, the 3rd by
Mercury, the 4th by Moon, the 5th by Saturn, the 6th by
Jupiter. With the completion of the first 6 hours, 12
o'clock or noon is completed. The child is born at 12-30
pm. The next hora, ie., from 12 o'clock noon to | o'clock
p.m tbe hora is governed by Mars,, and as the birth has
taken place in the 7th hora of that day Mars in that
horoscope gets kalabala. Masadhipathi is the lord of the
week day with which the lunar month commences and if
it happens to be Friday, then Venus who governs it gets
kalabala as the*lord of that month. All these powers are
called Nisargika and have permanent influences while all
other sources of power named in the book must be
' superseded or modified by thesé permanent powers. For
‘the sake of brevity Varaha Mihira uses in the last part of
the verse the first letters of the planets to show their relative
strength, Sa—stands for Sani and he is the weakest of the
planets.^ This must be, I suppose, for doing good and
certainly not for doing evil. He holds tremendous power to
give evil. Ku—stands for Kuja and he is stronger than Sani.
Bu—stands for Budha and he is stronger than Kuja. Gu—
stands for Guru and he is stronger than Budha in power.
Su—stands for Sukra and he is stronger than Guru. Cha—
stands for Chandra and he is stronger then Sukra. Ra—
stands for Ravi and he is the strongest of the whole lot.
Bhatfotpala quotes from other works the results for these
four principal sources of power the planets get, viz. Stkana,
Dig, Chesta, and Kala. Saravali says Occha planet gives
5 K 3 E ran
G] a
a
N UP State ihrem Lucknow EXT
e

108 DU SBRIFAIATAKA — (Ch IDEO
much wealth. Moolatrikona planet makes a man minister
or commander.
A planet in his own house gives joy, wealh, grain and
happiness. :
A planet in a friendly house gives reputation, courage,
happiness, fixed and royal wealth.
A planet in his own navamsa makes a man weil known.
Varaba Mihira says also to a similar effect in his Laghu
Jataka F
A planet subjected te beneficial aspects, makes a man
wealthy, reputed, handsome, priacipal and agreeable.
If benefics in masculine signs aspect a planet the person
becomes respected, learned, and if they do soin feminine
signs, the person becomes frank-hearted, courageous and
god-fearing. This is for Sthanaoala. 4
Now the reader is taken to Digbala or directional
strength.
Planets with Digbala take the person to their directions
and get him clothes, conveyances, ornaments and happicess.
Planets with Chestabala Bive a man some territory Or
land, some respect, some money and some education. This
means that they give in small quantities these. beneficial
results and probably not in their completeness.
Benefics in Vakra are powerful and give territories. If
malefics are in Vakra they
troubles.
Victorious planet gives good health, happiness through
friends$'and Beneral prosperity, and lands without enemies.
Planets" wira. n$cturnal and diurnal powers give
elephants, cou;age, lards, destruction to enemies and wéalth.
give vain travelling and useless
UP State Museum, Lucknow ^

Ch. II, St. 21] SOURCES OF STRENGTH 109.
The lords of the year, of the month, of the day and of
the hora give good results in double proportion respectively.
This means tat the lord of the month gives double the good
. which the year-lord gives. The lord of the day gives double
of what the lord of the month gives and the hora-lord gives
double of the lord of theday. Planets in bright and dark
halves of lunar months give destruction to enemies,
precious gems, clothes, elephants, gold, females and iands,
clean reputation. Those planets whose rays are full of4ustre
give happiness, territory and all mental desires. If the above
sources of strength are possessed by benefics they give good
manners, prosperity, beauty, lustre, reputation, gratefulness,
faith in God and saintly persons, clothes, gems, garlands and
men. But if the malefics possessed these sources of strength,
they make man miserly, fond of evil work, selfish, join evil
company, quarrelsome, ignorant, cruel and ungrateful.
Powerful planets in masculine signs make men warlike,
courag:ous, strong, friendless, cruel, stubbora. Powerful
planets in feminine signs make men timid in war, quarrel
some and^fond of water, flowers and clothes.
e
a
a o p
A
na
n c ^
a m UP State Museum, Lucknow
m A

CHAPTER III
VIYONI JANMADHYAYA
AARAA:
quie: gafefadaea dici:
alt EUN qeu dc
SERIRITZ TARTE
wed Tate aer AAAA: do? oi
Stanza 1.—When benefics are ,powezless and
malefics are powerful, and when impotent planets
are in kendras, the birth must be foretold -of
objects which have resemblance to the nature of
the Dwadasamsa occupied by the Moon at the
time; or when under similar conjunctions the
birth sign is aspected by impotent planets: the
birth of Viyonis must be predicted.
NOTES
Varaha Mihira uses the term Viyoni or Vividhayonis
for various kinds of female sexual organs, through which
births take place other than those of the human species.
Cows, goats, birds, reptiles, insects and plants are meant
here: The author gives in this Chapter only 8 verses. while
one expects an able and exhaustive treatment in an imp rtant
division of the terrestrial phenomenon like this. In Chapter II
he has showy: clearly what is meant by power and weakness
UP State Museum, Lucknow +

Cee eee RE
Ch. IJI, St. 1) BIRTHS OF ANIMALS 11,
s D
kd
for planets, and also who are masculine, and who are
impotent. At the time of birth or quety, the Moon must
rise in some Hwadasamsa. If it is a Viyoni Rasi, then alone
the birth must be predicted of some other creatures than
buman but not when it represents Nara Rasis or human
signs. If the Dwadasamsa is Aries, occupied by the Moon.
at birth or question, the birth of goats, etc., must be deter-'
mined. Ifit is Vrishabha, cows, bülls, buffaloes, etc» If it
is Kataka, crabs, eic. If itis Simha, lions, tigers, cats, atc. If
it is Vrischika, serpents, reptiles and insects. If it is the
second half of Dhanus, predict horses, asses, etc. If it is the
first half of Makara, deers, etc., others, say frogs, crocodiles,
etc. are also borht If it is Meena, „fishes, etc. The cruel planets
Ravi, Kuja, Sani, bad „Mercury 'and weak Moon must be
powerful, while Guru, Sükra »Poornachandra and good Budha
must be powerless and if Saturn and Mercury (impotent
planets) are in the kendras then predict Viyoni treatures.
Under the above conditions if the birth is aspected by Saturn
then the same result happens. These facts are fully quoted’
from Sarávali by Bhattotpala, which are given here for ready
reference. '' Malefics must be powerful, benefics powerless,
Chandra must occupy Viyoni Bhaga, Budha and Sani must.
be in kendras, or these must aspect the rising sign, then
; apredict viyonis. If Chandra occupies Mesha or its amsa
. goats, etc. ; if Vrishabha, cows and buffaloes; if Mithuna,
human species; if Kataka, tortoises, crabs, etc. ; if Simha,
lions, tigers, etc.; if Kanya, mer; if Thula, human species;
if Vristhika, serpents, etc. ; if Dhanus, asses, horses, ets. ; if
Makara, deer, peacocks, varieties of frees and grasses And
if Kumbha, human species, and if Meena, " fishes and other |
aquatic animals must be "predicted: © 1 dogs, tattle, horses, ,
^ ae UP State Musetm, Lucknow 0
S ry

112 BRIHAT JATAKA [Ch. III, St. 2
etc., the number of young ones has to be determined by the
number of Dwadasamsas, which has passed in lagna at
the time.
This is an important aspect of knowing whether the
horoscope that is given belongs to a human being ora Viyoni
Janma and students of Astrology would do well to test «hese
with practical experience by noting the Dwadasamsa and
the position and aspect of planets there, to cause Viyoni
Janma. Many a time such test inspections come up and an
astrologer has to be caretul.
TT Ra: AUT: TET Far pe: |
wa a fateh cert PANA d N
Stanza 2.—If powerful malefics occupy their
navamsa, if powerless beneflcs cccupy otuers'
navamsas and if lagna is Viyoni then Viyoni
creatures must be predicted.
NOTES
The species must here also be predicted, of those
creatures which are represented by the Dwadasamsa occupied
by Chandra.
fea: Ras sue
Weta WRT web] —
: laah TA qe gent
Na ha aa 1s II o
UP State Museum, Lucknow

Ch II. Sts. 3 & 4] DIFFERENT ORGANS 113.
Stanza 3.—Aries represents head, Taurus
face and neck, Gemini front legs, Cancer back,
Leo chest, Virgo two sides, Libra belly, Scorpio
“anus, Sagittarius hind legs, Capricorn sexual
| organ and testicles, Aquarius the buttocks and
| > upper legs, and Pisces tail.
NOTES:
; The author uses chatushpada or quadruped in the
verse, but the learned commentator and others say that it is
used in a general sense and includes birds and reptiles. If
birds are taken then they have no front or hind legs. Wings
are meant when the term front legs is used and legs to be
taken when hind legs are meant. In Ch. I, verse 4, the
author has given the various organs of Kalapurusha, with a
view 1o enable the student to find out the proper development or deformity or non-growth of human organs by the
directions he has given there, but here he enables the
studeht tc» find out the growth, etc., of the various animal
organs.
A
(0. SAT Na
|o o. aana ga |
' 0^ sew uum jakenan
vat qup unie s ue
Stanza 4 —The. color mus; be, predicted by
the birth sign, its amsa, by planets in it or by
ae aspects. The intensity of, the, color by the
D Cu ^
^ UP State Museum, Lucknow

114 dogs CBRIHAT JATAKA [Ch. ITI, St. 5
powerful conjunctions or aspecting of the many
planets. By the planets in the 7th the lines or
spots on the buttocks or back must be identified.
NOTES
The planets, as well as the rasis, have already been given
different colors in Chapter II. The color of the animal or
reptile must be that which is ascribed to the birth sign or
the navamsa rising in it or by the conjunction or aspecting
of planets there. If there are more planets than one in the
birth the most powerful of them will impart his color, while
others give traces of their lines. The same holds good with
reference to their aspects. If the navamsa is that which
ríses in a lagna, whose lord conjoins or aspects it, then that
color must be prominent in the creature. Tbe various orsans
of these creatures have been sketched in Stanza 3 and the
colors cf these organs will be adjusted according to the
colors of the planets occupying those signs which govern
fhem. Saravali says tliat while planets cause their colors in
the different organs of the creatures they conjoin or aspect,
the brightness of the color will depend upon their occupation of their own houses or navamsas. But when they are
in others’ houses, the colors are there but greatly modified
by the strength or weakness of the planets. Jupiter give?
yellow color, Moon white, Venus variegated, Sun and Mars
red, Saturn dark, and Mercury a mixture of colors.
eh emit S EPIS Perte
SATS ur fan ener
00. ce 50 0 Self eden: ily
= UP State Museum, Lucknow

ch. HI, St. 5] DREKKANAS 115.
Guan EST birth is Pakshi Drekkana, if
Saturn joins or aspects it the birth of birds must
be predicted. If this Drekkana is joined or
'aspectéd by the Moon then water-birds must be
predicted.
s 1f the navamsa is movable, if a powerful
planet occupies it, and if,Saturn conjoins or
aspects it, then the birth of birds must be
predicted. If the Moon is there or aspects it, then
predict the birth of water-birds. If the navamsa
falls in Mercurial signs with Saturn in conjunction
or aspecting, then ordinary ‘birds, but if the Moon
ojoits or aspects it, aquatic birds must be predicted.
: NOTES
ə Each sign is divided into 3 equal divisions called
Drekkanas, Thus we have 36 Drekkanas. These are
tredted of glaborately in Ch. XXVII of this work and they”
are to serve a number of useful purposes which will be
explained later on. " The Ist Drekkana of Simha, the 2nd
. of Mithuna, the 2nd of Thula, and the 1st of Kumbha are
“called Vihanga or bird Drekkanas. If one of these DrekKanas rise at the time, conjoined or a-pected by Saturn
‘or Moon, the birth of birds and aquatic birds must be
predicted. The Mercurial sigos are Gemini and Virgo.
Several combinations are given here and the students must
carefully watch'them. Land birds are Marien from waterbirds and this is shown distinctly by the’, influences of
Saturn and the Moon. The last is a watery elobe lit up by. `
the rays ofthe Sun. Saravali supports, this theory entirely. ~
o
Ga A
| 3 S ^ UP State Museum, Lucknow
LENS

116 BRIHAT JATAKA [Ch. IIT, Sts. 6 & 7
af ani
MAS aenak THA: ANG: |
eue: TIGAN Tal
gaa UT AA: aea: Ig N
Stanza 6.—When birth sign, Moon, Jupiter
and-the Sun are powerless, the birth of trees
must be predicted. ^ The nature of the plants
(land or aquatic) must be identified by the rising
navamsa, and the number of the trees, by the
number of the navamsás, the lord of the navamsa
has passed from his rising amsa in the lagna. a
NOTES
The watery signs are Cancer, Meena and the latter kalf
of Mikara. When these signs r'se with watery navamsas,
then aquatic plants must be determined ; otherwise ordinary
trees. Or this may also refer to the trees growing in watery
places as opposed to trees growing in dry lands. Bhattotpala
suggests that the number of the amsas passed by. the
navamsa lord may be multiplied as in the case of Ayurdaye
(longevity, see St. 2, Ch. VII).
Breq: WIR TATA eA uus:
; tates f: pagea wi: |
ariel TEGA TT:
Rire: BHR YP STU: A UI
5 UP State Mesed, Lucknow

Ch. III, Sts. 7 & 8] NATURE OF TREES 117,
Stanza 7.—The Sun produces internally, strong
trees, Saturn raises ugly*trees, the Moon makes
milky tree$, Mars produces dry plants,; Mercury
: and Jupiter produce fruitless and fruitful trees,
respectively, Venus makes flowery trees, the
> Moon makes bright plants, and Mars makes bitter
plants. 5 po :
NOTES x
From the previous stanza the*reader learns the nature *
of the treg, and from this he can identify the class to which.
the tree belongs and the characteristics it possesses. Jupiter
makes trees, which bear fruit while Mercury produces
them without fruit. When the Sun happens to be the lord
^ of fhe amsa, then trees which’ havg heartwood or which are
strong inside are produced by his influence. Saturn produces .
| plants like aloes, etc., which are not pleasing to sight or mind.
| The Moon gives juicy plants like sugarcane and pelluliferas.
There'are some plants which . give only flowers but give nó
fruits and these are under the influence of Mercury. Venus
gives rise to flowery trees like champaca, jasmine, etc.
= Tsar ot up T,
a Hild vu RIAA TT |
[uk TU Th Aad sa: CSI : dic
| Hard gemessenen N < N E =
Stanza 8.—1f a benefic oceppies a bad sign,
then a good tree grows jn a bad place, if other- e
wise. it is reversed. .Ihe number of "trees. is -
8 ^ UP State MUSS Lucknow

118 BRIHAT JATAKA [Ch IIL, St. 8
determined by the amsas the lord has passed
from his.
š NOTES
There are good and bad trees and so also good end bad
localities. This verse enables the astrologer to say whether
a beautiful tree grows in a dirty place or a dirty tree grows
in a grand place. Take the rising navamsa as Cancer. The
lord of it is Moon. Suppose he occupies Meena. He will
be in the 9th amsa between the rising amsa and the place
occupied by its lord. If we take Moon as in exaltation then
this intervening number may be multiplied by three and if
Jupiter occupies Cancer it may still be increzsed. The
astrologer has been given some principles for guidance. He
must possess capacity to examine the time, nature, circumstances, and the places and then say what the trees are and
what their number may be.
UP State Museum, Lucknow à E
KAN

B
CHAPTER IV :
NISHEBA OR CONSUMMATION OF MARRIAGE
I frs —
serere Tt g eirg |
AUS TAYA ay AAN- ;
š miad e N
Stanza 1.—Mars and thé Moon are the cause
for monthly menses. When the Moon is in
anupachdya rasis the menses for conception occurs.
When the reverse is the case, and the masculine
benefics aspect, the woman gets sexual union with
man. . 1
NOTES
This is an important chapter.. Conception and the
previous states preparatory for this event are here described.
Nisheka means to soak well; that is to have nuptials
needed for conception and ch'ld-bearing. Mars represents
blood and the Moon water. These two planets in certain
o
* conjunctions and positions cause menses and their regular
or irregular appearances. The health of the women, and
"thus the health of the community, depends upon the
auspicious planetary influences exerted during the act of
sexual union. - . Every male or female must come through a
female, and therefore Woman occupies the highest. rank.in
the order of creative agencies. Upachayas afe 3rd, 6th, 10th
and I ith houses, and theerest, viz., Ist) 2nd, 4th, Sth, 7th `
8th, 9th and 12th are anupachayas or net upachayas. When
3 ^ UP State Museum, Lucknow

120 T BRIHAT JATARA CRY, sei
the Moon occupies these non-upachaya signs the menses
appear. ^ When the Moon occupies the anupachaya from
the birth sign of a woman aspected by Mars, menses
appear, which facilitate conception. This must not be
predicted in the case of young girls, old women, women
suffering from diseases and barren women. Badarayana
(Vyasa) is clear on this point and says that only such
menses must be predicted in the case of child-bearing
women. Saravali explaitis that the Moon causes water and
blood is formed out of water. Mars represents fire and fire
is developed by bile or heat. Such blood influenced by the
bile causes menses. Such menses when well formed, give
occasion for the development of the seed in- the ovary. But
when the Moon is in upachaya, there may be menses each
month and although Mars may aspect him, there will, be
eno conception or menses‘which facilitates conception. After
finding cut such menstrual times, the astrologer must then
consider the combinations which give the woman sexual
union with man. Bhaitotpala explains by the term reverse
used in the stanza as the combination affecting- men who
are to couple with the women. When the Moon is in
upachaya houses from the birth sign of a man aspected by
the masculine benefic Jupiter, the woman has connection
with him. Badarayana clearly refers to men. But Saravali
says that the Moon in the upachayas of a man’s horoscope
, aspected by Jupiter or Moon’s friends, causes union with a
female and this is certain if Venus aspects Inah
p
"Manitha says, that if woman, ‘after Bathing on the 4th
day, has tle “Meon dn the upachayas aspected by powerful
` Jupiter, she will have connection with her husband, if the Sua
aspects stich Moon, she will have sexual union with a royal
UP State Museum, Lucknow
EJ

Ch. IV, St. 2] FORMS OF SEXUAL UNION 121
personage, if Mars aspects, she will have a lover's embrace,
if Mercury aspects she wiil shave a fickle-minded man, if
Venus aspecte Moon she will have a handsome, person, if
5 Saturn aspects she will have a servant tô join her, and if
there are many evil planetary aspects she will behave like a
prostitute. The words used in Sanskrit are difficult to trans-
° late. Thecombinations may be meant for a man or a woman.
Ifa woman should haye an evil combination to cammit
adultery, she must also have the “man to do that offence.
Badarayana clearly refers to males’ horoscopes. Saravali
refers to upachayas and uses they. This may refer to male
or femalé. Even Manitha escapes ina quibbling fashion
from this difficutty. Since a great Maharishi like Vyasa is.
quoted by Bhattotpala, I have to interpret it as referring to
. males. The woman after bathing on the 4th day of such
menses wants some man to couple with her. Who will be
such a man is determined by the male’s horoscopic conjunctions at the time.
- arescit ante aaa red rp pO
KAGAN ANT Ft faetum | R
. Stanza 2.—The sexual union resembles the —
` mature of the Astha rasi. If malefics conjoin or
~ aspect the 7th, union will be consummated under
quarrelling, if benefics join or aspect the 7th, the
sexual] union will be happy. M
CY
e
NOTES + MO
Astha means the 7th hoyse from birth « er query and i
denotes setting. o oe D
e ^ UP State Museum, Lucknow

122 BRIHAT JATAKA [Ch. IV, St. 2
The process or act of sexual union resembles the nature
of the 7th house, frora the sign rising at the time of union
Or query. -
If the 7th is a quadruped sign, then the copulation will
resemble beasts, if it is human, then it will be natural to
mankind. If it represents reptiles, then sexual union’ will
resemble their process. Man and woman may join in sexual
union, „but if evil planets cccupy or aspect the 7th, then they
will unite and do the work ina quarrelling mood. When
good and evil planets occupy, the union will be under half
quarrelling and pleasure mixed up. But when bene£cs aspect
or join the 7th, the union takes place under very pleasant
circumstances. Saravali supports this view and refers to a
chapter in Vatsyayana called Samprayagikam.
È
Vatsyayana isa great Rishi who has written many works,
not the least important among them being his Kama Sutras
or full treatises on sexual union, This commonly goes
under the name of Kokkokam. . The art of love making, ‘of
Sexual union and of remedies to be applied in these processes,
are all admirably stated by him and show great skill in
medicine, chemistry, physiology and psychology.
Books on sex-matters are not pew nowadays. There
are hundreds of books and Vatsyayana’s Kama Sutras have '
been translated and published and boys who are in their
teen? have easy access to séxual knowledge. How far tbis
has fielped the present generation and how far such "knowledge is useruh to. students to lead a more moral and better
life, is a doubtful po/nt and we have our own fears in the
"matter. ^ ^
UP State Museum, Lucknow
f e

€h. IV, Sts. 3 & 4] CONCEPTION 123
vdtepupR EE eam
qt Breccia aT 1
FIAT R TATA ;
att fatica frame: || 3 UI
* Stqnza 3.—If Ravi, Chandra, Sukra and
Kuja occupy their own navamsas, if Guru is found
in lagna or thrikona, conception takes place. If
this combination is present in impotent cases, it
will be useless as moonlight is to a blind man.
. NOTES
This combination must be resent either at the time of
sexual union orat the rising sign of the query. Thrikona
méans 5th or 9th houses from the rising sign. Ravi, Chandra,
Sukra and Kuja may be in any sign, in the union lagna or
Prasna Lagna but they must be in their own navamsa. If ~
eVen all these planets are notin their own navamsas, if
the Sun and Venus are in the upachayas of the male and
have their own amsas, then conception takes place. If, in
the female's horoscope, Moon and Mars occupy upachayas
and join their own navamsas conception takes place. Thesee
combinations will be of no avail in the case of eunuchs and
impotent men and sterile women, just as a blind man cannot
LJ
enjoy moonlight. These ideas are quoted by the com-
` meptator from Laghu Jataka of Varaha Mihira.
Ramat: emet gsmeal :
TEAL GAGA TET | P.
wear uer Fat Ta, | 5 i:
Viv" wera fend JANG ao
Da AO n ^^
^ UP State Museum, Lucknow

124 BRIHAT JATAKA (Ch. IV, Sts. 4 & 5
Stanza 4.—]f Kuja and Arkaja occupy the
seventh from Ravi and Chandra, they make the
man and.the woman sick respectively. If they
occupy the 12th and the 2nd from Ravi and
Chandra, the man and woman will meet with
Mrityu respectively. If Kuja and Arkaja join
Ravi and Chandra,- and has one of their aspects,
death may be foretoid for the man and woman
respectively. 4
NOTES ’
If Kuja (Mars) occupies the 7th from Ravi (Sun) then
sickness happens to the man. If Arkaja (Sun’s son or Saturn)
occupies the 7th from the Moon, the woman gets sick.
If the Sun has Mars and Saturn in the 12th and the 2nd
houses respectively the person dies in the month governed
by that planet who isthe stronger of the two. (Vide Staza
16 for lords who govern the respective months of pregnancy).
If Mars and Saturn occupy the 12th and 2nd from the Moon,
death happens to the woman. If the Sun joins Mars and has
the aspect of Saturn or vice versa the man dies, while the
same conjunction and aspect with the Moon sends the
woman to the grave.
Ragat Aaa wats fiera rd
“Patani sr qeitsgpealee adt Tat lU
UP State Museum, Lucknow

ee aA
e
Ch. Ty, St. 5] TIME OF CONCEPTION 125
Stanza 5.—During the day the Sur stands
for father and Venus for mother; during the
night Saturn and Moon. Patefnal uncles and
maternal aunts are to be judged in the reverse
order, and if they are in odd and even signs respectively they become beneficial to the parties
concerned. e
| NOTES Y
lam afraid the brevity of Sanskrit expression, throws
the translator off his head and makes him reel back for
putting the ideas, so finely in English which presents poor
constructive capacity for expressing grand ideas. For those
who are born during'the day Saturn governs the paternal
uncles and the Moon indicates the maternal'aunts. Persons
horn*during the night have Ravi to govern the. paternal
uncles and Venus the maternalaunts. For those who are
born during the day, if the Sun occupies odd signs, he gives
prosperity to father and if he is so situated in the night,
he gives good to paternal uncles. If Venus occupies even
signs for a person born during the day he gives good to
mother, and'during the night he gives prosperity to maternal
aunts. If Saturn occupies odd signs during the night
Yie. for one who is born in the night) he gives good to
^ father and during the day to paternal uncies. Ifthe Moon
occupies even signs during tne night he favours, the
mother, and during the day maternal aunts. If, in the dbove
conjunctions óf planets; they are found in the reverse order
then they indicate evil to the presons nimede - Jn this stanza,
the ri$ing sign refers to the birth of the*chitd gnd not to tha i
ume.oi conception or query.” METH EP *
e AG ^ ^
^ UP State Museum, Lucknow

A
126 BRIHAT JATAKA [Ch. IV, Sts. 6 & 7
Z
A
afd af AN gaea |
semufrafes spa et DR Ul RI
Stanza 6.Af malefics are approaching the
rising sign without beneficial aspects the woman
dies. If Saturn occupies the rising sign aspected
by Mars or weak Moon she dies.
A NOTES
The rising sign here refers either to the time of conception
of the woman, or to the time of query put to the astrologer
with a view to know the results of such conception, About
the desire of the planets to go to the rising sign,’ some say
that malefics in the 2nd house from it have this desire of
going back to the house which is clesé to them. x
Baattotpala rightly condemns this strained meaning and
says that planets in the 12th house have a desire to go to the
rising sign which is their next destination and the verse
therefore means that when evil planets are in the 12th without
beneficial aspects to the rising sign, the woman dies. Gargi
clearly refers to the 12th house with malefics, and this is more
reasonable.
WITT weg a a atest |
quaa WD EORR ATA || 19 |i
Stanza 7.—If the rising sign and the Moon are `
betwixt two evil planets unaspected by benefics
jointly orseparately the woman dies in pregnancy.
; "eg NOTES): `
t The rising sign may be conjoined with Moon and thus be
_ between two “evii planets or tuey may be separately placed
between two evil pienets, The commentator gives clear
UP State Museum, Lucknow

Neer ene sacs sn a ee a OT i a een te en
a)
Ch. IV, St. 7] EXAMPLES 127
explanations. Take an example. If Aries rises at the time
of conception, with Moon there, having Mars inthe 12th
* and Saturn ia the 2nd, the women dies in pregnancy as in
No. I. , But suppose Aries rises and the Moon is in Virgo
with Mars in Pisces and Saturn in Libra, without any
planets between the rising sign and the Moon then also
* they may be said to be betwixt two malefics as in No. II.
= n Da
Con- | v ConMars | ception|Saturn| . * Mars |ception| 2 "Qs
Moon |
No. I No. II M
~) Conception) || ea] Conception
sign . sign
(Aries) ? (Aries) 5
s e ;
A | aaa — AM
Es | | Saturn | Moon
bie
In No. I all other planets may be placed anywhere
a SS p —M——MÀÀ uoce —
bui benefiss must not bein such houses as would make ;
them aspect the rising sign or the Moon.
Con- Conception Saturn | Moon
ception Sun
No, III No. IV 1
Conception. |. Conception
Sign L——
(Aries)
| ^ UP State Museum, Lucknow

128 BRIHAT JATAKA [Ch. IV, Sts. 8 & 9
In No. III we see that the rising sign as well as the
Moon are betwixt málefics, sc also in No. IV. Bhattotpala
observes, that even if either the rising sign br the Moon
singly has this evil ccnjunction inthe 12th and 2nd, death |
must be predicted for the woman in pregnancy.
Hr E eur fran FA |
secret: FAT: etre rem vi t e I
Stanza 8.—1f from the rising sign or the
Moon the 4th house is joined by evil planets and
Mars isin the 8th house, she suffers death. If
from lagna, the 4th and 12th houses are
occupied by the Sun and Mars and the Moon is
weak, she suffers death as before.
: NOTES
There are three cases stated here: (1) The 4th honse
from lagna joined by evil planets and the 8th conjoined by
Mars, (2) the 4th from the Moon should have evil planets
and the 8th occupied by.Mars, and (3) the lagna should
have the 4th occupied by Mars and the 12th by the Sun
with Kshina Chandra or weak Moon. In ali these cases,
the female dies, as before in pregnancy.
SKI: FARA THT TATA |
RARI AIR denta eub aaa l | UI
* Stanza 9.—If Kuja and Ravi are in the Ist
and 7th 1esnectively, death occurs to her by
.Weapons., The abortion takes place in the
month, whose lord is powerless or: afflicted.
UP State Museum, Lucknow

“Oe
I Ee
Ch. IV, St. 10] HAPPY PREGNANCY 129,
e G
NOTES
In Stanza 16 the author gives thé names of the lords
of the months who govern pregnancy. Abortiqns or mis_ carriages, take place in such months as those whose lords
are powerless or are otherwise afflicted. Those planets are
Nipiditha or afflicted, who are defeated in planetary fight,
conjoined: by Kethu or who suffer from the fall of meteors.
For the Sun and the Moon they must either be eclipsed by
Rahu and Kethu or be in conjunction with malefics. “Mars
in the lagna, and the Sun in thee7th, cause death from
weapons. This may be by being killed by fighting men or
by thieves‘or by enraged relations or by falling on dangerous
weapons. "9
. gungen: ssim fh jit
lenta reb: Teal d wat gem- |
: fea: I| £o Il.
. Stanza 10.—If benefics are in conjunction*
with lagna and Chandra, or if the 5th, 9th, 2nd,
7th, 4th and 10th houses from them are occupied.
, by benefics'or if the malefics occupy 3rd and 11th
“houses, and aspected by the Sun she will have a
3m and happy pregnancy. 2
NOTES ES
The author says that both the rising sign as well as the a=
Moon must have beneficfal conjunctiong with the aspect af
the Sun, and good planets must be found located 1 in the 5th,
9th, 2nd, 7th,.4th and 10th houses from agna or* Chandra t0. "E
give good «growth and keep the wopran happy in bər | : -
9 LC ^ E
^ UP State Museum, Lucknow

dm In Public D RIBHAT JA TAKAS an (cn Ù, St. M
pregnancy. Lagna here means, the rising sign at the time of
sexual union when conception takes place, as also the
lagna which rises at the time of the query on her behalf,
Some writers read Guruna and say that the lagna and Chandra
must have Jupiter’s aspects. The author uses Ravina, i.e.,
the Sun’s aspect. Bhattotpala quotes Saravali which clearly
mentions Ravina, i.e., the Sun’s aspect.
Tt is extremely difficult to justify such readings. What
the solar ray may do to tne development of the fœtus, as
opposed to what the ray of Jupiter may do, I am not in a
position to explain. General principles give Jovian aspect
great strength but these general laws may anu must be
superseded by special combinations. The real influences
must have been watched by Maharishis by Divya Drishti
or divine vision and it is possible to think that in this
particular instance the soiar ray may be absolutely needed
for the development of the fœtus in the womb. Saravali
supports it and I have no option of my own to choose.
Recent scientific books on the development of the embryo
and certain scientific investigations, go to show that the
influence of the Sun’s ray is more powerful than the Jovian
ray. Pregnant women are rarely allowed to come out
during solar or lunar eclipses and those who have dared
these, have been blessed with deformed children. The
connection between these has not been fully established as.
yet.
sed IFI eiieeii:
Jaa Sear TEMA Sif: | :
qi f frr rft ara [gu faa
SAMA adama Wut mie Ta ae I E |
UP State Museum, Lucknow
ed

Di Te Tt a
Ch. iv, St. 11] BIRTH OF TWINS 131
Sinza 11.—If powerful lagna, Ravi, Chandra and Guru occupy odd signs or navamsas,
they cause masculine birth. If these occupy even
* signs ahd amsas, they produce feminine birth. If
Guru and Ravi are found in odd signs, then a
> malè, if Sukra, Kuja and Chandra are in even
signs, a female is born. If these planets are in
double-bodied signs aspected by Budha, ‘there
will be twins after the sex of the zodiacal sign. ^
° NOTES
This may bg applied to identify the sex of the children
either from the nuptial time “or conception time or the
question time. Here the purport seems to be, that all these,
must be powerful, must be in oddesigns and navamsas and
then they produce male children. If all these are in even
signs and even navamsas then they give rise to female
children. The double-bodied signs are Gemini, Virgo,
Sagittarius, and Pisces. He has given four items namely,
birth sign, Jupiter, the Sun and the Moon. Suppose two
of them are found powerful, then the sex must be determined with reference to them. If two planets are powerful
- for male and two for female, then the sex must be
‘determined by the most powerful among these two sets. If
"Jupiter and the Sun occupy odd signs, without reference to 2
their occupation of the amsas, and are otherwise powerful,
| they produce male. Similarly, if the Moon, Venus and Mars oo
| are in even sighs, withdut reference to amsas, then “they
a,
produce female. There are four cGémmedn, signs (Dwiswablmava) „of which Gefniniand Sagittarius dre masculine ^ °
and Virgo.and Pisces are feminine. If Jupiter and the Sun ^ e
^ UP State Museum, Lucknow

132 BRIHAT JATAKA [Ch. IV, St. 123
join masculine navamsas, aspected by Mercury, then male
twins must be predicted. When Venus, Mars and the Moon
occupy the feminine common signs, Virge and Pisces
aspected by Mercury, then female twins must be predicted.
If the first and the second set of conjunctions, both exist
and have Mercurial aspect, then of the twins, one will be
a male and the other will be a female. ^ Bhattotpala
interprets the last portion of the sloka, as meaning the
planets in the double-bodied amsas, and supports this view
by quoting from Varaharsihira’s Laghu Jataka.
(aera e Råda: atrii jaw fies |
NGANAH dH ATA: WAG TENGGA 112 RN
Stanza 12.—If Satusn occupies odd signs
from the lagna (excepting lagna), he causes
male birth. Examine the relative strength of
the various planets and predict the birth of males
or females. "
NOTES
In the previous stanza odd refers to signs from Aries,
etc., but now odd refers to signs from the lagna, from
which they have to be counted. If Ravi and Guru are in
Aries, and lagna and Chandra are in Gemini, and all these
are powerful, then as per directions given above, predict
the birth of a male. But if Taurus is lagna and Saturn is in
Cencer, what is the result? Taurus is, by the general
division, an «wea sign and so also Cancer where Saturn is.
But under th:s stanzu, the lagna becomes an odd figure one,
because we count from it and Cancer becomes odd also,
UP State Museum, Lucknow

a a maa aa ANANA
Ch. LV, St. 13] BIRTH OF EUNUCHS i
because it is the third from lagna. But suppose Saturn
occupies lagoa; then it may bé left out “of consideration.
HT am waa: ated UAT UTR |
TR a aai PATAH sez ret Aq at |
gajanad qrafin
Sart Rasna: wy, Sta TE I fau
Stanza 13.—If the Moon and the Sun aspect
mutually, if Saturn and Mercury aspect mutually ;
if Mars, „in an odd sign, aspects the Sun in an
even sign ; if the Moon and lagna are in odd, and
, haye the aspect of ‘Mars in even sign; if the Moon
is in even and Mercury in odd, and have the aspect
of Mars; if Venus, lagna and the Moon are
posited in masculine amsas ; in all these six cases,
eunuehs will be born. d
T NOTES
The author gives here 6 sets of combinations, in each
of which, the birth of eunuchs or impotent men must be
redicted. Impotency varies considerably and is difficult
to define. There are some who are neither male nor female
‘in formation and they are incapable of sexual intercourse
and cannot reproduce their own species. There are others
who have eji developed sexual organs, but rárely
they feel any' inclinatlon for want ef erectile capacity.
Then again there are some who” by "abuse in the
earlie? stages, become thorcughly iripotent? when they,
grow. up to manhood and come to màrried life. Sudden
nee c ^
^ UP State Museum, Lucknow
[D

134 BRIHAT JATAKA [Ch. IV, St. 13
joys and sorrows and sexual union with certain women,
sometimes take away thése virile powers in man
and he becomes thoroughly impotent. But the author
here clearly means Cliba or Napumsaka yogas and refers
apparently to born eunuchs, or persons with defective
organs for these purposes. The study of astrology is the
most sublime, and it makes provision for all kinds of human
experience and existente. „ The Sunin odd and the Moon in
even sign, with mutual aspects, produce a eunuch. Saturn
in even and Mercury in odd sign with mutual aspects,
produce a eunuch. The Sun in even and Mars in odd sign with
mutual aspects, produce similar results. The other cases
are clearly stated and require no further éxplanation. The
verse is defective as some words are not used and by which
the meaning becomes obscure or doubtful. Bhattotpala :
clears these doubts by quotations from Saravali, where the
meaning is plainly expressed. If the combinations sketched
in verses 11 and 12 are not present, then these combinations
must be given prominence. But when they are p:esent,
they must be given preference, even if combinations sketched
here may also be present. Probably if all these yogas are
present, the potency of the male or female may be
considerably affected. Eunuchs may also be found among
females. They develop the external signs of womanhood,
and will have a complete feminine outfit, but the sexualorgan, being defective, they can neither enjoy the sexual
pleasure, nor are they capable of bearing any children. A
few ‘cases are recorded in medical works, where an individual
may have; ch ‘hale and female organs, ordinarily
developed, and it. is extremely doubtful, under, what
planetary gonjnnctions, they should be placed. , Astrology
X UP State Museum, Peete

SEES SEE Ee
b
Ch. LY, St. 14] BIRTH OF TRIPLETS
may contain references even to such poveri Its
pages must be carefully examined. °
ani, sz ata ase
C Cc
wag gai a sant wag pomi
ora PAJA ANGING TIO Teale
aia sp et sion aA WWW, dV? I
Stanza 14.—If the Moon and Venus are in
signs, and if Mercury, Mars, Jupiter and lagna
are in odd signs, twins are born, of whom one
will be male and the other female. Lagna and
the Moon in even houses aspected by male planets,
produce twins, as above. ° If powerful Budha,
Kuja, Guru and lagna are in even signs, then
Predict the same result. If planets and lagna are in
common amsas, aspected by Mercury in his amsa,
three children will be born, of whom two will
partake of the sex of the amsa occupied by
Mercury and the other of the opposite sex. If
- planets, lagna and Budha are in similar amsas,
. then three children of that sex will be born.
NOTES 3
The first two combinationsare easy. The third requires
a little explanation. "If all the planets (except, Budha)
occupy common navamsa, aspected by Büdha in his own
navamsa there will be three children, where fex has to be
*determined in the following manner. , if Mercury is in’ the `
zr e UP Staje Museum, Lucknow
@e
e

eo -O. In Public Domain. BRIG AT ATA A and aT, St. i4
amsa of Gemini, and aspects all planets in Sagittarius, then
the birth of two males and ong female should be predicted.
But if Mercury occupies the amsa of Virgo and aspects all
the planets in Pisce$, then two females and one male should
be predicted. In the last combination, as it is stated in the
verse, I cannot make any difference in meaning. But by
reading the invaluable commentaries of Bhattotpala and
specially his quotation: from Sarayali, the difference may
thus.be made out. If all the planets and lagna are
in Mithuna and Dhanus with Budha in Mithuna,
then all the three children should be males. But if
all the planets and lagna are in Kanya and Meena
with Budha in Kanya, then the birth of three females,
should be predicted. In the former half, the idea
seems to me to be that all the planets and lagna, must ,
be in Dhanus, with Mercurial aspect from Mithuna, to have
two male and one female and in Meena with Mercurial aspect from Kanya to have two female and one male birtks.
In the latter case all thé planets and birth may be in Dhanus
and Mithuna with the aspect of Budha in the sarme to have
three male and in Meena and Kanya with Budha in Kanya
to have three female children. It may be questioned that
if some planets are in Dhanus and some in Mithuna with
Budha in Mithuna, then Budha from Mithuna aspects
those in Dhanus, but not those which are in Mithuna as,
they will be in conjunction with him. So also he can aspect
planets in Meena from Kanya, but not the planets in Kanya
itse This question may be easily solved. Where a=planet
remains; it aspects all; those who are with it as well as those
who are in its *séventh house, and in such other houses,
‘where a plant $ has been given’ special sight. Budha has full
Li z c
¢ ^ oe f
UP State Museum, Lucknow

€h. IV, St. 15] STRENGTH OF PLANETS 137
aspect in the 7th house, and we are to understand the author
here, as referring to full aspegts and mot to any fractional
aspects. °
-RAA fea ENTAR: |
remet Aiga 2: fed spar f rade: NAI
Stanza 15.—If -lagna is ir Dhanus, or “falls
in that amsa, if all the planets are powerfuf and
occupy that amsa, and if they are aspected by
powerful Sani and Budha, then predict many
children 'at one birth.
«. NOTES
* The planets may be in any rasis but if they all occupy
the mavamsa of Dhanus, and are powerful, and if these
planets are aspected by powerful Sani and Budha, then
more than three children must be predicted. Ofcourse here,
omy ve possible combination is given. All the planets,
(except Budha and Sani) must be found occupying Dhanur
navamsa, as also the amsa of the lagna, and Sani and
Budha must be found in Mithuna, to produce this yoga for
'- mary children. Bhattotpala suggests that as many as 10
‘children may be born at one time, provided the strength of
“the planets is not in any way impaired. From the quotation
of the commentator, the births of more than 4 or 5 children
ata time was a well established fact and he even suggests
that as many as 10 children may be predicted ata time from
a single conception. Now and then we reati bf the birth of
as maay as 5 or 6 children at a time in € women, and there `
is nothing, strange in such „births althougho they^are rare. ^
e ^ UP State Museum, Lucknow
yy

438 BRIHAT JATAKA [Ch. IV, St. 16
The examples of quintuplets of America and the birth of
seven children at a tiine in 1937, are well known.
SUO aM
Pragaan: We
seas: HAT TAT
wata TAIT THAT: ATT I T |
"Stanza 16.—Kalala, Ghana, Ankura, Asthi,
Charma, Angaja, Chetanatha are governed by
Sukra, Kuja, Guru, Ravi, Chandra, Sani and
Budha respectively. The lord of lágna, Chandra,
and Ravi are rulers of the rext three months
respectively. The fctal growth depends upon
the strength and weakness of the planets, who
govern the particular month. s
NOTES *
Kalala in Sanskrit means the united fluid of the male
and the female after sexual union and the discharge of
the sperm. When a male joins sexually with a female,
vitalessence is discharged from the male organ into the
ovum of the female. At the time of discharge from the
male, the female organ receives it, but it does not enter
the ovum and hence proves useless. But after menstruation
and'at the time of fecundity this discharged , sperm
from the male organ, is directly received into the ovum
of the female “and mixes with the discharged essence
.of the femåles < The Sperm of the man js geùerally
yeltowish white, but the fluid discharged by the female, at
a UP State Miet M

ee
Ch. IV, St. 16] PUMSAVANAM 139
time ek E will be reddish white. The males
sperm is called Sukra or Suklæ (white) and that of the female
is called Shositha or blood-like fluid. As soon. as they are
, mixed in the ovum, fecundation begins, and what is technically called pregnancy commences. Vedas openly declare
that the sex of the child may be changed before delivery and
before tht formation of the sex-organs in the foetus by
certain rituals, which are full of medical and chemical significance. A ceremony called the" Pumsavanam is specially
recommended in the 5th month of pregnancy, and if we take
the trouble of examining the real purport of the incantations
(mantras), therein chanted, we will be struck by the vastness
of chemical and^physical knowledge, the ancient Rishis
possessed, about the process of conception, and the gradual
development of the foetüs incthe womb. When in the union
and discharge of the essences of the male and female, if the
fluid discharged by the male is greater in quantity, a male
child is formed and if the female discharge is greater, a girl's
birth &akes place, but when both fluids are equal in quantity,
the birth of a eunuch must be predicted. Charaka, one of
the greatest Ayurvedic writers in India on medicine, thus refers to Pumsavanam in his immortal Samhita. The learned
Sage observes, ** Instructions will be laid down about those
eVedic rites, by which the sex of the child (in the womb) before
- its manifestation may be changed observing that a woman has
coríceived, the medicines (with proper rites) called Pumsavanam should be administered to her before the manifestgtion
of the^sex of the child in the womb.” (See Pp. 824 and^825,
English Trans. of “Charaka Samhita'*by Avinash 'Chandra
e
Kaviratna). The translator says that ,Pumsaignam is per- .
formed just f after the expiration of 3 months, from the date:
va a
? ^ UP State Meno Lucknow
e
LJ ^

140 BRIHAT JATAKA [Ch. lV, St. 16
of conception. Therefore, studying these delicacies and secrets
of birth, foetal develópment aad sex, the joining couple are
strictly recommended to follow, certain regulations, laid
down, by Dharmasastras, containing the essence of Vedic
teachings with a view to give every advantage, for the birth
of a good and healthy male child. These ceremonies are not
meaningless and ought not to be neglected. During the
sexual union and the frst month of conception, the whole
process will be under the control of Venus and hence he is
also called Sukra or ore who controls sperm and vital
essence. Ghana (solidified) is the state of this united fluid,
in the second month, governed by Mars, when it condenses
and becomes thick, and takes the form of a kidney bean.
Ankura means sprouting, or budding when all the different
bodily organs, will begin to shcw themselves during the third `
month governed by Jupiter. In the fourth month Asthi or
bones are formed and it is governed by the Sun. In the fifth
month Charma or skin begins to gather on the body under
the control of the Moon. In the sixth month hai-s are
formed (Angaja) under Saturn. During the seventh month
consciousness (Chetanatha) or knowledg» begins to develop
in the foetus governed by Mercury or Budha. In Sanskrit
Budha, (knowing) is derived from Budha, bodhane or ~
consciousness. In the eighth month, the foetus takes
through the umbilical cord, the essence of the food consumed -
by the mother, and this is governed by the lord of conception ¿ime (sign). In the ninth month, udvega or the desire to
get cat of the mother's womb, actuates the, foetus and is
governec by the, Moca. During the tenth month Prasava or
delivery takes place and this important month is governed by
the Sun. _In ‘aye work, the lords of the 8th, Ito and 10th
UP State Museum, Lucknow
E
a

Ch. IV, $t. 16] FOETAL DEVELOPMENT 141
c j [d
months are given, but not the state of the foetus and the
development. Horasara gives a quotation about this more
clearly, Kalilaein the first month governed by Sukra, Ping_ aksha bija ia the second under Kuja, Garbhankura in the third
by Guru, Majja and Asthi in the fourth by Ravi, Twak,
Medha, Rakiha in the fifth by Moon, all organs in the sixth by
Sani, consciousness or Gnanendriya in the seventh by Budha,
hunger and thirst in the eighth by lord of conception ‘ime,
Udvega in the ninth by Moon, and Prasuti or delivery in the
tenth by Ravi. Bhattotpala quotes his authority from the
Laghu Jataka of Varaha Mihira. There is some slight
difference" between Varaha Mihira and Yavaneswara, who
says that the first month is under the control of Mars while
the second is governed by Venus. Yavaneswara is more
» to bie point and gives greater details as regards the foetal
development. In the fourth month, bones, blood vessels
afid nerves are formed. In the fifth Majja (marrow) and
skin are developed. In the sixth, blood, hair, nails and
Ekruta are formed. The last term has two significations :
(1) Some fleshy part developed in the head, and (2) some
kosha in the left side of the stomach, which has its opposite
pleha in the right side of the stomach; when there is any
disturbance to these two, mahodara or dropsy results and the
man dies. Inthe ninth month the foetus feels the touches
-which affect its mother. In the tenth month all nerves, all
blood vessels and all other necessaries in the body „will be
fully developed, and the child will be born in complete
humamshape. At the time of conception the strength: and
weakness of planets should be specially nqted,, and there
will be > miscarriage in that month, which is governed by an
afflicted pldnet. The foetus suffers much “dusing that ,
On a n
^ UP State Museum, Lucknow
n D

ae -O. In Public agan, Di BIBAT PAKAN and fet, St. 16
month, which is governed by a lustreless, or contracted
planet, but when the planet is strong and possesses its
natural brilliancy, the development will be what is most
desirable. Bhattotpala quotes some special points from
Saravali, which deserve reproduction here, not only to give
instruction to the readers of this work, but also to show,
how deeply the ancients had grasped the minutest details of
this important and all.absorbing question of human reproduction. The bad and gocd Karma of the Atma (soul)
during its states of previous existence, lie encumbered upon
it, and join the fluid at the time of male and female union by
the decrees of Karma. The child partakes of the nature of
the mental composition, which rules supreme over the parties
at the time of sexual union before conception. The child
partakes of the nature of Vata, Piththa, or Sleshma or wiad,
bile, and phlegm which is elevated in the couple at the time
of sexual union. If the Sun is powerful at the time of birta:
the child takes resemblance after the father, but if the Moon
is powerful, then the child resembles more its mother. JA few
references to grand medical ideas may be made here.
Saravali, which succeeded Varaha Mihira, knows the
important medical and Vedic idea, that the child is greatly
influenced, by the mental attitude of the joining couple at the -
time of conception. The Karma theory is directly supported
by astrological works. The Atma encumbered with its good
and evil acts in the previous births or states of existence,
will be driven, as it were,. by invisible energies, by the
decizes of Karma, and will be attracted to such mele and
female and,such env‘sonments, as are suitable to its orders,
and the results which it has to endure, during the present
state of existence. In short notes, such as dies a colossal
UP State Museum, Lucknow
S TEE S

i CC-O. In Public Domain. are by Sarayu Trust and eGangotri
CR. IV, St. 17] DEFORMED CHILDREN 143
question like that of Karma, and its decrees cannot be raised
and satisfactorily solved. I refer my readers to some of my
own contributions, in THE ASTROLOGICAL MAGAZINE Vol. IX,
for fuller information,on these vital points. (Vide
j. " ASTROLOGICAL MAGAZINE, January 1945, p. 33). The idea
of fixing a very auspicious time for the first contact of the
> couple ine nuptials, shows the anxiety of the earlier astrological writers to afford good opportunities for the birth and
breeding of healthy, well behaved, *intelligent and long lived
children. The time was not confined to only the first
occasion. Even on ordinary days, when the couple felt a
desire to Have sexual correspondence, they were religiously
enjoined to'avoid connection on all such evil lunar days and
week days as were governed by malefic planets. The lagna
. for gexual contact should be clean in the 8th house and good
planets must aspect it or occupy other favourable positions.
New Moon days, evil constellations and unsuitable times are
to be scrupulously avoided. When carefully examined, these
show that the sole object of the Maharishis in laying down.
such injunctions was to minimise the chances of producing
undesirable and defarmed children, and afford every possible
chance for improving the physical and mental breed of the
. future generations.
* AAN gp fase dires wag |
- —— Speer Af sni: AANA-
> REPE USO NU
Suave 17.—1f Budha is iş thrikona; and
f other planets are powerless, then the ghild will
À have two, faces, four hands, and four legs with one
SS a? ^ a
: | ; a 2 ^ UP State Museum, Lucknow ^
a^

144 BRIHAT JATAKA [Ch. IV, St. 18
face. If the Moon is in Taurus, and evil planets
are in Ruksha Sandhis, predict a dumb child,
If, in this conjunction, the Moon has beneficial
aspect, the child begins to speak very late in life.
NOTES
If Budha occupies Sth and 9th with powerless planets
in other houses, a double body joined in stomach will be
the result. Some say that Budha must be in Moolathrikona,
but this view is directly negatived by the authoritative
quotation from Maharshi Gargi. If Chandra is in Vrishabha and evil planets occupy the last navamsas of Kataka,
Vrischika and Meena, then a dumb child is produced, but
when Chandra is subjected to beneficial aspects, the child
may begin to speak after some years. The planets may’ be
in one or two or three last navamsas of the signs stated
above. Gargi says, that if the two sets of planets, evil
and good, aspect Moon and if benefics are stronger
than malefics, the speech comes aíter a long time, but if
malefics are stronger than benefics, the child becomes
dumb. Ruksha Sandhis are the last nàvamsas of Kataka,
Vrischika and Meena, and this is clearly stated so by Gargi.
dia tase Aaa ara:
gest TAG AAA TG aT |
vet urget eie |
weal TH AR a ae: Eaters: diae I
: Stanzc 18.—If Sani and Kuja occupy Budha's
^ houses or nzvarasas, the child will be born with
UP State Museum, Lucknow

Ch. 1; Si I8] "UNNATURAP BIRTHS 7° "oen
teeth. If Kataka is lagna with Chandra in it,
having the aspects of Sani and Kuja, the child
will be dwarf. If Meena becomes, lagna aspected
. by Saai, Chandra and Kuja, the child becomes
acripple. If the Rasi Sandhis are occupied by
malefics.and the Moon, the child will be deaf.
In all these cases there must, be no beneficial
aspects. o ?
e
NOTES
There are some children who are born defective or
with abnorinal developments. Children generally get their
teeth after some months. But here is a combination which
a briggs ina child with teeth already present at the time of
birth. Hyder from a tradition curtent at Budicota his birth
place “is said to have been born with all the teeth*and his
LJ
acs | Rahu ?
D
LJ
HYDER'S
RASI
© Sukra
EY
Kethu Budha | Birth °
uru 4
^ Kyia Sani
mother could not bear to look at the child, "The above
noted horosçope is the rasi diagram of Hydef. Budha’s |
rasis or amsas are Mithuna and Kanya.» If these are
10 BA ne E ,
Wi > "^ UP State Museum, Lucknow
m a

146 BRIHAT JATAKA [Ch. IV, St. 19
occupied by Sani and Kuja, then this abnormal development occurs. Some'are of opinion that both Sani and
Kuja must be in Mithuna as well as in that navamsa or
in Kanya and also in that navamsa. The full aspects of
the benefics negative these results while partial beneficial
aspects may produce traces of such defects or deformities,
When there are no beneficial aspects these results will be
fully realised. Geográphical researches have established
that here are some nations of dwarfs, the tallest of whom
will be about 18 inches in height while the shortest is under
afoot. In Central Africa, such a nation has been recently
discovered. Their women, although not higher than 16
inches, are graceful, handsome, attractive and well proportioned and they are intelligent and advanced fairly in
the arts of civilised life. ` a
Tara aa AAA HEA C
AMAT STC, TITAS: FATT US
Stanza 19.—If the last navamsa or Makara
is lagna aspected by Sani, Chandra and Ravi
then a dwarf is born. If malefics occupy the Sth,
9th and lst drekkanas, handless, feetless and
headless child respectively must be predicted.
NOTES
' The last navamsa of Makara is Kanya and if this
happens to be the birth and Saturn? the Sun’and the Moon
aspect it, the bicth uf a dwarf will be the result. The second
. half of thi; verse is the subject of some discussions by
Bhattotpala.
UP State Museum, Lucknow

r|
(SISSY ua Na aa
ch. LY, St. 19] DEFORMITIES 147
eiit to these drekkanas there are some who say
that as the 5th house is the 2nd drekkana, and if that forms
the lagna, oécupied by a malefic and .aspected by Sani,
, Chandra: and Ravi, the'child will have no arms. As the
9th is the 3rd drekkana, and similar combinations as above
are present the child will have no feet, and as the lst
drekkana' is the first itself and similar conjunctions are
present the child will be headless., This last may be simply
a lump of round flesh and aay live for a short time.
Vide Kabhandu’s description in the Ramayana. In the
division of drekkanas we have seen that the lords of the
drekkanas are (1) the lord of the house itself, (2) the lord of
the 5th, and (3) the lord of the 9¢h. Reference is made in the
light of this information, The malefic refers to Mars as the
oth®r two evil planets the Sün ang Saturn are required to
aspect, the lagna. Some other astrologers even go to the
length of simply saying that if these drekkanas are occupied
by evil planets, the results may be ,predicted even when,
unaspetted by Saturn, the Sun and the Moon. Some say”
that the word respectively need not be considered at all
as any one of thesé deformities may be predicted by any
one of these. combinations sketched above. Others say
'.that if lagna falls in the first drekkana then the fifth will
Ge the first division in the fifth from it or the second
drekkana and the first in the 9th will be the first in the 3rd
drekkana. If every one of these 3 divisions is occupied by
a malefic then deformities must bê predicted. Bhattotgala
explain$ his owa views thus. If, at the time of conception,
drekkana in the fifth house is occupied.Qy Kuja and
aspected by Sani, Chandra and Ravi, then apm4ess person `
will be born. If the drekkana which rises in -the 9th house
$ UP State Museum, Lucknow ^

i48 BRIHAT JATAKA [Ch. IV, St. 20
is occupied by Kuja having similar aspects by Sani,
Chandra and Ravi, then the’ child will have no feet. If
the drekkana which rises in the lagna is occupied by Kuja
aspected by Sani, Chandra and Ravi then predict. a child
without a head. This is supported by Bhagavan Gargi,
and the author of Saravali, both of whom are simple and
clear on this point. H
cafu fi A ssa
see: diee: IFAT: |
STAN au AKAN TiS sania rer aret afe DATA Ul Ro N
Stanza 20.—If Leo is birth occupied by the
Sun and the Moon, aspected by Mars and Saturn
the child will be blind. If in the above combination there is also beneficial aspect the vision
will be dim. The Moon in the 12th house causes
loss to the left eye and the Sun there causes loss
to the right eye. Beneficial aspects give some relief
in these combinations.
NOTES
Ravi and Chandra must be in Simha, the birth sign,
having the evil asp:cts,of Sani and Kuja to produce
bliedness. Blindnessis of many sorts. A child may be born
ferfectty blind or it may have dim sight and then lose it
later on or it may have good sight early in life, and lose it
by accident, sinàll-pox or otüer disease. Bene‘icial “aspects
to lagna, Chandra znd Ravi there, will greatly modify this
UP State Museum, Lucknow

mh} SEE a a aaa
Ch. IV, St. 20] CATARACT EYE 149
è è
blindness and a child will be born with Budbudaksha or
some defective vision in the sight. Budbudaksha means a
- cataract eye er what in ordinary language i is called a flower
in the eye. If the Sun is in Leo, as birth and has
> aspects of Mars and Saturn, the child will have the right
eye blind. If the Moon is there and has theseevil aspects,
» the left eye will become blind. If one of the two planets,
the Sun or the Moon, is in birth Which is Leo, thea the
blindness will be partial. n ‘these and the prévious
recorded combinations, care should be taken to gauge the
intensity of the misfortune by the strength of the evil
planets and the absence of the beneficial influences. When
evil influences Are attributed tp aspects or malefics, their
conjunctions will, of course, intensify the evil, although
^ this has not been hintéd at by the diligent commentator.
Suppose Simha is the lagna and Ravi, Chandra, Kuja and
Sani are also there without any beneficial aspects or conjínctions. What would be the result ? I believe that the
blindness will be there, though no mention of this is made
in the commentaries. Although this is my view it is possible
to imagine that results predicted from aspects of planets may
not be produced by their conjunctions and those results which
* they.give in conjunction may not be attributed to their aspects. These are difficult astrological points whose solution
can only be offered when we have any authority in the ancient ^
^ works. Those who base certain inferences on their personal
experiences will be doing very little credit by placing too
much ¢onfidence on such knowledge and twisting the plain >
texts of ancient astrological literat&re to , Support their
limited SAS and prige. _ Till now -Varahàmihira HIS 4°
KO to the diweg ôf conception and birth therefore refess to the -
E x UP State Museum, Lucknow ^

150 CC-O. In Public Domain, Digizra by Spreye rust and PERTY, St. al
birth of the child in the mother's womb or the time of conception when the seeG enters the womb. Vatsyayana says an
intelligent lady generally knows and feels it. Very few care
to know it.
Tak ai qdaka ger TMS |
TAG RAITAA-
«ms faf meuf: sew NR? Ul
Stanza 21.—The birth of a child takes place
in the sign occupied by the Moon, ,which is represented by the number, in which Dwadasamsa, the
Moon is fixed at the time: The day or the night |
and the ghaties of the birth time must be known
by the number of the ghaties at the time of the
question and the nature of the sign whether
diurnal or nocturnal. ^
NOTES
From here either actual birth or question time is discussed. The wording in the original Sanskrit is simply
untranslatable. The author subjects his verse to so many
omissions and understandings that in a poorly constructed
language like English, it is almost impossible to reproduce
the: “brevity of expression’ stated in the original Sanskrit.
I shall however explain the verse in cleer and simple
language by examplés. It is desired to know when a child
will be born-after conception, either by reference to that
' event or io a query or to the actual birth. The. directions
UP State Museum, Lucknow

CUF WSE r a n asa ah ARE La DA Na
Ch. IM, St. 21] DETERMINATION OF BIRTH 15]
è è
given here explain the time and the division of the day or
the night. The Moon occupies somé sign or rasi at the
time of conception, query or birth. Find which Dwadasamsa the Moon occupies and then count from there by that
number of the Dwadasamsa and find out what sign it will
be. The birth takes place in the tenth month under
normal , eonditions, when that sign is occupied by the
Moon. Take Aries as the rasi fos conception with the
Moon in the 9th house Sagittarius and in its tenth Dwadasamsa. The tenth Dwadasamse in Sagittarius will be
Virgo or Kanya. The birth takes place in the tenth month
of conception when the Moon occupies the tenth from
Virgo, i.e., Gemini. The commentator wisely restricts the
time of birth to be predicted to the tenth month, as students
in ¢heir ignorance of higher: knowledge of astrology may
predict the birth in any of the other months. As Chandra
moves in a rasi in 2X days he will be found in each of
tle rasis every month. Take another example as the
question is very important. Suppose the conception takes
place in Libra when the Moon is in Gemini in its fifth
Dwadasamsa. The fifth Dwadasamsa of Gemini is the fifth
house from it, namely, Libra. The birth of the child must
, be predicted in the 70th month, when the Moon moves in
Aquarius which is the fifth from Libra, the Dwadasamsa
occupied by the Moon at the time of conception. It
means that when the Moon moves in the constellations of
Dhanishta (last two quarters), Satabhisha (four quarters)
and Pervabhadra (three quarters) birth takes place. Th Ye is
some difference here between Saravalieand . Yaraha*Mihifa.
And Bhattotpala wisely . quotes Bhagavan” Gargi in the
explanation® above offered and considers that asethe best”,
D ^ es .
A UP State Museum, Lucknow

a
152 BRIHAT JATAKA [Ch. IV, St. zl
interpretation. Saravali says thus. “ The Moon is found in
some Dwadasamsa at conception time. Take the number
of the Dwadasamsa and count it from the first sign Aries,
and say that the child will be born in the 10th month on
that day when the Moon occupies that sign.” This seems to
make some difference. Take the above example. | The
Moon was found in the 5th Dwadasamsa of Gémini, the
birth happens at that time in the 10th month, when the
Moon moves in Leo, for that is the 5th sign counted from
Aries the number to the Dwadasamsa occupied: by the
Moon at the conceptiontime. Bhattotpala here suggests a
way to find out the constellation, about which the author is
quite silent in the verse. -The Moon móves 2} days ina
rasi and therefore this verse enables one, when rightly
understood, to fix the time of'birth within 2} days. Etch
rasi contains 30 divisions called bhagas or degrees and
each of these bhagas again is divided into 60 ghaties or
nadis. Thus for arasi we get 30x60—1800 kalas ‘or
yhaties. When the whole rasi is represented by 1800 kalas
and also by 24 constellations, we get by division 800 kalas
for each star. 1800 kalas represent tlie full rasi and this
divided by 12 gives 150 kalas for each Dwadasamsa. Thus
150 kalas make one Dwadasamsa. In the above example
Chandra is found in the 5th Dwadasamsa. He will be
moving in that part of the zodiac which is represented by.
kalas 600 to 750 in Mithuna. This must be divided by 800
kale5, the value of a star. To get one star complete we
have’ still to pass 50 kalas more. -Therefore the Moon is
within the “rst zonstéllation which composes Gemini. But
Gemini is composed. of the last two padams of Mrigasira,
- the, four padams of Aridra and ate 3 padams of Punarvasu
UP State Museum, Lucknow Si

b
Ch. I9€Sx.IrpHüplic Dgp4ip: EJISiZE ND SRAL West and eGangotri 153,
U D
or 9 padams in all. The Moon therefore is within the first
800 kalas or within the 2nd padam of Aridra. But the
kalas passed by the Moon is 600 and say he is in, the 700th
kala. Thus as each Nakshatrapadam gets 200 kalas he
“has passed 3 padams and is in the 4th padam. He is just
in half of the 2nd padam of Aridra or the birth of the
child takes place when Aridra has passed 22} ghatikas on
that particular day. If the conception or query sign is
nocturnal the time of birth will be night, if it is diurnal,
. it will be day and the ghati will be,the time of the ghaties
passed over by the rising sign above referred to. But this
point will also be easily found by the measure of the
constellation explained by Bhattotpala. In the first
example given above, the lagna is Mesha, and it is a
nocturnal sign. (See St. 10, Ch. I). Suppose the month
was the Ist of Kanya. The first degree of Meena sees the
sunset on that day. Suppose 2 ghaties of Mesha’ elapsed
before the rise of conception time. Then we have four of
Meena,and two of Mesha=6 ghaties. The birth will take,
place at 6 ghaties after sunset on that day when the Moon
is moving in Kanya»during the tenth month of conception.
Bhattotpala omits one question. The author uses Tatkala
' in the verse and this is explained by the commentator as
referring to (1) Prasnakala (question time). The above
explanation will be consistent if the data is conception
time; for then we may wait for the tenth month and find
out the movement of the Moon and fix the birth, etc. But
how tceregulate the 10th, month with reference to ques lion
time. Suppose the woman is full nige months pregnant
and the question, when she would deliver,” is put to the
astrologer katkon giving him any referencé to” the, time of `
D UPState Musetim, Lucknow
y e

154 BRIHAT JATAKA [Ch. IV, St. 22
sexual union or conception; how should the astrologer
proceed ? Y This vital question wants solution. In St. 2 of
this Chapter, Varaha Mihira explains combinations at query
to find out the natüre of the sexual union. The astrologer
must proceed safely as follows. Either find out the fact
of conception and its proper development (1) by the
combinations of planets at the time of query and predict
from that knowledge.the birth of the child in the tenth
month when the Moon js moving in a particular sign, or
(2) by the nature of the,conjunctions of the planets at the
time of question in the light thrown in Ch. II, St. 14. This
enables the astrologer, to say when the child wili be born.
Manitha ‘says clearly to this effect—'5 the happening of
a result has to be fixed with reference to such time as is
indicated by the lord of navamsa Tising in the question
time, multiplied by that number which the navamsa has
moved ia that sign ”. Take an example. Suppose Leo is
the sign and the 7th navamsa rises in it. The lord of the
„Ith navamsa in Leo is the lord of Libra, viz., Venus. He
is given a fortnight as his time. But the navamsa has
moved to the.7th division; therefore this (fortnight) or
more correctly paksha must be multiplied by 7, and it
gives us 34 months. The astrologer may say that the child .
will be born after 3} months.
SUR quia unge puer
ate watt Pte: Aea |
afia rf rares Tat.
Reza Pret afi qm EE: |
UP State Museum, Lucknow a
Ds
MM aira manane

Ld
Ch. [ECS |2Ppblic Dorai JAYGATIB BAM Trust and eGangotri 155
| Stanza 22.—1f Makara or Kumbha navamsa
rises at the time of conception, aspected by Sani,
the child will be born after 4 years. If Kata-
, kamsa»rises at the time of conception, aspected
by Chandra, then the birth occurs after 12 years
of pregnancy. The details in this chapter must
be carefully understood and ‘applied with sense
and judgment. >
NOTES
Pregnancy is supposed to last generally for 9 months
after conception and then usuallyin the 10th month the child
is born. But there are,certain cases (gajagarbham) in which
pregnancy is supposed to last for 3 years, and even for 12
long years. There are of course special and peculiar cases
which must have happened in the world to make the
astrological adepts to record these combinations. The
elephants have the same age as men but their pregnancy
lasts for 3 years. A caution is given to students here both
by the author and his illustrious commentator. When
questions are asked and the combinations denote conditions
`, inconsistent with the events, the man should study the
problem well and answer it. The astrologer must be
careful, prudent and well versed in the nature of times,
conditions, classes and the circumstances before he ventures
into the fields of future predictions. Is fact a nigh
intellectual development, practice in yoga and exceilent
mathematical and predictive skill, mus be, combined in'a
man tq make him a successful.astrologes. Blind fools, who
study only a few stanzas and whose general Gene i is `>
^ wo UP State Museum, Lucknow

156 BRIHAT JATAKA [Ch. IV, St. Z
most ordinary, can never hope to become successful
astrologers, in whose prediction people can place implicit
confidence, (Vide Life of Varahamihira by me), Bhattotpala
thus summarises his advice. Such events as defects in
organs, parents, uncles and aunts must be predicted from
birth combination. That which is inconsistent must not be
predicted. For instance, miscarriage ought not to be predicted iri a case where a child is born and so forth. The three
methods of gauging the influence of time sbould be carefully
compared and such of the results which are reasonable
should be predicted. The three methods are birth time,
conception time and question time. 1
BHATTOTPALA
(His work‘ and age)
Bhattotpala calls himself us Utpala, in his commentaries
of Varahamihira's Brihat Samhita, and as Bhattotpala in
his Prasna work entitled Prasna Gnyana. Itis not clear to
‘what country he belonged, but it seems certain that-he
belonged to North India. He has written commentaries
on all the works of Varahamihira excepting his Pancha
Siddhantika and also for Shat Panchashat by Varahamihira’s
son Prithuyasas. He seems to have composed an original
work on Prasna (query) called Prasna Gnyana and also
completed the missing or unfinished portions of Saravali.
There is a stanza which runs to this effect and which
is Xell- known to the learned in astrology. It says :—The
work Saravali, which was largely used by the Chinese and
which remained unfihished for one hundred years, was taken
„up by Bhattotpela and completed. Some strong colour is
given to this passage by Bhattotpala quoting largely from
: UP State Museum, Lucknow * A a

è ,ec-o. In Public DoH D Ried by apy Srust and eGangotri 157,
Saravali in support of his interpretations of the. texts in
Brihat Jataka. Itis difficult to say that Bhattotpala did
not write ccmmentaries on the Pancha Siddhantika of
varahamihira. Bhattotpala has also written commentaries
' on Khanda Khadya of Brahma Gupta, one of the famous
earlier astrological writers. The following are the works
of Varabzmihira :—
]. Brihat Samhita. © i ,
Samasa Samhita.
Brihat Jataka. D
Laghu Jataka.
Pancha Siddhantika.
Vivaha Patala. .
Yoga Yatra. . ,
NDARBENI
Commentaries by Bhattotpala for.all these (except Pancha
Siddhantika) are available.
e There are also two works, named by Bhattotpala, as
having been written by Varahamihira,'entitled Brihat Yatra
and Laghu Yatra. Whether these are the same as Yoga .
Yatra or different, it is not easy to say, because no copies
of such separate works are yet before the public.
As regards the age during which this illustrious commen-
.' tator lived, the readers are referred to Pp. 135 of THE ASTROLOGICAL MAGAZINE, Vol. X, Feb. issue. There the suggestion
‘seems to be a little wide off the mark. The writer refers to
Salivahana and converts 888 years which Bhattotpala gives
for the completion of his invaluable commentaries on B ‘hat
Jataka, and also suggests that it may refer to Samvat or
Vikramarka Saka. There is no necessity 40, convert them
into Salivakana at all, as Bhattotpala citarly refers the Saka,
to Vikramaditya and not to Salivahang — * °
6 Yo UP State Museum, Lucknow $

158 BRIHAT JATAKA
In Ch. VIII, St. 20 of Brihat Samhita Risttotpels converts the Saka years (rom thé era established by Vikramaditya after his conquest of Sakas or Mlecnas. Thus he
finished his commentaries of Brihat Jataka in April 832,
A.D. Therefore it is clear that Vikrama Saka is meant and
not Salivahana. The commentaries of Bhattotpala are
always to the point and are expressed in clear and simple
language. His power of, quotation is hardly surpassed by
any other writer, on astrology and indirectly he has conferred
a great boon on the succeeding generations, by handing over
to them fragments of astrological works many of which now
seem to have been either lost or have not yet been brought
before the public. His scholarship and reading must have
been simply colossal, to have enabled. him to deal with the
original texts in the masterly way in which he has explained
their hidden truths. We cannot think there is another commentator in the whole field of astrological literature, who
could equal Bhattotpala in the valuable services he has
rendered to the public and so long as the astrological literature stands in the world, his name is likely to be cherished
with affection and reverence. Learned 'as Varahamihira is,
it is certain that he would not have been so well-known to
the public as he is now, but for the commentaries of Bhattotpala. Throughout the length and breadth of India, and now
by English translations, in other countries, Varahamihira’s
works have been popularised by these commentaries, and
plac ‘ed within the reach of ordinary intellects. A splendid
and ‘authoritative work on Varahamihira and his times by
the present; “transiator is also available and therein
he has clearly „and: authoritatively shown how, wby and
“ when Varahamihira, who was called mereh Mihira, became
UP State Museum, Lucknow ^ 4

$ o k: Public DEN: OR RIS Trust and eGangotri 159°
< Varabamihira '. Warahamihira lived during the I Century
B.C. in the Court of Vikramaditya. Kalidasa’s Jyotirvidabharanam quotes the following stanza : 2
«]'Dhanvantari, 2. Kshapanaka, 3. Amarasimha,
4. Bhetalabatta, 5. Sankha, 6. Ghatakarpura, 7. Kalidasa,
8. Khyate. Varahamihira, Nripatesabhayam Ratnanivy,
9. Vararuchir Nava Vikramasya ” meaning that these nine
literary gems graced the Court ‚of *Vikramaditya of whom.
Varaha Mihira alone had the epithet Khyato or famous.
LJ
LJ
a
e.
Qro nn,
D inm
^ QU
e.
*» UP Sthte Musetm, Lucknow
° E i
oe

CHAPTER V
JANMA KALA LAKSHANA
MANCSA EAA:
(Peculiarities of Birth)
Riga: Weer sahara | ‘
eet qut Wem? RIR Ut N
Stanza 1.—If birth sign is unaspected by the
Moon, father will be absent at the birth. If the
Sun occupies a movable sign (pathitha) from the
10th, the father will be away in a foreign country
at the birth of child.
NOTES
Pathitha ( fallen) is explained by Bhattotpala as a fall
for the Sun, on either side of the 10th house apto two
.houses, i.e., when the Sun is in the 11th or 12th he will
be fallen from the 10th in front and when he i$ in the 9th
and 8th he will be fallen in the rear. He must occupy one
of these which should be a movable sign to keep the father
away in a foreign country. If the Sun is in a fixed sign the .
father will be in the country but absent from home and if he
is in a common sign, the father will be on his return from a
foreign place. Ifbirth is not aspected by the Moon and the
Sun is in the signs as stated above, the child will be born
when the father is away. Saravali Tuns to tbe same tune.
"semis m p gi red em
"au SWR Tega IRU
UP State Museum, Lucknow ^^

a CC-O.In Public Domain. ST EN by Sarayu Trust and eGangotri r
Ch. V, Sts. 2 & 3] CONSTANT COMBUSTS 161
` Stanza 2.—If Saturn occupies lagna or if
Mars is in the 7th or if the Moon is between Mercury and Venus, the father will be absent at the
‘birth of the child. `
NOTES
Three" combinations are given here to show the absence
of the father at the time of birth. „He may be in his own
country or in a foreign country or Tay be on his way back.
Venus and Mercury may be on both Sides of the Moon, in the
same sign, or they may be in the next house on either side of
the Moon,, ie. 2nd or 12th house. Venus and Mercury
follow close upofi the‘movements of the Sun, and have
constant combusts, risings and settings. This is specially
^so With Mercury. Therefore this conjunction can only take
place on Amavasya (New Moon) or a day or two on either
side of it. Between the Moon and Venus and Mercury on
either side there must be no other planet. In these 3 combinatioas, the Moon should not aspect lagna. Laghu Jataka "
also quotes” ‘the same combination, viz., Moon between
Venus and Mercury and Mars in the 7th.
TMS WIA ST ARTEA |
gu: expresa: TRASHY aT 3 N
Stanza 3.—If the Moon occupies Mars drekkana and benefics are in the 2nd and 11th houses,
predict a serpent’s birth. If an evil sign falls in
Kuja's drekkana and has benefice in the 2nd and
the 114h, the child will'be bound by SAPEN, dise
bandage. . ^ 3
u E AS UP State Museum, Lucknow

162 BRIHAT JATAKA [Ch. V, St. 4
NOTES i
The drekkanas of Mars àre the Ist of Aries, the 2nd of
Cancer, the 3rd of Leo, the Ist of Scorpio, the 2nd of
Sagittarius and the 3rd of Pisces. In the 2nd half, the evi]
sign referred to which possesses a Kuja drekkana will be
one of Aries, three of Leo and one of Scorpio. Then all the
benefics must occupy 2nd and llth houses. Gergi supports this view. It strikes me as most strange that while
‘Chandra occupies a Kuja drekkana and has benefics in the
2nd and 11th houses, fie produces a serpent while an evil
sign rising in Kuja drekkana with similar beneficial combinations produces a child bound with a serpent-like
appendage. ^
The intensity of evil appears to me to be greater inthe
2nd than in the first set of combination. But the text is plaia
and it is'supported by Maharishi Gargi and also by Saravali.
Readers would do well to test a few horoscopes, before venturing on such predictions, since such births are rare.,A case
of a serpent's birth in the author's own family has been
handed over by tradition and even now.in the village once a.
year, a serpent worship is being done by some member of the
family who is settled in the village and every scion of the .
family has a child named after Tirupathi Venkataramana,
who is called Seshadri Vasa or Lord of the Serpent's hill. .
ATTA At THAT ATT: |
ik EN
: Gawa anah wad: Mat |B Ul
Stanza 4.—If the Sun occupies a quadruped
sign and if other powerful planets occu py common.
UP State Museum, Lucknow ' i

ce- O. In RIS GL PININ: by Sarayu Trust and eGangotri
ISS APURUSHA 162
sidus, twins will be born covered with a common
hood. ;
. NOTES E
The quadruped signs are Mesha, Vrishabha, Simha, the
2nd of Dhanus and the first half of Makara. The twins will
be enclosed in one common bag.
TÀ RR TT SA TI hte gy | >
mA TE TTA aea: N Y |
Stanza 5.—If Mesha, Simha or Vrishabha
falls as lagna, occupied by Sani or Kuja, the child
will be born with a cowl or cord in that organ
which is represented by the rising navamsa.
; NOTES :
^ In Chapter I, Stanza 4, the different organs of Kalapurusha have been stated. The child born will have a cord»
or nerve-like appendage in that organ which is represented
by the navamsa rising at the time of birth. For instance
take Aries as the birth and the navamsa of Leo rises at the
~ time, Leo represents stomach or belly of Kalapurusha
and the child will have Nala (Nadi) about the belly.
1 euer a AA A aT TE TAT TATA |
See gibst Ae vtm sd mfn- $c
RS Fem. 4l 3 |
Stanza 6.—If Jupiter does nos aspect birth and i
Moon, or “if he does not aspect the-Sun, in con-
^ A ‘up Sfàté Museum, Lucknow

164 BRIHAT JATAKA [Ch. V, St. 6
junction with the Moon, if the Moon with a malefic
combines with the Sun then say certainly the
child is born to another person or of adultery.
NOTES
This isa very important stanza where the question of
the mother’s character arises and the students should not
hastily run away with niisinterpretations and thus throw
blame upon the character, of innocent women. Every astrologer must, in the first place, confine himself to predict such
events as are particularly referred to by the consulter. Even
if, from stupidity or neglect the native pets a senseless or
ungentlemanly question, the astrologer must be careful and
must decline to answer it in case it is likely to disturb the
harmony of the person’s life or that of his family or relations. ‘Suppose a man in his youthful vagary and ‘inexperience asks an astrologer whether his wife is adulterous.
The astrologer should decline to answer such a silly question
and give him better advice. Similarly many ‘horoscopes
show, want of chastity on the part of their mothers, wives or
sisters. Although the astrologer first notices this point he
must be reticent on this head and omit the point altogether
unless he has very grave necessity to express his views upon À
such delicate question as the chastity of females or the
morality of males. The world is a world of great diversities,
of testes, morals and position, whether public or private.
Prostitution is so strongly rooted in the nature of human
beings that.it is.found in all countries, in all nations, durirg
all times and in all sects and families where the number of
“members, assumes a respectable figure. “Ic is à mere
absurdity to assert " says Dr. W. Sanger “ that prostitution
UP State Müseum, Lucknow ^

Ch. Y» Susp Domain. pigitiggd Sex send eGangotri 165
can ever be eradicated. Strenuous and well-directed efforts
for this purpose have been made at different times. The
whole power of the Church (religious and political) has been
in vain directed against it. Nature defied the mandates of
` the clergy and the threatened punishment of an after life
were futile, to deter men from seeking and women from
granting, sinful pleasures in this world. Monarchs, victorious in the field and unsurpassed in “the council chamiber,
have bent all their energies of will and brought all the “aids
of power to crush it, but before ¢hese the vice has not
quailed. The guilty women have been banished, scourged,
branded, executed, their partners have been subjected to the
same punishments; held up to public opinions as immoral,
denuded of their civil rights, have seen their offences
visited upon their families, “have been led to the stake,
the gibbet and the block, and still "prostitution exists. The
teachings of morality and virtue have been powerless here.
Im'some cases they restrain individuals, but upon the aggregate they are inoperative. The researches of sciences haye?
been unheeded. They have traced the physical results of
vice and have foreshadowed its course. They have demonstrated that the suffering parents of their generation will
` bequeath to their posterity a heritage of the ruined powers,
that the malady which their illicit pleasure communicates, is
destructive to the hopes of man, that the human frame is
percéptibly and regularly deteriorating by the operation of
this poison and have shown that even the desire for health
and lomg life, one of the, most powerful motives that ever
influences a human being, has been of 20 ayai* to stem the
torrent". (See Pp. 19 and 20. The History of Prostitution `
by William P. Sanger, M.D., , New York, 1859 A.D?) (s
^ AUP state Museum, Lucknow

166 BRIHAT JATAKA [Ch. V. St. 6
opes give room for such combinations as would show adultery on the part of men and
women and the astrologer has no option, but to be silent on
this point. Further on, the character of the wife comes in,
and the astrologer will be in a nice funk, when he is asked
by a gentleman whose children are all born to adultery and
who wishes to know, by the examination of his Children's
horoscopes, when the iather would die. In some horoscopes,
under our observation, the' paramour of the woman dies
early, if the combinatioh is unfavourable to the progenitor
while her so-called husband puts the question, as regards
Therefore many horosc
the longevity of himself. A merchant’s wife gave birth toa .
son. The planets indjcate¢ immediate death to the father.
His wife had connection with a washerman and the child was
the result of this illicit intercourse. The astrologer consulted, :
told the man that the father would be drowned in a day or
two. The time passed and he learnt that his washerman had
died by drowning as. predicted and inferred that, in that
particular instance, he was not the father and it was good-for
him that he was not so, as death would have snatched him
away. Jupiter's aspect of the lagna or Moon or his aspect
of the Sun and Moon combined is favourable and no imputation should be made. Even if the'birth or the Moon oc- -`
cupies beneficial amsas or divisions, the result is favourable
and the mother will be chaste. The Sun and the Moon join
on the Amavasya day (New Moon) and if they have
má'efic associations or aspects without beneficial .conjunction or aspects there will be a strong presumption of guilt
| on the part of thé mother. The astrologer should see
y ada im the.rasiand amsa, kunéalis, the Sun and the Moon
are not áspected by Jupiter or are not situated in his houses.
a
UP State Museum, Lucknow or

oe
a
Ca. 9S Stan FudicFo"QU ESTAS RY OPMER IEY 167.
Yavaneswara, Gargi and Saravali are all unanimous that
when Jupiter aspects the question of immorality does not
arise.” But Bhattotpala says that when the Sun and the Moon
are in the same sign with other evil planets, the morality
' of the mother has to be doubted even though Jupiter aspects. But the benefit of the doubt should be given and the
astrologer should always be careful. » Discretion i is necessary
in such matters. D
seite! eee Oe]
aged fier Ream: A am che TAL II I
Stanza 7.—If malefics occupy the signs of
cruel planets dnd are in the 7th, 9th or Sth from
the Sun, the father will be imprisoned when the
child is born. The sign occupied by the Sun
determines the locality of his bondage. °
s NOTES ..
, Malefics are Mars and Saturn and the signs of the
cruel planéts are Aries, Leo, Scorpio, Capricorn, Aquarius
and Cancer, when the Moon is weak in the dark half of the
month and Virgo and Gemini, when Mercury isin evil
> conjunction. If the Sun occupies a movable sign, the
father suffers from imprisonment in a foreign land, if ina
fixed sign in his own country and if in a common sign on
his way home.
Ti TAA aah del oat Ta gu 5
SA FTAA T Ae Te TAA AI Z I >
Stanza 8.—If Fell Moon is in (Cancer, if `
Mercury, is in lagna and benefics are in the 4th,
^ a UP state Deum. Lucknow

d
| w -O. In Public Doman Di [iege ge A seri an songoy. Ste 8
the delivery takes place in a boat or steamer, «or
in a sea-voyage. If birth is watery with the Moon
in the 7th the same result happens.
NOTES
Some read Shubhaihi as benefics and think that,as the
plural is used three or more benefics must be uhderstood.
The text reads Shubhay in the singular and Bhattotpala
interprets this as Jupiter in the 4th. Since shubha means
benefic it may also refer to Venus. But when Mercury
occupies birth, Venus cannot be placed in the 4th from it.
"When the Moon is full and in Cancer, then necessarily the
Sun must be in the 7th from it, namely, Capricorn. If Mercury is in lagna and three benefics are in the 4th then we
must take birth as Aries with Mercury in it and the three '
benefics as in Cancer, ‘namely, Full Moon, Venus and
Jupiter. This view of some astrologers is quite untenable
as when the Sun is in Capricorn, Mercury can never be
im Aries and much less could Venus be in the 7th from
him. Bhattotpala therefore rightly renders the verse by
taking the text as shubhay (singular) and referring it to only
Jupiter. But some say that in ancient times such combinations may have occurred and the authors who recorded .'
such facts—now impossible—may have been perfectly true.
Later on some combinations of such stamp are also
recorded by the learned Varahamihira and he ‘says
thas'although they may look now as absurd, they may not
have been soin the earlier times and the.recordeá combinations of « ‘the Máharishis cannot be rejected as untrue.
It is very difficult to make remarks on such events, as in
2 “the,” nuriberless revolutions e the planets, universal
UP State Mou Lucknow ^" ja

Ch. O¢;Gin Public Dos LDGEARdbyGHaOHbiIand eGangotri 169
phenomena undergo such changes during immense cycles of
time and produce such inconsistent and contradictory
phenomena that nobody has any right to condemn them as
impossible. What is absurd now may have been perfectly
' consistent in times remote and what was absurd then may
now become perfectly true and practicable. Those who
affirm dogmatically that such and such events could not
have happened in the world, at anytime, simply expose the
shallowness of their brains and the weak comprehension
they have on matters terrestrial and celestial. They may be
absurd at one time, but possible at another age. Here
combinations are given to denote the delivery of the child
in ships or boats or on watery surfaces. Watery signs
are Cancer, the second half of Capricorn, and Pisces.
Tha fact that there are:the two systems now Sayana and
Mirayana, with a difference of nearly 23 degrees, shows
that the positions of planets from the respective positions
of their original starting, have changed and hence what
might have been possible in remóte ages, may not be
possible no and vice versa.
AAA: rp uU Was |
AGS: AAA: Ass « warm: N Ul
Stanza 9.—If birth fallsin a watery sign as
also the Moon, the delivery will be close to water.
If lagna (a watery sign) has Full Moon’s aspect she
same result? happens. If, for, such lagna, the
ma 0
Moon is there or in the 5th or 10th’ then similar .
results happen. Tie 2 ;
te Rae ee s >
o ^UP State Museum, Lucknow
d

179 9. In Publie ORR AE AYARA" PCH SB À & 21
NOTES
These refer to births close to watery surfaces like lakes,
seas, large tanks or rivers. If a watery sign is Jagna possessing Full Moon’s aspect delivery occurs near watery, surfaces.
Weak Moon’s aspect may not have this effect. If birth is
watery and the Moon occupies it or is in the 5th or 10th
from it delivery occurs near water. Some texts read 4 and 10.
SIC LIC gati TRAA ai |
feft fae att ARRAST I 2e I
Stanza 10.—If Saturn occupies the 12th, and
a malefic aspects the Moon, the woman delivers
the child when in bondage or jail. If Saturn is in |
Scorpio or Cancer one of which is the birth aspected by the Moon, the delivery takes place’ in a
hole or hollow or pit. E
NOTES ^
This denotes that birth and the Moon must be in the
same sign to bave Saturn in the 12th. Malefics here. may
refer to Mars and the Sun who should aspect Saturn. The ,
text also reads Saturn in the 12th from birth and the Moon `
aspected by evil planets. There are many women who are
imprisoned and who deliver while they are in jail or they
may be captured by vagabonds and kept in bondage or confinement and the delivery may take place there.
| TAS fam TTNG ara |
> RENA BH Tad SIRE EGET Ngt
3 UP State Museum, Lucknow af PEAN ;
ib er een —— dtl

ca. SES alee Dee RE MENDES qm
3 Stanza 11.—If birth is watery with Saturn in
it, aspected by Mercury, the Sun and the Moon,
the birth takes place in playgrounds, temples and
uncultivated fields, respectively.
4 NOTES
Threé combinations are sketched here. If the rising sign
is watery with Saturn in it aspected by Mercury, the delivery
occurs on playgrounds or pleasure resorts. If similar
Saturn has the Sun’s aspect the birth takes place in temples
or places of worship and if similar Saturn has the Moon's
aspect the delivery occurs in barren or uncultivated ground.
This also applies to lost property»and sex union questions.
TOTA ea Wa ATA vel fte TEC |
ves fene some PAR Racal
Stanza 12.—If birth with Sani falls in a Nara
Rasi aspected by Kuja the birth happens in a
grave-yard ; aspected by Sukra and Chandra in
pleasant places ; aspected by Guru in sacrificial
~ places; aspected by Ravi in royal, mansions,
cowsheds, or temple premises; aspected by Budha
in libraries, art colleges or carpenters’ premises.
à NOTES J
Nara Rasis are Gemini, Virgo, Libra, the first half of
Sagittarius and Aquarius. Saturn mist héjp Birth in any
one cf these signs and Rave the aspects of planets referred
to above, „to produce the results indicated there. The birth. 3
ha ^
9 UP State Museum, Lucknow

d T t
i ` CC-O. In Public Domain Ik We AO PY FARA rust €— "et. 43
happens in places indicated by the rising sign and « its
navamsa. If itis movable the delivery occurs in travelling,
if fixed at a house and if the amsa is the same. as the rasi at
her own home. ‘The result must be ascertained according |
to the strength of the sign and its navamsa.
THUAN ART sew R Rn Te H,
ala BARAT aedpmensqueudt 0 23 II
Stanza 13.—Place of birth happens to be
according to the nature of the rasi and navamsa,
either at home or outside. The birth place should
be determined according to the strength of the
lagna either in rasi or navamsa. ?
NOTES
For places represented by the different signs refer to
. 3, Chap. I. If the birth sign and its navamsa are
URN then the delivery takes place congenial to such
signs. Ifthey both are fixed there, she delivers at places
similar to their nature in her own house. If both of these
are common signs then in places, congenial to those signs :
outside the premises of her house. If the navamsa falls in
the same sign as the rasi (that is if it falls in its
Vargottama) the birth takes place in her own house, even if
the; are movable or doüble-bodied. The nature of the
place of birth must be. determined by the lagna or its
; navamsa dccbfdingsto the strength they possess. This
ene, Bhattotpalz remarks, will apply only whea the
" previous planetary ‘combinations are not founds , He means
à UP State Museum, L'uéknow^^ E
Q ec

rs
CR. VS. HPEPASPEORSERIINCPCHTLBRER T 17
that if such combmation are present then the results named
in this stanza should not be predicted. `
RARR TESA | ATASATA |
eESHQTSHÍCSTUT AA: GAA A AHA UVM
Stanza 14.—If the Moon or the Sun is in the
9th or 5th from Saturn and Mars, the child will
be forsaken by its mother.: It in that combination
Jupiter aspects it, the child lives long and prospers
although, forsaken by its mother.
"ie . NOTES
Here Saturn and Mars combined in any house, have the
» Moen in the 5th, 9th or 7th houses from them to make the
nrother forsake her infant. In this Combination if the Moon
is aspected by Jupiter the forsaken babe will be take care of
by'others, will live long and be happy and prosperous.
Some rgad here only the Moon as indicated above thoughthe original Says ‘ Chandre Arkacha ° while the other version
is ‘Chandre Asthecha’ meaning the 7th from the Moon,
i.e., including the 7th in addition te 5 or 9. Readers should
» judge for themselves.
Wf gie GAS
Gal asad Faas |
dasi Tah TATA o
diee Weems: d $4157 ^
Stanza, 15.—1f thé Moon isin bile aspected .
by a malefic and has Mars in the,7th the forsakén
^u
e^ a UP Statg Museum, Lucknow 2

474 BRIHAT JATARA (Ch. VW St. 16
babe will perish. If in this combination Mars
and Saturn are in the 11th, the child dies, if as.
pected by a benefic, the child gets protection by
such casteman as is indicated by the benefic ; if:
aspected by malefics, the child falls to different
hands and dies. e
* NOTES
1f the Moon occupying birth, has the aspect of the Sun
or Saturn with Mars in ‘the 7th the child is forsaken by the
mother, and it dies. If the Moon occupies birth aspected by
the Sun with Saturn and Mars in the 11th, the forsaken child
dies. If the Moon occupyingthe birth as above stated, has also
the aspect of a benefic, the forsaken child will be taken care -
of by such casteman as,is indicated by the benefic Who
aspects the Moon and the child lives long and prosperously.
Bhattotpala clearly declares this benefic to be Jupiter to
make the child live aad prosper on the strength of the combinations given by Saravali. Other benefics gre Mercary
and Venus but their aspect of the Moon will not protect the
life of the infant. The caste of the persón who takes care of
the mother—forsaken child—will be that which is governed
or indicated by the most powerful of the aspecting planet. '
Here even if Jupiter is very weak and aspects the Moon the
child lives and thrives although it may be taken care of by à
Brahmin, Kshatriya, Vaisya, Sudra or Antyaja. The signic fications conveyed by thesé caste divisions have already been
explained by me in Stanza 7, Ch. IX. aa ?
_ Se aerate ata euer AA Temi DD R8 U
UP State Museum, L'uóknow* E 7
e

Ch. ¥, St In, a Domain. CROW IDED PLAC ras and eGangotri 175-
: Stanza 16.—The birth takes place in the
house of the father or mother according to the
strength of their lords. If benefics occupy debi- -
‘litated places, birth will be under trees, roads, etc.
If benefics occupy neecha and if the Moon and
birth are unaspected by other planets occupying
one house, the birth occurs ip lonely places.
NOTES
In St. 5, Ch. IV, reference has already been fully made:
as to the lordship of the planets about father, mother and
other relations. , If the planet representing father (the Sun
during the day and Saturn during the night) is stronger, then
^ the birth must be predicted in the paternal house. Here
paternal means not only the child's father, but the brothers
of the-father and father's relations. Similarly maternal means
mother's relations, etc. If Venus in the day and the Moon in
the night are stronger, then delivery takes place in mother’s
house, i.e., mother's parent’s house. If the order is changed
that is if Saturn in the day and the Sun in the night are
stronger, then delivery would be in father's younger or elder
, brother's house or in father's sister's house. Similarly in case
'of mother. All the benefics must be debilitated to produce
birth in open places and road-sides. The word Adi used
by the author makes the meaning much wider and includes.
rivers, wells, tanks, gardens and mountains where there
is no cowering. In the last case of birth in lonely placés;
the benefics must be debilitated, all the other planets must.
be in one house and they should not aspect” birth and the 4
Moon? But if the Moon and birth Are -espected, then .
predict delivery in a crowded place: Probably this refers
^ UP State Museum Lucknow

176 BRIHAT JATAKA [Ch. V. St.47
to birth.in wilderness and other unfrequented places where
the woman may have stayed away Or left alone by others.
Saravali supports this view and is quoted by Dhattotpala.
weed ARIA feq were ses T
ams ap cafe sed etn AT II
aged BARS TATE TST
Regeng; Burmese Ul 9 Il
Stanza 17.—1f the Moon joins Saturn’s
amsa or is in the 4th or has the aspect of Saturn
or occupies watery signs or conjoins with Saturn,
then birth takes place ir. darkness. If there are
three or more debilitated planets, birth takes
place on the ground. The birth takes place
similar to the rast which rises on a level with the
equator. If malefics occupy the 4th cr the 7th
from the Moon or join the Moon the delivery is
attended by much pain.
NOTES
Certain characteristics pertaining to the birth are given
here with a view to find out the correct time of the birth
and the sign which rises then. Theories must be supported
by ‘hractice while practice must also be confirmed bs: theory.
By carefully reading this stanza, the astrologer will be able
to predict whether the birth occurred in darkness or on the
ground and whether the head or foot of the child came first.
Zodiacal signs ‘have already been described as rising with
UP State Museum, Lucknow

Ch. SP SU Pghlic Domain. Digitizeg RypSeyayu Trust and eGangotri 17]
head or tail or both and the birth of the child takes place
similar to the process represented by the rasi which rises
on a level with.the earth’s equator.
Bhattotpala says that that place where the earth and the
sky appear to meet is called Harija and directs the student
to watch the birth sign which rises in the horizon.
Probably’ the English word horizon is derived from the
Sanskrit word Harija. The birth takes place say in Aries.
Aries rises in the horizon with prusta and therefore,^ says
the learned commentator, the child comes out of the yoni
(sexual organ) with first showing its middle part. In
Sirshodayas the head presents itself first and the birth
takes place. In Oobhayodaya the sides will be first visible
and then the birth occurs. Saturn’s amsas are Capricorn
anl Aquarius. The watery signs are Cancer and Pisces.
Birth takes place in dark rooms or places without any light
when the Moon occupies the navamsas of Saturn’ or joins
Him or watery signs or has Saturn’ S, aspect. Saturn is a
dark planet capable of absorbing all light and reflecting
back dark rays. Three or more neecha planets deprive
the woman of any bedding or clothes and at the time of
delivery she lies down on the plain ground or that covered
with grass. In the following horoscope, note how 3 planets
debilitated caused immediate delivery on the ground in a
‘dark room. The mother finished her cooking by about
10-30, and as labour pains set in, she was immediately
taken toa dark room and delivecy immediately took place
and æ female child was, delivered. Note here Kuja, Guru
and Chandra are debilitated and Sani an eyil | planet aspects
birth as well as the Moon. If evil planets ‘are with the
‘Moon or in the 4th or 7th from him the, delivery ig attended’ ,
9:3 * UP State Musun, Lucknow
a

178 779 ^ P^ e OP PA PARR T fev. 16
with great pain and suffering for the mother. Bhattotpsla
quotes In this conaection Saravali, Yavaneswara and
Manitha. Inall the above cases, if the Moon has the
aspect of the Sun, there will be no darkne s and many |
lamps will be burning at the time of birth. What will the
result be, when the Sun is with the Moon ? Manitha differs
A panga Se ei
_Ravi | Sukra
Budha | Sani
Birth
Rahu Kuja
RASI |
Guru ^ | Kethu
E Chandra |
from the author about the manner of the birth, He observes
that if the lord of navamsa is retrograde the process of birth
will be reversed. He remarks that if the lord of the birth is
retrograde then the child will be born the reverse of what it
would do ordinarily. In ordinary delivery the child presents
its head first and it is thus thrown out. But when any of the
planets above named is retrograde the child comes out with
feet or back first. :
SE! TUT ANS THAT ATL: |
Ale eA Was RS Pu
, EISE ER Het gedimaa haat lc N
Stanza’ 18.—The quantity of oil by the Moon,
the wick by the birth sign and the light by the Sun,
UP State Müseum, Lucknow ici

re
eee
ca. GES gite PETRY SELAN Sanoi 179
thé door by the planets in the kendras or by the
most powerful of the planets must be ascertained.
°° NOTES
This verse enables one to have an idea of the quantity
of oilin the lamp at the time of birth. If the Moon is full
then the^lamp is full of oil, if it is new then there will
hardly be any oil. It may ba asked that as on the
Amavasya day the Moon is not visible, the lamps in the
rooms of all those who are born on that day, should have
no oil inihem. Bhattotpala anticipates this question and
observes that if the Moon i is in the beginning of the rasi
then the quantity will be full? When he is in the last
degree of it, there will , hardly be any oil. If the birth
takes place in the beginning of the rasi then the wick was
just lighted. If half the rasi has advanced then half of
the wick had been burnt and so on the measurement is to
be determined by the simple rule of three. If the, Sun is
ina movable sign the light will be moving, if in a fixed
sign it will be fixed in one place and if heis in a doublebodied sign the light will be moved now and then. The
direction of the lamp is determined by the cardinal direction
"^ shown by the rasi occupied by the Sun. If the Sun is in 2
Aries, the light is kept in, the eastern part of the room as
the, sign indicates East. There are some who maintain
that the direction of the lamp will be determined by the
position of the Sun to be located by dividing the day nto
8 Yamas and ! by fiading out where the Sun is at the time
of birth. This is a little difficult and-i,"shall give àn
example. Say that a child is born On æ Sunday at 25,
ghatikas after sunrise. The day contains 60 ghatikas, and ^
tian WANG 4 3
UP State Museum, Lucknow

180 BRIHAT JATAKA [Ch. V, St. 48
-this divi¢ed by 8 will give J=} ghatikas for a vage: or
three English hours. The ‘day has advanced 25 ghatikas
and therefore 7 will give us the Yama passed. Birth, we
find, falls in tbe 4th Yama on that day. The fourth from
the East will be the direction in which the Sun is to be
located for that purpose.
ege
Sou
The fourth from the East is the South-west and the
Sun should be placed there. The lamp must be represented
tofhave been placed in the S.-W. in the delivery reom.
The door has to be determined by the planets in the
keridras or if there are none there, by the most powerful
cf the planets in the horoscope. (See Chap. II, St. 5).
These are abiy supported by quotations from Manitha and
' Saravali, Manitha says that the direction of thedoor may
be determined by the direction indicated by-the -rising
? UP State Museum, Lucknow ^^
À s
ya” A

3 cr. V Si? Tg see Dopyainy Pialtizeshoy SEYH Trust and eGangotri 181,
aan in sign. Since the origin and development
of astrology is not clearly known and Since the Maharishis
gave out these facts by their Divya Drishti or divine sight
_ evolved by long meditation we have to simply record here
these differences without being in a position to affirm or
contradict them.
sid departs AGA eub ed eub! c
quw cé ub wfrgd TREAT
ved Bend a4 x pnt d ed afat
HAA TATA TAAL AAT Uta N
Stanza 19.—1f Saturn is the strongest, the
house willbe one newly repaired having become
old, if Mars is so it is partly burnt; if the.Moon,
new; if the Sun, the house contains much wood ;
and if Mercury, built by many artists; if Venus,
handsome, painted and new; if Jupiter, strong
house; the adjóining houses must be indicated
. similarly by the planets in the rasis.
NOTES
The author enables the readers to predict or to know
the nature of the house where the delivery takes place. If
Saturn i$ the most powerful among the planets at the time,
then the house will be oid, but newly repaired. If, Mars.is
the strongest then it will be partly a burnt hoüse; If the Moon
is the Strongsst then the house will be quiet rew.?If the Móon.
is waxing then die house will be whitewashed. If the-Sun ^
SU State Museum, Lucknow
no cu ^

182 BRIHAT JATAKA
is the mest powerful the house contains a lot of timber work
but in a weak condition ; if Mercury is the strongest the
house will have been built by many good artists and masons,
If Venus is the strongest the house will be beautifyl, new,
and adorned with pictures and paintings. If Jupiter is the
Strongest then the house will be strong. He now gives an
idea of the neighbouring houses. Having found out the
strongest planet and determined the nature of the delivery
house, take this planet as the lagna and proceed to divide
the 12 houses by four caidinal directions. Take an example.
Chan- | A
dra | Birth
| Rahu
San:
For argument’s sake we shall consider Mercury as the ©
strongest of the planets. Then as per above rule the person
must have been born in a house well built by various
skilful workmen. Thus we have a knowledge of the
delivery house but what about the adjacent houses. As
Budha has been found to be the most powerful, take him as
the first or lagua tne ascendant. Then Kumbha, Meena
and Mesha—the-first three houses from Budha form the
eastern direction and,,the houses indicated by the planets
UP State Museum, Lücknow z

[ Ci. VISEZ.. Doma Nieta ORR HERS eGangotri 183.
a) n
wil? be found situated to the east of the house where delivery
took place. The next three houses, viz.,°Vrishabha, Mithuna
and Kataka represent the houses adjoining the delivery house
_ in the southern direction and the planéts there show the
nature of those houses. The next three houses, viz., Simha,
Kanya and Thula represent the west and the planets there
will show the nature of the houses adjoining the western
direction. The next three houses, viz., Vrischika, Dhanus
and Makara represent the north and the nature of the planets
there shows the nature of the houses to the north. Thus the
zodiac has been divided into four equal divisions commencing with the most powerful planet as the starting point.
Bhattotpala cites from LaghuJataka and explains rules to find
out whether the house, is single, double or treble storied. If
^ Jupiter occupies degrees in Kataka before his deep exaltation:
and this forms the 10th house, then the house will be three
storied. If he isin deep exaltation there, then it will be
four storied. If Jupiter has fallen from his deep exaltation
the house will be double storied. If Dhanus is strong ia
conjunction with Jupiter and happens to be the 10th house
will be treble in extent. If Mithuna, Kanya or Meena forms
the 10th house with Guru there, it will be double in extent.
* The.extent probably refers to partition or accommodation
for two or three families.
' AAR: mapa media |
qma vum fiam e Rama fite 112° UI
Stanza Ri birth falls i3 Mesha, Kataka,
Thula, Vrischika and Kumbha,.os in these
navamsas the delivery will be in*the eastern .part^
S ^ UP State Museum, Lucknow
"n
E
ma

184 0 n Puble DORR FRE PPAR ANS t ERES St, 21
of the, house. If the birth falls in Guru's -or
Budha’s houses or amsas the delivery happens in
the northern part of the house. If it falls in
Vrishabha or its amsa the birth takes placé'in the
west and if it falls in Makara or Simha or their
navamsas the birth place will be in the southern
side.
. NOTES
Hitherto the house and its nature have been shown.
Now the author explains in what direction of the nouse the
birth takes place. If the rising sign is Aries, Cancer, Libra,
Scorpio or Aquarius, the delivery must be predicted in the
eastern part of the house. If birth occurs in the hovses :
or navamsas of Jupiter or Mercury, the delivery occurs in
the northern portion of the house. Taurus and its amsa
indicate the western portion as in the horoscope, Kanya
Lagna navamsa is Tàurus and the signs Capricoro and
Leo as well as their navamsas denote delivery 1n southern
portion of the bouse. These suggestions help the astrological
adepts in finding out the true time and thus enable him to
cast the future results of the individual with tolerable
certainty. They will also prove the value of the science in
knowing the minute details of the important events of birth.
TRR Premi at at Aiga: |
, ATA Tara wi: Tea 122
. Stanze 21.— The cardinal direction of the
lying down must be indicated by two signs from
UP State Museum, Lucknow |

Ch, VfSto2IEPuliNDDRGA BANS Par HIRBEMONSrgotr 185.
Masha, etc., and the corners by the double-bodied
signs. Similarly it must be astertained for the
direction of*the bed, etc. The legs of the cot or
. the sides of the bed must be ascertained by the
6th, 3rd, 9th and 12th houses from lagna.
Jt NOTES
The brevity of the Sanskrit lasguage throws great diffieulties in the way of easy translations. The etc. of the
English tongue cannot be really put as equivalent to the
Sanskrit terms Adi. There the high development of the
tongue has lai down certain rules for explanation which
are wanting in the English language. Take the two signs,
Mesha and Vrishabha: as „representing the East, then
Mithuna indicates the South-east, Kataka and Simha
indicate the South, and Kanya shows the South-west, Thula
and Vrischika represent the West while Dhanus indicates
the Nqrth-west. Makara and Kumbha represent the North
while Meenà shows the North-east. This is shown clearly
by the kundali in the next page.
Similarly for eny rasi fix up the directions as noted
' above. As there are 8 directions and 12 houses, the
directions are adjusted accordingly. Whichever rasi
liappens to be the lagna then the direction indicated by it
will be the direction in which the bed is placed, the front
legs are, indicated by the 3rd and 12th of which thé 3rd is
the right and 12th is the left leg. The 6th and 9th are hind
legs of which the 6th is the right and*the Yip is the left.
The lagna and the 2nd represent headssidg; 4th and Sth `
right side; 7th and 8th feet side ; and 10th and 11th denote ^
e * UP Stafe Museum, Lucknow

e CBRIHAT ATAKA (CRW, st.
left,side. The uses for these will be to judge the naturs of
the bed or cot, etc. If the rasis are cruel or common then
there will be damage or depression on that side.
By this it seems that there can be no cot or bed whose
Jegs are’ not damaged or expressed on some side or the
other. But Bhattotpala explains away this anomaly by
saying that such defects are cured by the conjunction. or
aspecting of benefics or the lords of the houses. Even
malefics occupying or aspecting such will not cause these
defects, if they are exalted or are in Moolathrikona or dx
own houses.
THOTT: aerate: |
IRTA Tag sedem pue
~ Stanza 22.—The number of women fo:assist
the delivery must be determined by the number of
planets befween. the Moon and the lagna. -Their
^ presence e inside or outside the delivery room has
UP State Museum, Lucknow ^

Ch. V, ct o2 pus DENG WE So ST BENT Elana eGangotril 87,
tobe learnt by the planets in the invisible and the
visible half of the zodiac respectively. Some say
quite the reverse. : j
NOTES
Take the horoscope given under Stanza 19. Between the
lagna in’ Vrishabha and the Moon in Mesha we have 6
planets and therefore the number qf women there will be six.
But this number is to be modified, i.e., multiplied or subtracted as per directions given in the Ayurdayadhyaya (see Ch.
VII, St. 11). But some of the women may beintheroom while :
there may be others outside. This can be identified by the
number of planets in the invisitfle and visible halves of the
zodiac. The two hatves are thus determined. Take the
number of the degree rising in the,sign. From that upto the
same degree in the 7th house the division of the zodiac is
called invisible (Adrusya) half. The remaining houses upto
the degree of rising in the birth will fortn the visible (Drusya)
half of the zodiac. Planets in the visible half of the zodiat
denote the number of women outside the room while planets
in the invisible half of the zodiac indicate the number of
_ women inside the room. The features, wealth, stature and
` complexion of the women will be denoted by the characteristics represented by the planets there as also their character
and caste. Jivasarma maintains this point quite contrary to
Varahamihira. He says that the planets in the visible half
of the zodiac represent the ladies in the room while planets
in the invisible half of the zodiac show their number outside.
This is quite unacceptable to the author as hg has distinctly
Stated soin his Laghu Jataka. But under wha® authority do
the two ayithors differ? eh TAS Ws
tos . . i
. e UP State Museum, Lucknow
ee t RES

188 CC-O. In Public Domain IAT ized b PUN Trust andati 23
Varahamihira, who had carefully studied the systems of
horoscopy expounded by the greatest of the Maharishis, has
always advanced views which had ample co nfismation in the
ancient works. Bhattotpala has not given his opinion here,
It looks reasonable to suppose with Varahamihira that the
planets which are in the invisible part of the zodiac represent
the women in the room, for when they are inside the room,
the ladies will be invisible. Visible planets must represent
the women who are visible and therefore outside the delivery
room where they could Fe seen by others.
AAMT: TAMSIN |
TANGAN TAN: ASMA: || 33 UI
Stanza 23.—The body of the child will resemble the planet who is the lord of the navamsa ot
who is the most powerful. The color of the infant
will resemble that of the lord of the navamsa
Occupied by the Moon. Taking the -lagna as.
head, etc., the limbs resemble the rasis in which
they fall.
NOTES
The author here gives important instructions to find out
the body, its color and the Proportion of the various limbs.
Planetary characteristics have already been made clear in
Chap. If, Sts. 8, 9, 10 and 11. Find out the na "vamsa
and its lord and describe the body as per ‘that planet. If this
does not ‘tally, thon find out the most powerful planet in the
horoscope ard describe his characteristics to the child | vorn.
“Judas the color by the lord of the navamsa occupi ied by the
UP State Museum, el n
í
c j GEM

ca. V; S YP" DRUSEV ATE KIRUN YA SAn 189,
Mcon. In Ch. I, St. 19, Varahamihira has explained which
signs are long and which are short. He now advises his
readers to take lagna as the head, etc., and find out the
_ proportion of the various limbs by the length of the rasis
occupied by them. Suppose a man is born in Vrischika.
This will represent his head. As Vrischika is a long sign,
the head-will be long or big. The next house represents
face. Itis Dhanus and this is moderate, therefore the face
will be neither small nor long. “The 3rd will be Makara and
itislong. Therefore, the chest will be long and broad.
Mithuna is the 8th from Vrischika and this represents the
sexual organ. As it is ordinary the organ will be moderately
sized. Again if the lords of the dong signs be found located
in short sigas, the result must be accordingly modified. If
' th@rasi is short and it also has a lord of a short sign then
that limb which it governs will be very short.
^ ERARA TH AANT-
"wd oris ANGGANG UNE: d
ata: Raye qd TINTS ul see
Kaga MARATRA || 28 N
_ Stanza 24.—]f the first drekkana rises in the
lagna ; by the Drusya and Adrusya halves of the
zodiac, left and right sides of head, eyes, ears,
nose; temples, cheeks and face must be determined
from the lagna respectively. ` If^jthe second
. drekkana,rises in tie lagna, meck, cshoulders,
arms, sides, chest, belly and .ravel should-‘be ©
a ^ UP State Museum, Lucknow
Rees? X

190 BRIHAT JATA
ust and Bene Sr 24
similarly determined. If the third drekkana rises
in the lagna, lower stomach, sexual organ and
anus, testicles, thighs, knees, calves and feet
must be similarly delineated.
NOTES
The meaning is highly compressed and I shali éxplain it
fully, to remove doubts and difficulties. Have the human
body divided into 3 parts. The Ist part represents head,
the 2nd part comprises all: below the neck and above the
navel, and the 3rd part shows all the organs below. the navel.
In order to find out any marks, cuts, scars, moles and
defects or malformations in the different organs, the author
asks the reader to take the rising drekxana. [If it is the first,
it represents the head, if.second it shows the organs below
the neck and above the navel and if the 3rd drekkana
commences, then the lower parts of the body from the
navel are shown. THe signs to the right of the lagna represent the right side, while the signs to the left of the lagna
indicate the left side organs. Suppose the first drekkana
rises in Mesha at the birth of the child. This represents
his head. Taking this drekkana as the lagna and head we -
now proceed to find out the right and left side organs. ~
The second house indicates right eye while the 12th shows
the left. The 3rd and 11th houses show right and left ears
respectively. The 4th and 10th bouses from the lagna
shów the right and left nostrils respectively. The Sth and
9th houses show the right and left temples respectively.
6th and 8th irdicaté the right and left cheeks respectively
- and the 7th house shows the general face, some say the
mouth. 'Suppóse tbe second drekkana rises. Then the
UP State Museum, Lucknow ^

' Cha V, C8tO25]PuDISHSAO NSO SE MANsBODVangotri 191,
agra shows the neck. The 2nd and 12th houses show
right and left shoulders. The 3rd and 11th houses show
. the right and ]eft arms. The 4th and 10th indicate the
right and leftsides. The 5th and 9th shów the right and
‘ift side of the chest. The 6th and 8th indicate the right
and left side of the stomach and the 7th house shows the
navel. If.the lagna has the 3rd drekkana rising at the
birth, then it represents the lower stomach or waist (that
region which is below the nave? and above the sezual
organ). The 2nd and 12th houses show sexual organ and
anus. The 3rd and 11th indicate the right and left testicles.
The 4th arfd 10th show the right and left thighs. The Sth
and 9th from the lagna show the right and left knees, 6th
and 8th indicate the right and left calves and the 7th shows
thefeet. The first half of the 7th house probably shows.
me right foot while the 2nd half shows the left toot
> aay Taga a BAIA È F SRA
Aa RAI wes: NAANA: |
weisse Wy Ts Wu
at apaga feat sasa: TAT RU MN
Stanza 25.—1f those rasis are occupied by
malefics there will be sores or wounds, if these
are occupied or aspected by benefics there will, pe
marks, if such planets causing sores, etc.—are in
their own rasis or navamsas or»jn | fixed: signs cr
navamsas, the sores, €tc., will agcompany birth,
if not they come by accidents after birth. If such >
ha an a A
^ UP State Museum, Lucknow
ee? ^

tp -O. In Public Domain. BRIHAT UNA rust and PERY. St225
a planet is Saturn the wounds will be caused by
stones and windy diseases; if Mars by fire,
weapons and poisons ; if Mercury by`the earth or `
the ground ; if the Sun by wood or quadiupeds ;
if the Moon by horned animals or aquatics ; if
they are other planets then there will be no
wounds.
^ NOTES
The division of the body into 3 parts and the process to
fnd out the right and left side organs haye already been
fully explained in the previous stanzas. If after finding
out the organs by the zodiacal houses they are occupied by .
evil planets then wounds or sores must be predicted, "but
if benefics are there or aspect them, then there will be
some marks or moles, but no sores. The author has
apparently omitted tae aspects of evil planets. In such
‘eases the results will probably be lighter in intensity than
when they occupy them. Bhattotpala distinctly says that
if such rasis are not cruel and occupied by evil planets,
then the mere aspect or presence of the benefics will not
cause even these marks or moles. He means thereby that
when the rasis are occupied by evil planets without
beneficial conjunctions or aspects they will cause certainly
wounds, cuts or sores. When the evil planets are there
in "conjunction with or aspected by benefics then there will
be marks or moles in these orgaas, but when they are
not occupiedyoy malefics but have beneficial aspects Or
.conjunctions there will be no marks or moles; The
< weunds, if accidental, would be inflicted during the periods
UP State Museum, Lucknow ‘

Gh. Yo. id Glubiic MORE AND, MARKER and eGangotri 193
of guch planets or their sub-periods. Varahamihira proceeds
to say how those wounds, etc, are caused. É
AAS UAT TWA AV Ts AT ET:
wai Paar: ATAT T |
zac WH E TART
Renag: TATA TEMA lI RA N >
Stanza 26.—1f Mercury joins three other
planets in any rasi he will cause wounds in that
organ Which is governed by it. Ifan evil planet
is in the 6th from birth, there will be wound in
that organ represented by that rasi. If such a
malefic has beneficial aspeçt then there will be
Thilaka, Masaka, etc., there. If benefics join
him there will be Lakshma, etc.
sene E NOTES s
See Ch. I, St. 4. Find out where Budha is with 3 othe
planets. This means that in any house if Budha joins 3 other
planets then that organ which is represented by that house
in the Kalanga Vibhaga will have wound or sore. An evil
planet in the 6th will cause wound in that organ which is
"controlled by that rasi under St. 4 of Ch.I as already
described. If such an evil planet has beneficial aspect then
there will be moles and marks. If such a planet has ueneficial conjunction then, there will be blackmarks or other
cutaneous indications. Thilaka means E blac mole or mark,
Masaka means a whit? spot just like leucoderma, and '
Lakshma means having hairs thick in that spot. ^ no ^
Oe nae RAD at cn .
^ UP State Museum, Lucknow =
as ^ EE

CHAPTER VI
BALARISTA OR “EARLY DEATH
MARLENA:
` EN ey
rami aise bI ETE |
gari aaa: Feat a Parasia Ue di
‘Stanza 1.—Children born during Sandhi or
when birth is in Chandra Hora, when evil planets
occupy the ends of signs or when four malefics
(including the Moon) occupy the quadrants, will
die. à e
«NOTES
The importance of a chapter which deals with combinations indicating early death can hardly be overrated. In fact
all events in life can only assume importance in relation ,to
their being enacted during the life career of a man. There
can be no painting without a canvas and no results can be
worth detailing which do not happen to an individual when
helives. This chapter has been advanced by the author
with a view to find out the longevity of the infant. Balarista
or death in early life refers to the death of infants before they
complete their 8th year. Children born during. the iwo
tw:lights, morning and evening, when the Moon’s Hora is
risicg and when evil planets are found located in tke last
degree cf the signs or when malefics occupy the four quadrants with the Moon, die early. The twilights are described
: T iu D D -
_ in Bharadwaja Samhita clearly. About 48 minutes after the
UP State Museum, Lucknow '

en Fie st Pipl Dong PAKE Saat and eSanaoth qos
sunset is called the evening twilight while about tthe same
period before sunrise is called the morning twilight. But
there are some regions where these two twilights extend for
many days or many hours. All such cases should be taken
as special and dealt with separately.
The planets in the last navamsas of the houses are said
to occupy their ends. In tbe second case of Balarista the
author refers to four malefics to ogcupy the four quadyants.
Properly speaking there are only 3 malefics—the Sun, Mars
and Saturn. The two real benefics are Jupiter and Venus.
The Mogn and Mercury are changing. Weak Moon, as on
Amavasya days, and badly associated Mercury are malefics
while Full Moon ‘and well-assóciated Mercury are benefics.
If SO, why should the?^author say particularly that the Moon
and other malefics should occupy the four kendras. It will be
secn that in order to make Mercury bad, he must,be in evil
company. If he is with Saturn or Mars he becomes evil but
then he cannot be in a kendra to the’ Sun for he never goes
béyond 23 degrees from him. The author therefore is perfectly
justified in calling for the fourth planet as the Moon. Moreover to have the Moon to be weak the birth must fall a few days
befote Amavasya and a few days after it. But Chandra must at
least be in the fourth house from Ravi and he cannot be so
unless it is 7 days before or after Amavasya in which case it
is difficult to say he is Kshina. The difficulty probably does
not seem to have struck the learned commentator, for. he
whole significance of this question has been entirely Qverlooked by him: (See Ch: II, Stanza 5. ) The following horoscope may be studied with interest as indicating a powerful I
* Balárista Yoga”. Born on 2-1-1934? the» child died on
QM 5 s
S: "UP State Museum, Lucknow
oo ^

196 BRIHAT JATARA (Ch. Vi, St.
Look at the combination in rasi and amsa. In rasi
there are only 2 evil planets in the kendra ‘but in amsa, we
have Sani in lagna, Moon in 4, and Kuja in 10th, i.e., 3
kendras. In rasi from Chandra ‘Lagna there are 3 evil
planets in the 7th, Sani, Kuja and Rahu.
THE THON HTT AT «p AA |
fan fart agua eme WeidearetraT as N 3Stanza 2.—If cruel and beneficial planets
occupy the first and the 2nd halves of the zodiac
respectively and the birth rises in Kita Rasi or if
the birth and the 7th are placed between mu
the child dies straight.
De NOTES
"The first or poorvabhaga of the Bhachakra (zodiac) as
well as the. aparardha (later half) is described as follows.
Leaving as many degrees i in the 4th house as have passed
_ in the rising Sigh XLagna) the remaining portion cf it and the
5th,” 6th, Tth, ‘8th, Sth and as many degrees in the 10th as
UP State Museum, Lucknow “
Mu e EE

X m
ne a
Ch. VI, st. 3] ic oma gi E SLANETS rust and eGangotri o
have rd in the lagna, form the parardha or the 2nd half
while the remaining portion of the zodiac not covered by the
above housés will have to be taken as the first half or
poorvabhaga. Kita means Cancer and Scorpio. If
cruel planets occupy the first half and the second half
is combined by benefics and the birth rises in Cancer or
Scorpio the child dies at once. If there are evil planets in
the 12th and 2nd sign of the birth, as'also in the 6th and 8th
the child dies at once. Quoting various authors and their
different views Bhattotpala explaihs these combinations in
a clear language. If there are evil planets in the 2nd, 6th,
8th and 12th, early death of course is ensured. If all the
evil planets are (1) in the 2nd end 12th; (2) in the 6th and
8th, death should be predicted. Some writers say that
planets i in the 2nd and 8th are confronting the Ist and the
7th respectively. This is opposed to facts enunciated in
Hindu Astronomy. Planets are moving from the west to the
east and therefore planets in the 12tł confront the birth or
lst and planets in the 6th do so with the 7th. This îs
supported by Yavaneswara. Bhagavan Gargi clearly summarises these points and says that: (1) If evil planets are
in 6th and 12th, or (2) if they are in 2nd and 8th, or (3) if
lagna is enclosed by malefics, or (4) if the 7th is enclosed by
malefics as noted in the horoscope, and (5) if the 7th from
‘Chandra is enclosed by Kuja and Sani, death happens to
the child. Devala says that if with these evil planets in
the houses indicated above benefics are found death siiSuld
not be predicted. ^
ce em ga fent UL m
A Suse Lucknow EN

198 BRIHAT JATAKA [Ch. VI, Sts. 4 &*
Stanza 3.—If,malefics occupy birth and 7th
and if the Moon joins cruel planets, unaspected
by benefics, the’child dies quickly.
NOTES
Here the Moon, birth and 7th must have evil conjunctions.having no beneficial aspects to kill the child early.
afta Rant emnt qe:
ey wa sp Gp Ret Free mae d V) N
Stanza 4.—If weak Moon occupies the
12th with malefics in the birth and the 8th
without benefics in the kendras the child dils
soon.
| NOTES
If there are any benefics in the kendras, they prolong
the child's life according to their relative strength.
sm dew: Tal eeueemeue |
WORE: TAMA mega: Ul ||
Stanza 5.—1f the Moon joins a malefic and.
occupies the 7th, 12th, 8th or birth and when
beizefics are outside kendras, and do not aspect
these, the Ge dies.
E a
NOTES
Ifa malefic in conjunction with the Mooi occupies
birth, 7th, , 8th, "or 12th possessing no beneficial aspects
UP State Museum, Lucknow "d
E

a
Ch. NT, St. 6] TIMES OF EARLY DEATH 199
ant having no benefics in the kendras death comes to the
child. The principal point ere is the non-occupation of
the kendras by benefics and the want of-their aspect to the
Moon in conjunction with a malefic in the above enumerated houses.
Tika fram :
guter ww gana AX: RaR: | ;
SHEER NUR setter WTd ga
Heated a TRR Rem Ig N
Stanza 6. _if the Moon occupies 6th or 8th
agpected by malefics early death comes. If such
Moon has beneficial aspects the child dies before
8 years. If such Moon has mixed aspects the
child lives for 4 years. If a bénefic occupies the
6th or Sth aspected by powerful malefics: the
child lives for amonth. If the lord of the birth
joins the 7th and suffers defeat there by malefics
similar results must be predicted.
NOTES
° Mixed aspects refer to the aspect of benefics and malefics together. „Planetary defeats^and successes are ch rly
explatned i in my notes on Stanza 20, Chap. II. If the Moon
occupies 6th or 8th and has no aspect? bensi7i jal or " malefic,
then this combination does not apply. af the aMoon joins `
beneficial Signs and has beneficial conjurctions,’ he gives *
longe? life. Mardavya, declares that to the child born during
5 “UP State'Museum, Lucknow C
aa

200 BRIHAT JATAKA I, St.°7
half of the lunar month and to the
child born during the night in the bright half of the month,
even when the Moon occupies 6th or 8th with good and bad
aspects, there will be no death. Ifthe benefic in the 6th or
8th has beneficial aspect there is no danger. The position of
the Moon in the 6th, 8th or 12th without praelo. aspects
or conjunctions indicates early death to the infant.
wa A TRI f cuins mi
quendi AARTEN T SER |
wd A vale wearer Te
iat aa af a a quale: aa: Uo dI
Stanza 7.—If weak Moon joins the lagna
with malefics in the 8th or kendras or if the
Moon is betwixt. malefics occupying the 8th;
4th or 7th the child dies. If the Moon is in
lagna as above stated, malefics in the 7th and
8th without the aspect of powerful benefics, the
mother as well as the child dies.
the daytime in the dark
NOTES
If Full Moon occupies birth then the danger is consiGzrably lessened. The words “as above" refer to
Cha‘idra’s occupation of lagna with malefics ‘on both sides
of.it. Taatis if Chandra occupies ‘lagna and evil planets
- are in 12th, 2ud, 7th and 8th without beneficial aspects the
-ehild and its ‘mother will both die. If there arè beneficial
aspects for the Moon then tke child dies but nót the
UP State Museum, Lucknow ^

€h? Missio. a SP BAME DIATE DEATH s and eGangott?! E
- isin lagna death results from wéapens: If the
motber- Here also the idea of the lagna lying betwixt
evil planets seems to have been repeated:
queni ated emt ez Prararetaal Fa: |
SU: TTA Agana a efte let
Stanza 8.—If the Moon occupies the last
navamsa pf the sign and malefics are in the 5th
and 9th without beneficial aspects, or if lagna
joins Chandra with malefics in the 7th, the child
dies immediately.
, NOTES
. "The last amsa in every sign will be its 9th navamsa
and Chandra must be here unaspected by benefics with
malefics in the two thrikonas, viz., 5th and 9th to kill the
a
D
child at once.
supe Ted EX Wi fram
eger Tal qp ATES |
sem ct aait a Grarirfaeant-
: Paraga fag gafas ws N 3
Stanza 9.—1f the Moon joins a malefic 44 .
lagna? eclipsed with Mars in the 8th, both
mother and child will die. Simitarly"f the Sun
Moon op the Sun occupies the lagna with
s: “UP StateeMuseum, Lucknow EX
ee 3

œ 202 BRIHAT JATAKA [Ch. V1, St. 9
powerful malefics in thrikonas and 8th, ^ unaspected by or uncombined with benefics, the
child dies. -
NOTES
Bhattotpala has ably explained this verse. If the Moon
joins Saturn eclipsed by Rahu with Mars in the 8th the :
mother and child die, The author simply says, the Moon
with a malefic and it may mean the Sun or bad Mercury.
The Moon is eclipsed gn Full Moon days when the Sun is
in the 7th from him. Ifthe Sun is in the 7th from the
Moon, Mercury cannot be with the Moon in the lagna for
he is never removed more than 23 degrees from the Sun.
Mars has been placed in the 8th. Thus the only other
evil planet left for consideration is Saturn and he muct be’
with the Moon in the lagna with Rahu, In the case of the
Sun, ike malefics referred to, will be either Mercury or
Saturn. For Mercury with the Sun is classed as a malefic.
. Weak Moon is also a malefic, but in all solar eclipses which
occur only on New Moon days (Amavasyas) the Moon will
be with the Sun. He specially uses tho word Asubhasahitay
and it must refer to either Mercury or Saturn. In this case
the mother and child will both be killed by weapons.:
Weapons refer to surgical instruments and operations which :
cause the death of the child and mother. If the Sun or the
Moon occupies lagna with powerful evil planets in trikonas <
and the 8th, without combination or aspect of benefics, the
child dies. A significant point brought oat to Tight by
Bhattotpala is-that, Mercury with the Sun is an evil planet.
There are many ignorant astrologers who maintain that
Budha has no astadosha or the evil of combusfion. This is
wrong. ^ ^ =
‘UP State Museum, Lucknow «t
e
[2 cooo.

Ch." VI; St. 10] N EXAMPLE
aRar Rag Raga aA:
vata TUNA aR Ra ge A.
e Afla: I $e d
Stanza I0.—1f Saturn, Sun, Moon and Mars
"occupy the 12th, 9th, lagna and 8th respectively
unaspected by powerful Jupiter the child dies
quickly.
D
a NOTES
Bhattotpala observes thatif powerless Jupiter aspects
all, or powerful Jupiter aspects some of these planets, death
comes a little later. But if Jupiter in the 5th aspects all
these planets there will be no "death. The point may thus
be illustrated.
s 20 | Birth
[eee IEMA
e RASI
Jupiter
Here Jupiter aspects the Sun in the Sth apdithe Moon
and birth in the 9th both of which are very powerfully
aspected. As per Warahamihira’s statement in Stanza 13,
a
Ap State"'Museum, Lucknow
N
T^

A
204 BRIHAT JATAKA [Ch. VI. Sts. 11 & 12
Chap. -II, all planets have quarter aspects in the 4th and
8th houses and under this rhethod if we include the aspect
of Jupiter upon Mars in the 4th and Seturn in the 8th -
houses, we can predict that the child lives.
saraga] ATTA Alaa: d
Oe affa Gasset Tl $3 N
Stanza 11.—1f the Moon with - malefics occupies 5th, 7th, 9th, 12th, Ist or 8th houses and not
aspected by or combined with powerful Venus,
Mercury or Jupiter death comes early.
NOTES
The commentator here accepts Moon as weak Moon
and supports this assertion by an apt quotation from
Saravali which refers to Kshina Chandra. Weak Moon
therefore must occupy Ist, 5th, 7th, 8th, 9th or 12th, with
malefics to produce death.
If he is aspected by any one of the powerful benefics, '
Mercury, Jupiter or Venus, death will be averted. Full
Moca alters the case and produces good results.
© aR aM TA SUUS. cd WD GET |
A c . G w
WES Toate Ae atata fe gta NG
Startza.J2'—lIf the Moon by Goghara joins E
the house of the most.powerful maleficin the
4 UP State Museum, Lucknow "i
r
P

above yogas or joins his own place, or the lagna,
when he is strong and hag strong malefic aspects
“he causes death to the child within one year.
NOTES
This is greatly compressed in Sanskrit and much has
- been said by the erudite commentator to offer satisfactory
explanation. The Moon moves in the 12th house of the
zodiac in about 27 and odd days? Where combinatidns
of planets have been clearly stated for the period of death
the student is directed to find out the time within one year
by the following methods. Certain planets have been
named in combirasions as causing arista or death. Find
out which of these planets is the most powerful malefic for
^causáng death and take that as the powerful arista house.
The Moon in his rapid movements'approaches that house
ata certain time and death may be predicted duririg that
tiñe ; or take the house occupied by the Moon at the time
of birth. This will be what is technically called his rasi.
Death takes place when the Moon approaches that sign formerly occupied by him at birth or when the Moon approaches
the birth siga, predict death. The death must be predicted
within one year. But it may be questioned that as the
. Moon moves in all the zodiacal signs within 27 and odd
days, how are we to find out the correct day or time of
= death-during the year, for the Moon approaches each planet
or his own rasi or the lagna, twelve or thirteen times in?
year. Atclue is thus given. Death takes place at that tiñe
when the Moon ` approaches any one of. the Abowe Named:
signs, powerfully aspected aby malefics. "Then "lone death
` must be foretdld. All these have been stated by Varahamihira in accordance with principles "of astrology, long
© UP. ce Museum, Lucknow ~
a mn: a
5 ch» VSSE: {Public DERAH Dien byygepeyvr[rust and eGangotriggs |

We -O. In Public pemain R itized — and qero, Si. 12
before enunciated by the renowned Munis of this land, He
openly disclaims tall pretensions to originality or facts
deduced ,by his own observations. Bhattotpala now.
approaches with a vast store of information on this most
vital point of early death and says that individuals with
such arista combinations sketched by Varahamihira have
been known to live long, within his own experience and that :
it is his sacred duty to humanity to collect all such conjunctions of planets which arc considered by various, strong
enough authors to protect the child, and which wili enable
them to live when the Arista yogas are present in their
horoscopes. i
Lite and death are so supremély important a
interesting to mankind in all ages and climes, that I ma
no apology to give the full quotations brought to bear e
this vital question by " Bhattotpala. The students should
very cárefully learn these combinations and see if they are
present in horoscones which are afflicted with Balarista
- conjunctions. He gives 16 stanzas which are very necessary in judging of the Balarista yogas.
(1) If powerful Jupiter with bright rays occupies birth,
heavertsallaristas (evils) as does Shula Dhara (Shiva)
to get rid off a man's sins when he devoutly prostrates
before that God.
(2) Ifthe lord of birth is most powerful, unaspected |
»by malefics and aspected by benefics occupying the kendras,
the evils will be averted and the child lives long in wealth
„and prosperity. e P
(3) Bien when the Moon is in the 8th house, if
A)
he occupies fke Drekkanas of Mercury, Jupiter or f Venus, a
hè will avert all evils and give long life. ^
4 UP State Museum, Lucknow ‘^
G

o
e "Ch. VECS. Iq Ppblic DomgiM Poite dpe Trust and eGangotri 207 ;
(4) ‘If the Moon is full, occupies beneficial signs
with beneficial aspects, the ewils will be averted, much
„more so when Venus aspects.
(5) 3f Venus, Mercury or Jupiter occupies powerfully a kendra although in conjunction with malefics, he
will avert early death.
(6) Even when the Moon occupies the 6th house, if
he joins the Drekkanas of Mercúty, Jupiter or Venfis,
the child will be protected as does a serpent-bitten man by
the medicine of Siddhas. These are men with wonderful
psychic development.
(7) If Full Mdon is between wo benefics with bright .
light, the child will be protected completely as men can be
protétted by Garuda against al? serpents.
. (8) » Even if Full Moon occupies 5th or 8th during the
night of the bright half of the lunar month, he protects the
child from all dangers. pea
(9) If Jupiter is bright, powerful, and lustrous and is
found in a quadrant he averts all evils.
(10) If Jupiter, Moon, Venus and Mercury occupy .
beneficial signs or divisions they avert all evils.
, (11) If the lord of the house occupied by the Moon,
-at the time of birth joins a kendra with benefics, he
protects the child from all evils as the devout prayers”
e
addressed’ to VisHnu protect a man from all his. sins.
(12) If benefics join beneficial diio i and aspect
. malefics in beneficial divisions they cut dwaye al eyils as
does a bad woman her husband. o s
Oa AD o 9
2 UP State Museum, Lucknow ~
emn 2
E
e

CC-O. In Public Dorpe fligiiped ATRA Trust dGhGM boit. 12
(13) If Rahu joins the 3rd, 6th or llth house having
beneficial aspects, all the evils will be blown out as cotton
threads by powerful winds. ;
(14) Ifall the planets occupy sirshodayas, the evils
will be melted away as does the ghee placed on the fire.
(15) Ifa successful benefic in the planetary fight is
aspected by another benefic, the evils are blown away as
do the trees by a violert storm.
(16) Ifthe Moon is aspected by all the planets, the
evils will be conquered as a powerful emperor would
conquer a petty chief opposed to him.
Apart from these planetary states which prevent Balarista, Sripathi says that the evils. of Balarista dosha can
be overcome by timely remedies and worship of »God.
There are the Durga Pujas (not in the Vamachara or evil
ways, but in the Dakshinachara or Satvik ways) and
Mrityunjaya Japa, (the remedy that overcomes death),
Mantrayamila, Havana, Homa, etc. which hzve, been
fully described in the Santi Kamalakara or the book of
remedies and which have been deal: with in my ‘ Introduction to the study of Astrology ’.

. CHAPTER VII
Ax AYURDAYA OR LONGEVITY
AAN A TATAG cpu: AE: |
ATMANE TAR arf IE AT Ut FU
Stanza l.—Sun, etc., in deep exaltation give
10+10 years" of life respectively according to
Maya, Yavana, Manitha and Saktipurva.
E NOTES ,
Before he gives his own views Varahamihira» quotes
psevious authorities about the length of life each planet
gives to the child, when he is in Seep exaltation, and |
suggests thatsuch term of life granted by each planet varies
proportionately as per a pianet’s fall, etc., from that place
of deep exaltation. The Sun gives 19 years, the Moon 25,
, Mars 15, Mercury 12, Jupiter 15, Venus 21, and Saturn
, 20 years. Thus we get 19+25+15412+15+21+20 years
or 127 years. Bhattotpala could have thrown greater
. light on the lives of the famous authors quoted by Varahamihira, but he has been mercilessly short about them.
Maya was an Asura (Rakshasa or giant) who prayed
devoutly to the Sun and fo whoma personification ef that
God, gave the whole work of Suryasiddhahta, so famous
all over the world. Yavana, an early fosín of Ivan in
Persia,^is said to be a Mlecha Astrologer of great note.
9. a UP State Museum, Lucknow

sie CC-O. In Public Dejgajn4DigrtizeA PASKrAyu Trust{Sn eWddgoBt.. 2
Mlechas, refer to Mussalmans or those who inhabit Turkey,
Arabia, Persia, etc." Manitba was an acharya, a Brahmin
of great astrological proficiency. Saktipurva is the son of
Sakti or Parasara, the renowned father of the great
Vedavyasa and the grandson of the venerable Vasishta the
preceptor of Sri Rama. The views of these authors are
here expressed. T
Asisi sale fa A Sa
NG imr TT qai |
Ra te fguenddiad ET
alaa a TM TAHAN Ut R N
Stanza 2.—Where a planet is debilitated he
cuts away half of the term of life and in the
middle rasis he gives terms of life as per rule of
three. The lagna is supposed to give that
aumber of years, which is represented by its
amsa, while others say the number will be similar
to the rasi. A planetin an unfriendly sign cuts
one-third of his term unless he is retrograde. The
combust planets except Venus and Saturn, cut
off half their term of life.
NOTES
As this touches the mathematical portion of astrology
to some extent the notes must necessarily be long and
thoroughly explenatory. Planets in their lowest debilitation
take away Lali the term of life granted by them while
thoy are in deep exaltation. Thus when the Sun is at his
UP State Museum, ‘Lucknow

s Ch, PFI? Se. ple Domain Dojszed RY SER Trust and eGangotri JA
lowest ‘debilitations he gives 4 of or 9% years=114
months. ?
The Moomat his lowest gives 121 years or 150 months ;
Mars gives 7$ years or 90 months ; Mercury gives 6 years
or 72 months ; Jupiter gives 74 years or 90 months; Venus
gives 10$ years or 126 months ; and Saturn gives 10 years
or 120 months.
There will be 6 signs or 180 degres between tif degree
of deep exaltation and that of debilitation for a planet.
Multiply the bhagas (degrees) into "ghatikas (minutes) we
get 1800 for each sign. This multiplied by the distance
in rasi between exaltation and debilitation gives 1800 x 6=
10800 ghatikas. When a plane? falls from his exaltation
„take the number of degrees from it and convert them into
" ghaflkas. When a planet has risen from his debilitation
take the number of bhagas (degrees) from that and convert
them into ghatikas. These are called the ghatikas gained
by the planet. When the planet takes away half of his
ternt of life far 6 signs (from his exaltation to his debilita- ^
tion) or for 10800 ghatikas how much does he take away
forthe ghatikas he has travelled from his exaltation or
.debilitation ? In the case of a planet's fall he loses the
term of life proportionately till he reaches his minimum in
the lowest debilitation. But in the case of a planet rising from
. his debilitation till he approaches his exaltation, he gains
proportionately above the lowest term given to him, till he
gets the highest term mentioned to fis credit. Take the number of "ghatis gamed by the planet and multiply this by the.
number of months it would give in its lowest ebititation.
Then divide the total by 10800. The figure obtained
represents months. Take the remainder and multiply by
9 Y UP State Museum, Lucknow
—^ AN

212 CC-O. In Public Domain Diojtizeg ly Serayu Trustang etangan: 2
30, and. divide the total by 10800, the figure obtained
represents days. Then take the remainder and multiply it
by 60 ghatis and divide the total by 10°00 the figure
thus obtained will be ghatis, and so on for the minuter
divisions. When the figure representing the months is
divided by 12, we naturally get the years. The figure
obtained by this procedure must be subtracted from the
total period the planet gives when it falls from its exaltation.
But when the planet rises from his lowest debilitation, this
figure must be added to the term of life which the planet
gives at its lowest debilitation. Thus if the Sun is in
Taurus, he is fallen from his exaltation in Aries. His
total term in the highest clevation is 19 years and from
this 19 years the total obtained by the above process must
be deducted. But suppose the Sun is in Scorpio, then he
has risen from the lowest fall in Libra, where he gives
only 94 years. Whatever is obtained by this process of ihe
rule of three, that mest be added to 93 years.
Bhattotpala gives an easy method. Take any given
planet and find out the degree, etc., he has gained, deduct
the exaltation degrees, etc., if possible. But if the degrees
he has gained cannot be deducted from the exaltation
degrees then add the 12 rasis (signs) and from this total
deduct the exaltation degrees and keep the remainder
separate. If this remainder is less than 6 signs then deduct .
t^at from the 12 signs and keep it. But if the remainder
is nore than 6 signs then keep it as it is; Multiply this
figure by the total number of yéars the ‘planet gives in
exaltation. “Yake the case of the Sun; here we have to
multiply the rasis, degrees, ghatikas, etc., cach by the
to.al sum of 19, and convert the same into ghatis, bhagas,
UP State Museum, Lucknow

Ch. wit; St. 2) EXAMPLES 2
and,asis. Saravali gives instructions in a similar manner.
Unfortunately Bhattotpala gives the theory but.not the
practical solution and in order to verify it, two or three
examples must be given here.
Example 1.
Süppase the Sun is in 5 rasis, 15 bhagas and 20 kalas :
convert the whole into kalas thus: 5 x 30— 150--15—165 x 60
-9900--20—9920 ghatis (kalas). 1f the Sun loses 93 years
for 10800 kalas, what does he lose for 9920 kalas— 10800 :
114:: 9920 kalas to the answer—
ZI0800 7 7907 eae Wo — [04 months
3* Zz days = 21 days and 3 x 60 = 20 kalas (ghatis). 5
3 CM É
The total of 104 months, 21 days and 20 kalas must be
deductèd from his total of 19 years. Thus we get 19 years,
3months, 8 days and 40 kalas as the term of life granted
by Sun, 3
Example 2.
Suppose the Moon is in 11 rasis, 20 bhagas and 45
“kalas=21045 ghatis or kalas from his exaltation.
If the Moon gets 123 years for 10800 kalas what does
> he get for 21045 kalas = 3 5 months = De 292
months and ix S 2 8 days and 3 x 15=45 ghatis or 34 a
years, 4 months, 8 days and 45 ghatis og kala will be the
- term of life granted by the Moon=292 months, 8'days, 45gh.
Take other planets in a similar way.
3 ^ 4 uP State Museum, Lucknow
ON

"214 SRIHAT JATAKA — C8. Vit, St. 2
The birth gives the number of years denoted b; the
navamsa it occupies ; say birth falls in the 10th degree and
30' of Gemini. As each rasi has 9 navamsas 9 years are
given. jaguars
The navamsa by calculation falls in the 4th division.
The whole sign Gemini gives 9 years of life. But Gemini
covers 30 x 60 or 1800 ghatis (minutes) and this divided by 9
gives 200 ghatis foreach year. In Gemini the birth has
advanced 10 degrees or 10x 60+30 ghatis=630 ghatis
(minutes) this en gives the number of years the birth denotes: that is 3 years and 3/20 x 3=9/5=1 month and
4/5 x 30 days = 24 days. ETT st
Therefore to a person ‘born when Gemini has advanced
10 bhagas and 30 kalas, the term of life given by that sign
is 3 years, | month and 24 days. Similar procedure must
be adopted for all birth terms of life. Manitha and’ others
say that the number of years, etc., given by birth depends
_upon the rasi. P y
Take the same lagna. It has advanced through 2 rasis
and 103 degrees. Two rasis give two vears.
But by rule of three if 30 degrees give | year what
would be given by 104 degrees? Converting the year into.
months we get the sum=30: 12: : 103^ months req. —Zmonths=4 months and 6 days. :
. Thus according to Manitha and that school of àstrology, a person born when 104 degrees of Gemini have
passed, will be given 2 years, 4 months and 6 days’ of life
by the birth sasi onLagna Ayurdaya.
In thefirst ca-e the birth sign cannot give more than
9.years'at the -most as there are only 9 navamsas in each
Sign, while in the second case the birth sign cannot give .
UP State Museum, Lucknow

a
os Bes Dope itized by Sarayu Trust and eGangotri
t.
ch. VAT, SC 5 MIPUT
pg RA 21$
anything more than 12 years. , There will thus be % maximum difference of three years, and that certainly makes a
great deal of difference in fixing correctly, the period of life
„the manhas, Bhattotpala sides with Manitha and denounces the view of Varahamihiracharya. The author of
Saravali cuts a happy medium. He Says that the lagna
gives rasi longevity if its lord is powerful and amsa longevity if its lord is strong. Excepting “the retrograde ones,
those planets which occupy unfriendly signs take away 4rd
of their term of life. The word used in the original is
Vakram Hitva which means leaving aside the Vakra
or retrograde planet or Vakra which also means Kuja
or Mars and therefore exceptillg Mars. This is sup-
. ported by Badarayana’ who clearly mentions Bhumiputra,
Saravali says excepting retrograde., Varahamihira later on
says in Stanza 11 of this chapter that planets in Vakra
og retrogression become powerful and give thrice the term
of their life ; so probably he means “by Vakra retrogression. Excepting Venus and Saturn the other planets when"
they are in combust, take away half of their term of life.
Badarayana supports this view, viz., that except Sukra and
Sani, the other planets, viz., Budha, Kuja, Guru and ChanE dra take off, half of their term of life when in combust.
PAGEANT:
| ATA ATAY ATA | n
eed gale Pa :
AA EX AS que TS UB c
É
Stanza 3.—Evil planets in the atti, llth, 10th, _
9th, Sth, and 7th take away |, 45 3, 4, 1/6 and 1/8th
s i ^ } UP State Museum, Lucknow
ec
m~n ^

CC-O. In Public Dopp ya ge spa Sore! Trust qGheM bre. 3
of the term of life allotted to them respectivelv. If
benefis occupy the samé houses, they take away
only one half.of that which the inalefics do.
Satyacharya says that, if there are many
planets in anyone of the houses, only the most
powerful among them will eat the proportion of
life granted by it.
NOTES
A malefic in the l2th house from lagna absorbs the
whole of the term of life granted by it. In the llth 2 of it,
in the 10th 1/3rd of it, in the 9th 3th of it, in the 8th 1/5th of
it, and in the 7th 1/6th of it. Take on example,say Saturn in the
12th house. He absorbs all his 20 years and gives to the
child none at all as his share. If he isin the 11th he cuts
away half and gives 10 years. If he is in the lOth he cuts
away 1/3 of 20 that is 6 yearsand 8 months. If he is in the
9th he takes away 1 cf 20 or 5 years. If he is in the 8th
: 1/5 of 20 or 4 years he absorbs. If he is in the 7th iie takes
away 1/6 of 20 or 3 years and 4 months.
If, on the other hand, there is Jupiter instead of Saturn in
the 12th house, he absorbs 4 of his life or 4 of 15 years. If
he is in the 11th then he takes away 1 of his period or 3 years
9 months. If he is in the 10th he takes away 1/6th of his term `
and when he is inthe9th i1thofhisterm. Ifin the 8th he
removes 1/10th and when he is in the 7th he removes 1/12th
of; his period.
i If there are, for instance Saturn, Jupiter, Mars and the
| Sun in the J2th'hodse, then the most powerful among them
wil cut awáy the Proportion or the whole of-his period
While the others do nothing at all. By quoting Spei,
A UP State Museum, Lucknow

" Ch VEG: -t Indfublic DIUM BRR py BANAWA gust and SN 7
the author shows no difference jn opinion but only as an
authority to support him.
aain.
TENTARA |
SEX fiorated RIT ata
disi GOAT FHT sam uoi
Stanza 4.—1f an evil planet occupies the birth
the number of amsas, etc., passed by the lagna
must be multiplied by the total of the planetary
terms of years, etc., and then divided by 108, and
deducted from the total term of life the figure
` thus obtained. Ifa benefic aspects the above conjünction, half of this must be deducted.
NOTES
Take the time passed by the lagna and convert the
whole into kalas. Divide this by 200 and we get the number.
of navamsas gained by lagna. Multiply this by the total
planetary terms of life. Take the total and then divide this
by 108. The figure obtained must be deducted from the
* total term of life for the malefic and half of this for the
' benefic. Take an example :—
"Gemini is the birth and it has passed 3 amsas and 1
' bhaga and 20 kalas. Suppose Mars and Saturn are in
Gemini and the total number of years granted by all the pt4nets is04 years. Gemini has passed 3, navamsas=3 2/5
To this add 18 amsas of Mesha and Vrishabha ; This must be
multiplied by 40% years and divided by ips: , Thus we get
N21 this x Sx ggg WAS css A 'SxZx4 0
k > T UP State Muséum, Lucknow
WN

jh CC-O. In Public DR LH. itized Py Saray Trust FE ROVERS. 5
years. 2 years and 1/40 x 12 months— 3/10 months= 3/10 x 30
days=9 days or 8, years and 9 days. Deduct this from the
total granted by the planets, viz., 40 years, 6 inonths. Thus
there will be a balance of 32 years, 5 months and 21 days.
But suppose Jupiter aspects these planets: then only half their
terms should be deducted. That is for Saturn we have to
deduct 4 years and 43 days, and the same for Mars if he is
that. The author of Saravali seems to make some difference
in this connection. His process has been given here for ready
reference. Convert thé lagna into kalas, and multiply the
same by the term of life granted by each planet, and then
divide this by 21600 kalas the total of the 12 rasis. Then
convert the quotient into years, etc. The length of life
thus obtained for each planet will be the true measure of
life the man enjoys. If there are malefic and benefic
planets in lagna take the term of life granted by that planet
which is close to lagna. Thus if Saturn is 20 degrees from
the lagna and Mars:15 degrees from the lagna, then Mars
must be taken in preference to the former. By, evil planets
the Sun, Saturn and Mars alone must be understood.
Weak Moon and bad Mercury cannot be accepied. This
is supported by a quotation from Badarayana.
amen Tata wa sp Ra
MAT ATA: a q FR: |
aN SITA Tahan Wu spem d N
Stanza §.—Men and :elephants have 60x2
years as term of life and 5 days more. Horses
live 32 years. Camels and asses 25 years. ` Buffa UP State Museum, Lucknow

| ca VACS ENE URINE D erp rand canai
n
aloes and bullocks live 24 years. Dogs have 12
years. Goats, etc., 16 years.
o^ NOTES
This raises a great and difficult question. The utmost
limit for ordinary men is 120 years and 5 days. But there
are men Who have lived for hundreds and thousands of
years. There are also instances of hórses having lived for
50 years and more. So also dogs probably live to 20 years.
Much depends upon the seed, “the soil, the climatic
conditions and tie occupations or work in which the man
or the animal has been engaged. The limits given here are
those which ordinarily apply And these years are solar
, years. In the horoscopes of horses, sheep, dogs and cattle
the same rule of three which is applied to men here must
also be applied to them. Thus if for 120 years the Sun
gives 19 years what would he give for 32 years.
32 x9. nre id 6 4 a Kapa 9,
“0° years = I5. 715 5 years and is PS B
months X30 days = 24 days. Thus the Sun gives
, in the case of the horse 5 years and 24 days, when he is
. Similarly situated. This enables one to fix the periods of
life for pet animals, eic. Dogs include tigers, cats and
lions according to some.
CIEIE EEEETELE Taree =
TAWA MA TARA ss s
WAR agan mmo o
BENE ARTE BERAE URN
UP State Muse ucknow
an

Bon CC-O. In Public OORT PIR PARA Trust and ROanpptrs; 6
p
Stanza 6.—1f the last navamsa of Meena
becomes lagna, If Mercury is in the 25th minute |
in Vrishabha and if all the rest are in their deep
exaltations, the person gets the utmost limit of
life, viz., 120 years and 5 days.
NOTES
The following is the list of planets in their Rasis,
Bhagas, and Kalas :— :
" Rasi Bhaga Kala
The Sun 0 9 « 0
The Moon l 2 0
Mars po 27 0
Mercury ] " 0 DS M
Jupiter 3 4 0
Venus 1] 26 0
Saturn 6 19 0 c
Lagna à 11 29 59
All these planets except Mercury now give the total
number of years named against them when they are in deep
‘exaltation. Mercury has fallen from debilitation. Therefore he has now passed one rasi, bhaga nil and 25 kalas.
This must be deducted from the rasi he occupies. Thus
we get | rasi, 15 bhagas and 25 kalas converting this
into kalas we get 2725 kalas. If Budha gives 6 years
fer 10800 kalas what does he give for 2725 kalas
months and J 16% 30 days—5, thes we get | year, 6 months
and 5 days. This must be added to 6 years. We therefore
8ev7 years, 6 months and 5 days for Budha, Ses
P
UP State Museum, Lucknow E

eel i VIPER: pibe Dorgajp: AKORI RATION Trust and eur. :
As ‘Mars is in the lith ongo he _Bives half .of his
term, iz, 74 years,
As Saturn?is in the 8th house, out of his 20 years he
loses 4 years or 1/5th of his term of life and gives 16 years.
The Sun, Moon, Jupiter and Venus give their full terms.
As the’last navamsa rises in the lagna it gives 9 years.
Sr eaaa an maan M
Birth | Sun Moon i
Venus d Mercüry X
Hi MA
| $ | | Jupiter
Horoscope
-—"-54 — | where 6 planets |-—-
areexaled |
Mars | |
| me.
| | | Saturn
: | DSE
„Thus we have—
Years Months Days
| The Sun ne 19
| The Moon 54 25 p
| 2 . Mars in 7 6 as
` Mercury m 7 6 5
> Jupiter ad 15
^ Venus S 21
Saturn EPI MIO X oie
4? Lagna” uu 9 VR
When tite Sun is exalted Mercury can noler occupy his
exaltation in Virgo. Hence he is placed in Taurus. Bhat-
: 3 o a UP. State Wee. Lucknow
~n E
Now

255 CC-O. In Public BagaimADtoiizet Ayoárayu TKb.aNd begor & 8
totpala says that even here Mercury cannot be more distant
from the Sun than 4 degrees in Taurus when the iatter
planet is in his own deep exaltation that isin the 10th degree of Aries. Probably Mercury did go beyond 24 degrees
from the Sun during the time of Bhattotpala. His displacement now, according to present astronomical calculation,
may be carefully noted.
If Mercury is in, the 4th degree of Taurus the commertator thus calculate: the age of the child. If we take
Budha in the 4th degree of Taurus he gives 1 year, 7 months
and 18 days. This added to 6 years of his Neecha position,
he gives 7 years, 7 months and 18 days. Thus ihe combination above sketched may give a term of 120 years,
| month and 18 days. Varahamihira’s statement that a
man lives to 120 years and 5 days has been shown tc be
erroneous by his commentator. Man sometimes lives even
to greater ages than this.
«ueri PASA a
Ta gua TA |
aaa adsa RE
Ra Aaa: EA d Ui
TRAIT Tag: aes
TAT Ah ARNA: |
TTS dy dm: ASA
* eme maaf qe d
Stanzasn,7 ° — NGGI :
aad selec. ae hee
UP State Museum, Lucknow”
r

go Ch. VIIPSts. th &uBic Dob Rotizel AKSA J ast and eGangoty,, .
There 18 One serious objection to the acceptance
of their theory, because according to them, no
- children camdie above 8 and below 20 years
which ie absurd.
They have further stated that those who
have this longevity will also become emperors.
This is erroneous as many men live long and still
be beggars.
A
: NOTES
Bhattotpala "says that Vishnugupta was the famous
Chanikya, the founder of the Mauryan Dynasty, who be-
'friended Chandragupta and raised him to the throne formerly occupied by the Nava Nandas. Flease refer to my notes
on the "history of Vijayanager, Pp.30. Chandragupta asceded the throne of Magadha in B.C. 322 and ruled for
25 years. Varahamihira quotes Chanikya and therefore h
naturally must have come after him. The whole politica]
record of the methods adopted by Vishnugupta to place
Chandragupta on the throne of the Nava Nandas is beautifully explained in a Sanskrit Drama entitled Mudra
| Rakshasa. Devaswami is called an Acharya who is
quoted by Varahamihira and therefore must have flourished
*before him.
^ Ly
Chanikya is a historical personage who was contempaTary with Alexander the Great in the latter part of the 4th
century B.C. Bhattotpala gays nothing aboat "Siddhasena
| `- and probably» he was an astrologer of great ,fame to have
been quoted, by Varahamihiraas an authority." ' 2^
b i ^ 9 uP State Museum, Lucknow
re
ma A

CC-O. In Public ORIHAT JATARA (Ch: Vit, SATE g
Bhattotpala points out that probably these two stanzas
were not the production of his author as they are themselves subjected to severe criticism and erroneous statements. Quoting Badarayana and Yavaneswara, -Bhattotpala says that if 6 planets are exalted the person will
become an emperor and if seven planets are exalted then
the person will be lord of the three worlds. This last
statement comes from Badarayana. Probably during the
earlier centuries of the world’s creation sach a combination
may have been possible, for Vyasa maintains it and others
have declared it to be frequently occurring.
But under the present mathematics as applied to
planetary movements, it is impossible to have the Sun and
Mercury, exalted at the same timc. Mercury as above
stated by Bhattotpala, never moves beyond 24 degrees of
the Sun and therefore he cannot be in Virgo when the Sun
isexalted in Aries. He can only be in Pisces, Aries or
Taurus but never is Gemini, much less in 150 degrees
from him, so also with Venus, when Mercury is in Virgo
exalted and therefore the idea of ascribing results to the
exaltation of seven planets at one time in a horoscope
looks perfectly absurd on its face now. What the planetary
movements could have been millions of years ago, it is
difficult to say and dangerous to dogmatise. To get the
full life, 6 planets must be in exaltaticn, but when they A
are so, the person becomes an emperor. But there are
many who are poor, but who live long.. This is found
to be the casein practical life. — - G
Bhattotpala first shows the error in Varahamihira’s
objection in Stanza 7. As per conditions lid down in
Stanza 4 of this chapter it is difficult to fix tke different
UP State Museum, Lucknow
ER

A Cin FAT Os Publi Romaina Neiteed hy Sp py Trust and eGangotri 225
| periods of life given by evil planets in the lagna as they
may considerably lessen the relative terms of life granted
| by them and thus bring down the total to less than 20 years
and more, than 8 years. He gives an example.
Lagna gives no term of life as it has just entered
Kumbha. We have known the relative periods given by
exalted ard debilitated planets.
Suk ChanBudha | Ravi | du |
n | Lagna |
| Kuja
| I— = RASI oi
A | Guru | ©
| d | Sani |
o A Rasi Bhaga Kala
| Ravi 0 9
| Chandra 1 2
- Budha 11 14
Guru 9 4
"Sukra 11 26 s
Sani 6 19 7
„ Lagna, I@ 0 Ds
These are the positions at the birth gs :à child. given
above for illustration. a
We mu& now find out the term given ‘y Kuja. He
has new fallen w, degress from his exaltation, viz., from
S Q ? UP State lusso. Lucknow
an A

226 pe Publis RIAD PATA R ROY {CHS MEE SERINE 8
28 in Makara. Reduce 30 degrees into kalas 30 x 60=
It he loses 90 months in 10800
= 13800 " WW 15 kalas = 15 months.
What does he lose in 1800?
This must be deducted from Kuja’s total period of 15
years. He gives therefore 13 years and 9 months. We
shall now give Chakrapatha or the ternts of life to be
deducted by the positions of the various planets in the
horoscope. Guru occupies the 12th from lagna and cuts
half of his term. He gives 3 years and 9 months.
The Sun gives 19 years, Moon 25, Mars 13%, Mercury 6 years, Jupiter 3 years and 9 months, Venus gives
21 and Saturn 10 years. , Lagna gives none. Thereforé the
total is.
Years Months
The Sun , an 19
The Moon ses 25 EC
Mars SM 13 9
Mercury x GO 3 vss
Jupiter T 3 9
Venus ace 21
Saturn Lis 10
Lagna Ss 0
iota] 98 6
< Varahamihira, although he has not clearly stated so,
had implied that the terms of life given by the exalted and
debilitated ,plahets could not belessened either by their
, occupation of'unfriendly or combustion houses. For this
cán be easily inferred from Stanza 6 of this chapter."
* rc
T UP State Museum,. Lucknow

“Ch. VAS Sun PRSPO PATRETO VERA eGangoti a.
For there, the Moon is in Taurus and Venus isan Pisces. From such mutual positions of 3 and 11 both of them
. become temporary enemies and they are also not permanent
friends. Jf one-third of the Moon’s period is deducted for
his occupation of Vrishabha, then the total of 20 years, etc., -
given by Varahamihira cannot be obtained. The lagna in
the above horoscope, in Stanzas 7 and 8 falls in the first
navamsa of Kumbha and therefore i$ the 91st navamsa
from Mesha. This must be multiplied by the terms of longevity given by all the planets. 2.
4 d. [poto Eb S e
Thus 91 x $ divided by 108 = 2x 108 ears 216 ^
82 years and 5 16 x 12months=11 months and z x 30 days
=28 days and 1/3 x 60"ghatis=20 kalas or ghatis. Thus
the presence of an evil planet in ‘the lagna takes away
82 years; 11 months, 28 days and 20 kalas. >
* This must be deducted from the total Ayurdaya (term
of life), viz., 98 years and 6 months. There is, therefore, ,
a balance of 15 years, 6 months, l day and 40 kalas. A
person having that combination given above will live only
for 15 years and odd. He has shown here that Varahamihira's objection that no age comes above 8 or below
20 years according to the theories of other Acharyas falls to
the ground. But others may say that with an evil planet
in the lagna the term of life falls like this. Varahamihira
had in view only good planets in lagna in which case no aga `
Comes below 20 years. But this is equally fallacious. When
à statement is made, it must be approved Qf by the majority
of the astrological writers and nothing can be "supported
"Which is against their declared principles. The very same,
Acharyas’ who have treated ofthe questions on longevity
LJ
9 ! UP State Museum, Lucknow
De

228 SRIHAT ATARA” (Cho VfI SE 7&8
Be. also treated of ceriain Mrityu yogas (combinations for
eath) and they must. be fully taken into consideration. As
s question of life and death is most signiricant for man,
I have thought fit to explain the whole in detail even at the
risk of profuseness.° Badarayana says:
“If an evil planet joins 6th or 8th in a cruel si
aspected by an unfriendly planet or if he suffers defe: Zs in |
the planetary fight the person dies in his antardasa or subperiod." |
Yavaneswara observes :
* Tf a malefic occupies 6th or 8th, even if that is a
friendly house aspected by malefics he will kill the person
in his sub-period by ropes, imprisonment and so forth.”
Saravali declares: ' |
“if the period of a cruel planet has the sub-period of
another malefic, the person suffers death. If these malefics |
have unfriendly conjunctions then the danger is erhanced. |
In the dasa of Sani if the sub-dasa of Kuja intervenes
although the man may have lived long, he will be certainly
killed. If malefics join cruel signs and occupy 6th or 8th
houses or if aspected by unfriendly planets occupying 6thor 8th, the man dies during such sub-periods. If theperiod of an unfriendly planet of the lord of lagna occurs,
and the sub-period of the lagna intervenes the person dies
seddenly according to Satyacharya’’. Here one point of
interest is that Satyacharya has "been quoted by “Saravali
‘and therefore” he must have been “earlier than that work in
the field. «Varahemihira quotes:often Satyacharya and does
not mention “Saravali. It is plain from this^that Saravali `
came between Vardhamihira and , Bhattojpala. RA
UP State Museum, kaa
ae

Ch, VEFOStis Pübsc Bbmain. DiBiticqtEby EAE Frust and eGangotri 229 ,
Therefore the commentator triumphantly observes that
according to the statements of^other Atharyas—authors—
_ longevity can bg ensured both above 8 years and also below
20 years and many cases of death certainly occur during
these periods. The second objection ,taken by Varahamihira also falls to the ground. There are many who live
Jong but are veritable beggars.
Example. ? »
Rasi Bhaga Kala
The Sun 1 10
The Moon , . 2 3
Mars “eo > 98
s Mercury MM 15
Jupiter 4 S i.
. Venus p 27 20,
| » saturn 10 20 XE
| Mercury |
Venus | SUD | Moon
i; Mars |
í Saturn | |
: | | RASI pe
9 | | Jupiter
Lagna | | i E EO
ar a aoe ^4
We shall now determine the various? terms of life .
granted by the planets. Making the caléulations we get— à
UP SMOD Lucknow

230 COO In Public Bermip no Ag Ry Brev Teh er BG Septi, & 8
Years Months | Days
The Sun £x ay oly) 5
The Moon ue 2») 11
Mars cp 13 QU yc
Mercury . n 7 Ves
Jupiter dos 13 9
Venus Aes 19 2^6 23
Saturn < «€ 13 4
Lagna 2 T 9
Total soo IG 4 23
Out of this Jupiter occupying the 9th house from lagna
loses ith of his term or"1 year, 8 months, 18 days, 45
kalas, and Chandra loses 1/7th of»his term by occupying
the 7th house or 3 years, 9 months, 25 days or both of
these together lose 5 years, 6 months, 13 days and 45
ghatis. We get 110 years, 10 months, 9 days and 15 kalas.
None of the planets is in exaltation.
Thus a man can live for more than a hundred and ten
years and still be a beggar. As there are no planets on
both sides of the Moon in this diagram because Sun is not
taken into consideration in considering Anapha, Sunapha, -
Dhuradhura and Kemadruma, there is the Kemadruma -
combination which produces dirt, sorrow, uneasiness,
beggarliness, servility and vagabondism even in persons
bern in royal families; much more therefore will these
qualities be in ordinary families. (See Stanzas Sand 6,
Chapter XH.) Therefore Bhattotpala has shown by
example that persons can get kong life without royal or
affluent, state. * Varahamihira prefers Satyacharya’s system,
not because other Acharyas quoted already arc false, but
UP State Museum; ieee ;
e
ae
cr

g a
: CR PALSE Ryplic Domain. Ripitasd Pye NEA ust and eGangotri 231,
| because Satyacharya represents the system adopted, by the
| majority of the astrological Rishis. “In Brihat Samhita
| . Varahamihira clearly declares that ** Jyotisha is like a Veda
| and when, different doctrines are promulgated therein we have
no ability or capacity to say which is correct and which not.
Therefore I shall explain the different systems". (Vide
* Life of Yarahamihira’ by me, Chapter V.) If this is the
position taken by the learned Varahamihira, what could
the ignorant modern man say about the differences in the
astrological systems. Some say thatthere is no Kemadruma
in the above given illustration as Chandra is in the 7th
kendra but the author is clear in omitting the presence of i
Surya and he is' supported ty Bhagavan Gargi who
distinctly says that the, kendras with planets must be referitd to from lagna excepting Chandra. Moreover when
Kuja and other planets are not in 4th and 10th, there is
Kemadruma according to some.
, TATA Prone spp °
a D
RAT WATT CRT
TEVHATATATA
oo RAA NA ATAR d 4 N
. Stanza 9.—Jeevasarma says, on his own y
` responsibility, that each of the planets gives
one-seventh of the period of the longevity stated
above. Satyacharya, says that each planet gives
that term of life which is indicated" by the
navamsa he occupies. This seems > tarde’ approved _
of by'many astrological, experts. ` en
> ? UP State Museum, Lucknow E
E

CC-O. In Public DorgeinaDigitizea bySarayy Trust BOtheGAhbpts;. 9
k NOTES ;
Varahamihira declares that he has seen Jeevasarma’s
works where he distinctly lays down 1/7th of 120 years
and 5 days as the longest term of life given by each of the
seven planets.
Thus we get for each planet in exaltation 17. years,
1 month, 22 days, 8 kalas and 34 vikalas. Half of this will
be the period given by each of the planets when in debilitation. For other rasis, the rule of three must of course
be applied. In other respects Jeevasarma gives the same
. proportionate subtractions and additions as other authors
have done in the Chakrapatha. à
Bhattotpala gives an 'easy method for calculating the
term of life given by any planet. Takeany planet and sub- ,
tract the degrees he has fallen from his deep exaltation.
If the sum so subtracted is less than 6 signs, that must be
subtracted from 12 rasis. Multiply the remainder by 8641
and divide the sum óbtained by 504. The quotient represents days. This divided by 30 gives morths and the
quotient thus obtained must be divided by 12 to get years.
Jeevasarma is not at „all supported by any great Rishis or
Acharyas and therefore the only objection against Jeevasarma’s system is that he bases his authority on himself.
Bhattotpala has done immense service to the chronology
of various authors, although not to that extent to which
we could have expected aman of his wonderful learning
todo. Varahamihira refers to Maya, Yevana, Manitha
and Parasara, in Stanza | of this chapter. The commentator
siys that the Yavanü referred to hy the author could not be
; Yavanacharya' who, under another name of S»huji Dwaja,
hac composed ‘a work after the Saka era commenced. In
LI a 3
; UP State Museum,.Lucknow

rs
n Ch. VIECR-1rP Public bd BigiteBdby BANTO RSand eGangotn 33
this work which was completely possessed by Bhattotpala.
sphuji Dwaja refers to some cld Yavanas who have given
various characteristics to planets in the olden times. Bhattotpala tightly infers that as this Yavanacharya follows
'Varahamihira closely, he could not have been quoted by the
author, for to quote an author he must have differed from
him. Unfortunately the commentator did not get a copy
of the work of the older Yavana. He also complains that
he did not get a copy of the Parasara Hora to which
Varahamihira refers. But Bhattotpela says that he possessed a copy of Parasara Samhitha. He also quotes another
sloka from Parasara Hora which was referred to by some '
early authors. Bhattotpala clearly says that he possessed
full copies of the works of Maya and Manitha. Admitting
for"argument's sake that Bhattotpala was one of the greatest commentators on astrological works, we get a doubt
about the author of Jataka Chandrika when he says that he
Has made an abstract of Parasara Hora. Venkateswara,
the author of Jataka Chandrika, was the son of Yagnya |
Narayana, a Dikshitar or one who had performed a sacrifice
and must have been certainly more recent than Bhattotpala.
The age of Bhattotpala, if we take the Saka he refers to as
' Vikramarka’s era, will be now (1936 A.D.) about 1105 years
or 821 A.D. when he completed his invaluable commentaties. (Vide the previous chapter.)
But if Saka refers to Salivahana then it will be 955 years
0r979 A.D. Anyhow Parasara Hora had not been available at that remote time and the commentator regrets the
incident very naturally. Probably 'üuring the time of
Varahamihiza, that reputed work was wgi-known and
respected and the author had made ample references teit.
n°
n ^ UP State Museum, Lucknow

E CC-O. In Public PARIHA MN NG Trutepd seneg if ;
Varahamihira now gives the terms of life given by the different planets and this system not only recommended itself
to the author but was also supported by such great astro- -
logical writers as Badarayana, Satyacharya and the older.
Yavanas. Each planet gives the number of years which is
represented by the navamsa he occupies, irrespective of the
rasis occupied, by such a planet. "a
Tard Tee Balser suem |
meamna: wp: ATT WAT NGON
Stanza 10.—Convert the intended planet’s
position into kalas; divide this by 200; the
quotient, if divisable, divided by 12 represents |
years, etc.
NOTES
Take a planet in one rasi, 8 bhagas and 45 kalas,
Convert this into kalas. One rasi has 1800 kalas. r
8 bhagas x 60=480+45=2325 kalas.
Divide this by 200, and we get 11 years and 200 * 12
J 7 months and 4x30 days=15 days. There is-11 asthe first quotient but it is not divisible by 12, and therefore represents year. But suppose it is 14, then divided by
12, there will bea remainder of2 and that will be the
number of years given by the planet. 2 ar
é Badarayata gives another method. Taking the same
example we : have 1 rasi, & bhagas and 45 kalas.
* Myltipiying this Ey, 180 we get thus x 108 279 = 1391
Crag 2e.
‘ ne
UP State Museum, Lucknow p ^
r
"^nm

Ch. vae t Bubli¢ Remo. Digitizec y Saray Just and eGangotri 235
ae rouen must be ciis by 12, and we get years 11,
and [5 = T moni and 15. ‘days. practically the same
AA
z EEANN An + X
STANT HET MAA
TATAHAN SAPA keel
Stanza 11.—A. planet in exaltation or retrogression will give 3 times the term of his life.
If he is in Vargottama of in his own house or
nqvamsa or drekkara he gives double the period.
This is the speciality named by Satyacharya.
NOTES ;
A planet in his exaltation or retzogression, gives three
times the term of life obtained by the above calculation.
Vargottama is the position of the planet in the same
rasi and the same navamsa. His own house in the rasi
or his navamsa or drekkana enables a planet to double the
quantity of life he is able to give otherwise.
(keta WA «uid
discat cfr a AT |
^o REA ASTA: A DO
i AER! HIATT! cll ta i
Stanza 12. — Lagna gives similar number of
years asit has Adonem in the navamsa. If itis
a
"up Staté Museum, Lucknow

236 CC-O. In Public eH AP ges. | AD aarayu arenes I2
very powerful it will give similar to the rasi. «atf
a malefic is in ‘lagna ho deduction should be
M on'this account. Do not take (he terms of
life granted by the planets as stated before?
NOTES
In this system, Satyacharya fixes one year for each of
the navamsas, with proportionate terms for fractions of
that navamsa subject to a division by the Mandala Sankhya
or 12, the remainder being represented as years. But if the
lagna is very powerful then the number of rasis. passed by
the lagna may be added to the amsa longevity obtained by
the lagna. Suppose 109 kalas in the 4th navamsa in
Meena have passed at the time of birth; if the lagna is .
not powerful as per Str 19, Ch. I, then lagna gives the
term of life which is obtained by multiplying 11 rasis by
9 amsas and adding the 3} amsas passed in Meena to it
and then by dividing’the total by the mandala figure 12,
and the remainder will be the years given. Thus converting rasis into navamsas we have 11 x9=99+3} amsas=
1023 amsas. This must be divided by 12; thus there is a
remainder of 63 years and that is the term of longevity ,
given by the lagna. But suppose this Meena Lagna is
powerful, then it gives 11 years represented by the eleven
rasis passed by it plus the fraction of Meena passed by
the lagna. If 1800 kalas give one year what would 700
SEN a) c :
kalas piye 18 x12= Baa months and A x 30 days *
_ Thus if Meena i B powerful and 100 kalas havé passed in
it “at the birth, it would givera total of 63 yeazs pus 11
UP State Museum, Lucknow

CA. resi ipa ue Domains Pjoitizeg by Sere Trust and eGangotri 231
years, 4 months and 20 days or a total of 17 wears, 10
months end 20 days. Abolt the rasi and its additions, -
Varaha Mib/ra is vague and unconvincing, Bhattotpala
. quotes an excellent passage from Badarayana where the
whole principle is distinctly explained.-
AEA ASAT,
, T g TR TST BET N RR N
Stanza l3.—Satyacharya's system is excellent, but many haye spoiled it by useless multiplications. ,
"Whenever two or three figures are to be
“multiplied, then multiply it by that figure which `
représents the strongest factors.
NOTES
Varahamihira expresses his regret at the way in which
some astrologers have interpreted Satyacharya’s views and
principles. For instance, Satyacharya says that with the
exception of the specialities named by him the rest must be
interpreted as usual. Wherea planet is in his own house,
his drekkana or his navamsa, he gives twice the term of
life. granted by him. Suppose he occupies his own house,
his own drekkana and “his own navamsa, then, the term of
life granted by him oughi not to be multiplied twice for
rasi, ther? twice for his navamsa. Whiofiever of these is
the Stronger that planet enly must 5e made to give twice
UP State Museum, Lucknow
ga)
re

om CC-O. In Buble PER RP a ep Rarau Tretggndyggangetri 3
the period found out to his credit in the above formulated
calculations. The same thing for Lagna Ayurdaya. No
deductions should be made on account of the presence of
other planets in the lagna when the Amsa Ayurdaya is |
made. :
Saravali refers to Varahamihira and says that he
alone, out of the many astrologers found out thé' truth in
the method recommended by Satyacharya and approves
his restrictions put upon multiplications.
Suppose a planet is retrograde and in exaltation, Then
the term of life granted by him must be multiplied only
thrice and not six times as the tenor of Maya and others
suggest. When a planet ‘gets multiplication twice and
thrice then only multiply that ternr by 3 only. When
division comes it must be similarly dealt with. Suppose a
planet is in Neecha and Asta; only subtract one «term
. obtained by the greater of the two. When a planet is in.
the 11th and it also happens to be his unfriendly sign which
snould be first deducted? The first deduction -falls ‘under
the Chakrapatha and it is to be done first and then the
term given by the planet in good or bad signs, etc.
From the quotation given from Gargi these matters
are made very clear. First Chakrapatha should be done.
Then the terms of loss must be ascertained and out of these
the largest quantity obtained must be deducted. The
multiplication sources must be found out and then the
largest figure obtained must be multiplied.
. Bhattotpala: says that the author has given preference
only to the Amsayurdaya which is not correct. Quoting
Manitha and Seravali, Bhattotpala observes that when
laga is most powerful Amsayurdaya should be done.
UP State Museum, Lucknow

P: Ch, VRG-StInPiblic Domain. AiytPédRo 9e SA ST rust and eGangotri 239.
When the Sun is most powerful, Pindayurdaya ,and if
Chantira is most powerful Nisargayu should be consulted.
| , Some others say that the term of life granted by the two
methods Amsayurdaya and Grahadatia Pindayurdaya
should be found out and whichever cqmes shortest in the
two must be divided into Antardasas. If the last subperiod there, is owned by an unfriendly planet then death
must be predicted. If it is ordinary the person passes
through the danger, but if he is good then he escapes the
danger and progresses well. Take an example.
Suppose by the Grahadatta Pindayurdaya a man gets
50 years while from the Amsayurdaya he gets only 40 years.
Then take the lowest period, i.e., 40 years granted by amsa.
.Ifag the end of the 40th year an unfriendly Antardasa
happens the person dies at 40. But suppose the period of
agood"planet comes; then the person will not bs killed
a* 40 years but lives on.
. * TÊKA aire .
UI SETS D HAT |
. VARGAS 3n -
— 0 AnNa vm, | tU i
. ` Stanza 14.—If birth falls in Kataka and
Guru and Chandra are in it, Budha and Sukra in
the kendras, * the rest in 3-6-11 the person lives
very long and mathematical ealculátions for
. longevity do not apply to Such a “Sombination. < , e ^ 5 e
UP Staté Museum, Lucknow ^
e
o

r
.240 BRIHA
CC-O. In Public Domain. CO UA: umm Vern 14
. NOTES ‘
The following Is to TOs the above stanza. Lord
of 3 is in 4 in a friendly house Lord of $ is in Il ina .
friendly house. Lord of 2 is in 3 and lord of 7 in, 11.
aranana LTT
err IN
| | Sani |
= pos INN Birth
| e Guru
Moon
epus RASI =
Kua | [BB Ravi
Guru and Chandra must be in Kataka the birth
sign, Sukra and Budha may be in any of the kendras
„with the rest of the^evil planets Ravi, Sani and Kuja in
“the 11th, 6th and 3rd either together or sepárately. That
is, these last three planets may be in any one or two or
three of these houses or each in one house. But anyhow
those three must be in these houses or in any one of them..
Under such combinations the person lives very long. The .
author implies that longevity calculations do not apply, to
such horoscopes. Bhattotpala touches a very fine point -
which is quite worthy of the highest consideration. He
observes that the person for whom the period of longevity
has beon foend out cannot live longer, neither can he die
earlier that the terms granted by the planets under such
. calculations. “But the rules apply only to thse who live
ou definite principles of conduct, i.e., those who- follow
UP State Museum Midcksovs í

Ch. PHOS. Hef PLEPI OS UNCERTA PST 241,
good Achara. But he rightly says that such terms, cannot
be enjoyed by adulterers anc vagaboads as the Dharma
Sastras have distinctly laid down loss of terms of life for
evil or sinful deeds in this life. But in the last yoga
“quoted as tending to give unlimited term of life this may
be accomplished by taking such medical preparations as
are recommended in the Ayurvedic principles. Thus all
elements of uncertainty are here introduced which really
and convincingly change the crool.ed theory of fatalisra in
astrology and introduces human efforts by adopting which
they can either shorten or lengthen the periods of life
granted by the planets as the results of previous Karmaic
deeds. This is the key to the knowledge in astrology, and
must be carefully remembered.
S r
UP State Museum, Lucknow

r F
CHAPTER VIII
DASANTARDASA -
à Een
«urere en: ;
STAT AAMT MO aKT:
PaA ASÀ p eT: TAR |
4 fF a TATE Wenden
waht f retn: Gamiastt N? N
Stanza 1—The most powerful among Lagna,
Surya and Chandra, “with planets in their kendras give results in the commencement, middle,
and last periods of- life respectively. If planets
are not in kendras, etc., the results will flow in
the commencement even from Apoklima planets.
NOTES a
This stanza is very concisely put in and requires a great
dealof explanation. Afterfinding out the period of life
for a man it becomes the duty of the astrologer next to deal
out the good and evil terms which await him in his mortal
career. The different dasas or periods of planets are given i
here to enable man to know when and how he will get his
gcod and evil fortunes. The lagna represents body (physi- À
cal, the Sun represents the atma (soul), and the Moon
_ indicates manas (mind). Find out which cf these three is
the strongest in« the horoscope and then ascribe the first
dasa to it. “Then “he second dasa willbe given by that
“planet which is the strongest in the kendras. If there are
[a r
UP State Museum, Lucknow

Ch. WIDI, St AF Domain. Digitieeg ppp rust and eGangotri 243,
two or more planets in the kendras they give the dasas consecutivély one after the other according to the sources of
strength they possess. After them comes the period of the
most powerful planet in the next houses to Kendras or
Panaparas. After all these planets are finished then comes
the dasa of the strongest planet in the Apoklimas. Suppose
there are ao planets in the kendras then the second dasa
begins with that planet which is the serongest in tbe Panaparas. Suppose there are no plallets in the kendras or
Panaparas, then all the planets will^be in Apoklimas, and
the most powerful among them will give the second dasa,
and the third will be of him who is next to him in styength.
Kendras are 1-4-7-10, Panaparas 3-5-8-11, Apoklimas 3-6-912. Ifthe original stapza is carefully read, it reads very
^ ambiguous and smacks ofa meaning quite inconsistent with
the clear explanations of Bhattotpala and the valuable quotations from Yavaneswara and the author’s own Swalpa Jataka,
Prathama Vayasi, Madhya Anthayacha, etc. This refers to the
three periods of man’s life, viz., 1st, 2nd and 3rd part and
seems as if the Phalam (results) indicated happens in these
three divisions.
In other words it looks as if the kendra planets affect
"the man in the first part of his life, the Panapara planets in
' the second part and the Apoklima planets in the last period
of an individual’s existence. But this is not so.
ag: md da R TAA >
ET EM Th SET TY | a TERRA
aed apa AW
NO get ia Lg Deco
UP State Museum, Lucknow ^
Lal

244 BRIHAT JATARA "^ tei PAPS. 2
Stanza 2.—The planet most powerful gives
the first dasa extending over that period of life
granted by him. If many planets 'are equally
powerful then the first dasa will belong ‘to that
planet who gives the largest term of life. If some
planets give equal terms of life, then the first dasa
will be given by that planet who rises first.
NOTES
The extent of any planetary period will be that term,
which he gives after all the subtractions and multiplications,
are made about him. First determine whe is the strongest
among the Lagna, Surya and Chandra and give the first
dasa to the most powerful of these. Then the 2nd dasa
will belong to him wko is the strongest of the planets
occupying the kendras and if there are no planets-in the
kendras then the strongest among the Panapara planets
_gets the first dasa and if there are none there, then ascribe
the dasa to the most powerful among the Apoklima
planets. Suppose two planets are in exaltation and Vargottama. Then both of them are equally strong. Who
should be preferred? He who gets the Nisarga strength.
(See St. 21, Ch. ID. Suppose Sani has 3 sources of.
strength and Kuja has two sources. Then they both
become equal because Kuja has Nisargika as against, Sani.,
Fhe Sthanabala, Digbala, Kalabala, Chestabala, and
Nisargikabala are the sources of strength es well as Shad-
«vargas. - Í$ careful calculations are made the strength of
each of the five planets can be measured and if in all
sources of strength two planets get equal strength then he .:
who gives the longest term will begin his dasa in preference
UP State Museum, Lucknow

ch, Vitr St Sf O°BASAS"S" ANTAR DASAS COS" 245,
to the Other. But if after all these sources of strength
are nieasured and two planets are found equal in strength,
then that plangt out of these two, which rises from the Sun
first, will get preference. As many sources of strength are
‘recorded it would be almost difficult to say when any two
planets get equal strength from all those sources. The word
rising refers to the rising of the lagna as well as the rising
of a planet from the Sun. But the»latter explanation is
supported distinctly by a fine:quótation from Maharishi
Gargi. >
NA Zaid qu
{ay PERTEN: RUT: TTT |
, o TE HUET ATA: AT0. CRWA Wee TARTAN RU
^ Stanza 3.—The planet with the Dasanatha
RS half the term of that dasa with his results.,
€ planet who occupies the thrikona from him
gives one-third of that period with his results.
“The planet in the 7th from him gives one-seventh
of his period. The planet who is in chaturasra
gives one-fourth of that term. In this manner
“lagna and planets give their Dasas and Antardasas.
4^ > NOTES» ^
This enables the stüdent to find oni theZords. of the
Sub-periods. The planet in con junction’ wita the dasa lord,
cuts half of she latter period and gives during that half his _
. own results, Lagna also gives its results as any planet docs.
UP State Museum, Lucknow ^

That is, if the lagna is with the lord of the dasa or in the
5th or 9th or 7th, or 4th or Sth from him it takes away the
proportionate periods named for the othec planets and
introduces during those perio
The first sub-peviod in a dasa
to the lord of that dasa and then to others. if there are
many planets with the dasa lord then a sub-perio@ must be
ascribed only to one planet who is the strongest of them.
This is implied by the singular noun the author has used
in the text. 4
This is ably supported by Bhattotpala with quotations
from Gargi, Yavaneswara, Satyacharya and. Yama.
There are some writers who say that the sub-periods
must always be ascribed
will have to be distributed among all the planets in conjunc- -
tion there, and some say, get the sub-period time for the
most powerful amongst them and then distribute the same
among all the planets in conjunction. But the comment&-
tor has shown his disapprobation of such hair-splittings.
Who is Yama? A quotation is made by Bhádttotpala and
that is all we have here. He seems to have been a great
astrological writer to be quoted along with men of Gargi's
stamp and by a commentator like Bhattotpala.
erred TAIT
TT AA | ;
Ta gum wa. 0.
BUC TATE E MN
3 Stanza 4.—Bring all the fractions fo a comnfon figure, Omit» the denominators and. multiply
E UP State MuseumpLucknow = 5
ds its own Phalam ar results. ,
CC-O. In Public BRIHAT JATARA Trustang SSA, 4
e pu
~w
Ca

Ch corr SEAS Domain. Digitigedrby Sagas Test and eGangotri 241
a shee, E ?
severally the numerators by the dasa years and
then divide the whole by the total of the numerators. By doing this you get the Antardasa
- periods.
~ NOTES
The term used in the original text is sthanam and
means fractions. Bring these fractions to a common, denominator. Omit the denominators. Take each of the
numerators and then multiply each figure by the dasa
number. ,Add all the numerators and then divide the total
thus obtained ky that figure. The quotient represents the
sub-period in years, months, days, kalas, etc.
9 Take an example: The „whole is worked out by fractions so that those who know mathematics can easily understand them. Kujais the Dasanatha and he gives^3 years.
* He now asks us to add the numerators and we get 3:
The dasa has to be (1) multiplied by 2 and divided by the
total 3; we get 2 years for the first lord. Then multiply
the dasa 3 years by one and divide it by 3 and we get one
. year: Therefore the first lord gets 2 years of sub-period,
while the 2nd lord or one who is with him takes one year
ot half of the first sub-period.
Take another example.
a
{here is one planet, with the lord of the dasa, another
in the Sth, and another i im the 7th. Then y? aayo — 7
*1/131/241/341/7 ja BEDI IBE s e a
- y a OS ^2 : a a
Up State Museum, Lucknow a
i > a
a

248 BRIHAT JATAKA et ATES. 4
d of the dasa gives 16 years. Take the
id multipiy it by 16, we have 672. By
Thas we have to
Suppose the lor
first numerator 42 an
adding all the numerators we get 83.
divide 672 by 83 to Dm years, etc. 4
= years=8—1—42 & days.
Taking the second figure 21 and multiplying ii by 16
we get 336. Divide this by 83 and we get 4 years, no
morths and 172days. e Taking the third figure 14 and
multiplying it by 16 we get 224. This divided by 83—
22 years, 8 months, 112 days. Then take the last figure
a Multiplying this by 16 we get 96=% =] year, 1 month
and 26% days. The first figure, namely, 8 and odd years is
the ae period of the dasa lord. , The second 4 and odd
yearsare governed by the sub-lord who is with the dasa
lord. The third figure two and odd years is governed by
the sub-period of the planet who is in the 5th house from
the dasa lord. The last one and odd years are governed by
the planet who is in the 7th house from the dasa lord.
Taking all these, viz., the dasa lord, the planet in the 7th
and the planet in the chaturasra (4 or 8th) we are able to get
32 varieties of antardasas. For six we get 4, for five we get
7, for four we get 9, for three we get 7, for two we get 4 4
and one nil. Therefore we have 14+4+7+9+7+4=32
varieties in the sub-periods, when many will be guided by
the order in which the dasa lords take precedence. But
when a planet gets power fo give a sub-period and does not
possess power to give a dasa period-then the-sub-period for
him should be entire’y omitted.
Some say that the Antardasas are regulated in the
= SES
fokowing manner: . z
e r
UP State Museum, Lucknow^ ©

Ch. RE SUP Dornpaiscjigitized PYASAYU Trust and eGangotri 249 .
First, the Antardasa of the dasa lord; 2nd, the subperiod of the planet with him ? 3rd, the planet in the tri-
“kona; 4th, thesplanet in the 7th; and Sth, the planets who
are in trikona, Sth and 9th, or in chaturasra 4th and .8th ;
then determine their relative strengths and ascribe the subperiod., But this is not recognised as correct by Maharishis, and» Gargi clearly explains that the Antardasa should
be distinctly regulated in accordance with the lords of the
dasas. More examples in this connüction seem to be quite
unnecessary as the principles have been fully demonstrated.
wee VISA WU Sese Wr |
(raise aga NATE Ta TAA WY di
<- «Stanza 5.—The ‘Dasa (period) of a most
powerful and exalted planet is called the Poorna
Dasa. The dasa of a powerless planet is called
the Rikta. The period of that planet which is in
the “navamsa of unfriendly amsa is called the `
Aristaphala.
NOTES
The dasa is the major period of a planet and its results
` will be as per names given to those. Dasa Sampurna means
“that which gives full or complete good and to get this name
“the planet must not only be deeply exalted but must also be
Possessed of all the sources of strength detailed in this
work. o * t
Suppose a planet gets all these sourcts of strength and
- is not exalted or it is exalted but without®some Sources of
strength, then it cannot be called Sampurna o? perfect. As ^
RA
E
z e? a
UP State Museum, Lucknow ^
aa a

250 CC-O. In Public Domain Bigigeg ARRA Trust PEHESANEPITISt, 6
the author and the commentator have fixed the 'timits in
definite language, very few people get this Sampurna” Dasa.
Bhattotpala says that during the time of such a Poorna Dasa ;
the person will have good health, wealth, and ‘Teputation
and they go on increasing daily. But ifa planet is powerful
and occupies exaltation, then the dasa is called Poorna.
This gives health and wealth. Rikta means poo*. or devoid
of any power. During such times there will be bad health
arid losses. €,
Arista means undesirable or miserable and all these
have been distinctly quoted by Bhattotpala from Bhagavan
Gargi. :
ECT Teas
gedi WATT GEJT | :
sme eaters
«reparar WAAL 0 & UI
Stanza 6.—The planet who has ‘fallen from
exaltation gives Avarohi Dasa. If he joins friendly
or exalted navamsa, he constitutes Madhya Dasa.
The planet who is ascending from his debilitation gives Arohani Dasa. If such a planet’
occupies debilitated or unfriendly navamsa, he,
gives a worthless period.
e
LENGE NOTES ^
Avarohg mean? falling from a high to a low place or
state, and Arefiarí; means rising from a low place to a high
^ place Gr state" Asa planet falls from exaltation he must
A
e p. A lal
UP State Museum,-Lucknow” = i
e

“Ae
Che WEEP St Papi DAMES Migitized Ay DFEAMAst and eGangotri 251
give bad, but if he occupies exalted or friendly navamsa,
then the results of his dasa wil be ordinary. The names
are indicative ef the results they produce and Sanskrit is so
sweet, pleasant, rich, constructive and expressive that for
"those who have intellects to use, the language includes the
whole „gist of what the planets give or do. The words
waning aad waxing may be conveniently used. Waning
indicates evil and waxing good. Bhattotpala makes a slight
difference between Anista and Adhama. The former means
the worst, while the latter is not so bad. This is supported
by quotations from Gargi.
o
AAN TAMAT
TA TS Rawan are |
dae corra,
. ^ wu aa anang SN
i Stanza 7.—]f a planet is.in a good house
and joins debilitated or unfriendly navamsa, it:
gives mixed results. The names are fixed for these
indicative of their results. I shall give the results
-of the periods of the Sun, etc., later on.
NOTES
E By good houses the author means planets in deep exaltation, Moola Thrikona, tbeir own houses and the house of
a friendly planet. By Misraphaia or mixed results tpe
author means wealth with disease, or health yith poverty
and so forth. The periods are— A e
a
(1) Sampurna=Perfect or excellent regults.
P a
2) Poorna=Good reguits. o y me
o LJ
o o o ^
o
UP State Museum, Lucknow ^
[J

asa CO: Peb OST AE FR SRR" Tri fer ngs. 8
8) Adhama=Ordinary good with miseries.
(4) Rikta= Poverty atid misery.
(5)- Anista= Bad in every way., a
(6) Misra= Mixed results.
SHASTA EATS ZAAT — |
FERE Ra PAT: RERA TAT Wen
> Stanza 8.—If- lagna rises in common sign,
its ores constitute Adhama, Madhya and
Pujita respectively. . If lagna is movable, the
order must be reversed. If lagna is fixed, they
constitute Ashubha, [sta and Sama respectively.
Lagna Dasas are thus arranged. e
NOTES
If the birth sign falls in the first drekkana of Dwiswábhava Rasi (common) it gives Adhama Dasa. Ifit fals in its
2nd Drekkana, it gives Madhyama or mixed and if it falls in
its 3rd Drekkana it gives Pujita or. good results. In
movable or Chara Rasis the 1st Drekkana gives Pujita, the
2nd Madhyama and the 3rd Adhama results. 1
In fixed or Sthira Rasis, the 1st Drekkana gives bad °
results, the 2nd gives Ista or desirable and the 3rd SE “or
mixed results.
Mesha, Kataka, Thvla and Makara | are movable
signs. 5
Vrishabha,, Simha, Vrischika ard tanto en.
Mithuna, Katya, Dhanus fand Meena—common or
^ Dsyiswábhava.^ 4 D
UP State Museum, Lucknow © Di
r
e MM

Che PRE fy Pubjic DonddihS ARGEKAS Fay Ast and eGangotri 253,
E. Hs s jih MAJA TATA aa C
NANANG an: |
ài à : gest PANA: REENA FNged GAGA JAR Taal ses HT M A N
Stdüza 9.—Moon, Mars, Mercury, Venus,
Jupiter, the Sun and Saturn give 1, 2, 9, 20, 18, 20,
50 years respectively of Nisargika Dasa. If in the
previously stated dasa period of the planets, they
get also "this Nisargika dasa, they produce good
results. Some of Yavanas say that the Lagna
Dasa comes in the end and gives good. Some
do not accept this view.” .
rk NOTES
The Moon gives one year of Nisargika Dasa from the
time of birth. Mars gives 2 years of his period after the
Moon. This makes the total 3 years. Mercury then gives
9 years. This makes 12 years. Venus gives 20 years after
Mercury and this brings up the age to 32 years. Then
a
* comés the period of Jupiter for 18 years and this makes up a
total of 50 years. Then comes the Sun with 20 years,
making a total of 70 years. Then comes the long period of
Saturn for 50 years and this brings up the total to 120 years.
If they are powerfuland occupy the upachayas (3—6—10—
11 houses), they produce good. If the revessg’they produce
‘bad. The author says that he has great experience in these —
dasas and 4heir results are highly encouraging. Without
mentioning the years Yayaneswarae thu$ attributes thé
OY ry Oe ^
L UP State Museum, Lucknow ^
a
asc a
o

-254 ia BRIHAT JALAK UTS Cf, ATP Sk. 9
Milk-drinking age for Chandra,
stüdent's life to Budha, youthful
and sensual life to Sukra, manhood te Guru. Ravi .
governs the next age or old age and Saturn completes,
the imbecility or the last stage. If, at any period of life,
the Nisargika dasa and the dasa for the same planet as
described in the Ayurdaya Bhaga run together much good
will result, Take for instance the dasa of Sukra running
from the 13th year to the’ 32nd year by the Nisargika
system. If in these ^20 years of Sukra, comes in the
period of Sukra as ascertained by the Dasantardasa,
then that period will be good. Suppose from the
24th to 29th, the Antardasa of Sukra comes according to
planetary periods. This period will -be very favourable as
the man has both the Nisargika and ordinary dasa ruled by $
Sukra. From this it may be inferred that if the Nisargika
is bad then his own period or sub-period in that time will
also be bad and if that is good this will also be good.
But this view is negatived by direct quafations from
Yavaneswara and Satyacharya who maintain that Nisargika
Dasas are always good when the same planetary period joins
them. According to old Yavanas (Purana Yavanas) the
lagna and Nisargika Dasa comes after 120 years and- it is?
good.
Nisarga-planetary periods.
teething season for Kuja,
Tf it is asked why the Lagna Dasa comes after 120 years 5
they say that as the 120 years are allotted to the various
plenets lagna has no opportunity to assert its power. Then
it may be quisstioned as to whether there be any who live
above 120 years. A combination is given which shows that
_lives even aftef-200 years are possible. Birth is in the end
of'Meena which is powerful. All the planets, some vxalted
UP State Museum, Lucknow e = x €

ch. VITE; Igpugye Domain. Digitized oy Ran ntt and eGangotri 255
and others “retrograde occupy the Meena navamsa. As
Meena is powerful it gives 24 years. Tle planets, each of
them being in Meena give 12 years. Excepting the Sun, the.
other planets, some exalted and others' retrograde give
thrice their terms or 36 years each. The, Sun is in Mesha,
and in its last Navamsa Dhanus, so he gives 27 years.
Thus :— oe
Lagna _ tq 24 years o
Ravi EC D] E
Chandra Ad 36s cts;
o Kuja ses SORS
» Budha | ne 36515
Guru fad eJ gg
A Sukra EE 36/79
Sani 2 3000
2 4 267 years
. The views of all writers agree in the fact that the
Lagna Dasa becomes good only when it is powerful and
not otherwise. The methods by which they approach the
question differ.
Shruta Kirti says that the dasa will be good or bad
according to the strength or weakness of the Lagna. Varahamiliira has already stated that the Lagna Dasa should be
"judged in the movable, fixed and common signs, by the
rising drekkanag at birth and Yávanas affirm that it is
good." Varahamihira doss not agree with. ;Shruta Kirti
because he advances an unsupported View qf. his own,
at variance, with the declared opinichs of the great
Maharishies. a ce,
s
a
UP State Museum, Lucknow ^
à pd e

56 CC-O. In Public Domain Apiti zapa parayu Trust ang eGarigate t. 10
nei Sah Gee ar Riser dies wq
WET BAST TM AIRT N WHT |
maak TATE PAzx: RAA FEA TAA ASIN Uo N
Stanza 10.—If the anthardasandtha is in
lagna, or if his friend isin lagna, or if lagna
falls in his friend’s or in his varga, the dasa
beginning then, will be productive of good. Or
if he is in the 3rd, 6th, 10th or 1Jth houses it is
good. Or if the Mcon occupies the exaltation
house of the Pakaswami or his friendly rasi, or
thrikona, or the 7th from him, it produces good.
If it is the reverse it produces bad.
NOTES
That planet whose sub-period commences is caliéd the
Pakaswami or lord of the Antardasa. If this planet, the
lord of the Antardasa, is in birth or if his friends are in
birth, or if birth falls in the vargas of that planet, or if
a good planet happens to be in lagna at the commencement
ofthat sub-period, or if the sub-lord is in 3, 6, 10 or 1L
from lagna, in all these cases the Antardasa produces good
results.
ə If this sub-period comes during the period of friends,
_it becomes, very good, but if it falls in that of unfriendly
or evil planets, it produces evil. Now the author tries to
answer a ver, important question. Under certain combina- . . |
‘tions sketched above, the planetary sub-period is said to be
UP State Museum Lucknow^
M

Ch, Vif; IgPubls PAN PASA and eGangotri 257good. “But does good come all along that period or when
and how does it come? As^the lord of the sub-period
. moves on (imgochara) day after day in the zodiacal signs,
„he falls into temporary friendly relations with the other
‘planets. Then, wherever the Moon ,occupies or moves
into such friendly planetary houses the person gets good
during sveh times or if the Moon occupies the exaltation
sign of the Pakaswami or if the Moon falls into Upachaya
houses from the lord of the sub-ptriod or in the 5th, 7th
or 9th from him, these times must %e considered as good.
By good what are we to understand and with reference to
what event in our life does it come. The Moon has been
given 3rd, Sth, 6th, 7th; 9th, 10%, 11th and the exaltation
house of the Pakaswami, for producing good results. Now,
` find out which of the bhavas from birth Lagna are occupied
by the above signs and in which the Moon is moving and
prediet good only for such events indicated by those
bhavas. Suppose Aries is the birth lagna and Mercury
is the°Antardasadhipathi occupying the lagna. As theMoon moves on, he occupies different positions from
Mercury. Suppose the Moon occupies the 5th or Leo,
then predict good for events signified by the Sth house
“from Jagna, viz., children, father and intelligence. Suppose
` the Moon is in Thula, 7th and Budha in Lagna, good comes
tothe 7th bhava which controls wife and passions. When
* the Moon occupies other houses than this, then he inflicts
bad results upon bhavas indicated by those houses. All
these fatements are supported by Maharishi Syri.
mem erat qum TET aedi
NG Tah feet meri Renae | PNG
> Aa
"up State’Museum, Lucknow A
` ES z

asg COO In Publio paroi rotg MEA" TUREN d VERDC, 11
giua BIL fae RESET
selan, TASTE madat | 22 UI
Stanza 11.—Ihat dasa which begins when
the Moon is in his own house is good and gives
honour, wealth and happiness. That dasa which
begins when the Moon is in Kuja's house makes his
wife immoral; if that dasa begins when the Moon
is in Budha’s house it gives education, friends and
wealth; if the dasa begins when the Moon is in
Simha it gives work fos him in forts, forests, roads,
houses and agriculture; if it begins when the
Moon is in Sukra’s. house he gives all desira'ole -
food;.if it begins when the Moon is in Sani's
house it gives mean woman; ifit begins when
the Moon is in Guru’s house it gives reputation,
wealth and happiness.
NOTES
The Dasa or Antardasa (period or sub-period). lord |
may happen to be any planet. The Moon seems to have *
very great influence in producing misery and happincss.
It must be remembered that the Moon represents mind and '
controls it.
D
All happiness and misery affect the mind. Therefore
the Moon's;positión at the time of the commencement of
_ the dasa or ais sub-period has great significance. Two
sets of planetary movements are jumbled up here. “At the
A UP State Museum; Lucknow

Ch. vant, SEPA PRESSE OE SORS Aga angot 355
time of birth the planets are fixed (with refesence to
Gockara) and also the birth sign. At birth they are there,
but later onethey go on moving continuously. Having
made calculations we get the Dasas and Antardasas as per
directions given in the earlier stanzas,in this chapter and
suppose the Antardasa of Guru begins on a particular day.
Find out&he position of the Moon (in Gochara) on that
day and then apply the above principles enumerated. If,
at the time of the beginning of Gurü's Antardasa, the Moon
is in Cancer he gives good. Ifthe Moon were in Aries or
Scorpio at that time his wife commits adultery. If Chandra
is in Simfia he will give work to the man in forests,
fortifications, agriculture, roads and homes.
atl TAMEN ngeeet Waga: em a:
ARTER SATE
«emer TATA: STAY ATENE: I? N
Stanza 12.—The Sun gives wealth by Nakha,
"(nails or claws) teeth, skins, gold, cruelty, travel,
kings and wars. He makes the man hot-temper-
-ed determined in doing work, in getting reputation
and good by courage. He gets misery through
wife, Children, wealth, enemy, weapon. fire and
king. The Sun gives liberty, fondness for sinful
deeds, quarrels among his workmén pri servants,
complaints in chest, stomach and-other diseases. WA
e da >
UP Staté Museum, Lucknow e
z a
p) a
a

c NOTES
The author has omitted the proper adjectives and
verbs. The Sun is stated to give the above results, but
when and under what circumstances, Varaha Mihira has not
‘stated. In the first half of the stanza the results are those
which the Sun gives when he is favourable and well
situated both in his Dasa and Antardasa. These results
ascsibed to the Sun must always be subjected to the influences of other planets and the students should be
careful in venturing their future predictions. — * Nakha”
means skins or claws. Teeth refers to elephapt's tusks,
c., skins to tiger's skins, etc. He gets wealth by cruelty
or LM Or courage or ín war or from kings. All these
good results happen when the Sun i$ favourable. A
By Dhairya used in the text Bhattotpala explains it to
mean equanimity of temper maintained under good and
evil influences and events. When the Sun is unfavourabls
‘miseries arise through a man's wife, his children, his
servants, his monetary transactions, his enemies, ^ his,
weapons, and through fire, and kingly displeasure. By
liberality or extravagance he gets into bad positions or
debts and difficulties. But when the Sun is good he is ,
liberal in the right direction. Varaha Mihira here ‘gives
what good and bad results may be expected in the dasa of
Ravi, and how those results are brought about. Suppose "
tks Sun is exalted or is occupying favourable position,
then he gives the native money through gold, scents. claws,
ivory, skinsior hides, travelling, “kings and war. He may
get money. thróuglt all these seurces or through one or
„more of them according to the strength of tre Sun. He
may become a traveller and get money, become @_king’s
AT o.
e UP State Museum; Lucknow.

ee
t
bjj itized by Sarayu Trust and eGangotri
ch, Varie lapang B ETS OF MOON'S DASA 26r
man or employee and thus secure wealth or he may trade
in ivory, scents, claws, hides and other such erre,
zn ma Tali Tall Bd TARA
BISCINC CIC CER EA ccnp
Reais: alata
miata sp RN eqq 11 23 I
Stanza 13.—During the ‘Moon’s period the
person gets money or profits from mantras,
Brahmins, sugarcane, milk, clothes, flowers,
playing, oil seeds, food and fatigue or pain. He
^ wid be fond of sleep, ‘laziness, enduring pain,
Brahmins and Devatas, getting female issues,
possessed of good intelligence, reputation, earning
and spending, and he will pick ‘quarrels with his,
own men and those who are more powerful than
himself.
NOTES
Varaha Mihira gives general results and does not say
which results are produced by good Moon and which are
- given,by bad Moon. Buta careful student can easily make a
selection from the results given by the Moon waning er
waxing If the Moon is favourable the person may get
money through mantras. These may, be E secrets of
Saiva or Vaishnava or othet symbolic language; by practicing which, man gets some cleverness, efficacy, Or reputation, z
and thùs be able. to make that sourcé an open door for
a ða E
UP State?Museum, Lucknow ^
a

2o CC-O. In Public BRIA A Disi got Ry Saravu ren PATEL. 13
income. He gets money through priestly or religious men.
He may deal in products of sugarcane, like jaggery or sugar,
etc., or milk and its products, curds, butter; milk, cheese
and ghee. He may deal in varieties of clothes or deal in.
flower sales or by arranging plays or taking part in them.
Oil seeds referred to, are sesamum seeds and the oil obtained
from them. He sells food or arranges for their preparation
anq distribution and gets money by the sweat of his brow in
getting these. He will get many female children, and will be
equanimous in temperament. Hisintelligence will be brightened and reputation enhanced. He will carn well and spend
well. He will respect Brahmins and Devatas. The last are the
purified beings higher in the scale of creation than the Brahmins. Scientifically speaking the laws of continuity reveal to >
us that man is not the climax of creation. Beyond him ‘rise
beings superior in moral and physical scale and endowed probably with far higher physical and mental potencies. When
the Moon is good he gives income or profit through these
“sources and when he is unfavourable he makes, the man-lazy
and quarrel with hisown men and with those who are far
more powerful than himself. This undoubtedly leads him
into the folds of great misery and poverty. The unit of
man’s bliss is shown below as compared to Brahmananda :*
1. If Man's is 1 then.
2. Manushya Gandharva's—100.
3. Devagandharva's—100,00.
4. Pitrulokananda—1,000,000. — .
5... Soarta Devalokananda—100,000,000.
6. cKarmadevananda—1 000,000,000.
: 8. Indrananda—1 ,0000,0000, 0000, Os wd ies
e UP sate Na eae, -
e

Ch. WIJI, St. 14] RESULTS OF MARS’ DASA 263
9, "Brihaspatiananda-—] ,0000,0000,0000,0000.
ə As such Brahmananda is incomprehensible.
WARTA PA
151: ARARE |
TOASTS TTG Wel: à
A > AnA T A
AR: WATANA: TET eT a g N
Stanza 14.—During the period of Mars
there will be destruction of enemies, gains from
rulers, lands, brothers, sheep and wool. He will
have hatred among his children, wife, friends,
brothers, learned men, and preceptors. He will
‘suffer from thirst, bloody diseases, fever, bile,
fractares. He will be fond of others’ wives, sinfu!
men and uncharitable deeds. He will be harsh,
hot and evil tempered.
A NOTES
Here again it is to be made out when Mars gives out all
these results. If Mars is good he destroys a man’s enemies
and-gives him wealth through kings, brothers, trading in
sheep and goats and in woollen stuffs. But when heis bad,
he subjects thé man to family hatred and the displeasure í of
his friends, educated men and his own receptors. 2
The person suffers fróm all such complaint? which arise
from corruption of blood or by passing of flood, piles, dis-,
charging blood hy nose or mouth, or through anus in stools.
3 y = UP State Museum, Lucknow ^
o

oe CC-O. In Public Domain, Digitized. bx Sarayu Truppen proa. 1.5
Mars produces thirsty and bilious complaints. Fractures or
broken limbs are under the direct control of this red planet.
He will make the person adulterous, join the company of
bad and sinful men and engage himself in unlawful or un- .
charitable deeds. In the text one reading is '' Para Stri
Krita Pritihi" meaning fondness for others’ wives. Another reading is ** Rogalia" meaning venereal diséases got
from fondness for others’ wives. Another reading is Parastrishtatha meaning one who is fond of others’ wives. Both
interpretations are acceptable.
dai TAG A TAN |
TET AT ara daana hem: |
TENTANG aera raga :
Wes IIIT dier p pam di $i
Stanza 15.—]n the period of Mercury the
person gets wealth by embassy, friends, preceptors and Brahmins. He will be praised by learned men and gets reputation thereby. He gets
gold, mules, lands and personal charm, and happiness. He will be witty and humorous and will `
be clever in serving. He will have good mind,
and charitable disposition. Harshness, fatigue,
restraint or imprisonment, mental disease, and
complaints from the three DAatus, will result’
of ss NOTES
Mercury i iba beneficial planet but all plarets may be
"góod or ibad as "they *own Or occupy good or bad houses.
e Pe p
e UP State Museunt, Lucknow
e
o e
e

cha VISE NA apa aka OP MERCURY DASA 265.
In Sanskrit he is called Soumya or Somaputra or she son
of the: Moon. But Soumya also indicates a beneficial planet
. and this is thesense in which the word is generally used.
When Mercury is good, the person can make wealth through embassy or diplomacy, through the good offices of his
friends and through the influences of his priests or preceptors. He’ gets reputation and men learned in sciences
praise him. He gets gold, mules and lands, and magnetism
by which his personality will be agreeable to and welcomed
by every one who knows or sees him? His wit and humour
will be cultivated and thus he gets a good name and attraction as a speaker or writer. His mind will be noble and
engages itself in doing charities. »When Mercury is bad he
will be harsh and have. to bear much fatigue. He may be
° plated under bodily or mental: restraints or may suffer imprisonment. His mind will be greatly affected, and he will
suffer from complicated diseases due to the elevation of the
three “ Dhatus?. In Sanskrit Ayurveda (Medical Science) three dhatus are mentioned, viz., (1) “ Vata”, (2)-
“ Pitta”? and (3) ** Sleshma ". The first includes all windy
complaints or diseases which arise from accumulation of
bad gases and which lead to very serious complaints like
;rheumatism, paralysis, burning sensation in the soles and
' hands and nervous debility. Pitta indicates bile and heat
and complaints from these are many and various. Oozing
' of blóod from the various organs, overheat in the body and
burning sensation in the eyes and body, may happen. Most
feversare based. upon bile or heat, passing blood, constipation, piles and so forth. , a ie :
^o
Sleshme is the excess of lymph or tat and from these
various complications arise such as asthma, cough, dropsy, ^
d e a UP RES MEE Lucknow
æ N

A
. whose,chief &
£266 O n Public OMB HPAP IA TARA "CR PST Sw, 16
dysentery, and accumulation of much fat. There is hardly
any disease in which these three Dhatus do not figuré; but
what the author here means is that such diszases in which .
these three Dhatus are equally prominent will trouble the
person when Mercury is bad.
Saat WORRY ales: TATA
» ET A A AT THA TA |
Katan: MAA gU:
TENGGA: TIM Padha: RE UI
Stanza 16.—In his period Jupiter gives honour,
good character, good. mind, personal chazm,*
courage, philanthropic disposition, determination
and devotion. He gets wealth through mantras,
kings, vedic recitation, counsel, skill in diplomacy.
` He will have gold, houses, sons, elephants, clothes,
and friendship with good rulers. He gets troubled
by deep thinking, diseases in the ear and hatred
among lawless people.
NOTES
e
Jupiter is the most beneficial planet we have and «when -
he is well placed he gives, honour, purity of mind, personal
charm Or beauty, great courage, charitable disposition devotion and determination in the execution of great or important
work. Thet are certain classes 6f men, among all nations,
Y Jccupation consists in repeating heir sacred
books or prayers and who are remunerated either by-ruling
e UP State MüSedms Lekno ^ E

CC-O. In Public D tT gs d by S a deG
Cho VHL St. 17] RESULTS OF JUBITER DASA 267.
monarchs or by public subscription and charities. Such
men “are called in India, Ghanapaties, and whose sole
. business cons$sts in learning the Vedas by heart and re-
.peating them in temples, large assemblies, and on marriage
and other sacred occasions. Personal,charm means that
when a man is in the luck's way he gets an indescribable
beauty, Which is attractive and which continues as long as
the good dasa lasts. There are mary men who are fair
and well proportioned but who are somehow repuisive
and hateful in appearance. This Pndiscribable charm or
fascination comes with good dasas and disappears with
evil periods. Courage will be agreeable when itis shown
in a righteous cause, but not whe’ a man goes on murdering
and committing dacoities and other unlawful deeds. When
' the period of Guru is bad, *troubles and anxieties arise
from all the good sources named above and from ear
disease and the enmity of lawless people. When he is
good, the person gets excellent horses, much gold, elephants,
varietiés of rich clothes and much skill in carrying ondiplomatic relations. These will also be sources of income
for him and he will be honoured and made much of, in their
possession. Deep thinking, specially in unfortunate
‘circumstances produces harmful effects on the mind and
body and therefore becomes bad.
aptat MANGGA TAAT 4
GTA ANGGANA l, a
med MAHA sinatra
sspe gu Aza: Å goe o.c
a Ory
UP Stat® Museum, Lucknow a
e a

268 CC-O. In Public PRP Digiti gero Rayu Trusteng Fangs, 17
Stanza 17.—During the period of Venus
(Sukra) the person will be fond of music, pleasure,
fine scents, good meals and drinks, clothes, -
females, gems, personal charm, sensual pleasure,
yogis, desirabl£ personages, friends, skill in
merchandise, agriculture, treasure-troves, wealth,
hated by communities, kings, wild people,
vagabonds and sorrow through friendship.
NOTES
For all wordly purposes Venus when auspicious, will
give all desirable results and makes a man, what the general
public call, materially happy. He gives him musical tastes
and talents, taste in refined arts; enables him to progure .
all pleasures in the shepe of food and sweet scents, fine
clothes, luxurious meals, rich and delicions drinks, fine and
costly gems, great personal charm and attractions, all sense
pleasures, handsome females, desirable and agreeable
“people, and obliging friends, skill in buying and selling
articles, successful agriculture, finding treasure-troves, and
wealth by other pleasant means. He will come in contact
with yogis and learn yoga to some extent. He will have high,
intelligence and great liking for dramatic compositions and `.
performances, His horses, carriages, and cattle will ,be
good and his houses will be handsome, well built, attractive
and nicely and tastefully furnished. When Sukra is bad,
tb? person will be hated’ by all communities, incur „kingly
displeasure, be on bad terms with’ wild and'ferocious tribes
and lawless, gags. ^ He gets sorrow and misery through
friends. This',méans that his former intimate ‘friends will
“become his bitter enemies and this will certainly be'a very
e
ef^
UP State Mseuins Lucknow"
e
G

ch, VAP: um West PSP SATURN BASA" 26
good source for acute pain and worry, and the consequent
unhappiness. When Sukra is powerfully situated and
. aspected by the benefic Guru, he will get lucky sons and
daughters, but when he is unfavourable,” daughters suffer
‘and cause him misery. X
A Oe A A
aki mer TATANAN:
MINA YUTA TS] FTCA: |;
` Cn LN ‘
SAAS A TENTARA ST TATA
e A
SES Te ERR TAU A ART N 9 c N
Stanza 18.—During thé period of Saturn the
. pegson gets donkeys, camels, birds, buffaloes, old
women, leadership over communities, towns, or
cities and inferior gains. He gets miseries or
troubles through phlegm, jealousy, wind, anger,
derangement, dirt, laziness and fatigue. He willbe insulted and terrified by servants, children,
and wife and will suffer the loss of a limb.
NOTES
Saturn is the worst planet to do good and the best to do
: evil., When he is good and auspicious, the man becomes a
leader of a community, town or city. He gets wealth through
inferior grains such as ragi, kumbu, maize, sesamum seeds,
birds, buffaloes? iron, hides and salt. If Saturn i ig well situ:
ated or aspected by benefics, he will trade i ona laxge scale in
donkeys, camels, birds and buffaloes.- He iay be engaged
in selling or buying, these in large quantifies, or in transactirig `
a AR
` UP Statê Museum, Lucknow ^
pd ^

270 CC-O. In Public DerpejmlAigitizes pysarAyu TrustGid eCRhBoGt. 19
work in, which the products obtained from these objécts may
be sold or bargained. He w:ll marry old women or, have
connection with such women. He may trade in iron, salt, -
claws, skins and feathers. He may become a leader Or chief
of his community or may be appointed as magistrate over
them ; but if Saturn is debilitated oris otherwise disposed
towards the native unfavourably then he gives a lot.of misery,
which can hardly be matched by any other miseries caused by
other evil planets. As he represents blackness, and power
for absorbing all beneficial rays, he will be able to inflict on
the unfortunate man untold miseries. Various diseases of
phlegm attack him, jealousy troubles him a great deal and
causes much pain, and diseases from excess’ of wind in the
body may also be predicted. He becomes easily excitable
and the anger of himself and those with whom he comes in *
contact, will be a fruitful source of trouble and loss. His
brain rcels or derangement sets in, his surroundings will be
dirty and he suffers from laziness and constant fatigue. His
„servants try to lord over him and his wife and children
terrify him or offer insults. He may lose alimb or an
operation might take away one of his limbs. He will lose
his wealth, his lands and his previous agreeable surroundings, and will suffer severely in every way.
TUT TNS Tala gAsafiga ATT |
3 Rag A arent
APRS GATE TATA NRS N
Stanza 19.-—Good periods give happiness and
“bad periods produce misery. Mixed, periods
e
UP State Museums Lucknow. P <
A

Cb. VIPS. Public Pp man PARE PERNT gst and eGangotrio7 4
roducé mixed results, and the result of Lagna
Dasa will be similar in nature to iis lord.
T NOTES
In the course of the first fourteen verses Varaha
Mihira has elaborately discussed about the planetary
periods and sub-periods ; and when they would be good and
when they would be bad and what is méant by mixed dasas.
In all these cases, exaltations, "Moóla-trikonas, own and
friendly signs, beneficial conjunctions and aspects, and
occupations of good divisions, ownership and position, play
a great deal, and,make the planet yield good results. By
good, we must understand that thè man will be honoured,
.healthy, influential, happy, educated, possessed of good
"children, wife and relations, surrounded by pleasant and
agreeable friends, and respected and attractive. He will
command all appendages to happiness or enjoyment, such
as good houses, gardens, horses, carriages, clothes, gems
and valuable furniture. During the period of evil planets ~
the reverse happens. He loses wealth, houses, lands,
conveyances, character, becomes dull and careless of honour,
Suffers from various complaints brought on by the three
-dhatus: Vata-wind, Pitta-bile and Sleshma-phlegm. He
gets into all sorts of sorrow, becomesa drunkard or rake,
incurs the displeasue of rulers, the hatred of relations and
‘friends, and will get lawless, untruthful and vagabond
classes as companions. Wife, children, and close relations
begin to hate him and go where he will, there will be insult,
insubordination, and unpleasantness startug bim. id the face.
-. During the mixed periods there will be go3d a and ‘bad, often
following each other rapidly or coming, together or “partly ~
° z > VA
UP Staté'Museum, Lucknow ^
em >)

2726€ 9- In Public Domaim pigizEd px JAMA rust pGheGangarist, 19
neutralising each other's results. Here it would be advantageous to summarise Ehattotpata’s commentaries on this stanza
as he throws considerable light on judging the good and bad
resulis. Those planets who occupy oopachayas and who are
bright, give enjoyment. Those planets who occupy apachyas, who are struck by comets and meteors, who are dull
and contracted in size, give unfavourable results.» Planet in
swocha or kalabala, gives favourable results, or when he is
ine moolatrikona or his own house. Planetin a friendly
house gives mixed results. Planet in debilitation, unfriendly houses or divisions, or defeated, or cut or assuming different colour, or lustreless; or is unfriendly with
the ford of the birth, or-owns sixth or eighth house, the
period of such a planet will be full of defects and miseries.
Quoting Satyacbarya, Bhattotpala confirms what has been ^
already stated above. The results of lagna dasa will be
similar to what its lord is able to give. One born in Mesha
will have the dasa results similar to what Kuja is able to
give, and born in Vrishabha will have his resulis similar to
what Sukra would give, or the lagna may give good if it
rises in a good drekkana or bad if it occupies a bad
drekkana. Quoting Saravali, Bhattotpala says :—If a planet
is powerful at the time of the commencement of his period:
or sub-period, has beneficial aspects and occupies good:
divisions at the time of birth, he will not kill the person
although he may be armed with deadly powers. 3 :
^ If the lord of the sub-period is powerless, he will not
give any results, but he will not kill him although he may
make him sick-or suffer from accident. If the sub-lord is a
victor in the planctary war, and combines with the benefics --
* Qr if He occupies exaltation, he will not kill the man:
UP State Museum, Lucknow `

Ch. Vio di Pur HR d WV HOOD eGangotri 275
' deem er ageng . s
PUAN TAC TAGE: |
> MAASAI SA T
THT qer AST TTRI Ro I
Stanza 20.—In the period, of each planet,
the results will be based upon the materials or
objects which have been detailed in the Saumgnyadhyaya, and the means of livelihood detailed
in the Karma Jivadhyaya. Results of the planets
will be determined by the” aspects, occupation
- and other combinations given elsewhere.
4 NOTES
E “Th the first two chapters planets have inm given
various characteristics, events, and objects. (See St. 12,
Chap. IL.) ^
The Sun gives in good dasa, copper and takes it away
or causes loss to it in his bad dasa. In Chap. X means
Of livelihood are detailed and they will flow in good dasas
and disappear in evil ones. In Chap. XX he gives the
Tesults of the planets occupying the various bhavas and
. they will be good when the planets are auspicious and bad
when they are evil. In Chap. XIX he sketches the results
of planetary aspects and they must be similarly explained.
Excepting in Nabhasa yogas (Chap. XII) ; in , all other
yogas or conjunctions, tbe results good ôr bad will be
Prominent ?n the planetary periods which" are the most.
powerful among them in causing that yoga. But in tHe
UP State Museum, Lucknow =
em ^

CC-O. In Public RI Riaitiegd bx pareve reta Sanget; 21
Nabhaca conjunctions, the planets which cause those
yogas will be fruitful and will produce good results
whenever their
themselves or in the periods of other planets.
srat wena wd
sire WMATA |
: peAa TOA
METE || Rt II
Stanza 21.—The different planets give their
lustre of the Mahabootas in their periods. This
lustre or shade has to be identified by the nose,
face, eyes, skin, and ear obtained by or through
the earth, water, fire, air and space (Akasa).
^ NOTES 4
This isa difficult stanza and its real explanation will
be the clue or key to the whole knowledge of the planetary
periods and sub-periods. This stanza is supposed to enable
a person to find out the planetary period and sub-period,
passing in the career of a man who has no horoscope or’
recollection of his time of birth. (See St. 6, Chap. II).
Chaya is the word Varahamihira has used in the original. ,
Ghaya means the lustre or shade of the colour the person
possesses. It is natural to say that a man bas good .or bad
charm or “fascination about his person. ^ This represents
Chaya. Tbe planets give such-colour or personal charm
, of the, Mahaboota which they represent. When a person
* émits “good Or sweet smell. he represents the “earthly
AN A
UP State Museum, Lucknow ^
e
Dasas or Antardasas cone, whether in .

Ch. yif Sena Dopis ASH ED Pau Trust and aeann ;
characteristic of smell and therefore will be passing the
| period of Budha. This can be'learnt by the nose. The
watery characleristic is Rasa or taste and this has to be
known by ,the tongue. When he eats luxurious or good
meals, he will be passing the periods of Sukra or Chandra,
both of whom represent water. The Sun and Mars govern
fire and its’ characteristic is beauty, and this has to be
learnt by vision or eyes. When a màn is handsome or
fascinating, then he must be passing? the periods of Ravi
and Kuja. When air controls a mah, the body will be
soft and this can be identified by the skin which is governed
by Saturn, "and therefore known by the touch. When
Akasa controls him its characteristit of sound predominates,
and the period of Jupiser can be identified by the good
Speech of the man by the ears. Varahamihira refers to
this Chaya elaborately in his Brihat Samhita in Chap.
ag TATA dat sheet = |
TANTE E SE PER EIE
to. Ru meri: errata: D 93 I
Stanza 22.—During the time of an auspicious.planet the mind of the person (innerman)
will be good. It enables the man to get wealthe
and segure happiness, The dasa may also be.
known by the happiness or misery tHe, than is
' . Subjected ta. The results produced “bye powerless
planete wil] be enjoyed in dreams and thoughts. -
NEN \
UP Staté Museum, Lucknow ^
r E
LJ
gw” —

. a4 CO: Public Doman, Dig eat py Sepe rust FLERE, 22
c ` NOTES i
Bhattotpala quotes from Brihat Samhita and remarks
that with the exception of Vayuchaya, in all others there:
will be good or bad, but in the Vayu everything seems to be
evil (see St. 93, Chap. 68). The Vayuchaya makes a man
dirty, harsh or cruel, dark, stinking, die, imprisoned, unhealthy, unfortunate or lose property. Here we see all
evil results and therefore this has been omitted or excepted.
There are apparently several important methods of finding
out the dasas and periods. The periods or sub-periods may
be ascertained by regular calculations, by Chayas, by the
innerman or mental peculiarities or by the results a man is
enjoying as the product of dasa influences. When a good
dasa comes, the mind or the inner consciousness will alsa
be good, but when the period is bad, it will also be bad.
In Varahamihira’s Yatra work (or travelling) he-thus observes: There is a light in man which is small and great,
by which the past," present and the future may be known,
and it is to this light that the name Atma is given. A person
can certainly know by consulting his own Atma what prospects he will get in the course of his journey. There are
many omens apnd evils and there are many encouraging
signs but whatever they may be, itis the clearness of the
Manas (mind) that enables a person to achieve success. A
man enjoys or suffers in many ways. The periods of. planets
^have been given peculiar characteristics; and one therefore
“can AN identify the dasa by the man ’s surroundings. In
< the evil period of Saturn loss cf limb is predicted but we
see many-persons under such Sani losing no limbs, and
many undér the auspicious dasa of Saturr losing limbs. --
E Similarly many Co not get treasure troves in gooé. periods
^ UP State Museum, Lucknow

Ch. Yili, St. 25] pesti ate WEAK PLANETS” 277 »
of Venus "and some get them in bad periods. With a view
to clear these doubts, Varahamihira says that many of the
results or event? are enjoyed in thought regions or in dreams.
Such enjoyments or miseries will be the results of powerless or weak planets. Here with reference to such remarks,
I may offer the following. In other works on astrology
enjoyment ər misery may take various shapes and forms.
Say a man has good Vahana Yoga (conveyances). He
keeps a coach or coaches, horses, Dulls, etc., and enjoys
them. A friend of his who keeps noné of these goes regularly on a drive or ride with him and he also has this Vahana
Yoga but in ^a powerful form. When they are driving they
see another friend of theirs and giv® him a lift fora certain
distance. Then again his coachman and groom have
Wahana Yoga for they mount the carriage before and get
down the carriage after the master does so. Then any of
these may have constant thoughts about buying and keeping carriages while others may simply be dreaming of drives
and rides’ during their sleep. Provision is made in astrology about these differences in enjoyment and the causes
are traceable in the relative powers of the planets.
Do o. USERS MEA Kai
aa TIA TATA dd |
* WE qe: TETEH fes f
> at ei TETT: THOTT: wp d tide
Stanza 23. —If ong planet represents two
-- Contrary results, the effect will be destruction to
those «vents. But if one is stronger than the”
UP State Museum, Lucknow ^
eid a
o

; XB -O. In Public DoBRT THE PAM Trust E ogg St. 23
other the stronger will prevail. If one planet
represents one and another indicates a contrary
result, there will be both the results. Planets give
good or bad in their own periods.
NOTES s
When a planet, by its dasa, gives gold, while by other
combinations (Ashtaka Varga, etc.) it takes away the gold,
then the result will be, the man gets no gold at all. But of
these two sources o` power, of giving and destroying whichever is stronger will prevail, When both are.equal in a
planet they produce nothing. 5
But suppose Jupiter gives gold and Mars takes it away
at the same time, tbe person gets: the gold and loses it again..
When a planet gives by one source of power gold, and by
another source silver, what would be the result? Some say
that according to the strength of sources it will give gold-as
well as silver while others maintain that whichever source
is the strongest the result will be similar to that source. If
the silver source is stronger, then he gives silver and
suppresses gold and if gold source is stronger he gives gold
.and suppresses silver. But I hold that when a planet has
various sources of strength independently, it is reasonable
to think that such sources produce results which are ascribed
to them.
AD « A
c UP State Museunr, Lucknow
E ba
A

LJ
CHAPTER IX , .
a ASHTAKA VARGA
AGH, TATA TATRA EGUN
THAME TELA Perga wrens [0.2
Haran aa: ÅnAgag FT JEA TAIT: d$ UI
Stanza [.—The. Sun is favourable from his
position at the birth in 1, 11, 4, 8, 2, 10, 9 and 7.
' He? is similar from Mars and Saturn. From
Venus he is good in 7, 12 and 6. From Jupiter
in 9, 5, 11 and 6. From Moon in 10, 3, 11 and 6.
From Mercury in 3, 10, 11, 6, 12, 9 and 5. From
lagna in 10, 3, 11, 6, 4 and 12 he is favourable.
NOTES
o There are two sets of conjunctions to be considered.
‘One set consists in fixing the planets correctly in their
positions at the time of birth. But at any given time after
birth; the planets by their incessant movements will be
found in different situations both from the lagna as well as
from their own fixed positions at the birth time, Ashtaka
Varga means eight sources of energy for edch. planet in»
cluding the lagna. Rahu and Kethu are > pitted throughout this work, except for names and direction for JRahu. ,
Say a* horoscope, contains the Sun in “the 10th, which M
= UP State Museum, Lucknow ^

P
. 280 CC-O. In Public Donja pjoitired RYISAIRA Trust antegengstr St. 1
Kumbba. Vrishabha is birth and Ravi is in Kufnbha, or
10th from it. But after 4° months Ravi will not-be in
Kumbha, but by Gochara he will be in M‘thuna. He is ,
now really in the Sth house from himself, and the 2nd
house from lagna. As he keeps on moving from day-to- -day
he forms various angles from his original position not only
with reference to himself, but also with reference to all
the other planets. Fake an example. At birth the combinations stood thus:— *
Chandra) p; :
Rahu Birth enl
Ravi :
Budha E
Guru | Mr. ^B.S.R.' s
— Horoscope ————
^ Rasi. | ^
3 | Kuja posa
Sukra | Kethu
But four months hence, where would all the planets.
be, and where would each of the planets be with reference'
to his own original position, as also with reference, to
other planets fixed at the time of birth.
G
Dm
When understanding the principles laid down in this
chapter, the author enables the Teader to “know the good
and bad results Which the everyday moving planets give,
_when they forfa various angles from the original positions
“otcupied by them.* He has already given the. results of
a UP State Museum; Lucknow

Ch pfe Sdn pbc DomamyPigtixed ky pargyu Trust and eGangotri 281
Dasas and Antardasas but the commentator observes that
results from these will be move certail in their influences
. on men. Ir» this chapter the results sketched may be
Sukra
Rahu Budha
Sani
Guru |
Four months later.
ə
Sani Kethu
Kuja Chandra
marked by figures and ciphers. In the horoscope gjven we
see the Sun in Kumbha. The following from Kumbha
occupied by Ravi will produce good» results, and in these
Houses put eiphers, and in the rest put the figure 1. “4
5 Ravi
o ^ x A
o a =
nn Sa 2
S Cy v? à a
z . o o fa
UP State‘Museum, Lucknow ^
sæ E o

282 CC-O. In Public Dompig yPjgitired hy SArgyA Trust antefiergstr'st. 1
Thus in this horoscope writing the ciphers and figures,
first from Kumbha is itself, the 2nd is Meena, the 4th is
Vrishabha, the 7th is Simha, the 8th is Kanya, the 9th |
is Thula, the 10th is Vrischika and the 11th is Dhanus.
This means that whenever the Sun moves in these
houses where ciphers are placed, he forms such, chemical
combinations, or takes such angular positions, that he is
able to produce good to the native. But when he moves
in houses in which the figure (1)is marked, he does not
give good results. The Sun gives good in similar positions
from Mars and Sani as have been sketched for himself
here. 5
0 | Koja
Take now the position of Sukra. He isin Dharusattke time of birth. The following positions taken by Ravi
from him are good. 2 =
That. is when the Sun moves in Vrishabha, Mithuna
and Vrischiké he takes favourable angles from Sukra and
“produces good. Ir other houses he, shows, evil with
eS z
A UP State Museum; Lucknow
Ga E =
e

Ch. PROSE APISUN'S OBEY AKSAYA Resyend Canori 283
reference to Sukra. From Guru, he is favourable in 9, 5,
11,6. Referring to the horoscope above we find Guru in
` Kumbha. f
oe
^ Thus when the Sun moves in Mithuna, Kataka, Thula
and Dhanus, he is good, with reference to Guru and is
unfavourable in other houses.
D Guru
LJ 1 o
ae (o)
w
o o
e o
dE urn | i s RE
S o pn NT x
TEH = e 2 4m
UP State Museum, Lucknow o

284 CC-O. In Public POR PET De RTA Rexayu Trust Fe CERIO 1
From Chandra in 10, 3, 11 and 6, Ravi is good.
1 í Chandra 190 )
à 0 j , Pr h
In the horoscope Chacdra is in Mesha. When Ravi
moves in Mithuna, Kanya, Makara and Kumbha he
produces good and in the rest „unfavourable results. From
Budha in 10, 3, 11, 6, 12, 9 and 5, Ravi is good. We
find Bucha in Kumbha at birth. When Ravi moves in
Mesha, Mithuna, Kataka, Thula, Vrischika, Dhanus and”
Makara, he forms favourable angles and produces. good
results. From Lagna Ravi is good in 10, 3; 11, 6, 4
and 12.
Budha 0 0 d
c E
UP State Museum; Lucknow

o
ch. ROSE. YP NGON BOSAY AKA AKEN Genio 2g
When Ravi moves in Kataka, Simha, Thula, Kumbha,
Meena and Mesha he produces good and in the rest
unfavourablé results. I have shown to each of -the planets
_and lagna the favourable and unfavourable angles formed
by Ravi in his gochara movements, and this is called
Suryashtaka Varga.
= Suryashtaka
The above shows that when the Sun moved in Mithuna,
Kåtaka and Thula, he produced good results in Meena,
Vrishabha, Simha and Kanya he produced unfavourable
results and the rest Mesha, Vrischika, Dhanus, Makara and
Kumbha, he was neutral, i.e., neither good nor bad. So,
the Sun was good for 3 months in the year, bad for 4 morths
and neutral for 5 months. The author gives such positions
for, all the planets and whenever in a house, we have more
ciphers that indicates good. Ciphers and figures are technical. Ciphers,are placed for góod angular positions ang
Reais for unfavourable positions.
o
Sm, RATTAT: E EE]
enee awang d moaie qam
oda
“UP State Museum, Lucknow a
o
o

agg COO In Public DAGA A by SEA" Et qt S0: 3
STATS TASTE: |
üeger Rad Meee di N
Stanza 2.—Chandrashtaka Varga:
Chandra in 6, 3, 10, 11 from Lagna.
6, 3, 10, 11, 8and 7 from Ravi.
6, 3, 11 and 5 from Sani.
Budha.
Guru. ` Í
Sukra produces good.
TAAT ANGATAK ATA TEM ea IeATTHVT HAIMA: EPA: |
TTS eT: o
TAM TET HAI I FAAS N 3 N
Stanza 3.—Kujashtaka Varga:
. Kuja in 3, 6, 10, ll and 5 from:Ravi. ^
»., > 6511, 10 and 1 from Lagna.
» 3, 6and 1! from Chandra. ,
ae » 1, 4,7, 10, 8, 11 and 2 from him;elf.
oN [
UP State Museum; Lucknow

Ch. 185 Sis FSP BUD PASH PARRY ARGA SES TE
Kuja in 9, 11, 8, 1, 4, 7 and 10 from Sani.
» 46 3,5 and 11 from Budha.
zi *6, 12, 11 and 8 from Sukra.
» . 10, 12, 11 and 6 from Guru produces
good.
SITE: Ws aes:
UAT TANANAN TATA: |
TARKAN Alla: A AAT:
TATA VAT ALT SAHA: dd
- Stanza 4.—Budhashtaka Varga:
Budha in 2, 1, 8, 11, 9,4,3 and 5 from Sukra.
and Sani.
12, 6, 11 and 8 from Guru.
9, 11, 6, 5 and 12 from Ravi.
own position.
6, 2, 11, 8, 4 and 10 from Chandra.
will produe good results. ^
e o
Pee, gare Pare
uc aa 32
oda
° up State Museum, Lus

on CC-O. In Public DRIN AUT PAR THELEN MOG e 6
arta Gaman PISHISTT |
GA ag ana gga TT TEAC TTT A Ho
Stanza 5.—Guruashtaka Varga.
Guru in 10, 2, 1, 8, 7, 11 and 4 from Kuja.
10, 2, 1, 8, 7, 11, 4 and 3 froni himself.
Ravi.
5, 2, 9, 10, 11 and 6 from Sukra.
» 1, 11, 2, 9 and 5 from Chandra.
» 3,6, 5 end 12 from Sani.
Lagna produces good results.
GAE ANTA: UT: STATE AT:
WW wu ga aI RÀT: dis
TAME TANANAN Tel
MANTAN NATE TATA ae cot mT & I
Stanza 6.—Sukrashtaka Varga :
Sukra in 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 11, 8 and 9 from [LR
: ic. Chandra.
p * fries?
wo 432 SOT 8 and. 11 im Sani.
- UP State Museum, MR Gur

6 E. E ACA IP P SERTASBEREAVARGA" and eGangotri ag M
cura! in 8, 11 and 12 from Ravi. 5
* yy 9» 10, 11, 8 and 5 from Guru.
» 5,3, 11, 9 and 6 from-Budha.
» 3,9, 6, 5, 11 and 12 from Kuja produces favourable results.
ea: CQ PARURE SD: RUD NUM
acres Ge TNA |
THRIFTY TA TATA PETA:
garam: FAA GT mrereerdts || ON
Stanza 7.—Saniashtaka Varga :
oSani in 3, 5, 11 and 4 from himself.
1551-3; p ilil G 10 and 12 from Kuja.
„ 3,6 and 11 from Chandra.
» 6,11 and 12 from Sukra.
», 11,12, 5 and 6 from Guru produces
good.
NOTES
Readers must be very careful as regards predictions.
They are based upon a large number of facts and events,
that wfen persons do not take into account all the sources,
Of strength and weakness relating to the positions, fSconjunc-
. tions and aspects the planets possess, along with the lagna,
they mgy not be successful: a 5 o A
e a oda
UP Stat Museum, Lucknow o
c L

m
* 290 BRIHAT JATAKA — [Ch.iX.St. 8
'- gf Anais AaBPENSSIERIE? BTA FT|
SUTA TENANG: gefue
araga ANTE i6 |
Stanza 8.—The places mentioned above are
good and the rest are evil. The good or bad
results will be ascertained by the ciphers and
figures marked as stated above and the balances
show good. Planets.in Upachaya, in friendly and
own houses and exaltations, will give plenty of
good; planets in Apachayas, in neecha^ or
unfriendly houses give no good.
NOTES
As the places mentioned above are good, ciphere have
to be put in there, and in the other houses not mentioned
put figure | in each. Here as the planets keep continuously
moving from house to house, it will be seen that they take
endless positions both with reference to themselves as well
as with reference to other planets and the birth sign. Light,
heat and other invisible agencies radiated and reflected by
the planets, will undergo endless varieties of changes ánd thé
Ancient Maha Rishies sezm to have found out that when they
„move in certain houses, they shed. good influences and when
they move in-other houses, they produce bad or neutralise
the good “effects “ndicated. Therefore when these ciphers
^ „and figures have been placed as per directions given, above,
mE A
A UP State Museum,-Lucknow
- zi Se

a D
Cho IX; ef^ gec PRIN oreet? eGangoti ag] »
we get a E number of ciphers and a certain number of
figures. Deduct the figures from the ciphers in each sign
and take the Salance of ciphers. In each Iasi if the balanced ciphers are eight then predict complete good, but when
the ciphers are 6, then iths of the original good only has to
be expected. When there are only four ciphers, the good
will be haff and when there are only 2, the good anticipated
will only be 4th of the promised benefit. But when the rasi
contains no cipher there will be only. evil, vide the Suryashtaka Varga given above at the end of Stanza 1.
Referring to the horoscope given in Stanza 6 of Chapter
VII, Bhattotpala gives the AshtaPa Varga for Kuja.
* «Applying the rules given in Kujashtaka Varga we get
the following ciphers and figures : ;
a
H Litt 1111
RASI IKUJASHTAKA
VARGA
LJ
In Mesha we have five figures and three ciphérs. Deduot
the ciphers, we have only two figures. puo "whenever
- Kuja moves,in Mesha he causes 2/8ths o? bad to the man
concemied. i ^ e
a
ə
wi . a 2
a
UP State Museum, Luçknow

“292 BRIHAT JATARA angeng se,
In Vrishabha a similar result and in Mithuna the same,
But in Kataka, figures and ciphers are equal and cance: each
other. Therefore when Kuja moves in Kataka there is -
neither good nor bad. In Simha we have five ciphers and
3 figures. Therefore there is a balance of two ciphers and
whenever Kuja moves in Simha he produces 2/8ths of the
happiness. In Kanya we have 6 figures and two ciphers,
suhtracting we have four figures and therefore when Kuja
moves in Kanya he will give 4/8ths of the evil. In Thula
we have 3 figures and five ciphers and therefore there will be
2/8ths of good. In Vrischika we have seven figures and one
cipher and deducting this from seven, we get 6 figures thereby
indicating that when Kuja moves id Vrischika he produces
6/8ths of bad. Similarly it must bê judged for all other |
signs. But when there are 4 ciphers and four figures as in
Kumbha given above, then there will be no result. , When
there are eight ciphers, the best results must be expected.
and when there are eight figures the result will be most
“unfavourable. This is supported by quotations from
Badarayana. There are many astrological writers who
say that the results predicted by the Gochara will be very
general and cannot be depended upon, while the results
predicted by the system of calculations based on Ashtaka -
Varga Shodhana are certain and could be depended upon.
Badarayana and Yavaneswara have given the results to
each of the planets in Ashtaka Varga and say that the pre--
déctions based upon thesé will be certain. They further say
that this. Ashtaka Varga should -be specially consulted in
Yatra or travelling If a planet gives good in Ashtaka Varga
and occupies, Oópachaya from Moon or birth, then that
“planet will givé much good. Devakirthi clearly says that the
e
ph e
e e
~ UP State Museum, «Lucknow
e ` ee.

Ch. 1 Stub EEAG Az MO) CEMENT Sna eGangotri 293,
Oopachayas should be taken from birth as well as from the
Moon. Ifa planet becomes bad'in Ashtaka Varga, and he also
occupies the "à pachayas 1, 2, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 12 or unfriendly
or neecha houses then he gives immense bad. These
‘Oopachayas must be referred to birth time and not as per
Gochara. Yavaneswara and Devakirthi are quoted by
Bhattotpela to clear this point and Satyacharya supports this
view. All the planets will give good er bad only when they
are powerful except Chandra. Even when Chandra’ is
auspicious, if he is powerless he owill give evil results.
Devakirthi supports this view. Summing up all, the learned
commentator says that these states of planets, viz., exaltation, moolatrlkona, own and friendly houses, debilitation and unfriendly hoyses have always reference only to the
time of birth and not to their Gochara movements. But the
favourable or unfavourable positions as ascertained by
Ashtaka Varga and Bindu (cipher) Shodhana (examination)
fefer to the movements of the planets in their Gochara. (For
fuller treatment of Ashtaka Varga see “Hindu Predictive ,
Astrology" by B.V. Raman.)
ə
CA
a
e
We a asgo
A a 4 , UP State Museum, Lugknow

f
“CHAPTER X
KARMAJEEVA— PROFESSION
e
AMSAT ETT:
att Ratatat
TERRESTRES STR! |
ACAI ECE CIEL
Wesana ANTAA 11 9. ||
Stanza 1.—Fromethe Sun, etc, the acquisition of wealth must be predicted through father, |
mother, enemy, friend; brother, woman and
servant respectively, when he occupies the 10th
house from birth or Moon, or through lord of the
.navamsa occupied by the lord of the 10th, from
birth, the Moon or the Sun.
NOTES
This is a very important chapter inasmuch as this „gives ^
us all the ways and means by which a man earns his
money and livelihood. The callings of men are.as
various, as interesting and as diversified, as the in-°
dividual peculiarities they,exhibit, and it becomes extremely
important to learn the details given here as carefully as
possible. «Take the Lagna or the Moon at birth, and see
who occup%és the tenth house from it. Ifthe Sun is in the
10th heuse the person inherits paternal property; if the Moon
^ As
e : fe
PLE e
e LI
UP State Museum, Lucknow
e e a,

f
Ch. X,ditol In e bid CA ONS QE. ELANEIS, eGangotd^ ?
is there, he” gets money through the mother; if Mars
occupies it, he procures wealth through his enemy ; if
Mercury joins¢he 10th, he gets money through friends; if
Jupiter is found there, the person has wealth through
brothers ; if Venus is in the 10th, then money come through
women ; and if Saturn occupies it, servants fetch him
money. Some astrologers say that the most powerful
among the two must be found out agd then the source of
wealth predicted from the planet who occupies the 10¢h
from it. Suppose there are two or mpre planets in the 10th
from Lagna or Chandra or from both, then money flows in
through these channels which are ascribed to the planets
in their Dasas and Antardasas., If there is no planet in
the 10th house from Lagna or Chandra, Varaha Mihira
»thus, proceeds to find out the source of income. Take the
lord of the navamsa occupied by the‘lord of the 10th from
Bha (Lagna), Indu (Moon) and Arka (Sun), and ascribe
te acquisition of wealth to such methods or processes
which are controlled by that planet. Bhagavan Gargi
supports tbe “above views distinctly. As a man may get
money from various Ways both at one time as well as at
different periods in his life, the view taken by Bhattotpala
and his quotations from Gargi seem to be the best in my
humble opinion. A man may be a lawyer, may have Jands
yielding produce, may carry on ready money transactions,
may be a paid trustee or manager in some charitable institution or temple and may hold shares in banks, funds and
other speculations and be at the same time a Government
Pleader paid so’ much per month. His fathar and mother
may give him money, his Wife may bring, dowm dowry and
o
his brothers’and friends may also help him. 3rherefoge the |
` ^ a asa

296C-O. In Public DomaBRUGHAEE b) ASTA. Aust and efSabgoti, St. 2
view advanced by some that the income should be ascribed
to the planet in the 10th eitker from the Moon or the birth,
whichever is the stronger, falls to the ground-and does not
receive support from eminent writers like Gargi.
aga SANGGAMA |
TAA: gian
dai PARA: |? N
Stanza 2.—If the lord of the navamsa is the
Sun, the person gets wealth through scents, gold,
wool, medicines, etc. If the amsa lord is the Moon,
wealth flows through agriculture, watery prodacts -
and dependence upon women, etc. If the lord
of the navamsa is Mars, he gets money through
minerals, fire, weapons, adventures and physical
' strength. “esha
If the lord of the navamsa is Mercury
money is obtained by writing, mathematics,
poetry and fine arts, :
NOTES
When there are no planets in the 10th house from the
Moon or the birth sign, then we have to take the lord of.
the 10th house from the birth, Moon and the Sun and
fhen find out which navamsa is occupied- by him., Then |
dake the, lord of that navamsa 4nd if he^is the Sun, the
person makes money by scented articles, gold, wool and
t medicines. Ee may be a medical man himself or may be
LI D
e b > P
e UP State Museum,*Lucknow
a o
a

Ch. XeSb 3l puni DEALING IN PRODUCTS
pars
an attendarit or nurse upon the patients. If he is the Moon,
he gets money by dealing in corals, pearls, shells, agricultural’ produats and dependence upon women. If Mars
owns that navamsa, he will make money by minerals, Ores,
‘or compounds, by weapons of various kinds, by fire in
being engaged in fireworks, kitchens; engine driving or
wherever, there is work connected with fire and by rash
adventures Or speculations and venturesome deeds or such
actions, in which physical strength js utilised. If Mercary
becomes the lord of that navamsa, the person becomes a
writer, mechanic, painter, sculptor, engraver, poet, mathematician, architect or scent maker.
stata Bahan:
ZEE CE ARARA: |
Aià aana:
TANANAN Ul 3 Ul
Stanza 3.—If the lord of the navamsa is
Jupiter, he gets money from Brahmins, priests,
. Gods, in mines or manufactures, and from
: charities. If that lord is Venus he makes money
by gems, silver, cows, buffaloes, etc.
° If he is Saturn he gets money from labour,
| by execution, carrying, and by low artisanship.
Thé source of income may be such as that which
is controlled by the lord of the*navamsa, occu-
-4 - pied by the lord of the 10th in Gochára. |,
o a A xt E
0 a E . UP State Museum, Lucknow
ÍD— MM S :

e
29g CC-O. In Public PRIAMA MANASI AJR Arayu Trust Eadie SaaS 3
i NOTES "hes
When Jupiter becomes the lord of the navamsa occupied by the lord of the 10th, the person gets meney through
Brahmins, priests, “educated classes, temples and charities,
mining operations and manufactures, sacrifices, disciple- '
ship, pilgrimage, and Khedda operations. When Sukra
becomes the navamsa lord, he gets wealth by gems; metals,
cows and buffaloes. When he is Saturn the man earns
moliey by labour, such ae travelling and carrying, by being
anexecutioner or hangman, and such mean trades which
are against the traditions of his family. All these refer to
the planetary combinations at the time of birth. «But now
Varahamihira gives a clue to read the sources of income by
the Gochara of the planets. Karmesa js the lord of the 10th.
Find out in which navamsa he,js at any given time by the ~“
Gochara movements. ‘Then ascribe such means of income
as are controlled by the lord of that navamsa. This is
supported by quotations from Gargi. This Gochara method,^
Says the learned commentator. applies only to those who
have their birth horoscopes but not to others. ° 2
A practical example is given here to illustrate the
points mentioned above. Note the positions of the planets
in the following chari : :
There no planets in the 10th house from lagna. So '
the lord of 10th is Sukra and he is in Meena in the nav-
` amsa. So ascribe Jupiters profession to some extent. -
Secondly from Moon, Budha is in the 10th and hence
Budha S professions have to be taken. From Ravi, the
x ree eat is in Thula in’ the navamsa.
a m T ord. Outof these three we have to
S 3 8 most powerful. The plafiet who is
o e e Dg
e
` UP State Muséum, LucknoW e ^ e

ə
Ch. iem. Public Domain. ANIK y NAPA Trust and eGangotri299
jn the last navamsa ofthe house where heis situated becomes the Karaka or the most*powerful? Here the Moon
vis in the 8thmavamsa and becomes the most powerful.
Moreover he has Parivarthana yoga with Sani. From Moon,
Budha lord of 9 is in 10 and the lord of 10 is in 9 and they
LI a e
| Kethu |, Sani
| — RASI
$n Birth
oerte = Rahu
| IR Ravi
| ^ a f Kuja |.Budha| Sukra
| »| Guru
both have Parivarthana. Hence the calling is by teaching
and writing and the native was in the, Educational service
as aeGüzetted Officer, as Budha gave the Karma Jeeva.
Budha dasa- will also make him bring out some books and
enable him to live as a writer.
There are many who have no horoscopes and for whom
lost horoscopes (Nasta Jatakas) are prepared according to
the methods given:at the end of this book by Varahamihira.
Ho such this system probably does not apply.
Rembagan Si :
° «i TAA IRA aii le *
amer GEA» 7j
i Wd qe THA agi SLE
e
pe c de State Museum, eae

. 300 CC-O. In Public gemainAGjolfaed Byrearayu Trust afc boaigdit. 4
o
Stanza 4.—Planets give wealth similar to the
houses they occupy. Ifthe Sun is exalted and
powerful the man gets wealth by self-acquisition.
If powerful benefics are in lagna, 2nd or 11th;
he gets money by many ways.
NOTES a0
Take those lords in the 10th either from Chandra or
Lagna, and find out in® what house he is. Ifthe house he
occupies is his own Se gets money in his house. If it is
his friend’s then he gets money through friends. If he
occupies unfriendly houses, then he makes money through his enemies. If hé happens to be Sun, and is in
his exaltation and is otherwise e powerful the person
acquires wealth by self-exertions. This is clearly ex- ^
plained by Gargi. By marking the Sun with this
characteristic of self-acquisition it sounds as if other planets are not able todo such work. Ifall the benefics are
powerful and occupy the lagna, 2nd and 11th houses, the
person will make money by various ways. The commentator says that such a person will succeed in any business he |
undertakes, however divergent it may be from his original
work. If there are no planets in the 10th house, find out?
where the lord of the 10th from Sun, or Moon or Lagna
is situated in the navamsa and if he is in a friendly or
inimical sign predict as above. To the above must be”
added the fact of the Sun being exalted, i.e., in Aries, to
make the man j 10
n i „acquire wealth by self-exertign. S
Qe - C e
o o
° : pies C
5 b a
e : n. o D
UP State Mus6up?, Lucknow e E Q^
o c LI

9 Cy
LJ
y d
| > CHAPTER XI `
| ; RAJA YocA .
TANNA: S,
| seda CATS FUNNAR: |
| step a Sagi: và fafa: TA uid
A
Stanza 1.—Yavanas say that three or more
cruel planets in exaltation will produce a cruelminded king: Jeevasarma,and his school say
that exalted cruel planets will:not raise a man to
kivgly power. mene
: NOTES
7 ' Three or more planets when exalted make a person
king when born in a royal family, and five or more planets
exalted” make any person a king. The same may be said -
of planets in moolatrikonas. This is a well-known
principle of astrology found in all works on the subject
especially Laghu Jataka. Yayanas and Jeevasarma differ in
"this combination for a king. Yavanas (Yavanacharya,
Yavaneswara and their followers) maintain that when 3
cruel planets, Sun, Mars and Saturn in Aries, Capricorn
" and Libra, are exalted they raise a man toa king's position
and make him a cruel or tyrannicad ruler. Jeevasarma says
that three exaljed cruel;planets cannot make a man king,
but will produce a rank almost equalo bis; the person
“will be wealthy but cruel and evil-mindeds Manithacharya
“supports Yavana’s views and says, that if the three planets.
z a D `
a
" s ^ UP State Museum, Lucknow
a

MELLE TIEREN. 2
exalted are cruel the king becomes cruel- minded, if they
are benefics he becomes a generous minded king and if
they are mixed (malefics and benefics) the” temper of the.
king would be mixed. Bhattotpalaisays that Vareha Mihira
supports the views of Yavanas.
THAT Toa 0n
4 WIR fest afa |
AAT a Ara Ped
ATT IAA Mery AT: TW 3 N
Stanza 2.—If Mars, Saturn, Suh and Jupiter
or any three of them are exalted and one of these .
three occupies the lagna, 16 Raja yogas arise.
If the Moon is in his own house, and any two .of
the above planets are in exaltation, with one of
them in the birth, or if any one of the above
named planets is in exaltation occupying the
Lagna, they produce 16 Raja yogas.
NOTES 6 i
If Mars, Saturn, Sun and Jupiter are exalted and one
of them occupies the birth sign, we naturally get four combinations for royalty. Take an example. Sun in Aries,
lupiter in Cancer, Saturr in Libra and Mars in Capricorn,
ith the o? theni planets in any order prodyce (1) with the
‘Sun in Birth ein Aries, (2) with the birth in Cancer with
Jupiter in it, (3¥ with birth in Libra with Saturn in it, and
-(4) with Capricorn as birth with Mars in it. If three of
UP State Mus€um, akena o E G
e E G ?

Ch, XE Ser yplc Domain: Rijal Sey. Trust and eGangotri 302,
these planets are exalted, with one of them in birth, they
give sise to 12 Raja yogas. “Thus take the Sun in Aries,
Jupiter in Cancer, and Saturn in Libra. With the other
planets in any order these produce 3 ‘combinations for
royalty, i.e. (1) when Aries becomes Lagna, (2) when Cancer
becomes Lagna, and (3) when Libra becomes Lagna. Then
again take Ravi in Mesha, Guru in Kataka and Kuja in
Makara with other planets in any order. This gives rise, to
3 combinations for royalty by’ the? lagna being placed in
Mesha, Kataka or Makara respectively. Then place
Ravi io „Mesha, Sani in Thula and Kuja in Makara
with the other planets in any order, we get 3 combinations
by the lagna being placed in?Kataka, Thula or Makara
respectively. Thus we have 12 conjunctions for royalty
" and adding the first four yogas (çombinations) we get 16
Raja yogas. If the Moon is in his own house (Kataka)
with any two of the above four planets in exaltation and
with one of them in the lagna we get 12 Raja yogas. Thus
the Sun in Aries and Jupiter and the Moon in Cancer give
two combinations by the lagna being placed in Mesha or
Kataka. Take the Sunin Aries and Saturn in Libra with
Moon in Cancer. We get two combinations by the lagna
` being posited (1) in Aries, and (2) in Libra. Similarly the
other ten conjunctions can easily be worked out. If any
onè of the four planets Saturn, Mars, Jupiter and the Sun
` is exalted, with that exalted planet in birth and with Moon
in his own house, we get four combinations for royalty.
“Thus take Aries as lagnaswith the Sun there and the Moan
in Cancer: (1) take Cancer as lagna wath Moon and
Jupiter therg ; (2) take Libra with Saturn therg and the Moon
in Cgncer; (3) and take Capricorn 9s lagna wit? Mars
s o = D
^ LJ
p 5 UP Stafe Museum, Lucknow
a . e

-304 BRIHAT JATAKA WEZE. 3
there and the Moon in Cancer (4). Thus we have 16 combi- |
nations for royalty sketched here. e
In all the latter 16 cases there will be no yoga if
Chandra is not in his own house. I beg to offer a few |
observations here bzsed upon an examination of thousands
of horoscopes extending over a period of sixty vears. I
have in my possession many horoscopes with Chandra and
Garu in Kataka as the lagna and the men are in ordinary
circumstances. Then again there are many who have Ravi
in Mesha as birth sign and Chandra in Kataka, who have
no pretentions to royalty or even a high social life.
Bhattotpala is mercilessly silent in this connection and I
feel almost certain, that whatever may have been the
strength of the planets in those good old days (Varaha =
Mihira lived nearly 20 centuries ago), to produce Raja
yoga, when one of the four planets was in exaltation with
birth there and Chandra in his own house, they have lost
that good influence Of making persons kings or even his
equals, and consistent with those great authors' erudition
and grasp of astrology, it may be said that the last
combinations would raise a man to kingly or ruler's position only when he is born in a royal family but not otherwise. »
RFT SH Ak A AKAs: |
Ao c ?
FEE aT area: enm URW
^ Stanza 3.—If Lagna or Chandra occupies,
Vargottama: and has the aspects of four or more
planets {cxcepting Chandra) twenty-two Raja
„yogas are generated. ;
UP State Museüm, Lucknow^ = = o

Ch. xb Seay" DORA VRE tN US and eGangotri gg; E
NOTES 7 >
By these combinations forty-four Raja yogas are arranged thus : Vargottama is the 1st, 5th and 9th navamsas of
movable, fixed and common signs. (See St. 14, Ch. I.)
But for easy grasp it may be thus explained if the
navamsa of any sign falls in it, it becomes Vargottama.
Thus Mesha navamsa in Mesha, Vrishabha navamsa in
Vrishabha, Mithuna navamsa in Mithuna, and Kataka
navamsa in Kataka become Vargottama. If Lagna rises in
Vargottama,and is aspected by four or more planets twentytwo Raja yogas are arranged. Chandra is excepted. But
if he aspects, the yoga is not disturbed. The aspecting
-Planets must be four without Chandra. Ina similar way if
Chandra occupies Vargottama, and chas the aspect of four
or more planets, there arise twenty-two Raja yogas. „If the
Lagna or Chandra is aspected by four planets 15 Raja yogas
arise. Q
Thus (1) Ravi, Kuja, Budha and Guru aspecting Lagna
or Chandra.
(2) Ravi, Kuja, Budha and Sukra aspecting Lagna.
(3) Ravi, Kuja, Budha and Sani aspecting Lagna.
(4) Ravi, Kuja, Guru and Sukra.
2 (5) Ravi, Kuja, Guru and Sani.
(6) Ravi, Kuja, Sukra and Sani.
(7) Ravi, Budha, Guru aad Sukra. p
^ (8) Rayi, Budha, Guru and Sani. i ,
(9) Ravi, Budha, Sukra and Sani. + |
(10) Ravi, Guru, Sukra and Sani? ^
e (il) Kuja, Budha, Guru and Sukra. ^
icc a WP State Museum, Lucknow
a

- 306 BRIHAT JATAKA . teh Shs t3
^ (12) Kuja, Budha, Guru and Sani.
(13) Kuja, Budha, “Sukra and Sani. ; ;
(14) Kuja, Guru, Sukra and Sani.
(15) Budha, Guru, Sukra and Sani. z
If five planets aspect the lagna we shall get 6 combinations thus—
(1) Ravi, Kuja, Budha, Guru and Sui.
d (2) Ravi, Kvia, Budha, Guru and Sani.
(3) Ravi, Keja, Budha, Sukra and Sani.
(4) Ravi, Kuja, Guru, Sukra and Sani.
(5) Ravi, Budha, Guru, Sukra and Sari.
(6) Kuja, Budha, Guru, Sukra and Sani.
If six planets aspect the. lagna there will be one.
combination. Thus twenty-two combinations are produced.
In a similar way it must be calculated for Chandra.
Properly speaking all these merge into two principal combinations. If the Lagna risesin Vargottama and 4 or more
planets aspect it; (1) if Chandra is Vargottama and four or
more planets aspect it; and (2) if the permutations and
combinations are taken a little more minutely, viz., taking
Chandra in Vargottama in each of the 12 signs we get 264
yogas, and a similar number of yogas for Lagna Vargottama
in each of the 12 signs. Thus a total of 528 combinations
dor royalty are obtained. by these conjunctions and aspects
of planete. Mandavya says that if powerful Lagna Or
“Chandra occupies, s,the Vargottama, aspected by four or more
planets (excepting Chandra) the combinations produce
_. mighty kings. (Vide ROYAL Honoscorzs, Pp. 29.) The
UP State Musetim, tuicknow? 2 x an
s

CC-O. |
ch. XÍ, SHAB Doman TP SPR A d ION Trust and eGangotri 307
EN d ;
following horoscope illustrates to some extent the” above
combinations. ?
KJ
Rah
| aug Sun | Saturn
do Kethu Mer.
RASI = AMSA ~
Rahu ^
JE = M Ba
ars oon || Birth Moon
Jupiter | MS- E Venus || Mars Kethu | venus
Saturn
,Lagna, Mars, Moon, .Venus are Vargottama, Jupiter,
Saturn and Mars in Rasi Lagna and ga ae in navamsa.
ay Si Sh Sa uf HE C
| gaffe: arare: |
iz uk SE ; waist TWAT
quus: aapa edt U8 N
9 Stanza 4.—1f Sani is in Kumbha, Ravi in
Mesha, Chandra in Vrishabha, and Lagna rises
in one of these, and Budha, Guru and Kuja are
‘in Mithuna, Simha and Vrischicka, there will be
combinations, for royalty. °- o
If Sani afd Chandra are in exaltation and:
. lagna rises in one of these signs and jfRavi and
Budha are in the 6th, and if Sukra; Kujasand.
a
5 5 WP Stdte Museum, mer

- 308 BRIHAT JATAKA [Ch. XI, St. 4
Guru are in Thula, Mesha and Kataka, they
generate two Raja yogas.
Chan Chan:
Ravi -| Budha Kuja ra
avi dra Lagna
Sani
PA i Guru
KY Guru
3 .| Sani | "Ravi
Kuja ^ “| Sukra | Budha
NOTES :
Here five Raja yogas are sketched. Sani in Kumbha,
Ravi in Mesha, Chandra in Vrishabha and lagna falls’ in
one of these, and Budha, Guru and Kuja are in Mithuna,
- Simha and Vrischika respectively. We get three Raja yogas
by lagna being placed (1) in Kumbha, (2) in Mesha, and
(3) in Vrishabha. If lagna falls in Thula, or Vrishabha
with Sani and Chandra in exaltation and if Budha and Ravi
are in 6th (Kanya) and Sukra, Kuja and Guru are in Thula;
Mesha and Kataka respectively, two Raja yogas arise. The
expression “in the 6th ” in this stanza is interpreted as, the
6th from the lagna, but the quotation from Badarayana'
glearly explains the position of Ravi and Budha in Kanya
as the 6th from Mesha. When Sukra is in Thula, Ravi and
"Budha cannot, be in Meena.
* 6th from* Vrishabha cannot be Kanya and so~the 6th must
* mean Kanya (6th by nature from Mesha).
UP State Musetim, Lucknow“ e

"o 5 gP State Museum, Lucknow
Ch. Xf; Stin Spblic Domai Aijizey OySagyu Trust and eGangotri 309,
dep der SANA Tue uou C
: fenore: (gah aa i
AAR uh Set enun mmu
Mae arem ARAR: ws UI
Stanza 5.—If Kuja is in Makara, Ravi and
Chandra in Dhanus, and Lagra rising in Makara
with Sani in it, the person becómesa king. If, in
the above combination, the Moon joins Mars in
birth, or if Saturn and the Moon are in the 7th, if
Jupiter is in Dhanus, and Aries becomes lagna with
- the Sun there exalted the „person becomes a king.
eee E a,
x Lagna
Kuja
L| | Il
Sani :
Kuja
Lagna
Ravi Sani
(Chandra Guru Chandra
ura
- In the above the other planets have not beensnentioned
and the intelligent astrologer has to take the oes ay
planets Ravi, Budha, Sukra, Rahu and Kejhû and then
predict Rajå yogas. Qe gS legs

CC-O. a i ae :
ES In Public DORIBAT J ATARA US ^t CARI St 6
c NOTES
Three separate combinations of planets are given here
for producing kings: d
(1) If Makára rises at birth with Sani and Kuja in it,
and if Ravi and Chandra occupy the 12th from it, viz.,
Dhanus. j
(2) If Makara rises with Kuja and Chandra-in it and
with Ravi in Dhanus.
^ (3) If Mesha rises with Kuja and Chandra and Sani
in Thula, and with Guru in Dhanus the person rises to
royal power or becomes a king. In the first part of the
stanza, the author uses “Yama Lagnay > which means,
according to some, the houses of Yama (Sani) or Makara
and Kumbha, and according to others, it may be any lagna
with Yama (Sani) in it. This view is supported by Badara- <
yana. Bhattotpala prefers the first as meaning Makara
alone, and such a view is clearly supported by Mandavya.
a at o aai: 1
seemed ferrara: |
Wy we GA NAGAI
TUE Taat vmm Sew d M
Stanza 6.—1f Taurusrises at birth with the
Moon in it, and the Sun, Jupiter and Saturn are
in the 4th, 7th and 10th respectively, the person
certainly becomes a king. If Capricorn is birth
with Saturn in it, and 3, 6, 9 or 12' are occupied
by the Moon, ,étc., the peison becomes a famous,
- good» naturéd, and prominent king.
o c
UP State Museum, Lucknow”
e

Ch. XG. iAPublic Doma bldhiz X yu Trust and eGangot | L ^
TE NOTES T
Two Raja yogas (combinations) are’stated in this verse.
En (iy ole Vfishabha is Lagna with Chandra in it, Ravi in
Simha, Guru in Vrischika and Sani in Kurhbha, the person
becomes certainly a king. (2) If Makara is Lagna with
Sani in it, Chandra in Meena, Kuja in Mithuna, Budha in
Kanya, Guru in Dhanus, and Sukra and Ravi in any houses,
the person becomes a famous and mighty king with good
and generous qualities. This is *clearly explained by
Mandavya. >
Kethu | oon Kuja
Sri Krishna's
Horoscope
Budha
Kuja | Rahu Ravi
> gy Sch ht arsed afta
. gge] eu Sema gai |
* geil tale gen ani RI | A
| aaa aa as qma t wal
E Uri m MESE
Stanza 7.—1f Guru with Chandra is 1n
Dhanus, *Kuja in Makara, and Meena or Kanya
° ry
2 ` WP StBtesMuseum, Lucknow T

312 0C-0. In Public DREAM WSK A Trust anfGbaXibySt. 8
become lagna with Sukra or Budha respectively
two Raja yogas arise. < If Kuja and Sani occupy
the Sth, Guru, Chandra and Sukra join the 4th, F
if Kanya risés as Lagna with Budha in it, the
person becomes,a king with good character.
NOTES ,
There are three combinations given here for royalty.
If Meena is Lagna^with Budha in it, Sani and Kuja in
the 5th and Guru,” Chandra and Sukra occupy 4th or
Dhanus, the person becomes a good king. Some of these
combinations found in navamsa kundali have also produced
kings of native states, vide TLLUSTRATIVE Horoscopes, Pp. 70.
ai et en Tema afd- ^
ARS ag vam: qm ae! d
sS at Tai ARTETA mra Í
gA T SA AAAS gars || e t
Stanza 8.—If Meena becomes Lagna with
Chandra in it, Sani,- Kuja and Ravi, are in
Kumbha, Makara and Simha respectively the.
person born will rule the earth.
If Mesha becomes Lagna with Kuja ih t ;
with Curai in Kataka.
Li P^ ^
or 4, A
If Kos rses with Guru in it, with Kuja in
Mesha, a good king will be born. e
UP State Museum, fucknowe e
H

ae
Ch. XG-StuBbublic Domai Adteed YGAayu Trust and eGangotri313
NOTES
Three Raja yogas are sketched here.
Chandra e
Lagna
Sani
RASI 1
Kuja Ravi
ye Sfate Museum, Lucknow
a

314 CC-O. In Public DEPART Ag ASRA" Trust amcueaxerst. 9
With other planets in any order. "oq
With other planets | in any order. 5
In all these cases, peculiar powers seem to characterise
the angular positions of the planets, which enable persons
born under such combinations to become kings. Kings are of
* various descriptions and their nature, extent of their empire
-or Kingdom and their resources will be determined by the
strength of the planets generating these royal combinations.
Sri Rama's horoscope is an illustration.
hf GA AT S ERES TATA DO
NGISA sui enter westapm t LN
« Stanza 9.—If Cancer is birth with Jupiter in
it and if the Moon, Venus and Mercury are ifi the
llth homse; ard the Sun is in Aries, a mighty
king will bé:born. c
j it State Museum, Fucknow* e *
e
"w

Ch. xit Sunc DomaiR Aijiizey OS a[ayu Trust and eGangotri3] 5
LJ ^ o
. NOTES "
There is one Raja yoga here.
5 Moon
Sun Venus
Mer.
35, Birth
| Jupiter
RASI * Md
LJ
» With the other planets in any order.
. This is a powerful combination and the prince becomes
a great king.
fuere e
Ga NG NSA |
gadhaha gara
qf qup ayam ART: ke N
"Stanza 10.—1f Capricorn is birth with Saturn
in it and ,if Aries, Cancer and Leo ats
combined with their lords and if Gemini and
Libra are occupied by Mercury “and Venus the
a
person bécomes a renowned ruler. < > E
a
a a
. J X
3 T A WP StateMuseum, Lucknow
a

f
316 CC-O. In Public DenreiqpisitizpA PERA" Trust ds 10
& NOTES ^
This is a good'conjunction of planets ang the king born
must become famous.
| Mars Mercury
| Moon
€ RASI {=
Birth |*
Saturn Sun
6 Venus
a
With Jupiter in any othef house.
Reading the commentaries of Bhattotpala, I expected.an
explanation as regards the relative positions of the Sun and
Mercury. Mercury rever goes beyond 28? of the Sun either
` in the front or in the rear. Then again, in this combination
Mercury is placed in Gemini while Venus is placed in Libra.
This combination can never happen. It is explained thus.
Now in any house Mercury can only be 28? distant from the.
Sun. Suppose the Sun is placed in the 10? of Leo. ‘Then’
the most distant position that Mercury can attain would be
the 28th? from him, i.e., Mercury can go back as far as the.
12th? of Cancer.
^ Venus never goes beyond 47° from the Sun and thvs thoe
extreme limit at which Venus can be placed from the Sun in
front would be 4T , L.e., Venus may be found in the 27th? of
Virgo., Thus the greatest distance at which Mercury and
e
UP State Museum, PAKOON e o
e
e

CC-O.
Ch. xl, St. fi PERRETARY MOVEMENTS eGangoti 1, 5
Venus may be imagined to be will be 28--47—75 Aegrees.
Thus if Mercury is in the 12th° of Cancer, Venus will be in
. the 27th? of Virgo. This is clearly explained by Bhattotpala
in St. 6, Chap. VII (see notes to St. 6, Chap. VII). But here
there are three clean rasis separating Yenus and Mercury
and the mean distance must be more than 90 degrees which
appears absurd according to present movements of the
planets. Then again Mercury is placed at a distance of
more than 30° from the Sun which is also absurd. But
there are some places in this work where Varahamihira
gives conjunction of planets which are impossible under
present conditions but which probably might have been
possible under a different set of planetary movements with
. velocities considerably differing from those of the present.
* Varahamihira says in such places that as these yogas
were found recorded by the ancient Maharishis he has
placed them also in his works but which, he clearly says,
could not happen as being opposed to-present mathematical
calculations relating to planetary bodies. The present confusion in calculating the position of planets is mainly due
to there being no definite Ayanamsa calculated according to
any definite principle. The Ayanamsa varies from 20° to
'23* and no two almanacs agree even with regard to the
movements of the Sun on whom depends all calculations.
„Thè predicative portion becomes very difficult and that is
why many of the predictions of the astrologers who depend
„On their particular almanacs, which are all different, do net
tally hor happep. We have to get a standard alinanac.
E OEC RUE EUIS h:
| Asa Aà TA AAA Ba LRN.
a
A YUP State Museum, Lucknow
a

d by S. Trust G
PLE PT Sev
Stanza 11.—1f exalted Budha occupies lagna,
Sukra occupies the 10th, Chandra and Gurv join
in the 7th and Sani and Kuja occupy ‘the SUN E :
person becomes a Raja.
c NOTES
One Raja yoga is sketched here and the Sun may be
placed in any house. Very rarely can such a combination
as Budha being in the fourth from Sukra may happen.
Theoretically this may not ‘be improbable as the distance
Guru
Chandra Kuja | Rahu
may be within 75° from each other. Sukra may be in the
28th degree of Mithuna. Budha must be in the 15th degree,
of Kanya in order to be exalted and so the difference:
between Sukra and Budha would be 2+30+30+15 or 77
which is impossible.
c AÑ SS ATT TTT:
| far guest Seeds 0007
TVA: Tela aaa
waft ATARE: 1 22 f
UP State Museum, Lucknow“ r
e

Ch. XE; St: Ig zpblic Doma. Agkiz¥eOGPerayu Trust and eGangot319 ,
Stünza 12.—In the combinations for royalty
sketched before, persons born in poverty will
. become kings; much more so persons born in
royal families. The combinations to be given
hereafter will make men kings who are born in
royal fasnilies and others born in ordinary families
will become equal to kings — *
NOTES °
In all the conjunctions of planets stated in the last
eleven stanzas, even persons born in humble families become kings and.therefore, remarks Varahamihira, there is
no doubt whatever of persons becoming rulers who are born
. in royal families. The following horoscope illustrates how
born poor, Hyder became a king. ^
o
RASI
Sani Ravi
Chandra
Kuja
Guru
Budha
Lord of bitth is in 4 aspected by Sani, lords.of 4 and 3.
He had no motherly love. Lord of father 3s also lord of
12 and is in the 6th from Bhagya. Chapdra isedebilitated
but with Kuja and Guru loses his debilitation. There is
3 n AP Stibte Museum, Lucknow
Birth

-320 BRIHAT JATAKA [en XI, St. 13
Gurumángala yoga, Gajakesari yoga and the 2nd house
has 6 planets. He was able to leave a cash of 80 crores
of rupees; many crores of rupees worth of jewellery and .
gems, million well-trained troops, 300 strong ferts, well
garrisoned and an empire from Krishna to Cape Comorin
yielding an annual revenue of 30 crores (at present about
600 crores) to his son Tippu who born rich, lost all.
Whatever may be thé rationale of the political codes, and
the moral codes taking their stand upon politics there is
not the slightest doubt that even fools born in royal families
have greater chances of becoming rulers than the best of
men born in the humbler spheres of life. The starting
advantage possessed by royal family men is tremendous and
throws the best men in the humblér families far behind .
them to achieve distinction. "Thus the fool of an emperor's
son is at once declared to succeed his father while the best
men in the empire will be simply asked to obey that fool.
and be guided by him. Therefore Varahamihira realises this
- inequality and ascribes royal powers to persons only "when
the planetary combinations are very very powerful. Thus
in all the previous Raja yogas, he says, that men will
become kings or rulers who are born in such combinations.
But in the combinations he is going to mention hereafter, -
only those who are born in royal families become kings
while those who are born in poor families will rise up to.
great eminence and will be similar to kings but will not
become actual kings.
echten ata |
ie venari dan a fé Il $3 UI
UP State Museum, Lucknow « D ^ A

Ch. XI, St. 13] RAJA YOGA 321°
Stanza 13.—If there are three or more
powerful exalted or Moolatrikona planets in a
"horoscope a person born in a royal family will
become a king. If this number is five or more,
then persons born in ordinary families will
become rulers. If these planets are powerless the
persons will not be kings but wealthy men.
À NOTES
There must be three or more powerful planets in
exaltation or Moolatrikona to make a man king when he is ©
born in a royal family. if there are five or more similar
planets in a horoscope, the man beeomes a ruler wherever
he.may be born. But if the three or more planets in
exaltation or Moolatrikona are not powerful (Kala, Nisargika, Chesta, Dik, etc.), then even a man born in a royal
family will not become a king but will remain a wealthy
man. All the planets need not be in exaltation or Moolatrikona. Suppose two are exalted and one is in Moolatrikona, does the person become a ruler? If born in a
‘royal family he will become a king, but in other families
he will become a wealthy man. If there are three planets
.in Moolatrikona and two planets in exaltation the person
becomes a king wherever he may be born. If there are
more planets, then certainly Raja yoga happens. , z
; x YP State Museum, Lucknow
LJ
g
o
D

CC-O. In Public Domain. Digiti Tu aT G
.322 BRIHAT JATARA ost ore "RES. 14
The following horoscope illustrates the above principle.
[LE a ANE EET
Kethu | Saturni
Moon
| Mars
Jupiter BA
——— RASI :
f
| | Rahu
Birth | Venus |Mercury
| Sun
Lo pp p
Two planets Guru and Budha are exalted. Sukra is
in Moolatrikona, Ravi and Kuja though debilitated have -
neechabhanga Raja yoga, which has made the native a
Dewan of 3 states and hold one of the most enviable
appointments. 9
dara sb Sat ote e ge RT
wm SH ws pi femp vetas Ui N
Stanza 14.—If Aries is lagna with the Sunhalf-rising and Moon in it, Mars in Capricorn
and Jupiter in Sagittarius the person born -in aroyal family becomes a king.
UM. NOTES E
Mesha ‘must-be the lagna with Chandra in it and Ravi
disingowith his disc half visible in the horizon, Kuja im
A : o
o
UP State Museum, Luckfiow x e^ -

1 E XP ji Domain, Rigitzed by Sarayu Trust and eGangotri 323 A
Makara mand Guru in Dhanus to constitute thes above
combination. A person born în ordinaty family in such a
time will becéme wealthy and influential. The word used
“in the original is /ak/ia which means the'Sun half visible
Leo or Simha. This is also acceptable as it forms
Moolatrikena for Ravi.
Chandr
a
= RASI ^ -
Kuja aee Ravi
Š = | ME
: Guru | Sukra Budha s
c h TITA i À TX |
gangna: Qus eal A: N O4 N
x Stanza 15.—1f Sukra occupies his house
which forms the 4th from Lagna, Chandra occupies the 9th and the rest are in the 3rd, Ist and
“11th houses, the person becomes a king. S
ST . NOTES" : :
This is possible for two lagnas. , Kuribha» as lagne
will have Sukra in the 4th in Vrishabha, Or Kataka as lagna
will have Sükra in the 4th in Thula. In this combination a
o E J EI
po o WP Stàte Museum, Lucknow
in the eastern horizon. Some read it as /aya which means `

324 n Fuse DOSRIHAT JATARA ^ TCR. Xf, St. 16
person orn in royal family will become a king “and one
born in any other family will become wealthy.
P
Chandra | Sani e
Lagna
Guru e^
———— RASI
p Ravi
Sukra | Budha 3
KujaIn Stanza 15, Kumbha Lagna will not be so good as
Kataka Lagna. G
AA 4H wage dier pu TaN!
guitarra didam qua: wea wee”
Stanza 16.—If powerful Budha is in Lagiia, a
powerful benefic in the 9th and the rest of the
planets in the 2nd, 9th, 3rd, 6th, 10th or 11th, the
person born in a royal family will become a.
good and charitable king. à |
NOTES e
_ The lagna must be combined with Budha while Guru”
or Sukra or both must be in the 9th. The rest of the
planets must be in the 2nd, 3rd, 6th, 9th, 10th or 11th°
nouse or in ‘two or three of these houses in any order.
The idea seéms to. be that the remaining five planets must be
in any one or more of the houses named and not outside.
r
UP State Museum, Lucknow a n 6 0
n^

ch, XY, St i Domain. Rigitzed by Sarayu Trust and eGangotri 325,
Some read sukha for subha and make the 4th house
occupied by a benefic. Under such ?a combination the
person will become a good natured king if born in a royal
' family and a wealthy man in other families.
girah uenRendt
~ IRANRAN: |
TS Tt & AAA :
TAA SANAN Jl 09 I
Stanza. 17.—1f Vrishabha is lagna and
Chandra, Guru, Sani and other planets occupy
respectively (the 1st, 2nd, 6th and 11th), the person becomes a Raja. “If Guru is in the 4th, Moon
and Ravi in the 10th and Sani'in Lagna and other
planets in the 11th the person becomes a king.
NUM NOTES |,
Seo combinations are sketched here for Raja yoga. In
the first we have:
Sukra
Ravi agna
Kuja does Guru
Budha
lr CREME Ist RASI e
a “a
Sani
id 5
x e dP Sfate Museum, Lucknow
e
o
ô

e
- 326 BRIHAT JATAKA [Ch. XI, St. 18
There are three planets exalted here and the person
becomes a king. - A A
In the 2nd combination we have :
Guru
Here the lagna is not given and I have simply put it
in Makara. The lagna, therefore, may be placed in any
house, only there should be Sani in it. Mesha lagna gives
- better results. Nr
Wang: Wasa:
ant us facit fé ez |
TATA Aaaa
kasuse seni TN
^ Stanza 18.—If Chandra, Sani and Guru are,
in the 10th,; 11th and']st respectively, Budha and
Kuja in ^the 2nd and Sukra and Ravi in the 4th,
the person becomes a king. If Kuja fand „Sani
UP State Museum, Lucknow - T Ls :

U
e XL St. 18) Domelnan Ad SA Yu Trust and eGangotri
are in Lagna, Chandra, Guru, Sukra, Ravi and
Budha are inthe 4th, 7th, 9th, 10th and 11th
. houses respectively the person becomes a Raja.
. NOTES f
Two royal combinations are given here.
Chandra | Sani
Ist RASI
? " Budha
“Sukra,
Ravi
Here we notice the same objection of positing Budha
in thaedrd house from Ravi backwards and thus giving him
a minimum distance of more than 30 degrees which is not
possible now. It is curious that even a great scholar and
mathematician like Bhattotpala does not point out these
‘inconsistencies. The author makes no mention of it. But
as Bhattotpala clearly says that the greatest distance
between Ravi and Budha can only be 25 degrees, all
` combinations in which this measurement is transgressed
must be taken to be those which the ancient Maha Risltis
ehave written down in their works and which, have bech
stated by Varaħamihira in accordance with them °
(See commentaries of Bhattotpala gn St? %, Ch. VII
and my notes on that). 4 E o 7
uP State Myseum, Lucknow
LJ
o

e
CC-O. In Public Dori] HiditiPeg ASAKA Trust aft Gakobrrt, 19
In the 2nd combination we have the following positions :
Budha Chandra};
In the first as well asin the second thé lagna has been
simply given by me by way of illustration. Any lagna may
be taken provided the planets are given their allotted
places. In all these combinations kingly power must be
_ predicted only for those who are born in royal families but
for others born in humbler surroundings great wealth and
. position may safely be predicted. a
PACTTATRMA NISUS UII TATE |
aprire maa amat ata REEN || 9 ||
Stanza 19.—The person gets the royal power’
in the antardasa of the most powerful planet -or
of the planet who combines in the 10th or the’
Ist. He loses that power in the antardasa of the.
planet wo is in unfriendly -or neecha house because such. period is called Chidra dasa. Then he
must seek protection from a powerful king.
A
UP State Museum, RUSKNOWA -

a
Ch. KIC S.I Biblic DomaiR AHAz OArayu Trust and eGangottk»9
uA NOTES 3
By this stanza the author'enables the astrologer to fix
the period when a person may get kingly power and when
' he may expect to lose it or try to get over the misfortune.
Take the planets in the 1st and 10th and whichever is the
stronger, then predict the acquisition of power during his
antardasa» But his antardasas may come several times and
then the author says, that antardasa must be fixed as powergiving which appears as the most powerful with reference
to Gochara movements. If there ase no planets in the 1st
and 10th then find out which of the whole lot of planets
is the strongest and ascribe the power to him during his
antardasa. Such kingly power er office will be lost when
the antardasa of a planet which occupies an unfriendly or
debilitated rasi intervenes. +
. The following horoscope illustrates the fall of the Czar
pf Russia, Nicholas II :
pant ura | Sui
a
e OA SS e RR
At birth he had Budha dasa for 16-3-15 ard he lost
his life and kingdom in Ravi dasa Sukra bhukthi. o Note.
Sani
Y * UP State Museum, Lucknow Y
* MU A

e
.330 BRIHAT JATAKA (eh: Xf; St. 20
how the Sun is afflicted as birth lord with Saturif's aspect
and how Sukra and Ravi are in 2nd and 12th and how
Sani aspects lagna as well as the 10th from it^
This is called Chidra dasa which means accident or
misfortune as well as a hole and therefore he gets into unfortunate position by losing his power. Then he must seek
protection from a powerful king and thus try to “get tid of
his threatened misfortune. Bhagavan Gargi clearly speaks
toa similar effect and the matter is also referred to by
Varahamihira in his Yatra a book on travelling he has written.
yes AAA SA
Rah find Wat ste ae |
TRF: BURA q- :
safe Tegen Panda TU Ro UI
Stanza 20.—]f Guru, Sukra or Budha is in
- Lagna, Sani in the 7th and Ravi in the 10f% the
person will enjoy his life well. If beneficial signs
are powerful and fall in kendras and malefics
occupy cruel signs, the person will be master of.
hunters, thieves and wealth.
NOTES
These are important combinations. The conversation
of Alexander the Great and the robber may be remembered.
There are” some persons who enjoy their life very well
although ‘they ‘may have no money and there are others who
become maste-s cz leaders of wild tribes, hunters and thieves
or dacoits and? become wealthy and very powerful. „They
e r
UP State Museum, Lucknow, A

Ch. XI, St. 56] ^^ Domaj. Pik pyser Trust and eGangotri
command hundreds or thousands of persons, live ir? wealth
and put on all the luxuries of'rulers and kings. Guru or
. Sukra 01 Budha must be inlagna, Sani must be in the 7th
and Ravi.must occupy the 10th. Now, when Ravi is in 10,
Sukra and Budha can never be in the lagna as already
shown. Hence some say that the lagnas must be Leo,
Taurus, Libra, Gemini and Virgo. Even under Vajra yoga,
similar combinations are shown. Gargi also says that the
houses of Guru, Sukra and Budha sould be strong and be
kendras to the birth lagna and evil ptanets should be in the
houses of Mars, Sun and Saturn, to produce a noted bandit
or dacoit leader. There seems to be some inconsistency. A
truant may be worse than a bandit chief and it is difficult to
say who can be called a constituted authority. Persons born
under such conjunctions of planets will enjoy theirlives well
even when they are poor or quiet. In the latter part of the
stanza the beneficial signs namely Vrishabha, Thula, "Dhanus
and Meena, must fall in the kendras,.,while the evil planets
must@ccupy evil signs. Then the person will lead dacoits,
or hunters, get money and live happily. There is also the
simple dictum that one should not examine a horoscope
which has neither Budha anc Sukra in Lagna, Guru in
' kendra, or Kuja in the 10th, as that horoscope is not going
to be useful to society. The science is meant to help really
deserving men whose rise is impeded by certain bad
` influences which are capable of being neutralised and which
may then lead the man to power and wealth so that he may
* help'humanity at large. , ?
a
. * UP State Museum, Lucknow
. è o

e
e
CHAPTER XII 1
NABHASA YOGAS
ATA ATTA:
A anaa kafe
ja fara aa: SI:
qA vean
a fre Freue gem ur odi N
Stanza I.—By combinations of two, three
and four the multipies of 9, 10, 8 by 3, 3and 4
respectively will be the number of Nabhasa yogas
obtained by this process. Yavanas have described
- 1800 varieties but I will describe them here briefly.
NOTES
Nabhasa yogas are of feur varieties (1) Akruti, (2) Akruti, Sankhya, (3) Akruti, Sankhya, Asraya, (4) and Akruti, °
Sankhya, Asraya, and Dala. There are 20 of Akruti, 7 of
Sankhya, 3 of Asraya and 2 of Dala, 9 x 3,10x3and 8x4—
27, 30 and 32. By taking combinations of two planets '
we get 27, by three 30 and by four 32. ThusAkruti is 20
and Sankhya is 7, the two together will give 27. Add tc this“
Asraya yogas 3, we get 30. Add to this two Dalayogas we
get 32. Gla Xaxanas have described these under 1800
varieties. Sucbi-Dwaja declares that Nabhasa yogas are
UP State Museum, Lucknow ;

ci xti, ri ep BIN SENA YOGA Trust and "T 3
countless? Purana Yavanas give 22 Akruti yogas, Sankhyayogas a at 127. This is shown as below :—
LJ
1. Ekavikalpaja Yogas 7) 5
. 2. Dvivikalpaja Yogas — .. ‘al This Vikalpa cal3. Trivikalpaja Yogas 55 6) |a culation is shown
4. Chaturvikalpaja Yogas 35 mote elaborately
5. Pancha Vikalpaja Yogas 21 | in Sunapha and
6. Shadvikalpaja Yogas ... 7 | Anapha yogasof
7. Saptavikalpaja Yoga ... 1j the Moon.
This 127 added to 23 Akriti yogas make 150.
As the lagna may'fall in each of the 12 houses and as
these 150 yogas happen for each of the rasis they have
multiplied 150 x 12=1800 yogas. Varahamihira says that
has made an abstract of all these yogas and given them as
32, All the other yogas are incorporated in them and
thereSefe they can be easily grasped when the whole chapter
is carefully perused.
tadas THAT TATANG qmm |
dk: aaae) agati HAT TRT lR I
~ Stanza 2.—If the planets.are in Chara, etc.,
'Rajü, Musala and Nala yogas are formed
Jespectively „according to ‘Satya. These are
Asraya yogas. Parasara mentions: two yogas
as Dala under sruk ahd sarpa When ‘the benefics and nialefics are in kendras respectively. mente:
` 2 "UP State pasun, Lucknow *
D) id D o

Ign CC-O. In Public DM THAT RA Tes Eh RI Sc 2
d NOTES TE
The stanza i$ very Compressive and baffles easy
translation. There are three sets of house$, viz., ‘Chara, é
Sthira and Dwiswabhava, or movable, fixed and, common
signs. This presupposes all the planets in kendras from
any lagna to form any of the three yogas mentioned by
Satyacharya. It is very rare to get such a Horoscope.
According to Satyacharya it will be Rajju yoga when
all the planets occupy*he movable houses; it is Musala
when all the planets are in fixed houses and when all the
planets occupy common signs it will be Nala. Planets in
these three cases need not be found in all the movable, fixed
or common signs. There® are four movable signs Aries,
Cancer, Libra and Capricorn. All the planets may be in any
one or two or three or four of these houses in any order to
constitute Rajju The word Rajju in Sanskrit means a rope,
Musala’ means pistol and Nala means grass. Satyachaiya
gives the results of these different yogas which are of great
importance to be omitted here. Gargi lucidly explaisz-these
in his inimitable yet homely style. One who is born in
Rajju willbe unjust, resident in foreign countries and
wealthy. Musala produces-men of self-respect and wealth.
Nala makes persons short of limbs or long limbed, skilful,
hoarders of treasure and jenjoying life. If all the benefics
are in kendras the yoga is called sruk. If all the malefics
are in kendras it is called sarpa. Bhattotpala, with his vast’
Jearning, gives the following summary, which otherwise
should have been very difficult to make Qut. He quotes”
from Baóarayana, „Parasara, Gargi, Manitha and Satyacharya. Afl these are agreed on the points at issue and
„hence? Bhattotpala explains the latter half of this stanza in
UP State Museum, Lucknow ; r
T

Ch. xfi Scope "NUAGE HAR Rey eee" Trust and eirca
simple Innguage. If three quadrants are occupied by
Mercury, Jupiter and Venus 'without àny malefic, either
with them or fn the other kendra it constitutes Sruk yoga
' which gives enjoyment in life and all that is pleasant. This
js not possible as Budha or Sukra can never be in two
different kendras and if they are in one kendra and Jupiter
in another then only two quadrants will be occupied.
Look at the I and II horoscopes : .
| Kethu | | Sani * Rui
Sani | Chandra Budha | Sukra
=. e 5 Rahu
Wuja
RRE : I
promising irgi
horoscope ET
Budha : °W | Guru
| Rahu RA Kethu
| ME EE
When the three malefics Saturn, Mars and the Sun
occupy the three kendras without any benefics with them
pr in the 4th kendra, it is called Sarpa yoga and produces
a sorrowful and unpleasant life. The Sruk yoga is also
called a Mala (garland) yoga. Only three good and three
evil planets are mentioned and not the Moon. He is
both good and bad as he waxes or wanes and his presence
pr absence makes no difference in the yoga. : ®
Suppose the three malefics occupy, the three kendras
and a Full Moon occupies the 4th kendwa. He does not
disturb the Sarpa yoga.
e e UP,State Museum, Lucknow $
Suppose the three henefics occupy, `

e
“336 NABHASA YOGA [Ch. XII, St. 3
the three quadrants. and a waek Moon joins the 4th kendra
then the yoga is not also disturbed. In fact. all the great
Maharishies quoted above have not taken any notice of -
Chandra in this connection. e
It is really not clear as to how the Moon (Manahkaraka) governing the [mind should have been emitted in
these yogas, as many,of our miseries are more mental than
physical. p
WT AAA: TA
TAMAT ANG | 007
PRT: TAKA OEAaes + vang Fat at 3 I :
Stanza 3.—Asraya yogas, according to some,
are really incorporated in the Yava, Abja, Vajra,
Andaja, Golaka, etc., to be stated herecfter.
Dala yogas have no separate significance, according to some, as the results of benefics and malefics occupying the kendras have already been.
indicated.
NOTES 5
. Some take objection for describing Dala yogas sepaaately as it is well known that benefics in kendras produce.
good while malefics there cause evil. Bhattotpala justifies
their enufperation here by Varahamihira in this way. All
Nabhasa yogas. h£ve permanent influences and fheir results
good Or bad afe manifested in all periods and sub-periods.
UP State Museym; Lucknow- A A oe
ro

Ch. XII, St. 4] NABHASA YOGA 337°
Dala yogas have a similar influence and therefore they have
been included in this chapter by the author. Parasara
declares that all Nabhasa yogas have a continuous effect as
opposed to the influences of particular planetary periods
and sub-periods.
SATANG TARA ISAT d N
^ Stanza 4.—When two adjacent quadrants A
are combined with all the planets it goes under
the name of Gada.
"Í will be called Sakata when all the planets
occupy the Ist and the 7th houses. When all the
planets occupy the 4th and the 10th it is called
Vihaga. If all the planets occupy the Ist, 5th
and 9th houses it is called Sringataka. If all the
Planets are in 5th and 9th it is called Hala. So sey
the learned in aslap.
à NOTES "T 5 ra
The readers should be careful in adjesti ps the results
for all these yogas. In Sanskrit yoga is derived from yuj.
^ UP State Museum, Lucknow
a
e A^ J om

e
CC-O. In Public Domain. Digitized b RE u Trust and eGangotri
- 338 BRIHAT JATA [Ch. AI, St. 4
to join" or combine. Most of these yogas are nfechanical
or chemical combinations and are produced by the interchanging of the various planetary rays whose junction is.
designated as a yoga or combination. Ifa planét occupies
the Ist degree oft Aries and another occupies the same
it must naturally be expected that some interchange takes
place there producing certain definite results. The positions of other planets have also great power to modify
these conjunctional results. Varahamihira here sketches
many such combinations and indicates that their influences are permanent and effective. But the readers
have to be careful. Suppose Mesha is Lagna with
Ravi, Budha, Kuja and Sukra there and the rect of
the planets are in Kataka. Kindly consider the splendid
positions occupied here as against the same yoga appearing
in the second horoscope.
SR
UP State Museum, uéknow- -
e E -

Ch. XII, St. 4] NABHASA YOGA 339*
a
a He 7 5
J o NI
2nd RASI
s, Guru
Chandra
Sani ^ 4
“Lagna?
Ravi
Sukra
Budha
Kuja
LÀ
In both these horoscopes the Ist and the 4th houses
contain all the planets. But the relative strength, aspect
and, position of all the planets change considerably and
although the yoga is Gada the same results must not be
predicted. 9
In the Ist tbe Sun is exalted, Kuja is in Moolatrikona,
Guru»? exalted and Chandra occupies his own house;
that will be a splendid combination for anybody to have.
But in the second Ravi is debilitated, Kuja occupies an
unfriendly sign, Guru is debilitated, while Chandra is in
@ cruel sign and cruel associations. The results must
differ and they do. In the I Rasi, Ravi is lord of 5*
Chandra lord of 4, Budha lord of 3 and 6, Kuja lord of 1
and 8,” Sukra lord of 2 and 7, and Guru lord of 9 and 12
occupies exaltation with lord of,10 and 11. Note the,
combinations of lords of 5 and 7, 9 and 10 andel and 5,
forming Raja yogas. In the II, lords of 1, 2, 42, T, 7 and”
8 (except 2 and 7 Kuja) are all bad. Theslosd of 3 and 6
is with lord of 4 and 5 and lord of 10. ,Henee one has to.
9 WP State Museum, Lucknow e
a ə R nA
E a
EYE aa a A gg A Ag aga agan

y
I, St. 5
ae
“340 BRIHAT JATA
be careful in giving the results, though in both the horoscopes we have the Gada yoga. Take a practical illustration.
There is village magistrate who has nominal powers, there .
is town magistrate who has a larger area and powers and
there is a district magistrate whose powers are still greater
and whose jurisdiction must embrace a wider area. All
go under the name of magistrates but there is à world of
Gifference in power, pay, personal respect and status in life.
Thus the result of Gada may be produced on a small
or large scale according as the planets are powerful or
weak. There are four Gada yogas: (1) when all the planets
are in the Ist and 4th, (2) when they are in 4th and 7th,
(3) when they are in the 7th and 10th, and (4) when they
are in the 10th and Ist. All these yogas are called Afriti
yogas. The names arë indicative of the forms the planets
present when occupying the different signs. Gada means
a club. Sakata means a cart, Vihaga indicates a bird, Srinz
gataka denotes a tridngle, and Hala means a plough. | Tf all
the planets are not in the houses named here then this combination is not formed and its results must not be predicted.
TREAT GAINS aferdita: |
aud g PRAMANA safe estem: 14
Stanza 5.—When benefics are in first, and.
.Seventh and malefics are in fourth and tenth it is
called Vajra. If the planets are reversed then it
is called Yava, If the planets are mixed it is
called Kamala. If the planets are outside kendras
“at is called Vapi
UP State Museum, ‘Lucknow’ e A

"e a
Ch. XII, St. 6] NABHASA YOGA 341.
a
s NOTES D
In the Vajra the benefics must be In the 7th and 1st
while ihe malefics are placed in the 4th and the 10th. In
Yava the malefics, must be in the 1st and 7th while benefics
must be in the 4th and 10th. If all the planets, benefics
and malefics occupy all the four kendras in any order it is
called Kamala. Benefics and malefics may join or be
separate in the houses. © à
When all the planets occupy , either Panaparas or
Apoklimas it is called Vapi. In all these cases there must be
no planet ogitside the specified houses. For Panaparas and
Apoklimas (see St. 18, Ch. I) , ;
2, 5, 8, 11 are Panaparas
a 3, 6, 9, 12 are Apoklimas
3, 6, 10, 11 are Upachayas 1
6, 8, 12 are Dusthanas
Now 6 is an Apoklima, Upachaya and Dusthana,
but how should it be considered. 11 also comes under two
headings. Inallthese cases we have to take the strength
of the planet in the shadvargas and give him the good
points among these. Six comes ünder Upachaya and is not
so bad-as 8 and 12.
* TATA WD THAT: WU |
agina aaa wat: Kan NG o c
Stanza 6. ii havê given these Vajra.yogas,
etc., in accordance with older sciences, ‘but how
can Budha and Sukra be in the 4th from the Sun US
o
e
OP StBteMugoum, locken

.342 CC-O. In Public DARIA TAPEKA" Trust ORR.
c NOTES Le
Vajra and Yava do not happen but ,Varahamihira
says he has recorded them under the sanction of thé older :
sciences. The author uses Adi after Vajra to show that
all such improbable or impossible combinations have been
mentioned by him, as he found them described by Maya,
Manitha, Yavana and Satyacharya. When the Sun is in a
house, Mercury car only be at a distance of 28 degrees
from him either in thé East or in the West and therefore
either in the same sigfi or in the 2nd or 12th sign occupied
by the Sun. Venus has been shown already not to move
more than 47 degrees from the Sun, and tHerefore the
utmost distance he can be found from the Sun will be
either in the 3rd house or 11th from the Sun. A few points
may be advantageously discussed here with referenct to
astronomy and astrology. Varahamihira was a great
mathematician and composed a work called Pancha
Siddhantika. This means that it gives the purport of five
Siddhantas which he has named in St. 3, Ch. II 68=Brihat
Samhita. They are (1) Poulasa, (2) Romaka, (3) Vasishta,
(4) Saura and (5) Paithamaha. Vasishta is venerable and
has written various leareed works on astronomy and
astrology. Paithamaha or Brahma and Saura or Surya;
have also written Siddhantas. Combinations of planets
are given here which cannot be found under the present
velocities and movements of planets. The question *therefore now arises as to whether Varahamihira blindly quotes
combinations which he found recorded in the older works
‘of Vasishta afd Gargi, Badarayana and Parasara, or didjhe
seriously “béligveein their possibility in the earlier centuries
of the earth’ Se creation. Where a thing is recorded which
* e c
UP State Museum, Lucknow c >
he

Ch. XU, St. 6] NABHASA YOGA 343 ,
looks quite absurd on its face whatever may >be the
reverence to the professor who'recorded'it, the duty of the
later writers i$ to simply omit them as savouring of impos-
” sibility under the present mathematics. Another important
question which crops up at thisfstage is whether Vasishta,
Surya, Paithamaha, Vyasa, Parasara, Marichi, Kasyapa,
Chandra and other eminent astronomers recorded facts,
which happened during their time or whether they simply
blindly recorded combinations of planets which they found
? in still older works of which we have not got now even
bare references. These are really extremely difficult but
very interésting questions which better men than myself
may attempt to ‘answer. ^
It strikes me from a careful perusal of the existing
astronomical and astrological. literature, that it would be
unreasonable to apply one set of physical conditions, and
their results to another set of similar conditions, after a
jong lapse of time in the womb of which may be marked
an inexMaustible series of changes. ‘In the Mahabharata,
Vyasa deliberately says that Budaprakaso Jagadaprakasaha,
i.e., when Mercury shines well—visible to the naked eye—
the destruction of the world may be predicted. (See St. 1,
“Ch. VII, Brihat Samhita.) Kasyapa and Vriddha Gargi
| "give similar opinions. See also Romasa. Vyasa is an
astronomer and astrologer, a Maharishi, compiler of the
‘Vedas, author of the Bhagavad Gita and the immortal
Brahma Sutras in addition to his 18 voluminous Puranas.
| o There must, therefore, be times during which Mercury
may either gain greater ‘velocity than he posseses now OT
may be separated from the Sun far beyond | what we have
been now^ accustomed to calculate mathematically as
AP Sfate, Museum, Lucknow
mad
a

j 344 CC-O. In Public DoR by Aere Trust are RSarpptris, 6
‘possible. There is no guarantee that the planetary movements, as now asceftained, were the movements many many
millions of years ago. Geologists and astronómers ave now
racking their brains to determine the physical deyelopment `
of the earth from its earliest evolution. 800 millions of
years are reached by some of them while others say that
they are not sufficient to bring the earth to the present
condition in which we find it. It would be unreasonable
therefore to determine that planets could not have assumed
certain angular positions, some billions of years ago which
they are able to do just now, or vice versa. The age of
the creation of the earth in its present form as given by
Hindu astronomers is 195 and odd crores of solar years,
and it would be absurd to maintain now what the conditions, physical and celestial were same 195 crores of years
ago. Without calling upon the present generation of
mathertiaticians either to support or to criticise me in my
views, it looks tc me reasonable to suppose that there
were times when the planets were moving at farhigher
rates, than they are doing now, and that combinations
such as those which have been mentioned by Vasishta and
Parasara, were combinations of planets actually seen by
them or considered quite reasonable and mathematical
during their times. The Sun attracts all other planets of
the solar system with the solar gravitation at a certain rate
now during the last some thousands of years ago but who’
càn dogmatically maintain unless he is a fool (who does
not care to take the changes wrought by the all powerfulhand of timey that these solar attractions‘and their rates
are statiorlaty and that planets have been moving all along
at the present rates uniformly? The Sun” constantly
* A C
UP State Museum, Eucknowc c
e

Ch. XII, St. 7] NABHASA YOGA 345.
changes his position in space, his position on his axis and
his position with reference tó other planets and so also
other *planet$. This is clearly shown by the Sayana
' and Niryana systems. Attractions are guided by the
quantity of heat and light and electricity and ether,
which any planet exhibits towards other planets, and
if there i?-any sense or truth in these statements, then we
can easily imagine the conditions for the Sun and the
attendant planets when their mutual attractions and
repulsions were quite different from what they are now,
and we can as reasonably predict that such attractions and
repulsions which the present astronomico-mathematics give
us, may not be found existing wlten the planets have made
some more revolutions. on their axis {and the orbital lines
fixed for them by the solar attsactions. All these and many
more facts show clearly that in the earlier centuries of the
world, there were conjunctions of planets, in which Sukra
“and Budha could have taken angular positions from the
Sun, efd that there may be some occasions in the remote
future when they may attain to such positions with
reference to their master and lord the Sun.
to eese POS: |
quynfsevereat ATÀ: meu WATT | UI
Stanza 7—If all the planets are within the
"first" four houses of the Ist, 2nd, 3rd“ and 4th
kendras Yupa, Ishu, Sakthi and Panda yogas are
HSN formed. i ^
o
^s AP Sfhte Museum, Lucknow

e
346 CC-O. In Public Dosage Sy Age Trust des 8
c NOTES e
If all the planets are in the Ist, 2nd, 3rd and 4th houses
from lagna itlis Yupa, if they occupy the 4th, Sti, 6th end 7th
then it is called Ishu. If all the planets are in the 7th, 8th,
9th and 10th it goes under the name of Sakthi and if all these
are in 10th, 11th, 12(h and 1st, they constitute Danda yoga.
ataca quemad fed | 4
` ah NA aa ani a MAKA
Stanza 8.—If all the planets are in the first
7 houses from the 1st, 2nd, 3rd and 4th. kendras
they give rise to Nau; Kuta, Chatra and Chapa
yogas respectively. If these yogas are in other
houses they are called Ardachandra. 5
NOTES
If all the planets are in 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7, it font
e
. Nau Yoga. If they are in 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 and 10, it. ag called
Kuta. If allthese occupy the 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12 and
l, itiscalled Chatra yoga. If all are placed in 10, 11,
12, 1, 2, 3 and 4, it goes under the name of Chapa. In the
other half of the stanza if all the planets are placed in Pana-.
paras we get four yogas and if all be placed in Apoklimas, `
there will be four yogas. These are styled Ardachandra.
Thus if all the planets are found in 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 and-8 : orin 11, 12, 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5. In all these fourcases the yogas..
take theirestart from Panaparas (see Stanza 18, Chap. I).
Now take%be "Apoklimas. If afi the planets are in 3, 4, 5,
e
* e c
UP State Museum, FURTO [2
e

CC-O. In Public pon itized N Sarayu Trust and eGangotri
Ch, XII, St. 9] ABHASA YOGA
eight cases the yoga goes undér the narhe of Ardachandra.
r.
|| ga MM:
Birth | Budha| suk irt
Ravi | BU ukra Birth
e
( *. Guru Ravi
—— ———| Nau Yoga Kuta Yoga
Kuja | |Chanüra Budha
f o
e Moon | Sani Guru |Kuja| Sani | Sukra
if 9
ene E
Ravi | Budhal Sukra > E Ravi [Budha | Sukra
Guru
a
Chatra Yoga
Kuja
Birth
| Sani Chandra
- Itis not possible to get such combinations now nor
` have"we been able to come across any horoscope having
l these combinations. One factor should be noted, viz., the
? absence of Rafu or Kethu in any of these combinations.
aratoh: TRR °°
_ Renk Raiena: aie
o
Qe Sfate Museum, To
o

.348 CC-O. In Public Daggirrpigifzgdbr Aen Trust TOI X'Hy'St, 9
Stanza 9.—1f all the planets are in the alternate houses from the Ónd from lagna, it goes
under the name of Samudra. If from lagna .
planets are similarly situated, it forms ‘Chakra.
This is the summary of Akriti yogas.
NOTES ud
. lfallthe planets-are in 2nd, 4th, 6th, 8th, 10th and
12th houses, it is called Samudra Yoga.
Lagna
Guru Chandra
Sani
e
CHAKRA OE 2
Kuja
Ravi EN
e
: Sukra Budha
| Guru | Lagna | Chandra
Sani
UP State Museum, lrucknow € e - 2n
e

Ch, XII, St. 10] NABHASA YOGA 349.
Vardhamihira says that he has made a summary of the Akriti yogas mentioned by the previous writers on this science.
In any horoscope where planets are not in 2-and 12 or
6 and 8 mutually there the native will have very few cares
or even if there be trouble, care a two pence for them. The
late following horoscope illustrates this.
Chandra Lagna | » Sani m
EE Ba Ng
Guru ^
Ravi
Budha RASI
C) Mr. B. S. Rao's
D Horoscopg
is) .
Sukra Rus
Note that planets have not 2 and 12 or 8 and 6 places
from eh other. Hence he kept a jolly temperament till „
his end.
deu qum un oguauadel-
: TATANAN +t |
"gt pq ASAT m A
. Wesen Ramet to Il
Stanza 10.—By all the planets occupying 7,
e 6, 5, 4, 3, 2 and | houses, they form seven yogas,
viz., Vallaki, Dama, Pasa, Kedara, Shula, Yugaand ^
Gola, respectively. These are tq, be considered
in the absence of the previously 1 mentioned yogas.
o WP Státe'Museum, Lucknow

.350 CC-O. In Public DopéitcPietzgdr Re Tested ERTS. 10
G NOTES 5
When all the planets are within seven houses they form
Vallaki. -When they occupy 6 houses it goes under the
name of Dama,' when they are in 5 houses they form 9
Pasa, when they are in 4 houses they compose Kedara,
when they are in 3 Houses they form Shula, when they are
in 2 houses they compose Yuga, and when all tke planets
are in one house they make the Gola yoga. In the previous stanzas the planets are required to be in all the
houses consecutively oc alternately as stated. But in these
yogas, the planets may be in any order. If they occupy
a definite number of houses they form a specia] conjunction. Take an example. “It may be questioned that when
there is Ardachandra yoga, there must necessarily be Vallaki
also. When both are present and satisfy the conditions nrentioned by the author are we required to prescribe these two
yogas separately or take one yoga in preference to another
which is suppressed by its presence. The latter is the case.
When Ardhachandra and Vallaki are present Vallakiis suppressed and the results must be ascribed only to Ardhachandra
Lagna| Sun
Kuja
Saturn] Jupiter
UP State Museum, Fucknow^ e
e

Ch. XII, St. peni Daha E
^ Thestudents should carefully mark all these conjunc-
‘tions and then predict their results according to the strength
and: position of the planets, their aspects and associations.
Kahu and Kethu are entirely omitted in all these combinations and what are we to say if Rahu and Kethu encircle,
€ all these yogas ‘in their ‘Kalasarpa yoga’. It is not clear
whether Varahamihira did pot consider ,Kaldsarpa yoga as
one counteracting very strongly the good! resujts’ of all these
yogas. Bhattotpala is also silent. The Asrayadi *yogag
LJ
wa) o BP Státe* Museum, Lucknow
Sani
Budha
Ravi
Moon

e
.352 CC-O. In Public DorgainrBigiigeg RyrSgergyu Trust feh og tSt, 11
have to be given preference to the Sankhya yogas, i.e., we
have to give preference to the positions of planets in kendras and .trikonas, to the positions of planets in 2, 3, 4,
5 and 6 houses. It isa point to be noted that while Kali- `
dasa, a contemporary of Varahamihira has mentioned Rahu
and Kethuin his Uttarakalamrita, Chapters IV and VI,
Varahamihira has not taken the good and evil effects produced by these two planets in these yogas.
ENERO ES n
Sukra Birth earn | Gu. Su. Birth
ears YUGA Y A FEA GOLA NW
AES
Sn Seer Tadi
Wet Tt guo THAT |
egg Rate «est epe
AE ATTY TESTA CATT d 22 Al
Stanza ll.—Rajju produces envy, foreign
residence and fondness for travelling. Musala
“makes one proud, wealthy, and capable of doing.
many works. Nala makes a person limbless,
determined, rich and courageous. Srik makes
-himchappy pnd Sarpa gives him great misery
UP State Museum, Lùcknow ^ -

Ch. XII, St. 12) NABHASA YOGA 353°
Y
a NOTES i
The author has sketched the sated combinations
T forming these yogas already and now proceeds to give the
results of these planetary conjunctions. As the results are
stated in simple and clear language, no further commentaries are, I believe, needed to explain them.
SARI net waaay er: | É
«Eb ta qg: GRET N23 M
Stanza I2.—Asraya yagas, when they join
other yogas become fruitless. The yogas with
which Asrayas join will give results. When
Asrayas are free, they give their own results;
*Vaeahamihira observes that when Asraya yogas join
with other yogas or are present with other combinations,
they give no results, and they only produce results when
these are not disturbed by the, presence of other yogas.
Yoga means a conjunction or combination of planets.
When a movable sign rises at birth and all the planets are
in fixed or common signs, or whena fixed sign rises at
birth end all the planets are in movable or common signs
or when the birth falls in a common sign with the other
«planets in movable or fixed houses, then these Asraya"
yogas do not cothbine with other combinatiogs. a
a a
* For a reore comprehensive account of these € ycas see “Three
Hundred Important Combinations ” by B.V. Ramare z
5 P StàtæMuşeum, Lucknow
a
a

54 CC-O. In Public Domain y2igiiaecyby n PacgnaT rust ene Roadrist. 13
It inust also be noted that in these yogas, th» relative
strength of each planet should be noted to find out who is
influenced more than the other and are they sufáciently
strong to produce the yoga. For example let us take two `
examples here.
Ravi 1
Sukra | Budha | Sia
| Guru | Kuja
Chart II
Chart I
Except the difference in lagna, the positions of all the
planets are the same. Sani in 4, Kuja in 7, Sukia in 9;
Ravi and Budha in 10, Guru and Chandra in 1, i.e., all the
planets are in kendras and trikonas. While 5 planets are
exalted in Chart I, these? 5 are debilitated in Chart II.
Can we predict the same yogas mentioned in this chapter
for planetary combinations in kendras.
< Taun TATA ATT
, ABNER: TEA: gem |
a
> AT SEA HOCH WE:
cB c Prat FASETAN CR
UP State Museum, Lücknow f

Ch. zm, Sts. 13 & 14] NABHASA YOGA 355°
Stanza 13.—Gada= fond of Sacrifices; rich ;
Sakata=lives by carriages, sickly, bad wife;
. Vihaga= ambassador, traveller, , quarrelsome ;
Sringata&a—happiness after a long age; Hala—
agriculturist. :
X NOTES
The combinations for all „these yogas have already
been explained.
TH SOAR: gi sium
RAET saa a} afar acted: |
Pemda qq
Tat Tawar AFA amm uu $9 Ut
. Stanza 14.—Vajra= =enjoys happiness it in the:
beginnipg and end of his life, popular, courageous; ,
Yava=warlike, happy in the end; Padma-wellknown reputation, great happiness, and good
character; Vapi-good health, accumulator of
money and miser.
ji NOTES
In^ Vajra thg planets make a man enjoy life in the
commencement and end of life. This implies that he will? ,
be unhappy duting the middle period. There are many\ .
peculiarities in the enjoyment. Some ara born iD ; the lap.
of luxury, are brought up so forsome Yeats and then
become > hopelessly miserable. Some are born n the lap of 3
5 EJ
^ &P StæMuşeum, Lucknow
a

CC-O. In Public Degsaipr Rigitigec py garayy Ohist Mile Gesadts & 16
poverty, endure their hard lot throughout the firet period
of their life, then become prosperous and enjoy life, during
the rest of their days. Some are born in misery, » spend
two-thirds of their life in that stage, then mount the ladder ~
of fortune and die in plenty, some are poor in the middle
of their life and enjoy life well at the other two ends.
AWAHANA HEAT st qu
alsa garage: TESTA |
AAs: TIAA Wal
que Praha ASAR: || 24 Ul
Stanza 15.—Yupa-liberal, watchful, performs sacrifices; 'Sara-fond of killing, jailor,
maker of weapons; Sakti-mean, lazy, devoid
of wealth and happiness; Danda-servitude, rejected by or separated from those who are dear.
NOTES
Sacrifices are those which are done according to Hindu
Sastras, but this is a restricted sense. It means any offerings which are made to their deities by men in different parts
of the world according to their religious and moral codes.
' Near: Wu dist
RST ST | ‘ual
- SARA BAAR seen:
ICA HURT: mateges IRA N
UP State Museum, Lücknow ^ ^

Ch. XII, Sts. 16, 174 18] NABHASA YOGA 357
Stanza 16.—Nou= famous, unsteady fortune
and miserly ; Kuta=liar, imprisonment ; Chatra=
. helping Telations, enjoyment in old age; Chapa—
courageous enjoying life in the first and last
parts oi his days.
RE TRAY: IA- ,
«TIT eremi simt |
"Wh aaea Aasinter Ago: Afaa: | to
Stanza 17.—Aydhachandra=popular, handsome, leader ; Samudraequal to a ruler, happy ;
Chakra=respected by sovereigns ; Veena =intelJigent and skilful, clever in dancing and music.
47 NOTES
Veena is called by Varahamihira as Vallaki in St. 10.
Asaria: v arf
Tal TAA ASMA! |
Ra: efter: Sape:
SEE CCE CORCIECE RCH $e E:
protector, many cattle; Pasa— possessing relations and servants who are clevem i in acquiring
Wealth, and bad in behaviour ; Seen agricul-:
AJP SfataMuşeum, Lucem
a
a
Stanza 18.—Damini=libéral, philanthropic,“
s

S
“358 BRIHAT J
chere is that the results: delineated here as pertaining to
{conjunctions of planets under Nabhasa yogas will make
CC-O. In Public Domain. Digitized 2620 PIN Trust ER RIT se. 19
turist, ‘helping many ; Shula=courageous, mae
wounds, fond of wealth but poor.
ARE: TWAS aT AA AT Sed
faaaar saria: greet Sea: |
aft Fak aim: ate Tee SH
emerge wawa US Ul
Stanza 19.—Y uga- poor, unbeliever ; Gola=
penniless, sinful, ignorant, skilful in mean arts,
lazy, travelling. These are Nabhasa.yogas related
by me, and they will always be productive of their
own results. gti ^
= NOTES
The Nabhasa yogas are continuously productive of
results good or bad as the case may be. If they are really
so, then there is some objection against some “Of these’
yogas in which Varahamihira has clearly stated that the
person will have happiness in the first and ldgt periods of a
man’s existence. The answer is simple. When the results
of a combination of planets take a particular turn, then
other rules or principles cannot be applied to them. For,
it is the nature of such a combination to produce those
results irrespective of general influences. » What he means
themselves prominent in a man’s career although now and
then they maf not be present so prominently on account of
the presence *of oher yogas. If these results are perUP State Museum, Lücknow m ©

Ch. KIT, St, 19] | NABHASA YOGA 359°
Ton then some will have all good, while' others
will have all evil. It is not so. Bhattotpala very: clearly
E remarkà—rich men may have external objects for enjoyment,
but their minds may be greatly affected and they ‘may feel
themselves miserable, through various other causes. Poor
men may have external marks of misery, but at heart they
may feel™ quite happy and contented. Happiness and
misery are relative terms and are made so by the bent cf
the mind the man possesses and thé view he takes of the
presence of evil and good about him." :
Milton's famous lines may be remembered in this
connection^— 4 ;
“ The mind in itself and in its own place can make a
heaven of hell and a hell of heaven."
*It depends upon the outlobk ong has about life and its
happiness. Some are entirely devoid of humour and to
them life is miserable. The Moon in Dusthanas or aspected
by Sani or Kuja or Sani and Kuja aspecting'each other,
Sani befng in the 4th from Kuja, make the man worry
himself unnecessarily. One should be sportive and laugh
at these things and reduce his burden of misery.
There are evil and good resŵts which come to man as
the natural consequence of planetary periods and sub-periods.
Then there are the results which happen to him as the results of the planetary movements as ascertained by Ashtaka
Varga. Then again there are the results of the planetary
combinations or yogas on the man exercised by their pecu- a
fiar angles and ‘states. All these do not counteract each)
other's influences but confer enjoyment during their respective periods and in a conjunctional or incivigual manner.
Dala yogas and Akriti yogas do not come toporhst Dala;
a
A AP Sfate Museum, Lucknow
o
a

x ao In Public Doms Pintifeg SARA Trust D Sa St. 19and Asraya do not concurrently happen. Dalas “and Sankhyas may come together and then Dalas will have preference. Akriti and Asraya may come together wher Akriti :
will produce its results. Akriti and Sankhya yogas may
come together when the influences of Akriti will prevail.
Asraya and Sankhya may come together when Asraya will
have preference. Astaya yogas always contaiüi Sankhya
vogas but we may have Sankhya yogas separately and by
themselves. Therefore when Asraya and Sankhya yogas.
are present preference' should be given only to Asraya yogas.
For example, ifall the planets are in one house, there is.
Sankhya yoga but not Asraya. The old Yavanas have given.
1,800 varieties of these Nabhasa yogas. Sankhya yogas are
127. There are 23 Akriti yogas. The two sets added
1274-23 willgive 150, yogas. But there are 12 différent
zodiacal signs and if each ofthese signs has 150 yogas the
total number of Nabhasa yogas possible will be 150 x 12—
1,800 yogas or planetary conjunctions. When the number
of planets taken is seven one yoga arises; when six planets
are taken at atime there arise seven yogas; when the
number of planets taken is five we get 21 yogas; when that
< number is four we get 35; ‘when three planets are taken at a
time we get 35; when two planets are taken at a time we
get 21 ; and when we take one planet at a time we get seven.
We add 23 Akriti yogas to these we get 140 yogas for eack
~ lagna of the zodiac or 1,800 for the 12 signs.
[a ce
fie - ,
e P
UP State Museum, Lücknow ^ G
e
A

D A
. CHAPTER NITI
CHANDRAYOGADHYAYA
TANNA:
Results from Lunar Positions and Conjunctions:
a
TAA Aaaa |
wer AR a sex SAAT a
ups Arar eng gel t
o Stanza 1.—By the Moon occupying kendras,
etc., from the Sun, three yogas arise called
„Adhama, Sama, Varishta respectively, producing
politengss, wealth, wisdom, intelligence and skill,
accordingly. If the Moon is in his own or frendly navamsa during the day and night possessing,
the aspect of Jupiter and Venus respectively, the
‘person will be wealthy and happy.
NOTES
‘Fhe brevity and suggestiveness of Varahamihira’ s
verses are admirable and cannot be done justice to in
9 English translations like this. If the Moon isin a kendra
from the Sun at the time of birth he will have very faint or
no traces of politeness, wealth, wisdom, iptélligence and
skill. If the Moon is in Panaparas from the Suni Ae., in
^ d State Museum, Lue
o
kJ
o

-362 CC-O. In Public Domgig Digilized py Faayua ust PERRIN, St. 1
2, 5, 8, NA then he will have, all these characteristics to a
moderate extent. But if the Moon is in Apoklimas from
the Sun, viz., in 3, 6/9 or 12, the person will have all those .
qualities to the fullest extent possible. For those who are
born during the day, if the Moon occupies his own navamsa or that of the navamsa of his intimate friend aspected
by Jupiter, he will give wealth and happiness. The same
result must be predicted when the Moon is in any of those
above named navamsas'^and has the aspect of Venus. Some
say that the Moon in his own amsa during the day and in his
friendly navamsa during the night aspected by Jupiter and
Venus respectively, causes these results. But Bhagavan
Gargi clearly says as I have explained above and Bhattotpala quotes also Yavaneswara to the Same effect.
Uttarakalamrita, Khanda IV, Stanza 8, says that if at
birth, the Moon with her digits full and endowed with |
strengtb, be in her exaltation, swakshetra or a friend's
- house, identical with 4, 7, 9 or 10, and be aspected by or
in conjunction with Jupiter or Venus, the person will be
Guru © || Budha | Kuja | Rahu | Ravi
Kethu |
Sani gou s
- RASI —— —| AMsA |— —
Sukra
ac e Rahu $ Sokra
Kuja Chandra T Ravi ; Moon | Lagna
A | : Budha Kethu| Sari
UP State Museum, Lücknow © ©
G

Lj
Ch. XIII, St. 2] ADHI YOGA 363°
AIO a A 9
omniscient, endowed with all virtues, extolled by people
and be a highly munificent and great personage. (See also
. Stanza$ 25 and 26).
Note how Chandra in a friend's house, having Vargottamamsa and aspected by Jupiter and imApoklima (3) from
Sun in rasi and (6) in amsa, has made the above horoscope a very wealthy personage and one, who has the honour
of being the guest of Viceroys and travelled widely, but tHe
position of the Moon (debilitated) has made him a bit
unhappy.
alta: TATA AAN eat
sain afe meisten |
ME VCI aana an P
Hara Aaa Ta WU
Stenza 2.—When benefics occupy the 6th, 7th
and 8th from the Moon, they cause Adhi yoga x
and the result is the birth of a commander, a
minister, ora king. Persoms born in this conjunc-
‘tion. (Adhi yoga) will be gentlemanly, happy;
surrounded with luxury, foeless, long lived and
rejected by the diseases.
NOTES, x
in this Adhi yoga all,the benefics, viz., Mercàry, Jupiter
and Venus must be in one af these houses. All of them may
be in the 6th, 7th and 8th, or in 6th or Tthoomsth, or in the
6th and Teh a 6th and 8th, or in the ,7th and 8th. ^ Thus
o
o o
eUP State Museum, Lucknow
D e o
o
a

« 364 O-O: In Public Doggis Plor RREN Trust nd gospel St, 2
seven varieties of Adhi yogas have been named here. If all
these benefics are completely powerful, the person will
become a great king, if they possess ordinary (medium |
power) then he will become a minister, and when all these
are powerless, the man becomes a commander.
Vide Stanza 26 of Khanda IV of Uttarakalamrita of
Kalidasa for this Adhi yoga.
Srutakirti observes that if in these places there are evil:
planets from the Mcon then they will produce the same:
results, but the person will be evil minded and tyrranical.
If mixed planets are found there, the results willbe mixed,
and when the benefics are’ there the results will be good..
But the quotations from Badarayana, Mandavya and
Saravali, clearly indicate the: presence of benefics in tkose
houses and Srutakirti does not seem to have been supported:
by thera in his inference of making Papadhi yoga by putting.
evil planets in those houses. But as their quotations are
not full we cannot draw any conclusions définitely.
Mandavya and Saravali declare that this Adhi yoga belongs
to Raja yoga and produces kings and emperors, when the
planets are powerful. It iscnot always possible to say why
a certain combination produces a certain result, but it is
easy to say from study and experience that a special
combination of planets produces special and definite results.
It will be seen in this world that there are many varieties of’
power developed by the planetary conjunctions, each of
lich has<its own value and power and several of which <
may be 'compined in one and the same individual. As
objects drawn, together under special physical and mental
conditions exhibit different moods in their behaviour so alse
UP State Museum, racer e
e

Ch. LE- Si Paglic Dompin PBFA DRA ayy Trust and E
men 1 produded by different planetary conjunctions exhibit a
wonderful variety of phenomeha, whick requires long and
tedious study to understand its nature and complications.
' Some have wonderful talking power while others have
special walking capacity. Some are excellent hunters while
others are splendid fighters. We have°refined writers and
magnificent poets. Some are eminent in art while others
are great in religious faith. Some, are great tyrants
while others are honourable philanthropists. Some
have special theiving propensity while others distinguish
themselves in giving to others what they have. Some think
deeply whele others sce far into the future. Some have easy
reproductive capacity while others are characterised by
stern barrenness. All these and many more are due ot
plenetary influences as moulded into definite forms by the
energy which results from good and bad karma. The
„astrologer will be a great naturalist. His capacity must
"be DES and his observation keen and piercing. It is a
most interesting and intricate science and has been most
profoundly dealt with by the ancient masters in this field of
sublime knowledge.
Rah SARTO CAAT
ahaa: aAa q gA: Fresca |
eX sang sa TIA FAA ATA :
Stanza 3. _with *the exceptioni *of sthe ae
OSs planets in the 2nd house froni the Moon:
Sy og Q * UP &tgte Museum, RON
o
o
ALTA q qae: mitral a Walle «

e
366 CC-O. In Public DOREN Aigttigosl PARKAYU TrustfORoSenper"St, 3
in the 42th from him and in the 2nd fared 12th
from the Moon cause Sunapha, Anapha and
Dhuradhura yogas respectively. If these are
not so, many ‘say it is Kemadruma. If planets
are in kendra from birth or the Moon or if the
Moon is combined with planets there is no
Kemadruma. Some say these yogas arise from
kendras and navamsas, but their doctrine has
not been accepted. ^
NOTES
This is a very important stanza and explains some of
the most prominent permanent yogas (conjunctions) which
affect the careers of individuals. Several systems are
brought. out and the most acceptable among them have
been clearly indicated. After fixing correctly the planetary ©
. positions in a horoscope, take the position of thé-Moon.
If in the second house from the Moon there are planets a
special yoga called Sunapha is generated. When there
are planets in the 12th house from the Moon the yoga goes
under the name of Anapha. When planets are found both
in the 2nd and 12th houses from the Moon, the yoga is '
called Dhuradhura. If there are no planets on both sides
of the Moon, i.e., 2nd and 12th houses, then the yoga is °
called Kemadruma. Many have said so and they are
quoted by Bhattotpala. If in the kendras from birth or the
Moon, pianets are found, or if the Moon j Joins with any
other planét; therg Will be no Kemadruma. Look at these
Bue heroscopes, f
UP State Museum, leucknow « A
E

CC-O. In Public D Di d by S Trust and eG tri
ca. S, ubl Domain, Diese EE
D
TUA
In both there are no planets in the 2nd and 12th from
the Moon unless we take Rahu and Kethu as planets, but
both have planets in the kendra from the Moon. ,
Pahu Lagna | Sani 4 |
Ravi E
Guru Kethu | ^ Sani
Budha "
Chandra megna
cc Ravi
Sukra uM ? Kuja |Budha Su
" Sukra
The presence or absence of the Sun does not interrupt
these yogas. Thatis, if there is Sun in the 2nd' house
"from the Moon he does not cause Sunapha unless there is
some o*lér planet with him. If there are one or more
planets in the 2nd house from the Moon and also the Sun
with them he does not disturb the Sunapha yoga. Some
say that the word Kendrasitakarey should be interpreted as
m kendras, from Chandra but this is against the spirit of
‘quotations from Gargi and Saravali. Some Acharyas
represent these conjunctions from the kendras of the
“Moon? Srutakirti observes: “When planets are in the
4th house from the Moon it is Sunapha, when they are
, in the 10th from the Moon it is 'Anapha, when they are
both in the 4th "and 10th from the Moon it is Dhwtadhura;
but when they are not there, there will pe Kémadruma ”
Jivasarma declares on the strength of some dun that
a
SS.
a
o UP State Myseum, Lucknow
a
a

E
.3eg CCO In Public Doggimylpisiizep/ASr gere Trust RD SEPP, 3
planets ia the 2nd house from the Moon in the navamsa
create Sunapha, ‘if they are in the 12th from him
it is Anapha, when they are in the 2nd anu 12th from
him it is Dhuradhura, and if there are no planets in
these houses it is Kemadruma. But these explanations
are not consistent with the view of eminent ancient writers
and therefore says Varahamihira, are not acceptabie. Perusing these remarks ef eminent astrologers, carefully, I beg
to venture here a few observations. Readers of my translation may draw their own conclusions after a special study
of these important yogas. When planets are not in certain
Bhavas (houses) signifying events then writers or astrology
direct the students to go to those bhavas in the navamsa
and find out the planets and predict the results ascribed to
them. Varahamihira has done so in many places in this
work (see St. 23, Chap. V and St. 1 in Chap. X). In
Chapter VII he also recommends the Amsayurdaya propounded by Satyacharya and now the question will be simply this. When planets produce ‘certain
results in the rasi, they will also produce the same in the
navamsa.
This is an interesting problem which has been tackled:
to some extentin the columns of THE ASTROLOGICAL MAGAZINE as to how far, the results in the rasi bhavas have to be
modified in the navamsa. Can we say that when planets
in certain positions in the rasi, producing certain results,
vill produce the same results when they are ia the navamsa ?
to that case we have to say that | every blessed planet has
to be in the Vargottama, so that the same combinations
hold food. : v
n
r e
UP State Museum, Lucknow ^ -

Ch. XIII, St. 4] STRENGTH OF LAGNA 369 "
Ther? again we have on good astrological authority
to consult planetary conjunctions from the Lagna or
Chandra whichever i IS Stronger. In this case, if planets are
"jn the 4th sand 10th houses from Chandra there are good
yogas and the results will be favourable, The same holds
good when they are in kendras from lagna. If planets can
produce S'inapha, Anapha and Dhuradhura, when they are
in the 2nd or 12th, or 2nd and 12th from Chandra in the,
Rasi I can see hardly any material objection to the generation of those same yogas when the^same planets occupy
similar positions from the Moon in the navamsa. Suppose
a man has?no planet in the 7th from Lagna or Chandra
in the Rasi but there are planets from Chandra in the navamsa, do we not indicate the colour, features, dispositions
and^position of the wife by looking at the planet or planets
in the 7th house from Chandra in the navamsa? But what
probably Varahamihira and his illustrious commentator
mean here, seems to be that the positions of the planets
in the navamsa or in the kendras from Chandra, may not
successfully create these special yogas as the older and the
most famous writers of India did not countenance such a
view. Iam sure there will be ybgas as per slokas quoted
Dy Bhattotpala from Srutakirti and Jivasarma, but they may
not be identical with these special combinations detailed
BOIL Sunapha, Acapha, Dhuradhura and Kemadruma.
Fae: TAHARI:
> apart em ANTE | Pu c
AnA Haase >
fia fate: gada ug eee NE
a a
9 "UP State Museum, LIRE

370 CC-O. In Public Dom pine Pigiizaby ARA Trust OH eGempp'rist. 4
Stanza 4.—There are 30 varieties of Sunapha
and Anapha conjunctions. There are threesixties of varieties (180) in Dhuradhura. : The
intended varieties can be found out by-placing
planets in regular order and dropping the first in
proceeding to the last and repeating this.
NOTES
The yogas can be found out by permutations and combie
nations of planets in the signs. 60x3=180 varieties of
Dhuradhura are named. The principles of mathematics.
involved here are easily explained by Bhattotpala.. He says,
take the number of planets.and the varieties they produce.
DUET
Tibe ——— ij
A little knowledge of permutations and combinations.
. will enable one to easily understand these. =>,
If five planets are in the 2nd there will be one yoga; if
four planets are there five varieties are produced ; if in the 2nd
three planets are taken at a time we have ten varieties; if
two planets are taken at a time ten varieties; and if one planetis taken ata time five varieties. Thus there are 30 varieties for Sunapha and an equal number for Anapha. The
commentator asks the student to put five planets taken at a -
tithe in the reverse order under the first set of figures.
A
s e Thus-
"oe
D
UP State Museum, Lucknow y z
e

Ch, XIII, St. 4] VARIETIES OF FIGURES 371°
Tak’ the first figure five and divide it by the lower figure
1—we get 5 varieties of one planet taken ata time in the
E 2nd house from the Moon. Take the product 5 and multiply it with the next figure 4— we get 20, divide this by the
figure 2, which represents two planets taken at a time—
we get 10 varieties. Multiply this product 10 by the next
figure 3 we get 30, divide this by the lower figure 3 and we
have 10 varieties of 3 planets taken àt a time. Multiply
this 10 by the next figure 2 and We get 20. Divide this
by the lower figure four and we get five varieties of four
planets taken at a time. Then multiply this 5 by the next
figure 1 anti divide it by the lower figure 5, we get 1. Thus
the total will be 5+10+10+5+1=31 yogas.
„Tbe total is 31 and nót 30 as stated though the original
clearly says Trimsat Swarupaha, i.e?, 30.
` There are 180 varieties of Dhuradhura for which theauthor, as well the commentator, giveg a hint to call in the
skill of the student to find out the number. They are thus
formed :
(1) Mars and Mercury
(2) Mercury an@ Mars
X " (3) Mars and Jupiter
4 (4) Jupiter and Mars
> (5) Mars and Venus
" (6) Venus and Mars ^
(7) Mars and Saturn
° (8) Saturn and Mars 2. e
(9) Mercury,and Jupiter , D
(10) Jupiter and Mercury ^ e
: (11) Mercury and Venus, °
EL
bd a
S aUP State Myseum, Lucknow
a
EJ

Similarly if we go on counting the different combi-.
nations of planets, we get the large number of 180 varie-.
CC-O. In Public D: in. Digitized b:
n Public BRIA tized Py ea Ta "RIT, S. 5
Venus and, Mercury g
Mercury and Saturn
Saturn and Mercury
Jupiter and Venus
Venus and Jupiter
Jupiter and Saturn
Saturn and Jupiter
Vénus and Saturn
Saturn and Venus
Mars— Mercury and Jupiter
Mars—Mercury and Venus
Mars—Mercury and Saturn
Mars—Jupiter and Venus
Mars—Jupiter and Saturn
Mars—Venus and Saturn
Mercury—Mars and Jupiter
-Mercury—Mars and Venus
Mercury—Mars and Saturn |
Mercury—Jupiter and Venus J
Mercury—Venus and Saturn
ties for Dhuradhura.
.^o mue wen WU
. = Wü fe Gamat deem 0c
fa
Tea Meaty Carella
: * ieget Re, tU 7
ve
UP State Museum, Lucknow + e

Ch. XIII, St. 5] IMMORAL WAYS 373
Stanza 5.—A person born in Sunapha will
be king or his equal with self-acquired wealth,
intelligent, wealthy and reputed. . A person born
under Anapha will be a Tuler, healthy, moral,
renowned, enjoying good pleasures, fond of decorations-and free from mental sorrow.
D
NOTES ,
Varahamihira now gives the 2esults of Sunapha and
other yogas he has given in Stanza 3. A person will be a
king or hés equal only when the planets causing this (yoga)
Sunapha are eXalted and powerful. But when they are weak
and debilitated they give the persons some position, which
may be important in small localities. Suppose Moon is in
Pisces and Saturn is in Aries. There is Sunapha so also
, When the Moon is in Virgo and Saturn is in Libra. The
* student in these two cases ought not to predict the same
resulte and position as Saturn is exalted in Libra and
debilitated in Aries. These general sources of strength and
weakness play their role all through human experience, and
astrologers must be very careful and cautious in making |
° predictions.
Inthe Anapha yoga the word Vishaya Sukha, sense
pleasures or enjoyments is purposely used and Bhattotpala
` clearly explains» by saying that this combination does not
give that grand pleasure which the Yogis are said to enjoy»
2 as the result of their deep contemplation on Parabrabest, A
The pleasure will be from the satisfaction of sense craving,
but not in jmmoral ways. For instance if à tan has a good
wife-and enjoys her company or has 8004 horses and drives
a
a 5 a UP State Myseum, luan

A
sana 079 n Ple DRR HAN JAN KRA T fet? RI, St. 6
or rides on them, has nice houses and furniture, txcellent
food and clothing, he may be said to gratify his sense
cravings but in the approved methods. Sense pleasures are
short-lived. There will not be the mental happiness or j
glow. They give pleasure while enjoying them, but after
enjoyment, they weaken the man and sometimes exhaust
him. In Yogic pleasure, the body becomes stronger, there
is mental peace and spiritual force generated.
SEE D ATA TANG ANE
AMAA GERTE: gue
de Rag: Ra;
dan; Wela TRR HAM WEN,
Stanza 6.—One born under Dhuradhura
enjoys all pleasures, has wealth and conveyances,
will be liberal and possessed of good sérvants.
The person born under Kemadruma, although he
may take his birth in a royal family, will be dirty,
sorrowful, doing work against his caste, poor,
dependent and roguish.
NOTES f
Enjoying all pleasures may mean, that the pers6r will’
-be fortunate enough to get objects from different parts of the
world which are likely to give him pleasure or will have ,
pleasure from, products grown, in the places where he
happens to live. -There is a slight difference in reading
Su Bfitya andcSa Britya. The first means good servants,
e e
UP State Museum, Lucknow = e
e
F
r
Dest

ki)
Ch, XIII, $t.7] INDICATIONS OF PLANETS 375
while th second means with servants. The first is preferred
as Bhattotpala supports it. Kemadruma seems to be a
dreaded yoga as evils are predicted for it. Vatahamihira
adds emphasis by saying that men born even in royal families
suffer these evils predicted by Kemadruma, and therefore
those who are born in ordinary families will surely have
much more of them. Malina is interpreted as having dirty
unwashed clothes and person. Sorrow refers to physical as
well as mental sorrows. Nicla used here means that the
person will do such acts as are prohibited by his religious
and social codes and therefore degrades himself in the
estimation of his fellow-subjects. Khala means all roguish
and desperate acts which unprincipled men are apt to do.
> RRC EI PERGIEREISE AISE
diez: We: gaai AN: meu -
sirsdadgeug TTT
” apr gagan PATETAN dise tI
Stanza 7.—1f Mars gauses these yogas, the
“person will be energetic, wealthy, warlike and
"adventurous. If Mercury causes the yogas, the
person will be skilful, have sweet speech and he
“learned in arts. If Jupiter causes the yogas, the
person will be rich, charitable, happy and respect?
' ed ‘by rulers. If Venus, he will» be «fond of °
women, very wealthy and will,epjóy
pleasures: i eee
a
a : A 9 UP State Mgssum Lucknow
a

faa
< 376 CC-O. In Public Domgip-ipied ix Paral rust ec ROaxgqtri St. 8
€ NOTES 08
The stanzas are given with a view to find out the
particular results from the special planetary positions in
e
causing these yógas, viz., Sunapha, Anapha and Dhuradhura. These results do not apply to Kemadruma as there
will be no planets on either side of the Moon. If one
planet is in the 2nd, the result may be given” in their
entirety if he is strong, but when two or more planets are
in one house, the results will have to be predicted for all of
them according to their strength and position. Suppose
Mars and Jupiter are in the second. They are friends and
augment each other’s strength. But suppose the Sun and
Saturn are in the second from the Moon. The results are
greatly neutralised as they are inimical and counteract
each other's influences. , P 7
TTT TA aT
Chaar TERAHAN: | 2a
asare fa cuTqRiNGA DÀ ANSAR ui c N
Stanza 8.—If Sani causes these yogas, the
man will enjoy other's wealth and articles, wil! be
engaged in various works, and be a leader'of an'
A -assembly. The Moon, if visible in the day, does
. $schief but when he is invisible, he will be’
auspicious.” Ctherwise the results will be
different. — c
n
è r
S G G
UP State Museum, Lucknow m -
e

Ch. xi: ere FERS Piste DY WEXTTESS eGangotri. yy
ec NOTES °
When Saturn causes these yogas, the person will enjoy
life at the cost of others. He will be engaged in a variety
' of work, and will also be elected as the leader of men or
assemblies. This will give him great influence and
probably he will support himself at their cost. The word
used for"the visibility and invisibility of the Moon is
Drisya and Adrisya. | Bhattotpala explains it as Drisyg
Chakram. In Stanza 22, Chapter V of this work, I have
explained these words and what they mean and refer the
readers to it. When the Moon is in Drisya Chakra
during tht day, he will produce evil and when he is in
Adrisya Chakra, he will be duspicious. This will be
reversed in the night .When the Moon is in Drisya
Chakra in the night, he is auspicious; when he occupies
the Adrisya Chakra during the night, he becomes inaus-
.picious.
o “ameata qure ost
E A A
danau: TARA |
siri WASTA AAT7 o. Aaa A NG UI
. Stanza 9.—When all benefics are in Upa-
'chayás ‘from Jagna, the person will be extremely
wealthy. When all benefics are in Upachayas»
? from the Moon, he will be wealthy. , When tra
benefics are in Upachayas, there will Bemioderate
wealth. ‘Less than that will produce fittle wealth.
o à
* SUP State Museum, Lucknow
LJ

e
> 37800 O In Public Don TAT SARRA "SPOR ARAL St, 9
The results from these will predominate over
others.
a
NOTES
This is shortly and sweetly expressed in the original,
The three benefics are Jupiter, Venus and Mercury. The
Upachayas are the 3rd, 6th, 10th and 11th houses from
the Lagna or the Moon. (See Stanza 10, Ch. I and St. 5,
Ch. II.) When these three benefics are situated in the
Upachayas from lagpa, the person will be very rich but
when they are so from the Moon, he will be rich. When
two of the benefics are in Upachayas from. Lagna or
Chandra the person will be moderately rich. When one
of them is so, he will be little wealthy, but when there are
no benefics, there will be poverty. In the following
diagram, we can easily see that even when Chandra is not
Birth Moon
Sun
Jupiter
Venus
Mercury
on
e
= Md
in in Lagna, the benefics may be in Upachdyas from “both.,
“Birth is "Piscés and the three benefics Jupiter, Mercury and
Venus are in the 6th Upachaya. The Moon is in Gemini
and they are in the 3rd house from him, also an Upachaya.
e
e e
UP State Museum, Lucknow T r Pah
Pm

Ch. xiii, St e Doppi TOSUSERAPPRION Trust and PT
In such Bases, when the three benefics are in Upachayas
both from the birth and from the Moon, it is hardly
necessary to say that the person will be immensely rich or
' what will be called a millionaire.
The following horoscope illustrates the truth of this.
The native is a rich coffee planter who was on the brink
of bankruptcy but the sudden rise im the price of coffee
enabled him to liquidate his debts aad become a sufficiently
rich man worth about 10 to 15 lakhs ‘at present.
From» Lagna, Guru, Sukra and Budha are in
Upachayas and” from the Moon} Sukra is in Upachaya.
This makes him a wealthy man.
Rahu | Sukra B
m * Ravi
E Guru Kuja
Budha
— RASI
Moon ^
rd woe 5 cn —-
Kethu Lagna
i o 2 0 e im
a A
o x O A A
— a o
o
= UP State eee Lucknow
a

D
ra O
“CHAPTER XIV ;
DWIGRAHAYOGADHYAYA :
fieret:
( Results from the conjunction of two Planets)
: MATA ITAA FRAT a
e
eld aa fugi sistit |
at TATANG DAT THY
were Casal WHATS META TH i
Stanza 1.—If the Sun conjoins with “the
Moon, the person will be skilled in machinery
and masonry; if with Mars, fond of sinfui
deeds; if with Mercury, skilful, ifitelligent,
renowned and happy; if with Jupiter, he will
be cruel and always doing other’s work; if with
Venus, he will make money on S and by
weapons ; and if with Saturn, he will be skilful in
working ores or earthenware.
NOTES G
Here Varahamihira is very short and suggestive and
the studeats will have to explain a great deal from" their:
"experierite afid the experience of their instructors. The
Sun and thé Moon in conjunction prodüce men skilled in
making, handEÉng Qr dealing with all machinery and under
UP State Museum Luckhow “e -
P

CC-O. In Public Domain. ANE by Sarayu Trust and eGangotri
Ch. X1V, St. 1] TWO-PLANET COMBINATION 381 ^
this head No may bring in mechanics, engineers, chemists)
and other workmen.
Herb it is desirable to point out that, in many of the
horoscopes, the combination of Ravi and Budha has also
produced engineers more than the combination of Ravi
and Chandra. Ravi and Chandra join on Amavasya
day or a day previous or later and as such the Moon is weak
or Kshina. J
Ravi 3 Lagna
Moon Kaja Ravi
Budha Je Rahu avi
Reghu Sani Moon | Budha
n á 9
Kuja Late Chief | Engineer in | Sukra
Engineer ofa | * , Military
o State D Service
Chart I D Chart II
RASI Lagna RASI Guru
IN -
a Céru | Rahu | Sani Kethu 3
In the Chart I Ravi and Chandra are combined and in
the Chart II Ravi and Budha are combined. The Chart I
hfs better combination and carried the man to a Chief
Engineer's place on Rs. 2,500 while the Chart II is drawing
only.a few hundreds—about 5 or 6. The combinations
indicate Engineering profession.
Y
Asma means large flat-stones ysed in building houses 5
and the man máy be a mason, a seller of these stones and
4h. examiner of them or cutter 9nd fitter. When 4he Sun joins
|] Mars, the person will be fond of sin and vice? fn all these
Cases mine position of the man has nothing t5 do with his»,
SR 9 = UP Stael Museum, ELE e
a
a

e
< 382 CC-O. In Public Domai pigizpd px Fanaa rust "YCRPXT, St. 2
character. Prince and statesman, priest and poets, philosophers and literates have been known to be guilty of the
most abcminable vices, while poor and ignorant men have
been known to be strictly moral and religious. The 9
tendencies of men are shown herewith and they pursue
their courses suitable to their rank. If the Sun joins an
exalted Saturn, the person may not become a regular potter
but may bein charge of earthenware depot or if he is in
some high political lifeche may prepare rich pottery and take
delight in such manufactures.
«s: WMATA ATA qq |
Rad egak ahi reat Ta
Tet ata: Page ae wt griaa AN
Stanza 2.—The Moon in eo mee with
Mars makesa man a counterfeit, a seller of women,
wives and pots and doing mischief to mother; |.
the Moon with Mercury makes a person polite ii: |
speech, clever in interpretation, popular and
renowned ; the Moon with Jupiter makes a person
successful against enemies, chief of that sect or
- family, capricious and wealthy; the Moon with
-Xenus makes a man skilful in weaving ; and the”
Moon with Saturn makes a person the son of ^
a second marriage.
e
UP State Museum, Lucknow =
e

o
Ch. XIV, St. 2) LUNAR CONJUNCTIONS 383. ^
DP NOTES n
The commentator gives various panyams or saleable
.articles.^ Kutapanyam, Streepanyam, Asnapanyam and
Kumbhapahyam. When the Moon joins with Mars he will
make the native counterfeit all sorts of saleable articles,
sell women, wines and pots. In fact, in all these expressions,
the various relations which a man can have with such articles are indicated. The seller of toddy, the preparer of that,”
the superintendent of those shops ° and the forgerer or
imitator of such articles come under this heading according
to the strength of the conjoined planets.
A man may sell his daughter, his wife, his mother, or get
other women and pimp them to adulterous people. In all
these cases, he makes some gain and “this is due to planetary
conjunctions. The son of a second marriage is called
punarbhusuta *' born again." Bhattotpala quotes an authotity and, d«$cribes punarbhu as follows. When a woman
marries and voluntarily neglects her husband, marries again
a man of her choice from her own sect and thus stands both
polluted and pure she is called a punarbhu.
E
' Theson of a second marriage should not be understood to mean, the son of a second wife, but that the
woman having her husband living, leaves him and gets a son
by some one else than her first married husband.. The *
birth ef the Pandavas comes under this category as Kunti,
‘while Pandu was'living, got children by other husbaifds who ~
married her according to Gandharva rites, inti is is not
classed as ie póliateds. 9 3
LJ a
2? S A Die State Mog LUKO
a

. ggg COO M Public Dona Rte ANGERA Trot ERSRIY St, 3
PM ngia ele
Tea ws aR mR: RA Sst T |
NA Wels qu: TARA TATA Sy
gansa: TATA wes AFEN 3 UI
Stanza 3—When Mars joins Mercury the
person will be *a dealer in roots, etc., oils,
imitation articles and’versed in boxing. Mars
with Jupiter produces a ruler of a city or Raja or
a rich Brahmin. Mars with Venus produces cowherds, wrestler, skilful, fond of other women and
gambler. Mars with. Saturn makes the man
sorrowful, untruthful, and aisgraced or blamed
NOTES
By the word Mooladi in the original, it is meant'to.
denote bulbs, roots, flowers, fibres, cloths and fruits. Mercury and Mars in conjunction make a men dealer in the
above articies, oils of all descriptions, preparation and
selling of imitation stuffs and also a good boxer.
Jupiter with Mars (called Guru Mangala Yoga) will
make a man a chief officer or leader or protector or magistrate in a city or a king or a learned or wealthy Brahmin as
we take the reading “ Prapta vitta or Prapta vidya.” .
Venus in conjunction with Mars makes a good wrestler,”
a | cowherd, a gambler, skilful and fond of other women. It
may be neted in this connection that i in thoüsands of koros- ,
"Copes I Fave had occasion to examine, I invariably found the
morals of the, individual with this combination very loose
and himself omherself suffering from vencieal complaints.
UP State Museum, Luckíow = -
Ej

u Trust and eGangotri
Ch. eios Pare CVPR ER HAT? DISEASES 385-
© oThe following horoscopes of persons well known
to me illustrate the truth. D
a are E ——
Chandra] Kethu Sani à |
Guru |, Lagna |\Chandra Kethu
H Male | Female
oroscope T Horoscope 1
4 r Gury
Sani Rahu
Á tm Ravi
Ravi
Kuja Budha
padha, | Sukra Eu Kuja
ahu a Sukra
Both suffered from: serious venereal diseases, though
themale horoscope was worse'in that respect.
| The conjunction of Mars with Saturn culminates in
P^ producing misery, falsehood and disgrace in the person.
die teat gere tate gern :
Wt wur: RAA age WTS |
: TAY TATAG; GAT quon
5o 7T Su: wars SESSQUISSERRISS T d Ul
. Stanza 4.—When Mercury and Jupiter join,
"they produce „a man who figures constantly op
the stage, when Mercury joins Venus the man will .
“be fond of music, dancing, eloquence and protecs, ,
tion of lands and assemblies. Mercury wita Saturn
makes a man-a cheat and disobedigat. jopiter,
4 ~ UP Mass a TEC

- 386 CC-O. In Public Donga] PigitiFed WISAYA Trust afGiGabGbVi, St. 5
with Venus produces good education, wife; wealth
and men of many virtues. Jupiter with Saturn
produces barber, potter or cook.
NOTES
The stanza is easy and requires few notes. Those who
appear on the stage may.do so under various capacities and
forms and all these varieties have to be made out by the
relative strength and position of these planets.
SAAT RIT | :
vata a KRIYAN
MATHS. quur Bada WAM —
Stanza 5.—Venus with Saturn gives a man
small eyes, wealth from depending upon some
females, artistic capacity, ordinary writing and
painting. Similarly results of combinations of
more than two planets must be made out.
NOTES T
The last part requires some further explanation:
Varahamihira true to his motto of writing little and suggesting much, asks the readers to make out results sim: ilarly -.
_for larger combinations. „Suppose the Sun, "Moon and Mars
“ate in onechouse. Then we have to take oué the results of ©
‘the conjunction of (1) the Sun with the Moon, (2)
the Sun with. Mars, and (3) the Moon with Mars. Suppose “there are two planets in one house-nd three planets
t
e
UP State Museum, Lücknow ~ A
e

CC-O ur blic Domaip. Digitized Nd Sarayu Trust and eGangotri
Ch. XIV, St. 5] TABOB
in CE house. Then all the results. mentioned here
must be traced out according to their “relative strength.
Suppose, there are 4 planets in one house, viz., the Sun,
“Moon, Mass and Mercury. As above suggested, conjunctional results for all these must be made out.
The readers should do well to work out their own
horoscope’. The following horoscopes illustrate this:
; Guru y Sx |
Kethu a Sani
CHARTA ~| CHART II
| Lagna Moon
MOOD Rabu i|, Sukra
| | i Ravi
| Guru į a
N Kuja |Budha| Ravi Budha | Sani
Sukra | Paena
eimen eese ens
Chart I gives Ravi and Guru, Ravi and Sukra and
Guru and Sukra (three combinations). Ravi and Guru—
cruel and doing other's work; Ravi and Sukra—makes
money on stage and by weapons;? Guru and Sukra—good
education, wife, children and wealth, and man of many
virtues.
Chart II is the horoscope of a great Matadhipathi
(fuler Gf a Mutt) and a man of rare devotion and Tapobala..
Note here Ravi and Budha and Chandra and Sukra forming combinations. He is repowned, intelligent and” a great: I
Scholar. Study the Chart II t understandsthe next ghapter
O y
J about Sanyasa yoga or Pravrajya yoga. f
LJ
a
mn 9
* . * UP &tate Museum, Lucknow

m
[o
G
CHAPTER XV c
PRAVRAJYA YOGA
“TAS ETE:
(Renunciation of the world or Sanyasa)
PROP RMICIRE gastar vant:
MAM AAAI FAT ATTA: |
sare afe: AAT: TARTRATE: seit: NGU
Stanza 1.—When there are four or more
powerful planets in one house, the persons born
will become Sakya, Aajivika, Bikshu, Vriddha,
Chakra, Nirgrantha and Vanyasana,” when
Mahaya, Gnya, Guru, Kshapakara, Sita, Prabhakari and Ina are powerful respectively. The
Pravrajya yogas are determined by the most
powerful planets. When these planets have
suffered a defeat, the person will renounce the
< Pravrajya afterwards. 1
s
> NOTES 4 a
Te ro thé Hindu, the spiritual has as much mures E
net more—as ‘the material comforts and taken from sucha `
standard the combinations sketched out here : are really very .
e
e
A
z UP State Museum, Cudknowe” e
A . z e

o
Ch. XV, St. 1] PRAVRAJYA YOGA 389
a
valuable as the person can make out, when and SN kind
of Sanyasa ha will become and what would be his spiritual
.progres$ after renouncing the worldly pleasures. There
must be four or more planets in a house for this yoga
Seven planets four at each time would give us many
permutatidns but what is meant is that there should be at
least four planets in a house and according to the most
powerful among the seven, the Moon, etc., seven kinds of
Sanyasa ,yogas are formed. ^ Laghu Yataka also says that
if more than one planet is powerful, the different kinds of
a
| Sanyasis will be taken up one after the other and if no
planet is powerful, there will be nb yoga of Sanyasa.
The following two horoscopes of two great Sanyasis
are given to illustrate a few combipations. The I is Adi
Shankaracharya's and the II of the late Sringeri Jagadguru
Abhinava Narasimha Bharati Swami who died in 1912.
A^ a
Ravi | Lagna
Budha | Sukra Rahu Sukra | Guru
Ravi
* Chandra|| Budha Oe Sani
e Kai EG ein
guo Sbankara baya anaa Bharati Swami) — —
Kuja Chandra Chart II Kethu
Kethu) Guru | Sani "| Kuja Lam oft
2 2 ta Ma
In Chart I, Ravi, Kuja and Sani are exalted, Sukra
E]
` and Chandra in théir own houses. . ;
? Tag a UP,State Museum, Lucknow s

e
A ^ c -O. In Public Domain. BRIHAT JATAKA. and FEE Xv. St. i
The following strong planets in this conjunction will
produce the undermentioned varieties of Prayrajya yoga :—
1. Powerful Mars : Sakya—those Sanyasis who Wear’
red clothes.
2. Mercury: Aajivika—a Sanyasi bearing Ekadanda
or single staff. a
3. Jupiter: Bikshu—ordinary Sanyasis who have
yellowish rose-coloured clothes.
4. The Moon: «Vriddha—Kapalika or one who moves
about with a skull in his hand. :
5. Venus: Chakra—one who carries a cbakra or ring
e
or circle. E
6. Saturn: Nirgrantha—moving about in nude forms.
« 7. TheSun: Vanyasana—those who live on roots and
bulbs in a forest. Bhattotpala quotes for the first time from
“Vankalakacharya” and elaborates verses in pure Prakritand f
in excellent style. Who this great astrologer was and where
e helived would be a very interesting research to meke. The
language unmistakably shows his remote antiquity and it
would be quite a gain to astrological literature if we could
throw some light upon this ancient astrological writer and
his works. He apparently seems to have been the authorof
a Samhita. Vriddha stands for Vriddhasravaka and ‘is
beautifully explained by Vankalakacharya. These Sanyasis
Stand for devotion to Eswara while Aajivikas are these who
e are devoted to Vishnu. |
pn
o cox When two Ee are powerful among the lot, the
order o£ Satyasicwill be deterinined first by the most powerful among taefa, and then the person. may, embrace the
«^ second. It is Ony when a planet is very strong that he |
é
e e
UP State Museum, Lasaon? em e
e

D
E)
Ch.,XV, St. 2) DIKSHA OR SANYASA . "agii
makes the man a Sanyasi for a long time. If the planet
is weak, then,he will only make the person long after it but
. will nct induce him to take it up. When the most powerful planet" is defeated ia the planetary fight the person will
take up Sanyasa and after sometime renounce it. If the
last powerful planet is not defeated, then the person will
die in that yoga which is ruled by’ that planet. If two of
them are powerful and suffer no defeat then, when the first
planet's sub-period comes he embrátes the first and when
the sub-period of the second planet comes he will renounce
the first and take up the second and keep it on. If only one
planet is powerful and has not suffered defeat then he takes
the order indicated by him and keeps it on uninterruptedly.
TANGAN feriat AT |
aRar ARTA U R N
Stanza 2.—If the powerful Pravrajya causing planets are in combust with the Sun then the
persons born will not take up Sanyasa but will
greatly worship those who have embraced Sanyasa. If the Yogakaraka and defeated planets
are aspected by other planets the person would be
making application for Diksha.
: 9 NOTES Ve
| 3 Pravrajya arises only when there are four or more» œ,
ə planets ina house. Of the most powerful of these Which, o
.| . cause this yoga, the combus@d planets produce , no Diksha
1 . Or Sanyasa put produce admiration or rega?d dor those who
have taken Sanyasa similar to that whichethe planet governs?,
s
t
a
UP Staté Museum, Lucknow
ae

D
392099 In Public Domgjm pigitized by Sareye Arust and PERRY, st. 3
Regarding combustion or Asta, Bhattotpala says that simply
because a planet is in the same house with the Sun, it must
not be presumed that he is in combustion, neither should it
be presumed that the planet who is in the 2nd kouse from -
the Sun is not in combustion. The fact of combustion or
not must be ascertained by regular mathematical calculations. If the powerful Yogakaraka planets are defeated and
-aspected by other planets, then the man will simply make
application to be admitted but they would not become Sanyasis. In the first Stanza it was alleged that powerful
planets defeated in planetary fight would give Sanyasa and
then would make him renounce it afterwards. But now he
clears this by saying that the man would take up Sanyasa
only when the planet is not aspected’by other planets. But
when others aspect the, planet then the man will only be
applying for it without taking or getting. The planet will
give Sanyasa during his sub-period, when in the gochara
movements, he obtains the greatest strength.
TAS ATTY
TETIGA A TATA |
Sat TATA STOTT 3
Waa dad WEE UB
Stanza 3.—When Janmesa is not aspected
by other planets, but aspects Saturn, or when
^ * Saturn aspects the weak Janmesa or if the Moon
“is in Saturn’s drekkana and” occupies the amsa of”
Saturn “of Mats and has saturnine aspect, the
person will have Diksha. c
e e
UP State Museum, Lucknow e7 e
"n
e

a
a
ch. XV, St. a)" Domain. TAN fies Trust and CU eg 3
? NOTES j
Now he gives three sets of combinations, when the
Diksha, or the ordinance of a Sanyasi may take place even
' when there are not planetary conjunction’ of four or more
_ jn one house. Bhattotpala explains Janmesa as the lord of
the house occupied by the Moon at the time of birth.
Genérally Janmesa means the lord of birth, but here it
is to be understood as the lord of thé house in which tho
Moon is situated. Take the horosc@pe No. II given under
Stanza 1. The lord of the house where the Moon is situated is Saturn and he is aspecting his own house. So also
in Sankardcharya’s horoscope, the Moon in his own house
is aspected by Saturn. 1
5 (a) If this lord is not aspected by any other planets
| but aspects Saturn, then there will be a Pravrajya yoga.
| The Sanyasa then will take that form which is ruled by
/ > Saturn as mentioned in the first stanza. This comes in
during the' sub-period of the most powerful among these
two, viz., Janmesa and Saturn.
(b) When Saturn is powerful and aspects the weak
lord of the house occupied by the Moon, then the saturnine
form of Pravrajya will be obtained.
(c) If the Moon occupies a Saturnine drekkana in any
sign and also occupies the navamsa of Mars or Saturn, and
>is not aspected by any other planet than Saturn, then the
. man will assume the Sanyasa peculiar to Saturn.
m
applying the conditions laid down in the first two stanzas,
) that is we must take into consideration tlie planetary
OM. n
; combustions and defeats. eae "
ee ES œ UP State Mu eun Lucknow
A : A
a
Here the cbmmentator insists on the necessity for also

Di
¢ 394000. In Public Domgip Bigitizedyby parqyual rust and eengg yy, St. 4
. RUT Teal Teds Uu |.
ATTY TRAST ^
wa aaa Sa: Sex: d 9
Stanza 4.—If Jupiter, the Moon and birth are
saspected by Saturn, and if Jupiter is in the 9th,
the person born wóuld be a Raja who would write
on shastras or sciences. If 9th is occupied by
Saturn unaspected by any planet, the person will
become a Dikshita when he is born in Raja yoga.
NOTES
Here Varahamihira gives two combinations peculiar to
kings.
(a) If Saturn aspects the Moon, birth andJupiter, with,
Jupiter in the ninth (91h) house, then, a king in whose horoscope such conjunction rises, becomes a writer on sciences.
Bhattotpala here gives instances of persons, who, although
born as rulers and princes, become great as scientists and
philosophers. This is a stránge fact brought to light by him.
He quotes Kanada, Buddha, Panchasikha, Varahamihira and Brahmagupta. Kanada was the first great
writer on Tarka or Sanskrit logic and his system even today
ges under the name of Kanada matham. From what’
e Bhattotpala says, Kanada must have been a royal personage, © |
“who devofed himself to sciences and who became a ‘great. |
authority on Hindy logic or Taka. : 1
Buddha 55 too well-known a royal personage, who i
renounced the tegal.pleasures when young and enunciated
C e [3 e
T
UP State Museum, Fucknow c^ er
c e i" ra
C B c
e

a
a
CC-O. In Public D: in. Digiti "
Ch, XV, St. 4) ic ROY RE EXMIDY Musi and eGangotri
one of ‘he most profound systems of religious faith and
philosophy., Panchasikha must have been a well-known
Prince and writer on science before Bhattotpala’s time. Who
he was and what he has written are now not known. From
this statement of Bhattotpala, Varahamihira appears to have
been a petty Raja or chief and whose scientific works are
now so well known to the educated public. Brahmagupta
was a great astronomer and probably, he belonged tosa
royal family and was a high personage in Kashmir. Some
explain the first part of this stanza ds referring to the two
houses of Jupiter and the sign of the Moon, viz., Sagittarius,
Pisces anti Cancer. But this is contradicted by the clear
quotation from Maharishi Mandavya. If there is a Raja yoga
coupled with the above named yoga, then the person will
ndt be a king but only will bé a scientist. If the person has
two Raja yogas, along with this yoga, then he will become
a ruling king and also a great writer on sciences. Instances
of Jina, Kasiraja and Sphujidhwaja and Janaka are quoted
in support of this principle. Jina was probably the great
Teviver of Jainism and must have been of a high royal
family. Kasiraja was the King of Banares who taught the
great Medical Science of Ayurveda to Susruta, Oupadhenava,
^Vytharana, Ourabbra, Poushkalavatha, Karavirya and
* Gopurarashita and claims to have received his knowledge
from heavenly Gurus. Janaka was the King of Mithila and
, was a great yogi and father of Sitadevi, wife of Sri Rama.
But if a personshas no Raja yoga but has this combination,
then he will become a Sanyasi. o E
“Then Chart I given at the end of Chapter XIV cen de
studied with advantage. SAni aspects Jupiter and the Moon
and Jupiter is in the 9th from the Moon. Tae native has an
inclination to spiritual matters and is grthodox. T
2 D a
> UP State Meem Lucknow
D > e

CHAPTER XVI
RIKSHASILADHYAYA
rerahinan
(Influences of Constellations)
, Rey: GET. gui zts afu |
safe «qt TATA AUNT UU
Stanza 1. —The person born in Aswini will
be fond of decoration, handsome, popular,’ skilful and intelligent. One born in Bharani will be
determined, truthful, healthy, skilful and happy.
TEV WENA Shay RENT: |
Ruai afu: Aia: Racal: Tera WU
Stanza 2.—The person born in Krittika will
be a voracious eater, fond of other’s wives,
attractive and renowned. Rohini makes a man
truthful, clean, following religious and moral principles, ‘sweet in speech, fixed mind and handsome.”
Trea she: Tevet vat aT ft |
Sed: Baar fee TI TT 3
' ^, Stanza 3.—Mrigasira—Capricious, skilful,
: cowardly, good speaker, ‘hopeful; rich and '
enjoying. ‘Aridra—Dissimulating in self-interest,
e
proud, pugrasoiub cruel and sinful. >
n
uP State Museum; Kucknow . e^ CE
e

a
ch. KAB MIESE BoHAITBLAEN CESVOR PER NETS 397.
aa: gei gA shen g fna |
sa a dug: TAH A wes dd
Stanza 4.—Punarvasu—Religious endurance,
happy, 800d, dull, sickly, thirsty and pleased
with small gifts.
AAA a Weal wet wddus: gui
qmd: ger Wak Us N
Stanza 5.—Pushya—Control over passions,
populaf, learned, rich and charitable. Aslesha—
Dissimulator, clever in Selfishness, sinful, ungrateful and a cheat.
Tagara int ghana ater PA
Ramar gR TATA d NR Il
E
"Stanza 6.—Makha—Many servants and great .
wealth, enjoying, respector of elders and gods and
very enterprising. Pubba—Sweet speech, liberal,
. handsome, fond of travelling and royal servant.
gui feet sint gerade |
seré ug: THAIS aem zed ll 9 Il
Stanza 7,—Uttara—Popular, self-acquired
property, enjoying and happy. 4
prising, intelligent or (shameless), drunkard, cruel
and thivish-— ppt beh
œ, UP Stale Museum, luos :
Hasta—Eater- A
UN

' gos COO "Py Pema ATERA Tenses eH 1
RTT: ARA uid Reim |
ar aa ane: erai eqs N< N
Stanza 8.—-Chitta—Using various clothes and
garlands, good looks and limbs. Swati—Polite,
merchant, kind hearted, not able to endure
thirst, sweet tongued and generous.
Rigen atari: RoN |
aA fies speeds ii Ul
Stanza 9.—Visakhe-Jealous, avaricious, handsome, clever speaker and quarrelsome, or maker
of money. Anuradha—Master or chief, living
in foreign countries, not able to bear hunger
and fond of travelling. i
SIG t TERT MET ARAT: d
We Aa TATA Tal a ar Rar stat dito d
Stanza 10.—Jyeshta*-Few friends, contented, _
charitable, very irritable. Moola—Proud, rich, .
happy, good, steady and enjoying.
IAGO Al Tele Tae t
e ar A.O N a
JA eS EESE esi kad)
Stanza £1. —Purvashada—Good and pleasant
wife, * proud and a steady friend. Lttardshada—
UP State Museum, ucknowe e
G

ka bawi
«children and, grandobildren,
a e “UP State Museum, Lucknow
> Y S te NC
Ch. XVI, Sts.12, 13 & 14] STELLAR EFFECTS 399 ^
Polite, 5nowing, virtuous, many friends, grateful
and popular.
tarea TAMEN Weed: Sara?
qT EU SET Tat age aga di $3
Stanza 12.—Sravana—Rich surroundings,
learned, good and liberal or liberal to wife,
wealthy and renowned. Dhanis&ta— Liberal, rich,
courageous, fond of music and money.
TRET ger urea Taras se: |
EERE: ARARE FU 83 N
. Stanza 13.—Satabhisha—Plain and truthful,
striken from sorrow through females, etc., killer `
of enenties, adventurous and irreconcilable.
Poorvabhadra—Sorrowful, loss of money through
females, skilful and miserly.
qw gef satay frozen iter |
mes gp m enam disant $9 UI
Stanza 14.—Uttarabhadra—Good and E
speaker in society and meetings, happy, many s
enemies and charitable.“ Revati—Well- developed
E: greans populaz;-courageous, clean aní wealthy.
B B 5
LJ
successful, ovem, ,
Du
a

à , 400 CC-O. In Public Deja Aiatizes DERA Trust SSW, 14
NOTES
Riksha has been explained by Varahamihira to mean
(1) constellations, and (2) zodiacal signs (see St. 4, Ch. I),
Here both of these are explained. 3 ;
In St. 8 of this there are two readings :
1. Kripalu=generous. a
2. Thrishalu=thirsty.
In St. 9 of this there are two readings :
1. Vachanapatuhu-ciever speaker.
2. Arthapatuhu=clever in earning monev.
In Stanza 13 two different interpretations are given:
(1) Strijitaha- conquered by females, and Dhani= wealthy
and patuhu=clever. Or Strijithadhani—one whose wealth
has been acquired through females. These results must be
predicted according to the strength of the Moon. If he is^
weak in a constellation then there will be very raint traces
of the characteristics. If he is strong, then these qualities
will be possessed to a larger extent.
Readers are requested to refer to the book ‘Nakshatra ~
Chudamani’ where detailed characteristics for each quarter
of a constellation are given. For example Krittika covers
two rasis and the characteristics cannot be the same.

o
o
[d
. CHAPTER xvii
o [e
A FU EET G2 So I E
RASISILADHYAYA OR THE LUNAR EFFECTS
IN THE NATO SIGNS
Wegen farmers: ^
xil Gastar: seas
Te Frat ATTA atl Maer
| mud qr Sa SITUE a ate: BT gU
a Stanza 1.—Moon,in Aries.—Round and
red eyes, eating hot and light’food, fond of grains,
, easily calmed, traveller, passionate, fleshless knees,
changeable wealth, courageous, liked by females,
good'servant, bad nails, cut or scar in the head,
proud, chief among brothers, has Saktirekha (line)
in the palm, capricious ,and dreading water.
-Another version is Ati Bhiru—one who is afraid
very much. The stanza says Thoyecha Bhiru.
"(Many lines on the palm of the hand are
> given different names in the science of palmistry. -
a
Redders may, refer to.‘ Hasta Samudrika "and:tha. ,
articles appearing in THE ASTROBOGICAL” MAGAZINE.) > oo
E^ É
oe
a ^S m, UP State Museum Lucknow
a 2 D
Ny

1402 CC-O. In Public BREA IATARA {TH HS S82 &3
ar Sent TRI: WTAE C
verf Be: pt mg We Ust AHT: |
dependen: dawae: Wl
Fuh: marêngna TA UR
Stanza 2.—Moon in Taurus.—Handsome,
playful walk, long thighs and face, back sides and
face contain some marks, liberal, bearing fatigue,
possessing paraphernalia, begetting girls—phlegmatic, separated from elders, relations, family,
wealth and children; popular, patient, strong
digestion, loved by females, firm friendship and
happy in the middle and end of his life. É
Gale: TENTANG: Ta
qu FTEs: raf |
The: Bare TA Tf an TAA
ANA AYACAI AS TATA UI 3 N
Stanza 3.—Moon in Gemini.-Fondof women, `
skilled in sexual sciences, red. eyes, scientist,
ambassador, curled hairs, clever knowledge in'
- c Wit and human nature and gambling, handsome :
- -organs,. sweet speech, good eater, fond of music,
skilled in -dancing, playing with impotents, high
nose. : = s
e UP State Museum, Lucknow tee zt

Ch. XVII, Sts. 4 & 5] MOON'S INFLUENCES 403"
AARTE gea Maia: ae
Aug TANG: WU eq sea |.
e Tame: SUR pu BIG IR rg on
TATA: TARA m TMS AC? 19 T,
Stanza 4.—Moon in Cancer.—Walking in
curves quickly, high buttocks, submissive tô
women, good friends, astrolĝger, many houses,
waxing and waning wealth like the Moon, short,
stout neck, amenable to kind words, fond of
friends, water and gardens.
ET: TIGA NGT PN Sena:
Stet trea serani Ae |.
~ 700 GANGGA disarm
ara: Rach: guiar mae dua oStanza 5.—Moon in Leo.—Angry, high or
broad cheeks, coloured eyes, few children, hater of
women, fond of flesh, wilderness and mountains,
long displeasure, suffering from complaints.
arising out of hunger, thirst, stomach, teeth and.
‘mind ; liberal, courageous fixed, proud mind and. M
‘obedient to mother. : A
aUai G cae ZE NE IE CREES LEES gai. 2
SU; Werner AT: umepis s! .
a *UP State Museum, Lucknow S E
a A ^s 5
o
a
LJ
a Tai ie,

A
5 204 CC-O. In Public Domein pigga RIM [C 8.508 "SR ey
idt gef: uita usd
sequ quu Ben BAST: UE N
Stanza 6.—Moon in Virgo.—Walk and sight
will be charactérised by modesty, bent shoulders
and hands, happy, sweet speaker, truthful,
-charitable, skilled in arts, learned in sastras,
intelligent, passionate, ‘possessed of other's wealth '
and houses, foreign residence, calm speech; female
children and few issues.
SAMOA TIAA? Hur BRU est
WETANAN FIRAS SA:
dmg: TIRTA PIA ARAN wm,
RRA: A WO”
Stanza 7.—Moon in Libra.—Fond of worshipping Gods, Brahmins, pious people, intelligent,
clean, submissive to women, tall, long nose, weak
and disjointed organs, traveller, rich, ill-developed
organs, clever in merchandise, having the second
name pertaining to God (meaning that he
‘will not have the names of Gods as Rama,
- Krishna but that ‘which denotes „the names of
^ -~ Gods^ as; Shanmuga—six faced--Gangadhara;
etc.), sickly,- helping relations, and coerced and
_-Tejected by relations. (Ancther ‘version is .
e a
UP State Museum, Lucknow - ZR

Ch. XVII, Sts. 8 &9] MOON'S INFLUENCES 405 '
Penangaha having well-developed organs but
this will be inconsistent with what has I
EMT „already
ERISEUEEC IA Rg
CREE RE BME, GUERE |
atuse: New: FAR:
TRIESTE: |< N
Stanza 8.—Moon in Scorpio.—Broad eyes
and cheat, round knees, buttocks and thighs,
separated from parents and Guru, sickly in
infancy, respected by royal members, honey-color,
cruel, has marks of fish, vajrayudha, and bird,
„Secret sinner. 7
TAR: Aaen aiaa
ST ETAT IAA: eere: reat |
gaia: gadi uiuos: aeei-
. ST A TRAR T ae TARTASA: IIe II
Stanza 9.—Moon in Sagittarius.—Long face
and’ neck, paternal wealth, liberal, poet, strong,
clever speaker, thick teeth, ears, tips. and
nose; active,worker, fine atts, bent shoulders, ^ ^
“bad. nails, strong arms, ,highly intelligent,*skilled'" °
` in righteous knowledge, hater of «elaiions and
^ Won.over by fai means and kind.words. A
J EN a 2 UP. State Museum, Luckndw 3 s
v N BD ^

e
S CC-O. In Public BRIHA Di tized by ARM I Ch RAE SEG « T
fred sea VANITIES: WA
qa: MARANGA NIASSA: |
SANGA TANSAH Wat aaa: METE
ASTANE AT: TARTASZ: iol
Stanza 10.—Moon in Capricorn. —Pleaser of
wife and children? pretending charity, lean in
the lower half, good eyes, lean buttocks, grasping
intelligence, popular, idle, not able to bear cold,
traveller, strong or liberal, poet, learned, miserly,
incestuous and low intercourse, shameless and
merciless. i: f
arang: frag: ASAT
TIANG ATANG:
quapiam: ATT AA:
Prasanta saa: || 2? I
Stanza 11.—Moon in Aquarius.—Long neck
like a camel, bulging veins and arteries, rough
and closely haired, and long body, big legs,
~ thighs, -buttocks, tack, waist, face, stubborn,
"fond óf other's wealth and women, and sinful,”
changeabie”, fertune, surrounded by good flowers,
„scents and fr iends, bearing fatigue on the way.
e e
UP State Museum, Lucknow , of WA

. XVII, Sts. 1
| Ch 2 Á 5. 12 & 13] LUNAR STRENGTH
| TATAG TAN saa: s
, WERA quon:
“rah Wey Shang;
RRRA amana || 22 1
Stanza 12.-Moon in Pisces.--Enjoying other's
wealth and aquatic articles, a fond of wife and
clothes, well proportioned and handsome body
prominent nose, big head, conquering enemies
submissive to women, charming eyes, enjoying
treasure trove, lustrous articles, wealthy and
e
leecned.
^ M aga Tat ahaa s
. Wes: emis gR: |
HATHA AHOATAT
IREA egret I 3 UI
‘Stanza 13.—When the Moon, the sign in
which he is, and its lord are powerful, the results
-indicated above will be fully verified. The other
- planetary results must be similarly suggested. j m
a
P^ IE "NOTES NUS Done
É S od 6 a .?
The Moon at the time of birth occupissg zodiacal sign
and,this is technically [called the Janmarasi? The Moon is
D J 4 UP State Museum, Luckrtow `
A aS ^ ^ A
a

as Co PPS PIETA TEKES
identified with the rising constellation at the time and will
be moving there. If the Moon is strong as, well as the
house he óccupies, and its lord, the results predicted will be
completely visible. But when two of them are powerful,
they will be partly.visible. When one is powerful there
will be traces of these characteristics. But when all of them
are weak, then there will be no traces even of the ‘qualities
samed in the respective places. The author is now going
to relate the results from the occupation of other planets
in the various houses of the zodiac and desires the readers
to judge of them on the lines of argument suggested here.
As the results of the occupation of the Moon in the
12 zodiacal signs are clearly given in simple language, I do
not think any further notes in this connection are wanted.
e
D
UP State Museum? Lutknowe Ga *
e
° ie Li
e
s»

3 ^ CHAPTER XVIII
i . RASISILADHYAYA
UE SZ ES: Lo ER
(The Results of Planets in various Rasis)
4 ANGAS NATÈ: frat capers |
TA Tagara aab gaga SETET NU
l Stanza 1:—When the Sen is not in his deep
exaltation in Aries, the person will become
fanzous, clever, traveller, possessed of little wealth
and bearer of arms. When the Sun is in Taurus,
the person will sell scents and clothes, hate
females ahd be clever in drumming and music.
NOTES
Aries extends over 30 degrees of the zodiac and in its
10th degree the Sun is in Swatunga or deep exaltation. But
in the first 9 degrees and from the 11th to the 30th degree
inclusive, he is said to be in exaltation in Aries. When he
is im deep exaltation, the Sun will make the man very
famous, clever, wealthy, and commander of men bearing
à arms. So much is not in the original, but Bhattotpala ., E
rightly adds in his commentaries the results above ‘sketched,, |
getting his information from” other valuable sources. The
‘ original work has not treated this under a separate chapter,
$ ^ but continues it as à continuation of the previous chaptere |
S9
e
E A ^6 UP State Museum, WE
o

* 410 CC-O. In Public BACHE AB VATA RORY WA Nn ab &3
Even ‘the previous chapter Rikshasiladhyayae was not
treated as a separate chapter.
A
Ravi in his deep exaltation, i.e., in 10th degree will not .
make the person have little wealth, travel and bear arms,
but make him very.rich, guarded by armed men and become
famous.
. Penak fan RIAN ril dit Ra
ASE: TRIS WU d
Hae TANNA S: Ga
HAR Asean; ug: Ul N
Stanza 2.—When the Sun is in Gemini, the
native becomes educated, astrologer and wealthy.
In Cancer, he makes the native angry, poor, doing
other's work, and suffer from fatigue by travelling? —
and other cares. “In Leo, the Sun makes one love
the forests, mountains and cattle, courageous and
dull. When the Sun is in Virgo, the person
becomes skilful in “writing, painting, poetry,
philosophy and mathematics, and possess a
feminine body.
TAA Misa tone aa ^oc
"me WEAR Tari RRI o
saei desit Aert n
usq: Sag Tsetse gesar en URN .
j "UP State Mugeuné, Liicknowe > J
e e e. .

Ch. xvi slg mo IR RESULTS Trust and a 6
n Stanza 3.—When the Sun GED Libra, he
| makes the man a toddy-seller, drunkard, traveller
: goldsmith and mean. When the Sun is in Scorpio,
he makes the man cruel, adventurous and rash,
making profits by sales of poisonous substances,
losing Wealth by robbers, and skilled in military
weapons, and destroyer. When the Sun is im
Sagittarius, the person will be respected, rich,
angry,'doctor and artisan. When the Sun is in
Capricorn, the person will be mean, ignorant,
seller of low articles, little wealth, covetuous and
enjoying at other’s cost.
at ae TATAPI RAST:
-C NANA TAPA afsaredisecd |
TETI ARA fart 2
kaa AG Ut aa 9
Stanza 4.—The Sun in Aquarius makes a
man mean, separated from children and wealth,
and poor. The Sun in Pisces causes wealth
“through articles found in water and fondled by
. women. When the Sun and:the Moon are com-> a
= bined in a rasi, marks or moles in the organ» >
which is governed by Kalipurusha, are
o o a
found. y E 1 6
LJ o
j = sa UPState Museum, Lucknow e
o

a
"412 CC-O. In Public DgginEDigfftz doy Adieu TrubGind 34jiySt. 5
; NOTES e
The stanzas are easy enough. As per author's previous
suggestions, the results indicated by the Sun in thee twelve ,
zodiacal signs will be full, when the Sun as well as'the house
he occupies and its lord are strong. In St. 4, Chap. I of this
work, I have clearly explained the different organs governed
by Kalapurusha. Thus if the Sun and the Moon are in
‘Aries, the person will have a mole or mark on the head. If
they are in Scorpio, thé mark will be on the sexual organ.
The author now proceeds to give the results of the other
planets in different rasis. Two rasis are combined and
results are given as for one only, viz., the, houses of the
planets. It comes to mean, Mars in his own house, in
Sukra’s house, in Budha’s house, in Chandra’s house, in
Ravi’s house and in the.houses of Jupiter and Saturn.
Here it may be asked how Mars in Mesha as the lord
of 4 and 11 for Makara Lagna gives the very same result as. =
he would give in Scórpio for Simha Lagna, when he becomes the lord of 4and 9. For Simha he is a Rajayoga
karaka but not for Makara. Hence readers should be very
careful.
aaa seer ferent:
anges qas erm |
TINATA Geekery we
Wenger RR AUK -
: Stanza 3-z-Mars in Aries and Scorpio.—Respectéd by kings, traveller, commander, merchant,
UP State Museum: Lu&know. ^ pe s
EY ^ o 4 E

Ch, OAS temi ARS RS TS aia
zen cut Or scarred body, thief, running through
various sense pleasures or objects.
Mars in Taurus and Libra. —Submissive to
women, ungrateful friend, fond of other’s Wives,
cheat, fop; timid and unsocial. *
" Asaa Aaga
TAg: BSS |
asia fosse
TA RÀ AFT: wea NSN
Stanza 6.—Mars in Gémini and Virgo.—Jealous, sons, friendless, grateful, clever in music and
martial work, miserly, undaunted and mendicant.
Mars in Cancer.—Rich, wealth procured
^ "through „Ships or through travelling, intelligent,
wanting in organs and cruel. '
faa: BAS TATU serena
Sp Sagara: CASSE: |
gant Asisin SARA
AA gR TTA ISAT TAA: dio I
' Stanza 7.—Mars in Leo.—Poor, enduring,
` travelling i in forests, few children and wife: 09
= Mars in Sagittarius and Pisces-—Many. >
enemies, minister, renowned, courageous rang im
Sind : o z
o
o
mo m so UPStae Museum Lucknow
. Q o

às 4]4 CC-O. In Public BREAD PARTY Rote. [Ghs Cand eit &9
Mars in Aquarius. —Sorrowful, poor, traveller,
untruthful and irritable. z
Mars in Capricorn.—Much wealth and many i
children, and king or his equal.
antia A:
PAREPA: FTA |
AMANGAN:
ae aa RTA d | e t
Stanza 8.—Mercury in Aries and Scorpio.—
Fond of gambling, borrowing and drinking,
atheist, thief, poor, bad wife, cheating and untruthful. i A i
Raat: sre: Bac: denta |
FOUTS AAA TT? rm AIRA |S UI
Stanza 9.—Mercury in Taurus and Libra.—
Fond of getting instructors, children, wives and
wealth, liberal, and respectful to elders. Mercury
- - in Gemini.—Liar, skilled in arts and sciences, polite
-peeches, and fond of happiness. - Mercury in ~
Cancer.—Wealth through water, and hateful to
his relations, ‘ r
2 UP State Museum; Lucknow. ^ r

Ch. xoan sawa Mara PREGI KESOI ang eGangoti Am ct
* eed gass — ^
TABS! TVS |
CUR SU TIT get aay
TEN AAA Suus | Lo |
Stanza 10.—Mercury in Leo.—Hateful to
women, without wealth, happiness and children,"
traveller, stupid, fond of Women, and disgraced
by his own community.
Mercury. in Virgo.—Liberal, learned, many
noble qualities happy, patient, expedient or
reseurceful and intrepid. .
. wena faf qusds |
TAHA STATA
ssec] adana: | 24 N
Stanza ll.—Mercury in Capricorn and
Aquarius.—Engaged in other’s work, poor, not
fond?of arts, debtor, carrying out others orders.
Mercury in Sagittarius.—Respected sp king, ee
—learmed, timely speech. — eee.
Mercury in Pisces.—Winning ovis servants
to his side; and mean artist. sates e
dre * e 6 Py UPState Musee Lucknow
o
o LI . o

results indicated above in Cancer. .
- 416 CCO. In Public BRA ATtEA BAS Ayu esci bangah? & 13
adegit emm gue AT
qA: GERI TIM; ga S de |
engi Taman frr aA
AA gasangan; Tel I RR I
Stanza 12.—Jupiter in Aries and Scorpio.—
Commander, possessed of large family, children
and wealth, liberdl and good servants, forgiving,
handsome, good wife and famous. ‘
Jupiter in Taurus and Libra. Healthy,
possessed of happiness, friends, wealth and
children, liberal and popular.
[s
Jupiter in Gemini and Virgo.—Surrounded
by worldly paraphernalia or titles, children and.
friends, minister, consul and happy.
az TATA NPG A TANGEN;
Re ATA; TURE NGA qued |
wai meki ataata; dats at
SY TARA AKL seg Ngan
Stanza 13.—Jupiter in Cancer. — Possessed of
great wealth and gems, children, wife, enjoyment;
. _« intelligence and happiness., °
em
Jüpitér im Leo.—Commander and all the
UP State Museum, Lucknow ^. ^ Pas e
fran

Ch. KOTO, $9? di Dain iiie d hi Bare Trust and eGangotri UE: x
Jupiter in Sagittarius and Pisces.—King or
minister or, commander or wealthy.
Jupiter in Kumbha or Aquarius will produce
the results ascribed to him in Cancer. J upiter in
Capricorn.—Mean, poor and unhappy.
^ qned
edv goaa: mud d
. SRAN RATA:
Py: AAAs: A A LN
- Stanza 14.—Venus in “Aries and Scorpio.—
Fond of other women, lósing money through
their flattery and hater of his race.
. Venus in Taurus and Libra.—Self-acquired
^ "property, | respected by rulers, leader of his men,
renowned and courageous. i :
THURS Hola
Faget TASAR |
.— vfsdmdsqaturs )
| . gp AA ca: emm i$ i 3
Stanza 15,—Venus in Gemini.—Doing ruler’s
"Work or service, wealthy and, learned. n i ee
= Venus in Virgo.—Doing very mean acts.c. ,
Venus in Capricorn “and Aquarius-Popular,
slave to women, and intercourse with bad women,
e 22 ^ of UR State Museum Lucknow M ^
o

e
og a Pubic DREA TOAT AJ do E UT Sif 4 1"
(msi ate: aeu ed WEN °
al dp: naga aa d ^
gi: ven emgem TA +
ay farre TARA d 38 I
Stanza 16.—Venus in Cancer. —Gives two
wives, mendicant, timid, full of sexual passion
and sorrow through it.
Venus in Leo.—Getting wealth A a
woman, handsome wife and few childrem
Venus in Sagittarius. —Adorned with many
good qualities and rich. , »
Venus in Pisces. st onde wealthy, respected by rulers and very popular. S
quise aegis] o
He q ATTA TASJA |
fulgure Ta SEY
vanas geass arg Qe.
Stanza 17.—Saturn in Aries.—Ignorant,
itinerant, cheat and friendless.
^^ Saturn i in Scorpio. —Imprisonment, whipping, -
.fapricigüs and merciless. , °
Safura’ im Gemini ‘and Virgo.—Childless,
poor, shameless, unhappy, not knowing painting,
UP State Museum, Lucknow% e e *

o
protective officer and chief man. (One reading
is skilled ip painting. Another reading says he
. will be Rakshasapathi or lord of Rakshasas or
evil genii).
VETT ste Poit foit quet
Tata; BA gaai iiA |
aI Are masg:
asaat Agaat AREATA eu
- Stanza 18.—Saturn in Taurus.—Connections
with prohibited and low caste women, Ordinary
wealth and many wives. z
communities, towns, army and village, wealthy.
Saa in Cancer.—Poor, loose teeth, motherless, childless and ignorant.
Saturn in Leo.—Bad, childless and unhappy,
carrying loads.
RG TAT ALATA TAMA
PATS TATANAN | ;
i— ^ werde gue `, o
e =? AQ ə è s.
e &JP State Musgum, Lucknow
o e ° ə
LJ
Ch. XVI. Sté2uii&iomotmADf res Sero TEFEN eGangotri 419. 7
e
. ` Saturn in Libra.—Famous, respected by
erat aA RATATAT RT s ta TATU

e
^ 4gQ CC-O. In Public DBRIHATAAT A Key Todes st. 19
Stanza 19.—Saturn in Sagittarivs and
Pisces.—Good death or happy in the end, confident with princes or rulers, good children, wife .
and wealth, commander of towns, armies and
villages. 3
Saturn in Capricorn and Aquarius.— Getting
"other's women, wealth and other's houses, chief
of towns, villages and army, short-sighted, dirty,
permanent wealth, general prosperity and enjoying. |
.NOTES j
In the results sketched above they must be predicted in
full, when the house is strong, as also its lord and the planet
which occupies it. If“two of these are strong, the results
will be moderate, if one of them is strong there will be
some of these characteristics; but if none of these is strong, — |
then there will be traces of these results. For the sake of |
brevity, I have not added many notes to these stanzas and
Idon'tthink they are needed as the translation itself is given
in the simplest language possible. These results given by |
Varahamihira must be carefully predicted. Asin medical
drugs so also in planets individually each may have its T
more prominent characteristics but its results are influenced
by time, place and other menial conditions, habits and
_ mature and the greatest skill of the doctor and the astrologer
cS is wanted iu discriminating the right result. Readings
* ' differ and sometimes they give fadically Opposite meaningst-—
It is extremely „difficult to say which is correct and as these
^ planetary rays of light are mixed up with the edifferent rays
— au:
UP State Museum, Lucknow’ o p^ y

G
Ch. XVIII, St.20] LAGNA RESULTS, 421
of light of the zodiac it is póssible to imagine results of
quite a different nature from what we may expect from
- ordinary conjunctions. In St. 17 under “ Saturn in Gemini
and Virgo" one reading is *'*Kusalascha Lakhay ”
meaning one well skilled in painting. «The other reading
is ““ Skhalitascha Lakhay ” meaning one who is discomfited
in his attempts at painting. These, two are radically
different in purport. One reading is Rakshapathi or he^
who protects people and another reading is Rakshasapathi
M or lord'of evil genii or Rakshasas or giants mentioned in
| many of the Puranic works. This must be taken as referring
to one who coremands evil natured or bad men.
RARAN
TENANG AA SATEN |
. 5 eum Ter wae :
ATTAIN E usc t ll Ro I
Stanza 20.—The results which have been
stated for the presence of the Moon in each rasi,
and the results of aspects on Moon by other planets in the different signs will have to be applied
t for lagna. The prosperity and adversity of each
bhava must be predicted by the strength of the
| bhava and its lord.
: ^ -NOTES ` Ag
What the author means-by this is that alí-those results
which are attributed to the Moon in eac} sign will also
apply, to each of the/signs or lagnas. Aman born in Aries ,
e ka)
o EXC)
o o
o ° o UP State Museum, Lucknow
D
e O e o

e
qn o n Pe ORT RE TATRA "ERG Ss, 20
will have the results predicted similar to those attributed to
the Moon when he is in Aries. (See St. 1, C» XVII.)
Maharishis have said that the results of the lagna as .
well as of the Moon are similar, and bear no ‘difference,
because they are similar in nature. (See notes on St. 8,
Ch. VII). Satyacharya, the great authority, on whom
Varahamihira relies for support, thus gives the results
“of the various lagnas. -
Aries as Lagna.—jad nails, irritable, creating quarrels,
stammering, bilious and windy temperament; miser,
suffering much from diseases, losing parents at an early age,
few children, helping relations and brothers, perilous,
going to foreign ccuntries, doing unremunerative work,
getting asa wife a woman who is already married or who '
is base in character or s tale-bearer, or who has lost a limb,
friendly, windy or bilious complaints, death by poison, or
by the treachery of his own men or by fire, or rain or by' -
falling from fort walls. xt
Taurus as Lagna.—Thick lips, nose, cheeks, big forehead, windy and phlegmatic, liberal, spending in various
ways, female children, few sons, doing much evil to parents,
active, engaged in immoral work, wealthy, fond of wife,
destruction by weapon, doing always bad to relatiorts, will >
. die in a foreign country by weapons, chains or ropes, beasts, |
fatigue, water, cross or by force, travelling or guadrupeds, |
Gemini as Birth sign.—Defective or abnormal organs, |
R2
polite, specially skilfulin work, mixed temperament, two
e .*mothers ordinary intelligence,. and body, respected by.
holy mea and parents, few brófners, suppressor of enemies,
virtuous, foné óf many works, charitable, makjng remedies
A—— 9 re
. for illegal sources-of wealth, many wi'yes, gets over many . ¢
e e d
UP State Museum, £ucRnow o 4 »- mec o |
r3 e

a
ch, RVI SEU] "LAGNA RESULTS 423
diseases; deve by rutted elephants, wild beasts,
animals or yater.
Cancer as Lagna.—Capricious, diseased sexual organ,
timid, móle or mark on the chest, windy and phlegmatic
temperament, quick comprehension, sinful, troubled by
enemies misappropriating other's monies, rejected by
relations, having miscarriages, doing hard work in foreign
countries, leader of other people, unrivalled wife, suffering
defeats, respected by large commtnities, death by neck
disease? ropes, phlegm, breaking of bones, separation of
limbs by cuts or dropsy.
Leo as Lagna.—Fond of flesh, bilious, suffering big
losses, undertaking many enterprises, big family, misery,
loved by good people, "famous, causing trouble to brothers,
destruction to relations, warlike, sarrowless, accomplishing
work by various devices, uncharitable, many wives from
t different castes, suffering pain from back knees and teeth,
death by Weapons and poisons, sticks, phlegmatic diseases
aquatic animals or ihefts.
virgo as Birth sign.—Polite speech, handsome, long
arms and legs, mixed temperament, good, sores, wealthy
miser, having many daughters; quarrels among brothers,
virtuous, satisfied with small profits, clever in work, death
by quadrupeds of various kinds, weapons, bilious com-
, Plaibts, sorrow, burning sensation from diseases or ropes.
Libra as Bsrth.—Deformed organs, crooked temper,
‘windy and phlegmatic constitution, capricious, s short neck, o a
. gratéful, reputátion by lagge deeds, fond of serving pazents ,
and instructors, respected by father, brothers, and other
people, traveller, charitable, ruin by daily troubles,
widgwer, quarrelsome, suffering various sorzows, death by.
o *e
LJ e. 9
e 2 e UP State Myseum, Lucknow
e
LJ ` . o
T
AFA .
poison,

424 CC-O. In Public DggeierPietegder Rex TrupGind MGADBB YS t. 20
e i 4
a leader, relations, quadrupeds, sorrows from separation,
fasting or travelling. e
Scorpio as Birth.—Large nose, belly and face, cruel, |
bilious, golden eyes, soft and quick walk, leader, of
foreigners, big family and relations, extravagant, many
issues, cruel, unhappy, having many enemies, many bulls,
unrighteous, disgust thróugh wife, victorious ovef enemies,
“not inclined to give many charities, has enemies in his
own family, many diseases, death by fever, cutting of limbs,
capture by enemies, ropes, beating, sinful diseases or fire. 9
Sagittarius as Lagna.—Thick lips, nose and teeth,
windy and phlegmatic, large sexual organ, bif arms and
thighs, bad nails, active, warlike, company with bad and
base men, loss of wealth through théfts, fire and fines from |
rulers, highly intelligent, ° greatly respected, fond of
murdering brothers and going to foreign countries, getting
wealth from rulers, not much inclined to charity, quarrel- « -
ling with wife, . faeial diseases, death by quadrupeds,
serpents, imprisonment. :
Capricorn as Lagna.—Small nose, long face, arms
and legs, windy, deer-faced, timid, capricious, imprisonment, bad wife, little wealth, miserly, daughters, deaths
among relations, many brothers, earning wealth tbrough i
strength, kings or forest, fasting, getting a base woman as
wife, quarrelsome, short hairs, weak knees, sickly, death
by children, wind, weapon, ruler, poison, falling, elephant,
e^ bile, indigestion, or loss of way. Hi i
Mcd Aquarius as Birth —Idle, cruel, chief in family, Windy he
and bilious disposition, good" pose, spending earnings, .
many servants, Eecoming poor through various expenditure,
„enemy to parents, clan or race, péople, friends „and
UP State Museum, &uckhow ‘o ° "m s
e
D
e e . vw

Ch. SEV ili Opmain TDAG (grab Y e grex y Fest and eGangotri 425 e
kaon sinful, acguiring profits to his desires,” looking
generous and charitable and religious,’ quarrelsome wife,
phlegmatic or lung complaints, death by stomach diseases,
vomitttng or feminine schemes.
Pisces as Birth.—Thick lips, fishy eyes, long nose,
windy and phlegmatic temperament, dignified, cutaneous
eruptios, capricious mind and unsteady work, good earning
and spending money, servants, respected by his relations
and women, chief among his brothers, engaged in righteoug
work, brought up by father, base but handsome wife,
many enemies, danger through nasty blood diseases, lions,
elephants, death by base disease in sexual organ, medicine,
fast or travelling. ^
When the lagna and its lord are strong, there will be
gced health, when the second and its lord are powerful,
he will be rich. When the third'and its lord are strong,
courage and brother’s prosper. Similarly for all the twelve
different „significations or bhavas the results should be
ascertained. But these results should be.reverted in the 6th,
8th and 12th houses. When the 6th and its lord are weak,
then the results indicated by that house would be destroyed.
The following hints may be arefully noted. The lagna
` must be strong as also its lord. The lord of the house
occupied by the lord of Lagna or Chandra must also be
strong. They must have good conjunctions and aspects
~ and. they should not be placed betwixt evil planets. The
vargas occupied should bej beneficial and they must håve
also clear and brilliant rays. Tie rays of exalted planets
are certainly different from the rays of debilitated planet3;
planets in unfriendly signs will have weaker, influences than
those who'are in friendly mansions. E v
d G
m `e UP Stale Museum, Lucknow
D J 9

e
A e
e
e
"CHAPTER XIX :
DRISTI PHALADHYAYA E : |
TERANA:
(Results of Planetary Aspects) 6
«3 gaga] AA AASTA
Aa: Aaroa Ra: Na: SANA | j
TAN agaran sa :
wi args fisv ere I Ul
Stanza l.—When the Moon is in Aries
aspected by Mars, etc., the person becomes a
king, philosopher, equal to a ruler, virtuous, thief
and poor, respectively. E
When the Moon is in Taurus aspected By
< Mars, etc., the person becomes poor, thief,
respected by people, ruler, wealthy and servant
respectively.
When the Moon is in Gemini aspected byMars, etc., the person will be a seller of weapons,
ruler, learned, courageous, weak and poor eS.
pectively. 2 :
«^ . When the Moon is in Cancer aspected by °
Mats, etc., the person will be a warrior, poet, n
learned, ‘ruler, _fiving by weapons and have eye |
a
complaints respectively. JS
s S UP State Museum, Éucknow', e Ee Y
m e $ ie © f e
LJ (Cj x

In; ublic Domai YN M IOON and eGangotri Pd
Ch, m UIT A HEELS MO 421
NOTES
True to*his motto Varahamihira is very brief and suggestivo in these stanzas. One or two explanations offered
here will be quite sufficient to make his meaning clear.
When the Moon occupies Aries aspected by Mars the
person hecomes a ruler, aspected by Mercury he becomes
learned or philosopher, aspected by, Jupiter he becomes a
statesman or some other personage equal to a king or ruler,
aspected by Venus the person becomes virtuous or full of
good qualities, some read here Vanik instead of Guni and
make it rgean a merchant, aspected by Saturn he becomes
a thief, and a’spected by the Sum the man becomes poor.
In the case of Saturn, Jupiter and Mars, there will be
péwerful aspects in the 3rd and,l0th, 5th and 9th and 4th
and 8th houses respectively as wéll as in the 7th from all
other planets. Thus when the Moon is in Aries with
Saturn in Cancer, Jupiter in Leo and Mars in Virgo, we
shall have the aspect of Saturn in the- 10th, of Jupiter in
the 9th, and of Mars inthe 8th. When the Moon is in
Aries and Saturn is in Libra there is saturnine aspect and
the person will become a thie& but as Saturn is exalted in
` Libra the rank of the person may be good among the thiefs.
He becomes their leader. If the Sun is in Libra he aspects
the Moon in Aries and makes the person poor as he has
his:fall in that house. The concensus of astrological opinion
seems to say that the most powerful aspect will be in the
Tthe house akhough special sights have been enumerate
both in Briha? Jataka and other eminent works. | * When this °
Moon is in Taurus aspected by Mars "tpe person becomes
por, aspected by Mercury thief, aspected by Jupiter tes9 o . e UPsStdte Ai, Lucknow
e

Sop CC-O. In Public Demain, Djofigeg RySarayu Trust ReheSersersc, 2
a
pected by people, same read #ripadhya instead of Nrimanya
and explain by saying that he will be a ruler,,aspected by
Venus king, aspected by Saturn wealthy, and aspected by
the Sun the person becomes a Servant. Similarly explain
regularly for other signs and aspects.
These results will also hold good for lagna or birth
sign when aspected by Mars, etc. That is if birth' is Aries
aspected by Mars thé person becomes a king, aspected by
Mercury learned, by Jupiter equal to a ruler, by Venus
virtuous, by Saturn thief, and by the Sun poor. ©
NA TAR Ae
TETAMI: TUSIA: GMAT: |
si pania: RA udi : |
ale Baas Wea TARSAN uds WAU
Stanza 2.—If the Moon is in Leo aspected
by Mercury, etc., the person will become learned |
in astrology, chief or lord, Raja, barber, ruler and |
thief respectively. -
If the Moon is in Virgo aspected by Mercury, -
etc., the man becomes a ruler, commander, dexterous and aspected by malefics the person lives
asa dependent upon women respectively. l
«^ , Ifthe Moon is in-Libra aspected by Mercury,
a €tc.," heebecomes a ruler, goldsmith, merchant
and by the- eyil planets killer ‘of animals respece
tively: D z
A e > C E e^
e e
e UP State Museum, £ucknow', e C E E
e e e
^ e G e e
e ern

Ch. XIX jn$tubid Domain. PHALA AG Aust and eGangotri 429^
Whén the Moon is in Scorpio aspected by
Mars, etc, the person becomes father of twins,
polite, washerman, defective in organs, poor and
ruler respectively. E
NOTES
Here he has commenced from Mercury, etc., with a
view to shorten the stanza and make it more suggestive.
The planets are always to be taken in'their usual order ef
the Sun, Moon, Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus and Saturn.
Suppose we commence with Mercury then the order will be
Mercury, Jupiter, Venus, Saturn, the Sun and Mars as we
are treating of the aspects of these planets upon the Moon.
Flere to cut short the language and give greater suggestion
the last three planets are malefics, viz., Saturn, the Sun and
Mars and hence he gives one result for all these malefics.
; Ifthe Moon is in Leo aspected by Mercury the person
becomes , learned in astrology. This term astrology in
Sanskrit includes both 'Siddhanta (Astronomical Mathema- .
tics) and Phalabhaga or predictive or Judicial astrology. If
the Moon is in Leo aspected by Jupiter the person
becomes a lord, if aspected by Venus ruler, aspected
by Saturn barber, aspected by the Sun king, aspected by Mars a ruler. Similarly for other signs. The
word Yugmapitha is used, which means father of
twins. Aspected by Mercury applies to a person who 15
the father of twins. In the last case it is to be explained
as a man being born to one father and then if, his mothet" e
marries another man and he gets another-fathcr. This^is ^
very frequently met with among the Western nations. The
first Yugfnapitha „suits well grammatically as representing
E - a
ees 0 Ps UP State Museum, NM T

e
eo
M UP State MusgumeLuéknowe e °
e
e
7430 cc-o. in Public BREA AGT bMS Ay ril C uu eSI 3
the fathet of twins, but the second interpretation geems to.
be strained from a gfammatical point of view.
maiaa TO TÈ: ate aS E
agaaa ATT À |
q qasan AT: a TT
TIN Aga AA TT TANA N 3 It
Stanza 3.—If the Moon ‘is in Sagittarius.
aspected by Mercury, etc., the person will protect
relations, be a king, master of many, aspected
by malefics the person will be showy or di$simulator, inattentive to other’s interests respectively.
If the Moon is in Capricorn aspected by
Mercury, etc. the*person becomes king of
kings, “Raja, pandit, wealthy, and poor respectively. À e
< Ifthe Moon is in Aquarius aspected by
Mercury, etc., he becomes a Raja, equal to a ruler,
fond of other’s wives and aspected by other
planets he will be fond of other's wives -
respectively. A
If the Moon is in Pisces aspected by Mercury,
etc,, the person will be a jester, Raja, pandit and
e Aspected by malefics becomes sinful.
accede E NOTES * j
Here ke haS nos given the results of the aspects of the
Moon apon lagra.“ Bhattotpala thus reconciles o? explains
e e
e LJ
o
o
o c °
e

o
o
Ch. KIH; ISPR uc Dopa ONitized by Savaunyyat gnd eGangotri 431 4
this omission. (See Ch. I, Stanza 19.) The lagna Becomes
powerful when aspected or joined by its ford, by Jupiter or
Mercury. Therefore when Cancer becomes lagna and the
* Moon aspects it, it becomes powerful and good results must
be predicted. When other signs become lagna (ascendant):
and the Moon aspects them, they do not become powerful
and therefore no good results would follow.
DATAN: DAR E: Tall Td- i
waa RA: gere AAT TAA |
Ah ARNT TA Td
aaa ras TAA FF aaa UU
Stanza 4.—If the other planets occupy the
sarpe horas as the Moon and aspect him the results
will be beneficial. When «the lord of the
.dmekkana occupied by the Moon aspects him the
* results are favourable. If the Moon is aspected
by plànets in friendly houses, it is good. The -
results which have been stated above for each of
the houses of the zodiac by the occupation of the
Moon and the aspecting of other planets will
also ‘be similar when the Moon occupies the
Dwadasamsa of those planets. Hereafter the
‘aspects of the,Sun, etc., in the navamsas, and the
«Moon in the navamsas will be detailed. 2
=, s NOTES REA EM
Hora means half of d Sign (see Sts..9 and 1b, Ch. 1).
The Moonenecessarily occupies some hor? of a sign qt the
e A O Q ..
6 EI x
e : e
e - UP State Musgum, Lucknow "
o
e e

7^ 432 CC-O. In Public DOBRUHATE: AT Hays Trust habe GS dgviSt. 4
time of birth. Suppose he occupies the solar-hora in
Aries. Then if he has the aspects of planets in solar horas
in any other sign or signs the results will be favourable.
But if they occupy lunar horas and aspect such Moon the
results will be malefic. Suppose the Moon is in the lunar
hora in Virgo; then if he has the aspects of planets
occupying lunar horas in any other house the results will
be favourable, butif they occupy solar horas and aspect
the Moon in a lunar hora, the results are evil. Lagna must
similarly be explaineü. Coming to the drekkana (onethird part of a sign) suppose the Moon occupies the third
drekkana in Aries. The lord of this drekkasa will be
Jupiter. If Jupiter aspects the Moon the results are gocd.
The word used is Tatpathibhi, i.e., lord of those houses. By
this Varahamihira includes the aspects in navamsas,
dwadasamsas and trimsamsas. When the lords of these
divisions (aspecting the Moon) are benefics the results -
are very good, but when they are malefics, the results are
moderate. In support of this view Bhattotpala quotes from
Varahamihira’s Laghu Jataka. Planets in friendly or own
houses will produce good when they aspect the Moon,
thereby implying that plauets in unfriendly houses will
produce bad. Similarly for lagna. The results now explained in re. the position of the Moon in the various signs
of the zodiac and the aspects of the other planets upon him
will hold good in his dwadasamsas. i
mfi vae gaat Aas
E Li fafta L
—— — —À e ag M f — MM ta ———À
fi Gee ^
UP State Museum, Lucknow ^. ~ A

- lg, Public Dom NO by Sarayu Trust and eGangotri
Ch. KANE, BS! pen WULAN SDREKKANA 593
* gue rfe qdqemen:
ARREST NT |
"waht AeA
TURCA BHT || VW |
Gee 24.—The last Drekkana of Vrischika ,
represents a lion with a broad flat face, resembling a tortoise, frightening dog$, deer, boars and
jackals, protecting localities covered with sandalwood treés. . "
* NOTES
This is a masculine, quadruped, lion Drekkana ruled
by the Moon.
TATI SATAMA
TITEN TATA |
areata quier
TA AN TAN: || 3% I
Stanza 25.—The 1st Drekkana of Dhanus
represents a man with a human face and a horse's
body with a bów in hand residing in a hermitage,
protecting sacrificial articles ahd Maharishss.
“NOTES D sae 3t
This is à masculine, quadruped, armed "Djekkana AMEN
"y: Jüpiter. a
f 38 e% - e UP Stale Museum, Luck
Pd

594CC-O. In Public DoBRAMA Bed A EA rud Ga dX ANG St. 26
AANA eRe :
aga fagi semet |
«guia Aaa
TAA FIT ASE? d 3E I
Stanza 26.—The middle Drekkana of Dhanus
- represents a woman, handsome, with the colour
of Champaca or gold, picking up the gems from
the ocean and sitting in the Bhadrasana fashion.
NOTES z
Tbis is a feminine Drekkana ruled by Mars.
There are several postures in: which Devotees in the
yoga practice are required to sit and contemplate. This is
technically called Asana which means a position of the body
by which steadiness and concentration can be secured in-the
search of knowledge, after Para-Brahma. Sixty-four Asanas |
are mentioned and even today there are some yogis who can
show all the sixty-four. The schools are also teaching some
important Asanas to the students and many boys can show
more than 16 to 20 Asanaz as observed. In 1906, I brought
a north Indian yogee to the house, who showed all the 64
Asanas. I kept him for about a week and sent him with rich [
presents, asking him not to exhibit them in the Moore Market
for the sake of a few pice and giving him the healthier
aspect of these Yogasanas and their sacred attainments.
.. Tbe mos: important Asanas for yoga practive are: >
—— rE
(1). Padmasana 45). Kapalasana Tus
(2) Swestikasana (6) Mayurasana i
°(3) Bhadrasana (7) Kukkutasara |
"S (4) Gomukhasana (8) Simhasana and so-forth. -
G
UP State Museum, Lucknow E T
A

"t
Ch. KANG Stu Dit Bêna MAKARA SoxByE KES HAAN ie Gangotri 595 7
Gs cere C :
TAA TSR ATN: |
TETIGA 4
giret ATALT UAE Ul Vo |
Stanza 27.—The 3rd Dtekkana of Dhanus
represents a man with a long beard, complexion
like that of Champaca or golé, holding a stick,
sitting in a splendid posture and keeping silks and.
deer skins.
. NOTES
?This is a masculine, armed Drekkana governed by the
Sun:
` Champaca belongs to the Mangels family and is kale
Michelia champaca.
TPT arg:
BATA ATATATUT..|
"T [SR EET GENGA]
UGA ARCATA a ||
‘Stanza 28.—The ist Drekkana of Makara
Tepresents aman covered with much hair, teeth ER
“like those of a crocodile, body like that of a pig,"
keeping yokes, nets and bandage$, ent ‘witha
. cruel face. iS . ..
e . e Q a
wie e UP State Myseum, Lucknow
e e e

EN
596 CC-O. In Public FPR Pp oc PARA [Cus epo Vo S9129 —30
: NOTES z
Bandages include ropes and chains. This isa masculine, Nigala (chains or bandages) Drekkana governed by
Saturn.
seris emat
smt fanfti smi |
quit
ANA WEL eem TET URS Ul
Stanza 29.—The middle Drekkana of Makara
represents a woman, «skilled in arts, broad eyes
like lotus petals, greenish dark, searching all kinds
of articles and wearing iron ear ornaments. ^
X NOTES
This is a feminine Drekkana ruled by Venus.
PATA: URATUATE Wf: |
dugzeh cabin
Remp Wem: 3o! ——.
Stanza 30.—The last Drekkana of Makara
represents a man, with a body like that of-Kin*
naras, with a Kambalam, with a quiver arrows
. . and bow, and bearing a pot on the shóulder
deckee with gems. E
c NOTES A 2
„This is a masculine, armed Drekkana ruled by. Mercury. l
UP State Museum, Lücknow ^| s: e
e

Ch. xri, Sts. 51-2] KUMBHA DREKKANA 597
ka :
ENPI: dau: |
MURATA
TAG ser: N 3R N
Stanza 31.—The lst Drekkana of Kumbha ,
represents a man with a mind disturbed by oils,
wines, water and food being brôught to him, with
a Kambala, silk cloth and deer skin and a face
resembling that of a vulture,
* NOTES
This isa masculine Drekkana zuled by Sani. It represents a man being sorrowful by oils, food, wine; etc.,
~ "being brought to him, with Kambala (woollen cloth) Pattasa,
silk cloth, and Krishnajina or deer skirt. The face resembles
that of a vulture or Gridhra.
TA Wat AA NGANTEN |
-ARAT Ra ae AMSAT des ETA: d 3R I
Stanza 32.—The 2nd Drekkana of Kumbha
represents a woman, covered with a dirty cloth
in a forest, bearing pots on her head and dragging
Metajs in a burnt cart loaded with cottóp trees ,.
in it. DE dd e fee
o
e A NOTES D Y
usi is a a Bey) feminine Drekkana (ruled by Merqury. `
e UP*State Mican Luka
a
2o

a
598 ^ PRIHAT JATAKA [Ch. XXVII, Sts. 3734
sata; cpu mS
5 Ar cc
asane |
asi NATA
dawaa FEET Ul 33 Mt
Stanza 33.2-The 3rd Drekkana of Kumbha
indicates a man dark, with ears covered with long
hair, wearing a crown and wandering with pots
filled with iron, skin, je gum ang fruits.
NOTES
This is a masculine Drekkana governed by Venus. „ The
auior uses Thwak which means skin or bark.
gams ATTA
sifa: agana |
aera Aa
Aa RTA AIT || 8B Ul
Stanza 34.—The 1st Drekkana of Meena
represents a man decked with ornaments, holding
in hand sacrificial vessels, pearls, gems, and conch
shells and crossing the ocean in a boat in search
‘of, jewels for his wife. — , nds
t EC NOTES
* As ds language is plain and simple in the translation
e
ç ‘notes are necessarily short. This is a^ masculine Drékkana 3
governed by Jupiter: State Museum, aneng à Si

Em
——— PEERS
D
o
ə
ch. XXVII, Sts. 35 53] MEENA DREKKANA
sg egere uf qd c
RS TAA SR: Tae |
qa FETT TAT PRI
E , ec
vier fa AARAA: i 34 N
Stanza 35.—The 2nd Drekkana of Meena
indicates a woman with a colour more beautiful"
than that of Champaka, surrounded by her
attendants, and sailing in a boat decked with long
flags in search of the coast of the ocean.
NOTES
eThis is a feminine Drekkana ruled by the Moon.
Champaka is a beautiful yellow strongly scented flower,
o
pertaining to Mangolia species. 2
e
aah AIRNE :
ANRT: RTN |
sedeant
RAAS AIT d 35 II
Stanza 36.—The 3rd Drekkana of Meena
represents a man crying in a pit in a forest, naked
“and covered over his body by serpents and with
“a mind distracted by thieves and fire. .
j : , NOTES «aes
This is a masculine serpent Drekkana governed by Mars.
-There are twelve signs and each sign has 3 DrekRanas
‘or there ape in all 36 Drekkanas. It has already been’
e UP'Stáie Myseum, Lucknow
e ° o
E . e
oe
A
Pe
a

e
e
^ 600 CC-O. In Public DRTE Agite pASerayu Trpeien XX EbHSt. 36
explained in several places ip the body of this werk about
the uses of these Drekkanas. They are especially useful
in travelling. Varahamihira says in his Yatra patala thus
—“ The results of the rising Drekkana at the time of journey
must be predicted with reference to their form, actions and
nature. If the Drekkana is agreeable, bearing flowers,
fruits, gems or treasures or if they are aspected by ‘benefics,
„then prosperity wilb attend the traveller’s march. If the
' Drekkanas are armed she will be victorious, if aspected by
malefics, he will be Gefeated or beaten. If the Drekkana
happens to be serpent or bondage, the traveller will be
disgraced or imprisoned or will die. These Drekkanas also
enable one to know the nature, place and form of the
thieves. Varahamihira’s son Prithuyasas thus observes in
his Shatpanchasat. ‘By the navamsa of the questiof the
nature of the article lost, by the Drekkana, the nature of
the thieves, by the Lagna, the time, locality and direction. b
and by the lord of the Lagna, the age and caste of the
thieves have to be known and predicted”. My work
* Chappanna ° gives elaborate details of Prasna.
The matter may be simplified thus. When a question
is put to an astrologer abcat the loss of an article by theft
or otherwise he will make the necessary calculation and fix
the lagna and navamsa for the time of question. When the
calculations are correct, the Shadvargas Lagna, Hora,
Drekkana, Navamsa, Dwadasamsa and, Thrimsamsa cam
easily be ascertained and fixed. After having done this he.
must asoertain the nature of the article lost by the.rising
“navamsa. Ezch sign has various significations and governs"
several articles. , The nature of the thieves will have to be
predicted by the Drekkana which rises at the tifne. By the
e Lagna, the time, at°which an article has’ been lost or stolen
UP State Museum, Lücknow ^. Pun. =
a

Ch. ARV, SOS GO" SE ROR PEK KAPAS eGangotri co, ^
away, the direction in whick it has been taken and the
place from which it is lost and the locality in which it is
deposited or concealed, and by the lord of the Lagna, the
age and caste of the thieves. In the’ second and third
chapter of this work all these details are given and the
student is referred to them for ready information. In
travelling, necessarily the person leaves his house or place
of occupation at some time. The Lagna can easily be
ascertained and the rising Drekkana known. If the
Drekkgna is good, he will have a prosperous journey, if it
is evil or malefic he will suffer loss, and if it is very bad he
will even» die. The strength, position, conjunction and
aspects must be carefully consulted. Varahamihira and
his famous son Prithuyasas seem to have confined their
vi?ws of Drekkana to lost articles, thieves and their
directions and travellers and their luck or ill-luck on their
jeurney. But their uses are more comprehensive than has
been stated here. When a persop is born in a cruel
Drekkana, he will be bad and miserable. When he is born »
in a beneficial Drekkana he will be good and successful.
When the Drekkana is good and evil planets occupy it, or
when it is evil and good pléaets combine in it the results
will be mixed. But when it is evil, occupied by a malefic
and aspected by an evil planet, the results are very
disagreeable, the person will suffer miseries, defeats,
poverty, losses,, disgraces and various diseases. When the
Drekkana is good, occupied and aspected by benefics, |
without malefic influence, the person will be eminently v
successful, wilt be happy, will have good and distinguishe@ ə
progeny and will attain to a good position, and^ command
great respect and influence. (See VaidyBnatha's Jataka
Pdrijata, Sts. 112 to 116, Chapter D o S
ə
o Q5 iS UP*State Myseum, Lucknow

A II — ?QqeusuA : < :
E II ILJEN snus, uinjeg AINA, G
ga I vÁuey , eururuoj eut[nase]A oulu i Bhoey
* 6 el Me
im III "uso € Sie c ung 'pirq 3 t
: s snueu(q pednipenQ) Joudne ‘podnipend
L4 I equis eui[n5se]A eui[nose]A eui[noseN Ë c equis
Dig n (AG
EV, HI LUN quadsog E uoow ‘=
> Il BYLYOSITA Ioydnf SIEN pədnıpend "e
me I DD ur o[euroq uec ves
ED. II eqquiny uinjeg snus, S E
ic e I enu peuny e pig ÁinoJ9]A 3
54 I eangu W ae yen È əmu `| eung
ch ul RIVAL ce ums ^ Á1n919]A m
£ < Hu Bhaey, pednipend podnupend snuoA N
a ae wel eqqeysiiA our[nose]A eurnose]A ouu &JQqeusrrA?
AME a ae sendang ung “pa kes T
£ PEN "sndeqd TII uejN oewos “aurad LWN :
o “eyung ‘IJ “BUS 1 eur[noseJA podnipend eqsoW "c. . tuse
Om <
t syavuay puvyyə4q IIL Uubxxoiq | 2404424 1 "x
AUVINWAOS V
r
e
e

SUMMARY
Ch» XXVII, St. 36]
EXIQOSHA.
[iU
BUS
eng
vunqirjA
eqquiny
ekuesy
PqqeusHA
BILABIAL
ce
equis
PUSA
snueuq
egee
Busy
EXIQOSITA
eung W
eqquiny
Engh
S1eJA
yuedi9g
eui[noseJA
snus,
urnose W
K1nol9]A
euingsejA
ung
out[nose]A
uooJA
podnipend
out[gose]A
Áanol9JA
, pednipend
eur]nosejA
uooW
urug
Ammoasoyy
eururuo jy
e
SnU9A
oulua y
SIW
ouiuruoq
royidne
yuadiag
surasa
e uInjeg
pig
our[poSe]A
^c
royidne
Unse N
uinjes
eur[nose]A
uinjes
eurnoseJA
Joydnf
pednipend
ue
sive
yuodies
QUINT
SNUSA
DON
e
e
roo
LJ
now
ec
a
m
mm
o
a
‘os
a
UP stà
fe
o
"e
o

A
r
la
e
CHAPTER XXVIII ^“
UPASAMHARA ADHYAYA
‘STASI:
(Concluding Chapter)
TATANAN COLE CU)
fiiere Fanaa: |
FATA TAA ag- ;
e
samasa: || ou A
Stanza I1.—The first chapter is Rasi Píabheda, the second Grahayoni Bheda, the third
Viyonijanma, the fourth Nishakakala, the fifth ^.
Janma Vidhi, the sixth Balarista, the ' seventh
an
ZEE ate igen ELE yg
Ayurdaya, the eighth Dasa Vipaka, and the ninth
is Ashtaka Varga.
NOTES
Here the author simply quotes the names of the'
chapters he has composed from the commencement in this
work and their meanings have been well explained in their
respectíve places.
wT usd: ep
. TA ufa <P.
E WATANG sa aot: 1h 2 1 X
UP State ji crum Lutknow a Qr

Ch. PUES Ste 2ndIponfa d HiBiceWQ Ragu Trust and eGangotrigos |
Stanza 2.—Tenth chapter is Karma Jiva, the
eleventh Raja Yoga, the twelfth Nabhasa Yoga
the thirteenth Chandra Yoga, the fourteenth
Dwigrahadi Yoga, the fifteenth Pravrajjya Yoga
the sixteenth Rasi sila, the seventeenth Dristi
Phala, the eighteenth Bhavadhyaya, the nineteenth
Asraya, and the twentieth Prakeerna.
NOTES ?
Here he repeats consecutively the names of the
chapters he has composed.
NGT der med TAA
^. fuii ems cum |
| aaa ate: TAg
: seekers ATT Ul 3 N
"Stanza 3.—The twenty-first is Anistayoga, °
the twenty-second is Strijataka, the twenty-third
is Niryana, the twenty-fourth Nastajataka and
- the twenty- -fifth is Drekkana. Thus is Hora Sastra.
I have composed 25 chapters, and I am going
to. name other chapters relating to Yatra or
travelling. - j
: NOTES 26
" Varahamihira names | only 25 chapterse while we” have 4
given 28 chapters in this work. In tae sixteeith chapter
under Rasi sila, there have been divided thrte chapters, viz.,
(Ij Rooksha sila,'(2) Chandra Rasi sifa, and (3) Rasi sila.
o Q > UP Sfhje Museum, NUN :
5 D J

~ 606 BRIHAT JATAKA [Ch. XXVIII, St. 4
ce
Thus two more chapters have been added by giving sepa‘ate
names by somebody. But Bhattotpala concludes each of
the 17th and 18th chapters with his name. ‘herefore we
have a good authority in this learned commentator to
follow in the division and enumeration of these chapters.
It matters very little what the number of chapters are, since
the same chapter has been converted into 3 chapters dividing
the treatment of the subject into (1) results of ‘signs, (2)
qesults of signs e by the Moon, and (3) results of
constellations.
MUT aa: ana
wal R ag mei .-
sre US .
(fed WWII TN UI P
Stanza 4.—First Prasna Prabheda, (2) Thithi .
Bala, (3) Nakshatra Bhedana, (4) Divasa:Bala, (5)
Vara Bala, (6) Muhurtha, (7) Chandra Balá, (8)
Lagna Nischaya, (9) Lagna Bheda, (10) Graha
Siddhi,(11) Apavada, (12) Vimisra, and (13) Thanu
Vepana.
NOTES
Varahamihira enumerates the names of chapters. he
has written in his Yatra work, but it is very curious to see ”
why he should name the headings of chapters which go to -
form, altogether a separate work dealing on a different
‘subject and having nothing to do- with this book. But the
nature of the subjects have inter relations and probably he
gave "his readezs to understand that “he has written a
T UP State Museum, Lücknow *. ee e
P r c

Ch. ZXY IH PStiicboFhin GIGHBROWEORK Rust and eGangotri 607
LJ D
separate Book called Yatra patala and they must also be
| read in order to understand Brihat Jataka well. Or it may
be that eve if Yatra patala is lost by the destructive hands
of time, people may know what its contents are. `
SK TARA TR
. aH mu MAA afew: |
qq mamaa fia.
. murs RE agate d oU
Stanza 5.—(14) Worship of Guhyaka, (15)
Swapna, (16) Snana Vidhi, (17) Grahayagnya,
(18) Nirgama. ,
^ o farre: me wem
ti With User ST | i
war Hal gaai ars Ul & Ul
Stanza 6.—(19) Shakuna, (20) Vivahakala,
"and, (21) Graha karma. ‘In this way have been
composed works in the three important branches
. of Jyotishya for the benefit of the astrologers by
ome me, viz., Vacahamihira.
. ; NOTES na dame, ~~
He also refers hereto Vivaha patala os a work he has
Thus he says his works extend in
Ly
composed,on marriage.
the three Skandas.(Sections of Jyotishya), viz. : ^
Ag i 2 9 xd UR State Museum, Lucknow X 2

. explained in his Pancha Siddhantika.
| 608 CC-O. In Public IBRÉELATBIGAIDASGAyu fe AYE Rte. 5—6
(1) Siddantha (Ganitha or mathematical astroromy) as
n
(2) Hora or astrology (horoscopy) as shown in Brihat
and Laghu Jataka.
(3) Samhita (treatment of collateral subjects and physica] phenomena) as shown in his Brihat and Sama Samhitas, `
Muhurtha, Prasna and Yatra belong to the horoscopy.
When I was in Cochin in 1910 A.D. an excellent
carpenter of a low casie was introduced to me who gave
extensive quotations from Grantha Samuchaya by Varahamihira. The genius of Varahamihira was versatile,
comprehensive and unrivall€d and hence in the enumeration
of the nine literary gems in the -court of the famous
Vikramaditya, Kalidasa adds: the adjective Khyato (zee
nowned) to Varahamihira (vide “Life of Varahamihira ’
by me). Grantha Samuchaya refers to house building,
carpentry and the nature of the materials to be collected for
such purposes. His Brihat Samhita (which is now ‘being
translated by Prof. B. V. Raman) is a monument of
Varahamihira’s extensive knowledge, and those who read
carefully that illustrious work: will be immensely benefited
by the expansion of their intellects, and by the useful `
knowledge he has stored in his priceless pages. Modern
scientific culture of the highest order in agriculture, commerce, industry, discoveries and inventions has been
; forestalled and the chapter on the metamorphosing of .
planets and making them yield fruits and: flowers quiet
< foreign to their nature and growing them dn the shortest
time possible, "is wost interesting and worthy of an early
trial. < (See Chs; VII and VIII, Part 2 of Brihat Samhita by
the same author). ° ME UE
UP State Museum, Lücknow '.
A
e D

e a
Ü i ized d eG tri
Ch. KOS Hic Dom Area pyra ust and eGangotri |
means when Saturn is in his own houses or exaltation or
his friend's houses. Bhattotpala condemns this reading by
a quotation trom Saravali which says Swochay swajeva bhava-
' nay. Tn the second Saturn gives good: wealth, fines or
penalties from Government and facial disease, In the third
intelligence and prowess. In the fourth unhappiness and
mental Worry. (See Sts. 1, 2 and 3. of this chapter) and in
other houses results similar to those given by the Sun.
TENTARA
HOATMC AA GAMAN |
agaa Aa dhana qu
TATA rud RREAN || 2o I
Stanza 10.—Take the birth sign, and the
body, etc., and predict results by the planets
occupying friendly, inimical, neutral, own, and
exaltéd houses. Satyacharya declares that benefics and malefics in the houses produce good and
bad results in them respectively. And the results
are reversed in the 6th, 8th and 12th houses.
o
NOTES
“The notes given by Bhattotpala are clear and
. exhaustive. Take birth, 2nd, 3rd, etc., upto and including
the ,12th and assign to them the proper events already
` enumerated by Varalíamihira and other aStrologicat
writers. Thus the birth indicates body? the second family,
the third Brothers and so forth. Here Varahamihire uses
` Bai o UP State Museum, Lucknow
kJ

450 CC-O. In Public DBRAH Aiditided PAKA u Trust daket. 10
the word lagna distinctly and asks the readers to count
from lagna. This looks like repetition. (See St. 15, Ch. I.)
As Yavaneswara has laid down the principle that the
bhavas may be begun by hora (birth) or Sasibham, the
house occupied by the Moon, i.e., from the Moon, Varahamihira also supports this view in some instances. But here
with a view to avoid any.reference to the Moon asa lagna
(Chandra Lagna) he specially mentions lagna only. The
prosperity or adversity to the various bhavas (significations)
must be judged by tlie conjunction of planets in those |
houses. Bhavadhipathi (lord of the house indicating any |
event) gives such results as are indicated by *he terms
under which he occupies a‘nouse. Suhrut means a friend ; ;
Ari means an enemy; Parakiya means a neutral; Swa |
means his own house ; and Thunga means exaltation. Wken
the lord of a particular’ bhava is in a friendly house he
gives prosperity to events indicated by that bhava. Take a
the birth, It indicates body, personal characteristics, etc. —
If its lord is in a friendly house he gives a good and healthy
body and desirable attributes. If he is in an unfriendly
house he introduces sickness, deformity, etc. Benefics or
malefics in unfriendly or debilitated houses produce evil to
events indicated by that bhava. If they are neutral houses '
their results will be indifferent. If they are in exaltation,
Moolatrikona, their own houses or friendly houses they
give prosperity and success to events indicated by that
_ bhava. Bhagavan Gargi is quoted to support this view.
* (Vide also °“ Bhavartha Rainakara’ and. * How to Judge a
c Horoscope" both by B. V. Raman.) 5
According to $a &tya when benefics are in the 6th, 8th and
Eu they destroy the evils indicated by those bhavas and
e
e
UP State Museum, Lücknow *. "S

Ch. mice Lupus Domaj. PUS RATIONS and En
if evil planets are there they increase the evils.
quotes Satya here in conformity with the above view, In
the previous part of this Work all planets (benefics and
' malefics) have been declared to be productive of favourable
results if they are in Upachayas of which 6th is said to be
one. Now it is stated that malefics increase evils in the
6th house. When two distinct Statements are made by
Varahamihira, each contradicting the*other the meaning ,
should be thus explained. Among ,the Upachaya houses
(3, 6, 10, 11) evil planets in the 6th Ñust be declared to be
inauspicious and not producing good results attributed to
Upachayas» The commentator quotes from Laghu Jataka
which says that benefics increasé the bhavas they occupy
excepting in the 6th where they destroy the events indicated
by that bhava. This seems to be more correct than the
other view, especially with regard. tothe 6th bhava, as
-Mmadefics increase the evil results ofthe 6th house. The
d following boroscope illustrates this aspect. The lord of
6 is in 8 aspected by an evil planet. Six is occupied by an >
evil planet aspected by Rahu and lord of 3. Though
Bhattotpala
E e ə UP State Museum, Luckfow °
o

aS
452 CC-O. In Public DOBR TRAE HATARA Trust (e 10
the aese earned lacs of rupees, he was always jn debt land
never free from it, till the end of his days. E
Malefics destroy the bhavas they occupy. It is
undesirable to have any planets in the 8th and 12th
houses. Here Varahamihira contradicts himself. In
the 6th according ^to the above quotations evil planets
destroy the evils, while. according to the present stanza
.evil planets in the €th increase the evils. But Bhattotpala
very clearly reconciles. these apparent contradictions, by
stating that Varahamühira who studied the several Matas
(systems or methods) of the ancient Maharishis explains
one systemin Brihat Jataka and another in Lashu Jataka
and this he further supports by a quotation from Varahamihira himself from his immortal Samhita, where Varahamihira thus explains his views with reference to var‘ous
contradictions which he must have noticed in the course
of his extensive and wonderful studies. Varahamihira
observes—‘“‘ Jyotisha is a Veda ; contradictions n it cannot
be criticised by us, for it has been compiled by the great
Munis who were blessed with thrikala dristi and therefore
I simply give here the many systems propounded by the
ancients”. (See St. 7, CheX, Brihat Samhita.) Here it will
be seen that both the learned Varahamihira and his illustrious commentator Bhattotpala, deal a deathblow to such
egotists, who in their narrow and self-elated views, think
they are competent to express their own views as against
the opinions expressed by the ancient Maharishis. Some.
in astrology is comparable to the knowledge of the tortoise’
in a small “walle ^ think foolishly that they can cure the
defects in astrology by their ill- -digested views. ^ These may
e
UP State Museum, Lücknow | pain
e
e e
e
,9f the biaggadocio Western astrologers whose knowledge. l

Ch. KA Se THN P" ATTRA WORKS 3 453
safely refer to the noble remarks of, two of di
eminent astzologers, and think Seriously whether the n
not under the malevolent influences of an afflicted ue
when they boast of their ns which is not even a
grain in the sands of the vast ocean
Varahamihira clearly points out the different contradictory systems when they are „ably and properly
supported by equal authorities. Bhattotpala here mentions?
some other works of Varahamihir& which have not been
before the public in any printed form. Varahamihira is =
undoubtedly declared to have written (1) Brihatyatra,
(2) Laghuyatra, (3) Brihat Vivaha Patalam, and (4) Laghu
Vivaha Patalam and in these works he is stated to have
givén various kundalis or plangtary combinations (in horoscopes) to enunciate his principles and the different
doctrines he has compiled. When I was in Cochin, a few
g` carpenters | of great skill and Sanskrit ability quoted verses
from Varahomihira’ s Granthasamuchchaya, which deals with
mechanics and carpentry and house-building. Ifthe books
containing the horoscopes can be found they will be very
interesting factors.
amorem |
TÅ ATAATA ARE || 2t N
Stanza 11:—Planets in exaltation, in Moola-
"trikona, in own, friendly, inimical, depilitated ES
“houses, and 4n combyst with the Sua give good? a
in full, three-fourths, half, quartet, li little and nil
o
Tesylts respectively. ° ome
E A > Ul State Museum, Luckhow Z D
ENG ^ ^ a

e
454 CC-O. In Public Donar Biaitizeg AYSARA Trust ange ganged! St. 11
| | NOTES ?
In planetary conjunctions two sorts of resuits are named
(1) good, and (2) evil. When planets are inclined, to give .
good they give full when they are in exaltation, threefourths when they are in Moolatrikona, half when they
are in their own houses, one-fourth in friendly honses, less
than that in unfriendly houses, and no good result in debili-
“tation and combust places. As regards the evil results
the order must be r(versed. If the combusted neecha
planet is inclined to give evil he will give it in fuil, threefourths in unfriendly houses, one-fourth in its own houses,
in Moolatrikona less than one-fourth, and one in exalta.
tion. A planet will give full good or bad only when he is
powerful and this must be carefully applied to periods'and
sub-periods and Astakavarga, etc. Bhattotpala quotes an
anciert authority which runs thus: “A planet when inclined
to give good or bad will give it in full, etc., only when he is ^
powerful". The soürces of strength here indicated „are detailed in Ch. II. As compared to other works, the results
mentioned in Bhavadhyaya by Varahamihira are very short
and vague. In Rama Nadi it is a bit more explanatory and
Sarvartha Chinthamani is more exhaustive. Brihat Jataka
along with Uttarakalamrita will enable an astrologer'to give
out fairly good results. Sanketa Nidhi also has something
to say on these. As one proceeds one feels that so many
conflicting ideas have to be analysed and «o fix exactly the
eo
e eintüitiom deep study and piessings of the Guru who teachesthe sciefice, * o
- UP State Museum, Ļûcknow aie z
[4 ue e
relative strength of a planet is no ordinary work and requires’ :

e
o
e
o
CHAPTER XX?
ASRAYA YOGADHYAYA
SATATA atan
* (Certain Special Combinations)
KAKA NGA YLT .
AIRANI: cr |
TUATHA ETT TACT
maar RANG || N
Stanza 1.—When one and more planets are
in^their own houses the man becomes equal to his
relations, chief of his family, respected by relations,
wealthy, equal to aruler, happy, and king Tespectively. If one and more planets are in friendly
houses the person will be brought up by others,
by friends, by cousins, by brothers, chief ofa
community, commander aad king respectively.
NOTES
When one planetis in his own house the person becomes an equal to his relations which means that he wil
attain to ordinary positions attained by his family members
when two are in their own houses he becomes a chief of th:
family, when'three planets are 'jn their own ‘houses he
will be respected by his,relations, when four planets are in
their own houses he will command wealth? when five planets
are in their own houses he will be happy, when six planets
a
x , UP gee Museum, LucRnow
^s

e
456 CC-O. In Public Do RYT EDIAIE eA T9 KA Trust femora 2
are in ter own houses he will be equal to a rien AG shea
seven planets are placed in their own houses the person t
becomes àking. When one planet is in his friendly house
he will be dependent and be brought up by others,
when
two planets are so he will be brought up by friends, when
three planets are so he will be brought up by cousins,
when four planets are so-his brothers bring him up, when
-five are so he beconies the chief of a community or society,
when six are so he becemes a commanderfor general, and
when seven planets are in their friendly houses he becomes f
a king.
The following diagram illustrates the possibility :
| Kuja”
Saturn
In their own
rT houses
Moon Sukra
In friend's
houses
Sun Budha
Venus
Jupiter
In Land II Lagna and Rahu and Kethu may be anywhere.
Merc&y|| Ravi Sani
5 sem RISUS ATE: |
pat pe Sessa sy Tice
ema qeu
Sant po Cc mes
UP State Museum, Hamont e e
e
[a
r

seven planets in debilitation. Under the present astroa 5 ^ o UP State Museum, eae °
o
e
Ch. 8969; sehr Drei fisse cy ERALTATIOR ON 45
Stunza 2.—If there is one exalted planet aspected by « friendly planet, the person becomes a
king., When such a planet is conjoinéd by a
friendly planet, he becomes very wealthy, and
commands universal respect. If one and more
planet$.are in unfriendly or debilitated houses,
they produce poverty, misery, dullness, disease,.
imprisonment, sorrow and banging respectively.
Jj . NOTES
In this it will seen that at least one planet must be in
exaltation having a friendly aspet to produce a king. Ifa
planet is exalted having the conjunction of a friendly planet
he swill get as much money. as he wants and will be
respected wherever he moves. If there is one planet in an
unfriendly house or debilitation, the person becomes’ poor,
when two planets are so he will be unhappy, when three
planets are so he becomes ignorant or dull, when four planets
are so he will be constantly suffering from disease, when five
planets are in debilitation or unfriendly houses, he gets
imprisonment, when six planets are so he will be drowned
in sorrow and when seven are so the person commits acts
which would take him to the gallows or he will be hanged.
No results have been stated here for exaltation of è
* seven planets but in this stanza, phalam has been stated for
, nomical conditions, calculations and movements of planets :
' such a conibination as the debilitation of egeven planets °
seems to be an impossibility. For if the Sum Be exalted in
AG we can easilysimagine the exaltation of:Venus in Fisces
e o o
° e o

o
= 458 CC-O.In Public BREATH AD ABA yu Trust Iah hat 2 :
but Mercury can never be ipe exaltation. For according to
Bhattotpala's commentaries and present astronomical
calculations Mercury can never be longer than 29° on
either side of the Sun. The exaltation of Mercury is in
Virgo and in the 15th degree. The Sun is exalted in the
10th degree of Aries. But if both of them are to be exalted
at the same time there must bean elongation of Mercury
_ from the Sun ranging over 155° which is absurd. When
exaltations do not hapnen, debilitations, as a matter of fact,
become also impossible. Bhattotpala says that Varahamihira gives these combinations in accordance with the
principles contained in ancient sciences propounded by
Gargi, Parasara and Vasishta. Thisshows that there must
have been tremendous changes in the different epochs ofthe
terrestrial and celestial phenómena and that the sciencés in
India seem to have attained to the greatest perfections long
before the dawn of present European civilisation. Fhe e.
ancient works quote the following verse : E
** Ekagrahoccha Jatasya
Sarvarishta Vinasanam
Dwigrahocchathu Samantha
Trigrahoccha Mahipathihi
Chaturgrahoccha Samratsyat b
Panchoche Lokanayakaha.”’
e
. Ifone planet is exalted, all evils will be removed, if*
two are exalted he becomes a petty king, if three a big ruler, .
if four ar emperor, andif five ruler of the^universe.» The i
* “only horoscope, so far known ds. Sri Rata's where five”
planets are'exaltéd. It is possible for six to be exalted
except Mercury. (Vide Stanza 2 of Chapter XXIL.)
e e Cy e [3 Oo .
UP State Museum, Lucknow ° 2 CE
e LI -

e
Ch, xd, si Dongin PERE y F'RUMBH and ES 159
AGA YAM TT -
A ANGETAN ace |
RIA A TARA TÀTARA Gagas 03 ||
Stanza 3.—Satya declares. Kumbha Lagna
as bad. Yavanas observe Kumbha dwadasamsa
as evil. Vishnugupta assert? that Yavanas are
erroneous as Kumbha dwadasamsa occurs in
every lagna,
> NOTES
^ Kumbha (Aquarius) as birth sign is condemned by
Satya for whom Varahamihira seems to have great régard
> aad admiration and whom he follows often closely. Bhattotpala quotes Satya here: “ The Moon ig bad in the 6th, 8th and
Lagna at the time of birth, and all biped signs are good
except Kumbha " (see notes on Ch. I, St. 19.) The biped
signs are, Gemini, Virgo, Libra, the first half of Sagittarius
and Aquarius. Continuing Satya’s quotation :—The person
"born in Aquarius will be sorrowful and miserable. Yavanas '
maintain that Aquarius as birth is not bad, but the Dwadasamsa of Aquarius in each sign is bad. Bhattotpala who
* was not able to secure the Puranayavana works (ancient
e Yavana writing) but who possessed the Yavana literature
on astrology *of later date quotes Srutakirti a follower
' of the Yavant doctrine, thus :—Birth máy fajl in any
house (rasi) but if its dwadasamsa ° falis “in Kumbha
the person "then born will be unhappy, andebred on others
Md 7 9 e s
NUS e e UP State Museum, m

460 CC-O. In Public PPRP ArfpitirecrpSerAyu Trust ORSAF St, 3
cost. Vishnugupta (the famous Chanikya who esfablished
Chandragupta on the throne of Magadha in place of the
Nava Nahidas in B.C. 322 or a few years after the invasion
of Indía by Alexander of Macedon (see Pp. 20 of my History
of Vijayanagar, Part I) observes with great force that the
Yavanas were impertinent or erroneous, for if the dwadasamsa of Aquarius is bad in every lagna then good results
-predicted for all the'signs, will be nullified and that there
can be no lagna or (zodiacal) sign without containinga Kumbha dwadasamsa which is bad and which is opposed to the
spirit of astrology and the best written works on the subject.
It is only the sign Kumbha as birth which stands condemned
by the great writers. Heré one important question arises,
viz, why should of all signs, Aquarius be the worst?
Neither the author Varahamihira nor his commentator mas
thrown any light on the cause or causes for Kumbha being
inauspicious as a lagna. Wading through the whole of the
valuable commentaries and examining even the question of
Satya, Srutakirti and Chanikya we find no reasohs are
advanced for Kumbha being the worst among the 12 signs.
I may however venture to suggest the following facts for
the consideration of the feaders. Kumbha is owned by
the worst of the planets, viz., Saturn. Besides, its lord.
also happens to be the lord of the 12th house from it and
the 12th sign is called Nasa, Ripha and Vyaya. Therefore
when the lord of lagna also owns the 12th house he be- °
comes evil and indicates i in himself self-destruction. This -
kind. of cómbination occurs for Kumbha and not for any
other rasi. or ‘Planet. Also Kumtha is called Hrit (heart)
and ,Roga " (Cis: sase) (see St. 21, Chap. II and St. 8,
Chap. I.) € "
^ a e
UP State Museum, Lucknow

Ch. D Stub SqmbBiOBgtiz END $pyrpyu TRINY eGangotri 46
amener RAN ,
SERI TATA ANANG |
"TIRE AT Sft Ee
dier gag: Ha Me N
Stanza 4.—If malefics join the solar hora in
odd signs, the person becomes famous, undertakesgreat works, possesses strength, wealth and great
persofial attractions. If benefics join the lunar
hora in,even signs, the person becomes tenderhearted, hahdsome, happy, popular, intelligent
and polite speaker.
uU)
NOTES
Hora means one half of a rasi?^or sign and extends for
13°. Odd signs are Aries, Gemini, Leo, Libra, Sagittarius
and Aquamus. In all these the first 15 degrees are under
the solar control and hence the Sun is called the Prathama
Horadhipathi in these signs. If evil planets are in these
horas of the Sun, then the person becomes famous, etc.
In the even signs, viz., Taurus, Cancer, Virgo, Scorpio,
"Capricorn and Pisces, the first hora or half is ruled by
the Moon, and if benefics are in such hora the native
becomes kind-hearted, handsome, etc.
TAT ATA :
dere qum ema o
ARENA, gO
odi TATANAN N w if °
o 2 UP*State Museum, iene

462 k^ O. In Public DR RTH JATAKA, Trush eai eis. 5
Stanza 5.—if the planets in the same: horas
are found in other rasis (signs) the person born
then wiil have the results moderately. If the
planets are reversed in horas and rasis, the persons born will not have the above characteristics.
NOTES
' The motto of Varahamihira to say briefly is terribly
fulfilled here. He is sfAlendidly helped by the flexible and
highly developed Sanskrit language and the same brevity
and suggestiveness can never be brought out in, the poor
English language. If evil planets are in solarchoras in even
signs the results named above will be moderately enjoyed.
If benefics are in lunar hora jn odd signs the results Are
moderate. But if evil planets are in Chandra hora in
even signs there will be no phalam sketched above. If
benefics occupy the solar hora in odd signs there will be
no phalam. When thére are two or more planets in similar
position the intensity of good or evil must be proportionately considered. (See St. 11, Ch. I.) Here we see that odd
signs are considered as cruel, masculine, etc., and even
signs as mild, feminine, etc. The solar hora must be cruel.
as compared with the lunar, which is milder. Thefefore
cruel planets in cruel houses, in cruel horas give good
results, If there are some in one and some in the other the ;
results will be neutralised. If all the planets are topsytervy then these good results will not be present.
scissa ai | z
UP State Museum; Lucknow”
e

o
Ch. XX£, Stn 6hblic MODNDiditeDH GAN ATIS and eGangotry63
R a
TENGAH l8 I.
Stanza 6.—If the Moon is in his own or
friendly drekkana the person will be handsome
and virtuous. If the Moon is in other drekkanas
the person will get the characteristics of thelord of
the drekkana. If the Moon is in Vyala, Udyatha- :
yudha, Chatuscharana and Andaja drekkanas, the
person born will be vindictive, very cruel, fouling
Guru's wife and traveller regpectively. -
, NOTES
When the rasi (sign) is divided into 3 equal parts each
is called a drekkana, or each divisiort gets 10 degrees. The
lords of these 3 drekkanas are the lords of the Ist, of the 5th
“and of the 9th divisions respectively of that rasi. When the
Moon iein his own or friendly drekkanas he gives beauty
and virtue. But when heis in other drekkanas then the
characteristics will be decided by the lord of that drekkana.
Ifthe lord of that drekkana whera the Moon is, becomes
his temporary friend, then beauty and virtue will be full,
and when he is a neutral, they will be moderate, but when
he is a foe then they will be absent. Vya/a means in Sanskrit serpent; Udyathayudha means armed with weapons;
Chatuscharana means four-footed or quadrupeds; and Andaja
Means born of aa egg or bird. If fhe Moon is in» serpent”
Drekkana the person will b&vindictive or higltly excitable. 2
` The following are Vyala drekkanas: *,2ad' and 3rd
of Cancer, l$t and 2nd of Scorpio and 3rd of Pisces, if
e e UP State Museum, Lucknow
5 s o
ES *
e

464 CC-O. In Public DORRA HA Mek AK Trust anl GBangetiL, St. 6
the Moon isin Udyathayudha the person will ber fond of
killing or murdering. The following are armed, Drekkanas :
1st and 3rd of Aries, 2nd and 3rd of Gemini, 2nd and 3rd
of Leo, 2nd of Virgo, 3rd of Libra, Ist and 3rd of Sagit- `
tarius and 3rd of Capricorn.
If the Moon is in quadruped Drekkanas the person will
-commit adultery with his instructor's wife. The following
are quadruped Drekkanas: 2nd of Aries, 2nd and 3rd of
Leo, 3rd of Libra, 3rd'of Scorpio, Ist of Sagittarius and the
1st of Capricorn.
If the Moon is in bitd Drekkana the person will be a
traveller. The bird Drekkanas are-the following: 2nd of
Gemini, Ist of Leo, 2nd of Libra and Ist of Aquariuss If
now the Moon is in the 1st drekkana of Cancer, he will be
both in his own drekkana and that of a quadrupedalso. The _
results will have to be predicted by reference to both. Sup- ^
pose the Moon occupies the 2nd or 3rd drekkana of Leo.
He occupies a friendly drekkana, an armed drekkana and a
quadruped drekkana. What results should be predicted ?
Bhattotpala says summarice the three sources of results and
predict them. (See Chap. XXVII.) A
(There seems to be some difference in the nature of the
drekkanas mentioned in the original and in the English
translation. In the quadruped Drekkanas, 2 of Taurus,
1 of Canzer and 1 of Léo are not mentioned by Mr.-Rao ; `
and in bird Drekkanas, 3rd ot Gemini is also included?
The rest of tke arekkanas naturally belong to the lords of
those houses cnd those characteristics - must be mentioned.)
UP State Museum, Lucknow ? ES > >
e
e

e
oh. XEL Btn Bhblic REMU IDDSiz ENDNPATSVA NESUeqd a UP
“aa Ara Than qi
ala: smtp rarah
: "ant feats mkaAma TASTE: UU v9 UI
Stanza 7.—A person born in the Navamsas
of Aries, etc., will become a thief, an enjoyer, i
learned, verity ruler, impotent, warlike, carrier,
servant, sinful, cruel and intrepid. If these navamsas fal? in, Vargottamas, ,the person born then
will become master or chief of the above. The
resü]jts for the Dwadasamsas will be similar to
rasis. 2
UP j NOTES
If any other sign than Aries is lagna and the navamsa
falls in Aries the person will become a thief, excepting the
sign Taurus, if the Navamsa Taurus rises in any sign the person enjoys well the comforts of this life, ifthe Gemini
navamsa rises in any other sign than Gemini the person becomes “learned. And so for other signs. But suppose
Aries is the ascendant and that navamsa rises at birth. As :
that navamsa falls in Vargottama, the person becomes a
leader or chief of thieves or robbers. Taurus Navamsa is the
" Vargottama for Taurus sign and one born when Taurus is
"ascendant as well as the navamsa, will be pre-eminent or E
chief among those who'enjoy the goods of, life." When
Gemini is both the Rasi and Navamsa Lagnj, the person 5
will be the chief GR jeader among the learned. (See St. 14,
ques 30 ^", UP State Museum, es
KJ
^ B LJ
D ^ a

46622-2- In Public Dong Bigitipeg AYISARYA Trust and Sansom, St. 8
Ch. I). The results mentiontd for the Moon in tHe twelve
signs will be the results for the Dwadasamsa “agnas from
Aries, etc. (See Ch. XVII). There are two readings ,
quoted by Bhattotpala for a petson born in Meenamsa :
(1) Abhischa which means fearless, and (2) Adhischa which
means without sense. The laiter cannot be accepted as
Varahamihira distinctly^says Abhaya in Laghu Jataka, in
- this connection, and therefore Abhischa alone is Sadhu or
acceptable. E
GASANGAN A TA 7000
Qi eese erts Ta
gud agi RASAR c o^
Stanza 8.—When Mars is in his own Trims- <
amsa, the person will have wife, strength, ,ornaments, generosity, personal attraction, and
enterprising spirit. When Saturn is in his own
Trimsamsa, the persGn becomes sickly, loses his
wife, possesses double heart, enjoys others wives,
sorrowful, possessed of houses, cloths, servants,
etc., and will be uncleanly. :
2 A > NOTES ve
‘In this Stanza, Varahamihira uses the word Bhaga *
which means-Amsa, but when he gives the results of Venus
in the third, . he distinctly says Trimsamsa, ° and hence
" Bhattotpala rightly interprets Bhaga, here as Trimsamsa.
UP State Museum, Lacknów E e

Ch. KRESE P sUpPPHR T MRAM SR oc
Besides the results of Amsas have already been stated. In
odd signs theMords of the Trimsamsas are—
Mars» Saturn Guru Budha ites
=30°.. In even signs the order should Be reversed thus—
Venus ' Budha Guru ' Saturn Mars.
9 es
aia RI errat sw
aRar aAA:
HAHAH SET (RT Ie -
* ampie asta | 4 ||
7 ` Stanza 9.—When Jupiter is in his own
Trimsamsa, the person will have wealth, repu- .
tation, happiness, intelligence, attraction, respect,
health, hope and enjoyment. When Mercury
occupies his own Trimsamsd, he gives the man
intelligence, education, show, poetical ability,
eloquence, skill in arts, philosophic acumen, aM
enterprise and much respect.
2 NOTES , j ue 9
+ The stanza is clear and needs no explanation. o
o
Eu nas | 7,
P State Mgseum, Lucknow o

46C-0, In Public Dom ROHA WASTAN Aust and EZERT, St. 10 —
greed fae agra] gast
Tai TATANG | Vo |
Stanza 10,—When Venus occupies his own
Trimsamsa, the man will be blessed with many
_ sons, much happiness, health, popularity, wealth,
beauty, vindictiveness, handsome body and enjoyment with many women. When the Sun and the
Moon are in the Trimsamsa of Mars, etc., the
person will be warlike and slothful, cruel and
killing, virtuous and wealthy, happy and learned,
handsome and popular respectively. 4
e
NOTES
There are two readings with reference, to Venus: ©
(1) Bhagya which means popularity, and (2) Bhogya which
means wife. Both are admissible. If the Sun and the
Moon are in the Trimsamsa of Mars, the person will be
warlike and slothful. In Saturn's Trimsamsa, the person
will be cruel and murderous. In Jupiter’s Trimsamsa, he
will be virtuous and wealthy. In Mercury’s Trirasamsa,
he will be happy and learned. In Venus Trimsamsa, he
will be handsome and popular. |
/ SUME.
UP State Museum, Lacknow e [3

. CHAPTER XXII
D PRAKIRNAKADHYAYA :
TANTE Ta -
(Mixed Results)
TATA: WARY quu emen |
Wd S ASTI KAT Wub fume di $i
Stanza -1.—Planets im kendras when they
happen to be in thejr own houses, in exaltations
or sin Moolatrikonas are mutually termed
karakas. Of these, the planet in the 10th will be
~ the best karaka.
. E NOTES
Mixed results or enumeration of various matters goes
under the name of Prakirna. If there is any planet in a
kendra from birth, which is his “own house or exaltation
or Moolatrikona and there is another planet in a similar
state in another kendra, these two planets are said to be
the karakas mutually or to one another. Of these karakas
the most powerfulsis the one who occupies the 10th. This
gouuites a little more explanation.
d Budha is ineLagna Kéndra and in his xh house and
he becomes a Karaka. Guru is in the 10tf? house and being
in his own house he becomes a Karaka, Guru is in "the
lot from the Karaka Budha and becognes thus the most
5 $ UP*State Museum, Lucknow
l a ^ a

470 CC-O. In Public Dorp PANTES ABAK ATrust hedabi St. 2
etl karaka. ‘Another version about these krakas is
given here for comparison. x
For the Sun, Guru in 9th is the Karaka.
» Moon, Sani in llth ,, a
» Mars, Sani in lith ,, $i
» Mercury, Venus in Sth ,, S
» Jupiter, . Moon in "th: 5, re
A „ Venus Guru in 12th oes A:
» Sani, | Guru in 6th ,, 3
Birth of
Guru Budha
[EY
erra ceu lop e
BM FATAL:
ait FTAs TEA
TATA TANSAH dia N
à Stanza 2.—If birth falls in Cancer with Moon
. in-it and Mars, Saturn, Sun and Jupiter are in
exaltation they become mutual karakas. For the 4
planet in “Lagna, the planets in the Ambara and
- Ambu become ‘karakas. . .
UP State Mosen leückrfow 'e o
e

- these kendras as also exalted.
ə
Ch. XOCi®,; IStubjc Dogin Djgitgad sy Rey Opt and eGangotri 471
LJ LI * ^
. NOTES *
Bhattotpala, gives a kundali or zodiacal diagram which
belongs to Sri Rama, the national hero of India. His
horoscope as explained by Valmiki in Balkanda is thus given
in the Ramayana.
In this stanza Varahamihira clearly refers to Rama’s
horoscopé. This proves the great antiquity of Ramayana.
Such a combination of planetsis of rare occurrence and
in this five planets are exalted and tle Moon is in his own
house. “Here the planets are not only in kendras but also
in their exaltations and they become karakas to each other,
the results of which will be explained later on.
LJ
e Venus Sun [| Mer. | Kethu
o A £
° Birth
^ Moon
Rama's “Jupiter
* horoscope |—— —
Rasi diagram
Mars
Es)
s Rahu Saturn
Ambara means the 10th house and Ambu means the
4th house. Wher there is a planet in birth and there are
“planets in the 4th and 10th, those planets which are in the
a>
last two houses become. karakas of the fosmer,ci.e., ethe e ,
planet in the ascendant. o Except for Aries, Cancét, Libra
and Capricc«n, for no other lagnas could the planets be in
LI i. o
o D
` 9 © UP State Museum, Lucknow
a

e
472 CC-O. In Public DapRipppictizgaby KEA Trust {Cle GN SIT, St. 2
o
Ravi
UP State Museum, taickrow A
e e
(Ensas

ə t
Ch. SEXT Sub Domajppigiized REAR TIONS eGangotri 473
Ravi
III :
sali |
and Mesha as Lagna.
7o cerit NA aR sates
TEIGUATA ACSA Wo Tat ll 2 Il
— : Stanza 3.—Ifthe planet in the 10th House from
the planet who occupies his own house or Moolathrikona or exaltation, happens to be a Nisarga
friend and also Tatkalika, he becomes a karaka.
NOTES
He gives here a separate case altogether unconnected
E with'kendra planets. If a planet is not in Lagna Kendra
but occupies any other house and another planet occupies:
. the 10th house from such a planet and this 10th house
| , happens to be it$ own house or Moolatrikona or exaltation
| ` then this planet becomes akacaka proyided, he is an
* intimate friend to the “other planet. Here Bhattdtpala
seems to make some difference in karakas, The pianet in the
j 10th house does not become a Karaka to the planet from
whom he is in the 10th. :
un ? UPStáte MISSE Lick i
e a 2
a

e
474 cc.o. In Public DBRT AH LA d AKA. Trustin e dX Ubi St. 4
Take Sani in Meena, Budha is in his own houss- Sani
now becomes a karaka, but not a karaka to Budha. Sani
is a temporary as well as a permanent friend of Budha and
is located in the 10th house from Budha.
The use of these &arakas is elaborately given in
Varahamihira's Yatra. During the dasas of karakas the
person will do well to go to some ruler, win his favour and
serve under him, so that his difficulties may be warded off.
Rikta dasa (defeated planet's dasa), the dasas of the lords
of birth and Chandra and during the sub-periods of their
enemies, the results will be þad and hence the recommendation to go and serve under some monarchs (see notes on.
Ch. XI, St. 19).
.— GP sew Area a ase | !
^o RAS I RRI Tg Fe I
Stanza 4.—1f thé lagna falls in Vargottama,
if good planéts are in the Vesi, if the kendras are
not unoccupieé, if there are karaka planets, then
the person wiil be CERIS s e
e ‘Slice e
UP State Museum, Lucknow 2 e
e B ^
A
LA

Ch. BRA nSturtd poMARGATHAMAAN Av VsAavtSaloangotri 475
2 x a NOTES 4 a
Vargotéama Navamsa will be the ‘Ist navamsa of the
movable, the Sth navamsa of the fixed and the 9th navamsa
of the double bodied signs and when examined will be found
to fallin the same houses. Thus the Vargottama of Aries
will be Aries in the navamsa, that of Taurus will be Taurus
and Gemini will fallin Gemini. This also applies to the
Moon. Vesi means the 2nd house from where the Sun ig
located for the time being. Vide, ‘Satayogamanjari’ by
Mr. B.S. Rao, Pp. 17 and 18. This must be occupied by
benefics. There are four quadrants from lagna and one of
them at ast must be occupied by planets. Here if evil
planets are found, the good will be moderate but if benefics
ase there, the results will be eminently satisfactory.
Bhattotpala quotes a versé from Varahamihira’s Yatra,
which says that in travelling or in any business or 34 birth
there must at least be a benefic in one of the kendras. If
all the factors enumerated above, are present then the
happiness will be unlimited, but when less, the results will
also be proportionately less. When there are karakas in a
Saturn
Rahu
Venus
Mer. Mars
a NAVAMSA
Moon > ` i
» y J
Lagna
` Kethu E
s . UP State Museum, Lucknow

476 cC-O. In Public DBR TA gab AKA Trustlée e Ge obl St. 5
horoscope it is good? (See Ch. I, Sts. 14 & 20). No horoscope can be considered good unless planets are in kendras
from each other or aspect each other. If every bhava
is aspected by its lord the planets must be in kendras (7th)
to that bhava. The following horoscope illustrates this:
Lagna is aspected by its lord, 2nd lord, 3rd and 4th lord ;
4th house -is aspected by its lord, 5th by its lord, «6th has
its own lord, 7th and-8th are not aspected, 9th, 10th, 11th
and 12th are aspected by its lords, respectively. Seven
houses are aspected by their lords and it is a powerful
yoga horoscope.
WS] ATT TAIT: exe gesemew | ;
steerage tI N,
Stanza 5.—If ‘Gurl Janmadhipathi or
Lagnadhipathi occupies a kendra, the person will
have happiness in the middle of life. Planets in
Prushtodaya, Ubhayodaya and Sirshodaya give
results in the end, middle and beginning of the
man’s life respectively. `
NOTES
` Janmadhipathi means the lord of the house where the
Moon stays at the time of birth. Lagnadhipathi is the lord
of.the birth or ascendant. If any one of these or Guru
czcupies a‘kendra, the person gets happiness in the middle
life. If the lerd of the dasa happens’to be in Aries, Taurus,
Sagittarius or C§pricorn at the time of commentement of
his ‘period, he will $ give results at the end of his dasa. if
UP State Museum, Laicknow 2 e^
Ee ©

a
Ch. ERE, SUP OS OPYPER IN’ RENDRA and eGangotri “an
the NE occupies Pisces, then the results will be given in
the middle. and if the planet is in Gemini, Leo, Virgo,
Libra, Scorpio or Aquarius the results will be produced in
the commencement. These results may be good or bad
and they will be given by the Dasanatha at the time
indicated. Thus we have here to refer to their Gochara
movements to find out where they-are and when they begin
the dasas. Gargi is quoted by the commentator to support, .
this explanation as the original is short and silent. This is
an important point to be remembered while making predictions. The astrologer is expected to know the position of
planets ia their Gochara movement. For example, the
position of planets would be'Sani in Cancer, Guru in
Vsischika till February 1948 and then in Dhanus, Rahu in
Vilshabha till the end of November 1947 and Mars in
Cancer and Leo. The rest would be moving once awhonth
from house to house and could be known from any almanac.
Find out where the planet is at the time of the commencement'of his dasa. Then if he is in—
(1) Mithuna, Simha, Kanya, Thula, ... Results will be
Vrischika or Kumbha (Sirghodaya) seen in the
beginning.
(2): Pisces (Meena) Ubhayodaya ... In the middle.
(3) Mesha, Vrishabha, Dhanus, ... In the end.
Makara, Kataka-Prushtodaya.
ferent AIRY
st weder quad. o oe e
xat Reset". 3
T pu ee sa
95 ? UP Sthje Museum, Lucknow

4m SOON PULTE AR YAYA RAN "CRRA St 6
Stanza 6.—The Sun and Mars give results
when they enter a house, Jupiter and' Venus in
the middle and-Saturn and the Moon in the end
and Mercury always.
NOTES ne
_ Here the results- are indicated with reference to the
Ashtakavarga already explained in Ch. 1X. Take the Sun.
He gets certain power according to Ashtakavarga calculations and thereby becomes powerful to give good or evi]
results. Divide the rasi into 3 equal divisions. , The Sun
and Mars give their results when then entef a rasi, and
before they leave the Ist division, Jupiter and Venus do so
in the 2nd division and Saturn and Moon in the 3rd divisien.
But Mercury continues fo give his results all through the
house he occupies. This must be taken into account in
predicting future events. ^
UP State Museum, Lucknow ^.
n

o
. By A
CHAPTER XXIII
ANISHTADHYAYA OR MISFORTUNES
ex
SISTERE C
SESIA TANNA
TAE ate aefa R Tas eh: |
qti ot cai aR a
RTT TAHU TAS EMT
az Stanza I.—If*the Sth and 7th houses from
Lagna or Chandra be Occupied or aspected by
benefics or their lords, then these bhavag will
- prosper sif not they will suffer.
If Kanya falls as birth ith Ravi initand °
Sani in Meena, the wife will be lost. If in this
conjunction the 5th house, is occupied by Kuja,
he causes loss to children.
NOTES
This Chapter is called Anishta or Arishta and means
that which treat$ of misfortunes. When a horoscope ‘is
d given to an astrologer he will be able to.say from what
* misfortunes the person i$ suffering from and this is Very? o
important for men to khow. If the Sthehouse-from Lagna
or Moon is occupied or aspected by beneffes or its lord,
thé person will be blessed with children. If the Sth house
. 9 e UP State Museum, Luckħow o

480 CC-O. In PublicgpRrEBIDA Co Ae T WIGAayu TES lande Xd est, 1
from Lagna or Chandra is not so occupied the percon will
bechildless. There are 12 kinds of children mentioned in
the sastras and combinations for all these varieties are
quoted from Saravali by Bhattotpala.
The twelve kinds of children are :—
(1) Aurasa—born to lawful wife.
(2) Kshetraja—born to one's wife with the consent of
husband.
(3) Datta—given it, adoption.
(4) Kritrima—nursing any one as one's own child.
(5) Adhama Prabhavan—one born to a wife without
the husband's kn¢wledge by a low caste man.
(6) Ghudhothpanna—one born to wife similarly but
for men of equal caste. Ghuda means in secet,
^.. one born secretly to the wife without the husband's knowledge.
(7) Apaviddha—one neglected after birth. :
(8) Pounarbhava—a child born to a second husband
after the woman renounces the first.
(9) Kanina—born to an unmarried girl.
(10) Sahodha—born to second wife.
(11) Kritaka—a child purchased while the first is living *
(12) Dasiprabhava—born of illegitimate connection.
Saravali thus explains these varieties of children. If
the 5th house in a horoscope belongs to a benefic or has '
its conjunction or aspect the person will have children.
if the Sth. house falls in any one of the 6 divisions of
Guru, of falls in. a beneficial sign the person will get
legitrmate children, that is in Dhanus or Meesa in Rasi,
Mora: Drekkana, Navamsa, Trimsamsa' and Dwadasamia.
UP State Museum, dun A ex.
s

Ch. XXI; St'^j]ub'is Brean Pigitipan ABITAN Aust and eGangafg ].
Compare this with Chapter IV where “the legitimacy or
otherwise ofthe child is discussed at full length. Unless
Guru aspects Lagna, Chandra or Surya either in rasi or in
^ amsa, the legitimacy of the child has to be suspected.
If the 5th house from Lagna or Chandra, whichever is
more powerful, has beneficial aspects the person will have
lawful children. If the navamsa ofthe Sth house fall in a
beneficial sign the number of children’ will be determined
by that navamsa. Ifa benefic aspects it the number will be
doubled. If this falls in a malefic amsa the number of
losses will be determined by that navamsa. If the 5th falls
in one of $ani's houses aspected by Budha, the child will
resemble Sani. If Guru, Kuja and Ravi aspect the same,
the-child will be blind."
ih the 5th house belongs to Budha aspected by Sani,
Kshetraja will be born. Pandavas are said to be Ksherajas
` since Kunti got the three sons, Dharma Raja from Yama,
Bhima from Vayu (God of wind) and Indra giving her
Arjuna while the 2nd wife Madri got Nakula and Sahadeva
from Aswini Devatas (celestial physicians) with the consent
of her husband Pandu as he was under a curse not to
approach his wife. If the 5th house belongs to Sani with
Sani there aspected by Chandra, the son will be adopted.
If the 5th house belongs to Budha with Budha there aspected
by Chandra, the child will be purchased.
^ ‘If the Sth house joins Kuja's Saptamsa with Sani there
^ unaspected by other planets, the.child will be Kritrima.
- If the 5th house falls in Seni's varga with Ravj there aspect-^ ,
ed by Kuja, the child wil be Adhama Prophaya.. if the 5th
joins Kuja's amsa with Chandra there, asptcted by Sani,
undspected by other planets, the child will be Gudhotpanna. -
Shes ^ UP State. Museum, Lucknow

482 BRIHAT JATAKA [Ch. XXIII, St. 1
If the Sth joins Sani's varga with Kuja there-aspected -
by Ravi, Apaviddka will be Born as per Charaka Muni.
If the 5th falls in Sani's varga with Sani dud Chandra
there aspected by Sukra and Ravi, the child will be Punar- .
bhava.
If the 5th falls in Cancer conjoined or aspected by the
Sun, the child will be Kanina. Kanina means one who is
.born to an unmarried girl as Karna to Kunti before she
was wedded to Rando.
If the 5th falls in Ravi's or Chandra’s divisicns with
Ravi or Chandra in it aspected by Sukra, the cone will be
Sahodha.
If the 5th falls into alete signs ed by powerful
malefics, unaspected by benefics, the person will have, no
children. If the 5th house falls in Sukra's navamsas, aspectec by Sukra, the children will be from concubines.
à AE
If the 5th falls in Chandra Navamsa with: his aspect, |
similar results must be predicted. If the 5th falls im Sukra
or Chandra vargas and conjoined or aspected by them there
will probably be daughters or the child’s nature will partake
of that rasi. Similarly if the 7th house from Lagna or
Chandra is combined or aspected by benefics or its lorá
is there, there will be prosperity to wife. If there is no
conjunction or aspect for the 7th then there will be no wife.
Here the author has quoted two bhavas, the 5th and 7thas examples and thereby shows the readers that these princi- ,
_Ples may: be extended io all other bhavas. Bhattatpala z
^ quotes Yavanéswara who says that the events of life may be”
judged eithér reif birth or the Moon. There Seems to be
some contradiction. in the views of the. earned" commentaÚP State Museum, Luckfiow cee o 6

e
Ch. AXP, Blk] PPRS Tha ed ho Rare) Nggak canori 4o.
“tor. ^ In Ch. "XX, St. 10 in his valuable «notes he says that
the different i bhavas must be taken from Lagna and not
from Chandra and that is the reason why his author. Varahamihira sepeats, Lagna Dehadi Bhavyhi. ‘See notes. If
Venus, Jupiter, Moon or Mercury or all of them Occupy or
aspect the 7th or if the 7th falls in the house of any one of
these or their divisions then the nature of the wife will be
according to the lord of the varga or theenature of the sign.
Ifthe 7th from birth or Moon, whichever is powerful—
is combined or aspected by malefics there will be loss or
destruction to wife. If the 7th house is occupied by Saturn
and Moon his wife will marry separately while he is living.
The. number of wives will have to be determined by the:
number of navamsas the*lord of the 7th has gained or by the
numBer of planets who aspect'the lord of the 7th. If the:
| 7th falls in the amsas of Ravi, Kuja, Guru or Budha, aere
pe “willebe one wife. Ifthe 7th is powerful and occupied by
"Chandra and Sukra or aspected by them, probably he will
have many wives. If Sukra occupies or aspects the 7th
there will be many wives. If Guru and Sukra occupy the
7th the wife comes from his own caste. If Ravi, Kuja,
Chandra and Sani occupy. or aspect the 7th the girl will be
from a.lower caste. If Sukra occupies or aspects 7th,
the wife probably will behave like a dancing woman or
prostitute. If Kanya is birth with the Sun there and Saturn
i$ in Pisces, his wife will die before him. If in this connection Mars occupies the 5tb, Capricorn, the „person loses.
all his Children düring his life. Kuja is exalted in Makara’ 9
. and still he will kill the issues. The 7th and, “5th “houses
are allied ta, each other closely since if he Should havo
. children, he must hawi a wife, while if he Rasa ‘wife, he may ©
o
o Q ? SUP StatedMugeum, Lucknow z
B uc PUE E e

484 BRIHAT JATAKA (Gh. RNE St. 2
or may not have children, but can adopt and thus have
children. Unless there is a wife, the question of children,
of whatever denomination they may be does not arise.
Hence both the bhavas are discussed in detail here.
saat! Raagidaka TANANAN: |
dan cafe d Pa
KAN TA NR -
Stanza 2.—1f cruel planets are in the 4th and
the 8th from Venus or if Venus is between malefics or if Venus is not combined or not aspected
by benefics, the wife will be killed by fire, fall or
ropes.
NOTES S
In these combinations the fact to be remembered is the
death of the wife when the person is living. The cruel
planets are the Sun, Mars and Saturn and if these in any
order occupy the 4th and the 8th the person will lose his
wife by fire or burning. If Venus has evil planets in the
2nd and the 12th houses from him the wife will die by fall
from an elevated place. In this case if Venus is in the same
aouse with malefics, but is placed between two evil planets
jn ten degrees the same results must be predicted with.
- greater force, If Venus does not join with Or is not aspected
by any -benélic, the wife will die by being tied with ropes.
Some misintorpret this verse but Bhattotpala „supports the
above explanatior by quoting Bhagavan Gargi, who is Very .
clear on this pointyp State Museum, Lucknow i CEN 4
a
e
yo
"om
a

j
Ch. mu sigh ———Pn€ Eo mo
^ emen faeit: whee:
Weal GERAI qae sew |
. Werden
sms suem 3 N
Stanza 3.—If the 6th and 12th houses from
lagna are occupied by the Sun and the Moon, the
husband and wife will have each one eye. If
Venus,and the Sun occupy the 7th, 9th or 5th,
the wife will be defective.
5 NOTES
' In the first half of, the verse the 12th and the 6th must
be°~ccupied by the Sun and the Moon in any way to
produce defective vision in both the couple. The second
half of the stanza requires that the Sun and the Venus must
= be togetherin the 5th and 9th or the 7th house to produce
defect in any particular organ of the wife.
RUE gasa
TRAR A ARTIT |
MRAR:
Ad TAARAH RA og
"Stanza 4.—If Saturn occupies birth, Venus
in the 7th when it is in gandantha and if the: 5th
: is unoccupied by benefics thé personewill° become.
" husband of 4 barren, ‘woman. If mafeficsoccupy `
12th, 7th.and birth with weak Moor in the 3d
the person will have no wife or son. 2
Se & UP*State Wih Sarin, met. »
o
o

cc O. In Public DATE Digitized TAA Sarayu Trust and eGangotri
486 RIHA (Ch. XS
NOTES
The last navamsas of Kataka, Vrischika and Meena
are called technically Chakra sandhies or important junc- '
tions. When these navamsas happen to become the 7th
house with Sukra there, with Yama (Saturn) in the lagna
and when there are no benefics in the 5th, the person's wife
will be a barren woman. This combination can arise only
in Makara, Vrishabha and Kanya. The author uses the
expression Vandhyapáthi. This means that even if he
marries two or three wives he will get no children because
his wife or wives will be barren women. All she malefics
may be in 12th, 7th or birth or in any two or three of them,
weak Moon must be in the 5th. Under such circumstances
he will have no wife or children. (See notes on Si. 5,
Ch. 1) for Kshina Chandra).
TAN a SEC T
Würfel Sarg Pur we dam: |
sss “a Agis at
vet TENT sr erudi ll |.
Stanza 5.—If Sukra occupies the 7th, which
liappens to be the varga of Sani or Kuja and.
aspected by. them the person becomes: fond of^
"other women. If Sani and. Kuja j join Chandra i in^
the 7th and have the aspect of Sukra the person
and his wife both become adulterous. If Sukra
‘and. Chandra have San and soda - in tbe 7th Geo
P State eum
A
ILSt.5.,

* CheXXIII;St. 5] ILLUSTRATIONS ^ 487
o > C
person becomes wifeless or issueless. If female
and male planets have Sani and Kuja in'the 7th
aspecfed by benefics the couple would be married
when old. D
i NOTES.
If Sukra occupies any one of the vargas of Sani or Kuja -
] and is located in the 7th and is aspected by any one of them
$ the person becomes adulterous.
The following I horoscope of a late ruling prince
illustrates this — e
. The II is that of a woman noted for her incestuous
inteStourse :— >
RN . Ravi | £
' | Sukra | Moon | Kethu Guru | Budha
ja
a Sukra
Ravi Lagna Rahu
I = II
. Moon
Budha Kethu Kuja
Birth ;
s Rahu | Guru Sani Sani
J ? Look at the 7th house and 4th house in both. In I,
Sukra in 7th is aspected by Sani and 4th is aspected Sy Kuja. o .
In II, the 7th house has Kuja and Chagdra, aspected by
E Sani in Kuja's house and Sukra is aspected by Sani ande4th
t . hasRavi, Sukra and'Budha and Kuja aspects Sani. She had ,
| " a reckless oharacter.up State Museum Lucknow :
| ena. a s Q
| a o a

488 CC-O. In Public DYRFA ATZA PASAU Truna XGéMjiySt. 5
If Chandra, Kuja and Sani are in conjunctión in the
7th house and aspected by Sukra who is found án any of the $-
vargas of Sani or Kuja, then the person goes in search of J
other women and his wife seeks other men. Both ‘become
adulterous. If Sukra and Chandra join in any sign having
Sani and Kuja in the 7th house from them, the person will
have no wife or childrens Varahamihira uses va indicating
-or and meaning having no wife or children. But the learned
commentator asks the, readers to interpret the passage as
conjunctional for va and gives a hint to interpret ag having ?
no wife and children.
If there are two planets in a house one female and the
other a male and the 7th from them is occupied by Sani and
Kuja and the latter have beneficial aspects, the person when 2
old will marry an old weman.
The following horoscope of a rich zamindarini illus <= <
trates this. Sun is male, Budha is female and 7th from them °
is occupied by Sani and Guru aspects Sani. Kuja aspects
the 7th from lagna. She lost a husband and after a few
years married a second time. She is now dead.
Sun Kuja ^
Sukra
Budha Guru e A
Chan- E
Rahu dra
e Lagaa
RASI :
rd e e s 5
e e ` C) Kethu z ?
E HC x e
x E Sani e. e 1 *
s UP State Museum, Lücknow t ee y
e x ? i
e ° e

y.
Ch. SERIE "utin KANYA BIER Sangoti 489
EST VATS:
Reh sa IRGA rexienmiae? |.
^ amen stat RANG REN when
AANE umts N EN
Stanza 6.—1f the 10th, 7th and 4th are
occupied by Chandra, Sukra and malefics respectively, the person destroys his: family. If Sani in
kendra aspects the house indicated by the
Drekkana joined by Budha, the person becomes a
silpi. If Sukra occupies the 12th, joining the
navamsa of Sani, the person becomes the son of
a menial servant woman. if Ravi and Chandra
occupy the 7th aspected by Sani, the person does
degradiag acts.
NOTES
The Moon must be in the 10th, Venus in the 7th, and
malefics—Sun, Mars and Sajprn in the 4th, to make the
person’s family extinct. There are some persons who
represent the last of their families and with whose death,
the family name ceases. This is considered to be a great
misfortune as he will cause the termination of his family.
Bhattotpala quótes Duryodhana the eldest son of Kurus as
an example. - All of them died and their,family ceased to
exist. Budha occupies some Drekkana. The house indicated by that Drekkarla must be aspectad. by Sani who must
be in a ktndra, to produce a silpi. This “term is nade to
o
Di . Da o . . L o
_ indicate persons living by painting, engraving, etc., hence
x o = e
[EU
D
~ UP State Museum, Lucknow
e
o
a

o
` servant in any c capacity.
e
490 B BRIHAT JATAKA [Ch. ASSET St 6
we may call these as artists or skilled men. Some author
interpret this part as indicating the aspect of Budha by Sani
in the rasi: But-as the author clearly uses Thriamsay it
means Drekkana. Suppose Budha is in Mesha and in the
3rd Drekkana. This will be Dhanus. If, in the rasi, Sani
occupies a kendra from lagna and aspects Dhanu then
the person becomes an artist. Here it will be seen that if
Budha is in the 3rd Drekkana, then it represents Dhanus
and Sani is in the 10th from birth and therefore in a
kendra. He aspects the 7th house Dhanus and such a
combination produces silpi. But suppose Sani is jn Thula.
Budha Sani
e Birth
Even then he aspects Dhanus in the 3rd house, but as
Thula is the 2nd house from lagna and not a kendra, there
willbe no yoga for producing a silpi. If Sukra is in the
- 12th from Jagna and is located in the navamsa eof Sani
then tke child will be born of a woman who is a merfial
If the Sün,and the Moon are in
the 7th house fren? lagna and aspected by Sani, tbe person
does, disgraceful’ ané degrading acts, quite beneath the
, dignity of his family HA Susedia SAR Only happen on *
e a
o e `
e 2 o
Case |

A e
Ca. TO St. 7] DEFES D IN TIMBA e 491
24 Abs when the Sun and the Moon are joined together in
a rasi in every month.
aaa: Remate veriti eT
VER TCT THT TIA ET |
GR Rema gansa ct
we ARIST p Rear saat ART: Uo d
Stanza 7.—1f Venus and Mars join the 7th
house aspected by malefics, there will be serious
danger "frem dysentery. e If the Moon joins the
navamsa of Cancer or Scorpio and is in conjunc-:
^ tien with malefics, the person will have diseases in
| the secret places. If the Moon joins lagna, Sun in
"(7 | fhe7th and two malefics in the 12th and 2nd, the
| person will be attacked by a serious form of
| leprosy. If the Moon occupies the 10th, Mars in
| the 7th and Saturn in the 2nd house from the Sun,
the person will be defective in limbs.
NOTES
if Kuja and Sukra are in the 7th and evil planets aspect
them, the person will suffer from Vriddhiruk or dysentery.
` "There is a second reading which runs as Ardha Drik meaning that, the man will have half sight. But this is not ~
supported by the commentator. Among the’ „European
nations dysentery is dréaded like a great» »epidemic and ^
sometimes it proves fatal. The Moon meys “be in any sign.
If he joins the navamsas of Kataka or, Vrischika and is. in
‘conjunction with | a. malefic, the person will have diseases
P'State Mugeum, Lucknow

e
e
492 cC-O.In PublicIBBAE Aged Ay Sdtayu Tena E Ad ouSt. 8
e e e
in private parts like sexuale organ, testes, anuo, etc.
Where should the Moon join the malefic, in rasi or
navamsa ?. The original seems to countenance both. In
many places where navamsas are stated the conjunctions
often refer to the rasi. The Moon should not only join
Kataka or Vrischika navamsas but must also join there
with malefics. But suppose the Moon is in Kataka or
Vrischika navamsa and an evil planet joins him in the
rasi. I should atiribute disease in private parts even in
this combination. 2
Chandra should be in Lagna, Ravi should bein the
7th and two evil planets Kuja and Sani shoyld^be in the
.2nd and 12th to produce white k eprosy. This is one form
ofa hideous disease, and there are other forms such as
black, red and blue leprosy. The word in the original is
Ashubhas or evil planets and Bhaitotpala interprets this as
referring to Sani and Kuja. When the Sun and the Moon
are in the 7th house from cach other, the days must be
Full Moon days. The 2nd house from the Sun at the time
of birth is called Vesi. Saturn should be in the 2nd house
from the Sun, the Moon must be in the 10th house, and Mars
must be in the 7th house from lagna to produce defect in y
the limbs. This means that either the man will have limbs
cut off by various weapons or he wili be born without suitable limbs and become what we call defective or defornted..
SF UAT Tas ^
Mer ee cast) :
d Bem miei sir C :
UP State Museum, Luckaow 9
Ly € e

Ch. XXII, Sts.8&9] PTHISIS ergot
Stanza 8.—When the Sun i$ in Makara, and
the Moon is between two malefics, the person
gets asthma, consumption, enlargement of spleen,
carbuncle or abdominal tumours. If the Sun
and the Moon mutually exchange their places in
Rasi or Amsa, the person gets pthisis. If these
two join together in any one 6f their houses, he
may become consumptive or emaciated.
e
NOTES
4 The Sur must be in Capricorn, and the Moon must be
between two evil planets, Saturn and Mars to produce
ág&hma, consumption, spleen enlargement, carbuncle (vidradhi) or abdominal tumours. If she Sun is in Cancer and
the Moon is in Leo either in the rasi or in the savamsa
the person gets consumption. Some are of opinion that
the Sun must be both in the rasi and the navamsa of
to produce this result. But Bhattotpala quotes from Gargi,
who plainly supports the first interpretation. If the Sun
. and the Moon are (1) in Cancer or (2) in Leo, they produce
consumption or weakness in the body or emaciation or
undesirable leanness and debility. There are some people
who are not particularly sick but who are extremely weak.
STITT o
gat aaae? qe Wh, 2 7 7
9 TANGEN DIRE ICEREN] q^ ji e
coo. giu mee AUS C
O C
D
o
SUP StatesMugeum, Lucknow
(al
e e o
Cancer while the Moon must be similarly situated in Leo p

III, St.9 &
494 Gen pu BRIHAT JATAKA [Ch.2 XX 10
Stanza 9.—If the Moon occupies “the Sth
amsa of Sagittarius or the amsas of Pisces,
Cancer, Capricorn or Aries, and aspected by or
is in conjunction with Saturn or Mars, the person
will suffer from leprosy.
If Scorpio, Cancer, Taurus or Capricorn
becomes one of the thrikonas aspected by or in
conjunction with evil planets, the person suffers
from leprosy.
$ NOTES
If the Moon joins the 5th navamsa of Dhanus, viz.,
Simha or the navamsa of Metna, Kataka, Makdra or Mesha
having the aspects or conjunction of Kuja or Sani the man
suffers from leprosy. Bhattotpala explains that in sus n
conjunctions, suppose there is beneficial aspect the man
suffers from cutaneous eruptions or irritation, verging op
leprosy. This view of the commentator is supported by a
quotation from Yavaneswara which is clear on this point.
If Vrischike, Kataka, Vrishabha or Makara happens to be
the 5th or 9th from any lagna having an aspect or conjunction of a malefic, the person suffers from leprosy.
Pamanahan CATT TA TA |
TSANG MA AAA || Lo d.
"Stanza 10.—If Ravi, Chandra; Kuja aud
"Sani occupy 8th, 6th, 2nd and 12th in. any way,
-tke person loses his sight by the elevation of that
Dhatu which -is indicated by the most powerful
of these planets.
o
UP State Museum, Lucknow © cS NS

Che Mp itc Hdmain. DISARARNSEH Trust and eGangotri 495
9r ome, NOTES Q
o o a
Four planets are indicated here, viZ., Sun, Moon, Mars
and Saturn and four houses, viz., 2nd, 6th, 8th and, 12th. Any
of these planets may be located in any ofthe houses and
the author requires no particular order or method. The
Dhatus referred to are (1) Vata (wind), (2) Pitha (bile) and
Sleshnma, (phiegm). Find out which of these four planets is
the strongest and attribute that Dhatu, which is indicated by
him. (See notes on Ch. II. Sts. 8-9-10-11). The sight will be
lost or the blindness will be caused Sy the increase of such
compláints, which are caused by the excess of these Dhatus.
amaaa spp tex Rag:
o RARER TIARA TAM | VE I
.. Stanza 11.—If malefics occupy 9th, 11th, 3rd
and 5th houses unaspected by benefics, the person
will suffer from deafness. If these evil planets are
in the 7th house, there will be decomposition of
the teeth.
NOTES
By malefics we are to understand here Ravi, Chandra
(must be Kshina Chandra to be a malefic) Kuja and
Sani. All these planets must be found in the 9th,
11th, 5th and 3rd. They may be in one or two or more
houses oone in each of the houses. Then hard hearing or
deafness will result. Thégleafness will be eaused by the?
elevation of that Dhatu; which is governed by ‘the most
power among these planets. If all these planets are in the
à Y sup State Museum, Lucknow
Bit I o o
o

496 cc.o, in Public BRAM Ai d S yu Trust Mra Seius. 12
7th house without beneficial aspect, the person suffers from
bad or ugly teeth. These resulis must be predicted during
the periods and sub-periods of planets causing such combinations. (See notes on St. 20, Ch. VIII).
SET] UAT aMAPAISTMAaRTA: |
AIGA SS CITA ATARE: | RR IStanza 12.—if the Moon eclipsed by Rahu
occupies birth and evil planets are found in trines,
the person suffers from devils. -
If the Sun is eclipsed and occupies the birth,
the person becomes blind. 6
. NOTES
When the Moon is eclipsed by Rahu aud occupiec-*he
birth with evil planets in the 5th and 9th houses, the person
suffers from spirits, devils, hobgoblins, etc. The belief in
devils is still strong though many scientists may laugh at
this statement. I have seen with my own eyes certain of
these and I have in my humble experience witnessed a few
cases of unnatural phenonena of my brother-in-law's wife
said to be possessed of a davil, able to lift up a stone of
about 100 Ib. easily in her right hand, carry it to the riverat Closepet and throw it into the water and then saying she
would jump to the tree and fall down senseless. She lived a
year later but could not remember anything personally though .
I have tried my best. I could not see devils as they are, but
have seen men possessed of them. a Y»
zoe Tf; Ravi is eclipsed by Rahu, Kuja and Sani are ^
found in the. 5th aad 9th houses the person becomes blind.
In the original the occupation of konas by malefics is left
out but it is te be supplied as in the first ‘half. : "
UP State Museum, Lucknow <

E
^ LI
Ch. SCIT, rd o PANSANT Y" Trust and eGangotri ip
dede: waa wee s red Tt
Geisa Rats fa Reha |
TAAST TRAST
Sat T TATA att emque |i 23 A
Stanza 13.—1f Jupiter occupies birth and,
Saturn is in the 7th, the persor suffers from windy
complaints. If Jupiter occupies Lagna with Mars
in the 7th, the person suffers from insanity or
madness. ‘If Saturn occupies Lagna and Mars
is found in 9, 7 or 5, the person suffers from
inSanity. If weak Moón with Saturn joins the
12th house, the same insanity must be predicted.
o
s NOTES vœ
Asitirvataja Rogas or the principal complaints arising from
the excess of wind are 80 in number, and these take various forms in various constitutiqns. (Vide Charaka and Suso ruta Eng. Translation). When Guru is in Lagna and Sani
occupies the 7th house (from lagna and therefore from Guru
also) there will be suffering from windy complaints. If in
the same conjurction Kuja occupies the 7th instead of Sani,
the person suffers from insanity. If Saturn occupies Lagna
with Mats in 5, 7 or 9 the persom suffers from insanity. Af
Kshina Chandra joins Sani and occupies,the 12tle from
lagna the man suffers from insanity. eBhattotpàla is not
explanatory in this connection. In the Horoscope ef Sri
,Rama, birth is Kataka with Guru thete and Kuja is in*the
32 E 3 UP State Museum, Lucknow 2
o
e

498 CC-O. In Public DdibEDAgilizdaoy Sake TrufGhd SHE St. 14
7th. Rama was nct insane afld nobody could ever attribute
such a state to him. Here Sani is not in lagna, though
Kuja is in the 7th and Kshina Chandra does not join Sani.
Probably Bhattotpala means that Sani must be in Lagna and
Kuja in 5, 7 or 9. At any rate Kuja and Sani aspecting
each other cause a little idiosyncracy. Here as well as
other horoscopes within: my observation insanity’ must be
predicted only wher the planets are powerless and not in
conjunction with others.
Sukra | Ravi |Budha | Kethu
ina |-
| Birth
"^ Guru k
Sri Rama’s | Moon m
» Horoscope
& Kuja
| t e
[iios
Rahu | Sani
MEPEVIEUE SEM ARTS
«trato TATA |
AASA: HAA: ut:
i ST TUNAN ETAN: WS ate
SEIS Stanza 14.—If .the lord of the Rasyamsa, :
Bun,.Meon and Jupiter join neecha or: unfriendly .
amsa they ‘produce self-slavery, slavery by pur- -
chase or hereditary slavery when one of two or
more of the above planets occupy such positions, ~
e UP State Museum, Lucknów + a : (y "5
Z F E EIE

Ch, XXIII, St. 15] DEFECTIVE ORGANS
5 NOTES :
Rasyamsa is the navamsa occupied by the Moon. If
its lord, Sun, Moon and Jupiter are found located in their
neecha or unfriendly navamsas, they produce slavery. If
one of them is so the person will go inas a slave by selfo
will; i$ two are so occupied then he will be sold as a slave ;
and if three or more are so located he will be derconded
from a hereditary family of slaves. e
fresas Wes qud
wea ed ep gms F |
FATA MAES THATS
“Raa AHEM: TA f: gam t ts Ul
> Stanza 15.—]f birth EY to be Vrishabha, Mesha or Dhanus, aspected by malefics the
persón will have ugly teeth. If birth falls in
malevolent signs ar Dhanus or Vrishabha and is
aspected by evil planets the person becomes baldheaded. If the Sun is in the 5th or 9th aspected
by malefics the person will have weak eyes. If
Saturn is so situated he suffers from many complaints. If Mars is so situated there will be defect
in orgags. : E
° “NOTES t
Ugly geeth, bald-headedness, shorteof weak visjons,
suffering from many diseases and possessing defective organs
are also, classified as SEN usen and 29 doubt they are sos
R s

< If Saturn is in thé Sth or 9th from lagna aspected by
in Bhujaga or Nigada Drekkana, aspected by
500 CC-O. In Public Daging year Serv Truste SRRI si. 16
When the lagna ‘falls in Vrishabha, Mesha or Dhanus
aspected by malefics, the man will have ugly of'ill-set teeth.
When ihe birth falls in malefic signs like Mesha, Simha,
Vrischika, Ma kara or Kumbha and also Dhanus or
Vrishabha aspected by malefic planets, the person will have
_a bald head. If the Sun is in the 5th or 9th sign from
lagna aspected by malefits, the person will have weak eyes.
malefics, there will be, complaints of many varieties and if
Kuja occupies the 5th or 9th aspected by evil planets, there
will be some defect in the organs.
TUTTI ?
asus Regen | ~ è
SAETTAdana AAAA asa || 2 1
Stanza 16.—1f evil planets occupy 12th, 5th,
2nd or 9th, the person will be imprisoned according to the nature of*that house. If lagna falls
powerful malefics, the person will be similarly
confined. 5
NOTES A
{falt the evil planet$ are in any one of more of these |
" houses—viz., 2nd, 5th, 9th or Mth, the person will suffer
bondage or impritonment according to the nature of the
houses they occupy. If the planets are in Aries, Taurus
“and Sagittarius the person will be tied by ropes, chains, ete.
UP State Museum, ALD a : i
Cu Te FS p
* 5 5 e C qtu

Pd
Ch. dps St. 17] BHUJAGA DREKKANA e Or
If these eyil planets are in’ Gemini, *Virgo, Libra and
Aquarius, tRe person will be shakled or fettered. If these
evil planets are in Cancer, Capricorn and Pisces, the person
will be confined in Durgas or forts. If these are in Scorpio
their confinement will be in underground cells. If birth
falls in -Bhujaga or Nigada Drekkana and if the rasi represented by this Drekkana is agpected by powerful evil
planet: „the person's confinement will bé similar to that Rasi. e
Bhyjaga Drekkanas are the 2nd°and 3rd of Cancer, the’
ist and 2nd of Scorpio and the last of Pisces. Nigada'
Drekkana ¢s the Ist of Ma kara. Bhujaga is the same as
serpent as mentioned already and Nigada is quadruped.
Agcording to the origi^ial it would dppear as if the author
haoi iven a 3rd Drekkana Called the Pasabhrit. But in'
the enumeration of the 36 Drekkanas in Ch. XXVII no’
mntion is made of Pasabhrit as a separate one. "Hence
Bhattotpala asks the readers to refer this as an adjective to’
the Bhujaga and Nigada Drekkanas.
qgan: Bat «p Prud
-— mes send p REN |
E oy AC > a
(Raag MENETAN-
: Seres FEHEPEHREEE E || On|
, Stanza 47. —]f the Maon with the, ring or
halo around, him joing Saturn and iseaspéctetl bye
Mars, the person "will be harsh, » suffer from
hysteria "and cansumption. If the-Sun, Saturn
and Mars arg in the 10th house unaspected by
State Museum, Lucknow
m C o
a x

y
502 COO. In Public Dose HPRH ZIAL AREA TROMORGENPP St. 17
benefics, the person will become a servant. If
three or two or one of them occupy thé 10th, the
man becomes inferior, ordinary and superior
servant respectively.
NOTES
Sometimes we see haloes or ring-like appearances round
“the Sun as well as the Moon. In ordinary parlance they
denote rain or wet weather. When there is a ring (Parivesha)
round the Moon, Saturn joins him and Mars aspects such
a Moon the person will suffer from the above complaints.
Here three different states fur Moon are indicated (1) halo
round his disc, (2) conjunction with Saturn, and (3) aspect
of Mars. There are also three complaints mentioned by>~:he
author, viz., (1) harshress in speech, (2) hysteria, and
(3) consumption. Bhattotpala therefore observes that if the
Moon is possessed of, one of these states the person will
have one of these complaints, if two the person will ‘suffer
from two complaints, and if all three states are found the
person suffers from the three complaints named. Then the
author gives a special combination for servantship. If the
Sun, Mars and Saturn unaspected by any benefic occupy the"
10th, the person becomes a menial or servant. If there are
two of these planets in the 10th, then he becomes a higher
menial. If there is only one planet in the 10th, then he °
becomes the leader of menials or head-servant.
t E e
LJ
v a
€ e " OG e
E
a
e
e y f£ € A e Hi
UP State Museum, Lucknow A c ue
€ A h
c E

^ LJ
a ee
iJ
CHAPTER XXIV
STRIJATAKADHYA YA"
SATA TEA: p
TRI ras RAT |
Tat q AAT frat Te
SAM Tara TRA lle Ul
. Stanza l.—Such of these results as the
fefflales could not possess or enjoy must be attributed to their husbands. From the 8th house in
a female’s horoscope the death of her husband,
from the birth sign and the Moon her (female's)
own physical beauty and from the 7th house her
husband and his love to her must be predicted.
e
NOTES
From the commencement of this work, the author has
been detailing results for males and now he specially
devotes a chapter to the females with a view to point out
certain physical and mental peculiarities which do not
happen %o males but which aré confined onlyeto females.
Delivery, conception,’ aAtainment of age,” appearance or
menses, etc., are peculiar to females. Buj suppose a planet
indicates health ox sickness, à female can have itas well as
¿a male. .There are three kinds of results “which must be
sa B UP State Museum, Lucknow
e
e

r
Di
sog 029 PUNE I Polit CP T CH? SUN. 2
differentiated. First, there are some events which must be
predicted only for females. Second, there are Some which
must be predicted for their husbands and third there are
others which can be shared in both by the females as well
as by their husbapds. The results indicated in St. 1,
Ch. XIII areapplicable to females. Rajayogas, etc., must
be referred to their husbafids as also to them. The results
such as produced by Sunapha, Anapha, etc., must be
applied to both females and their husbands. We have
heard of several eminent queens and empresses whe have
managed their estates and kingdoms with great credit and
ability. The nature of thg husband, his love to her and
qualifications must be predicted from the 7th house in'a
female's horoscope, as the nature of the wife, her love artd
her features must be predicted with reference to the 7th
house ia a man's horoscope.
e
ELS NL 4
PAY DIRE: ag AR il ;
TOMI YALA |
HARA ag ANCA
T a ARARA R
Stanza 2.—1f the birth and Moon fall-in
even signs, the female will be modest, if they are
aspected by benefics she will be virtgouse if the
birth'aná^ Moon fall in odd.signs, she will hàve
masculine temperament and form, and if these
two ‘are aspected: jor are in conjunction with
fnalefics, she will be sinful and dihgrapterless,
Stat HEU
e e
e e Li
e
D
D-

. Ch,XXIV,St.3] FEMININE GRACE ^ 505
NOTES 5
If Chandra and Lagna both fallin even signs such as
5 Kataka, Vrishabha, etc., she will be natural and possess
feminine grace and temperament. If Lagna and Chandra
are aspected by good planets, she will be virtuous, modest
and full of feminine grace. If these two—birth and Moon—
are in odd signs,such as Mesha, Mithuna, etc., she will '
become masculine and if aspected by Or are in conjunction?
i with evil planets, she wili become sinful, cruel and masculine*
in form and teraperament. Her thoughts, deeds and
behaviour, will be devoid of feminine grace. If birth falls
in an even sign and Chandra isjn an odd or vice versa, she
will be possessed of common temperament. If one of them
@ iSgaspecied by a benefic and another by a malefic, the
character, etc., will be middling, i.e., she will be in-some
acts feminine and others masculine. >
"eda FOI AAAS A.
arei QAT satya |
gara AKAN
f CEOS CCRC IGIUG Wg ul
“Stanza 3.—If the birth or Moon falls in the
house of Mars and occupies the Trimsamsa of
Mars, SaturnsJupiter, Mercury or Venus, the girl
* will besimmoral before puberty, dancing woman,
< virtuous, double heapted, or sinful respectively. =
NOTES ‘ss
- Trimsamsas tave been explained, by me under notes
*io St. T Ca. È £ íhe birth or Moon occupies Arjes or
5 UP State Museum, Lucknow

506 CC-O. In Public Demin abyaitzeq Rayu Truptagd LRS. 4
Scorpio and falls ix the Trim$amsa of Mars, she becomes
adulterous even before she attains her age. The*expression
also means that she has connection before marriage. If the
Trimsamsa falls únder Saturn, she becomes a dancing girl
before her puberty ; if the Trimsamsa falls under Guru, she
will bej virtuous; if the Trimsamsa falls under Mercury,
she becomes deceitful or- double hearted; and if Venus
governs that Trimsamsa, she will be sinful or immoral.
In this Chapter, the results are indicated with reference to
Trimsamsa and Bhattotpala advises his readers to examine
them carefully. The Amsa used in the original refers to
Trımsamsa as will be clearly explained later Gn by the
author. The world used is Kanya and it means a girl who
has not attained her puberty. Kanya also means a girl who
is not yet married. There cannot be any immorality before
puberty or attaining her age as there can be no sexconnection. No doubt a boy of 10 anda girl of 10 may
Aug each other or try to imitate the sex act, but it can
never be construed an immoral act. The text says Kannaiva
meaning before marriage. Kanya means only a girl and it
is not stated as one who has not attained her age. The text
says before marriage and seéms alright.
gg gue SEU FETT
CAM STULTE STS |
TARA SATA Ul a
AES AA amen aerate usu
otanza 4 birth or Chandra Talls in
Vrishabha or Thula rasi and occupies the. ~
F'State Museum, Lucknow
e
e e

à
Ch. XXIV; Sers} Domajar pigitigad PAPERE and a 507
Trimsamsas of the above planets, she becomes
sinful, marrying a second husband, virtuous,
skilful in arts and reputed respectively. If birth or
Chandra falls in Mithuna or Kanya and occupies
the above planetary Trimsamsa, the woman becomes: deceitful, impotent, virtuous, good and
adulterous respectively. `
NOTES *
If birth or Chandra falls in Vrishabha or Thula and
occupies «he Trimsamsa of Kuja, shejbecomes immoral ; in
Sani, she marries a second husband while the first is living
eee In Guru she will be’virtuous; in Budha ishe
be skilled in fine arts like painting, music, etc., and i in
suka she will be famous for her good qualities. If birth or
Chandra falls in Mithuna or Kanya and occupies the
Trimsamsa of Kuja, she becomes deceitful, in Sani’s
Trimsamsa she will be impotent, in Guru’s she becomes
virtuous, in Budha’s she will be blessed with good qualities,
in Sukra’s she will become adulterous promiscuously, i.e.,
she does not care who the man? is so long as he satisfies her
lust..
ea ARA g ARTA
AAR FOTIA TAT: TAG emu!
| NA agen ag Raat set .
ari acar, fem TES, Wa Ul
Stanza 5. t Chandra or “Birth fails in
s Kataka and "occupies the ‘Trimsamsa of the
* a Slate Museum, LUCK
a

508 CC-O. In Publcirrpim Bajang AGA ayu Trust Rng GERI St, 5
planets already aamed, she does what she likes,
causes death to husband, blessed with good
qualities, skilled in arts and immoral respectively.
If birth or Chandra falls in Simha and occupies
the Trimsamsas of ihe planets already named,
she will become masculine, adulterous, Queen>
manly, and commit incestuous intercourse
respectively. If birth or Chandra falls in Meena
or Dhanus and occupies the above námed
Trimsamsas, the woman will be good, have little
sexual desire, virtuous, skilled in “arts and
adulterous respectively. If birth or Moon falls
in Capricorn or Aquarius and occupies the
above Trimsamsas, the woman becomes servant,
fond of low men, virtuous, sinful and childless
respectively. ‘ °
NOTES
The Trimsemses are ronning in the following order:
Kuja, Ravi, Guru, Budha and Sukra and the results thust
be aitributed to them respectively. If birth or Chandra
occupies Kataka and js in Trimsamsa of —
e
Kuja=self-will ed and doing as she likes.
Sani causes death “to her husband. “Bhis may ‘be
“by berself ar byeprompting others Sng abetting his murder.
Guru=bléssed with many admirable qualities.
a Budha —skilledoin refined arts. Oo =
Sukra=evil RAGA GEB hernow e ee
A
Ez ee
AY

Se
e a
Ch. XXIV, St. 5] TRIMSAMSA RESULTS 509
Ifbirth or Chandra falfsin Simba and is found in the
T. Amsa O Kuja=masculine intemperament. Here some
read the original as Vachata instead of Nrachare and explain
it as me: ining very talkative and impertinent.
Sani=adulterous. G
* Guru wife of a king or a ruler.
Budha- masculine. °
Sukra=committing adultery among prohibited relations? or among forbidden castes and communities. The
word used is Agamyya, that is going to a person with winga
she ought never to have any c@unection.
If birth or Chandra occupies Meena or Dhanus and
ffs in T. Amsa of— °
Kuja=blessed with good qualities.
° Sani=easily satisfied in sexual intercourse or possessed of weak sexual desire. There are some men and
women who are not passionate while there are others who
are very lustful.
Guru=blessed with all good qualities.
Budha=skilled in fine arts.
* Sukra—immoral.
. If birth fallsin Makara or Kumbha and occupies the
T. Amsa of— , 5
: Kuja— servant. 3 s
Sanf=fond of leg or worthless men 9 6 5
Guru virtuois.. P
Budha — bad or sinful.
e o Ü Gries
6 : Sukra = —barren or issueless. 3
% UP State Museum, Lucknow

510 GEO. In Public Dap Plea TSAR TES FEARR, St, 6
I have explained these at considerable length because
the students may in a hurry misapply the words or expressions and thus fallinto errors. T. Amsa stands for Trimsamsa. Each lagna contains 30 bhagas or degrees and
the Trimsamsas, areidistributed among the five planets»
Kuja, Sani, Guru, Budha and Sukra.
> JATI: ub PANEN |
TASK TATE APTI US UI
Stanza 6.—The results have now been
described for Lagna or Chandra i in the various
T. Amsas, and the results must be ascertained
with reference to the strength or weakness of BUS
and Chandra.
NOTES
Lagna as well as Chandra must necessarily occupy some
Trimsamsa, and this word is now distinctly used by
Varahamihira in this stanza. If both of them occupy the
same T. Amsa then the results indicated will be powerful
whether good or bad. But if one of them occupies a good
and another a bad T. Amsa then the results will have to-be
modified according to their sources of Strength. If one of
them is stronger than the other, then the results must be
given for the stronger of the two and not fof the "weaker.
- In all these cass there should bé- no haste. * For, to find
out the character oi a man or woman, there are so many
e
other planetary conjunctions, whose inflvences should also... ~
be taken into consideration. - G
? UP State Museum, Lucknow € (oO e
S s

l | ge pou RTE TA Set Teste: € Tl
Ch. XXIV, Sts. 7 & 8] HUMAN NATURE 511
zudem! wera!
aie a a Fe tle |
- ih: AGAMA -
dated Tala M UM TET
Stanza | 7.—1f Sani and Sukra are in each
other's navamsas, aspecting nfutually, or if the
birth falls in Vrishabha or, Thula, with the
navamsa rising in Kumbha the woman will get
sexual satisfaction from females dressed in male
attire.- : a
es NOTES
Here Sani must be in Sukre's and Sukra must be in
Sani's navamas with mutual aspects or the lagna must fall
in one of,the houses of Sukra, viz., Vrishabha or Thula,
with.the rising navamsa of Kumbha to produce these
results. There are some women whose strong passions are
not satisfied by men and who resort to women for gratification, with male leather organs attached to their waists. In
the History of the world many abominable practices have
been recorded from time immemorial and human nature is
a most puzzling problem for the philosophers to solve.
(Vide Dr. Mehta's ‘Sexual Abnormalities’). 6
. Wd FRÄSTA, alrameritiad
^ gud TOMAS Ae aaa | c
sper tat gaa faa alee
a
o
° WP Sig Museum, Dickfow
i Ai, g

512 CC-O. In Public DBrFaliHDAltiz bd y As iau Trust ra eG EVA, St. 8
Stanza S.--1f the 7th house is powerless,
unoccupied and unaspected by beifefics, the
husband will be mean. If Mercury and Saturn
are in the 7th house, the husband will be impotent.
If the 7th is a niovable sign, the husband will be
constantly travelling., If the 7th is occupied by
the Sun, aspected*by malefics, she will be rejected
by her husband. If there is Mars in the 7th
aspected by evil planeis, she becomes a widow
early. If Saturn is in the 7th aspected by malefics,
she will become old without marriage:
. NOTES d
These combinations must be taken both for Lagna and
also fo? Chandra. If the 7th is occupied by Saturn and
Mercury, the husband will be a eunuch or one who has no
male organ. Bhattotpala rightly expands the idea suggested
by the author about the movable nature of the 7th house. If
the 7th house is fixed then the husband will always reside
with the wife, but when it is a common sign the husband
will be half travelling and half residing at home. Find out”
whether Chandra or Lagna is powerful and judge óf the
results from the stronger of the two. A question may be
raised as ¢o why these results must be predicted with reference to Lagna or Chandra, since the author makes no
mention of Chandra in the original. Bhattotpa.a rightly
“suggests that zs the results are named for all the planets
in the 7th except for Chandra; the author implies
clearly that the results must be predicted with reference.
to both. ©
UP State Museum, Lucknow.
m

Ch. XXIV." sun pong dle by ES and eGangotri a3
êrah: TATA
Bt dass atten TARA aaa |
secat: fara
ga a afa ff esr 14 |
Stanza 9.—If there are,several malefics in the
7th she becomes a widow. If there are evil and
good planets there, she will marry a second husbandin the same caste. If there is a powerless evil
planet in the 7th aspected by a benefic, she will be
rejected by*her husband. » If Venus and Mars exchange their navamsas, she will be adulterous. If
t€ Moon joins Venus and Mars in the 7th, she becomes adulterous with her husband's connivance.
1 : NOTES |
df there are several evil planets in the 7th, the girl is
sure to become a widow. If the Sun or Saturn or Mars
joins the 7th perfectly powerless and possess the aspect of a
benefic, the girl will be rejected by her husband. Venus
e must be in the navamsa (Aries or Scorpio) of Mars and
Mars must be in the navamsa (Taurus or Libra) of Venus,
to produce an immoral woman. If Venus and Mars
are in the 7th with the Moon then the woman commits
adultery with the consent or connivance of her husband.
Truth is stranger than fiction. ə Often we see» woman encouraged to ^ do evil acts. by her friends, relations, parents
and husbands for varidus considerations. dn royalties and
official classes these practices are more rampant on account
e" E Tof the. temporal advantages, which thé men fancy will "flow
O°
e
33 ^4 e up Sige Museum, Lucknow
Gr : A
e
o

514 cc- o: In Public BRA Aad ATA KA yu LC ALS. 9
to them by prostituting theire wives and daughters- The
following horoscopes illustrate the truth of the aþove.
In I, the 7th is aspected by two evil planets and Guru as
lord cf 1 and 10 is-bad in 7th. Hence became a widow.
In IJ, Sukra (Bhartrukaraka) is aspected by Sani and
Kuja and Sani have joined.
In III, the woman had a reckless character and incestuous
intercourse. (See Sukra and Kuja enchanging their navamsa.)
^ In IV, the Moon and Kuja are in 7 and she is separated
from her husband and leading a loose life.
7th house is aspected by Sani.
Kuja
Sani Rahu Rahu Guru x
Birth »
Moon G |
^ I II AX
Became a o Deserted by |————
widow early her husband
: | Ravi
Ravi, Budhal Guru || Lagna | Sukra | Budha Kuja
c Kethu
Ravi | Sukra | Kuja | Kethu oda Kethu
Guru G
= Nevers ©
COGN I [coro x
Kundali N
Sani ^ « | Budha aus he dar
> m C a e
6. as Ravi | L
Rahu” Lagna | Moon || Budha Rete 2| Guru” Sani
A | Sukra enm
ee dle
UP State Museum, Lucknow ^

Ch. BONG St. 10] MORALITY 515
. dhewi ont Rega :
A MS TI WIE |
-RAKA diim saree:
TMA AGA Agata ECT
Stanza 10.—1f the house of Mars or Saturn
becomes Lagna with the Moon, and Venus there"
is aspected by malefics the git] becomes adulterous along with her mother. If the 7th navamsa.
from the “Amsa Lagna falls, in a house of Mars,
aspected by Saturn, the woman?s sexual organ will
""s-^ béoiseased. If the 7th navamsa falls. in a
beneficial house, the woman will be handsóme
, and loved by her husband.
: NOTES
If Lagna falls in Aries, Scorpio, Capricorn or Aquarius
joined by the Moon and Venug and aspected by malefics,
the girl as well as her mother become immoral. There are
numberless families in which when mothers are immoral
girls also get into such nasty habits. When the 7th navamsa
.falls in Aries or Scorpio and is aspected by Saturn, the
sexual organ. wil? be rotten or diseased. This can happen
^ only, when the, navamsa of the lagna falls in Taurus or
or even possess fairly good health but, shg? will'have her
private parts diseased. If the 7th navanisa falls tn a
^ "beneficial sign hef'sexual organ will be healthy and she.
6 g % Q qu siajo Museum, Lucknow E
a
a
° Libra. The wọman mayskeep a general healthy appeatance o :

A
n^
516 CC- 2 In Public BRAMATA AB Ayu rrud Gba St. 11
will be fovea by her husbard. Subhaga and DEU
may also mean handsome or repulsive, much depends upon
the selection of the couple and the attraction and repulsion
of their personal ^ electrical currents. These currents are
generally of two kinds, external and internal. First, a man
and a woman may be attracted by external currents and
may like each other. But when they join sexually, there
will be further discharges of magnetic currents, which if
‘not agreeable make the couple repulsive and miserable.
The marriage relatioris must be carefully coupled with
reference to astrological principles as otherwise they become
failures and cause great misery to the combining parties.
That is why there are sé many divorce cases owing to
sexual inadaptability. r
T.
IA Fa: Assqm WI
Clare: Tad BTA |, :
sik asa Imma :
Raa Hat Agga da U $t N
Stanza 11.—If the 7th from lagna or navamas.
falls in the house of Saturn, the husband will be
old and stubborn; if the 7th from lagna or
navamsa fallsin the house of Mars, the husband
will be fond of other women and cruel; if the 7th ,
„falls in the hóuse of Venus, the husbend wili be 3
handsorae and loving; and‘if the 7th falls in the
house of Mercury, the husband will be learned
E
and intelligent. | ETE T We.
UP State Museum, Lucknow li rie c

Ch, i. XXIV, St. 12] AN ILLUSTRATION 517
. NOTES ;
Now the author gives results of the 7th house when it
is unoccupied by any planet. The 7th house may be taken
from the lagna or its navamsa. Take an illustration. This
is the horoscope of a woman (now widpwed) born on the
10th September 1895 at about sunrise. Here it will be
M MM
1 Mer.
Moon Rahu
i kan ————
Q Mars
Rahu Jupiter || Venus
5 Saturn
——— RASI = NAVAMSA |———
5 Sun
. Birth 5
a ^D Kethu
Mars ? 5 a
; Birth | Jup.
1 Sani Med Moon | Sup [Kethu]
seen „that there are no planets in the 7th house both in the
rasi and also in the navamsa. Therefore the 7th from
lagna or its navamsa must be taken. As the 7th from
Lagna is Aquarius, one of the houses of Saturn the husband
. Will be aged or old and also will be stubborn.
ACA ACA AK
^ fest qaa Rafa | :
a Aa Ada,
WA RsaI a D az Taisi
Stanza 12.—If the 7th falls iat Cancer; the
^ husband, will be passionate and “mild? If the Tth
?^ UP siap Myseum, Lucknow

518 CC-O. In Public DgyRiFEDATz HA Te KA Trus( Gili BAKA St. 13
falls in Sagittarius or Pisces, the husband ‘will be -
good and control his passions. If tHe 7th falls
in Leo, the .husband will be mild and hard .
working.
NOTES
If the 7th house falls in Cancer or its amsa - (Cancer)
. the husband will bé passionate and mild. He will be very
fond of sexual intercourse but his nature will be mild.
The other combinatiofis are easily understood. In the last
portion the Sanskrit expression is Atimriduratikarmakrit,
which may be divided into (1) Atimriduhu= Very mild, and
(2) Atikarmakrit— very hard working; when taken as a
compound word, the meaning is very mild and passionate.
Another version is Ratikarmakrit one fond of sexual Won.
As given under St. 11 if the 7th house in rasi differs from
the 7th house in the amsa, then the more powerful of £he
two houses must be taken and attributes referred to it ^
must be predicted. 2
SÊ genu freu
Fran eg A rer gore |
TATA GAT FAT FHT
Praman BAF || 23 Ul
Stanza 13.—1f the Moon and Venus are in.
„lagna, the woman will be „jealous and fond of.
happiness. ^ If the Moon and Mercury occupy the
birtn, she Will be skilled in arts, happy and
-blessed with good character. If Wenus ang
UP’State Museum, Lucknow e
e E
e e n
aed

an
Ch. DANG St. 14] WIDOWHOOD 519
Meréury join the birth, she wall be handsome,
beloved'and skilled in fine arts. If three benefics
are in birth, the woman will haye much wealth,
great happiness and fine character.
C 5 NOTES
There are five combinations here contemplated although
the original refers only to four. The word Api (even that
or that too) used indicates the combination of Mercury,
Venus and Jupiter. Thus there may be in Lagna (1) Moon
and Mercury, (2) Moon and Venus, (3) Venus and
Mercury; (4) Moon, Venus gnd Mercury, and (5) Venus,
Jupiter and Mercury. The meaning is plain enough to
Teapire further notes.
gie fara Raat ;
aka aR a aa R C
, AAT AU aaa TET
HAM regem! 9 Ul
Stanza 14.—The widowhood comes at that
. age which is indicated bj the lord of the amsa
occupied by ihe lord of the 8th house, when
there is an evil planet in the 8th house. If
benefics occupy the 2nd, she dies before her
husband. If the Moon is in Virgo, Scorpio, i
Taurus or. Leo, she will have few children. |
e NOTES! o,o
That woman, becomes a widow whose 8th house from
o
; lagnai is pocupied "by a cruel planet. “Wher does she “getit
? UP State Museum: Lucknow
o a
o

520 CC-O. In Public IBRAH Aigitide’ PAKA u Tihana pst. 14
is the question whiçh the author tries here to solve: The
lord of the 8th house must be in some navamsam Find the
lord of tbis navamsa and ascertain his age. The girl
becomes a widow’at atime similar to that age. Bvt this
idea does not recommend itself to Bhattotpala and his
arguments are summarised for ready reference. Some are
of opinion the ages of planets must be taken as detailed in
St. 9, Chapter VIII. -The following are the ages given for
the planets :—
Chandra v. ] year:
Kuja vie 2 years
Budha A 91555
Sukra b v 2055
Guru a Sie,
. Ravi d 2017. —À
Sani È ae 502, im
Total sss 120
The word used in the text is Vayas and it is to be iaterpreted as referring to periods and sub-periods and not to the
ages of the planets. Because, if the lord of the 8th is in
Moon's or Mars navamsa,then the age indicated will be
one or two years. It is absurd to think that the girls would :
be married at one or two years of their age, and therefore
they cannot become widows. Therefore the right interpretation will be to find out the period or the sub- period
of the lord of the navamsa occupied by the lord of the
8th and predict the widowhood during such times &fter the
„ marriage. In the original text, the words used, c are Vayasi—
thasya—satnay ` ‘and ethe author cleafly says at that age,
which‘is equal to the age of the planet, who i is the lord of
Ne
aT
the Payaman cecupiéd by the lord of the 8th house:
UPcState Museum, Lucknow
^ a e
à
e ae

Ch. XXIV, Papa 3^ ae Sato AC and eGangotri c
Bhattotpala clearly introduces, on his pwn authority, the
words—aftsr the marriage—in the commentaries. If this
holds good then the interpretation he condemns is as faulty
as his- own offered solution. For, if the idea after the
marriage-is introduced then the girl becomes a widow after
one or two or nine years as indicated by the lord of the
navamse, after her marriage and not when she is one or
two years old. If we take the Dasantardasas the same.
objection rules good unless we take the expression “after
the marriage’. For suppose the gitl gets the Dasa or the
Antardasa of the lord of the navamsa occupied by the lord
of the 8th,when she is an infant of one or two years, then
the objection raised by Bhattofpala will have to be returned back to him in his-own coin and the same absurdity of -
wGwhood at one or two years has to be pointed out. He
may have charged other writers with dropping the expression
‘after the marriage’ but he has probably overlooked the
word samay in the text and this js very important. If
there°is a malefic in the 8th and benefics in the 2nd she will
die before her husband. In the text benefics is used while
Bhattotpala says that even a single benefic in the second
will kill her before her husbands When the Moon occupies
“Taurus, Virgo, Scorpio or Leo, she will have few children.
alt wem Ta Tea: ataia:
giana: Teel se STRE: | é
Namek afe meat uu
Pean fana eaaa ambahi Ut I
Stanza 15 if Saturn is modefately pewer-
— Tul, if Venus, Mercury and Moon are powerless
n a UP State Museum, Lucknow
0 o A

522 CC-O. In Public DBRAHATIJA RAKAU TrugtGhd Pee 16
and the rest are powerful and if the birth falls in
an odd sign the woman will be adulterous. If
lagna falls in an even sign and Guru, Kuja, Sukra
and Budha are powerful, she will become famous,
learned in many sciences, and a vedantini. à
. NOTES s
Two combinatiéns are given here. Sani must be neither
powerful nor powerless, Chandra, Sukra and Budha must
be entirely powerless ‘and the rest, viz., Surya, Kuja and
Guru must be powerful with the lagna in an odd sign like
Mesha, Mithuna, Simha, ete. . then the woman will have
many lovers. No. IV horoscope given under stanza 9-of
this Chapter, illustrates this clearly. “Lagna is odd (Thule),
Sani is in 12, not very powerful, Chandra is with Kuja ánd
Budha and Sukra in an enemy's house with Ravi are
powerless while Ravi in 3, Guru in Lagna and Kuja in-his
own house are very powerful, thus making the woman very
loose in her character. Guru, Kuja, Sukra and Budha must
be powerful and may be found in any house and when the
lagna falls in an even sign, the woman will become famous,
versed in many sciences afd a vedantini or one who seeks
Para Brahma. É
TAS ATAU qut
sarei TANGGA | :
Bale TUT TAH ^
. Present rai repe N RA Uf .
Stanza‘ 16,—If an evif planet occupies the
7th, "she wif *embrace that Sanyasa, which is
e
B
a
o
o
represented « by the planet occüpying the ti »
UPeState Museum, Lucknow œ
c^
o
A A
e c
e . ae

CH d If)nain. BEWAHABAd A LAMna eGangotri 523
houst. These results may be foretold during the
wedding, during the search for the girl or during
the query. * i
: NOTES
The author now introduces a new*phase. Tbe results
foretold when there are evil planets in the 7th, will only be
verified when there are no planets in the 9th house. By
this it is clear that when there are planets in the 9th house
the former results cannot be predicted. The woman will
take to that kind of Pravrajya, which is represented by the
planet inthe 9th house. (See St. 1, Ch. XV).
These results detailed in this Chapter must be applied
enis to the horoscopes of females and to none else. The
results will have to be predicted at the times at which we
have shown them to happen. d
LZ
Ry Varahamihira has written a work called Vivahapatalam
or marriage combinations. We have not seen this work
but Bhattotpala refers to two works one Brihat and the `
other Laghu. When there is any difference between the
combinations sketched here during the marriage time and
those explained in Vivabapatalam, the latter must be given
credit. Varahamihira was really a great genius and seems
to have traversed all the departments of astrology in
a most masterly way. ^ Stri Jataka ", gives much information about female horoscopes and readers would do
well tÒ go through that book dealing exclusively with all ?
aspects of .a woman's life. ““ Sarvartha Chintamani-” |
chapter on 7th house is very exhaustive in dealing with
women’s breasts, private parts, character, sex-pléasures,
^ dry or wet organs, and such other details. °
ROS ° Cy KI o Ej "
UP State Museum, Lucknow

a
CHAPTER XXV
“ NIRYANADHYAYA ,
^ Sai ftrnrcarz:
. (Death)
APRA RNAARRTT agit sea: |
MATTIAS IIASA J
wisi RI tanana NUN
Stanza 1.—The man dies from such disease
as is indicated by the nature of the planet which
aspects the 8th house and in that orgar or part
of the body which is represented by the 8th house
in the division under Kalapurusha. If many
planets aspect the 8th house there will be many
diseases before death. ^ If the Sun, etc., occupy .
the 8th house, the person dies from fire, water,
weapon, fever, disease, thirst and hunger respectively. If the 8th house is movable, etc., the death .
. wil happen in foreign country, own land and
during travelling DE s. E
RS NOTES >
This is an "important verse showing the nature and _
place of death» As represented on several occasions the .,
UP State Museum, Lucknow ín
A n P

Ce Doman Adi RE bOs4rayEAUEHind eGangotri 525
i o
results shown by the planetary conjunctjons may be partly
or compleéely averted by the development of will-power
in the right direction. Hence consultation and previous
knowledge becomes of paramount importance. First, the
author takes the causes for death by the indications of the
aspecting planets. Planets have been given various Dhatus
as detailed in Sts. 8, 9, 10 and 11 in Ch. II. The meaning
is that if the Sun aspects the 8th house, the disease will be
developed by bile or heat. If the Moon aspects the 8th
house, the disease will be raked up By wind and phlegm; if
Mars aspects it, by bile or heat; if Mercury aspects the 8th,
the diseasg will be developed by a mixture of vata, pitha
and sleshma'; if Jupiter aspetts the 8th, by phlegm; if
Venus aspects the 8th; by phlegm and wind; and if Saturn
aspects it, by wind. Tho disease will take a serious form
or appear in that organ of the human body which is governed, by Kalapurusha. Take a horoscope. Here the 8th
house fróm Lagna is Thula and it, is occupied by Guru
and àspected by Sani and Budha and also by Kuja in the
4th. But Thula falls among the organs of Kalapurusha
in the abdomen. According to Bhattotpala when there
are no planets in the 8th, aspects must be considered but
when there are planets in the 8tb, aspects should not be
taken into notice. Thus we find Guru in the 8th and it
represents abdominal regions. Guru represents disease of
a complicated nature difficult to diagnose, and the man
should die from abdominal disorders. If Jupiter is powerfub heré thef the result will result from good work or
Subhakarma «and if He is powerless, fróm eyil acts or
Papakarma. Among the Medical worko, insthis land of the
Vedas, diseases may result from good as well as bad work
o
o or deeds. Diseases from good work can beaemedied while
G o o
oe UP Stat? Museum, Lucknow ^
"e LJ e
e

526 CC-O. In Publi da XE Tigh Ab AS ayu Trl le XY 1
diseases from evil works are difficult to cure. Suppose the
horoscope stands thus : e
Kuja
ien d ode dildo c le
Sukra g
Kethu |
RASI |
Guru red
Budha
Chandra Birth
Here there are no planets in the 8th house, but it is
aspected by the Moon, who is given very much of wiza
and phlegm. The 8th- house is Taurus which represents
the face of Kalapurusha. Accordingly when this man
dies, there wlll be some disorder in the face causing death.
Suppose there are no planets in the 8th house and it is
unaspected, the mode of dealth is detailed further by the .
author in St. 11 of this Chapter. After finding outthe
kind of disease, the author also proceeds to give the place
of death. If there is Sun in the 8th from lagna, death will
be caused by fire, if the Moon by water, if Mars by weapons,
- if Mercury by fever, if Jupiter by complicated discase, if
Menus òy thirst. and if Saturn by-hunger. If the 8th is
movable, Geath occurs in a foreign country. If it is fixed,
in his own countzy and if it falls in a common sign it occurs
while travelling- i Se
^ t UP ‘State Museum, Lucknow- ^ A^ c
A
— m — mg

Ch. KAN. SA Domai, OBES by Sara JATH and eGangotri c
Teenie RST: wegen:
qu mee yer | :
TAU SITAR TSE
erat” Tagen ska aa TEAR Us I
Stanza 2.—If the Sun and Mars occupy the
4th or 10th, death will be caused by ‘stones. If
Saturn, Moon and Mars are in 4th, 7th and 10th
respectively, death will be caused by falling into
a well. If the Sun and the Moon are in Virgo
| aspected by malefics, he will be killed by his own
pe^p*. If the birth falls in a common sign with
the Sun and the Moon in it; the person will be
„drowned.
E NOTES
Other modes of death are indicated here: If the Sun
and Mars join together and occupy the 4th or the 10th,
death results from blows from "stones Or rocks. When
Saturn is in 4, Moon in 7 and Mars in 10, the person falls
into a well and dies. When Virgo (Kanya) is occupied by
the San and the Moon aspected by Mars or Saturn, the
“person will be killed by his own men or relations. If birth
» falls in common signs like Geminj, Virgo, , Sagittarius or
Pisces and conjoined by the Sun and the Mooa, deathe wil]
be caused by drowning The Sun and thé Méon join
together in e month for only 24 days ang then only ese
GANDHENG are possible. v
LA e UP Státg Museum, Lucknów
e
D
e e a e
E
e

528 CC- O. In Public RR AT. IATAKA Trust Jens s St. 3
TA HR ANGGA g AA e
sama: TATANG geet Rud |
maai ANANTA R seat”
ated a asda few crafted: Sa U3 N
Stanza 3.-If Saturn is in Cancer and the Moon
occupies Makara tiie person dies from jalodara.
If the Moon occupies the house of Mars and is
betwixt evil planets the person dies from weapons
or fire. If the Moon occupies Virgo between malefics; death comes from corrupt blood or consumption. If the Moon occupies one of the
houses of Saturn between malefics the person dies '
by ropes, fire or fall.
NOTES
When the Moon is injCapricorn and Saturn is in Cancer,
they will be not only occupying watery signs but will also
have mutual aspects and they cause a disease jalodora'or a
particular kind of dropsy. It may be called ascites, (See
Sts. 23 and 24, Udara Nidhana in Madhava Nidhana,) If ©
^ the Moon is‘in Aries or Scorpio, between any two evil ©
planets Saturn. "Mars and Sun, death will result from fire
, or weapons. _ Take a horoscope. ze l i
UP State Museum, Lucknow ^

Ch. KENO St. 3plic WATERY eCOPERLATNEnd eGangotri 529
n 6 rj MPO
» Sun Venns
Saturn | Moon Mars
2 Mercury Rahu
0 Birth
. Jupiter
RASI °
No. I
| Kethu Q
Here the Moon is situated between two malefics and the
child died from watery complaiñt.
"Take another.
"B5 cs @
| * | Budha s
| Kuja | Sukra Ravi (Chandra .
™, | Rahu
a e
"i Guru Lagna E
No. II E
Kethu Sani
Here the Modn is in Mithuna with Rahu and Budha |
* and athe Sun i in the 12th. As regards the words detwixt or
. Madhyagata, it, is enougheeven if the Moon i is in the * same? ,
house between two evil *planets. Thus if the Sun occupies
the 3rd degree of Aries, the Moon occupies the 10th dégree
6 "and Mars occupies ‘the 15th degree, the Moonemust be con--
34: e e WP State Museum, Luckrfbw
a
e

530 cc- O. In Public EA, RI St. 4
sidered as being betwixt two nralefics, although they are all in
the same sign. The Moon is in 12 hemmed in between Rahu
and Ravi, aspected by Kuja and the boy died in Guru dasa,
Guru bhukthi in his 5th year by slipping and dislocation of
hip joint. If the Moon is found in Makara or Kumbha between two evil planets, death comes by ropes, fire or fall.
He may be bandaged or tied by ropes or may die fróm fire,
which takes so many forms or by falling from elevated
places.
TAA ANGGANG: diememgd c
Xa am fnere |
at amt « fs mv dak ufq vU =
Stanza 4.—If the 5th and 9th houses | are
occupied by malefics unaspected by benefics death «
comes from bandage. If the Drekkana rising in
the 8th house falls in Sarpa or Nigada then
similar death occurs. If the Sun is in birth, Virgo
falls in the 7th with Moon in conjunction with a
malefic and Venus in Aries the person suffers
death from female agency in his house.
NOTES n
If melefics are found in the 5th and 9th, houses without *
à beneficial aspects, the person dies: from being tied by Topes -
or chains. If, the.8th house rises in a Serpent or Nigada
(shackles) Drekkana, the person dies a similar Geath. The
3 2nd and 3rd in Kataka, the Ist and 24 in Vrischika and |
UP'State Museum, Lucknow e G zu

Ch. XKvypSt. FSijblic Dona NA Ei! DERG Udang ngati 531
the *3rd,in Meena are called Serpent Drekkanas. The Nigada
Drekkana ig the first of Makara. If the birth falls in Meena,
with Ravi there, Chandra and a malefic in Kanya or the 7th,
and Sukra is in Mesha or the 2nd, death’ will result from
female infrigue in the house.
This combination is possible for only persons born in
Meena. By female agency or intrigüe the death of the,
person will be brought about. When the 7th is occupied
LJ
Birth
Ravi Sukra
Chandra
Sani
by evil planets with an evil planet in lagna and with Sukra
in the 2nd house Mesha, there will be much room for
suspicion about the character of the wife and other females
and they bring about his death.
sets: Bassa List qr pu
eerta fetu acento, | ^ .
TYR wb RT füüerdejf C
pi mime: ma sre ANARA JD Wo
e YP State Museu, Luckrfow
| S A

532cc- O. In Public Do BiA Eed AK Atrust Me St. 5
Stanza 5.—1f the “4th is occupied by Mars
and the Sun and the 10th by Saturn, the man will
be crucified., If malefics and Kshina Chandra
occupy birth, 5th and 9th the same result
happens. If tne Sun occupies the 4th, and Mars
is in the 10th aspected by weak Moon, there
- will be crucifixión. If Saturn aspects the above
conjunction, death results from beating.
NOTES
There are three combinations for crucifixion here
named. First, there must-be Mars and Sun in the 4th and
Saturn in the 10th. „In this case, all the malefics have
mutual aspects and give the man shula. In thec-ecónd ^4 -
case the Sun, Mars, Saturn and powerless Moon must
occupy birth, 5tb or 9th to produce death from shula. - In
this combination all these four planets may be»in bifth or:
5th or 9th or in any two of them or in the three houses.
They must not be outside those houses. The word shula
means any sharp pointed iron or wooden pike on which the
intended victim would be mounted and torn to pieces.
This isa kind of punishment probably now prevalent in
semi-civilized countries. Hanging in various ways now
prevalent may be safely substituted for these forms of death.
The Sun must be in the 4th and Mars in the 10th aspected. |
by powerless Moon, for the person to be hanged. If the |
Sun occupies the 4th and 10th is joined by Mass aspected | | c
by Saturn, he will be beaten to death by sticks. Here the
SE ‘named bx Varahamihira nfust be carefully consider-
(See Ch: II, St. 13). If Saturn has to aspéct Mars in
s Ls 10th then he must be in the 4th with the Sun or in the 4 .
UP State Museum, Lucknow- e AG MN |

Ch. Dou SE gli Dei BjgitiesdcoxSergyp grust and uds 533.
8th koms from lagna or he mist be in the lagna. All these
positions fos Saturn are evil.
, TTNG -
ATANG |
qu SaaS GS
sue N
Stanza 6.—If powerless Moon, Mars, Saturn -
and the Sun occupy 8th, 10th, *birth and the 4th.
respectively, the death results from blows from
rods or clods of earth. If the same planets occupy
» 10th, 9th, I'st and 5th respectively, death comes
by, smoke, fire, bandage or blows on the body.
NOTES e *
. Powerless Moon in the 8th, Mars in the 10th, Saturn
„in Kerana and the Sun in the 4th, cause death by blows from
iron rods or clods of earth. If powerless Moon occupies
10th, Mars 9th, Saturn Ist and the Sun Sth death may
result from excessive smoke, fire or bandage or blows on
the body by sticks, etc.
| No. 1 ° No. II
> i Combination Combination.
Kujé jt e ||Chandra e ] Revi
* e e
5 »- ve So | e
Chandra Kuja 5

534 COO. In Public Baw pli PARAN TEKAN Apte. 7 & 8
generat: T-
“Garang a Kf TA |
AA: ai
Ja: ifr Ae: Ul |
_ Stanza 7.—If Kuja, Ravi and Sani occupy
4th, 7th and 10th respectively death results from
weapons, fire or thé anger of the rulers. If Sani,
Chandra and Kuja occupy 2nd, 4th and 10th
respectively the person, dies by worms generated
in sores or wounds. b
NOTES oe we
Kuja must be in the 4th, Raviin the 7th and Sani in
the 10th to produce death related in the first half of the
stanza. If the 2nd is.occupied by Sani, 4th by Chandra and “
10th by Kuja, the person will get wounds or sores and dies
from the increase of worms in them.
EO E TEE CATON TATANAN
TANGGA FAA nianu |
Reread fraises gases
LSU CS Ss c
. iid agate I < il
Stapza 8.—If the Sun occupies the JOth and - |
- * Kuja is in the 4th, death comes by fall from con-. |
veyances. Jf Sani, Chandra and Ravi occupy the
Lagna with Kuja in the 7th, death comes by
. machinery or rgcks. „lf Kuja Sani and. Chandra '*
e Museum, i
à A
TAS "4^
"et n"

| Ch. inia ; Singke Don EB AITIHeBNY SRAT Trust and pe et 535
are Xinspboln Mesha and^a house, of Saturn respectively,"or if powerless Chandra, Ravi and Kuja
are in the 10th, 7th and 4th respectively the
person falls in night-soil and dies.
NOTES
If Ravi occupies 10th and Kuja is in the 4th, death.
comes by fall from vahanas or carriages. These may include’
all sorts of animals and vehicles use@ by man for his comforts. When the Sun is in the 10th and Mars is found in the
4th, they will be subjected to mutual aspects. Men are
killed often by infernal machinery invented by the diabolical
genius of man for the destruction and torture of his fellow
= <æ creatuzes. Kuja must be in the 7th, with Chandra, Sani
and Ravi in the Lagna for producing the above result.
When the Sun is with the Moon, the latter is not powerless.
Theré is a difference in the text. Saurandvina is substituted
for Kshinandvina. But when the Moon is with the Sun, ,
Kshina or powerless, will become a superfluous adjective.
If Kuja occupies Thula, Sani is in Mesha, and Chandra in
Makara or Kumbha, the person gies by falling in dirt or
might-soil. If powerless Moon is in the 10th, Sun in the
7th and Mars is in the 4th the person dies by falling into
dirty pits. There is much difference in saying Kshina
j Chandra and powerless Moon as when powerless Moon is
` jn 10th and Ravi i$ in 7th, Moon will not be Kshina, since
* there, will be a difference of more than 6 or 7,daysfor Moon
*to go four houses beyond the Sun and 5 days after Ama- £ ,
vasya (New Moon), Chandra cannot be called Kshina. Ji is
not clear how the Moon is not powerless. when he is with
¿e ‘the Sun.- It has to “be understood that Moonewith the Sun o
| x 3 J^ * JP State Museum Luckflow Q
a
E
a a

536 CC-O. In Public DBR AT AAT ARA. Iba AS Sts 59 é 10 |
when he becomes a,lord of a quadrant, may be const: med as
powerful, as he is evil and so gets power. c
SETA ated Reemi | |
gera BY emp SATA |
Stanza 9.—1f powerful Mars aspects power-
.less Moon with Saturn in the 8th the person dies
from worms or fire or instruments in treating of
disease in secret parts.
NOTES »
Kshina Chandra must? be aspected by “the powerful
Kuja, and Sani must occupy the 8th house from lagna.
Then the man gets serious disease in the private part: «e œ ~
may die by worms generating there or by treatment of those
parts by fire or instruments.
mA Tl ae ask e
Ad cere feat Aa |
wae fara tae
Tae Seren: UW ko
Stanza 10.—If Ravi occupies the 7th with
Kuja and Sani joins the 8th and powerless Chan- :
dra is in the 4th death comes by birds. „If Ravi, .
- Kuja, Sani and Chandra are in the ‘Ast, “Sth,” 8th .
and 9th respestively the person dies by falling '
from the tops of a mountain or by the an of |
"lightning of wall.
UP'State Museum, Lucknow e MUR
e aps |
E e a” coj ^
b

a
Ch. X&W. Sted} pdadiAdigiizER(OMaBIBIESn eGangoti 537
NOTES .
e
LJ]
Ravi and Kuja must be in the 7th, Sani in the 8th,
with powerless Chandra in the 4th to produce the first form
of death.
Lagna E "
È Chandra!
D
EN E E E
.* | Ravi
Sani Kuja °
eIn the latter half of the stanza, Ravi must be in the |
Lagna, Kuja in the 5th, Sani in the 8th and Chandra in the
9th to produce the danger indicated there.
Death from birds may mean that he may be killed by
birds, or his body after death may be eaten by birds for
want of a burial or cremation. Bhattotpala however
confines the meaning to the latter explanation. This may
not stand the test of reason as all Parsees put their dead
bodies Sh a Fower and allow the birds to prey on them.
If so, then every horoggope of that commünity | must have o
this combination. The idea would te o far-fetched, It is
only people who die on the way in forests that are-eaten by
, birds and beasts. 9
o
o
UP State Museum, LuckRow a
o
o

538 h BRIHAT JATAKA [Ch. XXV St.11
CC-O. In Public E
aa? Bae BCT ke
Ren Aa aera: |
Tm sa t
Patt cup Tas NTT 07 —
Stanza 11.—The learned in astrology indicate the 22nd Drekkana as the cause of death to
the person. The death will be caused by the
manner attributed to the lord of this Drekkana or
the lord of the Rasi to which it belongs. ^
"NOTES
a
The author now gives explanation for cause of death in
cases where there is no planet in the 8th, where the 8th is
not aspected by planets and where none of the combína-
. tions, named already is present for causing death. The 8th
house or bhava literally begins with the 22nd Drekkana.
There are three Drekkanas for each house and 7 houses
from lagna at 3 for each house will give 21 Drekkanas. Therefore the learned in astrology consider the 22nd Drekkana “
as that of death or Mrithyu. The 8th house begins with
the 22nd Drekkana. The lord of that Drekkana kills the
person by that disease which is attributed to him in the first
stanza of this Chapter. If not, the lord óf the 8th house
to which the 22nd Drekkana belongs will cause €eath as
fer his nature, Bhattotpala points eut that the stronger of
the two planets,wiz.. lord of the 22fd Drekkana and the
lord of the 8th house will give death by such diseases as he
can cause. a er
f UP State Museum, Lucknow P X
G
Do
e
e

Ch. KENO Strdeth DIA NBLARYSASPERETSd eGangotri 539 ig
ENTAH TT FT
MATÊNG: Tag |
^. Weed Sg RA:
Saha Safa; Tea Ul Lz U
Stanza 12,—Death will take place in places
similar to the rasi occupied* by the lord of the
navamsa, in which birth falls. Further details or
specialities must be described by conjunctions and
planetary aspects. The time of death has to be
ddentified by the unrisen number of navamsas in
the birth. If the birth lord aspects it, the’ time
must be doubled ; aspected by benefics the time
will be irebled. ;
NOTES
The birth falls in some nawamsa, and the lord of this
' navamsa occupies some rasi necessarily. The place of
death resembles localities governed by that rasi. In the
horoscope given below, the lord of navamsa lagna, Ravi is
in Kanya and death in or near a well is indicated but it has
to be modified according to so many aspects, viz., Sani's
aspect, *assqeiation with Guru and Sukra and,occupation
of Kataka in. amsa. The four points enumerated for corsideration by Bhattotpala may be applied 4n the horoscope
and it will be seen that Sani and Guru influence the house
- and the place of death can be predicted near à well or watery
ge e o
a UP*State Museum, LucRnow
e
e
fe)

e e
540 CC- 3. In PubliBRHAA PighacE A eAayu ribs 12
place in a hole Ifthat rasi i$ Mesha the place of death
will be frequented by goats, etc. If Vrishabha, grazing
ground ; if Mithuna, in a house; if Kataka, a well ; if Simha,
a wilderness; if Kánya, a well; if Thula, death will be in
a place of merchandise; if Vrischika, low places; if Dhanus,
places frequented by horses ; if Makara, marshy places; if
Kumbha, a house; and if Meena, swamps. Bhattotpala
cleverly raises a difficuity and solves it. In the Anishtadhyaya or Chapter on misfortunes, various modes of death
have already been detailéd. Then how is the reader to be
guided when these combinations are present in a horoscope.
e
| Sukra
e Ravi
Kethu Sanio Sani
RASI NAVAMSA —1
Tapia | Gur |
Chandra Rahu Kethu Pl
Ravi :
5 Kuja
Kuja | Budha] Sukra
Guru Budha
He assures the students that when such uufortunate combinations exist, death must be predicted as per those yogas,
but when they are not present, the present principles must
guide the readers. It is not enough if we look into the
nature of rasi. The conjunctions and aspécts of that rasi
' must also bertaken into consideration. The word Adi used
in the ofiginal, further gives scope in extending the meaning,
to.the nature of 1 navamsa sign occupied by the lord of the
navamsa of the lagna which rises at the birth time. He
has thus enumerated four points for consideration :_ 3
o UP State Museum, Lucknow — „ E
SPA 9

Ch. Vin StblQpomain. TIME O Babe Ar TEBnd d 541
b. The nature of the zasi occupied by the lord of the
navamsa«ising in the lagna.
2. The nature of the navamsa rasi occupied by the
lord pf the navamsa of the lagna.
3.. Planets in conjunction with the rasi occupied by
the lord of the navamsa rising in the lagna, and
4. The planets who aspect that rasi occupied by the
lord of the rising navamsa in lagna: 4
When all these are present in a horoscope or when two
or mpre are there, then the nature of the locality of death
must be determined by the strongest among these four. The
_ nature ofthe ground for planets will be the nature of the
zodiacal sign which they own. But when a planet owns two
houses, then the nature of the house where he has his
“hoolatrikona, must be represented. Thus Ravi has Simha,
Chandra has Vrishabha, Kuja has Mesha, Budha has Kanya,
Suyru has Dhanus, Sukra has Thula, and Sani has Kumbha.
Some also say that tbe places will bə those governed by the
planets in Chap. II, St. 12. But Bhattotpala does not °
approve of this.
Lagna rises in some navamsa and there may be other
navamsas yet to rise. Take the totaltime of the unrisen
navamsas and predict that the time of death will be equal
to their total. If the lagna is aspected by its lord then this
total time must be doubled. Ifa benefic conjoins lagna, it
must be trebled® If lagna is both aspected by its lord and
also hawa bepeficial conjunction, the period mast be multi- S
plied sixfold; Take a horoscope. Birth is Vrishabha and falis |
in the fourth navamse at its end. Thea, there atefive navamsas yét to rise. Vrishabha extends over *43 ghatis© Thus
. 2 ghatis i in Vrishabha have passed leaving æ balance of 24
e JP State Museum, Lucknow 3
b Oo
o
o

e
32 CC-O. In puhi BRIT JATAKA ou aes, SERA 12
ghatis. The navamsa of birth consequently falls in Mesfía.
Thelord of Mesha is Kuja.
nature of the locality where this man dies, should be such
as is represented by Thula.
Chandra
Rahu
Birth
Sani
He occupies Thu]a and the
favi
Sukra Kuan, Budha |. Kethu | Si Chandra
e. Kuja `
NAVAMSA
[The lord of the rising navamsain birth, viz., Kuja
occupies Thula Navamsa and therefore is in Vargottaurá,
but Thula is aspected ‘in the rasi diagram by Guru and
Chandra. There are three points now to be considered,
viz., the nature of Thula, the nature of Guru and the nature
of Chandra. The place of death will be such as is represented by the strongest of^these three, viz., Thula, Guru .
and Chandra. Thula as the place where lord of Navamsa
Lagna falls is aspected by Guru and Chandra. Chandra is
not very powerful, but Guru is very powerful and heace
the gentleman died in his own house near the gate. The
time of death for this particular horoscope was about 1 p.m.
pn Magha ‘Bahula Amayasya (12th March 1937). Lagná is
not aspectcd by. its lord or by any benefic and” therefore the
time of death wi'l%e 2% ghatis. But here isa difficulty. If
we simply say 22 ghatis without saying after sunrise or
UP State Museum, Lucknow e "C r
e
e r e

Ch. XXX. Sbulislpos AT OMS4BYSWMATER and eGangotri 543
sunset, or with reference towsome definite time, how is the
reader to,be guided? Bhattotpala is also silent on this
point. In Chap. IV, St. 21, hints as to the time of the birth
of chjldren are clearly given. The same may be conveniently
applied, hese. If the lagna falls in day sign the time must
be taken as referring to day and if it fats in nocturnal sign
the time must be referred to night. The details regarding
these particulars are shown under notes in St. 10, Chap, I.
Probably the lagna referred to should be the Navamsa
Lagna and as it is the 5th navamsaeand falls in a day sign
MesHa and as each sign has to be calculated at 2% ghatis
(Total 12 x 2=30) for day and 2% for night and as 5
‘navamsas have passed, it is X23 ghatis in the day, when
the native should have become unconscious prior to death.
e» «lis death was observed by about 12-30 or 1 p.m. Vrishabha
falls in 5th and being Mesha, thefperson died at 12-30 ghs.]
. Arae Em: |
zd SATRUTAPA adm:
Trae FRAT Ul $3
1 Stanza 13.—The deal body as per the Drekkana in the 8th house, viz, Dahana, Jala and
Misra, will be reduced to ashes by fire or atoms
. by water and putrefaction by atmosphere respec-
. tively. If the 8th house Drekkana is Vyala the
, body will be disgraced. The disposal ofthe dead
body must*be explained in this manner, and as
regardse the past and future bfrehs, the mader
» must consult elaborate works om the subject. -
e UP State Museum, Lucknow e
* ey . e
vo e L2
. N rá
o

G
544 cc.o. In Public BRIBAT JATAKA, Truths é XV, St. 13
NOTES eed
Here we have rules to guide us in determining the
disposal of the dead body. Man seems to have a great
desire to have his dead body disposed of according to the
mostapproved methods in vogue in his country, These
disposals are of various forms. Sometimes the dead bodies
are subjected to great indignities, as if their departed spirits
watch them and feel such degrading cruelties. There are
Various methods; cremation, burial, drowning, and exposure
toatmosphere. The rising Drekkana in the 8th house will
be the 22nd from the birth, and if it falls in Dahana
Drekkana, the body will be cremated and turned to ashes.
Dahana Drekkanas are the divisions of evil pldnets. If the
22nd Drekkana happens to bea Jaia (watery), the dead
body will be thrown into watery places and there allowe*
to dissolve. The beneficial drekkanas are termed Jala
Drekkanas. If the 22nd is Misra Drekkana, then the degd
body will neither be burned nor thrown into water"and
probably this refers to all sorts of burials, where the
atmospherical forces dissolve the body. If the beneficial
drekkanas are joined by malefics, or if the malefic
drekkanas are conjoined by benefics, they are counted as
Misra (mixed) Drekkanas. If the rising drekkana in the‘
8th house is Vyala (serpent) the dead body will be exposed
to birds and beasts or otherwise disgraced. Men somehow do not like that their dead bodies should be so dealt
with. (Vide notes on Stanza 10). Serpefit Drekkanas are
the Ist and 2nd pf Kataka and Vrischika, and tke 3rd of
. Meená. Bhattotpala quotes in support of. these views,
from somé ancient work which heedoes not name. The
n
Word” Adi used in the text, gives a clue to fmportant
information concerfiing the place frorí which man has
UP’ State Museum, Lucknow. ‘ous
e e
— ag

Ch. XX; agenep PUOSTRRTION and eCangot 545
come to this birth, his status‘in his previous birth, and the
place to which he would go after death in this life. He
aske the readers to consult on these important points among
elaborate treatises on astrology written by great Maharishis
and premises to give a short abstract of it in the
next verse. =
TEST eit ust 4
gata mata gd: |
"o feret rre:
Matasan || 29 I
^» + Stanza 14. — Guru, Chandra and Sukra, Ravi
and Kuja, and Sani and Budha bring people from
Deyaloka, Pitruloka, Tiryagloka and Narakaloka
respectively. According to the position of the
lord of the drekkana occupied by the most
powerful of the Sun or the Moon, we have to
predict the high, middle or,low state of the man
“in his previous birth.
ee
o NOTES
In the first portion of this verse, the meaning is no
Bi clear. Find out who is the stronger of the two in a horosO cope, viz., the Sun or the Moon and ascertain" in, which
drekkana the stronger of these two is conjoitied. “Then the
man has, come from thaf loka or existence "which is ?epre-
» sented. by the lord of this drekkana. Théfollowing. horostope
s 35 on e Ue Siete Museum, Luckmow
o
o o
-— oO, S A
E

546 CC-O. In Public BRARDAT AT y Kaeyu TrudGhe EVs. 14
will illustrate this point clearly’ The Rasi and the Drekkana
diagrams are given:
5 Guru >
| Kuja Ravi | Kethu
Kethu Sané “ Sani
RASI L— | DREKKANA |————
Chandra Dirth :
: ha! GUI || Rabu Budha Chandra
Kuja |Budha S ae Lagna ‘ Sukra
Here it is clear that the Moon is more powerful than tha =
Sun, having Parivartana yoga and being a benefic. He is in
Budha Drekkana. Hence the person comes from Narakaloka
where he must have occupied a high position, as Budha has .
e Vargottamamsa and in a friendly sign. e
If this Drekkana belongs to Guru predict that he has
come from Devaloka.
If the Drekkana Belongs to Chandra or Sukra he hascome from Pitruloka.
If the Drekkana is governed by Ravi or Kuja, he{comes
from Tiryagloka. y:
e
If the Drekkana belongs to Budha or Sapi, he'has come
"from Narakalgka. To find out in what state,he was in'the *
Ep birth er,eristence in that foka, the author: throws
out some hints which are interesting. If the lord of the above
‘said Drekkan? is exalted, then he ‘occupied a high status or * 4
C UP State Museum, Poel C H
e^ T
e ^ e

CHERRY, drone r SSN TAT and s 547
RED in the previous loka, if he.is ordinary then the:
position was middling, and if the planet is debilitated, he:
occupied a mean or degraded state. Devaloka represents a .
higher world where superior men are supposed to go afterdeath. + Here Devas or exalted order of beings are alleged.
to live enjoying greater privileges and higher prosperity than:
men. . "
Pitruloka indicates that order of existence which fs
inferior to Devaloka, where the spirits of the dead are supposed to live.
Tiryagloka represents an inferior order of existence
: Where men, ‘in the course of evil careers out-balancing their
good actions, are supposed to live.»
Narakaloka indicates that order of existence -where
men with evil deeds far in excess of their good actions have
to take their turns of cosmic evolution.
— TAA Rears aR at .
Tey Keer: ener:
TA ATAS TAA a aay
, Fate TE awa AREA BU UW 4 dI
Stanza 15.—The lord of the drekkana of the
6th or 8th, or the planet who occupies the 7th
house indicates the state of man’s future existence e
after deaths’ If Guru in exaltation’ occtipies 6th,
Sth or any kendra,, ff Meena is agfa cecupying `
beneficial navamsa and other plarfets than ‘G Guru
. are Powerless tHe person attains mokeha. :
e e UP State Museum, Luckne@w ie E
e

548 CC-0. In Public BREA AGIA NAKAL ral Bra SENG: B
« NOTES e
Here we have suggestions for finding out the state of
existence to which a person goes after his death. If there
are no planets in the 6th, 7th and 8th, then find out the lord
of the drekkana rising in the 6th and 8th and accertain
which of these two is stronger and then attribute that Joka
to him which is denoted by that planet. In the above
example, in Drekkana Kundali, the 6th and 8th are occupied
by Guru, Ravi and Sani and the lords of these are Sukra
and Chandra. Hence the man after his death will propably
go to Pitruloka, which is said to be higher in status than our
world. If there is a planet in the 6th, 7th or 8th house, then
the man goes to that /oka which is indicated by that planet,”
But if there are two os more in these houses then the
strongest of the lot determines the loka to which the person” ^ !4
proceeds, In thetext, only the words Asta(7th) Sthithova
(standing) are used. These preclude the idea of planets
being taken in the 6th and 8th houses. Bhattotpála whose
reading seems to be most comprehensive, explains va as
standing for cha (and), and supports this view from quotations from Laghu Jataka of Varahamihira where the idea is
fully expanded. €
If Guru occupies 1, 4, 7, 8 or 10 from Lagna and Js in^
Kataka (his exaltation) or if Meena rises at the time of birth
and occupies a beneficial navamsa and if Guru is powerful
and other planets are powerless, the person gets moksha or
final emancipation from all gross forms of existence. These
results of. füture*states of existence may also be “predicted
* from the conjunction of planets æt the time of a man’s
death, This iden*is supported by a quotation, from
Laghu daiala 5
ec
UP State Museum, Lucknew e A e
ec
D
e € e
pom

LJ o
CHAPTER XXVI
: NASTA JATAKA `
3 ISARA:
(Unknown Horoscopes)
AMAT AT AL THS,
* .— dead sew RRETA |
TAA sme 0$ o
Stanza 1.—When à person has no record of
his birth time or the time of conception, the birth
must be predicted according to the lagna rising
at-the time of question. The birth must be predicted in Uttarayana or Dakshinayana as the
first or the second hora in the lagna rises.
NOTES
-Here the author wishes to help those persons with the
construction of a horoscope, who have no recollection of
their birth or conception time. It is quite unreasonable to
expect a man to Rnow anything about the time of his conception by his mother and in fact, very few persons know
or care to know about the details of conception. Even the
woman who conceives sometimes does Rot k know of the fact.
But genefally the birth time is known to many interested i in
_the family. Wher a person goes to an astrologer and asks
A e UP State Museum, Lucknew
bo LJ

550 CC-O. In Pubi PS AA B ie AS Ay rd BEC St. 2
him to prepare a lostchoroscope'or a new one he does eso at
a definite time. The astrologer should find out tke proper
lagna which rises at the time and if the first hora prevails he
mustsay that the man was born in Uttarayana when the
Sun was in the 6 signs from Makara to Kataka. - But if the
second half of the lagna rises then the man must have been
born in Dakshinayana when the Sun was in the 6 months
ftom Kataka to Makara. Thus Uttarayana comprises the
months of Makara, Kumbha, Meena, Mesha, Vrishabha
and Mithuna and Dakshinayana comprises Kataka, Simha, $
Kanya, Thula, Vrischika and Dhanus. If one knows the
time of conception but not the time of birth rules have
already been laid down for finding the isan from conception. '
(See St. 21, Chap. IV).
vais afar a- Mh.
IESi
Stanza 2.—By the rising drekkana in the
lagna, Guru’s positio in 1, 5 or 9 must be
ascertained according to the appearance of.the ?
querist. If Ravi is in Lagna, the birth takes place
in Grishma and so on for other planets as stated
before. If the Rithu falls in a wrong Ayana then
it must bé corrected by the position of.the*Sun. 2
ee NOTES “e, : d
Here the author „Enables the astrologer to find out the |
year and the Rethu (Season). If the 1st Drekkana i in Lage =- M.
UP State Museum, Lucknow C ^ k
e Gc um
c "EL Ne.
5 D e a.

ee
Ch RR VIP YU OMAN ORK Pe FERMI AERGNIO — 551
rises gt the time of query then predict Guru as being in
Birth Lagna ; if the 2nd Drekkana in Lagna rises then
Guru must be placed in the 5th house; and, if the 3rd
Drekkana rises he will be in the 9th. As other places than
1, 5, 9, arg not named here Bhattotpala gives hints to find
the correct house of Jupiter. Take the rising Dwadasamsa
in the. query lagna. If the first Dwadasamsa rises Guru
will be in Lagna, if the second rises he will be in the 2nd
and if the 10th rises Guru will be found in the 10th
house from the Birth Lagna. Sonfe astrologers explain the
meaning quite separately. They say that if the 1st Drekkana
rises in tbe question lagna, then find out the number of the
` houses, Guru has travelled ùp to the question time and
predict that the person was bors ina similar number of
"years before. If the 2nd Drekkana rises then count from
the 5th house of the question lagna to the position of Guru
in the present period and predict that the man was born a
similar number of years before. If.the 3rd Drekkana rises
at tthe question time, then count from the 9th house of the
query lagna to the present position of Guru in the zodiac
and predict birth before so many years. It would be better
understood by an illustration.” Take the question time as
11-30 a.m. on 11th September, Friday 1908 (Salivahana
Saka 1830). Vrischika Lagna rises at about 11 ghatis
after sunrise. 11-30 a.m. converted gives about 14 ghatis
after sunrise. Therefore 3 ghatis out of 53 ghatis . (the
extent of Vrischika) have passed and the 2nd Drekkana for .
Viischika will be Meena. On this date Guru 1 is found in
Simha. We have to cunt therefore from Meena to Simha `
and weeget 6 years. Say that the chilé was born «6 years
» ago or 18 years cr 30 years or 42 years or 54 or 66-years
a
2 Cy. 5 UP State Museum, Lucknew ^ "

D G
552 CC-O. In Public BRIHAT JATAKA Trus RANE St. 2
according as you find the querist’s person. This interpreta.
tion is not approved by Bhattotpala who quotes: Yavaneswara to support the first exposition. As Jupiter goes round
the whole zodiac in 12 years the age of the person, must
be ascertained by the querist's physical appearance and
probable age. When there is a doubt or difficulty in
determining these cycles of 12 years or the difference of
that period, then ascertain the age of the party according
to the Purusha Lakshana explained in Brihat Samhita.
(See Chap. 70, Sts. 2455-6). The astrologer may ask the
querist to touch any organ of his body or the organs of
Kalapurusha which he can keep in the form of,a picture.
If the person touches the ftet and the ankles then Gury’
will be in the 2nd house; if he touches the thighs,
sexual organ or testicles in the3rd ; if naval or loins tliz 7^ »
4th ; if belly the Sth ; if chest or breast the 6th ; if shoulders
the 7th ; if neck or lips the 8th; if eyes or brows 9th; df
forehead or head the 10th. As only 10 organs fiave been
named and we have 12 years before a complete circle of the
zodiac by Guru we have to divide these 12 years by 10,\
and account by such counting, the position of Jupiter. '
Thus for each organ, we eget 1 year, 2 months and 12
days. Thus if a person touched the 7th organ then Guru '
must be predicted in the 9th house, as we have 6x 12
years — <8 years and e x 12-2 4 months and
+ x 30 days =24 days, :
? e a e e
By thís process stated in Brihat Jataka thé time gained
` would be that óf Jupiter whose Ména is different from the
soura or solar sidéreal years. The jovian years may be easily
converted into, solar*years and the methods are explained .
LÀ Li
UP State Museum, L@ckngw , A m
LJ
e

EL
Ch. REVISE mO VENT MOVEMENTS Ct gg,
by Bhattotpala in the commentaries on St. 1 of ‘Ch. VIII
of Brihate Samhita. (Vide Translation by Prof. B. V.
Raman in THE ASTROLOGICAL MAGAZINE). . The four
yugas, (a Mahayuga), Krita, Treta, Dwapara and Kali
contain 4320000 solar years or the Sun would go so many
rounds in the zodiac in one Mahayuga. But for the same
number of years the jovian years would be 4370688. As jovian
years are greater the solar years must be deducted from
them thus: 4370688—4320000— 50688 jovian years. When
50688. are gained in one Mahayuga? what would be the proBoston to one solar sidereal year. Thus we have X 255 4320000
4320000 aer by the common factor 2804 we get
KANA 1875 =] 18750235. ‘For every 170-7 7 solar „years
we get 2 Jovian years extra. For one solar year we get-—— 1875
dass. ou — solar years what do oo get. Thus 22 x Be
=720 X or two years measured by jovian movements.
In the Nasta Jataka process we have to multiply p
; numbers of years obtained by the position of Jupiter by ——-- T
and subtract the same from the number of solar years to get
the solar time. Now he gives hints to find out the seasons
or Rithus. Accarding to Aryan astronomy there are given
6 Rithus., They are :—
KED) Vasailta = Chaitra and Vaisakha ot, sprig "April,
D
and May. ES]
(2) Grishma=Jyeshta and Ashada or Summer. Jure and
. July. on S a jo ME
T t. UP State Museum, Lucknow x
d
M) a
a

554 RIHAT JATAKA [Ch. XXVI, St. 2
(3) Varsha—Sravana and Bhadrapada. August and
September—rainy. 6
(4) Sarat=Aswija and Kartika-October and November
—clear or bright season. "
(5) Hemanta— December and January. Margasira and
Pushya—dewy or cold season, autumn.
(6) Sisira=Magha and Phalguna—February and March
—cold season, winter.
ee
If the Prasna Lagna is occupied by the Sun or his
house rises as drekkana, the birth must be predioted in
Grishma. If Saturn is in Lagna or his drekkana rises at the |
time, then birth takes placeén Sisira. If Venus fs in Lagna |
or the drekkana falls in his house, birth happens in Vasanfa, 5
If Mars is in Lagna or his bopse rises as drekkana predic
Grishma. If Lagna risesin the drekkana of Chandra or he
isin Lagna predict Varsha Rithu. If Mercury is in Lagna
or his drekkana rises in it, Sarat. IfJupiter occupies lagna
or his house rises as" drekkana, Hemanta. If therg are
many planets in the question lagna, then the season must
be ascribed to him who is the strongest of the lot. When
there are no planets in the lagna, then alone reference must
be made to the rising drekkana. When a Rithu comes in.
an Ayana in which it does not fall then predict the “Rithu
with reference to the Sun. These results, observes
Bhattotpala, must be referred to the solar movements ant not
to the lunar (Chandramana) which prevails usually in the `
world. , hus if Vasanfa is to be predicted thep say that `
© Rithá extends. to the season when the Sun thoves i in Aries. j
and Taurus. "According to Chandvamana Chaitra may fall
while’ the Sun‘ 7s still in Pisces ‘and it is called Meena,
"Cháitra or Chaitra Which falls in Meene:
UP State Museum, Lucknow Sis e

| Ch. XL Sid} Dora NING OT SERVA THANE Canori 555
* crx adhan -
YANA AAN |
> SHUT TIT q sl
Wires: Rare; (3 ui
Stanza 3.—If a Rithu falls in a wrong Ayana
then, change Moon, Mercury and Jupiter for“
Venus, Mars and Saturn respettively. If the first
half of a drekkana rises the first month of the
Rithu must be predicted, and the day must be
»|^ proportionately found out.
m NOTES. 4
. In this stanza Varahamihira gives suggestione fora
o knowdedge.of the correct Rithu in a wrong Ayana, month
andethe day. There are two Ayanás [namely Uttarayana
and Dakshinayana. Uttarayana contains 3 Rithus, viz.
Sisira (Makara and Kumbha), Vasanta (Meena and
Mesha) and Grishma (Vrishabha and Mithuna). There
4s some confusion here. In the last stanza, it is stated
that Vasanta has to be taken as Aries and Taurus,
while here it is stated as Pisces and Aries. This is
. only to be taken when the Rithu falls in a wrong Ayana
and according toethe movements of the Sun. But our
Mx Rithus always are calculated: according to, , Chandra6 mana and as it is brought up to the Souramana every 2 or 4
meaning ih this stanza only has to be coitsidered in fixing
^ the montha p a
UP State Museum, Lucknow , A ^
a
On a
a o °
3 years by the additieh of an inter-calary mênth, uon ie
a

556 CC-O. In Public p BR RIHAT JATAKA Trust 46 Gh St. 3
Dakshinayana,comprises3 Rithus, viz., Varsha ataka
and Simha), Sara (Kanya and Thula) and Hemanta (Vrischika (and Dhanus). If Varsha Rithu comes in Uttarayana tben predict it as Vasanta. Chandra is given rainy
season and Sukra, Vasanta and therefore Sukra- must be
substituted for Chandra. If Sarat rises in Uttarayana
then Grishma must be sybstituted and vice versa- Budha
_governs Sarat and "Ravi and Kuja rule Grishma. They
must be exchanged. Similarly work out for other Rithus
and the lords who govern them. Asa Ruthu contains two
months the author now takes the readers to find out the
correct month. Divide the rising 'drekkana into two equal
divisions and ascribe the first month of the Ruthu to the
first half and the second month to the second half. Each
drekkana contains 10 degrees and therefore, the first 7
degrees of it represent the first and the next 5 degrees the
second month of the Rithu. All these must be referred-to
solar movements and not to lunar or Chandramana.
Each rasi is composed of 1800 liptas and therefore each
drekkana contains 600 liptas. Drekkana represents two
months and one half of it or one month is represented by
300 liptas. Each month ‘contains 30 days and therefore.
each day gets 10 liptas, and the particular day will be
found out by the rising lipta at the time of question. Take
an illustration. A person puts the question in the commencement of the 10th degree of Mesha with the Sun there.
The Rithu therefore will be Grishma. As the last half of »
- the drekkana, rises the month Will be the second of. ;
Grishma ‘or “Mithuna (it may fall ?a Jyeshta and Ashada—
June and July}. ° But as the lagna rises in the first hora of
-Mesha the Ayana Will be Uttarayana; The person was’ .
E - UP State Museum, Lucknow ;

Ch. XXVI) Su Doma D RURAL SERENS ond e 557
born in Utistdysuk Grishma Rithu apd Mithuna Masa
(month). The question was put at the commencement of
the 10th degree. The first five degrees represented the 30
days of the first month in Grishma or Vrishabha. Therefore in the second out of the 5 degrees four degrees have
passed and the Sth is just rising. Hach degree gets 60 liptas
and therefore 4 x 60 or 240 liptas in the second half of the
drekkana have passed. If 30 days get'300 liptas, each day _
gets 10 liptas. Therefore 241 liptas give 24 days and a
balance of one lipta or the commen@ement of the 25th day
in the second month of Grishma.
AMA NTT (2331:
ataga RARA |
In FUE EE COLTE: 6
aa Fon mus Re we os
‘Stanza 4.—The learned Brahmin astrologers
predict the thithi by reference to the degree of the
Sun. The birth must be predicted reversely in
the nocturnal and diurnal,signs. By the degrees
‘of the lagna, the time of birth must be acertained.
NOTES
‘This is a very important stanza, determining the lunar
> day, the time of the day and the sign of the zodiac in
< which a person is born. The learned Brahmin astrologers
. suggest that tte lunar day has to be made outby the degrees, > R
etc., the Sun ‘has passe in the rasi at thie ‘tithe of the
query and these represent the number “of lunar tlfithies
o which passed at the time of birth. Suppose jhe Sun a the.
e
s 2 ON e UP State Museum, Lucknew ,
LJ e e
ee : E MP
e

558 CC-Q. In Public pERIHAT JATAKA Trust IG ERST. St. 4
time of the question is found*in the 10th degree, then ‘the
lunar day will be the 10th or Dasami in the Sekla Paksha
(or bright half). If he is in the 27th degree, then the
lunar day will be the Dwadasi of the Krishna Paksha (or
dark half of the month). Bhattotpala says. that if the
month is Makara then convert that into the Magha of
Chandramana, Kumbha for Phalguna and Meena for
Chaitra, etc. In the original there is no authority to say
that the Zhithies must be counted from the Prathama of
Sukla or the Ist day of the bright half of the lunar month,
While in Southern India, the month is calculated from
New Moon to New Moon, in Northern Indiay it is from
Full Moon to Full Moon and so our Phalguna Bahula wiil
be their Chaitra Bahula while Chaitra Sudda will be common to both. The calculation presupposes that the Sün
and Moon enter a house together. It is not always
possible that Chandramana will be in the 10th of the
bright half when the Sun is in the 10th degree of any 4
sign. [For example, the 18th of Meena this “year
(31-3-1947) was not Krishna Paksha 3, but Sukla Paksha
(Chaitra) 10th]. Bhattotpala supports his interpretation
by a clear quotation ffom Manitha. After knowing
the day, he now gives the method for finding out
the birth during the day or the night. Nocturnal
and diurnal signs have been explained in St. 10, Ch. I.
If the rising lagna at ihe time of Query is nocturnal `“:
then the birth must be predicted during the day and vice -
n verse After knowing the time of birth duritig the night or. —
‘day, the time of birth and hence ibe correct lagna of birth
will have to bé thus ascertained. Take the chesKaka gained
~ ovér in the lagna “at the time of query and multiply thek * UP State Museum, Lucknow „ ae ^
n
A
e

Ch. XR SCA TEM se E 559 .
same by the duration of the*day or night ofthe birth, and
divide theeresult by the Swadesha Rasi Pramana and the
quotient represents the time after which the birth of the
person,during the day or the night, has happened. Work out
an example.e A man questions an astrologer on the 15th of
September 1908 at 5 ghatis after sunrise.” The solar day is
31 of Simha. The Sun is in the 30th degree of Simha. He
has to gain 11 vighaties in Simha. Thus there has passed 11
vighaties in Simha and 4.49 ghts. in Kanya at the time of the
question. Bringing these into chesħakas or vighaties, we
get 4 x 60.- 49 or 289 Cheshakas. Kanya measures here (in
Madras) 315 cheshakas. Kanya forms a diurnal sign and
therefore the birth took place d&ring the night. To find out
the correct time of the birth during ¢he night the following
-J4uethod must be pursued. First find out where Guru is at
the time of birth. The rising dreKkana in Kanya is the 3rd
atid so Guru was at the time of birth in Vrishabha. "There-
* fore the cHild must be 3 or 15 or 27,0r 39, etc. years. By
otlfcr circumstances such as personalappearanceheis3 years ,
old. As it is the 2nd Hora the Ayana was Dakshina. Budha
is in Kanya and the Rithu was Sarat. The second half of
the 3rd Drekkana has risen in» Kanya and therefore the
‘second month of the Rithu Sarat or Thula masam.
The tunar month will be Karthika. Find out now the
solar day. In Kanya each drekkana gets 105 cheshakas
a and half of it will be 524 cheshakas. This comprises
e 30 days or we get fix each day 52 =~ 30= BD = >= — 105 A
. cheshakas. AS per lagnasphuta 289 cheshakas have expired, >
of which the. first 210 «present the first two D'rekkanas. =
Therefore’ in: the. 3rd. Drekkana 79 *cheshakas.. * have
sapa of which? 523 form the first half of the?3rd.
ee A oS O We oe Museum, Lucknew , O 5

560 CC-O: In Public cos NASA Trust eh. XXV, St.4
Drekkana and the first month of the Sarat Rithu.» Now
in the second half of this drekkana 79-524 or 264
cheshakas have expired. Thus 26} + 607 2 * 105
cO en 15+ days or the Sun occupies the '16th degree
of Thula. As the Sunis in the 30th degree of Simha
at the time of question, the lunar day will be the Ama-
‘vasya of the lunar month Karthika. The duration
of night on the birthday was 31-52 ghts. Convert
these into cheshakas. We get 31 x 60 + 521912,
Multiply this by the number of cheshakas passed in
Kanya at the time of questicn. We get 1912 x 289 — 552568
cheshakas. These must be divided by the Swadesha
Lagna Pramana (or the extent of Kanya obtained in aüx-—
particular place) or 315 ckeshakas, governed by Kanya here
= a 1754-25. cheshakas. Dividing again this by 60
cheshakas to bring it into ghatis we get 4725 ^ 29^ 325
ghatis. So the birth was after 29 ghatis on the night of
that day.
Bhattotpala gives a list of the extent of the cheshakas
for the various signs, probably to his native place, and they
are—
Meena and Mesha—200 ch. each.
Vrishabha and Kumbha=240 ch. each.
Mithuna and Makara—280 „do.
Kataka and Dhanus— 320 do.
, Kaaya and Thula—400- do.
From these it seems that Bhi*totpala must have lived
somewhere nedr Ujjain, for the extent of rasis‘applies to
“that place. (See Chap. I, St.19. ~
“UP State Museum, Lucknow ~ eo
e
^Simha and Vrischika=360 do. ^ . A
e
D

Ch. XR I itg Pons GRE BOSTON nd Gene sg
*— 3gPressmgred(rentut «
THI TATA AAT |
- Würenssrewarfsfst us |
Stanza 5.—Some say that: the lunar month
has to be made out with reference to the position
of the Moon in the navamsa. The position of
the Moon must be made out by the most powerful among. the Lagna apd Trikona or by the
|* touching of the organs, etc. of the querist.
aa
NOTES o
He gives here a different method to find out the*month
e and the rasi where the Moon is. Chandra occupies some
naz2msa at the time of question. This is indicated by some
constellation. The lunar month will be that in which this
constellation figures on its Pournima. There are some stars
from which some months take tbeir names. In such cases if
-the Moon occupies such a constellation, the month must be
made-out as per movements of Jupiter detailed by Varahamihira. In Ch. VIII, Sts. 1 and 2 of Brihat Samhita,.
Vardhamihira thus explains :—The two stars Krittika and
` Rohini give rise to"Karthika ; Mrigasira and Aridra produce
. ° Margasiras; Puparvasa and Pushfami give Pyshya; Aslesha
e and Makha produce Magha; Pubba, Uttara and asta 5
give Phalguna ; Chitta abd Swati give Chgitra ; Visakha and .
Anuradha’ produce Vaisakha ; Jyeshta and Moola próduce
E Jyeshta; Purvashada and Uttarashada give Askada; SravanaE 36 ° v. : e 4JP State Museum, Luckeow,
isti
e

562 CC-O. In Public ABRIBATJATARA, Trust Gh RAYS = 5
and Dhanista produce Sravand; Satabhisha, Poorvathadra
and Uttarabhadra produce Bhadrapada aná Revati,
Aswini and Bharani give Aswija. Therefore if Chandra is
in the 9th navamsa of Mesha or the first seven navamsas
of Vrishabha, the person must be declared to' have been
born in the lunar month Karthika. If Chandra is in the last
two navamsas of Vrishabha or the first six navarnsas of
Mithuna the month will be Margasira. If Chandra is in
the last three navamsas of Mithuna or the first five navamsas of Kataka the man will be born in Pushya. If Chandra
is in the last four navamsas of Kataka or the first four of
Simha the month will be Magha. If Chandra isin the last
five navamsas of Simha or the first seven navamsas of
Kanya he will be born in Phalguna. If Chandra is in the
last two navamsas of Kanya or the first six navamsas of
Thula the month will be Chaitra. If Chandra is in the last
three navamsas of Thula or the first five navamsas of Vrischika the month will be Vaisakha. If Chandra is in the-last
four navamsas of Vrischika or the first four navamsas of
Dhanus the person will be born in Jyeshta. If Chandra is in
the last five navamsas of Dhanus or the first three navamsas
of Makara the month will be Ashada. If Chandra is in the.
last six navamsas of Makara or the first two navamsas of
Kumbha the month will be Sravana. If Chandra is in the
last seven navamsas of Kumbha or the first five navamsas
of Meena the month will be Bhadrapada. If Chandra
occupies the last four naverhsas of Meena or. the “first eight
4 “navamsas of Mesha the month willbe Aswija. The original :
contains Suklantha -Soungmya Masé with a purpose. The
lunar month begins with the first lunar day after the New
Moon and noteas some erroneously have cried out that the ^
“UP State Museum, Lucknow . Pit
^ Li
e P
e
E
— gc
UE
mr

Ch. EA SEN —ÀÓ EC ge
month Serine with Krishna Paksha. (Vide note on Stanza 4
on this aspect). Find out which of the trikonas, viz.,
Lagna, 5th or 9th is most powerful and place therein
Chandra. Yavaneswara clearly supports this view. We
have already given the different organs of the Kalapurusha.
Whichever organ among these is touched” by the querist the
Moon may be placed in that sign which is represented by
that organ. The word Adi or etc. is used in the original.
Suppose the querist asksthe question whena goat passes `
by or bleats. Then the sign occupiéd by Chandra may be
fixed as Mesha. The reader must be very careful in judging
these mattegs.
Ta TA; Soins
KANGA ai RE :
Co CWRHTERTRRGGN R l G I
Stanza 6.—The position of Chandra will be
in that rasi which is equal to the number of
rasis gained by him from the question lagna. If
“Chandra is in Meena, then that will be the sign
occupied by him at birth. The position of the
Moon at birth may also be ascertained by the
articles of food, by animals and sounds at the
question time. Sie .
we
Z NOTES EAO
Another method is sketched here for frtitng out thé posit
e -ion of a Moon #t the time of birth. Put the lagna cS the,
DA e dP State Museum, Luckeow,

564 CC-O: In Public “ERUIAT JATAKA Trust Ich: SAN i St. 7
time of query and ascertain where Chandra is locatedo Find
out how many rasis (houses) he is from lagna. Then place
Moon at the time of birth in a house which is removed as many
rasis from Chandra as he is from lagna. Take an example.
Say the query lagna falls in Cancer and Moon is-in Scorpio.
Counting from lagna to the Moon at the time we find him
in the Sth house. Then count from Moon the 5tk house
and it becomes Meena. Predict therefore thatthe Moon
was in Meena at the time of birth. Suppose at the time of
question, Chandra is in Meena, then place him in that
house at the time of birth also. This is only applicable to
Chandra being in Meena. Though Meena is the 9th from
Cancer, we cannot put him inthe 9th from Meena as was
done in the previous ca$e. Probably this is an exception.
Bhattotpala offers some suggestions here which are very”
valuable. Different methods have been given above for
finding out the position of the Moon at the time of birth.
Suppose difference in the position of Chandra arises : ; then
the reader will be in a fix. The commentator suggests that
at the time of question if any animal is seen or food, etc»
is brought or the appearance of the querist suggests
some resemblance to animals or the sounds suggest the |
nature of the animals, then the Moon may be fixed in
that rasi to which any of these events suggested resemble.
Suppose a cat or a dog appears at the time, then suggest
Simha. If any cattle appears then the Moon will be in
Vrishabha and > forth.
MER hoes
errem Roig: mit arga o N
“UP State Museum, Lucknow ^
c rr
a
G

ah
Ch. Sant ge Domain. m" A and ues 565
Stanza 7.—The birth lagna-will be that represented by the rising navamsa at the time of
the query or it will be that lagna which when
counted from the question time is similar in
number to the drekkanas separating the question
lagna from the Sun at the time.
NOTES :
Take the lagna which rises at the question time and
find its navamsa, The birth sign will be that house which
the rising navamsa denotes. eThus if the question time
falls in Mesha when, the navamsa, of Kataka rises, then
--ptedict that the man was born when Kataka was rising as
lagna. This is easy enough. Another method here suggested
is a little complicated. Find out the rising drekkan& at the
question time, and also the drekkana where the Sun will be
loested; then .count from the Lagna Drekkana to the
drekkana occupied by the Sun at the time of the query.
Take this number and count from the question lagna toa
similar number and predict that sign which falls there as
-the birth lagna. Take one example. The 2nd Drekkana
in Mesha rises at the Prasna time. The Sun is found in
the 3rd Drekkana of Dhanus. Each drekkana has 10° of a
sign and so one sign has 3 drekkanas. The 3rd Drekkana
would be the 9th? house from lagna. Thus Sun is found
in the 26th drekkana from thé .drekkana, at the time of
question. There are only 12 signs in the zodiac. Divides ,
26 by 12, we get 2 Smainder. Now. count "from the
question “Lagna Mesha and put the. birth lagna in the
second from it or Vrishabha. Take anotherexample. ` The
4JP State Museum, Luckson
e
. e e

ma
e
e
566 cc.o. In Public Dor S BUT s SAKA ust anlGbakXV1, St. 8
first drekkana in Kataka rises while the Sun is found in the
2nd Drekkana of Thula at the time of query. Counting
from the ‘drekkana at the time of question to the drekkana
occupied by tbe Sun we get lagna as the llth house from
the lagna at the time of question, viz., Kataka and hence
Vrishabha which is the 11th from Kataka.
Varahamihira says that these principles are put forward
“py him on the strength of the ancient sciences and not
based on his own intelligence or education. The great
Varahamihira shows the highest respect for the ancient
Maharishis and thus adds dignity to himself and his
works. m
SINGASANA SANE |
MAGANG
NGETEN WET Uh < N
Stanza 8.—Multiply the sphuta of the planet
in the lagna or that*of the most powerful by
chayangula and divide it by twelve. The remainder
denotes the number of the birth lagna from
Mesha or the birth lagna will be the 7th, 4th, ;
10th or lagna as the querist is Sitting or lying *
d
e à D
e
down or rising or standing respectively. ^
S cat NOTES};
. He gives here two methods to find out the birth lagna
“of the querist. Find out if there is any pla
©UP State Museum, Lucknow, po
c Gc
waged wd c X
net in the”
fa
G

oo
Ch. UL Sui DAS CER FAINING! SPIUTI angot 567
aeng at the question time or if there is none there,
then find out the most powerful of the planets at the ques*
tion time and ascertain its sphuta or the'correct degree,
minute and second. Reduce these into kalas. Get a place
levelled, by,water and fix the sanku or stick which must be
12 angulas. 8 yavas make an angůla. Yaya means a
barley grain or something like it. Four angulas make a.
mushti or fist, and 6 mushtis make a'Aasta or hand. Four
hastas make a danda or danas (bow) and 2000 dandas
or rods make a krosa. Four X&rosas make a yojana.
Hundred yojanas make a desa (country) and four desas
make a mandala, One hundred mandalas make a khanda
"(continent) and the earth confáins nine khandas. A hand
is roughly about 18 inches or a foot and a half. "Therefore
one angula roughly means $ths of an inch. Danda means
6 ft. 12,000 ft. make a krosa or 2 miles 2 furlongs- and 40
yards or 2 miles 22 furlongs. A yojana so often repeated i in
Sanskrit works will be 9 miles 8/11 furlongs. A country or
desa will be about 909 miles, and 4 desas make a mandala
or 3,636 miles. A khanda contains 100 mandalas or 3,63,600
miles and the earth contains nine khandas or 32,72,400
. miles. (See Lilavathi, Stanza?5, Paribhasha Prakarana by
Bhaskaracharya. Also Suryasiddhanta).
Twelve angulas will be equal to about nine inches.
Take the shadow cast by this stick and multiply kalas by
this and divideeby twelve. The remainder shows the
number of the birth sign frem Mesha. Thus, if the
remainder is 7, then the birth lagna will be; Thula. qf it 1s;
11, then it will be Kudjbha. There is angthér method to Y
find out “the birth lagna. If the quens? asks the prasna
, sitting, then the birth lagna will be thé 7th from the Ptäsna
^. e YP State Museum, Luckgowe
A e é

568 'BRIHAT JATAKA [Ch. XXVI, St. 8
Lagna. If he asks when lying-down, the 4th lagna from the
‘query lagna will represent the birth sign. When ^he querist
is rising, then the birth lagna will be the 10th from Prasna
Lagna. When the querist is standing at the time, the birth
‘lagna will be the same as the Prasna Lagna. This, view is
supported by quotation from other works. Thus, if the
man asks the astrologer standing, then his birth lagna will
be that which rises at the time of question. Suppose a
man comes to an astrologer at midday in the month of
Virgo, then the rising lagna will be Dhanus. If this
question is asked when he stands, then his birth house will
be Dhanus. If this question is put while he is sitting, then
the 7th from Dhanus or Mithuna will represent his birth
lagna. If the question is asked when he lies down, then
the 4th from Dhanus or Meena- will be his birth sign. If—
he puts the query when rising, the 10th from Dhanus or
Kanya will represent his birth sign.
[The following horoscope will illustrate this ‘point. A
gentleman consulted an astrologer at 10-10 a.m. on Wednesday the 24th Sept. 1947. The planets at the time of
query were thus situated.
Rahu
cUF State Museum, Lucknow = AE
z~

Ch. XVI Doral, BibE LS BATION and us 569
a
As the query was madeerising on „the chair, "ic birth
lagna wold be the 10th or Kataka and the horoscope was
cast for 9-8-11 at 0-15 ghatis in the moming and proved
correct.]
NAVAMSA
|Moon Budha
Kuja
e sue | D Sani
wet fugeret frage aequi HH
. dai anea AA: Spp AKEN: |
Santee: THAN en Alea
qafat Aaa AAA: mud a asam WS N
Stanza 9.—The signs Taurus and Leo, Gemini
and Scorpio, Aries and Libra, Virgo and Capricorn, must be multiplied by 10, 8, 7 and 5
respectively. ° The remaining rasis (signs) must
be. multiplied by their own aumber.J upiter, | Mars,
Venus and Mercury must be similarly muliplied: «
The remaining plailets must bé&emiultiplied like
, Mercury. This must be necessarily done -with
e
SS a s UP State Museum, Luckifows
E
o © e
D c e °

570 BRIHAT JATAKA [Ch. XXVI, St. 9
the signs. When there issa planet in the lagna, it
must also undergo this multiplication. ©
NOTES
Here a general summary of the various methods for
calculating lost horoscopes is given. Convert the rising
sign at the time of the question into kalas. When Taurus
or Leo rises, multiply its 'kalas by 10. When Gemini or
Scorpio rises, multiply its kalas by 8. When Aries or
Libra rises, multiply its kalas by 7. When Virgo or
Capricorn rises, multiply its kalas by 5. The other "signs,
viz., Cancer, Sagittarius, Aquarius and Pisces, must be
multiplied by their own namber, viz., Cancer represents.
four from Aries and therefore must, be multiplied by 4,
Sagittarius represents 9° and it must be multiplied by 9,
Aquarius by 11 and Pisces by 12. Thus multiply the signs.
as follows :—
Aries 6 by na 1
Taurus 2 e 10
Gemini 3 8
Cancer vi m 4
Leo fs e gal
Virgo - 5
Libra Us D" 1
Scorpio 55 odo 8 s
Sagittarius 2 K- 9
Capricorn as Gia 7 5
X105," TA qarasi c; r pli Siege
e Pisces $ Re 12
The lagna az the time of question must be niultiplied
by their respective figures. If there isa planet in that
Š «UP State Museum, Lucknow — m
Cpe
ng

e o
Ch. BEV In Stol bon EGURES o MULTIRELBD: Sanget 571
lagna, then the kalas the planet has passed in it must be
multipliad by the number given to it. Thus, when Jupiter
occupies lagna, first multiply the lagna by its number and
then,multiply the result by the number given to Jupiter,
viz., 10. When Mars is there, by 8; when Venus is there,
by 7; and when the rest of the planets, viz., Mercury, Sun,
Moon and Saturn, by 5.
Thus :—Jupiter must be multiplied by 10, >
Mars A $5,558;
m Venus me os
Mercury, Sun, AS
c Moon and Saturn.
If there is more than nol planet in the rising sign, then
«each must be multiplied, by the figures given to them
respectively. The resultant must be kept in one place, for
disposal as detailed in the following stanzas: 5
gaa aa ANA A OSISHSISCRI |
Ud TATANAN 4e:
sedare qp! te Ul
Stanza 10.—Multiply the result thus obtained
by 7, and divide the total (after adding to or
subtracting 9°from it) by 27; the remainder shows _
the nümber of the star i which the-person is.
born. From the guestion lagna, the 7th, 3rd, 5thand 6h bhavas, may also be ihdicated and their
. stars ascertained. š T
e
On e UP State Museum, LuckRove ; a
c e

e
r
572 CC-Q. In Public o BIBAT ABA rl Ca I.S. 10
. NOTES ots
Here he gives hints to find out the constellation at the
time of birth of a person and that of any of his relations like
children, brothers, wife or enemies. In the previous Stanza
a certain process ,has been named and a resultant is
obtained. This must be multiplied by seven. We get a
result. To this total we must add 9 when the rising lagna
falls in a movable sign. When it falls in a common sign»
9 must be subtracted from the total. When the lagna falls
in a fixed sign, no addition or subtraction must be made.
This is what some authors say. But Bhattotpala explains
itina different way. If the Ist Drekkana of the question .
lagna rises, then 9 must be added to the total. If it falls
in the 2nd Drekkana, there must be no addition or subtractien. “If the rising drekkana is the 3rd, then 9 must be
subtracted. After doing this, take the total and divide it
by27. Then the remainder denotes the number of the «tar
from Aswini. Some are of opinion that the grand total,
before adding or subtracting 9, must be divided by 27.
Take the remainder and then add to, or subtract from or
do nothing, as the case may be and predict the constellation
from that number. In the case of children, brothers, wife,
enemies, etc., the author advises the readers to consult
similarly from the house, which represents that bhava from
the question sign. Take an illustration. Suppose Mithuna
rises at the question time. The 7th fronf Mithuna is the
house of his.wife, Take that bhava, see how many kalas
_it has passed ard follow the multiplication and division
process as' recommended above ang the number that remains there, wilF represent the constellation at the’ time of
the birth of his wife. “For other relations’ and events take
e AJPrState Museum, Lucknow, Me

o
Ch. xxvi, Stell Do KANGIN S SSEMES st and eGangotri9 73
other havas (significations) and predict the constellations
working fsom them as if they are the rising lagnas at the
time of question. The age, lagna, year, etc., for any relations just be worked out asthe author’ has done for the
person himself from their lagnas. Bhattotpala gives preference to his explanation. F
aiga aias
Agana LA! |
> aT Gan afar
AVA RAATI U1 t Ul
. Stanza 11.—By multiplying the total mentioned in Stanza 9 by 10, etc., and also by| adding
to, or subtracting from it and by dividing that
by the various figures already given, the year,
season, month, lunar day, night and day, constellation, time, ascendant, navamsa, etc., may be
ascertained.
NOTES
This stanza is so briefly expressed in Sanskrit that no
English translation could do justice to it unless it is supple--
mented by full and elaborate explanations. Reduce the
rising sigg to kalas, and then emultiply it by the figures
given to that fagna and, any planet which “may occupy it. -
Keep this total in fog separate places." Mtuitiply one `
by 10, the second by 8, the third by 7 and «he fourth: by 5.
Then follow the methods for adding to’or subtracting from,
d o WP State Museum, Luckfhow
e
o

r e
574 cc- O. In Public BRA hi JATAKA sulla EVES 12
them the figure 9. Then the total must be divided by 120
to get years e
Do—by 6 to get Rithus
Do—by 2 to get Months e^
Do— by 27 to get Constellations *
Do—by 15 to get Lunar days
and these details are clearly:given in the next three stanzas.
AAN TAIT] mamar F |
wpa maaa TM AT d Vell
Stanza 12.—From the total multiplied by 10
the year, season and month have to be found do
out. From the total multiplied by 8, fortnight
and lunar day have to be ascertained.
NOTES
s The total has been desired to be posited in four different places. Take the total multiplied by 10, and divide
it by 120 the parmayus or the total length of life mentioned
in the earlier chapter. The remainder shows the age in
years of the questioning person or the person about whom -
he puts the query. The same figure divided by 6 will give
the Rithu represented by the remainder from the Sisira. |
When that total is divided by2and the remainder is one, |
then it represents the first month of the Rithu already
ascertained. But when thert is no remainder then the 2nd: re
. montizof the Rithu must be predicted. But ifa man is
above 120 years, then the process p^med in the lost horoscopes “will not apply to such cases. Then take the total ——
ebtained by multiplying it by 8. Divids this by 2 and ift - J.
UP State Museum, Lucknow _
e
a r

Ch. KA peka ary" EM co
the remainder is one, then tHe birth has taken ad in the
first half “of the lunar month. If there is no remainder,
then the birth takes place inthe 2nd or dark half of the
lunar month. When the totalis divided by 15, the number
ofthe remainder shows the number of lunar days in the
first or second half of the lunar month.
M Te
akehi sg RANT I t3 d
Stanza 13.—Take the total multiplied by 7
do ‘and from it predict the^constellation, day and
night times. 2
NOTES t
: Jake,now the total obtained by multiplying the first
by 7. When this total is divided by 2, representing day and
night, if the remainder is one, the birth falls in day, and if
there is no remainder then the birth falls in night. When
this total is divided by 27, the number of constellations,
. the remainder shows the number of constellation from
Aswjni. As the importance of constellations is very great
for all, the explanation has been repeated twice.
o
y der fret p ERIS q | i
207 URS Gana [c a
eee
Stanza 14. — Tàke the total*multipliedeby 5
B e . and ascertain the time, sign, Hóra, Amsa, ett. :
YP State Museum, Luckngwe
“a ey) D D 26

e
AA
576 CC-O. In Public BRIBA DA DASA, TrudGle ERIS 6
5 NOTES
Take now the total obtained by multiplying the first by
five and if the man was born during the day, then divide it
by the duration of that day or if he was born during the
night divide it by the duration of the night on that day.
The remainder shows the number of ghatikas during the
day or the night—as the case may be, when the person was
born. Finding the correct ghatis, etc., the divisions of
lagna—viz., Hora, Drekkana, Navamsa, etc., may easily be
ascertained by correct calculations. Then by mathematical
calculations the positions of the planets at the time of birth
may be easily ascertained. Then the results deta#led in the _
earlier chapters, viz., of Dasas, Antardasas, Astakavargas
can be predicted.
denen yu 5 arg’: emm AMI |
ai Pramana agate || du MAT
Stanza 15.—Take the matras of the real
name, multiply it by two and add to the result
the number of chayangulas obtained at the time
and divide the total by 27; then take the remainder and count it from Dhanista to get the birth
constellation of the querist.
NOTES "
Here Varahamihira gives another method t9 identify
fr find.the birth constellation of the querist. A man may
^ have many=or several names, pet, nick or from other cause ;
but his real name given at the time of birth must be taken.
r
Seusonsnts represent half matras (measure of time) while .
UP State Museum, Lucknow _ à
A

eae.
ol oO
gg WS
e
Ch. MO Stu pomain BUTE STAR Trust and e 577
vowels. represent full matra:? Take'the, number of matras,
containedén his proper name and multiply it by 2. In the,
previous stanza a process has already been named to get
the number of chayangulas (shadow) at thé time of the question and, add this number to the total thus obtained. Then
divide the total thus obtained by 27 we get some remainder.,
This number shows the number „of constellation—counting
from Dhanista—at the time of birth. ° Takean illustration,
We shall say the name is Ramakrishna. This name is composed of Ra Ma Kri Shna 14+14+{4+2=64 matras. This;
total must be multiplied by 2 and the result is 13. Suppose
the chayangula or shadow measurement is 5 angulas. Thus,
13+5=18. This must be diviGed by 27. As 18 cannot be;
divided by 27, we must take 18 asa the remainder. Count
from Dhanista till you get 18 and then name the Star you:
get as that of the birth constelldtion of the querist. The
18th from Dhanista is Hasta and it becomes the birth star.
Take^an English name: Edward. It,iscomposed of, Sanskrit letters which give 4 matras. This multiplied by 2 gives:
8. Add Schayangulas. The total is8+5=13. The remainder is 13; the 13th from Dhanista is Pushyami and
it is to be predicted as the birth star of the querist.
" fáfraaéseufafitere nara esr |
TRE RTR i RE I
«Stanza 46.—The figures 2994 14, 10; 15, 21,
' 9 and 8 from the East, etc., must be multiplied by $
15 and the number of persons looking in the same
.direction as the» querist, must Be added to the.
e 37 i a WP State Museum, Luckgow,
of M

p e
$78 cc.o. In Public BRIBATJAT/ arayu veh andé XVI fi St. 17
total; and divided by 27; the remainder shows
the number of constellation from Dhanista.
NOTES Rr
Another method is given here to find out the birth star
of the querist. If the querist faces the East, South, S.W.,
West, North-West, North and North-East are represented
by the figures 2, 3, 14, 10, 15, 21, 9 and 8 respectively.
If he faces East, then take the number 2 and multiply it
by 15. The total is 30. Suppose two persons are. also
looking with him towards the East. Then add 2 to the
total 30. The totalis 32. This must be divided by 27,
the remainder is 5, or, the star Revati, which is the 5th
from Dhanista, must be identified as nis birth star. Suppose the querist faces the South without any company.
14 represents South and this must be multiplied by 15—
14x15—210. This must be divided by 27=210+ 27-7
and the remainder is-21. The 21st from Dhanista, viz.,
Visakha must be identified as his birth constellation. T
TATANG Tera WD RART |
NX TA
Tat aoa: wher garam wala 0$ Ul.
Stanza 17.—Various methods have been expounded by me about the lost horoscopes. The
real student will accept that whick he finds cor- ^
rect after- ‘laborious calculations. MEE E E
P. NOTES $
Varahamihita collected his information about lost
horoscopy from Vasishta, Parasara, Martha, Yavana, etc., - a
A UP-State Museum, Lucknow.
n"
miden ké ES
AA
e A ^ e

The reader, may refer to them.
Ch. XXVI, St. 17] MIHIRA'S METHOD 579
and e&plained in this chapter the various methods by which
the birth? time, constellation, week day, lunar day, solar
day, month and the year can be ascertained. He here concludessby exhorting the diligent student to try all these by
proper ánd* laborious calculations and accept that system
which agrees best with his practical experience. It may be
questioned as to why Varahamihira does not give one
method which is the best out of tlie lot, and which tallied
with the experience of that great astrologer. In St. 7,
Chap, VII, he has clearly stated ‘the reasons which have
been fully dealt with by me in my notes for that stanza.
e
o
kl
a
e e L4.) s
e [LÀ a o ø
So e
s (J GIS e
e e e
Q UP State Museum, Lucknow, e
On . N

o
e
CHAPTER XXVII
DREKKANA ADHYAYA om
^ genoma:
qai aaa: meu ure ESTARIA |
Ve: WY Vga Bt TATA: FATT d ? i
Stanza 1.—The 1st Drekkana of Mesha represents a man with e white cloth rdund his.
waist, dark complexion, pretending to protect,
fearful red eyes and a lifted axe.
NOTES
There are 12 signs in the zodiac and each sign is.
divided into 3 equal parts called a Drekkana. Thus there
are 36 drekkanas, whose individual influences, peculiarities
and potencies are distinctly „explained in this Chapter by
Varahamihira. The uses for these drekkanas are clearly *
stated in the commentaries of Bhattotpala under St. 36 of
this Chapter. Mars rules this drekkana; it is masculine
and armed. Since each sign has 3 drekkanas, there ‘are
36 drekkanas and Mesha, Simha, Dhanus orm 3 drekkanas.
for Mesha»and, Mars, Suh and Jupiter are the lords.
1 ‘Vrishatha, Karya and Makara are the 3 drekkanas for
AA
Vrishabha with Sukra, Budha and Sani as lords. Similarly
from every housé, “the Ist, 5th and 9th form the 3 drekkanas and as the Ist, 2nd and 3rd Glen, they have.
UP, State Museum, Lucknow
co

E
‘Chi seit epig De ngan, MESHA DREKKANA ^9" gel
different "€ and differen? characteristics, so that Mesha
as Ist drekkana, is not the same as the 2nd drekkana for
Dhanus and is feminine and as the 3rd drekkana for Simha
is masculine. The lords are no doubt the same.
“TERE C
FERIRE enit 1.
TA Teal p HW] :
Amet qaare N R N
Stanza 2.—The 2nd Drekkana of Mesha is
‘sketched by Yavanas as representing a woman
with red cloth, fond, of ornaments and food,
pot-belly, horse-face, thirsty and single-fcoted.
6 š NOTES
o Thisisa quadruped Drekkana, feminine in nature and
governed by the Sun. The characteristics are those of a
woman and hence biped. But Varahamihira classifies this
as quadruped because the face is that of a horse—a quadru-
* ped. Some say that this is a Khaga or bird Drekkana.
HU’ Fog: Ae? Peat
TAN SATANG: |
o TAR TENT MEE a 3
; à acta: forfan: Hau m s
Stánza 3—The 3rd DrekfZma of Mesha
. * represents a mat, cruel, skilled i in ares; yellowish,
State Museum, Luckno
Ors A

e
e
582 BRIHAT JATAKA _ [Ch. XXVII, Sts. 4—5
fond of work, unprincipled, with a lifted-up Stick,
angry and covered with purple clothes. ^
NOTES
This is a masculine Drekkana armed and ruled by
Jupiter. |
ATT gAs RT |
AMAA A .
SURE ATTN,
ec
Stanza 4.—The lst Drekkana of Vrishabha
represents a woman with torn ringlets, pot-belly,
burnt cloth, thirsty,” fond of food and ornaments.
r
NOTES ^
This represents a feminine Drekkana, fiery in nature
and governed by Venus. The hair will be in ringlets but
partly torn and protruding belly resembling a pot.
PITTI TAS Wu) Gun | ^
TETI WT SAN ASAT: || Wu
Stanza 5.—The 2nd Drekkana of Vrishabha
Fepresents a man possessing knowledge of lards,
- grains, houses, COWS, arts, ploughing and carts,
hungry, sheep-faced, dirty clothes and skoulders
like the hump of ‘an ox. “
UP,State Museum, Lucknow _ E
e
c e

Ch.RRVIFUBE BFR PHA BEY AR ERROR N ROI eos
d NOTES i
Arts" include knowledge in music, drums, dancing,
writing, painting, etc. This isa masculine Drekkana, quadruped and governed by Mercury.
A
ij
to STUART NANAS || S di
Stanza 6.—The 3rd Drekkana of Vrishabha
js represented by a man with» a body like that of
an elephant, white teeth, legs like that of sargbha,
yellowish colour, and clever in capturing, sheep
and deer.
NOTES
Sarabha isan animal at which the lion is supposed to
. get frightened. It has eight leas of great size and strength.
Deer is representative of mild animals. This is masculine,
quadruped and ruled by Saturn. Amara Simha thus derives
the word Sarabha=Srinathi Simbam=Sarabha or that
which kills thelion. Referring to Mahabharata, we find
Sarabha thus described :—
LJ
o
* Ashtapadurdheva enainaha Wearable 'yanagocherala
means that it has eightJegs, eyes in the fop afid lives in^
the forest. Probably this species is nov j'extinct or may be
. found in forests yet to be discovered." O "
UP State Museum, Lucknow, D
o
0 o G

e
e
AT JATAKA : [Ch. XXVII, Sts. 7—8
D
Ti, aufm Tl gH. — 070 |
ENN ARASEN T |
Jaag E- : 4.
ma gaa qae ai Ut [i |
Stanza 7.—The, ist Drekkana of Mithuna |
fepresents a female, fond of needle work, handsome, fond of oraamentation, issueless, lifted f
hands and in menses.
NOTES i X |
This is feminine and*ruled by Mercury.
TMA: HAA AJMSESA Tea | eat |
MIS RAMSRCMA Tear :
FAR Hey ya Tas N < N
Stanza 8.—The 2ed Drekkana of Mithuna : |
represents a man, living in garden, in armour,
with a bow, warlike, armed with weapons, face |
like that of Garuda, and fond of play, children,
ornamentation and wealth. : |
cO x a 2 ^ f; Y
zu. Mn A NOTES . c ' "^ -
Garuda iš the vehicle of Vishny? and is represented as |
having @ long nose? This isa masculine and bird Drekkana |
armed; and ruled by Venus, “ e d
e UP State Museum, Lucknow | 3 oP E |
e A çc ol

Ch. && su. 9—10] KATAKA DREKKANA : 585
D MAN wera:
TETRA: Wm: |
e. TUMA
RARAJN || € I]
Stanza 9.— The 3rd Drekkana of Mithuna
represents a man, adorned, decked with gems,
armoured with quiver and bow, skilled in dancing,
drumming and arts, and poet.
: NOTES
This is a mascufine and arnted Drekkana ruled by
Saturn.
ASRS STAT:
"TED We: uif |
ASAT SARS
quà WwwWeWguf || Lo |
Stanza 10.—The 1st Drekkana of Kataka
represents a man, holding fruits, roots and leaves,
elephant bodied, residing on sandal trees in the
“ forest, legs like that of Sarabha, and horse-
' necked. e , *. Bea
* NOTES ons NH
| “the Moon. s
EES h e UP State Museum, Luckgow, .
LJ LJ
e.
This is a quadruped masculine Drękkana governed, by

A ec
586 cc- OQ. In Public BRIHATIJATAKA, (ch. x an eit mus
a Hak APTA ae
at irren RAR |
qmi Tee TAMA oe
ey feat heme vu d t
Stanza 11.—Ihe: 2nd Drekkana of Kataka
Tepresents a female worshipped on the head by
lotus flowers, with ‘serpents, full blown youthfulness, living in forests on the branch of p/íalasa
and crying. : Pr
NOTES
This is feminine and ruled, by Mars.
aiaiai AAT weef aAa: |
Baa gat aAA areas qub? l 95 II
Stanza 12.—The 3rd Drekkana of Kataka
represents a man covered with serpents, flat-faced,
and crossing the ocean ina boat in search of
wife's jewels.
NOTES
This is masculine and serpent Drekkana ruled by
Jupiter.
o re >,
REET ESEE RIN Ej u
- UP. State Museum Lucknow.
e Go

Ch. XXVII Stait Donen STRE DERE KANE eGangotri con z
| * ° ‘Stanza 13—The tet Drekkana of Simha
| represerfts a vulture and a jackal on the Salmali
||. tree, a dog and a man dressed in, dirty raiments,
| leaving father and mother, and crying.
| ; NOTES
This is masculine, quadruped and bird Drekkana governed by the Sun. Salmali is the Salmalia-Malabearica or
7 the loose cotton tree largely found fh S. India.
graft WITTY
E Raf sures T |
; quee: Fe TART
ATI DIATE WLI
"Stanza 14.—The 2nd Drekkana of Simha
represents a man resembling a horse's body with
white garlands on the head, wearing krishnajina
| and kambalam, fierce as a,lion with a bow in the
| *hand and bent nose.
NOTES
? This is a maseuline Drekkana, armed and governed by
| . * Jupiter. 4 C E Ma
s 2 e. KI
O There are two readings—Krishnajina : Kambalt* and °,
| Krishnajina Chivara. Kerishnajina is the hide of a dark
deer, kambala means a woollen blanket, and chivara means
+. © torn cloth. D e c
1 è e UP State Museum, Luckpow, e
i E C z
LJ . e
| oe
Ao J
Whe

LJ
n
1 KA [Ch. XXVII, Sts. 15—16
588 CC3O. In Pubic BRAT LATA Sarayu Trust and e&angptri
HAA TACT ms
fafa «vé SAT a
ai aga ees 0 00 0 077
SUGGEST: UR Ul
Stanza 15.— The 3rd Drekkana of Simha |
represents a man with a bear’s face, acts like
those of a monkey, long beard, curbed ringlets |
and holding a stick, fruit and flesh.
„ NOTES | ; ; "i e
This is a masculine, quadruped, armed Drekkana governed by Mars. 3
germ TA Wer ies
AGAR |
TANNA ATA
TU: FS ASA BAHT IRG
Stanza 16.—The ist Drekkana of Kanya represents a female with a pot, full of flowers,
covering the body with dirty raiments, fond of .
money and clothes, and going to the home of the
. preceptor. ~ 4 : .
: «°° NOTES :
This is a feminine Drekkana governed by Mercury.
« UP State Museum, Lucknow. : i
P

Ch. XH, HtPublc edhak ANEAN DREKK aj qaod eGangotri 589:
"o Gen mva: .
EE STER |
T e AR a Ruf as i
TAA FETT: d tell
Stanza 17.—The 2nd -Drekkana of Kanya
represents a man with a pen in the hand, dark?
| complexion, the head tied round by a cloth,
counting gains and expenditure, covered over the
body with dense hair and holding a big bow.
a 9 NOTES
* This is a masculine Dsekkana, armed and adis by
Saturn.
. MUS d
| . WERT SARC HEM |
Sara et ATI
qafa TANG Ut $e UI
Stanza 18.—The last Drekkana of Kanya
(observe great authors) represents a female,
, yellowish, covered by a white silk cloth, tall,
i , holding a pot-and a spoon, going to a temple
” with great sanctity. : Sie ae
: *NOTES MSS
One reading is Dukula Gupta or covered by a Silk
J|- » “cloth, another reading is Dukula - Hasta or folding cloth F
| UP State Museum, Luckeove
es e.
M e 7
es
o o os. P

e bd
Ch. XXVII, ‘Sts. 19—
590 CCO. In Pubi AT AS DEM Trust and eGangotri is
in the hand. This ds a feminine Drekkana governtd by
Venus. These are characteristics explained by'the great
Munis or Rishis.
ALAA STRIS
JAE: Mae: |
ave Rate aa p geagi aea Tai WA TST’ d RA N
Stanza 19.—The 1st Drekkana of Thula,
say Yavanas, represents a man seated ina shop
in the middle of the “road, holding balances,
clever in weighing and measuring with a small
scale for weighing gold, diamonds, and thinking
of his capital, and the prices of the articles in the
shop. p T
NOTES
This is a masculine Drekkana ruled by Venus. Measuring here refers to the measure of grains, etc. The Yavanas here referred to are the Purana or old Yavanas.
e
Ei Tagen; xo b
stanza 207 —The middle Drekkana of Thula
Tepresents e man with a vulturé S pacs hungry:
e UP State Museum, Lu€know
e
e 4 c
e

Ch. XR PrN, Sese NERA Trust and eGangotri 591
and Mrs: holding a pot which is Bay to fall
and thinking of his wife and children.
.. NOTES
The pot is ready to fall because of his weakness by
hunger and thirst. This is a eee bird Drekkana
governed by Saturn.
> AMA SEE CUCL Cr |
Reka IRENB. MAMA, TAKE || R? N
"Stanza 2L—The {ast .Drekkana of Thula,
say the 'Yavanas, represents a man, decked with
gems, wearing golden quiver and armour and
frightening the animals in the wilderness, resembling a monkey and holding in the hand fruits and
flesh.
NOTES
Fruits refer to mangoes, etc. There are two readings :
. (1) Kanchana Thuna Varma Brit—wearing gold
A quiver and armour.
d (2) Kinnara Rupa Brinnagaha- wearing the form of
like faces. > o> o
This isa masculine, quadruped, restufbling a ménkey
sand governed by Mercury. O i
2 * UP State Museum, Luckgow Ir
OS ta °’
EGI ERLESEIG] cubat à
2 "Kinharas, a set of celéstial beings with horse- .

592 BRIHAT JATAKA [Cb. XXVII, Sts. 22—23
TAAT SANA aui enid
AUAA FOI |
wa ESTE Eee t
FATA ARTA: I RR II
Stanza 22.—Fhe st Drekkana of Vrischika
represents a woman naked and without ornaments, coming from the middle of a great ocean
to the shore, dislocated from her original place,
the feet bound by serpents and handsome.
LE
NOTES
This is a feminine, serpent Drekkana ruled by Mars.
erga at
AGHA WS |
TAUN ANNA
Amaea || 93 I
Stanza 23.—The middle Drekkana of Vrischika represents a woman fond of home and
happiness for her husband’s sake and covered by
Sling with a body resembling a tortoise and a
A
e oo 6 NOTES ^
pusi is a feminine, serpent Drekkana: ruled by Jupiter. e |
cUP State Museum, Lucknow’ | »
[2] e Ab

Jeremie: -
| TATU CMS ATA |
| : e AÑ a WORROHNI
- AITARI AEA M RY II
| Stanza 24.—The last Drekkana of Vrischika
represents a lion with a broad flat face, resembling a tortoise, frightening dogs, deer, boars and
jackals, protecting localities covered with sandalPISO trees,
| Ch. sen CHE eGangotri 593
M * NOTES.
This is a masculine, quadruped, lion Drekkana .ruled
by the Moon.
^05 CHSETBRISERIRIUIT .
: TARNITI: |
maa TIRTA
TA AN TRIN: || RY UI
"Stanza 25.—The Ist Drekkana of Dhanus
represents a man with a human face and a horse's
* body with a bow in hand residing in a hermitage,
.? protecting Sn articles,and Maharishis.
$ 2 NOTES OO
This'is a masculine, quadruped) arided Drekkana" ruled
Yo by Jupiter. ^n 3 3
We 38 R v , »UP’State Museum, Lucknow e
BH. x Y

594 BRIHAT JATAKA [Ch. XXVII, St. : 26
HAA TETEH on
ATUN fast HTETI |
aurea Aaga
TIAA TAT: RE: d VE Ml
Stanza 26.—The middle Drekkana of Dhanus
represents a woman, handsome, with the colour
of Champaca or gcld, picking up the gems from
the ocean and sitting in the Bhadrasana fashion. .
NOTES =
This is a feminine Drekkana ruled by Mars.
There are several postures in which Devotees in the
yoga. practice are required to sit and contemplate. This is
technically called Asana which means a position of the body
by which steadiness and concentration can be secured in the
search of knowledge aiter Para-Brahma. Sixty-four Asanas
are mentioned and even today there are some yogis who can
show all the sixty-four. The schools are also teaching some
important Asanas to the students and many boys can show
more than 16 to 20 Asanas‘as observed. In 1906, I brought.
a north Indian yogee to the house, who showed all the 64
Asanas. I kept him for about a week and sent him with rich
presents, asking him not to exhibit them in the Moore Market
tl a
for the sake of a few pice and giving, him the healthier “
aspect of these Yogasanas and their sacred attainments.
n The most’ impos tant Asanas for yoga practice are:
(1) Padmasana (5) -Kapalasaria
(2) Swastikasina (6) " Mayurasana
(3) Bhadrasana (7) Kukkutasana
(4) Gomukhasana (8) Simhásana and so forth.- ^
“UR State Museum, LuckKnowf
D

ə»
- keeping “yokes, nets and pandan "aud witha
Ch. AERE SEWER RARE ed by by Sarat aN and NA "a
Wea GSR yum: |
ganas a
dT ATT wa d VW |
Stanza 27.—The 3rd Drekkana of Dhanus.
represents a man with a long. beard, complexion
like that of Champaca or gold, holding a stick,
sitting in a splendid posture and keeping silks and.
deer skins: e e
: ` NQTES °
This is a masculine, armed Drekkana governed by the
Sun.
Champaca belongs to the Mangolia family and is called
Mfchelia champaca. D
EIE SEE AE COE
ERRIETAN: 4
TATANAN
Niku I Re UI
Stanza 28.—The ist Drekkana of Makara
2d .represent$ a?man covered ‘With much hair, feeth .
like those of a crocodile, body like that: ofa pig, °
; «cruel face. TUTO e .
SUP State Museum, Luckgove be

596 CC-O. In Public oR SLE LJATAKA or M 29—30
NOTES
Bandages include ropes and chains. This is a masculine, Nigala (chains or bandages) Drekkana Bong by
Saturn.
TANANAN TUNAN
sarat RATA a mim |
Prawane
ara feet Wee AAN «A Il
Stanza 29.—The middle Drekkana of Makara
represents a woman, ckilled in arts,’ broad eyes
like lotus petals, greenish dark, searching all kinds
of articles and wearing iron ear ornaments. `
; ' NOTES
This is a feminine Drekkana ruled by Venus.
RAIA: UTTA
TATA: TATA:
HM ARITA Roll.
Stanza 30.—The last Drekkana of Makara
represents a man, with a body like that of Kin-.
naras, with a Kambalam, with a quiver arrows,
and bow, . 'and bearing a por on“ “the shoulder
deckea with gems. IR
3 NOTES
e
A T Thsi is £ masculine, armed Drekkána ruled by Mercury... +»
SUP State Museum, Lucknow mn
e eT 4 3
e A >
a,
Nd
e

LJ
Ch. XXXVID Ste tie G2 RCUDMIBERA BREE KA NIA Gangotri 597
SEE AGUNA :
FATA: wu: |
MEDGENCREISSENESGI
' agaaa Were: 1 32 N
Stanza 31.—The lst Drekkana of Kumbha
represents a man with a mind disturbed by oils, -
wines, water and food being brought to him, with
a Kambala, silk cloth and deer skin and a face
resembling that of a vulture.
LJ
. NOTES ,
° This isa masculine Drekkana ruled by Sani. It represents a man being sorrowful y oils, food, wine, etc.,
being brought to him, with Kambala (woollen cloth) Pattasa,
° silk cloth, ånd Krishnajina or deer skin. The face resembles
that of a vulture or Gridhra.
TÀ Tae ATG STRASTNA |
aR Ra GIA ASAE May Wem: 0 33 II
Stanza 32.—The 2nd Drekkana of Kumbha
represents a woman, covered with a dirty cloth
< in a forest, bearing pots on her head and dragging
metals im a burnt cart loaded with cotton trees
“in it. $ 2 UNO
s "NOTES Ga? S
is This is a fierys, feminine Drekkana? tuled by Mereury. |
WAN On SUP Sila pc Luckgove e

r
BRIHAT JATAKA [Ch. XXVII; Sts. 33—34
am: wu ut P
eofdem afa |
area ATAPA
daga dewa |] 33 M
Stanza 33.—The 3rd Drekkana of Kumbha
-indicates a man dark, with ears covered with long
hair, wearing a crown and wandering with pots
filled with iron, skin, leaves, gum and fruits.
NOTES 14
This is a masculine Drekkana governed by Venus. The
author uses Thwak which mears skin or bark. 6
ras TMA ag Ay
edifamesg: arya | nd
wnat Peart
TA FATA AIT N 39 di
Stanza 34.—The^ Ist Drekkana of Meena
represents a man decked with ornaments, holding
in hand sacrificial vessels, pearls, gems, and conch
Shells and crossing the ocean in a boat in search .
of jewels for his p
e^ A e
So : ' NOTES: E ?
As tne Tahguage is plain and^simple in the translation
notes are necessarily short. This isa masculine’ Drekkana |
- governed by Jupiter. o
eUF State Museum, Lucknow’
o e
E
e
e

Ch. X36 Step 5te 3E] MEIBINZECDEGEROK ANAN eGangotri 599
Re Tae À: Tara |
ater Seifert gE: I 34 1
Stanza 35.—The 2nd .Drekkana of Meena
indicates a woman with a cólour more beautiful
than that of Champaka, surrounded by her
attendants, and sailing in a boat decked with long
flags in search of the coast of the ocean.
s NOTES
This is a feminine Drekkana ruled by the Moon.
Champaka is a beautiful yellow strongly scented flower,
pertaining to Mangolia species. *
-aR ARAR,
ANNA: RAN |
S IPAC COH ESTESA ISI
PATA ATTA ATT d 35 Il
. Stanza 36.—The 3rd Drekkana of Meena
represents a man Crying in a pit in a forest, naked
and covered over his body by serpents and with
a mind distracted by thieves and fire.
° : ; NOTES Ree.
This is a masculine serpent Drekkana governed by Mars. .
These are twelve signs and each sigreJias 3 Drekkanas
or there are in -gll 36 Drekkanas. «It has already been
IH ^
«UP State Museum, Luckgow, .

P
600 BRIHAT JATAKA [Ch. XXVII, St. 36 |
explained in several places in «he body of this work -about
the uses of these Drekkanas. They are especialy useful
in travelling. "Varahamihira says in his Yatra patala thus.
— The results of the rising Drekkana at the time of journey
must be predicted with reference to their form, actions and
nature. If the Diekkana is agreeable, bearing flowers,
rja
fruits, gems or treasures or if they are aspected by henefics, E.
then prosperity will attend the traveller’s march. If the i
Drekkanas are armed he will be victorious, if aspected by |
malefics, he will be defeated or beaten. If the Drekkana
happens to be serpent or bondage, the traveller will be
disgraced or imprisoned or will die. These Drekkanas also
enable one to know the nrture, place and form of thethieves. Varahamihira’s son Prithuyasas thus Observes in "|^
bis Shatpanchasat. ‘‘ By the navamsa of the question tlie
nature of the article lost? by the Drekkana, the nature of
the thiéves, by the Lagna, the time, locality and direction,
and by the lord of the Lagna, the age and caste of the :
thieves have to be known and predicted". My work
‘ Chappanna ' gives elaborate details of Prasna.
The matter may be simplified thus. When a question
is put to an astrologer about the loss of an article by theft
or otherwise he will make the necessary calculation and fix '
the lagna and navamsa for the time of question. When the
calculations are correct, the Shadvargas Lagna, Hora,
Drekkana, Navamsa, Dwadasamsa and Thrimsamsa ' can
easily be ascertained and fixed. After Kaving done this he
must ascertain the nature “of the article lost bẹ the rising €. | .
,'navamsa. | Each sign has various significations and governs « ?
several articles? The nature of theXhieves will have to be | :
predicted by the-Dfekkana which rises at the times By the B: f
Lagna, the time, at which an article has been lost or stolen, —
5 v cUR- State Museum, Lucknow/ E om
ce sr 3 . e

Ch. REV, SE'SBP"SERPENP SRK KAKA Ci Go
aWvayp the direction in whith it has been taken and the
place from which it is lost and the locality in which it is
deposited or concealed, and by the lord of the Lagna, the
age and caste of the thieves. In the second and third
chapter of this work all these details are given and the
student is referred to them for ready information. In
travelling, necessarily the person leaves his house or place
of occupation at some time. The “Lagna can easily be
ascertained and the rising Drekkana known. If the
Drekkana is good, he will have a*prosperous journey, if it
is eVil or malefic he will suffer loss, and if it is very bad he
will even “die. The strength, position, conjunction and
- aspects must be carefully comsulted. Varahamihira and
his famous son Prithuyasas seem, to have confined their
Views of Drekkana to tost articles, thieves and their
directions and travellers and their luck or ill-luck of their
journey. But their uses are more comprehensive fhan has
beea stated here. When a person is born in a cruel
Brekkana, he will be bad and miserable. When he is born
in a beneficial Drekkana he will be good and successful.
When the Drekkana is good and evil planets occupy it, or
when it is evil and good planets combine in it the results
will be mixed. But when it is evil, occupied by a malefic
and.'aspected by an evil planet, the results are very
disagreeable, the person will suffer miseries, defeats,
poverty, losses, disgraces and various diseases. When the
Drekkana is godd, occupied and aspected by benefics,
without malefic influence, the person will be eminently
successful, will be happy, will have good and distingnished,
progeny and’ will attai$ to a good positiot and? command ^
great respect and influence. (See Vuidyanatha’s eJataka
. Parijata, Sts. 112 to 116, Chapter IX). f c $
5 oe A 4 UP a Museum, Lucknow, o 4
me

[Ch. XXVII, St. 36
BRIHAT JATAKA
II] = €QqeusuA €
I €IEXeJA snu) QINJLS
e ` vkuey Suruiuio eur[nose]A
Ti PySoy SIRE :
I snueqqd pednipeaQ) RU
I ?quis UINISE eui[nose]A
Il Buss] 3uosdiog
I €XIQOSIIA Ioydnf SIEN
I exeex TEN ojew
EB! eqquiny uInjeg SnuoA
= T e[nu ], peuiy pig
I eang WN, ue < ALN
IH DI e uinjes AINAN
_I eáuey ` pednipenQ) pednipend
ah , BQLSA euinose]A eur[nose]A
podnipenb soyidng ung “parag Kes
CRAT CONR IRE Uew oWos *oururur,q
"equis “JJ "eqs 1 eur[nose]A podnipen()
Sapa» Duvy»24q III vupya4q YI
AUVNWNAS V
Kinol9JAd
ovium
ung ‘pirg
‘podnipend
eui[nose]A
uoo/w
podnipend
uel
AINIIN
€ IMUA
snuo,
gulu
SJIEeW
9[eJA
LI CCJAM
e
eAuBy
e
* — equis
|: RAWE
eun
eUqEQsA
to è 6
9 €eusoJA
puoyyxasq I
tsoy
eUR State Museum, Lucknow/
e
e
e
e
e

e
D LJ
d III BANYOSIJA s1eJA
E IL BARE] quodisg uoo Joyidne c o O
Bg I Cer) eur[nose]A “sulung eujnosejq ~ © eN
= III v[nuL QM
E II Bong SnU9A Á1n219]A uinjes 1
5 I. *qquny our]nosejA oururmuo, eugnosejN ~ e° egqamy
s Ill ehueye ud. Ji
E II ?UQP?USIIA , e ÁIMIN , SNUSA uinjeg =
WT I BIBRA our[noseJA eurururoq eunnoseJN ^7 e BIRAWA
O e € E
= - m equis 1oydng 3
> Il €uso]A ung ^* Siew pednipend z
I snueqq eui[nose]A euiuruio,q ueg -'— snueqq 2
E I eeey uoo leydnf SIVJAI a
an II BUSA podnipend 3uediog juediog e © o
a I V3IQOSIIA Ps eururuo T ouu -- A EJONA
fale p Bangi ee umgjeg $
& I jegang podnipen * pig SnuoA t e UG
5. 9t : nu] euinosejA eurinoseJA 9JEW ^U enu,
g e K Sa 2
- nak — MÀ A —— pan — p mA ER. e 4
< URS 79 Fia

n
e
n
e
CHAPTER XXVIII
UPASAMHARA ADHYAYA
STASI:
(Concluding Chapter)
TARA CELER
Rats fant: |
TATA TAA ag- 5
ETRAS: N R
Stanza 1.—The first chapter is Rasi Prabhedá, the second Grahayoni Bheda, the third
Viyonijanma, the fourth Nishakakala, the fifth
Janma Vidhi, the.sixth Balarista, the sevetith
- Ayurdaya, the eighth Dasa Vipaka, and the ninth
is Ashtaka Varga.
NOTES
Here the author simply quotes the names of the -
chapters he has composed from the commencement in »this
work and their meanings have been well explained in their
respective places.
RATA THT TANT
. exp 3m fiery ae
"SASI Re Raires THT WRU
-UP. State Museum, Lucknow - =
e

Ch. AVN SI^" OTHER WORKS 605
"Stanza 2.—Tenth chapter is Karma Jiva, the
eleventh Raja Yoga, the twelfth Nabhasa Yoga,
NS the thirteenth Chandra Yoga,.the fourteenth
| Dwigrahadi Yoga, the fifteenth Pravrajjya Yoga,
À the sixteenth Rasi sila, the seventeenth Dristi
3 Phala, the eighteenth Bhavadhyaya, the nineteenth
Asraya, and the twentieth Prakeerna.
chapters he has composed,
^ 07 C Re ata med ufa
fiti earam vum |
Mea Fae: WaT
0009 c SATE TTT I 3 Ui
Stanza 3.—The twenty-first is Anistayoga, °
the twenty-second is Strijataka, the twenty-third
is Niryana, the twenty-fourth Nastajataka and
the twenty-fifth is Drekkana. Thus is Hora Sastra,
I have composed 25 chapters, and I am going
to name other chapters relating to Yatra or
travelling.
] NOTES»
'Here he Tepeats consecutively the names of the
NOTES Q
Varahamihira names only 25 chapters whileowe have
given 28 chapters in this work. In the sixtéenth chapter
under Rasi sila, there have been divided three chapters, viz.,
(1) Rooksha sile, Q) Chandra Rasi sila, and (3) ken sila.
o
e e e
tate Museum, Luckn
e o
e
e 9 O
e o o

r
606 BRIHAT JATAKA [Ch. XXVIII, St.4
Thus two more chapters have been added by giving sepurate
names by somebody. But Bhattotpala concludec each of
the 17th and 18th chapters with his name. Therefore we
have a good authority in this learned commentator to
follow in the division and enumeration of these chapters.
It matters very little^what the number of chapters are, since
the same chapter has been converted into 3 chapters dividing
the treatment of the subject into (1) results of signs, (2)
results of signs occupied by the Moon, and (3) results of
constellations.
ARETE ITT sr UII
Stanza 4.—First Prasna Prabheda, (2). Thithi
Bala, (3) Nakshatra Bhedana, (4) Divasa Bala, (5)
' Vara Bala, (6) Muhurtha, (7) Chandra Bala, (8)
e
e
Lagna Nischaya, (9) Lagna Bheda, (10) Graha
Siddhi,(11) Apavada, (12) Vimisra, and (13) Thanu
Vepana.
NOTES
Varahamihira enumerates the names of chapters “he
has written in his Yatra work, but it is very curious to see
why he should name the headings of chapters whieh go to
form altogether // a separate work dealing on a different
“subject and*having nothing to do wità this book. But the
nature Of the subjgctS have inter relations and probably he
gave kis readers to "understand that hé has written a
4 c UR. State Museum, Lucknow,
e : one

Ch. SN SRP PERAK ^. and eGangotri 607
sepafate book called Yatrd patala and they must also be
read in @rder to understand Brihat Jataka well. Or it may
be that even if Yarra patala is lost by the destructive hands
of time, people may know what its contents are.
OR TR UT .
TAM Tat Maa: meg: |
wat TETAS Pup 4
. Ht RE TETANY UI
Stanza 5.—(14) Worship of Guhyaka, (15)
' Swapna, "(16) Snana Védhi, (17) Grahayagnya,
(18) Nirgama. -> .
Aera: qup gent
o. Stee Tagen sme |
: TAPA TGS
aM Fal afai fears || i
Stanza 6.—(19) Shakuna, (20) Vivahakala,
and. (21) Graha karma. In this way have been
composed works in the three important branches
of Jyotishya for the benefit of the astrologers by
me, viz., Vacallamihira.
e
E : ; NOTES D Sra i
He also refers héfe to Vivaha patala Gra work he bas”
composéd onmatrriage. Thus he says Ai$eworks extend in
* the three SkandasY(Sections of Jyotish¥a),viz.: - j
: «UP State Museum, Lucknow, .
a
kJ .

608 BRIHAT JATAKA [Ch. XXVIII, Sts. 5—6
(1) Siddantha (Ganitha or mathematical astronorty) as
explained in his Pancha Siddhantika. |
(2) Hora or astrology (horoscopy) as shown in Brihat
and Laghu Jataka.
(3) Samhita (treatment of collateral subjects and physical phenomena) as shown in his Brihat and Sama Samhitas,
Muhurtha, Prasna and Yatra belong to the horoscopy.
When I was in Cochin in 1910 A.D. an excellent
carpenter of a low casie was introduced to me who gave
extensive quotations from Grantha Samuchaya by Varahamihira. The genius of Varahamihira was versatile,
comprehensive and unrivalled and hence in the enumeration
of the nine literary gems in the court of the famous
Vikramaditya, Kalidasa adds the adjective Khyato (renowned) to Varahamihira (vide “Life of Varahamihira °
by me). Grantha Samuchaya refers to house building,
carpentry and the nature of the materials to be Coliectec for
such purposes. His Brihat Samhita (which is now being
translated by Prof. B. V. Raman) is a monument of
Varahamihira's extensive knowledge, and those who read
carefully that illustrious work will be immensely benefited
by the expansion of their intellects, and by the useful '
knowledge he has stored in his priceless pages. Modern
scientific culture of the highest order in agriculture, commerce, industry, discoveries and inventions has been
forestalled and the chapter on the metamorphosing of
planets and making them "yield fruits and. flowers quiet
‘foreign- to their nature and growing them in the shortest
time possiolé, ‘is most interesting. and worthy of an early
trial. «(See Chs.« VII and VIII, Part 2 of Brihat Samhita by
the same author). ~ Ke
D UP State Museum, Lucknow

Ch. OCO uie, Ppmain. Bates by WOR Tee! and eGangotri 609
e et E e in qm = e
TIOGA THAT |
.. She fi aay Hanae
- mw aie ue eiu eei Uv Ul
Stanza 7.—Other great Rishis have composed
extensive works on these subjects. I have made
only an abstract of what they have already stated.
Let'good people excuse faults, if any, in my works
as my object is to sharpen the intellect.
Jo . NOTES.
Here Varahamihira *is plain and plump. He
pretends no originality. He takes no unnecessary or unwarranted credit of pride to himself. There are many
importaüt works in the extensive sections (Skanda
Thraya) of astrology, viz., mathematics or astronomy,
Horoscopy or astrology and Samhita or natural
phenomena.
OB —
D Varahamihira's great credit lies in bringing, in a
small compass, large and comprehensive works of great
difficulty and technical in nature. He has eminently
succeeded in his aim, and the literary world of.all nations
is greatly obliged, for his labours and the ability which he
brings tg bear on his numerous productions. Leaving
aside the great Maharishis who could not easily be
approached'in elevation of intellect, or versatility, by anye
person? he stands second to none ameng the inymerous
authors on astrological literature for the ability, facility,
39 > 4 UP State Museum, Lucknow, a
a 5 S

610 BRIHAT JATAKA _[Ch. XXVIII, St. 8
capacity, and easy flow of siyle in his works. Though
he flourished 2,000 years ago, and was honoured y Vikramaditya, one of the greatest Sovereigns of the world, who
patronised literature, sciences and arts in India, his name
is now as familiar, and as honoured, as that of any other
author ancient or inodern. He is candid in his opinions
and excels generally in the brevity of expression which is
the soul of all literary compositions.
He has given the suggestive ideas with a view to simplify matters and encourage their easy study. By reading
his works Varahamihira rightly says that the human intellect
will be sharpened and much useful knowledge will be acquired. He requests the learned men to excuse.im, if ia
his concise expression of extensive "ancient works, any
errors may have unwittingly crept into them. Here there is
a double signification. Fifstthe fact that errors creep into
works composed by great men and second that humility
and not pride should mark the conclusion of a learned work.
TRA TANNA ANIAR '
SETZE RTT |
E qur puaa eu
WE qe fqq wea WU d c N
Stanza 8.—If the work suffers in its travel and
copyings, the reader must set the errors right by
referring.them to the.rinost learned. They must
- also correct any errors, which'I may have committed, “by my negligence, or by misapprehension
of the originals without envy or mean jealousy.
mU State Museum, Lucknow.
P

ə
Ch. XXVIII, St. 9] AUTHOR'S HUMILITY , 611
U C
NOTES œ
As time advances, good works in manuscript, as well as
printed ones suffer a great deal at the hands of the ignorant
copyists and the careless, conceited and ignorant printers.
Itisalso possible to think that the author in his anxiety
to be concise and short, may not have paid as much attention to the sketching of the detatls as was necessary or he:
may have misapprehended some ideas put forth in the sutra.
form by the renowned Maharishis Varahamihira, therefore, ebegs his readers and the learned men into whose hands
these works may fall, to put away envy and mean jealousy
.[we may alst» mention staunch bigotry so abnormally prevailing among literary men and correct any errors which may
kave crept into his books from the various sources enumerated above. His work will sharpen their intellects and
they will be benefited by reading what he has so well said.
2000 ARATTA:
efie ATMA: |
TATA FAT ATE REATHT TEAR SAT TAT IESU
Stanza 9.—Varahamihira, the son of Aditya
Dasa, who imbibed his knowledge from his father,
blessed with the grace of the Sun in all branches |
of knowledge, born in Kapitha, a ‘town ip, the.
country of ‘Avantica, having carefully read/all the °
extant literature of the Maharishi$, Composed this
^ s o
excellent, work. ° UP State Museum, Lucknow E
eiecit. * de
a a
5 LI

612 CC-O. In Public BRIBAT JATAKA "Ies YAN, St. 9
NOTES s
e
A learned and holy Brahmin called Aditya Dasa lived
in Kapitha, a villagein the country of Avantica [Ujjini] or
Malva and Varahamihira was his renowned “son. The
author seems to have been carefully educated by the father
as he says that he was instructed by his father in the principles of astrology. °Varahamihira appears to have been
a great worshipper of the Sun [Savitru], and declares that
he obtained all his knowledge and capacity from tbe grace,
the Sun was pleased to bestow upon him, for he distinctly
uses the expression. Savitru Labdha Vara Prasada or the gift
of the knowledge from the glorious Sun himself?" This must.
have been the result of ardent devotion and deép contemplation upon the most glorious light which creates, pròtects and destroys the worlds and which embodies the three
characteristics of Brahma, Vishnu, and Maheswara and
which is the representation of all terrestrial<and celestial
knowledge. The father was a ver ry learned Brahmin as
declared by Varahamihira himself. We have seen the capa.
bilities and genius of the author and the high proficiency
he has exhibited in his valuable works and corroborated
E
and commentated by no less a scholar than Bhattotpala *
Varahamihira's son, Prithuyasas (greatly known) is tbe
author of Shatpanchashat, one of the finest works in 56 stanzas. We have on Prasna sastra (horary) his work known as
rcd and I have translated^ his * Chappanna '
* Shatpanchasat °. Thus for three generatians father,
*son and grandson, this Brahmin family maintained a high
order oríntelligence and genius aud in jataka and prasna,
the father and gon’ ‘yield to none in capacity, Brevity or
clearness i In exposition. e
a UP State Museum, Lucknow, e
e (s mu
e e

Ch. XVn S9 main CONCLUSION Trust and eGangotri GU
LIANG
Rana
MATTE THIS pigra: | go di
"Stanza 10.—This work was composed by me
after my intellect was elevated by, my prostrating
upon the feet of the Sun, Maharishis and my
preceptor. I bow in reverence to the Purvacharyas or ancient preceptors. i
2 NOTES "
Among all great Sanskrit writers, Mangala (or blissful
. invocation*to Gods and Preceptors) or invocation must be
used eithtr in the commencement, in the middle or in the
end of their works. ' Some of the authors use this Mangala
thrice, viz., in the commencement, middle and end. Jn the
first stanza he invokes the grace of the Sun and in the
middle, he-eften names Maharishis which is considered to be
a Mangala and in the end he invokés their help and blessings. Varahamihira thinks [rightly] that his mind has become pure and elevated by the blessings of the Sun, Maharishis and those of his Preceptor [Guru] Aditya Dasa (his
father). By referring to the Sun all other planets, constellations, and zodiacal divisions are implied and by using
Maharishis, the greatest intellectual giants of this land,
Vasishta, Bharadwaja, Vyasa, Gargi, Atri and others are included, and by referring to Guru, he includes all preceptors
including, his father who may have instructed him in this as
well as in other branches of learning. WithXhese invocations
the learned Varahamilira concludes his ana Aa
Bhattotpala thus brings his pricelefs tommenthifes to a
. conclusion. He observes : sf Varahamihira’s works BISON.
e A
te Museum, Lucknow
a a
a

e
614 BRIHAT JATAKA [Ch. XXVIII, St. 10
a great ocean of knowledge. Utpala has written theecorimentaries called Vivriti (Chintamani) and those who desire
to possess treasures (real intellectual truths) can use this as
a boat to cross the ocean of knowledge to secure them.
This commentary is called Chintamani (the heavenly gem
which grants all ‘mental desires) and it will be highly
endearing to all learned men. .
His commentary contains 7,500 Anustup verses. An
Anustup stanza generally contains 32 letters and is prominently used by all great writers. Bhattotpala says, '' Don’t
accept this commentary out of any love to me or reject it
out of envy in you. Take al] that is useful in nfj c commen- ,
taries. Please try and find out those errors which fave been
neglected by me, which have been stated by me in con
sistency with high intelligence, and which have been
explained by me against the real meaning of the
original texts. This commentary was corspleted s by
me in the saka year 888° on a (Guruvasara) Thursday, on
' Panchami the 5th lunar day of the bright half of the lunar
month Chaitra. Let the Sun who represents the essence of
the Thrimurties,—Brahma, Vishnu and Iswara—be pleased
with the merit I have obtained by writing these commentaries to this sastra". Here Bhattotpala gives Vaswaswatamithay Sakay, 888 saka year as the time at which he
completed his commentaries. There may be some doubt
raised about the meaning of the word sake (Era) as it may
refer to Vikrama or Salivahara. Varahamihira algo simply
uses the} word saké in his Brihat Samhita (See Ch. XIII, St.3)
‘put that ‘refers to, Yudhistira saka/oy adding 2536 years
to the pzejent sak? p-evailing in his time. About the age
and time of Bhattotpaia see note on the chapter on Bhattot-
€ UP State Museum, Lucknow p
e c e e ©
e (a € r

«œ? Sun and whose d
Ch. SORE Fut pmo an fr Sem E ae
e E
pala 6f this work and my arficle in The Astrologiccl Magazine, Pp.*133 of Vol. X of 1908 A.D. It is clearly proved by
references that he means Vikramasaka, as his illustrious
Successor Bhaskaracharya after 180 years also names Nripasaka or*Vfzramasaka. (See also Stanza 20, Ch. VIII, Brihat
Samhita.) Here he clearly explains that saka refers to the
era or period, when the Mlechas or Sakas were completely
conquered by the illustrious Emperot Vikramaditya. The
famous Kalidasa, one of the nine literary gems who flourished n that Emperor's court, gifes clear details of the
conquest of these sakas in his Jyotirvidabharana a work of
great merit on Muhurtha and says that the 14th year of the
“reign of Yikramaditya was mdtked by the complete defeat
of the 55 lacs of troops brought byethe sakas and this grand
event, which saved India for some time from the foreign
yoke, was marked by institution of the Vikramasaka Era
Which now counts as 2004 (1948). d
p
tz These valuable translations and notes on one of the
greatest works in astrology, were finished by me, viz.,
Bangalore Suryanarayana Rao, on Friday the 11th day of
the bright half of the lunar month Jyeshta in the constellation, Chitta on the 1st June 1917, A.D. at 15 m. after 10
o’clock in the morning at my own residence in Hunsamaranahalli near Bangalore in S. India and the following
is the diagram for the time which may be perused for
interest and guidance for fixing the age to which my humble
labours vould remain as useftil and be appreciated by the
educated public of all times and nations. Doffer these,notes.
with my most humble r€spects to that final Pula and ^
infinite Wisdom whose visible manifest@ticn is thel glorious
ivine energy alone cap give capacity
a - UP State pase Lucknow y E
^ ia a

616 AT VYRTARA [Ch. XXVIII, St. 10
CC-O. In Public BRIM} igitized by Sarayu Trust and eGangotr i
and life for writers to finish their works whether, originals
or commentaries. |
The astrological diagram for the time at | |
which I, Bangalore Suryanarayana Rao, finished M
the notes on Brihat Jataka of Varahamihira with — '^
the help of the invaluable commentaries of. Bhat- 5 |
totpala is given here for reference and study.
Vikrama Saka 1974
Salivahana Saka 1839 z
Cyclic year Pingala - |
Solar month Vrishabha 16th day
Lunar month Jyeshta om E a
llth day of the bright half, , (e
Christian Era 1st June 1917 :
Friday, in the consteHation Chitta (14th) at 15’, after
10o'clock in the morning or about 12-30 ghatis after sunrise.
Kuja | Ravi Sukra
Budha | Guru | Kethu
RASI Sani |
Diagram for t A |
— ——7| the time at NEV MSA; |
which I finished 8 i
the notes
AN
As*,the cofistellation Chitta rifled at the time, the E
period | offMars fules and there is a”balance of 5 years, 11. 4
months z 3 ahd 221 days, The lord of the lagna (ascendant) —
is the Sun and he ded. «hs d th house po d benefic -+ ^ V
a e

-labour and research will have a bright future,
Ch. XXVMI, St l0] "CONCLUSION
Gur& who owns the 5th. *The lord of the 12th or Vraya
occupies*the 2nd and is aspected by Guru and Sani. Sukra
lord of 3rd and 10th is in the llth with Kethu. The lords
of Lakha [gains] and Bhagya [9th indicating wealth] Budha
and Kujæ are in the 9th, and the 10th or Karyasthana is
hemmed in by two benefics Sukra and Budha in the 2nd
and 12th houses respectively. Besides,
the 9th, 10th and 11th houses from |
Budha, Ravi and Guru and Sukra and Kethu, is good and
anticipate that these notes of mine written after much
the occupation of
agna by Kuja and
will bea
source of instruction and pleasure to Students, will live
'.long imthe literary world amd will enlighten the learned.
Readers might calculate the Ayusdaya of the child born at
“this time. Guru as lord of 8 being in 10, and also as lord of
5 is not likely to kill, Sani ¢hough lord of 7 and in the
‘12th, is in the labha bhava. Except the Moon 4s lord of
12jh, ant in the 2nd aspected by Sani in rasi and combined
With him in amsa, others will not make the work forgotten. F
It means that it will live for more than 110 years and by.
that time probably, the English language would have gone
out of India and not understood as widely as itis now.
The prejudices created by foreign nations about these
vahiable Aryan sciences and arts will and must disappear in
the destructive folds of all powerful time, and there will be
a time when the Aryan sciences, Aryan literature and Aryan
genius will appear in their true grandeur and utility.
«m R a
May God be pikased with my humble labogrs in the
field of astrology has always been my, sarnes | to
Him, who is the fountain head of „all mercy,\ devotion,
faith, energy, prStoctinneandefinal rasituee. een
9 ey Q
a
a D

D
j
MY GENEALOGY* i
Ibelong to the Mulakanadu Andhra section of the
Brahmin Community, and descended from the stock ‘of the
venerable Vasishta and claim that Gotra. Twelve generations ago my ancestors resided in Walaja Nagar, under the
patronage ofthe Nawabs of Arcot and the neighbouring
Polagars and they had distinguished themselves by performing sacrifices or Yagnas, by simple and holy lives and
by the religious fervour of their exemplary and virtyous
lives. My family records give me the following names of'
my ancestors :— " c i
1. Sarana Varjhulu .. Had performed Yggnas or'
sacrifices.
2. Konda Varjhulu m 1 Do. i
3. Naga Varjhulu ep Do.
4. Mailava Dhanlu .. Religious and holy Brahmins.
5. Malla Bhatlu sd Down e e
6. Lingappagaru `... Devoted themselves to public and
private business and service. :
7. Venkatappagaru um Do.
8. Venkatagiriappagaru ... Do.
9. Parayyagaru E
10. Venkataramaniahgaru
This was my grandfather who was born in 1747 AD.
and died in 1828 A.D. having lived 81 years. He married
first Narasamma and had two sons by her. | After her death `
, he married Naranamma when, he was nearly 60 years. He
commanded*500 horse and suitable corps of infantry under
Hyder abd T ipp and changing his;life into civil, he was
G Prof Rao haggiv*n a summar i is li
: | Ra e y here while his life Ka
fully given i4 his ey a summary of which m ed
in Januafy 1947 issue of TRE ASTROLOGICAL MAGAZINE
€ UP State Museum, Lucknow e e
[3 e C ve e^
E
e
A
a

e
CC-O: p Public PRAM REL Pope Trust and eGangotri £i
að Amildar and became Peshkar of Kikkeri, Channarayapatna ar Devanhalli, in which last place Hyder first made
his political entry. My grandfather had two daughters and
five sons by his second wife and my father Gopala Rao was
the thizd spn and the most lucky among the lot. My father
was born on the 17th July 1816 on Friday, the 10th lunar
day of the dark half of the month Ashadha, at about
15 ghatis after sunrise when the Constellation Bharani ruled
with the dasa of Venus. He was only 12 years when hi$
father died and had to educate hirtself, as best as he could.
He Was of slender build, energetic, Strong and extremely
active in work which I have inherited from him to a large
- extent. ~My mother Rukmimiamma was an intelligent,
quiet going and very handsome woman and she died when
I was about 10 years old. *My father could read and speak
about ten languages and filled various posts in the Ganjam
District and became Manager or Dewan of Pariakimidi
Zamjndarft He was an expert in Mantra Sastras, and
deus religious and obliging. He would never flinch from
doing an obligation and brought me up with great care and
love. The following is his horoscope:
e
Rahu | Budha
Chandra

BRIHAT JATAKA A
Mark the positions of planets in all the kendraso lik
addition to his onerous duties, he completed® the gigantic task of completing with his own hand, one crore
and twenty-five lakhs of Rama Namas or names of Sri
Rama and concluded the religious rites connected with
them four months before his death. He died in his
76th year on the morning of 27th August 1891 and was
therefore 75 years and- 40 days according to English
calculations. My mother bore six children, four daughters
and two sons, and I ata the second. My elder brother
Jagannatha Rao entered Mysore Service retired as an Amil-.
dar and died in December 1915. I was born on 1 the Rathasaptami, Tuesday, in the month of Magha in Rakshasa, -
at about 14 ghatis after sunrise at Chicacole and the following is my horoscope :—
A AT
-Moon | »; Birth
Rahu Birth | Saturn Jupiter Rai
Mercury "
Jupiter
Sun
erm RASI ~~ NAVAMSA
n $ Sun
Venus Ketha Mercury] Kethu Menus, Moon
Mars
An incident occurred in my fifth year' which has influenced all my-life to a remarkable extent. My dirstAkshara_vhyasz, ; ;gducaticn, began at Parlakimidi in my fifth year
‘and I slep: that Right with my fathe*. I dreamt that I was
taken t6 Suryaloki to the presence of the Sun, made to sit
on his lap, and given some P ayasam (wheat preparation)
2 e UP State Museum, Lucknows:
A Ce ae e + ?
et ;
ad

D
CC-O. Ih Public DAMA TURANGGA NXEROET p 621
$y his wife Chayadevi ard after a a greal ideal of love,
the Sun*putting his hands on my head, observed that I
would live long, be happy and become a great scholar and
author. I awoke and related my dream to my father,
who Hadealready anticipated some ideas of my future greatness. In my boyish days I was extrefnely intelligent, and
possessed an excellent memory coupled with a piercing
intellect. But as it often happens’ with intelligent boys,
I was irregular in attendance at school, careless of my
studies, fond of running and otlfer athletic exercises and
. was mischievous toa considerable extent. All the while
I felt I would become a great man, and even challenged my
* . teachezs, With thisidea. Waile I was in the Senior B.A.
class in the Central College at Bangalore, Mr. Cook, M.A.,
"its Principal rebuked me for'my want of attention to studies and for not writing notes which he gave very copiously.
'I was ready with my impertinent answer. I observed ina
delermitíéa tone that copying notes forms the part of dull-
“leaded students and superficial teachers and that bright |
students like myself need no such process. He remarked
that he was a student and amanuensis of Dr. Bains of
Psychological fame and that Lshould obey him. I told him
that I would become a greater man than both of them with
the’result that I was turned out of the class for a day. Mr.
Cook was a generous Scotch gentleman. He sent for me
next day, and asked me whether my behaviour was right.
I said that his treatment of students should be different, |
as the intelfigent and spirited vould nof beat calmly, remarks which dull bos may consider as otheis jfbéritance.
When? I met him after publishingg same of jar works,
specially History of Vijayanagar, fie had the ‘nobility to
A g 5 9, UP do Museum, Luckgow : s

622 CC-O. In Public BREA Ani AAS Au Trust and Scangotri
address me asa greater man than himself while I moéestly
acknowledged his valuable instructions as the basis for all
my scholarship in English. I was intended to take the legal
line and accordingly finished my legal studies and practised
for about 9 years. My astrological instincts wereStifred up
by a Sastri while I was in the F.A. class and I picked up
my knowledge in it by reading books on the subject in Sanskrit. I had no high opinion for English astrological publications and never cared to them. My first work in Astrology*
in a diglot form (English and Kannada) appeared in 1882,
and it sold well. My collegiate studies gave me no leisure’
to attend to astrological studies and my Self-Instructor in
English appeared in 1892. The second edition in 1223 and. '
third in 1900, the interval being taken up by my legal practice, 4th, 5th and 6th editions followed and the 7th is in
print. Soon after my birth *an Ooriya Astrologer by name
Brahma ‘predicted my future greatness. I feel I am under
the direct grace of the glorious Sun at every important torn
. In my life and his presence in the 10th house along with
Budha and Guru has enabled me to hold the view that I am
destined to become a great man and write valuable works
on a variety of subjects. I married first my maternal uncle's
daughter by name Bhagirathi and she bore 10 children of
whom four died early in life. I have now 6 children “by
her, 3 sons and 3 daughters and after her death I married
again Subbi. She has one daughter now and I am leading
. a quite honourable and religious life. My second son
Lakshminare; yana Rao is a graduate of Philosophy ard
Logic ard has eni ‘ered the Mysore Edicational Service. My
E rad Sodoma under the name, of Compendium of
CORRER, prion
useutm "Lucknow". c
r mel
e
e

CC-O. Ih Public. NER QUUSa PNSFAN OFS and eGangotri 623
dest son Nanjunda jRao*assists me in my office work.
(B. V.eRaman in his eldest son.) Ihave now 4 grands
sons and 6 grand-daughters. God has been pleased to
place me above want, and though my earnings are great,
my empegses have not been small. I possess generous
instincts and always take delight in helping others who are
in need. Iam an admirer of all talent in any form in any
man and my company is always pleasant and instructive.
I possess powers of speech and writing fluently in almost
equal degrees and my familiarity with various Western and
,Bast£rn sciences, gives me a decided advantage to lead the
people wherever I may be. I ama great lover of music and
. fine arts, “hd my residence js generally kept in a very
fashionable manner., My house is open to all classes alike
and I have never withheld my help in any charitable cause
when they sought my help. jJ have had audience with
Viceroys, Maharaja's and Governors and all of them were
pleased wit2 my behaviour, spirit of independence, and
wis in conversation and discussion. I have had
suitable Khillats or presents from many Maharajas and the
national predictions I have made about wars, famines,
deaths of royal personages, epidemics, and other pheno-
^ mena, have been remarkably" fulfilled. My prediction
about the present great Anglo-German war, six months
before it happened, in my Astrological Magazine has raised
my'reputation high and my works and lectures have always
been appreciated and recognised by the educated public.
Iam nowsin my Guru Dasa arfd Sukra Bhukthi and hope to
pull through it and a portion of Sani, throhgh Go jS-Bracet
I have been leading a tNigious life in this age of fise allurements, Of false civilisation and have felt song in my
innermost heart ‘that God protects all thgse who’ éntirely
=, UP State Museum, Lucknow
TS ? ^ PA ^ kJ zs
a
a
a

624 BRIHAT JATAKA
place their confidence in Him aad my own independer* lize
isa great illustration of that great principle which lays
down complete devotion to God and honest and sincere life
under His able and Omnipotent guidance. May He shower
His blessings on all-and make the world happy and cheerful
have been my earnest daily prayers.
[THE END| ,
“UP State Museum, Lucknow ,—
^h

a
A
Aajivaka 388
Aaya 60, 71
Abhaya 466
Abhischa 466
Abja 336
Acharya 85, 241
Adhama 25%, 36]
Adhama Prabhaya 480
Adhidevata 79 3
Adhimitra 101
Adhischa 466
Adhisatru 101
Adityadasa 17, 611
' Adrigya 187; 377
AMvaita 85
Agamyya 509
Agni 79
Agu 76
Agnya 63, 71
: Ahas 33
Ahoratri 34
Akasa 30, 274
Akokero 46
Akruti 332
Alexander 223 5
Amarakosha 76
*. Armegras 209 a
^ Amarasimha 583
Amavasya 81
Ambara 470
~ 7Amsa 43
INDEX
a
a
N
A
Amsa Ayurdaya 238
Andaja 336, 463
Angaja 138
Angira 76
Angula 567
Anishta 251
Ankura 138
ə Antardasas 295
Antardasadhipathi 257
Artardasanatha 256
Anthya 46, 447
Anthyabha 48
Anthyajas 83
Anupachaya 119
Anuradha 36, 398
Anushtap 19
Apachayas 60
Aparadha 196 *
Apavadha 606
Apavidha 480
Api 519
Aquarius 37
Ara 76
Ardha 94
Ardha Chandra 346, 357
Ardha Drik 491
Asidra 36, 398 ^^
Aries 37 4
Arishta 206° ° “4
Arishtaqhyaya 25, 179
Arishtaphala 249
Arishta Yogas 206
a UPaState Museum, Lucknow
ay
N
NEL Ma

626 i ,, p JNDEX info
Arjava 85 e
Arjuna 481
Arka 295
Arkaja 124
Arohani Dasa 250
Arthapatuhu 400
Asana 594 6
Ashadha 92, 562
Ashta 105
Ashtadosha 202
Ashtakavarga 22, 279
Ashtamurthies 29
Asita 76
Asitirvataja Rogas 497
Aslesha 37, 398
Asnapanyam 383
Aspect 66, 93
Aspujit 76
Asraya Yoga 332
Astarasi 121
Asti 138
Asubhas 252, 492
Asubhasahitay 202
Asura 76
Aswija 92, 562
Aswini 35, 398
Aswini Devatas 481
Atala 31
Athar Veda 92
Ati Bhiru 401
Atikarmakrit 518
Atimriduhu 518
Atma 29, 73
Atma Vidam 30
Atma Vidya 29
Atri49 -°
. Atrius 49 f
Apoklimas 65, 70
Aurase 4 50 ais
Avanay: 76 T
Avantika 17 a
UP State Museum, Bhpjaga pun
? Avarohi 250 eX
Ayana 93 e
Ayanamsa 317
Ayurdhayadhyaya 21, 209
Ayurvedic 241 ze
Badarayana 32
Bahula 542
Bala 101
Balakanda 471
Balarishta 21, 195
Bandhu 60, 71
Bhachakra 196 : é
Bhadrapada 92, 562 j Hl
Bhadrasana 594
Bhagas 36, 45
Bhagavad Gita 85
Bhagya 319 . A
Bhakti 85 ir E
Bhanam 64 Ss
Bharadwaja Samhita 194
Bharani 36, 396
Bharthru Karaka 514
Bhaskaracharya 615
Bhatta 68 :
Bhattotpala 17 is
Bhava 63, 71, 439 ki
Bhavadhipathi 450
Bhavadbyaya 439 z
Bhavana,36, 41 o
Bhavartha Ratnakara 95
Bhima 481 » ©
Bhogya 463
Bbéuthika Kalanidhi 74
Bhrigu 76
Bhrigu Suta 76
c x e

Oo 4
CC-O. Ih Public Domain. Did WA BXSarayu Trust and eGangotri 627 5
Bhubka 31
Bhumiputra 215
Bhuvarloka 31
Bibliotheca Indica 17
Bikshu 385
Binduya3,
Bodhana 76
Brahma 30, 32, 84
Brahma Gupta 68
Brahmananda 262
Brahma Sutras 343
Brahmins 47
Brihaspatiananda 263
-Brihat Jataka 17
Brihat Samhita 18
Brihat Vivahapatalam 453
` -Brihat Yatra 453
A
72 e Chandramana 554
3 R =“, UP State Museum, Luckpow,
Bud Bodhana 140
Budbudaksha 149
Buddha 324
Budha 95
Budhi Tl
ot
Cancer 37
Cape Comorin 320
Capricorn 37
Cha 106
Chaitra 92, 561
Chakrapatha 226,
Chakrasandhis 486
Champak& 117
Chandra 41 °
Chandrabalé 606
Chandragupta 223
‘Chandrama 76
e
LJ
Candrgshtaka Varga 286
Chandra Yoga 23, 261
Chanikya 32, 223
Chapa 346, 357
Chara 58
Charaka 18, 139
Charakamuni 482
Charma 138
Chashakas 66
Chathurtha 64
Chathuspada 67
Chatra 346, 357
Chaturasra 63, 70
Chaturvikalpaja 333
Chatuscharana 463
s Chatustaya 64, 70
Chaya 274
Chayangula 566
Cheshaka 559 ;
, Chesta 101 g
Chesta Bala 104
Chetanata 138
Chidambara Iyer 48
Chidra Dasa 328
Chintamani 614
Chitta 36, 398
Chivara 587
Cliba 134
* Cochin 453
Constellations 36, 46
Czar 329
D
° Dahana 543 *.
Dakshinachara 208 .
Dakshinayana 194 556
Dala Yoga 332 à,
Dama 34 3
Damini 33

628 r . INDEX ir
anas 568 * Dukula Gupta 589 « %
peras 345, 356, 567 Dulkila Hasy 589: |
Dara 71 Durbhaga
Dasa 57, 228 Durga Pujas 208
Dasama 57 Durgas 500 n."
Dasantardasa 20, 242 Duryodana 489 wot
Dasanatha 245 - Duschilkya 66
Dasa Vipaka 604 Dusthanas 341 3
Dasiprabhava 480 Dviswabhava 58
Datta 480 Bed Dwadasamsas 41
Daya 85 Dwadasi 558
Debilitation 39, 55 s Dwapara 553
Desa 567 Dwigraha Yoga 23, 380
Devagandharva 262 Dwipada 67
Devakirti 72 Dwivikalpaja 333
Devala 197 . Dyuna 63 A
Devaloka 545 va d
Devananda 262 n : ‘lo
Devastana 90 | E
Devaswami 223 P
Devatas 30, 81 Ekavikalpaja 333
Dhairya 260 Ekruta 141
Dhani 400 Y Even Signs 46 ^ ` ‘
Dhanista 36, 399 Exaltation 55 Nes
Dhanus 37
Dharma 75 ¢
Dhatus 74 G
Dhuradhura 230, 366, 374
Digbala 102, 108 -j Gada 337, 355 D
Dik 101 Gajagarbham 155 ,
Diksha 390 Gajakesari 320 :
Dikshitar 233 Gandantha 485
Dinabala 51 Gandharva 383 .
Dirgharasis 67 Gandhaynkti 18 f
Divyadrishti 130 Gangadhara 404
^ Drekkana 25, 46, 52, 580. ^ Ganithaskanda 67 a
-Drekkanadhipafais 55 Gargi 32 i
e Drishti 24; 4270 Gazuda 207 °
Drisya 3/7 Gemini 37 :
Drisya Ç hakram Bi, Ghana 138
Prusya p Eu € UP State Museum, Big papaties 261,
Va e 6 ec e

CC-O. In Public Domain. pi UD. sarayu Trust and eGangotri 620
attes 35 2 er
Chatika 66 PARU
Gno 74, 76 Hemanta 91
Gnya 388 Hemno 76
Gochara 22, 204, 280 Hercules 49
Gola 3599358 Hibuka 65, 70
Golaka 336 Hindu 35
Gomukhasana 594 Homa 208
Gopurarashita 395 Hora 52
Grahadatta 239 Hord‘Sastra 17, 33
Grahakarma 607 Horologue 33° 9
Grahasiddhi 606 Hraswa 67
Grahgyagna 607 Hrid 48, 460
Graha Yoni Bhedadhyaya Hridaya 48
19, 73 Hridroga 46, 48
Grantha | Semuchaya 453 , Hyder 319
Gridhra 597
Griha 63, 35 ? e
Grishma 91 ° I
Gudhotpanna 480 Ijya 76 D
Guhyaka 607 Ina 388
Guyas 857 ^ Indra 79
Geni 427 Indrananda 262
Guru 41, 63, 71, 388 Indrani 79
Guruashtaka Varga 288 Indu 295
Gurumangala 320 Induputra 76
Guruna 130 „Ishu 345
Guruvasara 614 “Ista 252
^ Iswara 390
27 Ivan 49
H
Hari 27 Ja ^
Hexija 17P œ 4 aimini 3
Harikulas 49° o Jyeshta 36 2, 398 Gae
Hasta 36, 397,567 A Jala 543 ? sf
Hasta Samudrika 402 Jalana a-Rasis 64) o
na 208 alam 5
M Q UP State Museum, Luckgove
e So N
o

630 INDEX
itra 65, 71 * Kanina 480 e 9 A
mae 395 E Kantaka 64, 70 e 4
Janamejaya 47 Kanya 37, 506
Janmakala Lakshana 20,160 Kapalasana 594
Janmadhipathi 476 Kapalika 390 |
Janmasa 392 Kapitha 17, bll T
Janma Vidhi 604 . Karaka 24, 469 f
Janoloka 31 Karavirya 395 1 J
Jataka 612 Karma 35, 65, 71 |
Jataka Chandrika 235- - ^ Karmadevananda 262
Jataka Parijata 601 Karmajeeva 22, 294
Jeevasarma 187 f Karmesa 298
Jina 395 Karna 482 1
Jitheema 46 Karthika 92, 562 f
Jiva 76 Kashmir 395
Jovian 130 Kasiraja 395 ^
Juka 46 ^ Kasyapa 32, 343 ~
Jupiter 24 : Kataka 37 ele
Jyotishas 29 - Katakamsa 58 :
Jyothirvidabharana 615 | Kaychit 53
Kedara 349, 357
Kemadruma 230, 366
e
K Kendra 64, 76 > <
. Kendrasitakarey 367 bod
Kaha 82 Kern, Dr. 17
Kala 101, 213 Kesava 79
Kalabala 106 Kethu 57
Kalala 138 Kha 64
Kalanga Vibhaga 193 H Khaga 581
Kalapurusha 35, 73 Khala 375
Kalasarpa 351 Khanda 362, 567
Kalatma 74 Khedda 298
Kali 380 Kinnaras 591 G
Kalidasa 352 Kita Ragis 64
Kaliyuga 47 Kokkokam 122
> Kamala 340 p Kogha 141 ‘ 7
« Kama Ñutzas 122 EID 46 °
Kambal/im 587 . " ripalu 400 e
Kanada 394 » Mrishine ina 587
.Kancháaa 591 _ ita 553
2 7 , UP State Museum, EE 7 z
e c e t e e?
Cec [2

o
CC-O* Ig Public Domain. Ditto Sarayu Trust and eGangotri
Kriya 46, 48.
Krosa 567
Krura 42
Kruradt4e76
Kshana 93
Kshapakara 388
| Kshata 63, 71
| Kshatriyas 83
| Kshetra 35
Kshetraja 480
| Kshing Chandra 204
Kshinandvina 535
Kuja d *
Kujashtaka Varga 286
'*|* Kukkutasana 594 .
- Kulachalas 74
Kulira 46
Kumara 37
: Kumbha 37
* Kumb hapányàm 383
Kæübu 269
Kundali 166
7 Kunti 383
Kurus 47, 489
^ Kutapanyam 383
Kutumba 60, 71
A fein 480
: ritrima 480
à L 5
Laghu Jatdka 18
Laghu Yatra 453
~ Jh agna Bheda 606
nadhipathi 4769
hacen
* Laghu Vivahapatalam 453
«e, UP State Museum, TUM
Lagna Mischaya 606
Lagna Pramana 560
Lagna Sputa 559
Lakha 323
Lakshana 193
Lakshmi 30
* Leo 37
Libra 37
LilavAti 567
Liptas 556 p
Lokas 29, 546
M
o
Madhava Nidhana 528
Madhyadasa 250
Madhyagata 529
Madhyama 252
Madri 481 D
Magadha 223
Magha 92, 561
Mahabharata 34, 47
Mahabhoota 83
Mahaloka 31
Maharishi 32
Mahatala 31
"Mahaya 388
Mahayuga 553
Maheswara 30
Mahodara 141
Majja 141
Makara 37
„Makha 36, 397
“Mala 335 *e
Malefics 164 4 Ex
Malina 375° ° °
Mana PE e
Manas,.07, 242
Manat Kargka 336 D
` Sy

Manda 76
Mandala 567
Mandala Sankhya 236
Mandavya 32, 199
Mangala 613
Mangolia 595
Manitha 49
Mantras 92, 261
Mantrayamila 208
Manusha Gandharva 22
Marana 30, 60, 71
Margasira 92, 561
Marichi 343
Mars 24
Martya 31
Masa 94
Masadhipathi 107
Masaka 193
Matam 96
Matas 576
Mathadhipathi 387
Matras 452
Mauryan Dynasty 223 _
Maya 32, 49
Mayurasana 594
Meena 37
Mercury 24
Mesha 35
Meshurana 65, 70
Milton 359
Mimamsa 26
Misra 543
Misraphala 251
Mithila 395
Mithuna 37
Mitra 101 c"
»Mlechha 49
Moksh 292 ^ ~-
Mooladi3384 =
Moolatbrikonas. 59
, UP State Museum,
ORA
Pa &
INDEX
^ Moon 24 `
Mrigasira 36, 396 -
Mrityu 124, 538
Mrityunjaya Japa 208
Mudra Rakshasa 223
Muhurtha 606 <”
Munis 206
Musala 333, 352
Mushti 567
Mutt 387
N
Nabhasa Yoga 23, 332
Nakha 259 ~~
Nakshatra 36
Nakshatra Chudamani 400
»Nakshatra Padams 153
Nakula 481
Napumsaka Yogas 134
Naraka 545
Nara Rasis 64
Narasimha 389
Nasa 460
Nastajataka Adhyaya 549
Navama 66
Navamsa 41, 42
Navamsa Kundali 312
Nava Nandas 223
Neecha 175
Neecha Bhanga 23
Neutral 96
Nicha 375
Nicholas 329.
Nigeda 500
Nigantus 46
Nipiditha 129 ^
Nirgama 607
lirgantba 388
oy
my
a

CC-O. ih Public Domain. Digif«qs BwSarayu Trust and eGangotri
Qiriyana 169
iryanddhyaya 25, 524
Nisargayu 239
Nisargika 99, 253
Nisargikabala 244
Nisha la 604
Nisheka 20, 119
Nrachare 509
Nrimanya 428
Nripadhya 428
Nripasaka 615
Js a
"Odd Signs 46
Oobhayodaya 51 °
Ooccha 57
Oopachayas 61
Oopasamharadhyaya 25
Oogareygna 104, 549
Ooftama 58
Gupadhenava 395
Ourabhra 395
Padams 35
Padma 355
Padmasana 594
Paithamaha 3425
Pakaswami 256
Peksha 154 ?
Pakshi Drekkana Migo
Pandawas 383
Pandit 430
Pandu 383
Pandus 47
Papyams 383
Papa 81
Papadhiyoga 364
Papakarma 525
Taraphaya 106
Brahma 30, 85
Parakiya 450
Parakrama 72
Parama Neecha 56
Paramocha 56
Parardha 197
Parasara 32, 47
Parmayus 574
Rarivartana Yoga 299
Parivesha 502
a Parvati 30
Pasabrit 501
Pasu Rasis 64
Patala 31
Patanthara 447
Pathitha 160
Pathona 46
a Patni 60
“ Penangaha 405
Phalabhaga 429
Phalam 243
Phalasa 586
Phalguna 92, 561
Pindayurdaya 239.
2 Pingala 88
anchavigalpais 832. Museum
sPisces 37 s
Pitrulokaã547 ; °
pissed 29
Pitta ^c
Plava oy NG
EUM " V :
4 MU H
S

Poorna Chandra 111Poornadasa 249
Poorvabhaga 197
Poorvashadha 36, 398
Poulasa 342
Pounarbhava 480
Pournima 561 ^
Poushkalavata 395
Prabhakari 388
Prajapatiananda 263 “ae ^
Prakeernadhyaya 24, 468
Prakrit 390 M
Prakriti 85
Prasava 140
Prasna 565
Prasna Kala 153
Prasna Lagna 123
Prasna Prabheda 606
Prathama 558
Prathama Horadhipathi
Pravrajya Yoga 24, 388
Prithuyasus 600
Prushta 51, 177
^ Prushtodayas 50
Pubba 36, 361
Pujita 252
Pulisa 32
Pulisacharya 105
Pumsavanam 139
Punarbhu 383
Punarvasu 36, 397
Puranas 343
Purana Yavanas 254
Purohit 34
^ Purusha Lakshana 552
Purvabhadra 36, /399
"Purvamireazisa 22
Pushya 92?561 ^.
Pushyami36 "da.
Pntra 60j 71
E
CC-O. In Public Domain. ARER, Sarayu Trust and eGangotri
^. UP State Mesa ^ p VT
et ^
Q by
Quandrants 66 -
Ragi 269
Rahu 56, 76
Raja 318
Rajabhanga 23
Rajas 73
Rajasa 83
Rajastan 49
Rakshapathi 42] uR”
P.akshasapathi 421 1
Rakshasas 86
Rama Nadi 454
Rama, Sri 34 ,
Ramayana 471° "^ Š :
Randhra 60, 71
Rasa 275
Rasatala 31 ~
Rasis 24
Rasisila 24, 385, 409
Rasyamsa 498 .
Ratri 33
Ratribala 50
Rau's, Mr. 349
Ravi 41 (2
Ravija 508 :
Ravina 130
Revati 36, 399. ^ a
Rig Veda 31, 92 b
Rikshasandhi45 o
Rikshaseeladhyaya 24, 396"
e

CC-O. IÀ Public Domain. Digit fysSarayu Trust and eGangotri 635
Rohini 36, 396
wy Romaka 32
Rom3Nez342
^ Rudra 30
Ruthu 92, 550
-Sabritya 374
Sachi 82
—Sadhu 30, 466
"Sagittarius 37
j o Sahadeva 481 .
= Sahaja 66, 71 .
^ Sahasra Kirana 31
*. Sahodha 480
. gahotha 60
^, Saiba 267 °
Sakata 337, 355
- Sakas 92
Sakti 345, 356
Saktipura 210
Saktirekha 402
» Sakuna 607
Sakya 388
Salivahana Saka 68
Salmali 587
Samagama 105 ,
Sama Mitra 101
. Samaved$31,92 `
^ Samgnyadhydya 70 »
, amhita 233% 608 DN
4 ankhya Yoga 332
2 Samprayagikam 122
we
E iv: Q )
E 3 re.
“ge
dvina 535.) |
mpurna 250 xJ UR State Museu DARA ^
\ Ss
Samudra 348, 357
Sandhis 46
Sandhy 194
Sanger, Dr. 164
Sani 39
Saniashtakavarga 289
Sankaracharya 85
Sanketa Niddhi 454
Sankhya 26
Sambu 567
Sannyasa Yoga24,387 -~
Sanskrit 18
Santi Kamalakara 208
Saptama 64
Saptamsa 481
Sapta Vikalpaja 333
Sapta Vyasana 75
Sarabha 585
, Saraswati 30
Sarat 9]
Saravali 20, 60
Sarpa 333, 352
Sarvartha Chintamani 22
Sasa 30 S
Sasabrit 30
Sasi 30
Sasibham 450
*Sasibrit 30
Satabhisha 36, 399
Satru 101
Saturn 24
Satvik 208
Satwa 85
Satya 85, 333
Satyacharya 32,058
Satyaloka BI Ls A
Sauramagd 555 o o
Saur.
E
A E
N

e^
636 CC-O. In Public Domain DU EAS, Sarayu Trust and eGangotri
Scorpio 37 n ^ Soumya 52, 265 e y
Seeta Devi 395 Sphuji Dwaja 232 e P;
Seshadri Vasa 162 Sravana 92, 399. 562
Shadvargas 43 Sri Krishna 311
Shadvikalpaja 333 Sringataka 337,355 , .
Shanmuga 82, 404 Sripatbi 208 en
Shastra 394 ^ Srik 352
Shastraic 27 Sruk 333
Shatpanchasat 600 — , Sthana 101
Shatpanchasika 18 "aser © Sthanabala 101
Shodasavargas 43 Sthira 58
Shodhana 293 - Sthiratwams 85
Shonitha 139 Strijataka Adhyaya 25, 503
Shruta Kirti 255 Stripanyam 383 é
Shubha 60, 71 Strijitha 400
Shubhaihi 168 o Su 106 a Alb, oe
Shubhay 168 Subhaga 516 sf 4
Shula 349, 358, 532 e Subhakarma 525 «|o
Shuladhara 206 Subritya 374 d
Siddhantas 608 . Sudra 83 :
Siddhas. 207 Suhrut 101, 450
Siddhasana 222 Sukha 65, 71
Signs 37 T Sukla 139 ga ES NL
Sigrakendras 105 Suklapaksha 558 :
^ Sikhi 57 Sukra 41 T.
Silpi 489 Sukrashtakavarga 288 23 *
Simha 36 Sun 18, 30
Simhasana 594 Sunapha 230, 366, 373
Sirshodayas 51 À ^ Sundaresa Srouti 48
Sirus 51 Suraguru 76
Sisira 91 Surya 18, 32, 76
Sita 716, 388 Suryaputra 16
Sitarasmi 76 Suryashtakavarga 285 ~:
Siva 29 Suryasiddhanta 34
Skandas 607 Sutabham 65
Slokas 19 -° 2o Sutala 31 ose *
-Smarta Devalokanda 262 Sutras26 ° E c
1 Snana Vidéi 607 Suyarloka 31 ^
Solr "d CIUS Loir Swa 63, 71 k | w
oma 32; z Swadesa Rasi Pramana 559° À
Somapuf ra 265 e. UP State Museum Swaxspetta 59 m.
AM, E no MEE C
; RA WE :
WA PE,
n

alpajataka 243
Swarga 31 ,
Swastikasana 594
Swati 36, 398
SwatriRoaa, 101
Swatunga 409
Swochha 101
T
Talatala 31
Tapobala 387
Tapoloka 31
Palgesahas 436
“Farka 395
«fe Tatkala 153
= Tatkalika 100
~ Tatpathibhi 432
\ Taurus 37
Tkamas 76
» Thafaasa &3 ^
Thanu 60, 71
Thanu Vepana 606
"e * Thapas 66, 71
Thasya 520
Thaushika 46
» Thavuri 46
Thilaka 193
MU
CC-O. In Public Domain. NREX Sarayu Trust and peser xU
Thunga, 450
Thwak 598
Tippu 320
Tirupathi Venkataramana
Todd, Col. 49
Treta 553
Tm Swarupaha 371
rivikalpaja 333
ji paj
Ubhayodaya 40
Udara Nidhana 528
Udvega 140
° Udyathayudha 463
Ujjain 561
Upachaya 119, 257
Upasamhara Adhyaya 604.
tpala 614 Y
Uttara 36, 397 —
Uttarabhadra 36, 399
Uttarakalamrita 352
Uttarashadha 36, 398
Vachana Patuhu 400
Thiryagloka 545
yag Vachasampathi 76
7 Thithi 557
| Tbifi Bala 606 Vachata 509
|. * Thoyacha Bhiru 402 Vahanas 535
| ' Thrikaladrishti 452 Vahana Yoga 277
? Nahni 30 ^^
5j Thrikona 56, 70
E - Thrilokas 31 *
hrimsamsa 42, 44, 505,
Vaisakha 92, 561 | .
Vaishnava 26% o
: hrimurthies 614 Vaisya 83
ff hrishalu 400 Vajrayĝga 331, 336 ` j
y 4 la .37 i Vajrayudha, 405 t
A ^ 4 > UPS fats M UE Luka” g ; fo
9 wei è IN

oe
l ; EX k
638 CCo. In Public Domain. ARE by Sarayu Trust and eGangotri
Vakra 76, 104, 215 c * Vikramarka Era 233° 4
Vakram Hitva 215 Vimisra 606 e )
Vallaki 349 Vipras 83 c
Valmiki 471 Ma 105
ama Chara 208 Virgo 3 EE
Venera 33 Visakha 36, 398. «^
Vandhyapathi 486 c Vishaya Sukha 373
Vanik 427 Vishnu 30
Vankalacharya 390 Vishnu Chandra 105
Vapi 340, 355 f Vishnu Gupta 32, 223
"arabala 606 Vit 76
Vargottama 58, 235 — Vitala 31
Varishta 361 Vivaha Kala 607 E
Varsba 91 Vividhayoni 110 |
Vasanta 91 Vivriti 614
Vasi 69 ə ViyonillO e S
Vasishta 32 Viyoni Janmadhyafa 3
Vatsyayana 122 *Vrana 71 $
Vayas 520 A Vridda 388
Vayasi 520 Vridda Gargi 343 ey
Vayoo 30, 276 Vridda Sravaka 390 zs
Vayu 481 4 Vrischika 37 ~ ~
Vayuchaya 276 Vrishabha 37 iL
Vedanta 26 Vyala 463
Vedantini 522 Vyasa 32, 47
Vedas 29 Vyaya 60, 71
Veena 357 < Vytharana 395
Venkateswara 22 vef
Venus 24
Varga 50 Ww c.
Vesi 474 Wasara 94 A
Vesma 65, 71 A
Vighaties 66
Vihaga 337, 354 T.
Vijayanagar 223 ee a^ xv fe
*Vihapga 115 ^ Yapı b
^ Vikala 232: * * Moo Tau ee
Vikalpa 333 “. Yajats 31 3 i
Vikrama,63, 71‘, Yajurveda 31, 92 `
Vikramfditya 49. C cu "-
z y , UP State Museum Y 8&$B85:86 , Q owe
ee e URS ay
1 BT e t » € m j
2 [e aim a

e
cc I^ Public Domain. Digit Sarayu Trust and eGangotri
y! g
mas 140 Yudhishtira Saka 614
Yatra25 ə Yuga 349, 358
Yava 336, 340, 355, 567 Yugmapitha 429
Yavapa, 32, 49 Yupa 345, 356
ANANN 54 Yuvaraja 73
Yavaneswara 57 Q
Yayajuka 30
Yoga 26, 337 Z
Yogakaraka 391 M
Yoga Yatra 18 Zamindarini 488 S
Yogi 87 Zodiacal 24
e
Tea * e.
ios
e ; Q e ce
-— e E ` Eie. x
: S E e. VS
3 l RU UP &tate Museum, Lucknow.
0 EG c NG

ry)
z
CN »
e hu
s
Aue
g PRINTED AT AN
RAMAN PUBLICATIONS’ PRESS, ““ SRI RAJESWARI”, BANGALORE-3 A gm
oti
i s e TN f e a
es
e n [
Ce |
LJ
‘ A S
e 6 e EN le
2 e C e z e .
e «v E
ee :
€ UA
UP State Museum, Lucknow ^
we Z pe ANE

| *CC-O. In Public Domain. Digi P by Sarayu Trust and eGangotri
P
b cs
is yo
e.
LJ
e.
LJ
e
D
e
LJ
ES OC D
E e i ” OF
e * o
z w e
A * UP State Museu aeo L :
21 C Ai OS \

e a
—À
Ly N
e i
aS
= ai
er
E
e
e e apte s
m i
© we
*. of
af. 4
e
i B
s IN — Pa
bu
Cw
mn.
E
f
Phe
e MOS

Q ] OO 9 GS 00 a ja :
j Publi aman Digitized PY Sarayu Trust and eGangotri at
IMPOBTANT BOOKS’
(AH are in English unless otherwise stated)
BY I"
Prof. B. SURYANARAIN RAO i
|| This book de RE COR the full method of |
Y working the horoscopes of women. 4th *Edition. U
| Jaimini Sutras— : |
l| English Translation. A most scientific system of |
fj astrology which entively departs from the conventional n
|| methods. This isa book the type of which has never |
[| been published before. 3rd Edition. Cloth Bound.
|| Compendium of Astrology— |
| The first book to be ever written in English on Hindu |
|| Astrology. 3rd Edition. Rs. 1/8 or Sh. 3. | |
f Life of Varaha Mihira—
A unique publication dealing with the story of the
|| great Astrological writer. Rs. 1/4 or Sh. 2/6.
e
" MU it
:RAMAN PUBLICATIONS- |
«gri Rajeswari AE g ÉARGALORE 3" (India) |
Ag MEL Museum, ie, "EA E
E ~ Me NRE UTC
[o = p que S. or,

LJ
LJ
$ THE ASTROLG/GICAL MAGAZINE $
bud 5 e
$ me.
H * Sri Rajéswari”, BANGALORE 3 e $
$ THE BEST EXPONENT OF INDIAN SCIENCES je
$ ` Founded 1895 by Prof. B. SURYANARAIN RAO $
Edited by B. V. RAMAN >
as
Published every nog eut contains the following features—
/ . (2) Discussion of eminent
Sp ie a men sorecasts of the trend of national and
TiS aR events. (A) Finds from Investigations. (5) Articles
with illustrations on A \rojogy, Astronomy, Medicine in relation
to Astrology, Phrenolw, x, Palmistry, Yoga, Spiritualism, Graphology, Biology in relate n to Astrology and articles of general
and scientific interest. (6) Commercial and Market Forecas?s
detailing prices of commedities, shares, cotton, etc., for every
month which will be of great practica) value to the businessmen
and speculators. (7) Readers’ section dealing with questiags put
by readers about scientific pro@lems. (8) Hints for Agriculturists. (9) Airways Guide. (10) How is this Month for You?
aud many other interesting ed topics.
^y
p
PLPPALLPECSP LPL LDP LAP Le
im
"c
KA
GP IOS 8/9 Sy "p y See
“The only organ throughomt India dealing in Astronomical,
Astiologica and other allied subjects in as cing and popular o
style... S —Unidad ITE Indian States, Delhi. e
ve <
* To those students who desire to obfain an insight into- d
Hindu Astrology, they cannot do better than subscribe to this 2
SA A yvy ALII
SN excellent publication". — British Journal of Astrology, London. $
“Free from platitudes, yet deals with many things of intense $
human interest." —W. B. Crow, D.Sc., Ph.D. in Proteus, London. ~p
A
d afc e “This always interesting magazine is got up iÑsplendid g
N- $ style". o —New York Astrology, Rw York. $
$ “ Contains a number of interesting contributions devott
$ discussions of different tonics...the Journal is pledged to a 5
$ cation of the scientific status of Astrology". —The Hindu, id
E o
$ pcr Magazine of great interest". —Times of Ceylon A
$ Annual Subs. Rs. 12 Single Copy Re. 1 p Me A
e rj Use
57 pply for a free ee Copy at once to:
e
ga
Oe RAMAN PUBLIC TIGO
e is Sri Rajésari » : BAN ALOR
e
f re x iade APR We poner
c UP State menan iro
e e 1 wu
