READABLE DATASET
================================================================================
Original file: brihat_samhita_of_varaha_mihir_part_1_edited_by_m_ramakrishna_bhat_motilal_banarasidas_delhi.json
Dataset number: 65 of 455
Format: valid JSON
Structure: Object / structured dataset
Original size: 1,692,978 bytes
Top-level fields: 11
Title: Brihat Samhita Of Varaha Mihir Part 1 Edited By M Ramakrishna Bhat - Motilal Banarasidas, Delhi
Creator: —
Date: —
Description: —

CONTENT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
METADATA AND OTHER FIELDS
  • title: Brihat Samhita Of Varaha Mihir Part 1 Edited By M Ramakrishna Bhat - Motilal Banarasidas, Delhi
  • creator: —
  • date: —
  • description: —
  • subject: —
  • identifier: —
  • source_folder: Brihat Samhita-XML
  • total_pages: 625
  • total_words: 173441
  • text_quality:
    • ocr_word_validity_score: 0.893
    • quality_tier: good
    • note: —

FULL TEXT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Y š
IHIRA
Rot) |)
EOD
um
ØD. f.
K
à

e

VARAHAMIHIRA‘S
TA
BRHAT SAMHI
बृहत्संहिता
en me — 7.
TAGES |
ee रर

VARAHAMIHIRA’S
BRHAT SAMHITA
बृहत्संहिता
with English Translation, Exhaustive Notes
and Literary Comments
PART ONE
M. RAMAKRISHNA BHAT
MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS
PRIVATE LIMITED e DELHI

XXXVIII
सद्योवर्षणाध्यायः--Signs of Immediate Rain
कुसुमलताध्याय:--1?1021105(105 from Flowers
and Creepers
सन्ध्यालक्षणाध्यायः-Indications at Dawn
and Twilight
दिग्दाहलक्षणाध्याय :—Glow at the Horizon
भूकम्पलक्षणाघ्याय:--9115 of Earthquake
उल्कालक्षणाध्याय:-- Signs of Meteors
qaaa: Characteristics of Halos
इन्द्रायुघलक्षणाध्याय:--918115 of Rainbows
गन्धवनगरलक्षणाध्याय:-- Signs of Aerial City
प्रतिसूर्यलक्षणाध्यायः- Mock Suns
रजोलक्षणाध्यायः- Indications of Haze
निर्घातलक्षणाध्यायः- Symptoms of Hurricane
सस्यजातकम्--Growth of Crops
द्रव्यनिश्चयाध्यायः-— Classification of Substances
अर्घकाण्डाध्यायः Fluctuations of Prices
इन्द्रध्वजसम्पत्ू--(>1079 of Indra’s Banner
नीराजनविधिः--Lustration Ceremony
खऊ्जनकलक्षणाध्याय:--1116 Wagtail
उत्पाताध्याय :—Portentous Phenomena
मयूरचित्रकम्- Motley Miscellany
पुष्यस्नानम्-R०yal Ablution
पट्ुलक्षणम्-Signs of Crowns
खङ्जलक्षणम्-Signs of Swords
भ्रङ्गविद्य-Science of Limbs
पिटकलक्षणम्-_Characteristics of Pimples
वास्तुविद्य-—Architecture
दकार्गसम्- Exploration of Water Springs
वृक्षायुर्वेदाध्यायः- Treatment of Trees
प्रासादलक्षणाध्यायः-Description of Temples
वज्रसेपलक्षणाध्यायः--Preparation of Adamantine Glue
PAGE

INTRODUCTION
Itis by sheer grace of the Lord Sri Siddhi Vinayaka that this
new and enlarged edition of the Brhat Samhita with English translation and exhaustive notes, literary comments, etc. has been made
possible, considering the vastness and pre-eminence of this extraordinary work as well as the unique position of Varahamihira, one of
the brightest stars in the galaxy of Indian astronomers and astrologers. Though we cannot claim to possess all the qualifications needed
for undertaking this onerous task single-handed, yet we have ventured todo this work mainly for two reasons, viz., our innate love for
the qualities of head and heart of the illustrious author that are
visible like gems in the pages of this work, which really deserves to
be designated as his magnum opus, and the fact that we had translated
jointly this work in 1947.1 There have been persistent demands
on the publishers for a fresh edition of the Brhat Samhita, since
none of the previous English editions by Dr. Kern, Chidambara
Iyer and our own is available at present. It is in the fitness of things
that the world of scholars and lovers of ancient culture and wisdom long to probe this mine of wisdom, nay, the Encyclopaedia of
Indian Culture in. general and astrological lore in particular. In all
countries of the world, especially in India, where astrology is held in
high esteem on account of its being the ‘Eye of Wisdom,” this was
an honoured discipline. No activity, however insignificant it might
be in the social, political or religious sphere of man, would be
permitted without due regard being paid to the injunctions of
Jyotirvidya. For, astrology is a Sàstra, Science, according to the
wise men of the east, who had tested the veracity of this Sastra in
the crucible of their experience and penance of several centuries. If
some rationalists of today were to decry this Science as superstition,
we have to forgive them their unscientific attitude. For, they know
not what they say.
In reality, astrology is an integrated science as well as Dharmaéastra. It aims at synthesis of all branches of learning, as shown by
1. See the Brhat Samhita translated by V. S. Sastri and M. R. Bhat.
2. Jyotisimayanam caksuh.

First Edition: Delhi, 1981
Reprint: Delhi, 1986, 1992, 1995
© MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS PRIVATE LIMITED
All Rights Reserved
Also available at:
MOTILAL BANARSIDASS
41 U.A. Bungalow Road, Jawahar Nagar, Delhi 110 007
120 Royapettah High Road, Mylapore, Madras 600 004
16 St. Mark’s Road, Bangalore 560 001
Ashok Rajpath, Patna 800 004
Chowk, Varanasi 221 001
R. d. aa MABRARY ) >
Ae isa. YY TY ७ 059»
D
Ld
PRINTED IN INDIA
BY JAINENDRA PRAKASH JAIN AT SHRI JAINENDRA PRESS,
T. o
A-45 NARAINA, PHASE I, NEW DELHI 110 028
AND PUBLISHED BY NARENDRA PRAKASH JAIN FOR
MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS PVT. LTD.,
BUNGALOW ROAD, DELHI 110 007

CONTENTS
Introduction
PART I
Adhyaya—Chapter
उपनयनाध्यायः Introductory
सांवत्सरसूत्राध्यायः- Canons for Astrologer
आदित्यचारः- The Sun’s Transit
चन्द्रचारः- The Moon’s Transit
राहुचारः—Rahu’s Course
ataart:—Transit of Mars
बुधचारः-Mercury’s Transit
बृहस्पतिचारः-_]upiter’s Course
शुक्रचार:ः-Course of Venus
शनैश्चरचारः-—Saturn’s Transit
केतुचार:---()0 Comets
अगस्त्यचारः- Canopus
सप्तषिचारः-Course of the Seven Sages
कूर्मविभागः-Divisions of Globe
नक्षत्रव्यूहः-— Stellar Rulership
ग्रहभक्तियोगः-—Planetary Rulership
्रहयुद्धाध्यायः--Planetary Wars
शशिग्रहसमागमाध्यायः-Conjunction of the Moon
with Planets or stars
ग्रहवर्षफलाध्यायः- Planetary Years and Effects
wage काध्यायः-— The Planetary Triangle
गर्भलक्षणम्-Pregnancy of Clouds
गर्भधारणाध्यायः--Retention of Embryo
प्रवर्षणाध्याय :—Rainfall
रोहिणीयोगाध्यायः he Moon's Conjunction
with Rohini
स्वातियोगाध्यायः The Moon’s Conjunction
with Svati
ग्राषाढीयोगाध्याय :—The Moon's conjunction with
Asadha
वातचक्रम्-The Wind Circle

XXXVIII
सद्योवर्षणाध्यायः--Signs of Immediate Rain
gquearean:—Prognostics from Flowers
and Creepers
सन्ध्यालक्षणाध्याय:--11]0109(1015 at Dawn
and Twilight
दिग्दाहलक्षणाध्याय :—Glow at the Horizon
भूकम्पलक्षणाध्यायः--Signs of Earthquake
उल्कालक्षणाध्याय:--Signs of Meteors
परिवेषलक्षणाध्यायः- Characteristics of Halos
इन्द्रायुघलक्षणाध्याय:---51815 of Rainbows
गन्धवंनगरलक्षणाध्याय:---9197$ of Aerial City
प्रतिसूयलक्षणाध्याय:--1५४6 ०८६ Suns
रजोलक्षणाध्याय:--111012311015 of Haze
निर्घातलक्षणाध्यायः- Symptoms of Hurricane
सस्यजातकम्--Growth of Crops
द्रव्यनिश्चयाध्यायः-— Classification of Substances
अर्घकाण्डाध्यायः Fluctuations of Prices
इन्द्रध्वजसम्पत्-Glory of Indra's Banner
नीराजनविधिः--Lustration Ceremony
खञ्जनकलक्षणाध्यायः- he Wagtail
उत्पाताध्याय:-Portentous Phenomena
मयूरचित्रकम्-Motley Miscellany
पुष्यस्नानम्-R०yl Ablution
पट्टुलक्षणम्-Signs of Crowns
खङ्जलक्षणम्--Signs of Swords
भ्रङ्गविद्य-Science of Limbs
पिटकलक्षणम्-_Characteristics of Pimples
वास्तुविद्य-—Architecture
दकार्गसम्-Exploration of Water Springs
ृक्षायुवेदाध्यायः-Treatment of Trees
प्रासादलक्षणाध्यायः-Description of Temples
वच्त्रलेपलक्षणाध्यायः--Preparation of Adamantine Glue
PAGE

INTRODUCTION
Itis by sheer grace of the Lord Sri Siddhi Vinayaka that this
new and enlarged edition of the Brhat Sarhhita with English translation and exhaustive notes, literary comments, etc. has been made
possible, considering the vastness and pre-eminence of this extraordinary work as well as the unique position of Varahamihira, one of
the brightest stars in the galaxy of Indian astronomers and astrologers. Though we cannot claim to possess all the qualifications needed
for undertaking this onerous task single-handed, yet we have ventured to do this work mainly for two reasons, viz., our innate love for
the qualities of head and heart of the illustrious author that are
visible like gems in the pages of this work, which really deserves to
be designated as his mágnum opus, and the factthat we had translated
jointly this work in 1947.1 There have been persistent demands
on the publishers for a fresh edition of the Brhat Samhita, since
none of the previous English editions by Dr. Kern, Chidambara
Iyer and our own is available at present. It is in the fitness of things
that the world of scholars and lovers of ancient culture and wisdom long to probe this mine of wisdom, nay, the Encyclopaedia of
Indian Culture in general and astrological lore in particular. In all
countries of the world, especially in India, where astrology is held in
high esteem on account of its being the ‘Eye of Wisdom,” this was
an honoured discipline. No activity, however insignificant it might
be in the social, political or religious sphere of man, would be
permitted without due regard being paid to the injunctions of
Jyotirvidya. For, astrology is a Sastra, Science, according to the
wise men of the east, who had tested the veracity of this Sastra in
the crucible of their experience and penance of several centuries. If
some rationalists of today were to decry this Science as superstition,
we have to forgive them their unscientific attitude. For, they know
not what they say.
In reality, astrology is an integrated science as well as Dharmaéastra. It aims at synthesis of all branches of learning, as shown by
1. See the Brhat Samhita translated by V. S. Sastri and M. R. Bhat.
2. Jyotisimayanam caksuh. 5

viii Brhat Samhita
iis work, which is really encyclopaedic in depth and
extent. Generally it is divided into four categories, VIZ., mundane, horary
electional and natal astrology. This remarkable science, in which
d has implicit faith, has been handed down in
man all over the worl ।
India from time immemorial. There are other countries like China
where this was practised in the remote past. In ourcountry, the Vedas
and its branches, which are the oldest records of human civilization, contain innumerable references to the Naksatras, seasons. months,
ete. It is tobe remembered that astrology-astronomy is reckoned among
the mds of the Veda. The Taittiriya Samhita (IV. 4, 10, 1-3) and
the Taittiriva Brahmana (III. 1-1, 2) mention the presiding deities
ofthe asterisms. The Rg Veda (11-32, VIII-3,20, etc.) speaks of the
Moon asthe measurer of time. Likewise the Atharva Veda (Book
XIN) refers to the Naksatras. The Sakalya Samhita gives the configurations of the stars. The Kausika-sutra of the Atharvaveda contains a Naksatra-kalpa and a Santikalpa, both treating of the lunar
mansions. Panini has many Sutras bearing on the constellations,
months, seasons, etc.’ The Taittiriya Brahmana says that the
‘Spring is the Face of the year. The Satapatha Brahmana speaks of
six (sometimes five also) seasons (Rtus).? According to P. C.
Sengupta® at the earliest Brahmana period the sun reached the
winter solstice at the New Moon of Magha; the year was considered
to be at its end at the Full Moon of Phalguna; the Rriiikas rose
exactly in the east; and the Spring set in one day after the New
Moon of Caitra. The Arthafdstra (300 B.C.) refers (XLI) to
Grahacaras (planetary movements), especially of Venus. As late
as the 4th century A.D. Naksatras were used for dates in the Singhala Chronicle Dipavamía. It is learnt that a work entitled Sard ilakamüvadànam deals with the Buddha’s exhortations to an outcaste girl.
The work was translated into the Chinese language in 170 A.D.
T his work contains many chapters dealing with the topics treated of
in our Sanità, such as Earthquake, Moles, Results of birth in different constellations, Portents, Dreams, and Palmistry.?
the contents of tl
e It is believed by some Western as well as Indian scholars that
E e weekdays were introduced into India from the West. This view
is ro oF e f . ^ . — -
erroneous for th ollowing reasons: In connection with Rupa
. Il Kanda 17-6 Bra. 27. inne
3. Indian Hist. Qly. Vol. X 3 1934.
+. Brhat Samhita
rhat hità, Intro. pp. 18-19, Varanaseya Skt. Vi. Vi. Edn.

Introduction A
satra (Worship of the Stellar Deity CY. 6), Sage Garga who is
quoted by Utpala, mentions the weekday, Candravare. It is undoubted
that Sage Garga is one of the most ancient authorities on astrology,
being the direct disciple of Svayambhü, the Creator. Burgess
states in his concluding remarks thus: ‘“There is abundant testimony
to the fact that the division of the day into 24 hours existed in the
East, if not actually in India, before it did in Greece." About some
common words like Hora, he is of the view that ‘‘they were passed
from the Sanskrit to the Greek at a period of high antiquity." Prof.
Wilson is more forthright in his statement about the weekdays.
According to him, it was unknown to the Greeks and not adopted by
the Romans until a late period. He adds that the Hindus appear to
have at least as good a title to the invention as any other people.”
Burgess replies to those scholars who maintain that Indian astrology
has been borrowed from the Greeks, thus: “It is difficult to see what
it was that they borrowed, since in no case do numerical data and
results in the systems of the two peoples exactly correspond.” He
concludes that ‘the course of derivation was from east to west rather
than from west to east’, and the Indians were the teachers rather than
learners) It is in the light of the above conclusions that we have
to interpret Varahamihira’s statement (II.14) that ‘the Yavanas are
honoured like the Sages.’ The bogey of Greek influence is laid to
rest by the strong arguments of Swami Vivekananda. He says:
“There may be, it is true, some similarity between the Greek and
Indian terms in astronomy and so forth, but the westerners have
ignored the direct Sanskrit etymology and sought for some far-fetched
etymology from the Greek. That such shallowrand biased learning
has been manifested by many orientalists in the West is deplorable.
From a single Sanskrit Sloka that reads, “The Yavanas are Mlechchas; in them, this Science is established; therefore, even they deserve
worship like Rishis..."in the west, they have gone sofar as to
declare that all Indian sciences are but echoes of the Greek; whereas
atrue reading of the Sloka may show that the Mlechcha disciples
of the Aryans are herein praised in order to encourage them to a
further study of the Aryan Sciences... .”
Of late, people in the west, especially some astronomers and
other scientists, have begun to take some interest in Hindu astrology,
1. See notes under I-5.
2. J. Roy. Asiat. Soc. IX. 84.
3. Transactions of R. A. Soc. I. 579.

Vill Brhat Samhita
the contents of this work, which is really encyclopaedic in depth and
extent. Generally it is divided into four categories, viz., mundane, horary
electional and natal astrology. This remarkable science, in which
man all over the world has implicit faith, has been handed down in
India from time immemorial. There are other countries like China
where this was practised in the remote past. In our country, the Vedas
and its branches, which are the oldest records of human civilization, contain innumerable references to the Naksatras, seasons, months,
etc. It is to be remembered that astrology-astronomy is reckoned among
the limbs of the Veda. The Taittiriya Samhita (IV. 4, 10, 1-3) and
the Taittiriya Brahmana (III. 1-1, 2) mention the presiding deities
ofthe asterisms. The Rg Veda (II-32, VIII-3,20, etc,) speaks of the
Moon asthe measurer of time. Likewise the Atharva Veda (Book
XIX) refers to the Naksatras. The Sakalya Samhita gives the configurations of the stars. The Kausika-siitra of the Atharvaveda contains a Naksatra-kalpa and a Santikalpa, both treating of the lunar
mansions. Panini has many Sütras bearing on the constellations,
months, seasons, etc. The Taittirlya Brahmana says that the
‘Spring is the Face of the year’. The Satapatha Brahmana speaks of
six (sometimes five also) seasons (Rtus). According to P. C
Sengupta at the earliest Brahmana period the sun reached the
winter solstice at the New Moon of Magha; the year was considered
to be at its end at the Full Moon of Phalguna; the A7étikas rose
exactly in the east; and the Spring setin one day after the New
Moon of Caitra. The Arthasastra (300 B.C.) refers (XLI) to
Grahacaras (planetary movements), especially of Venus. As late
as the 4th century A.D. Naksatras were used for dates in the Singhala Chronicle Dipavamía. It is learnt that a work entitled Sard ülakarnàvadánam deals with the Buddha'sexhortations to an outcaste girl
The work was translated into the Chinese language in 170 A.D.
This work contains many chapters dealing with the topics treated of
in our Samhita, such as Earthquake, Moles, Results of birth in different constellations, Portents, Dreams, and Palmistry.’
It is believed by some Western as well as Indian scholars that
the weekdays were introduced into India from the West. This view
is erroneous for the following reasons: In connection with RupaII Kanda 17-6 Bra. 27.
3. Indian Hist. Qly. Vol. X 3 1934.
4. Brhat Sarihità, Intro. pp. 18-19, Varanaseya Skt. Vi. Vi. Edn.

Introduction T
satra (Worship of the Stellar Deity CV. 6), Sage Garga who is
quoted by Utpala, mentions the weekday, Candraváre. It is undoubted
that Sage Garga is one of the most ancient authorities on astrology,
being the direct disciple of Svayambhü, the Creator. Burgess
states in his concluding remarks thus: ‘There is abundant testimony
to the fact that the division of the day into 24 hours existed in the
East, if not actually in India, before it did in Greece." About some
common words like Hora, he is of the view that “they were passed
from the Sanskrit to the Greek at a period of high antiquity." Prof.
Wilson is more forthright in his statement about the weekdays.
According to him, it was unknown to the Greeks and not adopted by
the Romans until a late period. He adds that the Hindus appear to
have at least as good a title io the invention as any other people.”
Burgess replies to those scholars who maintain that Indian astrology
has been borrowed from the Greeks, thus: “It is difficult to see what
it was that they borrowed, since in no case do numerical data and
results in the systems of the two peoples exactly correspond." He
concludes that ‘the course of derivation was from east to west rather
than from west to east’, and the Indians were the teachers rather than
learners? It is in the light of the above conclusions that we have
to interpret Varahamihira’s statement (II.14) that ‘the Yavanas are
honoured like the Sages.’ The bogey of Greek influence is laid to
rest by the strong arguments of Swami Vivekananda. He says:
“There may be, it is true, some similarity between the Greek and
Indian terms in astronomy and so forth, but the westerners have
ignored the direct Sanskrit etymology and sought for some far-fetched
etymology from the Greek. That such shallowrand biased learning
has been manifested by many orientalists in the West is deplorable.
From a single Sanskrit Sloka that reads, ‘The Yavanas are Mlechchas; in them, this Science is established ; therefore, even they deserve
worship like Rishis..."in the west, they have gone so far as to
declare that all Indian sciences are but echoes of the Greek; whereas
atrue reading of the Sloka may show that the Mlechcha disciples
of the Aryans are herein praised in order to encourage them to a
further study of the Aryan Sciences . . . =
Of late, people in the west, especially some astronomers and
other scientists, have begun to take some interest in Hindu astrology,
1. See notes under I-5.
2. J. Roy. Asiat. Soc. IX. 84.
3. Transactions of R. A. Soc. I. 579.

x Brhat Samhita
as its findings on mental health come very close to their own. For
example, William Bonyun, an eminent American astronomer, describes Hindu astrology as “the oldest science in the history of mankind," whose precepts and formulae were worked out in the remote
past, according to strictly modern scientific methods. Sir Bernard
Lovell, Director of Jordel Bank Observatory admits that there is
truth in the ancient belief in the connection between the Moon and
lunacy. Similarly, Count Bjornistjerne admires the greatest antiquity
of Hindu astronomy and civilization.
Modern Scientists have now discovered that Sun-spots and Solar
flares have a direct bearing on heart-attacks, irritability, headaches,
nausea, mental and nervous illness, etc. For, the human body is
affected by the natural electricity in the air around us. Professors
Robert O. Becker, a medical doctor, Howard Friedman, a psychologist, and Charles H. Bachman, a physicist, have detected the sensitive
electrical receiving apparatus in our bodies which they believe is
affected by fields of electro-magnetic force given out by the sun.
Both types of solar disturbance release into space untold myriads of
highly charged electrons and protons. These space hurricanes are
known as solar winds. As a consequence of this the earth experiences
what is usually called a magnetic storm, which plays havoc with
radio and telegraph communications. Whenever sun-spots and solar
flares led to geomagnetic storms around the earth, traffic accidents
rose 70 per cent, suicides jumped abnormally. For, it is largely the
harmful positive ions that come through from the Sun to affect us in
these ways. Probably all living things are in fact affected by the
sun's magnetism..1 Recently the National Geophysical Research
Institute of Hyderabad had come to the same conclusion: “A strong
positive correlation is found to exist between the disturbances of the
earth’s magnetic field and daily hospital admissions of heart cases in
Hyderabad.’
Readers would be surprised to hear that ancient Sages had
discovered a correlation between some disturbances on the solar disc
and terrestrial happenings like dust-storms, earthquakes, famines, destructive tendencies among men, diseases, destruction of life on a large
scale, etc. These are called Tamasakilakas, Dark Shafts appearing on
the Sun’s disc, by the Sages. There are also other comets or Ketus
that cause the phenomena akin to the sun-spots and solar flares.
1. From an article “How Sun-Spots affect you" by David Gunston.
. are Article, “Heart attacks linked to solar disturbances", Sunday Standard of

Introduction Xi
Author: Varahamihira (505 A.D.) was a scientist of rare merits,
who in spite of his regard for ancient traditions and Sages, followed
always the scientific method. His scientific thinking is illustrated by
what he says in connection with the commencement of the solstices
in III 1-3 as well as with Ràhu and eclipse.! In view of his
extraordinary and masterly treatment of the subjects of astronomy
and astrology in all their ramifications, he was held in high esteem
by scholars of ancient and medieval India. About his greatness
Al-Birüni, the Arab scholar and traveller says, ‘‘Varahamihira has
already revealed himself to us as a man who accurately knows the
shape of the world... On the whole his foot stands firmly on the
basis of the truth, and he clearly speaks out the truth."? He was
considered, for this reason, to be an incarnation of the Sun-God?
and one of the Nine Gems adorning the court of the legendary King
Vikramaditya. Kalyànavarman, author of the Saravali (650-725
A.D.) says that our author has bequeathed to posterity the unique
wisdom of the ancient seers. So does Bhaskaracarya in his Stddhdntafiromani 1.2. Satananda in his Bhasvati Karana (1098 A.D.) calls
Varahamihira’s work as one on a par with the Sürya Siddhanta, while
Ksemendra reckons him among the great poets.‘ It is well known
that astrology-cum-astronomy is based upon the theory that the Sun®
is the hub and driving force of the universe. The same sun who
is eulogized in many a Rgvedic hymn, chief of which is the famous
Gayatri Mantra, was the tutelary Deity of Varahamihira, whose
genius, it is reported, flowered as a result of the Sun’s unique boon.
His life’s mission was to revive the ancient learning of astronomy and
astrology which was fast disappearing. His father was a great devotee
of the Sun-God and was appropriately named Aditya-dasa. This also
shows that the sun was the tutelary Deity of his ancestors. The
word Mihira, meaning the sun, in the author’s name points to the
same conclusion. The author asserts that he obtained a special boon
from the Sun-God at Kapitthaka and that his Guru was his own father.®
Utpala explains that Kapitthaka was a village where the Avantikacàrya was born and where there must have been a temple of the
Sun-God famous in those days. Scholars have identified this village
Vide page 119 Vol. II of “India.”
Vide notes on page 1.
Aucityavicaracarcad, 26-79.
Sürya àtmà jagatas tasthusasca. (Rg)
Brhajjataka XXVIII. 9.
20 20 wo 00 HS Ga

xii Brhat Samhita
with the present Kayatha or Samkagya ata distance of about 12 miles
from Ujjain. This conclusion is in consonance with the popular
belief that Varaha was a resident of Ujjain and spent his life there,
radiating his unsurpassed wisdom to the whole world.
However, Utpala calls our author Magadha-dvija in two places
in the Brhat Samhita. This word poses a riddle to scholars
inasmuch as an Ávantika could not at the same time be called one
of Magadha country. So Dr. Kern surmises that Varaha or his
forefathers might have migrated from Magadha to Ujjain in search
of royal patronage. Monier Williams, on the other hand, explains
the word Maga as ‘worshipper of the Sun.’ If we follow this explanation, we shall have to admit that the word Magadha means ‘the
place or country where reside worshippers of the Sun.’ In that case
even the village Kapitthaka could be called Magadha. It is possible
that the country of Magadha was so called because of the Maga
Brahmanas who had colonized it in the remote past. Is there any
connection between the Magas and the Magi who were supposed to
be the wise men hailing from the East? We are inclined to believe
that possibly some of the ancestors of the Magas migrated to Persia
and had a colony of their own there. That is why we find Mitra,
Aryaman, etc., names of the Sun-God, prevalent in that country in
ancient times. We have another doubt also on the basis of a quotation of the Bhavisyapurana— “मगं ध्यायन्ति ये तस्मात्तेन ते मगधाः स्मृताः
(CXVII. 55). This would also entitle Varaha and his ancestors to
be classified as Magadhas, as they were all intensely devoted to the
Sun-God. Is it possible that Maga isa variant or another synonym
of Bhaga, meaning the Sun ?? We are also told that Varaha was
one of the Sakadvipi Brahmanas whose Gotra was Mihira. We are in
the dark about the whereabouts of this Sakadvipa. This will land us
in greater confusion: There is only one way of getting out of this
dilemma: In very ancient times some worshippers of the sun must
have migrated from India to the Sakadvipa and colonized it; and
later some of their descendants returned to India, the land of their
ancestors. Hence the name Sakadvipa Brahmanas.*
It isnot known exactly as to who was Varaha’s patron king.
Many theories have been put forward by scholars: Some say that
1. In the beginning of his Vivrti and under LXXXVI 4 of Br. Sam.
2. इनो भगो धामनिधि: Amarakosa.
3. According to the भविष्यपुराण, Samba, son of Srikrsna built a temple to
the Sun at Milasthina (Multan) on the Candrabhaga (Chenab) and had to bring
from Sakadvipa Maga Brahmins for the installation.
k

Introduction xiii
it was Harsa Vikramaditya of Ujjain who ascended the throne in
the 6th century A.D. Others hold that it was Vikramaditya who
came to power in 544 A.D. According to the Paficasiddhantika
(I. 8-10) epoch of 427 Saka year Caitra Sukla Pratipad, Varahamihira
must have composed it in 505 A.D. This fits in with Al-Birüni's
statement in 1030 A.D. to the effect that the P.S. was composed 526
years before his time.! According to Amaraja, Varaha is said to
have died in 587 A.D. It is also held that Varaha visited the Yavana
country, and, according to Persian tradition translated the Pafcatantra
into the Pahlavi language at the instance of the then King of
Persia (531 to 576 A.D.)
Al-Birüni and Varahamihira : Al-Birüni (born in 973 A.D.) came
to India in 1030 A.D. with the object of studying Hindu astrology
and culture. He is also reported to have translated into Arabic the
Brhat Samhita (B.S.) and the Laghujataka (L.].), some parts of
which are also explained in the pages of his India. Though he has
done a wonderful work, he has committed some errors in interpreting
Varaha’s works.” He says that the Hindus have no understanding
of the motions of the fixed stars; and he reprimands the author for
the statement in IV.7 of the B.S. Al-Birüni does not realize that in
the Samhita the author first of all mentions the views of ancient
Sageslike Garga, and then gives his own conclusions. The Arab
scholar takes our author to task for his statement on the solstices and
remarks: “The solstice has kept its place, but the constellations have
migrated, just the very opposite of what Varaha has fancied.” Even
here we have to say in defence that Varahamihira refers at first to
the views of ancient sages and then states his own views in unequivocal terms. If Al-Birüni had studied the author's statements carefully, he would have found no contradiction between his own view
and that of Varaha. The latter's scientific attitude is borne out by
his advice to students to the effect that they should study the subject
by means of systematic observations and markings on a circle. AlBirüni shows his intolerance for the Hindu practice of performing
sacrifices at the rising of stars such as Agastya (Canopus). He says,
«It is rather chaff than wheat." The Arab traveller could not realize
that it was the chaff that protected the grain. Besides, he could not
rise to the high level of the lofty ideals of Vedic religion. We need
l. “India” II. p. 7.
2. Sec Appendix II.

xiv Brhat Samhita
not go into the deep significance, spiritual and scientific, of the
institution of sacrifices. We have also to remember, in this connection, that Varaha was also a poet par excellence, and his medium and
subject matter are such that he is easily lifted by their magic from
the sordid plane of science to the ethereal regions of inspired poetry.
All the same, Al-Birüni praises the Hindus for their perfect knowledge
of the eclipses.
His works : Utpala calls him Acarya (Teacher), who is
FyotisSastra-samgrahakrt (one who has abridged the works on astrology and astronomy). He says that Varaha has already compiled
the two Skandhas, viz., Ganita and Hora, and now he is trying to
compile the 3rd one, viz., Samhità or Angaviniscaya. The author says in
the B.S. CVII 14 and Brhajjataka (B.7.) XXVIII6 that he has composed Bahvascaryam jatakam (Natal astrology of many wonders) ,
Yatra (or Journey) and the P.S. that is Bahu codyam of many arguments or wonders). His works are available in two versions, ViZ.,
Brhat (major) and Laghu (minor). His Brhad Yatra or Br. Yogayátrà
was also known as Mahāyātrā. It had the commentary of S üryadeva
Somasut of Naidhruva Gotra. The Svalpayatra (Abridged work on
Journey) is also known as Tikanika Yatra Another work on
“Journey,” according to Utpala, is the Yogayaira. Kern had edited
nine chapters of this work; and now the entire work has been
published. Bhattotpala refers? to the two versions of the Vivdhapatala and is reported to have commented on it. In B.S. I.10 as
well as LI.7, the Acarya says that he has already written the Yatra.
Utpala invariably quotes from it and calls it Yogayātrā (under
XLIII.31). He explains that the author had already written B.7.,
Br. Yatra, and Br. Vivahapajala. The author refers to it in many other
places too. B. J. mentions Vivahapatalaand Yatra as future works.*
Similarly in the Br. Yatra it is stated that १८८७८ has already
been written. Yogaydtra IV.52 and Vivahapatala 16, 97 speak of
Jataka as an earlier work. In his Viorti on Yogayāirā Utpala gives the
order of Varaha’s works as follows : (i) P. Siddhantika, (ii) Jataka,
(iii) YaksyeSvamedhiya Yatra, (iv) Yogayatra, (v) Vivàhapajala, and
(vi) Samhita. But after writing all these works Varaha must have
1. The word Tikanika must be a vernacular name for ‘small.’ Cf. Kannada
word, cikani, in this sense.
2. Under B. J. XX. 10.
4. B.J. XXIV. 16; XXVIII. 3.
5. Wide India As seen in Br Samhita, p. 32.

Introduction xv
revised them. For, in P.S.XV.10 he refers to Samhita; in B.].
XXVIII.6 to V. Pafala and Samhità in the past tense.
Many other works are also attributed to the Acarya. Al-Birüni
states that Varaha wrote Horàpaficaltotrya and a work on architecture.
The latter must be the chapters LIII, LVI and LVII of B.S. that
deal with this subject.
Vatakanika seems to be a work on portents. 120 verses of this
work are quoted in Ballalasena’s Adbhutasdgara as those of Varahamihira. He is supposed to have written works on erotics and poetics
too. Another work in manuscript entitled Paiicapaksi is attributed to
our author. It is a short work on divination through the five vowels
अ, इ, उ, and at. It has a commentary too. Other works attributed
to him are Prasnamahodadhi, Prasnacandrikd, and Daivajfiavallabha.
Subject matter : The term Samhita connotes ‘compilation.’ As
such it cannot be an original work. Its business is to condense many
Sastras. It should, therefore, include details of many subjects
found in varied works. The Samhita, in astrological parlance, is
nothing but an encyclopaedia of astrological and other subjects of
human interest. It is also mundane astrology with many scientific
topics and other subjects in which human beings have an abiding
faith. Hence the Samhita can rightly be termed a work of social
Science. For, social science should have reference to and explanation
of almost all aspects of social life and those that have a human
appeal. The structure of the Samhità is such that it gives ample
scope for the exhibition of the poetic genius and artistic talents of
the author. For, to state a simple fact the author uses poetic
language abounding in figures and hyperbole while describing
Agastya (cf. XIX.13-15). When we go through this work, we are
reminded of Homeric similes and the linguistic elegance and charm
of Valmiki, Vyasa, Bhasa and Kalidasa. Whatever subject the author
takes up for delineation, whether it is eclipse, planetary movements,
rainfall, clouds, gemology, architecture, water-divination or some
other topic, it is discussed with thoroughness and mastery based on
the knowledge of ancient Sastras.
Varaha had several predecessors in the field of Samhita, whom
he mentions by name, viz., Garga, Parasara, Kasyapa, Rsiputra,
Devala, Brhaspati, Nandiévara, etc. He mentions both Vrddha
Garga and Garga. He shows great regard for ancient sages. In
every chapter he invariably mentions the authorities on the topic to
be discussed.! Whenever he differs from their views, he gives his
1. Cf. XXI. 2; XXXII. 1; XLVI. 1.

set Brhat Samhita
Sukra, Vagiga (Guru), Vasistha, Kapisthala, Garutmat, Rsabha,
Bharadvaja, Vi$vakarman, Narada, Nagnajit, King Dravyavardhana,
Saptarsimata and Yatrakaras. His store of knowledge is very vast,
having studied all works on the subject both in Sanskrit and Prakrit.
He has followed closely the Samhitàs of ancient Sages like
that of Vrddha Garga. The Vrddhagargiya contains practically the
same topics with an additional chapter entitled Yugapurdna. Varaha’s
respect for a good astrologer is commendable. For, according to
him, a country that does not possess a good astrologer is doomed. A
good astrologer must be an all-rounder : He must know everything
connected with the three Skandhas, astronomy, horoscopy and
Sakha or Samhita. The last one like the Mahabharata should treat
of every subject under the sun.
This work holds the mirror to the social conditions and the
cultural height attained by India in the author’s time. Most of the
arts and crafts were practised and encouraged by the rulers and the
ruled. For example, architecture, sculpture, iconography, manufacture of cemerts, perfumes, cosmetics, medicines, umbrellas, ornaments, etc., construction of chariots, cots, etc. were practised with
consummate skill. Metallurgy, weaving, painting, music, dancing,
acrobatics, leather work, calligraphy, book making, etc. had reached
a high standard of perfection. People used to hold cock fights for
the delight of all. Rich people used to tend in their houses fishes,
tortoises, etc. The practice of Sutee was in vogue. People knew veterinary science, botany (Vrksayurveda), movements of birds and
beasts, water-divination, weather conditions and good and bad
auguries. People were generally highly cultured and enjoyed good
life. This is borne out by ‘Praise of Women,’ ‘Erotic Remedies,’ etc.
In mundane astrology, eclipses play an important role. The
author refers to the ancient view about eclipses, and dismisses it as
unscientific. We understand that Mercury has a major say in the
matter of price-fluctuation. This work appears to be meant for the
benefit of kings. For, Agastyacara, Indradhvaja, Pusyasnana, etc. are
specially meant for them. They are also advised to perform worship
on these occasions In ancient times kings had human observatories.
Without meticulous care and keen observation, how could they find
out if Jupiter became visible at daytime or at night (VIII. 18).
Geographical details of Varaha do not depart much from those
of his predecessors. He follows Vrddha Garga in this field. Geographical details are met with even in Vedic literature: The Satqpatha
Brahmana states that the land known as Kuru-Páficálas was the home

xxii Brhat Samhita
whereas elsewhere they are 7} P. and 14 P. respectively. In LIV
Sarasvata’s treatment is more detailed, while Manu’s is general. The
latter alludes to conditions for different tastes of water. The author
names nine varieties of water veins. It is regrettable that we have
no means of knowing about Sdrasvata’s work except through Utpala’s
quotations. Manu speaks of types of stones that have water underneath. It is interesting that this sage gives recipes for breaking
hard stones,! and sage U$anas for making swords unbreakable.”
While speaking of tank construction our author states? that
tanks should have long sides on the east and west. He gives a recipe!
for purifying well-water. For rain-water Varaha's authority is Baladeva,
but Utpala does not quote him. On the other hand, he quotes from
the works of Rsiputra, Garga, Devala and Kasyapa. So we are in the
dark about the work of Baladeva, which was available to the
author.
It is felt that Chapters LVI to LX should have been arranged
after LIII, but the author gives the reason for the change in LVI. 1.
According to Maya and Vifvakarman the height of a temple-storey
should be 108 and 84 digits respectively. Maya is the authority
mentioned by our author for his treatment of adamantine glue.? In
LVIII we are given units of lineal measurements: Paramdnu (Atom),
Rajas ( Dust-particle), Valagra (Tip of hair), a Nit, Louse, Barley, and
digit, each following measure being eight times the previous one.
JNagnajit seems to have written on Dravida architecture and sculpture.
There was also a system of measurement known as Dràvidamána. But
this science was prevalent in the south long before Nagnajit. It is
not known whether he was a Digambara Jaina or one who had conquered them. Sage Vasistha wrote on sculpture. Varaha describes in
detail all the limbs of an idol from head to foot with their measurements. The description of Srimahdvisnu is very entrancing and reads
like Dhyanaslokas’. In the list of Gods and Goddesses described here
there is no mention of Sarasvati, Kali or the Planets. There are some
common features between Chapters XLIII and LIX in respect of
trees.
9. SAA
ZL, ao TIN. 191,122)
SEES VIT `

Introduction xxiii
The ceremony of consecration and installation of idols! is
very interesting and significant in that it has great esoteric meaning.
The Deity is treated like a new-born child or a king in respect of
sleep, food, clothing, etc.? In Verse 19 Varaha states that the
Magas are the accredited priests for installing the Sun’s images.
Physiognomy and Palmistry are treated of in three chapters,
LXVIII-LXX. In the first he speaksof thirteen elements in the case
of men for predicting their past and future. The knower of this Science
is called Sámudravid. This lore is known as Sàmudrika Sàstra. It is held
by some that Samudra means Lord Visnu, while by others, Siva. It
may also be the name of a class of writers on this subject. It is the
name of a work quoted by Padmanábha. Vardha does not mention any
particular authority here except “मुनिमतानि निरीक्ष्य. Even sage Garga
refers to Samudra? (LXVIII). Monier Williams mentions some
later works like the Samudratilaka of Durlabharaja; Sdadmudrikakanthabharana and Samudrikacandrikd. The Viramitrodaya of Mitramisra (of
about the l4th century A.D.) mentions the signs of men and
women (Purusalaksana and Strilaksana) among a variety of subjects
included in this Samhita. It quotes several works like the जगन्मोहन,
समुद्र, विवेकविलास, स्क्रान्द, भविष्यपुराण, प्रयोगपारिजात, गरुड़पुराण, नारदोयसंहिता, गर्गसंहिता and हेमाद्रि. According to this work too the
Gargasamhità quotes Samudra on Anüka (heredity and previous life).
Garga is quoted in this work in respect of 24076 or lustre. According
to the Bhavisyapurána thick and large thumbs indicate lack of luck.
Garga, on the other hand, has given unusualimportance to the eyes:
एकतो दुर्लक्षणशतं सौम्यं चक्षुस्तथकत: । दुर्लक्षणशतं हन्यान्नरः सौम्येन चक्षुषा |i
तस्मान्नेत्रे . . . पश्येत्कालवित् Uu”
According to Prahlada the lines on the body constitute the
Mudrds imprinted by Ivara. Hence the body becomes Samudra or
Samudraka. So this science is termed Samudrika. This Chapter ( LXVIII)
has many ideas that are common to the Valmiki Ramayana. This has
been shown in appropriate places in the notes. Haldyudha must have
written a work on SdmudrikaSastra. For, in his commentary on the
Pingala ChandaSsastra there are given a large number of illustrative
verses bearing on this interesting subject. Verses 89 and 116 are
excellent both as poetry and as portraits of truth. The latter giving
four constituents of real happiness, viz., food, drink, conveyance and
l. Vide LX.
2. Interested readers may read an article on this subject in the Ananta
Vibhava Souvenir, April, 1976, by us.
3. Vide LXVIII. 95.

XXIV Brhat Samhita
protection when needed, isreminiscent of a Subhdsita, ४12.,““षड॒जीवलोकस्य
सुखानि राजन्.” In LXX.23 there is a famous Subhdsita or Arthantaranydsa
which is reminiscent of Kalidasa’s famous line “यदुच्यते पार्वति पापवृत्तये
न रूपमित्यव्यभिचारि तद्वचः” as well as Sudraka’s remark, “न agfa:
g (स्व) aa विजहाति वृत्तम् ll! : This chapter contains many repetitions of ideas already explained in LXVIII.?
We find excellent erotic poetry and Srigara in LXXIV with
superb imagery, like Sara, Vyatireka, Küvyalinga, Upamd and Arthantaranydsa. Manu's testimonial for women's superiority in nine verses
is highly dignified and unique in world literature. The simile in the
last verse is very telling and full of humour—“ Thieves, when caught
red-handed, cry ‘thieves, thieves." Manu opines that by and large,
women have greater self-control than men. Verse 16 shows that
Varaha honours the Suite custom. “The quintessence of kingdom
consists in dainty food and damsels” is a fine general statement. Verses
18 and 19 are still more erotic in nature: “Even in the world of
Brahman one cannot hope to get the joy that is experienced by
embracing a loving damsel.” In LXXV our author makes a statement which deserves to be tested by psycho-analysts and those
engaged in researches on genetics. For, he says that a woman gives
birth to a child that will resemble wholly the man whom she thinks
ofat the time of sexual congress. In verse 3 he states some of the
Upanisadic principles regarding the experience of sensual objects
by the Soul. There are also some excellent poetic pieces as well as
some nice pieces of advice for daily life. LXXVI tenders very good
advice to newly married young men about food and what they
should avoid. Verse 12 is also important from the point of personal
hygiene. This proves the author's deep knowledge of medical
science.
Chapter LXXVII apart from showing the author's mathematical genius, gives us a peepinto the high level of civilization of the
people of his times. For, wealthy people used to manufacture luxury
materials such as hair-dyes, hair-oils, scents, cosmetic powders, incenses, bathing powders, Sarvatobhadra scents, Parijdta, Kesaragandha, etc.,
powders for perfuming the mouth, tooth-powder, tooth-sticks, etc.
Verses 35-37 describe the advantages of betel-chewing and method
of using its constituents. The words Turuska and Yavana throw light
on the ancient trade relations that our country had with the west.
| 1 Vide Mrcchakatika. IX. 16.
2. 'The chapters on Cámara and Chatra could have been incorporated by the
side of those on Khadga, Paf[a, etc.

In troduction VAM
Probably the Turks and Greeks were expert manufacturers of perfumes. The instances of feminine treachery mentioned in LXXVII,
1, 2, are repeated in Sanskrit literature like Bana’s Harsacarita. There
are some very good indications of conjugal harmony mentioned in
verses 4-6, and of disharmony in verse 8. He advises people to
guard women against certain classes of persons and occasions. He
states that virtuous women are called gems. He does not hesitate
in condemning bad women. This too proves conclusively the author's
thorough grasp of the essence of Kamasastra. He advises people with
what type of women they should have sexual relations.!
In ancient India handicrafts were encouraged by kings and
the aristocracy. Various kinds of cots were made for different classes
of high officials. *A cot made of sandalwood and covered with gold
and decked with gems is envied even by Gods.' The decorations are
generally done with ivory.? He speaks of Karmangula (practical digit)
in this connection, which is the distance of eight husked barley
grains (verse 8).
Gemology is another important topic discussed in LXXX.
He mentions in all 22 gems and describes the qualities and varieties
of diamonds (verses 4, 5). In verses 12, 13 he enumerates units of
weights of gems and their corresponding values. Here the weight of
8 white mustard seeds is considered as equal to one rice grain. The
price of a diamond weighing 20 Tandulas (rice grains) is said to be
two lakh Karsapanas. In LX XXII. 6-11 he praises an excellent ruby
and mentions its prices according to weight. He states here that the
prices he has mentioned are based on the standards prescribed by
Pirvacaryas. In the previous chapter pearls are described. He says
that best pearls are got from eight places headed by Simhalaka. These
pearls differ from one another in shape and shade. They are also
presided over by different Deities headed by Visnu, on the basis of
their colours. Their prices are given in Karsas silver on the basis
of weights in Mdsakas. Here the units of weights are Krsnala (Retti),
Masaka, Dharana, Suvarna and Pala. He speaks of 18 types of Pearlnecklaces. This is another proof of the high water-mark of workmanship attained by the artisans of those days.1
In LXXXV we find principles of public health and sanitation
highlighted following Ayurvedic injunctions.
— प aaa
1. Vide LXXVIII. 16-18.
23 > IDOLOS, NO;
3. 80 silver coins make one Pana and 20 Panas one Karsapana.
4. For different binds of ornaments see XLIII. 41-49.

xxvi Brhat Samhità
Chapters LXXXVI to XCVI form one vast section dealing
with omens and auguries. The author mentions several authorities
for this subject. A king of Avanti named Sridravyavardhana is also said
to have written on this subject. Unlike portents which always bode
ill these auguries presage both prosperity and adversity for those
going on a journey, as a result of their good and bad deeds of a
previous existence. Unless the ancients had been keen observers of
the heavens, how could they have stated the several conditions of
planetary warfare, Tamasakilakas (comet), eclipses, etc. ? Similarly,
they observed carefully the psychological behaviour of birds and
beasts as well as those caused by environments such as the seasons.
This is borne out by the delineation of the multitudinous omens.
This reminds us of Kalidasa’s statement, “सत्त्वानामपि लक्ष्यते विकृतिमच्चित्तं
भयक्रोघयो :.” Hence these omens are an instance of the psychological
study of animals and of their impact on human behaviour. Even
trees and creepers are supposed to presage coming events. It is to be
remembered that there are hundreds of references to auguries and
portents in the Ramayana and the Mahābhārata. It is claimed that
even in the Vedas there are such references. Panini refers to them
in many places. The ancients observed minutely the nest-building
activity of crows in particular months in order to predict future
prospects for the country. Prediction of rain and pests is made on
the basis of these nests.
The author gives in this connection a useful list of synonyms of
birds and beasts.
During our author’s time, it is presumed, women were practising astrology and sooth-saying. They were called Tksanikas.
We can make a fair surmise about the commencement of seasons during the author’s time. According to him the year began
with Sigira (cold season). But Garga opines that it begins with
Vasanta, the spring. Among the months, the pride of place is given
to Kartlika by the author, because of the importance of Kritika from
early times. According to Suíruta the months begin with Magha and
the Rius (seasons) with Sisira.
Among the Chapters CIV assumes special importance on
account of its being a mini text book on prosody, though it treats
of the effects of planetary transits. The author utilizes this opportunity to teach prosody to posterity. It is believed that he wrote a
2. ,, LXXXVIII, 4-9.
Sy >>> IP

xxviii Brhat Samhita
14. Samuccaya : CIV. 1.
15. Arthàpatti : II. 25, 32; XII. 14; LXXI. 13; LXXIV. 20.
16. Atifayokti : IT. 17.
17. Rüpaka (Metaphor) : XII. 6; XLIII. 32; XLIV- 1; XLVIIL. 1,
18. Punaruktavadabhasa and Yamaka : XII 3; XIX. 2; 5.
19. Parikara : XXIV. 1, 2; CV. 9-12.
90. Vifesokti : XII. 4.
Varaha’s Nature-description
The author’s descriptions of nature, of the ocean, gardens,
clouds, towns, mountains, forests, monsoon, autumn and the starry
heavens, and of fish, frogs, horses, etc. of sage Agastya’s feat, are
both graphic and fascinating. We find in them sound echoing the
sense, nay, both dancing, as it were, in unison.? It is also to be
noted that like Kalidasa, he makes Nature a vivacious damsel. He
knows also how to get maximum effect by means of appropriate
metres, containing alliteration. For example, in XXIV. 13 and 14
the Puspitagra metre heightens the grandeur of the theme in such a
way that the reader feels as though he is about to be drenched by
a heavy shower: Here the four elements, viz., description, jingling
assonance, elegant diction and theme—all work in unison to produce
maximum effect on the reader's mind. The following examples will
illustrate the author's powers of description of nature.?
Erotic Sentiment is much in evidence in the description of the
year presided over by Venus, of the rite for Pusyasnana and of erotic
remedies.*
Practically every verse in.this chapter has slesa which is a necessity.
Vide XII. 2-12; XIII. 1, 2; XXIV. 12-19.
> pS
XIX. 16, 18; XLVIII. 8, 10; LXXIV. 4, 17-19; LXXVI. 7.

Introduction xm
Kalidasa's influence is clearly discernible in the images, descripens eel language employed by Varahamihira. In many places
Vàlmiki's phrases and ideas as well as analogies are re-echoed by
the author. In our previous edition some examples of this were
provided. In this edition, however, a larger number of parallelisms
have been pointed out in the notes
instances of striking parallelism :
(1) The descriptions of Sarat and clouds resemble those of
Kalidasa in the Raghuvamsa IV and the Meghadita respectively.
(2) The description of clouds, ‘eaatftart:’ (XXIV. 18) is
reminiscent of “स्रवन्मदवारिधारा : . . . सुखान्युपलेभिरे ते? (Raghu. XIII).
(3) “मनो हि मूलं ...” (LXXVIII. 14) is very similar to
Kalidasa’s “a कामवृत्तिवंचनीयमीक्षते' and ““मनोरथानामगतिन विद्यते and to
Valmiki’s “मनो हि हेतुः सर्वेषामिन्द्रियाणां sad? (V).
(4) “प्रलम्बबाहुः: .. .” (CV. 9) reminds us of Kalidasa’s “युवा
थुगव्यायतबाहु . . .” (Raghu. III).
(5) “wama . . . (CV. 10-12) resembles Kalidàsa's “सर्वोपमा-
(6) “सरस्सु नलिनी ...” (LVI. 4-7) is an echo of Vàlmiki's
““हंसकारण्डवाकीर्णा . . . (V).
(7) ““परदारद्वेषिणः ... ” (LXVIII. 25) is verily like" वशिनां तु
परपरिग्रहसंश्लेष . . . ” (शाकु०) .
(8) “सर्वोपकारानुगतस्य ..." (LXXV. 9) reminds us of ** सर्वोपकारक्षममाश्रमं ते) (रघु० V).
(9) “विस्तीर्ण . . .? and “wet स्त्रिया . . . (LXX. 4, 5) are ona
par with “एतावता नन्वनुमेयशोभि ..." and “तस्याः प्रविष्टा नतनाभि . . .” (कुमार० 1).
(10) “ashina गुणा auf" (LXX. 23) and “प्राय: शरीराकारानु-
वत्तिनो. . . (11. 2) echo “यदुच्यते पार्वति . . .” (gue V).
(11) “देदीप्यमानं wq (XLIII. 6) is similar to Vàlmiki's
“पोप्लूयमानं शरदीव dm (V).
(12) “उत्पतद्धूरिव खं . . - "(XLIV.26) is analogous to ““वश्योदग्नप्लुतत्वाद् . . .” (mgo) and also the description of the Puspaka in the
Sundarakanda of the Ramayana.
(13) “क्षमया क्रोध इव जिवः” (XLVIII. 13) isan exact replica of
Valmiki’s “a: समुत्पतितं क्रोधं क्षमयैव निरस्यति." ES
(14) “पुलिनजघनेषु . . . (XLVIII. 8) echoes “या eng..."
Ra hu. XIII) . ` >
ee (15) “'पोप्लतहंसच्छत्रे . . (Do. 9) is like “पद्मा maqam. . . (Raghu.
: Hereunder are given a few

XXX Brhat Samhita
(16) ““जलखगनखविक्षेतेषू” (Do. 8) is similar in idea to “नखक्षतानीव
वनस्थलीनाम्?” (कुमार० III).
(17) “ब्रोत्तुड्रकुड्मलकुचा: (Do. 10) resembles “आवर्जिता किञ्चिदिव
स्तनाभ्यां . . . aaa”? (कुमार० III).
(18) PINEA . - 2? (Do. 14) echoes “न दुर्वेहश्रोणिपयोधरार्ता . . O
(कुमार० I).
(19) “eat रत्नोज्ज्वला राज्यसुखस्य सार:” (LXXIV. 1) reminds us of
Valmiki’s “द्वैलोक्यराज्यं सकलं सीताया नाप्नुयात्कलाम् .
(20) ““नभः प्रसन्नं विमलानि भानि. . .? is similar to ““प्रसन्नदिक् पांसुविविक्त. ..””
(कुमार० I).
His Language : Like Kalidasa our author wields language with
rare felicity as well as facility. His language is remarkable for its
simplicity, lucidity, delightful diction and lilting alliteration. Though
he takes poetic licence many 4 time in respect of grammatical construction, gender, etc., his style is distinguished by what are called
Draksapaka, Prasáda, Madhurya, Sukumarata and other poetic excellences. Where necessary he uses Ojas i.e. long compounds, also for
effectiveness as in the description of Agastya (XII). Acarya Dandin
praises Kalidasa’s 'प्रसादसुभगं वचः’. We can say, likewise, that the description of the Seven Sages ( Pleids) is noteworthy for its pleasant,
simple diction and enrapturing imagery. We can cite as examples
the verses describing the sky (XXXI. 5), house CINE), man’s
physiognomy (LXVIII. 1, 89, 91), woman's superiority (LXXIV.
3, 5, 17), erotic remedies (LXXVI. 2) and the effects of Mercury's
transit (CIV. 22): The descriptions of Gods like Visnu contain the
excellence called Udaratà. Of course the work is replete with
Samadhi in the descriptions of nature and seasons.
Rare Expressions : Varaha uses some rare expressions invariably
following the ancient Sages ; afz, अन्तिः, ईक्षणीक (for ईक्षणिका ) , भिक्षुणिका
(Sanskritized form of the Pali word), वणिजका:. “नद्यः पयो न saf”
(XIX. 1), ग्रध्वानरुचिः (LX VIII. 80), frat and मानयितुः (XCV. 61). The
word मानयिता is generally used in the sense of ‘one who honours’; but
the author uses it in the sense of ‘one who believes or has faith’. In
Hindi it is still used in that sense. So we can infer that Varaha
uses it in its correct sense, which might have undergone a change
over the centuries. The expression “प्रियं चान्तम् ? (GOIN WE) meaning
‘scarce and costly’ is still used in some parts of India like K arnataka
in that sense. The word dpa meaning acrobat must be very old,
possibly designating a class of people. It is still used in the South
in the same sense in the compound zitaue (play of acrobats). Another peculiarity of his language is that he resorts to Anuyrtli, as in

Iniroductton xxxi
grammar. For example, in XXI. 8 the subject, Garbhah, isto be
borrowed from the previous verse. There are many expressions like
र धात्री वश्यं सागरान्ताश्भ्युपति” (LXXXVIII. 18) that are rather strange. So
is the one in “आखण्डलायां दिशि”? (XXXV. 7). This shows that the
author is carried away by his zeal for delineating the theme, and
forgets the grammatical niceties. There are many other violations of
Pàninian rules such as in प्रज्वालयित्वा and स्थाप्य, which are out of place
in this appreciation of the master's genius. Many a time the author
had to disregard grammatical rulesfor the sake of metre.
His Scholarship : His mastery over various Sastras becomes
apparent ‘when we go through this vast Book of Knowledge. Let us
first of all consider his scholarship of grammar, which again confirms
our conclusion that he had to discard grammatical norms only
under poetic licence. He uses the following scholarly expressions :
(i) Desideratives—frstaar, सज्चिक्षिप्सु:, दित्सन्ति, युयुत्सतः (for युयुत्समानस्य),
बिभक्षयिषुः, जुगुप्समानाः .
(ii) Frequentatives : पोप्लूयन्ते, पेपीयते, ' जेगीयते, बोभुज्यते, रोख्यते, बम्भ्रमीति,
mfg, देदीप्यमानम्, बोभुजीति, नरिनति (for नरीनति) .
(iii) Taddhitüntas (with secondary suffixes) : प्रास्थानिकम् शार्व्याम्,
तान्तवम्, ज्यैष्ठी, औपयिकम् वैया घ्रे, पार्वतीयाः (for पवंतीया:) , ग्रौदीच्याः (for उदीच्याः),
शाकुनी (for शाकुनिकः) , कौप्यैः (for कोपैः).
(iv) Nama-dhatus (Nominal Verbs): पुरीषणे, धूमायन् (£07 धूमायमानः).
(v) Compounds : अध्यक्षरम्.
His mastery over medical science, mathematics, DharmaSastra,
music, veterinary science, architecture, sculpture, perfumeries,
iconography, metallurgy, erotics, etc. has already been pointed out.
Metrics : This is another important branch of studies where he
evinces exceptional originality and mastery. This is evidenced by his
remark in the Brhajjataka, viz., वृत्तविचित्रम् (1.2). His employment of
metres is judicious and free from artificiality. His choice metres add
charm to the subject matter under discussion. Chapter CIV on
planetary transits is especially utilized by the author to teach
Prosody Without Tears to his pupils ( श्रुतिसुखदवृत्तसङग्रह). His verses are
more charming like जघनचपला (courtesan). He introduces through
pun the names of metres employed in the verses. It is to be remembered that the basic metre adopted by the author in this work is the
common variety of Arya. Identification of metres has invariably
been done in the notes under the verses of other chapters as well.
According to the author even great Sastras of yore suffer for want of

xxxii Brhat Samhita
a good metrical form, because they appear unattractive.’ मणिगुणfim" is an example of fine poetry.? In this chapter alone he employs seven varieties of the Arya and 52 other metres. He has used three
kinds of Dandakas. In this connection we can remember that Pingala
mentions Ratamandavya (or Rata and Mandavya P) as a writer on
prosody; and Varaha names Mandavya. It is possible that Rata and
Mandavya refer to one and the same writer; but according to Utpala
they are two persons as Ratamandavya and Mandavya. Another
feature of this section is that he gives the definition of some of the
metres. For example, in verses 50 and 51 he gives the rules for
Upagiti and Arya; in 57 for Sloka and in 58 for treating the last short
syllable in a foot as long.
Our author uses many metres which are not found in any work
on prosody. The two verses, viz., 5 and 13, of XLVII have not been
named, though they come under the Pankti group. He resorts also
to grafting of one metre on another and thereby creates a new
metre : Verse 14 of XLVII has been effected by combining one foot
of the Rathoddhat (of eleven syllables) and the other of Priyamwvadaà
(of twelve syllables). This has resulted in the creation of a new
Ardhasama metre. In LXXXV. 6 he combines one of Vatormi with another of Salini; in LXXXVIII verses 19, 21 and 27 are in Bhadravirat
minus the last long syllable; verse 26 of XLVII is of a nameless
metre, but it is a variety of Upasthita where instead of the penultimate long syllable there is a short one; in XXXIII. 29 the metre
cannot be identified; verse 31 of LXXXVIII is an amalgam of
Samanika and Pramanikd; verse 12 of LXIX is in an unidentified
metre, but in a footnote of the Pizigalacchandas the author of the
note Sri krsna by name calls it Snigdhà metre; he uses Prakrta metre in
LXX. 18 and in another place. He gives entirely new names to
certain metres : He gives a romantic name, Vildsini, to CIV. 32,
which is found neither in Piigala nor in the Vrttaratnàkara. He calls
the metre Harini by the name Vrsabhacarita (CIV. 10). All these
things suggest that Varaha had a more ancient source like Mandavya,
which must have been more thorough than either. In XIV. 6 (I
half) out of 30 matrás he has used 22 short syllables, thereby showing
his mastery over metrics. In XXIV. 13, 14 he employs the Puspi16276 metre with telling effect. He makes use of the Aryagiti rarely
as in XCV. 15, 33 andLVIII. 58. In a large number of instances
1. Vide CIV. 1.

Introduction ced
HI
he employs Arya of the Vipulà type.! He uses longer metres for the
purpose of description and condensing many ideas. The Drutavilambita in XXVIII. 11 is very happy and effective. His Varnaka Dandaka
must needs be mentioned for its choice diction and charming
assonance. i
In Chapter II some parts of the prose passages are found to be
metrical : “सांवत्सरोऽभिजातः”; “कुशलोऽव्यसनी शान्तिक . . .?; “तव्रतोपवासनिरत:_;
“ग्रहगणितसंहिताहो''; “पौलिशरोमकवासिष्ठसौरपैतामहेषु . . So “सूर्याचन्द्रमसोश्च . . 2;
“कक्ष्याप्रमाणप्रति . ..7 “क्षेतरकालकरणेपु??; “शास्त्रस्य वक्ता qun" etc. In the
above examples we can detect parts of Arya, Sloka, Dandaka, Sarditlavikridita etc. Similarly in some of the Arya verses we can discover
parts of the Sloka metre.?
No doubt, a few instances of metrical flaw have been detected
in this work. Some of them may be ascribed to the carelessness of
scribes; e.g. in XXXIV. 2 there is one Matra surperfluous in the
second foot ending in “हरितशुक्ला :. The author must have written
“«हुरिशुक्लाः?. Varaha is aware of Pingala’s rule regarding Atihrasva
when a short syllable is followed by प्र or ह. The footnote under
this? reads thus : “वस्तुतस्तु तत्र न गुरुत्वम्.
Varaha must have been acquainted with the works of ancient
sages on prosody such as क्रौष्टुकि, यास्क, ताण्डि, सैतव, काश्यप, शत, माण्डव्य etc.
who have been referred to by Pingala. Our author uses the word
““छन्दोविचिति? in CIV. 64 like Dandin. We cannot say definitely
whether there was a popular work of that title before our author;
or the science of metrics might have been popularly known as
Chandoviciti.
The author's knowledge of the Vedas, sacrificial lore and
propitiatory rites is stupendous. For, he summarizes, sometimes, some
Mantras and at others, quotes their initial words : In XLIII. 55 he
quotes the initial part of the Mantra, '"पतत्वातारमिन्द्रमवितारमिद्ध . . . In
LXXIV. 7 while quoting Manu's views with approval he exhibits
his deep knowledge of both the Dharmagastra and Vedic Mantras such
as “सोमः प्रथमो विविदे गन्धर्वो विविद उत्तर: . . १4 ग्रापो हि ष्ठा. . .?, “हिरण्यवर्णा . ..”,
“आयुष्यं वर्चस्यं . . . ° Similarly he demonstrates his close acquaintance
|. Vide Vrttaratnakara II. 26.
95; LX. 10; LXVIII. 61; LXIX. 1, 2; LXXVIII. 19; LXXIX. 22; VIII. 8.
3. Vide Pingala chandas page 5; and XXX. 9 for तनुहुस्व.

XXX1V Brhat Samhita
with the rule of Dharma-Sastra regarding Ddratikrama' and with
many sacrificial rites such as स्थालीपाक, “रुद्रेभ्यः ``” षडेव होमाः, प्राजा-
पत्यमन्व, "m amc इति पञ्चर्चः, “देवाः BAIA”, “सुदेवाः `` „ शाकुनसूक्त,
“वा mat”, अथर्वशिरः, महाशान्तयः, महारौहिण, कुबेरहृदय, समृद्धित्रक् and
इष्टापूर्त 1°
His intimate acquaintance with the Agama-sastra is attested to
by his scholarly treatment of iconography, installation of idols, temple architecture etc. He must have studied thoroughly all the six
traditions of that Sastra, ofwhich the Saiva and Vaisnava schools stand
out most prominently. It is interesting to note that there is close
relationship between this Sastra and the Samhita literature in astrology. For, both of them treat of the subjects such as art, architecture, gemology, painting, sculpture, town-planning, gardening, etc.,
etc. We are able to infer that in his time there was a famous work
on Agamasastra entitled Savitra.?
We have already seen that the author was an expert in
Ayurveda for human beings and trees. He mentions several recipes
for health and long life. He evinces his close acquaintance with
genetics and other subjects treated of in Ayurveda. Chapter LXXVI
is full of interesting recipes for the preparation of tonics and elixirs.
In verse 11 he gives a very good prescription for digestive troubles.
In the next verse he advises people to refrain from eating excessively
sour, bitter, salt and pungent dishes. His advice regarding ghee’
reminds us of the Vedic dictum, “आयुर्वे घृतम्. He explains how tanks
should be constructed and what kind of trees planted on its banks,
so that there may be pure water for drinking purpose. As an
intimate knowledge of herbs and trees is essential for a physician,
the author shows his proficiency in that branch also." His description of the preparation and benefits of tooth powder and chewing
betel leaves would bear repetition. His reference to Pranayama and
the process of the soul’s experiencing pleasure and pain confirms
our belief in his acquaintance with Pataijala Yogasütras, Samkhya
and other systems of philosophy.?
. Vide LXXIV. 13.
> XINVIII 71; EVI. 2y eS 222
„» LXXVI. 1; LXXVIII. 23, 24, 26.
» XLVIII. 52.
» XCV. 62; LXXV. 3.

Introduction XXXV
The author shows his intimate knowledge of culinary art also,
as he refers several times to sweets and other tasty edibles like मोदक,
उल्लोपिका, पूप, शष्कुली, पायस, गुडाशन, त्रिमधुर, परमान्न, भक्ष्य, दधि etc. His knowledge of ornithology is borne out by his detailed treatment of various
species of birds in connection with auguries. In this connection we
are tempted to refer again to the wholesome political tradition
prevalent in ancient times, viz., at the end of the Royal Ablution the
king should proclaim protection to the subjects, release animals from
the hands of butchers and order a general amnesty to prisoners
except those who endanger internal peace.”
Author’s Temperament, Character etc. : Varahamihira must have been
a man of robust optimism, humanism, humour, jovial temperament
and a high moral calibre. For, he says that men should not be
thwarted by fate or dejected by his Karman whose effects are presaged by portents and evil omens, but he should try to undo or
mitigate their evil consequences by proper and timely expiatory rites.
The portents are said to affect mankind both individually and
collectively. They affect kings especially as they are the very foundation of the State-edifice?. He must have enjoyed both royal patronage and domestic felicity. We can justly infer that he enjoyed good
dress and cosmetics as well as chewing betel leaves. He seems to
have closely studied the Science of Erotics (KamaSastra) , trade and
commerce (Arthasstra), rnetrology; meteorology, poetics and philosophy. He appears to have taken keen interest in the worship of
Gods, Visnu, Siva and others, though his chief Deity of worship was
the Supreme Sun God. He must have been influenced by the Yoga
of Devotion propounded by Lord Krsna. His devotional fervour is
apparent in his firm faith in the power of Agastya to remove all
sins, and in his fine delineation of the features of Lord Visnu, which
is on a par with his Dhyàna- sloka.^
He was a psychologist par excellence too. He was a keen
observer of external nature as wellas human nature and knew the
working of the human mind. His ethicalstandard was very high and
his instructions on moral conduct are worth their weight in gold.
1. Vide XLIII. 38; XLVIII. 31; LIX. 8; XCV. 20; XII. 17.
2. „XLVIII. 8l.

XXXVI Brhat Samhita
Commentaries
It is presumed that the Brhat Samhita, which had attained
great fame in olden days, had many scholarly commentaries. It is a
well-known fact that scholarship was measured in India in terms of
original writings and scholarly commentaries on famous works.
However, we have noknowledge of any commentary on this work
prior to that of Bhattotpala, from whose references we can conclude
that there were at least two schools of interpretation on the Brhat
Samhita, for the reasons mentioned below :
(1) Under LXVIII. 2 he says : केचिद् रुचिर . . . इति पठन्ति.
(2) He condemns the reading तिर्यञ्चम् in 108 and prefers the
ancient reading तिरश्चाम्.
(3) Under LXXVI. 11 he states “axa काञ्जिकम्, पय इति केचित्.
(4) Under LXVIII. 1 he dislikes the reading ‘प्रकृतयश्च ततोऽह्नूकम्?
for its grammatical flaw, saying “aR अन्यथा पठन्ति. He refutes their
arguments ably.
(5) In verse 57 again he says “केचिन्मुदु. . 2.
(6) Inverse 63he refers to more than one interpretation :
(7) Under LXXXVI. 68 and 78 he refers to two schools of
interpretation and concludes ‘एषैव व्याख्या ज्यायसी.”
(8) Under verse 12 he condemns the interpretation of some in
respect of maga fea, as ‘aa केचित् . . . श्रयुक्तमेतत्? and quotes भगवान् गर्ग.
(9) Under verse 31 while construing the word शौण्डिक, he says
“मधपानसक््त:, कल्यपाल इति Shaq.’
(10) Under verse 79 he refers to two interpretations : एवं
केचिद् व्याचक्षते, भ्रन्ये चतस्रो दिश इच्छन्ति.'
(11) Under LIII. 75 while referring to नवगुणसूत्र .. . he condemns outright some interpreters : ‘aa केचिदनिश्चितबुद्धयो विकल्पांश्चोदयन्ति . . 2
and quotes several authorities like नन्दी, गर्ग, etc. to prove his contention.
(12) Under verse 31 he says ‘केचित् aaa इति वर्धयन्ति..
(13) Under verse 41 he states 'केचिदविदितशास्त्रसऱ-ह्वावा मन्यन्ते.'
(14) Under XI. 7 he refers to व्याख्याविप्रतिपत्ति (conflicting interpretations) and gives the correct interpretation.
(15) Under V. 26 he quotes another interpretation : ‘Ha एवं
व्याचक्षते.”
(16) Under LXI. 5, 6 he says ‘अक्षिभ्यां शिश्नेन च सिञ्चतीति केचित्.'

Introduction k
(17) Under LXI. 19 twice he refers to other readings: केचित् ...
पठन्ति. à
(18) Under LXVIII. 12 he says: ‘केचित् . . . इति पठन्ति.
The name Bhattotpala itself proclaims that the commentator
was a Kashmirian. Al-Birini too specifically states this fact.
Varunabhatta commentator of the Khandakhàdyaka confirms the above
statement. Utpala lived in the middle of the 10th century A.D. For,
he states in his commentary on the Br. Jataka that he wrote his
Vivrti in Saka year 888 (966 A.D.). It was a Thursday coinciding
with the 5th lunar day of the bright fortnight of the lunar month
Caitra. The Brhat Samhitüà was commented upon by him towards
the end of thesame lunar year i.e. on a Thursday, Phalguna Krsna
Doitiya.
He has also commented upon the following works : Yogayatra,
Brhajjdtaka, Brhanmánasa) a Karana grantha according to Al-Biruni
I. 157), Laghujdtaka, Brhat Samhita, Khandakhadya, Satpancasika (of
PrthuyaSas).
His original works : He appears to have written many an
original work, some of which are the following :(1) Praínajüüna in
70 Arya verses on horary astrology.* (2) He seems to have written a
work entitled Bhattotpala-hora-Sastram in 75 verses. (3) According to
Al-Birüni, Utpala wrote a work entitled Rahunrakarana (Rahunirakarana ?) and Karanapata, whose authenticity cannot be vouchsafed.
(4) He states that he has written a work on Vástuvidya—architecture,
from which he quotes five lines in the Brhat Samhita.? Al-Birünr's
statements about his authorship of a work called the Sridhava are
conflicting.*
His Contribution : We have already pointed out Utpala’s
unique veneration for Varahamihira. He has rendered yeoman
service to the cause of Indian culture and Sanskrit learning by
means of his vast knowledge and practical experience of many
branches of learning. But for his erudition and able exposition many
passages and technical terms in this work would have remained
obscure to the readers. His quotations from many unknown works
are a boon to the world of scholars. His language is simple and
forceful. He is well informed about many technical subjects such as
1. ‘India’ I. 157, etc.
2. See the English translation of this work by this writer and V.S. Sastri,
Bangalore.
3. Vide LIII. 57.

XXXVill Brhat Samhita
astronomy, mathematics, poetics, Agama or Tantra, perfumery, etc
His frankness about his lack of practical knowledge of perfumes is
praiseworthy.! Even here his knowledge is by far above the average
For, he quotes from Jsvara’s work in Prakrta on this subject in order
to explain the terms Vedha and Bodha
He mentions several authorities and quotes extensively
from their works : (1) Unnamed authorities; (2) Agamavidah;
(3) Acaryavisnucandra; (4) Aryabhata; (5) Lsvara; (6) Rsiputra;
(7) Kapila; (8) Karana; (9) Katyapa; (10) Katyàyana; (11) Kamandaki;
(12) Kasyapa; (13) Kiranakhya-tantra; (14) Kusalah; (15) KhandaKhadyaka; (16) Garga; (17) Caraka; (18) Chandassastra; (19) Devala;
(20) Nagnajit: (21) Nandin; (22) Narada; (23) Nighantu; (24) Paiicasiddhantika; (25) Pardsara; (26) Pünini-sütras; (27) Purana;
(28) Purdnakara; (29) Pulisacarya; (30) Balabhadra; (31) Bahulaka;
(32) Brhajjataka; (33) Brhaspati; (34) Brahmagupta; (35) Bhattotpala;
(36) Bhadrabahu; (37) Bharadvàja; (38) Bhaànubhatia; (39) Bhrgu;
(40) Manudharmàh; (41) Maya; (42) Mayitracitraka (of Garga)
(43) Mimamsakas; (44) Yama; (45) Yavanesvara; (46) Yatra and
Yogayatra; (47) Rata-mandavyau; (48) Lokokti (49) Laukdyatika;
(50) Vararuci; (51) Vasistha; (52) Visvakarman; (53) Virabhadra;
(54) Virasoma (writer on Elephants’ Treatment); (55) Vrddha Garga
(or Bhagavan Garga) ; (56) Vyasa; (57) Sakra (Indra); (58) Salihotra;
(59) Sruti; (60) Samdasa-samhita (61) Samudra; (62) Sarasvata;
(63) Saravali; (64) Siddhasena; (65) Siddhartha; (66) Süryasiddhanta;
(67) Smrti; and (68) Hiranyagarbha.
His Learning : His vast learning is attested to by his explanations of the following difficult technical terms : Vedha and Bodha
(mixture of liquids and powders respectively) ; Pasdnta and Dafanta;?
Samavrtta (cylindrical); XKuksa (middle of the stomach) ;4 Visána
(tusk) ;5 Unmàna and Mana (height and weight); Isa (frame of a cot)?
Ksveda,’ Ghosa;s Vaitalika (Nagnacarya ?) ; Dindibhanda (musical drum) ;
Devalaka (Bhojaka, it may mean a temple-worshipper;? (Domba
1. Vide LXXVII.4.
2. ,, LXXI.9. The initial and final parts of a cloth.
4. ७५७, LXVII. 19. It may be an obsolete form of kuksi or kuksa.
5; IPODS DT
7. ,, LXXXVI. 39 sound produced by the. mouth.
8. ,, ibid. 78 a cavern, We cannot say if he is correct. It may mean a hamlet
is
„ LXXXVII. 16.

Introduction ;
a ; Kücchika (perfume manufacturer); Coksa (wicked);
kandha and Amsa (these are distinguished by him : the latter is the
side of the neck) ;1 he explains three kinds of Angula formed by the
distances of 8, 7 and 6 barleys; he also distinguishes the two intersecting diagonals as Varsa and Rajju, while the Acarya designates
both by the generic term Varia; Alupa (the junction of the collarbone and neck,? Anda (possibly means the dome) ;? Sukumáraka (the
raised portion or ridge of the ear);! Goccha (has not been explained
by him); Tristhénam mehate (has been explained by him as—JVilyam
galad-asruni caksusi bhavata ityarthah) ; Mani (is construed by him as
the bottom of a well, but we fee] that it means an artificial tank);
Kukundara{ is explained as Nitambar upakam (Küpakam?) ;it may be the
depressions in the hips] , Pecaka (root of the tail) °; Udumbara (consists of Dehali and Nitala, the threshold and its counterpart above);
Pitha (foundation) ; Sird (one of the 10 X 10 cross lines in the Vastu
chart); Karaviraka (inner corner of the eye);? and Tarkukd (those
who look at others’ faces) .
As observed above, his contribution to a variety of subjects of
human interest such as architecture, astronomy, water-divination,
etc. is astoundingly vast and deep. In the context of perfumeries he
says under LXXVII. 4: “All the ingredients must generally be
washed either with Kaijika or with pure water, some with cow’s
urine, and then cooked on gentle fire in an iron vessel along with
Nakha (shell perfume) and gingily oil. The Acarya has not given
these details. Wetoo have not given them for fear of making the
-work too big." Then under verse 8 he gives a. special rule : *"Wherever a scent is to be fumigated, first it should be done with Haritaki
and then only with the particular substance prescribed. This is the
tradition among the experts of this science.” In this connection we
are surprised at his becoming humility in spite of his vast knowledge and information that are both copious and remarkable. For, he
says: ““गन्धसंस्कारपाकवेधवोधध्पनादिकं नोक्तम् । एतत्तज्ज्ञेभ्य उपलभ्य कार्यम् D... न चास्माकमल्ल
तथाविधं प्रावीप्यम्? (LXXVII. 4) and quotes from the work Gandhayuktt
. Vide XC. 3.
कळ
, LVIII. 7, 9.
o LIII. 26.
„ LVIII. 13.
eio

x] Brhat Samhita
in Prakrta by one Í#ara. His keen scientific attitude and mathematical genius are revealed by his calculation and explanation of
the varieties of scents. He says that by Gaunavytti, secondary method,
the number is 174,720, but primarily 43,680. In this connection he
quotes a long passage from a JVighantu of synonyms of substances.
This shows that he was well acquainted with Apurveda also.
His profound scholarship in astronomy and mathematics is
attested to by the calculations and quotations he has given in
Chapter II. Therein he quotes profusely the Brahmasiddhénta,
Paiicasiddhantikà, Paulifa-siddhanta, Aryabhata, Bhatta Balabhadra,
Brahmagupta and Garga about the elements of calendar ( yuga Cte
whose smallest unit is } Trufi. It is surmised that he has written an
independent Karana grantha. Under II.12 he explains that the earth
hangs in space like an iron ball held steady between two magnets.
He tells us, in this connection, about the divergence of opinion
among the Zcàryas regarding the ‘lord of the day and Hora.’
His extraordinary proficiency in architecture is clearly proved
by his quotations and intimate knowledge of the various details of
the construction of houses and temples as well as iconography. He
supplements many statements of the Acàrya with lucid explanations
and apt quotations. According to his own statement he had written
a detailed work on architecture. He mentions three kinds of cubits
and digits, viz., Sadhdrana, Fyestha and Kanistha, and technical terms,
Kanda, Pamsuka, Stara and Varandika. He makes profuse quotations
from the Kiranàkhyatantra, Nandin, Caraka and Anyasastra and mentions
many things not given by the author!.
His intimate knowledge of the Puranas is attested: to by his
explanation of the many stories and names such as that of Tilottamd,?
Revanta,® the Mothers (the seven mátarah described in the SaptaSati) ,
Kala (Time), etc. His knowledge of Dharma Sastra and kindred
subjects is equally amazing : under LXXXVII.39 he explains who
is a 17406; he quotes the Manusmrti (under 1.6) which is directly
based on the JVasadiyasükta of the Rgveda; Kapila’s Samkhya philosophy,
Kanādas Vaisesika system, Mimamsakas, Advaita philosophy (LX XV);
he tells us which weekdays are good for Samskara, diksà, vrata,
mekhala, etc*. His knowledge of the Agamas becomes quite evident
» LXXIV. 20.
» LVIII. 56.
» I. 7 where he quotes the Paurinikas.
» XCVIII. 16.
Deh

Introduction xli
from his reference to the Vatula tantra and Pañcaratragama regarding
the installation of Siva’s image and worship of Kesava. In Chapter C
he quotes a good deal from works on Dharmafástra. His explanation
of the shape of the altar as a quadrilateral with its middle part
contracted shows his proficiency in sacrificial Core. He quotes
Smrtis regarding bath at night.? His intimacy with Arthasastra is discernible in his explanation of XIX.11. His acquaintance with veterinary
science is worthy of admiration. For, he gives a long quotation which
explains the anatomy of horses?, and from Pardfara and Vararuci who
treat of this subject, which was very popular in the Vedic period
when horses of good breed and features were required for the
Asvamedha sacrifice. Though the author does not mention the word
Avarta (hairy circle) in verse 2, Utpala supplies it on the authority of
Vararuct.
His proficiency in metrics and poetics becomes apparent by his
scansion of verses and definitions of all the metres employed by the
author. In this connection he refers to the views of Rata, Mandavya
and observes that the Acdrya has made prosody an attractive subject
and that he himself has made his Vivrti (exposition) ‘Sisyahitavaha’
(beneficial to pupils), a remark which is amply borne out by his
scholarly explanation.
He is a poet of no mean achievement. He could have achieved
singular success as a poet Jike his ideal, had he only wished for it.
His poetic talent is discernible in the two verses (2nd and 3rd) at
the beginning of his commentary as well as in those which he has put
at the end of important sections, viz., II, XIII, LIII, XCVI and CV
as well as the penultimate verse, describing his Vivrti as a boat for
crossing the ocean of Varaha's deep learning. In all these verses he
uses charming metaphors and puns (e.g. Artha meaning wealth and
sense).
He was an adept in the Sdmudrika Sastra (Human Physiognomy): He explains minutely all the features, quoting the authorities
of Samudra, Garga and some unnamed author. In this section he
quotes only a single verse of Parasara. He is so thoroughly informed
about this subject that he has no hesitation in condemning the previous interpreters who gave a wrong reading and held that Prakrti
. Vide LIX. 19; CV. 8.
» XLIV.8; LVI.2
p Volke}
» LXVI.
oN

xlii Brhat Samhita
and Sativa meant one and the same .1ing!. In this connection he
brings to our knowledge what Kapayana says regarding Unmana
(height) and Mana (weight) .
Regarding gems he says that Diamond, Pearl, Ruby and
Emerald are the most important among the 22 varieties of gems.
His observation about the origin of gems, viz.,subterrannean pressure
in course of time produces gems, is quite scientific and uptodate.?
He is also well informed about the prices of gems based on their
weights and qualities.
His scrupulous adherence to local traditions and general principles in the sphere of iconography is worthy of his vast learning and
keen understanding of the spirit of art. For he observes : “किन्तु तासां
स्तनशोभा मध्यक्षामता नितम्बवैपुल्यं कार्य येन प्रकारेण स्त्रीरूपस्य शोभा जायते"
and “ga प्रतिमालक्षणां देवानां देवतानां यल्लक्षणमाचार्येणोक्तं तेषां लोकप्रसिद्धा
यथा यथा शरीरशोभा भवति, तथा तथोक्तवत्प्रतिमा कार्या लक्षणज्ञैः 1”
His acquaintance with the science of Eroties or Kamasdstra is
equally intimate. Under LXXVIII.12 he quotes from a work
entitled Bahulaka the definitions of Bhdvas, etc. Not much is known
about this work. His quotations from Kafyapa show that his Samhita too
had contained matters relating to erotics which Varahamihira must
have utilized for his work.
His proficiency in lexicon is proved by his quotations from
Nighantus (already referred to). He explains certain words, quoting
relevant Kosas : Kukundara as the cavity of the loins; Dindibhanda, as
a particular musical instrument; Jatru is explained as 'कुक्षयोः सन्धि:
which is palpably incorrect. The mistake must be attributed to the
scribe. For, Ksirasvdmin says ““अंसवत्सयो: (वक्षसो:? ) सन्धिरुद्धि न्नास्थि जतु. He
explains the word Viyadgd as ‘girdle.’ Similarly about Visama he
quotes some Kofa to show that it means also ‘tusk.’* He follows the
same procedure to prop up his explanation of Kapotapalt.®
His scholarship of grammar is testified by his quotation of
Panini’s authority for explaining words like Hautabhuja.® Similarly
under LXVI.2 he says, “wa प्राण्यवयवत्वात्सर्वत्न समाहारः” which is permitted
by Panini’s rule II.4-2.
1. Vide LXVIII.4.
2. , LXXXIII.3.
3. ,, Amarakośa II. 6.78.
Shp EMAG 30:

Introduction xliii
We have already given an account of his veneration for the
Acarya bordering on religious devotion. He, therefore, tries always to
justify Varaha’s statements, though, prima facie, they may appear to
be mutually contradictory. For example, the author says that
Avartas or curbs are bad. (in LXVI.2) in Savyakuksi, and again in
the next verse he says that they are good in the Kuksi. This, says,
Utpala, is not self-contradictory. For he says: “There is no inconsistency in the Acarya’s statements, inasmuch as he has condemned it
only on the left side ofthestomach, and not on its right side.” Similarly,
the word Gala occurring in both these verses is norepetition. For, in
the first instance it means Hrtkantha-sandhi (junction of the heart
and neck) and in the second the neck itself. Likewise. he supplies
words and information not found in the author’s verses.
Another important feature of Bhattotpala's Vivrti is that he
alludes to various regional traditions and vernacular words, which
should provide sufficient material for research in linguistics:
(1) He states that the Mrdaiiga (tabor) is popularly known as
Mandala Probably it was known by that name in his region.
(2 We learn from his statement (under LXXII.4) that Vitana
(canopy) was known as Kanaka in the world (Loke) i.e. in his
regional language.
(3) He mentions that Ksveda (sound produced by the mouth) is
popularly known as Sodanikà.? We are informed that in the
Punjab and Malava people use the word in that sense.
(4) He says, similarly (under verse 41), that the bird Bharadvdja is
called Lata by the people.
(5) The word Domba (which has already been noticed) occurring
in LXXXVII.33 was probably known to him as meaning
acrobats because of popular usage, though he does not give
any explanation. It looks like a vernacular or a foreign word.
(6) The word Coksa3 was understood to mean a Dusta or notorious
fellow, in popular parlance, according to Utpala, though the
dictionary gives just the contrary meaning i.e. H is not
clear as to how this word came to connote the opposite sense.
Somebody has told us that the word Cokhā is used in the sense
of Sharp in Eastern Hind .
1. Vide LXVIII. 95+"
Ds ay रणा BY
3. ,, LXXXVII. 43.

Brhat Samhita
In his local dialect, we are told, the Bhrigara, Vase, was known
as Damdani or Damani (LX X.6). We are not in a position
to affirm whether the word was in vogue in Kashmir or elsewhere. We have been told, however, that that word is used in
Eastern Hindi for Guídastà (vase).
He explains the North Indian custom of building earthen
granaries in the following words “paa मृन्मयं areae! स्थाप्यते.??
Even now we can see in the villages such mud granaries standing near fields. In Eastern Hindi it is called, they say, Dehari
or Bakhar.
He interprets the word Svapacah (in LIII.84) as Domah. Even
now outcastes are called by this term in Eastern Hindi.
The word Sahayaán (in CIV.35) meaning companions or helpmates, is construed by him as Sarthinah. We cannot make out
as to what exactly he means by this expression. According to the
accepted connotation of the term, it should mean ‘one having
a caravan or flock of animals.’ It must be a case of semantic
variation. For, actually Sathi is used in Hindi in the sense of
‘companion.’ Utpala, therefore, must have been influenced by
local usage.
He explains the word Janu-kapiccha (Knee-cap) in LVIII.17
as “ये च लोके एक्कलके इति प्रसिद्धे.” This also would help researchworkers in identifying the regions traversed by the learned
commentator.
Under LXIII.2 he remarks that the popular name of a kind
of fighting cock, whose neck is like barley corn in shape, is
Yavasiras.
The world of scholars must remain greatly indebted to
Bhattotpala for giving it a peep into a realm of wonderful ideas, arts,
crafts, beliefs, traditions, etc. of the ancient peoples of this land. In
this
connection, some people naturally entertain a feeling that
Vrddhagarga and Garga might, after all, havebeen oneand the same
person. That this notion is quite unfounded would be clear to us
from the forthright statements of Utpala :““एवमाचारयण गर्गेऋहषिपुत्रयोर्मतमङ्गीकृत म् ।
वृद्धगगेपराशरकश्यपेः सह मतभेद: 1? We find here the two Gargas in the
opposite camps. The Acarya has preferred the views of the junior to
that
of the senior?. He quotes both the sages under XXXII.1-2.
1. Note the peculiar usage of the word Anna here.
2. Vide XXXII. 8-11.

Introduction du
Moreover he refers to the elder sage as ‘Bhagavan Garga’ as Vrddhagarga and as Gargena maharsind. Incidentally the Gargasamhita is also.
known as Vrddhagargiya. The Mahabharata too refers to the Elder sage.
With regard to the identity of Kasyapa and Kaspapa, we may conclude
that the two names may, after all, point to one and the same
person. For, Utpala refers to the author’s difference of Opinion with
Kaíyapa and quotes in support KaSyapa. The difference may be
due to the carelessness of scribes.
Regarding Devala and others too some interesting details can
be called from Utpala’s Vivrti:
(i) Itis quite evident from P.S.I. 22 that Varaha has given
the effects of planetary years, etc. on the authority of ancient sages
(Munipranitam dlokya). Hence it is intriguing why Ultpala has not
quoted the authority of sages like Pardfara, but quoted only a single
verse of Devala. On the other hand, he quotes eight verses from
each of Yavanesvara and the author's Samdsa-samhité. This leads us
to suspect that by Utpala’s time the literature of ancient sages on
this subject might have been well nigh lost.
(ii) He quotes two verses (under V. 11) ofthe Süryasiddhanta,
which are not available in its modern version. This leads to the
conclusion that the version that was studied by Utpala was materially `
different. !
(iii) Utpala quotes Ratamandauya on prosody and Mandavya
separately. This name, however, has been mentioned by A/-Birüni
(I. 157) as that of the author of a Samhita, which is quite possible,
since the commentator quotes him in the B.J.1. It is to be borne in
mind that the name Mandavya occurs in many Puranas, the Ramayana
etc. It is quite possible that there were many sages of that name in
ancient times.
(iv) The author states in LIV. 125? that his authority for
‘Rainfall’? (XXIII) is Baladevamatddi (views of Baladeva and others).
However, the commentator does not quote him even once. On the
other hand, he quotes Garga thrice, Kasyapa once, Devala once and
the Samdsa-samhita twice (3 verses in all). It is, therefore, a subject
fit for investigation, both from the point of meteorology and authorship of Baladeva.
(v) The author asserts that his authorities for temple architecture are Garga, Manu and others (Maya, Visvakarman, etc.) ;? but the
2. This verse is not found in the Varápaseya edition.
3. Vide LVI. 29, 31.

xlvi Brhat Samhita
commentator quotes not a single statement of Garga or Manu. On
the other hand, he quotes extensively Kasyapa, a verse and a half
from Tantrantara (another scientific work), one line from Visvakarman and one verse from Maya. Does this mean that the manuscript of Garga samhita that was available to Utpala did not contain
this subject ? However, he quotes both the Gargas in the chapter
on architecture (LIII).
(vi) Utpala rightly concludes that the five chapters ( LXXIVLXXVIII) dealing with ‘Praise of Women’ and such other erotic
subjects are meant for the use of royal personages in their harems
(Antahpuracintayam . - -)
(vii) He identifies sometimes the author with the work. This
may be intentional, since it is usually asked, *Have you read
Shakespeare ?” meaning his ‘works.’ In Sanskrit too such a practice
is prevalent. For, Magha is identified with his Sisupalavadha by
Mallinatha : “माघे मेघे wd बयः.” Accordingly Utpala might have said,
«am च aad पठ्यते” (IX. 37) instead of ‘waaga . . 2 Likewise, he
identifies Samudra, the author, with his work (cf. LXVIII) : “समुद्र
भ्रोक्तं सामुद्रम्? though he should have said. “समुद्रेण प्रोक्तं . . 2. This Bhadrabahu, a Jain astrologer, is said to have written a Samhita entitled
the Bhadrabahavi Samhita and a commentary on the Siiryaprajiiapit.
(viii) Bhattotpala’s extensive quotations from the author's
Samasa-samhita have saved that work from total oblivion. For, we
have no other means of getting at its contents than through these
references, though incomplete. Altogether 1223 verses of this
abridged Samhita are quoted in his Vivrti. That work must have
been lost soon after Utpala's time, since Al-Birüni says nothing
aboutit. Similar is the case with the work of an ancient author
named Sérasvata who had written on underground water-sources.
Utpala, however, quotes only 31 Slokas from the above work, which
would, otherwise, have remained a mere name.
(ix) Utpala quotes, for the benefit of his pupils, 32 verses of
the Aksarakofa of Yavanesvara, occurring in the Bodhiyatra dealing
with journeys and horary astrology.! Elsewhere he quotes five verses
of a Yatrikira named Siddhértha. It may be conjectured that some
Buddhist saint, a Bodhisattva, had written a work on Yatra, which
Yavanesvara might have expounded, adding his own knowledge and
experience.
1. Vide XCVI. 13.

Introduction xlvii
(x) He explains the expression ‘प्रियसाहसत्वं यत् तन्न तेजः?! as 'न तत
तेजः श्शृङ्गारो भवति. It is suspected that this too might be another
instance of semantic variation. In his local dialect the expression
Srigara might have had the connotation of ‘chivalry or heroism.’
This line of argument on the part of the author reminds us of Bána's
$ ukandsopadesa.
We have already expressed our high appreciation of Utpala’s
simple and graceful language. However, we cannot close our eyes
to some of the gross errors he has committed in grammatical construction, gender, compounds and interpretation : Srotriya is construed by him as JViyaminah— (observers of vows); Müányamanapitr is
explained as Manya (worshipable) and Manapitrs or Püjakas. This
kind of interpretation sounds odd. He construes Akiiicana (indigent)
as Akincitkarah purugakarahinah (LXVIII. 29). He explains the
word Strimrtyuh (verse 61) as Stri tasya mdrayati, which is evidently
wrong in grammar. The word Sroninibha (resembling hips) is
explained as Stryadhararágasadríam i.e. like the red tinge of a
woman's lower lip. Lavaliphala, according to him, is Lavaüga-puspam,
¿asya phalàsambhavàt. Actually Lavanga is clove, while /avali is Cicca
acida which is called Kirunelli in Kannada. Similarly he explains
the compound ‘Vridavimisralasa’ a bit clumsily by changing the
Karmadharaya into Bahuvrihi. The word Sakuni (fowler) is Dhivarah
(fisherman) for him; Avagahana (plunging) is Ultaraya (crossing);
Parivrajakasya bhayam (danger to ascetics) is changed to the ablative
case (i.e. danger from ascetics); the word Payu (anus) means
Upastha (genital organ) ; Avalokayan iksan (for iksamanah). Brahmavarcah, Sragdimah, Ratnabhedani etc. are some other instances. In
some places we have taken a different view from that of Ulpala. For
example he says: “अपसव्य: प्रदक्षिण उच्यते' which is against the views of
the ancients.
He ridicules the pseudo-astronomers who speak of the sun’s
victory and defeat in planetary war.
Utpala’s commentary was abridged, we are told, under the
name, Utpalaparimala by one Bhaskara, son of Kumara, grandson of
Rama of Naidhruva Kagyapa gotra and Vàrsaganya family. This is not
available in print.
1. Vide LXXV. 7.

xlviii Brhat Samhita
The commentator speaks of some of the verses of the text as
Anirsa i.e. not based on ancient authority, indicating thereby that
they are not genuine : They are XVII. 9,10; XXV. 6 and XXVIII.
17, 23 and 24. He has not commented either on the last three
verses. Similarly, he considers some of the chapters as not genuine :
They are XXVII entitled Vatacakra;} XXXVIII Rajolaksana;? LI
Angavidya;? LII Pitakalaksana;* and CIII Vivahapatala, when he says,
अथ प्रसङ्गागतं विन्ध्यवासिकृत विवाहपटलं व्याख्यायते. Among these chapters he is
not quite sure about the genuineness or otherwise of Chapter LI,
because the Acdrya includes this topic also among the contents of the
Samhita (II. 23). Hence it is reasonable to infer that some scholar or
scholars before Utpala, finding some elements missing in their
manuscript of this work, composed this and such other chapters in
order to make the Samhita appear complete. It is not known as to
who the author Vindhyavasin was.
In this connection Utpala observes that the five chapters
(XXVII, LI, LII, LXVI and LXVII) are not included in the list
of 100 chapters which contain a total of verses equal to 3900
Slokas. The last verse of CVI specifically states that the work has
been completed, as itends with a prayer. We would, on the other
hand, prefer to exclude from the total number of chapters, viz., 107,
printed in this edition, the following six. viz., XXVII, X XXVIII, LI,
LII, CII and CIII, the last chapter, viz., CVII, being out of the
purview of the regular work. However, it may be presumed that
the original work of Varaha must have contained chapters on Wind
Circle (XXVII), Haze (XXXVIII) Limbs (LI) and Pimples also
(LII). For he had promised these subjects in Chapter II. But the
“Table of Contents’ at the end (CVII) omits to mention chapters
XXXVIII, LI, LII, LXVI, LXVII, XCII, CII and CIII. This
leaves a deficit of two chapters, which can be made good only
by taking into account the two chapters LI and LII, because
these were considered as genuine by some predecessors of
Bhattotpala.
Though the printing of this unique work was commenced early
in 1974, yet, as ill luck would have it, it could not progress satisfacVide «wq वराहकूतं न भवति’ |
This chapter is omitted: by him.
Vide “अत: परं केचिदङ्गविद्यां पठन्ति,” but comments upon it.
» अत: परमपि केचित् . . 2 but comments upon it.
ee a

Introduction xlix
torily. Hence the publishers have been advised to publish this work
in two volumes, of which the first is brought out now for the benefit
of eager scholars and students of astrology and astronomy as well as
Indian culture in general. We hope by Heaven's grace the second
volume will be published without much delay.
Vittal M. Ramakrishna Bhat

श्रीसिद्धिविनायको विजयते
बृहत्संहिता
BRHAT SAMHITA
उपनयनाध्यायः ॥ १॥।
Chapter I—Introductory
जयति जगतः प्रसुर्तिवइवात्मा सहजभुषणं नभसः d
द्रतकनकसहृरदशशतमयूखमालाचितः सविता ॥१॥
The Sun—creator—flourishes supreme—He who is the source
of the universe and of the nature of the universe (or, who is the
soul of the universe), who is the natural (inborn) ornament of the
firmament, and who is bedecked with innumerable rows of rays
that resemble molten gold.
[The author who isan ardent devotee of the Sun-Ged is
never tired of praising his Deity of choice in the choicest terms, as
he is in the Brhajjataka. The simile of ‘molten gold’ being so apt
makes one believe that Varahamihira must have delighted in meditating on the rising Sun. The metre of this and the following seven
verses is Arya.
Bhattotpala, the able commentator of Varahamihira, makes
obeisance, in the first. verse, to the Trinity, Gane$a, the Seven
Planets and his preceptor, at the commencement of his Vivrti. In
this connection, he calls our author Avantika (one belonging to
Ujjain), who composed this Samhita or Compilation, after his intellectual powers were awakened by the Sun-God’s boon. In the
second verse Utpala salutes the Sun in the form of Varahamihira,
who is called by the wise the Sun himself, who had incarnated
on earth in order to save, in the Kali age, the triple Sastra, consisting ofthe three Skandhes or branck ss pre E astronomy and
Samhita, which he wrote in an abridged form, after he had created
(in the golden age) the science of astrology with the three branches
in great detail. a
Following the epic description of the Mahabharata war which
is compared to a turbulent river, the commentator calls, in the
third verse, the author (i.e. his work) an ocean filled with the water

9 Brhat Samhita
of numerous ideas, abounding in aquatic animals viz. groups of
planets and constellations (as well as the Signs of the Zodiac), and
bright with the gems of multiple Yogas (planetary configurations).
Men of little intelligenee greedily wander about this ocean in
search of Artha (wealth, correct meaning). ‘Hence, according to
my light, I construct this raft of explanation (for their benefit)’.
See also what the author says in his Brhajjataka (1-2) “mrama
प्रारभ?'.]
प्रथसमुनिकथितमवितथमवलोक्य ग्रन्थविस्तरस्यारथंम् i
नातिलघुविषुलरचनाभिरुद्यतः स्पष्टमभिधातुम् nau
Finding the truth of the great Science expounded at great
length by Brahman (the first or Ancient Sage or by ancient sages),
I am now engaged in explaining clearly the same truth in words
that are neither too brief nor too elaborate.
[The expression Prathama-muni used here is synonymous with
Kalidasa's Purano-munih. The author's idea is to impress upon the
readers that he is only condensing the vast store of astrological
knowledge bequeathed by numerous Sages of yore, so that they
may mo the abstruse principle without any doubt or difficulty.
मुनिविरचितमिदमिति यच्चिरन्तनं साधु न मनुजग्रथितम् ।
ठुल्येऽथऽक्षरभेदादमन्त्रके का विशेषो क्ति: usu
lt cannot be said that an ancient work must be good as it
was composed by sages, whereas one written by an ordinary man
(i.e. a house-holder) cannot be so. For, what difference would it
make in a non-Vedic subject when the same meaning is conveyed
by two different groups of words ? |
न [The potency and efficacy of Vedic chants would be adversely affected by substituting Synonyms or translating them into
other languages. The Mantras have a i
ges. ? 2 eculiar charm and symphony of their own.
: Here the author reminds us of Kilidasa’s own fighting words
lOr recognition in the Malavikagnimitra (prologue) as ‘Purina
ityeva na sadhu sarvam...." However, Bhavabhüti strikes a slightly
different note in his Uttararémacarita in the verse, *Rsinàm punar
adyanam vacam artho’nudhavati.’’] COME SUE
क्षितितनप्रदिवसवारो न शुभकृदिति यदि पितामहप्रोक्ते ।
कुजदिनमनिष्टमिति वा कोऽत्र विज्ञेषो नृदिव्यकृतेः ॥ ४॥

Introductory I 3
What difference is there between the divine declaration of
Brahman to the effect that the weekday presided over by Mars i.e.
Tuesday, is not auspicious, and the human statement that Tuesday
is harmful ?
भ्राब्रह्मादिविनिःसृतमालोक्य प्रन्यविस्तर क्रमश: ।
क्रियमाणकमेवेतत्समासतोऽतो ममोत्साहः ॥५॥
I have been encouraged to write this book, having scen many
works on this science starting right from Brahman being abridged
by successive authors.
[The commentator, Bhattotpala, quotes the following verses
from Sage Garga, which state that this science of astrology—astronomy was originally created by the creator as an Aga or ancillary
ofthe Vedas and handed down to Garga :
स्वयं स्वयम्भुवा सृष्टं चक्षुर्भूतं द्विजन्मनाम् ।
वेदाङ्ग ज्योतिषं ब्रह्मपरं यज्ञहितावहृम् ॥
मया स्वयम्भुवः प्राप्तं क्रियाकालप्रसाधनम् |
वेदानामुत्तमं शास्त्रं त्रेलोक्यहितकारकम् ॥
मत्तशचान्यानृषीःप्राप्तं पारम्पर्योण पुष्कलम् ।
तेस्तदा स्रष्टुभिर्भूयो ग्रन्थेः ed: स्वेरुदाहृतम् u]
ariaa: किलेदं तत्रापां तेजसेऽभवद्धेमे ।
स्वर्भूशकले ब्रह्मा विइवकृदण्डेऽकंशशिनयनः ॥६॥
It appears that originally i.e. before creation, there was nothing but darkness everywhere. Then water came into existence.
From that sprang a fiery golden egg consisting of the two parts of
the shell viz. heaven and earth. Out of this arose Brahman, Creator of the universe, with the luminaries (the Sun and the Moon)
as his eyes.
[This verse is an exact summary of the following nine verses
of the famous Manusmrti I-5-13 :—
ग्रासीदिदं तमोभूतमप्रज्ञातमलक्षणाम् |
अ्रप्रतक्येमविज्ञेयं प्रसुप्तमिव EST
ततः स्वयम्भूभंगवानव्यक्त व्यञ्जयन्निदम् ।
महाभूतादिवृत्तौजा: प्रादुरासीत्तमोनुद: ॥
यो$सावती न्द्रियग्राह्यः सूक्ष्मोऽव्यक्तः सनातन: |
सवंभूतमयो$चिन्त्य: स एव स्वयमुदूबभौ ॥

4 Brhat Samhita
सोऽभिध्याय शरीरात्स्वात्सिसक्षुविविधा: प्रजा: ।
प एव ससर्जादौ तासु वीर्यमवासृजत् |!
तदण्डमभव द्वेमं सहस्रांशुसमप्रभम् |
तस्मिञ्जज्ञे स्वयं ब्रह्मा सर्वलोकपितामहः ॥
ग्रापो नारा इति प्रोक्ता श्रापो वे नरसूनवः |
ता यदस्यायनं qd तेन नारायणाः स्मृतः dd
यत्तत्कारणामव्यक्तं नित्यं सदसदात्मकम् |
तद्विसृष्टः स पुरुषो लोके ब्रह्मेति mue ॥
तस्मिन्नण्डे स भगवानुषित्वा परिवत्सरम् ।
स्वयमेवात्मनो ध्यानात्तदण्डमकरोदृद्विघा ॥
ताभ्यां स शकलाभ्यां तु दिवं भूमि च निर्ममे ।
मध्ये व्योम दिशश्चाष्टावपां स्थानं च शाश्वतम् |i
This statement of Manu has iis root in the नासदीयसूक्त of the
Rgveda].
कपिलः प्रधानमाह द्रव्यादीन् कणाभुगस्य विइवस्य ।
कालं कारणमेके स्वभावरपरे जगुः कमं NVN
Sage Kapila, propounder of the Sinkhya system of philosophy,
has declared Pradhana or unmanifested Prakrti (primordial matter)
to be the material cause of the universe, while Sage Kanada, founder of the Vai‘esika system or atomic theory of the origin of the
universe, has stated that the seven categories headed by Dravyas
or substances Constitute its material cause. According to some
Time is the root cause of the universe. There are others like the
Laukayatikas who have declared that nature or the inherent properties of substances were responsible for the emergence of the
universe. There are also some who opine that actions of beings
are its cause.
[Here the author alludes to five theories about the origin of
the universe. There are six Padarthas or Categories according to
the Vaisesikas, twentyfive according to the Sankhyas and twentyseven according to the followers of Pataijjali. "The Dravyas orsubstances arc nine i.e. thc five eleineznts, ‘Time, Space, Soul and
Mind.]
तदलमतिविस्तरेगा प्रस द्वा दाथ निणांयोऽतिमहान् ।
ज्योतिःशास्त्राङ्गानां वक्तव्यो निणंयोऽत्र मया ॥८॥

Introductory I 5
Let me stop this otherwise very lengthy discussion ofa vast
and polemical subject which has been referred to only incidentally.
I am now engaged, on the other hand, in expounding in a decisive
manner, the various parts of the science of Astrology in this work.
ज्योति:शास्त्रमनेकभेदविषयं स्कन्धत्रयाधिष्ठितं
तत्कात्स्न्योपनयस्य नाम मुनिमिः सड्डोत्यंते संहिता ।
स्कन्धेऽस्मिन्गणितेन या ग्रहुगतिस्तन्त्राभिधानस्त्वसो
होरऽन्योऽङ्गविनिश्चयशच कथित: स्कन्धस्तृतीयो$पर: We
The science of Astrology has many branches within its scope
and is mainly divided under three heads or sections termed Skandhas viz. Ganita or Tantra, Hori and Angaviniscaya. ‘The treatment of this subject in its entirety has been designated as Samhita,
Collection or compilation, by the Sages. The first section or Skandha is called Tantra as it deals with the movements of planets
through the signs of the zodiac that are arrived at by means of
mathematical calculations. The second section treats of Hora or
horoscopy. The third and the last is termed Angaviniscaya—
determination of the limbs—as it explains the method of ascertaining by calculation the ascendant and other houses in a natal
chart.
[The word Samhita has a religious halo about it, asit has
been used in connection with the Vedic texts and other hoary
Sàstras viz. ऋग्वेदसंहिता etc., चरकसंहिता and the like. It is to be understood that Samhitàs are not meant to be original works, but collections of materials gathered from various sources. Varahamihira
faithfully follows this tradition and draws profusely from Garga’s
work. For, says Garga :
गणितं जातक शाखां यो वेत्ति द्विजपुङ्गवः ।
त्रिस्कन्धज्ञो विनिदिष्टः संहितापारगश्च सः ॥
Here the Sage calls the last Section Sakha. The verse is in the
शार्दूलविक्रीडित metre. ]
वक्रानुव क्रास्तमयोदयाद्यास्ताराग्रहाणां करणे मयोक्ताः ।
होरागतं विस्तरतश्च जन्मयात्राविवाहैः सह पूव मुक्तस uten
I have already expounded in detail in my astronomical work,
the Pafcasiddhantika, retrograde and direct motions of the nonluminous planets viz. Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus and Saturn,

6 Brhat Samhita
their combustion (as a result of close proximity to the Sun) and
re-emergence and the like (i.e. ग्रहयुद्ध or planetary war). Similarly
have I explained already in detail everything connected with birth,
journey and matrimony in my works entitled BrAajjataka, Brhadyatra or Yogayatra and Vivahapatala respectively.
[The exact name of the last workis not known. The commentator has included in his edition of this work a chapter (CIII) on
this topic written by one Vindhyavasin. It may be presumed to be
a faithful summary of our author’s missing work. ‘his verse shows
that Varahamihira had already written the पज्चसिद्धान्तिका, बृहज्जातक,
agai and a work on विवाह. However, some references occurring
in the पञ्चसिद्धान्तिका to this संहिता make us believe that all these works
were planned simultaneously or cross references were introduced
after all the works had been completed. See पञ्चसिद्धान्तिका XV-10
on Rahu.
This verse and the following are in Upajati metre.]
प्रश्नप्रतिप्रश्नकथाप्रसद्भान्स्वल्पोपयोगान्ग्रहसम्मवांद्च ।
सन्त्यज्य फल्गूनि च सारभुतं YATIAA: सकलः प्रवक्ष्ये ॥११॥
Avoiding trivial matters of very little practical importance
such as long-drawn queries and answers, interesting legendary stories as well as the origin of planets, I shall here explain the real
facts in their essential features along with all their benefits.
: [The commentator explains and illustrates in detail the questions put by Kraustuki to Vrddha Garga. The story narrated by
Sage Parasara is about the fight between the Gods and demons
or Asuras, in which the Gods seek the help of Sukra, preceptor
of Asuras. Sage Paragara tells Kaugika how the planets originated,
of course, according to the Puranas.]

सांवत्सरसूत्राध्याय: NMN
Chapter IJ—Canons for Astrologer
AAM: सांवत्सरसुत्रं व्याख्यास्यामः utu
a We shall now explain the aphorismsi.e. rules or qualifications
or an astrologer.
__ [This chapter consists of both prose passages and verses in
different metres. The first aphorism is in line with those of
ancient writers on the Sastras like Caraka. However, original
writers like बादरायण do not use the word व्याष्यास्यामः, but employ the
term जिज्ञासा or enquiry, instead. In this chapter the author enumerates a number of qualifications expected of a thorough astrologer.]
तत्र सांवत्सरोऽभिजातः प्रियदर्शनो विनोतवेषः सत्यवागनसूयकः समः सुसं हि-
तोपचितगात्रसन्धिरविकलश्चा रकर चरणनखनयनचिबुकदशनश्रवणललाटश्रूत्तमाङ्भो
वपुष्मान् गम्भीरोदात्तघोषः । प्रायः शरीराकारानुवतिनो हि गुणा दोषाश्च
भवन्ति ngn
In this connection an astrologer should belong to a noble
family, be good-looking, of modest appearance or dress, truthful,
free from jealousy, impartial, with well-proportioned and strong
limbs and joints, undeformed, with beautiful hands, feet, nails,
eyes, chin, teeth, ears, forehead, brows and head, with handsome
body and a voice deep and sonorous. For, virtues and foibles are
generally dependent on good and bad physical features.
[The author here expects a true astrologer to be possessed of
all possible virtues and good physical features mentioned in the
सामुद्रिकशास्त्र. We are reminded of the long list of virtues expected
of the alae—hero—of a drama according to Sanskrit rhetoricians.
Like Kalidasa our author is an adept in similes and general statements. Here the last sentence is a beautiful instance of भ्रर्थान्तरन्यास.
He has put the statement of Kalidasa in his own words. See what
the poet has said in the Kumarasambhava Canto V-36 :
यदुच्यते पार्वति पापवृत्तये न रूपमित्यव्यभिचारि Tea: |
तथाहि ते रूपमुदारद्नने तपस्विनामप्युपदेशतां गतम् uj

8 Brhat Samhita
तत्र गुणाः । शुचिर्दक्षः प्रगल्मो वाग्मी प्रतिभानवान् देशकालवित् सात्त्विको न
पषंदृभीरुः सहाध्यायिमिरनमिभवनीयः कुशलोऽव्यसनी शान्तिकपौष्टिकामिचारस्नानविद्याभिज्ञो विबुधाचंनव्रतोपवासनिरतः स्वतन्त्राइचर्योत्पादितप्रभावः पृष्टाभिधाय्यन्यत्र
दवात्ययात् । प्रहगणितसं हिताहो राग्रन्यार्थवेत्तेति ॥ ३॥
Now the following are the virtues of an astrologer : He must
be clean, efficient, bold, eloquent, possessed of genius or ready wit,
knower of the time and place, sincere, not timid in assemblies, not
to be overpowered by his fellow students, expert, free from vices,
well-versed in the art of performing rituals of both curative and
preventive types, as well as in that of magic and bathing, engaged
in the worship of Gods, observances or austerities and fast; possessed of great power generated by the wonderful achievements of his
scientific knowledge and capable of answering queries made by
others and suggesting remedial measures for troubles other than
the visitations of God. He must also be thoroughly conversant
with works dealing with calculations of planetary positions etc.,
Samhita (triple compilation) and horoscopy in their details.
तत्र ग्रहगणिते पोलिशरोमकवासिष्ठसोरपेतामहेषु पञ्चस्वेतेषु सिद्धान्तेषु
युगवर्षायनतुंमासपक्षाहोरात्रयाममुहु्तनाडी्रारात्ुटित्रुट्याद्यवयवादिकस्य कालस्य
क्षेत्रस्य च वेत्ता ॥४॥
Among the astronomical calculations the astrologer should be
conversant with the various sub-divisions of time such as the
yuga, year, solstice, a period of two months, month, fortnight, day
and night, watch (a period of an hour and a half), Muhürta (one
of fortyeight minutes or two Ghatis), Nadi (equal to 24 minutes),
Prana (time required for a breath), Truti (a small unit of time
equal to that of two winds)! and its further subdivisions as well as
l. According to the ancient seers the
following table gives the measures of
time :
Time taken to pronounce onc syllable is a Nimesa.
2 Nimesas=1 Truti. 60 1 tue
2 Trutis =l Lava. ene syllables =l Vinadi
2 Lavas =] Ksana. 6 Prāņas oh E
10 Ksanas =] Kastha. (Breaths) Vighati
10 Kasthàs —1 Kala,
one breath i
10Kala —1 Nadika. (one breath consists
of one inspiration and one
expiration).
Angles
60 Tatparas=1 Vilipta or Vikala (second).
60 Viliptás =1 Lipta or Kala (minute).
60 Liptas =] Bhaga or Asa (degree).
30 Bhagas =] Rafi or sign :

Canons for Astrologer 1I 9
with the ecliptic (or with geometry) that are treated of in the five
Siddhantas (ancient astronomical systems) entitled Pauli§a (taught
by Pulisa), Romaka (of the Romans), Vasistha (taught by Sage
Vasistha), Saura (taught by Sürya or the Sun-God, called the
Suryasiddhinta) and Paitamaha (of Pitàmaha or Brahman).
चतुर्णा च मानानां सोरसावननाक्षत्रचान्द्राणामधिमासकावमसम्भवस्य च
कारणाभिज्ञः ॥५॥
He should also be thoroughly acquainted with the reasons
for the existence of the four systems of measurement of time, Viz.
Saura or the solar system, Sāvana, terrestrial or the time intervening between the first rising of any given planet or star and its next
rising, Niksatra or sidereal and Candra or lunar, as well as for the
occurrence of intercalary months and increaring and decreasing
lunar days.
[A solar day is the well-known period intervening two successive risings of the Sun. The same interval at the Equator is known
as the Sivana day. Thirty such days make one Savana month.
The Sidereal day is the time taken by the Moon to traverse a star
completely. Similarly a Sidereal month is the time taken by the
Moon to cover the entire circle of 27 stars. A lunar day is called
Tithi in Sanskrit and is measured in terms of 12? per day after the
conjunction of the luminaries at a New Moon. A lunar month is
the interval between two successive New Moons. See Aryabhatiya
IlI—5, 6. An Adhikamisa or intercalary month occurs when a
complete lunar month is contained within the period of a solar
month i.e. between two Solar Sarikrintis. It means that the Adhikamasa, which is a lunar month, has no solar Sankranti (transit)
at all. Consequently that lunar year comes to have thirteen months.
On the other hand if a lunar month comes to have two solar Sankrantis, which is a very rare occurrence, it is called Ksayamasa
or Diminutive month. One such month had occurred in the Saka
year 1744 and the next was in 1885 (Saka year).!]
षष्ट्यब्दयुगवषं मासदिनहो राधिपती नां प्रतिपत्तिच्छेदवितु ॥६॥
He should also be well-versed in the calculation of the beginning and ending times of the cycle of sixty years, a yuga (a fiveyear period), a year, a month, a day, a Hora (hour), as well as
of their respective lords.
1, Of. ब्रह्मस्फुटसिद्धान्त “शशिसावनदिवसान्तरमवमानि 1”

10 Brhat Samhita
[The names of the five years constituting a Yuga and their
lords as well as those of the 12 Yugas are explained by the author
in Chapter VII1—23 and 24 infra. For Hora see पञ्चसिद्धान्तिका 2% 111
सौरादीनां च मानानामस हरस हृशयोग्यायोग्यत्वप्रतिपा दनपटु: ॥७॥
He should also be capable of explaining by means of arguments the similarities and dissimilarities as well as the appropriateness or otherwise ofthe different systems of measurement of time
headed by the solar system.
[The differences among the four systems are to be found out
by calculations, while the propriety or otherwise of a particular
system has to be learnt from the Dharmasastras, which lay down
all the rules for different rituals and observances.]
सिद्धान्तभेदे$प्ययननिवृत्तो प्रत्यक्षसममण्डललेखासम्प्रयोगाभ्युदितांशकानां छाया-
जलयन्त्रहग्गरिपतसाम्येन प्रतिपादनकुशलः US
Despite differences of opinion among the Siddhantas (astronomical systems) regarding the expiry or ending time ofan Ayana
(solstice), he should be capable of reconciling them by showing
the agreement between correct calculation and what has been actually observed in the circle drawn on the ground by means of the
shadow of the gnomon as well as water-appliances. |
सुर्यादीनां च ग्रहाणां शी त्रमन्दयाम्यो त्तरनीचोच्चगतिकारणामिज्ञः 8
He should also be well acquainted with the causes that are
responsible for the different kinds of motions of the planets headed
by the Sun, viz. fast, slow, southerly, northerly, towards perigee
and apogee.
सूर्याचऱ्द्रमसोश्च ग्रहण ग्रहणादि मोक्षकालदिकप्रमाणस्थितिविमदवणादिशा-
नामनागतग्रहसमागमयु द्धानामादेष्टा ॥। १०॥
He must be able to forecast by calculation the times of commencement, ending, direction, magnitude, duration, intensity and
colour at the eclipses of the Sun and the Moon, as well as the conJunctions of the Moon with the five Taragrahas or non-luminous
planets and the planetary warfare.

Canons for Astrologer 11 11
प्रत्येक ग्रह श्रम शयो जनकक्ष्या प्रमाराप्रतिविषययोजनपरिच्छेदकुशलः ॥ १॥॥
He should also be expert in determining accurately the motion in Yojanas, orbit, dimensions etc. of every planet in YojaNas.
[The subject of this verse is treated of in astronomical works
like the Siryasiddhanta, Aryabhatiya, Brahmasphutasiddhanta
etc. The Goladhyaya, Chapter IV, of the Aryabhatiya with the
translation of W.F. Clark throws much light on this. ]
भ॒भगर्रमरासंस्थानाद्यक्षावलम्बकाहर्व्यासचरदलकालराइ्युदयच्छायानाडीकरणप्रभृतिषु क्षेत्रकालकर णष्वभिज्ञ: ॥ १२॥
He must be thoroughly acquainted with the Earth’s rotation
on its own axis round the Sun and its revolution along the circle
of constellations, its shape and such other details, the latitude of
a place and its complement, the difference in the lengths of the
day and night (lit. diameter of the Day-circle), the Carakhandas
of a place, rising periods of the different Signs of the zodiac ata
given place, the methods of converting the length of shadow into
time (in Ghatis) and time into thelength of shadow and such other
things, as well as those to find out the exact time in Ghatis that
has elapsed since Sunrise or Sunset at any required time from the
position of the Sun or from the Ascendant, as the case may be.
नानाचोद्यप्रइनभेदो पलब्धिजनितवाक्सारों निकषसन्तापाभिनिवेशेः कनकस्येवा-
धिकतरममलीकृतस्य शास्त्रस्य वक्ता तन्त्रज्ञो भवति ॥१३॥
He should really be learned in the Science of Astrology whose
words have attained the power (of carrying conviction to the hearers) as aresult of his proper understanding of the various objections.
and queries, and who is capable of expounding the Science which
has become in his hands all the brighter and more flawless like
gold that has been subjected to the touch-stone, fire and hammer.
[The qualifications of an astrologer-cum-astronomer indirectly
enumerate the subject-matter of this Science,in all its ramifications.
Thus the Visaya or subject-matter of this Sistra among the four
Anubandhas has been explained.
After this the author resorts to the metrical medium.]
न प्रतिबद्धं गसयति वक्ति न च प्रश्नमेकमपि पृष्टः ।
निगदति न च झिष्येभ्यः स कथं शास्त्रविज्ज्ञयः utu

12 Brhat Samhita
If a person is unable to understand the real purport of the
Science (by separating the essentials from the non-essentials by
means of his intellectual acumen), nor to answer any question put
to him, nor to explain the Science to his pupils, how could he be
known as an astrologer, one well-versed in this Science ?
[This is the usual tirade against half-baked astrologers, hypocrites and quacks. The following verse too is in the same vein. ]
ग्रन्थो$न्यथा5न्यथाथकररां यइचान्यथा करोत्यबुधः |
स पितामहमुपगम्य स्तोति नरो वेश्िकेनार्यामू ॥१५॥
He is an ignorant fellow who interprets the text wrongly and
whose astronomical calculations are utterly inaccurate. For, such
a person is no better than one who goes to his grandfather or God
Brahman and praises before him his grandmother or the Goddess
Sarasvati with the attributes of a courtesan.
[Through the figure of speech Nidar$ana the author condemns
charlatans bitterly, of course, in a sarcastic manner.]
तन्त्रे सुपरिज्ञाते लग्ने छायाम्बुयन्त्रसं विदिते ।
होरार्थं च सुरूढे नदेष्टर्भारती वन्ध्या ॥१६॥
Ifan astrologer has mastered the astronomical Science, and
has brought about perfect agreement between the mathematical
results and observations made by means of the shadow of gnomon
and the water-appliance, and is well established in the science of
predictive astrology, his pronouncements will never go wrong or
fruitless.
[After ridiculing unworthy astrologers the author extols a
worthy one here. This is similar to the Vedic text quoted by
Pataüjali viz. “एक: शब्द: सम्यग्ज्ञात: सुप्रयुक्तः स्वर्गे लोके कामधुग्भवति’, and Dandin’s statement viz.
“गौगौ : कामदुघा सम्यकप्रयुक््ता स्मयेते TA: |
दुष्प्रयुक्ता पुनर्गोत्वं प्रयोक्तुः सेव शंसति u”
See also फलदीपिका X XVI-50.
ens employed in astronomy are enumerated in
the सिडान्ताश्नरोमणि thus.
गोलो नाडीवलयं यष्टिः शङ्कुघेटीचक्रम् ।
चापं तुयं फलकं घीरेकं पारमार्थिक यन्त्रम् ॥

Canons for Astrologer II 13
उक्तं चायं विष्णुगुप्तेन--
AAIE पुरुष: प्रतरन्कदाचि-
दासादयेदनिलवेगवशेन पारम् ।
न स्वस्य कालपुरुषाख्यमहाणंवस्य
गच्छेत्कदाचिदन्षिमंनसापि पारम् ॥ १७॥
It has also been declared by the revered Visnugupta :—
Perchance a man might be able to reach the other shore
of the ocean by swimming, being driven by the force of wind. On
the other hand, never could one, who is nota Sage, even dream
of crossing the great ocean that is known as Kalapurusa or the
God of Time i.e. the Science of Astrology.
[Just as the mysteries of life and death are proved by Sages
by means of penance and Yoga, even so this Science of astrology
helps one to solve this eternal mystery, provided he equips himself
both intellectually and spiritually. In other words, a true astrologer must lead a life of contentment, detachment and contemplation.
This verse appears to have been taken from some work,
possibly on astrology, written by the famous politician stalwart,
Cànakya, who was otherwise known as Visnugupta as well as
Kautilya. This verse is in वसन्ततिलका metre.]
होराशास्त्रेषपि च राशिहोराद्रेष्काणनवांशकद्वादशभागत्रिशदृभागबलाबलपरिग्रहो
ग्रहाणां दिकस्थानकालचेष्टाभिरनेकप्रकारबलनिर्धारणं प्रकृतिधातुद्रव्यजातिचेष्टादि-
परिग्रहो निषेकजन्मकालविस्मापतप्रत्ययादेशसद्योमरणायुर्दायदशान्त दंशाषटकवगंराजयोगचन्द्रयोगद्विग्रहादियोगानां नाभसादीनां च योगानां फलान्याश्रयभावावलोकननि-
्याणगत्यन्कानि तत्कालप्रइनशुभाशुभनिमित्तान विवाहादीनां च कमणां करराम्
And the Science of Predictive Astrology treats of the following topics: The Signs of the Zodiac, Hora (equal to 15°), decanate
(equal to 10°), Navarh$a (1/9 of a Sign or 3°—20’), Dvadasamsa
1/12 of a Sign or 2°—30’), Trimiamsa (30° degrees assigned to the
five non-luminous planets), determination of strength and weakness
of planets on the basis of these parts or Vargas, ascertaining the
multifarious strength of planets due to their direction, position,
time and motion, the humours, constituent elements of the body,
substances, castes, functions and the like, represented by or -

14 Brhat Samhita
allotted to the planets as well as the Signs, the time of impregnation and actual birth, forecasting wonderful and freak births,
immediate death, total span of life contributed by the planets, the
planetary major periods and sub-periods, Astakavargas of planets,
Raja-yogas, lunar Yogas, conjunctions of two or more planets,
Nàbhasa-yogas and such other Yogas and their effects, the effects
arising from the occupation cf Signs, houses etc. by the planets
and those of their aspects, exit from the world and the region
from which one had come and to which one would go after death,
predicting good and bad results on suddea queries, good and bad
omens (or good and bad prognostications indicating the answers
to be given to a query made on the spot), and the performance of
religious rites such as marriage.
[Here the author alludes to all the three branches of astrology
viz. Predictive Horary and Electional. Hence it appears that the
name Horasastrais a comprehensive term and not applicable to
predictive astrology or horoscopy alone. It is, however, to be distinguished from Grahaganita, Astronomy.]
यात्रायां तु तिथिदिवसकररानक्षत्रमुहतंविलग्नयोगदेहस्पन्दनस्वप्नविजयस्नानग्रहयज्ञगरायागारिनलि ङ्ग हर्त्यइवे ङ्कितसेनाप्रवादचष्टादिग्रहषाडगुण्योपायमङ्कलाम s
शकुनसेन्यनिवेशभुमयोऽर्निवर्णा मन्त्रिचरदूताटविकानां यथाकालं प्रयोगाः परदुर्गोपलम्भोपायश्चेत्युक्तमाचायेः ॥ १६॥
The ancient teachers have also stated that the Science of
Yatra or Journey or Expedition comprises the following topics :
Tithis or lunar days, week days, Karanas, constellations, Muhirta
(period of 48 minutes), Ascendant, Yogas (called Nityayogas),
throbbing of limbs, dreams, ritual bathing for victory in battle,
sacrifices performed for propitiating the planetary Deities, worship
of the Yaksas seven days, before the commencement ofa journey
or expedition, prognosis through the movement of the flame of the
sacrificial fire, reading the mind of the elephants and horses through the movements of their limbs, talk of the troops (or military
proclamations), their activities and the like as omens, auspicious
and inauspicious auguries as well as the positions of planets for the
employment of the six military expedients and the four political
. means, camping grounds for the army, colours of the sacrificial
fires as auguries, employment of ministers, spies, ambassadors or

Canons for Astrologer II 15
emmissaries and foresters at the appropriate time and the plan for
besieging and capturing enemy fortresses.
[From the above-named topics it is clear that Yatra covers
the five elements of the almanac that can be got through mathematical calculations, prognostications which are within the province
of horary astrology, and electional astrology. Unless the astrologer
has a rudimentary knowledge of the rituals as well as politics he
cannot be a good adviser in respect of inilitary expeditions.]
जगति प्रसारितमिवालिखितमिव मतो निषिक्तमिव हृदये ।
शास्त्रं यस्य सभगणं नादेशा निष्फलास्तस्य ॥२०॥
The predictions made by an astrologer who has mastered
both the theory and practice of the science of astrology, and
astronomy, as if it were spread before his eyes in the world, inscribed in his intellect and firmly implanted in his heart, will never
go wrong.
[This verse is but an elaboration of verse II-3 supra. These
two could have been given together.]
संहितापारगश्च देवचिन्तको भवति ॥२१॥
A true astrologer whose business is to divine man’s fortune
as determined by his past actions, should also be a thorough
scholar of the Samhita.
[For a brief description of Samhita see 1-9 supra.
In the following long prose passagea detailed list of the
contents is furnished.]
aaa संहितापदार्थाः ॥२९॥
दिनकरादीनां ग्रहाणां चारास्तेषु च तेषां प्रकृतिविक्ृतिप्रमाणावणंकिरणद्यति-
संस्थानास्तमनोदयमागँमार्गान्तरवक्रानुवक्क्षं ग्रहसमागमचारादिभिः फलानि, नक्षत्रक् मविभागेन देशेष्वगस्त्यचारः। सप्तषिचारः । ग्रहभक्तयो नक्षत्रव्यूहग्रहश्व॒ द्धाठकग्र हयु दग्र हे-
समागमग्रहवषंफलगर्भलक्षणारो हिणीस्वात्याषाढी योगाः सद्योबबंकुसुसलतापरिधिपरिवेषपरिघपवनोल्कादिग्दाहक्षिति चलनसन्ध्यारागगन्धबनगररजो निर्घाताघकाण्ड-सस्यजन्मेन्द्रध्वजेन्द्र चापवास्तुविद्याद्क-विद्यावायसविद्यान्तरचक्रसृगचक्रशव-चक्रवात चक्रप्रासादलक्षणा-
प्रतिमालक्षणाप्रतिष्ठापन-वृक्षायुर्व दो दकागंलनीराजवखञ्जनकोत्पातशान्ति-मयूरचित्रकघृतकम्बलखड्गपट्टकृकवाकुक् मंगोजाइवेभपुरुषस्त्री लक्षणान्यन्तःपुरचिन्ता पिटकलक्षणो-
'पानच्छेदवस्त्रच्छेदचामरदण्डशयनाऽऽसनलक्षणरत्नपरीक्षा दीपलक्षणं दन्तकाष्ठाद्याश्रतानि शुभाशुभानि निमित्तानि सामान्यानि च जगतः प्रतिपुरुषं पार्थिवे च प्रतिक्षणमनन्यकर्माभियुक्तेन देवज्ञेन चिन्तयितव्यानि। न चेकाकिना शक्यन्तेऽहनिशमवधारयितुं

16 Brhat Samhita
निसित्तानि । तस्मात्सुभ्ृतेनव दवज्ञेनान्येऽपि तद्विदश्चत्वारः कतंव्या: । तत्रेकेनेन्द्री
चाग्नेयी च दिगवलोकयितब्या | यास्या नऋ ती चान्पेनेव वारुणी दायव्या चोत्तरा
चेशानी चेति । यस्मादुल्कापातादीनि शीघ्रमपगच्छ्न्तीति। तस्याइचाकारवरास्नेहप्रसाणादिग्रहरक्षोपघातादिभिः फलानि wafza ॥२३॥
In this Science the following subjects are dealt with in the
Samhita :- The movements of the planets headed by the Sun,
their nature and change, if any, their magnitude, colour, rays,
lustre, shape, setting, rising, orbit, change of motion on their
route, retrograde and direct motion; upward motion, conjunction
with a star or planet, and their course among these; the division
of the constellations among the countries and their effects on the
latter; the movement of Agastya (Canopus) and its rise, the course
of the seven sages i.e. the’ constellation called Ursa Major, and
their effects; the assignment of countries, substances and living
beings to the planets and stars; a triangular oonfiguration of the
planets wherein all the three houses, viz. Ist, Sth and 9th are
occupied and its wholesome effects; the effects of planets being at
war, their conjunction with the Moon, the planet presiding over
the year andits effects, indications of the approach of the monsoon,
the Moon’s conjunctions with the stars, Rohini, Svati and the two
Asadhas, signs of immediate rainfall, prognostication through the
growth of flowers and creepers, the misty circle around the Sun
and the Moon, a_bar-like row of clouds crossing the Sun at its
rising or setting, effects of winds, fall of meteors, appearance ofa
blaze in the quarters, earthquakes, redness of the sky at twilights,
clouds appearing in the form of a City, dust-storms, portent of
thunder-bolts, fluctuation in the prices of commodities, growth of
crops, Indra’s banner worshipped by kings, rainbow, architecture,
the science of foretelling effects from the movements of limbs or
from the cawing of crows, omens in the circle of quarters, phenomena connected with the deer, dogs, winds blowing in the eight
quarters, characteristics of temples and royal palaces, manufacture
of images, installation of idols, treatment and fertilizers of trees,
water-divination, ceremony of general purification by water done
by kings etc., flight of the wagtail, expiatory ceremonies for warding off calamities presaged by portents, a colourful resume of the
astronomical elements, royal bath under the Pusya asterism, characteristics of swords, royal crowns, cocks, tortoises, cows, goats,
horses, elephants, men and women, matters pertaining to harems,

Canons for Astrologer II ` 17
features of pimples, tearing of shoes and clothes, chowries, royal
staffs, beds and seats, examination of gems, characteristics of
lamps, materials derived from tusks, wood etc., good and bad
omens in general applicable to the entire world as well as to each
individual and the sovercign—all these ought to be considered by
an astrologer every moment of his life with a single-minded
devotion. And it is not possible for an astrologer to comprehend
single-handed all the omens occurring day and night. Hence an
astrologer who is well employed bya king should engage four
other scholars of the science (to assist him). Each of them would
be in charge of two directions: One to watch the east and the
south-east, the second one for the south and the south-west and
the third one for the west and north-west, and lastly the fourth
one for the north and the north-east. For, the fall of meteors and
the like take place suddenly and disappear quickly, and different
effects are mentioned according to their shape, colour, viscidity
or glossiness, size and the like, as well as to their striking, grazing
etc. the planets and stars.
[The word &dfawrr has interesting connotations: It should
not be construed as Division of Tortoise. Instead, it means, the
Division of the Globe, because the back or shellof that animal
resembles a half of the globe. In this connection read what Dr. H.
Kern remarks on this subject: ‘‘The word Kurma is the specific
Sanskrit form of a word once common to all Indo-European
tongues, viz. Karma, Lat. Culmus, Teuton holm, etc. It does not
originally denote the ‘tortoise’ itself, but its back, for the proper
meaning is ‘mound, buckle, half-globe, holm.” Even in Sanskrit,
in such compounds, as Kurmonnata, the word signifies the form of
the back of the tortoise. At the time when the word Kurma-Vibhága
became current, Kiirma was taken in its proper sense. Yet in later
times, they wholly mistook the meaning and made an absurd drawing, representing a tortoise, as if Kurma could denote a level ! The
rendering by ‘Globe’ is not wholly exact, since properly only a
half-globe, a holm, is supposed to be raised above the waters."
The Planetary Triangleis referred to in the Brhajjataka as “AgI
नवमपञ्चमलग्नसं स्थे: ।??
He gives its effect as, ‘ayes चिरसुखी i"
The Saravali, however, states, —
प्रियकलहसम रसाहससुखिनो नृपतेः प्रिया: सुभगकान्ताः |
ग्राढधा युवतिद्वेष्याः श्युद्ञाटकसम्भवा मनुजाः di]

18 Brhat Samhita
कृत्स्ना द्कोपाङ्गकुशलं होरागरितनष्ठिकपु ।
यो न पुजयते राजा स॒ नाशमुपगश्छति ॥२४॥
A king, who does not honour an astrologer who is thoroughly
proficient in the science with all its parts and minute subdivisions
and who is wedded to Horoscopy and Astronomy, will surely come
to grief.
[In this and the following fourteen verses the metre employed is the Sloka.]
वनं समाश्रिता येऽपि निर्ससा निष्परिग्रहाः ।
ufa ते परिपृच्छन्ति ज्योतिषां गतिकोविदम्न ॥२५॥
Even ascetics who have resorted to forests and who are free
from attachment (i.e. the sense of ‘mine’) and family ties, consult
an expert astrologer (who can know people’s fate through the
movements of planets).
[It is extremely difficult even for sages and hermits to attain
self-realization. As Sankaracarya states ‘ईश्वरानुग्रहादेव पूंसामद्वेतभावना',
itis not given to all to attain the supreme bliss. Some may have
to take several births for that. Hence, naturally even sages may
become anxious to know from anastrologer how far the planets are
favourably disposed towards them.]
agi यथा रात्रिरनादित्यं यथा नभः ।
तथाऽसांवत्सरो राजा भ्रमत्यन्ध इवाध्वनि ॥२६॥
Just as the night devoid of lights or lamps is utterly blind,
and the sky without the Sun dark, even so will a king grope in
life in the dark like a blind man on the way, if he is not guided
by a good astrologer.
[This and the following verses extol the utility and greatness
of a true astrologer in all spheres of life, especially in the political
one. The author, who was a gifted astrologer, had realized the
unusual importance of astrology as a social science. The similes
employed here are striking.]
मुहूतं तिथिनक्षश्रमृत वश्चायने तथा ।
सर्वाण्येवाकुलानि स्युनं स्यात्सांवत्सरो यदि ॥२७॥
If there be no astrologer to guide a king’s steps, Muhürtas
(auspicious periods), lunar days, stars, seasons and solstices would
all be confused for him.

Canons for Astrologer II 19
a Un dac ce of an astrologer-guide the king cannot underŠ ८ seasons, auspicious and inauspicious days etc. and so may
commit serious errors leading to Adharma.]
तस्माद्राज्ञाधिगन्तव्यो विद्वान् सांवत्सरो$ग्रणी: ।
जयं शः श्रियं भोगाञ्श्रेयशच समभीप्सता ॥ २८॥
Hence a king who aspires for victory, fame, prosperity, enjoyments and spiritual progress ought to employ the best astrologer
who is well-versed in the science.
[In the author’s view the king has no better friend, philosopher and guide than a good astrologer. It has been already
shown that the astrologer should be an ideal person, not a mercenary. See his extraordinary greatness in the following verses.]
नासांवत्सरिके देशे वस्तव्यं भतिमिच्छता ।
चक्षुभूंतो' हि asw पापं तत्र न विद्यते ॥२६॥
One who wishes for prosperity ought not to reside in a country which does not possess a good astrologer. For, no sin can remain in the place where resides an astrologer who is the eye, as it
were, of the society.
न सांबत्सरपाठी च aTHqqqaa |
ब्रह्मलोकप्रतिष्ठां च लभते देवचिन्तकः ॥३०॥
A person who studies astrology and divines the course of
people’s destiny will never be found in hell. On the other hand,
he will attain a permanent status in the world of Brahman.
ग्रन्यतइचार्थतशचतत्कृत्स्तं जानाति यो दविजः ।
Spe स भवेच्छ्राद्धे पूजितः पङ्क्तिपावनः utu
A Brahmin who knows this science in its entirety both in
letter and spirit deserves to be worshipped and fed as the chief
guest at a Sraddha and he sanctifies the whole feast.
[Generally guests that arc not related to the departed person
are not invited to Sraddhas. However, great personages and saintly persons, who may visit a house by chance on such an occasion,
are honoured and fed before the food is offered to the manes. The
word पङ्क्तिपावनः means that one purifies the ‘entire row of eaters’,
though the row may contain some unholy persons and the food
served may not be quite holy and good.]

20 Brhat Samhita
स्लेच्छा हि यवनास्तेषु सम्यक शास्त्रभिदं स्थितम् ।
ऋषिवत्तेषपि पुज्यन्ते कि पुनर्देवविदृद्विज: ॥ ३२॥
The Yavanas are, no doubt, non-Aryan in origin. Still this
Science has found a stable position in them. When even they are
honoured as Sages, how much more should a Brahmin astrologer
be ?
[The realm of the intellect and spirit knows no barriers of
time and clime as well as of religion and colour. Our author displays his catholicity by acknowledging the greatness of Greek astrology. This statement, however, does not prove that Indian astro1089 is derived from the Greek. It only shows that by the time of
Varahamihira the Greeks and Romans had a system of astrology
akin to the Indian. This led to his quoting parallel views of foreign
astrologers.
The commentator quotes the following verses to show that
the science went from the east to the west :
यद्दानवेन्द्राय मयाय सूर्य: शास्त्रं ददौ सम्प्रणताय Gay ।
विष्शोर्वेसिष्ठश्च मह॒षिमुख्यो ज्ञानामृतं यत्परमाससाद |
पराशरबचाप्यधिगम्य सोमाद्गुह्य सुराणां परमाद्भुतं यत् ।
अ्रकाशयाज्चक्ररनुक्रमेणा महधिमन्तो यवनेषु तत्ते ॥
What the Divine Sun had imparted to the humble Maya,
king of the Danavas, in days of yore, the supreme nectarous
knowledge that the great Sage Vasistha got from Lord Visnu, and
the wonderful secret knowledge of the Gods that Paragara obtained
from Soma, were ll brought to light in course of time by these
illustrious ones, and are now found with the Yavanas (Greeks).]
कुहकावेशपिहित करा पिश्चतिहेतुभि: ।
कृतादेशो न wd प्रष्टव्यो न स देववित् 1॥३३॥
One who makes predictions as a result of sorcery, spiritpossession and learning got by eavesdropping and hearsay, should
never be consulted. For, he is no astrologer at all.
श्रविदित्वेव यः शास्त्रं damned प्रपद्यते ।
स पड्क्तिदूषक: पापो ज्ञेयो नक्षत्रसूचकः ।।३४॥।
One who assumes the status of an astrologer without having
any knowledge of the Science should be considered as a sinner that
pollutes the holy company of eaters at a feast and a mere gazer at
the stars.

Canons for Astrologer II 21
[The compound नक्षत्रसूचक is a derisive remark against charlatans. There are similar digs at grammarians and ritualists viz.
बेयाकरणखसूचि: and मीमांसकदुर्दुख्छः.]
नगरद्वारलोष्टस्य यद्वत्स्यादुपयाचितभ् ।
भ्रादेशस्तद्वदज्ञानां यः सत्यः स विभाव्यते ॥३५॥
The prediction made by ignorant men (i.e. so-called astrologers) which might be fulfilled by a fluke is just like a prayer made
to the brick of the city gate for a boon that is granted by blind
chance.
[There is a world of difference between a road-side stone and
an Emblem of the Lord Siva which has been installed in a proper
shrine with due solemnity and to the accompaniment of Vedic
rites and chants done by great saints and seers.]
सम्पत्त्या योजितादेशस्तद्विच्छिन्नकथाप्रियः ।
सत्तः शास्त्रेकदेशेन त्याज्यस्ताहङ्महीक्षिता ॥३६॥
A king should reject an astrologer who is proud of his little
knowledge of the Science, who claims success of his previous prcdictions, and who is fond of elaborating irrelevant matters.
यस्तु सम्यग्विजानाति होरागणितसंहिताः i
AATA: स नरेन्द्रेण स्वीकत्तंव्यो जयेषिणा ॥३७॥
A king wishing for success ought to worship and secure the
services of an astrologer who is a past master in Horoscopy, Astronomy and Samhita.
न aaga करणां वाजिनां च ugue ।
करोति देशकालज्ञो यथंको देवचिन्तकः ॥३८॥
A single astrologer i.e. one who studies the course of Destiny,
who is familiar with the special features of times and climes can
achieve what a thousand elephants and four times as many horses
cannot together do.
दुःस्वप्नदुविचिन्तितदुष्पर क्षितदुष्कृतानि कर्माणि à
क्षिप्रं प्रयान्ति नाश शशिनः श्रुत्वा भसंवादम् ॥२९॥
All bad dreams, bad thoughts, bad sights and bad deeds of
a person come toan end immediately on his hearing about the
Moon’s passage over the lunar mansions from an astrologer.

29 Brhat Samhita
[It is well-known that astrology-cum-astronomy is a holy
ancillary of the Vedas called the ‘Eye’ of the वेदपुरुष, As such its
study must redound to one’s spiritual progress. Yogins meditate on
the Sun. So it is a tradition among astrologers, and some others
too, to read the पञ्चाइग—almanac—in the morning after ablutions
and recite the following verse at the end :
fares श्रियमाप्नोति वारादायुष्यवर्ध नम् ।
नक्षत्राद्धरते पापं योगाद्रोगनिवारराम् ||
HUTCH Aas च पञ्चाङ्गफल मुत्तमम् |
एतेषां पठनान्नित्यं गद्भास्नानफलं भवेत् ॥
The commentator here quotes another verse :
श्रृत्वा fafa भग्रहवासरं च प्राप्नोति धर्मार्थयशांसि सौख्यम् ।
भ्रारोग्यमायुविजयं सुतांश्च दूःस्वप्नघातं प्रियतां च लोके ú]
न तथेच्छति भूपतेः पिता जननी वा स्वजनोऽथवा सुहृत् ।
स्वयशोऽभिविवृद्धये यथा हितमाप्तः सबलस्य देववित् ॥४०॥
Even his own father, mother, kinsman or a friend would not
be solicitous so much for the prosperity of the king and his army
(or followers) as is a friendly astrologer who works only for his
untarnished fame.
[In the Viyogint metre the author explains the supreme
importance and self-abnegation of a true astrologer, to whom work
Is worship. |

ग्रादित्यचारः ua
Chapter III—' The Sun's Transit
ग्राइलेषार्द्हिक्षिणामुत्तरमयनं रवेर्षनिष्ठाद्यम् |
नूनं कदाचिदासोद्येनोक्तं पूर्वशास्त्रेषु uqu
There was indeed a time when the Sun’s southerly course
began from the middle of the star Aslesa and the northerly one
from the commencement of the star Dhanisthà. For, it has been
stated so in ancient works
साम्प्रतमयनं सवितुः ककंटकाद्यं मृगादितइचान्यतू i
उक्ताभावो faga: प्रत्यक्षपरीक्षणाव्यं क्तिः ॥२॥
दुरस्थचिह्ववेधादुदयेऽस्तसयेऽपि वा agaist: ।
छायाप्रवेशनिर्गमचिह्नर्वा मण्डले महति usu
At present the southerly course of the Sun starts from the
beginning of Cancer and the other from the initial point of Sign
Capricorn. The actual fact which goes against the old statement
can be verified by direct observation. The Sun’s change of course
can be detected by marking everyday the position of a distant
object either at sunrise or sunset, or.by watching and marking the
entry and exit of the shadow of the gnomon planted at the centre of
a big circle drawn on the ground
[The author’s scientific attitude is discernible here. A true
astronomer should not follow blindly the statements of ancient
writers. For, without applying periodic corrections to the | results
obtained according to old rules, one cannot get at the true positions
of planets.]
ara मकरमर्को विनिवृत्तो हन्ति सापरां याम्याम् ।
ककटकमसस्प्राप्तो विनि वृत्तञ्चोत्त रामेन्द्रीसू uxu
If the Sun should change his course before reaching Makara
(Capricorn), he would cause the destruction of countries in the
west and south, while should he alter his course before touching
Cancer, he would harm the countries in the east and north.

24 Brhat Samhtta
[Sage Garga says on this:
यदा निवतंतेऽप्राप्तो धनिष्ठामुत्तराबणे |
maasi दक्षिणोऽप्राप्तस्तदा विन्द्यान्महःद्कयम् ॥
Sage Pará$ara too echoes the same idea. This means that
sometimes on actual observation the Sun must have been found to
be changing his course causing the solstices before touching the
initial points of Capricorn and Cancer respectively. This phenomenon was considered to be a bad indication.]
उत्तरमयनमतीत्य व्यावृत्तः क्षेससस्य वृद्धिकरः |
प्रकृतिस्थइचाष्येवं विक्ृतगतिभंयकृदुष्शांशुः uu
Should the Sun tarry a little longer in his northerly course
and then retrace his steps towards the south, he would cause great
happiness in the country as well as an abundant growth of crops.
The same effect will follow from the natural movement of the
Sun. Butif itis contrary to the rule, there will be danger to
the world.
[By the word प्रकृति the commentator means the absence of any
difference between observation and calculation.]
सतमस्कं qq विना त्वष्टा नामाकंसण्डलं कुरुते ।
स निहन्ति सप्त भूपाञजन'ंश्च शस्त्राग्निदुभिक्षः ॥ ६॥
The planet Tvasta darkens the solar disc on days other than
the Parvans viz. 8th, 14th and 15th of each fortnight. As a result
of this seven kings and their subjects come to grief through clash
of arms, fire And famine.
[See what Sage Parasara says on this :
ग्रपवेणि शशाङ्काकौ त्वष्टा नाम महाग्रहः |
आवृणोति तमरश्यामः सवंलोकविपत्तये ।।]
तामसकीलकसंज्ञा राहुसुताः केतवस्त्रर्यास्त्ररात् |
वर्णस्थानाकारेस्तान्हष्ट्वाऽकं फलं AAT uen
There are 33 Ketus or Comets named Tamasakilakas (Dark
Shafts) that are the offspring of Rahu. When they appear on the
Sun’s orb, their effects will have to be.declared according to their
colour, position and shape.
[For details see footnote at the end of Chapter XI infra.]
ते चार्कमण्डलगताः पापफलाइचन्द्रमण्डले सौम्याः ।
ध्वाङ्क्षकबन्धप्रहरणरूपाः पापा: शशाइकेडपि usu

The Sun's Transit शा 25
These comets produce untoward effects, when they are seen
on the Sun’s disc, but are auspicious when seen on the lunar orb.
However, when they take the shape of the crow, headless body
and a sword (or any weapon), they produce only evil effects even
in respect of the Moon.
तेषामुदये रूपाण्यम्भः कलुषं रजोवृतं व्योम ।
नगतरुशिखरामर्दो सशकरो मारुतइचण्डः nen
ऋहतुविपरीतास्तरवो दीप्ता मृगपक्षिणो feat दाहाः ।
निर्घात महीकम्पादयो भवन्त्यत्र चोत्पाताः ॥१०॥
When these comets make their appearance the following
effects are observed : The water turns turbid; the sky is filled with
dust; a storm arises carrying sand and breaking the tops of mountains and trees (or of mountain trees); the trees and creepers show
effects contrary to the seasons; animals and birds get heated by
the Sun; there appear flares in the quarters; and thunderbolts,
earthquakes and such other unusual phenomena take place foreboding evil.
[Modern scientists connect the appearance of sunspots with
some unusual occurrences on the earth. I feel that these Tamasakilakas might have been the same as the sunspots of today.]
न पृथक् फलानि तेषां शिखिकीलकराहुदशेनानि यदि ।
तदुदयकारणमेषां केत्वादीनां फलं ब्यात् ॥११॥
No separate effects should be declared if these Tamasakilakas
make their appearance during the eclipses of the luminaries.
Their effects will have to be declared only when they become
visible at other times.
यस्मिन्यस्मिन्देशे दर्शनमायान्ति सुर्यबिम्बस्थाः ।
तस्मिस्तस्मिन्व्यसनं महीपतीनां परिज्ञयम् uisu
षुत्प्रम्लानश री मुनयोऽप्युत्सृष्टधमंसच्चरिताः ।
निर्मासबालहस्ताः कृच्छर शायान्ति परदेशम् ॥१३॥
तस्करविलुप्तवित्ताः प्रदी घनिःइवासमुकुलिताक्षिपुटाः i
सन्तः सन्नशरीराः शोको दृभवबाष्परुद्ध हशः ॥ १४॥
क्षामा जुगुप्समानाः स्वन्पतिपरचक्रपीडिता मनुजाः ।
स्वनृपतिचरितं क्षमं न qued ब्र्वन्त्यन्ये॥ १५॥

26 Brhat Samhita
गर्भेष्वपि तिष्पल्ना वारिमुचो a प्रसुतवारिसुज: ।
सरितो यान्ति aged कवचित्क्वचिज्जायते सस्थस् ॥१६॥
In whichever country these Dark Shafts are sighted on the
solar orb, the kings of those countries will have great suffering,
Even sages with emaciated bodies owing to hunger will forsake
their religious duties and righteous conduct, and emigrate to other
countries with difficulty, carrying in their arms their children that
are reduced to mere skin and bones. Virtuous people will be
robbed of their wealth by thieves, will heave deep sighs and have
drooping eye-lids and languid bodies, and will shed torrents of
tears of great grief blinding their eyés. Famished people will feel
disgusted being tormented by both their own king and by the kings
of other countries, and will condemn their king’s conduct (which
causes their suffering) but not their own previous acts. Though
rain-bearing clouds appear in the sky, they will not pour down
sufficient quantity of rain on the earth. Rivers will become very
slender and crops sparse (i.e. in a few places only).
[In the next two verses the author refers to the effects of the
shapes of these Dark Shafts. ]
दण्डे नरेन्द्रमृत्युव्याधिभयं स्यात्कबन्धसंस्थाने ।
ध्वाङ्क्षे च तस्करभयं दुर्भिक्षं कीलकेऽकंस्ये ॥ १७॥
If the Dark Shaft on the solar disc should appear in the form
of a rod, the effect would be death to the king; if in the form of a
truncated body, it would cause danger of diseases; if in the form
of a crow, there would be serious trouble from thieves; and lastly
if in the form of a nail or wedge; there would be famine.
[The ancients must have come to the above conclusions after
long and minute observations. For, they have given different evil
effects for the Shafts appearing in different shapes.]
राजोपकरणरूपंइछत्रध्वजचामरादिभिविद्धः ।
राजान्यत्वकृदकः स्फुलि ङ्कघूमा दिभिज नहा ugan
If the Sun’s disc be attacked by the Shafts in the form of
royal paraphernalia such as the umbrella, banner, chowrie etc., it
1S an indication of change of rulership; and ifthe solar orb is covered with sparks of fire, smoke oy something similar to that, there
would be destruction of human life on a la rge scale.
[By स्फुलिङ्ग what is possibly meant is the solar flare spoken of
by modern astronomers. ]

The Sun's Transit [I] 27
एको दुभिक्षकरो gaat: स्युनंरपतेविनाझ्ञाय ।
सितरक्तपीतकृष्णस्तेवद्धोऽ्कोऽनुवंष्नः ॥१६॥
If there is one of the objects mentioned above on the Sun's
disc, it will cause famine; and if two or more such objects are sighted, it bodes the king's death. If, on the other hand; the objects
mentioned above have the colours, white, red, yellow and black,
the destruction of the four classes v
and Südra, respectively is indicated.
[White is the symbol of purity, learning and intellectual guide;
red is that of power, strength, anger etc.; yellow is the colour of
auspiciousness and prosperity; and lastly black stands for inertia,
ignorance and sin. Similarly wind and fire are symbols ot phy sical
power and intellectual brilliance respectively.]
iz. Brahinin, Ksatriya, Vaisya
हश्यन्ते च यतस्ते रविबिम्बस्थोत्थिता महोत्पाताः à
ameaga लोकानां तेनंव भयं प्रदेशेन ॥२०॥
ln whichever direction of the Sun's disc these great portents
make their appearance, from that direction will arise trouble to
the pcople.
ऊध्वेकरो दिवसकरस्ताञ्ञः सेनापति विनाशयति ।
पीतो नरेन्द्रपुत्रं ug पुरोहितं हन्ति ॥२१॥
चित्रोऽथवापि quit रविरहिमर्व्याकुलं करोत्यृध्वभ् ।
तस्करशस्त्रनिपातेयेदि सलिलं नाशु पातयति ॥२२॥
If the Sun should look red with rays shooting upwards, it
forebodes the commander’s death; if yellow, the prince’s end; and
if white, the priest’s demise. If the Sun’s upward rays be varicgated or smoky and if there be no immediate rain following, it would
cause great disaster to the country through robbers and clash
of arms.
ara: कपिलो वाकः शिशिरे हरिकुडकुमच्छविःच मधो ।
श्रापाण्ड्कनकवर्णो ग्रीष्मे वर्षासु शुक्लइच ॥२३॥
शरदि कमलोदराभो हेमन्ते रुधिरसन्निभः शस्तः ।
प्रावृट्काले स्निग्धः aadfaatsia spem ॥२४॥
The Sun appears gencrally reddish or tawny in winter, of
greenish ycllow or saffron colour in the spring, pale or golden in
summer, whitish in the rainy season, of the colour of the interior

28 Brhat Samhita
of the lotus in autumn, and lastly blood-red in the dewy .season.
These natural colours of the Sun in the different seasons would
produce only beneficial results. However, even if the Sun is glossy
or having the colours assigned to other seasons in the monsoon,
only auspicious results would follow.
[The commentator quotes from the author's समाससंहिता :
ताग्नघृतकनकमुक्ताकमलासुक्सन्निभः शुभः सविता ।
शिशिरादिषु षट्सु ऋतुषु प्रावृषि सवेर्त्सन्निभ: स्निग्ध: ॥
as well as from qari:
शिशिरे ताम्रसङ्काशः कपिलो वापि भास्करः |
वसन्ते कुङ्कुमप्रख्यो हरितो वापि शस्यते ॥
ग्रीष्मे कनकवेदूर्यं सर्वरूपो जलागमे |
शस्तः शरदि पद्माभो हेमन्ते लोहितप्रभः |
एतत्स्वरूपं सवितुविपरीतमतोऽन्यथा |
Jt is to be remembered in this connection that in ancient India the
year commenced with the Sisira or winter season.]
रूक्ष: इवेतो विप्रान् रक्ताभः क्षत्रियान्विनाशयति ।
पीतो बश्यातू कृष्णस्ततोऽपराञ्शुमकरः स्निग्ध: ॥२५॥
If the Sun should appear in the rainy season rough and white,
it would cause the destruction of Brahmins; if blood-red in colour,
the ruin of Ksatriyas; if yellow, calamity to Vai$yas (trading
class); and if black, destruction of the Sudras (labouring community). Still if he is glossy, he will prove auspicious to all the
communities.
ग्रोष्मे रक्तो भयकृदर्षास्वसितः करोत्यनावृष्टिम् ।
हेमन्ते पोतोऽकंः करोति न चिरेण रोगभयम् ॥२६॥
Being blood-red in summer the Sun causes danger to the
people; in the rainy season he causes drought, being dark in
appearance; and being yellowish in the dewy season he leads to
the outbreak of diseases in the near future.
सुरचापपाटिततनुन्'पतिविरोधप्रदः सहस्रांशुः |
प्रावृट्काले सद्यः करोति विमलद्य॒तिवृःष्टिम् ॥२७॥
वर्षाकाले वृष्टि करोति सद्यः शिरीषपुष्पाभः |
शिलिपत्रनिमः सलिलं न करोति द्वादशाब्दानि ॥२८॥

The Sun's Transit III 29
Ifthe Sun's disc is cut by the rainbow, it bodes evil to the
ruler of the country. Ifthe Sun looks quite bright in the rainy
season, it betokens immediate rain. Similarly, if the Sun be of the
colour of the Sirisa flower in monsoon, there will be immediate
rain. If, on the other hand, the Sun has the colour of the peacock's plume, there will be no rain for 12 years to come.
[See what agi says :
मयूरचन्द्रिकाभो वा यदा हृश्येत भास्कर: |
पुरणे तु द्वादशे वषे तदा देवः प्रवर्षति ॥]
श्यामे5 के कीटभयं भस्मनिभे भयमुशन्ति परचक्रात् ।
यस्यक्ष सच्च्िद्रस्तस्य विनाशः क्षितीशस्य ॥२९॥
If the Sun looks dark, there will be danger to crops from
pests like locusts; and if he looks ash-:oloured, there will be trouble to the country from an alien army. If the Sun's orb should
have a slit, it forebodes the death of the king whose natal aste ism
is currently occupied by the Sun.
शशरुधिरनिभे मानो नभस्तलस्थे भवन्ति सङ्ग्रामाः ।
शशिसहशो नपतिवधः क्षिप्रं चान्यो नृपो भवति ॥३०॥
If the Sun up in the sky should have the colour of hare's
blood, it presages wars, and if he should look like the Moon, the
king would be killed and another installed in his place.
[cf. mi :
शशलोहितवर्णाभो यदा भवति भास्कर: |
तदा भवन्ति सङ्ग्रामा घोरा रुधिरकदंमा: 1]
क्षुन्मारकृदूघटनिभ: खण्डो जनहा विदीधितिभंयदः à
तोरणरूपः पुरहा छत्रनिभो देशनाशाय ॥३१॥
The Sun appearing like a pot would cause hunger and death;
if he looks cut up, people will die in large numbers; without rays
he will cause dangers; appearing in the form of an arch, he will
destroy the capital or cities; and in the form of an umbrella, he
will cause the destruction of the entire country.
ध्वजचापनिभे युद्धानि भास्करे वेपने च रूक्षे च ।
कृष्णा रेखा सवितरि यदि हन्ति ततो qq afaa: ॥३२॥
The Sun appearing like a flag or bow causes wars. The same
effect will follow if he is quivering or rough or sharp. If there is a

30 Brhat Samhita
dark streak across the solar disc, the ruling monarch will be killed
by his own minister.
[In the last quarter there is another reading—‘aq: सचिवम्’,
which would mean ‘the king kills his own minister.’]
दिवसकरमुदयसंस्थितमुल्काशनिविद्युतो यदा हन्युः i
नरपतिमरणं विन्द्यात्तदान्यराजप्रतिष्ठा च ॥३३॥
Should the solar disc be struck by a meteor, lightning or
thunderbolt at sunrise (or sunset), then it should be understood
that the ruling king would die and the king of a foreign country
be installed as the ruler.
[See पराशर :
उदयास्तमये भानुमुल्का हन्यात्समुत्थिता |
प्रज्वलन्ती तदा राजा क्षिप्रं शस्त्रेण वध्यते 11]
प्रतिदिवसमहिमकिरणः परिवेषी सम्ध्ययोहंयोरथवा i
रक्तोऽस्तमेति रक्तोदितश्च भूपं करोत्यन्यम् ॥३४॥
If the Sun should have the misty ring around him, or be red
at the time of both rising and setting, there would be another
king in the country.
प्रहरणसहशज लदं: स्थगितः सन्ध्याद्येषपि रणकारी ।
बृगमहिषविहगखरकर भस हृशरूपइच भयदायी ॥ ३५॥
If the Sun should be covered at both the twilights with clouds
resembling weapons of destruction, it would lead to wars in the
near future. And ifthe clouds appear like the deer, buffaloes,
birds, asses, camels and the like, there would be danger to the
people.
दिनकरकराभितापाहक्षमवाप्नोति सुमहतीं पीडाम् i
मवति तु पश्चाच्छुद्धं कनकमिव हुताशपरितापात् ॥३६॥
It is true that an asterism is subjected to great torture as a
result of its being burnt by the hot rays of the Sun; but it soon
becomes pure and sparkling like gold purified in fire.
[Sage पराशर says :
ग्रहोपसृष्ट नक्षत्रं सवितुर्योगमागतम् ।
विशोघयति तत्पापं तुषारिनिरिव काञ्चनम् ॥
Here we can see the difference in the opinions of the sage and our
author. For, the former says that an asterism involved in an eclipse
gets rid of the sin arising therefrom through its association with
the Sun. However, qai strikes a different note :

The Sun's Transit HI 31
यथाग्निना प्रज्वलिते गृहे तप्यन्त्यद्रिणः |
तथाकंस्याप्यदूरस्थमृक्षं तदपि तप्यते ॥]
दिवसकृतः प्रतिसूर्यो जलकुदुदग्दक्षिणे स्थितोऽनिलकृत् ।
उभयस्थः सलिलभयं त्पसुपरि निहन्त्यघो जनहा ॥३७॥
If the mock-sun be situated to the north of the Sun, there
would be good rain; if to the south of the Sun, storm; if on both
sides of the Sun, danger from floods; if over the Sun, the king
would die; and if beneath the Sun, the people of the country would
perish.
रुधिरनिमो वियत्यवनिपान्तकरो न चिरात्
परुषरजोऽरुण्ीकृततनुयंदि वा दिनकृत् ।
भ्रसितविचित्रनीलपरुषो जनघातकरः
खगमृगभ रवस्वररुतंश्च निशाद्यु्ुखे ॥ ३८॥
If the Sun up in the sky should look blood-red, it would ere
long destroy the king. The same effect would follow, if the Sun
be reddened by a dry duststorm. Ifthe Sun’s colour be dark,
variegated, blue or soiled (rough), many people would be killed.
The same disaster would overtake the country, if birds and beasts
should howl dreadfully at sunrise and sunset.
[Being a poet of great eminence like कालिदास our author changes the metre towards the end of the chapter as it is done in the
Mahakavyas. This metre is called नदेंटक.]
श्रम्लवपुरवक्रमण्डलः स्फुटविपुलासलदीघंदीधितिः i
प्रविकृततनुवणां चिह्लभूज्जगति करोति शिवं दिवाकरः ॥३६॥
The Sun with a spotless form, with his orb not crooked, with
bright, plentiful, clear and long rays, and having a natural appearance, colour and features will confer all good things on the people
of the world.
[Says Sage पराशर :—
aaa: शिरीषपुष्पाभः पद्माभो रूप्यसन्निभ: ।
वेदूयंघधृतमण्डाभो हेमाभरच दिवाकरः ॥
वरॉरेभिः प्रशस्तः स्यान्महास्निग्ध: प्रतापवानु ।
भावनः सर्वसस्यानां श्ेमारोग्यसुभिक्षदः ||
The verse is in the प्रपरवक्ल्न or वतालीय metre.

ARAT ।।४॥।
Chapter IV—The Moon’s Transit
नित्यमघःस्थस्येन्दोर्माभिर्मानोः सितं भवत्यद्धंस् ।
स्वच्छाययान्यदसितं कुम्भस्येवाऽऽतपस्थस्य ॥१॥
By the Sun’s rays one half of the Moon that is always beneath
the Sun is illuminated, while the other half becomes dark by her
own shadow, just as one half of a pot exposed to the Sun is.
[The commentator quotes both प्रह्मसिद्धान्त and खयं सिद्धान्त :
रविहष्टं सितमद्ध॑ कृष्णमहष्टं यथातपस्थस्य |
कुम्भस्य तथासन्नं रवेरधस्थस्य चन्द्रस्य ||
and
महतश्चाप्यघस्थस्य नित्यं भासयते रविः |
wd शशाद्बिम्बस्य न द्वितीयं कथञ्चन 11]
सलिलमये शश्ञिनि रवेर्दीधितयो मूच्छितास्तमो du ।
क्षपयन्ति दर्पणोदरनिहिता इव मन्दिरस्यान्तः ॥२॥
The Sun’s rays being reflected on the surface of the watery
Moon dispel the darkness of the night on the earth, just as the
solar rays reflected on a mirror kept outside illumine the interior
of the house.
[The सूर्य सिद्धान्त says : :
तेजसां गोलक: सूर्यो ग्रहक्ष ण्यम्बुगोलका: |
भ्रभावन्तो हि हृश्यन्ते सूयंरश्मिविदीपिता: ou
भ्रायंभट says :
भृग्रहभानां गोलार्द्धानि स्वच्छायया विवर्णानि |
aaa यथा arg सूर्याभिमुखानि दीप्यन्ते ।।
This verse of the text is also found in the पञ्चसिद्वान्तिका.]
त्यजतो5कंतलं शशिनः पशचादवलम्बते यथा शौक्ल्यम् ।
दिनकरवशात्तथेन्दोः प्रकाञतेऽधः प्रमृत्युदय: uqu
As the Moon goes farther and farther away from the surface
of the Sun, her back gets more and more illumined by the Sun. In
the same manner the Moon’s disc begins to shine from the bottom
in an increasing measure.

The Moon’s Transit IV 33
[See what the सूयंसिद्धान्त 5395 :
विप्रकर्ष यथा याति ह्यघःस्थञ्चन्द्रमा रवे: |
तथा तथास्य भूहृश्यमंशं भासयते रविः u]
प्रतिदिवसमेवमर्कात्स्थानविज्ञेषेण शौक्ल्यपरिवृद्धिः i
भवति शशिनोऽपराहणे पश्चाऱद्भागे घटस्येव ॥४॥
In this manner the Moon’s brightness increases everyday in
proportion to her distance from the Sun, just as the western side
of a pot becomes increasingly illumined in the afternoon.
[This explains how the Moon’s phases occur. The simile
given in this verse makes the meaning quite clear : Till the noon
the front part of the pot will be illumined by the Sun and not the
western or hind part. However, in the afternoon as the Sun descends from the zenith of the sky, greater and greater portions of
the hind part of the pot are illumined.
In the following verses effects of the Moon’s transit are
given.]
ऐन्द्रस्थ शीतकिरणो मुलाषाढाद्दयस्य चायातः d
यास्येन बीजजलचरकाननहा वह्निभयदश्च ॥५॥
When the Moon passes through the south of the stars Jyestha,
Mila and the two Asadhas (Pūrva and Uttara), there would be
destruction of seeds, aquatic animals and forests as well as danger
from fire.
[The Moon is invariably auspicious if she moves to the left
of planets and stars. See XVIII—1 infra.]
दक्षिणपाइर्वेन गतः शशी विशाखानुराधयोः पापः ।
मध्येन तु प्रशस्तः पितुदेवविशाखयोशचापि ॥६॥
If the Moon should pass through the south of the stars Visakha and Anuradha, evil effects would follow. However, if she
passes through the middle of Magha and Visakha, only beneficial
effects will accrue to the world.
[See the समाससंहिता on this—
भवति विशाखाद्यानां षण्णां याम्येन पापदश्चन्द्रः |
उदगिष्टः सर्वेषां पित्र्येशविशाखयोरचान्तः u]
षडनागताति पौष्णाद् द्वादश रोद्राच्च मध्ययोगीनि ।
ज्येष्ठाद्यानि तनर्वरक्षाण्युडपतिनातीत्य युज्यन्ते NON
The six constellations beginning with Revati conjoin with
the Moon before she has actually come to them; the twelve stars

beginning with Ardra conjoin with the Moon only when the latter
comes to their middle portion, while the remaining nine counted
from Jyestha conjoin with the Moon only after she has completely
passed by them.
[Sage mmi says :
saa तथादित्यं विशाखा चेव रोहिणी |
एतानि षडध्यद्ध भोगीनि महाक्षेत्रारि ॥
मधाश्विकृत्तिकासोमतिष्यपित्र्यभगाह्वयाः |
सावित्रचित्रानूराधा मुलं तोयं च वैष्णवम् ॥
घनिष्ठाजेकपाच्चेव समभागः प्रकीतितः |
एतानि पञ्चदश समभोगीनि मध्यक्षेत्राशि |
याम्येनद्ररद्रवायव्यसार्पवारुणसंज्ञिताः |
एतानि षडद्वंभोगीनि स्वल्पक्षेत्राशि i
See 2]90 ब्रह्मसिद्धान्त :
केशादित्यविशाखाप्रोष्ठपदायंम्णवैरवदेवानि |
षट्षड्ज्येष्ठाभरणीस्वात्यार्द्रावारुणाइ्लेषा: |l
पञ्चदशात्रानुक्तान्येकाइभिजिदुक्तमृक्षभोगो SET: |
तन्मानं नाक्षत्रं दुरधिगमं मन्दबुद्धीनास ॥
अध्यर्द्धाद्धेसमक्षेत्राणां मध्यगतिलिप्तिकाः शशिनः |
रध्यरद्ाद्धिकगुणा भभोगलिप्तास्तदैक्योनाः ॥
मण्डललिप्ताः शेषा भोगोऽभिजितः... ... |
Now the author refers to some unusual appearances of the
Moon and their effects.]
उन्नतमोषच्छ्ङ्गं नोसंस्थाने विशालता चोक्ता ।
नाविकपीडा तस्मिन्भवति शिवं सर्वलोकस्य usu
When the Moon looking. like a boat has her horns raised a
little and far from each other, there will be trouble to sea-faring
people, but happiness to all the rest.
्रद्धोन्नते च लाङ्गलमिति पीडा तदुपजीविनां तस्मिन ।
प्रीतिच निर्निमित्तं मनुजपतीनां सुभिक्षं auen
When the Moon’s northern horn be higher than the other by
a half, then it is called Langala or Plough (in shape). The effect of
this would be trouble to farmers, but cordiality among the rulers
of countries without any apparent reason, as well as good crops
and prosperity in the country.

The Moon’s Transit IV 35
[A question might be raised here: How could there be good
food crops and prosperity in the land when the husbandmen are
in trouble ? The answer would be that when food crops are available in plenty their prices fall down. So the agriculturists suffer
in consequence. It is also possible that there might be some epidemic breaking out among the farmers.
See what qai says on this :
यदा सोमः प्रतिपदि नोस्थायी सम्प्रहृरयते ।
उत्तरोज्ज्वलश्ृङ्गो वा लाङ्गली च मनोहरः ॥
क्षेमं सुभिक्षमारोग्यं सर्वभूतेषु निदिशेत्।
राज्ञां च विजयं ब्र याद्वदधन्ते Rueda ॥
From the above quotation it appears that according to this
Sage no untoward happenings are indicated by the Junar appearance in the form of a boat or plough.]
दक्षिरविषाणासरद्धोन्नतं यदा दुष्टलाड्भरलाख्यं तत् ।
पाण्डयनरेशवरनिधनङ्ृदुद्योगकर बलानां च ॥१०॥
If the southern horn be raised by a half, it is named Evil
Plough, and will bring about the death of the Pandya king and will
lead to the mobilization of armies for war.
[13i is again quoted here :
दक्षिणे च भवेत्स्थूलं हीनं श्वृज्भमथोत्तरम् ।
दुष्ठलाज्भलसंज्ञ तत् प्रजाक्षयकरं स्मृतम् ॥
This means that the Evil Plough is brought into existence
when the Moon’s southern horn appears much thicker than the
northern one. The result of this would be destruction of human
life on a large scale.]
समशशिनि सुभिक्षक्षेमवृष्टयः प्रथमदिवससहशाः स्युः ।
दण्डवदुदिते पीडा गवां नृपञ्चोग्रदण्डोऽत्न ॥ ११॥
When the two horns of the Moon are of equal height and
thickness, there will be happiness, good rains and abundant food
crops in the land. These effects will be felt throughout the month
similar to those experienced on the first day of the month. If the
Moon rises in the form of a rod, there will be trouble to the cattle
and the king will be very cruel and tyrannical in punishing the
subjects.
[वृद्धगगं says :
समश्चुङ्गो यदा हृष्टः शशी क्षेमसुभिक्षकृत् ।
प्रतिपत्सहर्श तत्र वासवो वषंते तदा |i

36 Brhat Samhita.
चन्द्ररेखा यदा चोद्ध्वंमृज्वी दण्ड इव स्थिता |
उदक श्व॒द्भाधिकसमो दण्डस्थानं तदुच्यते ॥
उद्युक्तदण्डा राजानो विनिघ्नन्ति समन्ततः |
गवां पीडां विजानीयाहुण्डस्थाने यदा शशी ॥ ]
कार्मुकरूपे युद्धानिः यत्र तु ज्या ततो जयस्तेषाम् ।
स्थानं युगमिति याम्योत्तरायतं भुमिकम्पाय ॥१२॥
If the Moon should appear in the form of a bow, there would
be wars, and victory would go to those that live in the direction
of the bowstring. Should she be stretched like the yoke of a carriage from the south to the north, there would be earthquake.
[वृद्धगर्गे states:
उदथे तु यदा सोमं पद्येद्धनुरिवोदितम् |
घनुद्धंराणामुद्योगो जगद्युद्धक रो भवेत् ॥
क्षत्रियाः क्षत्रियान् घ्नन्ति वर्णाश्चंव तथा परे ।
AIGA जयस्तेषां पृष्ठतश्च पराजयः |i
चन्द्ररेखा यदा व्यक्ता दक्षिणोत्तरमायता ।
शुक्लादौ प्रतिपद्येत तद्योगस्थानलक्षणाम् ॥
सेन्योद्योगा भवन्त्यत्र भूमिकम्पशच जायते 11]
युगसेव याम्यकोट्यां किञ्चित्तुङ््गं स पाइर्वजञायीति i
विनिहन्ति सार्थवाहान् वृष्टेश्च विनिग्रहं कुर्यात् ॥१३॥
If the yoke is slightly raised at its southern tip than at the
other, the Moon is then said to be lying on a side, the effect of
which would be drought and destruction of traders.
[Compare aai :
याम्यकोट्यायतः किञ्चिद्युगकाले यदा शशी ।
पाइवंशायीतिसंज्ञोऽयं साथेहा वृष्टिनाशन: uj
भ्रभ्युच्छायादेक यदि शशिनोऽवाङमुखं भवेच्छ ङ्गम् ।
श्रावजितमित्यसुभिक्षकारि तद्गोधनस्यापि ॥१४॥॥
If one of the horns of the Moon should appear turned downwards as a result of the other’s elevation, it is called ‘Bent’. It
would then cause famine in the country affecting even the cattle.
[See qam} :
भ्रधोमुखं यदा eT शशिनो हृश्यते तदा ।
संस्थानमावजितक गोघ्नं दुभिक्षकारकम् ॥]

The Moon’s Transit IV 37
भ्रव्युच्छिन्ता रेखा समन्ततो मण्डला च FINEAN ।
श्रस्मिन्माण्डलिकानां स्थानत्यागो नरपतीनासृ uuu
If the horns of the Moon should together appear like an unbroken circle, the figure is called Kunda or Pit. It would force
the ruling chiefs to abandon their posts.
[Compare azmi—
अच्छिन्ना मण्डले रेखा शशिनो दृश्यते यदा ।
कुण्डाख्यं नाम संस्थानं नुपविग्रहदायकम् ॥
See also पञ्चसिद्धान्तिका V-1-10.]
प्रोक्तस्थानाभावादुदगुच्चः क्षेमवृद्धिवृष्टिकरः ।
दक्षिणातुङ्गइचन्द्रो दुर्भिक्षभयाय निर्दिष्ट: ॥१६॥
If the northern horn of the Moon be raised and if she be
devoid of any of the forms mentioned above, she would lead to
increase of happiness, and prosperity and to timely rains in the
country. On the other hand, with the southern horn raised she
portends the threat of famine.
श्यूडगेणकेनेन्दुविलोनमथवाप्यवाडःमुखं "Ia ।
arqu चाभिनवं हृष्ट्वको जीवितादुअब्येत् ॥१७॥
One who sees the Moon with only one horn, devoid of the
other, or with one horn bent downwards, or the fresh Moon as
full, will lose his life before long.
[See the समाससंहिता—
उदयन्तमप्यसहशं न शुभं बहुरूपताथवेकस्य |
एकश्चन्द्रविकारं यः पश्येन्न स चिरं जीवेत् ॥ |]
संस्थानविधिः कथितो रूपाण्यस्माऱूवन्ति चन्द्रमसः ।
स्वल्पो दुभिक्षकरो सहान्सुमिक्षावहः Mat: Us
मध्यतनुत्र AA: क्षुद्धयदः सम्भ्रमाय राज्ञां च ।
चन्द्रो मृदङ्गरूपः क्षेमसुभिक्षावहो भवति uten
ज्ञेयो विशालमुतिनंरपतिलक्ष्मीविवृद्धये चन्द्रः ।
स्थूलः सुभिक्षकारी प्रियधान्यकरस्तु तनुर्मातः ॥२०॥
Details of the Moon’s configurations have already been
dealt with. There are yet other forms of the Moon that are explained below ; The Moon appearing tiny indicates famine, whereas
the big Moon good crops. It is called Vajra or Thunderbolt when
the Moon is slender in the middle, which is indicative of trouble to

38 Brhat Samhita
the people from hunger and fright as well as of war-preparations
among the kings. When she appears like the tabor, she causes
happiness and abundance of food crops. The Moon with a broad
disc leads to marked increase in the king’s wealth, with a stout
disc she brings about bumper crops and with a slender form she
causes the growth of agreeable grains (or, she makes grains very
dear).
[Compare az:i—
विलग्नमध्यो मेघाभो वज्रसंस्थानसंस्थित: ।
मध्यच्छिद्रो विलीनो वा भयं च जनयेन्महत् ॥ |
प्रत्यन्तान्कुनपांश्च हन्त्युडुपतिः Yat कुजेनाहते
ास्त्रश्षुद्धूयकृद्यमेन शशिजेनावृष्टिदुभिक्षकृत् |
श्रेष्ठान्हन्ति नुपान्महेन्द्रगुरुणा शुक्रेण चाल्पान्नृपा-
ञ्शुक्ले याप्यसिदं फलं wana कृष्णे यथोक्तागमसु ॥२१॥
If the Moon’s horn is struck by Mars, kings living in the neighbourhood as well as the wicked ones will come to grief; if it is
struck by Saturn, there will be danger from weapons and hunger;
ifitis by Mercury, drought and famine; if it is by Jupiter, destruction of leading monarchs; and ifit is by Venus, exit of petty
kings. These effects caused by the several planets will be mild, if
the phenomena take place in the bright fortnight, whereas in the
dark fortnight they will be felt in full measure as stated in the
text.
[Compare the समाससंहिता--
प्रत्यन्तविनाशोऽन्नक्षयो महाराजपीडा च |
सङ्ग्रामाइचाभिहते Wet भौमादिभि: क्रमराः 11
This verse of the text suggests that keen observations were
conducted by the ancients to detect any grazing or touching of the
Moon's horn by the planets during the two fortnights, especially
in the initial part of the light half and the final one of the other.
This verse is in the शादूलविक्रीडित metre.]
मिन्नः सितेन मगघान्यवनान्पुलिन्दातु
नेपालभृङ्गमरुकच्छसुराष्ट्मद्रान् ।
पाञ्चालकंकयकुलूतकपुरुषादानु
हन्यादुशीन रजनानपि सप्तमासानु ॥२२॥

The Moon’s Transit IV 39
When the lunar orb is cut asunder by Venus, the people of
Magadha, the Yavanas, Pulindas, the Nepalese, the Bhrngis, the
Marwaris, the people of Cutch, Surat, and Madra, the Paficalas,
the Kekayas, the Kulutakas (people of Kulu valley ?), the cannibals and the people of Usinara (Kandahar) will have great sufferings for seven months.
[Fourteen geographical units are mentioned here according
to the ancient geographical subdivision of the country.
The metre of this verse is वसन्ततिलका.]
गान्धारसोवी रकसिन्धुकी रान्धान्यानि शलान्द्रविडाधिपांइच ।
faira मासान्दश artha: सन्तापपेद्वाकूपतिनां विभिन्नः ॥२३॥
If the Moon’s disc is cut by the conjunction of Jupiter, the
people of Gandhara, Sauviraka, Sindhu and Kira, and all kinds
of corn, mountains, kings of the Dravida country and Brahmins
will be troubled for ten months.
[Some more regionsare mentioned here. Itis to be remembered that Jupiter presides over the Brahmin community. The metre
is उपजाति 1]
उद्युक्तान्सह वाहनेनंरपतींस्त्रेगतेकान्मालवानु
को लिन्दान्गणपुद्भवानथ शिबीनायोध्यकान्पाथिवानु ।
हन्यात्कौ रवमत्स्यशुक्त्यधिपती त्राजन्यमुख्यान पि
प्रालेयांशुरसृम्ग्रहे तनुगते षण्मासमर्यादया ॥२४॥
If Mars should obstruct the Moon’s orb, it would cause
troubles for six months to kings who have mobilized their army
for war along with their vehicles (such as chariots, elephants and
horses), the Traigartas (people and kings of the Trigarta region),
Malavas, Kaulindas (those of Kulinda), tribal chiefs (or leaders of
groups), the Sibis, Kings of Ayodhya, the people and rulers of Kuru
country, Kings of Virata and Sukti countries and other important
Ksatriya chiefs.
[The metre is शार्दूलविक्रीडित.
As Mars presides over war and is the commander of the
heavenly forces, his contact with the Moon presages harm to warmongers etc.]
यौधेयान्सचिवान्सकौ रवान्प्रागीशानथ चार्जुनायनानु ।
हन्यादकंमिन्तमण्डलः शीतांशुदंशमासपीडया ॥२५॥

40 Brhat Samhita
If the Moon’s disc is cut by Saturn, the Yaudheyas, ministers,
people of the Kuru country, rulers of the eastern countries, and
the Arjunayanas will undergo great suffering for ten months.
[The metre is शुद्धविराट, The Yaudheyas are a people belonging
to the northern division. So are the Arjunayanas.]
सगधान्मथुरां च पोड्येद्वणायाइच TS शक्षाडूः'ज: ।
श्रपरत्र कृतं युगं वदेद्यदि भित्त्वा शशिनं विनिर्गतः ॥२६॥
When Mercury cuts the Moon and then departs therefrom,
there will be trouble for the country of Magadha, the city of
Mathura and the people living on the banks of the river Vena.
In other places there will be peace and plenty as in the Golden
Age.
[The metre is वैतालीय].
क्षेमारोग्यसुभिक्षविनाशी शीतांशुः शिखिना यदि भिन्नः ।
कुर्यादायुधजीविविनाशं चोराशामधिकेन च पीडामु ॥२७॥
When the Moonis obstructed by Ketu (meteor), it will destroy
people’s health, happiness and prosperity; and it will cause much
destruction among fighters (those that are employed in the military)
as well as intense suffering to the people through increase in
robberies.
[This occurs in पंक्ति, but no name is available for it. Of
course it is similar to the शुद्धविराट् with सगण instead of the जगण before
the गुरु.]
उल्कया यदा शशी ग्रस्त एव हन्यते ।
हन्यते तदा नृपो यस्य जन्मनि स्थितः ॥२८॥
When the eclipsed Moon is cut by a meteor, the king, whose
natal star is occupied by the Moon at the time, will soon die.
[See the समाससंहिता--
उल्काभिहतो ग्रहणो तन्नक्षत्रं TT हन्ति॥
This metre occurring under उष्णिक् category has no name given.]
भस्मनिभः परुषो$रुणामत्त: शीतकरः किरण: परिहीणः ।
श्यावतनुः स्फुटितः स्फुरणो वा क्षुडडम रामयचोर भयाय NREN
If the Moon is of ash colour, rough, reddish, devoid of rays,
and of dark appearance, and looks broken or shaky, people will
have danger from hunger; tumult, pestilence, disease and thieves
in store.

The Moon’s Transit IV 4]
[The metre is दोधक.]
प्रालेयकुन्दकुमुदस्फटिकावदातो
यत्नादिवाद्रिसुतया परिमृज्य चन्द्रः ।
उच्चः कृतो निश्चि भविष्यति मे शिवाय
यो हर्यते स भवित! जगतः शिवाय ॥३०॥
Should the Moon appear white like snow, the Kunda (jasmine) flower, lotus and crystal, as if she were placed above by
Goddess Parvati after polishing her carefully with the idea that
she might get happiness at night through her, she would bestow all
happiness and prosperity on the whole mankind.
[The Moon is one of the eight constituents of the Lord Siva’s
form. She is also said to adorn the matted locks of the Lord. Here
the poesy of theastronomer asserts itself, as he gives a fine example
of poetic fancy in this verse.
The metre 15 वसन्ततिलका.]
शुक्ले पक्षे सम्प्रवृद्धे प्रवाद ब्रह्मक्षत्रं याति gig प्रजाश्च ।
हीने हानिस्तुल्यता तुल्यतायां कृष्णे सबं तत्फलं व्यत्ययेन uat
If the Moon waxes regularly in the bright fortnight, Brahmins and Ksatriyas as well as all the people will enjoy power, prosperity and happiness. If her growth is meagre, the effect will be
loss; and if it is moderate, the result too will be likewise. These
effects will have to be declared in the reverse order in the case of
the dark fortnight.
[The metre is शालिनी.]
यदि कुमुदमृशालहारगौरः स्थितिनियमात् क्षयमेति qim वा ।
ग्रविकृतयतिसण्डलांशुयोगी भवति aut विजयाय शीतरश्मिः ॥३२॥
If the Moon is as bright as the lotus stalk and a pearl necklace, if her digits increase or decrease proportionately to the number of lunar days that have elapsed, and if her motion, orb and
rays remain natural, all people will enjoy success and prosperity.
[Here the author sums up what he has said already about the
Moon.
The metre is पुष्पिताग्रा].

Chapter V—Rahu’s Course
श्रमुतास्वादविशेषाच्छिन्नमपि शिरः किलासुरस्पेदस् à
प्राणरपरित्यक्तं ग्रहतां यातं वदन्त्येके utu
Though the demon’s head was cut off, it was not deprived
of life asa result of his having tasted nectar, and, it is said, it
assumed the form of a planet.
[Compare the following Puranic statement :
सिहिकातनयो राहुरपिबच्चामृतं पुरा à
शिरहिछन्नोऽपि न प्राणोस्त्यक्तोऽसौ ग्रहतां गत: n
The reader may notice here the author’s regard for the views of
ancient Sages in spite of his own scientific thinking.]
इन्द्रकंमण्डलाकृति रसितत्वात्किल न हद्यते गगने ।
WAA पवकालाद्व रप्रदानात्कमलयोने: NN
They say that the Dragon’s Head (Rahu) being similar in
form to the orbs of the luminaries and dark in colour, is not visible
in the sky except on the Parvan days (i.e. New and Full Moon).
As a result of the Creator’s boon Rahu is visible only during
eclipses and not on other days.
[The Purànic story runs thus : Simhika, one of the wives of
Sage Kasyapa, requested her husband for progeny at an unseasonal
hour. Enraged at this untimely request, he gave her a son who was
dreadfullike the God of Death. This child came to be called
Rahu. Soon after his birth he fought with Aditi's son and was
trounced. Humiliated by this, he performed severe penance for ten
thousand divine years on a Himalayan peak. He asked Brahman,
when the latter appeared before him, to confer on him the status of
a planet, immortality, victory over the Gods and power to devour
the two luminaries. At this, the Lord spoke smilingly thus : ‘fou
will find it extremely hard to digest these two; still, be it so." So
Saying, Brahman vanished. Then Rahu rushed at the luminaries.
But Lord Visnu hurled his discus, cut off his head and said, “Let

Rahu’s Course V 43
the Creator’s words not go to waste. In your respective periods
you may devour the two luminaries and thereby indicate good and
bad things for the world.’’]
मुखपुच्छविभक्ताङ्गं भुजड्भुमांकारमुपदिशन्त्यन्ये ।
कथयन्त्यमुतंमपरे तमोमयं सं हिकेयास्यम् uiu
Some Sages declare that Rahu i.e. son of Sirhhiks, is of a
serpentine form with only the face and tail, while others hold that
he is formless and of the nature of pure darkness.
[The commentator quotes from three authorities : वीरभद्र who
says—
सिहिकातनयस्यास्य राहोः पुच्छमुखारते ।
नान्यदस्ति परं बाहुकटिपादकरादिकमु ।।
वसिष्ठ who says—
भषट्कान्तरितो राहुः सूर्याचन्द्रमसावुभौ |
छादयत्युरगाकारो वरदानात्स्वयम्भुव: ॥
and देवल who says—
अन्धकारमयो राहुमेघखण्ड इवोत्थितः |
आच्छादयति सोमाकौ पर्वकाले ह्युपस्थिते u]
यदि स्तो भविचारी शिरोऽथवा भवति मण्डली राहुः ।
मगराद्धेनान्तरितो yga कथं नियतचारः uyu
In case Rahu has a body, moves in the zodiac, possesses only
the head and a circular shape, how is it that he seizes the luminaries who are separated from him by 180°, when his own movement
is fixed and uniform ?
भ्रतियतचारः खलु चेदुपलब्धिः संख्यया कथं तस्य ।
पुच्छाननामिधानोऽन्तरेणा कस्मान्न Ter ति ॥५॥
If, on the other hand, his motion is not fixed, how is it that
his exact position is determined by calculation ? If he is to be
identified only by his tail and face, why should he not seize them
(the luminaries) at other intervals (instead of only when 180? apart) ?
ग्रथ तु भुजगेन्द्ररूपः पुच्छेन मुखेन वा स गृह्लाति ।
मुखपुच्छान्तरसंस्थं स्थगयति कस्मान्त भगराद्धेस् ॥६॥
If this Rahu whois a big serpent in appearance actually seizes
the Sun or the Moon with his tail or mouth, why should he not
obstruct half of the zodiac that lies between his head and tail ?

44 Brhat Samhita
राहुद्वयं यदि स्याद् ग्रस्तेऽस्तमितेऽयवोदिते we ।
तत्समगतिनान्येन ग्रस्तः सूर्योऽपि हृश्येत wou
If there should be two Rahus, when the Moon is eclipsed by
one Rahu when she is rising or setting, the Sun who is 180° away
from the Moon should also be eclipsed by the other Ràhu whose
rate of motion is also equal (to that of the other Rahu).
भुच्छायां स्वग्रहण भास्करमकंग्रहे प्रविशतीन्दुः ।
प्रग्रहरामतः पडचान्नेन्दोर्भानो$च पूर्वार्धात् usu
At a lunar eclipse the Moon enters the shadow ofthe earth,
and at a solar eclipse she enters the Sun's disc. That is the reason
why the lunar eclipse does not begin at the western limb, nor the
solar one at the eastern limb.
वृक्षस्य स्वच्छाया यथकपाइवें भवति दीघचया ।
निशि निशि तद्वृदभुमेरावरणवशाहिनेशस्य wen
Just as the shadow of a tree goes on increasing on one side as
a result of the Sun’s movement, even so is the case with the
shadow of the earth every night by its hiding the Sun during its
rotation.
सूर्यात्सप्तसराशो यदि चोदग्दक्षिणेन नातिगतः d
चन्द्रः पूर्वामिमुखशछायामोर्वो तदा विशति ॥१०॥
In her course towards the east, if the Moon tenanting the 7th
house from the Sun, does not swerve much either to the north or
the south (when her declination is very little), she enters the earth’s
shadow.
[Compare the ब्रह्म सिद्धान्त--
भूच्छायां शशिकक्ष्यागां रवौ भार्द्धान्तरास्थिते ।
यदा विशत्यविक्षिप्तश्चन्द्रः स्यात्त दृग्रहस्तदा ॥ ]
चन्द्रोऽघस्थः स्थगयति रविमम्बुदवत्समागतः पश्चात् ।
प्रतिदेशमतश्चित्रं हृष्टिवश्ञाद्भार्करग्रहणसु ॥११॥
The Moon situated below and moving from the west obstructs
the solar disc like a cloud. The solar eclipse, therefore, is different
in different countries according to the visibility of the eclipsed
disc. i

Rahu’s Course V 45
[The सूर्यसिद्धान्त says :
इन्दुना च्छादितं सूर्यं भवोऽविक्षिप्तगामिना |
न पश्यति यदा लोकस्तदा स्याऱ्भास्क रग्रहः 1
तमोमयस्य तमसो रविरर्मिपलायिनः । -
भूच्छाया चन्द्रबिम्बं च स्थाने द्वे परिकल्पिते ॥
The ब्रह्मसिद्धान्त--
सुच्छायेन्दुं चन्द्रः सूर्यं छादयति मानयोगार्द्धात् |
विक्षेपो यद्यून: शुक्लेतरपञ्च हृश्यन्ते ॥ ]
AAC महदिन्दोः कुण्ठविषाणस्ततोऽद्धंसञ्छन्नः |
स्वल्पं रवेरयतोऽतस्तीक्ष्णविषाणो रविभ॑वति ॥१२॥
When the lunar eclipse takes place, the obstructing agency
is very large, whereas in the solar eclipse itis small. Hence in
semi-lunar and semi-solar eclipses the luminous horns become blunt
and sharp respectively.
[The same idea is found in the agfaara—
महदिन्दोरावरणां कुण्ठविषाणो यतोऽद्धंसञ्छन्नः |
ग्रद्धच्छन्नो भानुस्तीक्ष्णविषाण स्ततोऽस्याल्पम् i]
एवमुपरागकारणमुक्तमिदं दिव्यहर्मिराचार्यः ।
राहुरकारणामस्मिन्नित्युक्तः शास्त्रसद्भावः ॥१३॥
In this manner have the ancient seers endowed with divine
insight explained the causes of eclipses. Hence the scientific fact
is that Rahu is not at all the cause of eclipses.
[The above categorical statement of our author shows that
though he has regard for religious traditions, he would not allow
scientific truths to be diluted with popular beliefs.
The ब्रह्मसिद्धान्त says :
यदि राहुः प्राग्भागादिन्दुं छादयति कि तथा नाकमु ।
स्थित्यद्धं महदिन्दोयंथा तथा कि न सूर्यस्य ॥
कि प्रतिविषयं सूयो राहुश्चान्यो यतो रविग्रहणो ।
ग्रासान्यत्वं न ततो राहुक्ृतं ग्रहणमकन्द्रोः 11]
योऽसावसुरो राहुस्तस्य वरो ब्रह्मणायमाज्ञप्तः ।
भ्राप्यायनमुपरागे दत्तहुतांशेन ते मविता UU
तस्मिन्काले सान्निष्यमस्य तेनोपचयंते राहुः |
याम्योत्तरा शशिगतिगंणितेः्प्युपचयंते तेन ॥१५॥

46 Brhat Samhita
A boon was conferred on the demon Ràhu by the Creator:
‘Thou shalt sustain thyself by means of the oblations offered to the
sacred Fire at an eclipse." Hence Rahu’s presence is assumed at
that time. The Moon has two nodes, Northern and Southern, as a
result of her declination (deviation to the north or south), which
can be ascertained by astronomical calculations. The Ascending
Node is called Rahu.
[Here the author refers to the traditional aspect of Rahu
mentioned in the Puranas. The two nodes of the Moon are called
Rahu and Ketu respectively.]
न कथञ्चिदपि निसित्तंग्रेहणां विज्ञायते निमित्तानि ।
श्रन्यस्मिन्नपि काले भवन्त्यथोत्पातरूपारि ।। १६॥।
An eclipse can by no means be ascertained through omens
and other indications. For, portents such as fall of meteors and
earth tremors occur at other times as well.
[This refers to a popular belief that an eclipse is heralded by
some unusual occurrences such as earthquake and terrific thunder.]
पञ्चग्रहसंयोगान्न किल ग्रहणस्य सम्भवो भवति ।
तेलं च जलेऽष्टम्यां न विचिन्त्यमिदं विपश्चिद्भिः ngon
Scholars should not believe the following traditional statement to the effect that an eclipse cannot take place except, when
there is a combination of five planets in the same zodiacal Sign,
and that a week before the eclipse i.e. on the previous 8th lunar
day, its characteristics can be inferred from the behaviour or appearance of a drop of oil poured on the surface of water.
[Here two more popular beliefs are mentioned. qai too
refers to the same :
ग्रहपञ्चकसंयोगं दृष्ट्वा न ग्रहणं वदेत् ।
यदि न स्याद्बुघस्तत्र तं हष्ट्वा ग्रहणां वदेत् ॥
Agta परिवेषः स्यात्तले जलगते यदा |
प्रसारिते विजानीयाद्यतः खण्डस्ततस्तमः 11]
भ्रवनत्याकं ग्रासो NAAT वलनयाऽवनत्या च ।
तिथ्यवसानाद्वेला करणे कथितानि तानि मया ॥ १८॥
The magnitude of the solar eclipse should be determined
through the Moon’s deflection i.e. parallax. The direction of commencement of the eclipse is found out through the deflection and

(wee:
Rahu’s Course V 47
angles of the Moon known as Ayanavalana and Aksavalana. The
duration of the eclipse is got by noting the exact time of conjunction
of the Sun and the Moon. All these have been explained in detail
by me in my astronomical work Paücasiddhàntika.
षण्मासोत्तरवृद्ध्या पर्वेशा: सप्त देवताः क्रमश: ।
ब्रह्मशशीन्द्रकुबेरा वरुणाग्तियमाइच विज्ञेयाः ॥ १ ९॥
The Creator (or Brahman), the Moon, Indra, Kubera, Varuna, Agni and Yama (God of death) are in order lords of the successive half-yearly periods since creation.
ब्राहमे द्विजपशुवृद्धिः क्ष मारोग्यानि सस्यसम्पच्च |
तद्वत्सोम्पे तस्मिन्पीडा fazama feza ॥२०॥
एन्द्रे भूपविरोधः शारदसस्यक्षयो न च क्षेमम् ।
कोबेरेऽथपतीनाम्थविनाशः सुभिक्षं च ॥२१॥
वाइणसवनीशाशुभमन्येषां क्षेमसस्यव् द्विकरम् ।
भ्राग्नेयं मित्राख्यं सस्यारोग्याभयाम्बुकरस् ॥२२॥
याम्या करोत्यवृष्टि दुर्भिक्षं संक्षयं च सस्यानाम् ।
यदतः परं तदशुभं क्षुन्सारावृष्टिदं wd ॥२३॥
During the Period presided over by the Creator Brahmanas
and the cattle will prosper; and there will be happiness, and good
health among the people as well as abundant crops. In the next
period owned by the Moon the results would be similar to those
in the previous Period, but there would be trouble to the learned
aswell as drought. In the Period presided over by Indra rulers
will be at loggerheads, autumnal crops will be destroyed and there
will be no happiness among the people. In the fourth Period
belonging to Kubera wealthy persons will suffer loss of their wealth
but there will be general prosperity or good crops. In the fifth
Period owned by Varuna there will be trouble to kings, but others
will enjoy happiness and abundant crops. The sixth Period of
Agni, otherwise known as Mitra, will lead to good harvest, health
and happiness, freedom from fear (or protection or security) and
abundance of water (i.e. good rains). Yama’s Period, which is the
seventh, will produce drought, famine and destruction of crops.
In case of an eighth Period coming after that of Yama asa result
of unusual causes, it will be harmful by causing hunger, death
and drought.

48 Brhat Samhita
वेलाहीने पर्वणि गर्भविपत्तिइच शस्त्रकोपश्च ।
ग्रतिवेले कुसुमफलक्षयो भयं सस्यनाशइच ॥२४॥
Should an eclipse take place a little earlier than the time
arrived at by astronomical calculation, there would be abortions
and clash of arms. On the other hand, if it should commence a
little later than the calculated time, there would be destruction
of flowers and fruits, panic would grip the people, and loss of
crops would ensue.
[mi says :
वेलाहीने शस्त्रभयं गर्भाणां स्रावणां तथा |
अतिवेले फलानां तु सस्यानां क्षयमादिशेत् ॥
हकसमे पर्वणि नृपा निर्वेरा विगतज्वराः |
प्रजाश्च सुखिताः सर्वा भयरोगविवजिताः ॥
and काश्यप--
अनागतमतीतं वा ग्रहणां पर्व EU |
गर्भेस्रावमनावृष्टिः फलं पुष्पं विनश्यति ॥ |
हीनातिरिक्तकाले फलमुक्तं पुवंशास्त्रहष्टत्वात् |
स्फुरगरितविदः कालः कथञ्चिदपि नान्यया सवति ॥२५॥।
I have mentioned the effects of eclipses taking place a little
earlier or later than the calculated time for the sole reason that
the ancients have stated so in their works. However, if the astrologer knows the correct method of calculating eclipses, by no means
can there be any difference whatsoever in the time of their occurrence.
[Again we see our author asserting his scientific attitude. For,
if there is any difference between the actual time and calculated
time of an eclipse, it should be understood that the person concerned does not know the science of astronomy properly. Still Varahamihira would quote the opinions of the ancients for historical
reasons as well as for making his Samhita a true compendium of
both modern and ancient knowledge. ]
यद्येकस्मिन् मासे ग्रहणं रविसोसयोस्तदा क्षितिपाः ।
स्वबलक्षोभः सङ्क्षयमायान्त्यतिशस्त्रकोपश्च NIRU
Should there be two eclipses, one solar and the other lunar,
in one and same month, kings would be destroyed as a result of
revolt of their army; and there would be bloody battles.

Rahu’s Course V 49
[काश्यप says :
चन्द्राकंयोरेकमासे ग्रहणां न प्रशस्यते ।
परस्परं वघं कुर्युः स्वबलक्षुभिता नृपाः 11]
ग्रस्ताबुदितास्तमितौ शारदधान्यावनोइवरक्षयदो à
सवंग्रस्तो दुर्भिक्षमरकदौ पापसन्हष्टो ॥२७॥
Should the luminaries rise or set being eclipsed, there would
be danger to autumnal crops as well as to kings. On the other
hand, if the eclipse should also be total and the eclipsed orb be
aspected by malefics as well, there would be famine and pestilence
all over the country.
[181 says in this connection :
उद्गच्छति गृहीतरचेदस्तं वा यदि गच्छति i
शारदं तु तदा सस्यं जातं जातं विपद्यते ॥
Ay तत्र जीवन्ति नरा मूलफलेन वा ।
भयदुभिक्षरोगेरच तदा सम्पीड्यते जगत् ॥
and *efaga—
यावतोंऽशान्ग्रसित्वेन्दोर्दयत्यस्तमेति वा |
तावतोंऽशान्पृथिव्यास्तु तम एव विनाशयेत् ॥
उदयेऽस्तमये वापि quer TEU भवेत् |
तदा नृपभयं विन्द्यात्परचक्रस्य चागमम् ॥
fat गृह्णाति सोमाको ad वा ग्रसते यदा |
हन्यात् स्फीताञजनपदान्वरिष्ठां्च जनाधिपान् di
ग्रेष्मेणा तत्र जीवन्ति नराश्चाम्बुफलेन वा |
भयदुर्भिक्षरोगेश्च सम्पीडचन्ते प्रजास्तथा u]
प्रद्धोदितोपरक्तो नंकृतिकान्हन्ति सर्वयज्ञांइच ।
घरन्युपजी विगुणाधिकविप्राश्चमिणो युगेऽभ्युदितः ॥२८॥
कषंकपाखण्डिवणिक्क्षत्रियबलनायकान् द्वितीयांशे i
कारुकरुद्रम्लेच्छान् खतृतीयांशे समन्त्रिजनान् ॥२९॥
मध्याहने नरपतिमध्यदेशहा शोभनइच धान्याघेः ।
तृणभुगमात्यान्तःपुरवेशयघ्नः पञ्चमे खांशे ॥३०॥
्त्रीशूद्रान्षष्ठेऽशे वस्युप्रत्यन्तहाऽस्तमयकाले ।
यस्मिन्खांशे सोक्षस्तत्प्रोकतानां शिवं भवति ॥३१॥

50 Brhat Samhita
Should an eclipse, solar or lunar, commence when the disc
has just half-risen, it would destroy low tribals, Candalas etc. as
well as all sacrifices i.e. religious practices. Should the above
phenomenon take place in the first division of the visible part of
the sky, when it is divided into seven equal parts, those that live
by working on fire like the goldsmiths, virtuous men, Brahmins
and hermits would be affected. If this happen in the second part
of the sky, agriculturists, heretics traders, Ksatriyas and army
chiefs would come to g:ief. In the third part it would harm artisans, artists, the Sadras, Mlecchas and ministers. If the eclipse
take place at midday i.e. the fourth division of the sky, the king and
the middle country would suffer, but the prices of grains would
be fair. In the fifth division animals that live on grass, ministers,
inmates of harems, and Vaisyas (or merchants) would suffer.
An eclipse occurring in the sixth division ofthe sky would harm
women and the Südras, and lastly one occurring at sunset or the
last portion of the sky would destroy robbers and those that live
in the border countries. In whichever part of the sky the eclipse
ends, the people and things corresponding to that part would be
benefited.
[Kasyapa says—
उदितास्तमितो ग्रस्तौ सर्वसस्यक्षयङ्करौ ।
सवंग्रस्तौ यदा पद्येद्दुभिक्षं तत्र जायते ॥
प्रथमांशे विप्रपीडा क्षत्रियाणां द्वितीयके ।
शुद्राणां च तृतीयेऽशे चतुर्थं मध्यदेशिनामु ॥
वेश्यानां पञ्चमे खांशे षष्ठांशे प्रमदाभयम् |
दस्युप्रत्यन्त कम्लेच्छविनाशः सप्तमांशके ॥
येषामंशे भवेन्मोक्षस्तज्जातानां शुभं भवेत् ।
Also वृद्धगर्ग--
येषां सोमो युगे ग्रस्तो विमर्दो यत्र वा भवेत् ।
तेषां पीडां विजानीयाम्मोक्षे शुभमथादिशेत् n
In the case of a solar eclipse the daytime should be divided into
7 equal parts. One should then note down in which divisions
the eclipse begins, becomes maximum and ends. The persons
assigned to these will in order suffer,- be destroyed and prosper.
Same is the case with a lunar eclipse, where the night is to be
divided. From the text it is clear that certain castes, avccations

Rahu’s Course V 51
and countries belong to certain subdivisions of the visible sky or
the day or night, as the case may be.]
िजनृपतीनुदगयने विदशुद्रान्दक्षिणायने हन्ति ।
राहुरुदगादिहृष्ट: प्रदक्षिरां हन्ति विप्रादीनू ॥३२॥
स्लेच्छान्विदिकस्यितो यायिनइच हृत्याद्धताशसक्तांश्च ।
सलिलचरदन्तिघाती याम्येनोदग्गवामशुभः ॥३३॥
पूर्वश सलिलपुर्णा करोति वसुधां समागतो dea: à
पश्चात्कषंकसेवकबीजविनाशाय निर्दिष्ट: ॥३४॥
An eclipse (i.e. Rahu) occurring in the northern (winter)
solstice would destroy Brahmins and kings (i.e. Ksatriyas), while
in the southern (summer) solstice, Vaigyas (traders) and Südras
{labouring class). If the eclipse, solar or lunar, be sighted in the
four quarters beginning with the north, people of the four classes
beginning with Brahmins would suffer in order. Should it occur
in any one of the four corners or semi-quarters viz. north-east,
south-east, south-west and north-west, Mlecchas, attacking or
marching armies and those who earn their living by means of
fire like fire-worshippers and smiths would be affected. If it begins
in the south, aquatic animals and elephants will be destroyed; and
if in the north, cattle will perish. If it should begin in the east,
the earth would be troubled with floods; and if in the west husbandmen, servants, labourers and seeds and seedlings would be
destroyed.
[See what Sage काश्यप says—
पूर्वं सलिलघाती स्यात्पशचाद्धान्यकृषीवलान् |
याम्ये जलचरान्हन्ति सौम्ये गोनाशकः स्मृतः ॥
म्लेच्छान्यायिनृपान्हन्ति विदिकस्थः सिंहिकासुतः ।
and the समाससंहिता--
उदगादिषु दिक्ष्वशुभो विप्रादीनां सितादिवरांस्य ।
विदिगादिगतो हन्याद्राहुम्लेच्छान्सविजिगीषन् ॥
द्विजराजन्यान्हन्यादुदगयने दक्षिणे तु faga ।
समरामयाय राहुर्यदि पक्षान्ते पुनह श्यः ॥ ]
पाञ्चालकलिङ्भशुरसेनाः काम्बो जोड़किरातशस्त्रवार्ताः ।
जीवन्ति च ये हुताशवृत्त्या ते पीडामुपयान्ति मेषसंस्थे uqun

52 Brhat Samhita
If an eclipse takes place in the Sign Aries i.e. when the Sun
or the Moon is eclipsed while passing through Aries, the people of
the Pañcala country, Kalingas, the Sürasenas, the Kambojas,
people of modern Orissa, hunters or foresters, those who wield
weapons i.e. warriors, and those that work on fire will come to
grief.
[In this and the succeeding seven verses the author discusses.
effects of eclipses taking place in the twelve houses beginning with
Mesa. The metre is श्रोपच्छन्दसिक.]
गोपाः पशवो5थ गोमिनो सनुजा ये च महत्त्वमागता: ।
पीडामुपयान्ति भास्करे ग्रस्ते शीतकरेऽथवा वृषे uisu
When the eclipse, solar or lunar, occurs in Sign Taurus,
shepherds, cattle, owners of large herds of cattle, and men who
have risen to prominence will be affected.
[As the Sign affected is called Vrsabha—Bull—cattle, their
owners and virtuous men are said to be afflicted. This Section
may well be read with advantage with what is given in chapters
XIV—XVI infra.
The metre is Vaitaliya.]
मिथुने saaga नृपा नृपमात्रा बलिनः कलाविदः ।
यघुनातटजा galga मत्स्याः Fama: समन्विताः uen
If the eclipse should take place in Sign Gemini, high-class
women, kings and powerful ministers and the like, persons proficient in (fine) arts, people living on the banks of the Jumna, people
of Balkh, the Viratas and the Suhmas would be affected.
[As the Sign Mithunais entirely Human with artistic activities,
it is but meet that such persons are affected. The metre is वियोगिनी
with one difference viz. in the last quarter instead of the initial
am two long syllabes are used, thereby giving the same number
of Matras].
ग्रामो राञ्छुबरान्सपल्लवान्मल्लान्मत्स्यकुरूञछ्कानपि ।
पाञ्चालान्विकलांरच पीडयत्यन्नं चापि निहन्ति ककंटे uacu
_ Ifthe eclipse should be in Sign Cancer, it would afflict the
Abhiras, the Sabaras (these are people of some mountain regions),
the Pallavas, wrestlers, the Matsyas, the Kurus, Sakas, the Paficalas and those that are infirm. Food-grains also would be in
jeopardy.

Rahu’s Course V 53
[The metre employed is Suddhavirat.]
fag पुलिन्दगणमेकलसत्त्वयुक्तान्
रजोपमान्नरपतीन्वनगोचरांइच i
षष्ठे तु सस्यकविलेखकगेयसक्तात्
हन्त्यशमकत्रिपुरशालियुतांशच देशानु ॥३६॥
Should an eclipse occur in Sign Leo, it would destroy the
tribe of hunters, the people inhabiting the Mekala mountain, heroic
persons, rulers and their equals as well as the forest-denizens.
Should it occur in Sign Virgo, it would afflict crops, poets, writers
scribes, musicians, people of the A$maka and Tripura regions as
well as countries abounding in paddy fields.
[The Sign Simha stands for a mountainous region, and Virgo
is represented by a virgin holding corn etc. As this Ragi belongs
to Mercury, whose exaltation and Milatrikona are here, his
characteristics are naturally affected. The metre is वसन्ततिलका.]
तुलाधरेऽवन्त्यपरान्त्यसाधून्वरिग्दशार्णान्मरुकच्छपांइच ।
ग्रलिन्यथोदुम्बरमद्रचोलाव्द्र मान्सयो घेयविषायुधी यानु on
If the eclipse occurs in Sign Libra, people of Avanti and
Aparanta regions (i.e. the western borders near the Sahya mountain), virtuous persons, traders, inhabitants of the Da$àrna country,
Maru and Kacchapa regions wlll come to grief. If it takes place
in Sign Scorpio, people of Udumbara, Madra and Cola, the Yaudheya tribe, fighters that use poisoned weapons and trees will be
destroyed.
[In the first line there is a variant reading सिन्धून्, meaning
rivers, for साधून्. The metre is उपन्द्रवज्ञा.]
धन्विन्यमात्यवरवाजिविदेहमल्लान्
पाञ्चालवद्यवरिजो विषमायुधज्ञानू ।
हन्यान्मृगे तु कषमन्त्रिकुलानि नीचान्
मन्त्रौषधीषु कुशलान्स्थविरायुधीयानु ॥४१॥
If the eclipse should happen in Sign Sagittarius, it would
destroy chief ministers, horses, people of Videha, wrestlers, E
Pancalas, physicians, merchants, those that are rough and toug

ऊूम्पेप्त्त गरिजास्सपक्चिसजतान्नाराद्रहा स्त =
š
rpa चवरपरकाव्हत्य = — ,
Dogg zi == T cm |
दारोराव्दरदायासहपुरकाल्हच्यात्तवा! बदरानू
सांत सावरकूलसागरजल2 न्या र जनान्
If an eclipse takes place in Sign Aquarius, it will harm people
211 A Sesto twa I 2 E
living on the mountains and in the west, bearers of b rGens, thi
eves, Abhiras (herdsmen), the Daradas, noble me
eves, J
would affect the shores of oceans and the articles such as pearls
obtained from the sea-bed, foresters, scholars and those whose
profession is connected with water or water-products. The effects
of eclipse occurring in the several constellations will have to be
predicted according to the rules mentioned in the Chapter on the
“Sphere of the Heavens or Starry Firmament.”’
[In chapter XIV the author discusses the geographical subdivisions of the country in relation to the constellations. So we have
to apply the principles enunciated in this chapter to the peoples
and things presided over by the different stars, when we have (0
predict the effects of eclipses occurring in the different stars, as We
have done in the case of the different Signs of the Zodiac.
Tu a variant for वन्यान् in the third line of the verse. The
metre is शादलविक्रीडित.
See समाससंहिता--
कूर्मविभागेन वदेत् पीडां देशस्य वीक्ष्य नक्षत्रम् |
सहितं ग्रहणं येन तहदेशश्चाप्नुयात्पीडाम् 11]
भन्यापसव्यलेहुग्रसननिरोधावमदनारो हा:
आश्रात मध्यत मस्तमोऽन्त्य इति ते दश ग्रासाः ॥४३॥
Eclipses are of ten kinds viz. Savya, Apasavya, Leha, Grasang,
trodha, Avamardana, Aroha, Aghrata, Madhyatamas and Tamonty4-

Rahu’s Course V 55
[When the shadow appears in different parts of the lunar or
solar disc, or when the shadow appears to behave in different ways
different designations are given to the eclipses. Savya means the
southern side of the disc, while Apasavya means the northern side.
In the case of a lunar eclipse south-east is called Savya, while northeast Apasavya. In the case of the solar eclipse these are respectively
north-west and south-west. Leha means ‘licking with the tongue’.
Grasana means swallowing. Niroaha is blocking. Avamardana is complete crushing. Arohana is remounting. Aghrata is smelt. The other two
terms are self-explanatory. ]
सव्यगते तमसि जगज्जलप्लुतं भवति मुदितमभयं च ।
ग्रपसव्ये नरपतितस्करावमदंः प्रजानाशः USSU
When the shadow (Rahu) is on the southern side of the solar
or lunar orb at an eclipse, the world will be inundated by floods,
but people will be happy and free from fear. If the eclipse occurs
on the northern side, people will perish asa result of the tyranny
of kings and depredations of robbers.
[It is to be remembered that the words savya and apasavya
mean different directions in the case of solar and lunar eclipses].
जिह्वोपलेढि परितस्तिमिरनुदो मण्डलं यदि स लेहः ।
प्रमुदितसमस्तभुता प्रभूततोया च तत्र मही ॥४५॥
The eclipse is called Leha (Licking) when the eclipsed disc is
enveloped all round (or licked) by the tongues of darkness. All
beings will be happy and there will be plenty of water on the earth
as a result of this eclipse.
[The highly imaginative and observant Aryans must have
observed eclipses where like the flames (i.e. tongues) of fire the
tongues of shadow or darkness gradually licked and enveloped the
orb].
ग्रसनमिति यदा saat: पादो वा गृह्यतेऽथवाप्यद्धम् ।
स्फीतनपवित्तहानिः पीडा च स्फोतदेशानाम् ॥४६॥
Ifa part of the disc i.e. one half, one-third or one-fourth,
is covered by shadow, itis termed Grasana (Swallowing). Asa
consequence of this there will be the end of a very powerful king,
. and destruction of wealth in the country, and prosperous countries
also will have troubles.

54 Brhat Samhita
and those who wield weapons. An eclipse occurring in Sign Capricorn would ruin fishes, ministers and their families, men of low
classes, those who are skilled in charms and herbs, those that are
old and infirm and the persons who live by weapons.
[This Sign Sagittarius is presided over by Jupiter, who is the
minister or teacher of the Gods. Its form also is partly equestrian
and partly human. Hence the suffering of particular persons and
animals. The metre is वसन्ततिलका.]
कुम्भे$न्त गिरिजान्सपश्चिसजनान्मारोद्ृहांस्तस्करा-
नामौरान्दरदार्येसिहपुरकान्हन्यात्तया बबंरानु ।
सीने सागरकूलसागरजलद्रव्याणि वन्याअनान्
प्राज्ञान्चायूपजीविन३इच भफलं कूर्मोपदेशाहदेत् ॥४२॥
If an eclipse takes place in Sign Aquarius, it will harm people
living on the mountains and in the west, bearers of burdens, thieves, Abhiras (herdsmen), the Daradas, noble men, residents of
Simhapura and the Barbaras. One taking place in Sign Pisces
would affect the shores of oceans and the articles such as pearls
obtained from the sea-bed, foresters, scholars and those whose
profession is connected with water or water-products. The effects
of eclipse occurring in the several constellations will have to be
predicted according to the rules mentioned in the Chapter on the
“Sphere of the Heavens or Starry Firmament.””
[In chapter XIV the author discusses the geographical subdivisions of the country in relation to the constellations. So we have
to apply the principles enunciated in this chapter to the peoples
and things presided over by the different Stars, when we have to
predict the effects of eclipses occurring in the different stars, as we
have done in the case of the different Signs of the Zodiac.
मान्यान् is a variant for वन्यान् in the third line of the verse. The
metre is शादूलविक्रीडित.
See समाससंहिता--
कूमेविभागेन वदेत् पीडां देशस्य वीक्ष्य नक्षत्रम् |
सहितं ग्रहणां येन तहेशश्चाप्नुयात्पीडाम् 11]
सव्यापसव्यलेहग्रसननिरोधावमदंनारोहाः ।
MATa मध्यतमस्तमोऽन्त्य इति ते दश ग्रासा: ॥४३॥
Eclipses are of ten kinds viz. Savya, Apasavya, Leha, Grasana,
Nirodha, Avamardana, Aroha, Aghrata, Madhyatamas and Tamontya.

Rahu’s Course V 55
[When the shadow appears in different parts of the lunar or
solar disc, or when the shadow appears to behave in different ways,
different designations are given to the eclipses. Savya means the
southern side of the disc, while Apasavya means the northern side.
In the case of a lunar eclipse south-east is called Savya, while northeast Apasavya. In the case of the solar eclipse these are respectively
north-west and south-west. Leha means ‘licking with the tongue’.
Grasana means swallowing. Niroaha is blocking. Avamardana is complete crushing. Arohana is remounting. Aghrata is smelt. The other two
terms are self-explanatory.]
सव्यगते तमसि जगज्जलप्लुतं भवति मुदितसमयं च ।
ग्रपसव्ये नरपतितस्करावमदंः प्रजानाशः ॥४४॥
When the shadow (Rahu) is on the southern side of the solar
or lunar orb at an eclipse, the world will be inundated by floods,
but people will be happy and free from fear. If the eclipse occurs
on the northern side, people will perish asa result of the tyranny
of kings and depredations of robbers.
[It is to be remembered that the words savya and apasavya
mean different directions in the case of solar and lunar eclipses].
जिह्वोपलेढि परितस्तिमिरनुदो मण्डलं यदि स लेहः ।
प्रसुदितसमस्तभुता प्रभूततोया च तत्र मही ॥४५॥
The eclipse is called Leha (Licking) when the eclipsed disc is
enveloped all round (or licked) by the tongues of darkness. All
beings will be happy and there will be plenty of water on the earth
as a result of this eclipse.
[The highly imaginative and observant Aryans must have
observed eclipses where like the flames (i.e. tongues) of fire the
tongues of shadow or darkness gradually licked and enveloped the
orb].
ग्रसनमिति यदा त्र्यंशः पादो वा गृह्यतेऽयवाप्यद्धेम् ।
स्फीतनुपवित्तहानिः पीडा च स्फीतदेशानाम् ॥४६॥
Ifa part of the disc i.e. one half, one-third or one-fourth,
is covered by shadow, itis termed Grasana (Swallowing). Asa
consequence of this there will be the end of a very powerful king,
. and destruction of wealth in the country, and prosperous countries
also will have troubles.

56 Brhat Samhita
पर्यन्तेषु गृहीत्वा अध्ये पिण्डीकृतं तमस्तिष्ठेत् ।
a निरोधो विज्ञेयः प्रमोदकृत्सवं भुतानाम् ॥४७॥
When the eclipse starts all around and forms a thick lump
of darkness in the centre, it is called Nirodha (Obstruction). All
beings will be happy in consequence.
श्रवसदेनसिति निःशेषमेव सञ्छाद्य यदि चिरं तिष्ठेत् i
हन्यात्प्रधानमुपानू प्रधानदेशांश्र तिभिरमयः TET
It is called Avamardana (Crushing) when the eclipse is total
and lasts long in that condition. Its result will be destruction of
prominent kings and léading countries.
वृत्त ग्रहे यदि तमस्तत्क्षणसाधृत्य हश्यते WU: d
शारो हणमित्यन्योन्यसर्दनेभयकरं राज्ञाम ॥४६॥
It is called Arohana or Aroha (Mounting) if after the termination of the eclipse the luminary be again covered with darkness.
Consequently there will be great. panic in the country as a result of
mutual fighting among the kings.
दर्पण इबंकदेशे सबाष्पनिःइवासमारुतोपहतः |
हृश्येता55प्रात॑ तत्युवृष्टिवृदृध्याबहं जगतः ॥५०॥
lt is called Aghrata (Smelt) when the shadow appears on a
part of the disc as does the vapours of the hot breath of the mouth
on a mirror. This will bring in good rains and prosperity to the
world.
मध्ये तमः प्रविष्टं वितमस्कं मण्डलं च यदि परितः।
तन्मध्यदेशनाशं करोति कुक्ष्यामयभयं च ॥५१॥
The eclipse is called Madhyatamas (Darkness in the Centre)
when the shadow appears in the Centre of the disc leaving the
surrounding parts bright. It will destroy the people of the Central
regions and afflict humanity with fear and stomach troubles. :
[This phenomenon is possible only in a solar eclipse].
पर्यन्तेष्वतिबहुलं स्वल्पं मध्ये त मस्तमोऽन्त्याख्ये ।
सस्यानामीतिभयं मयमस्मिस्तस्क राणां च ॥५२॥
When the shadow is very thick in the surrounding parts of
the disc and very, thin in the central portion, the eclipse is known

Rahws Course V 51
as Tamontya (Dark in the edges). There will be trouble to the
crops through locusts and such other pests, and people will have
danger from thieves.
[There are six Itib3dhàs as stated below:
भ्रतिवृष्टिरनावृष्टिमूषकाः शलभाः खगाः (खलाः) ।
प्रत्यासन्नाश्च राजानः षडेता ईतयः स्मृताः H
Jt means—Excessive rain, drought, rats, locusts, birds (wicked
persons) and hostile kings in the neighbourhood. Sage काश्यप says
about these ten kinds of eclipses thus:
सव्यगे तु सुभिक्षं स्यादपसव्ये तु तस्कराः । .
लीढे प्रजाः प्रहृष्टाः स्युर्ग्रंसनं लोकनाशनम् ॥
निरोधे जनहषंः स्यादारोहे नृपसङ्क्षयः |
mafaa चापमदे स्वयं क्षुभ्यन्ति पाथिवाः ।।
स्वच्छं वरांप्रदेशं यदाघ्रातं तद्विघातयेत्।
मध्ये तमसि सन्दृष्टे पीडयेन्मध्यदेशजान् ॥
हृष्टे तमसि पयंन्ते सस्यानामीतिजं भयम् ॥
There is a difference of opinion regarding the effect of the Aghrata
type of eclipse between our author and Sage Ka$yapa who remarks
that it will bring about destruction.
In the following seven verses effects of various colours of
the eclipsed disc are given.]
aaa क्षेमसुभिक्षं ब्राह्मणपीडां च निदिशेद्राहो ।
भ्रग्निमयसनलवणं पीडा च हुताशवृत्तीनास् ॥५३॥
हरिते रोगोल्बणता सस्यानामीतिभिशच विध्वंसः ।
कपिले शीध्रगसत्त्वम्लेच्छध्वंसोऽय दुर्भिक्षम् ॥५४॥
श्ररुणकिर णानुरूपे दुभिक्षावृष्टयो विहगपीडा i
aaa क्षेमसुभिक्षमादिशेन्मन्दवृष्टि च ॥५५॥
कापोतारुणकपिलश्यावाभे क्षुझ्धूयं विनिद saq ।
कापोसः शूद्राणां व्याधिकरः कृष्णवणश्च ॥५६॥
विमल कमणिपीतामो वइयघ्वंसी भवेत्सुमिक्षाय |
साचिष्मत्यग्निमयं गंरिकरूपे तु युद्धानि ॥५७॥
ूर्वाकाण्डश्यामे हारिद्रे वापि नि्दिशन्मरकम् ।
झ्रशनिमयसम्प्रदायी पाटलकुसुमोपसो राहुः USI

58 Brhat Samhita
पांसुविलोहितरूप: क्षत्रध्वंसाय भवति वृष्टेश्च ।
बालरविकमलसुरचापरूपमृच्छस्त्रकोपाय ॥५६॥
If the eclipsed disc looks white, there will be happiness and
prosperity all round, but trouble to the Brahmins. If the colour
looks like that of fire, there will be fire-outbreaks and those who
work with fire will suffer. lf the colour be green, there would be
all kinds of diseases afflicting the people, and destruction of crops
through 718 i.e. excessive rain, drought etc. If the colour is tawny,
there will be famine and destruction of Mlecchas and swift-moving animals like camels. If the colour resembles that of the rays of
the rising Sun, there will be famine and drought as well as trouble
to birds. If it is grey, there will be prosperity and happiness but
limited rains. If the disc appears reddish, or of the colour of the
pigeon, or of gold, or yellow-black, people will suffer as a result of
famine. If it looks dark or is of the colour of pigeon, Südras will
suffer from diseases. When its colour resembles that of the spotless
jewel (topaz ?) or is yellowish, it will harm the Vaisyas (traders),
but will lead to prosperity. Ifit resembles the burning flame in
colour, there will be fire-outbreaks; if it resembles the colour of
minerals, there will be wars. Ifit looks dark like the Dürvà
grass, or yellowish, there will be epidemics. When Rahu looks
like the Patala flower in colour, there will be risk from lightning
and thunderbolts. When Rahu looks reddish brown, there will
be destruction of the Ksatriyas (fighting men) and rains. If the
colour resembles that of the rising Sun, the lotus or the rainbow,
it will bring about wars.
[In the following two verses effects of the aspects of different
planets on the eclipsed disc are given.]
पड्यन्ग्रस्त सौम्यो घृतमघुतलक्षयाय राज्ञां च ।
सोमः समरविमर्दं शिखिकोपं तस्करभयं च ॥६०॥
शुक्रः सस्यविमदं नानाक्लशांश्र जनयति धरित्र्याम् ।
रविजः करोत्यवृष्टि दुभिक्ष तस्करभयं च ॥६१॥
Should Mercury aspect the eclipsed Moon, ghee, honey and
oils would become scarce and dear, and kings would come to grief.
Should Mars aspect the eclipsed lunar or solar disc, he would
cause outbreak of wars, risk from fire and trouble from robbers.
Should Venus be the aspecting planet, there would be destruction
of crops, and appearance of all kinds of troubles and miseries on

Rahu’s Course V 59
the earth. Should Saturn aspect it, there would be famine, drought
and trouble from thieves.
[In the case of Mercury and Venus the aspected eclipsed disc
can be only the lunar one, and not the solar one. For, Mercury
and Venus can never be at a distance of 180° from the Sun.]
यदशुममवलोकनामिरुक्तं ग्रहजनितं ग्रहण प्रमोक्षण वा ।
सुरपतिगुरुशाबलोकिते तच्छममुपयाति जलँरिवाग्निरिद्धः ॥६२॥
Whatever evil effects have been mentioned here as accruing
from the aspects of planets on the eclipsed disc either at the commencement or at the termination of the eclipse, would all be warded off by the benefic aspect of Jupiter, as the blazing fireis put
out by the pouring of water.
_ [To ward off the evil effects of planets’ aspect on the eclipsed
luminary Jupiter should be posited inthe 5th, 7thor 9th house
from the luminary. The metre is पुष्पिताग्रा.]
ग्रस्ते क्रमान्निमित्तः पुनग्रंहो मासषट्कपरिवृद्घ्या ।
पवनोल्कापातरजःक्षितिकम्पतमोऽशनिनिपातः NE 30
If at the time of an eclipse (lunar or solar) there should occur
portents viz. a strong wind, fall of meteors, dust-storm, earthquake
complete darkness, and fall of lightning, the eclipse will recur
after 6, 12, 18, 24, 30 and 36 months respectively.
[The commentator here quotes...
उपरक्ते यदा qu (चन्द्रे?) प्रबलो वाति मारुत: |
मासषट्के तदा विन्द्याद्राहोरागमनं ध्रुवम् ॥
उल्कायां द्वादशे मासे रजसाष्टरादशे तथा |
भूकम्पे च agad fae तमसि निदिशेत् u
षट्त्रिशेऽशनिपाते स्यात्सर्वेषु स्यात् षडुत्तरे ॥
This ancient authority mentions only the solar (lunar ?) eclipseNow he speaks of conjunction of planets with the eclipsed luminary.]
qafas जनपदाः कावेरीनमंदातटाश्रयिशः |
zara मनुजपतयः पोड्यन्ते क्षितिसुते प्रस्ते ॥६४॥
If Mars be conjoined with the eclipsed Sun or the Moon, the.
people of Avanti, those living on the banks of the Kaveri and the
Narmada (rivers) as well as despotic rulers would be in trouble.

60 Brhat Samhita
Addi सरयूं नेपालं deme sie ।
स्त्रीनृपयोधकुसारान्सह विद्दऱ्हिबुंधो हन्ति ॥६५॥
If Mercury be the planet conjoined, the people living in the
country lying between the Ganges and the Jumna, on the banks
of the Sarayü, those living on the east coast and on the banks of
the Sona, womenfolk, kings, warriors, princes (or boys) and the
learned would come to grief.
ग्रहरोपगते जीवे विद्वल्नृपसन्त्रिगजहयध्वंसः i
सिन्धुतटवासिनामप्युदगिदशं संश्रितालां च ॥६६॥
If Jupiter is thus eclipsed, there will be destruction of the
learned, kings, ministers, elephants, horses, those that reside on the
banks of the Indus as well as those that live in the north.
भृगुतनये राहुगते दाशेरककेकयाः सयौधेयाः ।
mataat: शिबयः स्त्रोसचिवगराश्र्व पीड्यन्ते ॥ ६७॥
When Venus is thus conjoined with the eclipsed luminary,
the people of Dageraka, Kekaya, Yaudheya, Aryavarta and the
Sibi country, womenfolk, ministers and tribes will be troubled.
सोरे मरुभवपुष्करसोराष्ट्रिकधातवोऽबुदान्त्यजनाः ।
गोमन्तपारियात्राश्रिताश्च नाशं व्रजन्त्याशु ॥६८॥
When Saturn joins Rahu, the people of Maru (desert), Puskara and Saurastra, minerals, people living in the regions of the
Arbuda mountain, people of low-castes, cowherds, and the inhabitants of the Pariyatra mountain will quickly come to grief.
[In the following 12 verses effects of eclipses occurring in the
12 lunar months beginning with Karttika are described.]
कात्तिक्यामनलोपजीविसगघान्प्राच्याधिपान्कोसलान्
कल्माषानथ शुरसेनसहितान्काशींश्व सन्तापयेत् ।
हन्यादाशु कलिड्डदेशन्र्पात amaga तमो
हष्टं क्षत्रियतापदं जनयति क्षेमं सुभिक्षान्वितमृ ॥६९॥
Should an eclipse, solar or lunar, occur in the lunar month of
Karttika, men who eke out their livelihood through fire, people of
Magadha, eastern kings, people of the Kosala country, the Kalma-

Rahu’s Course V el
m the Sürasenas and those of Kagi (Benares) will be put to great
suffering. The Kalinga king along with his ministers and followers.
will be wiped out. All Ksatriyas will be afflicted, but all the rest
will enjoy happiness and prosperity.
[The metre is शार्दूलवि क्रीडित.]
काइमी रकान्कोशलकान्स पुण्डान्मुगांश्र हुन्थादपरान्तकांश्रव ।
ये सोमपास्तांश्च निहन्ति सौम्ये सुवृष्टिकृत् क्षे मसु मिक्षकृच्च ॥७०॥
If an eclipse takes place in the month of Margasirga, it will
destroy the people of Kashmir, Kosala, and Pundra as wellas
the animals of the forests and the people of the western border. It
will also harm the Soma sacrificers, but it will lead to good rains
and to the happiness and prosperity of the people.
[The metre of this and the following verse is उपजाति.]
पौषे दविजक्षत्रजनोपरोघः ससेन्धवाख्याः कुकुरा विदेहाः ।
ध्वंसं व्रजन्त्यत्र चच Wege wu च विन्द्यादसुभिक्षयुक्तम्ू ॥७१॥
If the eclipse happens in the month of Pausa, there will be
trouble to Brahmins and Ksatriyas. The people of the Sindhu
regions, the Kukuras and the Videhas will also suffer. There will
be scanty rainfall, famine and fear.
aa तु मातृपितृमक्तवसिष्ठगो त्रात
स्वाध्यायधर्म निरतान्करि णस्तुर ड्भानु t
बड्भाड्रकाशिमनुजांश्व दुनोति राहु-
वृष्टि च करषकजनामिमतां करोति wor
An eclipse falling in the month of Magha will afflict people
who are devoted to their parents, people born in the Gotra (religious lineage) of Sage Vasistha, those who are engaged in their
sacred studies and performance of religious duties, elephants and `
horses, people of Bengal, Anga and Benares, but will bestow good
rains for the joy of the farmers.
[It is to be remembered that the month Magha derives its
name from the constellation Magha which is presided over by the
manes. Hence the statement पितुमातुभक्त. The metre is वसन्ततिलका.]
पीडाकरं फाल्गुनमासि पर्व वड्धाइसमकावन्तिकमेकलानासू ।
नृत्यज्ञसस्यप्रवराड्भनातां धनुष्करक्षत्रतपस्विनां च ॥७३॥

62 Brhat Samhitg
An eclipse occurring in the month of Phalguna will prove
harmful to the people of Bengal, Asmaka, Avanti, and those that
live on the Mekala mountain, dancers, crops, noble women, bowmakers (i.e. manufacturers of weapons), Ksatriyas and hermits.
[The metre is उपजाति.]
qai g चित्रकरलेखकगेयसक्तान्
रूपोपजी विनिगमज्ञहिरण्यपण्यानु t
पोण्डो डककयजनानथ IS
तापः स्पृशत्यमरपोऽत्र विचित्रवर्षी ॥ ७४॥
An eclipse falling in the month of Caitra would affect painters, writers, musicians, dancing girls, Vedic scholars, dealers in
gold, people of Pundra, Orissa, Kekaya and A$maka. There would
also be erratic rainfall in the year.
[In all these effects one could discern factors that affect particular professions, regions, castes and types of beings. The metre
is वसन्ततिलका.]
वेशाखमासे ग्रहणे विनाशमायान्ति कर्पासतिलाः समुद्गाः ।
इक्ष्वाकुयोधेयशकाः sag: सोपप्लवाः किन्तु सुभिक्षमस्मिन् ॥७५॥
An eclipse taking place in the month of Vaigakha would destroy cotton, sesamum and green gram. Descendants of Iksvaku,
the Yaudheyas, the Sakas and the Kalingas would be in. trouble,
but there would be good crops in the land.
[The metre is इन्द्रवच्चा in this and the following verse.]
ज्येष्ठे नरेन्द्रद्विजराजपत्न्यः सस्यानि वृष्टिश्च महागरणास्र्य |
प्रध्वंसमायान्ति नराश्च सौम्याः साल्वः समेताश्च निषादसद्धूः ॥७६॥
An eclipse taking place in the month of Jyestha will destroy
kings, queens, Brahmins, crops, rains, large groups of men, gentle
people, the Salvas and the tribe of hunters.
ग्राषाढपर्वेण्युदपानवप्रनदीप्रवाहान् फलमुलवार्त्तानू ।
गान्धारकाइमी रपुलिन्दचीनानु हतान्वदेन्मण्डलवषंमस्मिन् ॥७७॥
An eclipse falling in the month of Asadha will destroy the
banks of wells, tanks etc., rivers, those who live on roots and
fruits, the people of Gandhara, Kashmir, Pulinda and China. The
rains too will not be evenly distributed.
[The metre is उपजाति.]

Rahu’s Course V 63
काइसीरान्सपुलिन्दचीनयवनान्हन्यात्कुरुक्षत्रजान
गान्धारानपि मध्यदेशस हितान्हषटो ग्रहः श्रावण ।
काम्बोजेकशफांश्र शारदमपि त्यक्त्वा यथोक्तानिमा-
नन्यत्र प्रचुरान्नहुष्टमनुजर्धात्रीं करोत्यावृताम् dec
An eclipse occurring in the month of Sravana will harm the
following : the people of Kashmir, the Pulindas (hunters or forest
tribes), the Chinese, the Yavanas, people of Kuruksetra, Gandhara,
the Central region, and Kamboja as well as the animals with uncloven hoofs and autumnal grains. All the rest and other places
will enjoy happiness and prosperity.
[The metre is शार्दूलविक्रीडित.]
कलिङ्गवद्कान्मगधान्सुराष्ट्रान् म्लेच्छान्सुवी रान्दरदाइमकांश्च ।
स्त्रीणां च गर्भानसुरो निहन्ति सुभिक्षकृऱ्द्वाद्रपदे$म्युपेतः ॥७६॥
If the eclipse occurs in the month of Bhadrapada, it will
destroy the people of Kalinga, Bengal, Magadha and Surastra, the
Mlecchas, the Suviras, the Daradas, the Asmakas, and children
in the womb. However, there will be plenty of food in the land.
[The metre is उपजाति.]
काम्बोजचीनयवनान्सह NUT
वाह्लीकसिन्घुतटवासिजनांश्र हन्यात् i
आनतंपौण्डु मिंषजश्च तथा किरातान्
हष्टोऽसुरोऽश्वयुजि भुरिसुभिक्षकृच्च ॥८०॥
When the eclipse takes place in the month of A$vina, the
people of Kamboja, China, the Yavanas, the Vahlikas, surgeons,
people living on the banks of the Indus, in the Anarta country,
the Paundras (residents of Pundra), physicians and the Kiratas
(hunters) will come to grief. But there will be plenty of food and
happiness.
[Our author states succinctly in one verse the effects of eclipses taking place in several lunar months in his समाससंहिता thus—
magia माघकात्तिकभाद्रपदेष्वागतः सुभिक्षकरः |
राहुरवशिष्टमासेष्वशुभकरो वष्ट्रिघान्यानास् ॥
The metre is वसन्ततिलका. Next he speaks of the ten kinds of the end
of eclipses. See also verse 43 supra.]
हनुकुक्षिपायुभेदा feta: सळ्छदंनं च mÜ च ।
मघ्यान्तयोशच विदरणमिति दश शशिसूययोर्माक्षाः ॥८१॥

64 Brhat Samhita
The end of an eclipse, solar or lunar, is of ten varieties °
(i) Daksina hana, (ii) Vama hanu, (iii) Daksinakuksi, (iv) Vamakuksi,
(v) Daksinapayu, (vi) Vamapayu, (vii) Saiichardana (viii) Jarana, (ix)
Madhyavidarana, and (x) Antavidarana.
[The last is also called Antyavidarana. The definitions and
effects of these ten kinds of Moksa or release are given in the following nine verses.]
भ्राग्नययासपगसनं दक्षिणहनुभेदसञ्ज्ञितं शशिनः ।
सस्यविमर्दो सुखरुङ्नृपपीडा स्यात्सुवृष्टिच UoN
If the eclipse begins to leave in the South-eastern quarter
of the lunar disc, it is called Daksinahanubheda (Break of the Sous
thern or right Chin). The effect of such a release would be destruction of crops, appearance of facial diseases, trouble to the rulers,
and good rains.
[Sage Kasyapa says—
दक्षिणो हनुभेदः स्याच्चाग्नेय्यां यदि गच्छति |
सस्यनाशं च कुर्ते AUG सुदारुणाम् i]
पूर्वोत्तरेण वासो हनुभेदो न्पकुसारमयदायी à
मुखरोगं शस्त्रभयं तस्मिन्विन्द्यात्सुभिक्ष च ॥८३॥
If the release of the lunar orb occurs in its North-eastern part,
it is termed Vámahanubheda—Break of the left chin. In consequence
of this there will be trouble and danger to the king’s son, facial
diseases and fear of armed conflict. However, there will be plenty
of food grains in the land.
[Cf. Sage Kasyapa—
पुर्वोत्तरो$परो भेदो नृपपुत्रभयप्रद: 1]
दक्षिणकुक्षिविभेदो दक्षिणापाश्इवे न यदि भवेन्मोक्षः ।
पीडा नुपपुत्राणामभियोज्या दक्षिणा रिपवः ॥८४॥
If the release takes place on the Southern side of the lunar
disc, it is called the Daksinakuksibheda—Break of the right belly. In
consequence of this there will be trouble to the princes and conflict
with the enemies living to the south.
[Cf. Ka$yapa—
दक्षिणः कुक्षिभेद: स्याद्वामे मोक्षो भवेद्यदि ।
राजपुत्रभयं तत्र दक्षिणाशाद्विषां aa: i

Rahu’s Course V 65
वामस्तु कुक्षिभेदो यद्युत्तरमागंसंस्थितो राहु: ।
स्त्रीणां गर्भविपत्तिः सस्यानि च तत्र मध्यानि ॥८५॥
If the end of the eclipse occurs on the Northern side of the
Moon's disc, it is termed Vamakuksibheda—Break of the left belly.
As a result of this women will have miscarriages and the crops
will be moderate.
[Cf. Kasyapa—
सोम्याशां तु यदा मोक्षो वामकुक्षिविभेदतः |
स्त्रीणां गर्भेविनाशाय सौम्याशाधिपतेयंथा ।।
According to this Sage there will be in addition the destruction of the king who rules over the territory in the north].
नऋ तवायव्यस्थौ दक्षिणवामो तु पायुभेदौ gti
गुह्यरुगल्पा वृष्टिद्वयोस्तु राज्ञीक्षयो वामे ॥८६॥
Should the liberation take place on the South-western side of
the Moon’s disc, it would be designated as Daksinapayubheda—
Break of the southern or right anus—while the one in the Northwestern side, Vamapdyubheda—Break of the left anus. In both the
cases the effect would be that people will suffer from diseases of
the anus and the generating organs. There will be little rain. In
the case of the Vamapayu there will be the death of the queen of the
land.
[Cf. Ka$yapa—
पायुभेदगते राहौ वायवीनेऋ ताशयो: |
गुह्यरोगभयं विच्द्याद्वामे राज्ञीभयं तथा du]
पर्वण प्रग्रहणं कृत्वा TAT चापसर्पेत ।
सञ्छदंनमिति तत्क्षमसस्यहादिप्रदं जगतः cll
When the commencement and end of the eclipse are both on
the eastern side of the lunar disc, it is called Sazchardana—V omiting. Jt will lead to happiness, peace, goodwill and prosperity as
well as good crops.
[Cf. Kasyapa—
ग्रासमोक्षो यदा पूर्वे Bat तु तदा भवेत् ।
क्षेमहादिप्रदं ज्ञेयं सस्यनिष्पत्तिकारकस् ॥]
प्राकप्रग्रहणं यस्मिन्पशचादपसपंणं तु तज्जरणम् ।
क्षुच्छस्त्रभयोह्विग्ना न शरणमुपयान्ति तत्र जनाः ॥८८॥
If in an eclipse the beginning is on the eastern side and the

66 Brhat Samhita
liberation on the western side of the Moon's disc, it is called Farana
—Decaying. As a result of this people will be troubled by hunger
and threat of weapons and consequently be utterly helpless.
[Cf. Kasyapa—
पूर्वेण ग्रसते राहुरपरस्यां विमुञ्चति ।
भुत्तस्करभयं तत्र मोक्षस्तु जरणां स्मृतम् d]
मध्पे यदि प्रकाशः प्रथमं तन्मध्यविदरणं नाम ।
श्रन्तःकोपकर स्यात्सुभिक्षदं नातिवृष्टिकरम् Use
If the liberation starts from the middle of the Moon’s disc
and if that part becomes bright at first, it is called Madhya vidarana
—cleaving in the middle. Jts consequences would be disaffection
in the king’s army, and sparse rains, but good crops.
[Cf. Kasyapa—
यदा प्रकाशो मध्ये स्याद् द् भिक्षमरकं तदा |
In the light of Kasyapa’s statement it would be better if we interpret सुभिक्षदं etc. in the text with the 4 as applicable to both the preceding word and the following one. Then it would mean—Neither
good crops nor good rains. For, good rains and good crops always
go together.]
पयंन्तेषु विमलता बहुलं मध्ये तमोऽन्त्यदररणाख्यः ।
सध्याख्यदेशनाशः शारदसस्यक्षयइचास्मिन् ॥९०॥
If at first there appears brightness all round leaving thick
darkness in the middle of the lunar orb, it is called Antyadarana—
Piercing at the end. Consequently the central region of the land
and the autumnal crops would suffer destruction.
[Cf. Kasyapa—
पर्यन्ते विमलत्वं स्यात्तमो मध्ये यदा भवेत् |
मध्याख्यदेशनाशः स्याच्छरत्सस्यं विनश्यति ॥]
एते सव मोक्षा वक्तव्या भास्करेऽपि किन्त्वत्र ।
पूर्वा दिक् शशिनि यथा तथा रवो पश्चिमा कल्प्या ॥६१॥
All these ten kinds of liberations that have been mentioned
with reference to the lunar eclipse should also be applied to solar
eclipses as well, but the only difference between the two is that
wherever the east has been stated for the Moon, west should be taken
for the Sun. Similarly in the case of other pairs of quarters.

Rahu’s Course V 67
मुक्ते सप्ताहान्तः पांसुनिपातोऽन्नसङक्षयं कुरुते ।
नीहारो रोगभयं भूकम्पः प्रवरनृपमृत्युस् NEN
उल्का मन्त्रिविनाशं नानावर्र्ा घनाश्च भयमतुलम् |
स्तनितं गर्भे विनाशं विद्युन्तृपदंष्टिपरिपोडाम् ॥९३॥
परिवेषो रुक्पीडां दिग्दाहो नृपभयं च साग्निभयभ् |
रूक्षो वायुः प्रबलश्चोरसमुत्थं भय धत्ते uei
निर्घातः सुरचापं दण्डश्च Aga सपरचक्रम् ।
ग्रहयुद्धे नृपयुद्धं केतुश्च तदेव WEE: ॥६५॥
गविकृतसलिलनिपातेः सप्ताहान्तः सुभिक्षसादेशयम् ।
यच्चाशुभं ग्रहणजं तत्सवं नाशमुपयाति ॥६६॥
If after the termination of an eclipse there should arise a duststorm in the place within seven days, it will cause famine; if
there be heavy mist, there would be outbreak of diseases ; if there
be an earthquake, death ofa leading king ; if there be fall of a
meteor, destruction of a minister ; if there appear clouds of many
colours, extreme panic ; if there be thunder, miscarriages ; if there
be lightning, trouble to kings and tusked animals (or from kings
and snakes) ; if there occur a misty circle around the Sun or the
Moon, outbreak of diseases ; if there be false fires in the quarters,
risk to the king and danger from fire ; if there be fierce dry winds,
trouble from robbers ; if there be a clap of portentous thunder, or
rainbow or Danda (a rod-like appearance of the clouds), danger of
famine and attack by an enemy’s army ; if there be aplanetary warfare, wars among the kings ; and if Ketu (Comet) be seen, the same
effect, i.e., wars. If there should be normal rains (without any unnatural features) within these seven days, there would be prosperity
and plenty of food, and whatever evil was indicated by the eclipse,
all that would be completely warded off.
[Cf. the समाससंहिता--
परुषपवनाभ्रगजितविद्यृत्परिवेषभूप्रकम्पा द्या: |
सप्ताहान्तनं शुभा ग्रहणनिवृत्तौ शुभा वृष्टि: ॥
अथेन्द्प्रहनिर्मुक्ते सप्ताहान्तर्भवेद्यदि |
पांसुवर्षोऽन्ननाशः स्यान्नीहारो रोगवृद्धये ॥
नुपनाशाय भूकम्प उल्का मन्त्रिविपत्तये |
रोगाय परिवेषः AT SATA AT भ्रसम्प्लव: ॥

68 Brhat Samhita
विद्युद्गर्भविनाशाय दिग्दाहो$ग्निविवृद्धये ।
निघतिन्द्रधनुरदण्डा द् भिक्षाय भयाय च ॥
पवनः प्रबलो रूक्षश्चौ रोपद्रवसूचकः |
सर्वोपद्रवनाशः स्यात्सम्यग्वृष्टिभवेद्यदि ॥
यद्राहुचरितं प्रोक्तं चन्द्रग्रहणहेतुकम् ।
तदेव सकलं सूर्य वेदितव्यं शुभाशुभम् ú]
सोमग्रहे निवृत्ते पक्षान्ते यदि भवद् ग्रहोऽर्कस्य ।
तत्रानयः प्रजानां दम्पत्यो रमन्यो न्यस् ॥९७॥
Should a solar eclipse occur at the end of the fortnight after a
lunar eclipse, people would become unruly and unjust in their behaviour and couples would be at loggerheads.
श्रकंग्रहात्त् शशिनो ग्रहणं यदि हृश्यते ततो विप्राः |
नकक्रतुफलभाजो भवन्ति मुदिताः प्रजाइचेव ues
Should a lunar eclipse take place at the end of the next fortnight after a solar eclipse, the Brahmins would perform many sacrifices and be blessed with the fruit thereof, and all the subjects would
be happy and contented.
[When an eclipse, solar or lunar, takes place, all persons are
advised to observe some rules regarding food, recreation, etc. Those
persons whosenatal star or sign is affected by this are, however,
advised to perform some propitiatory rituals including gifts. These
are explained in the Matsya Purana, Chapter 67. Devout Hindus
abstain from food, sleep, etc. during an eclipse. For, though they may
not be aware of the scientific reason for it, yet they feel that the
period of an eclipse is a critical one, when mysterious cosmic forces
are released, which when properly attuned through prayers and
meditations lead to beneficial results. ]

Chapter VI—Transit of Mars
यद्युदयरक्षाद्क्रि करोति नवमाष्टसप्तमक्षेषु ।
तद्वक्त्रमुष्णांमुदये पीडाकरमग्निवारत्तानामु ॥१॥
If Mars should start his retrograde motion while passing
through a constellation that happens to be the 7th, 8th or 9th
from the one in which he emerged after his conjunction with the
Sun (i.e. eclipse), it (the emerging face) would be called Usnavaktra
or Hot Face. It is harmful to those who work on fire, such as the
smiths, cooks and sacrificers.
[Cf. वृद्धगर्ग--
उदयान्नवमे कुर्यादष्टमे सप्तमेऽपि वा ।
निवृत्ति लोहिताङ्गस्तु तदुष्णं वकत्रमुच्यते ॥
नरोऽर्निजीविनो ये च पचन्ति च दहन्ति च ।
तेषामुत्पद्यते तापो जायते धनसङ्क्षयः di
The author mentions in all five Faces of Mars.]
द्वादशदशमेका दशनक्षत्रा इक्रिते कुजेऽश्र मुखम् ।
दूषयति रसानुदये करोति रोगानर्वृष्ट च uqu
If Mars begins his retrograde motion while passing through
the 10th, llth or the 12th star reckoned from the one wherein he
rises after eclipse, it is called Asrumukha or Tear-Face. Consequently,
he will spoil all juices or tastes, and cause diseases and drought at
his next emergence from combustion.
[८ वृद्धगगे--
दशमेकादशे वापि द्वादशे वापि m ।
लोहिता ङ्ग ग्रहे ज्ञेयं वक्त्रमश्रुमुखं च तत् ॥
तत्र वर्षंति पर्जन्यो दूषयित्वा शुभान् रसान् |
ते दुष्टा दूषयन्त्याशु AUT धातूंस्तथा भृशम् ॥
बहवो व्याधयः क्रूरा उत्पद्यन्ते शरीरिणाम् |
बहुभिः कारणेरेतेस्ततो लोकः प्रलीयते u]
व्यालं त्र योदशर्क्षाच्चतुर्दशाद्वा विपच्यतेऽस्तमये ।
दंष्टरिव्यालमुगेभ्यः करोति पीडां सुभिक्षं च ॥३॥

68 Brhat Samhita
विद्युद्गर्भविनाशाय दिग्दाहो$ग्निविवृद्धये ।
निघतिन्द्रधनुदेण्डा द् भिक्षाय भयाय च ।।
पवनः प्रबलो रूक्षश्चौ रोपद्रवसूचकः |
सर्वोपद्रवनाशः स्यात्सम्यग्वृष्टिभवेद्यदि ॥
यद्राहुचरितं प्रोक्तं चन्द्रग्रहणहेतुकम् ।
तदेव सकलं सूर्य वेदितव्यं शुभाशुभम् 11]
सोमग्रहे निवृत्ते पक्षान्ते यदि भवद् ग्रहोऽकंस्य ।
तत्रानयः प्रजानां दम्पत्योर्वेरमन्योन्यस् ॥९७॥
Should a solar eclipse occur at the end of the fortnight after a
lunar eclipse, people would become unruly and unjust in their behaviour and couples would be at loggerheads.
भ्रकंग्रहात्त शशिनो ग्रहणं यदि हश्यते ततो विप्राः ।
नेकक्रतुफलभाजो भवन्ति मुदिताः प्रजाइचेव ues
Should a lunar eclipse take place at the end of the next fortnight after a solar eclipse, the Brahmins would perform many sacrifices and be blessed with the fruit thereof, and all the subjects would
be happy and contented.
[When an eclipse, solar or lunar, takes place, all persons are
advised to observe some rules regarding food, recreation, etc. Those
persons whosenatal star or sign is affected by this are, however,
advised to perform some propitiatory rituals including gifts. These
are explained in the Matsya Purana, Chapter 67. Devout Hindus
abstain from food, sleep, etc. during an eclipse. For, though they may
not be aware of the scientific reason for it, yet they feel that the
period of an eclipse is a critical one, when mysterious cosmic forces
are released, which when properly attuned through prayers and
meditations lead to beneficial results.]

भोमचारः NGN
Chapter VI—Transit of Mars
यद्युदयरक्षादृक्रं करोति नवमाष्टसप्तमक्षेषु ।
तह्क्त्रमुष्णंमुदये पोडाकरमसग्निवारत्तानासू ॥१॥
If Mars should start his retrograde motion while passing
through a constellation that happens to be the 7th, 8th or 9th
from the one in which he emerged after his conjunction with the
Sun (i.e. eclipse), it (the emerging face) would be called Usnavaktra
or Hot Face. It is harmful to those who work on fire, such as the
smiths, cooks and sacrificers.
[Cf. azmi—
उदयान्नवमे कुर्यादष्टमे सप्तमेऽपि वा ।
निवृत्ति लोहिताङ्भस्तु तदुष्णं वक्त्रमुच्यते ॥
नरोऽग्निजीविनो ये च पचन्ति च दहन्ति a
तेषामुत्पद्यते तापो जायते धनसङ्क्षयः ॥
The author mentions in all five Faces of Mars.]
द्वादशदशमंका दशनक्षत्रा TAA कुजेऽशभ्रमुखम् ।
दूषयति रसानुदये करोति रोगानर्वृष्टि च ॥२॥
If Mars begins his retrograde motion while passing through
the 10th, llth or the 12th star reckoned from the one wherein he
rises after eclipse, it is called Aírumukha or Tear-Face. Consequently,
he will spoil all juices or tastes, and cause diseases and drought at
his next emergence from combustion.
[Cf. वृद्धगगं—
दश मैकादशे वापि द्वादशे वापि वक्तिते |
लोहिताङ्ग ग्रहे ज्ञेयं वक्त्रमश्ुमुखं च तत् ॥
तत्र वर्षंति पर्जन्यो दूषयित्वा शुभान् रसान् |
ते दुष्टा दूषयन्त्याशु TUT धातूंस्तथा भृशम् ॥
बहवो व्याधयः क्रूरा उत्पद्यन्ते शरीरिणाम् |
बहुभिः कारणेरेतैस्ततो लोकः प्रलीयते u]
व्यालं त्र योदशर्क्षाच्चतुदंशाद्वा विपच्यतेऽस्तमये ।
दंष्टिब्यालमृगेभ्यः करोति पीडां सुभिक्षं च ॥३॥

70 Brhat Samhita
If the retrogression referred to above starts when Mars moves
through the 13th or 14th star, it is known as Vyala-Vaktra or SnakeMouth. It will fructify when Mars gets eclipsed next time. Consquently, people will be troubled by snakes (or tusked animals),
wild elephants and beasts, but they will enjoy prosperity or abundant food.
(Cf. Sage गर्ग—
त्रयोदशे च नक्षत्रे यदि वापि चतुर्दशे ।
निवृत्तं कुरुते भौमस्तद्वकत्रं व्यालमुच्यते ॥
भवन्ति प्रचुरा व्यालास्तेभ्यो लोकभयं वदेत् ।
नुपाणामशुभं विन्द्यात्सस्यसम्पत्तिमादिशेत् ॥
also पराशर--
त्रयोदशचतुर्देशयोः सस्यदष्ट्रिव्यालप्राबल्यं हिरण्यसञ्चयं च ।]
रुधिराननमिति वक्त्रं पञ्चदशात् षोडशाच्च विनिवृत्ते ।
तत्कालं मुखरोगं सभयं च सुभिक्षसावहतिं ॥४॥
If Mars begins his retrogression while passing through the
15th or 16th asterism counted from the one occupied by him at the
time of his emergence, that face is known as Rudhiranana or BloodFace. This will produce immediately facial diseases and panic,
but it will also bring about prosperity.
[Cf. गर्गे--
यदि पञ्चदशक्षें तु भुसुतः षोडशेऽपि वा ।
निवृत्ते कुरुते वक्रस्तद्विदुर्लोहिताननम् ॥
दीप्तिमन्तः पार्थिवाइच भवन्ति प्रथिता भुवि ।
क्षत्रकोपर्च सुमहान् मुखरोगा भवन्ति च ॥
also पराशर--
पञ्चदशषोडशयोर्मुखरोगो नृपक्षोभः शस्त्रकोपश्च 11]
ग्रसिमुसलं सप्तदश्ञादष्टादशतोऽपि वा तदनुवक्र ।
दस्युगणेभ्यः पीडां करोत्यर्वृष्ट सशस्त्रभयाम् QUU
When the retrograde motion of Mars commences when he
passes through the 17th or 18th asterism from the one occupied by
him at the time of combustion, it (the face) is called Asimusala or
Sword-Stave. When Mars becomes direct after this, people will be
troubled by bands of robbers, drought and risk from weapons.
[The reader would have noticed in verse 3 and onwards that
the counting of asterisms is done not from the one in which Mars
emerges from eclipse, but from -the one in which he gets eclipsed.
This is made clear by the use of the word 'भ्रस्तमये' in verse 3. Now
compare what sage Garga says :

Transit of Mars VI 71
सप्तदशेऽष्टादशे वा लोहिताङ्ग निवतिते
निस्त्रिशमुसलं नाम तद्वक्त्रं परिकोतितम् ॥
पशुपुत्रधनं धान्यमाहरन्ते तु दस्यवः |
प्राणिनां जीवनं हन्ति जायते झस्त्रसम्भ्रमः ।।
also पराशर--
“सप्तदहोऽष्टादशे वा दस्युगणे: प्रजानामुपद्रवमर्वृष्ट्र शस्त्रभयं च” u]
, भाय्यार्यमोदितो यदि निवतंते वेइवदेवते भौमः ।
प्राजापत्येऽस्तमितस्त्रीनपि लोकान्निपीडयति ॥६॥
Should Mars begin his retrogression in the star Uttarasadha
after being released from eclipse in the star Pūrva or Uttara Phalguns, and get eclipsed again in the asterism Rohini, he would
afflict the three worlds with untold sufferings
[After disposing of the effects of the five Faces or Vaktra of
Mars, the author now deals with the effects of some of the asterisms
connected with his retrogression and combustion or release.
Cf. पराशर
फाल्गुन्यामुदयं कृत्वा TH स्याद्वेशश्वदेवते |
प्राजापत्ये प्रवासश्च त्रेलोक्यं तत्र पीड्यते 1]
श्रवणोदितस्य तक्र पुष्ये सूरद्धामिषिक्तपीडाङृत् ।
यस्मिन्नृक्षेऽभ्यु दितस्त हिग्व्युहाञ्जनान् हन्ति uen
Should Mars emerge from his conjunction with the Sun in
the asterism Sravana and become retrograde in the star Pusya, kings
would be in jeopardy. Similarly the people, countries and things
denoted by the star in which he re-emerges would come to grief.
[See chapters XIV and XV for the countries, peoples, etc
denoted by the stars
Cf. पराशर--
उदितः श्रवणे भौमः पुष्ये वक्र चरेद्यदि |
qatfafaaar राजानों विनहयेयु: परस्परम् ॥
यथा जनपदव्यूहे दिग्विभाग: प्रदर्शित: ।
तस्य बे मोहितं कुर्याल्लोहिताङ्गस्तथा मुखम् ॥]
asda यदि मघानां गतागतं लोहितः करोति ततः ।
पाण्ड्यो «ut विनश्यति शस्त्रोद्योगाऱ्डूयमवृष्टिः uc
Should Mars start his retrogression while passing through
the cluster of stars comprising Magha, the Pandya ruler would meet
with his end, and there would be drought and panic resulting from
fighting.

भित्त्वा मघां विशाखां भिन्दन्भोमः करोति दुशिक्षम् ।
सरकं करोति घोरं यदि भित्त्वा रोहिणीं याति uen
Should Mars first cut the star Magha and then Visakha, there
would be famine in the country. Should he cut the star Rohini,
there would be great mortality in the land.
दक्षिणतो रोहिण्याशचरन्महीजोऽघवृष्टिनिग्रहकृत् |
घूसायन्सशिखो वा विनिहन्यात्पारियात्रस्थान् ॥१०॥
If Mars should pass through the southern side of Rohini, he
would cause drought and slump in the market. Should he appear
emitting smoke or flames, he would destroy the people living in the
region of the Pariyatra mountain.
प्राजापत्ये श्रवणे मुले त्रिषु चोत्तरेषु शाक्रे च ।
विचरन् घननिवहानामुपघातकरः क्षमातनयः d$ ui
The transit of Mars through the following stars viz. Rohini,
Sravana, Mila, the three Uttaras and Jyestha, would destroy the
formation of clouds. |
[Here the author speaks of the harmful effects of the mere
transit of Mars through the above esterisms. This is one of the
methods of predicting drought.]
चारोदयाः प्रशस्ताः श्रवरामघादित्यहस्तमूलेषु ।
एकपदािविविशाखाप्राजापत्येषु च कुजस्य ॥१२॥
The transit and rising of Mars after conjunction with the Sun
in the asterisms Sravana, Magha, Punarvasu, Hasta, Mula, Pürvabhadra, Asvini, Visakha and Rohini will prove auspicious.
[This verse gives a general rule to the effect that Mars does
good to the world when he transits through or rises in the above
asterisms. This must be taken in conjunction with what the author
has stated in the previous verse. ]
विपुलविमलर्मातः किंशुकाशोकवर्णः
स्फुटरुचिरमयूखस्तप्तता म्रप्रभा भः ।
विचरति यदि मार्ग चोत्तरं मेदिनोजः
शुभकृदवनिपानां हादिदशच प्रजानाम् ॥१३॥
If Mars being possessed of a large and bright form, red
colour resembling the Kim$uka and Agoka flowers, brilliant and
charming rays and lustre like that of red-hot molten copper, should
move along the Northern Path (or to the north of the star he is in),
he would prove beneficial to the kings and bring peace and joy to
the subjects.

Transit of Mars VI 73
[Cf. mi—
याम्यादिपितूपर्यंन्तं नवर्क्ष मार्गमुत्तरम् ।
भाग्यादिनेतऋ तान्तं तु मध्यमं मार्गं मुच्यते ॥
श्रापाढाद्याङ्विनान्तं तु दक्षिणं समुदाहूतम् |
सौम्यमार्गस्थितो भौमः प्रजानामुपकारकः ॥
मध्यमे मध्यफलदो याम्ये तु भयदः स्मृतः ll
In these verses Sage Garga speaks of the Northern, the Middle
and the Southern Path for Mars. The nine stars beginning from
Bharani come under the Northern Path, the nine from Pürvaphalguni
come under the Middle Path, and Jastly the nine stars from Purvasadha under the Southern Path. Jt is also an astrological principle
that a planet situated to the north of an asterism gives good results.
The metre is मालिनी.]

JAAT: ॥७॥
Chapter VII—Mercury’s Transit
नोत्पातपरित्यक्तः कदाचिदपि चन्द्रजो व्रजत्युदयम् ।
जलदहनपवनभयकृद्वान्या घक्षयविवृद्ध्ये ॥ १॥
Never does Mercury reappear after his eclipse by the Sun
unaccompanied by any unusual (portentous)phenomenon, Generally
at such times he creates danger to the people through water,
fire or wind, and causes extraordinary fluctuations in the prices
of food grains.
[Mercury’s movements must be studied by astrologers and
economists for predicting market trends in certain periods.
Cf. the समाससंहिता--
उदयं याति शशिसुतो नोत्पातविवजितः कदाचिदपि ।
पवनारिनिसलिलभयदो धान्यां वृ द्धिक्षयकृद्वा ॥
also वृद्धगर्ग ---
अवर्ष कुरुते वर्ष वर्ष वर्ष न गच्छति
भये च कुर्ते क्षेमं सवंत्र प्रतिलोमगः ॥
also कश्यप
नाकस्माहूशेनं याति विनोत्पातेन सोमजः ।
भयवातातप हिमे रर्घवृ ्वक्षयादिभिः 11]
विचरञ्श्रवणध निष्ठाप्राजापत्येन्दुवेशवदेवानि i
aqa हिमकरतनयः करोत्यवृष्टिं सरोगभयाम् uqu
When Mercury passes through the stars Sravana, Dhanistha,
Rohini, Mrgasiras and Uttarasadha and thus cuts them across, he
creates drought, diseases and panic.
[Cf. कश्यप
रोहिणीं वेश्वदेवं च सौम्यवेष्णववासवान् |
शशिजश्च यदा हन्ति प्रजा रोगेरच पीडयेत् ॥
Here we have to note the wording “मृद्नन्? in the text and ‘efta’ in
Kasyapa’s work. This should make us believe that the untoward
effects mentioned here would take place only if mercury cuts across
the particular asterisms, and not otherwise. ]
रोद्रादीनि मघान्तान्युपाश्चिते चन्द्रजे प्रजापीडा ।
शस्त्रनिपातक्षु्ूयरोगानाबृष्टिसन्तापेः usu

[ode e et a AN sayaca n
When Mercury passes through the five constellations beginning
with Ardra, people will be afflicted asa result of clash of arms,
hunger, fright, diseases, drought and sorrow.
[Here the author speaks of the effect of Mercury's movement
through some of the stars. But Kasyapa refers to the cutting of the
stars
Cf. कश्यप--
रौद्रादीनि यदा पञ्च नक्षत्राणीन्दुनन्दनः |
भिनत्ति शस्त्रदु्भिक्षव्याधिभिः पीड्यते जगत् ॥ |
हस्तादीनि चरन् षड्ऋक्षाण्युपपीडयन्गवामशुभः ।
स्नेहरसार्घविरवृद्ध करोति चोर्वो प्रभूतान्नाम् ॥४॥
When Mercury moves through the six stars beginning with
Hasta, cutting across them, prices of oils, and juices will shoot up,
there will be plenty of food in the country, but the cattle will
suffer.
[The word Sneha means something that lubricates. So it
includes ghee. Rasa means honey, jaggery and such other things.
Cf. कश्यप—
हस्तादीनि चरन् षडवे नक्षत्राणीन्दुनन्दनः |
गवामशुभदः प्रोक्तः सुभिक्षक्षेमकारकः di
There is a metrical flaw in the first quarter of this verse.]
giri होतभुजं भद्रपदामुत्तरां यमेशं च ।
चन्द्रस्य सुतो निघ्नन्प्राणभृतां धातुसङ्क्षयक्ृत् ॥५॥।
When Mercury cuts across the stars Uttaraphalguni, Krttika,
Uttarabhadrapada and Bharani, all living beings will be afflicted
with diseases arising from the vitiation or diminution of the seven
constituent elements of the body viz. muscle, bone, blood, skin,
semen, fat and marrow.
[According to Ayurveda the seven elements are : रस, 44%, मांस,
मेदस् afa, मज्जा and शुक्र. According to some there are ten elements
including केश, त्वक् and स्नायु.
Cf. कश्यप —
भरणीकृत्तिकार्यम्णमहिर्बुध्नं च AKT: ।
चरन्धातुविनाशाय प्राणिनां परिकोतितः u]
ग्राडिवनवारुणमूलान्युपमु नन् रेवतीं च चन्द्रसुतः |
पण्य भिषग्नौजी विकसलिलजतुरगोपघातकरः UI
When Mercury transits afflicting the stars A&vini, Satabhisaj,
Mula and Revati, merchants (merchandise ?), physicians, sailors,

substances derived from water, such as pearls, conch shells etc.,
and horses will come to grief.
[Cf. कश्यप
रेवतीं वारुणां मूलमश्विनीं चोपमर्दयन् |
बुधो वरिग्भिषग्वाहाञ्जलोत्थांइ्च विनाशयेत् u]
ूर्वाहक्षत्रितयादेकमपोन्दोः सुतोऽभिसृद्नीयात् |
क्षुच्छस्त्रतस्करामयभयप्रदायी चरञ्जगतः Wo
When Mercury cuts through any one of the three Pūrva stars,
(Purvaphalguni, Pürvasadha and Pürvabhadra), people will suffer
from hunger, armed conflict, robbers, diseases and panic.
[Cf. the following—
पुर्वात्रये चरन्सौम्यो भेदं कृत्वा यदि ब्रजेत् ।
शुच्छस्त्रतस्करभ्ेः करोति प्राणिनां वधम् u]
प्रा कृत विमिश्रस ङ्क्षिप्तती&षणयोगान्तघोरपापार्याः à
सप्त पराशरतन्त्रे नक्षत्रे: कोतिता गतयः visu
Seven courses of Mercury named (i) Prakrta, (i1) Vimiéra,
(iii) Sarnksipta, (iv) Tiksna, (v) Yoganta, (vi) Ghorà and (vii)
Papa, have been mentioned in the Tantra (Scientific work) of Sage
Parà$ara, on the basis of the asterisms.
[The qa mentioned by our author must be ‘पराशरसंहिता’. Some
translators have taken the name of the last course to be पापाख्या,
while actually it is पापा as shown by वृद्धगगं.]
प्राकृतसञ्ज्ञा वायव्ययाम्यपतामहानि बहुलाइच |
मिश्रा गतिः प्रदिष्टा शशिशिवपित् भुजगदेवानि nen
सङ्क्षिप्तायां ga: पुनवंसुः फल्गुनीद्वयं चेति ।
तीक्ष्णायां भद्रपदाद्वयं सञशाक्राइवयुक् पौषम् ॥१०॥
योगान्तिकेति मूलं द्वे चाषाढे गतिः सुतस्येन्दोः ।
घोरा श्रवरास्त्वाष्ट वसुदेवं वारुणं चेव ॥११॥
पापाख्या सावित्रं मत्रं शक्राग्निदेवतं चेति ।
The course is known as Prakrta when Mercury passes through
Bharani, Krttika, Rohini or Svati. It is Mitra when the star is
Mrgasiras, Ardra, Aslesa or Maghi. In the course called Samk sipta
Mercury transits through Punarvasu, and the two Phalgunis. The
gait is called Tzksna when his transit takes place through the two
Bhadrapadas, Jyestha, Aśvinī and Revati. In Yoganta Mercury
moves through Mila, Pürvasadha and Uttarasadha. In Ghora he
moves through Sravana, Citra, Dhanistha and Satabhisaj. Lastly

ES
Mercury's Transit VII 77
in the course known as Papa Mercury courses through Hasta,
Anuradha and Visakha.
उदयप्रवासदिवसँः स एव गतिलक्षणं प्राह ॥१२॥
चत्वारिशत् tare द्विसमेता विशतिद्वितवकं च ।
नव मासार्धं दश चेकसंयुताः प्राकृताद्यानास् ॥१३॥
The same authority (i.e. sage Paragara) has given the duration of visibility and combustion of Mercury in the seven courses in
terms of days as 40, 30, 22, 18, 9, 15, and 11 days respectively.
[The idea is that if Mercury gets eclipsed or rises in his first
course, he will remain invisible or visible for 40 days.
Cf. वृद्धगगं—
चत्वारिशात्प्राकृतायां गतावालक्ष्यते बुधः |
मासमेकं विमिश्रायां दर्शयित्वास्तमहं ति ॥
wat द्वाविशति are सङ्क्षिप्तामेत्य लक्ष्यते ।
ग्रष्टादशाहं तीक्ष्णायां घोरायां दश पञ्च च ॥
पापायां पादहीनानि तर्थेकादश तिष्ठति ।
योगान्तिक्यामिन्दुसूनुर्ने वाहं लक्ष्यते तथा ॥
चारकालो य एवोक्त: सोमपुत्रस्य भागशः ।
भ्रस्तकालः स एव स्यात्सूर्यमण्डलचारिणाः d
There is difference of opinion between Paragara and Vrddha 3
Garga in that the latter states that in the third (Samksipta) course
the duration of visibility or otherwise is 22% days and in the last
it is 10% days. Our author follows Parasara and says as follows
in the समाससंहिता--
प्राकृतविमिश्रस ङ क्षिप्ततीक्ष्णयोगान्तघोरपापाख्याः ।
गतयो लक्षणमासां नोदयदिक्सँ: स्फुटं भवति ॥
स्पष्टा पराशरमते स्वाती च प्राकृता त्रिभं याम्यात् ।
मिश्रा गतिः शशिशेखरभुजगपितृदेवतासौम्येः ॥
agrar नाम गतिः grag: फल्गुनीद्वयं पुष्यः |
तीक्ष्णा भद्रपदाद्यं नक्षत्रचतुष्टयं ज्येष्ठा ॥
मूलत्यूक्षं योगा घोरा श्रवणत्रिभं च सत्वाष्ट्रम् ।
पापाख्या तु विशाखा हस्तो मेत्र च शशिसूनोः ॥
कश्यप agrees with पराशर and says :
चत्वारिशत्तथा त्रिशहिनानि द्वौ च विशतिः ।
ग्रष्टादशाद्धेमासं च दश चेकयुताति च ॥
नव च प्राकृताद्यासु सोमजस्तुदितस्तथा |

Brhat Samhita
ged गतः सर्वकालं तिष्ठतीति विनिश्चयः ॥
Next the author gives the effects of these courses.]
प्राकृतगत्यासारोग्य वृष्टिसस्यप्रव् द्वयः क्षेसस् ।
संक्षिप्तमिश्रयोमिश्रमेतदन्यासु विपरीतम् ॥१४॥
When Mercury is in his Prakrta course, people will enjoy
health, happiness, good rains and bumper crops. Inthe Samksipta and Miírà courses the effects would be of a mixed nature,
in the rest they would be quite untoward.
[Cf. mi— !
क्षेमारोग्यसुभिक्षेषु लक्षणा प्राकृता गति: d
संक्षिप्ता च विमिश्रा च शुभाशुभफलोदये ॥
तीक्ष्णा घोरा च पापा च तथा योगान्तिकापरा |
एताइचतस्रः सौम्यस्य दुभिक्षाक्षेमलक्षणाः n]
ऋज्व्यतिवक्रा वक्ता विकला च मतेन देवलस्यताः ।
पञ्चचतुदृ्य काहा ऋज्व्यादीनां षडभ्यस्ताः ॥१५॥
According to Devala’s view the Rjvi or Direct, Ativakra or,
Exceedingly Retrograde, Vakra or Retrograde and Vikala or Deformed
motions of Mercury would come into being when he stays visible
for 30 (5x 6), 24 (4x 6), 12 (2x6) and 6 days (1 x 6) respectively.
[Sage Devala who himself quotes ancient authorities is quoted
here in respect of the four kinds of motions of Mercury. These
four names would also apply to the conditions wherein he remains
invisible for the different durations. The commentator wants us
+o understand that the effects of these motions also will last for so
many days. |
ऋज्वी हिता प्रजानासतिवक्राघं गतिविनाशयति ।
इस्त्रभयदा च वक्रा विकला भयरोगसञ्जननी ॥१६॥
Mercury’s Direct motion is beneficial to people, while his
Exceedingly Retrograde motion brings about economic ruin of the
country through famine. His Retrograde motion produces threat of
war, while his Deformed motion causes panic and diseases.
[Cf. देवल
दिनानि त्रिशदुदितस्तिष्ठेद्यदि च सोमजः।
ऋज्वी गतिः सा विज्ञेया प्रजानां हितकारिणी ॥
चतुविशह्नान्येवं यदि तिष्ठेच्च सोमजः |
अतिवक्रा गतिज्ञेया दुभिक्षगतिलक्षणा ॥
श्रहानि द्वादश यदा बुघस्तिष्ठेत्तथो दृगतः |
वक्रा गतिः सा विज्ञेया झस्त्रसम्भ्रमकारिरणी ॥

Mercury’ s Transit VII 79
षड् दिनानि यदा तिष्ठेदुदूगतः सोमनन्दनः ।
विकला सा गतिज्ञेया भयरोगविर्वाद्धनी ॥
एवमस्तमये सर्वं गतिजं सोमजस्य g ।
भावाभावाय लोकानां फलं वाच्यं शुभाशुभम् ॥
Next the author gives the effects of Mercury’s visibility and
disappearance in the different lunar months.]
पौषाषाढश्रावरावंशाखेष्विन्दुजः समाघेषु ।
EET भयाय जगतः शुभफलकृत्प्रोषितस्तेषु ॥१७॥।
If Mercury becomes visible in the lunar months of Pausa,
Asadha, Sravana, Vais$akha and Magha, there will be great danger
to the world. But if he remains eclipsed (invisible) during these
months, he will prove auspicious.
[According to Vrddha Garga Mercury is seldom visible in the
sky in the above-named five months. In the remaining seven
months generally he is visible. So the two groups are respectively
called Invisible and Visible. If this rule should be violated, there
would be outbreak of cattle disease, drought and famine. For,
he says—
वेशाखपौषमाघेषु श्रावणाषाढयोरपि ।
न इश्यते बुधः प्रायो मासेष्वन्येषु इश्यते ॥
यदाऽरङ्येषु दृष्ट: स्याद् RAY च न ERU |
गवां रोगमनावृष्टि दुभिक्षं चापि निदिशेत् ॥
See also पराशर--
वेशाखाषाढयोर्माचे पौषश्रावणयोस्तथा ।
बुधो न इृश्यते जातु इश्येत भयमादिशेत् ॥
पौषे करोति मरक माघे वातं तथा च सोमसुतः ।
वैशाखे जनमरकमाषाढे श्रावणो च दुभिक्षम् ॥
Paragara gives mortality as the evil effect for the two months
Pausa and Vai$akha, storm for Magha, and famine for Asadha
and Sravana.]
कात्तिकेळवयुजि वा यदि मासे रुयते तनुभवः शिशिरांशोः ।
झस्त्रचौरहुतभुग्गदतोयक्षुट्यानि च तदा विदघाति ॥१८॥
Should Mercury be visible in the lunar months of Karttika
and Agvina, there would be danger from weapons (or war), robbers, fire, diseases, water and hunger.
[Out of twelve months for seven months Mercury, being visible

80 Brhat Samhita
is disastrous for the world. This may be the reason why Mercury
is not considered bad when he is combust, in astrology.
The metre is स्वागता. ]
रुद्धानि सोम्येऽस्तगते पुराणि यान्युद्गते तान्युपयान्ति मोक्षम् ।
aà तु पश्चादुदिते वदन्ति लाभः पुराणां भवतीति तज्ज्ञाः ॥१९॥
If towns are besieged when Mercury gets eclipsed, they
would be freed from the siege when Mercury rises again. According to other scholars besieged cities would be benefited only
when Mercury rises in the west.
[Cf. नन्दी
पञ्चार्द्वादुदिते सौम्ये लभते पुररोधकः |
पुनः प्रागुदिते तस्मिन्पुरमोक्षं विनिदिशेत् ॥
According to this authority the besieging army becomes victorious
or takes possession of the town when Mercury rises in the west,
whereas when he rises again in the east the town would be retaken
or freed from the enemy’s hold. The metre is इन्द्रवज्रा.]
हेमकान्तिरथवा शुकवर्णः सस्यकेन मरिना सह्शो वा ।
स्निग्धमूतिरलघुरच हिताय व्यत्यये न शुभकृच्छशिपुत्र: ॥ २० ॥
If Mercury appears being possessed of golden hue or of the
colour of parrot or is similar in hue to the Sasyaka gem and if his
disc is glossy and pretty big, he will prove beneficial to mankind.
In the absence of these features he will prove harmful.
[Cf. पराशर---
विमलजलरजतस्फटिकाभः प्रशस्यते 1]

बृहस्पतिचारः usu
JUPITER’S COURSE
नक्षत्रेण सहोदयमुपगच्छति येन देवपतिमन्त्री ।
dere वक्तव्यं वषं मासक्रमेणेव ॥१॥
Ascertain the star in which Jupiter reappears after conjunction with the Sun. That year of Jupiter will bear the name of
that particular star, and the succeeding years those of the lunar
months following it in regular order.
[The jovian year commences with the rising of Jupiter and
is called after the asterism in which he reappears. For example,
if Jupiter re-emerges after an eclipse in the star krttika, then that
year would be called Karttika. The succeeding years would be
Margasirsa, Pausa etc. Cf. faga :—
यत्रोत्तिष्ठति नक्षत्रे सह येन प्रवर्धते ।
संवत्सरः स विज्ञेयस्तन्नक्षत्रविधायकः 11
also काश्यप :— :
संवत्सरे युगे चेव षष्टचब्देऽङङ्गिरसः सुतः ।
यन्नक्षत्रोदयं कुर्यात्तत्सञ्ज्ञं वत्सरं विदुः ॥
तिष्यादि च युगं प्राहुवेसिष्ठात्रिपराशराः ।
बृहस्पतेस्तु सौम्यान्ते सदा द्वादशवाषिकम् ॥
उदेति यस्मिन्मासे तु प्रवासोपगतोऽङङ्गिराः i
तस्मात्संवत्सरो मासो बाह स्पत्योऽथ गम्यते ॥
also गर्ग :—
प्रवासान्ते सहक्षेण तूदितो युगपच्चरेत् ।
तस्मात्कालारक्षपूर्वो गुरोरव्द: TATT od
युगानि द्वादशाब्दानि तत्र तानि बृहस्पतेः ।
तत्र सावनसौराभ्यां सावनाब्दो निरुच्यते ॥
एवमाइवयुजं चेव wu चेव वृहस्पतिः |
संवत्सरं नाशयते सप्तत्यब्दशतेऽधिके ॥]
वर्षाणि कार्षत्तकादीन्याग्तेया-दूद्वयानुयोगीनि ।
ऋरमशस्त्रिभ तु पञ्चममुपान्त्यमन्त्यं च यद्वषंस् ॥ २ ॥
Jupiter’s years commence from Karttika and consist of two
asterisms each beginning with Krttika and follow in regular

82 Brhat Samhita
order. However, the 5th, 10th and llth years comprise each
three asterisms.
[Here the word Antya is interpreted as the 12th to the
11th i.e. 10th. If Jupiter rises in krttika or Rohini, his year will be
called Karttika; if in Mrga$iras or Ardra, Margasirsa; if in Punarvasu or Pusya, Pausa; if in Aslesa or Magha, Magha; if in
Purvaphalguni, Uttaraphalguni or Hasta, Phalguna; if in Citra or
Svati, Caitra; if in Visakha or Anuradha, Vaifakha; if in Jyestha
or Mila, jyestha; if in Parvasadha or Uttarasadha, Asadha; if in
Sravana, Dhanistha, or Satabhisaj, Sravama; if in Pürvabhadra,
Uttarabhadra or Revati, Bhadrapada; and if in Asvini or
Bharani, Ana. This shows that only the three months Viz.
Bhadrapada, Phalguna_and Sravana, have three stars each. I cannot
understand how the Afvina month which is the 12th in order could
have three stars. On the other hand the 10th, viz. Sravana, has
three stars. Our author must have followed some ancient author
or he means 10th by the word s as given above.
Cf. गर्ग :--
फाल्गुनी चेव हस्तं च चरेद्यदि बृहस्पति : ।
स फाल्गुनो5्ब्दः करः स्याद्धान्यमुच्चाटतां ATT ॥
श्रावणादीनि च त्रीणि चरेद्यदि वृहस्पतिः ।
श्रावणो नाम सोऽब्दः स्यात्क्षेमसौभिक्षमूतिमान् ॥
पूर्वोत्तरे प्रोष्ठपदे चरेद्रेवतिमेव च ।
प्रोष्ठपाद इति ज्ञेयो मध्यमो वत्सरो हि सः ॥
aaa चेव याम्यं च चरेद्यदि बृहस्पतिः |
संवत्सरः सोऽरवयुकस्यात्सवेभूतहितावहः ।।
नववारा द्विनक्षत्रा गुरोर्दादशमासिका: ।
शेषास्त्रयस्त्रनक्षत्राः पञ्चमेकादशान्तिमाः ॥
also काश्यप :—
कात्तिकादिसमा ज्ञेया द्विनक्षत्रविचारिणा |
त्रिभं भाद्रपदे ज्ञेयं फाल्गुने श्रावणे तथा u]
शकटानलोपजोवकगोपीडा व्याधिदास्त्रकोपइच |
वृद्धिस्तु रक्तपीतककुसुमानां कात्तिके वर्ष ॥ ३॥
In the Karttika year of Jupiter cartmen, persons living by
fire, and cattle will suffer. There will also be outbreak of diseases
and clash of arms. Red and yellow flowers will grow in abundance.

Jupiters Course VIII 83
[Cf. mi:—
कात्तिकः प्रचुरातडू: क्षुच्छस्त्राग्निभयप्रद: d
गोशाकटिकपीडां च करोत्येवमवृष्टिद: 11]
सौम्येऽब्देऽना वृष्टिमृ गा खुशल भाण्डजेशच सस्यवधः ।
व्याधिभयं मित्रेरपि भुपानां जायते वेरम् uyu
In the Margasirsa year of Jupiter there will be drought,
destruction of crops asa result of pests like wild animals, rats,
locusts and birds, outbreak of epidemics and kings’ hostilities
even with their friends.
[Cf. mi:—
वर्ष हन्ता व्याधिकरो मिथो भेदभयावह: |
शलभाद्याकुलः सौम्यो दुभिक्षभमयकारक: 11]
शुभकृज्जगतः पोषो निवृत्तवेराः परस्परं क्षितिपाः |
हित्रिगुणो धान्यार्घः पौष्टिककमंप्रसिद्विशच ॥५॥
In the Pauga year of Jupiter the world will be happy and
prosperous, kings will be free from enmity among themselves, the
prices of food grains will go up two-fold or three-fold, and preservative work will flourish.
[Bhattotpala interprets धान्यार्घं etc. as fall in prices of corn.
Cf. mi:—
प्रशान्तव्या धिदुभिक्षदुवरर्षांश नितस्करः d
सर्वलक्षणसम्पन्नः पौषः संवत्सरोत्तमः U]
पितृपूजापरिवृद्धिर्माघे हादिश्च सर्वभूतानाम् ।
भ्रारोग्यवृष्टिधान्याघंसम्पदो मित्रलाभश्च UU
In the Magha year of Jupiter people would worship the
manes (and parents and elders) with greater devotion, and all beings
would enjoy happiness and contentment as well as sound health.
‘There would be good rains and good prices for corn ; and people
would live with greater amity and cordiality.
(Cf. गर्गः
क्षेमारोग्यं सुभिक्षं वषंणं शिवमेव च ।
पितृपूजा: sada माघे राज्ञां च सन्धयः ॥
According to this sage the year of Magha would be notable for
treaties among rulers also.]

84 Brhat Samhita
फाल्गुनवर्ष विन्द्यात्कवचित्क्वचित्क्षेसवृष्टिसस्यानि।
दोर्भाग्यं प्रमदानां प्रबलाइचौरा नृपाशचोग्राः NVN
In the Phalguna year of Jupiter happiness, rainfall and
crops would be sporadic and young women would be afflicted with
misfortune. Kings would become cruel and aggressive and robbers
would increase enormously.
[Cf. mi —
नारीदीर्भाग्यकृच्चौरः फाल्गुन: सस्यवषंदः |
क्वचितक्षेमं सुभिक्षं च क्वचिदक्षेमकारकः 11]
aa मन्दा वृष्टिः प्रियमन्नं क्षेममवनिपा मृदवः ।
वृद्धिश्च कोशधान्यस्य भवति पीडा च रूपवताम् usu
In the Caitra year of Jupiter rainfall would be scanty, food
costly, but people would enjoy happiness and kings would become kind-hearted. Pulses would thrive, but the beautiful would
suffer.
मृदुप्रचारा राजानः प्रियमन्नं जनस्य च |
क्षेमारोग्यं च मृदुता चैत्रवषंस्तथा म॒ दुः ॥
The word ख्पवतां in the text may mean ‘those who live
by their physical charm’ such as actors and dancing girls.
The beginning of the second half of the verse looks like a
Sloka line. The flaw in caesura is quite apparent here.]
वेशाखे धर्मरता विगतभयाः प्रमुदिताः प्रजाः सनृपाः |
यज्ञक्रिया प्रवृत्तिनिष्पत्ति: सवंसस्यानाम् nen
In the Vai$akha year of Jupiter both the rulers and the
ruled would be devoted to religious practices, happy and free from
fear (or troubles). People would be engaged in performing sacrifices
and there would be abundant growth of all crops.
[Cf. mi:—
ईतयः प्रशमं यान्ति सन्धि कुर्वन्ति पार्थिवाः |
ATH ठु सम्यजन्या वृष्टयः सम्भवन्ति हि u]
ज्येष्ठ जातिकुलधनश्रेणीश्रेष्ठा नुपा: RIAA: ।
पोड्यन्ते धान्यानि < हित्वा TST शमीजातिम् uon
In the Jyestha year of Jupiter leaders of classes (castes),

Fupiter’s Course VIII 85
families, wealthy men and trade guilds, kings and those that are
well-versed in the laws governing righteous conduct (like judges
and wise elders) will be in trouble. All grains except Kangu and
those of the Sami class will suffer.
[सबीजानि is another reading for शमीजातिम्. According to this reading, ‘all grains with their seeds’ should be affected.
Cf. mi;—
वृक्षगुल्मलतासस्यक्षेमवर्ष विनाशन: |
क्रराज्ञादीप्तिजननो ज्येष्ठो ज्येष्ठनृपान्तक्ृत् ॥]
ग्राषाढे जायन्ते सस्यानि क्वचिदवृष्टिरन्यत्र ।
योगक्षेमं मध्यं व्यग्राश्च भवन्ति भूपालाः ॥११॥
In the Asàdha year there will be growth of crops in some
places and drought elsewhere. The welfare of the people will be
moderate, and kings will become very active and busy.
[att is the acquisition of things one does not possess, while
क्षेम is the protection of what has been acquired.
Cf. mi:—
दु भिक्षाक्षेमजनन₹चाषाढोऽन्योन्य भेदकृत् |
भूपालयुद्धजननो मध्यमक्षेमकारकः di]
savas क्षें सम्यक् सस्यानि पाकमुपयान्ति ।
gat ये पाखण्डाः पीड्यन्ते ये च AAT: ॥१२॥
In the Sravana year of Jupiter people will be happy and
crops abundant. Heretics and the mea-nminded will be troubled
along with their followers.
[Cf. गर्ग:—
श्रावणः सस्यसम्पन्नः क्षेमारोग्यकरः शिवः |
धान्यं समघंतां याति सम्यग्वर्षति वासवः ॥
भुद्रान्पाखण्डिनः सर्वास्तःदभक्तांश्चोपतापयेत् i] °
भाद्रपदे वल्लीजं fasta याति पूर्वसस्यं च ।
न भवत्यपरं सस्यं क्वचित्सुभिक्षं क्वचिच्च भयम् ॥१३॥
In the Bhadrapada year of Jupiter the produce of creepers
like green grams and the first crop of the year will be quite satisfactory. There will be no second crop in the year. Food grains
will be in plenty only in some places, and there will be panic or
danger in other parts.

86 i Brhat Samhita
[Cf. mi:—
प्रौष्ठपात्सस्यजननो नाशयत्यपरं च यत् |
करोति च क्वचित्क्षेमं क्वचिदक्षेमकारकः ॥ |
ग्राइवयुजेऽब्देऽजस्र पतति जलं प्रमुदिताः प्रजाः RRJ ।
प्राणचयः प्राणभृतां सवंषासन्नत्राहुल्यस् ॥ १४॥
In the jovian year called A$vayuja there will be constant
rainfall, and the people will enjoy health and happiness. All living
beings will grow strong and there will be abundant food for all.
[Cf. वृद्धगगे:---
पर्याप्तसस्यान्नजलक्षेमरचारवयुज: शिवः |
सम्प्रवृत्तोत्सवः श्रीमान्सवेकामसुखावहः ॥
Having disposed of the effects of the 12 years of Jupiter, the
author now turns to those of jupiter’s position, motion, colour
etc.]
उदगारोग्यसुभिक्षक्षमकरो वाक्पतिश्चरन् भानाम् ।
याम्ये तद्विपरीतो मध्येन तु मध्यफलदायी ॥ १५॥
Should Jupiter move during his transit to the north of the
asterism he is in, he would bestow health, happiness and plenty,
while to the south of the star, he would cause contrary results.
If he moves in the middle, the effects will be of a mixed nature.
विचरन्मद्दयसिष्टस्तत्सा द्ध॑ वत्सरेश मध्यफलः |
सस्यानां विध्वंसी विचरेदधिकं यदि कदाचित् ॥१६॥
If Jupiter moves through two asterisms in the course of a
year, he will prove auspicious,; if he covers 21 stars the effect
will be mixed; and if he moves by chance faster and covers more
than that, all the crops will be destroyed.
अनलभयमनलवर्ण व्याधिः पीते रणागमः इयामे ।
हरिते च तस्करेभ्यः पौडा रक्ते तु शस्त्रभयम् ॥१७॥
घुमाभेऽनावृष्टिस्त्रिदशगुरो नृपवधो दिवा दुष्टे ।
विपुलेऽमले सुतारे रात्रो दृष्टे प्रजाः स्वस्थाः ॥१८॥
If Jupiter appears with the colour of fire, there will be
danger from fire; if with yellow colour, diseases will crop up;
if with dark colour, war will break out ; if with green colour, there
will be danger from thieves; if with red colour, danger from
weapons; and if with the colour of smoke, the result will be
drought. Should Jupiter be sighted during the day, aking will be
killed. If Jupiter’s orb be large, clear, posited in an auspicious

Jupiters Course VIII 87
asterism and sighted at night, all the people would be quite
happy.
[In the last line नृपा: is another reading for प्रजा: í Many of
the colours are said to be bad for Jupiter. In astrology Jupiter’s
colour is given as golden. So all other colours except golden must
be inauspicious for him.
Cf. पराश र:---
कदाचिद्यत्र ada दिवा देवपुरो हितः ।
राजा at म्रियते तत्र स देशो वा विनश्यति ॥
In the next verse the Body of the year is explained along with its
limbs. Effects of planetary conjunction or aspect are also given |
here. ]
रोहिण्योऽनलभं च वत्सरतनुर्नाभिस्त्वषाढाद्वय॑
ad हृत्पितृदेवतं च कुसुमं शुद्धेः YA तः फलम् ।
देहे क्र रनिपीडितेऽन्यनिलजं नाभ्यां भयं क्षुत्कृतं
पुष्पे मूलफलक्षयोऽथ हृदये सस्यस्य नाशो ध्रुवम् ॥ १६ ॥
The stars Krttika and Rohini constitute the Body of the year
(personified); the two Asadhas are the navel; Aslesa, the heart; and
Magha the flower. If these lunar mansions are devoid of malefics,
the effect will be beneficial. If the Body is afflicted by malefics
through conjunction or aspect, there will be danger from fire and
wind. Ifthe navel is afflicted, there will be threat of famine. If
the flower is afflicted, destruction of roots and fruits will ensue.
Lastly if the heart is afflicted, undoubtedly there will be destruction
of crops.
[This verse gives clues to find out if the particular year of
Jupiter would be well or ill. Just as Time is personified as कालपुरुष,
even so here the year 1s = as संबत्सरपुरुष. I feel that here
the person is to be taken as female in view of the flower.
Cf. काश्यप :—
कृत्तिका रोहिणी चोभे संवत्सरतनु: स्मृता |
ग्राषाढाद्वितयं नाभी सार्पं हृत्कुसुमं मघा ॥
क्ररग्रहहते देहे दुभिक्षानलमारुता: |
क्षुदृभयं तु भवेन्नाभ्यां पुष्पे मुलफलक्षय: |i
हृदये सस्यहानिः स्यात्सौम्येः पुष्टिः प्रकोतिता ।
The metre is sg लविक्रीडित.
Er जाळ NES

88 Brhat Samhita
Next he tells us the method of calculating the years of the
lustrum or Yuga of five years.]
गतानि वर्षाणि शकेन्द्रकालाद्धतानि रद्रेग्रायेच्चतुर्मिः ।
नवाष्टपञ्चाष्टयुतानि कृत्वा विभाजयेच्छून्यशरागरासः ॥ २० I
लब्धेन युक्तं शकभूपकालं संशोध्य षष्ट्या विषयविभज्य d
युगानि नारायरपूवकारि लब्धानि शेषाः HAM: समाः स्युः । २१ ।
Multiply the number of years that have elapsed since the
beginning of the Salivahana era by 44. Add 8589 to the product
and divide the result by 3750. To the quotient thus obtained add
the Saka years. Divide this by 60 and its remainder by 5. The
quotient represents the five-year periods ruled by Visnu and
others, and the remainder denotes the number of years that have
elapsed in the particular lustrum.
[Let us work out this rule in order to find out the lustrum ruling
at present : The current Saka year (elapsed) 1893 when multiplied
by 44 yields 83292. Add 8589 to this product. The result
is 91881. By dividing this by 3750 we get a quotient, 24. Add
this again to the past Saka years i.e. 1893. The sum is 1917.
By dividing this sum by 60, we get 31 57/60. The remainder
57 gives the past year from Prabhava, which is Angirasa, and the
current year Raktaksa (See also note under verse 22 for the discrepancy). So the current yuga or lustrum is the last one ruled by
Bhaga (see verse 23 infra). There are 12 yugas or five-year periods
whose names are given in verse 23 infra. The next verse gives the
names of the five years of a yuga. The metre of these and others
upto the 37th, except 36, is उपजाति.]
एकेकमब्देषु नवाहतेषु दत्वा पृथरद्वादशक्क क्रमेणा ।
हृत्वा चतुर्भिवंसुदेवताद्यान्युइनि शेषांशकप् वंमब्दमु ॥२२॥
Place the years of Jupiter obtained according to the previous verse in two places separately. Multiply the first by 9 and
divide the other by 12. Add the product of the first and the quotient
of the second. Divide the result by 4. The quotient would reveal
the particular star counted from Dhanistha. The remainder would
indicate the particular Pada or quarter of the next star that is
occupied by Jupiter.
[To work out the formulae given in verses 20-22 first of all
we have to find out the number of jovian years that have elapsed

Jupiters Course VIII 89
from the beginning of Kali yuga till the beginning ofthe Salivahana era. This is done as follows:—
In a Mahayuga (i.e. collection of the four yugas) the number
of Solar years is 4320000=3750 xX 1152. That of Jupiter for the
same period is 4370688—3794 x 1152. Hence for every 3750 solar
years we have 3794 jovial years. Therefore 1 solar year—3794—
lors years of Jupiter. Now we have to find out the number of
Jupiter's years past in Kali yuga at the beginning of the Salivahana era. For this proceed thus :
- The number of solar years past from the beginning of Kali
Yuga upto the beginning of the Saka era is 3179. This should be
Now it is known that kaliyuga started in the year Vijaya
(which is the 27th from Prabhava). Therefore, 32161225 +26 (26 is
the number of years elapsed from Prabhava at the beginning of
Kaliyuga)—32421125. This being divided by 60 gives a remainder
23725 which means it is the3rd year Viz. Sukla, of the cycle of 60
years of Jupiter.
Now coming to the current year of the Saka era, viz. 1894,
the number of jovian years elapsed is 1893++44,2828+2112% years
from the beginning of Prabhava. It is 1893--22,795;--2112$ or
19173745 which being divided by 60 gives 3157 i.e. 31 cycles of
60 years have passed and in the 32nd cycle 57 years have elapsed.
According to this the current cyclic year should be Raktaksa,
the 58th year. However, our Paficangas, especially the
South-Indian ones, name it Virodhikrt, the 45th year. How did
this discrepancy arise? “Originally there was no difference
between the Northern and Southern systems of the 60-year jovian
cycle. But later on in South India the distinction between the jovian and solar years was ignored and consequently
a southern jovian year is the same as a solar year and there
is no suppression of a Samvatsara in a period of 85 or 86 years as
is the case with the Northern or true system. It has no connection
with the movement of Jupiter, and Pramathin is regarded as the
first year of Kaliyuga as against Vijaya in the Northern system.’
At present, we are told by the same author on the basis of S.B.
Dikshit’s findings, the northern year is 12 years in advance of the
(1) Vide “India As Seen In The Brhatsamhita"—Ajaya Mitra Shastri,
converted into Jupiter’s years: pies xX 3179 or 3216

90 Brhat Samhita
southern one. So by deducting 12 years from 57 got by us, we
arrive at 45, which should be taken as the current, and not past
Samvatsara in the southern system. Now divide this 57 by 5 in
order to get the yugas and years. We get then 11 yugas and 2
years, which means that it is the Parivatsara year in the last yuga
known as Bhaga (Sun). The current year would be Idavatsara
ruled by the Moon.
Using the method given in verse 22 for finding the star occupied by Jupiter at the beginning of Saka year 1893, multiply the
result got above viz. 57, by 9 in one place, and divide the same
(57) by 12. Add up these results. Then divide the sum by 4. The
quotient gives thenumber of the star occupied by Jupiter, counted
from Dhanistha. (For, it has been declared that at the commencement of the cyclic year Prabhava Jupiter was in the star Dhanistha).
Divide this by 4=517.75—4=129.4. This means that Jupiter was
in the 130th star from Dhanistha. So divide 129.4 by 27. The
balance is 21 and odd. So Jupiter must have been in the 22nd
star from Dhanistha i.e. Anuradha, on 27th March 1971. This
isa fact. Cf. also qdfwegra I. 55 & XIV 17.]
विष्णुः सुरेज्यो बलमिद्धृताशस्त्वष्टोत्तरप्रोष्ठपदाधिपइच |
क्रमाद्यगेशाः पित् विशवसोमशक्रानलाख्या इव मगाः प्रदिष्टाः NRIN
The lords of the 12 yugas (five-year periods) in the cycle of
Jupiter are the following in order : (1) Visnu, (2) Jupiter, (3)
Indra, (4) Fire, (5) Tvastà (one of the Prajapatis or creators),
(6) Ahirbudhnya, (7) the Manes, (8) Visvedevas (the All-Gods),
(9) Soma (the Moon), (10) Indragni, (11) the Agvins, and (12)
Bhaga (the Sun).
[Cf. समाससंहिता--
विष्णुगुरुशक्रहुतभुकत्वष्टाहिवृंध्न्यपित्र्वविश्वानि ।
सोम्य मथेन्द्राग्त्याख्यं त्वाश्विनमपि भाग्यसंज्ञं च ॥]
संवत्सरोऽग्निः परिवत्सरोऽर्क इदादिकः शीतमयूखमाली i
प्रजापतिइचाप्यनुवत्सरः स्यादिद्वत्सरः शेलसुतापतिइच ॥ २४ u
_ The names of the five years in a lustrum along with their
Presiding deities are (1) Sarnvatsara with its lord Fire, (2) Parivatsara with the Sun, (3) Idavatsara with the Moon, (4) Anuvatsara
with Prajapati (creator), and (5) Idvatsara with Rudra.

J'upiter's Course VIII 91
वृष्टिः समाद्ये प्रमुखे द्वितीये प्रमुततोया कथिता तृतीये ।
पर्चाज्जलं मुञ्चति wage स्वल्पोदकं पञचममन्दमुक्तम् ॥ २५॥
In the first year viz. Sarnvatsara, rainfall will be evenly distributed; in the second year (Parivatsara) the rainfall will be good
in the beginning only and not after; in thethird year (Idavatsara)
there will be plenty of rain throughout the season; in the fourth
year (Anuvatsara) rainfall will be late i.e. at the end of the season;
and in the last year (Idvatsara) it will be scanty.
[The four months of Sravana, Bhadrapada, Asvayuja and
Karttika constitute the rainy season. Even distribution of rains
means equal distribution in all the four months of the monsoon.]
चत्वारि मुख्यानि युगान्यथेषां विष्ण्वन्द्रजीवानल देवतानि i
चत्वारि मध्यानि च मध्यमानि चत्वारि चान्त्यान्यधमानि
Among the 12 yugas the first four viz. Višnu, Jupiter,
Indra and Fire, are the foremost and the best ; the four middle
ones viz. Tvastà, Ahirbudhnya, the Manes and Viévedevas, are
moderate, and the last four viz. the Moon Indragni, Asvins and
the Sun, are to be understood as the worst.
[Cf. the समाससंहिता--
चत्वारि युगान्यादौ शुभानि मध्यानि मध्यमफलानि ।
चत्वायंन्त्यानि न शोभनानि वर्षेविशेषोऽत्र u]
ala धनिष्ठांशमभिप्रपन्नो माघे यदा यात्युदयं सुरेज्यः ।
षष्ट्यब्दप् वः प्रभवः स नाम्ना प्रपद्यते भुतहितस्तदाब्दः ॥२७॥
When Jupiter enters the first quarter of the asterism Dhanistha and at the same time rises after getting eclipsed by the
Sun, in the month of Magha, Prabhava, the first year of his cycle
of 60 years comes intobeing and it will be beneficial to all beings.
[The commentator states that the month of Magha is of the
lunar calendar and not of the solar one. For, the lunar Magha
begins when the Sun enters Aquarius and then it is the Solar Phalguna. The condition mentioned in this verse would be satisfied if
Jupiter be in 9-23?-21! and the Sun in 10-6?-21!, because Jupiter
rises only when there is an interval of 13° between his longitude
and the Sun’s. In actual experience, however, these three conditions viz. Magha, Dhanistha and Jupiter’s rising, may be hard to
realise. ]
क्वचित्त्ववृष्टिः पवनाग्निकोपः सन्तीतयः इलेष्मकृताइच रोगा: ।
संवत्सरे$स्मिन्प्रभव प्रवृत्त न दुःखमाप्नोति जनस्तथापि ॥२८॥

92 Brhat Samhita
During this year viz. Prabhava, there will be drought, outbreak of fires, storms, the six-fold troubles known as Itibadhas and
phlegmatic ailments in some parts. However, the people in genera]
will not suffer.
तस्माद् द्वितीयो विभवः प्रदिष्टः शुक्लस्तृतीयः परतः प्रमोदः à
प्रजापतिशचेति यथोत्तराणि शस्तानि वर्षाणि फलान्यथेषास् nen
निष्पन्नशालीक्षुयवादिसस्यां भयेविमुक्तामुपशान्तवेराम्।
संहृष्टलोकां कलिदोषमुक्तां क्षत्र तदा शास्ति च भुतधात्रीम् ॥३०॥
Thereafter the second year named Vibhava sets in, then Sukla
the third year, then Pramoda the fourth year and then Prajapati
the fifth year. These years will yield more and more beneficial
effects in their order. In this first yuga of Jupiter the rulers
(Ksatriyas) will govern the country so well that the land would be
smiling with abundant paddy, sugarcane, barley and other grains,
being rid of all fears, hostilities and the curses of the Kali age,
with the subjects quite happy and contented.
Masts: श्रीमुखभावसाह्वौ युवा सुधातेति युगे द्वितीये i
वर्षारि waa यथाक्रमेण त्रीण्यत्र शस्तानि समे परे Š ॥३१॥
त्रिष्वाद्यवर्षषु निकामवर्षी देवो निरातःडुःमयइच लोकः |
ग्रब्दद्येऽन्त्येऽपि समा सुवृष्टिः किन्त्वत्र रोगाः समरागमश्च ।।३२॥
In the second yuga of Jupiter the five years are named in
order : Angiras, Srimukha, Bhava, Yuvan and Dhata. Among these
the first three will prove auspicious, while the last two will be
moderate. In the first three years there will be plenty of rainfall
and the people will be free from diseases and fear. In the last two
years rains will be moderate, but diseases will crop up and wars
will also break out.
शाक्रे युगे पूवमथेइवराख्यं वर्ष द्वितीयं बहुधान्यमाहुः |
प्रमाथिनं विक्रममप्यथान्यद्वषं च विन्द्या द्गुरुचा रयोगात् ॥३३॥
राद्यं द्वितीयं च शुभे तु वषं कृतानुकारं कुरुतः प्रजानासु ।
पापः प्रमाथी वृषविक्रमो तु सुभिक्षदौ रोगभयप्रदौ च ॥३४॥
In the third yuga presided over by Indra the years are
named in order : [{vara, Bahudhanya, Pramathin, Vikrama and Vrsa as
a result of Jupiter’s transit. The first two years will be very auspicious and will confer on the people the blessings of the Golden
Age. The year Pramathin will be very harmful, while the last two
will produce plenty of food but will cause diseases and fear.

Jupiter's Course VIII 93
श्रेष्ठं चतुर्थस्य युगस्य qd यच्चित्रभान् कथयन्ति aay ।
मध्यं द्वितीयं तु सुभानुसञ्ज्ञं रोगप्रदं मृत्युकरं न तच्च ॥३५॥
तारणं तदनु भूरिवारिदं सस्यवृद्धिमुदितं च पाथिवम् ।
पञ्चमं व्ययमुशन्ति शोभनं सन्मथप्रबलमुत्सवाकुल म् ॥३६॥
The first year named Citrabhanu of the fourth lustrum is considered to be the best, while the second year named Subhanu is of
moderate effect, as it produces diseases that are not fatal. The
third called Tarana gives abundant rains, and the fourth named
Parthiva makes people happy with abundant crops. The last one
called Vyaya is said to be auspicious, but it will be marked by the
activities of cupid (i.e. there will be many romances) as well as
by various festivities.
[The commentator takes the reading नतं च for न तच्च and says that
नत is the name of the third year. This is against the traditional list
of names. He also omits Parthiva, the fourth year, resorting to the
reading मुदितातिपाथिवम्, which is not very happy. Hence I have
rejected it here.
The metre of the last verse is रथोद्धता.]
CUE युगे सर्वजिदाद्य उक्तः संवत्सरोऽन्यः खलु सर्वंधारी ।
तस्माद्विरोधी विकृतः खरइच स्तो द्वितीयोऽत्र भयाय शेषा: । ३७ ।
The first year of the fifth lustrum presided over by Tvasta is
Sarvajit. The others are Sarvadharin, Virodhin, Vikrta and khara.
Of these only the second year viz. Sarvadharin, is beneficial, and
the rest lead to danger.
नन्दनोऽथ विजयो जयस्तथा मन्मथोऽस्य परतश्च दुर्मुखः ।
कान्तमत्र युग श्रादितस्त्रयं मन्मथ: समफलोऽधमोऽपरः ॥३८॥
In the sixth lustrum presided over by Ahirbudhnya the years
are named Vandana, Vijaya, jaya, Manmatha and Durmukha. Of these
the first three years are beneficial, while Manmatha, the 4th year,
is middling, but the last one is utterly baneful.
[The metre is रथोद्धता; so is the next one.]
हेमलम्ब इति सप्तमे युगे स्याद्विलम्बि परतो विकारि च ।
शवरीति तदनु प्लवः CATT वत्सरो गुरुवशेन पञ्चमः | ३९ |
ईतिप्राया प्रचुरपवना वृष्टिरब्दे तु पूव
Wed सस्यं न बहुसाललं वत्सरेऽतो द्वितीये |
agen: प्रचुरसलिलः स्यत्तृतीयश्चतुर्थो
दुभिक्षाय प्लव इति ततः शोभनो भूरितोयः ॥ ४० ou

94 Brhat Samhita
The years composing the 7th yuga of Jupiter presided over
by the Manes are Hemalamba, Vilambi, Vikari, Sarvari and Plava.
In the first year there will be stormy rains accompanied by the
six-fold calamities. In the second year both the rains and crops
will be scanty. In the third there will be great havoc caused by
floods. In the fourth year there will be famine andin the last
year known as Plava there will be good rains and prosperity.
[The metre is मन्दाक्रान्ता.]
aaa युगे शोभकृदित्यथाद्यः संवत्सरोऽतः शुभकृद्द्वितीयः ।
क्रोधी तृतीयः परतः क्रमेर विइवावसुश्चेति पराभवश्च ॥ ४१ u
पूर्वापरौ प्रीतिकरो प्रजानामेषां तृतीयो बहुदोषदोऽब्दः ।
gat समौ किन्तु पराभवेऽग्निः झस्त्रामयातिद्विजगोभयं च ॥ ४२॥
The years of the 8th lustrum owned by Visve-devas are
Sobhakrt or Sokahrt, Subhakrt, Krodhin, Visvavasu and Parabhava.
The first two years will be highly beneficial to the people, while
the third very troublesome. The last two will be moderate,
but the last one, Parabhava, will be afflicted with fire, weapons,
diseases, sorrow, and danger to Brahmins and cattle.
[For शोभकृत् there isa variant reading viz. med. According
to tradition the year Subhakrt precedes Sobhakrt. The metre is
उपजाति upto the 45th verse.]
भ्राद्यः CATS नवमे युगेऽब्दः स्यात्कीलकोऽन्यः TARA सौम्यः ।
साधारणो रोधकृदित्यथाब्दः शुभप्रदौ कोलकसौम्यसञ्ज्ञो ॥ ४३ ॥
कष्टः प्लवङ्गो बहुशः प्रजानां साधारणोऽल्पं जलमीतयश्च ।
यः पञ्चमो रोधक्ृदित्यथाब्दर्चित्रं जलं तत्र च सस्यसम्पत् ॥ ४४॥
In the 9th lustrum belonging to the Moon the five years are
in order Plavanga, Kilaka, Saumya, Sadharana and Rodhakrt. The two
years, Kilaka and Saumya, are auspicious and beneficial, while
Plavanga is troublesome to the people in many ways. Inthe year
Sadharana there will be scanty rains and the sixfold troubles will
be on the increase. In the fifth year of Rodhakrt rainfall will be
sporadic but the crops will flourish.
[The traditional name for Rodhakrt is Virodhikrt.]
इन्द्राग्निदेवं दशमं युगं यत्तत्राद्यवर्षं परिधाविसंज्ञम् ।
प्रमाद्ययानन्दमतः परं यत्स्याद्राक्षसं चानलसञ्ज्ञितं च ॥ ४५ ॥
परिधाविनि मध्यदेशनाशो नुपहानिर्जलमल्पमग्निकोपः ।
श्रलसस्तु जनः प्रमादिसञ्ज्ञे डमरं रक्तकपुष्पबीजनाशः ॥ ४६ N
तत्परः सकललोकनन्दनो राक्षसः क्षयकरोऽनलस्तथा ।
ग्रीष्मघान्यजननोऽत्र राक्षसो वह्विकोपमरकप्रदोऽनलः ॥ ४७ u

Jupiters Course VIII 95
In the tenth lustrum belonging to Indragni the years are
named Paridhavin, Pramadin, Ananda, Raksasa and Anala. In the
year Paridhavin the central country will be destroyed, a king will
meet with his end, rain willbe scanty and disastrous fires will
break out. In Pramadin the people will generally be indolent, war
will break out and trees which bear red flowers and whose seeds
are red will perish. The next year i.e. Ananda, will make every
body happy and prosperous. Raksasa as well as Anala is destructive.
However, the former will help the growth of summer crops, and
the latter will lead to the outbreak of fires and epidemics.
[In the second line Bhattotpala reads प्रमादिनं विक्रममप्यतोऽन्यत्. In
the fifth line also fama: for तत्परः’, As Vikrama has already been
used for the 4th year of the 3rd lustrum, I think the author
could not have used it again. The metre of 46 is ्रौपच्छन्दसिक, and
that of 47 रथोद्धता.]
एकादशे पिद्धूनकालयुक््तसिद्धारथरोद्राः खलु gatas ।
श्राद्य तु वृष्टिमहती सचौरा इवासो हन् कन्पयुतरच कासः ॥ ४८ ॥।
यत्कालयुक्तं तदनेकदोषं सिद्धार्थसंज्ञे बहवो गुरणाइच ।
रौद्रोऽतिरोद्रः क्षयकृत्प्रदिष्टो यो दुर्मतिमंध्यमवृ्टिकृत्सः ॥ ४६ U
In the llth yuga of Jupiter owned by Asvins the five years
are called in order Pingala, Kalayukta, Siddhartha, Raudra and
Durmati. In the first year viz. Pingala, there will be excessive rains
causing havoc to the people, increase of robbers and severe asthmatic complaints that shake the jaws. The second year willbea
source of troubles. The third will be highly advantageous and
auspicious. The year Raudra will be dreadful causing much
suffering and destruction. In the year Durmati the rainfall will
be moderate.
[These verses and the following two are in the उपजाति metre.]
भाग्ये युगे दुन्ुभिसञ्ज्ञमाद्यं सस्यस्य वृद्धि महतीं करोति।
उद्गारिसञ्ज्ञं तदनु क्षयाय नरेशवराणां विषमा च वृष्टिः ú ५० ॥
रक्ताक्षमब्दं कथितं तृतीयं यस्मिन्भयं दंष्ट्रकृतं गदावच ।
कोधं बहुक्रोधकरं aga राष्ट्राणि शून्यीकुरुते विरोधः ॥ ५१ u
In the last lustrum owned by Bhaga (Sun) the years are named
Dundubhi, Udgarin (or Rudhirodgarin), Raktaksa, Krodha and
(Ksaya). The first year is helpful to the growth of abundant
crops, the second year brings about the ruin of kings and has
uneven and irregular rains (or fierce at times). In the third year

96 Brhat Samhita
there will be trouble from tusked animals like boars, and diseases.
The fourth year will engender excessive wrath (hatred) and will
denude kingdoms through hostilities.
[In the secord line instead of उद्गारि some read g#r<. However,
the popular name of the year is Rudhirodgarin, one which vomits
blood.]
क्षयसिति युगस्यान्त्यस्यान्त्यं बहुक्षयकारकं
जनयति भयं तद्विप्राणां कृषीवलवृद्धिदभृ i
उपचयकरं विट्शुद्राणां परस्वहृतां तथा
कथितमखिलं षष्ट्यब्दे यत्तदत्र समासतः ॥५२॥
The last or the fifth year, known as ksaya, of the last lustrum
will create all kinds of loss and destruction, and panic among Brahmins. But the agriculturists will flourish. The Vai$yas and Südras
also will prosper; so will robbers and dacoits. Thus have I succinctly described all things pertaining to the cycle of 60 years of
Jupiter.
[The author has detached the last year from verse 51 in order
to effect a fine finale to the topic of cyclic years. He has compressed in three verses in his समाससंहिता the material he has developed
here in 26 verses :
ऐन्द्रे तृतीयमशुभं द्वितीयवर्जानि पञ्चमे तु युगे ।
पित्र्ये युगे तृतीयं चतुर्थमपि पापदं वषं म् ॥
aaa तृतीयमशुभं शुभदान्युक्तानि चावशेषाणि |
सोम्ये द्वितीयवर्ष शुभावहं यत्तृतीयं तु ।
प्रथितं शुभमेन्द्राग्नौ तृतीयवर्ष तथार्विदैवत्ये i
भाग्ये प्रथमं वर्ष षष्टचन्दस्यंष संक्षेपः I
The metre is हरिणी.]
भ्रकलुषांशुजटिल: प् थुर्म तिः कुमुदकुन्दकुसुमस्कटिकाभः ।
ग्रहहतो न यदि सत्पथवर्ती हितकरोऽमरगुरुमंनुजानाम् ॥ ५३ ॥
Should Jupiter be filled with bright rays all round, be possessed
of a large form, white like the lotus, the Kunda jasmine and crystal,
be not overpowered by any other planet, and be moving along the
right path i.e. to the north of planets and asterisms, he would prove
beneficial to the entire mankind.
[Here again the author speaks of Jupiter, the astronomical
Jupiter, as having white colour like the lotus, Kunda and crystal.
The metre is an extension: of स्वागता with two short syllables.
instead of a long one in the beginning. ] |

Course of Venus
नागगजरावतवृषभगोजरदृगवमृगाजदहनाख्या: |
श्रश्विन्याद्या: कश्चित्त्रिभाः क्रमाद्वीययः कथिताः ॥ १ ॥
Nine avenues named (1) Naga (Serpent), (2) Gaja (Elephant),
(3) Airavata (Indra’s elephant), (4) Vrsabha (Bull), (5) Go (cow),
(6) Jaradgava, (7) Mrga (Deer), (8) Aja (Goat), and Dahana
(Fire) composed of three stars each in regular order beginning
with A$vini, have been allotted to Venus by some (i.e. Devala and
others.)
[According to Devala and Ka$yapa the three stars, A$vini,
Bharani and Krttika, constitute the Nagavith; of Venus. In the
same manner other Avenues are also formed by other triads of stars
in regular order. Our author's own view is given in the 2nd.
verse.
Cf. Devala.
ग्रर्विन्यादित्रिभाः सर्वा नागाद्या दहनान्तिकाः ।
वीथयो भृगुपुत्रस्य नव प्रोक्ताः पुरातनः ॥
also Kasyapa :
त्रिष्वर्विन्यादिषु यदा चरति भृगुनन्दनः |
नागवीयीति सा ज्ञेया प्रथमान्या निबोधत ॥
रोहिण्यादिगजा ज्ञेयाऽदित्याद्यँ रावती स्मृता i
मघाद्या वृषभा ज्ञेया हस्ताद्या गौः प्रकीतिता ॥
जारदूगवी विशाखाद्या मुलाद्या मृगवीथिका |
अजवीथी विष्णुभाद्याऽजाद्या तु दहना स्मृता ॥]
नागा तु पवनयाम्यानलानि पेतामहात् त्रिभास्तिस्रः à
गोवोथ्यामदिविन्यः पौष्णं द्वे चापि भाद्रपदे ॥२॥
However in my view the Naga avenue of Venus is constituted
by the three asterisms Svat, Bharani and Krttika; and the Gaja,
Airavata and Vrsabha by the three succeeding triads of stars, viz. (1)
Rohini, Mrgasiras, and Ardra, (2) Punarvasu, Pusya and Aslesa,

98 Brhat Samhita
(3) Magha, Pürvaphalguni and Uttaraphalguni. And the Govithi
is composed of the four asterisms A$vini, Revati, Purvabhadra and
Uttarabhadra.
जारदगव्यां श्रवणात्त्रिभं मृगाख्या त्रिभं च मंत्राद्यम् ।
हस्तविश्ञाखात्वाष्ट्रण्यजेत्यषाढाद्वयं दहना ॥ ३ u
Similarly the jaradgava avenue is composed of three stars
Sravana, Dhanistha and Satabhisaj; the Mrga avenue of Anuradha,
Jyestha and Mila, the Ajavithi of Hasta, Citra and Visakha; and
the Dahana avenue of the two stars Parvasadha and Uttarasadha.
[Our author and the ancients are of the same view only in
respect of the three Vithis, viz. Gaja, Airavata and Vrsabha.]
तिस्रस्तित्रस्तासां करमादुदङ्सध्ययास्यसागस्थाः |
तासामप्युत्तरमध्यदक्षिणेन स्थितेकका ॥ ४ ॥
Of these nine avenues the first three viz. Naga, Gaja and
Airavata, are in the North; the next three viz. Vrsabha, Go and jaradgava, in the Middle; and the last three viz. Mrga, Aja and
Dahana, inthe South. In each triad of avenues too the three individual
ones are further subdivided into Northern, Middle and Southern
respectively.
[In the matter of allotment of stars to the nine Vithis there
are three distinct schools viz. (1) Devala and others, (2) Garga
and Varahamihira, and (3) Pardgara. Between the first school and
the second there is complete agreement in respect of only the
Airavata and Vrsabha Vithis. There is partial agreement between
the two in respect of Naga (only Bharani and Krttika) and of Mrga
(only Mila). Between the Second and third Schools there is full -
agreement in respect of Naga, Gaja, Go and faradgava, and partial
agreement in respect of Azravata (with Magha added) Vrsabha
(with Magha removed), Aja (Visakha is the only common feature)
and Dahana (the two Asadhas are common) Mrga is completely
different in the two Schools. The following chart shows the Vithis
and their constituent asterism according to the three schools. The
stars are numbered form Asvini.

Course of Venus IX
T
Serial Names of I School II School | III School
No. Vithis Devala & Varaha & | Paragara.
others Garga
1 Naga Stars Stars Stars.
Gf. mi :—
कृत्तिका भरणी स्वाती नागवीथी प्रकोतिता |
रोहिण्याद्यास्त्रिभास्तिस्रो गजेरावतवार्षभाः ॥
अहिर्बुध्न्याश्विपौष्णं च गोवीथीति प्रकोतिता |
श्रवणात्रितयं ज्ञेया वीथी जारद्गवीति सा ॥
मैत्रत्रिभा मृगाख्या स्याद्धस्तचित्राविशाखिका à
अजवीथी तु दहनाषाढायुग्ममिति स्मृता ॥
पूर्वोत्तरा नागवीथी गजवीथी तदुत्तरा |
ऐरावती ततो याम्या एतास्तूत्तरतः स्मृताः ॥
आषंभी तु चतुर्थी स्यादूगोवीथी पञ्चमी स्मृता।
षष्ठी जारदूगवी ज्ञेया तिस्तस्ता मध्यमाश्रिताः ॥

100 Brhat Samhita
सप्तमी मृगवीथी स्यादजवीथी तथाष्टमी i
दहना नवमी ज्ञेया दक्षिणं मार्गमाश्रिता: ॥
also समाससंहिता :—
वीथी नागानाम्नी स्वातिभरणी च कृत्तिका चैव ।
स्वायम्भुवस्त्रिभा: स्युगंजवीथ्येरावती वृषभा |!
एकपंदादिचतुष्कं गोः स्याज्जारदृगवी त्रिभा श्रवणात् |
मत्रातूत्रिभं मृगाऽजा हस्तश्चित्रा विशाखा च ॥
द्वे चाषाढे दहना fore उदग्वीथयः क्रमाच्छुभदाः |
मध्या मध्यास्तिस्रो याम्याः पापा मृगाद्यास्ताः |i]
वीथीमागानपरे कथयन्ति यथास्थिताग्भमागस्य ।
नक्षत्राणां तारा याम्योत्तरमध्यमास्तद्वत् ॥ ५ ॥
Others (like Sage Ka$yapa) declare these three Vithis or
Avenues for the asterisms as well according as they happen to be
to the North, in the Middle or to the South of the ecliptic. Similarly,
Venus too is considered to be in the Northern, Middle or Southern
Avenue, if he moves to the north, in the middle or to the south of an
asterism, as the case may be.
[This is another definition of the Vithis for the stars. A
planet too may be said to be in a particular Avenue, if it occupies
the corresponding position relative to the asterism, according to
the commentator.
Cf. काश्यप :—
नक्षत्राणां त्रयो मार्गा दक्षिणोत्तरमध्यमा: |
उदक्स्थास्तारकाः सौम्यो मध्यमो मध्यमाः स्मृतः di
दक्षिणा दक्षिणो मार्गो नक्षत्रेषु प्रकीतितः |
नक्षत्रात्सौम्यगः सोम्यमार्गस्थो ग्रह उच्यते |
दक्षिणे दक्षिणो मार्गो मध्ये मध्य इति स्मृतः ॥]
उत्तरमार्गो याम्यादि निगदितो मध्यमस्तु भाग्याद्यः ।
दक्षिणमार्गोऽषाढादि कश्चिदेवं कृता मार्गाः ॥ < u
Yet others (like Sage Garga) have stated that the Northern
Avenue is constituted by the nine asterisms beginning from
Bharani, the Middle Avenue by the nine stars beginning from
Purvaphalguni, and the Southern Avenue by the nine stars beginning
from Pirvasadha.
[Cf. Garga :—
ग्रश्वयुग्भोगपयन्ते$पाढादो नवके गरो |
वतमानः सदा क्रूरो दक्षिणे पथि वतंते ।

Call No. rem
शुक्रो निऋ तिपर्यन्ते भाग्यादौ नवके qan
वर्तमानश्च मध्यस्थो मध्यमे पथि वर्तते ॥
भरण्यादौ मघान्ते च तृतीये नवके गणे |
वर्तमानः शुभो ज्ञेय उत्तरे पथि वर्तते n]
Course of Venus IX 1 01
ज्यौतिषमागमशास्त्रं विप्रतिपत्तौ न योग्यमस्माकम् 1
स्वयमेव विकल्पयित्ं किन्तु बहूनां मतं वक्ष्ये non
The science of astrology-cum-astronomy has been founded on
the intuition of ancient Sages. Hence it is not proper on our
part to say which among the divergent views of the Sages are
correct and which not. I have, therefore, only quoted here the
opinions of many wise men.
[We have seen above a vast number of conflicting opinions
regarding the Vithi. Our author must have felt the necessity to
pronounce his judgment on this. But he thought that such a
course would not be justified in a field where there is no scientific
machinery to prove the correctness or otherwise of a statement.
For, all the views quoted above have the scriptural sanctity or
authority.)
उत्तरवीथिषु शुक्रः सुभिक्षशिवकृद्गतोऽस्तमुदयं वा ।
मध्यासु मध्यफलदः कष्टफलो दक्षिणस्थासु ॥ ८ ॥
When Venus rises or sets while travelling along the Northern
Avenues, he will promote prosperity, food crops and all good
things; he will produce modrate results while passing through the
Middle Avenues; and he will bring about disasters while moving in
the Southern Avenues.
[Cf. mi :—
उदयास्तमयं कुर्यान्मागंमुत्तरमाश्रित: ।
सुभिक्षं च सुवृष्टिं च योगक्षेमं विनिदिशेत् ॥
उदयास्तमयं कुर्यान्मध्यमं मार्गमाश्रितः |
मध्यमं चाघंसस्यं च योगक्षेमं विनिदिशेत् odi
उदयास्तमयं कुर्याहृक्षिणां मार्गमाश्रित: ।
धान्यस्य सङ्ग्रहं कृत्वा Harry तिलान्वपेत् ॥
According to Paràsara the effects of the movement of Venus
through the nine Avenues are (1) trouble to those who live by
serpents (snake-charmers), (2) suffering of herds of elephants, (3)
revolt of the army, (4) affliction of the aged, rich, learned, strong
Ber a Ga

102 Brhat Samhita
and crops as well as outbreak of phlegmatic troubles, (5) destruction of crops and owners of cattle, (6) trouble to the learned in the
Sastras, (7) diseases among the deer or quadrupeds, crop-diseases
and ailments of hermits, (8) fine growth of crops, plentiful rainfall and prosperity to religious students, and (9) destruction of
crops, outbreak of fires and diseases caused by the vitiation of bile.]
ग्रत्युत्तोत्तमोनं ससमध्यन्यूनमधमकष्टफलम् |
कष्टतरं सोम्याद्यासु वीथिषु यथाक्रमं TATA ॥ ६ u
The transit of Venus through the nine Avenues divided into
three groups, Northern, Middle and Southern, will produce in
order the following results : In the Naga Avenue the results would
be exceedingly beneficent, in the Gaja, very good, and in the
Airavata slight. Inthe next triad viz. Vrsabha, Go and Jaradgava
the effects would be in order moderate, middling and slightly
harmmful. Lastly in the Mrga, Aja and Dahana they would be
very bad (or untoward), inauspicious, and exceedingly harmful
respectively.
[Next he speaks of six Mandalas or circles of Venus and
their effects.]
भरणीपूर्वं मण्डलमृक्षचतुष्कं सुभिक्षकरमाद्यम् |
वद्भा द्गमहिषवाहह्रिकर्कल द्भ देशेषु भयजननम् ॥ १० ॥
भ्रत्रोदितमारोहेद ग्रहोऽपरो यदि सितं ततो हन्यात् ।
भद्राइवशुरसेनकयो घेयककोटिवर्षन्पान् ॥ ११ ॥
The four stars beginning with Bharani, (i.e. Bharani, Krttika,
Rohini and Mrgaéiras) constitute the first Mandala or circle of
Venus. This will produce good effects in the form of plenty of food.
However, it will create fear or trouble in the countries of Vanga,
Anga, Mahisa, Vahlika and Kalinga. Should another planet pass
over Venus after the latter has risen in this circle, it would kill the
rulers of the tribes viz. Bhadragva, S$ürasena, Yaudheya and
Kotivarsa.
भचतुध्यमार्दराद्यं द्वितीयममिताम्बुसस्यसम्पत्त्य |
विप्राणामशुभकरं विशेषतः: क्र रचेष्टानाम् N १२॥
श्रन्येनात्राक्रान्ते म्लेच्छाटविकश्वजीविगोमन्तानु ।
गोनदंनीचशुद्रान् वे देहांइचानयः स्पुशति ॥ $3 u
The second Mandala consists of the four stars, Ardra, Punarvasu, Pusya and Aslesà. It will promote good rains and luxuriant

Course of Venus IX 103
crops. It will, however, be harmful to the Brahmin class, especially to those that are engaged in cruel deeds. Should Venus be
attacked or blocked in this circle by another planet, Mlecchas,
foresters, those that live by dogs (hunters etc.), cattle-owners, the
people of Gonarda and Videha, Sudras and those that.are engaged
in menial work would be afflicted.
विचरन्मघादिपळ्चकमुदितः सस्यप्रराशकृच्छुक्रः ।
क्षुत्तस्कर भयजननो नोचोन्नतिसङ्करकरश्च ॥ १४ ॥
पित्र्याद्येऽवष्टब्धो हन्त्यन्येनाविकाञ् शबरशाद्रान् ।-
पुण्ड्रा रान्त्यशुलिकवनवासिद्रविडसामुद्रान ॥ १५॥
The third circle consists of the five asterisms, Magha, Parva
and Uttara Phalguni, Hasta and Citra. If Venus traverses this circle
after rising, he will destroy the crops, create the fear of famine
(hunger) and thieves, and revolutionize the social order bringing
about confusion of the classes. should Venus be attacked by another
planet in this circle, he would kill shepherds, Sabaras (a class of
hunters), Sadras, Pundras, people of the western regions, Silikas,
forest dwellers, Dravidas and the coastal people.
स्वात्याद्यं भत्रितयं मण्डलमेतच्चतुर्थमभयकरम् |
ब्रह्मक्षत्रसुभिक्षाभिवृद्धये मित्रभेदाय ú १६॥
भ्रत्राक्रान्ते मृत्यु: किरात भत: पिनष्टि चेक्ष्वाक्न् ।
प्रत्यन्तावन्तिपु लिन्दतड्भरणाज् शुरसेनांशच ॥ १७ ॥
The three stars, Svati, Visakha and Anuradha, constitute the
fourth circle. This produces the sense of security in the minds of
people, promotes the interests of Brahmins and Ksatriyas as well
as excellent growth of crops, but causes estrangement among
friends. Should Venus be assailed in this circle by another planet,
he would kill the chieftain of the Kiratas (hunters), and crush the
Iksvakus, cave-men, people of Avanti, Pulindas, Tanganas and
Sürasenas.
ज्येष्ठाद्यं SAA क्षुत्तस्कररोगदं प्रबाधयते ।
काइमी राइमकमत्स्यान् सचारुदेवी नवन्तींइच ॥ १८॥
प्रत्रा रोहेद् द्रविडाभी राम्बष्ठत्रिगतंसो राष्ट्रान् ।
नाशयति सिन्धुसौवीरकांशच काशीइवरस्य वधः ॥ १६ ॥
The fifth Mandala consists of the five stars, Jyestha, Mula,
Pūrva and Uttara Asadha, and Sravana. This will trouble people
with hunger, thieves and diseases and afflict the people of Kashmir,
TS ese se m coco i

104 Brhat Samhita
Asmaka, Matsya, Avanti and those living on the banks of the
Carudevi. If Venus is overpowered here by another planet, he
will destroy the Dravidas, Abhiras, Ambasthas, Trigartas, Saurastras, people of Sindhu, Sauvirakas and the king of Kasi.
षष्ठं षण्नक्षत्रं शुभमेतन्मण्डलं धनिष्ठाद्यम् ।
भुरिघनगोकुलाकुलमनल्पधान्यं क्वचित्सभयस् ॥ २० N
रत्रा रो हेच्छुलिकगान्धारावन्तयः प्रपीड्यन्ते ।
वदेहवधः प्रत्यन्तयवनशकदासपरिवृद्धिः ॥ २१ ॥
The sixth Mangala consists of the six stars, Dhanistha,
Satabhi£aj, Pūrva and Uttara Bhadrapada, Revati, and Aévini.
It is auspicious and productive of abundant wealth, cattle-wealth
and bumper crops, but in some places there will be fear too. If
Venus is attacked here by another planet, the Sülikas and the
people of Gandhara and Avanti will be tormented; and people of
Videha will be killed; but cave-men, Yavanas’ Sakas and slaves
will prosper.
[The Sulikas are assigned to the north-west and south-east
divisions (XIV) 23,8). They are also called Culikas in the Purànas.
The Matsya-puràna refers to their country as being watered by the
river Caksu (Oxus). Scholars identify them with the Sogdians living
to the north of the Oxus, with the Calukyas of the Deccan etc.
They were also identified with the Sülikas of Orissa. Gandhara
extended from the Kabul valley to Taksasila and comprised the
Rawalpindi and Peshawar districts. The town Puskalavati is mentioned by our author.
The Yavanas were the Greek settlers found in the south-west
divison near Nasik.
The Videha country comprised the country from Gorakhpur
en the Rapti to Darbhanga, with Kosala on the west and Anga on
the east.
The Sakas are mentiond in many inscriptions beginning with
that of Rudradaman. They are assigned to the western division.
The Agni-purana (LV. 16) assigns them to the south-west of India.
They were the descendants of the Scythians who adopted Indian
titles such as Ksatrapa and Mahaksatrapa.]
श्रपरस्यां स्वात्याद्यं ज्येष्ठाद्यं चापि मण्डलं शुभदम् |
पित्र्याद्यं पूर्वस्यां शेषारिण यथोक्तफलदानि ॥ २२॥
If Venus rising in the fourth or fifth Mandala happens to be
in the western horizon, the results will all be auspicious, and they

Course of Venus IX 105
will be beneficial in the third Mandala, provided he rises in the
east. The effects of his transit in other Mandalas will be as stated
already.
[According to Parasara the six Mandalas are called (1) Adya,
(2) Rohita, (3) Daruna, (4) Virocana, (5) Urdhvadanda, and
(6) Tiksna. Unlike Varahamihira’s, Parasara’s third and fourth
Mandalas contain four stars each. The last two, it is said, contain
five stars each. Then, nobody knows what has happened to the star
Asvini. This sage says that the first four Mandalas are said to be
Vata (wind) and the last one, Tiksna, Vyalamarga the Serpent Route.
Urdhvadanda minus Sravana is known as Vaisvanara or Fire. So
the opinion of Parāśara differs much from Varahamihira’s.
Cf. the समाससंहिता--
भरणीरोद्रमघानिलशक्रधनिष्ठादिसम्प्रवृत्तषु ।
चारोदयः शुभो मण्डलेषु हित्वेन्द्रथपित्र्याय u]
हष्टोऽनस्तमितेऽकं भयकृत् क्षुद्रोगकृत्समस्तमहः ।
श्रद्धे दिवसे च Aga पबलपुरभेदकृच्छुक्रः ॥ २३ U
If Venus becomes visible before the Sun sets, he will create
panic; if he is seen throughout the day, famine and diseases will
break out; andif seen at midday along with the Moon, there will
be discord between the king, his army and the population.
[Cf. पराशर—
We: सर्वं यदा शुक्रो AIST महाग्रहः |
तदा त्वागन्लुभिरग्रामा बाध्यन्ते नगराणि च ॥
The last quarter of the text may also be interpreted as—‘‘The
king's army and towns will be vanquished.’’]
भिन्दन्गतोऽनलक्षं कूलातिक्रान्तवारिवाहाभिः।
श्रव्यक्ततुङ्गनिम्ना समा सरिद्धूर्भवति धात्री ॥ २४ ॥
Should Venus pass cutting the star Krttika, the entire earth
will be submerged by rivers carrying waters that overflow the banks
and conceal all elevations and depressions on the earth. °
प्राजापत्ये शकटे भिन्ने कृत्वेव पातकं वसुधा ।
केशास्थिशकलशबला कापालमिव व्रतं धत्ते ॥ WU
When the wain of Rohini is cut by Venus, the earth would
be strewn with the hair and pieces of bones (of the dead), and

106 Brhat Samhité
appear as though she were observing the Kapala vow to atone for
the heinous sin of Brahmin-murder.
[For the vow of Kapala see मनुस्मृति XI-72. One who commits
the worst crime such as killing a Brahmana should perform the
above vow observing celibacy and penance, covering himself with
garlands of skulls, bones, hair etc. for getting rid of the sin. Here
the poet speaks metaphorically that the Earth too would look like
one observing the vow, since her body would be covered with
hundreds of dead bodies, caused by all kinds of visitations of God.
The wain of Rohini is said to be cut by a planet, when it is
situated in the 17th. degree of Taurus and has a southern latitude
of a little more than two degrees. Cf. ब्रह्मस्फुटसिद्धान्त--
विक्षेपोंऽशद्वितयादधिको वृषभस्य सप्तदशभागे |
यस्य ग्रहस्य याम्यो भिनत्ति शकटं स रोहिण्याः ॥
also भानुभट्ट--
वृषस्यांशे सप्तदशे विक्षेपो यस्य दक्षिणः ।
अंशद्वयाधिको भिन्द्याद्रोहिण्याः शकटं तु सः ॥]
सौम्योपगतो रससस्यसंक्षयायोशनाः समुद्दिष्ट: ।
श्राद्रागतस्तु कोशलकलिङ्गहा सलिलनिकरकरः ॥२६॥
When Venus comes to Mrgasiras, he will destroy all juices or
tastes and crops; and when he visits Ardra, he will ruin the Kosala
and Kalinga countries and produce exceedingly heavy rains.
भ्रश्मकवदर्भारां qaduer सिते महाननयः |
पुष्ये पृष्टा वृष्टिविद्याधररणविमदश्च ॥२७॥
When Venus is situated in the star Punarvasu, the people of
A$maka and Vidarbha countries will be greatly troubled. When
he is in Pusya, there will be good rains and destruction of the
Vidyadharas (the learned ?) in battle.
[Bhattotpala interprets the word Vidyadharanam, as Devayoninam
meaning demigods. However, since the author is explaining
effects of the transit on the denizens of the earth, and not of heaven,
that ben must stand for some class of human beings of learned
men.
ARATY भुजद्धूमदारुणापोडावहश्रवरन् शुक्रः ।
भिन्दन्मघां महामात्रदोषकृद्भुरिवृष्टिकरः ॥२८॥
When Venus stays in the constellation Aslesa, he will cause
acute suffering to the people through snakes. But when he pierces

Course of Venus IX 107
the star Magha, he will harm the commanders of elephant-divisions
or chief ministers, and ensure copious rains.
. मिहामात्य is another reading for agma’. The piercing or occultation of the junction star of Maghi by a planet is defined by
astronomers as follows: “A planet occults the junction star of
Magha (Regulus) when its own rectified latitude, being in the
same direction (north), is more than half the iatitude, and less than
one and a half the latitude of the star." Dr. Kern continues to
say: "From this we may deduce that the author ofthe stanza,
(quoted below), whoever he may have been (probably Brahmagupta), had a still more accurate knowledge ofthe real latitude of
Regulus than the Sürya Siddhanta has, in which the latitude is
stated to be 0.”
Cf. ब्रह्मस्फुटसिद्धान्त--
छादयति योगतारां मानाद्धोनाधिकादुभविक्षेपात् i
स्फुटविक्षेपो यस्याधिकोनको भवति समदिक्स्थ: ॥
विक्षेपेऽन्त्ये सौम्ये तृतीयतारां भिनत्ति पित्र्यस्य |
इन्दुभिनत्ति पुष्यं पौष्णं वारुणमविक्षिप्तः 11]
भाग्ये शबरपुलिन्दप्रध्वंसक रोऽम्बुनिवहमोक्षाय ।
AAW कुरुजाङ्गलपाञचालघ्नः सलिलदायी ॥२६॥
Tenanting Purvaphalguni Venus destroys Sabaras and Pulindas
(two forest tribes), but causes abundant rains. While staying in
Uttaraphalguni he gives good rains but ruins the people of Kuru and
Paficála countries as well as the beings living in the Jangala regions
i.e. where there is very little water.
कौरवचित्रकराणां हस्ते पीडा जलस्य च निरोध: ।
कूपकृदण्डजपीडा चित्रास्थे शोभना वृष्टिः ॥।३०॥
When Venus occupies the star Hasta, the people of the Kuru
country as well as artists i.e. painters, will be in trouble, and there
will be drought. When he occupies the star Citra, there will be
good rains, but birds and labourers engaged in the sinking of wells
will suffer.
स्वातो प्रभुतवृष्टिद्तवरिग्ना विकान्स्पृशत्यनय: |
ऐन्द्राग्नेऽपि सुवृष्टिवशिजां च भयं विजानीयात् ॥३१॥
When Venus passes through Svati, there will be good
rains, but messengers, traders and sailors will be in trouble. In
Vi$akha Venus would cause beneficial rainfall as well as threat to
merchants.

108 Brhat Samhita
सत्रे क्षत्रविरोधो ज्येष्ठायां क्षत्रसुस्यसन्तापः |
सौलिकमिषजां मुले त्रिष्वपि चेतेष्वना वृष्टिः ॥३२॥
When Venusts in Anuradha, there will be hostility among
the Ksatriyas; when he is in Jyestha, leaders of Ksatriyas will be
in jeopardy; and when he is in Mila, druggists (those who deal in
medicinal roots) and physicians will be harmed. In addition, there
will be drought resulting from his transit through all the three
stars (mentioned here).
भ्राप्ये सलिलजपीडा विइवे व्याधयः प्रकुप्यन्ति ।
श्रवरो श्रवणव्याधिः पाखण्डिभयं धनिष्ठासु ॥ 33 ॥
When Venus passes through the star Purvasadha, aquatic,
animals and products will suffer (or people will be troubled by
aquatic animals etc.); when he is in Uttarasadha, diseases will
spread; when he is in Sravana, people will suffer from ear-diseases;
and when he is in Dhanistha, heretics will be in trouble.
शतभिषजि शोण्डिकानामजकभे द्यूतजीविनां पीडाम् ।
कुरुपाञ्चालानामपि करोति wrfenuq सितः सलिलम् n ३४॥
When Venus is in Satabhisaj, distillers of liquor as well as
drunkards will suffer. While passing through Purvabhadrapada he
afflicts gamblers and the people of Kuru and Pāñcāla countries.
However, there will be good rains.
ग्राहिबुंध्त्ये फलसूलतापकृद्यायिनां च रेवत्याम् ।
श्रङ्विन्यां हयपानां याम्ये तु किरातयवनानाम् ॥ ३५॥
While tenanting the star Uttarabhadrapada Venus will
destroy roots and fruits; Revati, travellers and marching troops;
Asvini, keepers of horses; and Bharani, Kiratas (hunters) and
Yavanas.
[See what sage Kasyapa says on this :
भेदयेत्कृत्तिकां शुक्रो बहुतोयं विमुञ्चति ।
रोहिण्यां मरणं घोरं ग्रधाकुलभयाकुलम् |i
मृगे तु सवंसस्यानां क्षयं Haig भृगोः सुतः |
आर्द्रासु च कलिङ्गानां कोशलानां भयावहः ||
पुनवेसौ विदर्भाणां पीडयत्युशनास्तथा |
पुष्ये पुष्टि समायान्ति जनाः सस्यानि वृष्टयः ॥
आइलेषासूशना भेदात्पीडयेद् भुजगैः प्रजाः |
मघाभेदकरः शुक्रो महामात्रांश्च पीडयेत् ॥

Course of Venus IX 109
भाग्ये शबरविध्वंसं agate प्रमुञ्चति ।
आये म्णे तु कुरुक्षेत्र पाञ्चालांहचोपतापयेत् ॥
हस्ते चित्रकराणां तु पीडा वृष्टिक्षयो भवेत् |
gate क्पकृत्पीडां चित्राभेदं यदा ब्रजेत् ॥
स्वातिभेदे सुवृष्टि च वणिग्नाविकभीतिदः à
विशाखायां सुर्वृष्टि च मंत्रे मित्रं विरुष्यति ॥
Ure पौरविरोधः स्यान्मूले तु भिषजां भयम् |
आप्ये वेश्वे व्याधिभयं वेष्णवे कणंवेदना |
धनिष्ठासु कुकमंस्थान्वारुणे शौण्डिकक्षयम् |
प्रोष्ठपादे पूर्वसक्तानहिध्न्ये फलक्षयः di
यायिनां सनृपाणां च पौष्णो ज्ञेयं WS |
Rep हयपीडाकृङ्करण्यां कृषिजीविनाम् 11
According to Paragara Venus being glossy and full of rays
produces rains while tenanting Purva and Uttaraphalguny, Svatt,
Vigakha, the Bhadrapadas, Ardra, Bharani and Pusya. In case
he moves to the north, in the middle or to the south of Rohini, Citra,
Vigakha and Anuradha, he will cause health and happiness, crops
and rainfall to the best advantage, moderate benefit and minimum
advantage respectively of the people. If he moves to the north or
in the middle of Magha and Krttika, he will prove beneficial to
mankind. Similarly his movement in the middle of the Asadhas,
Punarvasu and Rohini will bring about encirlement of cities by
enemies.
In the next verse the author gives the effects of Venus’s
rising and setting in the different lunar days or Tithis :—]
चतुर्दशो saai तथाष्टमीं तामिल्नपक्षस्य तिथि भूगोः सुतः ।
यदा व्रजेद् दर्शनमस्तमेति वा तदा मही वारिमयीव लक्ष्यते ॥३६॥
When Venus rises or sets on the 8th, 14th or 15th lunar
day (new moon) of the dark fortnight, the earth would look as
though it were avast sheet of water i.e. it will be completely
submerged in floods.
[Cf. Kasyapa—
कृष्णपक्षे ह्यमावस्याचतुर्देश्यष्टमीषु च ।
उदयं भार्गवः कुर्यात्तदा वृष्टि प्रमुञ्चति ॥
Sage Paraíara gives some more details regarding the months in
which he rises or sets thus: If his rising or setting takes place in

110 Brhat Samhita
the month of Karttika, there will be no rain at all for 90 days.
If Venus rises (or sets) during the transit of Jupiter through
Krttika, there will be good rain-fall throughout the year. In case |
the luminaries complete their circuit of the ecliptic (?) at the 2
time of Venus's rising or setting, there will be good rains. Should
Venus be tenanting at the time a star or sign that is considered
dry or non-rainy, then too there would be rains; and a rain-produing star or sign, surely there would be no rain.
The metre of this verse and others upto the 42nd. is वंशस्थ.]
JIT गुइचा परप् वंकाष्ठयो: परस्परं सप्तमराशिगो यदा ।
तदा प्रजा रुग्भयशोकपीडिता न वारि पश्यन्ति पुरन्दरोज्कितम् t ३७॥
When Jupiter and Venus are situated in the Western and
Eastern horizons, being at the same time in opposition (i.e. 180°
apart), mankind will be afflicted with diseases, panic and grief and
will have no rain at all.
[In the opinion of Bhattotpala there is no order meant in respect of the quarters occupied by Jupiter and Venus. So either of
them can be in the east or west, but it is essential that they should
be in the 7th house from each other. He quotes पराशर, "ga, TT,
बृहज्जातक etc. He has come to the conclusion that even the Sages are
not unanimous on this subject. Says पराशर-—
उदयास्तमयस्थौ तु यदा शुक्रबृहस्पती |
पूर्वंसन्ध्यागतौ स्यातां जनयेतां तदा भयम् ॥
Here this Sage introduces a new rule i.e. both Jupiter and Venus
being situated in the eastern horizon.
ऋषिपु् speaks differently :
पृष्ठतस्तूशना यत्र पुरस्ताच्च बृहस्पति: |
न च करिचिदूग्रहो मध्ये बुधो वाप्यथ स्यते di
एकमागेसमापन्नौ प्रेक्षमाणौ परस्परम् ।
ते दिशौ पीडिते विन्द्यात् त्रीन्पक्षानभियोजयेत् ॥
Bhattotpala quotes from the work of Bhadrabahu, a Jain monk,
with the words “aat च भद्रबाहौ पठ्यते?’ which indicates a work entitled
Bhadrabahu’. Our commentator must have taken the author’s
name for that of the work as it often happens in the case of authors
of single works e. g. माघ for the शिशुपालवध and भारवि for the किरातार्जनीय.
The following are the verses of the Jain monk : x
प्रत्यूषे प्राक्स्थितः YR: पृष्ठतरच बृहस्पति: |
यदाऽन्योन्यं निरीक्षेते तदा चक्र प्रवतते ॥

Course of Venus IX 111
धर्मार्थकामा लुप्यन्ते प्रस्तावा ATTA SET: |
नृपाणां च समुद्योगो यतः शुक्रस्ततो जयः ॥
ग्रवृष्टिरच भयं रोगो दुर्भिक्षं च तदा भवेत् ।
ग्राढकेन तु धान्यस्य ग्राहकः स्यात्तदा प्रियः 11
यदा तु पृष्ठतः शुक्रः पुरतश्च वृहस्पतिः |
यदा वालोकयेतां तौ तावदेव फलं भवेत् ii
The evil effects of a journey in the direction of Venus are referred
to by Kalidasa in “काम: पुरश्शुक्रमिव प्रयाणे?’ (कुमार ITI. 43.)
Cf. also mi—
ग्रन्योन्यमस्तसंस्थौ तु यदि शुक्रवृहस्पती i
पुर्वेसन्ध्यागतौ घोरं जनयेतां मह्यम् 11]
यदा स्थिता जीवबुधारसूर्यजाः सितस्य सर्वऽग्रपथानुर्वात्तनः i
नुनागविद्याधरसङ्गरास्तदा भवन्ति वाताइच समुच्छितान्तकाः ॥३८॥ .
न मित्रभावे सुहृदो व्यवस्थिताः करियासु सम्यग् न रता द्विजातयः ।
न चाल्पमप्यम्बु ददाति वासवो भिनत्ति वज्त्र शिरांसि भुभृताम् ॥३६॥
When Jupiter, Mercury, Mars and Saturn move in advance
of Venus, there will be wars among men, serpents and Vidyadharas
(a class of demi-gods) and the winds will raze to the ground all
things standing erect, such as trees and mountains. Friends too will
not remain cordial any longer; Brahmins will not be devoted to
their duties; and the God of rain will not give even a drop cf water;
and he will smash the tops of mountains with his thunderbolt.
[In the following four verses the author discusses separately
the effects of the four planets remaining ahead of Venus :]
शनश्चरे म्लेच्छबिडालकुञ्जराः खरा महिष्योइसितधान्यश्ञकराः |
पुलिन्दशुद्राइच सदक्षिणापथाः क्षयं वजन्त्यक्षिमरुदृगदो-डूबः ॥ ४० ॥
Should Saturn be the planet in advance of Venus, barbarians,
cats, elephants, donkeys, she-buffaloes, boars, black grains, Pulindas; Sudras and the people of the Southern country would perish
through eye-disease and ailments caused by the vitiation of wind.
निहन्ति शुक्रः क्षितिजेऽग्रतः प्रजां हुताशशस्त्रक्षुदवृष्टितस्कर: ।
चराचरं व्यक्तमथोत्तरापथं दिशोऽग्निविद्युद्रजसा च पीडयेत् ॥ ४१॥
Should Mars march ahead of Venus, the latter would destroy

112 Brhat Samhita
human lives by means of fire, weapons (wars), hunger (famine),
drought and robbers. He would also destroy completely all movable and immovable objects as well as the Northern-country. He
would afflict the quarters with fire, lightning and dust.
बृहस्पतौ हन्ति पुरःस्थिते सितः सितं समस्तं द्विजगोसुरालयानु ।
fasi च पूर्वा करकासुजोऽस्बुदा गले गदा झुरि भवेच्च TTS ॥ ४२ N
When Jupiter is ahead of Venus, the latter will destroy all
white objects, the abodes of Brahmins, cattle and Gods, as well
as the Eastern region. Clouds will pour down plenty of hailstones (instead of rain); and people will be afflicted with throatdiseases, but the autumnal crops will flourish.
[This verse is specially noteworthy for its charming alliteration in both the halves.]
सौम्योऽस्तोदयोः पुरो भृगुसुतस्यावस्थितस्तोयङ्कama पित्तजकामलांशच कुरुते पुष्णाति च ग्रेष्मिकान्।
हन्यात्प्रब्रजिताग्निहोत्रिकभिषग्रङ्गोपजीव्यान् हयान्
amam: सह वाहनेर्नरपतीन् पीतानि पशचाद्िशम् ॥ ४३ u
When Mercury, whether setting or rising, is in advance of
Venus, the latter will produce copious rains and summer crops.
He will also engender diseases caused by the vitiation of bile, and
jaundice. In addition, he will destroy recluses, sacrificers, physicians, horses, actors, wrestlers etc., traders, cattle, vehicles, kings,
all yellow objects and the western country.
[The metre of this verse is mg लविक्रीडित.]
शिखिभयमनलाभे आास्त्रकोपइच रक्ते d
कनकनिकषगौरे व्याधयो देत्यपूज्ये ।
हरितकपिलरूपे इवासकासप्रकोपः
पतित न सलिलं खाद् भस्मरूक्षासिताभे ॥४४॥
If Venus appears with the lustre of fire, there will be danger
from fire; if he is red in colour, there will be war; if he is golden
in hue, diseases will erupt; if he looks green or tawny, people will
suffer greatly from asthma and cough; and if he appears grey like
ashes, coarse or dark in colour, not a drop of water will fall from
the sky.
[The metre is मालिनी.]
द्धिकुमु दशशाडू-का न्ति भृत्स्फुटविकस त्किर रणो बृहत्तनुः i
सुगतिरविकृतो जयान्वितः कृतयुगरूपकरः सिताह्वयः ॥४५॥

Course of Venus IX 113
Should Venus be possessed of the lustre of curds, Kumuda
(a kind of lotus) flower or the Moon, bright and expanding rays,
a full and large orb and good motion i.e. not retrograde, and
situated to the north of a star or planet, and be free from disturbances like portents, and be victorious in a planetary fight, he would
confer the blessings of Krta yuga (golden age) on humanity.
[Cf. पराशर
““हिमकनकरजतशझ्भुस्फटिकवे दु्यंमुकतामध्घृतमण्डकुमुदशशाद्धूच्छवि: स्निग्धदीप्तप्रकान्ति-
प्रकाश: प्रसन्नाचिरवनिपतिहितकरः प्रशान्तवेरो दुभिक्षारोगवृष्टिकरश्च श्यावनीलरूक्षकपिलरक्तध्वस्तदीनाल्पलोष्टसन्निभः शस्त्रबैरव्याधिवर्षान्नक्षयकरः ।” In this passage the expression, “'प्रशान्त...रश्च?’ makes little sense. For, if Venus is triumphant
in a fight, how could he cause famine, freedom from diseases, and
rain ? There might be some mistake in the text.
The metre of the verse is श्रपरवक्त्र, The following verses are also
quoted possibly from Parasara:
“कूटाकारनिभः स्निग्धो मार्गस्थो रजतप्रभः |
भागेवो विस्तृताचिइच प्रजाभावकरः स्मृतः di^
“प्रावृषि शुक्रः प्राच्यां दिशि स्थितोऽत्पं जलं सृजति नित्यम् |
धान्यं च भूरि Hed तृणं च बहु जायते तत्र ॥
अपरां निषेव्यमाणः काष्ठां शुक्रो जलं सृजति भूरि ।
धान्यं कुरुते चाल्पं तृणं न बहु जायते तत्र U^
In the first quotation good effects are mentioned, while in the
second the presence of Venus in the eastern horizon during the
monsoon is said to be not helpful for rainfall but beneficial to crops
and grass.]

शनेइचरचारः ।। Qo N
Saturn’s Transit
श्रवणानिलहस्ताद्रभिरणीभाग्योपगः सुतो$केस्य ।
प्रचुरस लिलोपगूढां करोति धात्रीं यदि स्निग्धः ॥ १ ॥
अहिवरुणपुरन्दरदवतेषु सुक्षेमकुन्न चातिजलम् ।
क्षुच्छस्त्रावृष्टिकरो मूले प्रत्येकमपि वक्ष्ये ॥ Q U
When Saturn tenants the stars Sravana, Svati, Hasta, Ardra,
Bharani and Pirvaphalguni, the earth will be flooded with
water, provided he is glossy. When he passes through the constellations Aslesa, Satabhisaj and Jyestha, he will make people
happy; but will not cause sufficient rain. Passing through Mila
he brings about hunger or famine, clash of arms and drought.
Now I shall give separately the effects of Saturn’s passage through
the different asterisms.
[Cf. mi—
याम्यवायव्यसावित्ररोद्रश्रवणसंस्थितः ।
भवेत् स्निग्धवपु: सौरो भाग्ये चेवातिवर्षदः ।।
सार्पवारुणमाहेन्द्रनक्षत्रेषु च संस्थितः |
स्निग्धः सौरः क्षेमकरो नातिवृष्टि प्रमुञ्चति 11
क्षुच्छस्त्रावृष्टिदो मूले सूर्यपुत्रः समस्थितः ।]
तुरगतुरगोपचारककविवद्यामात्यहार्कंजोऽशिविगतः U
याम्ये नतेकवादकगेयज्ञक्षुद्रनेकृतिकान् ॥ ३ ॥
When Saturn sojourns in the star Agvini, he destroys horses,
horsemen, poets, physicians and ministers; and in the star Bharani
he harms dancers or actors, musicians or singers, those who play
on musical instruments, the wicked and hunters.
बहुलास्थे पीड्यन्ते सोरेऽगन्युपजीविनइचमूपाइच à
रोहिण्यां कोशलमद्रकाशिपाञचालशाकटिकाः ॥४॥
When Saturn passes through the star Krttika, those who work
on fire i.e. goldsmiths, blacksmiths etc., and army commanders
come to grief; and when he passes through Rohini the countries of
Kosala, Madra, Kasi and Paficala as well as cartmen are troubled.

Saturn’s Course X 115
[As Iam writing this, Saturn is tenanting Rohini and is
retrograde. ]
मृगशिरसि वत्सयाजकयजमानार्यजनमध्यदेशाइच ।
रौद्रस्थे पारतरमठास्तेलिकरजकचौराइच uxu
When Saturn sojourns in the star Mrgasirsa, misfortune
befalls the people of the Vatsa country, sacrificers, officiating
priests at sacrifices, noble persons and the middle country; and
when he tenants the asterism Ardra, trouble befalls the people of
the Parata and Ramatha countries, oilmongers, washermen and
dyers as well as thieves.
[Bhattotpala reads Paratara and Matha as two countries. It
should be Parata or Parada and Ramatha. One of the synonyms
of asafoetida is Ràmatha, as it is got from the Ramaiha country,
which according to Ksirasvamin, lies to the north of India. The
Paradas are identified with Pardene of Ptolemy in the centre of
Gedrosia (Baluchistan).! S. Levi's identification of the Ramathas
with the country lying between Ghazni and Wakhan seems to be
correct.]
श्रादित्ये पाङचन दप्रत्यन्त सु राष्ट्र सिन्धुसौवीरा: à
पुष्ये घाण्टिकघौषिकयवन वरिक्कितवकुसुसानि ।॥। ६॥
When Saturn passes through the star Punarvasu, the people
of the Punjab, Saurastra, Sind and Sauvira as well as cave-dwellers
are harmed; and when he sojourns in the star Pusya, persons engaged in ringing bells, those who make loud announcements (or those
who live in hamlets), Yavanas, Kiratas (traders?), gamblers and
flowers are destroyed.
[Lhe commentator construes Vanik as kiratas. Sometimes
Sindhu and Sauvira are mentioned as one region. It lies between
the Jhelum and the Indus. Here Utpala takes them as different
names. However, according to Alberuni, Sauvira stands for Multan
and Jahravar. Surastra corresponds to the Kathiawad peninsula.
The word Surat is the corruption af Suràástra. Pratyanta is a
bordering country occupied by Mlecchas.]
सार्पं जलरुहसर्पाः पित्र्ये बाह्लीकचीनगान्धा राः à
शूलिकपारतवश्या: कोष्ठागाराणि वणिजइच non
When Saturn sojourns in the asterism Aslesa, aquatic objects
or animals, as well as snakes are destroyed; when he tenants the
l. LA.LB. pp. 93-95.

116 Brhat Samhita
star Magha, the Bahlikas, Cinas, Gandharas, Sulikas, Paratas,
traders (or Vaisyas), godowns and Kiratas come to grief.
[Bahlika is the modern Bactria or Balkh in the north of
Afghanistan. Gandhara country extended from the Kabul valley
to Taksasila. Sulikas, otherwise known as Cūlikas, were the people
of the north-western part of India. According to the Matsyapurana!
the country of the Sulikas is watered by the river Caksu (Oxus).
Since the author uses both ‘Vaisya’ and ‘Vanijah’, they cannot be
synonyms. The word ‘Vaisya’, therefore, means a tribe of nonAryan Origin. (See XIV-21 Infra). Since the commentator interprets the word ‘Vanij’ as Kirata a forest tribe—originally the nasal
might have been of the dental class. The root ‘वनु’ means to
‘destroy’ according to the तत्वबोधिनी. Cf also गर्ग—
भुजज्भुकच्छपग्राहतागमत्स्यसरीसपान् ।
हन्यादकसुतस्तिष्ठन्नक्षत्रे सपंदेवते i]
भाग्ये रसविक्रयिणः पण्पस्त्रीकन्यकामहा राष्ट्रा: ।
sided नृपगुडलवराभिक्षुकास्बूनि तक्षशिला usu
If Saturn is situated in the star Purvaphalguni, dealers in
juices or articles having the six kinds of tastes, courtesans, virgins
and the people of Maharastra will suffer; and ifhe stays in the
star Uttaraphalguni, trouble will befall kings, jaggery, salt, hermits
(or mendicants), water and the town of Taksasila.
[The city of Taksasila (Taxila) was an important centre of
learning in ancient India. At present the site of the city consists of
some villages to the north-west of Rawalpindi.]
हस्ते नापितचाक्रिकचो रभिषक्सुचिका द्विपग्राहाः |
बन्धक्यः MATH मालाकाराइच TSA PA NEN
When Saturn stays in the star Hasta, barbers, potters, oilmanufacturers etc., thieves, physicians, tailors (needle-workers),
elephant-catchers (or elephants and crocodiles), harlots, the people
of the Kosala country and garland-makers (florists) come to harm.
चित्रास्थे प्रमदाजनलेखकचित्रज्ञचित्रमाण्डानि ।
स्वातौ मागधचरदूतसुतपोतप्लवन टाद्याः toll
When Saturn sojourns in the asterism Citra, trouble befalls
women, writers, painters and painted vessels. When he is in Svati,
rhapsodists (or bards or the people of Magadha), spies, couriers,
charioteers or story-tellers, sailors, actors, musicians etc. are
affected.

Saturn’s Course X 117
ऐन्द्राग्नाख्ये त्रगतंचीनकौलूतकुडकुम लाक्षा ।
amtaa माञ्जिष्ठं कौसुम्भं च क्षयं याति ॥११॥
When Saturn stays in the star Vigakha, the people of Trigarta (i.e. Jalandhara), Cina, Kulita (Kullu in the upper valley of
the Beas), saffron, lac, crops, madder and safflower are destroyed.
मंत्र कुलूतत ङ्गणखसकाइमीराः समन्त्रिचक्तचरा: |
उपतापं यान्ति च घाण्टिका विभेदश्च मित्राणाम् ॥१२॥
When Saturn passes through the star Anuradha, the people
of Kuluta, the Tanganas, the Khasas, the Kashmirians, ministers,
those that work with wheels such as potters, oil-makers etc., and
those that beat gongs or bell-makers are afflicted; and friends get
estranged.
[The Tanganas were an aboriginal tribe living in the northeastern region of India.
Bhattotpala says thatthe Khasas are mountain-dwellers. Their
country lay on the south and west of Kashmir. Re. मित्रभेद see
IX 16 supra.]
ज्येष्ठासु नृपपुरोहितन्पसत्कृतशुरगर्कुलश्रेण्यः |
सूले तु काशिकोशलपाञ्चालफलोषधीयोधाः ॥ १३॥
When-Saturn tenants the asterism Jyestha, trouble befalls
kings, their preceptors, those that receive royal patronage or honour,
war veterans (i.e. great heroes), groups or seminaries, elite families
and trade guilds; and when he stays in Mila, the people of Kasi,
Kosala and Paricala, fruits, herbs and warriors come to grief.
[The star Jyestha is presided over by Indra, leader of Gods.
Hence if this star is tenanted by the malefic planet, Saturn, all
those who are at the top are adversely affected. Originally the
country of Paficala consisted of two parts, the Northern and
Southern, with the Ganges as the dividing line and with Ahicchatra
and Kampilya as their respective capitals.]
श्राप्येषड्भवद्धकोशलगिरिक्जा मगधपुण्डमिथिलाइच à
उपतापं यान्ति जना वसन्ति ये ताम्रलिप्त्यां च ॥१४॥
When Saturn occupies the star Purvasadha, the people of
Anga, Vanga, Kosala, Girivraja, Magadha, Pundra, the city of
Mithila and the town of Tamralipti get troubles.
[Girivraja must be the capital of Kekaya.. Tamralipti is the
same as Tamluk in the Midnapur district of Bengal.]

118 Brhat Samhita
विश्व इवरे$कंपुत्रश्चरतु दशार्णान्निहन्ति यवनांश्च ।
उज्जयिनीं sx पारियात्रिकान् कुन्तिभोजांदच uuu
When Saturn moves through the star Uttarasadha, he des-
` troys the people of the Dasarna, the Yavanas, Ujjayini,. the Sabaras,
those who live on the Pariyatra mountain, and the Kuntibhojas.
[Dasárna was a famous country in the ancient times. Katyayana speaks of that region in his Varttika *Pravatsara..." Kalidasa
celebrates it in his Meghadüta in ““कतिपयदिनस्थायिहंसा दशार्णाः”? It lies to
the east of Vidita on the bank ofthe river Dhasan. The Kuntibhojas were a peopleand their country too was called after them.
The Pariyatra mountain forms the western part of the Vindhya
range.]
श्रवणे राजाधिकृतान् विप्राग्रयभिषक्पुरोहितकलिङ्भात् ।
वसुभे मगधेशजयो वृद्धिशच धनेष्वधिकृतानाम् ॥१६॥
Saturn, tenanting the asterism Sravana, destroys king's officers, eminent Brahmins, physicians, priests and the people of
Kalinga; and while dwelling in the star Dhanistha, he causes the
victory of the king of Magadha and the prosperity of treasurers,
bankers and the like.
साजे शतभिषजि भिषक्कविश्ौण्डिकपण्यनी तिवृत्तीनाम ।
ग्राहिबृंध्न्ये नद्यो यानकराः स्त्रीहिरण्यं च ॥१७॥
When Saturn occupies the stars Satabhisaj and Purvabhadrapada, physicians, poets, drunkards, traders and politicians are
afflicted; and when he stays in Uttarabhadrapada, rivers, those
who dwell on river-banks, carriage-makers, carpenters etc., women
and gold are destroyed.
रेवत्यां राजभृताः कोञ्चद्वोपाश्चिताः शरत्सस्यम् ।
शब राइच निपीड्यन्ते यवनाइच शनइचरे चरति ॥१८॥
When Saturn moves in Revati, king’s proteges, inhabitants
of the Krauiica Dvipa, autumnal crops, the Sabaras and Yavanas
come to have difficult times.
[The commentator quotes here an extensive prose passage of
Parasara describing the effects of Saturn’s stay in the different
asterisms. I shall give only the differences, if any, in the approaches of our author and Sage Paratara. The former starts with
Agvini, while the sage with Krttika. According to the Sage Krttaka
holding Saturn would afflict among others the Surasenas, women
and brewers. In Rohini he troubles the people of Anga and

Saturn’s Course X 119
maidens as well. In Punarvasu he afflicts widows in addition. In
Pusya he troubles those who are in charge of weights and measures,
messengers and sea-faring people also. In Magha he harms in
addition oilmen, physicians (Vaidyas instead of Vai$yas given
by Varahamihira), the Daradas and artisans. In Uttaraphalguni
the queen, her children, sesamum, and the people of Kürcaghara
and Darga are also affected. Under Hasta washermen also are
mentioned. Under Vifakha yellow flowers as well as war-mongers
too are affected. Under Sravana Agnidesa also is affected. In
Dhanistha he afflicts lords of wealth, Our author gives only good
effects under this star.
In Satabhisaj those who live by harlots, robbers and heretics
are also afflicted, but not poets and politicians. In Pirvaprosthapada
the people of Dravida, Karnata, Cola, Pandya and Simhala countries
as well as the residents of Mahendranagara are afflicted. In Uttarabhadrapada pulses and those who are in charge of rivers are harmed.
Towards the end of the chapter he changes the metre and
the following three verses are in three different metres. In the
next verse the author discusses the effects of the mutual positions
of Jupiter and Saturn.]
यदा विशाखासु महेन्द्रमन्त्री qasa भानोदंहनक्षयातः ।
तदा प्रजानामनयोऽतिघोरः पुरप्रभेदो गतयो भ॑मेकम् uu
When Jupiter tenants the star Visakha and Saturn Krttika,
there will be dreadful unrest and violence among the subjects; and
when these two planets occupy one and the same constellation, the
capital will be stormed.
[Cf. पराशर---
कृत्तिकासु शनेशचारी विशाखासु बृहस्पतिः |
तिष्ठद्यदा तदा घोरः प्रजाना7नयो भवेत् ॥
एक नक्षत्रमासाद्य इश्यते युगपद्यदि |
अन्योन्यभेदं जानीयात्तदा पुरनिवासिनाम् ॥
Similarly the conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter (which is called
गृर्चण्डालयोग in astrology) in the dual Rais is considered harmful.
See what देवल says:
मीने धनुषि कन्यायां मिथुने सगुरुः शनिः ।
तिष्ठेद्यदा तदा घोरः प्रजानामनयो भवेत् ॥
The metre of the verse is उपेन्द्रवज््ा.]

120 Brhat Samhita
अण्डजहा रविजो यदि चित्रः क्षुद्धयकृद्यदि पीतसयूखः |
शस्त्रभयाय च रकतसवणों भस्मनिभो बहुवेरकरश्च ॥२०॥
If Saturn should appear with many colours, he would destroy
birds (or fishes); if he be possessed of yellowish rays, he would
cause the threat of famine (or famine and fear); if he be blood-red,
there would be war; and if he be ash-coloured (i.e. grey), allthe
subjects would rise in revolt in a dangerous way.
[Cf. पराशर
नीलपीतः क्षुधे । रक्तभस्मचित्रवर्णः शस्त्रवेरकरोऽण्डजाभिहन्ता | यद्वर्णस्तदृणंविनाशी भवति |
The metre is दोधक.]
वेदू्यकान्तिविमलः शुभ कृत्प्रजानां
बाणातसीकुसुसवर्णेनिभशच शस्तः ।
यं चापि वर्णमुपगच्छति तत्सवर्णान्
सूर्यात्मजः क्षपयतीति मुनिप्रवादः ॥२१॥
Saturn becomes auspicious and beneficial to people, if he is
possessed of the bright lustre of Vaidurya gem (Lapis lazuli or
beryl); sois he if he resembles in colour either the Bana flower
(which is jet black) or the Atasi flower (which is deep blue).
Whatever colour—white, red, yellow or black—he attains, he will
destroy the corresponding class of people, in the opinion of the
Sages such as Garga.
[The colours assigned to the four classes, Brahmanas, Ksatriyas, Vai$yas and Sudras, are respectively white, red, yellow and
black. Cf. mi—
भवत्यर्कात्मजे रूक्षे श््यावपीतारुराप्रभे |
तदात्मकानां भावानां क्षृच्छस्त्राग्निकृतं WU ॥
and पराशर
पाण्डुः स्निग्धोऽमलः श्यामो विस्तुताचि: शनैश्चरः |
मार्गस्थरच प्रसव्यरच नक्षत्राद्धित इष्यते ॥
The metre of the verse is वसन्ततिलका.]

Chapter XI— On. Cométs
गार्गीयं शिखिचारं पाराशरमसितदेवलकृतं च ।
श्रन्यांशच बहून्हष्ट्वा क्रितेऽयमनाकुलश्चारः ॥ १॥
I am now explaining in a perspicuous manner the movements
of comets, after seeing the works of the Sages Garga and Parigara
and of the masters Asita, Devala and a host of others, bearing on
this subject.
[Though the achievements of the ancient Sages in respect of
astronomical observations may not be quite up-to-date from the
point of modern science, yet they must be adjudged as highly
satisfactory and analytical, considering the time and facilities under
which the ancients had to labour. They must have observed the
comets appearing at different times and parts of the sky and their
effects, and come to certain conclusions in a scientific manner.
We have to admire this scientific attitude of these people. While
discussing the phenomena called comets Al-Beruni says that the
theories and methods of the Hindus are very lengthy and very
subtle. In his opinion these comets do not seem to have much astronomical significance, inasmuch as he treats of this subject as an
astrological matter. Chidambara Iyer quotes some scientific
opinion in his translation of this work: “What then is a comet
according to the latest scientific researches ? The spectroscope has
pretty well solved the query. It consists, first, of a more or less solid
nucleus of fire, blazing and glowing; second, of vast masses of
incandescent gas, constituting the luminous head; third, solid
materials, constituting the tail, which are ponderable, which reflect
the Sun’s light and are carried along by the influence of the nucleus;
fourth, an immense prolongation of the tail in the nature of attenuated volumes of gas. The solid materials of a comet, it is believed,
consist of stones and sand, particles ground by ceaseless attrition.
The proof of this is the concession of most astronomers that

199 Brhat Samhita
meteoric showers are shreds and patches of cometic matter, dropped
from the tail, and .these meteors are stones. The genesis of comets
is found to be in the explosicn of planetary bcdies, a theory not
without good scientific authority.
Arage estimates that there are 17,000,000 of these fiery wanderers within the orbit of Neptune, and Lambert regards 500,000,000
as a moderate estimate for those in the solar system. All the
astronomers agree that they are scattered through space as profusely as the fish in the seas. The Orbit of the Earth is overwhelmed in a fine network of cometary orbits, and our globe is like a
lost child in a forest full of wild beasts."
**A comet is a cloud of meteors surrounded (at times) by a gaseous envelope moving around the sun," wrote German astronomer
Nicholaus Richter in 1868. No longer is that true, says Thomas
O’Toole (Sunday St. 24-12-72). Astroncmers once thought there
were fewer than 500 observable cometsin the Solar System. Telescopic observation alone has doubled the number of observable
comets, and some scientists now believe there are millions of comets
wandering about the Solar System, most of them invisible to man
because of their distance from the sun. **Every once in a while one
gets perturbed in toward the sun by a stellar or planetary disturbance", explains Maurice Dubin of the U.S. National Aeronautics
and Space Administration. ‘“This is the only time we see any of
these comets.” They are the largest, perhaps most puzzling bodies
in the Solar System.
The comet Encke was found surrounded by a cloud of hydrogen gas six million miles across. The comet Bennet had a
hydrogen envelope which was 15 times the size of the sun. Comets
were long felt to be mixtures of ice and dust.]
दर्शनमस्तमयो वा न गणितविधिनास्य शक्यते ज्ञातुम् ।
दिव्यान्तरिक्षभौमास्त्रिविधाः स्युः केतवो यस्मात् uqu
It is not possible to determine by calculation the rising or
setting of the comets, since there are three categories of comets as
Celestial, Atmospheric and Terrestrial.
[As the comets are strange phenomena in the nature of portents, they cannot have any fixed timings of rising and setting.
For, a portent isa sudden occurrence that augurs well or ill; and
if itcan be ascertained by mathematical calculations, it ceases
to be an augury or portent.
In the next verse the author gives a method for detecting
the Ketu.]
्रहुताेऽनलरूपं र्यास्मस्तत्केतुरूपमेवोक्तम् ।
खद्योतपिशाचालयमणिरत्तादीनु परित्यज्य ॥३॥

On Comets XI 123
In places where, despite the absence of fire, there is still the
appearance of fire, Ketu's presence is recognized, save for the
presence of glow-worms, phosphoric lights on graves, gems, crystals,
marble pieces and the like.
[पिशाचालय is construed as यक्षस्थानम् by Utpala.]
ध्वजशस्त्रमवनतरुतुरगकुऊ्जराद्यष्वथान्तरिक्षास्ते ।
दिव्या नक्षत्रस्था भौमाः स्युरतो$न्यया शिखिनः nxn
The Atmospheric Ketus are those that are sighted on flagstaffs,
weapons, buildings, trees, horses, elephants and-such other quadrupeds. The Celestial ones are seen amidst the constellations, and the
Terrestrial ones are those that do not come under either of the two
categories.
शतमेकाधिकमेके सहस्रमपरे वदन्ति केतूनाम् ।
बहुरूपमेकमेव प्राह मुनिर्नारदः केतुम् ॥५॥
Some Sages like Parasara speak of 101 Ketus, while others
such as Garga of 1000 Ketus. However, Sage Narada declares that
there is only one Ketu which appears in many forms and places.
[According to पराशर there are 101 Ketus, of which 16 were
born of the breath of Death, 12 of the Sun, 10 of Rudra’s wrath at
the destruction of Daksa’s sacrifice, 7 of Pitamaha (creator), 15
are the sons of Sage Uddilaka, 17 were born of the foreheads of
Sages Marici and Kasyapa, 5 of Prajapati's laughter, 3 of fire, 1 of
smoke, 14 were born along with the Moon when the ocean was
churned for nectar, and lastly one was born of Brahman’s anger.
. See what Ti says:
ग्रतीतादयचारारामद्युभानां च दशंने |
ग्रागन्तूनां सहस्र स्थाद् ग्रहाणां तन्निबोध मे ॥
Cf. नारद also:
दिव्यान्तरिक्षगो भौम एकः केतुः प्रकीतितः ।
शुभाशुभफलं लोके ददात्यस्तमयोदयंः ॥
Next the author gives his own opinion:]
यद्येको यदि बह्वः किमनेन फलं तु सर्वथा वाच्यम् ।
उदयास्तमयः TATA: स्पशेराधूमनेवंणेः ॥६॥
What difference does it make whether there is a single Ketu
or many ? Under any circumstance, its eflects ought to be declared

124 Brhat Samhita
through the positions of its appearance and setting, contact with
planets or asterisms, smoky mantle and colours.
[Here the author shows himself to bea practical thinker,
not a mere theorist. What are required for our practical purpose are
the particular part of the sky in which a Ketu appears or disappears
and the effects that accrue to the people. Similarly one ought to
observe their colours, smoky nature and contact with planets or
stars. For, each one of these circumstances is supposed to yield
a particular result.]
यावन्त्यहानि ह्यो मासास्तावन्त एव फलपाकः ।
मास रब्दांदच वदेत्प्रथमात्पक्षत्रयात्परतः ॥७॥
The effects of Ketu would be felt for so many months as the
number of days during which it remains visible. Similarly its
effects would last for so many years as the number of months during
which it remains visible. However, the effects in all cases would
come to pass only after the first three fortnights of its appearance.
[Bhattotpala refers to a contrary interpretation of the second
half of this verse by some: “ma केचिद् व्याख्याविप्रतिपत्ति sauf...
According to this interpretation the meaning would be: “If the
Ketu remains visible for not more than three fortnights, the effects
would be felt for so many months as the number of days it is visible;
and if it is visible beyond three fortnights, the years of its effects
would correspond to the number of months it is visible. To prove
the incorrectness of this interpretation Utpala quotes the words of
both गर्ग and aaa. The above wrong construction must have been
taken by Al-Biruni who too goes wrong, as he says, “If the appear
rance of a comet lasts longer than 14 months, subtract from it 45
days. The remainder represents the months of its influence."
Now see what गर्ग says:
यावन्त्यहानि इृश्यस्तावन्मासान् फलं भवेत् |
मासांस्तु यावद् AAT तावतो&ब्दांबच वेकृतम् ॥
त्रिपक्षात्परतः कमं पच्यतेऽस्य शुभाशुभम् |
सद्यस्कमुदिते केतो फलं नेहाऽऽदिशेद् बुधः ॥
Cf. also «mi :
यावतो दिवसांस्तिष्ठेत्तावन्मासानु विनिदिशेत् |
त्रिपक्षात्परतर्चापि कर्म केतोः प्रपच्यते ॥
तस्मात्कालात्परं ब्रूयात्फलमस्य शुभाशुभम् |
सद्यस्कमुदिते केतो फलं नेहाऽऽदिशेद् बुधः I!
EM

On Comets X1 125
See also the author’s समाससंहिता--
केचित्केतुसहस्र शतमेकसमन्वितं वदन्त्येके |
नारदमत एकोऽयं च्रिस्थानसमुद्भवो विविधरूप: |
दिव्यग्रहक्ष॑जातास्तीब्रफला मन्दफलकरा भौमाः |
प्राणिध्वजादितुङ्ग षु चान्तरिक्षा न चात्यशुभाः ॥
उदयास्तमयाऽधूमनसंयोगाकारमागं दिग्यातैः ।
फलनिदेशो दिवसेर्मासा मासँ स्तु वर्षाणि ॥
All Ketus are not evil. There are some which augur well
for the world.] :
हस्वस्तनुः प्रसन्न: स्निग्धस्त्वुजुरचिरसंस्थितः शुक्लः à
उदितोऽथवाभिवृष्टः सुभिक्षसौख्यावहः केतुः ॥८॥
Ifa Ketu (comet) be short, slender, clear, glossy, straight,
white and visible but for a short while, and if its appearance be
immediately followed bya rain, there would be abundance of
food crops and happiness.
[There is another reading “'उदितो वाप्यभिदृष्टः”? which, of course,
has not been noticed by the commentator. ]
उक्तविपरीतरूपो न शुभकरो वुभकेतुरुत्पन्नः |
इन्द्रायुधानुकारी विशेषतो द्वित्रिचूलो वा uen
A comet whose form is contrary to what has been described
above, is considered asa Dhümaketu—a portentous comet—that has
risen; and it is disastrous in its effects, all the more so when it
resembles the rainbow or is possessed of two or three crests.
[Cf. समाससं fear—
श्रचिरस्थितोऽभिवृष्टस्त्वृजुः स्मित; स्निग्धम् तिरु दगुदितः |
ह्वस्वस्तनुः प्रसन्नः केतुर्लोकस्य भावाय ॥ ,
न शुभो विपरीतोऽतो विशेषतः शक्रचापस ङ्काशः |
द्वित्रिचतुश्चूलो वा दक्षिणसंस्थश्च मृत्युकरः ॥
In this abridged work the author introduces a new element
viz. rising in the north or south. It may be in the northern or the
southern sky, or to the north or south of a planet or asterism.
Next he describes in the following verses upto verse 52 the
thousand Ketus with their effects, mentioned by Sage Garga.]

126 Brhat Samhita
हारमणिहेमरूपाः किरणाख्याः पर्ज्चावशतिः सशिखाः à
प्रागपरदिशोर sar नुपतिविरोधावहा रविजाः ॥१०॥
There are 25 comets named Kiranas, born of the Sun,
resembling a pearl-necklace, gems or gold. They are possessed of
crests and appear in the east and west. They are disastrous to the
rulers of the land.
[Cf. गर्ग—
शुद्धस्फटिकस ड्काशमृणाल रजतप्रभाः |
मुक्ताहारसुवर्णांभाः सशिखाः पञ्चविशातिः ॥
किरणाख्या रवेः पुत्रा esed प्राग्दिशि स्थिताः ।
तथा चापरभागस्था नृपतेभेयदाइच ते ॥
The commentator adds here a note to the effect that only
one of the 25 comets appears at a time, and not all at once. This
rule applies to all groups of comets.]
शुकदहनबन्धुजी वकलाक्षाक्षतजोपमा हुताशसुताः ।
प्राग्नेय्यां हृशयन्ते तावन्तस्तेऽपि शिखिभयदाः ॥ ११॥
There are 25 other comets born of the fire and resembling
the parrot (blue and yellow), the fire, the Bandhujiva flower (which
is deep red), lac and blood in colour. They make their appearance in the South-east and portend fire-disasters.
[These comets are the children of the fire whose direction
is the South-east.
Cf. गर्ग--
नानावर्णाग्निसङ्काशा दीप्तिमन्तो विचूलिनः à
स् जन्त्यर्निमिवाकाशात्सर्वे ज्यौतिषनाशनाः ॥
तेऽग्निपुत्रा ग्रहा ज्ञेया लोकेऽग्निभयवेदिनः |
आग्नेय्यां दिशि श्यन्ते पञ्चविशत्प्रकीतिताः 1]
वक्रशिखा मृत्युसुता रूक्षाः कृष्णाइच तेऽपि तावन्तः ।
EH याम्यायां जनमरकाबेदिनस्ते च UL
There are 25 yet other comets born of Death, possessed of
crooked crests, rough and dark in colour. They appear in the
south and portend extensive mortality of human beings.
[Cf. गर्ग—
कृष्णा रूक्षा वक्रशिखा ead याम्यदिक्स्थिता: |
पञ्चविशा मृत्युसुताः प्रजाक्षयकराः स्मृताः 11]

On Comets XI 127
दपंणबृत्ताकारा विशिखाः किरणान्विता धरातनयाः ।
क्षुद्भयदा द्वाविशतिरंशान्यामम्बुतेलनिभाः ॥१३॥
There are 22 comets born of the Earth, which are round
like mirror, devoid of crest and possessed of rays. They resemble
the water or oil, appear in the North-east and portend famine.
[Cf. गर्ग—
समस्तवृत्ता विशिखा रस्मिभिः परिवारिताः।
्रम्बुतेलप्रतीकाशा द्वाविश्व्भू सुताः स्मृताः ॥
ऐशान्यां दिशि esae दुभिक्षभयदास्तु ते 11]
शशिकिरणरजतहिमकुमुदकुन्दकुसुमोपमाः सुताः शशिनः d
उत्तरतो दृश्यन्ते त्रयः सुभिक्षावहाः शिखिनः ॥१४॥
There are three Ketus, born of the Moon, which are white
like the rays of the Moon, silver, snow, white lotus or the round
jasmine and which appear in the North and are conducive to
plenty of food crops.
[Cf. mi—
चन्द्रररिमसवर्णाभा हिमकुन्देन्दुस प्रभाः à
त्रयस्ते शशिनः पुत्राः सौम्याशास्थाः शुभावहाः 11]
ब्रह्मसुत एक एव त्रिशिखो वर्ण सित्रभिर्युगान्तकरः |
ग्नियतदिक्सम्प्रभवो विज्ञेयो ब्रह्मदण्डाख्यः uuu
There is a single Ketu known as Brahmadanda (Rod of
Brahman), born of the creator, and possessed of three colours and
three crests. There is no fixed direction for its appearance, but
it is dreadful in its effect, in that it forebodes destruction of the
entire world.
[Cf. mi—
एको ब्रह्मसुतः क्र्रस्त्रिवगु स्त्रशिखान्वित: ।
सर्वास्वाशासु इर्यः स्याद् ब्रह्मदण्डः क्षयावहः =
शतम भिहितमेकसमेतमेतदेकेन विरहितान्यस्मात् ।
कथयिष्ये केतूनां शतानि नव लक्षणः स्पष्टः NRU
I have thus delineated 101 comets. I shall next describe
distinctly the remaining 899 comets with all their characteristics.
सोम्यशान्योरुदयं शुक्रसुता यान्ति चतुरशीत्याख्या: d
विपुलसिततारकास्ते स्निग्धाइच भवन्ति diam: ॥१७॥
There are 84 comets called Caturasiti (meaning 84) that are the
children of Venus. They are of the form of large and bright stars
as well as glossy in appearance. They appear in the North and
North-east and produce very dire consequences.

128 Brhat Samhita
[According to Garga these comets are called Visarpaka that
rise in the East, for says he—
स्थुलेकतारकाः RATT: स्नेहवन्तरच सप्रभाः |
अचिष्मन्त: प्रसन्ताइच तीव्रे ण वपुषान्विता: ॥
एते विसपंका नाम शुक्रपुत्राः पुरोदया:।
अशीतिर्चतुरश्चेव लोकक्षयकराः स्मृताः ॥ |
स्निग्धाः प्रभासमेता द्विशिखाः षष्टिः शनेश्चराङ्गरुहाः ।
अतिकष्टफला EXHI: सवंत्रेते कनकसंज्ञाः Mic
Glossy (clear) and lustrous are the 60 comets, having two
crests each, that are the children of Saturn. They are called Kanaka (golden), appear in all directions and produce disastrous effects.
[Cf. गग —
सुस्तिग्धा रश्मिसंयुक्ता द्विशिखा: सप्ततारका: |
षष्टिस्ते कनका घोराः शनेश्चरसुता ग्रहाः 11]
fasar नाम गुरुस् ताः सितकताराः शिखापरित्यक्ताः à
षष्टिः पळ्चभिरधिका स्निग्धा याम्याश्रिताः पापाः ॥१९॥
There are 65 comets named Vikaca, having a single white
star each, bereft of the crest, which are the children of Jupiter.
They are glossy, appear in the south and are dreadful in effect.
[Cf. गग --
शुक्ला: स्निग्धा: प्रसन्नाइच मंहारूपा: प्रभान्विताः ।
एकतारा वपुष्मन्तो विशिखा रश्मिभिवृ ता: ॥
एते बृहस्पतेः पुत्राः प्रायशो दक्षिणाश्रयाः 1
नामतो विकचा घोराः पञ्चष ्ट्िभेयावहाः i]
नातिव्यक्ताः सूक्ष्मा दीर्घाः शुक्ला यथेष्टदिक्घ्रमवाः ।
बुधजास्तस्करसञ्ज्ञाः पापफलास्त्वेकपञचाशत् ॥२०॥
Mercury’s children named Taskara (Thieves), numbering
51 are faint, slender, long and white. They may appear in any
direction and are harmful in effect.
[Cf. गग —
अरुन्धतीसमा रूक्षाः केचिदव्यक्ततारका: |
सपाण्ड्वर्णा: AINT: सूक्ष्मा रश्मिभिरावृताः ॥
एते बुधात्मजा ज्ञेयास्तस्कराख्या भयावहा: |
एकाधिकास्ते पञ्चाहदथोत्पथचरा ग्रहाः ॥]

On Comets XI 129
क्षतजानलातुरूपास्त्रिचुलताराः कुजात्मजाः षष्टिः ।
नाम्ना च कोङ्ङुमास्ते सोम्याशासंस्यिताः पापाः ॥२१॥
The sons of Mars are 60 in number and are called Kaunkuma.
They resemble blood and fire, are possessed of three crests as well
as three stars each, and appear in the north. They are productive
of disastrous effects.
ck ute
त्रिशिखाइच त्रिताराइच रक्ता लोहितरइ्मय: |
प्रायशइचोत्तरामाशां सेवन्ते नित्यमेव ते ॥
लोहिता ङ्गात्मजा ज्ञेया ग्रहाः षष्टः समासतः |
नामतः कौङ्कुमा ज्ञेया राज्ञां सङ्ग्रामकारकाः ॥ |
'त्रशतुतर्यधिका राहोस्ते तामसकीलका इति ख्याताः ।
रविशशिगा ' हश्यन्ते तेषां फलमकंचारोक्तम् ॥२२॥
There are 33 comets well known as Tamasakilakas (Dark
Shafts) that are the children of Rihu. They are seen on the discs
of the Sun and the Moon. Their effects have been already described in the chapter on the ‘Sun’s Transit’.
[These Dark shafts might be the prototypes of the modern
solar flares and sun-spots. The ancients must have observed these
appearing on the solar orb.
Cf. mi—
कृष्णाभाः कृष्गावर्यन्ताः सङ्कुलाः कृष्णरश्मयः |
राहुपुत्रास्त्रयसित्रशत्कीलकाश्चातिदारुणाः ॥
रविमण्डलगाइ्चेते द्यन्ते चन्द्रगास्तथा ॥
Cf. also पराशर
ग्रयवेण्येव दृश्यन्ते ह्यमक्चिरःकाककोलका: |
Afg मध्ये हयुभयोः काककीलको ॥
afer: सरथो धन्वी इश्यते पुरुषाकृतिः ।
काकः कालाकृतिर्घोरस्त्रिकोणो वापि लक्ष्यते ॥
मण्डलं कीलके मध्ये मण्डलस्यासितो ग्रहः |
महानृपविरोधाय यस्यक्षें तस्य मृत्यवे ॥
According to sage Paragara these are three comets named Angiras,
Kaka and Kilaka, of which the first appears only on the solar orb,
while the other two on both the orbs. The first appears like a

130 Brhat Samhita
human being armed with a bow and seated in a chariot. Kaka,
which is black (like Yama) and triangular in form, is of dreadful
effects. Kilaka, which is black and circular in form, brings about
hostilities among mighty kings and death of those whose natal star
is occupied by the luminary at the time. See also 111, 7-10 supra.)
{वजशत्याधिकमन्यच्छतमग्नेविइवरूपसंज्ञानाम् ।
तीव्रानलभयदानां ज्वालामलाकुलतनूनाम् ॥२३॥
There is another group of 120 comets known as V2svaripa,
born of Agni (Fire). Their forms are filled with rows of flames.
They produce terrible fire-disasters.
Cf. गर्ग quoted under verse 11 supra, and instead of the 4th.
line have the following :
fast ग्रहशतं घोरं विश्वरूपेति नामतः ॥
From the different numbers of the two seis of comets born of
Agni it is clear that they are not identical. The former set has no
specific name, while the latter is called Visvartipa.]
इयामारुणा विताराइचामररूपा विकीर्णदीधितयः i
gaiga वायोः सप्तसप्ततिः पापदाः.परुषाः ।।२४॥
There are 77 comets, called Aruna, born of the Wind, which
are dark-red in colour, rough, without any starry fcrm, but Iccking
like the chowries and possessed of scattered rays. They produce
disastrous consequences.
[Cf. mi—
अताररूपप्रतिमा धूमरक्तसवशिनः ।
वातरूपा इवाभान्ति शुष्कविस्तीणंरर्मयः ॥
सप्ततिः सप्त चेवान्ये वायुपुत्रान्प्रचक्षते |
लोकविध्वंसना रूक्षा नामतस्त्वरुणा ग्रहाः l]
तारापुञ्जनिकाशा गणका नाम प्रजापतेरष्टो ।
द्वे च शते चतुरधिके चतुरस्रा ब्रह्मसन्तानाः usu
There are 8 comets known as Ganaka, sons of Prajapati, that
look like a cluster of stars. There are 204 comets named Caturasra
(Square), born of Brahman. All these produce only untoward
results. :
[The commentator tellsus that wherever no direction of
comets is mentioned it should be understood that they may appear
in any direction.

On Comets XI 131 |
Cf. गगं--
तारापुञ्जप्रतीकाशास्तारामण्डलसस्थिता: |
प्राजापत्या ग्रहास्त्वष्टी गणाका भयवेदिनः ।।
SAT वा चतुरस्रा वा सशिखाः इवेतरङ्मयः |
& शते चतुरश्चेव ब्रह्मजा भंयदाइच ते l]
कडू नाम वरुराजा द्वात्रिशद्वशगुल्मसंस्थानाः ।
शशिवत्प्रभासमेतास्तीव्रफलाः केतवः प्रोक्ताः ॥२६॥
Kanka is the name of the 32 comets born of Varuna, having
the appearance of a clump of bamboos, and being possessed of
moon-like lustre. ‘They produce dire consequences.
[Cf. गर्ग --
वंशगुल्मप्रतीकाशा ARIA: पूर्णरश्मय: |
काकतुण्डनिभेश्चापि afa: केचिदावृताः ॥
मय़ुखानुत्सृजन्तीव सुस्निग्धा: सौम्यदर्शनाः ।
एते कष्टफलाः प्रोक्ता द्वात्रिशद्वारुणा ग्रहाः 11]
षण्णवतिः कालसुताः कबन्धसञ्ज्ञाः कबन्धसंस्थानाः ।
पुण्ड़ाभयप्रदाः स्युविरूपताराइच ते शिखिनः ॥२७॥
The sons of Kala, numbering 96, are called Kabandhas and
have the form of a truncated human body. They have no distinct starry bodies and prove beneficial only to the Pundras.
[Cf. गर्ग—
तारापुञजविरूपाश्च कबन्धाकृतिसं स्थिताः |
पीतारुगासवणारच भस्मकर्प् RAT: du
कालपुत्रा: कबन्धारच नवतिः षट् च ते स्मृताः |
लोके मृत्युकरा घोराः पुण्ड़ाणामभयप्रदाः 11]
शुक्लविपुलेकतारा नव विदिशां केतवः समुत्पन्नाः |
एवं gaga विशेषमेषामतो वक्ष्ये ॥२८॥
There are 9 comets born of the intermediate quarters, having
a single, broad and white star. Thus have I described the 1000
comets. I shall now mention their special characteristics,
[These 9 comets are visible only in the intermediate directions and produce only evil effects.

132 Brhat Samhita
Cf. mi—
शुक्लेकतारा विपुला ARJAT नव ग्रहाः |
विदिक्षु संस्थितास्ते च aed भयदायकाः ॥।
In this connection the commentator remarks that only a
few of these thousand Ketus become visible to human eyes. Hence
the author gives below the peculiarities of these visible ones.]
उदगायतो महान् स्तिग्धमूतिरपरोदयी वसाकेतुः ।
सद्यः करोति मरक सुभिक्षमप्युत्तमं कुरुते NREN
There is a big comet named Vasaketu which has an elongated
glossy body stretched towards the north. It rises in the west. Its
appearance coincides with dreadful mortality, but it leads to very
good growth of food crops in the land.
तल्लक्षणोऽस्थिकेतुः स तु रूक्षः Parag: Maa: ।
स्निग्धस्ताहक् प्राच्यां शस्त्राख्यो डमरमरकाय NJON
There is one named Asthiketu, endowed with all the characteristics of Vasaketu, but is rough and capable of causing famine.
There is another Ketu named Sastra, which is similar to the
previous one, but glossy and rising in the east. It leads to war and
pestilence.
[Para ara gives some more details about these comets : «qq
षड्विशतिरुदय: फलमावेदय्ति । तान् नामतो रूपतः फलतः कालतोऽभिधास्यामः ।
तत्र भार्गवास्त्रय उदयं यान्ति । एकेकशो वसास्थिशस्त्रकेतवः | तत्र वसाकेतुः स्निग्धो
महानुदगायतशिल्त्रिशद्वर्षशतं प्रोष्य सम्प्लवे युगे पञ्चिमोदितः सद्यो मरकफलः
सौभिक्षकरस्तु | रूक्षोऽस्थिकेतुरसौ भिः्रुकतुल्यप्रवासकालफलः । पूर्वेण स्निग्ध एव न
शस्त्रकेतुः | राजविरोधमरकफलः समो रूक्ष: d]
हइयोऽमावास्यायां कपालकेतुः सवू स्ररडिमशिखः |
प्राइतभसोऽद्धविचारी क्षुन्मरकावृष्टिरोगकरः URN
There is a comet named Kapalaketu, which is visible during
the Amivasya—new moon—in the east. Its rays and crest are of
smoky colour and it traverses half the heavens. It produces famine,
pestilence, drought and diseases.
(CE पराशर--
ग्रथादित्यजातां क्रतालक्रेतुरुदयतेउम।वास्यायां पूर्वस्यां दिशि सधूम्राचिशिखो
नभसोऽद्ध॑चरो इश्यते | पळ्वविशववेशतं प्रोष्य Alea पक्षानमृतजस्य कुमुदकेतोरचा-
राने स दृष्ट एवं दुभिज्ञातावृष्टिव्याधिभपरमरणोयद्रवान् quai जगति यावतो

On Comets XI 133
दिवसानु SUR तावन्मासानु मासं वंत्सरान्पञ्चप्रस्थं च शारदधाच्याघं कृत्वा प्रजानामु-
पयुङ्क्ते ।। From these statements of the Sage we come to know that
Vasaketu, Asthiketu and Sastraketu are included among the sons
of Sukra (Venus). The first of these makes its appearance once
in every 3,000 years. Kapalaketu is one of the children of the Sun.
It appears once in every 2500 years.]
प्राग्वश्वानरमार्गे शुलाग्र: इयावरूक्षतास्राचिः ।
नभसस्त्रिभागगामी रोद्र इति कपालतुल्यफलः ॥३२॥
Raudra is another comet, rising in the east, whose effects are
similar to those of Kapalaketu. It traverses in the Dahanavithi
(IX-1,3). Its crest is in the form of a trident, and its flame grey,
rough and red. Tt traverses a third of the sky.
(Cf. वृद्धगर्ग--
ज्येष्ठामुलमनु राधा या वीथी सम्प्रकीतिता |
तां च वीथीं समारुह्य केतुरचेत्क्रीडते भृशम् ॥
दक्षिणाभिनतां कृत्वा शिखां घोरां भयङ्करीम् ।
TATA तीक्ष्णां श्यावताम्रारुणाप्रभाम् |i
पूर्वण चोदितर्चेष नक्षत्राण्युपधूमयेत् ।
घोरं प्रजासु सृजति फलं मासे त्रयोदशे ॥
त्रिभागं नभसो मत्वा ततो गच्छत्यदर्शनम् |
यावतो दिवसांस्तिष्ठेत्तावद्वर्षाणि WENT ॥
शस्त्राग्निभयरोगेरच दुभिक्षमरणांहंताः |
पर्यमाणाः प्रजाः सर्वा विद्रवन्ति दिशो दश ॥
Cf also पराशर--
ग्रथ दक्षयज्ञरुद्रक्रोधो-द्भवः कलिकेतुस्त्रीरा वर्षशतानि नव च मासान्
प्रोष्योदयते पूर्वेण वेश््वानरमार्गे ह्यमृतजस्य मणिकेतोइचारान्ते श्याव रूक्षताम्रारुणा
शूलाकारसइशीं शिखां कृत्वा नभसस्त्रिभागचारी स॒ सझस्त्रभयरोगदुभिक्षानावृष्टि-
मरकेर्यावन्मासान् ead तावद्वर्षाणि त्रिभागशेषां प्रजां कृत्वाघं च झारदधान्यमाढकमस्तं व्रजति ॥ |
भ्रपरस्यां चलकेतुः शिखया याम्याग्रयाङगुलोच्छ्रितया i
गच्छेद्यया यथोदक् तथा तथा दध्यमायाति ॥३३॥
सप्तमुनीन्संस्पृइय ध्र,.वमभिजितमेव च प्रतिनिवृत्तः ।
नभसोऽद्ध॑मात्रमित्वा याम्पेनास्तं समुपयाति ॥३४॥
हन्यात्प्रयागकूलाद्यावदवन्तीं च पुष्करारण्यम |
उदगपि च देविकामपि भूयिष्ठं मध्यदेशाख्यम् ॥३५॥

134 Brhat Samhitz
भ्रन्यानपि च स देशान् क्वचित्क्वचिद्धन्ति रोगदुभिक्षेः ।
दश सासान्फलपाको$स्य कंश्चिदष्टादश cu: ॥३६॥
There is another Ketu nam. d Calaketu, which appears in the
western direction, and is possessed of a crest, raised a digit high,
with its tip turned towards the south. As it moves towards north its
length increases. It touches the Seven Sages i.e. towards the Great
Bear, as well the Pole Star and the star Abhijit, and turns back after
travelling only half the length of the sky and then sets in the south.
When this comet makes its appearance, people in the area lying
between the banks of the Prayaga (near Allahabad) and the town of
Avanti as well as the forest of Puskara will be destroyed. In the
northern region too people .will come to grief as far as the Devika
river; and those who live in the Madhyadega (Middle Country)
will be killed in large numbers. In other countries too people will
perish here and there as a result of diseases and famine. These effects
will be felt for ten months. According to others they will be experienced for 18 months. In all cases the period is to be counted
after three fortnights of the appearance of a comet.
[Cf. गग
कषुच्छस्त्रमरकव्याधिभये: सम्पीडयेत् प्रजा: |
मासान्दश TIGL च चलकेतुः सुदारुणः di
also पराशर--
ग्रथ पेतामहश्चलकेतुः पञ्चदशवर्षंशतं प्रोष्यो दितः पर्चिमेनाङ्गुलिपर्वंमात्रां
शिखां दक्षिणाभिगतां कृत्वा जलक्केतोश्चारान्ते नभसस्त्रिभागमनुचरन् यथा यथा
चोत्तरेण व्रजति तथा तथा शूलाग्राकारां शिखां दर्शयन् ब्रह्मानक्षत्रमुपसृत्य मनाग्
ध्रुवं ब्रह्मराशि सप्तर्षीन् स्पृशन् नभसोऽद्व॑मात्रं दक्षिणमनुक्रम्यास्तं व्रजति । स स्वर्गे
दारुणकर्मा । स्वगं प्राप्तत्वादेव च कृत्स्तमभिहिनस्ति लोकम् । aft च भूमि कम्पयित्वा दश मासान्मध्यदेशे भूयिष्ठं जत पदमनवशेषं कुरुते । तेष्वपि क्वचित्क्वत्चि-
च्छस्त्रदुभिक्षव्याधिमरकभय: किलिश्तात्यष्टादश मासानिति i]
प्रागद्धेरात्रहश्यो याम्याग्राः इवेतकेतुरन्यइच |
क इति युगाक्ृृतिरपरे युगापत्तो सप्तदिन हृशयौ ॥३७॥
स्निग्धौ सुभिक्षशिवदावथाधिक हर्यते क नामा यः।
दश वर्षाण्युपतापं जनयति शस्त्रप्रकोपक्ृतम् ॥३८॥
There is another comet named Svelaketu, whose crest is turned
to the south, and which rises in the east at midnight. There is

On Comets XI 135
yet another comet named Ka in the form of a yoke, which rises in
the west. Both these can be seen at the same time for a pericd of
seven days. They are glossy i.e. very bright, and lead to prosperity and happiness, if sighted. Should, however, the comet Ka be
visible for more than seven days, there would be great disaster
aused by wars for ten years
[Cf. पराशर
अ्थौद्दालक: शवेतकेतुर्दशोत्तरं वर्षशतं प्रोष्य भटकेतोश्चारान्ते पूर्वस्यां दिशि
दक्षिणाभिनतरिखोऽद्धकाले दृश्य: तेनेव सह द्वितीयः कः प्रजापतिपुत्रः परिचिमेन
ग्रहकेतोर्यृपसंस्थायी युगपद् स्श्यते । तावुभौ सप्तरात्रइर्यो दशवर्षाणि प्रजाः पीडयन्ते (पीडयतः) । कः प्रजापतिपुत्रो यद्यधिकं इश्यते तदा दारुणतरं प्रजानां शस्त्रकोपं कुर्यात्तथेव स्नेहवणंयुक्तौ क्षेमारोग्यसुभिक्षदौ भवतः ॥]
aaa इति जटाकारो रूक्षः इयावो वियत्त्रिभागगतः ।
विनिवतंतेऽपसव्यं त्रिभागशेषाः प्रजाः कुरुते ॥३९॥
The comet called Sveta is rough, black and of the form of
matted locks. After traversing a third of the sky it turns back in
the sinistral way. It destroys two-thirds of the population
[There should not be any confusion between the two comets
Svetaketu and Sveta. According to Parasgara the former is the
son of Sage Uddalaka and the latter of Sage Kasyapa.
Cf. पराशर
WA BRAT: इवेतकेतुः पञ्चदशवर्षंशतं प्रोष्येन्द्रांश. सहजस्य पद्मकेतोश्चा-
रान्ते इ्यावरूक्षो नभसस्त्रिभागमाक्रम्थापसव्यं निवृत्योध्व॑ प्रदक्षिणजटाकारशिखः ।
स यावन्मासान् इश्यते तावद्वर्षाणि सुभिक्षमावहति । मध्यदेश आर्यंगणानामो दीच्येश्च
भूयिष्ठं बहुशस्त्रिभागशेषां प्रजामवशेषयति ॥ ]
भ्रा पुत्रया तु शिखया दशनमायाति कृत्तिकासंस्थः |
ज्ञेयः स रहिमकेतुः इवेतसमानं फलं धत्ते ॥४०॥
There is another comet named Rasmiketu which appears near
the constellation Krttika with an ash-coloured crest. It produces
effects similar to those of the comet Sveta
[Cf. पराशर--
ग्रथ रश्मिकेतुविभावसुज: प्रोष्य वर्षंशतमावतंकेतोश्चारान्ते उदितः कृत्तिकासु
qafa: इवेतकेतोः सरशफलः 11]
ध्रुवकेतुरनियतगतिप्रमाणवर्णाकृतिभंवति विष्वक् |
दिव्यान्तरिक्षमौमो भवत्ययं स्निग्ध इष्टफलः ॥४१॥ `

136 Brhat Samhita
amg षु नुपाणां गृहतरुशलेषु चापि देशानास् ।
गृहिणासुपस्करेष् च विनाशिनां asi याति ॥४२॥
There is another comet known as Dhruvaketu, whose movements, dimensions, colour and shape are not regular (i.e. indefinite). It travels in all directions and may be seen in the upper
regions of the sky, in the intermediate space or on the earth.
It gives good effects, if it is clear and soft. If it be seen on the
military equipments of kings, on houses, trees or mountains of
countries, and on the house-hold articles such as vessels, ladles and
winnowing baskets of house-holders, the concerned persons would
meet with their end.
[The second verse should be taken as giving an exception to
the rule given in the first viz. स्निग्ध इष्टफल:, Alberuni wrongly translates the word उपस्करेषु.
Cf, पराशर--
अथानियतदिक्काल रूपवर्णप्रमाणसंस्थानो ध्रुवकेतुः पराभवमिष्यतां देशानां
राज्ञां जनपदानां च वृक्षपुरपर्वतवेरमध्वजपताकाइस्त्रवर्मायुधावरणरथनागोष्ट्रपुरुषशयनासनभाण्डेषु वा इश्यते । स एव च स्निग्धो विमलः प्रदक्षिणशिखो गोगजा-
जनागवीथीइचोत्तरेण aay सुभिक्षं क्षेमारोग्यं चावहति। दशंकविशतिद्वि (त्रि) afgशतधा वा दशेतमिच्छन्ति मुनयो ध्रूवकेतोः | तस्य प्रागुदयनिमित्तानि--श्रवनिचलनम् |
अग्नेः प्रभामान्द्यम् । प्रधूपनं दिशाम् । शीतोष्णाविपर्यय: । श्रतिरूक्षवायुसम्भवश्च ।।
कुमुद इति कुमुदकान्तिर्वारुण्यां प्राकशिखो निशामेकाम् ।
दृष्ट: सुभिक्षमतुलं दश किल वर्षाणि स करोति ॥४३॥
The comet named Kumuda of white lustre, with its crest
turned to the east becomes visible for a single night in the west.
It is said that it will produce unique peace and plenty in the
countries it is sighted for a period of ten years to come.
[Cf. पराशर---
अ्रथामृतजः कुमुदो मणिः । जलोद्भवः पद्मः । श्रावतः। ऊमिः। WE: |
हिमः । रक्तः । कुक्षिः । कामः। त्रिगणः । शीतश्चेति । तत्र कुमुदकेतुवेसाकेतोशचा-
रसमाप्तौ वारुण्यां दर्शनमुपेति गोक्षीरविमलस्तिग्धप्रभां पूर्वेशाभिनतां शिखां कृत्वे-
करात्रचरः। स es एव मुभिक्षमुत्मादयति । दशवर्षाणि प्रजानामविरोधं च।
प्रतीच्यानां च मुखरोगारोचकप्रतिस्यायपाण्ड्रोगजननेः प्रजा बाधत इति A]
सकृदेकयाम हृद्यः सुसूक्ष्मतारोऽपरेरा मरिकेतुः ।
ऋज्वी शिखास्य शुक्ला स्तनोद्गता क्षीरधारेव UV

On Comets XI 137
उदयन्नेव सुभिक्षं चतुरो मासान् करोत्यसौ सार्द्धान् ।
प्रादुर्मावं प्रायः करोति च क्षुद्रजन्तूनाम् ॥४५॥
The comet named Maniketu is in the form of a tiny little
star, rising in the west and visible only once for a period of only
three hours. Its crest is straight and white like a streak of milk
ejected from the breast. Even as it appears, it causes abundant
food for 4$ months; but it also helps the abnormal appearance
of harmful creatures such as reptiles, venomous creatures and
the like.
(Cf. पराशर
मणिकेतुरपि कपालकेतोइचारावसाने प्रतीच्यामुदयमुपयाति । सूक्ष्मो$रन्धती-
तारकामात्रः क्षीरप्रसेककान्त्या पूर्वाभिनतया स्निग्धशिखया शर्वेयमिकयामहृश्य: | स
उदयात्प्रभृत्यद्धंपज्चमानु मासानु क्षेमसुभिक्षमुत्पादयति । क्षुद्रजन्तूनां प्रादुर्भावं
करोत्यतिमात्रकालदृष्ट: ||
According to this Sage the enormous growth of lower creatures
i.e. pests, is conditional on the comet appearing for a greater length
of time.]
जलकेतुरपि च पइचातूस्निग्धः शिखयापरेण चोन्नतया ।
नव मासान् स सुभिक्षं करोति शान्ति च लोकस्य ॥४६॥
There is another comet called Jalaketu, which is spotless in
form, and is possessed of a crest raised towards the west. It rises
also in the west. It causes good crops as well as peace among
people for nine months.
[Cf. पराशर--
ग्रथ जलकेतुः पेतामहजस्य चलकेतोनंवमासावशिष्टे कमंणि कृतं प्रवर्तयति ।
परिचिमेनोदितः स्निग्धः सुजातो$नुपश्िचिमाभिनतशिख: | स च नव मासान् क्षेमसुभिक्षारोग्यारि प्रजाभ्यो धत्ते । अ्रन्यप्रहकृतानां चाशुभानां व्याघातायेति ॥]
भवकेतुरेकरात्रं ह्यः प्राक सूक्ष्मतारकः स्निग्धः ।
हरिलाङगलोपमया प्रदक्षिणावत्तंया शिखया unvon
यावत ga ggat दशंनमायाति निदिशेन्मासान् ।
तावदतुलं सुभिक्षं रूक्षे प्राणान्तिकान् रोगान् ॥४८॥
Bhavaketu which isa glossy i.e. bright, little star, is visible
in the east only for one night. It has a crest resembling the lion’s
tail and curling to the right. It causes unique abundance of

138 Brhat Samhita
food crops for as many months as the number of Muhürtas (a
muhürta—48 minutes) it remains visible. Should, however, it be
rough, it would cause fatal diseases to mankind.
[Cf. पराशर---
प्रथ जलकेतोः कमंसमाप्तावर्म्यादयः शीतान्ता भ्रष्टौ प्रादुर्भवन्ति। ते
त्रयोदशचतुर्दशाष्टरादशवर्षान्तरिता दृश्यन्ते | स्निग्धाः सुभिक्षक्षेम्या विपर्यया विपरीताः i
क्षुद्रजन्तूनां वधाय । तेषामष्टानां कमंण्यतीते भवकेतुर स्यते PARAJI या
कृत्तिक्रानामग्रतमा तारा तत्प्रमाणया सिनिग्धयाऽरूक्षाभया सिंहलाङ्गूलसंस्थानया
प्रदक्षिणनताग्रया शिखेयोदितः । q यावन्मुहुर्तान्डश्यते तावन्मासान् भवत्यतीव सुभि-
क्षाय । BA: प्राणहराणां रोगाणां प्रादुर्भावायेति d]
अपरेण TST शालगौरो भवेन्निशामेकाम् |
सप्त करोति सुभिक्षं वर्षाण्यतिहषंयुक्तानि uve
Another comet named Padmaketu which is as white as the
fibre of the lotus stalk, rises in the west and is visible far one night.
Its appearance heralds abundance of food as well as happiness for
seven years without interruption.
(Cf. पराशर--
अथ पश्षकेतु: श्वेतकेतुफलसमाप्तौ पश्चिमेनाह्नदयन्तिव मृणालकुमुदाभया
शिखयैकरात्रचरः | सप्त वर्षाण्यभ्युच्छितं हषमावहति जगतः 11]
aad इति निशार्द्ध सव्यशिखोऽरुनिभोऽपरे स्निग्धः ।
यावत्क्षणान् स हश्यस्तावन्मासान् सुभिक्षकरः ॥५०॥
The comet named Avarta appearing at midnight in the west
is glossy and ruddy in colour and possessed of a crest turned to the
right or south. It will bring about peace and plenty for mankind
for so many months as the number of Muhirtas it remains visible.
[Cf. पराशर
प्रथावतंकेतुः स्वेतकेतोः कर्मण्यतीतेऽपरस्यामद्धरात्रे शङ्खावदातोऽणुणाभया
प्रदक्षिणनताग्रया शिखयोदितः। स यावन्मुहुर्तान् ead तावन्मासानु भवत्यतीव
सुभिक्षं नित्ययज्ञोत्सवं जगत् ॥ |
पइ्चात्सन्ध्याकाले संवर्तो नाम धूम्रताम्रशिखः |
mara वियत्त्र्यंशं शूलाग्रावस्थितो रोद्र: UX
यावत एव मुहर्तान् दृश्यो वर्षारि afta तावन्ति ।
भुपाळ्कास्त्रनिपातरुदयक्षे चापि पीडयति ॥५२॥

On Comets XI 139
The comet named Sarvarta with its crest smoky and coppery
in colour, appears in the west at sunset. It occupies a third of the
sky and looks as though situated on the points of a trident. It is
dreadful in effect, as it afflicts kings with wars and strifes for so
many years as the number of Muhzrtas it remains visible, and
creates trouble for those persons in whose natal star the comet
appears.
[Here the author gives a general principle of mundane astrology
but also one of horoscopy. For, a malefic comet, like an eclipse,
rising 1n a person's natal asterism augurs ill for him.
Cf. mi—
येषां नक्षत्रविषये रूक्षः सज्वाललोहितः |
ead वहुमूतिश्च तेषां विन्द्यान्महाभयम् i
wag शस्त्रकोपं च व्याधि दुभिक्षमेव च ।
कुर्थान्तुपतिपीडाइच स्वचक्रपरचक्रतः u
यत्रोत्तिष्ठति नक्षत्रे प्रवासं यत्र गच्छति ।
धूपयेद्वा स्पृशेद्वापि हन्याद्वेशांस्तदाश्रितान् ॥
यस्याभिषेकनक्षत्रं जन्मभं HAW तथा |
देशक्षं पीडयेद्वापि स शान्त्युपरमो भवेत् ॥
स्निग्धः प्रसन्नो विमलः प्रदक्षिणशिखस्तथा |
ead येषु देशेषु शिवं तेषु विनिदिशेत् ॥
गगताद्ध चरः सद्यः प्रधानदेशान्विनाशयेदचिरात् |
निखिलगगनानुचारी त्रेलोक्य विनाशकः केतुः ॥
(The last verse in the Arya metre does not appear to be
Garga’s).
Cf. also पराशर —
अथ संवर्तो वर्षसहस्रमष्टोत्तरं प्रोष्य पर्चिमेनास्तं गते सवितरि सन्ध्यायां
an तन्वीं ताम्ररूक्षां शूलाभां धूम्र विमुञ्चन्तीं दारुणां शिखां कृत्वा नभसस्त्रि-
भागमाक्रम्य | स यावन्मुहुर्तानु निशि तिष्ठति तावद्वर्षाणि परस्परं शस्त्रे घने न्ति
पा्थिवाः। यानि नक्षत्राणि घूपथति यत्र चोदेति तानि दारुणतरं पीडयति । तदा-
श्रितांश्च देशानिति ॥
In the following verses the author states the evil effects of
certain asterisms being afflicted by the malignant comets.]

140 Brhat Samhita
ये झस्तास्तान् हित्वा केतुभिराधूपितेऽथवा स्पृष्टे ।
नक्षत्रे भवति वधो येषां राज्ञां प्रवक्ष्ये तान् ॥५३॥
I shall now explain the fatal consequences of the asterisms of
kings being eclipsed by the tails of comets or touched by them,
except by the beneficent ones.
[We have seen in the preceding verses that some comets like
kumuda, Maniketu, Jalaketu, Bhavaketu, if glossy, Padmaketu and
Avarta are auspicious and augur peace and plenty in ihe land.
However, the rest produce different untoward effects. The comets
especially the evil ones, are seen emitting smoke from their tails.
If a person’s natal star is thus tarnished by this smoke, he will have
hard times ahead. Similarly kings and countries that are assigned
to such asterisms, will have different unpleasant experiences. ]
अध्विन्यामशमकपं भरणीषु किरातपार्थिवं हग्यात् ।
बहुलासु कलिङ्गशं रोहिण्यां शुरसेनपतिस् ॥५४॥
When the star Asvini be affected by a comet by its touch or
smoke, it would destroy the king of the Asmakas; if it be the star
Bharani, the king of the Kiratas would meet with his end; if it be
Krttika, the Kalinga ruler would come to grief; and if it be Rohini,
the chief of the Stirasenas would suffer.
[The Asmaka country is differently identified by different
scholars. Our author refers to this several times. It lies in the
north-western part of India. During Alexander’s time the Asmaka
territory comprised part of Swat and Buner and extended eastwards as far as the Indus and had its capital at the town of Masakavati." The Kiratas were a people in the south-west and northeast divisions of India. They are mentioned in the Periplus and
by Ptolemy. The Sirasenas were a people living near Mathur?.]
ग्रौशोनरमपि सौम्ये जलजाजीवाधिपं तथार्द्रासु t
्रादित्येऽशमकनाथान् पुष्ये मगधाधिपं हन्ति uuu
When the asterism Mrgasiras is afflicted by an evil comet
(by smoke or touch), the king of the Usinaras will fare ill; when
the affected star is Ardrà, the chief of fishermen will suffer; when
it is Punarvasu, the rulers of the A$maka people will come to grief,
and when the asterism thus affected is Pusya, the king of Magadha
will get into trouble.

ts XI
On Comets TT
[The U$inaras are supposed to have lived to the north
Kurus, possibly between the Chenab and the Ravi. pee T
interprets the word जलजाजीव as ग्रामदेशवासिन: i.e. rural people; ‘bar e
author means only those who live by catchi :
oysters, shells and the like.] dic e iu fien
alata wing dsg पाण्ड्यनाथमपि भाग्ये ।
ग्रौज्जयिनिकमोर्यम्णे सावित्रे दण्डकाधिपतिम् ॥५६॥
If the affected asterism be Aslesa, the chief of the Asikas
would be destroyed; if it be Magha, the ruler of Anga would meet
with his end; if it be Parvaphalguni, the Pandya king would quit
the world; if it be Uttaraphalguni, the governor of Ujjain would
be afflicted; and if it be Hasta, the lord of the Dandaka forest
would be destroyed. Pie
[The state of Anga is very ancient being mentioned in the
Atharvaveda (V-22.14), the Aitareya Brahmana (VITI-22). During the
time of the Buddha its capital was Campa. This country is mentioned in the Ramayana also (1.23). Regarding Asikade$a many
theories are held : Some read Misikanagara in its stead. So some
locate it to the west of Kalinga. Others take it as Rsika. Even
this is not accepted by scholars owing to geographical anomalies. ]
चित्रासु कुरुक्षत्राधियस्य भरणं समादिशेत्तज्ज्ञः ।
काइमी रकक।म्बोजो नुपती MASAA न स्तः ॥५७॥
If the affected asterism be Citra, a wise astrologer should
predict the death of the ruler of Kuruksetra; and if it be Svati,
the kings of Kasmira and K imboja would quit the world.
[Kamboja is an ancient place mentioned by Yaska (1.2.1.4)
and Kalidasa (Raghu. IV). From the latter’s reference it is clear
that it is situated near the Himalayas. The areas of Pamir and
Badakshan are supposed to represent the ancient Kamboja
country.]
इक्ष्वाकुरलकनाथरच हन्यते यदि भवेद्विशाखासु ।
मंत्रे पुण्ड़ाधिपतिज्येष्ठासु च सावंभौमवध: ॥५८॥
Ifthe afflicted asterism be Visakha, the chiefs of the Iksvakus and of thecity of Alaka would be killed; if it be Anuradha, the
chief of the Pundras would be exterminated; and if it be Jyestha,
an emperor would meet with his end.

142 Brhat Samhita
[The commentator construes the word सार्वभौमवध: as कान्यकुन्जाधि-
पतेम॑ रणम्. Does it mean that Kānyakubja was the capital of an empire
during the time of our commentator? Our author refers to
Pundra frequently. It corresponds to North Bengal with Pundranagara as its capital.]
मलेष्न्धसद्रकपती जलदेवे काशिपो मरणमेति ।
यौधेयकार्जुनायनशिबिचेद्यान् वेइवदेवे च ॥५६॥
If the affected asterism be Mila, the kings of Andhra and
Madraka (Madra) countries would come to grief; if it be Purvasadha, the king of Kasi would die; and if it be Uttarasadha, rulers
of the Yaudheyas, Arjunàyanas, Sibis and Cedi would be killed.
[Madra is the name of a people and their country. This name
was famous both in the Brahmana period and in the period of the
Mahabhirata. Madri the younger queen of Pàndu, was the
daughter of the king of Madrade$a. It is in the north-west of India.
In the Mahabharata it is spoken cf as a part ofthe Vàhika country.
It covered the territory between the Ravi and the Jhelum. The
Arjunayanas are also an ancient people descended from the Pànlava
prince Arjuna. Some trace their origin to Kartaviryarjuna. These
are to be assigned to the northern division. This name occurs in
the Gana of Panini IV. 2.53. Historians opine that the country of
the Arjunayanas lay within the triangle of Delhi-Jaipur-Agra.
The Sibis are, also a very ancient people. Some claim their identity with the Sivas of the Rgveda (VII. 18.7). Our author includes
the Sibi country among the Southern states (XIV-12). According
to the Jatakas there were two Sibi settlements, one with its capital
at Aristapura and the other at Jetuttara. These differing accounts
only prove that the Sibis were constantly changing their settlements. The Cedi is an ancient country, whose king was Sisupála
of the Mahabharata fame. The modern Baghelkhand and adjoining
regions roughly comprised the ancient Cedi country.]
हन्यात्ककयनाथं पाञचनदं सिहलाधिपं वाद्भःस् ।
नेमिबनपं किरातं श्रवणादिषु षट्स्विमान् क्रमशः NGON
If the afflicted asterisms be Sravana, Dhanistha, Satabhisaj,
Purvabhadrapada, Uttarabhidrapadaand Revati, rulers of Kekaya,
the land of the five rivers, Simhala, Bengal, the Naimisa forest and
Kiratas respectively would be killed.
[The Kekaya country lies in the northern division. This name
1s immortalized in the Ramayana because of Dagaratha’s third

On Comets XI 143
queen. Its capital was Girivraja. The country comprised the
districts of Jhelum, Shahpur and Gujarat. The country of the five
rivers is the Panjab in the western division. Sirhhala is the wellknown island of Ceylon. The Naimisiranya occupies a hallowed
place in the pages of the Mahabharata and Puranas. It is near the
Nimsar Railway Station situated to the north-west of Lucknow on
the left bank of the Gumti. The Kiratas, according to our author
(XIV. 18-30) belong to the south-west and north-east divisions.
According to Kalidzsa (Raghu. IV. 76) they lived in the Brahmaputra valley. Their descendants are still found in the Morung,
west of Sikkim.]
उल्काभिताडितशिख: शिखी शिवः शिवतरोऽतिवृष्टो यः ।
aga: स एव चोलावगाणसितहृराचीनानाम् ॥६१॥
A comet whose crest has been struck by a meteor will prove
beneficial. It would be all the more auspicious and beneficent,
should its rising be followed immediately by heavy rains. However,
it would be unfavourable to the people of Cola, the Afghans, the
white Huns and the Chinese.
[Albiruni has misread the word शिवतरो as शिवतरो: meaning
Siva’s tree. प्रतिदृष्ट instead of अतिवृष्ट is the reading adopted by Utpala.
He interprets it as “उदितमात्र एव दृष्टः? seen as soon it has risen. He
takes सित-85 a distinct people. But our author takes सित-as only an
adjective as he says elsewhere (XVI. 37) श्वेतह॒ण.]
vat यतः शिखिशिखाभिसुता यतो वा
ऋक्षं च यत् स्पृशति तत्फथितांइच देशान् ।
दिव्यप्रभावनिहतान् स यथा गरुत्मान्
भुङ्क्ते गतो नरपतिः परभोगिभोगान् ॥१२॥
Note the direction in which a comet’s crest is bent or curved
as well as to which it is projected and the asterism that is touched
by it, All the countries situated in those quarters as well as those
coming under the particular asterism in question will be overrun
by a mighty monarch of matchless valour, and the territories,
enjoyed previously by other kings, brought under control, even
as Garuda (the Vahana—vehicle of Lord Visnu) kills by his superhuman prowess the great (or inimical) serpents, and eats their
bodies.
[A beautiful simile involving Slesa—pun is employed in this
verse couched in the वसन्ततिलक्रा metre. The Countries etc. that are
affected are mentioned in Chapters XIV and XV infra.

144 Brhat Samhita
CF पराशर--
यस्यां दिशि समुत्तिष्ठेत्तां दिशं नाभियोजयेत् ।
यतः शिखा यतो धूमस्ततो यायान्नराधिपः ॥
प्रतिलोमे यतः केतोजयार्थी याति पार्थिव: |
सामान्यवाहनबलः स नाशमधिगच्छति ॥
SET पोडश वासरान्न शुभदः के र्चित्प्रदिष्टः शिखी
सर्वारम्भफलप्रदो हि नियतं चेत्रेऽथवा माधवे |
aep यत्मरिभुकतपीडितहतं यच्चाऽऽशिखाभेदितं
तत्सर्वं परिवज्यं शुद्धमपरं पारिग्रहे वास्तुषु ॥।
The last verse is patently an interpolation by a scholar
interested in electional astrology,
Another interpolated passage speaks of 105 Ketus, of which
10 are Varuna’s children, 24 ofthe Sun, 18 of Kubera, 9 of Yama,
24 of Fire and 20 of Wind. When a child of Varuna rises (and
that is in the months of Sravana and Bhadrapada i.e. the rainy
season), there will be heavy floods and prices will be normal (or
may soar high ?). The sons of the Sun rise during the next two
months of autumn and dry up all wells, tanks and rivers. Consequently cattle and other animals will perish; there will be drought,
famine and panic. In the next two months the children of fire rise
and bring about destruction of territories by fire, thefts of valuables,
flight of people in panic and outbreak of diseases. The sons of
Yamarisein the months of Magha and Phalguna. Consequently
there will be terrible famine and destruction of all grains. Kubera's
sons rise in the months of Caitra and Vaisàkha and herald good
rains commensurate with the appearance of clouds, performance of
sacrifices and such other religious rites everywhere, and happiness,
peace and plenty in the land. Vāyu’s sons rise any time during
the two months of Jyestha and Asadha. As a result of this banks
of clouds will be scattered by strong winds, tops of trees and
mansions will be swept off and rulers will be engaged in hostilities.
I have already quoted some scientific opinions about the
comets at the beginning of this chapter, Here I am quoting some
relevant scientific facts from Thomas Heath’s ‘‘The Twentieth
Century Atlas of Popular Astronomy: Comets consist of a hazy,
luminous head, accompanied by a long train of light, known as
the tail. The head usually contains a bright star-like point called
the nucleus, the most condensed part of the comet’s substance.
Round thisappears the coma, shading out from the nucleus and
forming with it the head. The tail, the least substantial part,
emanates from the coma and stretches out into space ina direction opposite to that of the sun. Some of the smaller comets show
no trace of a tail. As the comets approach nearer the sun the
tail makes its appearance. The tailis usually directed away from
Roemer

On Comets XI 145
thesun. According to some astronomers the sun exerts both the
force of attraction and repulsion on the comet according to the
density of its parts. The main body of the comet is thus kept
moving in its orbit about thesun, while the lighter particles are
driven away from the sun to form the tail. Professor Bredichin of
Moscow Observatory has come to the conclusion that the repulsive
force exerted by the sun's electrical condition has resulted in the
formation of three distinct types of tails. In the first type the tail
is long and pretty straight and is probably formed of hydrogen. In
the second type the tails are curved to some extent, and are of
moderate length. In the third type the tails are comparatively short
and still more curved and brush-like in appearance. These tails
are probably composed of particles of iron and other metals. Some
of these brighter comets have two or even three tails.
Newton proved that the movements of comets, like those of
the planets, are governed by the attraction of the sun, and moved
generally in an orbit which was practically a parabola with the sun
at the focus. There are several instances of comets breaking up into
two or more fragments. Thus wesee an intimate connection between
comets and meteors. There are eighteen periodic comets whose
orbits reach out close to the orbit of Jupiter, two to Saturn, three
to Uranus and six to Neptune.... In 1811 there appeared one of the
most splendid comets. Its tail stretched over 25° of the sky and
measured in absolute length about 100 million miles. The great
comet of 1843 was seen in broad daylight in the vicinity of the sun.
Its tail measured 150 m. miles in length. ..The star Arcturus (Svatt)
was seen shining with unimpaired brilliancy through the densest
part of Donati’s comet of 1858 (pp. 99-104).

Brhat Samhita
pito A 9331] WT AA
əy} JO uorjonijsop
pooj jo juaja
oururej [819919 MOIM
əouə[nsəq | 0०1०००० PIM
o} Surp1o22*)
o1j uro1j 129u*e(T
353210 MOYNM
SSuLy S}S229 UM
Suoure AJ[NSOH
uondriuosop
peq
pue poos ‘saya
jNOYIUM IO YUM
uorpoidrp AUY SINO[OD 9914} YIM | I urwyeig epüepeurueig
ouruisef
quoN | 7० 5४००] ‘mous “IƏA|IS e uoo ueinsiseS
| Sy8ijuoour ə[qurəsə%
)yseə-U1ON Sui[quios21 ५१५९९1 | cz yeg qenseaeuq
^. | pue solu əyi punosq
DNE 0 00——— 0 ie aa
ymos xiep pue ysnoy | oz eq Í üvimsnÁdTN
- poo[q 10 | Pes
yeo-qmnog | 2९[ “194900 eattnypueg | ५८ गम qeinsiusy
‘aay “$००३४ af qurasoy
pIo8 10 suas ‘swej | GG ung ou, [2502551
JSƏAA 10 ISEH
20 eee
३४३१4४ Kou) yorum | Uendrosaq pue uoy
ur Uuo11991I(T
G
J s39u10"7y JO Xey

On Comets XI
SI9)SVSIP -1J
(too out
uo poos sourirjoulos) *313
uriojs *qveop s. Sum 'sose
“OSIP ‘SIEM “JJəu) ‘OUTUIR]
: $j23g2 peq Jo spur I[V |
. (v81e5) SEM PALIN |
oq |
51०99 pemon [1827० moyi AA
s92uanbosuoo Iq |
$123go [NJproig
$1210 MOYN M
>न्यप्1 UM
OM) PIM
uoopy
Inj puge Mou
UY} 19110 SUIT)
1९ uooJN 29 ung
əy) uo uieoddy
UON
19311enb Luy
uonooaurp Áuy
'jsea
-qi1ou 10 YON
S
Spuleg jo
SMOI Aq papunozmg
uodvam 10 Ápoq
p21e»unjj ‘MOJO
Ə9[qurəsə: 'xoeq
10 poo[q s[quiasay `
SIUM pue Suo[
*iopuo[s Aran Sure g
12}S INYM Ə|Surs
९ SuIAey “४5४००
snoijsn[ pute Asso[:)
ƏNYM 931v[ JO WOJ
>प Jo pue Assojy
QT €ednieAStA
nye | vyvilyvsewuey
S.C JA vumsumes
AINIIIIN €.rexs* T,
exuti CILIA
uinjeg E vexvut y
(esip)
vy edaestA
po

YEN
suo01}2311p 9}¥IpP
iejs INYM ‘SIL ००० YUM
eei i pe tin
Is
T
Ë
जज ——rF Tp me T_T cd I
o
डे
svip
mq &1][[९1य०पा sonpolg
-3प"्पा31प ƏY? u
प012०गए Áuy
sayen | QE3nsxIpIA
9jerpaurioju]
nojo? ut pet
10 MO][oÁ ‘sagas yNoyIIM mq | 96 (yjzoq) | *upueqesr
“531004१ po}vount} əo[qurəsə yf थध्भ
sooquieq jo 13151[30 ४ ə[qurəsə: vuv y
pue uoo ०प oxi PUIS | cg eunieA
SAeJ1 INYM ueurqeuiq [2C 129)
ir^ ‘oienbs 10 1e[nSu* t4, | p03
Eh ME ete:
519 JO Ja\snjo e AQWA | 8 yedeleig eyeury
SÁ?I pa3J93)€9$ |
ym pue uSnox ‘səarımoyo ONY | LA putM eünly
‘ULIOj Á11ejs NOYIIM ‘pore |

On Comets XI : 149
* Tamasakilakas —In my opinion these things may stand comparison with
the modern sun-spots and solar flares discovered by astronomers with the help
of powerful telescopes. Hence it would be useful for us to know what the
scientists mean by these phenomena. Thomas Heath describes them as follows:
When a telescope of moderate power is used, it will be found that there are dark
spots on the surface of irregular form and of different sizes, sometimes arranged
in groups, sometimes separated by intervals at different parts of the disc. In the
neighbourhood of spots smaller bright patches of light are seen, more luminous
than the general surface. These are called faculae or torches
These spots are seen sometimes to split into two or more and sometimes to
coalesce to form one. They also move from the eastern edge and disappear on
the western edge, crossing the disc ina period of about twelve days Their
movements are sometimes in straight paths and at others in curved ones. The
solar spots and their influence on our Surroundings would grip the imagination
of scientists until the mystery is solved.... Alexander Wilson of Glasgow had
shown that the spots were cavities in the sun’s surface. Even this view has not
been accepted.
In 1843 Schwabe of Dessau discovered the number of spots appearing was
subject to a periodic fluctuation in a period of more than eleven years. Dr.
Rudolph Wolf of Berne proved that the eleven year period corresponds exactly
with the period which has been shown to exist in the frequency of magnetic
disturbances in the earth’s surface. Many other manifestations of the working
of nature on the earth and in its atmosphere have practically shown a periodicity
similar to that of the sun-spots. But the attempts to trace a connection between the sun
spots and the phenomena of weather, or the price of corn have not been so successful as the
probability of such a connection might have led one to expect.

Brhat Samhita
pue jysnoip *33ua[nsod ‘sue
ee 2 ee Eo
exui
---0p-- aes oy) avou sieaddy _ 19919 pauno[oo-qse svH | MIA User
— e mem ENDE SUC
ostMopo]o-nuv ur sje24]93 'Axs $ spaga ९1०५७४
uonv[ndod š sÁo.nso — *sxoo[ २१४० sə[qurəsə: ^x?*[d ‘ysnoy i
s1e2Á OI 1०] 5531151) 2 JEM [sÁvpy, 10} ouosnorA21d
‘sep „ ugy) 21001 10J वाड» JI “OCT punte ५२२४9१ OF 122 "२४.१ ०10 10 485018 ३० v jo WOJ SSH. eM
7 "Kiuodsoid | skup ; 10} uses 3६ asIMday}o | mj)Ə3%%194S
pue 330308 pue sdoio pooS-Ásso]8 JI | o13uSruprur १४१४४ | 7० Ksso[r) ‘ymos əy} 03 poun SI 35249 ST
919 oumuej| ` "imos əy}
'9)ə you əy} Ul IA ZAMIA ut s)əs pute Ays £ ५०५९०) “पृ “7४१४ 9[od
‘esopeAupey 'eiexsng 2 urel{q o) pue uwəg 1९373 ay} seyono} ‘preMu)iou
esekeig wor o[dood jo uorjonuiso(T SOAOU JI SE S9S?2JOUI quoJ 81! ‘ynos əy}
‘S UOU gp 10 0I 10} 3[9J 9०४ SYA NM EN 0} pouan} st ‘paste youl ००० 15970 SIT njoxve[e2
—op—
Soseastp
oouo[nsad puv 1B M
LE Surtureqg
pooj 3uepunq? mq ‘sasvasIp [४1४ ५्
—s Gr rr
KS +
‘ynos suey pue
sosIgAvij— pai pue 4318 |niexeupnejT
ytavueyed >प) ul
45919 IJU pPI WM
JOOS OLD SS ee
Aep uooJA sudAvay əy? JIEQ
MON 3प UO seq 8प्राइ190841-/भू०प्प& 1891० pug 5८४० UM | nexeredesr
Ue र >
| 810 ‘Asso[y | miexeanse
SSS निम्न ¿z = [ Š
1592M m ysnoy og | meisv
SoM | unou əy} spieMo1 pəyesuo[ə “५5६018 ‘Ig MJES A
^ sivodde या
USM ur uono91IG( *919 SINSTIIPPLVILYO *uordrrosa( SUTIN
£ ç l I
II siəurop JO 343eqD

‘yt Aq pordnooo st 1४१५ |ejeu kys
9soq^ SUOSI9d sioage 1 `Ə[qISIA st 1t jesuns |२५्) JO paru) ९ səldnooo—unooo ur Á1oddoo
sejinyny Jo 1oquinu oy) se 51४३४ Aueuw fe ysam ay} ur sivoddy :
niox
एप Áxouis sr yeu) 18919 ४ uM uo
S? 10J SIEM Aq padkousap 21? ssursy -11} € sə[qur9sər ‘gouvivadde m e ig Me
te SOD [WEED 810) |
ymos
SUt€UI31 ५ sejinun]A Jo s9quinu əy} se fysruprurye 353% 3५) UJ 91 ०} pouunj 18949
syjuour Aueu se 40] 0००] juepunqy - ds REE EL «o USES) || iex ORANG
पपच əuo [| ET ल्क जि रण
sivaf ¿ 10०] ssəurddeu pue sdo poop | 10) 4[u० 1s2^ Əy} UT xIe35-5130[ Jo 21qg oy) se 3॥प sy | njoxeupeg
535९3५1) [९९] ‘YSNOI SII JI `“Ə[qISIA ३५३५ ATUO [४1 suot ४ Zurjquissos yy 811 əy}
st 1 svjamyny] 30 Jaquinu əy} se प्) f- ouo 7९३५७० oq) प] | 03 pouan} 35212 ४ UYA "1९18 Asso[8 “Kun y njoxeAeug
-uow Aueur os 10} poo} jo 22uepunqy š
1SƏA
su)uour Əuru वय 4३५३14 pue ooe[q JSƏAA 91?) SD1*M0) Paste 159219 ४ UYA, Assos) nioxe[e f
oj | Auo smogs 1 | E
se[pdori jo पे jnq ‘syuoUL ij [o»uoo[qrstA Isom otpu]| प “Iys ४ pm ००९५५० Aun y | orien
10} sdo19-po03 BUISII sit WIM ssulig : ; š
"ugru ouo 1४४३ Əy} पा
51९३८ OI 2०} sdo1o-juo][oox* | 10} A[UO ysam oy} प] \
Ppəu91933s 1897० 81 YIM 'snjo[ भा ITY AA InJoxepnuINy
'Sp[10M Ásso|S sə
‘919 S[9ss2A 'sosnou ग3प) UO UIS
jt Ə[doəd jo 'sjusuidinba 1195) uo uses
ji sSurx Jo uyeə( "Ásso[8 jt |erogousg
urrjourog Jem
91e advys 99 1no[oo ‘azis *uorjour sJ njoxeAniuq
T
On Comets XI
N

ग्रगस्त्यचार: N १२ Ul
Chapter XII— Canopus
भानोवंत्मंविघातवृद्धशिखरो विग्ध्याचलः स्तस्भितो
बातापिमुनिकुक्षिभित् gagina येनासुरः ।
पीतश्चाम्बुनिधिस्तपोऽम्ड्ुनिधिना याम्या च दिग्भुषिता
तस्यागस्त्यमुनेः पयोद्युतिकृतश्चारः समासादयम् uin
The following is a brief description of the course of sage
Agastya (Canopus), who is an ocean of penance (i.e. spiritual
powers), who purifies the waters, by whom was suppressed the
Vindhya mountain whose peaks grew so high as to obstruct the
Sun's passage, by hom the demon Vatapi who tore the stomachs
of sages was eaten and digested, who drank away the ocean, and
who adorns the southern direction.
[This verse is from the समाससंहिता by our author. This is in the
शादूलविक्रीडित metre.]
समुद्रोऽन्तः जैलैमंकरनखरोत्खातशिखरेः
कृतस्तोयोच्छित्त्या सपदि सुतरां येन रुचिरः ।
पतन्मुक्तामिश्रैः प्रवरमणिरत्नाम्बुनिवहैः
सुरान् प्रत्यादेष्टुं मितमुकुटरत्नानिव पुरा ॥२॥
That sage suddenly made the ocean appear extremely charming by drying up its waters, in days of yore, through the mountains
(such as the Mainaka which were exposed) situated in its interior
whose peaks were scooped out by the claws of crocodiles (sharks,
whales etc.), and which had streams of water and excellent gems
and jewels falling down along with pearls, as though to out-shine
the Gods that have only a limited number of gems on their crowns.
[According to the Puranic story the sage Agastya drank the
ocean in a sip in order to expose the demons lying concealed within
it. The metre is शिखरिणी.]
येन चाम्बुहरणेपि fageniat: समशिरत्नविदरुमः ।
निर्गतस्तदुरगेश्व राजितः सागरोऽधिकतरं विराजितः ॥३॥

कन ——
Ganopus XII 153
Though he (ie. the sage) deprived the ocean of its waters,
still he made it more beautiful by means of the (exposed)
mountains which were devoid of trees but were bedecked with
excellent gems and corals and of the serpents that emerged from
them in long rows.
[This verse looks beautiful as a result of the figure of speech
called यमक where the word विद्रुमैः as well as राजित: appears twice
though ina different sense. The metre of this and the following
verse is स्वागता.]
प्रस्फुरत्तिमिजलेभजिह्मगः क्षिप्तरत्ननिकरो सहोदधिः।
ग्रापदां पदगतोऽपि यापितो येन पीतसलिलोऽमरश्रियम् uv
Though the ocean was reduced by him to a pitiable condition
being drained off, yet it was raised to celestial glory, as it exhibited
the glittering (or struggling) whales, water-elephants and serpents
as well as heaps of gems that were scattered about.
[The commentator interprets the first compound as applying
to the world of Gods as well : ‘That world possesses denizens some
of whom move about riding whales, some others reside inside water,
some ride elephants, some move with retrograde motion and some
go about throwing gems.]
प्रचल त्तिमिशुक्तिजशङ्भचितः सलिलेऽपहृतेऽपि पतिः सरिताम् i
सतरङ्गसितोत्पलहंसभृतः सरसः शरदीव बिभत्ति रुचम् na
Though the waters were taken away, still it came to possess,
as it were, the charm of a lake in autumn with its waves, white
lotuses and swans, asa result of its being filled with floundering
whales, pearl-oysters and conch-shells.
[रुचिम् is another reading for शुचम्. The word शुक्तिज may also be
construed as ‘Pearls’. The metre is तोटक.]
तिमिसिताम्बुधरं मणितारकं स्फटिकचन्द्रमनम्ब्रुशार द्द्युति ।
फरिगफणोपलरश्मिशिखिग्रहं कुटिलगेशवियच्च चकार य: usu
The sage transformed the ocean into the sky, as it had white
clouds in the form of whales, stars in the form of gems, the Moon
in the form of crystal gem, the autumnal splendour in the form of
the waterless bed and comets (Ketus) in the form of the rays of the
gems on the hoods of the serpents. ; "
[The poet has employed a fine, complete metaphor in addition
to alliteration. The metre is द्रुतविलम्बित.]

154 Brhat Samhita
The poet now proceeds to describe in prose the Vindhya
mountain and its treatment at the hands of the sage.
दिनक ररथमागंविच्छित्तयेऽभ्युद्यतं यच्चलच्छुङ्गसुद् ्रा-
न्तविद्याघ रांसावसक्त प्रियाव्यग्रदत्ताद्कदेहावलम्बा-
स्बरात्युच्छ्रितोद्यमानघ्वजः शोभितम्,
करिकटसदमिश्ररक्तावलेहानुवासानुसारिद्विरेफावलीनो-
amg: कृतान् बाणापुष्पेरिवोत्तंसकान् धारयम aes:
सनाथोकृतान्तदरीनिेरस् i
गगनतलमिवोल्लिखन्तं प्रवृद्धेगेजाकृष्टफुल्लद्रुमत्रासवि-
भ्रान्तमत्तद्विरेफावलीह्ृष्टमन्द्रस्वनः शेलकूटस्तरक्षक्षं-
amg लशाखामृगाध्यासितः,
रहसि मदनसक्तया रेवया कान्तयेवोपगूढं सुराध्या-
सितोद्यानमम्भोशनानन्नमूलानिलाहारविप्रान्वितं विन्ध्य
सस्तम्भयद्यश्च तस्योदयः श्रूयताम् NVN
Listen, ye, now to the rising of that sage (Agastya or
Canopus), who stemmed the Vindhya Mountain, which threatened
to obstruct the course of the Sun’s carriage by raising its peaks;
which was beautified with flags hoisted aloft in the form of the
clothes hanging and waving from the bodies of the Vidyadhara
damsels, who clinging to the shoulders of their confused lovers
eagerly seated them on their own laps; which possessed streams
inside the caves occupied by lions whose heads were covered with
bees following the smell caused by their tasting of the blood mixed
with ichor on the heads of the elephants and consequently were
wearing ornamental wreaths of Vana flowers, as it were, on their
heads; which was scratching, as it were, the firmament with its
raised peaks that had the sonorous sound of the humming of the
swarms of intoxicated bees that were scattered being shaken by the
falling trees in bloom pulled down by elephants and which (peaks)
contained hyenas, bears, tigers and monkeys; which is embraced
closely by the river Reva (Narmada) having the Madana trees
growing on her banks, as by his beloved engaged in amorous sport;
whose gardens are occupied by Gods; and where dwell Brahmanas
(sages) who live on water, roots, air and nothing.
[In these descriptions of the Vindhya mountain the poet displays his rare poetic gifts, employing his knowledge of geography
and the Puranas. He uses with consummate skill the figures of speech,
both of sound and sense, such as alliteration, Slesa, Upama, Virodha-

Canopus XII 155
bhasa, Utpreksa etc. and poetic excellences viz. sweetness, perspicuity and brilliance. This is a Dandaka with four quarters conforming to the rules of the Suramadandaka (See वृत्तरत्नाकर, footnote on
page 72).]
उदये च मुनेरगस्त्यनाम्नः कुसमायोगमलप्रदूषितानि ।
हृदयानि सतामिव स्वभावात्पुनरम्बूनि भवर्ति निर्मलानि ॥८॥
At the appearance of sage Agastya (Canopus) the waters that
are polluted (in the rainy season) by their contact with mud become
clear once again spontaneously, just as the minds (of men) that are
corrupted by association with the wicked become pure at the sight
of the virtuous.
[Sanskrit poets are fond of comparing the human mind to
water. An agitated mind is likewise compared to agitated or turbid
water.
Cf. रघुवंश IV. 21.
प्रससादोदयादम्भः कुम्भयोनेमंहोजस: |
रघोरभिभवार्शद्ध चुक्षुभे द्विषतां मनः ।।
The metre is Asafas.
Next the poet describes autumn in 4 verses.]
पाइवंद्याधिष्ठितचक्रवाकामा पुष्णती सस्वनहंसप्ङ्क्तिम् i
ताम्बूलरक्तोत्कषिताग्रदन्ती विभाति योषेव शरत्सहासा ॥६॥
The autumn which nurtures a row of cackling swans flanked
on both sides by ruddy geese, shines like a smiling damsel whose
front teeth are smeared with the red tinge of betel leaves.
[It is a poetic convention to say that the swans being tortured
by rains repair to the Manasa lake and return to the plaias in autumn. Here the comparison is between the autumn wherein the white
row of swans flanked by red cakravakas and a beautiful woman
whose white laughter is flanked by two sets of reddened teeth.
Many poets like Bhasa and Kalidasa have described autumn.
सरित्सहासा is another reading which makes the comparison more
appropriate. The metre is उपजा।त.]
इन्दीवरासन्नसितोत्पलान्विता शरद् भ्रमत्षट्पदपड्क्तिमूषिता ।
सश्रूलताक्षेपकटाक्षवीक्षरा विदग्धयोषेव विभाति सस्मरा ॥१०॥
The autumn which possesses white lotuses flanked by blue
lilies and which is adorned with rows of hovering bees, looks as

156 Brhat Samhita
charming as a clever woman in love casting side-long glances with
dancing brows.
[Instead of शरद्, सरिद् is the reading in some editions. Here
the blue lilies are compared to the dark pupils of the eyes, white
lotuses to the white eye balls and the moving bees to the moving
brows and glances. The metre is a mixture of इन्द्रवंशा. and वंशस्थ.]
इन्दोः पयोदविगमोपहितां विर्भात
द्रष्टुं तरङ्गवलया कुमुदं निशासु ।
उन्मोलयत्यलिनिलीनदलं सुपक्ष्म
वापी िलोचनमिवासिततारकान्तस् ॥ १ १॥
The pond having the bracelets of waves opens at night the
lilies on whose petals rest the bees, as its eyes with dark pupils and
beautiful lashes, as though to witness the Moon’s splendour caused
by the disappearance of the monsoon clouds.
[Here too the poet indulges in a fine imagery i.e. poetic fancy
coupled with metaphor and pun. There is also the excellence named
Samadhi or pathetic fallacy. One could find here also Dhvani or
suggestion of a love-lorn woman eagerly looking at her lover’s
charming face after a long separation.
The metre is वसन्ततिलका.]
नानाविचित्राम्बुजहंसकोककारण्डवापुणंतडागहर्ता ।
रत्न: AYA: कुसुमः फलंश्र भूर्य च्छती वा घंमगस्त्यनाम्ने ॥१२॥
The Earth offers worship, as it were, to sage Agastya with
abundant gems, flowers and fruits held in the hands viz. the pools,
filled with various kinds of lotuses, swans, ruddy geese and ducks.
[When a venerable person visits a house, the lady of the house
offers him worship. Here Mother Earth worships sage Agastya at
his arrival or rising. Here too the poet uses his poetic skill.
The metre is इन्द्रवज्त्रा.]
सलिलममरपाज्ञयोज्भितं यदघनपरिवेष्टितमृत्तिभिभुंजड्गेः ।
फरशिजनितविषाग्निसम्प्रदुष्टं भवति शिवं तदगस्त्यदर्शनेन uta
The water which is released at the command of the Rain-god
Indra by the serpents whose bodies are wrapt up in the clouds, and
which is polluted by the fire of poison emitted by them, becomes
pure and wholesome at the appearance of sage Agastya.
[The idea of serpents vitiating the waters in the clouds is an
ancient Rgvedic symbolism, where the cloud or serpent 15 said to

Canopus XII 157
impound the waters or Indra’s cattle. Sometimes the same cloud
is spoken of as the fortress of the demon Vrtra.
For a scientific explanation of the Indra-Vrtra fight see Yaska’s
Nirukta, II-14.
Itis a fact that in the rainy season river waters get muddy
and polluted. They become pure only in autumn.
The metre is पुष्पिताग्रा.]
स्मररणादपि पापमपाकुरुते किमुत स्तुतिभिवरुणाङ्गरुहः ।
सुनिभिः कथितोऽस्य यथार्घविधिः कथयामि तथव नरन्द्रहितमु ॥१४॥
Sage Agastya, son of Varuna, removes sin through mere
remembrance; how much more when he is invoked ! I shall now
explain the mode of worshipping him for the benefit of kings as it
has been propounded by ancient sages like Garga.
[It is true that Albiruni takes our author to task for mixing
science with religion. However, the objection would become untenable if we remembered the cultural background of our author as
well as the nature of the work called Samhita, which should rise
to the status of an encyclopaedia of knowledge. This verse is notable for its fine metre, which is Totaka, and graceful diction.]
संख्पाविधानात्मतिदेशमस्य विज्ञाय सन्दर्शनमादिशज्ज्ञः ।
तच्चोज्जयिन्यामगतस्य कन्यां भागे: स्वराख्यः स्फुटभास्करस्य NLN
The time of rising of Agastya-Canopus—for each country
should be determined by calculation and announced by an astronomer. Now, for Ujjain, it takes place when the Sun’s true position is T° short of Sign Virgo (Kanya).
[Colebrook comments on this verse and quotes XIV 39, 40
from the Paficasiddhantika :
विषुवच्छायाधं गुणा पञ्चकृतिस्तत्कलास्ततश्चापम् ।
छायात्रिसप्तकयुतं दशभिर्गुशितं विनाड्यस्ताः ॥
ताभिः ककटकाद्याद्यल्लग्तं Met सहस्रांशौ |
याम्याशावनितामुखविशेषतिलको भुनिरगस्त्यः ॥
“Multiply half the length of the equinoctial shadow by 25;
take from this product, expressed in minutes, the corresponding arc;
add the length of the shadow multiplied by 21; multiply by 10; this
gives the number in Vinadis. At this number, reckoning from the
beginning of Cancer, stands the Sun when Agastya rises in the
south, like a mark on the front of a damsel.”

158 Brhat Samhita
Cf. समाससंहिता
सप्तभिरंशेः कन्यामप्राप्ते रोमके तु दिवसकरे ।
₹श्योऽगस्त्योऽवन्त्यां तत्समपूर्वापरे$प्येवम् ॥
This and the following verses are in इन्द्रवस्त्रा metre.
ईषत्प्रभिन्तेऽरुणरहिमिजाले नेशेऽन्धकारे दिशि दक्षिणस्यास् |
सांवत्सरावेदितदिग्विमागे भूपोऽघंमुर्व्या प्रयतः प्रयच्छेत् ॥१६॥
कालोड्भूवेः सुरभिभिः HAA: Teva
रत्नैश्च सागरभवेः कनकाम्बरेश्च ।
धेन्वा वृषेण परमान्नयुतेशच भक्ष्यदध्यक्षतैः सुरभिधूपविलेपनेश्च ॥१७।।
When the nocturnal darkness is just pierced by the mass of
Aruna’s rays, the king being pure should offer worship to the sage,
in the south on the earth with fragrant flowers and fruits of the
season, gems got from the sea, gold, garments, milch cows, bulls,
Payasa (milk porridge). eatables, curd, coloured rice, fragrant
incense and ointments, at a place pointed out by the astronomer.
[Here the poet enumerates the articles that are used in the
worship of Deities. The metre of the second verse is वसन्ततिलका.]
नरपतिरिममर्घ श्रहधानो दधानः
प्रविगतगददोषो निजितारातिपक्षः ।
भवति यदि च दद्यात्सप्तवर्षाशि सम्यगजलनिधिरशनायाः स्वामितां याति भूमेः teu
Should a king offer this worship (to the sage) with faith at
heart, he would be free from all ailments, and deféat the entire host
of his enemies. And if he should offer the worship for a period of
seven years continuously according to rules, he would become
the unrivalled monarch of the entire earth girded by the ocean.
[The worship of Agastya is prescribed for kings. There are
other rituals also like the worship of the Banner of Indra (cf.
Chapter XLIII), Nirajana of horses etc. (chapter XLIV) and
Pusyasnana (cf. XLVIII). The number 7 plays an important role
in Indian religious belief.
The metre is मालिनी. This verse is. remarkable for its fine
diction and alliteration. ]
द्विजो यथालाभमुपाहृताघः प्राप्नोति वेदानु प्रमदाश्च पुत्रात् ।
वेश्यश्च गां भूरिं धनं च शूद्रो रोगक्षयं धर्मफलं च सबं eel

Canopus XII 159
A Brahmana who worships Agastya according to his means
would be blessed with a good knowledge of the Vedas, good wives
and sons; a Vaigya would become rich in cattle; and a Sidra would
become very wealthy. All persons in general who offer this worship
would be free from diseases and get the merits of virtuous or religious deeds.
[Having mentioned the merits of this worship accruing to
kings the author takes up the other three classes in_ this verse.
This reminds us of the फलश्रुति given in the रामायण : “qsa द्विजो वागृषभत्वमेयात्स्यात्क्षत्रियो भृमिपतित्वमेयात् ...॥?? à :
The metre is उपजाति.]
रोगान् करोति परुषः कपिलत्त्वर्वृष्टि
TA गवामशभकृत्स्फुरणो भयाय |
साञ्जिष्ठरागसरशः क्षुधमाहवांश्च
कुर्यादणुश्च पुर रोधमग सत्यनामा ॥२०॥
If Agastya is rough, he causes diseases; if russet, drought; if
smoky, harm to cattle; if throbbing, fear or danger; if red like
madder, famine and wars; and if tiny, siege of the city.
[Finally the author gives the effects of Agastya’s appearance,
colour etc. The metre is वसन्ततिलका.]
शातकुम्भस हशः स्फटिकामस्तर्पयन्निव महीं किरणाग्र: ।
रश्यते यदि तदा प्रचुरान्ना भूर्भवत्यमयरोगजनाढ्या URL
If Ganopus shines like gold or crystal and appears to refresh,
as it were, the earth with the tips (streams) of his rays, the earth
will abound in food, making the people happy and prosperous.
[किरणौधः is another reading. Utpala interprets the word शातकुम्भ
as silver For he says :—
शातकुम्मशब्द: सुवर्ण रजतथोद्व॑योरपि वाचकः ।
Cf. गर्ग—
श ङ्ककुन्देन्दुगोक्षौ रमृणालरजतप्रभः |
दृश्यते यद्यगस्त्य: स्यात् सुभिक्षक्षेमकारवः ॥
वेश्वानराविप्रतिमेर्मासशोरितकदंम: |
qiiia विविधैः किञ्चिच्छेषायते प्रजा ॥]
उल्कया विनिहतः शिखिना at aga मरकमेव विधत्ते ।
ह्यते स किल gerne रोहिणीमुपगतेऽस्तमुपति ॥२२॥

160 Brhat Samhita
If Agastya be struck by a meteor or comet, there would certainly be danger of famine and pestilence. It is said that Canopus
rises when the Sun is stationed in the asterism Hasta and sets when
the Sun goes to Rohini.
[This verse the author employs only to give expression to the
traditional view with regard to Agastya’s rising and setting. This
is borne out by the expression. “g few...". The commentator too
expresses the same idea :
“यद्यप्यत्र गशितसाम्यं न भवति तथाप्याचार्येण पुर्वेशास्त्रदृष्टत्वात्कथितम् |”
For the author has specifically stated thus in the पञ्चसिद्धान्तिका, (See
notes under verse 15 supra) पराशर too makes the traditional statement :
“हुस्तस्थे स वितर्थृदेति रोहिणीसंस्थे प्रविशति : He continues thus—srarer fafaधश्चारोदयकालो दृष्ट:--प्राश्वयुग्बहुलाप्टमीपञ्चदर्यो: कात्तिकाष्टम्यां वा 1 तत्राश्वयु-
ग्बहुलोदितः सुवृष्टिज्ञेमान्तसम्पत्कर: | वर्गेश्चावेदयति । अग्निपरुषरुक्षाभो रोगाय
कपिलो वृष्टिनिग्रहाय । धूमाभो गवामभावाय। माञ्जिष्ठः कुङ्कुमच्छविः
्षुच्छस्त्रदः | नीलोऽतिवर्षाय | संवृतः पुररोधाय | स्पन्दनो भयाय |
अपि च--
हन्यादुल्का यदागस्त्यं केतुर्वाप्युपधूपयेत् |
दुभिक्षं जनमाररच तदा जगति जायते ॥
सुस्निगधवणाँः ITA शातकुम्भसमप्रभः |
सुनिः क्षेमसुभिक्षाय प्रजानामभयाय च ॥
The metre is स्वागता.]

सप्तषिचार: NIN
Chapter XIII —Course of The Seven Sages
सैकावलीव राजति ससितोत्पलमालिनी सहासेव ।
नाथवतीव च fara: कोबेरी सप्तभि्मुनिभिः utu
ध्रुवनायकोपदेशान्नरिनर्ततीवोत्तरा भ्रमश्च ।
येश्चारमहं तेषां कथयिष्ये वृद्धगर्गमतात् uqu
I shall now expound, according to the view of the Sage
Vrddha (Senior) Garga, the movements of the Seven Seers (the
Great Bear), through whom the northern region shines as though
bedecked with a pearl necklace, like a maiden with a smiling countenance wearing a garland of white lotuses, by whom she appears to
have a lord (or husband), and by whose circular movements the
northern quarter seems verily dancing at the instruction of the
leader, viz., the Pole-Star.
[The author who is a born poet cannot resist the overtures of
his muse and bursts into fine poetry at the sight of the beautiful line
of seven stars looking like a pearl necklace which he must have enjoyed on several nights. He employs in this verse simile, metaphor
and poetic fancy.
Cf. agag मगृप्त--
sarig सव्यगममरारणां क्षितिजसंस्थमुडुचक्रम् ।
अपसब्यगमसुराणां भ्रमति प्रवहानिलक्षिप्तम् ॥]
ग्रासन्मघासु मुनयः शासति पृथ्वीं युधिष्ठिरे न्पतौ i
घट््विकपञ्चद्वियुतः शककालस्तस्य राज्ञश्च UU
The Seven Sages were stationed in the asterism Magha when,
king Yudhisthira Was ruling over the earth. The commencement
of the Saka era took place 2526 years after the period of that
monarch.
[There is difference of opinion among scholars with regard to
f शककालः. According to some it means the beginnthe interpretation o
and according to others the Salivahana
ing of the Vikrama era,

162 Brhat Samhita
era, and some others hold that it refers to the Buddha era. The
year of the Mahabharata War ranges from 950 B.C. to 3201 B.C.
in the opinions of different scholars from Pargiter to Mankad. On
the basis of the planetary positions mentioned in the Great Epic as
as well as the day of Bhisma’s departure i.e. 8th Tithi ruled by
the star Rohini in the bright fortnight of the lunar month Magha
at noon at the commencement of the winter solstice, astronomers
have fixed the commencement of the Kaliyuga at 3102 B.C. and
the Great War at 3138 B.C. For according to the मत्स्यपुराण Kaliyuga
started on the very day that the Lord Krsna closed His incarnation.
According to the Epic itself Srikrsna’s departure took place 36 years
after the War. If we deduct the number 2526 from the date of king
Yudhisthira, 3138, we get 612 B.C. as the commencement of the
Sakakala referred to by our author. Thus we come across a great
hurdle in accepting the above date, 3138 B.C., assigned to the
Great War or Yudhisthira, the latter having been crowned at the
end of the 18-day war. If the Sakakala of Varahamihira refers to
the Vikrama era, then Yudhisthira’s period would be 2582 B.C.;
on the other hand if it be Salivahana era, the year would be
Cf. agmi—
कलिद्वापरसन्धौ तु स्थितास्ते पितृदेवतम् |
मुनयो धर्मनिरताः प्रजानां पालने रताः u]
एकेकस्मिन्नृक्षे शतं शतं ते चरन्ति वर्षाशास् |
प्रागुदयतोऽप्यविवराहजून्नयति तत्र संयुक्ताः uyu
The Sages traverse through each lunar mansion fora period
of 100 years. Whichever constellation makes them conspicuous when
they rise to the east of it, in that they are said to be situated.
[The second line has a variant reading :
प्रागुत्तरतरचते सदोदयन्ते ससाध्वीकाः |
This is clearer in sense and flawless in construction. This
reading might have been suggested by some earlier commentator.
This would mean : “These Sages accompanied by the chaste Arundhati always rise in the north-east.” But then the two readings
express different ideas viz. the direction of rising and the constellation in which they are posited at the time.

Course of the Seven Sages XIII 163
Cf. कश्यप--
ad शतं तु वर्षाणामेकेकस्मिन् WW: |
नक्षत्रे निवसन्त्येते ससाध्वीका महातपाः ॥ ]
qd भागे भगवान्मरीचिरपरे स्थितो वसिष्ठोऽस्मात् |
तस्याङ्गिरास्ततोऽत्रिस्तस्यासन्नः पुलस्त्यश्च UL
पुलहः ऋतुरिति भगवानासन्ता AJANT पूर्वाद्यात् ।
तत्र वसिष्ठ मुनिवरमुपाश्रितारुन्धती साध्वी usu
Among the Sages the revered Marici is situated in the east;
to his west is Vasistha, to his west is Angiras; to his west is situated
Atri; and close to him is Pulastya. Next to him are in order Pulaha
and Kratu. Arundhats, the paragon of virtue, is close to the great
Sage Vasistha among them.
उल्काशनिधूमाद्यहँता विवर्णा विरश्मयों qeu 1
gg: स्वं स्वं वर्ग विपुलाः स्निग्धाश्च तदवृद्धय ॥७॥
When these Sages (the Great Bear) are attacked by meteors,
thunderbolts, smoke and the like, or when they become pale, devoid
of rays or tiny, they will destroy severally their own dependencies
(as stated blow), whereas they help the same to prosper, if they
appear large and bright.
[Gf वृद्धगर्गे--
उल्कया केतुना वापि धूमेन रजसापि वा ।
हता विवर्णाः स्वल्पा वा किरणः परिवजिताः ।।
सवं स्वं वर्गं तदा हन्युर्मुयः सर्वं एव ते ।
विपुलाः स्तिगधवर्णाश्च स्ववरगेपरिपोषकाः ॥
Their Vargas are enumerated in the following 4 verses. ]
गन्धर्व देवदानवमन्त्रौषधिसिद्धयक्षनागानाम् |
पीडाकरो मरीचिज्ञेयो विद्याधराणां च usu
शकयवनदरदपारतकाम्बोजांस्तापसान् वनोपेतान् ।
हन्ति वसिष्ठोऽभिहतो विवृद्धिदो रहिमसम्पन्नः ॥९॥
श्रज्धिरसो ज्ञानयुता धीमन्तो ब्राह्मराशच निदिष्टाः ।
gr3: कान्तारभवा जलजान्यस्भोनिधिः सरितः ॥१०॥
रक्षःपिज्ञाचदानवदत्यभुजङ्भाः स्मृताः पुलस्त्यस्य ।
पुलहस्य तु मूलफलं क्रतोस्तु यज्ञाः सयज्ञभृतः utt
When Marci is hurt, he is said to harm the Gandharvas,

164 Brhat Samhita
Gods, demons, spells, herbs, angels, Yaksas, Nagas and Vidyadharas. Vasistha, when hurt, proves harmful to the Sakas, Yavanas
Daradas, Paratas, Kambojas, hermits and those living in forests
when radiant, he bestows prosperity. Scholars, intelligent men and
Brahmins are mentioned as belonging to the domain of Angiras;
and foresters, aquatic products, the ocean and rivers are assigned to
Atri. Giants, devils, demons, Daityas and serpents are said to
belong to Pulastya; roots and fruits to Pulaha; and sacrifices and
sacrificers to Kratu.
[In these verses different classes of beings, tribes and articles
are mentioned as coming under the influence of the Seven Sages,
For a detailed treatment of geographical jurisdiction of the planets,
asterisms and quarters the following three chapters may be referred to.
Cf. also aemi—
देबदानवगन्धर्वा सिद्धपन्नगराक्षसा: ।
नागा विद्याधराः सर्वे मरीचेः परिकीतिता: 11
यवनाः पारताइचेव काम्बोजा दरदा: शका: |
वसिष्ठस्य विनिदिष्टास्तापसा वनमाश्रिताः ॥
धीमन्तो ब्राह्मणा ये च ज्ञानविज्ञानपारगाः |
रूपलावण्यसंयुक्ता मुनेरङ्गिरसः स्मृताः ॥
कान्तारजास्तथाम्भोजा अत्रेयें सरिदाश्रिताः |
पिशाचा दानवा देत्या भुजङ्गा राक्षसास्तथा ।।
पुलस्त्यस्य विनिदिष्टाः पुष्पं मूलं फलं च यत् |
तत्सर्वं पुलहस्योकतं यज्ञा यज्ञभृतश्च ये ॥
क्रतोरेव विनिदिष्टा वेदज्ञा ब्राह्मणास्तथा ।]

कूम विभागः USSU
Chapter XIV— Division of Globe
नक्षत्रत्रयवर्गे राग्नेयाद्येव्यवस्थितनंवधा i
भारतवर्ष मध्यप्रागादिविभाजिता देशाः ॥ १॥
In Bhàratavarsa the central region and other countries in
regular order beginning with those situated in the east are assigned
to the nine triads of stars beginning with Krttika.
[The central region is ruled - by the three stars Krttika,
Rohini and Mrgasiras, the countries to the east by the next triad
and so on. By Bháratavarsa what is meant is the land lying to the
south of Meru. This is the last of the nine Varsas.
Cf. mi—
कृत्तिकाच्येस्त्रिनक्षत्रेभवगेनेवभिः क्षितिः à
कल्पिता मध्यदेश्यादौ प्रागादिक्रमयोगत: ॥
कुत्तिकाद्यस्त्रितक्षत्रो मध्यदेशे गणो यदा |
पापेरुपहतो हन्ति मध्यदेशाखिलांस्तदा ॥
रौद्रादिको हन्ति पूर्वा सार्पाद्य: पूर्वदक्षिणाम् i
ग्रार्यम्णाद्यस्तथा याम्यां स्वात्याद्यो दक्षिणापराम् |
्यष्ठाद्यः पश्चिमामाशां वंश्वाद्श्चाप रोत्तराम् ।
वारुण्याद्यो हन्ति सौम्यां पौष्णाद्यः शूलिनो दिशम् u]
मद्रारिमेदमाण्डव्यसाल्वनीपोज्जिहानसंख्याताः ।
मरुवत्सघोषयामुनसारस्वतमत्स्यमाध्यमिकाः ust
माथुरकोपज्योतिषधर्मारण्यानि शूरसेनाश्च ।
गौरग्री वो ददे हिकपाण्डुगुडाइवत्थपाञ्चालाः NRN
साकेतकड्ूकुरकालकोटिकुकुराइच पारियात्रनगः । š
्रोदुम्बरकापिष्ठलगजाह्वयाशचेति सध्यमिदस् ॥३४॥।
To the central region belong the following countries : Bhadra,
Arimeda, Mandavya, Salva, Nipa, Ujjihana, Samkhyata, Marwar

166 Brhat Samhita
(desert land), Vatsa, Ghosa, those of the Yamuna and Sarasvaty,
Matsya, Madhyamika, Mathura, Upajyotisa, Dharmaranya (holy
place), Sürasena, Gauragriva, Uddehika, Pandu, Guda (or (Panduguda?) Aévattha, Pañcala, Saketa (or Ayodhya) Kanka, Kuru,
Kalakoti, Kukura, Pariyatra mountain, Udumbara, Kapisthala
and Hastinapura.
[Alberuni speaks thus of the Kürma-cakra : ‘Their astronomers and astrologers divide the directions according to the lunar
stations, ...and the figure which represents this division is similar to
a tortoise. Therefore it is called Kgrma-cakrai.e. the tortoise-circle or
the tortoise-shape (I 296-97).’? The Markandeya Purana (LV III 80-81)
lays down certain propitiatory rituals for the affliction of asterisms
and planets ruling a country. This division of India into nine parts
is a very ancient device. In the Puranas the country is divided into
seven regions viz. Madhyade$a, Udicya, Pracya, Daksinapatha,
Aparanta, Vindhyavasinah and Parvatasrayinah. Rajasekhara
divides Kumaradvipa in his Kavyanusasana into five dejas. Both in
the Atharvaveda (XIX 17.1.9) and the Aitareya Brahmana (VIII 14)
this five-fold division is met with.
Many of the places or countries mentioned in these lists cannot be identified with certainty. It is doubtful whether Varàhamihira himself was acquainted with all these. According to Kern
Bhadra is a class of blessed people. Panduguda is one word, according to the commentator, but according to Alberuni and Kern it is
Pandu and Guda. The Udumbara region is included in the Gurdaspur district.
Matsya country is mentioned prominently in the Mahabharata.
Viráta was its king. The Pandavas lived in disguise for one year
as servants of this king. The Salva country is connected with Matsya.
"Salva comprised the territory extending from Alwar to north
Bikaner with Salvapura, probably modern Alwar, as its principal
city." Ujjihana is the same as Uddiyana, which is corrupted into
Urain in Monghyr district, near Kiul, according toN.L. Dey Vogel
identifies it with Ujjhana near Bhikdeo in the Kanpur District.
According to another opinion itisidentical with the Ujhani town
in Badaun district. Kapisthala is said to be identical with the
modern Kaithal in the Karnal district. Alberuni calls it Kavital.
Madhyamikas are the inhabitants of the country Madhyamika identified with Nagar near Chitor in Rajasthan. The Vatsas are an ancient
l. Vide India As known to Panini, p. 55.

Division of Globe XIV 167
people whose monarch was Udayana with his capital Kausambyi,
modern Kosam on the Yamuna. Uddehika is identified by Alberuni
with a place situated near Bazana, eighty miles from Kanauj.
Bazana is said to have been the capital of Gujarat. The Udumbara
territory is said to have comprised Pathankot, the eastern part of the
Kangra Valley and the Hoshiarpur district. Dharmáranya, according
to the Mahabharata (III. 82.46), is the same as Kanvasrama
(Kansawa near Kota). The Sarasvatas are the people living on the
banks of the Sarasvati river. At present there is a small stream
called Sarsuti, rising in the hills of Sirmur in the Sevaliks and
emerging into the plains at Ad-Badri in Ambala.
Our author places Pañcala in Madhyadesa, but originally it
lay to the north and west of Delhi from the foot of the Himalayas
to the river Chambal. The Ganga divided it into Uttara and Daksina Pañcala. According to Parasara the Madhyadesa includes what
is called Aryavarta. From this we have to deduce that in ancient
India the land lying between the two mountains, the Himalayas
and the Vindhya, was designated as Madhyadesa.
In this connection Sage Parasara gives a graphic description
of Jambiidvipa and its subdivisions as follows :
चत्वारिशोत्तरं योजनसहस्र' जम्बूद्वीपस्तत्र पूर्वादापश्चिमाणावमपगाढाः षण्महागिरयः। हिमवान् हेमकूटो निषधो नीलः श्वेतः श्यू्धवांश्च । शतं सहस्राणामितरेषां
षष्टिसहस्राणि काञ्चनमयानां गिरीणां चत्वारिशन्महानद्यश्चत्वार उदधयः | कुनदीनां
षष्ट्रिसहस्राणि या महार्णावमनुप्रविशन्ति। एकनवती राज्यानामेकोनशतं कुराज्यानां
दश जाङ्गलानि मरवोऽष्टावशीतिः (अष्टाविशतिः) कच्छास्तावन्त एव द्वीपाः। पञ्च
जनपदसहस्राणि । तत्र कृत्तिकादीनि त्रीणि मध्यदेशेऽस्मिन्वषं भवन्त्यार्द्रादीनि त्रीणि
्रीण्युक्तवर्जं क्रमात्पूर्वादिष्वष्टासु दिक्षु | दिङ्नक्षत्रेषूप सृष्टेषु दिगजनपदानामेवोपतापो
भवति, विशेषतस्तु शूरसेनमगधकलि ङ्गावन्तिसौवीरसँन्धवहाररश्नूतिमन्दकुणिन्दाधि-
पतीनाम् | ग्रतः परं दिग्जनपदान् व्याख्यास्यामः ।
ग्रथ मध्यदेशे भ्रार्यावतं इति य आख्यायते तत्र जनपदा:--श्रसेनोद्देहिकपा्डुगुडाश्वत्थनीपकाचनकौरवौत्तमञ्योतिषभद्रारिमेदमाध्यमिकसाल्वसाकेतमत्स्यकपि-
ठल चक्रदौले पमा्डव्यपाण्डुनगरगौरग्रीवपारियात्रिककुकुरराज्यो दुम्बरयामुनगजा ह्वयो-
ज्जिहानकालको टिमाथुरोत्तरदक्षिणपाचालकुस्कषेत्रधर्मारण्यसारस्वताः u]
ग्रथ पूर्वस्यामञ्जन वृषमध्वजपद्ममाल्यवद्गिरयः ।
व्या घ्रमुखसुह्मकवंट'चान्द्रपुराः शूर्पकर्णाश्च uxu
खसमगधशिबिरगिरिमिथिलसमतटोड़ाइवबदनदन्तुरकाः ।
प्राग्ज्योतिषलोौहित्यक्षी रोदसमुद्रपुरुषादाः Usu

168 Brhat Samhita
उदयगि रिभद्रगौडकपोण्ड्रोत्तलकाशिमेकलास्बष्ठा: |
एकपदतास्रलिप्तककोसलका वर्घसानाइच ॥७॥।
To the east are situated the seven mountains viz. Arijana, Vrsabhadhvaja, Padma, Malyavan, Sibira, Udayagiri and Mekala, the
river Lauhitya, the milky ocean, the Vyaghramukhas (people whose
face resembles the tiger’s), Suhmas, Karvatas, those of Candrapura,
Sürpakarnas (whose ears resembled winnowing basket), Khasas,
Magadha country, Mithila, Samatata, Orissa, the Asvavadanas (a
tribe whose face resembled the horses), the Danturakas (possibly a
people with protruding teeth), Pragiyotisa, Cannibals, the Bhadras,
Gaudas, Paundras, Utkala, Kasi, the Ambasthas, the one-footed
people, those of Tamralipti, Kosala and Burdwan.
[The Lauhitya is identified with the Brahmaputra. A tributary
of this river is even now called Lohit. Mudlyavan is identified by
Pargiter with the hills near Kupal, Mudgal and Raichur. Our
author locates this in the eastern region. The Udayagiri may be
the mythical Rising Mountain or the one near Bhuvaneshwar in
Orissa.
In this section we come across the names of many tribes like
the Ambasthas. According to Manu an Ambastha is the offspring
ofa Brahmana father and a Vaisya mother. In our text it means
a territory peopled by this tribe. They are also mentioned in the
south-western division (verse 17 infra). Alexander’s historians refer
to them as living in the northern part of Sind and on the lower
Ghenab. In the Mahabharata they are spoken of along with the
north-western tribes such as the Sibis and Ksudrakas. They are also
mentioned by Ptolemy as living in the Vindhya region.
Suhma is mentioned both in the Mahabharata and the Raghuvamsa (IV. 35-36). Kalidasa locates it to the west of Vanga.
According to Dandin Tamralipti, modern Tamluk in the Midnapur
district, was included in the Suhma country.
The Khasas are found both in the eastern and northern divisions. The country of these people was included in the hill-states of
Rajapurt and Lohara They are represented by modern Khakkas in
Kashmir.
Magadha originally comprised the districts of Patna and Gaya
in Bihar. In the Rgveda (III 53.14) its name is Ktkata, but in the
Atharvaveda (V. 22.14) it is called Magadha itself.

Division of Globe XIV 169
Samatata is associated with Davaka (Nogong district of Assam)
and Kamaripa \Assam) in Samudragupta’s Allahabad Prafasti. In
the time of the Khadga rulers Karmmanta (modern Kamta near
Comilla) was the capital of Samatata.
Pragjyotisa is the region around Gauhati. , According to the
Raghuvarhsa (IV. 81) it lay on the other bank of the Lauhitya.
Hemacandra tells usin his Abhidhanacintamani (IV. 22) that this
place is the same as Kamaripa.
Paundra corresponds to North Bengal with its capital at
Mahasthan in the Bogra district. |
Gaudaka comprised the present Murshidabad district. Sometimes it means the whole of Bengal. Others hold that Western
Bengal came to be called Gauda from the city of the same name.
Cf. पराशर---
ग्रथ पूर्वस्यां माल्यवच्छिबिराञजनपद्मवृषभध्वजोदयशिखरिदन्तुरकाः काशि-
को शल मिथिलमेकलो त्क लपुण्डूकर्वंटसमतटोडू गौड कभद्रद्रविडसुह्यता म्रलिप्तप्राग्ज्योतिषवद्ध मानवाजिमुखाम्बष्ठपुरुषादकशिकोष्ठा घिश्रोत्रव्या प्रमुख ली हित्या णावक्षी रोदाणांवमी-
नाशनकिरातसौवीरमहीधरा विवसनेकपादोदयानुवासिनशचेति ॥]
श्राग्नेय्यां दिशि कोसलकलिङ्कवङ्गोपवद्भजठरा ङ्गाः ।
झौलिकविदभंवत्सान्ध्रचेदिकाइचोध्वंकण्ठाइच ॥।८॥
वृषनालिकेरचमंट्टीपा विन्ध्यान्तवासिनस्त्रपुरी ।
इमश्रुधरहेमकुड्यव्यालग्रीवा महाग्रीवाः NU
किष्किन्धकण्टकस्थलनिषादराष्ट्राशि पुरिकदगशार्णाः ।
सह नग्नपणंशबरेराइलेषाह्ये त्रिके देशाः ॥१०॥
In the south-east are situated Kosala, Kalinga, Vanga, Upavanga, Jatharanga, Sulikas, Vidarbha, Vatsa, Andhra, Cedi, the
Urdhvakanthas (high-necked ones), the island of Vrsa, Nalikeradvipa (the Cocoa-nut Island), Carmadvipa, the inhabitants of the
Vindhya range, Tripuri, the Smaégrudharas (the bearded ones),
Hemakudya, the Vyalagrivas (the serpent-necked), the Mahagrivas
(long-necked ones), Kiskindha, Kantakasthala, the territory of the
Nisadas (aborigines), the Purikas, Dasarna, the naked Sabaras and
Parna-$abaras (those wearing leaves). All these places come under
the jurisdiction of the triad beginning with Aslega.

170 Brhat Samhita
[The Kosala country has been already assigned to the east.
Here it is placed in the south-east as well. This means that its
territorial boundaries extended from the east to the south-east
considerably. The people of Kosala are called Kosalaka or Kausalaka. For, our author uses both the forms. The eastern Kosala
roughly corresponds to the present Oudh. During the period of
Sri Rama’s sons, Kuga and Lava, Kosala country was divided into
two territories viz. Uttara and Daksina Kosala with their capitals
at Sravasti and Kugasthalf respectively. As the name indicates
Kuga’s capital must have been named after him. Our author tells
us (in LXXX-6) that the diamonds mined in Kosala have the
lustre of the Sirisa flower.]
Kalinga comprised the districts of Puri and Ganjam. It was
this country that Asoka conquered.
Vanga is mentioned by Kalidasa (Raghu. IV-36) as situated
in the delta formed by the Ganga and the Brahmaputra. According
to Pargiter it comprised the districts of Murshidabad, Nadia,
Jessore, parts of Rajshahi, Pabra and Faridpur.
Upavanga has been identified with the central area of the eastern part of the delta of the Ganga. According to Alberuni Jatharanga consists of two territories viz. Jathara and Anga.
The Szlikas are called Cülikas in the Puranas. In the Matsyapuràna this country is said to be watered by the Caksu (Oxus). A
branch of the Sülikas that migrated to Orissa is to be identified
with the Sulkis. P.C. Bagchi connects the Stlikas with the Calukyas of the Deccan.
Vidarbha comprised modern Berar and the territory between
the rivers Varada and Wainganga. Acarya Dandin praises the
Vaidarbhi style as containing all the ten literary excellences. In
ancient times it was a famous country where lived distinguished
scholars and poets. Damayanti, consort of Nala, hailed from this
country.
The Cedi country roughly corresponds to modern Baghelkhand
and adjoining regions.
Tripuri was the capital of the Kalacuris.
Kantakasthala is identified with the ancient Kantakasaila,
modern Ghanta$ala.
The Nisadas are identified by some with the Bhils. The Mahabharata (III. 130.4) mentions Vinagana or the place of the disap-

Division of Globe 171
pearance of the Saraswati as the gate of Nisadarastra. It places a
Nisada settlement between Matsya and the Chambal (II.
Purika was situated at the foot of the mountain Rksavat (Satpura), according to the Harivarnsa.
Kigkindha was the capital of Valin and later of Sugriva. It is
the hilly region in the vicinity of the Hampi ruins of Vijayanagar
in the Bellary district. The Rsyamüka mountain where Sugriva
is said to have taken refuge is visible from the Virupaksa temple at
Hampi.
Dasarna is the region east of Vidi$à watered by the river
Dasarna, modern Dhasan. Kalidasa has paid his tribute to this
country in his Meghadita : “कतिपयदिनस्थायिहंसा दशार्णाः । The grammarian Katyayana has included this word in a Varttika.
Sabaras are an aboriginal tribe. In the Matsya and Vayu Puranas they are mentioned as inhabitants of Daksinapatha. In the
south they are found in almost all States, while in the north they
are found to the south-west of Gwalior and Narwar and in southern
Rajputana. Nagna and Parna-sabaras are two subdivisions of these
forest tribes. The latter group of Sabaras is still called in South
Kanara district by the name Soppu Koragas, meaning leaf-Koravas.]
श्रथ दक्षिणेन लङ्काकालाजिनसोरिकीर्णंतालिकटाः ।
गिरिनगरमलयददु रमहेन्द्रमालिन्द्य मरुकच्छा: ut
कङ्टकडवनवासिशिबिकफरिका रको्भूरा मी रा: |
प्राक रवेशावतकदशपुरगोनर्दकेरलकाः ॥ १२।।
कर्राटमहाटविचित्रकूटनासिक्यकोल्ल गिरिचोलाः ।
क्रौञ्चट्वीपजटाधरकावेर्यो रिष्यमूकइचच uti
वेदूयंशङ्भमुक्ता त्रिवारिचरधमंपट्टन द्वीपाः ।
गणराज्यकष्णवेल्लरपिशिकशार्पाद्रिकुसुमनगाः utu
तुस्बवनकार्मणेयकयाम्योदषितापसाश्रमा ऋषिकाः ।
काञचीसरुचीपटुनचेर्यायर्कासहला ऋषभाः ॥ १५
बलदेवपटूनं दण्डकावनति्मिङ्गिलाशना AAT: ।
कच्छोऽथ कुञ्जरदरी सतास्रपर्णोति विज्ञेयाः ॥१६॥
Now in the south are situated Lanka, the Kalajinas, Saurikirnas, Talikatas, Girinagara, the mountains Malaya, Dardura,

172 Brhat Samhita
Mahendra and Malindya, the Bharukacchas, the Kankatas, Kankanas, Vanavasi (modern Banavasi in North Kanara district), the
Sibikas, Phanikaras, Konkanas, Abhiras, the mine-region, the Vena
river, the Avartakas, Dasapura, the Gonardas, Kerala, Karnataka,
the Mahatavi (the Great Forest), Citrakuta hill, Nasik, Kollagiri
(a hill of that name), the Colas, the Kraufica island, the Jatadharas (those that have matted locks), the Kaveri river, Rsyamüka
mountain, the mines of beryl, conch shells and pearls, Atri’s her.
mitage, the mariners, Dharmapattana (Dharmapuri ?), the islands,
Ganarajya, Krsna, Velluru, the Pisikas, the Surpa mountain, mount
Kusuma, Tumbavana (a forest), the Karmaneyakas, the Southern
Ocean, Tàpasásrama (a place abounding in hermitages), the Rsikas,
Kafict, Marucipattana, Ceryaryakas (or Ceryas i.e. people of Cera
or Kerala, kingdom, and the Aryakas), the Sirmhalas, Rsabhas,
Baladevapattana (the modern Valarpatnam in Malabar ?), Dandaka
forest, the whale-eaters, the Bhadras, Cutch, elephant caves (where
they are caught) and the Tamraparni river.
[We have to find out the reason for the separate mention of
Lanka and Simhala. Fleet suggests **Lanka seems to denote here not
the island of Ceylon, but its capital city, because it provides the
Hindu prime meridian.]
Kalajina, which is also spelt as Kalarijana, is identical with
Kalafijara, according to Fleet. According to a Puranic verse,
“सप्तव्याधा दशार्णेषु मृगाः कालाञ्जने गिरी...,” which is recited at Sraddhas,
it is a mountain of some religious importance. We cannot be sure
of its location. It may be a mountain in the south abounding
in Krsnamrgas, a type of spotted dear, whose skins are used for
various religious purposes such as the Upanayana.
Saurikirnas : Kern splits this word as Sauri and Kirna and
identifies the former with the Sorae or Colas of Ptolemy.
Talikata is identified by Fleet with Talikot in the Bijapur
district.-.A.M. Shastri feels that it would be more appropriate to
identify it with Talakadu in Mysore, the celebrated capital of the
Gangas. In my view Talikot is preferable.
Girinagara is the modern Junagadh, which is immortalized by
the Girnar inscription of Rudradaman I.
Bharukaccha is the modern Broach which was Barygaza to
the Greeks.
Malaya and Dardura are twin mountains in the south. The

Division of Globe XIV 173
former stands for the southern part of the western Ghats from the
Nilgiris to Cape Comorin. In the Mahabharata (Drona 23.70-72)
it is associated with the Pandyas. Dardura is identified with the
Nilgiris or Palni Hills. Kalidasa compares these two mountains to
the bosoms of Earth
Mahendra ‘‘embraces the entire chain of hills extending from
Ganjam to Tinnevelly." Kalidasa associates it with Kalinga
(Raghu. VI. 54). In the Ramayana Hanuman is described as flying
across the ocean from the summit of this mountain.
Abhtras are supposed to have entered India from eastern Iran
about the second century B.C. They were also considered to be
Sudras. They must have migrated later to the south from the north.
In the second and third centuries of the Christian era they were
occupying important political positions in Gujarat and Nasik.
Akara is identified by Kern with modern Khandesh. The
word occurs in the inscription of Rudradaman I. Therein it denotes
eastern Malwa. The name is still preserved in Agar, 35 miles
north east of Ujjain. l
Vena is the modern Wainganga, a tributary of the Godavari.
Dasapura, which is mentioned by Kalidasa, as well as in the
inscription of the Guild of Silk-weavers, has been identified with the
modern Mandasor.
The Sibis are identified by some with the Sivas of the Rgveda,
which is not convincing. There is a Sibijataka written by AryaSura. These Jatakas know of two Sibi settlements with their capitals at Aristapura and at Jetuttara, Jattaraur of Alberuni, modern
Nagari, 11 miles north of Chitor. Fa-hian locates the scene of the
Sibijataka at Sborkot in the Punjab. Thus it cannot be said with
certainty who and where exactly these Sibis were in the south. It is
possible that some branches of them might have migrated to the
south.
Gonarda is said to be the birth place of Patafijali. It is also
mentioned in the Markandeya Purana. In the Suttanipata it has
been placed between Ujjayin! and Vidiga. However, Patafijali was
not a south-Indian.
The Rsikas are spoken of along with Vidarbha, Mahisaka,
Agmaka and Anüpa, according to the Ramayana and the Mahabharata.

174 i Brhat Samhita
Of. पराशर
अथ दक्षिणस्यां विन्घ्यकुसुमापीड दर्द्रमहेन्द्र शूपवत्समलयमालिन्दावन्तिसाम्बवतिदशपुरंककच्छभरुकच्छद्धिवनवासोपगिरिभद्र गिरिनगरदण्डकगराराज्यत्रिराजकर्कोटकज्चनतिमिड्लाहाररिष्यमूकतापसाश्रमशद्भ मुक्ताप्रवालवेदूर्याक रोद्वक्त्ात्रिवारिचरा-
णंवचोलककौवेरकावेरिकपाशिक धमपट्टनपट्रिकाशकृष्णवेल्लूरता'म्रपणांनामंदगोनदेचा-
ञ्चीकपट्टनतालिकटसौ रिकी णंसहका रिवेणातटतुम्बवनका ला जिनद्वी पकरणशिका र शिबिको-
ङ्कुणचित्रकूटकर्णाटमहाटविकान्ध्रकोल्लगिरिनासिक्यकार्मेरोयकावेर्वारुकवेधिनिकबलदेवपटुनक्रोच्चद्वीपर्सिहलाः परमतदर्दूरमलयमरीचित्रकूटशिखरालङ्कृतालङ्क र शूर्प पर्वतकुञ्जरदरीसम्भोगवतिन्णां गिरिसाराश्रमाः ॥ ]
नऋ त्यां दिशि देशाः पह्व॑वकाम्बोजसिन्धुसौवीराः à
वडवामुखारवाम्बष्ठकपिलनारीसुखानर्ताः ॥ १७।१
फेणगिरियवनमार्गरकणंप्रावेयपारशवशद्राः ।
बर्बरकिरातखण्डक्रव्या दाभीरचङचुकाः ॥। १८।।
हेमगिरिसिन्धुकालकरवतकसुराष्ट्रबादरद्रविडाः ।
स्वात्याद्ये मत्रितये ज्ञेयश्च महाणंवो$त्रेव ॥ १६॥।
In the south-west are situated the following countries. Those
of the. Pahlavas, Kambojas, Sindhu-Sauviras, Vadavamukhas,
Aravas, Ambasthas, Kapilas, Narimukhas, Anartas (Northern
Gujarat), the Phenagiri, Yavanas, Margaras, Karnapraveyas, PāraSavas, Sidras, Barbaras, Kiratas, Khandas, Kravyadas (eaters of
raw meat), Abhiras, Caficükas, the Hemagiri, the Indus, the Kalakas, the Raivataka mountain, the Surdstras, the Badaras, the Dravidas, and the great ocean. These come under the triad of stars
headed by Svat.
[Pahlavas are identified with the Parthians, who are known to
have occupied parts of north-western India in a few centuries before
and after Christ. Rudradaman’s inscription mentions a Pahlava
named Suvi$akha, as the governor of Anarta and Surastra.
Kamboja is mentioned by Kalidasa (Raghu IV) and in the
Mahabharata (VII 4.5).. Hence it is located by scholars to the
south of Kashmir; and its western boundaries might have extended
to Kafiristan. Yàska refers (1.2.1.4) to the particular usage of the
root Sav in the sense of ‘to go’ among the Kambojas. It is learned
that this peculiarity is still current in the Galcha-speaking areas of
Pamir and Badakhshan. It is possible that during the period of
Varahamihira there might have been a settlement of the Kambojas
in the south-western region of India.

Division of Globe XIV 175
Sindhu-Sauvira is identified with Sindh-Sagar Doab, the region
between the Jhelum and the Indus. In the Junagadh Ce i
ption also
the two parts appear as one geographical entity. According to the
Kamasütra Sindhudesa lay to the west of the Indus.
Alberuni states that Sauvira denotes Multan and Jahravar.
In Sanskrit the word Sauvtra is used in the sense of ‘sour gruel’,
‘jujube fruit’, and ‘antimony’. It is also used in combination as in
Sauviráüjana. It is possible that in ancient times great heroes and
warriors hailed from this region. Hence the name. Anarta is mentioned in the Girnar inscription. According to the Mahabharata
(II. 14-50) Kusasthali or Dvaraka was situated in Anarta.
Phenagiri is placed near the mouth of the Indus by MonierWilliams.
Karnapraveya is synonymous with Karna pravarana mentioned in
the Ramayana (IV. 40.26) according to Kern.
Paragava is the son of a Brahmana by a Sidra woman. Here
it is identified with Persia. In chapter LXXXI-2, 5 this country is
said to be the producer of excellent pearls.
The Sudras are associated with the Abhiras and are located
in West Rajputana near VinaSana, according to the Mahabharata
(II. 32.10; IX.37.1). Alexander's historians call them Sodrai who
lived between the Indus and the Sutlej above the junction of the
Gve rivers near Mithankot and south of the district of Multan.
They had their capital on the Indus.
The Barbaras are located in the region about the port of Barbaricum situated on the middle mouth of the indus, according to the
Periplus. The Markandeyapurana (LVII. 39) places the Barbara
country in the Sindhu valley.
The Cancikas are identified by some with the Chenchus, a hill
tribe, living in the Šrišailam area of Andhra Pradesh.
Hemagiri may be identical with Kanakagiri near Mysore.
Raivataka is a hill opposite Mt. Girnar. Sometimes it is identified with the Girnar mountain itself, which is believed to be birthplace of Neminatha and regarded as one of the five great Twthas
of the Jainas. In the Junagadh inscription of Skandagupta, it is
said to be the source of the river Palāśinī.
Surastra corresponds to the Kathiawad peninsula. Surat is a
corruption of this name. The author of the Periplus calls it Syrastrene.

176 Brhat Samhita
Badara is identified by Cunningham with modern Eder. In
the time of Yuan Chwang Badari was a large kingdom bounded by
Ajmer and Ranthambhor on the north, by the Loni and the Chambal on the east and west and the Malwa frontier on the south, and
extending from the mouth of the river Banas in the Ran of Cutch
to the Chambal near Mandasor.
Dravida or Dramida is usually regarded as the Sanskritized
form of Tamil. Kern feels that Varahamihira means by this term
some Dravidian tribe in the west, perhaps the Brahui in Baluchistan
who belong to the Dravidian stock.
Cf. पराशर--
श्रथ प्रत्यग्दक्षिणस्यां सुराष्ट्रमहाराष्ट्र सिन्थुसीवीरशद्राभीरद्रविडकनकखण्डसिन्धु-
कालकफेणगिरिरेवतकनतंकबा क्लीकयवनप ह्ववमार्गरारवरथकारास्बष्ठकालाजकर्णप्रवरगिरिवासिनोऽतः परं महारांवोऽरवकोपजोऽग्निर्वंडवामुख इति u]
श्रपरस्यां मरिमान् मेघवान् वनौघः क्षुरापंशोऽस्तगिरिः ।
'्रपरान्तकशान्तिक हैहय प्रशस्ता द्रिवोक काशा: ॥२०॥
पञ्चनदरमठपारततारक्षितिजुद्गवशयकनकशकाः |
निसर्यादा म्लेच्छा ये पश्चिमदिकूस्थितास्ते च ॥२१॥
In the west are the Manimat and Meghavat mountains, Vanaugha (Vast Forest), Mount Ksurarpana, Astagiri, the Aparantakas, Santikas, Haihayas, Mount Pragasta, the Vokkanas, the
Punjab, Ramathas, Paratas, Taraksiti, the Jrhgas, Vaisyas, Kanakas,
Scythians (or Gold-Sythians ?) and all the lawless tribes of barbarians living in the west. All these are ruled by the three stars, Jyestha, Mula and Purvasadha.
[Aparantakas are the people living on the western borders
near the Sahya mountain, Kalidasa mentions (Raghu. IV. 53) the
kings of this country. |
The Haihayas were a branch of the Ydadavas. They were
divided into five clans, viz., Vitihotra, Bhoja, Avanti, Tundikera,
and Talajangha. The Kalacuris of Central India were also called
Haihayas. The Haihaya country, which was also called Anüpa,
comprised the region round Mahismaty.
Vokkana has been identified with Wakhan.
Ramatha is the country whence asafoetida was obtained.
Hence it was called Ramatha. S. Levi places it between Gazni and
Wakhan.

Division of Globe XIV 177
The Paratas are identified with Ptolemy’s Pardene in the
centre of Gedrosia (Baluchistan).
Kanaka is identified by Dey with Travancore. Kern takes
this word as an epithet of Saka and translates the compound as
Gold-Scythians.
Sakas are located in the south-west of India, in the Agnipurana
(LV. 16). Apart from the Scythian rulers of north-western India
Saka Ksatrapas and Mahaksatrapas of the lineage of Bhumaka and
Castana are known to have ruled over western India in the eariy
centuries of the Christian era. In the Allahabad inscription they
are said to have paid homage to Samudragupta.
Mlecchas, according to Kern, are foreigners or barbarians. In
II. 15 supra the Greeks are spoken of as Mlecchas. In Alberuni's
time the term was used to denote the Arabs.
Cf. पराशर--
ग्रथ पश्चिमायां दिशि मणिमान् aait मेघवान् वनौघः | चक्रवदस्तगिरि-
प्रशस्तमण्डितार: । पञ्चनदकाित्रह्मवमतितारक्षितिपारतशान्तिकशिबिरमठजृङ्भि-
वायव्यगुडवासि जहैहयस त्क ङ्गताजिकहूणपाइवेवेतककवोक्काणाः | mà च गिरिवनवासिनस्त्यक्त धर्मदण्डमर्यादा म्लेच्छजातयः ॥ |
दिशि पड्चिमोत्तरस्यां माण्डव्यतुषारतालहलमद्राः |
गइमककुलूतहलडाः स्त्नीराज्यनसिहवनखस्थाः URRI
वेणुमती फल्गुलुका गुलुहा मरुकुच्छच मंरद्भाख्याः ।
एकविलोचनशूलिकदी घंग्रीवास्यकेशाइच ॥२३॥
In the northwest are situated the Mandavyas, Tusaras, Talas,
Halas, Madras, A$makas, Kulutas, Haladas, the Kingdom of Women,
Nrsimha forest, the Khasthas, the river Venumati, Phalgulukas,
Guluhas, Marukucchas, Carmarangas, the one-eyed tribe, Sulikas,
the long-necked ones, long-faced ones and long haired ones. These
are ruled by the three stars headed by Uttarasadha.
(मरुकुच्च is another reading. कोशाएच is the other reading in some
editions. )
Mandavya is identified with the people of Madavika known
from anearly copper coin. Mandavi of the Mahamayurt is sometimes identified with Mandawar, 8 miles north of Bijnor, or with
Mandavyapura (Mandor near Jodhpur), which might have been
their capital. ;
The Tusaras are Ptolemy’s Tochari who are said to be under
the subjugation of the Bactrians and are described as “the most

178 Brhat Samhita
distinguished." According to Stein, the Turkhara (Tusara) country:
comprised the upper Oxus Valley including Balkh and Badakhshan.
It corresponds to the Tukharistan of the Arab writers.
Halada is translated by Kern as Lahada. He suggests that it
may be Lahara, mentioned in the Rajatarangint. It is a borderland
between Kashmir and Dardistan.
Madras are a people living in a part of the Vahika country,
according to the Mahabharta (Karnaparvan Chs. 44 and 45). It
covered the extensive territory between the Ravi and the Jhelum.
It had two wings, the eastern and the western. Those of the
northern division are the Uttara-Madras who lived beyond the
Himalayan range.
Asmaka, according to Bhattasvamin, commentator of the
Arthagastra, is identical with Maharastra. T.W. Rhys Davids thinks
that the A$maka country was originally situated immediately to the
north-west of Avanti and that the settlement on the Godavari was a
later colony. However, Kern suggests that it is more plausible to
identify the A$maka of our text with the Assakenoi of the Greek writers. In Alexander's time the A$maka territory comprised part of Swat
and Buner and extended eastwards as far as the Indus and had its
capital at the town of Massaga (or Masakavati).
Kulita is also placed in the north-east. It is the famous Kullu
in the upper valley of the Beas. Yuan Chwang calls it Kiu-lu-to.
The Kulütas are mentioned by the author of the Mudraraksasa.
Strirajya, a kingdom of women, was known to Yuan Chwang
as an amazonian kingdom in the Himalayan valley of the Sutlej.
Dey states that it was ‘a country in the Himalaya immediately on
the north of Brahmaputra, which has been identified with Garwal
and Kumaun ° Atkinson tells us that a woman named Pinchu ruled
over the Nu-wang tribe in Eastern Tibet, and the people in each
successive reign chose a woman for their sovereign. Vatsyayana
(II. 5.27) mentions a Strirajya, which Yasodhara places to the west
of Vanga.
The Agnipurana (LV. 17) mentions it as a country in the west
of India.
Cf. पराशर
अ्रथ पश्चिमोत्तरस्यां दिशि गिरिमतिवे णुमतिरलमतिफल्गुलुकमाण्डव्येकनेत्रमरु-
कुच्चतुषारतालमल्लहलडहलातवदिलीतविलीनदी घकेशग्रीवान्या जहा रग विषवे षशू लिक गु-
लुहाः । परमतः स्त्रीराज्यमिति uj

Division of Globe XIV 179
उत्तरतः Halal हिमवान् वसुमान् figni ।
क्रौञ्चो मेरुः कुरवस्तथोत्तराः श्रुद्रमीनाइच ॥२४॥
केकयवसातियामुनभोगप्रस्थारजुनायनाग्नोध्राः ।
1्रादर्शान्त ह पित्रिगतंतुरगाननाः इवमुखाः us uu
केशघरचिपिटनासिकदासेरकवाटघानशरधानाः |
तक्षशिलपुष्कलावतकंलावतकण्ठधानाशच ॥२६॥
'्रस्बरमद्रकमालवपोरवकच्छारदण्डपिद्कलकाः |
माणहलहुरकोहलशीतकमाण्डव्य TAT: ॥२७॥
गान्धारयशोवतिहेमताल राजन्यखचरगव्याइच ।
यौधेयदासमेयाः इयामाकाः क्षेमधूर्ताइच ॥२८॥
In the north lie the Kailasa, Himavat, Vasumat, Dhanusmat,
Kraufica, Meru (all mountains), the Uttara Kuru country, the
Ksudraminas, Kaikayas, Vasatis, Yamunas, Bhogaprastha, the
Arjunayanas, Agnidhras, Adarsas, Antardvipins, Trigarta, the
Turagananas (horse-faced people), the Svamukhas (dog-faced
people), Kesadharas (the hairy ones) Gipitanasikas (flat-nosed tribe)
Daserakas, Vatadhanas, Saradhànas, Taxila, Puskalavata, Kailavata,
Kanthadhanas, Ambaravatas, Madrakas, Malwa, Pauravas, Kaccharas, Dandapingalakas, Manahalas, Huns, Kohalas, Sitakas,
Mandavyas, Bhutapura, Gandhara, Yasovati (town), Hematalas,
Ksatriyas, Khacaras, Gavyas, the Yaudheyas, Dasameyas, Syamakas and Ksemadhtrtas. These are ruled by the triad of stars beginning with Satabhisaj.
[The mountain Kraunca has been identified with that part of
the Kailasa mountain on which Lake Manasa is situated.
Meru is identified by some with apart of the Himalayas.
According to others it is the highland of Tartary, north of the
Himalayas. B.C. Law identifies it with Rudra Himalaya in Garhwal where the Ganges rises, and regards it as identical with the
Mount Meros of Arrian. According to another view, Meru denotes
the Pamir range in Central Asia.
Uttara- Kuru is the country beyond the Himalayan range, probably in the land of Kashmir (Parena himavantam, Ait. Bra. VIII.
14). It is the same as Ottorokorrha of Ptolemy. The land is represented as an earthly paradise.
The Kekaya country lay beyond the Beas and had its capital
at Girivraja which is identified with Girjaak or Jalalpur on the

180 Brhat Samhita
Jhelum. Roughly speaking, it comprised the districts of Jhelum,
Shahpur and Gujarat.
Vasatis are the Ossadioi of Alexander’s historians, settled in
the region between the Indus and Jhelum, comprising Rawalpindi.
Vasati is mentioned in the Mahabhasya (IV. 2.52) and the Mahamapurr.
The Arjunayanas are identified by Fleet with the Kalacuris
who trace their descent from Kartavirya Arjuna. But according to
the Kasika (II. 4.66) they were discended from the Pandava hero
Arjuna. The find-spots of their coins indicate that their country,
known as Arjunayanaka, lay within the triangle of Delhi-JaipurAgra.
Adarsa is the place where the Sarasvati disappears. So the
word, meaning the country or its people, is derived from Adaría. It
was regarded as the western boundary of Aryavarta. According to
another view, it lay not far from the ancient kingdoms of Srughna
and Trigarta (Kangra).
Trigarta denotes the country drained by the three rivers, Ravi,
Beas and Sutlej. It comprised the whole of the upper Doab between the Ravi and Sutlej. Hemacandra identifies Trigarta with
Jalandhara.
Cipitanasikas are those with Mongolian features such as flat
nose. The Periplus mentions a people called Cirrhadae with flattened
nose, who, according to Schoff, were a Bhota tribe, whose descendants, still called Kirata, live in the Morung, west of Sikkim.
Daserakas may be an aboriginal tribe. Panini (IV. 1.131)
derives the word from Dasi, a slave woman.
The Vatadhanas are located, according tothe Markandeya-purana,
between the Bahlikas and Abhiras. According to Pargiter, Vatadhana was a country on the eastern side of the Sutlej, southwards
from Ferozepur. Dey identifies it with Bhatnair. 1n the Mahabharata (II. 32.8) mention is made of a Vatadhina settlement near
Madhyamika, modern Nagari, in Rajputana.
Taksasila comprised the villages of Shahdheri, Sir-kap, Sirsukh and Kacheha-kot at ashort distance to the north-west of
Rawalpindi.
Puskaldvata has been identified with Charsadda, about 17
miles north-east of Peshawar.
Ambara is explained by Utpala as Ambaravata.

Division of Globe XIV 181
Malava Fleet observes, ‘Varahamihira places them too
much to the north, as they are undoubtedly the people of Malwa,
from whom...the Vikrama era derived its origin.’ It is possible
that our author refers here to a northern settlement of the Malavas who lived between the lower Ravi and the Chenab inthe 4th
century B.C.
The Pauravas or Purus lived on the eastern bank of the Jhelum
including the Gujarat district. In the 4th century B.C., when
Alexander invaded India, Porus, probably the Piru chiet, was ruling
over the region between the rivers Jhelum and Chenab. King
Dusyanta is said to be a descendant of Piru.
Hiinas are often mentioned by classical writers such as Kalidasa and Bana. Prabhakaravardhana is styled ‘Lion to the Huna
deer’. Skandagupta had to encounter the Hupas. Yuan Chwang
says that Baladitya, son of Tathagatagupta, imprisoned and later
released the Hina chief Mihirakula. Having been expelled from
central India, the Hünas seem to have confined themselves to Kashmir and Gandhara.
Gandhara extended from the Kabul valley to Taksasila and
comprised the Rawalpindi and Peshawar districts. Our author
mentions two towns of Gaàndhàra viz. Taksasila and Pus.
kalàvati (modern Charsadda), situated to the east and west
respectively of the Indus. Gandharvadesa seems to be the original
name of Gandhara (Ramayana VII. 101.11).
The Rajanyas must be the same as the Ksatriyas or Xathroi
ofthe Greek writers. The Hoshiarpur region was perhaps their
homeland. Later they seem to have migrated to Mathura. It is
reasonable to suppose that each of the four Varnas had its own
original homeland.
Yaudheyas are first mentioned by Panini (V. 3.117). Their
coins ranging from the second century B.G. to the fourth century
A.D. have been found in Eastern Punjab and in the region between
the Sutlej and the Yamuna. They lived on both banks of the Sutlej
along the Bhawalpur frontier which is known as Johiyawar, a name
reminiscent of the Yaudheyas.
Syamakas are identified by Levi with Gho-mi of Sungyun etc.
It is also identified by some with Chitral.
Cf. qxrax—
ग्रथोत्तरस्यां हिमवान् क्रौद्चो मधुमान् कैलासो वसुमानुत्तरोत्तरस्यां मद्रपौरवयौधेयमालवशूरसेनराजन्यार्जुन यन त्रेगतककयक्षुद्रमाचेलूकमत्स्यवसातिदर्भफलाफलप्रस्त-

182 Brhat Samhita
लक्षेमधूर्ताशाकलदाशधानहव्यमुरदण्डगव्यशरधानदासेरकवाटधानान्तर् पिगान्धारववन्थिषुवास्तुतक्षशिलालवणवतिपुष्कलावतियशोवतिमशिवतिश्यामाकखचरकोहले कनगरशरभूतपुरकेरातकादशंकान्तारदण्डपि ङ्ग लमाण्डव्ययामुनेयमाणहल हृणहेमतालाश्वमुखा
हिमवद्वसुमत्कलासक्रौच्चात् १रमभिजना इति ॥ |
ऐश्ञान्यां सेरुकनष्टराज्यपशुपालकीरकाइसीराः ।
प्रभिसारदरदतङ्गणाकुलूतसेरिन्ध्रवनराष्ट्राः ॥२६॥
ब्रह्मपुर दावंडामरवनराज्यकिरातचीनको णिन्दाः ।
मल्लाः पटोलजटासुरकुनटखस घोषकुचिकाख्याः URN
एकचरणानुविद्धाः सुवर्णभुवंसुधनं दिविष्ठाइच |
पौरवची रनिवासित्रिनेत्रमुङ्जा द्रिगान्धर्वाः ॥ ३ १॥
In the north-east lie Meruka, Nastarajya (lost kingdom), the
Pagupilas (protectors of cattle), Kira, Kashmir, the Abhisaras,
Daradas, Tanganas, Kulutas, Sairindhras, Vanarastra (forest empire), Brahmapura, the Darvas, Damaras, Vanarajya (forest kingdom), Kirátas, Cina, the Kaunindas, Bhallas, Patolas Jatasuras,
Kunatas, Khasas, Ghosas, Kucikas, one-footed men, the Anuviddhas, Suvarnabhi (gold region), Vasudhana, Divisthas (situated in
heaven), Pauravas, bark-clad people, Trinetras (three-eyed ones),
Mount Mufja and the regions of the Gandharvas. These come under
the triad of stars beginning with Revati.
[For प्रनुविद्धा: there isa variant reading as श्रनुविश्वा: and for
वसुधनम्, वसुवनम् .
The Kiras are mentioned in a number of epigraphic records.
Their country comprised the territory near Baijnath in the Kangra
valley. A Chamba copperplate inscription mentions Kiras between *
Durgaras (Dongras) and Trigartas.
Abhisara is identified by Dr. Stein with the tract of the lower
region and hills between the Jhelum and Chenab including the
state of Rajapura (Rajauri) in Kashmir.
Darada is ‘Dardistan north of Kashmir on the upper Indus.
Sir Aurel Stein identifies its capital Daratpuri wich modern Gurez.
Tne seats of the Daradas extend from Chitral and Yasin across the
Indus region of Gilgit, Chilas and Bunji to the Kishanganga
valley in the immediate north of Kashmir.
The Tanganas are Ptolemy's Tanganoi whose territory stretched from the Ramganga river to the upper Sarayu. They were one of

Division of Globe XIV s
the aboriginal tribes which tbe Aryans, while pushing their conquests to the east of the Ganga and Yamuna, drove back into the
Himalayas or towards the Vindhyas. The Tonk Rajputs of Rohilkhand and the Dangayas are said to be the present representatives
of the Tanganas.
Brahmapura is mentioned in the Agnipurana. Cunningham
identifies it with Variat-pattan on the Ramganga river. Yuan
Chwang mentions it asa country which lay in the Garhwal and
Kumaun region.
Darva is closely associated with Abhisara and these together
roughly comprised the Punch and Naushera region between the
Jhelum and the Chenab.
Dàmaras are identified by Wilson with a fierce intractable
tribe inhabiting the mountains to the north of Kashmir.
The Cinarattha 1s identified with the Himavantapadesa in the
Pali Sasanavamsa. B.C. Law places it in the Himalayas beyond
Cilata or Kiráta. Kern translates it into ‘the Chinese’.
Patola, according to Kern, is Palola, and a corruption of the
word Palvala. He suggests that by Palola is meant the eastern part
of the Tarai near Cooch-Bihar.
Suvarnabhü is sometimes identified with Ptolemy’s Golden
Khersonese or the delta of the Irawadi forming the province of
Pegu. But it may include also Malaysia and the islands of eastern
archipelago.
The subject-matter of this chapter has been summarized by
Varahamihira in his समाससंहित्ता thus :—
भत्रयमाग्नेयाद्यं मध्यं प्राकप्रभृति च प्रदक्षिणतः |
कथयामि प्रविभागं रौद्रात् प्रागादिदेशानाम् ॥
मध्यमुदकूपाञ्चाला वङ्गा यमुनान्तरं कुरुक्षेत्रम् ।
उदगपि च परियात्रात् परमथवाऽयोग्यमत्स्याश्च ॥
सारस्वतयामुनवत्सघोषसंख्याननीपमाण्डव्याः ।
भद्रारिमो दने मिषसाल्वोपज्योतिषाश्वत्थाः 1
श्रौदुम्बरो$थ कुकुरोज्जिहानगजसा qo SUIS! |
माध्यमिको द्देहिककालकोटिकापिष्ठलाश्चेति T
मध्येऽयं प्रविभागः शेषर्क्षाणां तथादिशेद्देशान् |
प्रख्यातदेशमध्यानन्यांश्चैवाभिधास्यामि T
आर्द्रादिकाशिकोशलमिथिलोत्कलवधंमानपाण्ड्योड़ा: |
लौहित्यमगधसमतटमेककलाम्बष्ठता म्रलिप्ताख्या: T

184 Brhat Samhita
आइलेषाये त्रिपुरी निषादराष्ट्राणि चेदिकदशार्णाः |
झुलिकविन्ध्यान्तःस्था वत्सान्ध्रविदर्भकालिङ्गाः |
्रा्यम्णाद्ये चेदिकको ङ्कुणवनवासिकोल्ल गिरिमलयाः |
उज्जयिनीभरुकच्छा दिशा च याम्यार्णवो यावत् |!
स्वात्याद्ये सिन्धुसौवीरकापिलवनितास्यामागेरानर्ताः i
Aq रयवनसुराष्ट्रक काम्बोजद्रविडरेवतकाः ॥
ज्येष्ठा दितोऽपरान्तकशकहैहयजु ङ्गपाञ्चनदकतकाः |
निमेर्यादा म्लेच्छा: शान्तिकवोक्काणवेश्याइच |i
विश्वेश्वरादिशुलिकतालतुषा रेकनेत्रमाण्डव्याः |
्त्रीराज्यचर्मर ङ्गाइमकलडहारुहकफाल्गुलुकाः ॥
शतभिषगाद्ये केकयगान्धारादशेया मुनाग्नी ध्रा: |
दासेयचिपिटनासार्जुनायना दण्डपिङ्गलकाः ॥
पौष्णाद्ये काइमीरत्रिगर्तदरदाभिसारचीनखसाः |
तङ्गणकिरातकीरा ब्रह्मपुरजटासुराइचेति ॥
Cf. also पराशर--
अथ प्रागुत्तरस्यां कौलूतब्रह्मपुरकुणिन्ददिवादिनपारतनष्टराज्यवनराष्ट्रवेम-
. केणभल्लासिहपुरचामरतङ्गणासार्यकपर्वंतककाइमीरदरददर्वाभिमुरजटासुरपटोलसे रिन्ध्रकुचिन्तनकिरातपशुपाल चीनसुवरां भूमिदेवस्थलदेवोद्यानानि u]
वर्गेराग्नेयाद्यः कर रग्रहपीडितेः क्रमेण नृपाः ।
पाञचालो मागधिकः कालिद्कइच क्षयं यान्ति ॥३२॥
भ्रावन्तोऽथानर्तो gem चायाति सिन्धुसौवीरः ।
राजा च हारहौरो मद्रेशोऽन्यशच कौणिन्दः ॥३३॥
When the nine triads of stars beginning with the group of three
stars viz. Krttika, Rohini and Mrgasiras, are afflicted by malefic
planets, the kings of the following nine countries will in their order
be destroyed :—Paficala, Magadha, Kalinga, Avanti, Anarta,
Sindhu-sauvira, Harahaura, Madra and Kuninda.
[In these verses our author puts countries under stars different
from those mentioned previously in this chapter. For example,he places
Avanti in the south, but actually it should belong to the north where
Malwa is situated. Though both Anarta and Sindhusauvira belong
to the south-west, he puts the latter in the west. King Harahaura
is mentioned here for the first time. The Harahaura country is
supposed to be the land lying between the Indus and the Jhelum
and the Gandgarh mountain and the salt range.]

नक्षत्रव्यह: ॥ १ ५॥।
Chapter XV—Stellar Rulership
श्राग्नेये सितकुसुमा हिता ग्निमन्त्रज्ञसुत्रमाष्यज्ञा: 0
श्राकरिकनापितद्विजघटका रपुरोहिताब्दज्ञा: ॥१॥
The star Krttika presides over the following : White flowers,
Brahmanas who maintain and worship the sacred fire daily, knowers
of the sacred hymns and sacrificial rules, grammarians, miners,
barbers, Brahmanas, potters, priests and astrologers.
[In the preceding chapter the author gives the rulership of the
nine triads of stars over the nine regions or quarters and the peoples
and countries situated therein. In this chapter he gives various
things and types of persons that are ruled by the 27 asterisms
severally. Rulership of the four Varnas or classes is separately
given in 28-29 infra.]
रोहिण्यां सुब्रतपण्य भुषधनियोगयुक्तशाकटिका: |
गोवुषजलच रकर्षकशिलो च्चयेश्वयंसम्पन्नाः NRN
The following are ruled by Rohini : Observers of vows, merchandises, kings, wealthy persons, Yogins, cartmen, cows, bulls,
aquatic animals, husbandmen, mountains and men in authority.
[Bhattotpala construes the word Panya as Panyavrttayah i.e.
merchants.]
सृगशिरसि सुरभमिवस्त्रान्जकुसुमफलरत्न वनचरविहज्धा: |
सृगसोमपीथिगान्धवंकामुका लेखहाराइच ॥।३॥
The following are allotted to the constellation Mrgasiras :
Fragrant articles, garments, aquatic products, flowers, fruits, gems,
foresters (or forest-dwellers), birds, beasts, those who partake of
Soma juice (in sacrifices), musicians, lovers and carriers of letters.
UF वधबन्ध्रानृतपरदारस्तेयशाठ्यभेदरताः ।
तुषधान्यतीक्ष्णमन्त्रासिचारवेतालकसंज्ञाः ॥४॥
Murderers (or executioners), animal-catchers, liars, adulterers,

186 Brhat Samhita
thieves, rogues, creators of discord, cereals, cruel persons, charmers,
sorcerers and those well versed in the art of raising goblins—all
these are assigned to star Ardra.
mà सत्योदायंशौचकुलरूपधीयशो$थंयुता: |
उत्तमधान्यं वणिजः सेवाभिरताः सशिल्पिजनाः uuu
Under Punarvasu are placed the truthful, generous, pure
(clean), high-born, handsome, intelligent, famous, the rich, best
varieties of cereals (like the Kalama paddy), merchants, servants and
artisans.
[Bhattotpala construes Vanizjah as Kiratah here as well as in V,
पुष्ये यवगोधूमाः शालीक्षुवनानि मन्त्रिणो भुपाः ।
सलिलोपजीविनः साधवश्च यज्ञेष्टिसक्ताइच uu
Under Pusya come barley, wheat, rice, sugarcane, forests,
ministers, kings, fishermen and the like, virtuous men and those that
are engaged in big and small sacrifices.
ग्रहिदेवे कृत्रिमकन्दसूलफलकीटपन्नगविषाणि i
परघनहरणाभिरतास्तुषधान्यं सर्वेभिषज३च usu
To Aslesa are assigned artificial things, bulbs, roots, fruits
insects, reptiles, poison, robbers, cereals and all classes of physicians
[In Ayurveda many types of Cikitsa-treatment— such as Salya
Salakya, Kayacikitsa etc. are mentioned.]
पित्र्ये धनधान्याढ्याः कोष्ठागाराणि पर्वताश्रयिणः à
पितृभक्तवरिएक्शुराः क्रव्यादाः स्त्रीद्विषो मनुजा: ॥।८॥
The following are ruled by Magha : People rich in gold
(money) and corn granaries, mountaineers, those who are devoted
to parents or the manes, traders, heroes, carnivorous beings and
women-haters
[The commentator takes the word Kosthagara to mean Vipulagramah, large villages.]
प्राक्फल्गुनीषु नटयुवतिसुमगगान्धवशिल्पपण्यानि i
कर्षासलवणमाक्षिकतेलानि कुमारकाइचापि teu
The following are presided over by Pirvaphalguni : Actors,
young women, amiable persons, musicians, artists, commodities,
cotton, salt, honey, oil and boys.
WAN मादंबशोचविनयपाखण्डिदानशास्त्ररताः ।
शो मनघान्यमहाधनकर्मानुरताः समनुजेस््राः Ue oll

Stellar Rulership XV 187
Star Uttaraphalguni signifies kind-hearted persons, the pure in
conduct, modest, heretics, charitable persons and the learned, finecorn (like the Kalama rice), very rich men, those who are devoted
to their duties, and kings.
हस्ते तस्करकुऊजर रथिकमहामात्रशिल्पिपण्यानि i
तुषधान्यं श्रुतयुक्ता वरिणजस्तेजोयुताइचात्र ॥११॥
Hasta rules thieves, elephants, those who travel in chariots,
elephant-drivers, artisans, commodities, cereals, men learned in the
Vedas, traders and men of prowess.
त्वाष्ट्रे भूषणमरिरागलेख्यगान्धवंगन्धयुक्तिज्ञाः ।
गशितपदुतन्तुवायाः शालाक्या राजधान्यानि ॥१२॥
Citra presides over persons skilled in making ornaments, jewellery (or jewel-examiners), dyeing (or painting), writing, singing
and perfumery, as well as mathematicians, weavers, ophthalmic
surgeons and king’s corn.
स्वातौ खगमृगतुरगा वर्जो धान्यानि वातबहुलानि ।
अ्रस्थिरसोहूदलघुसत्त्वतापसाः पण्यकुशलाइच uta
Under the jurisdiction of Svat are placed birds, beasts, horses,
traders, grains that cause lot of wind (like Bengal gram), unsteady
friends, feeble characters, ascetics and connoisseurs of wares.
[Instead of Panya some texts read Vanya. That should be
translated as those who are experts in forest-products.]
इन्द्राग्निदवते रक्तपुष्पफलशाखिनः सतिलमुद्गाः ।
कर्पासमाषचणकाः पुरन्दरहुताश मकताश्च uv
Vigakha rules trees that bear red blossoms and fruits, sesamum,
green gram, cotton, black gram, Bengal gram and men devoted to
Indra and Agni.
मंत्रे शौर्यसमेता गणनायकसाधुगोष्ठियानरताः ।
ये साधवइच लोके सवं च शरत्समुत्पन्नम् utu
Anuradha rules men of prowess, heads of corporations, friends
of the virtuous, lovers of assemblies, tourists (or lovers of carriages),
all honest persons in the world and all things that grow in autumn.
पौरन्दरेऽतिशूराः कुलवित्तयशोऽस्विताः TAFT: ।
बिजिगीषवो नरेन्द्राः सेनानां चापि नेतारः ॥ १६॥
SS DR RE ER ss

188 Brhat Samhita
To Jyestha belong great battle heroes, those who are noted
for pedigree, wealth and fame, thieves, kings who are intent on
conquests and commandants.
मुले भेषजभिषजो गणमुख्याः कुसुमपुलफलवार्ताः 1
बीजान्यतिधनथुक्ताः FAFAT च वतंन्ते ॥१७॥
Mala rules medicines, physicians, leaders of groups, those who
deal in flowers, roots and fruits, seeds, exceedingly wealthy persons
and those who live only on fruits and roots.
MÀ geal जलमार्गगामिनः सत्यशौचधनयुक्ताः ।
सेतुकरवारिजीवकफलक्सुमान्यम्बुजातानि ug su
Pirvasadha presides over people that are tender-hearted,
navigators, fishermen, aquatic animals etc., the truthful, pure and
wealthy, constructors of bridges, those who live by water, and
aquatic flowers and fruits.
विश्वेश्वरे महामात्रमललकरितुरगदेवतासक्ताः ।
स्थावरयोधा मोगान्विताइच ये तेजसा थुक्ताः ॥१९॥
Elephant drivers, wrestlers, elephants, horses, devotees of
Gods, immovable things like trees, warriors, persons enjoying pleasures, and men of valour—all these come under Uttarasadha.
श्रवणे मायापटवो नित्योद्युक्ताइच कमसु समर्थाः ।
उत्साहिनः सधर्मा भागवताः सत्यवचनाश्च ॥२०॥
To Sravana belong jugglers, the ever-active, the efficient,
the energetic, the righteous, devotees of Lord Visnu and the
truthful.
वसुभे मानोन्मुक्ताः क्लोबाचलसोहृदाः स्त्रयां द्वेष्याः i
दानाभिरता बहुवित्तसंयुताः शमपराइच नराः URL
Dhanistha rules the following : Men without pride,
eunuchs, fast friends, men who are hated by women, charitable
persons, the very wealthy, and peaceful (or self-controlled) persons.
[Instead of atataa there is another reading viz. क्लीबाश्चल. In
the latter case the meaning would be just the opposite.]
वरुणश पाशिकमत्स्यबन्धजलजानि जलचराजीवाः ।
सौकरिकरजकञ्चौण्डिकशाकूनिकाइचापि वर्गेऽस्मिन् ॥२२॥
The following come under the star Satabhisaj : Snarers, anglers, aquatic products, and dealers in fish etc., boar-hunters, washermen, distillers and fowlers.

Stellar Rulership XV 189
राजे तस्करपशुपार्लाहस्रकीनाशनीचशठचेष्टाः।
धर्म ब्रतेविरहिता नियुद्धकुशलाइच ये मनुजाः ॥२३॥
Under Pirvabhadrapada are placed thieves, cowherds, murderous persons, niggards and those engaged in despicable and
roguish activities, those who are devoid of virtuous or religious
observances and those that are clever in single combat.
भ्राहिबुंध्न्ये विप्राः ऋतुदानतपोयुता महाविभवाः ।
miyan: पाखण्डा नरेइवराः सारधान्यं च ॥२४॥
Brahmanas, those that are engaged in sacrifices, charity and
penance, very wealthy persons, recluses, heretics, monarchs and
valuable corn—all these are ruled by Uttarabhadrapada.
पौष्णे सलिलजफलकुसुमलवणमशिएशद्ःमौवितकाब्जानि à
सुरभिकुसुमानि गन्धा वणिजो नौकर्णधाराइच NRN
Revati rules aquatic products as well as fruits and flowers,
salt, gems, conch shell, pearls, lotuses, perfumes, flowers (or fragrant
flowers), traders and sailors (or helmsmen).
'प्रड्विन्यामश्वहराः सेनापतिवद्यसेवकास्तुरगाः ।
दुरगारोहा वशिजो खूयोपेतास्तुरग रक्षाः ।२६॥
A§vini rules horse-dealers, commandants, physicians, attendants, horses, horse-riders, merchants, handsome personsand horsegrooms.
[The commentator interprets Vanijah as Kiratah, Krayavikrayaniratah.]
याम्ये$पुकपिशितभुजः करा वघबन्धताडनासक्ताः !
तुषधान्यं नोदकुलोद्भवा विहीनाइच सत्त्वेन ॥२७॥
Bharani rules those that feed on blood and flesh, cruel men,
those that are engaged in killing, imprisoning and beating others,
cereals, low-born persons, and those who are deviod of courage
(character or nobility).
[In the following three verses the author alludes to the groups
of stars that rule the classes or Varnas.]
पूर्वात्रयं सानलमग्रजानां राज्ञा तु JAT सहोत्तराशि ।
सपोष्णामेत्रं पितृदं वतं च प्रजापतेर्भं च कृषीवलानाम् NRN
ग्रादित्यहस्ताभिजिदाह्विनानि दरिग्जनानां प्रवदन्ति तानि ।
सूलग्रिनेत्रानिलवारणानि भान्युग्रजातेः प्रमविष्णुतायाः UREN

190 Brhat Samhita
सौम्य्द्रचित्रावसुदेवतानि सेवाजनस्वास्यमुपागतानि ।
सार्पं विशाखा श्रवणो भरण्यइ्चण्डालजातेरभिनिदिशन्ति ॥३०॥
The three Pürvas viz. Pürvaphalguni, Purvasadha and Pirvabhadrapada, and Krttika rule the Brahmana class. The three
Uttaras i.e. Uttaraphalguni, Uttarasadha and Uttarabhadrapada,
and Pusya own the Ksatriya class. Revati, Anuradha, Magha and
Rohini rule husbandmen. Vaisyas are ruled by Punarvasu, Hasta,
Abhijit and Agvini. Mila, Ardra, Svati and Satabhisaj belong to
the powerful class of cruel men. Mrgasiras, Jyestha, Citra. and
Dhanistha own the servant class. Aslesa, Visakha, Sravana and
Bharani rule the outcasts.
[Here the author divides human beings into the wellknown
five classes including the outcasts and two more classes viz. husbandmen, and cruel persons. The last category is likely to include
all unruly elements in society who may violate all norms of civilized
society. Utpala interprets. वणिग्जनानाम् as किरातलोकानाम् in verse 29.
These verses are in उपजाति metre.
In the next two verses definition and effect of Upahata are
given.]
रविरविसुत भोगसागतं क्षितिसुतभेदनवक्रदूषितस् ।
ग्रहणगतमथोल्कया हतं नियतमुषाकरपीडितं च यत् ॥३१॥
तदुपहतमिति प्रचक्षते प्रकृतिविपयंययातमेव वा ।
निगदितपरिवर्गदूषणं कथितविपयंयगं समृद्धये ॥३३॥
A lunar mansion is said to be Upahata or Afflicted when it is
tenanted by the Sun or Saturn, when it is spoilt by Mars either by
cutting through or by retrogradation in it, when it gets involved in
an eclipse, when it is struck by a meteor, or when it is manifestly
crushed by the Moon; or when something unnatural happens to it.
When a constellation is thus afflicted, all the people and things coming under its jurisdiction will be harmed Otherwise they will
prosper.
[In mundane astrclogy this subject matter will be of great
use. As we consider the effects of transits of different planets with
reference to an individual’s natal Moon, even so transit-effect can
be gauged for different groups of persons as well as articles according to the method enunciated in this chapter as elsewhere. Utpala
explains the word Bhedana as cutting through, or covering.

Stellar Rulership XV 191
उषाकरपी डितम् is explained thus : यस्य नक्षत्रस्य चन्द्रमा योगतारका-
भेदेन आच्छादनं मध्यगमनं दक्षिणाभागगमनं वा करोति तदुषाकरपीडितम् ।
Gh, प
शनेश्चरस्य सूर्यस्य ueni भोगमागतम् ।
धरित्रीतनयेनापि भिन्नं वक्रप्रदूषितस् ॥
राहुग्रस्तमथोल्का भिहंतमुत्पातदूषितम् i
चन्द्रेण पीडितं यच्च प्रकृतेरन्यथास्थितम् ॥
तच्चोपहतक विन्द्यान्नक्षत्रं हन्ति सर्वदा ।
स्ववर्गमन्यथा नित्यं पुष्णाति निरुपद्रवम् ॥
The metre is वैतालीय. It is a pleasing practice of our author
that he changes the metre at the end of chapters as it is the case of
the Mahakavyas.]

ग्रहभक्तियोग: ॥। १६।।
Chapter XVI — Planetary Rulership
प्राङनमंदाड्ंशोणोड़वद्गसुह्याः कलिङ्गवाह्लीकाः ।
शकपवनमगधशबरप्रागज्योतिषचीनकास्वोजाः ॥ १॥
मेकलकिरातविटका बहिरन्तःशेलजःः पुलिन्दाइच |
द्रविडानां प्रागर्धं दक्षिणकूलं च यमुनायाः uqu
चम्पो दुस्ब रको शास्बिचेदिविन्ध्याटवीकलिङ्गाशच |
gst गोलाङ्गूलश्रीपवतव मानानि ॥२३॥
इक्षुमतीत्यथ तस्करपारतकान्तारगोपबीजानाम् ।
तुषधान्यकटुक्षतरुकनकदहनविषससरशुराशास् ॥।४॥
भेषजभिषकचतुष्पदक्ृषिकरनुर्पाहस्रयायिचौराश्णास् ।
व्यालारण्ययशोयुततीकणानां मास्करः स्वास ॥५॥
The Sun presides over the eastern half of the Narmada district, the Sone, Orissa, Vanga, Suhma, Kalinga, Balkh, Sakas
(Scythians), Yavanas, Magadha, Sabaras, Pragjyotisa, Cina,
Kamboja, Mekala, Kiratas, Vitakas, people in and outside mountains, Pulindas, eastern half of the Dravida country, the south bank
of the Yamuna, Campa, Udumbara, Kaugambi town, Cedi, Vindhya forest, Kalinga, Pundra, Golàngulas, Sriparvata, Burdwan, river
Iksumati, robbers (or the country of the robbers), Paratas, wilderness, herdsmen, sceds, cereals, pungent substances, trees, gold, fire,
poison (a kind of medicine), heroes, medicines, physicians, quadrupeds, husbandmen, kings, evil-doers, those who march for conquests,
thieves, serpents, woods, men of repute and bitter articles or men of
cruel disposition.
[The author uses the words तस्कर and चौर here. The commentator says तस्करो देशो जना वा and चौरास्तस्करा: 1]
The Mekala mountain is usually identified with the Maikal
range in the Gondwana in Madhya Pradesh including the AmaraKantaka which is the source of the Narmada.
The Vitakas are, according to Kern, the same as the Utsavasanketas and the Lampakas of the महाभारत.

Planetary Rulership XVI
C = C
à or AAT "
ae Es NES: Campavati was an ancient city on
the Ganges. It was the capital of the Ar
e A ए ` . A
the modern Bhagalpura. ngas and identified with
रक Sriparvata is identified with the Nallamalais of the K 1
district in Andhra Pradesh, extending all alongthe Krishna in urnoo
erly direnip; on the basis of a Nagarjunakonda inscri ee re
sometimes identified with the Siritana of the Nasik cave i . Itis
of Vasisthiputra Pulumavi. ave inscription
Iksumat? river is now called Ikhan or Kalindi, a tributary of
E E flowing through Kumaun, Rohilkhand and the district
of Farrukhabad. The old town of Sankasya was situated on its bank.
It is the same as the Oxvmagis of Arrian.
Cf. कारयप--
TITS नमंदायाश्व शोणः शबरमागधाः |
उड़ा वङ्गा कलिङ्गाश्च बाह्लीका यवनाः शकाः ।
काम्बोजा मेकलाः सुह्माः प्राग्ज्योतिषकिरातकाः |
चीनाः सर्वे सुशलेया: gaat बहिरिन्तजाः ॥
यमुनाया याम्यकूलं कौशाम्ब्योदुम्बराणि च ।
विन्ध्याटवी च पुण्डाश्च AGATA पर्वताः ॥
श्रीपर्वतश्चेदिपुरं गोलाङ्गूलं qua च ।
इक्षुमत्याश्रिता ये च जनाः शूरा मदोत्कटाः ॥
कान्तारमथ गोपाइच कन्दरास्तस्करास्तथा |
समरे विषमाः शूरास्तरवः कटुका f ॥
चतुष्पदा भेषजं च धान्यं वा भिषजस्तथा |
ग्ररण्यवासिव्यालाश्च PITH बालक्रास्तथा l!
गौरपत्यं च किञ्जल्कं पूंसज्ञा ये च जन्तवः ।
सर्वेषां भास्करः स्वामी तेजस्तेजस्विनामपि ॥ |
गिरिसलिलदु्गकोसल भरुकच्छसमुद्ररोमकतुषाराः ।
वनवासितङ्गणहलस्त्री राज्यमहाणंबद्वौपाः ॥६॥
मधुररसकुपुमफलसलिललवणमणिशङ्कमौक्तिकाब्जानास् l
शालियवौषधिगोयूमसोमपाक्रन्दविप्राणाम् ।।७॥
सितसुभगतुरगरतिकरयुवतिचमूनाथ भोज्यवस्त्रारामु ।
श्यूज्धिनिशाचरकार्षकयज्ञविदां चाधिपश्चखः ॥5॥

194 Brhat Samhita
The Moon presides over mountain-fortresses, natural waterbarriers, Kosala, Bharukaccha, the ocean, Romans, Tocharians,
Vanavasins (forest-dwellers or people of Banavasi), Tangana, Hala,
Strirajya, the islands of the great ocean, sweet things, flowers, fruits,
water, salt, jewels, conch shells, pearls, aquatic products, rice, barley, herbs, wheat, drinkers of Soma juice, Kings called Akranda (in
the cycle of 12 kings they occupy the position next to the Parsnigraha), Brahmanas, white objects (like silver), beloved persons,
horses, lovers, young women, commandants, eatables, clothes,
horned animals, demons, agriculturists and persons learned in the
sacrificial lore.
[In this section we find some of the characteristics of planets
mentioned in Brhajjataka etc. being repeated. See also उत्तरकालामृत?
V 25-54. It is interesting to note that our author brings the
Romans under the tutelage of the Moon, whereas Kasyapa does
not mention them in his list.
Cf. काश्यप-—
परवता जलदुर्गाश्च कोशलास्तङ्गणा हला: |
सत्रीराज्यं ARH SAM तुषारा वनवासिनः ॥
मौक्तिकं मणिशङ्कान्जमौषधं कुसुमं फलम् |
द्वीपा महाणेवे ये च मधुरा लवणादयः ॥
गोधूमाः शालयः श्यूद्धिकार्षकाश्व यवा ग्रपि |
सोमपा ब्राह्मणा ये च यज्ञज्ञास्तु सुरासवम् |!
स्त्रीसौभाग्यसमेताश्च लास्यहास्येक्षितानि च ।
निशाचराधिपश्चनद्रो हृष्टानां च प्रकीतितः u]
शोणस्य नमंदाया भीमरथायाश्च पश्चिमा द्वंस्थाः ।
निर्विन्ध्या वेत्रवती सिप्रा गोदावरी वेशा nen
मन्दाकिनी पयोष्णी महानदी सिन्धुमालतीपाराः à
उत्तरपाण्डघमहेन्द्राद्रि विन्ध्यमलयोपगाश्रोलाः 1$ ou
द्रविडविदेहान्धाइमक भासापरकोड्कुरणाः समन्त्रिषिकाः |
कुन्तलकेरलदण्डककान्तिपुरम्लेच्छसङ्करिराः eeu
न।सिक्यभोगवर्घनविराटविन्ध्याद्रिपाइवंगा देशाः à
ये च पिबन्ति सुतोयां तापीं ये चापि गोमतीसलिलम् ॥१२॥
l. See Uttarakalamrta ed. V.S. Sastri & revised by M.R. Bhat,

Planetary Rulership XVI 195
नागरकृषिकरपारतहुताशनाजी विशस्त्रवार्तानाम् ।
ग्राटविकदुर्गक वंटवधिकनृझंसाव लिप्तानास् 11 १३।।
नरपतिकुमारकुञ्जरदास्मिकडिम्भाभिघातपशुपानाम् ।
रक्तफलकुसुमविद्रमचमूपगुडमद्यतीक्ष्णानास् ॥१४॥
कोश भवनारिनिहोत्रिकधात्वाकरशाक्यभिक्षुचो aram
शठदीर्घवेरबद्वाशिनां च वसुधासुतोऽधिपतिः ॥ १५॥
Mars presides over the countries situated in the western half of
the Sone, Narmada and Bhimaratha, Nirvindhya, Vetravati, Sipra,
Godavari, Vena, Ganga, Payosni, Mahanadi, Sindhu, Malati, Para,
Uttarapandya, those who live near mount Mahendra, Vindhya and
Malaya, Cola, Dravida, Videha, Andhra, Aśmaka, Bhasapara,
Konkana, Mantrisika, Kuntala, Kerala, Dandaka, Kantipura,
Mlecchas, half-castes, Nasik, Bhogavardhana, Virata, the countries
by the side of the Vindhya mountains, people living on the banks of
the Tapi (Tapti) and the Gomati (Gumtee), town-dwellers, farmers,
Paratas, persons who live by fire (such as goldsmiths), warriors,
foresters, forts, Karvatas, slayers, cruel men, arrogant persons, kings,
boys, elephants, hypocrites, infanticides, shepherds, red fruits and
flowers, corals, army generals, jaggery, liquor, bitter things (like the
Neem or merciless persons), treasury, keepers of the sacred fire,
mines, Buddhist monks, thieves, rogues vindictive and gluttonous
persons.
[Verse 12 is omitted in some editions. The word डिम्भाभिघात
is interpreted in another manner by the commentator : अशस्त्र: कलहो
डिम्भः, तत्राभिघातः à
Bhimaratha is the modern Bhima, a tributary of the Krsna. It
is also called Bhaimarathi.
Mahanadj rises in the Amarakantaka range, flows through
Orissa and falls into the Bay of Bengal.
Nirvindhya is identified with the Nevuz, a tributary of the
Chambal between the Betwa and the Kali-Sindh in Malwa. Kalidasa refers to it in his Meghadita (I. 28-9).
Vetravati is the modern Betwa, a tributary of the Yamuna.
Sipra is a tributary of the Chambal into which it falls a little
below Sitamau. The city of Ujjain is situated on its bank.
Sona isthe modern Sone which falls into the Ganga near
Patna. Megasthenes calls it Erannaboas (Hiranyavaha) at whose

196 Brhat Samhita
junction with the Ganga was situated Pataliputa, the celebrated
Maurya capital.
Payosni is identified by Cunningham with the Pahoj, a tributary of the Yamuna between the Sindh and Betwa. According to
others it is to be identified with the Paisuni or Paisundi in Bundelkhand.
Para or Paravati is a tributary of the Chambal rising in Bhopal. The old town of Padmavati (modern Pawaya) was situated
at the confluence of the Paravati and Sindhu.
Tapi, modern Tapti, rises in the Satpura hills and falls into
the Arabian Sea.
There are altogether 16 names of rivers coming under the -
‘jurisdiction of Mars.
Cf. #ršqq—p
महेन्द्रविन्ध्यमलयाः सिप्रा वेणा महानदी |
गोदावर्या नमंदाया भीमायाः पश्चिमा दिशः ॥
चेदिकाः कोडुरणा दुर्गा द्रविडा वेत्रवन्नदी |
मन्दाकिनी पयोष्णी च मालती सिन्धुपारकाः ॥
पाण्ड्याश्चोत्तरदेशस्था विदेहाऱ्ध्राइमकास्तथा |
भासापराः कुन्तलाश्च केरला दण्डकास्तथा ||
नागराः पौरवार्चेव काषंकाः शस्त्रवृत्तयः |
हुताशनाजीविनो ये कुञ्जराः पशुपास्तथा ॥
साङ्ग्रामिका नृशंसाश्च स ड्कुराश्रोपघातकाः |
कुमारा भूमिजस्योक्ता दाम्भिकास्तस्करास्तथा 11]
लोहित्यः सिन्धुनदः सरयूर्गाम्मोरिका रथाख्या च ।
गङ्भाकोशिक्याद्याः सरितो वेदेहकाम्बोजाः ॥ १६॥
मथुरायाः पूर्वाद्धं हिमवद्गोमन्त चित्रकूटस्थाः i
सौ राष्ट्सेतुजलमागंपण्यबिलपवताश्रयिशः ॥। १७॥
उदपानयन्त्रगान्धवेलेर्यमरिपरागगन्धयुक्तिविदः i
श्रा ले यशब्द गणित प्रसाधक युष्य शिल्पज्ञाः ULSI
चरपुरुषकुहकजीवर्काशशुकविशठसुचकामिचाररताः |
दुतनप्सकहास्यज्ञभुततन्त्ररद्रजालज्ञाः ।१६॥।
भ्रारक्षकनटनतंकघुततेलस्नेहबीजतिकतानि ।
ब्रतचारिरसायनकुशलवेस राइचन्द्रपुत्रस्य ॥२०॥

Planetary Rulership XVI 197
Mercury presides over the river Lauhitya, Indus, Sarayü,
Gambhirika, Rathakhya (i.e. one named Ratha. Is it Bhimaratha?),
Ganga, Kausiki and other rivers (such as Vipa$a, Sarasvati and
Candrabhaga), Videha, Kamboja, the eastern half of Mathura, the
Himalayas, Gomanta hill (or cattle-owners) and Citrakita (the
people living in these regions), Saurdstra, bridges, water-routes,
merchandise, cave-men, hillmen, reserviors, mechanics, songesters,
writers (or copyists), jewel-experts, dyers, perfume-makers, painters,
grammarians, mathematicians, decorators, experts in the preparation of elixirs of life, artisans, (such as carpenters, masons, blacksmiths and potters), spics, jugglers, infants, poets, imposters, talebearers, those engaged in black magic, messengers, eunuchs, buffoons,
those that are proficient in demonology and magic, policemen,
actors, dancers, ghee, oil, oil-seeds, bitter things, observers of vows
(like Brahmacarins), chemists (who prepare good tonics) and
mules.
[Kaufikz river may be the modern Kusi flowing into the
Ganga through the district of Purnea in Bihar, or the Kusiara of
Sylhet (Bangla Desh) flowing through the area known as Paficakhanda.
Gambhira, mentioned by Kalidasa in the Meghaduta (I. 40),
is a tributary of the Yamuna above the Chambal flowing east from
Gangapur through eastern Rajputana.
Cf. काश्यप---
चित्रकूटगिरी रम्यो हिमवान् कौशिकी तथा |
मथुरायाश्र gate लोहित्य: सिन्धुरेव च ॥
गाम्भीरिका च सरयू रथाख्या गण्डकी नदी ।
गान्धर्वा लेखहाराइच तथोदाराश्र कृत्रिमाः ॥
वैदेहाः सवेजलजा: काम्बोजाश्च सुराष्ट्रिका: |
गन्धयुक्तिविदोये च सौगन्धियदलेपना: ॥।
सुवर्ण रजतं रत्नं मातज्भतुरगादि यत् ।
पौरा जनपदाः सौम्याः सोमपुत्रवशे स्थिताः od]
सिन्धुनदपुव भागो मथुरापश्चा द्धंसरतसौवीराः ।
a घ्नौ दीच्यविपाशासरिच्छतद्र् रमठशाल्वाः RU
त्रगतंपौ रवाम्बष्ठपारता वाटधानयोषेयाः ।
सा रस्वतार्जुनायनसत्स्या दग्रामराष्ट्रारि ॥२२॥

198 Brhat Samhita
हस्त्यशवपु रो हित भूपमन्त्रिमा द्भल्यपौष्टिकासक्ताः।
कारुण्यसत्यश्ञो चब्रतविद्यादानधमं युताः UR
पौरमहाधनशब्दार्थवेदविदुषो5भिचा रनी तिज्ञा: ।
मनुजेश्वरोपकरणं छत्रध्वजचामराद्यं च ॥।२४॥
शेलेयकमांसीतगरकुष्ठरससेन्धवानि वल्लीजम् ।
मधुररसमधूच्छिशनि चोरकश्चेति जीवस्य ।।२५॥
To Jupiter belong the eastern part of the Indus, the western
half of Mathura, the Bharatas, Sauviras, Srughnas, Northern
People, the Vipasa river, the Satadru, the Ramathas, Salva, Trigartas, Pauravas, Ambasthas, Paratas, Vatadhanas, Yaudheyas,
Sarasvatas, Arjunayanas, half the rural provinces of Matsya, elephants, horses, royal priests, kings, ministers, those who are engaged
in auspicious ceremonies and preparation of tonics, those who are
compassionate, truthful, pure, pious, learned, charitable and righteous, citizens, rich men, grammarians, philologists, Vedic scholars,
sorcerers, politicians, royal equipments (weapons etc.), umbrellas,
banners, Chowries etc., benzoin, Jatamamsi, Tagara, costus, mercury, rock salt, beans, sweet juices, bees-wax and Coraka perfume.
[Srughna is identified with the modern village of Sugh on the
old Jumna near Jagadhari.
Vipasa is Beas. It was also known as Arjikiya in the Rgveda
Cf. काइ्यप-—-
त्रेगतसिन्धुसोवीरा: शतद्रूमथुरे afa À
स्न्घ्तौदीच्यविपाशाश्र पारताम्बष्ठकास्तथा ।।
राजा पुरोहितो मन्त्री माङ्गल्यं पौष्टिक aay ।
कारुण्यं कमं सिद्धानां विद्याशोचतपस्विनाम् 11
मत्स्याश्च वाटधानाश्च योधेयाश्रार्जुनायनाः |
सारस्वताश्च रमठा हस्त्यश्चघ्वज चामराः ||
झब्दार्थविदुषः पौरा नीतिज्ञा: शीलसंयुताः |
मांसीतगरकुष्ठं च शेलेयं लवणं रसाः ।।
मधुरस्वादवल्लीजं विप्राणां चाधिपो गुरुः ॥
Both Ka$yapa and Varàhamihira have committed a grammatical error in using the word Vidusah in the sense of scholars,
nominative plural.
_ शक - tony By qua a a ttm imm Jl U U ni ma TON S

Planetary Rulership XVI | 199
The Varanaseya edition reads verse 25 as ेलेयकुष्ठ,..” which
is short of one Matra in the second Pada. ]
तक्षशिलमात्तिकावतबहुगिरिगान्यारपुष्कलावतका: |
प्रस्थलमालवकंकयदाशाररपोशीनरा: शिबयः ॥२६॥
ये च पिबन्ति वितस्तामिरावतीं चन्द्रभागसरितं च ।
रथरजताकरकुअरतुरगमहामात्रधनयुक्ताः URI
सुर भिकुसुमानुले पनम शिवप्त्रवि भूशाम्बुरुहशय्याः |
वरत रुणयुवतिकामोपकरणामृष्टान्नमधु र भुजः ॥ २८॥
उद्यानसलिलकामुकयशःसुखो दार्य रूपसम्पन्नाः ।
विह्ठदमात्यवणिग्जनघटकृच्चत्राण्डजा स्त्रिफलाः usen
कौशेपपट्टकम्बलपत्रौराकरोध्रपत्रचोचानि !
जातोफलागुरुवचापिप्पल्यश्चन्दनं च भृगोः ॥३०॥
The following come under the jurisdiction of Venus : Taxila,
Martikavata, Bahugiri, Gandhara, Puskalavata, Prasthala, Malwa,
Kaikaya, Dasarna, Usinara, Sibi, those who dwell on the banks of
the Vitastà, Iravau and Candrabhaga, chariots, silver, mines,
elephants, horses, elephant-drivers, wealthy persons, fragrant things,
flowers, unguents, gems, diamond, ornaments, lotuses, couches,
leading personalities (bride-grooms), young men, young damsels,
aphrodisiacs, those who enjoy sumptuous and sweet food, gardens,
baths, lovers, those that are endowed with fame, happiness, generosity and charming personality, scholars, ministers, merchants, potters, different varieties of coloured birds (or pictures and birds ?),
the three fruits (viz. Cardamom, Clove and Kakkola), fine silk,
woollen rugs, bleached silk, Lodhra (whose powder is used asa
cosmetic), Patra (the scented skin of a fruit), Coca, nutmeg, Agaru,
Vaca, Pippali and sandalwood.
[Martikavata is a country, according to Utpala. This name
may have been derived from Mrttikavata which may be identical
with Mrttikavarapura mentioned in the Visnupurana (IV. 13.7).
The Bhojas appear to have got the name Matrikavara as a result of
their living in this town. Dey identifies it with the ancient Salvapura, modern Alwar, or with Merta in Marwar. But in the opinion
of Wilson it is more appropriate to identify the place with the
country of the Bhojas by the side of the Parnasa (Banas) in
Malwa.

200 Brhat Samhita
Vitasta is the Jhelum, one of the five streams of the Punjab.
Travati is the modern Ravi, the Hydraotes of Greek writers.
Candrabhaga is the modern Chenab, the largest of the five
streams of the Punjab.
Cf. काश्यप--
चन्द्रभागां वितस्तां चेरावतीं च पिवन्ति 4 ।
पुष्करावतकेकेया गान्धारप्रस्थलास्तथा ॥
दशार्णा मालवास्तक्षशिला मौक्तिकमेव च |
धनाढ्याः कुभरा अश्वा: प्रस्थल च विलपनम् ॥
सुंरूपसुभगोद्यानकामुकाः कामचारिणः d
वेसरा मधुरा हृद्या सलिलाशयजीविनः ॥
तरुणा योषितः क्रीडाविदुषो जनगोष्ठिकाः ।
चित्राण्डजाश्च कौशेयं पत्रौणं काशिकोशिका: ।।
विप्पल्यश्चन्दनं जातीफलमामलकानि च ।
गन्धपत्रस्य लोध्रस्य शुक्रश्चाधिपतिः स्मृतः ॥ |
भ्रानर्तार्बुदपुष्करसो राष्ट्राभी रूद्र रवतकाः ।
नष्टा यस्मित् देशे सरस्वती पश्चिमो देशः ।।३६॥
कुरुभुमिजाः प्रभासं विदिशा वेदस्मृती महीतटजाः à
खलमलिननीचतेलिकविहीनसत्त्वोपहतपुंस्त्वाः 11331
बान्धनशाकुनिकाशुिकवरत्तंविरूपवृद्धसोकरिकाः॥
गणपुज्यस्खलितब्रतशबरपुलिन्दार्थपरिहीनाः 320
कट्तिक्तरसायनविधवयोषितो भुजगतस्करमहिष्यः।
खरकरमचराकवातलनिष्पावाश्चाकं पुत्रस्य ॥३४॥
Saturn presides over the Anartas, Arbuda (Mt. Abu.), Puskara, Saurastra, Abhiras, Siidras, people living in or near the
Raivataka mountain, the country where the river Sarasvati disappears, the western country, inhabitants of Thaneswar, Prabhasa,
Vidisaà. the river Vedasmrti, those that live on the banks of the
river Mahi, rogues, the slovenly, unrighteous persons, oilmongers,
cowards, eunuchs, gaolers and prisoners, fowlers, impure fellows,
fishermen or sailors, deformed persons, aged ones, boar-hunters,
leaders of corporations, those that have fallen from their vows,
Sabaras, Pulindas, the penurious, pungent and bitter substances,

Planetary Rulership XVI 201
tonics, widows, serpents, thieves, she-buffaloes, donkeys, camels,
Bengalgram, pulses that cause flatulence and Nispava pulse.
[Puskara is mentioned in V. 68 and Puskararanya in XI. 36. It
is identified with Pokhar near Ajmer. It is a famous place of
pilgrimage.
Veda-smfti is identified with the Besula in Malwa. In the
Bhisma parvan of the महाभारत it is called वेदस्मृता.
The river Mahi rises in the Pariyatra mountain, hasa southwestern course upto Banswara wherefrom it turns south and passing
through Gujarat drains into the Gulf of Cambay.
Cf. काइयप--
maar रवतगिरि: सोराष्ट्राभीरकास्तथा |
सरस्वतीपश्चमाशा प्रभासं कुरुजाङ्गलम् ॥
maiga विदिशा aad लिकनीचकाः |
वेदस्मृती सौकरिकाः मलिनाश्च महीतटम् ॥
दुःशीलशाकुना हीनाः पशुबन्धनकास्तथा |
प।खण्डिनश्च वेतण्डा निग्नेन्था शबराः कृशाः ॥
विरूपाः कटुतिक्तानि रसायनविषादिनः ।
पुलिन्दतस्कराः सर्पा महिषोष्ट्खराः शुनी ॥
चणका वातला वल्ला: पुंस्त्वसत्त्वविवर्जिता: |
काकशृध्रश्ृगालानां वृकाणां च प्रभुः शनिः ॥]
गिरिशिखरकन्दरदरीविनिविष्टा म्लेच्छजातयः शाद्रा: ।
गोमायुभक्षशूलिकवोक्काराइवमुखविकला ड्भाः ॥३५॥
कुलपांसर्नाहस्रकृतध्नचौरनिःसत्यशौचदानाइच |
खरचरनियुद्धवित्तीब्ररोषगर्त्ताश्रया नीचा: uu
उपहतदाम्भिकराक्षसनिद्राबहुलाइच जन्तवः सर्वे ।
धमरा च सन्त्यक्ता माषतिलाइचाकंशशिशत्रोः ॥३७॥
Rahu rules over the inhabitants of mountain-peaks, dens
and caves, barbarian tribes, Südras, jackal-eaters, the Silikas,
Vokkanas, Kinnaras, crippled persons, those who disgrace their
lineage, cruel persons, ungrateful men, thieves, untruthful, dirty and
miserly persons, donkeys, spies, duelists, wrathful persons, those
who live in pits (or children in the womb), evil-doers, reprobates,

202 Brhat Samhita
hypocrites, giants, all sleepy beings, lawless or unrighteous persons,
blackgram and sesamum.
[गर्ताश्रया: is read as गर्भाश्रया: in some editions. From the reading
in the समाससं हिता it is clear that the author's version can be only the
latter.
Cf. काश्यप
बुभुक्षितास्तीक्षण रोषा विभिन्नाः कुलपांसना: |
नीचा म्लेच्छोत्सादकाश्च गर्तस्थाः पारदारिकाः dI
सत्यधर्म विहीनाश्च गिरिस्थाः कन्दराश्रिताः | |
प्रतापसत्यहीनाश्च श्रुगालादा महाशना: ||
तिलाश्च बाहुयुद्धज्ञा माषाइचौरा: खराश्रराः |
यज्ञान् हिसन्ति ये नित्यं राहुस्तेषामधीश्चरः 11]
गिरिदुगंपह्लवश्वेतहुणचोलावगाणमरुचीना: ।
प्रत्यन्तध निमहेच्छव्यवसायपराक्रमोपेता: ।।२८॥।
परदारविवादरताः पररन्ध्रकुतूहला मदोत्सिक्ताः ।
मूर्खा धामिकविजिगीषवश्च केतोः समाख्याताः ॥३९॥
Ketu presides over mountain strongholds, the Pahlavas,
White Huns, Colas, Afghans, deserts, Chinese, cavemen (or borderland), the wealthy, highly ambitious persons, energetic men, those |
endowed with prowess, adulterers, quarrelsome people, those who |
take pleasuse in others’ difficulties, those that are puffed up with
pride, fools, unrighteous persons and those that are intent on subjugating others.
[Our author refers to the White Huns in XI-61 also. Since he
uses Sveta and Sita, synonyms of white, it is clear that neither of
these words is the name of a country or people.
Cf. काश्यप---
प्राकाराभ्युच्छिता: श्रृङ्गगिरिस्था विजिगीषवः ।
प्रत्यन्तवासाभिरताः परच्छिद्रविशारदाः ॥
मूर्खा विज्ञानहीनाश्च faltar नरास्तथा |
परदाररता नीचा: केतोरिति विनिदिशेत् ॥ |
Cf. also the समाससंहिता of our author— x
भानोरङ्गकलिङ्गवङ्गयवनाः श्रीपवंता: पारता x
बाह्लीकोत्कटसुद्य शोणमगधा: प्राइनमंदार्धाशका: । |

Planetary Rulership XVI 203
कोशाम्त्री शबरान्भ्रपौण्ड्यवना याम्याश्रिता मेकला-
श्वी नो दुम्बरवर्धेमानविकटाश्रम्पेक्षुमत्याश्रिताः ।।
जलपवंतदुर्गकोशला वनिताराज्यतुषारत ङ्गणाः ।
वनवासहलाः सरस्वती शीतांशोर्भरुकच्छरोमका: 11
क्षितिजस्य महानदी पयोष्णी वेणा वेत्रवती च मालती।
मलयद्रविडाइमकान्ध्रचोला भीमाध त्वपरे च ये स्थिताश्च Gi
पारेविन्ध्यं पश्चिम: शोणभागो गोदावर्याः कूलम दिम हेन्द्रः ।
सिप्रा सिन्धुर्भूमिजस्येति देशा व॑देहाख्याः कोङ्कणा: केरलाइच ॥
सोम्यस्य सौराष्ट्रिक भोजदेशा गङ्गाश्रिताश्चोत्तरकूलनद्यः |
विन्ध्या द्वंमन्त्यं मथुरापुरस्तात्सुवास्तुसिन्ध्वद्विगुहा श्रिता श्च i
जीवस्य सारस्वतमत्स्यशाल्वाः प्राक्सिन्धुभागो मधुरापराद्धम् |
BET: शतद्रू रमठा विपाशा त्रैगर्तयोधेयकपारताइ्च di
देशा भृगोस्तज्नशिला वितस्ता गान्धारकाः कंकयमालवाश्च |
दाशाणाकोशीनरचन्द्रभागारचेद्या ह्वसि प्रास्थलकालकासख्याः ॥
सरस्वती यत्र गता प्रणाश वेदस्मृती मालवकाः सुराष्ट्राः |
पाश्चात्यदेशा विदिशा मही च सोरेः स्मृताः पुष्करमर्बुदश्च |
राहोः कृतघ्नकुलपांसननीचशुद्रा वोक्काणझूलिकनियुद्धविदुग्रकोपाः |
गोमायुभअगिरिदुर्गनिवासिनश्च गर्भस्थहिसूपरराररताः खलाश्च ॥
शिखिनो वनसंस्थितावगाणा मरुभ्रूपल्लवचोलहुण चीनाः |
व्यवसायपराक्रमोपपन्ताः परदारानुरता मदोत्कटाश्च ॥]
उदयसमये यः स्निग्धांशुमंहान् प्रकृतिस्थितो
यदि च न हतो निर्घातोल्कारजोग्रहमदनेः |
स्वभवनगतः स्वोच्चप्राप्तः शुभग्रहवीक्षितः
स भवति झिञस्तेषां येषां प्रभुः परिकीतितः ॥४०॥
A planet proves favourable to those (persons and objects)
whose lord he is declared to be, if, at rising, he be large, of glossy
rays, and in his natural state, if no portentous thunder, meteors,
dust or planetary conflict afflict him, and if he be posited in his own
house, exaltation or be aspected by benefics.
[Bhattotpala interprets उदय as क्षितिजात्प्रत्युद्गमकाले which means the
daily rising as against the re-emergence of a planet after being
eclipsed by the Sun. In my view the author’s intention is to convey
the latter sense.

204 Brhat Samhita
As the chapter is coming to a close, the metre is changed. It
is हरिणी here].
प्रभिहितविपरीतलक्षणे क्षयघुपगच्छति तत्परिग्रहः |
डमरमयगदातुरा जना नरपतयश्च भवन्ति दुःखिताः ॥४१॥
यदि न रिपुकृतं भयं नृपाणां स्वसुतकृतं नियमादमात्यजं वा ।
भवति जनपदस्य चाप्यवृष्ट्या गमनमपूर्वपुराद्रितिस्तगासु ua
Ifa planet is possessed of signs contrary to those mentioned
above, his dependency (countries, people and things) will suffer;
the people and the rulers will be afflicted by battles, panic and diseases. Incase the kings have no danger from their enemies, there
will certainly be trouble for them from their own sons or ministers.
Moreover, in consequence of drought, the people of the country-side
will repair to towns, mountains and rivers which they had never
visited before.
[The second verse here is construed by Utpala ina different way:
स्वसुतकृतमात्मीयपुत्रकृतं वा तियमान्तिश्चयादमात्यजं मन्त्रिकृतं वा भयं न भवति ।...
एषां मध्यादन्यतमो न भवति तदा जनपदस्य लोकस्यापि यथा तथा भयं भवति...।
This line of argument appears to be unwarranted in view of the
word नियमात् employed by the author.
Cf. गर्गे
स्निग्धरर्मिविशालश्च प्रकृतिस्थश्च यो ग्रहः |
ग्रहयुद्धरजोधूननिर्घातोल्काघनाहतः ॥
स यदा स्वोच्चराशिस्थो मित्रभे स्वणृहेऽपि वा ।
स्थितः ganag: स पुष्णाति परिग्रहम् ॥
स्वमन्यथा हन्ति वर्ग जननाशां करोति च |
नपाणां भयदः प्रोकतस्त्ववृष्टिमयकारक: ।।
The metres of the verses are वैतालीय and पुष्पिताग्रा respectively].

ग्रहयुद्धाध्यायः ॥१७॥
Chapter XVII—Planetary Wars
युद्ध यथा यदा वा भविष्यमादिश्यते त्रिकालज्ञः ।
तद्विज्ञानं करणे मया कृतं सूर्यसिद्धान्तात् ugu
How and when a planetary war will take place according to
the teachings of the sages who know the past, present and future,
has been explained by me in the astronomical treatise viz. Paficasiddhantika, on the basis of the Suryasiddhànta.
[सूर्यसिद्धान्ते is another reading for qdfezram. Our author frequently alludes to his previous works like the पञ्चसिद्धान्तिका, बुहज्जातक
etc.
In the following verse the cause and varieties of planetary
warfare are explained. ]
वियति चरतां ग्रहारामुपर्य्पर्यात्ममागंसंस्थानाम् ।
प्रतिदुराद् हग्विषये समतामिव सम्प्रयातानाम् usu
श्रासन्नक्र मयोगा दभेदोल्लेखांशुमदनासव्येः |
युद्धं चतुष्प्रकारं पराशराद्यम्ंनिमिरुक्तम् usu
When the planets move in the sky along their orbits lying over
one another, they appear to our eyes to moveon even surface
or plane, as a result of their great distance (from the earth). According to the degree of their seeming approachment, there are four
kinds of war as stated by Parà$ara and other sages, viz. Bheda
(occultation, cleaving), Ullekha (grazing), Amsumardana (clashing of
the rays) and Apasavya (passing southward).
[Planetary warfare has been treated of by many ancient sages
such as Pardsara, Garga, Ka$yapa and Vajra, according to the
commentator. When two planets appear to have a single orb on
account of their apparent over-lapping, the fight is called Bheda. In
this the orb of the lower planet obstructs completely the upper one.
When the rims of the two orbs graze each other, it is called Ullekha.
When the rays of two planets situated closely appear to be clashing

206 Brhat Samhita
with one another, it is Amsumardana. Whena planet covering another
moves towards the south, it is Apasavya (see notes under XVIII-1
infra). Bhattotpala appears to confuse सव्य and श्रपसव्य, as he says:
“अपसब्य: प्रदक्षिण उच्यते 1’? But this is against the statements of the sages.
He quotes a verse which distinguishes Yuddha, Samagama, Ullekha
and Bheda : “gan alag बाहुमात्रं समागम: 1 वितस्तिमात्रमुल्लेखो भेदश्चैत्र
fagia: 11” ऋषिपुत्र says in this connection :
दक्षिणोेनापसव्यं स्यादुत्तरेण प्रदक्षिणाम् |
ग्रहाणां चन्द्रमा ज्ञेयो नक्षत्राणां तथेव च ॥
Vrddhagarga explains how the planets’ mutual प्रपसब्य and प्रदक्षिण
positions are to be determined :
ग्रहाणां विजये भङगे नक्षत्राणां च संश्रये |
कथं प्रदक्षिणं ज्ञे यमपसव्यं तथेव wg
नक्षत्राणां ग्रहाणां वा यदा FACT: शशी d
तत्प्रदक्षिणमित्या हुभेवेत् क्षेमसुवृष्टये ॥
नक्षत्राणां ग्रहाणां वा यदा दक्षिणातो ब्रजेत् ।
श्रपसव्यं तदेव स्यादवृष्ट्रिभयलक्षणम् ॥
Bhattotpala adds here that though the definition of Apasavya is the
same with respect to all planets, yet in the case of the planetary war
named Apasavya it is different i.e. it means सव्य. Dr. Kern says:
“The Apasavyam or Asavyam yuddham takes place when the interval
is somewhat less than a degree; at a greater interval there is no
conflict." Rsiputra and others speak of 15 kinds of war.
Cf. पराशर
भेदनमारोहणमुल्लेखनं रश्मिसंसर्गरचेति ग्रहयुद्धं चतुविधमाचक्षते कुशलाः |
तेषां पूर्वात् पूर्वो गरीयान् ।
Cf. mi—
छादनं रोघनं चेव रश्मिमर्दस्तथैव च |
ग्रपसव्यं ग्रहाणां च चतुर्धा युद्धमुच्यते ।।
Cf. also काश्यप--
सवंग्रहेभ्यः शीघ्रे ्दुस्ततस्तस्येव चात्मजः।
भार्गवो रविभौमौ च जीवो मन्द: शनैश्च रः il
शीघ्रगा मन्दगाइचैते काले त्वेकक्षंगामिनः |
ततो योगो भवेदेषां यतोंऽशत्वैकमाश्रिताः di
Was

Planetary Wars XVII 207
उपर्य परिसंस्थास्ते रश्यन्ते युगपत् स्थिताः |
भेदोल्लेखांशुमर्दाश्चापसव्यइच तथापरः ॥
चतुष्प्रकारः संयोगो युद्धे तु दिविचारिणाम् 1]
भेदे वृष्टिविनाशो भेदः सुहृदां महाकुलानां च ।
उल्लेखे शस्त्रभयं मन्त्रिविरोधः त्रियान्नत्वस् ॥ ४॥
अंशुविरोधे युद्धानि भूभृतां शस्त्ररुकक्षुदवमर्दा: ।
युद्धे चाप्यपसव्ये भवर्ति युद्धानि भूपानास् ॥५॥
When the Bheda (occultation) type of warfare takes place,
there will be failure of rains, and discord among friends and big
families. At the Ullekha (grazing) type of war there will be danger
from clash of arms, ministers will be at loggerheads among themselves or with the king, and food will be very dear. When the third
type of war (clashing of rays) takes place, there will be wars among
kings and general destruction by the sword, diseases and famine. At
the last type of conflict i.e. Apasavya, kings will be engaged in
wars.
[Dr. Kern remarks : ‘‘This is not difficult to understand, for
the Moon leaving, in her eastward course, a planet or star at her
own right (7.e. standing north from the planet or star), may be said
to make a Pradaksina; standing to the south, 2.6. leaving a planet or
star at her left, she makesan Apasavya. Thus Apasavya means, “from
the left, at the left", and, in a special application,*'at the southside,”
but from this, it does not necessarily follow that apasavya originally
was simply the opposite of savya “left”. Yet it cannot be doubted that
they have taken afasavya as the reverse of savya, or, in other words,
that aba was understood to mean, not “from the side"! but ‘‘not’’;
therefore asavya was considered to be simply synonymous with apasavya. Moreover, Savya has got the meaning of “right”, precisely the
reverse of its most common acceptation, viz. “left”.
“Not to be confounded with this acceptation of sauya is its
use in augury. Applied to augural birds, etc., savya is strictly and
properly “left”, but as birds first appearing from the left of the
observer move in the direction of his right, and keep him at their
own right savya, ‘‘left’’, and pradaksina, ‘moving to the right’, imply
the same, without being the same. Utpala remarks : सवे uq शकुनादयो
यातुर्वामपार्श्वादग्रत श्रागत्य दक्षिणपाशवराक्रामन्ति यत् तत् प्रदक्षिणं qaqaq | एत-

208 Brhat Samhita
द्विपरीतं दक्षिणापार्श्वाद्वामपाश्व गमनं यत्तदपसव्यम् | In astronomical works,
savya “moving (revolving) toward the right and apasavya "moving
toward the left, is common enough; e.g. Sürya Siddhanta XII-55;
Siddhanta Siromani, Goladhyaya 3-51, Aryabhatiya IV-16.”
While answering an objection to the effect that there can be
only three kinds of planetary conflict, the commentator says: The
signs of defeat of a planet are (i) being placed to the south of the
other planet, (ii) rough appearance, (iii) trembling, (iv) loss of
colour or lustre, (v) deformity, (vi) being super-imposed by the
other, (viii) tiny form, and (viii) retreating. Those of victory are: (1)
to be stationed tothe north of the other, (ii) glossiness, (iii) largeness, etc. Though a planet is placed to the south, if it is endowed
with the marks of triumph, given above, it should be declared to be
victorious. So, whatever effects have been prescribed for a victorious
planet stationed to the north, should be said for a victorious planet
though placed to the south. This is the purpose of mentioning this
variety separately.]
रविराक्रन्दो सध्ये पौरः qasa? स्थितो यायी ।
पौरा बुधगुरुरविजा नित्यं शीतांशुराक्रन्दः nen
केतुकुज राहुशुक्रा यायिन एते हता घ्नन्ति ।
श्राक्रन्दयायिपोराञजयिनो जयदाः स्ववर्गस्य ॥७॥
The Sun standing in the meridian is called Akranda i.e. an
ally who comes to the rescue being situated behind the Parsnigraha,
when he is in the east i.e. in the forenoon, he is called the Paura, a
king staying inside the town; and in the west ८.८. in the afternoon,
he is termed the Yayin, one who marches against the enemy. Mercury, Jupiter and Saturn are always Pauras, while the Moon is
always the Akranda. Ketu, Mars, Rahu and Venus are marching
planets. All the planets known as the Akranda, Yayin and Paura
when hurt, will destroy severally kings coming to the rescue, marching and staying in town. When-such planets are victorious, they
bestow victory on their own classes of kings.
[In Sanskrit literature 12 kinds of kings are mentioned. Among
them the Vijigisu occupies the hub of the wheel. Akranda is next to
the Parsnigraha behind the Vijigigu. In case Parsnigraha attacks the
central king from behind, the Akranda who is behind the former
could help the chief king by attacking the attacker Yayin and Paura

Planetary Wars XVII 209
are general terms meaning one who attacks or marches, and one
who defends the town respectively. These names do not occur in
the list of 12 kings.
The luminaries do not participate in planetary wars. Still they
are mentioned here in view of their affliction by meteors ete. ]
पौरे पोरेश हते पौराः पौरान् नृपान् विनिघ्नन्ति ।
एवं याय्याक्रन्दा नागरयायिग्रहाइचेव ।।८॥
When a planet called Paura is overpowered by another of the
same description, kings defending their towns would kill others in
the same situation. The same applies to Yayin and Akranda planets
and kings. When there is a conflict between Paura and Yayin
planets, the victorious will bestow victory on its own class of kings.
[Cf. पराशर
तेषां तज्जयाद्विजयों वधादू वधोऽच्योन्यभेदाद् भेदः साम्यात् साम्यम् |
In the next verse the symptoms of a defeated planet are
given.]
दज्ञिणदिकूस्थः परुषो वेपथुरप्राप्य सन्तिवृत्तोऽएुः ॥
ग्रधिरूढो fagat निष्प्रभो विवर्णश्च यः स जित; neu
A planet is said to be defeated when it is situated to the south
of the other, is rough, quivering, retreating without actually coming in contact with the other, small, mounted upon, of unnatural
appearance, without brilliance and colourless.
[Here nine marks of defeat are listed, but Parasara has one
more, viz. Abhihata or struck.
Cf. गर्ग
प्रररिमर्लोहित: श्यामः परुषः सूक्ष्म एव FI
ग्रपसव्यगतो यञ्च चक्कान्त:पतितस्तथा॥
च्युतः स्थानाद्वतो यश्च प्रतिस्तब्धस्तर्थंव च ।
निष्प्रभो विकृतश्चापि जवेनाभिहतश्च यः ॥
अप्राप्य वा निवृत्तो यो वेपनः कृष्ण एव च |
लक्षणैः सप्तदशभिम्रंहं विन्द्यात् पराजितम् ॥
Though the sage speaks of 17 marks, yet we can count only 16. To
solve this difficulty we may have to change the reading of जवेन into
जवोनो$भिहत:. Then we get one more mark i.e. one bereft of speed.]

210 Brhat Samhita
उक्तविवरीतलक्षणासम्पन्नो जयगतो विनिर्देश्यः ।
विपुलः स्निग्धो द्यतिमान् दक्षिणदिक्स्थोऽपि जययुक्तः ॥१०॥
A planet possessed of characteristics contrary to those mentioned above should be considered as victorious.i.e. when it is large,
glossy and brilliant, even though it may be placed in the south.
[Cf. wi—
द्युतिमान् रहिमिसम्पन्तः प्रसन्नो रजतप्रभः |
वृहद्रपधरश्चैव यः समेत्य ग्रहो भवेत् ॥
प्रभावर्णाधिको यश्च ग्रहमावृत्य तिष्ठति |
area जयिनं विन्द्यादू ग्रहं ग्रहसमागमे ।।
In this connection Utpala remarks, “एतत् शुक्रस्य प्रायः सम्भवति |”
He quotes in support पुलिशाचार्य --
“सर्वे जयिन उदक्स्था दक्षिणादिवस्थो जयी शुक्रः 1”
From this we can infer that generally the palm is given to a planet
that is situated in the north, but in the case of Venus it is the
reverse.]
द्वावपि मयूखयुक्तौ विपुलो स्निग्धौ समागमे भवतः |
तत्रान्योन्यं प्रीतिविपरीतावात्मपक्षघ्नौ n?
When both the planets at conjunction are radiant, large and
glossy, they being in love with each other conduce to their respective parties (Akranda etc.) establishing peace and friendship between
them; while in the contrary case they destroy the kings over whom
they preside.
[Here the word विपरीती means—if both of them are devoid of
radiance, small, and rough.]
युद्धं समागमो वा यद्यव्यक्तौ स्वलक्षणेर्भवतः ।
भुवि भूभृतामपि तथा फलमव्यक्तं fafadsug ॥ १२॥
If, owing to the indistinctness of the indications, it cannot be
determined whether a conflict or conjunction is taking place, the
effects accruing to the kings on earth too should be declared to be
equally uncertain.
[War takes place among the non-luminaries, while Samagama
(conjunction) is between the Moon and one of the non-luminaries.
At a planetary war sometimes it may not be possible to determine

Planetary Wars XVII 2]1
the victor owing to the absence of distinct indications, e.g. when both
are radiant, large and glossy. Similarly, at a conjunction it may not
be possible to find out if the Moon is either to the north or south of
the other planet (non-luminary). If she passes through the other,
the effect of cleaving should be Prescribed and not of conjunction.]
गुरणा जितेऽवनिसुते बाह्लीका यायिनोऽगिनिवार्ताइच à
शशिजेन शुरसेनाः कलिड्भाशाल्वाइच पीड्यन्ते ॥ १३॥
सौरेणारे विजिते जयन्ति पौराः प्रजाइच सीदन्ति ।
कोष्ठागारम्ले च्छक्ष त्रियतापइच शुक्र जिते ngyn
When Mars is defeated by Jupiter, the Bahlikas, marching
kings and persons living by fire (such as goldsmiths, cooks etc.)
will come to grief. When he is vanquished by Mercury, the Sürasenas, Kalingas and Silvas will suffer. When he is defeated by
Saturn, kings defending a town will become victorious, but the
subjects will be harmed. When he is defeated by Venus, granaries,
Mlecchas and Ksatriyas will suffer,
भौमेन हते शशिजे वृक्षसरित्तापसाइमकनरेन्द्रा: ।
उत्तरदिक्स्थाः क्रतुदीक्षिताश्च सन्तापमायान्ति ॥१४॥
गुरुणा जिते बुधे म्लेच्छशुद्र चौ राथंयुक्तपौरजनाः à
त्रेगतंपार्वतीयाः पीड्यन्ते कम्पते च सही ॥१६॥
रविजेन बुधे ध्वस्ते नाविकयोधाब्जसधनर्गाभिण्यः |
शृगुणा जितेऽग्निकोपः सस्याम्बुदयायिविध्वंसः ngon
When Mercury is defeated by Mars, trees, rivers, ascetics, the
Asmakas, kings, people living in the north and sacrificers will
come to grief. When he is conquered by Jupiter, the Mlecchas,
Südras, thieves, wealthy men, citizens (defenders of towns), Traigartas and mountain-dwellers will be affected, and there will be an
earthquake. When he is vanquished by Saturn, sailors, Warriors,
aquatic products, rich persons and pregnant women will suffer.
When he is overpowered by Venus, there will be destruction by fire
and ruin of corn, clouds and marching monarchs.
जीवे शुक्राभिहते कुलूतगान्धारकंकया मद्राः ।
शाल्वा वत्सा वङ्गा गावः सस्यानि पीड्यन्ते usn

212 Brhat Samhita
भोमेन हते जीवे मध्यो देश। नरेश्वरा गाव: ।
atta चार्जुनायनवसातियौधेय शिबिविपध्रा: ॥१९॥।
शशितनयेनापि जिते बृहस्पतो म्लेच्छसत्यशस्त्रभृतः ।
उपयान्ति मध्यदेशश्च संक्षयं यच्च भक्तिफलम् ॥२०॥
When Jupiter is vanquished by Venus, the Kulutas, Gandharas, Kaikayas, Madras, Salvas, Vatsas, Vangas, cattle and corn
will be affected. When he is overcome by Mars, the middle country,
kings and cows will suffer. When he is defeated by Saturn, the
Arjunayanas, Vasatis, Yaudheyas, Sibis and Brahmanas will be
harmed. When he is defeated by Mercury, the Mlecchas, truthful
men, soldiers and the middle country will be ruined. In addition,
those people and things belonging to Jupiter (vide XVI. 21-25
supra) will also be destroyed.
[Though the author mentions भक्तिफल- effect of planetary
rulership—only with reference to Jupiter and Venus, it is to be
understood that the dependencies of all defeated planets will be
adversely affected, as a general rule. For, he makes this point clear
in the last verse below i.e. 27].
शुक्र ब्रहस्पतिजिते यायी श्रेष्ठो विनाशमुपयाति à
ब्रह्मक्षत्रविरोध: सलिलं च न वासवस्त्यजति ॥२१॥
कोसलकलिङ्गवद्भा वत्सा मत्स्याइच मध्यदेशयुताः।
महतीं ब्रजन्ति पीडां नप्ूंसकाः शुरसेनाइच NU
कुजविजिते भुगुतनपे बलमुख्यवधो नरेन्द्रसड्ग्रामा: |
सोम्पेन पावेतीयाः क्षी रविनाशोऽल्पवृष्टिशच ॥२३॥
रविजेन सिते विजिते गणमुख्याः शस्त्रजीविनः क्षत्रम् ।
जलजाश्च निपीड्यन्ते सामान्यं भक्तिफलमन्यत् ॥२४॥
When Venus is defeated by Jupiter, the marching monarch
will meet with his end; Brahmanas and Ksatriyas will be at loggerheads, and there will be no rain; the Kosalas, Kalingas, Vangas,
Vatsas, Matsyas, the Middle country, eunuchs and the Sürasenas
will suffer severely. When he is defeated by Mars, commandants
of armies will be murdered, and kings will be locked up in wars.
When he is overcome by Mercury, mountaineers will be afflicted;
and there will be great scarcity of milk and rainfall When he is

Planetary Wars XVII 213
vanquished by Saturn, leaders of corporations, military men, Ksatriyas and aquatic animals (and products) will be harmed. Moreover, the general effects due to planetary rulership (mentioned in
XVI. 26-30) will also come to pass.
ग्रसिते सितेन निहते$घंवृद्धिरहिविहगमानिनां पीडा i
क्षितिजेन तङ्गणान्धोड़काशिबाह्णीकदेशानास् ॥२५॥
सौम्येन पराभूते मन्देऽङ्गवशिग्विहङ्गपश्चुनागाः |
सन्ताप्यन्ते गुरुणा स्त्रीबहुला महिषकशकाइच ॥२६॥
When Saturn is overcome by Venus, prices increase, and
snakes, birds and proud persons suffer. When he is defeated by
Mars, the Tangana, Andhra, Udra, Kasi and Bahlika countries will
be afflicted. When he is defeated by Mercury, the Angas, merchants, birds, cattle (quadrupeds) and elephants will suffer. And
when he is hurt by Jupiter, countries where women are in a majority, the Mahisakas and Scythians will be troubled.
aa विशेषोऽभिहितो हतानां कुजज्ञवागीशसितासितानास् ।
फलं तु वाच्यं ग्रह भक्तितोऽन्यद्यया तथा घ्नन्ति हताः स्वभक्तीः ॥२७।
Thus have been described the special effects of the defeat of
Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus and Saturn. The general effects,
however, are to be declared as explained in the chapter dealing
with planetary rulership. The more a planet is stricken, the more
will it harm everything belonging to it.
[What the author means is that the general effects of victory
or defeat will accrueto the people, countries and animals as well as
things enumerated in the previous chapter. What is given here is
only the special character of the effects for each planet.
The metre is उपेन्द्रवज्रा.]

शशिग्रहसमागभाध्यायः ॥१८॥
Chapter XVIII—Conjunction of the Moon with Planets or Stars
भानां यथासम्भवमुत्तरेशा यातो ग्रहाणां यदि वा शशाङ्कः ।
प्रदक्षिणं तच्छुभदं नृपाणां याम्पेन यातो न शिवः शशाङ्कः ॥। १॥
When the Moon moves, wherever possible, to the north of
stars or planets i.e. keeps them to her right side, it is called her
dextral movement and augurs well for kings (or mankind). If she
moves to the south of them, she does noi bring happiness to them.
[शुभकृन्नराणां is another reading in the second half of the
verse.
“यथासम्भव” is explained by the commentator thus: It is only
in the case of the star or planet that is nearby. This generally
happens in the case of those stars whose Viksepa is equal to or less
than that of the Moon; for example, Krttika, Rohini, Pusya, Magha,
Citra, Visakha, Anuradha, Jyestha, Satabhisaj and Revati. In
the case of those that are situated far away, e.g. Svati, Sravana,
Dhanistha etc., she cannot move totheir north. The declination
of Svati is 37° north, while the Moon’s 4.5°. Hence she moves
always to its south. On the other hand, she moves always to the
north of those stars whose southern declination is greater than
hers. The same rule holds in the case of Mars and other planets.
Cf. «faga and azwi under XVII. 2-3. The metre is उपजाति.]
चन्द्रमा यदि कुजस्य यात्युदक्पावेतोयबलशालिनां जय: |
क्षत्रियाः प्रमुदिताः सयायिनो भुरिधान्यमुदिता वसुन्धरा uqu
Should the Moon move to the north of Mars, mountaineers
and the mighty would be victorious; Ksatriyas and marching
monarchs would be happy; and the earth would rejoice with abundant corn.
[The metre is रथोद्धता.]
उत्तरतः स्वसुतस्य TAME: पौरजयाय सुभिक्षकरश्च ।
सस्यचयं कुरुते जनहादि कोशचग्रं च नराधिपतीनाम् uz

Conjunction of Moon with Planets or Stars XVIII 215
When the Moon traverses to the north of Mercury, she confers victory on the king defending the town, plenty of food, and
corn as well as happiness on the people, and enrichment of treasuries of kings.
[The metre is दोधक.]
बृहस्पतेरुत्तरगे शशाङ्के पौरद्विजक्षत्रियपण्डितानाम् |
धर्मस्य देशस्य च मध्यमस्य वृद्धिः सुभिक्षं मुदिताः प्रजाश्च ॥४॥
When the Moon moves to the north of Jupiter, prosperity
will dawn on kings defending their towns, Brahmanas, Ksatriyas,
learned men, righteousness or religion, and the middle country.
There will be plenty of food and happiness among the people.
[The metre is उपजाति.]
भार्गवस्य यदि यात्युदक् शशी कोशयुक्तगजवाजिवृद्धिदः |
यायिनां च विजयो धनुष्मतां सस्यसम्पदपि चोत्तमा तदा॥५॥
When the Moon is to the north of Venus, those who have
hoarded wealth, elephants and horses will flourish, marching
chiefs and archers will be victorious and there will be a bumper
harvest.
(The metre is रथोद्धता.]
रविजस्य शशी प्रदक्षिणं कुर्याच्चेत्पुरभुभृतां जय: ।
शकबाह्हिकसिन्धुपह्लवा umen ua: समस्विताः usu
Should the Moon traverse to the north of Saturn, kings defending a town would win victory, and the Scythians, Bahlikas,
people of Sindhu, Pahlavas and Yavanas would be happy.
[The metre is वैतालीय.] ;
येषामुदग्गच्छति भग्रहाणां प्रालेयरश्मिनिरुपद्रवश्च |
तद्द्रव्यपौरेतरभक्तिदेशान् पुष्णाति याम्येन निहन्ति तानि non
If the Moon moves to the north of a star or planet, herself
remaining free from affliction, she proves beneficent to the substances, kings defending towns or marching chiefs as the case may be,
and countries assigned to the particular star or planet. In case she
moves to the south of the same, she will destroy all the abovenamed things belonging to it.
[The metre is इन्द्रवज्त्ा.]
शशिनि फलमुदक्स्थे यद् ग्रहस्योपदिष्टं
भवति तदपसव्ये adda प्रतीपम् ।

216 Brhat Samhita
इति शशिसमवाया: कीतिता भग्रहाणां
न खलु भवति युद्धं साकमिन्दोग्रंहक्षेः us
Thus have been described the effects of the Moon’s conjunction with stars and planets to the effect that all the results declared
for the Moon’s standing to the north of a planet become null and
void when she moves to its south. The Moon has no conflict whatsoever with any planet or star.
[The Sun’s conjunction with any planet is called the latter’s
Eclipse; the Moon's, Samagama; and that of the non-luminaries
among themselves, Conflict.
Cf. आचाय॑ विष्णुचन्द्र--
दिवसकरेणास्तमयः समागमः शीतरश्मिसहितानाम् ।
कुसुतादीनां युद्धं निगद्यतेऽन्योन्ययुक्तानाम् ॥
Here Bhattotpala ridicules those who have spoken of the Sun’s
victory and defeat, as being utterly ignorant of astronomy.
The metre is मालिनी.]

ग्रहवषफलाध्यायः ॥। १६॥।
Chapter X IX—Planetary Years and Effects
[Bhattotpala reminds us that Varahamihira had promised in
the पञ्चसिद्धान्तिका 1-22 that he would treat of the effects of years and
months in this work :—
वर्ष यद्यस्य फलं मासे च मुनिप्रणीतमालोक्य |
तत्तदवृत्तवेक्ष्ये होरातन्त्रोत्तरविधाने ii
In this connection Dr. Kern remarks thus :—
‘Jt is not known which source has been chiefly used by our
author in this particular instance; thus much, however, is certain
that long before his time Greek horoscopy had been introduced into
India."
None can doubt the sincerity and honesty of Varahamihira
inasmuch as he mentions the authorities, both ancient Indian and
foreign, for his statements. In the above verse quoted from the
Paiicasiddhantikg he expressly states that the वर्षफल and मासफल were
expounded by ancient sages (मुनिप्रणीतम्) who must be Garga, Paraara, Kasyapa, Devala etc. He also pays tribute to the scholarship
ofthe Yavanas (vide II. 14). From this we are not justified in
inferring that everything in astrology and astronomy here was
borrowed from the Greeks. It is true that our author adds many
Greek terms such as Kriya, Tavuru and Jutuma to the names
prevalent in India.]
aaa भूविरलसस्ययुता वनानि
देवाद बिभक्षयिषुदंष्टरिसमावृतानि ।
नद्यश्च नेव हि पयः प्रचुरं स्रवन्ति
रुग्भेषजानि न तथातिबलान्वितानि ॥ १॥
तीक्ष्णं तपत्यदितिजः शिशिरेऽपि काले
नात्यम्बुदा जलमुचोऽचलसन्निकाशाः |
नष्ट प्रभक्षेगणशीतकरं TARA
सीदन्ति तापसकुलानि सगोकुलानि uqu

218 Brhat Samhita
हस्त्यश्वपत्तिमदसह्यबले रुपेता
बाणासनासिमुशलातिशयाइचरन्ति |
घ्नन्तो नृपा युधि नपानुचरंश्र देशात्
संवत्सरे दिनकरस्य दिनेऽथ मासे NIN
The state of things in a year, month or day presided over by
the Sun will be as follows : Everywhere the earth will yield very
little crop; the forests will be infested with hungry tusked animals
as a visitation, there will be very little water flowing in the rivers;
medicines will not have their potency. Even in winter the Sun
will be extremely warm; clouds, though resembling mountains, will
not pour down sufficient rain; the Moon and the clusters of stars in
the sky will lose their brilliance; groups of hermits and cattle will
languish. Kings accompanied by their followers as well as irresistible forces consisting of the divisions of elephants, horses and
foot-soldiers, and armed with mighty bows, swords and staves, will
go about destroying the countries in Wars.
(Cf. यवनेश्वर--
ग्रब्दाश्रयं लक्षणमीरितं यद् ग्रहस्वभावप्रभवं जनानाम् |
तदेव तन्मासदिनरत्तुषूक्तं तदीशवरस्थानविकल्पितं च ॥
दिवाकराब्दे रणाविग्रहोग्रक्षितीशवरस्तीब्रविषज्वरार्निः |
वर्षे शुष्कद्र मशुष्कसस्य प्रचण्डवह न्युग्रविषाक्षिरोगाः |
The reading of the second verse appears to be slightly corrupt.
Cf. also समाससंहिता--
तीक्ष्णो$क: स्वल्पसस्यरच गतमेघोऽतितस्करः ।
बहुरगव्याधिगणो भास्कराब्दो रणाकुल: ॥
Utpala has quoted relevant verses from the पञ्चसिद्धान्तिका I.810; 17-19 under II-6 where lords of years, months etc, are mentioned. For a clear method refer to श्रीपतिपद्धत, pp. 40-42 (V.S.S. Edn.).
Unless otherwise stated the metre employed in this chapter is
वसन्ततिलका].
व्याप्तं नभ: प्रचलिताचलसन्निकाश -
वर्यालाअनालिगवलच्छविभिः पयोदः i
गां पुरयल्हिरिखिलाममलाभिर ऱ्-
रुत्कण्ठितेन quum ध्वनितेन चाशाः ।।४॥

Planetary Years and Effects XIX 219
तोयानि पद्मकुमुदोत्पलवन्त्यतीव
फुल्लद्र माण्युपवनान्यलिनादितानि ।
गाव: प्रभूतपयसो नयनाभिरामा
रामा रतेरविरतं रमयन्ति रामान् uuu
गो वू मशालियवधान्यवरेक्षुवाटा
भुः पाल्यते नृपतिमिनंगराकराढ्या ।
चित्यङ्किता क्रतुवरेष्टिविधुष्टनादा
संवत्सरे शिशिरगोरमिसम्प्रवृत्ते usu
During the year presided over by the Moon, the sky will be
covered with clouds which resemble moving mountains, which
possess the colour of snakes, collyrium, bees and buffaloes’ horn, and
which fill the entire earth with pure water and the quarters with
their deep thunder that produces pangs of separation in the minds
of lovers. The waters (of lakes etc.) will be adorned with lotuses
and lilies, trees blossoming and bees humming in the gardens; cows
will yield abundant milk; and charming ladies will always be delighting their handsome lovers with amorous sports. Kings will rule
over the earth justly and properly and enable the latter to yield a
rich harvest of wheat, paddy, barley, Kalama rice and sugar-cane,
and be enriched with excellent towns and mines as well as marked
with sacrificial altars, and resounding with Vedic chants at big and
small sacrifices.
[उत्कण्ठकेन is another reading for उत्कष्ठितेन. These verses are
marked by an extra-ordinary felicity of diction and elegant imagery.
The author’s poetic talents appear to brush aside his scientific
restraints and assert themselves giving a literary relief tothe reader
whose mind must be rigid with scientific ideas. The alliteration in
these verses, especially in verse No. 5, is particularly pleasing.
Cf. यवनेश्वर--
सम्पन्नसस्यक्षुपशष्पशालिप्ररूढगुल्मो AGATA: |
रत्नौषधिस्ने हपटुप्रसेकशचान्द्रो रतिस्त्रीसुखवधं नोऽब्दः ॥
also समाससंहिता--
बहुवर्षातिसस्यशच गवां क्षीरप्रदायक: |
qata: कामिनामिष्ठश्चित्य द्धितम हीतल: t]

220 Brhat Samhita
वातोद्धतश्चरति वह्हिरतिप्रचण्डो
ग्रामान्वनानि नगरारि च सन्दिधक्षुः ।
हाहेति दस्युगणपातहता रटन्ति
निःस्वीकृता विपशवो भुवि मत्यंसद्धगः ॥७॥
श्रभ्युन्तता वियति संहतमूतंयोऽपि
मुञ्चर्ति न क्वचिदपः प्रचुरं पयोदाः |
सीम्नि प्रजातमपि शोषमुपेति सस्यं
निष्पन्नसप्यविनयादपरे हरन्ति usu
War न सम्यगभिपालनसक्तचित्ताः
पित्तोत्थरुकृप्रचुरता भुजगप्रकोपः ।
एवंविघेरुपहता भवति प्रजेयं
संवत्सरेऽवनिसुतस्य विपन्नसस्या uei
During the year ruled by Mars most violent fires fanned by
the wind will spread out threatening to consume villages, forests
and towns; crowds of men ruined by the depredations of hordes of
robbers and deprived of their properties and cattle, will cry out,
“Alas! Alas P", throughout the land. Though the clouds may
appear thick and piled up in the sky, nowhere will they pour down
sufficient rain. Even the crops that grow in the low-lying lands will
wither away. Even if they should grow, they would be snatched
away by robbers. Kings would not be interested in governing their
countries properly. Bilious ailments would be on the increase; there
will be great trouble from snakes and the people will be afflicted
by various calamities such as destruction of food crops.
[कुत्रचिद् is the reading adopted by some in the place of न क्वचिद्
and निम्ने instead of सीम्नि,
Cf. यवनेश्वर---
रणाप्रचण्डक्षितिपो$ल्पसस्यो विशुष्कवारिद्रुमशष्पशीर्ण: |
अद्भारकाब्द: प्रचुरोरगग्निरातद्ूचौर्यक्षुदवृष्टिदृष्ट: ॥
and समाससंहिता--
अ्ग्नितस्कररोगाढ्य्यो नूपविग्रहदायक: i
गतसस्यो बहुव्यालो भोमाब्दो बालहा भृशम् di]
मायेन्द्रजालकुहकाकरनाग रारां
गान्धवेलेख्यगरितास्त्रविदां च वृद्धिः i

Planetary Years and Effects XIX 29]
पिप्रीषया नृपतयो5छुतदशंनानि
दित्सन्ति तुष्टिजननानि परस्परेम्यः ॥१०॥
वार्ता जगत्यवितथाविकला त्रयी च
सम्यक्च रत्यपि मनोरिव दण्डनीसि: ।
प्रध्यक्ष रस्वभिनिविष्टधियो5पि केचि-
दान्वीक्षिकोषु च परं पदमीहमानाः utu
हास्यज्ञटूतकविबालनपुंसकानां
युक्तिन्ञसेतुजलपर्वंतवासिनां च ।
atte करोति मृगलाञ्छनजः स्वकेऽब्दे
मासेऽथवा प्रचुरता भुवि चौषधीनास् ॥ १२॥
During the year, month or day presided over by Mercury
fortune will smile on those who are proficient in the art of jugglery,
hypnotism and magic, mines, townsmen, musicians, painters,
accountants (or mathematicians) and fighters. Kings will be eager
to exchange wonderful gifts creating joy among themselves with
the idea of cultivating friendship. Rearing of cattle, agriculture and
trade will thrive through sincere efforts. Vedic studies will be in
full swing. Justice will be administered scrupulously by kings as
by Manu himself. Some will be engaged in spiritual discipline, and
others in the science of logic, desiring to attain the supreme state
(of Moksa or liberation). Jesters, envoys, poets, children, eunuchs,
perfumers, and those who live near bridges, water and mountains
will be happy. There will be abundant growth of herbs in the
land.
[All the persons and things mentioned in this chapter are to
be understood to be ruled by the respective planets. For example,
Mercury has been described in astrology as an expert in singing,
dancing, comics, mathematics etc.
Cf. यवनेएवर--
सन्धानदानप्रयतक्षितोशः स्वाध्यायतीर्थाध्वरभी द्विजौघ: ।
निराधिरुङमध्यमसस्यवर्षो बोध: सुहत्स्नेहविवर्धनो5ब्दः ii
I prefer the reading : प्रध्वरधीद्विजोघ: i
See also समाससंहिता —
ब्रह्मक्षत्रस्य सस्यानां जनानां च कलाविदाम् |
वृद्धिप्रदोऽन्दो बौधस्तु भूपसाम्यकरः क्षितौ 1]

222 Brhat Samhita
ध्वनिरुच्चरितोऽध्वरे द्यगामी विषुलो यज्ञमुषां मनांसि भिन्दन् ।
विचरत्यनिशं द्विजोत्तमानां हृदयानन्दकरोऽध्वरांशभाजास् ॥१३॥
क्षितिरुत्तमसस्यवत्यनेक द्विपपत््यइवघनोरुगोकुलाढ'धा |
क्षितिपरमिपालनध्रवृद्धा द्युचरस्पद्धिजना तदा विभाति ॥। १४॥
विविधेवियदुन्ततेः पयो देवृ agat पयसामितपर्याःदः i
सुरराजगुरोः शुभे तु वर्ष बहुसस्या क्षितिरुत्तमद्धियुक्ता utu
During the auspicious year ruled by Jupiter the deep sounds
produced in sacrifices by expert priests chanting Vedic hymns will
go up to heaven continually rending the hearts of evil spirits and
delighting the hearts of the gods partaking of the offerings. The
earth will abound in excellent crops, be rich in elephants, horses,
foot-soldiers, wealth and large herds of cattle, and be very prosperous owing to the all-round protection given by her rulers, as if,
her people vied with the denizens of heaven. ‘The sky will be
covered with numerous towering clouds that regale the earth with
their water. The earth will be blessed with plenty of crops and great
prosperity.
[The commentator raises a question, 94 तु किमर्थं शृभग्रहणम्, meaning, why should the author qualify the year as auspicious ! The
reason is: All the years of the sixty-year cycle are not auspicious,
there being some with untoward effects. For, in VIII. 48-52 the
effects of the years Pingala, Kalayukta, Raudra, Rudhirodgarin,
Raktaksa etc. are said to be very bad, whereas those of Prabhava,
Vibhava, Sukla, Pramoda are auspicious. Hence, only those auspicious years of Jupiter will be able to generate good effects, and not
the rest.
I feel that the very form and structure of the Samhita gives
the author ample opportunities to exhibit his poetic talents. For,
the ideas given in three verses are effectively condensed by him in
an anusjubh sloka in his abridged work given below :
बहुयज्ञोऽतिसस्यशच गोगजाइवहितस्तथा |
पुरन्दरगुरोरब्दो बहुसस्यप्रदः शिवः ।।
Cf. यवनेश्वर
सुवषेयज्ञो त्सवसम्प्रदानो नीरुर्व्यथो धर्मपरावनीशः |
स्फीतान्नपानेबहुसस्यकर्मा गुरोः स्वकर्म प्रयतप्रजोऽब्दः ॥
The metre of these verses is प्रोपच्छन्दसिक.]

Planetary Years and Effects XIX 223
शालीक्षुमत्यपि धरा धरणीधरामधाराधरोज्भमितपयःपरिपुणंवप्रा |
श्रीमत्सरो रुहतताम्बुत डागकीरा
योषेव भात्यभिनवामरणोज्ज्वला ङ्गी u9 su
क्षत्रं क्षितौ क्षपितभुरिबलारिपक्षमु दृघुष्टनेकजयशब्दविराविताशम् |
संहृष्टशिष्टजनदुष्टविनष्टवर्गा
` गां पालयन्त्यवनिपा नगराकराढ्यामु ॥१७॥
पेपीयते मधु मधौ सह कामिनी भि-
जेगीयते श्रवणहारि सवेणुवीणम् |
बो भुज्यतेऽतिथिसुहूत्स्वजनः सहान्नase सितस्य मदनस्य जयावघोषः LEN
During the year presided over by Venus the earth will be rich
in rice and sugarcane, with its surface filled with water poured out
by mountain-like clouds, and bedecked with lakes whose waters are
filled with charming lotuses, and consequently will shine like a
damsel whose limbs are resplendent with lustrous ornaments. Kings
will make the quarters resound with the loud cries of victory,
having destroyed the mighty hosts of their enemies, and will rule
over the earth rich in towns and mines, making the virtuous happy
and contented and extirpating all the hordes of wicked persons.
Young men will, in the vernal season, drink wine frequently in the
company of their sweet-hearts; people will constantly sing melodious songs to the accompaniment of flute and lute; men will enjoy
often feasts in the company of their guests, friends and kinsmen;
and the cries of victory of the God of Love will be heard everywhere.
[Here too the author shows himself as an erudite scholar and
skilled poet, using fine alliterative language and rare grammatical
expressions.
Cf. यवनेइवर —
पर्याप्तसौख्यस्फुटसस्यमेघः प्ररूढवल्लीवरशष्पपुष्प: |
कामप्रकामक्षितिपो मुदाढ्यः शोक्रोऽङ्गनाहषंवसुप्रदोऽब्दः ॥
also the समाससंहिता--
AMSA धमंबहुलो गतातङ्को बहूदकः |
कामिनां कामदः कामं सिताब्दो नृपशमंदः (aa: सदा) u]

224 Brhat Samhita
उद्वृत्तदस्युगण भुरिरणाकुलानि
राष्ट्राण्यनेकपशुवित्तविताकृतानि i
रोरूयमाराहतबन्धुजनजं नेशच
रोगोत्तमाकुलकुलानि बुभुक्षया च ॥१९॥
वातोद्धताम्बुधरर्वाजतमन्तरिक्षसारुग्णानेकविटपं च धरातलं द्यौः ।
नष्डाकंचन्द्रकिरणातिरजोऽवनद्धा
तोयाशयाइ्च विजलाः सरितोऽपि तन्व्यः uou
जातानि कुत्रचिदतोयतया faaसृच्छन्ति पुष्टिमपराणि जलोक्षितानि ।
सस्यानि मन्दमभिवषंति gana (त्रो-)
वर्ष दिवाकरसुतस्य सदा प्रवृत्ते ॥२१॥
When Saturn holds sway over a year, countries will be torn
by many battles of unruly bands of robbers, and deprived of their
cattle and wealth, with vast multitudes of people crying piteously
as a result of the murder of their near and dear ones, and of hunger
and fell diseases. The sky will be denuded of clouds driven by the
wind, all the trees with their branches broken down will cover the
earth; the sky will not be illuminated by the rays of the luminaries, being covered with a dense mass of dust. Tanks and lakes
will dry up; and rivers will be very tiny. In some parts, crops will
perish for want of water, in others they grow being watered by
artificial means; and (or as) the Rain-god will yield but little rain.
[Cf, यवनेदवर---
तुष्टाल्यवर्ष: प्रबलानिलाग्निवियत्नसस्यश्चलितक्षितीश: |
मृत्युक्षुधात ड्कःभयोपजुष्टः शनेशचरोऽब्दः पशुशुद्रगोघ्तः ॥
I feel, it must be सृष्टाल्पवषः ।
See also the समाससंहिता---
दुभिक्षमरकं रोगान् करोति पवनं तथा |
शनेशचरो$ब्दो दोषांश्च विग्रहांइचैव भूभुजाम् ॥
संवत्सरोक्तं सकलमृतुमासायनेषु च |
फलं ग्रहस्य वक्तव्यं बलयुक्तस्य नान्यथा 11]

Planetary Years and Effects XIX 225
ग्रणरपट्मयूखो नीचगोऽन्येजितो वा
न सकलफलदाता पुष्टिदोऽतोऽन्यथा यः ।
यदशुभमशुभेऽब्दे मासजं तस्य वृद्धिः
शुमफलमपि चेवं याप्यमन्योन्यतायास् ॥२२॥
Should a planet be tiny in appearance, with faint rays, be
posited in his depression or be defeated by another, he would not
yield any good result (in his year, month or day). If he be otherwise i.e. big, brilliant, posited in his own or any other good house,
or victorious in war, he would bring about great progress and prosperity. If both the lords of the year and month be inauspicious or
malefic, then their evil effects would be aggravated in the
particular month. On the other hand, if both be benefic, the
good effects would be heightened. If one of them be good and the
other bad, the result would be trifling.
[Cf. देवल---
बली वषंपति: पुष्टं फलं यच्छति शोभनम् |
faasa तथानिष्टं वषंमासदिनात्मकम् ॥।
The metre is मालिनी.]

ग्रहश्र॒द्खाटक्ाध्यायः ॥२०॥
Chapter XX—The Planetary Triangle
यस्यां दिशि हृइयन्ते विशन्ति ताराग्रहा राव सवं i
सवति भयं दिशि तस्यामायुधकोपक्षुधातङ्केः।।१॥
The direction in which all the non-luminaries become visible
after they emerge from combustion, or are eclipsed by the sun will
be afflicted with famine, war and diseases,
[In addition to the subject-matter of this verse, the author
discusses the effects of some peculiar dispositions of the planets. All
these have a bearing on the health and happiness of mankind as
well as on their political and social behaviour.
Cf. काश्यप---
भूमिपुत्रादय: सवं यस्यामस्तमिते रवौ ।
रथ्यन्तेऽस्तमये वापि यत्र यान्ति रवेस्ततः ॥
दुभिक्षं शस्त्रकोपं च जनानां मरकं भवेत् ।
रन्योन्यं भूमिपाः सर्वे विनिघ्नन्ति प्रजास्तथा n]
चक्र धनुःश्॒ ्भाटकदण्डपुर प्रास वर््त्रसंस्थानाः।
क्षुदवृष्टिकरा लोके समराय च मानवेन्द्राणाम् NI
The configurations named Cakra (Discus), Dhanus (Bow),
Srhgataka (Triangle), Danda (Staff), Pura (Town), Prasa (Dart) and
Vajra (Thunderbolt), produce famine and drought in the country
and promote war among kings.
[Cf. काइयप--
विहायोक्त च संस्थानं इश्यन्ते á ग्रहा यदा ।
तदा न तत्फलं ब्रूयाल्लोके नाशुभदाइच ते ॥]
यस्मिन् खांशे हव्या ग्रहमाला दिनकरे दिनान्तगते ।
तत्रान्यो भवति नृपः परचक्रोपद्रवश्च महान् uu
Note the particular direction of the sky in which a group of
planets is sighted at sunset. There will be another king and great

Planetary Triangle XX 227
trouble from foreign armies in the country corresponding to that
quarter.
[This does not refer to the emergence of planets after eclipse,
but their sight ina group at sunset in a particular direction.]
यस्मिन्नृक्षे कुर्युः समागमं तज्जनान् ग्रहा हन्युः ।
ग्रविभेदिनः परस्परममलमयुखाः शिवास्तेषाम् ॥४॥
When planets combine in any asterism, people ruled by that
asterism (vide XIV & XV supra) will be killed. But when they are
radiant and do not occult each other, they will prove beneficent to
the same people.
[Cf. the समाससंहिता--
सर्वे यदा दिनकरं विशन्ति कुर्युग्रेहास्तदा पीडाम् ।
क्षुच्छस्त्रभयातङ्केरपरंशच परस्पराघातेः ॥
प्रत्यचिष: प्रसन्नाः सम्भृतकिरणाः प्रदक्षिणावर्ताः i
सुस्निग्धामलतनवः क्षेमसुभिक्षावहास्ते स्युः n]
ग्र हसंवतंसमागमसम्मोहसमाजसन्निपाताख्याः ।
कोशश्चेत्येतेषामभिधास्ये लक्षणं सफलम् ॥५॥
I shall now describe the characteristics and effects of the six
planetary combinations, viz. Samvarta (concourse), Samagama
(Gathering), Sammoha (Tarnishing), Samaja (Meeting), Sannipata
(Encounter) and Kosa (Fellowship).
एकक्षे चत्वारः सह पोरेर्यायिनो$थवा पञ्च ।
संवर्तो नाम भवेच्छिखिराहुयुतः स सम्मोहः ॥६॥
पौरः पौरसमेतो यायी सह यायिना समाजाख्यः ।
यमजीवसद्भमेऽच्यो यद्यागच्छेत्तदा कोशः ॥७॥
उदितः पश्चादेकः प्राक् चान्यो यदि स सन्निपातार्यः ।
भ्रविकृततनवः स्तिग्धा विपुलाइच समागमे धन्याः ॥८॥
If four or five planets designated as Pauras (defenders of town)
and Yayins (marching ones) congregate in one and the same constellation, the yoga (combination) is termed Samvarta or Concourse. If in
the above combination Rahu or Ketu should find a place, it would
be named Sammoha or Tarnishing. When a planet called Paura is
combined with another of the same category, or when one named

228 Brhat Samhita
Yayin is joined with another of the same calling, it is termed Samaja or Meeting. When a third planet joins the combination of Jupiter
and Saturn, it is called Kosa or Fellowship. If two planets, one rising
heliacally in the east and the other in the west, join together
in the same asterism, it is called Sannipata or Encounter. Any
conjunction of planets other than the above five is called
Samagama or Gathering, in which the effect would be always auspicious, if the concerned planets be large, resplendent and natural in
appearance.
[Cf. the समाससंहिता---
ग्रहकोशसन्निपाती संवर्तसमागमी समाजश्च |
सम्मोहरचेति तेषां लक्षणमस्तात्समादेश्यम् ॥
सूर्यजगुरुसंयोगे द्वावप्येकोऽपरः समागच्छेत् 1.
स हि भवति कोशसजञ्ज्ञो दुभिक्षभयावहो लोके ॥
एक उदित: प्रतीच्यामपर: प्राच्यां ग्रहोदितो यदि च।
ग्रन्योन्यमथोस्रारभिविलिखेत्स हि सन्निपाताख्यः 1
सह पौरेण च पौरो यायी सह यायिना ग्रहो यश्च ।
RIT समायुक्तः स समाजाख्यः समुद्दिष्टः d!
अथ यायिनागराख्याश्चत्वारः पञ्च वा सह भवेयुः |
एकक्षें संवर्तः शिखिराहुयुतः a सम्मोहः du]
समो तु संवर्तेसमागमार्यो सम्मोहकोशो भयदौ प्रजानाम् |
समाजसंज्ञे सुसमाः प्रदिष्टा बेरप्रकोपः खलु सन्निपाते weil
The effects of the two Yogas Samvarta and Samagama are
moderate; Sammoha and Kosa are dangerous to people; in Samaja
the year will be highly beneficial; and Sannipata there will certainly be great hostilities among men.
[C£. काश्यप---
संवतेसङ्गमौ मध्यौ सम्मोहो भयदः स्मृत: |
कोशश्चानिष्टफलदः समाजाख्यः FASTA: ॥
सन्निपाते महाव रमन्योन्यमुपजायते ॥
In the समाससंहिता Our author gives greater details regarding
the effects and positions of planets in these Yogas in the several
Vithis mentioned in IX supra:
api =

Planetary Triangle XX
संवर्तसमागमयो: साम्यं मोहे भयानि कोशे च |
सुसमा समाजसञ्ज्ञे वे राण्यथ सन्निपाताख्ये ॥
दुभिक्षरोगतस्क रशस्त्रा वृष्टिक्नुधं ग्रहाः कुर्युः ।
amada ज्ञेया श्रजवीथ्यां नेत्रपरिहानिः ॥
STET TG मृगवीथ्यां जारदुगव्यां क्षुधं च रोगांइच ।
wit गोवीथ्यामृषभाख्यायां च नृपपीडा ॥
सुसुभिक्षमिरावत्यां गजवीथ्यां च क्रतृत्सवामोदाः ।
अ्रतिजलमोक्षं कुर्यूर्तागाख्यायां च सर्वे तु ॥
ग्रहोदये प्रवासे च सोमसूयंग्रहे तथा ।
विचायं वीथीमार्गाइच लोके ब्रूयाच्छुभाशुभम् ॥]

गर्भलक्षणास् ॥२१॥
Chapter XXI—PREGNANCY OF CLOUDS
न्नं जगतः प्राणाः प्रावृट्कालस्य चान्नमायत्तम्
यस्मादतः परीक्ष्यः प्रावृट्कालः प्रयत्नेन ॥ १॥
As food forms the very life of living beings, and as food is
dependent on the monsoon, it should be investigated carefully.
[All our scriptures beginning from the Vedas and Upanisads proclaim that food is the Supreme Being for the majority of human beings.
Gradually they realize that they are neither the body, nor the vital
airs, nor the mind, nor the intellect, nor the bliss, but something
beyond all these which, the sages say, is Anirvacaniya—inexplicable—
and should be realized by oneself for oneself in one’s own self. But,
as Kalidasa says ‘शरीरमाद्यं खलु धर्मसाधनम्”, the highest spiritual experience cannot be achieved without a sound body, which, of course, is built up and maintained by proper, Sattvika, food. This food
can be had only if the monsoon is effective, So says the Bhagavadsila (111-14) “्रन्नाद्भवन्ति भूतानि पर्जन्यादन्तसम्भवः 1” See 8150 तै. उप.
III.-2. This science of meteorology was developed in ancient India
by sages like Garga, Parasara, Kagyapa, Rsiputra and Siddhasena.
This and the following seven chapters deal with topics connected
with meteorology—rain and weather.]
तल्लक्षणानि मुनिभिर्यानि निबद्धानि तानि दृष्ट वेदम् ।
क्रियते गर्गपराशरकाइ्यपवच्त्रादिरचितानि ॥२॥
After going through the characteristics expounded by ancient
sages such as Garga, Parāśara, Kasyapa, Vajra (Badarayana, Asita
and Devala) in their works, I am now explaining the properties of
the rainy season.
देवविदवहितचित्तो द्युनिशं यो गर्भलक्षणे भवति ।
तस्य मुनेरिव वाणी न भवति मिथ्याम्बुनिदेशे ॥३॥

Pregnancy of Clouds XXT 231
The prediction of an astrologer, who observes attentively day
and night the symptoms of Pregnancy of the clouds, will never be
falsified, like that of a Sage, when he determines the rainfall,
[प्रविहितचित्तो is another reading. cf. II. 5.]
कि वातः परमन्यच्छास्त्रं ज्यायोऽस्ति यद्विदित्वेव |
प्रध्वंसिन्यपि काले त्रिकालदर्शी कलो भवति neu
Is there a science superior to this (astrological) science, by
knowing which alone one gets the power of visualizing the past,
present and the future even in this Kali age which destroys all good
things ?
केचिद्ददन्ति कात्तिकशुक्लान्तमतीत्य गर्भदिवसाः स्युः।
न च तन्मतं बहूनां गर्गादीनां मतं वक्ष्ये ugn
Some teachers like Siddhasena declare that the days of pregnancy begin soon after the full-moon of Kartika month; whereas the
Opinion of the majority is opposed to this. Hence I shall give the
opinion of sage Garga and others (like Vasistha, Parad ६818, Rsiputra
and Ka$yapa).
[The commentator spells the word Kasyapa and not Kasyapa.
It is, therefore, surmised that both these names refer to the same
sage.
Cf. सिद्धसेन--
शुक्लपक्षमतिक्रम्य कात्तिकस्य विचारयेत् |
गर्भाणां सम्भवं सम्यक् सस्यसम्पत्तिकारणम् N]
मार्गेशिरःसितपक्षप्रतिपत्प्रभृति क्षपाकरेऽषाढाम् ।
पुर्वा वा. समुपगते गर्भाणां लक्षणं ज्ञेयम् usu
The symptoms of pregnancy are to be detected when the Moon
passes through the asterism Purvasadha beginning from the first
day of the bright fortnight of the Margasirsa month.
शुक्लादौ मागंशीर्षस्य पुर्वाषाढाव्यवस्थिते ।
निशाकरे तु गर्भाणां तत्रादौ लक्षणां वदेत् ॥
also sagqq—
सितादी मार्गशीर्षस्य प्रतिपहिवसे तथा ।
पुर्वाषाढागते चन्द्रे गर्भाणां धारणां भवेत् di]

232 Brhat Samhita
यन्नक्षत्रमुपगते गर्भइचन्द्रे भवेत्स चन्द्रवशात् |
पञ्चनवते दिनशते तत्रैव प्रसवसाया ति ॥७॥
The foetus formed during the Moon’s stay in a particular constellation will be released 195 (solar) days thereafter, when the
Moon passes through the same constellation according to the laws
of her revolution.
[The commentator discusses whether the days are to be counted according to the civil calendar or the lunar calendar, and comes
to the conclusion that it is the former. In support of this he quotes
“'युगवर्षमासपिण्डं रविमानं साधिमासक arag” (पञ्चसिद्धान्तिका 1. 16).
Cf. also the समाससंहिता---
पौषासितपक्षाद्यैः श्रावशशुक्लादयो विनिद्देश्या: |
arg: षड्भिर्मासँगंभंविपाकः स नक्षत्रे ॥]
सितपक्षमवाः कृष्णे शुक्ले कृष्णा द्युसस्मवा रात्रौ ।
नक्तंप्रभवाइचाहनि सन्घ्याजाताइच सन्ध्यायामु ॥८॥
The foetuses formed in the bright fortnight will be released in
the dark fortnight and vice versa, those formed in the daytime will
come out at night and vice versa, and those that are formed at dawn
in the evening and vice versa.
[Cf. i
दिवा भवति यो गर्भो रात्रौ स इति पच्यते |
शुक्लपक्षे समुद्भूतः कृष्णे पक्षे च वर्षति ॥
पौ णामास्यामथोत्पन्नः सोऽमावास्यां प्रवर्षति ।
भ्रमावास्यां समुद्भूतः पुर्णंमास्यां प्रवर्षति ॥
पूवेसन्घ्यासमुद्भूतः पर्चिमायां sayfa |
पह्चिमायां समुद्भूतः पुर्वं सन्ध्यां प्रवर्षति ॥
पूर्वाह शौ यः समुद्भूतः पदचाद्वात्रौ प्रवर्षति ।
निशायां पश्चिमे यश्च स पूर्वाह् रो प्रसूयते ॥
दिनाद्धे तु समुत्पन्नः स fard प्रसूयते 11]
मृगशीर्षाद्या गर्भा मन्दफलाः पौषशुक्लजाताश्च |
पौषस्य कृष्णपक्षेरा निदिशेच्छ्रावणास्य सितम् uen
माघसितोत्था गर्भाः श्रावणकृष्णा प्रसुतिमायान्ति ।
माघस्य कृष्णपक्षेण नि्दिशेऱदवाद्रपदशुक्लस् ॥१०॥

Pregnancy of Clouds XXI 233
फाल्गुनशुक्लसमुत्या भाद्रपदस्यासिते विनिर्देश्याः ।
तस्येव कृष्णापक्षो-्भवास्तु ये तेऽऽवयुक्शुक्ले ॥ १ UM
चे त्रसितपक्षजाताः कृष्णेऽश्वयुजस्य वारिदा गर्भाः ।
चेत्रासितसम्मुताः कातिकशुक्लेऽमिवषंन्ति ॥१२॥
The foetuses of clouds formed in the bright fortnight of the
Margasirsa and Pausa months are of little consequence. Those formed in the dark half of Pausa would be delivered in the
bright half of Sravana. Similarly, those that are formed in
the light half of Magha would yield rain in the dark half of
Sravana. For clouds formed in the dark half of Magha the period
of delivery is the light half of Bhadrapada. Likewise, those formed
in the light half of Phalguna would have their delivery in the dark
half of Bhadrapada. ‘Those formed in the dark half of Phalguna
would come out in the bright fortnight of Asvina. Clouds formed in
the light and dark halves of Caitra would be delivered in the dark
half of Asvina and the bright half of Kartika respectively.
[The commentator observes that as far as this chapter of pregnancy of clouds is concerned the counting of lunar months should
start with the light half of Caitra, but the dark halfof the same
month will be called that of Vaisakha, as is the practice in northern
India.
Cf. गर्ग--
माघेन श्रावणं विन्द्यान्नभस्यं फाल्गुनेन तु ।
चेत्रेणाइवयुजं प्राहुर्वेशाखेन तु कात्तिकम् ॥
शुक्लपक्षेण कृष्णं तु कृष्णपक्षेण चेतरम् |
रात्र्यह्लोशच विपर्यासं कार्यं काले विनिश्चयम् ॥
पराशरस्याप्येवं मतम् ॥]
qafa: पश्चादपरोत्थाः प्राग्मवन्ति जीमूताः ।
शेषास्वपि दिक्ष्वेवं विपयंयो भवति वायोइच ॥१३॥
Clouds formed in the east will pour down rain in the west and
vice versa. The same rule holds good in the case of the other pairs
of quarters. In the same manner, the winds too are reverse at the
two periods.
[Clouds formed in the north will pour down in the south and
vice versa. Treat similarly the pairs of quarters north-east and southwest, north-west and south-east. 1f the wind blows towards the east

234 Brhat Samhita
at the time of formation of the foetus, then it will blow towards the
west at the time of delivery.
Cf. पराशर
अथ माघेन श्रावणं फाल्गुनेन भाद्रपदं चैत्रेणाश्वयुजं वैशाखेन तु कात्तिकं
शुक्लेन कृष्णं कृष्णोन शुक्लं दिवसेन रात्रि रात्र्या दिवसं wat: प्रवर्षन्ति 11]
ह्लादिमृदूदक्शिवशक्रदिग्भवो मारुतो वियहिमलस् ।
स्निग्यसितबहुलपरिवेषपरिवृतो हिसमयूखाकों ॥१४॥
पृथुबहुलस्निग्ध घनं घनसुचीक्षुरकलोहिताभ्रयुतस् |
काकाण्डमेचकाभं वियदहिशुद्धेन्दुनक्षत्रम् ॥१५॥
सुरचापमन्द्रगजितविद्युत्प्रतिसु्यका शुभा सन्ध्या d
शशिशिवशक्राशास्थाः शान्तरवाः पक्षिमृगसद्धा: ॥ १६॥
विपुलाः प्रदक्षिणचराः स्निग्धमयुखा ग्रहा निरुपसर्गाः ।
तरवइच निरुपसृष्टाङ्कुरा नरचतुष्पदा हृष्टाः ॥१७॥
गर्भाणां पुष्टिकराः सर्वेषामेव योऽत्र तु विशेषः |
स्वर्तुस्वभावजनितो गर्भविवृध्ये तमभिधास्ये ॥ १८॥
The following are the good symptoms at the conception of
clouds : A delightful and cool breeze from the north, north-east or
east; a clear sky; the Sun and the Moon encircled by a glossy, bright
and thick halo: the sky covered with large, bulky, smooth, needle-like
or razor-like, red clouds or having the colour of the eggs of crows
(i.e. bluish) or of the peacock’s neck, with the moon and the stars
shining brightly; an auspicious twilight—morning or evening—
accompanied by rainbow, good rumbling of thunder, lightning and
a mock sun; groups of birds and animals crying pleasantly in the
north, north-east or east and not facing the Sun; the planets being
large, beaming brightly and moving to the north of the asterisms
and unhurt; trees with their sprouts unimpaired, and men and quadrupeds happy. These symptoms nourish all the embryos. There are,
however, some special characteristics tending to the growth of the
foetuses and arising from the peculiar nature of the several seasons
which I shall now explain.
[These marks are the general symptoms of a good rainfall. These
ought to be observed from the beginning of the bright half of MargaSirsa to the end of Vai$akha. In addition to the above there are
some special seasonal symptoms which are explained in the following
four verses.

Pregnancy of Clouds XXI 235
Ch qxrqx—
ग्रथ गर्भसंस्थासु माघादिषु चतुर्ष मासेषु या शुचो धारणा । नभोनभस्यौ
प्रावृट् तस्या अनु वर्षा येषु प्रसवन्ति । तत्र चापा श्रविद्यृत्स्तनयित्नुवर्षाणि गर्भास्तांल्लक्षयेत्प्रशस्तानप्रशस्तांश्च | प्रशस्ताभाइच यस्मिनु काले सूर्येन्दुनक्षत्राश्रयाणां वर्षालि-
Wai प्रादुर्भावः । पञ्चरूपता गर्भाणां धारणा मासेन शुद्धिः u]
पौषे समार्गशीर्ष सन्ध्यारागोऽम्बुदाः सपरिवेषाः ।
नात्यर्थं मृगशीर्षं शीतं पोषेऽतिहिमपातः ॥१९॥
माधे प्रबलो वायुस्तुषारकलुषद्य॒ती रविशशाड्कौ ।
भ्रतिशीतं सघनस्य च भानोरस्तोदयौ धन्यौ ॥२०॥
फाल्गुनमासे रूक्षश्चण्डः पवनोऽश्रसम्प्लवाः स्निग्धाः ।
परिवेषाश्चासकलाः कपिलस्तास्रो रविश्र शुभः ॥२१॥
पवनघनवृष्टियुक्ताश्चं त्रे गर्भाः शुभाः सपरिवेषाः |
घनपवनसलिलविधुत्स्तनितेश्च हिताय वेशाखे ॥२२॥
The auspicious symptoms in the months of Margasirsa and
Pausa area red glow of the horizon at dawn and sunset, clouds
with halos, not much cold in Margasirsa and not too thick frost
in Pausa; in Magha, a strong wind, the Sun and the Moon dim by
mist, bitter cold, and the Sun rising or setting, accompanied by
clouds; in the month of Phalguna, a rough and violent storm, glossy
floating banks of clouds, an incomplete halo round the Sun or the
Moon, and the Sun russet or red; in the Caitra month the foetuses
being formed along with wind, clouds, rain and halos are of good
augury; and in Vaisakha, those that are attended by clouds, wind,
rain, lightning and thunder, are beneficial.
[Cf. काइ्यप--
शीतमश्रं तथा वायुञ्चन्द्रार्कपरिवेषणाम् |
माघे मासि परीक्षेत श्रावणे वृष्टिमादिशेत् ॥
फाल्गुने चात्र सङ्घातं वृष्टिस्तनितमेव च |
पुरोवाताइच ये प्रोक्ता मासि भाद्रपदे शुभमु ॥
बहुपुष्पफला FAT वाताः शकरवाषिराः |
taad तथाश्राणि चैत्रेगाश्वयुजं वदेत् ॥
वहन्ति मृदवो वाताः पुरः शीघ्र प्रदक्षिणाः |
वैशाखे तानि रूपाणि कात्तिके मासि वर्षति ॥

236 Brhat Samhita
Cf. also the quraafeat—
शस्तानि मृगान्मासाच्छीतहिमवायुमेघकृतानि ।
स्तनिततडिज्जलमारुतघनतापान्यतिशयं तु Wm ॥।
कृष्णेन शुक्लपक्षः सितेन कृष्णो निशा दिनोत्थेन |
रात्र्याहः सन्ध्यायां सन्ध्यादिग्व्यत्ययाज्जलदाः ॥ ]
सुक्तारजत निकाशास्तमालनीलोत्पलाञजनाभासः ।
जलचरसच्वाकारा गर्भेषु घनाः प्रभूतजलाः ॥२३॥
तीब्रदिवाकरक्िरणामितापिता मन्दमारुता जलदाः ।
रुषिता इव घारामिविसुजन्त्यस्भः प्रसवकाले NIN:
Clouds that resemble pearls and silver, or Tamala flower, blue
lily and collyrium, in colour, and are shaped like aquatic animals,
will possess abundant water in their embryo. Those clouds which
are scorched by the fierce rays of the Sun and fanned bya gentle
breeze will pour down, at the time of delivery, torrential rains, as if
they were angry.
[The words रुषिता: and घाराभि: give rise to what is called:
शब्दशक्तिमुलध्व्नि or suggestion based on the power of word: They
suggest enraged warriors cutting the throats of their enemies with
their swords.
Cf. the समाससंहिता--
पृथुघनबहुला जलचरसत्त्वान्विताः शुभा Wat: |
स्निग्धसितबहुलपरिवेषपरिवृतौ हिमक रोषणक रो ॥
नखगमृगा मुदिता निरुपहतास्तरवः |
वियदमलं च यदा भवति तदा सुसमा ॥
स्तिग्धतडित्प्रतिसूर्यंकमत्स्यशक्रधनुःप्रथमापरमध्ये ।
शान्तरवा मृगपक्षिमनुष्याः शक्रशशीश्वरदिक्पवनश्च t]
गर्भोपघात लि ङ्कान्युल्काशनिपांसुपातदिग्दा हाः ।
क्षितिकम्पखपुरकीलककेतुग्रहयुद्धनिर्घाताः us uu
रुधिरादिवृष्टिवेकृतपरिघेन्द्रधन्ं षि दर्शनं राहोः ।
इत्युत्पातेरेतेस्त्रिविधेशचान्येहंतो गर्भः ॥२६॥
The following are the symptoms of miscarriage of the foetus:
Fall of meteors, thunderbolt (or lightning), dust-storm, false fire in
the quarters, earthquake, appearance of city-like formations in the

Pregnancy of Clouds XXI 237
sky, Tamasakilakas, Ketu, planetary fight, portentous thunder, unnatural phenomenon in the rain, such as the appearance of blood,
a cross-bar of clouds at sunset or sunrise (vide XLVII. 19 infra),
rainbow and an eclipse (lunar or solar). By these and similar portents of three kinds viz. celestial, atmospheric and terrestrial, a foetus
gets destroyed.
[Cf mj —
अश्मवर्ष तमोवषं मांसशोरितवरषराम् |
उल्कानिर्घातकम्पशच वज्त्रपातस्तथव च ॥
परिवेषाः परिधयो वासवस्य धनूंषि च ।
अनभ्रस्तनितं वर्षं दिशां दाहस्तथेव च ॥
aada पुष्पफलं वारणीयेषु वर्षणम् ।
ग्रहयुद्धेषु घोरेषु हतान् गर्भान् विनिदिशेत् ॥
also पराशर
तेषां ग्रहाणामुदयास्तमयोल्कानिर्घाताशनिपातगन्धर्वनगरदिग्दाहाकं रश्मिवरां-
विकारभूचलनप्रा दुर्भावो वर्षास्ववर्षाय i]
स्वरत्तस्वभावजनितेः सामान्येरयश्च लक्षणेवृ द्धिः ।
गर्भाणां विपरीतंस्तेरेव विपर्ययो भवति ॥२७॥
Signs, exactly the reverse of those, both general and special
for any particular season, by which the growth of a foetusis assured,
produce contrary results.
भद्रपदाद्वयविश्वाम्बुदेवपं तामहेष्वथक्षेषु ।
सर्वेष्वृतुषु विवृद्धो vat बहुतोयदो मवति ॥२८॥
A foetus that is formed when the Moon is situated in any of
the five lunar mansions, viz. Pürvasadha, Uttarasadha, Purvabhadrapada, Uttarabhadrapada and Rohiny, in any season will yield
copious rains.
शतमिषगाइलेषार्द्रास्वातिमघासंयुतः शुभो TH: ।
पुष्णाति बहून् दिवसातु हत्त्युतपाते हैत स्त्रिविधेः ॥२९॥
An embryo that is formed when the Moon occupies Satabhisaj, Aslesa, Ardra, Svati or Magha proves beneficial and PE
(or rains) for many days, while being stricken with three-fold portents (terrestrial, atmospheric and heavenly), it is destroyed.

238 Brhat Samhita
[The समाससं हिता explains the three-fold portents thus :
दिव्यं ग्रहक्षजातं भुवि भौमं स्थिरचरोऱ्भवं यच्च |
दिग्दाहोलकामारुतपरिवेषाद्यं वियत्प्रभवम् ॥
Cf. also गर्ग---
प्राजापत्यं मघारलेषा रोद्रं चानिलवारुणम् |
आषाढाद्वितयं चेव तथा भद्रपदाद्वयम् ॥
नक्षत्रदशकं चेतद्यदि स्यादुग्रहदूषितम् |
न गर्भाः सम्पदं यान्ति योगक्षेमं न कल्पते |i
उल्कयाभिहतं वापि केतुना वाप्यधिष्ठितम् ॥
न गर्भाः सम्पदं यान्ति वासवश्च न वर्षति u]
मृगमासादिष्वष्टौ षट् षोडश विशतिश्चतुर्य्क्ता ।
विशतिरथ दिवसत्रयमेकतमक्षर पञ्चभ्यः ॥।३०॥
Foetuses that are formed when the Moon is in conjunction
with any of the aforesaid asterisms during the months of Margagirsa,
Pausa, Magha, Phalguna, Caitra and Vaisakha, will yield rain for
8, 6, 16, 24, 20 and 3 days respectively after 195 days.
[Cf ऋषिपुत्र—
माघे षोडशसंख्यास्तु षोडशाष्टौ च फाल्गुने |
विशतिश्चैत्रमासे तु त्रयश्चेन्द्राग्निदैवते ॥
ग्रष्टो सौम्येऽथ षट् पौषे संख्यास्तासु च वर्षति ॥]
पञ्चनिमित्तं: शतयोजनं तदर्द्वाद्धेमेकहान्यातः |
वर्षेत पञ्चनिमित्ताद्रपेणेकेन यो गर्भ: ॥३१॥
If an embryo is formed to the accompaniment of the five phenomena or symptoms, viz. wind, water, lightning, thunder and
cloud, it will pour rain over an area of 100 Yojanas and for every
symptom less, over half the extent of the previous one; but if it is
accompanied by only one symptom, the rainfall will be over five
Yojanas around.
द्रोराः qewfafau गर्भे त्रीण्याढकानि पतनेन ।
षड् faa नवाश्रः स्तनितेन द्वादश प्रसवे ॥३२॥
If the formation of foetus is accompanied by the five symptoms
the quantity of rainfall will at the season amount to a Drona; if by
wind, three Adhakas; if by lightning, six Adhakas; if by clouds,
nine Adhakas; and if by thunder, twelve Adhakas.

Pregnancy of Clouds XXI 239
[A Drona=200 Palas. An Adhaka=1/4 Drona or 11 oz.
Avoir. Parasara says that an Adhaka is the capacity of a circular
vessel whose diameter is 20 Angulas and depth 8 Angulas.
Cf. पराशर--
श्राढकांश्रतुरो द्रोशमपां विन्द्यात्प्रमाणतः |
धनुष्प्रमाणं मेदिन्या विन्द्याद् द्रोणातिवर्षंणाम् ॥
समे विशाङ्गुलानाहे द्विचतुष्काङगुलोच्छिते i
भाण्डे वषति सम्पूर्णं ज्ञेयमाढकवर्षणाम् ॥
See also XXIII-2 infra.
Cf. वृद्धगर्गे---
वाते तु आढक farang स्तनिते द्वादशाढकम् |
नवाढक तथाश्र षु द्योतितेषु षडाढकम् ॥
निमित्तपञ्चकोपेते द्रोणं वर्षति वासवः 11]
क्र रग्रहसंयुक्ते करकाशनिमत्स्यवषंदा गर्भाः ।
शशिनि रवो वा शुभसंयुतेक्षिते भूरिवृष्टिकराः ॥३३॥
If the star at whicha cloud-foetus is formed be afflicted by
malefic planets, there would be a rain of hail stones, thunderbolt
and fish, in the season. If, at that time, the Sun or the Moon be
posited in this star and be conjoined with or aspected by benefics,
there would be copious rain.
गर्भसमयेऽतिवृष्टिगेर्भाभावाय नि्निमित्तकृता i
द्रोणाष्टांशे$भ्यधिके ast गर्भ: सरतो भवति ॥३४॥
If there be excessive rain at the time of the formation of foetuses without any apparent cause, there would result destruction of
the foetuses. Should the amount of rainfall exceed 1/8 of a Drona,
there would be miscarriage of the foetus.
[The causes of rain are listed in the following verse occurring
in XXVIII. 20 infra.
प्रायो ग्रहाणामुदयास्तकाले समागमे मण्डलसङ्क्रमे च ।
पक्षक्षये तीक्ष्णक रायनान्ते satis नियमेन चार्द्राम् ॥]
गर्भः पृष्टः प्रसवे ग्रहोपघातादिभियंदि न वृष्टः ।
ग्रात्मीयगर्भसमये करकामिश्रं ददात्यम्भः ॥ ३५॥
If a full-grown embryo does not yield rain at the time of delivery owing to planetary and other evil influences, it will rain mixed
with hail-stones at the time of the next formation of pregnancy.

240 Brhat Samhita
[Our author has explained in VI-10, 11 supra how Mars afflicts the clouds and destroys rain. What is the exact meaning of
ग्रात्मी पगर्भसमये ? The commentator clarifies it with the words
“पुन: पुरस्ताद् द्वितीयगभग्रहणकाले ' 1.९. when there are symptoms of conception after this affliction. In other words, there will be a rain
mixed with hailstones at the next conception. This would mean
that there will be both a delivery and a formation of foetus almost
at the same time.]
काठिन्यं याति यथा चिरकालधृतं पयः पयस्विन्याः ।
कालातीतं तहृत्सलिल काठिन्यमुपयाति ॥३६॥
Just as the milk of a milch cow grows thick and hard if kept
too long, even so does the water kept beyond its time.
[Scientific explanation of rain, hail etc. :—
Water is evaporated or turned into water vapour and mixed
with the atmosphere, at the surface of any sheet of water, and even
over the land, where a considerable amount of wateris evaporated
by day from the surface of vegetation...condensation is the opposite
of evaporation. In the atmosphere the condensation of water into
drops takes place, not by the molecules of water-vapour collecting
together, but by the collection of the molecules of water-vapour on
a particle of dust ofa particular type. These dust particles are
named nuclei of condensation, which act as foundations for the waterdrops in clouds or rain. Before the water-vapour in the atmosphere
can condense on the nuclei, the air must be saturated or nearly
saturated.
Cloud floats, while rain falls. Cloud-drops fall too. Rain-drops
also vary in size; the drops in light drizzle have a diameter of about
eight thousandths of an inch, and fall at a rate of about 21 feet per
second; the drops in heavy rain average about 1/16 inch in diameter
and fall about 17 feet in a second.
Rain is formed by the ascent of damp air. Its temperature falls
at first at the rate of about 53°F. for every 1000 feet of ascent. When
the amount of water-vapour present is just sufficient to saturate it,
condensation takes place in the form of rain or snow.... Ifa warm
current of air clashes against the flank of a cold current, rain associated with the depressions is formed. This depression isto be regarded as a battle-field where warm and cold currents of air
clash.

Pregnancy of Clouds XXI 241
When the condensation of wacer-vapour from a current of
ascending damp air takes place at temperatures above freezing point,
the precipitation is in the form of rain.
When water-drops are formed in a rising current of air, and
are carried up beyond the level at which they are formed, they do
not freeze immediately, but remain at first in the form of liquid
water. They probably begin to freeze when their temperature falls
below about—10?C, or 14°F. The raindrop then freezes into a softcore of white ice. Drops of waterata temperature below freezing
point freeze on to the falling core. In freezing they trap some air
within the ice, so that the coating will be white ice. As a result of
its journey the hailstone will have an inner core of softice, then a
coating of white ice, and outside this a coating of clear ice.... Large
hailstones can form only when there are violent ascending currents
in the atmosphere. Further, the clouds must extend to a great
height at which the temprature is —20°C.
(Cf. “Weather Science for Everybody” by David Brunt,
Though modern science is able to explain the formation of
clouds, rain, hailstones and to distinguish the types of clouds, it is
unable to say for how many days the water-vapour would remain
in the atmosphere in the form of cloud before condensing and falling as rain. According to science, which re-echoes Yàska's remark
of warfare in respect of radiation and cloud, there are many myse
teries in the atmosphere such as the crystal of snow. Like the sages
scientists distinguish mainly four types of clouds viz. Cirrus, Stratus,
Cumulus and Nimbus. The behaviour of the elements is beyond
human ken. Nobody can say whether the water-vapour of today will
fall down tomorrow as rain. So it is better for scholars to understand and test the principles enunciated by the sages for predicting
weather, rain and crops.]
पवनसलिलविद्युदर्गाजता$भ्रान्वितो यः
स भवति बहुतोप्रः पञ्चरूपाभ्पुपेतः ।
विसुजति यदि तोयं गर्भकालेऽतिभूरि
प्रसवसमयमित्वा शीकराम्भः करोति ॥३७॥
An embryo which is accompanied by the five concomitant
signs, viz. wind, rain, lightning, thunder and clouds, will yield copious rains at the appropriate time. On the other hand, if an em-

242 Brhat Samhita
bryo pours down excessive rain even at its conception, it will produce only a drizzle at the time of delivery.
[This verse occurring in the समासस हिता has been incorporated
into the text by Bhattotpala for the reason that Varahamihira generally closes a chapter with a verse in a longer metre, the metre here
being मालिनी].

गर्भधारणाव्यायः ॥२२॥
Chapter X YII —Retention of Embryo
ज्येष्ठसिते$ष्टम्याद्याइचत्वारो वायुधारणा दिवसा: ।
एृडशुभपवनाः शस्ताः स्निग्धघनस्थगितगगनाइच ॥१॥
The four days commencing from the 8th lunar day of the light
half of Jyestha month are sustained by the winds, and will prove
beneficial, if they be attended with soft and auspicious breeze, and
if the sky be covered with glossy clouds.
[The idea is that the four days mentioned here are helpful in
retaining the embryo by means of the winds. Hence the days are
called Vayudháranas. The word wa is construed by the commentator
as ‘the wind blowing from the north, north-east and east’. ]
तत्रेव स्वात्याद्ये वृष्टे भचतुष्टये क्रमान्मासा: ।
श्रावणपूर्वा ज्ञेयाः परिस्र् ता धारणास्ताः स्युः ॥२॥
If in the same month and fortnight there be rain in the four
lunar mansions beginning with Svati, the four months commencing
from the Sravana would in order be retainers of rain, i.e. there
would be no rain in the several months corresponding to the stars in
which there is rain.
[If there is rain in the star Svati, there will be no rain in the
month of Sravana; if there is rain in the star Visakha, no rain in
Bhadrapada; if there is rain in Anuradha, no rain in Agvina; and
if in Jyestha, no rain in Kartika.
Cf. काश्यप
ज्येष्ठस्य शुक्लाष्टम्यां तु नक्षत्रे भगदैवते |
चत्वारो धारणाः प्रोक्ता मृदुवातसमीरिताः ॥
नीलाञ्जननिभे मेघं विद्युत्स्थ गितमा रतैः |
विस्फुलि ङ्गरजो धुञ्र॑श्छन्नौ शशिदिवाकरौ ॥
एकरूपाः शुभा ज्ञेया AJAT: सान्तराः स्मृताः |
श्रनारयेस्तस्करंर्घोरेः पीडा यैव सरीसृपः ॥

244 Brhat Samhita
ततः स्वात्यादिनक्षवेश्चतुभिः श्रावणादयः d
परिपूर्गा: शुभास्ताः स्युः चौम्पाः शिवसुभिक्षका: N
स्वाती तु श्रावणां हन्यादुवृ ष्टे$थेन्द्राग्निदेवते |
भाद्रपदे त्ववृष्टि: स्थान्मेत्रे BRAT स्मृता ॥
Ua तु कात्तिक्रे त्वेवं वृष्टे वृष्ट निहन्ति च।
एतेषु यदि नो वृष्टिस्तदा सौभिक्षलक्षणम् ॥]
यदि ताः स्युरेकरूपाः शुभास्ततः सान्तरास्तु न शिवाय ।
तस्करभयदाशचोक्ताः इलोकाइचाप्यत्र वासिष्ठाः UI
If those four days of retention be of the same condition, the
effect would be happy. If they be dissimilar, they would prove
disastrous and cause danger from robbers. The following verses of
Sage Vasistha prove this statement.
सविद्युतः सपृषतः सपांसूत्करमारुताः ।
सार्कचन्द्रपरिच्छन्ना धारणाः शुभधारणाः ॥४॥
यदा तु विद्युतः श्रेष्ठाः शुभाशाः प्रत्युपस्थिताः ।
तदापि सर्वसस्यानां ghz ब्रूयाहिचक्षणः uud
सपांसुवर्षा: सापश्च शुभा बालक्रिया श्रपि ।
पक्षिणां सुस्वरा वाचः क्रीडा पांसुजला दिषु usu
रविचन्द्रपरीवेषाः स्निग्धा नात्यन्तदूषिताः ।
वृष्टिस्तदापि विज्ञया सवंसस्यार्थसाधि का non
मेघाः स्निग्धाः agana प्रदक्षिएागतिक्रियाः à
तदा स्यान्महती वृष्टिः सवेसस्याभिवृद्धये us
The days of retention of the embryo will be efficacious, if they
are accompanied by lightning, water-drops, dust-storm, and the
luminaries hidden by clouds. If there be beautiful flashes of lightning emanating from the auspicious quarters (east, north and northeast), a wise astrologer should predict very good growth of all
crops. If there be rain with dust-storm, or if children be engaged
in happy sports, the cries of birds be pleasant and their sport be in
dust, water and the like, ifthe luminaries be surrounded by halos
that are glossy and not broken, then too there would be good rain
helping the growth of all crops. If the clouds be glossy, collected
together and moving in a clockwise manner, there would be heavy
rains tending to the growth of all crops.
[These five verses are quoted by our author from the work of
Sage Vasistha. Most of the ancient sages wrote in the Sloka
metre. |

प्रवषेणाध्याय: ॥२३॥
Chapter XXIII — Rainfall
ज्येष्ठ्यां समतीतायां पुर्वाषाढादिसम्प्रवृष्टेन |
शुभमशुभं वा वाच्यं परिमाणं चाम्भसस्तज्ज्ञैः ngn
Should there be rain jn the
Pirvasadha after the full
should judge the quantity
effects thereof.
lunar mansions beginning with
Moon in the month of Jyestha, astrologers
of rainfall as well as the good and bad
[The amount of rain observed on these days would enable the
rain-forecasters to predict the exact quantity of rainfall for the entire
season. शुभ and अशुभ have been interpreted by the commentator as
‘good effects for rain’ and ‘bad effects for absence of rain’.
Cf. mi—
ज्येष्ठ मुलमतिक्रम्य मासि प्रतिपदग्रत: ।
वर्षासु वृष्टिज्ञानार्थ निमित्तान्युपलक्षयेत् u]
हस्तविशालं कुण्डकमधिङृत्याम्बुप्रमाणनिर्देशञः |
पञ्चाशत्पलमाढकमनेन मिनुयाज्जलं पतितम् usu
The quantity of rainfall should be determined with the help of
a gauge whose diameter is one cubit. When this vessel contains 50
Palas, it will measure one Adhaka.
[According to Paragara quoted under XXI.32 an Adhaka=
17600/7 cubic Angulas. We have already seen that an Adhaka is
1/4 Drona.
Cf. the समाससंहिता---
ज्येष्ठस्य पौर्णामासीमतीत्य भूमुद्रया यथा वृष्टे।
आप्याद्यर्जलमानं मागधमानेन हस्तमिते |i
This statement of our author proves the great advance made by
Magadha in trade and culture. Hence the weights and measures
used in Magadha must have become famous throughout India. ]
क Lu LL a oes

246 Brhat Samhita
येन धरित्री मुद्रा जनिता वा बिन्दवस्तृरणाग्रेषु ।
वृष्टेन तेन वाच्यं परिसाणं वारिराः प्रथसस् NIN
The quantity of rainfall should be gauged on the day ruled by
any of the rain-producing asterisms (headed by Purvasadha), when
there is rain for the first time, through the amount of rain by which
the earth is cleared of dust or drops of water are made to appear on
the tips of blades of grass.
[The prospect of rainfall in the season isto be determined
through the rain water that falls for the first time in any asterism. In
other words, it is the star of the initial rain which is the pivot for
the prospect of rainfall throughout the season or in the coming
months as explained in chapter XXI.]
केचिद्यथाभिवृष्ट दशयोजनमण्डलं वदन्त्यन्ये ।
गर्गवसिष्ठपराशरमतमेतद् द्वादशान्न परम् ॥४॥
Some sages like Kasyapa are of opinion that if there be rain
in a certain area at the beginning, there will be good rain in the
same place throughout the season; while others like Devala maintain that if there be rain over an area of ten Yojanas, there would
be good rain during the whole season. But, according to sages
Garga, Vasistha and Paragara good rain should be predicted only if
the rainfall be over an area that is not less than twelve Yojanas.
[C£ काइ्यप---
प्रवर्षणे यथा देशं वर्षणं यदि ead |
वर्षाकालं समासाद्य वासवो बहु वर्षति ॥
also देवल--
प्रवर्षणे यदा वृष्ट दशयोजनमण्डलम् |
वर्षाकालं समासाद्य वासवो बहु वर्षेति ॥
and गर्ग--
ग्राषाढादिषु वृष्टे षु योजनद्वादशात्मके |
प्रवृष्टे शोभनं वर्षं वर्षाकाले विनिदिशेत् 11]
येषु च भेष्वभिवृष्टं भूयस्तेष्वेव वषति प्रायः ।
यदि नाप्यादिषु वृष्टं सवेषु तदा त्वना वृष्टिः uxu
In whichever stars there is rain at the beginning, there will
generally be rain once again under the same stars in the season. It

Rainfall XXIII 247
there be no rain at all in any of the asterisms beginning with
Pürvasadha at the time of delivery, then there would be no rain in
the season.
हस्ताप्यसोम्यचित्रापौष्णधनिष्ठासु षोडश द्रोगा: ।
शतभिषगेन्द्रस्वातिषु चत्वारः कृत्तिकासु दश ॥६॥
TAT सधघानुराधामरणीमूलेषु दश चतुर्यक्ताः |
wrai Wasa: पुनवंसो विशतिदद्रोराः nou
ऐन्द्राग्न्याख्ये aaa च विशतिः सार्पभे दश त्र्यधिकाः ।
प्रा हिब ध्न्यायस्णप्राजापत्येषु पञ्चकृतिः usn
पञ्चदशाजे पुष्ये च कीतिता वाजिभे दश द्वौ च ।
रोद्रेऽष्टादश कथिता द्रोणा निरुपद्रवेष्वेते weir
Should there be rain in any one of the asterisms, viz. Hasta,
Purvasadha, Mrgasiras, Citra, Revati and Dhanistha, the quantity
of rainfall in the season would be 16 Dronas; in Satabhisaj, Jyestha and Svati, it would be 4 Dronas; in Krttika, 10 Dronas; in
Sravana, Magha, Anuradha, Bharani and Mila, 14 Dronas; in
Purvaphalguni, 25 Dronas; in Punarvasu, 20 Dronas; in Visakha
and Uttarasadha, 20 Dronas; in Aslesà, 13 Dronas; in Uttarabhadra, `
Uttaraphalguni and Rohini, 25 Dronas; in Pūrvābhādrā and Pusya,
15 Dronas; in A$vini, 12 Dronas; and Ardra, 18 Dronas. These
quantities should be predicted, provided the concerned lunar mansions are not hurt in any way.
[In this section the author gives the amount of rainfall to be
predicted for the season on the basis of rain in the several asterisms
at the beginning. It is to be borne in mind that the stars should not
be under any affliction..
Cf. the समाससं हिता---
दशयुक्ता द्विकृतखतिथिरसाष्टदिग्विषयरामजलतिथिभिः |
तिथिरसरसेश्च विरसाः सदशक्ृताः षड्विहीनाशच ॥
जलषट्कदशकसहिता जलरसयुक्ताः षड्नाइच |
विषयतिथिषटकसहिताइचाहिविन्यादियु जलद्रोणाः ॥]
रविरविसुतकेतुपीडिते भे क्षितितनयत्रिविधाद्भुताहते च ।
भवति च न faa न चापि वृष्टिः शुभसहिते निरुपद्रवे दिवं च ॥१०॥
Should a lunar mansion be afflicted by the Sun, Saturn or
Ketu, (i.e. by presence in it), or be hurt by Mars (by retrograde

248 Brhat Samhita
motion, cleaving through or by cutting the Yogatara) or by the
three-fold portents, there would be no prosperity to mankind, nor
would there be any rain in the season. On tbe other hand, if the
asterism be unhurt and conjoined with benefics, beneficial effects
would follow.
[Cf. गर्ग---
सूर्यसौराहते वाच्यं नक्षत्रे भौमघातिते ।
उत्पातैस्त्रिविधर्वापि राहुणा केतुनापि वा ou
अवृष्टिमशुभं विन्द्याद्विपरीते शुभं वदेत् ॥
The metre is पुष्पिता as it is the last verse in the chapter.
Kautilya’s Arthasastra, 11-24 (p. 68 Jolly’s edition) deals
with the amount of rainfall in different countries as well as with the
planetary causes therefor :
“षोडशद्रोणं जाङद्भलानां वर्षप्रमाणमध्यर्धमानूपानाम् । देशवापानामधेत्रयोदशाइमकानां त्रयोविशतिरवन्तीनाममितमपरान्तानां हैमन्यानां च कुल्यावापानां च कालतः |
तस्योपलब्धिवृं हस्पतेः स्थानगमनगर्भाधानेभ्यः शुक्रोदयास्तमयचारेभ्यः सूर्यस्य प्रकृतिवं-
कृताच्च । सूर्याद् बीजसिद्धिः । वृहस्पतेः सस्यानां स्तम्बकरिता | शुक्राद् वृष्टिरिति i
त्रयः सप्ताहिका मेघा अशीतिः कणशीकराः |
बष्टिरातपमेघानामेषा वृष्टिः समाहिता ॥
वातमातपयोगं च विभजन्यत्र वर्षंति |
त्रीन् करीषांश्च जनयंस्तत्र सस्यागमो AA: U^
Further on this section treats of seed-treatment as well.]

रोहिणीयोगाध्याय: ॥२४॥
Chapter X XIV— The Moon’s Conjunction with Rohini
कनकशिलाचयविवरजतरुकुसुमासज्धिसधुकरानुरुते ।
बहुविहगकलहसुरयुवतिगीतमन्द्रस्वनोपवने uu
सु रनिलयशिखरिशिखरे बृहस्पतिर्नारदाय यानाह i
गगंपराशरकाइ्यपसयाइच यानु शिष्यसङ्घेभ्यः ॥२।।
तानवलोक्य यथावत् प्राजापत्येन्दुसम्प्रयोगार्थान् ।
स्वल्पग्रन्थेनाहं तानेवाम्युद्यतो वक्तुम् URN
I shall now explain briefly the good and bad effects of the
Moon’s conjunction with the star Rohini, having studied them as
expounded by Garga, Paragara, Kāśyapa and Maya to their numerous pupils, and as instructed originally by Brhaspati to Sage Narada
in the celestial garden on the summit of the Meru, which resounded
with the humming of the bees clinging to the flowers on the trees
growing in the caves of the golden rocks that resound with the
twitterings of numerous birds as well as the melodious strains of
music of heavenly damsels.
[The Rohint-yoga should not be mistaken for the Moon’s msnthly conjunction with the star Rohini. This takes place only once in
the year i.e. when she is in contact with this star in the dark fortnight
of the lunar month of Asadha.
Shri Chidambara Iyer remarks in this connection: “These
prefatory remarks clearly shew that what follow are important
scientific truths in the eyes of Hindu astronomers : that the weather
indications of one single day in a year should form the subject of so
much calculation with the Hindus in determining the future agricultural prospect of the land, while to the inexperienced eye of a
western man of science, the day appears as indifferent or otherwise
as any other day of the year argues that modern science is still far
behind in her investigations of the laws of nature.”’]

250 Brhat Samhita
प्राजेशसाषाढतमिस्रपक्षे क्षपाकरेणोपगतं समीक्ष्य ।
वक्तव्यभिष्टं जगतोऽशुभं वा शास्त्रोपदेशाद् ग्रहचिन्तकेन ॥४॥
योगो यथानागत एव वाच्यः स धिष्ण्ययोगः करणे मयोक्तः d
चन्द्रप्रमाणद्यतिवणंसागेरुत्पातवातंश्च फलं निगद्यस् ॥५॥
An astronomer should carefully observe the Moon’s conjunction with the asterism presided over by the creator (i.e. Rohini) in
the dark fortnight of Asadha and then predict good or bad effects to
mankind according to the injunctions of the Sastras (scientific
works). The method of finding out by calculation future conjunction
of the Moon with the asterism Rohini has been explained by me
in my astronomical treatise Paicasiddhantika under the head of
“Conjunction with Fixed Stars”. The effects, however, should be
declared as deduced from the Moon’s size, brightness, colour,
direction and from portents and winds occurring at the time.
[C£. the पञ्चसिद्धान्तिका, XIV. 33 :—
बुद्धवा शशिविक्षेपं कृत्वा ताराशशाद्धूविवरं च |
संसाध्य च वक्तव्यः पश्चात्तारासमायोग: d!
This is yet another reference to the q, सि. which clearly proves
that Varahamihira had already written that work. However, he
refers to the Brhat Samhita in the प. सि. XV.10 in respect of
Rahu.
These verses and many of the succeeding ones are in the
gaaat or उपजाति metre. ]
पुरादुदग्यत् पुरतोऽपि वा स्थलं त्र्यहोषितस्तत्र हुताशतत्परः ।
ग्रहात् सनक्षत्रगणान् समालिखेत् सधूपपुष्पेबेलिमिशच पूजयेत् ॥६॥
सरत्नतोयो षधिभिइचतुदिरं तरुप्रवालापिहितेः सुपूजितः ।
भ्रकालमुंलः कलश्ञेरलङकृतं कुशास्तृतं स्थण्डिलमावसेद् द्विजः NoN
A Brahmana should go to a place north or east from the town,
stay there for three days fasting and worshipping the Sacred Fire,
draw a diagram of the planets and stars, and worship them with
oblations coupled with incense and flowers. He should also occupy
the bare ground strewn with the sacred grass, adorned at the four
corners with waterpots, not blackened at the bottom, containing
gems, water and herbs, covered above with the sprouts of trees, and
kept clean and smeared with sandal paste.

The Moon’s Conjunction with Rohini XXIV 251
[गग
नगरादुपनिष्कम्य दिशं प्रागृत्तरां शुचि: ।
विविक्ते प्रस्थले देशे देवतायतनेऽपि वा |!
राज्ञा नियुक्तो das कृतशौचो जितेन्द्रियः ।
निमित्तकुशलो धीरः शुक्लाम्बरसमावृतः |i
उपवासमथातिष्ठेदष्टमीं संयतब्रतः |
ततोऽप्टम्याः परे यस्मिन् दिने संयुज्यते शशी ॥
प्राजापत्येन च ततो निमित्तान्युपलक्षयेत् ॥
The metre of these verses is वंशस्थ.]
प्रालम्ब्य मन्त्रेण महाव्रतेन बीजानि सर्वाणि निधाय कुम्भे ।
प्लाव्यानि चामीकरदर्भतोय होमो मरुद्ारुणसोममन्त्रः usu
He should then sanctify all sorts of seeds with the hymns of
Mahavrata and immerse them in the water containing gold and
sacred grass in the pot. Then he should perform a Homa (fireworship) with the hymns invoking the Maruts, Varuna and the
Moon.
[The commentator refers to a variant reading to मरुत् as चरुः,
which is evidently wrong.]
इलक्ष्णां पताकामसितां विदध्याइण्डप्रमारां त्रिगुणोच्छ्रितां च ।
Mat कृते दिग्ग्रहरऐे नमस्वान् ग्राह्मस्तया योगगते शशाङ्के ।।६॥।
He should hoist a flag of very fine yarn and black colour, four
cubits in length, on a staff 12 cubits high. After understanding thoroughly the different directions, he should ascertain the direction of
the wind through the movement of the streamer, at the Moon’s.
conjunction with Rohini.
[1 Danda—1 Dhanus=4 Cubits.
चतुर्हस्तो घनुःस्मृतः |
धनुर्देण्डो युगं नाली तुल्यान्येतान्यथाङ्ग्लैः |
The method of finding out the quarters is explained in the
शङ्कुचतुविस्तारे वृत्ते छायाप्रवेशनिगे मनात् |
ग्रपरंन्द्री दिक्सिद्धि्यंवाच्च याम्योत्तरे साध्ये |i
The use of a flag for ascertaining the direction of the wind is
a matter to be specially taken note of, because even at modern
meteorological stations some kind of mechanical vane is employed.

252 Brhat Samhita
We may also remember what Kalidasa says about the wind anda
fine flag in the Sakuntala :
““चीनांशुकमिव केतो: प्रतिवातं नीयमानस्य 1”
The commentator has explained the प. सि. verse for fixing the
directions thus : On a piece of ground which is made level through
water-level draw a circle with a string whose length is 24 Angulas.
Then the diameter will be 48 Angulas or 4 times the height of the
gnomon. Fix the gnomon at the centre of the circle. Make a mark
on the part of the circumference where the shadow of the gnomon
falls when the Sun is in the eastern horizon. That will give you the
western quarter. Similarly make a mark in the afternoon. That will
give the eastern point. Now join these two points. Now with the
two points on the circumference as the centre with the same radius
draw two circles on either side. The two points of intersection
represent the north and south. By joining the two points you get
the north-south line. This is how दिक साधन is done. Now with the
aid of a flag you can easily find out the direction of wind.
तत्राद्धंसासा: प्रहरेविकल्प्या वर्षानिसित्तं दिवसास्तदंशे: ।
सव्येन गच्छञ्छुभदः स देव यस्मिन् प्रतिष्ठा बलवान्स वायुः ॥१०॥
For purposes of determining the times of rainfall, each watch
of the day (3 hour-period) should be considered as a fortnight, and
its subdivisions as days. If the wind blows round from the east to
the south and so on i.e. ina clockwise manner, it augurs always
Prosperity to the world i.e. good rains and bumper crops. When
two contrary winds blow, that which is stronger alone should be
considered as more powerful, and it is from this wind that prediction should be made.
[In a day and night there are eight watches or Praharas.
Generally rains occur in the four months beginning with the lunar
month of Sravana. Now these four months have eight fortnights.
Hence it is possible to equate the eight watches with the eight fortnights. One should observe the behaviour of the wind throughout
the day when the Moon is tenanting the star Rohini. Suppose the
wind blows sinistrally in the fourth watch of the day i.e. from
3 p.m. to 6 p.m. roughly, the rainfallin the 4th fortnight i.e. the
dark half of Bhadrapada, will be unfavourable. To get at the prospects of rain on any particular day, take 1 hour as equivalent of 5
days and a period of 12 minutes as equal to 1 day.

The Moon’s Conjunction with Rohini XXIV 253
Here the commentator refers to another reading तेनात्र मासाः
67 तत्रारद्ध॑मासा: which would mean that the four watches of the day
(not of the night) alone are to be considered for prognostication.
In this case one watch is equal to one month. Jt is understandable
that watching the movement of the flag at night is extremely difficult. Bhattotpala says that the latter reading is preferable in the
light of Varaha’s assertion that he is following in the footsteps of
Garga, Paragara and others whose opinion agrees with this reading.
CE Rp
तदहश्चोदयादूर्ध्वं चतुर्धाहो विभज्य < |
हिताहितार्थं मासानां चतुर्णाम्पलक्षयेत् ॥
The same Sage follows this rule of one watch=one month in the
Vatacakra :
दिनाद्धंमथवा argat मासौ तत्र वर्षति ।
चतुर्भागेन मास तु शक्रोऽत्यर्थ प्रवर्षति ॥
qd चैवारद्धदिवसे gat मासौ तु वर्षति ।
Weed पश्चिमे भागे पङ्चिमौ द्वौ तु वर्षति ॥
ग्रथ पूर्व व्यतिक्रम्य भागं तत्पश्चिमं ततः |
मध्याह्नं वाति चेद्टायुर्मध्यौ मासौ तु वर्षति ॥
भाद्रपदोऽइवयुक् चेव मासावेतौ तु मध्यमौ |
एतयोरपि निर्देश्या वर्षारात्रस्य सम्पदः ॥
Cf. also "faga —
दिनाद्धं वाति ag: qd पश्चिममेव वा |
aama तदा वर्षो विभागः पूर्वपश्चिमे ॥
समग्रं दिवसं argafe वाति सुलक्षणः |
मासास्तु श्रावणाद्या ये तेषां सम्पद्विनिदिशेत् ॥
वायन्तं मारुतं चापि यो वायुः प्रतिवायति।
तत्र यो बलवान् वायुस्तस्येव फलमादिशेत् |i
The word प्रतिष्ठा in the text is interpreted by some as ‘the wind
blowing at sunset’, but Utpala rejects this meaning.]
वृत्ते तु योगेऽङ्कुरिताति यानि सन्तीह बीजानि धृतानि कुम्भे ।
येषां तु योंऽशोऽङकुरितस्तदंशस्तेषां faut समुपेति नान्यः ॥११॥
When the Moon is in conjunction with Rohini, find out which of
the seeds immersed in the water-vessel and what percentage of them,
have sprouted. Only those grains and none else will flourish during

254 Brhat Samhita
the year, and also to the extent shown by the percentage of sprouting grains.
शान्तपक्षिमृगराविता दिशो निर्मलं वियदनिन्दितोऽनिलः ।
शस्यते शशिनि रोहिणीगते मेघमारुतफलानि वच्म्यतः ॥१२॥
During the Moon's conjunction with Rohini the following
auguries are considered beneficial: The quarters resounding with
the pleasant cries of birds and beasts, not facing the Sun; the sky
being clear and the breeze, not vitiated. I shall now explain the
effects of the clouds and the wind.
IEF गर्ग--
योगे ह्यनुद्धता वाता ह्लादयन्तः सुखप्रदाः |
प्रदक्षि णा: श्रेष्ठतमाः पुर्वपुर्वोत्तरा इति ॥
The metre is रथोद्धता.]
बवचिदसितसितेः fad: क्वचिच्च क्वचिदसितंभुंजगरिवास्बुवाहैः i
वलितजठरपृष्ठमात्रहृइ्येः स्फुरिततडिद्रसनेव् तं विशाल: ॥ १३॥
विकसितकमलो दरावदाते ररुरकरद्यतिरञ्जितोपकण्ठेः ।
छुरितमिव वियद्धनेविचित्रेमंधुकरकुङ्कुमकिशुका वदातेः Yn
The following are happy auguries relating to the clouds : The
sky in some places is to be covered with large banks of black and
white clouds, in others with white ones and in some others with
dark ones as with huge serpents whose bellies and backs alone are
visible in their coils and whose moving tongues are represented
by the flashes of lightning (in the clouds). It should look as though
the sky were adorned with clouds, some of which are as white as
the interior of lotus-blossoms, whose fringes are tinged by the rays
of the rising Sun, which may be dark like bees, yellow like saffron,
red like the Kimsuka flower, and white, and which consequently
have a large variety of colours.
[This description of clouds would remind a modern reader
of the various types of clouds distinguished by scientists. Here
the poet combines both sound and sense effectively with the aid of
figures of speech. Here the metre is पुष्पिताग्रा which looks very charming in descriptions of this type.]
ग्रसितघननिरुद्वमेव वा चलिततडित्सुरचापचित्रितम् ।
द्विपमहिषकुलाकुलीकृतं वनमिव दावपरीतमम्बरम् ॥१५॥
: Or, the sky being studded with dark clouds and beautified
with dashing streaks of lightning and the rain-bow, looks verily like

The Moon’s Conjunction with Rohini XXIV 255
a forest on fire, which is teeming with herds of elephants and
bisons.
[The metre is ग्रपरवक्त्र.]
प्रयवाञ्जनशेलशिलानिचयप्रतिरूपधरेः स्थगितं गगनम् ।
हिममोक्तिकरङ्भरशा डुक रद्य॒तिहारिमिरम्बुधरेरथवा ॥ १६॥
Or, it (the sky) is blocked by clouds that resemble the mass of
boulders of the collyrium mountain, or by those that set at naught
the lustre of snow, pearls, conch-shells and the rays of the Moon.
[The metre is तोटक.]
तडिद्वेमकक्ष्येबलाकाग्रदन्तेः त्रवद्वारिदानेशचलत्प्रान्त हस्ते: |
विचित्रेन्द्रचा पध्वजोच्ट्रायश्ोभंस्तमालालिनीलंव् तं चाब्दनागेः॥ १७॥
Or, it is filled with elephants in the form of clouds, which are
as dark as Tamala and the bees, which have lightning representing
the golden trappings, cranes representing the tusks in front, pouring
rain standing for ichor, moving fringes for the trunks, and the
multi-coloured rainbows for the majestic banners held aloft.
[The description, the alliteration, the metaphor and the dancing
metre भुजद्धप्रयात--91 these make up the charm of this verse which
is an excellent specimen of our author's literary art. We hear
Kalidàsa's echo in these lines.]
सन्ध्यानुरक्ते नभसि स्थितानामिन्दीवरश्यामरुचां घनानाम् |
वृन्दानि पीताम्बरवेष्टितस्य कान्ति हरेश्चोरयतां यदा वा ॥१८॥
Or, when there are in the sky that is crimson at twilight,
clusters of clouds, which, bearing the dark hue of lilies, rob, as it
were, Lord Krsna, clad in his yellow silken garment, of his
beauty.
सशिखिचातकदर्द्रतिःस्वनेर्येदि विमिश्चितमग्द्रपटुस्वनाः |
खमवतत्य दिगन्तविलम्बिनः सलिलदाः सलिलौघमुचः क्षितो ॥१६॥
Should the deep and distinct peal of thunder of clouds be
followed by the cries of peacocks, Cataka birds and frogs, and the
clouds hang low at the horizon having spread throughout the firmament, there would be a torrential downpour on the earth.
[The metre is द्रतविलम्बित. The conditions mentioned in this
verse are familiar to village elders who prognosticate rain from the
atmospheric conditions. |

250 Brhat Samhita
निगदितरूपेर्जलधरजालेस्त्र्परहमव रुद्धं इ यहसथवा हः ।
यदि वियदेवं सप्रति सुभिक्षं मुदितजना च प्रचुरजला भूः ॥२०॥
Should the sky be covered for three, two or one day at a
stretch with banks of clouds of the above description, there would
be abundant food, the people would be happy and contented and
there would be plenty of water in the land.
[Ch गग
दधिरोप्यामलक्रोञ्चताम्राभारुणसन्निभाः |
शुककोरेयमाञ्जिष्ठास्तपनीयसमप्रभाः |
्रच्छिन्नमुलाः सुस्निग्धाः पर्वताकारसन्निभाः |
घना घनाः प्रशस्यन्ते विद्युत््तनितसङ्कुलाः ॥
Cf. also पराश र--
रोहिणीयोगे पुनः प्रदक्षिणो मृदुर्मारुतः स्नेहवन्ति चाभ्राणि विद्युच्छक्रचापालड्कृतानि स्वादुसुरभिविमलशिशिरतावृद्धिश्राम्भसां वृष्टिक्षेमसुभिक्षाय । यावतो दिवसान्
निमिततप्रादुर्भावानुबन्धस्तावद्वर्षाणि सुःभक्षक्षेमम् । ग्रासप्त रात्राद् बिलवासिनां बिलेभ्यो
निष्क्रमणं स्त्रीपुरुषबालानां प्रमोदः पक्षिणां क्षी रपुष्पफलवृक्षसेवनं तरूणामच्छिद्रपत्र ता
पुरपौरहिताय ॥
Cf. also the समाससंहिता---
ग्राषाढबहुलपक्षे शिशिरकरे रोहिणीसमायुक्ते ।
यदि गगनममलमत्यन्ततीक्ष्ण रश्मि: सहस्रांशुः ॥
सलिलगुरुनम्रजलध रतडिल्लतालोल रञ्जित दिगन्तः |
अमितमलभेकचातककादस्बविमिश्रमाकाशम् ॥
क्षितितनयरविजरहितः स्फटिकनिभरचन्द्रमा निरुत्पात: à
मरुतरच पुवंपूर्वो त्तरोत्तरा: शान्तमृगविहगा: ।।
The metre is कुसुम विचित्रा. ]
Next he speaks of the characteristics of unproductive and
harmful clouds.
रूक्षे रल्पेर्मारुता क्षिप्तदेहैरुष्ट्रध्वा इ््षप्रेतशाखामृगाभैः ।
्रन्येषां वा निन्दितानां स्वरूपेर्मूकैइचाब्देर्नो शिवं नापि वृष्टिः ॥२३॥
There would neither be prosperity nor rain in the land, should
the clouds be rough and small, tossed about by the wind, have the
shapes of camels, crows, dead bodies, monkeys or other inauspicious
creatures, and be silent.
SE IN
छिन्नमुलाइच वृक्षाश्च शुष्का वाष्पाकुलीकृताः ।
पापसत्त्वानुका राश्च मेघाः पापफलप्रदाः di

The Moons Conjunction with Rohini XXIV ` 257
The metre is शालिनी. ]
विगतघने वा वियति विवस्वानमृदुमयृख: सलिलकदेवस् i
सर इव फुल्लं निशि कुमुदाढ्य खमुड़विशुद्धं यदि च सुवृष्ट्ये URIN
If the Sun should shine with burning rays in a cloudless sky
and the sky at night with bright stars look blooming like a lake with
lily blossoms, there would be plentiful rain.
[The metre is कुसुमविचित्रा. ]
Next he speaks of the effects of the clouds appearing in the
different directions.
quique: सस्यनिष्पत्ति रब्देराग्नेयाशासम्भवेर ग्निकोपः ।
याम्ये सस्यं क्षीयते नेऋ Ass पश्चाज्जातेः शोभना वृष्टिरब्दे: ॥२२॥
वायव्योत्थेर्वात वृष्टिः क्वचिच्च पृष्टा वृष्टिः सौस्यकाष्ठासमुत्थेः ।
श्रेष्ठं सस्यं स्थाणुदिक्सम्प्रवृद्धर्वायुश्चेवं दिक्षु धत्ते फलानि ॥२४॥
If the clouds rise in the east, there will be good crops; in the
south-east, there will be outbreak of fires; in the south, crops will
decay; in the south-west, only partial growth of crops; in the west,
good rains; in the north-west, stormy and sporadic rain; in the north,
very fine and full rain; and in the north-east, bumper crops. The
same effects should be predicted of the wind also arising in the several directions.
[The metre again is शालिनी.]
उल्कानिपातास्तडितोऽशनिशच दिग्दाहनिर्घातमहोप्रकम्पा: ।
नादा मृगाणां सपतत्रिणां च ग्राह्या यरथंवाम्बुधरास्तयैव ॥२५॥
Fall of meteors, flashes of lightning, thunderbolts, false fires
in the quarters, portentous rumblings in the sky, earthquakes and
the cries of birds and beasts produce the same effects as the clouds
do under the above conditions i.e. directions.
नामाडिसतेस्तेरुदगादिकुस्मः प्रदक्षिणं भावणामासपूर्वेः ।
qui: स सासः सलिलस्य दाता स्रूतेरवृष्टिः परिकल्पनीया ॥२६॥
The four water-vessels beginning with the one kept at the
northern end should be designated as the four months beginning
with Sravana in the dextral order. If any of the pots be full of
water, the particular month signified by that pot will have good rain.
On the other hand, if any one be empty, that month would have no
rain. The amount of rain will have to be estimated on the basis of
the quantity of water left in the pots.

258 Brhat Samhita
[ Cf. gum
सौम्ये तु श्रावणं विन्द्यात् पुर्वे भाद्रपदं वदेत् |
दक्षि णेऽवयुजो ज्ञेयः पश्चिमे कात्तिक fag: ॥
सर्वे कुम्भाः सुपूर्णाः स्युरभग्नाः कान्तिसं gar: 1
चतुरो वार्षिकान् मासान् सर्वान् वर्षति वासवः ।।
TACIT: स्यादद्धर्मध्यमवषराम् ।
्रवेस्तथाविधा वृष्ट्वक्तव्या जलमानतः 11]
Raed HAA Wang देशाङ्गूतेश्चाप्यपरंस्तथेव |
भग्ने: सरू तेन्यूंनजलः FIT भग्यानि वाच्यानि यथानुरूपसु ॥२७॥
Likewise, through other pots bearing the names of kings, countries and other things (such as the four classes etc.) their fortunes,
(good, bad or middling) should be predicted according to the conditions of the pots, when they are quite full, broken, drained off or
having a little water.
[Cf. काश्यप---
ग्रन्यदेशाङ्किताः कुम्भा भिद्यन्ते च स्रवन्ति च ।
बन्धहीना वितोयाइच तेऽभियोज्या नृपेण वे ॥
In this verse the sage prescribes a method to find out which of the
kings could be attacked and vanquished.]
Next the author speaks of the effects of the Moon’s contact
with the constellation Rohini.
दूरगो निकटगोऽथवा शशी दक्षिरो पथि यथातथा स्थितः d
रोहिणीं यदि युनक्ति सर्वथा कष्टनेव जगतो विनिदिशेत् ॥२८॥
Should the Moon situated to the south of the star, whether
far or near, conjoin with Rohini, there would result terrible disaster
to the world.
[The metre is रथोद्धता. |
स्पृशन्नुदग्याति यदा दाशाद्स्तदा सुवृष्टिर्बहुलोपसर्गा i
mae योगमुदक्समेतः करोति gfe विपुलां शिवं च ॥२९॥
When the Moon touches Rohini while standing in the south,
and then moves to the north, there will be good rains accompanied
by many disasters. On the other hand, when she moves to the
north without touching the constellation, there will be abundant
rains and prosperity to mankind.

The Moon’s Conjunction with Rohint XXIV 259
रोहिएीशकटमध्यसंस्थिते चन्द्रमस्यश रणीकृता जना: |
क्वापि यान्ति शिशुयाचिताशना: सुयंतप्तपिठराम्बुपायिनः ॥३०॥
When the Moon is posited in the centre of the wain of Rohini,
people will roam about shelterless, their children procuring food for
them by begging, and drinking water from sun-scorched vessels (as
a result of drought and famine).
[The group of six stars constituting Rohini is,called Sakata or
cart. This subject of cleaving the ‘Wain of Rohin’ has been dealt
with in chapter IX.25 supra and in notes thereunder,
प्रजा: Is another reading for जना: in the text.
The metre is again रथोद्धता.]
उदितं यदि शीतदीर्धिति प्रथमं पृष्ठत एति रोहिणी i
शुभमेव तदा स्मरातुराः प्रमदाः कामवशेन संस्थिताः ॥३१॥
Should the Moon rise first and Rohini rising later follow her,
there would be all-round happiness and prosperity to mankind, but
young damsels, stricken with love, would be under the influence of
amorous men.
[The metre of this and the following verse is वियोगिनी.]
श्रनुगच्छति पृष्ठतः शशी यदि कामी वनितामिव प्रियाम् ।
सकरध्वजबाणखेदिताः प्रसदानां वशगास्तदा नरा: ॥३२॥
If the Moon should follow Rohini from behind, as a lover does
his beloved, men would be under the control of youthful women,
being smitten by the shafts of cupid.
श्राग्नेय्यां दिशि चन्द्रमा यदि भवेत्तत्रोपसर्गो महानु
नेऋ त्यां समुपद्रु तानि निधनं सस्यानि यान्तीतिभिः à
प्राजेशानिलदिकस्थिते हिमकरे सस्यस्य मध्यश्चयो
याते स्थाणुदिशं गुरणाः सुबहवः सस्याघंवृष्ट्यादयः ॥३३॥
When the Moon stands to the south-east of Rohini, there will
be great calamities in the year; when to the south-west, all the crops
will be destroyed being afflicted with all kinds of pests; when to the
north-west, crops will flourish only moderately; and when to the
north-east, there will be many advantages, bumper crops, higher
prices, good and timely rains, health and happiness among the
people.

260 Brhat Samhita
[Cf. the समाससंहिता —
उदगपि च तुहिनकिरणाः पूर्वोत्तरतोऽथवा स्थितः प्राच्याम् ।
यदि भवति तदा वसुधा भवति विवृद्धा प्रहष्टजना N
उपसर्गो ऽनलदिक्स्थे याम्याशासंस्थिते शकटके च ।
कि कष्टंस्तैरुक्तँः श्रुतमात्रेयें: कृशो भवति ॥
क्रिमिशुकशलभादिभयं tae त्यां नाति पुष्टि रपरेण |
वायव्याशासंस्थे मध्यं सस्यं कुमुदनाथे dg
The metre is शार्दूलविक्रोडित.]
ताडयेद्यदि च योगतारकामावृणोति वपुषा यदापि वा ।
ताडने भयमुशन्ति दारुणं छादमे नृपवधोऽङ्गनाङृतः ॥३४॥
Should the Moon cut across the brilliant star of the group of
Rohini or cover it with her disc, there would be great danger and
the king’s murder committed by a woman respectively.
[योगतारा is the most prominent .or brightest star of a group.
For,
सतारागरामध्ये तु या तारा दीप्तिमत्तरा |
योगतारेति सा प्रोक्ता नक्षत्राणां पुरातने: ॥
According to Utpala cutting means STSTHAMA «gata or touching
it with a portion of her horn.
The metre of this and of the following verses is रथोद्धता.]
गोप्रवेशसमंयेऽग्रतो वृषो याति कृष्णापद्युरेव वा पुरः ।
भुरि वारि शबले तु मध्यमं नो सितेऽम्ब्रुपरिकल्पनापरेः ॥३५॥
Jf at the time of the arrival of the cattle in the evening, there
be a bull or a black animal (such as a goat) in front, there would be
copious rains in the year; if it be black and white, rains would be
moderate; and if it be white, there would be no rain at all. A proportionate estimate of the quantity of rain isto be made with the
animals of other colours.
[It is to be remembered that the prognostication referred to in
this verse should be made under the circumstances mentioned in the
beginning of this chapter and the previous one too.
Cf. गगं—
प्राक्प्रवेशे तु यूथस्य पुरतो वृषभो यदा ।
प्रवेशे कृष्णवर्णो वा पशुर्बहुजलप्रदः ॥
Ba.

The Moon’s Conjunction with Rohini XXIV 261
कृष्णा तु गौ: सुभिक्षाय क्षेमारोग्याय चोच्यते 1
गोर्यामथ च नीलायां मध्याः सस्यस्य सम्पदः ॥
अनावृष्टिकरी श्वेता वाताय कपिला स्मृता ।
पाटला सस्यनाशाय रोगाय करटा स्मृता ॥
एकदेशाय शबला चित्रं चित्रा तु वर्षति ।
पाण्डुरा मध्यमाङ्की वा ग्रीष्मधान्यविवद्धेनी ॥
कपिला पश्चिमं वर्ष शोणा त्वग्रे प्रवर्षति ॥
See also what पराशर says :—
भ्रथास्तमयवेलायां पुरद्वारमभिगम्य निमित्तान्युपलक्षयेत् । तत्र गोगजाइवरथप्रथमप्रवेशे पुरविजयो वानरखरोष्ट्नकुलमार्जारप्रवेशे विद्रवो नेत्राद्गहीनप्रवेशे त्वशनि-
भयमिति ul
हश्यते न यदि रोहिणीयुतश्चन्द्रमा नमसि तोयदावृते ।
wag महदुपस्थितं तदा Ysa भूरिजलसस्यसंयुता ॥३६॥
Ifthe Moon in conjunction with Rohini is not visible asa
result of the sky being overcast, great danger from diseases is imminent, but the earth will be blessed with plenty of water and bumper
crops.
[Here the author-poet does not alter the metre of the last
verse.]

स्वातियोगाध्यायः usu
Chapter XXV—The Moon’s Conjunction with Svati
यद्रोहिएीयोगफलं तदेव स्वातावषाढासहिते च चन्द्रे ।
ग्राषाढशुक्ले निखिलं विचिन्त्यं योऽस्मिन् विशेषस्तमहं प्रवक्ष्ये ngu
The effects of the Moon’s conjunction with Svati and Asadha
are the same as for her conjunction with Rohini. However, the
observations should be made in the bright fortnight of the month
of Asadha. I shall now explain the special features of this latter
conjunction.
[CF पराशर---
सर्वे एते योगा मास्याषाढे भवन्ति । तान् दैवज्ञः प्रयत: शुचिरवधारयेत्, स्वाति-
संयुते चन्द्रमसि घधघनस्निग्धस्तनितविद्युन्माले रम्भोदेन भसो$वच्छादनं सुभिक्षक्षेमाय
तद्ृत्सवेवातप्रादुर्भाव इति | उल्कानिर्घातकम्पोपघातेइच विपर्ययः ।।
Here the metres employed are geq] in the first three verses,
रार्या, शादूलविक्रोडित and अनुष्टुभ. |
स्वातो निशांशे प्रथमे5भिवृष्टे सस्यानि सर्वाण्युपयान्ति वृद्धिम् ।
भागे द्वितीये तिलमुद्गमाषा ded तृतीयेऽस्ति न शारदानि ॥२॥
वृष्टेऽह्वि भागे प्रथमे सुवृष्टिस्तद्वद्द्वितीये तु सकीटसर्पा ।
afeeg मध्यापरभागवृष्टे निर्छिदरवष्टि्युनिशं प्रवृष्टे uan
If it rains in the first four-hour period of the night when the
Moon is in conjunction with the asterism Svati, all the crops would
thrive; if in the second part, sesamum, green gram and black gram
would grow splendidly; if in thethird part, summer-crops alone would
thrive and not the autumnal ones. If it rains in the first part of the
day, there would be excellent rains in the year; if in the second, the
effect will be the same, but insects and snakes would increase; and

The Moon’s Conjunction with Svati XXV 263
if in the third part, the rain would be moderate. If there be rain
throughout the day and night, there would be excellent rain in the
year.
[Cf. qj —
स्वातियोगे यदा युक्ते पुवं रात्रे प्रवर्षति ।
ग्रीष्मशारदसम्पन्नां तां समामभिनिदिशेत् ॥
रात्रेद्विभागमाश्रित्य स्वातियोगेऽभिवर्षति i
सम्पदो मुद्गमाषाणां तिलानां चावधारयेत् ॥
त्रिभागशेषे adat: स्वातियोगेऽभिवर्षति ।
Wem सम्पद्यते सस्यं शारदं तु विनश्यति d
Ward प्रथमे भागे वर्षाक्षेमसुवृष्टये |
द्वितीये शोभना वृष्टिबहुसस्यत्तरींसृपा: ॥
ग्रह्नस्तृतीये भागे q मध्यमां कुरुते TATA ।
ग्रहो रात्रं यदा वर्ष स्वातियोगे पुरन्दरः ॥
तदा तु चतुरो मासान् सर्वान्वर्षेति वासवः ou]
ARAFAT तारा चित्रायाः कीत्यते ह्यपांवत्सः ।
तस्यासन्ने चब्दरे स्वातेर्योगः शिवो भवति ॥४॥
There is a star named Apamvatsa, Child of Water, which is
situated due north of Citra. When the Moon joins with Svati while
staying in the neighbourhood of Apamvatsa, the effect will be splendid and beneficial.
सप्तम्यां स्वातियोगे यदि पतति हिमं माघमासान्धकारे
वायुर्वा चण्डवेगः सजलजलधरो वापि गर्जत्यजस्रम् ।
विद्युन्मालाकुलं वा यदि भवति नभो नष्टचन्द्रार्कतारं
विज्ञेया प्रावुडेषा मुादतजनपदा सर्वेसस्येरुपेता ॥५॥
If there be snowfall on the 7th lunar day of the dark fortnight
of the month of Magha during the Moon’s stay with Svati, or if the
wind be very strong, or if the dark clouds thunder constantly, or if
the sky, where the Sun, the Moon and stars become invisible, is
filled with wreaths of lightning, one should understand that the rainy
season would be rich in all kinds of crops, gladdening mankind.
[This is a fine example of a good, descriptive poetry. We get
here a fine description of the rainy-season, with the sound echoing
tbe sense. |

264 Brhat Samhita
तथैव फाल्गुने BA बेशाखस्यासितेऽपि at ।
स्वातियोगं विजानीयादाषाढे च विशेषतः ॥६॥
In the same manner one should consider the effects of the
Moon's conjunction with Svati occurring in the month of Phalguna
or Caitra or in the dark half of Vaigakha and especially in the month
of Asadha.
[Bhattotpala writes here : ““प्रनार्घोऽयं लोकः. Does he mean by
this that the above statement is not borne out by the statements of
ancient sages like Garga, or that this verse is not our author’s ? ‘The
previous verse in the शार्दलविक्रीडित metre looks like the last verse of
the chapter.]

ग्राषाढीयोगाध्यायः ॥२६॥
Chapter XXVI—The Moon’s Conjunction with Asadha
[Whatever effects have been enumerated for the Moon’s conjunction with Rohini, all that will apply to her conjunction with
Uttarasadha on the full Moon of the month of Asadha.
Cf. पराश र--
ग्रतो$नन्तरमाषाढासंयुक्ते शशिन्यादानविसर्गान्तर्भागेषु निमित्तानि प्रावृष्याद्यन्तमध्येषु फलन्ति । तत्र सुरभिरनुकूलः maag मारुतः पूर्वपुर्वोत्तरोऽतिवर्षंसस्यकरो
नेऋ तारनेययाम्यवारुणवायव्या मध्यसस्यकराः | विपर्ययो विपरीतेषु । वंदूर्यरजतमधुहेमप्रभा सन्ध्या स्निग्धाश्रवृक्षप्रादुर्भावश्च प्रावृड्वृद्धये । प्राङ्मध्यपश्चादृभागे-
ष्वाषाढानां योगः शशिनो वर्षासु तत्कालमेव वर्षाय | वैश्वदेवादुत्तरतः शशी वर्षंकरो
न दक्षिणतः। निर्घातोल्काशनिभूचलनदण्डान्यावग्रहोपतापे सस्यवधो भवति। भवति
चात्र
सोदक सातप ure सविद्यूत् स्तनयित्नुमत् |
प्रवातं च निवातं च प्रशस्तं तदहः स्मृतम् ॥]
प्राषाढ्यां समतुलिताधिवासितानामन्येद्युर्यदधिकतांमुपेति बीजम् ।
तद्वृद्धिभंवति न जायते यदूनं मन्त्रोऽस्मिन्भवति तुलाभिमन्त्रणाय ॥१॥
At the time of the full Moon in the month of Asadha take
equal weights of several kinds of seeds and keep them for a night
being sanctified with the Mahavrata hymn. Those seeds whose
weight increases the next day will flourish during the year, whereas
those that go down in weight will not. The hymn for sanctifying
the balance used for weighing the seeds is the following :
[Gif गर्ग--
वायव्यवेरवदेवाभ्यां प्राजापत्यस्य चेव हि |
एषामप्यधिक चापि रोहिणी नाम याप्यते ॥
See also the समाससं हिता--
तुलिताधिवासितानामन्येद्युयंदधिक भवति बोजम् ।
आषाढपौर्णमास्यां तद्वृद्धिस्तत्र मन्त्रोञ्यम् ॥
The metre is प्रहाषणी.]

266 Brhat Samhita
स्तोतव्या सन्त्रयोगेन सत्या देवी सरस्वती t
दर्शयिष्यसि यत्सत्यं सत्ये सत्यव्रता gm uqu
थेन सत्येन चन्द्राकों ग्रहा ज्योतिगंणास्तथा ।
उत्तिष्ठन्तीह पूर्वण पश्चादस्तं ब्रजन्ति च ॥३॥
यत्सत्यं qaqaq यत्सत्यं ब्रह्मवादिषु ।
यत्सत्यं त्रिषु लोकेषु तत्सत्यमिह हह्यतास् ॥४॥
ब्रह्मणो दुहितासि त्वसादित्येति प्रकीतिता ।
काइयपी गोत्रतशचेव नासतो [AMAT तुला uu
The balance should be invoked with the following hymns :
“As the Goddess of Speech is verily Truth, you will, O Truth incarnate, show the real truth, since you are dedicated to Truth. May
that Truth appear here, the Truth by which the Sun and the Moon,
the planets and the hosts of stars rise in the east and set in the west,
the Truth which is revealed in all the Vedas, in the Sages rooted in
spirituality and in the three worlds. You are the daughter of
Brahman (creator), called by the name Aditya (daughter of Aditi),
and descended from the spiritual preceptor, Sage Ka$yapa. You are
popularly known as Balance."
[These verses in praise of the Balance are not by our author.
They have been reproduced from the works of ancient sages. Hence
the commentator says “ग्रथ तं मन्त्रमार्षमाह'”. Weights, measures and
scales must be exact and the same to everybody in the world. They
should be trustworthy. Hence the balance and the like were considered sacred in ancient times. Manu, Kautilya and others insist on
the correctness and infallibility of weights and measures.]
क्षोमं चतुःसुत्रकसन्तिबद्धं षडङगुलं शिक्यकवस्त्रमस्याः |
सुत्रप्रमाणं च दशाङगुलानि षडेव कक्ष्योभयशिक्यमध्ये NGU
The scale-pans should be made of silk cloth six digits in length
and width, fastened with four strings ten digits long and the cord
by which the balance is held between the two scales is six digits in
length.
[The commentator interprets the word षड्व...as the dimension
of the कक्ष्यासूत्र otherwise known as ग्रहरासूत्र, For the length of the

The Moon’s Conjunction with Asadha XXVI 267
beam refer to verse 9 infra.
The metre is उपजाति.]
याम्ये शिक्ये काञ्चनं सन्निवेशयं शेषद्रव्याण्युत्तरे$म्बूनि चेव ।
ala: कोप्येः संन्धवंः सारसेइच afegim मध्यमा चोत्तमा च ॥७॥
दन्तेर्नागा गोहयाद्याशइच लोम्ना हेम्ना भूपाः सिक्थकेन द्विजाद्याः ।
तद्॒हेशा वर्षमासा दिशवच शेषद्रव्याण्यात्मरूपस्थितानि usu
Gold should be weighed in the right hand pan; while all other
articles as well as water (liquids) in the left hand pan. Weigh
severally the waters of wells, rivers and lakes. The rain in the year
will be meagre, moderate and copious according as well, river and
lake water becomes the heaviest. The value of elephants is determined by the amount of ivory they have; of cows, horses and the
like (viz. donkeys, camels, goats and sheep), by their hair ; of
kings, by the amount of gold in their coffers; of Brahmanas etc:,
as well as of countries, years, months and quarters, by bees-wax;
and of other substances, by their actual weight.
[वृद्धिर्हीना is another reading. The metre is शालिनी.]
हैमी प्रधाना रजतेन मध्या तयोरलाभे खदिरेर कार्या ।
विद्धः पुमान येन शरेण सा वा तुला प्रसारोन भवेद्वितस्तिः NEN
A golden balance is the best, one of silver is middling. In the
absence of the above two, it should be made of Khadira (Acacia
catechu) wood, or it should be made of a shaft by which a person is
pierced. The length of the balance should be twelve digits.
[An Angula or digit is the space covered by 8 grains of barley
placed side by side, or that of three grains placed lengthwise. It is
primarily the breadth of a human finger.
This and the following three verses are in उपजाति metre. |
हीनस्य नाशो$म्यधिकस्य वृद्धिस्तुल्येन तुल्यं तुलितं तुलायास् ।
एतत्तुलाकोशरहस्यमुक्तं प्राजेशयोगेऽपि नरो विदध्यात् ॥१०॥
Such substances as appear to have lost weight on being weighed again, would suffer loss; such as have gained in weight would
thrive; and such as continue in the same condition would be indifferent. This is termed the ‘secret of weighing treasures’. This applies
equally to the Moon’s conjunction with Rohini too.

268 Brhat Samhita
[Cf. गर्ग--
येषां प्रणमते सारं ते भवन्ति च नासमम् |
येषा तु हीयते सार तेषां नाशं विनिदिशेत् ॥
समानि तु समानि स्युस्तुलया तुलितानि तु ॥
also पराश र---
सारसे$म्भसि umma राज्ञां च विजयो$धिके ।
नादेये मध्यमा सम्पत्कनीयस्यचलोदके ॥
यस्यां दिशि भवेन्माल्यमम्लानं शुचिगन्धिमत् |
तस्यां दिशि विजानीयादद्राज्ञां शिवमनामयम् ॥ |
स्वातावषाढास्वथ रोहिणीषु पापग्रहा योगगता न शस्ताः ।
ग्राह्म तु योगद्वयमष्युपोष्य यदाधिमासो दविगुणीकरोति ॥११॥
Evil planets (Mars, Saturn, Rahu and Ketu) posited in Svati,
Uttarasadhà or Rohini during the Moon’s conjunction with any of
these, cause havoc in the country. In the case of an intercalary
Asadha month occurring, one should observe devotional fasting on
both the occasions.
(Cf. qj —
योगे: पाप रुपहते: प्रजानामशुभं वदेत् |
दुभिक्षावृष्टिम रकान् died: सौभिक्षमादिशेत् ॥
also पराशर---
शुक्रबुधवृहस्पतिसंयोगे शुकधान्यतिलमुद्गविनाश:। सौरस्य मध्यदेशाभावो
भौमस्य शस्त्रकोप: | केतोर्भयदुर्िक्षप्रादुर्भावावग्रह: । रोहिएीमध्यगमनमिन्दो: सुभिक्षक्षेमवृष्टिकरम् N]
त्रयोऽपि योगाः ACA: फलेन यदा तदा वाच्यमसंशयेन ।
विपयये यक्त्विह रोहिणीजं फलं तदेवाभ्यधिकं निगद्यम् ॥१२॥
When the effects of the Moon’s conjunctions with Rohini,
Svati and Asadha are the same, whether good or bad, the prediction
is to be made accordingly without hesitation. Should the effects be
different, those of Rohini alone would prevail.
निष्पत्तिरग्निकोपो वृष्टिमन्दाथ मध्यमा श्रेष्ठा ।
बहुजलपवना JST शुभा च पूर्वादिभिः qas: ॥१३॥
If the wind blows from the eight quarters beginning with the
east at the time of the Moon’s conjunction with Asadha, the effects
would be in order (i) good harvest, (ii) danger from fire, (iii) sparse
rain, (iv) moderate rain, (v) very good rain, (vi) copious rain

The Moon’s Conjunction with Asadha XXVI 269
accompanied by winds, (vii) abundant rain, and (viii) highly beneficial rain.
[The author has already referred to this aspect in Chapter
XXIV. 24. Hence this is only by way of clarification for the benefit
of students.]
वृत्तायामाषाढयां कृष्णाचतुर्थ्यामज कपादक्षं ।
यदि वर्षंति पर्जन्यः प्रावृट् शस्ता न चेन्न ततः ।।१४॥
If, after the full Moon in the month of Asadha, there is rain
on the 4th lunar day of the dark fortnight in the asterism of Purvabhadra, the rainy season will prove beneficial; otherwise not.
[This verse is patently spurious. For, Utpala says that it is
Anàrga. The Benares edition puts this verse at the end of वातचक्र.]
श्राषाढ्यां पोणमास्यां तु यद्येशानोऽनिलो भवेत् ।
प्रस्तं गच्छति तीक्षणांशौ सस्यसम्पत्तिरुत्तमा ॥१५॥
If there bea north-easterly wind on the fullemoon day of
Asadha at sunset, there would be excellent growth of crops in the
season.
[This verse appears as the first of वातचक्र in the Benares edition
where the reading is ग्राषाढपौर्ण amat. |

वातचक्रस् ॥२७॥
Chapter XXVII—The Wind Circle
[According to Utpala this chapter is spurious, as it is patently
redundant. But, he says, this section is found in many books,
So he comments for the benefit of students. ]
qd: पुर्वसमुद्रवीचिशिखरप्रस्फालनाघूरितइचन्द्रार्कांशुसटाकलापकलितो वायुर्यदाकाशत: ।
नेकान्तस्थितनीलसेघपटला शारद्यसंवधिता
वासन्तोत्कटसस्यमण्डिततला सर्वा मही शोभते ॥१॥
If on the day of the full Moon in Asadha an easterly wind
blows from the sky, being tossed by the strokes of the tops of the
billows of the eastern ocean and mingled with the mass of the manelike rays of the luminaries, the whole earth will rejoice being enriched by the splendid vernal and autumnal crops, and being
covered overhead with groups of dark clouds everywhere.
[The poet, whoever he might be, has tried to come up to the
level of our author in poetic fancy and verbal exuberance.
The metre is शाईलविक्रीडित. The grammatical form are is
rather unusual. He ould have instead used सच्छारदेवंधिता.]
यदाग्नेयो बायुम लयशिखरास्फालनपटुः
प्लवत्यस्मिन्योगे भगवति पतङ्गे प्रवसति d
तदा नित्योद्दीप्ता ज्बलनशिखरालिङ्गिततला
स्वगात्रोष्सोच्छ्वासेवंमति वसुधा भस्मनिकरम् uqu
When the wind blows with such force as if to break off the
peaks of the Malaya mountain, from the south-eastern part of the
sky at sunset on the same full-moon day, the earth, blazing continuously with the flames of fire embracing or spreading on its surface,
will emit heaps of ashes along with the hot vapour emanating from
its own body.
[The poet continues his description in the same strain. His
expressiont qafq instead of प्लवमाने is un-Paninian. Here the word

The Wind Circle XXVII 271
aufa leads to the poetic excellence named समाधि mentioned by
Dandin. The metre is शिखरिणी.
यदा वह्नौ वायुर्वहति गगनेऽखण्डिततनुः is another reading.]
तालीपत्रलतावितानतरमिः शाखासृगान्नतेयन्
योगेऽस्मिन् प्लवति ध्वनिः सपरुषो वायुर्यदा दक्षिणः |
तद्वद्योगसमुत्थितस्तु गजवत्तालाङकुशेघे ट्विताः
कीनाशा इव मन्दवारिकणिका सुऊ्चन्ति मेघास्तदा ॥३॥
When at the above-named conjunction a very rough and howling south wind blows, making the monkeys dance through the
(shaking) leaves of palm trees, bowers of creepers and trees, the
clouds rising like the elephants struck by rod and pricked by goad,
shed a few drops of water like miserly persons.
[सर्वोद्योगस मुन्नताइ्च is another reading in the third line. This
and the following verse are in शाद लविक्रीडित metre.]
सुक्ष्मेलालबलीलवङ्गनिचयात् व्याघूर्णयन् सागरे
भानोरस्तमपे प्लवत्यविरतो वायुर्यदा नेऋः तः ।
्नुत्तष्णावृतसानुषास्थिशकलप्रस्तारभारच्छदा
सत्ता प्रेतवधूरिवोग्रचपला भूमिस्तदा लक्ष्यते ॥४॥
If at sunset on the full-moon day of Asadha a south-west wind
blows unceasingly tossing up and down in the sea heaps of small
cardamoms, averrhoas and cloves, then the earth shrouded by a
heavy load of scattered bone-pieces of men who have perished by
hunger and thirst, would appear wild and restless like a young
woman who has just lost her husband.
[The style is brilliant and imagery vivid in this verse in which
we come across the ghastly effects of famine, drought and mortality
stalking the land.]
यदा रेणूत्पातैः प्रवचलसटाटोपचपलः
प्रवातः पश्चाच्चेहिनकरकरापातसमे |
तदा सस्योपेता प्रवरतिकराबद्वसमरा
क्षितिः स्थानस्थानेष्ववरतवसामांसरधिरा ॥५॥
Ifat sunset on the same day there isa strong gale from the
west, raising dust with its striking wings, the earth will be endowed

272 Brhat Samhita
with rich crops, but will have the leading monarchs engaged in sanguinary battles leading to huge masses of marrow, flesh and blood
being thrown everywhere.
[Here alliteration is very prominent. His descriptions of a
duststorm and battles are effective.
The metre is शिखरिणी. |
ग्रापाढीपर्वकाले यदि किररापतेरस्तकालोपपत्तो
वायव्यो वृद्धवेगः पवनघनवपुः पन्नगार्द्धानुकारी ।
जानीयाटारिधाराप्रमुदितमुदितामुक्त मण्डूककण्ठां
सस्योऱद्भासंकचिह्वां सुखबहुलतया भाग्यसेनामिवोर्वो म् ॥६॥
At sunset on the same day, if the north-westerly wind be very
strong, have a dense appearance and resembles mutilated bodies of
serpents (or Garuda with his wings out-stretched), then it should be
understood that the earth would possess the plenitude of blessings
on account of undiluted happiness, caused by the all-round growth
of splendid crops and torrents of rain, wherein the frogs rejoice and
croak continuously.
[In the second line पन्नगादानुकारी is another reading; where
पन्नगाद means Garuda. Here too alliteration is patent. The commentator interprets भाग्यसेनां as भाग्यचम्ं-the army of blessings. This
description suggests a blessed woman whose forehead bears the
auspicious mark of Kurhkuma—saffron. The metre is स्रग्धरा.]
मेरुग्रस्तमरीचिमण्डलतले ग्रीष्मावसाने vat
वात्पासोदिकदम्वगन्धसुरमिर्वायुर्यदा चोत्तरः ।
विद्युदृश्रान्तिसमस्तकान्तिकलनामत्तास्तदा तोयदा
उन्मत्ता इव नष्टचन्द्रकिरणां गां पुरयन्त्यम्बुभिः wen
If, at the end of summer i.e. on the full-moon day of Asadha,
where the mass of the sun’s rays is screened by Mount Meru, a
northerly breeze blows, wafting the fragrance of the sweet-smelling
Kadamba flowers, then the clouds will flood the earth with water,
as though crying madly, and intoxicated by the sight of the spreading illumination caused by flashes of lightning, and destroying the
Moon’s rays on the earth.
[The metre is शार्दूलविक्रीडित. |
नष्टचन्द्राकंकिरणं नष्टतारं A AAA:
न तां भद्रपदां सन्ये यत्र देवो न वर्षति usu

The Wind Circle XXVII 273
If the sky be bereft of the rays of the Sun, the Moon and the
stars, and if there be no rain, then, I think, the month cannot be
called Bhadrapada.
[Ihe verse in the Anustubh metre is Anarsa or spurious
according to the commentator.]
ऐशानो यदि शीतलोऽमरगणैः संसेव्यमानो भवेत्
पुन्नागागरुपारिजातसुरभिर्वायुः प्रचण्डध्वनिः i
भ्रापुर्णोदकयौवना वसुमती सम्पन्नसस्याकुला
घर्मिष्ठाः प्रणातारयो नृपतयो रक्षन्ति वर्शास्तदा ULU
If the north-easterly wind be cool, scented by the flowers of
Punnaga, Agaru and Parijata, be sonorous and be enjoyed by
groups of celestials, the earth filled with the youth of water would
be rich in food crops, and kings would control their rivals and protect all classes of people with the utmost justice.
[This verse in the शादलविक्रीडित metre is not found in the
Benares edition. When the poet has qualified the Earth as उदकयौवना, I do not understand why he has not given the epithet as
सम्पन्नसस्यांशुका.]

सद्योबषरणाध्यायः ॥ २८॥
Chapter XXVILI—Signs of Immediate Rain
वर्षाप्रश्ने सलिलनिलयं राशिमाश्रित्य चन्द्रो
लग्नं यातो भवति यदि वा केन्द्रगः शुक्लपक्षे ।
सोम्यह ष्ट: प्रचुरमुदकं पापहष्टोऽल्पमम्भः
घ्रावृशकाले सृजति न चिराच्चन्द्रव:्भागंबोड5पि uqu
If, ata query regarding rain, the Moon be posited in the
ascendant which happens to be a watery Sign (Cancer, Capricorn
or Pisces), or in the 4th, 7th or 10th house from the Lagna in the
bright fortnight, there would be copious rain ere long in the monsoon, provided she is aspected by benefics (Mercury, Jupiter and
Venus). If she be aspected by malefics in the above yogas, there
would be very little rain. (If she be aspected by both benefics and
malefics, there would be ordinary rain). In predicting rain, Venus
should be treated just like the Moon under similar circumstances.
[Here the commentator raises an objection to the apparent
contradiction in the text : The Moon in the Lagna or a Kendra.
Is not the Lagna a Kendra? The author's idea is that the Moon
should be only in the Lagna-Kendra in the dark fortnight, whereas
in the bright fortnight she may be even in another Kendra, provided it is a Watery Sign, for making the above prediction.
Though all the editions read quf प्रश्ने I feel it is a misprint for
वषप्रश्ने. For, the word quf: means ‘rainy season? which is not intended here as the author mentions it in the 4th line : प्रावृट्काले.
Cf. the समाससंहिता--
वर्षप्रइने प्रावृषि जलराशौ कण्टके शशी बलवान् |
भृगुजो वा शुभद्ष्टो बहुजलकृत् स्वल्पदः dT: di
The metre is मन्दाक्रान्ता in this and the following verse.]

Signs of Immediate Rain XXVIII 275
WU द्रव्यं स्पृशति यदि वा वारि तत्सञ्ज्ञकं वा
तोयासन्नो भवति यदि वा तोयकार्योन्मुखो वा ।
NET वाच्यः सलिलमचिरादस्ति निःसंशयेन
पृच्छाकाले सलिलमिति वा श्रूयते यत्र शब्द: ॥२॥
If the questioner touches any wet object, or water or any
object having a name similar to that of water (like milk, pearl etc.),
or stands near water or is about to do something connected with
water, or if at the time the word ‘water’ is heard in the place, then
he should be told that there would be rain almost immediately without any doubt.
(Cf. the समाससंहिता--
आद्रंद्रव्यं सलिलं जलसज्ञश्रवणादर्शनान्यथवा 01]
उदयशिखरिसंस्थो दुनिरीक्ष्योऽति दीप्त्या
द्रुतकनकनिकाशः स्निग्धवेदू्यकान्तिः à
तदहनि कुरुतेऽम्भस्तोयकाले विवस्वान्
प्रतपति यदि चोच्चे: खं गतोऽतीव तीक्ष्णम् ॥३॥
If, in the rainy season, the Sun, even while rising, cannot be
looked at on account of his dazzling brilliance and appear like
molten gold, or possess the pure lustre of beryl, or if he burns with
intense heat at the Zenith of the sky, there would be rain on the
very same day.
[Cf. ^ Kalidasa's statement: “दिवस इवाभ्रशयामस्तपात्यये
जीवलोकस्य 1"
The metre is मालिनी.]
विरसमुदकं गोनेत्राभं वियद्विमला दिशो
लवणविकृतिः काकाण्डाभं यदा च AXAN: |
पवनविगमः पोप्लूयन्ते कषा: स्थलगामिनो
रसनमसकृन्मण्डूकानां जलागमहेतवः UY
The following are the indications of rain: Tasteless Water,
the sky with the colour of cow’s eyes or crow’s eggs (white and
blue), the quarters being uncontaminated, salt becoming moist,
subdued wind, much tumbling of fishes ashore and the repeated
croakings of frogs. ea
[These symptoms are familiar even to rustics of India. The
metre of the verse is. हरिणी.]

276 Brhat Samhita
मार्जारा भूशसर्वान नखेलिखन्तो
लोहानां मलनिचयः सविस्रगन्धः ।
रथ्यायां शिशुरचिताइच सेतुबन्धाः
सम्प्राप्तं जलमचि रान्तिवेदय न्ति nuu
Immediate rain is indicated by cats scratching the ground
vehemently with their nails, accumulation of rust on iron or bronze
vessels with the smell of raw meat or fish, and construction of
bridges on the roads by children.
[In the third line शिशुनिचिताश्च is another reading.
The metre is प्रहाषणी.]
गिरयोऽ्जनच्षुरांसम्निभा यदि वा बाष्पनिरुद्धकन्दराः ।
कृकवाकुविलोचनोपसाः परिवेषाः शशिनइच वृष्टिदाः ॥६॥
Mountains looking like heaps of collyrium or their caves
wrapt in vapour, and haloes round the Moon with the colour of
cock’s eyes (deep red), are symptoms of rain.
[The commentator says : कृकवाकोजेलकुक्कुटस्य याद्ग् विलोचनम्
The metre is वियोगिनी.]
विनोपघातेन पिपीलिकानामण्डोपसडःक्रान्तिरहिव्यवाय: i
द्रमावरोहृरच भुजङ्गमानां वृष्टेनिमित्तानि गवां प्लुतं च ॥७॥
Other indications of rain are the following: Ants shifting
their eggs without any trouble, mating of snakes, climbing down
the trees by snakes and cows’ leaping.
[The metre is उपजाति.]
तरुशिखरोपगताः कृकलासा गगनतलस्थितहृष्टिनिपाताः ।
यदि च गवां रविवीक्षणापुध्वं निपतति वारि तदा न चिरेण nen
If the chameleons perched on the tops af trees fix their gaze
on the firmament, and cows (or bulls) look up towards the Sun,
there will be rain ere long.
[It is accepted by scientists that certain animals have uncanny
powers of fore-knowledge of coming events. Nowadays the police
department employs dogs in tracking criminals.
The metre is तामरस.]
नेच्छन्ति विनिगेमं गृहाद्धन्वन्ति श्रवणान् खुरानपि i
पशवः पशुवच्च कुक्कुरा AMSA: पततीति निर्दिशेत् ven
If the domestic animals like cows are unwilling to go out of

Signs of Immediate Rain XXVIII 277
the house and shake their ears and hoofs, or if the dogs behave in
the same manner, it should be declated that there will be rain
soon.
[The author uses the word श्रवण, which is generally used in
the neuter gender, in the masculine.
The metre is बँतालीय.]
यदा स्थिता गृहपटलेषु कुक्कुरा रुदन्ति वा यदि विततं वियन्मुखाः ।
दिवा तडिद्यदि च पिनाकिदिग्भवा तदा क्षमा भवति ada वारिणा ॥१०॥
When dogs stand on the roofs of houses, or bark continuously
looking up towards the sky, or when lightning appears in the northeast at day-time, then the earth will be submerged in water.
[The metre is रुचिरा. ]
शुककपोतविलोचनसन्निभो मधुनिभश्च यदा हिसदोधिति: ।
प्रतिशशो च यदा दिवि राजते पतति वारि तदा न चिरेण च nggu
When the Moon appears with the red hue of the eyes of a
parrot or pigeon or of honey, and when a second Moon shines in
the sky, there will be immediate rain.
[The metre is द्रतविलम्बित.]
स्तनितं निशि विद्युतो दिवा रुधिरनिभा यदि दण्डवत्स्थिताः à
पवनः पुरतश्च शीतलो यदि सलिलस्य तदाऽऽगमो भवेत् ॥१२॥
If there be peals of thunder at night and blood-red streaks
of lightning standing erect like rods at day-time, and if there be a
cool breeze blowing from the east, there would soon be rain.
[The metre is वेतालीय.]
बल्लोनां गगनतलोन्मुखाः प्रवालाः
स्नायन्ते यदि जलपाँसुर्भिवहङ्काः i
सेवन्ते यदि च सरीसूपास्तृराग्रा-
ण्यासन्नो भवति तदा जलस्य पातः ॥१३॥
If the sprouts of creepers are turned up towards the sky, birds
bathe in water or dust, and reptiles or worms are seated on the |
tips of grass, there will be an immediate fall of rain.
[For the sake of metre the author uses the root sup in आत्मनेपद
instead of परस्मंपद.
The metre is प्रहाषणी.]

278 Brhat Samhita
सयूरशुकचाषचातकससानवर्खा यदा
जपाकुसुमपड्ूजद्युतिमुषश्च सन्ध्याघनाः d
जलोशिनगनक्रकच्छपवराहमोनोपसा:
प्रभूतपुटसञ्चया न तु चिरेण यच्छन्त्यपः ॥१४॥
If the clouds at dawn or twilight possess the same colour as
peacocks, parrots, blue-jays or Cataka birds, or have the lustre of
roses and red lotuses and resemble in shape waves, hills, crocodiles,
tortoises, or fishes, and are piled up in many layers, they will pour
down rain before long.
[Here the poet uses his descriptive powers very effectively. He
employs Homeric similes here.
The metre 1s पृथ्वी. |
पर्यन्तेषु सुधाशशा डूःधवला मध्येऽञ्जनालित्विषः
स्निग्धा नैकपुटाः क्षरज्जलकणाः सोपानविच्छेदिनः |
साहेर्ट्रीप्रभवाः प्रयान्त्यपरतः प्रपग्वाम्बुपाशो Gat
ये ते वारिसुचध्त्यजन्ति न farnar: प्रभूतं भुवि utu
Ifthe clouds are as white as chunam or the Moon at the
edges as dark as collyrium, or the bees at the centre, glossy, have
many layers, dropping particles of water, and are cut up like the
steps of a staircase, and being formed in the east sail westward or
vice versa, they will drench the earth ere long with plentiful rain.
[We can say that the author is engaged in writing a poem on
the clouds in this section.
The metre is are afanifed. |
शक्रचापपरिघप्रतिसुर्या रोहितोऽथ तडितः परिवेषः ।
उद्गमास्तसमये यदि भानोरादिशेत्प्रचुरमम्बु तदाशु ॥१६॥
If at the time of sunrise or sunset there be a rainbow, a cross
bar of clouds, a mock Sun, a straight fragmentary rainbow, flashes
of lightning, and haloes round the Sun and the Moon, it should be
predicted that there will be plentiful rain in the near future.
[There are three technical terms used in this verse viz. परिघ,
रोहित and परिवेष. These are explained in order in XLVII—19, 20
and XXXIV —1 infra.
The metre is स्वागता.]
यदि तित्तिरपत्रनिभं गगनं मुदिताः प्रवदन्ति च पक्षिगणाः |
उदयास्तमये afage faa विसुजन्ति घना न चिरेण जलम् ute
If the sky is variegated like the feathers of the Tittira bird,

Signs of Immediate Rain XXVIII 279
and groups of birds twitter merrily at sunrise or sunset, then the
clouds will pour down rain soon by day and night respectively.
[The commentator says “ग्रनार्षो$्यं pm: i.e. it is spurious, or
one not based on ancient authority.
The metre is तोटक. ]
यद्य मोघकि रणाः सहस्रगोरस्तभूधरकरा इवोच्छ्रिताः d
भुसमं च रसते यदास्बरुदस्तन्महडूवति वृष्टिलक्षणम् ॥१५॥
If the Sun’s rays called Amogha—Unerring—are stretched
upwards like the outstreched arms of the Setting Mountain, and if the
clouds thunder close to the earth,. they are sure signs of heavy
rains.
[For the definition of Amogha vide XXX-11 and XLVII-20
infra. The expression रसते is un-Paninian.
The metre is रथोद्धता.
Cf. the समाससं हिता--
पृच्छाकाले शान्ता वारुणदिक्स्था विहङ्गा वा |
दर्पणलोहकलङ्को लवणक््लेदो$तितीक्ष्णाकिरणो$के: ॥
पोप्लूयन्ते मत्स्या दिश्येशान्यां तडिच्च दिवा i
उत्क्णेपुच्छवदना गावस्तापोऽम्भसां पवननाशः ॥
्ञ्जनपुञ्जश्यामा गिरयो बाष्पातृता यदि वा ।
यदि जलपांसुस्नानं विहगानां qaq द्विजिह्वानाम् 1
वृक्षारोहणमथवा पिपीलिकाण्डोपसङ्क्रान्तिः |
कृकवाकुशुककपोतकलविद्कूविलो चनोऽकन्द्रोः ॥
स्निग्धः परिवेषो वा वियदमलं बालकतिमित्तम् |
ges शीतांशुः प्रतिचन्द्रः शीतमारुत: पूर्वः U
ऊर्ध्वाङ्कुराश्च वल्ल्यः सद्योवर्षाय कीत्येन्ते |
स्निग्धाः समसितरेखा यथा भ्रवृन्दानि कल्पितान्येव ॥
यच्छन्त्यपो मयूखा यदि चेन्दोर्वा रवेर्दोप्ताः ॥
In verse 7 supra the author states “द्रुमाव रोहुश्च भुजङ्गमानां ,
but in the समाससं हिता he says ‘वृक्षा रोहणम् - Even the COD
interprets the former as वृक्षाव रोहणम् I feel that the reading of the
समासस हिता is the correct one inasmuch as the snakes being unable
to bear the heat may climb trees in order to get some relief. It is to
be noted that snakes generally do not climb trees, except some
varieties.

280 Brhat Samhita
Cf. also पराशर--
बलवत्सु महद्वर्ष मल्पेष्वल्पाम्बुशीक रम् |
मध्येषु मध्यमं ब्रूयान्निमित्तेषु निमित्तवत् ॥
उल्कानिर्घातभूकम्पपांसुवर्षाणि केतवः |
अपसब्या ग्रहाश्चेव नित्यं वर्षासु agar: 1]
प्रावृषि शोतकरो भृगुपुत्रात्सप्तमराशिगतः शुभदृष्टः ।
सू यंसुतान्नवपञ्चमगो वा सप्तमगइच जला5ऽगमनाय ॥१६॥
If the Moon occupying the 7th house from Venus, or the 5th,
7th or 9th house from Saturn, is aspected by benefics during the
rainy season, there will be rain soon.
[This verse must be read along with the first verse of this
chapter. This is a popular verse often quoted by astrologers.
The metre is दोघक.]
प्रायो ग्रहाणामुदयास्तकाले समागमे मण्डलसङ्क्रमे च ।
पक्षक्षये तीक्ष्एकरायनान्ते वृष्टिगतेऽकं नियमेन चार्द्राम् ॥२०॥
Generally there will be rain at the heliacal rising and setting
of the planets, at the conjunction of the non-luminaries with the
Moon, at their entering any of the six Mandalas, at the end of a
fortnight and a solstice, and undoubtedly when the Sun passes
through the asterism Ardrz,
[For an explanation of the Mandalas vide IX. 10 to 20 supra.
The metre 1s उपजाति ]
समागमे पतति जलं ज्ञ्ुक्रयोज्ञंजीवयोगुरुसितयोरच AGA ।
यमारयोः पवनहुताशजं भयं ह्यहृष्टयोरसहितयोइच सद्ग्रहैः URL
There will be rain at the conjuction of Mercury and Venus,
of Mercury and Jupiter, and of Jupiter and Venus. At the conjunction, however, of Mars and Saturn there will be great peril arising
from wind and fire, provided they are neither conjoined with nor
aspected by any of the benefics.
[What would happen if at the conjunction of benefics mentioned here, there be malefic aspect or conjunction ? Evidently there
cannot be a good rain.
The metre is रुचिरा.)
aaa: पृष्ठतो वापि ग्रहाः सुर्यावलस्बिन: ।
यदा तदा प्रकुर्वन्ति महीमेकार्णवामिव ॥२२॥
When the planets are about to be eclipsed by the Sun in front

Sings of Immediate XXVIII 281
or behind (slower planets in front and faster ones behind) they help
in turning the earth into an ocean, as it were.
[Since the author has already mentioned this subject in verse
20 supra, the special reference to combustion here suggests that when
many planets get eclipsed almost simultaneously there will be a near
deluge.
प्रविशति यदि खद्योतो जलदसमोपेषु रजनीषु |
केदारपुरमघिकं वर्षति देवस्तदा न चिरात् ॥२३॥
वर्षत्यपि रटति यदा गोमायुइच प्रदोषवेलायाम् ।
सप्ताहं दुदिनमपि तदा पयो नात्र सन्देहः ॥२४॥
If there be glowworms at night near the clouds, there would
be rain ere long flooding all the fields. In spite of rains if jackals
how] in the evening, there will not be a drop of rain, though the
sky is overcast for a week at a stretch. This is certain.
[These two verses were evidently added after Bhattotpala had
written his Vivrti on this work. In the last verse to get at the intended meaning we have to take the negative particle “न? with both
the preceding and following words.]

कुसुमलताध्याय: NEN
Chapter XXIX—Prognostics from Flowers and Creepers
Regarding plants and prognostics see the ‘Reader’s Digest’,
May 1972, pp. 70-72, “Do Plants Have Feelings" by James Lincoln
Collier, who refers to the experiments conducted by Backster and
other scientists with the polygraph. These experiments show that
even modern science has come to believe that plants have feelings,
can read man’s thoughts and forecast coming events.
फलकुसुमसम्प्रव॒द्धि वनस्पतीनां विलोक्य fastu i
सुलभत्वं द्रव्याणां निष्पत्तिश्चापि सस्यानाम् ॥१॥
By observing the abundant growth of flowers and fruits of
trees, the availability of all things in large quantities at cheap rates
should be ascertained; so is the excellent growth of crops.
[The author means to say that by seeing luxuriant growth of
flowers or fruits on a certain kind of trees you can predict bumper
crops of a particular cereal or pulse. This fact will be clear from
the next verse. ]
शालेन कलमशाली रक्ताशोकेन रक्तशालिइच ।
पाण्डूकः क्षीरिकया नीलाशोकेन सुकरकः UR
Through the (luxuriant growth of flowers and fruits of the)
Sala tree, the prospects of the Kalama rice are to be determined;
through the red Asoka, red rice; through the Ksirika, yellow rice;
and through the blue Asoka, hog's rice.
न्यग्रोधेन तु यवकस्तिन्दुकवृद्धया च षष्टिको भवति ।
mada ज्ञेया निष्पत्तिः सवंसस्यानास् usu
Through the banyan tree, the crop of yavaka should be prognosticated; through the ebony tree, the Sastika rice; and through
the sacred tree Asvattha, the growth of all crops in general.
[Sastika isa kind of paddy that ripensin 60 days. Yavaka
1s a corn different from yava. Vide Panini V. 2-3.]
जम्वूमिस्तिलमाषा: शिरोषवद्धया च कडगुनिष्पत्ति: ।
गोधूमाऱ१च मधुकंयंववृद्धिः; सप्तपर्णेन ॥४॥ -
Through the Jambi fruits (Rose-apples) the growth of sesamum and black gram is ascertained; through the excellent growth

Prognostics from Flowers and Creepers XXIX 283
of Sirisa the success of Priyangu (panic seed) is assessed; through
the Madhüka trees, of wheat, and through the Saptaparna, of
barley.
[Ksirasvàmin explains Madhüka thus : गुडवन्मधुराणि पुष्पाण्यस्य
गुडपुष्पः | मधुप्रधानो द्रुमः मधुद्रुमः 1]
श्रतिमुक्तककुन्दाम्यां कर्पासं सर्षपान् वदेदसनैः |
बदरीभिश्च कुलत्थांश्चिरबिल्वेनादिशञन्मुद्गान् ॥५॥
The prospects of cotton crop are to be declared from the
Alimuktaka tree and the Kunda jasmine flowers; those of mustard,
from the Asana trees; those of horse-gram, from the jujube fruits;
and those of green gram, from the Cirabilva (black silk-cotton).
भ्रतसी वेतसपुष्पः पलाशकुसुमेशच कोद्रवा ज्ञेयाः ।
तिलकेन शट्डूमो क्तिकरजतान्यथ चेङ्गुदेन शराः usu
Atasi (linseed) is to be determined from the flowers of the
Vetasa tree; Kodrava (a kind of grain), from the flowers of the Palaía
tree; conch shells, pearls and silver, from the Tilaka tree; and hemp,
from the /ngudi tree.
करिणइच हस्तिकर्णरादेश्या वाजिनो5श्वकर्णन ।
गावश्च पाटलाभिः कदलीभिरजाविक भवति non
The welfare and price of elephants should be read from the
Hastikarna trees; those of horses, from the A$vakarna; those of cows
from the Patala trees (trumpet flower); and those of goats and
sheep, from the banana plants.
चस्पककुसुसेः कनक' विद्रमसम्पच्च बन्धुजीवेन ।
कुरवकवृद्धया वज्त्र वंदूर्यं नन्दिकावत्ते usu
The abundance and cheapness of gold is to be inferred from
the Campaka flowers; those of corals, from the Bandhujiva flowers;
those of diamonds from the growth of Kuravaka trees (crimson
variety of amaranth); and those of Vaidirya (beryl) from the
Nandikavarta trees.
विन्द्याच्च सिन्धुवारेण मौक्तिक कारुकाः कुसुम्भेन ।
रक्तोत्पलेन राजा मन्त्री नीलोत्पलेनोक्तः: net
The prospects of pearls are to be ascertained from the Sindhuvara tree; those of artisans, from saffron; those of the king, from red
lotuses; and those of the minister, from blue lilies.

284 Brhat Samhita
श्रेष्ठी सुवणंपुष्पात्पदमं वप्राः पुरोहिताः कुमुदैः |
सौगन्धिकेन बलपतिरक णा हिरण्यपरिवृद्धिः ॥ १०॥
Traders luck is judged from Suvarnapuspa (golden flower);
Brahmanas, from lotuses; royal priests, from lilies; the commanderin-chief of the army, from the Saugandhika flower; and the increase
of gold, from the Arka plant.
ग्राम्र: क्षेमं भल्लातकेर्भयं पीलुमिस्तथारोग्यस् |
खदिरशमीभ्यां दुर्भिक्षमर्जुन: शोमना afe: ॥११॥
One should infer the happiness of mankind from mangoes;
danger, from Bhallataka; health, from Pilu; famine from the growth
of Khadira and Sami trees; and good rain, from the Arjuna trees.
पिचुमन्दनागकुसुमेः सुभिक्षमथ मारुतः कपित्थेन ।
निचुलेनावृष्टिभयं व्याधिभयं भवति कुटजेन ॥१२॥
From the flowers of the Neem tree and JVagakesara, abundance
of food grains can be predicted; from the wood-apple, wind; from
the Nicula tree, danger of drought; and from the Kufaja tree, threat
of diseases.
दूर्वाकुशकुसुमाभ्यामिक्षवंह्िश्च कोविदारेण ।
इयामालताभिवृद्धया बन्धक्यो वृद्धिमायान्ति ॥१३॥
The thriving of sugar-cane is presaged by the flowers of
Dürva grass and the sacred grass; outbreak of fires, by the Kovidara
tree; and the increase and prosperity of concubines, by the growth
of the Syamà creeper.
यस्मिनु काले स्निग्धनिहिछद्रपत्राः सन्हइयन्ते वृक्षगुल्मा लताश्च ।
तस्मिन्वृष्टिः शोभना सम्प्रदिष्टा रुक्षेर्छिद्रेरल्पमम्भः प्रदिष्टम् ॥१४॥
When trees, bushes and creepers are seen fully packed with
green glossy leaves without any interspace, good rains are to be
predicted; whereas if the leaves be rough leaving inter-spaces, very
little rain should be declared.
[The commentator was silent upto the previous verse about
ancient authorities, and now he quotes पराशर under this Sloka :
भ्रच्छिद्रपत्रा: सुस्निग्धा: फलपुष्पसमन्विता: |
fafafa शुभं वृक्षा विपरीतं विगहिताः ॥
Jt is possible that Bhattotpala had no access to any ancient texts
bearing on this subject except the one verse quoted here.
The metre is शालिनी.].

सत्ध्यालक्षणाध्याय: ॥३०॥
Chapter X XX —Indications at Dawn and Twilight
ग्रद्धस्तिमितानुदितात् सूर्यादस्पष्टभं नभो यावत् ।
तावत् सन्ध्याकालश्चिह्नं रेते: फलं चास्मिन् ॥ १॥
The interval between the periods when the Sun is half-set and
when the stars have not yet become distinct, is called a juncture
i.e. the evening twilight. Similarly that between the periods when
the stars have become dim or indistinct and when the Sun is halfrisen is called dawn. The effects—good and bad—of the juncture are
to be judged from the following indications.
[CE एता
ग्रहोरात्रस्य यः सन्धिः सा च सन्ध्या प्रकोतिता ।
द्विनाडिका भवेत्साधुर्यावदाज्योति दशनम् ॥
According to याज्ञवल्क्य सन्ध्या lasts for one Wed only.]
मृगशकुनिपवनर्पारवेषपरिधिपरिधाभ्रवृक्षपुरचापे: ।
गन्धर्वनगररविकरदण्डरज:स्नेहवर्णेशच ॥२॥
The effects of Sandhya i.e. juncture, should be determined
through the deer, birds, wind, halo round the Sun and the Moon,
mock Sun or Moon, a cross-bar of clouds on the Sun’s disc at a
juncture, tree-shaped clouds and rain-bow as well as through the
glossiness of an apparent town in the sky, Sun's rays, a rod-like
formation caused by the combination of solar rays, clouds and wind,
and dust.
(The commentator takes the word gaq: — by the oily appearance — as applicable to each member of the compound गऱ्धर्वं***
रजसाम. I may suggest another interpretation by adding स्नेहवर्णे:
to the Dvandva as another member. It should then mean : Through
...dust and the colours of oils.]
भेरवमुच्चेविरुवन् मृगो5सकृद्प्रामघातमाचणष्टे ।
रविदीप्तो दक्षिणतो महास्वनः सेन्यघातकर: ॥३॥
A wild animal (or deer) dreadfully howling aloud repeatedly,
indicates the destruction of the village. The same facing the Sun,

286 Brhat Samhita
standing to the south of an army and crying aloud, foretells the
annihilation of the army.
ग्रपसब्ये सङ्ग्रामः सव्ये सेनासमागमः शान्ते ।
मृगचक्रे पवने वा सन्ध्यायां सिश्रगे वृष्टिः usu
If at a juncture (dawn or twilight) a flock of deer (or animals)
or the wind be to the left of an army (and be facing the Sun), a
war would break out; if it be to the right of the army, cries pleasantly (and is not facing the Sun), the two armies would come
together; if it be of mixed characteristics, there would be rain.
[The mixed conditions are (i) The flock being to the left of
the army but cries pleasantly and is not facing the Sun, and (1) it
being to the right of the army but facing the Sun.]
दीप्तमृगाण्डजविरुता प्राक सन्ध्या देशनाइासाख्याति ।
दक्षिरादिक्स्थेविरुता ग्रहणाय पुरस्य दोप्तास्ये: nu
If at dawn there be awkward cries of birds and beasts facing
the Sun, it forebodes the destruction of the country. If these with
their faces glowing in the sun send forth their cries, standing to the
south of a city, the latter will be captured by the enemies.
गृहतरुतोरणमथने सपांसुलोष्टोत्करेऽनिले प्रबले ।
भैरवरावे रूक्ष खगपातिनि चाशुभा सन्ध्या ॥६॥
A dawn or twilight would be of disastrous consequences, if at
the time astrong and rough wind be blowing, making a howling
noise, crushing houses, trees and arches, raising heaps of dust and
clouds of earth, and throwing down birds from the sky.
सन्दपवनावघट्टितचलितपलाश्द्रुमा विपवना वा i
मधुरस्वरशान्तविहड्भमृगरुता पुजिता सन्ध्या ॥७॥
A dawn or twilight would prove auspicious and beneficial, if
the leaves of trees be slightly shaken by the impact of gentle breeze
or if there be no stir in the wind at all and if animals and birds,
not facing the Sun, send forth their melodious cries.
[Dipta and Santa are technical terms. The former means the
direction illumined or heated by the Sun, and the latter, just the
opposite. So in the forenoon the west and the creatures standing in
that direction become Dipta, while the east and those standing
there become Santa in the afternoon. For another definition of Difta
vide LXXXVI-12 infra.)

Indications at Dawn and Twilight XXX 287
सन्ध्याकाले स्निग्धा दण्डतडिन्मत्स्यपरिधिपरिवेषाः à
सुरपतिचापेरं रावतरविकिरणाश्चाशु वृष्टिकराः ॥८॥
The following things being glossy at a juncture, betoken immediate rain : Danda (a rod-like formation caused by the combination
of sun-beams, clouds and wind), lightning, fish-like formations of
clouds, a mock sun, a halo, a rainbow, Airdvata (along fragmentary
rainbow) and the sun’s rays.
[There are many technical terms in this stanza. For Danda
vide verse 16 infra; for Paridhi, and Airavata vide XLVII 19.20; P
Parivesa vide XXXIV-1.]
विच्छिन्नविषमविध्वस्तविकृतकुटिलापसव्यपरिवृत्ता: i
तनुहस्वविकलकलुषाश्र विग्रहावृष्टिदाः किरणाः neu
The Sun’s rays, which are broken off, unequal, discoloured,
unnatural, crooked, turned anti-clockwise, slender, short, impaired
and soiled (not bright) cause war and drought.
[In the second line there isa metrical error as g in @& is
taken as a simple consonant while it is actually a conjunct one.
According to Pingala it is optionally treated as single consonant.]
उद्द्योतिनः प्रसन्ना ऋजवो दीर्घाः प्रदक्षिणावर्ताः
किरणाः शिवाय जगतो वितमस्के नभसि भानुमतः ॥१०॥
The Sun’s rays, which are brilliant, pure, straight, long and
turned ina clock-wise direction, and which are seen in a bright
sky, presage prosperity to the world.
शुक्लाः करा दिनकृतो दिवाविमध्यान्तगामिनः स्निग्धाः ।
ग्रव्युच्छिन्ना ऋजवो वृष्टिकरास्ते त्वमोघाख्याः ॥११॥
The Sun’s rays which are white, glossy, unbroken and straight,
and which pervade the entire region of the firmament (from the
beginning to the end), are termed Amogha ‘Unerring’. Such rays
indicate good rain.
कल्माषबभ्र कपिला विचित्रमाजिष्ठहरितशबलाभा: |
त्रिदिवानुबन्धिनोऽवृष्टयेऽल्पभयदास्तु सप्ताहात् ॥१२॥
Rays that are greyish, tawny, russet, variegated, madder-hued,
green and spotted, and stretch all over the sky (and are turned
upwards) are productive of drought and some danger after a
week,
[In the first line शबला वा is another reading. ]

988 Brhat Samhita
ताम्रा बलपतिमृत्यूं पीतारुणसन्निभाश्व qEWSU |
हरिता: पशुसस्यवधं घूमसवर्णा गवां नाशम् utu
साञ्जिष्ठाभाः शस्त्राग्निसम्भ्रमं बभ्रवः पवन वृष्टिम् ।
भस्मसहशास्त्वर्वृष्ट तनुभावं शबलकल्माषाः ॥१४॥
Copper-coloured rays of the Sun bring about a general's
death; yellow and rosy ones, his misery (or danger from diseases);
green ones, the destruction of cattle and crops; smoky ones, the
ruin of cows; madder-coloured rays cause trouble through clash of
arms and fires; tawny ones, stormy rain; ash-coloured ones, drought;
and spotted and greyish ones, slight rain (or emaciation).
[रुग्व्यसनम् is another reading for तद्व्यसनम्. The commentator
interprets तनुभावं as slightness of rain by supplying the word as¢:. Had
it been the author’s intention, he would have plainly used the
expression तनुवृष्टिम् without harming the metre. Hence I feel that the
expression should mean general debility or emaciation of people.
In this section the author shows his familiarity with the use of
several colours viz. शुक्ल, कल्माष, बभ्रु, कपिल, विचित्र, भाञ्जिष्ठ, हरित, शबल. ताम्र
पीत, mw, घूम, the colour of बंधूकपुष्प and assa. Of these the primary
colours are white, red, yellow, black, blue and green.]
बन्धूकपुष्पाञ्जनच्नुणंसन्निभं सान्ध्यं रजोऽभ्येति यदा दिवाकरम् ।
लोकस्तदा रोगशतेनिपीड्यते शुक्लं रजो लोकविवृद्धिशान्तये uzun
If, ata juncture, dust coloured like the Bandhüka flower
(blood red) or like the collyrium powder goes up towards the Sun
mankind will then be afflicted by innumerable diseases, whereas
white dust, at the time, betokens prosperity, peace and happiness to
mankind
[Cf. पराशर--
बन्धुजीवनिकाशेन तपनीयनिभेन वा |
उदये रजसा सुर्य: संवृतः शस्त्रमाव हेत् ॥
शद्धचूण निकाशेन रजसा संवृतो रविः ।
राज्ञो विजयमाख्याति वृद्धि जनपदस्य च ॥
The metre is इन्द्रवंशा. ]
रविकिरराजलदमरुतां सङ्घातो दण्डवत्स्थितो दण्ड: ।
स विदिक्स्थितो नृपाणामशुभो दिक्ष द्विजादीनाम् ween
The combination of the rays of the Sun, clouds and wind,
appearing in the form of a rod, is called Danda When the Danda

Indications at Dawn and Twilight XXX 289
appears in the intermediate directions, harm would come to the
kings, while in the cardinal directions, it forebodes evil to Brahmanas, Ksatriyas, Vaisyas and Südras respectively.
[The cardinal points are reckoned generally from the north in
the scheme of the classes. According to other commentators, the
rod appearing in any cardinal direction is inauspicious to all twiceborn classes in general.]
शस्त्रभयातडूःकरो EE: प्राङमध्यसन्धिषु दिनस्य ।
शुक्लाद्यो विप्रादीन् यदभिमुखस्तां निहन्ति दिशम् uon
The Rod seen at dawn, noon and twilight causes danger from
weapons i.e., war, and diseases. The same with white, red, yellow
and dark colours destroys the four classes in order. It also destroys
the particular direction which it faces.
[The commentator says thatthat part ofthe Rod which is
close to the Sun is called its bottom and the other end its face.]
दधिसहशाग्रो नीलो भानुच्छादी खमध्यगो5भ्रतरु: |
पीतच्छुरिताश्च घना घनमूला भूरिवृष्टिकरा: ॥१८॥
If a blue cloud with its top resembling curds, being situated
at the Zenith of the sky, screens the Sun, it takes the name of
Abhrataru—Cloud- Tree. If the clouds are tinged yellow, having a
dense bottom, they would produce copious rains.
[The simile दघिसदृशा ग्र is tell-tale and happy. To enjoy this one
must have seen thick curds. Here the commentator does not say
specifically that श्रश्नतरु is the name of a particular formation of clouds,
but the author’s intention is quite clear. Both the types of clouds
mentioned here are good for rain.]
भ्रनुलोमगेऽभ्रवक्षे शमं गते यायिनो नृपस्य वधः |
बालतरुप्रतिरूपिरि युवराजामात्ययोमू त्युः ॥ १९॥
Ifa Cloud-Tree moving in the same direction behind a marching king, disappears suddenly, the king will be killed; while if the
same in the form of a young tree (plant) disappears likewise, the
prince (heir-apparent) and minister will die.
कुवलयवेदूर्याम्बुजकिञ्जल्काभा प्रभञ्जनोन्मुक्ता |
सन्ध्या करोति ate रविकिरणो-द्वासिता सद्यः ॥२०॥
A twilight which has the lustre of blue lily, beryl or lotusfilaments, which is free from strong winds and which is brightened
by the Sun’s rays, produces rain the same day.

Brhat Samhita
प्रशुभाकृतिघनगन्धवंनगरनी हा रघूमपांसुयुता ।
qafa करोत्यवग्रहमन्यत्तौं शस्त्रकोपकरी ॥२१॥
A twilight which possesses clouds of inauspicious forms (like
those of an ass, a camel, a headless trunk, a crow, a cat etc.), an
aerial city, fog, smoke and dust, produces drought in the rainy
season, and clash of arms in other seasons.
शिशिरादिषु amt: शोणपीतसितचित्रपद्मरधिरनिभाः |
प्रकृतिभवाः सन्ध्यायां स्वत्तो शस्ता विकुतिरन्या ॥२२॥
In the six seasons beginning with Sifira or winter the natural
colours of the sky at twilight are in order red, yellow, white, variegated, lotus-coloured (red and white) and crimson (blood-red).
Each colour at twilight is beneficial in its own season, and harmful
if it is contrary.
[Cf. mi—
वसन्ते मधुवर्णाभाऽथवा रुधिरसन्निभा |
ग्रीष्मे श्वेता रजोध्वस्ता पांसुवर्णा च शस्यते ॥
नीललो हितशुक्लाभा सन्ध्या वर्षासु वाषिका |
माञ्जिष्ठवर्णा शरदि पीयूषाभा च हास्यते 1
हेमन्ते ayaqi च पिङ्गला चापि पुजिता ।
शिशिरे शोणवर्णा च सन्ध्या क्षेमसुखप्रदा ॥
स्निग्धा प्रसन्ना विमला सप्रभा नाकुलापि वा |
सन्ध्या यथर्तुवर्णाभा शान्तद्विजमृगा शुभा u]
श्रायुधभून्नररूपं छिन्नाञ्र' परभयाय रविगामि ।
सितखपुरेऽर्काक्रान्ते पुरलाभो भेदने नाशः ॥२३॥
If a broken cloud presents the appearance of an armed person
and is situated close to the Sun, there will be danger to the king
from enemies. If a white aerial city (formed by clouds) is approached by the Sun, the besieged town will be victorious; while if it is
cut into two by the Sun, the town will be destroyed.
[Bhattotpala interprets the second line of the verse differently:
खर्काक्रान्ते is rendered by him as the aerial city ‘by which the Sun is
attacked’, but the natural interpretation would be—‘which is attacked by the Sun’. For, we know that a city is attacked or besieged
by an enemy king. पुरलाभ: is also rendered differently by him: येन
उर नगरमाक्रान्तं तस्य लाभो भवति. This is a far-fetched construction: Here
पुरलाभर simply means, the victory of the defenders of the city. In the

Indications at Dawn and Twilight XXX 291
next sentence he reverts to the natural construction as, “'अर्केण यदि
मध्यात् खपुरं भिद्यते तदा पुरस्य नाश: 177]
सितसितान्तघनावरणं रवेर्भवति वृष्टिकरं यदि सव्यतः |
यदि च वीरणागुल्मनिभैर्घतेदिवसमभर्तृरदीप्तदिगु-्भवेः ॥२४॥
If the Sun be screened on the right side by clouds that are
white or white-fringed, there would be rain. The same result would
ensue, if he be screened likewise by clouds which resemble bushes
of Andropogon grass, and which arise in an unblasted (not heated
by the Sun) quarter.
[The metre is द्रुतविलम्बित in this and the following two verses].
नृपविपत्तिकरः परिघः सितः क्षतजतुल्यवपुर्बलको पृत् |
कनकरूपधरो बलवृद्धिदः सवितुरुदृगमकालसमुत्थितः ॥२५॥
A white cross-bar of clouds appearing at sunrise will be disastrous to the king; a blood-red one will ruin the army through
internal dissensions; and one with a golden hue will bestow prosperity and victory on the army.
उभयपाश्वंगतो परिधी रवेः प्रचुरतोयकरो वपुषान्वितौ i
प्रथ समस्तककुप्परिचारिणः परिधयोऽस्ति कणोऽपि न वारिणः ॥२६॥
If there be mock suns touching the sun on both sides, there
would be abundant rain. Should they surround the Sun on all the
four sides, not a drop of rain would fall.
ध्वजातपत्रपर्वंतविपाइवरूपधारिणः ।
जयाय सन्ध्ययोघंना WUT रक्तसन्निभाः ॥२७॥
पलालधूमसञ्चयस्थितोपमा बलाहकाः ।
बलान्यरूक्षमुत्त॑यो faasafe YA NISN
विलम्बिनो द्रुमोपमाः खरारुणाप्रकाशिनः ।
घनाः शिवाय सन्ध्ययोः पुरोपमाः शुभावहाः NREN
At the two junctures the clouds that resemble a banner,
umbrella, mountain, elephant, and horse conduce to the victory of
kings as well as the people; while blood-red ones tend to war. Those
that look like the mass of smoke rising from straw-fire and are smooth
in appearance, cause the prosperity of the armies ‘of kings. Those
clouds which hang low, resemble trees, shine brightly with their
deep red colour or look like towns, will bestow prosperity.
[The metre is प्रमागाका.]

292 Brhat Samhita
दीप्तविहङ्गशिवामृगघुष्टा दण्डरजःपरिघादियुता < |
प्रत्यहमकविकारयुता वा देशनरेशसुभिक्षवधाय ॥३०॥
At a juncture if birds, jackals and beasts that face the Sun cry
out, if there be the Rod, dust, cross-bar and the like, or if the Sun
appears in an unnatural form everyday, the country, king and the
crops would be destroyed.
[Cf. पराशर
gag सन्ध्यासु द्वियोजनान्तरे देशे सद्यः फलमादिशेत् | रङ्मिसंयुक्तायां तु
सप्त रात्रनिवाते निर्मलस्निग्धायां ` शान्तमृगद्विजायां प्रसन्नायामनुपहतायां सन्ध्यायां
योगक्षेमं विन्द्याद्विपर्ययं विपरीतायाम् । इवेतायां वसुवृर्द्धि तस्यामेव परिमण्डलायां
रक्तायाम् । हरितायां शस्त्रकोपम् । माञ्जिष्ठायामग्नि पीतायां चतुःपाद्रोगं श्यावायां
चौरतो भयम् । नीलपीतायामीति गवाम् । हरितालवर्णायां प्रथमामात्यस्य शस्त्रेण
वधम् । ग्राम्रकोरकवर्णायां qd नीलरक्तायामवग्रह च कृष्णायामवर्षम् | श्यावकृष्णगौर्या पशुघातं विन्द्यात् । वातं कपिलायामस्तमितमात्रे qu याऽतिमात्रश्रकाशा स्यात्
प्रभा सा नाम तस्यां वर्ष विन्द्यात् । प्रत्युषसि तद्रूपायामेव राज्ञः सेनापतेर्वा वध:
स्यात् । महावर्षं रूप्यवर्णायां च तस्यामेव ताञ्रमध्यायां कृष्णायामनृतौ वर्षमृताववग्रहम् । तथा पीतमाञ्जिष्ठा भ्रग्निजीविनां वधाय। लोहितश्यावा चौरवृद्धये। सर्वा
एव च त्रिगात्राः पञ्चरागा वा युद्धाय यच्चालोहितेनेव लिम्पेत्तस्य वधाय । स्निग्धा तु
गौरी योगक्षेमाय भवति चात्र |
प्रतिसूर्यः शक्रधनुर्दण्डकः परिवेषणम् |
तर्थेरावतमत्स्याश्च स्निग्धा ये चार्क रश्मयः ॥
विद्युतो भूरिकाराश्च वर्णा ये च प्रदक्षिणाः ।
सन्ध्यासु यदि इश्यन्ते सद्यो वर्षणलक्षणाम् ॥
Cf. also काइयप--
दिनरात्र्यन्तरं सन्ध्या सुर्यस्यार्द्ध प्रदश्यते ।
यावच्च तावदारभ्य शुभा वाप्यशुभापि वा ॥
नभोऽमलं शुभदिशः पद्मारुणसमप्रभाः |
मारुतो वाति सुरभिः सुखदो मृदुशीतलः ॥
एषा सन्ध्या शुभा ज्ञेया विपरीताऽशुभा स्मृता |
रुक्षा च सविकारार्का क्रव्यादखरनादिता ॥
स्निग्धा दण्डपरीवेषा सुरचापविभूषिता |
fas वषंप्रदा सन्ध्या जयाऽऽरोग्यविवृद्धिदा 1
The metre is दोधक.]

Indications at Dawn and Twilight XXX 203
प्राची तत्क्षणमेव नक्तमपरा सन्ध्या ज्यहाद्वा फल
सप्ताहात्परिवेषरेणुपरिघाः कुर्वन्ति सद्यो न चेत् ।
तद्व तुये करेन्द्रकार्म् कत डित्प्रत्यकंमेघानिला-
स्तस्मिन्नेव दिनेऽष्टमेऽथ बिहगाः सप्ताहपाका मृगाः ॥३१॥
Characteristics of a dawn produce their effects—good or bad—
at the same moment (i.e., immediately); of the evening, on the same
night or in three days; halos, dust and cross-bar of clouds, in a week
if not the same day; the Sun-beams (Amogha and the like), rainbow,
lightning, mock-sun, clouds and wind act in the same manner; birds
produce the effects on the 8th day, if not the same day; and beasts,
ina week.
[The metre is शारद लविक्रीडित.]
एक दीप्त्या योजनं भाति सन्ध्या विद्युद्भासा षट् प्रकाशीकरोति।
पञ्चाब्दानां गजितं याति शब्दो नास्तीयत्ता केचिदुल्कानिपाते ॥३२॥
A twilight illuminates (and has effect over) a distance of one
Jojana with its gleam; lightning illumines six yojanas with its flash;
the peal of thunder extends over five yojanas; and according to
some (i.e., Devala and others), there is no limit for the effect of the
fall of meteors.
सन्ध्या तु योजनं याति विद्युद्भासा षडेव fg !
मेघशब्दस्तु पञ्चानां योजनानां फलप्रदः di
उल्का सर्वत्र फलदा शुभा वाप्यशुभापि वा |i
The metre is शालिनी.]
प्रत्यर्कसंज्ञः परिधिस्तु तस्य त्रियोजनाभः परिघस्य पञ्च ।
षट्पञ्चहृइयं परिवेषचक्रं दशामरेशस्य धनुविभाति ॥३३॥
The Sun’s halo called mock-sun spreads its lustre (as well as
influence) over three yojanas; a cross-bar of clouds (Parigha), over
five yojanas; a halo, over five or six yojanas; and the rainbow shows
its effect and lustre for ten yojanas.
[The metre is उपजाति.]

दिग्दाहलक्षणाध्याय: ॥३१॥
Chapter XXXI—Glow at the Horizon
दाहो feat राजभयाय पीतो देशस्य नाशाय हुताशवर्ण: ।
BATU: स्यादपसव्यवायुः सस्यस्य नाशं स करोति दृष्टः ॥१॥
The fire observed in the quarters, if yellow, forebodes peril to
the king; if fiery in colour, the ruin of the country; and if rubicund
and accompanied by wind from the left, it will cause destruction of
the crops.
[The metre 15 इृन्द्रवज्त्रा.]
योऽतीव दीप्त्या कुरुते प्रकाशं छायामपि व्यञ्जयतेऽर्कवद्यः ।
राज्ञो महद्वेदयते भयं स शस्त्रप्रकोपं क्षतजानुरूपः NIU
That fake fire which creates illumination and reveals shadow
also as the Sun does, owing to its excessive brilliance, portends
great calamity to the sovereign, A blood-red one indicates sanguinary wars.
[The fire in the quarters is not a genuine one. It is only an
apparent fire.
The metre is gra war. |
राक् क्षत्रियाणां सनरेश्वराणां प्राग्दक्षिणि शिल्पिकुमारपीडा ।
याम्ये सहोग्रेः पुरुषस्तु बेश्या दूताः पुनर्भूप्रमदाश्च कोरो ॥३॥
पश्चात्तु Yat: कृषिजीविनश्च चौ रास्तुरद्भः: सह वायुदिक्स्थे |
पीडां ब्रजत्त्ुत्तरतश्च विप्रा: पाखण्डिनो वाशिजकाश्च शार्व्यास् nxn
The fire seen in the east portends evil to Ksatriyas and to the
rulers; in the south-east, to smiths (or artisans) and princes; in the
south, to the Vaisyas and cruel men; in the south-west, to messengers
(or ambassadors) and remarried young widows; in the west, to
Südras and agriculturists; in the north-west, to thieves and horses; in
the north, to Brahmanas; and in the north-east, to heretics and
merchants.

Glow at the Horizon XXXI 295
[पुनर्भू is a virgin widow who is remarried :
“पुनर्भूः सोह्यते भूयो याऽक्षतत्वाद्ययाविधि u”
Cf. काइयप—
प्राच्यां दिशि प्रदीप्तायां श्रेणीनां भयमादिशेत् |
आग्नेय्यां तु कुमाराणां वश्यानां दक्षिणे तथा ।।
ame त्यां च सत्रियो हन्ति शूद्रान् पश्चिमतस्तथा |
वायव्यायां चौरभयं विप्राणामृत्तरे तथा ।
पाखण्डिवशिजां पीडा हयंशानी यदि दीप्यते ॥
The metre is the same as before.]
नभः प्रसन्नं विमलानि भानि प्रदक्षिणं वाति सदागतिश्च ।
दिशा च दाहः कनकावदातो हिताय लोकस्य सपार्थिवस्य ॥५॥
A calm sky, glossy and bright stars, breeze blowing in a
clock-wise direction, and the blaze in the horizon with the colour
of gold, are for the prosperity of mankind and kings.
[This verse, noted for its naturalness and simplicity, proves
that the author was an in-born poet worthy of being ranked with
Kalidasa. This reminds us of the latter's verse in the कुमारसम्भव
Canto I-23. š
The metre is उपेन्द्रवस्त्रा.]

भकस्पलक्षणाध्याय: I 33!
Chapter XXXII— Signs of Earthquake
क्षितिकम्पमाहुरेके बृहदन्तर्जलनिवासिसत्त्वकृतम् ।
मभारखिन्नदिग्गजविश्रामसमुऱ्भूवं चान्ये ॥१॥।
Some Sages hold that an earthquake is brought about by the
huge animals living in the waters of the ocean, while others (like
Garga) opine that it is the result of the rest (ie. heaving) that is
resorted to by the elephants of the quarters that are tired by the
weight of the earth.
[Cf. काश्यप
वारुणस्योपरि पृथ्वी सशलवनकानना |
स्थिता जलजसत्त्वाश्च सक्षोभाइचालयन्ति ताम् ॥
also गर्ग--
चत्वारः पृथिवीं नागा धारयन्ति चतुदिशम् i
वर्धमानः सुवृद्धश्चाति वृद्धश्च पृथुश्रवाः |:
वर्धमानो दिशं पुर्वा सुवृद्धो दक्षिणां दिशम् ।
पश्चिमामतिवृद्धस्तु सौम्याशां तु परथुश्रवाः ॥
नियोगाद् ब्रह्मणो ह्येते धारयन्ति वसुन्धराम् ।
ते श्वसन्ति यदा शान्ताः स वायुः इवसितो महानु ॥
वेगान्महीं चालयन्ति भावाभावाय देहिनाम् du]
भ्रनिलोऽनिलेन निहतः क्षितौ qaq सस्वनं करोत्यन्ये ।
केचित्वहष्टकारितमिदमस्ये प्राहुराचार्या: uqu
Yet other Sages like Vasistha declare that it is caused by
the atmospheric wind colliding with another and falling to the earth
with a booming sound. There are still othets like Vrddhagarga
who maintain that it is occasioned by some unseen power (or by
the result of the good and bad deeds of human beings). There are
some more Sages such as Para$ara who declare as follows :
[The opinions cited in this verse have a semblance of being
scientific.

Signs of Earthquake XXXII 297
Cf. afass—
यदा तु बलवान्वायुरन्तरिक्षानिलाहत: i
पतत्याशु स निर्घातो भवेदनिलसम्भव: 1
तस्य योगान्निपततश्चलत्यन्याहता क्षितिः i
सोऽभिघातसमुत्यः स्यात्सनिर्घातमहीचलः ॥
The word अर in the text also means fortune, which is nothing but
the resultant of man's Karma or action, in previous life.
Vide qami—
प्रजा TARA यत्र तत्र कम्पं शुभं वदेत् ।
जनानां श्रेयसे नित्यं विसृजन्ति सुरोत्तमाः N
विपरीतस्थिता यत्र जनास्तत्राशुभं तथा i
विसृजन्ति प्रजानां तु दृःखशोकाभिवृद्धये 1]
गिरिभिः पुरा सपक्षेवंसुधा saqaf genai gA i
ग्राकस्पिता पितामहमाहामरसदसि सद्रीडम् vau
भगवन्नाम ममतत्त्वया mud यदचलेति तन्न तथा ।
क्रियतेऽचलेश्चर्लद्रिः शक्ताहं नास्य खेदस्य ॥४॥
तस्याः सगदूगदगिरं किञ्चित्स्फुरिताधरं विनतमीषत् ।
साश्रुविलोचनमाननमालोक्य पितामहः stg ॥५॥।
मन्यु हरेन्द्र धात्र्याः क्षिप कुलिशं शेलपक्षभङ्गाय ।
am: कृतमित्युक्त् वा मा भेरिति वसुमतीमाह ॥६॥
किन्त्वनिलदहनसुरपतिवरुणा: सदसत्फलावबोधार्थस् i
प्राग् हित्रिचतुगिषु दिननिशोः कम्पयिष्यन्ति ॥७॥
In bygone days the Earth, being shaken severely by the
winged mountains which flew up and came down heavily, spoke
bashfully to the Creator (Brahman) in the assembly of the Gods —
“My lord, the name you have given me, namely Acala (Immovable),
is falsified by the flying mountains, and I am unable to put up with
this suffering. Hearing these words of Mother Earth who was
choked with tears and whose lower lip quivered slightly, and
observing her down-cast face with tears flowing from her eyes, the
Creator spoke thus: “Indra, remove this humiliation of Mother Pagh
throw your thunder-bolt and chop off the wings of the mountains ०
At this, Indra said, ‘So be it’, and consoled her with the words “Do
not fear; but Wind, Fire, myself and Varuna will shake you in the

298 Brhat Samhita
four parts of the day and night put together respectively in order to
reveal the good and bad effects of actions to the world.”
[The story occurring in this section has come down from the
Rgvedic time to the period of the Kavyas. In the Indrasükta (Rg.
II. 2.2.) Indra is credited to have fixed firmly the earth that was
often quaking. Kalidasa too alludes in his Kumdrasambhava 1-20 to
this story. I feel that it is an allegory containing the principles of
the early formation of the various celestial bodies including the
earth. See also the Ramayana V. I. 23-27. सव्रीडा is another reading
for सव्रीडमु. Like Kalidasa our author too uses some obsolete forms,
as he employs the expression मा भै: for मा भ॑षीः.
The commentator refers to another interpretation of the last
verse, according to which, both the day and night are divided into
four parts each and the four deities mentioned cause earthquake
in order in the four parts of the day as well as of the night. This
wrong interpretation, says he, is due to the observation made in
other Sastras as follows : —
रात्रौ दिवा च पूर्वाहणे वायव्य: कम्प उच्यते |
मध्याह्ने चाद्धं रात्रे च हौताशः कम्प उच्यते |!
दिवारात्रौ तृतीयेंऽशे माहेन्द्रश्नाभिगीयते |
चतुर्थे वतंमानेऽशे वारुणं निदिशेद् बुधः ।।
Against this he quotes पराशर thus :
“तत्र चतुर्षु चतुर्भागेषु दिवानक्तमनिलानलेन्द्रवरुणजं कम्पक्रमं विन्द्यात् ॥”
also “ग्रद्रिजमत: परं भयमपनयाम्यनिलानलाम्बुपतिमदभिसृष्टाः कम्पाः कदाचिज्जगति हिताहितवेदिनो भविष्यन्ती त्यकं चन्द्रग्रहणाग्रहविकृतचारजांश्च कम्पानाहुः lU
This shows that earthquakes are caused by eclipses of the luminaries, unnatural phenomena occurring in the planets and special
movements of the heavenly bodies.
Cf. also गर्ग--
कृत्वा चतुर्धाहो रात्रं द्विघाहोऽथ द्विधा निशम् ।
देवताश्रययोगाच्च चतुर्धा भगणं तथा ॥
पूवे दिनाद्धे वायव्य श्राग्नेयोऽद्धे तु पश्चिमे ।
Ua: पुर्व च uag पश्चिमाद्धें तु वारुणः 11
चत्वार एवमेते स्युरहो रात्रविकल्पजाः |
निमित्तभूता लोकानामुल्कानिर्घातभूचलाः i]

Signs of Earthquake XXXII 299
चत्वायंयम्णाद्यान्यादित्यं मृगशिरोऽइवयुक् चेति ।
मण्डलमेतद्वायव्यमस्य रूपारि सप्ताहात् ॥८॥
धूमाकुलीकृताशे नभसि नभस्वान् रजः क्षिपन् भौमम् ।
विरुजन् gates विचरति रविरपटुकरावभासी च nen
वायव्ये भूकम्पे सस्याम्बुवनोषधीक्षयोऽभिहितः i
इवयथुइ्वासोन्मा दज्वरकासभवो वणिक्पीडा ॥१०॥
रूपायुधभृद्वैद्याः स्त्रीकविगान्धवंपण्यशिल्पिजनाः à
पौड्यन्ते सौ राष्ट्रककुरुमगधदशारांमत्स्याश्च ॥ ११॥
The stellar circle or group presided over by the Wind-God
consists of the seven constellations viz.. Uttaraphalguni, Hasta,
Citra, Svati, Punarvasu, Mrgasirsa and Asvini, (this means that if
there is an earth-quake under any of these seven asterisms, it should
be construed as caused by wind). The following symptoms of this
circle will appear a week in advance: The quarters will be covered with smoke; a strong wind will blow throwing the dust of the
earth breaking down trees; and the Sun will not shine brightly. The
effects of an earth-quake of the Wind Circle are the following:
Destruction of crops, water, forests and herbs, outbreak of swellings,
asthma, lunacy, fever and phlegmatic affections, and trouble to the
trading class, courtesans, warriors, physicians, women, poets, musicians, traders, (or commodities), artisans, the Saurdstras, Kurus,
Magadha country, Dasarna region and the Matsyas.
[Ck पता
प्रथमेऽह्नि चतुर्भागे निर्घातोल्कामहीचला: |
सौम्यादित्यार्यम्णहस्तचित्रास्वात्यश्चिनीषु च ॥
भवन्त्यनिलजा: सर्वे लक्षणान्यवधारय |
धूमव्याप्ता दिशः सर्वा नभस्वान् प्रक्षिपन् रज: ॥
gaia भञ्जंश्चरति रविस्तपति शीतलः |
सप्तमेऽहनि कम्पः स्यादृभूमेरनिलसम्भवः ॥
Here the commentator makes a significant observation to the
effect that our author has adopted the views of Sage Garga and
Rsiputra which differ from those of Vrddhagarga, Parasara and
Kagyapa. From thisit becomes evident that Garga and Vrddhagarga
are two different persons.
Vide पराशर-—
वायव्याभिजिद्वासवाश्वार्यम्णहस्तत्वाष्ट्रेष्वनिलोऽभिकम्पयन् परुषपवर्नाचपात-

300 Brhat Samhita
स्तरुकुसुमशष्पसस्यान्युच्छेदयति | उन्मादश्वासश्वयथुविषमज्वरातङ्ककृद्विशेषतो भिषग्वरिक्पण्यस्त्रीशिल्पिशुरचित्रकारकविविद्याविवादशीलधूतंकुरुसारदण्डकवात्समगधसा-
ल्वसौवध॑ नपुलिन्दर्वदेहसो राष्ट्रनलदकदम्बदशार्णाङ्गव ङ्गवतिमालवपौ रवत्रिगत॑ सौ वी रयौधेयक्षुद्रकशिविकानभिहन्ति ॥
Chapters XIV & XVI supra may be referred to with advantage
in this section. ]
पुष्पाग्नेयविशाखा भरणी पित्र्याजभाग्यसज्ज्ञानि ।
वर्गो हौतभुजोऽयं करोति रूपाण्यथेतानि ॥१२॥
तारोल्कापातावृतमादीप्तमिवाम्बरं सदिग्दाहम् ।
विचरति मरुत्सहायः सप्ताचिः सप्तदिवसान्तः ॥१३॥
श्राग्नेयेऽम्बुदनाशः सलिलाशयसङ्क्षयो नृपतिवेरस् i
दद्रू विर्चाचकाज्वरविसपिकाः पाण्डुरोगश्च ॥ १४॥
दीप्तोजसः प्रचण्डाः पीड्यन्ते चाइमकाङ्गबा ह्लीका: ।
तङ्गणकलिद्भवङ्ग्रविडाः शबरा भ्रनेकविधाः ॥ १५॥
The Fire Circle consists of the seven asterisms, Pusya, Krttika,
Visakha, Bharani, Magha, Pürvabhàdrapadà and Purvaphalguni.
It reveals its symptoms a week in advance in the following manner:
The sky will be filled with falling stars and meteors and will appear
aglow as a result of the fire in the horizon; and fire aggravated by
the wind will rage over the land. During an earth-quake of the Fire
Circle, clouds will be destroyed; lakes and tanks will dry up; kings will
be at loggerheads with one another; herpes, scab, fever, erysipelas
and jaundice will break out; and men of great valour, hot-tempered
persons, the Asmakas, Angas, Bahlikas, Tanganas, Kalingas, Vangas, Dravidas and hillmen of various tribes will be troubled.
[Cf. गर्ग---
fadtasfg चतुर्भागे निर्घातोल्कामहीचला: ।
पिव्यभाग्याजपुष्याग्तिविशाखायमद॑ वत: ।।
भवन्त्यनलजास्ते च लक्षणानि निबोध मे ।
तारोल्कापातदिग्दाहैरादीप्तं लक्ष्यते नभः ॥
मरुत्सहायः सप्ताचि: सप्ताहान्तश्चरत्यपि |
सप्तमेऽह्नि विज्ञेयः क्रम्पश्चानलसम्भवः ।।
also पराशर---
अग्तीन्द्रा गयजयम पितृगुरुभगर्द वतेष्वनलो5भिकम्पयन् वर्षसरित्सरःस्रोतसामपः

Signs of Earthquake XXXII 301
क्षपयन् सुखानि रोगा रोचक्रपिटकपाण्डुरुग्ज्वरकिटिभदद्रूदाहक दिशेषाद्रातपादका ग्नि-
वित्पुलिन्दयवनवा ह्लीकव क्ञोष्ट्रासन्त्याइमकेक्ष्वाकुकुलूततुखा रशिबिक fand वैदेहद्रविडसुराष्ट्रमध्यदेशदशारण श्र हिनस्ति ।]
ग्रमिजिच्छुवराधनिष्ठाप्राजापत्यन्द्रवश्वमेत्रारि ।
सुरपतिमण्डलमेतःडूवन्ति चाप्यस्य रूपाणि ॥१६॥
चलिताचलवर्षर्साणो गम्भीरविराविणास्तडिदन्तः ।
गवलालिकुलाहिनिभा विसुजन्ति पयः पयोवाहाः ॥१७॥
ऐन्द्र स्तुतकुलजातिर्यातावनिपालगणापविध्वंसि i
ग्रतिसारगलग्रहवदन रोगकृच्छदकोपाय ॥ १८॥
काशियुगन्ध रपो रवकिरातकीराभिसारहलमद्राः ।
प्र्बुदसुराष्टरसालवपीडाकरमिष्टवृष्टिकरम् ut eu
The seven asterisms, Abhijit, Sravana, Dhanistha, Rohini,
Jyestha, Uttarasadha, and Anuradha, constitute Jndra’s Circle. Its
symptoms are the following: The clouds looking like moving
mountains, sending forth loud peals of thunder, containing flashes
of lightning and resembling in colour buffaloes’ horn, swarms of
bees and serpents, will pour down rain. An earthquake occurring
in Indra’s Circle will ruin men of celebrated families and castes,
famous persons, kings and heads of corporations. It will also produce dysentery, swelling of the throat, facial diseases and severe
vomiting. It will cause trouble to the people of Kasi, Yugandhara,
the Pauravas, Kiratas, Kiras, Abhisáras, Halas, Madras, Arbudas,
Surástra and Malava countries. It will, however, bring good
rains.
(Cf. गर्ग—
fare तु यदा qd उल्कानिर्घातभूचला: |
मैत्रेद्रवैश्वश्रव॒णा भिजिद्रोहिणिवासवेः ॥
स्यादिन्ट्रसम्भवः कम्पो लक्षणानि च मे श्ण |
वर्षन्ति बहवो मेघा वराहमहिषोपमाः ॥
धुन्वन्तो मधुरान् रावान् विद्युद्धासितभूतला: |
सप्तमेऽहतिः सम्प्राप्ते कम्पः स्यादिन्द्रसम्भव: ॥
also पराशर---
ऐनद्रवैश्वदेववंष्णवप्राजापत्यसौम्य raig सुरपतिरवनिमतिचालयन् प्रवृद्धाः
म्भोदयज्ञधर्मान्नपानोत्सवो जात्यप्रथितकुलाधिपतिसुवास्तुनी चकाइ्मीराभिसारश्राच्य-

NS. er
302 Brhat Samhita
शककिरातपौरवाच्युतवास्वरणवमालवपह्लवदण्डककाशिका षंककलासमल्ललह॒वहाला नुपanaf ।।
It is evident that Parasara’s circles are constituted differently. For
example, his Wind Circle consists of Abhijit and Dhanistha, while
Garga’s Mrgasiras and Punarvasu. Similarly there are differences
in other Circles also.]
पोष्णाप्याद्राइलेषामुला हिबृंध्न्यवरुरादेवानि ।
सण्डलमेतद्वारुरामस्यापि भवन्ति रूपारिण ॥२०॥
नीलोत्पलालिभिन्नाञ्जनत्विषो मधुरराविणो बहुला: ।
तडिदुः्जासितदेहा धाराङ्कुरवर्षिणो जलदाः ॥२१॥
वारुरामर्णवसरिदाश्चितध्नम तिवृष्टिदं विगतवैरम् i
गोनदंचेदिकुकुरानु किरातवंदेहकानु हन्ति ॥२२॥
Varuna’s Circle is constituted by the seven asterisms, Revati,
Parvasadha, 81015, Aslesa, Mila, Uttarabhadrapada and Satabhisaj. Its indications appearing a week before are the following :
Huge clouds resembling blue lily, bees and collyrium in colour,
rumbling pleasantly, and shining with flashes of lightning, will pour
down slender lines of water resembling sharp sprouts. An earthquake ofthis circle will kill those that are dependent on the seas
and rivers; and it will lead to excessive rains. People will also bury
the hatchet. It will destroy the Gonardas, Cedis, Kukuras, Kiratas
and the people of Videha.
[Cf. गर्ग--
निशायां पश्चिमे भागे निर्घातोल्कामहीचला: |
पोष्णाप्याद्रोरगा मूलाहिर्बृघ्न्यं वरुणं तथा n
कम्पो वारुण एभिः स्याच्छुणु तस्यैव लक्षणम् ।
वर्षन्ति जलदास्तत्र नीलाज्जनचयोपमाः ॥
विदयुद्भासितदेहाश्च मधुरस्वरभूषिताः à
सप्तमेऽहनि सम्प्राप्ते कम्पः CHTETSUTEG: ।।
cf. also परादार---
“'धराभिन्नकेदा रपुरनगरप्रबद्धतरुणततजलताक्षुपद्धष्पसस्यातीसा रहिक्का क्षि रोगsaq च विशेषतः किरातकाशमी रापरान्तककौकुरेयशौर्यारकचे दिवत्ससँन्धवो दकयात्रिकोदधिनदनदीसंश्नितांश्र देशानुपहन्ति ॥”
According to this Sage Varuna’s Circle consists of only six
asterisms where Pirvasadha does not find a place.]

Signs of Earthquake XXXII 4o
षड्मिर्मासेः कम्पो द्वाभ्यां पाकं च याति निर्घातः |
श्रन्यानप्युत्पातानु जगुरन्ये AoA: ॥२३॥
An earthquake bears fruit in six months, and a portentous
thunder in two months. Other sages like Garga include other
portents also in the above Circles for predicting their effects,
[Other portents are—eclipses, fall of meteors and the like.
Their effects are to be judged according to the Mandala or Circle in.
which they occur.
Cf. गग —
निर्घातोल्कामहीकम्पा: स्निग्धगम्भीरनि:स्वना: à
मेघा: स्तनितशब्दारच सूर्येन्दुग्रहणे तथा ॥
परिजेषेन्द्रचापं च गन्धर्वनगरं तथा |
मण्डलरेव बौद्धव्या: शुभाशुभफलप्रदा: ॥
Cf. also the समाससं हिता--
ग्राय॑ म्णपुर्व भचतुष्टयं च शशाडःकमादित्यमथाश्विनी च ।
वायव्यमेतत्पवनोऽत्र चण्डो मासद्दयेनाशुभद: प्रजानाम् ॥
भ्रजेकपादं बहुला भरण्यो भाग्यं विशाखा गुरुभं मघा च |
क्षुदग्निशस्त्रामयकोपकारि पक्षेरित्रभिर्मण्डलमग्निसंज्ञम् ॥
प्राजापत्यं वैष्णवं Hades विश्वेशं स्याद्वासवं चाभिजिच्च |
Uk ह्य तन्मण्डलं सप्त रात्रात्कुर्यात्तोयं gue प्रशान्तम् ॥
श्राहिबूंध्न्यं वारुणं सुलमाप्यं पौष्णं सार्पं मन्मथारीइवरं च |
सद्यःपाक वारुणं नाम शस्तं तोयप्रायं हृष्टलोक प्रशान्तम् ॥
The author states that the time of fruition of an earthquake is
six months, but in his abridged Samhita we find him giving two
months for the Wind Circle, three fortnights for the Fire Circle,
seven days for Indra’s Circle and lastly immediate effect for the
last one.]
The following three verses also occur in the समाससंहिता, but
they are translated because of their importance.
उल्का हरिश्चन्द्रपुरं रजश्च निर्घातभूकम्पककुप्परदाहाः |
वातोऽतिचण्डो ग्रहणं रवीन्द्वोनक्षत्रतारागणशवकुतानि ॥२४॥
व्यञ्ज afedad वातवृष्टिध्मो$नग्निव्स्फुलिद्धाचिषो वा ।
चन्यं wed ग्राममध्ये विशेद्वा UNAT BAH हश्यते वा ॥२९॥
सन्ध्याविका रः परिवेषखण्डा नद्यः प्रतीपा fafa तूर्यनाद: ।
MUSA यत्स्यात्प्रकृतेः प्रतीपं तन्मण्डलेरेव फलं नियाद्य॑स् ॥२६॥
Other portents are the following : Meteors, aerial city, dust,

ro
304 Brhat Samhité
portentous thunder, earthquake, fires in the quarters, furious winds,
eclipses of the luminaries, unnatural phenomena in the case of any
star or group of stars, rain without clouds, anything unnatural in
the sky, excessive rain (or stormy rain), smoke without fire, flames
without sparks, entry of wild animals into a village, sight of a rainbow at night, unnatural phenomena at the junctures, broken halos
round the Sun or the Moon, contrary flow of rivers, and sounds of
musical instruments in the heavens. The effects of any other phenomenon which is unnatural should be predicted on the basis of the
above Mandalas or Circles.
[In the second verse चातिवृष्टि is another reading for वातवृष्ठि.
The middle one is in शालिनी metre and the rest is इन्द्रवज्रा.
According to Garga persons in whose natal asterisms earthquakes and such other portents occur, will have troubles. Hence
such persons are advised to perform propitiatory rituals with respect
to the Deities in whose Mandalas the portents are observed. ]
हन्त्येन्द्रो वायव्यं वायुर्चाप्येन्दरमेवसन्योन्यम् ।
वारुणहौतभुजावपि वेलानक्षत्रजाः कम्पाः Un
An earthquake taking place in Indra’s Circle counteracts one
in Wind’s Period and vice versa. Similarly one of Varuna’s Circle
will undo the effects of one occurring in the Fire-Period and vice
versa. ‘Thus the earthquakes of particular periods and circles, as stated
above, cancel each other.
[As we have already seen above i.e., verses 3-7 supra, the periods
are of six-hour duration each, while circles are constituted by the
asterisms. For example, Indra’s period is the first half of the night
while Wind Circle comprises the seven stars Uttaraphalguni (cf.
8-11 supra). If an earthquake occurs in the first half of the night and
in Uttaraphalguni or some other star of its group, it would come
under the purview of this verse, and they would cancel each other.
If both the Vela and Mandala were to belong to the same authority
i.e. Deity, the effect would be doubly strong.
In the opinion of Garga if an earthquake were connected with
two asterisms belonging to two different Mandalas, the Vela or
Period would take precedence. ]
प्रयितनरेइव रम रणव्यसनान्याम्नेयवायुमण्डलयोः Wier
श्ुदुभयमरकावृष्टिभिरुपताप्यन्ते जनाश्चापि urs
If there be an earthquake in the Fire Circle and Wind Period

Signs of Earthquake XY XII 305
or vice versa (i.e. Fire Period and Wind Circle), there would be
calamities to or death of celebrated monarchs; and people would be
tortured by the dread of famine, mortality and drought.
वारुणपोरन्दरयोः सुमिक्षशिववृष्टिहादयो लोके i
गावोऽतिभूरिपयसो निवृत्तवेराइ्च ATA: ॥ -९॥
Should an earthquake occur inthe Varuna Circle and Indra
Period or vice versa, there would be plenty of food crops, prosperity,
rain and joy and contentment in the world. Cows would yield milk
in abundance and kings sink their differences.
[Gf काश्यप--
ऐन्द्रश्चानिलजं हन्ति वायव्यश्रापि शक्रजम् ।
श्राप्यो हौतभुजं हन्ति चारिनर्वारुणसम्भवम् ॥
वाय्वर्निमिश्चितो यश्च वेलामण्डलसम्भवः।
दुभिक्षव्याधिरोगँस्तु पीडचन्ते तत्र जन्तवः |
माहेन्द्रवारुणे यत्र वेलामण्डलसम्भवः |
सुभिक्षक्षेमधर्माणां तत्र वृष्टिः प्रतिष्ठिता u
Cf. also. प्राशर-—
योऽन्यस्मिन्तक्षत्रे भागे चान्यत्र भूचलो भवति |
स भवेद् व्यामिश्रफलस्तन्मे गदतो निबोध त्वम् ॥
कुरुशाल्वमत्स्यनेषधपुण्डान्ध्रकलि ङ्गविन्ध्यपादस्थान् ।
वाय्वाग्तेयः कम्पः सानलजीवान् भजति RAT N
प्राच्यशकचीनपह्ववयो घेयकपदियक्षवद्गोमान् |
शरदण्डमगधबन्धकिविनाशनः शक्रवायव्यः 11
आवन्तिकाः पुलिन्दा विदेहकाशमी रदरदवासान्ताः |
बाह्याश्रिताश्च वायव्यवार्णे प्राप्तुयुः पीडाम् ॥
ऐक्ष्वाकवाऽइमरथ्यान् पटच्चराभी रचीनमरुकुत्सान् |
ऐन्द्राग्नेयः कम्पो हिनस्ति राज्ञश्च समुदीर्णान् ॥
सरितः सरः समुद्राश्चितांश्र गोतदमङ्गना राज्यम् |
क्त्रियगणांश्र हन्यात् कम्पो वरुणाग्निदेवत्यः ॥
काञ्याभिसा रकाच्युतकच्छट्वीपायंदेशजाः पुरुषाः |
गणपूजिताः कुलाग्र्या नृपाश्च वरुणेन्द्रवध्याः स्यु: lI
In the next verse the author speaks of the periods of fruition
for other portents :]

306 Brhat Samhita
पक्षेश्रतुभिरनिलस्त्रिभिरग्निदंवराटू च सप्ताहात् |
सद्यः फलति च वरुणो येषु न कालोऽदरुतेषुक्तः ।।३०॥
When the time of fruition of the effects of portents or extraordinary happenings such as throbbing of limbs, and the like has
not been specified, they will be felt within two months, provided
such happenings take place in the Wind Circle; within three fortnights, in the Fire Circle; within a week, in Indra’ Circle; and in the
course of the same day, in Varuna’s Circle.
[Next he speaks of the area or distance over which these
circles spread their influence. ]
चलयति पवनः Maga हातसनलो दशयोजनान्वितम् ।
सलिलपतिरशी तिसंयुतं कुलिशधरोऽभ्यधिकं च षष्टितः ॥३१॥
An earthquake occurring in the Mandala of Wind shakes the
earth to an extent of 200 Yojanas; one of the Fire Circle, 110
Yojanas; one of Varuna’s, 180 Yojanas; and one of Indra’s, 160
Yojanas.
[Cf. काइयप-—
वायव्ये मण्डले नित्यं योजनानां शतद्वयम् ।
दशाधिकमथाग्नेय tes षष्ठ्याधिकं शतम् ॥
शतं चाशीतिसंयुक्तं वारुरो मण्डले चलेत् ॥
The metre is वैतालीय |.
त्रिचतुर्थसप्तमदिने मासे पक्षे तथा त्रिपक्षे च ।
यदि भवति भुमिकम्पः प्रधाननृपनाशनो भवति ॥३२॥
Should there be another earthquake on the 3rd, 4th or the 7th
day, or at the end of a month, fortnight or three fortnights, it would
cause the destruction of celebrated monarchs.
[Cf. गर्ग —
्रद्ध॑मासे चतुर्थेऽह्नि तृतीये वाथ सप्तमे |
कस्मात्पुनयेदा क्रम्पो मासे Ala यदापि वा ॥
उत्पद्यते जने यत्र तत्र विन्द्यान्महःद्रयम् ॥
f. also पराश र--
स्तिग्धस्वनाः प्रदक्षिणानुयायिनोऽम्बुधरा धाराभिषिक्ताः पर्वसु च सर्वं एव
प्रशस्यन्ते । तीध्णाम्बुवहोऽवनिपतिविग्रहोच्छ्॒याय | त्रिचतुःसप्तरात्रे पक्षमासत्रिपक्षा-
«TX प्रततानुक्रम्पतः प्रवरनरपतिविनाशाय । als च शमयन्त्यासप्ताहात् कम्पादिक्रृतं
निमित्तमाइवेवातिवर्षणोपवामन्रत दीक्षाजप्यहवनानि t]

उल्कालक्षणाध्याय: 0331
Chapter XXXIII—Signs of Meteors
दिवि भुक्तशुभफलानां पततां रूपाणि यानि तान्युल्काः ।
घिष्ण्योल्काशनिविद्यृत्तारा इति पञ्चधा भिन्नाः utu
The meteors are nothing but the forms of those who fall down
after having enjoyed the fruits of their meritorious deeds in Heaven.
These meteors are divided into five categories viz. Dhisnya or
Ignescent Balls, Meteors, Thunder-bolts, Lightning and Shooting
Stars.
[It is a tradition among Indians that those who perform
meritorious deeds while living on the earth go to heaven for enjoying their good results. When these are exhausted, the souls come
down again to the earth to resume their mundane work. It has also
been witnessed that at the departure of great Souls a. bright star is
seen shooting up towards the heavens.
Vide the Bhagavad Gita IX-21 rafto पुण्ये मर्त्यलोकं विशन्ति 1”
Cf. also गर्ग--
स्वास्त्राणि संसृजन्त्येते शुभाशुभनिवेदिन: ।
लोकपाला महात्मानो लोकानां ज्वलितानि तु ॥
and the समाससं हिता--
भ्रस्त्राणि लोकपाला लोकाभावाय सन्त्यजन्त्युर्काः ।
केषाञ्चित्पुण्यक्ृतां तत्रोल्काविच्युतिः स्वर्गात् ॥
Here Sage Garga’s view also is incorporated, while in the text our
author mentions the popular view about the meteors.
I feel that the original reading in the first line must have been
यानि ar gent: according to the rule 'विधेयस्य प्राधान्यम्'].

—s
< ataqa ae aom
308 Brhat Samhita
उल्का पक्षेण फलं तह द्विष्ण्याशनिस्त्रिमिः पक्षैः ।
विद्युदहोभिः षड्मिस्तद्वत्तारा विपाचयति usu
An Ulkà or meteor and Dhisnyà bear fruit in a fortnight; a
thunderbolt, in three fortnights; and lightning as well as Tara, in
six days.
[Cf. the समाससं हिता---
उल्काथ पञ्चरूपा धिष्ण्योल्का विद्युतोऽशनिस्तारा ।
चिष्ण्योल्के पक्षफले त त््त्रिगुणश्चाशनिः षडहिकेऽन्ये ॥
फलपादकरी तारा धिष्ण्यां पुष्कलं शेषाः ॥ |
तारा फलपादकरी फलाद्धंदात्री प्रकीतिता धिष्ण्या ।
तिस्रः सम्पूर्णफला विद्युदथोल्काशनिश्चेति॥३॥
The Tara meteor produces only a quarter of the effects; the
Dhisnya, a half of it; while the remaining three produce their effects
in full measure.
प्रशनिः स्वनेन महता नगजाइवमृगाइमवेइमतरुपदयुषु ।
निपतति विदारयन्ती धरातलं चक्रसंस्थाना ॥४॥
The thunderbolt falls with a deafening sound upon men,
elephants, horses, beasts, rocks, houses, trees and domestic animals,
revolving like a discus and piercing the surface of the earth.
[Cf. the समाससं हिता--
qafa: प्रारिषु निपतति दारयति धरातलं बृहच्छब्दा ti]
विद्युत् सत्त्वत्रासं जनयन्ती तटतटस्वना सहसा ।
कुटिलबिशाला निपतति जीवेन्धनराशिषु ज्वलिता ux
Lightning, which is crooked and extensive, falls suddenly on
living beings and heaped up fire-wood, setting them ablaze, causing
fright to the animals and producing a rattling sound.
Cf. the समाससंहिता (? )---
विद्युत्तटतटशब्दा ज्वालामालाकुला पतति ॥]
घिष्ण्या कृशाल्पपुच्छा धन् षि दश हृइयतेऽन्तराभ्यधिकस् d
ञ्वलिताद्कारनिकाशा द्वौ हस्तो सा प्रमारोन ॥६॥
The Dhisnya is a slender thing with a short tail with a body
two cubits long. It resembles burning embers and appears quite
distinct over an area of forty cubits.
[Cf. the abridged work :—
धिष्ण्या सिता द्विहस्ता धनूंषि दश याति कृशदेहा u]

Signs of Meteors XXXIII 309
तारा हस्तं दीर्घा शुक्ला ताम्राब्जतन्तुरूपा वा ।
तियंगधश्चोध्वं वा याति बियत्युह्यमानेव ॥७॥
The Tard or shooting star is one cubit long, white, red or
slender like the fibre of the lotus-stalk and moves across, up and
down the sky, as if being dragged.
[Cf. the abridged work :—
तारा तु हस्तमात्रा यात्यूध्वेमधः स्थिता सिता ताम्रा u]
उल्का शिरसि विशाला निपतन्ती वधते प्रतनुपुच्छा |
दीर्घा च मवति पुरुषं भेदा बहवो भवन्त्यस्याः ॥८॥
The Ulkà or meteor is broad at the head, having atiny tail.
As it falls down, it grows bigger and bigger. It is 34 cubits long.
There are many varieties of it.
[Cf. the following :
उल्काग्रतो विशाला बहुप्रकारा पुरुषमात्रा N]
प्रेतप्रहरणखरकरभनक्रकपिदष्ट्रिलाद्गलमृगाभाः ।
गोधाहिधूमरूपाः पापा या चोभयशिरस्का NEN
Those varieties of Ulké that resemble dead bodies, weapons,
asses, camels, crocodiles, monkeys, boars, ploughs, wild deer,
lizards, snakes and smoke, as well as those that have two heads, are
of inauspicious consequences.
ध्वजकषगिरिकरिकमलेन्दुतुरगसन्तप्तरजतहंसाभा: ।
शरीवृक्षवप्त्रशङ्कस्वस्तिकरूपाः शिवसुभिक्षा: ॥१०॥
Those that resemble banners, fishes, mountains, elephants,
lotuses, the Moon, horses, molten silver, swans, Bilva tree, diamond
(or Indra’s weapon), conch and the Svastika design, lead to prosperity and abundance of food grains.
[C£. काइ्यप---
नरेभतुरगाश्वाइमवृक्षेषु च पतेत् सदा |
ज्वलन्ती चक्रवद् CAT त्वशनी रावसंयुता॥
विदुत्तत्रासकरी भीमा शब्दयन्ती तटत्तटा |
बृहच्छीर्षाऽतिसूकष्मा च जीवेषु च पतेत्सदा ॥
qifa दश वा इश्या सा च धिष्ण्या प्रकीतिता।
ज्वलिताङ्गारसब्शी द्वौ हस्तौ सा प्रमाणत: ॥
पद्मताम्राकृतिइचैव हस्तमात्रायता गता |
तियंगूर्ध्वमधो याति सोह्ममानेव तारका ॥

ia ON
j
F
310 Brhat Samhita
उल्का मूर्धेति विस्तीर्णा पतन्ती वर्धते तु सा ।
तनुपुच्छा नृमात्रा तु बहुभेदसमावृता N
ग्रायुधप्रेतसच्शी जम्बुकोष्ट्रवराकृति: ।
धूम्रवर्णा तु पापाख्या विशीर्णा या तु मध्यमा ॥
घ्वजपद्मेभहंसाभा पर्वंताइवसमप्रभा ।
श्रीवृक्षशङ्लसच्शी या चोल्का सा शिवप्रदा u]
ग्रस्बरमध्याद् TBAT निपतन्त्यो राजराष्ट्रनाशाय 1
बस्भ्रमती गगनोपरि विश्रममासख्याति लोकस्य ॥११॥
le of the sky, they portend
If they fall in clusters from the midd
y. If it circles round and
the destruction of the king and the countr
round at the zenith of the sky, it indicates unrest and distress among
the people.
संस्पृशती चन्द्राको तद्विसृता वा स भुश्रकस्पा च ।
परचक्रागसन्पमभयदु्िक्षा वृष्टिमयजननी ॥१२॥
If it touches or comes away from the Sun or the Moon and
is accompanied bv an earthquake, it will lead to an enemy attack,
r to the ruler, famine and trouble from drought.
पौरेतरघ्नमुल्कापसठप्रकरणं दिवाकरहिमांशवोः ।
उल्का शुभदा पुरतो दिवाकरविनिःसृता यातुः uti
If an Ulka moves to the left of the Sun and the Moon, it will
destroy the defenders of the town and the attacking army respectively; whereas if it issues forth from the Sun and falls in front of a
king on the march, it will bestow victory on him.
शुक्ला रक्ता पीता कृष्णा चोल्का हिजादिवणेध्नी i
क्रमशशचेतातु हन्युमूर्धो र:पाइवंपुच्छस्था: ॥१४॥
A meteor being white, red, yellow and black ruins in order the
four classes beginning with the Brahmana. Similarly it harms the
four classes in order if it falls with its head, middle part, side and
dange
tail foremost.
उत्तरदिगादिपतिता विप्रादीनामनिष्टदा रूक्षा ।
ऋज्वी स्निग्धाखण्डा नीचोपगता च agge uuu
A rough meteor that falls in the north, east, south and
west bodes evil to the four classes in order beginning with
the Brahmana; while, being straight, glossy, unbroken and

Signs of Meteors XXXIII 311
falling down from the sky, it tends to the prosperity of the members
of the four classes severally.
इयावारुणनीलासृग्दहनासितभस्मसन्निभा रूक्षा ।
न्ध्यादिनजा वक्रा दलिता च परागमभयाय ॥१६॥
A meteor that is grey, rosy, blue, crimson, fiery, dark or ashy
in colour, rough, visible at a twilight or daytime, crooked and
broken, forebodes foreign invasion.
नक्षत्रग्रहधातेस्त:दूक्तीनां क्षयाय निदिष्टा ।
उदये घ्नती रवीन्दू पोरेतरमृत्यवेऽस्ते वा ॥१७॥
Ifa meteor should strike an asterism or a planet, the latter’s
wards (objects, countries and people) would be ruined. Should it
strike the Sun and the Moon at the time of rising or setting, the
defenders of the town and the attacking foe respectively would
come to grief.
[Cf. काश्यप---
नक्षत्राणि ग्रहाइचेव यद्युल्काध्वस्तधूमिता: |
तदेशनाथनाशाय लोकानां सम्भ्रमाय च ॥
also the समाससंहिता--
उदगादिषु विप्रादीन् सितलोहितक्ृष्ण॒वर्णाश्र ।
घ्नन्ति ग्रहरक्षाघातेस्तद्भक्तीनां च नाशाय ॥]
माग्यादित्यधनिष्ठामुलेषुल्काहतेषु युवतीनाम् ।
विप्रक्षत्रियपौडा पुष्यानिलविष्णुदेवेषु ॥ १८॥
ध्रुवसौम्येषु नुपाणासुग्रेषु सदारुणेषु चौराणाम् |
क्षिप्रेषु कलाविदुषां पीडा साधारणो च हते ॥१६॥
If the Yoga-tara (brightest star) of the asterisms, Purvaphalguni, Punarvasu, Dhanistha and Mula be struck by a meteor, young
women would be afflicted; if that of Pusya, Svati and Sravana be
hit, Brahmanas and Ksatriyas would suffer. When the stars termed
Dhruva—Stable—and Saumya—Gentle—are struck by a meteor, there
will be trouble for kings; when those termed Ugra—Fierce—and
Daruna —Dreadful—are struck, thieves will be apprehended and tortured; and when those termed Ksipra—Quick—and Sadharana—
Moderate are struck, artists as well as artistes will be in trouble.
[Here we see the asterisms divided into six categories viz.
Stable, Gentle, Fierce, Dreadful, Quick and Moderate. The first

k
D
r——————— OR TP
312 Brhat Samhita
Uttaras and Rohini; the second, of MrgaRevati; the third, of three Pürvas, Bharaa, Aglesa, Jyestha and Mila; the
Abhijit; and the sixth, of Krttika
e asterisms that are
group consists of the three
giras, Citra, Anuradha and
ni and Magha; the fourth, of Ardr
fifth, of A$vini, Pusya, Hasta and
and Vigakha. Of course there remain some mor
not treated of in this context. ]
कुर्वन्त्येताः पतिता देवप्रतिमासु राजराष्ट्रमयम् |
शक्रोपरि नृपतीनां गृहेषु तत्स्वामिनां पीडाम् ॥२०॥
ग्राञञाग्रहोपघाते तद्देश्यानां खले gam i
चैत्यतरौ सम्पतिता सत्कृतपीडां करोत्युल्का URW
द्वारि पुरस्य पुरक्षयमथेनद्रकीले जनक्षयोऽभिहितः ।
ब्रह्मायतने fasi विनिहन्याद् गोमिनो गोष्ठे ॥२२॥
Meteors falling on the images of Gods cause disaster to the
king and the country; on Indra, to the kings; on houses, to their
owners; striking the planets presiding over the several quarters, to
the people of the countries situated in those quarters; threshing floor,
to agriculturists; a holy (prominent) tree, to respectable people;
one falling on the gate of a town will destroy the town itself; on the
bolt of a door, the people; on the temple of Brahman, the Brahmanas; and cowpens, their owners.
[For planets ruling the quarters see the — 3gsst II-5. We
know that countries, peoples etc. are allotted both to the quarters
and to the planets in XIV & XVI supra. Hence the compound
ग्राश्याग्रहोपघाते in verse 21 can also be interpreted thus : “When the
several quarters as well as the several planets are attacked by
meteors, it would spell ruin to the countries, peoples, objects etc.
assigned to them severally."]
क्ष्वेडास्फोटितवादितगीतोत्क्रुष्टस्वना भवन्ति यदा ।
उल्कानिपातसमये भयाय राष्ट्रस्य सनुपस्य ॥२२॥
If sounds of roaring, clapping hands, instrumental music,
songs and loud cries are heard at the time of falling of a meteor,
there would be danger to the country and its king.
nenia तिष्ठत खेऽनुषङ्को दण्डाकृतिः सा नृपतेभेयाय ।
या AIA तन्तुघृतेव खस्था या वा महेद्द्रध्वजतुल्यरूपा ॥२४॥

Signs of Meteors XXXIII 313
If a meteor having the form of a rod leaves its trail on the sky
for a long time, it bodes disaster to the king. So does one that
appears to be carried along the sky by a thread, or one that looks
like Indra’s banner.
(The metre 15 इन्द्रवज्त्रा].
श्रेष्ठिनः प्रतीपगा तियेगा नुपाद्कनाम्।
हन्त्यधोमुखी नपान् ब्राह्मणानथोध्वंगा ॥२५॥
बहिपुच्छरूपिशी लोकसङ्क्षयावहा ।
सपंवत्प्रसपंती योषितामनिष्टदा ॥२६॥
हन्ति मण्डला पुरं छत्रवत् पुरोहितम् ।
वंशगुल्मवत् स्थिता राष्ट्रदोषकारिणी ॥२७॥
व्यालसुकरोपमा विस्फुलिद्धूमालिनी |
खण्डशोऽथवा गता सस्वना च पापदा ॥२८॥
A meteor that goes backwards harms traders; crosswise, the
queen, with its head downwards, kings; head upwards, Brahmanas;
one that resembles the peacock’s tail causes the annihilation of the
people; one creeping like a snake is ruinous to women; one falling
in a circular form destroys the city; in the form of an umbrella, the
royal priest; in the form of a bamboo-clump, is harmful to the
kingdom; one resembling snakes or hogs or is wreathed in sparks
or is broken to pieces and is accompanied by sound, proves
destructive.
[Here the author employs a few ungrammatical forms viz.
तिर्यगाः, प्रसपेती, मण्डला.
The metre is समानिका (प्रा. पि. सू. II. 59)].
सुरपतिचापप्रतिमा राज्यं नभसि विलीना जलदानु हन्ति |
पवनविलोमा कुटिलं याता न भवति शस्ता विनिवृत्ता वा NREN
A meteor which looks like the rainbow destroys the kingdom;
one which disappears in the sky itself ruins the clouds; one moving
against the wind in a crooked way or backwards, is harmful.
[The metre comes under त्रिष्टुभ् , but no special name is found.
So it is to be called गाथा]
ग्रभिभवति यतः पुरं बलं वा भवति भयं तत एव पार्थिवस्य ।
निपतति च यया दिक्षा प्रदीप्ता जयति रिपुनचिरात्तया अयातः ॥३०॥

314 Brhat Samhita
e trouble in store from the direction wherefrom
A king will hav
s to that direca meteor attacks his town or army; but if he marche
tion in which a meteor falls down ablaze, he will soon vanquish his
enemies.
[Of. काश्यप--
पार्थिवे प्रस्थिते दीप्ता पतत्युल्का महास्वना |
at दिशं सिद्धयते सिद्धि विजयं लभते चिरात् ॥
अन्न च तात्कालिकलग्नग्रहसंयोगाच्छकुनिर्तश्रवणाच्च HATA |
Vide the समाससंहिता--
क्रूरग्रहक्षलग्नक्षणातिथिकरणाप्रभञ्जनेदीप्ते: ।
दीप्ताण्डजमृगविरुतं निर्घातक्षितिविमदेश्च ॥
The metre is पुष्पिताग्रा. |

परिवेषलक्षणाध्याय: ॥३४॥
Chapter XX XIV —Characteristics of Halos
संभूच्छिता रवीन्होः किरणाः पवनेन मण्डलीभूताः ।
नानावर्ण्क्ृतयस्तन्वञ्र व्योम्नि परिवेषाः uu
The rays of the Sun and the Moon turned into a circle by the
wind, and reflected in the sky with sparse clouds, become halos
possessed of different colours and shapes.
ते रक्तनीलपणण्डुरकापोताञ्रामशबलहररितशुक्लाः |
इन्द्रयसवरुणनिऋ तिइवसनेशपितामहार्निकृताः uqu
They attain the following colours—crimson, blue, pale white,
dove-coloured, dark, variegated, green and white, when they are
caused by Indra, Yama, Varuna, Nirrti, Vayu, Siva, Brahman and
Agni respectively.
[The Benares edition wrongly takes the reading भ्रम्बुकृता:
instead of ग्रग्निकृता: । Bhattotpala too says: “सोऽपि वरुण कृत
एव”. In the first line there is also a metrical flaw in the word
हरितशुक्लाः. It is possible that the author might have used हरिशुक्लाः
or हुरितसिताः. The mistake, therefore, must be attributed to the carelessness of the scribe. In the second line too there is an apparent
metrical flaw in निऋ तिश्वसन, but it is allowed according to prosodical rules. The particular conjunct consonant is called क्रम (Cf.
वृत्तरत्नाकर I-10).]
धनदः करोति मेचकमन्योन्यगुणाश्रयेणा चाप्यन्ये ।
प्रविलीयते मुहुर्म हुरल्पफलः सोऽपि वायुक्ृतः ॥३॥
Kubera produces a halo whose colour is that of the peacock’s
neck; others produce halos of mixed colours. One that is brought
about by Vayu disappears frequently and produces little effect.

316 Brhat Samhita
[Cf. काइयप--
सितपीतेन्द्रनीलाभा रक्तकापोतबभ्रव: |
शबला बाहिवर्शाश्च विज्ञेयास्ते शुभप्रदाः ॥
ऐ्द्रयाम्याप्यनै ऋ त्यवारुणाः सोम्यवह्लिजा: |
aada भावेन वायव्यः सोऽपि कष्टदः ॥]
चाषशिखिरजततेलक्षीरजलाभः स्वकालसस्मुतः ।
गविकलवृत्तः स्तिग्धः परिवेषः शिवसुभिक्षकरः ॥४॥
A halo shining like the blue jay, peacock, silver, oil, milk and
water in their order in the six seasons beginning with winter
(Sisira), glossy or clear and in an unbroken circle, conduces to
peace and prosperity.
[The natural colours of halos in the six seasons are mentioned
here.
Cf. काश्यप--
शिशिरे चाषवणेश्च वसन्ते शिखिसन्निभः |
ग्रीष्मे रजतसङ्काशः प्रावृट्तैलस मप्रभः ।।
गोक्षी रसरः शस्तः परिवेषः शरत्स्मृतः d
हेमन्ते जलसङ्काशः स्वकाले शुभदः स्मृतः U]
सकलगगनानुचारी ABTA: क्षतजसन्निभो रूक्षः ।
ग्रसकलशकटश्रासनश्डुद्गाटकवत् स्थितः पापः ॥५॥
One which stays in the sky from morning till evening, shines
with many a hue or like blood, and is rough, broken, having the
form of a cart, bow or triangle, is of disastrous consequences.
शिखिगलसमेऽतिवषं agan नुपवधो भयं Wr ।
हरिचापनिभे युद्धान्यशोककुसुसप्रभे चापि usu
When the halo resembles the peacock’s neck in colour, there
will be very heavy rains; when it possesses a number of colours, the
king will be killed; when it is of smoke colour, there will be panic;
and when it has the colour (the deep red) of the ASoka flower or of
the rainbow, there will be wars.
वर्णेनेकेन यदा बहुलः स्निग्ध: क्षुराञ्रकाकोणेः ।
स्वत्तो सदो वर्ष करोति पीतइच दीप्तार्कः uen
When a thick and glossy halo possesses the particular single
colour assigned for the season and is covered with little razor-like

Characteristics of Halos XXXIV 317
clouds, there will be rain the same day. Similar is a yellow halo
accompanied by the fierce Sun.
दीप्तमृगविहद्भरुत: कलुषः सन्ध्यात्रयोत्यितो$तिमहान् ।
मयकृत्तडिदुल्कायहँ ती नपं हन्ति शस्त्रेण ॥८॥
A huge and clumsy halo formed at dawn, noon or sunset
accompanied by the cries of wild animals and birds facing the Sun,
causes fear; and if it is struck by lightning, meteors and the like
(such as portents of terrestrial, mid-regional and celestial kinds), it
will cause the king’s assassination by weapons.
[Cf qj —
उदयास्तमयोमंध्ये सुर्याचन्द्रमसोद्व॑योः ।
परिवेषः प्रहरेत तद्राष्ट्मवसीदति i]
प्रतिदिनमकहिमांइवोरहनिशं रक्तयोनेरेन्द्रवघः ।
परिविष्टयो रमीक्ष्णं लग्नास्तमयस्थयोस्तद्ठत् ॥६॥
If everyday the Sun and the Moon look blood-red throughout,
the king will be slain. The same result will follow, if the luminaries
are encircled by halos repeatedly both at rising and setting.
[In the second line there is another 7€90112--लग्नास्तनभ:स्थयोः
which would mean—when they are rising, in mid-heaven and
setting.
66 Gee
दिवा सूर्ये परीवेषो रात्रौ चन्द्रे यदा भवेत् |
एकस्मिश्चेदहो रात्रे तदा नश्यति पथवः ॥
एतेन दिघिना नित्यं सप्ताहं परिविष्यते ।
सर्वभूतविनाशः स्यात्तस्मिन्नुत्पातदशने ॥
Cf. also the समाससंहिता--
ग्यूद्धाटकचापविकारसन्निभः परुषमृतिरतिबहुलः ।
सकलगगनानुचारी बहुवर्णश्चावलम्बी च ॥
द्वित्रिगुणः खण्डो वा सन्ध्यात्रयमुत्यितो ग्रहच्छादी ।
परिवेषः पापफलो ग्रहरोधी हन्ति agt: ॥
स्निग्धो मघुघृतशिखिचाषपत्रनीलोत्पलाब्जरजतनिभः ।
क्षेमसुभिक्षाय भवेत् परिवेषोऽक्ंस्य शशिनो वा ॥]
सेनाप्तेर्भयकरो द्विमण्डलो नातिशस्त्रकोपकरः ।
्रिप्रमृति शस्त्रकोपं युवराजमयं नगररोधम् ॥१०॥

cow SS ARTE Se
316 Brhat Samhita
[Cf. काश्यप
सितपीतेन्द्रनीलाभा रक्तकापोतबभ्रव: |
शबला बहिवर्णाश्च विज्ञेयास्ते शुभप्रदाः ॥
ऐन्द्रयाम्याप्यनै ऋ त्यवारुणाः सौम्यवह्लिजाः |
aada भावेन वायव्यः सोऽपि epa: U]
चाषशिखिरजततेलक्षीरजलामः स्वकालसम्सुतः ।
श्रविकलवृत्तः स्तिग्धः परिवेषः शिवसुभिक्षकरः uu
A halo shining like the blue jay, peacock, silver, oil, milk and
water in their order in the six seasons beginning with winter
(Sisira), glossy or clear and in an unbroken circle, conduces to
peace and prosperity.
[The natural colours of halos in the six seasons are mentioned
here.
Cf. काश्यप---
शिशिरे चाषवर्णश्च वसन्ते शिखिसन्निभः |
ग्रीष्मे रजतसङ्काशः प्रावृट्तलसमप्रभ: ।।
गोक्षीरसरशः शस्तः परिवेषः शरत्स्मृतः ।
हेमन्ते जलसङ्काशः स्वकाले शुभदः स्मृतः ॥ |
सकलगगनानुचारी ABTA: क्षतजसन्निभो रूक्षः ।
ग्रसकलशकटशरासनश्शुद्गाटकवत् स्थितः पापः NLN
One which stays in the sky from morning till evening, shines
with many a hue or like blood, and is rough, broken, having the
form of a cart, bow or triangle, is of disastrous consequences.
शिखिगलसमेऽतिवषं बहुवर्णं नुपवधो भयं धुसर ।
हरिचापनिभे युद्धान्यशोककुसुमप्रभे चापि wei
When the halo resembles the peacock’s neck in colour, there
will be very heavy rains; when it possesses a number of colours, the
king will be killed; when it is of smoke colour, there will be panic;
and when it has the colour (the deep red) of the Asoka flower or of
the rainbow, there will be wars.
वर्णनेकेन यदा बहुलः स्निग्ध: क्षुराञ्रकाकोणः ।
स्वत्तो सद्यो वर्ष करोति पीतइच दीप्ताकः ॥७॥
When a thick and glossy halo possesses the particular single
colour assigned for the season and is covered with little razor-like

Characteristics of Halos XXXIV 317
clouds, there will be rain the same day. Similar is a yellow halo
accompanied by the fierce Sun.
दीप्तमृगविहद्भरुत: कलुषः सन्ध्यात्रयोत्थितोऽतिमहान् ।
मयकृत्तडिदुल्काद्यहंतो नपं हन्ति mAT ॥८॥
A huge and clumsy halo formed at dawn, noon or sunset
accompanied by the cries of wild animals and birds facing the Sun,
causes fear; and if it is struck by lightning, meteors and the like
(such as portents of terrestrial, mid-regional and celestial kinds), it
will cause the king’s assassination by weapons.
(Cf. गर्ग--
उदयास्तमयोमंध्ये सूर्याचन्द्रमसो द्वयोः i
परिवेषः प्रद्वयेत तद्राष्ट्रमवसीदति ॥]
प्रतिदिनसकंहिसांइवोरहनिशं रक्तयोनरेन्द्रवघः ।
परिविष्टयो रमीक्ष्णं लग्नास्तमयस्थयोस्तष्ठत् ॥६॥
If everyday the Sun and the Moon look blood-red throughout,
the king will be slain. The same result will follow, if the luminaries
are encircled by halos repeatedly both at rising and setting.
[In the second line there is another reading— लग्नास्तनभ:स्थयो:
which would mean—when they are rising, in mid-heaven and
setting.
CE गग
दिवा qa परीवेषो रात्रौ चन्द्रे यदा भवेत् |
एकस्मिश्चेदहो रात्रे तदा नश्यति पाथिव: ॥
एतेन दिघिना नित्यं सप्ताहं परिविष्यते ।
सरवे भूतविनाशः स्यात्त स्मिन्नुत्पातद्शने ॥
Cf. also the समाससंहिता--
श्युद्धाटकचापविकारसन्निभः परुषमुतिरतिबहुलः ।
सकलगगनानुचारी बहुवर्णशचावलम्बी च ॥
द्वितरिगुणः खण्डो वा सस्ध्यात्रयमुत्थितो ग्रहच्छादी 1
परिवेषः पापफलो ग्रहरोधी हन्ति तद्भूक्तीः ॥
स्निग्धो मघुघृतशिखिचाषपत्रनीलोत्पलाब्जरजतनिभः ।
क्षेमसुभिक्षाय भवेत् परिवेषोऽक्ंस्य शशिनो वा ॥]
सेनापतेभयकरो द्विमण्डलो नातिशस्त्रकोपकरः t
त्रिप्रभृति शस्त्रकोपं युवराजमयं नगररोधम् utet

318 Brhat Samhita
A halo consisting of two rings causes danger to the commander
of the army, but very meagre clash of arms. One having more than
two rings tends to fighting, danger to the prince (yuvaraja) and a
siege of the town.
[Cf. गर्ग—
द्विमण्डलपरीवेषः सेनापतिभयद्धूर: |
युद्धे सुदारुणं कुर्याद् इश्यते मण्डलं स्त्रिभिः 11]
वृष्टिस्त्र्यहेण ससेन विग्रहो वा ग्रहेन्दुभनिरोधे i
होराजन्माधिपयो जन्सक्षं वाऽशुभो राज्ञः ॥११॥
When a planet (Mars, Mercury, Jupiter Venus or Saturn) and
a star are encircled by the halo round the Moon, there will be
rain within three days, or a war will break out in a month. It would
be disastrous to a king, if the lord of his ascendant (at birth) or of
his natal sign, or his natal star itself be enclosed within this halo.
[Cf. गग
त्रीणि यत्रोवरुध्येरन्नक्षत्रं चन्द्रमा ग्रहः |
त्र्यहेण AGAR मासाद्वा जायते भयम् di]
परिवेषमण्डलगतो रवितनयः क्षुद्रधान्यनाशकरः d
जनयति च वातर्वृष्टि स्थावरक्ृषिकृन्निहन्ता च ॥१२॥
we कुमारबलपर्तिसन्यानां विद्रवोऽग्निशस्त्रभयस् ।
जीवे परिवेषगते पुरोहितामात्यनृपपीडा u$ 31
मन्त्रिस्थावरलेखकपरिवृ्धिइचस्त्रजे gafea |
शुक्रे यायिक्षत्रिय राज्ञीपीडा प्रियं चान्नस् ॥ १४।।
क्षुदनलभृस्युन राधिपशस्त्रोभ्यो जायते भयं Rat |
परिविष्डे गभेभयं राहो व्याधिन पभयं च ॥१५॥
Saturn being encircled by a halo (round the Moon) destroys
base corn such as Priyangu, causes stormy rains, and destroys trees
and agriculturists. Mars inside the halo causes sufferings to princes
(or boys), commanders of armies, and armies and trouble from
fire and weapons. Jupiter in the above situation gives trouble to
royal priests, ministers and kings. Mercury inside the halo bestows
prosperity on ministers, trees and writers, and produces good rains.
Venus in that place causes affliction to marching kings, Ksatriyas
and the queen, and makes food very costly (i.e. causes famine).
Ketu in a similar situation would create danger from hunger, fire,
mortality, king and weapons. Rahu brings about trouble to
children in the womb, diseases and danger to the king.

Characteristics of Halos XXXIV 319
[The presence of Rahu or Ketu inside the Parivesa cannot be
observed, but has to be arrived at by calculation. chere ‘ce Yel
round the Moon and if the longitudes of Rahu or Ketu and the
Moon are almost the same, we can say that the planet is inside the
halo.
Cf. the समाससं हिता---
बलपपुरोहितनरपतिकृषिकृत्पीडा क्रमेण परिविष्ट: i
कुजगुरुसिताकंपुत्रे: सौम्येन तु मन्त्रिपरिवृद्धि: ॥
Hat: शस्त्रोद्योगो राहो: परिवेषणेन रोगभयम् |
zag gaat व्याध्यादिभिः क्रमशः u]
gata विजानीयात्परिवेबाभ्यन्तरे द्योग्रेहयो: ।
दिवसकृतः शशिनो वा क्षुदवृष्टिभयं त्रिषु प्रोक्तम् ॥१६॥
याति age नरेन्द्र: सामात्यपुरोहितो वशं मृत्यो: ।
प्रलयमिव fafg जगतः पञ्चादिषु मण्डलस्थेषु ॥१७॥
If there be two planets inside the halo around the Sun or the
Moon, there would be wars; if there be three planets, famine and
drought; if four, the king would die along with his ministers and
preceptors; and if five or more, there would be a near-destruction of
the universe.
ताराग्रहस्य कुर्यात्वृथगेव समुत्थितो नरेन्द्रवधम् ।
नक्षत्राामथवा यदि केतोर्तोदयो भवति ute
If a non-luminary or an asterism comes to have an independent halo around it, there will be the destruction of the monarch,
provided there is no appearance of a Ketu (Comet) at the time.
[Cf. काश्यप--
परिवेषाभ्यन्तरगो हौ ग्रहौ यायिनागरौ i
युद्धं च भवति क्षिप्रं घोररूपं सुदारुणम् n
मण्डलान्त॑रिताः पञ्च जगतः सङ्क्षयावह्ः |
ग्रथ ताराग्रहस्यैव नक्षत्राणामथापि वा ॥
परिवेषो यदा इृश्यस्तदा न रपतेर्वधः |
यदि केतुदयो न स्यादन्यथा तद्वदेत्फलम् u]
विप्रक्षत्रियविद्शुद्र हा भवेत् प्रतिपदादिषु क्रमशः |
श्रेणीपुरकोशानां पञ्चम्यादिऽवशुभकारी ute

320 Brhat Samhita
युवराजस्याष्टम्यां परतस्त्रिषु पार्थिवस्य दोषकरः |
पुररोधो द्वादश्यां स॑न्यक्षोमस्त्रयोदश्याय् ॥२०॥
नरपतिपत्नीपीडां परिवेषोऽम्युत्यितश्चतुर्दश्यास् |
कुर्यात्त पञ्चदश्यां पीडां मनुजाधिपस्यंव ॥२१॥
A halo observed on the first four lunar days of a fortnight
destroys in order Brahmanas, Ksatriyas, Vai$yas and Südras; on the
Bth, 6th and 7th days, trade guilds, towns and royal treasure respectively; on the 8th lunar day, the yuvaràja; on the 9th, 10th and 11th
days, it is harmful to the king; on the 12th, it causes a town to be
besieged; on the 13th, mutiny in the army; on the 14th day, danger
to the queen; and on the 15th day, to the monarch himself.
नागरफाणामभ्यन्तरस्थिता यायिनां च बाह्यस्था ।
परिवेषमध्यरेखा विज्ञेयाक्रन्दसारारासू् ॥२२॥
रक्तः श्यामो रूक्षशच भवति येषां पराजयस्तेषाम् ।
स्निग्ध: इवेतो घ्युतिसानु येषां भागो जयस्तेषास् 1२३॥
The line inside a halo refers to the kings defending a town;
one outside it, to the marching kings and the central one, to the
two kinds of allies called Akranda and Asara, who come to the
rescue ofthe besieged ones. A line that is blood-red or dark and
rough (or impure) denotes defeat to those kings whom it represents,
while that which is glossy (clear), white and bright, suggests victory
to such kings as are represented by the line.
[The commentator remarks :
“परिवेषे वर्णत्रयेण रेखात्रय इश्यते प्रायेणा । तत्र E रेखे बहिर्वोतन्यावतिक्रम्य `
या feaat रेखा साऽभ्यन्तरस्थिता..,” Vide XVII 6, 7 infra.
ग्राक्रन्द is an ally of the marching king and follows his
enemy, Parsnigraha, staying behind the attacker. श्रासार
is explained in the Amaratika by Ksfrasvamin “सेन्यस्य सर्वतो व्याप्तिरा-
सारः, afaa येनेत्यासारोऽन्वागच्छदबलम् 1” (P. 195). Vide the शिशुपालबध
II. 64 and Manu VII. 207.

इन्द्रायुधलक्षणाध्यायः UB AU
Chapter XXXV—Signs of Rainbows
सुर्यस्य विविधवर्णाः पवनेन विघट्टिताः कराः ATT ।
वियति धनुःसंस्थाना ये हृश्यन्ते तदिन्द्रधनुः ॥१॥
The multi-coloured rays of the Sun, being dispersed by the
wind in a cloudy sky, are seen in the form of a bow which is
called the Rainbow.
[Here the author shows his knowledge that the Sunlight is
composed of 7 colours, which are called 7 horses figuratively. The
clouds act as a prism to disperse the sunlight into its component
colour. |
केचिदनन्तकुलो रगनिःइवासोद्भूतमाहुराचार्याः |
तद्यायिनां नपाणामभिमुखमजयावहं भवति uqu
Some Sages like Kasyapa declare that the rainbow is caused
by the breath of the descendants of Ananta, the king of serpents.
The rainbow appearing in front of marching kings causes their
defeat.
[Here the author alludes to the traditional story about the
origin of rainbows. Even the sage Kasyapa refers to his predecessors
for this belief :
अ्रनन्तकुलजाता ये पन्नगाः कामरूपिणः |
तेषां निःइवाससम्भूतमिन्द्रचापं प्रचक्षते u]
ग्रच्छिन्तसवतिगाठं gana स्निग्धं घनं विविधवणंस् |
द्विरुदितमनुलोमं च प्रशस्तसम्भः प्रयच्छति च NIN
Ifa rainbow is unbroken, bright, glossy, thick, multi-coloured
and touching the earth at both extremities, and if it appears double
and behind persons, it is auspicious, and will yield good rains.
[The expression 'द्विर्दितमनुलोमं e xx interpreted otherwise by
other commentators : If two rainbows appear in the same direction,
notin opposite directions, the result would be beneficial. Our
commentator does not approve of this construction.

322 Brhat Samhita
Cf. ऋषिपुत्र--
द्विरुत्तरमविच्छिन्नं स्निग्धमिन्द्रायुधं महत् |
पृष्ठतो विजयाय स्याद्विच्छिन्नं परुषं न तु ॥
also नन्दीः
बहुवणमविच्छिन्नं feud स्निग्धममरपतिचापम् |
पश्चात् पाइव वापि प्रयाणकाले रिपुवधाय d
also बृहस्पति
नीलताम्रमविच्छिन्नं द्विगुणां सिद्वमायतम् |
पृष्ठतः पाइवंयोर्वापि जयायेन्द्रधनुर्भेवेत् ॥
also the मयूरचित्रक of गर्ग --
पूर्वस्यां दिशि सङ्ग्रामे भवतीन्द्रधनुर्यदि i
पर्चिमे च प्रयातानां जयस्तत्र न संशयः ॥
तेषां प्रवृत्ते सङ्ग्रामे पश्चादिन्द्रधनुर्भवेत् ।
qaq तु प्रयातानां जयस्तत्र न संशयः ॥
येषां प्रवृत्ते सङ्ग्रामे वामपाइर्वे च पृष्ठतः ।
धनुः प्रादुर्भवेदंन्द्रं जयस्तेषां न संशयः di
येषां प्रवृत्ते सङ्ग्रामे पुरस्ताहृक्षिणेन AT |
धनुः प्रादुभेवेदैन्द्रं wu तेषां विनिदिशेत् ॥
पश्चिमे तु दिशो भागे भवतीन्द्रधनुर्यदि à
समेघगगनं fenu वे दूर्यविमलद्युति 11
विद्युच्च निर्मला भाति पूर्वे वायुर्यदा भवेत् !
सप्तरात्रं महावर्षं निदिशेहवचिन्तकः 11]
बिदिगुदूभूतं दिक्स्वामिनाशनं व्यभ्रजं सरककारि ।
पाटलपीतकनील: झास्त्राग्निक्षुत्कृता दोषाः ॥४॥
A rainbow that is seen in an intermediate quarter, will destroy
the lord of that particular region; one seen in a cloudlesss sky will
cause pestilence, and one that is pink, yellow and blue will
create troubles from war (weapons), fire and famine respectively.
[The lords of quarters mentioned here are not the planets, but
are political functionaries viz. king, prince, leader, emissary, merchant, spy, Brahmana (twice-born) and master of the royal
elephants. Vide LXXXVI-34, infra.)
जलमध्ये$नावृष्टिभूवि सस्यवधस्तरी स्थिते व्याधिः ।
वल्मीके शस्त्रभयं निशि सचिववधाय qux ॥५॥
A rainbow seen in the middle of water leads to drought; on

Signs of Rainbows XXXV 323
land, to destruction of crops; on a tree, to diseases; on an ant-hill,
to danger from weapons (or war); and at night, to the minister’s
murder.
[Kalidasa alludes in his मेघदूत to this phenomenon of a rainbow being observed on the tip of an anthill—“'वलमीकाग्रात्प्रभवति धनुः-
खण्डमाखण्डलस्य |” |
वृष्टि करोत्यवृष्ट्यां ate gegi निवारयत्येन्द्रथासू ।
पइ्चात्सदेव ate कुलिशभृतश्चापमाचष्टे usu
A rainbow seen in the east when there is no rain, will produce
rain and vice versa; one seen in the west always indicates rain.
चापं मघोनः कुरुते निशायामाखण्डलायां दिशि भुपपीडासू ।
याम्यापरोदक्प्रभवं निहन्यात्सेनापति नायकमन्त्रिणौ च usu
A rainbow seen at night in the east will cause trouble (ill
health) to the king; and in the south, west and north, it will destroy
in order the commander-in-chief, a great leader and the minister.
[Cf. काइयप—
वृष्टो वर्षणं galaa दिशमुपाश्रितम् |
पद्चिमायां Aged करोतीन्द्रधनुः सदा ।।
रात्रौ चेद् इश्यते पुर्वे भयं नरपतेभंवेत् |
याम्पायां बलमुख्यशच विनाशमभिगच्छति i
पर्चिमायां प्रधानस्य सौम्यायां मन्त्रिणो वधः |
fama: ga atem fafa इश्यते 11
बहूदकं सुभिक्षं च शिवं सस्यप्रदं भवेत् ॥
The metre is उपजाति.]
निशि सुरचापं सितवर्णाद्यं जनयति पीडां द्विजपूर्वाणाम् ।
भवति च यस्यां दिशि aged नरपतिमुख्यं न चिराद्धन्यात् usu
A rainbow seen at night with white, red, yellow and dark hues
causes trouble to Brihmanas, Ksatriyas, Vai$yas and Südras respectively. It will also destroy before long the prominent monarch of
that region in the particular direction wherein it is sighted.
[The metre is not named in either Pingala’s or the Vrttaratnakara. It comes under faszw group. Here I have given a new definition and name: रसकरण: श्रीनेयसगग: स्यात्.]

गन्धवंनगरलक्षरणाध्याय: ॥ ३६॥
Chapter XXXVI—Signs of Aerial City
उदगादिपुरोहितनृपबलपतियुवराजदोषदं खपुरम् ।
सितरक्तपोतकृष्णं विप्रादीनामभावाय ॥१॥
An aerial city appearing in the four quarters beginning with
the north is injurious to the royal priests, kings, commanders of
armies and Yuvaraja respectively. So is one with white, red, yellow
and dark colours to the Bráhmanas, Ksatriyas, Vaisyas and Südras
respectively.
नागरन॒पतिजयावहमुदग्विदिक्स्थं विवर नाशाय i
शान्ताशायां हृष्टं सतोरणं नृपतिजयाय uqu
An aerial city seen in the north confers victory on the kings
defending their towns; in the intermediate quarters it will bring
about the destruction of persons of mixed castes; and one observed
with triumphal arches in a direction not facing the Sun will lead to
the victory of kings.
सर्वदिगुत्थं सततोत्यितं च भयदं नरेन्द्रराष्ट्राणाम्् |
चौराटविकान् हन्याद मानलशक्रचापामम् UU
One appearing in all directions and at all times indicates
danger to kings and countries; and one having the hue or hues of
smoke, fire and rainbow will destroy robbers and foresters.
गन्धवनगरमुत्थितमापाण्डुरमशनिपातवातकरम् i
दीप्ते नरेन्द्रमृत्युर्वामे ऽरिभयं जयः wen ॥४॥
An aerial city of pale white colour causes the fall of thunderbolts and storms; if it arises in a blasted quarter, a king will die;
if it is to the left (of an army or town), it will cause trouble from
enemies; and if to the right, it will confer victory.
[The word दीप्त is a technical term. This is the appellation
given to a paarticular quarter among the eight. For details see
LXXXVI-12 infra.)

Signs of Aerial City XXXVI 325
भ्रनेकवरा किति खे प्रकाशते पुरं पताकाध्वजतोररान्वितम् |
यदा तदा नागमनुष्यवाजिनां पिबत्यसृग्भूरि ररो वसुन्धरा ॥५॥
When an aerial city of various colours and shapes shines in
the sky with streamers, banners and gateways, the earth will drink
plenty of the blood of elephants, horses and human beings in
battle.
[CF काइयप--
बहुवणं पताकाढयं गन्धर्वनगरं महत् ।
इृष्टं प्रजाक्षयकरं सङ्ग्रामे लोमहर्षणम् ॥।
The metre is वंशस्थ. |

प्रतिसयलक्षणाध्यायः ॥३७॥
Chapter XXXVII—Mock Suns
प्रतिसुर्यकः प्रशस्तो दिवसकृहतुवरांसप्रभः स्निग्धः ।
वेदूयेनिभः स्वच्छः शुक्लश्च क्षेमसोमिक्षः ॥१॥
A mock Sun is auspicious, if it is glossy and possessed of the
colour appropriate for the Sun in the particular season, if it 1S
similar to beryl in lustre, and is clean and white, it is productive
of happiness and plenty.
[Vide III. 23-24. supra for the Sun’s seasonal colours. |
पीतो व्याध जनयत्यशोकरूपइच शस्त्रकोपाय ।
प्रतिसूर्याणां माला दस्युभयातद्कूत्पहन्त्री uqu
A mock sun that is yellow engenders diseases; one of the colour
(red) of the Asoka flowers leads to clash of arms; and a row of
mock suns causes danger from robbers, diseases and murder of
kings.
दिवसकृतः प्रतिसूर्यो जलकुदुदग्दक्षिरे स्थितोऽनिलकृत् ।
उभयस्थः सलिलभयं नृपमुपरि निहन्त्यधो जनहा ॥३॥
The mock sun appearing to the north of the Sun causes rain;
to the south, a strong wind; on both sides, danger from water (i.e.
floods etc.); the same appearing above the Sun destroys the king;
and below, the people.
[This verse has already appeared in III as 37 supra.
The mock sun is nothing but a reflection of the Sun’s disc in
the thin clouds near the Sun in the morning hours. This phenomenon may occur in the evening also.

Mock Suns XXXVII 327
Cf. काइ्यप---
याम्ये वातप्रदो ज्ञेय उत्तरे वृद्धिदो रवे: ।
उभयोः पाश्वेयोर्भाति सलिलं भूरि यच्छति ॥
also पराशर
` referas: कनकप्रभो वा सन्ध्यासु चेद्भास्करमावृरोति |
कम्पेत भूः खात्प्रपतेन्महोल्का नृपो विनश्येत्सहितः प्रजाभिः ॥
सन्घ्यासमीपे यदि भास्करस्य रुयेत माला प्रतिसुर्यकाणाम् |
सर्पा भवेयुः प्रचुराश्च चौरा रोगाश्च घोरा विविधप्रकाराः ॥
Sera मिन्द्रा युघमत्स्यदण्डाः सविद्युदश्राशनिवषंवाताः i
भवन्त्यभीक्षणं दिन रात्रिसन्धौ भयं तदा भूमिपतेवेधः स्यात् ॥ ]

रजोलक्षणाध्यायः ॥३८॥
Chapter XXXV I11—Indications of Haze
Since Bhattotpala does not comment upon this chapter,
it must have been interpolated after his time.
कथयन्ति पाथिववधं रजसा घनतिमिरसञ्चयनिमेन |
श्विभाव्यमानगिरिपुरतरवः wat दिशहछुन्ताः ॥१॥
It is said that a king will be killed when all the quarters are
covered with dust, resembling the mass of pitch darkness, and making the mountains, cities and trees indistinguishable.
यस्यां दिशि धूमचयः प्राक् प्रभवति नाशमेति वा यस्यास् ।
ग्रागच्छति सप्ताहात् तत्रेव भयं न सन्देहः li
There will undoubtedly be danger within a week to that
quarter wherein a mass of smoke appears at the first or disappears.
aaa रजोघनौघे पीडा स्यान्मन्त्रिजनपदानां च ।
न चिरात्प्रकोपमुपयाति शस्त्रमतिसड्कुला सिद्धिः ॥३॥
When the mass of cloud-like dust is white, there is trouble in
store for ministers and the people alike, and before long there will
be a great clash of arms, and normalcy and peace will be restored
after a good deal of confusion and suffering.
nata विजुम्मति यदि दिनमेकं दिनद्वयं वापि ।
स्थगयन्निव गगनतलं भयमत्युग्रं निवेदयति uyu
Dust appearing prominently, blocking as it were, the entire
sky at sunrise for a whole day or two continuously, augurs terrible
disaster.
ग्रनवरतसञ्चयवहं रजनीमेकां प्रधाननृपहन्तृ ।
क्षेमाय च शेषाणां विचक्षणानां नरेर्द्राणाम् uuu
Dust appearing in amass throughout a night tends to the
se of a leading king, but confers prosperity on other clever
ings.

Indications of Haze XXXVIII 329
रजनीद्वयं विसपंति यस्मिन् राष्ट्रे रजोघनं बहुलम् |
परचक्रस्यागमनं तस्मिन्नपि सन्निबोद्धव्यम् ।।६॥
When a thick cloud of dust spreads over a kingdom for two
nights continuously, it should be understood that the country will
be the victim of foreign aggression.
निपतति रजनीत्रितय चतुष्कमप्यन्नरसविनाशाय à
राज्ञां संन्यक्षोमो रजसि भवेत् पञ्चरात्रभवे ॥७॥
If dust falls continuously for three or even four nights, food
grains and liquids or juicy substances will be destroyed; and if for
five nights, there will be mutiny in the armies of kings.
केत्वाद्युदयविमुक्तं यदा रजो भवति तीव्रभयदायि ।
शिशिरादन्यत्रत्तौ फलमविकलमाहुराचार्याः ॥८॥
Dust presages extreme danger only when it is not accompanied
by the rise of Ketus etc. The sages have declared that the effects
would be fully felt only in seasons other than winter.
[Here the interpolator puts the seal of authority by alluding to
the opinion of the acaryas.]

निर्घातलक्षणाध्यायः NIEN
Chapter XXX1X—Symptoms of Hurricane
पवनः पवनाभिहतो गगनादवनो यदा समापतति ।
भवति तदा निर्घातः स च पापो दीप्तविहगरुतः nen
When a gust of wind struck by another dashes against the
earth from the sky, a portentous thunder is generated. It is inauspicious when accompanied by the harsh cries of birds facing the
Sun.
[Cf. sj —
यदान्तरिक्षे बलवान् मारुतो TIE: |
पतत्यधः स निर्घातो भवेदनिलसम्भव: ॥ |
श्रकोदयेऽधिक ररिकन्पधनियोघाङ्गनावणिर्वेइयाः ।
श्राप्रहराशेउजा विकमुपहन्याच्छूद्रपो रांइच NRN
श्रामध्याह्लाद्राजोपसेविनो ब्राह्मरांइच पीडयति ।
बश्यजलदांस्तृतीये चौरान्प्रहरे चतुर्थे तु ॥३॥
श्रस्तं याते नीचानू प्रथमे यामे निहन्ति सस्यानि ।
रात्री द्वितोययामे पिशाचसङ्धान् निपीडयति nxn
तुरगर्करास्तृतीये विनिहन्याद्यायिनइचतुर्थे च à
भेरवजजरशब्दो याति यतस्तां दिशं हन्ति ॥५॥
At sunrise such a thunder destroys judges, kings, wealthy
persons, warriors, women, traders and courtesans; in the first watch
of the day, goats, sheep, Südras and city-dwellers; in the second,
king’s servants and Brahmanas; in the third, merchants and clouds;
in the fourth, thieves; at sunset, iniquitous persons; in the first
watch of the night, crops; in the second, groups of goblins; in the
third, horses and elephants; and in the fourth, marching kings.
The direction from which issues the dreadful sound like that of a
breaking pot, will be destroyed.

Symptoms of Harricane XXXIX 331
[In this section the author gives the effects of the thunder
occurring in the different watches of the day and night as well as the
direction. What is the sunrise-period ? The commentator answers :
“दिनारम्भाद घटिकाद्वयं यावत् quie:
Cf. the समाससं हिता--
निर्घातोष्होरात्रेण हन्ति नृपपौरभृत्यराष्ट्रजनान् ।
तस्करविप्रांडूचार्कोदयाहिशं पतति यस्याम् ॥
also गर्ग —
यदा सूर्योदये प्राप्ते निर्घातः श्रूयते भुवि ।
क्षत्रिया योघमुस्याइच पीडथन्तेऽत्र न संशयः ॥
प्रह्रांशे तथा TRAY हन्याद् गोजीविनस्तथा |
परिवृत्त हरौ वेश्या WT तु दस्यवः ll
नीचचौरांच हन्यात् स अस्तमेति दिवाकरे |
प्रथमे प्रहरे सस्यान्यद्धे रात्रे तु राक्षसान् |i
रात्रित्रिभागे वेश्यांश्र प्रत्यूषे चाहितो wag |
यां दिशं चाभिहन्येत निर्घातो भैरव: स्वनः ॥
तद्देश्यान् हन्ति देशांश्च सवंदिग्भक्तयस्तथा ॥

सस्यजातकस् Voll
Chapter XL—Growth of Crops
वृश्चिकवृषप्रवेशे मानोये बादरायणेनोक्ता: ।
ग्रीष्मशरत्सस्थानां सदसणोगाः झुतास्त इसे utu
The good and bad yogas, planetary configurations, that have
been declared by sage Bàdarayana for the growth of summer and
autumnal crops, at the time of the Sun’s entry into Scorpio and
Taurus respectively, are explained here.
[The prospects of the next summer crops have to be judged
from the planetary positions with reference to the ascendant at the
time of the Sun’s entry into Scorpio. Similarly those of autumnal
crops should be gauged at the entry of the Suninto Taurus. In
ancient times sage Badarayana, who might be identical with or
different from the sage Parasarya, must have been an authority
on this subject. Here the commentator remarks that Scorpio or
Taurus alone should be taken as the ascendant. This is quite unscientific and unacceptable. For, we could get this ascendant only
when the Sun enters the sign, in the morning hours, and not at
other times. The correct method would be to calculate the ascendant
for the exact time of the Sun’s entry into Scorpio or Taurus and
then apply Badarayana's rules for reading this horoscope. Bhattotpala's method (based on the ancient rules) be adopted as a rough
one.]
भानोरलिप्रवेशे केन्द्रेस्तस्माच्छुमग्रहाक्रान्ते: ।
बलर्वाद्ः सोम्यर्वा निरीक्षिते प्रेष्मिकविवृद्धि: uqu
If at the time of the Sun’s entry into Scorpio, the Kendras
(angles) from him are occupied by benefics, or if he is aspected (or
conjoined with) strong benefics, summer crops will flourish
splendidly.
[It is possible that the word 'तस्मात्' in the text means ‘from
the Sun’. The commentator construes the expression : “सौम्येर्वा
निरीक्षिते” as follows :

Growth of Crops XL 333
Either the angles from the Sun are occupied by benefics, or
the Sun is aspected by strong benefics occupying non-Kendra
houses. This can happen only inthe case of Jupiter and not of
Mercury and Venus. Then he adds, "Serata: सौम्यर₹॑ ष्टे भानौ TR.
If they are close to the Sun, they would be combust. So he goes on
further and says, “यदा सोम्येबंलिभिरबलिभिर्वा केन्द्रस्थानानि युक्तानि भवन्ति
तदा ग्रैष्मिकसस्यविवृद्धिभवति । यदा तु पुनस्त्रिकोशरिपुलाभगा: सौम्या बलिनः
पद्यन्ति तदा ग्रैष्मिकस्य विवृद्धिभवति 1”
Cf. बादरायण---
वृश्चिकसंस्थे qa सोम्यंबेलिभिनिरीक्षिते वृद्धिम् ।
ata केन्द्रगेर्वा ग्रीष्मजधान्यस्य निदिशेन्महतीम् u]
श्र्टसराशिगते5क गुरुशशिनोः कुम्मसिहसंस्थितयो: i
egere संस्थयोर्वा निष्पत्तिग्रीष्मसस्यस्य ॥३॥
When the Sun tenants Scorpio, and Jupiter and the Moon
Aquarius and Leo, or vice versa, summer crops will prosper.
श्रर्कात्सिते द्वितीये बुधेऽथवा युगपदेव वा स्थितयोः ।
व्ययगतयोरपि तद्दन्निष्पत्तिरतीव गुरुहष्टया uyu
When Venus or Mercury or both are posited in the second or
12th house from the Sun in Scorpio, summer corn will grow well.
If, in addition, the Sun be aspected by Jupiter, there would be
bumper crops.
[It is clear that there is no place for the ascendant in Badarayana’s scheme. I have stated above that the method is very
rough.
Cf. qraxraur—
quiq ga द्वितीये gm वा युगपदेव तयोः ।
रिप्फगयो रप्येवं निष्पत्तिर्गृरुहशाऽतीव 11]
शुभमध्येऽलिनि सूर्यादृगुरुशशिनोः सप्तमे परा सम्पत् |
ग्रल्यादिस्थे सवितरि गुरौ द्वितीयेऽद्वं निष्पत्तिः ॥५॥
When Scorpio is surrounded by benefics i.e. Mercury and
Venus, and when the 7th house from the Sun i.e. Taurus, is occupied by Jupiter and the Moon, there will be excellent growth of corn.
When the Sun occupies the initial part of Scorpio and Jupiter the
second house therefrom, the growth will be only half.

334 Brhat Samhita
लामहिबुकार्थयुक्तः सुर्यादलिगात्सितेन्दुशशिपुत्र: ।
सस्यस्य परा सम्पत् HAA जीवे गवां चाग्रचा NE
When Venus, the Moon and Mercury are posited in the llth,
4th and 2nd houses respectively from the Sun in Scorpio, there will
be excellent crop. If in the above planetary configuration Jupiter
be in the 10th house i.e. Leo, there would be unique prosperity of
cattle.
कुम्भे goif शशी सूर्योऽलिमुखे कुजाकंजो मकरे ।
निष्पत्तिरस्ति महती पश्चात्परचक्र भय रोगम् tet
If at the time of the Sun’s entry into Scorpio Jupiter be in
Aquarius, the Moon in Taurus, and Mars and Saturn in Capricorn,
there would be excellent growth of corn, but later there would be
outbreak of diseases and threat of an enemy attack.
मध्ये पापग्रहयोः gå: सस्यं विनाशयत्यलिगः d
पापः सप्तमराज्ली जातं जातं विनादयति usu
The Sun occupying Scorpio, being surrounded by malefics on
both sides, destroys crops. If there be a malefic in the 7th house,
. crops would be destroyed even though they may grow well.
[Cf. बादरायण--
क्ररान्तःस्थः सूर्यो वृश्चिकसंस्थो विनाशयति सस्यम् ।
जातं जातं पापः सप्तमसंस्थो विनाशयति 1]
श्रथंस्थाने ML: सोम्ये रनिरीक्षितः प्रथमजातम् ।
सस्यं निहन्ति पश्चादुप्तं निष्पादयेदृव्यक्तम् ue
A malefic in the second house from Scorpio, being unaspected
by benefics, will destroy the crops sown first; but will enable those
sown subsequently to thrive well.
जामि त्रकेन्द्रसंस्थो क्रो quer वृश्चिकस्थस्य ।
सस्यविर्पात्त कुरुतः सोम्यंहष्टो न सयंत्र ।। १०॥
Two malefics viz. Mars and Saturn, occupying the 7th and
any other angular house from the Sun in Scorpio, will destroy the
crops; and if they be aspected by benefics, they would not destroy
corn completely or everywhere.
[For benefics to aspect the malefics in Taurus, Mercury and
Venus ought to be in Scorpio itself, but Jupiter could be in any one
of the following signs, Scorpio, Capricorn and Virgo.
Cf, बादरायरा---
सूर्यात्सप्तमसंस्थ: पापो यः केन्द्रगञ्च हानिकरौ ।
सोम्यग्रहसन्दृष्टो न तथा सवंत्र निदिष्टौ u]

Growth of Crops XL
वृश्चिकसंस्थादर्कात् सप्तमषष्ठोपगो यदा mot ।
मवति तदा निष्पत्तिः सस्यानामर्धपरिहानिः ॥११॥
When the two malefics occupy the 6th and 7th houses from
the Sun in Scorpio, there will be
í good growtl c
prices will slump. Š 1 of crops, but their
[Bhattotpala misinterprets the ex i घपरिहारि
pression, ग्र °
मुल्येनाल्पं लभते 1.९. things be र i M
ल्येनाल्प त gs become very costly, whereas it means only
fall in prices. |
विधिनानेनव रविवृ घप्रवेशे शरत्समुत्यानासू à
विज्ञेयः सस्यानां नाशाय शिवाय वा तज्ज्ञ: ॥१२॥
According to this method alone astrologers ought to declare
the prosperity or destruction of the autumnal crops, when the Sun
enters Taurus.
(Cf. बादरायण--
य एव योगोऽभिहितो वृश्चिकस्थे दिवाकरे ।
वृषेऽपि ते शारदानां चिन्तनीया यथार्थतः u]
fag मेषादिषु ga: सौम्ययुतो वीक्षितोऽपि वा विचरन् ।
ग्रेष्मिकधान्यं कुरुते समर्घमभयोपयोग्यं च ॥१३॥
When the Sun moves through Aries, Taurus or Gemini in
conjunction with or being aspected by benefics, summer crops will
fetch good price, will be free from pests and be entirely useful.
[उभयोपयोग्यं is another reading which is interpreted by Bhattotpala as ''इहलोके परलोके चोपयुज्यते |" The word ‘qqq’ is again wrongly
construed by him as 'स्वल्पमूल्यम्'. |
कार्मकमृगघटसंस्थ: शारदसस्यस्य तद्वदेव रवि: ।
सङ्ग्रहकाले ज्ञेयो विपर्ययः क्रूरहग्योगात् utu
Similarly, the Sun occupying any one of the Signs, Sagittarius,
Capricorn and Aquarius in conjunction with or being aspected by
benefics, helps autumnal crops to flourish and fetch good price etc.
But at the time of harvest, if the Sun be aspected by or conjoined
with malefics, contrary effects should be understood for them (i.e.
the corn will be very costly, useless and infested with pests).
[Here too the commentator twists the text and construes the
expression सङ्ग्रहकाले 25 विक्रयकाले. But it means only ‘the time of
harvest.” He adds “विप रींतयोगस्ये सूर्ये विक्रयः कार्यः’. This meaning is
not warranted by the text.]

द्रव्यनिइचयाध्यायः ॥४१॥
Chapter XLI—Classification of Substances
à येषां द्रव्याणामधिपतयो राशयः समुद्दिष्टाः ।
मुनिभिः शुमाशुमार्थ तानागसतः प्रवक्ष्यासि utu
I shall now expound, on the authority of the Sastras, the
different Zodiacal Signs that have been declared by ancient Sages
(like Kasyapa) as the rulers of different substances, so that their
good and bad effects (on prices etc.) may be understood.
[From the commentary it is clear that Sage Kasyapa had
treated of the subject of commodities and price fluctuations. For
this purpose the ancients had allotted different substances to the
different Signs of the Zodiac. If the concerned Sign is unafflicted,
but well-aspected, the articles will be available in plenty and also
fetch good prices. ]
वस्त्राविककुतुपानां मसुरगोधुसरालकयवानास् |
स्थलसम्भवोषधीनां कनकस्य च कीत्तितो मेष: ॥२॥
Sign Aries is considered to rule over cloths, shcep's wool,
clothes made of goat's hair, lentils, wheat, resin, barley, herbs growing on land, and gold.
[Cf. काइ्यप--
मेषे सुवर्णस्थलजा गोधूमाजाविकास्तथा i
ग्रहवरोक्षंसंयोग शोभने सफलं भवेत् 11]
गवि वस्त्रकुसुमगो घूमशा लियवमहिषसुरभितनया: eg: à
मिथुनेऽपि घान्यशारदवल्लीशालूककार्पासाः ॥३॥
Sign Taurus controls cloths, flowers, wheat, rice, barley,
buffaloes and bullocks. Gemini presides over corn, autumnal creepers like grape vines, lily bulbs and cotton.
[CF कारयप---
वृषे महिषगोवस्त्रशालय: पुष्पसम्भवा: |
मिथुने धान्यशालूकवल्यः कार्पासशारदम् ॥]

Classifications of Substances XLI 255
ककिरिण कोद्रवकदली दूर्वाफलकन्दपत्रचोचानि ।
fag तुषधान्यरसाः सिहादीनां त्वचः सगुडाः ॥४॥
Sign Cancer rules over paspalum, bananas, Dürvà grass, fruits
bulbs, fragrant leaves and woody cassia (or cocoanut ?). Sign Leo
controls husk-grains, juices, skins of lions etc. and jaggerv.
[Cf. काश्यप-.-
ककेटे HAA कोद्रवः कदली तथा |
fag धान्यं सर्वेरसा: सिंहादीनां त्वचो गुडाः u]
षष्ठेऽतसीकलायाः कुलत्थगो धूममुद्गनिषपावाः ।
सप्तमराशौ माषा यवगोधूमाः ससषंपाइचैव nun
Sign Virgo owns Atasi (common flax), Kalàya corn (peas ?),
horse-gram, wheat, green gram and leguminous seeds. Sign Libra
rules over black gram, barley, wheat and mustard.
(Cf. काइयप--
कन्यायां मुद्गनीवारकुलत्था: सकला यवा: ।
तुले तु यवगोधूममाषा: सिद्धार्थकास्तथा ॥]
ग्रष्टमराशाविश्षुः qaq लोहान्यजाविक चापि ।
नवमे तु तुरगलवणाम्बरास्त्रतिल धान्यमूलानि ug
Sign Scorpio owns sugarcane, whatever grows being watered,
such as fruits of creepers, iron or bell-metal and goats’ and sheep’s
wool. Sign Sagittarius has horses, salt, weapons, sesamum. corn and
roots.
[Cf. काश्यप
ग्रलिनीक्षुरसं सँक्यमाजं लोहं सकाँस्यकम् |
धान्यं धनुषि वस्त्राणि लवणं तुरगास्तथा ॥]
मकरे तरुगुल्माद्यं सैक्येक्षुसुवरणकृष्णलोहाति ।
कुम्भे सलिलजफलकुसुमरत्नचित्राशि रूपारि non
Sign Capricorn presides over the shrubs, creepers etc., whatever grows as a result of watering, sugarcane, gold and black metal
i.e. iron. Aquarius rules over water-products, fruits, flowers, gems
and brilliant things.
(Cf. काइयप--
मकरे g सस्यसीसं च सुवर्णगुडधातुजम् |
कुम्भे कुसुमचित्रारि हंसाश्च जलजास्तथा u]

338 Brhat Samhita
सीने कपालसम्भवरत्नान्यम्बू-द्वूवानि वज्त्राणि ।
ARITA नेकरूपा व्याख्याता सत्स्यजातं च USI
Sign Pisces controls such gems as come from testaceous animals, e.g. from the pearl oyster, water-products, diamonds, oils of
various kinds, fishes and fish-products.
[Cf. काश्यप---
पद्ममुक्ताफलादीनां द्रव्याणां मीन ईश्वर: 11]
राशेइचतुर्दशार्थायसप्तनवपञ्चमस्थितो जीवः i
इथे कादशदशपञ्चाष्टमेषु शशिजश्च वृद्धिकरः Ue
षट्सप्तमगो हार्न वृद्धि शुक्रः करोति शेषेषु ।
सञ्चयसंस्थाः AW: शुभदाः शेषेषु हानिकराः ॥१०॥
Jupiter occupying the 4th, 10th, 2nd, llth, 7th, 9th or 6th
house from the Sign promotes the interests of those objects that are
allotted to that Sign. So does Mercury while occupying the 2nd,
llth, 10th, 5th or 8th house from the concerned Sign. Venus tenanting the 6th and 7th houses from a Sign destroys its objects, while
in the rest he promotes their progress. Malefics in the 3rd, 6th, 10th
and llth houses from the concerned Sign prove beneficial while in
the rest, harmful.
(Cf.
चतु:सप्तद्विपळ्चस्थो नवदिग्रुद्रगो गुरु: ।
यस्य राशेस्तदुक्तानां द्रव्याणां वृद्धिदः स्मृतः ।
शुक्रः षट्सप्तमस्थो वा हानिकृदुर्वृद्धदोऽन्यगः |
ठथेका दशदशार्थाष्टसंस्थितः शशिजः शुभः t
पापास्तूपचयस्थाश्च वृद्धि gafa नान्यथा it]
राशेयंस्य क्रूराः पीडास्थानेषु संस्थिता बलिनः।।
तत्परोक्तद्रव्याणां महार्घता zeDued च ॥११॥
If strong malefics occupy the Apacaya houses (other than the
3rd, 6th, 10th and 11th) with respect to a particular Sign, the
objects assigned to that Sign would become very costly and scarce.
[Cf. काइयप—
राशेरनिष्ठस्थानेषु पापाश्च सबलाः स्थिताः ।
तदृद्रव्याणां नाशकरा दुल भासते भवन्ति हि uj

Classifications of Substances XLI 339
इष्टस्थाने सौम्या बलिनो येषां भवन्ति राशीनाम् ।
तद्द्रव्याणां वृद्धिः सामर्घ्यं वल्लभत्वं च ॥१२॥
Those articles whose ruling Signs have strong benefics occupying auspicious Signs therefrom, will thrive well, fetch good prices
and have great demand.
[For the Istasthanas for the different benefics vide verses 9-10
supra.
Cf. काइयप--
इष्टस्थाने स्थिताः सँम्या बलिनो येषु राशिषु ।
भवन्ति तञवानां च द्रव्याणां शुभदाः स्मृताः U]
गोचरपीडायामपि राशिर्बलिभिः शुभग्रहैह ष्टः ।
पीडां न करोति तथा क्र्ररेवं विपर्यास: ॥१३॥
Even though a Sign is afflicted by the unfavourable transits
therefrom of the benefics, yet no harm would come to the objects
governed by it, provided it is aspected by strong benefics. However,
the result would be utterly bad if under the unfavourable transits of
benefics the Sign be aspected by strong malefics.
[The Gocarapida or transit-affliction mentioned here refers to
the benefics occupying houses other than those mentioned in verses
9 and 10. These benefics may aspect the Sign, though they themselves may be posited in unfavourable houses. The result of this
aspect must do some good at least.]

प्र्घकाण्डाध्यायः Ul
Chapter XLII—Fluctuation of Prices
afaae युल्कादण्डानु परिवेयग्रहरापरिधिपूर्वाश्च i
दृष्टा$मावास्यायामुत्पातान् पौर्णमास्यां pU १॥
ब्रूयादघेविशेषानु प्रतिमासं राशिषु क्रमात्सूर्यं ।
श्रन्यतिथावुत्पाता ये ते SATA राज्ञाम् NUI
By observing excessive rain, meteor, Rod, halo, eclipse, mocksun and such other portents on the new-Moon and full-Moon days
and also at the Sun’s entrance into a new Sign of the Zodiac
every month, one should predict fluctuations in the prices of commodities. These portents observed on other days forebode sufferings
to kings through wars or bloodshed.
[There are many technical terms in this verse. For Ulka.
Danda, Parivesa and Paridhi see ch. XX XIII-8; XXX-16; XXXIV1 and XXXVII-1 respectively. From this verse it is clear that the
Prospects of prices have to be determined thiough the phenomena
occurring on the three critical days viz. new Moon, full Moon and
the Sun's entry into a new Sign of the Zodiac. In fact this chapter
and the previous two are to be read together for a complete understanding of the prospects for crops and their prices. We find the
same sage Kasyapa being quoted as authority on this subject.
Cf. काइ्यप--
उल्कातिवृष्टिग्रेहणे quet परिवेषणम् ।
प्रतिसूर्यादयो येऽन्ये पक्षमासान्तसड्क्षये ।।
तिथौ निरीक्ष्य चोत्पातान्त्र्याल्लोके शुभाशुभम् |
सुभिक्षदुभिक्षकृतान् विशेषोऽत्र विचारतः n
प्रतिमासं विधानज्ञो नान्यस्मिनु दिवसे वदेत् ।
रन्यत्र ये भवन्त्येते ते सर्वे नृपदोषदा: di]

Fluctuation of Prices XLII 341
मेषोपगते सूर्य ग्रीष्मजधान्यस्य सङ्ग्रहं कृत्वा |
वनमुलफलस्य AI चतुर्थमासे तयोर्लाभः uad
When the Sun enters Sign Aries one should observe the portents mentioned above, as well as on the Full-Moon and New Moon
days, and collect or buy summer corn. He would earn much profit
by selling the corn in the fourth month. In the case of forest roots
and fruits the observation should be made when the Sun enters
Sign Taurus.
सिथुनस्थे सर्वरसान् धान्यानि च सङ्ग्रहं समुपनीय |
षष्ठे मासे विपुलं विक्रेता प्राप्नुयाल्लाभम् ॥४॥
If one collects all kinds of juice (or juicy things or the six
varieties of taste) and corn when the Sun isin Sign Gemini, after
observing the portents, and sells them in the sixth month, he will
make large profits.
airs मधुगन्धतेलघृतफारिपतानि विनिधाय ।
द्विगुणा द्वितीयमासे लब्धिहीनाधिके छेदः ॥५॥
Similarly one should store up honey, perfumes, oils, ghee and
treacle, when the Sun isin Cancer, and sell them in the second
month. He will then make cent per cent profit. He will sustain 1058
if the selling time exceeds or falls short of that period.
fag सुव्णमशिचमंवर्मशस्त्रारि मौक्तिकं रजतम् ।
पञ्चममासे लब्धिविक्रेतुरतोऽन्यथा छेदः (su
One should store up gold, gems, skins, armours, weapons,
pearls and silver when the Sun is in Leo, and sell them in the 5th
month in order to get good profits. Otherwise he will sustain loss.
कन्यागते दिनकरे चामरखरकरभवाजिनां क्रेता।
षष्ठे मासे द्विगुणं लाभमवाप्नोति विक्रोणनु usu
If one buys chowries, donkeys, camels and horses when the
Sun is in Virgo and sells them in the sixth month, he will get an
equal amount as profit.
तौलिनि तान्तवभाण्डं मरिकम्बलकाचपौतकुसुसानि |
प्रादद्याद्धान्यानि च वर्षार्द्वाद्विगुणिता वृद्धिः usu
If one should buy cotton cloths, gems, blankets, glass, yellow
flowers and corn, when the Sun isin Libra, and sell them in six
months, he would make hundred per cent profit.

342 Brhat Samhita
वृश्चिकसंस्थे सवितरि फलकन्दकपुलविविधरत्नानि ।
वर्षद्रयमुषितानि द्विगुण emi प्रयच्छन्ति nen
One should hoard fruits, bulbs, roots and varieties of gems for
two years having secured them during the Sun’s transit through
Scorpio, and then sell them to get a profit equal to their price.
चापगते गृह्हीयात्कुडकुमशडःखप्रवालकाचानि ।
मुक्ताफलानि च ततो वर्षार्धाद् द्विगुणतां यान्ति॥१०॥
One should buy saffron, conch shell, corals, glass and pearls
when the Sun is situated in Sign Sagittarius, and sell them in six
months. Then he would get double the amount invested.
मृगघटसंस्थे सवितरि गृह््ीयाल्लोहभाण्डधान्यानि à
स्थित्वा मासं दद्याल्लाभार्थी द्विगुणमाप्नोति ween
When the Sun tenants Capricorn or Aquarius one wishing for
profit should bay and keep metallic (or iron) vessels and grains and
sell them after a month. He would then get double the amount
invested.
सवितरि कषमुपयाते मूलफलं कन्दभाण्डरत्नानि ।
संस्थाप्य AAS लाभकमिष्टं समाप्नोति ॥१२॥
One should collect roots, fruits, bulbs, vessels and gems when
the Sun has entered Sign Pisces, and sell them after six months.
He would then get as much profit as he desires.
राशौ राशो यस्मिन् शिशिरमयूखः सहस्रकिरणो ati
युक्तोऽधिमित्रहृष्टस्तत्रायं लाभको दिष्टः ॥१३॥
Profits mentioned above should be declared only when the
Sun or the Moon occupying any of the zodiacal Signs is conjoined
with or aspected by very friendly planets.
[The commentator is thrown off his guard by the expression,
Adhimitra, which usually means a planet that is friendly both naturally and temporarily. But in this context it cannot mean any thing
other than ‘u strong friend’. For, a temporary friend can neither
aspect nor conjoin with a planet, except, of course, Mars aspecting
from the 10th and Saturn from the 11th house. In the case of the
Sun, Mars can be the friend aspecting him, but he is a malefic. I
feel that more than the aspect etc. of friendly planets there should
be the aspect etc. of strong benefics.

Fluctuation of Prices XLII 343
Cf. कारयप---
राशौ राशौ स्थितः सूर्यः शशी वा मित्रसंयुत: |
ग्रधिमित्रेण सन्दृष्टो यथा लाभप्रदः स्मृतः ॥ ]
सवितृसहितः सम्पूर्णो वा शुभेय्तवीक्षित:
शिशिरकिरणः सद्योऽर्घस्य प्रवृद्धिकरः स्मृतः ।
अशुभसहितः सन्हष्टो वा हिनस्त्यथवा रविः
प्रतिगृहगतान् भावान् बुद्धवा वदेत्सदसत्फलम् ॥१४॥
The Moon, full or in conjunction with the Sun (on New
Moon day) being conjoined with and (or) aspected by benefics,
promotes immediately the prices of articles belonging to the particular Sign occupied by her. Similarly, the Sun conjoined with and
(or) aspected by malefics, destroys the prices of commodities
belonging to that Sign. Thus should one make predictions, good
and bad, regarding the price of materials, having duly comprehended the objects belonging to the several Signs of the Zodiac.
[It is understood here that the prices will slump down, if the
Moon in either situation is conjoined with or aspected by
malefics.
Cf. काइयप---
अत्राकंशशिनौ सौम्यैः संयुक्तौ वा निरीक्षितो ।
शुभग्रहस्थानगतौ सद्योऽर्घस्य विवृद्धिदो ॥
विपरीतस्थितावेतौ पापयुक्तौ निरीक्षितौ ।
अर्घहानिकरी प्रोक्तौ मिश्चितौ मध्यमौ स्मृतौ ॥
Here the Sage lays down one more condition for rise in price i.e.
the luminary should be in the house of a benefic.
The metre is हरिणी].

इन्द्रध्वजसम्पद् ॥४३॥।
Chapter XLIII—Glory of Indra’s Banner
In the previous three chapters the author has treated
of agricultural and economic matters. Now he takes up for exposition political astrology. What I mean is that the auguries mentioned herein pertain to kings and their kingdoms.
ब्रह्माणमुुरमरा भगवज् शक्ताः स्म नासुरानु समरे |
प्रतियोधयितुमतस्त्वां शरण्यशरणां समुपयाताः ॥१॥
Once the celestials submitted to the Creator :—“Oh Lord, we
are unable to withstand the demons in battle.
have come to you, the protector of the helpless.”
देवानुवाच भगवान् क्षीरोदे केशवः स व: केतुम् ।
यं दास्यति तं दष्ट्वा नाजो स्थास्यन्ति वो gear: ॥२॥
The Lord replied to the Gods thus :—“ Lord Narayana reposing on the Milky Ocean will grant you a banner, at sight of which
the demons will not be able to face you on the battlefield."
Consequently, we
लब्धवराः क्षीरोद गत्वा ते तुष्टुवुः सुराः सेन्द्रा: ।
श्रीवत्साङ्कं कौस्तुभमरिकिरणो-द्भासितोरस्कम् na
श्रीपतिमचिन्त्यमसमं समं ततः सवंदेहिनां सूक्ष्मम् ।
परमात्मानमनादि विष्णुमविज्ञातपर्यन्तम्॥४॥
d: संस्तुतः स देवस्तुतोष नारायणो ददौ चेषानू ।
ध्वजमसुरसुरवधूमुखकमलवनतुषारतीक्ष्णांशुम् uuu
The Gods with Indra as their leader received the Creator’s
boon and went to the Milky Ocean and eulogized the Lord Narayana, consort of Laksmi, who had the mark Srivatsa on His breast,
which was brightened by therays of the Kaustubha gem, who was
incomprehensible, peerless, impartial, unknowable to all beings, the
Supreme Being, without beginning and end, and all-pervasive. The
Lord, being pleased with their invocations, vouchsafed unto them
en rx

Glory of Indra’s Banner XLIII 345
a banner which would prove as the Moon and the Sun respectively
to the lotuslike faces of the damsels of the demons and the Gods.
[The Moon is said to be inimical to the lotuses which are
delighted at the rising of the Sun. Here the idea is that the banner
would enable the celestials to trounce the demons. These verses
represent our author's good poetry. Mark the fine alliteration and
description in the second line, paradox in the third and yathasankhya
in the last line.]
d विष्णुतेजोभवमष्टचक्र रथे स्थितं भास्वति रत्नचित्रे ।
देदीप्यमानं शरदीव सूर्य ध्वजं समासाद्य मुमोद शक्र: ॥६॥
Indra was overjoyed on receiving that banner, which was
born of Visnu’s effulgence, which shone brilliantly like the blazing
Sun in autumn, and which was mounted on a glittering eightwheeled chariot, bedecked with jewels.
[मुमोद is ungrammatical in form The author might have
employed the word तुतोष instead. The commentator too commits a
similar mistake by using 'जहर्ष' instead of ‘agt’. The second line
that contains a beautiful simile reminds us of Valmiki’s verse,
“पोप्लूयमानं शरदीव guq — V. 2-58.
This and the following verse are in उपजाति metre.]
a किड्िरीजालपरिष्कृतेन स्रकछत्रघण्टापिटकान्वितेत i
समुच्छितेनाम रराड्घध्वजेन निन्ये विनाश समरेऽरिसेन्यस् usu
The Lord of Gods i.e. Indra, put the army of the enemies to
death in battle with the help of the banner, which was erected
aloft, bedecked with wreaths of little bells, and which bore garlands,
umbrellas, bells and ornaments.
[Cf. गर्ग--
असुरास्तं ध्वजं इष्टवा ध्वजतेजःसमाहता: |
विसंज्ञाः समरे भग्नाः पराभूताः प्रदुद्रुवु: ॥
AAG रा सहस्राक्षो मासे भाद्रपदेऽसुरान् |
घातयित्वा सज्येष्ठायामेकरात्रेणा वाजिना (हस्तिना) ॥
स जित्वा श्रवण स्वर्ग प्रययौ सद्विजः पथि 11]
उपरिचरस्यामरपो वसोदंदौ चेदिपस्य वेणुमयीम् ।
ate at स नरेन्द्रो विधिवत् सम्पुजयामास usu
Thereafter once Indra gave a bamboo flagstaff to the king of

346 Brhat Samhita
Cedi, named Uparicaravasu (who could travel to Heaven from the
earth). The king worshipped that according to the sacred laws.
[For the story of Uparicaravasu see the Mahabharata I, 64.
प्रीतो महेत मघवा प्राहैवं ये नपा: करिष्यन्ति ।
वसुवद्वसुमन्तस्ते भूवि लिद्धाज्ञा भविष्यन्ति nen
मुदिताः प्रजाश्च तेषां भयरोगविवर्जिताः प्रभूतान्नाः ॥
ध्वज एव चाभिधास्यति जगति निमित्तं: फलं सदसत् ॥१०॥
Being pleased with the worship, Indra spoke thus: “Those
kings who emulate Vasu will be blessed with wealth and will have
their orders obeyed implicitly on earth. Their subjects also will be
happy, free from fear and diseases, and have plenty of food. The
banner itself will suggest good and bad results in the world through
appropriate signs.
[The commentator adds :
“q एवं भगवता दत्तं ध्वजं राजा पूजयिष्यति स॒ एव ध्वजः पुज्यपानो लोके
निमित्तेश्चिह्न॑: शुभाशुभं दास्यति v]
पुजा तस्य नरेन्द्रबेलवृद्धिजयाथिभियथा Gay ।
शक्राज्ञया प्रयुक्ता तामागमतः प्रवक्ष्यामि ॥ ११।।
I shall explain on the authority of the Sastras the method
adopted by ancient kings, who aspired for power, prosperity and
victory, for worshipping the banner, at the behest of Indra.
तस्य विधानं शुभकरणादिवसनक्षत्रमङ्गलमुह त्तः ।
प्रास्थानिकंवनमियाद् दंवज्ञः सुत्रधारइच ॥१२॥
The method of preparing Indra’s Banner is the following
An astrologer and a carpenter should repair to the forest on an
auspicious weekday having a beneficial Karana, asterism and
Muhirta (a period of 48 minutes), when good omens for a journey
are observed.
[For an explanation of the Karanas see the author’s ‘Fundamentals of Astrology’ p. 185, also C. 1-2 infra. The word Divasa
means both a Weekday and a lunar day. Generally Monday, Wednesday, Thursday and Friday are good provided their lords are not
weak or afflicted. The lunar days are divided into five groups viz.
Nanda, Bhadra, Jaya, Rikta and Pürnà. An auspicious asterism is one
which is other than the Daruna (Dreadful) and Ugra (Fierce) and one
that is Gentle and Common that is free from malefics. Good omens

Glory of Indra’s Banner XLIII 347
are curds, coloured rice, flowers etc. In the Yatra, Karanas other than
Gara, Vanija and Visti are recommended. There are 15 Muhirtas
in the day and 15 in the night. They are given in the following
verse `
शिवभुजगमित्रपितृवसुजलविश्वविरिड्चिप्ुजप्रभवा: l
र््राग्तीन्द्रनिशाचरवरुणायंमयोनयश्चा ह्लि ॥
रुद्रा जा हिर्व ध्न्या: पुषादस्रान्तकाग्निधातार: |
चन्द्रादितिगुरुहरि रवित्वाष्ट्राण्यनिलाख्यका रात्रौ ॥
ug: पञ्चदशांशे रात्रेश्चेवं मुहूतं इति |
संज्ञा स च विज्ञेयश््छायायन्त्राम्बुभिर्युक्त्या n]
उद्यानदेवतालयपितृवनवल्मीकमार्गेचितिजाताः '
कुब्जोध्वेशुष्ककण्टकिवल्लीवन्दाकयुक्ताश्र ॥ १३॥
बहुविहगालयकोटरपवनानलपीडिताश्च ये तरवः ।
ये च स्युः स्त्रीसञ्ज्ञा न ते शुभाः शक्रकेत्वर्थे UT
The following trees are not good for the preparation of Indra’s
Banner: Those that grow in pleasure gardens, temples, cemeteries, anthills, roads and sacrificial places; those that are very short
(i.e. whose growth is stunted), withered at the top, thorny, entwined
by creepers and parasitical plants; those that contain nests of
numerous birds and hollows, those that have been affected by wind
and fire, and those that bear feminine names.
[From the restrictions mentioned we can deduce the ancient’s
solicitide for fauna and flora. Trees with feminine names are
बदरी, etc.
Gü TT
प्रोष्ठपादे प्रतिपदि ध्वजार्थ पूर्वतो वनम् |
गत्वा वृक्षं परीक्षेत वयःसारगुणान्वितम् u]
श्रेष्ठो$र्जनो$जकणे: प्रियकधवोदुम्बराश्र पञ्चते |
एतेषामेकतमं प्रशस्तमथवापरं वृक्षम् URLAN
गौरासितक्षितिभवं सम्पूज्य यथाविधि द्विजः पुर्वस् ।
विजने समेत्य रात्रौ स्पृष्टा ब्रूयादिमं मन्त्रम् ॥१६॥
The best trees are the following five: Arjuna, Ajakarna,
Priyaka (Priyangu), Dhava (Lythrum fruticosum) and Udumbara
(Glomerous fig-tree). One of these or any other of excellent qualities that has grown on white (or red) or black soil should be selected. A Brahmana should approach alone in the first part of the

348 Brhat Samhita
night such a tree, worship it according to the rules and recite the
following hymn, touching the tree.
यानीह वृक्षे भूतानि qua: स्वस्ति नमोऽस्तु वः ।
उपहारं गृहीत्वेसं क्रियतां वासपर्ययः ॥१७॥
पाथिवस्त्वां वरयते स्वस्ति तेऽस्तु नगोत्तम ।
ध्वजार्थं देवराजस्य पुजेय प्रतिगृह्यताम् ॥ १८॥
“Hail to all beings living in this tree! Salutation to you.
May you change vour abode after receiving this gift offered by me.
O great tree, hail to thee ! The king elects thee for (making) the
banner of the Lord of Gods. Kindly accept this worship."
[There is an under-current of deep humanism in this hymn.
It has been now established by experiments that trees and creepers
respond marvellously to human love. Asthe horse in the case of
a royal horse-sacrifice sacrifices itself for the cause of its king and
country, so does the tree for a nobler cause. Hence we cannot but
agree with Kalidasa when he puts in the mouth of the fisherman
the following sentiment :
“पशुमा रणकर्मदारुणोऽप्यनुकम्पा मृदुरेव श्रोत्रियः]
छिऱ्द्यात्प्रभातसमये वृक्षमुदक्प्राङमुखोऽपि वा भूत्वा ।
परशोजंजेरशब्दो नेष्टः स्निग्धो घनच हितः ngen
At dawn, facing the east or north the carpenter should cut
the tree. A rough and creaking sound of the axe is not auspicious,
but a soft and deep one is beneficial.
नुपजयदमविध्वस्तं पतनमना कुञ्चितं च पूर्वोदक् ।
श्रविलग्नं चान्यतरो विपरीतमतस्त्यजेत् पतितम् ॥२०॥
If the tree falls down unbroken and unbent, and without being
entangled in other trees, it will confer victory on the king. So will
one that falls with its tip towards the east or north. If it falls down
under contrary circumstances, it should be abandoned.
छित्वाग्रे चतुरङ्गुलमष्टौ मूले जले क्षिपेद्यष्टिम् ।
Sga पुरद्वारं शकटेन नयेन्मनुष्येर्वा ॥२१॥
Four digits of the tree at the top and eight digits at the
bottom should be cut off, and then the trunk should be put into
water. After being taken out it should be carried to the city-gate
either through.a carriage or by men.

Glory of Indra’s Banner XLIII 349
प्ररभडगे बलभेदो नेम्या नाशो बलस्य विज्ञेयः ।
ग्रथक्षयोऽक्षमङ्गे तथाणिभङ्गे च वद्धं किन: ॥२२॥
If the spokes of the carriage were to be broken when the treetrunk is put on it or carried by it, the king’s army would be shattered (i.e. there would be revolt), if the rim breaks, the army will. be
destroyed; if the axle, the king’s wealth would be lost; and if the
axle-pin gives way, the carpenter will come to grief.
भाद्रपदशुक्लपक्षस्याष्टम्यां ATT तो राजा |
देवज्ञसचिवकञ्चुकिविप्रप्रमुखैः सुवेषधरेः ॥२३॥
भ्रहताम्बरसंवीतां ate पौरन्दरीं पुरः पौरेः ।
त्रग्गन्धधूपयुक्तां प्रवेशयेच्छङ्कतूर्यरवंः ॥२४॥
On the eighth day of the bright fortnight of the lunar month
of Bhadrapada, the king, accompanied by the citizens, royal
astrologers, ministers, chamberlains and prominent Brahmanas, all
dressed in auspicious garments, should cause Indra’s Standard covered
with a new cloth and beautified with garlands, perfumes and
incense, to be brought into the town by the people to the
accompaniment of the sounds of conches ard musical instruments.
[Cf. T —
प्रोष्ठपादे सिताष्टम्यां ज्येष्ठायोगे स्वलङ्कृताम् |
afg पौरन्दरीं राजा नगरं सम्प्रवेशयेत् ॥
While paraphrasing Garga’s ideas our author uses sometimes the
very same words as used by the sage. However, here he has omitted
one important condition mentioned by the sage viz. the day should
synchronize with the asterism Jyestha, presided over by Indra. It
may be observed that this year, 1972, we get the Sth lunar day
with Jyestha star after 11.35 A.M. on September 15th.
In the next two verses the author describes the town into
which the Standard is carried.]
रुचिरपताकातोरणवनमालालङ्कृतं प्रहृष्टजनम् ।
सम्माजिताचितपथं सुवेषगणिकाजनाकोरांम् ॥२५॥
श्रभ्यचितापरागृहं प्रमुतपुण्याहवेदनिर्घोषम् ।
नटनर्तकगेयज्ञराकीर्णचतुष्पयं नगरम् ॥२६॥
The town into which the Banner is brought should be decorated
with beautiful flags, triumphal arches and leafy garlands, have happy
and gay people, the thoroughfares kept neat and tidy, as well as

350 Brhat Samhita
purified, and filled with gaily dressed courtesans, Possess shops that
are sanctified, be resounding with the loud chantings of the Punyaha
and other Vedic hymns, and have the junctions of roads filied with
actors, dancers and songsters.
तत्र पताका: saat भवन्ति विजयाय रोगदाः पीता: ।
जयदाश्च चित्ररूपा रक्ता: शस्त्रप्रकोपाय ॥२७॥
d lead to victory; if
Flags hoisted in the capital, if white, woul
success; and if red,
yellow, to outbreak of diseases; if variegated, to
to clash of arms.
gis प्रवेशयन्तीं निपातयन्तो भयाय नांगाद्या: ।
बालानां तलशब्दे सङ्ग्रामः सत्त्वयुद्धे वा ॥२८॥
If the elephants or other animals carrying the Banner into the
town allow it to fall down, there would be danger in store; and if
boys clap their hands or if animals fight each other, at that time,
there would be fighting.
[The expression प्रवेशयन्तीं is not correct, unless it is taken in
the non-causal sense. I suspect that the author might have written
प्रवेशयन्तो which must have been mis-spelt by writers. The commentator explains the word नागाद्याः as “ग्रादिग्रहरादश्वमहिषगवादयो गृह्यन्ते U
I am not sure if buffaloes could be included in this list. ]
सन्तक्ष्य पुनस्तक्षा विधिवर्द्याष्ट प्ररोपयेद्यन्त्रे ।
जागरमेकादश्यां नरेइवर: कारयेच्चास्याम् UREN
सितवस्त्रोष्णीषधरः पुरोहितः शाक्रवेष्णवर्मन्त्र: ।
जुहुयार्दाग्न सांवत्सरो निमित्तानि गृह्होयात् ॥३०॥
Then the carpenter should plane the trunk (of the tree) and
mount it on a platform, so that it is kept horizontally with its tip
resting on something. On the 110 lunar day of the same month
the king should cause vigil to be observed at night. The royal
priest dressed in white clothes and wearing a white turban should
offer oblations to the sacred Fire with hymns addressed to Indra and
Visnu, while the astrologer should observe the auguries of the sacred
fire.
इष्टद्रव्याकारः सुरभि: स्निग्धो घनोऽनलोऽचिष्मानु ।
शुभकृदतोऽन्योऽनिष्टो यात्रायां विस्तरोऽभिहितः ॥३१॥
Ifthe sacred fire be fragrant, glossy, thick, full of flames and
be possessed of the shape of auspicious objects (such as an umbrella),

Glory of Indra’s Banner XLIII 35]
it would be beneficial. If it be otherwise, the result would be di
astrous. This subject (of auguries) has been dealt with by m T:
detail in the work entitled Yatra (or Yogayatra). diu
[The reference to the Yatra here shows that our author had
already written or planned to write that work. The Brhadyatra or
Brhadyogayatra was also known as Mahayatra and was commented
upon by Süryadeva Somasut. Our author has written an abridged
version of this called Svalpayatrà or Tikanikayatra. ne.
to Utpala, the Yogayatra is a different work on journeys written i
Varāhamihira. Dr. H. Kern had edited its first nine chapters. We
are told that the entire work has been published by J.L. Shastri
(Vide I.A.I.B. P. 27). Utpala's commentary on this has not yet
been published. The Brhadyatrà also refers to the Jataka as having
been already written.
Cf. the योगयात्रा--
कृतेऽपि यत्ने$पि कृशः कुशानुर्धातव्यकाष्ठाविमुखो नताचि:।
वामे कृतावर्तशिखोऽतिधूमो विच्छिन्नसोत्क्रम्पविलीनमूत्तिः ॥
सिमिसिमायति चास्य हृविहुंतं सुरधनुःसद्शः कपिलोऽथवा 1
रुधिरपीतकबश्रुहरिच्छविः परुषमूत्तिरनिष्टकरो$नल: ॥
खरकरभकवानरानुरूपो निगडविभीषणशस्त्ररूपभृद्वा |
शवरुधिरवसारिथमञ्जगन्धो हुत भुगनिष्टफलः स्फुलि ङ्गकृच्च ॥
चर्मविपाटनतुल्यनिनादो जजंरददुंररूक्षरवो वा |
agaia पुरोहित मर्त्यान् धूमलवैर् शिवाय हुताशः ॥
हारकुन्दकुमुदेन्दुस न्तिभः सहतोऽङ्गसुखदो महोदयः |
ग्रङ्कुशातपतिवारणाकृति हूं AISA उपमानहव्यभुक् ॥
उत्याय स्वयम्ज्ञ्वलाचिरनलः स्वाहावसाने हवि-
भुङ्क्त देहसुखप्रदक्षिणगतिः स्निग्धो महान् संहतः |
निर्धूमः सुरभिः स्फुलिङ्गरहितो घात नुलोमो मृदु-
मुक्तेन्दीवरका वनद्युतिधरो यातुर्जयं संयति ॥
इष्ठद्रव्यघटातपत्रतुरगश्रीवृक्षश लइति-
भेय॑ब्दोदधिदुन्दुभी तशकठस्निग्धस्वने : पूजित: |
Ag: प्रोक्तविपर्यये हुतवहः स्निग्धो यथाभीष्ट्द:
सव्येऽङ्गे नुपतेदंहस्नतिशुभः WI च लोकाद्वदेत् ॥
The author says here, after giving a good deal of details, that whatever has not been included in this description should be understood
from the traditions current in society. This science of prognostics of
the Sacred Fire is very ancient in that Kalidasa says in connection

352 Brhat Samhita
with Raghu’s Digvijaya (expedition) :
“प्रदक्षिणाचिव्यजिन हस्तेनेव जयं ददौ” 1४ ]
स्वाहावसानसमये स्वयमुज्ज्वलाचि:
स्निग्धः प्रदक्षिणशिखो हुतभुग् quem ।
गद्भादिवाकरसुताजलचारुहारां
धात्रों समुद्ररशनां वशगां करोति ॥३२॥
At the time of the Purnahuti (final oblation) if the sacred fire
blazes forth by itself, is glossy and is full of flames turning to the
right, the king will bring under his sway the entire earth with the
oceans acting as her girdle and the waters of the Ganga and
Yamuna as her beautiful pearl necklaces.
[This verse is a piece of fine poetry with elegant alliteration
and brilliant imagery, though the idea contained in it is not new.
The metre is वसन्ततिलका. |
चामीकराशोककुरण्टकाब्जवं दू्यंनी लोत्पलसन्ति भेऽग्नौ à
न ध्वान्तमन्तभेवनेऽवकाशं करोति रत्नांशुहतं नृपस्य ॥३३॥।
Darkness will not find any place inside the King’s palace, as it
will be dispelled by the rays of gems, when the Sacred Fire is of the
hue of gold, Asoka flower, Kuranta flower, lotus, beryl or blue lilv.
The idea is that if the Fire shows the above characteristics, the
king will soon conquer the entire earth and become very wealthv
and happy.
[These verses give an opportunity to the author to show off
his poetic powers. The metre is the usual उपजाति. There is also
the figure of speech named काव्यलिद्ध.]
येषां रथौघारांवमेघदन्तिनां समस्वनो$ग्नियेदि वापि दुन्दुभेः ।
तेषां मदान्घेभघटावघट्रिता भवन्ति याने तिमिरोपमा दिशः ॥३४॥
Those kings whose sacrificial fire emits sound similar to that
of a group of chariots, oceans, clouds, elephants or drums, will in
their march darken the quarters, being crowded with hosts of intoxicated elephants.
[In the previous verse the author refers .to the auspicious
colours of the Fire. Here he refers to its auspicious sounds. The
figures are quite patent.
The metre is an उपजाति of the इन्द्रवंशा and वंशस्थ mixed
together. ] I

Glory of Indra’s Banner XLIII 353
ध्वजकुम्महयेभभुभृतामनुरूपे वशमेति भूभृताम् ।
उदयास्तधराधराधरा हिमवहिन्ध्यपपोधरा धरा ॥३५॥
Ifthe Fire wer k lik
š Fire were to look like a banner, pot, horse, elephant
or mountain, the concerned kings would bring under their control
the whole earth having the rising and setting mountains for her lips
and the Himalaya and the Vindhya for her bosoms.
[Here again the shapes presented by the flames are referred
to. We see in these verses more of poetry and less of science. The
reader will easilv detect in this verse the happy alliterations, puns
and metaphors. The word भूभृतां is once repeated; while घरा, four
times. The metre is वियोगिनी. It is usual with Sanskrit poets to
fancy the Earth as a damsel whose lofty bosoms are the two mountains, the Himalaya and Vindhya. Bhàsa makes these her ear-rings :
“हिमवद्विन्ध्यकुण्डलाम् (स्वप्न.)]
द्विरदमदसहीस रोजलाजाघृतमधुना च हुताशने सगन्धे ।
प्रणातन्पशिरोमणिप्रभामिर्भवति पुरइछुरितेव भुन पस्य ॥३६॥
If the sacrifice Fire emits the smell of elephant’s ichor, mud,
lotus, fried grains, ghee or honey, the king will have the earth in
front carpeted, as it were, with the rays of the crown-jewels of
prostrate potentates.
[Here the reference is to the smell of the sacred fire. The fancy
is quite clear here. The metre is पुष्पिताग्रा.]
उक्तं यदुत्तिष्ठति शक्रकेतो शुभाशुभं सप्तमरीचिरूपेः ।
तज्जन्मयज्ञग्रहशान्तियात्राविवाहकालेष्वपि चिन्तनीयम् ॥३७॥
Whatever good and bad omens, already delineated, are observed from the features of the sacrificial fire on the occasion of the
installation of Indra’s Banner, should be taken into consideration
also at the time of a person’s birth, sacrifice, propitiatory ceremonies for the planets, journeys or military expeditions and marriage.
[The idea is that whenever a sacrifice is performed in connection with any ceremony, the omens of the fire would be helpful in
predicting the future with reference to that event.
The metre is उपजाति.]
गुडपुपपायसाद्यं विप्रानस्यच्यं दक्षिणाभिश्च ।
श्रवणेन द्वादशयामुत्थाप्योऽन्यत्र वा श्रवणात् ॥३८॥
On:the 12th lunar day ruling the asterism Sravana or any

354 Brhat Samhita
other asterism, the Banner should be raised and erected, after honouring the Brahmanas with jaggery, sweet-meats, milk porridge and
such other dishes as well as with Daksinas (gifts of money).
[We are told that the Standard of Indra should be brought
inside the city on the 8th lunar day and its final erection done on
the 12th Tithi. So it is a festival lasting for five days. It would be
better if the 5th day had the star Sravana; but the former is more
important than the asterism. This reminds us of the rule
मूलेनावाहयेददेवीं sada विसर्जयेत् 1”
GENI
तत्र श्रव॒णायोगेन ध्वजोत्थानं प्रशस्यते |
द्वादश्यां विजये वाइवमुहुत्ते वा दिनेऽथवा 11]
शक्रकुमार्य: कार्याः प्राह मनुः सप्त पञ्च वा तज्ज्ञैः ।
नन्दोपनन्दसञ्ज्ञे पादोनाद्ध॑ध्वजोच्ङ्रायात् NRE
षोडदमागाभ्यधिके जयविजये š वसुन्धरे चान्ये ।
भ्रधिका शक्रजनित्री मध्येऽष्टांशेन AATATT ॥४०॥
Manu has laid down that seven or at least five minor Standards, called /ndra’s Daughters, should be made by experts. Of these
two called Nand and Upananda should measure respectively threefourths and a half of the height of the main Standard. Four others
named Jaya, Vijaya, and two Vasundharas should be taller than the
previous one by a sixteenth. In the middle of these, there should be
one called Indra’s Mother, which is taller than the previous one (viz.
Vasundhara) by an eighth.
[Cf. mi—
रढकाष्ठकृताः पञ्च सप्त वा लक्षणान्विताः d
इन्द्रध्वजस्य शोभार्थं कुमारीः कारयेद् द्विजः ॥
ग्रष्टाविशत्करा यट्टिरष्ट्रहस्ता ततोऽपरा |
विष्कम्भश्चाङ्गुलंस्तस्याः wafufggfuni: स्मृतः ॥
समग्रमनुलोमं वा तक्षं प्राक् शिखयान्वितम् |
कुर्यादिन्द्रध्वजं YA सारदारुमयं शुभम् 11]
प्रीतः कृतानि fagaatfa पुरा भूषणानि सुरकेतोः ।
तानि क्रमेणा दद्यात् पिटकानि विचित्ररूपाणि ॥४१॥
The ornaments of various colours and shapes that were put on
the celestial Standard by the Gods who were very pleased, in days
of yore, should be applied to this Banner also in their order.
s

Glory of Indra’s Banner XLIII 355
[In the following eight verses the author describes the various
ornaments (thirteen in number) offered by various Gods headed by
Vigvakarma, in order.]
रक्ताशोकनिकाशं चतुरस्र fara mem प्रथमम् ॥
रशना स्वयम्भुवा शङ्करेण चानेकवर्णगा TAT USA
meray नीलरक्तं तृतीयमिन्द्रेण भुषणं दत्तम् ।
रसितं यमश्चतुर्थं मसु रकं कान्तिमदयच्छत् ॥४३॥
मञ्जिष्ठाभं वरुणाः षडश्रि तत्पञ्चसं जलोमिनिभम् ।
मायुरं BAL षष्ठं वायुं लदनीलम् ॥४४॥
स्कन्दः स्वं केयुरं सप्तममददाद्ध्वजाय बहुचित्रम् ।
प्रष्टसमनलज्वालासङ्कारां हव्यभुगवृत्तस् NAN
वेदूयंसहशमिब्द्रो नवम ग्रेवेयकं ददावन्यत् ।
रथचक्राभं दशमं सूर्यस्त्वष्टा प्रभायुक्तम् ॥४६॥
एकादशमुद्वंशां विश्वेदेवाः सरोजसङ्कशम् ।
द्वादशमपि च निवेशं मुनयो नीलोत्पलाभासम् ॥४७॥
किञ्चि दध ऊध्वर्निमितमुपरि विशालं त्रयोदशां केतोः ।
शिरसि बृहस्पतिशुक्रौ लाक्षारससन्निभं ददतुः ॥४८॥
यद्यद्येन विभूषणममरेश fafataad ध्वजस्पार्थे |
तत्तत्तहृँवत्यं विज्ञातव्यं विपश्चिज्धि: ॥४६॥
The first ornament made and offered to the Banner by Vi$vakarman, the celestial architect, was red like the Agoka flowers and
of quadrangular form; the Creator and Siva gave severally a girdle
of many colours; the third ornament, octangular and bluish-red, was
offered by Indra; Yama offered the fourth ornament viz. a dark and
lustrous Masüraka (emerald ?); Varuna gave the fifth ornament, a
hexangular one which was like madder in colour, and resembled
the waves of water; Vayu (the Wind-God) bestowed the sixth gift,
viz. an armlet, made of peacock feathers and as dark as the cloud;
Lord Skanda gave it his own multi-coloured armlet for the seventh;
the Fire-God offered the eighth, a circular ornament as brilliant as
the flame of fire; Indra gave another ornament as the ninth, viz. a
necklace resembling beryl; one of the Sun-Gods, Tvastà by name,
gave a lustrous ornament looking like the wheel of a chariot, as the
tenth; the Visve-Devas presented the eleventh ornament named
Udvaria, resembling a lotus; the Sages gave the twelfth ornament
called Nivesa which shone like the blue lily; and lastly Jupiter and
Venus adorned the head of the Banner with the thirteenth ornament

356 Brhat Samhita
with designs at both the ends (or which has a short bottom and tip)
and broad at the top and shining like molten red lac. Whatever
ornaments were created by the different Gods for the sake of the
Banner, are to be taken as being presided over by the respective
Deities.
[The presentation of ornaments to the Banner by the Deiues
is similar to that of ornaments, dress and weapons by different Gods
to the Goddess who was specially created to fight the Asura, described in the सप्तशती, otherwise known as the देवीमाहात्म्य.]
ध्वजपरिमारा>यंश: परिधिः प्रथमस्य भवति पिटकस्य ।
परतः प्रथमात् प्रथमादष्टांशाष्टांशहीनानि ngon
The first ornament has a circumference which is a third of
that of the Banner; and each succeeding ornament should be smaller
than the preceding one by an eighth.
कुर्यादहनि aga पुरणामिन्द्रघ्वजस्य MEAR: |
agat चागमगीतानु मन्त्रानेतानु पठेन्नियतः ॥ ५ १॥
One who knows this science of Indra’s Banner should fill it
with ornaments on the fourth day thereafter ie. onthe 15th lunar
day, and chant with devotion the following hymns sung by Manu
according to the scriptural tradition.
हराकंवेवस्वतशक्रसोमे धंनेश्वेइवानरपाशभृ दि: ।
महाषसङ्घेः सदिगप्सरोमिः शुक्रा द्भिरःस्कन्दमरुद्गणौइच ॥५२॥
यथा त्वमुजस्करणकरूपे: सर्माचतस्त्वाभरणंरुदारंः ।
तथेह तान्याभरणानि योगे शुभानि सम्प्रीतमना TIT ॥५३॥
श्रजोऽव्ययः शाइवत एकरूपो विष्णुवेराह: पुरुषः पुराणाः |
त्वमन्तकः AAT कृशानुः UZAMA: शतमन्युरीड्य: NYX
काव सप्तजिह्द त्रातारमिन्द्रंमवितारं सुरेशम् ।
ह्वयामि शक्रं वृत्रहणं सुषेणमस्माकं वीरा उत्तरा भवन्तु ॥५५॥
“Accept with a pleased heart these auspicious ornaments on
this occasion of the Sacrifice in the same manner as you did, being
worshipped with excellent gifts of brilliant forms by Siva, the Sun,
Yama, Indra, the Moon, Kubera, Fire, Varuna, groups of great
Sages, the Deities presiding over the quarters, nymphs, Venus,
Jupiter, Skanda and the multitudes of Gods (or Maruts). Thou art
without birth, imperishable, eternal, of imm
Š ह utable form, all-pervading, the Great Boar, the ancient Being,
the God of Death, Destroy-

Glory of Indra’s Banner XLIJI 357
er of all things, fire, thousand-headed, Indra and the Adorable. I
invoke the omniscient, Seven-tongued one (Fire), who is the pide
tor; I invoke the mighty Indra, the ruler of the Gods, the destroyer of Vrtra, and leader of a mighty army, who protects us carefully. May our heroes (warriors) be crowned with success !”
[This is a beautiful hymn containing the hoary Vedic phrases
and ideas. It 1s quite clear from these and other Vedic hymns that
the ancient Sages were in direct communion with the higher cosmic
powers which when attuned and channelized helped man to solve
his secular and spiritual problems. The last verse is an abridged
version of the Rk,
“त्रातारमिन्द्रमवितारमिन्द्रं हवे हवे सुहवं शूरमिन्द्रम् ।
हुवे तु शक्र पुरुहृतमिन्द्रं स्वस्ति नो मघवा तात्विन्द्रः 117]
TIT चोच्छुयरो प्रवेशे स्नाने तथा माल्यविधौ विसर्ग à
पठेदिमानुनृपतिः सोपवासो मन्त्राज् शुभान् पुरुहृतस्य केतोः ॥ ५६॥
The king observing fast should recite the above auspicious
hymns in front of the Banner of Indra, when it is decorated, erected,
brought into the town, bathed, bedecked with garlands and when
it is finally removed. j
[The metre is a mixture of «wr, उपेन्द्रवजा and an unnamed
variety of fay which is found in the sacred literature.]
छत्रध्वजादर्शफलाद्धंचन्द्रेविचित्रमालाकदलोक्षुदण्ड: ।
सव्पार्लासहेः पिटकंगवाक्षेरलड्कृतं दिक्षु च लोकपालेः।।५७॥
ग्रच्छिन्नरज्जु हढकाष्ठमातृक सुङ्लिष्टयन्त्रार्गलपादतोरणाम् |
उत्थापयेल्लक्ष्म सहस्रचक्षुषः सारद्रुमाभग्नकुमारिकान्वितम् ॥५८॥
The Standard, bedecked with umbrellas, flags, mirrors, fruits,
crescents, multicoloured garlands, banana trunks, sugar-canes,
figures of snakes and lion, ornaments, windows and the images of
the protectors of the eight quarters in their respective places, should
be raised being fastened with strong ropes and hard wooden props
on both sides, along with the minor standards called ‘‘Indra’s
Daughters” made of strong and unbroken wood. The arch at the.
bottom must be fastened with tight nails.
[Utpala translates फल 25 लाङ्गलम् ploughshare. Under अच्छिन्तरज्जुम् he remarks :
“इन्द्रध्वजबन्धनाथंमष्ठासु दिक्षु भ्रष्टौ रज्जवः कार्या: |

358 Brhat Samhita
and quotes गर्गे--
यथादिशं च wssagt मौञ्जीस्नग्दामसं हिताः |
निग्रहार्थं ध्वजे कार्या निबद्धाशचेन्द्र मण्डले ।।
मातृका is explained as 'इन्द्रध्वजनिष्पीडनार्थ पार्श्वद्वये मातृकाद्वितयं कार्यम् । He
explains the word yama as : तत्र याः मातृकाः पा्श्वेस्थितानि निरन्तराणि काष्ठानि
तासां मातृकाणां तिर्यककृत्वा यानि काष्ठानि निक्षिप्यन्ते तान्यर्गलाग्रहणेनोच्यन्ते ।
The metres employed are उपजाति and इन्द्रवंशा respectively.]
भ्रविरतजनरावं मङ्गलाशीःप्रणामंः
पढुपटहमृदङ्गेः शद्भेर्यादिभिश्च |
श्रतिविहतवचोमिः पापठडमिश्च fasरशुभविहतशब्दं सेतुमुत्यापयेच्च uel
The king should raise the Standard to the accompaniment of
the unceasing shouts of the people drowning the inauspicious sounds
through the auspicious benedictions and ‘invocations, the loud
sounds of drums, tabors, conchs, kettle-drums etc., and through the
repeated loud chantings of Vedic hymns by Brahmanas.
[In the fourth line there is another reading. सुशुभसहितशब्दम्, for
अशुभ- which is evidently an emendation by a later scholar.
The metre of this and of the following verse is मालिनी.]
फलदधिघृतलाजाक्षोद्रपुष्ाग्रहस्तः
प्रशिपतितशिरोमिस्तुष्टवऱ्द्िश्रव पो रेः i
वृतमनिमिषमतुः केतुमीशः प्रजाना-
मरिनगरनताग्रं कारयेद् द्विडबधाय ।'६०॥
The king should ‘cause the Standard to be erected for the
destruction of his enemies, in such a manner that the tip of the
Banner points to the city of the enemy, the Banner being surrounded by the citizens who bow their heads in homage and who invoke
it with fruits, curds, ghee, fried grains, honey and flowers held in
their hands.
[The reading in the second line, तुष्टवद्भि: is adopted by the commentator who construes it as अत्यर्थं स्तुवद्भि:. We are at a loss to find as
to how he could get this meaning from the word gezaq. The correct
reading should be सुष्टुवद्भिः. Otherwise we should interpret the word
as ‘by the happy and content citizens.’]

Glory of Indra’s Banner XLIII
नातिद्रुतं च विलस्बितमप्रकम्पमध्वस्तमाल्यपिटकादिविभूषणं च ।
उत्थानमिष्टमशुभं यदतोऽन्यथा स्या-
तच्छान्तिभिनेरपतेः जशमयेत्पुरोधाः us eu
The raising of the Banner is auspicious if it is neither too slow
nor too fast, not shaky, and if its garlands, decorations and Bini
ments are not spoiled. If it is otherwise, it forebodes evil, and the
royal preceptor should mitigate it through expiatory ceremonies.
[Cf. mi—
अ्रविध्वस्तमनाधूतमद्रताजिह्यामुध्वंगम् ।
इन्द्रघ्वजसमुत्थानं क्षेमसौभिक्षकारकम् ॥
निर्घातोल्क़ामहीकम्पा दीप्ताइच मृगपक्षिणः |
उच्छीयमाणे चण्डा वा वायवः स्युर्भयाय ते ॥
The metre is व्रसन्ततिलका.]
क्रव्यादकोशिककपोतककाककडङ््कः
केतुस्थितेमंहदुशन्ति भयं TIT |
चाषेण चापि युवराजभयं वदन्ति
saat विलोचन मय faqaq करोति ugs
छुत्रमद्कपतने नुपमृत्युस्तस्करान्मधु करोति निलीनम् ।
हन्ति चाप्यथ पुरोहितमुल्का पार्थिवस्य सहिषीमशनिइच ॥६२॥
राज्ञीविनाशं पतिता पताका करोत्यवृष्टि पिटकस्य पातः 1
मध्याग्रमूलेषु च केतुभङ्को निहन्ति मन्त्रक्षितिपालपो रानु u < Yu
धूमावृते शिखिभयं तमसा च मोहो
saa भग्नपतितेने भवन्त्यमात्याः |
ग्लायन्त्युदकप्रमृति च क्रमशो द्विजाद्यान्
सङ्गे च बन्धकिवधः कथितः कुमार्याः gun
रञ्जूत्सद्भच्छेदने बालपीडा राज्ञो मातुः पीडनं मातृकायाः ।
यद्यत्कुर्शचारणा बालका वा तत्तत्ताहग्मावि पापं शुभं वा ॥६६॥
The wise opine that there is great danger in store for the king
ifa carnivorous bird, owl, dove, crow or vulture sits on the Banner.
If it be a blue jay, it is dangerous to the Yuvaraja (prince); an eagle
sitting on it will prove harmful to the king’s eyes. The king will die
if the umbrella on the Banner breaks or falls down If honey- bees
cling to it, there will be increase of thieves; a meteor falling on it

360 Brhat Samhita
will kill the royal priest; a lightning augurs the queen’s death. The
fall of a flag on it denotes the queen’s exit, while that of an ornament augurs drought. If the Banner should break in the middle,
top and bottom, the ministers, king and citizens respectively will
meet with their end. When the Banner is covered with smoke, there
is danger from fire; when with darkness, mental aberration will be
the result. If the figures of snakes fall or break, the minister will
come to grief. If portents are sighted in the north and other quarters, Brahmanas and other classes in order will suffer. If any of the
minor standards, called ‘Indra’s Daughters’, breaks, courtezans will
be killed. Should the ropes snap, there would be trouble to children.
If the prop at the bottom breaks, the king’s mother will be troubled.
Whatever good or bad is done by boys or actors (or wandering
ministrels) at the time will have corresponding effects on the
people.
[Cf. गग --
प्रहृष्टमनसः सर्वे क्रीडेयुर्मुदिता यदि |
यदा जलेन गन्धंश्च विन्द्यात् सौभिक्षलक्षणम् ॥
AMET रक्तकः केशंभंस्मना क्रन्दनेन च ।
दुभिक्षपीडा विज्ञेया शस्त्रश्चापि भयं वदेत् i
The metres of these five verses are in order वसन्ततिलका, स्वागता,
उपजाति, इन्द्रवस्त्रा and शालिनी].
दिनचतुष्टयमुत्थितमचितं समभिपुज्य नृपोऽहनि पञ्चमे i
प्रकृतिभिः ag लक्ष्म विसजंयेद् बलभिदः स्वबलामिविवृद्धये ngon
After worshipping the erected Standard of Indra for four days,
the king should discard it on the fifth day (i.e. the first day of the
dark fortnight) after due worship in the company of his ministers
for the rise of his own power.
[The metre is द्रुतविलम्बित].
उपरिचरवसुप्रवतितं नृपतिभिरप्यनसन्ततं कृतम् i
विधिमिममनुमन्य पाथिवो न रिपुकृतं भयमाप्नुयादिति ngan
Should a king observe this vow (or rule) established by Uparicaravasu and followed by other kings without a break, he would not
experience any trouble from his enemies.
[The metre is वैतालीय.]

नोराजनविधि: uv
Chapter X LIV— Lustration Ceremony
[An important item in the worship of Hindu Gods in temples
as well as homes is the waving of different kinds of lights before the
Deities. This is called आरति in the vernaculars and नीराजन in Sanskrit.
Originally it consisted of purificatory rituals. This kind of worship
is also offered to kings, warriors, heroes, bridal couple etc. Even
royal emblems, horses etc. were recipients of this honour in ancient
times. It is done in the month of Karttika in the autumnal season
before kings undertook military expeditions. Actually it isa purificatory ceremony.]
भगवति जलधरपक्ष्मक्षपाकराकक्षरो कमलनाभे |
उन्मीलयति तुरद्भमकरिनरनीराजन कुर्यात् utu
When the Lord Narayana opens His eyes, viz. the Sun and the
Moon, with the eye-lashes of the clouds (i.e. when He wakes up from
His Yoganidra or Yogic slumber), the purificatory ceremony, called
Nirajana (or Lustration), should be performed for the horses, elephants and warriors.
[“Nīrājanā is lustration of arms, a kind of military and religious ceremony performed by kings or generals of armies in the
month of Agvina before they took the field; (it was, so to say, a
general purification of the king's Purohita, the ministers, and all
the various component parts of the army, together with the arms
and implements of war, by means of sacred Mantras)." (Apte
Dictionary). This is mentioned by poets like Kalidasa ““वाजिनीराजनाविधो”
(xe 1९-25) and Sriharsa in the Naisadha “रराज नीराजनया स <.
Actually the word नीराजनं is derived thus: ““नीरेण जलेन अजनं स्पशेनम् ।
This is done by householders for cows during the Dipavali and
for tools etc. during the Dussera. The Lord Visnu is said to go into
His yogic slumber on the llth lunar day of the month of Asadha
and remains in it for four months and wakes up on the Ekadasi of
Karttika.]

362 Brhat Samhita
द्वादश्यामष्टभ्यां कात्तिकशुक्लस्य पञ्चदश्यां वा ।
भ्राइवयुजे वा कुर्यान्तोराजनसञ्ज्ञितां शान्तिम् uqu
The purificatory ceremony named lustration should be performed on the 8th, 12th or 15th day of the bright half of the lunar
month Kirttika or Afvina.
[Bhattotpala interprets without reason the word पञ्चदश्यां as full
Moon or New Moon. Amāvāsyā is not meant here by the author. ]
नगरोत्तरपुर्वदिशि प्रशस्तमुमौ प्रशस्तदारुमयम् |
षोडशहस्तोच्छ्रायं दशविपुलं तोरणं BAA ॥३॥
In the north-east of the town onan auspicious ground a
triumphal arch of excellent timber, measuring 16 cubits in height
and ten cubits in width, should be erected.
[प्रशस्तदार is that timber which is used for sacrificial purposes.
The jack tree, Devadaru etc. are included in this list.]
सर्जोदुम्बरशाखाककुभमयं शान्तिसद्म कुशबहुलम् ।
वंशविर्निमतमत्स्प्रध्वजचक्रालङकृतद्वारस् uyu
It is also necessary to have a holy house (meant for propitiatory rites), made of the branches of the Sal tree, Indian fig tree or
the Arjuna tree, fully strewn with Ku$a grass and having a door
adorned with the figures of fishes, flags and discuses made of
bamboo.
प्रतिसरया तुरगाणां मल्लातकशालिकुष्ठसिद्वार्थान् i
कण्ठेषु निबध्नीयात् पुष्ट्यर्थं शान्तिगृहगाणाम् uuu
With a string dipped in saffron paste, marking nuts, rice, costus
and white mustard seeds should be tied to the neck of the horses
brought into the holy house for the sake of their prosperity.
[According to the Amarakoga the word प्रतिसर is not used in
the feminine, but our author does not regard the rule as sacrosanct.
Cf. काश्यप--
शालिजातकसिद्धार्थानु कुष्ठं भल्लातक तथा |
BRAG कण्ठे बघ्नीयात्सप्ताहं शान्तिमाचरेत् u]
रविवरुणविइवदेवप्रजेशपुरुहतवेषणव मन्त्रे: ।
सप्ताहं शान्तिगृहे कुर्याच्छान्ति qug ॥६॥
A propitiatory ceremony should be performed in the holy house
for the horses for seven days with the Vedic hymns addressed to the

Lustration Ceremony XLIV 363
Sun-God, Varuna, Visvedevas, Brahman, Indra and Visnu.
(Cf. काश्यप--
पौष्टिकविविधेर्मन्त्रे: पुरोधा ज्वलनं हुते(वे?)त् |
हुतान्ते भोजयेद्विप्रान् दक्षिणां विपुलां ददेत् i]
ग्र्याचिता न परुषं वक्तव्या नापि ताडनीयास्ते ।
पुण्या हृशङ्ूर्यध्वनिगीत रवेविमुक्तमया: ॥७॥
The horses that have been worshipped thus ought not to be
addressed harshly or beaten. On the other hand, their fears and
misgivings ought to be dispelled through the holy sounds of the
Punyaha hymns, conchs, musical instruments and songs.
्रप्तेऽष्टमेऽहह्न कुर्यादुदड्मुखं तोरणस्य दक्षिणतः ।
कुशची रावृतमाश्रममर्नि पुरतोऽस्य वेद्यां च ॥८॥
When the 8th day dawns, a hermitage covered with the holy
‘grass and tree barks should be constructed to the south of the arch
and facing the north. In the front part of this hermitage sacred fire
should be installed on a sacrificial altar.
[Cf. काश्यप--
ग्रष्टमे$ह्ि पुरस्कृत्य राजा पौरजनंवृ तः |
गच्छेच्छान्तिगृहं हृष्टः शङ्कतू्यंरवेः सह ॥
From the author’s description it becomes clear that the Asrama
mentioned here is different from the Santigrha, the former being
meant for sacrifice, while the latter for the worship of the horses.
Bhattotpala quotes extensively in this connection from some
work dealing with sacrificial altars :
यज्ञे चतुष्षष्टिकरा विवाहे वेदी द्विजानां द्वित रप्रमाणा |
कार्या ततोऽष्ठांशशमक्रमेण राजन्यवेश्यवृषलान्त्यजानाम् ॥
तथा A—
सप्तहस्ता ब्राह्मणानां वेदी यज्ञे प्रकोतिता |
षट्करा क्षत्रियाणां तु वेश्यानां पञ्च कीत्तिता ॥
«gécar तु शुद्राणां विवाहेऽपि विनिश्चिता |
ग्रलाभे सर्ववर्णानां चतुर्हस्ता प्रकीतिता ॥
व्यन्त राणामतो न्यूना निदिष्टा मुनिभिः सदा |
अतो न्यूनाधिका वेदी यजमानस्य मृत्युदा ॥

364 Brhat Samhita
तथा च
यज्ञे विवाहे वक्ष्यामि वेदिमान समासतः |
त्रिःसप्तहस्तविस्तारा ब्राह्मणानां शुभावहा |!
क्षत्रियाणां पञ्चदशी वेश्यानां नवसंमिता |
सप्तहस्ता तु शुद्राणां शिल्पिनां पञ्च कीतिता t
त्रिहस्ता व्यन्तराणां तु वेदी aaa कीत्तिता |
भुवोऽपरोधे मर्त्यानां चातुवेण्ये: प्रकीतिता ॥
पञ्चहस्ता कृता वंदी सर्वमाद्भल्यदायिका ॥
We are told that Varáhamihira himself has given in the following
verse the effects of the altars :
वेदी शुभाशुभविघानविधौ प्रदिष्टा
दिकस्थानमानाभ्यधिका न हीना |
श्रष्टा प्रमाणेन करोति भङ्ग
दिग्वक्रसंस्था न च सिद्धिदा स्यात् u
प्राग्भागहीना नगरस्य नेष्टा पुरोधसो दक्षिणभागवक्रा |
नरेन्द्र जायाऽशुभदाऽपरस्यामुदग्बलेशस्य नृपस्य मध्ये l|]
चन्दनकुष्ठसमङ्गा हरितालमनःङिलाप्रियङ्गुवचाः i
दन्त्यमृताञ्जनरजनीसुवरणं पुष्प्यग्निमन्थाइच WE
इवेतां सपुर्णकोशां कटम्मरात्रायमाणसहदेवीः ।
नागकुसुम स्वगुप्तां शतावरीं सोमराजीं च ॥१०॥
कलशेष्वेताः कृत्वा सम्मारानुपहरेदुर्बाल सम्यक् ।
भक्ष्येर्नानाकारेम घुपायसयावकप्रचुरेः॥ १ tu
Sandalwood, costus, madder, yellow orpiment, red arsenic,
Priyangu, Vaca (orris root), Danti, Guricha, Morunga (or antimony ?), turmeric, Suvarnapuspl, Agnimantha (Premua Spinosa),
Girikarnika (Clitoria), Pirnakosa, Katurohini, Trayamana,
Sahadevi, Nagapuspa, Kapikacchu (Cowitch), Satavari and
Somaraji—all these sacrificial materials should be put into full
pots, and the same collected materials offered properly to the Deities
as Bali (food) along with eatables of various kinds, consisting mostly
of honey, milk porridge and barley preparations.
[In some editions एता: in the last verse is read as एतान्, thus
making it an adjective of सम्भारान्. In the first verse सुवर्णपुष्पारिन- is the
other reading. A big list of herbs—Osadhis—is given here. They are
to be put into the Holy Pot which is worshipped. The Balyupaharana
may also mean the offering of food to the different Deities on the
ground, and not necessarily offerings to the fire.]

Lustration Ceremony XLIV 365
खदिरपलाशोदुम्बरकाइमर्यशवत्यनिमिताः समिधः ।
स्र ककनकाद्रजताद्वा कतंव्या भूतिकामेन uisu
The sacrificial twigs required are of Khadira, Pala$a, Indian
fig tree, KaSmari and Asvattha (holy fig tree). One who wishes for
prosperity should use the sacrificial ladle made of gold or silver.
पूर्वाभिमुखः श्रीमान्वयाध्र चर्मरि स्थितो राजा ।
तिष्ठेदनलसमीपे तुरगमिषग्देववित्सहितः ॥ १३॥
The king who is possessed of royal power and majesty and is
accompanied by a veterinary surgeon and an astrologer, should take
his seat on a tiger-skin facing the east in front of the sacred fire.
यात्रायां यदभिहितं ग्रहयज्ञविधो महेन्द्रकेतौ च ।
वेदीपु रोहितानललक्षणार्मास्मस्तदवधायंस् ॥ १४॥
Whatever symptoms of the altar, priest and fire have been
given in my work on Yatra (Journey) in connection with the
sacrifices to the planets and: Indra’s Banner, should be carefully
noted and applied to this ceremony as well.
[The commentator quotes profusely from the Yatra in connection With ग्रहयज्ञ thus :
ग्रहयज्ञमतो वक्ष्ये तत्र निमित्तानि लक्षयेदवेद्याम् |
west मानोनायां दिरभ्रष्टायामसिद्धिशचः॥
नगरपुरोहितदेवीसेनापतिपाथिवक्षयं कुरुते |
प्राग्दक्षिणापरोत्तरमध्यमभागेषु या विकला N
with the पुरोहित thus :—
कम्पोच्छवास विजुम्भराप्रचलनस्वेदाश्रुपातक्षुधो-
द्गाराद्यं च पुरोधसः स्मृतिविपच्चानिष्टमन्यच्छुभम् |
atsa केशपिपीलिकामलयुतं सत्त्वावलीढं च यत्तन्नेष्टं शुभमन्यथोपकरणं द्रव्याण्यनूनानि च ॥
For the symptoms of the fire see the ararat quoted under XLIII-31
supra.]
लक्षणयुक्तं तुरगं द्विरदवरं चेव दीक्षितं स्नातम् ।
ग्हतसिताम्बरगन्धस्नःधषू पाम्यचितं कृत्वा ut
ग्राl्भमतोरणमुलं समुपतयेत्सान्त्वयञ्छनेर्वाचा ।
वादित्रशङ्कपुण्याहनिःस्वनाषुरितदिगन्तम् tuts
A horse possessing laudable features and an excellent
elephant, after being consecrated, bathed and honoured with new

366 Brhat Samhita
white cloths, perfumes, garlands and incense, should be brought
slowly with coaxing words under the arch of the hermitage, with
the quarters resounding with the noise of musical instruments,
conchs and Punyaha hymns.
[For the features of horses and elephants see LXVI and
LXVII respectively].
यद्यानीतास्तष्ठेददक्षिणचरणं हयः समुत्क्षिप्य ।
स जयति तदा नरेन्द्रः angu: यत्नात् ॥१७॥
त्रस्थन्नेष्टो राज्ञः परिशेषं चेष्टितं द्विपहयानाम् |
यात्रायां व्यार्यातं तदिह विचिन्त्यं यथायुक्ति ॥१८॥
Should the horse or elephant brought into the Santi-sadman
(holy house) stand with its right leg uplifted, the king would conquer
his enemies ere long without difficulty. Should it stand frightened,
it would be harmful to the king. Allother activities of elephants
and horses indicating good and bad results, which have been dealt
with at length in the Yatra should be applied to lustration also
according to circumstances.
[For omens through horses and elephants see XCIII. 5.13.14;
पिण्डमभिमन्त्र्य दद्यात्पुरोहितो वाजिने स यदि जिघ्रेत् ।
Rae जयकृद्विप रीतोऽतोऽन्यथाभिहितः ॥ १९॥
The royal priest should give the horse a rice ball duly sanctified with Vedic hymns. Should the horse smell or eat it, the king
would come out victorious; otherwise it would lead to his defeat.
कलशोदकेषु शाखामाप्लाव्योदुम्बरीं स्पृशेत् तुरगान |
शान्तिकपौष्टिकमन्त्रेरेवं सेनां सनृपनागाम् NoN
The priest should dip a branch of the Indian fig tree in the
holy waters of the full pots (already worshipped) and touch the
horses with it to the accompaniment of Vedic hymns meant for both
expiation and propitiation. The same thing should be repeated for
the army, the king and the elephants.
[In mantras and medicines there are two varieties viz. remedial and progressive. Among medicines we have curative ones and
those that are tonics meant for improving one’s health, one being
destructive and the other constructive.]

Lustration Ceremony XLIV
शान्ति राष्ट्रविवृद्धय कृत्वा भूयोऽभिचा रकंमंन्त्रंः ।
मृण्मयर्मार विभिन्द्यत्च्छ्लेनोरःस्थले विप्रः ॥२१॥
The expiatory (or remedial) ceremony should be repeated for
the prosperity ofthe kingdom, and then the priest should pierce
the heart of the enemy made of clay with a spike, chanting the
hymns used in black magic. P.
खलिनं हयाय दद्यादभिमन्त्र्य पुरोहितस्ततो राजा ।
megas पूर्वा यायान्नीराजितः सबलः ॥२२॥
Then the priest should give the sanctified bits to the horse
Thereafter the king should mount the horse, receive lustration d
proceed towards the north-east along with his army.
[The word उदक्पूर्वा may also be interpreted as ‘first to the
north’. In this connection we may remember Kalidasa’s statement
in the Raghu.
“स गुप्तमुलप्रत्यन्तः शुद्धपाष्णिरयान्वितः |
षड्विधं बलमादाय प्रतस्थे दिग्जिगीषया ॥ `
and
Ug ययौ प्रथमं प्राचीं... ...
मृदद्गशङ्कध्वनिहृष्टकुञ्जरस्रवन्मदामोदसुगर्धिमार्तः ।
ज्िरोमरित्रातचलत्प्रभाचयेज्वेलन्विवस्वानिव तोयदात्यये ॥२३॥
हंसपङ्क्तिमिरितस्ततोऽद्रिराट् सम्पतद्रिरिव शुक्लचामरः |
मृष्न्धपवनानुवाहिमिर्धूयमानर्शचरल्नगम्बरः TERT
न॑ कवर्णमरिवज्त्रभूषितर्भूषितो मुकुटकुण्डलाङ्कदंः |
भूरिरत्नकिरणान्, रजितः शक्रकार्सकर्राच समुद्वहन् URAN
उत्पतद्धूरिव खं तुरद्धमेर्दारयऱ्हिरिव दस्तिभिध॑ राम् |
निजित[रिमिरिवामरेन रेः शक्र वत्परिवृतो AAT: ॥२६॥
The king should proceed under the following happy circumstances : The breeze is scented by the smell of the dripping ichor of
elephants that are gladdened by the sounds of tabors and conchs.
He shines like the Sun in autumn by the mass of glittering rays of
His beautiful garlands and clothes are shaken by
f fine fragrance, just as the Himalaya
flying hither and thither, carrying
The king, adorned with his crown,
his crest jewels.
white chowries wafting waves 0
is surrounded by rows of swans
with them the fragrant breeze.

368 Brhat Samhita
ear-rings and armlets bedecked with gems and diamonds of myriad
hues, would resemble Indra’s Bow (rainbow) in lustre, being irradiated with the rays of innumerable gems. The king would be
accompanied by horses springing up to the sky, as it were, by
elephants tearing up, as it were, the earth, and by warriors, who
have vanquished their foes, just as Indra is attended upon by the
Gods who have defeated their enemies.
[The author cannot resist the temptation of showing off his
poetic talents whenever there is an opportunity for it. The similes
and fancies he employs here are well known images in Sanskrit
literature. Even the diction is appropriate for the theme. मृष्टगन्धपवनानुवाहिभिः reminds us of Kalidasa's expression, ‘प्राचारपुतं पवनः सिषेवे'
(Raghu 11-10) and 'यद्वायुरन्विष्टमृगैः कि रातै रासेव्यते भिन्नशिखण्डिबह: (कुमार.
I-15). Inthe last verse we find traces of Kalidasa's influence :
'पञ्योदग्रप्लुतत्वाद्वियति बहुतरं स्तोकमुर्व्यां प्रयाति’ (शाकु. 1-7) and 'वप्रक्रीडा-
परिणातगजप्रेक्षणीयं ददशे (मेघ० २). शक्रकार्मुकरुचं is another reading.
The first is in वंशस्य metre and the rest in रथोद्धता.]
सवत्त्रमुक्ताफलभूषणोऽथवा सितस्रगुष्णीषविलेपनास्बरः ।
घृतातपत्रो गजपृष्ठमाश्रितो घनोपरीवेन्दुतले भृगोः सुतः ॥२७॥
Or, he should proceed being adorned with diamonds, pearls
and ornaments, wearing white garlands, turban, ointment and
garments, having the royal umbrella held over his head, and sitting
on an elephant, just as planet Venus rides a cloud having the Moon
above him.
[Like Kalidasa in the Raghu (XIII. 76) “तारापतिस्तरलविद्युदिवा-
श्रवृन्दम् |" here our author employs a very charming simile taken
from the planetary region.
The metre is वंशस्थ].
सम्प्रहृष्टतरवाजिकुञ्जरं निमलप्रह रणांशु anres t
निविकारमरिपक्षभीषरां यस्य सेन्यमचिरात्स गां जयेत् ॥२८॥
The king whose army consists of soldiers, elephants and horses
in a happy mood, is bright with the rays of glittering weapons, is
free from unnatural dispositions or evil portents, and is dreadful to
the hosts of the enemies, will conquer ere long the whole earth.
[The metre is रथोद्धता].

खज्जनकलक्षराध्याय: ॥४५॥।
Chapter XLV—The Wagtail
खञ्जनको नामायं यो विहगस्तस्य दने प्रथमे ।
प्रोक्तानि यानि मुनिभिः फलानि तानि प्रवक्ष्यामि ngu
I shall now expound the effects, enunciated by ancient Sages,
of the first sighting of the bird called Wagtail in the season.
[The commentator tells us that the Wagtail cannot be seen
during the four months beginning with Sravana. Many types of this
bird are mentioned below.]
स्थुलोऽभ्युन्ततकण्ठः कृष्णगलो भद्रकारको AT: ।
प्राकण्ठमुखात् कृष्णः AFJ: पुरयत्याशाम् UII
कृष्णो गलेऽस्य बिन्दुः सितकरटान्तः स रिक्तकुद्रिक्तः ।
पोतो गोपीत इति क्लेशकरः खञ्जनो Ze: ॥३॥
A variety of wagtails named Bhadra, which has a stout body
and a black raised neck, is auspicious. One which is black from
the face to the neck is called Sampürna (Full) and fulfils one's ambition. The one with dark spots on the neck and white cheeks is
named Rikta (Empty) and causes disappointment. The one called
Gofita which is yellow in colour produces troubles when sighted.
[Cf काश्यप
स्थुलो5भ्युन्नतकण्ठो यो भद्रः कृष्णगलः स्मृतः |
कृष्णमूर्घा गलान्तं यः स सम्पूर्णं इति स्मृतः ॥
करटान्तौ सितौ यस्य कृष्णो बिन्दुगेले तथा ॥
स रिक्त इति निर्दिष्ट: पीतो गोपीतकः स्मृतः u
नामानुरूपेण फलं विहगानां विनिदिशेत् ॥]
गथ मधुरसुरभिफलकुसुमतरुषु सलिलाशयेषु पुण्येषु i
करितुरगभुजगम्ध्नि प्रासादोद्यानहम्यषु ॥४॥
गोगोष्ठसत्समागमयज्ञोत्सवपाथिवद्विजसमीपे ।
हस्तितुरङ्गमशालाच्छ्त्रधवजचामराद्येषु ॥५॥
हेमसमीपसिताम्बरकमलोत्पलपुजितोपलिप्तेषु à
दधिपात्रधान्यकूटेषु च श्रियं en कुरुते ॥६॥।

370 Brhat Samhita
A wagtail sighted in the following places tends to prosperity :
On trees bearing fragrant flowers and sweet fruits, on holy lakes
and rivers, on the heads of elephants, horses and serpents, on temples, gardens and mansions, near cows, Cowpens, assemblage of
virtuous men, sacrifices, auspicious functions (or festivities , kings
and Brahmanas, on elephant-yards, stables, umbrellas, flags, chowries and other royal appendages, near gold, on white cloths, lotuses,
blue lilies, worshipped objects, paved and decorated spots, on curdpots and corn-heaps.
पङ्के स्वाहन्नाप्तिर्गोरससम्पच्च गोमयोपगते i
शाद्वलगे वस्त्राप्तिः शकटस्थे देशविश्र शः ॥॥७॥
ggqewsdw शो वध्रे वन्धोऽशुचौ भवति रोगः ।
पृष्ठे त्वजाविकानां प्रियसङ्गममावहत्याशु usun
When the wagtail is seen perched on silt, one wiil enjoy
sweet food; on a heap of cow-dung, excellent milk and milkproducts; on green grass, clothes; on a cart, there will ensue devastation ofthe country; on the roof of a house, there will be loss of
wealth; on a piece of hide, imprisonment; on filth, disease; and
on the backs of goats and sheep, immediate union with one’s
beloved.
महिषोष्ट्गदं भास्थिरमशानगृहकोराझकंराट्टस्थः ।
प्राकारभस्मकेशेषु चाशुभो मरणरुग्भयदः NEN
Ifthe wagtail is seen sitting ona buffalo, camel, donkey,
bones, burial ground, corner of a house, clod of earth, turret, compound wall or a heap of ashes or hair, the result would be disastrous and would cause danger from disease and death.
[अद्रि is another reading for अट्र.]
पक्षी धुन्वन्नशुमः शुभः पिबन्वारि निम्नगासंस्य: ।
सूर्योदये प्रशस्तो नेष्टफलः खञ्जनोऽस्तमये ॥१०॥
Jt is inauspicious, if the wagtail is seen flapping its wings;
auspicious, if it is found drinking water from a river; it is beneficial
to sight it at sunrise, but in the evening, the result will be
harmful.
[वारिवाहस्थ: is another reading for निम्नगासंस्थः. The commentator
interprets वारिवाह as a channel or tube carrying water. The common
meaning, however, is ‘cloud’.]

The Wagtail XLV 371
नीराजने निवृत्ते यया दिशा खञ्जनं नृपो यान्तम् ।
qaar गतस्य क्षिप्रमरातिवजमुपेति ॥११॥
If a king observes at the end of lustration ceremony a wagtail
flying in a particular direction and marches against an enemy whose
country is situated in that direction, he will surely subjugate that
enemy in no time.]
[The wagtail will help a king in throwing his enemy off his
guard, because the latter’s spies might have brought the news of the
intention of the marching king to attack a king living in another
direction.
तस्मिन्निधिभंवति मंथुनमेति यस्मिन्
यस्मिस्तु छर्दयति तत्र तलेऽस्ति mraq ।
श्रद्खारमप्युपदिशन्ति पुरीषरोऽस्य
तत्कोतुकापनयनाय खनेद् धरित्रीम् ॥१२॥
There will be a treasure underneath the place where the
wagtail copulates; mica, where it vomits; and charcoal, where it
voids its excrements. To satisfy one’s curiosity one may dig the
earth in the same place.
(Cf. काश्यप
मंथुनं कुरुते यत्र तत्र वे निधिमादिशेत् ।
भुक्तं छदेयते यत्र तत्र काचमधो भवेत् ॥
पुरीषं यत्र कुरुते तत्राङ्गारं विनिदिशेत् n]
मृतविकलविभिन्नरोगितः स्वतनुसमानफलप्रदः खगः ।
घनकृदभिनिलीयमानको वियति च बन्धुसमागमप्रदः ॥१३॥
The bird being dead, crippled, wounded or diseased produces
effects similar to its own condition on the person that sees it. If it
comes to roost in one’s front, the person will get wealth; if it flies up
into the sky, it augurs one’s meeting with one’s kith and kin.
[The metre is वैतालीय. The expression मृत...रोगितः is grammatically indefensible. It should have been —<rrar+.]
नपतिरपि शुभं द्युमप्रदेशे खगमवलोक्य महीतले विदध्यात् ।
सुरभिकुसुमधूपयुक्तमर्घ शुभमभिनन्दितमेवमेति वृद्धिस् ॥१४॥
When the king observes an auspicious wagtail in an auspicious
place, he should make an offering consisting of fragrant flowers and
incense on the ground. By doing so (i.e. by honouring an auspicious omen), he obtains all prosperity and much happiness.

[The metre is पुष्पिताग्रा.]
्रशुभमपि विलोक्य खञ्जनं हिजगुरुसाधुसुराचंने रतः ।
न नुपतिरशुभं समाप्नुयान्न यदि दिनानि च सप्त मांसभुक् utut
Should a king behold an ill-omened wagtail, he would not
meet with evil consequences, provided he engages himself in worshipping Brahmins, preceptors, pious men and gods, and also
abstains from meat for one full week.
[The metre is वैतालीय.]
ग्रावर्षात्प्रथमे दशने फलं प्रतिदिनं तु दिनशेषात् ।
दिक्स्थानमुत्तिलग्नक्षंशान्तदीप्तादिभिइचोह्यम् ॥१६॥
The effects of the first sight of a wagtail will be felt within a
year; and those of the daily sight, before the end of the day itself.
The effects must be carefully determined after examining the direction, place, physical features, the Lagna, the asterism, position with
respect to the Sun etc.
[Cf. काश्यप--
प्रथमे दर्शने पाकमावर्षात्प्रवदेद् बुध: |
प्रतिदेवसिके वाच्यं दशंनेऽस्तमये फलम् |!
The good quarters are east, north and north-east. The auspicious
places are mentioned in verses 4-6 supra. The good physical features
are found in the Bhadra and Sampiirna types (see verse 2 supra).
Regarding the ascendant it should be seen whether the sign is owned, occupied and aspected by benefics. Among the asterisms Dhruva
(Firm) and Mrdu (Tender) are auspicious; Ksipra (Fast), Cara
(Moving) and Sadharana (Common) are medium, and Daruna (Dreadful) and Ugra (Fierce) are forbidden or inauspicious. A place is
called Dipta or Santa according as it is lighted by the Sun or
protected from it. There are other places named Angara (Charcoal)
and Dhumita (Smoky) A bird may also be Dipta (Harsh) in its cry.
These are explained in detail in LXXXVI etc.)
पणा —

उत्पाताध्यायः ॥४६॥
Chapter XLVI—Portentous Phenomena
यानत्रेरुत्पातानु WH: Mata तानहं वक्ष्ये ।
तेषां सङ्क्षेपोऽयं प्रकृते रन्यत्वमुत्पातः ॥ १॥
I shall now expound the portents enunciated by Sage Atri and
taught by Garga after him. The following is a summary of such
portents. Anything that is contrary to nature is called Utpdta or
Portent.
(Cf. the author's समाससंहिता--
य: प्रक्ृतिविपर्यासः सर्वः सङ्क्षेपतः स उत्पातः |
क्षितिगगनदिव्यजातो यथोत्तरं गुरुतरो भवति u
There are three kinds of portents viz. terrestrial, atmospheric and
heavenly. The science of portents or unnatural occurrences was
originally taught by Sage Atri to Sage Garga, who in his turn
wrote down details of these in his संहिता.]
ATA नराणामुपसर्गः पापसञ्चया-द्ूवति ।
संसूचयन्ति दिव्यान्तरिक्षमौमास्त उत्पाताः uqu
Sins accumulate as a result of bad deeds committed by men.
These sins in their turn bring about troubles to them. The three
kinds of portents, viz. celestial, atmospheric and terrestrial, foreshadow such troubles.
[Cf. गर्ग--
अतिलोभादसत्याद्वा नास्तिक्याद्वाप्यधर्मत: |
नरापचारान्नियतमुपसगे: TTT u]
मनुजानामपचारादपरक्ता देवताः सुजन्त्येतात् |
तत्प्रतिघाताय नपः शान्ति राष्ट्रे प्रयुक्षीत ॥३॥
Displeased with the misdeeds of human beings, the Gods
create these portents. The king should cause propitiatory rites to be
performed in his kingdom for warding off their evil consequences.

374 DTA’ VAMMIG
[The effects of both good and bad deeds are indicated by good
and bad omens respectively. These Utpatas are the precursors of
disasters. Some people argue that remedial ceremonies are quite
unnecessary and ineffective in preventing what is destined to happen
since the latter is the effect of Prarabdhai.e. deeds of previous life
that have already begun to yield their effects. If we were to follow
this philosophy of fatalism, man would have no impetus to do any
work for improving his lot. The Prarabdha gives man certain inherent tendencies, no doubt, but he, being a thinking animal, has
some amount of freedom to work for his uplift or downfall. Hence
the sages of yore found that remedial measure had great significance
and could be used for removing hurdles and for constructive
purposes.
Cf. गर्ग—
ततोऽपचाराम्म्त्यानामपरज्यन्ति देवताः |
ते सृजन्त्यद्भ॒तान् भावान् दिव्यभूम्यन्त रिक्षजान् ॥
त एव सर्वलोकानामुत्पाता देवनिमिताः |
विचरन्ति विनाशाय wd: सम्बोधयन्ति च ॥
तानु शास्त्रनिगेमा विप्राः पश्यन्ति ज्ञानचक्षुषा |
प्रवदन्ति तु मर्त्येषु हितार्थं श्रद्धयान्विताः ॥
ते तु सम्बोधिता fas: शान्तये मङ्गलानि च ।
श्रहृघानाः प्रकुर्वन्ति न ते यान्ति पराभवम् 1
ये तु न प्रतिकुर्वन्ति क्रियामश्रद्धयान्विताः à
नास्तिक्यादथवा कोपाद्विनशयन्त्यथवाऽचिरात् U]
दिव्यं ग्रहक्ष॑वकृतमुल्कानिर्घातपवनपरिवेषाः |
गन्धवंपुरपुरन्दरचापादि यदान्तरिक्षं तत् uyu
भौमं चरस्थिरभवं तच्छान्तिभिराहतं शममुपंति ।
नामसमुपेति मृदुतां शाम्यति नो दिव्यमित्येके ॥५॥
The celestial portents are the unnatural behaviour `of planets,
and asterism, meteors, thunders, storms and halos; the atmospheric
ones are aerial cities, rainbows etc; and the terrestrial ones arise
from the moving and stationary objects. The terrestrial portents
become ineffective being struck down by remedial measures; the
atmospheric ones can be mitigated by expiatory rites, while the
celestial ones, according to some, cannot be nullified.

Portentous Phenomena XLVI 376
(Cf. गर्ग—
स्वर्भानुकेतुनक्षत्रग्रहता रा कजेन्द्रजम् (जेन्दुजम् ?) ।
दिवि चोत्पद्यते यच्च तहिव्यमिति कीतितम् ॥
वाय्वश्रसन्ध्यादिग्दाहपरिवेषतमांसि च ।
WX चेन्द्रचापं च तद््िन्द्यादन्त xen |i
भूमावुत्पद्यते यच्च स्थावरं वाथ जङ्गमम् |
तदेकदेशिकं भौममुत्पातं परिकीतितम् ॥
Cf. also काइयप---
भौमं शान्तिहतं नाशमुपगच्छति I$ |
नाभसं न शम याति दिव्यमुत्पातदर्शनम् ॥
Vide the समाससं हिता--
दिव्यं ग्रहक्षेजातं भुवि भौमं स्थिरचरोऱ्भूवं यच्च |
दिग्दाहोल्कापतनं परिवेषाद्यं वियत्प्रभवम् u]
दिव्यमपि शममुरषेति प्रभुतकनकान्नगोमहीदानेः |
रुद्रायतने भुमौ गोदोहात् कोटिहोमाच्च usu
Even the celestial portent might be remedied by enormous
gifts of gold, food, cows and lands; by milking cows on the ground
in a Siva temple; and by offering a crore of oblations into the sacred
Fire at a sacrifice.
[It is not quite clear what the author means by ‘milking on
the ground.’ It may mean that the milk should not be collected in
a vessel, but should be allowed to drench the holy floor of the temple. Or it might mean simply ‘in the precincts of a Siva temple.’]
पाकमुपयाति देवं परिकल्पितमष्टधा नृपतेः ॥ ७॥।
The adverse effect of acelestial portent becomes the object of a
king’s experience in respect of eight individuals or objects, viz.
himself, his children, treasury, vehicles (or chariots, horses etc.),
his town, his consorts, preceptors and subjects.
[Cf. गर्ग —
पुरे जनपदे कोशे वाहने5य पुरोहिते ।
पुत्रेष्वात्मनि भृत्येषु पश्यते देव WEST ॥
It may be noted here that Garga puts servants in the place of
consorts. Look also at the sage’s passive form of दृशू.]

376 Brhat Samhita
(1) Portents through idols of Gods in Temples.
भग्रनिमित्तमद्धचलनस्वेदाश्रूनिपातजल्पनाद्यानि ।
लिङ्कार्चायतनानां नाशाय नरेशदेशानास् usu
The breaking, moving, sweating, shedding tears, falling,
muttering and the like, of Siva’s Emblems, idols of Gods and temples (or holy places), without any cause, forebode the destruction of
kings and their countries.
[Cf. गर्ग--
देवतार्चा: प्रनृत्यन्ति वेपन्ते प्रज्वलन्ति वा ।
मुहुन् त्यन्ति रोदन्ति प्रस्विद्यन्ति gafa वा |
उत्तिष्ठन्ति निषीदन्ति प्रधावन्ति पतन्ति वा ।
कुजन्ति विक्षिपन्ते च गात्रप्रहरणाध्वजान् ॥
्रवाङ्मुखा वा तिष्ठन्ति स्थानात् स्थानं ब्रजन्ति वा ।
वमन्त्यर्नि तथा qu स्नेहं रक्त पयो जलम् ॥
प्रसर्पन्ति च जल्पन्ति ar Aged वसन्ति वा |
समन्ताद्यत्र इश्यन्ते गात्रेर्वापि विचेष्टितैः u]
देवतयात्राशकटाक्षचक्र युगकेतुमङ्भपतनानि i
सम्पर्यासनसादनसङ्कशच न देशनृपशुभदाः UU
The breaking or falling down of the axle, wheel, yoke, and
flag of the car during a temple festival do not augur well for the
king and his country. Similarly their being twisted, destroyed and
entangled are evil for both.
[सुरयात्रायां is another reading in the place of दैवतयात्रा.]
ऋषिधरमपितृब्रह्मप्रोद्मुतं वकृतं द्विजातीनाम् ।
यद्रुद्रलोकपालो-दूबं पशुनामनिष्टं तत् ॥१०॥
गुरुसितशनेशचरोत्थं पुरोधसां विष्णुजं च लोकानाम् ।
स्कऱ्दविशाखसमुत्थं माण्डलिकानां नरेन्द्रारास् ॥ ११॥
वेदव्यासे मन्त्रिणि विनायके qud चमूनाथे |
धातरि सविश्वकर्मणि लोकाभावाय निदिष्टम् ।। १२॥
देवकुमारकुमारीवनिताप्रष्येषु वकृतं यत्स्यात् i
तन्नरपतेः कुमारककुमारिकास्त्री परिजनानाम् 002310
रक्षःपिशाचगृह्यकनागानामेदमेव निदिष्टम् i
मासश्चाप्यष्टाभिः सवेषामेव फलपाकः NLSN
Any unnatural behaviour observed in the images of Sages,
Yama (God of Death), the Manes and the Creator presages evil to

Portentous Phenomena XLVI í 377
Brahmanas; one in the idols of Siva and the protectors of the quarters (eight in number), to the cattle or animals; one in the images
of Jupiter, Venus and Saturn, to the priests; one in that of Visnu, to
the people at large; one in those of Skanda and Vigakha, to the
governors of provinces; one in that of Sage Vyasa, to the ministers;
one in that of Lord Ganapati, to the commander of the army; one
in those of the Creator and Visvakarman (celestial architect),
foreshadows the destruction of the people. Any uncommon
feature seen in the images of sons, daughters, wives, and
servants of Gods forebodes disaster to the king's sons, daughters,
inmates of the harem and servants respectively. The same result
will befall the same kinsmen of the king in order, in case the portent is seen in the idols of the sons, daughters, wives and servants of
demons, goblins, Yaksas and Serpents. All these portents bear
fruit in eight months.
[The last verse may also be interpreted as follows: The portents seen in the images of demons, goblins, Yaksas and Nagas
presage great trouble to the king's sons, daughters, wives and servants respectively.]
बुद्धवा देवविकारं शुचिः पुरोधास्त््यहोषित: स्नातः à
स्नानकुसुमानुलेपनवस्त्रेरभ्यचयेत्प्रतिमाम् uqun
मधुपकण पुरोधा मक्ष्येबेलिभिश्च विधिवदुपतिष्ठेत् i
स्थालीपाक जुहुया द्विधिवन्मन्त्रश्च तल्लिङ्गः ॥१६।॥
On seeing portents in the idols of Gods, the priest should
purify himself both physically and mentally by bath and mental
concentration, fast for three days and worship the idols with ablutions, flowers, sandal paste and the like as well as with cloths. He
should also propitiate them with the offerings of Madhuparka (a
mixture of _ eatables and other presents, and offer into the
Sacred Fire cooked rice, according to the rules, with the Vedic
hymns appropriate to the Deities concerned.
[स्थालीपाक is a particular sacrifice performed by house-holders.
In that sacrifice the Caru or cooked rice, is cooked in an earthen
vessel. Madhuparka forms part of the reception accorded to distinguished guests, bride-grooms, kings and Gods. It is a sweet drink consisting of five ingredients viz. curd, ghee, water, honey and sugar.
The word उपतिष्ठ q is not grammatically correct.]

378 Brhat Samhita
इति विबुधविकारे शान्तयः सप्तरात्रं
हिजविबुधगणार्चा गीतनृत्योत्सवाश्च |
बिधिवदवनिपालंये प्रयुक्ता न तेषां
भवति दुरितपाको दक्षिणाभिइच रुद्धः ॥१७॥
Should kings perform properly these expiatory rites for seven
days continuously along with the worship of Gods (like Lord Ganapati) and groups of learned Brahmanas, who are also honoured with
money presents, and also with songs, dance and festivities (as well
as vigil at night), whenever they behold any unnatural occurrence
in the images of Gods, the evil effects of the portents, being supressed by these rituals etc., would not be experienced by them.
[The author concludes this section after giving the method of
atoning for the sins of previous life.
The metre is मालिनी]
(2) Portents through Fire
राष्ट्र यस्यानग्निः प्रदीप्यते दीप्यते च नेन्धनवान् i
सनुजेशवरस्य पीडा तस्य च राष्ट्रस्य विज्ञेया utc
If there are flames seen without the existence of fire, and if it
does not burn brightly even though fed with dry fuel, it forebodes
trouble to both the ruler and the ruled (i.e. country).
जलमांसाद्रेज्वलने नपतिवधः प्रहरणो रणो रोद्र: ।
संन्यग्रामपुरेषु च नाशो वह AVA कुरुते ॥१६॥
If fire is observed on water, flesh or anything wet, it foreshadows the king’s death; if on weapons, a sanguinary war; and if the
fire goes out in military camps, villages or towns, there will be
danger from fire.
[After the invention of matches there is no question of fire
going out in modern times. But till about 60 years ago in many
Indian homes fire was never allowed. to be extinguished. Should a
woman find that in her hearth the fire has gone out completely, she
would go to the neighbouring house and borrow a few embers.]
प्रासादमवनतो रणाकेत्वादिष्वननलेन दग्धेषु |
तडिता वा षण्मासात् परचक्रस्यागमो नियमात् ॥२०॥
Should temples, houses, triumphal arches, flags and the like be
burnt without fire or by lightning, there would undoubtedly be an
attack by a foreign army after six months.

Portentous Phenomena XLVI 379
[The word आदि in केत्वादि is explained by Utpala as referring to
store-room, granary etc.]
धूमोऽनरिनिसमुत्यो रजस्तमइचाह्विजं महाभयदम् ।
व्यञ्ज निश्युडुनाशो दशनमपि चाह्नि दोषकरम् uq tu
Should there arise smoke without fire, and dust and darkness
spreading in daytime, there would be unprecedented danger.
Similarly the disappearance cf stars at night from the cloudless sky
as well as the sight of stars in daytime, is very harmful in its effect.
[Cf. गर्ग—
ग्रनिशानि तमांसि स्युर्यदि वा पांसवो रजः।
धूमञ्चानर्निना यत्र तत्र विन्द्यान्मह-द्भयम् u]
नगरचतुऽपादण्डजमनुजानां भयकरं ज्वलनमाहुः |
धूमाग्निविस्फुलिड-ग: शय्याम्ब रकेशगमृं त्युः ॥२२॥
Flames proceeding from towns, animals, birds and human
beings are said to be dangerous, according to the wise. Similarly
smoke, fire and sparks seen on beds, clothes and hairs will cause the
owner’s death.
(Cf. गर्ग —
शयनासनयानेषु केशप्रावरणषु च ।
दृश्यन्ते विस्फुलिङ्गा वा धूमो sil मरणाय तत् 11]
भ्रायुधज्वलनसपंरास्वना: कोशनिर्गमनवेपनानि वा ।
anata यदि वायुधेऽपराण्याशु रोद्रररासडःकुलं वदेत् ॥२२॥
The blazing, movement, sounding, rushing out of the scabbard,
trembling of the sword, or other unnatural phenomena observed in
weapons would presage a devastating war leading to utter confusion, in the near future.
[Here the commentator raises an objection : Js not the author,
who has already referred to the blazing of Praharana or weapon in
verse 19 supra, guilty of repetition ? He says that actually there is
no repetition. For, according to Nagnajit there are three kinds of
Ayudhas or weapons viz. Prakarana, Panimukta (those that are
thrown by the hand), and Yantramukta (chose flung by mechanical
device). The first category includes weapons like swords; the
second, like discuses; and the third, like stones, arrows, missiles,
rods etc. The word Ayudha is all-inclusive, wheres Praharana , restrictive, meaning only swords, axesetc. Hence there is no fault committed by our respected author. Though there is no difference

550 | Brhat Samhita
in the effect, yet the author has mentioned the two words separately
in order to suggest the existence of many varieties in weapons.
The metre is रथोद्धता.]
मन्त्रेराग्नेयः क्षीरवृक्षात्समिद्रिहोतव्योऽग्निः aed: सपिषा च i
प्रगन्यादीनां वेकृते शान्तिरेवं देयं चा स्मिन्काज्चनं ब्राह्मरोभ्यः ॥२४॥
The expiatory ceremony to be performed for warding off the
evil effects of portents of fire etc, consists of a sacrifice to the sacred
fire with white mustard seeds, ghee and the twigs got from milky
trees, to the accompaniment of hymns addressed to the Fire-God,
and of gifts of gold to Brahmanas.
(3) Portents of Trees
शाखाभङ्गेऽकस्माद्वृक्षाणां निदिशञेद्ररोद्योगम् ।
हसने वेशभ्र शं रुदिते च व्याधिबाहुल्यम् ॥२५॥
If the branches of trees break down all on a sudden, it should
be predicted that there would be feverish preparations for war;
should the trees preduce a sound similar to laughing, the country
would be ruined; and if they produce a weeping sound, there would
be a rich crop of diseases.
राष्ट्रविभेदस्त्वनृतो बालवधोऽतीव कुसुमिते बाले ।
वृक्षात् क्षीरस्रावे सबद्रव्यक्षयो भवति neu
If trees put forth flowers and fruits out of season, the country
would disintegrate; if very young plants blossom (or bear fruit)
luxuriantly, there would be great mortality of children; and if milk
flows from trees, all substances will be destroyed.
[Cf. गर्ग—
स्वराष्ट्र भेदं कुरुते फलपुष्पमनातंवम् |
बालानां मरण कुर्याद् बालानां फलपुष्पजम् 11]
मद्ये वाहतनाशः सङ्ग्रामः शोणिते मधुनि रोगः ।
स्नेहे दुभिक्षमयं महद्भयं निःख््ते सलिले ॥२७।।
If wine (or liquor) flows from trees, vehicles (or horses etc.)
will be destroyed; if blood, war will follow; if honey, disease will
break out; if oil, there will be threat of famine; and if water, there
will be great danger.
शुष्कविरोहे वीर्यान्नसङ्क्षयः शोषणे च विरुजानाम् ।
पतितानामुत्थाने स्वयं भयं देवजनितं च ॥२८॥
If withered trees sprout again, and healthy ones wither away,
there will be the destruction of vitality (or powerful persons) and

Portentous Phenomena X LVI 381
food; and if fallen trees stand erect by themselves, there is the
ger of divine visitations.
पूजितवृक्षे ह्यनृतौ कुसुमफलं नुपवधाय निदिष्टम् ।
धूमस्तस्मिन् 3 भवेन्त्पवधायेव NEN
The appearance of flowers and fruits on a worshipped tree out
of season, or of smoke or flame on it, is considered as a sure sign of
the king’s destruction.
सपंत्सु तरुषु जल्पत्सु वापि जनसङ्क्षयो विनिदिष्टः i
वृक्षाणां वेकृत्ये दशभिर्मासः फलविपाकः ॥। ३०॥
Walking or talking of trees presages annihilation of the population. The portents of trees bear fruit after ten months.
स्रग्गन्धधुपास्बरपुजितस्य च्छत्रं विधायोपरि पादपस्य à
कृत्वा शिवं रुद्रजपोऽत्र कार्यो रुद्रेभ्य इत्यत्र षडेव होमाः ॥३१॥
पायसेन मधुनापि भोजयेद् ब्राह्मणान् घृतयुतेन भुपतिः ।
सेदिनी निगदितात्र दक्षिणा वेकृते तरुकृते हिताथिभिः ॥३२॥
Putting an umbrella over, the tree should be worshipped with
garlands, perfumes, incense and cloths. An imnge of Siva should
be placed under the tree and the hymn called Rudradhydya chanted
repeatedly; and only six oblations made to the Fire with the sacred
expression, “Hail to the Rudras". Then the king should feed Brahmanas with milk porridge, honey and clarified butter. In this
connection the Daksina (votive gift) prescribed by the wise, who
are interested in the welfare of the people, to ward off the evil
consequences of the portents of trees, is in the form of gifts of
land.
[The metres are इन्द्रवसत्रा and रथोद्धता.]
(4) Portents of Crops
नालेळ्जयवादीनामेकस्मिनु द्वित्रिसस्मवो ATTY |
कथयति तदधिपतीनां यमलं जातं च कुसुमफलम् NIIN
If the stalk of lotus, barley (or wheat, Priyangu etc.), has one
or two branches, it forebodes death to its owner. So does a twin
flower or fruit.
afagta: सस्यानां नानाफलकुसुमसम्भवो वृक्षे ।
अवति हि यद्येकस्मिन् परचक्रस्यागमो नियमात् ॥३४॥
If the growth of crops is too excessive, and if many varieties
of flowers and fruits grow on a single tree, there will undoubtedly
be an invasion by a foreign army.
dan-

382 Brhat Samhita
्रर्धेन यदा तलं भवति तिलानामतेलता वा स्यात् ।
AACA च वेरस्यं तदा तु विन्द्याद् भयं सुमहत् ॥३५॥
When sesamum seeds yield only half the quantity of oil or no
oil at all; and when food (and eatables) Jose their taste, one should
know that there will be great danger ahead.
विकृतकुसुमं फलं वा ग्रामादथवा पुराइबहिः कार्यम् ।
सोम्योऽत्र चरुः कार्यो निर्वाप्यो वा पशुः शान्त्य ॥३६॥
सस्ये च दृष्टा विर्कात प्रदेयं तत्क्षेत्रमेव प्रथमं द्विजेभ्यः |
तस्येव मध्ये चरुमत्र भौमं कृत्वा न दोषं समुपेति तज्जम् ॥३७॥
A freakish flower or fruit should be thrown out of the village
or town (as part of the expiatory measure). Cooked rice should be
offered as oblation to Soma and a goat sacrificed in order to remove
the baneful effects of this portent. On detecting any unnatural phenomenon in the crop, the concerned field itself should be gifted away
to Brahmanas, first of all, and at the centre of the field, the owner
should offer an oblation of cooked rice to the Earth. By so doing he
will not experience the evil effects of such portents.
[The metre of the second verse is इन्द्रवस्त्रा.]
(5) Portents of Raintall
डुमिक्षमनावृष्टावतिवृष्टो gad परभयं च ।
रोगो ह्यनृतुभवायां नुपतिवधोऽन भ्रजातायाम् icu
Drought foreshadows famine; excessive rain, famine and
threat of an attack by a foreign foe; untimely rain, disease; and a
cloudless rain, the king’s death.
शीतोष्णविपर्यासो नो सम्यगृतुषु च सम्प्रवृत्तेषु ।
षण्मासाद्राष्ट्रमयं रोगभयं देवजनितं च ॥३९॥
Change of weather conditions in the hot and cold seasons, and
the improper functioning, of the seasons foreshadow danger to the
kingdom, fear of diseases and divine visitations after six months.
[The commentator takes दैवजनितं a5 an adjective of रोगभय, which
would mean—threat of diseases arising from past misdeeds .]
्रन्यत्तो' सप्ताहं प्रबन्धवर्ष प्रधाननृपमरणम् |
रक्ते शस्त्रोद्योगो मांसास्थिवसादिमिर्मरकः non
धान्य हिरण्यत्वक् फलकुसुमाद्यं बं षितेरभ॑यं विन्द्यात् ।
श्रद्धारपांसुवर्ष विनाशमायाति तन्नगरम् ॥४१॥
Continuous rain for seven days in any season other than the
monsoon forebodes the death of the chief monarch. Should there be

Portentous Phenomena XLVI 383
a rain of blood, there would be war; if one of flesh, bones, marrow
or the like (i.e. ghee, oil etc.), epidemics; if one of corn, gold, treebarks, fruits, flowers etc. (i.e. leaves and the like), peril; and if one
of burning coal or dust, the particular town would be destroyed.
उपला विना जलधरेविकृता वा प्रारिनो यदा ger: ।
छिद्रं वाप्यतिवृष्टौ सस्यानामीतिसञ्जननम् ॥४२॥
When there is a shower of stones or of freakish animals without clouds, or when there is a spot without any rain whatsoever in
spite of excessive rain, the crops would be affected by many pests.
[Vide V 52 and notes thereon supra. विकृताः प्राणिनः—ugly creatures—are asses, camels, horses, cats, jackals etc., according to
Utpala.]
क्षीरघृतक्षोद्रारणां दध्नो रुधिरोष्णवारिणां वर्ष ।
देशविनाशो ज्ञयोऽसृग्वर्षं चापि नृपयुद्धम् ॥४३॥
If there be a rain of milk, ghee, honey, curds or hot water, the
country itself would be devastated; and if there be one of blood, war
between kings would ensue.
[This verse is considered by some as an interpolation.]
यद्यमलेऽकं छाया न हश्यते हर्यते प्रतीपा वा ।
देशस्य तदा gag ganad विनिदेश्यम् ॥४४॥
If trees etc. do not cast their shadow even when the Sun shines
brightly, or if the shadow is in the same direction as the Sun, it
should be predicted that great calamity is in store for the country.
व्यभ्रे नभसीन्द्रधर्नुदवा यदा हृइ्यतेऽथवा रात्रो |
प्राच्यामपरस्यां वा तदा भवेत् Yea सुमहत् ॥४५॥
If there be rainbow in a cloudless sky by day or night, in the
east or west, then there will be great danger from starvation.
सुर्यन्दुपज न्यसमी रणानां यागः स्मृतो वृष्टिविकारकाले à
धान्यान्नगोकाञ्चनदक्षिणाइच देयास्ततः शान्तिमुपेति पापम् ॥४६॥
When there is a portentous rain, a sacrifice to the Sun, the
Moon, Cloud and Wind shouid be performed, according to ancient
authors. If gifts of corn, food, cows and gold are also made to Brahmanas, the sin (that causes these portents) would be obliterated.
(6) Portents of Water
ग्रपसर्पणं नदीनां नगरादचिरेण शून्यतां कुरुते ।
शोषइचाशोष्याणामन्येषां वा ह्लदादीनामु uve

RIYA AG TEM &ZUTHETVLVUE
स्नेहासुङ्सांसवहाः सङकुजकलुषाः प्रतीपगाइचापि i
परचक्रस्यागमनं नद्यः कथयन्ति षण्मासात् ॥४८॥
If rivers recede froma town, or if those that never dry or
other places like lakes, dry up, the town would be desolate ere long.
If rivers flow carrying oil, blood or flesh, be turbulent or filthy or
flow upwards, they presage attack by a foreign enemy after six
months,
[हद is a lake which has a perennial spring : “gà यत्न पातालादुदकमागच्छति स्वयमेव? remarks the commentator.]
ज्वालाधुमक्वाथारुदितोत्क्ष्टानि चेव कूपानाम् ।
गीतप्रजल्पितानि च जनमरकायोपदिष्टानि ॥४६॥
The emanation of flames, smoke, foam (boiling), sound of
weeping, shouting, singing or talking, from wells is declared asa
fore-runner of the mortality of the population.
सलिलोत्पत्तिरखाते गन्धरसविपर्यये च तोयानाम् ।
सलिलाशयविकृतौ वा vega तत्र शान्तिमिमामृ ॥५०॥
If water springs up from the earth that has not been dug, if
water acquires a different smell or taste, and if some unnatural
features are seen in tanks etc., there will be great disaster. The
following is the expiatory method fo be adopted in the above cases.
सलिलविकारे कुर्यात् qai वरुणस्य GART: ।
तेरेव च जपहोमं शममेवं पापमुपयाति ॥५१॥
When any unnatural feature is observed with respect to water
Varuna should be worshipped with Vedic hymns relating to Him
and with the same hymns Japa (mental repetition) and Homa
(offering of oblations to the sacred fire) should be performed. By
doing so, the sin (evil) can be warded off.
(7) Portents of Births
प्रसवविकारे स्त्रीणां द्वित्रिचतुष्प्रभृतिसम्प्रसुती at ।
हीनातिरिक्तकाले च देशकुलसङ्क्षयो भवति ॥५२॥
When women give birth to monstrocities, or two, three, four
or more children at a time, or when the birth happens to be too
premature or over-delayed, ruin will befall the country and the
family.
बडवोष्ट्महिषगोहस्तिनीषु यमलो-द्ूवे मरणमेषाम् ।
षण्मासात् सुतिफलं शान्तौ इलोकौ च गर्गोक्तो ॥५३॥
Should mares, camels, she-buffaloes, cows and cowelephants bring forth twins, the former would meet with death. The

Portentous Phenomena XLVI 385
consequences of such births will come to pass after six months. The
following two verses of Sage Garga pertain to its expiation.
[Cf. mr —
अकाले प्रसवे चेव कालातीते$थवा पुनः ।
श्रसख्याजनने चेव युरमस्थ प्रसवे तथा gi
अ्रमानुषाणि काण्डानि सञ्जातव्यञ्जनानि वा |
अनङ्गा ह्यविकाङ्गा वा हीनाङ्गा: सम्भवन्ति वा i
विमुखाः पक्षिसदशास्तथार्धपुरुषाश्च वा |
विनाशं तस्य देशस्य कुलस्य च विनिदिशेत् i
्रप्राप्तवयसे गर्भे ZI चतुष्पात् त्रयोऽपि वा ।
्रत्युच्चा विनताश्चापि प्रजायन्तेऽनयो भवेत् n
वडवा हस्तिनी गौर्वा यदि युग्मं प्रसूयते |
विजन्यं विकृतं वापि षड्भिर्मासँनपक्षयः 11]
atà: परस्य विषये त्यक्तव्यास्ता हिताथिना ।
aidsa द्विजान् कासे: शान्ति चैवात्र कारयेत् ॥५४॥
चतुष्पदाः स्वयुथेभ्यस्त्यक्तव्या: परभूमिषु ।
नगरं स्वामिनं यूथमन्यथा तु विनाशयेत् ॥५५॥
Such women as give birth to freaks or twins etc. should be
removed from the place and left in another country by one who
wishes for happiness. He should also please Prahmanas with gifts
desired by them, and perform an expiatory ceremony (with the
help of priests). As for the quadrupeds, they should be removed
from their flock or herd and left in other countries Otherwise they
will destroy their own towns, owners and herds.
(8) Portents of Quadrupeds.
परयोनावभिगमनं भवति तिरइचामसाधु धेनूनाम् ।
उक्षाणो वान्योन्यं पिबति इवा वा सुरभिपुत्रम् nugu
मासत्रयेण विन्द्यात्तस्मिन्निःसंशयं परागमनम् ।
तत्प्रतिघातायतौ इलोको गर्गेण निदिष्टौ ॥५७॥
Should birds and beasts mate with animals of a different
genus, or cows with cows, oxen with oxen, or should a dog suck a
calf, the result would be untoward and there would undoubtedly be
an invasion by a foreign army in three months. Sage Garga has
taught the following two verses for counteracting the evil influences
of such portents.

386 Brhat Samhita
[Bhattotpala interprets these verses, not on the basis of their
wording but on that of Garga’s statement given below. Accordingly
he says : “Should cows suck each other's udder, or oxen suck each
other, or should a dog suck a cow’s udder...” How could 'सुरभिपुत्र
mean 'गोस्तन ?
Cf. mi—
वियोनिषु यदा यान्ति मिश्रीभावः प्रजायते ।
खरोष्ट्रहयमातङ्गा मनुष्या वा न साधु तत् ॥
ग्रकालसक्ता इऱ्यन्ते काले च विमदा यदि ।
मातङ्गोष्ट्हयश्वानः पक्षिणोवा न साधु तत् ॥
qd धेनुः पिबेद्यत्रानडवानं ह्यनड्त्तथा |
इवा वा पिबेद्धेनुमथ Wq: इवानमथापि वा ॥
प्राप्तेषु fag मासेषु परचक्रागम वदेत् ॥]
त्यागो विवासन दानं तत्तस्याशु शुभं भवेत् ।
तर्पयेद् ब्राह्मणांश्चात्र जपहोमांश्च कारयेत् ॥५८॥
स्थालीपाकेन धातारं पशुना च fga:
प्राजापत्येन मन्त्रेण ANAS AAMT ॥५९॥
If such an animal be abandoned or taken to another place, it
would remedy the evil effects of the portents and usher in auspicious
ones. For this purpose the owner should also worship Brahmanas
and cause Japa (silent repetition of Mantras) and Homa (offering
of oblation to the Fire) to be performed. The priest should, on this
occasion, offer Caru (cooked rice) anda goat (or some other prescribed animal) to the Sacred Fire to propitiate the Creator, to the
accompaniment of the chanting of hvmns addressed to Prajapati
(Creator), along with large-scale feedings and generous gifts of
gold.
(9) Portents of the Wind.
यानं वाहवियुक्तं यदि गच्छेन्न ब्रजेच्च वाहयुतम् |
राष्ट्रभयं भवति तदा चक्राणां सादभङ्गे च ॥६०॥
Ifa carriage moves without a driver (or horses), or does not
move even when driven (or dragged) by him (or by them), or if
the wheels sink into the earth or break down, there is imminent
danger to the kingdom.
[The word यान may also be interpreted as an animal used for
riding, such as the horse and elephant. Why are the horses brought

Portentous Phenomena XLVI 387
under this section dealing with the ‘portents of the wind’? According to Vedic literature the horses are presided over by the Wind
od. Itis also important to note that the ‘speed of Wind’
exemplar for that of running animals.
carried by the wind.]
is an
Likewise, scunds are also
गीतरवतूयंशब्दा नभसि यदा वा चरस्थिरान्यत्वम् |
मृत्युस्तदा गदा वा farazga पराभिभवः ॥६१॥
| When sounds of singing and musical instruments are heard
in the sky; or when moving objects (like carriages) become stationary, and stationary objects (like trees) move, it augurs death or
diseases. When musical instruments produce eerie sounds, there
would be defeat at the hands of an enemy.
श्रनभिहततूयंनाद: शब्दो वा ताडितेषु यदि न स्यात् ।
व्युत्पत्ती वा तेषां परागमो नुपतिमरणं वा ॥६२॥
If musical instruments produce sounds without being struck,
or produce no sounds even when struck, or produce multifarious sounds, there will be an attack by an enemy or the king’s
death.
गोलाद्भलयोः सद्ध दर्वोशूर्पाद्यपस्करविकारे ।
क्रोष्टुकनादे च तथा शस्त्रभयं मुनिवचश्चेदम् ॥६३॥
When the oxen and plough get entangled, when ladles, winnowing baskets etc. (staves, mortars etc.) and cooking utensils
exhibit portentous changes, or when these things produce a sound
similar to the howling of jackals (or when jackals howl), there will
be danger from weapons (i.e. war). The following is the instruction
of Sage Garga for remedying the evil effects of this portent.
[The compound a4í—can also be interpreted as—''Unnatural
changes seen in house-hold appurtenances such as ladles,
winnowing baskets etc” Our commentator takes the words
separately.]
वायव्येष्वेषु नुपतिर्वाय्ं सक्तुभिरचयेत् |
श्रावायोरिति पञ्चर्चो जप्तव्याः प्रयते विजेः ॥६४॥॥
ब्राह्मणान् परमान्नेन दक्षिणाभिश्च तपंयेत् ।
बह्वन्तदक्षिणा होमाः कतंव्याइच प्रयत्नतः WEA
When these aerial portents are witnessed, the king ought to
worship the Wind-God with the flour of barley, and devout and
pure Brahmanas should chant repeatedly the five hymns beginning

388 Brhat Samhita
with “A Vayoh”’. The king should also please Brahmanas with milk
porridge and monetary gifts. Similarly, offerings should be made
into the sacred fire with devotion and efforts, along with large-scale
feeding of the worthy and generous gifts of gold.
[We are not expected to sit in judgment over the language
and expressions of ancient Sages like Garga. A modern editor has
pointed out that the word जप्तव्या: is against Panini's rule. For, he
must have mistaken the verses for Varaha’s. Actually these are
Garga's, whose ‘aasq’ has been ignored by him. Utpala too repeats
“जप्तव्य' in his commentary. ]
(10) Portents of Animals and Birds.
पुरपक्षिणो वनचरा वन्या वा निर्भया विशन्ति पुरस् i
नक्तं वा दिवसचराः क्षपाचरा वा चरन्त्यहनि ॥६६॥
सन्ध्याद्येऽपि मण्डलमाबध्नन्तो सुगा विहङ्गा वा ।
दीप्तायां दिश्यथवा क्रोशन्तः संहता भयदाः NGON
If village birds roam in the forest, or jungle birds move about
freely in towns or villages or day-birds (like crows) fly at night, or
night-birds (like owls) fly at daytime, or if birds or beasts form
groups or circles at dawn or dusk, or if they howl in groups facing
the Sun, there would be danger ahead.
इयेनाः प्ररुदन्त इव द्वारे क्रोशन्ति जस्बुका दीप्ताः ।
प्रविशेन्तरेन्द्रभवने कपोतकः कौशिको यदि वा ngan
When eagles appear to be weeping, jackals facing the
Sun howl hideously at the city gates, or when a pigeon or owl
enters the king’s palace, danger is to be apprehended.
[श्वानः is another reading for श्येनाः. It is believed that the howling of a dog resembling moaning presages tragedy in the place.
Cf. mi—
स्येनग्रधरबलाकारच वामना मुण्डचारिणाः |
शब्दायन्त इवात्यर्थं प्रदीप्ताः सङ्घशो यदि ।।
रुदन्ति विविधं तदेवाशु विनश्यति à
यद्यभीक्ष्णं कपोता वा प्रविशन्ति बसन्ति वा ।
राजवेश्मन्युलूका वा तच्छून्यमचि रा-्भवेत् 11]
कुक्कुटरुतं प्रदोषे हेमन्तावौ च कोकिलालापाः ।
प्रतिलोममण्डलचरा: इयेनाद्याशचाम्बरे भयदाः NGEN

Portentous Phenomena XLVI 389
गृहचेत्यतोरणेषु द्वारेषु च पक्षिसड्धसम्पातः ।
मधुवल्मीकाम्भोरुहसमुऱ्भूवडचापि नाशाय ॥७०॥
Cocks crowing in the evening, cuckoos warbling in the beginning of the dewy season, and vultures and the like (i.e. carnivorous
birds) flying in a circle from the right to the left in the sky, forbode
danger. Should groups of birds sit on houses, sacred trees, arches
and gates, or should honey, anthill or lotus grows in houses etc. (i.e.
sacred trees, arches and gates), the place would be devastated.
इवभिरस्थिशवावयवप्रवेशनं मन्दिरेषु मरकाय i
पशुशस्त्रव्याहारे नृपमृत्युर्मुनिवचश्चेदस् ॥७१॥
If dogs bring bones or parts of dead bodies into houses, epidemics would break out soon; and if animals and weapons talk like
human beings, there would bethe king’s death. The following
remedial measures have been prescribed by the Sage (Garga).
मृगपक्षिविकारेषु कुर्याद्धोमान् सदक्षिणान् ।
देवाः कपोत इति च जप्तव्याः पञ्चभिद्विजेः ॥७२॥
सुदेवा इति aha देया गावः सदक्षिणाः ।
जपेच्छाकुनसुक्तं वा मनो वेदशिरांसि च ॥७३॥
For warding off the evil effects of the portents connected with
birds and beasts, sacrifices should be performed with liberal gifts
of money. Five Brahmanas should also repeat the hymn beginning
with the words. ‘‘Devadh kapotah" and the one ‘“‘Sudevah...’’ (vide
Valakhilya 6-4). Or, they may chant repeatedly the Sakuna hymn,
the prayer “Va Mano..." or the Atharvasiras. The priests should also
be presented with milch cows and liberal gifts of money.
[These two verses must be Garga's, although they are printed
as those of Varahamihira.]
(11) Portents of Indra’s Banner etc.
शक्रध्वजेन्द्रकोलस्तम्भद्वारप्रपात भङ्गेषु ।
तद्वत्कपाटतोरणाकेतूनां नरपतेर्मरणस् ॥७४॥
When Indra’s Standard, the cross-bar of a door, pillar, door,
door-leaves, arch or flag, falls down or breaks, it foreshadows the
king’s death.
सन्ध्याद्वयस्य दीप्ति्धूमोत्पत्तिइच काननेऽनग्नौ ।
छिद्राभावे भुमेदंरणं कम्पश्च भयकारी ॥७५॥
Brilliant light at dawn and sunset, smoke rising from the

forest without fire, splitting of the earth without any breach and its
tremor are harmful-to the people.
पाखण्डानां नास्तिकानां च भक्तः साध्वाचारप्रोज्कितः क्रोधशीलः ।
ईष्यू: करो विग्रहासक्तचेता यस्मिन् राजा तस्य देशस्थ नाश: ॥७६॥
The country which is ruled by a king, who is devoted to heretics and atheists, who has forsaken virtuous conduct, is hot-tempered,
malicious, cruel and always intent on fighting, will be utterly
ruined.
[It is a portent for a country to have a king described in this
verse. By inference we can get Varaha’s definition of an ideal
king.
The metre is शालिनी.]
प्रहर हर छिन्धि भिन्द्वीत्यायुधकाष्ठाइम पा यो बाला: |
निगदन्तः प्रहरन्ते तत्रापि भयं भवत्याशु ॥७७॥
The place where children strike one another, holding weapons, sticks and stones in their hands and shouting “Strike ! drag !
cut ! break !" will see danger ere long.
[Of. पराश र---
यदि धनुरसिकाष्ठलोष्टहस्ता पुरशिशवो रणावत्समाच रन्ति ।
प्रहर हर जहीत्युदाह रन्ते भयमचिरात्तुमुलं निवेदयन्ति ।।
According to Panini ‘हर छिन्धि’ should have been used as “हरच्छि-
fm’. But then the metre would be spoiled. We can allow such
lapses with our author who is a great author, scholar and poet,
under the plea, “Freesssrr: खलु कवयः'.]
श्रद्धारगेरिकाञ्य विक्ृतप्रेताभिलेखनं यस्मिन् ।
नायकचित्रितमथवा क्षये क्षयं याति न चिरेण ॥७८॥
A house where figures of monsters or ghosts are drawn with
charcoal, red chalk etc., or a picture of the house-owner is drawn
with any of the above-named materials, will be destroyed before
long.
लूतापटाङ्गशबलं न सन्ध्ययोः पुजितं कलहयुक्तम् ।
नित्योच्छिष्टस्त्रीकं च यद्गृहं ततक्षयं याति noei
A house, which is full of cobwebs, where Gods are not worshipped at dawn and sunset, where there is constant quarrel and
where women remain unclean everyday (through their monthly
course), will go to rac and ruin.

Portentous Phenomena XLVI 391
zg यातुधानेषु निदिशञेत्सरकमाशु सम्प्राप्तम् ।
प्रतिघातायतेषां गर्गः शान्ति चकारेमाम् ॥८०॥
If goblins (unearthly beings or evil spirits) are sighted in a
place, imminent pestilence should be predicted for it. For averting
the evils of these portents Sage Garga has prescribed the following
remedial measure.
महाशान्त्योऽथ बलयो भोज्यानि सुमहान्ति च ।
कारयेत महेन्द्रं च HIRED च समचयेत् ॥८१॥
The king should perform Great Santis (expiatory rites), offer
food and worship to the Deities and get large quantities of eatables
prepared (and distributed among the Brahmanas). He should also
worship Mahendra and His consort Indrani.
(12) Harmless Phenomena
नरपतिदेशविनाशे केतोरुदयेऽथवा ग्रहेऽकन्द्रोः ।
उत्पातानां प्रभवः स्वर्त भवश्चाप्यदोषाय ॥८२॥
The appearance of portents or unnatural phenomena, at the
time of death of a king, devastation of the country by a hostile army,
the rising of Ketu (comet) or at a solar or lunar eclipse, and also
the sight of those phenomena that are peculiar to the respective
seasons, are not harmful.
[It is reported that when great personages cast off their mortal
coils, a bright star is seen rising into the heavens. ‘The appearance
of a comet itself is a portent, which may be accompanied by other
unnatural events. Each season has its own peculiar features which
cannot be called portents. Our author quotes profusely Sage Rsiputra on this subject of the peculiar features of the six seasons.]
ये च न दोषाञ्जनयन्त्पुत्पातास्तानृतुस्वमावकृतान् |
ऋषिपुत्रकृतेः इलोकेविद्यादेतेः समासोक्तेः ॥८३॥
Those portents which are generated by the peculiar nature of
the seasons and so do not lead to evil consequences, could be under_ stood from the verses of Rsiputra that have been summarized hereunder.
वज्त्राशनिमहोकम्पसन्ध्यानिर्घातनिःस्वना: à
परिवेषरजोवृमरक्ताकस्तिमयोदया:॥।८४॥
द्रमेभ्यो$न्न रसस्नेहबहुपुष्पफलोद्गमा: ।
गोपक्षिमदवृद्धिश्च शिवाय मधुमाधवे ॥८५॥
Auspicious are the following portents seen in the spring season

392 Brhat Samhita
constituted by the lunar months of Caitra and Vaisakha : Thunder.
bolt, lightning, earth-tremor, bright glare at twilight, sounds of loud
thunder, halos, dust, smoke (in forests), the Sun being crimson at
the time of rising and setting, the exudation of food, sweet Juices,
oil and an abundant yield of flowers and fruits on trees and increased sensuality on the part of bulls and birds.
[For details of सन्ध्या vide XXX supra. The commentator
interprets == as lightning, and अशनि as : “अश्मवर्ष णम् उल्काभेदो वा p
तारोल्कापातकलुषं कपिलाकन्दुमण्डलम् ।
प्रनग्निज्वलनस्फोटधुमरेण्वनिलाहतम् ॥८६॥
रक्तपद्मारुणा सन्ध्या TA: धक्षुब्धाणंवोपमम्् ।
सरितां चाम्बुसंशोषं हृष्ट वा ग्रीष्मे शुभं वदेत् ॥८७॥
The following portents seen in summer constituted by Jyestha
and Asàdha, are said to be beneficial : The skv tarnished by shooting stars and falling meteors; the orbs of the luminaries being tawny;
blaze and explosion without fire, smoke, dust and a strong wind
filling the sky; the twilight red like the red lotus; the sky looking like
the ocean with surging waves; and the drying up of the waters of
the rivers.
शक्रायुधपरीवेषविद्युच्छुष्कविरोहराम् ।
कम्पोद्दतंनवकृत्यं रसनं दरणं क्षितेः ॥८८॥
सरोनद्युदपानानां FSU ध्वतरराप्लवाः ।
arq चाद्रिगेहानां वर्षासु न भयावहम् ॥८९॥
The following unnatural phenomena are not dangerous in the
Tainy season: Rainbow, halos, lightning, sprouting of withered
trees, tremor, upheaval, unnatural appearances, rumbling and
splitting of the earth; rising, flowing upwards and flooding of lakes,
rivers and wells respectively; and falling off of mountains and
houses.
दिव्यस्त्री मुतगन्धवंविमानादुभुतदर्शनस् i
ग्रहनक्षत्रतारारां दशनं च दिवाम्बरे neon
गीतवादित्रनिर्घोषा वनपवंतसानुषु i
सस्यदुद्धिरपां हानिरपापाः शरदि स्मृताः ॥९१॥
The following portents in autumn lead to auspicious results :
The sight of celestial damsels, spirits, Gandharvas, aerial chariots,
marvellous things, and of planets, stars and constellations in the day-

Portentous Phenomena XLVI 393
time in the sky; sounds of singing and musical instruments in the
forests and on mountain plateaus: increase of crops and diminution
of water.
शीतानिलतुषारत्वं नदेनं मृगपक्षिणाम् ।
रक्षोयक्षादिसत्त्वानां दर्शनं वागमानुषी NERU
दिशो घुमान्धकाराइच सनभोवनपवंताः।
उच्चे सूर्योदयास्तौ च हेमन्ते शोमनाः स्मृताः ॥६३॥
The following portents in the dewy season are considered
beneficial : Cold wind, frost, cries of birds and beasts, sight of
demons, Yaksas and such other invisible beings; aerial voice being
heard; the quarters along with the sky, forests and mountains getting darkened with smoke; and the high rising and setting of the
Sun.
हिमपातानिलोत्पाता विरूपाछुतदर्शनस् ।
कुऽ्णाअनाभमाकाशां तारोल्कापातपिञ्जरस् ॥ ६४॥
चित्रगर्मोद्ूबाः स्त्रीषु गोऽजाइवसृगपक्षिषु d
पत्राङ्कुरलतानां च विकाराः शिशिरे शुभाः ॥६५॥
The following phenomena in winter (Sisira) are productive of
good results : Snowfall, unnatural winds, appearance of deformed
and wonderful (superhuman) beings, the sky looking like dark
collyrium, and colourful with the fall of stars and meteors; women,
cows, goats, horses, beasts and birds giving birth to freakish young
ones; and unnatural changes in leaves, sprouts and creepers.
[Bhattotpala gives an additional meaning to “गोश्जाश्व...?” as,
“Change in the natural behaviour of cows etc." The unnatural
phenomena listed here become natural in the respective seasons as
a result of change in the weather conditions.]
ऋतुस्वभावजा ह्येते EEST: स्वतौ' शुभप्रदाः |
ऋतोरन्यत्र चोत्पाता दृष्टास्ते चातिदारुणाः UE KU
These portents which are natural to the respective seasons,
prove beneficial, if they are seen in their own seasons On the other
hand, if they be seen at other times, they would prove dreadful
in their effects,
उन्मत्तानां च या गाथाः शिशुनां यच्च भाषितम् ।
स्त्रियो यच्च प्रभाषन्ते तस्य नास्ति व्यतिक्रमः neon
The vernacular songs of lunatics, utterances of children and

394 Brhat Samhita
the words of women do not at all go wrong in their effects.
[The words of playing children etc. are of great importance in
the sphere of prognostics.]
qd चरति देवेषु पश्चाच्चरति मानुषात् ।
नाचोदिता वाश्वदति सत्या ह्येषा सरस्वती uec
This Supreme Goddess of Speech is always truthful. She does
not speak unless she is goaded. For, first She travels among the
Gods and then (being goaded by them) goes to the mortals.
[Here we are reminded of the Brahmana statement, “सत्यसं हिता
वै देवाः’. Being wedded to truth the Gods cause portentous words and
behaviour to be revealed through all kinds of beings, young and old,
human and sub-human. Hence what the author has said in verse 2
of this chapter stands confirmed by this statement. These 15 verses.
are taken from the work of Rsiputra.]
उत्पाताचु गणितविवर्जितोऽपि बुद्धवा
विख्यातो भवति नरेन्द्रवल्लभश्च |
एतत्तन्मुनिवचनं रहस्यमुक्तं
यज्ज्ञात्वा भवति नरस्त्रिकालदर्शी ween
Though a person may not be well-versed in astronomic calculations, yet he can become famous and a favourite of monarchs, if
he observes (and understands the significance of) the portents carefully. Thus have I explained this secret (of portents) taught by the
Sages, by knowing which man can look into the past, present and
future.
[In the case of omens etc. intuition plays an important role.
In astrology mere kno wledge of astronomy and an intellectual grasp
of the astrological principles would not be sufficient for predicting
correctly one’s past, present and future.
The metre is प्रहषिणी ]

मयूरचित्रकम् ॥।४७।।
Chapter XLVII— Motley Miscellany
दिव्यान्तरिक्षाश्रयमुक्तमादो मया फलं NAANA च ।
प्रायेण चारेषु समागमेषु युद्धेषु मार्गादिषु विस्तरेश ng
भूयो वराहमिहिरस्य न युक्तमेतत्कतु' समासकृदसाविति तस्य दोषः ।
asta वाच्यमिदमुक्तफलानुगीति
यदुर्बाहचित्रकमिति प्रथितं वराङ्गम् uqu
स्वरूपमेव तस्य तस्प्रकीत्तितानुकीर््तनम् ।
ब्रवीम्यहं न चेदिदं तथापि मेऽत्र वाच्यता nan
In this work I have already dealt with the good and bad
effects of the celestial and atmospheric phenomena mostly in connection with the planet’s courses, conjunctions, wars, paths etc. (i.e.
Mandalas). Some may find fault with me, saying, “It does not
behove Varahamihira, being noted for = to repeat the same
subject." However, scholars of this science ought not to remark that
this chapter is a repetition of the effects already expounded, because
this chapter, entitled “Barhicitraka” or ‘‘Mayiracitraka” (Peacock’s
Colours) , is a reputed important section of this Samhita (collection).
Hence it is the very nature of this section to repeat what has once
been explained. And if I exclude this chapter, still they (scholars)
would blame me.
[From the nature and contents of this chapter, it looks almost
like the concluding section, at sometime, of a part of this work,
if not of the entire work.
For the Divine and Atmospheric see XLVI. 4. For the Margas
and Mandalas see IX 1-3 and 10-21.
The metres are उपजाति, वसन्ततिलका and प्रमाणिका.]
उत्तरवीथिगता द्युतिमन्त: क्षेमसुमिक्षशिवाय समस्ता: |
दक्षिशमागंगता द्युतिहीनाः भ्षुद्धूयतस्क रमृत्युकरास्ते ॥४॥
All the non-luminous planets, being radiant and moving in the
northern paths i.e. Naga, Gaja and Airavata, confer happiness, peace

and plenty; but, being shorn of radiance and moving in the southern
avenues viz. Mrga, Aja and Dahana, they produce threat of famine,
theft and mortality.
[Cf. mi—
वणंवन्तः स्वमार्गस्था नागवीथीविचारिणाः i
यदि ताराग्रहा: सन्ति सर्व लोकहितावहाः N
वं शवानरपथप्राप्ता एकनक्षत्रचारिणः |
पञ्चताराग्रहाइचेत्स्यु्विन््याल्लोकस्य सङ्क्षयः ॥
The metre is दोधक.]
कोष्ठागारगते भृगुपुत्रे पुष्यस्थे च गिराम्प्रभविष्णौ i
निर्वेराः क्षितिपाः सुखभाजः संहृष्टाश्च जना गतरोगाः ngn
When Venus occupies the asterism Magha, and Jupiter
Pusya, kings will be happy and free from mutual hatred, and the
people, contented and hale and hearty.
(Cf. mi—
कोष्ठागारगते शुक्रे पुष्यस्थे च बृहस्पतौ |
विन्द्यात्तदा सुखं लोके शान्तशस्त्रमनामयम् ॥
The metre of this verse has not been named either in Pingala’s or
Kedarabhatta’s work on prosody. However it falls under the
category of पङ्क्तिच्छन्दः ]
पीडयन्ति यदि कृत्तिकां मघां रोहिणीं श्रवणामेन्द्रमेव वा ।
प्रोज्कूय सूर्यमपरे ग्रहास्तदा पश्चिमा दिगनयेन पीड्यते ngi
Should the planets barring the Sun hurt (by moving south,
covering the chief star of or cutting through) the asterism Krttika,
Magha, Rohini, Sravana or Jyestha, the countries situated in the
west would be torn by troubles.
[Cf. गर्ग—
वं ष्णवं पित्रमाग्नेयं ज्येष्ठामपि च रोहिणीम् ।
पीडयन्ति agafa राहुषष्ठानुचारिणः ॥
दुभिक्ष जायते लोके सस्यमत्र न रोहति ।
शुष्यन्ति सरितः सर्वाः पर्जन्यश्च न वर्षति ॥
The metre 15 रथोद्धता ]
प्राच्यां चेदृध्वजवदवस्थिता दिनान्ते
प्राच्यानां भर्वति हि विग्रहो नपाणाम् i

Motley Miscellany XLVII 397
मध्ये चेद् भवति हि मध्यदेशपीडा
sAd तु रुचिमन्मयूखवसद्धि: won
Should the above planets be situated in the form of a banner
in the east in the evening, there would be war among the eastern
kings; should the formation be in the middle of the sky, there would
be misery in the central country, provided the planets are rough
and tiny in appearance; and not when they are possessed of bright
rays.
[The metre is प्रहषिणी.]
दक्षिणां ककुभमाश्रितस्तु तेदेक्षिणापथपयोमुचां क्षय: ।
हीनरूक्षतनुभिश्च विग्रहः स्थुलदेहकि रणान्वितः शुभम् usu
If they are stationed in the south, the clouds over the Deccan
(or the southern country) will be destroyed; and if they come to
have small and rough orbs, war will be the rexult. Good result will
follow if they are large and full of bright rays.
[The metre is रथोद्धता ]
उत्तरमार्ग = शान्तिकरास्ते तम्नूपतीनाम् i
SATA भस्मसवर्णा दोषकराः स्युर्देशन्पाणास् NEN
Being endowed with bright rays and stationed in the northern
avenues, they bestow peace on the kings of the northern countries.
On the other hand, if they are tiny in form and ashy in colour,
they cause harm to the rulers of that region.
[CE गर्ग—
उत्तरोत्तरमागस्था रश्मिपालाधरा ग्रहाः ।
विष्पन्दन्त इवात्यर्थं जयमाहुरुपस्थितम् ॥
The lilting metre is known as रूत््मवती or चम्पकमाला: In the second
line the alliteration is happy.]
नक्षत्राणां तारकाः सग्रहाणां धुमज्वालाविस्फुलि द्वान्विताइचेत् |
ग्रालोकं वा fatafad न यास्ति याति ध्वंसं सवलोकः सभूपः uou
Should the stars of the constellations with the planets posited
therein be full of smoke, flames and sparks, remain invisible for no
reason, the entire population along with their king would be annihilated.
[At the end of the first line आवृताश्चेत् is another reading for
` अन्विताश्चेत्.
The metre is शालिनी.].

दिवि भाति यदा तुहिनांशुयुगं द्विजवृद्धिरतीव तदाशु शुभा ।
तदनन्तरवणंरणोऽकंयुगे जगतः प्रलयस्त्रिचतुष्प्रभूति ॥ ११।।
When two Moons shine in the sky, Brahmanas wil] then
achieve great prosperity and happiness ere long. Should there be
two Suns, Ksatriyas would engage themselves in warfare; and
should there be three or more Suns, there would be dissolution of
the world.
[Cf. mi —
द्विचन्द्रं गगनं इष्ट्वा विन्द्यादव्रह्मा समुत्थितम् ।
at वा सूयौ यदा स्यातां तदा क्षत्रं विरुध्यति di
इष्ट्वा त्रिचतुर: सूर्यानुदितान् सवंतो दिशम् |
शस्त्रेण जनमारेण तद्युगान्तरदशनम् ॥
The metre is तोटक.]
मुनीनमिजितं ध्रुवं मघवतश्च भं संस्पृशन्
शिखी घनविनाशकृत् कुशलकर्महा शोकदः |
भुजङ्भमथ संस्पृशेद् भवति वृष्टिनाशो ध्र वं
क्षयं ब्रजति विट्रुतो जनपदश्च बालाकुलः ॥१२॥
| Should a comet touch the Seven Sages (the Great Bear),
Abhijit, the Pole Star and Jyestha, it would destroy the clouds as
well as works and people's health, and cause sorrow to them. Should
it touch Aslesà, there would undoubtedly be drought and consequently the people, troubled by their famished children, would run
hither and thither for relief and perish ultimately.
[The metre is पृथ्वी.]
प्राद्वारेषु चरन् रविपुत्रो नक्षत्रेषु करोति च Sm |
giaa कुरुते महदुग्रं मित्राणां च विरोधमवृष्टिम् ॥१३॥
When Saturn passes through the ‘Front Gates’ viz. the seven
stars commencing with Krttika, and becomes retrograde, there will
be a dreadful and long-drawn famine, drought and hostilities among
friends.
(Cf. mi—
विलम्बितगति: सौर: प्राद्वारेषु यदा भवेत् ।
महाभयानि चत्वारि विजानीयात्समन्ततः ॥
अनावृष्टिभयं घोर दुर्भिक्षं मित्रविग्रहम् ॥
B.G. Tilak has shown in his Orion that in the Vedic period and
during that of some of the earlier Brahmanas like the शतपथ the

Motley Miscellany XLVII 399
Krttikas(Pleiades) never swerved from the east.
Hence they were
considered the eastern stars.
The metre of this verse is similar to that of verse 5
without a name under the पङ्क्ति group.]
रोहिणीशकटमरकनन्दनो यदि भिनत्ति रुधिरीऽयवा शिखी à
कि वदामि यदनिष्टसागरे जगदशेषमुपयाति सङ्क्षयम् ॥१४॥
When Saturn, Mars or a comet cuts the wain of Rohini,
shall I say, alas ! For, the whole world will perish,
in the ocean of misery.
[Cf. गर्ग—-
रोहिणीशकटं भौमो भिनत्त्यकंसुतोऽथवा |
केतुर्वा जगतो ब्ूयात् प्रलयं समुपस्थितम् ॥
This is an अर्धसमवृत coined by our author by combining a foot of
रथोद्धता with one of प्रियंवदा. Hence it is to be called >
above,
what
being plunged
See also IX. 25 supra.]
उदयति सततं यदा शिखी चरति भचक्रमशेषमेव वा ।
भ्रनुभवति पुराकृतं तदा फलमशुभं सचराचरं जगत् ॥१५॥
When a comet stays visible always or traverses the whole cycle
of stars, the whole world with its moving and stationary objects will
reap the evil fruit of their past misdeeds (i.e. the whole world will
be plunged in the depths of sorrow).
[The metre is वैतालीय.]
धनुःस्थायी रूक्षो रुधिरसहशः क्षुद्धूयकरो
बलोद्योगं चन्द्रः कथयति जयं ज्याऽस्य च यत: ।
गवां YH गोघ्नो निधनमपि सस्यस्य कुरुते
ज्वलत् धूमायन्वा नुपतिमरणायंव भवति ॥१६॥
The Moon being rough (unclean ?), blood-red and bow-shaped, presages famine and confrontation of armies, victory going to
that side which is situated in the direction of the string of the lunar
bow. Ifthe Moon’s horns resemble those of cows, cattle and crops
will be destroyed; and if she glows or spouts smoke, it is a sure sign
of the king’s exit from the world.
[The metre is शिखरिणी. I suspect that in the third line the
original reading might have been गवांश्यु ]
स्निग्धः स्थुल: समश्य॒ ST विशालनस्तु द्भइचो दग्विच रन्नागवीथ्याम् ।
दृष्ट: सौम्ये रशुभेविप्रयुक्तो लोकानन्दं कुरुतेऽतीव चन्द्रः ॥१७॥
If the Moon be glossy, thick, of even horns, extensive, high

in the sky, moving north in the Naga avenue (viz. Bharani, Krttika
and Svati), aspected by benefics, and unaccompanied by malefics,
she would confer great joy and happiness on humanity.
[For the Wagavitht cf. IX. 2 supra. Utpala wrongly construes.
उदक् as उत्तरश्ण ङ्गोन्ततः.
The metre is वातोर्मी.]
पिञ््यमंत्रपुरुहतविशाखात्वाष्टूसेत्य च युनक्ति शशाङ्कः |
दक्षिणेन न शुभः शुभकृत्स्याद्यद्युदक चरति मध्यगतो वा qan
It is inauspicious, if the Moon comes in contact with Magha,
Anuradha, Jyestha, Vi$akhaà and Citra on the south, while on the
north or in the middle, it is auspicious.
[The metre is स्वागता.]
परिघ इति मेघरेखा या तिरयग्भास्करोदपेऽस्ते वा i
परिधिस्तु प्रतिसूर्यो दण्स्त्वृजुरिन्द्रचापनिभः ॥१६॥
उदधेऽस्ते वा भानोय दीर्घा रइमयस्त्वमोघास्ते ।
सुरचापखण्डमृजु यद्रोहितमेरावतं दोघंम् ॥२०॥
A line of clouds standing across the Sun at his rising or setting
is termed Bolt; a second or mock Sun is Paridhi or Halo; a straight
staff (composed of the Sun’s rays, clouds and wind) resembling the
rainbow is Rod; the long rays of the Sun at rising or setting are
named unerring (amogha); a straight and fragmentary rainbow is
Rohita (Red), and the same, being longer, is termed Air@vala.
[Vide XXX. 16 and XXXVII. 1-3. The commentator construes ऋजु, which means straight, as स्पष्ट, clear.]
श्रर्धास्तमयात्सन्ध्या व्यक्तीभुता न तारका यावत् ।
तेजः परिहानिमुखा-द्भानोरर्धोदयो यावत् ॥२१॥
तस्मिन्सन्ध्याकाले fag ata: शुभाशुभं वाच्यम् ।
सर्वेरेतेः स्निग्धैः सद्यो वर्ष भयं रूक्षः ॥२२॥
The period after the Sun is half-sec and before the stars have
appeared is known as Sandhyd (evening twilight), and that after the
stars have lost their lustre and before the Sun is half-risen is the
morning twilight. From the above-mentioned symptoms of the two
twilights (or junctures) one should predict good or bad effects. If
all the features are glossy, there will be rain the same day; if rough,
there will be danger.
[Vide XXX. 1]

Motley Miscellany XLV II 40
श्रच्छिन्तः परिघो वियच्च विमलं श्यामा
स्निग्धा दीधितयः सितं सुरधनुविद्युच्च पूर्वोत्तरा i
स्निग्धो मेघतरुदिवाकरकरेरालिङ्भितो वा यदा
; afe: स्पार्चाद वाकसस्तसमये मेघो महाञ्छादयेत् ॥२३॥
1 the Bolt is unbroken (i.e. full), the sky clear, the Sun's rays
(unerring) dark and the other rays glossy (clear or bright), the rainbow white, lightning flashing in the north-east, and the tree-shaped
cloud glossy or embraced by the Sun’s rays all round, there will be
RUE The same will happen, if a huge cloud covers the Sun at
setting.
मयुखा रवेः
[This is a beautiful piece of descriptive poetry. In the third
line there is the ‘poetic excellence’ called Samadhi, inasmuch as we
get here the idea of a person embracing his friend warmly.
The metre is शार्दूलविक्रीडित.]
खण्डो qm: कृष्णो wea: काकाह्वा fas विद्धः ।
यस्मिन्देशे रूक्षश्चाकस्तत्राभाव: प्रायो राज्ञः ॥२४॥
The country where the Sun appears 3 crooked, black,
small and rough or marked with the figures of crows and other
inauspicious things, will probably lose its monarch.
[Cf. गर्ग--
खण्डो वा कृष्णवर्णो वा gea: पिद्गलकोऽथवा ।
यत्रार्को इश्यते तत्र राज्ञो मृत्यं विनिदिशेत् ॥
The metre is विद्युन्माला.]
वाहिनीं समुपयाति पृष्ठतो मांसभुक खगगणो युयुत्सतः ।
यस्य तस्य बलविद्रवो महानग्रगैस्तु विजयो विहङ्गमः ॥२५।।
If groups of carnivorous birds should follow the army of a king
wishing to attack his enemy, his army would take to its heels; if the
birds fly in front, he would be victorious.
(The metre is रथोद्धता. The desiderative word युयुत्सतः is not quite
correct, as the root is आत्मनेपदी. The proper form is युयुत्समानस्य.]
भानोरुदये यदि वास्तमये गन्धर्वपुरप्रतिमा ध्वजिनी ।
बिम्बं निरुणद्धि तदा नृपतेः प्राप्तं समरं सभयं प्रवदेत् ॥२६॥
If at sunrise or sunset an army resembling an aerial city obstructs the Sun’s disc, one should predict that the king would be
involved in a dangerous war in the near future.
[Cf. गर्ग—
ग्रादित्ये सरथा सेना सन्ध्याकाले यदा भवेत् |
प्रत्यासन्नं विजानीयाद् भूमिपस्य पराजयम् ।।

402 Brhat Samhita
It should be remembered that the army mentioned here is not a real
one, but an apparent one formed by a peculiar arrangement of the
clouds.
The metre is an unnamed variety of faszw got by replacing the
penultimate long syllable by a short one in the उपस्थिता metre. ]
Teal शान्तद्विजमृगघुष्टा सन्ध्या स्निग्धा मृदुपवना च ।
पांसुध्वस्ता जनपदनाशं धत्ते रूक्षा रुधिरनिभा च ॥२७॥
A twilight is Jaudable if it is clear, has gentle breeze blowing
and is resounding with the pleasant cries of birds and beasts, not
facing the Sun; while one vitiated by dust, rough or red-coloured,
will bring about the destruction of the country.
[Vide XXX. 3, 6, 7. The metre is मत्ता.]
ufgea ur कथितं मुनिभिस्तदस्मिनु
सर्वं मया निगदितं पुनरुक्तवर्जम् |
श्रुत्वापि कोकिलरुतं बलिभुग्विरौति
यत्तत्स्वभावकृतमस्य पिक न जेतुस् ॥२८॥
Whatever had been expounded in great detail by ancient Sages
like Garga has all been explained here by me without committing
the fault of repetition. That the crow caws even after hearing the
sweet warbling of the cuckoo, is entirely its natural trait and is not
done with the idea of defeating the cuckoo.
[This is excellent poetry containing the figure अर्थान्तरन्यास, following in the footsteps of great masters like Kalidasa. Here the author
reveals his humility and eligibility to summarize the ancient teaching
in his own humble way. This reminds us of Kalidasa’s statement :
ग्रथवा कृतवाग्द्वारे वंशेऽस्मिन्पूर्वसूरिभिः |
मणौ वज्त्रसमुत्कीणां सुत्रस्येवास्ति मे गतिः ॥
Similarly a later poet, Bhoja, says in his चम्पूरामायण--““कि तर्पणं न
विदधाति नरः पितृणाम् i" :
The metre is वसन्ततिलका.]
Mr. Chidambara Iyer has quoted in his translation of this
work some material coming under the purview of Samhità, from
some source. I requote the same for the benefit of readers :
There will be famine as long as the course of Jupiter and that
of Saturn lie through the end of the signs Mesa and Vrécika and
through the middle of Vrsabha and Sirhha.
So so

404 Brhat Samhita
there would also be famine; if six, the chief ruler would run away
from his kingdom, and if seven, humanity would come to an
end.
If the course of Mars and Saturn through the signs of Karkataka, Simha and Mina should be retrograde or re-retrograde, there
would be much suffering on earth. There would also be a scarcity
of water and wars in the land; grains would be destroyed and mankind would suffer from robbers.
If Saturn and Rahu should meet, crops would be injured;
commodity would become scarce; husbands and wives would be at
strife, there would be drought and famine in the land; cows would
suffer death and men would become exceedingly lazy.
If the course of the Sun and the Moon, both of brilliant discs,
should lie through the seven asterisms from Krttika, Madhyadesa
would suffer miseries.
If the course of the Sun, the Moon, Mars and Venus should
lie through the seven asterisms from Magha, there would be grief
and disease among men and the God of Death would be busy in his
wide work of destruction in the southern countries.
If the course of Jupiter, the Moon and Mercury, all of brilliant discs, should lie through the seven asterisms from Anuradha,
the western countries, as far as the sea, as well as the western sea
itself with its creatures would suffer miseries.
If the course of the Sun, Venus and Mars should lie through
the seven asterisms from Sravistha, the northern countries would
suffer miseries.
If the benefic planets should appear of the colour of gold, the
Brahmins, the Ksatriyas, the Vai$yas and the Südras would all
attend to their respective duties and would become happy.

पुष्यस्नानस् ॥४८॥
Chapter XLVIII— Royal Ablution
मुलं मनुजाधिपतिः प्रजातरोस्तदुपघातसंस्कारात् ।
aya शुभं च लोके भवति यतोऽतो नृपतिचिन्ता ॥१॥
The king is the root of the subject tree. Efforts should be made
to enhance the king’s welfare, since progress and decay of the people
are entirely dependent upon the nourishing and injuring respectively of that king-root.
[This is a very significant expression of a patent truth made
in a metaphorical language. Here the Subject-tree stands for the
entire state, called in Sanskrit, Prakrti. It consists of seven parts viz.
the king, ministers, allies, treasury, territory, fortifications and
army. By Praja, the author means this Collective Prakrti whose tap
root is represented by the king. Varáhamihira's statement is based
on the ancient dictum stated by the Great Sage Vyasa:
“कालो वा कारणां राज्ञो राजा वा कालकारणम् |
इति ते संशयो मा भूद्राजा कालस्य कारणम् u
and the statement that the king is there for ‘resa and ‘sare’
and not for 'कामकरण', Hence the king should conduct himself in the
fashion of the tap root, taking sustenance from the earth and
distributing it among its different parts.
See also the contrary qualities in XLVI. 76.]
या व्याख्याता शान्तिः स्वयम्भुवा सुरगुरोमंहेन्द्राथे |
तां प्राप्य वृद्धगर्गः प्राह यथा भागुरेः TUT uz
Listen, Ye, to the method of expiation, which had been originally expounded by the Creator to the Preceptor of the Gods for the
sake of Indra (the Lord of the Immortals), and which, later,
Vrddhagarga got and imparted to sage Bhaguri.
[We are not in a position to state definitely whether this Bhaguri and the grammarian were one and the same. All rituals are
said to have been taught for being performed first for Indra, and
then, on that model, for earthly kings. We hear the same thing
about King Janamejaya's Coronation and his subsequent
A$vamedha sacrifice as well as world-conquest.

406 Brhat Samhita
Cf. gent —
देवाइच दितिजेः सार्धं स्पर्धमाना हि मानिनः à
परस्परं महद्युद्धं चक्र: सर्व सुरासुराः ॥
ततो द॑त्यगणाँः mgar: सर्वं विनिजिताः ।
ततोऽङ्गिराः सुरगुरुध्यानसक्तोऽभवत्पुरा ॥
पुरन्दराभिषेकार्थं व्ृहस्पतिरकल्पयत् ।
तिष्यमात्मीयनक्षत्रं यस्य देवो बृहस्पति: ॥
तेन चेवाभिषिक्तश्च देवराजः पुरन्दरः |
ततो बलसमारूढो नाशयामास दानवान् ॥
देवाच हृष्टमनसः पुरीं प्राप्यामरावतीम्।
पुष्यस्तानं TAAL तदारभ्य प्रवतितम् ॥
I feel बलकरं must have been the original reading.]
पुष्यस्नानं नृपतेः कतंव्यं दववित्पुरोधा (धो?) भ्याम् i
नातः परं पवित्रं सर्वोत्पातान्तकरमस्ति ॥३॥
The royal astrologer and preceptor should give the king a holy
bath on a day with which synchronizes the asterism of Pusya. There
is nothing holier than this which puts an end to all the evil effects
of portents.
[Hindus believe that on certain holy days like some Full Moons,
Sankrantis, eclipses etc. some cosmic forces are released. They are
tapped on such occasions for beneficial ends by persons who perform
certain rituals on the banks of holy rivers, lakes etc. after bathing
therein. Certain holy places stir the imagination of pious people
with stored-up impressions of bygone births. Why should, otherwise, people go to the distant Varanasi and bathe inthe holy river
Ganga that was brought down from Heaven to the earth by King
Bhagiratha to purify his ancestors ? I do not think our author could
have committed the mistake of using the expression, पुरोधाभ्याम् instead
of पुरोधोभ्याम्. The mistake evidently must have been committed by
the scribes. The description of the place of the holy bath that
follows is splendid, making out the author a great poet.]
इलेष्मातकाक्षकण्ट किकटुतिक्तविगन्धिपादपविहोीने à
को शिकगृध्रप्रभृतिभिरनिष्टविहगेः परित्यक्ते ॥४॥
तरुणत रुगुल्म वललीलताप्रतानान्विते बनो वेशे ।
निरुपहतपत्रपललवमनोज्ञमधुरद्रुमप्राये ॥५॥
The royal bath should be performed in a forest-region, which

Royal Ablution XLVIII 407
is devoid of cordia, beleric myrobalan, thorny, pungent, bitter, and
badsmelling trees; which is not frequented by owls, vultures and
such other inauspicious birds ; which is full of young trees, shrubs,
creepers and bowers, and which consists mostly of beautiful and
sweet trees with unspoilt leaves and sprouts.
कृकवाकुजीवजीवकशुक शिखिशतपत्रचाषहा रीते: ।
क्रकरचकोरकपिड्जलवज्जुलपा रावतश्रो कं: NEN
कुसुसरसपानमत्त ्विरेफपुंस्कोकिलादि भिइचान्येः i
विरुते वनोपकण्ठे क्षेत्रागारे शुचावथवा ॥७॥
Or, it may be done in a pure building in a sacred place in the
vicinity of forests that resound with the notes of cocks, jivas, jivakas, parrots, peacocks, wood-peckers, blue jays, green pigeons,
krakaras, cakoras, Kapitijalas, Varijulas, doves, Srikanthas and
other birds such as the male cuckoos and bees that are intoxicated
by drinking honey.
[The commentator suggests that क्षेत्रागारे शुचावथवा’ may be taken
independently, and not necessarily as an adjunct to ‘वनोपकण्ठे’. I think
that this interpretation is not quite consistent with what was given
in the previous two verses. Having already given ‘वनोद्देशे’ the author
would not repeat the same idea. For, there is no material difference
between the two expressions वनोद्देशे and वनोपकण्ठे.]
हृदिनीविलासिनीनां जलखगनखविक्षतेषु रम्येषु ।
पुलिनजघनेषु कुर्याद हङमनसोः प्रीतिजननेषु usu
Or, it may be performed on the charming laps viz. the sandy
banks, that delight the eyes and the heart, that have the marks of
nails in the form of aquatic birds, of the courtgzans Viz. the rivers.
[This is erotic sentiment par excellence. It is also a good example of connected पक or metaphor. The poet continues the imagery
in the following two verses.]
्रोत्प्लुत हंसच्छत्रे कारण्डवकुररसा रसोद्गीते ।
फुल्लेन्दीवरनयने सरसि सहस्नाक्षकान्तिधरे uen
Or it may be done at a lake, which possesses Indra’s grandeur
on account of its royal umbrella in the form of the flying swans, the
loud songs in the form of the cries of ducks, ospreys and cranes, and
its numerous eyes in the form of the blue lily blossoms.
[Here the poet employsa full metaphor re-informed by a
simile. In all thes: images we can clearly perceive Kalidasa's

408 Brhat Samhita
influence. The reader may see the description of the Sarayü (in
XIII. Raghu). For gassa we have ““पद्मा पद्मातपत्रेण भेजे” in the Raghu
प्रोत्फुल्लकमलवदनाः कलहंसकलप्रभाषिण्यः |
प्रोत्तड्भकुडसलकुचा यस्मिन्नलिनीविलासिन्यः ॥१०॥
Or, in a place where there are the sportive damsels viz. lotusponds, with their beaming faces of full-blown lotuses, melodious
voices of the sweet notes of the royal swans, and hard (or lofty)
bosoms of the uplifted buds.
[Here the poet compares the lotus-ponds to charming damsels.
The reader may, with advantage, bring to memory Kalidasa’s
inimitable verse in the description of Parvati:
“भ्रावजिता किञ्चिदिव स्तनाभ्यां वासो वसाना तरुणाक रागम् |
पर्याप्तपुष्पस्तबकावन्रा सञ्चारिणी पल्लविनी लतेब ॥”
In the second line there is another reading : प्रोद्बद्ध, instead of
प्रोतुद्ध.]
कुर्यादृगोरोमन्यजफेनलवककृत्खुरक्षतोपचिते ।
श्रचिरप्रसृतहुड्कृतवल्गितवत्सोत्सवे गोष्ठे ॥११॥
Or, itmay be done ina cow-pen, which is filled with the
drops of foam from the mouths of cows chewing the cud, with cowdung and with scratches made by their hoofs; and which is pleasing
on account of the lowing and frisking of tender calves.
[I am inclined to take the two halves of this verse as independent sentences : In a place which is strewn with the marks of hoofs
and drops of foam, or in a Cow-pen etc.]
श्रथवा समुद्रतीरे कुशलागतरत्नपोतसम्बाधे ।
घननिचुललीनजलचरसितखगशबलीकृतोपान्ते ॥१२॥
Or, it may be perfomed on the sea-shore which is teeming
with ships that have arrived safely with their cargo of gems and
other very valuable things; and whose fringes are variegated with
white birds and fishes and the like lurking in the thick bushes of
the Nicula trees.
क्षमया क्रोध इव जित: सिहो मृग्याभिभूयते येषु ।
दत्तामयखगमृगशा वकेषु तेष्वाश्रमेष्वयवा ॥१३॥
Or, it may be done in the hermitages of sages where a lion is
subdued by a female deer just as wrath is conquered by forbearance,

Royal Ablution XLVIII 409
and where the young ones of birds and the deer roam about freely
without any fear.
[The simile in this verse has been suggested by Valmiki’s verse,
“यः समुत्पतितं क्रोधं aada निरस्यति ।
यथोरगस्त्वचं जीर्णौ स वं पुरुष उच्यते u^
काऊ चीकलापन् पुरगुरुजघनोद्ृहनविध्नितपदाभिः i
श्रीमति यृगेक्षणाभिग हे$न्यभृतवल्गुवचनामि: ॥१४॥
Or, it may be gone through in a house rendered resplendent
by the presence of charming (deer-eyed) women whose gait is impeded by the weight of their heavy hips, girdles and anklets, and
whose speech is as pleasing as the warbling of cuckoos.
[This is reminiscent of Kalidasa’s line,
“न दुवहश्रोरिपयोधरार्ता भिन्दन्ति मन्दां गतिमश्वमुख्यः 1”
पुण्येष्वायतनेषु च तोर्थेषुद्यानरम्यदेशेषु ।
पुर्वोदकप्लवभूमो प्रदक्षिणास्भोवहायां च ॥१५॥
It may be done also in holy temples, near holy rivers, in gardens, in attractive regions, in a place where the earth slopes down
towards the east or the north, or where the water flows from the
left to the right.
[Cf. zz mi—
समुद्रतीरे सोद्याने नदीनां सङ्गमे शुभे ।
महाह्वदेऽथवा तीर्थे देवतायतनेऽथवा ॥
सर्वेर्तृकुसुमोपेते वने द्विजवरररयृते।
गृहे रम्ये विविक्ते वा पुष्यस्नानं समाचरेत् u]
Next the author speaks of the site for this bath.
भस्माङ्का रास्थ्युषरतुषकेशइव्रकर्कटावासँ: ।
इवाविघमूषकविवरंवंल्मीकर्या च सन्त्यक्ता ॥१६॥
धात्री घना सुगन्धा स्निग्धा मधुरा समा च विजयाय d
सेनावासेऽप्येवं योजयितव्या यथायोगम् uen
If the site selected for the holy bath be free from ashes, charcoal, bones, sandy mud, husk, hair, pits, burrows of crabs as well
as from burrow-dwelling animals, holes of porcupines and rats and
ant-hills, and if it is hard (not hollow), sweet-smelling, glossy (not
arid), sweet and even (without ups and downs), it would conduce to

410 Brhat Samhita
victory. The same conditions apply to the case of encampment of
armies as well, according to circumstances.
[Here the author and the commentator following him commit
two grammatical errors viz. एवाविध 21 सुगन्धा. It should have been
श्वाविन्मूषक... and सुगन्धिः ]
निष्क्रम्य पुरान्नक्तं देवज्ञासात्ययाजकाः प्राच्याम् ।
atat वा कृत्वा बलि दिशीशाधिपायां वा ॥१८॥
लाजाक्षतदधिकुसुमंः प्रयतः प्रणतः पुरोहितः कुर्यात् ।
प्रावाहनमथ मन्त्रस्तस्मिन् मुनिभिः समुद्दिष्टः ugen
The astrologer, minister and the sacrificial priest should set
out of the city at night and make food-offerings to the Deities in the
east, north or north-east. Then the priest, being pure and prayerful
should perform the Avahana (invoking the Deity to be present)
with fried grains, coloured rice, curds and flowers. The hymn of
invocation prescribed by the sages is the following :
[In the first verse the author has not given any finite verb, nor
can the singular verb in the second go well with the subject in
plural in the first. He could have avoided this error by substituting
qa: for कृत्वा.
From the circumstances mentioned here and in subsequent
verses we have to conclude that these three persons are to form the
advance party to prepare the ground for the holy bath. So the king
does not accompany them.]
श्रागच्छन्तु सुराः सव येऽत्र पुजामिलाषिरा: ।
दिशो नागा द्विजाइचेव ये चाप्यन्येऽशभागिनः ॥२०॥
maga ततः सर्वानेवं ब्रूयात्पुरोहितः ।
इवः Gat प्राप्य यास्यन्ति दत्वा शान्ति महीपतेः ॥२१॥
“May all the Gods who wish to be honoured with worship
condescend to come here, as well as the quarters, serpents, sages
and others that partake of the sacrificial offerings ^ Having thus
invoked them to be present in the images, the priest should address
all of them thus : “Tomorrow you will go back after receiving worship and bestowing peace and prosperity on the king.”
श्रावाहितेषु कृत्वा पूजां तां शवरीं वसेयुस्ते ।
सदसत्स्वप्ननिमित्तं यात्रायां स्वप्नविधिरुक्तः ॥२२॥
After offering worship to the Deities that have been invoked

Royal Ablution XLVIII 411
to be present, they (the astrologer, minister and priest) should spend
the night in the same place in order to find out the good or bad
nature of the future revealed by dreams, the rules pertaining to
which have been treated of in my work, viz. the Yatra.
[Cf. the arar—
दुकूलमुक्तामणिभृन्नरेन्द्रः समन्त्रिदेवज्ञपुरोहितो5त: i
स्वदेवतागारमनुप्रविश्य निवेशयेत्तत्र दिगीश्वराचाम् ॥
अभ्यच्य मन्त्रैस्तु पुरोहितस्तामघश्च तस्यां भुवि संस्कृतायाम् ।
दर्भश्र कृत्वास्तरमक्षतंस्तां लिखेत्समन्तात्सितसष पंश्च ॥
ब्राह्मीं सदूर्वामथ नागपुष्पी कृत्वोपधानं शिरसि क्षितीशः |
पुजार्घजान् पु्पफलाभिघानानाशासु दध्याच्चतुरः HAT ॥
यज्जाग्रतो दूरमुदेति देवमावत्यं मन्त्रं प्रयतस्त्रिरेतम् ।
लघ्वेकभुग्दक्षिणपाशवंशायी स्वप्नं परीक्षेत यथोपदेशमु ॥
नमः शम्भो त्रिनेत्राय रुद्राय वरदाय F |
वामनाय विरूपाय स्वप्नाधिपतये नमः N
भगवन् देवदेवेश JANG वृषवाहन |
इष्ठानिष्टं समाचक्ष्व स्वप्ने स्वप्नस्य शाश्चतम् ।
इष्ठमन्त्रांस्ततः स्मृत्वा शिवशक्तिपुरोगमान् |
ग्रभ्यर्थंनां ततस्तस्य कृत्वा सुप्रयतो नृपः ।।
एकवस्त्रे कुशास्तीर सुप्तः प्रयतमानसः |
निशान्ते पश्यति स्वप्नं शुभं वा यदि वाऽशुभम् ॥ |
भ्रपरेऽहनि प्रभाते सम्भारानुपहरेद्यथोक्तगुरान् ।
गत्वावनिप्रदेशे रलोकाइचाप्यत्र मुनिगीताः ॥२३॥
On the morrow, at dawn the required materials possessing the
prescribed qualities are to be brought to the same place of worship
and offered on the ground; and the following verses bearing on this
subject have been imparted by the Sage viz. Vrddhagarga :
[The idea is that the materials mentioned in the following
verses are to be placed in the appropriate compartments of the
circular diagram drawn on the ground and then the various Deities
worshipped.]
तस्मिन् सण्डलमालिख्य कल्पयेत्तत्र मेदिनीस् ।
नानारत्नाकरवतों स्थानानि विविधानि च ॥२४॥
पुरोहितो यथास्थानं नागान् यक्षानु nq fua
गन्धर्वाप्सरसइचंव gar सिद्धांश्च विन्यसेत् uqun

412 Brhat Samhita
ग्रहांश्च सर्वनक्षत्रे रुद्रांश्च सह mafa: ।
स्कन्दं विष्णु विशाखं च लोकपालाव् सुरस्त्रियः ॥२६॥
व्ाकंविविधेः gear हृद्यं गन्घगुरान्वितँः ।
यथास्वं पुजयेद्विद्वात् गन्धमाल्यानुलेषनः ॥२७॥
भक्ष्य रन्नेशच विविधः फलसूलामिर्षस्तथः ।
qaa fafadg दयः सुराक्षीरासवादिभिः ॥२८॥
On the afore-named ground the learned priest should draw a
circle and therein mark the Earth along with the various oceans
and the various other regions. He should place serpents, Yaksas,
Gods, the Manes, Gandharvas, Nymphs, Sages and Siddhas in
their respective compartments. He should also draw in their proper
places the planets with all the stars, the Rudras along with the seven
Mothers, Skanda, Visnu, Vigakha, the protectors of the quarters and
the celestial damsels, with various coloured powders (appropriate to
each) that are attractive and sweet-smelling and worship all the
deities with perfumes, garlands, scented pastes, eatables and dishes
of various kinds as well as with varieties of roots, fruits and meat
and attractive drinks such as liquor, milk and wine.
[Bhattotpala interprets नानारत्ताकरवतीं मेदिनीम् as “बहूनि रत्नानि aa स्थापये-
दित्यथं:” i.e. one should place on the ground all kinds of gems. Following him we had translated accordingly in the edition of V.S. Sastri
and M.R. Bhat. However, after 25 years I make bold to say that
the commentator has not fully comprehended the significance of
the occasion. For, the purpose ofthe Pusyasnana is to absolve the
king of all his sins and enable him to conquer the entire world. For
this purpose he should have before him the picture ofthe whole
globe with the oceans and lands as well as the regions inhabited by
Nagas etc. Even the celestial region is depicted in this diagram.
Each deity has its appropriate place and colour allotted.]
कथयाम्यतः परमहं पुजामस्मिन्यथामिलिखितानाम् ।
भ्रहयज्ञे यः प्रोक्तो fafirqgrmi स Tia: ॥ २६॥
मांसौदनमद्याद्य: पिशाचदितितनयदानवाः पुज्याः à
ग्रभ्यज्जना्जनतिलेः पितरो मांसो द नंश्चायि ॥३०॥
सामयर्जु भर्मुनयस्त्वृरिमिगेर्धेश्च धूपमाल्ययुत: i
ग्रहलेषकव णेस्त्रिमधुरेश चाभ्यचयेन्नागान् ॥३१।।

AOJO 2101011018 ALY LII 413
इुपाज्याहुतिमाल्येविबुधानु रत्न: स्तुतिप्रणा्श्च ।
गन्धर्वानप्सरसो गन्धर्माल्येश्च सुसुगन्धेः ॥३२॥
शेषांस्तु सावर्वाणकबलिमिः quit न्यसेच्च सर्वेबामु |
प्रतिसरवस्त्रपताकाभूषरायज्ञोपवीतानि ॥३३॥
Now I shall explain the method of worshipping the Deities
drawn in their respective places inside the circle or
mystic diagram.
As for the planets,
the same method as expounded in the Yatra in
connection with the Planetary Sacrifices should be adhered to. The
Danavas, Daityas and 0165095 are to be worshipped with flesh, rice,
liquor etc.; the Manes with oil bath, collyrium, sesamum, meat and
rice; the sages with the hymns of the Sama, Yajus and Rg Vedas,
perfumes, incense and garlands; the Serpents with unmixed colours
and the triple sweet—a mixture of honey, ghee and sugar, the Gods
with incense, ghee, oblations, garlands, gems, invocations and
salutations; the Gandharvas and the nymphs with excellent
perfumes and sweet smelling garlands; the remaining Deities (such
as Yaksas) with multi-coloured food-offerings. All the Deities should
be worshipped and also strings dipped in saffron-paste, clothes,
flags, ornaments and sacred threads placed in their respective
compartments.
[Cf. the arat—
यात्रायां ग्रहयज्ञे तत्रार्चा ताम्रमयसवितुः |
(1) पालाशिकी समिद् वंकङ्तजाता तथा स्नुक् च ॥
भ्राकुृष्णोेति च मन्त्रो रक्ता गन्धाः सहागुरुणा ॥
माषातसीतिलाल्वकमुद्यांश्चणका न्विहाय भोज्यविधिः ।
वकुलार्कागस्त्यपलाशशल्यको कुसुमपुजा च ॥
ग्रष्ठशतसस्मितेभ्यो विप्रेभ्यो दक्षिणाऽऽहिताग्निभ्यः |
देया वृषकनकमही agafa समुदिश्य ॥
(1) It is strange that the editor of the सरस्वतीभवनग्रन्यमाला (६७)
claims on page 522, “aqq, पुस्तकेषु 'पालाशिकी aa च' इति भ्रष्टपाठो वतते । अस्मा-
भिर्वेदिकानुसारेण वँकङ्कतजाता qur इत्यधिकः पाठो योजितः", since in our 1947
edition, to which the above learned editor refers in his अवतारिका (pp.
18, 19), this addition had already been adopted.]
मण्डलपश्चिमभागे Heather देक्षिणो$्थवा TG ।
ग्रादद्यात्सस्मारातु दर्भान् दीर्घानगर्माश्व NIVU
लाजाज्याक्षतदधिमधुसिद्धार्थकगन्ध सुमनसो धूपः ।
गोरोचनाञ्जनतिलाः स्वर्तुजमधुराणि च फलानि ॥३५॥

414 Brhat Samhita
qaaa पायसस्य च तत्र शरावाणि asa सम्भार: ।
पञ्चिसवेद्यां gat कुर्यात् स्नानस्य सा वेदी ॥३६॥
Fire should be kindled on a sacrificial altar made to the west
or to the south of the mystic circle, and all the following necessary
sacrificial materials collected on the altar, viz. long (uncut) blades
of Darbha grass that do not contain tender sprouts inside, fried
grains, ghee, coloured rice, curd, honey, white mustard seeds, perfumes, flowers, incense, Gorocana (a bright yellow pigment found
in the head of a cow), collyrium, sesamum and the sweet fruits of
the season, as well as earthen plates filled with ghee and Payasa
(milk porridge). With these materials got ready worship should be
done on the altar to the west of the circle. For, this is the altar
recommended for the royal ablution.
[Though the altar for the holy bath may be selected either to
the west or south of the mystic diagram, yet the western altar seems
to be more powerful for the bath, as the author mentions the पश्चिमवेदी once again at the end. If for some reason the western part is not
suitable, then only the southern part should be selected to start with.
Wide also verse 75 infra.]
तस्याः कोरोषु हढान् कलशान् सितसूत्रवेष्टितग्रीवाच् ।
सक्षी रवृक्षपल्लवफलापिधानान् व्यवस्थाप्य ॥३७॥
पुष्यस्नानविसिश्रेणापुर्णानम्भसा सरत्नांश्च t
पुष्यस्नानद्रव्याण्यादद्याद्गर्गगोतानि ॥३८॥
In the four corners of the altar should be placed water pots
strong and stable with white strings tied round their necks, and
sprouts of milky trees and fruits put on their mouths. They should,
be filled with water containing the herbs prescribed for this ablution
and gems. Then the following materials for the holy bath prescribed
by Sage Garga should be brought in.
[Cf. गर्ष—
कलशहेमताम्रं श्र UAT HÅN |
सुत्रसं वेष्टितग्री वेश्चन्दनागुरुचचितंः i
प्रशस्त वृक्षप त्रेशच फलपुष्पसमन्वितं: |
पुण्यतोयेन ATT रत्नगर्भमंनोहरै: n]
ज्योतिष्मतीं त्रायमाणाममयामपराजितासु ।
wat विश्वेश्वरीं पाठां are विजयां तथा ।।३६॥

Royal Ablution XLVIII 415
सहां च सहदेवों च पूर्णकोशां शतावरीम् ।
श्ररिष्टिकां शिवां भ्रां तेषु कुम्भेषु विन्यसेत् ॥४०॥
ब्राह्मी क्षेमामजां चैव सर्वबीजानि काञ्चनीम् ।
सङ्ख्यानि यथालाभं सवोंषध्यो रसास्तथा ॥४१॥
रत्नानि aiman बिल्वं च सविकडुःतस् ।
प्रशस्तनास्न्यश्चौषध्यो हिरण्यं सङ्गलानि च ॥४२॥
The following herbs and articles should be put into the four
holy pots :
The Jyotismati creeper (a luminous herb), Trayamana, Abhaya (Haritaki), Aparajità (Visnukranta), Jivantr, Viśveśvarī, Pāthā
(Ambastha or Vanatiktka), red madder, Vaca, Saha (Mudgaparni),
Sahadevi, Purnakosa, Satavart, Aristika, Siva, Bhadra, Brahmr
(moonplant), Ksema, Aja, all kinds of seeds, Kàücani (turmeric),
all auspicious articles (such as curds, coloured rice and flowers) as
far as they are available, all herbs, juices of different tastes, gems,
all perfumes, Bilva and Vikankata fruits, herbs with auspicious
names, gold etc. and auspicious materials.
[In every little object created by God there is some amount of
spiritual and physical potency. That is the reason why preparations
of herbs called decoctions and other medicines possess both curative
and ameliorative powers. In esoteric science too herbs, spells and
gems play an important role in this regard. This is due to the fact
that objects receive, in addition to having their innate powers,
cosmic energy from every other object in the world, especially from
the mighty heavenly bodies. If we understand this principle, we
can easily appreciate the Moon's appellation, Osadhisa, lord of
herbs. The herbs, gems, seeds and minerals used for the Pusyasnana along with the powerful Mantras are meant to give a good
deal of spiritual strength to the king. Look at the wonderfully significant names of the herbs : Trayamana meaning protective, Abhaya freedom from fear, Aparajita never defeated etc.]
भ्रादावनड॒हश्चसं जरया संहृतायुषः ।
प्रशञस्तलक्षर्पश्चृतः प्राचीनग्रीवमास्तरेत् ॥४३॥
ततो वृषस्य योधस्य चमं रोहितमक्षतम् ।
[सहस्याय तृतीयं स्थाद् व्याघ्रस्य च ततः परस् ॥४४॥
चत्वार्येतानि चर्माणि तस्यां वेद्याभुपास्तरेत् ।
शुभे ggd सम्प्राप्ते पुष्ययुक्ते निज्ञाकरे 1॥।४५॥
At first the skin of a bull bearing auspicious marks, which had

416 Brhat Samhita
died of old age, should be spread on the altar with its neck turned
to the east. Over this should be spread the red-coloured and unspoilt skin of a fighting bull. Over thisa lion’s skin and over that
a tiger’s skin should be put. This should be done in an auspicious
Muhürta when the Moon is in the star Pusya.
[In Mantrasastra different skins that are used as seats for
meditation etc. are said so give out different types of spiritual vibrations. Lord Siva is said to have used a tiger-skin seat for His penance : “'शार्दूलचर्मव्यवघानवत्याम्.”
The excellent features of cows and bulls are given in LXI
infra. f
From verse 44 we understand that in ancient India bull-fighting was one of the popular sports.]
भद्रासनमेकतमेन कारितं कनकरजतताज्रारणास् |
क्षीरतरुनिसितं वा विन्यस्यं चर्मणामुपरि ॥४६॥
त्रिविधस्तस्योच्छ्रायो हस्तः पादाघिकोऽध युक्तश्च ।
साण्डलिका नन्तरनित्समस्तराज्यार्थिनां शुभदः ॥ ४७॥
A throne made of gold, silver or copper or of any milky tree
should be placed on the above-named skins. If the height of the
throne is one cubit, one and a quarter, and one and a half cubits, it
will prove beneficial to governors of provinces, those who wish to
conquer neighbouring kingdoms and those who wish to bring the
whole earth under their sway respectively.
श्रन्तर्धाय हिरण्यं तत्रोप विशेन्नरेशवरः quu ।
सचिवाप्तपुरोहितदं दपौ रकल्याणानासवृतः ॥४८॥
वन्दिजनपौरविप्रेः प्रघुष्टपुण्याहवेदनिर्घोषंः i
समृदद्गशङ्कःतु्यमं ड्रालशब्द हतानिष्टः ॥४६॥
After placing some gold inside the throne, the king should sit
on it with a jubilant heart, in the company of his ministers, trustworthy friends, preceptors, astrologers, citizens and others having
auspicious names; and with bards, citizens and Brahmanas shouting
panegyrics and chanting aloud the Punyaha hymn and other Vedic
Mantras; and with all evils warded off by the auspicious sounds of
tabors, conchs and such other musical instruments.
[The word देव here stands for दैवज्ञ (astrologer), a part standing
for the whole. Auspicious names are some of the following: Jayaraja, Simharàja etc., which Suggest victory and prosperity for the
host.]

Royal Ablution XLVIII 417
अहतक्षीमनिवसनं पुरोहितः कम्बलेन USAT |
कृतबलिपुजं कलशेरमिषिञ्चेत्सपिषा qui: ॥५०॥
Then the priest should cover the king, who is clad in fresh,
unwashed siiken garments and who has already offered food and
worship to the Deities, with a blanket and bathe him with pots filled
with ghee.
अ्रष्टावर्शा वशति रष्टशत वापि कलशपरिभाशस् ।
धरधिकेऽघिके गुणोत्तरमयं च मन्त्रोऽत्र मुनिगीतः ॥५१॥
The number of pots filled with ghee should be eight, twentyeight or a hundred and eight. The greater the number of holy pots,
the greater will be the efficacy. And the following is the hymn
sung by Sage Vrddha Garga for this occasion.
msg तेजः समुहिष्टमाज्यं पापहरं परस् ।
प्राज्यं सुराणासाहार भ्राज्ये लोकाः प्रतिष्ठिताः ॥५२॥
were: दिव्यं वा यत्ते कल्सषभागतस् ।
सर्व तदाज्यसंस्पर्शात् प्रणाशमुपगच्छतु ॥५३॥
Ghee has been declared as power (or vitality); it isthe greatest
dispeller of sins; it is the food of the celestials; it is ghee on which
are established all the worlds. ‘‘Whatever sin, terrestrial, atmospheric or celestial, has befallen you, may all that come to an end asa
result of this holy ghee coming in contact with your body !”
कस्बल्मपनीय ततः पुष्यस्तानास्बुमिः सफलपुल्पे: ।
्रमिषिञ्चेन्मनुजेन्द्रं पुरोहितोऽनेन सन्त्रे ॥५४॥
Thereafter the preceptor should remove the blanket (from the
king’s body) and bathe the king with the holy waters meant for the
sacred bath, containing fruits and flowers, chanting the following
hymns :
सुरास्त्वाममिषिञ्चन्तु ये च सिद्धाः पुरातनाः ।
ब्रह्मा विष्णुश्च रुद्रश्च साष्पाश्च समरुद्गणाः NRRL
भ्रादित्या वसवो रुद्रा akaa च मिषग्वरो ।
ग्रदितिदेवसाता च स्वाहा सिद्धि: सरस्वती ॥५६॥
कोतिलंक्ष्मोधु तिः श्रीश्च सिनीवाली कुहुस्तथा ।
दनुश्च सुरसा चेव विनता ua च ॥५७॥
देवपटन्पश्च या नोक्ता देवसातर एव च ।
सर्वास्त्वाममिषिञ्चन्तु दिव्याइचाप्सरसां गणाः ॥५८॥

418 Brhat Samhita
नक्षत्राणि FRAT पक्षाहोराजसन्धय: ।
संवत्सरा दिनेशाश्च कलाः काष्ठाः क्षणा लवाः URE
सर्वे त्वासमिषिञ्चन्तु कालस्यावयवाः शुभाः ।
एते चान्ये च मुनयो वेदव्रतपरायणाः ॥६०॥
सशिष्यास्तेऽभिषिञ्चन्तु सदाराश्च तपोधनाः ।
aaa: सुरगणा AAS: सागरः सह ॥६१॥
सरितश्च महाभागा नागाः किम्पुरषास्तथा ।
वेखानसा खहाभागा हिजा वेहायसाश्च घे ॥६२॥
aasa: सदाराश्च ध्रुवस्थानानि यानि च।
सरीचिरत्रिः पुलहः पुलस्त्यः तुर द्गिराः ॥६३॥
BY: सनत्कुसारश्च सनकोऽथ सनन्दनः |
सनातनश्च दक्षश्च जंगीषव्यो भगन्दरः ॥६४॥
एकतश्च farda त्रितो जाबालिकह्ययौ ।
दुर्वासा दुर्विनीतश्च कण्वः कात्यायनस्तथा ॥६५॥
मार्कण्डेयो दीघतपाः शुनःशेफो विदूरथः |
ऊब: संवत्तंकश्चेव च्यवनोऽत्रिः पराशरः ॥६६॥
द्पायनो यवक्रीतो देवराजः सहानुजः d
पर्वतास्तरवो वल्ल्यः पुण्यान्यायतनानि च ॥६७॥
प्रजापर्तिदतिशचंव गावो (assem सातरः |
वाहनानि च दिव्यानि सवलोकाश्चराचराः ॥६८॥
maq: पितरस्तारा TT: खं दिशो we ।
एते चान्ये च बहवः queue शुभैः NGEN
तोरथस्त्वामभिषिञ्चन्तु सर्वोत्पातनिबहुण: i
यथाभिषिक्तो सघवानेतेर्सृदितसानसँः ॥७०॥
May the Gods bathe thee, and the ancient Siddhas, Brahman,
Visnu, Siva, Sadhyas, groups of Maruts, the Suns (twelve in number), Vasus, Rudras, the great Celestial Physicians, Aditi, the mother
of the Gods, Svaha (wife of Agni), Siddhi, Sarasvati, Kirti, Laksmi,
Dhrti, Sri, Sinivali (New Moon beginning later in the day) Kuhü
(the same beginning right from the dawn), Danu, Surasa, Vinatà,
Kadru, consorts ofthe Gods not mentioned already, and also mothers
of the Gods, may all these bathe thee ! May the groups of Divine
Nymphs, the stars, Muhürtas (periods of 48 minutes), Fortnights,
Days, Nights, the three junctions, years, the Lords of the Day (the

Royal Ablution XLVIII 419
Sun and other planets), Minutes, Seconds, Moments, Lavas (the
sixth part of a twinkling), all these and other auspicious divisions of
Time bathe thee ! May the Sages wedded to the propagation of the
Vedas and engaged in penance, along with their wives and pupils
bathe thee ! May the celestials who always move about in aerial
chariots, groups of Gods, Manus, Oceans, Rivers, the great Serpents, Kimpurusas, Vaikhanasas (anchorites), the great Bráhmanas
(or Sages), Vaihayasas, the Seven Seers with their wives, the Fixed
Places (like Dhruva), Marici, Atri, Pulaha, Pulastya, Kratu,
Angiras, Bhrgu, Sanatkumara, Sanaka, Sanandana, Sanatana, Daksa,
Jaigisavya, Bhagandara, Ekata, Dvita, Trika, Jabali, Kasyapa,
Durvàsas, Durvinita, Kanva, Katyayana, Markandeya, Dirghatapas, Suna$$epha, Vidüratha, Urva (Urdhva ?), Sarmvartaka,
Cyavana, Atri, Para$ara, Dvaipayana (i.e. Vyasa), Yavakrita, Indra
and his younger brother(sj, Mountains, Trees, Creepers, Holy
Places, Prajapati, Diti, Cows, the Mothers of the Universe, Divine
Vehicles, all the Worlds, the Moving and Stationary Beings, Fires,
Manes, Asterisms, Clouds, Sky, Ouarters, Water—these and many
others of auspicious names bathe thee with holy waters capable of
destroying all the evil effects of the portents, even as they did Indra,
with a happy heart !
इत्येते श्चान्येश्चाप्ययर्वकल्पाहितेः सरुद्रगण: ।
कोष्माण्डमहारो हिणकुबे रहे: समृद्धया च ॥७१॥
With the above-named hymns and others prescribed in the
books on rituals belonging to the Atharva Veda, the eleven Anuvakas (hymns) of the Rudrapatha (of the Yajurveda), Kausmanda
(six Anuvakas), Maharauhina, Kubera-hrdaya and the Samrddhi
Rk the above bathing ceremony should be done.
[There is an expiatory sacrifice called Kusmangda Homa. The
hymns used therein are six in number. Mahdrauhina is a Mantra.
Kuberahrdaya like the Adityahrdaya is a set of prayers addressed to
Kubera.
The कृष्माण्डहोम is performed for atoning for all kinds of heinous
sins. There are many methods of performing this ceremony : One
method has been taught by Sage Jamadagni and the other by
Bodhayana. The former is simpler without involving पक्वहोम or
cooked oblations. The following is the method taught by
Jamadagni :—
अथातः सम्प्रवक्ष्यामि कूष्माण्डविधिमुत्तमम् i
एनसां स्थूलसुक्ष्माणां प्रायश्चित्तं तु वेदिकम् ॥

420 Brhat Samhita
भ्रकुवेत् विहितं कर्म निन्दितं च समाचरन् |
प्रसजंश्चेन्द्रियार्थषु प्रायश्रित्ती भवेद् द्विजः ॥
PUTT वापयित्वा स्नात्वा पुण्यजलाशये |
प्रतिष्ठाप्य तर्थैवा ग्नि स्वग्रृह्योक्तविघानतः |
्राज्यभायानन्त <= कृष्माण्डर्जुहुयांद् द्विजः d
“aa 'द्यनुवाकेस्तु त्रिभिहुं त्वाऽऽज्यमन्वहम् ॥
“'वेश्वानरा”नुवाकेन तमग्निमृपतिष्ठते ।
“यदित्या घाय समिधं जयादि प्रतिपद्यते ॥
कर्मा दिष्वेव जुहुयात् पुतः ed समइनुते |
संवत्सर ब्रह्महा तु मासं d वीरहा द्विजः ॥
चतुविशतिरात्रीस्तु परिवेत्ता तु दीक्षितः |
द्वादश त्वग्रदिधिषुः षड़ात्रो: इयावदन्तपि ॥
तिस्रो रात्रीस्तु कुनखी दीक्षितो भवति द्विजः d
न मांसमन्नमइनीयान्नोपेयात्कामिनीमपि ॥
नोपर्यासीत खट्वायां जुगुप्सेतानृताद् द्विजः ।
पयो ad ब्राह्मणस्य यवागूः क्षत्रियस्य च ॥
्रामिक्षा चेव वेश्यस्य प्रायश्वित्तार्थमिष्यते ।
सावित्रीञ्च जपेन्नित्यं पवित्राणि च शक्तितः N
सर्वेष्वेव व्रतेष्वेवं प्रायश्चरत्तार्थ मिष्यते । ]
भ्रापोहिष्ठातिसृभिहिरण्यवर्ण ति चतसु भिर्जप्तमु ।
कार्पासिकवस्त्रयुगं बिभ्रूयात्स्तातो नराधिपतिः ॥७२॥
After undergoing the holy ablution the king should wear a pair
of cotton cloths that have been sanctified by the three Mantras of
the hymn beginning with ‘Apo hi stha’ and by the four beginning with
‘Hiran yavarnam .
[The Mantra ‘Apo hi stha’ is used for purification. 'T'his is done
daily by every twice-born. ‘Hiranyavarnam harinirh suva rnarajatasrajam’ is the commencement of the Srisükta. The former is meant
for purifying the cloths and the latter for conferring prosperity.]
पुण्याहृशङ्कशब्द राचान्तोऽभ्यच्यं देवगुरुविप्रान् ।
छत्रध्वजायुधानि च ततः स्वपुजां प्रयुञ्जीत ॥७१॥
After sipping water (thrice with Mantras) the king should worship Gods, Preceptors, Brahmanas, his royal umbrella, banner and

Royal Ablution XLVIII 421
weapons, when the sounds of conchs and chanting of Punyaha
hymns flourish; and then he should adore his own guardian Deity
(or perform his daily worship).
mga वचेस्यं रायस्पोषाभिऋ ग्मिरेताभिः |
परिजप्तं वेजयिकं नवं विदध्यादलङ्कारम् ॥७४॥
Thereupon the king should wear new ornaments conducive
to victory, sanctified by the six Mantras beginning with the words
‘Ayusyam varcasy- rh rayasposam...’
गत्वा द्वितीयवेदीं समुपविशेच्चमंशामुपरि राजा ।
देयानि चेव चर्माण्युपयं पर्यवमेतानि ॥७५॥
वृषस्य वृषदंशस्य रुरोश्च पृषतस्य च |
तेषामुपरि सिहस्य व्याघ्रस्य च ततः परम् ॥७६॥
Going to the second altar, the king should sit on the skins
which are to be placed one upon another in the following manner :
First the bull's skin is placed, upon this is put that of a cat, upon
that, that of an antelope, then that of a spotted deer, upon that the
lion’s, and lastly the tiger’s on the top.
[In verse 34 supra the author has told us that an altar should
be made either to the west or south. Here he speaks of the other
altar. So we have to conclude that if the first altar selected is the
western one, then the second would be the southern one, and vice
versa. |
मुख्यस्थाने जुहुयात् पुरोहितो$ग्नि समित्तिलघृताद्य॑ः à
ब्रिनयनशक्रब्रृहस्पतिनारायणनित्यगतिऋरिभिः ॥७७॥
In the chief place i.e. sourhern altar, the priest should make
offerings of sacrificial twigs, sesamum, ghee and such other articles
(like Sriphala) into the sacred Fire with hymns addressed to Siva,
Indra, Brhaspati, Narayana and Vayu (Wind).
[There is a doubt about the exact meaning of the word, मुख्यस्थान.
There are three places mentioned in this scheme viz. the central
circle and the western and southern altars. The king sits on the
skins spread on the southern altar and the priest performs the Homa
in the मुख्यस्थान. I feel that the मुख्यस्थान should be the first altar where
the rituals for the पुष्यस्नान were first performed. Of course, the
commentator construes the word as ‘the southern altar’. Is it not the
last and the least important ?]
इन्द्रध्वजनिविष्टान्यग्निनिमित्तानि देवविद् ब्रूयात् ।
कृत्वाऽशेषसमाप्ति पुरोहितः प्राअलिब्रयात् ॥७८॥
The astrologer should explain the auguries of Fire, dealt with

422 Brhat Samhita
in the chapter on ‘Indra’s Banner! (XLIII. 32 supra). After finishing all the rites, the priest should make the following statement with
folded hands :
यान्तु देवगणाः सव पुजामादाय पाथिवात्।
fate दत्वा तु विपुलां पुनरागसनाय च ॥७९॥
“May all the groups of Gods depart from here in order to
come again on a subsequent occasion, having now received worship
at the hands of the king, and bestowed great success on him.”
[This is the usual verse that is recited at the close of worship
by the worshipper who rings the bell signifying the end.]
नृपतिरतो gaa पुरोहितं चाचंयेद्धनेबंहुभिः ।
gaia दक्षिणीयानु यथोचितं श्रोत्रियप्रभृतीनु ॥८०॥
After this the king should honour the astrologer, priest
and others worthy of gifts such as Vedic scholars, with large gifts
of money (clothes etc.) according to their merits.
[Cf. mi— (it must be वृद्धगर्ग )
दत्वा वित्तं ब्राह्माणेभ्यो गावो हेमपरिष्कृता: |
वास्तु युग्यं मही रूप्यं qva बहुभोजनम् 1
शङ्कभेरीस्वनंदिव्येर्गीतिश्चंव मनोहर: |
सम्प्रविश्य ततो राजा सचिव: परिवारितः ॥
३वेतकुञजरमारूढः इवेतमर्वमथापि वा |
₹३वेतचन्दनलिप्ताङ्गः शवेताम्बरधरः शुभः ?।
पुरस्ताद्विकिरेद्वित्तमाशीवरदिश्र पूजितः n]
दत्वाऽभयं प्रजानामाधातस्थानगानु विसुज्य Wan ।
बन्धनमोक्षं कुर्यादभ्यन्त रदोषङृद्वजम् ॥८१॥
The king should proclaim protection to the subjects, release
animals (goats etc.) from the hands of butchers, and order a general
amnesty to all prisoners except those who threaten the internal
peace of the kingdom.
एतत्प्रयुज्यमानं प्रतिपुष्यं सुखयशोऽथंवृद्धिकरम् ।
पुष्याद् विनार्धफलदा पौषी शान्तिः परा प्रोक्ता ॥८२॥
If this holy bath be performed every month on the day of the
asterism Pusya, it would bestow happiness, fame, wealth and progress on the king. If it be performed on any other day, it would
produce only half the benefits. However, the expiatory ceremony
performed on the Full Moon day in the month of Pusya has been
declared to be the foremost in merits.

Royal Ablution XLV III 423
राष्ट्रोत्पातोपसर्गेषु राहोः केतोश्च दशने ।
ग्रहावमर्दने चेव पुष्यस्नानं समाचरेत् ॥८३॥
The royal ablution should be performed whenever a kingdom
is afflicted with portents or disasters like epidemics, when there is an
eclipse, when a comet is sighted and when there is a planetary
war.
नास्ति लोके स उत्पातो यो ह्यनेन न शास्यति ।
aga चापर नास्ति यदस्मादतिरिच्यते ॥८४॥
There is no portent in the world that is not warded off by
this ceremony; and there is no auspicious ritual that surpasses this
one.
[Cf गर्ग—
प्रतिपुष्येण यो राजा स्नायीत विधिपूर्वकम् ।
तस्य राष्ट्रे न सीदन्ति मर्त्या ये जन्तवो भुवि u]
भ्रधिराज्याथिनो राज्ञः पुत्रजन्म च SSAA: d
तत्पूर्वमभिषेके च विधिरष प्रशस्यते ॥८५॥
This ceremony is highly recommended for the occasion of a
king’s Coronation, when he aspires for the sovereignty of an empire
and when he is anxious for the birth of a son.
महेन्द्रार्थमुवाचेदं बृहत्कीतिबृ हस्पतिः ।
स्तानमायुःप्रजावृद्धिसो भाग्यकरणं परस् ॥८६।।
Brhaspati of extra-ordinary fame taught this unique ablution
which confers great longevity, prosperity of children and happiness
as well as good fortune, for the benefit of Indra.
mada विधानेन हस्त्यइवं स्नापयेत्ततः ।
तस्यामयविनिर्मक्तं परां सिद्विमवाप्नुयात् ॥८७॥
The king who afterwards bathes his elephants and horses in
the same manner, will see them free from all illness and attain great
SUCCESS.

पट्टलक्षणास् ॥४९॥
Chapter XLIX—Signs of Crowns
विस्तरशो निदिष्ट' पट्टानां लक्षणं यदाचार्ये: ।
TASHA: क्रियते मयाऽत्र सकलाथंसम्पन्नः ui
In this chapter I am givinga summary, containing all important subjects, of the characteristics of royal crowns that have been
delineated at length by the ancient sages like Ka$yapa.
पट्टः शुभदो राज्ञां मध्येऽष्टावङ््गुलानि विस्तीर्ण: i
सप्त नरन्द्रमहिष्याः षड् युवराजस्य निदिष्टः ॥२॥
चतुरङ्गुलविस्तारः पटुः सेनापतेर्भवति मध्ये ।
Ë च प्रसादपट्टः पञ्चते कीतिताः पट्टा: ॥३॥
The crown of a monarch should have an expansion of eight
digits in the middle, to confer prosperity on the wearer; that of the
chief queen, of seven digits; that of the Yuvaraja (heir-apparent),
of six digits; that of the commander of the army, of four digits; and
that of the royal protege, of two digits. These are the five types of
crowns that have been prescribed.
सर्व द्विगुणायामा मध्यादर्धेन पाइवविस्तीराः i
Wd च शुद्धकाञ्चनविनिमिताः श्रेयसो वृद्धये ॥४॥
All the varieties of crowns must have a length double their
respective breadth, while their breadth on the sides should be half
the central breadth. All of them, made of pure gold, would conduce
to increase of prosperity and happiness.
पञ्चशिखो भूमिपतेस्त्रिशिखो युवराजपा थिवमहिष्यो: i
एकशिखः संन्यपतेः प्रसादपट्टो विना शिखया ugu
The king's crown has five crests; the Yuvaraja’s and the
queen’s three; the commander’s has only one crest, while the protege’s crown has no crest at all.
[The crests are knobs on the top of the crown, resembling the
Kalasas (small domes) on the top of the temple towers.]

Signs of Crowns XLIX 425
क्रियमाणं यदि पत्रं सुखेन विस्तारमेति पत्रस्य ।
वृद्धिजयौ सूमिपतेस्तथा प्रजानां च सुखसम्पत् URU
When the gold for the crown is beaten into a sheet if it expands easily, it augurs prosperity and victory to the king, and
happiness and wealth to the subjects.
जीवितराज्यविनाशं करोति मध्ये ब्रणः समुत्पन्नः ।
मध्ये स्फुटितस्त्याज्यो विघ्नकरः पाइवयोः स्फुटितः ॥७॥
A dent or hole in the middle of the crown, when it is under
preparation, will bring about loss of life and kingdom. Ifit breaks
in the middle, it should be rejected. Onethat breaks on the sides
will produce hindrances.
[Cf. काश्यप---
क्रियमाणां यदा पत्रं मध्ये स्फुटति भिद्यते ।
तदा नृपभयं प्रोक्तं यस्यार्थं वा प्रकल्पितम् ॥
सुलक्षणं प्रमाणस्थं सुकरं च हितावहम् |
सुरूपं aida च प्रजानां वृद्धिदं स्मृतमु uu]
ग्रशुअनिमित्तोत्पत्तौ शास्त्रज्ञः शान्तिमादिशेद्राज्ञः ।
शस्तनिमित्तः पट्टो नुपराष्ट्रविवृद्धये भवति usu
At the appearance of inauspicious omens, a scholar wellversed in this science should advise proper expiatory rites to the
king. A crown, accompanied by laudable symptoms, will lead to
the prosperity of both the king and the kingdom.

ARIAT ॥५०॥
Chapter L—Signs of Swords
श्रड्गुलशताधंमुत्तम ऊनः स्यात्पञ्चविशञतिः खड्गः ।
श्रङ्गुलमानाज्ज्ञेयो व्रणोऽशुमो विषमपर्वस्थः utu
The best sword is one that measures fifty digits, while the
smallest one, twenty-five digits. A dent or scratch in an odd digit
in the measurement of the sword is to be reckoned as inauspicious.
[If the defect is in an even digit, it would not be inauspicious. ]
धोवृक्षव्धमानातपत्रशिवलिद्धकुण्डलाब्जानाम् |
AEM व्रणाः प्रशस्ता ध्वजायुधस्वस्तिकानां च ॥२॥
Dents or scratches resembling in shape a Bilva tree, Vardhamana figure, umbrella, Siva’s emblem, ear-ring, lotus, flag, weapon
and Svastika mark are all auspicious.
कृकलासकाककड्कुक्रव्यादकबनधवृश्चिकाकृतयः |
खड्गे ब्रा न शुभदा वंशानुगताः प्रभु ताश्च uF
The dents resembling a chameleon, crow, heron, carrioneating bird (like vulture) truncated human body and scorpion, and
many dents in the upper part of the blade are ominous.
स्फुटितो gea: कुण्ठो वंशच्छिन्नो न हङमनोऽनुगतः ।
aeaa इति चानिष्टः प्रोक्तविपर्यस्त इष्टफलः ॥४॥
A sword that is broken, too short, blunt, cut at the top, not
attractive to the eye and mind, and without resonance, is harmful;
whereas one with contrary qualities will yield beneficial results.
safari मरणायोक्तं पराजयायाप्रवतं नं कोशात् ।
स्वयम्द्गोणे युद्धं safe विजयो भवति खड्गे uuu
Jf the sword sounds by itself, it forebodes the owner’s death;
if it does not come out even when pulled out, defeat; if it comes out
automatically, war; and if it glows, the result would be victory.

Signs of Swords L 497
नाकारणं विवृणुयान्न विघट्टयेच्च
पश्येन्न तत्र वदनं न वदेच्च मूल्यम् ।
देशं न चास्य कथयेत् प्रतिमानयेन्न
नंव स्पृशेन्नृपति रप्रयतोऽसियष्टिम् usu
A king ought not to unsheath the sword for no reason, nor
brandish it, nor see his own face in it; nor mention its price, nor the
place of its origin, nor measure it, nor touch its blade, when he is
not pure.
[The rules laid down in this verse are very interesting from
the point of esotericism. Some of these rules may with advantage
be applied to the gem that is worn for prosperity.
The metre is वसन्ततिलका.]
गोजिह्वासंस्थानो नीलोत्पलबंशपत्रसहृशइच ।
करवीरपत्रशुलाग्रमण्डलाग्राः प्रशस्ताः स्युः NON
The following shapes of swords are highly beneficial: One
like the cow’s tongue, blue lily petal, bamboo leaf, and karavira
leaf. A sword with a pointed or round tip also is auspicious.
निष्पन्नो न च्छेद्यो निकष: कायः प्रमाणयुक्तः सः ।
सुले fama स्वामी जननी तस्याग्रतडिछिन्ते usu
Ifa sword happens to bea bit too long, the surplus length
should not be cut off, but it should be made to have the required
length by rubbing it against a file. If it is cut at the bottom, the
owner will die; and if at the tip, his mother.
[Cf. काश्यप
उत्पन्नो न पुनइछेद्यो निष्पन्नो यः TATA: |
मुष्ट्या भङ्ग म्रियेत्स्वामी तदग्रे तस्य मातरम् ॥
तस्मान्न छेदयेत् खड्गमात्मनोऽशुभदं यतः |
fagga: प्रमाणस्थः कार्यो येन शुभो भवेत् u]
यस्मिन् त्सरुप्रदेशे व्रणो भवेत्तद्वदेव खड्गस्य |
वनितानामिव तिलको गुह्य वाच्यो मुखे हष्ट वा usin
An injury in a particular part of the hilt indicates a similar
injury in the corresponding part of the blade of the sword, just as a
mole on the face of women suggests the existence of a similar one in
their private parts.

428 Brhat Samhita
श्रथवा स्पृशति यदङ्गं प्रष्टा निस्त्रिशभूत्तदवधार्य ।
कोशस्थस्यादेव्यो व्रणोऽस्ति शास्त्रं विदित्वेदसू utet
Noting the particular limb touched by the swordsman who
questions an astrologer about the existence of injuries in the sword,
the latter should declare the injury to exist in the particular part of
the sword kept in the sheath, by understanding the following rules
thereon.
[The commentator tells us that first of all we have to find out
whether there is any injury in the sword, and then in which part.
For this the astrologer should find out the ascendant for the time of
query. In the chart if there be malefics in angles, he must come to
the conclusion that there is injury.]
शिरसि स्पृष्टे प्रथमे$डंगुले द्वितीये ललाटसंस्परों ।
मध्ये च तृतीये नेत्रे स्पृष्टे चतुर्थं च ॥११॥
नासोष्ठकपोलहनुभ्रवणग्रोवांसके च पञ्चाद्याः ।
उरसि द्वादशसंस्थस्त्रयोदशे कक्षयोज्ञेयः ॥१२॥
स्तनहृदयोदरकुक्षीनाभौ तु चतुर्दशादयो ज्ञेयाः ।
नाभीसूले कट्यां WA चेकोनविशतितः ॥१३॥
ऊर्वोद्वाविशे स्याूर्वोमध्ये ब्रणस्त्रयोविशे च ।
जानुनि च चतुविशे जङ्कायां पर्ञ्चावज्ञे च ॥१४॥
जङ्कामध्ये गृल्फे पा्ण्यां पादे तदङ्गुलीषवपि च 1
षर्डवशतिकाद्यावत्त्रिशदिति मतेन गर्गस्य ॥१५॥
If the querent touches his head, the dent or injury will be
in the first digit of the sword; if the forehead, in the second; if the
space between the brows, in the third; if an eye, in the fourth; if the
nose, in the fifth; if the lip, in the sixth; if the cheek, in the seventh;
if the chin, in the eighth; if the ear, in the ninth; if the neck, in the
tenth; if the shoulder, in the eleventh; if the chest, in the twelfth;
if the armpits, in the thirteenth; if the breast in the fourteenth; if the
heart, stomach, abdomen, and navel, inthe fifteenth, sixteenth,
seventeenth and eighteenth digits respectively; if the bottom of the
navel, hips and the private parts, in the nineteenth, twentieth and
twenty-first respectively; if the thighs, in the twenty-second; if between the thighs, in the twenty-third; if the knee, in the twentyfourth; if the shank, in the twenty-fifth; if between the shanks, ankles,

Signs of Swords L 19
heels, foot and toes, in the twenty-sixth, twentyeighth, twenty-ninth and thirtieth respectively,
authority of Sage Garga.
[Cf. गर्ग--
शिरो ललाटं श्रू मध्य नेत्रप्राणकपोलकम् ।
हनुश्रोत्रं तथा ग्रीवा स्कन्धो वक्षश्च कक्षकम् ॥
स्तनौ हृत् क्रोडकुक्षी च नाभिस्तन्मुलमेव च ।
कटिगुह्योरुमध्यं च जानुजङ्घे तयोरघः॥
gem पाष्णिस्तथा पादमङ्गुलिस्पशंने ध्रुवम् ।
मूलात् प्रभृति खड्गेऽपि avi त्रिशाङ्ग्लं वदेत् ॥]
seventh, twentyaccording to the
पुत्रमरणं धनप्राप्तिर्धनहानिः सम्पदश्च बन्धइच ।
एकाद्यङगुलसंस्थेब्रं णेः फलं निदिशत्कमशः ॥ १६॥
सुतलाभः कलहो हस्तिलब्धयः पुत्रमरणधनलाभौ ।
क्रमशो विनाशवनिताप्तिचित्तदु:खानि serait ngon
लब्धिरहानिस्त्रीलब्धयो वधो वृद्धिसरणापरितोषाः à
ज्ञेयाइचतुर्देशादिषु धनहानिइचेर्कावशे स्यात् ॥१८॥
वित्ताप्तिरनिर्वाणं धनागसो सृत्युसम्पदोऽस्वत्वस् ।
ऐइवर्यभृत्युराज्यानि च क्रमात् त्रिशदिति यावत् ॥१६॥
The results of the injuries in several digits, from the first to
the thirtieth, are to be declared in the following order :
(1) Son’s death, (2) acquisition of wealth, (3) loss of money,
(4) prosperity, (5) imprisonment, (6) birth of a son, (7) quarrel,
(8) winning of elephants, (9) death of a son, (10) influx of wealth,
(11) death, (12) getting of wife, (13) mental affliction, (14) gain,
(15) loss, (16) winning a damsel, (17) murder, (18) progress, (19)
death, (20) rejoicing, (21) loss of wealth, (22) acquisition of wealth,
(23) lacking happiness, (24) influx of wealth, (25) death, (26)
wealth, (27) penury, (28) prosperity or authority, (29) death, and
(30) kingship.
[The commentator construes the word, अनिर्वाणं as मृत्युः, but I
prefer the meaning ‘loss of joy’.]
प्रतो न विज्ञेषफलं विषमसमस्थास्तु पापशुभफलदाः ।
केहिचदफलाः प्रदिष्टा स्त्रिशत्परतोऽप्रमिति यावत् ॥२०॥
Should there be defects beyond the thirtieth digit, the effects
thereof would be negligible; but those in the odd and even digits
would yield bad and good results respectively. However, according

430 Bghat Samhita
to some Sages (like Para§ara) the injuries beyond the thirtieth digit
upto the tip of the sword have no effects whatsoever.
(Cf. गर्ग--
We गुलानि च पञज्चाशत्प्रधान: खड्ग उच्यते |
तद्धेको निकृष्ट: स्यात्तन्मध्ये मध्यमः स्मृतः ॥।
विषमाङगुलसंस्थो यो व्रणः सोऽनिष्टदः स्मृतः |
शुभः समाङ्गुलस्थस्तु मध्यगो मध्यम: स्मृतः ॥
त्रिशद्यावद्विनिदिष्टमङ्गुलानां फलं तत: i
षोडशाङ्गूलगो ज्ञेयो ब्रणो मध्यफलप्रदः |i
also पराशर
तेषां ध्रमाणानि । जघन्यमङ्गुलानि पञ्चविशतिः । मध्यमं त्रिशत् । उत्तमं
चत्वारिशत् 1 wat हीनमतिरिक्तं वा न धारयेत् । पुर्णात् प्रत्यङ्गुलान्तरितेषु au.
ष्वनाकृतिषु यावत्त्रिशदड्गुलं तावत्क्रमात्फलनियमः। पुत्रनाशोऽर्थागमोऽ्थना्तोऽर्थं-
सञ्चयो गृहदाहो मित्रलाभो व्याधिभयं सुखाप्तिज्ञातिबन्ध भ्राज्ञाप्राधान्यं विपक्षोत्पत्ति-
वाहनलाभः शोकः प्रब्रज्यासुतज्ञातिकुलच्छेदो माहात्म्यबललाभः सन्तापः क्लेशः
पुत्रलाभो घनागमः शोकः प्रामाण्यमाधिपत्यमुपभोगो भयं दौर्भाग्यमैश्वर्य राजपुजेति ।
परतः सर्वेमप्रशस्तं विन्द्यात् 11] |
करवी रोत्पलगजमदघृतकुङ कुमकुन्दचस्पकसगन्धः ।
शुभदोऽनिष्टो गोमुत्रपङ्कुमेदःसहशगन्धः ॥२१॥
कू मं वसासुकक्षारोपमइच भयदुःखदो भवति गन्धः ।
वेदूर्यंकनकविद्युत्प्रमो जयारोग्यवृद्धिकरः ॥२२॥
Auspicious is a sword which smells like the Karavira flower,
blue lily, elephant’s ichor, ghee, saffron, round jasmine or Campaka
flower, whereas harmful is one that smells like cow’s urine, silt or
fat. Similarly, one with the smell of tortoise, marrow, blood or
salt causes danger and misery; and one with the lustre of beryl, gold
and lightning confers victory, health and progress.
इदमोशनसं च WAI रुषिरेश श्रियमिच्छतः प्रदीप्ताम् ।
हविषा गुणावत्सुताभिलिप्सोः सलिलेनाक्षयमिच्छतःच वित्तम् ॥२३॥
वडवोष्ट्रकरेणुदुग्धपानं यदि पापेन समीहतेऽर्थसिद्धिम् i
रषपित्तमृगाइवबस्तदुग्धेः करिहस्तच्छिदये सतालगर्भे: NIXU
The following sword-drinks have been laid down by Sukracarya (preceptor of the Demons) : One wishing for extra-ordinary
opulence should give a drink of blood to the sword; for begetting a
virtuous son, a drink of ghee (sacrificial offerings?); for inexhaustible
wealth, one of water; for acquiring great wealth by sinful means,

Signs of Swords L 431
one of the milk of mare, camel or ele
trunks of elephants (in battles), one of ñ
deer, horse and goat, mixed with the to
[Cf. also पराशर--
ग्रथ पायनानि, क्षीरपायितमरिवघार्थी घारयेत् । तिलतैलारालाभ्यामर्थार्थी ।
पुत्रार्थी उदकेन | सपिषा श्रीकामः । साहसिकः शोणितेन । हस्त्यश्वोष्ट्क्षीरैः शिला-
सारच्छेदकामः | AA तालवसया मत्स्यवडवाहरिणपित्तेन द्विरदस्कन्धच्छेदकामः । नित्यं चैनं धूपपुष्पगन्धोपहारंरचयित्वा शिरस्यपशायिनं कुर्यात् । नावमन्येत
न चोच्छिष्टः संस्पृशेत् 1 नादशंकी कुर्यात् । नानिमित्तं विवृणुयात् । न क्रीडनायास्य
मूलं विवृणुयात् ॥
The metre of the verses is औपच्छन्दसिक.]
phant; and for cutting the
sh-bile, and the milk of the
ddy of palm trees.
wis पयो हुडुविषाणामषीसमेतं
पारावताखुशकृता च युतः प्रलेपः ।
शस्त्रस्य तैलमथितस्य ततोऽस्य पानं
पश्चाच्छितस्य न शिलासु भवेद्विघातः ॥२५॥
A sword rubbed with sesamum oil and then smeared with an
unguent prepared with the milky juice of Arka plant mixed with
the ashes of sheep’s horn, and the excreta of doves and mice, must
be given any of the drinks mentioned in the above two verses, and
thereafter whetted. Such a sword will not break even against rocks.
[The commentator explains that every weapon should first of
all be well massaged with sesamum oil and then the ointment
applied to it. Then the weapon should be put in the fire and heated well. After removing the coating, one of the drinks should be
given to it,
The metre is वसन्ततिलका.]
क्षारे कदल्या मथितेन युक्ते दिनोषिते पायितमायसं यत् । |
सम्यक् शितं चाइसनि नेति भङ्गं न चान्यलोहेष्वपि तस्य कौण्ठयम् ॥२६॥
An iron weapon treated with a day-old drink made of the
burnt powder of bananas (or its ribs) mixed with butter-milk, and
then sharpened properly, will not break on stones, nor become blunt
on other iron instruments.
[The metre is उपजाति.]

श्रद्धाविद्या ॥५१॥
Chapter LI—Science of Limbs
[The commentator is of opinion that this chapter may not be
by Varahamihira himself. But he has mentioned this subject as one
of the topics that are discussed in the Sarhhita. Vide II. 18 supra. It
is quite possible that the original chapter of our author, being lost,
might have been rewritten by some scholar before Utpala.]
देवज्ञेन शुभाशुभं दिगुदितस्थानाह्तानीक्षता
वाच्यं प्रष्टूनिजापराङ्कघटनां चालोक्य कालं धिया ।
सर्वज्ञो हि चराचरात्मकतयाऽसो सर्वदर्शी विभु-
इचेष्टाव्याहृतिभिः शुभाशुभफलं सन्दशेयत्याथनास् utu
An astrologer should predict good and bad effects after observing carefully the direction, utterances, place and articles brought
at the time, also taking into consideration the movements of the
limbs of the questioner with reference to himself or to another
person and the particular time of his query. For, Time which is
Omniscient, All-powerful, and All-seeing, as It is the Soul (sustainer) of all beings — both movable and stationary — shows good and
bad effects through physical movements and utterances of the
querents.
[Cf. पराशर--
इह खलु चराचराणां भूतानां कालोऽत्तरात्मा सर्वदा सवंदर्शी Tara:
फलसूचक: स विशेषेण प्राणिनां स्वपराङ्गेषु स्पर्शेव्याहारेङ्गितचेष्टादिभिनिमित्तेः
फलमभिदर्शयति । तत्प्रयतो द॑वज्ञोऽनुगहतमतिरवधार्य स्वशास्त्रार्थेमनुस्मृत्य यशोधर्मा
ुग्रहार्थमथिनां शुभाशुभानामर्थानां भावाभावमभिनिदिशेत् ॥
| तत्र देशे दिशः कालं व्याहारं द्रव्यदर्शनम् |
ग्रङ्गप्रत्यङ्गसंस्पशं समीक्ष्य फलमादिशेत् ॥।
The metre in this and the following verse is शा्दूलविक्रीडित.]

Science of Limbs LI 433
स्थानं पुषपसुहासि भुरिफलश्रृत्सुस्निग्धकृत्तिच्छदा-
सत्पक्षिच्प्रुतशस्तसंज्ञिततरुच्छायोपगुढं समम् ।
देर्वषद्विजसाधुसिद्धनिलयं सत्पुष्पसस्योक्षित
सत्स्वादृदकनिर्मेलत्वजनिताह्लादं च सच्छाद्ठलम् ॥२॥
An auspicious place for a query is one which is even, covered
with the shade of trees that smile with flowers, are laden with
fruits, have glossy barks and leaves, are devoid of ill-omened birds
and bear auspicious names (e.g. Palasa, Pippala, banyan etc.);
which is the abode of Gods, sages, Brahmanas, virtuous men and
Siddhas, which is rich in fragrant flowers and crops, which pleases
the heart through the limpidity of its sweet water and which is
covered with beautiful green grass.
[Cf. पराणर---
अथ पुष्पितफलितहरितस्तिग्धत्वक्पत्रप्रशस्तनामाङ्कितसौम्य द्विजनिषेविततरु-
च्छायोपगूढे सस्यकुसुमहरितमृदुशाट्वलसतमृष्टहृद्यप्रसत्नसलिलावकारे देवषिसिद्धसाधु-
द्विजावासे प्राङ्मुखोत्त रोत्तरपुर्वाभिमुखो वा यः पृच्छेत्तस्य प्राथितार्थोपपत्तिमभिनिदि-
am u]
छिन्त भिन्तकृमिखातकण्टकिण्लुष्टरूक्षकुटिलेने सत्कु्जः d
करपक्षियुतनिन्धनामभिः शुष्कशीर्णबहुपर्णंचमंभिः ॥३॥
Inauspicious is a place abounding in trees which are cut,
split, worm-eaten, thorny, scorched, coarse, crooked, inhabited by
ill-omened birds (e.g. crows, vultures, cranes etc.), bearing despicable names and having many withered ieaves and barks that have
fallen.
[The metre is सथोद्धता.]
इमशानश्न्यायतनं चतुष्पथं तथाऽमनोज्ञं विषसं सदोषरम् |
प्रवस्कराद्गारकपालभस्मभिश्चितं qu: शुष्कतृण ने शोभनस् uyu
Equally inauspicious are the following places : Burial ground,
a deserted shrine, a place where four roads meet, one that is not
pleasing to the heart, rugged, a sandy place, and one that is
covered with rubbish, charcoal, potsherds, ashes, husks and dry
grass.
[The commentator construes कपालैः as अस्थिशकल:. The metre is
वंशस्थ.]
प्रब्रजितनग्ननापितरिपुबन्धनसो निकंस्तथा sats: ।
कितवयतिपीडितंयूं तमायुधमाध्वीकविक्रयेनं शुभस ॥५॥
Similarly harmful are the places that are occupied by ascetics,

434 Brhat Samhita
naked persons, barbers, enemies, butchers, dog-eaters (candalas),
gamblers, hermits, sick persons as well as a prison, armoury, apiary
or a shop where honey (liquor) is sold.
प्रागुत्तरेशाश्च दिश: प्रशस्ताः प्रष्टुने वाय्वम्ब्रुयमाग्निरक्ष: ।
ूर्वाह्कालेऽस्ति शुभ न रात्रो सन्ध्याह्ये प्रश्नकृतो$पराह्ह ॥६॥
The best directions for a query are east, north and north-east;
north-west, west, south and south-west are unfavourable to the
querent. The forenoon is beneficial, while the night, the two
twilights and the afternoon are not favourable.
(Cf. पराशर---
छिन्लभिन्नशुष्करूक्षवक्र जन्तुजग्धदग्धकण्ट किक्रव्या द द्विज निषे विता प्रशस्त ना मा-
ड्वितपादपच्छाये शमशानशुन्प्रायतनचत्वरोष ररिपुनापितायुधमद्यविक्रयशालासु नेत्रं =
ताग्नेययाम्यवारुणवायव्याशाभिमुख: प्रचोदयेत्तस्थे.्टमर्थमनर्थाय विन्द्यात् ॥
अपि च
वेलाः सर्वाः प्रशस्यन्ते gaie परिपृच्छताम् |
सन्ध्ययोरपराहरो तु क्षपायां तु विगहिताः n
The metre is zr in this and the following verse.)
यात्राविधाने हि शुभाशुभं acted निमित्त तदिहापि वाच्यम् ।
EE वा पुरो वा जनताहृतं at sez: स्थितं पाणितलेऽथ वस्त्रे ॥७॥
The same good and bad results as well as auguries as were
mentioned in connection with a king’s marching (vide XLIII. 12
supra) should be taken into consideration here too. The prediction
may also be made by observing the articles brought at the time by
others, what is in front of the astrologer, or what is in the querent's
hand or clothes.
[Cf. पराशर--
यात्राविधाने निदिष्टं निमित्त यच्छुभाशुभम् ।
तदेव दृष्टा gaat वाञछ।सिद्धि विनिदिशेत् u]
भ्रथाङ्कान्युर्वोष्ठस्तनवृषणपादं च दशना
भुजो हस्तौ गण्डौ कचगलनखाङगुष्ठमपि यत् d
ATES कक्षांसं श्रवशागुदसन्धीति पुरुषे
स्त्रियां w नासास्फिग्वलिकटिसुलेखाइगुलिचयम् ॥८॥
जिह्ला ग्रीवा पिण्डिके पा््णियुग्मं जङ्घे नाभिः कर्णपाली कृकाटी |
वक्त्रं पृष्ठं जत्रुजान्वस्थिपाइवं gaaat मेहनोरस्त्रिक॑ च ॥९॥

Science of Limbs LI 435
नपुंसकाख्यं च शिरो ललाटमाइवाद्यसञ््ञ रपरे हिच रेण ।
सिद्धिभंवेज्जातु नपृंसकर्नो रुक्षक्षतेभग्नकृशंश्च qd: ॥१०॥
The following are masculine limbs : Thighs, lips, breasts, testicles,
feet, teeth, arms, hands, cheeks, hairs, throat, nails, thumbs (or
big toes), the frontal bone, armpits, shoulders, ears, anus and joints.
The feminine ones are the brows, nose, buttocks, folds in the belly,
hips, lines on the palm, fingers, tongue, neck, the hind parts of the
shanks, heels, shanks, navel, ear-lobes, and the nape of the neck.
The neuter limbs are the face, back, collar bone, the knees, bones,
the sides, heart, palate, eyes, the male genital organ, chest, end of
the spine, the head and forehead. Should the querist touch a limb
of the first (masculine) group, there would be immediate success in
the task undertaken ; should it be one of the second (feminine)
group, success could be achieved only after a long time; while in
the last (neuter) group, success would be improbable. Even in the
case of the limbs of the first two groups success cannot be predicted
in case they (the limbs) are dry, injured, cut or very lean.
[Human limbs are divided here into three grovps.
Cf. पराशर
agfa मुष्कस्तनपादोर्गुह्यभुजहस्तसमस्तकर्णासशङ्कदन्तौष्ठाङ्गुष्ठनखगलगण्डकेशसन्धयः पुरुषाख्यानि । wat नासाग्रीवावलयोऽङ्गुलयो लेखा श्रोणिनाभी
रसना spgr पिण्डिके पालिस्फिजौ पाष्णिः कृकाटिकेति स्त्रीसञ्ज्ञानि |
शिरो ललाटमुखचिबुकपृष्ठजठरजत्रुजान्व स्थिपाइवं हृदयकणंपीठाक्षिमेहनो रस्त्रि-
कताल्बिति नपृंसक्राख्यानि ॥
तत्र पुन्नाम स्तिग्धमुितमनुपहतमक्षतमरोगमङ्गं स्पृष्टं दिग्देशकालव्या हा रेष्टदशने रुपपन्न प्रष्टुः पृच्छार्थं सकलफलमभिनिवर्त॑यति । स्त्रीसञ्ज्ञमपि पुर्वोक्तलक्षणयुक्त
यत्नात् कालान्तरेण सफलम् | नपुसकाख्यमकाय॑ सिद्धिमनर्थानां वाऽऽगमनं कुर्यात् ॥
अपि च
qasar सिद्धिः स्यात् स्त्रीसज्ञेषु चिरा<द्भवेत् i
अशुभ त्वेव निदिष्टं नपूंसकसनामसु ॥
पुरुषाख्ये तु संस्पृष्टे बाह्ये रूक्षेऽतरले क्षते |
नार्थसिद्धिमतो ब्रयादङ्गविद्याविशारदः ॥
The metres are in order शिखरिणी, शालिनी and उपजाति.]
स्पृष्टे वा चालिते वाऽपि पादाङगुष्ठेऽक्षिरुरमवेत् |
ग्रङ्गुल्यां दुहितः शोक शिरोघाते aay ॥११॥
If at a query the big toe be touched or shaken, the querist

436 Brhat Samhita
would suffer from eye-disease. Ifa finger is touched, his daughter
will have grief. If he strikes his head, he will have trouble from the
king.
[The author's use of the accusative in “दुहितुः mag is hardly
defensible, though the commentator supplies the verb ‘वदेत्’. For,
the author has already used the verb “भवेत with which ‘me: would
go better.
Cf. पराशर
wu पृथक् पृथक् फलनिर्देश: । तत्र पादाङ्गुष्ठे प्रचलयन् स्पृष्ट्वा वा
पृच्छेत् प्रष्टुश्चक्षुरोगं विनिर्दिशेत् । श्रड्गुलि स्पृष्ट्वा दुहितृशोकं शिरो$भिहन्यमानं
राजतो भयम् ॥
The metre is अनुष्टुभ्-श्लोक.]
विप्रयोगमुरसि स्वगात्रतः कर्पटाहृतिरनर्थदा भवेत् ।
स्यात् प्रियाप्तिरभिगृह्य कपंट' पृच्छतश्चरशापादयोजितुः ॥१२॥
If the querist touches his chest, he will have separation from
a near and dear one ; if he takes off his cloth from his body, he will
undergo some calamity. Should he take a piece of cloth and join
his feet together he would attain his cherished object.
[Cf. पराशर--
उरः स्पृष्ट्वा विप्रयोगं स्वगात्राहृसत्रमुत्सृजेत् |
तस्यानर्थागमं पादं पादेन संस्पृशेत् पटम् ॥
तमभिग्रह्य वा पृच्छेद्रिन्द्यात् प्रियसमागमम् |!
The metre is र्थोद्धता.]
पादाङ्गुष्ठेन विलिखेद् भुमि क्षेत्रोत्थचिन्तया ।
हस्तेन पादौ कण्डूयेत्तस्य दासीमयी च सा ॥१३॥
Should the querist scratch the ground with his big toe, he
would be thinking of his fields. If he scratches his feet with the
hand, his thought concerns a maid servant.
[Cf. पराशर--
ग्रङ्गुष्ठेन लिखेद् भूमि क्षेत्रचिन्तां विचिन्तयेत् ।
हस्तेन पादौ कण्ड्येत् कुर्याद्यासीकृतां स ताम् ॥
The metre is RATT. |
तालभुजेपटदशनेऽशुकं चिन्तयेत् कचतुषास्थिभस्मगस् ।
व्याधिराश्रयति रज्जुजालक वल्कलं च समवेक्ष्य बन्धनम् NLSN
If the querist looks at palm-leaves or birch bark, he must be
thinking of fine clothes ; ifhe stands on hair, husk, bone or ashes,

Science of Limbs LI 437
he will be attacked by disease ; and if he stands on, looks at or
holds ropes, nets or barks, while asking, he will suffer from
imprisonment.
(Cf. पराणर--
तालभूज॑पत्रदर्शने वस्त्रार्थं केशास्थिभस्मान्याक्रम्य व्याधिभयं ब्रूयात् । निगडजालरज्ज्वाश्रित्य बल्कलान्यघिष्ठाय दशेने वा बन्धनभयम् ॥
The metre 15 रथोद्धता.]
पिष्पलीमरिचशुण्ठिवारिदे रोध्रक्षछठवसनाम्बुजीरकेः i
गन्धमांसिशतपुषपया वदेत्पृच्छतस्तगरकेणा चिन्तयेत् ॥१५॥
्त्रीपुरुषदोषपीडितसर्वाध्वसुताथ घान्यतनयानास् ।
द्विचतुष्पदक्षितीनां विनाशतः कीतितेह ष्टे: ॥१६॥
If long pepper, black pepper, dried ginger, cyperus grass,
Lodhra, costus, cloth, water, cumin seeds, Gandhamamsi, Sonph or
Tagara be seen or mentioned at the time, ,the querist's thoughts
would be about a woman's failure, a man's fault, an afflicted person,
loss of everything, missing of the passage, loss of children, loss of
money, destruction of corn, son's death, loss of bipeds (animals
with cloven hoofs), loss of quadrupeds and destruction of landed
property respectively.
[Cf. पराशर
पिप्पलीनां दशने प्रदुष्टस्त्रीकृतां चिन्तां मरिचस्य पापपुरुषकृतां yaw
मृतचिन्ताम् । ग्रजाज्याः सुतनाशकृतां रोध्रस्यार्थनाशकृतां मुस्तस्य सवेनाशकृतां
कुष्ठस्य सुतनाशकृतां वस्त्रस्यार्थनाशकृतां Slaves धान्यनाशक्ृतां तगरस्य भूमिनाशकृतां शतपुष्पया चतुष्पन्नाशाय WieuT द्विपदनाशकृताम् ॥
In the third line wat is another reading for aata. The metre
of the first is रथोद्धता.]
न्यग्रोधमधुकतिन्दुकजम्बरप्लक्षास्रब दरजातिफलः।
घनकनकपुरुषलो हांशुकरूप्यो दुस्बराप्तिरपि करगे: utet
If the querist holds in his hand the fruits of the banyan tree, |
Madhuka, Tinduka, Jambü, Plaksa, mangoes, and jujube, he would
gain wealth, gold, servants, iron, silken clothes, silver and copper
respectively.
[Cf पराशर--
अब्वत्थन्यग्रोधफल हंस्तस्थै: पृच्छेद्दनागममादिशेत् | मधुकोदुम्बरफले: काञ्चनागमम् | द्विपदागमं तिन्दुकेः । वस्त्रागमं प्लक्षजेः | रूप्यस्यागममाम्र : । ताम्रस्या-
TH बदरेः | लोहस्यागमं जम्बूकेरिति वा ।।]

438 Brhat Samhita
घान्यपरिपुणांपात्र' कुम्भः पूर्ण: कुटुस्बवृद्धिकरो i
गजगोशुनां पुरीषं धनयुवतिसुहृद्विनाशकरम् uqsu
Should a vessel filled with corn ora pot full of water be seen
at the time, the querist’s family would prosper. On the other hand,
the sight of the dung of elephants, cows and dogs would prove
severally destructive to wealth, young women and friends.
(Cf. पराशर--
घान्यपात्रपुर्णोदकुम्भदशंने कुटुम्बवृद्धि जानीयात् । हस्तिना द्रव्यागमम्
हस्तिशकृतो भ्र शमेश्वर्यस्य वा । गोमयस्य स्त्रीव्यभिचारम् | शुनः सुहृद्विनाशम् u]
पशुहस्तिमहिषपङ्कजरजतव्याध्रं ANT सन्हष्ट : ।
श्रविघननिवसनमलयजकोशेया मरणास द्धातम् ॥१६॥
If a cow, elephant, buffalo, lotus, silver and tiger be sighted
at the time, the querist would get woollen articles, money,
garments, sandal paste, silken clothes and ornaments respectively.
(Cf. पराशर--
महिषस्य क्षोमवस्त्रागमम् । मणिभाण्डस्य गजवाजिनामौशिकानाम् STAस्याभरणागमम् | TEST रक्तवस्त्रचन्दनलाभम् । रूप्यस्य कौशेयवस्त्राणाम् 11]
पृच्छा वृद्धश्नावकसुपरिक्वाडदशने नर्मिविहिता |
मित्रद्यतार्थ भवा गरिकान्पसुतिकाथंकृता ॥२०॥
If the querist should look at an old Sravaka (Kapalika, a
Saiva monk who wears skulls), his enquiry should be about friends
or gambling ; and if at an ascetic of a respectable sect, it would be
about a courtesan, king or a woman in confinement.
शाक्योपाध्यायाहुं न्निग्नेन्थिनिमित्तनिगमकवंत: ।
चोरचमृपतिवरिजां दासीयोधापरएस्थवध्यानाम् us tu
If a Buddhist monk, a teacher, a Jain monk, a naked fakir, a
sooth-sayer, a trader of a town, and a fisherman be seen at the time,
the querist’s thought would be about a thief, commander of army,
a merchant, a female servant, a soldier, a shop-keeper and a condemned criminal respectively.
तापसे शोण्डिके हष्टे प्रोषितं पशुपालनम् |
हृद्गतं पृच्छकस्य स्यादुञ्छवृत्तो विपन्नता ॥२२॥
When an ascetic is seen, the querist thinks about a person that
has gone abroad ; when a toddy-seller, about tending cattle ; and

Science of Limbs LI 439
when a hermit engaged in gleaning corn, about onethat hascome to
grief.
[Cf. पराशर
fad न्थिदशंने दासीपुच्छा । वृद्धश्नावकदशंने मित्रद्यूतकृता वा । शावयस्य
चौरकृता । परिव्राजकस्य नपसूतिकागणिकार्था वा । उपाध्यायस्य चमूपतिकृता ।
नैगमस्य श्रेष्ठिकृता । नैमित्तिकस्य योघार्था । ग्रहतो वाणिजिकार्था । उञ्छवृत्तिनो
विपन्नार्था । तापसस्य प्रोषितार्था । शौण्डिकस्य पशुपालनार्था। pada वघ्यघातइच्छामि प्रष्टुं भरा पद्यत्वार्यः समादिशेत्युक्ते ।
संयोगकुट्म्बोत्था लाभेइवर्योद्गता चिन्ता ॥२३॥
Ifa querist uses the expressions, viz., “I should like to ask,"
«Please tell," “Your honour may see", and “Kindly predict", his
thoughts are about some association or meeting, his family, profit
and lordship or authority respectively.
निदिशेति गदिते जयाध्वजा प्रत्यवेक्ष्य मस चिन्तितं वद ।
wg सवंजनमध्यगं त्वया हृश्यतामिति च बन्धुचौरजा ॥२४॥
If he says, “Predict,” his thought is about victory or travelling. If he says, “Think out and tell my thoughts”, it is about his
kinsman ; and if he runs to the astrologer in the midst of a crowd
and speaks “Find out quickly”, it is about a thief.
[Cf. पराशर
ग्रादिशायेंत्येव॑ पृच्छेदैश्वरयंचिन्ताम् । भणेत्युक्ते कृटुम्बकृताम् | इच्छामि
प्रष्टुमिति संयोगकृताम् | पश्यत्वाये इति लाभकृताम् | निर्दिशेत्यध्वकृताम् | जयपृच्छां
वा । पृच्छामि तावदाचार्येति वा सम्यक् मां प्रत्यवेक्षस्वेति बन्धुकृताम् । श्रथ काले
निःश्वसनान्तः सहसा बहुजनमध्यगतं दृश्यतामिति पुच्छेदिति चौरचिन्तां जानीयात् ॥
The metre is रथोद्धता.]
भ्रन्तःस्थेऽङ्गो स्वजन उदितो बाह्मजे बाह्य एव
पादाङगुष्ठाङगुलिकलनया दासदासीजनः स्यात् ।
जङ्घे प्रेष्यो मवति भगिनी नामितो हृत्स्वभार्या
पाण्य ङगुष्ठाङ, गुलिचयकृतस्पशने पुत्रकन्ये Rut
मातरं जठरे मूध्नि गुरं दक्षिणवामको ।
बाहू satsa तत्पत्ती स्पृष्ट. dd चोरमादिश्ञेत् ॥२६॥
If the querist touches an internal limb, the thief must be one
belonging to the family ; if an external limb, itis an outsider ; if a

440 Brhat Samhita
big toe, a man-servant ; if a toe, a maid-servant ; if the shanks, a
labourer or messenger ; if the navel, his own sister ; if the heart, his
own wife ; if a thumb, his son ; if the fingers, his daughter ; if the
stomach, his own mother ; if the head, his father or teacher ; and if
the right and left arms, his brother and brother's wife respectively.
In this manner prediction of theft has to be made from the limb
touched by the person.
[Cf. पराशर
बाह्याज्भस्पशने बाह्यचौरम् | Hea: स्वकृतम् । तत्र पादाङ्गुष्ठ दासम् |
अङ्गुलीषु दासीम् 1 जद्भूयो: प्रेष्यम् । जठरे मातरम् geavegfag दुहितरम् |
agg सुतम् । नाभ्यां भगिनीम् । गुरु शिरसि। हृदि भार्याम्। दक्षिणबाहो
भ्रातरम् । वामे श्रातृभार्याम् ॥
The metres are मन्दाक्रान्ता and श्लोक. ]
भ्रन्तरङ्गमवमुच्य बाह्यगस्पशनं यदि करोति पृच्छकः ।
इलेष्मसुत्रशकृतस्त्यजत्यथो पातयेत्करतलस्थवस्तु चेत् ॥२७॥
भ्ृशमवनामिताद्भपरिमोटनतोऽप्यथवा
जनधृतरिक्तमाण्डमवलोक्य च चौरजनम् ।
हृतपतितक्षतास्म्ृतविनष्टविभग्नगतो--
न्मुषितमृताद्यनिष्टरवतो लभते न हृतम् ॥२८॥।
The following are the indications for the non-recovery of the
stolen article: The querist touches an external limb after an
internal one ; or spits phlegm, passes urine or evacuates the
bowels ; or drops something from his hand; or bends some limb
very much and cracks it ; or beholds empty pots carried by people,
or thieves ; or hears ominous words such as ‘taken away’, ‘fallen’
‘injured’, ‘forgotten’, ‘lost’, ‘broken’, ‘gone’, ‘stolen’, ‘dead’ and the
like.
[Cf. पराणर---
श्रभ्यन्तरगं स्पृष्ट्वा बाह्यं स्प॒शेन्निहंरणं वा इलेष्मपुरीषमूत्रत्यागं कुर्याद्धsar किच्चित्पातयेत् । गात्रारि वा स्फोटयेत् । क्षतहृतपतितमुषितविस्मृतनष्टकष्टदुष्टानिष्टभग्नगतजीणंशाब्दप्रादुर्भावो वा स्यात् । रिक्तभाण्डतस्क्ररारां दशने न प्रष्टा
लाभे विन्द्यात् ॥
The metres are रथोद्धता and कुटक.]
निगदितमिदं यत्तत्सवं तुषास्थिदिषादिकंः
सह मृतिकरं पीडार्तानां समं रुदितक्षुतेः।

Science of Limbs LI 441
श्रवयवसपि egg वान्तःस्थं gd मरुदाहरे-
दतिबहु तदा भुक्त्वाऽन्नं संस्थितः सुहितो भवेत् UREN
All these that have been enumerated already along with
husk, bones, poison and the like or with the sound of weeping and
sneezing (or injury), forebade death to those that are afflicted by
illness. If the querist touches an internal limb and belches aloud,
it should be said that he is quite happy after a sumptuous
feast.
[In the second line क्षत: is another reading for att:. The metre
is हरिणी.
Cf. पराणर--
aa रोगाभिघातच्छदंमुत्रपुरीषोत्सर्ग केशास्थिभस्मतुषविषादीनामशुभानां
दर्शने तथा छिन्नभिन्नव्यापन्नहतमृतावक्षतजग्धवद्धपाटितरुदितश्व्दश्रवशे वा रोगिणां
मरणमादिशेत् 1]
ललाटस्पशेनाच्छूक दर्शनाच्छालिजौदनम् ।
उरःस्पर्शात् षष्टिकार्यं ग्रौवास्पशें च यावकम् ॥३०॥
If the querist touches his forehead or sees corn with sharp
thorns (like paddy), it is to be inferred that he has eaten food consisting of the Sastika rice (which ripens in sixty days) ; and if he
touches the neck, his food consisted of barley.
The metre is एलोक,]
कुक्षिकचजठरजानुस्पर्श माषाः पयस्तिलयवाग्वः à
ग्रास्वादयते चोष्ठौ लिहते मधुर ve ज्ञेयम् ॥३१॥
If he touches the abdomen, paps, stomach and knee, he must
have eaten black gram (with rice), milk (with rice), sesamum (with
rice) and rice gruel respectively ; if he licks his lips, he must have
enjoyed sweet dishes.
fagat स्फोट्येज्जिद्वामाम्ले वक्त्रं विकूरायेत् i
कट्के5थ कषायेऽथ हिक्केत् NATT सँन्धवे ॥३२॥
If he strikes his tongue against the corner of the mouth, it is
to be inferred that the querist had eaten something sour ; if he
makes his mouth wry, something pungent ; if he hiccups, something
astringent ; and if he spits, something salt.
इलेष्म त्याग शुष्कतिक्तं qucd वा क्रव्यादं प्रक्ष्य वा मांसमिश्रम् ।
भ्र गण्डो ्ठस्पशेने शाकुनं agaa तेनेत्युक्तमेतन्निमित्तम् ॥३३॥
If he spits phlegm, it is to be understood that he has eaten a
small quantity of something dry and bitter ; if a carnivorous animal

442 Brhat Samhita
is sighted, something mixed with meat; if he touches his brows,
temples or lips, food consisting of bird's meat. Thus the signs for
predicting the food eaten have been stated.
[The Varanasi edition (1968) reads the second line “श्रुत्वा क्रव्यादं
वा प्रेक्ष्य वा मांसमिश्रम् U This is evidently not the author's mistake. For,
how could he compare only one line of the शालिनी metre, which has
only eleven syllables in a quarter, with 13 syllables ? The error
must have been committed by somebody else. The best reading
would be: क्रव्यादं वा प्रेक्ष्य वा मांसमिश्रम्. The meaning of the second वा is
“श्रृत्वा’,
The metre is शालिनी ]
सु्ेगलकेशहनृशङ्ककणंजङ्घं वस्ति च स्पृष्टवा |
गजसहिषमेषश्ुकरगोशशसृगसहिषमांसयुग्भुक्तस् ॥२४॥
If the querist touches the head, throat, hair, chin, frontal
bone, ear, shank and abdomen he must have eaten food mixed
with the flesh of elephant, buffalo, sheep, hog, cow, hare, deer and
buffalo respectively.
[We can say definitely that this verse is not by Varahamihira.
For, he never violates the metrical rule that in the Arya the 6th
Gana must have either a जगरा or four short syllables. Hence what
I have stated at the beginning of this chapter regarding the
authorship of this chapter stands confirmed.]
हष्टे श्रुतेऽप्यशकुने गोधामत्स्यामिषं qq ।
afam गर्भस्य च निपतनमेवं प्रकल्पयेत्प्रइने NILU
When an evil omen is seen or heard, the astrologer should
state that the querist has eaten the flesh of alligators or fish. In the
same manner, the prediction of abortion should be made at a query
regarding a pregnant woman, i.e. if there are evil omens at the
time of consultation, miscarriage has to be predicted.
(Cf. पराशर--
ग्रथ fend इढमभ्यन्तराङ्ग स्पृष्ट वोदगिरन् पृच्छेद् भुक्तमन्नं विन्द्यात् । तत्र
ललाटस्प्षे शुकानां वा शाल्योदनम् । उरसि संस्पृष्टे षष्टिकौदनम् | ग्रीवायां यवान्नम् |
जठरे तिलौदनम्। met माषौदनम् । स्तनयोः क्षी रोदनम् । जानुनोर्यावकम् । स्वादये-
दोष्ठौ वा परिलिहेत मधुरम् । ग्राविसृक्के जिह्वामपि स्फोटयेदाम्लम् | विकूणयेत्
कटुकम् । हिक्केत् कषायम् । निष्ठीवेत्तिक्तम् | शुष्कमल्पं ३लेषमाणमुत्सृजेदतिलवणम् |
क्रव्यादानां दर्शने मांसप्रायम्। तत्र भ्र गण्डजिह्वौष्ठसं स्पर्शने शाकुनम्। हन्वोर्वाराहम् |

Science of Limbs LI 443
कर्णयोः पाषंदम् । जद्भयोर्मारगंमु । केशानामौरश्रम् | शङ्कयोरगव्यम् । वस्तिगलयो-
माहिषम् | मूध्नि कोञ्जरम् । पाटितच्छिन्नभिन्नानां स्पर्शने श्रवणे गोधामत्स्यपृंसत्रीनपुंसकाख्ये हष्टेऽन् मिते पुरःस्थिते स्पृष्टे ।
तज्जन्म भवति पानान्नपुष्पझलदशेने च शुभम् ॥३६॥
At a query regarding the sex of the child to be born, ifa man
is seen, inferred, present in front or touched, the birth ofa male
child should be predicted ; if it is a woman that is seen etc. that of
a female child ; and if it is a eunuch or one having a neuter name,
a eunuch’s birth is to be predicted. The child-birth will be easy
and happy, if some drink, food, fruit or flower is seen at the
time.
agya आ दरं areata वा स्पृष्ट वा पच्छेद्गर्भ चिन्ता तदा स्यात् ।
मध्वाज्यादय हेंमरत्नप्रवालैरग्रस्थर्वा मातृधात्र्यात्मजँशच ॥३७॥
If a woman touches with her thumb her eye-brow, stomach
or finger at a query, she must be thinking of pregnancy. The same
prediction should be made when honey, ghee and such other things
(i.e good fruits, things having masculine names) or gold, gems
and corals (sprouts), or her mother, nurse and child are in front of
her.
[Cf. पराशर
ग्रथ स्त्री Wal जठरमङ्गुष्ठेन वाऽङ्गुलि स्पृष्ठा पृच्छेद् गर्भेपृच्छां जानीयात् |
तथा फलच्छायावृक्षप्रवालाङ्कुरमधुघृत हेमगर्भंप्राजापत्ये वा मातृधात्रीपुत्रनिदशंनशब्दप्रादुर्भावे गर्भपृच्छामेव ।।
The metre is शालिनी.]
TAZA जठरे करगे स्याद्दुष्टमिमित्तवशात्तदुदासः ।
कर्षति तज्जठरं यदि पोठोत्पीडनतः करगे च करेऽपि ॥३८॥
If, at a query about a woman’s pregnancy, the querist touches
the belly with his or her hand, the woman in question may be pregnant. However, if there should also be bad omens at the time, she
may have miscarriage. The same result will have to be predicted,
if the querist scratches (or drags) his (or her) stomach owing to
the pressure of the seat, or puts one hand on the other.
[The metre is दोधक ]
घ्राणाया दक्षिणे द्वारे स्पृष्टे मासोत्तरं वदेत् ।
वामेऽब्दौ कणं एवं मा द्विचतुष्तंः श्रुतिस्तने ॥३९॥

444 Brhat Samhita
When the querist touches the right nostril, the woman in
question may conceive after a month ; when the left nostril or the
left ear, after two years ; when the right ear and the breasts, after
two months and four months respectively.
[The word घाण being neuter in gender, घोणाया would have been
proper. The metre is एलोक.]
वेशीसूले त्रोनु सुतान् कन्यके Š कर्ण पुत्रान्पञ्च हस्ते त्रयं च ।
प्रङगुष्ठान्ते पञ्चकं चानुपूर्व्या पादाडगुष्छे पा््णियुग्मेडपि कन्यास ॥४०॥
If the querist woman touches the root of her braid, she will
give birth to three sons and two daughters ; if the ears, five sons ;
if the hands, three sons ; if the little finger, one son; if the ring
finger, two sons; if the fore-finger, four sons ; if the thumb, five
sons. If she touches the big toes or the heels, she will have a single
daughter.
[The metre is शालिनी.]
सव्यासब्योरुसंस्पशे qu कन्यासुतद्दयसू ।
स्पृष्टे ललाटमध्यान्ते चतुस्त्रितनया भवेत् ॥४१॥
If she touches her right and left thigh, she will beget two
daughters and two sons respectively ; if the middle of the forehead,
four sons : and if the end of the forehead, three sons.
[The author always uses wer in the sense of ‘right’ and अपसव्य
of ‘left’.
Cf. पराशर--
तत्र जठरस्पर्श गर्भिणीमेवमेव ब्रूयात् । ग्रङ्गुष्ठेन नासास्रोतसि दक्षिणे कुर्याद्
मासान्तरेण गभंग्रहणाम् | वामाद् द्विवर्षान्तरेण । कर्णाच्छिदे मासद्वयेन । वामे adद्येन । स्तनयोरङगुष्ठेनेव स्पर्श चतुर्भिर्मासँः । पीठमर्द क कृत्वा चानन्तरमुदरं कण्डूये-
दग्नहस्तं हस्तेनाभिगृह्य वा पृच्छेद् भग्नलौहिकपिठरकुद्दालककुठार्रुतिचलितपतितभग्तदशं नशब्दे प्रादुर्भावे वा गर्भपतनं विन्द्यात् | तथान्नपानपुष्पफलपक्षिद्विचतुष्पदाना-
मन्यद्रव्याणां पृंसंज्ञानां दर्शनशाब्दप्रादुर्भावे पुञ्जन्म विन्द्यात् । स्त्रीसंज्ञानां स्त्रीजन्म ।
नपृंसकास्ये नपूंसकानाम् । पृंसंज्ञमङ्गं संस्पृश्य गभिणी पृच्छेत् ques विन्द्यात् । स्त्रीः
संज्ञानां स्त्रीजन्म । नपृंसकाख्येषु नपंसकानाम् |
अथ विशेष :---
वेणीमूलमभिणृह्य पृच्छेत्तदा द्वे कन्यके त्रीन्पुत्रान् जनयिष्यसीति qun |
ललाटमध्यं स्पृशन्ती चत्वारयपत्यानि ललाटान्तं त्रीणि । कर्णयोः संस्पशे पश्चापत्यानि।
दक्षिणोरुसंस्पशे द्वौ पुत्रो 8 च कन्यके जनयिष्यसीति । वामस्य तिस्रः कन्या द्वौ पुत्रौ ।
पादाङ्गुष्ठस्य spesso | पाष्ण्यो: कन्यरककवेति i]

Science of Limbs LI a
क्रिरोललाटभ्रू कणेगण्डं हनुरदा गलम् ।
सव्यापसव्यस्कन्धइच हस्तो चिबुकनालकम् ॥४२॥
उरः कुचं दक्षिरामप्यसव्यं हृत्पाइव मेवं जठरं कटिश्च ।
स्फिक्पायुसब्ध्यूरुयुर्ग च जानू जङ्घेऽथ पादाविति कृत्तिकादौ ॥४३॥
Ifthe pregnant woman touches, while enquiring about the
possible birth star of her next issue, the head, forehead, brows,
ears, cheeks, lower part of chin, teeth, neck, right shoulder, left
shoulder, hands, chin, pipe of the neck, chest, right bosom, left
bosom, heart, right side, left side, belly, hip, joint of buttocks and
anus, right thigh, left thigh, knees, shanks, and feet, sh
birth to a child in any of the asterisms in their order
from Krttika.
e will give
commencing
[Cf पराशर
शिरसि संस्पृष्टे कृत्तिकासु जन्म विन्द्यात् । ललाटे रोहिण्याम् । श्र वोमृगशिरसि । कर्णयोरारद्रायाम् । गण्डयोः पुनवंसौ । हन्वो स्तिष्ये | दन्तयो राइलेषासु |
ग्रीवायां मघासु | दक्षिणांसे प्राक्फल्गुन्याम् । वामांसे उत्तरफल्गृन्याम् । हस्ते हस्तयोः ।
चिबुके चित्रायाम् | स्वातौ नालके। उरसि विशाखायाम् । दक्षिणास्तनेऽनुराघासु ।
ज्येष्ठासु वामे । हृदि मुले । दक्षिणपाकवं प्रागषाढासु । उत्तराषाढसु TITRA | जठरे
श्रवणे । श्रोण्यां धनिष्ठासु i स्फिग्गुदयोर्वारुणे । दक्षिणोरुणा प्राक्प्रोष्ठपदायाम् |
वामेनोत्तरपदायाम् | जानुभ्यां पौष्णे । जङ्कयो रश्विन्याम् । पादयोर्भरण्यामिति ॥
The metres are श्लोक and उपजाति.]
इति निगदितमेतद् गात्रसंस्पशं लक्ष्म
प्रकटमभिमताप्त्य वीक्ष्य शास्त्राणि सम्यक् |
विपुलमतिरुदारो वेत्ति यः सवंमेतन्नरपतिजनताभिः पुज्यतेऽसौ सदेव ॥४४॥
Thus have I explained in clear terms the prognostics of touching the limbs, after carefully examining the treatises on this science,
for enabling people to attain their cherished desires. An intelligent
and noble astrologer who knows all this, will always be honoured
by sovereigns as well as peoples.
[The metre is मालिनी.]

पिटकलक्षरास् ॥५२॥
Chapter LII—Cha»acteristics of Pimples
[This too is supposed to be a spurious chapter. However,
Bhattotpala comments upon it. ]
सितरक्तपीतकृष्णा विप्रादीनां क्रमेर पिटका ये ।
ते क्रमशः प्रोक्तफला वर्णानां नाग्रजातानास् ॥१॥
For the four classes of people beginning with the Brahmanas
pimples will be auspicious, if they are in order white, red, yellow
and black in colour. These colours are beneficial for the respective
classes as well as for those that are below and not for those above
them. In other words, a white pimple is good for Brahmanas ;
white and red for Ksatriyas ; white, red and yellow for Vaisyas ;
and white, red, yellow and black for Südras.
सुस्निग्धव्यक्तशोभाः शिरसि धनचयं सूध्निसोभाग्यमारा-
alata श्र युगोत्याः प्रियजनघटनामाशु दुःशीलतां च ।
तन्मध्योत्थाइच शोकं नयनपुटगता नेत्रयोरिष्ट हष्टि
प्रत्रज्यां शङ्कदेशेऽश्रजलनिपतनस्थानगा रान्ति चिन्ताम् ॥२॥
Pimples that are glossy and of clear lustre, on the head indicate vast wealth ; on the back of the face (i.e. near the hair), good
fortune or happiness in the near future; on the two brows, misfortune ; in the middle of the brows, meeting with beloved person
very soon and bad conduct ; on the eye-lids, grief ; on the eyes,
sight of friends ; on the frontal bone, renunciation ; and in the area
where tears fall down, worries.
[Cf. पराशर--
ग्रथ पिटकाः सितरक्तपीतकृष्णा द्विजादीनां वर्णानां क्रमात् स्थानवर्ण विशेषणोत्तरोत्तरफलदा भवन्ति। तत्र मूध्नि सुव्यक्तः सुस्तिग्धः सुवर्णोऽभिषेकागमनं कुर्यात् |
शिरसि घनागममु । केशान्ते सौभाग्यम्। ललाटे धनसञ्चयम् । भ्रवोदौ भाग्यम् ।
सङ्गमे दौःशील्यमिष्टसङ्गमं च । नेत्रपुटयोः शोकम् । नेत्रयो रिष्टदशेनम् TERA
प्रब्रज्याम् | चिन्तामश्रुपाते ॥

Characteristics of Pimples LII 447
The metre is स्रग्धरा-]
घ्राणागण्डे वसनसुतदाश्रो ष्ठयो रन्नला भं
कुर्यस्तद्च्चिबुकतलगा भुरि वित्तं लारे ।
न्वोरेवं गलकृतपदा भुषणान्यन्नपाने
श्रोत्रे तदुभुषणगणमसपि ज्ञानमात्मस्वरूपस UN
Pimples on the nose and temples bestow clothes and children
respectively ; on the lips, good food ; on the lower part of the chin,
the same thing i.e. food ; on the forehead, plenty of money; on the
two sides of the jaw-bone, the same result i.e. much wealth ; on the
neck, ornaments, good food and drinks ; on the ears, a number of
ear-ornaments as well as spiritual knowledge.
[Cf पराशर--
गण्डे सुतलाभमु । नासावशे वस्त्रलाभम् | चिबुकाधरेष्वोष्ठाधरेष्वन्तम् ।
ग्रभिह*्वोधंनागमम् । गले चान्नपानमाभरणं F | शिर:सन्धो ग्रीवायां चोपघातं
शस्त्रेण, कर्णयोस्तद्भूषरामात्मश्रवणं च ॥
The metre is मन्दाक्रान्ता.]
शिरःसन्धिग्रीवाहृदयक्चपाइर्वोरसि गता
भ्रयोघातं घातं सुततनयलाभं शुचमपि ।
fasia स्कन्धेऽप्यटनसथ भिक्षाथमसक्कfan कक्षोत्था विदधति धनानां बहुमुखम् ॥४॥
Pimples on the joint of the head cause a hurt from an iron
instrument , on the neck, blows ; on the heart and breasts, birth of
son ; on the sides, grief ; on the chest, attainment of desired objects;
on the shoulders, frequent roamings for begging alms ; and in the
armpits, loss of wealth in various ways.
[The metre is शिखरिणी.]
दुःखशत्रुनिचयस्थ विनाशं पृष्ठबाहुयुगजा रचयन्ति i
संयमं च मणिबन्धनजाता भूषण्णाद्यमुपनाहुयुगोत्याः ॥५॥
Pimples appearing on the back lead to the destruction of all
miseries ; on the arms, to the annihilation of all enemies ; those on
the wrists, to restraint or arrest ; and those near the arms, to the
acquisition of ornaments and the like.
[विघातं is another reading for विनाशं in the first line. Utpala
interprets the last word as “ञआभरणवस्त्रान्नदानं कुर्वंन्ति 1
Cf. पराशर--

448 Brhat Samhita
- पार्श्वयोः शोकम् । उरसीष्टसङ्गमम्। स्कन्धयोभॅक्ष्यचर्याम् । कक्षयोरथंक्षयम् ।
हृत्स्तनयो: पुत्रलाभम् । पृष्ठे दुःखशमनम् । ्ररिविनाशं बाह्वोः | प्रबाद्दो राभरणम् ।
मणिबन्धने नियमनम् ।।
The metre is स्वागता.]
धर्नाप्ति सौभाग्यं शुचसपि कराडंगुल्युदरगाः
सुपानान्नं नाभौ तदथ इह चौरंधंनह्तिस् ।
घनं धान्यं वस्तौ युवतिमथ As सुतनयान्
धनं सौभाग्यं वा गुदवृषणजाता विदधति ngu
Those appearing on the hands, fingers and stomach cause
attainment of wealth, good fortune and splendour, and grief respectively ; on the navel, excellent food and drink; those beneath
the navel, loss of wealth by theft ; on the pelvis, wealth and corn ;
on the penis, getting a young wife and good sons ; on the anus,
wealth ; and on the testicles, fortune and an attractive personality.
[Cf. पराशर
पाणौ धनागमम्। सौभाग्यमङगुलिषु । शोकमुदरे। भ्रन्नपानावार्प्तिच नाभौ।
चोरँरर्थंहरणं तदधरे। धनधान्यावाप्ति वस्तौ । सौभाग्यमर्थलाशं च वृषणयोः ।
पुत्रजन्म स्त्रीलाभं मेहने | गुदे सौभाग्यम् ॥
The metre is शिखरिणी .]
ऊर्वोर्ानाङ्गनालाभं जान्वोः शत्रुजनात् क्षतिम् ।
शस्त्रेण जङ्धयोर्गृल्फेऽध्वबन्धक्लेशदायिनः ॥७॥
Pimples on the thighs augur the acquisition of vehicles and a
wife ; on the knees, loss (or trouble) on account of enemies; on the
shanks, hurt from weapons ; and onthe ankles, suffering through
wandering and imprisonment.
. [Cf. पराशर
यानाङ्गनालाभमूर्वोः । जान्वोरुपरि रिपुघातम् । शस्त्रेण विनाशं जच्धूयोर्गु-
ल्फयो रध्वबन्धपरिक्लेशागमः |
Both the author of this section and the sage use the word जानु,
which is in neuter, in another gender.
The metre is एलोक.]
स्फिकर्पा ष्शापादजाता धननाशागम्यगमनमध्वानम् ।
बन्धनसडःगुलिनिचये5्ड्गुष्ठे च ज्ञातिलोकतः पुजाम् usu
Pimples on the buttocks, heels and feet cause loss of wealth,
illicit cohabitation (especially with a forbidden person), and long

—— wn m D,
Characteristics of Pimples LIT 449
travelling respectively ; on the toes, imprisonment ; and on the big
toe, respect of kinsmen.
[The word अडगुलिनिचये in the second line has been translated by
me as ‘on the toes’ and not as ‘on the fingers’, because the author
has already given the effect of pimples appearing on the fingers in
verse 6, as सौभाग्य. Consistently have I translated अङ्गुष्ठ as पादाङ्गुष्ठ
i.e., big toe.
Cf. पराशर--
स्फिजोरथंहरणाम् । पार्ष्ण्योरगम्यगमनम् । पादयोरध्वगमनम् । नियमनमङ्गु-
ल्याम् । श्रङगुष्ठेन जातिपुजाम् |]
उत्पातगण्डपिटका दक्षिणतों वासतस्त्वभोघाता: ।
धन्या अवन्ति पुंसां तद्विपरीताश्च नारीणाम् uen
Throbbing, inflammations or boils and pimples appearing on
the right side of the body and blows on the left side are auspicious
for men, while the same on the opposite side are good for women
i.e. throbbing etc., on the left side, and impacts on the right.
इति पिटकविभागः प्रोक्त भ्रामुधेतो5य
ब्रणातिलकविभागोऽप्येवभेव प्रकल्प्यः ।
भवति मशकलक्ष्मावतंजन्सापि तहन्निगदितफलकारि प्राणिनां देहसंस्थम् uou
Thus have I analyzed the effects of pimples on all the parts of
the body from head to foot. In the same manner should ulcers and
moles be classified. Moles, special marks and hairy circles too
appearing on the limbs of human beings produce likewise the results
enumerated above,
[Readers can apply the principles enunciated in this chapter
to other marks such as moles and hairy circles.
The metre is मालिनी.]

Chapter LIII— Architecture
Vastu-tilba or the science of house-building is very ancient in
India. Our author has dealt with this vast science in a single chapter
containing 125 verses. The word Vastu means a dwelling. He
treats of temple-architecture in LVI and of sculpture in LVIII.
It would have been better, had the author put these three chapters
in succession.
वास्तुज्ञानमथातः कमलभवान्मुनिपरम्परायातप, l
क्रियतेऽधुना मयेदं विदग्धसांवत्सरप्रीत्ये ॥१॥
I shall now expound for the delight of learned astrologers the
science of house-building which has come down from Brahma
(Creator) through an unbroken succession of sages.
[According to the विश्वकमंवास्तुशास्त्र the celestial architect got a
thorough knowledge of this science from Lord Sambhu. The
अपराजितपुच्छा of भुवनदेव (13th century A.D.) speaks of this lore as the
gift of the celestial Tree. Another version of the work of Visvakarman mentions the line of succession of teachers from Lord
Sambhu as follows’ : Paragara, Brhadratha and Visvakarman. Dr.
Kern remarks in this connection as follows :
“According io Utpala, Garga, etc., more explicit is the
statement in a work bearing the title ०! श्री ब्रह्मोक्तविश्वकमंप्रकाशिका, where
we read,
इति प्रोक्त वास्तुशास्त्रं qd गर्गाय धीमते ।
गर्गात्पराशर: प्राप तस्मात्प्राप बृहद्रथः N
बृहद्रथाद्विश्वकर्मा प्राप्तवान्वास्तुशास्त्रकम् |
स विश्वकर्मा जगतो हितायाकथयत्पुनः ii
वायुदेवादिषु gay लोक भक्तितोऽब्रवीत् à £
sx स विमलविद्यो विश्वकर्मा महात्मा
सकलगुणावरिष्ठः सर्वशास्त्रार्थ वेत्ता |
सकलसुरगणानां सुत्रधार: कृतात्मा
भवननिवसतां सच्छास्त्रमेतच्चकार ॥

Architecture LIII 451
This passage, with many others, shows that Garga, Parašara,
and the like, are more mythological beings, of exactly the same
historical value with Brahman, Visvakarman, Vasudeva.
opening stanzas of the विश्वक, we find,
यदुक्तं शम्भुना पूर्व वास्तुशास्त्रं पुरातनम् ॥
पराशरः प्राह् वृहद्रथाय बृहद्रथः प्राह च fase ।
स विइवकर्मा जगतां हिताय प्रोवाच शास्त्रं बहुभेदयुक्तम् ॥
विश्वकर्मोवाच —
वास्तुशास्त्रं प्रवक्ष्यामि लोकानां हितकाम्यया ।
The Vigvaka seems to be a compilation, for most of the passages quoted by Utpala; either from what he terms किरणाख्यतन्त्र or from
Garga, from Brhaspati, Visvakarman himself, Kasyapa etc.,
recur in the Vigvaka, a copy of which is in the translator's
possession."']
In the
किमपि किल भुतमभवद्रुन्धानं रोदसी TAT ।
तदमरगरोन सहसा विनिगृह्याधोमुखं न्यस्तम् uqu
यत्र च येन गृहीतं विबुधेनाधिष्ठितः स qua ।
तदमरमयं विधाता वास्तुनर कल्पयामास ॥३॥
There was, it is said, some Being which obstructed the earth
and the sky with its body. The Gods suddenly caught hold of it
and laid it upside down. Whichever limbs were held by different
Gods had those very Gods as their presiding deities. The Greator
ordained that Being to be the House-God of the nature of Gods.
[Cf. बृहस्पति--
पुरा कृतयुगे ह्यासी न्महदुभूतं समुत्थितम् |
व्याप्यमानं शरीरेण AFA भुवनं ततः ॥
तदुदृष्टवा विस्मयं देवा गताः सेन्द्रा भयावृता: |
ततस्तैः क्रोधसन्तप्तैगृ हीत्वा तमथासुरम् ॥
विनिक्षिप्तमधोवकत्रं स्थितास्तत्रैव ते सुराः |
तमेव वास्तुपुरुषं ब्रह्मा समभिकल्पये(य)त् ॥ |
उत्तममष्टाभ्यधिकं हस्तशतं तपगृहं पृ युत्वेन ।
ग्रष्टाष्टोनान्येवं पञ्च सपादानि SEAT uyu
The king’s palace is One of five kinds. The best of them is
108 cubits in width, and the others are 100, 92, 84 and 76 cubits
respectively. Their length is greater than the breadth by a quarter

452 Brhat Samhita
[Cf. काश्यप —
रष्टोत्तरं हस्तशतं विस्तारान्नृपमन्दिरम् |
कार्य प्रधानमन्यानि तथाष्टाष्टोनितानि तु t
विस्तारं पादसंयुक्तं ded तेषां प्रकल्पयेत् |
एवं पञ्च नृपः कुर्याद् गृहाणां च पृथक् पृथक् ॥]
षड्भिः षड्मिरहीना सेनापतिसद्मनां चतुःषष्टिः i
एवं पळ्चगृहारि षड्भागसमन्विता देघ्यंम् uu
The five kinds of houses of a commander-in-chief are in order
64, 58, 52, 46 and 40 cubits in width, and their length exceeds the
width by a sixth.
The length of the varieties would be in order 743, 673, 603,
532 and 462 cubits. The third quarter of the verse, as it is, is faulty
being deficient in one Matra. It can be rectified by adding qat the
end : एवं पञ्च गृहाणि तु ]
षष्टिइचतुश्चतुर्भि्हीना वेशसानि पञ्च सचिवस्य i
स्वाष्टांशयुतो देघ्यं तदर्धतो राजमहिषीणाम् usu
The houses of ministers are 60, 56, 52, 48 and 44 cubits in
width and their length exceeds their breadth by an eighth. The
houses of queens have half the dimensions of the above ones.
[The length of the five kinds would be in order 672, 63, 582,
54 and 49% cubits. The breadth and length of the queens’ houses
would be: 30 and 33.75 cubits ; 28 and 315; 26 and 292 ; 24 and
27 ; and lastly 22 and 24.75 cubits.]
षड्भिः षड्भिइचेवं युवराजस्यापवजिताऽशीतिः à
त्यंशान्विता च dvd qsa तदधँस्तदनुजानाम् ॥७॥
The width of the Yuvaraja’s houses should be 80, 74, 68, 62
and 56 cubits respectively and their length exceeds the breadth by
a third. The dimensions of the houses of the younger princes should
be half those of the Yuvaraja’s.
[The length of these five varieties would be : 1062, 982, 903,
82$ and 742 cubits in order. The breadth and length of the princes’
houses would be 40 and 53} cubits ; 37 and 493 ; 34 and 452; 31
and 415 ; and lastly 28 and 372 cubits respectively. ]
नुपसचिवान्तरतुल्यं सामन्तश्रवरराजपुरुषाणाम्।
नपयुवराजविशेषः कञ्चुकिवेइयाकलाज्ञानाम् usu
The dimensions of the houses of feudatory chiefs, nobles and
king’s officers would be equal to the difference between the measure-

Architecture LIII 453
ments of king’s houses and those of the minister’s. Similarly the
dimensions of the houses of chamberlains, courtesans and artistes
would be equal to the difference between the measurements of the
houses of the king and the Yuvaraja.
[We have the measurements of the best type of houses for the
king as 108 cubits and 135 cubits.
The corresponding figures for the minister’s house are 60 and
674 cubits. So 108 —60—48 cubits ; and 135—674=674 cubits will
be the width and length respectively of the houses for the Samantas
etc. According to this principle the breadth and length of a chamberlain’s house should be 28 and 284 cubits respectively. This looks
rather odd.]
भ्रध्यक्षाधिकृतानां सर्वेषामेव कोशरतितुल्यम् ।
युवराजमन्त्रिविवरं कर्मान्ताध्यक्षद्तानाम् teu
The houses of all directors and officers (of stables, elephant
yards, dairies, royal kitchens etc.) should be of the dimensions of
treasure-houses and pleasure-mansions. The difference between
the measurements of the houses of Yuvaraja and minister would
give those of the houses of heads of industrial workshops and envoys.
[In the second line सामन्त is another reading instead of युवराज
which is rejected by Utpala. According to Kullüka (under Manu
VII-62 ) कर्मान्त is sat धान्यादिसङ्ग्रहस्थानम् --8 store of grain The measures of treasuries and pleasure-houses are given in verses 14 and 16
infra.]
चत्वार्रशद्धीना चतुरचतुभिस्तु पञ्च यावदिति।
षड्भागयुता ded देवज्ञपुरोधसोभिषजः 112 011
The five varieties of houses of royal astrologers, preceptors and
physicians should measure 40, 36, 32, 28 and 24 cubits in breadth,
and their length should exceed the breadth by a sixth.
[Their length would be in order 462, 42, 374, 322 and 28
cubits. ]
Next he speaks of the height and number of rooms.
वास्तुनि यो विस्तारः स एव चोच्छायनिइचय: sp ua: À
शालेकेषु गृहेष्वपि विस्तारादृद्विगुणितं देघ्य॑स् ॥११॥
Jt is auspicious for houses to have the same height as their
breadth. The length of houses with single halls should be double
their breadth.

454 Brhat Samhità
[Cf. काश्यप —
चतुःशालगृहेष्वेवमुच्छायो व्याससम्मितः i
विस्तारं द्विगुणां देघ्येमेकशालयुतस्य च ॥
Next he speaks of the dimensions of houses for the different
classes or Varnas.]
चातुवेण्यंव्यासो द्वात्रिशत् सा चतुश्चतुर्हीना ।
ग्राषोडशादिति परं न्यूनतरमतीव हीनानाम् ॥१२॥
सदशांशं विप्राणां क्षत्रस्याष्टांशसंयुतं दघ्येस् ।
षड्भागयुतं वेश्यस्य भवति शूद्रस्य पादधुतम् ॥१३॥
The width of the houses of Bráhmanas and other four classes
ranges from 32 cubits to 16 cubits, each being reduced by 4 cubits;
i.e. Brahmanas have five houses with 32 cubits and below; Ksatriyas
have four with 28 cubits, 24, 20 and 16 cubits for their width; Vaisyas, three with 24, 20 and 16 cubits; and Südras two with 20 and
16 cubits. The lowest class of men (like the Candalas and Svapakas)
will have houses with much smaller dimensions than these. The
length of the houses for the four classes should exceed the breadth
by a tenth, eighth, sixth and fourth respectively.
[The length of the five houses for Brahmanas would be in
order 35:2, 30:8, 26:4, 22 and 17:6 cubits; for Ksatriyas, 31:5, 27,
22:5 and 18 cubits; for Vaiáyas, 28, 234 and 182 cubits; and for
Südras, 25 and 20 cubits.
See the किरणाख्यतन्त्र quoted by Utpala :
हस्तद्वात्रिशता युक्तो विस्तार: स्याद् द्विजालये ।
विस्तारं सदशांशं तु ded तस्य प्रकल्पयेत् ॥
त्रयाणां क्षत्रियादीनां मानं यत्पुवचोदितम् |
तच्चतुभिः करंस्ताक्ष्यं ह्वासयेदनुपुर्वशः ॥
एषामष्टांशषड्भागपाददर्ध्यं क्रमाद् भवेत् ॥
Next the author mentions the measurements ofthe treasury
and pleasure mansion.]
नुपसेनापतिगृहयो रन्तरमानेन कोशरतिभवने ।
सेनापतिचातुण्यंविवरतो राजपुरुषाणाम् u$ Yu
The dimensions of the treasury and pleasure-mansion would
be equal to the difference between those of the royal palace and the
commander-in-chief’s house. The measure for the houses of king’s
officers would be equal to the difference between those of the houses
of commander-in-chief and one of the four classes. That i 8,

Architecture LIII 455
officer belongs to the Brahmana class, the difference referred to is
one between the measure of the commander-in-chief's house and an
ordinary Brahmana’s mentioned in the previous two verses; if the
officer is a Ksatriya, we have to subtract the dimensions of a Ksatriya’s house from those of the second house of the Senapati; if he is
a Vaigya, the subtraction should be done from the measure of the
Senapati’s third house; and lastly, if the officer is a Südra, the fourth
house of the commander-in-chicf should be taken.
[The breadth of the treasury and pleasure-house will be 44,
42, 40, 38 and 36 cubits respectively for the five varieties. Now for
a Brahmana officer the measurements are: 32,30, 28, 26 and 24
cubits; for a Ksatriya officer, 34, 28, 26 and 24 cubits; for a Vaisya
one, 28, 26 and 24 cubits, and lastly for a Sidra officer, 26 and 24
cubits. ]
Next he gives the measures for the houses of mixed castes :
ग्रथ पारशवादीनां स्वमानसंयोगदलसमं भवनम् |
हीनाधिकं स्वमानादशुभकरं वास्तु सर्वेषाम् ॥१५॥
The houses of persons of mixed classes such as Parasavas, sons
of Brahmanas by Südra women, Bhürjakantakas, sons of Brahmanas
by ४81893 women, and Mürdhávasiktas, by Ksatriya women, should
have a measure equal to a half of the sum of the measures fixed for
the two classes of parents. It is inauspicious for all people to have
houses which either exceed or fall short of the fixed measurements.
[The dimensions of a Paragava’s house is equal to 32+20-2=
26 cubits; of a Bhürjakantaka's 32 4-24--2—28 cubits; of a Mirdhavasikta’s 32-4- 28— 2— 30 cubits.
I have taken Utpala's explanation of Bhürjakantaka, but
according to Manu (X. 21) it is the offspring ofa fallen Brahmana
by a woman of the same class,
“ब्रात्यात्तु जायते विश्रात्पापात्मा भूर्जकण्टकः । ']
पइवाश्रमिणाममितं धान्यायुधवह्हिरतिगृहाणां च।
नेच्छन्ति शास्त्रकारा हस्तशतादुच्छ्रितं परतः ॥ १६।॥।
There is no fixed measurement for the houses of cattle and
ascetics as well as for granaries, arsenals, houses of sacred fire and
pleasure-houses. However, the authorities on this subject do not
approve a height of more than 100 cubits.
[This is an exception to the rule given in verse 11.

456 Brhat Samhita
Cf. wi—
शतहस्तोच्छितं कार्यं चतुःशालगृहं gH: |
afr तत्त्वेकशालं तु शुभदं तत्प्रकोतितम् u]
सेनापतिन॒पतीनां सप्ततिसहिते द्विधाकृते व्यासे ।
शाला चतुर्दशहृते पङ्चात्रशद्घृतेऽलिन्दः ॥१७॥
Add 70 to the measure for the houses of the king and commander of the army; keep this sum in two places, and divide the
one by 14 and the other by 35. The quotients give the measure for
the hall and verandah respectively in each case,
[Let us take the best type of king’s house whose breadth is 108.
Add 70 to this and divide it by 14: 108--70—14—127 cubits, This
is the measure of the hall. Again divide 1084-70 by 35: We get
5,2 cubits for the verandah. In the case of the commander’s house
these are 92 cubits and 33$ cubits respectively.]
हस्तद्वात्रिशादिषु चतुश्चतुस्त्रिन्रिकत्रिका: शालाः ।
सप्तदशत्रितयतिथित्रयोदशक्कृताङगलाभ्याधकाः tt cu
त्रित्रिद्रिद्रिद्रिसमाः क्षयक्रमादडगुलानि चेतेषास् ।
व्येका विशतिरष्टो विशतिरष्टादश त्रितयम् uteu
In the houses of Brahmanas and others, measuring from 32
cubits downwards, the halls should have a breadth of 4 cubits 17
digits, 4 cubits 3 digits, 3 cubits 16 digits, 3 cubits 13 digits, and
3 cubits 4 digits respectively. The verandahs of these are in order
3 cubits 19 digits, 3 cubits 8 digits, 2 cubits 20 digits, 2 cubits 18
digits and 2 cubits 3 digits, where the measures gradually
decrease.
[In the third line व्यतिक्रमाद् is another reading for क्षयक्रमाद्. The
commentator refers to अन्ये, other commentators, who interpret
क्षयक्रम as reduction of the digits from the.cubits given here. In that
case instead of 3c. 19d for the verandah, we would have 2c 5d.
This interpretation is rejected on the authority of aged architects,
When the measures of halls and verandahs are given in the
case of Brahmana houses, those for the other classes can be easily
got from the second, third and fourth places. ]
शालात्रिभागतुल्या कतंव्या वीथिका बहिभेवनात् ।
यद्यग्रतो मवति सा सोष्णीषं नाम तद्वास्तु ॥२०॥
सायाश्रयमिति पश्चात् सावष्टम्भ तु पाइवंसंस्थितया ।
सुस्थितमिति च समन्ताच्छास्त्रज्ञेः पूजिताः सर्वाः ॥२१॥

Architecture LIII 457
Outside the house there should be made a foot-path whose
breadth must be a third of that of the hall. lfthe path is in front of
the house, the latter is termed *'Sognisa"—one with a turban; if it is
behind the house, it is called ““Saydsraya’’—Evening Resort; if it is
on the two sides, it is designated as ““Savastambha’’—Properly Supported; and if itis laid on all four sides, it is named ‘‘Susthita”—
well-placed. All these types are approved by the authorities on
architecture.
[Cf. the किरणाख्यतन्तव —
य: शालायास्तृतीयांशस्तेन कार्या तु वीथिका ।
यद्यग्रतो भवेद्वी थी सोष्णीषं नाम तद् णहम् ॥
पञ्चात्सायाश्रयं नाम सावष्टम्भं तु TAAN: |
समन्ताद्यदि जाता सा तदा सुस्थितमुच्यते u]
बिस्तारषोडशांशः सचतुर्हस्तो भवे द्ग॒होच्छायः t
द्वादशभागेनोनो भुमी FAY समस्तानाम् URW
The height of the first floor (storey) should be a sixteenth of
the width increased by four cubits. The height of each of the following upper storeys should be reduced by one-twelfth of the preceding
one.
[The height of the first floor of the king’s biggest house is
195.-4—]0 cubits 18 digits. That of the next storey is
jo —Lc—184_9 cubits 204 digits.
व्यासात् षोडशभागः सवेषां सद्मनां भवति भित्तिः ।
पक्वेष्टकाकृतानां दारुकृतानां तु न विकल्पः ॥२३॥
The wall of all houses made of burnt bricks should be a sixteenth part of their breadth. There is no restriction regarding the
houses made of wood.
[According to this rule, a king’s house whose width is 108
cubits, should have walls of 6 cubits 18 digits. In respect of wooden
houses there is absolutely no restriction of length, breadth and
height.
Cf. wi—
विस्तारषोडशांशेन ग्रहर्भित्ति प्रकल्पयेत् ।
हीनाधिका न कतंव्या gud MAAT N

458 Brhat Samhita
Also the किरणाख्यतन्त--
पक्वेष्टानामयं व्यासो दारुजानां यथेच्छया |
द्विजाद्येव गृहं कार्य तत् स्याच्छुञ्रं स्वदिग्गतम् ॥
नवत्रयोदशाद्य॑श्च करज्ञात्वा प्रकल्पयेत् ॥ |
एकादशभागयुतः ससप्ततिन् पबलेशयोवर्यासः ।
उच्छ्रायोऽङ्गुलतुल्यो द्वारस्यार्धेन विष्कम्भः ॥२४।॥
The breadth of the houses of kings, commanders (and others
except the four classes) should be increased by an eleventh part and
70 added to it. This number will give the height of the doors in
digits. Their width would be half of their height.
[Applying this rule to the width of the king's house we get
108+1$$+70=187-% digits or 188 digits in round number, This is
the height of the door. Half of this i.e. 94 digits, would be its width.
Here Utpala commits a small error : Instead of saying : चतुर्ण वत्यङ्गुलानि
विस्तारः he says नवनवत्यङ्गुलानि...]
विप्रादीनां व्यासात् पञ्चांशोऽष्टादश्ाङ्गुलसमेतः ।
साष्टांशो विष्कम्मो द्वारस्य त्रिगुण उच्छ्रायः ॥२५॥
In the case of the houses of Brahmanas and other classes the
number denoting the breadth in cubits should be divided by 5 and
the quotient taken as so many digits. This should be increased by
18. To this should be added an eighth part of itself. That will give
the width of the door; and thrice that number will be its height in
digits.
[Taking 32 cubits, the width of a Brahmana’s house, we divide
it by 5 and get 6 as the quotient. This number is to be taken as 6
digits. Now add 18 to it. We get 24. By increasing this by its own
eighth part we get 24+ 3--27 digits Tnis is the width of the door.
Thrice this will be its height i.e. 27x 3—81 digits.]
उच्छ्रायहस्तसंख्यापरिमाणान्यङ्गुलानि बाहुल्यम् ।
शाखाद्वयेऽपि कार्य साधं तत् स्यादुदुम्बरयोः usu
उच्छ्रायात्सप्तगुणादशीतिमागः पृथुत्वमेतेषाम् ।
नवगुरितेऽशीत्यंशः स्तम्भस्य दशांशहीनोऽग्रे ॥ २७॥
The thickness of the two side-frames of the door is as many
digits as the number of cubits in its height. One and a half times
this gives the thickness of the threshold and the upperblock. The
breadth of all the four pieces is an eightieth part of seven times the
door-height. An eightieth part of nine times the height (of — )

Architecture LIII 459
gives the width of a pillar at the bottom, and the same reduced
by atenth is its width at the top.
[Here we find two technical terms, शाखा and उदुम्बर. The former
is the side-frame and the latter consists of देहली and निटाल, the lower
and upper blocks respectively.
We have seen that the height of the door in the king's
house is 188 digits, which comes to 8 cubits approximately. So the
thickness of the frame would be 8 digits, and that ofthe threshold
iis. N 188 x7 O aa
and the upper-block, 12 digits. Now — go 10 digits. Hence
16:5 digits would be the breadth of allthe four pieces. A pillar
on the ground floor ofthe above house will have a width at the
8U
26:1 or 26 digits. Its circumference is thrice its width (24 digits
make one cubit).]
समचतुरस्रो रुचको वस्ञ्रोष्टाश्रिद्विवज्ञको द्विगुणः ।
द्वात्रिशता तु मध्ये प्रलीनको वृत्त इति qu ॥२८॥
A pillar that is perfectly square in the middle (barring the
two ends) is termed Rucaka; one that is octagonal, a Vajra or Diamond; one with sixteen sides, a double diamond; one with 32 sides,
Pralinaka; and a round is named Vrtta or cylindrical.
bottom — —29 digits; and its width at the top=29—23=
[Thus five types of pillars are mentioned here : Rucaka, Vajra,
Dvivajra, Pralinaka and Vrtta. All these are said to be auspicious.
These names are based on the shape of the middle portion. For, the
lower and upper parts will have different motifs.
Cf. किरणाख्यतन्त्रवेदास्रो रुचकः स्तम्भो वज्राष्टा्रियुतो मतः।
faa: षोडशास्तिः स्याद् द्विगुणात्रिः प्रलीनकः t
समन्तवृत्तो वृत्ताख्यः स्तम्भः प्रोक्तो द्विजोत्तमः u]
स्तम्भं विभज्य नवधा वहनं भागो घटोऽस्य भागोऽन्यः |
पद्मं तथोत्तरोष्ठं कुर्याद् भागेन भागेन ॥२६॥
When the whole pillar is divided into nine equal parts, the
first two will belong to the bottom and the last two to the top. They
are called Vahana or Support, Ghata or Pot, Padma or Lotus, and
Uttarostha or Upper lip. Designs and artistic motifs can be carved in
these parts.
[Utpala says : “उत्तरोष्ठो यत्र शोभार्थं रू पकविशेषा: fart’? The names
Ghata and Padma are used here because they are actually shaped

460 Brhat Samhita
like them. The commentator refers to some other opinion which
makes Uttarostha, the eighth part and Padma, the ninth.
Cf. the किरणाख्यतन्व —
विभज्य नवधा स्तम्भं कुर्यादुद्ृहनं घटम् ।
कमलं चोत्तरोष्ठं तु भागे भागे प्रकल्पयेत् ॥ |
स्तम्मसमं बाहुल्यं मारतुलानामुप्य् पर्यासास् |
अवति तुलोपतुलानामुनं पादेन पादेन ॥३०॥
The thickness of the main architrave is equal to that of the
pillar; above this there are beams and minor beams, whose thickness is three-fourths of that of its immediately preceding one.
[We have seen that a pillar on the ground floor of a king’s
house hasa width of 29 digits at the bottom. This will be the
thickness of the main architrave. The thickness of the beam and
minor beam would b: 29 x3 digits and 29x 2 x digits respectively.
The commentator says first :
“भारतुलाया उपरि यदन्यत् काष्ठं दीयते तत्तुलोपतुलासंज्ञम् U
Then he adds
“वीप्साकरणात् केचिच्चतस्र इति वर्धयन्ति । भारतुला उपतुला तुलोपतुला
चेति n”
I feel, however, that they must be gat and उपतुला.]
भ्रप्रतिषिद्धालिन्दं समन्ततो वास्तु सवंतोभद्रमर ¦
नुपविब्रुघसमुहानां कार्य द्वारंशचतुभिरपि ॥३१॥
A house with an unbroken (unrestricted ?) verandah all round
is called Sarvatobhadra (All-auspicious). This type of house with four
doors is beneficial for kings and Gods.
[The four doors are to be in the four directions. What is the
special significance of अप्रतिषिद्धं?’ Does it mean that there is no restriction about its measurements ?
Cf. गर्गे --
भ्रलिन्दानां व्यवच्छेदो नास्ति यत्र समन्ततः |
तद्वास्तु सर्वतोभद्रं चतुर्ढ्वारसमायुतम् i]
नन्द्यावतंमलिन्देः शालाकुडचात् प्रदक्षिणान्तगतः |
द्वारं पश्चिमस्मिन् विहाय शेषाणि कार्याणि ॥३२॥
A house which has verandahs starting from the walls of the
halls and going to their respective extremities from left to right is
termed Nandyavarta, which should have only three doors leaving off
the western one.

Architecture LUI 461
[Cf. गर्ग--
प्रदक्षिणां गतेः सर्वे: शालाभित्तेरलिन्दर्क: |
विनापरेण द्वारेण नन्द्यावतंमिति स्सृतम् u]
द्वारालिन्दोऽन्तगतः प्रदक्षिणोऽन्यः शुभस्ततइ्चान्यः ।
afara वर्धमाने द्वारं तु न दक्षिणं कायम् ॥३३॥
The front verandah of the main building should extend from
the left hall to the right hall. Another verandah is made from there
from left to right, and still another beautiful one from there in
the same manner. A building with such verandahs is known as
Vardhamana, which should not have an entrance in the south.
[Cf. गर्ग—
द्वारालिन्दोऽन्तगस्तेषां ये त्रयो दक्षिणां गताः |
विहाय दक्षिणं द्वारं वर्धमानमिति स्मृतम् u]
श्रपरोऽन्तगतोऽलिन्दः प्रागन्तगतौ तदुत्थितौ चान्यो i
तदवधिविधृतइचान्यः प्राग्द्वारं स्वस्तिके शुभदम् ॥३४॥
In the Svastika type of mansion the western verandah
should extend from the left hall to the right one; the other two
verandahs (southern and northern) originating from the western
verandah should touch the ends in the east, and the fourth one (i.e.
eastern one) is held between their bounds. Such a mansion with
only an eastern entrance is beneficial.
[Cf. गर्ग—
पश्चिमोऽन्तगतोऽलिन्दः प्रागन्तौ द्वौ तदुत्थितौ ।
प्रन्यस्तन्मध्यविधृतः प्राग्द्वारं स्वस्तिक शुभम् ॥]
प्राकूपदिचमावलिन्दावन्तगतो तदवधिस्थितौ शेषो ।
रुचके द्वारं न शुभदधुत्तरतोऽन्यानि शस्तानि ॥३५॥
In the building known as Rucaka the eastern and western
verandahs touch the ends in the south and north; and touching
these two internally there are two more. In this building an entrance in the north is not auspicious, while in the other quarters they
are good.
[Cf. गर्गे--
प्राकूपश्चिमावलिन्दौ यावन्तगो aat परी ।
सौम्यं द्वारं विना यत्स्याद रुचकाख्यं तु तत्स्मृतम् U]
श्रेष्ठ नन्द्यावतं सवषां वर्धमानसं च ।
स्वस्तिकरुचके मध्ये शेषं शुभदं नुपादीनाम् ॥३६॥
The Nandyavarta and Vardhamana types of houses are the best

462 Brhat Se mhita
for the people of all classes (i.e. Brahmanas etc.); Svastika and
Rucaka are moderate, and the last one viz. Sarvatobhadra, is beneficial
for kings, ministers etc.
[Utpala gives the plans of these five types of houses which are
shown below :
3 वर्च्मानम
उत्तरशालाहीनं हिरण्यनाभं त्रिशालकं धन्यम् |
प्राकृशालया वियुक्तं सुक्षेत्रं वृद्धिद वास्तु ॥३७॥
यास्याहोजं चुल्ली त्रिशालकं वित्तनाशकरमेतत् |
पक्षघ्नमपरया वर्जितं सुतध्वंसवेरकरम् ॥३८॥
A three-halled house, where the northern hall is absent, is
named Hiran yanàbha and fortunate. Similarly, Suksetra is one where
the eastern hall is absent and leads to prosperity. One without the
southern hall is designated as Culiz, which leads to loss of wealth.
Lastly a house devoid of the western hall is named Paksaghna and is
destructive to children, and the cause of hatred.
HLNOS

hitecture LIII
Architectur 463
[Cf. the किरणाख्यतन्त्र--
aed हिरण्यनाभाख्यं हीनं चोत्तरशालया |
सुक्षेत्र Gaal हीनं शालया वृद्धिदं मतम् ॥
चुल्ली दक्षिणया हीनं धनाथंप्राणनाशनम् |
यत् स्यादपरया हीनं पक्षघ्नं तत् सुतान्तकृत् ॥
By suitable adjustment of the lines in the first four types of
houses we can get these three-halled houses.]
In the following verses the author describes six types of twohalled houses.
सिद्धा्थेमपरयाम्ये यमसूर्यं पदिचिमोत्तरे शाले ।
दण्डाख्यमुदकपुर्वे ARA प्राग्युता याम्या ॥३६॥
पूर्वापरे तु शाले गृहचुल्ली दक्षिणोत्तरे काचम् |
सिद्धार्थ्थावाप्तियंमसुये गृहुपतेमृ त्युः ॥४०॥
दण्डवधो दण्डाख्ये कलहोद्वेगः सदेव वातार्ये |
वित्तविनाशइचुल्ल्यां ज्ञातिविरोधः स्मृतः काचे ॥४२॥
A two-halled house with only the western and southern halls
is known as Siddhartha; one with the western and northern halls
Yamastrya; one with the northern and eastern halls, Danda; one with
the eastern and southern halls, Vata; one with the eastern and western ones, Grha-cullt (or Culli); and one with the southern and
northern ones, Kaca. The first type of house leads to acquisition of
wealth; the second, to the owner’s death; the third, to death by
being beaten with clubs (or, to punishment and death); the fourth,
to constant grief from strife; the fifth, to loss of money; and the
sixth, to enmity with kinsmen.
[Instead of दण्डवधो in 41 दण्डवधो is another reading.
Cf. the किरणाख्यतन्तव़ —
सिद्धार्थ तु भवेच्छुभ्रं याम्यापरयुतं यदि ।
परिचमोत्तरसंयुक्तं यमसूर्यं d मृत्युदम् ॥
उदक्पुर्वयुतं यत् स्याद् दण्डाख्यं दण्डकारकम्।
पुर्वयाम्ययुतं ज्ञेयं वाताख्यं कलहुप्रियम् ॥
पूर्वापरयुतं गेहं चुल्लीनामार्थनाशकृत् |
दक्षिणोत्तरशालाढयं काचसंज्ञं विरोधकृत् 11]
Here the commentator commends the author's exceptional
success in summarizing briefly the views of ancient authors like
Vigvakarman, Maya and Kama, who have explained the construction of each type of house in very great detail. For, look at the

464 Brhat Samhiia
statement of Hiranyagarbha about the existence of 64 types or 120
varieties of the houses :
गृहाणां क्रमयोगेन चतुःषष्टि: समासतः |
प्रनेकयोगभेदाच्च शतं विशोत्तरं स्मृतम् ॥
But विश्वकर्मा speaks of 256 varieties of buildings.
एवं शतद्वयं पिण्डं षट्पञ्चाशच्च वेशमनाम् ।
यथावत् कृत्यजः कृत्स्न उक्तशास्त्रेऽपि यत्नतः ॥
Here Utpala refers to some scholars, who have not rightly
understood the meaning of this science of architecture, and thereby
cast aspersions on the author’s contradictory statements in verses 11
and 16 about the breadth and height of houses, viz. “It is auspicious
to have the height of a building equal to its breadth," and “The
authorities do not approve of the height to be more than 100 cubits.”
[The contradiction here is that the king's first house has a width of
108 cubits. If its height were to be 108 cubits, it would be violating
the rule of maximum height.] These half-baked scholars, he continues, explain away this difficulty by referring to one as the general
rule and to the other as the exception. In fact there is neither in
this case. For, in verse 22 our author has given the height of the
first floor as 10 cubits 18 digits and of the next floor (storey) as the
above reduced by a twelfth.
Vitvakarman has laid down that mighty emperors could have a
mansion of Ti storeys; Brahmanas, 65; Ksatriyas 54; Vaisyas 43; and
Südras 3% storeys :
यजन्ते राजसूयाद्यंः क्रतुभिये$वनीश्वरा: |
तलैरर्धाष्टमेस्तेषां कारयेद् भवनोत्तमम् ॥
तथाधंसप्तमरेव विप्राणां कारयेद् गृहम् |
ggas: क्षत्रियाणां वैश्यानामर्धप्चमेः ॥
त्रिभिः सार्धेश्र शूद्राणां भवनं शुभदं स्मृतम् ।।
The same authority speaks of tnree kinds of cubits ४17., ज्येष्ठ or प्रशय
major, मध्यम or साधारण medium, and कनिष्ठ or शम minor :
यवा मध्यान्विता श्रष्टावडगुलं ज्येष्ठमुच्यते |
सप्त मध्यमसंख्यानामङ्गुलं षट् कनीयसाम् ।।
According to Utpala the minor cubit is adopted by Varahamihira. Vigvakarman wants the medium cubit to be employed in the
matter of height of buildings :
साधारणोत हस्तेन परं quem विशतिः ।
चत्वारिशच्च वेश्यस्य wfg: स्यात् क्षत्रियस्य g

Architecture LIII 465
त्राह्मणस्य तथाशीतिः शतं च नृपतेः स्मृतम् ।
नात: परतर नुणामुध्वमानं विधीयते a
गन्धवंसिद्धयक्षाणां धर्मतः समुदाहृतम् ॥
The three kinds of cubits mentioned above represent in
order the length of 192, 168 and 144 full-grown barley grains.
So 100 medium cubits would be equal to 874 major cubits. The total
height of the 73 storeys of a king’s house would be 6lc. 21d. Here
Utpala commits a mistake, because he says the total height is 62:5
cubits.
Vi$vakarman lays down that the height of the foundations of
best houses should be 2% cubits. There is restriction regarding the
height of the storeys of buildings only with two, three and four halls.
In a house of a single hall, the height is equal to its breadth. For,
says Sakra :—
एकशालं यथाकामं विस्तारं कारयेद् गृहम् ।
गुहमायामहीनं तत्त्वेकशाल प्रचक्षते ।।
गृहविस्तारमाधिक्यं प्राहोत्सर्गास्तु गोतमः ।
According to this the breadth should not exceed the length in
a single-halled house. However, should it exceed the length, such
houses would be called Utsargas, according to Gautama. Single-halled
houses are not constructed for Bráhmanas etc. Such houses are not
conducive to longevity, but, if made of straw, they are good.
See what ग says :
अनाजीवकरं सर्वमेकशालमुदाहूतम् |
प्रपि शाला तृणमयी कार्या तस्य शुभप्रदा |i
Vis$vakarman (in the वास्तुविशवकरमं प्रकाश) employs the three kinds
of cubits for different constructions :
ग्रामखेटपुरादीनां विभागायामविस्तरानु i
परिखाद्वाररथ्याश्च स्तम्भान् प्रासादवेश्मनाम् |!
तेषां निर्गममार्ग च सीमाक्षेत्रान्तराणि च ।
देशान्तरविभागांश्च वासोपवनयोस्तथा ॥
mead: परिमाणं च क्रोशगव्युतियोजनेः |
खातक्रकचराशींश्र प्रशयेन प्रमापयेत् ।।
शयनाशनयानानि कमंदण्डायुधं तथा |
वापीकूपप्रमाणानि तथा नृगजवाजिनाम् ॥
इक्षयन्त्रारघट्टांश्च हलयूपयुगध्वजानु |
ग्रातोया (द्या ?) नि च नावश्च शिल्पिनां चाप्युपस्करानु ॥

466 Brhat Samhita
पादुके च वृषीं छत्रं चर्मोपकरणाति च ।
मात्रा शमेन हस्तेन नल्वदण्डांश्र मापयेत् ॥
In support of the statement that Varahamihira uses only the
शम or minor cubit, the commentator refers to the reading शम or शय
in verse 19— fafafefeaan:’.
In verse 23 the author says that the thickness of the wall
should be equal to a sixteenth part of the width of the house, provided it is made of burnt bricks. The mixing together of raw and
burnt bricks as well as of new and old ones in the construction of
houses is forbidden as shown below :
न नवं पुराणयुक्तं न पक्वमामेन चैव संयोज्यम् ।
aaa स्खलितशिलाविशीणेमच्छिन्नसंस्कारात् ॥
(तन्त्रान्तरे)
Hiranyagarbha, however, permits the mixing as follows :—
ग्रामेष्टकास्त्वधश्चेयाः पववाइच चिनुयात्ततः |
पक्वाश्रिता द्यधश्चेया यथेष्टमुपरीष्टकाः ॥
The same authority speaks of eight kinds of buildings according to the material used in their construction :
गृहं तु विविधं प्रोक्तं शरीरेस्तु पृथग्विधं: |
पाषाणेनिचितं यच्च qqug मन्दिरं स्मृतम् ॥
पक्वेष्टक वास्तुनाम भवनं हितमुत्तमम् |
श्रामेष्टकं सुमन्तं तु सुधारं mama तु ॥
मानस्यं वधितं काष्ठवंणुमिर्नेन्दनं स्मृतम् ।
वस्त्रेश्च विजयं प्रोक्तं राज्ञां शिल्पिविकल्पितम् ॥
कालिमेति च विज्ञेयमष्टमं तृण॒जातिभिः à
उत्तमानि तु चत्वारि गृहाणि गृहमेधिनाम् ॥
सौवर्णं राजतं ताम्रमायसं च प्रकीतितम् |
सौवण पुष्करं नाम राजतं श्रीभवं तथा ॥
ATH णा सु्यमन्तं तु चण्डनाम ANUAR N
देवदानवगन्धर्वयक्ष राक्षसकिन्नरेः |
्वादशते प्रकारास्तु ग॒हाणां नियताः स्मृताः u
जातुषं त्वानिल नाम त्रापुषं वारिबन्धकमु |
एवञ्जातिषु सर्वासु गृहाणि तु चतुदश ॥
But Maya rejects these categories and accepts only five :
feg ग्रन्थिमं चेव दायिमं रिपिमं तथा |
खातिमं च पुरं ख्यातं क्रियाः पञ्चविधा गृहे ॥

Architecture LIL 467
The commentator adds :
“vad एव विकल्पाः पक्वेष्टकाकृतानां क्रियन्ते, नान्येषाम् । दारुकृतादीनां तु
पुनदेवतानिवेशभोजनदेवागारमहानसादिनिवेशमात्रमेव क्रियते, नान्यदिति | तथा च
तन्त्रान्तरे पठयते--
तत्र च विसस्यभूमेः परीक्षणं देवतानिवेशश्च |
तलकोच्छाय: कार्यो विधानतो वास्तुपुरुषस्य od
शेषाणामपि च qua सन्निविष्टक्रिया समुहिष्टा i
भोजनशालासंस्थानलक्षणां TI सामान्यम् di
नैषां नियमस्तलकोच्छुयेषु नायामविस्त रार्थेषु ।
न द्वारेषु न दारुषु न पालिनाडीविभागेषु u]
एकाशीतिविभागे दश दश पूर्वोत्तरायता रेखाः ।
प्रन्तस्त्रयोदश सुरा द्वार्पत्रशद्बाह्यकोष्ठस्थाः ॥४२॥
In order to divide the ground-plan of a house into 81 squares
draw ten lines from east to west and ten others from north to south.
Inside the diagram, thirteen deities are situated, and thirty-two in
the outer compartments. Thus, there are 45 deities in this figure.
(See diagram 1 under 48 infra).
शिखिप्जेन्यजयन्तेन्द्रसुयं सत्या भृशोऽन्तरिक्षश्च ।
ऐशान्यादिक्रमशो दक्षिणापुर्वनिलः कोणे ॥४३॥
पूषा वितथब्रृहतक्षतयमगन्धर्वास्य भृ seres ।
पितृदौवारिकसुग्रीवकुसुमदन्ताम्बुपत्यसुराः ॥४४॥
NAST पापयक्ष्सा रोगः कोणे ततोऽहिमुख्यौ च ।
मल्लाटसोमभुजगास्ततोऽदितिदितिरिति क्रमशः uuu
The nine deities situated in the outer compartments beginning
with the one at the north-eastern corner and ending with the southeastern are : Sikhin, Parjanya, Jayanta, Indra, Sürya, Satya, Bhréa,
Antariksa and Anila (or Anala). Then follow in order Pusan,
Vitatha, Brhatksata, Yama, Gandharva, Bhrngaraja, Mrga and
Pitr on the south to the south-western corner. Then come regularly
in the west Dauvarika, Sugriva, Kusumadanta, Varuna, Asura,
Sosa, Papayaksman and Roga ending in the north-western corner.
Thereafter there are Ahi, Mukhya, Bhallata, Soma, Bhujaga, Aditi
and Diti in the north in regular order, the total number being 32.
[Instead of शिखि, अनिल and agea, शिख, अनल and बृहत्क्षति are the
respective variant readings. ]

468 | Brhat Samhita
सध्ये ब्रह्मा नवकोष्ठकाधिपोऽस्यार्यंमा Era: STeuTq ।
एकान्तरात् प्रदक्षिणमस्मात्सविता विवस्वांडहच NYRI
बिबुधाधिपतिस्तस्सान्मित्रो$न्यो राजयक्ष्मनासा च ।
पृथिवीधरापवत्सावित्येते ब्रह्मणः परिधौ ॥४७॥
श्रापो नामशाने कोणे हौताशने च सावित्रः d
जय इति च नऋ ते रुद्र ग्रानिलेऽभ्यन्तरपदेषु ॥४८॥
Diagram 1 (with 81 squares)
N.E. EAST S.E.
: qd: | सत्यः | भृशः | ग्रन्त- | afaa:
रिक्षः
शिखी | पर्जन्यः | जयन्तः
दितिः | आप: | जयन्तः | इन्द्रः | सूर्यः | सत्यः | भृशः | पुषा
eel
दितिः |प्रदितिः| aq- | adar | waar | waar | सविता | वितथः| वितथः
वत्सः
P
| SS
भुजगः | भुजगः पुथिवी-| ब्रह्मा | ब्रह्मा | विव- | Je बह:
स्वान् | cata: | त्क्षतः
faa- | यमः | यमः
Z
O
ë सोम: | सोम: पृथिवी-
= स्वान्
भल्लाटः |भल्लाटः पुथिवी- faa- | गन्धर्व: | गन्धव:
धरः स्वान्
मुख्यः | मुख्य: | राज- इन्द्रः | yg- | भृङ्ग
यक्ष्मा राज | राजः
——| —əƏəs- -— — P eo
प्रसुरः | वरुणः | कुसुम | सुग्रीवः| जयः | मृगः
ufa: | रुद्रः | शोषः
; “aed:
यक्ष्मा
agr | वरुणाः | कुशुम- | सुग्रीव: दौवा- | पिता
दन्तः रिकः
HLNOS
N.W. WEST S.W.

Architecture LIII 469
In the centre of the diagram Brahman occupies nine compartments; to his east there is Aryaman (in three squares); next to the
right of Aryaman there is Savitr in a single square at an interval of
one division; next to him to the right is Vivasvat; next to him is
Indra; then going up to the west of Brahman there are Mitra (in 3
divisions) and Rajayaksman; then turning to the east, there are
Prthvidhara (in 3) and Apavatsa. In this manner these eight deities
are situated on the circumference around Brahman. In the internal
north-eastern corner (behind Parjanya), there is Apah; in the southeastern corner (between Savitr and Anila), Sāvītra; in the southwestern corner, Jaya; and in the north-western corner, Rudra.
भ्रापस्तथापवत्सः पर्जन्यो5ग्निदितिइ्च वर्गोऽयम् ।
एवं कोरो कोरो पदिका: स्युः पच पञ्च सुराः ॥४९॥
बाह्या द्विपदाः शेषास्ते विबुधा विशतिः amean: |
शेषाशचत्वारोऽन्ये त्रिपदा दिक्ष्वर्थमाद्यास्ताः ux et
One group consisting of five deities that own one division each
viz. Apah, Apavatsa, Parjanya, Agni (Sikhin) and Diti, is situated
in the north-eastern corner. In the Same manner there are five
deities in each of the remaining three corners viz., south-east, southwest and north-west. The remaining deities in the outer compartments, 20 in number, own two squares each. The remaining 4
deities headed by Aryaman preside over three squares each (beginning with the east of Brahman).
[In diagram 1 there are altogether 81 squares or compartments
owned by 45 deities : In the four outer corners there are 5x4=20
deities having 20 squares i.e. one square each, "Then there are
20 deities (5x 4) in the four outer quarters, each owning two compartments, which comes to 40 compartments. Then there are four
deities in the four inner quarters having three divisions each i.e. 12
divisions. Lastly, Brahman who is in the centre of the site, owns or
occupies 9 squares.
(i) Deities ruling over single compartments :
Sikhin, Parjanya, Diti, Apah and Apavatsa; Antariksa, Anila,
Pusan, Savitra; and Savita, Mrga, Pitr, Dauvarika, Jaya and Indra;
and Papayaksman, Roga, Ahi (serpent), Rudra and Ràjayaksman.
(ii) Those ruling over two squares :
Jayanta, Indra, Sürya, Satya and Bhrsa; Vitatha, Brhatksata,
Yama, Gandharva and Bhrügaraja; Sugriva, Kusumadanta, Varuna,

470 Brhat Samhita
Asura and Sosa; and Mukhya, Bhallata, Soma, Bhujaga and
Aditi.
(iii) Those ruling over three squares each :
Aryaman, Vivasvat, Mitra and Prthividhara.
(iv) Only one viz., Brahman holds sway over 9 squares.
Cf. पराशर
तत्र बहिदेवताः प्राकपज॑न्यकरग्रहमहेन्द्ररविसत्यभृशान्तरिक्षपवना: । दक्षिणतः
पुषावितथबृहतक्षतयमभृङ्भगन्धर्वंमृगपितरश्चेति | पछ्चिमतो दोवारिकसुग्रीवपुष्पदन्ता-
सुरवारुणायक्षरोगशोषाइचेति | उदङ्नागराजमुख्यभल्लाटसोमादितिकुबेरनागहुतवहाः |
तन्मध्ये ब्रह्मा तत्पुरतो5यं मा दक्षिणातो विवस्वान् मित्रः प्रत्युदक् पृथ्वीधर इति। ब्राह्मा-
पदानुर्षङ्गणोऽष्टावन्ये | श्रापापवत्सार्वंशान्यां सावित्रसवितारावेवाग्नेय्यां जयेन्द्रौ
त्रं त्यां way वायव्यामिति सर्वदेवताः पश्वचत्वारिशदिति । तथान्यः सहैतेषां
पदाना मसाइश्यम् 11
Then the commentator quotes the following from some
unknown text :
रुद्रा हुताशनइचेव पिता चानल एव च ।
एते कोणगता देवा एकाशीतिपदे स्थिताः ॥
चतुःष ष्टिपदेऽप्येवं पापयक्ष्मात्र न स्थितः |
एभ्योऽन्ये ASAT AAT: सुराः सर्वपदाश्रिताः uj
In the next four verses the author mentions the assignment of
these deities to the different limbs of Vastu-purusa (House-God) :
ूर्वोत्तरदिङ्मुर्धा पुरुषोऽयमवाङमुखोऽस्य शिरसि शिखी ।
AIG मुखे स्तनेऽस्यायंमा हयुरस्यापवत्सशच ॥५१॥
पर्जन्याद्या बाह्या रक्श्रवणोरःस्थलांसगा देवाः d
सत्याद्याः पञ्च भुजे हस्ते सविता च सावित्रः ॥५२॥
वितथो ब्ृहतक्षतयुतः पाइवं जठरे स्थितो विवस्वांश्च ।
ऊरु जानु च जङ्घे स्फिगिति यमाद्यैः परिगृहीताः ॥५३॥
एते दक्षिणपाइवे स्थानेष्वेवं च वामपाइवस्थाः ।
मेढे शक्रजयन्तो हृदये ब्रह्मा पिताऽइ्घ्रिगतः ॥५४॥
This Vastu-purusa (House-God) who lies prone on the site,
has his head turned towards the north-east. Fire (Agni) is situated
on his head; Water (Apah), on the face; Aryaman, on the breast;
Apavatsa, on the chest; Parjanya, on the eye; Jayanta, on the ear;
Indra, on the chest (neck ?); and the Sun, on the shoulder (all these
four belong to the outer divisions); the five headed by Satya (i.e.

Architecture LIII "nm
Satya, Bhrsa, Antariksa, Anila and Püsan), on the arm; Savitr and
Savitra, on the hand; Vitatha and Brhatksata, on the sid ;
on the stomach; Yama, Gandharva, Bhrigaraja and Mrga, on the
thigh, knee, shank and buttock respectively. The above deities are
situated on the limbs of the right side of the Vastu-purusa. Similarly, there are deities on the left side 1.८. Prthividhara, on the left
breast; Diti, on the left eye; Aditi, on the left ear; Bhujaga, on the
left side of the chest (neck ?) ; Soma, on the left shoulder; Bhallata,
Mukhya, Ahi, Roga and Papayaksman, on the left arm; Rudra and
Rajayaksman, on the left hand; Sosa and Asura, on the left side;
Mitra, on the left side of the stomach; Varuna, on the left thigh;
Kusumadanta, on the left knee; Sugriva, on the left shank; Dauvarika (Door-keeper), on the left buttock; Sakra (Indra) and Jaya, on
the genital organ; Brahman, on the heart; and Pitr, on the feet.
e; Vivasvat,
[In verse 53 seatt and जङ्घा would have been better readings
instead of s* and जङ्घे. In this figure of the House-God there are
nineteen limbs from head to foot, of which chest appears in three
lists viz. Apavatsa as mere chest, and then Indra as the right side
of it, and Bhujaga as the left side of the chest. Only one deity viz.
Pitr, is assigned to the feet. The commentator too has erred while
allotting deities to the various limbs on the left side: The author
has assigned Vivasvat to the right side of the stomach, but Utpala
has forgotten to assign any deity to its left side. Actually Mitra
should be assigned to the left side of stomach. I feel that the original reading in the last line must have been, मेढे शक्रजयौ तौ instead of...
जयन्तौ. Another doubt arises in mind as I count the limbs taken by
the author i.e. he has not assigned any deity to the neck. So I make
bold to suggest that the reading should be, हकृश्रवणगलस्थलांसगा देवा: in
verse 52, as उर:स्थल has been already dealt with. This kind of division of the ground into 81 squares should be resorted to while planning the construction of cities, villages and houses.]
प्रष्टाष्टकपदमथवा कृत्वा रेखाइच कोरागास्तियंक ।
ब्रह्मा चतुष्पदोऽस्मिन्नधेपदा ब्रह्मकोणस्थाः uuu
asat च बहिष्कोरोष्वर्ध पदास्तदुभयस्थिताः arat: i
उक्तेभ्यो ये शेषास्ते दविपदा विशतिस्ते हि ॥५६॥
Or, by drawing nine lines across and nine vertically we can
get 04 squares. Here diagonals should be drawn from corner to
corner. In this diagram, Brahman rules over four squares at the

472 Brhat Samhita
centre; and the eight deities situated along the diagonals in the
corners near him rule over half a square i.e. Apah, Apavatsa,
Savitr, Sàvitra, Indra, Jaya, Rajayaksman and Rudra; in the outer
corners, Sikhin, Antariksa, Anila, Mrga, Pitr, Papayaksman, Roga
and Diti, over half a square each; thosethat are on both sides of
these, over one square anda half i.e. Parjanya, 31189, Pusan,
Bhrngaràja, Dauvarika, Sosa, Naga (or Ahi), and Aditi; and the
remaining twenty, over two squares each.
[Here too Utpala’s commentary is sometimes confusing as he
omits some names such as Mrga from the second group, and Pisan
and Aditi from the last group. Instead of Jaya he states Jayanta in
a corner. While enumerating the 20 deities he omits Sugriva.
According to this scheme the House-God has 64 parts.
Utpala refers here to some scholars who hold this 64 square
scheme to be the biggest one. In this it is probable that the doors
are in the corners. Though the author mentions here only quadrangular sites, he speaks of circular, hexagonal, octagonal houses as
well as those with ten and sixteen sides or angles, elsewhere (vide
LVI. 20, 23, 28 infra). Sage Bharata too speaks of circular and triangular buildings. Then Utpala quotes the following from some other
Sastra :
एकाशीतिपदे क्षेत्रे कतंव्यं वृत्तपश्वकम् |
बाह्ये वृत्तद्वयं यत्तत्पदद्वात्रिशता युतम् ॥
तृतीयं द्वादशपदं चतुर्थं तु चतुष्पदम् |
केवलं पञ्चमं कार्य ब्रह्मा पञ्चस्ववस्थितः lI
शिख्यादयस्तु द्विपदा बहिविष्कम्भसं स्थिताः i
ग्रयंमाद्याः सुराः सर्वे पदिकाः परिकीतिताः 11
For an explanation of this see diagram 3.
वृत्तानि चत्वारि समानि कृत्वा वास्तोश्चतुःष ष्टरिपटस्य सम्यक् ।
भ्रधस्तदरधेन च सूर्यवेदंवि भज्यते वृत्तचतुष्टयं च ॥
शिख्यादयश्चेकपदे निविष्टाः पदद्वये चार्यं मकादयश्च ।
ग्रापादयश्च faqar: प्रतिष्ठाश्चतुष्पदश्चात्र पितामहः स्यात् ॥
See diagram 4. Regarding the triangular plan the following
quotation gives the details :
व्यस्नाणि पञ्च क्षेत्राणि त्रिकोणे परिकल्पयेत् |
प्राची fargar कार्या कोरवर्ज्या तत: परे i
रविभागविभक्ते ते वास्तुद्वाराशि तानि तु i
दिति वायु जलर्पात कोणेषु त्रिषु विन्यसेत् ॥

Architecture LIII 473
ततः शिख्यादिकान्सर्वान् शेषेषु विनिवेशयेत् i
द्वितीये gaaq भागाः षोडशद्विगृणास्ततः ॥
तत्रापि कोणात्रितय पूर्वोक्तान् विबुधान् न्यसेत् ।
शेषेषु वास्तुको ए्ठस्थान्सुरांश्च विनिवेशयेत् ui
aa तृतीये चत्वारि सरवंशाखासु कारयेत् ।
प्राग्गतिर्यंमसावित्री सविता च ततः परम् ॥
विवस्वानिन्द्रमित्रौ च जयश्चेव हरस्तथा |
राजयक्ष्मा भूमिधर आपो वत्सयुतः स च ॥
चतुर्थं पञुचभिर्भाग: कृत्वा तन्मध्यगस्तथा |
पितामहो विनिदिष्टस्त्र्यस्रक्षेत्रेश्प्ययं विधिः ॥
See diagram 5 for explanation.]
सम्पाता वंशानां मध्यानि समानि यानि च पदानाम्।
| मर्माणि तानि विन्द्यान्न तानि परिपोडयेत्प्राज्ञः uen
The meeting points of the longer diagonals and the exact
middle points of the squares should be considered as Vulnerable Points,
which a wise astrologer ought not to hurt.
[Actually the word Vara means ‘diagonal’, but the author
uses the word here ina wider sense i.e, they stand even for the
minor lines connecting a few pairs of squares as explained in verse
63 infra. In addition to the two main diagonals there are four minor
ones. These six bring about nine points of intersection. These minor
diagonals are called Rajjus. Bhattotpala seems to have written a
work on architecture entitled वास्तुविद्या, wherefrom he quotes here
two verses :
रोगाद्वायूं नयेत्सूत्रं पितृतो$थ हुताशनम् ।
एततसूत्रद्वयं प्रोक्तं मुनिभिवंशसंज्ञितम् ॥
वितथाच्छोषकं चान्यद् भृशं मुख्यात्तथा नयेत् |
जयन्ताद् भृङ्ग राजाख्यं सुग्रीवमदितेस्तथा ॥
एतच्चतुष्टयं प्रोक्तं रज्जुसज्ञ मनीषिभिः u]
तान्यशुचिभाण्डकोलस्तम्माद्यः पीडितानि शल्यंशच ।
गृहभतुस्तत्तुल्ये पौडामङ्गे प्रयच्छन्ति ॥५८॥
Should the vulnerable points be hurt by dirty materials, nails,
pillars, pegs etc. (with heavy things like stones), they would cause
trouble to the owner of the building in the corresponding limbs of
his body.

474 Brhat Samhita
[The limbs of a man correspond to those of the House-God
enumerated in verses 51-54.]
कण्डूयते यदङ्गं गुहमर्तृयंत्र वाऽसराहुत्यास् |
aya भवेन्तिसित्तं विकृतेर्वाग्नेः सशल्यं तत् NRL
If, at the time of query, the owner of the house scratches a
limb, it should be understood that the corresponding part of the
house (in contact with the limbs of the Vastu-purusa) has some
affliction or hurt. Or, if at the time of offering oblations to the
Deities at the sacrifice (connected with the construction of the house)
there is some evil omen (such as sneezing, spitting, weeping, howling, or uttering inauspicious words etc.) or unnatural behaviour of
the fire (such as sparks, crackling sound, bad odour and the like),
those particular limbs of the House-God occupied by the Deities (to
whom oblations are offered) should be afflicted with a nail or
peg.
धनहानिर्दारुमये पशुपीडा रुग्मयानि चास्थिकृते ।
[लोहमये शस्त्रमयं कपालकेशेषु मृत्युः स्यात् ॥६०॥
Wer स्तेनभयं भस्मनि च विनिदिशेत्सदाग्निभयस् i
शल्यं हि मर्मसंस्थं सुवणं रजताइतेऽत्यशुभस् NGU
मर्मण्यमर्मगो वा निरुणाद्धघर्थागमं तुषससृहः 1]
aft नागदन्तको ममंसंस्थितो दोषकृऱद्टवति ॥६२॥
If the thorn (or affliction) is wooden, the owner will sustain
loss of money; if it is caused by bone. he will have the risk of disease
and his cattle will be afflicted; [if it is made of iron, he will have
trouble from weapons; and it is skulls or hair, there will be death;
if it is charcoal, there is fear of thieves; and if it is ashes, there will
be constant danger from fire. The dart, unless it is of the nature of
gold or silver, will prove highly dangerous, if it is situated in a
vulnerable point. A heap of husk or chaff, whether found in a
vulnerable spot or elsewhere, will obstruct the influx of wealth.]
Even an ivory peg entrenched in a vulnerable part will cause
misery.
[The portion inside the square brackets is not found in some
editions.
All kinds of Salya or thorn except silver and gold are harmful.
Ivory, no doubt, is an auspicious thing. Still it is considered here
as ruinous. Gold, silver, gems etc., are considered as promoters of
the strength and auspiciousness of the foundation. ]

Architecture LIII 475
रोगाद्वाय् पितृतो हुताशनं शोषसुत्रमपि वितथात् ।
मुख्याद् भृशं जयन्ताच्च भृद्धमदितेश्व सुग्रीवम् nal
तत्सम्पाता नव ये तान्यतिमर्माणि सम्भ्रदिष्टानि i
यश्च पदस्याष्टांशस्तत् प्रोक्तं ममंपरिमाणम् ॥६४॥
The nine points of intersection of the lines connecting Roga
and Anila, Pitr and Sikhin, Sosa and Vitatha, Mukhya and 81189,
Jayanta and Bhrngaraja, and Aditi and Sugriva are considered to
be the most Vulnerable Parts. The measure of the vulnerable part is
an eighth part of a square.
पदहस्तसंख्यया सम्मितानि बंशोऽङ्गुलानि factor: i
वंशव्पासोऽध्यर्घः शिराप्रमाणं विनिदिष्टस् ॥६५॥
The breadth of a diagonal is as many digits as the number of
cubits each square measures. The breadth of a line (running eastwest and north-south of the ten lines in each direction) is one and
a half times that of the diagonals.
[शिरा or Vein is the line that runs from east to west or north
to south. There are altogether 20 such lines in Diagram 1. Utpala
quotes the following verses from another Sastra or text which
happens to be none other than the वास्तुविश्वकर्मप्रकाश--
शान्ता यशोवती कान्ता विशाला प्राणवाहिनी i
सती च सुमना नन्दा सुभद्रा सुरथा तथा ॥
पूर्वापरा गता ह्येता उदग्याम्याश्रिताः TA |
हिरण्या सुव्रता लक्ष्मीविभूतिविमला प्रिया |
जया काला विशोका च तथेन्द्रा दशमी स्मृता |
धन्या घरा विशाला च स्थिरा रूपा गदा निशा ॥।
विभवा प्रभवा चान्याः सौम्ययाम्याश्रिताः शिराः u]
सुखमिच्छन् ब्रह्माणं यत्नाद्रक्षेद्गृही गृहान्तःस्थस् ।
उच्छिष्टाद्यपघाताद् गृहपतिरुपतप्यते तस्मिन् ॥६६॥
A house-owner wishing for happiness should guard very carefully Brahman (i.e. the nine squares occupied by Him) situated at
the centre of the house. For, His affliction by dirty things like
remnants of food, would harm the owner in it.
दक्षिणभुजेन होने वास्तुनरे$थेक्षयो5ड्रभुनादोषा: ।
वामे$थेधान्यहानिः शिरसि गुणहीयते सर्वः ॥६७॥

476 Brhat Samhitg
स्त्री दोषाः सुतमरणं प्रेष्यत्वं चापि चरणावकल्ये ।
ग्रविकलपुरुषे वसतां मानार्थयुतानि सौश्यानि nest
If the House-God is bereft of the right arm, the owner wil]
sustain loss of wealth and misery through women (or disgrace of
women); if He is without the left arm, loss of money and corn; if
His head is absent, he will fall from all virtues, If His feet are missing, faults of women (or troubles from women), death of sons, and
servitude will be the result. On the other hand, if the God is
endowed with all the limbs in fine shape, the occupants of the house
will be blessed with honour, wealth and happiness.
[After treating of afflictions to the Deity, the author explains
the harmful effects of the absence of His limbs. We have seen the
different limbs of the Deity in verses 51-54 supra. ]
गृहनगरग्रामेषु च सवंत्रेवं प्रतिष्ठिता देवाः |
तेषु च यथानुरूपं वर्णा विप्रादयो वास्याः ॥ ६६॥
In the same manner are Deities (Sikhin etc.) situated in the
different parts of towns and villages, as in the case of houses. In
these places also suitable parts should be allotted to Brahmanas and
other classes.
[When villages or towns are planned the same sketch of the
Vastu-purusa should be prepared and His limbs marked. The vulnerable parts ought to be guarded there too. People belonging to the
four classes should be given house-sites in the appropriate directions
in those places ]
वासगृहारि च विन्दयाद्विप्रादीनामुदग्दिगाद्यानि à
विशतां च यथा भवनं भवन्ति तान्येव दक्षिणतः nvon
The houses of Brahmanas and other classes should ke located
in the northern, eastern, southern and western parts respectively of
villages and towns. The houses are to be constructed in such a
manner that for the people who enter the courtyard the houses lie
to their right.
[The four classes are given the four quarters beginning with
the north in regular order. The courtyard should be SO constructed that when you enter it the house lies to your right: Ifthe
house faces the east, the gate leading to the court should be in the
north; if it faces the south, the gate should be in the east; if the
west, in the south; and if the north, in the west.]

Architecture LIII 4771
नवगुणसुत्रविमक्तान्यष्टगुणेनाथवा चतुःषष्टेः à
द्वाराणि यानि तेषामनलादीनां फलोपनयः ॥७१॥
The following are the effects of the doors put up at the 32
outer squares beginning with Sikhin (see diagram No. 1), whether
in the plan of 81 compartments or of 64. (diagram No. 2).
श्रनिलमयं स्त्रीजननं प्रमुतधनता नरेन्द्रवाल्लभ्यम् ।
क्रोधपरतानृतत्वं miu चौयं च पूर्वश ॥७२॥
If the door is put up at Sikhin, Parjanya etc., to Antariksa on
the east, the respective effects are (1) danger from wind, (2) birth
of daughters, (3) immense wealth, (4) royal favour, (5) extreme
wrath, (6) falsehood, (7) cruelty and (8) theft.
megaa प्रष्यं नीचत्वं भक्ष्यपानसुतवृद्धिः i
Ue कृतघ्नमधनं सुतवीर्यघ्नं च याम्येन ॥७३।।
The effects of the door being in the eight places on the south
beginning with Anila and ending with Mrga are in order (1) few
children, (2) slavery, (3) mean life, (4) increase of food, drink and
children, (5) fierceness, (6) ingratitude, (7) penury and (8) destruction of children and power.
gada रिपुवृद्धिनं सुतघनाव्तिः सुतार्थफलसम्पत् ।
धनसम्पन्नुपतिभयं धनक्षयो रोग इत्यपरे ॥७४॥
The effects of the door being in the8 places on the west
beginning with Pitr and ending with Papayaksman are (1) trouble
to sons, (2) increase of enemies, (3) no acquisition of wealth or
children, (4) prosperity of sons, wealth and fruits, (5) increase of
wealth, (6) danger from the king, (7) loss of wealth, and (8) ill
health.
वधबन्धो रिपुवृद्धिः सुतधनलाभः समस्तगुणसम्पत् ।
पुत्रधनाप्ति्वेर सुतेन दोषाः स्त्रिया नेःस्वस् ॥७५॥
The effects of the door being in the 8 places beginning with
Roga and ending with Diti on the north are (1) death or imprisonment, (2) increase of. enemies, (3) influx of wealth and birth of
sons, (4) possession of all virtues, (5) getting children and wealth,
(6) enmity with one's own son, (7) faults of wife, and (8) poverty.
[नैःस्व्यम् would have been a better expression.
On the eastern side the auspicious squares for the doors are
Parjanya, Jayanta and Indra; on the southern side, Brhatksata only;

478 Brhat Samhita
on the western side, Kusumadanta and Varuna; and on the northern side, Mukhya, Bhallàta and Soma.
The commentator states here that in spite of the option given
by the author in respect of the two plans (of 81 and 64 squares), it is
essential to prepare the ground into 81 squares for the construction
of houses for kings etc., as well as for the four classes. For, Visvakarman also lays down the same rule in the following words :
राजवेश्मनि वेशश्च गृहादीनि च वशिनाम् ।
एकाशीतिपदेनँव शक्रस्थानं च मापयेत् ॥
प्रासादान् विविधान् छन्दांस्तथाऽऽद्यांश्राष्टमण्डपान् |
एकाशीतिपदेनेव सर्वानेतान् प्रमापयेत् ॥
नगरग्रामखेटादीन् शिबिराणि च भूभृताम् ।
स्थपतिस्तान् शतपदप्रविभागेण मापयेत् ॥
The parts of the plan where doors are to be fixed should be
separated in the beginning itself. Only after this the wall should be
constructed.
For says Nandin :
“भित्तिश्रिन्त्या द्वारे सत्याचार्या व्यवस्यन्ति ।”
ग्राचार्येण समाससंहितानिबन्धने स्पष्टतरं निबद्धम्
र्वाण्यँशान्यां यान्याग्नेय्यां दक्षिणानि जानीयात् ।
द्वाराणि नेऋ तात्पश्चिमान्युदक्स्थानि वायव्याम् ॥
ग्राग्नेयमर्निभयद पार्जन्यं सत्री प्रसुतिदं द्वारम् ।
प्रचुरधनदं जयन्तं नृपवल्लभका रि माहेन्द्रम् ॥
सौर्ये क्रोधः प्रचुरः सत्येऽनृतवादितं भृशे RAT ।
चौर्य तथान्तरिक्षे marufu प्रदिष्टानि ॥
वायव्येऽल्पसुतत्वं seu पौष्णेऽथ नीचता वितथे ।
बह्वन्नपानपुत्रं वृहतक्षते याम्य अपि रोद्रम् ॥
गान्धर्वे गन्धत्वं नुपचौरभयाय भृङ्ग राजाख्यम् |
मृगमपि सुतवीर्यघ्नं दक्षिणतो द्वारनिर्देशः ॥
पित्र्ये शरीरपीडा दौवारिकसंज्ञिते च fegafa: à
सुग्रीवे धनहानिः पुत्रधनाढ्यं कुसुमदन्तभ् ॥
वारुणमर्थेनिचयदं नृपभयदं चासुरं विनिदिष्टम् |
शोषं धनहानिकरं बहुरोगं पापयक्ष्माख्यम् u
रोगमुखं वधबन्धदमात्मजवे राभिवृद्धिदं नागम् ।
मुख्यं धनसुतवृड्धिदमनेककल्याणदं च भल्लाटम् ।।

Architecture LIII 419
सौम्यं घनपुत्रकरं भौजङ्गे पुत्रवेररिपुवृद्धि: |
afaa स्त्रीदोषाः स्युदितौ घनं संक्षयं याति ॥
The above quotation proves conclusively that the north-eastern corner should be reckoned as belonging to the east, the southeastern to the south, the south-western to the west, and the
north-western to the north. It is for this reason that the commentator ridicules the doubting Thomases who express the doubt,
**What is the fate of the ninth square in the east ?" Then he quotes
with approval the opinion of भगवान् गर्ग--
पुर्वादिक्रमयोगेन हौताशेऽग्निभयं वदेत् ।
पार्जेन्ये प्रचुरा नार्यो जायन्ते बहुवित्तता ॥
माहेन्द्रे नृपवाल्लभ्पं सौर्येऽतिक्रोधिता भवेत् |
सत्येऽनुतत्वं विज्ञेयं क्रूरत्वं तु भृशे भवेत् ॥
ग्रन्तरिक्षे g विज्ञेयो नित्यं चोथेसमागम: ।
स्यात् पुत्रकामो वायव्ये पौष्णो प्रेष्यत्वमेव च ॥
नीचत्वं वितथे ज्ञेयं स्याद् बृहाक्षे तु सन्ततिः ।
क्षुद्रकर्मा भवेद्यामे गान्धर्वे कृतनाशनम् ॥
पित्र्ये स्वल्पायुरधनं व्ययं दौवारिके महत् |
सुग्रीवे धननाशः स्यात्पुष्पदन्ते तु wu ॥
वरुणे मुख्यभोगित्वं न्पभङ्गस्तथासुरे ।
नित्यातिरोगता शोषे पापाख्ये पापसञ्चयः ॥
रोगे बन्धवधो नित्यं नागे रिपुभयं सहतु |
मुख्ये घनसुतोत्पत्तिभेल्लाटे विपुलाः श्रियः t
सौम्ये तु धर्मशीलत्वं भौजङ्गे बहूव रता |
afsat वनितादोषा दितौ तु धनसंक्षयः ॥
पदे पदे कृतं श्रेष्ठं द्वारं सफलदायिकम् |
पदक्षये कृतं यच्च तद्व्यामिश्रफलप्रदम् ॥
The commentator adds that what Varahamihira has given
here is a general definition and description of houses and doors, but
other writers on this subject have mentioned eight House-Gods and
their asterisms as well as those of the 32 doors. According to them
houses and doors should be constructed on the basis of the strength
of the Moon and the asterism (of the deities and doors) known as
usw and ताराबल. They speak of eight deities of houses thus :
रिक्तो ध्वजश्न ध्वांक्षश्च fae: श्वा वृषभस्तथा |
वानरो भद्र इत्यष्टौ ज्ञेया वास्तुनरा FA: ॥

480 Brhat Samhita
These deities are found out by calculation thus :
ग्रहान्तरदिशां मानं सङ्गुण्य च परस्परम् ।
वसुभिर्भागमाहृत्य शिष्टं वास्तुनरं बदेत् ॥
ग्रथवा---
argh: sarg: संयोगदलमन्योन्यताडितम् i
वसुभक्तं ततः शेषं सेव्यं वास्तुनरं वदेतु ॥
एतच्चतुरसरक्षेत्रे ।
ग्रथ वर्तुले--
व्यासं त्रिगुणितं कृत्वा विष्कम्भं तत् समादिशेत् ।
व्यासा द्वव स्त्रिगुणः फलं स्यात्परिवर्तुले ।।
Here विष्कम्भ means circumference and the value of z is 3.
ग्रथ qefsrrgfag—
ह्विन्येस्य परिधेवंगमेकस्मादश्रिजाधितात् ।
लब्धं संशोध्य परतो भक्त्वा द्वादशभिः फलम् ॥
ग्रथ त्रिकोणे
बाहुप्रवाहुसंयोगदलघातं त्रिकोणके ।
The idea is that the house-deity is represented by the
remainder got, when the area of the site is divided by 8. If the
remainder is zero, it is called Rikia or Empty; if I Dhvaja or Banner
and so on:
समशुन्यगतो रिक्तो ध्वजश्चैकावशेषके |
gredi ध्वांक्षस्त्रिभि: सिंहश्चतुभिः var प्रकीतित: ॥
पञ्चभिवृ ष इत्याहुः षड्भिर्वानर उच्यते |
aafia इत्येतदष्टानां लक्षणं स्मृतम् i
Rad सूर्यस्तथाश्लेषा ध्वजे सोमञ्च कृत्तिका |
ध्वाङ्क्षे राहुश्च भरणी सिंहे भौमस्तथा मघाः i
बुधः शुनि धनिष्ठा च वृषे जीवश्च रोहिणी ।
भद्रे तु श्रवणः सौरः कपौ शुक्रश्च फाल्गुनी ॥
चन्द्रतारानुकृल्येन कारयेत विचक्षणः |
विभुनंश्यति fada ध्वजेन विपुला: श्रियः ॥
ध्वांक्षेण fagn: सिंहेन जितशत्रुता ।
भ्रस्थेयं सारमेये स्यादुवृषे परितपो ध्रुवः ॥
कपिना चापलं स्त्रीणां नित्यं भद्रेण निवृतिः ॥
श्रथ द्वारनक्षत्राणि---
कृत्तिका भगर्मन्द्रं च विशाखा च पूनवं सुः ।
तिष्यो हस्तस्तथाउर्द्धा च क्रमात् qq निदिशेत् ॥

Architecture L11I 48]
चित्रा विशाखा पौष्णं च नैऋषतिं यमदेवतम् ।
वंश्वदेवाश्विनं मंत्र क्रमाद् दक्षिणासं श्रितम् ॥
पित्र्यं प्रोष्ठपदार्यम्णमाषाढं च द्विदेवतम् ।
वारुणाश्चिनसावित्रं क्रमात् पर्चिमसंश्रितम् ॥
स्वाव्याञ्लेषाभिजित्सौम्यं वँष्णवं वासवं तथा |
याम्यं ब्राह्मं क्रमात्सौम्यद्वारेषु च विनिदिशेत् ॥]
मार्गतरुकोणकूपस्तम्भश्रमविद्धमशुभ दं द्वारम् ।
उच्छ्रायाद् द्विगुणमितां त्यक्त्वा भूमि न दोषाय ॥७६॥
A door being pierced by a road, tree, corner, well, pillar or
water-sluice, is inauspicious, but if it is removed to a distance equal
to twice its height, there will be no harm done to anybody.
[CF भगवान् गर्ग---
द्वारोच्छायद्विगुणितां त्यकत्वा भूमि बहिःस्थितः ।
न दोषाय भवेद्वेधो ग्रहस्य ग्हिणोऽथवा 1
also the समाससंहिता--
स्तम्भतरुभ्रमकोणविद्धं वेधश्च न शुभकरद्वारम् |
वेधोच्छायाद् द्विगुणां भूमि त्यक्त्वा न दोषाय i
Here the commentator raises a doubt whether the expression
height refers to the door or the object that pierces or wounds.
Here it is Garga’s statement, more than that of the समाससंहिता, that
dispels the doubt.]
रथ्याविद्धं द्वारं नाशाय कुमारदोषदं तरुणा ।
पड्धूद्वारे शोको व्ययोऽम्बुनिःत्राविणि प्रोक्तः ॥७७॥
कूपेनापस्मारो भवति faama देवताविद्धे ।
स्तम्भेन स्त्रीदोषाः कुलनाशो ब्रह्मणो saga ॥७८॥
A door wounded by a road presages the owner’s death; by a
tree, harm to children; by mire, grief; by a runnel, excessive expenditure of money; by a well, epilepsy; by an idol of God, the owner’s
destruction; by a pillar, frailty of women; and one facing Brahman,
extinction of the family.
(Cf. विश्वकर्मा --
गृहमध्ये कृतं द्वारं द्रव्यधान्यविनाशनम् ।
भ्रावहेत् कलह शोक नारीर्वा सम्प्रदूषयेत् ॥
also भारद्वाज--- :
शिरा मर्माणि वंशाश्च नालमध्यं च सर्वेश: |
fagra वास्तुमध्यं च द्वाराणि विनिवेशयेत् ॥

482 Brhat Samhita
Cf. यम--
ब्रह्मस्थाने न विध्येत नागदन्तस्थलानि च |
मृह्दारुभिगंवाक्षेश्च मानपार्नस्त्थव च ॥
aria भित्तिभिश्चैव शय्याभागेः कथञ्चन |
स्वामिनो मरणं तत्र महादुःखेन पार्थिव ॥
The commentator raises another doubt here i.e. he has stated in
verse 75 that the doors on Bhallàta and Soma in the north are
highly auspicious, but they face Brahman in the centre, which is
forbidden according to this verse. The explanation is that what is
given in verse 75 is an exception to the rule given in 78.)
उन्मादः स्वयमुद्घाटितेऽथ पिहिते स्वयं कुलविनाशः |
सानाधिके नृपभयं दस्युभयं व्यसनमेव नीचे च NEN
ait ह्रारस्योपरि uere शिवाय age यच्च ।
ग्राव्यात्तं क्षुद्भयदं कुब्जं कुलनाशनं भवति ॥५०॥
पीडाकरमतिपीडितमन्तविनतं भवेदभावाय i
बाह्यविनते प्रवासो दिग्भ्रान्ते agfa: diet ॥॥८१॥
A door which opens automatically causes lunacy; one that
closes likewise, destruction of the family; one that is too big leads to
trouble from the king; one that is too low, fear of robbers and
misery; one above another as well as one that is too narrow is not
conducive to happiness; one that is too broad brings about famine;
a crooked door, extinction of the family; one that is pressed very
much by the upper block, affliction to the owner; one that is bent
inwardly, the owner’s death; one bent outwardly, absence from
home; and one that is not properly situated in its usual direction,
trouble from robbers.
मुलद्वारं नान्येद्वरिरभिसन्दधीत रूपद्धर्था i
घटफलपतन्रप्रमथादिभिश्च तन्सद्धलेश्रिनुयात् ॥८२॥
The principal door ought not to be surpassed by other doors
through superior structure and decorative motifs. That door should
be embellished profusely with the designs of auspicious objects such
as water-pots, fruits, foliage as well as images of Siva’s attendants
{and lions, serpents, swans, etc.).
ऐशान्यादियु कोणेषु संस्थिता बाह्यतो गृहस्यैताः ।
चरको विदारिनामाऽय पुतना राक्षसी चेति ॥८३॥

Architecture LIII 483
पुरभवनग्रासारां ये कोणास्तेषु निवसतां दोषाः à
श्वपचादयो$न्त्यजात्यास्तेष्वेव विवृद्धिमायान्ति ॥८४॥
In the outer corners beginning with the north-east of a
house there dwell evil spirits viz. Caraki, Vidari, Pütanà and Raksasi
respectively. Hence those who dwell in these corners of cities,
houses and villages come to grief, whereas the outcastes such as
Candalas (who eat dog's meat) alone flourish there.
[Cf. what other works say :
स्कन्दोऽर्यमा जम्बुकाख्यः पिलिपिञ्चस्तथापर: |
प्राच्यादिदिकूचतुष्के तु निवसन्ति महाग्रहाः ॥
कोणेष्वाचार्योक्ता एव |
ऐशान्यां चरकी प्रोक्ता स्कन्दः प्रारभागसं स्थितः |
होताशन्यां विदारी च याम्यां चेवार्यमा स्थितः n
पूतना AR ते ज्ञेया जम्बुकः पश्चिमे स्थितः d
राक्षसी चानिले कोणे पिलिपिञ्चस्तथोत्तरे i |
Among the outcastes are included cobblers, Pukkasas etc. Pukkasa
is the offspring of a Nisada by a Sidra woman. (Manu X. 18).]
याम्यादिष्वशुभफला जातास्तरवः प्रवक्षिणेनंते ।
उदगादिषु प्रशस्ताः प्लक्षवटोदुम्बराइवत्या: USA
The trees Peepal, banyan, the Indian fig and the holy Asvattha growing in the south, west, north and east respectively are of
untoward effects; while in the north, east, south and west respectively they are beneficial.
[Gf गर्ग--
वर्जयेत् पूवंतोऽवत्यं प्लक्षं दक्षिणतस्तथा |
न्यग्रोधं पश्चिमे भागे उत्तरे चाप्युदुम्बरम् ॥
प्रस्वत्थे तु भयं ब्रूयात् प्लक्षे ब्रूयात्पराभवम् |
न्यग्रोधे राजतः पीडा नेत्रामयमुदुम्बरे |
वटः पुरस्ताद् धन्यः स्याद् दक्षिणे चाप्युदुम्बरः |
yaaa: TRAN भागे प्लक्षस्तूत्तरतो भवेत् ॥ ]
gaat: कण्टकिनो रिपुभयदाः क्षी रिशो$थनाशाय ।
फलिनः प्रजाक्षयकरा दारूण्यपि वर्जयेदेषाम् US i
छिन्द्याद्यदि न तरूस्तान् तदन्तरे पुजितान्बपेदन्यान् |
पुन्ना याशोकारिष्टबकुलपनसाञ, शमीशालो ॥८७॥
Thorny trees (like the Khadira) in the vicinity of houses cause

484. Brhat Samhita
danger from enemies; milky ones (like the Arka) lead to destruction
of wealth; and fruit-bearing ones (like the mango), to loss of children. Even their timber should be avoided in the construction of
houses. If these trees (thorny etc.) cannot be cut down, auspicious
trees such as Punnaga, Asoka, Arista (Nimba), Bakula (or Kesara),
the jack tree, Sami and Sal should be planted amidst them.
[If there should be any forbidden tree in the vicinity of a house
which cannot be removed for some reason or other, an auspicious
tree could be planted between the house and the forbidden tree so
that the latter becomes farther off. If this is done the untoward
effect prescribed for the bad tree could be warded off.)
In the next verse the author discusses the best ground for constructing a house on.
शस्तौषधिद्रुमलता मधुरा सुगन्धा
स्निग्धा समा न सुषिरा च मही नराणाम् ।
ग्रप्यध्वनि श्रमवि नोदमुपागतानां
धत्ते श्रियं किमुत शाइवतमन्दिरेषु ॥८८॥
A ground which is soft, even, of sweet smell and taste, and
abounding in excellent herbs, trees and creepers, and not hollow
underneath, confers all-round prosperity even on those persons who
may take rest on it in order to relieve themselves of the fatigue of
their journey, how much more then on those who construct a permanent home on it and live in it ?
[Under commendable herbs are mentioned Jaya, Jayanti,
Jivanti, Jivaputra, etc. The trees should be fit for sacrificial purposes,
such as Pala§a, Pippala, etc. The creepers are Syamalata etc. The
commentator Mentions चूतततयर्च among creepers.
The metre is वसन्ततिलका and the figure of speech र्थापत्ति. ]
In the next two verses the discusses the effects of the neighbouring buildings on a house.
सचिवालयेऽर्थनाशो FATS FIAT: समीपस्थे ।
उद्वेगो देवकुले चतुष्पथे भवति चाकीत्तिः use
चेत्ये भयं ग्रहकृतं वलमीकश्व्रसङकुले विपदः |
गर्तायां तु पिपासा कूर्माकारे धनविनाशः neon
Ifa minister’s house be in the neighbourhood of the house in
question, the owner of the latter would sustain loss of wealth; if

E
Architecture LIII 485
a rogue's (or gambler's) residence, death of a son; if a temple,
mental afflictions; if a: crossing of roads, infamy; if a holy tree,
danger caused by evil spirits; if a place filled with ant-hills or
pot-holes, calamities; if a cave, thirst; and if a piece of ground
shaped like a tortoise, loss of money.
[The commentator says that चेत्यवृक्ष, is कल्पवृक्ष. For says the
Purdna— ;
मन्दरस्य गिरे: शुद्ध महावृक्ष: स केतुराट् ।
आलम्बशाखाशिखर: कदम्बर्चैत्यपादपः ।।
Cf. बृहस्पति--
चैत्यवृक्षेषु भूतेभ्यः कृच्छावासः पुरा ह्ययम् |
श्ररतिस्त्वभिवर्धेत निविष्टः कण्टकिदरुमैः ॥
Utpala says about गर्ता, “गर्ता प्रसिद्धा चिता **”]
उदगादिप्लवमिष्टं विप्रादीनां प्रदक्षिणेनैव ।
विप्रः सर्वत्र वसेदनुवणंमथेष्टमन्येषास् ue 2u
If the ground slopes down towards the north, itis beneficial
for Brahmanas; towards the east, for Ksatriyas; towards the south,
for Vai$yas; and towards the west, for Südras. However, a Brahmana
may have his dwelling on any of these grounds, but the rest only
according to their rank i.e. a Ksatriya ona ground sloping down
towards the east, south or west; a Vai$ya, towards the south or
west; and a Sidra, towards the west only.
In the following four verses the author describes the same
methods for testing the suitability of the grounds for the different
classes.
गृहमध्ये हस्तमितं खात्वा परिपुरितं पुनः इवभ्रमू ।
यद्यूनमनिष्टं ततु समे समं धन्यमधिकं यतृ ues
A pit measuring one cubit in diameter and depth should be
dug in the centre of the house-site. If, on filling it with the same
earth, the pit is insufficiently filled, it is harmful; if just filled,
moderate; and if the earth is more than sufficient, it is blessed.
इवञ्रमथवास्म्ब्रुपुणं पदशत मित्वाऽऽगतस्य यदि नोनस् ।
तद्धन्यं यच्च भवेत् पलान्यपामाढक. चतुः षष्टिः NEIN
Or, fill the same pit with water and then walking a hundred
steps, come back. Ifthe water in the pit has not diminished, the
ground is blest. Similarly, itis very favourable, if an Adhaka of
the earth dug out weighs 64 palas.

486 Brhat Samhita
(Cf पराशर---
निमेषशतमतीत्याखातश्व भ्रगतजलगतां चारिणीं समुद्धतामापूर्यंमाणामति-
रक्तां मृदं चतुःषष्टिपलाढकां तुल्यां च ॥]
WITH वा मृत्पात्रे इवञ्रस्थे दीप॑वतिरभ्यधिकस् ।
ज्वलति दिशि यस्य शस्ता सा भूमिस्तस्य वर्णस्य uev
Or, place a lamp inside an unbaked earthen pot in the same
pit with four wicks facing the four directions. The site is most beneficial for that class of people which is represented by the direction
of the wick.
[The reader is aware of the rule regarding the classes and
directions. The north is the direction of Brahmanas. This verse
may also be interpreted as follows : Place four lamps in pits in
the four directions and observe which lamp burns longest. The
तन्त्रसमुच्चय of Kerala mentions this wick-experiment with four
lamps inthe four driections for testing the site. (See the author's
paper entitled “On Architecture in Ancient India" read in the
‘Symposium on History of Sciences of India’, New Delhi, October
इवभ्रोषितं न कुसुसं यस्य प्रम्लायतेऽनुवणंसमस् |
तत्तस्य भवति शुभदं यस्य च यस्मिन् मनो रमते ।।९५॥
Place flowers of the four colours, white, red, yellow and dark,
assigned to the four classes in the pit at night and observe them on
the morrow. That class whose flower has not faded in the pit will
flourish on that site. Similarly, any site would be auspicious for a
person, provided his heart feels very happy there.
[The last statement is based on a psychological principle. The
condition of the mind presages future events and their success or
failure. See also LXXV-3 infra for a similar idea.
See also गर्ग--
या यस्य राशिता भूमेर्भवेत्तु गृहकर्मणि i
तस्यां VAM खनेमंध्ये हस्तमात्रं समन्ततः ।।
तच्छव भ्र पूरयेत्तेन पांसुना सुविचक्षणः ।
वर्धमाने च वृद्धिः स्याद्धीयमाने विगहिता ॥
साम्ये साम्यं विनिदिष्टमथवान्यद्विचारणाम् i
पूरयित्वाऽथवा इवभ्र मृद्भिः क्रमशतं ब्रजेत् ॥

Architecture LIII 487
पूर्ण स्यादागमं यावत् सा भूमिस्तु प्रशस्यते ।
तस्मिन् वा धारयेच्छवश्रो चित्रं माल्यमनुक्रमात् ॥
यच्चिरान्म्लायते माल्यं तद्व तत्र चावसेत् ।
श्रामे वा मृण्मये पात्रे दीपवत्तिचतुष्टयम् |
यस्यां दिशि प्रज्वलति चिरं तस्यैव सा शुभा u]
सितरक्तपीतकृष्णा विप्रादीनां प्रशस्यते भुमिः ।
maza भर्वात यस्यां घृतरुधिरान्नाद्यमद्यसमः ॥९६॥
कुशयुक्ता शरबहुला दूर्वाकाशावृता क्रमेर मही |
ह्यनुवर्णं वृद्धिकरी सधुरकबायाम्लकटुका च ॥९७॥
A soil that is white, red, yellow and black is beneficial to the
Brahmanas, Ksatriyas, Vai$yas and Südras respectively. Similarly
if it smells like ghee, blood, food and liquor, itis good for the four
classes in order. It is also favourable for these classes in their order,
if it is covered with the four kinds of grass viz. the holy Darbha,
Sara, Dürvà and Kaéa. Likewise, a sweet, astringent, sour and pungent soil bestows prosperity on these classes in order.
[Ci mp =
मधुरा द्भेसंयुक्ता घृतगन्धा च या मही |
उत्तरप्रवणा चेति ब्राह्मणानां तु सा शुभा ॥
रक्तगन्धा कषाया च शरवीरेण संयुता ।
रक्ता प्राकप्रवणा ज्ञेया क्षत्रियाणां तु सा मही ॥
दक्षिणप्रवणा भूमिर्याम्ला दूर्वाभिरन्विता ।
श्रन्नगन्धा च वैश्यानां पीतवर्णा प्रश स्यते ।।
पश्चिमप्रवणा कृष्णा विकुण्ठा काशसंवृता |
मद्यगन्धा मही धन्या शूद्राणां कटुका तथा di]
What should one do before constructing a house ?
कृष्टां प्ररूढबीजां गोऽध्युषितां ब्राह्मणेः प्रशस्तां च ।
गत्वा महीं गुहपतिः काले सांवत्सरोहिष्टे ues
भक्ष्यर्नानाकारे दध्यक्षतसुरभिकुसुम वुपेशच i
द॑वतपुजां कृत्वा स्थपतीनम्यच्यं fasisw ueeu
विप्रः स्पृष्ट्वा शीर्ष sarsa क्षत्रियो विशइचोरू d
Ux: पादौ स्पृष्ट्वा कुर्याद्रेखां गृहारम्भे ॥१००॥

488 Brhat Samhitd
The owner of land who wishes to construct a house should go at
a time prescribed by the astrologer to the worthy site which has been
ploughed, where sown seeds have sprouted, and where Brahmanas
and cows have stayed for a night, worship the deities with varieties
of eatables, curds, coloured rice, fragrant flowers and incense, and
honour Brahmanas and architects. Then touching his head, breast,
thighs or feet, according as he is a Brahmana, Ksatriya, Vai$ya or
Südra, he (owner) should draw a line (with any object held in the
hand) on the ground, at the commencement of the construction of
a house.
[The first line gives a few conditions such as ploughed to show
that the land is not barren, on the other hand, fertile as well as blessed
by cows and Brahmanas. For, the Lord is said to be ‘गोब्राह्मणहिताय च’,
See the following verse quoted by Utpala on purification of land :
सम्मार्जनेनाऊ्जनेन सेकेनोल्लेखनेन वा |
गवां च सन्निवासेन भूमिः शुध्यति पञ्चभिः 11]
The following verses give the effects of the line being drawn
with various objects.
श्रङ्गुष्ठकेन कुर्यान्मध्याङ्गुल्याऽथवा प्रदेशिन्या ।
कनकमरिपरजत मुकतादधिफलकुसुमाक्षतेइच शुभम् ॥१०१॥
mAN शस्त्रमृत्युर्बन्धो लोहेन भस्मनार्निभयस् |
तस्करभयं तृ णेन च काष्ठोल्लिखिता च राजभयम् ॥१०२॥
वक्रा पादालिखिता शत्रुभयक्लेशदा विरूपा च ।
चर्माद्कारास्थिकृता दन्तेन च कर्त रशिवाय ॥१०३॥
बेरमपसव्यलिखिता प्र दक्षिणं सम्पदो विनिर्देश्या: à
वाचः परुषा निष्ठीवितं क्षुतं चाशुभं कथितम् ॥ १०४॥
Should the owner draw the line with his thumb, fore-finger,
middle finger, or with gold, silver, gem, pearl, curds, fruit, flower
or coloured rice (barley), the result would be quite good. On the
other hand, should he draw the line with a weapon, he would be
killed by a weapon; with a metallic (or iron) piece, he would suffer
imprisonment; with ashes, there would be danger from fire; with
straw, fear of theft; and with a wooden piece, trouble from
the king. A line that is crooked, and drawn with the foot leads
to trouble from enemies and misery; so is one that is ugly or not
clear; one drawn witha piece of hide, charcoal, bone or tooth
would cause disaster to the owner; one drawn in an anti-clock wise
direction, hatred; and ina clock-wise direction, prosperity. Harsh

Architecture LIII 489
words, spitting and sneezing at the commencement are said to be
inauspicious.
श्रद्धेनिचितं md वा प्रविशन् स्थपतिगृ हे निमित्तानि ।
भ्रवलोकयेद् गृहपतिः कव संस्थितः स्पृशति कि areq ॥ १०५॥
रविदोप्तो यदि शकुनिस्तस्मिन् काले विरोति परुषरवस् ।
संस्पृष्टाङ्गसमानं तस्मिन् देशेऽस्थि निर्देश्यम् ॥१०६॥
After entering a finished or half-finished house, the architect
should carefully look for the auguries and also observe where (i.e. in
which limb of the House-God) the house-owner is standing and
which part of his body is touching. If at that time a bird, heated
by the Sun, cries harshly, it must be predicted that there is a bone
of that limb corresponding to the one touched, on the spot.
[The commentator gives here a detailed exposition of the word
‘Ravi-dipta’—‘heated by the Sun’: One meaning of Diptà is that
direction opposite to the Sun. Among the eight quarters one becomes
Angarini or having charcoal, the next Diptā or heated, the next to
that Dhumità or smoky, and the remaining five Santa or tranquil
in each watch of the day or night. For example, from Sunrise till
the end of the first watch (i.e, till 9 A M., taking the sunrise to be
at 6 A.M.) the North-East is termed (1) Angarini, the East (2) Dipta,
South-East (3) Dhumit& and the remaing five i.e. (4) South, SouthWest, West, North-West and North, Santa. In the next watch i.e.
from 9 A.M. to 12 A.M. these designations go to East, S.E., South
and S.W., West, N.W., North and N.E. in order. In the same manner the process has to be repeated in the last watches of the day
and in the four watches of the night as well.
See the quotation from some other Agama :
पुच्छाकाले गृहस्वामी qas स्पृशति स्वकम् |
भुवो हस्तप्रमाणोन शल्यं ब्रूयात्तदङ्गजम् ॥ ]
शकुनसमयेऽथवाऽन्ये हस्त्यशवइवादयोऽनुवाशन्ते ।
तत्प्रभवमस्थि तास्मस्तदङ्गसम्भुतमेवेति ॥१०७॥
Or, at the time of observing the auguries, if other animals
like the elephant, horse and dog, scorched by the Sun, cry, it should
be predicted that the particular spot occupied by the owner contains
a bone of such an animal, belonging to the limb corresponding to
the one touched by him.

490 Brhat Samhita
तरे प्रसार्यमाणे गर्दभरावोऽस्थिशल्यमाचष्टे ।
इवशुगालल(ङ्किते वा सूत्रे शल्यं विनिर्देश्यम् ॥१०८॥
If at the time of stretching the measuring string or tape there:
be the braying of a donkey, it indicates the presence of a bone
underneath. The same fault or thorn should be declared in case the
string is crossed by a dog or jackal.
[The Salya or hurt must be a piece of bone of that class of
animals to which the one crossing the line belongs. The bone, of
course, would belong to that limb of the animal which corresponds.
to the one touched by the owner.]
दिशि शान्तायां शकुनिमंधुरविरांवी यदा तदा वाच्यः d
भ्रर्थस्तस्मिन् स्थाने गृहेइवराधिष्ठितेऽङ्की वा ॥१०६॥
Ifat that time a bird sitting in a tranquil quarter, warbles
sweetly, it should be understood that there isa hidden treasure on
the spot or in the limb of the House-God occupied by the owner.
[The meaning of 'तस्मिन् स्थाने! is—in the place occupied by the
bird. The depth will be so many cubits as correspond to the height
ofthe limb touched: “When the ground is dug for laying the
foundation the owner should stand up with arms uplifted in the
pit. Find out the height of that limb from the bottom of the pit.
The depth of the Salya or fault (bone etc.) would be equal to this
measure.”
Cf. गर्ग--
प्रश्नकाले ग्रहपतिः कस्मिन्नद्ध॑ समास्थितः ।
किमङ्ग संस्पृशेद्ठापि व्याहरेद्वा शुभाशुभम् ॥
विलोक्य स्थपतिः पूर्वं पशचाच्छल्यं विचारयेत् |
शङ्कभेरीमृदङ्गानां पटहानां च निःस्वनाः ॥
दध्यक्षतानां पुष्पाणां फलानां दर्शनानि च |
Woes प्रवदेच्छल्यं वास्तुज्ञानविशारदः |
दीपदिक्संस्थितः पक्षी विरौति परुषं रवम् |
स्पष्टाङ्गसरशं शल्यं तस्य स्थाने विनिदिशेत् ॥
निखनेदवनि तत्र तदङ्ग ed यथा |
गृहनाथस्य तत्राधः शल्यं निःसंशयं वदेत् ॥
प्रश्नकाले गजो गौर्वा तुरगो गर्देभोऽपि वा ।
उष्ट्रो वा सारमेयो वा मार्जारुछागरो$पि वा ॥

Architecture LIII Š 491
यः प्राणी व्याहरेत् तत्र तद्भवं शल्यमादिशेत् |
प्रमाणां तस्य वक्तव्यं पूर्वोक्तविधिना ततः U]
Next he gives some more evil omens and their consequences:
सुत्रच्छेदे मृत्युः कीले चावाङ्मुखे महान् रोगः ।
गृहनाथस्थपतीनां स्मृतिलोपे मृत्युरादेशयः ॥११०॥
स्कन्धाच्च्युते शिरोरुक कुलोपसर्गोऽपर्वाजते कुम्भे ।
भग्नेऽपिच रकामववइच्युते कराद् गृहपतेमृ त्युः ॥१११॥
If the string snaps, while being stretched, the owner will die;
if a peg is driven upside down, a fell disease will afflict him; if the
owner or carpenter (architect) forgets anything, he will meet with
his end. Should the pot of water, while being brought, fall from
the shoulder, the owner would have some cerebral disease; should
it be drained away, there would be misery to his family; should
it be broken, the labourers would be killed; and should it fall
down from the hand, the owner would die.
उत्तरपूर्वे कोणे कृत्वा पुजां शिलां न्यसेत्प्रथमस् ।
शेषाः प्रदक्षिणेन स्तम्भाशचवं समुत्थाप्याः ॥११२॥
छत्रत्रगम्बरयुतः कृतधूपविलेपनः समुत्थाप्यः |
स्तम्भस्तथेव कार्यो द्वारोच्छ्रायः प्रयत्नेन ॥११३॥
In the north-eastern corner of the site a worship should be
offered with the necessary materials (such as garlands, scents, incense,
cloths, food, gold, liquor, meat etc.) and then, first of all, a stone
laid there, and other stones in the remaining (seven ?) quarters in a
clock-wise manner. In the same manner should pillars and doors
be raised carefully, being decorated with umbrellas, garlands, cloths,
incense and ointments,
[Utpala takes the reading दक्षिणपूर्व first and then refers to the
other reading उत्तरपूर्वे. He should have known that nobody would
advise a worship to be performed in the South-eastern corner at
first.
Cf. गर्ग--
शि लाविन्यासकाले तु सम्भारांश्चोपकल्पयेत् |
समुद्रजानि रत्नानि सुवर्णां रजतं तथा ।
सरवंबीजानि गन्धांश्च श रान्दर्भास्तथेव च |
शुक्लान्सुमनसः सपिः केतकीं मधुरोचनाम् ॥

Brhat Samhita
आमिषं च तथा मद्यं फलानि विविधानि च 1
क्षी रोदनं पूर्णकुम्भान् कोणो कोणे प्रदापयेत् ॥
नानाविधानि भक्ष्याणि पानानि विविधाति च ।
हुत्वाग्नि विधिवत्काले मुहूर्ते चोपपादिते ॥
गृहकोणाषु सर्वेषु पूजां कृत्वा विधानतः |
ततः पुण्याहघोषेण शिलान्यासं प्रकल्पयेत् ॥
ऐशानमादितः कृत्वा प्राग्दाक्षिण्येन विन्यसेत् ।
अनेनेव विधानेन स्तम्भद्वारावरोहणम् |!
वास्तुविद्याविधानज्ञः कारयेत्सुसमाहितः |
झि लाविन्यासमन्त्रोऽयं निदिष्टो मुनिभिः पुरा ॥
नन्दे नन्दाय वासिष्ठे वसुभिश्च हितप्रजे |
सुचिरे नन्ददे नन्दे वासिष्ठे रम्यतां गृहे ॥
भद्रे काइयपदायादे पूजनं भद्रमावह |
सुभगे gad देवि ge काश्यपि रम्यताम् ॥
जये भार्गवदायादे प्रजानां भद्रमावह् |
भव भूतिकरी देवि गृहे भागंवि रम्यताम् ॥
सर्वंबीजसमायुक्ते सर्व गन्धौषधँ वृ ते |
प्रजापतिसुते देवि सुखदाऽस्तु महीसुते U
पूणंऽङ्गिरसदायादे पूर्णाकामा: प्रजाः कुरु ।
पूजिते परमाचार्ये गन्धमाल्यँरलङः कृते di
Wag चाक्षते पुणा मुनेरङ्गिरसः सुते ।
इष्टके त्वं प्रयच्छेष्टं प्रतिष्ठां गृहिणः कुरु ॥
ग्रामस्वामिपुरस्वामिगृहस्वामिपरिग्रहे ।
मनुष्यपशुहस्त्यशवधनवृद्धिकरी भव ॥
Next the commentator quotes the rules for installing the
Sanku-peg, from another book on the subject :
स्निग्धादिभूभागसमुत्थितानां न्यग्रोधविल्वद्रुमखादिराणाम् |
शमी वटोदुम्बरदेवदारुक्षीरिस्वदेशोत्थफलद्रुमाणाम् ॥
उपोषितः शिल्पिजनस्त्वर्थेषां मध्यात्तु तीक्ष्णेन कुठारकेण |
भित्त्वा ततो दिक्पतिनोत्तरस्यां शुभे च लग्ने परिगृह्य शङ कुम् ॥
क रप्रमाणां परतश्चतस्नस्तदर्धमानेन ततोऽनुगृह्य ।
नीत्वा न्यसेत् तांश्च गृहे तु तावद्यावत्प्रतिष्ठासमयोऽस्य शङ्कोः ॥

Architecture LIII
नन्देति सूक्तिः क्थितैश कोणे हुताशनाख्ये सुभगेति चान्या ।
सुमङ्गली नेऋ तभागसंस्था भद्रङ्करी मारुतकोणयाता |i
वृषाश्वपुन्नागपदाङ्कितानां नन्दादिकानां क्रमशः शिलानाम् ।
ग्रखण्डितानां सुरढीकृतानां सुलक्षणानां ग्रहणां निरुक्तम् ॥
कूर्मोऽथ शेषो हि जनार्दनः श्री ध्रुंवर्च मध्ये भवनस्य संस्था ।
द्वाराधिपा दिक्पतयो गजाइच सम्पूजनीया बलिभिः सुमन्त्रः ॥
स्नानार्ध्येमाल्याम्बरधूपलेपैबेल्योपहारे: प्रतिपूज्य AS कुम् ।
ध्रुवे शिलायाशच ततः खनित्वा शङ क्ं प्रतिष्ठाप्य तथा च कुम्भम् u
लाजाक्षतब्रीहिसपञ्चगव्यमध्वाज्ययातं परिपूर्य सम्यक् ।
ऋग्मिस्तर्थंशं विधिवत्प्रकुर्याद्धोमो ध्रुवादुत्तरस्तु कार्यः ॥
ग्रथ लग्नशुद्धि:--
धनुर्वे णिग्गोयुगनारिकुम्भे वास्तुप्रतिष्ठाकरणां प्रधानम् ।
एतच्चतुर्थं गृहसंज्ञमृक्ष जलोद्भवं तच्छुभमुद्दिशन्ति ॥
्रसम्भवे शुक्रशशाङ्कयोगाज्जलाश्रयं प्राहुरती न्द्रियज्ञाः d
एषां नवांशे$न्यग्रहे शुभक्षे कतु वर्ययाष्टत्रिककोणवर्ज ॥
केनद्रत्रिकोणज्वलनाए्यलाभार्थावस्थितेष्वीज्य सितेन्दुजेषु |
गृहं समृद्धं Fee जनाढ्यं व्यये तृतीये ज्ञगुरू समृद्धौ ॥
वाच्यं तथा सूर्यकुजाकंजेषु तृतीयषष्ठायगतेषु नित्यम् ।
रेषेष्वतोऽन्येषु विशेषतस्तु चौराग्निदाहक्षतरोगजाडयम् ॥
लग्नात्तृतीयाम्बुषडायगेन्दौ कार्यं गृहं स्त्रीधनधान्यदासँः ।
अभी पमन्येषु गतोन्यथातो धिष्णायं ve चात्र गुणातिरिक्तम् ॥
प्रवेश एवं भवनस्य कार्यो विप्रादिकानां यदुदीरितं घ्राक् |
किन्त्वत्र गोजाविकवाहनानां विना स्थिर: स्वाएसर्म: प्रवेशः ॥
ग्रथ वैदिकमन्त्राः:
ध्रुवे वास्तुनरे चैव द्वाराणां ग्रन्थिषु स्मृतात् |
वैदिकांइ्चेव मन्त्रांश्ूच प्रवक्ष्याम्यनुपूर्वंशः ॥
कुमे मन्त्रमयो यज्ञो वर्धतां बलिकर्मणि ।
शेषे नमोऽस्तु सर्पेभ्य इदं विष्ण जंनाद॑ने ॥
तव श्रियः श्रिये यान्तु ध्रूवाद्यास्तु À स्मृतम् ।
सविता श्रियः प्रसविता श ड्कोराहुरमंनीषिणः ॥
अथ शडकुदेवता:---
ब्रह्मणे ब्रह्मजज्ञानमर्यम्णे यान्तु HAA |
सविता श्रियः प्रसविता तथवेति विवस्वतः ॥

494 Brhat Samhita
इन्द्रस्येन्द्रो मयं वाच्यं fad मित्राञ्जनं स्मृतम् |
तथा मृडानो रुद्रोऽथ रुद्रस्य परिकीत्तितम् ॥
भूधराय इहैवैधि रम्भराय हयं महत् |
परोक्ता वास्तुनरस्यैवं देवताश्च त्रयोदश ॥
ये देवा हि चतुदिक्षु द्वाराणां मन्त्रसङ ग्रहे |
नक्षत्राणां पुरा प्रोक्तं सूक्तीनामधुना शृणु ॥
यो रुद्रोऽग्नौ तु नन्दिन्यामाहुत्यं शुभगाय च ।
सुमङ्गली: सुमङ्गल्या भद्रं कर्णीति भद्रिका N
एतेषां बलयो वक्ष्ये हविषं पायसं दधि |
मोदकाज्यपयोब्री हिलाज!क्षतफलानि च t
ध्रूवादुत्तरतो होममनादेश्यं तु कारयेत् |
तव श्रियादिमन्त्रैस्तु हुवेदाज्यं समाहितः ॥
एवं प्रवेशकाले तु स्थालीपाकसमो हि सः ।
मन्त्रेर्होमस्तु सूक्तीनां पञ्चरङ्ग प्रवाहणः ॥
ये देवादिकरण्डाइच काण्डात्काण्डात्प्ररोहणाम् |
पाद्यमर्ध्यादिक यत्तु शान्तिकल्पेन दशितम् |
तदिहापि ग्रहीतव्यं सर्वमेतच्छू तार्थकम् ॥
एवं देवालये शान्तौ दीक्षायज्ञादिसवंतः |
स्वतन्त्रोक्तेन वक्तव्यं निर्माणस्य प्रवेशनम् 11]
विहगादिभिरवलीनेराकस्पितपतितदुःस्थितंइच तथा à
शक्रध्वजसहृशफलं तदेव तस्मिन्विनिदिष्टस् ॥ ११४॥
When the pillars and doors are mounted by birds and the
like (i.e. reptiles, bees etc.), when they shake, fall or are placed
wrongly, the effects will be the same as those prescribed for Indra’s
Banner.
[Many bad effects have been enumerated in XLIII 62-66 supra
for Indra’s Flag being occupied by vultures, owls etc. ]
प्रागुत्तरोन्नते धनसुतक्षयः सुतवधश्च दुगंन्धे ।
वक्रे बन्धुविनाशो न सन्ति गर्भाइव दिड्मुढे ॥११५॥
इच्छेद्यदि गृहवृद्धि ततः समन्ताद्विवधंयेततुल्यम् |
एकोद्देशे दोषः प्रागथवाऽप्युत्तरे कुर्यात् ॥ ११६॥
If the house is raised in the east or north, there will be loss
of wealth and children; if it gives outa bad smell, a son will be
killed; if it is not straight, death of kinsmen; and if it does not face

Architecture Lit 495
any particular direction, no children will be born. If one wishes for
the prosperity of one’s house-hold, one ought to raise the level of
the floor uniformly on all sides. If at all there could be any fault
anywhere, it should be either in the east or in the north.
[This rule is very important in that it lays down that you
cannot have different parts, of one and the same house at different
levels. If at all raising the level becomes unavoidable, then it
should be done either in the east or north. For, in these two directions the fault seems to be not a serious one.]
प्राग्भवति मित्रवैरं मृत्युभयं दक्षिणेन यदि वृद्धिः ।
भ्रथविनाशः पइ्चादुदरिविव् द्विमेनस्तापः ॥ ११७॥
If the floor of a house be raised in the east, the owner would
be at loggerheads with his friends; if in the south, fear of death;
if in the west, loss of wealth; and in the north, mental affliction.
[From this we can realize that the faults accruing from the
elevation of the floor in the east and north are not very serious.]
In the next verse he prescribes directions for kitchen etc, in the
house:
ऐञ्ान्यां देवगृहं महानसं चापि कायं माग्नेय्यास् ।
नैऋत्यां भाण्डोपस्करोऽर्थधान्यानि मारुत्यास् ॥११८॥
In a four-halled house (Catuísala) the worship-room should
be situated in the north-east; kitchen in the south-east; the storeroom in the south-west; and the treasure-room and granary in the
north-west.
[Cf. the किरणाख्य तन्त्र
पूर्वस्यां श्रीगृहं प्रोक्तमाग्नेय्यां स्यान्महानसस् |
शयनं दक्षिणायां च AR त्यामायुधाश्नयम् di
भोजनं पर्चिमायां च वायव्यां धनसञ्चयम् ।
उत्तरे द्रव्यसंस्थानमैशान्यां देवताशहम् ॥
According to some schools different types of Vastu-Purusa are
to be adopted even for the construction of kitchen, worship-room
etc. (See notes under 75 supra) :
श्रीगृहे$त्र ध्वजः कार्यो धूपश्चैव महानसे ।
सिहो निद्राग्रहे कार्य: शवा कुर्यादायुधाश्रये ॥
वृषो भोजनशालायां कपिर्धान्यग्रहे सदा |
द्रव्यस्थाने सदा भद्रो रिक्तो देवगृहे तथा ॥

496 Brhat Samhité
Is it possible that qq stands for ध्वाङ क्ष ? |
In the next verse he deals with the effects of the existence of
water i.e. its source like tank, well, etc., in the different directions.
प्राच्यादिस्थे सलिले सुतहानिः शिखिभयं रिपुभयं च ।
स्त्रीकलहः स्त्रीदौष्ट्यं seed वित्तात्मजविवृद्धिः ॥११९॥
If there is water to the east, south-east, south, south-west,
west, north-west, north and north-east of a house, the effects would
be (1) loss of children, (2) danger from fire, (3) fear of enemies,
(4) quarrel among (or with) women, (5) frailty of women, (6)
poverty, (7) increase of wealth, and (8) prosperity of children in
order.
[Under verse 75 supra 1 had referred to the ungrammatical
expression, नैःस्वम्, which was not made by the author but by the
scribe, as the correct word is used in this verse.]
In the next verse he discusses the types of trees that could be
used for the construction of houses.
खगनिलयभग्नसंशुष्कदग्धदेवालयइमशानस्थात् |
क्षी रतरुषवविभीतकतिम्बारणिवजितान् छिन्द्यात् ॥१२०॥
For constructing a house one ought to select for timber, trees
other than that are inhabited by birds, that are broken, withered,
burnt, that are in temples and burial grounds, milky trees, Dhava
(Lythrum fruticosum), Vibhitaka (Beleric myrobalan), Nimba (Neem)
and Arani (the tree whose twigs are used for churning out fire for
sacrifice).
रात्रौ कृतनलिपुजं प्रदक्षिणं छेदयेद्विवा वृक्षम् ।
धन्यमुदक्प्राक्पतनं न ग्राह्योऽतोऽन्यथा पतितः ॥१२१॥
A tree that had been worshipped with food, etc. the previous
night, should be cut at day-time beginning with the north-eastern
part in a clockwise direction. lf it falls towards the north or east,
it will be blest and beneficial; and one falling elsewhere should be
rejected.
[See XLIII 13-20 supra in connection with Indra’s Banner.
छेदो यद्यविकारी ततः शुभं दारु त दृगृहौपयि+स् ।
पोते तु मण्डले निदिशेत तेमंध्यगां गोपाम् ॥ १२२॥
मञ्जिष्ठाभे भेको नीले सपंस्तथा5रुणे सरट: ।
मुद्गाभेऽश्मा कपिले तु मू कोऽम्भशय खड्गाभे ॥१२३॥

Architecture LLL 497
If the cutting appears natural, the timber is good for being
used for a house. If there isa yellowish circle (not natural) in the
centre of the cross section of the tree, it should be predicted that
oe rt Ey ASO inside the tree; ifa madder-coloured circle,
a frog; if a bluish one, a reptile; ifa red one, a chameleon; if it is
one with the colour of green gram, a stone; ifa tawny one, a rat;
and if it is one resembling a sword, water.
[The commentator says that the word खडगाभे means ‘circle as
black as the blade of a sword.’]
धान्यगोगुरुहुताशसुरारां न स्वपेदुपरि नाप्यनुवंशम् ।
नोत्तरापरशिरा न च नग्नो नेव IESU श्रियमिच्छन् ॥१२४॥
A person wishing for prosperity ought not to sleep above
grains, cows, elders or teachers, fire and deities, nor along the
diagonals, nor with the head turned towards the north or west, nor
naked, nor with wet feet.
[The Varh$as are nine in number, explained in 63-64 supra.
This verse looks more like an excerpt from the Dharma$astra. A
house-holder should not sleep with Naga-dantas (ivory pieces)
towards his feet. For says विश्वकर्मा---
शय्यानुवंशविन्यस्ता तुला हन्यात्कुटुम्बिन: ।
कतु: शय्या स्वतानस्था नागदन्ता: क्षयावहा: dO
The metre is स्वागता. The word स्वपेत् is grammatically
untenable. ]
भूरिपुष्पविकरं सतोरणं तोयपु्णकल'शोप शोभितम् ।
घूपगन्धबलिपूजितामर ब्राह्मणध्वनियुतं विशेद् UEW ॥१२५॥
The owner should enter the house which is strewn with heaps
of flowers, decorated with arches, embellished with auspicious pots
filled with water, where the Deities of the site have been worshipped
with incense, perfumes and offerings of food, and which is resounding with the sound of Brahmanas chanting the Vedas.
[The commentator draws our attention to the fact that the
Deities worshipped on this occasion are only those that are in the
centre of the diagram 1, and not those in the outer squares, such
as Sikhin, Parjanya etc. as well as Aryaman etc. Vide, तन्त्रान्तर
(which only means ‘some other work’) :
ज्येष्ठस्य कर्मसिद्धयर्थं नव पञ्चगुणाः सुराः |
यतस्तत्र वसन्त्येते sg षु कृत्स्नशः ॥

498 Brhat Samhita
Some more deities external to the 45 mentioned already have
been spoken of by Hiranyagarbha :
देवताः सम्प्रवक्ष्यामि वास्तूनामनुपूर्वशः |
art प्रजापति विन्द्याद् द्वारदेशे ह्युमापतिम् ॥
बलदेवो यमश्चँव दक्षिणस्यां च संस्थितो |
स्कन्द: शेषोऽथ वरुणाः पश्चिमायां दिशि स्थितः 11
आदित्या वसवो रुद्रा उत्तरां दिशमाश्रिताः |
ब्रह्मा चैव महेन्द्रश्च दिशमैन्द्रीं समाश्रितौ ॥
की तिध तिश्च लक्ष्मीरच वास्तुमध्ये प्रतिष्ठिताः |
gaa गृहमध्ये तु देवतान्यचेयेदु बुधः ॥
दिगन्तरेषु सर्वषु दिक्षु चेव यथाक्रमम्।
कुलदैवतपूजां च कृत्वा च कुलमेधिताम् ॥
दिक्षु दैवीषु सर्वासु विदिक्षु च यथाक्रमम् ॥
See also तन्त्रान्तर-—-
बाह्याम्यन्तरदेवांस्तु वास्तुमध्ये यथास्थितान् |
तथा च सर्वान् सम्पूज्य विधिनैव पुरोहितः ॥
The metre is रथोद्धता. The commentator says in a verse that
he has constructed a boat in the form of his scholiam to enable
students to cross the ocean of this science taught by Varahamihira
that they may get the wealth.]

दकागेलम् ॥५४।।
Chapter LIV— Exploration of Water Springs
[Like the previous chapter, Water-Divination is an important and
independent science practised in ancient India. Water is available
from two sources, Viz. the sky and the subterranian region. Our
author states that the teachers of the science of the former kind of
water i.e. atmospheric, are Baladeva, Garga, Ka$yapa and Devala,
while those of the latter i.e. subterranian one, Sarasvata and Manu,
whose authority is quoted by Utpala. Asfar as our present knowledge goes, no work of Sage Manu bearing on Dakirgala has been
discovered. For this reason Bhattotpala’s commentary assumes
special importance. Now what is the exact meaning of this word,
Dakàrgala ? Daka is the shorter form of Udaka meaning water; and
Argala stands for bar or bolt. In other words the expression means
a branch ofscience dealing with water locked up or imprisoned in
the bowels of the earth. Hence we can take it to represent the modus
operandi for tapping the underground water resources.]
qe यशस्यं च वदाम्यतोऽहं दकार्गलं येन जलोपलब्धिः ।
पुंसां यथाङ्गेषु शिरास्तथैव क्षितावयि प्रोन्ततनिम्नसंस्थाः ॥१॥
एकेन वर्णन रसेन चाम्भइच्युतं नभस्तो वसुधाविशेषात् ।
नानारसत्वं बहुवर्णतां च गतं परीक्ष्यं क्षितितुल्यमेव uqu
I shall now expound the science of ‘Water-Divination’ which
leads to religious merit and fame, as it helps men to ascertain the
Just as there are veins in the human body, even
source of water.
others lower down, in the earth.
so do they exist, some higher up,
Though the water falling from the sky (as rain) possesses the same
s various colours and tastes owing to
colour and taste, yet it assume
f the soil (where it falls). Hence it
the difference in the nature o
should be examined in relation to its environments.

500 Brhat Samhita
[Cf. verse 104 infra for the different tastes of water, and verses
23-26 etc. for Siras or veins. The rnetre is उपजाति.]
In the next three verses the author tells us the names and
effects of the various veins.
पुरुह तानलयमनिक्ऋ तिवरुणापवनेन्द्रशद्धःरा देवा: ।
विज्ञातव्याः क्रमशः प्राच्याद्यानां दिशां पतयः NIN
दिक्पतिसञ्ज्ञा च शिरा नवमी मध्ये महाशिरानाम्नी i
एताभ्योऽन्याः शतशः विनिःसृता नामभिः प्रथिताः uu
पातालाूर्ध्वेशिराः शुभा चतुर्दिक्षु संस्थिता याइच ।
कोणदिगुत्था न शुभाः शिरानिमित्तान्यतो वक्ष्ये ॥५॥
The Gods who preside over the eight quarters beginning with
the east are in order Indra, Fire, Yama (God of death), Nirrti
(demon), Varuna (Lord of water), Wind, the Moon and Siva. The
water-veins in the different directions are named after their presiding
deities. There is the ninth known as the Great Vein in the centre
of these. There are hundreds of veins branching off from these
and bearing distinct appellations. A vein that comes up from the
nether-world is auspicious; so are those that are situated in the
four cardinal points, while those in the intermediate quarters are
inauspicious. Hereafter I shall explain the characteristics of these
veins.
यदि वेतसोफ्म्ब्रुरहिते देशे हस्तेस्त्रिभिस्ततः पश्चात् ।
साधें पुरुषे तोयं वहति शिरा afaa तत्र ॥६॥
चिह्नमपि चार्धपुरुषे मण्ड्कः पाण्ड्रोऽथ मृत्पीता ।
पुटभेदकइच तस्मिन्पाषारो भरवत तोयमधः wel
If a rotang tree is seen flourishing in a waterless tract, there
will be water at a depth of 74 cubits at a distance of 3 cubits to the
west of the tree. There will be found a westerly vein flowing underneath. At a depth of 23 cubits the symptoms would be a pale white
frog; thereafter, yellow clay and further, a hard stone (which will
break only by the application of much heat! and underneath that
there will be water.
[Purusa is the height of a man with his arms raised, which is
120 digits or 5 cubits. Cf. Sage सारस्वत---

Cd HS ELEME 9U1
fia वेतसं इष्ट्वा तस्माद् वृक्षादपि त्रयम् ।
पश्चिमायां दिशि ज्ञेयमधः सार्धेन वे जलम् ॥
नरोऽत्र षष्ट्रिद्विगुणा चाङ गुलानां प्रको तितः।
तत्र खात्वाऽधेपुरुषं भेकः पाण्ड्रवणकः ॥
मृत्पीता पुटभेदशच पाषाणोऽधस्ततो जलम् |
शिरा पर्चिमदिक्स्थात्र वहतीति विनिदिशेत् u]
जम्ब्वाइ वोदग्घस्तेस्त्रिभिः शिराधो नरद्वये पूर्वा ।
मृल्लोहगन्धिका पाण्डुरा च पुरुषेऽत्र मण्ड्कः ॥८॥
In a waterless place if a Jambi tree is found, an easterly vein
can be detected at a depth of ten cubits at a distance of three cubits
to the north of the tree. Its signs are: the earth smelling like iron
at a depth of five cubits, then pale-white clay, and further a frog.
जम्बूवृक्षस्य प्राग्वल्मीको यदि भवेत् समीपस्थः |
तस्माइृक्षिरापाइव सलिलं पुरुषद्वये स्वादु ॥६॥
भ्र्धेपुरुष च मत्स्यः पारावतसन्निभश्च पााणः ।
मुद्भूवति चात्र नीला दीर्घ कालं बहु तोयम् ॥१०॥
If there be an ant-hill nearby to the east of a Jambi tree,
there would be sweet water at a depth of ten cubits at a distance
of three cubits to the south of the tree. When the earth is dug 2%
cubits deep, there will be found fish; next a stone with the colour
ofa dove;and next blue clay. Underneath this there will be inexhaustible water for a long time.
[Cf. सारस्वत--
जम्बूव॒क्षात्यूवंभागे वल्मीको यदि इश्यते |
तरोर्दक्षिणतो हस्तांस्त्रीस्त्यक्त्वाऽधो जलं वदेत् ॥
नरद्वयेऽधंपुरुषे मत्स्योऽरमा पक्षिसन्निभः ।
ततोऽपि मृत्तिका नीला ततो मृष्टं जलं वदेत् l]
पइचादुदुम्बरस्य त्रिभिरेव करेर्तरद्वये साधे ।
पुरुषे सितोऽहिरइमाञ्जनोपमोऽधः शिरा सुजला ॥११॥
If there be an Indian fig tree ina waterless place (with or
without an ant-hill), there would be a vein of good water at a depth
of 124 cubits at a distance of three cubits to the west of the tree.
Here the indications are that at depth of five cubits there would be
a white snake, then a stone as black as collyrium, and then the
vein of water.

502 Brhat Samhita
उदगर्जुनस्य ह्यो वल्मीको यदि ततो$जुंनाद्वस्तेः ।
त्रिभिरम्बु भवति पुरुषेस्त्रिभिरधेसमन्वितः पश्चात् ॥१२॥
RATT गोधाधंनरे पुरुष AGA ततः कृष्णा |
पीता सिता ससिकता ततो जलं निर्दिशेदमितम् ॥१३॥
If there be an ant-hill tothe north of an Arjuna tree, there
would be water at a depth of 174 cubits at a distance of three cubits
to the west of the tree. Here the signs are that ata depth of 23
cubits there will be a white alligator; then at a depth of five cubits,
grey clay; then dark, then yellow, then white, and then sandy earth;
and beneath that abundant water will be found.
वल्मीकोपचितायां निगुंण्ड्यां दक्षिणेन कथितकरेः |
पुरुषद्वये सपादे स्वादुजलं भवति चाशोष्यस् ॥१४॥
रोहितमत्स्योऽ्धेनरे Aq कपिला पाण्डरा ततः परतः d
सिकता सशकराऽथ क्रमेण परतो भवत्यम्भः ॥ १५॥
If there is a Nirgundi tree overgrown with an ant-hill (or
with an ant-hill closeby), there will be sweet and never-failing
water at a depth of 112 cubits ata distance of three cubits to the
south of the tree. There will be red fish at a depth of 2} cubits; then,
red-brown clay; next, pale-white clay; then, sand mixed with gravel
and beneath that there will be water.
पूर्व यदि बदर्या वल्मीको हस्यते जलं पश्चात् ।
पुरुषेस्त्रभिरादेश्यं saat गृहगोविकारद्ध॑नरे ॥ १६॥
If an ant-hill be seen to the east of a jujube tree, water should
be declared to exist at a distance of three cubits to the west of the
tree at a depth of 15 cubits. When the earth is dug 23 cubits, a white
lizard will be found.
(Cf. सारस्वत---
पूर्वभागं बदर्याइचेद्दल्मीको इश्यते जलम् ।
पश्चाद्धस्तत्रये वाच्यं खाते तु पुरुषत्रये ॥
ग्रधःखातेऽ्धपुरुषे इश्यते गृहगोधिका |
सवेतवर्णा ततोऽधःस्थं जलं भवति निर्मलम् ॥]
सपलाशा वदरी चेद् दिश्यपरस्यां ततो जलं भवति ।
पुरुऽत्रये सपादे पुरुऐऽत्र च दुण्डभश्चिह्नम् ॥ १७॥
If in a waterless place there bea jujube tree along with a
Palasa tree, there would be water at a depth of 164 cubits at a distance
Nm ttr ——Á—

Exploration of Water Springs LIV Be
of three cubits to its west. Here the symptom will be a non-poisonous snake at a depth of five cubits.
(Cf सारस्वत---
पलाशयुक्ता बदरी यत्र RAT ततोऽपरे ।
हस्तत्रयादधस्तोयं सपादे पुरुषत्रये ॥
नरे तु दुण्डुभः सर्पो निविषश्चिक्लमेव च ।
भ्रधस्तोयं च सुस्वादु दीर्घकालं प्रवाहितम् u]
बिल्वोदुम्बरयोगे विहाय हस्तत्रयं तु याम्येन ।
पुरुषे स्त्रिभिरम्बु भवेत्कृष्णो seat च मण्डकः ॥ १८॥
There will be water at a depth of 15 cubits ata distance of
three cubits to the south of the place where a Bilva and an Indian
fig tree are joined together. The indication in this case isa black
frog at a depth of 2; cubits.
काकोदुम्बरिकायां वल्मोको दृशयते शिरा तस्मित् |
पुरुषत्रये सपादे परिचमदिक्स्था वहति सा च ॥१९॥
श्रापाण्ड्पीतिका मृद्गोरसवर्णश्च मवति पाषाणः ।
पुरुषार्धे कुमुदनिभो दृष्टिपथं मूको याति ॥२०॥
If an ant-hill is seen near (or.along with) an opposite-leaved
fig tree (Phalgu), there will be a westerly water vein flowing underneath it at a depth of 161 cubits. The symptoms are pale yellow clay
and white stone; and ata depth of 2} cubits a white rat will be
found.
[The commentator takes तस्मिन् to mean under the very same
ant-hill, but elsewhere through out he takes the vein to be at a distance of 3 cubits in a certain direction. I feel that that rule need not
be given up in this instance and the meaning would be: “There
will be a vein of water flowing in a westerly direction at a distance
of 3 cubits to the west of the ant-hill.]
जलपरिहीने देशे वृक्ष: कम्पिल्लको यदा दृश्यः ।
प्राच्यां हस्तत्रितये वहति शिरा दक्षिणा प्रथमस् ॥२१॥
मृन्नी लोत्पलवर्णा कापोता दृश्यते ततस्तस्मिन् ।
हस्तेऽजगन्धको मत्स्यकः पयो5ल्पं च सक्षारम् UR
When a Kampillaka tree is seen in a waterless place, there will
be a water-vein flowing ina southerly direction at a distance of

504 Brhat Samhita
three cubits to the east of the tree at a depth of 16} cubits. The symptoms are blue-clay at first, then dove-colour-clay, and further at a
depth of one cubit, there will bea fish smelling like goat, and
beneath that a little brackish water.
[Cf सारस्वत--
निजेले यत्र कम्पिल्लो दृश्यस्तस्मात् करत्रये ।
प्राच्यां त्रिभिनरेर्वारि सा भवेद् दक्षिणा शिरा ॥
अधो नीलोत्पलाभासा मृत् कापोतप्रभा क्रमात् |
हस्तेऽजगन्धको मत्स्यो जलमल्पमशोभनम् 11 |
शोराकतरोरपरोत्तरे शिरा द्वौ करावतिक्रम्य ।
कुसुदा नाम शिरा सा पुरुषत्रयवाहिनी भवति ॥२३॥
There is a water-vein named Kumuda, which flows at a depth
of 15 cubits and at a distance of two cubits to the north-west of a
Sonàka tree in a waterless tract.
[In the अमरकोश स्योनाक and शोणक are given as synonyms. ]
प्रासन्नो वल्मीको दक्षिणपाइवं विभोतकस्य यदि ।
mead wate शिरा पुरुषे ज्ञेया दिशि प्राच्यास् ॥२४॥
Should there be an ant-hill closeby to the south of a Beleric
Myrobalan tree, there would be a water-vein at a distanceof 2 cubits
to its east and at a depth of 7} cubits.
[विभीतकस्य याम्यायां वल्मीको यदि इश्यते |
करद्वयान्तरे पूर्वे सार्धे च पुरुषे जलम् 11]
तस्येव पश्चिमायां दिशि वल्मीको यदा भवेद्धस्ते |
तत्रोदग् भवति शिरा चतुभिंरर्धाधिकेः पुरुष: ॥२५॥
adul विशवम्भरकः प्रथमे पुरुष तु कुङ्कुमाभोऽइमा |
श्रपरस्यां दिशि च शिरा नव्यति वषंत्रये ऽतीते ॥२६॥
If the ant-hill be to the west of the same tree, there would be
a vein to the north of the tree ata distance of one cubit and ata
depth of 223 cubits. The signs here would bea white reptile (or a
scorpion?) at a depth of five-cubits, then a crimson stone, and then
there would be a vein of water flowing westward. However, this
vein will disappear after three years.

Exploration of Water Springs LIV 505
[The commentary does not help us in identifying the विश्वम्भरक
which is a creature.]
सकुशासित ऐश्ञान्यां वल्मीको यत्र कोविदारस्य ।
मध्ये तयोनं र रधघंपञ्चमंस्तोयमक्षोभ्यस् ॥२७॥
प्रथमे पुरुष भुजगः कमलोदरसन्निभो मही रक्ता |
कुरुविन्दः पाएाणार्चि ह्वान्येतानि वाच्यानि ॥२८॥
If there is an ant-hill darkened by the holy grass to the northeast of a mountain ebony tree, there will be inexhaustible water at a
depth of 22 cubits between the tree and the ant-hill. Theindications
mentioned are a snake of the colour of the lotus-calix at a depth of 5
cubits; below that red earth; and lower still a coryndon stone (ruby).
[In the first line सकुश:सित is another reading. But in our previous edition we had adopted the reading given here. This is more
sensible than the one where faq appears instead of ग्रसित ].
यदि भवति सप्तपर्णो वल्मीकवृतस्तदुत्तरे तोयम् ।
वाच्यं पुरुषः पञ्चभिर त्रापि भवन्ति faga ॥२९॥
पुरुषार्ध मण्डको हरितो हरितालसन्निभो Yea ।
पावाणोऽश्रनिकाशः सौम्या च शिरा शुभाम्बुवहा ॥३०॥
Should an Echites tree be covered by ant-hills, it should be predicted that there is water at a depth of 25 cubits at a distance of one
cubit to its north. The signs are that at a depth of 24-cubits there
would be a green frog, then the earth resembling yellow orpiment,
then a stone dark like the cloud, and beneath that a northerly vein
carrying good water.
[Cf. सारस्वत--
` भुजङ्गणृहसं युक्तो यत्र स्यात् सप्तपर्णाक: |
ततः सौम्ये हस्तमात्रात् पञ्चभिः पुरुषैरधः ॥
वाच्यं जलं नरार्धे तु मण्डूको हरितो भवेत् ।
हरितालनिभा yea मेघाभोऽइमा ततः शिरा tt
उत्तरा सुजला ज्ञेया दीर्घा मृष्टाम्बुवाहिनी t]
सवेषां वृक्षाणामधः स्थितो ag रो यदा दृश्यः ।
तस्माद्धस्ते तोयं चतुर्भिरर्धाधिकः qeq: NIM

506 Brhat Samhita
पुरुष तु मवति नकुलो नीला मृत्पीतिका ततः इवेता ।
<< रसमानरूपः पाषाणो दृश्यते चात्र ॥३२॥
If a frog is seen at the foot of any tree, there will be water at
a depth of 22i cubits at a distance of one cubit to its north. The
signs are : a mongoose at a depth of 5 cubits, then blue-clay, yellow,
then white clay and next a stone of the formof a frog. (Water will
be got underneath that.)
[Cf. सारस्वत---
तरूणां यत्र सर्वेषामध:स्थो दद् रो भवेत् |
वृक्षादुदग्दिशि जलं हस्तात् MATUTA: ॥
चतुभि: पुरुषे खाते नकुलो नीलमृत्तिका |
पीतइ्वेता ततो भेकसरशोऽहमा प्रदृश्यते ॥ ]
यद्यहिनिलयो दृश्यो दक्षिणतः संस्थितः करञ्जस्य ।
gazà तु याम्ये पुरुषत्रितये शिरा सार्धे ॥३३॥
कच्छपकः पुरुषाद्ध प्रथमं चोद्यते शिरा पूर्वा ।
उदगन्या स्वादुजला हरितोऽइमाधस्ततस्तोयस् ॥३४॥
Should an ant-hill be found to the south of a Gray Bonduc
tree, there would bea water-vein ata depth of 174-cubits at a
distance of 2 cubits to its south. The signs would be: a small tortoise
at a depth of 2i-cubits; there would emerge first of ‘all an easterly
vein, then another northerly vein of sweet water; then a green stone
below; beneath that there would be water.
[It is strange that Utpala construes the werd हरित: as शुक्रवणाः. |
उत्तरतश्च मधूकादहिनिलयः पश्चिमे तरोस्तोयम् ।
परिहृत्य पञ्च हस्तानर्धाष्टमपोरुषान् प्रथमम् ॥३५॥
्रहिराजः पुरुषेऽस्मिन् qur धात्री कुलुत्थवर्णोऽइमा ।
माहेन्द्री भवति शिरा वहति सफेन सदा तोयम् ॥३६॥
If there be an ant-hill to the north of a Bassia tree, there
would be water at a depth of 374 cubits at a distance of five cubits
to the west of the tree. Here the indications are : first a big snake at
a depth of 5 cubits, then tawny clay, next a stone of the colour of
horse gram; next there would be an easterly vein carrying always
foamy water.

Exploration of Water Springs LIV 507
[I feel that कुलुत्थ might be a mistake for कुलत्थ.]
वल्मीकः स्निग्धो दक्षिणेन तिलकस्य सकुशदूर्वश्चेत् ।
पुरुषः प5चभिरभ्भो दिशि वारुण्यां शिरा पूर्वा ॥३७॥
If there be a glossy ant-hill covered with holy grass and dürvà
grass to the south of a Tilaka tree, there would be water at a depth
of 25 cubits at a distance of 5 cubits to the west of the tree. The
water-vein there would be an easterly one.
(Cf. सारस्वत
तिलकाद् दक्षिणे स्निग्ध: कुशदूर्वासमायुतः |
वल्मीकाच्चोत्तरे पञ्च हस्तान् सन्त्यज्य परिचिमे ॥
नरे: पञ्चभिरम्भोऽधः शिरा gata विद्यते u]
सर्पावासः पश्चाद्यदा कदम्बस्य दक्षिणेन जलम् ।
परतो हस्तत्रितयात् षड्भिः पुरुषेस्तुरीयोनेः ॥३८॥
कोबेरी चात्र शिरा बहति जलं लोहगन्धि चाक्षोभ्यस् ।
कनकनिभो मण्डूको नरमात्रे मृत्तिका पीता ॥३६॥
If there be an ant-hill to the west of a Kadamba tree (Nauclea
orientalis), there would bea northerly vein carrying inexhaustible
water with the smell of iron at a depth of 282 cubits at a distance of
3 cubits to the south of the tree. The signs are: a golden frog at
a depth of 5 cubits; and then, yellow clay.
वल्मीकसंवृतो यदि तालो वा भवति नालिकेरो वा ।
पश्चात् षडभिहेस्त तेरेइचर्तुभिः शिरा याम्या ॥४०॥
If a palm tree or cocoanut tree be found covered with anthills, there would bea southerly water-vein at a depth of 20 cubits
at a distance of 6 cubits to the west of the tree.
याम्येन कपित्थस्याहिसंश्रयश्चेदुदग्जलं वाच्यम् ।
सप्त परित्यज्य करान् खात्दा पुरुषाञ्जलं पञ्च ॥४१॥
कर्बुरको$हिः पुरुषे कृष्णा मृतु पुटभिदपि च Wim: à
३वेता मृत् पश्चिमतः शिरा ततश्चोत्तरा भवति ॥४२॥
If there be an ant-hill to the south of a wood-apple tree, there
would be water at a depth of 25 cubits at a distance of 7 cubits to
the north of the tree. Here the symptoms would be: a variegated
snake at a depth of 5 cubits ; then, black clay; then a hard stone;

508 Brhat Samhita
next white clay; and then there would be a westerly vein and next,
a northerly one.
ग्रश््मन्तकस्य वामे बदरी वा दृश्यतेऽहिनिलयो वा |
षड्भिरुदक् तस्य करः ATA पुरुषत्रये ataq ॥४२॥
कर्म: TAA पुरुष पाषाणो धूसरः ससिकता मृत् ।
wet च शिरा यास्या पूर्वोत्तरतो द्वितीया च ॥४४॥
Should there be a jujube tree or an ant-hill to the north of an
A£mantaka tree, there would be water at a depth of 173 cubits and
at a distance of 6 cubits to the north of the Asmantaka. The signs
thereof are: in the first layer of 5 cubits a tortoise, then purple
stone, next, clay mixed with sand, then at first a southerly vein and
next, a north-easterly one.
वामेन हरिद्रतरोवंल्मीकर्चेज्जलं भवति qd ।
हस्तत्रितये सत्र्यंशैः पुम्भिः पञचमिभेवति ॥४५॥
नीलो भुजगः पुरुषे मृत्पोता मरकतोपमश्चाइमा ।
कृष्णा भु: प्रथमं वारुणी शिरा दक्षिणेनान्या ॥४६॥
If there is an ant-hill to the north of a Daru Haldi tree, there
will be water 282 cubits down and 3 cubits to the east of the tree.
The signs for this are : a blue snake upto a depth of 5 cubits, next
yellow clay, then an emerald-like stone, next black earth, then at
first a westerly vein and then a southerly one.
[The Haridradruma is called Maradarasina in Kannada. The
ordinary arasina is turmeric.]
जलपरिहीने देशे दृइ्यन्तेऽन्प जानिचिह्वानि ।
वीरणदूर्वा gaara यत्र तस्मिन् जलं पुरुष ॥४७॥
भार्ङ्गो त्रिवृता दन्ती सूकरपादी च लक्ष्मणा चेव ।
नवमालिका च हस्तद्वयेऽम्बु याम्ये fafa: पुरुषः ॥४८॥
If in a waterless place are seen the characteristics of a watery
region or soft Virana grass or Dürva, water will be found there
at 5 cubits below the earth. Or if a kind of brinjal (?) Trivrta (white
variety of Teori), Danti, Sükarapadi, Laksmana and Navamalika
(Double Jasmine) creeper be found to be growing in a place, water
will be got at a depth of 15 cubits and two-cubits to the south of
these herbs.

Exptorarton CU 7८५६५ d
[The Benares edition gives the wrong reading 'चेन्तिमित्तानि!
which spoils the metre. The commentator remarks that "gt and
others are 'स्वनामभिः सुप्रसिद्धाः. Jt is not clear what argi means.
Isit भार्गी (Bamanaithi) mentioned in the Amarako§a?]
स्निग्धाः प्रलम्बशाखा वामनविकटद्रुमाः समीपजलाः ।
सुषिरा AACA रूक्षाइच जलेन सन्त्यक्ताः ॥४६॥
Those trees which are glossy, have long overhanging branches,
are very short and very extensive, have water nearby (i.e. there
must be water under ground in such places); whereas those that ar
hollow, have pale leaves, and are dry,do not indicate water in the
neighbourhood.
तिलकाम्रातकवरुणकभल्लातकविल्बतिन्दुकाड्कोलाः ।
पिण्डारशिरीबाञजनपरूषका वञ्जुलोऽतिबला ॥ Wo ॥
एते यदि सुस्तिग्था वल्मीकैः परिवृतास्ततस्तोयम् ।
हस्तेस्त्रिमिरत्तरतरचतुभिरधेंन च नरेण ॥५१॥
If Tilaka (Tila), Amrataka (Spondias), Varuna (Tapia),
Bhallataka (Marking Nut tree), Bilva, Tinduka (a sort of ebony)
Ankola (walnut), Pindara, Sirisa Siris), Anjana, Parüsaka, Varijula
(Bayas) and Atibalà are very glossy and covered with ant-hills,
there will be water at a depth of 221 cubits and at a distarice of
3 cubits to the north of them.
AAT ATU यस्मित् सतृणे तु रावाजिता मही यत्र ।
तस्मिन् शिरा प्रदिष्टा वक्तव्यं at धनं चास्मिन् ॥५२॥
If in a grassless place a patch of ground is seen covered with
grass, or in a grassy plot, one is seen devoid of it, a vein of water
or treasure is to be declared to exist there.
[The commentator refers here to some opinion according
to which the depth of the vein also should be considered as in the
previous Sloka i.e. 4$ Purusas. ]
कण्टक्यकण्टकानां व्यःयापेऽम्मस्त्रिभिः करेः पश्चातु ।
लात्वा पुरुअत्रितयं त्रिमागयुक्त धनं वा स्यात् ॥५३॥

When a thorny tree flourishes in the midst of non-thorny trees
and vice versa, there will be a treasure or water at a depth of 183
cubits at a distance of 3 cubits to the west of the tree.
नदति महो गम्भोरं यस्मिंइ्चरणाहता जलं तस्मिन् ।
साधे स्त्रिभिम॑नुष्य: कौबेरी तत्र च शिरा स्यात् ॥५४॥
Where the earth being srtuck by feet emits a loud and pleasant
sound, a northerly water-vein will be found at the same place at a
depth of 174 cubits.
वृक्षस्येका शाखा यदि विनता भवति पाण्डुरा वा स्यात् ।
विज्ञातव्यं शाखातले जल त्रिपुरुषं खात्वा ॥५५॥
Should a single branch of a tree hang low or be colourless, it
should be understood that water exists at a depth of 15 cubits under
the branch.
फलकुसुसविकारो यस्य तस्य पुवं शिरा त्रिभिहंस्तेः i
भवति पुरुषेशचतुभिः पाषाणोऽधः क्षितिः पीता ॥५६॥
Where the fruits and flowers of a tree look unnatural (i.e. resemble others), there will be a water-vein flowing 20 cubits below at
a distance of 3 cubits toits east. Here the symptoms are: Stone
below and yellow clay.
यदि कण्टकारिका कण्टकेविना दृश्यते सितैः कुसुमः ।
तस्यास्त लेऽम्बु वाच्यं त्रिभिनंरेरघंपुरुषे च ॥५७॥
If a Kantakari (Brhati or Prickly Nightshade) plant is seen
devoid of thorns, but with white f lowers, there will be water underneath it at a depth of 171-cubits.
खर्जूरी द्विशिरस्का यत्र भवेज्जलविवर्जिते देशे ।
तस्याः पश्चिमभागे निर्देश्यं त्रिपुरुषेर्वारि ngon
Should there be a date tree with two tops in a waterless area,
water should be declared to exist 15 cubits below at a distance of
two cubits to the west of it.
[CF सारस्वत--
खर्जूरी द्विशिरस्का स्यान्नि्जेले चेत् करद्वये ।
निर्देश्यं पर्चिमे वारि खात्वाऽधः पुरुषत्रयम् ॥ ]
यदि सवति ककारः सितकुसुमः स्यात्पलाशवृक्षो वा।
सव्येन तत्र हुस्तद्वयेऽम्ब्ु पुरुषद्वये भवति ugen
SS seer RR ——

Ifa Karn ikara (Barahal) or Palaga (Butea Frondosa) tree bears
white flowers (instead of red ones), there will be water two cubits to
its south at a depth of 10 cubits.
यस्यामृष्मा धात्र्यां Fat वा तत्र वारि नरयुगले ।
निद ष्टव्या च शिरा महता तोयप्रवाहेश ॥६०॥
If steam or smoke arises from the earth, there will be water
underneath at 10 cubits; and it should be stated that the vein will
yield an abundant supply of water,
यस्मिन् क्षेत्रोहे शे जातं सस्यं विनाशमुपयाति i
स्निग्धसतिपाण्ड्रं वा महाशिरा नरयुगे तत्र ॥६१॥
If in the region of a field the crops that have grown perish or
if the vegetation there is very glossy and exceedingly white, there
will be a vein of abundant water on the spot at a depth of 10 cubits.
[The above exposition relates to the availability of water in
jungle and watery regions. Hereafter the author treats of waterdivination in desert areas.]
मरुदेशे भवति शिरा यथा तथातः परं प्रवक्ष्यामि ।
ग्रीवा करभाणामिव भूतलसंस्थाः शिरा यान्ति ॥६२॥
I shall now expound the possibilities of veins in desert regions.
The water-veins run below the earth’s surface in the form of camel’s
neck i.e. syphons).
[The camel’s neck is crooked, long and thin. The veins of
water in deserts would be very deep and slender. }
पुर्वोत्तरेश पीलोय दि वल्मीको जलं भवति पश्चातु ।
उत्तरगमना च शिरा विज्ञेया पञ्चमिः पुरुष:॥६३॥
fag «dx श्रादो मृत्कपिला तत्पर भवेद्धरिता !
भवति च पुरुषेऽघोऽश्मा तस्य तलेऽम्भो विनिर्देश्यम् ॥६४॥
-hill to north-east of a Pilu tree, there would
f 42 cubits to the west of the tree and ata
nning in a northIf there be an ant
be water at a distance o
depth of 25 cubits. The vein of water would be ru
erly direction. The signs would be: in the first Purusa (5 cubits) a
frog, then brown clay, thereafter green clay,
and beneath that water (in plenty).
then below, a stone

[I do not understand why Utpala says हरिता means शुक्ला. The
author does not give in thetext the distance of the vein from the tree
but Sage Sarasvata, who is quoted by the commentator, gives it as
E SECER SUP हस्तः” which Utpala takes to mean 4% cubits. If that be
correct, the reading ought to be सदले: instead of सरले: which must
be a printer's devil. Hence I take the liberty of correcting the reading in the following quotation from सारस्वत—
ऐशान्यां पोलुव्रुक्षस्य वल्मीकद्चेज्जलं वदेत्।
agr: सदलेहंस्ते: पश्चिमे नरपञ्चमे ॥
प्रथमे पुरुषे WH: कपिला हरिता च मृत् |
पाषाणस्य तले सौम्यां शिरां बहुजलां वदेत् ॥ |
पीलोरेव प्राच्यां वल्मीकोऽतोऽर्धपञ मे हस्तः ।
दिशि याम्यायां तोयं वक्तव्यं सप्तभिः qus: ॥६५॥
प्रथमे पुरुषे भुजगः सितासितो हस्तमात्रमुक्तिशच ।
दक्षिणतो वहति शिरा सक्षारं भुरि पानीयम् ॥६६॥
If the ant-hill be to the east of the Pilu tree, there would be
water 44 cubits to the south at a depth of 35 cubits. The signs would
be: in the first Purusa (5 cubits) a white and black snake of one
cubit length; to its south flows a vein with plenty of brackish water.
उत्तरतश्च करीरस्याहिगृहं दक्षिणे जलं स्वादु ।
«aw: Ferra पुरुषे पीतोऽत्र मण्ड्कः। ६७॥
Should there be an ant-hill to the north ofa Karira (Caril)
tree, there would be sweet water 50 cubits below at a distance of 42
cubits to the south of the tree. The sign at a depth of 5 cubits isa
yello w frog.
[The word Karira should not be taken here to mean ‘the
tender bamboo shoot.’ For, it is a desert tree, Maru vrksah, says
Ksirasvàmin (Amara II-77). He says (in II[-174) it is वंशविशेष or a
variety of bamboo.
Of. सारस्वत —
उदक्करीराद्दल्मीको IT चेज्जलं वदेत् ।
चतुभिदेक्षिणे हस्ते: साधेदेशन रादत: ॥
नरे भेकः पीतवर्णो ead fagua हि ॥]
रोहीतकस्य पश्वादहिवासःचेत्तव्रिभिः करेर्याम्ये ।
द्वादश पृरुषान् खात्वा सक्षारा पर्चिमेन शिरा ॥ ६८॥

Exploration oj Water oprinss Liv 2123
If there be an ant-hill to the west of a Rohitaka tree, there
would be a westerly vein of brackish water 60-cubits underneath at
a distance of 3 cubits to the south of the tree.
[According to the Amarakosa the tree is Rohitaka. Itis otherwise known as प्लीहृशत्रु-enemy of spleen ]
इन्द्रत रोर्वल्मीकः «mau: पश्चिम शिरा हस्ते ।
खात्वा चतुर्दश नरान् कपिला गोधा नरे प्रथमे NGEN
Should there be an ant-hill to the east of an Indra tree (Kahua),
there would be a vein of water one cubit to its west at a depth of 70
cubits. The indication is that at a depth of 5 cubits there would be
a brown alligator.
[According to the Amara (11-46) grag is the same as नदीसर्ज and
Arjuna. Ksirasvamin states that /ndradru has three meanings : Kutaja
Arjuna and Devadaru. It is possible that in the present context it
stands for Devadaru which grows on the hills.]
यदि वा सुवर्णनाम्नस्तरोभंवेद्दा मतो भुजड्भगृहम् |
हस्तद्ठये तु याम्ये पळवदशनरावसाने$म्बु Ul
क्षारं पयो ऽत्र नकुलो ऽर्धमानवे तास्रसन्तिभशचाइमा |
रक्ता च भवति वसुधा वहति शिरा दक्षिणा तत्र ॥७१॥
If there is an ant-hill to the north of a Suvarnaka tree (Cassia
fistula), there will be brackish water 75 cubits below at a distance
of two cubits to the south of the tree. When the earth is dug 21.-cubits,
there will be found a mongoose; next copper-coloured stone; then,
red earth; then there flows a southerly vein.
बदरीरोहितवृक्षौ argent चेद्विनापि वल्मीकम् ।
हस्तत्रयेऽम्बु पश्चातु बोडशभिर्मानवेभेंवति west
सुरसं जलमादौ दक्षिणा शिरा वहति चोत्तरेण्ान्या ।
पिष्टनिभः पाषाणो gq श्वेता वृश्चिको ATT ॥७२॥
If a jujube tree and a Rohita tree are joined together with or
without an ant-hill- nearby, there will be sweet water 80 cubits below
at a distance of 3 cubits to their west. First a southerly vein will
come to light and then a northerly one. The signs here are : the stone
will be paste-like, next white clay, and at 25 cubits down a scorpion
will be seen.

014 Brhat Samhita
सकरीरा Be बदरी त्रिभिः we: पश्चिमेन TAA: ।
प्रष्टादशमिः पुरुषरेशानी बहुजला च शिरा ॥७४॥
If a jujube tree be joined with a Karira tree, there would bea
north-easterly vein of copious water at a depth of 90 cubits and at a
distance of three cubits to the west of the tree.
पौलुसमता बदरी हस्तत्रयसम्मिते दिशि प्राच्याम् ।
विशत्या पुरुषाणामशोष्यमम्भोऽत्र सक्षारस् ॥७५॥
If the jujube tree is combined with a Pilu tree, there will be an
inexhaustible supply of brackish water 100 cubits below to the east
of the tree at a distance of three cubits.
ककुभकरीरावेकत्र संयुतौ यत्र ककुभबिल्वौ वा ।
हस्तद्वयेऽम्बु पश्चान्नरे भवेत् पञ्चविशत्या ॥७६॥
If a Kakubha (Indradru?) and a Karira tree or Kakubha and
Bilva (Marmelos) trees are joined together, there will be water 125
cubits below at a distance of two cubits to the west of the trees.
वल्मीकमूर्धनि यदा दूर्वा च कुशाइच पाण्ड्राः सन्ति।
कूपो मध्ये देयो जलमत्र नरकाविशत्या ॥७७॥
When the Dürvà grass (Bent grass) or the holy grass growing
on the top of an ant-hill appear pale-white, a well should be sunk in
its middle, There will be water in this place at a depth of 105 cubits.
भूमि: कदम्बकयुता वल्मीके यत्र दृश्यते दुर्वा ।
हस्तद्वयेन याम्ये नरंजलं पर्ज्चाविश्त्या ॥७८॥
If Dürvà (Bent grass) is seen on an anthill in a place full of
Kadamba trees (Nauclea orientalis), there will be water at a depth of
125 cubits and at a distance of two cubits to the south of the anthill.
[The Kadamba tree is supposed to be dear to Balarama, because
it has the smell of wine We do not know if people were extracting
liquor from it. The धन्वन्तरि निघण्टु (V-105) says
“पर: कदम्बः प्रावृषेण्यः कादम्बर्यो हलिप्रिय: ।
नीपो घुलिकदम्बोऽन्यः सुवासो वृत्तपुष्पक: ॥
This tree has two other names, धाराकदम्ब and राजकदम्ब. |

Exploration of Water Springs LIV
gı
ct
वल्मीकत्रयमध्ये रोहीतकपादपो यदा भवति ।
नानावृक्षैः सहित स्त्रिभि्जेलं तत्र वक्तव्यम् ॥७९॥
हस्तचतुष्के मध्यात् षोडशमभिरचा ङ्गः लँरुदग्वारि ।
चत्वार्ररशत्पुरुषान् खात्वाऽइमाऽधः शिरा मवति ॥८०॥
If there is a Rohitaka tree along with three other trees of different types in the centre of three ant-hills forming the apexes of a
triangle, there will be water 200 cubits below at a distance of 4
cubits and 16 digits to the north of the centre. When the bottom is
reached, there will be stone and beneath that water-vein.
ग्रन्थिप्रचुरा यस्मिञ् WAT भवेदुत्तरेण वल्मीकः ।
पश्चात्पञचकरान्ते शतार्धसंर्यरनरः सलिलम् ॥८१॥
If there be an ant-hill to the north of a knotty Sami tree ( Saen)
there will be water at a depth of 250 cubits at a distance of 5 cubits
to its west.
एकस्थाः Ta यदा वल्मौका मध्यमो भवेच्छवेतः ।
तस्मिन् शिरा प्रदिष्टा नरषष्ट्या पञवचर्वाजतया ॥८२॥
When there are five ant-hills in one and the same place and
the central one white, there is said to bea water-vein below the
central one at a depth of 275 cubits.
सपलाशा यत्र शमी पश््चिमभागेऽम्बु मानवः WEST ।
nials: प्रथमं सवालुका पीतमृत्परतः ॥८३॥
Where there is a Sami tree joined with a Palasa (Buteo frondosa) tree, there will be water 300 cubits below at a distance of
5 cubits to its west. Where the earth is dug 23 cubits, there will
be a snake at first, and then yellow clay mixed with gravel.
[Cf सारस्वत--
शमी पलाशसंयुक्ता यत्र स्यात् तत्र TRAA ।
पञ्चहस्ताज्जलं वाच्यं TESTA पुरुषेरधः ॥
ग्रत्राधेपुरुषे wd: पीता मृत् स्यात्सवालुका |
तदधोऽम्भो विनिर्देश्यं दीर्घकालं प्रवाहितम् ॥ |
वल्मीकेन परिवृतः शवेतो रोहीतको भवर्यास्मन् i
पूर्वश हस्तमात्रे सप्तत्या भानवेरस्तु ॥८४॥
Where there is a white Rohitaka tree surrounded by an anthill, there will be water at a depth of 350 cubits and one cubit to
the east.

Brhat 47 s
516 That Sàmhiua
इयेता कण्टकबहुला यन्न शमी दक्षिगोन तत्र पयः 1
नरपञ्चकसंपुतया सप्तत्याहिनराध च ॥८५॥
If there 18 8 white Sami tree full of thorns, there will be
water at depth of 875 cubits and one cubit to the south of the tree.
At a depth of 24 cubits there will be a snake.
a number of desert trees with or with-
[Thus the author refers to
uiding factors locating water,
out ant-hills in their vicinity as the g
In modern times tube wells arc sunk to get water from very great
depths. Here the maximum depth in desert areas is 375 cubits and
the minimum is 25 cubits, while elsewhere they are 37% cubits and
71 cubits respectively. ]
Cf. सारस्वत--
इवेतातिकण्टका यत्र शमी स्यात् तत्र दक्षिण ।
हस्तेन पञ्चसप्तत्या नराणां निदिशेज्जलम् ॥
खातेऽर्धपुरुषे सर्पो रश्यतेऽञ्जनसप्रभः ।
सुरसं च जलं ज्ञेयं चिरचारभ्रवाहितम् ॥ ]
मरुदेशे यच्चिह्न न जाङ्कले तेजेलं विनिर्देश्यम् ।
जम्बूवेतसपु्वे ये पुरुषास्ते मरौ द्विगुणाः ॥८६॥
The existence of water in a semi-desert area (where there is
little water) should not be predicted on such symptoms as are
found in a desert. If the characteristics mentioned viz. Jambi,
Vetasa etc., in connection with waterless tracts, are seen in deserts,
water should be declared to exist there at twice the depth mentioned.
[The symptoms of Jangala or semi-desert tracts, are mentioned
in Verses 6 and 8 supra. Sometimes the characteristics of Jangala
and Anüpa tracts may be found in desert areas, and vice versa, but
prediction of water will have to be made on the basis of the type
of land. In the former case the measure of the depth should be
doubled and in the latter halved.
जम्वस्त्रिविता मोर्वों शिशुमारी सारिवा शिवा ध्यासा।
वीरुधयो वाराही ज्योतिष्मती गरुडवेगा च ॥८७॥
सूकरिकमाषपर्णीव्या घ्रपदाइचेति यद्यहेनिलये |
वल्मीकाइुत्तरतस्त्रिभिः करेस्त्रपुरुषे तोयम् ॥८८॥

Exploration of Water Springs LIV i
If a Jambü tree, Trivrt, Maurvi, Sigumart, Sariva, Siva
gyama, Varahi, Jyotismati, Garudavega, Sükarika, Masaparni E.
vyaghrapada creeper grows onan ant-hill, there should be water
15 cubits below at a distance of 3 cubits to the north of the
ant-hill
(There isa big list of botanical names given here. Except
Jambu all are herbs.
In the second line of the first verse there is a metrical flaw,
in that the fourth quarter is short of one Matra or syllabic instant;
and there is a जगण in the 5th Gana. In this verse Varahamihira
uses a new word viz. वीरुधय: which is the plural of वीरुधि, which is
not in common usage. ]
एतदनूपे वाच्यं जाद्भलभूमो तु पञ्चभिः पुरुषः ।
vata नि्मित्तैमंरुदेशे सप्तभिः कथयेत् use
The above measures apply only to those areas which abound
in water; but in a semi-desert region the depth should be 25 cubits.
If these indications are found in a desert water should be declared
to exist at a depth of 35 cubits.
[This and the previous two verses are meant for illustrating
the principle enunciated in verse 86. |
एकनिभा यत्र मही तु रात रुवल्मीकगुल्मपरिहीना |
तस्यां यत्र विकारो भवति धरित्र्यां जलं तत्र॥६०॥
Where a patch of ground, otherwise uniform and devoid of
grass, trees, ant-hills and bushes, contains some unusual characteristics, there will be water 25 cubits below.
(Cf. सारस्वत — |
एकवर्णा मही यत्र वृक्षगुल्मतृणादिभिः ।
वल्मीकैर्चापि रहिता तस्यां तत्र विपर्ययः ॥
पञ्चभिः पुरुषैस्तत्र जलं भूमावधः स्थितम् ॥ |
यत्र स्निग्धा निम्ना सवालुका सानुनादिनी वा स्यात्।
तत्रार्धपञ्चकैर्वारि मानवः पञ्चमियंदि वा uetu
If the earth is soft (not dry), low, sandy or emitting sound,
there will be water in that place at a depth of 223 or 25 cubits.
स्निग्धतरूणां याम्ये नरंग्चतुभिजलं प्रभूतं च ।
तरुगहनेऽपि हि विकृतो यस्त स्मात् तद्वदेव वदेत् NERU
ST sn

516 Brhat Sàmhiàa
इवेता कण्टकबहुला यत्र शमी दक्षिणेन तत्र पयः ।
नरपञ्चकसंयुतया सप्तत्याहिनं राधे च USK
Ifthereisa white Sami tree full of thorns, there will be
water at depth of 375 cubits and one cubit to the south of the tree.
At a depth of 24 cubits there will be a snake.
[Thus the author refers to a number of desert trees with or without ant-hills in their vicinity as the guiding factors locating water.
In modern times tube wells are sunk to get water from very great
depths. Here the maximum depth in desert areas is 375 cubits and
the minimum is 25 cubits, while elsewhere they are 37} cubits and
74 cubits respectively. ]
Cf. सारस्वत---
इवेतातिकण्टका यत्र शमी स्यात् तत्र दक्षिण |
हस्तेन पञ्चसप्तत्या नराणां निदिशेज्जलम् |!
खाते५धंपुरुषे सर्पो रश्यतेऽञ्जनसप्रभः |
सुरसं च जलं ज्ञेयं चिरचारभ्रवाहितम् t]
मरुदेशे यच्चिह्नं न जाङ्गले तैजैलं विनिदेश्यस् ।
जम्बूवेतसपू्वे ये पुरुषास्ते मरो द्विगुणाः ॥८६॥
The existence of water in a semi-desert area (where there is
little water) should not be predicted on such symptoms as are
found in a desert. If the characteristics mentioned viz. Jambu,
Vetasa etc., in connection with waterless tracts, are seen in deserts,
water should be declared to exist there at twice the depth mentioned.
[The symptoms of Jangala or semi-desert tracts, are mentioned
in Verses 6 and 8 supra. Sometimes the characteristics of Jangala
and Anüpa tracts may be found in desert areas, and vice versa, but
prediction of water will have to be made on the basis of the type
of land. In the former case the measure of the depth should be
doubled and in the latter halved.
जम्बूस्त्रिवृता मौर्वो शिशुमारी सारिवा शिवा श्यामा।
वीरुधयो वाराही ज्योतिष्मती गरुडवेगा च ॥८७॥
सूकरिकमाबपरणाँव्यात्रपदाइचेति यद्यहेनिलये ।
बल्मीकाढुत्तरतस्त्रभिः करे स्त्रिपुरुषे तोयम् ॥८८॥

Exploration of Water Springs LIV i
If a Jambi tree, Trivrt, Maurvi, Sifumàárt, Sariva, Siva
gyama, Varahi, Jyotismati, Garudavega, Sükarika, Masaran or
vyaghrapada creeper grows onan ant-hill, there should be water
15 cubits below at a distance of 3 cubits to the north of the
ant-hill j i
[There is a big list of botanical names given here. Except
ambü all are herbs.
In the second line of the first verse there is a metrical flaw
in that the fourth quarter is short of one Matra or syllabic dene
and there is a जगरा in the Sth Gana. In this verse Varáhamihira
uses a new word viz. वीरुधय: which is the plural of वीरुधि, which is
not in common usage.]
एतदनूपे वाच्यं जाडूलभुमो तु पञ्चभिः qeq: ।
vara निमित्तैरमरुदेशे सप्तभिः कथयेत् usen
The above measures apply only to those areas which abound
in water; but in a semi-desert region the depth should be 25 cubits.
If these indications are found in a desert water should be declared
to exist at a depth of 35 cubits.
[This and the previous two verses are meant for illustrating
the principle enunciated in verse 86.]
एकनिभा यत्र मही तु णात रुवल्मीकगुल्मपरिहीना |
तस्यां यत्र विकारो भवति धरित्र्यां जलं तत्र॥९०॥
Where a patch of ground, otherwise uniform and devoid of
grass, trees, ant-hills and bushes, contains some unusual characteristics, there will be water 25 cubits below.
[Cf. सारस्वत — 7
एकवर्णा मही यत्र वृक्षगुल्मतृणादिभि: ।
वल्मीकैुचापि रहिता तस्यां तत्र विपर्ययः ॥
पञ्चभिः पुरुषैस्तत्र जलं भ्रुमावधः स्थितम् ॥ |
यत्र स्निरधा निम्ता सवालुका सानुनादिनी वा स्यात्।
तत्रार्धपञ्चकैर्वारि मानवेः पञ्चभियंदि वा ॥६१॥
If the earth is soft (not dry), low, sandy or emitting sound,
there will be water in that place at a depth of 221 or 25 cubits.
स्निग्धतरूणां याम्ये नरेश्चतुर्मिजेलं प्रभूतं च ।
तरुगहनेऽपि हि विकृतो यस्त स्मात् तद्वदेव वदेत् ॥६२॥

518 Brhat Samhita
There will be abundant water at a depth of 20 cubits to the
south of trees that are very glossy. The same result should be
declared if a tree in the midst of a thicket shows uncommon
features [water will be found at a depth of 20 cubits to the south
of that tree.]
नमते यत्र धरित्री सार्धे पुरुषेऽम्बु जाद्भलानूपे ।
कोटा वा यत्र विनालयेन बहवोऽस्बु तत्रापि ॥६३॥
Where in a semi-desert or a place full of water the earth goes
down being trodden upon, or where numerous insects are seen without their abode, there, will be water at a depth of 74 cubits.
उष्णा शीता च मही शोतोष्णाभ्भस्त्रिमितरः सार्धः |
इन्द्रधनुमंत्स्यो वा वल्मीको वा चतुहँस्तात् ॥९४॥
An isolated cold spot in a warm ground or vice versa will have
water at a depth of 17} cubits. Where in a semi-desert or watery
region a rain-bow, anti-hill or fish is seen, water will be found at
the same depth at a distance of four cubits therefrom.
वल्मीकानां पङ्क्त्यां यद्येको$भ्युच्छितः शिरा तदधः ।
शुष्यति न रोहते वा सस्यं यस्यां च तत्राम्भः NEXU
If in arow of ant-hills, one is taller than the rest, there isa
vein of water four cubits underneath that. Similarly there should be
water at the same depth in a spot where vegetation that has grown
withers away or does not sprout at all. ‘This rule is applicable to
semidesert and watery tracts only. (Another meaning is : at a depth
of 17} cubits at a distance of 4 cubits from that.)
(Cf. सारस्वत --
वल्मीकपङ्क्त्यां यद्योकोऽम्युच्छितस्तदधो जलम् ।
न रोहते शुष्यते वा यत्र सस्यं चतुष्करात् ॥
जलं तत्रैव निर्देश्यं भूमौ निःसंशयं तदा ॥
Here there is a ticklish problem : In almost all the cases the
depth of water is given in Purusas and the distance in cubits. However, Bhattotpala interprets in this verse :
“तदा तदधस्तथोच्छितस्य वल्मीकस्याधस्तले चतुभिहंस्तैः शिरा जलं भवति 1”
When water is said to be just underneath a thing, there is no
necessity for mentioning any distance from it. However, the state-

Exploration of Water Springs LIV 519
ment of Sage Sarasvata, चतुहुंस्तात्, which is in the Ablative case
gives room for doubt whether the reference is to horizontal length
or not. In our previous edition (page 477) we have taken it to mean
the horizontal distance of 4 cubits. If this be the correct interpretation, we might take the depth from the previous verse, viz. ara स्त्रिभि-
नरै: ie 174 cubits.]
न्यग्रोघपलाशोदुम्बरेः समेतस्त्रिमिजेलं तदघः ।
वटपिप्पलसमवाये त द्वद्वाच्यं शिरा चोदक् ॥९६॥
If a banyan, Butea Frondosa and Glomerous fig tree, or a banyan and a holy fig tree are found together, there will be water underneath them at a depth of three-cubits; and the vein will be flowing
towards the north. [Another meaning :—there will be water underneath at a distance of 3 cubits from them and at a depth of 15
cubits (174 ?)]
[In the interpretation of this verse too the same doubt persists:
The word fafa; may also mean at a depth of 15 cubits. Even Sage
Sarasvata’s words do not help resolve the doubt, for he says :
पलाशोदुम्बरौ यत्र स्यातां न्यग्रो घसंयुतौ ।
वटपिप्पलकौ वाथ समेतौ तदधो जलम् ॥
करैसित्रिभिरुदक् चाम्भः शिरां बहुजलां वदेत् ॥
The last line may also be construed as: There will be water
underneath them at a distance of 3 cubits to the north of the trees:
and the vein will be a source of abundant water.]
In the next two verses the author gives effects of sinking wells
in the different quarters of a village or town.
श्राग्नेये यदि कोण ग्रामस्य पुरस्य वा भवेत्कूपः ।
नित्यं स करोति भयं दाहं च समानुषं प्रायः ॥९७॥
नऋ तकोण बालक्षयं च वनिताभयं च वायव्ये ।
दिक्त्रयमेतत्त्यक्त्वा शेषासु शुभावहाः कूपाः ॥६८॥
Should there be a well to the south-east of a village or town,
it would mostly cause constant fear and danger to men from. fire.
Should it be situated in the south-west, it would cause infant
mortality; and in the north-west, danger to women. Wells sunk in
quarters other than these three would lead to auspicious results.
[This may be applied to wells in houses as well. The phrase,
समानुषं दाहम्, is interpreted by our commentator as : मनुष्यादि दहति
ग्रग्निभयं करोतीत्यर्थः, which is rather far-fetched. ]

520 Brhat Samhita
सारस्वतेन मुनिना दकार्गलं यत्कृतं तदवलोक्य ।
भार्याभिः कृतमेत दूवृत्तेरपि मानवं वक्ष्ये uec
Thus have I expounded the subject of water-divination in
verses composed in the Arya metre, having studied the work on
the subject written by Sage Sarasvata. Now I shall treat of the
same subject in verses composed in the Vrtta type of metres as
taught by Sage Manu.
[As I have mentioned in the beginning of this chapter Manu
and Sarasvata had both written on Dakdrgala. Vardhamihira has
summarized the former’s in Vrtta and the latter in Arya. In Sanskrit prosody Vrtta and Jati are the two categories of metres. In the
former the Ganas viz. म, य, X, स, d, ज, भ, and न are based on
certain groups of three syllables, short and long, whereas the latter
on Matris or syllabic instants. Arya being Jati, is based on Matragana.]
स्निग्धा यतः पादपगुल्मवल्ल्यो निदिछद्रपत्राइव ततः शिरास्ति ।
पद्मक्षुरोशी रकुलाः सगुण्डाः काशाः कुशा वा नलिका नलो वा ॥१००॥
खर्ज्रजम्ब्वर्जूनवेतसाः स्युः क्षीरान्विता वा द्रमगुत्मवल्ल्यः |
छत्रेमनागाः शतपत्रनोपाः स्यु्नकतमालाइच ससिन्दुवाराः ॥१०१॥
विभीतको वा मदयन्तिका वा यत्रास्ति तर्मिन्पुरुषत्रयेऽम्भः |
स्यात्पर्वतस्योपरि पवंतो$न्यस्त त्रापि मूले पुरुषत्रयेऽम्भः ॥ १०२॥
There will be a water-vein at a depth of 15 cubits in a place
where the trees, bushes and creepers are glossy and densely covered
with leaves, (or have leaves without holes) or where land-lotus, Goksura or Sadanga, Usira, Kula, Gundra, 1९389, Nalika or Nala
(a kind of grass) grow. Water will be available at the same depth,
if the following trees are found: Date trees, Jambi, Arjuna and
Vetasa or milky trees, shrubs and creepers, or mushrooms, Hastikarna, Nagakesara, Satapatra, Kadamba, Karoja and Sinduvara
or Vibhitaka or Madayantika. Similarly there is water at the same
depth at the foot of mountain, if that be surmounted by another
mountain.
[According to the commentator the water will be found at the
foot of the upper mountain and not of the lower one. Manu’s
words too do not clarify the point.

Exploration of Water Springs LIV 591
Cf. मनु--
गुल्मपादपवल्ल्य: स्युः पत्रेशचाखण्डितैर्युताः ।
तदधो विद्यते वारि खाते तु पुरुषत्रये ॥
पद्मक्षुरोशीरकुला गुण्डा काशः कुशोऽथवा ।
नलिकानलखर्जूरजम्बूवेतसकार्जुनाः ।॥।
यत्र स्युर्दुमवल्ल्यश्च क्षीरयुक्ताः फलान्विताः |
छत्रेभनागनीपाइच झतपत्रविभीतकाः d
सिन्दुवारा नक्तमालाः सुगन्धा मदयन्तिका: ।
यत्रैते स्युस्तत्र जलं खातेऽम्भः पुरुषत्रये ॥
गिरेरुपरि यत्रान्यः पर्वतः स्यात्ततो जलम् ।
तस्यैव मूले पुरुषै स्त्रिभिर्वाऽधो विनिदिशेत् ॥
The metre of these verses up to 109 is उपजाति. |
या मौडिजकः काशकुशेश्च युक्ता नीला च मृद्यत्र सशर्करा च |
तस्यां प्रभूतं सुरसं च तोयं कृष्णाथवा यत्र च रक्तमृद्दा ॥१०३॥
There is plenty of sweet water ina place which has Murija
grass, reeds and sacrificial grass, where the earth is blue and mixed
with pebbles, and where the earth is black or red.
सशकरा ताम्रमही कषायं क्षार धरित्री कपिला करोति ।
श्रापाण्ड्रायां लवर प्रदिष्टं मृष्टं पयो नीलवसुन्धरायाम् ॥१०४॥
A copper-coloured earth mixed with gravel will yield water
of astringent taste; red-brown earth makes the water brackish; a
pale white earth produces salt-water; and blue earth, sweet water.
शाकाइवकरर्जुनबिल्वसर्जाः श्रीपण्यं रिष्टाधर्विशपारच ।
छिद्रेश्च पत्रेट्रेमगुल्मवल्ल्यो रुक्षाइच दूरेऽम्बु निवेदयन्ति ॥१०५॥
Saka, Agvakarna, Arjuna, Bilva, Sarja, Sriparni, Arista,
(soap-berry tree ?), Dhava (Lythrum fruticosum) and Sirhgapa trees,
other trees, shrubs and creepers being coarse and having leaves full
of holes, indicate the existence of water far away.
[This idea has already been referred to in verse 49 supra.]
सुर्याग्निभस्मोष्ट्ख रानुवर्णा या निजला सा वसुधा प्रदिष्टा i
रक्ताडःक्राः क्षीरयुताः करीरा रक्ता धरा चेज्जलमश्मनोष्धः ॥१०६॥
The land which has the colour of the Sun, fire, ashes, camel
or donkey, is said to be waterless. If the Karira exudes milk and has
red sprouts, and the earth red, there will be water underneath
stones.

522 Brhat Samhita
वेदुर्यमुदगाम्बुदमेचकाभा पाफोन्मुखोदुश्बरसन्निभा वा |
भुड्ाञ्जनामा कपिलाभवा या ज्ञेया शिला भुरिसमौपतोया ॥१०७॥
A rock that resembles beryl, green gram, cloud, dark gem,
ripe fig, bee or collyrium, or is brown, should be understood as
having abundant water nearby.
[भङ्गाञ्जनाभा is another reading. The meaning then would be :
which looks, when cut, like collyrium.]
पारावतक्षौद्रघुतोपमा या क्षौमस्य वस्त्रस्य च तुल्यवर्णा ।
या सोशवल्ल्याइच समानरूपा साप्याशु तोयं कुरुतेऽक्षयं च ॥१०८॥
A rock or stone which resembles in colour a pigeon, honey
ghee, silken cloth or the Soma creeper, yields soon inexhaustible
water.
ata: समेता पूषतेविचित्रैरापाण्ड्भस्मोष्ट्खरानुरूपा |
भृद्गोपमाङ्गुष्ठिकपुष्पिका वा सूर्याग्निवर्णा च शिला वितोया ॥१०९॥
A rock that is full of red or variegated spots that is pale white
or has the colour of ashes, camels, donkeys, the Sun, fire, bee or
the flower of the Angusthika creeper (bluish red), is incapable of
giving any water nearby.
चन्द्रातपस्फटिकमौक्ति कहेमरूपा
याइचेन्द्रनील मणिहिङ्गुलुकाञ्जनाभाः ।
सुर्योदयांशुहरितालनिभाश्च याः स्यु-
स्ताः शोभना मुनिवचोऽत्र च वृत्तमेतत् ॥११०॥
Stones that possess the colour of or lustre of moonlight, crystal
gem, pearl, gold, sapphire, vermilion, collyrium, rays of the rising
Sun or yellow orpiment, are auspicious. ‘The following is the authority of Sage Manu on the point, couched in the Vrtta (Indravajra)
metre.
[The metre is वसन्ततिलका. ]
एता ह्यमेद्याइच शिलाः शिवाश्च यक्षेश्च नागेशच सदाभिजुष्टाः ।
येषां च राष्ट्रेषु भवन्ति राज्ञां तषासवृष्टिन भवेत् कदाचित् ॥१११॥
These stones, enumerated above, are auspicious and hence
ought not to be broken, since they are always tenanted by Yaksas
and Nagas. Those kings, in whose kingdoms such stones or rocks
are found, will never experience drought.
[The metre of this and the following two verses is gegqwiT
or उपजाति.]

Exploration of Water Springs LIV 523
Next the author mentions some methods of breaking stones.
भेदं यदा नेति शिला तदानीं पलाशकाष्ठंः सह तिन्दुकानाम् |
प्रज्वालयित्वानलमरिनिवर्णा सुधाम्बुसिक्ता प्रविदारमेति ॥११२॥
When a stone does not break ever when it is hammered, a fire
should be burnt on it with the logs of Palasa (Butea frondosa) and
Tinduka (a sort of ebony) trees until the stone assumes the colour
of the fire i.e. red, and then it should be sprinkled with lime water.
Then it will break easily.
[According to Utpala सुधा means क्षीर or milk, which is patently
wrong. Varahamihira commits a grammatical error here by using
क्त्वा suffix in प्रज्वालयित्वा instead of प्रज्वाल्य. ]
तोयं शृतं सोक्षकभस्सना वा यत्सप्तकृत्वः परिषेचनं तत् ।
कार्य शरक्षारयुतं शिलायाः प्रस्फोटनं वह्विवितापितायाः ॥ ११३॥
The ashes of the Moksaka tree should be boiled in water and
mixed with the ashes of reeds. The rock, being heated (as explained
in the previous verse), should be sprinkled seven times successively
with the decoction. Then it will break.
[The reading we have is Bd which is wrong. It should be
शृतम्. Hence I have taken the liberty of correcting it. The mistake
must have been committed by the scribe, the tree मोक्षक is otherwise
known as म॒णीवक according to Utpala, but the धन्वन्तरिनिघण्टु says :
मुष्कको मोक्षको घण्टामूषको रञ्जकस्तथा |
क्षारश्रेष्ठो गोलिहशूच द्विविधः Aap: ॥ (V. 132).]
तक्रकाञ्जिकसुराः सकुलत्था योजितानि बदराणि च तस्मिन् ।
सप्त रात्रमुषितान्यभितप्तां दारयन्ति हि शिलां परिषेकः ॥११४॥
Butter-milk, sour gruel and liquor with horse gram and
jujube fruits, mixed together, must be kept for seven nights and
then poured on the hard rock that has been heated as before. Then
it will break.
[I feel that it is not enough if the mixture mentioned here is
poured only once. It should be poured seven times, each time after
the stone is heated. For, the author uses the plural in परिषेकः and the
word सप्तकत्व: appears in the previous verse. Utpala, however, does
not clarify the point.
The metre is स्वागता. |
नैम्बं पत्रं त्वक् च नालं तिलानां सापामार्ग तिन्दुक स्याद् गुड्ची ।
गोमत्रेण स्रावितः क्षार एषां षट्कृत्वोऽतस्तापितो भिद्यतेऽश्मा ut tuu

524 Brhat Samhita
The leaves and bark of the Neem tree, sesamum stalks, Apamarga (a medicinal creeper), Tinduka and Amrtà creeper should
be burnt to ashes. These ashes should be dissolved in cow’s urine
and poured six times on the stone heated successively. Then it will
break.
[Utpala interprets तिलानां नालम् as “यस्मिन्तम्यन्तरे कोशाकारे तिला
भवन्तिः which would mean the pods of sesamum, but the word
नाल means only the stalk.
ग्रपामार्ग is called uttarane in Kannada. cf. धन्वन्तरि. अपामागस्तु
शिखरी प्रत्यकपुष्पी मयूरक: । श्रधःशय्याथ किणिही gig: खरमञ्जरी ॥ स एवोक्तः
शैखरिको मकंटी दुरभिग्रहः । पत्रपुष्पी च शिखरः कूटो मर्क॑टपिप्पली ॥ (1 260The metre is शालिनी. |
V. 116 Same as L 26.
V. 117 Same as L, 26.
[I do not understand the relevance of these two verses to the
subject of breaking a stone. Even the commentator does not explain
why the matter pertaining to the sword should be introduced here.
Possibly the author means by repeating these verses to suggest
that the unguent and the ashes mentioned there are to be applied
to the heated stone for breaking it, or that the sword or hammer
may be made more effective in breaking the stone by the application
of these unguents etc.]
Next the author treats of the construction of ponds, wells,
etc. and their effects.
पाली प्रागपरायताम्बु सुचिरं धत्त न याम्योत्तरा
कल्लोलैरवदारमेति मरुता सा प्रायज्ञः प्रेरित: ।
तां चेदिच्छति सारदारुमिरपां सम्पातमावारयेत्
पाषाणादिभिरेव वा प्रतिचयं क्षुण्णं द्विपाइवादिभिः ॥११८॥
A rectangular tank with its longer banks on the eastern and
western sides retains water fora long time, while the one with
those sides in the south and north does not, because it is eroded
invariably by the strong waves raised by the wind. Should one wish
for such a pond (with the long sides on the southern and northen
sides owing to exigencies of the land), he would do well to guard
its walls against the impact of the water with strong timber or with
stones and the like (i.e. with burnt bricks). The bed of the pond or

Exploration of Water Springs LIV 525
tank should also be made hard by being trampled by elephants,
horses, etc.
[The author uses two rare words here, viz. पाली and चय. The
former is explained by Utpala as वापी, but actually it means a line
i.e. embankment; the latter is not. In the Amara, however, we get चय
as a synonym of qq which is generally used in the sense of an embankment, e.g. वप्रक्रीडा. Ksirasvamin, however, says चीयते चय: प्राकाराधारः,
which would mean the ‘base of the wall. In the present context it
may also be taken to mean ‘the joints’, which must be made
proof against water. In villages the instruments that are used for
making the earth hard are heavy wooden pieces witha flat face
resembling the elephant’s foot.
The metre is शार्दूलविक्रीडित. ]
ककुभवटास्रप्लक्षकदम्बेः सनिचुलजम्बूवेतसनीपेः |
कुरबकतालाशोकभधृकेबंकुलविमिश्रेशचावृततीरस् ut ten
The banks of the tank should be shaded with Arjuna, banyan,
mango, pipal, nauclia orientalis, Hijjal, Eugenia, Bayas, or Bent, Nipa
(Dhülikadamba ?) globe amaranth (the crimson variety), Tala,
Agoka, Bassia and Bakula trees.
[Though Kadamba and Nipa are considered as synonyms, here
we have to take Nipa as another variety of Kadamba.
The metre is अनवसिता. |
दारं च नैर्वाहिकमेकदेशे कार्यं शिलासञ्चितवारिमागंस् |
कोशस्थितं निविवर कपाटं कृत्वा ततः पांसुभिरावपेत्तम् ॥१२०॥
An outlet for the water should be made on one side with the
sluice being built of stones; and a panel without apertures, fixed in
a frame and fastened to the earth with mud.
[The metre is इन्द्रवप्त्रा.]
In the next two verses he gives a prescription for purifying
water.
झ्रज्जनमुस्तोशी रः सराजकोशातकामलकचूरांः ।
कतकफलसमायुक्तेर्योगः कपे प्रदातव्यः ॥१२१॥
A mixture of antimony, and the powder of Bhadramusta (a
kind of grass) bulbs, andropogon, Rajakosataka and myrobalan
combined with Kataka nuts should be dropped into a well (for
purifying the water).

526 Brhat Samhita
[About अञ्जन the commentator says: प्रसिद्धो वृक्षविशेषः । सौवीरक
इति केचित् । Even the latter word has three meanings: antimony, sour
gruel and jujube. The mixture comprises six ingredients.]
कलुष' कटुकं लवणां विरसं सलिलं यदि वाऽशुभगन्धि भवेत् ।
तदनेन भवत्यमलं सुरसं सुसुगन्धि गुणेरपरेशच ga ॥१२२॥
Even the water that is muddy, bitter, saltish, bereft of good
taste, and of bad odour, will become clear (pure), of good taste
and good smell and endowed with other good qualities ]
[The other qualities are said to be freedom from bitter taste
and saltishness.
The metre is तोटक. |
Next he speaks of the good asterisms for sinking wells.
हस्तो मघानुराधापुष्पधनिष्ठोत्तरारि रोहिण्यः i
शतभिषगित्यारम्भे कूपानां शस्यते ATT: ॥॥१२३॥
The following asterisms are beneficial for sinking wells : Rohini,
Pusya, Magha, the three Uttaras (Uttaraphalguni, Uttarasadha
and Uttarabhadrapada), Hasta, Anuradha, Dhanistha and Satabhisaj.
कृत्वा वरुणस्य बलि वटवेतसकीलक शिरास्थाने ।
कुसुमेरगन्धे धूपः सम्पुज्य निधापयेत्प्रयसम् ॥ १२४॥
One should, first of all, offer worship with oblations to Varuna
and erect a peg of banyan or Vetasa tree at the place of the vein,
having worshipped it with flowers, perfumes and incense.
Aaga प्रथममेव मया प्रदिष्टं
ज्येष्ठामतीत्य बलदेवमतादि दृष्ट्वा ।
मौमं दकार्गेलमिदं कथित द्वितीयं
सम्यग्वराहमिहिरेरा मुनिप्रसादात् ॥१२५॥
I have already explained the subject of water born of the
clouds (i.e. celestial or atmospheric water) which is judged after the
full Moon in the month of Jyestha (as stated in XXIII supra), on
the authorty of Baladeva and others. This second method of exploring the subterranian water has now been clearly treated by me,
Varahamihira, by the grace of the Sages (i.e. Sarasvata and Manu).
[This verse is not found in the Benares edition. The metre is
वसन्ततिलका. |
[Note : See Chart of Water-Veins and Indicators.]

वक्षायुवेंदाध्यायः ॥५५॥
Chapter LV— Treatment of Trees
This too is an important scientific topic that was cultivated in
ancient India. Gardening is closely connected with town-planning,
house-building and construction of tanks. Ancient Sages likeKasyapa
and Paragara have laid down rules about the trees to be planted in
gardens, grafting and transplantation of trees as well as diseases of
trees and their treatments. Sixteen varieties of Anüpaja (born in
watery tracts) trees are mentioned in connection with transplantation
and grafüng. They have also taught the diagnosis of diseases of
trees and their treatment. There are many works of later origin
such as the KrsiparaSara, Abhilasitarthacintamani, Vi$vavallabha of
Cakrapanimisra, Vrksayurveda of Surapala and the Upavanavinoda
which deal with many topics such as fertilizers for curing diseases
of trees and to produce better yields as well as some wonderful
effects. These have been detailed in my Paper, “Fertilizers in
Ancient India" read in the International Sanskrit Conference, New
Delhi, on 27-3-1972.
प्रान्तच्छायाविनिमु कता न मनोज्ञा जलाशयाः |
यस्मादतो जलप्रान्तेष्वारामान् विनिवेशयेत् utu
Since tanks and the like do not look charming without shade
on their sides, one ought to have gardens laid out on the banks of
water.
[Vide LIV. 119 where the author has spoken of the necessity
for shading the banks of tanks. Both the tanks and gardens are
mutually beneficial. That is why charming gardens like the Brindavan Gardens in Mysore have been created near dams and reservoirs in modern India.
The metre upto 18th verse is अनुष्टुभू ० sloka. |
Next he speaks of the Sesamum-treatment for the soil.
wat भूः सवंवृक्षाणां हिता तस्यां तिलानु वपेतु ।
पुष्पतांस्तांच मुदूनीयात्कमंतत्प्रयमं भुवः NRN

528 Brhat Samhita
A soft soil is helpful for all varieties of trees. First of all one
ought to sow there sesamum, which must be crushed when in bloom
(to mix with the soil). This is the first treatment to be done for
the soil.
[The sesamum plants in bloom, when cut into pieces and
allowed to mingle with the soil, would become an excellent green
manure for preparing the soil for further cultivation. It is also held
that if these sesamum crop does not flourish in a field, nothing
could be grown there with advantage.
Cf. काश्यप--
दुर्वावीरणसंयुक्ता: सानूपा मृदुमृत्तिका: ।
तत्र वाप्यः शुभा वृक्षाः सुगन्धिफलशखिन: ॥ ]
प्ररिष्टाशोकपुन्नागशिरीषाः सप्रियङ्गवः ।
मङ्गल्याः पूर्वमारामे रोपणीया गृहेषु वा ua
Arista (Neem or soap berry tree), A$oka, Punnaga and Sirisa
trees and Priyarigu creeper, which are auspicious, should first be
planted in gardens as well as near houses.
[Cf. काइयप--
अ्रशोकचम्पकारिष्टपुन्तागाइच प्रियङ्गवः |
शिरीषोदुम्बराः श्रेष्ठाः पारिजातकमेव च ॥
एते वृक्षा: शुभा ज्ञेयाः प्रथमं तांश्च रोपयेत् |
देवालये तथोद्याने गृहेषूपवनेषु च ॥ |
Next he treats of grafting.
पनसाशोककदलीजम्दूलकु.चदाडिमाः |
्राक्षापालीवताशचव बीजपुरातिमुक्तकाः UY
एते FAT काण्डरोप्या गोमयेन प्रलोपिताः ।
मूलोच्छेदेऽथवा स्कन्धे रोपणीया: परं ततः ॥५॥
Grafting may be done in respect of the jack tree, Asoka,
plantain, Eugenia, lemon, pomegranate, grape vine, Palivata,
Matulunga (citron) and jasmine-creeper by smearing a branch with
cowdung and transplanting it on the branch of another; or it may
be done by cutting off the trunk of atree and by transplanting it
like a wedge on the trunk of another tree. (Here the part when the
junction is effected must be covered with a coating of mud).
[Our commentator remarks : श्रन्यवृक्षस्य मूलोच्छेदं कृत्वा तस्य छिन्नमूलस्योपरि विजातीयो वृक्षो रोपणीयः, which would mean : ‘Uproot a
tree and transplant a tree of a different type upon it.’ This is not

Treatment of Trees LV 529
| the meaning intended by the author, as faras I can judge. The
author must have meant that in casea good tree has been uprooted,
its trunk or branch can be transplanted on the branch of another
tree of the same group. If we could have transplantation in respect
of two trees of different groups, then we should be able to get jack
fruits from one branch and mangoes from another. Even this wonder
may be feasible in modern times. The Abhilasitarthacintamani refers
to many recipes for turning sour or bitter fruits into sweet ones, a
tree into a creeper, etc.
Cf. कारयप---
द्राक्षातिमुक्तको जम्बूबीजपूरकदाडिमा: |
कदलीबहुलाशोका: काण्डरोप्याइच वापयेत् |i
अन्येषपि शाखिनो ये च पुष्पिताः फलितास्तथा |
गोमयेन प्रलिप्ताइच रोपणीया विवृद्धये u]
ग्रजातशाखाज् शिशिरे जातशाखान् हिमागमे ।
वर्षागमे च सुस्कन्धान् यथादिक्स्थान्प्ररोपयेत् ॥६॥
The grafting should be done in the Sisira season (February:
March) for those plants which have not yet got branches; in the
Hemanta season (December-January) for those that have grown
branches; and in the rainy season (August-September) for those
that have large branches. The particular direction of the tree that
is cut off should be kept’ up in grafting also.
[The commentator refers to some scholars who prefer the
reading : 'जातशाखान् घनागमे । वर्षागभे <, which would mean, the
beginning and middle of the monsoon. These readings are to be
rejected on the authority of Sage काश्यप, who says :
ग्रजातशाखा ये वृक्षाः शिशिरे तांश्च रोपयेत् |
जातशाखाइ्च हेमन्ते रोपणीया विधानतः ॥
सुस्कन्धा: शाखिनो ये तान् प्रावृट्काले तु रोपयेत् ॥ ]
घृतोशीरतिलक्षौद्रविडद्भक्षी रगोमयेः |
ग्रामलस्कऱ्धलिप्तानां सङ्क्रामणविरोपणस् ॥७॥
Trees can be taken to other countries and there grafted on
others, if they are smeared from root to the stem with ghee, andropogon, sesamum, honey, Vidanga, milk and cow-dung.
[The word सङक्रामणविरोपणम् may also be construed thus :
Trees thus treated can be safely taken to another place and planted
there. Here Utpala quotes a verse without naming, possibly from
Sage Ka$yapa :

530 Brhat Samhita
घृतं क्षीरं तथा क्षौद्रमुशीरतिलगोमये: |
विडङ्गलेपनं मूलात् सङ्क्रामणविरोपणाम् ||
शुचिर्भूत्वा तरोः पूजां कृत्वा स्नानानुलेपने: ।
रोपयेद्रोपितश्चेव पत्रेस्तेरेव जायते ॥८॥
One should be clean and pure and worship a tree with ablutions and sandal paste etc. and then graft it. Then it will thrive
even with the leaves with which its has been grafted.
सायं प्रातश्च घर्मत्तौं शीतकाले दिनान्तरे ।
वर्षासु च भुवः शोषे सेक्तव्या रोपिता द्रुमाः NEN
The transplanted (grafted) trees should be watered both in
the morning and evening everyday in summer; on alternate days in
the cold season; and whenever the soil becomes dry in the rainy
season.
जस्वूवेतसवानीरकदम्बो दुम्ब राज्ँनाः ।
बीजपुरकमृद्दीका लकुचाइच सदाडिमाः ॥१०॥
वञ्जुलो नक्तमालइच तिलकः पनसस्तथा |
तिमिरोऽस्रातकइचेति षोडशान्पजाः स्मृताः ॥११॥
Eugenia, Bayas (or Bent), Vanira, Nauclea orientalis, Glomerous
fig tree; Arjuna, Bijapüra (citron), grape vine; lemon, pomegranate,
Vañjula (spondias), Naktamala (Gray bonduc), Tilaka, jack, Timira
and Amrataka are the sixteen trees that grow in a moist soil.
[The distinction between अनूपज, जाङ्गल and T*S is not
absolute, as the author himself has stated that the trees which are
generally found in moist soil may at times be found growing in other
regions as well.]
Next the author discusses the subject of distance between one
tree and another in a garden.
उत्तमं विशतिहंस्ता मध्यमं षोडशान्तरम् |
स्थानात् स्थानान्तरं कायं वृक्षाणां द्वादशावरम् ॥१२॥
It is very good, if trees are planted 20 cubits. apart; moderate,
if 16 cubits apart; and inferior, if 12 cubits apart.
[Cf. काइयप—
ग्रन्तरं विशतिहंस्ता वृक्षाणामुत्तमं स्मृतम् |
मध्यमं षोडश ज्ञेयमधमं द्वादश स्मृतम् dU]
्रभ्याशजातास्तरवः सं€प॒शन्तः परस्परम् ।
मिश्रेमूलेशच न फलं सम्यग्यच्छन्ति पीडिताः ॥ १३॥

Treatment of Trees LV 53]
Trees that have grown quite close to one another and are
touching one another with their roots interlocked are tortured and
so do not yield fruits in full measure.
शीतवातातप रोगो जायते पाण्डुपत्रता ।
ग्रवृद्धिशच प्रवालानां शाखाशोषो Tae fq: ॥१४॥
Trees get d from cold weather, strong. winds and hot
sun. Consequently their leaves become pale-white, sprouts scanty
and sickly, branches dry, and their milk oozes out.
[The विइववल्लभ of Cakrapanimisra states in VIII that trees get
diseases by the vitiation of the three humours, वात, पित्त and कफ
(Wind, Bile and Phlegm) (vide, my Paper on ‘Fertilizers in Ancient
India) ]
चिकित्सितभथतेबां शस्त्रेणादौ विशोधनम् ।
विडङ्गघृतपङ्काक्तान् सेचयेत् क्षीरवारिणा ॥१५॥
Thereafter (i.e. after the trees show symptoms of disease), the
trees should be treated. At the outset, the trees should be cleared
of ulcers and the like (i.e. whatever is colourless and wet) with a
knife. Then a paste made of Vidanga, ghee and silt must be applied
to those parts and they should be sprinkled with water and milk.
(If this is done, they will be free from disease).
[Cf. काश्यप---
शाखाविटपपत्रैरच च्छायया वि(र?)हिताइच ये |
प्रेऽपि पर्णफलैहीता रूक्षाः पत्रैश्च पाण्डुरैः ॥
शीतोष्णावर्षवाताद्येमूलैर्व्यामिश्रितेरपि ।
शाखिनां तु भवेद्रोगो द्विपानां लेखनेन च ॥
त्विकित्सितेषु कतंव्या ये च भूयः AAT: |
शोधयेत्प्रथमं शस्त्रैः TAT दापथेत्ततः ॥
कर्दमेन विडङ्गैश्च घृत मिश्रैशच लेपयेत् |
क्षीरतोयेन सेकः स्याद् रोहणं सर्वशाखिनाम् t]
फलनाशे कुलत्यैच Ha ATTA ATT: ।
शृतशीतपयःसेकः फलपुष्पसमृद्धये ॥१६॥
When the fruits of a tree are destroyed (prematurely), it should
be watered with milk that has been cooled after being boiled, with

532 Brhat Samhita
horse-gram, black gram, green gram, sesamum and barley. Being
treated thus, it will have abundant flowers and fruits.
ग्रविकाजशकुच्चूरांस्याढके द्वे तिलाढकम्।
सक्तुप्रस्थो जलद्रोणो गोमांसतुलया सह ॥१७॥
सप्तरात्रोषितेरेतेः सेकः कार्यो वनस्पतेः ।
बल्लीगुल्मलतानां च फलपुष्पाय सर्वेदा ॥ १८॥
For increasing the yield of flowers and fruits of trees, creepers
and shrubs, they should be sprinkled constantly witha mixture of
an ddhaka (64 Palas) of the powder of the dung of goats as well as of
sheep, one ddhaka of sesamum powder, a prastha (16 Palas) of wheat
particles, a Tula (100 Palas) of beef anda Drona (256 Palas) of
water kept for seven nights. (This is the measure for one tree).
[The commentator quotes the following verses from some text
explaining the different weights and measures :
त्रियवं कृष्णलं विद्यान्माषल: पञ्चकृष्णलः |
ते स्युर्द्वादश लक्षाख्यं सुवर्णमथ षोडश |i
पञ्चलक्षैश्चलुभिस्तु सुवण निष्क उच्यते |
चतुष्पलोऽथ कुडवः प्रस्थः स्यात्तच्चतुष्टयम् ॥
ग्राढकस्तु चतुष्प्रस्थो द्रोणस्तु चतुराढकः |
मानिका तु चतुद्रोणा खारी स्यात्तच्चतुष्टयम् ॥
तुला पलशतं ज्ञेयं भारः स्याद्विशतिस्तुलाः ।
शुष्कद्रव्येषु संख्येयं wm द्विगुणा भवेत् ॥
Cf. काश्यप---
अजाविकानां द्वौ प्रस्थौ ASST च कारयेत् |
तिलानामाढक दद्यात् सक्तूनां प्रस्थमेव च l!
गोमांसशतमेक स्याद् द्वे सार्धे सलिलस्य च |
सप्ताहमुषितैरेतैः सेकं दद्याद् वनस्पतेः dI
स भवेत्फलपुष्पैषच पत्रेशचाङ्कुररितँवृ त: ॥ ]
Next the author discusses the topic of treatment of seeds :
वासरारि दश दुग्धभावितं बीजमाज्ययुतहस्तयोजितम् ।
गोमयेन वहुशो विरूक्षितं क्रोडमार्गपिशितेशच धूपितम् ugen
मांससुकरवसासमन्वितं रोपितं च परिर्कामतावनो i
क्षोरसंयुतजलावसेचितं जायत कुसुमयुक्तमेव तत् ॥२०॥

Treatment of Trees LV 533
All seeds should be soaked in milk for ten days, taking them
out daily with the hand smeared with ghee. Then they must be
rolled many times in cow-dung, fumigated with the flesh of deer and
hog; thereafter with flesh and hog’s marrow, they should be planted
in a soil that has been already prepared (with the sesamum treatment). Being sprinkled with milk and water, they will grow and
bloom.
[It is not clear if the author wants us to believe that if the
process mentioned in these verses is gone through, the seeds would
be accompanied by blossoms even as they sprout. Note the expression
used : 'कुसुमयुक्तमेव जायते ।'
The metre here and in the following verse is रथोद्धता.]
तिन्तिडीत्यपि करोति वल्लरीं ब्रीहिमाषतिल चूर्णसक्तुभिः i
पुतिमांससहितेश्च सेचिता धूपिता च सततं हरिद्रया ॥२१॥
Even a tamarind seed will produce a sprout when sprinkled
with a compound of the flour of rice, black gram and sesamum and
wheat particles along with stale meat, and repeatedly fumigated
with turmeric powder.
कपित्थवल्लीकरणाय मूलान्यास्फोतधात्रीबववासिकानामु ।
पलाशिनी वेतससूर्यबल्ली इ्यामातिमुक्तेः सहिताष्टमूली ॥२२॥
क्षीरे शृते चाप्यनया सुशीते तालाशतं स्थाप्य कपित्थबीजम् ।
दिने दिने शोषितमर्कपादेर्मासं विधिस्त्वेष ततोऽधिरोप्यम् ॥२३॥
हस्तायतं तदुहिगुरां गभीरं खात्वावटं प्रोक्तजलावपूणंम् ।
शुष्कं प्रदग्धं मधुसपिषा तत् प्रलेपथे-द्भस्मसमन्वितेन ॥२४॥
चुशाकृतंर्माबतिलेयंवेशव प्रपूरयेन्मृत्तिकयान्तरस्थंः |
मत्स्यामिवाम्भस्सहित' च हन्याद्यावद् घनत्वं समुपागत तत् ॥२५॥
उप्त' च बीजं चतुरङ्गुलाधो मत्स्याम्मसा मांसजलेश्च सिक्तम् d
वल्ली भवत्याशु शुमप्रवाला विस्मापनी मण्डपमावूणोति ॥२६॥
For making the wood-apple seeds sprout, take the roots of
Sariva, myrobolan, Dhava, Vasika (Justicia), the branches with
leaves also of Vetasa and Süryavalli, Syama-creeper, and Atimuktaka
(eight roots in all), boil them in milk and cool it, and then soak
the seeds in this liquid for a period of time equal to that of 100
beats (of the hand). Take them out and after drying them in the
sun daily for 30 days, sow them according to the following method :

534 Brhat Samhita
Dig a pit one cubit in diameter and twice as deep, fill it with milk
and water; and burn the pit when it becomes dry. Then smear it
(pit) with a mixture of honey, ghee and ashes. Then, first fill it with
mud to a height of four digits, then fill it with the flour of black
gram, sesamum and barley; again put mud over this to the same
height (4 digits). Again fill it with the flour of black gram etc.
Pour on it an infusionof fish and water and then pound all this
until it becomes a thick mass. Sow the seed at a depth of four digits
and sprinkle it with fish-water and flesh-water. Soon will a tendril
with excellent sprouts cover the bower in a marvellous manner.
[Utpala says that Syàmà, according to some, means Trivrt.
The author commits two grammatical errors in 23: For तालशतं
he says तालाशतं and स्थाप्य without a preposition is wrong. Here ताल
means a beat in keeping time in music. The metre is उपजाति except
in the last where it is gam. |
हतशो$डकोलसम्भुतफलकल्केन भावितम् t
एतत्तलेन वा बीजं इलेष्मातकफलेन वा ॥२७॥
वापित करकोन्समिश्रमृदि तत्क्षणजन्मकम् ।
फलभारान्विता शाखा भवतीति किमद्भुतम् ॥२८॥
Any seed being soaked a hunderd times in a paste of Ankola
fruit or in its oil, or ina paste or oil of Slesmataka (Sebesten) fruit,
will, when sown in a soil mixed with hail, sprout instantaneously,
and what wonder would it be, if its branches were laden with
fruits !
[Utpala says that करका is अद्यनिपात, which, according to the
accepted meaning of the term, is wrong. For, says Amara :-- वर्षोपलस्तु wept. 1.2.12 The metre is Sloka.]
इलेष्मातकस्य बीजानि निष्कुलीकृत्य भावयेत् प्राज्ञः ।
भ्रड्कोलविज्जलारद्टिरछायायां सप्त कृत्बेवम् UREN
साहिषगोमयघुष्टान्यस्य करीषे च तानि निक्षिप्य ।
करकाजलमुद्योगे न्युप्तान्यह्ला फलकरारि ॥३०॥
A wise man should remove the shell of the Slesmataka (Sebesten) seeds, soak them in water mixed with the slimy paste of
Ankola (Alangium) fruits and dry them in shade seven times. Then
rub them with buffalo’s dung, and lay them in their dry dung.

Treatment of Trees LV FE
Being sown thereafter in a soil soaked with hail-water, they will
bear fruit in a day.
[Bhattotpala says that the seeds smeared with buffalo-dung
should be kept inside a heap of dry buffalo-dung ina pot until the
contents are drenched by hail-water. He construes करकाजल as
ग्रशनिपातजल here too. The author enumerates the asterisms suitable
for planting trees.
ध्रुवमूदुमूलविशाखा गुरुभं श्रवरपस्तथाश्विनी हस्तः ।
उक्तानि दिव्यदृग्भिः पादपसंरोपणे भानि ॥३१॥
The asterisms prescribed by the Seers of transcendental wisdom
(such as Garga) for the planting of trees are the three Uttaras,
Rohini, Anuradha, Citra, Mrga$irsa, Revati, Mula, Visakha, Pusya,
Sravana, Agvini and Hasta.
[Instead of उक्तानि some people have the reading शस्तानि, says
Utpala.]

प्रासादलक्षणाध्याय: ॥५६॥)
Chapter LV I.— Description of Temples.
कृत्वा प्रभूतं सलिलमारामान् विनिवेशय च ।
देवतायतनं कूर्याद्य॒शोधर्माभिवृद्धये uqu
One should build a temple in order to enhance one’s fame
and religious merit, after securing an abundant supply of water
through tanks and lakes, laying out fine gardens.
[Generally big tanks are constructed near places of worship
for the use of pilgrims and of the temple itself. Gardens are also
laid out near temples for shade and for producing a pleasant
atmosphere around them as well as for the supply of fragrant
flowers for the worship. This verse appears to have been introduced
to silence criics who might call in question the author's wisdom in
separating this chapter from the one on ‘House-Building’.
The first 19 verses are in Sloka metre. ]
इष्टापूर्तेन लभ्यन्ते ये लोकास्तान् बुभूषता ।
देवानामालयः कार्यो द्दयमप्यत्र हश्यते UR
One who wishes to attain to the worlds secured by performing
sacrifices and sinking wells and the like, should build a temple,
whereby one could attain the fruits of both.
[The commentator quotes the following verses from some work
to explain the word ggrmi:
इष्टं यज्ञेषु यद्दानं ततो$न्यत्पूत्तमिष्यते ।
इष्टाभिः पशुवन्धैश्च चातुर्मास्यैर्यजेद् द्विजः ॥
श्ररिनष्टोमादिभियंज्ञैर्यो यजेत स इष्टवान् |
वापी कुपतडागादिदेवतायतनानि च ॥
भ्रन्तप्रदानमाचार्येः qub इत्यभिधीयते di
Cf. also काइयप--
इष्टापूर्तादिभियज्ञर्यावत्कुवेन्ति मानवाः |
अग्निष्टोमादिपश्युभिरिष्टं यज्ञ प्रकोत्तितम् ॥
वापीकूपतडागादिदेवतायतनानि च ।
स्वर्गरस्थात सदा कुर्यात् तद॒दानं पृत्तेसंज्ञितम् ॥
देवानामालयः कार्यो द्वयमप्यत्र लभ्यते 11]

Description of Temples LVI 537
सलिलोद्यानयुक्तेषु कृतेष्वकृतकेषु च ।
स्थानेष्वेतेषु सान्निध्यमुपगच्छन्ति देवता: usu
Deities reside with pleasure in places which abound in water
and gardens, whether natural or otherwise.
[Ancient Sages had their A§ramas or hermitages as well as
Gurukulas amidst sylvan grandeur on the banks of big rivers. For,
in such surroundings there is a spiritual atmosphere, where the turbulent mind and senses can be subdued without much difficulty.
After all, God dwells in His glory where the mind finds tranquillity
and contentment. ]
सरःसु नलिनीछत्रनिरस्तरविरश्मिषु à
हंसांसाक्षिप्तक ह्वारवीथीविमलवारिषु uyu
हंसकारण्डवक्रौञचचक्रवाकविराविषु ।
पर्यन्त निचुलच्छायाविश्रान्तजलचारिषु ux
Gods dwell with pleasure also in (or near) lakes, where the
rays of the sun are wardcd off by the parasol of lotus, whose
clear waters contain avenues of white lotuses tossed by the shoulders
of swans, which resound with cries of swans, flamingoes, curlews
and ruddy geese and which have the aquatic animals resting in the
shade of Nicula (Hijjal) trees on their banks.
[These lines are reminiscent of the poetry of great masters
like Kalidasa and Valmiki. Vide Yo कां० XIV. 24-26. The following
verses of the महाभारत which explain the places where the Goddess
of wealth and beauty dwells are interesting :
सत्यासु नित्यप्रियदर्शनासु सौभाग्ययुक्तासु गुणान्वितासु |
वसामि नारीषु पतिब्रतासु कल्याणशीलासु विभूषितासु ॥
वसामि फुल्लासु च पद्मिनीषु नक्षत्रवीथीषु च शारदीषु ।
नदीषु हंसस्वननादितासु तपस्विसिद्धद्विजसेवितासु ॥
(Condensed edn. page 451)]
क्रौञचकाञचीकलापाइच कलहंसकलस्वराः ।
नद्यस्तोयांशुका यत्र शफरीकृतमेखलाः UU
फुल्लती रद्र मोत्तंसाः सद्भ मश्रोशिमण्डलाः ।
पुलिनाभ्युन्नतोरस्या हंसहासाइच निम्नगाः usu
Likewise do they dwell in places where the rivers have large
girdles of curlews, sweet voice in the form of the melodious notes
of the royal swans; silken sarees of the waters, knots of the cloth made
of tiny fishes, floral ear-ornaments in the form of treesin bloom on

538 Brhat Samhita
their banks, round buttocks of confluences; lofty bosoms of sanddunes, and merry laughter in the form of the white swans.
[Here the imagery is excellent as the rivers are spoken as
charming damsels. The metaphor employed here is worthy of
great poets like Valmiki ard Kalidasa.
Bhattotpala reads हंसवासा: instead of हंसहासाः : In my view
his reading is not good as it is a repetition. There isan apparent
repetition in the text, viz. काञ्ची and मेखला. Actually the latter has
to be taken, as suggested by the commentator, in the sense of नीवि
or knot of the lady's cloth.]
वनोपान्तनदीज्ञेलनिकरोपान्तभूमिषु ।
रभन्ते देवता नित्यं पुरेषद्यानवत्सु च us
They rejoice always in the vicinity of forests, rivers, mountains and waterfalls, as well asin towns abounding in pleasuregardens,
[Cf. काश्यप
हरितोज्ज्वलतोयाढ्या वाप्यः पक्षिभिरावृताः ।
वनोपवनमालिन्यो नित्यमुत्फुल्लितद्रुमाः ॥
हंसकारण्डवाकीर्णा: कोकिलालापनादिताः |
षट्पदागीतमधुरा qe: शिखिभियूंताः ॥
तत्र देवा रति यान्ति सान्निध्यान्नित्यसंस्थिताः ॥ |
भूमयो ब्राह्मणादीनां याः प्रोक्ता वास्तुकमं रि ।
ता एव तेषां शस्यन्ते देवतायतनेष्वपि nen
The different kinds of earth recommended for the ccnstruction
of houses for the different classes of the society are likewise recommended to persons of various classes for constructing temples.
[Vide LIII. 96-97 supra for the varieties of soil recommended.
This shows that each community or class had its own temple.]
चतुःषष्टिपदं कायं देवतायतनं सदा ।
द्वारं च मध्यमं तस्मिन् समदिक्स्थं प्रशस्यते ॥ १०॥
The temple site should always be divided into 64 squares.
Its central or main gate would be auspicious if situated in one of
the four cardinal directions.
[Vide LIII. 55 supra and diagram 2 for the subdivision of the
site.]
The author next gives the dimensions of temples.

Description of Temples LVI Ba
यो विस्तारो भवेद्यस्य द्विगुणा तत्समुन्नतिः ।
उच्ङ्रायाद्यस्तृतीयांशस्तेन तुल्या कटिः स्मृता ॥११॥
विस्तारार्धं भवद् Tat भित्तयोऽन्याः समन्ततः |
गर्भपादेन विस्तीर्ण द्वारं द्विगुणमुच्छ्रितम् ॥१२॥
उच्छ्कायात्पादविस्तीर्णा शाखा तद्वदुदुम्बरः |
विस्तारपादप्रतिमं बाहुल्यं शाखयोः स्मृतम् ॥१३॥
त्रिपञ्चसप्तनवभिः शाखाभिस्तत्प्रहास्यते ।
gre; शाखाचतुमगि प्रतीहारौ निवेशयेत् ॥१४॥
शेषं सङ्गल्यविहगंः श्रीवृक्षैः स्वस्तिकघंटेः d
मिथुनैः पत्रवल्लोभिः प्रमथेशचोपशोभयेत् ॥१५॥
हारमानाष्टभागोना प्रतिमा स्यात् सपिण्डिका ।
at भागौ प्रतिमा तत्र तृतीयांशश्च पिण्डिका ॥१६॥
The height of a temple should be double its width, and the
height of the foundation above the ground consisting of steps (over
which the edifice is built) equal to a third of this height. The Sanctum
Sanctorum should be half the width of the temple. All round it there
should be walls. Its door should be one fourth of the Sanctum
Sanctorum in width and twice as high. The side-frame of the door
should have a breadth of a quarter of its height. Similar should be
the threshold and the upper block. The thickness of the frames is
to be equal to a fourth of their breadth. A door consisting of three,
five, seven or nine frames is highly commended. In the lower part,
upto a height of a fourth of the doorpost, two images of door-keepers
(like Nandin and Danda) are to be installed, the remaining space
being ornamented with the carvings of auspicious birds (like swans
and ruddy geese). Bilva trees, Svastika figures, pitchers, couples,
foliage, creepers and Siva’s Hosts. The idol with its pedestal ought
to be as high as the door diminished by an eighth, of these, the
idol being of two parts and the pedestal of one.
[Many technical terms occur here : कटि meaning hip or the
flight of steps in the foundation, qÑ the central shrine, शाखा the side
per block, and पिण्डिका the pedesdifferent dimensions.
Breadth=32 cubits,
frame, उदुम्बर the threshold and up
tal. There are twenty types of temples with
The Meru type has the following dimensions :

540 Brhat Samhita
height=64 cubits, height of Kati=$* cubits; the sanctum san torum —
16 cubits; all round there are walls of three cubits thickness, leaving
a distance of 1 cubit all around for people to move about. The door
is 4 cubits in breadth; its height is 8 cubits; the width of the frame
and threshold=2 cubits, its thickness = 12 digits; height of the ido]
—4 cubits and 16 digits; the height of the pedestal—12 cubits and
8 digits.
In verse 13 there is another reading उदुम्बरौ instead of उदुम्बरः.
Utpala explains the statement that the door should consist of th ree,
five, seven or nine Sakhas or frames, by pointing out that the total
width of the frame should be made up of the width of as many
frames as necessary : “'शाखाविस्तारस्तिसृभिर्यंदि न पूर्यते, तदा पञ्चभिः पुरणी य:,
Cf. काश्यप
पुरानुसारप्रासादाः कर्तव्याः शुभलक्षणाः ।
नात्युच्चा नातिनीचाइच समदिकसूत्रसूत्रिताः ।।
चतुःषष्टि कोष्ठकानां मध्ये च तत्र विन्यसेत् ।
द्वार च मध्यमं श्रेष्ठं समदिक्स्थं प्रशस्यते d
विस्तारद्विगुणोत्सेधः कटिरंशे तृतीयके ।
विस्ताराधेन तद्गर्भो भित्तयोऽन्थास्तथान्तरे ।।
गर्भाच्चतुर्थभागे च द्वारं तद्द्विगुणोच्छितम् ।
द्वारोच्छायचतुर्भागो विस्तारः शाखयोः स्मृतः ॥
उदुम्बरस्तथे वोक्तः शाखामानेन नित्यशः |
घनत्वं पादमानेन शाखयोइच प्रकीतितम् |i
एकशाखास्त्रिशाखा वा पञ्च सप्त नवापि वा |
द्वारिकास्तत्र शास्यन्ते द्वारिभिर्या श्रकुण्ठिकाः ॥
शाखाचतुर्थेभागेऽत्र प्रतीहारौ तु कारयेत् |
प्रमर्थेविहगेश्चव जीवजीवजलोडूर्वः ॥
श्री वृक्षस्वस्तिकं: पद्मं gud मनोरमैः |
qara? लताशुभेग्रहैवेनायकादिभिः ॥
देवं सपिण्डिकं स्थाप्यं द्वाराष्टं शोभितं शुभम् ।
at भागो प्रतिमा कार्या adtasta पिण्डिका i
स्रवणाद्रोरिकाभागो वामे grea विधीयते ।
निर्माल्यञ्च निवेद्यं च बलिपुजापमार्जनम् 11]
मेरुमन्दरकलासविमानच्छुन्दनन्दना: |
समुदूगपद्गरुडनन्दिवर्धनकुञ्जराः ॥। १७॥

Description of Temples LVI Sd
गुहराजो वृषो हंस: सवंतोमद्रको घट: ।
[सहो वृत्तशचतुषक्कोणः षोडक्राष्टाश्रयस्तथा ॥१८॥
इत्येते विशतिः प्रोक्ताः प्रासादाः संज्ञया सया ।
यथोक्तानुक्रमेणेव लक्षरानि वदाम्यतः ॥१९॥
There are twenty types of temples enumerated ‘here by me as
follows : (1) Meru, (2) Mandara, (3) Kailasa, (4: Vimanacchanda
(5) Nandana, (6) Samudga, (7) Padma, (8) Garuda, (9) Nen
dhana, (10) Kuñjara (11) Guharaja, (12) Vrsa, (13) Harhsa, (14)
Sarvatobhadraka, (15) Ghata, (16) Simha, (17) Vrtta, (18)
Catuskona, (19) Soda$aéri, and (20) Astagri. Ishall now explain
their characteristics in regular order.
तत्र षडश्रिर्मर्द्रादशभोमो विचित्रकुहरश्च |
द्वारयुंक्तश्चतुभिर्दात्रिशद्धस्दविस्तीर्ण: ॥२०॥
Among them, the type of temple known as Meru is hexangular,
has twelve storeys and internal windows of various kinds. It has four
doors or gates in the four directions and is 32 cubits in width. (Its
height is 64 cubits).
[Cf. काइयप —
द्वात्रिशद्धस्तविस्तीर्णं चतुर्द्वारं षडञश्चिकम् ।
भूमिकास्तत्र कतंव्या विचित्रकुहरान्विताः ॥
द्वादशोपर्युपरिगा वर्तूलाण्डेः समायुताः |
प्रासादो मेरुसंज्ञः स्याद् निदिष्टो विश्वकर्मणा ॥ |
त्रिजञद्धस्तायामो दशभौमो मन्दर: शिखरयुक्तः ।
केलासोऽपि शिखरवानष्टर्वशोऽष्ट भौमश्च us
The Mandara too is hexangular, 30 cubits in width, and has
ten storeys and domes. Kailisa is similar to this, but has eight floors
and is 28 cubits in width.
[The height of Mandara would be 60 cubits and of Kaildsa
56 cubits.
Cf. काश्यप —
त्रिशद्धस्तास्तु विस्तीर्णं प्रासादोऽयं द्वितीयक: |
ग्र्टभौमरच कैलासो हस्ताष्टराविशतिः स्मृतः ।
षडश्रि: शिखरोपेतः प्रासादस्तु तृतीयकः ॥ |
जालगवाक्षकयुक्तो विमानसञ्ज्ञर्त्रिसप्तकायामः |
नन्दन इति षड्भोमो द्वर्धत्रशः षोडशाण्डयुतः ॥२२॥

542 Brhat Samhita
The temple of the Vimánacchanda type is hexagonal 21 cubits
breadth, and has latticed windows and eight floors. The Nandana
is similar, but has six storeys and 16 cupolas and is 32 cubits in
width.
[Cf. काइयप---
गव/क्षजालसंयुक्तो विमानइचेकविशतिः ।
षडश्चिरष्टभौमश्च प्रासादः स्याच्चतुर्थकः di
नन्दनस्तु षडश्रिः स्याद् द्वात्रिशद्धस्तविस्तृतः |
षड्भौमः षोडशाण्डस्तु प्रासादः पञ्चमो मतः ॥ ]
वृत्तः समुद्गनामा पद्माकृतिः शया भ्रष्टौ |
शृङ्ग शकेन भवेदेकेव च भूमिका तस्य ॥२३॥
The temple known as Samudga is circular in shape, and the
Padma is shaped like a lotus (with eight petals). Both these measure
8 cubits in width, and have only one storey and one dome.
[The commentator says that the Samudga is shaped like a green
gram and Padma has eight petals.
Cf. काश्यप
वर्तुलस्तु समुद्गः स्यात्पद्म: पद्माकृतिस्तथा |
हस्ताष्टक तु विस्तीर्णो भूमिका श्वद्भभूषिता ॥]
गरुडाकतिव्च गरुडो नन्दीति च षट्चतुष्कविस्तोर्णे: |
कार्यस्तु सप्तभौमो विभूषितोःण्डस्तु विशत्या ।'२४॥
The Garuda is shaped like an eagle with wings and tail. The
Nandin (i.e. Nandivardhana) is like the previous one but without the
wings and tail. Both these are 24 cubits broad. They have seven
storeys and are adorned with 20 cupolas.
[Cf. काइयप---
गरुडो गरुडाकारः पक्षपुच्छविभूषितः |
नन्दी तथाकृतिज्ञेय: पक्षादिरहितः पुन: ॥
कराणां षट्चतुष्कास्तु विस्तीणौं सप्तभूमिको ।
दशभि द्विगुणा रण्डे्भूषितौ कारयेत्तु तौ ॥ ]
कुञ्जर इति गजपृष्ठः षोडशहस्तः समन्ततो मूलात् |
गुहराजः षोडशकस्त्रचन्द्रशाला भवेद्दलभी ॥२५॥
The Kuijara has the form of the back ofa standing elephant,
and measures 16 cubits all round from the bottom. It has only one
storey. The Guhardja type (shaped like a cave) is 16 cubits wide
and single-storeyed. Both have their sloping roof with three upper
rooms.

Description of Temples LVI 543
[Utpala refers to another reading viz. सुविस्तरो मूलात् in the
place of समन्ततो मूलात् |
Cf. काइयप--
कुञजरो गजपृष्ठाभो हस्ताः षोडश विस्तृतः ।
गुहराजो गुहाकारो विष्कम्भात् षोडश स्मृतः ।।
त्रिचन्द्रशाला वलभी तयोः कार्या सुलक्षणा ।
दशमैकादशावेतौ प्रासादौ द्वौ प्रकीतितौ ॥]
वृष एक भूमिश्वद्धो द्वादशहस्तः समन्ततो वृत्तः'
हंसो हंसाकारो घटोऽष्टहस्तः कलशरूपः ॥२६॥
The temple known as Visa has only one storey and dome,
measures 12 cubits in width, and is circular all round. The Hamsa
is shaped like a swan with beak, wings and tail, and is 12 cubits
broad. It has only one storey. The Ghata is shaped like a pot, 8
cubits broad and single-storeyed and single-domed.
(Cf. काइ्यप--
वृषो द्वादशहस्तस्तु समवृत्तेकभूमिक: |
श्रृ ङ्गे णकेन संयुक्त: प्रासाद: परिकीत्तित: o
हंसो हंसाकृतिज्ञंयो हस्ता द्वादशविस्तृतः ।
एकभू मिकया युक्तः पक्षपुच्छायलङकृतः |i
घटः कलशरूपस्तु विस्तीर्णोऽष्टकरः स्मृतः ॥ ]
दारेयु तरचतुभिबंहुशिखरो भवति सवंतोभद्र: i
बहुरुचिरचन्द्रशाल: षड़िवशः पञ्चभौसइ्च NWI
The Sarvatobhadra has four doors in four directions, many
beautiful dormer windows (i.e. upper rooms) and five storeys, its
breadth being 26 cubits. (It is square in shape).
[Cf. काश्यप---
शिखरेवंहुमिर्यक्तश्चतुर्द्वारवि भूषितः i
रुचिरेश्चन्द्रशालैश्च बहुभिः परिवारितः ॥
चतुरस्र: पञ्चभौमः र्षाड्वशद्धस्तविस्तृतः ।
सर्वतोभद्र इत्युक्तः प्रासादो दशपञ्चमः 11]
tag: सिहाक्रान्तो द्वादशको णोऽष्टहस्त विस्तीणंः i
चत्वारोऽञ्जनरूपाः पञ्चाण्डयुतस्तु चतुरस्रः NSN
The Simha, which is adorned with images of lions, has 12
angles and is 8 cubits broad. The last four viz. Vrtia i.e. circular,
Catuskona i.e. Quadrangular, Sodasdsri i.c. one with 16 angles, and

544 Brhat Samhita
Astüsri i.e. Octagonal, have significant names and are dark inside.
All these are single-storeyed except the Caturasra (Catuskona) which
has five domes.
[Bhattotpala explains the construction of the last four as
follows : These dark temples do not have external light entering the
interior. Cllose to the temple walls should be constructed all round
and the entrance should be on the western side, The walls should be
so constructed with openings in the upper parts that they appear
to be rising from the temple structure itself and not away from its.
People should enter by the outer gate in the west, go towards the
north and coming to the eastern. part. of the temple, enter it by the
door in the east. The idea is that the temple will have only one door
in the east, but the outer gate will bein the west. The idol inside
the sanctum sanctorum, being made of gems, would illumine the
interior by means of its effulgence.
Cf. काश्यप
सिंहः सिहसमाक्रान्त: कोणीर्द्रादश मिर्युतः ।
विष्कम्भादष्टहस्तः स्यादेका तस्य च भूमिका gi
वृत्तो वृत्ताकृतिः कार्या संज्ञातुल्यार तथापरे ।
सान्धकारास्तु सर्वे ते भूमिकेका: समावृताः ।।
एकाण्डरूपिताः सर्वे पञ्चमि श्चतुरस्रकः ॥ |
भूमिकाङ्गुलमानेन मयस्याष्टोत्तरं शतम् |
ag हस्तत्रथं चेव कथितं विश्वकर्मा use
According to Maya, the height of a storey is 108 digits, while
according to Vifvakarman it is 34 cubits or 84 digits.
[Cf. मय--
प्रासादभूमिकामानं शतमष्टोत्तरं स्मृतम् ॥
and विश्वकर्मा--
चतुभिरधिकाशीतिरङ्गुलानां तु भूमिका i]
प्राहुः स्थपतयश्चात्र मतमेकं विपदिचितः ।
कपोतपालिसंघुक्ता न्यूना गच्छन्ति तुल्यताम् ॥ ३०॥
Learned architects reconcile the above two opinions on the
subject : If the height of the crown-work (dove-cot or cornice) be
added, the smaller number will be equal to the greater one.
[Utpala says :-कपोतपालिग्रहणेन बहिनिर्गतानि सिंहमुखानि काष्ठान्यु-
च्यन्ते । तथा चोक्तम् --“कपोतपालि ब्रुवते विटडूक च बहुश्रुताः” तथा च तन्त्रान्तरे
पठ्यते —

Description of Temples LVI 545
कपोतपालिरहितं मानं चतुरशीतिकम् ।
भूमिकानां सह् तया शतमष्टोत्तरं स्मृतम् ॥
भ्रङ्गुलानामतः साम्यं भूमिकासु प्रकीतितम् ॥
This and the previous verse are in Sloka metre. ]
प्रासादलक्षणमिदं कथितं समासाद्
wim यद्विरचितं तदिहास्ति सर्वम् i
मन्वादिभिविरचितानि पृथूनि यानि
तत्संस्पृशन् प्रति सयात्र कृतोऽयिकारः ॥३१॥
Thus have I briefly explained the characteristics of temples.
All that had been expounded by sage Garga has been incorporated
in this chapter. I have derived authority for my statements by
following closely the voluminous texts composed by sages Manu and
others (like Vasistha, Maya and Nagnajit)
[The author’s statement shows clearly that he has practically
summarized what sage Garga had written. He has also seen the
large works of Manu and others on this subject. However, our commentator, surprisingly does not quote even a single verse of Garga
or Manu. We have to conclude from this that at the time of Utpala
their works must have passed into oblivion. Hence he quotes largely
from one Kafyapa.
The metre is वसन्ततिलका 1]

क्ज्त्रलेपलक्षरणाध्याथ: N ५७॥
Chapter LVII— Preparation of Adamantine Glue.
[The subject of preparation of adamantine glue is closely connected with that of construction of temples, mansions etc., because that
was very essential for fixing idols, in constructing walls and the like
when cement and other modern materials were unknown. Even now
these glues known as Asfabandha are prepared in temple premises for
fixing or refixing images of Gods. Only one authority viz. Maya,
is mentioned by our author.]
आमं तिन्दुकमामं कपित्थकं पुष्पमपि च शाल्मल्याः ।
बीजानि शल्लकीनां धन्वनवल्को वचा चेति ॥ q u
एतेः सलिलद्रोणः कवाथयितव्योऽष्टभागशेषश्च ।
अवतार्योऽस्य च कल्को द्रव्येरेतेः समनुयोज्यः ॥ २ ॥
श्रीवासकरसगुग्गुलुभल्लातककुन्दुरुकसर्जरसैः d
ग्रतसीबिल्वश्च युतः कल्कोऽयं वञ्जलेपाख्यः॥ ३ ou
Take the unripe fruits of Tinduka (Diospyros paniculata) and
Kapitiha (Feronia elephantum), flowers of silk cotton (Morus acedosa)
seeds of Sallaki (Boswellia serrata) , bark of Dhanvana, and Vaca ( Orris
root); boil all of them in a Drona (256 Palas )and reduce the decoction
to an eighth of its original volume (i.e. 32 Palas). Mix the sediments
with the following substances, viz. Srivasaka (a secretion of a tree used
as incense, Turpentine?), Raktabola (myrrh), Guggulu (Commiphora
roxburghii), Bhallataka (Semecarpus anacardium), | Kundurüka (cunduru
exudation of Deodar?), resin, Atasi (Linum usikatissimum) and Bilva
fruit ( Aegle marmelos). The resulting paste is termed Adamantine Glue.
[Next he mentions the uses of this Glue. ]
प्रासादहम्यवलभोलिद्भप्रतिमासु कुड्यक्पेष् ।
सन्तप्तो दातव्यो वर्षमहस्नायुतस्थायी ॥ ४ ॥
When this glue, being heated, is used in the construction of

Preparation of Adamantine Glue LVII 547
temples, mansions, windows, walls and wells as well as in fixing
Siva’s Emblems and idols of Gods, it will last for a crore of years.
[Next he gives another composition of this glue. ]
लाक्षाकुन्दुरुगुग्गुलुगहधूमकपित्यबिल्वमध्यानि ।
नागफलनिम्बतिन्दुकमदनफलमधूकमञ्जिष्ठाः ॥ ५ u
सर्जरसरसामलकानि चेति कल्कः कृतो द्वितीयोऽयम् ।
वज्धाख्यः प्रथमगुणेरयमपि तेष्वेव कार्येषु u ६॥
There is another adamantine glue of excellent qualities already
mentioned which is also used for the same purpose. It is composed of
lac, Kunduru, Guggulu (Commiphora roxburghti), soot (collected in
the house), wood-apple (Feronia elephantum) , Bilva (Aegle marmelos)
Kernel, fruits of Naga (Canthium parviflorum), Neem (Azadirachta
indica) Tinduka (Diospyros paniculata) and Madana (Randia
dumetorum). Madhüka ( Cynometra ramiflora) , Mafijistha (Rubia cordifolia) ,
resin, myrrh and Amalaka (Emblica officinalis).
[There is another reading नागबलाफलतिन्दुक inthe place of नागफलनिम्ब.
The method of preparation is the same as before. In the next verse
he mentions a third variety of glue.]
गोमहिषाजविषाणैः खररोम्णा महिषचमंगव्येश्च ।
निम्बकपित्यरसेः सह ade नाम कल्कोऽन्यः U ७॥
There is a third variety of glue known as Vajratala ( Adamantine
Surface) which is constituted by the horns of cows, buffaloes and
goats, hair of donkeys, buffalo-hide, cow-hide, Neem fruits, wood
apples and myrrh.
[This mixture too should be boiled and reduced as before. In
this glue some organic substances are also included. ]
Next he mentions a fourth variety of glue taught by Maya.
अष्टौ सीसक भागाः कांसस्य at तु रीतिकाभागः ।
मयकथितो योगोऽयं विज्ञेयो वजसडः घातः ॥ ८ ॥
A compound of eight parts of lead, two of bell-metal, and one
of iron rust, has been mentioned by Maya and is to be known as
Vajra-sanghàta (Adamantine compound ). |
[According to Utpala this compound includes other materials
as well, but they are to be used in equal quantities. Possibly he

548 Brhat Samhita
means to say that the materials mentioned in the previous verses may
also be added to this mixture in equal quantities.
[ Cf. मय—
सङ. गृह्याष्टौ सीसभागान् कांसस्य st तथांशकम् |
रीतिकायास्तु सन्तप्तो वप्त्राख्यः परिकीतितः 11]

H!U-Jue NOU:
QUO}S xov|q uəoul pue 991] SY} 10 प) JOVI} SS9[19]UM
oyvus əyyam ४ ujdop ०५ JV JO JSOM OY} 0} “OE ? UI 991] DJDQUInpf) EETA 101९७ POOS JO UDA
MS WES EI. a) Spa T E
Áv]o on[q
}xou *ouojs poJno[oo-o4op 991] २५} 991] Nquip¢ v
1४०० “usu yidop ‘ofZ jy Jo ynos əy} 0} “OE JO 1४४० OY} 0} [पाप 9 OI IIJEM JIMS
"JD UPN nS SO =
301] v UMOP 194710} put Áv]o
आप oed ५०५) ‘Uon XI 99.1] 3५] sovjd sso]
supus pnu ^ojoq '9ç JV JO YWOU 3पा 0 ‘OG -I19jvA V UI 991] Hquivf SHANI QJ UA A[I3]SCE
jxou “əuo)s prey AOJ[oq 2
Áe]o Ao]Jj9Á yey} ^o[oq “50.1 921] २५ JO 39४.1} SSO]
ony ered yydap suqno Z JV 18०७ SY} ० SUGNO £ -I9JVM V UI 9942 ०५४७०१ sgn š, UIA Á[491S9/AA
punof
$40]DOIpup[ wort Yo1yM SUID
yjvausapun suto0]duiíÇ SUOMA P aouvjsig $40]D21pu[ Jp doq Jojon fo u01J22-1(]
SONTAdS JALYM ANNOAOAAANN 10 LAVHO

Brhat Samhita
JLI INYM
v ydəp '3 Z 1? pue ouojs ]nue əy} 921]
SIUM pug Aep AOo][oÁ oed JO ISOM 911 01 “OE nsjvyd ४ uo yuy "3 ३091] UIDA /[.1०163/0
301] $901] ƏŞ} -ulof oq 33.1 Sj uerpug
Xov|q ४ ० iz jo gdop ९1७ 10 unos oy] ०1 '०६ ue pu? 99.1 D4fig V “OCT ‘og
JOVI} SSo|19]e^
o»xeus (19}eM) sno 991] ƏY} UI 991] D$DJDq ए YUM
-uosiod-uou ४ A^O[9q "9५ १९ JO JSOM 34} 01 “OE guo[e 3311 LIDpDg V o To] 1०1९५ JIMS
-Zi AIM ४ yzdəp `o iz IV JO 1994 911 0} “OE Jo 1५४9 IY} 0} [ruv 961] I9je4 ənd
oS EO OSM O M
JOAvIS YIM
pəxitu putes uou) Áv[o 9JIUA
ged 3vou ‘Áe uAoiq-po: 3911 OY} 991) IPUNBAIN' v JoJeM
uou) “ysy paz ^o]oq 50 IV JO qnos oU] o] oc Aqivou Jo uo [पाप "5 Zi ]99A JO Aus
q11e9 Apurs
Udy} pue SIUM Udy} “Ao
- uəy} “Jep uouj ‘Avjo
You eq) 0} yuy 0 $7] 791४७ juepunqy
-je थापु७ ४ ७०७०१ “OFZ IW — Jojso^ ou oj “OE

Chart of Underground Water Springs
TN ae
UI9A-I9jeA OY} fpno[o
exi rep ouojs ४ ५०५)
*uourdio SMI] yerə jxeu 9013 9} भापाण्ए YIM po1o409 1०1९७ 0008
‘yjdop 'ट 1९ 301} ५३३18 y — Jo YHOU eu) O] I 33:11) puavdvi dvs V "267 JO uA Á[I9(HON.
पा s i ei Y 1 ii 7, 55
Aqni ४ ७००१ 118 991] DIDPIAOY
pue yes pol yey} ४००१५ ४ JO 19९3-प1.10प 3प]
“oç Jo ujdop ९1९ श[४० Snjo] Iij3ue pue — 03 5४४४-३5 DYQADT UA
jo INOJOS oY} YAM oxeus V 291} oY] uoowjog ०1०१०३ Any [WY “DEG 191४७ juepunqy
I eee
-Wo ए jXou “४०0०१ 3५ 18 99.1} OU} 394} DYDIUYGIA ४ JO Jeaddesip TIM yom
(uordioos) e]ndor əpym y ३०५५०५०३७9 “OT JSOM OY} 0} pru V "टट UISA Á[19]$9 V
come Sooo LLL i iL iii Di iD ii SS
901} jeu 991) DYDIINGLA * JO
224) plu. E E
901} ou oov[d sso[1o]e/4
jo YOU 9} ०} '9८ ? UI 991] DYDUOS V ‘OC. Dpnwuny po[[£9 ur A
ERN o. oc TC hee s
IM
Asrqot1q 3111 e yey} प1ए०प०१
pue 1008 oxi Sur[ours USU
००१ ‘oJ Udy} fÁv[o 03110 997] 3प] oov[d sso[19jvA p uonoerp Áproqjnos
-Joo-o^op uay} ‘Aep anjg Jo1sv2 oy} 0) ‘9g W 3991) Vyvjjiduwy V "3 19] ? पा SUMO UNA

a
Sarmhit
Brhat
uol; म] SUL
-[JOUIS 191४७ ]njryuo|d
Áv]o ^oj[oÁ uou) pur 921] ५} 9944 DqUIDpDM
yidop ‘og 1४ 801] uop[os y jo ynos OY} 0} '3६ v SOA OU} 0} ]iu v "95682 JO UIA AJISULION
991] DYDILT ९
jo YINOG oY} ० ४१.४6
921] २५} pu? ssvis Ajoy YIM
JEM
Awtvoj xou "[[1ए13-99-0ए
jo uUnoJoo ०) jo 300015
v xou ‘Avjo Áuwv] uou) 99.1] ०3५) 9294] DAHUpD JW ४ JO
JO JSOM ०५1 ०1 "96 You oy} 0} yuy "OFLE ul9A Á|I19]SUq
‘yous 5१ ४ tdop ‘oS १४
ple IN S U U U Sie” a NE e sa sa
1972M ey} MO]
-3q pug 9७015 U35 ए Jeu}
ymouaq *uroA &][.०५]-10५ usu)
‘uroa Á]19)seo ue 3513 “UIP
JO ynos OY} ०] `F
1912७ JIMS
jo 300 Ájiouliou
JoQjoue uot “UIA
Á]I9]sv9 ue jS1l4
991) D/UDADY ४ JO
qjnos oU) 0} juu yv 'osLT
ic w 391011 jews V
BAR a ecc meu 1. C NNN
QUO}S v IJl]
301] v yxou “Avo 9jIUA uou
‘moyjos Ae] ysinjq voy}
"dep ‘og 3€ esooguou V
991) Aue
Jo Y}IOU 34} ० “OT IWM

Chart of Underground Water Springs
n—— —— U AM OS ASA ee a
sseld DAING IO SSeJS
DUDALA 1109 Jo oouoso1d
Jo *oov|d sso[191e/^
? ur UOI AIIM
jo sonsuojoei1tu) OG I9]tAA
ouo Á[1o
-yjnos ए Udy} pu? UIA ATIO
-JSOM uot 'uj1vo ३०९]१ 1xou
ouo Á[19
‘QUOJS og[-p]eIeu uoU
‘Kejo AO][oÁ 3xou “oç Jo 3311 3५} 991} PDH n4pq ® jo -nos ४ ^o[oq put
uqdop v ojdn oxeus ong V JO 1५९० 3प] O) “OF WuHuoN og O) UY 79297 UIA Á[I9]S24 ४ ISIA
ouo AjJajseq-YION V Y}
Aojoq pue uia AjJoqjnos
v पप] ‘pues UMA Ppoxiur '091] DYDIUDUISP ouo Á[Io]svo
Áv[o yxou ‘ouols o]dind uoy) 991 zopjupuugp ƏY} Ue jo YOU OY} 03 qu -i[j1ou Woy} pue
५901101 ४ ydəp '०५ IV JO ou oy} 03799 -JUV 10 991] MUpDg V FLT UQA ATAOYINOS ISIA
9uo
Kejo थापृ७ jxou “uols prey
Ayu Udy} pu?
uəy} ‘Avjo yoryq uot *qudop 90.1} OY} 991] DYIIdDY ४ JO
Ç 1७ 3४५ DOJUBOLISA WV jo YOU OY} ०} 797, unos OY} 0] [पाप "ICE UNDA Á[19]99A ४ ISIA
s[mmue
JO 3994 99} O] ‘29 -VODOD IO 9०1 Ul[eq V "20 urA AJouinog

Brhat Samhita
punos juesvo|d pute pno] æ
sus 100] Aq poduiejs
oov[d sures oy} JV Suioq YHL I} NAM 'osLT UIDA Á[19]JOU V
C r F ss a... E EE RR
DSADA
991] ƏY} 22/4 IO $901} AUIOY]-uOU
JO 1594 oY} 01 ‘of — jspiu 221] AUJOY] V ʻo ६81] ‘oq ‘od
Jo Used Ássei8 y NC IJEM JO UA V
©) ५७ त O Oe SES MF oN
शापापष्ट YIM p319A02
pue Assojs AISA ol? '0]9
njoxyuy 'pnpuip ‘vajig
$221] 9५} *Doypipj]pug “DUNADA
JO you 9Y} ०} ‘OE ‘DYVIDAULY “D3DJ1L JJ "9 icc ‘od
—— EE Eee "|
soar ९१ ƏSAISU9)X9 pu? JOYS oq
UJI soon mooy pue Áip soyouvig Suigueq19Ao0
role suornvolpur ÁI91jUO]) Suo| YUM S291) /550[0. ÁqivoN ‘od
Se ae eee
oov|d e ui SUIMOIS
lodoolo Dl[UwuDADNI
sqioy osouj pue zuüpusv'T ‘ippd
jo unos Y} 03 OZ -DADYNS NUDA mia ‘OCT ‘oJ

Chart of Underground Water Springs
1310/ Jo ÁAjuo|d
Jey] Ao[oq put 2uojs v Udy} oov|d 11989
‘Kejo uoo18 1xou SALJO UMOIQ 991] ƏY} ४ पा 33.1 HJIq V JO 1४९० Jovem Juepunge
jxou 561] v ujdop ‘oS TY JO 1994 OY} O] ‘ofp -you 3प OF JHUJUV ‘IGT YUM UNA Á[ISTHON
PYM
Jo Assojs Á19A SI uon)
-333/ OY} JI 10 Usd
sdo1o oy} pjoy v ur jJ 201 ‘od
oov[d sures yue əy} Woy Sui
og) qjeouiopuf) -SIV oxouis JO WLIS ‘O01 1310. juvpunq y
oov|d
sso|ijjuM ४ ul sdo}
JSƏA 91 0} “OZ OM} UHA 991] IPP V ‘OST og
JOMOL SIUM
yA pug ‘suroy} JO
ploaop oq 17०५ 11014g “OFLT ‘0d
Avjo jeinjwuun »oo[ 291
MOJSA pue? moq ०००१९ 15४3 SJL O] ‘OE ४ JO आयु pu? S19^0[4 "00८ ‘od
Sso|1no[oo oq
10 MO] AISA SULY 291]
youvlg zey} Jopuf) g jo uouwiq o[suls y "e IIM

Brhat Samhita
94} JO १5४२३५३ 01 DE ष UMA peurof nmppg “०001 पृशञअ४०१ Jo Ajuo[q
c ——— eee
291] OY} 991] VADY 191४७ snordos Jo
JO 1894 94} 01 “OE ४ UNA pourof ¿¿mppg ‘206 UIA Á[19]svo-q]JONI
>> eee
Aq 19]eA
uord.oos -IVU [[njju? JnouyrA 199//$ JO suo
v yjdop ‘oiZ 1४ pur Ato $291] ƏY} 10 YAM 1919803 pourof K[19gji0u ए uoi pue
SIUM jxou “3५015 Ə3H-3]JSed JO 1४9७ ou] ०1 “OE S391} DJIYOY pue Linpyg 008 1SIU uroA Apiognog
‘Urea por uouyj 'ouojs po
-ino[oo-1oddoo jxou “98008 991] 9५} 99.1] DYDÜIDANÇ ए JO J9]€A पृ9००.१
-uour e oig Jo पावफ ४1७ jo ymos əy} 0} “OZ you 9U ० [muy 3S, JO UIA AjJoujnog
— LECCE EO Ch 0001 1
uMOIG e ‘Og Jo udop v jV JO 1994 OY} 01 ‘oT JO JS%9 oY} ०1 muy "20L IM
991} 9५} 99.1] DYDIIYOY ४ loye^ spyoe1q
Jo ymos əy} O] '9६ JO 39०१ 9U) O) [muy ‘209 JO UIA ÁJ491SƏAA
ee RNC
yjdop e o3dn Soy ^o][oá V Jo qnos oY} ० ‘ofp YOU oY} ० [पाप ‘00S 1०1९/॥ 120M
— n Ñ < —F Se eo oo oN
NS I9]0A
Jo undəp v ojdn Buoy 31qno k 9311 Nji ९ पृभूजू०९1१ Jo A3uojd
ouo २९५५ ३०९१ P MUYM V ynos 9५} 0) “Dip JO 15४9 १५) ०} puy SSE YUM UA Asougnog

Chart of Underground Water Springs
q^ poxiu Áv usiaojəÁ 991) ०४४७०7
uou ‘oyvus pu)dop '० iZ IV JSOM SJ! 0} 0g V UHA pourof ००1] 1709 000€ oq
eee
US
rue oq siue ç jo dnoi8
[४.१५०9 əy} ^o[og ४ JO ouo [ujuoo ƏU JI ÇAT 'Oq
oon ou] ##2७ Ayouy v Jo प]
शाप
syiqjuv Jo sue ç Aq popunolins
UloA-I9]tA v jv] 97००0 2U JO YOU $991} 1ogjo IN} YUM
qjvouoq pue ouojs ४ 3514 IY} oj SHSIP 9[ ‘Op 3uo[e 201} ०/०//०्ए V 900४ ‘oq
pyme oy} »qurppy Jo jn] oovjd
JO ymos oU) o) "og v ur pue uo pang "OccI 'oq
MYM ojed 1eodde
əop]d JryJue uo Zumos
sj] ur uns jM V ssvis Polos 10 ping "9001 ‘od
19119903 pourof
991) ƏY} 201) VAJI 40 VADY

Brhat Samhita
$911]?9J UOUIWIOD
-Un SUIMOYS joxong ४
‘od Jo 3jspiur əy} ur 3311 V ‘od ‘od
əy} JO ginos oy} OL $991] ÁSSO|£) 'o0C 1391९, juepunqy
Jons UIM
punos Suillrtuə 10 Ápuvs OCG
‘moj Jos punols au 10 {ZZ ‘od
SO1}SIIDJOVIVYS [v1njeu
sue 'sse18 jnoy IM
punois Wiojiun v ur JJ 062 ‘od
ue lodoo1o pprdvu8
Jo you oy} 0} og -VAA ०011139311 NQuiDe V “OC | ‘od
oyeus 901} 3५] ooe[d ४ ur 3311
voq [|^ ०1०प) dep ‘ofz IV Jo ymos əy} ० ‘OT 77४०७ AIM Kuiog y IAS ‘od
-ju? Aq popuno.ins

Chart of Underground Water Springs
J081} ÁI9]UA JO asap
-IWI9S ? UI ‘jv 18 3nouds
Jou soop IO Á?A? SIO
UIO.1J919U] 'op -YHA UOIVIJOSOA JOY AA 'ofLI 0d
[ue
183. IY] oui
OY} ULY} IV} SI ouo Jopun
Siue jo MOI v uj suqun p UIDA 19]€AA
eee M >> >>> i > >> क > Te eU Uo TR
9q ysy 10 [पण ‘moq:
-UII € UOIdol (191४७
Wojo} ‘of JO j1osop-luios ४ UT oq ‘od
a U E M Sa 1€. 2 DONMIMNBMNIDNMGEUIN NUMINE RE ERN RR
DSAIA ASIA
JO punoJlg WIeM ४ UI
Jods pjoo pojegoj: uy OTT ‘od
opoqe? 1y} mo
-UI snoloumnu ƏISUA
Jo uəppo urq syurs
QUO IO JJ9S3p-Iuss V UJ "of, ‘0d

Brhat Samhita
pal 10 xov[q
SI Y}Ivd OY} ƏYA 10
'fseIqqed UM pax
pue ysinjq sr jo
oq] MYM “65५९18 pq
-IDA pu? “भ)33 “sspi9 13०126
plung SI 9190] INYM é ]99AS Jo /]॥][व
Mmmm =———— a sss
Jayjoue Aq pa]
urejunoul
oy} Jo 1001] əy} jy -unourms urejunour y ‘od 'oq
SMOIS DOIJUDÁDpDM
Jo ‘suioolysnut “59311
Áy[Iu IO 252724 ‘punt
Ap “nquive 'soo1) ojeq "OC [ oq
PETA TTT ककसी E E
MOIS '3)3 DAIS 5४1०]
pur] Jo—soAv9[ osuop
(31A ÁSSO]S uv s1odoo1o
7p soysng 224] IIIJ AA OC] IJLM
BE sss s Ts nra a NNN
-0} 9971 34 Ajoy pue
ueAueq JO 19139303 po
-urof oq vavquinpn pue (; 'ocD
(way) woy ०६) 7४20२ २००] uvAugq y "oc urA Á[Iogj]1ou V

u
IIs ‘says ‘AsuoU
*uoedid ४ AI poi
-10]09 Suo]s 10 JIOA
s
Le ‘ES
i op CY
AN
191४७ o|qnsnvevuxoug
Chart of Underground Water Springs
UMOJIg SI 30
‘uiniIA]JOO 1o 3०१ “SU
odii ‘ules अाएए0 ‘pnojo
*ureld uoo1g *[Á1oq
gui[quioso1 YOO! V
poi si u11vo oy) pu? sin
-OJ
ds pol sey pue जाप्प
sopnxo VDJ SIUM
१17०० usin]q
५३२४२ IMYA oed
AqJEIN 197V” juvpunqy
yupun 10/0
191९७ JIMS
yue UMOIG poy
126४-65 yya pour
q11e2 pauno[oo-1oddo;)
EAE rr e aa
791४७ Qspr[oviq
315४} ur juod
-ULI]S" SI VY} 1910/0

== c t mo Ea Fe. mp ER Sok SNS T°! a. cda

By the same author:
ESSENTIALS OF HORARY
ASTROLOGY
This book provides an insight into the importance of astrology :
viz. natal, electional and horary, as well as deals with other
dimensions of this science such as spirituality, spiritualis?
Ayurveda, transmigration of souls, thought-reading, dreams, -
temple and its rituals and effects of particular sins.
The work presents new theories and methods of determining
success and defeat in contests and wars with the help of illustrative charts. It urges readers to avoid fatalism commonly
associated with predictions and explains how one could solve
riddles in life and tide over the pessimistic attitude and related
psychological problems. The author has thrown fresh light on
some questions like the name of the author of Prasnamarga, lint:
of succession of his pupils, and the authorship of the Dasadhya». `
The most significant contribution of this work is the clear exposition of the rules of Astamangala and Devaprasna, in addition
to Candragupti (water-divination), martial problems, Coragrahas,
Necromancy, special importance of Mandi and Dasa of its star,
Kalacakradasa, etc.
FUNDAMENTALS OF ASTROLOGY
In this book an attempt has been made to give a good account
of the science of astrology, with a view to making the reader a:
good and true astrologer. It also shows that astrology does not
make man a fatalist, a helpless automation in the hands of a
merciless Fate. It should, on the other hand, help him to take
to self-exertion and self-help. This hoary lore, according to the
author, is to be practised not for selfish ends, but to guide the
needy and the distressed, to remove the cause of their suffering
and to turn their attention towards God.
MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS PRIVATE LIMITED:
