READABLE DATASET
================================================================================
Original file: chandrakala_nadi_1.json
Dataset number: 79 of 455
Format: valid JSON
Structure: Object / structured dataset
Original size: 1,224,198 bytes
Top-level fields: 11
Title: Chandrakala Nadi 1
Creator: —
Date: —
Description: —

CONTENT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
METADATA AND OTHER FIELDS
  • title: Chandrakala Nadi 1
  • creator: —
  • date: —
  • description: —
  • subject: —
  • identifier: —
  • source_folder: ckn-3
  • total_pages: 268
  • total_words: 142419
  • text_quality:
    • ocr_word_validity_score: 0.933
    • quality_tier: good
    • note: —

FULL TEXT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Deva Keralam
(CHANDRA KALA NADI)
BOOK-1
Translated by
R. SANTHANAM

DEVA BRERALADNI
(CHANDRA KALA NADI

DEVA RERALANSMI
(CHANDRA KALA NADI
BY
ACHYUTA OF BRERALA
BOOK I
(Containing 2718 Slokas)
Translated by
R. Santhanam
SAGAR PUBLICATIONS
FJ2 Janpath
Ved Mansion
New Delhi-110 OO1

First Published January 1992
@ Publishers
Printed by-Narinder Sagar for Sagar Publications, New Delhi
Printed at Gayatri Offset Press, Noida»

Preface & Introduction
Salutations to Lord Ganesa, the Remover of Obstacles; to Goddess Saraswathi, the all-pervading
Mother of Learning, and to Nava Grahas, the destiny-makers of the Universe. After bringing out
Essentials of Predictive Hindu Astrology last year, 1 am happy to be amidst my readers with Book 1 of
Deva Keralam with English translation, notes etc.
Some have just heard the name of this work, Deva Keralam. Some have seen the Sanskrit
manuscript. Yet, almost every student of astrology has been keen to possess an English translation of
this work since decades. And, now, here is an occasion for all of us to actually enjoy the instructions
of Achyuta, the author of Deva Keralam.
The name itself suggests that the work belongs to Kerala, in the south of India, which is a
treasure-house of original astrological manuscripts like Jatakadesa Marga, Krishneeyam and Prasna
Marga. Each work from Kerala is a magnum opus, unto itself.
Deva Keralam has over 8200 slokas in all. Its author Achyuta had unfortunately left no clues
about his lineage, place of origin, time period etc. Lack of such information does not affect the
greatness of the work adversely. The name however suggests that it hails from Kerala.
_ The author obviously was a man of letters in astrology and had mastered various Nadi Granthas.
He specialized in use of Nadiamsa apart from employing Parasarian principles. He had consulted, in
compiling the present work, several Nadi Granthas including Surya Nadi, Chandra Nadi, Kuja Nadi,
Budha Nadi, Guru Nadi, Sukra Nadi, Sani Nadi, Lagna Nadi, Lagnadhipathi Nadi, Sarva Nadi and
Yoga Nadi
He had also quoted Garga, Vasishta, Parasara, Yavana etc. As far as I know, thc. Nadis are not
available in any form nowadays. These Nadis, unlike Saptahrshi Nadi, apparently contained principles
usable in predictive astrology and not full-fledged horoscopes. The readers may be aware, Saptharshi
Nadi contains horoscopes discussing various aspects of natives, but far less instructive principles. The
average reader can hardly know of the basis of such conclusions without the help of an experienced
tutor. However, in case of the Nadi texts consulted by our author, those apparently fulfilled, inter alia,
the sole purpose of laying down rules for exhaustive interpretation of events of numerous kinds mainly
from one starting point - Nadiamsa.
Other stages of instructions contain predicting without the help of Nadiamsa, 1.6. with the help
of special planetary combinations, positions, Ashtaka Varga, Dasa periods and the like as is normal
for any standard work we follow
What is a Nadiamsa is’. 1685014 to be explained to the reader. Most of us are us are aware of
Shodasa Vargas, the Parasarian division of a sign or Rasi into sixteen different parts of different lengths
of longitudes. What is less commonly known or employed is Nadiamsa, the 150th part of a Rasi, or one
fifth of a degree. That way, the entire space of 360 deg of the zodiac is divided into 1800 Nadiamsas.
In Table 1, in the immediately ensuing pages, I have enlisted the order and names of Nadiamsas,
as collected from the present work (the relevant original slokas appear much later in our work) and
from late C.G. Rajan of Madras, a known authority on Nadi astrology in particular. Lafe Rajan’s list

is hence taken with a specific purpose of textual utility on some occasions. And in Table 2, the
commencing and ending spaces of these 150 Nadiamsas are given.
In giving notes, I have followed the Nadiamsa divisions as shown in column 5 of Table 1. The
reader may use alternative spaces according to his choice and experience if he feels he can obtain
better effects of the text.
As could be observed, the order and names of these ‘Nadiamsas are identical for all the four
movable signs in a specified manner. Immovable signs again have a common pattern for themselves,
but different from those followed by movable and common signs. The same is the case among the four
common signs, 1.6, these have an exclusive arrangement for themselves.
For example whatever applies in this classification and identity to Aries applies equally to Cancer,
Libra and Capricorn; whatever applies to Taurus applies to Leo, Scorpio and Aquarius; and lastly
whatever applies to Gemini applies to Virgo, Sagittarius and Pisces.
The Nadiamsa count is different for movable, immovable and common signs as could be witnessed
in Table 1. In movable signs, the count is in regular order from 1 to 150 (as shown in col 1).
For an immovable sign, the count is reverse, 1.6. from 150 to 1 (i.e. 150, 149, 148, 147, 146, etc...
as shown in col.2).
For common signs the count is firstly from 76 to 150 and then from 1 to 75 (as shown in col.3).
Keeping the list for movable sign as basis. Col. 4 gives the names of these segments as per C.G.
Rajan while col. 5 gives what is at one stage followed by our present work. Table 1 will of course make
the whole thing very clear.
Now if you observe the list, Vasudha Nadiamsa is the 1st of a movable sign, the 150th of an
immovable (or fixed) sign and the 76th of a common (or dual) sign. Vaishnavi Nadiamsa is the 2nd of
a movable sign, the 149th of an immovable sign and the 77th of a common sign. Braahmi is the 3rd of
a movable sign, the 148th of an immovable sign and the 78th of acommon sign. The concerned segments
should be selected from Table 2.
Details about all the names and positions of Nadiamsas can be well understood from Table 1.
Table 2 is an easy one and can be used to know the serial number of Nadiamsa when the actual
longitude is selected following which the exact name of Nadiamsa should be referred to in Table 1.
For example there is a planet or the ascendant cusp in one of the movable signs (Aries, Cancer
Libra, Capricorn) at 10 deg 52’ of arc. That is 55th Nadiamsa which is Seethala Nadiamsa (as per col
1, Table 1). The same longitude in an immovable sign (Taurus, Leo, Scorpio, Aquarius) causes
Apavargaa Nadiamsa (as per col. 2 of Table 1), Again in a common sign (Gemini, Virgo, Sagittarius,
Pisces) the relevant Nadiamsa is Raudri (as per col. 3 of Table 1). We should do well to remember that
the first Nadiamsa in a movable sign is Parameswari Nadiamsa, and in a common sign it is Mahamaaya
Nadiamsa.
For ascendant, its cusp should be used to find out its Nadiamsa position, and for the planets the
usual longitudes we obtain from the ephemeris.
In many cases, the text divides the Nadiamsa in four parts called Vipra, Kshatriya, Vaisya and
Soodra Kalas. Vipra denotes a Brahmin, Kshatriya a ruler, Vaisya a trader and Soodra the fourth caste
as per Vedic divisions. Kala means time. Simply these are quarters 1 to 4 (each of 3’ longitude) of a
given Nadiamsa and are superior or inferior in that order for certain purposes. In other words they
(40 not always indicate the birth in a certain caste as prevailing in olden days. These are actually meant
for attainment of perfection in prediction. Needless to mention, this kind of division makes the whole

zodiac into 7200 equal minor segments, each of 3’ arc (total 21600’ accounting for 360deg) - 1800 each
of Vipra, Kshatriya, Vaisya and Soodra Kalas, the use of which can hardly allow accuracy to escape
from the hands of a master astrologer.
The reader going through the pages will find the extent of changes in events each quarter (viz.
Vipra etc.) of a Nadiamsa can introduce. In the same Nadiamsa, for example Vipra Kala gives certain
result while another of the 3 parts gives completely different results.
Another division made of this Nadiamsa is first half and second half making the whole zodiac in
3600 parts. That is of 6’ longitude. Here again the effects are absolutely in mutual variance.
On quite limited occasions, we find that a Nadiamsa is made into six parts attributing to Garga’s
authority. Meseems, this division is however questionable and must have been wrongly attributed to
the said sage.
True, exact degree of ascendant in terms of degrees and minutes of arc is very essential to use
some of the instructions contained hereof. Then without that, there can be no real astrology. Astrology
of approximation can only be disastrous. To use the principles containing Nadiamsas, the astrologer
must also obtain excellence in standard methods of rectification, prenatal epoch theory and through
Horary methods. Once that is done, with known events the correct Nadiamsa can be located.
For an established astrologer, Ayanamsa or precession is not an unsettled issue. Let me however
state for the benefit of the new reader that Lahiri’s Chaitrapaksha Ayanamsa is the accurate one when
the horoscope is cast using the exact coordinates at every point.
Not just for Nadiamsa, accuracy of Ayanamsa is a must even in other cases, like Navamsa,
Sapthamsa and Shashtiamsa. To wit, if a planet, say Saturn is in Aries 19deg 59’ as per Lahiri ayanamsa,
another ayanamsa even with a small difference of minus 2’ of arc can place Saturn somewhat ahead
and give it Libra Navamsa instead of Virgo navamsa due to Lahiri. Saturn even in Aries Rasi with
Libra Navamsa protects one from heart ailments, gives him longevity and helps him progress in his
calling. The same Saturn with Aries sign position but in Virgo Navasma makes him wholly unreliable,
and makes him a victim of some sort of diseases of hand and legs. This difference could be easily located
by an experienced astrologér. Same is the case with other divisions including Nadiamsa.
All the rules given in this book do not, as could be seen, always revolve around Nadiamsa. And
each Nadiamsa in each sign is of course not given in the context of delineation. Select Nadiamsas are
given and they can be easily applied to the same kind of sign - movable, immovable or common, thus
multiplying their use four - fold. Sometimes the reader should be careful for they are just for a given
sign only.
Some Nadiamsas appear with synonym though not in that name. Some have not been enlisted in
both the lists of the text in which case, I have to the possible extent supplied suitable alternatives. These
may or may not be acceptable to the reader.
There are umpteen rules given by the text without ever considering Nadiamsa division. Such
rules, which can be rarely found in other sources than the present text, could be of exemplary use. For
an easy understanding several groups of slokas have been given suitable captions and any reader can
understand where a Nadiamsa features, and where it does not.
The beauty of the text lies in the fact that based on one planetary hint, many of the native’s relatives
have been exhaustively discussed.
The original suffers from certain defects. In some cases, the Sanskrit heading denoting a certain
Nadiamsa and ascendant clashes with the actual text thereof. The reader better follow the body text

for details. In some cases, copying errors, hopeless interpolations etc. are there, particularly in terms
of transit, using meaninglessly words like "Sphuta Yoga" even though only one planet features. In
some cases, the expression "Sukhi" is used denoting happiness although the effects are not always so.
Such misnomers including some corrupt words have been as far as possible, if not invariably but
carefully, omitted in translation to protect to the reader from being misguided. This mention is not
belittle the author, but with an understanding mind of the limitations of the copyist.
The Contents pages given before the commencement of the text, for understandable reasons, is
only brief as it is bound to be. For in each section, a number of items have been discussed and enlisting
them is only enlarging the volume.
I have in fact tried to give due exposure to the original’s true spirit and I believe I have succeeded
to a great extent in this direction.
I have left no stone unturned in fulfilling my task as the reader expects, having provided English
translations for rare standard works like Saravali (2 vols), Parasara Hora (vol 1 only), Suka Nadi, Hora
Sara etc.... etc... Yet there ought to be some shortcoming out of my ignorance, what in Sanskrit, and
what in astrology. In such an event, I can only pray the reader’s broad-minded favour of forgiving me
on such count of failures.
I have however the happiness that I am the first person to have undertaken the task of rendering
these slokas in English and the reader is well aware that so far no language translation has been
provided for the present original text. The present issue, Book 1, contains 2718 slokas while Book 2
and Book 3 containing discussions on further Nadiamsas in many ascendants, and a number of general
rules independent of Nadiamsas, will soon follow to complete the work in question.
The text also excels in suggesting suitable remedies for many shortcomings in the lives of the native
and his relatives.
J am specially appreciative of the interest and enthusiasm shown by Mr. Narinder Kumar Sagar
in placing the present title before the readers.
I will feel greatly honoured if the reader finds something useful in my present efforts.
र. Santhanam,
Editor,
The Times Of Astrology,
9/1040 Govindpuri,
Kalkaji,
New Delhi 19 (India)
January 15, 1992 Telephone 6462777

(an ole छ नो भैः आ तो जक भो पे Ge च कथ
Movable Fixed Dual Name of Nadiamsa As Per:
C.G.Rajan Deva Keralam
01 150 76 Vasudha Vasudha
02 149 77 Vaishnavi Vaishnavi
03 148 8 Brahmi Braahi (Brahmi)
04 147 79 Kalakoota Kalakoota
05 146 80 Sankari Sankari
06 145 81 Sadaakari Sudhakarasama
07 144 82 Samaa Saumya
08 143/ 83 Saumya Suraa
69 142 84 Suraa Maaya
10 141 85 Maaya Manoharaa
11 140 86 Manoharaa Maadhavi
12 139 87 Maadhavi Manjuswana
13 138 88 Manjuswana Ghoraa
14 137 89 Ghoraa Kumbhini
15 136 90 Kumbhini Kutilaa
16 135 91 Kutilaa Prabhaa
17 134 92 Prabhaa Paraa
18 133 93 Paraa Payaswini
19 132 94 Payaswini Maala
20 133 95 Maala Jagathi
21 130 96 Jagathi Jarjhari
22 129 97 Jarjharaa Dhruvaa
23 128 98 Dhruva Musalaa
24 127 99 Musalaa: Mudgala(Mudgara)
25 126 100 Mudgara Pasaa
26 125 101 Pasaa Chambaka
27 124 102 Champaka Daamini
28 123 103 Daamini Mahi
29 122 104 Mahi Kalushaa
30 121 105 Kalushaa Kamalaa
Table 1
List of Nadiamsas
Their Order in Various Rasis (Signs)
©> भू क क भ क ND le भो भ a A Gi SD A त भ क र SD ED HO क उ आ च 89 भ चो जा का ज क OR ls A ny OP FOS क ज) Sell ED भा SD ED GP in GID ny ७99 A Ds Wn ज णो अ साः को च ज ae क जमः भो क भको क क ह आ ऋ जः ज च आः भक भः मिः पि च भ Eb भि अ EP OE जम ज निः ls ae १५४४

क ज भः भ आ आ 1 प 9 त भ ज पा कर च पः जत भं म भः जो सो भोः भ यो kata kt re
ey ae आच भा प भय यः कः आ आ आ च भ ad आ आ) वि व कः भा [ठ ज भ भ ककः क भाः च भका जे a ठि ज nd ज ककः व क आ छ क कि गोपे क भ भ क भक उ छ) चक चक
(Sin क % मेभ 699 क अ ऋ का च ln जः च ज ce नि सोः क का
Sign
1 शोके आक ॐ को आ प 9 स जवा Om coe She भ पेजः छ ७५७५ yo का
भः eo क ie ज आ छः आ जा
भ दोप cae अ Ga कमि आ भः पर व आ आ काम आ 69) 00 भ ए क स छ आम क वः ७७8 क) Oe कः च
क भ क क भः भ 6) लोर जि 99 भाः भण भ ठ भा छ प धो प त को चो td जह का ० कण भ के जः जक जक क 08 99 ज ee ee कः
0 च ® ए जन क पछ आक ie त ज पि भति भथा ¢ = "ज कक
Kamalaa
Kantha
Kaalaa
Karikaraa
Kshamaa
Durdhuraa
Durbhagaa
Viswa
Visirnaa
Vikata Viswala
Aavilaa
Vidrumaa
Sukhada
Snigdha
Sodaraa
Surasundari
Amrithaplavini
Karalaa
Kaamadhuk
Karaveerani
Gahvaraa
Kundini
Raudra/Kaantha
Vishaa
Vishavinaasini
Nirmadaa
Seethalaa
Nimnaa
Pirida(Preeta)
Priyavaasini
Kanthaa
Kaalaa
Karikaraa
Kshamaa
Durdharaa
Durbhagaa
Viswa
Visirnaa
Vihwala
Anilaa
Bhima
Sukhaprada
Snigdha
Sodaraa
Surasundari
Amrutaprasini
Kaala (Karalaa)
KamadrukkaraVeerini
Gahwaraa
Kundini
Kanthaa
Vishakhya
(Vishaa)
Vishanaasini
Nirmada
Seethala
Nimnaa
Preeta
Priyavivardhani
Manaadha
(Maanaghna)
Durbhaga
मा trrrmperrieneememateniementeencnamictt

Movable
Sign
FO क OE जः Oe च वः OE Eh छा चा भः का श कोरे आ en चे i कि ज
C.G.Rajan
णं भ भ क भ छतः भेत छे त श क क
Deva Keralam
82 भं त भ पर ® कि भि तभो eee पः ऋ क भे भ ओ मो व क चि जो व व ज ज क भ ete hehehehe ज पे व म भका क जा आ hs dente 098 जतः वा भः वआ आ; आ [हः ७) ति 9 ज च भिः आ कः आ lt tt tok ७40) भ कि आ म भ ttt hd Ad ज आ जा, म Lt Lk tt भ आ. भि Lr क क भ तः er ft ऋ 09४8 भम
Maanaghna
Durbhagaa
Chitraa/Chittaa
Chitrini
Chiranjeevani
Virupa/Bhoopa
Gadaharaa
Naala
Nalini
Nirmala
Nadi (river)
Sadamritamsukala
Chapalaa
Saankuraa
Trailokyamohanakari
Mahaamaari
Suseethala
Sumatha/Subhaga
Suprabhaa
Sobhaa
Sobhana
Sivadaa
Siva
Balaa
Jwalaa
Gadaa
Gaadaa
Nootanaa
Sumanoharaa
Somavalli
Chitraa
Vichitra
Chirajivini
Bhoopa
Gadaaharaa
Naalaa
Gaalavee
Nirmalaa
Nadi (river)
Sudha
mritamsuga
Kaali
Kaalika
Kalushankura
Trailokyamohanakari
Mahaamaayaa
Suseethala
Sukhadaa
Suprabhaa
Sobhaa
Sobhana
Sivadaa
Siva
Balaa
Jwalaa
Gadaa
Gaadaa
Sootana(Nootana)
Sumanoharaa
Somavalli

क भप भ) भो पे सो AE च वाः ण आ भो क आ आ ज भ A a पः ण ज SE आः च हि आ जे ig भि OO च क भ मः म जम क म शि स ee च वो वक आ आ भ म जो जा भ ESO व जमः क आ चो आ आ वि आ कथ क भः ज द ज त हाः ओ भरः सो भ जो क कोः भ आ द आ आ प पः क ज Oh चि ज oy ध तो पः ओति ae भ भ भः कः भ म आ व ध चः de सः
Movable Fixed Dual Name of Nadiamsa As Per:
Sign Sign 5 " a a a
C.G.Rajan Deva Keralam
91 60 16 Somalatha Somalatha
92 59 17 Mangala Mangala
93 58 18 Mudrika Mudrika
04 §7 19 Sootha Sudha
95 56 20 Mokshapavarga Melaa
96 a5 21 Valayaa Apavargaa
97 54 22 Navaneetha Pasyathaa
98 53 23 Nisakari Navaneetha
99 92 24 Nirvrithi Nisachari
100 51 25 Nigadaa Nivrithi
101 50 26 Saara/Sauraa Nirgathaa
102 49 2) Sangeetha Saaraa
103 48 28 Sumathaa Samagaa
104 47 29 Viswambhara Samadaa
105 46 30 Kumari Samaa
106 45 31 Kokila Viswambharaa
107 44 32 Kunjarakrithi Kumari
108 43 33 Aindira Kokila
109 42 34 Swaahaa Kunjarakrithi
110 41 35 Swaraa Indra
111 40 36 Vahni Swaahaa
112 39 37 Preethi Swadha
113 38 38 Rakshajala Vahni
114 37 39 Plava Peethaa
115 36 40 Vaaruni Yakshi
116 35 41 Madiraa Achalaprabha
117 34 42 Maitri Saarini
118 33 43 Haarini Madhuraa
119 32 44 Harini Maitri
120 31 45 Maruth Harini

स जो भ आ मे भ पि जो भ जभ प ए भ क ज म ज AY श पः जो at द tO म भह र आ भ आथ ज जि जम Se आ सि क व जः is 0 क आ सो lt जो RMU AS आ व OD lt क कमा लो आ आ जा ज भो DE भ आ च स ७9 क जिच तः आ स ज आग आः ज SU sD ज सोः SO क जह Se भ ज भो 9 ०४० ज भि
Sign
ष भी भि EE AD OPO SOS GE ND tO Se SY Se A OP OY DO SEE OF MO OE SY OE AED OP OOD OE Ge OE Oe On
Name of Nadiamsa As Per:
C.G.Rajan Deva Keralam
Dhananjaya Haarini
Dhanakari Maruthaa
Dhanadaa Dhananjaya
Mricchaya Dhanakari
Ambuja Dhanada
Tsaani ` Kachchapa
Thoolini Ambuja
Raudri Isaani
Sivaa Soolini
Sivakari Raudri
Kalaa Sivaasivakari
Kunda Kalaa
Mukunda Kundaa
Bharatha Mukundaa
Pasithaa Paratha(Bharata)
Kandini Kadali
Smaraa Smaraa
Kunthala Basitha
Kokila Kodala
Paapa (Sin) Kokilamsa
Kaamini Kaamini
Kalasodhbhava Kalasodbhava
Viraprasoo Viraprasoo
Sankara Sangaraa
Sathayaghna Sathayagna
Sadaavari Sataavari
Brahvi/Virahapa = Sragvi
Paatalini Paatalini
Pankajaa Naagapankaja
Parameswari
Parameswari

Table 2 - S.Nos. & Arcs of Nadiamsas
S.No.
Deg
Min
RDS & &
Deg Main

S.No. From To
Deg Min Deg Min

S.No.
Deg Min

S.No. From To
Deg Min Deg Min

Deg Min
at 48
28 IZ
SESBEESRERSRSRBRBNNUNANKRB

Ly.
CONTENTS
Vasudha Nadiamsa, Maaatanga Yoga.
Durbhaga Nadiamsa, Srikaara Nadiamsa,
Father.
Dasa Effects, Kalakoota Nadiamsa, Maalini
Amsa.
Jupiter in Kaalakoota Nadiamsa, dasa of 10th
lord, Malini Nadiamsa, Mother, Father,
Wealth, Grief.
Rajayoga interruption, Moon’s Dasa, Another wife, evils to wife, Remarriage, Koorma
Yoga.
Sth Dasa, Co-born, Cancer LagriaAries Lagna with Cancer Navamsa, death,
children, Abala Nadiamsa first half.
Mars in immovable Lagna, Abala Nadiamsa,
Prosperity.
Taurus Lagna with Aries Navamsa, Sun in
11th, children.
Childhood, sister, co-born, mother, death,
3rd Dasa.
Sixth Lord, Fourth Dasa, Jupiter in Scorpio ~
with Virgo Navamsa.
Jupiter in Viswambhara Nadiamsa, Jupiter in
Scorpio with Virgo Navamsa, Rahu in Lagna.
Jupiter in Viswambhara Nadiamsa, birth in
Agada Nadiamsa, step-mother, 11th lord in
10th house, 5th lord in Sth, firsthalf of Agada
Nadiamsa.
Half-brother, father, Sun and Jupiter in
Manjuswana Nadiamsa, Father’s death, Jupiter in Viswambhara Nadiamsa.
Mother, Chandra Nadi quoted, Moon in Kutila
Nadiamsa.
Half-sister, second dasa, first 2 years, Agada
Nadiamsa, 11th lord.
7th lord, Sun without beneficial aspect, 9th
lord in 4th house.
oh.
Le:
x ix
Moon in 2nd house, Saturn’s transit.
First dasa, danger to wife, Mars in Sth, Moon’s
sub period.
Mars’ sub period, 4th dasa, Varuna Nadiamsa, Retrograde Jupiter.
Escaping death, 5th year, Co-born, A specific horoscope.
Father, happiness, Father’s prosperity obstructed.
Venus in Pisces, fame, learning, Rajayoga,
marriage, Bride, obstacle to marriage, father-in-law.
Mangala Nadiamsa, Mars, maternal uncle,
maternal grand-father.
Other relatives, Sagittarius Lagna - Prabha
Nadiamsa, first and second halves.
Father, his prosperity, native’s fortune.
Obstacles, illness.
3rd dasa, pilgrimage, Rahu in 10th, dasa
effects, Varuna Nadiamsa, Jupiter in Lagna.
Wide rulership, Sun in Scorpio, Sr. Garga
quoted, Limited progeny, dead children.
Loss of fortunes, royal service & association.
9th lord’s Navamsa, 8th lord, other sub periods, trouble to spouse, mother, parents.
Danger to father, 8th lord’s dasa, children,
Sun in 10th.
Royal displeasure, dasa effects, Kala Chakra
dasa junctions, Saturn aspecting Aquarius.
Deha or Jeeva Rasi, Physical troubles, untimely death nullified, 4th dasa.
3rd dasa, dasa of Navamsa dispositor of 9th
lord, auspicious effects, 2nd dasa.
Malefic dasa, Saturn in Aquarius, Sth lord’s
dasa, &th lord.
Prosperity, Rahu-Sun in Aquarius.

oe
Sun in Kumara Nadiamsa, Cancer Lagna -
Uraga Nadiamsa.
Umbilical cord, other effects, father, elder
brother, Moon-Rahu.
Rahu in 10th, Moon’s navamsa lord, MoonJupiter, Family, wealth, Rahu in Arudra 4th
quarter, grand-father.
Parents, grand-father, maternal relatives, evils,
prosperity, marriage.
Marriage, mother’s death, spouse, Mercury’s
dispositor, children.
Jupiter in 6th, danger to father, Saturn’s transit, relatives, father-in-law, father, old age,
2nd lord. ~.
Exit, Durdhara Nadiamsa.
Mohana Nadiamsa, Mars, Jupiter, Jupiter in
Pisces, Sudha Nadiamsa.
Relatives, Jupiter in aspect to Saturn.
Lord of Lagna, Saturn in Virgo.
Maternal relatives, lord of 11th, 3rd dasa,
Saturn’s transit, 3rd lord’s navamsa dispositor.
Mercury in 9th, paternal uncle, Venus in 11th
lord’s Navamsa, Durdhara Nadiamsa, 3rd
dasa.
12th house, Daridra Malika Yoga.
4th and Sth dasas, Rahu in 10th, Saturn in 8th,
4th dasa, wealth.
Danger to mother, children, malefic transit,
Manu quoted.
Venus in 11th & Jupiter in 2/10/4th, Sam
Nadi quoted, Capricorn Lagna - Sachira
Nadiamsa.
Capricorn Lagna - Sachira Nadiamsa.
Relatives, maternal grand-father, maternal
uncles.
Paternal grand-father, Venus in Capricorn,
co-bom, lords of 9th and 10th, 8th lord,
Saturn-Mars, Lagna lord.
6th lord, brother-in-law, Saturn in Capricorn.
Saturn in Aquarius with Libra Navamsa, evils,
Saturn’s transit and 11th lord’s Navamsa.
Father’s death, danger to mother, fortunes,
old age.
Ath dasa, sub periods of Jupiter & Mars, Rahu
in 9th.
Death, Rahu’s transit in Deha Rasi.
Pisces Lagna - Kunda Nadiamsa, Mercury
aspected by Jupiter.
7th lord, Mercury in Kunda Nadiamsa, Kesari
yoga.
Maternal relatives, Saturn’s transit.
Sun- Mercury conjunction, Rahu’s Navamsa,
Fortunes, Moon’s Navamsa.
Marriage, danger to father, Mercury in Kunda
Nadiamsa, Sun in Harina Nadiamsa, Mercury and 10th lord.
Rahu dasa, 4th dasa, Venus dasa, Moon in
Virgo, Mercury in Mukunda Nadiamsa, wives.
Danger to wife, Mercury-Jupiter, 10th lord,
Jupiter in Pisces Lagna.
Dhanada Nadiamsa, Virgo Lagna, father, 5th
lord.
Lagna lord, Jupiter’s transit, Saturn-Mars.
2nd dasa, Mercury in Sura Nadiamsa, Venusian Navamsa, Mercury in 2nd, Sun in
Libra.
Mercury in 2nd, Sun in Virgo, 8th lord,
father, Lagna Rasi dasa.
Saturn’s transit, 8th lord, Jupiter - Rahu, 1 1th
Rasi Dasa, 10th Rasi dasa, danger to father,
10th Arudha, 9th Rasi dasa.
Auspicious and inauspicious events, 5th Rasi
dasa, Dhanada Nadiamsa, Pisces Lagna -
Kamala Nadiamsa, Saturn - Mercury.
Satum - Sun, Lakshmi Yoga, Danger to mother,
Scorpio or Aries navamsa.
Mars, 3rd lord, 11th lord, 2 planets exalted,
wife, brother-in-law.
Sister-in-law, Saturn in Leo navamsa, evils,
Ketu with Mars, maternal relatives.

Marriage, Sth lord, Sun in Aries, Rahu in
Dhanu, 6th Rasi dasa.
Saturn/Rahu transit, Dasa of Leo Rasi, Dasa
of 8th Rasi,Rahu in 10th, Libra Lagna -
Nirmala Nadiamsa.
Street of birth, emaciated body, infantile
mortality.
Mars in 9th, Nirmala Nadiamsa - Libra Laena.
Saturn in 5th, Saturn in Libra. —
Saturn with Mercury, Jupiter’s-aspect, Mercury with Venus and Saturn in 11th.
Nirmala Nadiamsa 2nd half, Saturn in Leo,
brothers, sisters.
Lord of 3rd, mother, 3rd dasa.
Sakata Yoga, Jupiter in 7th.
Moon in debility, Moon with Rahu, Lagna
Jord’s dasa.
Indra Yoga.
12th lord with Venus, Venus and Arudha,
weak body, foolishness.
Vishnu Yoga, Avastha Yoga.
Cancer Lagna with Scorpio Navamsa, many
daughters, excessive limbs.
Libra Lagna - Kutila Nadiamsa, Naraka Yoga,
final rites, Libra Lagna - Indra Yoga.
Moon in Scorpio with Rahu, Indra Yoga
continued.
. Marsin 9th, 9th lord’s dispositor, destruction
of blemishes.
Eye disorders, fortunes, Saturn in Leo, dasa
results.
Saturn in 81, malefic transits, other results.
Destruction of wealth, other effects, 2nd dasa,
wealth, Benefic in 111, Sun dasa - Ketu
bhukti, 6th lord’s sub period, great danger,
great fortunes.
Rahu in Vargottama, Rahu without Vargottama, other dasa effects, evils to co-born.
Lay
2nd 1010 ऽ dasa, Seethala Nadiamsa, Saturn
Venus coninction, Jupiter - Saturn.
Saturn - Venus, Saturn - (लप्र. Venus - Kett
Saturn in 5th, Venus in Sth, 2nd dasa, pater
nal happiness.
Father, relatives, Saturn in Seethala or Maha
maari Nadiamsa.
Saturn - Mars , first dasa, other effects.
Evil Rasis, other effects, Rahu dasa.
4th dasa, Rahu dasa, 10th lord’s dasa, Raj:
Yoga, danger to wife, Moon in Virgo, Small
POX.
- Half-brother, 10th lord’s dasa, dasa effects.
57/48th year, 12th lord, Saturn with an ex
alted planet, Saturn in Aries - Kokila Nadi
amsa.
Moon in Sagittarius, Sarva nadi quoted, Sat
urn in Aries, birth in Sagittarius Lagna.
Sagittarius Lagna - Sun in Scorpio, 0६५०७
to Lords Vishnu and Siva.
Aquarius Lagna - Guha (Dhruva) Nadiamsa
Guha Nadiamsa, Jupiter and 9th lord.
9th lord, dasa results, infantile mortality
cancellation, short life, Yavanas quoted.
Senior Vasishta quoted, Balarishta.
Garga quoted, wealth, poverty, Aquarius Lagn:
- Mars in 11th.
Sinfulness, knowledge, fortunes, uncles.
Father, ninth lord.
Many wives, Raja Yoga, Co-born, 3rd dasa
relatives, maternal uncle.
Other matters, maternal family, family death
Transits, miscellaneous, diseases etc., Dhruve
Nadiamsa.
Guha Nadiamsa, first and second halves
Mars with benefics, Mars in 10th.
Life-span, physical strength, twins, Balarishta
Capricorn Lagna - Kantha Nadiamsa, 4th 15
sue.

ia
Birth place, Venus Trimsamsa, Co-born,
parents.
Paternal rites, other effects for father,
mother, children, curse, luminaries.
Dasa effects, Sagittarius Lagna - Kantha
Nadiamsa.
Parents, Mudgara Nadiamsa - Sagittarius
Lagna, ascetic order.
25th year, marnage, children, Rahu dasa.
5th lord’s dasa, Lagna lord, parents, Sun in
Aquarius, paternal wealth, other effects.
Spouse, Amala Yoga, Sth dasa, death, Cancer Lagna - Champaka Nadiamsa, other effects.
Co-borns, self, rise in life, mother;s death.
Other effects, 4th lord in 10th Navamsa,
Kahala Yoga.
Dead children, remedies, grand-father, sorrow, 4th dasa, father’s prosperity, other results.
Venus in 6th, Sun-Mars, Upanishadic knowledge.
Paralysis, Sun - Mars, Saturn’s transit- in
Cancer.
Champaka Nadiamsa, Rahu in 4th.
Rahu bhukti, Venus bhukti, Rahu dasa, Jupiter dasa.
Fortunes and illness, Kalakoota Nadiamsa.
Rahu or Sun in Pisces, Sivada Nadiamsa,
Venus dasa. Sagittarius Lagna - Kalakoota
Nadiamsa.
Dhanada Nadiamsa - Aries Lagna, Mother,
Progeny.
Vyasa and others quoted, Dhanada Nadiamsa, father, Garga quoted.
Rahu dasa, Jupiter’s transit, fourth dasa, other
effects, Saturn in Scorpio, Aries Lagna -
Sama Nadiamsa, Saturn in Sagittarius.
Sama Nadiamsa - first and second halves.
Long-living mother, new house, elder brother,
Venus and Jupiter, 4th dasa, Saturn in SagitChild-birth, 9th lord’s dasa, 6th 1005 dasa,
death. Capricorn Lagna - Sundara Nadiamsa,
Guru Nadi quoted.
Rahu’s period, Jupiter in 12th from Moon,
Periods of luminaries, Jupiter’s transit,
Trailokya Nadiamsa - movable Lagna.
Satu in third, Trailokya Nadiamsa - 15142110
halves.
Children, brothers, diseases, wives, service,
uncle, Capricorn ascendant - Trailokya Nadiamsa.
Parents, uncles, Rahu and 11th lord, Sun &
coborn.
Father, Mars, Venus.
Different school quoted, grand-father, parents.
Other effects, Ketu dasa, Venus in Sth.
Saturn’s transil, marriage and progeny.
Venus in Sth, third dasa, 8th lord.
7th lord’s dasa, Mars, 4th dasa.
6th dasa, Rahu dasa, death, Ketu in 12th,
other sources quoted, severance of ears.
Ketu in Libra Navamsa, Saturn aspecting
Ketu, Ketu in in 12th, Ketu in Pisces, On
ears.
Troubles from flies, Jupiter with 3rd lord &
Saturn.
Venus in Scorpio, Brahmayaaamala quoted,
Ketu in Aquarius, movable Lagna, Ketu in
Lagna.
Saturn in 3rd house, 7th lord, progeny, Pankajamsa.
Cancer Lagna, Champaka Nadiamsa.
Moon in Indra Nadiamsa, 4th lord in Leo
Navamsa, Moon with Mars, Mercury in 8th.
Mars in 8th, Mars in exaltation, Chamara
Yoga, Kendrad: Yoga.

Kahala Yoga, Jupiter with Mars, Jupiter in
debility, enemies, spouse.
Taurus Lagna - Seethala Nadiamsa.
Venus, Moon, Mercury, Saturn, 5th house,
Sun, Mother.
Jupiter-Sun, Dull-headedness, single marriage, natal Moon, fortunate family, postmarital fortunes, mother’s relatives, immovable Rasi - Seethala Nadiamsa.
Obstacles, 4th lord, Saturn’s transit, dasa
periods.
The luminaries, Nirmala Nadiamsa, Aquarius Lagna.
Lunar blemish, parents, coborn, MercuryKetu.
Leo Navamsa, Vaishnavite, danger to mother,
Mars and Venus, dull-headed, first half of
Nirmala Nadiamsa.
Venus’ Navamsa, Jupiter, Saturn, Kunda
Nadiamsa in Aquarius Lagna.
Mother, father, thread ceremony, wealth etc.,
medical profession.
Female and male issues, eye trouble, dasa
periods, Scorpio Lagna - Gada Nadiamsa.
After-born, elder coborn, early loss of mother,
inauspicious effects, lords of 6th and 12th.
Wealth, 9th lord’s dasa, Raja Yoga.
Mars dasa, enemies, sub periods of Mars &
Mercury.
Strength of asterism, Moon’s dasa, charity,
death of son.
Remedies, Leo Navamsa,Jupiter aspecting
Sagittarius, Neecha Bhanga Raja Yoga.
Lords of 6th and 8th, conjunction of an exalted and debilitated planet, Sakata Yoga.
Delayed progeny, Ashtaka Varga, Rahu’s
period, Scorpio Lagna - Suprabha Nadiamsa.
Lord of 9th, Leo Lagna - Champaka Nadiamsa.
Venus, Mars, Saturn, father, conveyances,
श
children.
Danger to father, Nirmala Nadiamsa, Champaka Nadiamsa.
Moon, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn.
Aquarius Lagna - Nirmala Nadiamsa, single
marriage, progeny.
Taurus Lagna - Gada Nadiamsa, Saturn, thread
ceremony, early marriage, wealth, conveyances, 2nd dasa.
Children, 4th dasa, sons.
Life span, Jupiter in Libra, Gemini Lagna -
Agada Nadiamsa, Mcon aspected by Jupiter.
Jupiter in Sth, 3rd dasa, Moon, two marriages.
4th dasa, Sura Nadiamsa, Mercury in Jarjharamsa.
Elder brother, Vaishnavite, thread ceremony,
marriage, Saturn, father endangered, Mercury.
Mother’s death, fortunes, Bhargava quoted,
Capricorn Lagna - Jagathi Nadiamsa, MoonSaturn, parents.
Thread ceremony, Moon in Pisces, SaturnMars,progeny.
Wealth, 8th Rasi’s dasa, Moon in Pisces.
Aquarius Lagna - Kunda Nadiamsa.
Royal service, father, thread ceremony, wealth.
Marriage, music, royal service, father.
Saturn's Navamsa positions, 5th dasa, dasa
of 11th lord, marriages, progeny.
IlIness, 6th dasa, 2nd lord’s dasa, Aries Lagna- Mangala Nadiamsa.
Twins, Venus-Mars conjunction, Saturn in
direct motion, father.
Aries Lagna with same Navamsa, 9th lord in
6th, infantile mortality.
Garga quoted, Mercury with Jupiter, Jupiler’s aspect on 10th, wisdom and fortunes,
lord of 9th.

Zu
Mangala Nadiamsa - other effects.
Obstacles to marriage, Mars in Pisces
Navamsa,2nd dasa, Scorpio Lagna.
Jupiter in Leo, retrograde Mars, timely death.
Pilgrimage, 4th dasa, pilgrimage, lord of
10th, death, Pisces Lagna - Uraga Nadiamsa.
Moon-Mars conjunction, wealth etc.
Rahu in Aslesha Nakshatra, Venus, Mother.
Thread ceremony, marriage, bride, period of
marriage, children.
Marriage, progeny, father, dasa period.
Sth dasa, Sun in exaltation, Saturn in transit
in Scorpio, Scorpio Lagna - Sudha Nadiamsa.
Sumathi Nadiamsa, father, mother, relatives.
2nd dasa, marriage, lord of 4th, Moon in 7th.
‘Family deaths, 2nd dasa, progeny, abortions,
Saturn - Mars periods, Saturn’s transit.
Cancer Navamsa, Moon in Kutila Nadiamsa,
Saturn in an immovable Navamsa, Jupiter in
Aries Navamsa.
Saturn, Venus, Moon, pilgrimage, Pisces Lagna
Vasudha Nadiamsa.
Indra Nadiamsa, Jupiterian Trimsamsa, properties, horse-riding, Martian aspects, Cancer
Navamsa, sisters.
Mars in malefic Navamsa, Taurus Navamsa,
Adhi Yoga, Kahala Yoga.
Anies navamsa, Jupiter’s transit, parents, Jupiter
with Sun-Mars.
Children, two wives, life span, Mars with
Sun.
Lords of 9th and 10th, Kesari yoga in Geminl.
Adhi Yoga, 5 planets in Lagna, trouble to
spouse, Jupiter-Mars.
Luminaries, Dhruva Nadiamsa, 3rd house.
Capricom Lagna - Kala Nadiamsa, physical
description, coborn, mother, happiness.
XX iv
Progeny, female child, dead children, grief,
convey- ances, Sakata Yoga, happiness, danger
to father,
Life-span,Capricorn Lagna - Dhruva Nadiamsa, (000), Saturn in malefic Shastiamsa.
Progeny, Moon, prosperity, 11th lord’s dasa,
royal authority, death, Taurus Lagna - Seethala
Nadiamsa.
Marriage, prosperity, 4th dasa, progeny, Taurus
Lagna - Kamala Nadiamsa.
Marriage, father, Mercury, Mars-Venus,
mother, untimely death, Pankaja Nadiarnsa -
Sagittarius Lagna.
Jupiter-Mars-Sun conjunction, marriage,
progeny, 12th lord, Taurus Lagna - Sivada
Nadiamsa.
Fifth issue, parents, coborn, Saturn’s transit,
Marriage, Mars-Ketu, 10th Arudha.
Progeny, 7th lord, Jupiter’s transit, dasa effects.
Senior Vasishta quoted, Gemini ascendant -
Kamala Nadiamsa.
Mars in debility, prosperity, Bhagya Yoga,
2nd dasa, Danger in Sth year, childhood
diseases, education.
Jupiter in Gemini Navamsa, father,*Venus in
10th.
Female issue, obstacle io progeny, 3rd dasa,
9th lord’s dasa.
Danger to mother, professional progress,
untimely end. death, Aries Lagna - Champaka Nadiamsa.
Jupiter in Pisces Navamsa, 9th lord in CanCer, Lagna lord in 2nd house.
Marriage, Venus in Mangala Nadiamsa, lifelong fortunes, conveyances, danger to mother,
Wealth, father’s brothers,d: aperiods, progeny, Sun-Mercury in 10th, dasa periods.
Bhargava Nadi quoted.

Deva Kerulam
। । वसुधशफलम्। । waar पपे मन्दे राहुसमन्विते।
मालिन्य॑शे प्रजातस्य मालिन्यकुलजन्मवान्। । ३। ।
Vasudha Nadiamsa
3. Birth ofa mean order: Should muletics be
मालिन्यंशे पूर्वपगे अ Sale गुरौ । in a trine from the Moon while Saturn is in the
पातंगयेगजातस्य | । १।। company of Rahu, a Malini Amsa native will be
गुरूः ard aay alan समन्विक। born in an impure (or dirty) family, Le. of a mean
मतंगयेगो विख्यते निजे कऋष्षंशके शशी। । २।। Order.
मातगखेगमालिन्यं सोदरभातृहीनवान्।
soma ati ४।।
ie दुश्चरित्रसहोदरौ।
माता पतित्रत्र पुण्य गृहच्छिद्रेण कर्शिता। । ५।।
1-2. Effects of Vasudhamsa: Onc born in
the first half of Maalini Amsa with Jupiter in
Kaala Koota Nadi Amsa with Maatanga Yoga
will have blood-red complexion and un auspicious (1.6. or pleasing) appearance. If Jupiter is
exalted, simultaneously occupying Pisces Nuvamsa (1.6. Jupiter in the last Navamsa of Cance:) and
is in the company of Venus, Maatanga Yoga is
4-5, Maatanga Yoga’s effects: One born in
this Yoga with Maalini Amsa will have no full
brothers and sisters but will have step- brothers.
~ His father will have thre ses. The native’
formed. The Moon should further be in he: own aie have three spouses. The native’s
. N ; mother will 2-|1\' er sister Will be 0
Rasi and Navamsa (for completion of Mautanga er will be long-lived and her sister will be of
Youa) questionable character. The native’s mother will
be a chaste and devout wife and meritorious. She
will become emaciated due to family impediments (“Griha-chidrena’, thus losely transiated to
suit the context) She wil! have her husband
(i.c.the native’s father) long-living. She will come
to grief following her brother’s destruction.
Notes: According to the author, Maathanga
yova is formed when Jupiter is in Cancer between
26 deg. 40’ and 30;. The positions of Venus and
Moon should also be in Cancer. The Moon
should additionally be in Cancer navamsa itself,
ie, be in Vargottama. For this Yoga, only appearance and comlexion are discussed in these Notes: The 9th lord, Jupiter, as counted
two slokas, while in 8101085 5 etc. other elfects for = (जा the Moon sign joining both the Moon and
whole of this Nadiamsa are discussed. Venus denotes step-mother/s for the native.
Malini Nadiamsa is not enlisted in the Venus ruling the 4th from the Moon, joining
present work, while the caption hereof inentions Jupiter and Moon, gives long life to mother.
‘Vasudha’. Vasudha Nadiamsa extends from 0
deg. 0 to 0 deg. 12’ ina movable sign, 29 deg. 48” वहुकालममागल्य प्रतूनाशेन दुःखिता।
to 30 deg. of an immovable sign, and 15 ५८.015 पतगयेग एकाकौ मतगांशकमे गुरौ। । ६। |
dey. 12’ of a common sign. भगिन्येका चिरायुष्य शेषं नाशमि तीरयेत् | |
Is the position of Malini identical with पितृव्ये वा मातुले वा स्वगोत्रज्ञातिवग॑मे। | ७।।
Vasudha? Perhaps the compiler’s source confirmed this 6-7. The native’s father will be long-lived and
a Jupiter’s position is fixed in Kalakoota [1८ mother will be grieved on account of destrucadiamsa which in Cancer extends from 0 deg. = tion of her brother if Jupiter in the said Maatanga
36’ to 0 deg. 48’ which cannot allowsimultancous- Yoga is in Maat anga Nadiamsa. One of her sisters
ly last Navamsa of Cancer. will be long-lived while others will die prematureApparently, the compiler made some er- _sy.
71015. It should be Jupiter in Kalakoota Nadiamsa, Notes: Neither Matanga Nadiamsa 15 ee
or in last Navamsa of Cancer. listed in the present work.

Chandra Kala Nadt
मतंगयोगजातस्य स्वभार्खसंगमेष्यति।
वियोगवशतश्चैव वैघव्येन मरिष्पति। । ८ । |
AGS व् तु ara वा मृतिमादिशेत्।
सुखधिपं नीचनक्रनवाशगे। । ९। ।
भ्रगयाधिपेन संदृष्टे श्रीकारांशस्य नाडिगे।
दुभगावसरे जातत ॥ wi | १०। |
भगिन्येका चिरायुष्य
Sor चन्द्रे भगिन्येका च भग । । ११।।
च कट्टत्रद्रसवान् पित।
त्रयश्चेति स्वपिता बहूभाग्यवान्।। १२।।
AMY संचारं क्रयविक्रयजीवनम्।
एत्धन्यसवस्त्रदिनानाव्यपारमादिशेत्। । १३। ।
वृद्धिजीवन वाणिन्यं स्वपिता ्रातृभत्रिमान्।
8-131/2 The Matanga Yoga subject will
desire union with his spouse (1.6. he will not join
others). His spouse will become a widow due to
separation and will die. The native’s father will
die in (native’s) childhood or before native’s marriage. If the Moon placed in Srikaara Nadi Amsa,
becomes the lord of the 4th, (or) occupying Scorpio/Capricorn Navamsa, and is aspected by the
9th lord (Jupiter), one born in Durbhaga Nadi
Amsa will have no brothers born after him. His
only sister will be long-lived. So also the mother.
If the Moon is in Durbhaga Nadiamsa, there will
be one sister who will be unfortunate. There will
be also destruction of step-brothers while father
will have two marriages. After the native attains
15th year of age, the father will become very
fortunate. He father) will tour many countries
for business in diamonds, grains, clothes etc. He
will live kv commercial activities, be an intelléctual and will have brothers and sisters.
Notes: Sloka 9 and others deal with Aries
ascendant in which the birth Nadiamsa should be
Durbhaga (from 7 deg. 12’ to 7 deg. 24’). Then
birth Navamsa falls in Gemini. Another space for
Durbhaga Nadiamsa in Aries is from 11 deg, 48’
to 12 deg. (Cancer Navamsa) The Moon should
be in aspect to 9th lord Jupiter. She should be in
Srikaara Nadiamsa (or) be in Scorpio or
Capricorn Navamsa. Then the native will have no
younger brother, but one younger sister who
along with mother will be long-lived.
Srikaara Nadiamsa is mentioned as
Karikaraa Nadiamsa 107 the Moon to be in, (with
other conditions as per out text) by C.G. Rajan.
Karikaara Nadiamsa is from 6 deg. 24 to 6 deg.
36 of a movable sign, 23 deg. 24 to 23 deg. 36’ of
an immovable Rasi and 21 deg. 24 to 21 deg. to
36’ of acommon sign. Hence Srikaara Nadiamsa
of our text is Karikaara Nadiamsa, as per Table of
Nadiamsas, supra.
Even though the 4th lord Moon is in debility
in Navamsa, or in the 8th in Capricorn in Navamsa, she will give a long lease of life to the mother,
because of Jupiter’s aspect. The aspect as a rule
should be seen in Rasi chart only. Not in Navamsa and other charts. For aspects emanate only by:
longitudinal distances.
Coborns come in the picture because the
Moon is a death-dealer, being lord of 2nd from
3rd.
The sister will be unfortunate if the said
Moon is in Durbhaga Nadiamsa. Durbhaga
means unfortunate. Instead of acquiring carly
death, she will live an unfortunate life. Durbhaga
Nadiamsa = 7 deg. 00’ to 7 deg. 12’ in a movable
Rasi, 22 deg 48’ to 23 deg. 00’ of an immovable
Rasi, and 2 deg. 00’ to 2 deg 12’ of a commun
Rasi. This position also causes loss of stepbrothers, This Nadiamsa repeats from 11 deg.
48’-12 deg. 0’ of a movable sign, from 18 dey, 0’ -
18 deg. 12’ of an immovable sign and from 2h deg.
48’-27 deg. of a common sign.
सुरांशगे तात््रकोणे सुखेशांशत्रिकोणगे। । १४। ।
pecan गते मन्दे पितृनाशं वितिर्दिशेव्।
जनमदोये पितारिष्ठं तदभावेअपि वाथ वा।। १५।।
स्वभुक्तौ मृतिमाप्नोति संसारे च Bagel
मालिन्यंशे पूर्वभागे मतंगे योगजातके। । १६। ।
14-16. Father’s destruction: Destruction of
father will result if Saturn occupies the degree
cause 4 by adding the longitudes of the Sun (Sura
= Su ) and the 4th lord. For one born in the first
half of Maalini Nadi Amsa with Mathanga Yoga,
the first sub-period of Janma Dasa (first Dasa)
will prove ominous for father bringing illness or
death.

Deva Keralam 3
Notes: Suramsa also means Sura Nadiamsa.
Seeing the words ‘Tattrikonage’ in sloka 14,
‘Suramsage’ ibid is not translated as Sura
Nadiamsa while it could also mean so. Sura
means Sun and hence it denotes degree occupied
by the Sun at birth. This should be added to that
of the 4th lord.
As stressed by me often in my writings the
4th lord denotes father’s death while the Sth lord
denotes mother’s death. This technique is used
widely by many Nadi Granthas. In my own
studies, I did find these clues working quite effectively.
Sloka 14 gives important clue about father’s
death. Saturn should not be in the degree arrived
at by adding the degree of the 4th lord (father’s
death-dealer) and of the Sun (signifying father).
If so, being a dire enemy of the Sun, and a planet
incharge of death, Saturn will cause early destruction of father.
From this, we can form another rule of our
own. The 5th lord rules mother’s death. The
Moon rules the mother. If Saturn occupies the
degree denoted by the degree arrived at by adding the longitudes of the Moon and Sth lord,
early loss of mother can be anticipated.
In the absence of Saturn being there, the
transits of malefics like Saturn/Rahu/Ketu/Mars
will cause some physical adversity to the parent
concerned. Not death always.
a pad सौख्यं व
प वाहं स्यत् कर्माधिपतिभुकितिषु। । १७।
विंशेपरि feat वा पंचविंशेपरिस्तथः?। ’
मतंगयेग उद्वाहं बाल्ये विघ्नप्रदो भवेत्। । १८।।
17-18. Dasa effects: In the first Dasa (Janma
Dasa), there will be some comforts and investiture of sacred thread. In the sub- period of 10th
lord in the Vipat Dasa (third from birth) there will
be marriage or in the 22nd or 25th year? There
will be obstacles in childhood for one born in
Maatanga Yoga.
Notes: Terms like Janma Dasa occur often
in this work. These details could be found in the
following table:
Ist dasa : Janma dasa
2nd dasa : Sampath dasa
3rd dasa : Vipat Dasa
4th dasa : Kshema dasa
Sth-dasa : Prathyak dasa
6th dasa : Sadhaka dasa
7th dasa : Vadha (Nidhana) dasa
8th dasa : Maitra dasa
Oth dasa- : Parama Maitra dasa
A general yardstick is: odd dasas from birth
are inauspicious while even dasas are auspicious.
Lt ORTH ।
Kaala Koota Nadiamsa
tit“ aa Bo Bra जीवे मतंगे येगजातके।
0 Ba Be Rs Taq । १९।।
19. Kaala Koota Nadi Amsa: One born in
Maatanga Yoga, with Jupiter in Kaala Koota Nadi
Amsa will earn money by selling unmarried girls
and his sister will be somewhat wealthy.
Notes: Kalakoota Nadiamsa in Cancer extends from 0 deg. 36 to 0 deg to 48’ and Jupiter
should be in that position, For Aries ascendant,
Jupiter in this particular Nadiamsa compels one_
to indulge in immoral activities. Hence this 12’
of arc in Cancer should not give him that beneficial status as due to his Vargothama.
Other effects for Jupiter in this Nadiamsa
are given in slokas 21 etc. below.
जीवे SARI Esl as Sl am
मालिन्यंशे प्रजातस्स
20. Saturn and Jupiter in Cancer Navamsa,
while Libra Navamsa is occupied by some planet,
will give wealth through sister in case of one born
in Maalint Amsa.

4 Chandra Kala Nadi
Notes: This verse dealing with Malini 26. Father: His father will die in the native’s
Nadiansaisan interruptiontoJupiter’s position childhood due to grief from women. The native
in Kaala Koota Nadi Amsa (Vide sloka 21 etc.) will die in a foreign (distant) place due to
which may be carefully understood bythe reader. = delirium.
स्वभुजर्जितवान् किंचिदबाल्य । मालिन्यंशे पूर्वभरगे Taney मवान् घनाद् यवान्।
oS = | | वार्धके क्लेशदासिद्ं बल्ये किचित्सुकासुकं 1191 |
वेर्वतुरच दुष च Bosal » । २२।। 27. Wealth etc.: One born in the [07८ half
ara नित्यं वृत्र १.९ of Maalini Nadi Amsa will become wealthy in the
0 ; middle of his life. His old age will be marked by
21-22, jupiter in Kaala Koota Nadi Antsa’ gricf and penury while his childhood will be a
He will have self-earned wealth, During nice of happiness and unhappiness.
childhood he will enjoy some paternal wealth. He
along with his sister will receive wealth from his
blood- relatives. He will live by selling (plants
and) trees.
क्रिवत्वारिंशतः Ward क्तेशनाद्रत्सरत्रयम्।
प्रत्यग्दाये जन्मदेशे विप्लवेन प्रजापद। । २८। ।
28. Grief: Three years following his 43rd
कर्मरशरप्रहदशकाते मित्रविनारानम्। (0 (अ
क्तेशमाप्नेवि mits year of age will cause grief. During his 5th Dasa,
भगिनी क्तेरम MEAS तकत परम्। । २३।। the people of his country will incur danger due to
a revolution(?)
23. During the Dasa of his 10th lord, his
friends will be destroyed. Grief to sister and evils
to mother will also result.
Notes: The dasa of 10th lord, Saturn, for
Aries ascendant is evil to one’s friends, sister and
मण्डलाधिपतै लुत राजान्तरं सुखम्।
केडशन्दात् परं चेति लोके दुर्भक्षडाम्बरम्। । २९।।
mother, This is a general instruction. 29. Note: This sloka is a mix-up of mundane
branch deling with death of king, change of king,
मालिन्यंशै स्वजीवेजै वार्धके चित्तविप्रमम्। famine and the like.
are मूतिं चेति दुष्ठजतिमूगेण वा । । २४।।
, ूर्यशगे oferty — गत्ते शनौ।
24. Maalini Nadi Amsa: One born in this Went प्रजातस्य नृपावधी | | ३० ।
Nadi Amsa will be mentally deranged in his old
age. He will die in a forest in the hands of wild 30. For a Maatanga Nadi Amsa_ native
animals. Salurn in transit arriving in the Navamsa Rasi
occupied by the Sun at birth, or its trine will
ae eh ah मतंगांशे लाभेशे CREE wait for a change of king.(This is a mix-up).
क्रूर मातृदुर्मरणं मतंगशि : परयेशंरो
रषद मतूदर्मरणं वदेत्। । २५। । शि नृपरिष्टं waa तथैव च।
1 णन्पधिपतिनाशनम्। । ३१। ।
25. Bad end to Mother: According to some, कुजांशके तत्विको qe
the mother will meet with a bad end if the native टयेगं गते शनौ।
of Maatanga Nadi Amsa has the conjunction of मालिन्यशे प्रजातस्य Pca Part
the 11th lord and Rahu in a malefic Shashtiamsa. मतंगयेगे जातस्य ्रत्यण्दुये इत
लेके धल्यक्षयदीनि प्रजक्षभ । । ३३। ।
स्वपिता च स्ववाल्येषु सरो सवात | व्यये राहुयुते मन्दे कलिकंशे शभ्िते।
सन्निपातन्वरे TERT Weel) रेखयेगं क्व चित्कालं केपदरुमफलं क्ववित्। । ३४।।

Deva Keralam 5
31-34. Mathangamasa birth will cause evils
to king. So also the Navamsa lord of the 9th lord.
The king will be destroyed........... in the respective
7th house or trine thereof. When Saturn tansits
the Navamsa Rasi of natal Mars there will be
famine in the country for a Malini Nadiamsa native. When Saturn comes to Libra in transit, the
Matanga Nadiamsa native men will be distressed.
Saturn in Kaalika Nadiamsa, joining Rahu and
begetting a benefic’s aspect will casue Rekha
Yoga and sometimes Kemadruma.
Notes: Sloka 31 to 33 are incoherent and a
mix up with mundane astrology. As for sloka 34,
it gives Rekha Yoga and Kemadruma Yoga which
are adverse.
Rekha Yoga
व्यये pl A जीवे अष्टमे चन्द्रजातके।
Tan
35.Effects to be interrupted: The effects of
Rajayoga ( 1.6. Maatanga Yoga, Sloka 36) will
sometimes be offset (temporarily) if Saturn is in
the 12th, Jupiter in the 4th and the Moon in the
8th,
Notes: Jupiter is the main planet in Maatanga Yoga (vide sloka 2, Supra). Saturn and Moon
in trines from Jupiter obstruct occasionally the
good effects thereof. The interruption will be in
Moon’s Dasa as seen below.
कतिके मध्यमे चन्दे मतंगे येगजातके।
स्वदशायां महत् कष्टं पूर्वार्धे व्याकुलं भवेत्॥ ३६॥
36. Moon’s Dasa: The Moon, placed as
above will in her Dasa give great difficulties. In
the first half of Moon Dasa, the native will be ina
state of bewilderment.
षट्चत्वारिशत्तद्र्ष सूर्ययेगं see
Rr मुखं चेति धनलापं वििर्दिशेत्। । avi t
कर्तरिश्च तथ भवेत्। । ३५। ।
37, Another wife: For three years from the
age of 44, the subject will gain happiness from a
different wife (i.e. second wife) and will also gain
wealth.
Note: The words "Surya Yogam" have no
proper place in the sloka. These are faulty additions in this context.
कतिके मध्यमे चन्दे aay Anaad |
स्वदशयं महत् कष्टं पूर्धि व्यकुलं भवेत् । । 3c
38. This sloka is a repetition, vide 9.36 above.
मतंगयेगे जतस्य afte विनिर्दिशेत् । । ३९।।
39. There will be evils to the wife of the
native born in Maatanga Yoga.
Note: The first line of this sloka is not given
in the original to give full concept. However from
sloka 37, it can be understood that the native’s
wile will die between 44-46 years of his age.
धिप्रेणेद्राहमापनेति पश्चाच्छन्यन्तरे पुखम्।
गुरूभुक्तिं समारभ्य, शनिभुक्तौ pata i ४०। |
40. Immediately (after expiry of his first
wife) he will get (re)married. He will be abundantly happy in Saturn’s sub-period (of Moon
Dasa). His Jupiter sub-period will give even
results,
Notes: The sub-periods of Jupiter and
Saturn feature as they are in trines from the
Moon, vide Sloka 35, Supra.
प्रत्यग्दाये विवाहं स्याद्गृहे कल्यणसंभवम्।
धनलापं wpatd कूर्मयेगवशाद् GGL । ४९। |
41. Koorma Yoga: In his 5th Dasa, there will
be a marriage in his family, and also financial
gains. Due to Koorma Yoga there will occur happiness.
Notes: The 5th Dasa 15 suggested to be
favourable for wealth and a marriage in the family. But why Koorma Yoga all of a sudden is
referred to is not known.

6 Chandra Kala Nadi
The Koorma Yoga otherwise known is
caused by benefics being in 5th, 6th and 7th identical with own, friendly or exaltation signs while
malefics are in the Ist, 3rd and 11th being in
own/exaltation places. Results: Kingship, fame,
courage, happinesss and leadership. Also see
Sloka 46 infra.
सर्वदा weed तु कुजभुक्तौ च वा यदि।
द्वीपान्तरे र इन्त प्रत्यग्दाये विशेषक्तः। । ४२। ।
42. Specially in the 5th Dasa, in the subperiods of the Moon and Mars, one will gain
(wealth) in a foreign place.
कूर्मयेगे दशाकाले अपराधं महत् सुषम
वहुव्यपारशिक्षा aati दिने दिने। । ४३।।
43. In the Dasa period of Koorma Yoga(?),
the second half will give great happiness. The
native will gain experience in many business activities and will day by day gain wealth.
Note: "Koorma Yoga Dasa Kale" is meaningless. Actually the verse should be referring to
Pratyak Dasa, the 5th from the birth Dasa.
लभेशंशे aferary sear त्रिकोणगे।
स्फ्रयेगं गते मन्दे सहोद्रिविनाशनम्। । ४४। ।
44, Danger to coborn: The native’s coborns
will be struck by destruction (or dangcr) when
Saturn reaches the Rasis, or trines of the undermentioned planets: (1) Navamsa dispositor of
11th lord.(2) Navamsa dispositor of 6th lord.
Notes: Navamsa dispositor is given high importance in prediction by various Nad/ texts.
Navamsa dispositor is the owner of the Navamsa
a planet is in. Example: Mercury is in Libra
Navamsa. Then his Navamsa dispositor is Venus.
The present sloka asks us to note the
Navamsa lords of the 11th lord and 6th lord.
Then we have to find out in which Rasi, such
dispositors are placed. Saturn coming over to
such Rasi/trine thereof will prove dangerous to
one’s brothers/sisters.
The 11th lord is understandable. Why the
6th lord comes in the picture can be understood
by some probe. The 6th is 8th from 11th.
in my view, this rule applies only to elder
coborn as the 11th, and the 8th from 11th feature.
To apply this to younger coborns ‘one should be
somewhat careful. But the 11th lord has been
cited regarding younger coborn also.
वत्सरे एकपंचाशे अष्टचत्वारिवत्सरे।
मालिन्यंशे पूर्वभागे सहोदरिविनाशवान्। । ४५५1 ।
45. The native of first half of Maalini
Nadiamsa will see his coborns in danger during
the progress of his 51st/48th year.
कूर्मखेगे प्रजातस्य लग्नाधिपवशात् सुखम्।
TR सुखप्राप्तिवाध॑कं स्त्रीषु सौख्यवान्। i ४६। |
46. One born in Koorma Yoga will gain happiness on account of his ascendant lord. On account of his second wife there will be obstacles to
his happiness. He will gain happiness through
women.
Notes: Koorma yoga effects are given under
sloka 41 supra. Here it is further stated that the
native will gain through the ascendant lord. Thus
the ascendant lord will be beneficial to the subject.
चन्द्रे लग्नाधिपे भौमे दशयं गुरूभुक्तिषु।
स्वसमानजनारिष्ठं त च।
तदभावे धनच्छेदं दशन्ते वा वितिर्दिशेत्। । ४८। ।
47-48. Cancer Ascendant: When the Moon
is the lord of the ascendant, the sub-period of
Jupiter in the dasa of Mars will cause extreme
difficulties, untimely death, evils to one’s own
people, and destruction of female children. In the
absence of these, financial destruction will take
place in the end of the dasa (of Mars).
Notes: These two slokas relate to Cancer
ascendant, as the Moon is required to rule the

Deva Keralam
ascendant. The dasa of Mars (lord of Sth and
10th) and the sub period of Jupiter (ruling 6th and
9th) is quite destructive for the native in the form
of loss of daughters, many difficulties to the native
and his kinsmen. He may also have fear of untimely death because the combination of Mars -
Jupiter does not seem to be a good augury in
general.
Also make a note of Jupiter’s period being
evil for one born with Cancer Navamsa, in Aries
ascendant. This need not be straightaway applied
to birth in any of the other eight Navamsas of
Aries ascendant.
मेषलग्ने कुव्टीराशे भूसुतस्य दशमुखम्।
ugaa प्रियं चेति i a ¡ । ४९। ।
जीवान्तेे त्रिषष्ठ्यन्दे स॒ जातकः।
भपम्त्युभयप्राप्तिः शान्त्य शान्तिं प्रयच्छति। । Got |
49-50. Aries Ascendant: For one born in
Aries ascendant in Cancer Navamsa, the dasa of
Mars will give happiness. Rahu dasa will beget
him favours or kindness (from others), and wili
cause busy activities on account of marriage of a
son. Sixty-third year, in Jupiter’s interval (ie.
dasa) will bring effects of untimely death to a
Maalini Nadiamsa native for which remedies may
be resorted to.
Notes: These effects be attributed to rising
Navamsa being Cancer, for a native of Aries ascendant. The dasas of Mars and Rahu will be
then favourable while Jupiter’s dasa, or 63rd year
will cause fear of untimely end of the native. By
conducting suitable remedy like Mrityunjaya
Japa/Homa, the native of Cancer Navamsa as
above shall overcome the fear.
TRIN तथ येगे कालकृूदंशजातके।
सप्तसप्ततिमे मूत्युर्नैधनेशदशन्तरे । । ५१।।
५५८६ त्रिमासेषु अथवा wary च ।
भवेन्मृत्युरूपःकाले न संश । । ५२। ।
51-52. Death: One born in Maatanga
Nadiamsa, Maatanga Yoga and (or) Kalakoota
Nadiamsa(?) will face death in 77th year, in the
025६ periods of Sth lord, when the Sun transits
Taurus, Gemini, Cancer or Capricorn, on a Monday.
Notes: The three conditions laid down, viz.
Matanga Nadiamsa, Matanga Yoga and
Kalakoota Nadiamsa are inconsistent. Ignoring
these. we can conclude that for an Aries native,
the (५०8 of 8th lord Mars operating in old age will
be dangerous.
मतेगंशे व्यये पपे दुर्मूतिरन॑त्र Ayre |
पश्चान्निकृष्ठजन्मश्च वार्धक पुत्रयोगवान्। । ५३। |
53, For one born in Maathanga Nadiamsa, a
malefic in the twelfth house will cause a bad end.
He will have children in his old age and his next
birth will be in an outcaste family.
। । वृष्मलग्नम्। ।
(अबलाश्टे)
Taurus Ascendant ~ Abala Nadiamsa
अबलांशे स्थिरि लग्ने पुर्वभरगे प्रजायते।
विप्रजन्मा सुखौ नित्यं श्याम वर्णकृशकृत्ति। । ५४। |
साधुर्बल्ये क्लेशेन कर्शिता।
देशन्तरसुभ्फग्यवान्। । ५५। ।
54-55. Abala Nadiamsa - Firsthalf: One
born in this part will be a Brahmin, be happy, be
dark in complexion and lean in composition. He
will be fond of his older brother. He will in his
childhood be gentle and have an emaciated physique. Due to the good offices of his brother-in-law
he will migrate to a foreign place and will beget
prosperity.
Notes: Slokas 54 to 93 deal with an immovable ascendant including Taurus. The reader will
suitably according to context understand these.
Abala Nadiamsa is also known as Prabha
Nadiamsa according to late C.G. Rajan.

‘ Chandra Kala Nadi
This Nadiamsu in an immovable Rasi extends from 26 deg. 48’ to 27 deg. 00’ of urc. And
can cover even the 9th Navamsa Virgo according
to a given case. In case of movable sign. this
Nadiamsa extends from 3 deg. to 3 deg. 12’ and in
a common sign from 18 deg. to 18 deg. 12’ of
space.
The first half of this Nadiamsa in this case is
26 deg. 48’ to 26 deg. 54 of arc, again with a
possibility of attaining cither Leo Navamsa or
Virgo Navamsa.
The effects given in the current slokas are
for just birth in first half of Abala Nadiamsa,
wilhout reference to positions of any planets.
at कुजे सुते जीवे अबलांशस्य जातके।
पश्चाद्भातृविहीनश्च जायते मृतिमादिशेत्। । ५६। 1
56. Coborns: Mars in ascendant (which is an
immovable sign) while Jupiter is in the 5th house
will deprive the native of after- borns. Even if
there be such a birth, only death (of alter-born)
will result.
Notes: Immovable signs are Taurus, Leo,
Scorpio and Aquarius. For Taurus and Aquarius
ascendants, this rule can be safely applicd as
neither Mars nor Jupiter will be in own sign. In
case of Leo, Jupiter in 5th will be in Sagittarius,
and in case of Scorpio both Mars and Jupiter will
be in own signs (Scorpio and Pisces respectively).
Hence, for Leo ascendant and Scorpio ascendant, this rule should be used after a thorough
scrutiny, more so for Scorpio ascendant.
wht एकश्रतृसमन्वित।
नश्च मातृसौष्यविहीनवान्। । ५७। |
57. The native of Abala Nadiamsa, first half
(independent of sloka 56) will have two sisters
and one brother, will be passionate, and will not
enjoy paternal happiness. So also maternal happiness will be absent.
उत्तरंशे प्रजातस्य पितृमातृचिरायु्।
पूर्वभागे ज्येष्ठभ्रत दीर्घमायुश्च विन्दति। । ५८। ।
58. One born in the second half of Abala
Nudiamsa will have long- living parents while the
native of former half of this Nadiamsa will have a
long-living older brother.
Notes: The second half of Abala (or Prabha) Nadiamsa extends in an imniovable sign from
26 deg. 54 to 27 deg. 00. The first half of this
Nadiamsa is adverse for parents, while the second
half will promote parental life-spans
Sug जीवनं चेति सम्पदूदाये विदेशवान्।
पर्चिमीयनदीप्रन्त्ये गोकर्णप्रान्त्यदेशके ¡ । ५९। ।
ara संचारमाप्नेति afar च are |
SAU प्रजातस्य जन्मदेशे सुभाग्यवान्। 1 G01 |
59-60. Prosperity: The native of the first half
of Abala Nadiamsa will live in a small village and
will in his Sampath (2nd) dasa migrate toa foreign
place. During his childhood he will wander
around western river banks or in Gokarna (a
pilgrim center in the Southern India, sacred to
Lord Siva) and willsulfer from poverty. One born
in the 2nd half of Abula Nadiamsa will attain
prosperity in his birth country (itself). Due to a
revolution he will leave his country and will later
On rclurn.
विप्लवेन विनिर्गत्य पश्चात् स्वस्थनमादिशेतु ।
मेषे वृषभे लाने पुण्यक्षेत्रेषु भाग्यवान् । । ६१। ।
HER रदत ए प्रवल्यं चोत्तसेत्तरम् ।
gaunt वाल्ये पितृविनाशवान्। 1621 ।
on eye gt one शस्य जातके ।
लाभे qa अव्रलांशस्य नातके । । ६३।।
सम्पद्दाये rated देशत्यागं वितिर्दिशेत्।
चन्दलग्नाष्टमाधीशदशायं पापभुकितषु। । ६४। ।
स्वपितरिष्टमाप्नोति arated वि्िर्दिशेत |
TAA गते चन्दे HOTTA । । ६५। |
क्वचितपक्षे त्रिभार्यश्च दार सौख्यादिहीनवान् ।
अवलांशे पूर्वभागे द्वादशे शनिवीधिते । । ६६। |
nye. pc ज दरिद्रिणी ।
अबलांशे सुतेशे राहुसंयुते 11 ६७। |
लाभे मन्दे प्रजातस्य सन्तानप्रतिवन्धवान्।
उत्तरांशे महाभेगी ज्येष्ठभार्यपि वाथ वा। । ६८। |
काकवन्ध्यापतिश्चैव पूर्वभागे अपुत्रवान्।
ग्रन्थान्तरे पूर्वभागे अवलांशस्य जातके । । ६९। ।

Deva Keralam ५
कालान्ते मुपत्रतिदरिन्तरफलं स्मृतम् ।
लग्नात् पंचमगे जीवे पापद्रयनिरीक्षिते । । ७०।।
HAAN प्रजातस्य पुय ब्रह्मा OMIT । Notes: Aries Nuvamsa for Taurus ascendant
तत्फपपरि हायर्थ पेतुस्नानं शिवार्चनम्। em extends from 10 deg. (’ to 13 deg. 20’ (4th Navamनागेश्वपप्रसादेन सन्तानप्रप्तिमादिशत् । sa).
पलमेकं तदर्धन सोमवारप्रदोषके । । ७२। |
Donations on Mondays, and worship in the mornings be resorted ta.
That the native of Abala Nadiamsa will have
उपेप्य विधिवत् gat सावद्य दानमाचेत् ।
61-721/2 . Taurus Ascendant: One born in
Taurus ascendant, with Aries Navamsa, will beget
prosperity in a pilgrim center. Gradually his
prosperity will increase in Andhra region. The
a long-living mother (irrespective of first/second
half) should be applied 10 only Taurus ascendant
and not the other three immovable ascendants, as
slokas 57 and 58 give aspecific account of parents’
lifespans.
native born in the 2nd one-third of former half of
Abala Nadiamsa will lose his father in childhood.
For Abala Nadiamsa native, the mother will be
long-lived. Saturn in the 1 1th house along with the
Sun, 107 an Abala Nadiamsa native, will in Sampath (2nd) dasa cause evils to father and displacement of the native from his birth-place. Malefic
HAAN स लभे सूर्ये प्रजयते । । ७३।।
भनुव्रतदिपुण्येन संशय |
अष्टमाधिपक्तै वे Gay शनिवीक्षिते । । ७४।।
अबलाज्ञे प्रजातस्य सन्ततिकषयमादिरेत्।
नागेश्वरप्रसादेन FATS जातके । । ७५। ।
कालान्तरे अल्पसन्तनं वार्धके नत्र संशय।
bhuktis in the dasa of the planet owning the 8th
from the Moon will cause danger to both father
and mother. The Moon (Saturn according to
another text) in this Nadiamsa will give two wives
to the native. Yet some say there will be three
wives. The native with Moon (or Saturn) in Abala
Nadiamsa will be devoid of marital happiness. For
one born in the former half of Abala Nadiamsa,
Salurn aspecting the 12th house will give two
mariages While the first wife will suffer from
penury. The native ol former half of this Nadiamsa will have obstacles in getting progeny if the Sth
lord is with Rahu, while the 11th is tenented by
Saturn. One born in the 2nd half of this Nadiamsa
73-751/2 . Ifthe blemish is caused by the Sun
being in the 11th house, there will be birth of a
child to the native of former half of Abala
Nadiamsa by fasting (on Sundays) and worshipping the Sun God. If Jupiter rules the 8th house
(Ascendant is Taurus as an immovable sign
should rise at birth) is placed in the 5th, and is
aspected by Saturn the Abalamsa native will have
destruction of his race (ie. to be childless etc.)
while one born in the former half will have limited
progeny in old age due to mercy of Lord Siva.
ज्येष्ठप्रतृसुतधीशनीचां्े शुमवीषिते | । ७६। ।
ees ष्ठं warms विनिर्दिरेत्।
RAAT भगिनीपुत्रयेगवान् । । ७७। |
will greatly enjoy pleasures; his wife will give birth
to just one child and will later on become barren.
One will be totally childless if birth be in the
former half of Abala Nadiamsa. According to
some other authorities, such a native will beget a
child in his old age, alter a long interval. This will
be when Jupiter is in the 5th house in aspect to
two malefics. This childlessness for Abala
Nadiamsa native will be due to a curse of a Brahmin in previous life. To ward off this evil, bathing
in Sethu (in the South) will bless the native with
the mercry of Lord Shiva (Nageswara also means
(he Cobra King) and then children will be born.
76-77.Children: The lord of the 3rd(lord of
Sth from 11th) in debilitation Navamsa, in aspect
to a benefic will cause evils and dange: through
water concerning the children of the native’s
elder brother. The sister of the native of former
half of Abala Nadiamsa will be blessed with (longliving) children.
Notes: The Moon, Venus, Saturn and Mars
arc the various 3rd lords for the various immov-

10) Chandra Kala Nadi
able ascendants. Their occupying debilitation
Navamsas; in aspect to a benefic planet (viz.
Venus, Jupiter and Mercury as the case may be)
will cause (untimely) danger to the native’s elder
brother’s progeny.
पितृन्यमातुलवशादाबाल्ये + वान् सुखै |
उत्तरा प्रजातस्य भगिनी द्री सुपुत्रिणी ।। ७८। ।
78. The native right from his childhood will
be rich and happy due to his paternal and maternal relatives. This will apply to birth in former half
of Abala Nadiamsa. One born in the second half
of this Nadiamsa will have two sisters who will
have virtuous daughters.
पूर्वभागे तथ वन्ध्य वैधव्येन च कर्शित।
781/2 If birth be in first half, the native’s
sisters will be emaciated due to childlessness and
widowhood.
निर्मलांशे विक्रमे अवबलांशस्य जातके। । ७९। |
सोदरः फंव संख्या वा द्ित्रिसंख्या वियु ।
उत्तरशे स्वपगिनी एका मांगल्यमश्नुते । । ८०। |
पूर्वभागे च वैन्यं सोदरी द्वै न संशयः।
79-801/2 , Coborns: If the 3rd lord is in Nirmala Nadiamsa, the native of Abala Nadiamsa
will have five brothers out of whom two willbe
endowed with long lives. The sister of the native
of second half of Abala Nadiamsa will have long
married life while in the case of first half, the
sisters will be widowed (early).
Notes: Nirmala Nadiamsa extends from 13
deg. 24’ to 13 deg 36’ of a movable sign, from 16
deg. 24 to 16 deg. 36’ of an immovable sign and
from 28 deg. 24 to 28 deg. 36’ of a common sign,
That is the space where the 3rd lord should be in
case of birth in an immovable sign for one to have
two long-living brothers out of a total of five.
Taq सप्तमगे Aa असितेन निरीक्षिते । | ८१।।
अवलाशे प्रजातस्य माजरिष्टं विनिर्दिशेत्।
मुताधिपदशकाले दे पपोअपिवा यदि । | ८२। ।
पित्रारिष्टात् परं मात्रं परलोक प्रयास्यति।
gaat पध्यखण्डे मात्ररिष्टात् परं पित ।। ८३।।
81-83. Evils to mother: If the planet Saturn
aspects Mars in the 7th house from the Moon, the
Abala Nadiamsa native will incur danger to
mother, in the Dasa of the 5th lord. The same
effect will occur if a malefic is in the 7th house
(from the Moon in aspect to Saturn). The mother
will quit the world alter the expiry of the father.
But in the second one-third of this Nadiamsa, the
reverse will take place - mother will die prior to
father’s death.
as मृतिं चेति sg क
अष्टमन्दे द्रादशब्दे अथवा । | ८४! ।
चतुर्विंशे वा चेति मातपितृविनाशनम्।
84-841/2 . These deaths will occur in the
native’s second dasa (जगी ला the 10th year of age,
(or) in 8th/12th/16th/24th year of age.
वर्गत्तमे निशनाथे अवलांशस्य जातके । । ८५। |
उत्तरांशे वपदूदाये सन्धिकाले अरिष्टकृत्।
जन्मदेशं परित्यन्य पूर्वष्रणस्य जातके । । ८६। ।
देशन्ते hal मातं ए op, ष्टं १
तर | | cor
85-87. Third Dasa: If the Moon is in Vargothama Navamsa, one born in second half of
Abala Nadiamsa will incur evils in the end of the
3rd Dasa, while one born in the first half (with
Moon in Vargothama) will have to leave his birth
country (in the end of the 3rd Dasa), and his
parents will die in a place different from birth
place. Relative results are detailed under Prastarashtaka Varga (elsewhere).
अबला प्रजातस्य फलमन्यद्विचार्यते।
्वोच्वांशगे कर्मनाये निर्मलाशे निशकरे। । ८८। ।
वेदुन्तज्ञान तत्वङ्गः सदा sa i
यतिभक्तिरते नित्यं निर्मलांशे । । ८९। ।
pig a अ हरिशंकरभक्तिमान्।
द्वादशन्दात् परं चेति संचरन्।
पितूमातृविनाशेन क्लेशं प्रप्नोति भूरिशः । । ९१।।

Deva Keralam Il
महानदि aR निवासं योगं वदेदवलांशजति।
अतीव सौख्यं मुनये वदन्ति विपदूदशन्त्यादिपु
88-92. Sixth Lord: For effects of Abala
Nadiamsa, other sources may also be consulted.
If the Moon is in Nirmala Nadiamsa as the 10th
lord is in his own Rasi/Navamsa, the native will
have knowledge of Vedanta (second and most
important part of Mimamsa or third of the three
greal divisions of Hindu philosophy) and Tatwas
(24 in number) and will perform actions enjoined
by the Vedas. He will be ever-pious. He will be
pure, virtuous, eloquent in speech and will worship Lord Vishnu and Lord Siva. He will leave his
birth country in a revolution. He will incur danger
after his 10th year or 12th year. He will wander in
many coutries. Due to destruction of parents, he
will incur abundant grief. He will live in a town on
the banks of the Mahanadi. One born in Abala
Nadiamsa will enjoy yoga (i.e. effects due to for11111816 birth), and will be quite happy. His fortune
will be on the increase in the beginning and end
of 3rd dasa.
Notes: From hereon, the relative slokas deal
with Aquarius ascendant, an immovable sign.
The Moon is the 6th lord who should be in Nirmala Nadiamsa. The lord of 10th Mars should be
in Aries or Scorpio, either in Rasi or in Navamsa.
Then the native will be skilful in Vedanta and the
like. Other effects may also be noted.
The beginning and concluding parts of 3rd
dasa causing prosperity suggests that the middle
portion will be adverse.
Maha Nadi can be interpreted to be the river
so named, or a great river like the Ganges or
Cauvery.
day पहद्ष्छयं चत्वरिशे पहद्विपत्। । ९३। |
93. In his 4th Dasa he will enjoy much happiness. His 40th year will greatly endanger him.
Note: First line of $.93 is missing in the
original.
okt सुभायप्तै राजन्तरवसत् सुखम्।
येगपंगं मनस्तु oa फलम्। । ९४।।
TSN CECA pak
अतैव क्लेशकार्यणि शान्त्य सौख्यं विनिर्दिशेत्। । ९५।।
सुखधिपटश्रकाले अतैव भ्रियमशनुते।
रखधिपदशमृत्युरापत्सन्यासयेगवान्। | ९६। ।
94-96. After the age of thirty he will attain
great prosperity, and happiness through royal
patronage. Due to Saturn’s adverse transits, his
enjoyments will be interrupted and he will be in
mental agony; when Saturn comes tothe Navamsa
Rasi of the dispositor of 6th lord or its trine, much
grief will descend upon him. Remedies will restore happiness to him. In the Dasa of 4th lord, he
will gain much wealth. He will die in the Dasa of
the 8th lord. He will take to ascetic order following a calamity in the family.
Notes: The 6th lord for Aquarius is the
Moon. If Saturn in transit comes to the Rasi
occupied by the Moon at birth, or alternatively
the Rasi represented by the Moon-occupied
Navamsa at birth, the subject will incur abundant
grief.
11 Saw tt
Virgo Navamsa
raw वृश्चिके es स्वोच्चज्षंशके।
विप्रकाले प्रजातस्य धनी भवेत्। । ९७। |
वैश्यकाले वैश्यवृत्तिः sara तथा भवेत्।
Went तथ विन्द्यात् संकरस्य तथैव च। । ९८।
97-98. Jupiter in Scorpio, falling in Virgo
Navamsa as Mercury occupies the Navamsa of
Virgo/Pisces wil make one born in Vipra Kaala
wealthy right from birth. (But) the native if born
in Vaisya Kaala will be engaged in trading, in
Kshatriya Kaala be a king, and in Soodra Kaala
will take to such calling prescribed for his caste.
Note: There is no Agada Nadiamsa enlisted
in our test. Agada is Sukhada as per C.G.Rajan.
Thus it covers 20 deg: 36° to 20 deg. 48’ of a
movable sign, 9 deg. 12’ to9 deg. 24’ of an immov-

12 Chandra Kala Nadi
able sign and 5 deg. 36’ to 5 deg. 48’ of a common
sion. Although Viprakala etc. are mentioned in
these slokas, there is no reference to particular
Nadiamsa hereof. However, in sloka 108 infra, we
find Agada Nadiamsa which reference is carried
on, in the slokas ahead. Hence results from S.97
must belong to Agada Nadiamsa.
Vipra Kaala, Kshatriya Kaala, Vaisya Kaala
and Soodra Kaala in order are for 3’of arc of
ascendant, each in any Nadiamsa.
विश्वभरांशके जीवे गौरवर्णणुभाकृतिः।
श्यमवर्णयुतश्चेति विद्याविघ्नप्रदस्सुखै। । ९९। ।
99. Jupiter in Viswambhara Nadiamsa gives
following effects. The subject will be endowed
with a fair complexion and pleasing appearance.
He will face obstacles to his learning and be happy
(in general},
Notes: For Aquarius ascendant, Jupiter’s
position in Viswambhara Nadiamsa causes
obstacles to one’s academic pursuits. This
Nadiamsa extends from 21 deg. 00’ to 21 deg. 12’
of a movable sign, from 8 deg. 48’ to 9 deg. 00’ of
an immovable sign, or from 6 deg 0’ to 6 deg. 12’
of a common sign.
विश्वम्भरंशके जीवे ey लाभत्रिकोणगे।
पश्चाद्भ्रातृविहीनश्च भेदघ्रतृयुतो भवेत्। । १००। |
100. If Jupiter in Viswambhara Nadiamsa is
positioned in 8th/11th or in 2 trine, the subject will
not have an after-born, but will have halfbrothers.
Notes: The 11th house deals with élder
brothers/sisters. But the text deals with younger
coborn also in this context. This kind of treatment features in our text in many places.
कौटे SUM जीवे समगात्रप्रगत्भवान्।
धर्मिको ईगितज्ञश्च धर्मज्ञः सत्यवाचकः। । १०१।।
लेख्यविद्यासमर्थश्व मुखरो मतिमान् ea
राजसेवापरो नित्यं स्वपितवृत्तिजीवनम्। । १०२। ।
101-102. Jupiter in Scorpio: Jupiter in Scorpio, occupying Virgo Navamsa will make the native even-bodied. He will be resolute, righteous,
skilled in the expression or interpretation of internal sentiments by external gesture i.e. skilful in
understanding others’ minds, and be truthful.
He will excel in writing and studies (will be
a skilful writer endowed with great learning), will
be talkative and be intelligent.
Notes: For a birth in Aquarius ascendant,
Jupiter in the 10th house and attaining the
Navamsa position of Virgo causes excellence in
writing and other related activities. This can also
bless the subject with a high degrce of ancestral
inheritance, as Jupiter connected with 10th and
2nd occupies the 8th Navamsa Rasi.
TU
oe
नृपसेवकश्च।
विश्वम्भरांशे धनिकः प्रदिष्टः
AoA Ag तवत्सलणएच। । १०३। |
103. Mercury’s Navamsa: Jupiter in a
friendly Rasi which gives him a position in
Mercury’s Navamsa will make the native highly
passionate and serve the king. The said planet in
Viswamabhara Nadiamsa will cause riches. The
native will be fond of his half- brothers.
राहुविल्ने ne tay येगे
समीर = och ea |
कालान्तरे बन्धुजने विरोधे
नात्य pani tall पितारिष्ठं भेद्श्रतृवशत् सुखम्।
पश्चाद्विरोधमाप्नेति शूद्रमूलार्थनाशवान्। । १०५। |
104-105. Rahu in Ascendant aspected by
Sun: Rahu in the ascendant in aspect to the Sun
gives a dark physique. Such a person will after
some time develop enmity with his relatives. He
will incur grief even on account of his mother. His
childhood will cause him grief and evils to father.
He will be (initially) happy with his half-brothers
but will have enmily with them later on. His
wealth will be destroyed by Soodras.

Deva Keraiam 13
fava जीवे लग्ने राहूप्रजायते।
स्वपितरं परपकर्मस्यच्छुद्राचारप्रवोधकृत्। । १०६। |
क स्वपितर शुद्मित्रवान्।
वाणिज्यजीवनं भूरिं धनं संपदयिष्यति। । owl |
106-107. Jupiter in Viswambhara Nadia:
While Rahu is placed in the ascendant, if Jupiter
comes to occupy Viswambhara Nadiamsa, the
native’s father will seek recourse to committing
sinful acts and will conduct himself like Soodras
(men of the 4th caste as per the Vedas). The
native’s father will hate the progeny of his first
wife and will befriend Soodras. He willearn much
wealth through trading activities.
जीवे विश्वंभरंशगे।
PRICY सहोदरी। । १०८। ।
स्वपि च तथ विन्द्यात् सोद्रशरतृहीनवान्।
द्रन्यर्जनविनाशं च ज्येष्ठपर्यविनाशवान्। । १०९। |
taal
108-109. Agada Nadiamsa: The native of
this Nadiamsa’s first half, with Jupiter in Viswambhara Nadiamsa will have no coborns (at all)
while according to some authorities he will have
(only) sisters. His father would also get similar
effects (about coborn) and (the father) will face
destruction of first spouse as well as wealth.
अगदांशे agile ga dian
सापत्रीमातृभाक्
म्भलग्नस्य जातके।
110. Step-mother: The native of former half
of Agada Nadiamsa in Aquarius ascendant will
have a step-mother, while in respect of other
(immovable) ascendants such birth gives elder
coborn.
favau लाभेशे अगदुशस्य जातके।
भेदध्रातृसूरदधयुर्भगिनीद्रयसंयुतः। । ११९। ।
111. Step-brothers: The 11th lord in
Viswsambhara Nadiamsa will give long life to the
native’s step brothers. He will have, in addition,
two (full) sisters. This is for a birth in Agada
Nadiamsa.
ज्येष्टभ्रातृयुते भवेत्। । ११९०।।
स : प्रसनश्च लाभेशे कर्मराशिगे।
कलहः si : पफचेतनः। । ११२। ।
भेदध्रातृफलं कामी विषयलोलुए।
Were नित्यं स्वदार दरेषपापवान्। । ११३।।
112-113. When the ascendant is occupied by
Rahu as the 11th lord is in the 10th house, the
step-brother of the native will remain the eldest
issue, be happy, will indulge in sinful acts and be
fond of sensual pleasures. He will be a passionate
person and will pursue acts due to a Soodra. He
will hate his spouse. These are applicable to the
step-brother.
भेदश्रातृपुत्रधीजे wa वृषपंशके।
मृतप्रजाफलयप्रप्ति सन्तनप्रतिबन्धवान्। । ११४। |
114. If the 5th lord is in the 5th house,
occupying Taurus Navamsa, the step-brother will
have obstacles in begetting progeny as he will
obtain (only) dead children.
अगदांशे पूर्वभागे पेदभ्राता TPA!
तस्य शिवार्चनम् ।
षष्ठिव्रतेपवासेन 2 Veal |
Tour तु गदा :1
गोपालप्रतिमादानमगदांश इद् फलम्। । ११७।।
सौख्यसन्तानगोपालं कल्पोक्तेन प्रपूजयेत्।
CATT प्रसादेन आयुरारोग्यपुत्रवान्। । ११८। ।
115-118. The step-brother of the person
born in the former half of Agada Nadiamsa will
have no issues. Or they will be dead as they are
born, due to the (previous birth’s) sins of the said
relative. To overcome this evil, the step-brother
should bathe in the Setu, worhsip Lord Siva and
perform Shashti (the 6th lunar day of either
fortnight) Vratha (for example fasting on these
days and observing religious rituals). Then he will
beget progeny. Other authorities quote Maharshi
Vyasa suggesting donation of the image of Lord
Krishna (by the’ said relative to overcome such
evils). The idol of Santhana Gopala (Krishna) be
also worshipped. Duc to the blessings of

14 Chandra Kala Nadi
astrologers. birth of healthy and long-living | Nadiamsas, the native in his very first dasa will
children will then be possible. lose his father. His father will have troubles from
ulcers, will hate the progeny of his first spouse,
will incur a family-division, and will face heavy
लभिशंशे तत्तरिकोणे वत् financial destruction:
लभेशद्ष्ठिराश्चै तु जन्मलग्नं ठि । । ११९।।
नवमेन तदीशेन् स्वपित SG लग्नात् . फंवमगे धैमे way पपसंयुते।
119-120. The ascendant of the step-brother safer स्वपुत्रस्य व | १२६। |
will be the Navamsa Rasi occupied by the 11th TS ्यकाले भूपते चव जातके।
lord, or one of its trines. Alternatively the Rast च पितूर्विपत्। 122291 I
aspected by the 11th lord could also be such पापांशगे दुर्मरणं TR कषप्रमारकम्।
ascendant. From the 9th house and its lord, पित्ररिष्टस्य समये पाव देशान्तरं गत। 1 १२८।।
father’s ascendant be deduced. So also from the
सरय॑शभे तत्विकोणे यजयेत् अलवित्तमः। । १२०। । स्वपितुरमरणं चेति देशन्तरमिति स्मूतम्। । १२५। !
Navamsa, or its trines, occupied by the Sun (at the 125-128, Father’s death: If Mars is placed in
time of the native’s birth). the 5th house from the ascendant, as the 9th lord
is in the company of a malefic, the native’s father
मंजु Larry qa seer | will die in a foreign place. Ifthe Sun is in Manjusnll । Kt । । १२१। { wana Nadiamsa, the father’s death will be in a tiny
॥ village, due to indigestion and loose motions. At
। । १२२।। the time of death, the native will be by the side of
his father. For birth in Sun’s hora, if Mars joins
the solar ascendant (1.6. Mars and ihe Sun be
together) without beneficial aspect, father’s,
death will occur ९1 route. If these planets occupy
benefic Navamsas, death will be instant, but if
these are in malefic’s navamsa, father will incur a
tragic end. At the time of father’s death, the
native’s mother will have gone out of the relevant
place.
पके TIAA
121-122. Father: For a native of former half
of Agada Nadiamsa, if the Sun placed in Manjuswana nadiamsa joins Ketu, the native will lose his
father in childhood. His father will be devoid of
coborn, and will be troubled by ulcers in the body.
The native’s first and second dasa junction will
prove fatal to father.
Notes: The Sun should be in Manjuswana Notes: These four verses describe place of
Nadiamsa (extending from 2 deg, 12’ 102 deg. 24” death of father. | The death should not be interof a movable sign, from 27 deg, 36’ to 27 deg. 46 == ए6160 to be untimely.
of an immovable sign, and from 17 deg, 12’ to 17 Mars and Sun joining in a hora ruled by the
deg. 24’ of acommon sign). He should further | Sun denotes tragic end for the father of Aquarius
join Ketu. native. Solar hora is the first 15 deg. of any odd
sign, viz. Aries, Gemini, Leo, Libra, Sagittarius
pee alk जीवे विश्वंभराशगे। and Aquarius. For this, the two planets should
जन्मदये : ~+. 11 । । १२३।। also be in a Navamsa ruled by a malefic.
Srorayaay विभागं च विश्वंभरांशगे जीवे भग्येशस्य त्रिकोणगे!
संचितर्थविनाशेन क्लेशं प्रप्नेति पृरिशः। । १२४।। देवताप्रार्थने यत्काले पितृविनाशनम्। । १२९। ।
123-124, Should the Sun and Jupiter be in 129. If Jupiter is in Viswambhara Nadiamsa
order placed in Manjuswana and Viswambhara and be in a trine with reference to the ninth lord,

Deva Keralam 15
the father’s death will be at the time of worshipping the Almighty or during the course of a travel
(1.6. pilgrimage).
amet पूर्वभगे कुरिलांशे निशाकरे ।
sh abel महापापं स्वमात कलहप्रदा। । R301 |
ंशगते चन्द्रे क्लेशो मातृसहोदरी।
कुलया चेति वा काचित् पपमूला च,सास्मृता। । १३१।।
130-131. About Mother: When the birth is in
the former half of Agada Nadiamsa, as the Moon
is positioned in Kutila Nadiamsa, following effects may be noticed. Sins will be galore in the
mother’s family. The mother of the native will be
fond of promoting quarrels. There will be many
troubles to the mother’s sister. The said maternal
aunt will be of questionable character and will
indulge in sinful acts.
Notes: Kutila Nadiamsa is: from 2 deg. 48’
to 3 deg. 0’ of a movable sign, from 27 deg. 0’ to
27 deg. 12’ of an immovable sign, and from 17 deg.
48’ to 18 deg. 0’ of acommon sign. The Moon in
one of these three position, while birth is in first
half of Agada Nadiamsa in Aquarius, the results
described in the slokas above will come to pass.
मातुलाधिपतै ae कुटिलाशे वुधेक्षिते।
स्वमातुलस्य चायुष्यं केषित्सक्षे विनाशनम्। । १३२।।
दुश्चरत्रिवती मातं $... क्लेशेन कर्शित।
भदपुत्रविरोधेन वाल्ये peony ach १३३। ।
त्रहुकालं सुरमा गल्यं जननी ।
पध्यपुत्र सुसन्तेषं चन्द्रनाडीफलं स्मृतम्। । १३४। ।
शुक्रनाडीफलाध्याये मातृवंशे फलाफलम्।
मातुलादिफलै चेति विस्तारमिति कथ्यते। । १३५।।
132-135. According to Chandra Nadi: The
Moon being the lord of the house signifying
maternal relatives (i.e. in 6th house, the ascendant
being Aquarius) if placed in Kutila Nadiamsa, in
aspect to Mercury gives a long lifespan to maternal relatives. According to some authorities,
(early) destruction will take place. The mother of
such a native will be of questionable nature, and
will incur troubles on account of brotheis and be
emaciated. She will incur widowhood and also
enmity of step-children, during the native’s
childhood. She will beget auspicious effects fora
long time. (This part of the text is a corrupt
addition, considering other bad effects, particularly early widowhood.) The mother will,
however, be endowed with along lease of life. She
will beget happiness through her middle
daughter. These results are declared in Chandra
Nadi, Effects - good and bad - about mother and
maternal relatives have elaborately been dealt
with in Sukra Nadi,
Notes: In slokas 130 and 131, evilelfects are
described for the mother, maternal aunts etc. for
the Moon being in Kutila Nadiamsa. According
to the present slokas, Mercury (the significator of
maternal relatives) getting connected with the
Moon gives a long-life to maternal uncle. There
is another source to specify early end. Long life
to maternal relatives, as per Chandra Nadi is
apparently acceptable. This yoga is however adverse for the mother.
Tere कुम्भांशे शनिसंयुते ।
भदध्रावृफलं चेति चिरकालं मुमगली । । १३६।।
136. Note: This sloka suffers from constitutional defects. Pherhaps this is part of group
of slokas, while others are missing. Bhedabhratru
is indicative of step-brother (masculine gender),
while the word ‘Sumangali’ applies to a female. A
partial condition hereof relates to position of
Saturn in Aquarius Navamsa. This sloka may be
ignored.
कुरिलांशकमगे चन्दे qt ay abl शगे।
स्वभेदभगिनी चैका बाल्ये
137. With the Moon in Kutila nadiamsa
while the Sun is Manjuswana Nadiamsa, note the
following result: One of the native’s step-sister
will incur widowhood in her childhood.
विश्वंभरांशगे जीवे अगदंशस्य जातके।
स्वभेदभगिनी चैका अल्पपुत्रवतै Fat । १३८। |

16 Chandra Kala Nadi
138. Half sister: Jupiter in Viswambhara
Nadiamsa, in case of birth in Agada Nadiamsa,
will cause childlessness to a half- sister, but she
will (otherwise) be happy.
कुटिलांशकगे चन्द्रे कविद्भेदसहोदरी |
यमलं ५०५०५ क्लेशं प्राप्नोति afte । १३९।।
Tea सोदरशभरातृहीनवान्।
मध्ये भग्यवियोगेन दुरिदेण च कर्चितः। । १४०।।
स्वभेदभगिनीभर्ता Wert च मानवान्।
कालान्ते wash: पुत्रमूलात् सुभागयवान् | keel |
स्वभेदभागिनापुत्रौ ।वपद्दाये क |
नरवाहनयोगाप्तिः कतिमान् | Get । १४२। ।
139-142. Half sister: If the Moon be in Kutila
Nadiamsa, there is a possibility of having twin
half-sisters. The half sister will incur much grief
on account of destruction of her progeny. Her
husband will be pained by diseases and will be
bereft of coborn. The half sister will in her midlife be deprived of fortunes and will suffer penury.
Her husband will earn {ume through royal service.
Their fortunes will recover after some interval.
They will prosper through children, when the
native will be in his 2nd dasa. The brother-in-law
in question will acquire men-borne conveyances,
fame and yoga effects (1.6. prosperity) and be
happy.
जीवांशधिपतौ सौम्ये स्वोच्चे नीचांशरशिगे।
स्वभेदप्षगिनीभ्रतृपुत्रवान् पूत्रिमान् सुखी। । १४३। |
143. Half-sister: With Jupiter placed in a
benefic’s navamsa, the native’s step-sister will
have both sons and daughters,
_ Note: "Swochche" means in exaltation. Then
it can mean that Jupiter should be in Cancer Rasi.
_'Neechamsa Rasige" -being in debilitation
Rasi/Navamsa. This addition makes no sense.
Bhratru ` means brother. The text points
out to half- sister. Hence ‘brother’ is not added to
the rendering.
सम्पद्दाये जातकस्य पल परं यदि।
अथवा ऋतुवर्षन्ते भगिनीभर्तृभग्यवान्। । ९४४। |
144. When the native will cross his 5th year
during the course of his second Dasa, or at the
end of the year of the native’s slep-sister’s attaining her puberty, she will have the fortunes of
getting wedded.
अगृदांशे WA wet च् Racy
स्वभेदभगिनी चैव क्लेशमाप्नोति 'भूरिरशः। । १४५।।
सपत्नीमातृमूलेन भेद्रातृमनोव्यथ।
145-1451/2 . During the first two years of the
native, his half sister will undergo many difficulties, through her step-mother.
aera सूर्ये स्वपितापुत्रपं चकम्। । १४६। |
तस्य Wea मृत्युः संपद्दाये न संशयः ।
146-1461/2.. The native’s step-brothers will
be put to mental distress by his (native’s) stepmother. He will be the Sth issue of his father if
the Sun is in Manjuswana Nadiamsa at birth.
विश्वभ्रांशगे जीवे अगदांशस्य जातके। । Vw |
दशवर्त् परं भेद भ्रातृभग्यवशात् सुखी।
जन्मदाये तृतीयाब्दे दशासन्धिश्च कालगे। । १४८। |
गृहच्छिद्रकलपेन क्लेशं प्राप्नोति भूरिशः।
147-1481/2 . The native of Agada Nadiamsa
with Jupiter in Viswambhara Nadiamsa, will be
happy on account of his step- brothers. During
the native’s 3rd year (or) in the junction of 1st/2nd
Dasa, the native’s family will have abundant quarrels and grief.
a ayer et । । १४९।
वसुवर्ष़त् परं भ्रातृचित्तशृद्धग्रदो भवेत्।
भानुव्रतं तस्य र्मम श्रियमश्नुते। । १५०। |
भ्रातृसौख्यवती चेति agar सुमगली।
149-1501/2 . The 11th lord in Viswambhara
Nadiamsa while the seventh lord is in 11th
Navamsa will make the native’s co-born purehearted when the native is 8 years of age.

Deva Keralam 11
Notes: When the native will be eight, one of
the brothers (apparently older) will become
pure-hearted. This means, the said (older)
brother will earlier indulge in questionable acts.
Sloka 150 (2nd line) and 1501/2 (first line of
§.151) seem to have got mixed up here wrongly.
These two lines however mean: After performing
vows for the Sun-god, wealth will be acquired.
The mother (the word should be Mathru, not
Bhratru) will be happy and will have her husband
living for long time.
be ali Se शे द्रेशे प्रतिबन्धविमोचनम्। । १५१। ।
ं चेति न संशयं।
भानुव्रतेपवासेन तुलास्नानादहैतुना। । १५२।।
भेदध्रातुरिचत्तशुद्धिररि 01
पश्चात् सन्तानसिद्धिश्च । । १५३।
तदभावे दरिद्र श्यादुभेदभातृसुतं फलम्
151-153 1/2 . Should the 7th lord be in ManJuswana Nadiamsa (instead of being in the 11th in
Navamsa, as the 11th lord is in Viswambhara
Nadiamsa, vide sloka 159 supra) there will be
relief from obstacles (like brothers being with
impure hearts) and the native’s step-brothers will
enjoy marital happiness etc. By the native’s observance of vows to the Sun-god, and bathing in the
‘sea on the day of Tula Sankranthi (the Sun’s entry
in sidereal Libra), hundred evils like the stepbrothers being impure-hearted etc. wll be cured.
Following this, birth of children and happy family
life will result to step-brothers. If the remedies are
not done, penury will result.
Notes: The remedies suggested, viz. bathing
in the sea on the day of Sun’s entry in Libra and
daily worship of the Sun-God will help in a
general context to get relief from troubles with
step- brothers, father etc.
ए च प्रतिबन्धप्रपीडवान्।
शुद्रमूलेन भग्यनाशेन कर्शितः। । १५५। ।
तस्य नात् K सौख्यं भेदश्यतुसखवहम्।
समारभ्य अथवा दशवत्सरे । । १५६। |
WES नाशं नैवात्र संशयः।
ततः परं महत्सोख्यं भेदघ्रातृप्रियावहम्। । १५७। |
स्वभेदभगिनीभर्ता age योगमादिशेत्।
154-1571/2 . The Sun devoid of beneficial
aspect, in the Sth from 6th house along with Ketu
will be an obstacle for step-brother to beget
progeny. He will lose wealth on account of
Soodras and will later on be happy. When the
native is in his 8th/10th year of age, his father will
incur destruction (losses) on account of Soodras.
Afterwards he will obtain great happiness which
will lead to amiability with step brothers. Prior to
this, the native’s step-brother-in-law will enjoy
effects of good yoga (prosperity).
Note: The sequence of these hints can be
arranged thus to have a clear picture:
The Sun with Ketu in the 10th house without
a benefic’s aspect leads to the following:
1. Step-brother will have difficulties in
begetting progeny. He will initialy lose wealth on
account of Sudras and then will lead a happy life.
2. When the native will be 8 or 10 years of
age, financial losses to father will have to be
feared. After sometime he will have good terms
with children born to his other wife (than the
native’s mother) and be happy.
सुखे भागयाधिपे शुक्र. षष्ठे शनिसमन्विते। । १५८। |
जातकस्य सुविद्यप्तर्बहुग्रामाधिकारवान्।
लेख्यविद्यासमर्थश्च स । । १५९। ।
राजयोगप्रदो नित्यं हरिं |
जन्माधिसप्तमे वर्ष् सम्पद्दाये कचित् सुखम्। । १६०। |
स्वभेदध्रातुमूलेन रमौजीवन्धनमादिशेत्।
158-1601/2. Lord of the 9th placed in the 4th
house while Venus is in the 6th with Saturn will
make the native acquire decent learning and head
a few villages. He will excel in writing and studies.
He will be skilful in three languages. This combination will uninterruptedly give effects of

Rajayoga (wealth, position etc.) and will make the
subject a devotee of Lord Vishnu and Lord Siva.
For the first seven years from birth, second dasa
will give some happiness. His upanayana (thread
ceremony) will be with the assistance of a stepbrother.
Notes: These verses cannot relate to
Aquarius ascendant. Venus cannot be in the 4th
as well as in the 6th. Apparently this is a general
rule, or relates to some other ascendant.
विश्वम्भरांशगे जीवे सूर्यं मंजुस्वनांशगे। । १६१।।
त विवाहः स्यात् a + Bl Are |
अक्षराभ्यसं सप्तमे म । । १६२।
द्रादशब्दे विवाहं स्यादथवा मनुवत्सरे।
161-1621/2 . Should Jupiter be in Viswambhara Nadiamsa as the Sun isin Manjuswana
Nadiamsa, the native will get married in the first
sub-period of Vipat (3rd) Dasa. Commencement
of education { in sixth year >} and sacred
thread ceremony will take place in his 7th year of
age. His marriage will take place in the 12th year
(?) or in the 14th year (Manu Vatsara).
Notes: About marriage, there are conflicting views - in the first sub period of third dasa, or
in the 12th year, or in the 14th year. The first hint
may however depend on the dasa balance at the
time of birth.
great धने ax कुटिलालोचनप्रियः । । १६३। |
वाचालको राजसेवी राजद्रारसुकीर्तिमान्।
बालारिष्टभयं किचिद्रसुरीज्वरगण्डवान्। । १६४। |
जीविते भाग्यवांश्चेति जीवे विश्वम्भराशगे।
चापारूढे धने चन्द्रे जीवे केनदरत्रिकोणगे। । १६५।।
वंशोपरि शैरवरर्मध्ये वाहनभग्यवान्।
स्वप्राबल्यं प्रकुर्वत षेोडश्दात् परं क्व चित्॥। १६६॥
एकोनविंशद्र्षीदवुद्धिप्राल्ययोगवान्।
पचमन्दे दशसन्धर्द्दशब्दे तथैव च। । १६७। |
RAY अपमृत्युश्च तदर्ध अपमृत्युकृत्।
| 163-1671/2 . The Moon in the 2nd house, in
Kutila Nadiamsa will make one fond of crooked
Chandra Kala Nadi
thoughts. The native will be talkative. He will
serve a king and become famous thereafter. The
Moon in the said position will cause infantile
mortality through small- pox. Once he survives he
will be fortunate. The planet Jupiter in Viswambhara Nadiamsa in Sagittarius while the
Moon is in the 2nd house, makes the native acquire conveyances after 20. After 16 he will be
somewhat famous. He will be highly intelligent
after 21 years of age. He will incur danger of
untimely death during 5th year, or in a junction
period of two Dasas (in childhood), or 12th year,
or 32nd year or the 16th year.
Notes: In Sloka 165, 4८८1९ Kendra Trikonage"
means Jupiter in an angle or trine. But this expression is out of place as the Moon is in the 2nd for
Aquarius. Hence Jupiter can be only in angle
from the Moon, but not in trine.
Kutila Nadiamsa in Pisces extends from 17
deg. 48’ to 18 deg. and the Moon therein, for an
Aquarius native, will be prone to cause Balarishta
and other effects as stated. Kutila means
crooked, and the Moon therein will cause
crooked thoughts.
लभेशंशे तत्त्रिकोणे स्फुरयोगं गते शनौ । । १६८।
जननीव्याकुलं चेति बन्धुक्लेशं विनिर्दिरेत्।
pile i ओतु बन्धुवर्गं मनोव्यथा। । १६९।।
सेशं तत्त्रिकोणे सुखेशक्रान्तराशिगे |
सुखेशदुष्ि राशै तु भूपतेर्नशिमीरयेत्। । १७०। |
168-170. There will be troubles to the
native’s mother and his relatives when Saturn in
transit reaches the sign represented by the
Navamsa Rasi occupied by the 11th lord at birth.
There will be mental agony in the circle of one’s
relatives when Saturn comes to the Rasi aspected
by the 11th lord. Danger from king will strike
when Saturn comes to one of the undermentioned
Rasis: (a) The Navamsa Rasi occupied by the 4th
lord at birth. (b) A trine thereof. (c) The Rasi
occupied by 4th lord at birth. (d)The २851
aspected by the 4th lord.
Note: The Yogas featuring the 11th lord as
above denote danger to mother (8th from

Deva Keralam
4th) and to relatives, while the hints given about
the 4th lord can be used for professional debacles
and troubles from government.
जन्मदाये जन्मदेशे महानृपतिनाशनम्।
तत्युत्रप्रनलं चेति योगं च ध । । १७१।।
Se Sua (अददत् त ।
जन्मदा — : किँचद्दुर्भिक्ष्मादिशेत्। । १७२। |
सम्पददाये तथ pa दर्भक्षडम्बरम्।
विपदूदाये जन्मशनौ विरोधा्िपुपीडनम्। । १७३।।
दण्डाधिपतिकोशेषु किविदर्थविनाशनम्।
171-1731/2 . In Janma (first) Dasa, the
emperor will be destroyed. The emperor’s son
will become famous in the 10th year, or the 12th.
Later on happiness will come elsewhere. In first
Dasa and 3rd Dasa there will be drought. In the
3rd Dasa, with Saturn’s transit in Lagna, troubles
from enemies will occur, and in royal treasury,
some wealth will be lost.
Note: The above hints make no meaning for
an individual’s horoscope. There is apparently
some avoidable ™ix-up in transmission.
174-1741/2 . Danger to wife: During the subperiod of Mercury or Ketu, in the 3rd Dasa, there
will occur danger to wife.
द्रादशन्ते जन्मशनौ hl ये
Haat तथ चेति ष्ठं
Note:"Dwadasanthau" = end of the 12th
(year?).
"Tanma Sanau" - Saturn in the ascendant.
These two expressions are omitted from
translation as above to make proper use of the
instructions contained hereof.
विश्वम्भरंशगे जीवे कंठतरद्रमयेगवान्। । १७५।।
सीमन्तशिशुनाशादि पश्चात् सन्तनमायुष।
त्योविंशात् Gaus: Ae च मृतप्रना। । १७६। |
GAR पूत्रवृदिर्ितरिसंख्यचि रायु |
जीवे यावत् फलास्सन्ति तावत् सन्तनयोगवान् |
पत्रिकाद्रयमायुष्यं yaar: तथ भवेत्।
115-1771/2. Should Jupiter be in Viswambhara Nadiamsa, the native will have two
wives. Only after the death of first child, he will
have iong-living children. Such a child will be
possible in the 23rd year; till then children born
will not survive. He will have surviving children
after a remarriage; two or three children will be
long-lived. The number of children will correspond to Ashtaka Varga Bindus obtained in
Jupiter’s A.V. Two of the daughters will also be
long-lived.
pe Bt SA तदीशेअष्टमरशिगे। । १७८। |
क सुतायुष्यं मृतप्रगाबहुत्ववान्।
STE FATT! | १७९। |
सेतु्नानात् परं चेति ` पलवान मुखी।
षष्ठाधिपदशाकाले satay । | १८०। ।
भेदप्रातृविनाशेन क्लेशं प्राप्नेति भूरिशं।
178-1801/2. If Mars is found in the 5th as
his dispositor is in the 8th house, the native will
obtain many dead children (children will die
early) and only after a long interval, a long- living
child will be born. To overcome these evils,
worhship of Lord Kartikeya (Son of Lord Suva,
and army chief of gods) and bathing in Sethu (in
Rameswaram, Tamil Nadu, where Lord Rama
worshipped Lord Siva, installing His idol on the
sea-shore before setting off to Lanka). With this
remedy, children with long lives will be born to
the happiness of the native. Due to the Yoga
caused by Mars as above the native in his 6th
lord’s Dasa, in 40th year, will incur grief on account of destruction of step brothers.
Notes: Remedy for Lord Kartikeya is suggested because Mars represents the said God.
चन्द्रलग्नाष्टमाधीशद शायां चन्द्रभुक्तिषु। । १८१। ।
जीवान्तरे अथवा चेति स्वसमानजनावधि।
अपमुत्युभयं तस्य प्रात्पं शन्य प्रमु्जाति। । १८२। |
181-182. In the sub-period of the Moon, or
of Jupiter, during the Dasa of the 8th lord counted
from the natal Moon, there will be untimely death

20 Chandra Kala Nadi
of a relative equal to the native. Remedies be done 187. Death of the subject: Jupiter should be
to overcome the fatality in question. placed in Viswambhara Nadiamsa as the Sun is in
Notes: The dasa should be of 8th lord from Manjusvana Nadiamsa. Then in the 56th year, the
Moon sign. The sub period - of Moon or of subject will incur death. The month of death will
Jupiter. During such directional influence, the coincide with the transit Sun in Virgo or in Pisces,
Aquarius native will lose a relative in his age- uesday will complete the event of death.
group. चापे pu ॥ ।
त्मजेन rhs दगोत्पत्तिनाशनम्। । १८८ |
ER FAT Es , वारूणांशकगे अवे निशाकरसमन्विते। ।
SIAR PAT शन्तया शानि प्रयास्याति। । १८३। । प्रसूतिकाले वर्षन्तं त्रिरत्रमथ वा भवेत्। । १८९।।
183. There will be (dangerous) fever to the 010 1 1410
ae a a ae ee cee! 1 destroyed: Should Jupiter be ee in Sagittarius
वी in the company of the Moon, and birth be in the
Gran by ne (1 the Sun in order). Nadiamsa entitled Varuna, in aspect to Mars, the
nia ne Ren CCCe SHOU DE Cgne: native’s coborn will die as they come in this world.
OPUS सुतेशे aaa Such an event will occur during the last three
जन्माद्यायुषि पर्यन्तं आ्यवांश्च न संशयः । ecw । nights of the end of the first year of (brother’s)
birth.
184, Wealthy: In the beginning of the Dasa Notes: Slokas from 188 to 224 deal with
of the ninth Rasi, if the 5th lord is in exaltation, Sasittanius: Gecendant, “The: relevant bik
Res will be rich right from birth till the end Nadiamsa is entitled Varuna - extending from 7
+ ठ । । deg. 48 to 8 deg. 0’ of Sagittarius. The
otes: "Right from birth" should be = Nadiamsa’s correct name is Varuni, which acreplaced by "right from then" to make proper cording to C.G. Rajan and Deva Keralam’s alterBEDS native Table (Vol. I of original text) is the 115th of
The text also, apart from Vimshottari, uses a movable sign, 36th of an immovable sign and
Rasi dasas. It can be Kalachakra Dasa, or Jaimini = 40th of a common sign. That is from 22 deg. 48’
dasa. to 23 deg. of a movable sign, from 7 deg. to 7 deg.
12’ of an immovable sign and from 7 deg. 48’ to 8
deg. of a common sign.
आयुताधिकवित्ताप्त ्षेमदाये मुकीर्तिमान् |
विपद्दाये मुतवाप्ठिः पंचविशतिवत्सरे। । १८५। । मिथुनांशकगे जीवे वक्रे शुद्रंशनाडिगे।
Te परं महाभाग्यं प्रबलेद्योगजीवनम्। शुद्रजन्मा सुखै नित्यं श्यामवर्णस्वरूपवान्। । १९०।।
यवदायुष्यमाप्नोति ताचद्भग्यं विनिरदिशेत्। । १८६।। पित्तप्रकृतिदेहः i ig
185-186. The subject will gain limitless
wealth and fame in the 4th Dasa. Birth of a child 190-191. Seodra: If Jupiter is retrograde at
will take place in 3rd Dasa, at the age of 25, alter the time of birth and is in Gemini Navamsa, one
which he will gain Te prosperity and will = 0 in Soodra Kaala (last one fourth part) of
flourish in his calling. His wealth will last Varuna Nadiamsa, will be a Soodra, be ever
throughout his life happy and will have dark complexioned physique.
errant secs His body will be bilious in nature. He will be fond
जीवे रवौ 7 of sweet and sour juices. He will have a weak
Fe कालमृत्युः कन्यामासे मृतिं वदेत् । । digestion, be gentle in dispositicn will have a
अथवा मीनमासे तु Amat मरिष्यति। । १८७। । trembling voice and be highly intellig, 11

Deva Keralam
लग्नेशे TRAM aa कुजवीकषिते।
to
वारूणोशकगे जीवे जन्म तार दशन्त्यगे।
बाल्ये वसूरिकागण्डं yout हि जीवति।। १९२।। सोदरीजननं चेति दीर्घमायुर्भविष्यति। ¦ १९८। ।
Mirae पीडितेत्यन्तशेकवान्।
192-1921/2. Escaping death: Ifthe ascendant
lord is in Varuna Nadiamsa and be in own sign in
aspect to Mars, the subject will be troubled by
small-pox during his childhood and will nearly
escape death. He may also become a victim of
plague, (dangerous) fever or ulcer. Thereby he
will incur grief.
जन्मदयेअपम्त्युश्च तृतीयाब्दात् परं सुखम्। । १९३। |
oo yan : Heer प्रियवहम्।
THER बहुमान ` मानवान्। । १९४। ।
193-194, (Results continued): With the combinations mentioned above, the subject will further incur danger of untimely death during (initial
years of) Janma (first) dasa. He will be healthy
after 3rd year. His father’s prosperity will increase. He will be happy through his relatives. He
will become famous under royal service and will
receive great respect and honours.
वारूणांशकगे जीवे तथान्त्यग्रहदायगे।
पितृव्यारिष्टमाप्नोति राजेपद्रववान् पित। । १९५।।
195. Danger to father: When Jupiter is
‘ound in Varuna Nadiamsa, predict danger and
roubles to the native’s father through royal disdleasure in the dasa of the planet in the 12th.
पंचविन्दुयुते जीवे वारूणांशे कुजेक्षिते।
निधनाधिपसंयुक्ते पंचमाब्दे महाविपत्। । १९६।।
पश्चात् सहोद्रारिष्टं Pra ना।
नवमे सोदतेत्पत्तिर्बलारिष्टमृति वदेत्। । १९७। |
196-197. Fifth Year: If Jupiter is placed in
Varuna Nadiamsa, in aspect to Mars, and has five
dots in his Ashtakvarga (after final reduction)
the native’s fifth year will be capable of bringing
forth fatality to the native. Later on, his coborns
will be endangered by small-pox. If the said
Tupiter is placed in the 9th house (aspecting the
3rd) the native’s coborn will cur infantile mortality and will pass away.
सम्पद्दाये qatar सोदगोत्पत्तिमायुषम्।
एकभ्रातृयुतश्वैव वारूणंशफलं स्मृतम्। । १९९।।
198-199. Co-borns: Jupiter placed in Varuna
Nadi Amsa will in the first Dasa cause birth of a
sister who will be long-lived. In the concluding
one-third part of Sampath (2nd) Dasa, birth of a
brother will take place who will also be long-lived.
The native will have (only) one male co-born.
TUR वारूणंशे लग्नाद्विक्रमगे शनौ।
पश्चाद्भ्ातृविनाशः स्याद्भगिन्येकासमन्विते। । २००। |
200. Contrary effect: According to some
authorities, Saturn in the 3rd house, for a Varuna
Nadiamsa native will give converse results -
younger brother will be destroyed while one
younger sister will live long.
षष्ठे रवौ च शशिजे मन्दे तुतीयक्षगे
at on निशाकरयुते देहे शिख aia
eam यथाक्रममिदं जातः मुमौषख्ये महान्
वाल्ये र
भ्रातृश्चैव तथ
धितिपतिस्तत्तूल्यभूगयो धनी
श्रीमान विंशतिवत्सरात परमिदं द्रात्रिशदब्दे अथवा। | 2021 |
तदर्घात् पर तश्चेति स्वपिता सौख्यमशनुते।
तदर्धे योगभंगत्वाद्रसुवर्ष मनोव्यथ। । २०३।।
201-203. A specific horoscope: Mars, the
Sun and Mercury in the 6th house, Saturn in the
3rd house, the Moon joining Jupiter in the ascendant, Venus with Ketu in the 4th, and Rahu in the
10 house: With this array of planets, the native will
be quite happy, and be a great man. His childhood
will be marked by difficulties. He will have limited
number of issues. His coborn will also similarly
have limited issues. The native will earn so much
wealth and be so prosperous 116 a king. After
16th, 20th, and 32nd year, his wealth will show
increasing trends. His father will be happy.
During his 8th year, the native will see his father
declining and mentally distressed.
Note: In the second line of the text, "Lagne"
and "Dehe" repeat both of which mean “in the
ascendant", Secing a specific mention to Rahu
शये वदन्ति च शनावलत्पप्रजासन्ततिः। 1 २०१। |

22 Chandra Kala Nadi
being in the 10th, the position of Ketu should be
in 4th, not in ascendant. Hence Venus with
Ketu falls in the 4th. Further when the Sun is in
the 6th, Venus cannot be in the ascendant. Now
the horoscope, with Sagittarius ascendant is obtained thus:
Sat
Let us study the astrological combinations
with the help of the future events suggested.
1. The native will become great (professionally, etc.) because of Jupiter being in Lagna
while Venus, the 11th lord aspects the 10th, from
his exaltation sign.
2, Childhood will be marked by difficulties
as the 8th lord is in Lagna.
3, Limited number of issues is because Sth
lord Mars joins Mercury in the 6th house.
Jupiter’s aspect on Sth is a saving grace.
4. Royal kind of wealth and prosperity will
occur to the native because of 2nd lord Saturn in
Moolatrikona Rasi, conjunction of lords of 5th
and 9th, Jupiter aspecting 5th and 9th, Rahu in
the 10th aspected by an exalted planet, 5th lord
Mars aspecting the Lagna-cum-4th lord Jupiter,
dispositor of 5th and 9th lords in exaltation, 2nd
lord aspecting the 5th and the 9th etc. etc.
वारूणशकगे जीवे अष्टादश च वत्से।
स्वपितुरभीग्यवृद्धः स्द्राजान्तरवशत् प्रियम्। । २०४।।
204, Father: If Jupiter is in Varuna Nadi
Amsa, after the native’s 18th year his father’s
prosperity will increase and the latter will come
close to royal family.
वैष्णवप्रनले pet अल्पसौख्यं विमिर्दिशेत्।
वसुवर्षात् परं क्लेशं सायनान्दे कचित् सुखम्। । You) |
205. Happiness: One bornin Vipra Kala (of
Varuna Nadiamsa), will enjoy limited happiness,
The period after 8th year will cause many difficulties. After a year and a half he will regain some
happiness.
निधनाधिपदोषेण ष्ठाधिपतिदुयके।
कर्माधिपान्ते काले स्वपित योगभंगवान्। । २०६। |
वैष्णवेन wey बन्धुवर्गेण तेषणप्।
राजद्रारावमानेन क्लेश प्रप्नोति भूरिंश। । २०७। |
सोदसेत्पत्तिनाशश्च भु
206-208. Father’s prosperity obstructed:
Due to 8th lord’s blemish, his father will have
obstacles to his progress in the native’s 6th lord’s
Dasa and 10th lord’s sub-period. Enmity with
Vaishnavites, happiness among kinsmen, grief
due to insult from the king, and destruction of
brother will also come to pass. Initiation into
studies will occur for a Varuna Nadiamsa native.
नवमान्दे मनस्तपं (0 विनिर्दिशेत्।
लाभ्रधिपदशकाले । । २०९। |
वारूणंशे प्रजातस्य ।
209-2091/2. Other effects: In the 9th year,
mental agony and grief on account of coborn will
come to pass. In the sub-pcriod of 2nd lord and
in the major period of 11th lord, the native will be
initiated into education.
लिपित्रयप्रबीणश्च ~ ।
नाटकालंकृतौ कन्ये प्रियसंगीतवल्लभः। । २११।।
संस्कृतप्रियभाषी स्यदुदेवब्राहम ण भक्रितमान्।
210-2111/2, Fame through learning: Jupiter
in the ascendant, Venus in the 4th house with Ketu
inan Amsa of Mars will give following effects. The
native will be an expert in 3 languages, will be
famous for his high learning, will be fond of
drama, literature and music, cultured, charming
in his speeches, and will honour Gods and Brahmins.

Deva Keralam 33
असि तांशे ay शुक्रे पुच्छराशिसमन्विते। । २१२।।
218. About bride: The bride’s Moon sign will
लेखविद्यासुनिपुणे मन्दवुद्धिः क्कचित् क्वचित् । । २१३। be the Navamsa Rasi of the 7th lord of the native,
212-213. Venus in Pisces with a Navamsa of
Saturn while..... is in a Prishtodaya Rasi....... will
give birth to a person who will be skilful in education. Yet the subject will be sometimes a dunce.
Note: Apparently there is a missing link in
the Sloka concerning some planet to be ina Prishtodaya Rasi (rising with hind portion). This informatior, along with some other condition, may
have formed part of the first line of sloka No.213
which is missing here originally.
प्रन्यन्ते वारूणंशे a
विद्याविख्यतिमाप्नोति मान्। । २१४। ।
214. Fame and learning: According to other
authorities, if Jupiter is aspected by Mars, a
Varuna Nadiamsa native will gain wide learning
apart from fame through royal media.
विपद्दाये राजयेगं नरवाहनयेगवान्।
स्वपितधिकयेगं स्याद्यजद्ररे न संशयः। । २१५।।
215. He will gain conveyances and Rajayoga
effects during his 3rd Dasa. His father will gain
abundantly through royal favours.
PA वारूणंशे arin |
216. For one born in the third 1/4th part
(Vaisya Kala) of Varuna Nadiamsa, the 2nd dasa
will give wide fame apart from a family marriage.
बरह्माशकगते जीवे शुक्रे कुभ्रशजातके।
स्वजन्मदेश उद्राह वसुन्धरा। । २१७। |
217, Marriage: Jupiter in Brahma Shashtiamsa while Venus is in Aquarius Navamsa, will
give the Varuna Nadiamsa native marriage in his
birth place. The girl will be from the northern part
of his land.
Notes: Brahma Shastiamsa extends from 10
deg. 30’ to 11 deg. in odd signs and from 19 deg.
to 19 deg. 30’ in even signs.
FIN तत्विकोणे दारजन्मर्षभं विदुः ।
दोरेशबृष्ठिराशै वा येजयेत् कालवित्तमः। । २६८।।
or one of its trines, or a sign that is in aspect to the
7th lord.
मकरांशे कुजे मन्दे मीने seat भृगौ।
वारूणृशे प्रनातस्स विवाहप्रतिबन्धवान्। । २९१९। ।
219. Obstacles to marriage: The Varuna
Nadiamsa native will face obstacles in obtaining
his marriage if the following conditions prevail
simultaneously at birth, Mars in Capricorn
Navamsa, Saturn in Pisces (Rasi), and Venus in
Aquarius Navamsa.
यत्य नाडी 1 pat Sy
विवाहयत्नमात्रेण fac परपकर्मणि । 1 2201 |
द्वित्रिवारप्रयत्नेन पश्चादुद्राह येगवान्।
220-2201/2 . Obstacles: One born in this
Nadiamsa with Saturn in the 3rd house will face
obstacles in getting married, by his mere trials
(i.e. failures will be in the very first phase of
attempts) due to sins (of his previous birth). However after two or three weeks of such trials, he will
succeed in getting married.
Notes: Two or three weeks of delay is not a
big delay these days. Hence the present combination means major hurdles for some time in respect
of getting married.
जामातृपपदोषेण RAN अनिष्ठकृत्। । २२१।।
तृतीय श्वशुरस्थानं परपक्रान्तस्य जातके।
तस्य कन्योप्रदनिन रवम रस्य पहाविपत्। । २२२।।
Way wags विक्रमे बलन्विते।
नदेषकृद्विवाहं स्यच्छृशुरस्य YATE! | २२३।।
221-223. Father-in-law: The third house is
the house of father- in-law. (Having a malefic like
Saturn in the 3rd house, as above), due to the
Varuna Nadiamsa native’s sins, his father-in- law
by giving his daughter in marriage to the subject
native will confront a grave danger. If however,
the third lord is in a benefic’s Navamsa, be with
strength, and be aspected by a benefic, such a
blemish will not exist’ Then good will happen to
the father-in-law and the native’s marriage will
take place (without risking any danger).

Notes: The present slokas give us a hint that
malefics in the 3rd house are not auspicious for
father-in-law of the native.
कलत्राधिपतै At म॑गलांशस्य जातके।
रक्तवर्णकत्रं स्यद्विवाहानन्तरं सुखम्। । २२४।।
लकष्मीकयक्षवानित्यं गेहे गोषन्यसंकुलम्।
उद्वाहानन्तरं चेति नित्यश्री्ित्यमंगःवम्।। 2241 |
224-225. Mangala Nadiamsa: One born in
this Nadiamsa, having Mars as the 7th lord will
obtain a spouse who will be blood-red in complexion. Such a native will be happy following
marriage. There will be ever-lasting wealth apart
from acquisition of quadrupeds and grains, following marriage. The wealth and auspiciousness
of this native will be long-lasting.
Notes: Although Mars is required to be 7th
lord, this does not apply to Libra ascendant, as it
is not a fixed sign. The instructions here relate
only to Taurus ascendant.
In Taurus ascendant, Mangala Nadiamsa
should rise, according to the sloka. This Nadiamsa in Taurus ranges between 11 deg. 36’ and 11
deg. 48’ the Navamsa of which is Aries, ruled by
Mars. Mars should be in Manjuswana Nadiamsa
(sign not specified). The 7th house being that of
Mars and the Navamsa ascendant also being that
of Mars helps the native to have happy marriage
apart from enjoying firm wealth.
Paw रवौ धैमे मंगलांशस्य नडिगे।
श्वशुरस्य ad स्यन्मातुलस्यैकयेगवान्। । 2241 |
226. Mars in Mangala Nadiamsa: The Sun
in Aries Navamsa while Mars is placed in Mangala Nadi Amsa will cause following effects: The
native’s father-in-law will have two wives. One of
the native’s maternal relatives will be happy.
Notes: Mangala Nadiamsa is from 18 deg.
12’ to 18 deg. 24’ of a movable sign, from 11 deg.
36’ to 11 deg. 48’ of an immovable sign and from
3 deg. 12’ to 3 deg. 24’ of a common sign. Mars
should be in one of these spaces, the Sun should
be in Aries Navamsa, and the rising sign be
Taurus. Then the father-in-law would be twicemarried and a maternal uncle will have a happy
living.
Chandra Kala Nadi
(बाल्ये भ्रातृवियोगेन क्लेशं प्रप्नोति yt )
षष्ठाधिपदशाकाले षष्ठेशांशत्रिकोणगे।
लग्नेशस्यांशगे वापि मातुलारिष्टमादिशेत्। । 2251 |
227. (During childhood, the native will, due
to separation from coborns, incur difficulties
galore). In the dasa of the 6th lord... be in trinal
to the Rasi indicated by the 6th lord’s navamsa
position, or be in Navamsa ascendant, there will
be danger to maternal relatives.
Note: Here we need some clarifications.
Seeing the sequence after sloka 226, this sloka
does not scem to relate to Mars’ position in Mangala Nadiamsa. This apparently relates to
Varuna Nadiamsa. Actually Mangala Nadiamsa
slokas are wrongly appended hereof, while the
slokas otherwise deal with Varuna Nadiamsa.
Secondly sloka 227 has three lines, the first
line having been placed in brackets. This is a
misplaced line. In the 2nd line, the reference is to
some planet in {116 to 6th lord’s Navamsa position, or with reference to Lagna Navamsa (vide
3rd line). To which planet the reference is made,
is not understood. Hence these 3 - line sloka may
be treated as defective. Yet, rendering in English
has been made as above.
वारूणांशकगे जीवे एकमातुलयोगवान्।
बाल्ये भ्रातृवियोगेन क्लेशं प्रप्नोति भूरिशः। । २२८।
228. Maternal uncle: Jupiter in Varuna
Nadiamsa gives only one maternal uncle. The
native during his chudhood will incur abundant
difficulties due to separation form his coborn.
मातमहाधिपे भैमे पंगलांशस्य नाडिगे।
वार्धक्ये | हस्थ्यजीवनम्।
229-2291/2. Maternal grand-father: If Mars,
the ruler of the house signifying maternal grandfather occupics Mangala Nadiamsa, the said relative will be long-lived. However, many of the
native’s coborns will be destroyed. The native will
incur grief, in old age, on account of loss of
children. The status of his being pater familias will
be for a short duration.
Notes: These relate to Sagittarius ascen-

Deva Keralam an
dant, Varuna Nadiamsa birth. Mars rules the 5th
(Aries) which signifies grand-father for a Sagittarius native. For such a birth Mars should be in
Mangala Nadiamsa. The only good effect is long
lease of life to grand-father while the native will
face adversities about his own old age and loss of
coborn.
His being pater familias will also be affected.
Depending upon the whole horoscope his marriage will end early, or he may seek ascetism
(Sanyasaasrama).
वारूणंशकमगे जीवे स्वमाता चिरजीविनी। 1 २३०। |
मातामहवचिरायुष्यं तथैव च पितामहः।
पितामहाधिपे भौमे मेषंशे मंगलांशगे। । २३९। |
पितामहप्रसिद्धश्च भ्रातुत्रसयसमन्वितः।
उद्राहानन्त्रं भाग्यं स्वपितम हसौख्यवान्। । २३२। |
TARR वासो यावदायुष्यसौख्यवान्।
मेषांशगे सुताधीशे शशिजेन समन्विते। । 2331 |
230-233. Other relatives: Jupiter placed in
Varuna Nadiamsa will give a long living mother.
His paternal and maternal grand- fathers will be
also similarly long-lived. With Mars, ruling the
house of paternal grand-father if placed in Aries
Navamsa inclusive thereof a Mangala Nadiamsa,
the native’s paternal grand-father will be very
famous. The native will have three brothers. He
will prosper after marriage. He will enjoy happiness from his paternal grand-father. He will live
in a town surrounded by forests. He will be happy
throughout his life, if the Sth lord (Mars) joins the
Moon and takes position in Aries in Navamsa.
Notes: Mars to be placed in Aries Navamsa,
begetting simultaneously Mangala Nadiamsa allows his position only to be in a fixed sign. Thus
for Sagittarius ascendant, he can be in
3rd/6th/9th/12th house. As a result, his grandfather will be quite famous & C.
Independent of Mangala Nadiamsa position, the 5th lord Mars joining the Moon will bless
a Sagittarius native with happiness throughout his
life. Both of them should be in Aries Navamsa.
Thus, the 8th lord Moon is remedied and is in a
position to make the subject live happily.
। । धनुर्लग्नम् - पप्रपंशः) ।।
Sagittarius Ascendant -
Prabha Nadiamsa
परभंशके प्रजातस्य Fea पिजामहः।
wars धनुर्लग्ने तदीशे वारूणांशगे। । २३४। |
तिधनधिपसयुक्ते पितृमातुचिरायुष।
विंशोपरि sain फ्वविशे सुवाहनम्। । 2341 |
अष्टादशे श्रियं विन्द्यात् स्वपित्र सह भग्यवान्।
234-2351/2 Sagittarius Ascendant Prabha
Nadiamsa: The paternal grand-father of one
born in Prabha Nadiamsa would be given to great
pleasures. Birth in Prabha Nadiamsa, in Sagittarius ascendant, while its lord Jupiter is m
Varuna Nadiamsa will give long life to native’s
parents provided Jupiter joins the 8th lord
(Moon). (Without the Moon being in the picture)
additional effects hereof are: After the age of
twenty, the native will attain fortunes. While 25th
year will prove favourable for conveyances. 18th
year will cause wealth, to the native and his father.
Notes: Prabha Nadiamsa (also known as
Abala Nadiamsa) extends from 18 deg. to 18 deg.
12’ as far as Sagittarius is concerned, which is a
common sign.
aT aa भागे वारूणंशकमे TT २३६। |
नवमाब्दे मनस्तापं क्लेश स्मादष्ट वत्सरे |
236-2361/2. Birth in the second half of Prabha Nadiamsa, in Sagittarius ascendant, as Jupiter
is in Varuna Nadiamsa, the 8th and 9th years of
age will cause mental pain and grief to the native.
Notes: Second half of Prabha Nadiamsa in
Sagittarius extends from 18 deg. 6’ to 18 deg. 12’
of arc.
पूर्वभागे प्रजातस्य मनुषः षत् परं सुखम्। । २३५७। |
स्वपितुरभाग्यवद्धिश्व योगं च दशवत्स।
पश्चादूदरिद्रमप्नोति मनुवर्षीत् परं विपत्। । २३८। ।
237-238. Prabha Nadiamsa - first half: One
born in the first half of this Nadiamsa will be
happy after fourteen years of age. His tenth year
will cause prosperity to his father. Later on, the

2b
father will incur penury, and in the native’s 14th
year danger to father will come to pass.
Notes: First half of this Nadiamsa is from 18
deg. 00° to 18 deg 6° in Sagittarius. Such a birth
wil cause prosperity to father in the native’s tenth
year (corresponding to the Navamsa sign with
reference to natal ascendant - Virgo Navamsa 15
10th from Sagittarius natal ascendant). The
prosperity of father will be short-lived. His death
will also occur in the native’s 14th year. Thus in
four years, the father begets wealth, contacts
poverty and then dies,
The native will be happy after 14. That is,
after the death of father.
Te प्रजातस्य सायकाव्ात् परं सुखम् ।
स्वपितुर्बहुभाग्याप्िर्भग्याधिपदशन्त्यगे। । २३९। |
239. After 11/2 yoars of birth, the native of
second half of Prabha Nadiamsa will be happy.
His father will acquire great wealth in the concluding portion of the 9th lord’s dasa.
Note: In the first line, the word "Saayaka"
denotes an arrow, which makes no sense for us
here. If the expression is "Saayanaabde", then its
meaning is: Sa + Ayana + Abde which means
“one year and a half". (Add 6 months denoted by
one Ayana to one year, which is 11/2 years).
The second line refers to 9th lord’s dasa (i.e.
Sun’s dasa) being quite favourable in respect of
father’s prosperity.
लग्ने जीवे qa roe a कमं
स्वपिता वाहनादुयश्च ura | 1 २४० |
सोद्रशरातृमान् रोगी ज |
were विरायुष्यं भागिन्येका चिरायुषी। । २४१। |
240-241, Father: Jupiter in Sagittarius ascendant, Venus in the 4th house in the company
of lords of the 9th and 10th (ie. the Sun and
Mercury), will provide the native’s father
numerous vehicles, and fame via royal service. He
willbe endowed with coborns, be diseased and be
subjected to loss of older brother. He will have
three long-living brothers and one long-living
sister.
Chandra Kala Nadi
Sagittarius - Ascendant with Jupiter; Pisces
- Venus, Sun and Mercury. This partial horoscope throws up certain clues like father having
numerous conveyances (the Sun being 9th lord,
with exalted Venus), getting fame through association with king and long-living coi का,
Father being subjected to diseases proves
that the 9th lord joining Mercury in debilitation is
not good for his wellbeing. Loss of father’s older
brother is due to 7th lord in debility with Karaka
for father, the Sun. The native’s 7th house
denotes his father’s older brother, being 11th
from the ninth.
सूर्यकालाधिपे मन्दे तृतीये पकरंशगे।
धनुर्लगने प्रजातस्य cater मन्दभाग्यवान्। । २४२ । ।
242. Father’s Prosperity: The native’s father
will have checkered prosperity for one born on
Saturday, while Saturn is in the 3rd house (in
Aquarius Rasi) with Capricorn Navamsa.
Note: Suryakaala means day or day time.
Surya-kaaladhipa is lord of the week day, here it
is Saturn.
Sar ्यकाले पापाक्रान्तस्य जातके।
मष्ट च स्वल्पभग्यं विनिरदिशेत्। । २४३ । |
243. For birth in Prabha Nadiamsa, in Sagittarius Lagna, in day time, if the Sun is in the grip
of malefics, and be devoid of bencfic aspect, the
native will have limited fortunes,
Notes: The Sun rules the native’s fortunes
being the lord of the ninth house from Sagittarius
ascendant. Sloka 242 above deals with birth on
Saturday, with Saturn in 3rd (aspecting 9th
house) begetting Capricorn Navamsa (given by
Saturn’s position from 10 deg. to 13 deg. 20” in
Aquarius). The present sloka deals with birth in
day time, the Sun being ruler of day time. Here
he is the 9th lord as well.
चक्रयेगे धनुर्लग्ने तदीशे वारूणंशगे।
भरगयाधिपे कुमाराशे भाग्यवांश्च न संशयः। | २४४। |
244. Ascendant being in Sagittarius, with
Chakra Yoga while the lord of ascendant, Jupiter
is in Varuna Nadiamsa, and the 9th lord (Sun) is

Deva Keralam an
in Kumara Nadiamsa, will make the native fortunate.
Notes: Reference to Sagittarius native
having Chakra Yoga, along with two more conditions are made in the original. The result of these
three conditions is mere fortune, while Chakra
Yoga alone can give the most excellent result of
emperorship for any Lagna.
For the information of the reader, Chakra
Yoga is formed thus: when the six alternative
houses from Lagna are occupied by the 7 planets
from the Sun to Saturn, this Yoga is formed. As a
result, the native will "become the most powerful
emperor at whose feet, the heads of many kings
will lay in honour”. In the face of this effect,
Chakra Yoga in the present sloka, with two other
conditions, giving mere fortunes is of doubtful
origin.
This anamoly is extended to Slokas 250 etc.
infra. In my opinion, without Chakra Yoga, these
verses be taken.
Kumara Nadiamsa is not found anywhere.
It is Kumari that is enlisted in our work which
extends from 21 deg. 12’ to 21 deg. 24’ of a movable sign, from 8 deg. 36’ to 8 deg. 48’ of an
immovable sign and from 6 deg. 12’ to 6 deg, 24’
of a common sign.
स्वपित्रधिकभाग्यप्िर्विंवाहानन्तरं Far
वाल्ये सौख्यं विजानियात् कौमारे अलपसुखन्वि a) २४५॥
यौवने भाग्यमाप्नेति विपद्दाये श्रियौ वहम्।
रन््राधिपतिदोषेण — पीडा Farad क्कपित्। । २४६। |
पितमहविनाशेन क्लेशवान् Fa
245-2461/2. Effects for combinations in
sloka 244 - continued: The native’s father will also
incur a high degree of prosperity. The subject will
be happy after marriage. His childhood will also
give happiness. There will be less happiness in
boyhood while his youth will be fortunate. In his
third dasa, he will acquire wealth. Due to 8th
lord’s blemish, occasionally there will be worries
on account of father. Due to loss of the native’s
paternal grand-father, his father will incur grief.
He will be (generally) happy.
Notes: Blemish for 8th lordship is mentioned in the text, without mentioning the position
of the Moon, 8th lord for Sagittarius. Apparently
she should be related to the Sun, 9th lord, by
aspect or by conjunction, or in an angle or ina
trine from the Sun.
Thus we gather that the Moon is harmful to
Sagittarius native by virtue of her ownership of the
8th house, unless she is connected with Mars, the
Sth lord.
कुपारंशकगे जीवे सर्य nie ae स॒म्न्विते। | २४७। |
वराधद्रयं तद्दशायां सोगभगं विनिंदशेत्।
जन्म तार दशान्त्यादि भग्याधिपतिदायके। | २४८ । |
247-248. Obstacles: There will be twice
obstacles {of major order, causing significant
decline) in the first Dasa and the 9th lord’s Dasa
(ruled by the Sun), if Jupiter is in Kumara
Nadiamsa while the Sun is with Mercury.
Notes: "Jaddasayam" meaning in that Dasa
is redundant seeing a specific reference to the
Dasa of Janma Nakshatra and 9th lord’s Dasa.
The sloka apparently attributes decline of a
great order in these Dasas, not once, but twice.
Hence for Sagittarius Lagna, Jupiter in Kumara
Nadiamsa seems to be a blemish.
Pere सम्पद्दायेन रोगवान्
अष्ठमाधिपदोषेण सम्पद्दायेन WTA | २४९। |
249. IlIness: Due to the blemish of 8th lord,
Moon, the native will incur diseases in the 2nd
Dasa.
Notes: The second line of the sloka is a
repetition of first line, with some compositional
change.
How the Moon should be placed to cause
blemish is not specified here. One such position
of the Moon could be in Lagna.
od चन्द्रे aa समन्विते।
वारूणंशे चक्रयेगे विपदूदाये श्रेयो वहम्। । २५०। |
म तत्समश्च सुखी घनुः।
> प्रबलोद्योगजीवनम्। । २५१। |
सोदरीश्रियमश्नुते।

१६ Chandra Kala Nadi
250-2511/2. Third Dasa: The Moon with —hipa Yoga will not be so effective. By a careful
Jupiter while birthisin Varuna Nadiamsadenotes study we learn that combustion and Kendradthat the Chakra Yoga native willbe wealthyin3rd_ = वपर dosha (blemish due to ownershi of angle)
Dasa. He will attain kingship or be equaltoaking — should not be feared on the face value.
and be happy. He will beget conveyances, ornaee : : लग्नाधिपदशाकले शुभरशुभफलं समम्। । W491 |
ments and great professional progress. he will art
obtain progeny. His brothers will become weal- वुधान्ते अरिष्टं स्यच्छान्त्य शान्ति प्रयास्यति।
+. रन्धाधिपन्ते काले लग्नाधिपतिदायके। । २५८। |
thy.
वारूणांशे प्रजातस्य कालमृत्युत्नं संशयः।
वारूणाश्ञकगे जीवे चक्रयोगस्य ATH 1 २५२। | .
लाभधिपदाकाले स्वपित्रा सहयात्रिकः। 257-258 U2. Dasa results: The Dasa of asलग्नेशंशत्रिकोणे च स्फ्यं गते शनौ। । २५३। | cendant lord will give balanced results, both good
सेतुयात्रफलप्रपति्लभिधिपतिदायके । and bad. The sub period of Mercury (in the said
र Dasa) will bring dangers which can be stalled by
भेमदाये धनं विन्द्यात् FTA तथेव च । । २५४ | remedies. He will face due death in the 8th lord’s
252-254. Pilgrimage: The native of Chakra sub period, during Ascendant lord’s Dasa in case
Yoga having Jupiter in Varuna Nadiamsa will go of birth in Varuna Nadiamsa.
on pilgrimage in the 11th lord’s Dasa along with Notes: For birth in Varuna Nadiamsa, Sagithis father. When Saturn transits the Rasidenoted _tarius ascendant, the dasa of Jupiter is said to give
by the Navamsa occupied by Lagna or 8 trine such resuits which will be both good and bad, but
thereto, the native will visit Sethu (a pilgrim cen- 7 equal measure. Mercury’s sub period (in
ter in the South). In the Dasas that are 2nd क्षत Jupiter’s dasa) being that of 7th lord (deathSth from birth it will give wealth for the Chakra dealer) will endanger the native. The Moon’s sub
Yoga native whose Jupiter is in Varuna Nadiamsa. period, coming much after that of Mercury will
unfailingly endanger the native. This applics only
। 1 APTA | to the specified Nadiamsa.
Pilgrimage to Sethu भग्याधिपे कुमारांशे मंगव्टांशे सुताधिपे। । २५९। |
ayes fan | वारूणंशे प्रजातस्य परा शूद्रस्य जन्मना।
तुवात्रा त्रिवारं स्पादुगगास्नानफलावहा | पश्चज्जन्म तथा विन्द्याद्ब्यजन्म सुकौर्तिमान् | | २६० ।।
लानात् कर्मगते राहौ गंगास्नायी सुपुण्यभाक्।। २५५॥ per ते res ५ प्रकृतिः सुखी।
तदभावे सेतुयात्र त्रिवारं नात्र संशयः। od चेति तथ विन्द्यात् किं । । २६१। |
महादानफलप्रप्तिभाग्यकर्पेशसंयुत। । २५६। |
अग्रहारप्रतिष्ठदिकर्विमांश्च नं संशयः। 259-261. One born in Varuna Nadiamsa
| while the 9th lord is in Kumara Nadiamsa and the
a श । a placed : the 10th house —_ 5th Jord in Mangala Nadiamsa was a Soodra in his
0 € ve Pa religious merits by previous birth. The current and next birth are
ध a eee प the absence of this stated to be that of a Brahmana. (In the current
न off on a3-week = एप), he will be famous, will obey father’s inpligrimage to Sethu (in the South). With the con- structions, will be passionate and happy. SomeJunction of 9th and 10th lords, the subject will times he will be lazy ie
attain the fruits of great charitable acts. He will ।
be famous by donation of lands and villages to = लगने जीवे वारूणांशे [1 |
Brahmins. राजसप्रकृतिवानित्यं | । २६२ ।
Notes: The yoga caused by the Sun (9th 1
। ‡ (न 262. Jupiter placed in the ascendant i
lord) and Mercury (10th lord) is referred toin this Varuna Nadiamsa in aspect to Mars will a ae
part. Some recent writers wrongfully hold that
ome assionate and some etc.) 1
for Sagittarius ascendant, Dharma- Karamad- poster ५

Deva Keralam
A. जीवे सु शुक्रे तृतीये maa
aq राजसधर्मज्ञः को्तिमांश्च
शिवभक्तिरते नित्यं । । २६४ |
263-264. Wide rulership: Jupiter in the ascendant, Venus in the 4th, and a malefic in the 3rd
house - these 3 planets so placed will make one a
king’s counsellor, well-versed in royal administration and aruler of manya country. He will become
famous and be learned in ancient scriptures. He
will be a devotee of Lord Siva and perform daily
rituals to Him.
SE सूर्ये वृश्चिके काठूजातके।
धनुर्लगने प्रजातश्च हरि शंकरभक्तिमान्। । २६५ |
सन्मार्गवृत्तिनिर तै वैदिकाचार तत्परः।
देवभक्तिविशेषः स्याद्धर्मपुण्यपुराणवित्। | २६६। |
शिवभक्तिर ते नित्यं धनवाहनसंयुतः।
स्वपित च तथा feng सुकीर्तिमान।
भाग्यरूढाधिपे मन्दे स्वक्षेत्रे मकराशगे। । २६७। |
265-267. Sun in Scorpio: The Sun in Kumara
Nadiamsa and Rahn in Scorpio will make a Sagittarius native a devotee of Lords Vishnu and Siva.
He will always follow a virtuous path and his
conduct will conform to Vedic codes. He will be
learned in ancient Sastras, be religious, and endowed with wealth. His father will also have
similar qualities. The native will be famous among
his men.
अन्तःकरोधी WaT लोभप्रकृतिमान् पिता।
Ml तिमान् किषिद्वाच धर्मपरायण। । २६८। |
महापापी एकः पुण्यप्रदो भवेत्।
सुमगली पितृष्वसा वहुपुत्रवती सुखी। । २६९। |
न yy प्राबल्यं aking |
3 ` कीर्ति्र्वाहनवान् ATL | २७०। |
268-270. If Saturn is the 9th lord and is in
Capricorn Navamsa, the native will be inwardly
given to anger, be (outwardly) pleased while his
father, will be a miser, helpful to others, be somewhat talkative and religiously disposed. The
native’s paternal uncle will be a great sinner while
another paternal uncle will be meritorious. The
native’s paternal aunt will live a long married life,
will have many sons and be happy. She will
ध.
gradually prosper in the fields of Mantra and
Yoga. His relatives will cause him lame andvehicles.
area जीवे कुमारंशकमे रवौ।
स्वपितृःसोदरस्त्वेकः पुत्रवांश्च न संशयः। । २७१ |
वन्ध्यापतिद यश्चेति एकः BPI तप्रज।
कालान्तरे सुसन्तानं वृद्धगा््यमतं AAAI । २७२। 1
271-272. According to Senior Garga: With
Jupiter in Varuna Nadiamsa while the Sun is in
Kumara Nadiamsa, the native’s father will have a
brother who will have, no doubt, children. He will
have two barren wives, one giving birth to dead
children. After a long interval, progeny will be
born {to one of the wives).
म॑गलंशे सुतधीशे रविसोम्यसमतविते।
वारूणाशे प्रजातस्य अल्पसन्तनमादिशेत्। । 2193 1 |
273. Limited progeny: The 5th lord in Mangala Nadiamsa in association with the Sun and
Mercury will restrict the number of issues (to the
native).
लग्नात्तृतीयगे चन्द्रे वारूणंशस्य जातके।
Ry सुतप्रप्तिर्वारूणाशकगे ‘a |
चापलग्ने प्रजातस्य चक्रयोगस्म जातके । २७५। ।
कुमारांश फलं wt पितृव्यौ द्धौ च पुत्रकौ।
कालान्तरे पितृव्यश्च सन्तान प्रप्तिमान् Fats । २७६
274-276. Dead children: One एग रा Varuna
Nadiamsa having the Moon in the 3rd house will
beget many unsurviving children. One of the
children will (however) be long-lived. The native
of Chakra Yoga having birth in Sagittarius Lagna
while Jupiter is in Varuna Nadiamsa will have two
wives and obtain progeny. The native of Kumara
Nadiamsa will have two paternal uncles endowed
with sons. The paternal uncle will have progeny
after a long interval. (2 lines after sloka 276 have
some mix up).
पितृप्वसा wart गर्यवारे प्रजायते!
कुमारांश प्रजातश्च पितृव्येण सुपत्रवान्।
गार्ग्य
वारूणांशकगे जीवे कुमारांशकगे रवौ। 1 २७७। |
स्वपिता सोदरस्त्वेकः पुत्रवांश्च न संशयः। । २७८। |

at) Chandra Kala Nadi
वन्ध्यापतिद्रयश्चेति, एकः कश्चिन्मृतप्रजः।
कालान्तरे सुसन्तानं छ तम्। । २७९। ।
वारूणंशे सुतधीशे
वारूणंशे प्रजातस्य अल्पसन्तनमादिशेत्। । २८० |
लग्नात् तृतीयगे मन्दे वारूणंशस्य जातके।
Tage Serr । । २८१।।
Mea सुतप्रप्तर्वारूणाशकमे र |
Piel al gs त्रिका च तथ भवेत्। । WII I
सुतेशे मंगलांशस्ये प्रभंशे चक्रयेगके।
MEI सुतप्रप्तर्वहुसन्तनयोगवान्। | २८३। |
277-283. Note: These Slokas are repetition
of Sloka No.271 to 276 + two lines before Sloka
277, supra. Hence these are not provided with
translation again. In Sloka 281, Saturn is indicated
in the 3rd house, while in Sloka 274 it is the Moon.
The Moon seems to be the right planet, as the 8th
lord.
एकोनविंशवर्षदिविपद्दाये सुपुत्रवान्।
तृतीये शनिदोषेण सीमन्तसुतनाशनम्। । २८४। ।
284, In the 19th year (or) in 3rd Dasa, birth
of a (surviving) child is denoted. Because of
Saturn (i.e.Moon) in the 3rd, first child will pass
away (early).
धनांशगे तत्तिकोणे स्फ्टयोगं गते शनौ।
धनेशपृष्ठराशै तु स्वस्य भ्रगयमहद्विपत्। । २८५। |
285, Loss of fortunes: For birth in Varuna
Nadiamsa, Saturn in transit in the Rasi denoted
by the natal Navamsa of the 2nd lord or its trine
will cause loss of fortunes. This transit of Saturn
could also be in a Rasi aspected by the 2nd lord
at birth.
Notes: Saturn himself is the 2nd lord for
Sagittarius ascendant. We have to see in which
Navamsa Saturn is placed at birth, When Saturn
himself transits such a Rasi or 2 trine thereof, the
native will have decline of fortunes. Similar use
of Saturn’s transit be made with reference to the
Rasi he occupies at birth.
भाग्येशे सप्तमे वा द्रादशंशदिजन्मति।
स्फुटयोगं गते मन्दे स्वमतिक्लेशमाप्नुयात्। । २८६। |
286. Mental agony: When Saturn in transit
comes to the 7th Rasi counted from the Navamsa
Rasi occupied by the 9th lord at birth, or the 7th
from Dwadasamsa Lagna (should be from 12th
lord’s Navamsa), mental agony to father will come
to pass.
भग्याधिपदशकाले Tat ललने शनौ।
सौम्यस्यान्तर्दशपाके स्वदेशे नृपतेर्मुतिः। । २८७। |
287. King’s death (2): The native’s ruler will
die with Saturn in movement in Virgo during (the
native’s) 9th lord’s Dasa, in a sub-period of
benefic (or Mercury).
स्वमात जनकश्चापि yaa नात्र संशयः।
जन्मदाये ee ard ni तथा। । २८८। |
स्ववासदेशनृपतिरपमत्युं तथश्रित।
वृश्चिकान्ते वारूणांशस्य ATH । २८९। |
भवाति नृपतेरमृतिर्वा नात्र संशयः।
रज्यनाशं स्यादूदायादिकलहो महान्। | २९०।।
288-290. In the periods just mentioned (vide
sloka 287), there may be death of maternal grandfather. In the end of first Dasa, with the Sun and
Saturn moving in the end of Pisces or in Taurus,
the king will meet with untimely death(?). For the
native of Varuna Nadiamsa when Saturn moves in
the end of Scorpio, death of King...... ifhe survives
destruction of kingdom will occur. Big quarrels
with relatives will also take place.
Note: The above 3 slokas have got some
confusing mix-up, serving no clear hints.
सुतेशंशे fare 1 १
291. Royal Service and Association: If the
Sth lord’s Navamsa position is identical with a
trine from natal ascendant it will make the native
serve a King. The 9th lord’s Navamsa position, as
above, will enable the native move in association
with kings.
Notes: Trines from Sagittarius are Aries
and Leo. If Mars is in Aries Navamsa or in Leo
Navamsa, for a birth in Sagittarius ascendant, it
will enable the native serve a king. Such a deduction be made also with reference to the Navamsa
occupied by the Sun at birth.

Deva Keralam 3]
Wasa स्वपित wa fel
तद्दशयं महद्भाग्यं बुधभुक्तै |
292-2921/2. The sign that is trinal with retference to the Navamsa occupied by the 9th lord
at birth will be the Janma Rasi (Moon sign) of the
native’s father. Should the 10th lord be in Mangala Nadiamsa while there is a conjunction of the
said planet with the lord of the 9th, the native will
in the Dasa of the 10th lord enjoy great fortunes.
Yet in the sub-period of Mercury (in the Dasa of
10th lord), enmity (with others) will prevail.
रन््रधिपदशाकाले कर्माधिपतिभुक्त्िषु। । 2831 |
सहोदरमनस्तापं! राजद्ररे कलापवान्,
स्वदारदेहपीडादिङ्कूररोगविचारकृत्। । २९४। |
स्वप्रभोश्च मनस्तपं तद्वारि स्वजनावधि।
भाग्याधिपदशाकाले यथवबलमुदाहरेत्। । २९५। |
293-295. Eighth lord: During the Dasa of the
8th lord and in the sub-period of the 10 lord, one
will incur sorrow through co- born, and he will be
worried on account of severe illness to his spouse
and will have sorrow on account of the king.
These results depend on the strength (and weakness) of the ‘9th lord.
wad चैव काले तु बरधपुक्तै फलं स्मृतम्।
स्वपिता प्ित्रवर्गेणं वत्सं प्रप्नोति afte । २९६।
पश्चात् acacia शुक्रभुक्तै पित ॒सुखम्।
296-2961/2. Other sub-periods: In the subperiod of Mercury (in the 10th Lord’s Dasa), the
native will see his father troubled through friends
after which he will prosper. Venus Bhukti will
bring happiness to father.
fae शनीक्षिते काले चापन्ते मकरे शनौ।। 291 |
कन््रदेहपीडा च aay महाविपत्।
297-2971/2 . Trouble to spouse: At a time
when Saturn (in transit) aspects Leo (or) when he
transits the end of Sagittarius (or) the sign
Capricorn, the subject’s spouse will incur physical
illnesses, and there will be great evils to her family
members.
लभेशंशे तत्तरिकोणे स्फुटयेगं गते शनौ। । २९८। I
लाभेशदष्टिराशै तु मातृपीडो विमिर्दिरेत्।
विपत्तर दशन्त्यादिक्षेमदाये ere । । २९९। ।
मातृदेहभयं व्यिः क्रूरराशै |
298-299 1/2. Mother: There will be evils to
the mother of Varuna Nadiamsa native when
Saturn transits the Rasi identical with the Navamsa position of the 11th lord or its trine. Also when
Saturn comes to the sign that is aspected by the
11th lord. Diseases and physical danger to mother
will have to be feared in the concluding part of
Vipath (3rd) Dasa, or in the first sub-period of
Kshema (4th) Dasa.
Notes: Transit Saturn opposing natal Venus,
or moving in such a Rasi/trine equal to the
Navamsa occupied by Venus at birth endangers
the native’s mother. Apparently for Sagittarius
ascendant, Venus holds some clue about death of
mother. (So also the 5th lord Mars).
The 11th house playing a role in this regard
can be seen in the following slokas.
सुखेशे वारूणंशस्थे चपे कन्यांशगे शनौ। । 3001 |
लाभे शनीक्िते काले मातृनिर्यणमादिशेत्।
मेषे वृषभे मन्दे गोच
सूर्यशि तत्त्रिकोणे वा पितनिर्याणमादिशेत्।
300-301 1/2. Parents: The 4th lord in Varuna
Nadiamsa while Saturn is placed at birth in Sagittarius Rasi and Virgo Navamsa - in this case
predict mother’s death when Saturn in transit
comes to aspect the 11th house. Instead of Virgo
Navamsa, if Saturn is in Aries Navamsa, his movements in Taurus will bring about father’s end. This
can as well occur in the 4th Dasa (Kshema). The
death of father may alternatively occur when
Saturn transits the Navamsa Rasi of the natal Sun
or its trine.
Notes: The 4th lord Jupiter in Varuna
Nadiamsa, while Saturn is in Sagittarius 16 deg.
40’ to 20 deg. (Virgo Navamsa), the aspect of
Saturn on the 11th (from Capricorn/Aries/Leo)
will endanger the mother. Instead if Saturn is
within 3 deg. 20° of Sagittarius (Aries Navamsa),
his transit in Taurus will endanger father.
गुल ूर्यकाले सुखेशंशत्रिकोणगे। । ३०२। |
aged गते मन्दे पितृपीडां विनिर्दिशेत्।

ग,
302-3021/2 . Danger (or evils) to father can
also be foretold with Saturn’s transit in the Rasi
identical with Navamsa occupied by the 4th lord
at birth or a trine thereof.
Note: Surya Lagne Surya Kaale is an unnecessary addition in the text, not suitable to the
context.
भग्याधिपदशन्त्य दि रश्राधिपतिदायके। | ३०३। |
He शनीकषिते काले स्वपिता यास्यति व्यथाम्।
1 शन्त्या शन्ति प्रयास्यति। | ३०४। |
aay महच्वापि तत्कते नात्र संशयः।
303-304 1/2. In the Dasa of the 8th lord, or in
the beginning/concluding phase of 9th lord's
Dasa, if Saturn aspects the sign Scorpio, the
native’s father will face mental agony, and fear of
untimely death. Suitable remedies be done (to
overceome these evils). The native during the said
transit will get effects of great Raja yoga.
Notes: From sloka 301 we gather that
Saturn’s transit in Taurus will be bad for father.
From sloka 304, we find that Scorpio being
aspected by Saturn (from Aquarius/
Taurus/Virgo) will again prove bad for father.
These two clues can be profitably used in case of
Sagittarius ascendant according to circumstances.
Untimely death can also turn into some
dangerous illness.
व्ययेशंशे तत्त्रिकोणे सुम गते. शनौ। | ३०५।
पपा विनिर्दिशेत्।
तद्भवे जन्मदेशे राज्याधिपतिनाशनम्। । ३०६। |
व्ययेशदृष्ठिरशै तु
मातूवर्गे बलारिष्ठमथवा सेगपीौडितम्।
स्ववासदेशनृपतेरिदं फलमुदाहतम्। | Zo!
305-307. Evils to the native’s children be
foretold when Saturn in transit reaches the Rasi
identical with 12th lord’s natal Navamsa, or its
trine, or a Rasi that is aspected by 12th lord at
birth. In the absence of the said effect, Saturn
moving in such a Rasi will cause destruction of the
ruler of the nativ’s country(?) Further infantile
mortality and diseases to children belonging to
maternal relatives will come to pass.
Chandra Kala Nadi
पाके जन्यदशान्तयादि मिथनादष्टमे शनौ।
अनावृष्ठमरहते देशे किचिददुभिक्षमादिशत्। | ३०८।
308. In the beginning and end of first Dasa,
Saturn in transit in the 8th from Gemini, (1.6. in
Capricorn) will cause drought and lack of
rains(?)
अनावृष्टिश्च महती लोके दुर्भक्षडाम्बरम्।
चापे जीवे वारूणं मिथुनान्त्यत्रिकोणगे। । ३०९। |
स्फ़टयोगं गते मन्दे अनावृष्ठिं वितिर्दिशेत्।
सूर्याशक्त्रिकोणर्ष स्पुटयोगं गते शनौ। । ३१०।।
विप्लवेन मनस्तापं स्वप्रभोश्च विशेषत
कन्याशनीक्षिते काले चक्रयोगस्य जातके। । ३११। I
— वनान्ते सैनिकेश्वरः।
अर्कनन्दने काले पण्डयदेशे तथ भवेत्। । ३१२।।
वृषभे म्तेच्छनाशः स्याद् Ba वोष्व्देशगे।
तत्त्रिकोणे अथवा चेति पाण्डयभुपतिनाशनम्। । ३१३।।
309-313. ‘Irrelevant: Note if Jupiter is in
Varuna Nadiamsa in Sagittarius, or if he is in the
end of Gemini, or its trine (Libra or Aquarius
end). Then, Saturn in transit reaching an identical
position will cause lack of rains, drought etc., and
mental agony to the native’s king due to revolutions(?) For a Chakra yoga native Saturn coming
to aspect Virgo will cause headship of an army in
the hilly region located between Krishna and
Godavari rivers, and in Pandya kingdom when
Saturn is in Pisces. Destruction of Mlechcha
kingdom will occur when Saturn transits Taurus,
and Chola kingdom will be destroyed if he is in
transit in Cancer. In a trine to Taurus, he will
destroy the Pandya ruler.
eT a ry राजभावे समन्विते।
कर्माधिपेन संयुक्ते कुमारांशस्य जातके। । ३१४। |
पह पुं |
बहुशे नृपतिस्नेहः Fernie सुखी। । ३१५। |
तददवारप्रनलश्चेति |
राजन्यद्वेष्वान किंचित् त्रिवारं राजविग्रहम्। । ३१६।
।वपद्दायेशवारं स्यात् क्षेमदाये तथ भवेत्।
weary विशे स्यान्मारकग्रहभुक्तिबु। । ३१७। |
314-317. Sagittarius Lagna - Sun in 10th:
The native of Kumara Nadiamsa in Sagittariuas
Lagna, having the 9th lord Sun in the 10th house
in the company of the 10th lord (Mercury) will

Deva Keralam 33
acquire the following results. He will be endowed
with a big but soft physique and a sharp mind. He
will frequent royal circles and be dear to emperor.
He will be happy. In the Dasa of Mercury he will
become famous through royal service. He will
however incur royal wrath and enmity for about
three weeks. The week-day of the lord of the 3rd
Dasa will be inauspicious (in this context). So also
in the Dasa that is 4th in order (bringing royal
wrath etc.) and also in the sub period of a killerplanet during 5th Dasa.
Notes: For Kumara Nadiamsa, plese see
notes under sloka 244 supra.
षष्टाष्टमव्ययाधीश राश्यंशेशदशादिपु।
वेधकस्योत्ते काले eae राजेपद्रवमादिशेत्। । ३१८ ।
कारागृहभयप्राप्ति
क्लेशकालं विजानीयादभुक्तिमार्मेण ्। । २१९। ।
318-319. Royal Displeasure: For the above
native, displeasures from the king will come to
pass in the Dasa periods of Rasi and Navamsa
lords of 6th, 8th and 12th. These Dasas in their
second halves will reveal such result. Further
there will occur imprisonment, loss of acquired
wealth, and other difficulties. The sub-periods of
the occupants of these three houses be also
looked upon in the same light.
चापकन्यांशगे चन्द्रे कुम्भे द्वेष इति स्मृतम्।
कन्साजीवमिति प्राहुस्तमोग्रहरूजातुरं। । ३२०। |
320. The native having Sagittarius ascendant
with Virgo Navamsa while the Moon is in
Aquarius will hate others. (The 2nd line is a
mix-up but indicates troubles on account of diseases).
ica जन्मभुक्कतै मृतप्रायो अपि जीवति।
अपमृत्युस्तद्रि त। । ३२१। ।
चक्रसन्धे दशसन्थै काले वा गोचरे wr
जीवराशै भवेत्तत्र स्वजनारिष्टमादिशेत्। । ३२२। |
sll da pds श्चिके चक्रकालगे।
अतीव
अपमृत्युभयप्राप्तिश्चक्रदानं समाचरेत्।
321-323 1/2. Dasa effects: In the first subperiod of Janma (1st) Dasa, the subject will overकन्यन्ते तैलिगे शनौ। 1323!
शै
come death. Fear of untimely death will exist in
the Dasa of the 8th lord or that of the occupant of
the 8th house. Evils to one’s relatives will come to
pass in the Dasa junction (i.e. the end of either of
these two Dasas), or when Saturn in transit
reaches he concluding degrees of Cancer, or
Scorpio or Pisces or when he moves in a
Jupiterian Rasi, Much difficulties and fear of untimely death will result in the transit of Saturn in
the end of Virgo or in Libra. To overcome these
evils donation of an image of the Zodiac be done.
विंशब्देएकविंशब्दे एकोते विशवत्से 1 ३२४। |
कालचक्रदशासन्थै वारूणांशेष्युपद्रवम्।
तदुदोषपरिहारार्थ शान्ति कुयद्विचक्षणः ३२५। |
एकाशीतिपदं चक्रं cama प्रदापयेत्।
अपमृत्युभयं नास्ति अ श्व विन्दति। । ३२६। |
स्वस मानजनारिष्ट शिशृक्षय।
मातमहविनाशादि मातुलक्लेशमादिशेत्। 1 ३२७। ।
324-327. The native of Varuna Nadiamsa will
have troubles in the years 20, 21 and 19 and in the
junction periods of two Kala Chakra Dasas. To
overcome this blemish, remedies be resorted to.
Donation of an image of one white-footed(?)
Zodiac be also done. Then there will be no fear
of untimely death, and a long lease of life will
come to pass. In the said Dasa periods, the
native’s relatives will incur evils, and children in
their families will pass away. His mother will be
grieved on account of her father’s death.
कुम्भे शनिक्षिते काले देहपीडा मनोव्यथ।
वाहुचक्रदशारेग्यं सन्तानोत्पत्तिनाशनम्। । ३२८। |
328. During the time of Saturn’s aspect to
Aquarius, the subject will undergo physical ailments and mental distress. And children being
born to him then will die.
Notes: "Baahu Chakra Dasa Arogyam" 15
not amenable to a meaningful translation. Baahu
= hand; Chakra = wheel, Dasa = major period,
Arogyam = health.
Apparently these words are a corrupt addition.
देहे पपे देहपीडा जीवे पपे तथैव च।
तावुभौ पपसंयुक्तै तत्काले च दशन्त्यगे। 1 ३२९। |

श
मृ तभुक्तेश्च संप्रप्तर्मारकः स्यान संशयः।
तिपरातमतिर्नास्ति देहायासादुपद्रवम्। । ३३०। |
329-330. Should the Deha Rasi and or the
Jeeva Rasi contain malefic or malefics, as the case
may be, the native will contract physical ailments
in the end of such Dasa or Dasas. In the subperiods of death-dealers, the native will face a
dangerous end, or ailments and troubles to his
physique.
Notes: The text often refers to Kala Chakra
dasa periods also. For calculation of KCD, see
my work Essentials of Predictive Hindu Astrology.
कुम्भकन्याधनुरमीसे मन्दे मिथुनमासके।
yee क्रूरमासे च देहायासं ककचित्क्वाचत्।। ३३१॥
Ra फपयोगे क्रूरभागे भवेद्यदि।
विशेषोपद्रवं चेति योजयेत् कालवित्तमः। । ३३२। |
331-332. (During the operation of the above
Deha/Jeeva Rasi Dasas) in the months of the
Sun’s transit in Aquarius/ Virgo Sagiltarius/Gemini, or in evil months of every year
(during these Dasa), the subject will be somewhat
troubled by illnesses. (If the said) malefics (in the
said Deha/Jeeva/Rasis) be in evil Rasis or evil
divisions, the troubles will be specially
pronounced.
Notes: In sloka331 above, "Mande" appcars
which denotes Saturn. Some texts have the word
Made" meaning the 7th house. These are excluded from the translation as no suitable meaning emerges ihereby.
oar सन्दृष्टे रन््राधिपसमन्विते।
वुधास्तम नकाले वा जीवास्तमयगेअपि वा। । 3331 |
पष्ठाष्ठमार्शवर देहोपद्रवमादिशेत्।
स्वसोद्रप्रपीडा च अथ वा स्वजनामयाः। | ३३४। |
Tea RA य इदं फलमश्नुते!
333-334 1/2. Physical Troubles: ऽ6€ if the
lord of the ascendant aspects and the 8th lord
joins (the said Deha/Jeeva Rasi ) and if so
declare physical troubles to the native on the
week-days indicated by the 6th/8th lords during
the setting periods of Mercury/Jupiter. Further,
difficulties to the native’s co-borns and relatives
Chandra Kala Nadi
be also foretold. These adverse results can occur
in evil months of every year (during the dasa
periods of Deha and Jeeva Rasis).
Notes: The 8th lord Moon should be in
either the Deha Rasi, or Jeeva Rasi, and aspected
by Jupiter, the lord of Sagittarius ascendant. The
setting periods of Jupiter/Mercury should come
in such intervals. (These setting periods because
of combustion in the Sun can be known from
standard ephemeris). The week-days that are
important in this context are Friday and Monday.
Animportant clue emerges from the present
discussion. The lord of 8th in Deha Rasi or Jeeva
Rasi according to KCD is unwelcome.
Sloka No. 333 should be related to sloka 331
for a clear picture, and that is what we have done
here.
ares मंगव्ांशस्थे BATT दिवाकरे। । 3341 |
335, There will be no untimely death for a
Varuna Nadiamsa native, with Chakra yoga if
Mars is in Mangala Nadiamsa while the Sun is in
Kumara Nadiamsa.
Notes: "Chakra yoga" is an unnecessary condition appended. Such mentions occur a couple
of times which the reader may ignore for practical
nurposes as some such yogas are not connected
with life-span, long or short, and many other
events.
चक्रयेगे वारूणंशे ५ | न॒॑विद्यते।
साधनेशदशमद्युर्मेषन्ते वु WA । ३३६। |
तत्त्रिकोणे अपूव ॥ कुर्यादिचक्षणः।
ग्रहचारफलं ्रिग्रहं च फलं AAT । 3301 |
वृषभेशदशारम्भे तदीशे स्वोच्चराशिगे।
राजयोगं प्रकुर्वीत विपदूदाये श्रियो वहम्। । ३३८।।
336-338. The native of Varuna Nadiamsa will
face untimely death in the 4th Dasa while Saturn
moves in end of Arics/Taurus, or its trine, for
which remedies be done. [1 at the time of commenccement of Venus Dasa, Venus is in exaltation,
(the Dasa will give) Raja Yoga effects. In the 3rd
dasa, wealth will accruc.
Spiga तृतायंरेअपरार्धगे।
स्यात् क्लेशः स्याद्रसुवत्सरम्। । ३३९।।

Deva Keralam
युग्मराशिफलं चेति संपद्दाये wart
रनमरशदृष्ठिदोषेण स्वप्रबल्यं न विन्दति। । २४० ।
339-340. A period of eight years or the last
one-third part of the Dasa of the Rasi having Ketu
at birth (as per KCD) will obstruct father’s
prosperity. Due to the blemish of 8th lord, the
native of Prabha Nadiamsa of a dual sign, will face
obstacles to his own progress.
जामित्रमवने ot lic दशायां मघ्यखण्डके।
स्वपिताराजसन्मानं विवाहोत्सवसभ्रमम्। । ३४१ |
341. Royal honours: If the Sun is in the 7th
house, the middle of Sun’s Dasa will bring forth
royal honours to the native’s father. In addition,
the native will be busy with (his) marriage activities.
भागयेशंशे त्रिकोणक्ष दशारंभे तदीशगे |
लनाधिपतिना युक्ते _ तद्दशायां शुभं वदेत्। । ३४२! |
चक्रयेगे वारूणशे विशेषफलमरनुते।
स्वप्राबल्यं प्रकुर्वीत नघप्वाहनवान् भवेत्। । ३४३। |
342-343, Predict auspicious results in the
Dasa of the Navamsa dispositor of the 9th lord if
the former (said dispositor) is in a trine with
Lagna lord at the commencement of his
(dispositor’s) Dasa. The effects will be more
pronounced for a Chakra Yoga subject born in
Varuna Nadiamsa. The : 3tive will additionally
become famous and will acquire men-born conveyances.
दशं द्रादशध कृत्वा वीजयुग्मानुसार |
अन्तर्दशाफलं चैति योजयेत् कालवित्तमः। । ३४४ ।
344. Astrologers predict effects of sub
periods dividing a dasa into 12 various segements,
according to odd and even signs.
Notes: In the first line, the expression
‘Becjayugmaanu- saarathah’ should be
‘Ojhayugmaanusaarathah’ to make proper sense.
The author suggests that each Rasi dasa should
be made into sub periods spreading over twelve
7odiacal signs according to odd and even signs.
For odd signs, the counting is in the reverse orders
while for even signs, the counting is in usual asccnding order. But there is no clear instruction
as to what particular Jaimini dasa is referred to
Apparently, this sloka is a lone occupant of this
part of the text.
dic I as aa wa सौख्यफलं विदुः ।
वारूणंशे चक्रयेगे शुभं भवति नित्यशः|
345-3451/2 . The native will get auspicious
effects relating to the Rasi aspected by the lords
of ascendant, and 9th and 10th. (That is, these
bhavas will turn auspicious). So also the Rasis
aspected by 9th/10th lords.
Notes: Here are given some general rules.
- The house aspected by the lord of the ascendant
will prove favourable. This rule is generally found
in many standard texts. But in this text we find
some additional instructions about 9th and 10th
lords. The house aspected by such a lord, or the
house occupied by such a lord, will prove auspicious. One of these lords for example related to
the 2nd house as above will give wealth, happy
family life and the like. To the 3rd - acquisition of
coborn, good terms with them etc. To the 4th -
education, conveyances etc. To the 500 - progeny,
intelligence etc. To the 6th - freedom from diseases, debts etc. only when the planet in question
is well-placed. To'the 7th - auspicious marriage,
chaste sex life etc. To the 8th - the 9ta lord will
confer fortunes if strong; misfortunes/ professional adversities if weak. To the 12th - success in
foreign countries by 9th lord if strong and professional progress if 10th lord is strong. As far as
ascendant is concerned, such relation by lord of
9/10th is a Raja Yoga.
NUN te Nae ade L3vell
sb aie Md त्रसोजवाप्तिः बहुभाग्यकृत्।
विवाहं च सिंहाशे ललने TM । ३४७। ।
राजयोगं च सुमहत् पितृमूलच्छुभावहम्।
346-3471/2. The 2nd dasa and the Rasi 42525
of the four angles will be auspicious for the native
of Varuna Nadiamsa. When Jupiter in transit
arrives at the end of Gemini, the subject will earn
wealth; his fortunes will increase with Jupiter
moving in Cancer. When Jupiter obtains the
Navamsa of Leo during his transit in Virgo, the

are)
subject’s sister will be married off. The native will
obtain Rajayoga effects, and auspiciousness will
accrue to him through his father.
Notes: The first line of sloka 346 states that
one born in Chakra Yoga, with the rising Nadiamsa being Varuna (in Sagittarius) will be ever fortunate. There seems to be some erroneous
composition in the line, hence not added in the
translation.
Second dasa refers to Vimsottari. Rasi dasa
referred to in this sloka canfot be KCD as 4
Kendra Rasi dasas are referred. These refer to
Jaimini dasas. But the clues here are too limited
to make wide use of.
पापाक्रान्तान्तरे काले पूर्वोक्तक्रूरकालगे। । ३४८ । ।
अतीव क्लेशकार्यणि योगभंगं विनिर्दिेत्।
fae भैमदशाकाले लगनेशेन निरीक्षिते। । ३४९। |
| lh धनुर्लग्नस्य जातके।
348-350. In the malefic dasa cited earlier
and during malefic sub periods, he will be subjected to great miseries and his prosperity will be
obstructed. During the dasa of Mars, coinciding
with transit Jupiter’s aspect on Leo, the native of
Sagittarius ascendant will attain a high degree of
fortunes. He will be married for the second time.
Notes: The second marriage cited here
shall apply only to Varuna Nadiamsa native but
not to all Sagittarius natives. However, we can
take advantage of the condition that Jupiter’s
aspect on the Leo, during the dasa of Mars will
increase fortunes. So to say, if the 9th house if
favourably aspected by a favourable planet or by
Jupiter during the currency of a Yogakaraka’s
dasa, the native of any ascendant will reap better
fortunes.
For example in case of Libra ascendant,
Saturn is a benefic planet. If he aspects the 9th,
Gemini, while in transit, during the rulership of
Mercury dasa, or Saturn dasa, the native will
become more fortunate.
In case of another ascendant, say Aries,
Jupiter if in transit aspects Sagittarius during the
dasa of Sun/Moon/Mars/ Jupiter, the subject will
obtain better results.
6 Chandra Kala Nadi
विपदूदाये तृतीयांशे yar क्षेमदायगे।
rH घटे मन्दे द्विती येद्राहमादिशेत्। । 3421 |
दशाकालादि निश्चित्य फलानि परिचिन्तयेत्।
गोचरे स्फुटयोगांशे पलं ब्रूयाद्विचक्षणः । । ३५२। |
351-352 Saturn in Aquarius with Capricorn
Navamsa at birth will cause second marriage
either in the last one-third part of Vipat Dasa (3rd
from birth) or in the first half of Kshema Dasa
(4th from birth). Results should be declared after
analysing suitably the dasa periods. Also after
analysing the transits (of the relevant planets) on
the degrees concerned.
सुताधिपदशाकाले पत्ल्यस्य महाविपत्।
चन्द्राधिपदशाकाले स्वपितुस्सोदरव्यथा। । ३५३। |
353. The dasa ruled by 5th lord will greatly
endanger the native’s paternal uncle. Distress to
paternal uncle will come to pass in the dasa of the
Moon’s dispositor.
Notes: The hints given hereof will specifically apply to Sagittarius ascendant. The dasa of
Mars will endanger paternal uncle. One’s paternal uncles are denoted by 11th house as well as
the 7th.
Distress to paternal uncles during the dasa
of the planet in whose house the Moon at birth is
placed is a significant clue. For Sagittarius ascendant, the Moon’s dispositor has something specially to do, with paternal uncle.
तत्तद्भावाष्टमेशंशे स्फुटयेगं गते शनौ।
त्तन्मारकदोषेण तत्तन्निर्यणमादिशेत्। । ३५४। |
354. Take a particular bhava. See in which
Navamsa, the 8th lord for that bhava is placed.
When Saturn in transit comes to Navamsa Rasi in
question, the relative indicated by the bhava will
be endangered.
Notes: Given in this sloka are gneral hints,
not for one particular ascendant.
For example the 9th rules father. The lord of
the 8th counted from the 9th house is the 4th lord.
See in which Navamsa the 4th lord is placed. Take
it 28 a Rasi. When Saturn comes to that Rasi ina
future transit, he will prove ominous to the father

Deva Keralam 37
of the native. Following are the relatives identified
by the various bhavas along with the 8th house
thereof (Col.1 and 3 counted from ascendant).
Bhava Relative 8th from Bhava
ist Self, paternal great
grand-father 8th house
210 Father’s maternal
uncle 9th house
3rd Younger coborn,
step-mothe 10th house
4th Mother,
step-father-in-law,
paternal great
grand-mother 11th house
Sth Sons/daughters,
paternal grand-father,
elder brother-in-law,
elder coborn’s spouse
6th Maternal
uncles/relatives,
step grand-father
12th house
151 house
7th Spouse, maternal
grand-mother,
elder paternal uncle
8th Elder coborn’s
mother-in-law
9th Father, maternal
kinsmen younger
coborn’s spouse
10th § Mother-in-law,
maternal great
grand-mother
1ith Elder coborn,
Father’s younger
brother
12th Maternal kinsmen
of spouse, paternal
grand-mother,
maternal grand-father. 7th house
2nd house
3rd house
4th house
5th house
6th house
With the help of above table, we can find
easily the Navamsa dispositor of the lord of the
house noted in column 3. Then we can link it to
Saturn’s transit. An inquisitive reader can take a
great advantage of these clues. Also, see slokas
526-527 infra.
Further to an intelligent student, the above
table will clarify, why the 9th house is treated as
house of father instead of 10th which is 7th from
4th.
PIR परं Wa वारूणंशे प्रजायते।
गजन्तिश्वर्यमापनोति WRT नात्र संशय । । ३५५। ।
राज्याधिपतिसन्मानं बुध जयति शत्रवान्।
अतीव बहुमानदिकौर्तिमांश्च न. संशय । । ३५६। |
355-356. The native of Varuna Nadiamsa
will prosper after 35 years of age. He will obtain
importance apart from elephants, wealth etc. He
will be honoured by the king and will be victorious
over a multitude of enemies. He will earn a great
deal of honour and fame.
कामेशांशगते (0 कुम्भका्यार्कयोगगे।
कालान्तरे चित्तशुद्धिः
ुर्मर्गनिरतो नित्यं व. ३५८। |
सर्वदा दाररोगश्च मध्ये मध्ये सुखम्।
gam योगविस्तारं दारसौख्यं फलं स्मृतम्। । 3481 |
357-359, Should Rahu and the Sun be in
Aquarius, while the Sun begets a Navamsa ruled
by 7th lord (i.e. ruled by Mercury), the subject will
have union with other women, that is, he will be
adulterous. Further he will suffer from windy and
urinary disorders. After some interval he will
emerge pure-hearted and will give up the habit of
adultery. He will ever take to bad path and be
somewhat troubled by diseases. His wife will be
perennially ill, but will intermittently recover. If
the Sun is in a Navamsa of Venus (while being in
Aquarius Rasi in association with Rahu), the native will enjoy abundant prosperity. He will be
happy through spouse (i.e. she will be devoid of
health problems).
Notes: In the above yoga, Sun in Mercury's
Navamsa will be a source of health problems
while in Venusian Navamsa he will give her good
health.

३४ Chandra Kala Nadi
Seat वारूमरि कुमारं दिवाकरे | 12 deg. to 12 deg. 30 of an odd sign, and from 17
ana at papa ey पूजावितः। । ३६० । | deg. 30 to 18 deg. as well as 28 deg. 30' to 29 deg.
aay देहजाडयं स्यात् षट््रिशब्दे महाविपत्। of an even sign.
vee ज्वरपीडा च सन्तानेत्पत्तिनाशनम्। । ३६६। । | | कटकलग्नम् - (उरगीशः) (चन्द्रनाडी) । ।
360-361. For birth in Varuna Nadiamsa, Cancer Ascendant =
with Chakra Yoga, if the Sun is in Kumara U Nadi
adams wh 0 (Uraga Na iamsa)
“adiamsa while Mars is Mangala Naciamsa (Chandra Nadi)
subject’s life-span will be 65. In the middle of his
life (around 33rd year) he will incur illness. A sony Fon चन्दर गुरूसमन्विते |
crave danger will emerge in his 630 ल्य. Inthe = विप्रकाले प्रजातस्स विप्रजन्मा qat भवेत् Pree
20th year ofage he willbe inflicted by(dangerous) = वालारिष्टं परकुर्वीत चन्द्रे कुम्भे युतेकषिते।
fever and loss of progeny. sons निशानाथे शूद्रकाले तु नायते। । ३६९। |
मेषषचक्रदशाकाले लगनाधिपतिदायके। TRIN सुखी नित्यं वालारिष्ठ न विद्यते।
वारूणांशे PASTY aun PCH । ३६२। | 368-3691/2. Uraga Nadiamsa: The Moon in
अथवा uel पापे कन्यमासं अयवा ale Uraga Nadiamsa begetting the company of
TTT सौ Gornfata चादिशेत् | | ३६३।। Jupiter will cause the birth of a Brahmin. The
eee ws Moon in Aquarius or aspecting Aquarius (1.6.
362-363. He will die in the dasa of Ariés = 106 in Leo) will cause Balarishta (infantile
Rasi (or) in ascendant lord’s dasa when Saturn is mortality), to a Brahmin. If birth be in Soodra
in Aries and the Sun in Sagittarius, orinGemini र्त Uraga Nadiamsa, the native will be happy
or in Virgo, in bright half, on a Monday. and be free from Balarishta effects.
ग्रन्यान्ते न मंगव्यंशस्य जातके | Notes: Uraga Nadiamsa is found in none of
TEA शुक्लपक्ष न संशयः । | ३६४। | 116 sources in my possession. Uraga means
ूर्यैकरािष्ष्ठयशे कुमारांशस्य fet | snake. In one place we find Naga Nadiamsa,
वारूणुरेशलग्नेशपापपुण्यं सपं भवेत्। | ३६५। | which is 148th of a movable sign, 3rd of a movable
qa , तथा विन्द्यात् cee a aT | sign and 73rd of a common sign. This in Cancer
व्ययेशे sae Asie नाडिगे। 1 ३६६। | extends from 29 deg. 24 to 29 deg. 36’. The
स्वजत्यनुगुण लेके अन्ते Way भवेत्। | इति। decision is left to the discerning reader.
Pree चेति प्रत्यक्षं TRE RSI! उरगांश कीटलग्ने se च प्रजायते 11 ३७०। |
_ । 364367. In other texts, death on a Thursday सद्यो मरणमाप्नोति He च भाग्ययोगवान्।
in bright half is denoted for (the Sun in) Kumara = SOY निशानाथे yar प्रजायते। । 391 |
Nadiamsa and (Mars in) Mangala Nadiamsa. = शुद्रजन्मा Gat नित्यं तृतीये गर्भजातकः।
The Sun in Kumara Nadiamsa, in an identical अथवा च द्वितीयः स्यात् पश्चाद्भ्रातुवनाशनम् ठि |
Rast and Shashtiamsa will cause sins and merits ति wd ५
(Paapa Punyam) in equal measure. The native Nadi
370-372. One born in Uraga Nadiamsa,
ie ance ss attain Punya Loka, and according —geqrnig ascendant will die instantly (i.c. carly in
(०0 ne Win व @ good world (surviving childhood). (If he survives) he will enjoy
degra, I the 12th lord is in Deva Shash- prosperity. Birth in the first half of this Nadiamsa
iamsa, the native will attain the world according with the Moon therein will give the followin
to his caste and in the end of his life he will beget effects: He will be a Soodra (ath cast hehe &
These are the effects as foretold in Deva for ever, be either the 2nd or the 3rd issue 4
eralam.
eee | , parents. Issues born after him will not survive
Notes: Deva Shashtiamsa occurs twice in (that is he will be the last among surviving
each Rasi. It is from 1 deg. to 1 deg. 30’ and from children) in the family.

Deva Keralam 39
Notes: In sloka 370 "Keetamse Cha" meaning "and in Scorpio Navamsa" is contradictory to
Uraga Nadiamsa. The latter fixes a specific position for the ascendant in contrast with Scorpiu
Navamsa. Similarly in sloka 371, "Keete Cha’
meaning "and in Scorpio ascendant" isredundant.
Hence these are excluded in the rendering.
अपरांशकगे चन्र sal गुरूनिरौक्षिते।
उत्तराशे प्रजातस्य ञेष्ठन च न विद्यते|
पूर्वभागे क्कचिच्चेति गुरूदुष्ठिवज्ञात् सुखम्! । ३७४। |
373-374. Umbilical cord: If the 10th house
is aspected by Jupiter while the Moon is with
Rahu in the first half of Uraga Nadiamsa in Scorpio, the child born will be entangled with umbilical cord. If the birth is in the 2nd half, there will
be no such entanglement. Jupiter aspecting the
birth in former half of this Nadiamsa will at times
give happiness (at the time of delivery, free from
such complications).
कुलारिष्ठभयं नास्ति उत्तराशे क्कचित् stad
उत्तरांश नदीप्रन्ते जीवनं म्लेच्छपरर्णे। । ३७५। |
पूर्वभागे पुण्यदेशे अग्रहार प्रसूतिमान्।
WIR पुण्यदेशे पहादेवपुरालये 113381 |
wat च इति oe भ्रात॒नाशवान्।
वाल्ये pean ऊ सुखम्।
Ese =
तरणौ पतिभक्ता च व्यापदि ब्रहुभागयवान्।
375-378 1/2. Other effects: Birth in second
half of Uraga Nadiamsa will eliminate fear of
extinction of the family. In addition, the subject is
born in a city ruled by Mlcchchas, in a region of
river. If the birth is in first half of this Nadiamsa,
it will be in a pilgrim center in a colony of Brahmins, Other authorities state that the birth will be
in a place specially devoted to Lord Siva. The
native mentioned above will be a lonely child of
the family whose after-borns will remain
destroyed. One born in the second half of this
Nadiamsa will be blessed with brothers and
sisters. He will lose his father in childhood. Three
of his elder sons will be happy. One born in first
half of this Nadiamsa will have one elder sister
who will be happy. He will have various business
activities. His daughter will be devoted to her
husband.
उत्तरे प्रजातस्य वसुवर्षे पितुर्विपत्। 13921 |
जीविते ट्रे at fake भवेद्धृवम्।
379 -3791/2. Death of Father: The native of second
nalf of Uraga Nadiamsa will losc his father in his
Sth year. If not unfailingly in the 10th year.
ज्येष्टभ्रातृवणात् eo । । ३८० । ।
West सुखं चेति उरगांशे फलं स्मृतम्।
380-380 1/2. Elder brother: The said native
will be happy on account of his elder brother and
his marriage etc. will be celebrated under the
auspices of elder brother. His 16th year will cause
happiness.
पूर्वभागे bo जीवी जननी रोगपोडित। 1 ३८१ |
।वपददाये मृतिं चेति तुलान्ते वृश्चिके wh
381-381 1/2. First Half of Uraga Nadiamsa:
Birth in this half will easure a (long) living father.
The native’s mother will be (often) troubled by
diseases. His 3rd dasa will cause her death, with
Saturn moving in the end of Libra, or in Scorpio.
Notes: In Cancer, the first half of this
Nadiamsa extends from 29 deg. 24’ to 29 deg. 30’
of arc. The second half extends from 29 deg. 30’
to 29 deg. to 36’. Burth in first half will give a
long-living father while the 2nd half will cause
danger to the father during the native’s 8th/10th
year of age. Also see sloka 396 infra.
The first-half native will not however be
happy about father, nor will he inherit paternal
property (vide slokas 388-390 infra).
उरगंशे तिशानाथे दशमे राहुसंयुते। । 3221 |
eh ia
अल्पपुत्ार्थसंयुक्त उर गांशे प्रसिद्धिमान्।
382-383 1/2. Moon-Rahu: With the Moon in
Uraga Nadiamsa, as Rahu is in the 10th house,
one born in the first half of this Nadiamsa will
have dark complexion and a pleasing physique
(appearance). His happiness will increase (day by

40) Chandra Kala Nadi
day). He will have broad eyes. His wife will (also)
be dark-bodied. He will have limited progeny and
limited wealth, and be endowed with fame.
सिंहांशे दशमे राहौ कर्मेशेन समन्विते। । ३८४। |
धनाधिपतिना दष्टे वाल्ये क्लेशदरि द्रते।
384-384 1/2. Rahu in 10th: Should Rahu be
with the 10th lord, be in aspect to 2nd lord and be
in Leo Navamasa, the native’s childhood will be
marked with difficulties and poverty.
aad जीवे स्वेक्षिते स्वनवांशके। 1 ३८५। |
वियोगे पपकर्मेशे तमसप्रकृतिर्धनी।
sone निशानाथे पफपयोगे शुभेक्षिते । । ३८६। ।
अन्तःक्रोधी प्रसन्नात्मा हितशतरुत्वमाप्नुयात्।
385-3861/2. Jupiter: Should Jupiter be the
Navamsa dispositor of the Moon and be in own
Rasi and Navamsa, as the 10th lord is devoid of
malefic association, the subject will be rich but
indolent. Should the Moon be in Uraga Nadiamsa
with a malefic, but be aspected by a benefic, the
native will be inwardly angry in disposition, but be
pleased and be a well-wisher (even) of his
enemies,
पूर्वभागे aerator धनवान् सुखी।
387-3871/2 . The Moon related to Jupiter:
The Moon in Uraga Nadiamsa in aspect to or
association with Jupiter will cause following effects provided birth is in first half of the said
Nadiamsa. The subject willbe calm in disposition,
be valorous, wealthy and happy.
TY चैर्थकृत्यं परस्त्रीभेगलोलुपः। 1321 ।
वदु दुष्ठभार्यहि sk
स्वभुजार्जितसम्पननः पितृमातुप्रिकः सुखी)
भुजंगनक्त्रभवो भुजंगः
. धनान्विक्त साहसिकः कृतज्ञः।
wre पापमतिः निकृष्टः
स्यत् सर्वभक्षश्च सदप्यरोगः। । ३९०। |
388-390. Family, wealth etc.: One born in
the second half of this Nadiamsa will indulge in
thieving. He will be addicted to others’ women.
Otherwise he will get a wicked spouse promoting
quarrels. The native of the former half will have a
good family but be bereft of happiness through
father. He will have self- earned wealth and be
fond of parents. Rahu placed in Arudra Nakshatra will give wealth, valour and gratefulness. If
Rahu is in Navamsa (or divisions) of a malefic, the
native will be base and be a sinner. He will cat
anything and be ever troubled by diseases.
— णे मध्ये उरगांशे ashes |
वैश्यवृत्तिर्न्यायार्जितधनाढ्यवान्। । ३९१। |
अन्यायार्जितवित्तः स्यादुत्तरांशफलं स्मृतम्।
प्लेच्छसेवापरो नित्यं बहृव्यापारजीवनम्। । ३९२। |
ज्येष्ठभरातृत्रयं कश्चिदुत्तराशे द्विभार्यवान्।
पूर्वभागैकभगिनी वहुकालं सुमंगली। । ३९३। |
391-393. Rahu: The native of Uraga
Nadiamsa with Rahu in the 4th quarter of Arudra
(i.e. in Pisces Navamsa) will be fond of friends.
One born in the first half of this Nadiamsa will be
a Vaisya (trader) and will have wealth gathered by
just means. if the birth be in the second half, the
subject’s wealth will be by unjust-means. He will
be in the service of Mlechchas and will have
abundant business activities. He will have three
elder brothers. Sometimes birth in second half of
this Nadiamsa will give two marriages. One born
in the first half of the said Nadiamsa will have one
sister who will be auspicious (having a living husband etc.) for a long lease of time.
sl a पिताम हुर्चिरायुक।
ह वसुवर्षत् परं भवेत्। । ३९४। |
394. Grand-father: The Grand-father of the
native of first half of the Uraga Nadiamsa will be
long-lived. If at all early death is denoted, it will
be only after the native’s 8th year.
TRY राहुदोषं बहुत्वमिति Hera
गुरूदृष्ठिफलं वेति पूर्वभागस्य जातके। । 384i ।
395. For a native of Uraga Nadiamsa, second
half, Rahu will cause a great deal of blemish.
These are the effects for Jupiter’s aspect concerning birth in first half of this Nadiamsa.
Notes: Rahu’s adverse placement, in undesirable houses etc. and his association with

Deva Keralam
malefic planets for Scorpio Lagna, will cause
more troubles to the native. This is a general hint
that will be useful in estimating the tendencies of
Rahu.
The second line of the sloka is not in the
proper place.
उत्तरांशे प्रजातस्य जननी दीर्घमायुषम्।
पूर्वभागे पिता चेति दी्घमायुर्नसंशयः। । ३९६। ।
396. Parents: Birth in the second half of
Uraga Nadiamsa gives a long lease of life to the
native’s mother, and the first half to father.
Se षेडशब्दे पितमहविनाशनम्।
पूर्वभागे प्रजातस्य पितामहिविनाशनम्। । ३९७। |
397. Paternal grand-father: For one born in
the 2nd half of the said Nadiamsa, grandfather
will incur fatality in the native’s sixteenth year. In
case of the first half, the paternal grand- mother
will die early.
The 16th year of the native of first half of this
Nadiamsa will prove dangerous for his paternal
grand-father. If birth is in the 2nd half of this
Nadiamsa, it will be paternal grand-mother that
will be endangered during the native’s 16th year
of age.
उरगांशे निशानाथे पूर्वभागे शुभेकषित।
मित्रंशके १ शक्षयं गतम्। । ३९८ । |
उत्तरांशे मातु त् सुखम्।
मातुलत्रयनित्याहुरेकः कश्चित् सुभग्यवान्। । ३९९।
398-399. Maternal relatives: The Moon
placed in Uraga Nadiamsa’s first half with
benefic’s aspect will cause destruction of maternal relatives for one born in Leo Navamsa
(Mitramsa is the navamsa owned by the Sun) in
Scorpio ascendant. If she be in second half of the
said Nadiamsa, there will be manifold growth of
members of maternal relatives’ families. They will
in addition be happy. The native will have three
maternal uncles while one of them will be somewhat fortunate.
rendering instead of friendly Navamsa. Here the
reference is not to Mars, but to Scorpio.
The Moon in first half of Uraga Nadiamsa,
while birth is in Leo Navamsa, Scorpio ascendant
(3 deg. 20 to 6 deg. 40°) will cause maternal
kinsmen’s destruction. Just by change of the
Moon into the 2nd half of this Nadiamsa, the
other condition being present, the maternal family will see growth.
मम्पद्दाये पूर्वभागे मातृवंशेत्वरि ष्ठकृत्।
संवि तार्थविनाशेन स्वपिता ऋणशोकवान्। | ४००।।
400. Evils: In the 2nd dasa, the native of
former half of Uraga Nadiamsa will see evils for
maternal relatives. His father will incur debts
because of loss of wealth saved. As a result he will
be grief-ridden.
SAR भर्तृयोगं प्राबल्यं चोतरोत्तरम्।
तःमूलादिष्टसिद्धिं च विवाहादिश्रियोवहाम्। । ४०१। |
401. For one born in the 2nd half of this
Nadiamsa, prosperity will be on progressive increase. Thereby the native will achieve his desired
objects. He will get married and acquire wealth.
(Bhartru denotes husband which expression has
no relevance here.)
TART पूर्वभागे राहुयोगे शुभेक्िते।
पर्वभागे प्रजातस्य नगान्तस्पुरे वसन्। । ४०२। |
नग्नाधिपदशाकाले पूर्वभागस्य जातके |
लाभाधिपदशाकाले वायव्ये पाणिसंग्रहम्। । ४०३। |
402-403. One born in first half of Uraga
Nadiamsa with Rahu’s conjuction therein, and
with benefic aspects .... (results not mentioned).
One born in first half will live in a town surrounded by (adjacent to) hills. The native of first
half will get married in the bhukti of 11th lord and
in dasa of Lagna lord. His marriage will take place
with a girl hailing from the north-west.
STUY निशनापे पूर्वभागस्य जातके।
मायब्दे मधुमासे वा गुरूशुक्रज्ञवासरे।
ग्रीष्मर्तै वा विवाहं च लग्नाधिपतिवासररे। | ४०४। |
404. Marriage: For one born in Uraga
Nadiamsa’s first half with the Moon therein, marNotes: Mitra means the Sun. It also means
a friend. But seeing the reference to Scorpio
ascendant, the Navamsa of the Sun is a befitting

42 Chandra Kala Nadi
riage will take place in the 15th year in Chaitra
month on Wednesday/Thursday/Friday, or in
Greeshma Ritu (summer) on the day ruled by the
ascendant lord.
Notes: Insome slokas in this part of the text,
"Uttaramse’ appears in place of Uragamse. The
translation is accordingly corrected while the
original text is left unaltered. In some cases the
word ’Uttaramse’ rightly appears hereof.
दाराधिपतिवरि वा दरे शंत्रिकोणभे।
दारजन्मशुभं चेति पूर्वभागफलं स्मृतम्। | ४०५। |
405. Marriage can also take place (vide
sloka 404) on the day ruled by the 7th lord, or of
trinal lords from 7th lord’s Navamsa. The wife
would have an auspicious birth. (To wit, she will
hail from a good family). These are for first half.
Notes: The clue given for day of marriage
are theoretical and may not give practical
guidance.
sere निशानाये पूर्वभागे शुभेक्षिते!
दरवंशमिवृद्धिश्च श्वशुरस्य विरायुषम्। । ४०६। |
406. The native of Uraga Nadiamsa, first
half, with Moon therein in aspect to a benefic will
have flourishing in-laws’ family. His father-in-law
will be long-lived.
उत्तरे प्रजातस्य पित्रिष्टं स्वकन्यका।
उद्वाहमिति च MEAS नात्र संशयः। | ४०७। |
407. The native of second half of Uraga
Nadiamsa will incur (early) danger to father, His
marriage will take place in the 15th year,
Notes: That the father of the native of 2nd
half of Uraga Nadiamsa will die early was
referred to in previous slokas also. But the expression ‘Swakanyaka’ means nothing for us here.
Hence omitted in translation.
पूर्वभगे प्रजातस्य त्रयोदश च वत्सर ।
सम्पन्नगेह THe शवश्रूरवशुरवान् धनी । । ४०८। |
408. If birth be in the former half of Uraga
Nadiamsa, marriage will take place in the 13th
year in a Wealthy family. He will have parents-inlaw (alive at the time of marriage) and will be
wealthy,
उरगंशे निशानाथे पूर्वभागस्य जातके।
षेडशान्दात्रं माता परलोक प्रपा्यति। | ४०९। |
पक्षान्तरे पूर्वभागे पशब्दे मातृनाशनम्।
दरविंशब्दे सुतप्रप्तिर्विशब्दे वां भाविष्यति। । ४१०} |
409-410. Mother’s death: The Moon jp
Uraga Nadiamsa will cause mother’s death in the
15th year in case of birth in former half. Within a
fortnight, in the 15th year, mother’s death wil]
occur. In his 20th year or 22nd year, birth of a
child will occur.
Notes: Mother’s death twice appears above,
Apparently, the 2nd death within a fortnight
should be of some other relative than the mother.
चन्द्रात् सप्तमगे भैमे तदीशे गुरूवीक्षिते।
उरगांशे पूर्वमे सदारोगकठछत्रवान्। । ४११। |
411. Spouse: Onc’s spouse will be ever sick
if Mars is in the 7th from the Moon while the
dispositor of Mars is aspected by Jupiter.
केतुयोगे बुधाधांशे दारशतर्भविष्यति।
स्वपुरादृष्ठिरोगेण किचिद्रोगकठत्रवान्। । ४१२ । |
412. Mercury’s dispositor joining Ketu
denotes enmity with one’s wife. She will be somewhat sickly, due to eye disorders.
उत्तराशे धूर्तभारया ring SMTA |
Pi SAAS मृति WITH! । ४१३। |
उत्तरांशे द्विभायैः स्यात् पूर्वभागे सुदारवान्।
सत्कुलस्तरीषु सन्तानं दशसंख्यमिति स्मृतम्। । ४१४।
413-414, One’s spouse will be wicked and
unchaste in case of birth in second half in U raga
Nadiamsa. She will be healthy, and firm in disposition. This native will have two wives. One
born in former half will have a virtuous wife who
will be from a good family. He will have ten
children.
उरगाशे पूर्वभागे शण चन्दे गुरूनिरीकषते।
Pet चिरायुष्यं पुत्रिका च तथा भवेत्। । ४१५। |
उद्राहसमये मध्ये SAR नद |
पूर्वभागे राजपीडा बन्धुवर्गे :| । ४१६। ।
415-416. Children: However if the Moon is
aspected by Jupiter, the native of first half of this
Nadiamsa will have two sons and one daughter

Deva Keralam 43
who will be longlived. There will be heavy rains at
the time of marriage of the native of second half
of Uraga Nadiamsa, and troubles to relatives on
account of kings will occur if birth be in former
half.
षष्ठे जीवे सुरांशस्य दशमे चन्द्रसंन्थिते।
नकषत्रगण्डदोषस्तु नास्तीति मनुरब्रवीत्। । ४१७। |
417. Jupiter in the 6th while the Moon is in
the 10th with Leo navamsa (or in Sura Nadiamsa)
will ward off blemishes of (inauspicious)
asterisms.
Notes: The blemishes of inauspicious
asterisms refer to Doshas for birth in Moola and
such other Nakshatras.
उरगांशे nt श्वशुरस्तु विशोषतः।
जनन्याः च विपदूदाये मृतिं वदेत्। । ४१८। |
418. The 1811८65 father and father-in-law
will be longlived if birth is in Uraga Nadiamsa. If
it is in former half, mother’s death will take place
in the 2nd dasa.
उरगांशे पूर्वभागे एकत्रिशे पितविपत्।
एकविंश अथवा चेति sehr न संशयः! । ४१९। |
419. Danger to father: There will be fatal
effects concerning father of the native of first half
of Uraga Nadiamsa in the following years: 31, 21
सूर्याशके युगे तत्र शुभेशंशत्रिकोणके।
स्फुटयोागम् गते मन्दे पितृनियौणमादिशेत्। | ४२०।।
420. Saturn’s transit: Saturn transiting the
Rasi obtained by adding the longitudes of the Sun
and the 9th lord’s dispositor, or a trine thereof
shall be fatal to the native’s father.
विशब्दे स्वपितृव्यस्य मात्ररिष्ठात् परं मृतिः,
स्वपित्ररिष्ठतः पश्चच्छवशुरारिष्टमादिशेत्। । ४२१। |
421. After the death of mother, a paternal
relative will pass away in the 20th year. The
native’s father-in-law will die after the father’s
exit.
कर्माधिपदञ्जकाले कर्मेशंशत्रिकोणगे।
SHCA गते मन्दे श्वशुरारिष्टमादिशेत्। । ४२२।।
422. Father-in-law: His death will occur in
the native’s dasa ruled by the 10th lord. Saturn’s
transit in the sign denoted by the Navamsa occupied by the 10th lord, or 8 trine thereof will
prove fatal to father-in-law.
र्राधिपदशसन्धैलाभाधिपतिदययके।
मेषे शनीक्षिते काले पूर्वमगे पिःुर्विपत्। । ४२३।।
423. Father: If birth be in former half of
Uraga Nadiamsa, Saturn’s aspect on Aries, in
transit, will prove fatal to father, in the end of the
8th lord’s or 11th lord’s dasa.
विपत्तारदशकले अपरार्धे मत हम् |
स्वनुद्धिप्रनलचेति स्वप्राबल्यं
424. 310 dasa: The 2nd half of third dasa will
prove auspicious when the native will progress
well on account of his wisdom.
उर गांशे पूर्वभागे वार्धके क्लेशमश्नुते।
मिथुनेशदशाकाले अपमृत्युभयं भवेत्। । ४२५। |
425. Old age: Birth in former half of Uraga
Nadiamsa will cause grief in old age. Mercury
dasa will cause fear of untimely death.
SHR प्रजातस्य धनाधिपतिदाय॒के।
wera मृतिं चेति पतत्येवमथोगतिः। । ४२६। |
426. Second lord’s dasa (or) 56th year will
cause death of the native of second half of Uraga
Nadiamsa.
कूर्मयोगफलाध्याये ४१ !
427. In the chapter entitled 70078 Yoga
Phala’, "Lagnadhipathi Nadi’ (?) describes in
detail effects of birth in former half of Uraga
Nadiamsa.
लग्नाधिपदशकाले पूर्वभागे प्रजायते।
अपरार्धे शुभाधिक्यं स्यालकप्रनलं सुखम्। । ४२८।।
लाभाधिपदशाकौले शनिभुक्तौ महाविपत्।
क्कचित्।
धनधयाभिवृद्धिः स्यत् स्यालकःप्रनलं सुखम्। । ४३०।।
शुक्रशन्यन्तरे काले .पष्ठार्धपतिमुक्तिषु।
अतीव क्लेशकार्याणि प्रत्य्दाये फलं स्मृतम्। । ४२१। |

428-431. First half of Uraga Nadiamsa: For
this native, the second half of the dasa ruled by
Lagna lord will give highly auspicious effects and
his brother-in-law will obtain great happiness.
The subject will incur a great danger in Saturn’s
sub period in the dasa of 11th lord. In Jupiter’s
bhukti, mental agony will come to pass while good
and bad results will otherwise be in equal proportion. In the dasa of the tenth lord the native will
be troubled by windy disorders, but his wealth
increase apart from happiness to brother-in-law.
In the 5th dasa, the sub periods of Venus, Saturn
and that of 6th lord will cause abundant difficulसुतेशंश्रिकोणेषुं न्ययेशांशत्रिकोणगे।
स्फटयेगं गते मन्दे देशे राज्ञं कलापकृत्। । ४२२।।
अनावृष्ठिहते देशे दुरभिक्षभयमादिशेत्।
432-4321/2. Irrelevant: Troubles to the king
are denoted if Saturn in transit reaches the Rasi,
or a trine thereof, counted from the Navamsa Rasi
of the 5th/12th lord. The country will reel under
famine and absence of rains.
चांश bar Bb “ofa
एकसप्ततिवर्षणि भु दयनिर्णयम्। । ४२४।।
अंशायुश्चैकषष्टिश्च दषयन Ae: |
ger वृश्चिके मासे कन्यामासेअथवा यदि। । ४२५।।
उरगांश yar शुक्रवारे मृतिं वदेत्।
उत्तराशे महापपे ras न विद्यते। । ४३७। |
पूर्वभागे मिश्रफलं उत्तरांश सुखसुखम्।
433-437 1/2. Exit: One born with the Moon
in Uraga Nadiamsa, in first half will have a long
life if the Sun is in debilitation Rasi and such
Navamsa. His life span will be 71 years. At 61
(contrary to 71 just mentioned) he will die in
Dakshinayana (Sun’s southerly course) when the
Sun will be moving in Cancer/Virgo/Scorpio. His
death will be on a Friday. In his next birth, his
natal constellation will be Aswini. One born in
second half of this Nadiamsa will be a great sinner
and will not attain heavens. The general effects
for birth in former half will be mixed, and for
Chandra Kala Nadi
second half both happiness and unhappiness will
result.
। । मीनगुरूदुर्धरंशः। ।
(मालिक्येगः)
Jupiter in Pisces - Durdhara Nadiamsa
(Malika Yoga)
sii जीवे शनिसंयुतवीक्षिते। । ४३८ । ।
वतते प्रजातस्य ज्येष्टभ्रातृविनाशनम्।
पश्चाद्भ्ातुयुतः श्रीमान् वाल्ये
कलठत्र्रयवान् रागी कोपी िप्रप्रसादवान्।
विद्यबुद्धप्रदो नित्यं मधुरम्लरसप्रियः। | ४४०। |
कामी मातप्रियस्त्यागी युवतीजनवल्लभः।
पित्रर्जितार्थसंपन्नः कनिष्ठभ्रातवत्सलः। । ४४१। |
पितृव्यनाशवान् बाल्ये वसूरीज्वरगण्डवान्।
व्रणकितशरीरश्च दन्तवायुप्रपीडितः। । ४४२। |
राजसप्रकृतिः कामी किचित्तमसकृत्यवान्।
अभक्ष्याभक्षणं नित्यं किचित्सत्तिवकनबुद्धिमान्। | ४४२ । |
द्रव्यार्जनसमर्थश्च सीमन्तशिशुनाशनम्।
दारान्तरे पुत्रवद्धिःपत्रिकात्रयमायुषम्। | ४४४। |
पत्रयोगं तथा विन्द्यात् सहोदरफलं तथा।
438-4441/.2. Durdhara Nadiamsa: If Jupiter
joins Saturn or is aspected by him, one born in an
immovable ascendant with Durdhara Nadiamsa
will incur destruction of elder brothers. He will
be endowed with younger coborns, will be wealthy and will be emaciated in childhood due to
grief. He will have three wives, be passionate,
given to anger but could be appeased instantly.
He will be endowed with learning and intelligence. He will be fond of sweet and sour juices,
will be lustful, dear to mother, sacrificing in nature and attached to women. He will be wealthy
on account of his fahter’s properties and will be
affectionate to his younger coborn. During his
childhood, loss of a paternal uncle will come to
pass. He will further be troubled by smallpox,
ulcers, dental and windy disorders. He will be
somewhat mixed in disposition with Satwa, Rajas
and Tamas. He will eat even uneatable food. He
will be skillful in gathering wealth. His first child
will be destroyed. He will attain surviving children
through second wife. Three of his daughters will
be longlived. These are the effects concerning
progeny and coborn.

Deva Keralam 45
Notes: Durdhara Nadiamsa in an immovable sign (Taurus/Leo/Scorpio/Aquarius) extends from 23 deg. 0’ to 23 deg. 12° of arc. (Incase
of movable signs, from 6 deg. 48’ to 7 deg. 0’ and
in case of common signs from 21 deg. 48’ to 22
deg. 0’ of arc.)
Treat विलग्नेशे निधने गुरूवीक्षिते। । ४४५। |
त चिच्छान्त्या शन्ति प्रयास्यति।
मोहना प्रजाटस्स परकार्यार्थवंचकः।
पितृकार्यरते नित्यं अग्निमान्दप्रपीडितः। । ४४७ |
परोपकारवान् रागी किचिद्वर्मसुदेहवान्।
445-4471/2 . Mohana Nadiamsa: The ascendant lord in Mohana Nadiamsa while Jupiter
aspects the 8th house will cause danger in
childhood. Malika Yoga formed from the Rasi
occupied by 6th lord will give a charming appearance. One born in Mohana Nadiamsa will
deceive others and will gather wealth by questionable means. He will be dutiful to his father
and will be troubled by digestive disorders. He
will help others, be passionate, be somewhat
religious. (Dharma Sudehavaan is an improper
addition. Apparently the text implies acquisition
of a beautiful physique).
Notes: Here the ascendant refered to is an
immovable one, with Durdhara Nadiamsa on the
horizon. The lord of such ascendant should be in
Mohana Nadiamsa.
Mohana Nadiamsa is not enlisted. But we
have Trailokya Mohanakari Nadiamsa which extends from 14 deg. 48” to 15 deg. 0’ of a movable
sign, from 15 deg. 0’ to 15 deg. 12’ of animmovable
sion and from 29 deg. 48’ to 30 deg. of a common
sign. Mohana is an abbreviation, for metric purposes.
कन्यामन्दे Ay जीवे SET प्रजायते। । ४४८। |
अल्पसन्तानमाप्नोति la ied |
एकपुत्रश्चिरायुष्यं पुत्रिका च तथा भवेत्। । ४४९। |
448-449, Durdhara Nadiamsa: Saturn in
Virgo while the planet Jupiter is in Pisces will give
following effects to a Dhurdhara Nadiamsa native. The subject will have a limited number of
children and many of his children will be born
dead. However one son and one daughter will be
endowed with long lives.
TIT भैमे तुलांशे केन्द्ररशिगे।
भगिनीद्भयमायुष्यमेकक्ले शवती भवेत्। | ४५० । |
450. Mars: If Mars be the ruler of the third
house (i.e. ascendant is Aquarius, as immovable
sign is mentioned), be in an angle (except Taurus)
occupying simultaneously Libra Navamsa, two
sisters will be longlived, while one of them will be
grief-torn.
Sire जीवे भगिन्येका = षी।
कावित् सहोदरभ्रातृधूर्तस्थान् FILL । ४५१।।
सन्तानप्रतिबन्धश्च श्रतृद्ैषकये भवेत्।
451-4511/2 . Jupiter: One sister will be endowed with long lease of life if Jupiter is in
Durdhara Nadiamsa. This position will destroy
younger coborns. Additionally the native will
have obstacles in obtaining progeny and will hate
his younger brothers.
मीने जीवे — SUT सुभाग्यवान्। । ४५२। |
mara नित्यं सदा रोगशरीरवान्।
सहोदरश्च यः कश्चित् कठ््र्वयरोगवान्। । ४५३।।
पत्रवान् बुद्धिमांश्चेति द्रव्यार्जनसमर्थकः।
452-4531/2 . For a native of Durdhara
Nadiamsa, Jupiter in Pisces will give religiousness
and abundant fortunes. The native will be
charitable but be ever troubled by diseases. His
brother will have two wives and will be sickly. The
native will have children, be intelligent and skilful
in gathering wealth.
सुधांशगे निशानाथे aaa गुरूवीक्षिते। । ४५४। |
कुम्भलगने प्रजातस्य मातुलायुष्यव्धनम्।
454-454 1/2. Sudha Nadiamsa: The Moon
placed in Sudha Nadiamsa in Cancer in aspect to
Jupiter will ensure long-living maternal uncles in
case of birth in Aquarius Lagna.
Notes: Discussions for Durdhara Nadiamsa
in Aquarius ascendant continue. Now the position of the Moon in the 6th in Cancer in Sudha
Nadiamsa is dealt with. Sudha Nadiamsa in Can-

11 deg. o’ to 11 deg. 12
46 Chandra Kala Nadi
cer extends from 18 deg. 36’ to 18 deg. 48. (In
Immovable sign it is from 11 deg, 12’-11 deg. 24’
and in common signs from 3 deg. 36’ to 3 deg. 48°
of arc.)
For Aquarius Lagna, the Moon is the 6th
lord, denoting maternal uncles. The 11th is the
6th from the 6th and the 11th lord is Jupiter. The
Moon in the said Nadiamsa falls in Sagittarius
Navamsa. Such a yoga assists maternal uncles
with long-lives.
चन्द्रे यावत् कलाः सन्ति सूरये सावत् कलायुते।। ४५५॥
तावत्संख्या पिता माता सोदरस्य मृतिः स्मृता।
455-4551/2 . Relatives: The number of relatives that will face (early) death will correspond
to the number of Ashtaka Varga Bindus (alter
reduction) in the Ashtaka Vargas of the Moon
and the Sun. The Moon denotes maternal uncles
and the Sun paternal uncles. (This applies to
Durdhara Nadiamsa native.)
Notes: This sloka deals with maternal and
paternal uncles. Some condition detailing their
deaths seems to be missing. What all we gather
Moon’s Ashtaka Varga deals with maternal relatives and the Sun’s Ashtaka Varga paternal uncles. This deals with Durdhara Nadiamsa in
Aquarius ascendant. Also see sloka 458 1/2 infra.
TUR SR स्वपिता भ्रातृहीनवान्। । ४५६। |
कालान्ते भग्ययोगं बाल्ये क्ौशेन कर्शितः।
सुख्जीवनम्।
मातुलाधिपतै चन्द्रे सुधंशे Rea । ४५८ |
मातृवंशमिवृद्धिः स्यान्मातुलद्रययोगवान्।
456-4581/2 . Other texts state that one born
in Durdhara Nadiamsa will not have paternal
uncles, His father will attain prosperity after a
long interval. The native’s childhood will be
marked by troubles. There will be difficulties in
Notes: These slokas deal with birth in
Durdhara Nadiamsa in Aquarius ascendant
without reference to any planet. The last instruction hereof however relates to the Moon’s position in Sudha Nadiamsa as a continuing link to
sloka 454-4541/2 supra.
ुर्धरंशकमे जीवे असितेन निरीक्षिते। । ४५९। ।
कुम्भलग्ने प्रजातस्य केचित्पक्षकमातुलः।
न चेति कालान्तर इति ATU I ४६०।।
जीवे नारदीयस्य जातके।
पातम हचिरायुष्यं eee । । ४६१। |
मातृष्वसद्धयं चेति जीवति।
459-4611/2 . Jupiter in Durdhara Nadiamsa
in aspect to Saturn for an Aquarius Lagna native
according to some will give one maternal uncle.
After a long interval, the native will acquire a
step- mother. As per Naradeeya Jataka, Jupiter
in this Nadiamsa will give a long-living maternal
grand-father. The native will have two maternal
uncles. His mother will have two fathers-in-law.
(That is, the native’s paternal grand-mother
would have two marriages.) She will have only one
long-living son. She will be somewhat sickly and
will be grief-ridden on account of death of a
brother. She will have progeny aftcr ६ long interval and will be highly prosperous and happy.
Notes: Jupiter’s position could be in any
sign, us no sign is mentioned, But he should be in
Durdhara Nadiamsa in aspect to Saturn, while
birth be in Aquarius ascendant, with Durdhara
Nadiamsa. As a result, the native will have one
maternal uncle apart from acquiring a stepmother after a long interval. That ts, the native’s
father will remarry.
Clues from Naradecya Jataka given hercof
relate to Jupiter’s position in Durdhara Nadiamsa
without mention of Saturn.
मीने Sart जीवे स Ls सुभग्यवान्। । ४६२ । |
तद्दशायां महद्भाग्यं सुवाहनम्।
स्वपितुभोगनीभर्तृयोगकाले सुकीर्तिमान्। । ४६३। |
तदारभ्य फलं चेतति नरवाहनयोगवान्।
462-4631/2 . Jupiter placed in Pisces, with
Aquarius Navamsa, as Venus is in the Rasi Sagittarius will give following effects in Jupiter’s dasa.
the native’s father’s home and that of maternal
uncles. His father will be happy because of help
from his brother-in-law. With the Moon ruling the
6th if placed in Sudha Nadiamsa in aspect to
Jupiter, the native will have two maternal uncles
and there will be growth of (prosperity for)
maternal relatives.

Deva Keralam
The said dasa will be greatly prosperous. Second
half of the dasa will give conveyances. The native’s
paternal aunt’s husband will enjoy prosperity and
fame and will acquire conveyances.
Notes: For Aquarius ascendant, Jupiter is
generally described as a malefic. He can however
be favourable in given circumstances. One of this
is: Venus should be in Sagittarius in Rasi, while
Jupiter in Pisces should get Aquarius Navamsa
(23 deg. 20’ to 26 deg. 40’). Then the dasa of
Jupiter will be prosperous & C. Also see slokas
मोहनांशे विलग्नेशे मेषूढे WAR । ४६४। |
जन्मदाये महद्भाग्यं lia. eta, ।
स्वपितर्भगिनीभर्तृभवेशे | | ४६५। |
तद्दशायां महद्भाग्यं द्वितीयाब्दे Brat वहम्।
मोहनांशे विलग्नेशे are क्षिते। । ४६६। |
जन्मदाये महद्भाग्यं Seat शुभाधिकम्।
स्वपिताभागिनीभतुभावेशे भ | | ४६७ |
तद्दशायां महद्भाग्यं द्वितीयान्दे श्रियो वहम्।
464-4671/2 . The lord of the ascendant in
Mohana Nadiamsa in Aries in aspect to a benefic
will give great prosperity (to the native’s family)
in the first dasa. Second year will prove highly
auspicious. If the 5th lord is in the 9th, his dasa
will give abundant prosperity. The 2nd year (of
the dasa) will bring wealth. (Sloka 466 to Sloka
4671/2 are a repitition).
Notes: For Mohana Nadiamsa, see notes
under sloka 445 supra. Saturn should be in such
a space in Aries (in debility). Even then he will
allow the native’s family to prosper after his birth,
in the first dasa.
Mercury placed at birth in Libra during his
dasa will give great progress to an Aquarius native. In the first sub period ruled by Mercury, the
native will commence acquiring wealth.
मोहनशे विलग्नेशे मेषारूढे भुभेक्षिते। । ४६८। ।
निरीक्षिते च गुरूणा जन्मप्रभृति भाग्यवान्
स्वपिताभगिनीपुत्र वाहनत्रययोगवान्।
विपदूदाये फलं पूर्णं स्वप्राबल्यं सुवाहनम्। । ४६९। |
468-469. The ascendant lord (as per sloka
464) if aspected by Jupiter will give following
effects: The native will be rich right from birth.
His paternal aunt’s son will have three vehicles.
The native will get auspicious effects in the 3rd
dasa and will have conveyances.
क atcha जन्मदेशे ्।
भातनकारिर प्रजावधि। | ४७०। |
अक्तिचारगते जीवे. शनौ वक्रत्वमागते।
हाहाकारं जगत्सर्वं विशेषाद्दक्षिणदिशि। , ४७१। |
470-471. Saturn in Virgo in transit will cause
grief to the ruler of the country. Ministerial memhers will also incur grief. At the time of Jupiter’s
accelerated motion and Saturn’s retrograde motion, the entire world will be wailing aloud in grief,
particularly the southern region.
Notes: These clues do not pertain to any
individual horoscope but are applicable to annual
horoscopes of countries.
SIMMS स्फुटयोगं गते शनो।
पुत्रनाशमिति प्रोक्तं ayer ik । । ४७२। |
मात्यप्राणनाशः स्यात् स्वपिदृष्ोऽध पीडितः
472-4721/2 . When Saturn in transit comes to
the Rasi represented by the Navamsa position of
ile 12th lord, or its trine, the native will incur grief
due to destruction of his children and troubles
from royal people. The minister of the country
will die. (This clue is irrelevant.) The native’s
paternal unlces will be subjected to troubles.
मोहनांशे विलग्नेशे विरोधावस्थचेष्ठने। । ४७३। ।
विपदृदाये विरोधदिराजोपद्रवशोकवान्।
्षेमदाये द्विवारं स्यत् स्थाननाशे मनोन्यथा। | ४७४।
पश्चात् सन्तानमाप्नोति राजमातुप्रसादवान्।
473-4741/2 . If the ascendant lord is in
Mohana Nadiamsa and be in Virodhavastha, the
native will be troubled by kings and will consequently be grieved. For two weeks(?) in the 4th
dasa he will be displaced and grieved. Later on he
will beg2t children and will acquire favours from
royal mother (king’s mother).
Notes: These verses lack coherence in the
latter part. The text seems to suggest that the
fourth dasa will cause an undesirable change of
place initially. "For two weeks" is an insignificant

clue. About begetting progeny the hints are not
clear. Perhaps it means ’in the latter half of the
4th dasa’.
चन्द्रंशधिपते जीवे se शनीक्षिते । । ४७५। |
मातुलद्रयमायुष्यं मातृष्वसा तथा भवेत्।
मातुलौ दरौ दत्तपुत्र एकमेकस्य नाशनम्।
कालान्तर EO लस्य भ्रातृशोकप्रदो भवेत्। | ४७६। |
मातृष्वसद्रयं पुत्रीपुत्रसमन्विता।
एका क्लेशवती चैका TARA कर्शिता। | ४७७। |
एका सुमंगली चेति बहुपुत्रवती gal!
475-4771/2 . Maternal relatives: Jupiter
should be in Durdhara Nadiamsa, be the ruler of
the Moon-occcupied Navamsa, and be lastly
aspected by Saturn. Then, the native will have two
maternal uncles and two maternal aunts. Both the
maternal uncles will have adopted sons who will
only be destroyed. After a long interval, maternal
uncles will be grieved on account of peternal
destrucion. The two maternal aunts will be endowed with sons and daughters. One of them will
be troubled by grief, will lose her husband and be
emaciated. The other one will have a long-living
husband and be endowed with many sons and be
happy.
पितृव्यभवने एका मेषन्ते मृत्युचेष्ठने। । ४७८। |
जातस्य जननात् पूं Se. |
` ज्येष्टभ्रातृविनाशेन स्वपिता क्लेशवान् भवेत्। | ४७९। |
478-479, (The lord of the 11th) in the end of
Aries in Mrithavastha denotes that the native’s
paternal uncle would have passed away prior to
his birth. The native’s father would also incur grief
on account of loss of his elder sons (born prior to
the native’s birth).
Notes: Pitruvyabhavana denotes the 11th
house - paternal relatives. But there is no mention
of its lord. This verse relates to Aquarius Lagna,
and a reference to Jupiter occurs in sloka 475. The
11th house in addition denotes native’s elder
brothers.
Mrithavastha in Aries (or in an odd sign)
occurs to a planet when it is in the last six degrees.
विपद्दाये कनिष्ठश्च स्वपितृभातृशोकवान्।
र्धरंशकगे जीवे असितेन च निरीक्षिते! । ४८०। |
Chandra Kala Nadi
स्वपितुर्मातुलं हन्ति स््यायोग इति स्मृतम्।
क्लेरोन मातुलानी तु यत्किचिदुगूढचारिण्री। । ४८१। |
ae कटकः CA न संशयः।
जारिणी स्यात् स्वमाता |
480-4821/2. In the 3rd dasa, grief to father on
account of loss of coborn be foretold. Jupiter in
Durdhara Nadiamsa in aspect to Saturn will
cause (early) destruction of father’s maternal uncles. This is called Sandhya Yoga. The native’s
maternal uncle’s wife will be somewhat spying in
nature (Goodhachaarini). His maternal family
will incur some blemish. The native’s daughter or
his father’s uncle’s wife will be of questionable
character. The mother of the native will be a
devout spouse.
भाग्येशंशत्रिकोणेप्र HEAT गते WA । ४८३। |
i le गिनीपुत्रो नाश चेन्मनुरब्रवीत्।
sears च स्फुटयोगं गते शनौ। । ४८४। |
मातृवंशजनारिष्टं क्लेशं चेति स्वमातुलः।
483-484 1/2 . Saturn’s transit: Children of
the native’s father’s sister will be destroyed when
Saturn in transit reaches the sign represented by
the navamsa occupied by the 9th lord, or its trine.
The native’s maternal uncle or other maternal
relatives will be endangered with Saturn in transit
in the Rasi denoted by the Navamsa occupied by
the 11th lord or its trine.
पितृप्वसृसुतंशेशे केन्द्रे लाभित्रिकोणगे। | ४८५1 |
vt : श्रीमान् भ्रातुभरातृसमन्वितः।
: मानी पित्रार्जितधनाढ्यवान्। । ४८६। ।
द्रे भार्य जनकस्येका सोदयोत्पत्तिदुःखदा।
पितृष्वसुसुतफलं विवाहो रविवत्सरे । | ४८७। |
वसुवर्षात् परं चेति विवाहोत्सवसंभ्रमम्।
485-4871/2 . If the 3rd lord’s navamsa dispositor is in an angle or in a trine, a son of the
native’s paternal uncle will be rich, endowed with
coborns, step-brothers and be honourable, and
be rich by paternal wealth. He will have two wives
and will incur grief on account of loss of coborn.
His marriage will be in the 12th year/8th year.
पितामहाधिपे det भाग्ये रविसमन्विते। । ४८८। |
वित्ते जीवे प्रजातश्च प्रपितामहभाग्यवान्।

Deva Keralam 49
पितामहक्लेश्जेकज्येष्टभ्रातसमन्वितः। । ४८९। ।
भगिन्येका अजीवा च भतृभ्रतुविनाशवान्।
488-4891/2. Mercury ruling the house of
paternal grand-father placed in the 9th house in
the company of the Sun, as Jupiter is in the 2nd
house, denotes a prosperous paternal
grandfather. He will have one brother and will be
grieved. His lonely sister will not be longlived.
Notes: For Aquarius, Mercury is the lord of
the Sth - 9th from the 9th. Hence he denotes
paternal grand-father.
पितमहध्रातूपुत्रो भ्रातृ-भ्रातृसमन्वितः। । ४९०। |
व्यवसायपरो नित्यं i pee |
जातस्य जननात् व वैधव्यं मृतिमादिशेत्। । ४९१।
490-491. The native’s paternal uncle will be
endowed with coborns and progeny and will be
engaged in agriculture. Before the native’s birth,
death and widowhood would have occurred(?)
लभ॑शांशगते शक्रे STA मोहनांशके।
मातामहश्चिरायुष्यं मातमही तथैव च। । ४९२।।
मातमहानुजः कश्चिदूदत्तपुत्रे भविष्यति।
मातुलस्यैकमायुष्यं भगिनीत्रयमायुषम्। । ४९३। |
492-493. Venus in a navamsa owned by the
11th lord while the 12th lord is in Mohana
Nadiamsa gives the following effects: The native’s
maternal grand-parents will be long-lived.
Brother of maternal grand-father may have
adopted son. The native’s maternal uncle and
three sisters will be long-lived.
Notes: 11th lord for Aquarius is Jupiter.
Venus should be in Sagittarius/Pisces Navamsa,
while Saturn is in Mohana Nadiamsa (see notes
under sloka 445 supra). This deals with maternal
grand-parents.
8 शे स्वमातुलगृहे व्यथा।
मातमहः जामात्रारिष्टहेतुना। । ४९४। |
मातृष्वसा मृतिं विन्दादन्तर्वत्नी समादिशेत्।
494-4941/2. The native of Durdhara Nadiamsa will in his second Dasa see grief in his maternal
uncle’s family. Troubles will occur to maternal
grand-father, because of evils to his son-in- law.
A maternal aunt will pass away, during pregnancy.
Notes: This deals with birth in Durdhara
Nadiamsa in Aquarius without relevance to any
planet.
GRAY जीवे मीने a शनिवीक्षिते। । ४९५। ।
मातुप्व्नामयं pe ae वदेत्।
मातुलस्ययवा पत्नी मरिष्यति। । ४९६।।
तन्मूलात् ० TTT |
विंपद्दाये पुत्रनाशः ५ idl स्वपितामहः। | ४९७। |
495-497. Jupiter in Pisces in Durdhara
Nadiamsa in aspect to Saturn causes death of
mother’s sister due to miscarriage. This could
also happen to the wife of mother’s brother. Because of this, the native’s maternal grand-father
will be distressed. In the native’s 3rd dasa, his
progeny will be destroyed. This period will also
bring grief to maternal grandfather.
चरांशगे शुभाधीशे हिवुके शिखिजातके।
तद्दशायां पापभुक्तौ मातृवंशेत्वरिष्ठकृत्। । ४९८ ।
498. Ketu dasa: One born with the 9th lord
placed in a movable Navamsa, while Ketu is in the
4th house, will in Ketu Dasa, in a malefic’s subperiod, find destruction among maternal relatives.
मातामहारिष्ठकाले विपट्दाये भविष्यति।
मन्देशांशत्रिकोणेषु स्फुटयोगं गते शनौ। । ४९९। |
मन्देशदृष्टिराश तु मातामहविनाशनम्।
499-499 1/2, The third dasa will prove inauspicious for maternal grand-father. The grandfather in qusetion will be destroyed when Saturn
in transit arrives the Rasi denoted by his natal
Navamsa dispositor, or a trine thereof, or a sign
that is at birth in aspect to Saturn himself.
लगनेशंशत्रिकोणेषु SECA गते शनौ। । ५००। |
मातामहस्यारिष्ट स्यान्मातुलस्य मनोव्यथ।
500-500 1/2. The said destruction can also
happen with Saturn’s tfansit in a Rasi denoted by
the Navamsa occupied by the natal ascendant
lord at birth, or a trine thereof, causing distress to
the native’s maternal uncle.

5() Chandra Kala Nad
मातृष्वसा TTS पापाक्रान्तस्य जातके। । ५०१। |
नातृष्वसचैकसन्तानं मृतपुत्रा सुमंगली।
विपटदाये SUT सम्पत्तारदशान्त्यगे। । ५०२। ।
इदमेव फलं सत्यं प्रत्यक्षं cada!
501-502 1/2.. The 12th house in occupation
by a malefic will cause the undermentioned effects: The native’s mother’s sister will have at last
one son only, she will beget dead children, and
will have a long-living husband. These can happen
in the end of 2nd dasa or in the initial phase of 3rd
dasa.
पितृप्वसुर्र्तृभावे दीघायुधनवान् सुखी।
जन्म तारदशान्तयादौ FI pine वहम्। । ५०३।।
्वितीयर्ध फलं पूर्वं योगारम्भं विनिर्दिशेत्
eal मनस्तापं स्वपितुमित्रवर्गके। । ५०४। |
क्लेशकार्यणि सम्पदृदाये फलं भवेत्।
503-504 1/2. The native’s paternal uncle will
be long-lived, rich and happy. (The relevant
astrogical condition for these effects are missing.)
The native will beget wealth in the end of first dasa
or in the course of 2nd dasa. The 2nd half of 2nd
dasa will give the native auspicious effects, but
will cause distress for his kinsmen and troubles to
father through friends. In the 2nd dasa, the
native’s father will incur many difficulties.
Fora Beg मालिकायोगजातके। । ५०५। ।
atta क्लेशं विनिर्दिरेत्।
दरिद्ययोगे पापखेचरे! | ५०६। |
शुभद्ष्ठिविहीने च ata प्रपनुयद्ध्वम्।
505-506 1/2. Daridra Malika Yoga: If the
seven planets are disposed in the various seven
Rasis continuously counted from the Navamsa
Rasi of the 6th lord, the native will incur penury
and many difficulties in childhood. A malefic in
the 8th house without a benefic aspect will also
cause poverty.
Notes: Only seven planets from the Sun to
saturn are considered in Malika Yoga. They
should be progressively in continuous seven
houses. Thus 2 planets cannot be in one house.
When the Yoga starts from ascendant, it is called
Lagna Malika. From the 2nd Dhana Malika,
from the 3rd Vikrama Malika, so on and so forth.
To simplify, the Malika yoga goes under the name
of the house from where it commences.
The present work adopts a practice of
counting Malika Yoga from the Navamsa occupied by a certain planet. Here it takes the 6th
lord Moon. We should note Moon’s navamsa,
and from the Rasi identical with said Navamsa,
we should find seven planets in seven continuous
houses. Then the native instead of getting a Raja
yoga will suffer from poverty etc,
For Aquarius ascendant, a malefic in the 8th
house (Virgo) should be related to a benefic lest
he should cause penury.
दारिद्मालिकायोगे अष्टमे घनिजातके! । ५०४७। |
वित्ते जीवे प्रजातस्यः भाग्यवाष्वेनन संशयः।
वाधिके बहु दरिद्रं बाल्ये किचिच्छुभावहम्। । ५०८।
मध्ये भग्यसमृद्धिं च नरवाहनयोगवान्।
507-508 1/2. In the above Daridra (poverty)
Yoga, Jupiter placed in the 2nd house will make
the native rich, but in old age will cause utter
poverty. The childhood will somewhat produce
auspicious effects. In the middle part of life, the
native’s prosperity will increase and he will obtain
conveyances.
लभे ys धने जीवे अवयोगशतैरपि। । ५०९। |
धनिकः. कीरिमांश्चेति राजद्वरे ्रासिद्धमान्।
विपदूदाये महद्भाग्यसुत्तराध विशेषतः। । ५९०। |
नित्यश्रीवबहुमानादिप्रबलोदयोगभाग्यवान्।
509-510 1/2. Even a hundred adverse Yogas
(for prosperity) will become incffcctive if Venus
is in the 11th house while Jupiter is in the 2nd
house. In addition, the native will become wealthy, famous by serving a king, and in the 3rd dasa,
particularly 2nd half, will acquire huge wealth. He
will have firm wealth, great honours and
prosperous calling.
Notes: Also sce slokas 462-464 1/2 relating
to Jupiter and Venus for Aquarius ascendant.
Slokas 532-542 give elaborate treatment in this
regard.
पितृष्वसुः पुत्रयोगे काले Geet फलं विदुः। । ५११। ।

Deva Keralam 5 |
area विशेषं स्यात् प्रत्यग्दाये विशेषतः।
शुभाशुभफलं चेति योगरोगं विनिर्दिशेत्। । ५१२। |
511-512. In the native’s fourth and fifth
dasas, the paternal uncle will obtain progeny,
happiness, and a mix of good and bad results,
apart form diseases.
्विपंचाशात् परं कष्ट निधने कथने व्य॒थ।
अपरार्धे दरिद्र स्यात् पुत्रशोकं विनिर्दिशेत्। । ५१३।
दशन्ते मुतिमाप्नोति दशमध्यै अपमृत्युमान्।
सम्पद्दाये सेतुयात्रा पित्रा बन्धुजनैस्सह। । ५१४ |
माग॑मध्ये मनस्तापं सुतमूलो द्विरत्रकः।
तद्दोषपरिहारार्थ कषीरकुम्भं प्रदापयेत्। । ५१५। ।
पश्चादारोग्यमाप्नोति स्वदेशं पुनरेष्यति।
513-515 1/2. After 52, the native will pass
away. In the 2nd half of Sth dasa poverty will
result. Loss of progeny be also declared. He will
die in the end of 5th dasa, while in the middle part
fear of untimely death may come to pass. In his
2nd dasa, father will proceed on a pilgrimage
along with his relatives. En route, he will be
troubled for two nights on account of a son. To
overcome this evil, donation of a pot filled with
milk be restored to. As a result health (to the said
son) will be restored and the group will return
home happily.
कर्मराह, प्रजाते युः विपद्दायेसुयात्रवान्। । ५१६। ।
पुण्यतीर्थफलं सिद्ध गंगास्नानफलं स्मृतम्।
सानं त्रिवारं स्याद्गं णास्नानफलं समम्।
516-517 1/2. One who has Rahu in the 10th
house will undertake a pilgrimage in the third
dasa. He will acquire merits of visiting a sacred
place and bathing in the Ganges. Jupiter in
Durdhara Nadiamsa will be an obstacle to bathing in the Ganges. But he will enable the subject
bathe in Sethu for three weeks which is equal to
bathing in the Ganges.
patil गदांशगे ४ योगकाले गदातुरः। । ५१८1 |
यातायातं त्रिवत्स्यम्।
518-518 1/2. Venus in Gada Nadiamsa:
Venus in the 11th house in Gada Nadiamsa will
cause sickness, and indigestion. The native will be
engaged in travels for three years.
Notes: Gada Nadiamsa in Sagittarius extends from 2 deg. to 2 deg. 12’ of arc (a common
sign). (In movable sign this Nadiamsa rules from
17 deg. to 17 deg. 12’ of arc, and in fixed signs from
12 deg.48’ to 13 deg of arc).
Venus should be in Sagittarius from 2 deg.
to 2 deg. 12’ (in Aries Navamsa). Then the native
will face sickness, indigestion etc. Gada means
disease.
लगनाष्ठमगते मन्दे विषृचीज्वर् गण्डवान्। । ५१९। |
सन्निपातभयं किचिदतिसारप्रपीडितः।
519-519 1/2. Saturn in the 8th house will
cause troubles from cholera and delirium, and
also to some extent from dysentery.
्षमदाये यदा ay फलान्यो ५५ FFAG । ५२०। |
waa जीवभुक्तौ कुजभुक्तौ :
PUN देहजाडयं बुधभुक्तौ क्वचित् क्वचित्। । 428!
शन्यन्तरे क्रूरमासे शन्यस्तमयकालगे।
स्वदेहायासमाप्नेति सैम्यार्किगुरूवासरे । । ५२२। |
520-522. These will be in the sub period of
Saturn in the 4th dasa, or in the sub periods of
Jupiter as well as Mars, in any dasa (ruled by any
planet). The native’s health will decline in Mercury sub period, with Sun’s transit in an evil Rast,
or at the time of Saturn’s combustion in Gochara,
on Wednesday, Thursday or Saturday.
Notes: The adverse results (not travels)
mentioned in slokas 518 - 519 1/2 will materialise
in Saturn’s sub period in the dasa which is 4th
from birth. Alternatively, the sub period of Mars
and of Jupiter, in any dasa, can also be noteworthy
in this regard.
The period of illness relating to Saturn’s
combustion in transit may specially be noted.
That is, combustion is one of the clues to time
events, like retrogression/direction.
i गूरूस्थिते काले मेषे a मदगेजपि च।
विपद महद्भाग्यं पित्रादिश्रियमश्नुते। । ५२३। |
523. Wealth: In the course of the third dasa,
the native will acquire wealth (on his own ) and

52 Chandra Kala Naat
through his father, when Jupiter reaches Sagittarius, Aries, or the 7th house.
Notes: This relates to Jupiter’s transit only
and has nothing to do with the above slokas dealing with Venus and Saturn.
गुरूस्तृतीयपर्याये तुलान्ते वृश्चिके गुरो।
कुलीरे वा मृतिर्मातुः तत्त्रिकोणे प्रपीडिता। | ५२४। |
524. Danger to mother: The mother will
quit the world in the 3rd round of transit of
Jupiter, in the end of Libra, or in Scorpio or in
Cancer. When he is in a trine thereof, the mother
will be troubled (by diseases).
Sina तु स्फुटयोगं गते शने।
व्ययेशदृष्टिराशै तु सन्तानारिष्ठमादिशेत्। । ५२५। |
525. Danger to children: When Saturn in
transit reaches the sign represented by the
Navamsa Rasi occupied by the 12th lord, or a
trine thereof, danger to the native’s children will
have to be feared. Saturn in transit in the sign that
is at birth in aspect to the 12th lord can also cause
danger to children.
तत्तद्भावाष्टमेशंशे स्फुय्योगं गते WA
दृष्टिराशौ तथा चेति तत्तनििर्याणमादिशेत्। । ५२६। |
मात्रादिव्ययभावान्तं योजयेत् क 1 |
ग्रहचारफलं सत्यं प्रत्यक्ष EE ५२७। ।
526-527. Take any bhava. See who rules the
8th house from there and note the Navamsa Rasi
occupied by him, or the Rasi aspected by him.
When Saturn (in appropiate age) comes to that
particular Rasi or a trine, the death of the particular relative be foretold. The transit effects
stated for houses from 4th to 12th in this work will
actually come to pass(?)
Notes: For details see notes given under
sloka 354, supra. An addition here is the Rasi
aspected by the 8th lord counted from a certain
bhava.
देहे पपग्रहे काले देहपीडां विनिर्टिशेत्।
जीवयेगे जीवनाशं दृशसन्धौ महाविपत्। । ५२८। I
चक्रसन्धा मनस्तापं योजयेत् कालवित्तमः।
| 528-528 1/2. When a malefic transit in Deha
Rasi (as per KCD) it will cause physical troubles.
When it comes to Jeeva Rasi, loss of life will
occur. In the junctions of two Kala Chakra dasas,
great danger be foretold. When a malefic reaches
the junctions of a watery sign and a fiery sign,
astrologers predict mental agony.
राज्यस्थानं Fa, 9 प्रभुरूच्यते। । ५२९। |
ए lle मित्रभवनं iI
तत्तद्भावाष्टमे शंशे फलानि परिचिन्तयेत्।
529-530 1/2. The Sth house is called Rajyasthana, the 9th Prabhu sthana, the 10th Mitra
sthana (friends) and the 4th Bandhu (relatives)
Sthana. From each of the bhavas, note the Navamsa position of the 8th lord concerned and declare
effects (as per sloka 526) for the king and his
relatives.
Notes: The king and his relatives coming in
the context of someone’s horoscope is ununderstandable. Apparently, there is erroneous addition here.
मूर्त्यदिभावाष्ठमभावदाये
स्फुयंशके चार्कसुतेशकाले।
तद्ष्टिराशै मरणं च वाच्यं
शुभाशुभं तत्र विचार णीयम्। । ५३१। ।
531. According to Manu: From Lagna to
12th, the movements of Saturn in the respective
8th Bhava denote death of concerned relatives.
Or when Saturn transits such Rasis as aspected by
him at birth will also give same effect. Good and
bad for them be estimated accordingly.
Notes: This sloka may be linked to sloka 354
and 526-527 supra. According to Manu, the
planet Saturn holds key to deaths of various
kinsmen which can be foretold from one horoscope.
त शुक्रे भवे जीवे त्वव वा दशमेअपि च।
SRT TET मातृस्थने सुभग्यवान्। । ५३२। |
महानदीप्रान्त्यदेशे नगरे pas
विदेशे योगवान् भोगी
रागी त्यागभोगवशान्यवान्।
1 सुखावाप्तिः सन्तानोत्पत्तिमानननरः। । ५३४। ।
न

Deva Keralam 33
विंशोपरि शर्व weet क्वचित् सुखम्
die in a war(?) These effects relating to countries
षटूत्रिशब्दात् परं भगी धनं सह यिष्यति | | ५३६ ] | have been stated in Sani Nadi.
मित्ऋ्रभुविनाशेन क्लेशं प्राप्नेति ace
राजन्तरवशाद्भाग्यं क्षेमदाये श्रियो वहम्। | ५३७। |
पत्रिकोद्रहसोख्याप्तिः Were ततः परम्।
प्रत्यदाये फलं सत्यं मित्रदरेषन्तरं व्यथा। । ५३८। |
सोदसेत्पत्तिसन्तोषं सम्पद्दाये तुलाशनै।
कन्याशनौ Tae द्िबैन्धुवर्गे विशेषतः। । ५३९। |
स्वपितुर्भगिनी ie पितुस्सुखम्।
तुलाशनो धनप्राप्तिः कन्यामध्ये शुभं क्वचित्। | ५४० |
वृश्चिकान्ते चापशनौ स्वपितामहिनाशनम्।
तत्त्रिकोणे चोठ्देशे प्रजाक्षोभं विनिर्दिशेत्। | ५४१। |
TST राजान्तरं स्मृ तम्।
शनिनाडीफलाध्याये वाचा ष्ट फलानि च। । ५४२। |
532-542. Venus in the 11th, while Jupiter is
in 2nd/10th/4th - this Yoga will give following
effects if birth is in Durdhara Nadiamsa. The
native will be very prosperous. His prosperity will
be in the region of Mahanadi(also a great river)
or in a foreign country. He will enjoy pleasures,
will serve a mean king, will befriend many in the
course of his business activities, will be passionate
and will be sacrificing in nature. In his second
dasa, he will beget happiness'and children. In 4th
dasa he will prosper, will get sickness, and will be
famous. He will reject remnant food, be endowed
with firm riches; his fame will specially increase
after the 25th year. He will enjoy pleasures after
63rd year and gather riches. He will incur abundant grief on account of loss of friends and
employer. In the 4th dasa, in a different kingdom
he will acquire wealth. In the same dasa, he will
get his daughter and son married in that order. In
the Sth dasa he will be grieved on account of
enmity with his friends. In the 2nd dasa, he will be
happy following birth of coborn when Saturn will
be in Libra. Saturn moving in Virgo will increase
prosperity of relatives. At the same time, the husband of father’s sister will also prosper and his
father will acquire happiness. Saturn in transit in
Libra will give wealth; in the middle of Virgo he
will cause auspicious effects. When he moves in
the end of Scorpio or in Sagittarius, he will cause
the death of paternal grand-mother. In trines
thereof he will cause the wellbeing of the inmates
of Chola kingdom(?) The ruler of his country will
Notes: These eleven slokas apart from sloka
462-462 1/2 and 509-510 1/2 supra deal with Jupiter
and Venus for the ascendant Aquarius.
विस्तारमिदमाप्नोति विचित्रफलमद्भुतम्।
भग्यादीशे लाभगते दशंशे विप्रकालगे। | ५४३। ।
पुरा त्रह्मणसन्मानं फंवद्विदिकजन्मवान्।
व्रह्मजन्मान्त्यकालेषु भपत्संन्यसमादिथेत्। । ५४४। ।
तस्य पुण्यप्रभावेण वेदवेदिकजन्मवान्।
अ Wer गृरूवीक्षिते। । ५४५] |
। शमायुश्च विन्दाते।
येगे चास्य तदर्ध त्यादेकपर्यायसुवुतम्। | ५४६। |
मृतिरेकोनपंचंशे frase वा यदि।
भाग्यनाथयुते जीवे मरणं चैकसप्ततिः। |
गुरूनाडिफलं सत्यं प्रत्यत देवकेरव्छम्। | ८४७ |
543-547. The said Sani Nadi extensively discusses (such) effects in a surprising manner. One
born in Vipra Kala of Durdhara Nadiamsa (read
Durdharamse instead of 04587150) with the 9th
lord placed in the 11th house would have been a
Brahmm in the previous birth. Inthe next birth he
will be a Vaidic (following codes prescribed by the
Vedas) Brahmana. Following a calamity in the
family he would then take to ascetic order. Birth
25 Vaidic Brahmana will be duc to the meritorious
deeds done by him. If the 12th lord is aspected by
Jupiter, he will attain final emancipation following the next birth. (That is he will have one more
birth after the current one.) His life’s length will
be 74 years. 49th/52nd year will cause effects of
untimely death. If the 9th lord joins Jupiter, 71st
year will be fatal. These effects as stated in Guru
Nadi will be unfailing.
। । मकरलग्नम्-सविरांशः (शनिनाडी) । ।
Capricorn Ascendant - Sachira Nadiamsa
(Sani Nadi)
लगने (च) सचिरांशस्थे CEs समन्बिते। । ५४८।
मातुः IRIS स्यात् स्वज च at
विषारव्यांशकगे चन्द्र = Ning । । ५४९ |
सहोदर्यास्वमातुश्च जारसं |
548-5491/2. Sachira Nadiamsa: Ascendant
(Capricorn) in Sachira Nadiamsa with Mars

ae Chandra Kala Nadi
therein will cause physical ailments to the native’s
mother, or to his older sister. If the Moon is in
Pisces 1 her fateful degree and in the company
of Ketu, the native’s mother’s sister will indulge
illicit contacts. (Vishakyamsa can also be interpreted as Visha Nadiamsa instead of fateful degrec.)
Notes: In none of the works in my possession Sachira Nadiamsa is enlisted. Not even in
the present work.
{ do not know if I am right when | ६८] it is
Chitra Nadiamsa. This extends from 12 deg. to 12
deg. 12’ ina movable sign, from 17 deg. 48’ to 18
deg. of an immovable sign, and from 27 deg. to 27
deg. 12’ ina common sign.
Mars rules the 4th (mother) and 11th (older
coborn) and hence relatives are referred to here
when Mars is in Capricorn ascendant.
The second clue given is: the Moon in her
fateful degree in Pisces, and to be with Ketu.
The fateful degrees for the Moon are:
Rasi As per As per
Jaathaka Panjatha Phala Deepika
Aries 8th degre 26th degree
Taurus Sth degree 12th degree
Gemini 22nd degree 13th degree
Cancer 22nd degree 25th degree
Leo 21st degree 24th degree
Virgo ist degree 11th degree
Libra 4th degree 26th degree
Scorpio 23rd degree 14th degree
Sagittarius 18th degree 13th degree
Capricorn 20th degree 25th degree
Aquarius 20th degree 5th degree
Pisces 10th degree 12th degree
The degrees given by Vaidyanatha in his
Jaathaka Parijata appears to be more or less acceptable to a majority of astrologers. The views
followed by Mantreswara agree with the work
entitled ‘Brihat Prajapatyam’.
For Visha Nadiamsa, see notes under sloka
554-559 infra.
सचिरांशे घटे मन्दे भृसुतेन समन्विते। । ५५०। |
मृगलग्ने प्रजातस्स मातृवंशे कठत्रवान्।
भाग्येशे मिथुनांशस्ये नवमे राहुसंस्थिते। । ५५१ । |
निशाकरेण संदृष्टे परासक्ता तु सोदरी।
सिंहांशे मकरे लग्ने तदीशे गुरूसंयुते। । ५५२। |
स्वमाता or a भर्तृवाक्यं न श्रुण्वती।
चारवस्थे च समन्विते। । ५५३। |
स्वमातुर्दर्धमायुष्यं गुप्तजारवती शुभा।
550-5531/2. One born in Capricorn ascendant, Sachira Nadiamsa, having Saturn in
Aquarius with Mars will marry a girl hailing from
mother’s side. The 9th lord in Gemini Navamsa
while the 9th contains Rahu in aspect to the Moon
denotes a sister (i.e. the native’s coborn) being
interested in other men. Birthin Capricorn ascendant with Leo Navamsa while Saturn is in conjunction with Jupiter denotes an unfortunate and
wicked mother, who will not care to honour her
husband’s words. The 4th lord in Chaaravastha(?) in the company of Saturn will give a long
living mother, who will have secret relations with
others and be auspicious (?)
Notes: In these slokas four important events
are prescribed which are independent:
(1) Ascendant Capricorn, Sachira Nadiamsa, containing Saturn-Mars in it - bride from
mother’s side.
(2) The lord of 9th Mercury in Gemini
Navamsa, while Rahu is in the 9th house (Virgo)
in aspect to Moon - sister with illicit connections.
(3) Capricorn ascendant with Leo Navamsa (1.6. 23 deg. 20’ to 26 deg. 40’ of Capricorn
rising) while Jupiter and Saturn are together in
Rasi - unfortunate and wicked mother who does
not care for her husband, i.e. the native’s father.
(4) 4th lord Mars (in Charavastha?) with
Saturn - long-living mother but with illicit ties.
SRT विलग्नेशे सुखेशेन समन्विते। । ५५४। |
मातृवंशे महद्भाग्यं स्वपितुर्जावनं स्मृतम्।

Deva Keralam
चापारूटं Gees कुम्भे शनि.समन्विते। । ५५५। |
चापे जीवे sac मातामहसुभागयवान्।
SEG: TAMPA | ५५६। ।
राजद्वारे प्रसिद्धिः स्यान्नरवाहनभाग्यवान्।
लग्नारूढे निंशानाथे .विषनाड्यांशजातके। ! ५५७ |
माता सौख्यवती पूता भ्रातृभरत्रीसमन्विता,
ग्रन्थान्ते विलग्नेशे राजावस्थग्रहैर्युते। । ५५८ । |
स्वमातृसोद्री नास्ति माता भ्रातृसमन्विता।
चन्द्राष्ठवर्ग निक्षिप्य Hil चन्द्रे यावत्फ लैर्युते। 1 ५५९ |
तावत्संख्या पिरायुष्यं मातृसोदरमादिशेत्।
554-5591/2. Relatives: Saturn in Sachira
Nadiamsa with the lord of the 4th denotes an
abundantly prosperous maternal family. The
native’s father will have a (good) living. The 4th
lord in Sagittarius along with Jupiter, as Saturn is
placed in Aquarius denotes a fortunate maternal
grand-father. The said grand-father will have
numerous children, much wealth, brothers and
sisters, will acquire fame in royal service and will
have men-borne conveyances. The Moon in the
ascendant for a birth in Visha Nadiamsa will
cause happiness to mother who will be pureminded and will be endowed with brothers and
sisters, Elsewhere it is stated that the ascendant
lord (Saturn) in the company of a planet that is in
Rajavastha denotes a mother bereft of a sister but
endowed with brothers. The number of living
coborns will correspond to the net Bindus in
Chandrashtaka Varga.
Notes: In sloka 557, Visha Nadiamsa is
cited. This Nadiamsa in a movable sign extends
from 10 deg. 12’ to 10 deg. 24; in an immovable
Rasi from 19 deg. 36’ to 19 deg. 48’; and in a
common sign from 25 deg. 12’ to 25 deg. 24 of
space.
In Capricorn, this Nadiamsa rises from 10
deg. 12’ to 10 deg. 24. In such a case, the Moon
should be in Ascendant. Then the mother will be
happy & C.
मीनारूढे विलग्नेशे। स्वोच्वांशे कुजसंयते। । ५६०।
स्वमातुसोदरः समप्त् वा वसुसंख्यया |
मातुलद्रयमायुष्यं शेषं नाशम तीरयेत्। । ५६१। |
560-561. Maternal uncles: Saturn in the
company of Mars placed in Pisces Rasi and in
Libra Navamsa denotes 7 or 8 brothers for the
native’s mother. Only two of them will be longlived and the rest will not survive.
सुखेशे वृषभाशस्थे लग्नेशे सविरांशगे।
मातामहः प्रसिद्धः स्यादग्रहारप्रतिष्टवान्। । ५६२ । |
562. Maternal grand-father: The lord of
ascendant (Saturn) in Sachira Nadiamsa while
the 4th lord (Mars) is in Taurus Navamsa denotes
the following. The native’s maternal grand-father
will be famous in his colony (of Brahmins).
मातुलाधिपतौ Sey मकरे रविसंयुते।
क्षयावस्थे प्रजातस्य मातुलः क्षयरोगवान्। । 4831 |
563. Maternal uncle: If Mercury, as a ruler
of the 6th house, is in Capricorn ascendant in the
company of the Sun, the native’s maternal uncle
will be troubled by tuberculosis of the lungs.
(Kshayavastha is a strange term we find in this
context. Hence excluded.)
वृषभांशे सुखधीशे लग्नेशेन समन्विते।
क्षयरोगं मातृवंशे मातुलद्रयनाशनम्। | ५६४। |
564. Destruction of maternal uncles: Two
of the native’s maternal uncles will be destroyed
on account of lung tuberculosis if the 4th lord
(Mars) joins the ascendant lord (Saturn) and
occupies Taurus in Navamsa.
aig. er ips खाधीशेष्यसितेन समन्विते।
माता waa चैव TSA गुप्त्वारिणी। । ५६५। ।
स्वन्येष्ठभगिनी चेति जायते मृतपूत्रिणी।
चरावस्थफलं सत्यं स्वफिता सोदरीयुत५ । ५६६ |
565-566. Mars in Rajavastha (2) with Saturn
denotes female children to mother (1.6. the native
will have sisters). The mother will be skillful in
extracting the secrets of her family members. Her
elder sister will give birth to dead children. The
native’s father will be endowed with sisters. ह
fects thus stated for Charavastha (?) will be true.
Notes: Certain terms relating to Avasthas,
viz. Charavastha, Chaaravastha, Rajavastha,
Kshayastha have never been come across by me.
These terms seem to be strange.

स व्याधिपतौ भानौ चारावस्थेअर्कनन्दने।
Phd ey हः
पतन द्रौ पुत्रवन्तवेको वन्ध्यापतिभवेत् 1 ५६८ । |
567-568. Saturn being in Chaaravastha, the
Sun being the lord of the (seventh) house denoting paternal uncle (the relation between these two
planets remains unstated)...denotes a paternal
uncle who will be an expert in adultery. Further
he will be troubled by urinary disorders and will
beget dead children. The native will have two
paternal uncles one of whom will have children
and the other will be childless. [This rule applies
to Aquarius ascendant.]
सचिराञे विलग्नेशे विषनाङ्यंशजातके।
वण सूर्ये लग्नेशे सचिरांशके। । ५६९। |
: स्यात् सोदरभ्रातृमित्रवान्।
569-5691/2. The native’s paternal grandfather will be famous and be endowed with
brothers and sisters if the native belongs to Visha
Nadiamsa, while Saturn is in Sachira Nadiamsa,
and the Sun in Mukunda Nadiamsa. [From here
on, Capricorn ascendant is discussed. ]
पंचमाधिपतौ शुक्रे मकरे मिथुनाशगे। | ५७० । |
wart सन्दृष्टे राजसेवी पितामहः।
विदेशे वासवान् रागी व्यवसायपरःसुखी। । ५७१। |
अग्रहारनिवासः स्यात् किचिदुद्योगलाभवान्।
570-5711/2. If the 5 lord Venus is in
Capricorn ascendant, in Gemini Navamsa in
aspect to 9th lord, the paternal grand-father will
be in royal service. He will live in a foreign land,
be passionate, will live by agriculture (also), and
be happy. He will reside in a Brahmins’ colony.
He will somewhat gain serving others.
लग्नात्तृतीयगे चन्द्रे कुम्भांशे केतुसंयुते। । ५७२। |
व ष्यं श्रातृद्रसचिरायुष |
शेषं प्रहस्तत्तन्मारककालगे। | ५७३ । |
572-573. Coborn: The Moon in the 3rd
house from the ascendant (i.e. placed in Pisces
Rasi) in the company of Ketu, and occupying
Aquarius Navamsa: two each of brothers and
sisters of the native will be long-lived while rest
Chandra Kala Nadi
will pass away (prematurely) in their respective
Maraka periods.
भाग्यकर्माधिपे लग्ने तदीशे सचिरांशगे।
fared परं भाग्यं faced सुकीर्तिमान्। | ५७४।
574, The lords of the 9th and 10th (i.e. Mercury and Venus) placed in the ascendant while
Saturn is in Sachira Nadiamsa will give prosperity
after 20th year of age. In 2nd dasa he will attain
wide fame.
अष्टमाधिपतौ लग्ने जुभद्रयसमन्विते।
जन्मान्तगे जन्मदाये मृतप्रायोपि जीवति। । ५७५। |
575. See if the 8th lord is placed in
(Capricorn) ascendant in the concluding portion.
If he then joins two benefics, the native in his first
dasa will meet near-death, but will survive.
Notes: The 8th lord should be in the last
degrees of the ascendant Capricorn. If he joins
two benefics, the near-death in the first dasa will
be overcome. (Otherwise, without benefics in the
picture, the native may face early threat to his
life-span.)
स्वोच्चांशगे विलग्ने ५ तेन समन्विते।
विद्याविनयसम्पन्नः कोपी । । ५७६ ।.।
576. Saturn joming Mars, and placed in
Libra Navamsa denotes a person with learning
and modesty. He will be in the grip of anger only
to be passified instantly.
Notes: The navamsa position is for Saturn.
Mars may be in any Navamsa.
सचिरांशे विलग्नेशे ब |
विवान् भोगी
विपद्दासे महदुभाग्यं तसुखावहम्।
गृहे _लक्ष्मीकयक्षदिनरवाहनयेगवान्। | ५७८। ।
प्रनलोद्योगवान् भोगी लग्नेशे सचिरीशगे।
भगिनीद्रयमायुष्यं भ्रातृद्रयचिरायुषः। | ५७९1 |
577-579. The ascendant lord in Sachira
Nadiamsa will make the native earn fame through
royal service. He will have two wives, will enjoy
pleasure and will have self-earned wealth. In the
2nd dasa, he will attain great prosperity and will
beget happiness through his older brother. His

Deva Keralam S7
family will be blessed by Goddess Lakshmi (i.e.
wealth will multiply) and he will acquire menborne conveyances. He will get into superior jobs
and enjoy pleasures. Two each of his brothers and
sister's will enjoy longevity.
मातुलाधिपतौ सौम्ये क्षयावस्थे विलग्नगे।
सचिराशे = RTT कर्शितः। । ५८०। |
मातुलौ द्रौ lla 8.० स्मृतम्।
मातुलस्येकमायुष्यं जातकं। । ५८१। I
580-581. The 6th lord Mercury in
Kshayavastha in the ascendant will cause to the
Sachira Nadiamsa native an emaciated maternal
uncle troubled by tuberculosis of the lungs. The
native will have (in all) two maternal uncles, endowed with sons. One uncle will be long-lived.
Note: These arc repitition of slokas 563 etc.
षोडशष्दात् परं भाग्यं स्वज्येष्ठभगिनीसुखम्।
दीर्घायुषी पुत्रिणी च भवृभाग्यप्रदःसुखी। । ५८२ । ।
582. The native (with Mercury in Capricorn
Lagna) will prosper after the 16th year of his age.
He will enjoy happiness through his older sister.
She will be long-lived and will be fortunate lor her
husband.
ae विलग्नेशे लभेशेन समन्विते।
स्वज्येष्ठभगिनीभतु Pl ay va, | । ५८३। |
SATE नश्च जीवति।
ane ते मानी -पृतसन्तानयोगवान्। । ५८४। ।
कालान्ते सुतप्रप्तिर्योगवान् भाग्यवान् सुखी।
583-5841/2. Brother-in-law: Ifthe ascendant
lord (Saturn) is placed in Sachira Nadiamsa in the
company of 11th lord (Mars), the native’s elder
brother-in-law will prosper through his friends.
The said relative’s brothers will not be long-lived.
He will live by teaching and law. He will have
stcp-brothers and be honourable. He will beget
dead children. After a long interval he will obtain
a son that will survive.
सवपिरांशे विलग्ने अष्टादशकवत्सरे । । ५८५। |
sda RU तमूलात् सुभाग्यवान्।
कनिष्ठभगिनीभर्ती कर्शिंतः। । ५८६ । |
बहुसन्तान वांश्चेति अल्पयोगप्रदः सुखी |
585-5861/2. During the native’s 18th year the
said relative (older brother-in-law) will prosper
through father. The native’s younger brother-inlaw will be somewhat sickly and emaciated. He
will have many children and checkered
prosperity. He will be happy.
मीनशनौो जन्मदेशे नृपवधि।
मातुलस्तु सुसन्तानं क्षयरोगेण कर्थितः। । ५८८। |
agai भाग्यवृद्धिः पितृसौख्यं क्व चित् सुखम्।
सहोदरी विवाह च दशन्ते ART । ५८८ |
सम्पद्दाये विवाहः स्याद्विपद्दाय श्रिय वहम् |
HAM WAM Seca गते शने 1 ५९०। |
सविराशे जन्मदेशे सेनाधिपतिनाशनम्।
587-5901/2. Saturn in Capricorn while the
Moon is in Pisces Rasi with Aquarius Navamsa -
this yoga will give virtuous children to maternal
uncles, but troubles on account of tuberculosis
and emaciation. The native’s maternal relatives
will prosper while his father will sometimes be
happy. With Saturn in Pisces in transit coinciding
with the native’s first dasa, his sister will get marricd and he will have his Upanayana (Sacred
thread ceremony as per Vedic prescriptions). His
marriage will occur in his second dasa. His third
dasa will cause acquisition of wealth. When
Saturn comes to the Rasi indicated by the navamsa position of Ketu at birth, or its trine, the
country’s army-chief will be destroyed(?)
Notes: The Moon in Pisces will begct
Aquarius Navamsa when placed between 23 deg.
20’ and 26 deg. 40°. The Moon rules maternal
uncles only when she is the 6th lord. But here the
text takes the Moon into account although she 15
the lord of the 7th. The Navamsa ascendant being
Aquarius and the Moon being ruler of mother,
the text gives importance to the planet. The
Moon is 6th lord from Navamsa ascendant.
Saturn’s transit in 3rd in Pisces features in
respect of sister’s marriage, This is because of the
Moon’s position therein.
कुम्भ तुलांशगे मन्दे द्धराशिचतुष्ठये। । ५९१ । |
मृतियोगं गते मन्दे जन्मदेशे नृपावधि।
दायादिप्रमुखेः क्लेशं मातृवंशे मंहाविपत्। । ५९२। |
स्वजनारिष्ठमाप्नोति प्रबलक्लेशवान् भवेत्।

5£ Chandra Kala Nadi
§91-5921/2. For a Capricorn ascendant native, Saturn in Aquarius with Libra Navamsa, (or)
in art angle from the 8th, will cause quarrels with
important relatives, great dangers to maternal
kinsmen and his own relatives and a great deal of
agony to the native himself.
Note: First line of sloka 592 has an erroneous Yoga and an unrelated effect.
GRY विपद्दाये मातुलज्ञातिवगंक । । ५९३। |
विशेषाद्भाग्यमित्याहुः पुत्रसन्तानवृद्धिकृत्।
593-5931/2. Second dasa: For one born in
Sachira Nadiamsa, his second dasa will give abundant prosperity to maternal relatives. Birth of
children will occur in their families.
धने मन्दे शुभे राहौ चरेशे पपेसंयुते। । ५९४। ।
विपद्दाये दारहानि क्षपरिणद्राहयोगवान्।
धनेशंशे तततिकोणे स्फुटयोगं गते शनो। । ५९५। |
i ष्ठिराशौ तु सन्तानारिष्ठदोषवान्।
शे तत्तरिकोणे र्रशांशत्रिकोणगे। । ५९६। ।
स्फुटयोगं गते मन्दे मातुलारिष्ठशोकवान्।
तदभावे. मातृवंशे hh ५९७। |
बन्धुवर्गे विचारः स्यात्करूरमासे |
594-5971/2. Evils: Saturn in the 2nd, Rahuin
the 9th, and the lord of the week-day of birth with
a malefic - this yoga kills the native’s wife in the
(very) second dasa, and immediately re- marriage
will occur to the native. Saturn coming 1n transit
to the Rasi represented by the natal Navamsa
position of the 2nd lord, or to a trine thereof, or
to the Rasi that is aspected by the 12th lord, will
cause danger to the native’s children. Maternal
uncles will be destroyed with Saturn’s transit in
the Rasiidentical with the natal Navamsa position
of the ascendant lord, or its trine, or the Rasi
identical with 8th lord’s Navamsa position or trine
thereof. In the absence of this, there will be severe
destrucion of some other maternal relatives. The
Sun’s transit in evil Rasis will in this connection
be revealing. The entire clan of relatives will be
grief-struck (on account of such death/deaths).
Notes: The lord of the week-day of birth is
brought into the picture in this 3-planet yoga.
Saturn in 2nd in Aquarius, Rahu in 9th in Virgo,
and lord of week-day of birth in association with
a malefic. This will cause wife’s death in the
native’s 2nd dasa, paving way for an immediate
remarriage. From this we understand that the
lord of the week-day of birth is not less important
than the lord of ascendant.
The seven week-days are named after the
seven planets from the Sun to Saturn. Ketu
denotes Tuesday and Rahu Saturday.
Exclude this 3-planet yoga in respect of
danger to children. The requirements then are:
Saturn should come to the Rasi in transit which is
identical with his own natal Navamsa position.
Alternatively he can transit the Rasi which at birth
is aspected by the lord of the 12th (i.e. Jupiter).
Such a transit of Saturn will endanger the native’s
offspring.
The Rasi aspected by 12th lord assumes
additional importance as the 12th house for
Capricorn ascendant is ruled by Jupiter, the significator of progeny.
लाभेशंशे aT स्फुटयोगं गते शनौ। । ५९८। ।
जननीव्याकुलं चेति मात्ृवर्गेअल्युपद्रवम्।
कर्माधिपदशाकाले कर्मराशित्रिकोणगे। । ५९९। ।
सहोदरभ्रातृपीडा स्पफुटयोगस्य जातके।
सुखेशंशे aA PHA गते WAL | ६००। |
स्वपिता देहजाडचादि efteash महाविपत्।
सचिरांशे IGT सुखेशांशत्रिकोणगे। | ६०१। |
स्फटयोगं गते मन्दे पित्ररिष्टं विनिर्दिशेत्
Mil चेति पितृव्यस्य तथापि च। । ६०२।।
मृत्युविंपदूदोये न संशयः।
598-6021/2. The period of Saturn’s transit in
the Rasi identical with the Navamsa position of
the 11th lord or a trine thereof will cause agony
to mother and troubles to her relatives. ‘Troubles
to brothers be foretold in the native’s 10th lord’s
Dasa if Saturn in transit as above is related to the
10th lord’s Navamsa position. The 4th lord’s
Navamsa as above vis-a-vis Saturn’s transit will
cause health problein and great danger to father
in the native’s third Dasa. Also consider the sign
aspected by the 4th lord’s navamsa dispositor.
Where Saturn’s transit will further distress the
native’s mother and paternal uncle. Third dasa
will cause death of father or of a relative of similar
status.

Deva Keralam 59
Notes: Saturn’s transit for Capricorn ascendant in the Rasi denoted by Navamsa positions of
certain bhava lords at birth will be adverse for the
following relative, vide slokas 594 to 6021/2 as
indicated below:
~ Children
- Children
2nd lord’s Navamsa Rasi
Rasi aspected by 12th lord
Ascendant lord’s
Navamsa Rasi
8th lord’s Navamsa Rasi
- Maternal uncles
- Maternal uncles
11th lord’s Navamsa Rasi - Mother &
Relatives
10th lord’s Navamsa Rasi - Brothers
4th lord’s Navamsa Lord - Mother,
paternal uncle.
4th lord’s Navamsa Rasi - Father
For Capricorn ascendant, Saturn is himself
lord of ascendant and 2nd. Mars rules 4th as well
as 11th. Interpretation should be made according
to situation, apart from dasas etc. to identify the
right individual relative.
सचिरांशकगे मन्दे पु दिवाकरे । । ६०३। |
विपदुदाये पित्ररिष्टं nal |
अथवा मकरे मृत्युः Bes | । ६०४। |
स्वमाता विधवा भूत्वा बहुकालं सुजीवति।
603-6041/2. Father’s death: Saturn in
Sachira Nadiamsa while the Sun is in Mukunda
Nadiamsa will prove fatal to the native’s father or
a relative equal to father during third Dasa when
Jupiter in transit comes to the last degrees of
Scorpio, or when he moves in the sign Capricorn,
in adverse months. The mother will live for a long
time as a widow.
Notes: Mukunda Nadiamsa extends from
26 deg. 36’ to 26 deg. 48’ in movable signs; from 3
deg. 12’ to3 deg. 24 in immovable signs; and from
11 deg. 36’ to 11 deg. 48’ in common signs.
Mukunda is a synonym of Lord Vishnu who
is known so for He is the authority to bestow final
emancipation or Moksha. Thus this Nadiamsa
deals with one’s exit from this world. The Sun is
the indicator of father.
As per the present slokas, the Sun should be
in Mukunda Nadiamsa which denotes short life
to father.
विपत्तारदशन्त्यादिक्षेमदाये स्वभुक्तिषु। । ६०५। |
मत्रिष्टमिति प्राहः स्फटयोगन्त्यकालगे।
605-6051/2. The learned declare danger to
mother when the native will be in the concluding
part of 3rd Dasa, or in the first sub- period of 4th
Dasa. (Sphutayoganthyakaalage is an unintelligible addition in the text.)
कर्मभाग्याधिपे केन्द्रे Cy शनिसमन्विते। । ६०६।।
भययोगमिति प्रा (क
चतुर्विंशत् परं भग्ययोगं च : | । ६०७। |
अथवा वसुवर्षणि पश्चात् क्लेशं विनिर्दिशेत्।
606-6071/2. Fortunes: One will have meagre
fortunes and be under fear if the 9th and 10th
lords are in an angle as Saturn is in the8th house.
The native will enjoy fortunes for two or three
years after he is 24. He will have difficulties after
the age of eight.
Notes: For Capricorn ascendant, the lords
of 9th and 10th (Mercury and Venus) joining in
an angle will be checked from giving Raja Yoga
effects, if Saturn is in Leo.
धने पपद्रये योगे नवमे राह संस्थिवे। । ६०८। |
वार्धिके क्लेशमाप्नोति यौवने भाग्यवान् क्व चित्।
RR सुतप्राप्तिरल्पसन्तानयोगवान्। । ६०९। |
608-609. Old age: Two malefics in the 2nd
house as Rahu is in the 9th house will cause
troubles in old age, but some fortunes will accrue
in the native’s youth. He will beget sons through
his second wife, but will have limited progeny.
Shae विलग्नेशे nd |
मृतप्रजाबहत्वं च द्वित्रिसन्तानवान् सुखी। | ६१९० |
सुतेशे ea .भुक्तियोगांश संख्यया।
तावत्संख्या सुतप्राप्तिदीर्धमायुश्च विन्दति। । ६११। ।
610-611. Children: Saturn in Sachira
Nadiamsa will give a number of children. Many
children will be born dead. Ultimately the native

will be left with two or three surviving children.
The number of long-living children will depend
on the rays obtained, or on the Navamsa past, by
the Sth lord.
Notes: For Capricorn ascendant, Saturn in
Sachira Nadiamsa carries with him the blemish of
instant deaths of "many" children. In the end, two
or three will survive. However, the number of
surviving children can increase if the Sth lord
Venus obtains more Navamsas. That is, the Sth
lord Venus covering increased Navamsas in the
Rasi he is in at birth will have chance of giving
more surviving children. This clue is clear.
Another clue is to depend on the rays obtained by the 5th lord Venus. Rays are known as
Kiranas in Sanskrit. Calculating Kiranas is rather
an elaborate process all of which cannot be explained in the notes here. The reader is referred
to Saravali, English translation by R. Santhanam,
्षमाधिपद्शाकाले राजादरर ioe मान्यवान्।
संवितार्थविनाशाय एकयोगं त्रिवत्सरम्। । ६१२। |
612. In the 4th Dasa the native will earn
honours in royal service. This yoga will exist for 3
years after which the wealth gathered by him will
be destroyed,
poy aes न eee वा यदि।
अतीव क्लेशकार्यणि शनिभुक्तो श॒भाशुभम्। । ६१३। |
SRR काले aT |
wae क्रूरभुक्तौ तु क्रूरमासे म॒हाविपत्। । ६१४।।
सूयान्तर् शुक्रदाये स्वजनारिष्टशोकवान्।
TTT TT शुक्रभुक्तौ महाविपत्। । ६१५। |
सुखेशांशदशाकाले भग्येशांशदशान्त्यगे।
स्वजन्मदेशनृपतिः क्लेशं प्राप्नेति भूरिश। । ६१६। |
व्ययेशंशदशाकाले स्वभुक्तौ भ्रातृनाशनम्।
अतीव क्लेशकार्यणि बलारिष्ट च
स्वजन्मदेशनुपतिमू तप्रायोअपि जीवति।
स्ववान्धवजनद्रेषं सेनामात्यविरोधिता। | ६१८। |
613-618. For a Sachira Nadiamsa native in
Capricorn Lagna the sub periods of Jupiter and
Mars in any Dasa will cause difficulties while the
sub period of Saturn will give mixed results. In
malefic sub periods, the sub-sub periods of
त्रिशेअब्दे तु महत्क्लेशं wa
Chandra Kala Nadi
Jupiter, Mars and Saturn will cause danger. In
Venus dasa, Sun bhukti the native will be grieved
on account of evils to his people. Venus bhukti will
bring difficulties through king. Difficulties from
king will be galore in the dasa of the 4th lord or in
the end of 9th lord’s dasa. In the dasa and bhukti
of the 12th lord, destrucion of coborn will come
to happen, due to Balarishta. The subject will
incur enmity with his own people and with the
army chief and minister(?)
Wars गते रसते भूसुतेन निरीक्षितः।
स्ववासदेशनर्पत् दुष्ट स्वभावेवान्। । ६१९। |
सदा हास्यजनप्रीतिः क्रूर्कृत्यस्वभाववान्।
उग्रकार्यपरो नित्यं नृत्यगानप्रियः सुखी। | ६२०। |
619-620. Irrelevant: Rahu in the 9th
aspected by Mars causes sickness to the king(?)
who will be wicked, fierce in acts, fond of jokes,
dance and songs.
शक भाग्ये कन्याराहौ प्रजायते।
विपद्दाये सुतेत्पत्तिर्योगः स्याद्रत्सरत्रयम्।
पश्चादृभाग्यच्युतः क्लेशं क्षेमदाये दश FM । ६२२।।
प्रत्यग्दाये महत् सौख्यं राजान्तर वशात्सुखं।
पतरोत्पत्ति निना क्लेशं क्लेशं प्राप्नोति भूरिशः। । ६२३।
621- 623. Rahu in the 9th house in Virgo, and
in Taurus Navamsa will cause fortunes after 20
years of age, and happiness after 24. In the 3rd
dasa, birth of children will occur. After 3 years
fortunes will decline. The same is the case with
4th dasa. In the Sth dasa, the native will get happiness in abundance through the king. Duc to lack
of children, the native will have much gricf.
प्रत्यक्ताराधिपे चन्द्रे स्वभानुयुतवीक्षिते।
HOR फलं स्वल्पं शुभाशुभफलं समम्। । ६२४। |
एकोनचत्वारिशेब्दे चत्वारिशति वत्सरे |
अतीव क्लेशकार्यणि मीने चन्द्रे प्रनायते। । ६२५। |
मीने Wet चन्द्रे विषनाडयं B Poona |
ae
चतुत्रिशे सुखं ध प्रेण क्लेशमादिशेत्।
राजद्रं ¡` संच्चितार्थविनाशनम्। । ६२७। |
कुग्रामवासमाप्नेति स्वस्थानच्युतिशोकवान्।
624-6271/2. The Moon having the rulership
of the 5th asterism from natal star and being in

Deva Keralum 6 |
company of or aspect to Rahu will give following
effects: The sub period of Ketu will give limited
and mixed effects. The 23rd/24th year will be
highly troublesome if the Moon is in Pisces. One
born in Visha Nadiamsa, while the Moon is in
Pisces, with Capricorn Navamsa, will in the 30th
year undergo untold hardships and will have enmity with relatives in the 32nd year. His 34thyear
will cause happiness but troubles will be unexpected. He will incur royal wrath for about two or
three weeks and will lose wealth. He will live ina
small village leaving his earlier place, incurring
grief.
Notes: The 5th dasa should be of the Moon.
She should be related to Rahu. Then in Moon
dasa, Ketu bhukti will get mixed effects.
For Visha Nadiamsa, see notes under sloka
557, supra.
Slokas 626 etc. deal with birth in Capricorn,
Visha Nadiamsa. The Moon should be in Pisces
with Capricorn Navamsa. Results: 30th year -
hardships, 32nd year - enmity. 33rd year - happiness as well as unexpected troubles. Change of
place, royal wrath etc. will also follow.
साधनेशदशकाले vp Bare सस्थितं। । ६२८ ।
अतीव. क्लेशदारिच्ं रऽ |
अपरार्ध क्वचित् सौख्यं शुभाशुभफलं समम्। । ६२९।।
दशान्ते age त्युश्च चन्द्रभुक्तौ महाविपत्।
सविरांशे जनित नेधनेशदशामृतिः। | ६३०। |
रन््रधिपदशकाले वेधकग्रहभुकितिषु।
नेत्रहानिः स्यात् सचिरांशे तु जायते।
मध्ये मध्ये नेत्ररोगमथवा दन्तरोगवान्। । ६३२। |
षटपंचाशत्समान्त्यादि मध्ये संवत्सरद्रये।
628-6321/2. For a Sachira Nadiamsa native,
Rahu in the 9th house will cause abundant difficulties and poverty in the 4th Dasa. There will
be enmity with the king. In the second half of the
said dasa, some improvements will be experienced and good and bad will be mixed. In the
end of the 4th dasa, fear of untimely death will
exist. The sub period of the Moon in the 4th dasa
will endanger the native greatly. Even if the native
survives, death will take place in Sun’s dasa, in the
sub period of an adverse planet. The native will
be having fear of untimely death in adverse years.
He will have loss of sight in old age. In between
he will face eye-diseases, or dental disorders, for
a period of about two years from the end of 56
years of age.
सचिरांशकगे मन्दे मीनमासे मृतिं वदेत्। 18331 |
रन्धेशांशगते वारे क्रूराब्दे कूरमासगे।
633-6331/2. Saturn in Sachira Nadiamsa will
cause death in the month of Pisces (i.e. transit Sun
in Pisces) in an adverse year, adverse month and
on the week-day ruled by the Navamsa dispositor
of the 8th lord Sun.
देहे जीवे राहुकाले अपमृत्युभयं क्वचित्! | ६३४। |
रन्प्राधिपदशासन्धौ महत्क्लेशं समादिशेत्।
जीवान्तरे सर्वदाय BEATA मनोव्यथा। । ६३५। |
634-635. When Rahu transits Deha Rasi, or
Jeeva Rasi, fear of untimely death will prevail. In
the end of Sun’s dasa, the subject will be much
grieved. In the sub periods of Jupiter in any Dasa,
and in evil months, the native will be mentally
distressed.
Notes: Deha/Jeeva Ras reterred to relate to
Kalachakra Dasa.
भाग्यकर्मेशयोगेन योगःस्याद्रत्सरत्रयम्।
योगरोगं प्रकृर्वीत योगकाले सूजातुरः। | ६३६। |
तद्दोषपरिहारर्थं चक्रदानं समाचरे त्।
सचिरंशकगे मन्दे मृगलग्ने तु जायते।
इदमेव फलं सत्यं प्रत्यक्ष देवकेरक्छम्। । ६३७। |
636-637. The conjunction of the 9th and 10th
lords will give yoga for 3 years. This conjunction
will also give deseases when they come together
in transit (in adverse periods). To overcome this
evil, donation of the image of Zodiac be done.
These are the effects of Saturn’s placement in
Sachira Nadiamsa for a Capricorn Lagna native.
Notes: For Sachira Nadiamsa in Capricorn
ascendant, the conjunction of 9th and 10th lords
Venus has a limited utility. In the first place, the
effects will last for 3 years. Which part of life, 15
difficult to know from the instructions available.

62 Chandra Kala Nadi
Their conjunction in transit will often occur.
So it should be interpreted to be operable during
bad dasa periods.
। । मीनलग्नम्-कुन्दंशः (बुधनाडी) । ।
Pisces Ascendant - Kunda Nadiamsa
(Budha Nadi)
कुन्दोशगे सुखधीशे war रविसंयुते। । ६३८ |
कमौधिपेण ष्ठ मीनलग्ने सुभाग्यवान्।
चन्द्रलग्नाधिपे BI गुरूवीक्षिते। । ६३८ |
विकाले प्रजातृश्च पित्रार्जितधनाढ यवान्।
Samar Sey क्षत्रियो वा प्रजायते। | ६४०। |
विष्णुभवित्तर ते नित्यं महानृपतिसेवकः।
वैश्यकाले च तद्वारं बहुव्यापारजीवनम्। । ६४९ |
धनघन्यादिलाभः स्यात् ब्राहम णस्नहवान् सुख ।
YEH राजसेवौ भूमिग्रामाधिपत्यवान्। । ६४२। |
न्यवसायपरो नित्यं पशुधान्यसमूद्धिमान्।
638-6421/2. Kunda Nadiamsa: For a native
of Pisces ascendant, if Mercury is placed in his
own sign in Kunda Nadiamsa, in the company of
the Sun and in aspect to 10th lord Jupiter, good
fortunes will accrue. Mercury becoming the lord
of the Moon sign and being in aspect to Jupiter,
will give paternal wealth to a Pisces native of the
Kunda Nadiamsa, in Vipra Kala. One born in
Kshatriya Kala will worship Lord Vishnu and will
serve an emperor. If the birth be in Vaisya Kala,
the subject will acquire livelihood by various business activities. He will gain wealth and grains, will
serve Brahmanas and be happy. One born in
Soodra Kala will serve a king, will own lands and
villages, will be an agriculturist and will have plenty of quadrupeds and corns.
Notes: From here through sloka 855, rules
from Budha Nadi are quoted.
To start with, Pisces ascendant, Kunda
Nadiamsa is dealt with,
Kunda Nadiamsa rules thus: From 26 deg.
24 to 26 deg. 36’ in movable signs; from 3 deg. 24”
to 3 deg. 30! in immovable signs; from 11 deg. 24
to 11 deg. 36’ of common signs.
In the first yoga, Mercury should be in
Gemini/Virgo in unity with the Sun and be
aspected by Jupiter. As a result the native will be
fortunate. The Sun is 6th lord.
In the second yoga, Vipra Kala should rise.
That is to say, birth ascendant should be 11 deg.
36’ to 11 deg. 39’ of Pisces. Further, the Moon,
being Sth lord, should be in the 4th/7th
whereupon Mercury begets Moon Rasi ownership. Jupiter should additionally aspect Mercury.
Result - paternal wealth.
The clues for births in other 3 parts of this
Nadiamsa are independent of second yoga mentioned above.
Kshatriya Kala of Kunda Nadiamsa in Pisces
extends from 11 deg. 39’ to 11 deg. 42’ of arc. One
born in this part will be a devotee of Lord Vishnu
and will be associated with an emperor.
Vaisya Kala of this Nadiamsa is from 11 deg.
42’ to 11 deg. 45’ when it rises in Pisces. The
native will be a trader true to the nathe of the part
of the Nadiamsa.
Soodra Kala is the last one fourth part, ie.
11 deg. 45’ to 11 deg. 48” in Pisces. Such a native
will be a rich person with agricultural lands, quadrupeds and the like.
कृन्दांशके fanart सैम्ये गुरूनिरीक्षिते। । ६४३। |
al ass! 1 |
ज्येष्ठभ्रातयुतो मा ग्यसमृद्धिमान्। | ६४४। |
भेदग्रातृयुतश्चैव ACMA भवेत्। ह
643-6441/2. For birth in Pisces ascendant in
Vipra Kala of Kunda Nadiamsa, if Mercury is in
aspect to Jupiter, the younger coborns are
destroyed. The native will have older coborns, be
honourable and will have abundant paternal
wealth. He will have full brothers and stepbrothers as well.
Notes: Here Mercury’s position is not
prescribed unlike in the previous slokas. His connection in general with Jupiter is adverse for the
native’s younger coborn. But the birth should be
in the portion 11 deg. 36’ to 11 deg. 39” in Pisces.
However, the native will have full preborns,
paternal wealth and step- brothers. He will be an
honourable person as well.

Deva Keralam 63
प्रजाश्च हरिशंकरभक््तिमान्।
देव ब्राह्मणभक्तश्च 7 a सुखी । । ६४६। |
राजद्वारे प्रसिद्धश्च |
स्वपितान्दोच्िकाप्राप्तिर्वयोमध्ये सुभागयवान्। । ६४७। |
आत्मस्तुतिपरो नित्यं परोपकृतिकार्यवान्।
स्वपितुस्सोदगाः Ga भगिनीद्रयवान् सुखी। । exc! |
ज्येष्टश्नातृवियोगेन स्वपितुः क्लेशमादिशेत्।
ततः gar dh TEAS । ६४९। |
महानृपतितद्रारि ae |
वनान्तरपुरे वासं elu hk । | ६५० | |
वेष्णवद्रेषमूलेन क्लेशवान् पिता।
645-6501/2. If the 7th lord is in aspect to
Jupiter, one born in Kunda Nadiamsa will worship Lord Vishnu and Lord Siva. He will honour
gods and Brahmins and will have (long-living)
parents. He will be happy, will gain fame in royal
service and will have three conveyances. During
the native’s middle age, his father will acquire
palanquins (1.6. some conveyance) and fortunes.
The native will indulge in self-praising and will
help others. His father will have five brothers and
two sisters and be happy. Due to loss of older
brother, his father will incur grief. Following this
the father will migrate to the southern part of the
country. He will serve an empcror and will
befriend Brahmins. He will live in a town amidst
forests and will also serve a mean ruler. Hating
Vaishnavites, he will incur many difficultics.
Notes: We have to delink here the four parts
of Kunda Nadiamsa, and just apply the present
rules in general to Kunda Nadiamsa in Pisces
ascendant.
Mercury aspected by Jupiter will make the
native worship Lord Vishnu and Lord Siva. Mercury rules Vishnu. Devotion to Lord Siva is because of Jupiter-Mercury association. Other
effects given upto sloka 6501/2 are clear.
जन्मकाले पिता Sat SR सोमनन्दने। । ६५९। |
मकरांशस्य दोषेण तुरियन्दे मनोव्यृथा।
पश्चाद्भाग्याभिवृद्धिः स्यात् सम्पद्दाये पितुः सुखम्॥ ६५२॥
राजयोगाभिवुद्धश्च भर्तुनाशे विनिर्दिशेत्।
— pppoe ६५२। |
मातुलस्तु सुखी ।
भेद्रातृविवाहं स्यादुभेदभ्रतुसु तक्षयम् EGY | ।
मातामहारिष्ठं स्यान्मृ तप्रायोअपि sata
651-6541/2. Mercury in Kunda Nadiamsa for
a Pisces native will at the time of native’s birth
cause grief to father. If Navamsa Lagna be
Capricorn, the native’s fourth year ज्वा cause
distress to father, and after some interval father
will have increased fortunes. The native’s second
dasa will ¢ause happiness to father. The native’s
prosperity will be in progress. He will lose his
protectors. His step-brothers will acquire
progeny. His (full) brothers will be abundantly
happy. In the native’s first dasa, birth of children
to maternal uncle will come to pass. And his
step-brother will get married. Possibly children of
step- brothers will also be destroyed. Evils to
maternal grand-mother will also be experienced:
she will meet with near death and will survive.
Notes: In these slokas, Mercury's position
is fixed in Kunda Nadiamsa. The ascendant
should be Pisces, but need not necessarily be ina
particular degree. Then the father will be
grieved.
If the Navamsa ascendant be Capricorn (1.6.
Pisces 20 deg, - 23 deg 20’ rising), ine native’s 4th
year will cause distress to father & C.
लग्नात् सप्तमगे चन्द्रे केसरीयोगजातके। । ६५५। |
पितृमातृचिरायुष्यं मातामहाश्चिरायुषम्।
655-6551/2. Kesari Yoga: One born with this
Yoga while the Moon is in the 7th house from the
ascendant will have long-living parents. His
maternal grand-mother will also be long-lived.
Notes: The author refers to Kesari yoga
where the Moon should be in Virgo in the 7th. We
should know the difference between Gaja Kesar
Yoga and merely Kesari Yoga.
Very few texts exactly describe Gaja Kesari.
Perhaps many compilers for want of brevity did
resort to brief mention of the conditions of Gaja
Kesari.
In Gaja Kesari the main constituent is
Jupiter. The Moon may or may not be in the
picture. I have given some relevant information

on this in Essentials of Predictive Hindu Astrology,
25 well as Brihat Parasara Hora, Part 1.
Coming to Kesari yoga, the constitutents are
two planets - the Moon and Jupiter by being
mutually angular.
Long life, renown, high intelligence,
destroying enemies and valour are the main effects of this Yoga. There is a view that one with
this yoga will highly prosper in the dasa ruled by
Venus.
Coming to our text, the Moon forming
Kesari Yoga should be in Virgo in the 7th. Jupiter
can be in any of the four common signs. As a
result, the native’s parents and maternal grandmother will enjoy long leases of life.
arses गते see स्वेक्षिते रविसंयुते। । ६५६।
मातमहाश्चिरायुष्यं मातुलद्रयवान् भवेत्।
सम्पत्तारदशकाले लग्नेशंश्रिकोणगे। । ६५७। |
स्फुटयोगं गते मन्दे मातुलारिष्टमादिशेत्।
जननीभ्रातृशेकेन सम्पदूदा्य मनोव्यथ। । ६५८। |
656-658. Maternal relatives: Mercury in
Kunda Nadiamsa in the company of Saturn will
give following effects: The native’s maternal
grand-mother will be long-lived. He will have two
maternal uncles. In his second dasa with Saturn’s
transit in a Rasi identical with the Navamsa position of ascendant lord at birth or its trine, evils to
maternal uncles will occur. In this dasa, his
mother will be grieved on account of death of her
brother,
मन्दे कीटन्त्यगे काले जननीव्याढुलं महत्।
दलित काले लग्नेशे स्वोच्चकालगे। । ६५९।
युनान्त्यंशगे ig Say Ara
सुतधिपदशकाले कुन्दशे बहुसौख्यवान्। । ६६०। |
ब राजसन्मानं WAM परं सुखम्।
भेद्रातृशुभं चेति 1 ।
स्वपिता मित्रवर्भेषु योग प्राप्नेति
पितृमूलादिष्टसिद्धिर्मातुलस्य शुभानि च।
659.(.421/2. When Saturn in transit arrives at
the end of Scorpio the native’s mother will be
greatly distressed. The Kundamsa native will have
sacred thread ceremony with Saturn in exaltation
a
Chandra Kala Nadi
while ascendant lord Jupiter is in the end of
Gemini, or in Cancer. In the dasa of Sth lord, the
native in question will be very happy. His father
in this dasa will acquire royal honours, and be
happy after destroying his enemies. The native
will acquire palanquins, jewels etc. and will be
happy throughout the dasa in question. This
period will prove auspicious for his stepbrothers. He will enjoy great happiness through
his parents. There will be prosperity among his
father’s friends. The native will have his desires
fulfilled through his father. His maternal uncle
will obtain auspicious effets.
Notes: From slokas 660 to 6621/2, the effects
given are for one dasa. /Sutadhipadasakale’
means the dasa of the Sth lord and the rendering
is made as above accordingly. From sloka 663
onwards the words "Sukhadipadasa" appear
meaning the dasa of 4th lord. As the text so far
deals with Mercury from the beginning of this
portion of Kunda Nadiamsa, sloka 660 etc. should
be dealing with Mercury’s dasa and not Moon’s
dasa. Hence it should be Sukhadipa dasa kaale.
This terms continues in the following slokas also.
सुखधिपदशाकाले मुकुन्दंशे तु जायते। । ६६३।।
स्वमातुलशिशुक्लेशं पृतप्रयेश्रप जीवति,
स्वभेदभगिनीभती oo oe । ६६४ |
yaar परं चेति योगवान् सुखी।
663-6641/2. In the dasa of the 4th lord, the
native of Mukunda Nadiamsa (Pisces Lagna) will
come across the following effects: His maternal
uncle’s child will be endangered and will escape
death. The native’s step-brother-in-law will obtain a prosperous employment. He will beget a
son after which he will become famous and
prosperous.
Notes: Mukunda Nadiamsa is different
from Kunda Nadiamsa. For the former, please
see notes under sloka 603 etc.
मुकुन्दाशे सुखाधीशे रिपुनाथेन न । । ६६५। |
जन्मदाये पितृक्लेशं क्ररब्दे |
सिंहे शनिस्थिते काले स्वपितुर्व्यकुलं महत्। । ६६६। |
अतिसारप्रपौडादि सोदरोत्पत्तिनाशनम्।
मसूरिकाभयप्राप्तिर्मातृपीडा क्वचिद्भवे त्।\६६७। |
पशुधन्यविनाशेन व्याकुलं भवति श्रुवम्।

Deva Keralam 6
665-6671/2. Sun-Mercury conjunction: The
Pisces Lagna native (Mukunda Nadiamsa) having
the 4th lord in the company of 6th lord will see his
father in danger in his very first dasa. The father
will be troubled by fever with Sun’s adverse movements in evil signs. When Saturn is in Leo, the
native’s father will be in great distress. He will also
suffer from dysentery etc. The native’s afterborns being then born will pass away. His mother
will suffer from small-pox and the like. The family
will incur destruction of quadrupeds, grains and
the like.
Notes: With Saturn in transit in Leo, the
Pisces native with Mukunda Nadiamsa will have
destruction of younger coborns whose births
occur then. Saturn will aspect 3rd, Taurus. Also
see slokas 670-671 infra about loss of coborn
occurring in the bhukti of Venus, in the very first
dasa of the native.
राहुस्थितांशके मन्दे गोचरे तत्रिकोणगे। । ६६८। |
जन्मदाये जन्मदेशेराज्यधिपतिविग्रहम्।
कन्यांशकस्थिते काले जन्मदेशे नृपावधि। । ६६९। |
राजामात्यजनक्लेशं दशसन्धौ महाविपत्।
668-6691/2. Rahu’s Navamsa: See in which
Navamsa Rahu is stationed at the time of birth
(Pisces Lagna, Mukunda Nadiamsa_ native).
When Saturn comes into that Rasi or a trine
thereof in transit, the native will in the first dasa
acquire royal wrath. When Saturn transits in
Virgo Navamsa, troubles from king and minister
are to be expected. In the end of first dasa the
native will be greatly endangered.
शुक्रान्तरे जन्मदाये सोदरोत्पत्तिमादिशेत्। | ६७०। |
स्वजन्मदेशनपतिर्जातमात्रेण कर्शितः
बन्धुवर्गे मनस्तापो व्यकुलानन्तरं सुखम्। । ६७१।
670-671. Destruction of coborn: In the sub
period of Venus, in the first dasa of the native,
there will occur loss of coborn to him. After a spell
of mental distress and troubles to relatives, happiness will come to prevail.
सम्मद्दाये श्रियोवाप्तिमंषन्ते aay गुरूः ।
ca
672. Fortunes: In the 2nd dasa, the native
will acquire wealth in abundance conciding with
Jupiter’s transit form the end of Aries through
Gemini, including Taurus. His coborn during this
time will also stand to benefit of being happy and
rich,
TERM cera स्फुटयोगं गते शनौ।
all sada विनिर्दिेत्। । ६७३।।
निबाहत्सवकार्यणि स्वज्येष्ठभगिनीमुखम्।
673-6731/2. Moon’s Navamsa: When Saturn
in transit arrives in the Rasi represented by natal
Moon’s Navamsa position, or a trine thereof, the
native’s father will acquire diseases. The native’s
older sister will be happy on account of a marriage
in (her) family.
क्रूरमासान् परित्यज्य कन्याशनिफलं समम्। । ६७४। |
तुलाशनौ भग्यवृद्धिः Bay चन्द्रदायगे।
PU बिना सौख्यं स्वपिता बहुभाग्यवान्। । ६७५। |
674-675. Except in evil months (Sun’s adverse transits) the effects of Saturn’s transit
through Virgo Navamsa will be balanced. The
native of Kunda Nadiamsa will acquire fortunes
in Moon’s dasa coinciding with Saturn’s movements in Libra. This does not apply to the sub
periods of malefic planets (for Pisces lagna). Further, the native’s father will be highly prosperous
during this transit.
TTT तत्त्िकोणे धनेशंशेत्रिकोणगे।
स्फुटयोगं गते मन्दे स्वजनारिष्ट मादिशेत्। । ६७६। |
676. Relatives: See in which Navamsa the
lord of 2nd and of 8th are placed at birth. When
Saturn in transit reaches an identical Rasi or a
trine thereof, evils to one’s relatives be foretold.
Fart तारनाथे गुरूणा चे निरीक्षिते।
दशवर्षृत् परं चेति द्रादशब्दे विपाहवान्। । ६७७। |
ग्रन्थान्तरे मीनलग्ने स्वक्षेत्रे सोमनन्दने।
अतिवाल्ये विवाहः स्यत् सम्पदूदाये शुभे खगे। । ६७८।
अतिभाग्यकुलोद्राहं सत्कलत्ऋप्रियः सुखी।
विपद्दाये सुतेत्पत्ती WEL प्रवेशवान्। । ६७९ । ।
si Sik a वित्तप्तिरक्षराभ्यासमादिशेत्।
कान्यनाटकशस्त्रवान्। । ६८० । |
गीर्वाणन्प्रकविर्मानी क्षेमदाये सुकीर्तिमान्।
मिथुने बहुभाग्यं स्यादप्रातृसौख्यं श्रियो वहम्॥ ६७२।। राजयोगाभिवृद्धिः स्यादुद्रादशान्दात् परं सुखम्। । ६८९। ।

677-681. Marriage: The native will be married after the 10th year of age or in the twelfth year
if the Moon in Kunda Nadiamsa is placed in
aspect to Jupiter. Elsewhere it is stated that for
Pisces Lagna native, if the Moon is in Cancer, he
will get married in his early childhood, or in his
second dasa. A benefic in the 10th house denotes
acquisition of wife from a highly prosperous family and the native will be fond of his virtuous wife
and be happy. He will obtain children in the 3rd
dasa and enter in royal service. In the very dasa
he will acquire wealth. He will be skillful in three
languages and be learned in literature, drama,
sastras etc. He will be a poet in Sanskrit and
Telugu. He will be honourable and quite famous.
His prosperity will be on increase, and after the
10th year of age he will be happy.
Sareea पितृपीडवान्।
(6 चेति विपत्तारदशन्त्यगे। । ६८२। |
EA शमस्य काले मोनान्ते तत्तिकोणगे।
कुन्दांशके प्रजातस्य fisted विनिर्दिशेत्। । ६८३।
682-683. Danger to father: The dasa of the
8th lord counted from the Moon sign will endanger the native’s father.-In adverse years the
father will be in distress. In the end of 3rd dasa,
when Saturn reaches end of Pisces, or Aries, or a
trine thereof, the native’s father will be en02116760. This is for a Kunda Nadiamsa native.
वके सुखाधीशे पिव स्वभक्तिषु।
684. Mercury: Mercury in Kunda Nadiamsa, in his sub period in the 4th dasa will cause
danger to father, when Saturn moves in the end
of Pisces or in Aries.
हरिणंशकगे nl | 9 ^> जातके।
अम्बुजांशकगे सूर्य हरिणांशकगे गुरो ।
नाईत्रयफलं चैवे योजयेत् कालवित्तमः। | ६८६। |
685-686. For a Kunda Nadiamsa native, the
Sun in Harina Nadiamsa will give Raja yoga effects according to Surya Nadi. Similarly, when the
Sun is in Ambuja Nadiamsa as Jupiter is is Harina
Nadiamsa. So declare the learned about these
three Nadiamsas.
Chandra Kala Nadi
Notes: Two different Raja Yogas are mentioned for a native of Kunda Nadiamsa native in
Pisces:
(1) The Sun in Harina Nadiamsa. This
Nadiamsa is entisted as Harini (meaning deer)
Nadiamsa in all the three sources consulted.
This Nadiamsa extends from 23 deg. 48’ to
24 deg. in a movable sign; from 6 deg. 0’ to 6 deg,
12’ of an immovable sign; and from 8 deg. 48’ to 9
deg. 0’ of a common sign.
The Sun in respective space of Harini
Nadiamsa in any Rasi for Pisces native with
Kunda Nadiamsa will give a Raja Yoga. The Sun
is the lord of the 6th, and being just in such a
position he can elevate the native to a worthy
position.
(2) In the second yoga the Sun and Jupiter
are required to be in certain spaces. The Sun in
Ambuja Nadiamsa while Jupiter is in Harini
Nadiamsa.
Harini Nadiamsa is explained above.
Pankaja (lotus) Nadiamsa extends from 29
deg. 36’ to 29 deg. 48’ of a movable sign; from 0
deg. 12’ to 0 deg. 24 of an immovable sign; and
from 14 deg. 36’ to 14 deg. 48’ in a common sign.
Jupiter should be anywhere in this manner.
These two yogas are from Surya Nadi.
कृम्भांशके वाहनेशे कर्ममेण निरीक्षिते।
न फलं चिन्त्यं क्षेमदाये |
्षेमदाये महायोगं शान्त्या शान्ति प्रयास्यति।
687-6881/2. Mercury in aspect to the 10th
lord, and placed in Aquarius Navamsa, willin the
4th dasa cause great prosperity and acquisition of
three conveyances. (Ambujamsa Phalam Chintyam is a corrupt entry in this part of the text.) The
native will become widely famous in the 4th dasa.
Saturn in his third round coming to the end of
Cancer in fourth dasa will cause dangerous diseases. Propitiations be done to overcome this evil.
Notes: The first line of sloka 687 has the
words ‘Kumbhamsake’ and the rendering is ac-

Deva Keralam 67
cordingly made. However, seeing the sequence in
this part of the text, it should read as
‘Kundamsake’ in which case, the meaning is:
"Mercury placed in Kunda Nadiamsa and be in
aspect to Jupiter, ......"
सूयते महच्छष्ठं विनिर्दिशेत्।
689-6891/2. Rahu dasa: In the case of
Mukunda Nadiamsa native, both the sub periods
of the Sun and Ketu, in the major period of Rahu
will be highly beneficial and cause gains through
landed properties.
Note: Again Mukunda Nadiamsa discussions are resumed, leaving aside Kunda Nadiamsa. These discussions are from Budha Nadi.
अम्बुजांशकगे सूर्ये सौम्ये कुन्दंशजातके।
लाभाधिपन्तरे काले celal १ ्। । ६९०। |
सुखेशन्तरगे सौख्यं गेहे
राजयोगाभिवुद्धिः स्याद्बहुपुत्रा्थवान् सुखी। । ६९१ ।
690-691. Fourth dasa: Mercury in Kunda
Nadiamsa as the Sun is in Ambuja Nadiamsa will
in the 4th dasa cause following effects: In the
11th lord’s sub period, the native will enjoy
prosperity. And in the sub period of the 4th lord
(i.e. of Mercury), the subject will be happy, will
receive the mercy of Goddess Lakshmi (i.e. will
have increased wealth), be more prosperous and
will acquire many.sons.
५. क्रदशकाले मन्ददाये Farrar |
षते सुकीर्तिः स्यान्महा राजप्रसादवान्। । ६९२ । |
692. Venus dasa: In the dasa of Venus
placed in Libra at birth, the native will enjoy
increased prosperity in Saturn’s (sub) period. He
will in Mercury’s sub period acquire fame and
mercy of the emperor.
Notes: "Manda daaye" here should read
"Mandantare" (Saturn’s sub period) instead of
Mahadasa, as Venus dasa is referred to.
मेषत्रिकोणगे जीवे कन्याचनदरे सुभाग्यवान्।
693. The Moon: Should the Moo ve in the
sign Virgo, as Jupiter is in Aries or in us trine, the
native will be prosperous. If the Moon is in
Capricorn navamsa, one will be famous. He will
be happy after the 7th year of his age.
मीनत्रिकोणजातस्य जीवे मेषत्रिकोणगे।
कन्याचन्दरे महद्भाग्यं तुलशुक्रे न संशयः। । ६९४1 |
योगरोगं प्रकुर्वीत स्वबन्धुजनधोषकः।
नित्यान्नदानवान् रागी बहुकामातुरो भवेत्। । ६९५। |
694-695. The Moon in Virgo, Venus in Libra
and Jupiter in Aries/Leo/Sagittarius will cause
abundant fortunes to a Pisces Lagna native.
(Meenatrikona is unfit in this context.) He will
incur some infectious diseases, will maintain his
relatives and will perform poor feeding. He will
be passionate and highly libidinous.
वृश्चिकांगारके शुक्रे REA
राजान्तरमहदुभग्यं तुलाशुक्रे सुकीर्तिमान्। 1 ६९६ । |
696. The conjunction of Mars and Venus in
Scorpio causes the birth of a person who will
destroy his friends and protectors. He will attain
great prosperity in a different country. Venus in
Libra causes wide-spread fame.
(० सौम्ये योगः स्याद्दशवत्सरम्।
मध्यखण्डे बहुभाग्यप्रदः सुखी। | ६९७। |
697. Mercury in Mukunda Nadiamsa will
cause prosperity in (from) the 10th year. The
middle portion of 4th dasa will generate a high
degree of fortune and happiness.
राजयोगः-
(Raja Yogas )
दारेशे रविसंयुक्त्ते सप्तमे चन्द्रसंस्थिते।
Horan: स्यात् केचित्पकषे त्रिभार्थवान्। । ६९८।
698. Wives: The 7th lord (Mercury) in 25sociation with the Sun, as the Moon is in the 7th
house, a Pisces Lagna native will have two wives.
According to some, it could be even three.
दारयोगः
मकरांशे सुकीर्तिः स्यात् सप्तवर्ष्त् परं सुखम्। ६९२॥ (Yoga for Spouse)

6६ Chandra Kala Nad:
कुन्दाशगे दारनाथे धनाधिपतिदायगे।
स्वपित्रिष्टतपू्व तु दाररिष्टं विगिर्दिशेत्। । ६९९। |
लभे गाहुदशकाले द्वितीयेद्राह योगवान्
SUA पुत्रवद्िर्धनघत्यसमृद्धिमान्। 1 ७००। |
699-700. Danger to wife: The 7th lord
placed in Kunda Nadiamsa will in the 2ndlord’s
dasa cause danger to the native’s wife and his
father in that order. If Rahu be in the 11th house
at birth, his dasa will cause second marriage to the
native. After which the subject will have children,
wealth, corns etc. in abundance.
easy कर्मनाथे ara बुधवीक्षिते।
नित्यननदानपुण्यात्मा स्वपिताधिकभागयवान्। | ७०१। |
भाग्यधिपदशकाले शुभाशुभफलं समम्।
lg Wak प्रवेशवान्। | ७०२। |
त्वतीव श्रियम श्नुते।
जन्मदाये महत्कष्टं peak महत्।
कर्माधिपदशाकाले पूर्वार्ध | | ७०४। |
अपरर्धे योगभंगे oe क्लेशवान्।
कनिष्ठभ्रातृभार्मदितनयश्च 7
स्वदेहायससन्तापं स्वप्रभोश्च विशेषतः 1 । ७०६। |
TUR महत्कष्ठं कर्माधिपतिदायगे।
अम्बुजांशफलं सत्यं मिथुने रविसंस्थिते। | ७०७। |
701-707. For Kunda Nadiamsa: Mercury
and Jupiter being in own Rasis and Navamsas and
in aspect to each other denote a person who will
perform poor-feeding daily. He will be charitable
(do meritorious deeds) and his father will be
opulent. The dasa of Mars will give even results
(1.6. both good and bad in a balanced way) except
in malefic’s sub periods. Then the subject will
enter royal service. Influx of wealth is denoted in
the Dasa of Mercury. Happiness to father and
auspicious effects to half brothers will also come
to pass. However in the first dasa the subject will
undergo miseries, and his father agony. The first
half of Jupiter’s dasa will be comfortable, and in
the second half, interruptions will crop up. In the
same dasa and in the sub period of Mars, the
native’s younger brother will be troubled due to
adversities to his spouse and progeny. And in the
same Mars’ sub-period the native’s health will
decline. In the sub period of Mercury, in Jupiter’s
dasa, the native will experience great miseries.
[Second line of sloka 707 is an unfit expression in
this part.|
चन्दरंशकदशाकाले phan a क्तिषु।
कुन्दांशके बुधे भोगी स्वभक्त मारक भवेत्। । ७०८। |
708. In the dasa of Moon’s Amsa, and in the
sub period of the 8th lord...(?) If Mercury is
Kunda Nadiamsa, the native will enjoy pleasures,
death will be in own bhukti.
Note: This sloka’s first half does not seem
to be complete.
As for the second line, again the concept is
not clear.
कर्माधिपदशान्त्यादौ लान es स्वभुक्तिषु।
sara निर्याणं ara | | ७०९।।
709. In the dasa of the 10th lord, and in the
sub period of the 11th lord when the transit Sun
reaches the sign represented by the Moon’s natal
Navamsa position, or a human sign(?), or Virgo
or Pisces, the native will die.
जीवे स्वोच्चाशगे लग्ने जन्मना पुण्यलोकवान्।
व्ययेशरूढगे जीवे स्वोच्चांशे पुण्यलोकवान्। । ७१०।।
मध्यकाले देहप्रपीडवान्। । ७११। |
तदूदोषपरिहारार्थ शन्ति कुर्याद्विचक्षणः |
सप्तमांशकगे मृ पश्चात् ब्राहम णजन्मवान्। । ७९२। ।
कुन्दांशकगते इन्द्रयातनवान् पिता।
िप्रकालो अथ यत् सत्यं प्रत्यक्षं देवकेरव्ठम्। । ७१३।।
710-713. Jupiter in Pisces Lagna, in Cancer
Navamsa denotes attainment of Punya Loka after
death. If he is in the 12th, in Cancer Navamsa, the
same effect will come to pass. In addition, his
father would also attain the Brahma Loka after
death. The native will have two brothers and be
happy. His health will suffer in the middle part of
the dasa of (planet placed in) Chakra Sandhi. To
overcome this evil, remedies be done. Death in
Sapthamsa(?)...later on he will be born as Brahmin. Mercury in Kunda Nadiamsa denotes that
the native’s father will own a mansion. This applies birth in Viprakala.

Deva Keralam 6५
। । कन्यालग्नम्। ।
(तुलावर्गोत्तमम् - बुधनाडी)
Virgo Ascendant
(Vargothama in Libra)
(Budha Nadi)
वगेत्तमे लग्ननाथे ileal
धनदांशे प्रजातश्च
धनदाशे पूर्वभागे कन्याल्ग्ने प्रजायते।
सुरांशगे प्रजातश्च द्वितीये गर्भजातकः। 1 । ७१५। |
अथवा च तृतीयश्च ज्येष्टश्नातृयुतस्सुखा।
Sua जननं चेति श्यमवर्णः सुवीर्यवान्। । ७१६। |
धन नायके |
714-716. Dhanada Nadiamsa: Ascendant
lord in Vargothama, the 2nd lord in Sura Nadiamsa and birth in Dhanada Nadiamsa denotes a
Brahmin. If birth be in the first half of Dhanda
Nadiamsa in Virgo Lagna, the native will either
be the second issue or the third issue of the family.
He will be happy and endowed with an older
brother. His birth is in a small village. He will be
bold in disposition and dark in complexion.
Notes: From now on, discussions on Virgo
ascendant commence as per Budha Nadi.
Birth in Dhanada Nadiamsa in Virgo is
referred to. This Nadiamsa extends thus:
From 24 deg. 48’ to 25 deg of a movable sign;
from 5 deg. to 5 deg. 12’ of an immovable sign, and
from 9 deg. 48’ to 10 deg. of a common sign.
The first half of this Nadiamsa in Virgo is
from 9 deg. 48’ to 9 deg. 54 of arc.
One will be a Brahmin if Mercury is in Vargothama Navamsa, while Venus is in Sura
Nadiamsa. For Sura Nadiamsa, the various
zodiacal spaces are: from 1 deg. 24 to 1 deg. 36’
of a movable sign; from 28 deg. 24 to 28 deg. 36’
of an immovable sign; and from 16 deg. 24 to 16
deg. 36’ in common signs.
If the birth be in the second half of Dhanada
Nadiamsa, the Virgo native will be 2nd/3rd issue
वरगत्तमे लग्ननाथे कर्मनाथे सुरांशगे।
स्वपिता भाग्यवान् साधुभ्रातृसोदरहीनवान्। । ७१७। |
717, Father: Birth in Virgo Lagna which is
in Vargothama while the 10th lord (i.e. Mercury
himself) is in Sura Nadiamsa denotes a
prosperous father, who will be gentle in disposition, but be bereft of a coborn.
al aia भूसुतेन समन्विते।
: प्रसिद्धश्चशूद्रग्रामाधिपत्यवान्। । ७१८। |
तदभावे म्लेच्छसेवी चान्नदानद्विजप्रियः।
718-7181/2. 5th Lord: If the Sth lord Saturn
conjoins Mars and gets his position in Scorpio
Navamsa, the native’s paternal grand-father will
be famous. He will lead a village inhabited by
Soodras in the absence of which he will serve a
Mlechcha king. He will be fond of poor-feeding
and will honour Brahmins.
eso Eee ae ae | नीचशे चन्द्रसंयुते। 119281 |
म्लेच्छराज्ये स्वपिता बाल्ययोगवान्।
पितामहस्थता च्छ | । ७२०।।
स्वसमानद्विजश्रष्ठस्तन्मूला द्व्यकुलं महत्।
कारागृहप्रपीडां च सुराशे प्रपितामहः। । ७२१। |
पश्चादूभाग्यामभिवृद्धिश्च सेवकावृत्तिजीवनम्।
719-7211/2. For a Virgo native, Venus should
become the lord of the navamsa occupied by
Mercury. Venus should further join the Moon,
and be in Virgo Navamsa. If these are existent the
native’s father will serve Soodras in a Mlechcha
kingdom. In the native’s childhood, the father will
beget prosperity. So also the native’s paternal
grand-father. In addition, the paternal grandfather will head over a village of Mlechchas, and
will incur troubles on account of Brahmins. He
will run the risk of being imprisoned as well. After
(release from) the said imprisonment, his
prosperity will be on the increase. His livelihood
will then be by serving others.
Notes: The conditions stipulated here are:
Venus and the Moon be together in one sign while
Venus and Mercury exchange Navamsas owned
by them. The natal ascendant should be Virgo.
लग्नेशे लाभगे शुक्रे नीचांशे नीचराशिगे। । ७२२।।
ज्ञातिवर्गविरोधेन == 8 स्वपितामहः।
कुग्रामवासी स्वपिता नीचशि भग्यनायके। । ७२३। |
निशाकरेण संयुक्ते म्लेच्छरज्ये सुभाग्यवान्।

7) Chandra Kala Nadi
722-7231/2. The ascendant lord placed 77 the
11th house as Venus is in the sign Virgo and in its
Navamsa denotes enmity to paternal grandfather with his kinsmen. He will lead a troubled
life. The native’s father will dwell in a tiny village
if the 9th lord occupies his debilitation Navamsa.
If Venus joins the Moon (in Rasi), the native’s
father will attain his prosperity in a Mlechcha
kingdom.
TAIN पूर्वभागे सुरांशे लग्ननायके। | ७२४। |
पितृमातृचिरायुष्यं धनधान्यसमृद्धिमान्।
Ts प्रसिद्धश्च fe all cin
भरातद्रययुते मानी ind । । ७२६। |
शेष नाशमिति
iy चित्रयोगे धनदांशे तु जायते। | ७२७। |
: पंच तेप्वाद्यो प्रबलौ भग्यशलिनो।
724-7271/2. One born in the first half of
Dhanada Nadiamsa while the ascendant lord is in
Sura Nadiamsa will have long-living parents. He
will have increased wealth and corns. If Mercury
is inthe 2nd house in Sura Nadiamsa, Chitra Yoga
is caused as a result of which the native will be
extremely rich. His father will be in royal service
and will enjoy a high degree of prosperity. The
native will be honourable, happy and will have two
brothers and two sisters. He will have 8 sisters in
all (out of whom only two will survive). Birth in
Dhanada Nadiamsa 25 Mercuryis Sura Nadiamsa
will cause five sisters. Out of them the first one
will be famous and fortunate.
Notes: We find a new Dhana Yoga in this
part. This yoga is entitled Chitra Yoga which is,
for a Virgo native, caused by Mercury being in
Libra in the space from 1 deg. 24 to 1 deg. 36’ and
will cause abundant riches. Also note other ध
fects in the text above.
Whether this Chitra Yoga applies to all ascendants by the ascendant lord being in 2nd in
Sura Nadimasa, may be examined.
Begetting five sisters etc. as mentioned in
the text are independent of Mercury in the 2nd &
G:
TAN तत्त्रिकोणे SECaPT गते गुरो। । ७२८।।
सोदरोत्पत्तिकालः स्यात् सप्पद्दाये पितुः सुखम्।
एका स्वसा सौख्यवती भूषिता कनकप्रभा। । ७२९। ।
पत्रिणी पत्िमक्ता स्यात् कर्शिता च तथापरा।
728-7291/2, When Jupiter in transit arrives
the Rasi represented by the Navamsa position of
Mercury, or a trine thereof, the native will beget
coborns. In his 2nd dasa, the father will attain
prosperity. The native will have one sister who will
be happy and be endowed with golden splendour.
Her daughter will be devoted to her husband, and
later will become emaciated.
लग्नेशाद्भाग्यगे मन्दे भूमुतेन समन्विते। । ७३०।।
पश्चात् सोदरहीनश्चाप्यल्पायुदीयमादिशेत्।
लग्नाधिपे तुलांशस्थे भ्रातृभ्रात्रीचतुष्टयम् । ७३१। |
दीर्घायुर्योग क सुकोर्तिमान्।
भाग्यरूढाधिपे at कर्माधिपसम्न्विते। । ७३२। |
भाग्ययोग इति रव्यातः सत्कर्माचारबुद्धिमान्।
730-7321/2. If the 9th house is occupied by
Saturn in the company of Mars, the native will be
bereft of after-born and be short-lived. If the
ascendant lord isin Libra Navamsa, the native will
have four brothers and sisters (in all). He will be
endowed with longevity. His older brother will
enjoy wide fame. Mars becoming the lord of the
9th Aroodha and being in the company of 10th
lord (i.e. Mercury) will cause Bhagya Yoga leading to prosperity. Further the native will perform
virtuous deeds.
Notes: Saturn and Mars in the 9th house will
affect adversely the life-span of a Virgo native.
If Mercury begets Libra Navamsa, one will
be long-lived, and will have four coborns.
The above two rules are general.
The 3rd rule, viz. Mars becoming lord of 9th
Aroodha Pada, and be in association with Mercury, the 10th lord, leading to prosperity is quite
suggestive. Mars, otherwise is an evil lord for
Virgo, ruling 3rd and 8th. But if he lords over
Bhagyaroodha (9th Aroodha) he becomes
capable of conferring riches, being in the company of 10th lord. In a way it implies association
of lords of 9 and 10.

Deva Keralam 7]
How to count Aroodha Pada is explained in
many standard texts. A brief narration is given
here for immediate use by the reader. Count
from a house the number of signs its lord is away.
Again count equal number of signs from the sign
occupied by that lord. The resultant sign is
Aroodha Pada for the first mentioned sign. For
example, for Taurus ascendant, Sth lord Sun is
placed in Capricorn. We get six signs from Leo
to Capricorn. Again from Capricorn when we
count six signs we reach Gemini. So Gemini is
Aroodha for the 5th house, in this case. And is
called Putra Aroodha.
There are certain exceptions. The reader
may consult Part 1 of Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra,
English translation, by R. Santhanam.
धनदशे पूर्वभागे AU सुखवहम्। । 331 |
धनधन्यसमृद्धिश्च स्वपिता क्रतुसिद्धिमान्। |
733-7331/2. For a native of the first half of
Dhanada Nadiamsa, the 2nd dasa will bring happiness. The native will have increased wealth and
grains, and his father will perform Yagnas etc.
सुरशगे विलग्नेशे विप्रनारिषु जायते। | ७२४1 |
धनाधिपदशकाले विवाहोत्सवसंभ्रमः।
पंचमान्दात् परं चैवं द्विपक्षे चोत्तरायणे । ७२५। |
ब्रह्मोपदेशकर्माणि मेषदित्रयमासमे।
जन्मान्तरदशान्त्यसम्पदूदाये स्वभुक्तिषु। । ७३७ ।
Saag चेति मौजीबन्धनमादिशेत्।
734.7371/2. The birth will be of a Brahmin
girl if Mercury (lord of Virgo Lagna) is in Sura
Nadiamsa (in Virgo itself), She will get married in
the dasa of the 2nd lord. After the Sth year,
coinciding with the northern course of the Sun,
moving in the three signs from Aries, she will get
Brahmopadesa (instruction in 52660
knowledge). Her elder brother will be married in
the first round of Jupiter when he is in the end of
Aries, or in Taurus. In the end of her first dasa, or
in the first sub period of second dasa, her older
brother will be invested with Sacred Thread.
धनदाशे Yat स्वपितेगितज्ञानवान्। । ७३८। ।
सुमुखी कुशली मन्त्री वेदान्तज्ञानतत्ववान्।
जातकस्य गुणं वक्ष्ये श्यामवर्णः सुवुद्धिमान्। । ७३९।।
परोपकारनिरतः FATT |
अस्तिकः सर्वधर्मज्ञ वदान्यो दृढसौख्यदः। 1 ७४०। |
738-740. If birth is in the former half of
Dhanada Nadiamsa, the native’s father will be
skillful in understanding other’s internal sentiments. He will be happy, a minister and will have
knowledge of Upanishads etc. The native will be
dark in complexion, be very intelligent, intent on
helping others and will perform five Yagnas. His
older brother will be eloquent in speech, firmly
happy and will be versed in religious matters.
लग्नेशे भार्गवांशस्थे शक्रे नीचांशसंस्थिते।
अन्तःकोपौ प्रसन्नात्मा काललुब्धस्वभाववान्। । ७४१। |
741. Ascendant lord in a Navamsa of Venus
while Venus is in Virgo Navamsa, causes the native to be inwardly given to anger but outwardly
happy in disposition. Such a native will be tmeवित्ते सौम्ये शुभांशस्थे तेजस्वी वद्धिमान्नरः।
सुमुखं कुशलो भीरूविद्याबुद्धियुतः सुखी। | ७४२। |
742, Mercury in the 2nd house and in 9th
Navamsa (or a benefic’s Navamsa) denotes a
splendorous, intelligent, charming, skilful, timid,
learned and happy native.
Notes: Mercury should be in Libra in the
2nd house. In Navamsa chart, he should be in the
9th from Navamsa ascendant. Then the effects
mentioned will come to pass.
तुलांशे तैलिगे सूर्ये वेदशस््रर्थतत्परः।
यतिप्रीतिरते नित्य सुरांशे ज्ञानसिद्धिमान्। । ७४३। |
ज्येष्ठस्य पुत्राश्चत्वारः HAS सुतद्रयम्।
भ्रातृत्रयं चिरायुष्यं भगिन्यै द्रे सुजीवतः। | ७४४। |
743-744, The Sun in Libra: The native of
Sura Nadiamsa with the Sun in Libra Rasi as well
as its Navamsa will be skilful in understanding the
meanings of the Vedas. He will be fond of ascetics,
be a knowledgeable person (particularly about
the Supreme Being) and will have many attainments (of supernatural faculties). He will have
three long-living brothers. Two of his sisters will

10 Chandra Kala Nadi
live comfortably. His older brother will have four
sons and the younger one two sons.
Notes: Birth in Sura Nadiamsa referred to
hereof relates to Virgo. For details of Sura
Nadiamsa, please see notes under sloka 714 - 716
supra. The Sun’s position is in Vargothama in
Libra,
मुरांशगे चित्रयोगे वित्ते सौम्ये तु जायते।
वह ग्रमाधिपत्यं च स्वपिता बहुभाग्यवान्। | ७४५। |
वसुवर्षत् परं पित्र विदेशप्रिसवान् सुखी!
745-7451/2. Mercury in the 2nd: The native
of Sura Nadiamsa with Mercury in the 2nd house
with Chitra Yoga will have headship of many
villages. His father will be extremely prosperous.
After the native’s 8th year, his father will settle in
a distant place and be happy.
Notes: For Chitra Yoga to be caused by
Mercury, please vide notes under sloka 724 -
7271/2 supra.
कन्यालग्ने रवौ सौम्ये तुलांशे पापवर्जित। | ७४६। |
लग्नराशिदशकाले स्वपिता भग्ययोगवान्।
Re व्याकुलं किचिज्ज्वरोपद्रवपीडितः | 1 ७४७। |
षष्ठ्दे सोदरोत्पत्तिः सप्तमाब्दे क्वचिदन्यथा)
विप्लवेन विचारः स्याद्दशवपीत्परं सुखी। । ७४८। |
746-748. The Sun in Virgo: If the Sun is in
Virgo which is the ascendant, as Mercury, without
being associated with a malefic, is in Libra
Navamsa, the Dasa of Lagna Rasi will cause
prosperity to the native’s father. If Mercury is in
a malefic Navamsa in the above yoga, it will cause
distress and disease to father. The native will have
a coborn in his 6th year. His 7th year will cause
worries due to revolution (in his birth place). He
will be happy after the 10th year of age.
inst नवमे स्वपितर्व्यथ।
स्वपितुर्व्यथा।
निधनाधिपसन्दुष्ट
लग्नराशिदशाकाले ghee । । ७५० |
विवाहोत्सवकार्याणि यकालगे।
eat yw नित्यं MEA महत्। । ७५९। |
749-751. 8th Lord: Should the 9th house be
aspected by 8th lord Mars, it will be distressful to
the native’s father. After some troubles following
activities in his village, he will be in a happy
position. These troubles will occur when the 8th
lord in transit aspects the 9th house. After the 9th
year in the dasa of Lagna, happiness will prevail.
The father’s prosperity will pick up after marriage
of the native. 45th year will be auspicious for the
native’s father. In adverse years (denoted by
malefic transits) he will be in great trouble.
लग्नराशिदशान्त्यादौ स्वपिता कीर्तिमान् सुखी।
धनराशिदशाकाले धनाधिपतिदायके। । ७५२। |
सुरांशगे महदुभाग्यं गृहे लक्ष्मीकरक्षवान्।
द्रविशन्दात् परं येति व्ययाधिपतिदायके। । ७५३। ।
SoM पितुः क्लेशं क्रूरभुक्तौ न संशयः।
752-7531/2. The native’s father will prosper
and be happy during the native’s dasa of the
ascendant lord, in its beginning and ending
phases: The native of Sura Nadiamsa will in his
2nd Rasi (Libra) dasa or in the dasa of 2nd lord
(Venus) will acquire great fortunes. His family
will be blessed with the mercy of Goddess
Lakshmi. After his 2nd year (or) in the Sun’s dasa,
in evil months (or) in malefic sub periods, his
father will be in trouble (i.e in danger).
व्ययाधिपे ASS लग्नेशे धनरशिगे। ! ७५४। |
लग्नराशिदश सौख्यं व्ययराशिदशां व्यथम्।
लाभराशिदशकाले वसुवर्षत् परं सुखम्। । ७५५। |
i is लाभराशिदशा सुखम्।
ऊ -कनिष्टश्रातुसौख्यकृत्। । ७५६। |
विवाहोत्सवकार्याणि weed सुसोख्यवान्।
754-7561/2. Lagna Rasi dasa: If the ascendant or its angle is occupied by the 12th lord, while
the 2nd contains the lord of ascendant the native’s
dasa ruled by Lagna (Virgo) will give happiness
while the dasa of 12th house (Leo) will cause
grief. In the course of eleventh lord’s dasa, after
8th year, the native will be happy. Excepting the
years denoted by adverse transits, the 11th Rasi
dasa will give happiness. His elder wife (should
be elder brother - Jyeshta bhraatha) will beget
progeny while his younger brother will attain happiness. The native will get happiness on account
of marriage activities through his younger
brother.

Deva Keralam 73
सूर्याशगे तत्तरिकोणे स्फुटयोगं गते शनौ। । ५७1 |
स्वपिता देहजाङ्यदि स्वादायादधिकव्ययम्।
कन्यान्ते तैलिगे मन्दे सुरे तु प्रजायते! । sei |
लग्नराशिदशाकाले देशे राजान्तरं भवेत्।
लोके धन्यक्षयादीनि विप्लवेन प्रजावधि। । ७५९। |
fae शनिस्थिते काले अर्थवृद्धिः
ty ॐ |
ग्रामकार्यकलपेन स्वपिता व्याकुली | ७६०॥
757-760. Saturn’s transit: Note the Navamsa occupied by the Sun at birth. When Saturn in
transit comes to this Rasi, or its trine, the native’s
father will incur physical ailments. The native’s
expenditure will exceed his income. Saturn in the
end of Virgo, or in Libra, will in Lagna Ras dasa
of Sura Nadiamsa native cause a change of king
in his country(?) Allround destructicn of crops,
and a revolution will also take place. When Saturn
comes to Leo, increase of wealth and happiness
to inmates will result.(?) The native’s father will
be distressed due to village activities.
Tae तत्छरिकोणे स्फुटयोगं गते शनो।
क जातकस्य पित्ररिष्टं मनोव्यथा! | ७६१} |
धनप्राप्तिः UTE शुभधिकम्।
761-7611/2. The 8th lord: Saturn in transit
coming to the Rasi represented by the 8th lord’s
navamsa position at birth, or a trine thereof, will
cause distress to the native’s father. When it 1s
Jupiter, (instead of Saturn, as above) he will gain
wealth and auspicious effects in service of the
king.
राहुक्रान्तर्षगे जीवे spear गते सति। । ७६२। |
विप्लवेन विनिर्गत्य म्रामान्तरनिवसवान्।
762-7621/2. Jupiter - Rahu: When Jupiter
comes to the Rasi occupied by natal Rahu, the
native will be displaced due to a revolution and
will go to live in another village.
Notes: Whenever Jupiter transits the Rasi
containing natal Rahu, the effects are found to be
distressful. A detailed account of this trend of
Jupiter could be found in my work "Essentials of
Predictive Hindu Astrology".
लाभरशिदशाकाले सुरंशे तु प्रजायते। 1 ७६२। |
विंशवर्षत् परं भाग्य प्राबल्यं च धनागमम्।
763-764. {1 Rasi dasa: During the dasa
ruled bv the 11th Rasi, the native of Sura nadiamsa will attain prosperity, after the 20th year. His
fame will increase and he will obtain wealth.
Leaving the months denoted by adverse transit,
he will enjoy financial comforts and general happiness.
कर्मराशिदशाकाले सुरंशे व्याकुलं विपत्।
अपरार्धे पित्ररिष्टमापत्संन्यसमादिशेत्। । ७६५। ।
765. Tenth Rasi dasa: The native of Sura
Nadiamsa will be highly distressed in the dasa
ruled by the 10th Rasi. In its second half, there
will be danger to father. The native will take to
ascetic order due to a family calamity.
सुरांशगे सप्तविंशे त्रिंशब्दे जनकस्य च।
क्रूरवत्सरदोषेण पितृपीडां विनिर्दिशेत्। । ७६६। |
766. Danger to father; One born Sura
Nadiamsa will see his father endangered in his
27th/30th year. [Kroora Vatsara Doshena means
due to the blemish of evil year which is excluded
in the translation. |
कर्मारूढं शुभद्ष्टे भग्येशेन निरीक्षिते।
लाभराशिदशान्त्यादौ विशेषकृतिसिद्धिमान्। | ७६७। |
नित्यन्नदानसिद्धिः स्यात्स्वप्राबल्यम तः परम्।
त्रिंशोपरिशर्वक्ष सोदरश्चापि भाग्यवान्। । ७६८। |
अतीव श्रियमाप्नोति नरवाहनभाग्भवेत्।
767-7681/2. One will have special attainments in the beginning and ending parts of the
1ith Rasi dasa if the Arudhapada of the 10th
house is in aspect to a benefic as well as to the 9th
lord. The native will in addition perform poorfeeding. He will become widely famous. For a
period of 5 years, following the native’s 30th year
of age, his brother will be prosperous. He will
attain abundant wealth and conveyances.
भग्यराशिदशाकाले GU बहुभाग्यवान्। । ७६९। |
देशग्रामाधिकारौ चाप्यन्नदानसुकार्तिमान्।
Pet धनप्राप्तिः प्रबलेद्योगभाग्यवान्।
TRIMERS चत्वारिशात्परं व्यथा! | ७७९। |
चतुश्चत्वारिंशके अब्दे विशेषक्लेशभग्भवेत्।
769-7711/2. One born in Sura Nadiamsa will
कररब्दे च परित्यज्य वित्तसौख्यं म हत्सुखम्। । ७६४। | in the dasa of the 9th Rasi be highly prosperous.

14 Chandra Kala Nadi
He will lord over villages, will perofrm poor-feeding and become widely famous. In the years
denoted by evils transits, he will be however subjected to numerous difficulties and will have expenditure. In the 45th year he will get wealth and
a prosperous emplovment. In the dasa of the 8th
Rasi, after 40 he will be distressed. His 44th year
will cause abundant grief.
मन्दराशिदशाकाले AST लग्नकेन्द्रगे | ७७२।।
capes: स्यातमत्रिणी च सुपुत्रिका।
पुत्रनायात्परं SAT |
772-7731/2. Auspicious and inauspicious
events: If the dispositor of Saturn is in an angle
from the ascendant, the 2258 of
Capricorn/Aquarius will cause the following
events, The native’s son will get married and his
daughter will beget progeny. In the dasa of
Aquarius, however, good and bad effects will be
of even proportion. His older brother will
separate from the family on account of loss of his
son.
सुतराशिदशकाले करूरन्दे RTT । । ७७४। ।
अपमृत्युभयप्रप्तिः शान्त्या शन्ति प्रसास्यति।
774-7741/2 Fifth Rasi dasa: In this dasa, the
native will have fear of untimely death, in adverse
years and months. Suitable remedies be performed.
TST पूर्वमगे सुरांशे श्शिनन्दने। । ७७५। |
मुतराशिदशमृत्युः फ्वषष्टिस्सुजीविति।
ब्रह्मलोकफलं सत्यं व्यये यद जायते । । ७७६।
लाभराशि दशन्त्यादौ योगवान् तिमा |
बुधनाडिफलं सत्यं प्रत्यक्षं देवकेरल्टम्। | ७७७। |
775-777. Dhanada Nadiamsa: One born in
the first half of this Nadiamsa, with Mercury
placed in Sura Nadiamsa will live upto 65 years,
The dasa of 5th Rasi will be fatal for him. Should
Venus be in the 12th, he will attain the world of
Brahma (Sathya Loka, or Brahma Loka). In the
end of 11th एवऽ dasa, the native will attain fame
and happiness, These effects as stated in Budha
Nadi will bear truth,
भीनलग्नम् (कमलांशः)
(genre)
Pisces Ascendant -
(Kamala Nadiamsa)
(Budha Nadi)
रक्तवर्णतनुः प्रज्ञः शत्रुतापी क्रियाशनौ। । ७७८। ।
सिंहांशगे मतद्रेषी स्वम तन्तसिद्धिमान्।
778-7781/2. Pisces Lagna - Kamala Nadiamsa: One born in this part of Zodiac while Saturn
occupies Aries Rasi and Leo Navamsa, will have
blood-red complexion. He will be learned. He
wili disregard his religion and join another
religion. He will incur grief on account of
enemies,
Notes: From now on, the text deals with
birth in Pisces ascendant as told in Budha Nadi.
Kamala Nadiamsa obtains thus: From 5 deg.
48° to 6 deg. of a movable sign; from 24 deg. to 24
deg 12’ of an immovable sign; and from 20 deg.
48° to 21 deg. of a common sign.
Birth should be in the space between 20 deg.
48° 10 21 deg. of Pisces. Saturn should be in the
2nd in Aries from 13 deg. 20° to 16 deg. 40,
begetting Leo Navamsa (6th from Pisces). This
gives many troubles from enemies.
The native changing into another religion is
rarely discussed in the texts known to us. This is
one such useful yoga.
कमलाश॒गते मन्दे मेषे बुधसमन्विते। । ७७९। |
। विष्णुभवित्तर ते नित्यं tenga
779-7912, Saturn - Mercury: Saturn
should be in Aries in Kamala Nadiamsa in the
company of Mercury. In that case, one born in
Pisces ascendant will be devoted to Lord Vishnu.
He will have no after-born,
मेषे रवियुते मन्दे धर्मिकश्च स्ववीर्यवान्। । ७८०1 1
सर्वज्ञः सात्विकः क्रोधी मर्मभेदि च तमसः!
क्रूरषष्ठयंशगे मन्दे कमलांशे सुनुद्धिमान्। । ७८१। |
अन्तः कपटवान्कमीं कमलायतलोचनः।
पराक्रमी स्वतन्त्रश्च पेषं व्यसनप्रदः। । ७८२। |
ROA प्रसन्नात्मा कुशदेहस्वरूपवान्।

Deva Keraiam 75
180.7821/2. Saturn-Sun: If these two combine in Aries, the native will be righteous,
valorous, be a knower of all, given to anger, virtuous and be capable of breaking secrets. He will
be malignant (at times). The Kamala Nadiamsa
native having Saturn in a malefic Shashtiamsa will
be intelligent but inwardly cunning, He will be
libidinous and will have eyes resembling lotus-petals. He will be valorous, independent, addicted
to vices, given to instant anger, be pleased and
thin-bodied.
Notes: In the first place, exalted Sun and
debilitated Saturn joining together is discussed,
which is clear.
The second yoga dealing with Saturn in
malefic Shashtiamsa does not mention a specific
sign position to him. Nor the Sunis in the picture.
For details of Shashtiamsa - malefic and benefic -
please refer to Vol 1, Brihat Parasara Hora,
English translation by R. Santhanam.
लक्मियोगः
Lakshmi Yoga
कर्मराहो धने मन्दे सिंहांशे लकषिमियोगके। । ७८३। |
783. Lakshmi yoga: Rahu in the 10th house
as Saturn is in Aries Rasi, Leo Navamsa: the yoga
called Lakshmi yoga is produced.
Notes: Results for this yoga are not specifically mentioned here. The name suggests wealth.
Also see sloka 808 which states that this yoga gives
wealth after the age of forty.
कमलांशे प्रजातश्च किचिन्मूर्खः प्रतापवान्।
अन्तः क्रोधी प्रसनात्मा राजन्यजनामित्रवान्।। | ७८४। |
स्वपितृव्यवशात्सौख्यं ५ ण्यविहीनवान्।
art मन्दे कमलशे तु नाडिके।
बाल्ये afer: त्रिंशब्दे बहुभाग्यवान्। । ७८६। |
वातप्रकृतिदेहश्च मूर्छावायुप्रपीडितः।
सोदरीक्लेशवान् रोगी चागवेकल्यपुत्रवान्। | ७८७। |
तदभावे च यमो सन्तानोत्पत्तिनाशनम्।
784-7871/2. One born (in Pisces Lagna) in
Kamala Nadiamsa (with Saturn in Aries Rasi,
Leo Navams4) will experience following effects.
He will be inwardly short-temepred but be a
pleased soul. He will befriend men in royal
circles. Paternal nappiness will be absent in his
life. He will prosper through a paternal uncle. He
will have self-earned wealth. In the middle part
of his life he will be grieved. His childhood will be
marked by penury. After thirty he will enjoy abundant forunes. He will suffer from windy disorders
and will be hit by bouts of unconsciousness. Worries on account of his sister will haunt him. He will
beget either a sickly child, or a deformed child, or
twins who will only be destroyed.
मातृगंडः
Danger to Mother
भैमाशकगते मन्दे Ass बुधान्विते। । ७८८ |
मातृसौख्यवेहीनेन पश्चात्सोदरि नाशवान्।
कोपप्रकृतिमान् रागी मातमहगृहाश्रयो। । ७८९। |
बाल्ये चक्राकितश्चेति Paras त्र्या!
उद्राहानन्तरं सख्यं विंशवर्पत्पर FST! । ७९०।।
मातुलाग्ष्ठितः पश्चात्स्वपितुर्गृहवासवान्।
पितृव्यत्रयमायुव्यं sree Ta लद्रययेगवान् । | ७९१ 1 |
मातृष्वसा भाग्यवती yor ्विभार्यवान्।
कमलांश्चकगे मन्दे स्वपितृव्यचतुष्ठयम्। । ७९२। |
तेषं तु पुत्रहीनौ wa ब्र सपुत्रको।
मातृच्छसु HPs मालांशे eal च। 1 ७९३।।
minal तस्य च प्राहुः कमले तु
FHA जन्मदाये क्लेशं मातृष्वसुर्यथाम्। । ७९४। |
भागयनाशमिति प्र्देशन्तर इति स्मृतः।
788-7941/2. Instead of being Leo Navamsa as
above, if the Navamsa occupied by Saturn (with
Mercury in Aries, for a Pisces native of Kamala
Nadiamsa), is Scorpio/Aries, following (different) effects will come to pass. The native will
be devoid of maternal happiness. Sisters born
after him will be destroyed. He wili be given to
anger and be lustful. He will live in his grandfather’s home. During his childhood he will be
initiated into Vaishnava order by proper vedic
rituals.(Chakraankita denotes the Vedic
ceremony due toa Vaishnava Brahmin and during
such initiation, the boy’s shoulders are engrossed
by the sacred symbols of Lord Vishnu’s Sudarsana Chakra, and Sankhu - conch - by the Guru.
At the time of engrossing, these symbols, made of
copper, are heated. In Vaishnava circles, this is

6 Chandra Kala Nadi
called Samashanam.) Later on he will shift to his
paternal relative’s home. After his marriage and
following his 20th year of age he will be happy. As
a result of his mother’s (early) death, he will live
in father’s (relative’s) home. His mother’s sister
will be fortunate. His father’s brother will have
two wives. The maternal aunt in question wil have
a happy marriage. One born in Kamala Nadiamsa
will have troubles in his first dasa for himself and
to his maternal aunt as well. The native will
migrate to a distant country due to destroyed
fortunes.
Note: Chakraankita also means a symbol of
wheel, featuring in physiognomy relating to marks
noted at birth.
लग्नाच्चतुर्थगे धैमे ए उच्चग्रहसमन्विते। । ७९५।।
जन्मदाये मातुबन्धुवंशेप द्रवशोकवान्।
पितामहचिरायुष्यं पितृव्यस्य चिरायुषम्। । ७९६।।
795-796. Mars: Should Mars be in the 4th
house in the company of an exalted planet, during
the native’s first dasa, his maternal relatives will
be troubied and grieved. As a result of this yoga,
his paternal grand-father and paternal uncle will
be long-lived.
Note: This yoga does not pertain to Pisces as
none is exalted in Gemini.
Re ARR तत्त्रिकोणे।
स्वजन्मरक्षपितृव्योनपि व | 1 ७९७। |
a शेषं नाशमि तीरयेत्।
ृव्यपुत्रिका क्लेशं पुत्र षण्ड इति स्मृतः।
797-7981/2. The third (lord) in a Navamsa of
Saturn, or its trine [with the word trine, we get
many positions for 3rd lord which is not logical]
denotes a paternal uncle whose birth will also be
in Pisces ascendant and he will have two wives,
one son and two daughters. Other children will
face early death. If the said 3rd lord is in Pisces
Navamsa, a daughter of the said uncle will be
subjected to troubles and his son will be a eunuch.
पितृव्याधिपतौ मन्दे सिंहांशे नीचराशिगे। । ७९९। |
पितरन्यश्च दुराचारो week प्रसिद्विमान्।
big a ge वन्ध्यास्त्रीसक्तचित्तकः।.८००। |
डितः Grae दत्तपुत्रविनारशवान्।
799-8001/2. The 11th lord Saturn in Aries
Rasi and Leo navamsa denotes that the native’s
paternal uncle (father’s brother) will take to a bad
path, but will be famous in royal service. The said
uncle’s son will have speech defects and be given
to anger and be fond of barren women. The uncle
in question will be worried on account of his son’s
confinement. His adopted son will also be
destroyed.
द्विग्रहच्वे wear नीचे कमलांशे तु जायते। । ८०१। |
पितृव्यपुत्रिका क्वाचिज्जरि णी ATT |
दारिद्मवशमापन्ना मघ्ये भरतुविनाशिका। | ८०२। |
कमलांशे पितृव्यश्च स्वभायीवशगोञअपि च।
iat च कलंकः त्यात्स्वभत्रन्तर गामिनी | ८०२। |
801-803. If two planets are in exaltation at
the time of birth as Saturn is in debilitation, the
native of Pisces Lagna in Kamala Nadiamsa will
experience the following effects: His paternal
uncle’s daughter will be an adulteress, will have
limited issues; in her middle age she will be in the
grip of poverty. Her coborns will be destroyed.
Further, the native’s paternal uncle (father’s
brother) will be subdued by his wife and incur
infamy due to his daughter’s adulterous character.
Notes: Any two planets can be in exaltation,
while Saturn is in Aries, for a Pisces native with
Kamala Nadiamsa. Then the effects cited will
apply.
दारविचारः
On Spouse
कमलांशकगे मन्दे शशिजेन समन्विते।
मीनलग्ने प्रजातश्च सत्कन्छत्रधनाङ्यवान्। | ८०४। |
दारवंशे क्कः स्यात्स्वदारभतृपापवान्।
शूदरस्त्रीवशमापन्नः पतितश्शृद्रकृत्यवान्। | ८०५। |
कालान्तरे दरिद्रः स्यात् पितृद्रोदी च पुत्रकः
804-8051/2. Native’s wife & brother-in-law:
One born in Pisces Lagna in Kamala Nadiamsa,
with Saturn and Mercury in Aries will get a virtuous spouse and will be wealthy. Some infamy

Deva Keralam V7
will exist in his wife’s family. His brother-in-law
will indulge in sinful acts, who will be endangered
through a Soodra (fourth caste) female. The said
in-law will be fallen and will perform mean acts.
After some time, he will incur poverty, and will
betray his father.
मीने नीचांशके शुक्रे राहौ प्रजायते। । ८०६। |
स्वदारभगिनी क्लेशदुष्टा दुर्भगचारिणी।
806-8061/2. Sister-in-law: Venus exalted at
birth, and in Virgo navamsa, as Rahu is in the 10th
house causes a wicked sister-in- law who will lead
a troubled life. She will be unfortunate and adulterous.
लक्मियोगः
Lakshmi Yoga
मेषे सिंहांशके मन्दे चार्पाशकेअपि च। । ८०७। |
चत्वारिशात्परं भाग्यं लक्ष्मीयोग इति स्मृतः।
807-8071/2. Saturn in Aries 2251 with Leo
Navamsa, or Pisces Rasi with Sagittarius Navamsa causes Lakshmi yoga giving fortunes after the
40th year.
Notes: For Lakshmi Yoga, see 8150 sloka 783
supra.
लग्नारूढे PMA लग्नराशिदश व्यथाम्। । ८०८। |
जननी क्लेशमाप्नोति Li lh न विद्यते।
अष्टमाधिपतौ लगने । | ८०९। |
छ ष्ठिविहीने च दारारिष्ठं विनिर्दिेत्।
जीवे CRT केन्द्रगे । ८१९०। |
लग्नराशिदशकाले Yara जीवति!
स्वपिताधिकदारिद्यं क्लेशं lig ६.८.
पितृव्येद्राहसंप्रप्तिः क्लेशश्च |
धनाधिपं केन्द्रगते राहुसंयुतावीक्षिते।। ८१२। |
धनराशिदशाकाले धननाशं विनिर्दिशेत्
808-8121/2. Evils: The Moon in ascendant’s
Aroodha will cause distress in the Dasa of Lagna.
The native’s mother will also be troubled while his
father will be bereft of happiness. The 8th lord in
the ascendant in the company of, or in aspect to
Rahu, will cause (premature) danger to wife, if
this yoga is unaspected by Jupiter. One will nearly
escape death in Lagna dasa if Jupiter is in a trine
while the 8th lord is in an angle - both counted
from Lagna. In addition, it denotes utter poverty
and difficulties to father. Marriage to father’s
brother and troubles among kinsfolk will also
result in Lagna dasa, referred to above. In the
dasa of 2nd Rasi, the native will incur financial
destruction.
are विप्रकाले धनेशे कतय युते! । ८१३।।
धनराशिदशकाले मौजीवन्धनमादिशेत्।
विद्यारम्भं प्रकुर्वीत दुःखदं क्लेशजीवनम्। । ८१४। |
ना नस्य सन्तानं विप्लदेन "विनिर्गते
कलापः स्याद्राजन्तरमिति AT । ८१५। |
813-815. Ketu with Mars: If birth be in
Vipra Kala of Kamala Nadiamsa in Pisces ascendant, as Ketu is conjunct the 2nd lord, the native
in the 2nd Rasi dasa will have his sacred thread
ceremony. His education will also commence in
this Dasa. Yet as a result of this yoga, his life will
be miserable. His maternal uncle’s children will
be displaced as a result of a Revolution. In the
native’s birth country, change of ruler will occur
due to agitation(?)
Notes: Vipra Kala in Kamala Nadiamsa in
Pisces extends from 20 deg. 48’ to 20 deg. SV’ of
space.
When such space ascends, Ketu should be
in association with Mars. Then the results for
Aries Dasa (KCD) as mentioned in the text will
apply.
Budha Nadi mostly uses Kala Chakra Dasa
for this Nadiamsa in Pisces ascendant.
विक्रमाधिपते शुक्रे स्वोच्चे नीचांशगे स्थिते।
तद्राशीशदशकले मातृवंशे बधुमृतिः। । ८१६। |
मातामहविनाशः स्यान्मातृवंशे महाविपत्।
पितृवंशे तु ake पितृव्यस्य क्व चिसुखम्। । ८१४७। |
816-817. Maternal Relatives: If the 3rd lord
Venus is placed in Pisces Rasi with Virgo Navamsa, the native’s matenal relatives will quit the
world in the dasa of Taurus. Maternal grandfather will die and great dangers will cripple the
mother’s family. Father will incur poverty (financial decline) while some happiness will accrue to
father’s brother.

7S Chandra Kala Nadi
सुखधिपे धनस्थाने मीनलग्ने तु जायते।
सुखराशिदशाकाले वदेदुद्राहकमं च। । ८१८। |
818. The native will perform some marriage
(in the family) in the dasa of Gemini if the 4th lord
Mercury is in the 2nd house in Aries.
लग्नच्चतुर्थगे Fl गृहच्छिद्रकलापवान्।
पितृपीडाभयं. क्चिज्जन्मदेशे प्रभोविपत। । ८१९। |
विवाहानन्तरं चेति स्वभायामातृनाशनम्।
सुतराशिदश्चकले श्वशुरेण विहीनवान्। । ८२०।।
पितृन्यस्य wetted aquest कर्शितः।
819-8201/2. If Mars is in the fourth house, the
native’s residence will be destroyed. His father
will incur evils. The ruler of the country will also
be endangered? The native’s mother-in-law will
die immediately after his marriage. He will lose
his father-in-law in the dasa of the Sth Rasi. His
father’s brother will be greatly happy while the
native will be emaciated due to loss of brother.
सुतेशे सुतराशिस्थे seg निरीषिते। । ८२१।।
सुतराशिदशन्त्यादौ WER प्रवेशवान्।
सुतराशिदशाभाग्ययोगस्तु ome । ८२२। |
पुत्रलाभं प्रकृर्वीत catcher |
821-8221/2. The lord of the 5th house placed
in the Sth house in aspect to the 10th lord will
enable the native to enter in royal service in the
end/beginning of dasa of the Sth Rasi. In the
whole of this dasa, his fortunes will last for two or
three years. He will beget progeny during this
dasa while at the same time this dasa will be fatal
to his father.
मीनांशके सुताधीशे गुरूण्र च Pera 1 223 ।
तद्दश च महत्सौख्यं राजद्वारे शुभाधिकम्।
चतुस्त्िंशत्परं क्लेशं परार्धे कुजसंस्थिते। | ८२४। |
षष्ठराशिदशकाले दारिद्रेण कर्शितः।
823-8241/2. If the Sth lord is in aspect to
Jupiter and is in Pisces navamsa, the dasa of the
Sth Rasi will bring great happiness, and much
auspicious results in royal service. If Mars is
placed in the latter half of the horoscope (commencing the descendant), the period after 35
years of age will be grievous. The dasa of the 6th
Rasi will cause poverty.
cil Ra सु मीनलग्ने दशमे राहुसस्थिते। । ८२५। |
WHEN अवमानवान्।
षष्ठाधिपे स्वोच्चगते भाग्येशे बुधसयुते। । ८२६। |
षष्ठराशिदशाकले तृतीयांशे सुभागयवान्।
दशामध्ये मनस्तापं स्वपितुव्यवनाशनम्। | ८२७। |
राजन्यद्रेषमाप्नोति दशादौ व्याकुलं महत्।
825-8271/2. For a Pisces Lagna native, the
Sun, in Aries and Rahu in Sagittarius will also give
difficulties in the dasa of the 6th Rasi. The native
will further be humiliated in royal presence. Ifthe
6th lord (Sun) is in exaltation while the 9th lord
(Mars) is associated with Mercury, the last onethird part of the 6th Rasi dasa will produce fortunes. In the middle of the dasa there will be
mental agony to the native; his father’s brother
will be destroyed, and the native will incur royal
enmity. In the beginning of the Dasa, he will be
greatly distressed.
षष्ठराशिदशाकाले पूत्रिकानाशशोकवान्। । ८२८ । ।
क्लेशकाले फलं चेति स्वाच्चराशिफलं शुणु!
दशान्ते पुत्रिकोद्राहस्तृतीयांशे सुशोभनम्। । ८२९। |
स्वपुत्रद्राह सौख्याप्तिः मित्रवर्गे महत्सुखम् ।
उच्चक्षत्रफलं चेति तृतीयांशे विशेषतः। | ८३० |
नीचयोगफलं चेति खण्डाद्यायुः फलं वृथा।
मध्यखण्डान्तमारभ्य ष 12381 |
तृतीयांशे मध्यखण्डे ्।
829-8311/2. In the dasa of the 6th Rasi, the
native will be grieved on account of the death of
his daughter. If the Sun is exalted, then in the end
of the said dasa, the marriage of the native’s
daughter will take place. The last one-third part
will prove quite auspicious. His son will get married; his friends will be greatly happy. The Sun’s
exaltation effects will be specially felt in the last
one third part of the dasa. In the initial part of the
dasa, good effects will go in vain, while in the
beginning and end of the middle part and in the
third part, enemies of the native will be destroyed.
In the middle of the last one-third part of the dasa,
the native will earn fame and prosperity.
षष्ठराशिदशाकले षष्ठीशांशगते शनौ। । ८३२। |
राहौ वा गोचरे वापि श्तरुजेन प्रपीडितः।
षष्ठाष्टमव्येशंशे CECT गते शनौ । । ८३३।।
स्वप्रभोश्च मनस्तापं देहायासं धनव्ययम्।

Deva Kerelam 19
832-8331/2. If Saturn or Rahu in transit arrives in the Rasi identical with the Navamsa occupied by the Sun at birth, or if one of them be in
the said Navamsa Rasi at birth, the native in the
dasa of the 6th Rasi, will have troubles caused by
enemies. When Saturn transits the sign caused by
the addition of the longitudes of the lords of 6th,
8th and 12th, the native will have mental agony
through the king, physical illness and expenditure.
कमलांशगते मन्दे मीनलग्ने तु जायते। । ८३४ |
सिंहराशिदशकाले वैष्णवद्रेषमाप्नुयात्।
तृतीयांशे शत्रुनाशं स्वराजन्यजनावधि। | ८३५ |
देशे राजान्तरं चेति पश्चाद्भाग्यं विनिर्दिशेत्
SURI दशाकाले मीनलग्ने तु जायते। ¦ ८३६। |
Sra भाग्ययेगे ag भाग्यं विनिर्दिशेत्।
सप्तमारूढगे जीवे स्वांशे पुर्णबलान्विते। । ८३७। |
कमलांशे प्रजातस्स नरवाहनभाग्भवेत्।
834-8371/2. The native of Pisces ascendant
with Saturn in Kamala Nadiamsa will obtain enmity from Vaishnativites in the dasa of Leo. In its
last one third part, after change of ruler (?) the
native will obtain fortunes. In the dasa of Virgo,
his fortunes will multiply. Jupiter in the 7th
Aroodha, in own Navamsa and with full strength
will bestow men-borne conveyances.
र्ररशिदशाकाले लक्ष्मीयोगे तु जायते। । ८३८। |
पत्रयोगाभिवृद्धिः स्यात्तृतीयांशे महाविप॑त्।
अष्ठमाधिपतौ स्वाच्चे नीचांशे —_ रूवीक्षिते। । 2381 ।
मीनलग्ने प्रजातस्य मध्यमायुरि तीरितम्।
्ञातिवर्गे मृतिश्चेति पुत्रपीडा भविष्यति। । ८४०।।
Pe acter क्षप्रिणसेग्यभाग्यवान् |
भाग्यराशिदशाकाले लक्ष्मीयोगे प्रजायते। | ८४१ 1 |
पुत्रप्राल्ययेगेन बहुभाग्यतरस्मुखी।
838-8411/2. In the dasa of the 8th Rasi, one
born in Lakshmi Yoga will obtain prosperity for
his children, but in the last one third part there
will be great danger. The 8th lord in exaltation
Rasi and debilitation Navamsa will give medium
life span, provided he is in aspect to 8th lord. A
death will takeplace among his kinsmen and his
children will be troubled. In adverse months, his
wife will experience problems to her health, but
will instantly recover. His children will become
famous and prosperous.
कर्मराशिदशकाले कमै राहौ स्थिते सति। । ८४२।।
मीनलग्ने aa कर्मरशिदशाविपत्।
तात्नरकाणदशकालं मृतप्राे हि जीवति। । ८४३। |
842-843. The Lakshmi Yoga caused by
Rahu’s position ia the 10th will greatly endanger
Pisces Lagna native in the dasa of Sagittarius
Rasi. [n the dasa ruled by a trine from Sagittarius,
he will nearly die.
Notes: One kind of Lakshmi Yoga is
produced by Rahu for a Pisces native by his .cing
in the 10th in Sagittarius. Simultaneously Saturn
should be in Aries, with Leo Navamsa. (See sloka
783 supra).
The said Lakshmi Yoga apart from giving
wealth serves to greatly endanger, the native. The
Kala Chakra Dasa suggested is of Sagittarius
which contains Rahu.
It is also. further suggested that the dasas of
Aries and Leo (Saturn’s Rasi and Navamsa positions) could also nearly kill the subject.
रन्भ्ररशिदशसन्धै स्वजनारिष्ठशोकवान्।
कम॑राशिदशाकाले रन्ध्राधिपतिवत्सरे। । ८४४ |
saad निर्याणमथवा ततुत्रिकोणगे।
भाग्यपांशफलाघ्याये लक्ष्मीयोगे तु जायते। । ८४५। ।
शनिनाडिफलाध्याये स्वल्पं शुक्रस्य नाडिके।
वर्षचर्याफलादीनि योजयेत्कवालवित्तमः। | ८४६ | |
844-846. In the concluding pari of the dasa
of 8th Rasi, the native’s relatives will incur evils
and be a source of grief. He will die in the dasa of
Sagittarius, in a year ruled by the 8th lord with
transit Sun in Cancer or inits trine. Sani Nadi, and
to some extent Sukranadi, deal with results of 9th
lord.
| । जन्मप्रदेशः । |
Libra Ascendant ~ Nirmala Nadiamsa
५६ Nadi — Birth Place
निर्मलांशे पूर्वभागे तुलालग्ने प्रजायते।
शुद्रजन्मा सुखी नित्यं गर्भ च नवमे भवेत्। cvs! |

SU
मकराशकगे मन्दे 9 |
लग्नेशे शनिसंयुक्ते ala (101
तुलालग्नेअर्कसन्दुष्टे निर्मलंशे तु |
वनप्रन्त्ये पु वासं जननं च विनिर्दिशेत्। । ८४९। ।
847-849. Nirmala Nadiamsa: One born in
the first half of this Nadiamsa in Libra ascendant,
will be a Soodra, be ever happy and will be the
ninth issue of the family. If Venus joins Saturn
while the latter is in Capricorn Navamsa, and the
Moon joins Rahn, birth will be in a place surrounded by forests. The same effect will occur if
the ascendant being Libra is in Nirmala Nadiainsa
and is aspected by the Sun. Further such a subject
will live in ६ town.
Notes: From now on, Libra Lagna with Nirmala Nadiamsa commences. The Nadi’s name is
left blank. Apparently it relates to Sukra Nadi.
Nirmala Nadiamsa extends thus: from 13
deg, 24’ to 13 deg. 36’ in a movable sign; from 16
deg. 24’ to 16 deg. 36’ in an immovable sign, and
from 28 deg. 24 to 28 deg. 36’ of a common sign.
Its first half in Libra extends 13 deg. 24’ to
13 deg. 30’. The first half covers both Vipra &
Kshatriya Kaalas.
The second half is from 13 deg, 30’ to 13 deg.
36’ in Libra.
Pater पूर्वभागे दक्षिणेत्तरवीधिषु।
War, जननं चेति उत्तर द्ररगेहके। । ८५०। |
उत्तरांशे प्रजातस्य प्राकूपश्चिमवीधिषु।
महानदीप्रनत्यदेशे नगे प्रसवः स्मृतः। । ८५९१। ।
निर्मलांशेत्ते भागे गर्भं च पंवमे भवेत्।
अथवा च तृतीयः CIR प्रसुतिमान्। | ८५२।
निर्मलांशे सुष्ठपीनः पूर्वभागे शुभाकृति।
850.8501/2. Street of birth: For Nirmala
Nadiamsa, former half, birth will be in northsouth street. The house concerned will be northfacing. In case of the second half of this nadiamsa,
the street concerned will be east-west, in
Mahanadi region, in a city. The native of second
half will be the fifth issue, or the third, and will be
exceedingly fat. The former half will give an auspicious (pleasing) appearance.
Chandra Kala Nadi
उत्तरांशे pew : कृशदेहस्वरूपवान्। । ८५३। ।
ग्रन्थान्तरे शि तुलालग्ने तु जातकः।
गुरूदृष्टिफलं जातके।
प्रसूतिसमये विप्रः कालज्ञान सुखावहौ।। ८५५। |
853-855. There are also authorities who state
that the Nirmala Nadiamsa native belonging to
second half will have an emaciated body. His birth
will be in a good family. If Jupiter aspects the
ascendant, (only then) will corpulence come to
exist. One of former half of this Nadiamsa will be
a Brahmin (if Jupiter aspects the ascendant). The
native will be an astrologer.
। । बालारिष्टम् चन्द्रदोषपरिहारः। ।
Infantile Mortality —
Relief from Lunar Blemish
उत्तरांशे मन्दफलं भिषक् a मुखवहौ।
ros] तिकाग्रहे वासः सूतिकाले महाव्यथा। । ८५६। |
जननी बहु वेदनशलिनीः। । ८५७। ।
क्वचिच्चेति Ry प्रसवः yal |
गुरूदुष्ठिवशात् सौख्यं बालारिष्टं न । । ८५८। ।
8551/2.-858. His birth will be very painful to
the mother with the Moon in the 4th house. In the
case of birth in first half, delivery will be instant,
and happiness will prevail due to Jupiter’s aspect,
and there will be no Balarishta.
सिंहे मन्दे व्यये जीवे मेषांशे पापवर्जिते।
निर्मलांशे पूर्वभागे चन्द्रदोषे न विद्यते। । ८५९। ।
859. If Saturn is in Leo, Jupiter in the 12th
(in Virgo) and the Navamsa of Aries is devoid of
a malefic, one born in Nirmalamsa does not incur
Chandra Dosha (blemished Moon to cause
Balarishta).
नीचे मन्दांशगे चन्द्रे निर्मलोशे प्रजायते|
पित्ररिष्टोपशान्तयर्थ स्वर्णधेनुं प्रदापयेत्। । ८६०। |
860. One born in Nirmala Nadiamsa in Libra
ascendant with Moon in Scorpio Rasi and in a
Saturn’s Navamsa entails evils to father. To overcome this an idol of cow made of gold be given
away in chairty.

Deva Keralam 81
भाग्यभिवद्धिमान् रागी धर्मपुण्यपुराणवित्।
लग्नादभाग्यगते भैमे निर्मलांशे तु जातकः। । ८६१। |
र क्रोधी भराुद्रेषकलापवान्।
¡ कचित् कालं यौवने ग्रन्थि रोगवान्।। ८६२॥
पश्चात्तापात्स . धर्मात्मा शिवलिंगप्रपूजकः।
निर्मलंशे पूर्वभागे वयोमध्ये पिता सुखी। । ८६३। |
धर्मकार्यर तो नित्यं ज्ञतिद्धेषकलापवान्।
वार्धके मुन लेन त Sail es । । ८६४ |
निर्मलशे पवग स्वपिता |
अथवा द्रादशश्चेति व. खी। । ८६५। |
पितृव्यौ द्रौ पुत्रवन्तावेकः वत् |
पुरापातकदोषेण Ferry कंर्शितः। । ८६६। ।
861-866. If Mars is in the 9th house for a
native of Libra in Nirmalamsa, there will be increase of good furtunes, The native will be lustful
and be learned in religious codes, meritorious
acts and ancient sacred texts. He will be interested in wicked people, be given to anger and will
hate his co-born. For some part of his life he will
indulge in thieving. In his youth, he will suffer
from disorders of blood vessels. He will worship
Lord Siva’s idol.
For one born in the first half of Nirmalamsa,
there will be happiness from father in the middle
age of life. He will be ever intent upon doing
charitable acts. He will have enmity with his
kiusmen and in his old age he will obtain huge
fortunes through his son, and be happy.
The father of the native (born in first half of
Nirmalamsa) will have ten or twelve brothers. He
will be happy with one brother. Two of the native’s
paternal uncles will have sons while one will have
_ no sons born to him, be emaciated and troubled
by great (serious) diseases due to the sins of his
previous birth
कठ्छतरद्रयवाश्चेति दत्तपुत्रयुते भवेत्।
सुमंगली पितृष्वसा रोगिण्येक तु पूत्रिणी। । ८६७। ।
867. He (the last mentioned uncle) will have
two wives and an adopted son. He will nevertheless have a daughter who will be sickly, affectionate to father and will have a long-living
husband.
alpha | |
भेदश्रतृविरोधवान्। । ८६८ I |
निर्मले पूर्वभागे स्वपितुर्भगिनीसुतः।
राजयोगं प्रकुर्वीत लोके भग्योत्तमोत्तमेः ¡ । ८६९। |
868-869. One born in the first half of Nirmalamsa of Libra Lagna will have a paternal
aunt’s son endowed with Rajayoga (position etc.),
prosperity and excellence of a higher order.
The said aunt’s son will possibly have a stepmother and will have enmity with his stepbrothers.
(Sloka 869 has similar meaning mixed up
waa
त्र व
i aap : कश्चिदुद्विमार्यवान्। ,
शि पूर्वभागे लाभे मन्दे तु जायते। । ८७१। ।
870-871. The same results accrue to
(another) son of father’s younger sister. Father’s
elder sister will become a widow, who will have
only one son troubled by abject poverty. The said
son will have two wives. These results are for
Nirmala Nadiamsa’s first half, with Saturn in the
11th house (in Leo).
स्वपितृन्यसुतौ द्र च can eT |
Sart वृत्तिमान् Beans Raa त्रेण कर्शितः।
स्वभेदश्रतृपापेन । | ८७२। |
872. His paternal uncle will have two sons
born of his loins apart from an adopted son and
will have questionable and foul means of
livelihood. He will be emaciated due to worries
about his spouse and progeny. Due to his sins to
his step-brothers, he will have loss of children.
अदुष्टयुक्तपुत्रप्तिः मध्ये तु ea गुरूरन्र्वीत।
भदश्रातृसुतद्वेषो कश्चितपत्रफलं स्मृतम्। । ८७३। |
$73, In his middle age, he will obtain fortunate progeny. He will hate the children of his
step-brothers. These are effects about progeny.
aaa प्रकुर्वीत भग्यवान्पापचेतेनः।
स्वपितुव्यसुतस्थाने मन्दे चापत्रिकोणगे। | ८७४। ।

४2 Chandra Kala Nadi
स्वपितुन्यपिता कश्चिटुग्रहशंकप्रपीडतः।
चौर्यकृत्यकसो नित्यं ज्ञोतवित्तापहारकः। 1 ८७५। |
तस्य दोषवशाच्चेति सन्तानारिष्ठशोकवान् |
भानुत्रतदिपुण्येन देहारोग्यं भविष्यति । । ८७६ । |
सन्तानोत्पत्तिमाप्नोति Lays युतस्सुखी।
लभे Grams मन्दे भागवेण समन्विते। i ८७७।
874-877. The native will have two wives, be
prosperous but will do sinful acts. if Saturn is in
the Sth house, or Sagittarius or its trines, the
native’s grand-father will be troubled by
planetary evils, and by a weapon like dagger, will
indulge in thieving, and will swallow the wealth of
his kinsmen. Because of these evils, he will incur
grief on account of danger to his children. Worship and prayers offered to the Sun-God will
grant good health to the said relative, and one
(long) living son and happiness thereof. This applies to the native born in Nirmala Nadiamsa of
Libra ascendant, having Saturn in the 11th, falling
in exalted or own Navamsa, being in the company
of Venus. (That is Saturn and Venus in Leo, while
Saturn is in Libra, Capricorn or Aquarius
Navamsa.)
स्वपितृन्यपितुः erat waar
FOAM रागी पुत्रशेकेन कर्चितः। । ८७८। |
ae |
मध्ये वयसि सन्तापी वातरोगेण कर्शितः।
ज्ञतिवर्गकलापेन क्लेशं प्राप्नेति भूरिशः। । ८८०। |
878-880. His grandfather will enter royal
service, be valorous, will have two wives, be lustful
and incur grief on account of his children. His
children will be destroyed due to his sins. However, after a long interval he will have birth of a
(long) living son and be happy. He will be rich
from birth. In the middle age, he will be grieved,
and will incur windy disorders, Due to his sins to
his kinsmen he will incur royal displeasure.
निर्मलांशे पूर्वभागे स्वपितृव्यसुतस्य च।
लाभे मन्दस्थुदोषंचे जन्मदाये मृतिं वदेत्। । ८८१।।
881. One born in the first half of Nirmala
Nadiamsa of Libra, with Saturn in the 11th house,
will have loss of paternal uncle’s son in the Janma
Dasa, i.e. first Dasa.
पितुः कनिष्ठभगिनी gape मरिष्यति।
जन्मदाये फलं चेति पितृव्यस्य तुलाशनौ। । ८८२! |
जीविते जन्मदायन्त्ये प्रबलज्ञातिनाशनम्।
सम्पदूदाये Yared दशमध्येअथवा यदि। । ८८३। |
882-883. With Saturn in Libra, for a native of
Nirmalamsa of Libra Lagna, father’s younger
sister will predecease her husband, In the end of
his Janma Dasa, there will be destrucion of his
kinsmen. Alternatively such destruction can
occur in the middle of Sampath Dasa (second
dasa), or in Venus sub period thereof.
निर्मलांशे पितृव्यस्य did oe च 1
स्वपिता मध्यवयसि | | ८८४। |
धनघन्ययुतश्चापि रोगी प्राबल्यवान्सुखी |
se gi FA जन्म भे व्याकुलं महत्। । C241 |
अधना मनस्तापं स्वपितुर्जाडय मादिशेत्।
उत्तरांशे विशेषेण स्वपिताचापमत्युमान्। | ८८६। |
प व्यस्य सुतारिष्टं WIM CAAA |
वभे पितृजीडयं श्षिप्रेणरोग्यभाग्यवान्। | ८८७। |
884-887. One born in Nirmalamsa will have
destruction of his paternal uncles. His father will
in his middle age acquire wisdom of agreat order.
In spite of having grains (i.e. eating comforts) and
wealth, he (the father) will be sickly. He will be
famous and happy. With the blemish of Mars in
the 9th house (birth in Nirmalamsa in Libra
Lagna), there will be troubles and fear in his home
(of birth). Right from the days of his being in-his
mother’s womb, his father would be troubled by
diseases. If birth be in the 2nd half of Nirmala
Nadiamsa, with Mars in the 9th house, his father
will have an untimely death, while additional
results are: evils to paternal uncle’s son and great
destruction of kinsmen. For birth in the first half
of Nirmala Nadiamsa (with Mars in the 9th
house) of Libra or Lagna, there will be illness to
father which will however be speedily cured.
-पितामहविचारOn Paternal Grandfather
ताताम्बिका सौष्यमेति. ज्येष्ठभ्रातृशुभावहम्।
पितम हाधिपे मन्दे स्वोच्चशे बुधसंयुते। । ८८८। |

Deva Keralam 83
पितामहः प्रसिद्धश्च बहूश्रातृसमन्विते।
लग्नादुद्रितीयगे राहौ Ga:
बाल्ये पितामहः क्लेशी दारिद्रयेण च कर्चितः।
दक्षिणेत्तरदेशे तु संचारं स्वपितामहः। । ८९०! |
विवाहानन्तरं भाग्यं सौख्यं पुत्रीत्सवात्परम्।
तुलालगने निर्मलांशे ज्ञानी स्यात्स्वपितामहः। । ८९१। |
888-891. Libra Lagna - Grand father:
Saturn, who is the lord of the house of paternal
grand-father, for Libra Lagna, joining Mercury
and occupying Libra Navamsa will give comforts
(health, happiness etc.) to the native’s grandfather. He will also prove auspicious to the
native’s elder brother. The native’s grand- father
will be famous and will have many brothers if
Rahu is in the 2nd house (in Scorpio) and the Sun
in the 10th house. Further his childhood would be
grief-ridden and marked by penury. He will be
emaciated. He will travel in the southern and
northern parts of the country. After marriage he
will become prosperous and celebrate birth of
children. He will be a wise man. These results are
applicable to the grand father of a person born in
Nirmala Nadi Amsa of Libra Ascendant.
यैवनान्त्ये qarata वनस्थलगतस्सुखी।
कुलद्रये सुपून्यश्च वेदिकाचारधमिंकः। । ८९२। |
अनाचारः क्व चित्कालं पश्चात्सन्माग॑वृत्तिमान्।
पिताम हाधिपे मन्दे शुभद्रससमन्विते। । ८९३। |
892-893. The said grand-father wouid attain
good fortunes in the end of his youth and would
go {0 areas surrounded by forests and be happy.
He will have two preceptors, be respectable, orthodox as prescribed by Sastras and be religiously
disposed. However for some part of his life he
would take to unorthodox means and then would
tread virtous path. These are when Saturn, the
significator of paternal grandfather for Libra ascendant 15 with two benefics.
Notes: In sloka 892, ‘Kuladwaye’ appears
which denotes that the native will adopt two
religions. In another version ‘Gurudwaye’ appears which indicates that the native will have two
preceptors.
Seeing the results of the native of being orthodox as prescribed by Sastras, I have adopted
‘Gurudwaye’ in translation.
"For some part of life...he will take to unorस्थिते सति॥ ८८९॥ thodox means” may also mean adopting another
inferior religion, for some.
निर्मलशे पूर्वभागे निर्मलः स्वपितामहः।
्राृश्रष्ठस्सुखी नित्यं सत्कन्तत्रकवान्सुखी। | ८९४। |
बन्धुवर्गे सुपूज्यश्च सोदरभ्रातुपोषकः।
एकभ्रातयुतो मानी सत्पत्रधनधन्यवान्। । ८९५। |
894-895. The grandfather of one born in the
first half of Nirmala Nadiamsa in Libra ascendant
will be pure (in conduct and character), will be
excellent among his coborn, be happy and will
have only one spouse. He will be honoured by his
relatives and will protect his brothers. He will
have one brother(?), be honourable, will have
worthy progeny and be endowed with wealth,
grains etc.
क भागे गुरूणा च निरक्षिते।
पितामहाधिक भाग्यं ज्येष्टठश्रत्रविकां श्रियम्
जातकस्य फलं चेति Arai धनी सुखी। । ८९७।
896-897. Libra ascendant with Nirmala
Nadimsa having Jupiter’s aspect gives following
effects: Due to the meritorious deeds of the great
grandfather of the native, there will be fortunes in
grandfather’s family. The native’s paternal grandfather will have much wealth. So also his full
older brother. The subject will be wealthy and
happy.
ल ava मन्दे भार्गवेण समिन्विते।
Sl ५०५ ज्येष्टभ्रातुसुयोगवान्।,। ८९८। |
रक्तवर्णश्शुभाकृतिः। ,
कट्छत्द्रयवान् भोगी सहोदरिबहुत्ववान्।.। ८९९। |
ज्येष्ठ भ्राता निर्मलांशे बहून्यापारवित्तवान्।
पितृवाक्यरतो नित्यं देव ब्राह्म णवोषकः। | ९००। |
अल्पपुत्रार्थसन्तोषी पुरत्रयनिवासवान्।
द्रीपान्तरादिवस्तुनि स्वर्णव्यापारजीवनम्। । ९०१९। |
सम्पद्दाये जातकस्य ज्येष्टभ्रातुः श्रियो वहम्।
विशेषप्रनलं चेति गृहे लक्ष्मीकराक्षवान्। | ९०२।।
898-902. Elder brother: For one born in the
first half of Nirmala Nadiamsa in Libra ascendant, with Mercury, Saturn and Venus in the 11th
house, elder brother will enjoy great prosperity

६. Chandra Kala Nadi
and will be skillful in two languages. His complexion will be blood-red and appearance auspicious (pleasing). He will have two wives and will
enjoy mundane pleasures. He will have many
sisters. The elder brother (of the Nirmalamsa
native) will have various business activities. He
will always honour his father’s words, will worship
God and protect (honour) Brahmins. He will be
happy with limited number of children and
limited wealth. He will live in three cities. He will
deal with gold and other articles imported from
different islands (i.e. foreign countries). When
the native will be in his Sampath Dasa (second
dasa) the elder brother will amass wealth, and will
in addition become widely famous. There will be
mercy of Goddess Lakshmi showering on the
family.
उत्तरांशे WMT वयोमध्ये सहोदरः।
ज्येष्टभ्रातृवियोगेन क्लेशं प्राप्नाति भूरिशः । । ९०३।।
903. Nirmala Nadiamsa - second half: For
a person of Libra ascendant, birth in this part of
Nadiamsa will cause birth of a younger co-born
during his middle age (i.e. after a long gap), and
because of loss of elder brother abundant grief
will result.
सिंहे मन्दे तुलालग्ने ज्येष्ठभातृवियोगवान्।
पापदृष्ठियुते चेति फलमेतद्िचिन्तयेत्। | ९०४। |
904. For Libra Lagna Saturn in Leo related
to a malefic by aspect/company will cause logs of
elder brother.
निर्मलशे पूर्वभागे ज्येष्ठभ्रातुश्चिरायुषम्।
भगिनीत्रयमायुष्यं वेदसंख्यामथापि च। । ९०५। |
905. Elder brother will be long-lived if birth
be in the former half of Nirmala Nadiamsa in’
Libra Lagna. He will have three or four longliving sisters.
उत्तरे प्रजातस्य पश्चादुभ्रातुश्चिरयुषम्।
सहोदरविवाहश्च ज्येष्टभ्रातृविनाशवान्। | ९०६ ।
906. For one born in the second half of Nirmala Nadiamsa of Libra Lagna, brothers born
after him will live long. At the time of a brother’s
marriage, there will occur the destruction of elder
brother.
Pra पूर्वभागे सोदरा द्वादशास्य च।
दशसंख्याथवा चेति सोदरौ द्वौ चिरायुष। । owl |
907. There will be ten or twelve brothers, for
one born in the first half of Nirmala Nadiamsa out
of which two will be long- lived.
गन्थान्तरे निर्मलंशे पूर्वभागे तु जायते।
भगिनीत्रयमायुष्यं पश्चाद््रातृविनाशवान्। । ९०८ |
908. According to other textual sources,
three sisters with long life are denoted for birth in
first half of Nirmala Nadiamsa. However, male
after-borns of the native will not survive.
भैमे यावत्फलं चेति तावत्संख्या सहोदरः |
दीर्घयुष्यौ सुमंगल्यौ द्रे भगिन्यौ भविष्यतः। । ९०९। |
शेषं नाशमिति प्राहुः Phd gol |
909-910. The number of coborns (for the
first half of Nirmala Nadiamsa, Libra Lagna) will
correspond to the dots contributed by Mars in his
Ashtaka Varga. Two of the sisters will be endowed
with long-lives and will be fortunate and be
devout housewives. Rest will be destroyed according to wise men. The native (of the said
Nadiamsa) will gain wealth through his elder
brother. There will be increased prosperity in the
family. Birth in Nirmala Nadiamsa will give comforts and happiness.
Note: The word "Susmangali" is a specific
word in Sanskrit denoting a woman who 15 a
fortunate and devout housewife, with a long living
husband, the stress however being on husband’s
longevity.
The last line of sloka 909/10 only refers to
Nirmala Nadiamsa but not as to in which half the
birth should be. However this belongs to first half
of the Nadiamsa.
वर्गोत्तमे विक्रमेशे सप्तमे पापवर्जिते।
ज्येष्ठभ्राता विरायुष्मान् बहुभाग्यर तस्सुखी। । ९११। ।
कचित् सहोदरी क्लेशं सन्तानोत्पत्तिनाशनम्।
ध — बहस्तरप्रजसंयुता। । ९१२। ।
तुलालग्ने तु जायते।
भगिन्यै द्रे पुत्रवत्यै हेका भाग्यवती gets । ९१२३।।
क्लेशिता च पराष्येक ake च |
पूर्वभागे फलं सत्यं सहोदरिचतुष्ठयम्। । ९१४। |

Deva Keralam Ss
911-914. For birth in first half of Nirmala
Nadiamsa, Libra Lagna, the lord of the 3rd, ite.
Jupiter, in Vargothama as the 7th house is bereft
of a malefic, denotes that the native’s elder
brother will be long-lived and be endowed with
abundant fortunes and happiness. The native’s
sister will be somewhat troubled. She will lose
children and will have many daughters. The said
native’s two sisters will be blessed with children,
be fortunate and happy. Another sister will be
grief-stricken and will suffer poverty. There will
be in all four sisters.
— पपे मन्दे स्वोच्चाशे गुरूवीक्षिते।
शि प्रजातस्य स्वमाता बिरजीविनी। । ९१५। |
915. Regarding mother - Libra Lagna - Nirmala Nadi Amsa: The native’s mother will be
long-lived, if the 4th lord Saturn is aspected by
Jupiter and is in own/exaltation Navamsa.
मीने सूर्येमसिते लाभे चरलग्नस्व जातके।
त्रिषडायगताः पापाः मातृवंशः क्षयं गतः। । ९१६।।
916. For a native born in a movable ascendant (not necessarily Libra), the Sun in Pisces,
Saturn in the 11th house and malefics positioned
in the 3rd/6th/11th houses will cause destruction
of mother’s family.
Note: The text all of a sudden introduces a
rule applicable to a movable ascendant in general,
not restricting to Libra ascendant alone.
The following verses apply to Nirmala
Nadiamsa of Libra ascendant again.
स्वमाता सगुणपूता भ्रातृभाग्यसमन्विता।
मातृसोख्यविहीनश्च पितृभग्यविवर्जितः। । ९१७।।
जीवभ्रातुयुतश्चेति पुत्रभाग्ययुतस्सुखी।
उत्तरांश प्रजातस्य निर्मलंशस्य जातके। । ९१८। ।
= ` मातुर्मरणमादिशेत्।
पूरव॑भागे निर्मलांशे पितृश्चारिष्ठतः परम्। । ९१९।।
917-919. The mother of the native of second
half Nirmala Nadiamsa of Libra Lagna will be
endowed with virtues and coborns. The native will
not derive happiness both from his mother and
father. He will have long-living coborns and be
blessed with children. Before evils (death) occurring to his father, his mother will pass away.
जननी मृतिमाप्नोति तुलांशे वृश्चिके शनौ।
शनेः तृत्तायपर्यये तुले मातूनाशनम्। । ९२० ।
920. Death of mother wil take place if
Saturn is in Scorpio occupying Libra Navamsa. In
the third round of his transit when Saturn reaches
Libra Navamsa, destruction (death) of mother
will take place.
Notes: The sloka is not very clear. The first
line seems to suggest early death of mother of a
Libra lagna native who has Saturn in Scorpio
Rasi and Libra Navamsa. The second line seems
to suggest that third round of Saturn, after crossing his natal position twice, will bring danger to
mother, when he reaches Libra Navamsa. Jn the
third round he can reach Libra Navamsa more
than once. Hence the meaning is not very clear. It
is left to the ingenuity of the reader.
विपत्तारदशसन्धौ जननीनाशमादिशेत्।
शनिप्रथमपर्याये ~ मिथुने शनो। । ९२१।।
विपत्तूरदशामध्ये ्।
तत्विकोणेअपमृत्युश्च शन्त्या शन्ति प्रयास्यति। । ९२२ । |
पितरो च चिरायुष्यै पूर्वभागे न संशयः।
अष्ठादरेअथवाचेति विशब्दे वा मरिष्यतः। । ९२३।।
पूर्वभागे च तत्काले स्वपितुजीडयमादिशेत्।
Saat cafes स्यच्छन्त्या शान्ति प्रयास्यति। । ९२४। `
921-924. At the junction of Vipat Tara
(third) dasa mother will die when Saturn in the
first round is in Gemini. The native’s father will
die in the middle of the native’s Vipat Tara dasa.
Father’s death will be untimely (Apamrithyu).
Propitiations may prove helpful. If birth be in the
first half of Nirmala Nadiamsa, then the father
will be long-lived. He may live upto the 18/20th
year of age of the native. The native’s father will
fall sick immediately after the birth (of the native
in first half of Nirmala Nadiamsa) while evils to
kinsmen are also possible.
Notes: "Junction of Vipat Tara Dasa (3rd
dasa)" in this case may mean the period between
2nd and 3rd dasa, as mother is said to predecease
father. Also please note death of father is denoted
in the middle of Vipat Tara dasa. So there is no
question of mother passing away at the end of
Vipat Tara Dasa, i.e. junction of 3rd and 4th dasas.

६6 Chandra Kala Nadi
In sloka 922, the words "trines thereof
should relate to "Saturn in Gemini vide sloka 921".
In sloka 923, long life to father is predicted.
In the same breathsthg native is said to be 18/20
years of age at the time of father’s death. We do
not know as to what will be age of the father at the
time of the native’s birth. Hence these may not
mutually contradict.
al चन्द्रे शकटे तु प्रजायते।
ऊहापोहपटस्सुधीः।।९२५। ।
925. Sakata Yoga: The Moon joining Rahu
in the 2nd house and being in Sakata Yoga (with
Jupiter) will bless the native with abundant
education, skill in consideration of the pros and
cons, and a high order of intelligence.
विद्यास्थानाधिपे मन्दे स्वोच्चाशे भृगुसंयुते।
जात्यानुगुणविद्याप्तिः मणिरत्नपरीक्षेकः।। ९२६। |
926. Should Saturn be in the company of
Venus and occupy own/exaltation Navamsa the
native will acquire education as prescribed for
his family of birth, and will be an examiner of
precious stones.
iar Re पूर्वभागे ल देवपुजिते।
सत्कथप्रियवान्नित्यं ध्मशस्तरपुराणवित्। । ९२७। |
य क स्वेजनप्रिय |
; भाग्यं महादानप्रदस्सुखी। । ९२८। |
विद्यारम्भं पंचमाब्दे तृतीयाब्दे ज्वरादभयम्।
बाल्ये मान्द्ज्वरादीनि वसूरीज्वर गण्ड वान्। । ९२९। ।
तद्दोषपरिहारार्थं सेमस्य प्रार्थनां वदेत्।
नागप्रतिमदानेन देहारोग्यं महत्सुखम्। । ९३०। |
927-930. Jupiter in the 7th house for birth
in first half of Nirmala Nadiamsa, Libra Lagna:
Should Jupiter be in the 7th house (in Aries) for
native of first half of Nirmala Nadi Amsa in Libra
Lagna, he will be fond of mythological accounts
(Satkatha), and be learned in ancient Sastras and
Puranas. He will perform sacrifices, dig wells and
will do other acts of charity. He will be charitable
in general and will be of sacrificial nature. He will
attain fortunes through grandfather, be a great
donor and be happy. His education will commence in his fifth year. In the third year he will
have fear of fever (of some consequence). In his
childhood, he will be troubled by weak digestion
and will incur danger from chicken-pox. To ward
off these evils, the Moon god be propitiated and
donation of cobra’s image be made. Then sound
health and great happiness will prevail.
aire जीवे सप्तमे दीर्घमायुषः।
नालारिष्ठशतं हन्ति freed यथा। । ९३१।।
उत्तरांशे प्रजातस्सः बालारिष्टे मरिष्यति।
जीविते दीर्घमायुष्यं नामनाडिषु विस्तरेत्।
पूर्वभागे प्रजातस्सः कमलायतलोचनः। । 8321 ।
931-932. Nirmala Nadiamsa - Libra Lagna
- Lifespan: For one born in the first half of Nirmala Nadiamsa, long life will come to pass if
Jupiter in the 7th house (Aries) is in Vargothama
Navamsa. Infantile evils to lifespan, if any, will be
countered in respect of such a native just as
thunderbolt is resisted by the hill. One born in the
second half will face infantile evils to lifespan. If
however he survives (due to other combinations)
he will have a long life. One born in first half of
this Nadiamsa will have eyes resembling a lotus
petal.
मृदुकान्तवपुस्साधुमं राम्लरसप्रियः।
वातश्लोष्स्वभावश्च पित्तप्रकृतिदेहवान्। । ९३३। |
द्विनामा सत्यवान् रागी किचित् स्त्रीसंगपापवान्।
शुक्रे शनियुते जाते भोगी स्याद्राजवल्लभः । । ९३४। |
वेश्यस्त्रीसंगवान्कामि पश्चात्तापजितेन्द्रियः।
ज्येष्ठस्युसन्तुष्ठमनष प्रजातः
स्यादल्पमित्नो कृशदीर्घगात्न।
grates रतीव भीरू
सुधार्मिको धर्मपरायणाश्च। । ९३५। ।
धर्मशस्त्रप्रियो नित्यं ore
शुक्रेण संयुते जातः ज्ञानी
अन्तश्शुचिप्रियो वागमी निर्मलांशे सु ।
किचिद्रोगी प्रसन्नात्मा कोपी सुगृहवान्धनी। । ९२७। |
933-937. Nirmala Nadiamsa - Other
results: (Birth in first half - continued) - He will
wed a woman who is gentle in nature. He will be
virtuous (or saintly). He will be fond of sweet and
sour juices. He will incur windy and phlegmatic
imbalances. He will also have bilious excesses. He
will have two names. He will be truthful in disposi-

Deva Keralam 87
tion. Being libertine, he will sometimes commit
adultery.
He will enjoy material pleasures and be dear
to king, if Venus joins Saturn. In addition, he will
sexually unite with prostitutes, will regret later
on and will win over his senses. He will be pleased
with his elders. His friends will be limited in
number. He will be thin and will have a long body.
He will be pure, highly intelligent and somewhat
timid. He will follow religious codes and be
charitable. He will dabble in Dharma Sastras.
Should Venus join (the ascendant having
Nirmala Nadiamsa, first half), the native will be
proficient and learned (in ancient Sastras) and
will be a true philosopher (knowing the nature of
Brahman). He will be endowed with pure conscience. He will be a skilful speaker, be somewhat
troubled by diseases, be given to anger, will have
a good residence and be rich.
| । चांचल्ययोग। ।
Fickle-mindedness
कमलाशभवे चन्दे नीचे राहुसमन्विते। । ९३८ |
मनश्चान्वल्यवान् किन्विन्मन्दप्रकृतिरूपवान्।
चन्द्रे राहुयुते जाते राजचोरभयातुरः। | ९३९। |
निर्मलांशे _ वयोमध्ये भ्रातुक्लेशकलापवान्।
लग्नात्कम॑गते सूर्य (9 पुण्यवान्। । ९४०। |
गंगास्नफलाधिक्यं त्रिवारं |
वार्धके यौवने बाल्ये त्रिवारं :| । ९४१ |
त : तयकाद्यानकर्मकृत्।
गंगातीरे सुधर्म स्यानि =|
गंगायात्रोपकारादिधर्मसिद्धिर । | ९४३ । |
मीने सूर्य निर्मलांशे genet serge
कर्माधिपदशाकाले त्विदं Bai A TAL । ९४४। I
लग्नाधिपदशा भाग्यमुत्तरा्ध |
विशेषधर्मसिद्धिः स्याल्लग्नाधिपतिदायके। । ९४५} |
fart धर्मसिद्धिः स्वप्रानल्यं भविष्यति।
सम्पद्दाये द्वादशाब्दे त्रयोविशतिवत्सरे। । ९४६ । |
निम॑लाशे पूर्वभागे मधुमासे विवाहवान्।
मेषाशके मदाधीशे निमंलांशे तु जातकः। । ९४७। |
उद्वाहं जन्मदेशेषु प्राग्भागे नगरे | |
मेषत्रिकोणगे चन्द्रे दारजन्मक्षभं विदुः। । ९४८ । |
गृहस्थगेह उद्राही कच्छत्रान्तर योगवान् |
्रिंशब्दे दारनाशः
938-9491/2. If the Moon is debilitated, occupying Kamala Nadiamsa and be in the company
of Rahu, the native will not be stable in disposition. Moreover, he will be somewhat a dunce. The
Moon conjunct Rahu brings to the said Libra
native fear from king and thieves. For one born in
Nirmala Nadiamsa of Libra, there will be grief on
account of coborn in middle age. If the Sun occupies the 10th house,the native will bathe in
Sethu (or sacred rivers), will attain abundant
meritorious fruits by bathing in the Ganges, and
will undertake a pilgrimage to Sethu (in the
South). In the middle of his life he will perform
good deeds and construct tanks and gardens.
During his pilgrimage he will donate a tawny cow
and will attain Punya (religious merits) and will
do cahritable acts on the banks of the Ganges. He
will help others to visit Ganges etc. and will be
happy. He will be endowed with a long life with
the Sun in the 10th house with Libra Navamsa.
Thus the results be understood to be materializing in the dasa of the 10th lord.
Lagna Lord’s dasa in its second half will
bring prosperity. In the dasa of Lagna lord, he will
attain a great deal of religious merits and wide
fame thereof. In Sampth Dasa (2nd dasa in sequence), coinciding with twelfth or twenty-third
year, in the month of Chaitra (one of the months
in Spring), he will get married to a girl coming
from the eastern part of his country. Ifthe 7th lord
isin Aries Navamsa, for a person born in Nirmala
Nadiamsa of Libra Lagna. The learned say that in
this context, the natal Moon of the spouse will be
in Aries or one of its trines. He will firmly support
his marriage (but) will have a remarriage after
some interval, in his twenty-fourth year, in the
dasa of the Lagna lord. There will be destruction
of wife in his 30th year and immediately thereafter
(?) remarriage will occur.
Notes: Kamala Nadiamsa in Scoprpio extends from 24 deg. 0' to 24 deg. 12’ in which space
the Moon is required to be. She should also
conjoin Rahu. Then the Libra native will be un-

६६ Chandra Kala Nadi
stable in disposition and will have fear fromkings incur woes due to loss of progeny. He will get
(or government) and thieves. happiness from father in Janma dasa (first dasa)
व smear and wealth in the third year. There will be happiभाग्यांशगे विलग्नेशे लाभि भाग्यपसंयुते। | ९५० । | ness in the first year of his birth following the
सुखधिपेन संयुक्ते योगो असाविन्द्रनामकेः। marriage of an older brother. When Saturn
इनद्रयौगे तुलालग्न भोगीस्याद्राजवल्लभः | । ९५१ । | reaches the sign identical with 8th lord’s Navamsa
धर्ममार्गपरो ie ALi | Rasi, or its trines, there will be evils (to the native)
प्राकारगोपुरादीनि वर तस्युखो। । ९५२। | and his mother in his birth country. There will also
योगनाडीफलाध्याये फलं विस्तारमादिशेत्। be mental agony to kinsmen, particularly on account of royal wrath. When Saturn reaches the
birth sign (Libra) there will be great danger to
father in the dasa indicated by the lord of Navamsa holding the 9th lord. In the first dasa, the
native’s and his father’s prosperity will increase.
These results for birth in first part of Nirmala
Nadi Amsa of Libra Lagna have been elaborately
narrated in Dasa results chapter of Yoga Nadi.
950-9521/2. Indra Yoga: For a Libra Lagna
native, Venus placed in the 11th house, joining the
lord of the 9th/4th and begetting Cancer Navamsa
causes Indra Yoga. As a result the native will
enjoy material pleasures and be dear to the king.
He will follow the path prescribed by his religion
(or Sastras) and be endowed with much wealth.
He will attain religious merits (by constructing)
temple boundaries and towers and be happy.In = इनद्रयेगे प्रजातस्य गर्भश्रीमान्महाधनी।
Phaladhyaya of Yoga Nadi, results have been told हेमाम्बरसुभूषप्तिः स्वगृहे स्वर्णपात्रवान्। । ९६०। |
in detail (in this regard). । |
960. Indra Yoga (continued): The native of
Notes: Indra yoga forms thus fora Libra = Indra Yoga will be wealthy right from birth. He
native. Venus should be in the sign Leo. He will obtain gold, classicrobes and ornaments, and
should join Saturn and Mercury in Cancer will own golden vessels.
Navamsa. Result mentioned here apart from Notes: For Indra Yoga formation see sloka
those under Slokas 960 and 963-9651/2 will == 950 supra. Additional effects are mentioned in
materialize in this regard. This combination is 51012 963-651/2 below.
taken from Yoga Nadi by the author.
विपदूदाये 041 ्षेमदाये विशेषत।
लामे मन्दे तुलालग्ने द्विकस्मत्रसुपुत्रवान्। । ९५३।। प्रत्यगेदाये विशे । । ९६१। ।
पननिकत्रयमायुष्य णा एन भ निर्मलशे चक्रसन्धै दशसन्धिश्च जायते।
वार्धके > sa phan षष्टाष्ठमाधीशभुक्तौ स्वदेहायसमादिशेत्। । ९६२।।
Seas a ae 961-962. These effects will come to pass in
can wie गै -शनैौ | क र ज व in fourth
गिं स्वमात्रदिजिनावधि asa. There will be wealth exceeding ten
व त Bg ay ioe thousand (gold coins) in the fifth dasa. The native
शनौ जन्मस्थिते काले स्वपितुर्व्याकुलं महत। । ९५७। | will acquire physical illness if born in Chakra
भाग्यारूढाधिपंशेशदशायांच प्रजायते। न Sandhi (i.e. Riksha $ andhi) or in the junctions of
ee ; स्वपिता बहुभाग्यवान्। ।.९५८। । two Dasas. Such results will be experienced in the
योगनादीदशाफले | ५, sub periods of lords of 6th/8th.
निर्मले पूर्वभागे फलं विस्तारमादिशेत्। । ९५९।। निर्मलांशे पूर्वमे धनाधिपदशन््ये।
, 953-959. ऽप placed in the 11th house will wes CPIM वृक्चिकदत्रिमासगे =
give two wives and virtuous children to a Libra निर्मलांशे pe eae alin |
native. Three daughters will be long-lived while चदु पंचाशके वर्षे ज । । Sasi |
there will also be four sons. In his old age, he will त्वपमृत्युश्च शन्ति कुयद्विचक्षणः

Deva Keralam ६५
TSA क्लेशबाहुल्यं स्वशरीरसमावधि। । ९६५। |
निर्मलशे फलं सत्यं देहान्तरे सद्ग स्मृता।
963. Second Lord’s Dasa - Nirmalamsa:
One born in this Nadaimsa’a first half will confront danger of (timely) death in the end of 2nd
lord’s Dasa. The probable months will coincide
with the Sun in transit in Scorpio, Sagittarius or
Capricorn.
964-9651/2. Indra yoga (continued): One
born in Nirmala Nadiamsa with this yoga will face
death in his 60th year. In his 54th year, his eldez
brother will pass away. In the native’s 27th year,
the said elder brother may contract fatality but
remedies will help. The native in his 9th year (one
sixth of 54) will incur many troubles and physical
ailments. After death he will attain good heavens.
These are for birth in Nirmalamsa,
Notes: For Indra Yoga see sloka 950-9501/2
as well as sloka 960 supra.
पुण्ययेगः
Yoga for Moral Merits
व्ययेशे भृगुसंयुक्ते लाभे जीवार्कसंयुते। । ९६६। ।
देहान्ते पुण्यलोकप्तिः bet lg त्तमजन्मवान्।
निर्मलांशफलं सत्यं प्रत्यक्षं । । ९६७। ।
966-967. The 12th lord joining Venus, and
Jupiter in the 11th along with the Sun denote that
the native will go to heavens and will have an
excellent (worthy) rebirth. These effects for Nirmala Nadiamsa of Libra Lagna as narrated by
Deva Keralam will be true and practically experienced.
राजयोगः
Raja Yoga
कुम्भांशे TY शुक्रे राजयोगे तु जातके।
चरलग्ने प्रजातस्य सप्त्विंशात्पर॒सुखम्। । ९६८ ।
968. Raja yogas: There occurs a Raja yoga
for a native of one of the movable ascendants as
Venus occupies the sign Taurus, with Aquarius
Navamsa. As a result happiness (position etc.)
will come to pass after the age of 27.
लग्ने फग्यव्ययारूढे भार्गवेण युतेक्षिते।
राजयोग इति ख्यातो राजावा तत्समो अपि वा। 1 ९६९।।
0 प्रजात श्च ee भवेन्नरः।
वदन्यस्सत्यवादी च गन्धमाल्फम्बरप्रियः।
969-9701/2. Venus aspecting or joining the
Aroodha of ascendant, 9th or 12th causes a Raja
yoga. Such a native will become a king or equal to
him, will be endowed with valour and be heroic.
He will be fond of drama, rhetorics (or ornamenting), poetry and music. He will speak fluently and
be truthful. He will be fond of scents, garlands and
robes.
Note: The results of the said Raja yoga with
Venus & C apply to a movable ascendant.
दुब॑लदेहयोगः
Yoga for Weak Body
वृष्विकंशे चे लग्ने नीचे भौमे प्रजायते। । ९७१। |
लग्नात्तृतीयगे चन्द्रे रोगी sates
रक्तकाशक्षयादीनि योगकाले प्रपीडितः। । ९७२। |
971-972. Emaciated Body: A movable ascendant rising at birth, with Scorpio Navamsa, as
Mars is in debilitation and the Moon is in the 3rd
house will cause an emaciated body, tuberculosis
and emission of blood in cough (Haemoptysis).
मूर्खयेगः
Yoga for Foolishness
लग्नेशे मकरांशस्ये मूर्खप्रकृतिकोपवान्।
9721/2. A Fool: Lord of Lagna in Capricorn
Navamsa will give birth to a fool, ridden with
anger,
विष्णुयोगः
Vishnu Yoga
सिंहांशगे क्रिये सूर्य जीवे केतुसमन्विते। 1 ९७३।।
विष्णुयेग इति ख्यतो वैष्णवाचारभग्यवान्।
लग्ने कुजे व्यये मन्दे किष्णुयेगे तु जायते। । ९७४। |
बाल्ये क्लेशं च दारिच्ं सप्तविंशसमावधि।
विष्णुयेगे कृशंगश्च श्यामवर्णशुपाकृकिः। । ९७५ |

ब्रहमविद्धनिकश्शूरो मेधवौ Heres |
SUSE Hd Wace 1 ९७६ 1 |
भगिनीद्रयमायुष्यं aed li
राजयेगोशगे शुक्रे ले शके। । ९७७। |
कनिष्ठभमातृमान् रागी ज्येष्ठश्रतृसमन्विक।
913-9771/2. Vishnu yoga: The Sun in Aries
with Leo Navamsa while Jupiter joins Ketu (elsewhere) will cause Vishnu yoga. Such a native will
prosper and will follow the codes prescribed for
a Vaishnative. Mars in ascendant while Saturn is
in the 12th house will also produce the said yoga.
The native’s childhood will be marked by grief.
There will be penury upto the age of 27. He will
have an emaciated body, be dark in complexion
and be endowed with an auspicious appearance.
He will realize the Supreme Spirit (theologian
etc.), will be wealthy, heroic, intelligent and fond
of promoting quarrels. He will be dear to king. He
will have two sisters and will also have younger
brothers. Venus causing Raja yoga, placed in the
11th house and occupying Aquarius Navamsa will
give younger and elder co-borns and make the
native libertine.
Notes: Vishnu Yoga described here applies
toa movable ascendant (Aries, Cancer, Libra and
Capricorn). In any case the Sun should be in
Aries, between 13 deg. 20’ and 16 deg. 40’ while
Jupiter is with Ketu elsewhere. Results are
prosperity etc.
Another kind of Vishnu Yoga for a movable
ascendant is formed by Mars being in ascendant
While Saturn isin 12th. The results of such Vishnu
Yoga are grief etc. as discussed in the text. Also
see sloka 980.
HATTA:
Avastha Yoga
सप्तविंशातिवरषणि क्लेशजीवनवान्भवेत्। । ९७८। |
ततुः पश्चाप्राजयोगः त्रिशोपरि sas
कुरिलशे विष्णुयोगे क्लेशिता स्वस्य सोदरी ॥ ९७९॥
मृतैका च समागत्य क्षेमदाये sag!
कन्यचन्द्रे विष्णुयोगे हास्यापक्ष । । ९८०। ।
बाल्ये च निर्धनः क्लेशी कथकार्यप्वर्वकः।
हास्यवस्थे निशनाथे सदाहास्यकथप्रियः। । ९८२। ।
Chandra Kala Nadi
परेगितज्ञश्चतुरो मित्रवन्दनवुद्धिमान्।
स्वकार्य॑चतुरः 4 sig र्यविघा
स्वराजपिशुनश्चेति
हास्यावस्थे राजयेगे लग्ने पपे तु जायते। । ९८३। |
978-983. Avastha yoga: Upto the age of 27
the native will have a troubled life. Afterwards
there will be Rajayoga; particularly after the age
of 30 more favourable results will occur.
For one born with Kutila Nadiamsa of Libra
Lagna, with Vishnu yoga, there will be a troubled
(or unfortunate) sister while one will predecease
her husband. In the Kshema Dasa (4th Dasa) the
native’s will become widely famous. Vishnu yoga
is also caused by Bright half Moon placed in
Virgo. Such a native will be ever fond of listening
to accounts filled with jokes. He will be poor in
childhood and will incur grief. He will be skilful
in reading.others’ thoughts, will cheat his friends,
be skilful in his work, be wealthy, will cause
obstacles to the doings of his enemies, and will be
a tale-bearer. He will be a hindrance to others if
in the said Raja yoga, malefics are in the ascendant.
Notes: The sub-heading given in the text as
"Avastha Yoga" is not appropriate.
Hasyavastha of Moon is often referred.
This seems to be a confused term.
tReet ९ पापकरो भवेत्।
हास्यवस्थे निशनये विष्ये प्रजायते। । ९८४ । ।
्रीवैष्णवम् ताचारी स्वबन्धूजनपोषकः।
राजवंशकरो नित्यं स्वदारेष्वातिकामुकः। । ९८५। |
निषिद्वदिवसे कामी स्वस्त्रीसंगप्रदो भवेत्।
984-9851/2. In the Vishnu yoga caused by the
Moon as above, the nativ will enjoy a royal office
with seal (i.e. power), will indulge in many sinful
acts. He will follow the codes prescribed for a
Vaishnavite, will patronize his kinsmen and will
unite with his wife with exceeding passion. He will
cohabit (even) on days prohibited (by Sastras)
(i.e, on Amavasya and the two Ekadasi days).
qakerst कोशे तुष्णप्रकृतिदेहवान्। । ९८६। |
ततः श्लोष्मविकारी स्यात् किंचिद्रोगेणे पीडितः। । ९८७।।
परव्रतोपवासेन पैल्यकासप्रपीडितः।

Deva Keralam 9]
तत्पापपरि हारार्थं ग्रहचक्रं WAT! । ९८८। |
एकाशीतिपरं चक्र पलेनैकेन निर्मितम्।
rake Sy I a. | ! ९८९ ।
सोराक्षरं ट त्वमिजित्सह पेत्।
दैवज्ञाय प्रदानेन रोगी रोगद्विमुच्यते। । ९९०। |
परोपतारराजांशे विष्णुयेगे तु जायते।
शिवद्रोहवशाद्रोगी क्षेमदाये प्रपीडितः,
ग्रहचक्र द्वित्रिवारं WEA समाचरेत्। । ९९१। |
लक्षमीमृत्युन्जयादीनि जपेदीश्वरसन्निधौ।
नवग्रहमखं चैव ८ क्तविधनतः। । ९९२। |
दानेन सोख्यमाप्नोति ¡ शुभावहम् ।
तदभावे शिवक्षेत्रे कोरिमृत्युन्जयं जपेत्। । ९९३ ¦ |
शिवलिंगप्रतिष्ठेव रक्तकासं विनशयति।
Feared रक्तकासाय चैव हि। । ९९४1 |
मधु कुम्भाज्यदानेन किचिदासेग्यभाग्यवान् |
986-9941/2, One born in Cancer ascendant
with Scorpio Navamsa will have a warm body. He
will heve phlegmatic imbalances and will be
somewhat troubled by diseases. Due to excessive
observance of (religious) vows and fasting, he will
be troubled by bilious disorders and cough. As a
remedy (to overcome these ills) he should worship an image of the zodiac, to be drawn on
husk-filled ground. The names of Nakshatras including Abhijit be written on the said space and
the Grahas (planet) be worshipped as prescribed
in the Vedas. The astrologer should be honoured
with gifts. Then the patient will get rid of the
disease. The said illness will occur in kshema
Dasa (4th Dasa) on account of dishonouring
Lord Siva (in the previous birth). The zodiacal
image (as above) be worshipped for two or three
weeks, with Prayers and donations. In the
presence of God (or in temples), worship of
Lakshmi and recitation of Mrityunjaya Japa be
performed. Nava Grahas be worshipped in one’s
residence as prescribed. Then comforts and
sound health will prevail. In the absence of these,
recitation of Mrityunjaya in a shrine of Lord Siva
be done and the image of Lord Siva (Siva Linga)
be installed to overcome the cough with emission
of blood (i.e. Haemoptysis). Some health and
prosperity can be acquired by donation of pots of
honey.
कन्याचन्द्रे राजयेोगे मकराशे प्रजायते। । ९९५। |
क्षेमदाये राजयोगः ae न संशयः।
aga स्त्ीप्रजानां च पुप्रजस्वल्पमादिशेत्। | ९९६॥ |
995-996. Many daughters: The Rajayoga
caused bythe Moon placed in Virgo, in Capricorn
Navamsa will give results in the second half of
Kshema Dasa (4th Dasa). Such a native will have
many daughters and a few sons.
अधिकांगयोमः
Yoga for Excessive Limb
we गभ विष्णुयोगे सुपुत्रवान्।
नीचराशिस्थे कारके राहुवीक्षिते। । ९९७ । ।
अधिकांगसुतप्रप्तिः दन्तजातेजथवा भवेत्।
कुटिलांशे विष्णुयोगे न्वा विनाशवान्। । ९९८। |
रागी वन्ध्यापतिश्चैव iia hl
विष्णुयेगे कनिष्ठश्च सत्कटत्रकभाग्यवान्। । ९९९। । -
Teer त्मसिद्धश्च वहपुत्र्थस्सुखी।
wat षोडणशष्दे पित्ररिष्ठमिति AAI 1 १०००।।
विपद्दायेभृतिश्चेति न स जीवत्यतः प॒रम्।
लग्नेशंशे तत्त्रिकोणे स्फुटयोगं गते YAN । १००१।।
राजयेगे मित्रप्रमुविनाशनम्।
पश्चात्माबल्यमाप्नोति क्षेमदाये FAFA | १००२।।
997-1002. Exessive Limbs & other effects:
One born in Vishnu yoga will have a virtuous
child, which is the 4th or Sth in order, when the
4th lord is in debilitation and the significator
(i.c.Jupiter) 15 aspected by Rahu, (for birth in
Kutila Nadiamsa of Libra Lagna). One of his
children may have excessive limbs, or be born
with teeth. The native’s elder brother will face
destruction, be sickly, will marry a barren lady
and will face obstacles in obtaining progeny. The
native’s younger co-born will get a virtuous wife
and will be prosperous. The native will be widely
famous on account of his brothers and will have
many children and much wealth. In his 16th year,
there will be danger to father coinciding with
Vipat Dasa (3rd Dasa), when Saturn is in the Rasi
denoted by the Navamsa occupied by Lagna
Lord, or its {1165 Destruction of his friends and
masters will also follow. Later on, in the subperiod of Mercury in the Kshema Dasa (4th
Dasa), ascendancy will dawn on the native.

92 Chandra Kala Nadi
Note: According to one view, the planet to
be aspected by Rahu is the lord of the Sth, vide
sloka 997 above.
लाभि अ ja योगस्तु वसुवत्सरम्।
काले महारोगेण BME! । १००३।।
मिथुने च तथ apd skal महद्पयं |
तद्दोषपरिहारार्थं दानं । | १००४ |
राजयोगे प्रजातस्य कुरिलांशस्य जातके!
ते भग्यनाशदिक्लेशं प्रप्नोति भूरिशः।
पपे राहौ तथा सन्धौ काठमृत्युर्भविष्यति। | १००६। |
सूर्यचन्द्रमसोः काले सिंहान्ते वक्रगे शनो।
अब्दे त्वष्टत्रिंशाि |
षरटत्रिशब्दे मृति चेति राजयोगे प्रजायते। | १००८। |
युद श्च Ye एव च।
जीविते an चत्वारिंशे मरिष्यति। । १००९।।
1003-1009. Kutila Nadiamsa - Libra Lagna:
There will be Raja yoga effects in the eigth year
with Venus in the 11th house. When Saturn in
transit reaches Leo, or Gemini (i.e. Gemini/Leo),
the native will be troubled by a dangerous disease.
There will be great fear in the bhukti of the Sun.
To overcome these evils, gifting be resorted to. In
the (sub) periods of the Sun and Moon in Kshema
Dasa (4th Dasa), great danger will visit the native.
If he survives, he will be subjected to troubles like
destruction of prosperity. Death will result if
Rahu, playing a malefic role (as death-dealing
planet), reaches the Riksha Sandhi (in transit), In
the (sub) periods of the Sun and the Moon, when
Saturn retrogrades in the end of Leo, the native
will die on account of lung tuberculosis. The years
41, 38 or 36 of the native’s life may prove fatal.
32nd or 36th year may bring untimely end. If he
survives, the years after 41 will give Raja yoga
effects.
Notes: For Kutila Nadiamsa, see notes
under 8108 130-131 supra.
Riksha Sandhi is the junction of any of the
following pairs of Rasis in the Zodiac: CancerLeo; Scorpio-Sagittarius and Pisces- Aries.
नरकयोगः
Yoga for Attaining Hell
ik: योगे Ga —. Tae |
नरकं याति aes अधो गतै। । १०१० |
1010. Naraka Yoga: The first line does not
convey any clear meaning. It states: One born in
Vishnu yoga will for five nights perform Anushtana (religious ceremonies). Viththa is money
which makes, no sense. The second line means:
After death he will go to hell or will be fallen and
will attain mean worlds/birth.
GASES:
Bereft of Final Rites by Son
विष्णुयोगे व्यये मन्दे पुत्रसस्करहीनवान्।
स्वसुतस्य AMAT अन्त्यकालं न संशयः। । १०११।।
व्यये aie | मृत्युकाले विशेषतः।
ग्रामान्तरे अपुत्रफलमादिशेत्। | LORI |
1011-1012. Final Rites: For a native of Vishnu yoga caused by Saturn in the 12th, there will be
no performance of final rites by his son due to the
latter’s absence, residing in a different village, at
the time of the native’s death.
Notes: Saturn in the 12th implies Mars in
ascendant in case of Vishnu Yoga for a movable
accendant as per slokas 973-9771/2 supra.
। । तुलालग्नम्-नद्रयेगः । ।
Libra Ascendant — Indra Yoga
Fara चेन्द्रयोगे शुक्रे शनिसमन्विते।
1 गर्भश्रीमान्महाधनी। । १०१३। ।
शलाक्षो धनिकोः पुत्रमित्रवान्।
सुदीरघायुः कौर्तिमान्मुदितसुखी। | १०१४ |
इन्द्रयोगे महा्रेष्ठः कान्ताठयधनधान्यवान्।
कामी विद्वान् शयो मानी चंचलो धर्मिकस्सुधीः। । १०१५। |
1013-1015. Libra Ascendant - Indra yoga:
One born in Libra ascendant’s Indra Nadiamsa,
with Indra yoga caused by Venus- Saturn conjunction will be wealthy right from birth. He will be
highly intelligent, will have broad eyes, rich
friends and sons. He will have a long life, fame,

Deva Keralam 93
and be joyous and happy. He will be a great man,
rich with woman (or will have an excellent wife),
be endowed with wealth and grains, lustful,
learned, deceitful, honourable, fickle-minded
and intelligent.
oa हय नीचे इनद्रयेगे तु जायते।
1016. In the said yoga, if debilitated Moon is
conjunct Rahu, the native will serve mean people
and will make his fortunes in an insignificant
country.
नीचे vat ae तिविन्द्रयोगे प्रजायते।
CRAY Tel वाग्मी भोगी नीतिप्रियस्सुखी ॥ १०१७॥
1017. Ifthe debilitated Moon as above joins
the Navamsa of Capricorn, the Indra yoga native
will be subdued in nature, clean, deceitful, eloquent in speech, fond of (००५) behaviour, happy
and will enjoy pleasures.
ग्रन्थान्तरे क्व चित्पापी चेन्द्रयोगे
कालान्तरे सुवुद्धिश्च देव ब्राह्म
¶ ष्ठमनाः प्रजातः
PUTT |
nel द्विरतीव she
सर्गो धर्मपरायणाश्च। | १०१९। ।
1018-1019. By other authorities: The Indra
yoga native is described by some authorities thus.
He will be somewhat sinful, be lustful, will after
some interval become knowledgeable, will
honour Gods and Brahmins, will be pleased with
elders, will have a few friends and will have a tall,
emaciated body. He will be pure, highly intelligent, very timid, righteous and religious.
इन्द्रयेगेन्द्रदैवर्ष मकरांशे निशाकरे ।
मतु कामुक |
नृपतिप्रियवान् wit वाग्मी कुशलबुद्रिमान्। । १०२०। |
een |
इन्द्रयोगे प्रजातस्य
Feat शुभे प $I
ज्ातिद्रषकलपेन seats विनिर्दिशेत्। । १०२२।।
पितृमातुप्रपीडदिराधानानन्तरं व्यथा।
Fea जन्मदाये जन्माब्दे स्वपितुव्य॑था। । १०२२।।
जञातिवर्गे विशेषेण पितृव्यस्य शुभावहम्।
ुतरोत्सवादिसन्तेषः पितृव्यस्य फलं स्मृतम्। । १०२४ |
Bey Bc शोर्यकृत्यवान् |
1020-1025. One born in Indra yoga with the
Moon in Swathi Nakshatra (Indra Daivarksha)
and in Capricorn Navamsa will be dear to king,
libertine, eloquent in speech and highly intelligent. He will have an older co-born and many
friends. He will increase his fame through his
coborns. If the 9th house has a malefic, in the said
yoga, the native’s father will have professional
misunderstandings with his kinsmen. Evils to the
parents of the native be also predicted. Both these
would occur when the native was in his mother’s
womb, ic. before his birth. In the native’s first
year during Janma Dasa (first Dasa), agony to
father will occur. Good will occur to the native’s
paternal uncle and kinsmen. There will be happiness on account of birth of children and the like
in the house of paternal uncle. In the native’s
family the third son will do acts of bravery. The
native will be somewhat ill-disposed to his
kinsmen and will steal their wealth.
Notes: "Indra Daivarksha" denote Swathi
and Anuradha. These Nakshatras have Lord
Indra as Adhidevatha, ruling deity. Swathi 2nd
quarter falls in Capricorn Navamsa while
Anuradha has no such Navamsa. Hence in the
present context, Swati is relevant.
इन्द्रयेगे तुलालग्ने awared तु जायते।
पितृमातृचिरायुष्यं ज्येष्ठभ्नातुस्तथा ATT | FoR |
पितृष्वसुस्मुतः कश्चित्सपलनीमातृयोगवान्।
बहमाग्यार्थपम्पन्नो TEMA! | १०२७। |
इन्द्रयेगे पिता बाल्ये स्वगेहे चेर्यकृत्यवान्।
दारापवादपमूलेन स्वपिता क्लेशवन्क्वचित्॥ १०२८ |
1026-1028. If the Indra yoga (i.e. VenusSaturn conjunction - ref. sloka 1013) occurs in the
9th house, the native’s parents will be long-lived.
So also will his elder brother be. One of the
native’s paternal uncles will have two marriages.
The native will be happy with abundant wealth,
prosperity and many sons. The Indra yoga
(referred to in sloka 1026, taking place in the 9th
house) denotes that the native’s father would in-

dulge in thieving in childhood. Due to blemish
acquired by the native’s mother, his father will be
somewhat grieved.
दारांशमे चेन्दयोगे शुक्रे शनिसमन्विते।
जननी दीर्घमायुष्यं स्वपिता धर्मिकस्सुधीः। १०२९1 |
1029. The said yoga occurring (by the conjunction of Venus - Saturn) in the 7th Navamsa
(or in the 7th house, Aries) will confer a long
life-span on the native’s mother. His father will
take to righteous path.
नवमे कुजदोषेण स्वपिता मूर्खकृत्यवान्।
मध्ये वयसि सन्तापी चाग्निमान्दप्रपीडितः। | १०३०।।
तदुदोषपरिहारर्थं शान्ति कु्यद्विचक्षणः।
ग्रहचक्रम्रदानेन त्वायुरारेग्यवान्िता। । १०३१।।
1030-1031. The blemish caused by Mars in
the 9th house (for Libra Lagna) denotes that the
native’s father will indulge in foolish deeds, and
will in his middle age incur agony. He will also
suffer from complaints of weak digestion. To ward
off such blemish, remedies (as prescribed by
Sastras) and donation of an image of the Zodiac
be done.
इन्द्रयोगे तुलालग्ने चैकोनद्विंशवत्सरे।
अपमत्युं पिता यति शान्त्या शन्तिं प्रयास्यति!) १०३२॥
तदधे स्वपिता ज्येष्टश्रातृशोकेन कित्
जन्मदाये जीवभुक्तौ पितृन्यस्य प्रकोरतितः। । १०३३। |
= | किचित् पश्चादारोगयभाग्यवान्।
ae शुभेशंशे भाग्ये जीवत्रिकोणगे। । ९०३४। ।
र्योगं गते मन्दे पितृव्यस्य महाविपत्।
देहायासं प्रकुर्वीत जन्मदेशो नृपावधि।
स्ववासदेशनृपतेः पितृव्यस्स तथपि च। 1 १०३६।।
1032-1036, In the nineteenth year there will
be danger of untimely death to the father of the
native born in Libra ascendant with Indra yoga,
and in the 11th year the father will be troubled on
account of danger to his elder coborn (i.e. to the
native’s older paternal uncle). In the sub period
of Jupiter in Janma Dasa (first Dasa), the native’s
paternal uncle will be fatal, and will have fear of
untimely death. Later on, he will recover his
Chandra Kala Nadi
health. Saturn in transit in a trine to Jupiter, or
to the 9th lord’s natal Rasi/Navamsa position will
be fatal for the paternal uncle. It will further
cause loss of progeny among kinsmen and illhealth to father. (Sloka 1036 is a mix up dealing
with the ruler of the country.)
जन्मदाये YAR मन्दयेगे सि त्।
हप्रतिमदानेन चाक ग्यसोख्यभाक्।
राहुभुक्त्यन्तमारम्य MIG HAT! । १०३८। |
< ant oe क्लेशं (= ay रिश।
वसूरीज्वरगण्डवान्।
षष्ठाष्ठमाधीशकाले क्रूरमासेन्दयोगगे। । १०४० |
कालान्तरे जन्मदाये वसूरीज्वरमान्ययुक्।
तद्दोषपरिहारर्थं शन्तिं कुयाद्रिचक्षणः। | १०४१ |
1037-1041. See in which Rasi, the Navamsa
dispositor of the 9th lord is placed. When Saturn
in transit comes to that Rasi, during Janma Dasa,
the above-mentioned evils to paternal uncle will
materialize. As a remedy, Saturn should be worshipped and an iron image be donated. Then
health and prosperity will be achieved. In the sub
periods of Rahu and Jupiter (in first Dasa) difficulties galore from the king of his country will
come to pass. One born in Indra yoga will due to
adverse effects of the 8th lord acquire diseases
like smallpox in the 3rd /4th/6th year of age. In the
(sub) period of the 6th lord, after some interval
there will be difficulties of digestion as well-as
trouble from smallpox. To overcome these evils,
(suitable) remedies be performed.
अरिष्टपरिहारः
Remedy for Evils
इन्द्रंशगे चेन्द्रसोगे शुक्रे शनिबुधान्विते।
तुलालग्ने प्रजातस्य सहस्नरिष्टनाशनम्। । १०४२। |
1042. Destruction of Doshas: One born in
Indra Nadiamsa of Libra ascendant, with Indra
yoga while Venus is conjunct Saturn - Mercury,
will be protected from a thousand evils,

Deva Keralam ५5
नेत्ररोगः
Eye Disease
जन्मदाये च जन्माब्दे साधनेशस्वभुक्तिषु।
नेत्रपीडामवाप्नेति क्षप्रेणयेग्यवान् भवेत्। | १०४३। |
सुतेअर्कसंयुते शुक्रे चेन्द्रे eat
वाल्ये नेतरप्रपीडि स्यात् नागदानवशात् FSAI! १०४४ ॥
नरवाहनयोगः
Men-borne Conveyances
इन्द्राशके sear सिंहे शुक्रार्किसंयुते । । १०५०। |
भाग्याधिपेन संयुक्ते नरवाहनभागभवेत्।,
वाहनद्रयवान् रागी धनिकः की्मिन्सुखी 1 १०५९। |
1050-1051. One born in Indra Nadiamsa
शिरः प्रदेशे Be वा हृदये वा ब्रणदितः।
लग्नाधिपयुते राहौ मुखरोगी ससह । । १०४५ |
बाल्ये नागप्रदानेन मुखरोगं न |
नेत्ररिष्टभयं नस्ति नेत्ररोग्यकरं शुभम्। । १०४६। |
1043-1046. Eye Disorders: In the sub
periods of the 6th lord in Janma Dasa, one will
incur eye-troubles which will (however) be immediately curable. This may coincide with the first
year of birth. The Sun joining Venus in Sth will
give eye troubles to the native in childhood in case
of Indra Nadiamsa. If the ascendant lord is in the
company of Rahu, ulcers on head or shank, or in
the heart, or facial diseases will occur, in
childhood. These can be countered by donation
of a cobra’s image. As a result, disorders of eyes
can also be avoided, acquiring healthy eyes.
भग्यरूढे चेन्द्रयोगे भोगी भाग्यकुलोद्भ्वः।
Fees गते gr es | | १०४७ | |
ज्येष्ठभातुस्तथा चेन्द्रोगशलिनौ।
एका स्वसा क्लेशवती मध्ये कापित्तथापरा॥ १०४८ ॥
भगिन्यौ द्व सुमंगल्यौ पूत्रिण्यौ च भविष्यतिः।
इन्द्रशकगते — समन्विते। । १०४९। |
एका स्वसा दत्तपुत्रवती सुखी।
1047-10491/2. Fortunate etc: One born with
Indra yoga occurring in the 9th house will be given
to enjoy pleasures. He belongs to a fortunate
family. If Venus is in Indra Nadiamsa, the native
of Libra will have two wives. So also his elder
brother. The native will have only one sister who
will incur difficulties in her middle age. If Venus
in Indra Nadiamsa joins Saturn, the native will
have two sisters, with a long and happy marital life
and daughters. One of the sisters will have an
adopted son.
Notes: For Indra Nadiamsa, refer to notes
under Sloka 1105 infra.
with Indra yoga while Venus joins Saturn in Leo
along with the 9th lord, will have conveyances
carried by men. He will have two conveyances. He
will be wealthy, famous, happy and libertine.
Seat दशाकाले त्वपरा्धं इदं फलम्।
casa it गुरूमुक्तिषु। । १०५२। |
इन्द्रयोगे पित्ररिष्टं भ्रातुप्रबल्ययोगवान्।
शृक्रास्तमनकाले वा कुजमौढयेअथवापि च। । १०५३। |
गोचरे दष्टे WEA FM! | Rou |
PAM RBA शुक्रे अस्तं गते यदि।
इन्द्राशके Seat तत्काले क्लेशमादिशेत्। । १०५५। |
देहायासं मनस्तापमर्थनाशं io |
क्ूरकाले फलचेति Seas | | १०५६ । |
1952-1056. Dasa results: Following are the
effects of the 2nd half of the Dasa (of 12th lord)
for the Indra yoga native. In the sub period of
Jupiter, in the Dasa of the 12th lord (from Indra
Lagna?), there will occur evils to father, but extension of prosperity to the native’s co-born.
(Evils to father will occur) when Venus/Mars is
combust and relief will follow when Taurus comes
to be occupied by a benefic. If Jupiter and Venus
conjoin or mutually be in aspect, in transit, the
good effects due to transit will be nullified. In the
months of the Sun’s transit in malefic Rasis, and
when Venus/Mars is combust, there will be difficulties (to the Libra native, with Indra yoga and
Indra Nadiamsa), physical illness, mental worries, financial loss and head-ache.
Notes: These 5 slokas have certain effects
to be linked with certain transits etc. But we find
that the text needs a careful assortment in some
respects while dealing with these five slokas.
(a) Indra Lagna is used in sloka No. 1052.
There is no such term. Perhaps the text hints at
Libra Lagna and Indra Nadiamsa. Then the 12th

५6 Chandra Kala Nadi
lord (i.e. Vyavadheesa) is Mercury whose Dasa is 1060. Malefic Transits; When malefic
referred to by the author. planets iransit the ascendant (being Libra), there
(b) The combustion of Venus/Mars should Will be physical ailments. When Jupiter transits in
refer only to danger to father, not to prosperity of Libra Lagna, there will be danger to life span,
co-born. while his movement in the 12th denotes great
(©) The first line of sloka No. 1054 refers to 9 त
improvement possible to troubled father. Notes: In this context, Deha-Jeeva are not
(प) Venus/Mars combustion ete. referred to from Kala Chakra Dasa. Here Deha is ascen-
< hile the word Jeeva denotes the planet
in sloka No. 1055 relates to the bad effects due to dant, while Pp
Jupiter.
occur to the native.
(e) Insloka 1054, Venus-Jupiterconnection = जीवराशिगते भैमे aay जन्मदायमे।
is brought in to nullify the other good effectsdue = मरान्दज्वरव्रणदीनि नेत्ररोगं क्वचित् क्वचित्। । १०६१। ।
to other beneficial transits. This may be because मीने सैम्यदशरूढे योगवान्कीर्तिमान् सुखी
they are lords of 6th and 8th for Libra Lagna and जन्मदाये पित्ररिष्टं द्वितीयन्दे श्रियो वहम्। । १०६२।।
their association is not productive of good effects ae देहजाड्यं गेहे गोभूषणक्षयम् |
in given cases. $ पितृव्यस्य कश्चित्यु्र प्रपीडितः। । १०६३। |
सतु दरवियेगन क्लेशं प्राप्नोति भूरिश।
-अष्टमे शने-
व 1061-10631/2. Other results - Libra Lagna:
Saturn in Eighth If Mars is in the ascendant, or in a sign ruled by
palo मिसुतेन युक्तो रन्ध्रस्थितो वानिधनं करोति। Jupiter, then in the first Dasa (Janma Dasa), the
यदा मृत्युसमानरूपे TSAI? ०५७४८ will be troubled by indigestion, fever, ulcer
यद भवेतामाहस्तदा तामाहुस्तदा मृत्युसमानरूपा १०५ # indigestic
॥ etc. There may sometimes be eye diseases as well.
1057. Libra Lagna - Saturn in Sth: The = [7 the Dasa of a benefic (or Mercury) placed in
conjunction of Saturn with Mars‘in the 8th house Pisces, there will be prosperity, fame and happiwill bring (untimely) death toa Libra native. Even? ness. ta Janna Dass (first Dasa) evils to father
if they be in mutual aspects they areakintodeath- = vit come to pass. There will be wealth in the
givers. second year(?) of age. During the sub-period of
the 2nd lord, physical illness and loss of quadसद्भावस्याष्ठमे मन्दे क ak ei | rupeds and ornaments will occur. In the Dasa of
तद्भावक्लेशमाप्नेति ्। । १०५८। । € 2nd lord there will be troubles to paternal
relatives or sometimes to the native’s sons. Fur1058. Saturn placed in th |
aturn placed in the 8th or aspecting ther there will be abundant grief due to separathe 8th from 8 certain Bhava, will cause destruc:
tion to that (original) Bhava, dealing with rela- tion from spouse.
tives lik th her.
ike mother and other Ses
नीचे चन्द्रे चेन्द्रयोगे मकराशस्य जातके Fear from Thieves
मिथुनं जीव इत्याहु FIT देह उच्यते। । १०५९। |
1059. This Sloka suffers from constitutional
defects. The meaning is: The Moon in debilitation with Capricorn Navamsa and .... Gemizi.....
Jupiter...Taurus etc. etc.
लग्नाष्ठमगते केतावष्ठमाशे स्थितेअपि ay | १०६४। |
1064. Thefts: Should Ketu be in the 8th from
Lagna, or from Navamsa Lagna, the Dasa and sub
period of Ketu will often cause fear from thieves.
तद्दशन्तर्दशकाले चोरभीतिः क्व चितत्क्व चित्।
देहे US काले गोचरे देहजाञ्यकृत्। धने राहौ धनच्छेदं ऊ १९७ ०६५। |
जीवे तुजीवबाधा स्यात् व्ययस्थे च महाविपत्।। १०६०।। ज्ञातिकार्यकलापिन ् सौख्यं |
a“

Deva Keralam 94
1065-10651/2. Destruction of wealth: The राजचोरपयं Sa Fara रवौ।
sub period of Rahu in his major period will cause सम्पदूदाये १.
wealth to be destroyed if Rahu is in the 2nd house.
Later due to kinsmen’s work (i.e. help) happiness
will resume.
सम्पद्दाये विग्रभुकतौ स्वपितृव्यसुतामयम्। । १०६६। |
afraq प्राल्यमाप्नेति wat भार्मविनाशवान् |
मातृपीडा मनस्तापः प्रबलज्ञातिनाशनम्। | LORI |
तन्मूलाद्रयाकुलं चेति स्वपितुरनत्र संशयः ।
1066-10671/2. Other effects - Libra Lagna:
In the sub period of Jupiter operating in the 2nd
Dasa, there will be fame to the sons of patenal
uncles while one of their wives will face destruction. Danger to the native’s mother, loss of
kinsfolk, and agony to father on account of these
will also doubtless follow.
Tan जात्कस्थेव oe विनिर्दिशेत्। । 8082 1 |
उत्तराधं सौख्यमेति |
1068-10681/2. During the first half of the
Dasa which is the 2nd in order the native will incur
difficulties through coborn, In its second half, the
native’s elder brother will acquire birth of a son.
इन्द्रयोगे विपदूदाये क्षेमदायेषु॑वा यदि। । १०६९। |
1069-10691/2. Acquisition of wealth: Should
Venus be in the 11th house (Leo) one born in
Indra yoga will acquire wealth in the Dasas that
are 3rd and 4th in sequence.
लभे शुक्रे प्रजातस्य निधिप्रप्तिर्नसंशयः।
लाभस्थानं गते सौम्ये नीरचांशकविवर्जिते। | १९०७०। |
bel वापि निर्विज्गः परदारगः।
महद्भाग्यं FAY सोख्यजीवनम्। | १०७१। ।
1070-1071. Benefic in the 11th house, in
aspect to or in conjunction with Saturn, but not
being in debilitation Navamsa, will make the native a repository of learning. He will join others’
women. One born in a Navamsa ruled by Mercury, with Indra Yoga will become highly fortunate and will lead a comfortable life.
क , चेति pL alae aa |
घोरं विदेशे गमनं तथा। | Yow?! |
इदमेव फलं
गुरूपभुक्तै शुभाशुभम्
1072-10731/2, Sun dasa - Ketu bhukti: The
native will keep the company of men born of mean
order. He will have various business activities. He
will suffer from digestive disorders and inflammatory fevers. He will visit foreign places (out of
distress). There will be grief in general, and fear
from kings and thieves. These effects are for
Ketu’s sub period in the major rule of the planet
Sun. There will be a mixture of good and bad
effects in Jupiter’s sub period (of the Sun’s major
period).
Notes: For Rahu bhukti, with Venus placed
in Indra Nadiamsa, the results are missing, after
the words ‘!dameva phalam..."
सम्पद्दाये SHAT षष्ठाधिपततिभुकितिषु। | Rows I
= a ~ ae
अथवा चेति YR यथा! | १०७५।
सम्पत्तारदशासन्धिकाले क्लेशफलं विदुः|
1074-10751/2. Sub-period of 6th lord: In the
2nd dasa, the sub- period ruled by the sixth lord
will cause bewilderment and physical troubles.
This applies to the Indra yoga native. These effects will come to pass when the Sun transits
malefic Rasis in the zodiac. The sub periods of
Ketu and Venus (in 2nd dasa) will also give effects
as above (i.e. like the 6th lord’s sub period). The
junctions of 2nd and 3rd dasas will cause troubles
according to learned men.
i! laa ष्टग्रहाधीशे त्वर्काशर्षस्य राशिगे। । १०७६। |
महद्भाग्यं राजयोगो भविष्यति।
पपे शुक्रे चन्द्रयोग राहुभुक्तौ महाविपत्। । १०७७।
ज्वरगण्डं प्रकूरवीत् waged तथा भवेत्
राजतं चन्दरमभ्यर्च्य दानं कुयाद्विचक्षणः । । १०७८ |
रमभ्रधिपदशाकाले देहे पापोअथवा यदि।
स्वसमानजनक्लेशं सर्वनाडीफलं ACG! | १०७९। |
1076-1079, Great danger, Great -fortunes
etc. - In case of Indra yoga, note the dispositor of
the planet that is in aspect to the Moon. If the said
dispositor is in Leo Navamsa or Leo Rasi, the
effects are great fortunes and Raja Yoga (giving

position, wealth etc.). If Venus becomes a malefic
(by conjunction, aspect etc.), the Indra Yoga native in Rahu bhukti (of 2nd dasa) will face great
dangers. In Moon’s bhukti he will have fear of
dangerous fevers. To overcome the evils, the
Moon God should be worshipped and donation
of silver be made. When the 8th lord’s sub period
is in operation, malefic transiting the Ascendant
will cause difficulties to one’s kinsfolk.
सर्वान्ते सर्वयेगे चेन्द्रयोगे Gem
Seat धने राहौ भोगी वर्गोत्तमांशगे। | १०८०। |
वाल्ये व्याधितदेहश्च मध्ये प्राबल्ययोगवान्।
वार्धके RTA परवित्तापहारकः। । १०८१ । |
कुलाभिमानी स्वकुले प्रसिद्धो
रोगेण मी सुधमभाक् स्यात्।
राजाधिकारी
भिषग्जनैः पूजित कीर्तिमान् Faq । १०८२।।
1080-1082. Rahu in Vargothama: One born
in Indra Yoga with Rahu in the 2nd house in
Vargothamamsa, will be devoted to enjoyments.
He will suffer from illness during his childhood.
Fame and wealth will come to him in his middle
age. During his old age, he will be in the grip by
debts and will steal others’ wealth. In general he
will be proud of his lineage and will be famous
among his men, will be troubled by diseases, and
will be disposed charitably. He will have a notable
position with the king, and be highly honourable.
He will be famous and respectable among
physicians.
वर्गोत्तम बिना रहौ द्वितीये ऋणर्व्मवेत्।
वर्गोत्तमे शुभं चैवमिन्द्रंरस्मैव जातके। । १०८३1 ।
1083. Rahu without Vargothma: If Rahu be
placed in the 2nd house, without occupying the
same Navamsa, the native will only be indebted
Vargothama position of Rahu will give auspicious
effects to one born in Indra Nadiamsa.
Fart चेन्दरपेगे aera
SRG TIT । १०८४। ।
मत्ररिष्टं प्रकर्वाति चमदद्रयेमे तु जयते।
सम्पद्दाये चन्द्रभुक्तावन्तरान्तर्दशासु च । । १०८५1 ।
विषचोभयप्राप्ति स्वगेहे नात्र सशयः।
Chandra Kala Nadi
Sa देहजाडयं TAS च मासगे। । १०८६ |
स्वपितु रव्याकुलं चेति व पश्चात् सौख्यं विनिर्दिशेत्
लाभाधिपदशाकाले क्माधिपतिभुकितषु। । १०८७। |
wea म हाभोति लाभाधिपतिभुक्तिषु। । १०८८ |
दशान्ते sage चेति दशादौ वा क्त्रचिद्भवेत्।
कर्माधिपदशकाले Seat तु AAR । १०८९। ।
ुत्रप्र्ल्ययोगेन नित्य नेषमादियोत्।
1084-10891/2. Effects for other dasa periods:
One born in Indra Nadiamsa with Indra Yoga, will
be happy in the dasa of Lagna lord. In the end of
the 8th lord’s sub period under the 9th lord’s
major period, danger and evils to mother be
forecast. So also in the sub period and sub-sub
period ruled by the Moon, in the dasa, second in
sequence. Danger from thieves and poison apart
from physical diseases will come to pass in the sub
period of Mars coinciding with Sun’s transits in
adverse, or weak Rasis. In the sub period of the
10th lord under the major rulership of the
eleventh lord, the native’s father will be initially
troubled by diseases and will be later on cured. In
the dasa and also sub period of the eleventh lord,
there will be obstructions to one’s income and
acquisition of a disposition marked by repugnance and hatred - all these due to blemishes
caused by Rahu. Troubles to coborn, and great
fear to self will strike in the sub period of the 11th
lord in eleventh lord’s dasa, or the initial phase of
it, will be somewhat distressful. In the dasa of the
10th lord, one born in Indra yoga will be ever
happy due to children (either birth of children, or
fame brought by children depending upon the
age in which this dasa occurs).
षष्ठीशांशे aE SES गते जनौ। | १२९०।
सोदराकदजनक्लेशो ATH भप्रिथ्यति।
1090-10901/2. Evils to coborn: See in which
Navamsa the 6th lord is placed at birth, When
Saturn in transit reaches the sign identical with
this Navamsa, or its trines, danger to coborn will
manifest.
Notes: Some versions replace "Saturn" by
Jupiter. For Libra ascendant, Jupiter is lord of 3rd

Deva Keralam 99
(coborn) and 6th (cousin etc.) and hence it may
‹ शीतव्छशे पलातस्स गेरवर्णुभाकृ्तिः।
be equally appropriate to note Jupiter’s transit.
मीनलग्ने सुते मन्दे भागवेण. समन्विते। । १०९७। |
VMS एजतस्स श्यामवर्णः शुभाकृतिः।
अन्तरान्तर्दशामारगे कर्मलपेशदायगे। । १०९१।
फलविस्तारमाप्नोति FIN वु प्रजायते
1091-10911/2. Thus have been described the
effects for sub periods and sub-sub periods of the
dasas of the 10th and 11th lords, applicable to one
born in Indra Nadiamsa of Libra Lagna.
Notes: The results dealt with are brief. Apparently there must have been many more related
slokas in this regard. However, there are some
more hints in the following verses.
धनाधिपदशाकाले pps Glia । १०९२। |
इन्द्रयोगस्य पुत्रस्तु ot La ्।
धनाधिपदशान्त्याद द्वि । । १०९३। |
Seat कालमृत्युः साधनेशदशविपत्।
इनद्रशकगते शुक्रे THAT च जायते। । १०९४ |
पश्वादुत्तमजन्म स्यान्मधुमासे मृतिं वदेत्।
योगनाडी फलं सत्यमिन्द्रंशे चैव जायते। । ९०९५
विंशोपुरिसुभागयप्िर््रिषष्ठिः परमायुष्।
1092-10951/2. During the dasa of the second
lord, diseases will strike the native’s spouse and
progeny. The children of the Indra Yoga native
will have widespread business activities (in
general). In the beginning or end of the dasa of
the 2nd lord, or in the intervals of the planets
occupying the 2nd house, there will be fear of
death while great danger will strike in the dasa
that is the sixth in sequence. These apply to birth
in Indra Yoga and when Venus is placed in Indra
Nadiamsa. The native will die in the month of
Chaitra (with the Sun’s movement in Aries) and
will attain an excellent rebirth. These effects are
as per Yoga Nadi for one born in Indra Nadiamsa.
Such a native will attain prosperity after 20th year
of age. The length of his life will be 62 years.
। । शनिशुक्रयेगे शी तव्मंशेः। ।
Seethala Nadiamsa —
Saturn-Venus Conjunction
सुघाषष्ठयंशगे मन्दे चरराशिचतुष्ठये। । १०९६। |
1096-10971/2. Saturn - Yenus conjunction
for Seetala Nadiamsa: One born in Seethala
Nadiamsa will be endowed with a fair complexion
and auspicious (pleasing) appearance, if Saturn
is placed in the Shashtiamsa entitled Sudha and
be in a movable Rasi. One born in this Nadiamsa
(Seethala) in Pisces ascendant while Saturn is
with Venus in the 5th house will have auspicious
appearance but be dark in complexion.
Notes: From now on Seethala Nadiamsa in
Pisces ascendant is discussed. This Nadiamsa
rules thus: from 10 deg. 48’ to 11 deg. ina movable
sign; from 19 deg. to 19 deg 12’ of an immovable
sing and from 25 deg. 48’ to 26 deg. of a common
sign.
(There is also Seethala Shashtiamsa, and
Susitala Nadiamsa. These three terms should be
understood according to circumstances.)
According to the first condition, Saturn
should be in one of the movable signs in Sudha
Shashtiamsa. This particular Shashtiamsa extends from 18 deg. to 18 deg. 30’ of an odd sign,
and from 11 deg. 30’ to 12 deg. of an even sign.
(Sudha is a benefic Shashtiamsa. Sudha means
nectar, ambrosia, name of the Ganges.)
In addition to Saturn being so, Pisces should
1156 with Seethala Nadiamsa. As a result, the
native will be fair in complexion with charming
appearance.
In the second instance, Saturn-Venus should
be in Cancer to make the native dark-bodied, with
auspicious looks.
हरिणांशकगे ` जीवे शीतव्शेअर्कनन्दने। । १०९८। ।
मीनलग्ने प्रजात॒स्स ग hs d |
स्वयं तृतीयगर्भस्स्यात्
्रतृभात्रीयुतो मानी पितृभाग्यप्रतपवान्।
1098-10991/2. Jupiter - Saturn: One born in
Pisces ascendant while Jupiter is in Harina

Nadiamsa and Saturn is in Seethala Nadiamsa,
will be endowed with older coborns and be happy.
The native will be the 3rd issue of the family.
Children born after him will be destroyed (i.e. will
not survive). He will have (elder) brothers and
sisters. He will be honourable, valorous and
blessed with paternal happiness.
Notes: For Harina Nadiamsa, see notes
under sloka 685 etc.
wero
Wagan # ™
Raa e मन्दे चरराशिचदुष्टये) । १९०२०; |
Ura > seq stor Tai
योगे नृसम्पननो क्रर्यवान् Gea
1100-11001/2. Saturn - Venus: Saturn placed
in one of the movable signs in Seethala Nadiamsa,
in association with Venus will make the native
abundantly rich, valorous, intelligent and happy.
केतुयोगे पिता वाल्ये क्लेशेनात्यन्तकर्थितः। । ११०१। |
पश्चाद्भीनृवि हीनश्च ज्येष्टभ्रातविनाशवान्
देशान्त भग्ययोग भगिनोद्रयवाव्यिता। | ११००। |
कलत्रत्रतवान्यागो वातप्रकृतिदेहवान्।
स्वेभुजजितमन्पन्नो नरवाहनयोगवान्। । १९१०३। |
मन्द् sagt जनः पिता वैश्यवहेतुना।
णद
अतीव FATA THER कलापवान्। | ११०४।
1101-1104. Saturn - Ketu: In the above
mentioned position, if Saturn joins Ketu, during
the native’s childhood the father will be troubled
and will be quite emaciated. The native will not
have any after-born. His older brother will be
destroyed. The native will have his fortunes in a
foreign place. His father will have two sisters and
three wives, will be passionate, will have windy
imbalances (causing rheumatism, paralysis, artheritis and the like), will make his fortunes
through his own efforts, will have conveyances
carried by men (i.e. palanquins etc.), will incur
many difficulties due to sins committed against
Vaishnavites apart from incurring royal wrath.
केतुशुकराविन्द्रकंशे चासितेन समन्विते!
शीतव्यंशकगे मन्दे वैष्णवद्रेषवान्पिता। । ११०५। |
Chandra Kala Nadi
तन्मूलादव्याकुकश्चेति ग्रामभुम्यर्थनाशवान्।
FATS . मनस्तापो जननात् YS व्यथा। । ११०६। |
क) 2 d क्लेशभाग्भवेत्।
SRY मन्दे क्लेशं os । । ११०७। |
Tara च योगं aa |
1105-11071/2. Venus - Ketu: With these two
planets placed in Indra Nadiamsa in the company
of Saturn, while Saturn himself is in Seethala
Nadiamsa, the native’s father will hate Vaishnavites. As a result, he will incur difficulties, and
will lose "villages", lands and wealth. Mental
agony to fathcr will occur during the native’s
Janma (first) dasa as well as in the period prior to
native’s birth. Upto the native’s age of 3 yrs and 6
months, the father will face difficulties. Saturn in
eethala Nadiamsa (independent of Venus-Ketu)
will give difficulties to father till the native attains
fourth year of age. Later on, i.e. after the 4th year
till the end of Janma (first) dasa, the father will
enjoyprosperity.
Notes: Indra Nadiamsa rules from 21 deg.
48? to 22 deg. of a movable sign; from 8 deg, to 8
deg. 12’ of an immovable sign; and from 6 deg. 48”
to 7 deg. of a common sign.
Both Venus and Ketu should be so close that
they are placed in one Nadiamsa (12’ of arc)
entitled Indra, as above. Additionally Saturn
should be in Seethala Nadiamsa.
लग्नात् पंवमगे मन्दे शीतव्टाशे पिता व्यथाम्।। ९१०८॥
शीतज्वरभयार्तश्चाप्ततिसारप्रपीडितः।
जन्मदाये मनस्तापी नाना च व्याकुलः पिता। । ११०९।।
सोदरोत्पत्तिनाशादि वसूरिज्वरगण्डवान्।
SAAT स्वपिता ज्वरपीडिकतः। । 22201 |
तद्दोषपरिष्ारार्थ शान्तिं कु्द्रिचक्षणः।
लग्नात्प्वमगे मन्दे शीतलांशे तु जायते। । ११११।।
तिलपत्प्रदानेन पितरोग्यादिभाग्यवान्।
लक्षमीशप्रतिमादुने क : पिता।
ग्रन्थान्तरे--(निरीक्ष्यभान्यदानविधिः)
लक्ष्मीशप्रतिमादाने कनकानज्यनिरीक्षणे।
पश्चाद्भाग्यमिवुद्धिश्च पितृसौख्यप्रदस्मुखी। । १११३। |
याअलक्षमीर्यन्व मे दौस्थ्यं सर्वागिषु व्यवस्थितम्।
तत्सर्व शमयाज्य त्वं

Deva Keralam il
— चाज्यप्रस्थचतुष्ठयम्। । १११५ |
दक्षिणादानमाचरेत। .
देवज्ञाय प्रदानेन आयुरारंगयवान् TST! । १११६; |
अलक्ष्मीनाशनात्सद्यः पिता लक्ष्मीकरक्षवान्।
1108-11161/2. Saturn in 5th: Saturn placed
in the 5th house in Seethala Nadiamsa will cause
distress to father, who will suffer from affections
of gums, fever, dysentery and be fear-struck.
During the native’s Janma (first) dasa, the native’s
father would be subjected to a great deal of mental agony and perplexion. The native’s coborn will
die as they are born. He will sufffer from smallpox
and incur danger. The native’s father will be
troubled by (dangerous) fever if the Moon is in
blemished Nakshatras. Necessary propitiations
be done to ward off this evil. This is when Saturn
is in the 5th in Seethala Nadiamsa. By donation of
gingilee and an image of Lord Vishnu, the native’s
father will regain health. He will further earn
royal favours and will have destroyed enemies.
Some texts prescribe donation of clarified butter
(distinct from ghee or Ghrita) (in place of gingilee), image of Lord Vishnu, and gold, following
which the prosperity of father will increase, and
he will regain sound health. By giving in donation
to a Daivagna (astrologer) four vessels made of
lead, filled with ghee, and just a Nishka of gold (a
golden coin of ancient evaluation), father’s health
will become normal, his poverty will instantly
vanish and he will be blessed by Goddess
Lakshmi.
लग्नात् फंवमगे शुक्रे पापद्रयसमन्विते। । ९९१७। |
कनकान्यप्रदानेन गृहे लक्ष्मीकरक्षवान्।
पंचमाब्दात् परं भाग्यं स्वपिता नित्यसोख्यवान्॥ १११८॥
वेदाब्दान्ते क्वचित् सौख्यं फंवमब्दे शुभाशुभम्।
जन्मदाये जन्मदेशे वेष्णवेन प्रजावधि। । १११९।।
राजामात्यजनक्लेशं मध्यखण्डे विशेषतः|
तृतीयान्देअपमत्युश्च स्वपितुः शत्तुनाशनम्। | ११२०। |
पितृसौख्यं ततः पश्चाजन्म तारदशन्त्यगे।
1117- 11201/2. Venus in the 5th: If Venus is
in the 5th house along with two malefics, gold and
clarified butter be given away in charity when
Goddess Lakshmi will bless the native’s family.
There will be prosperity to the native’s father
after the native’s 5th year (i.e. from 6th year onwards) and ever-lasting happiness. In the 4th year
there will be some happiness while the Sth year
will give mixed results, both auspicious and inauspicious, to the native’s father. Due to sins
committed against Vaishnavites, the father will be
in difficulties on account of kings and ministers in
his birth place, during the time of the native’s
being in Janma (first) dasa. More specifically in
the middle of such dasa. During the native’s third
year of age, there will be fear of untimely death to
the father; later on till the end of the dasa in
question, happiness, and destruction of enemies
will accrue to father.
wee — मन्दे भाग्याभिवुद्िकृत्। । 22281 |
पितुसोख्यं धनप्राप्तिं Ferg श्रियो वहाम्।
1121-11211/2. Second Dasa: If Saturn is in
the Nadiamsa called Seethala, the 2nd dasa will
give prosperity in an increased manner. In addition, there will occur happiness to father, acquisition of wealth to father as well as half-brothers.
1 कीटमन्दे मीनलग्ने तु जायते। । १९२२।।
| पितृसौख्यं न विदयते।
कन्याशनिस्थते काले era च क्वचित् सुखम् ।। ११२३॥
स्वपिता शत्रुनाशी स्याद्भाग्यजन्मदशन्त्यगे।
1122-11231/2. Paternal happiness: The
father of the native will never be happy at the time
of whose birth Pisces rises, while Saturn is in
Scorpio obtaining Libra Navamsa. This will come
into effect right in the first year of the native’s
birth. However, when Saturn comes in transit to
the sign Virgo, or moving in the end of Leo, some
happiness (to father) will be seen. The father will
be able to destroy-his enemies during the native’s
9th lord’s dasa, or in the end of Janma (first) dasa
aaa मन्दे भार्गवेण समन्विते। । ११२८' ।
जन्म तारदशन्त्यादो विदेशे भग्यवान्पिता।

102 Chandra Kala Nadi
स्वदेशे वा ppl ye प विदेशे
कन्याशनिस्थिते जन्मदाये धं वहः।
कन्याशनिस्थिते काले गोचरे मिथुने गुरो। । ११२६। |
सम्पद्दाये जातकस्य मजीवन्धनमादिशेत्।
ज्यष्टभ्ातूर्जन्मदाये गोचरे ललनाशनौ। | ११२७। |
For जीवे विवाहोत्सवसंभ्रमः।
मेषे काले जन्मदाये पिता सुखम्। । ११२८। |
भेदप्रतृसुतप्रपतं पितृसौख्यं विनिर्दिशेत्।
स्वज्येष्ठभगिनीपीडां मीनान्त्ये च क्रिये क्वचित्।
शीतव्छंशकगे मन्दे पश्चात्सोदरनाशवान्। । ११३०। |
स्वभेदमगिनीभर्त werk प्रवेशवान्।
1124-11301/2. More about father and other
relatives: Saturn in the Sth house joining Venus
will give prosperity to father in the beginning and
concluding parts of the native’s first dasa. In the
birth country, prosperity to father will be limited,
while it will be abundant in foreign places. Saturn
in movement in Virgo during the native’s Janma
(first) dasa will give wealth (to father). While
Saturn reaches Virgo as Jupiter is moving in transit in Gemini, the native will have sacred thread
ceremony (Upanayana due to a Brahmin, called
Dwija, which gives him second birth). Marriage
to elder brother will occur during the native’s
Janma (first) dasa when Saturn is in Virgo, while
Jupiter moves in the end of Aries, or in Taurus.
During Janma dasa if Jupiter transits the sign
Aries, the native’s father will gain happiness. His
half brothers will acquire progeny. If Jupiter is
found moving in Pisces, the native will acquire
younger coborns. If Jupiter transits the end of
Pisces, or be in Aries, there will be evils to the
native’s elder sister. Saturn in Seethala Nadiamsa
will cause loss of coborn at a later date. The
husband of the native’s half sisiter will enter in
royal service.
चत शीतव्ठाशे । :
त्वन्त्यवियेगवान्। । ११३२।।
स्वभदप्रतृमूलेन सौख्यवान् पितृहेतुना।
1131-11521/2. In the 2nd dasa, a great deal of
prosperity will occur while happiness will occur
भाग्यवान् RRA to half sister. Her husband will become famous if
Saturn is in Seethala Nadiamsa. The husband of
the said step-sister will however suffer on account
of separation in the end. The native in the 2nd
dasa will gain happiness from father and steporothers.
शीतव्ंशकगे मन्दे महामार्यशके स्थिते। 1 22331 |
द्रे सोदर्ये विधी ee भ्रातद्रयसुपूजितः।
भेदश्रातुचिरायुष्यं waite । । ११३४ । ।
मृतवन्घ्यपतिश्चेति कालान्त्रमुपुत्रवान्।
स्वज्येष्ठभगिनी भतुरविपद्दाये श्रियो वहम्। । ११३५।।
सम्पद्दाये तृतीयांशे भगिनीभर्तृसौख्यवान्।
1133.11351/2. Saturn in Seethala or
Mahamaari Nadiamsa: Saturn placed in
Seethala Nadiamsa or in Mahamaari Nadiamsa
[instead of Sthithau, the word Sanau appears in
another version] will give the native two sisters,
who will be long lived, and also two brothers. The
native will be worshippable. His step brothers will
(also) be long-lived. The native’s sister will obtain
dead children or be barren, but be happy (i.e. will
get progeny) after a long interval. In the native’s
second dasa, the husband of the native’s elder
sister will become wealthy. During the third part
of Sampath (2nd) dasa (1.6. in the last one third
part of the dasa in question), the brother-in-law
of the native will obtain happiness.
Notes: Mahamaari Nadiamsa is also known
as Mahamaaya Nadiamsa. Mahamaari in the
Southern part of India ts noted as deity incharge
of small-pox, chicken-pox, cholera etc. Mahadhoothi is another name for this part.
Mahamaari Nadiamsa extends from 15 deg.
to 15 deg, 12’ of arc in a movable sign; from 14
deg. 48’ to 15 dég. in an immovable sign; and from
0 deg. 0’ to 0 deg. 12’ of a common sign.
लग्नात्सप्तमगे मन्दे महामार्यशके कुजे। । ११३६।।
महामारीभयप्रप्तिः बाल्ये सोदरनाशवान्।
ao मातुलद्रयवान्सुखी। 1 ११३७।।
एकस्तु Wael नारमपरस्तु चिरायुषम्।

Deva Keralam
लग्नेशंशे तत्त्रिकोणे स्षुटयोगं गते WAN । ११३८। | (position etc.) effects. These effects will be more
मातुलारिष्टमाप्नेति मातामहिमनोव्यथं।
सम्पद्दाये शीतव्टंशे तुलान्त्ये चापगे शनो। । ११३९। ।
माताम हस्यारिष्ठं स्यन्मातुलश्च विचारवान् ।
FOR जन्मदाये मातुलस्य सुतोत्सवम्। | ११४०। |
स्वभेदभगिनी चैव पुत्रेत्पति चिरायुषी।
1136-11401/2. Saturn - Mars: If Saturn is in
the 7th house while Mars is in Mahaamaari
Nadiamsa, following effects will occur. During his
childhood, the native will be plagued by cholera
and will incur destruction of coborn. His maternal
grand- father will be long-lived. The native will
have two maternal uncles. One of them will be
destroyed (i.e. will die early) while one will be
long-lived. Evils to maternal uncle will come to
pass when Saturn in transit reaches the Rasiidentical with the Navamsa position of ascendant lord,
or its trine. This will also bring grief to maternal
grand mother. In the 2nd dasa, for birth in
Seethalamsa when Saturn comes to the end of
Libra, or when he moves in Sagittarius, evils to
matenal grandfather will occur. During Saturn’s
transit of Virgo, the first dasa of the native will see
birth of children to maternal uncle. And also the
native’s step-sister will acquire progeny.
Notes: Cholera indicated in this part of the
text can also additionally mean small-pox, chicken pox etc. true to the name of the Nadiamsa Mars
is expected to be in.
oa स्यातुलाराहो RAPT! । ११४१।
भाग्यवृद्धि Use शुभाधिकम्।
शनिप्रथमपयौये म हत्सुखम्। । ११४२।।
स्वपिता राजयेगं च विशेषं च तुलाशने।
1141-11421/2. Janma Dasa: During the
native’s Janma (first) dasa, with Jupiter moving in
Aries, and Rahu in Libra, prosperity will dawn on
his father. This will also bring auspicious effects
to father in royal assembly. In the first round of
Saturn, in the native’s Janma dasa, great happiness to father will occur, apart from Raja Yoga
pronounced when Saturn journeys in Libra.
TS तत्त्िकोणे स्पुटयोगं गते उनौ। । ११४३। |
स्वपिता मित्रेषु क्लेशं प्राप्नेति भूरिशः,
षष्ठाधिपदशकाले षष्ठीशांशत्रिकोणगे। | ११४४। |
स्फुटयोगं गते मन्दे स्वपिता शत्रूनाशवान्।
जयैष्टभ्रातुः क्वपित् पीडा वन्धुवर्गष्युपद्रवः ।। ११४५॥
पितृष्वसुसुतादीनि दशन्त्से व्याकुलं महत्।
अनावृष्टिहते देशे लोके दुर्भिक्षाडम्बरम् ! | १९१४६ । |
देशे राजान्तरं चेति तत्काले पितृभागयवान्।
1143-11461/2. Other Effects: When Saturn
reaches the Rasi identical with the Navamsa occupied by the 6th lord at birth, or its trine, the
native’s father will incur abundant grief on account of his friends. Father’s enemies will be
destroyed during the dasa of the native’s 6th lord,
or when Saturn reaches the Rasi identical with the
Navamsa occupied by 6th lord or its trine. There
will be some troubles to the native’s elder brother
(i.e. illness and the like) while the native’s kinsfolk
will pose some nuisance. In the end of the first
dasa, patenal relatives will be under a spell of
mental agitation. Lack of rains and occurrance of
drought will tear his country(?) Due to change of
king, the native’s father will immediately become
prosperous.
सम्पटूदाये प्रिये नित्यं तुलान््ये वृश्चिके eA ११४७॥
मधुमासे शुक्लपक्षे शीतव्छशे ९ |
विपद्दाये qa कुम्भन्त्ये मीनगे
शीतां Rates तरयोविंशतिवत्सर।
शीतव्यशकगे मन्दे त्वापत्सन्यासवान् पिता। | ११४९ |
भाग्याधिपदशकाले मृतिं च ora च।
सूर्याशगे तत्त्रिकोण Seca a । । ११५० |
स्वपिता देह जाड्यं च कूरमासे मनोव्यथाम् |
1147-11501/2. Dasa Effects: One born in
Seethala Nadiamsa’ will gain wealth in the dasa
that is the second in sequence. When Saturn in
transit reaches the verge of Libra, or be in Scorpio, the Seethalamsa native will get married in

Chaitra (the Sun in Aries), in the bright fortnight
of the moon. In the 3rd dasa, during its last onethird part, when Saturn in transit reaches the end
of aquarius or be in Pisces, evil to father will come
to pass. During the Seethalamsa native’s 23rd
year of age, the father will take to ascetic order
(following some calamity in the family). In the sub
period of a malefic, in the dasa of the 9th lord, the
native’s father will die. When Jupiter in transit
reaches the Rasi identical with the Navamsa occupied by the Sun or its trine, father’s health will
suffer, while there will occur mental agony to
father in the months indicated by the Sun’s adverse transits.
। | क्ररराशिनिर्णयः | ।
Deciding Adverse Rasis
शीत्रोशकगे मन्दे क्रूरराशिविनिर्णयः। । ११५१।।
क्रूरमासमिति प्राहुः द |
partes AH च FATA । ११५२।
a प्रोक्तः Pe ~ ag च।
epee गतास्तवेते स्वजनादिप्रपीडितः।
स्वपित्रा क्रूरमामेषु FLU शनैश्चरं। | ११५४। ।
संवारकाले क्लेशः स्यत् मात्रादीनां मनोल्यथा।
सम्पद्दाये फलं चेति क्रूरग्रह दशान्तरं | ११५५। |
1151-1155, Evil Rasis: According to the
learned in astrology, when Saturn is in Seethala
Nadiamsa, the evil Rasis (Kroora Rasis) and evil
months (Kroora Masas - based on the Sun’s transit) are: Cancer, Leo, Scorpio, Pisces, Aquarius
and Cancer. When Rahu, Ketu or Saturn come to
occupy such a Rasi, the native’s kinsfolk will be in
trouble. Grief to father, and mental agony to
mother etc. will come to pass when Saturn moves
in one of the above Rasis. Thus be understood the
effects of sub peiods of the malefic planets m the
major rulership of the dasa that is 2nd in sequence.
Chandra Kala Nadi
पित्रदिदेहजा्यं स्यात् स्वजनारिष्ठमादिशेत्।
सुतरशिगते मन्दे शीतलांशे प्रजायते! । १९५६।।
पितृसोख्यं च भग्यप्तिः Peas |
राजयोगं प्रकुर्वीत क्षेमदाये विशेषतः। । ११५७। |
चतुर्विशात्परं ard स्वप्राबल्यं भवेद्भवम्।
शे राजयोगं नरवाहन्भागभवेत्।। ११५९। ।
सप्तविंशात्परं भाग्यं गेहे गोधन संकुलम्।
प्रबलोचोगलाभादि waa सुकीर्तिमान्। । ११६० |
1156-1160. Other Effects: The said malefic
bhuktis will in addition cause physical ailments to
father and such other relatives and evils to one’s
kinsfolk. These are due to birth in Seethala
Nadiamsa with Saturn in the 5th house. In the sub
period of benefic planets (in the 2nd dasa), happiness to father, and prosperity will come to pass.
In the 4th dasa, there will be specially effects of
Raja Yoga (to the native). After 24th year of age,
he will attain prosperity and widespread fame.
One born in Seethala Shashtiamsa will have
Rajayoga effects if Jupiter (at birth) is in the 9th
house, or when in transit he comes to an
angle/trine. Acquisition of conveyances (like
palanquins etc) will also come to pass. After the
27th year, prosperity, acquisition of quadrupeds
and wealth will also take place. The native will
become widely famous through royal service, and
will gain supreme positions.
राहृदाये मन्दभुक्तौ तथा केत्वन्तरे अपि च।
स्वदेशयसरोभैस्तु योगकाले प्रपीडितः। । ११६१।।
सूर्यन्त अपमृत्युश्च योगकाले महाविपत्।
श्वासकासनज्वरादीनि देहपीडां विनिर्दिशेत्। । ११६२।
तद्दोषपरिहारार्थं शान्तिं कुर्याद्विचक्षणः |
1161-11621/2. Rahu dasa: The sub periods
of Saturn and Ketu, in the Dasa of Rahu, will
cause physical ailments, while in the sub period
of the Sun, there will be fear of untimely death,
and great danger. Cough and breathing disorders
will also result in this sub period. To overcome
these blemishes, (suitable) propitiations be done.

Deva Keralam iS
्षेमदाये
मित्रप्रभुविनाशनम्। । ११६३। |
ज्वरपीडा
राजान्तरव शात्सुखम् |
VAT UTA कन्याचन्द्रे तु जातके। । ११६४। |
राजयैगफलं सत्यं मध्यख्ण्डे न संशयः |
अग्रहारप्रतिष्ठादीन्नित्यं राजोपचारवान्। ! ११६५। ।
मित्रदरोहवशाद्रोगी राहुदाये क्लेशवान्सुखी। । ११६६। ¦
1163-1166. 4th Dasa & Rahu Dasa: In the
sub period of Saturn, in Kshema (4th) dasa, there
will be destruction to friends and employers.
There will also be some fear out of fevers, but
happiness due to royal patronage will also occur.
For one born in Seethala Nadiamsa, with Moon
placed in Virgo, the middle portion of Rahu dasa
will give effects of Raja Yoga. He will gain aname
due to construction of colonies [in charity, not as
a professional builder] and will be intent upon
serving the king. During Rahu dasa, he will suffer
from diseases due to sins of causing evils to his
friends. Later on he will regain health. In the end
of Rahu dasa, he will incur some difficulties and
(yet) be happy. (That is, end of Rahu dasa will give
mixed results.)
का्यौधिपदशाकाले क ध |
1167. 10th lord’s dasa: During this Dasa,
Saturn reaching end of Scorpio, or moving in
Sagittarius will cause danger to mother, if the said
transit is in a trine to the Rasi indicated by the
Navamsa occupied by the 11th lord.
शीतव्ांशकमे मन्दे भार्गवेण समन्विते!
are राजयोगं द्वितीयेद्राहसोगवान्। । ११६८। |
1168. Raja yoga: For one born in Seethala
Nadiamsa while Saturn is with Venus, the 4th dasa
will give effects of Raja Yoga, and the 2nd dasa
will give conveyances.
धनेशंशे तत्त्रिकोणे स्फुटयोगं गते WT
दारारिष्ठं प्रकृर्वीत षष्ठराशौ त॒ वाभवेत्॥ ११६९॥
्षमदाये ew ses विनिर्दिशेत्
मिथुने AGS स्यात्तद्रशजननाशनम्। । १९१७० | |
PAU FAS मन्दे गोचरकालगे।
URS प्रकुर्वीत ATTA न संशयः । । ११७१। |
1169-1171. Danger to wife: See in which
Navamsa the 2nd lord is posited. Also see which
Rasi/s is/or aspected by the 2nd lord. When .
Saturn in transit reaches such a sign or its trine,
danger to wife will come into effect. Also when
Saturn comes to Leo in transit when the Kshema
(4th) dasa is in operation. Saturn in Geminiis also
capable of causing adversities to wife, or will
destroy her kinsfolk. During his transit of evil
Rasis and in evil months (vide sloka No. 11511/2
etc) Saturn in Kshema (4th) dasa will cause evils
to wife.
7 स्त्रप्रनाश्चेति sere द्वपत्रवान्।
Re च FIR पुत्रद्रसचिरायुषम्। । ११७२। |
1172. The Moon in Virgo: For a Seethala
Nadiamsa native, if the Moon is placed in Virgo
at birth, the native will have many female children,
and two sons. The said two sons will be long- lived.
The native will have two wives. (In one version it
reads "Daradwaye Na" which means there will not
be two wives.)
मीनलग्ने सुताधीशे मकराशे 2 |
मसूरिकाज्वरेणेव पुत्रनाशेन ECR oe
1173. Small-pox: For one born in Pisces
ascendant, if the Sth lord Moon is in Capricorn
Navamsa, there wil be troubles by small-pox and
destruction of children.
भेदश्रातुररिष्ठ स्याच्च । । ११७४। |
लाभे राहुदशाकाले रन््रधिपतिभुक्तिष।
भेदभ्ातुः प्रपीडा स्यात् षटत्रिशब्दे मनोव्यथ॥ ११७५॥

06 Chandra Kala Nadi
1174-1175. Step-brother: Destruction of
step-brother will result in the sub period of the
11th lord during the major period of the 10th lord,
or perhaps (i.e. alternatively) in the 44th year of
the native. If Rahu is placed in the 11th house at
birth, then in his dasa, and in the 8th lord’s sub
period, or during the 36th year, danger to stepbrother, and mental agony (to self) will come to
pass.
न दि gare वृश्चिके wh
चापे काले कर्माधिपतिदायगे। । ९१७६। |
भेदप्रतृविनारोन क्लेशं प्रप्नोति i Si |
न च भेदभ्रतृवधुर्भत्र we मरिष्यति। | ११७७। |
सहोदरस्य भार्यया A स्मृतम्।
कर्माधिपदशकालं शीतल्शे त्विदं फलम्। । ११७८
1176-1178. In the dasa of the 10th lord, when
Saturn moves in the verge of Libra, or in Scorpio,
or in Saggitarius, there will be evils to the native’s
younger coborn. Abundant grief will result on
account of destruction of step-brothers. Stepbrother’s wife will also 016. These results applicable to the 10th lord’s dasa will be applicable
to Kshema dasa (4th in sequence) also.
स्वप्रभोश्वैव तत्काले हि अरिष्टं च विनिर्दिशेत्।
तस्य तु WARE स्यात् क्षेमदाये तथेव च। । ११९७९।
1179, During the same time, his king will be
subjected to evils (this is irrelevant for natal
horoscopy). His king will face destruction. So also
in the 4th dasa.
agate care >
कनिष्टभ्रातृभायौदिज्ञातिवमै सुतमयम्।
शुक्रे शनियुते जात आरूढाल्लामराशिगे। । ११८१। ।
यवज्जीवं सुभाग्यं स्याद्योगे मासे रणांकितः।
1180-11811/2. Due to associations with many
116; (the words Rajaputra Sutaamayam
are a corrupt addition meaning "diseases to the
prince’s child). The native will in the 10th lord’s
dasa prosper. During that period children in the
families of his younger brothers will be ill. SaturnVenus joining in the 11th house from Aroodha
Lagna will cause prosperity throughout life, but
when they come together in transit, they will cause
injury.
्षेमदाये परार्धदि योगं प्रत्यग्दशा शुभम्। । ११८२। |
साधनेशदशाकाले स्वभुक्तावपमृत्युमान्।
तद्टोषपरिहारार्थ शान्तिं कुर्याद्विचक्षणः | ११८३।।
राशचक्रप्रदानेन देहासेग्य भविष्यति,
ves Aad केचिदभार्गवपक्षे। 1 ११८४। ।
तत्काले
Pee |
मन्दे YRRR काले Waa तु दायगे। । ११८५। |
कन्यामासे मूर्तिं चेति तत्रिकोणेषु वा तथा।
सप्तषष्टिश्चं वर्षणि परमायुश्च विन्दति। । ११८६। |
1182-1186. Dasa results: In the 2nd half of
Kshema (4th dasa) there will be Raja yoga effects.
The 5th dasa will prove auspicious. The sub
period of lord of 6th dasa, in his major period
there will be fear of untimely death. To ward off
this evil, propitiation be done, by donating the
image of the zodiac whereafter health will be
recovered. After the age of 56, there may be
fatality to the native, and if remedies are resorted
to, death can be overcome. Such a fatality will
strike (in the 6th dasa) in the sub periods of
Saturn/Venus, in the months when the Sun is in
Virgo, or its trines, in a bright half. The full lifeexpectancy is 67,
क्लेशं चेत्सप्तपंचाशे त्वष्टचत्वारिवत्सरे |
पाकेशस्य दशसन्धौ क्लेशं प्राप्नोति भूरिशः ॥ ११८७॥

Deva Keralam Ww
1187. The native will be distressed in his
fifty-seventh/ forty- eighth year. In the junction of
6th and 7th dasa, there will be agony galore.
चन्द्रनाडीफलाध्यायेशीतव्छंशे प्रजायते।
राजयौगफलादीनां विस्तारं मनुरब्रवीत्। । ११८८ |
1188. For a native of Seethala Nadiamsa,
effects of Rajayogas have been fully described in
Chandra Nadi in the Phaladhyaya.
rar व्ययधीशे चपे स्वोच्चांशगे गुरो!
शीतव्छांशे प्रजातस्स पुण्यलोकप्रदो भवेत्। । ११८९ |
and be conjunct Venus, sins and meritorius acts
will be equa: (1.2. good and bad effects to be
enjoved in this birth will be equal proportion). As
per the authority of वदाव Parasara Hora, the
conjunction of Saturn and Venus denotes that the
native will be fond of virtuous people, will perform penance, and will after death attain the
Heavens.
। 1 मेषशनिकीकिलाशः t |
Saturn in Aries —
Kokila Nadiamra
० Sg : Miva शनौ।
ali फलं सत्यं जीवस्योच्वांशजातके। । ११९० ।।
राजयोग walt नरवाहनवान् भवेत्।
ततः पश्चाद्युण्यलोक पश्चादुत्तमजन्मवान्। । ११९१।।
लग्नात्यचमगे मन्दे कोकिलांशे तु जायते।
पंश्चाद्भ्रातृविहीनश्च ज्येष्टभ्रातुविनाशवान्। । ११९४ |
मेष मन्दे कोकिलंशे त्वेकाकौ पुत्रमित्रवान्।
1189-1191. Should the 12th lord be in his
exaltation Navamsa while Jupiter placed in Sagittarius is in Cancer Navamsa, the subject will attain
heavens after death. One born in Seethala
Nadiamsa as Satura is conjunct Venus and Jupiter
in Cancer Navamsa, the native’s father will attain
Brahma Loka (i.e. Sathya Loka, the highest of the
worlds of merit to be attained after death). He will
enjoy Raja yoga effects, will have palanquins and
the like, will then go to heavens and will be reborn
as an excellent soul.
Notes: Sloka 1191 seems to be corrupt addition in the copying of the text, as it makes no
sense of continuity. Obviously it is misplaced
here, meseems.
शीतव्गंशकगे मन्दे तुच्चग्रहसमन्विते।
शुक्रयोगे व्क समं च मनुरब्रवीत्। । ११९२। ।
FURAN होर मन्दे शुक्रज्ञसंयुते।
साधुप्रियस्तपस्वी च देहन्ते पुण्यलोकवान्। । ११९३ |
1192-1193. For one born in Seethala
Nadiamsa, while Saturn is with an exalted planet,
1194-11941/2, Kokila Nadiamsa (upto sloka
1206): For one born in Sagittarius ascendant, in
Kokila Nadiamsa, as Saturn is in the 5th house,
there will be no after-borns. His elder brother will
be destroyed. For birth in Kokila Nadiamsa, if
Saturn is placed in Aries, (in Sth) the native will
be lonely (i.e. he will be the only issue in the
family). He will be endowed with progeny and
friends.
Notes: Slokas 1194 to 1206 deal with birth
in Sagittarius. Kokila Nadiamsa also features in
this part of the text.
Kokila Nadiamsa extends from 21 deg. 24
to 21 deg. 36’ of a movable sign; from 8 deg. 24 to
8 deg. 36’ of ० immovable sign; and from 6 deg.
24 to 6 deg. 36’ of a common sign.
For birth in Kokila Nadiamsa in Sagittarius,
Saturn in 5th in Aries gives such effects as mentioned upto sloka 1197 infra. -
धनुर्लग्ने प्रजातस्सः बाल्ये क्लेशेन कर्थितः।। ११९५॥
स्वपितुर्दहजाडयच्च परगेहे निवासवान्।

बन्धुमृलत्सुसन्तेषमुद्राहानद सुखम्। । ११९६। |
1195-1196. He will have a painful childhood
and be emaciated. Because of illness to father, he
will have to live in others’ houses. He will gain
happiness through his relatives. He will be happy
after marriage.
द्रविंशब्दे पित्ररिष्ठं विंशेब्दे वा भविष्यति।
पश्चात्स्वमातृहानिश्च व्रिशोपरि सुसौख्यवान्। ११९७॥
1197. There will be danger to father when
the native will be in his 22nd year, or in the 20th
year. Later on, his mother will incur danger. After
his 30th year, he will enjoy happiness.
चापे SORRY चन्द्रे कोकिलशेअर्कनन्दते।
कापसविक्रयादिनि त्रिंशेपरि सुजीवनम्। । ११९८।।
1198. With the Moon in Sagittarius ascendant, and in Sagittarius Navamsa, while Saturn is
in Kokilamsa, the native after his 30th year of age
will lead a comfortable life trading in cotton.
Notes: Here Saturn’s position is needed to
be in Kokila Nadiamsa in Aries. That is h> should
be in the space between 21 deg. 24" and 21 deg.
36’ of Aries, while the Moon is in Vargothama in
Sagittarius. Asa result the subject will be a cotton
merchant.
लग्ने समनग चन्द्रे मूर्खप्रकृतिकोपवान्।.
सप्तर्विंशात्परं सोयं विपद्द्ये विवाहवान्। । ११९९। ।
Tarrant det क्लेश क्षेमदशन्त्यगे।
साधनेशदशकाले मारकः स्मृतेः,
केत्वन्तरे कालमुत्यरमेषमासत्रिकोणगे। । १२०१।।
1199-1201. The Moon in Sagittarius ascendant in the company of Rahu makes the native a
Chandra Kala Nadi
fool. He will be given to anger. He will be happy
after his 27th year of age. His marriage will occur
in the 3rd dasa. He will attain happiness after the
birth of a child. Towards the end of the 4th dasa,
he will be subject tc grief. In the 5th dasa, he will
become wealthy and celebrate the marriage of his
children. He will die in the sixth dasa, in Ketu’s
sub period, when the Sun transits Aries or its
trinal Rasis.
Te तत्त्िकोणे स्पुटयोगं गते शनौ।
देहजाउ्यं स॒ लभते सर्वनाडीफलं वदत्। । १२०२।।
1202. According to the work Sarva Nadi,
such native will incur physical illness when Saturn
in transit reaches the sign identical with the
Navamsa occupied by 8th lord (Moon) or its trine.
कोकिलांशकगे मन्दे पुरा Yee जन्मवान्।
पश्चाज्जन्म तथ fee तथा भवेत्। । १२०३।।
1203. One born in Kokila Nadiamsa, in Saggittarius Lagna, with Saturn in the Sth house was
lastly born in Sudra’s family (fourth caste as per
Vedic prescriptions). His current birth is and next
birth will also be in Sudra’s family.
मेषे मन्दे कोकिलांशे पुत्रपुत्रीसमृद्धिमान्।
धनुर्लगने प्रजातस्य र्रिशद्रर्षत्परं सुखम्। । १२०४। |
खवदायुष्यमाप्नोति तावत्कालं सुखावावहम्।
शतद्रसधनाढ्यश्च व्यापारे जीवनं TATA । १२०५।।
ie gr फलं विस्तारमादिशेत्।
मन्दे कोकिलाशे त्विदमेव फलं स्मृतम्। । १२०६।।
1204-1206. Saturn in Aries, for birth in Sagittarius Lagna, Kokila Nadiamsa, will give many
sons and daughters. The native will attain happiness after his 30th year. Till the end of his life he
will then be happy. He will be rich ("he will be
worth 200, perhaps, gold coins", 1.6. be wealthy),
and will live by trading activities. The results for
Saturn in debilitation for birth in Kokila Nadiamsa (for Sagittarius Lagna) have thus been stated
in Guru Nadi.

Deva Keralam 109
Notes: Sloka 1194 to 1206 deal with birth in
Kokila Nadiamsa of Sagittarius Lagna while the
Sanskrit caption tersely means: Saturn in Aries -
Kokila Nadiamsa birth.
Liege? धृताशः। । वृक्चिका्कफलम्। ।
Sagittarius Ascendant —
Dhaata Nadiamsa — Sun in Scorpio
धातांशे वृश्चिके मन्दे धनुर्लग्ने प्रजायते।
बल्यं पितृविनाश स्यात् पश्चाटुभ्रतृविहीनवान्।! ९२०७॥।
ज्येष्टश्रातृविनाशेन मध्ये वयसि योगवान् |
बाल्ये सौख्यं ्।
प्चाद्देशन्तर वासः कुत्सितप्रभुसेवनम्। । १२०९।।
दारद्रये सुतप्राप्तिमिमलायोगजातकः।
वैदीकमध्यमूलेन नरवाहनयोगवान्। | १२१०। |
्षमदाये महत्सौख्यं मध्यखण्डे धनव्ययम्।
अपरार्धे सुखप्राप्तिः TAT ग्रमलाभवान्। | १२११।।
1207-1211. Sagittarius Lagna, birth in
Dhaatha Nadiamsa, Saturn placed in Scorpio
(upto sloka No. 1218): One born in Sagittarius
Lagna’s Dhaatha Nadiamsa, having Saturn in
Scorpio will lose his father in childhood, will later
on lose his coborn. During his mid-life, there will
be destruction -of his elder brother and his
prosperity will commence. He will have two
sisters one of whom will be long-lived, blessed
with progeny and happpiness. He will attain happiness in childhood in one of the Andhra provinces. Later on he will migrate to a different
province in service of a mean ruler. He will have
two wives, will have progeny and will have Amalaa
Yoga (i.e. a benefic in the 10th house, in Virgo).
He will attain palanquins due to his livelihood in
fields of Vedic lore. In the 4th dasa, he will get a
great deal of happiness, but in the middle portion,
there will be (heavy) expenditure. Happiness will
accrue to him in the 2nd half (of Kshema, or 4th
dasa). He will gain villages.
Notes: The heading ‘Vrischikarka Phalam’
should be ‘}ischikarki Phalam’ which means ‘effects of Saturn in Scorpio’ conforming to the text
hereof.
Dhaatha Nadiamsa in Sagittarius ascendant
features. This Nadiamsa is not enlisted. The
relative slokas are 12 in number.
मन्दे दावाग्निषष्ठ्यं शे —— तिदेहवान्।
दारद्रययुतो मानी UTE TEE १२९१२।।
1212. Saturn in Davagni Shashtiamsa for
birth in Sagittarius Lagna, Nadiamsa as above:
The native will have windy imbalances if Saturn is
in the Shashtiamsa entitled Davaagni. He will
have two wives, be honourable, and will become
famous through royal service.
Notes: Davagni shashtamsa is 2 malefic one
extending from 16 deg. to 16 deg. 30’ of an odd
sign, and from 13 deg. to 13 deg. 30’ of an even
sign. Davagni means forest conflagration.
TART जीवे मन्दे se A धातंशनाडिके।
waar च लभे TEE १२१३।।
1213. Devoted to Lords Vishnu & Siva: If
Jupiter is in Parameswari Nadiamsa while Saturn
is in Dhaata Nadiamsa, the Sagittarius native will
be devoted to Lords Vishnu and Siva.
Notes: Parameswari Nadiamsa extends
from 29 deg. 48’ to 30 deg. of a movable sign; from
0 deg. 0” to 0 deg. 12’ of an immovable sign; and
from 14 deg. 48’ to 15 deg. of a common sign.
धातांशे वृश्चिके मन्दे eget महामतिः।
¡ भाग्ये चत्वारिंशे सुवाहनम्।
द्विचत्वारिंशगे वापि योगवान्कीर्तिमान् भवेत्। । १२१५। |
THe दारहानिः 4
ज्येष्ठपुत्रीचिरायुष्यं बाल्ये
मृतप्रजाबहृत्वं स्साद्भगिनीद्र्थवन्सुखी।

Seager मानी पितृशुश्रूषणे परः। । ६२९७। |
विद्याविरघ्नप्रदो नित्यं धातांशे नात्र संशयः ।
तृतीययेगो लिखितः फलमन्यद्विचार्यताम्। | १२१८ । |
1214-1218. Dhaata Nadiamsa: Birth in
Dhaata Nadiamsa of Sagittarius, with Saturn in
Scorpio makes the native stout- bodied, highly
intelligent, (sometimes) foolish, and enjoy
pleasures. He will be given to anger but will instantly cool off. In his 38th year he will get
prosperity, vehicles in 40th year or 42nd year, and
will enjoy Yoga (good position, wealth etc.) and
become famous. In his Sth dasa, there will be
danger to his wife. Many of his children will die
(untimely) while his eldest daughter will be longlived. He will incur abdominal disorders in
childhood. He will have two sisters and also stepbrothers. He will be honourable and devoted to
his father. Doubtlessly the Dhaathamsa native
will meet with obstacles in education. Rest of the
results be understoo¢ from other sources.
Aquarius Ascendant — Guha Nadiamsa
TERY चोत्तरे भागे कुम्भलग्ने पजायते। । १२१९। |
1219. Aquarius Lagna - Guha Nadiamsa:
One born in the second half of Guha Nadiamsa
in Aquarius Lagna will be a Soodra (4th caste as
per Vedic prescriptions), be ever happy and be
second of the children born in the family.
| Notes: The fist line of sloka 1219 is missing
in the text. Maybe that one line relates to Dhata
Nadiamsa in Sagittarius dealing with Saturn.
| From now on the text deals with Aquarius,
an immovable sign. Guha Nadiamsa is the subJect-matter in this ascendant.
Guha Nadiamsa is not enlisted in the three
sources available with us. From the discussions
in Sloka No. 1313, this is actually Dhruva Nadiamsa and may have been wrongly copied as "Guha’.
Chandra Kala Nadi
शद्रजन्मा सुखी नित्यं द्वितीयगर्भजातकः।
गुहाशे चोत्तरे भागे विप्रकालेत्विदं Haq १२२०॥
Treaty माप्नोति gas भेदमादिशेत्।
किंचित्फलाफलं भेदमुत्तराशस्य जातके। । १२२१। |
वनप्रान्ते प्रसूतिश्च नगरे नात्र संशयं
1220-12211/2. Following are the effects for
one born in Vipra Kala of the 2nd half of Guha
Nadiamsa. He will be very famous. For the 2nd
half of this Nadiamsa, the results will be somewhat different. The native will be born in a city
near forests.
We त्वचे लग्ने चपि मन्दे इषांशगे। । १२२२।।
Vera सुखी नित्यं द्वितीयगर्भजातकः।
1222-12221/2. One will be a Soodra, ever
happy and be the second child in the family if birth
is in an immovable Rasi, Pisces Navamsa, Guha
Nadiamsa while Saturn is in Sagittarius.
पूर्वभागे प्रजातस्स गुहारण्ये ध | १२२३।।
उत्तरांशे वनप्रान्ते जन्माष्दे |
कृशंगः श्खमदेहश्च ज्येष्ठभ्रातृविनाशवान्। । १२२४। |
Wagaya मानी भ्रातृजन्मसमन्वितः।
मीनांशे त्वचे लग्ने WR तु प्रजायते। । १२२५। |
1223-1225. In case of first half of Guha
Nadiamsa, birth will be in a place surrounded by
caves and forests. Born near forests, the native of
second half of Guha Nadiamsa, will have an
emaciated body. There will be misunderstandings
in his family during his first year of age. He will be
of dark complexion, and will incur destruction of
elder coborn. Later on he will acquire coborn, be
honourable. These are applicable to birth in an
immovable Rasi, with Pisces Navamsa and in
Guha Nadiamsa.
सापतनमातृभाक् चान्ते भ्रतृभात्रीजनैर्युतः।
सूर्यात्पंचमगे मन्दे केवलांशे प्रजायते। । १२२६। ।

Deva Keralam ¡{|
1226. One born in Kevalamsa (१) while
Saturn is placed in the 5th from the Sun will have
a step-mother and will be endowed with brothers
and sisters.
Noite: Kevalamsa is neither a Shashtiamsa
nor a Nadiamsa. Apparently, there is an error in
composition.
गुहाशे स्वजनश्रीमान् मेघश्यपतनुः PEL
बाल्ये दारिद्यमापननो मध्ये रोगप्रपीडितः। । १२२७1 |
्रातृद्रसयुतो मानी ज्येष्टश्रातृवियोगवान्।
सूर्यत्पवभगे मन्दे TERT Aaa । 82221 |
स्वपितुर्ुखमापन्नः कोपी क्षिप्रप्रसादवान्।
किंचित्कालं दुराचारो ब्रणरोगेण पीडितः। । १२२९। |
पश्चात्तापी पापभीरूः देव ब्राह्म णपोषकः।
वैदिकाचारथर्मात्मा तान्तरिकश्च प्रिखपितुः। । 22301 |
1227-1230. One born in Guha Nadiamsa will
be wealthy, endowed with relatives, will have a
dark physique, and be emaciated. His childhood
will be marked by penury, while middle life by
diseases. He will have two brothers, be
honourable, be separated from his elder brother
(or will have loss of elder brother). If the Sun has
Saturn in the 5th while the 8th lord is in the 9th
house, the native will be a source of grief to father,
be given to anger but will instantly cool off, for
some time le will be in the grip of vices and be
troubled by ulcers. Later on he will repent (for his
vices), be afraid of committing sins, and will
honour Gods and Brahmins. He will follow Vedic
code, be charitable, be 2 Tantrika and be dear to
father.
गुहाशे चोत्तरे भागे च जायते।
बहुभ्रातृयुतो मानी दारशोकप्रदस्सुखी।
एकश्रातृयुतः श्रीमान् बहुकाल मपत्यकः | । १२३२। |
स्वज्येष्टा क लेन स्वपिता धमंबुद्धिमान्।
पितामहः सुखी धर्ममार्गप्रवर्तकः। 122331 |
1231-1233. For birth in the second half of
Guha Nadiamsa in Aquarius ascendant, the native will have a long-living paternal grandfather
and will in his old age confront grief on account
of loss of a son. He will have many a coborn, be
honourable, will suffer loss of spouse, will have
one coborn (?), be wealthy and will have progeny
after a long interval. The native’s father will turn
charitable on account of childlessness of the
native’s elder coborn.
गुहाशे नवमाधीशे गुरूयुक्तेअथ वीक्षिते।
स्वपिता धनिकः श्रीमान् ज्ञानम प्रवृत्तिमान् | ९२३४
dad च प्रियो नित्यं वैदिकाचारवान् सुखी।
pie Rania पसकृत्यानि मध्यन्ते सात्विकस्सुखी | १२३५॥
नो वहुपुत्रार्थवत्सलः।
1234-12351/2. Jupiter joining or aspecting
the 9th lord will give a rich father, who will take
to path of supreme knowledge (by meditation
etc), be a Tantrika and will follow Vedic injunctions. In his childhood, he will indulge in vicious
acts, and will from middle part to end of life
perform virtuous deeds and be happy. He will
perform charitable acts by constructing tanks and
gardens, will be endowed with many children and
be committed to a purpose. (Artha Vatsalah can
also mean "fond of wealth".)
TST चोत्तरे भागे ype ie Ba ग्रहवान् पिता। । 2238! |
सात्विको गुणसम्पन्नः ls |
खचके च प्रसन्नात्मा सदा धर्मपरायणः । । १२३७।।
1236-1237. The native’s father will have
blessings of Lord Siva, be virtuous, and will have
knowledge of Sruthis (Vedas as directly revealed
by Brahma) and Smruthi (distinctly opposed to
Sruthi, is of human origin, and as heard and
remembered). He will derive pleasure by begging
(or soliciting) and be always religious. These are
related to second half of Guha Nadiamsa.
भाग्येशे पापसंयुक्ते CRRA समन्विते।
TSR प्रजातस्य कच्छत्रद्रमवान्पिता। । १२२३८। |

११४. Chandra Kala Nad
FEE AERTS 1243. Short Life: One born in an immovable
चापरूढवशादमाग्यं जनकस्य न GME! 1 १२३९। 1 ascendant willbe short-lived ifthe Moon bein the
Sth house, in the 12th in Navamsa in association
with two malefic heavenly bodies.
1238- 1239. The 9th Lord: If the lord of the
Oth is conjunct malefics along with the 11th lord,
the father of the Guhamsa native will have two मीनांशे त्वचे लग्ने उत्तरांशस्य जातके।
wives, and will have many sons, much wealthand = चन्दर राहुयुते जातः बालारिष्टं समश्नुते | | १९४४1 |
much wisdom. If the said 9th lord is in Sagittarius
the father will have abundant prosperity. 1244. Balarishta: For a native of second half
of Guhamsa of an immovable ascendant, with
जातकस्य पिरशेषेण क्षेमदाये सुभाग्यकृत्। Pisces Navamsa, the Moon’s association with
सम्पद्दायेअपमूत्युश्च पितुपुण्यवशत्सुखम्। 1 १२४०। | Rahu will cause infantile mortality.
TRUITT चन्द्रे गुरूसंयुतवीक्षिते।
1240. Dasa results: Such a native (as above) गुहांशगे प्रजातस्य नालारिष्टं न विद्यते।। १२४५। |
will highly prosper in Kshema Dasa (4th Dasa).
There will be fear of untimely death in Sampath
(2nd) Dasa (itself) which would however be
40 1245. Cancellation: Balarishta (arising out
of any source) will stand nullified if the Moon
occupies the Navamsa owned by 8th lord (in Rasi)
and is in aspect to, or association, with Jupiter.
वालारिष्ट :
Infantile Mortality सवनः
गुहे According to Yavanas
गुहा चाष्टमे चन्द्रे पापद्रयसमन्विते।
शुमदृष्ठिविहीने च बालारिष्टं विनिर्दिेत्। । १२४१ । वक्रारम्भदशमध्ये लग्नेशे द्रयराशिगे।
गुहांशके पूर्वभागे बालारिष्टं ET WAT । १२४६। |
1241. Balarishta: Infantile mortalityistobe उत्तरांश प्रजातस्य बालारिष्ठं न यते |
declared for a Guhamsa native if the Moon, along षोडशब्दिषु मध्येषुदेहजाड्यं क्वचित्क्वचित् । | १२४७। ।
with two malefics, is positioned in the 8th house, `
bereft of beneficial aspects.
1246-1247. According to Yavana School
चन्द्रलग्नष्ठमाधीशे स्वर क) ते। (sloka 1246 - 1250): For one born in the former
शुभद्रययुते जातो बालरिष्टं न | | १२४२। । half of Guha Nadiamsa as the ascendant lord is
placed in a dual Rasi, infantile mortality will occur
(~ in the middle part of the Dasa of or planet about
ei ee — Sth ui from to retrograde (at birth). If | the birth is in the
or with two benefics, the Balarishta will 0 = व
न. । Balarishta will not come to pass, but the 16th year
will sometimes cause physical ailments.
व्ययांशेअष्टमगे चन्द्रे पापद्रयसमन्विते। Note: The words "Vakrarambha Dasa Madस्थिरलग्ये प्रजातस्य ACPA मादिशेत् [122831 । Aye" are not of proper composition. If Vakra is

Déva Keralam 113
taken to mean as Mars, then the evil referred to
will occur in the beginning and concluding part of
Mars Dasa provided it comes to rule the native’s
childhood. Then the word Arambha is out of
place.
स्वपितुः पूर्वपुण्येन चोत्तरांशे चिरायुषम्
मृत्युनजयायुतं जप्त्वा वस्त्रदानेन वारयेत्। | १२४८। |
1248. The native born in the 2nd half of
Guhamsa will live long because of the good deeds
of his father. The evils (vide slokas 1246 - 1247 for
both the halves of Guhamsa) can be warded off
by reciting Mrityunjaya Japa and donation of
clothes.
Te Ber भागे कुम्भलग्ने प्रजायते।
टशावर्षत्परं चैव बालारिष्टभयं क्कचित्। । १२४९ |
मरम्पद्दाये दशासन्धो विपद्दायेअथवा यदि।
बालारिष्टभयप्राप्तिः पितुपुण्यवशायुषम्। । १२५० ।।
1249-1250. For one born in the 2nd half of
Guha Nadiamsa of Aquarius Lagna, the period
after the 10th year will somewhat be adverse with
Balarishta effects. The junctions of 2nd and 3rd
Dasas may also give such effects. Due to the good
deeds of the father, the native will be long-lived.
वृद्धवशिष्टः
According to Senior Vasishta
मीनांशे aa लग्ने दशमे गुरूसंस्थिते।
बालारिष्ट निहन्त्यशु गिरिंवज्रधरो यथा। । १२५१1 |
1251. According to Vriddha Vasishta (Sloka
1251 thru 1255): Jupiter placed in the 10th house
will destroy Balarishta yogas for an immovable
ascendant the Navamsa of which is Pisces. (Thus,
Leo ascendant is excepted).
स्वभानुसूर्यचनद्रदिदाये प्रार्थनमादिशेत्।
वस्त्रदानवशायुष्यं जीवेनमत्युन्जयं जयम्। । १२५२। I
वालारिष्टसहस्रणि गुहाशे 7 विद्यते
1252-1253. Balarishta combinations (if any)
could be warded off by prayers in the Dasa of
Rahu, Sun, Moon etc. Reciting Mrityunjaya Japa
and giving away clothes etc. in charity will also
help overcome the evils. Birth in Guha Nadiamsa
will (itself) resist a thousand yogas of infantile
mortality. Benefics in angles or trines will give
medium span of life.
पूर्वभागे प्रजातस्सः आदि खण्डे तु जातकः।
oe ge By दयमाप्नोति मध्यखण्डे चिरायुषम् | । १२५४ I
शि पूर्वखण्डे पूर्वभागे तु |
मध्यखण्डे चिरायुष्यं गुहाशे चैव जायते। | १२५५। |
1254-1255. One born {3 the first one-third
part of first half of Guha Nadiamsa will have a
short life, and the one in second one- third (middle of the 3 parts) will be long-lived. And the one
born in the first one-third of second half of this
Nadiamsa will have a long life.
Notes. These two slokas need some
reconstruction for proper understanding.
Vasishta and Garga seem to have made each
half of Nadiamsa as 3 sub divisions, 1.6. one
Nadiamsa has 6 parts. (This is only my assumption
as otherwise there is no authentic teaching about
a Nadiamsa being made into six sub divisions). In
which case the above rendering conveys something. Yet the words "Poorva Bhaga" in the first
line of Sloka 1255 are out of place.
Alternatively avoiding a debate whether a
Nadiamsa has six parts, we can simply form two
specific clues from-the above two slokas:
1. Guha Nadiamsa - first half: the native will
be short-lived.
2. Guha Nadi Amsa - Second half: the native will be long-lived.

The second half of this Nadiamsa seems to
be better for life span, devoid of Balarishta, as
could bé seen in S. 1246 - 1247 above (Yavanas).
Similarly first half of this Nadiamsa gives poverty
and second half of riches (sloka 1261 infra).
गार्ग्यः
According to Garga
५०५ शि चेत्ते भागे मध्यखण्डे प्रजायते।
द नवसंख्याका ज्येष्ठभ्रातुविनाशवान्। । १२५६ । |
पश्चादप्रातृयुतः श्रीमान् frat च चिरायुषो।
सोदरा वसुसंखया वा षट्संखया विरजीविनः।। १२५७ I |
1256-1257. According Maharshi Garga:
One born in the middle portion of Guha Nadi
Amsa’s second part will have nine coborns. His
older brother will be destroyed. Thus he will
remain with after-borns (only). He will be wealthy
and his parents will be long-lived. Six or eight
co-borns will be long-lived.
उत्तरंशे पूर्वखण्डे, पश्चाद्भ्रातृविनाशवान्।
मध्यखण्डे ततः पश्चात्सोदरोत्त्ति AMAT! १२५८ ॥
ततः wae योगवान् कीर्तिमान्भवेत्।
सोदराः Ta चत्वारः ततः पश्चात्सहोदरी। । १२५९। |
1258-1259. Birth in first one-third part of
second half of Guha Nadiamsa will destroy
younger co-borns. In the second one third part,
coborn will be destroyed as they are born..... The
native will obtain name and fame and will have
four brothers and one sister. (Note: These two
slokas got mixed up with some other conditions
and these are unclear.
भ्रातृस्थानाधिपे वक्रे स्वोच्चांशे शुभयुते।
सोदरा वसु तेषु द्वौ प्रबलौ राजवल्लभौ। । १२६०। |
1260. Famous co-borns: Should the 3rd lord
Mars (or the 3rd lord be in retrogression) be
Chandra Kala Nadi
conjunct a benefic and be in own/exaltation
Navamsa there will be eight coborns out of whom
two will be famous and dear to king.
गुहांशे चोत्तरे भागे pte gral |
1261. Wealthy/Poor: Mars in the 10th house
(Scorpio) will make the native of second half of
Guhamsa wealthy right from birth while penury
will follow the brith in first half.
Fh lal AE शि तु जायते।
भेदभ्रातुसुतदरेष । । १२६२। ।
1262. The native of the second half of this
Nadiamsa will be wealthy if Mars is in Sagittarius.
He will incur enmity with the children of his
step-brothers and relatives.
Notes: The second line of the sloka should
simply mean that the native will have inimical
terms with his kinsfolk which effect is subject to
Mars being in the 11th house as could be seen, as
a repetition, in the following sloka.
चापारूढे घटे लग्ने सस्यं नाङ्यां प्रजासते।
जञातिद्रेषप्रदो नित्यं ज्ञातिवित्तापहारवान्। । £2631 |
भवस सुतद्रेषी पितृमूलाद्धि भाग्यवान्
मदै फलं सत्यं पंचविंशात्परं भवेत्। । १२६४! ।
द्रत्रिशान्दात्परं चेति स्वसोदरविभागवान्। । १२६५। |
1263-1265. For one born in Aquarius
Lagna, Mars in the 11th house (vide sloka 1262,
first line) will cause enmity with one’s relatives
and children of step-brothers. The native will
steal the wealth of his relatives, and will prosper
through father, in Kshema (4th) Dasa, (or) after
the age of 25. There will be (property) division
among brothers after 32.
Note: Sloka 1265 has only one line.

Deva Keralam
भेदप्रातृसुतद्रेषं न श्रुणेति पितुप्रियः।
वित्तापहारदेषेण ज्येष्टभ्रातृविनाशनम्। । १२६६।।
दायमार्गगते मन्दे TSR धर्मिकस्सुधीः।
पितृदत्त स्वकार्याणि दायमार्गे णल॒लितः (?) ॥ १२६७॥
न श्रुणेति पितुरमागिं गढहत्त्पापचेतेनः। । १२६८। |
1266-68. He will not listen to adverse comments about his step- brothers and will be a pet
of his father. When Saturn is in his direct motion
(Marga gate = direct motion, while the text reads
Daaya Marga, and the word Daaya denotes dasa,
making no sense here), the native of Guha
Nadiamsa will be righteously disposed. He will
be soft in disposition and will (carry out) the
orders of his father. Sloka 1268 has some mix up
which denotes that the native will not be obedient
to his father.......be secretive in disposition and be
sinful.
bie ते चन्दे वीक्षिते वा प्रजायते।
तो नित्यं पापप्रकृतिचित्तवान्। । १२६९। |
1269. Sinful: For Guha Nadiamsa (Aquarius
ascendant), the Moon aspecting by or conjuct
with two malefics will make the native interested
in secret (questionable) activities. Such a person
will earn through sinful means.
चन्द्रलग्नादगुरूस्थने भागवेण निररीधिते।
यस्यां नाडयां प्रजातस्तु जञानवान्भाग्यवान्भवेत्।। १२७०॥
1270. Knowledgeable & Fortunate: If birth
be in Guha Nadiamsa, the native will be learned
and fortunate with Venus aspecting the 9th sign
counted from the Moon.
लग्नाशधिपतो जीवे शक्रांगारकसंयुते।
TERT भाग्यमित्याहुर्बहुव्यापारवित्तवान्। । FWRI
1271. Wealthy: One will be ever fortunate,
will have various business activities and be rich
Lid
provided his birth is in Guha Nadiamsa, in a
Navamsa of Jupiter, while Jupiter is with Venus
and Mars.
द्रिसहमराधिकारी च स्वपितुव्यसुतप्रियः |
TERT चोत्तरेभागे पितृव्येको द्विभार्यवान्। । १२७२।।
eo नित्यमन्तः कापटय वान्सुखीः।
बहुपुत्रर्थसम्पन्नो goo ्। 1 १२७३। |
गरतः प्रसन्नात्मा a a स्सुखी।
कालान्तरे fart: राजद्वारे प्रसिद्धिमान्। । १२७४।
1272-1274. Second half of Guha Nadi Amsa:
This native will own two thousand (gold coins)
(i.e. he will be wealthy), and be fond of the
children of his paternal uncle. His paternal uncle
will have two wives. He will be intent upon gathering wealth, be ever deceitful in disposition, very
intelligent, be endowed with much wealth and
many children, and will attend to domestic cores
(responsibilities). He will relish doing secret acts
and will after some interval emerge pure-hearted.
He will attain fame serving the king.
a alli विपत्।
ज्येष्ठपित एकदारप्रियस्सुखी । | १२७५1 |
1275. The native’s elder paternal uncle will
have one wife, be happy, will have many children
and wealth.
Notes: "Pitrarishtaatparam Vipath" seem to
be an interpolation. It however means - "There
will be danger after evils to father".
क्रोधस्त्रीनायको नित्यं धर्माधिर्मविचक्षणः।
बाल्ये दारिद्ममापन्नः स्वभुजार्जितवित्तवान्। । 8298 1 |
पितृव्यप्रीतिमान् रागी पुत्री पत्रयुते भवेत्।
गुहाशे चोत्तरे भागे कुम्भे मीनांशके स्थिते। । १२७७ |
1276-1277. The said relative (vide sloka
1275) will marry a woman who is given to anger.

He will distinctly understand the right and wrong.
His childhood will be marked by penury. His
wealth will be self-made. He will be fond of his
paternal uncles, be passionate and endowed with
sons and daughters. These have reference to the
native of Guha Nadiama, second half in Aquarius
ascendant with Pisces Navamsa.
पितुन्योऽतिपेधावी ज्ञातिधमार्जितस्सुखी।
देव व्रह्म णधिविश्वासी मध्ये मत्युन्वरार्दितः॥ १२७८॥
1278. One of the native’s paternal uncles will
be highly intelligent, be endowed with knowledge
("Gnathi" should read as "Gnani") and religious
attainment, be happy, will honour gods and Brahmins and in the middle of his life will incur fatal
fever.
TER जननात् पूर्वे जन्मदायेञन्त्मगेअपि च।
स्वपितुभ्रातृरोकः स्यात् पश्चाद्माग्यं स्वतन्त्रता।। १२७९॥
गुहाशे चोत्तरे भागे मध्यखण्डे sil
स विनाशी च WARK । । १२८०।
वा स्थिते वापि मातुरदीर्घायुरादिशेत्।
पूर्वभागे समीपस्थे बाल्ये मातृविनाशनम्। । १२८१। |
शिवपूजारतो नित्यं च प्रियस्सुखी
1279-12821/.2 About father: One of the
native’s paternal uncle, causing grief to the
native’s father, would have passed away (just)
prior to the native’s birth, or during the progress
of the native’s Janma (first) dasa, or (probably) in
the end of such dasa. Later on the father will
attain prosperity and independence. This applies
to Guhamsa native.
One born in the middle one-third portion of
the second half of Guha Nadiamsa in Aquarius
Lagna will prove destructive (i.e. inauspicious)
Chandra Kala Nadi
for paternal uncles. He will live in a different
village (from his birth place) or in the viscinity of
birth place. His mother will be long-lived. One
born in the first half of Guha Nadiamsa will live
in a village that is near his birth- place. He will
lose his mother in his (very) childhood. Only the
mother of such Aquarius native will die (in the
native’s chiidhood). (That is, the father will be a
long-lived person.) The native’s father will be
quite religiously disposed, and will be devoted to
Lord Siva. He will daily worship Him. He will be
a Tantrika (a follower of Tantra doctrines), be
charming and happy.
पूर्वभागे प्रजातस्य स्वपिता तान्त्रिकप्रियः। । 2231 |
व ak त्यानि भ्रातदेषकरो तद्ेषकरे भवेत्।
ध pe पुण्यम्।
सुदीर्धमायर्मुनयो वदन्ति
1283-1284. For birth in former half of Guha
Nadiamsa - The native’s father will be fond of
Tantrikas (1.6. will patronize them), will indulge in
such acts characteristic of a hypocrite and will
hate his coborn. His second wife (i.e the native’s
step mother) will have increase and prosperity of
children. The mother of the native born in the
second half of Guha Nadiamsa, will be long-lived.
If birth be in Leo Navamsa, the father of Guha
Nadiamsa native will be meritorious and be endowed with longevity.
सैम्यांशे केन्द्रराशिगे।
ARRAY AIT । १२८५।।
न ज
स्वपिता
1285. Ninth Lord: Venus ruling the 9th
(from Aquarius ascendant) if placed in an angle,
at the same time falling in a Navamsa of Mercury
(or a benefic) (avoiding Virgo, of course), the
native’s father will be long-lived, performing
meritorius deeds.

Deva Keralam
भाग्येशे कर्मराशिस्थे कमेशेन समन्विते।
यस्यां ASA प्रजातस्तु बहु भा्यार्थयोगवान्। । १२८६ । |
1286. Many Wives: One born in Guha
Nadiamsa (in Aquarius ascendant) will have
many wives if the 9th lord Venus is in the 10th
house in association with the 10th lord (Mars).
लाभाध्िपिन संयुक्ते राजयेोगे नविद्यते।
ल्यापारजीवनं भूरि धनं संपादयिर्षत। | १२८७। |
1287. Raja Yoga: If the said 9th lord is conjunct the 11th lord (Jupiter), there will be a Raja
Yoga whereby the native will have wide business
activities and abundant wealth.
स्वसोद्रश्च यः कश्चित् पितुः प्रीतिकरो ser
तस्य शत्रुत्वमित्याहुर्जातकस्य विनिर्दिशेत्। । १२८८।
1288. The native will have some enmity with
his brother who will be a source of great satisfaction to his father.
TER dat भागे त्वनुजप्रीतिमान् क्कचित्।
ame wat विभागं द्वित्निवासरे। । १२८९। |
1289. Coborn: One born in the 2nd half of
Guha Nadiamsa will be somewhat fond of his
younger coborn. He will incur enmity with his
coborn in Kshema (4th) dasa. There will be
property division.
भेदय्रातृसुतः श्रीमान् विपद्दाये सुभाग्यवान्।
सम्पद्दाये तृतीयांशे भ्रातृसन्तानमाप्नुयात्। । १२९०। |
भेदमातु सुतभ्राता बल्यं set सुखन्वितम्।
ili ie पत्रीपुत्रसमन्वितः। । १२९१।।
¦ भ्रातृभरत्रीजनेर्युतः।
कालान्ते महत्पोढ्यं भ्रातृमूलच्छियोवहम्। | १२९२।
पुत्रमूलात् सुसन्तोषो वार्धके धनधान्यवान्।
1290. Third Dasa: In the native’s third dasa,
the step-brother’s son will beget prosperity and
become wealthy. During the last one third part of
Sampath (2nd) dasa, his brothers will acquire
children.
1291. Relative: The brother of the native’s
step-mother will be happy during his childhood.
Later on he will be troubled by poverty. He will
be endowed with progeny
1292-12921/2. "Her husband" (?) will be
gentle, endowed with calmness and will have
brothers and sisters. After a long interval he will
beget great happiness and will attain wealth
through coborn. She will be happy on account of
her children. He will be endowed with wealth and
grains.
Notes: In these three lines, there is no clarity
as to which relatives are being referred to.
Tadbharthaa means her husband. Which 15 that
female relative? Not the father of the native at
least. In the end dealing with old age, masculine
gender verb is used. Again to which relatives this
reference 19 being made 15 unclear.
माुलाधिपतौ चन्द्रे पपद्रूयसमन्विते। । ६५९३। |
मातुलस्य aga “ee त्रिसंखयाश्चिरायुष |
गुहाशे मातुलस्यापि मृतिमादिशेत्। । १२ ९४।
एकश्चोरपतिश्चेति पाषण्डाचार कुत्यवान्।
1293-12941/2. Maternal Uncle: Should the
Moon, being the lord of the house of signifying
maternal uncle, join two malefics, the native will
have many a maternal uncle. Yet only two or three
of them will be endowed with long lives. For a
Guha Nadiamsa native, predict death of maternal
uncles in a foreign place. One of such relatives will

be lord of thieves and will have conduct as due to
a hypocrite.
मातामहस्तु पपेन मातृवेशक्षयो भवेत्। । १२९५।।
सख्यं स्वपितृमूलेन मातुरुद्राह तःपरम्।
मातुलस्य सुखं किन्विदल्पसौख्यं सुखापुखम्। । 82881 |
स्वमातृसोदरः सप्त अथवा नवसंख्यकाः |
्ित्रिसंख्याश्चिरायुष्याः केचिद्रोगप्रपीडितः। । १२९७। |
1295-1297. Other matters: Due to the sins
cf the native’s maternal grand-father, the native’s
maternal families will be destroyed. The native’s
mother will become happy after her marriage due
to the good deeds of the native’s father. (That is,
she will not be affected by her father’s sins.) The
native’s maternal uncles will have limited happiness, and a mix of grief and happiness. The
native’s mother will have seven or nine coborns.
Two or three of them will be long-lived. She will
be however, troubled by diseases.
गुहांशे चोत्तरे भागे म्रियते मातृसोदरी।
मातुलस्य दरिद्रस्य क्लेशजीवनमादिशेत्। । १२९८। |
1298. Guha Nadiamsa - 2nd half: Native’s
maternal aunt will incur (untimely) death. His
maternal uncles will be poor and will lead a difficult life.
लग्नाद् द्वाशगे मन्दे कुम्भे AA तथा।
स्वमातुलकुले भार्या काचिद्दुष्ठगुणन्विता। | १२९९।
1299. Maternal Uncle’s Wife: If Saturn is in
the 12th house, one born in Aquarius ascendant
with Pisces Navamsa will have such a maternal
uncle whose wife will be somewhat wicked in
disposition.
Note: "Lagna Dwasage' is found in the text.
It should be "Dwadasage" meaning 12th house.
Meenamsa Jaathake is another reading for
Chandra Kala Nadi
Meenamsake which denotes birth in Pisces
Navamsa. The rendering is given after these rectifications.
मातुलस्य सुतस्थाने ig ial |
मातुलस्य भयं किचित् पुत्रमित्रवान्। । 83001 |
एक मृतसुतं चोति त्वत्र का ।
सम्पद्दाये मातुलश्च
दशन्त्ये क्लेशमित्याहुरमातामहमृतिस्तथा।
अथवा च विपदूदाये गुहांशे मातृवंशगे। । ९३०२ |
मातुलदिजनारिष्टं मातामहमृतिं वदेत्।
1300-13021/2. Maternal uncles: For a Guha
Nadiamsa native (Aquarius ascendant) Mars
placed in the Sth house (Gemini) in aspect to
Jupiter provides following effects: It forebodes
danger to maternal uncles in general. The said
relative will be endowed with sons and friends.
One of the maternal uncles will beget dead
children. Another will have a single son (only).
During the native’s second dasa, troubles on account of abdominal disorders will afflict his
maternal uncle. And in the end of the said dasa
calamity to maternal uncles, and death of maternal grand-father will take place. One born in
Guha Nadiamsa will in the third dasa see danger
to maternal grand-father and other maternal relatives.
सम्पद्याये तृतीयांशे गुहांशे पितृशोकवान्। 1.83031 |
पितामह मृतिश्चेति दशासन्धै भविष्यति।
TST द्रादशे वर्ष वत्सर To | । १३०४। |
पितामहास्त्वरिष्ट स्यात् प्रपीडिकृत्।
` 1303-13041/2. Family deaths: In the last onethird part of Sampath (2nd) dasa, the native will
incur grief on account of father. In the junction of
2nd - 3rd dasa, danger to paternal grand-father
will come to pass. Else 12th/13th year of the native
could also cause death of paternal grand-father
for a Guha Nadiamsa native apart from evils to
kinsmen.

Deva Keralam
ug नान्त्ये GST मन्दे लग्नात्रिकोणगे। । १३०५। |
गोच च यायादरिष्ठं च पितामहः!
तदभावे च सिंहादो मन्दे वक्रेअतिचारगे। । 23081 |
1305-1306. Transits: Grand-father (of a
Guha Nadiamsa native) will be endangered when
Saturn transits the end of Gemini, or initial part
of Cancer, identical with a trine. In the absence
of Saturn proving ineffective in such a transit
Saturn in retrogression or accelerated motion in
the initial part of Leo will be certain to endanger
the grand-father.
विपद्दाये राहुभुक्तौ पितामहमृतिं वदेत।
द्शवर्षत्परं चैव WERT च प्रजायते। । १२३०७। |
1307. Dasa periods: For a Guha Nadiamsa
native, after his tenth year of age, Rahu’s sub
period in third dasa will prove fatal to paternal
grand-father.
लोके धन्यक्षयादीनि पितृव्यश्च प्रपीडितः।
सम्पद्दाये सन्धिकाले BA शनि सुयुते। । १३०८।।
स्वदेशप्रभुनाशः TRS महाविपत्।
मिथुनान्ते = मन्दे वक्रेअक्तिचारगे। । १३०९। |
सम्पद्दाये व Wa |
on Seems । | १३१०। |
जन्मतारदशन्ते च
1308-1310. Miscellaneous: The native’s
paternal relatives will be troubled due to loss of
grains (crops etc.) in the said Rahu bhukti as
above. In the junctions of 3rd and 4th dasa, his
king will be destroyed(?) and danger will strike
the Chola Kingdom(?). When Saturn 1s in
retrograde motion or in acceleration in the end of
Gemini or in the beginning portion of Cancer,
evils will occur in Chola Dasa(?) in his 2nd dasa
and the end of his Janma (first) dasa, death of king
(?) be declared.
Notes: Certain effects where question
marks are given in the above rendering are not
relevant to a natal horoscope. Apparently there
Is 5016 mix Up.
Te चोत्तरे भागे मध्यग्रन्धि wife: |
कालान्ते Git स्यान्नरवाहनमाग्यवान्। । १३११९।
अगम्यागमनं चैव न frat लभते निशि।
उष्णप्रकृतिदेहश्च Beta क्रिमि पीडितः। । १३१२।।
Red त्रयं चैव सन्तानप्रप्तिमादिभेत्।
1311-13121/2. Guhamsa - Second Half: One
born in this part in Aquarius ascendant will suffer
from diseases related to blood vessels of the body
(or from diseases of the joints around hip - Madhya Granthi means also such joints). After some
interval he will become famous and will acquire
conveyances. Due to frequent journeys he will
lack even normal sleep. His body will be hot in
nature. He will (also) suffer from diseases caused
by worms and from itches. He will have two wives,
or even three. He will acquire progeny.
GaN भगिनी ज्येष्ठा भातृप्रियवती सदा। । १२३१३।
cit aa भ्रातुक्लेशवती wad!
विक्रमे षष्ठे शन्यंगारकसंस्थिते। 1 १३१४। |
भगिनी रोगमाप्नेति सदा क्लेशवती भवेत्।
1313-13141/2. Dhruva Nadiamsa: In the
Nadiamsa entitled Dhruva, following resuits for
Aquarius Lagna be declared. The native’s elder
sister will be dear to her husband and will be
endowed with progeny. She will have grief on
account of coborn. The native of this Nadiamsa
with Saturn and Mars in the 3rd/6th will have such
an elder sister who will be ever troubled by diseases and grief.
Notes: Dhruva Nadiamsa extends from 4
deg. 12’ to 4 deg. 24 of a movable sign; from 25
deg. 36’ to 25 deg 48’ of an immovable sign; and
from 19 deg. 12’ to 19 deg. 24 of a common sign.
TSR चोत्तरे भागे तत्नरयोदशवत्सरे । । १३९५। |

सम्पद्दाये विवाहः त्रिषु!
अ मीनादिषु
जन्म भूदक्षिणे भागे ra विवहकृत्। । १३१६1 I
1315-1316. Guha Nadiamsa - second half:
The native born in Aquarius ascendant, in this
segment of the zodiac, will be married in the 13th
year, (or) in the second dasa. At the time of his
marriage the Sun in transit could be found somewhere in three signs commencing from Pisces. His
marriage will occur in the southern part of his
land, particularly the south-east (1.6.106 bride will
hail from such a direction).
दारारूढत्रिकोणर्षं दारजन्मक्षमं fers
देशे यन्न॒ वांशस्थे तत्तिकोणे स्य राशिषु ॥ १२३१७॥
दारजन्यक्षमित्याहुः पूर्व भागे तु जायते।
विपद्दाये मन्दभुक्तावष्टादशकवत्सरे । । १३१८ I
स्याद्गुहांशे च प्रजायते।
भानुवारे विवाहः स्यादुत्तरांशे तु जायते,
1317-13191/2. Guha Nadiamsa - Former half
- Bride: For one born in the former half of this
Nadiamsa the bride’s Janma Rasi could be a trine
from the native’s 7th house, or a trine with reference to the Navamsa occupied by his 7th lord. His
marriage will take place in 10th year (or in)
Saturn’s sub period of third dasa. This will coincide with a Monday during the time of Mesha
Samkranthi, or with the Sun in Aries (1.6. Chaitra
Masa). Monday or Sunday will be the day of
marriage for the native of second half of Guha
Nadiamsa.
र्वशुराधिपतौ bil शुभत्रयसमन्विते। । 83201 |
विवाहानन्तरं सेयं याम वर्णकल्छत्रवान्।
भावाध्याये दारफलं विस्तारं मनुरब्रवीत्। । १३२१।।
1320-1321. Mars with 3 benefics: (For one
born in the former half of Guha Nadiamsa) Mars
ruling the 3rd house placed in the company of
Chandra Kala Nadi
three benefics will give happiness after marriage.
His wife will be dark in complexion. Detailed
results about 7th are given in the portion relating
to the 7th house, (in the sources consulted by the
author).
लग्नात्कर्मगते Wa शुभसंयुतवीक्षिते।
पितामहस्य वंशे वा पतिवंशे तथपि च।
गंगायात्रफलप्रप्तर्गृहाशे नत्र संशयः । । १३२३।।
जीर्णेद्वारण sale wert परिपालकः |
उत्तरांश भ्रातुमूलाद् बहुधरमप्रदो भवेत्। । १३२४। |
1322-1324. Mars in 10th: The native will
have good conduct, and devotion to father if Mars
is placed in the 10th (in Scorpio) for a Guha
Nadiamsa native. His paternal relatives, viz.
grand- father, uncle etc. will earn the good fruits
of visiting Ganges and other related pilgrimage
centers. The native will repair dilapidated
temples and the like. These apply to former half
of Guha Nadiamsa in Aquarius ascendant. If
birth be in second half of this Nadiamsa, with
Mars in the 10th, the native’s brother will be very
charitable (1.6. he will do good acts relating to old
temples etc).
दशमांगारको यस्य लग्नेवा सप्तमेअपि वा।
न तं मुंचति या लक्षीःलज्जा कुलवधूमिव।। १३२५
अजन्मप्रभृति श्रीमान् गुहाशे नत्र संशयः |
1325-13251/2. Wife: The native of Guha
Nadiamsa in Aquarius ascendant with Mars in the
ascendant, or in the 7th/10th will beget a bride
who will be so splendorous as to cause shame even
to Goddess Lakshmi. He will be wealthy right
from birth.
मन्दुंशगेअष्ठमे चन्द्रे कुम्भलग्न तु जायते॥ १३२६॥
लर्गनेशक्रान्तराशीशलग्नचन्द्रत्निकोणगे।
शुमदृष्टिश्चिरायुष्यं पापदृष्टिर्व्यथा भवेत्। | 23201 |

Deva Keralam 12]
1326-1327. Life-span: The Aquarius ascendant native, with the Moon in the 8th house in
Capricorn/Aquarius Navamsa will be endowed
with a long life provided a trine counted from (1)
the sign occupied by Saturn (2) the ascendant
Aquarius (3) the Moon sign is aspected by a
benefic. If however there be a malefic aspect, the
result of long life will go astray, [causing a short
life].
स्वोच्चे waa det स्ववर्गशे sere
PART बलं स्वल्पं पपे पापांशगे शुभम्।। १३२८॥
पापांशगे पापखेटे शुभांशे PRT
सम्पद्दशन्त्ये निर्याण गुहाशे तु प्रजायते। । १३२९। ।
1328-1329. Physical strength: The Moon in
exaltation, or in own sign will give an Aquarius
native happiness while 71 the sub divisions
belonging to Cancer she will give exceeding physical strength. If she be in benefic divisions, the
native’s physical strength will be less. Malefics in
malefic divisions will prove auspicious (for physical strength). Malefics in malefic divisions and
benefics in benefice divisions will cause the end of
a Guha Nadiamsa native in the last portion of
third dasa.
मन्दांशगे निशानधि (त्वष्टमे ज्वरगण्डवान्।
नाडीफलं जातकेष् योजयेत्कालवित्तमः। । १२३३०।।
षष्ठे चन्द्रे तत््रिकोणे मन्दे कुजसमन्विते।
यम्टीयोगजातस्य यमटद्रयनाशनम्। । १३३९ |
जन्मभे च तृतीयाब्दे यमले योगजातके।
aie जीविते च यमठ्गंशफलं शुभम्।। १३३२।।
1330-1332. Twins: One born in Guha
Nadiamsa will incur a dangerous fever in his Sth
year if the Moon is in 8 Navamsa of Saturn. The
Moon in the 6th house having Saturn-Mars in a
{1116 thereof will cause Yamala Yoga which will
indicate birth of twins who will incur danger in 3rd
year of age. If they survive, auspicious results will
follow.
षष्ठे मन्दे धने चन्द्रे स्थिरलग्ने तु जायते।
वालरिष्टप्रकृवीत् जीविते पितृनाशनम्। । १३३३। |
मृतावस्थगते चन्दे षण्मासे मृतिमादिशेत्।
तृतीयाब्दे जीविते च षष्ठाव्दे मरणं ध्रुवम् | १३३४। |
षष्ठे चन्दरेअष्टमे. चन्द्रे षष्ठब्दे वा मरिष्यति।
जीविते स्वपितुर्माुर््रतुर्वाभरिष्ठमेव च । । १३२५ |
1333-1335. Balarishta: One born in an immovable ascendant with Saturn in the 6th and the
Moor in the Znd will incur infantile mortality. If
he escapes, destruction of his father will follow. If
the Moon be simultaneously in Mrithavastha (in
extremis) death will strike in the sixth month
(from the time of birth). (In the absence of such
an end) death will be certain in the 3rd/6th year.
The Moon in the 6th (or Saturn in the 6th) while
Saturn (or the Moon) is in the 8th will bring
effects of infantile mortality. Alternatively evils
will strike the native’s parents and coborn.
Note: Sloka 1335 is rendered after some
reconstruction of the relevant part as Ashtame
Mande.
- 1 । मकरलग्नम्-(करन््रश्ट) (नाडी) । ।
Capricorn Ascendant — (Kantha Nadiamsa)
(ind Nadi)
कन्तांशगे पूर्वभरगे मृगलग्ने तु जायते।
विप्रजन्मा सुखी नित्यं चतुर्थोभयं प्रकीर्तितः। । १३२३६। |
1336. Self 4th Issue: One born in the former
half Kanthaa Nadiamsa, in Capricorn ascendant, will be a Brahmin, be ever happy and will be
the fourth issue.
Notes: Kanthaa Nadiamsa extends from 6
deg. to 6 deg. 12’ of a movable sign; from 23 deg.
+8" to 24 deg. of an immovable sign; from 21 deg.
to 21 deg. 12° of a common sign.
लग्नेशे व्ययरशिस्थे सागरप्न्त्यपट्टणे।
दक्षिणेत्तरवीथीषु जननं वासमाप्नुखत्। । 83391 |

1337. Birth Place: If the ascendant lord
Saturn is in the 12th house (in Sagittarius) birth
will be in a city on the sea-shore. The street of
birth and living will be south-north spread.
Notes: The Trimsamsa of Venus in
Capricorn covers the first five degrees of
Capricorn. But the Nadiamsa under discussion
does not fall in Trimsamsa of Venus. Apparently
birth shoudl be either in Kanthaa Nadiamsa (6
deg. to 6 deg. 12’) in Capricorn, or in the first 5
degrees of Capricorn in Venusian Trimsamsa.
कान्ताशे मकरे YRRRIRT के Tea
रक्तवर्णो मध्यगाक्र स्त्रीलोल सुरतप्रियः। । १३२८।
तमोगुणप्रधानश्च बुद्धिमान् — मुवाचकः।
भाषान्तरपरिज्ञाता द्रव्यार्जनसम्थकः। । १३३९।।
हास्यसेवापरो नित्यं भोगस्तरीसरसप्रियः।
नानाजातिवधूसंगी प्रसवग्रहनाशवान् | । १३४० । |
1338-1340. Venus Trimsamsa: One born in
Kanthaa Nadiamsa in Capricorn Lagna in
Venus’s Trimsamsa will be blood-red in complexion, be of medium build, be fond of women
and coition. He will be ignorant, intelligent and
soft-spoken, excel in knowledge of foreign languages, be skilful in acquisition of wealth, jocular
in disposition and be ever fond of enjoying
pleasures from women. He will join females of
various castes. He will prove inauspicious for his
family of birth. (The words Prasava Graha make
no sense. These should be Prasava Gruha meaning the house in which one 15 born).
SRI मकरे लग्ने BRST केअपि वा।
रूपवान्सुभगो दक्षः प्रसननमुखनेत्रवान्। । १३४६१। |
नृत्यगीत प्रवीणश्च गन्धमाल्याम्बरप्रियः।
द्रत्रिशाब्दात्परं भाग्यं त्रिंशोपरि विशेषतः। । १३४२ |
1341-1342. Effects - continued: The native
will have a charming appearance, be fortunate, be
(generally) skilful and will be endowed with attractive face and eyes. He will be skilful in dance
Chandra Kala Nadi
and music and be fond of scents, garlands and
dress. Following his 32nd year, prosperity will
dawn. Particularly after the 33rd year.
दुश्चिक्याधिपपौ जीवे स्वोच्चे स्वक्षत्रकेन्द्रग।
सुवासिनी भगिन्येका बाल्ये चारिष्ठ माप्नुयात्।
सूतिकाग्रहदोषेण त्वरिष्टं न : | । १३४४। |
i ष्ट ।
ज्येष्ठभ्रातृफलं चेति कालान्तरे सुपुत्रवान्। । १३४५। |
सूतिकाग्रहदोषेण त्वरिष्टं मुनिपुगवः।
1343-13451/2. Coborn: The 3rd lord Jupiter
in own sign, or in exaltation or in an angle from
Capricorn ascendant, will cause destruction of
older coborn, although the native may be endowed with after-borns. He will have a sister who
will reside in a respectable abode and who will
contact infantile mortality, due to blemishes in
birth family. Evils to older and younger coborn
will (thus) be evident, according to sages. His
older coborn will have progeny.
Note: The expression "Soothika Graha"
should be "Soothika Griha" in §.1344 and
S.13451/2 meaning home of birth, if not delivery
chamber here and accordingly the translation is
made. Anyway, these lines repeat twice while
only once it is meaningful.
सम्पद्दाये 5 bh enh a
नवमाधिपतौ SA पपे रम्रत्रिकोणगे।
कान्तांशगे पूर्वभागे बाल्ये पितृविनाशवान्। । ave |
सुताधिपद शाकाले लाभाधिपतिभुकितिषु।
चतुरब्दे पित्ररिष्ठं विदेशे च मृति वम्। । १३४९।।
1346-1349. Parents’ death: The 4th lord
Mars joming Ketu in Leo Navamsa will in the
native’s 21st year, as the Sun is in his northern
course, see the death of his mother. Alternatively

Deva Keralam
in the sub period ruled by Ketu (so placed at
birth) in the main period that is the 2nd in sequence from birth. If the 9th lord Mercury is with
2 malefic in the Sth or its trine, one born in former
half of Kanthaa Nadiamsa of Capricorn ascendant will lose his father in childhood. Or in the
sub period of the 11th lord during the major
period of the 5th lord. Danger to father will also
be possible during the native’s fourth year of age,
in a foreign place.
पंचमाधिपतौ षष्ठे षष्ठेशे निधनस्थिते।
कानतांशे मकरे लग्ने पितृसंस्कारदीनवान्। | 340 |
सिंहायनगते सूर्य स्वपितारिष्ट माप्नुयात्
1350-13501/2. Paternal rites: The native of
Kanthaa Nadiamsa in Capricorn Lagna will be
deprived of the good fortunes of performing the
last offices to his father if the Sth lord is in the 6th
as the 6th lord is relegated to the 8th house. The
Sun in Leo will cause (early) evils to father (of
Kanthaamsa native).
चन्द्ररूढगते शुक्रे लग्नेशेन निरीक्षिते। । 33421 |
स्वपिता धनिकः श्रीमान् बहुमित्रत्मवत्सलः।
पंचसंख्यायकाः A ्सुखी।
जन्मदाये पितुन्सस्य त्वरिष्टे : 1 । १३५३। I
1351-1353. Other results for father: One
born in Kanthaa Nadiamsa in Capricorn ascendant whose Venus is conjunct the Moon
(Chandraaroodhagathe Sukre = Venus in Janma
Rasi) will enjoy following effects about his father.
The father will be wealthy, will have many dear
friends, many kinsmen and will have nine coborns
out of whom five will be sisters and three will be
brothers. One (out of the said nine) will in the
native’s Janma dasa (first dasa) incur danger (i.e.
will expire).
i सोदरः पंच मातुलौ द्रौ विरायुषौ।
We पुर्वं मातुलारिष्टमादिशेप्। | १३५४। |
1354. Mother: With Venus placed as above,
the native’s mother will have five coborns while
two will be endowed with long lives. The mother
will pre-decease the native’s father.
सुतेशे रिपुराशिस्थे कारके रविसंयुते।
THE We जायते च मृतप्रजा। । १३५५1 |
1355. Children: One born in this Nadiamsa
with the 5th lord Venus placed in the 6th house as
Jupiter, signifying progeny, is with the Sun, will
have dead children born to his spouse. His wife
will incur miscarriages as well.
ale मक्रे लग्ने मन्दे Tay
ad मृतप्रजाबहूत्वान्। । १२३५६। |
मान्दीरूपं हिरण्येन कालज्ञाय प्रदापयेत्।
1356-13561/2. Curse: Due to astrologer’s
curse one will beget dead children if Saturn is in
the 8th house or one of its trines. This applies to
birth in Kanthaa Nadiamsa in Capricorn. Donation of a golden image of Mandi to an astrologer
will cause relief from this evil.
कान्तांशे मकरे लग्ने जूके रविसमन्विते। । 23401 |
कालान्तरे सुतप्रप्तिरयूनाधिपदशन्त्ये |
शीतज्वरभयर्तश्च Wea प्रदापयेत्। । १३५८ | |
देहारोग्यं शुभं चेति आत्मप्राणहसणि च।
1357-13581/2. The luminaries: If the birth is
in Kanthaa Nadiamsa in Capricorn as the Sun is
in Libra, birth of children will be after a long
interval. The end of the dasa of the Moon ruling
the 7th house will cause fear from cold fevers. To
overcome this evil, donation of an image of the
zodiac be done. Then health will be recovered.
रन््राधिपदशकाले दोषग्रहदशन्तरे। । १२३५९। |
जञतिबन्धुजनारिष्टं प्रवासे व्यधिपीडितः।
सम्पद्दशन्त्ये घनलाममेति चोचोगसिद्धि प्रवदन्ति ,
विपद्दशायं सुतदारपीडां मन्दन्त सौम्यफलं करोति
विपद्दाये राहुभुक्तौ संचारं ४ ५५) ।
पापदाये प्रपीडिदि भ्रातृवर्गेण SE । १३६२। ।

124 Chandra Kala Nadi
TARR तथा विरन््ाचतर्विशतिवत्सरे।
an east-west spread street, in a house facing the
विपद्याये मध्यखण्डे ast भवति yar) 183631 । north.
लक्ष्मीकराक्षवानित्यं पं प्रनायते।
रनु aaa org वीथि
वहिशे दक्षिणेत्तरवीधिषु।
जननं वासमाप्नुयात्। । १३६५।।
1339-1365. Dasa effects: In the sub period
of an afflicted planet during the main period of
the 8th lord, the native’s kinsmen will face danger
and the native will himself be diseased in a foreign
place. He will gain wealth in the concluding part
of the 2nd dasa and will have professional gains.
His third dasa will generally inflict troubles to his
wife and children, while the sub period of Saturn
thereof will give beneficial results. In the sub
period of Rahu in 3rd dasa, travels and financial
improvements will come to pass. Malefic periods
will cause troubles to coborn. In the 24th year the
native will face difficulties in dealing with others.
The middle one-third portion of Vipath (3rd)
dasa will cause difficulties due ot indigestion (i.e.
stomachial disorders). He will ever be blessed
with the mercy of Goddess Lakshmi (in general).
He will be the fifth issue, or the third or the fourth
(i.e. he will not be among the first two). When the
4th lord Mars is with Saturn, birth and dwelling
of the Kanthaa Nadiamsa native will be in northsouth spread street in the region of Maharnava.
। । धनुर्लग्नम् (कान्वंशः) (नाडी) । ।
Sagittarius Ascendant —
(Kantha Nadiamsa)
(० Nadi)
TRY धनुराशे धनुर्लग्ने विप्रजन्मा दरिद्रकः।
महारण्यनदी प्रसूतिर्नात्र संशयः । । १२३६६ |
1366. Sagittarius Ascendant - second half of
Kanthaa Nadiamsa: One born in this Nadiamsa’s
second half will be a poor Brahmin, His birth will
` bein aregion surrounded by forests and rivers, in
नात्र MoE । १३६४। | धनुर्लग्ने पूर्वभागे Te गुरूसमन्विते।
श्यामवणौ मध्यगात्रो भोगस्त्रीभोगलोलुपः। । १३६७। |
रजोगुणप्रधानश्च लिपिलेख्यविशारदः।
इगितज्ञो गुणग्राही वर्णव्यापार जीवनः। । १३६८। |
1367-1368. First half - Kanthaa Nadiamsa:
A Sagittarius ascendant native, with former half
of Kanthaa Nadiamsa, having Jupiter in the 8th
house, will be of dark complexion, of mediumbuild and be fond of enjoying pleasures from
women. He will be passionate, skilful in authorship, will grasp others’ thoughts and will have a
profession prescribed for his caste (or family). He
will be rich with paternal inheritances and will
have many relatives.
पित्रर्जितधनाढ्यश्च वहुज्ञातिजनेर्युतः |.
उत्तराशे प्रजातस्य ग्रामणीर्व्यवसायकः।
पूर्वापरविहीनश्च जन्माब्दे पितृनाशकः। । १३६९ । ।
बाल्ये दारिद्यमापन्नो मातुलावासवासवान्।
1369-13691/2. Second half - Kanthaa
Nadiamsa: One born in the second half of this
Nadiamsa (with no reference to Jupiter’s position) will be an agriculturist in a village (or his
calling will be in villages) and will have none
before, none after him, (i.e. lonely child). His
father will quit the world in the very first year of
birth of the native and the native will in childhood
experience poverty. He will live in his maternal
uncle’s home.
पूर्वभागे प्रजातस्य पूर्वापरविनाशनम्। । 23\90 1 |
जातस्य जननात्यश्चातस्वपिता भग्ययोगवान्।
धातुमूलकलमिन रसवर्गादिवद्धिकृत। । १३७१ |
1370-1371. Former haif: The native of this
part of Kanthaa Nadiamsa will have his pre-born
and after-born destroyed. After his birth, he will
cause prosperity to his father. He will be skilful in
jobs related to metals and fluids.
त्रिषष्ठाष्टमगे सौम्ये मन्दे रवियुतेक्षिते।
बाल्ये मातृविनाशादि सापत्नीमातृयोगवान्। । १३७२। |

Deva Keralam 125
स्वपितुदी्धमायुष्यं गुप्तकामातुरो भवेत्।
स्वपितुस्सोदराश्चेदि पक्षसंख्याजथ BST! | १३७३ । |
भगिन्यश्चाष्ट संख्यायका द्वित्रिसख्या सुवासिनी
pc a kills 1183981 |
angi © वहवः स्मृताः|
पत्रमूलाद्विचारिणी।
अदृष्टयत्नयोगेन कालान्तर सुपुत्रिणी | १३७६ | |
1372-1376. Parents: If Mercury is in the
3rd/6th/8th house while Saturn is in the company
of or in aspect to the Sun, the native’s mother will
pass away in childhood, and a step-mother will
step in his life. His father will be long-lived and
will have secret sexual urges. There will be fifteen
or sixteen coborns to him (father). Eight of them
will be sisters two of whom will live in respectable
abodes. His paternal uncle will also be long-lived,
be endowed with progeny. One of them will have
many children, even out of whom female children
will exceed male children. The native’s first paternal aunt will become a widow, but be long- lived.
Because of step-mother, the said aunt will worry
about children. Due to her own good fortunes, a
female child will be born to her after a long
interval.
उत्तराशे प्रजातस्य पितृव्ये st इ
कालान्ते महाव्याधिः पल्य सह
पूर्वभागे धनुर्लग्ने चनद्रनादीष |
SORT चन्द्रनाडी नास्तीति मनुरब्रवीत्। 1 83921 |
1377-1378. Second Half - Kanthaa
Nadiamsa: Two of the native’s paternal uncles
will be long-lived. He will be troubled by a great
disease, after a long interval. His wife will also die
along with him. Details for first half of this
Nadiamsa in Sagittarius Lagna have been explained in Chandra Nadi, while second half was
not narrated.
Tere भगे pci जायते।
जन्मप्रभृति दरिद्रं ध । । १३७९ ।
सन्तानार्थं (व स्यज्जाते जाते सुते मृते।
्षमदाये दशन्तरनिवासकृत्। । १३८०।।
1379-1380. Mudgara Nadiamsa - Sagittarius ascendant: Onc born in the second half of
Mudgara Nadiamsa in Sagittarius ascendant will
be in poverty right from birth and will be a
Purohit of the town (family priest performing
ceremonies prescribed by scriptures). He will be’
restless to have progeny as he will beget children
who will only pass away as they are born. Danger
will occur to his spouse in his fourth Dasa. He will
in the same Dasa live in foreign lands.
Notes: Mudgara Nadiamsa appears in some
places as Mudgala.
This Nadiamsa extends from 4 deg. 36’ to 4
deg. 48’ of a movable sign; from 25 deg. 12’ to 25
deg. 24 of an immovable sign and from 19 deg.
36’ to 19 deg. 48’ of a common sign.
These two slokas give effects for birth in
Mudgara Nadiamsa in Sagittarius (19 deg. 36’ to
19 deg. 48’) without reference to any planet as
such. Tersely, the native will never be happy in
terms of financial acquisition, will have children
with short life- spans and his wife will pass away
early.
Since a great deal of prosperity is indicated
for birth in 2nd half of this Nadiamsa vide slokas
1384-1386, we may conclude that the above effects are for birth in first half of the said Mudgara
Nadiamsa, 1.6. 19 deg. 36’ to 19 deg. 42’ in Sagittarius.
मीने ग॒रूयुते चन्द्रे Tre सुपुण्यवान्।
कालान्तरे च त्तशुद्धिरापत्सन्यासयोगवान्। । १२३८१। ।
1381. Ascetic order: For one born in
Mudgara Nadiamsa in Sagittarius Lagna if the
Moon is in Pisces along with Jupiter, there will
occur merits of bathing in the Ganges after some
time. He will emerge with a pure heart and will
take to ascetic order due to a family calamity.
FER धनुर्लग्ने चोतराशे प्रनायते।
लग्नादष्टमगे केक दशयं मृत्युमापतुयत्। । १३८२ । ।
1382. Mudgara Nadiamsa - death: The
native’s death will take place in Ketu Dasa if Ketu

15 placed in the 8th in Cancer for birth in the
captioned Nadiamsa’s second half, in Sagittarius
ascendant.
एकाशीतिसमे मृत्युं खष्य रोगेण कर्शितः।
पक्षशूलादि पीडा स्यत्पुरापापस्य हेतुना। | १३८३1 |
1383. He will pass away in his 25th year. He
will, due to the sins of his past birth, suffer from
diseases like paralysis, Cardiacarrest etc. (This is
for 2nd half of Mudgara Nadiamsa.)
ूर्वभरगे धनुर्लग्ने फलं विस्तारमादिशेत्।
सम्पद्दाये क्वचिद्भाग्यं विपदूदाये विशेषतः। । १३८४ |
पितामहस्यारिष्टं स्यात्तत्पल्यस्त्वथवा तथ।
तुलाशनौ चोतरर्ध वृश्चिके गोचरे शनो। । १३८५। |
स्वजनाप्तजनारिष्टं कलहेन भविष्यति।
अतिच्छिद्रकलपिन व्यकुलानन्तरं GET । १२३८६ । ।
1384-1386. First half of Mudgara Nadiamsa: Explained now are effects for this part in
Sagittarius ascendant. Some prosperity will be
acquired by the subject in his second Dasa while
abundance of the same will appear in the 3rd
Dasa. In the said Dasa, either the native’s wife or
his paternal grandfather will be endangered.
When Saturn in transit passes through the second
half of Libra or through the sign Scorpio, disputes
with and danger to the native’s near and dear will
strike on the scene. The native will be happy only
after a great deal of agitation.
Notes: From sloka 1384 to 1387, the text
deals with birth in 2nd half of Mudgara Nadiamsa
in Sagittarius, 1.6. the ascendant therein should be
between 19 deg. 42’ and 19 deg. 48’ of arc.
वित्ते राहुदशाकाले अन्तर्दये स्वमू्वितषु।
पापे कायव्रणदीनि ज्वरोपद्रवपीडितः। । १३८७। |
1387. Physical illness: Should Rahu be in
the 2nd house, the Dasa-bhukti of Rahn will bring
physical distress, fever etc.
मनुरब्दे विवाहः स्यादेकादशकवत्सर ।
स्वपिता धनिकःश्रीमान् मध्ये वयसि भोगवान्।। १२३८८।।
अष्टादशे faery water भविष्यति।
Chandra Kala Nadi
1388-13881/2. Marriage etc. - The 14th year
will be the year of marriage for one born in the
first half of Mudgara Nadiamsa in Sagittarius.
Further the eleventh year of the native will cause
wealth to his father. During his middle age the
father will enjoy pleasures. 18th year will be gainful through paternal uncles.
TTR पूर्वभागे सुतेशे STITT । 838681 ।
सन्तानार्थं SAGA च कालान्तरसुपुत्रवान्।
1389-13891/2. Children: If the 5th lord Mars
is in a comfortable division one born in former
half of Mudgara Nadiamsa will (initially) be worried for children (but) after a long interval will get
ISSUES.
Notes: Zoshanamsa is rendered as "comfortable division" viz. Navamsa etc. suitable to
Mars. I could not locate a Nadiamsa with the
name Toshana. The meaning of the word Toshana
is anything that gives satisfaction.
There seem to be generally obstacles for
Mudgara Nadiamsa native of former half, in
Sagittarius. Such difficulties will well apply to
second half of this Nadiamsa vide sloka 1380
supra.
सम्पद्दाये तथा विन्द्यात् फलमेवमुदाहू तम्। । 2380 |
पितृव्यपुत्रपीडादि स्वपिता च तथा भवेत्।
1390-13901/2. First half Mudgara Nadiamsa: The native’s marriage will occur in the second
Dasa. This apart, troubles to father and cousins
will be experienced.
ar al काले जीवे Pacer यदि। 1 १३९१।
रसव्गादिलाभः स्याद्धातुव गौदिलापकृत्।
स्वपित्रदिमहत्सौख्यं धनव । । ६३९२ ।
1391-1392. Rahu Dasa: Inthe dasa of Rahu,
and in Jupiter’s sub period the native will gain
through liquids, juices etc. if Jupiter at birth is
placed amidst benefics. There will be additionally
gas from metals etc. Great happiness will occur
for father and other (paternal) relatives.

Deva Keralam
पाके राहौ चोत्तरार्धं स्वप्राबल्यधनार्जनम्।
बहुन्यापारसिद्धिः स्यात् त्रयोविंशतिवत्स । ! १३९३। |
1393. The second half of Rahu Dasa will give
wide fame and wealth. The native will have many
business activities in the 23rd year.
पंचमेशेअथवा चेति पुण्यतीर्थप्रदो भवेत्।
्रिंशेपरिविशेष स्याद्धनलाभं सुतोद्भवम्। । १३९४। |
1394, The 5th lord’s dasa will give benefits
of visiting shrines. Financial gains and birth of
children will occur after the 30th year.
लग्नाधिपदशाकाले सुखाधिपतिभुक्तिषु।
पित्रादीनामरिष्ट स्यादादायादधिकं व्ययम्। । १३९५। |
1395. Ascendant lord: In the dasa of the
lord of the ascendant and in the sub peiod ruled
by the lord of the 4th (.e. Jupiter dasa and Jupiter
bhukti), following effects will materialize. Evils
to father etc. and expenditure exceeding income.
न qa कमेशे oa |
स्वपिता दीर्घमायुष्यं बाल्ये ` । । १३९६।
1396. Parents: The Sun in a 7216065
Navamsa while the 7th lord Mercury is with Venus
- the native’s father will be long-lived. But his
mother will pass away during childhood.
कुम्भके seg tli iat वणिल्यापारजीवनम्।
1397. The Sun in Kumbha: Should the Sun be
in the KumbhaRasi along with the aspect of
Saturn, the subject will live by trading activities
but will be foolish in disposition. His income will
be somewhat from illegal means.
मुद्गराशे पूव॑भागे पित्रजिंतधनाढ्यवान्।
स्वार्जितं च विपदूदाये क्षेमदाये विशेषतः। । 23421 ।
1398. Paternal wealth: One of former half of
Mudgara Nadiamsa will be wealthy by paternal
sources. His 4th and 2nd dasas will give selfearned wealth worthy of mention (or the 2nd dasa
will give more such wealth than the 4th dasa could
give).
Notes: For first half of Mudgara Nadiamsa
in Sagittarius, vide slokas 1379-1380, it is stated
that the native will be in poverty right from birth
whereas the current sloka, 1398, indicates the
subject being wealthy through paternal sources.
Obviously these effects will come to pass only
when the Sun is in the 10th house in aspect to
Saturn. Thus the condition laid down in sloka
1397 applies upto sloka 1404 infra.
स्वप्रावल्यं च लभते नवरत्नादिलाभवान्।
पश्चिमोत्तरदिग्भागे व्यापारधनवृद्धिकृत्। । १३९९। |
1399. Other Effects: The said native will
gain fame and be rich through acquisition of the
nine kinds of precious gems. His wealth will expand by his business activities in north-west direction.
पितृव्यपुत्रमात्रदिग्रामो गोघन्यसंकूलः।
अन्तशिष्द्रकलपिन व्याकुलानन्तर् AGL! | १४००। |
क्षेमाधिपदशमध्ये पितुश्चारिष्ठमादिरेत्।
कर्किवृश्चिकमासेन TORRY वा। । १४०१। |
अपम्त्युपयप्राप्ति शन्तिं कुर्याद्विचक्षणः ।
yt Nar a ष्टमादिशेत्। | १४०२।।
दशन्त्य
बन्धुन्याज्यकलपिन त्वादायाद्धिकन्ययम्। । १४०२। |
1400-1403. He will gather quadrupeds etc.
After some internal squabbles and agony, he will
be happy. In the middle part of 4th dasa danger
to father will have to be feared, or in the dasa of
Navamsa dispositor of the 8th lord, when the
transit Sun is in Cancer/Scorpio. This being untimely death, propitiations be done. There will
also be evils to step mother and paternal uncle
(during such dasas). In the end’ (of these dasas,
after remedies) happiness will prevail and the
native will gain through many business activities.
Due to litigations with his relatives, his expenditure will exceed his income.

Chandra Kala Nadi
अयुताधिकनिष्काणि पक्षसख्याय वा भवेत्। } १४०४ | former half of Mudgara Nadiamsa, when the tran1404. The expenditure (as above) will exceed ten thousand gold coins (4yutham =
10,000); it may be even 15 (thousand gold coins).
कमेशे रविसयुक्ते त्वन्यासंगं च विन्दति।
Hoa रागी द्विकठत्रसुपुत्रवान्। | १४०५। |
1405. Spouse: Should the 7th lord be in the
company of the Sun, the native will join other
women. He will have two wives, be passionate and
will be endowed with children.
अमलायेगके जीवे देवनब्राहम् णभक्तिमान्।
शिवभक्तिविशेषं॑स्वाद्दानधर्माग्रणीर्भवेत्। | १४०६। |
1406. Amala Yoga: Jupiter causing Amala
Yoga (being in Virgo) will make the native honour
Gods and Brahmins. He will be specially devoted
to Lord Siva and be supreme among men of
charitbale disposition.
सुन्दरंशे पूर्वभागे प्रत्फ्दाये तथम् iI
ज्ञातिवर्गजनारिष्टं मु वर्गे तः। । १४०७ |
द्वीपान्तरादिवस्तूनां लाभ भवति निश्चयः
1407-14071/2. Fifth Dasa: One born in
former half of Mudgara Nadiamsa in Sagittarius
ascendant will get mixed results during the 5th
dasa. Danger to relatives, and gain through articles from foreign will also follow.
दयूनाधिपदशाकाले wafrofageagt । १४०८ । |
धनाधिपान्ते काले त्वष्टसप्ततिवत्सरे।
एकोनसप्ततौ वर्षे HATHA स्मृतम्। । ९४०९ |
चापादित्रयगे मासे चोत्तरायणगे रवौ।
bi a सत्यं मुद्गरांशे तु जायते! । १४१० |
नै प्रजातस्य पापपुण्यफलं ५७
पूर्वभागे प्रजातस्य विप्रजन्मा सुखी
1408-1411. Death: In the major period of
the 7th lord, and in the sub period of the 8th or
2nd lord, (or) in the 78th year, or in the 69th year
(i.e. 69th/78th year) death will strike the native of
sit Sun moves in any of the three signs commencing from Sagittarius in the northern course of the
Sun. This native will be a Brahmin with effects of
sins and virtues in equal proportions.
Note: Sagittarius journey of the Sun is not
included in Uttarayana.
11 कटक लग्नम् (चम्पकांश) । ।
Cancer Ascendant — Champaka Nadiamsa
चम्भकशि पूर्वभागे कुव्टरि तुं प्रजायते।
विप्रजन्मा सुखी नित्यं सीमन्ततनय स्मृतः।॥ १४१२॥
महानदीप्रान्त्देशे शिवालयसमीपगे।
दकषणेततसवीधोष प्रागे जननं स्मृतम्।
1412-14131/2. Cancer ascendant - Champaka Nadiamsa: The native of first half of Champaka Nadiamsa, in Cancer ascendant, will be
aBrahmin, be ever happy and will be the first issue
of the family. He is born near a temple of Lord
Siva, in the Mahanadi region, in a big city, in his
relatives’ house. The street of birth is spread from
north to the south. The house is located in the
eastern corner.
Notes: Champaka Nadiamsa is spelt out as
Chambaka Nadiamsa (in Sanskrit text also).
Champaka Nadiamsa rules from 5 deg. to 5
deg 12’ of a movable sign; from 24 deg. 48’ to 25
deg. of an immovable sign; and from 20 deg. to 20
deg. 12’ of a common sign.
The first half of this Nadiamsa in Cancer
extgends from 5 deg. to 5 deg. 6’ of space.
चम्पकांशे Peaks लग्नान्त्ये चापशीतगौ। । १४१४।
रूपवान् |
अदृष्टशाली धर्मात्मा TEL १४१५।
1414-1415. Other effects: He will be goodlooking, intelligent, will have a charming face and
charming eyes, be fortunate, charitable, blood-

Deva Keralam 129
red in complexion and will have an auspicious
appearance.
Notes: In the 2nd line of sloka 1414, the
following expression is found which is not added
to the English rendering to avoid confusion.
"Lagnaanthye Chaapaseethage" which does
not clearly convey the condition laid down to give
the said effects. Lagnaanthye means end of
(Cancer) ascendant. Chaapaseethagau means
the Moon in Sagittarius. Dhanurasige replaces
the latter expression in some texts, which means
(some planet) in Sagittarius.
Apparently, the description of the native as
above shall exist if the Moon is in Sagittarius while
birth is in Cancer Lagna’s Champaka Nadiamsa,
in first half.
सृत्तिको TRI वैदिकाचारतत्परः।
परगितज्ञश्चतुरः Sila । । १४१६ |
हरिशंकरभक्तश्च णपोषकः।
शिवभक्तिर तश्च स्यत् त्यागी बन्धुजनप्रियः ।। १४१७॥
अत्युष्णकटुकद्रव्यमधुरम्लरसप्रियः।
चम्पकांशे पूर्वभागे कर्कटे हि प्रजायते। । १४१८ |
1416-1418. Other effects: In addition, the
native will be pure in character, endowed with
virtues, will follow the code and conduct
prescribed by the Vedas, will be able to know
others’ minds, and will be skilful in Sanskrit language. He willbe a devotee of Lord Siva and Lord
Vishnu, will be of sacrificial disposition aud will
be fond of his relatives. He will like hot, bitter,
sweet and sour juices.
मीनांशकगते सूर्ये सत्यवादी गुरूप्रियः।
सोदर नवसंख्यका अथवा दश सोदरः ॥ १४१९॥
षटसंख्यादीर्घमायुष्यं पंचसंख्चाथवा भवेत्।
सुवासिनी भगिन्येका पूत्रीपुत्रसमन्विता। | १४२० |
एका 7 चैव णी।
तद्दोषपरिहारार्थं नागस्य प्रार्थनां वदेत्।
1419-14211/2. Coborns: The Sun in Pisces
Navamsa will give following effects to the native
of former half of Champaka Nadiamsa, Cancer
Ascendant. The native will have nine or ten
coborns. Five or six of them will be endowed with
long lives. One sister will live in a respectable
abode and will be endowed with sons and
daughters. Another sister will be grief-struck and
will be worried on account of children and will be
troubled by serious abdominal disorders. To overcome these evils, prayers to Naga Raja (Cobra
King) are to be done.
पश्चादटृभरतुफलं चेति मध्ये वयसि waar १४२२॥
देशन्तरादिसंचारी वहुपुत्र्थभाग्यवान्।
अनुजश्रातुयेगेन ग्रामभूम्यधिकारवान्। | १४२३।।
1422-1423. Self: Those were the effects
about coborns for Champaka Nadiamsa former
half birth. As for the native, he will move in
foreign countries, and will be endowed with much
wealth and many sons. He will prosper in his
mid-life. Due to the good fortunes of the children.
of his after-born he will gain lordship over villages
and lands.
षडविंश्दात् ard त्रिंशेपरि Sse |
परस्त्रीसंगवान् कामी HARA AAA । १४२४। ।
1424. Rise in life: He will attain prosperity
after the 26th year, more so after the 30th year.
He will join others’ women, be libidinous and will
beget progeny after some interval (delays).
an चापांशगे चन्द्रे cae face
Ot सौम्यनते काते एकोनद्विंशवत्सरे । । १४२५। |
सिंहायनगते सूर्यं जननीमृतिमदिशेत्।
1425-14251/2. Mother’s death: If the Moon,
being in Vargothama in Sagittarius, is aspected by
the 8th lord (Saturn), the native-will lose his
mother in the dasa of Mars, in Mercv -’s bhukti
(or a benefic’s bhukti) (or) in the 21st year, when
the Sun will be heading towards Leo.
स्वमातृसोदराः सप्त साप्नीमातृयेगवान्। । १४२६। ।
चम्पकशे पूर्वभ्रगे कुलीरे च प्रनायते।
वाहनांशे सुखाधीशे नरवाहनयेगवान्।
सेनामात्यजनस्नेही नृपतित्रयसेवकः। | १४२७। |

130 Chandra Kala Nadi
1426-1427. Other effects: One born in
former half of Champaka Nadiamsa in Cancer
ascendant will have seven maternal uncles, and
will have a step-mother. The 4th lord (Venus) in
the 4th in Navamsa will grant men-born conveyances (palanquins et cetera). He will befriend
people holding ministerial positions. He will
serve three different kings.
Notes: Venus is the 4th lord for Cancer
ascendant. He should occupy the 4th sign
counted from Navamsa ascendant. That is he
should be in 4th in Navamsa chart.
This kind of technique has been widely
adopted by Nadi literature. This is worth following.
sae तु केसरिमहायेग प्रजातस्सुधीः
ऊान्ताभेगरतो महानदनदीयात्राधुरीणस्मुखं |
माधु्याम्लरूचिरस्सहोदरियुतो राजेपोसेवी धनी
त्यागी वाहनवान् प्रसिद्धविभवो वक्ता HASH ॥ १४२८॥
1428. If the 4th lord is in the 10th in Navamsa, while Jupiter and the Moon are in mutual
angles (in Rasi), the native will be very intelligent.
He will be fond of cohabiting with women, be
interested in bathing in sacred rivers and be
happy. He will have liking for sweet and sour
Juices and will have female coborns. He will be in
royal service, be wealthy, sacrificing in disposition, be a fluent speaker and will have two wives.
He will be famous for his wealth (or will occupy
an exalted position - Prasiddha Vibhavo).
नत्यिन्नदाता बहुमानजीवी
गाम्भीर्यमाधुर्यवचोअनिलात्मा।
पुत्री इ सभायां नृपतेः सुप्य
कृशांगयष्टिस्मुमुखी TH । १४२९1 |
1429, He will always perform poor-feeding,
and will live with great honours. His speech will
be majestic and sweet. He will be of windy
temperament, be honoured in royal assemblies,
be emaciated, happy and liberal.
1 ए Hed जातो सचिवो वा चमूपतिः।
तिष्कमीश्वरभाषितम्। | १४३०।
अष्टत्रिंशेअथवा चेति पित्रार्जितघनाढ यवान्
1430-14301/2. Kahala Yoga: One born in
Kahala Yoga will be a minister or an army chief.
He will own more than ten thousand gold coins.
He will speak like a lord (i.e. superior in speech).
His 38th year will give him paternal riches.
Notes: It is not understandable whether
Kahala Yoga is discussed as a general principle or
with reference to Champaka Nadiamsa in Cancer
alone.
Kahala Yoga is formed when the 4th lord
and Jupiter are in mutual angles. Alternatively,
the 4th lord should be in his own sign or in exaltation. He must as well join the lord of the 10th.
For Cancer ascendant, Venus is the lord of
the 4th. He should be in an angle to Mars. Or
Venus should be in Libra/Taurus/Pisces in association with Mars. According to the text,
Kahala Yoga gives wealth exceeding "10,000 gold
coins" while the native’s 38th year will bestow on
him paternal wealth as well.
With Kahala Yoga in general according to
Parasara, the native will be endowed with a complete army of chariots, elephants, horses and 17fantry. He willlord over villages, be energetic and
adventurous.
As per C.G. Rajan, the 3rd kind of Kahala
Yoga is torn thus : The lords of fourth and 9th
should be in mutual angles while the ascendant
lord is endowed with strength.
Foolishness is also a part of Kahala Yoga.
Mantreswara gives a fourth kind of Kahala
Yoga in his Phala Deepika. The dispositor of the
dispositor of ascendant lord should be in exaltation, or own sign, identical with a trine/angle
counted from the ascendant.
Also see notes under sloka 1813 infra.
चम्पकांशे पूर्वभागे मृ तापत्यबहुत्ववान्। । १४३१। I
तदूदोषपरिहारार्थ शिशुमारं प्रदापयेत्। i
पत्रप्रदशिवामन्त्जपादाधानमादिशेत्। । १४३२। |
केल्पोक्तविधिना पूजां -षष्टयुत्तरत्रयम्।
दोषणमयुतं हन्ति संतानं कुरूते सदा। । १४३२।।

Deva Keralam 13]
1431-1433. Dead children and remedies:
One born in the former half of Champaka
Nadiamsa of Cancer ascendant will obtain many
children dead. To surmount such possibilities,
Mantras and Japas for Lord Siva be performed
for 360 (days) whereafter a ten thousand such
blemishes will vanish and the native will beget
(long-living) progeny.
चम्पकाशे Test रिपुराशिगे ।
मातामहः
तत्सुतेषु च य कश्चिद्यतिवित्तापहारकः।
वित्तापहरदोषेण दारिद्यण च पीडितः।। १४३५। |
1434-1435. Grand-father; The grand-father
of the native of first half of Champaka Nadiamsa,
in Cancer Lagna, having the 8th lord in the 6th
house will be famous in the world (1.6. widely
famous), and one of his sons will be somewhat
given to stealing tendencies. Because of these
stealing tendencies he will suffer from poverty.
so eat तु प्रजायते।
मानी दारान्तरसुपुत्रवान्। । १४२६। ।
1436. Wife: The native of the Nadiamsa
under study will have a virtuous wife, be dear to
her, be honourable and will have progeny through
second wife.
अष्टमाधिपतौ क षष्ठेशे व्ययराशिगे।
कर्मे वा हिनुके वापि नैघनेशदशा व्यथा। । १४२७। |
शमिनाडीफलाध्यये विस्तरो योगनिर्णयः।
1437-14371/2. Sorrow: The 8th lord in the
6th, 6th lord in the 12th or in the 10th or in the 4th
will bring sorrow in the Dasa of the 8th lord for
the said subject. These yogas have been
elaborately told in Sani Nadi.
Notes: Jupiter being alone, as the 6th lord,
in the 10th/4th will not be that bad for Cancer
ascendant while his 12th house position will be a
distinct disadvantage. While being so, if the 8th
lord Saturn comes to occupy the 6th, Sagittarius,
the dasa of Saturn will cause sorrow to the native.
लोके प्रख्यातकोर्तिमाम्।। १४३४॥
aaa पापयेगे शनिपुक्तावुपद्रवम्। | १४३८ |
तिलदानात् सदारोग्यं कृष्ण॒धेनुं प्रदापयेत्|
आत्म बन्धुजनारिष्टं भ्रातृवर्गे प्रपौडितः। । १४३९।।
पितामहस्य पपेन सन्तानोत्मत्तिनाशवान्।
तदुदोषपरिहारार्थ गन्ति कुर्याद्विचक्षणः । । १४४० | |
1438-1440. Fourth Dasa: Saturn if conjunct
a malefic will in his sub period cause troubles in
the fourth Dasa. Donation of gingilee and black
cow be done to overcome these troubles. The
native’s relatives and co-born will incur evils,
while the subject will lose his children as they are
born due to the sins of paternal grand-father.
Suitable propitiations be done to safeguard from
these ills.
कान्तांशकगते सूर्य कममिन्यंशगतेपि वा । .
चम्पकांशे प्रजातस्य स्वपिता बाल्ययेगवान्। । १४४१।
1441. Father’s prosperity : During
childhood prosperity will occur to the father, if
the native of Champaka Nadiamsa in Cancer
Lagna has the Sun in Kantaa Nadiamsa, or
Kamini Nadiamsa.
Notes: Kamini Nadiamsa occurs from 28
deg. to 28 deg. 12’ in a movable sign; from 1 deg.
43? to 2 deg. in an immovable sign; anc from 13
deg. to 13 deg. 12’ of space of a common sign.
The Sun is required to be either in Kanthaa
Nadiamsa or in Kamini Nadiamsa of any sign.
Also see sloka 1454 for additional results,
viz. ‘struck by paralysis’ for the same position of
the Sun.
वित्तेशे सुतराशिगे कुजयुते चन्दर स्थनगे
जीवक्षत्रगते कन नत जीवेक्षित्रे तत्र वा।
मध्ययुर्घनवान् ग्रामाधिपः पण्डितः
त्खगी भेगसमन्वितो दिवि भुविहिः
1442. Other results: The subject of Champaka Nadiamsa former half having the 2nd lord
in the Sth along with Mars, as the 6th is occupied
by the Moon, and Venus is in aspect to Jupiter will

Loe
get following results: He will be wealthy in the
middle of his life, will have two wives, will head a
village, be learned, sacrificing in nature and will
enjoy pleasures.
Notes: In the second line, Jeevarksha Gathe
implies Mars to be in a house of Jupiter whereas
in the first line Mars is needed to be in the 5th
(Scorpio). As such there is an error in conditions
stipulated.
"Divi Bhuvi Hyasthana Kolahalah" is not
amenable to proper translation. Divi is heaven,
Bhuvi is earth, Asthana is assembly and Kolahala
13 uproar.
चम्पकांशे पूर्वभागे are रिपुराशिगे।
स्वपिता सोदरज्येष्ठः स्त्रीपुंसौ समलक्षणै। । १४४३ |
पितृव्यैकोअतिमेषवी गंगास्नायी द्विभार्यवान्।
दारापवादवान् न aon | | १४४ | |
भगिन्येका क्लेशिनी i ony PATH १४४५॥।
स्वपित्ररिष्टतः पूर्वं पितुव्यारि |
1443-14451/2. Venus in the 6th: For a native
of first half of Champaka Nadiamsa, Cancer
Lagna, the 11th lord in the 6th house will give the
undermentioned results. His father would be the
first issue of his family and would have the
resemblance of both a male and female. One of
the native’s paternal uncles would be of superior
intelligence, would bathe in the Ganges, would
have two wives, would incur a bad name due to
(misconduct of) a wife, may lose some of his
children, and would incur physical deformity due
to an after-born. The father would have one sister
who would cause grief to the native’s grandfather
during childhood. She will be childless. The
native’s paternal uncle will predecease his (i.e.
the native’s) father.
राज्यस्थाने स्थिते सूर्ये भैमेन च समन्विते॥ १४४६॥
कर्मे वा हिबुके भूसुतेन समन्विते।
तदा श्यमतनुर्भगी BRI AAT! | १४४७। |
नारकालंकृतौ काव्ये बन्धिवन्त्रीरतिप्रियः।
Chandra Kala Nadi
वदान्यः सत्यवादी च TARAS । १४४८ | |
द्रादशाब्दात् परं भग्यं षोडशाब्द् श्रियान्वितम् ।
वत्सरे फंचविंशानां राजयोगो भवेद्घ्रुवम्। । १४४९। |
अनेकयेषिदासक्ते भोगस्तरीसंगलोलुपः।
स्वजायाभगिनौसंगी शिवामनऋ्जपातुरः। । १४५० |
1446-1450. The Sun-Mars: These two
planets conjunct in the 10th or the 4th will give
following results to the native of former half of
Champaka Nadiamsa in Cancer ascendant. He
will be dark in complexion, will enjoy pleasures
will be courageous. He will have a concubine and
be fond of drama, poetry etc. and will be interested in joining a relative’s wife. He will in addition be bountiful, truthful and be fond of scents,
garlands and robes. His prosperity will be after 12
years while he will be wealthy after 16. In his 25th
year he will obtain Raja yoga effects. He will join
whores as well as his sister-in-law. He will be
interested in reciting Mantras that please Lord
iva.
रतिकाले विनोदी स्यात् कान्तांश्कगते रवौ।
महाराजसभमध्ये वाग्मी चातुर्ययुक्तिमान्। । ९४५१। |
घटनाघरसामर््य शिवानुग्रहहेतुना।
हयलक्षाधि कारौ च निष्कलक्षाधिपो भवेत्। । १४५२।।
1451-1452. The Sun in Kanta Nadiamsa:
The native of Champaka Nadiamsa’s first half,
with the Sun placed in Kanta Nadiamsa will be
amused during sexual union, will be eloquent in
his speeches in royal assembly, endowed with skill
and contrivance, will be able to do even impossible things and will own hundred thousand gold
coins due to Lord Siva’s mercy.
STAR तनुभावनथे
तुगांश्के वा गुरूणथ दष्टे।
अद्वैतमार्गेण निजस्वरूपं
वेदान्तनिष्ठः परमात्मवेत्ता। | १४५२ I |
1453. Upanishadic knowledge: If the Moon
is in Vargothama Navamsa, or in exaltation
Navamsa , or aspected by Jupiter the native will
be versed in Upanishads, will have knowledge of

Deva Keralam 133
the Supreme Being and will be an advocate of
Advaita (Non-duality, identity of Brahma with
Jeevathma, the ultimate truth).
RTT सूर्य मृगादित्रयमासगे।
कान्तांशकगते सूर्ये वातरोगप्रपीडित्तः। । १४५४ | |
1454, Paralysis etc.: One born in Champakamsa, having the Sun in Kanta Nadiamsa will
be struck by a disease like paralysis, when the Sun
is in northern course, in one of 3 signs commencing from Capricorn. [Some texts read
Chaapaditraya Maasage referring to uttarayana
which includes the Sun’s transit in Sagittarius,
incorrectly. |
Notes: The Sun in this Nadiamsa will cause
paralysis to the native, but prosperity to father,
vide sloka 1441 supra.
चम्पकशे पूर्वमगे भैमे रविसमन्विते।
pags
शब्दे पितारिष्टं विदेशे मरणं भ्रुवम्
यातायतं wate महानृपतिदर्शनम्। । १४५६। |
सन्तानोत्पत्तिनाशदि त्रयोविंशातिवत्सरे।
लग्नाधिपदशकाले रम्भ्राधिपतिभुकितिष। | १४५७ |
जन्मादिसप्तमे वर्षे सागरप्रन्त्यपट्टणे।
महासमरमनत्युग्रं Wa भविष्यति। । १४५८ I |
देशान्तरादिसंचारं स्वपितुर्न्कुलं महत्।
चन्द्रजीवान्तरे काले ्मोजीवन्धनमादिशेत्। । १४५९। |
द्रादशब्दे विवाहः eae वेदं फलम्।
स्वपितामहसौख्यं च गेहे भिस् | । १४६० | |
यातायातं Weal सन्धिकार्यानुमोदनम्।
लक्ष्मीकराक्षवानिित्यं नु Ss षणः । । १४६१। ।
दशन्त्ये व्याकुलं चेति ष्टमादिशेत्।
सायनाष्दे a canine हारिष्ठं
एकोनविंशे वर्षे जननं
जनकस्य महत्कष्टं Waa धनव्ययम्। । १४६३1 |
राजामात्यजनद्ेषं गोचरे चाष्टमे शनौ।
पश्चात्तापं तु लभते AY सौम्यन्तरेफलम्॥ १४६४॥
1455-1464. The Sun-Mars: The subject of
first half of Champaka Nadiamsa having the SunMars conjunction will be absent on the first day
of the obsequies of his father. During the native’s
संस्कारे प्रधानं दिवसं त्यजेत्। । १४५५। |
22nd year, his father will die in a foreign land. The
subject will have travels relating to royal meetings. In his 23rd year he will have a dead child. In
the sub period of the 8th lord during ascendant
lord’s major period (or) in the 7th year, in a city
on sea-shore, in a great, fierce battle, the army of
foe will be destroyed(?). He will wander in many
foreign places, and will cause worry to his father.
His Sacred thread ceremony will take place in
Moon/Jupiter periods, 12th year will cause marriage, in Venus bhukti (of Moon Dasa). His paternal grand father will be happy (comfortable). His
abode will be endowed with quadrupeds and
grains. He will have travels and be powerful. Goddess Lakshmi will be ever merciful to him. He will
be endowed with golden ornaments and superior
“obes. In the end of (Moon’s) dasa, he will incur
agony. During his 11/2 years of age danger to
paternal uncle will have tobe feared. His 21st year
will be fatal to mother. This will cause big difficulties to his father, and expenses on travels. When
Saturn reaches the 8th in transit, the subject will
earn the wrath of the king and his ministers, and
will regret thereby- all these in Mars Dasa, Mercury Bhukti(?)
स्वप्रमेश्च महत्कष्टं कलहेन विचारवान्।
कुवि अर्कसुते काले चोष्छदेशे कलापवान्। | १४६५। |
बहूसेनाश्वनाशदिधननशे नृपस्य च।
जनकस्य धनप्रप्ति द्वितीयेद्राहमदिशेत्। । १४६६। |
जातकस्य 1 न्त्यदिशेभनम्।
गर्भधनफलप्रप्तिर्जायते Farge |
देशकालफलं कष्टं राज्नामन्येन्ययुदकृत्। । १४६७। |
1465-1467. When Saturn reaches Cancer in
transit the subject will have grief in Chola
Kingdom and be greatly troubled by his king. His
father will acquire wealth and the subject will
have a second marriage. The native will acquire
happiness on account of nuptials and other related festivals. The child then born will die. Kings
will fight among themselves(?)
चापन्त्ये मकरादिमे यदि दश मीनन्त्यमेषद्ययेः
सिंहान्त्यै ललनोदये na ते तैल्यन्तकीराद्यये।
ad पश्चिम उत्ते गिरिनदी तीरे महायेधनं

134 (Chandra Kala Nadi
तद्देशे प्रभुणं त्रिसैन्यररणं -लेच्छध्ैर्यगवान्
उत्तरत्रयगे मन्दे भ रकी ङिति,
चोलपाण्ड्यपुराधीभ त्पवः। ; १४६९। |
1468-1459. Isrcisvant: If.....(Saturn?) is in
transit in the end of Sagi:tarius or in the beginning
of Aries, or in the exd of Leo or in the beginning
of Virgo with Ra‘u, or in the end of Libra or in
whe beginaing of $cc. tio, tere will be a great war
‘y the northern per. ci Sethu, on the Sanks of a
river, or near a i's, in vhich three armies will be
destroved and Micchcha rulership «i!! De established, VWuen Saturn moves in3 stars from Uttara
(Leo) in aspect to Rahu/Tupiter, there will be
mutual fights betv <€} the heads o: Chola and
Pandya kingdoms.
RR wedla उहुसेनवनाशवान् !
a a उत्पतदर्शनम्। ¦ ९४७० |
। aan REN च प्रजायते।
वप्रमूलात् सुसंपन्नो TSR भवेत्। ¡ १४७९ । ।
उत्कृष्टधर्मसिद्धिश्व कतरे सवत क्तिषु,
Tes महाभीरिर्ग्रहुच्कदेण कर्शित । । १४७२ |
आत्मबन्धुजनारिष्ठं गृहे AROMA |
1470. A huge portion of army and horses will
be destroyed in these royal fightings. Drought of
a serious nature, lack cf rains and a calamity
(earthquake, fall of meteor etc.) will strike the
country.
Notes: Slokas 1468 to 1470 do not belong to
natal horoscopy and areirrelevant to the Nadiamsa under strudy. These obviously relate to
Saturn’s transits m certain segments .of the
Zodiac.
1471-14721/2. First half of Champaka
Nadiamsa - Cancer Lagna: This subject will earn
wealth through Brahmins. He will increase his
wealth. He-will, in the first sub period of Kshema
(4th Dasa) earn merits by jobs of excellent
charities. In Rahu bhukti of the same Dasa he will
incur great fear, evils to his near and dear and be
busy with a family marriage.
गोचरे वृषभे जीवे फलमेवमुदाहूतम्। । १४७३। |
श्रीसैलात् पश्चिमे देशे जतस्य कलहे FEM
तुलादौ फण्डयदेशेषु अर्णवप्रन्त्यपट्रणे। | ६४७४। |
TERI: खण्डवृष्टि कलहः सेन्यनाशकः।
पहासमरमत्युग्रं पुरभगो भविष्यति। । १४७५। |
1473-1475. Jupiter's transit (not relevant):
When Jupiter in his movements attains the sign
Taurus, there will occur a great strife in the region
west of Srisailam, and while in Libra the said
planet will cause the same effect as above in
Pandya kingdom, followed by severe drought, insufficient rains, loss of army etc. in a great war.
Enemies will have their army destroyed.
Ss, न (= on
ग चोत्तरार्धं पुत्रेत्सवफलं भवेत्। | १४७७ | |
स्व्मनुदाये शनिभुक्तिकाले
पितामहस्सपि जनादयरिष्टम्।
areal वां सुदरपीडां
संचारमाकस्मिकराजकोपम्। | १४७८ । |
1476-1478. Rahu in the 4th: In the sub
period of the 9th lord during the Dasa of Rahu,
placed at birth in the 4th house (in Libra), the
native will befriend ministers and will earn wealth
by fair and unfair means (kaaryaakaarya
Dhanam). In the second half of Jupiter’s subperiod he will acquire progeny. During Saturn’s
sub period in Rahu Dasa, relatives like paternal
grand- father will be endangered. Also maternal
grand-father, wife and children will incur evils.
He will have (futile) movements and will earn
royal displeasures.
कीटे च पंचाननकर्कटेप्वा-
किस्सवक्छेअशनभीतिटः स्यात्।
श्रीचोरपाण्डये वृषभाचलेशे
Be NW परचक्रमाहुः १४५७९ |
1479. Saturn’s transit (not relevant): Saturn
in transit in Scorpio, Leo or Cancer, being in
retrogression causes war between kings of Chola,
Pandya and Vrishabhachala and destruction of
army.

Deva Keralam 133
उत्ते हकत जावै देहायासं धनव्ययम्। Jupiter will give wealth te him through kings or
TREY ६ सौख्यं भवति नित्यश ।। १४८० ॥ servants.
1480. Rahu bhukti: The second half of
Rahu’s sub period will cause physical illness and
expenditure. When Jupiter in movement comes
to the 11th house, physical conforts will prevail.
(This should be related to slokas 1476-78 supra.)
Notes: The sub period of Rahurelates tothe
dasa of Rahu as could be seen from the following
slokas.
दुरालोचनमन्त्यजैः।
co. 7
1481. Venus Sub-period: The sub-period of
Venus (in the dasa of Rahu, in case of birth in
Cancer ascendant, Champaka Nadiamsa) will
cause to the native a great deal of fortunes. However, the native’s youngest co-born (last of the
family) will develop evil thoughts. The native’s
friends and relatives will be destroyed. If Venus is
in "Sathamsa", auspicious effects will follow.
Notes: In this sloka, Rahu dasa, Venus subperiod, for a Cancer native is discussed. This
sub-period is said to give auspicious effects about
native’s fortunes, but adverse effects concerning
friends and relatives. The last line of the sloka
suggests good results in this respect also,
provided Venus is placed in a certain position.
‘Sathamsa’ is not a meaningful astrological term.
At best it could mean 100th degree or 100th part,
which makes no sense. Maybe it should read
‘Ucchamsa’ - exaltation Navamsa. However, obtaining a new meaning using Katapayadi numerical is not advisable at this point.
मृत्यवर्गजनररिष्टं राहुदाये pa
गुरूदाये नृपो वापि भृत्यवर्गच्छ्यं लभेत । । १४८२।
1482. Rahu dasa: The dasa of Rahu (in
general, for the subject Nadiamsa) will produce
evils to servants of the native, but will cause acquisition of wealth to the subject. The dasa of
aS गेहे गेधनसंकसम्।
उन्तशिद्रकलापकृत्। | १४८३।।
भगिनीत्रयपीडादि जीवे शन्यन्तरान्तर।
गुरूदाये वयेमध्ये ब्राहणप्रमुमित्रता। | १४८४। ।
ani WR लभेत्।
pid लभते कंचनादिकम्। । १४८५।।
TE PSs वाहनन्तरलभवान्।
yam क्लेशमाप्नोति शनि भुक्ति विना सुखम्। । १४८६। ।
उत्तरार्धे महत्सरैख्यं aah ष्कद्रन्यदिलाभवान्।
सन्धिकार्यं प्कुर्वीत देहायसं
शुक्रभुक्तौ वु कल्याणसभ्रमम्। | १४८८1 ।
गुरूदाये ह तय समम्।
चम्पके पूर्वभागे सूर्वकालांशजातकः।
बट््पंवसप्तमान्त्यदौ अष्टपचाशवत्सरे। । १४९० |
विष्ज्वरभयर्तस्य सन्निपातज्वरे मृक्ति।
स्वपितुः yaar द्विषष्ठिपरमायु्। । १४९१ |
1483-1491. Further the dasa of Jupiter will
bring happiness through coborn and cause acquisition of quadrupeds and wealth. Because of
brothers-in-law, the native will incur domestic
squabbles. During Jupiter dasa, Saturn bhukt,
three of his sisters will be subjected to troubles.
In the dasa of Jupiter, in his middle age, he will
befriend Brahmins and kings. He will also make
friendship with a Soodra (4th caste) minister and
will gain wealth through royal favours. Through
his younger coborn he will gain gold etc. He will
learn foreign languages, befriend the king and will
gain conveyances. The first half of Saturn bhukti
will only give troubles, but no happiness. Its later
half will confer great happiness. He will gather
useless objects (Sushka Dravya). In the dasa of
the 9th lord during the sub period of the 5th lord,
he will play mediatory roles. For two years, he will
be sickly. In Venus,sub period (of the 9th lord’s
dasa) auspicious events will occur and he will be
engaged in activities of family marriage. The last
one-third part of Jupiter dasa will give mixed
results. The native in that part of the dasa will

wander in foreign lands, and will come across
death of a female in brothers’ families. One born
in the former half of Champaka Nadiamsa will
incur death in 56th/57th/S8th year due to a
poisonous fever or delirium. At best due to his
father’s merits of previous birth he can live upto
कुम्भे चापांशगे राहौ मीनांशे वा स्थिते यदि।
धनुर्लग्ने प्रजातः स योगवान् रोगवान् भवेत्।। १४९२॥
1492. Fortunes & Illness: The native of
Sagittarius ascendant who has at birth Rahu in
Aquarius occupying the navamsa of either Sagittarlus or Pisces (1.6. Jupiter’s Navamsa having
Rahu, who at birth is in the sign Aquarius) will
have both fortunes and illness.
अत्युष्णकटुकद्रव्यक्र TA _— ५
तमोगुणप्रधानश्च मध्यन्ते : सुधीः ।। १४९३॥
बाल्ये ताम सकृत्यनि वाल्ये Wifes: |
कुजदुष्टियुते राहौ peg A a [| । १४९४ । ।
किंचित्कालं gaat मध्ये |
शुक्रे केतुयुते जते दुरालोचन तत्परः। | १४९५ |
ऋतुस्त्रीसगमी कामी भ्रातृभार्यारतिप्रियः।
दारापवादवान् किचित्कुम्भमीनांशगो त्तमः। । १४९६। ।
1493-1496. Further he will sell things that are
hot and pungent, will be soft in speech, malignant
in disposition, in the middle and concluding portions gentle, and be intelligent. In his childhood
he will perform malignant acts and will also be
troubled by diseases. If the said Rahu (vide sloka
1492) is aspected by Mars, the Sagittarius native
will only have a medium span of life. For some
time, he will follow a bad path and in the mid-life,
he will change to virtuous path. Venus and Ketu
being together denote that he will have evil
thoughts, will jo women in their periods,
be libidinous, will have illicit ties with his brother’s
wife and will experience infamy on account of his
wife. If these two planets attain Aquarius or Pisces Navamsa, good effects to some extent will
prevail.
कामांशकगतः नो TARTANA: |
Chandra Kala Nadi
यौवने दारशोकादिस्त्रयोविंशतिवत्सरे।
चतुर्विशसमान्त्यादो द्वितीयेद्राहमादिशेत्। । १४९८। |
विवाहानन्तरं चेति ज्ञानमार्गप्रवर्तकः।
ब्रह्म ज्ञानांशके जीवे लग्नात् केन्द्रत्रिकोणगे,
पर ब्रह्म ध्यानयोगी आपत्सन्यासयेगवान्। । १४९९ |
1497-1499, Kalakoota Nadiamsa: One born
in Kalakoota Nadiamsa, and having the Sun in the
7th Navamsa, will have injuries on privities and
other parts. He will lose his (first) wife in 23rd
year in his (very) youth, and will marry for the
second time in the beginning/end of the 24th year.
After marriage he will follow the path of Wisdom.
Jupiter in Brahmagnanamsa (?) being in an
angle/trine from ascendant Sagittarius will make
one a great yogi meditating on the Supreme Being
who will take to ascetic order due to a family
calamity.
Notes: This Nadiamsa, Kalakoota, should
rise in Sagittarius itself. The Sun should be in 7th
place in Navamsa chart.
Kalakoota Navamsa extends from 0 deg. 36’
to 0 deg. 48’ of a movable sign; from 29 deg. 12’ to
29 deg. 24 of animmovable sign; and from 15 deg.
36’ to 15 deg. 48’ of a common sign.
Jupiter is required to be in the Nadiamsa
entitled in Brahmagnana. We have no such
Nadiamsa enlisted. We have ‘Braahmi’ which
means the personified energy of Brahma
regarded as one of the eight mothers of created
beings, said to attend Skanda. Seeing similarity
in names, the text apparently uses a nearsynonym.
Braahmi Nadiamsa extends from 0 deg. 24
to 0 deg. 36’ of a movable sign; from 29 deg. 24 to
29 deg. 36’ of animmovable sign; and from 15 deg.
24 to 15 deg 36’ of a common sign.
Jupiter should be in trine from Sagittarius
ascendant, which needs him to be either in Aries
(0 deg. 24" to 0 deg. 36’) or in Leo (29 deg. 24 to
मीने च राहौ यदि वा दिनेशे
वित्ते शशांके गुरूवीक्षिते वा।

Deva Keralam 137
सत्कर्मशलौ र sub period, of Sampath (2nd) dasa, he will beget
एकान्तगे Tal । १५००। | a son, and will gain in his calling. He will acquire
horses and conveyances. He will live by author1500. With Rahu or the Sun being in Pisces
(in the 4th) while the Moon in the 2nd house is in
aspect to Jupiter, the native will perform good
deeds, be wealthy, be a lonely child and be happy.
ship and be charitable. In the 3rd dasa, he will be
quite happy. So also in Kshema (4th) dasa. Further he will have travels and will acquire wealth
in the 4th dasa. In the dasa of Venus ruling the Sth
Nakshatra’s dasa (1.6. birth Moon assumed in
Punarvasu or Visakha or Poorvabhadra Nakshatra) his happiness will increase.
शिवदंशे धनुर्तग्ने पूर्वभागे प्रजायते ।
विप्रजन्मा सुखी नित्य ज्येष्टभ्रातृविनाशवान्। । १५०१। |
पश्चादुभ्रातृविहीनश्च बाल्ये दरिद्ययोगवान्।
सूतिकागृहदेषेण जननीमृत्युमादिशेत्। । १५०२। | FTES गोचरे अष्टमे रनौ; -
WR चापमृत्युश्च शन्ति कुर्यद्िवक्षण । 1 १५०७। |
1501-1502. Sivada Nadiamsa: One born in
this Nadiamsa in Sagittarius asceadant will be a
Brahmin, be happy for ever, and will have loss of
elder coborns. Later, he will have no after- borns.
He will incur poverty in childhood. His mother
will die soon after the native’s birth due to faults
in delivery-chambers.
Notes: Now Sivada Nadiamsa in Sagittarius
ascendant is discussed. This Nadiamsa extends
from 16 deg. 12’ to 16 deg. 24" of a movable sign;
from 13 deg. 36’ to 13 deg. 48’ of an immovable
sign; and from 1 deg. 12’ to 1 deg. 24 ofa common
sign.
Siva Nadiamsa is another division which
should not be confused with Sivada Nadiamsa.
शिवदाशे ुत्रीपत्रसमन्वितः।
सम्पद्दाये स्वप्राबल्यं धनागमम्। । १५०२३। |
वैदिकाचारधर्मात्मा देव ब्राह्म णभक्तिमान्।
सम्पद्दाये सूर्यभुक्तौ पुत्ेतसवफलं TAL । १५०४।।
उद्योगधनलाभादि अश्ववाहनभाग्यवान्।
लेख्यजीवि सुधर्मात्मा विपद्दाये महामुखी। । १५०५।।
ame तथा विन्दाद्यातायातं श
परत्यक्ताराधिपे शुक्रे दशयं बत । । १५०६।।
1503-1506. Sivada Nadiamsa - first half:
One born in this part in Sagittarius Lagna will be
endowed with daughters and sons. In the 2nd half
of Sampath (2nd) dasa, he will gain wealth and
fame, He will follow the path prescribed by the
Vedas and be charitably disposed. In the Sun’s
1507. (During Venus dasa) if Saturn reaches
the 8th, the native’s near and dear will be endangered. In the end of the dasa the native will
meet with near-death. Propitiations be done to
overcome this yoga.
कर्मधिपदशकाले क्रूरवेधग्रहान्ते।
देशन्तरादिसन्तेषै स्वादायदधिकल्ययी। 1 १५०८। |
facade दवत्रिमासं मनोन्यथा्।
गोचरे Fey जीवे Ba sonia । १५०९ ।
a चैव
शे धनुर्लग्ने शुक्रनाडीषुं फेजयेत्। । १५१०।।
1508-1510. In the dasa of the 10th lord, and
in the sub period of a malefic planet or an obstructive planet (adverse planet), the native will be
happy in a foreign place, will spend more than his
earnings, will incur enmity with his friends and
close relatives and will be sad for two or three
months. When Jupiter in transit comes to Taurus,
the native will be active with his son’s marriage.
These results for Sivada Nadiamsa of Sagittarius
Lagna have been explained in Sukra Nadi.
Sagittarius Ascendant —
(Kalakoota Nadiamsa)
ee Nadi)
SA TEN मेषलग्ने प्रजायते।
Yew सुख नित्यं सप्तमो भवति असौ। । १५११ |

aT श्यमदेहश्च प्रमाण््नतदेहवान्।
युक्तिमान् a iy TUS लेख्याविद्याविशारदः। ! १५१२ । ।
वनप्रन्त्ये eum जननं स्मृतम्।
1511-15121/2. Dhanada Nadiamsa - Aries
ascendant: One born in this part of Aries will be
a Soodra, be ever happy and be the seventh issue.
He will be sexually passionate, and will have a
dark and prominent physique. Strategic, he will
speak sweetly. He will be skilful in studies. His
birth will be in a tiny village, in a hilly region. This
applies to the first half of Dhanada Nadiamsa,
above,
Notes: From now onwards, Aries ascendant,
Dhanada Nadiamsa is discussed. For this
Nadiamsa, please see notes under Sloka 714-716
supra.
Chandra Kala Nadi
daughters. Her husband will be endowed with
prosperity and wealth, serving a king. He will be
famous.
उत्तराशे प्रजातः म reaper |
ज्येष्ठश्रातुविहीनश्च TAAL | ६५१८। |
भगिनीद्रयवान् रागी चैका |
1518-15181/2. Second half - Dhanada
Nadiamsa: This native of Aries Lagna will be
troubled by diseases caused by windy and phlegmatic imbalanaces. He will have neither an older
brother nor a younger brother. He will have two
sisters one of whom will have a long living husband.
Note: The native will have an older sister
also as he is said to be the second issue, vide sloka
1514 supra.
TARR प्रजातः SLA सुखी भवेत्।। १५१३ ।
समुद्रतरि जननं गिरिप्रन्त्ये न संशयः ।
दक्षिणेत्तरवीरथीषु द्वितीयो प्रजायते। । १५९४ |
^ el स्थनाधिपे चन्द्रे लाभे वा लग्नकेन्द्रगे। । १५१९। |
प्रजातस्य स्वमाता चिरजीविनी।
उत्तरांश क्रिये लग्ने विपद्दाये दशन्त्यगे। । १५२०। |
1513-1514. Second half - Dhanada Nadiamsa: Here the birth of the native will be in a hilly
region, on a sea-shore, in a family of merchants.
The street concerned will be spread from south
to north. He will be the second issue.
at प्रजातःसः हरिशंकर भक्तिमान्।
देवव्राहम् णमक्तश्च she © A । । १५१५। |
अष्ट वशत्परं तस्य |
भगिनसख्रयवान् रागी विधवैका तु वाल्येके॥ १५१६॥।
सुवासिनी भगिन्येक पुत्रीपुत्रसमन्विता।
Tend भाग्यसम्पनो Ute प्रसिद्धिमान्। । १५१७। |
1315-1517, First half of Dhanada Nadiamsa
(Continued): One born in the former half will be
devoted to Lords Vishnu and Siva. He will honour
Brahmins and will have older coborn. After the
age of 8, the native will lose his after-born. He will
have three sisters, and be passionate. One of his
siters will attain widowhood in the native’s
childhood. Another sister will live in a respectable abode and be endowed with sons and
द्रविश्छन्दे मातृनाशमेकविंशतिवत्सर |
एकोनचत्वारिशेजब्दे जननीमृतिमदिशेत्। । १५२१। ।
1319-1521. Mother: Should the Moon be in
the 1ith, or be in an angle counted from the
Lagna, Aries, the native of former half of
Dhanada Nadiamsa will have a long-living
mother. (Without reference to the Moon), the
native of second half of this Nadiamsa will lose his
mother in the concluding part of Vipath (3rd)
dasa, (or) in the 22nd year, or in the 21st year, or
in the 23rd year.
पुतरस्थनगते we स्त्रप्रनाश्चधिकाः स्मृताः।
पप्रजाशेकसन्तप्तं ' पुरापातकठेत्ना। । १५२२। |
तद्दोषपरिहारार्थं हरिद्रालिंगमच॑यत्।
1522-15221/2. Progeny: Ifthe Moon be in the
Sth house, the native will have more female
children (than male children). His sons will be
grieved on account of the native’s sins relating to
previous birth. To restore happiness to his sons,

Deva Keraiam
worship of Siva L.nia cade of turmeric (Haridra}
be done.
भाग्यधिपदशाकाले भाग्यवृद्धिर्महोत्सवः। । १५२३ । |
बाल्ये दािद्यमापन्नो यौवने क्लेशुवान् भवेत्।
पित्ररिष्टात्परं भाग्यं ग्रापणीर्व्यवर्मौयकः। । १५२४। |
गा्हस्थ्यवान् धनाढ्यश्च किचिद्रखपारजीवकः।
निष्कपचवशताढयश्चेत्यहू्व्यसादयस्तथा। | १५२५ |
1523-1525. According te Vyasa and others:
His childhood will be marked by poverty, and
youth by grief. His prosperity will rise, after the
death of his father, or in the dasa cf the 9th lord.
He will have agricultural pursuits in a village. He
will be a householder (Grihastha), rich and will
have some trading activities (as weil). He will own
500 gold coins. These effects are according to
Vyasa and others.
Note: Sloka 1522 to 1525 apply to birth in
first half of Dhanada Nadiamsa of Aries Lagna.
= प्रजातः स गर्भश्रीमान् धनी भवेत।
वणिग्व्यपारमूलेन धे संपादयिष्यति।
पितरर्जितधनाठयश्च रजतस्वर्णविक्रयी। । १५२७। |
रसवगौदिम्लेन धातुवर्गादिवृद्धिकृत।
पचत्रिशाधिक निष्कं व्यापरेण
स्वप्राबल्सयं च लभते त्रिंशेपरि ee
एकत्रिंश पितृन्यस्य after मुनिरब्रवीत्। । १५२९। |
1526-1529. Second half - Dhanada Nadiamsa: This native will be rich right from his birth.
He will lose his wife in his youth and will have
virtuous sons through his second wife. Apart from
having paternal wealth, he will acquire wealth
through his own business activities. He will sell
gold and silver. He will also flourish through dealing with liquids and metals. He will possess precious stones and 500 gold coins. After the age of
thirty he will have fame in abundance. During his
31st year, evils to one of his paternal uncles be
foretold.
चन्द्रात् सुखेश्वराधीशदशाय Gea |
निधनेशदशयं वा मारको भवति प्रवम्। । १५३०। |
रन््रधिपदशाकाले गोचरे द्वादशे शनौ।
एकोनविंशके वर्ष fart सर्वनारनम्। । १५३१ |
खतायतं प्रकुर्वीत स्वादायादधिकन्ययम्।
on toes fe मध्यत्वेका सुदुःखिता। । १५३२।
बाल्ये र i नारी
PAR सुसंतुष्टा sachet । । १५३२।।
1530-1533. Father's death wili occur cither
in the dasa of the 4th lord c. of the 8th lord,
counted from the Mcon sigh at birth. The native
will lose everything when Saturn comes to the
12th in transit during the dasa of te 8th iord, or
in his 19th year. He will have (many) travels. His
expenditure will exceed his income. Out of the
three sisters of his father, one will be grieved on
account of widowhood early in her life during
childhood, while one will have long married life.
(There is however another reading for "PitruswaSnithrayanaam" as “pitruvyathrayamayushyvantekaa"... etc. which refers to paternal uncles, three
in number. This is meaningless, in the context of
results.) The said paternal aunt will be happy on
account of her sons and husband.
= तरको वाअपि स्वदेशे च विवाहवान्।
कालान्ते मुतप्राप्तर्वयोमध्ये mae ¦ । १५३४।
एका मृतप्रजा भार्यं saya
SRR सुतप्राप्तिद्धि्रिजायपतिभवेत्। । १५२५१ |
कालान्तरे महारोगी हुदरव्याधि पीडितं।
मध्यमायुरिति प्रोक्तं ग्गादिमुनिपुगरवैः। । १५३६ । ।
1534-1536. According to Graga etc.: His
first cousin will marry in his birth country (region)
and will obtain progeny after a long interval. He
will prosper in his middle age. One of his children
will be born dead. One daughter will be longlived. He will have children through another wife
(also). Two or three wives are indicated for him.
After along interval he will be troubled by serious
diseases including abdominal diseases. The said
cousin will have medium span of life. These effects are according to Garga and others.
पूर्वभागे प्रजातस्य रन्भ्रधिपदशन्त्यगे।
द्वाविंशाब्दे पित्रिष्ठं त्रयेविंशतिवत्सरे । । १५३७। |
देशबन्तरादिगमनात् पितृसंस्कारहीनवान्।

1537-15371/2. First half - Dhanada Nadiamsa: This native will incur a tragedy concerning his
father during his 22nd or 23rd year (or) inthe end
of the 8th lord’s dasa. Due to his being away in
foreign places, he will not perform the last offices
of his father.
उत्तरशे राहृदाये सौख्यं भवति Freee । १५३८ । |
पूर्वार्धे क्लेशमाप्नेति दाररिष्टं विनिर्दिशेत्।
मध्यकाले दारलाभः पितृव्यरिष्टमादिशेत् ॥ १५३९॥
1538-1539. Rahu dasa: The native of the
second half of this Nadiamsa will be happy during
Rahu’s dasa. But if birth be in the first half, the
dasa of Rahu will inflict grief, and loss of spouse.
In the middle age, he will remarry apart from
incurring danger to his paternal uncle.
पुत्रधिपदशाकाले धनं संपादयिष्यति।
स्फोरकादिव्रेणदीनि स्वगेहे शिशुपीडनम्। । १५४० ।
1540. 5th Lord’s Dasa: The native will acquire wealth in the Dasa of the Sth lord. However,
he will be troubled by tumours and will see his
child in pain.
गोचरे वृषभे जीवे गेहे कल्याणसंभ्रमः।
बहुव्यापारसिद्धिः स्यात् सप्तत्निशतिवत्सरे । | १५४१। ।
द्रीपन्तरदि वस्तूनां लाभे भवति निश्चयः।
1541-15411/2. Jupiter’s transit: Should
Jupiter in transit be in Taurus, the native’s family
will be busy with activities of a marriage. He will
be successful in many business deals. In his 37th
year, he will gain through foreign articles.
्षमधिपदशाकाले सुताधिपतिभुक्तिषु। । १५४२ |
रसवर्गदिलामः स्याद्यातायतं धनागमम्
1542-15421/2. Fourth Dasa: In the 4th Dasa
and in the sub period of the 5th lord, he will gain
through liquids, will have travels and will earn
wealth.
पूर्वभागे राहुदाये कृषिमूले धनर्तिकृत्। । १५४३। |
Chandra Kala Nadi
THER जनक्लेशी se es ina |
दशामध्ये ead सर्वे स्वं
1543-1544. Other effects: One born in the
first half of Dhanada Nadiamsa will in the Dasa
of Rahu lose wealth in his calling (or agriculture)
and will incur grief through royal wrath. However,
he will have gain of horses. In the middle of the
Dasa of Rahu he will be quite famous. But he will
himself destroy all his possessions.
उत्तरंशे प्रजातस्य गोचरे वृश्चिके रनै।
आत्मबन्धुजनारिष्टं दायादीनां विशेषतः। । १५४५। ।
1545. Saturn in Scorpio: One belonging to
the 2nd half of Dhanada Nadiamsa will find his
relatives in the grip of evils, as Saturn moves in the
sign Scorpio.
जातकस्य प्रपीडिदि दशान्ते फलमीदृशम्।
तदूदोषपरिहारार्थ महारुद्रं चेदुबुध । । १५४६ ।
वस्त्रदानवशरेग्यं WSs प्रश्यति।
भाग्यधिपदशकाले Wage: सुखेत्सवः। | १५४७।
1546-47. Such result as distress (or harassment) will occur in the end of the Dasa. To ward
off the said blemish, performance of Maha Rudra
Japa 1185 been suggested by the Icarned. Health
will be recovered by donation of clothes following
which (such) crucl blemish (as above) will be
extinguished. The dasa of the 9th ford will cause
increase of prosperity and acquisition of propeny
। । मेष्लग्नम् - समांश (चापशनिफलम्) । ।
Aries Ascendant — Sama Nadiamsa
(Saturn in Sagittarius)
समाशे मेषलग्ने ion प्रजाशरते।
वैश्यजन्मा सुखी कुज त्रिंशांशजातकं । । *'.५. ।
itor प्रसूतिश्च पट्टणे व सनिनिधे।
पूर्वपश्चिम वौथाषु चोत्तरे तु । । १५४९ ।
1548-49, Sama Nadiamsa - Aries ascendant:
The native of first half of Sama Nadiamsa in Aries

Deva Keralam
ascendant, in the Trimsamsa of Mars, will belong
to a family of Vaisyas (traders). His birth will be
near a temple of Lord Vishnu in a city in hilly
region. The street concerned will be east-west
spread and the house north-facing.
Notes: Sama Nadiamsa extends from 20 deg
48 to 21 deg of a movable sign; from 9 deg to 9
deg 12’ of an immovable sign and from 5 deg 48’
to 6 deg of a commen sign.
समांशे चोत्तरे भगे शद्रजन्मा सुजायते।
दक्षिणोत्तर वीथीषु चोत्तरद्रारगेहगे। । २५५० । |
1550. The native of second half of this
Nadiamsa in Aries ascendant will be a Soodra.
His birth will be in a north-south spread street in
time attains Aries Navamsa, there will be no afterborns, but (only) pre-borns.
Wee चिरायुष्यं भगिन्यौ च fare
ज्येष्ठभनतरेदरयेश्चैव विनाशं मनुरव्रवीत्। । १५५६ |
सुकरसिनी भगिन्येका पुत्रीपुत्रसमन्विता।
एका च भगिनी पूता वैधव्येन च कर्चिता। | १५५३। |
1556-57. The native of Sama Nadiamsa’s
first half (Aries ascendant) will have two brothers
and sisters endowed with longevity. Two of his
older brothers will be destroyed (early). One of
his sisters will live in a respectable abode and be
endowed with female and male issues. Another
sister will be pure in mind but be emaciated due
to (early) widowhood.
a north-facing house.
समांशे मेषलग्ने
त oat प्रजायते। उत्तरांशे प्रजातः स ज्येष्ठश्रातृविहीनवान्।
वैश्यजन्मा सुखी ष्टमोअयं प्रकीर्तितः।॥ १५५९ ॥
अथवा नवमश्चेति श्यमवर्णस्वरूपवान्।
प्रमाणेनतदेहश्च रजेोगुणसमन्वितः। । १५५२। ।
्रुगारकाव्सरसिको लेख्यविद्याविशारद्।
मधुरभाषी देव ब्राह्म णभक्तिमान्। १५५३ ॥
अन्तः कापर्चित्तवान्।
क्षिप्रकोपी प्रसन्नात्मा श्रातृभ्रात्रीसमन्वितः। । १५५४। |
1551-54, Sama nadiamsa - First half: The
Vaisya native belonging to the first half of Sama
Nadiamsa will be the eighth, or the ninth issue of
the family. He will be ever happy. He will be dark
in complexion, and will have an extremely wellbuilt body, and be passionate. He will enjoy
erotics (one of the eight or ten Rasas, sentiments
prevalent in character for which the tutelary deity
is Vishnu) and poetry. He will be skilful in writing
be learned, ingenious, sweet in speech, be
devoted to Gods and brahmins, be capable of
aa तो > page Sag चतुष्टयम्। । १५५८ |
een i : mal
1558-59, Sama Nadiamsa - 2nd Half: One
born in this part of Aries will have no pre-born.
He will be endowed with after-borns inclusive of
four sisters. He will be honourable. The 9th lord
Jupiter in aspect to the Sun and being in Aquarius
Navamsa, or being in aspect to or in association
with Rahu will deprive the native of co-born.
बाल्ये किचित् सौख्यमेति यैवने ऋणपीडनम्।
मध्ये मध्ये स्वल्पफलं वाग्मी च बहुबुद्धिमान्। । १५६० |
1560. During his childhood he will be somewhat happy. Debts will trouble him in his youth.
Off and on good results (indicated in the horoscope) will be interrupted. He will be an eloquent
understanding others’ thoughts, be inwardly cunning in disposition, be given to anger, be a pleased
soul, and be endowed with brothers and sisters.
भ्रातृस्थानाधिपे सौम्ये मेषंशे कुजवीक्षिते।
पश्चाद्भरातृविहीनश्च ज्येष्ठभ्रातृसमन्वितः। । १५५५।
speaker and be highly intelligent.
मातृस्थनाधिपे चन्र we re केतुसंयुते।
मानिनी ज सोमं गल्यचिरायुी।
दीर्घायुषी च भगिनी tara Fragen । १५६२। |
शेषं नाशमिति प्राहुस्तत्तन्मारकदायगे।
सम्पत्तारदशाकाले गुरू भुक्तै वसूरिमान्। । १६६३।।
mer
1555. If (however, for the said native) the 3rd
lord Mercury is aspected by Mars and at the same

मान्दन्वरप्रपीडदि वालारिष्टं क्द चित्क्व fad
सम्पत्तारदशाकाले गोचरे मिथुने शनौ न । १६६४ |
एकादशब्दे कष्टं स्यादुद्राद् शब्दे |
मातुलाधिपृतौ सौम्ये मेषनवांशके ।। १५६५॥
a ष्टियुते चेति गोचरे ललने शनौ।
ष्टमाप्नोति विपदूदाये न AME १५६६।।
1561-66. Long-living Mother etc.: Should
the 4th lord Moon join Ketu, in aspect to Jupiter
and at the same time beget Gemini Navamsa, the
native’s mother will be endowed will longevity.
Further, he will be honourable while his older
sister will be long-lived and will be auspicious
(will have a long-living husband). One of the
native’s brothers will also have a long life, while
other brothers will destroyed (early) in their
respective Maraka periods. The native will be
troubled by small- pox in the sub-period of
Jupiter in the second dasa. He will also suffer
from indigestion, fever etc. and will incur
Balarishta effects to some extent. During the said
dasa, when transit Saturn is found in Gemini (or)
in the 11th year, there will be some troubles.
Twelfth year will cause loss of father. The 6th lord
Mercury, denoting maternal kinsfolk, being in his
exaltation Rasi with Aries navamsa, should at
birth be aspected by Saturn. In that event, Saturn
in transit in Gemini will cause danger to maternal
kinsmen in the 3rd dasa of the native.
सुख्स्थनाधिपे चन्द्रे TART गुरूवीक्षिते।
राहुदये शुक्रभुकतौ oo । १५६७। |
व्यपे धनलाभश्च गेहे लक्ष्मीकटक्षवान्।
विशेषधनलाभः स्यदादायं च समं व्ययम्।। १५६८॥
1567-1568. New house: If the Moon, ruling
the 4th house, is in Gemini Navamsa, one will
obtain a new house in Rahu dasa, Venus bhukti,
provided the said Moon is in aspect to Jupiter.
Experiencing some expenses initially, the native
will gain financially and obtain the mercy of Goddess Lakshmi for his family. He will abundantly
gain wealth, but his spending will be in equal
measure.
विपत्तारदशाकाले गोचरे . वृश्चिके शनौ।
ज्येष्टभरातृविनाशश्च पूर्यभुक्तौ न संरायः ॥ १५६९॥
Chandra Kala Nadi
1569. Elder brother: In the Sun’s sub period
of Rahu dasa, (or) in the 3rd dasa whea Saturn
transits Scorpio, the elder brother of the native
will be destroyed.
५ 2 गुरूवीक्षिते।
BES वृषभे Bi त । । १५७० |
षड्विंशे सप्तविंशे च गोचरे चापगे शनौ।
स्व्मातुल मुतेद्राहो लभेशंशे त्रिकोणगे। । १५७१ । |
लाभेशदुष्टिराशै तु ara विनिर्दिशेत्। । १५७२।
1570-1572.Venus: The 2nd lord Venus
should be aspected by Jupiter and be in Libra
Navamsa. In that case, Jupiter’s transit in Taurus
will cause a family marriage. During the 6th/7th
year of age, with Saturn moving in Sagittarius, a
maternal uncle’s son will get married. See if the
11th lord’s navamsa dispositor is in a trine from
the ascendant. In that event when Saturn comes
to the Rasi aspected by the 11th lord, evils to
mother will occur.
षम् तारदशाकाले गेहे लक्ष्मीकरक्षकृत्।
PaO महद्भाग्यं व्यापारधनलाभवान्। । १५७३। |
1573-15731/2. Fourth Dasa: In the 4th dasa,
nis family will receive Goddess Lakshmi’s mercy.
After 30, his prosperity will be abundant and he
will have gains in business. He will be famous in
royal service and will please the king.
Wier प्रसिद्धश्च वष्छ्यंशे चरभागगे। । १५७४। |
चापे मन्दे प्रजातः प॒ मध्ये वयसि सौख्यवान्।
्रत्यक्तारदशकाले निक्षेपप्रम्तिमादिशेत् | १५७५। |
पंचचत्वारिंशदब्दे फंवाश्द्रत्सरेषु॑वा।
कुम्भेशांशकगे मन्दे निक्षेपं लभते नरः! । १५७६। |
1574-1576. Saturn in Sagittarius: One born
in a movable sign, whose natal Shashtiamsa also
falls in a movable sign, as Saturn is in Aries will
enjoy happiness in the middle of his life. In the 5th
dasa he will be abandoned (by his people). If in
this yoga, Saturn is in Aquarius Navamsa
(Kumbhamsakage Mande instead _ of
Kumbhesamsamsakage Mande), the abandoment
will occur in the 45/50th year of age.

Deva Kerala?
Notes: For Rasis ruling Shashtiamsas, see
Brihat Parasara Hora, Part 1.
acta सूर्ये तत्स्थे गुरूमिरीक्षिते।
शुक्रभुक्तौ पुत्रलाभं विनिर्दिशेत् । १५७७।।
1577. Child-birth: The Sun in the Sth house
as its lord, and in aspect to Jupiter will cause birth
of a child in Venus sub period in the 4th dasa.
भाग्यधिपदशाकाले स्वभुक्तौ च Tee
ज्येष्ठभ्रातृसतेद्राहं बन्धुवर्गे विशेषतः। | १५७८ 1 |
उद्योगमूलात् संपद्य पणिरत्नादिभूषणम्।
1578-15781/2. Ninth lord’s Dasa: The dasa
and Bhukti of Jupiter will give much happiness to
an Aries naitve. His relatives will particularly be
happy. His elder brother’s son will get married.
The subject will have professional gains. He will
acquire precious stones and ornaments.
षष्ठाधिपदशसन्धै oe, क्ितषृ। । १५७९। |
देहे रोगप्रपीडिदि वातरोगेण | ।
1579-15791/2. Sixth Lord’s dasa: In the sub
period of an adverse planet, in the dasa ruled by
the 6th lord, the native will be troubled by windy
disorders.
TERY तत्त्रिकोणे स्फटयेगं गते शनौ । । १५८०।।
चतुष्षष्ठौ तु वर्षे.वा अपमृत्युभयं ॐ 4
विष्णुमाह सरक जप्त्वा शन्त्य शान्ति,
चतुस्सप्ततिवर्ष तु at विंनिदिशेत्।
उत्तरायणगे सूर्य व । १५८२। |
कृष्णपक्षे दशम्यं च रत्र 1 वदेत्।
पापपुण्यसमं लोके प्रत्यक्षं देवकेरठम्। । १५८३। |
1580-1583. Death: When Saturn arrives at
the Rasi which is the Navamsa occupied by the
8th lord, or its trine, the native will have fear of
untimely death in the 64th year. Reciting Vishnu
Sahasra Nama will ward off the said evil. 74th year
will be the last leg of his life. He will die in
Uttarayana (Sun’s northerly course) when the
Sun is anywhere from Capricorn to Pisces in transi. im a दद fortnight, en Dasami Thithi, during
dag:
¡ ¡ मकरलगनम्- (Gate) (TEATS)
Capicorn Ascendant —
(Sundara Nadiamsa)
(Guru Nadi)
्रित्वार्यशकादीनि देशे राज्ञां HATHA!
मित्रात्मजजनद्रेषं |
मनोराज्यकलपिन -पचचत्वारिवत्सरे । | १५८५। |
जीवसौम्योत्तरे काले वातपित्तरूजातुरः।
मासेनैकेन सिद्धिः स्यादथ वा च Broads | १५८६ |
्िपचाशत्समाद्यात्वा चण्डदोषं विनाशयेत्।
पर्वमगे प्रजातस्य पापपुण्यफलं समम्। । १५८७। |
उत्तराशे तथ विन्दादुमाशक्ध्पषितम्। । १५८८। ।
1584-1588. NB: These five slokas, seemingly
narrating Sundara Nadiamsa of Capricorn ascendant suffer incoherence and lack of meaningful
sequence. Partly these relate to the king of the
country and partly to a native. The following
slokas from 1589 onwards give suitable account
of the same Nadiamsa. Hence the present five
slokas (nine lines in all) are to be ignored
Sundara Nadiamsa is not enlisted which
deals with Capricorn ascendant in this part of the
text. I have however a feeling that Surasundari
was wrongly copied as Sundara. Surasundari
Nadiamsa extends from 8 deg. 48’ to 9 deg. of a
movable sign; from 21 deg. to 21 deg. 12’ of an
immovable sign; and from 23 deg. 48’ to 24 deg.
of a common sign.
सुन्दरांशगते जीवे लग्नात् सप्तमकोणगे।
मृगलाने प्रजाते स मध्ये वयसि AAA! । १५८९। |
1589. Sundara Nadiamsa - Capricorn
Lagna: One born in this part of the zodiac, having
Jupiter in exaltation, or in the 5th/9th will earn
fortunes in the middle of his life.

144 Chandra Kala Nadi
तप्रमुमूलेन धनलाभं वम्। । १५९०।
कर्म मनी राहौ जूके वा ललनेञपि वा ।
तीथयत्रफलं चेति देवतेत्सवदर्शनम्। । १५९१। ।
भुक्तयन्ते देहपीडा च मितऋमजनविग्रहम्।
Ta चैव फलप्रप्तिः शन्ति कुर्याद्विचक्षणः ॥ १५९२॥
1590-1592. Rahu’s period: If the Moon
rules the 7th house and is placed in the 10th
house, the native will gain wealth through a base
king in the dasa periods of Rahu. He will further
acquire male issues during the said period.
Should Rahu be in the 8th/10th house with one of
the three Navamsaas, viz. Pisces, Libra and Virga,
the subject in Rahu dasa will visit pilgrim centers
and temples on festive occasions. In the end of
this sub-period, he will incur physical illnesses
and enmity with friends and close relatives.
Suitable propitiations be done (to surmount the
evils concerned).
चन्द्रलगनाव्ययं जीवं 1 दशां शुभभुक्तिषु।
विपति चन्दे दशायां शुक्रभुक्तिषु!
सन्तानेत्पत्तिलाभादि स्वगेत््ञातिनाशनम्।
बन्धुवर्गे विशेषेण क्रोधस्त्रीसंगमिच्छति। । १५९४ |
1593-1594, Note if Jupiter occupies the 12th
from natal Moon for a Capricorn birth. If so, the
sub-period ruled by a benefic, in the, dasa of
Jupiter (or) the 28th year will promote acquisition
of a newly constructed house. Should the 3rd
dasa be ruled by the Moon, the native inits Venus
bhukti will obtain sons but will see the destruction
of his kinsmen. Further the native will be fond of
cohabiting with women given to anger.
सप्तमाधिपतौ TI TR कामराशिगे।
तद्दशन्तर्दशाकाले अरिष्टं मुनिपुंगवः। । १५९५। ।
QT अपमत्यश्च स्वासप्राणहराणि च।
जीविते चेकषटयन्दे भेगरयसमुद्भवः।। १५९६॥
1395-1596. Luminaries’ periods: If the Sun
and the Moon exchange their houses for a
Capricorn birth, they will in their dasa and subperiods (either way) cause danger. In the end of
the dasa of the Moon/Sun, (as the case may be),
the subject will face fear of untimely death and
may even die. If he survives, he will (with this
exchange) not cross 61 years of age, but will acquire pleasures and fortunes.
गोचरे मिथुने जीवे धनं सपादयिष्यति।
लग्नाद्रा SAI ललने गुरो।
pt ae मनोवांछाफलं THAI । १५९६1 |
शके वर्षं फलमेवमुदाहूतम्।
1597-15981/2. Jupiter in transit in Gemini
will cause earning of wealth and gains through
association with army-chief and ministers.
Should he be in the 7th in his transit as counted
from Capricorn ascendant, or from natal Moon
(for such birth) the native’s fortunes will increase,
happiness will increase and his desires will be
fulfilled. These results can (also) occur in the
29th year of age.
Trailokya Nadiamsa
AH चरे लग्ने ya प्रजायते। । १५९९। |
शनम सुखी १ जातकः।
wart जननं चेति ।
गेहेशे 7 यन्नवाशस्थे यद्राश्यंशदुगणके। । १६०१। |
गृहद्ररे Walaa संशयः।
लग्नेशे rege गेहेशे WAFL । १६०२।।
वनान्तरपुरे जननं वा भविष्यति।
1599-16021/2. Trailokya Nadiamsa: The
native of first half of Trailokya Nadiamsa belonging to a movable ascendant will be a Soodra, ever
happy and be the fourth child of his parents. If
the 4th lord is conjoined with Rahu (in the above
case) birth will be in a north-south street, in the
eastern part in a house facing the north. See in
which Navamsa the 4th lord is placed. The house

Deva Keralam ifs
of delivery will correspond to such Rasi, Navamsa महानदीप्रन्त्यदेये विष्णवाल्यसमीपमे।
or decanate. Should the ascendant lordbeinthe जननं वासमाप्नोति भ्रातृत्रसयुतः सुखी। 1 १६०८। |
company of a benefic as the 4th lord is witha उत्तरा श्याम वरणैः as NPG
malefic, the native will either be born in atown = राजद्ररि प्रसिद्धश्च LE १६०९ |
surrounded by forests, or will dwell in sucha 43a चे लग्ने sas तु जायते।
town. लेखजीवनवान् रागी अश्ववाहनभाग्यवान्। । १६१० ।
Notes: Trailokya Nadiamsa 15
Trailokyamohanakari which extends from 14 deg, 1607-1610. Further, the street of birth will
48 to 15deg. of a movable sign; from 15 deg.to extend from west to east and the house will be
15 deg 12’ of an immovable sign; and from29deg, north-facing, situated in a region close to
48° to 30 deg. of a common sign. Some texts | Mahanadi (a river so named or a great river) and
simply call it Mohana Nadiamsa, or Mohita near a temple of Lord Vishnu. He will be happy
Nadiamsa. with his 3 brothers (after those destroyed). His
This part of the text deals with a movable bodily complexion will be dark. He will be heavyascendant. bodied and valorous. His name and fame will
increase through royal service. His livelinood will
लग्नात्ततीयमे मन्दे सोदरोत्पत्तिनाशवान् | | १६०३। । € bywriting activities. He will be passionate and
पश्चाद्भ्रातृविहीनश्च स्वमातुर्मरणं भवेत् त्। be endowed with horses (i.e. convevances).
1603-16031/2. Saturn in the 3rd: If Saturn is ila : | | it स रक्तवर्णशुभाकृति |
found in the 3rd house from a movable ascendant हरिशंकरभक्तिमान् । । १६१९९१९ |
the subject will lose his co-born and be devoid of = त्रलोक्यांशे पूर्वभागे SASH सहोदर
after-born. His mother will die(early) अथ वा द्रादश प्रोक्ता RIT सुजीविन | १६१२
wy ais cade नाशमिति स्मृतम्।
्रलोक्यांशे पूर्वभागे चैको जेष्ठः सुजीवतिः।। १६०४॥
सहोदरीबहत्व स्यदेकभ्रातृयुतो भवेत्। 1611-16121/2. First half: This subject of
Trailokya Nadiamsa will have blood-red com1604-16041/2, First half: Should birth be in. Pl&Mon anda pleasing appearance. He will foliw
Trai ; the code of conduct prescribed by Vedas and be
the first half of Trailokya Nadiamsa in a movable व (11011101 1
sign, the subject will have merely one elder Se ee eee, ae
sat ; - V whom
brother surviving. He will have many sisters but ae ee ee
one brother only six will have a good living. One of them will
be long-lived as others will incur (early) destrucउत्तरशे प्रजातः स gina ack | | १६०५। | — tion.
अथवाच तृतीय स a
पश्चाद्परातूमृतिं चेति भगिनीस्वल्पतां वदेत्॥ १६०६॥। a ATA 9 ae 1 । १६१
qa मन्दशे Sgt | । १६१४। ॥
1605-1606. Second half: If birth be in the oe प्रजातस्य मार्गमध्ये fog
second half of the above-cited Nadiamsa, the ४१ महक्लेशं समादिशेत्। | १६१५।।
subject will either be the first issue or third issue. विरोघदि रूपद्रवः।
His older co-borns will be destroyed. So also Pasi स्तापः पंचमब्दे महद्भयम्। । १६१६। ।
after-borns. And he will have a few sisters. ष्टमाप्नोति स्वपिता मातृवैरवान् ।
्रलोक्यांशे चे लग्ने उत्तरांशे प्रजायते। 1613-16161/2. Second Half: One born in the
ूर्वपश्चिमवीथीषुं चोत्तरस्यां प्रजायते। । १६०७। 1 = 5००१५ half of this Nadiamsa will have cight co-

| 46 Chandra Kala Nadi
born out of whom 3 brothers and 2 sisters will be
long-lived. and happy. If the Sun, being in the
company of Venus, occupies a Navamsa ruled by
Saturn, the native’s father would be on his way at
the time of delivery. In the 3rd year of age, his
paternal uncle will undergo a great deal of difficulties, and will incur royal and ministerial
wrath. In the 5th year of native’s life, the said
relative will be subjected to great fear and will be
displaced. In addition to these, the native’s father
wil have enmity with his mother (i.e. the native’s
grandmother).
yee प्रजातस्य पित्तरै चिरजीविनो) 1 १६१७। |
ल्पपारजीवनं भूरि धनं संपदयिष्यति।
SAR स्वजनकः कञछत्द्रसयोगवान्। । १६१८।।
1617-1618. Parents: Parents will be longlived in case of birth in the first half of Trailokya
Nadiamsa. They will earn abundant wealth
through business transactions. If birth be in the
first half, the native’s father will have two wives.
FRAN फलं नित्यं पूर्वभागे न विद्यते।
पितृ्यै द्ववेको वाथ ferrari १६१९॥
ae a पुत्रवन्तावेकः पुत्रविहीनवान्।
पुत्रशोकः पितृन्यस्य न संशयः।। १६२०॥
एकस्य pha ake ile Aa |
पूर्वमे सुविस्तारं sey | |
लग्ननाडीफलं किचित् पूर्वभागस्य । । १६२२।।
1619-1622. Paternal uncles: The native of
the first half of Trailokya Nadiamsa will have two
paternal uncles, one of whom will have two wives.
Further, one of them will have many sons while
one will be devoid of sons. Birth in Trailokya
Nadiamsa (either half) will cause grief on account
of children for paternal uncle. Chandra Nadi
explains elaborately about the first half of this
Nadiamsa. But there is no reference to second
half, ‘
deal स्थानाधिपे ear मेषे कीटनवांशके।
ane सोदरः Ga चोत्तरांशे भवन्ति वै।। १६२३। I
उत्तरांशे विष्णुभक्तः स्वपितृभ्ातृपभोषकः।
ate स्वपितु स्सोद्रस्सुखी। । १६२४ ।
पितृव्यौ द्रौ बहुकालं सुजीवतः।
om TIER |
आयुष्मन्तो हि पंचैव शेषं नाशमि तीरयेत्। । १६२६।।
1623-1626. Second half - Trailokya Nadiamsa: Mercury ruling the 9th house, (in case of birth
in a movable ascendant) should be placed in
Aries, with Scorpio Navamsa. Then the father of
the natie of this part of Trailokya Nadiamsa will
have five brothers, The subject will be a devotee
of Lord Vishnu and will look after his parents.
Out of the five paternal uncles, two will be endowed with long lives. In case of birth in first half,
both the paternal uncles (ref. ऽ. 1619 etc.) will be
endowed with comfortable living. If birth be in
first half, the native’s father will have ten coborns
five of whom will be destroyed.
Notes: Second half of Trailokya Nadiamsa
in a movable sign rules from 14 deg. 54 to 15 deg.
of space. Mercury being in 23 deg. 20 to 26 deg
40’ of Aries begets Scorpio Navamsa.
tania ल्यभवनाधीशः स्व्भानुयुतवीक्षितः।
1627, Rahu: Should the 11th lord be in association with, or in aspect to Rahu, the native’s
father will incur abundant grief on account of
destruction of his (father’s) coborns.
qa aac सन्ति — ष |
स्वपितृव्यफलं चेति दीर्घमायुश्च
1628. The Sun: The number of survivng
co-born will depend on the final Ashtaka Varga
Bindus obtained by the Sun (in his Ashtaka Varga,
in 656 of a movable Rasi ascending). Such number of paternal uncles will enjoy longevity.
त्रलोक्यंशे पूर्वभागे मृगलग्ने प्रजायते।
सर्वज्येष्ठपितृव्यश्च महारोगेण कर्शितः। । १६२९।।
1629. Capricorn Ascendant: Should birth
be in the former half of Trailokya Nadiamsa in

Deva Keralam
Capricorn ascendant, the native’s eldest paternal
uncle will be troubled by a very serious illness,
Notes: From now onwards, discussed is
Capricorn, a movable ascendant. Thus the other
three movable ascendants are excluded from the
discussions.
सप्तमाधिपतौ चन्दर pl igi
सर्वज्येष्ठपितृन्यस्तु
1630. Dead Children: For a birth cited
above, the Moon in Aries with Gemini Navamsa
(or in Virgo/Sagittarius Navamsa) will cause acquisition of two wives and birth of dead children
for the eldest paternal uncle of the native.
शके |
दत्तपुत्रफलपप्ति्दव्यार्जनसमथैकः।
मध्ये वयसि रोगारत पुरा पापस्य हेतुना।। १६३१॥
पित्रोश्च वंशपपेन aq व्याधिपीडितः।
1631-16311/2. The said relative (as per 5.
1630) will at last adopt a male child and be an
expert in gathering wealth. Due to the sins of last
birth, he will in his middle age be troubled by
diseases. Because of the sins committed by the
members in the native’s father’s family, two of the
paternal uncles will be troubled by diseases.
रक्तवर्ण कृशंगश्च सर्व॑ज्येष्ठपितामहः। । १६३२ । |
ARPS ज्ञातिद्रव्यपहारवान्।
ग्रन्थान्तरे पूर्वभरगे त्रेलोक्यंशे हि जायते॥ १६३३॥
1632-1633. There are other authorities who
state that the eldest paternal uncle of the native
of former half of Trailokya Nadiamsa will be of
blood-red complexion, be weak-bodied, will have
numerous sons and much wealth and will steal the’
wealth of his cousins.
पचन्येष्टभ्रातृयुतः सर्वेषमवरः स्मूतः।
तत्तेषु च यः करिचनज्ज्ञातिवित्तापहारवान्॥ १६३४॥
1634, The native will have five elder brothers
and he will be the youngest of all. He will steal
the wealth of his relatives.
कषप्रकोपी च पापात्मा ग्रहशंकप्रपीडितः।
शप्रेणरेग्यमाप्नेति सदा कृषिपरो भवेत्। । १६३५ |
स्त्रीलोलुफ कामी परस्त्रीसंगपापवान्।
महारोगी पुत्रवान् पुत्रिमान् भवेत्। 1 १६३६।।
कंडब्रद्रयवान् कश्चन्मृ तापत्यबहूत्ववान्।
WER प्रसिद्धश्च yp le Ll । । १६२७ ।
पभगिनीद्रयवान् रागी |
कालान्ते सुतप्रप्तर्येगवांस्च न संशयः । ! १६३८1 |
1635-1638. He will be instantly given to
anger, be sinful and troubled by dysentery but will
have early recovery. He will be ever industrious,
but be somewhat devoted to liasing with others’
women. He will be libidinous and unite with
other women. After a long interval, he will incur
a dangerous disease. He will beget sons and
daughters. He will have two wives who will
deliver many times dead children. He will be
famous in royal service, will have 3 brothers and
2 sisters, be happy, and skilful in gathering wealth.
After a long interval he will have children(?).
pana पितृव्यतनय naa |
1639. Paternal uncle: The paternal uncle of
the native of Trailokya Nadiamsa, former half, will
adopt two boys one of whom will prosper excellently from time to time.
्रलेक्यंशे पूर्वभरगे सम्पद्दायेअपरर्धगे।
स्वपिता धनिकः श्रीमान् ज्ञातिभग्यधनप्रदः | । १६४०।
1640. Second Dasa: The said native’s
second dasa in its later half will give wealth to his
father who will also gain wealth through his relatives.
Sees च मकरे न्ययर्जितकुलोदमवः।
RT रक्तवर्णश्च प्रातृभत्रीसमन्वितः। । १६४१। ।
1641. Capricorn Ascendant: One born in
this ascendant in Trailoxya Nadiamsa belongs to
afamiiy of repute. His father would be blood-red

in complexion and would have brothers and
sisters.
बुधांशके गुणी चैव प्रकृतिश्च तथा भवेत्।
संशयात्मा
सोदरा दश षु ज्येष्ठौ हि पिरजीविनौ।
स्वपितुर्भगिनी चैव सेगपुत्रवती स्मृता। 1 १६४३ | |
एका क्लेशवती नित्यं ake च कर्शिता।
1642-16431/2. Father: If the Navamsa ascendant is Gemini the native’s father will be virtuous
and will have predominant qualities of Mercury.
Further he will be of doubting nature, and will be
adulterous. He will have ten co-borns out of
whom two elders will be long-lived. His sister will
have a diseased daughter. Another daughter (of
the native’s aunt) will be miserable and indigent.
Notes: Trailokya Nadiamsa in Capricorn
does not give Gemini Navamsa. Hence the
Nadiamsa should not be linked here. This only
means birth in Capricorn ascendant with Gemini
as Navamsa. That is the ascendant should be
between 16 deg. 40’ and.20 deg. of Capricorn.
पितृव्याधिपतै भैमे रोगशे राहसयुते। । ewe |
— दरे सेगवन्तौ रोगिणे वा त्रयः स्मृतः।
शिवभक्तश्च धर्मपुण्यपुराणवित्। । १६४५। |
शिवाचनपरे नित्यं भ्रातृमूलविचारवान्।
+644-16451/2. Mars: If the 11th lord, being
in the company of Rahu, occupy the 6th Navamsa,
two or (even) three of the native’s paternal uncles
will be diseased. His father will be a devotee of
Lord Siva and will be skilful in religion, mythology
and meritorious disciplines. He will ever worship
Lord Siva, but will be worried (grieved) on account of co-borns.
Notes: Here again, the Nadiamsa under discussion is implied.
श्रद्धशे SEC येगे तलोक्यंशे तु जायते। । १६४६ 1 |
पितृणा वा पितुव्यानां फलं विस्तारमादिशेत्।
Chandra Kala Nadi
उत्तरांशे पितृव्य द्रौ पुत्रमावक्तिविचलो। । १६४७। |
राजयोगं प्रकृर्वात पितृभावे समादिशेत्।
1646-16471/2. For one born in Sraddha
वाल्ये परस्त्री संगपापवान् । 1 १६४२ | Nadiamsa(?) with Durdhura yoga in Trailokya
Nadiamsa(?) results about father and paternal
uncle have been elaborately explained. (These
lines are mixed up.) For the native of second half
of Trailokya Nadiamsa in Capricorn ascendant
there will be two paternal uncles who will be
devoid of ason. They will be fickleminded.
1 व्यभवने
| S a कश्चिद्राहन योगवान्।
उत्तरशे फलं सत्यं कम् WL । १६४९ |
पिताम हाध्पि शक्रे स्वक्षेत्रे रविसंयुते।
नीचांशे चोत्तरे भागे प्रबलः स्वपितामहः। । १६५० |
मण्डलाधिपतिद्ररे नरवाहन योगवान्।
बहुदेशाधिकारी A एकभ्रातृयुतः सुखी। । १६५९। ।
कलत्रत्रयवान् भोगी पाषण्डाचारपापवान्।
क क PRATT अग्रहारदिकारकः। । १६५२। |
: क्व चिच्वेति वैष्णवप्रभुसेवकः।
1648-16521/2. Venus: If the 11th house is
aspected or occupied by Venus, the native of
Trailokya Nadiamsa will be the third issue in the
family. He will have moderate number of conveyances. If birth be in the 2nd half of the said
Nadiamsa (with Venus & C), the subject’s paternal grand-father will certainly be long-lived.
Should Venus, as the 5th lord, be in own house in
the company of the Sun and be in Virgo Navamsa,
the grand-father of the native of 2nd half of
Trailokya Nadiamsa will be famous. He will obtain conveyances through royal patronage. He
will lord (2) over many countries, will have one
co-born and will marry thrice. He will be
hypocritical and of sinful character, will perform
Lord Vishnu’s worship and will be the head of a
colony of Brahmins. He will be fond of Brahmins
following orthodox laws, and will serve a Vaishnava king.
ग्रन्थान्तरे चोत्तरांशे AAPA तु जायते। । १६५३। ।
श्िवभक्तप्रभुद्रारा बहुग्रामाधिकारवान्।

Deva Keralam
cask पत्रिका च तथा LP १६५४ । |
¦ pk gist |
पितृमूलाद्भग्यवती समन्विता। । १६५५।।
कालान्ते. निर्धना क्लेशवती सदा।
ुत्रक्लेशवती चैका wit कर्शिता। । १६५६। |
बहुकालं सुमांगल्या पत्रशोकवती स्मता!
1653-16561/2. Different: According to some
other authorities, the native of second half of
Trailokya Nadiamsa (not the grand- father) will
acquire lordship over many villages through a
king who is a devotee of Lord Siva. He will have
two sons and two daughters. His paternal aunt
will have a long-living husband and she will be
fortunate through her father (i.e. the native’s
paternal grand-father), After some time she will
become poor. Another paternal aunt will be ever
in trouble, and will have grief on account of coborns and sons. She will have a long- living husband and will lose a son.
्रलेक्यंशे gary प्रसिद्धः. स्वपितामहः। । १६५७। |
बहुधरातृयुते मानी बहुपुत्र्थ भाग्यवान् ।
तयकोद्यानधर्मात्मा Fraga जापुराणवित्। । १६५८। |
बाल्ये ऋ्यसमृद्धिश्च देव ब्राह्मपोषक।
पुत्रमूलात् सुसन्तोषी पैत्रमूलेन कर्शितः । । १६५९ |
बालस्य जननात् पूर्वं पितामहविनाशनम्।
1657-16591/2. Grand-father: The paternal
grand-father of the native of first half of Trailokya
Nadiamsa would be famous. He would have
many co-borns, be honourable, would have many
sons and much wealth. He would have tanks and
gardens constructed, and worship Lord Siva.
During his childhood, he would enjoy abundant
fortunes and will honour Gods and Brahmins. He
would be happy through his progeny, but would
be emaciated (worried) on account of his grandchildren. He would have passed away before the
birth of the subject native.
्रलोक्यंशे पूर्वणगे निर्धनो हि पतिमहः। । १६६०।।
FoR पापी स्वल्पजीवनवान् Fal
RR सुतप्रप्तिः सम्पद्दाये मरिष्यति। । १६६१।
1660-1661. The paternal grand-father of the
native of former half of Trailokya Nadiamsa
would be poor. He would have three wives, be
sinful and would have limited means of livelihood.
He would beget progeny through latter wives (i.e.
not by first wife, but by second/third wife). He
would die during the native’s second dasa.
Note: These two slokas are in contradiction
to effects given in slokas 1657-591/2 above.
्रलोक्यंशे पूर्वभागे स्वमाता दीर्घजीविनी।
उत्तरंशे मातृनाथो द्वत्रिभार्यायुक्त पिता। 1 १६६२।।
1662. Parents: The subject of the first part
of Trailokya Nadiamsa will have a long-living
mother while the one of second half will have
early loss of mother, and his father will have two
or three wives.
yaar पिता बाल्ये स्वगेहे चौर्यकृत्यवान्।
वन् किचित् पश्चात्तापसुघार्मिकः। । १६६२। |
पिता दारापवादवान्।
क्िप्रकोपी प्रसन्नात्मा मूर्वप्रकृतिमान् सदा। । १६६४। |
शि वार्वनपरो नित्यं पीठार्चनपरः gai
aes पुत्रमूलेन बहुसौख्ययुते भवेत्। । १६६५। |
1663-1665. First half - Trailokya Nadiamsa:
The father of the subject would indulge in thieving
during childhood. He would also take to some
questionable deeds, but would later on repent
and follow virtuous path. He would incur some
blame on account of his spouse (1.6. native’s
mother). He would be instantly given to anger
(but) be pleased (soon). He would ever be foolish,
would worship Lord Siva and would prefer offering prayers being seated on a pedestal of Kusa
grass (Peethaarchana Parah). He would be
happy. During his advanced age, he would get a
lot of satisfaction through his progeny.
पूर्वभगे वयोमध्ये पिता रैगेण कर्शितः।
पे तुस्नानं त्रिवारं स्यादूगंगास्नानफलं समम्। । १६६६। |
Tea पूर्वभागे ` स्वपिता प्रातृशोकवान्।

150 Chandra Kala Nadi
सोदरोत्पत्तिनाशः स्यात् त्रैलेक्यांशस्य जातके 8603 1
अस्वतन्त्र स्वल्पकालं पश्चात् स्वातन्त्रयभाग्यवान्।। १६६५७॥
। fh दशसन्धै मनस्तापो ज्ञातिवरग Tate
द्रदशन्दात् क्लेशं प्राप्नेति BARE । १६६८। ।
ग्रहच्छिद्रवशपन्नः पितृन्यसुतवत्सलः।
1666-1668 1/2. Further, the native’s father, as
above will during his middle age be troubled by
sickness. He would bathe in Sethu for 3 weeks
and would acquire merits of bathing in the Ganges. He would incur grief on account of his
coborns. For some time, he would be dependent
on others, and later become independent and
would prosper. After the 12th year of the native,
his father will become wealthy. He will be much
grieved due to his brother’s children. He would
be endangered due to adverse planets. He would
be fond of the children of his uncle.
सम्पदुदाये तृतीयांशे अलोक्यंशे पितृसुखम्।। १६६९॥
धनधान्यसुभषप्तिः सोद्रभ्रातृभाग्यवान्।
1669-16691/2. Trailokya Nadiamsa native
(either half) will in the last one-third part of
second dasa obtain comforts through father,
apart from wealth, grains and ornaments. He will
be fortunate in respect of co-born.
उत्तरंशे प्रजातस्य पितृभ्रातृवशात् FET । १६७०।
प्रबल्ययोगवान् सत्यं Bese सुभाग्यवान्।
1670-16701/2. The subject of second half of
the said Nadiamsa will be happy through father
and co-borns. He will attain a great deal of
prosperity, particularly in Chola kingdom.
दशाधिपक्रमाच्चैव पति जायते। । १६७१।।
पित्रदिफलमाप्नोति लक्षणम्|
1671-16711/2. These two lines lack
coherence and are not amenable to proper translation.
नक्षत्रधिपतौ केतौ चनदराद्भाग्ये शुमेक्िते। । १६७२।।
पितृमातृसुदीर्घयुः स्वदशायां शुशुभम्।
मध्ये ज्वरभयक्लेशः वतम् सुखी।
1672-16741/2. Ketu dasa: Should Ketu rule
the birth constellation, and the 9th from the Moon
be in aspect to a benelic, the native’s parents will
be long-lived. The dasa of Ketu will then give
mixed effects and destroy co-borns. These effects are for a person born in Trailokya Nadiamsa.
In the end of the said dasa, mental agony will
come to pass and the spouse of a kinsman will die
during the Sun’s transit in a malefic Rasi. These
results apply to birth in the first half of Trailokya
Nadiamsa. Further, in the middle of the said
Dasa, the subject will be troubled by (dangerous)
fever. But he will recover early and be happy.
उत्तरांशे पितृव्यस्य सन्तानोत्पत्तिनाशनम्। । १६७५। |
Sill सिंहमीनस्थिते tah
जन्मदेशप्रजावधि। । १६७६ । |
1675-1676. Other results: If birth is in the
second half of Trailokya Nadiamsa, the native’s
paternal uncle will face destruction of progeny.
In case of birth in first half, the Sun in transit in
Sagittarius, Leo or Pisces will endanger the
native’s father.
लग्नात् फंवमगे शुक्रे निधनाधिपसंयुते।
स्वदशायां महत्सौख्यं shal MTT! । १६७७।।
जनकस्य धनप्राप्तिः सोदरारि | :
पंचमाधिपदोषेण क जातिजैर्विपत्। । १६७८। |
पिताम SAGA गृहे कल्याणसंभ्रमः।
स्वतातभगिनीभर्ृप्राबल्यधनलाभवान्। । १६७९। |
पितूर्भीतृकखत्रस्य व ।
भम्पदूदाये फलं सत्यं जातके। । १६८०।।
1677-1680. Venus in 5th House: Should
Venus be in the 5th house from the ascendant
(which is Capricorn), in the company of 8th lord
(Mercury), then the dasa of Venus will confer
abundant happiness. Acquisition of learning and

Deva Keralam 1
auspicious events will also come to pass. Evils to
the native’s coborns will have to be feared. Due
to the blemish of Sth lord Venus (by being in
association with 8th lord), many of the native’s
kinsmen will be endangered. A brother of paternal grand-father will be destroyed. However,
there will be a marriage in the family. The native’s
paternal uncles and aunts will prosper. Death of
the wife of a paternal uncle will come to pass.
These results for the second dasa (ruled by Venus
who is placed in the Sth along with Mercury, for
Capricorn native) relating to birth in the first half
of Trailokya Nadiamsa will bear truth.
उत्तरांशे वृषे मन्दे शनौ स्वपिता राजविग्रहम्।
उद्योगहानिरूत्प त्ति स्वमात्रेषमापनुयत्। । १६८१। |
1681. Second half: Respecting a native of
this part of Trailokya Nadiamsa, predict royal
wrath to father when Saturn in transit reaches
Taurus. Further, loss of calling to father and adversities to mother will also result.
मम्पदूदाये पूर्वभागे स्वपिता सौख्यमशनुते।
सिहे अर्कनन्दने काले देहायसं धनव्ययम्।। १६८२॥
1682. The first half of second dasa will cause
good results to father. Yet when Saturn in transit
is found in Leo, ill-health and loss of wealth to
father be foretold.
मेषन्तो TR मन्दे गोचरे शनिसस्थुते।
जन्मदेशे अरिष्टं स्यत त ।१६८२॥
स्वप्रभोश्च धनप्राप्तिगं जन्तेश्वर्यभाग्यवान् |
सम्पद्दाये शुभः स्त्रीणां पूर्वार्धं जन्तभूमि षु। । १६८४। |
रान्यधिपतिसोख्यं FAG धनक्षयम्।
fae शनियुते काले पूर्वभगे तु जायते। । १६८५ |
1683-1685. Saturn moving inthe end of Arics
and in Taurus will cause evils in the country and
loss of relatives to king (?) who will however gain
wealth, elephants etc. Happincss to king in the
first half of the dasa, and loss of wealth in the
second half will come into effect, with Saturn in
transit 12 8th house.
Notes: These three slokas are irrelevant to
natal horoscopes and are a mix up.
गुरूद्धिती यपयाये मेषे |
SUM चोत्तराशे शे विवाहकृत्।
विपद्दाये सुतप्रार्पतरूत्तरंशे तु जायते। । १६८७ |
1686-1687. Marriage and progeny: For a
native of the first half of Trailokya Nadiamsa,
Jupiter coming to Aries in his second round will
cause marriage. When he comes to Leo,
favourable circumstances will prevail for
procreative and propitiative rites. In case of birth
in second half of the said Nadiamsa, Saturn
moving in Virgo will cause marriage, and birth of
a child will occur in the third dasa.
१ व॑भागे विवाहोत्सव सौख्यवान्।
स्वपिता : स्यज्ज्ञातिवर्गे शिशुक्षयम्। । १६८८ । |
विवाहानन्तरं चेति दारवंशेअप्यरिष्टकृत्।
Po स्वदेहस्य ज्वरपीडा भविष्यति। । १६८९। |
सावत्फलानि लग्ने ac शन्तयादिपौख्यवान्।
पूर्वभागे सुसम्पूर्णं वाणिज्यं प्रबलं FAT । १६९० |
1688-1690. One born in the former half of
Trailokya Nadiamsa will have a comfortable (or
lavish) marriage. His father will be versed in
religion. Loss of children among the families of
the native’s relatives will take place. After the
native’s marriage, evils to in-laws will come to
pass. With the Sun is in transit in evil Rasis, the
subject will be troubled by fever and the like
(following marriage). Depending on the Ashtaka
Varga Bindus, in Capricorn Lagna, the native will
obtain (suitable) happiness in the beginning and
concluding parts of the third dasa. This native, of
first half of the said Nadiamsa, will be abundantly
prosperous in trading activities.
उत्तरांशे प्रजातस्य द्राविंशब्दे बहुश्रियम्।
प्राबल्यं स्वस्य aaa अश्वलामं विनिर्दिशेत्। । १६९१।।

a
1691. One born in the second half of
Trailokya Nadiamsa will earn much wealth in his
22nd year. ‘He will prosper with his own brain.
He will gain horses (i.e. conveyances).
अन्तरान्तर्दशमार्भे उत्तरांशस्म जातके ।
फलविस्तारमाप्नोति चन्दरवयेगांशजाठके। । १६९२। I
1692. This sloka is not amenable to translation as there is some mixup. The words
"Chandrayogamsa Jathakah" giving no clue read
25 "Aswa yogamsa Jathake" in another version - yet
another misnomer.
eRe
अष्टमाधिपतौ सूर्ये wa भृगुसंयुते।
दशन्त्ये क्लेशमाप्नोति मध्ये धय
1693. If Venus is in the Sth house (in Taurus)
with 8th lord Sun, the concluding part of Venus
Dasa (ref. sloka 1677 supra) will cause miseries
while in the middle portion of the dasa, (asa result
of this conjunction) auspicious events will be on
the increase.
aca पूर्वभगे विपद्दाये शुभाधिकम्।
कनिष्टभरातुस॒न्तोषं
्रलोक्यंशे विपद्दये पूर्वभागे तु जातकः। । १६९५ |
स्व प्राबल्यं प्रकृर्वात जनकस्य शुमाशुभम्।
सम्पदूदशान्त्ये सन्तापं प्रबलज्ञातिनाशनम्। । १६९६। |
1694-1696. Third Dasa: For a native of
former half of Trailokya Nadiamsa, auspicious
events will be pronounced in the dasa which is
third in sequence. He will further acquire
progeny and abundant wealth and grains. Happiness to younger coborns will come to pass.
Family marriages etc. will occur. In this dasa the
native will have widespread fame (prosperity etc.)
but his father will incur a mix of good and bad
events. During the concluding part of second
dasa (Sampath dasa), the native in question will
be distressed, and a series of deaths of relatives
wil take place.
तुलाशनौ पितृव्ये वा तत्पुत्रे वा मरिष्यति।
Chandra Kala Nadi
16961/2. Saturn in Libra: Under this transit,
the native’s paternal uncle or a son of paternal
uncle will quit the world.
त्रलोक्यांशे पूर्वथागे निधनाधिपदायगे। । १६९७।।
देहालस्य च लभते ज्वरगण्डाद्युपद्रवम्।
¡ प्राप्नोति भूरिश
1697-16981/2. Eigth Lord: In case of birth in
the first half of Trailokya Nadiamsa, in the dasa of
the 8thlord (Sun), the following effects will occur.
The native will be deprived of his physical energy
(will turn slothful). He will be endangered by
fever etc. His sister will be mentally tortured. His
paternal uncle will have loss of a son. He will
incur grief on account of loss of children born.
Tareas वेधक ग्रहभुक्तिषु। । १६९९। |
स्वस्मानजनारिष्टं गेहे शिशुविनाशनम्।
व्हुव्यापारसिद्धिः स्यत् पूर्वभागस्य जातके । । १७००।
पिता सन्तोषवान्नित्यं क्रूरभुक्तिं विना मुखम्।
1699-17001/2. In the sub-periods of adverse
planets during the rulership of Sun’s dasa, the
native will see his men in the grip of evils. Some
children in his family will face destruction. The
native of former half of the said Nadiamsa will
have wide professional gain while his father will
be ever happy in the dasa except in adverse subperiods.
उत्तरंशे राजयेगं विपद्दाये न संशय । । १७०१। |
कारागृहपयप्रप्ि सर्वस्वं नाशमेष्यति।
1701-17011/2. One born in second half of
Trailokya Nadiamsa will in his third dasa derive
benefits of Raja Yoga (position, wealth etc.)
without fail. He will have fear of imprisonment
and will have loss of everything.
Note: The 3rd dasa for the native of
Trailokya Nadiamsa will give at onc stage adverse
effects like imprisonment and loss of everything.

Deva Keralam 13
SAG पूर्वभागे द्यूनाधिपतिदायगे। | १७०२। |
०० लं चेति स्वतातारिष्टमादिशेत्।
काले अतीद क्लेशमश्नुते। | १७०२।।
द्विती येद्राहसिद्धिः स्यात् तलोक्यांशस्य जातके।
1702-17031/2. Dasa of 7th lord: Note if the
birth in Trailokya Nadiamsa is in the first half.
Then the dasa of the 7th lord in operation will
cause distress to mother and evils to father. The
periods of Venus/Moon (or Moon/Venus) will
produce abundant difficulties to the native. He
will have a second marriage.
दयूनाधिपे वेश्मगते सौभाग्यं दशवत्सरे | १७०४। |
+ त्रदारादिषु रोगचिन्तां
aR पापयुते तुपु
1704-1705. If the 7th lord (Moon) is in the
4th house, then ten years (of Moon’s Vimsottari
dasa) will yield fortunes. However the subject
will be worried on account of ill-health of his
spouse and progeny. He will also gain wealth (in
this dasa). If the 7th lord Moon is conjunct 8
malefic, the native’s son will have a second marriage.
SRR पूर्वभागे pa रभाग्यवा
राजयोगं च लभते बहुभाग्यप्रद । | १७०६] |
माय प्रजातः स ॥ Gp a द्विमान्।
दवे धर्म सिद्धि राजद्वारे ति | । १७०७। |
1706-1707. One born in the first half of this
Nadiamsa will have abundant gains in foreign
places. He will get effects of Raja Yoga and will
acquire a great deal of fortunes and be happy.
His wealth and grains will increase. In his fourth
dasa his religious acquisitions will be on the increase and he will get auspicious clfects in royal
Service.
प्रत्यक्ताराधिपे भौमे दशायां लग्नेकेन्दरे।
अतीव श्रियमाप्नोति बहुध्ार्थतिद्धिमान्। | १७०८। |
toa
षष्ठे कुजे प्रजातस्य दशायां सोदरीव्यथा।
सहोदरभ्ातृपीडा स्वगेहे शिशुनाशनम्। | १७०९। |
1708-1709. Mars: If the 5th star counted
from birth star is ruled by Mars (as per Vimsottari
dasa order) and the said Mars is in an angle from
the ascendant, the subject of Trailokya Nadiamsa
will have plenty of wealth and religious advancements. Should Mars be in the 6th house, then the
dasa of Mars will cause grief through sister. Further the native will see his brothers in trouble.
Children in the native’s family will be destroyed.
्षमाधिपदशान्त्यादे प्रत्यग्दाये cad मा
मध्ये वा जननीमृत्युः पूर्वभागे तु | | १७१०।।
व भुक्त्यन्तमारभ्य
शे पूर्वभागे कराते क्ववित्। । १७११। |
1710-1711. Fourth Dasa: One born in the
first half of Trailokya Nadiamsa will in the beginning and end of fourth dasa and (or) in the Sth
dasa enjoy good intelligence(?). In the middle of
Sth dasa, his mother will pass away. In the sub
period of Rahu and that of Jupiter (in 5th dasa),
the mother will be somewhat endangered physically.
सुखेशे राहुसंयुक्ते दशायां राजविग्रहम्।
स्थनच्युतिप्रवासादिक्लेशं प्राप्नेति भूरिश । १७१२।।
1712. If the 4th lord is with Rahu, then the
dasa will bring royal enmity, dislocation, migration etc. in an abundant measure.
उत्तराशे राजभयं निगव्डदिप्रपीडनम्।
FEMS चेति पश्चादारोग्यभाग्यवान्। । १७१३। |
1713. Birth in the 2nd half of Trailokya
Nadiamsa will cause fear of confinement and
blows by iron chain. He will recover his health
after some time (following such blows
ee
स्वपुत्रद्राह सौख्याप्ति
yaar फलं सत्यं सर्वदा सौढ्ययोगवान्। । १७१५। |

1714-1715. Sixth dasa: One born in the
former half of Trailokya Nadiamsa will in the first
sub period of 6th dasa undergo a lot of miseries.
And in Jupiter’s sub-period, he will acquire good
fortunes. His son will get married. He will beget
grandsons. The native of first half of this Nadiamsa will be ever happy and the effects mentioned
will bear full truth.
उत्तरंशे राहृदाये पुत्रशोकेन कर्शितः
पूर्वभागे राहुदाये परै |
त्तरंशे धनच्छेदं दशन्त्ये SHA महत्।। १७१४७॥
1716-1717. Rahu dasa: One born in the
second half of Trailokya Nadiamsa will incur grief
on account of progeny in the dasa ruled by Rahu.
His wealth, grains ctc. will be destroyed and he
will lead a miserable life. But if birth be in the
former half of this Nadiamsa, the second half of
Rahu dasa will cause happiness. The end of Rahu
dasa will cause financial destruction to the native
of second half of this Nadiamsa and he will be
distressed.
निधनाधिपते
FARA
विपद्दाये मन्दुभुक्तावपमृत्युस्तथा्रि |
तद्दोषपरिहाराथं शान्तिं कु्द्विचक्षणः। । १७१९। |
राहुदाये तथा व ड
व Aaa ll
रलोक्यंशे पूर्वभागे |
मेषमासे मृतिश्चेति तत्तिकोणे तथापि च। । १७२१।।
1718-1721. Death - First Half: Birth being
in the first half of Trailokya Nadiamsa will cause
timely death in Saturn’s sub period (Sani Bhuktishu 18 another, right reading which denotes
Saturn’s sub period.) during the major period of
8th lord Sun. But the same Saturn’s sub period
during the dasa which is the third in order will
cause fear of untimely death for which the wise
should seek (suitable) remedies. Saturn’s sub
period in Rahu dasa will also bring (such) danger.
By donating gingilee, this fear can be overcome.
The subject of former half of this Nadiamsa will
live for sixty-two years. His end will strike when
the Sun is in Aries, or its trine.
दशायां शनिदायगे।
Chandra Kala Nadi
उत्तरशि TT गुरूभुक्तौ eae
जीविते शनिभुक्त्यन्ते तुलामासे मृतिं वदेत्। । 89221 |
1722. Death - Second half: This native will
die in Jupiter’s sub-period in Rahu dasa. If at all
he survives, Saturn’s sub period (in Rahu dasa)
will kill him, with transit Sun in Libra.
aaa केतौ शन्यंगारकवीक्षिते।
गुरूदुष्टियुते वापि पापचुण्यसमं भवेत्। । १७२३। |
1723. Ketu in 12th: Should Ketu be found
in the 12th house tn aspect to Saturn-Mars, or
even to Jupiter, the native’s deeds - meritorious
and sinful - will be in equal measures.
ग्रन्थान्ते भर्गवसंप्रदाये
am शशी पापयुतेक्षितो वा।
कन्यशे 9५
1724. Other sources: Other sources following the school of Bhargava point out that if the
Moon is in Sagittarius, with Virgo Navamsa, in
aspect to or in association with a malefic, without
being related to a benefic, the native will have
(ever) diseased physique. And he will belong to
कालमृत्युभयं स्मृतम्। । १७१८ । । two Gotras.
। । कर्णच्छिद्योगः। |
Severence of Ears
सशन्यंगारके मीने केतौ कन्यांशे तथा।
मन्ददाये च तन्मध्ये कर्णच्छेदं विनिर्दिशेत्। । १७२५।।
1725. Severing of Ears: If Mars is in Pisces
in the company of Saturn while Ketu is in the
Navamsa of Virgo, the native’s ears will be
severed (or damaged) in the middle of Saturn
dasa.
स्वोच्वांशगे dear भूसुतेन निरीक्षिते।
वाग्मी पापात्मदेहः स॒ अगम्यागमनोत्सुकः।
शुक्रमनदयुते जातो कुजरारित्रिकोणगे। । १७२६।।
विप्रस््ीसंग्वान् पापी मध्ये राजप्रियः get
भेमांशके भैमगृहे pia al 11 १७२७। |
बीजहिसापरो नित्यं संशयः । । १७२८।।

Deva Keralum
1726-1728. The native will be a skilful
speaker, will commit sinful acts and will be fond
of travels, if a debilitated planet, which isin aspect
to Mars, occupies its exaltation Navamsa. Should
the two planets, Venus and Saturn, join in a sign
which is a trine to a Martian Rasi, the native will
join Brahmin women, be sinful, will be dear to
king and be happy. Jupiter in a Rasi of Mars, in
the company of Ketu and in Pisces Navamsa gives
an inclination to destroy crops (seeds etc.) and
evil disposition.
मीने तलांशके केतौ दारसोख्यविहीनवान्।
परस्त्रीसंगवान् कामी ० प्रपीडितः। । १७२९। |
Was प्रपीडा स्यान्मीने अप्यगे |
1729-17291/2. Ketu in Libra Navamsa: The
native will be devoid of marital happiness if Ketu
placed in Pisces occupies Libra Navamsa. Further he will be libidinous, will join others’ women,
and willincur urinary disorders. He will also have
pains in the urinary passage. These will come to
pass even if the said Ketu occupies Scorpio
Navamsa owned by Mars, while placed in the sign
jas
1733. Ketu will not be a blemishful planet (as
above} even if he joins Jupiter, provided he is
placed in Virgo. Ketu in the ascendant Aquarius
wil deprive one cf coborn. In the 9th (in Libra)
he will cause penury.
मीने चापांशगे केतावसितेन निरीक्षिते
किचिटूदारापवादा स्याच्चरलग्ने व जायते। । १५३४ । |
धर्मिकाअत्यन्तमेधावौ कल्ये sarah
भरतृशेकप्रदो नित्यं aca: मुखी । ¦ १३३५ |
1734-1735. See if Ketu is placed in Pisces in
aspect to Saturn, and occupies Sagittarius
Navamsa. In that case. the native’s spouse will
bring a bad name to him. However this aplies
only to a movable sign on the ascendant. Further,
the native will be charitable in disposition. be
highly intelligent, will take to bad path in his
childhood and will incur much grief on account
of his coborn. He will wed a wicked woman, and
be happy (in other ways).
यस्यां नाड्यां प्रजातस्तु मीने केतौ शनीक्षिते।
गुरूद्ष्टिविहीनै च EN Aa शोकवान्। । ९७३६। |
जन्मलग्नाशगे केतावसितेन |
स्थिरलग्ने प्रजातश्च ज्येष्टश्रातृविनाशवान् । | १७३७।
1736-1737. If birth is in Trailokya Nadiamsa,
Ketu placed in Pisces in aspect to Saturn, without
the aspect of Jupiter, will cause grief to the rative
Pisces.
श्निदृष्ट यांगवैकल्यं FA
किचित्कर्णविकारः स्याद्वृष्भांशे गुरो स्थिते। । १७३९ ।
समरे वा कलापे वा मर्गे
1730-1731. Other effects: Saturn aspecting
Ketu in Pisces denotes some physical deformity.
If Ketu is in a sign of Mars in the company of
Jupiter, the native will have danger to his ears in
a war or quarrel. Or he will have some deformity/disease of the ears. Such a deformity can also
occur if Jupiter occupies Taurus Navamsa.
ara व्यये केतो गुरूसंयुतवीक्षिते।
राजगुवोस्तल्पगामौ ज्येष्ठभ्ातृषुं वैरवान्। । १७३२।।
1732. Ketu in the 12th house in the company
of or in aspect to Jupiter, and placed ina Navamsa
ruled by Mercury will make the native a royal
teacher. He will in addition have limited desire
for sexual union. He will also have enmity with
his elder coborn.
कन्याराशिस्थतः सूयक क्तो न दोषदः।
कुम्भलग्ने Wels a
on account of coborn. Ketu aspected by Saturn
will destroy the native’s elder coborn, if at all in
the process he occupies the Navamsa ascendant.
This effect applies only to an immovable birth
Lagna.
Notes: The ascendant discussed here is an
immovable one, instead of a movable ascendant.
On Ears
कर्णविधप्रन्त्यदेशे TATA ee |
Tes त्वचे लग्ने केतौ मन्दा च।
शनिदृष्टो त्रिवर्षूषु कण्वेधप्रपीडितः। । १७३९। |
1738. The subject will have blood and flesh
aplenty around his ears, or hair on the upper part
दारिद्यमादिशेत्। । १७३३। । of the lobes of the ears.

156 Chandra Kala ५201
Note: For this sloka, the relevant combination is not present. It is not known whether we
should link it to sloka 1737, in which case the
Sanskrit caption in the text is a hindrance. Further the sloka conveys no sensible meaning.
1739. Ear disorders: One born in Guha
Nadiamsa of a fixed sign ascending, while Ketu
aspected by Saturn occupies Capricorn/Aquarius
Navamsa, will have severence of ears in the 3rd
year.
मकरांशगके केतौ जीवार्किरविवीक्षिते।
कुम्भमीनांशके Ae: HAA TAMA || १७४० |
कर्णवेधान्तरं भाति दुष्ट रोगादिहेतुना।
कण्च्छेदमिति प्राहुस्तदथवेषु नो भयम्। । १७४१ ।
शस््रनलाभ्या शरपीडया वा
bile Bade कर्णस्य वदन्ति चार्या |
स्वकर्ममवधिपते बलादये
1740-1742. Navamsa ascendant should fall
in Aquarius/Pisces. Ketu should be in Capricorn
Navamsa, apart from being aspected by Jupiter,
Saturn and the Sun. Results: The subject will
incur danger to his ears from weapons, fire and
ulcer. Due to some severe diseases, he will have
loss of ears (1.6. hearing power). If the 3rd lord is
endowed with strength, and be in the company of
a benefic, the subject will possess richly ornamented ears.
on स्यत्तदीशे शुमसयुते।
1743. The third house denotes one’s ears. If
the said lord is in the company of a benefic,
without falling in a Navamsa owned by a malefic,
or if the 3rd lord is with Jupiter, the subject will
have beautiful ears (without diseases etc.).
विकर्णभवनं वित्तं वित्ते पापं शनीकषिते।
मन्दाशगे विक्रमेशे श्रत्रे कन्तुकपीडितः। | १७४४। |
1744. The second house (being 12th to
Karna Sthaana, 3rd house) is a secondary house
in relation to ears. If the 2nd house has a malefic
who receives the aspect of Saturn, while the 3rd
lord is in a Navamsa owned by Saturn, the native
will suffer disorders of ears.
gad मक्षिकादेः BER प्रवेशनम्
बाधमाप्नेति कूलात् पापद्गयोगमपत्रतः। । १७४५। |
कुजे राहुयुते दृष्टे विकर्णस्थाममश्रिते।
कर्णमूले TU कर्णद्रारान्तरे कृमिः। । १७४६ | |
लग्नात्तृतीयगे जीवे कर्णसेगो न fered
तद्दिनेशयुते वापि कर्णरोगार्थभाग्यवान्। | १७४७ | |
1745-1747. Troubles from flies ete: If the
3rd lord (or even the second lord) is in the company of Rahu, related to a malefic by aspect or
association, the native will have troubles on account of flies bees entering in his ears. Mars in
the 2nd house in aspect to or in association with
Rahu causes ulcer in the roots of the ears and
growth of worms. If Jupiter occupies the 3rd
house there will be no disorders of the ear. The
Sun present in the said house will cause ear disorders but will give wealth.
विक्रमेशे गुखूयुते समन्दे a
वृश्चिके बहुभाग्यं स्यच्छस्त्राग्नि Tes भयम्। | १७४८ |
मकरे GPR च १ वायुपीडितः।
कुम्भे चोरभयप्रप्तिः राजाज्ञया भयम्। । १७४९। |
शुभक्षेत्रे महत्सोख्यं कर्णमूषणवान् सदा।
1748-17491/2. Jupiter with the 3rd lord and
with Saturn will cause ear disease. If this combination occurs in the third house which is Scorpio, the native will gain abundant fortunes but will
have fear from weapons, fire and thieves. If
Capricorn is the 3rd house having Jupiter-Saturn,
the native will have diseases of intestines and
testicles, apart from windy disorders. Aquarius
in such a case will give fear from thieves, while
Leo will bring danger through royal decree. A
benefic’s sign as 3rd house having Jupiter-Saturn
will cause great happiness and acquisition of ornaments of the ear.
लम्बकर्णीशभागस्थे अवस्थाभागहेतुना।
लम्भकर्णमिति प्राुश्चोव्टपाण्डयादिकं विना। । १७५०। |
SOR देशभेदे शा
लम्भकर्णमिति प्रोक्तं । । १७५१।।
1750-1751. Note: These two slokas are not
meaningfully constructed and are hence not
amenable to translation.

Deva Keralam [37
मन्दाशगे तृतीयेशे Re मगुसंयुते।
Tats व्यये पपे त्र ti । । १७५२। |
पुरा बाल्ये बालकस्य |
तस्य पापवशाच्चैव कर्णकन्तुकपीडितः। । 20431 |
तद्दोषपरि हारार्थं विष्णोश्च प्रार्थनां वदेत्।
seen द्विजाय प्रतिमां तथा। । १७५४। |
दानेन. शस्त्रादिप्रभवां सूजम्।
मन्त्रं जपेत् कन्तुकनाघ्नम्। । १७५५। |
1752-1755. Venus in Scorpio, 3rd lord in a
Navamsa ruled by Saturn, and malefics in 2nd and
12th from Lagna - this yoga will cause disorders
of the ears. This is because in the previous birth
during childhood the native committed theft of
ear ornaments. To overcome this disorder, prayer
to Lord Vishnu should be resorted to. Mantras
and Japas to please Lord Krishna be performed
through Brahmins, installing the image of the
Lord. Donation of ear ornaments be also done.
कर्णस्थानगते पापं तृतीयेशे शुभान्विते।
विकर्णे गुरूदुष्येतु कर्णशृलः प्रशामयति। । १७५६। |
मैथुन श्रुणयद्विप्र कणेशुली भवेन्नरः।
स्वस्त्री वा बधिरा किचिदःते काले विमुच्यते॥ १७५७॥
निष्कविंशधिकं दद्यादैवज्ञाय कुटुम्बिने।
विष्णुप्रकाशक मन्तरं जपेद्रोगोपशन्तये। | १७५८ । |
अपामार्जनमन्त्रेण मन्त्रितं तु जल a पिबेत्।
भेजनं ब्राह्म णेभ्यश्च प्रदद्याद् तथा। । १७५९ । I
कर्णशुलेपशन्त्यर्थ कुजस्य प्रार्थनां चरेत।
स्कन्दव्रतोपवासी च शलाकामनुमाजपेत्। । १७६०। |
पलेन वां तदर्धन कर्णमृलव्रणाय् तु।
शलाका च स्वर्णमयी दानं कुर्याद्विचक्षणः ॥ १७६१॥
कर्णकुण्डलदानं तु निष्कमात्रप्रमाणतः।
निष्क विंश्तिसंख्याकं कर्णशुलं विनश्यति॥ १७६२॥
प्रतिमां वस्त्रसंयुक्तां प्राप्तारिष्टनिवृत्तये।
तुभ्यं दास्यमि विप्रन यथोक्तफलदो भव ॥ १७६३ ॥
1756-1763. According to Brahmayaamala, if
the 3rd house is occupied by a malefic, the 3rd
lord is with a benefic and the 2nd house 15 in
aspect to Jupiter, the native will suffer ear-aches.
कुजंशके घटे केतौ शन्यंगार कवीक्षिते।
शुभदृष्टिविहीने च बधिरःस्यान्न संशयः ।। १७६४॥
कालान्ते तु वार्धक्ये वायुना वधिरामयंः।
मीनांशके त्वपुत्रस्तु राजयोगर तः सुखी। | १७६५।।
जीवदृष्टि युते जातो मृतापत्यबहत्ववान्।
oy
जीवांशके इषे केतावसितेन निरीकषिते। 1 १७६६।।
TOMES त्याच्चरलग्नस्य जातके |
1764-17661/2. Should Ketu be in Aquarius in
aspect Saturn and Mars, and be in a Navamsa
owned by Mars, without possessing the aspect of
a benefic, the subject will be deaf. (Alternatively)
he may become deaf in his old age due to windy
blemishes. If Ketu described above is in Pisces
Navamsa (instead of Martian Navamsa), the subject will be childless but will enjoy Rajayoga and
be happy. Should Jupiter aspect Ketu (who is
placed in Pisces Navamsa), the native will beget
dead children (instead of altogether being childless). The same effect of begetting dead progeny
will follow if Ketu placed in Pisces Rasi, aspected
by Saturn, occupies a Navamsa of Jupiter (1.6.
Sagittarius/Pisces). These yogas about progeny
apply to a movable sign assurging.
चरलग्नस्थिते पापं त्वसितेन समन्विते। । eval |
बुधान्विते ज्ञान वांश्च स्वपुत्रः कर्णपीडितः।
1767-17671/2. See if a movable sign ascends
and contains a malefic. If so, note Ketu joining
Saturn/Mercury. As a result, the native’s son will
have ear disorders while the native will be blessed
with wisdom.
चरोभयस्थिते केतौ पुत्रिका नेत्ररोगिणी । । १७६८ |
शुभांशे त्र कषिप्रेणारोग्यसंयुता।
वि
कर्णरोगं विजानीयात् सौमयनाडीफलं स्मृतम्।
तत्पापरिहारार्थं ब्रहमतीर्थमनुस्मृतम्।
त्रिदिनस्नानमात्रेण सर्वपापैः प्रमुच्यते। | १७७० |
1768-1770. Ketu in the ascendant, which 15
either a movable sign or a dual sign will cause
diseases of the eyes to the native’s daughter. Ifin
the process the planet Ketu is in a benefic’s
navamsa, or is associated with a benefic, her
diseases of the eyes will be cured early. The ear
disorders referred to above are due to the native’s
using harsh words to a Brahimin, according to
Budha Nadi. To get rid of this sin, dips for three
days in Brahma Teertha (a place of pilgrimage on
the Reva or Narmada River) be taken.

[3S Chandra Kala Nadi
लग्नातृतीयगे मन्दे लग्ने शुभयुते सुधीः।
कर्णरोगशतादीनि oe |
नेत्रान्ते कर्णपर्व CAIUS a: | ail १७७१ | |
अथवा कर्णरोगेन्य साध्यं चेति शुभांशके।
चापाशके त्वमाध्यः स्यच्छुभयेगे सुभाग्यवान्।। १७७२॥
1771-1772. Saturn placed in the third house
while the asendant is occupied by a benefic
denotes a person who will be highly intelligent.
Additional effects for this yoga are: Ear diseases,
hurt by weapons in a war in the eyes or by the side
of the ears. If in this yoga, Saturn is in a benefic
Navamsa, the bad effect will confine to mere
disease of the ear while bad effects will be totally
absent by Saturn being in Sagittarius Navamsa.
And if the yoga is blessed by a benefic, the native
will be highly fortunate.
जामित्रधिपतौ लग्ने शन्यंगारकवी्िते।
दन्तव्रणभयादीनि SRA प्रपीडितः। । १७७३। |
षष्ठाष्टमाधीशरशौ स्फ्ुटयोगं गते शनौ।
क्रूर रशिक्रूरमासे देहोपद्रवमादिशेत्।
तद्योषपरिहारार्थं शन्तिं कुरयाद्विचक्षणः। । १७७४। |
1773-1774, If the 7th lord is placed in the
ascendant in aspect to Saturn and Mars, the native will suffer from ulcer in the region of
teeth/cheek. When Saturn in transit arrives at the
space denoted by adding the longitudes of lords
of 6th and 8th, the native will face physical ailments, during the months denoted by evil transits
of the Sun. To overcome this, suitable remedies
be resorted to.
On Progeny
पत्रलग्नेशदरिशगुरूभिः 1.
TEST प्रजातस्य सन्तानप्रतिबन्धकम्।
पत्ररूढाधिपे शुक्रे लग्नात् कर्मत्रिकोणगे। । १७७६ । |
FAR प्रजातः सः सन्तानप्रतिबन्धवान्।
. 1775-17761/2, Assessment of native’s son
(1.6. progeny) be done through the following: The
lords of 5th, ascendant and the 7th apart from
Jupiter. One born in Pankaja Nadiamsa will have
obstacles in obtaining progeny if the lords of the
5th and 7th are in debilitation. If Venus becomes
the lord of the Putra Aroodha Pada (i.e. Aroodha
pada for the Sth house) and is placed in the 10th
or its trine, counted from rising sign, the same
result will materialise. This will apply only when
the rising sign’s Navamsa falls in Pisces.
Notes: For Pankaja Nadiamsa, please see
notes under sloka 685- 686. From sloka 1775 to
1778, Pankaja Nadiamsa, Capricorn ascendant is
dwelt with.
(a) If Venus and Moon are in simultaneous
debility, the native in question will have obstacles
in begetting progeny.
(b) Venus is lord of 5th. He should also
become lord of 5th Aroodha or Putraroodha.
Being so he must occupy Libra, or Aquarius, or
Gemini to give same effects as at "a" above.
As for condition ‘b’, the Navamsa ascendant
should be in Pisces. This is not possible as
Pankaja Nadiamsa in Capricorn ascendant comes
to Vrigo Navamsa.
This should be interepreted as Venus fulfilling the conditions stated above should 218० be in
Pisces Navamsa - his exaltation Navamsa, to create obstacles in respect of progeny.
This view is supported by Venus being in 5th
house and being in Pisces Navamsa & C bringing
in the picture a great delay in birth of children or
through second marriage, vide sloka 1779-1780
infra,
Apparently this strength of Venus is a discount for progeny in case of Capricorn ascendant.
पंकजांशे पूर्वभागे सुतेशे नीचराशिगे। । १७७७। |
TH भार्या सदा क्लेशवती भवेत्।
गर्भपत्रे Ha: स्थित्या सन्तानप्रतिबन्धकी । । १७७८। |
1777-1778. One born in former half of
Pankaja Nadiamsa with the 5th lord in debilitation will have a spouse who will be disposed to
abortions and who will be ever miserable. Due to
settlement of worms in the womb, she will have
obstacles to bear a child.
५. शुक्रे मीनांशे गुरूवीक्षिते।
TUM दारान्तरे भवेत्। । १७७९।।

Deva Keralam Sy
अदुष्टयलयोगेन र प्रार्थनां रवेः will have (series of) travels. His attempts will
गोपालप्रतिमादानं शिवार्चनम्। | ९७८० | | vield fruits. Following the second marriage,
1779-1780. Venus in aspect to Jupiter, being (natural) death of his first wife will occur
in the Sth house, and occupying Pisces Navamsa = पंकजंशे पूर्वभागे कुजत्रिंशांशजातकः।
will cause birth of children after along interval, = लक्ष्मीयोगप्रजातश्च दीर्घमायुश्च विन्दति। ! १७८७ | |
or through re-marriage. Due to good fortunes = षटपंदा्त्समन्त्यादो कालमृत्युभयं महत्।
and (suitable) efforts of the native, prayers to यदि जीवति पुण्येन AMT YL । १७८८ । |
Lord Sun, donation of Lord Krishna’s i d
+ 1787-1788. One born in former half of
? i iva wi 7
0 ४. Pankaja Nadiamsa in Trimsamsa of Mars will
लग्नेशे यनवांशस्थे मेषदि गणयेत्ततः। enjoy Lakshmi yoga, and long life. He will incur
तावत्संख्यासुतप्राम्तिरोजयुमकलक्षणम् | | १७८१ । | death in the 56th year. [fhowever he survives due
to the merits of previous birth, death will be cer1781. See who rules the natal ascendant. tain at eighty.
Note his Navamsa position. Count from Aries till
the said Navamsa. The number so revealed will । } कटक लग्नम् - (चम्पकांश) । |
denote the number of issues to be born to the ~
native. Odd Navamsas will mean male children
and even Navamsas female children. it gat oer
कर्कटे तु प्रजायते।
ूर्वपुण्यप्रभवेण shea | niga तीयो भवति Fa । १७८९। |
लग्नात् सप्तमगे AA निरीक्षिते॥ १७८२॥ महानरदीप्रन्त्यदेशे नात्र संशयः |
र । १७८३। । 1789-17891/2. One born in Venusian Trimassist qa गे त्वेवमुदाहृतम् हतम। samsa in Cancer ascendant, in the first half of
1.3 es Tage Champaka Nadiamsa will be the third issue of the
1782-17831/2. Due to the merits of previous family. His birth will be in a town in the region of
birth, only one son will survive. Mars inthe 7th | Maha Nadi.
house in aspect to the 12th lord, while the sig- Notes: Also please see sloka 1412 etc. for
nificator Jupiter is in the 5th house, will cause = Champaka Nadiamsa in Cancer ascendant.
birth of children through re-marriage. Further
the native will join others’ women and be sinful लग्ने धनरशिस्थे aes निरीक्षिते। 1 १७९०। |
The above results (from sloka 1775 to 1783) are Gray परं भरायमारोग्यदूढ गत्रवान् |
so described for birth in the first half of Pankaja चन्द्रे कन्यां तु प्रनायते। । १७९१ । |
Nadiamsa. वाल्ये दारिद्रमापन्नो यौवने राजयोगवान्।
भग्याधिपदशाकाले त्वेकपंचाशवत्सरे | १७८४। | पचविंशात् परं भाग्यं गेहे लकष्मीकटाक्षदम्। | १७९२।
ae जीवे द्वितीयोद्राहमादिशेत्।
रसिद्धिः स्याद्विशेषधनलाभवान्। । १७८५। |
यातायातं प्रकरी त यलकार्यर्थसाधकः।
विवाहानन्तरं चेति ज्येष्ठभायौविनाशनम्। । १७८६ |
Cancer Ascendant — Champaka Nadiamsa
1790-1792. Ascendant Lord: If the ascendant lord, Moon, is in the second house, in aspect
to the 11th lord, the native will prosper after 30
years of age. He will have a healthy and strong
physique. If the Moon is in Leo, with Virgo
1784-1786. The said native willremarry with Navamsa, the native will be in the grip of poverty
Jupiter’s transit in the end of Aries, orin Taurus, = during childhood; in his youth he will obtain efduring the dasa of the 9th lord (or) in the Slst fects of Raja Yoga. After 25, he will be
year. He will further have abundant business == prosperous and his home will be blesscd with the
gains, and will gain wealth in foreign lands. He = mercy of Goddess Lakshmi.

TIS Yt चन्द्रे त्विद्राशनाडिगे।
रूपवान् मतिमान् वाग्मी प्रसन्नमुखनेत्रवान्॥ 8033 Il
अदुष्टशाली Tle राजयोगयुतो भवेत्।
रक्तवर्णो मध्यगक्रः कुन्नदेहस्वरूपवान्। | १७९४। |
1793-1794, Moon in Indra Nadiamsa: In
case of birth in the former half of Champaka
Nadiamsa, the Moon (being ascendant lord)
placed in Indra Nadiamsa will make the native
beautiful, intelligent, skilful in speech and bestow
upon him charming face and eyes. He will be
fortunate and charitable in disposition. He will
obtain Rajayoga. He will have blood-red complexion. Of medium build, he will look short-statured.
Notes: Indra Nadiamsa could be referred to
in the notes under sloka 1105 supra.
म ary शुत्रत्रिंशंशनाडिगे।
वीर नित्यं देवब्राहम णपोषकः। | १७९५। |
मिताशी मितभाषी च मितनिदोअतिजाग्रतः।
Big i भूषणप्रियः। । १७९६। |
श रेषु क्रूरकृत्यवान्।
यनिहीनश्च स्वभूजारजि तभोगवान्। | १७९८ । |
ज्ञानाशे सुखनायके।
सर्वेषमुपकारी च शैर्यसाहा सकीरतिमान्। | १०९९। |
west नित्यं श्रीमान् दीनजनप्रियः।
शिवेत्रतेप॒वासी च हरिश्करभक्तिमान्। 1 ९८०० |
स्नमार्गवृत्तिनिर तश्चोत्कृष्टधनसिद्धिमान्।
कृषिपश्वादिभाग्यं च ग्रामभूम्यधिकारवान्। । १८०१। |
1795-1801. Venusian Trimsamsa: Birth in
Cancer Lagna, former half of Champaka
Nadiamsa, in the captioned Trimsamsa will give
following results. The native will be fond of sagely
persons. He will honour gods and Brahmins. He
will eat limited food. He will eat less, sleep less
and be extremely cautious. He will be skillful in
understanding the thoughts of others. He will be
fond of ornaments, and be himself an ornament
(of the family), He will be wicked amongst wicked people; his acts will be evil in nature when it
concerns the evil. He will be bereft of paternal
fortunes. He will enjoy wealth earned by his own
labour. He will be an expert in Sastras relating
to Dharma (1.6. Scriptures dealing with Religion)
if the 4th lord Venus is in 9th in Navamsa. He will
Chandra Kala Nadi
be helpful to all. He will be endowed with
prowess, adventure and fame. He will be fond of
listening to mythological stories. Being rich, he
will be well disposed to poor persons. He will fast
to obtain the mercy of Lord Siva. He will be a
devotee of Lord Vishnu and Lord Siva. He will
follow virtuous path and possess wealth obtained
through very fair means. He will have fortunes in
agriculture and cow-breeding. He will lord over
villages and lands.
Notes: Champaka Nadiamsa in Cancer
does not occupy the degree of Venus’ Trimsamsa.
In such cases we have only to select the trimsamsa
condition.
सिंहांशकसुयोगेन जीवनं राजसेवया।
चम्पकरशि पूर्वभागे कर्कटे च पजायते। । १८०२। |
1802-18021/2. (The 4th lord) in Leo Navamsa will enable the native earn livelihood through
royal service. One born in former half of Champaka Nadiamsa, in Cancer ascendant, will be skilful in horse-riding and will be head of a vast army
and a band of horses.
er ce ब i
लग्नेशे कर त्विष्टसत्कर्म॑सिद्धिमान्। । १८०३।
राजान्तरफलं चेति राजमुद्राधिकारवान्
1803-18031/2. If the ascendant lord Moon is
conjunct Mars, one will attain fruits of his virtuous
acts. He will prosper in another kingdom (ie. a
foreign land) and will get powers with royal seal.
ee लग्नाद्र्रत्रिकोणगे। । १८०४। |
ज च कनिष्ठश्रातुयोगवान्।
भगिनीत्रयमायुष्यमेका क्लेशवती भवेत्। । १८०५। |
बाल्ये वैधव्यमाप्नोति दानधर्मविचरिणी।
सुवासिनी मृता चैका पतिपुत्रसमन्विता। । १८०६ ¦ |
1804-1806. Mercury: The 3rd lord Mercury
being in the 8th, or its trine, will destroy all older
coborns. However, the subject will have younger
coborns. He will have three sisters one of whom
will lead miserable lives. She will incur
widowhood right in her childhood (or early
years). She will be charitably disposed. Another
will live in a respectable/comfortable abode, en-

Deva Keralam iol
dowed with spouse and progeny. One of his
sisters will die (early).
मातृस्थानाधिपे शुक्रे सुतेशे निधनस्थिते।
git संदृष्टे मातुदीर्घायुरादिशेत्। | १८०७1 |
सुवासिनी चिरं कालं वाल्ये क्लेशवती भवेत्।
1807-18071/2. Venus: Should the 4th lord be
Venus, while the Sth iord placed in the 8th is
aspected by 7th lord, the native’s mother will
enjoy long life. Her husband (1.6. native’s father)
will also be long-lived. The mother would have a
miserable childhood.
Notes: The conditions laid down in the
sloka are not clear as far as Venus is concerned.
It should read: Venus placed in the 4th house, as
the lord & C.
TEN बन्धुसयुक्ते सुतेशे स्वोच्चराशिगे 1 १८०८। |
चम्पकांश प्रजातृश्च गजान्तेश्वर्यभाग्यवान्।
चन्द्रस्य राहोश्च तनोश्च नाथे -
भाग्यस्य नाथो यदि कर्मगे वा।
1808-18081/2. If the 4th lord is in the 4th
house while the Sth lord (Mars) is in exaltation,
the native will be endowed with elephants, wealth
etc. provided he is born in Cancer Lagna,
Chamapaka Nadiamsa.
सम्बन्धवान् वाहनलाभकाभ्यां
तै चेत्तदा चेश्वरराजयोगो। । १८०९। |
1809. The native of Champaka Nadiamsa
will have elephants and fortunes. Lords of Moon
sign, ascendant and the 9th along with Rahu’s
dispositor placed in the 10th, or mutually related
causes a Rajayoga giving gains through conveyances.
जीवे कुजयुते दृष्टे योगश्चामरसंज्ञकः।
चामरे योगजातस्य SAT, पर् सुखम् १८१०॥
भेरीमृदंगवाद्यादि चम्पकांशे तु जायते।
1810-18101/2. Chamara Yoga: Jupiter being
in the company of or being in aspect to Mars
causes Chamara Yoga. The subject of this yoga
will get prosperity after 32 years of age. (Bheri
Mridanga Vadyaadi etc. denote musical drums
etc. which are not added in the translation as they
have no relevance here.)
Notes: The kind of Chamara Yoga discussed in the text relates to lords of the 9th and
10th for Cancer ascendant. In effect, the subject
rises in life after 32.
Chamara Yoga is explained in three different ways by standard texts. These are as under:
a) Lord of ascendant exalted and placed in
an angle in aspect to Jupiter.
b) Two benefics joining in one of the four
places, viz. ascendant, 9th. 10th and 7th.
Results for either of the above two kinds of
Chamara Yoga are: The native will be a king, be
honoured by a king, be a scholar, eloquent and
long-lived.
c) Ascendant occupied by a benefic while its
lord is in exaltation. Results: long-life, prosperity,
fame, virtues.
लभे भाग्याष्टमे द्यूने रव्यादिग्रहसंस्थिते। । 82821 |
केन्द्रदियेगो विख्यातः पंवविंशात् परं सुखी।
ख्यातः स्यदधियोगजा तमन. श्रीमान् प्रसिद्धो महा
नश्वान्दोव्नवाहनादिविभवेर्नित्यश्रियं ARS |
Tacoma विभ्राजितं चेन्दुवत्
कीरतिप्रभवशर्यसाहसयुते देशान्तरे कोतिमान्॥ १८१२॥
1811-1812. Kendraadi Yoga: The Sun and
other (six planets occupying (exclusively) the four
houses, viz. 11th, 9th, 8th and 7th will produce a
yoga called Kendraadi Yoga denoting fame and
happiness after 25 years of age. One born in Adhi
Yoga will be famous, wealthy, great and be endowed with horses, palanquins and other kinds of
conveyances, and the name and fame of his
spouse and progeny will ever shine like the Moon.
He will be endowed with fame, valour and adventure. He will attain fame in a foreign land.
Notes: The first line of sloka 1811 is a partial
presentation which specifies musical instruments
like Bheri, Mridanga etc.
These two slokas deal with two different
yogas, Kendradi Yoga and Adhi Yoga.
The condition laid down for Kendradi yoga
along with its effects are clear.

Adhi Yoga effects are mentioned, without
giving rules of formation. The reader is referred
to standard texts like Parasara Hora, Jataka
Parijata, etc.
Kahala Yoga
IAI भेमे स्वाच्चे वर्गेत्तमाशगे | । १८१३ । ।
भाग्यनाथेन संयुक्ते योगः काहकसंज्ञकः।
बहुधनधान्यसमृद्धि णे सुषि
सुगन्धमाल्यादिभूषणं ्॥
कुरूते Heo
रविसमकान्ति महामतिं कान्तम् | १८१४॥।
wes साहसी कोपी स्थिरचित्तः प्रतापवान्।
चतुरगबलोत्साही युद्धेअमि तपराक्रमः। । १८१५। ।
1813-1815. Kahala Yoga: For a Cancer
Lagna native, Mars in Vargothama Navamsa in
Capricorn, being in the company of Saturn will
produce Kahala Yoga. As a result, the native will
possess abundant grains, much wealth, scented
articles, garlands and ornaments, and be happy.
He will be blessed with the splendour of the sun.
He will be highly intelligent and radiant.
Valorous, given to anger, firm in disposition, adventurous etc. are additonal effects. He will be
enthusiastic among the four kinds of armies
(using men, horses, elephants and chariots) and
wil exhibit ilimitable valour in times of war.
Notes: For Kahala Yoga, see notes under
Slokas 1430-14301/2 dealing with Cancer ascendant.
In the present slokas, another variety of
Kahala Yoga is discussed involving thé lords of
7th and Sth-cum-10th for Cancer ascendant.
काहठे यौवने सौख्यं कौमारे त्वल्पसौख्यकृत्।
बाल्ये SSH: सत्क्तऋप्रियो भवेत्। ।१८१६। |
1816. According to the school of
Brihaspathi, the native having Kahala Yoga will
enjoy happiness in his youth prior to which happiness will be limited. Poverty will mark his
childhood. He will obtain a virtuous wife and be
fond of her.
Chandra Kala Nadi
Notes: Childhood being in the grip poverty
is a significantly adverse produce of Kahala Yoga.
जीवो भैमेन युक्तो यदि भवति तथा स्वक्षगे कर्कटे वा
A Se Bestia hae og वा यत्र संस्थो रथतुरगगजारोह ‘|
गेहद्ारप्रदेश मणिमुकुटलसद्धस्तसामन्तसेव्यः॥ १८१७॥
1817. Jupiter: Jupiter joining Mars in Sagittarius, Pisces, Cancer or in an angle counted from
Cancer ascendant will give foilowing effects. The
subject will be the lord of chariots, horses,
elephants and forts. He will be endowed with a
long lease of life. He will possess a number of
palanquins studded with golden ornaments. The
entrance of his house will have decorations of
precious stones. Subordinate kings will serve
him.
नीचे स्वोच्चांशके जीवे सुखेशेन समन्विते।
चम्पकांश प्रजातः स पुत्रीपुत्रसमन्वित्र। । १८१८ |
पप्रजात्रसममायुष्यं कन्यका सुखजीविनी।
1818-18181/2. In Debilitation: Jupiter in
debilitation, in the company of 4th lord (Venus)
but occupying Cancer Navamsa will bless a
Champakamsa native with daughters and sons.
Three of his sons will be long-lived. One of the
daughters will have a happy life.
van ais शुक्रे व्ययेशेन समन्विते। । १८१९। |
षष्ठेशे कुजसंयुक्ते शत्रुहन्ता प्रतापवान्।
मितज्ञातिजनेरयक्तः षष्ठेशे कटकांशगे। | १८२०।।
चम्पकांशे प्रजातस्य स्वपितुः सोदरत्रयम्।
1819-18201/2. Enemies: Venus in the 6th in
ithe company of the 12th lord while the 6th lord is
in association with Mars - the native will be
valorous destroying his foes. He will have limited
number of relatives, and his father will have three
brothers if the 6th lord is in Cancer in Navamsa.
These results apply to a Champakamsa native, of
Cancer ascendant.
। । कच्छत्रयेगः | ।
Yoga for Spouse
भावाध्याये दारफलं hg योजयेत्। । १८२१।।
जामित्रधिपतौ मन्दे स्थिरांशे स्थिररशिगे।
सुधांशे वृषभे लग्ने जीवे केन्द्रत्रिकोणगे। । १८२२।।

Deva Keralam 1 (3;
1821-1822. About spouse: In the chapter on
the 7th house, Sukra Nadi explains about spouse.
Saturn ruling the 7th house, if placed in a fixed
sign and fixed Navamsa, as Jupiter is in an
angle/trine, the native of Sudha Nadiamsa
belonging to Taurus ascendanrt..............
Note: The resuits for the above combinations are not given as the lines end abruptly.
। । वृषभलग्नम् - (शीतव्मंशः) । ।
Taurus Ascendant — Seethala Nadiamsa
al शनियुते दृष्टे स्वोच्चांशे बुधसंयुते।
प्रजातः स रक्तवर्णश्शुभाकृतिः। । १८२३।
1823. Taurus Ascendant - Seethala Nadiamsa: If Venus joins Mercury, in aspect to Saturn,
and is in his exaltation Navamsa the subject will
be of blood-red complexion with a pleasing appearance.
Note: For Seethala Nadiamsa, please refer
to notes under sloka 1096 supra.
सुधांशे त्वचे लग्ने कन्यारूढे प्रजायते।
शूद्रजन्मा सुखी नित्यं पंचमोअयं प्रकीर्तितः।। १८२४॥
अथवा षष्टपुत्रस्तु पूर्वभागेन संयुते।
उत्तरांशे प्रजातः स सर्वषु प्रथमःस्मृतः॥ १८२५॥
1824-1825. Sudha Nadiamsa: One born in
Sudha Nadiamsa of an immovable ascendant,
having its Aroodha in Virgo, will be aSoodra (4th
caste in Vedic terms), be ever happy and will be
the 5th issue of his parents. Or he may be the 6th
inorder. These effects are for birth in the former
half of he Nadiamsa in question. If birth be in
.ae second half, he will be the eldest issue.
Notes: Sudha Nadiamsa ranges thus: From
18 deg. 36’ to 18 deg. 48’ of a movable sign; from
11060. 12’ tolldeg. 24’ of an immovable sign; and
from 3 deg. 36’ to 3 deg. 48’ of a common sign.
This part of the text discusses Sudha
Nadiamsa. Sudha means nectar, lime. Here the
ascendant should be an immovable one. Occasionally Taurus features in particular.
Vide sloka 1824, the ascendant’s Aroodha
should fall in Virgo. For Leo/Aquarius, the
Aroodha ascendant cannot be Virgo. For Taurus,
Venus in Cancer yields Virgo as Aroodha Lagna.
Similarly for Scorpio, Mars in Aries takes Aroodha Lagna to Virgo. Thus by implication, this
particular rule relates only to Taurus and Scorpio
ascendants, and not to the other two immovable
ascendants.
उत्तराशे Ach शिवालयसमीपगे |
पूर्वपश्चिमवीथीषु उत्तरस्यां प्रजायते। । १८२६ |
महार्णवप्रन्त्यदेशे श्विलयसमीपगे।
ूर्वपश्चिमवीथीषु नगरे प्रसवः स्मृतः। । १८२७। |
1826-1827. Second Half - Sudha Nadiamsa:
Birth in this part of the Zodiac (in an immovable
ascendant) will be near a temple of Lord Siva
adjoining a river. The street in question will be
spread from east to west (and the house) facing
the north. It will be a city.
शीतत्रशे पूर्वभागे वृषभे तु प्रजायते।
गुख्युक्ते TNE समदेहस्वरूपवान्। । १८२८। |
गुूयुक्ते फलं व जातके।
प्रजातस्य प्रसवः स्मृतः।
गुरूयुक्तवशात् सौख्यं बालारिष्ट न ॒विद्यते। । १८२३० |
उत्तरांशे प्रजातस्य बालारिटं AACA |
1828-1830. First Half - Seethala Nadiamsa:
If birth be in the first half of Seethala Nadiamsa,
in Taurus ascendant, with Jupiter therein, the
native will be endowed with longevity. He will
possess a symmetric body. For a native of first
half (of the said Nadiamsa), results due for
Jupiter (occupying the ascendant) will materialize in full measure. At the time of his birth, the
mother would incur much labour pains. But his
coming into this world will be instant (without any
anxiety). Because of Jupiter being seated in the
rising sign, the child (and the mother) will be
happy and be devoid of infantile evils. In case of
second half, infantile mortality will certainly come
to pass.
Notes: Jupiter in Taurus ascendant which
has Seethala Nadiamsa’s firsthalf will undoubtedly endow the native with full life-span which will
not be discounted by any other adverse yogas.

lot
For the native of second hlaf, the life-span can be
somewhat affected even though Jupiter resides in
the ascendant. The text clearly states that
childhood will see danger to life-span which can
however be overcome.
Other effects relating to mother etc. apply
equally to both the halves of the Nadiamsa.
युग्मे मीनाशगे शुक्रे शीतव्ठाशे Beas || १८३१॥
पश्चाद्श्रातृविहीनश्च ज्येष्टश्रातृविहीनवान्।
भगिनीद्रयमावुष्यं पूर्वभागे न संशयः । । १८३२। |
उत्तरे पजातस्य भगिन्यौ दे सजीवतः।
1831-18321/2, Venus: If birth be in the first
half of Seethala Nadiamsa, see whether Venus in
Gemini has Pisces Navamsa. As a result of such
yoga, the subject will have neither an elder
brother nor a younger brother. He will have two
sisters endowed with longevity. In case of second
half of Seethala Nadiamsa, two sisters will be
long-lived (irrespective of Venus & C).
Notes: Placed in Gemini, Venus will beget
Pisces Navamsa if he occupies the space between
16 deg. 40’ and 20 deg. in which case the subject
will have no male coborn - older or younger.
भ्रतृस्थानाधिपे चन्द्रे जुकांशे भृगुसंयुते। । १८३३।।
कलत्रवान् पिता।
aie दुश्चरित्रा सहोदरी। | १८३४। |
Wasa पूर्वभागे वृषभे तु प्रजायते।
पितुमातृचिरायुष्यं पूर्वभागे न संशयः। । १८३५। |
उत्तराशे प्रजातः स बाल्ये पितृविनाशवान्।
1833-18351/2. The Moon: For a native of
former half of Seethala Nadiamsa in Taurus ascendant, the 3rd lord Moon being in the comppany of Venus should be in Libra Navamsa to
produce the undermentioned results: His father
will have two wives. His mother will have a questionable history. The native of the Taurus ascendant (irrespective of the Moon & C) will have
long- living parents, while the one born in the
second half will lose his father in his boyhood.
तुलांशकगते सम्य ie ial । । १८३६। ।
विष्णुभक्तिर ते नित्यं सोदरश्रातृहीनवान्।
Chandra Kala Nadj
1836-18361/2. Mercury: Mercury in association with or in aspect to Venus and being in Libra
Navamsa will cause one to be ever devoted to
Lord Vishnu. The native will, however, be bereft
of co-born.
व्यये कुजयुते मन्दे जीतव्छंशे तु जासते। । १८३७। |
अन्तःकपटवान् कामी कमलायतलोचनः।
िप्रकोपी प्रसन्नात्मा राजन्यजनमेत्रवान्। । १८३८। |
1837-1838. Saturn: One born in Seethala
Nadiamsa, having Saturn in the 12th along with
Mars, will be inwardly dceitful, be libidinous and
will have eyes resembling the petal of a lotus. He
will be instantly given to anger but be pleased in
disposition. He will befriend royal men.
सुते कुजयुते मन्दे शीतव्टशे च जायते।
बाल्ये दारिच्चमापन्नः पचमान्दात् परं सुखी। । १८३९।
1839. पि House: Saturn in the Sth house
along with Mars will cause poverty and danger in
childhood to a Seethala Nadiamsa native. After
the fifth year, he will be happy.
धने मीनांशगे सूर्ये शीतव्छंशे प्रजायते।
बाल्ये चक्रकितकरो वैष्णवाचारधर्मवान्। । १८४०। |
1840. The Sun: A 56611818 Nadiamsa native, with the Sun placed in the 2nd house with
Pisces Navamsa will have his religious initiation
after getting engrossed with the prescribed Vaishnava symbols. He will follow the codes
prescribed for a Vaishnavite.
oo es ५
1841. Mother: The native’s mother will be
endowed with longevity should the Sun be ia the
2nd house with Pisces Navamsa, as the Moon,
signifying mother, is with Venus.
शबिद्वितीयपर्मय गोचरे ललने शनौ।
SHUM प्रजातः स बाल्ये मातृविनाशकः।
1842-18421/2. Danger to Mother: Saturn in
his 2nd round reaching Virgo will endanger the
mother of the native of the first half of Seethala

Deva Keralam fas
Nadiamsa. The subject belonging to the second
half of this Nadiamsa will (however) lose his
मदेशांशे तत्तरिकोणे दारजन्मर्षभं विदुः
दरेशद्ष्टिराशी तु दारजन्म विनिर्दिशेत्। | १८४९ । ।
mother (early) in childhood.
लग्ने ` जीवे धने सूर्ये ATT शनिवीकषिते। । १८४२ ¡ |
लिपित्रयप्रवीणश्य ख्यातविद्याविशारदः।
संस्कृतप्रियभाषी स्याद्देवव्राह्य णभक्तिमान्। | १८४४। |
1843-1844, Jupiter - Sun: Jupiter in
(Taurus) ascendant, while the Sun - with Saturn’s
aspect - occupies Pisces Navamsa will produce
the following effects: The native will excel in
three languages. He will be famous for his wide
learning. He will speak charmingly in Sanskrit
language. He will honour gods and Brahmins.
मीनांशके गते सूर्यं त्वसितेन युतेक्षिते।
शीतर पूर्वभागे मन्दबुद्धिः क्वचित् क्वचित् १८४५॥।
1845. Dull-headed: The subject belonging
to the first half of Seethala Nadiamsa will be
dull-headed should the Sun, being conjunct with
or aspected by Saturn, be in Pisces Navamsa. The
native will however be so only on some occasions.
सम्पत्तारदशाकाले सुतेशांशत्रिकोणगे।
स्फुटयोगं गते जीवे विवाहोत्ससवमादिशेत्। | १८४६ । |
1846. Marriage: During the currency of the
2nd dasa, when Jupiter in transit comes to the
Rasi represented by the Navamsa occupied by the
Sth lord, or its trine, marriage of the native of
Seethala Nadiamsa, first half, will come to pass.
a गोचरे ५ |
aaa प्रजातस्य
1847. Alternatively, when Jupiter in transit,
during his second round, reaches the sign Scorpio, marriage will be possible for a native of
Seethala Nadiamsa.
जामित्रधिपतौ भैमे स्थिरांशे शनिसंयुते।
लामाधिपेन Tete वदेदेककठत्रवान्। | १८४८ । |
1848. Single Marriage: There will be just
one marriage (combinations for re-marriage will
get thus nullified) if Mars ruling the 7th (for
Taurus ascendant) conjoins Saturn and occupies
an immovable Navamsa. For this, however, 1110
lord Jupiter should aspect the said Mars.
1849. Natal Moon: Note the Navamsa accupied bv the 7th lord which, or its trine. could be
the natal Moon sign of the spouse. The sign
aspected by the 7th lord could also become the
Moon sign of the spouse.
ह घने सोम्ये मौनाशे शनिवीभिति।
TSN प्रजातस्य दारवंशः सुभाग्यवान्। । १८५०। |
1850. Fortunate Family: The family of the
would-be-spouse of the native will be fortunate
(or prosperous) if the 4th lord is in the 2nd house
while Mercury, being in Saturn’s company, occupies Pisces Navamsa. This applies to Seethala
Nadiamsa native.
उद्राहानन्तरं सख्यं दारारूदे भृगुस्थिते।
शनियेगे विशेषः स्यात् स्त्रीमूलाद्भाग्यवान् GT १८५१॥।'
1851. Post-marital Fortunes: One will be
comfortable and happy if Venus occupies the 7th
Aroodha Pada. Saturn’s association in this case
will strengthen such prosperity and the native will
gain through spouse, and be happy.
शीतव्छाशे पूर्वभागे निर्मलशे निशाकरे |
स्थिरलग्ने प्रजातः स मातृवंशे विवाहवान्। । १८५२। |
SRT मातृवंशे नास्तीति मनुरब्रवीत्।
1852-18521/2. Mother’s Relatives: One will
beget a bride from among maternal relatives if the
Moon is in Nirmala Nadiamsa while birth is in
Seethala Nadiamsa’s first half, in an immovable
Rasi. In case of birth in second half of the concerned Nadiamsa, (even if Moon be in Nirmala
Nadiamsa) marriage will not take place with a
bride hailing from the kinsfolk of the mother of
the native.
VAT पृव॑भागे स्थिरलग्ने प्रजायते। । १८५२३। ।
रूपवान् मतिमान् वाग्मी प्रसन्नमुखनेत्रवान्।
अदृष्टशाली धर्मात्मा रक्तवर्णः शुभाकुतिः। । १८५४। ।
aia मणिसम्पन्नः शीतव्टांशे धनौ सुखी।
1853-16541/2. Immovabe Rasi - Seethala
Nadiamsa: One born in the first half of this Nadi
Amsa will be beautiful, intelligent and skillful. He

will have an attractive face and attractive eyes.
Being fortunate, he will be charitably disposed.
He will havé blood-red complexion. He will be
virtuous, rich possessing precious stones, and will
be (otherwise also) wealthy.
पुत्रस्थानाधिपे सैम्ये जूकान्ते भृगुसंयुते। । १८५५। |
TI भार्या सन्तानप्रतिबन्धको।
पत्रस्थने गते मन्दे युग्माशे कुजसंयुते। । १८५६ |
सुतेशे PEARY ` प्रति बन्धकजातकः।
तत्पापपरिहारर्थ शिशुमारं प्रदापयेत्! । १८५७। |
सुदीर्धजीविनं पुत्रं लभते नात्र संशयः।
पुत्र्यं चिरायुष्यं पुत्रिका च तथा भवेत्! । १८५८ । |
1855-1858, Obstacles: For birth in an immovable ascendant, see if Sth lord Mercury, being
in the company of Venus, is placed in the ending
part of Libra. In that case, the spouse of the
native will have obstacles in giving birth to a child.
She will have some abortions as well, and consequent health troubles (as the term "Aathuraa"
explains). Saturn in the 5th house, being in the
company of Mars, if found in Gemini Navamsa
(or one of the other three dual Navamsas) the
native will find it difficult to beget progeny. However, Mercury in addition should be in a degree
on which he is stationary (before/after retrogression/direction). To overcome this blemish, childsacrifice be done. (For obvious reasons, this
remedy should be flatly ignored.) Then the native
will be blessed with two long-living sons and longliving daughter.
शीतव्ंशे पूर्वभागे वृषभे च प्रजायते।
मीनांशके सुखाधीशे नरवाहनयोगवान्। । १८५९। |
सेनामात्यजनस्नेहं कुत्सित प्रभुसेवकः।
1859-18591/2. Fourth lord: One born in
Taurus ascendant, in the former half of Seethala
Nadiamsa will be blessed with men-borne conveyances if the 4th lord (Sun) is in Pisces Navamsa. He will make friends with those working in
army or those who are ministers. He will serve a
mean ruler.
VTS पूर्वभागे वृषभे तु प्रजायते। । kl KON |
विष्णुकैकर्यधर्मात्मा चाग्रहाररदिकारकः।
Chandra Kala Nadi
edad क्वचिच्चेति वैष्णवाचारभाग्यवान्। । 8288 |
शीतव्छंशे पूर्वभागे लग्ने च वृषभे भवेत्।
पंचविशात् पर भाग्यं स्वप्राबल्यधनागमम्।
राजद्रारजनस्नैहं वाहनाम्बरलाभवान्। । १८६२। |
TERRA गोचरे अष्टमे शनो।
राहुभुक्तो मनस्तापं योगभंगं विनिर्दिशेत्। । १८६२।।
1860-1863. Former half - Seethala Nadiamsa: The native of this degree ascending in Taurus
will be a worshipper of Lord Vishnu. He will
administer rulership of some colonies. Sometimes he will follow the codes prescribed by
Smarithi, (or traditional-laws recorded by memory
as against Sruthi, laws directly heard). He will
prosper after his 25th year. He will have selfearned wealth. He will make friends with men in
royal service, and will gain conveyances and
robes. His prosperity will be obstructed and he
will be mentally distressed when Saturn in transit
comes to the 8th sign counted from the natal
Moon’s Navamsa, (or) in Rahu’s sub period(s) (in
general).
युग्मान्ते कटके प्रप्ते मन्दे वक्रातिचारगे।
Baa प्रजातः स योगवान् कीर्तिमान् सुखी।। १८६४॥।
शनिप्रथमप्र्याय गोचरे कटके शनो।
पित्ररिष्टं विजानी यच्छीतव्टांशे न संशयः । । १८६५। |
1864-1865. Effects - continued: Saturn
moving in retrogression or in accelerated motion,
either in the end of Gemini, or in Cancer, will
bring effects leading to prosperity and fame of the
above native. When Saturn in his first round of
transit reaches Cancer, there will be danger to the
Seethala Nadiamsa native’s father.
विपत्तारदशाकाले pl जायते।
नित्यश्रीबहुमानादिप्रबलेघ्योगभाग्यवान्।
प्रत्यक्तारदशाकाले क्रूरवेधग्रहान्तर |
देहजाड्यं प्रकुवीत शन्तिकुर्याद्यथाविधि। । १८६८। |
साधनेशदशाकाले Ya श्रियमशनुते। । १८६९। |
अपराधं योगभंगमपमत्युभयं महत्।
सदा तरति पुण्येन नैधनेशदशामृतिः। | १८७०। |
1866-1870. Dasa Periods: The Dasa results
being explained now apply to birth in first half of

Deva Keralam 167
9661818 Nadiamsa. His third dasa will bring
much prosperity. The fourth dasa will cause afflux of wealth. With a prosperous calling, the
native will receive unobstructed inflow of wealth.
During the sub period/s of adverse planet/s, in the
Sth dasa, the subject will incur physical ill-health
for which remedies will be helpful. The first half
of the sixth dasa will again give wealth while the
later half will create obstacles to financial pursuits
and will (even) thrust untimely death upon the
native. If the native overcomes this untimely
death due to the merits of his past birth, then the
dasa of 8th lord shall inescapably entangle kim in
the jaws of death.
सूर्ये कराव्छषष्ठ्यंशे शीतव्छंशस्य जातके ।
PAC निशानाथे पुण्यपापफलं समम्। । १८७१।।
oe लोके अन्ते स्वग॑पद् लभेत्।
तावद्भाग्यं विनिर्दिशेत्। | १८७२।
1871-1872. The Luminaries: For a Seethala
Nadiamsa native, the Sun in Karala Shashtiamsa
and the Moon in Nirmala Nadiamsa will ensure a
balance between merits and sins (good and bad
effects). During his mortal journey, he will live a
virtuous life, while in the end, he will attain the
Heavens. Throughout his life, he will live with
prosperity and fortunes.
Notes: The Sun should be in Karala Shashtiamsa which extends from 23 deg. 30’ to 24 deg.
of an odd sign and from 6 deg. to 6 deg. 30’ of an
even sign. This is also known as Karaladamshira,
meaning ‘frightful-teethed’. The planet Moon
should be in Nirmala Nadiamsa, for which please
refer to notes under sloka 847 supra.
nil वृषभे तु wae
लोके अन्ते Bali १८७३॥
कमलाकर षष्ठ्यंशे जीवे |
शुक्रे शनियुते दुष्टे तत्तिकोणे निशाकरे ।
PAT पजातः स रक्तवणैशुभाकृतिः॥ १८७४। |
1873. For a native of first half of Seethala
Nadiamsa, in Taurus ascendant, according to the
caste in which he is born.........(text incoherent).
In the end he will be a wise man.
1874 Nirmala Nadiamsa: One born in this
Nadiamsa will be blood- red in complexion and
will possess a charming personality, if Jupiter is
in the Shashtiamsa entit] ed Kamalaakara, while
Venus and Saturn are together (elsewhere) with
the Moon in their trine.
Notes: Sloka No. 1874 having three lines
should be clubbed with sloka 1875 etc. infra dealing with Aquarius ascendant.
For details of Nirmala Nadiamsa, please see
notes under sloka $47 supra. Kamalekara Shashtiamsa extends from 14 deg. - 14 deg. 30’ ofan odd
sign, and from 15 deg. 30’ to 16 deg. of an even
sign. Kamalakara means a lake full of lotuses.
। । कुम्भलग्नम् - (साप्राज्यकेसरियेगः ) | |
Aquarius Ascendant —
(Samragya Kesari Yoga)
साम्रान्यकेसरियोगे Sas प्रजायते।
विप्रजन्मा सुखी नित्यं द्वितीयोअयं प्रजायते। | १८७५।
अथवा च तृतीयः स पूर्वभागे न संशयः। । १८७६।
SAR प्रजातः स ज्येष्ठपुत्रः प्रकीर्तितः। । १८७७। |
1875-1877. Aquarius ascendant: One born
in Aquarius ascendant with "Samrajya-Kesari
Yoga" will be a Brahmin and be ever happy. He
will either be the second or the third issue of his
parents. Birth will be in the first half (of Nirmala
Nadiamsa). In case of birth in the 2nd half, the
native will be the first issue.
Notes: For obvious reasons, the words
‘Saamraajya Kesari Yoga’ are redundant in this
part of the text and hence they should be ignored.
महानदीप्रन्त्यदेशे शिवालयसमीपगे।
यन्नवांशस्थे तद्राशीशत्रिकोणगे।
तन्न वांशगृहद्ररे प्रसूतिनौत्र संशयः।
निर्मलांशे सत्कुव्टीनः पूर्वभागे शुमाकृत्तिः। । १८७९। |
1878-1879. Nirmala Nadiamsa - First Half:
Birth will be in Mahanadi region near a temple
dedicated to Lord Siva, in an east- west spread
street, in a house facing the northern quarter
(Kauberya denotes northern quarter regented by

Kubera, the god of celestial riches). Delivery will
be in a house the entry of which will correspond
to the sign represented by the Rasi identical with
the Navamsa occupied by the 4th lord, or a trine
thereof. This native belongs to an excellent
race/family,
उत्तराशे
ee नः कृशदेहस्वरूपवान्।
ग्रन्थान्तरे as शभे लग्ने च जायते।। १८८०॥
TREY ay ; समदेहस्वरूपवान्।
Teena पूणं पूर्वभागस्य जातके । । १८८१ |
1880-1881. The subject of second half of this
Nadiamsa also belongs to an excellent family, but
will have an emaciated physique. According to
some other authorities, ascendant (Aquarius)
having a benefic in it, with Nirmala Nadiamsa
rising, in aspect to Jupiter will bestow longevity
upon the native. He will further possess a symmetric physique. If birth be in former half, these
effects relating to Jupiter will come to pass in full
measure.
प्रसूतिकाले जननी बहुवेदनशलिनी।
जनन्या Wat तु बहुवेदनमादिथेत्। । १८८२ । ।
पूर्वभागे प्रसूतिश्च प्रेण प्रसवः स्मृ तः।
गुरूद्ष्टिवशात् सौख्यं बालारिष्ट न विद्यते ।। १८८२॥।
1882-1883. In the course of pregnancy and
at the time of delivery, the mother of the native
would undergo a great deal of pains. In case of
birth in former half, delivery of the child will be
instant (free from anxieties). Due to the aspéct
of Jupiter the child will be happy and free from
affection of infantile mortality.
मेषसिंहांशगे सोम्ये निर्मलाशे तु जायते।
पूर्वभागे प्रजातस्य चन्द्रदोषो न विद्यते। । १८८४। |
1884. Lunar blemish: The subject of former
half of this Nadiamsa will enjoy freedom from
afflicted Moon, if the planet Mercury is in either
Aries Navamsa or in Leo Navamsa.
SRT तु दोषाणां sed च् क sala |
पूर्वभागे क्कचिच्चेति शन्त्या शान्ति प्रयस्यति।। १८८५॥
सुखभाग्याधिपे शुक्रे निर्मलंशे तु. area
1885. In case of second half of Nirmala
Nadiamsa, troubles on account of (Moon’s)
Chandra Kala Nadi
blemish will be galore, for three months. For the
former half, such evils will be negligible.
Remedies to overcome these evils be resorted to
in an appropriate manner.
सुखभाग्याधिपे ys निर्मलांशे तु जायते।
पितृमातृचिरायु्यं पूर्वभागे न संशयः। । १८८६ |
1886. Parents: Long-living parents are
denoted for an Aquarius native, with Nirmala
Nadiamsa first half, if Venus being the ruler of the
4th and the 9th is (also) in Nirmala Nadiamsa (of
any Rasi).
लाभे शनियुते चन्द्र lie मगुसंयुते।
निर्मले प्रजातः स ज TI । १८८४७।
वि जायते मृतिमादिशेत्।
सि प्रजातस्स ज्येष्ठटभ्रातृयुतः सुखी। | १८८८ । |
1887-1888, Co-borns: If the planet Saturn is
with the Moon in the 11th house, as his dispositor
(Jupiter) is with Venus, the native of (former half
of) Nirmala Nadiamsa would have his pre- borns
destroyed. Even the younger co-borns will die
(early), But the native of second half of Nirmala
Nadiamsa will be happy about older co-borns.
सिंहांशकगते Sy मेषे केतुसमन्विते।
विष्णुभक्तिरतो नित्यं सोदरश्रृहीनवान्। । १८८९ |
1889. Mercury: If Mercury is with Ketu in
the sign Aries with Leo Navamsa the subject will
be devoted to Lord Vishnu. He will be devoid of
coborn.
मेषे केतुयते सौम्ये निम॑लांशे तु जायते।
अन्तःकापख्यवान् कामी कमलायतलोचनः। । १८९० |
Rant प्रसन्नात्मा समदेहस्वरूपवान्।
1890-18901/2. Mercury - Ketu: Should these
two planets join in Aries, the subject of Nirmala
Nadiamsa will be imwardly deceitful, be of
libidinous disposition and will have eyes resembling the petal of a lotus. He will be instantly
given to anger but be pleased. He will have a
symmetric body.
मेषे केतुयुते सोम्ये सिंहांशे लक्षिमियोगके। । १८९१ |
PART प्रजातः स किचिन्मूर्खस्वभाववान्।
अन्तःक्रोधी प्रसन्नात्मा राजन्यजनमेत्रवान्। । १८९२ |

Deva Keralam 1469
मेषे सिंहाशगे सौम्ये निम॑लांशे प्रजायते।
बाल्ये दारि्रमापन्नःपंचमान्दात् परं सुखी! । १८९३ । |
1891-1893. Leo Navamsa: Mercury joining
Ketu in Aries, and obtaining Leo Navamsa will
for a Nirmala Nadiamsa native cause Lakshmi
Yoga. The native will not show up his anger. He
will remain pleased. His friends will be from
royal circle. He will suffer penury in his early
childhood, and after the age of five he will be
happy.
मीनांशकगते सूरय निर्मलंशे तु जायते।
बाल्ये चक्राकि तश्चेति वेष्णवाचारधर्मवान्। । १८९४1 ।
1894. Vaishnavite: In case of Nirmala
Nadiamsa native, the Sun in Pisces Navamsa will
cause initiation into the Vaishnava order by a
ceremony of engrossing the prescribed Vaishnava
symbols and the native will follow the codes
prescribed for a Vaishnavite.
ae शुक्रे FR गुरूसंयुते।
कारके गुरूसंयुक्ते मातुर्द्र्धायुरादिशेत्। । १८९५। |
1895. Mother: The 4th lord Venus should
join Jupiter and be in a Navamsa owned by
Saturn. The significator for mother, the Moon,
should also be with Jupiter. These will enable the
mother of the native enjoy longevity.
शनिद्वितीयपयीये गोचरे वृषभे शनो।
मात्ररिष्टं विजानीयात् पूर्वभागे न संशयः। । १८९६।
1896. Danger to Mother: During his second
round of the Zodiac, when Saturn moves in
Taurus, the mother of the native of former half (of
Nirmala Nadiamsa) will be endangered.
लग्ने कुजयुते शुक्रे ARR गुरूसयुते।
लिपित्रयप्रवीणश्च ख्यात्तविद्याविशारदः। । १८९५७ । |
नारकालल्कृतौ काल्ये संगीतप्रियवल्लभः।
संस्कृतप्रियभाषी स्यादुदेवब्राहम णभक्तिमान्। | १८९८।
1897-1898. Mars - Venus: The ascendant
having Mars in it, as Venus joining Jupiter is ina
Navamsa owned by Saturn will give the undermentioned effects: The subject will be skilful in
three languages and be famous for his wide learning. He will be fond of drama, literature and
music. He will speak charmingly in Sanskrit and
will honour gods and Brahmins.
Notes: Three different conditions are laid
down: {aj Mars should be in Aquarius ascendant.
(b) Venus should join Jupiter. (cj Venus should
be in Cparicorn, Aquarius Navamsa.
असिताशे स्थिते शुक्रे त्वसितेन निरीकषिते।
निम॑लशे TM मन्दवुदिः क्वचित्क्वचित्। | १८९९।
1899, Dull-headed: Venus in aspect to
Saturn, and placed in a Navamsa of Saturn will
make the subject duil-headed. This relates to
birth in first half of Nirmala Nadiamsa.
लग्नेशंशत्रिकोणे वा स्पटयेगं गते. शनो।
निर्मलांशे प्रजातस्य मौजीवन्धनमादिशेत्। | १९००। |
1900. Thread Ceremony: When Saturn in
transit moves in the sign denoted by the Navamsa
occupied by the ascendant lord, or a trine thereof,
the native will have his sacred thread ceremony.
निर्मलाशे पूर्वभागे स्वपिता रोगवान् भवेत्।
धर्मशप्त्रार्तत्त्वजञो ज्ञानशे सुखनायके। । १९०२।।
सर्वेषमुपकारी च शेर्यसाहसकीरतिमान्।
सत्कथाश्रवणं नित्यं श्रीमान् दीनजनप्रिय । । १९०२। |
जातकस्य गुणं वक्ष्ये रक्तवर्णशुभाकृततिः।
परोपकारनिरतः पंवयज्ञपरा्यणः । | १९०४ । |
अस्तिकः सर्वधम॑ज्ञो वदान्यो दृढदेहवान्।
1901-19041/2. Nirmala Nadiamsa - First
Half: The father of the native will be sickly. The
subject will be wicked in case of wicked people,
and will reply the cruel by cruel acts. He will be
devoid of paternal happiness. His wealth will be
self-earned. Ifthe 4th lord is in the 9th Navamsa,
he will be skilful in the meanings of Religion and
Philosophy. He will be helpful to all, be endowed
with courage, adventures and fame, be fond of
listening to mythological accounts, be rich and
well-disposed to the poor. He will be endowed
with blood-red complexion and charming appearance, will help others and will perform five
yagnas (Vedic sacrifices). He will be a believer in
god, will be versed in all religious codes, be liberal
(or eloquent), and will have a sturdy body.
eo

Notes: In this part of the text, the birth
should be in Nirmala Nadiamsa, Aquarius. No
planets are involved.
लग्नांशे भागवांशस्थे शुक्रे नक्रांशसंम्थिते। | १९०५। |
अन्तःक्रोधी प्रसन्नात्मा किचिल्लुब्ध प्रतापवान्
1905-19051/2. If the rising degree obtains a
Navamsa of Venus, while Venus hitaself is in
Capricorn Navamsa, the subject will be inwardly
given to anger, but will be a pleased soul. He will
be somewhat miserly, but be valorous.
सुते जीवे शुभांशस्थे तेजस्वी बुद्धिमान् ATI १९०६॥।
सुमुखः कुशली भीरू्विद्यवुद्धियुतःसुखी।
1906-19061/2. Jupiter: Should the 5th house
contain Jupiter who is in the 9th Navamsa (or a
benefic’s Navamsa) the subject will be splendorous, intelligent, pleasing in appreance, skilful,
timid, learned and happy.
कुन्दाशे लाभगे मन्दे वेदशप्त्रार्थतत्ववित्। | १९०७। |
यतिप्रीतिकरो नित्यं निम॑लांशे धनी qa
1907-19071/2. Saturn: One will be an expert
in Vedas and Philosophy if Saturn is in the 11th
house in Kunda Nadiamsa. Further he willbe rich
and happy. All these are for a Nirmala Nadiamsa
native.
पूर्वभागे स्थिरे लग्ने Pretest तु जायते।। १९० ८। |
बहुग्रामाधिकारौ स्यात् ४ ब {I
सन्माग॑वृत्तिनिर तश्चोत्कृष्टो ्। । १९०९। |
कृषिपश्वादिलाभं च 7 {|
agai परं पित्रोविशेषश्रीयुतः सुखी। । १९१९०।।
1908-1910. The native of an immovable ascendant with the first half of Nirmala Nadiamsa
will lord over many a village. His father will be
quite prosperous. The native will follow virtuous
path, be excellent (as a person), will have religious
attainments, will gain through agriculture and
quadrupeds and will possess villages and lands
under his command. After the native’s eighth
year, his father will get much wealth.
निर्मलांशे पूर्वभागे Saray प्रजायते।
रूपवान् स्मृतिमान् वाग्मी प्रसन्नसुखनेत्रवान्।। १९१९॥
अदृष्टशली धर्मात्मा रक्तवर्णशुभाकृतिः।
Chandra Kala Nadi
1911-19111/2. One born in Aquarius ascendant in the first half of Nirmala Nadiamsa will be
beautiful, will have a good memory (Smritimaan
also means: to have a memory of former life), be
eloquent in speech, and be endowed with beautiful face and eyes. He will be fortunate, charitable,
and blood-red in complexion with pleasing features.
विपत्तारदशाकाले गोचरे ललने शनौ। । 88821 |
कुन्दाशे तु प्रजातस्य देशे रज्ञां च विग्रहम्।
स्वजन्मदेशनृपती राज्यनाशेन कंशितः। । १९१३। |
बन्धुवर्गे मनस्तापं व्याकुलानन्तरं सुखम्।
1912-19131/2. For One born in Kunda
Nadiamsa when Saturn reaches Virgo in transit
during the operation of third dasa
(meanings irrelevant to natal horoscope). There
will be quarrels among his relatives. After some
distress, happiness will resume.
Notes: All of a sudden, Kunda Nadiamsa is
referred to, extending upto sloka 19161/2 infra.
Kunda Nadiamsa may be referred to in note
under sloka 638 supra.
विपत्तारदशाकाले गोचरे वृश्चिके शनो। । १९९४।।
अनावृष्टिहते देशे दुर्भक्षभयमादिशेत्।
1914-1914i/2. Irrelevant: During the currency of the third dasa, with Saturn moving in
Scorpio, the country will be in the grip of famine
and absence of rains.
es ==> => => भर भवः भ te
क्षेमतारदशाकाले विशेषश्रियमश्नुते। । १९१५। |
st cal शुभफलं समम्।
साधनेशदशाकाले रोगं च क्रूरमासगे। । १९१६। |
देहजादयं च लभते शन्तिं कु्ाद्यथाविधि।
1915-19161/2. The native of Kunda Nadiamsa will obtain a lot of wealth in his 4th dasa and be
ever rich (in that dasa). Good and bad effects
concerning his happiness and honour will be in
equal measure. During adverse months (transits
of the Sun) in the 6th dasa, he will fall ill which
will be remediable.
अष्टमाधिपतौ Ge भूसुतेन समन्विते। । १९१७। |
पूर्वभागे प्रजातस्य पंचषष्ठयन्दगे afar |

Deva Keralam 17]
1917-19171/2. If the 8th lord Mercury is with
Mars, the native of first half of (Nirmala) Nadiamsa will die at the age of 56.
Notes: This part should, or perhaps does,
relate to Nirmala Nadiamsa in Aquarius ascendant.
गदांशके विप्रकाले वृङ्चिके लग्ननायके। । १९१८ |
पुरा ब्राहम णजन्मा स्यात् पश्चद्विदिकजन्मवान्।
ब्रहमजन्मान्त्यकालेषु त्वापत्संन्यासमादिशेत्। । १९१९ ।
पश्चान्जन्मान्तरे TAI गुरूसमन्विते।
विप्रकाले फलं सत्यं प्रत्यक्षं देवकेरव्ठम्। । १९२० |
1918-1920. Gada Nadiamsa: If the lord of
the ascendant is in Scorpio, one born in Gada
Nadiamsa was a Brahmin in the previous birth.
Now he belongs to a Vedic family (again a Brahmin). If Jupiter is in the 12th (in the current
horoscope) he will attain final emancipation after
the next birth. These results are for Vipra Kala
of Gada Nadiamsa and will bear truth.
Notes: Please refer to sloka 518 supra for
Gada Nadiamsa.
। । कुम्भलग्नम्(कुन्दशः) । ।
Kumbha Lagna — Kunda Nadiamsa
कुन्दांशे कटके मन्दे HH प्रजायते।
सम्पत्तारदशाकाले भाग्येशांशत्रिकोणगे। | १९२१।।
स्फुटयोगं गते मन्दे मात्ररिष्टं विनिदिंशेत्।
उत्तरांशे प्रजातस्य विपत्तारदशन्त्यके। । १९२२।।
मात्ररिष्टमवाप्नोति सापत्नीमातृयेगवान्।
1921-19221/2. Mother: Birth in Aquarius ascendant, Kunda Nadiamsa (former half) with
Saturn in Cancer will endanger the mother of the
native in the 2nd dasa when Saturn comes in
transit to such a Rasi identical with the Navamsa
occupied by the ninth lord. If birth is the 2nd half
of the said Nadiamsa, then the 3rd dasa will be
dangerous to mother. Further the native will have
a step-mother.
रिपुस्थनाधिपे चन्द्रे भाग्ये वर्गोत्तमांशगे। । १९२३। |
HORAN यस्य जनको नात्र संशयः।
1923-19231 2, Father: The native’s father
will have two wives if the subject has the 6th lord
Moon in Fargothamamsa in the 9th house.
Te विप्रकाले सम्पत्तारदशान्त्यगे। | १९२४ |
पूर्वभागे प्रजातस्य मोजीवन्यनमादिशेत् |
SORT WAT गेवे ART गुरो। । १९२५। |
व्रहमोपदेशकमोणि भ संशयः |
सम्पत्तारदशकाले सुखेशाशत्रिकोणगे। । १९२६ । |
स्पुययोगं गते जीवे विवाहोत्सवमादिशेत्।
षष्टीशंशे तत्त्रिकोणे aT Ho | । १९२७। I
RMI तु जन्मलग्नं |
1924-19271,2. Thread ceremony etc.: In case
of birth in the first half of Gada Nadiamsa, the end
of the second dasa will enable the native have his
sacred thread ceremony. For the native of second
half of the same Nadiamsa, there will be Brahmopadesa (Spiritual Initiation) when transit
Jupiter is found in Taurus. Further, he will be
married in the 2nd dasa when Jupiter comes to
the Rasi or its trine, with reference to the Navamsa occupied by the 4th lord. His wife’s natal
Moon sign will correspond to the Navamsa occupied by the 6th lord,or a trine thereof. Her
natal ascendant will be the same Rasi as occupied
by the native’s 7th lord (Sun).
गदशि त्वचे लगने लग्नेशे कर्मराशिगे। । ९९२८ |
जन्मनः प्रभृति श्रीमान् न कदाचिद् दरिद्रकः।
उत्तरे प्रजातः स सम्पद्दाये सुयोगवान्। । १९२९। |
1928-1929. Right from birth one will role m
wealth, never be in poverty, if the rising degree
gives Gada Nadiamsa in a fixed sign, as the ascendant lord is in the 10th house. Ifbirth is in the 2nd
half of the said Nadiamsa, second dasa will lead
to a good deal of prosperity.
TER त्वचे लग्ने लग्ने पापयुतेक्षिते।
पूर्वभागे प्रजातस्य भिषफ़भेषजजीवनम्। । १९३० |
1930. Medical Profession: The native will
live by medi¢al profession if the first half of Gada
Nadiamsa rises at birth in a fixed sign which is
occupied by a malefic,
पुत्रेशे युग्मरशिस्थे युग्मांशकगते बुधे।
CAST प्रथमं विन्दाद्गदाशे नत्र संशयः। । १९३१। |

172 Chandra Kala Nadi
1931. First Issue - Female: One born in
Gada Nadiamsa will first beget a female child if
5th lord Mercury is in a dual sign and a dual
Navamsa.
qed शक्रे शुभांशे धनरशिगे।
गदांशके HTT पुत्राणां च चतुष्टयम्। । १९३२।।
पत्रिकानाशमाप्नेति गदाश नात्र संशयः ।
1932-19321/2. Male Children: Venus in the
2nd house in a benefic’s Navamsa will give four
sons to a Gada Nadiamsa subject. The native of
Gada Nadiamsa will lose his daughter.
केतुयेगे सुख्धीशे दारनेत्रे कृमि वदेत्। । १९३३।।
पुर तु PR च किचिद्रोणकर्त्रवान्।
तत्फल चिन्त यत्तत्र समासमफलं भवेत्। । १९३४। |
वर्षवर्याविधानेन मासचर्यविधाततः।
गणित्वा अर्कभावानि चिन्तयेच्च फलाफलं | ९९३५।
लग्नाधिपे भाग्यभावे अथवा च द्वितीयगे।
1934-19351/2. Eye Trouble: Should Ketu join
the 4th lord, the native’s wife will have worm-infected eyes. The native would have suffered eye
disorders (in the last birth). His wife will be
somewhat diseased. Drawing Annual Horoscopes, the effects due {about said diseases)
could be monthly known. Also through the sign
occupied by the Sun, the 9th from the sign occupied by the ascendant lord, or from the 2nd
house (from ascendant).
Notes: Annual horoscopy was a part of Nadi
readings as could be elicited from this part of the
text.
ane दाये महद्भाग्यं WS शुभाशुभम्!। १९३६॥
अष्टमगते साधनेशदशासुखम्।
ुत्रोत्सवादिसन्तोषं शत्ज्ञातिविनाशनम्। । १९३७। ।
1936-1937. Dasas: His third dasa will
produce great fortunes while the fifth dasa will
give mixed effects. If the ascendant lord is in the
8th house, the 6th dasa will give happiness, birth
of children and destruction of enemies and relatives.
मारकाशं परित्यज्य पोषकांशे fears: |
तद्दशायां दोषभुक्तौ जीवकः त्वान संशयः ।। १९३८॥।
1938. This 81018 is of improper composition
and is not amenable to a sensible rendering.
। । afraneray - Wee (विप्रकालः) । ।
Scorpio Lagna
Gada Nadiamsa (I Quarter)
गदशि वृश्चिके लग्ने गुसूत्रिंशंशकालगे।
विप्रकाले प्रजातश्च रक्तवर्णशुभाकृतिः। । १९३९। |
1939, Scorpio Ascendant: The native of
Vipra Kaala of Gada Nadiamsa in Scorpio ascendant, in the Trimsamsa of Jupiter will be bloodred in complexion. He will have a charming
appearance.
Notes: From here on, Gada Nadiamsa of an
immovable ascendant,including Scorpio is dealt
with.
For Gada Nadiamsa, please vide notes
under sloka 518 supra.
This Nadiamsa in Scorpio falls within the
range of Jupiter’s Trimsamsa. From 10 deg. to 18
deg. Scorpio, the Trimsamsa degrees are of
Jupiter.
गदांशे त्वचरे लग्ने स्थिरांशे तु प्रजायते।
पूरव॑भागे प्रजातः TAR प्रसूतिमान्। । १९४० । |
1940. Immovable Ascendant: The subject
of an immovable ascendant with former half of
Gada Nadiamsa rising, and inimmovable Navamca will be born in a region annexed by a river.
Notes: Gada Nadiamsa of an immovable
ascendant does not fall in an immovable Navamsa. But why such mentions are made using
Navamsa/Trimsamsa etc. is not understood. In
such cases, we should ignore the Nadiamsa condition.
उत्तराशे स्थिरे लग्ने त्वेमलायोगजातके।
TSR प्रसूतिश्च नगरे नात्र संशयः। | १९४१ । |
1941. Amala Yoga: One of the second half
of Gada Nadiamsa with Amala Yoga will be born
in a city beside a river.
भ्रातृस्थानाधिपे मन्दे लग्नाल्लाभत्निकोणगे।
पश्चादुभ्रातृविहीनश्च जायते मृतिमादिशेत्। । १९४२। |

Deva Keralam
1942. After-born: 3rd lord Saturn. placed in
2 trine counted from the i1th house will deny
after-born. Should such an after- born come into
this world, he will (soon) die.
Notes: This applies to Scorpio ascendant.
Trines from 11th are 3rd (Capricorn) and 7th
(Taurus). Saturn in the 3rd in Capricorn or in the
7th in Taurus will deprive the Scorpio native of an
after-born.
ज्येष्ठश्रातूविहीनश्च वृषंशे तु प्रजायते।
सूतिकागृहदोषेण भगिनामुतिमादिशेत्। । १९९४३ । |
1943. Elder coborn: The subject of an immovable ascendant having Taurus in Navamsa,
will not have any elder coborn. Due to blemishes
in delivery chambers (carelessness, insufficient
medical care and the like), his sister will die (right
at the time of delivery).
Notes: This sloka is to be delinked from
Scorpio ascendant, as the Navamsa ascendant is
required to be Taurus. Such Navamsa can rise in
case of the other three ummovable ascendants, viz.
Taurus, Leo and Aquarius.
With such Navamsa ascendant, one born
among one of the three immovable ascendants in
question will not have any pre-born.
मातृस्थानाधिपे मन्दे नीचांशे TATA |
TST प्रजातस्तु बाल्ये a ao । । १९४४ |
शुभमेव फलं ब्रूयाद्र्मसिद्धिधनागमम्।
1944-19441/2. Early Loss of Mother: The
native of Gada Nadiamsa, having the 4th lord
Saturn in the 11th (in Virgo) with Aries Navamsa
will see the death of his mother in his very
childhood. The good effects due to this yoga will,
however be: religious advancement and acquisition of wealth (at a later part of life).
Notes: For Scorpio ascendant, Saturn 1s the
4th lord. He should be in Virgo - between 10 deg.
and 13 deg. 20’ - begetting Aries Navamsa. This
yoga will cause loss of mother in the native’s very
childhood. The good effects due to this yoga may
also be noted.
iS
अष्टयार्धीश्दायन्ये SAS मासके! । ६९४५८। |
८९ | तत्र जानीयाद्योजयेत् कालावित्तमः।
यन्नवांशस्थे तन्नवाशस्म मासके। । १९४६ । |
तत्तन्मासत्रिकोणे वा धम॑सिद्धिं शुभावहाम्!
1945-19461/2. Inauspicious: See the
Navamsa occupied bv the 8th lord at birth. When
the Sun transits such a Rasi, during the concluding part of the 8th lord’s dasa, the subject will be
a recipient of inauspicious effects. However,
religious progress will be available when the Sun
transits such a Rasi as above, or its trine.
Notes: End of Mercury dasa for Scorpio
native will bring inauspicious effects. This relates
to sloka 1944-441/2 and the native will lose his
wealth. Religious progress will be available to
him.
दशधक्तीशनिक्षत्रराशिक्रान्तांशवासरे | १९४७। |
दानधर्मादिपुण्यनि लभते नात्र संशयः।
दानधर्मत्यागभोगयोगरोगुभाशुभम्। | १९४८ । |
1947-1948. Good effects (in place of inauspicious effects cited) will be obtained by suitable
donations on the week-days of Dasa - Bhuktilord,
Nakshatra Lord and Rasi lord. Donations,
sacrificies, pleasures, diseases, good and bad effects.......(The second line of 9. 1948 is thus meaningless.)
षष्ठपेन व्ययेशेन फलानि परिचिन्तयेत्।
षष्टारूढे विलग्नेशे दुष्टे वा रविजेन च। | १९४९
SHRM seed तु महाव्याधिः क्कचिद्भवेत्।
व्ययेशेशद्शकाले गोचरे दोषकालके। । १९५० |
PAM देहजाडयं जीवितेअर्थविनाशनम्।
व्ययेेशदशाकाले योगभुक्तौ श्रियो Te) । १९५१। |
ग ; स्याद्योगप्राबल्यमादिशेत्।
पुत्रशोकं महद्दुःखं स्त्रीप्रजा तथा।
1949-19521/2. Lords of 6th & 12th: Now
about the effects of the lords of the 6th and 12th.
The subject will be troubled by a great disease if
the 6th Aroodha Pada is aspected by ascendant
lord or by Saturn, 25106 10th lord is endowed with
strength. With other major transits being evil and
with the Sun in adverse Rasis, during the currency

114 Chandra Kala Nadi
of the dasa of the 12th lord, the subject will be
inflicted by a serious illness. If he survives, his
wealth will be destroyed. In the sub periods ruled
by favourable planets, the 12th lord’s dasa will
bestow wealth. Depending on favourabie planets
in transit, progress of the native will be on the
increase. Gains through progeny will be more,
and fortunes(?) less. He will be greatly grieved
due to loss of progeny.
Notes: Lords of 6th and 12th respectively
are Mars and Venus. For Scorpio ascendant, if
the Aroodha for the 6th is aspected by Saturn or
by Mars, the native will invite dangerous diseases.
10th lord Sun’s strength (not weakness) is a precondition here.
With such a yoga, the dasa of 12th lord Venus
is said to cause either a serious illness, or destruction of wealth.
Wealth will however be earned in the
favourable sub periods c: Venus dasa. For Scorpio ascendant, favourable planets in general are
Jupiter, the Sun, the Moon and Mars. These four
sub periods in the dasa of Venus will give wealth.
Venus dasa is also said to be a minus point
in respect of progeny.
भाग्यधिपस्य नक्षत्रे रव्यादीनां त्रियो वहम्।। १९५३॥
दशस्वन्तर्दशकाले उच्चराश्यादिकं भवेत्।
1953-19531/2. Wealth: The Sun and other
planets placed in the Nakshatra ruled by the 9th
lord will be capable of conferring wealth. Increased quantities of wealth will be obtained
during such planet’s dasa and sub period.
गदांशके भग्यदाये कारके त्वायसंस्थिते। । १९५४ |
अग्रहारप्रतिष्ठादिक्रत्वर्थं धनधान्यवान्।
व्गौत्तमे कर्मनाथे लग्नाधिपतिदायगे। । १९५५ |
उत्कृष्टधम॑सिद्विः स्याल्लग्नद्ष्टिग्रहान्तर।
1954-19551/2. Dasa of 9th Lord: Should the
significator for fortunes be placed in the 11th
house; the dasa of 9th lord (Moon) will enable a
Gada Nadiamsa native to have Agraharas (colony
of Brahmins in olden days) constructed. He will
also earn wealth, grains etc. If the 9th lord is in
Vargothama Navamsa, the dasa of the ascendant
lord will grant excellent religious attamments on
the said native. The sub period ruled by the
planet aspecting the ascendant will be significiant (in respect of religious attainments) (in
the dasa ruled by Mars).
Notes: Jupiter is the general ruler of fortunes. 9th lord Moon is an additional ruler of
fortunes for Scorpio ascendant. Either the Moon
or Jupiter being in the 11th house will enable the
Moon’s dasa give results specified in the text.
धनेभाग्यायनाथांरो स्फुटयोगं गते गुरो। । १९५६। |
दृष्टे वा दशमांशे वा Scale वा समन्विते।
1956-1957. Raja Yoga: Add the longitudes
of the lords of 2nd, 9th and 11th. When Jupiter
in transit reaches or aspects the resultant degree,
the subject will have great religious advancements
and effects of Raja Yoga. These results will also
materialise if Jupiter aspects or occupies the said
degree in the natal horoscope (itself).
Note: The word "Dasamamse" is out of context and hence not added to the rendering.
भावाध्याये ग्रहदशायोगं प्राप्नेति ae
Wages लग्ने योगग्रहश्रिते। । १९५८ । |
योगग्रहान्तरे काले राजयोगं विनिर्दिशेत्।
1958-19581/2. Detailed delineation of
planetary periods could be found in the chapter
relating effects of houses (in the work the author
consulted). See which is the sign ascending at the
time of the commencement of the 6th lord’s dasa.
If a planet favourable to Scorpio ascendant occupies such an ascendant, such sub-period/s will
bring effects of Raja Yoga (leading to position,
prosperity etc.).
Notes: The exact moment of the commencement of a dasa is required to know the ascendant ruling then. Relevant tables and method of
calculations are discussed in detailed notes by me
in Horasara of Prithu Yasas (English translation)

Deva Keralam 7S
vide sloka 18, chapter 8. The process and tables
being quite elaborate, they cannot be reproduced
here.
The ascendant rising at the time of commencement of a dasa should be occupied by a planet
that is favourable for Scorpio, viz. one of Jupiter,
the Sun, the Moon and Mars. If that be the case,
the native will have Raja Yoga effects in the dasa
in question.
षष्ठाधिपदशाकाले क्रूरवेधान्तरान्तरे। । १९५९। |
भिन्नोद्रश्रातृपीडां शत्रुनाशं विनिदिशेत्।
षष्ठधिपे योगनाथे Te समन्विते। । १९६०। |
तद्दशायां महद्भाग्यं गेहे गोधान्यसकुलम्।
el विशेषेण सौख्यं भवति नित्यशः।
1959-19611/2. Mars dasa: In the dasa of the
6th lord Mars and in the sub period/s of malefic
planct/s, the native will have destruction of
cnemics, apart from seeing evils to stepbrothers/cousins. The 6th lord (Mars) is capable
of giving Yoga (1.6. Raja Yoga) if he is in the
company of Sth lord (Jupiter). If Mars is conjunct
Jupiter, then the dasa of Mars will confer great
fortunes, wealth, quadrupeds, birth of children,
sound health and other auspicious effects. Particularly the sub periods of favourable planets in
the dasa of Mars will give much comforts.
Notes: ` Malefic plancts for Scorpio ascendant arc Saturn, Mercury and Venus. These sub
periods in the dasa of Mars will help the native
succecd over his enemics. These malefic sub
periods will cause harm to cousins and stepbrothers.
However, the time of Saturn’s moving on the
Sth lord's Navamsa position or a trine thereof will
give troubles from enemies (vide sloka 1962-63
1/2 infra).
Pa तत्तरिमोणे
षष्ठाधिपदशाकाले योगं WAM |
शुभग्रहान्तरे काले देहारेग्य धनागमम्। । ९६३।।
WARM स्वग्रामे जयमांदशेत्।
स्फुरटयोगं गते शनौ। । १९६२।।
1962-19631,2. Enemies etc.: During the
rulership of 6th lord’s dasa, if Saturn in transit
comes to the Rasi. or a trine thereof, as denoted
by the Navamsa occupied by the &th lord at birth,
the subject will be greatly troubled by enemies.
The sub periods of favourable planets in the dasa
of Mars will help maintain sound health and acquire wealth. Further the native in his home town
will conquer his enemies.
षष्ठाष्टमा्धारभुक्तौ पेष्ठाधिपतिदायगे। । १९६४ ।
स्वजनारिष्ट्येगदिदेहोपद्रवमादिशेत्।
लग्नषडुरगहोरशे विपरीतस्य वासरे! । १९६५ |
1964-1965. Sub-periods of Mars and of
Mercury: Inthe dasa ruled by the 6th lord (Mars)
and in the sub-periods of 6th lord (Mars) and of
8th lord (Mercury), the native’s health will
decline due to his kinsfolk being in adversities.
These will occur on the week days which are not
ruled by the lords of the various ascendants
caused by the Shadvargas (six divisions) of the
natal ascendant.
Notes: Shadvargas are Rasi, Hora, Navamsa, Drekkana, Dvadasamsa and Trimsamsa. The
week-days denoted by the lords of these 6 ascendants will not prove harmful in the present context. The weekdays other than these will cause
illness to the native during the rulership of Mercury sub period and Mars sub period - both in the
dasa ruled by 6th lord Mars.
पाके यचन्द्रदशासन्धिकाले मध्यान्ते व्यथा।
परित्यज्य सौख्यं भवति नित्यशः। । १९६६। |
रत past शुभग्रहसमन्विते।
चन्द्रस्यान्तर्गते सूर्य सूर्य कर्मान्तरान्तर |
शनिकेत्वन्तरे देहायासं धनक्षयम्। । १९६८ |
शुभग्रहान्तरे काले स्यं भवति नित्यशः
pa परित्यज्य देहायेग्यं रिपुक्षयम्।
cite नित्यसन्तोषं वस्त्रधान्यादिमादिशेत्। । १९६९ |
1966-1969. The junctions of the dasa periods
of the Moon and Mars will cause distress. Except

176 Chandra Kala Nadi
the months denoted by transit Sun in the signs
ruled by Mars, other periods will give happiness.
The Sun endowed with strength, being in the
company of a benefic, will cause wealth and
health in his sub period in the dasa of the Moon.
If the Sun is in the 10th with strength, then his sub
period in Moon’s dasa will cause ill-health and
loss of money. The sub period of Saturn as well
as of Ketu, in Moon’s dasa will also give the same
effects. In the sub periods of benefics, comforts
will prevail. Excepting the evil months, other
intervals will cause health and destruction of
enemies. He will be happy through his spouse,
will gain robes, grains etc. and will enjoy overall
happiness.
Strength of Asterism
Med चन्द्रबलं च यत्र
तस्मिन् दिने सास्म तदारसौख्यम्।
सुपष्ठमन्नं मधुरं प्रियं च
गेहे महद्धान्यफलं वदन्ति। | १९७०।।
ताराबलं चन्द्रबलं च यत्र
न विद्यते तत्र दिने विचारः।
iy Bp eq अतिपापं
1970-1971. Strength of the Moon & Ruling
Asterism: On the day when the Moon is strong
and the ruling asterism is favourable, the native
will be happy with his wife, will eat food of good
quality, which is sweet and specially. liked by the
native, On these days, plenty of grains will exist
in his home. On such days when the Moon is not
strong, and the ruling asterism is adverse, the
subject will have to commit some sinful acts, wil
have lack of sleep, be distressed and will be weak
in arguments.
RAMA तु गोचरे च विपर्यये।
मृत्युकालो यदा ज्ञातस्तदा शन्तिं समाचरेत् ॥ १९७२॥
= यै उत्तरायणगे रवौ। `
पुण्यकाले प्रदानकृत्। । १९७३। |
द्िमुखीकपिलादानं कुलकोटिं rf
यावदाम तावत्कालमधोगतिः।
दाता त्वायुष्यकं सौख्यं गर्भवासं न ॒पर्यति। । १९७५। |
1972-1975. The concluding phase of the
Moon’s dasa will cause (untimely) death for
which propitiations should be done. The sub
period of the Sun in the dasa of the Moon, with
transit Sun in his northerly course will be such a
period (of untimely death). During auspicious
times, donation of an elephant or a tawny cow or
a two-faced(?) tawny cow be given in charity.
Note: The second line of $.1974 and §.1975
are not amenable to a proper translation.
तनुभावांशगे चन्द्रे सूर्ये भग्यत्रिकोणगे।
तदूदशान्तर्दशकाले महादानफलं लभेत्। । १९७६। |
1976. If the Moon at birth be near the rising
degree while the Sun is in 9th or its trine, the
native will obtain the merits of a Great Charity in
the dasa periods of the Moon and Sun. (That is,
the Moon’s dasa and Sun’s bhukti will not be
adverse but contribute to the merits of the subject.)
भग्याधिपदशन्त्याद लग्नाधिपतिदायगे।
शुभग्रहान्तरे काले दानधमंसुबुद्धिमान्। | १९७७। |
1977, Charity: The beginning and ending
phase of the dasa of 9th lord (Moon) and the dasa
of ascendant lord (Mars) will tend the native
involve in charitable activities and religious acquisition.
i ध zi क |
कार हु पत्रशोकयुतो भवेत्।
तद्दोषपरिहारार्थ शान्तं sarah । । १९७८ । |
1978. Death of Son: Should Saturn be in the
9th in the company of Mars, while the significator
for progeny, Jupiter, is with Rahu, the native will
incur loss of a son. To overcome this grief,
remedies as prescribed by Sastras be resorted to.

Deva Keralam
Notes: Saturn-Mars in the 9th while Jupiter
is with Rahu will cause death of a son. However,
if Saturn in the process obtains Leo Navamsa (i.e.
Saturn in Cancer between 3 deg. 20° and 6 deg.
40’) will not cause such a loss, but the child will be
long-lived (vide sloka 1983 infra).
In case Saturn is not in Leo Navamsa,
remedies as prescribed in slokas 1979-1982 infra
be resorted to.
तद्दोषेपशमार्थमन्र कथितं oe |
षष्ठटीवासर तद्व्रतं वितरणं
नागं प्रार्थ्यं च eee ५ : |
तिप्म ४1 सम॒पोषितो यः
t द्विजाय।
GPa दद्यात् सकलांश्च रोगान्
क्षिप्रं Wea न संशयोअत्र। । १९८० |
"0 मतिमान् प्रतापविनीतश्च कलाप्रवीणः।
नाधेर््रहाणं पितृभिः पिशाचैः
यः शिषुमारप्रतिमां स्वकल्पोक्तविधानतः।
दत्ते स श्रियमाप्नोति पुत्रयुष्यविवर्धनीम्। । १९८२।
1979-1982. To overcome such an evil (and to
beget a long-living son), given below are the
details of remedies. Lord Vishnu (or Lord Siva)
should be worshipped with a desire for obtaining
of a son, and a six-day vow be maintained. Immersion (or donation) of an image of Lord Santhana Gopala be done. Prayer to Naga (Cobra
incarnate) be offered. Dips in sacred waters like
Sethu be done. Siva Linga bejewelled with ornaments etc. be given in donation. Then a worthy
son will be born (whol will not incur early death).
A golden image of Lord Surya (i.e. Sun) be given
to a Brahmin on a Monday (Timmamsu = Moon,
who has rays that are not fierce). Worship of such
an image of the Sun will eliminate all diseases
(obstructing birth of a son) and instant results will
prevail, A son so born will be intelligent,
valorous, modest, and skilful in arts. Alternatively
a heavy image of a child be donated following
which wealth and acquisition of a child will occur.
मृतपुत्रो न जयेत सिंहांशे तु सजीवकः,
महाभागो म हाचारस्तेजस्वी पटुरातमजः। । १६८३ । |
1983. Leo Navamsa: If Satrun (being in the
company of Mars in the 9th as Jupiter is with
Rahu) is in Leo Navamsa, the native will not
obtain a dead child, but will obtain one who will
be long-lived. Further the son will be fortunate,
be of good conduct, splendorous and skilful.
क प्रकुर्वीत नात्र कायौ विचारणा।
शोध्यक्ष शुभगोचरे। । १९८४ |
1984. Note: The two lines of this 8108 do
not convey any practical meaning, Kuja = Mars.
Udvaaham = Marriage. Thus Kujodvaaham
makes no sense. The other part of the sloka
means: "A benefic in transit (in the sign represented by highest dots) in the Ashtakavarga of
Jupiter". The rest is missing, and the next sloka
deals with something else. Strangely, the next
sloka has (only) three lines.
गुरूदुष्टियुते at पुत्र लाभो न संशयः।
जीवाद्भग्यफलानि स्युरव्धयेतु फलानि च।
शोषतस्य दशाकाले भग्यवृद्धि धनागमम्। । १९८५। |
1985. If Jupiter (at birth) aspects Sagittarius,
birth of progeny is sure. One’s prosperity should
be evaluated with the help of planets disposed
with reference to Jupiter. The dasa periods of
remaining planets will cause fortunes and
wealth(?)
। । नीचभंगराजयेगः। ।
Neecha Bhanga Raja Yoga
नीचभगे राजयेगे महाराजो भवेन्नरः।
कटके तु प्रजातस्य योगभंग विनिर्दिशेत्। । १९८६। |
शुभमेव फलं ब्रूयद्राजयोगो भविष्यति।
दैवयोगे प्रजातस्तु योवने रान्यलाभवान्। । १९८७1 |
1986-1987. Cancelled Debility: If debilitation of a planet remains cancelled at the time of

178 Chandra Kala Nadi
birth, one will become an emperor. For a Cancer
ascendant native, (this cancellation) will obstruct
prosperity (ic. the good effects arising out of
cancellation will not exist). As a result of such
cancellation, the native (of other than Cancer
ascendant) will in his youth obtain a kingdom.
Notes: This is Neecha Bhanga Raja Yoga.
More details can be found in standard texts. Our
text, however, denotes that this cancellation is not
an advantage but disadvantage for a native of
Cancer ascendant.
नीचस्तु नीचधिपतेर्यदि स्यात्
केन्द्रस्थितो नैनमुपेति भंगम्।
नीचेन युक्तस्तु च सुप्रसन्नो
महोनतश्चाशश्युभं विदद्यात्। | १९८८। |
1988. Notwithstanding debility of a planet,
if its dispositor is in an angle, the debility in
question remains nullified. The debilitated planet
turns happy (1.6. becomes auspicious) if its dispositor unites with it. Lastly, the planet in debility
proves favourable if it obtains extremely
favourable divisions (in Shodasa Varga).
नीचग्रहदशकाले नीचभंग विनिर्दिशेत्।
शुभमेव फलं ब्रूयाद्राजयोगो भविष्यति। । १९८९। |
1989. The effects due to Neechbhanga
Rajayoga will come to pass in the dasa of the
debilitated planet (whose debility is cancelled).
The results will be auspicious causing a Rajayoga.
नीचग्रहः स्याद्यदि योगकाले
नीचस्य भगो यदि चाप्य हेतुः।
नीचः प्रसन्नो शुभमेव दद्यात्
स्वभाग्यसस्यं पुनरश्वलाभम्। । १९९०।।
सामत्रक नृपस्नेहम यत्ने राज्यलाभवान्।
हेतेस्तु देवयोगस्म देवानुग्रहयोगवान्। ।-१९९१। |
wearer भवेद्योगो विग्रहे वाहनायुधैः |
देवयोगे तु संज्ञातो देवानुग्रहयोगवान्। । १९९२। I
1990-1992. In the dasa of the said planet, the
subject will get auspicious effects, be happy, will
possess horses (conveyances) due to his own fortunes (efforts), will be feudatory king, will
befriend royal men, will attain kingdom, will
receive the Almighty’s mercy and will win over his
enemies. He will expand his conveyances and
weaponry.
जन्मर्शृषष्टाष्टमखेचराणां
पाकस्य काले त्वथवान्त्यभागे।
रन्म्रेशष्टाधिपभुकितिकाले
ज्वरदिदेहामयमादिशान्ति। । १९९३। I
1993. The ५2585 of the lords of the 6th/8th
counted from the natal Moon, or their concluding
phases, (in} the subperiods of the lords of 6th/8th
counted from ascendant will cause (dangerous)
fever and physical ailments.
उच्चनीचे usa स्वक्षत्रग्रहवर्चिते।
परस्परक्षेत्रयोगे महाराजो भवेन्नरः। | १९९४ |
1994, The conjunction of an exalted planet
with a debilitated planet, devoid of the company
of its dispositor, will be the cause of a Rajayoga.
An emperor is born if (two) planets exchange
their Rasis.
Notes: Mars and Jupiter can join in
Capricorn without Saturn’s position therein, or
they can join in Cancer without the Moon therein.
Similarly the Sun-Saturn conjunction in Aries
should not be shared by Mars in Aries. Nor
should the Sun-Saturn in Libra acquire Venusian
association.
Thus four Raja Yogas are produced by the
company of an exalted planet and a debilitated
planet.
The second yoga given here is wellknown
Parivarthana Yoga.
योगे तु pol te जातो जीवे राहुसमन्विते।
सन्तानप्रतिबन्धी च दारपुत्रविचारवान्। : १९९५। |
1995. Sakata Yoga: When Sakata Yoga is
formed, Rahu joining Jupiter will cause worries
tothe native on account of his spouse and progeny
and may even prove an obstacle in begetting an
issue.

Deva Keralam
Notes: This yoga suggests obstacles for
progeny if Jupiter joins Rahu, either in the 6th or
in the 8th counted from the Moon.
Jupiter in 12th from the Moon need not be
called Sakata formation.
Tay रिपुस्थाने व्ययेशे सुतरशिगे।
SRR सुतप्रप्तिः कालान्तरफलं स्मृतम्। | १९९६।
1996. Delayed Progeny: If the 8th lord is
found in the 6th house, while the 12th lord is in
the 5th house, the native will obtain offspring
through another wife (1.6. the first wife will be
barren).
त्रिकोणशोधनं tg पश्चदेकाधिपत्यता्।
सप्तभिर्गुणितं चैव अष्टमिभौगमाहरेत्। । १९९७। |
बिन्धुत्रये धने वाग्मी त्वल्पसन्तानयोगवान्।
मृतपुत्रंशके जीवे जातो जाते मृते भवेत्। । १९९८।
1997-1998. Ashtaka Varga: Firstly, commit
trinal reduction, then Ekadhipatya Sodhana
(reduction on account of a planet owning two
signs). Multiply the net dots by seven and divide
by eight. If three dots be the remainder, the
native will be wealthy and skilful in speech but will
have limited number of issues. Should Jupiter be
in a fatal degree, the subject’s children will die as
they are born.
Notes: The text does not specify as to which
Ashtaka Varga is dealt with. It relates to Jupiter’s
individual Ashtaka Varga.
After the two reductions, the bindus be multiplied by seven and multiples of eight be cast
away. The remainder 3 will give skill in speech
apart from a number of children.
Jupiter’s fatal degrees are:
Aries 19 deg.
Taurus 29 deg.
Gemini 21 deg.
Cancer 27 deg.
Leo 6 deg.
Virgo 4 deg.
Libra 13 deg.
Scorpio 4 deg.
Sagit 27 deg.
Capri 12 deg.
Aqua 29 deg.
Pisces 19 deg.
These degrees applicable only to Jupiter
should be used in this particular context when the
Sth house is badly afflicted with other combinations required being in existence.
Particularly, the ‘fatal degree’ for Jupiter in
Cancer Sagittarius and Pisces should be handled
with care,
राहुअन्तरान्तरे वापि देहायासं धनक्षयम्।
षम तारदशाकाले विशेषश्रियमश्नुते।
अ सामादिप्रबलोद्योगभाग्यवान्। । १९९९ |
; क्रूरवेधग्रहान्तर |
चम्पकांशे प्रजातस्य HAT AE | 2000] |
चम्पकांशे स्थिरे लग्ने पश्चादुत्तमजन्म वान्
लाभधिपफलं सत्यं प्रत्यक्षं देवकेरव्मम्। | २००१।।
1999-2001. The sub period and sub-sub
period of Rahu will cause physical ailment and
loss of wealth. The dasa which is 4th in sequence
will cause acquisition of abundant wealth. One
will receive uninterrupted wealth and will enjoy
professional progress. In the malefic sub periods
of (Rahu) dasa, the native of Champaka Nadiamsa will face timely death. One born in an immovable ascendant with Champaka Nadiamsa will
have an excellent rebirth. The effects described
in Devakeralam about the 11th lord will bear
truth.
Notes: These three slokas are a mixup here
and are incomplete. These do not belong to Gada
Nadiamsa in Scorpio or any other immovable
ascendant. Partially these belong to Champaka
Nadiamsa.
। । वृश्चिकलग्नम्-(सुप्रभांशः)
Scorpio Ascendant — (Suprabha Nadiamsa)
सुप्रभांशे पूर्वभागे वृश्चिके तु प्रजायते। | २००२।।

ISO Chandra Kala Nadi
2002. Now results for birth in the first half
of Suprabha Nadiamsa in Scorpio ascendant.
Notes: Suprabha Nadiamsa extends thus:
from 15 deg. 36’ to 15 deg. 48’ of a movable sign;
from 14 deg. 12’ to 14 deg, 24 of an immovable
sign; and from 0 deg. 36’ to 0 deg. 48’ of acommon
sign.
The first half of this Nadiamsa in Scorpio is
from 14 deg. 12’ to 14 deg. 18’ of arc. Slokas from
2002 to 2012 deal with Scorpio ascendant.
— दरजन्मा सुखी नित्यं TERE: |
भ्रतृहीनश्च भिननभ्रातृसमन्वितः। | A 0031 |
स्वकार्यनिष्टो बलवान् स तु |
बाल्ये लुन्धस्वभावश्च दाता च प्राप्तयैबनः। | २००४। |
अन्नदाता सुखी नित्यं सर्वदा seas: |
मित्रत्मवन्धुसंरक्षी क्वचित् क्रोधी क्ठचित्क्षमौ।। २००५॥
देवालयतयकानामारामाणं च कारकः।
विप्रप्रतिष्ठापयिता कृत्वा पुण्यानि भूरिशः। | २००६। |
2003-2006. He will be a Soodra (4th caste in
olden days) by birth, be ever happy, born in an
emperor’s family(?), be engaged in deriving fruits
of his work, be strong and be fond of charity and
juices. (Daana Rasa Priyah is not a proper combination meaning: fond of charity and juices.) In
his childhood, he will be miserly. But in his youth,
he will be charitably disposed. He will feed the
poor. He will ever protect many a people. He will
also take care of his friends and kinsfolk. Sometimes he will be given to anger, sometimes forgiving in disposition. He will be instrumental in
constructing temples, tanks and rest- houses. He
will engage the services of Brahmins in
meritorious acts.
Notes: Birth in an emperor’s family is a
misfit in the present context.
भग्याधिपे लग्नकेन्द्रे भाग्येशे लग्नराशिगे।
सुखधिपेन ५५ क्ते हरिशंकरभक्तिमान्। | २००७। |
देवस्तेत्रप्रियो नित्यं कवयत्काव्यसाधकः।
सोन्दर्ययोषितां भर्ता ARR भवेन्नरः। । २००८॥। |
काव्यनाटसालंकृतादितत्ववितत्वबोधकः। |
विषयासक्तचित्तश्च परदाररतिप्रियः। | २००९। |
ऋतुप्त्ीसंगवान् कामौ सदा विषयलोलुपः
बाल्ये किचिद्रणभयं यौवने देहरोगवान्। | २०१०। |
वाहनात् पतन् किचिनम्लेच्छम् लाद्विचारवान्।
यौवने काम्यभोगेन युद्धे वायुधगण्डवान्। | २०११।।
तदभवे येगभंग संचितार्थविनाशवान्।
अदृष्टशाली धर्मात्मा रक्तवर्णशुभाकृत्तिः। । २०१२। |
2007-2012. Lord of 9th: If the 9th lord Moon
joins the 4th lord and is angular, counted from the
natal ascendant (Scorpio), the native will worship
Lord Vishnu and Lord Siva. He will be fond of
divine recitations and will have literary achievements. He will marry a beautiful woman, will join
others’ women, be valorous and be skilful in
poetry, drama etc. He will be learned in
philosophy and be a philosophical teacher as well.
He will be fond of sexual enjoyments and will join
the spouses of other men. He will join women
who are in their monthly periods. In his
childhood, he will be troubled by ulcers, and in
youth he will contract some physical ailments. He
will have falls from vehicles. Through Mlechchas
he will have some worries. He will incur dangers
through sexual contacts in youth, and through
weapons in a battle. In the absence of these
adversities, his prosperity will be obstructed and
the wealth saved by him be destroyed. He will be
a fortunate person, charitably disposed and will
have blood-red complexion with a pleasing appearance.
Note: Vide sloka No.2007, Bhagyese Lagna
Rasige meaning the lord of 9th in ascendant, is
redundant as "9th lord with 4th lord in an angle"
already appears.
Leo Ascendant —
(Champaka Nadiamsa)
भ्रातृस्थानाधिपे शुक्रे TN समन्विते।
चम्पकाशे प्रजातः स एकाकी भ्रातृहीनवान्। | २०१२।।
भगिनीत्रयमायुष्यं शेषं नाशमि तीरयेत्।
स्वभेदसोदरी चैका स्वभर््रानुगामिष्यति। | २०९४। |

Deva Keralam
2013-2014. Venus: Venus should rule the 3rd
house and be conjunct 8th lord (Jupiter). In such
a case one born in Champaka Nadiamsa (of Leo
ascendant) will be the only male issue, will have
no brothers, and will have three sisters. Rest of
the sisters will be destroyed. He will have a stepsister who will follow the footsteps of her husband.
Notes: From now onwards Leo ascendant
features. The Nadiamsa is Champaka for details
of which please refer to notes under sloka 1412
supra.
मातृस्थनधिपे भैमे युग्मशि स्थिरराशिगे।
सम्पत्तार्दशाकाले मात्ररिष्टं विनिर्दिशेत्। । २०१५। |
2015. Mars: If the 4th lord Mars is in an
immovable sign, with a dual Navamsa, the native
in his second dasa will lose his mother.
जामित्रधिपतौ मन्द TTT
द्राविंशान्दात् परं चेति द्वितीयेद्राह योगवान्। | २०१६।
2016. Saturn: If Saturn, ruling the 7th
house, is in a trine counted from the 11th, the
native will have a second marriage after his 22nd
year of age.
ist
पितृस्थानाधिपे भैने त्वसितेन युतेक्षिते! ¦ 221 |
पितुव्याभतमित्याहुः स्वपिता योगवान् मुखी |
नण्डलाधिपतिद्ारि AETHER! | ००२०। |
TRAE नृपतिप्रयसेवकः।
2019-20201/2. Father: Should the 9th lord
Mars be in the 11th in aspect to or in association
with Saturn, the native’s father will be prosperous,
happy, will acquire conveyances through the good
offices of the king, will make friends with army
chief and minister, and will be a pet worker of the
king.
वाहनाधिपतौ AA ple an क्िते।
चम्पकांश प्रजातस्स |
2021-20211/2. Conveyances: Mars as the 4th
lord joining Saturn, or being in aspect to Satrun,
will bestow conveyances upon the native. This
applies to birth in Champaka Nadiamsa, Leo ascendant.
पत्रस्थानाधिपं जीवे चम्पकाशस्य जातके । । २०२२।।
ए ुत्द्रयचिरायुषम् | |
2022-2023. Children: The subject of former
half of Champaka Nadiamsa in Leo ascendant,
लग्ने शनियुते दृष्टे चम्पकांशे WTA
अस्वतन्त्र क्वचित् कालं पश्चात् स्वातन््रययोगवान्!। २०१७॥
बाल्ये दुष्टस्वभावेन परस्त्रीसंग चित्तवान् | |
चोर्यकृत्यं क्व चित्कालं यौवने ग्रन्थिरोगवेोन्। i 20821 |
ततः प्रभृति sate शिवलिंगप्रपूजकः। .
having Jupiter as the 5th lord, will have two sons
and two daughters who will be endowed with
longevity. Rest of his progeny will be destoryed.
विपत्तारदशकाले रविभेमान्तरान्तर |
यावदायुष्यमाप्नोति Tara विनिर्दिशेत्। । २०२४।।
2017-20181/2. Saturn & Ascendant: If
Saturn is in the ascendant (Leo) or lends his
aspect thereto, the native of Champaka Nadiamsa
will not be independent for some time, but will
later on be independent. During his boyhood he
will be wicked in disposition. He will tend to join
others’ women. For some time, he will indulge in
thieving. In his youth, he will suffer from disorders of blood vessels (hardening and swelling of
blood vessels). He will be charitable in disposition and will worship Lord Siva.
2024. The first line of the sloka means: " In
the third dasa and in the sub-periods of the Sun
and Mars... ... ह
The second line means: "Throughout his life,
he will be fortunate."
Apparently this sloka is not complete or 1
in a wrong place with half-told concepts.
तृतीयशनिपयौये गोचरे कटके शनौ।
पित्ररिष्ट' .विजनीयाच्छम्पकांशे न संशयः । | २०२५। |

2025. Danger to father: When Saturn in his
third round reaches Cancer, the father of the
native of Champaka Nadiamsa will be endangered.
1 मेषदित्रयमासगे।
मात्ररि PAC न संशयः । । २०२६। |
साधनेशदशाकाले क्रूरब्दे PATTY |
देहपीडाम वाप्नोति दशन्ते च प्रयास्यति। । 2021 |
निर्मलांशे स्थिरे लग्ने प्रत्यक्तारदशान्त |
साधनेशदशायां तु राजेपद्रवगण्डवान्।
तत्पापपरिहारार्थं शन्तिं कुर्याद्यथाविधि। | २०२८ । |
निर्मलांशे पूर्वभागे साधनेशदशाविपत्।
यदि जीवति पुण्येन नेघनेशदशाविपत्। | २०२९। |
2026-2029. Nirmala Nadiamsa: During the
Sun’s northerly course, coinciding with his transit
in the three signs commencing Aries, the mother
of the subject of Nirmala Nadiamsa will be in
danger. In the dasa that is sixth in sequence, the
native of Nirmala Nadiamsa will incur physical
illness. This will occur in the end of the 4th dasa,
or in‘adverse years/months. One born in this
Nadiamsa in an immovable ascendant will experience royal wrath in the sub-period denoted
by fifth Nakshatra from the natal Moon, during
the rulership of 6th major period. To overcome
this, suitable propitiations be done. For a native
of Nirmala Nadiamsa, former half, the 6th dasa
will bring danger. If at all he survives, the dasa
ruled by the 8th lord will endanger him.
Notes: Slokas 2026 -2032 are wrongly appended here. These deal with Nirmala Nadiamsa
of an immovable ascendant. For details of Nirmala Nadiamsa, please see notes under sloka
79-80 1/2 supra. In this portion of the text, Nirmala and Champaka Nadiamsas are clubbed
together. The reader may carefully assort such
rules without confusion.
वरगोत्तमांशे 8 | व
अत्युच्च गते वा गुरूणा च wy
उद्रितमार्गेण निजस्वररूपं ।
वेदान्तनिष्ठः परमात्मवेत्ता। | 2030] |
सूर्य करा्षष्ठयंशे निर्मलांशे तु जायते।
Chandra Kala Nadi
स्वजात्यानुगुणं लोकमन्त्ये ज्ञानयुतो भवेत्। । २०३१।।
शुक्रनाड़ीफलाध्याये विस्तारं. योगनिर्णयम्।
लग्ननाडीफलं सत्यं प्रत्यक्षं CARLA! | २०३२।।
2030-2032. If the ascendant lord is in Vargothama, or be in exaltation, or be in aspect to
Jupiter, the native will follow Advaitha (Nonduality), will be devoted to Philosophy and will
have knowledge of the Supreme Being. If the Sun
is in Karala Shashtiamsa, the native will live in the
manner prescribed for his family, and be endowed with wisdom. Sukra Nadi deals with in
detail the Yoga aspects. The results for Lagna
Nadi (amsa) narrated in Deva Keralam will bear
, truth.
Notes: Karala Shashtiamsa has been discussed in the notes under sloka 1871-1872 supra.
In this case, Karala Shashtiamsa softens the
maleficence of the Sun and gives wisdom to the
native. `
1 । सिंहलग्नम् (चम्पकांश-विप्रकालः)
(Champaka Nadiamsa — First Quarter)
चम्पकांशे Tart सिंहलग्न प्रजायते।
विप्रजन्मा सुखी नित्यं पफंवमोअयं प्रकीर्तितः। । २०३३
महानदीप्रान्त्यदेशे शिवालयसमीपगे।
पूर्वभागे प्रजातस्य नगरे प्रसवः स्मृतः। | २०३४। |
2033-2034. Champaka Nadiamsa: The native of first half of Champaka Nadiamsa, in Leo
ascendant, will be a Brahmin, be fifth issue of the
family and will have his birth in a city in the
Mahanadi region beside a Siva temple.
Notes: From now onwards Champaka 1s
discussed, the ascendant being Leo. For this
Nadiamsa, please see notes under sloka 1412
supra.
Other immovable ascendants also feature in
this part of the text.
चम्पकांशे स्थिरे लग्ने पूर्वभागे प्रजायते।
विप्रकाले प्रजातः स मातुलावासजन्मवान्। | २०३५।।

Deva Keralam 1N3
2035. One belonging to a fixed sign in the
former half of Champaka Nadiamsa will be a
Brahmin, born in his maternal uncle’s house.
चम्पकांशे सिंहलग्न प्रजायते
रूपवान् [ वाग्मी प्रसनमुखनैत्रवान्।
पधुराम्लप्रियः ic Hi सर्वेषां मोदकः सदा। | 20881 |
त्यागी वाहनवान्
नित्यानदाता बहुमानजीवि
गम्भीर्यवचोअनिलात्मा।
Aa राजसभासु ws
स्माग्यष्ठिः सुमुखो दयालुः। । 208d! |
2036-2038. The native of former half of
Champaka Nadiamsa in Leo ascendant will be
charming in appearance, be intelligent, eloquent
in speech, be endowed with beautiful face and
eyes, be fond of sweet and sour juices, be gentle
among men and will be ever happy. He will be of
sacrificing disposition, be endowed with conveyances an will earn fame spread across different countries. He will be very rich. He will
perform poor-feeding at all times. He will live
with great honour. His speech will be marked
with profoundity and sweetness. His body will be
of windy temperament. He will beget a worthy
son. Inroyal assembly, he will command worshippability. He will be endowed with symmetric features, be pleasing in appearance and be liberal in
disposition.
पितुव्यभवने चन्द्रे त्वसितेन युतेक्षिते।
निर्मलशे पूर्वभागे पितृव्यद्वयमादिशेत्। | 20381 |
शनिनाडीफलाध्याये पितृव्यस्य मृतिं वदेत्।
2039-20391/2. The Moon: Should the Moon,
placed in the 11th house, be in aspect to or in
association with Saturn, the native will have two
paternal uncles. In Sani Nadi (early) death of
paternal uncles is foretold (for this yoga).
पितृस्थानध्पि AA नक्रंशे गुरूसयुते। | २०४०।।
निर्मले प्रजातस्य स्वपिता योगवान् सुखी।
मण्डलाधिपयोगेन नरबाहनयोगवान्। | २०४१ | ।
नहुदेशधिपत्यं च अन्न दानसुकीर्तिमान्।
PUSS त्व ग्रहि प्रतिष्ठितः। । २०४२ |
स्मातेप्रियः क्व चिच्चेति वेष्णवाचारवान् सुधीः |
2040-20421;2. Mars-Jupiter: For birth in
Nirmala Nadiamsa, with the 9th lord Mars, joining Jupiter in Capricorn Navamsa following effects will come to pass. The native’s father will be
prosperous. He will acquire conveyances due to
his association with the king. He will rule over
many countries (?) and will perform poor-feeding. He will be devoted to the services of Lord
Vishnu and will have colonies constructed for
Brahmins. He will follow Traditional Laws. He
will also follow the codes prescribed for a Vaishnavite and will be very intelligent.
निर्मलशे पूर्वभागे मन्देशांशत्रिकोणगे | २०४३ । |
Spear गते मन्द् स्वपिता यौगभंगवान्।
चन्द्रंशराशिमारभ्य गोचरे त्वष्टमे WAT | २०४४ |
Ueda महत्कष्टं योगभंगं विनिदिशेत्।
मीनान्ते मेषगे राहौ सवक्रशनिसंयुते। | २०४५ । |
विरोधेन विनिर्गत्य स्त्रीगृहे सौख्ययोगवान्।
2043-20451/2. Saturn: Note in which
Navamsa, the dispositor of Saturn is placed at
birth. When Saturn himself comes to such a Rasi
or its trine, the prosperity of the father of the
native of former half of Nirmala Nadiamsa will be
checked. During Rahu dasa, when Saturn comes
to the 8th from the natal Moon’s navamsa, the
native’s father will be subjected to great troubles
and chequered prosperity. When Rahu joins
retrograde Saturn in the end of Pisces, or in Aries,
the native will due to inimical activities (with
others) lose his refuge and seek shelter in his
wife’s home and will be happy.
मदेशंशत्रिकोणगे वा स्षटुटयोगं गते VAT । २०४६। |
निर्मलांशे प्रजातस्य देशे राजा कलापकृत्।
देशे rae तत्काले PAC मनोन्यथा। | २०४७। |
सार्धवर्षत्परं चिन्ताकलहाभ्यां मनोन्यथा।
ततः परं महत्सोख्यं प्रबलेद्योगजीवनम्। | २०४८ |
2046-2048. When Saturn reaches the sign
represented by the Navamsa of the dispositor of

natal Saturn, or its trine, in the kingdom of Nirmala Nadiamsa native, a war and compromise will
occur which will cause distress to the native.
After a year and half, the native will enjoy great
happiness and professional prosperity.
Note: This part has a mix-up and has irrelevant interpolations. Hence ignorable.
। । कुप्भलग्नम्-(निर्मलांशः) । ।
Aquarius Ascendant — Nirmala Nadiamsa
सात्विको गुणसम्पन्नो वैदिकाचार तत्परः।
निर्मले पूर्वभागे कुम्भलग्ने तु जायते। | २०४९।।
2049. Aquarius ascendant: One born in the
first half of Nirmala Nadiamsa, in Aquarius ascendant, will be gentle, endowed with many virtues, and will follow the codes prescribed by the
Vedas.
मीनांशकगते सूर्ये सत्यवादी TS
गुरुप्रथम पयाये गोचरे वृषभे गुरो। । २०५०। |
सम्पद्दाये म॒ध्यखण्डे विवाहोत्सवमादिशेत्।
विवाहं जन्मदेशे हि प्रण्भागे नगरेषु वा। | २०५१ । |
2050-2051. Pisces Navamsa: If the Sun is in
Pisces Navamsa, the native will be truthful and
will honour his elders (or preceptors). His marriage will take place when Jupiter in his first
round reaches Taurus, in the middle of the second
dasa, in his birth country (or region) with a bride
hailing from the eastern part of the city.
Fs मीनांशगे सूर्य कर्मेशेन निरीक्षिते।
छ सौम्यान्तरे काले निर्मलांशे तु जायते॥ २०५२॥
सिंहायनगते 1 सूर्य जननीमृतिमादिशेत्।
CHARIS चत्वार्शि तु वत्सरे। । २०५३।।
दारपीडामवाप्नेति क्षिप्रणरोण्यभाग्यवान्।
भावाध्याये दारफलं शुक्रनादीषु योजयेत्। | २०५४। |
2052-2054, The Sun in the 4th house
(Taurus) with Pisces Navamsa, being in aspect to
10th lord will cause death of mother when the
Chandra Kala Nadt
Nirmala Nadiamsa native is in Mars dasa, Merला bhukti, coinciding with southerly course of
the Sun. His 23rd/24th year will endanger the
wife, but will instantly prove better. He will
during these years acquire fortunes. In the chapter relating to seventh house, Sukra Nadi
elaborates relevant effects.
जामित्राधिपतौ सूर्ये मीनांशे स्थिरराशिगे।
कारके गुरूसंयुक्ते वदेदेककठ्त्रवान्। | २०५५। |
असितेन युते दृष्टे परस्त्रीसंगपापवान्।
2055-20551/2. Single Marriage: Should the
7th lord be in an immovable Rasi, obtaining Pisces
Navamsa, as Venus, the significator of spouse, is
with Jupiter, the native will have one marriage. If
the said Sun is associated with Saturn by way of
aspect/association, the subject will join others’
women.
निर्मलाशे पूर्वभागे सुतेशे केतुसंयुते। । २०५६। |
विपद्दाये सुतोत्पत्तिः पूर्वभागे न oe संशयः।
पुत्रस्थानाधिपे dea मेषे सिंहा । । २०५७॥ |
Ga शुभसंयुक्ते पुत्राणां च चतुष्टयम्।
पत्रिकाद्रयमायुष्यं शेषं नाशमि तीरयेत्। । २०५८। |
2056-2058. Progeny: If Ketu joins Mercury,
the 5th lord, the first half of third dasa will bestow
progeny on the native belonging to the former half
of Nirmala Nadiamsa, in Aquarius ascendant.
The native will have four sons, if Mercury ruling
the 5th house is placed in Aries, with Leo Navamsa. For this, the 5th house should also be associated with a benefic. The native will further
have two daughters and rest of the children will
die.
निर्मलाशे पूर्वभागे कुम्भलगने प्रजायते।
मकरांशे सुखाधीशे नरवाहनयोगवान्।
सेनामात्यजनस्नेहं ian । | २०५९। |
साम्राज्यांशयुते तु हायोगे प्रजातः सुधीः।
कान्ताभोगयुते धनी नदनदीयात्रप्रवौणः सुखी । | २०६०।।
2059-2060. Conveyances €८. Predict conveyances for the native of first half of Nirmala

Deva Keralam
Nadiamsa, in Aquarius ascendant, if the 4th lord
Venus is in Capricorn Navamsa. The native vill
further befriend the army chief and ministers and
will be a pet servant of the king. One born in
Kesari Yoga, with (4th lord) in 10th Navamsa will
be very intelligent, be endowed with pleasures
from females, wealthy and will be skilful in journeying in rivers of both kinds that flow from west
to east and vice versa.
। । वृषमलग्नम्-(गदाशः - गुरूनाडी)
Taurus Ascendant —
Gada Nadiamsa (Guru Nadi)
गदांशे मिथुने जीवे तदीशे रविसंयुते।
विप्रकाले प्रजातः स ष्याम वर्णञ्ुभाकृतिः। । २०६९ |
2061. According to Guru Nadi: The native
of Gada Nadiamsa’s Vipra Kala (in Taurus ascendant), having Jupiter in Gemini, as Mercury is
with the Sun, will be of dark complexion and
pleasing appearance.
Notes: This part of the text deals with
Taurus ascendant, Gada Nadiamsa. For this
Nadiamsa, see notes under sloka 518 supra.
चन्द्रलग्नाधिपे मन्दे taped गुरूनिरीक्षिते।
स्थिरलग्ने प्रजाश्च एकाकौ श्रातृहीनवान्। | २०६२।
2062. Satura: With Saturn being the Moon
sign lord, if placed in exaltation in aspect to
Jupiter, one born in an immovable ascendant will
be the lonely issue of the family, bereft of any
coborn.
मीनारूटे विलग्नेशे त्वसितेन निरीक्षिते।
सम्पत्तारदशाकाले मौजीबन्धनमदिशेत्। । २०६३। |
2063. Thread Ceremony: The ascendant
lord placed in Pisces in aspect to Saturn will cause
Thread Ceremony in the 2nd dasa.
गदशे मिथुने जीवे मदेशे सुतरशिगे।
जन्मादिदशमे . वधे विवाहोन्सवमादिजेत्; ¦ २०६४ |
देशे ARIS कारके निर्वीिते।
FAA उद्वाहं गदि नात्र संशयः । | २०६५ | |
2064-2065. Early Marriage: The native’s
marriage will occur in the tenth year in case of
birth in Gada Nadiamsa. For this, Jupiter at birth
should be in Gemini, and the 7th lord Mars,
should be in the Sth house. If Venus is aspected
by Saturn, while the 7th lord is in the Sth house,
the bride will hail from the native’s own region for
a Gada Nadiamsa native.
व्ययस्थानं गते काव्यं ARTS |
थग्याधिपन ete lead संशयः । ¦ २०६६। |
2066. Wealth: Venus placed in the 12th
house, avoiding Virgo Navamsa. in aspect to the
Oth lord, will cause acquisition of wealth (of a
huge order).
Notes: Venus in Aries in the 12th should be
aspected by 9th lord Saturn which is a Dhana
Yoga of significance. The position of Venus in
Virgo Navamsa in the above yoga will far reduce
the Dhana Yoga effects.
वाहनधिपते सूर्य क्म गुरूनिरीक्षिते।
TERS प्रजातः स॒ नरबाहनयोगवान्। | २०६४७। |
2067. Men-borne Conveyances: The 4th
lord Sun placed in the 10th house (in Aquarius)
in aspect to Jupiter will bless the native of Gade
Nadiamsa with men-borne conveyances.
सम्पत्तारदशकाले क्रूरवेधग्रहान्त |
स्वसमानजनारिष्टं TEST नात्र संशयः | । २०६८ । |
2068. Second dasa: The native of Gada
Nadiamsa will see his kinsfolk failing to evil effects in the sub periods of adverse planets during
the currency of the 2nd dasa.
सुखेशे हरिणंशस्थे विक्रमेशे WITT
स्थिरलग्नम् प्रजातस्य क्षेम तरे महत्सुखम्। । 20881 |

2069. Fourth dasa: The 4th lord in Harina
Nadiamsa and the 3rd lord in Sura Nadiamsa will
give great happiness to the subject of an immovable ascendant during the rulership of the fourth
dasa.
Notes: See notes under sloka 685 for Harina
Nadiamsa. For Sura Nadiamsa, consult notes
under sloka 714-16 supra.
The rule given in the current sloka applies
to any of the four immovable ascendants.
पुत्रस्थानं गते पपे राहूभेमयुते Te!
पुरापातकदेषेण जायते च मृतप्रजा। | २०७०। |
ए t शिशुमारं प्रदापयेत्।
teas च सन्तानं लभते नात्र संशयः। | २०७१।
2070-2071. Dead Children: A malefic in the
Sth while Jupiter is in the company of Mars and
Rahu - this yoga wili cause birth of dead children
due to sins of the previous birth. To overcome this
evil child sacrifice should be done following
which long- living children will be obtained. (This
remedy, as already stated, should be shunned.)
विपत्तारदशकाले BAR चापगे शनैौ।
सुपुत्रोत्सवसंप्रप्ति गदांशस्यैव जातके ! | २०७२। |
2072. Son: The native of Gada Nadiamsa
will obtain a good son in the 3rd dasa when Saturn
moves in the end of Scorpio, or in Sagittarius.
भग्येशे षष्टराशिस्ये षष्ठेशे व्ययरशिगे।
FHT सुखभेः सूर्ये पुत्रवान् बुद्धिमान्|भवेत्॥ 20093 |!
2073. The native will be endowed with
progeny and intelligence if the 9th lord is in the
6th, the 6th lord in the 12th and the Sun is in the
10th/4th.
aT IRATE 1 inl |
तारदशाकाले गोचरे मिथने गुरो।,
Take विजनीयद्रगदांशं चैव जायतं।।२०७५। |
क्षेम तारदशाकाले गोचरे कटके ZT
अतिसारं फित्रिष्टमापत्सुन्यासयोगवान्। | २०७६। |
Chandra Kala Nadi
2074-2076. Fourth dasa: During the rulership of fourth dasa, when..... in transit arrives at
the Rasi represented by the Navamsa occupied by
the 5th lord’s dispositor, acquisition of a son will
occur. During the same dasa, when Jupiter in
transit is found in Gemini, the mother of the
native of Gada Nadiamsa will be endangered.
And when Jupiter moves into Cancer, in the same
dasa, the native’s father will incur danger due to
dysentery and the native will take to ascetism
following such a calamity.
Notes: In sloka 2074, the transiting planet is
not specifically mentioned. It should be Jupiter,
as will be clear from the other immediately following slokas.
— ते जीवे गदोशे लाभसंस्थिते।
2077. Two Sons: If in Jupiter’s Ashtaka
Varga, five dots are located, and if he is in the 11th
house, the native will have two sons and be
honourable.
Notes: Five dots in Jupiter’s Ashtaka Varga
giving two sons is notable.
गुरूशोध्यावशिष्टर्ष स्फुटयोगं गते गुरे।
पत्रीप्रप्तिस्तु तत्काले पुत्रयो गांशजातके । । २०७८ | |
2078. This sloka suffers defects of constitution. It hints at birth of a daughter when Jupiter
comes to an unspecified house. Also the words
"Gurusodhyavasishta Rasige" which roughly
means: the sign in Gurw’s rectified Ashtaka
Varga, which has no suitable meaning. Similarly,
the words "Putra yogamsa Jathake" do not convey
proper meaning.
मित्रे रवियुते दुष्टे गदांशे गुरूसंस्थिते।
Mas महत्सौख्यं चत्वारिंशात् परं सुखम्। । २०७९। |
महानरदीप्रानत्यदेशे नगरे भग्यमशनुते।
स्वदेशवासवान् रागी महानृपतिसेवकः। | २०८०। |
2079-2080. Great Happiness: Should the
11th be occupied by the Sun as Jupiter is in Gada

Deva Keralam
Nadiamsa the native of Gada Nadiamsa will inthe
fourth dasa enjoy great happiness. After 24 vears
of age, he will be happy. His prosperity will be in
a city in the region of Mahanadi. He will live in
his own country. He will be passionate and will
serve a king.
अष्टमाधिपतै जीवे कारके स्वोच्चरशिगे।
स्थिरलग्ने पजातः स पूर्णमायुस्तु विन्दति। | २०८१।
2081. Full Life-span: If Saturn is in his exaltation sign, whereas Jupiter is the ruler of the 8th
house, one born in an immovable ascendant will
live a full life.
चन्द्रलग्नाधिपे ण हणा च निरीक्षिते।
अष्टषष्टिसमे नात्र संशयः! | २०८२ |
2082. Death at 68: The native of Gada
Nadiamsa will die at 68 if the Sun is the ruler of
the Moon-sign and is in aspect to Jupiter.
व्ययेशे जीवषष्ठयंशे हरिणांशे दिवाकरे ।
गदांशकगते जीवे पुण्यलोकं प्रयास्यति। । २०८३ । |
9 लोके अन्ते स्वर्गफलं ययैौ।
तावद्भाग्यं विनिर्दिशेत्।
TSR फलं सत्यं प्रत्यक्षं देवकेरव्ठम्। | २०८४ I |
2083-2084. One will attain Heavens if
Jupiter is in Gada Nadiamsa, the Sun in Harina
Nadiamsa and the 12th lord is in a Shashtiamsa
ruled by Jupiter. During his journey in this world,
he will perform meritorious acts and in the end he
will go to the Heavens. Throughout life, he will
enjoy prosperity. The effects for Gada Nadiamsa
explained in Deva Keralam will bear truth and
come to pass in actual experience.
। । मिथुनलग्नम् (अगदांशः ~ गुरूनाडी) । |
Gemini Ascendant —
(Agada Nadiamsa — Guru Nadi)
सुरंशे der जीवे शन्यंगारकवीक्षिते।
विप्रकाले प्रजातः स गैौरवर्गञ्ुभाकृतिः। | २०
चन्द्रलग्नाधिपे मन्दे सुरभे विप्रकालं। 1 २०८
लग्ने च मिथुने जते ज्येष्ठश्रातृविहानवान्।
पश्चाद्प्रातृविहानश्च भगिन्येका FAN । २०८७ । |
2085-2087. Jupiter in Libra in aspect to
Saturn and Mars, will give a fair complexion and
charming appearance, to a native of first quarter
of Sura Nadiamsa. Saturn becoming the ruler of
the Moon sign, in case of birth in the first quarter
of Sura Nadiamsa in Gemini ascendant will
deprive him of male coborn - both elder and
younger. He will have a sister who will enjoy long
married life.
Notes: For Sura Nadiamsa, see notes under
sloka 714-716 supra. The present discussions
centre on Gemini ascendant. The first quarter of
this Nadiamsa in Gemini extends from 16 deg. 24’
to 16 deg. 27 of space.
Pa लग्नगे चन्द्रे गुरूणा च निरीक्षिते।
लगने तु मिथुने जातो हरिशंकरभक्तिमान्। | २०८८।
देवब्राहम णभक्तश्च पितृमातृप्रियः सुखी ।
WER प्रसिद्धश्च वाहनद्रसयोगवान्। | २०८९। |
2088-2089. Gemini ascendant, being in a
dual Navamsa, having the Moon in it in aspect to
Jupiter will give the following effects: The subject
will be devoted to Lords Vishnu and Siva. He will
honour gods and Brahmins, be dear to his
parents, be happy, will attain fame in royal service
and will possess two conveyances.
Notes: In case of Gemini ascendant, one of
the three dual signs, viz. Sagittarius, Pisces and
Gemini can be Navamsa ascendant in which case
Sura Nadiamsa becomes irrelevant as it takes
Aquarius Navamsa position.
Now the yoga as per the slokas under discussion is: Gemini ascendant with the Moon therein,
in aspect to Jupiter, while the Navamsa ascendant
is also Gemini.
लग्नात् फ्चमगे (न शि बहुवित्तवान्।
पितृमातृचिरायुष्यं शतायुषम्। | २०९० |
सुराशे Tay जीवे युग्मांशे कुजवीक्षिते।
मातामहचिरायुष्यं मातुलद्रययोगवान्। | [ORR I |
come

2090-2091. Jupiter in 5th: If the planet
Jupiter is in the Sth the Sura Nadiamsa native will
be very wealthy. He will have long-living parents.
His maternal grand-mother will live for 100 years.
Should Jupiter, in the 5th, be in aspect to Mars,
and occupy a dual Navamsa, the native’s maternal
grandfather will be endowed with longevity and
the native will have two maternal uncles.
विपत्त्रदशकाले ATT |
स्फटयोगं गते मन्दे मातुलारिष्टमादिशेत्। 1 २०९२।
2092. Third dasa: In the dasa which 15 third
in sequence, see if Saturn in transit comes to a
trine counted from the Navamsa position of the
lord of ascendant. That will be the time when the
maternal uncle of the native will be endangered.
सम्पत्तारदशाकाले लग्नेशे नीचकालगे।
सुरांशकप्रजातस्य मौजीबन्धनमादिशेत्। | २०९३। |
सम्पत्तारदशाकाले सुतांशे बहुसोख्यवान्।
विवाहोत्सवकार्यणि सम्पदूदाये शुभांशगे। । २०९४। ।
2093-2094. Second dasa: During the second
dasa, when the asendant lord comes to his sign of
debilitation, the native of Sura Nadiamsa will
have his thread ceremony. In this dasa, the native
will enjoy great happiness. In this very dasa his
marriage will take place.
Notes: The ascendant lord being Mercury,
he can come to his sign of debility , Pisces, every
year. Hence in the 2nd dasa, the appropriate sub
period be chosen after a careful study of a given
horoscope.
सुरंशे तैलिके चन्द्रे शन्यंगारकवकषिते।
द्विशब्दात्
सुरांशके i रिपुनाथेन वीक्षिते।
जन्मदाये पूवर्धिं ज्वरपीडितः। । २०९६। |
2095-2096. The Moon: For a Sura Nadiamsa
native, the Moon in Libra in aspect to Saturn and
Mars will cause prosperity and fame in the years
following 22. If the Moon is aspected by the 6th
lord (Mars) the native during his first dasa will see
परं चेति योगवान् कीर्तिमान् BA! २०९५॥
Chandra Kala Nadi
his father in troubles. The first half of the first
dasa will cause (dangerous) fever to father.
fas शनिस्थिते काले जन्मदेशे नृपावधि।
उतिसारात् frases सुराशे नत्र संशयः। | २०९७। |
जन्मदाये जन्मदेशे राजमात्यज॒नावधि।
कन्याशनिस्थिते काले जन्मदेशे . THAT! । २०९८। |
राजामात्यजनक्लेशं राजन्तरफलं स्मृतम्।
स्वजन्मदेशनृपति राज्यनशेन BME! । २०९९।।
बन्धुवर्गे मनस्तापं व्याकुलानन्तरं सुखम्।
2097-20991/2. When Saturn is in Leo, the
king of the country...(?). The father of the native
of Sura Nadiamsa will be endangered by
dysentery. In the first dasa, the king’s minister
will be .... During the period of Saturn in Virgo,
the king will.....Enmity between king and the minister---another king taking over....his king will be
emaciated due to loss of kingdom.... The native
will see his kinsfolk in mental distress after which
happiness will be revived.
विपद्दाये सुतोत्पत्ती राजद्वरे प्रवेशवान्।
। तु विद्यप्तिस्सुराशेनात्र संशयः । । २१०१। |
मेषगे मन्दे पुत्रलाभं विनिर्दिशेत्। । २१०२।।
2100-2102. Third Dasa: For a Sura NadiamSa native, Jupiter placed in Libra in aspect to the
Sth lord, will cause birth of a son in the third dasa.
In this dasa he will enter in royal service as well.
He will further acquire learning. Birth of a son
will coincide with Saturn moving in the last
degrees of Pisces or in the sign Aries.
हरिणांशगते 0 a तेलिगे गुरो।
2103. Two Marriages: With the Sun in
Harina Nadiamsa while Jupiter placed in Libra
occupies the Sun’s divisions, the native of Sura
Nadiamsa will have two marriages. But according to some, this yoga will give only one marriage.
सुरांशके कर्मनाथे Fad शनिवीक्षिते।

Deva Keralam
्षेमदाये महत्सौख्यं वहनद्रययोगवान्।
सुरंशगे फल सत्यं क्षेमदाये सुकीिमान्। | २१०४।।
2104 . Fourth dasa: For a native of Sura
Nadiamsa, see if the 10th lord is in the 5th house
in aspect to Saturn. Then, the dasa which is the
4th in order will confer great happiness and two
conveyances. The native will further become
widely famous. The eifects described for Sura
Nadiamsa will bear truth.
लग्नधिपदशाकाले सुरश्रे विप्रकालगे।
द्विकच्छत्रसुपुत्रप्तिः राजद्वारे प्प्रसिद्विमान्। 1 २१०५। |
2105. Dasa of Ascendant Lord: One born in
the first quarter of Sura Nadiamsa, will have a
re-marriage and acquisition of a son during the
rulership of the dasa of ascendant lord. He will
also become famous through royal service.
te ag
न । pols ade णजन्मवान्।
प्रत्यक्तारदशन्त्ाद लाभं प्राप्नोति
जनकस्य च निर्याणं नृकन्या्मं
सप्तपंचांशके
यदि जीवति
2106-2107. Sura Nadiamsa - Ist Quarter:
Other effects concerning this native are: He will
have abundant gains in the beginning and concluding phases of the Sth dasa. His father will quit
the world जाला... in transit in
Gemini/Virgo/Pisces. The subject will die at 57
after whcih he will be reborn as a Brahmin. If he
survives his 57th year due to his past merits, he
will live upto 65.
Notes: As regards father’s death, which
planet should be in transit in Gemini ete. is not
mentioned. It should be Saturn as he rules the 9th
house.
सुरांशकगते जीवे त्विद्दरियातीतवान् पिता।
विप्रकाले फलं सत्यं प्रत्यक्षं देवकेरल्म्। | २१०८ |
2108. Father: Jupiter in Sura Nadiamsa
enables the native’s father win over his senses.
Ls9
Effects described in Deva Keralam about the first
quarter of Sura Nadiamsa will be directly experienced.
Notes: Slokas 2075 to 2108 deal with Sura
Nadiamsa only. The caption denoting ‘Agada’
Nadiamsa is erroneous.
। । मिथुनवुधज््रंशफलं ~ (नाडी) । ।
Mercury in Jarjhara Nadiamsa in Gemini
(4 Nadi)
west स्थिते Sea गदांशे विप्रकालगे।
वगेत्तमे प्रजातश्च द्वितीयो अयं प्रकीर्तितः। 1 22081
महानदीप्रन्त्यदेशे जननं चाग्रहारके।
दक्षिगेत्तरवीथीषु प्राग्भागे जननं स्मृतम्। । २१९०।।
2109-2110. Mercury in Jarjhara Nadiamsa:
(According to Budha Nadi) Mercury in Jarjhara
Nadiamsa for a birth in Vargothama ascendant
with the first quarter of Gada Nadiama will give
following effects. The subject will be the second
issue of the family, born in a colony of Brahmins,
in the Mahanadi region. The house of birth,
facing the east, will be located in a north- south
spread street.
Notes: The present part deals with
Mercury’s position in Jarjhara Nadiamsa (also
known as Jarjhari) which spaces itself as under:
From 4 deg. to 4 deg. 12’ of a movable sign;
from 25 deg. 48’ to 26 deg. of an immovable sign;
and from 19 deg. to 19 deg. 12’ of a common sign.
The present yogas are from Budha Nadi.
In view of Vargothama in a common sign,
Gada Nadiamsa should be excluded. They cannot go together. Hence from slokas 2109-2111,
Gada Nadiamsa to ascend doés not apply.
उत्तरांशे प्रजातः स वैश्यजन्मा द्रिद्रकः।
समुद्रतीरे जननं गिरिप्रन्तये न संशयः । । २१११।।
2111. Gada Nadiamsa, with second half
rising, in the midst of the above additional horo-

1५6) Chandra Kala Nadi
scopic conditions, will cause birth of a person in
family of merchants. He will be penniless. Birth
will be in a place surrounded by hill in a region
located near a sea- shore.
जह रंशगते सेम्ये शीतव्छंशे निशाकरे ।
वगौत्तमे प्रजातः स ज्येष्ठश्रातृविहीनवान्! | २११२।
2112. Elder brother: The subject will have
no elder brother if Mercury is found in Jarjhara
Nadiamsa as the Moon is in Seethala Nadiamsa,
and the ascendant is Vargothama.
Notes: For Seethala Nadiamsa, please see
notes under sloka 1096 supra.
युग्मांशे ललने मन्दे Veit वुधे।
वर्गोत्तमे प्रजातश्च वीरवैष्ण्वजातकः। । २११३। |
2113. Valorous Vaishnavite: Saturn placed
in Virgo, with a dual Navamsa, as Mercury is in
Jarjhara Nadiamsa ana the natal ascendant is
Vargothama - these denote that the native is a
valorous Vaishnavite.
शीतत्शकगे मन्दे पृश्चादुभ्ातृविहीनवान्।
भगिनीत्रयमायुष्यं पूर्वभागे फलं स्मृतम्। । २११४। |
2114. Saturn: The planet Saturn in Seethala
Nadiamsa will deprive the native of younger
brother. But he will have three sisters endowed
with long lives if Saturn is in the first half of the
Nadiamsa cited.
नीचाशकगते सूर्यं वृषभे च प्रजायते।
सम्पत्तारदशाकाले मौन्जीनन्धनमादिशेत्। 1 २११५। |
2115. Thread Ceremony: The second dasa
will cause thread ceremony if the Sun is in Taurus
with debilitated Navamsa.
Note: The Sun cannot obtain Libra Navamsa when he is placed in the sign Taurus. Apparently, there is some original editorial error
here.
Sea सौम्ये viet निशाकरे ।
दरविंशब्दात् परं चेति विवाहोत्सवमादिशेत्। । २११६। |
2116. Marriage: The native will get married
after 22 if Mercury is in 10110018 Nadiamsa as the
Moon is in Seethala Nadiamsa.
लग्नात् सप्तमगे मन्दे irae निशाकरे ।
स्वपितामहदेहस्य शीतज्वरभयं तथा। । २११७] |
तत्पपपरिहासर्थं शान्तिं 7 |
लग्नात् पंचमगे मन्दरे शे निशाकरे । । २११८।
wer पित्ररिष्टमष्टविंशतिवत्सरे।
2117-21181/2. Saturn: See if Saturn 15 placed
in the 7th from ascendant while the Moon is in
Seethala Nadiamsa. This yoga will cause cold
fever which will be remediable. 20th year will
cause danger to the father of Jarjhara Nadiamsa
native, if Saturn is in the Sth house as the Moonis
in Seethala Nadiamsa.
सूर्याशके as lb स्फुटयोगं गते शनो। । २११९।।
Mars विजानीयान्जररांशे न संशयः।
शीतव्गंशकगे चन्द्रे HMR । २१२०।।
PUR पितररिष्टं करूरभुक्तौ न संशयः।
2119-21201/2. Father Endangered: Saturn
traversing the sign identical with the natal Sun’s
Navamsa position, or a trine thereof, will endanger the native’s father. If the Moon is in
Seethala Nadiamsa, the sub periods of malefic
planets, with adverse solar transits will also endanger the father.
जह्॑रंशकगे SY शीततव्छंरो निशाकरे । 1-22.22 1 |
त शात् पर भाग्यं स्वप्रानल्यं धनागमम्।
शेअब्दे पुत्रलाभः स्यादुदराविंशब्दे अथवा यदि। । २१२२।।
पुत्रेत्सवफलप्रप्तिज्खरंशे न संशयः |
पुत्द्रयचिरायुष्यं पुण्येका च तथा भवेत्। । २१२३।।
2121-2123. Mercury: Mercury in Jarjhara
Nadiamsa as the Moon is in Seethala Nadiamsa
will give prosperity after the 24th year. The native
will become famous and wealthy. Acquisition of
a son in the 20th year or in the 22nd year will come
to pass. On the whole he will have 3 long-living
children - 2 sons and a daughter.
व्ययेशे मन्दराशिस्थे att धनरशिगे।
गोचरे निधने मन्दे जननीमृतिमादिशेत्। । २१२४। |

Deva Keralam
2124. Mother’s death: 12th lord ina sign of
Saturn as the 11th lord is in the 2nd house at the
time of birth will promote mothez’s death at a
time when Saturn in transit moves in the &th
house.
भग्येशे सुतराशिस्थे सुतेशे नीचराशिगे।
Hat बहुभाग्याप्तिः सहस्द्रसयोगवान्। । २१२५। |
2125. Fortunes: The native will obtain great
fortunes in his youth, upto the extent of 2000 (gold
coins,) if the 9th lord is in 5th and the Sth lord in
turn is in debility.
weit सेम्ये शीतव्यशे निशाकरे ।
षट्पंचाशात् परं मूत्युः क्वचिद्भार्गवपक्षके। । २१२६।
सप्तषष्टिश्च वर्षीणि a ५.६. श्च विन्दति।
बुधनाडीफलं सत्यं प्रत्यक्ष LL २१२७। |
2126-2127. According to Bhargava, the native will die after his 56th year if Mercury and the
Moon are in order placed in Jarjhara and
Seethala Nadiamsa. However, full life-span is
stated to be 67. These results (from sloka 2101 to
2127) as stated in Budha Nadi, repeated in Deva
Keralam will be directly experienced.
L । मकरलग्नम् (IRAE) । ।
Capricorn Ascendant — (Jagathi Nadiamsa)
मीने च राहौ यदि वा दिनेशे
वित्ते शशांके गुरूसंयुते वा।
सत्कर्मचारी ६ धनाढयो
2128. Jagathi Nadiamsa: Rahu or the Sun
in Pisces as the 2nd house is occupied by the
Moon along with Jupiter - this yoga in a horoscope having Capricorn ascendant, with Jagathi
Nadiamsa, will make the subject perform good
acts and follow good path. The native will be, in
addition, wealthy and will be happy in a foreign
region.
Notes: From now onwards, the Nadiamsa
discussed is Jagathi. This part extends thus: from
3 deg. 48’ to 4 deg. of a movable sign; from 26 deg.
24 to 26 deg 36’ of an immovable sign; and from
18 deg. 48’ to 19 deg. of a common sign.
लग्नेशे SPE जगत्यंशे प्रजायते।
तुलांशगे षे म ज्येष्ठभ्रातृविहीनवान्। । २१२९। |
चादुभ्रातृविहीनश्च भगिन्येका सुमंगलं |
मन्दे भूसुतेन समन्विते। | 22301 |
लग्ने तु मकरे जातः पूर्वापरविहीनवान्।
2129-21301/2. The Moon-Saturn: For a native of Jagathi Nadiamsa, Capricorn ascendant,
note Saturn placed in Sachira Nadiamsa, while
the Moon in Pises obtains Libra Navamsa. If that
be the case, the subject will not have any elder
brother, nor a younger brother. He will have,
however, a sister who will be endowed with a long,
auspicious married life. There will be no preborn
and after-born at all, for a Capricorn native who
has Saturn in an immovable sign in Sachira
Nadiamsa in the company of Mars.
Notes: For Sachira Nadiamsa, please see
notes under sloka 548 supra.
SUN मकरे लग्ने Ta कुजसंयुते। । २१३१। |
oo बाल्ये पितृविनाशवान्।
सचिरांशे
बालारिष्ट्भयं क्कचित्
2131-21321/2. Parents: For a birth im
Capricorn ascendant, with Aquarius Navamsa,
while Saturn joins Mars, the mother of the native
will be long-lived; father will be destroyed in the
very childhood of the subject. The native will
himself experience danger in childhood if his
birth be in former half of Jagathi Nadiamsa in
Capricorn ascendant, while Saturn is in Sachira
Nadiamsa.
Notes: The combination discussing parents
hereof is for Jagathi Nadiamsa in Capricorn ascendant, in which case the Navamsa is Aquarius.

The yoga will be complete if Saturn-Mars are
found together in one sign.
The second yoga deals with Jagathi Nadiamsa in Capricorn ascendant while Saturn is in
Sachira Nadiamsa. Mars 15 not in the picture. As
a result of this yoga, the native will face danger in
childhood (i.e. Balarishta),
सचिरांशे चरे लग्ने विप्रनाडयां प्रजायते। । 22331 |
जननादष्टमे वर्षे मौजीबन्धनमादिशेत्।
गुरुप्रथमपर्याये मीनान्त्यदिक्रिये WA) । २९३४। ।
विवाहोत्सवकार्यणि जगत्यै न संशयः।
2133-21341/2. Thread Ceremony: (Saturn in)
Sachira Nadiamsa, ascendant being a movable
sign, in the first quarter (of Jagathi Nadiamsa)
denotes thread ceremony in the 8th year. In his
first round, Jupiter moving in end of Pisces or in
Aries will cause marriage to a Jagathi Nadiamsa
native.
जगत्यंशे पूर्वभागे ५.५९ मकरे तु प्रजायतते। । २१३५। |
स्वेजन्मदेशे Ase नगरे नात्र संशयः
2135-21351/2. Birth in former half of Jagathi
Nadiamsa in Capricorn ascendant will cause marrage in one’s own country, in a city. (That is, the
bride will hail from one’s region.)
जामित्राधिपतौ चन्द्रे मीने केतुसमन्विते। । 22381 |
श्याम वर्णकठछत्र च् विवाहानन्त्रं सुखम्।
लक्ष्मीकरक्षवान् नित्यं गहे गोधान्यसंकुलम्॥ २१२७॥
उद्राहानन्तरं चेति मन्दिर श्रियमादिशेत्।
2136-21371/2. The 7th lord Moon in Pisces
along with Ketu will give the native dark complexion. He will be happy after marriage.
Uninterrupted mercy of goddess Lakshmi will be
enjoyed by him. He will have plenty of quadrupeds and grains. He will earn wealth through
temples or religious activities after his marriage.
विद्याविनयसम्पन्नः क्िप्रप्रसादवान्।
Chandra Kala Nadi
SOI रागी Bal लनेशे सचिरांशगे। । २१३९। |
भगिन्येका चिरायुष्यं शेषे नाशमि तीरयेत्।
2138-21391/2. Saturn-Mars: If Saturn joins
Mars and occupies an immovable Navamsa, the
native will oe rich for his learning and modesty.
He will be given to anger, and be instantly
pleased. He will have two wives and be passionate. If the ascendant lord (Satrun) is in
Sachira Nadiamsa, he will have one long-living
sister. Rest (of the coborn) will face destruction.
कर्मेशांशे तत्िकोणे भग्येशंशत्रिकोणगे। | 22X01 |
स्फ्टयोगं गते मन्दे पितूनिर्याणमादिशेत्।
2140-21401/2. Father: When Saturn comes
in transit to such a sign as represented by the
Navamsa position of either the 10th lord or the
9th lord, or a trine thereof, predict father’s end.
वगेत्तमे लग्ननाथे भूसुतेन समन्विते। । 2ewe I |
विद्वान् विनयसम्पन्नो मधुराम्लरसप्रियः।
कामी मातूप्रियस्त्यागी परस्त्रीसंगपापवान्। । २१४२। |
2141-2142, Saturn-Mars: Should Saturn
obtain Vargothama Navamsa, and be in association with Mars, the native will be a scholar, be
modest of a great order, and be fond of sweet and
sour juices. He will be lustful, be fond of his
mother, sacrificing in disposition and will join
others’ women.
मृतावस्थं गते मन्दे भूसुतेन निरीक्षिते।
आरूढं शशिसंदुष्टे सन्तानप्रतिबन्धवान्। । २१४२ । ।
जगत्यंशे प्रजातस्य जायन्ते च मृतप्रजा
कालान्तर .सुतप्राप्तर्यद्रा SAR ATT! । २१४४। |
पृत्रप्रदं महामन्त्रं जप्त्वा तु प्रतिमां तथ।
अयुतानां सहस्रं तु पूजां कृत्वा विधानक्तः। । २१४५।
HATA प्रदातव्या बहुदोषे विनश्यति।
अनेकयत्नयोगेन त्वेकपुत्रोऽपि जीवति। । २१४६। |
2143-2146. Progeny: If the Moon, aspected
by Mars, is in extremis, and at the same time
aspects the Aroodha Lagna, the subject will face
hurdles in begetting progeny. One born in

Deva Keralam
Jagathi Nadiamsa will only obtain dead children.
After a long interval, through his second wife, he
will obtain progeny. He should recite
Mahamantra installing a deity’s image and read
Vishnu Sahsranama for a myriad times. Worship
as prescribed be conducted regularly. These
remedies will ward off numerous blemishes. And
after a great deal of efforts, he will obtain 2 female
issue. She will live long.
Notes: The Moon will be in extremis if she
is in the last six degrees of an odd sign, or in the
first six degrees of an even sign.
The Moon so placed should be aspected by
Mars. The Moon should aspect the Arroodha
ascendant. The result is hurdle in acquiring
progeny.
The word "Ayutha" in sloka 2145 means a
myriad or even ten thousand. Vishnu Sahasra
Nama should be recited for ten thousand times,
as a remedy to overcome obstacles in acquiring
progeny.
Another remedy suggested is recitation of
Mahamantra installing the image of a deity. The
deity concerned is not specified. Mahamanira is:
any very sacred or efficacious text of the Vedas,
particularly a great spell against a snake’s venom.
जगत्यंशे पूर्वभागे मकरे तु WAT
कर्मराशिदशाकाले स्वप्राबल्यं धनागमम्। । २१४७। |
भग्यराशिदशाकाले भाग्येशे लग्नकेनद्रगे।
जगत्यंशे क्क चिदुभाग्यं गेहे लक्ष्मीकराक्षवान्॥ २९१४८
क्रूरष्दे च महत्कष्टं विप्लवेन धनक्षयम् ।
शुभाब्दके धनप्राप्तिगेहे लक्ष्मीकरक्षवान्। । २१४९ |
2147-2149. Wealthy: One born in Capricorn
ascendant, with the former half of Jagathi
Nadiamsa will become a great and wealthy person
during the period ruled by the 10th Rasi. Should
the 9th lord be in an angle from the ascendant, the
said native will somewhat be wealthy during the
9111 Rasi dasa. He will be blessed by Goddess
Lakshmi. He will however be subjected to great
troubles in adverse years and will have loss of
wealth in revolution (or public outrage). In
auspicious years, he will obtain wealth.
रम्ध्रराशिदशाकाले all ia विप्लवेन प्रजावधि।
शं HERS विशेषतः । २१५० |
लोके धान्यक्षयादीनि प्रजापीडां विनि्िशेत्।
2150-21501/2. In the dasa of the 8th Rasi,
people will be troubled in revolution. Kings and
ministers will be distressed, particularly in the
middle of the dasa. Crops will be destroyed.
Troubles will strike the people. (This is irrelevant
to natal astrology and is erroneously placed in this
part.)
मदरशिदशाकाले मदेशे मीनसंस्थिते। । 2k4R 1 |
जगत्यंशे प्रजातस्य मदरशिदशान्यथा।
षष्ठरशिदशाकाले त्वष्टचत्वारिवत्सरे । । २१५२।।
पाके सर्वदशासन्धौ क्लेशं प्रप्नोति भूरिशः।
षष्ठरशिदशाकाले लग्नेशांशत्रिकोणगे। | २१५३ । |
स्फुटयोगं गते मन्दे मात्ररिष्टं विनिर्दिशेत्
सुतराशिदशाकाले सुतेशे लग्नकेन्द्रगे। । २१५४1 |
स्वपुत्रद्राहसिद्धिश्च पुत्रिकायास्तु वा भवेत्।
2151-21541/2. For 2 Jagathi Nadiamsa birth
in Capricorn ascendant, see if the 7th lord Moon
is in Pisces. If so, the dasa of Cancer (7th Rasi)
will cause troubles. In the dasa of the 6th Rasi
(or) in 24th year, the subject will be much distressed. The dasa junctions in all cases will be
troublesome. Predict danger to mother when
Saturn traverses the sign represented by the
Navamsa occupied by the ascendant lord at birth,
or a trine thereof; during the currency of the 6th
Rasi dasa, thus, the mother will be endangered.
See if the 5th lord is in an angle to ascendant at
birth. In that case, marriage of a son/daughter
will occur in the dasa of the Sth Rasi.
Notes: As for Kalachakra Dasa, we can take
some important clues from the present slokas.
7th Rasi dasa - troubles.
6th Rasi dasa - distress to native and danger
to his mother.
Sth Rasi dasa - marriage of son/daughter.
4th Rasi dasa - happiness.
सुखरशिदशाकाले सुखेशे शनिसंयुते। । २१५८५। |

जगत्यंशे प्रजातस्य पूर्वभागे महत्सुखम् ।
मीनराशिदशाकाले शुभाशुभफलं समम्। । २१५६। |
2155-2156. A great deal of happiness will be
acquired by the native of former half of Jagathi
Nadiamsa having the 4th lord (Mars) in the company of Saturn. This will be in the dasa of 4th Rasi
(Aries). For the same native with the same yoga,
the dasa of Pisces will give even effects about
happiness and unhappiness.
जगत्यंशे पूर्वभागे GRY विलग्नगे!
मीनरशिदशमृत्युं पंचषष्टि सुखी FIT । २१५७ |
2157. Death: One born in the first half of
Jagathi Nadiamsa with ascendant lord Saturn in
Sachira Nadiamsa will die in the dasa of Pisces.
He will be happy upto 56 years of his age.
गुरूनाडीफलाध्याये विस्तारो योगनिर्णयः।
शनिनाडीफलाधये विचित्रफलमीरितम्। । २१५८। |
2158. Guru Nadi describes yoga effects in
detail. Sani Nadi narrates in a surprising manner
about this Nadiamsa.
भग्याधिपे लग्नगते गदाशे विप्रकालगे।
पुरा ब्राहम णजन्मा च पश्चद्विदिकञन्मवान्। । २१५९।
र He Stil आपत्सन्यासमादिशेत्।
तस्य पुण्यप्रभवेण । | २१६०। |
पश्चाज्जन्मान्तरे मुक्तिर्व्ययेशे शनिसुयुते।
विप्रकाले फलं सत्यं प्रत्यक्षं देवकेरव्ठम्। । २१६१।
2159-2161. Gada Nadimsa: If birth is in
Gada Nadiamsa, first one fourth part (Vipra
Kaala), with the 9th lord in the ascendant, know
that the native was a Brahmin in his last birth and
that he will be reborn (after the present birth) in
a Vaidic family. During the concluding part of his
birth as a Brahmana (i.e. in the last birth), he took
to ascetic order following a calamity. As a result,
the next birth will be in a Vaidic family. Saturn in
the company of the 12th lord denotes that the
current native will attain final emancipation, after
the next birth.
om
Chandra Kala Nadi
। । कुम्भलग्नम् - (कुन्दंशः)
Aquarius Lagna —
Kunda Nadiamsa
चपे सिंहांशके कुञत्रिंशांशजातकः।
विप्रजन्मा सुखी द्वितीयश्च प्रजायते। | २१६२।
TERT वनप्रन्त्ये विष्णवालयसमीपगे।
दक्षिणोत्तरवीथीषु Arta दिशि जासते। । २९६६३। |
2162-2163, With Venus in Sagittarius Rasi
and in Leo Navamsa, as birth is in a Trimsamsa of
Mars, the native will be a happy Brahmin. He will
be the second issue of the family. His birth will
be in the northern part (Kauberya = north, the
regent of which is Kubera, the celestial treasurer)
in the region surrounded by caves and forests in
a street spread north-south. There will be a
temple nearby, dedicated to Lord Vishnu.
Notes: In these two slokas, Nadiamsa does
not come in the picture. For Aquarius ascendant,
in a Trimsamsa of Mars, Venus should be in the
11th in Sagittarius (from 13 deg. 20’ to 16 deg. 40”)
with Leo Navamsa.
ra शुक्रे शनिसंयुतवीक्षिते।
रिथरलग्म प्रजातःसः ज्येष्ठश्रातृविनाशवान्। | २१६४।
Wasaga मानी पितृभाग्यविहीनवान्।
भेदश्रातृयुतश्चैव Hosa पिता। । २९६५। |
2164-2165. Kunda Nadiamsa: One born in
an immovable ascendant with Venus in Kunda
Nadiamsa, in association with or aspect to Saturn,
will destroy his elder brother. He will have afterborns. He will be honourable and be bereft of
paternal happiness. His father will have two
wives, thus giving the native step-brothers.
Notes: From now onwards, Kunda Nadiamsa is discussed. For details, please see notes
under sloka 638 supra.
As for these two slokas, the ascendant
should be an immovable one (Aquarius/Taurus/
Leo/Scorpio) while Venus is in Kunda Nadiamsa
of any sign.
8 mel ` 'शनिसंयुतवीक्षिते।।
नित्यं वेष्णवाचारवान् सुधीः । । २१६६।

Deva Keralam
2166. Vaishnavite: The 5th lord in Kunda
Nadiamsa related to Saturn by aspect/company,
will be devoted to the Wheel of Lord Vishnu and
be interested in following the codes prescribed
for a Vaishnavite. He will be quite intelligent.
Notes: In ardent Vaishnava circles, a true
and enlightened devotee worships the Sudarsana
(the Wheel held by Lord Vishnu to destroy evils
in the Universe) and Sankha (the Conch called
Panchajanya, with which the God raises His voice
against evils). These two Symbols are held in
great reverence by the Vaishnavites.
In a nutshell, the sloka refers to the native
being a great devotee of Lord Vishnu. This apart,
the position of Sth lord, Mercury, with a connection with ascendant lord Saturn marks a piercing
intelligence on the part of the native.
भाग्येशे सचिरांशस्थे त्वसितेन निरीकषिते।
राजद्वारे पसिद्धश्च वाहनत्रययोगवान्। | २१६७। |
2167. Royal Service: If the 9th lord. being
aspected by Saturn, is in Sachira Nadiamsa, the
native will serve a king. He will have three conveyances.
स्वपित्रानदेिकादीनि वयोमध्ये सुभृग्यवान्।
आत्मस्तुत्तिपयो नित्यं रा तिकार्यवान्। | २१६८। |
स्वपितु सोदराः पंच सुधीः।
2168-21681/2. Father: Now about the father
of the native (vide sloka 2167, having 9th lord &
C). The native’s father will become prosperous,
acquiring palanquins etc. (i.e. conveyances)
during the native’s middle age. The native’s
father will be ever inclined to boast, but he will be
helpful to others. He will be very intelligent, will
have five brothers and two sisters.
पितृल्याधिपतौ जीवे कुजसंयुतवीक्षिते। । 28881 ।
पश्चादूभ्रतृविहीनश्च ज्येष्ठश्ातृयुतो भवेत्।
लाभस्थानगते शुक्रे त्वसितेन. निरीकषते। । २१७०।।
वनान्तरपुरे वासं कुत्सितप्रभुसेवकः।
2169-21701/2. Effects for Father (continued): With 11th lord Jupiter connected with
Mars by aspect or association, the father of the
native will be bereft of after-born. Venus in the
11th house in aspect to Saturn, denotes that the
father of the native will live in a town surrounded
by forests and will serve a base king.
विपत्तारदशकाले लग्नेशांश्त्रिकोणमे। | 22981 |
eRea गते मन्दे पितृव्यारिष्टमादिशेत्।
ततः पश्चद्विदेशप्तिर्दक्षिणे बहुभग्यवान्। । २१७२। |
महाराजस्य द्वरे वा ब्राहमणस्नेहयोगवान्।
स्वपिता राजसन्मानं WARM परं सुखम्। | २१७३।
नरवाहनभूषप्तिनित्यं सन्तोषवान् भवेत्।
2171-21731/2. Effects for father (contd.):
When Saturn in transit comes to the Rasi represented by the Navamsa tenanted by the ascendant
lord, during the rulership of the 3rd dasa, the
native’s paternal uncle (father’s younger coborn)
will be in danger. After this, the father of the
native will migrate to a country situated in the
south of the place where he will make much advancement. He will either serve an emperor or
will progress by associating with Brahmins. He
will obtain royal honours and be happy after
eliminating his enemies. Men-borne conveyances and ornaments will accrue to him keeping him
ever happy.
सम्पत्तारदशाकाले THM! । २१७४। |
स्फुटयोगं गते मन्दे Ha मोजिबन्धनम्?
सम्पदूदाये श्रियोअवाप्तर्मेषंशे वृषभे WN | २१७५।
मिथुने बहुभाग्यं स्याद्भ्रातृसौख्यं श्रियो वहम्।
2174-21751/2. Thread Ceremony & Wealth:
During the 2nd dasa, when Saturn traverses the
sign represented by the 8th lord’s Navamsa at
birth or its trine, the native’s Thread Ceremony
will take place. When Jupiter mov.ng in transit
attains Aries Navamsa, during the rulership of the
2nd dasa, the subject will beget wealth. Jupiter
traversing in Gemini will also increase one’s fortunes. The native’s coborns will also be happy
and prosperous. (These apply to birth in Kunda
Nadiamsa, of an immovable ascendant, particularly Aquarius.)

Notes: The 8th lord’s Navamsa, normally
used for death and such other tragic events is used
by the text in the context of Thread Ceremony (or
Upanayana). For immovable ascendants, Jupiter
and Mercury rule the 8th as the case may be.
These two planets are in charge of such Vedic
functions. Venus (another benefic) holds sway
over material functions like marriage.
चन्दंशगे तत्त्रिकोणे स्फुरयोगं गते शनौ 11 २१७६।
स्वपितुर्देहजाडयादियोगकालं विनिर्दिशेत्
कुन्दांशकगते शुक्रे विप्रकालेषु जातकः। । २१७७। |
RRR fat सख्यं स्वपिता बहुभाग्यवान्।
ग्रन्थान्ते चरे लग्ने लग्नेशे सौम्यराशिगे। । २१७८।
2176-21771/2. About Father: For a Kunda
Nadiamsa native (immovable ascendant) see the
Navamsa occupied by the Moon at birth. When
Saturn in his movements in the zodiac comes to
such a Rasi as above, or a trine thereof, predict
physical illness to father. If Venus is in Kunda
Nadiamsa, except in malefic bhuktis, the other
periods will bring prosperity to the father of the
native, and he will be happy as weil.
अतिबाल्ये विवाहः स्पद्विपद्दाये श्रियो वहः।
गृहास्थगेहे ASE कच्छत्रान्तरयोवान्। | २१७८। |
विपद्दाये सुतेत्पत्तिमक्षराभ्मासमादिशेत्।
लिपित्रयप्रवीणश्च ख्या तविद्याविशारदः। । २१८०। |
गीर्वाणान्भ्रलिपिज्ञश्च क्षेमदाये सुकीर्तिमान्।
राजयोगभिवृद्धिश्च क्षेम तारदशन्तरे। । २१८१। |
2178-2181. Marriage etc.: According to
other authorities, for a movable ascendant, the
ascendant lord in a benefic’s sign (or in a Rasi of
Mercury) will give marriage in the native’s early
years. In second dasa, this position will enable
him earn wealth. His marriage will be from within
his family circles (or from a family whose head will
be a true pater familias). He will be prone to
second marriage. In the 3rd dasa he will beget
progeny whose education will also commence (in
the said Dasa). The native will be skilful in three
languages and famous for his high degree of
learning. He will be versed in Sanskrit and
Chandra Kala Nadi
Telugu. He will be widely famous in fourth dasa.
In the various sub periods of the fourth dasa, the
native’s prosperity will increase.
Notes: The present three slokas deal with
movable ascendant and not an immovable one,
The lord of a movable ascendant should be in a
benefic’s Rasi, while Venus is in Kunda Nadiamsa. This will give the native an early marriage &
मदेशे रिपुराशिस्थे लग्नाधिपसमन्विते।
कुन्दांशकगते YR वीणावाद्यविशारदः। । २१८२। |
2182. Skilful in Instrumental Music: The
7th lord in the 6th house in the company of the
lord of the ascendant denotes that the native will
be skilful in playing the musical instrument called
Veena.
गन्धर्वयोगे weet वीणावाद्यप्रियः सुखी।
राजद्वारे Garena yey दिवाकरे । | २१८३। |
2183. The Sun: For a movable ascendant,
the Sun in Taurus Navamsa will bring prosperity
to the native through royal service.
Note: The first line of this sloka is a mix-up
with the second line of sloka 2182 above. Both
indicate expertise in and liking for Veena, while
the words Gandharva Viyoge gandharve convey no
sensible meaning.
षष्टेशंशत्रिकोणेषु स्पुटयोगं गते शनो।
कुन्दांशके सुखाधीशे षष्ठदाये स्वभुक्तिषु।
पित्ररिष्टं विजानीयात् कुन्दांशे नात्रसंशयः। । २१८५।।
हरिणांशकगे cea भृगुनन्दने।
सूर्यानाडीफलं योगायोगं विचिन्तयेत्। । २१८६।।
2184-2186. Father: Saturn moving in the
sign represented by the Navamsa occupied by the
dispositor of 6th lord at birth, or a trine thereof,
will cause danger to the native’s father. For a
native of Kunda Nadiamsa, the 4th lord placed in
Kunda Nadiamsa will bring danger to father in the
bbukti ruled by him during the major rulership of
6th dasa which should be appropriately the dasa

Deva Keralam 197
of the 6th lord . Surya Nadi excels in describing
the effects - good and bad for father - when the
Sun is Harina Nadiamsa as Venus is in Kunda
Nadiamsa.
Notes: Harina Nadiamsa is described in the
notes under sloka 685 supra.
कुन्दांशगे सुखाधीशे लाभेशेन निरीक्षिते।
्षेमदाये महद्भाग्यं वाहनत्रययोगवान्। | २१८७ 1 |
१4 सत्यं क्षेमदाये सुकीतिमान्।
प्रत्यक्तारदशाकाले विशेषश्रयमभनुते।
2187-21881/2. The native will acquire three
conveyances and a high degree of prosperity in
the 4th dasa if the 4th lord is in Kunda Nadiamsa
in aspect to the 11th lord. One belonging to
Ambuja Nadiamsa will be happy and famous in
the 4th dasa and will acquire much wealth when
Saturn in transit in the second round reaches the
concluding part of Aries, or Taurus which will
apply to the dasa that is fifth in order.
Notes: Ambuja Nadiamsa rules from 25
deg. 12’ to 25 deg. 24’ of a movable sign; from 4
deg. 36’ to 4 deg. 48’ of an immovable sign; and
from 10 deg. 12’ to 10 deg. 24’ of a common sign.
अचरांशे स्थिरे मन्दे गोचरे afer) । 28281 |
SAR भ्रातृसोख्याप्तिं राजदर्शनमादिशेत्।
प्रनलोद्योगलाभः स्यान्नित्समिष्ठन्नभोजनम्। । २१९०। |
राजामात्यप्रसदेन योगप्राबल्यमादिशेत्।
Aa तेलिगे मन्दे gary मेषराशिगे।
श्रातुः प्राबल्यकालः स्यात्स्वप्रानल्यमतःपरम्॥ २१९१॥
राजप्रसाददिधनाम्बराप्ति
॥ सहोदरभ्रातृसुयोगकालः।
2189-2192. Saturn’s Navamsa Positions: If
Saturn at birth is in a fixed Rasi and fixed Navamsa, his transit in a trine thereof will give the following effects to a native belonging to Kunda
Nadiamsa. He will visit a king and will gain a
great progress in work. He will uninterruptedly
enjoy sweet food (or quality food). With the
pleasure of royal ministers, he will enjoy great
prosperity. Further, he will derive happiness
from coborn. During his transit in Libra, with
Aries Navamsa, or in Aries with Libra Navamsa,
Saturn denotes prosperity to the native’s coborn.
The native will in addition become great, will earn
royal favours, wealth and robes. His brothers will
greatly prosper. This native of Kunda Nadiamsa
will also gain through a foreign king.
प्रत्यक्तारदटशाकाले लभिशस्य दशान्ते |
कुन्दांशगे महद्भाग्यं गेहे 'लक्ष्मीकयक्षवान्। | २१९३। |
2193. Fifth dasa: In the sub period ruled by
the 11th lord during the dasa which is the fifth in
order, the native of Kunda Nadiamsa will greatly
prosper and be blessed by goddess Lakshmi.
लाभादिपदशाकाले YAS शुभमासगे।
राजयोगामिवृद्धिः स्यात् सदा रजप्रसादवान्। । २१९९४ |
2194, Dasa of 11th Lord: In the dasa ruled
by the 11th lord (Jupiter), during favourable years
and months, the native will see increased
prosperity and will continue to receive royal
favours.
सुतेशे रविसंयुक्ते a गुनन्दने।
कल््रद्रययोगः स्यात् केचित तरिभायौवान्। । २१९५। ।
कालान्तरे सुतप्रप्तिदरन्तरफलं स्मृतम्। । २१९६।।
2195-2196. Marriages: Should the Sth lord
join the Sun as Venus is in Kunda Nadiamsa, the
subject will have two marriages. Yet according to
some, the number of marriages will be three. In
either case, birth of progeny will be after some
(long) interval. So has been said about additional
marriage/s. 5
नीचांशे च Ye जीवे मृत्युकालांशजातकः।
मृतप्रजाबहुत्वं स्यच्छान्तिं कुर्याद्यथाविधि। । Veet |
2197. Dead progeny: Jupiter either ina fatal
degree in Aquarius (or) with Capricorn Navamsa

will tend to give many dead children. Prescribed
remedies will ward off the blemish.
देहजाडयं प्रकुर्वात शन्तिं कुर्यद्मथाविधि। 1 22821 |
2198. Illness: In the dasa that is fifth in
sequence, the native will be physically ill during
the sub-periods ruled by malefic/obstructive
planets. Remedies be resorted to.
साधने शदशाकाले पूर्वाधं सोख्यमशनुते।
अपराधं येगभंगं PN भगुनन्दने। । २१९९। |
2199, Sixth dasa: The first half of sixth dasa
will give happiness while the second half will
cause obstructions to prosperity in case Venus is
in Kunda Nadiamsa.
धनाधिपदशाकाले रन््राधिपतिभुक्तिषु।
कनिष्ठभ्रातृभा्याया WY तनयस्य च | । २२००।
2200. Second Lord’s dasa: In the dasa ruled
by the 2nd lord, during the 8th lord’s sub period,
the native’s younger brother’s wife/son will fall
sick. The native’s own health will suffer and he
will be distressed. The sub period of Mercury will
be somewhat troublesome during the major
lordship of 11th lord.
स्वदेहायससन्तापः स्वप्रभोश्च विरेषतः।
GU क्वचित् कष्टं लाभाधिपदशान्तरे । । २२०१।
2201. (Mercury’s sub period in 11th lord’s
dasa) will cause the native illness and distress,
more so to the king(?). This sub period will be
somewhat unfavourable (to the native).
Sart फलं सत्यं मकरे रवि संस्थिते।
PRIMA चन्द्रशंशग्रहान्तरे | । २२०२।।
सव॑दाये महत्सौख्यं सर्वदाये न awe!
alae शुक्रे त्वम्बुजशे दिवाकरे । । 22031 |
धनेशदशाकाले चन्द्रशांशग्रहान्तर |
शुक्रनाडीफलं सत्यं प्रत्यक्षं देवकेरल्म्। | २२०४। |
Chandra Kala Nadi
2202-2204. Results mentioned for Kunda
Nadiamsa will bear truth. If the Sun is ip
Capricorn (in 12th), the dasa ruled by the lord of
the Navamsa occupied by the Moon’s dispositor,
and the sub periods of the said Navamsa lord wil]
be favourable in all the other dasas. Venus in
Kunda Nadiamsa, while the Sun is in Ambuja
Nadiamsa, the sub period of the Navamsa lord of
Moon's dispositor (will also prove auspicious),
These effects described by Sukra Nadi, as retold
in Deva Keralam will be true.
। । मेषलग्नम् - (मंगत्संशः)
Aries Ascendant — (Mangala Nadiamsa)
मंगन्छांशे पूर्वभागे मेषलग्ने प्रजायते।
शद्रजन्मा सुखी नित्यं सप्तमो भवति AAAI | २२०५।।
अथवा नवमो वापि ज्येष्टश्रातृविहौनवान्।
Aro भागे विप्रकाले _ तु जायते। | २२०६।।
विप्रजन्मा सुखौ नित्यं द्वितीयोअयं न संशयः |
किचित्फलाफलं भेदमुत्तरांशस्य जातके! | २२०७।।
2205-2207. One born in the former half of
Mangala Nadiamsa in Aries ascendant, will be a
Soodra (4th caste as per traditional classification). He will be ever happy. He will be either
the 7th or the 9th issue of the family. In spite of
this, his elder coborns will be destroyed. One
born in the second half of Mangala Nadiamsa
(Viprakala is a contradictory term in the text and
hence to be disregarded) will be a Brahmin and
be the second issue of the family. There are small
differences in the events mentioned for the
second half of this Nadiamsa.
Notes: Please see notes under sloka 226 for
Mangala Nadiamsa. This part of the text deals
with Aries Navamsa.
नदप्रन्त्ये प्रसूति च नगरे वासमाप्नुयात्।
TRY प्रजातः स ज े |
भगिनीद्रयमायुष्यं WATE सुखी। | २२०९। |
2208-2209. He will be born in a place beside
a river and will live in a city. One born in Mangala

Deva Keralem | ५५,
Nadiamsa, second half, having a dual Navamsa
will be bereft of older coborn. He will have two
sisters and three brothers who will live long.
aT परे भागे बुधसंयुतवीक्षिते।
यमठद्रययोगः सः नसंशयः । | २२१०1 |
qT पूर्वभागे शके तथा।
पश्चाद्भ्रातयुतो मानी जनन्या च समन्वितः। । २२११।।
2210-2211. Acquisition of Twins: The ascendant being in the second half of Mangala
Nadiamsa (in Aries) in aspect to or in association
with Mercury denotes that the native wil! acquire
twins. The same is the case with the native of first
half of this Nadiamsa, having Jupiter’s Trimsamsa. He will be endowed with after-borns and be
honourable. He will have (long-living) mother.
Notes: Jupiter’s Trimsamsa in Aries does
not coincide with this Nadiamsa. Hence the
Trimsamsa condition is redundant/contradictory.
शुक्रागारकसंयोगे TY तु जायते।
दक्षिणेत्तरवीर्थीषुं वारूण्यां दिशि जायते। 122221 |
2212. Venus-Mars Conjunction: If this 06
curs toa Mangala Nadiamsa subject, predict birth
in astreet spread south- northwise, situated in the
west (Vaarunyam represents the western direction, whose regent is Varuna, lord of oceans, with
a noose in the hand).
aaa कर्मगते मन्दे युग्मशे ऋबुमार्गगे।
सुधंशे जनकः श्रीमान् मेघश्याम तनुः कृशः२२९३। |
बाल्ये TREAT मध्ये वयसि भग्यवान्।
पश्चादुभ्रातृयुतो मानी ज्येष्ठभ्रातृविहीनवान्। | २२१४। ।
भगिनीद्यवान् रागी एका मांगल्यमश्नुते।
भगिन्यो द्वे सुंगल्यावुत्तराशे भविष्यतः। । २२९५। |
पूर्वभागे प्रजातस्य भगिन्येका चिरायुषे।
2213-22151/2. Saturn in Direct Motion:
Saturn in Sudha Nadiamsa placed in the 10th
counted from the Sun, being in direct motion, and
occupying a dual navamsa, denotes a wealthy
father. The native will be black in complexion
and be thin-bodied. He would be poor in
childhood and prosper in youth. He will be endowed with after-borns, be honourable, bereft of
preborns, will have ewo sisters and be passionate.
Only one of the said sisters will have a long married life (while the other would soon become a
widow). If the native’s birth be in second half of
Mangala Nadiamsa, both the sisters will be endowed with long married lives {not becoming
early widows). In case of birth in former half, one
sister will be endowed with longevity (while
another will not be).
Notes: For Sudha Nadiamsa, please consult
notes under sloka 1824 supra. For Aries ascendant, Saturn’should be in the 10th, in direct motion, not being retrograde. He must also cccupv
a Navamsa of either Jupiter or of Mercury. The
present slokas clearly differentiate first and
second halves of Mangala Nadiamsa.
सूर्यात् कर्मगते मन्दे रन्ध्रेशे रिपुराशिगे। । 22881 |
स्वपिता sae: साधुः कोपी किप्रप्रसादवान्।
किंचित्कालं दुराचासे RET च कर्शितः। | २२१७। |
पश्चात्तप्तः पापभीरूर्दवब्रहम णपोषकः।
ano पूर्वभागे शिवानुग्रहवान् पिता। । २२९८। |
daa च प्रियो नित्य पूर्वभागे न संशयः।
एकश्रातृयुते मानी भगिनीस्वल्पमादिशेत् । । २२१९।।
2216-2219. Father: The Sun having Saturn
in the 10th from him while the 8th lord 15 in the
6th will denote following effects respecting the
father of the native belonging to the first half of
Mangala Nadiamsa. He will be bereft of physical
strength, be gentle, given to anger, but instantly
pleased, will for some time take to bad ways, will
suffer penury, will regret later (for his misdeeds),
will be afraid of committing sins, will honour gods
and Brahnins and will enjoy the blessings of Lord
Siva. He will be fond of Tantrikas, will have only
one brother, and will have limited number of
sisters.
TY नवमा्धीशे भाग्ये शुभनिरीकषिते।
स्वपिता धनिकः श्रीमान् ज्ञानमार्गप्रवृत्तिमान्। । २२२०।।
dias च प्रियो नित्यं शिवार्चनपरः सुखी।
तयको्चाननिर्माता बृहूुमित्रतमवत्सलः! । २२२१।।

2220-2221. The ascendant Aries having
same Navamsa, while the 9th lord in the 9th house
ig in aspect to (another) benefic denotes that the
native’s father will be rich and follow the path of
wisdom. He will be fond of Tantrikas and be ever
devoted to Lord Siva. He will have tanks and
parks constructed and be endowed with many a
friend.
Notes: In these two slokas, the Nadiamsa is
to be disregarded as Aries should be Vargothama
ascendant.
मगठे चोत्तरे भागे भाग्येशे ५ रशिगे।
सात्त्विको गुणसम्पन्नः श्रुतिस्मृतिविचक्षणः। । २२२२।
याचके तु प्रसन्नात्मा सदा धर्म॑परायणः।
2222-22221/2. The Native: If the 9th lord is
in the 6th house, the subject of second half of
Mangala Nadiamsa will be gentle, blessed with
many virtues and will be able to differentiate
between Sruti (traditional laws as heard) and
Smruti (traditional laws as recorded out of
memory). He will be a "beggar" (ie. of soliciting
disposition) but will remain pleased and will be
ever charitable.
TART भृगुसंयुक्ते सुखेशे शिखिसंयुते। । 22231 |
मगव्ठशे Bax प्रजातस्य बालरिष्टं विनिर्दिशेत्
TARTS चन्द्रे मृत्युभागे प्रजायते। | २२२४। ।
THR पूर्वभागे sens विनिर्दिरेत्।
जन्म तारदशाकाले जन्माब्दे बा मरिष्यति। । २२२५। |
मान्द्ज्वरब्रणादीनि वसूरीज्वरगण्डवान्।
2223-22251/2. Infantile Mortality: Venus
with the 8th lord while the 4th lord (Moon) is with
Ketu will entangle the Mangala Nadiamsa native
in Balarishta effects. The Moon in fatal degree
(in the respective sign) will also give the same
effect. He may be endangered either in the first
year or in the first dasa. This may be due to
indigestion, ulcer, small-pox and the like.
- Notes: For the Moon’s fatal degrees, please
see notes under sloka 548 supra.
ATS पूर्वभागे लाभे चन्द्रे कुजेक्षिते। । २२२६।।
ˆ असितेन युते दृष्टे बालारिष्टं विनिर्दिशेत्
Chandra Kala Nadi
चन्द्रलग्नाष्टमाधीशे पापद्रयसमन्वित्। । २२२७।।
शुभदृष्टिविहीनेच त्वल्पायुर्दायमादिशेत्।
2226-22271/2. The same effect will come to
pass leading to infantile mortality if the Moon is
in the 11th aspected by Mars and/or aspected by
or conjunct with Saturn. Short life is denoted if
the 8th lord counted from the Moon is with two
malefics without a benefic’s aspect.
fast त्वचे मन्दे गुरूसुयुतवीक्षिते। । 22221 |
TTS प्रजातस्य बालारिष्टं न विद्यते।
2228-22281/2. Balarishta Non-existent:
Saturn in association with or in aspect to Jupiter
does not cause infantile mortality (1.6. such combination from other sources stands cancelled)
provided he is ina fixed sign with friendly Navamsa. This applies to a Mangala‘Nadiamsa native.
वक्रारम्भदशामध्ये लग्नेशे भृगुसंयुते। । २२२९।।
Tae पूर्वभागे . नालारिष्टभयं क्क्चित्।
जन्म तारदशान्त्सादो सम्पद्दाये स्वभूक्तिषु। | २२३०।।
बालारिष्टभयप्राप्तिः पितृपुभ्यवशायुषम्।
मृत्युजयायुतं जपत्वा ग्रहचक्र प्रदापयेत्। । २२३१। |
नालारिष्ट निहन्त्याशु गिरिर्रन्नहतो यथा।
स्वर्भनुसूर्यचनद्राणां द्ये तु प्रार्थनां वदेत्। । २२३२।।
वस्त्रदानवशायुष्यं जपेन्मृत्युंजयं शतम्।
मध्यमायुरिति प्रोक्तं शुभाः केन्द्रत्रिकोणगाः। । २२३२।।
पूर्वभागे प्रजातः स आदिखण्डे तु जायते।
i ily दौयमाप्नोति मध्यखण्डे चिरायुषम्। । २२३४।।
उततर पूर्वखण्डे पूर्णमायुः समादिशेत्।
मध्यखण्डे चिरायुष्यं WTS प्रजायते। | 22341 |
2229-2235. There will be sometimes
Balarishta effects for a native of Mangala
Nadiamsa, former half, if Venus joins the ascendant lord. This will be during the "dasa about to
retrograde". (This expression is faulty). These
effects will come to pass in the end/beginning of
first dasa, or in the first sub period of second dasa.
Due to the past merits of the father, the child will
survive. Performance of Mrityunjaya Japa and
donation of an image of the zodiac will eliminate
Balarishta effects as a hill remains unaffected by

Deva Keralam
lightning. If the native is in the dasas of the
luminaries or of Rahu, prayers be performed,
clothes be donated and recitation of Mrityunjaya
Japa for a hundred times be done. Benefics in
angle/trines will confer a medium span of life.
One will be short-lived if birth is in the first onethird part of first half Mangala Nadiamsa; and be
long-lived if birth is in the middle portion of the
same Nadiamsa. The life-span will be full if birth
is in the first one-third part of second half of
Mangala Nadiamsa. Long life is denoted for a
subject of middle part of second half.
Notes: "Dasa about to retrograde” should
actually read as first dasa, as Balarishta always
occurs in the first dasa. If the same is however for
a short duration, then it can go tu second dasa,
but before the child is twelve. The text also supports this view.
ATOR पूर्वभागे मध्यखण्डे प्रजायते|
सोदरा नवसंख्याका दशसंख्याथवा भवेत्। । २२३६। |
Tage: श्रीमान् पितरो दीर्घजीविनौ।
सोदरा नवसंख्याकास्तत्र षड् दीर्घजीविनः। । २२३७। |
2236-2237, According to Garga’s School:
The native of the middle one-third part of the first
half of Mangala Nadiamsa will have nine or ten
coborns, in which the afterborns are included.
He will be wealthy. His parents will be long-lived.
Out of the nine (or ten) coborns, six will be longlived.
उत्तरांशे पूर्वखण्डे पश्चाद्भ्ातृविहीनवान्।
मध्यख्ण्डे तु तत्यश्चात्सोदयेत्पत्तिमादिशेत्। । २२३८ ।
2238. One born in the first one-third part of
second half of Mangala Nadiamsa will be devoid
of coborns. For the one belonging to middle
one-third portion, after-borns will be existent.
भरातृस्थानाधिपं BY कुन्दांशे गुरूसंयुते।
सोदरा वसु तेषां दरौ प्रनलौ राजवल्लभौ। । 22381 |
2239. Mercury: 3rd lord Mercury in Kunda
Nadiamsa in the company of Jupiter will cause 8
coborns. 2 of them will be great, and be dear to
the king.
Notes: For Kunda Nadiamsa, please consult
notes given under sloka 638 supra.
8 भागे दशमे व गुरूवीकषिते।
2240. Jupiter’s aspect: See if Jupiter
aspects the 10th house in case of a Mangala
Nadiamsa native (of Aries ascendant). Riches
right from birth will exist, in such a case, if birth
is in the former part of the Nadiamsa in question.
However, if birth is in the 2nd half, only (perennial) poverty will result this yoga.
Notes: Jupiter’s aspect on Leo is welcome
for wealth if birth is in first half of Mangala
Nadiamsa in Aries. If the birth ascendant shifts
to second part of this Nadiamsa in Aries, the
aspect of Jupiter on Leo causes endless poverty.
लग्नांशाधिपतौ सौम्ये शुक्रांगारकसयुते।
यस्यां TSA प्रजास्तु ज्ञानवान् भाग्यवान् भवेत्॥ २२४१
2241. Wisdom & Fortunes: Should Venus
and Mars join together (for Aries ascendant)
while the Navamsa ascendant belongs to Mercury, the native will be endowed with wisdom and
fortunes. This applies to Mangala Nadiamsa.
पितृस्थानाधिपे जीवे मेषंशे धनराशिगे।
गूढचित्तः प्रसन्नात्मा गुप्तकार्यप्रियस्सुखी। । २२४२ |
कालान्तरे चित्तशुद्धिराजद्वारे प्रसिद्धिमान्।
बाल्ये दारिन्नमापननः स्वभुजजिंतयोगवान्। | २२४३। |
पित्रर्जितविहीनश्च सहश्नद्रययोगवान्।
2242-22431/2. Lord of 9th: The rising
Navamsa should be Aries (itself). The lord of the
9th should be in the 2nd house. Then the subject
will be secretive in disposition, be a satisfied soul
and be fond of performing sercetive acts. After
some interval he will emerge pure-hearted. He
will earn fame in royal service. In his early years,
he will be subjected to poverty. He will rise with

202 handra Kala Nadi
his own efforts. No paternal wealth will exist for skills in writing and learning. However, on some
him. He will earn 2000 (gold coins). occasions, the subject will be dull-headed. According to other authorities, (Aries) ascendant,
with Mangala Nadiamsa with Jupiter’s aspect/association will be an obstacle to learining while it
will be better for royal service.
Notes: In view of Navamsa ascendant being
Aries, the Nadiamsa entitled Mangala under discussion, be disregarded here.
HTS पूर्वभागे वसुवर्षत् परं सुखम्। । २२४४। |
शव द्धं च cai a8 (| विपद्दाये राजयोगं नरवाहनयोगवान्।
मनस्तापं भ्रातृक्लेशं विनिर्दिशेत्! । २२४५। । स्वपित्रधिकयेगाढयो USK न संशयः । । २२५१।।
सोदरोत्पत्तिकालं च सम्पत्तारदशान्तर |
2251. In the 3rd dasa, the native will gain
2244-22451/2. The native of the first half of | men-borne conveyances apart from effects of
Mangala Naidamsa willbe happyaftereightyears Raja yoga. His father will advance greatly
of age. His father’s luck will also improve andhe = through royal service.
will gain through a foreign king. 9th year wiil
cause mental distress. End of 2nd dasa will cause area वारूणं तृतीये खण्डके तथा|
birth of coborn. अर्तीव प्रबले गेहे विवाहोत्सवसभ्रमः। 1 22421 |
विपद्वाये मध्यखण्ड pe We 4 2 । 2252. The native of Varuna Nadiamsa, will
a area au meet v in the last one third part of 2nd dasa will become
दशकालं AIS नदना | । V9 | very great. There will be a marriage in his family.
2246-2247. In the middle of third dasa, abun- Note: The present sloka dealing with
dant wealth will accrue to him. In that dasa the Varuna Nadiamsa all of a sudden does not specify
7101110 commence. lathe 01: -9 0 which ascendant it belongs to. From 81018
of Apokleema signs (3rd, 6th, 9th, 12th), (or) in 2253 onwards, discussion on Mangala Nadiamsa
Sampath dasa (2nd dasa), he will become weal- "~ resumed.
hy.
ea सिंहांशगे सुखधीशे मेषे कन्यांशके स्थिते
SR प्रजातस्य त्वक्षराभ्यासमादिशेत्। स्वजन्मदेशे चोद्राहमथः वा BAY च। 1 22431 |
लिप्रयप्रवीणश्च ख्यातविद्याविशारद्ः। । २२४८1 I
2253. The 4th lord in Aries with Virgo
2248. The native of Mangala Nadiamsa will | Navamsa, while the ascendant (Aries) has Leo
be skilful in three languages and will be famous § Navamsa: the native will beget a bride from the
for his learning. northern part of his own country.
Note: The effect relating to the native’s दुरेशंशे तत्त्रिकोमे ारजन्मर्धमं विदुः।
being initiated into education does not fit the २५
योजयेत : 4
context and hence not added hereto. दरशदृष्टिराशो ना कालवित्तमः। । २२५४। |
2254. Note the Navamsa occupied by the
सिहाशगे सुखे Us मंगल्ांशे तु जायते। dispositor of 7th lord. The resulting sign or its
लेख्यविद्यामुनिपुणे मन्दबुद्धिः क्कचित् क्वचित्। २२४९॥ trinal sign will be the Moon sign of the bride. It
FURR मगव्ांशे जीवेन युतवीक्षिते। could also be the sign that is in aspect to the 7th
विद्यविघ्नमवाप्नोति use प्रसिद्धिमान्। । २२५०। । lord.
॥ 2249-2250. Venus in the 4th house 70 1.60 कौटंशगे घटे मन्दे सिंहे Ay गुरे।
avamsa in case of Aries ascendant, will confer = मंगव्डंशे प्रजातस्तु वि वाहप्रतिबन्धवान्। | २२५५। |

Deva Keralam 3443
2255. Obstacles to Marriage: Saturn in
Aquarius, Jupiter in Leo with Aries Navamsa,
and the ascendant Aries has Scorpio Navamsa -
this kind of yoga will cause obstacles to the
native’s marriage.
Notes: Obstacles to the Aries native’s marriage. can be foretold when the following three
conditions appear at one and the same time:
1. Saturn in Aquarius.
2. Jupiter in Leo, between 13 deg. 20’ and 16
deg. 40’ of space.
3. Ascendant in Aries between 23 deg. 20”
and 26 deg. 40’ of space.
कुत्भांशे शुभसंयुक्ते विक्रमेशे बलन्विते।
तद्दोषकृद्विवाहः TIPSY शुभावहः। | २२५६। ।
2256. The 3rd lord joining a benefic, and
getting Aquarius Navamsa, will prove a blemish
in respect of marriage. But a marriage with this
blemish will be favourable to the native’s fatherin-law.
दारस्थानाधिपे शुक्रे मीनांशे मगन्छोंशके |
TAS स्याद्विवा हानन्तरं सुखम्। 1 २२५७ । |
लक्ष्मीकरक्षवानिनत्यं गृहं गेधन्यसंकुलम्।
उद्राहानन्तरं चेति नित्यश्रर्नित्यमंगलम्। । २२५८ |
2257-2258. Venus in Pisces Navamsa: For a
native of Mangala Nadiamsa, if the 7th lord Venus
is in Pisces Navamsa, the subject will beget a
spouse having blood-red complexion. He will be
happy following marriage and be blessed with the
mercy of goddess Lakshmi. He will gather quadrupeds and corns. After marriage, he will enjoy
uninterrupted wealth and auspiciousness.
सीनांशगे सुखे भैमे ATS तु जायते।
श्वशुरश्च द्विभार्यः स्यान्मातुलो योगवान् भवेत्॥ २२५९॥
2259. Mars in Pisces Navamsa: For a Mangala Nadiatsa native, see if Mars placed in the
4th in Cancer occupies Pisces Navamsa. Ifso, the
native’s father-in-law would have iwo wises. His
maternal uncle will be prosperous.
TUR ष्ष्टेशशत्रिकोणगे | lee
स्फुटयोगं गते AA देहपीडां विनिर्िशेत्। | २२६० |
, स्वमातुलप्रपीडिदि सम्पत्तारदशन्तरे |
2260-22601.2. Second dasa: During the currency of the dasa which is 2nd in sequence, Mars
traversing the Rasi :deniicai with the Navamsa
occupied by 6th lord at birth, or a trine thereof,
will cause physica! ailments. In the end of this
dasa, it will prove inauspicious for the nealth of a
maternal uncle.
कन्यांशगे सुखाधाशे शरिजेन समन्विते । २२६६! |
WSR प्रजातस्य वृहद्रीजः पितामहः।
2261-22611/2. The 4th lord (Moon) joining
Mercury and occupying Virgo Navamsa denotes
that the paternal grandfather of the native would
have large testicles.
दयूनाधिपेन संयुक्ते पितरो दीर्धजीविनै।
विंशेपरि सुभाग्यप्तिः et वाहनम्। । २२६३ । |
अष्टाविंशे श्रियं विन्द्यात् स्वपित्र |
2262-22631/2. Scorpio ascendant: Ascendant being Scorpio with Mangala Nadiamsa,
while Mars is with Venus in Varuna Nadiamsa
will give long-lives to parents. After 20, the subject will prosper. At 25 he will beget a conveyance. 28th year will cause wealth to the native
and increased progress to father.
Notes: Varuna Nadiamsa could be seen in
notes under sloka 188 supra. This is known as
Varuni Nadiamsa also.
प्रगठे चोत्तरे भागे वारूणंशे कुजे ad । २२६४ |
मन्देक्षिते मनस्तापः क्लेशः स्यदष्ठवत्सरे |
पूर्वभागे पजातस्य ववर्त परं सुखम्। । २२६५। |
स्वपितर्भाग्यवृद्धिश्च योगः स्याद्दशवत्सरम्।
पश्चाददारिन्नमाप्नेति वसुतर्षत् परं विपत्। | २२६६।।
2264-2266. Birth in Scorpio ascendant, in
Mangala Nadiamsa’s second half, while Mars in

204 Chandra Kala Nadi
Varuna Nadiamsa is aspected by Saturn - this will जन्म तार-दशन्त्यदे सम्पद्दाये स्वभुक्तिषु |
cause mental distress and difficulties during the ASN प्रजातस्य कालमृत्युभय क्वचित् | । २२७२ |
8th year of age. In the same event, if birth is in the
former half of Mangala Nadiamesa (instead of 2nd 2272. Timely Death: Either in the end of
half as above), the native will be happy after 8th == 5६ dasa, or in the first sub periods of second
year. His father’s prosperity will be on the in- . dasa, the native of Mangala Nadiamsa will be
crease in the 10th year, following which penury = struck by (due) death.
will be experienced. After 8th year, danger will Note: Either some adverse astrological
strike the native. yogas causing so early a death are missing for this
sloka, or there is a hopeless interpolation. This
SR प्रजातस्य द्राविंशाब्दात् प्ररं सुखम्| could be understood from the discussions so far
स्वपितामहभाग्याप्तिः साधनेशदशन्तेरे। । २२६७।। made.
2267. The native of 2nd half of Mangala भग्यस्थानाधिपे जीवे fas मेषांशके तथा।
Nadiamsa Scorpio ascendant will be happy after aaapy apart विपदुदाये श्रिये ye | । 2293]
22. In the 4th dasa (in relevant sub) periods, his राजयोगं च लभते तत्समो वा धनी सय |
paternal grandfather will prosper. नरवाहनसंप्रप्तिः प्रनलेद्योगजीवनम । । २२७४। ।
यौवने पुत्रलाभं च सोदरी श्रियमशनुते।
fe जीवे सुखे शुक्रे कर्मलाभेशवीक्िते।
स्वपितावाहनाटयश्च Bn | | २२६८ I 2273-22741/2. Aries ascendant: If the 9th
सोदरभ्रतृमान् क्रोधी ज il lord Jupiter is in Leo, while Aries rises with Aries
Navamsa, the native of Mangala Nadiamsa will in
2268-22681/2. Jupiter in Leo, and Venus in === the 3rd dasa acquire wealth and will enjoy a
the 4th in aspect to 10th and 11th lords - this yoga Rajayoga or something equal to it. He will be
will cause rich conveyances to father. He will be wealthy and happy. He will obtain men-borne
famous in royal service. He will be given to anger, conveyances, and will be well-employed. He will
will have younger brothers, and be bereft of older = obtain progeny in youth (i.e. there will be no
coborn. ae in this respect). His sister will be wealthy.
वक्रयोगे क्रिये लग्ने तर्दीशे वारूणंशगे। । २२६९।।
भाग्याधिपे कुमारांशे भुग्यवांश्च न संशयः। वारूणांशकगे जीवे चक्रयोगे तु जायते।
दशवर्ष तु भाग्याप्तिर्विवाहानन्तर सुखम्। । २२७०।। भग्याधिपदशन्त्यादौ स्वपित्ररिष्टमादिशेत् | । २२७५। |
बाल्ये सौख्यं विजानीयात् कौमारे स्वल्पसौख्यवान् | |
यौवने भाग्यमाप्नोति भाग्येशे भाग्यसंस्थिते। । २२७१। | 2275. Jupiter in Varuna Nadiamsa for birth
2269-2271, Mars in Varuna Nadiamsa being in Chakra Yoga will endanger the father in his
aa Scorni hil inning/concluding phase. (Note:
retrograde in Scorpio ascendant while the 9th ease ma Vie peg क, hi
lord is in Kumara Nadiamsa - this yoga will be Sloka 2275 has three lines only, the first of which
capable of conferring (great) prosperity. Right 2PPeats after Sloka 2274.) .
from 10th year, prosperity will accrue. Happiness Note: The words ’Chakra Yoga’ do not seem
will prevail after marriage. Childhood will be a _to be the right part of the text. Chakra yoga and
happy one. Youth will restrict happiness, father’s death have no connection. Hence
Adolescence will cause prosperity. ’Chakra Yoga’ may be ignored in this context.
Note: "Bhagyse Bhagyasamsthithe" meaning oe ्ुवयेग
the 9th lord in the 9this not added to the transla. = लग्नेशंशे तत्तरिकोणे स्फुटयोगं गते शनो।
tion as these words are corruptly placed. सेतुयात्रफलप्रापिर्विपततारदशान्तरे । | ९२७६ |

Deva Keralam
2276. Pilgrimage: In the dasa which is 3rd
in order (in appropriate sub periods), when
Saturn reaches the sign represented by the
Navamsa dispositor of ascendant lord or a trine
thereof, the subject will go on pilgrimage to Sethu.
्षेमदाये घनं विद्यान्म॑गव्छंशे न संशयः ।
ane मन्दभुक्तौ मात्ररिष्टं विनिदिशेत्। | २२७७। |
2277. Fourth dasa: The 4th dasa will give
wealth. The sub period of Saturn in the fourth
dasa will endanger the mother of the native.
These apply to Mangala Nadiamsa native.
लग्नादुष्टमगे राहौ Fs गंगस्नायी सुपुण्यवान्।
तदभावे सेतुयात्रा त्रिवारं नात्र संशयः । । २२७८ |
2278. Pilgrimage: If Rahu is in the 8th
house, the native will bathe in the Ganges, or for
3 weeks he will visit Sethu.
महादानफलप्रपतूर्भाग्यकर्मेशवीक्षिते।
कर्माधिपदशाकाले शुभाशुभफलं समम्। । २२७९। |
2279, Lord of 10th: The 9th house in aspect
to 10th lord will bestow merits of great charity. In
such a case, the dasa of the 10th lord will give even
results, good and bad being duly balanced.
क्षेम तारदशाकाले रन््रधिपतिभुक्तिषु।
ATS प्रजातस्य नौ al 1 क्ठयचित्। । २२८० |
तत्पापपरिहारार्थं शान्तिं |
भग्याधिपान्तरे काले लाभाधिपतिदायके। । २२८१। |
ATS प्रजातस्य CT संशयः।
2280-2281 1/2. Death: One born in Mangala
Nadiamsa will face untimely death in the 8th
lord’s sub period during the dasa which is fourth
in sequence. To overcome this danger, remedies
may be done. In the dasa of the 11th lord, during
the sub period of the 9th lord, the said native will
face death.
भागयाधिपे वारूणंशे SAR सुताधीषे। । २२८२। |
ATS पजातस्तु पुरा शूद्रस्य जन्मवान्।
पश्चाज्जन्म तथा विन््ादिह जन्मनि कोर्तिमान्। | 32231 |
अतिभाग्ययुते नित्यं राजसप्रकृततिः सुखी।
सूर्ये कराच्छषष्ठयंशे भाग्येशे वारूणाशगे। | २२८४। ।
TTS प्रजातस्य पापपुण्यफलं समम्।
पुण्यलोकं तदा विन्द्यात् केचित्पक्षे सुलोकवान्। । २२८५। |
व्ययेशे CAMS मंगव्छंश्स्य ASS |
स्वजात्यानुगुणे लोके अन्ते ज्ञानयुत भवेत्। 1 २२८६। ।
लग्ननाडाफल सत्य प्रत्यक्षं CART | २२८७। |
2282-2287. The lord of the 9th in Varuna
Nadiamsa while the 5th lord is in Kumara
Nadiamsa denotes that the native was a Soodra in
the last birth and the next birth following the
present one will also be of a Soodra. In the
current birth he will be famous, be endowed with
great wealth, be passionate and happy. For one
born in Mangala Nadiamsa, the Sun in Karaala
Shashtiamsa while the 9th lord is in Varuna
Nadiamsa, good and bad effects will accrue in
equal measure. He will attain the heavens. According to some, he will go to some good world.
The 12th lord in Deva Shastiamsa will give wisdom in the end. The effects from Lagna Nadi
narrated in Deva Keralam will bear truth.
। । मीनलग्नम् - (उरगांश) । ।
Pisces Ascendant — (Uraga Nadiamsa)
उरगंशे निशानाथे च चन्द्रे सू्॑युतेक्षिते।
विप्रकाले प्रजातस्य विप्रजन्मा सुखी भवेत्। । २२८८ |
बालारिष्टं च लभते चन्द्रे राहुयुतेक्षते।
उरगांशे निशनाथे YER तु जायते।
Bea सुखी नित्यं बालारिष्ठं न विद्यते। । २२८९।।
2288-2289. One born in Vipra Kala of Uraga
Nadiamsa, with Moon therein, in assocaition/aspect to the Sun, will be a Brahmin and be
happy. If the Moon is with Rahu, the native will
incur Balaraishta effects. If the Moon 18 in Uraga
Nadiamsa (alone, not as above), the subject will
be born as a Soodra, devoid of Balarishta effects
उरगांशे स्थिरे लग्ने Ps स्थिरांशे वा WTA
सद्यो मरणमाप्नोति जीविते बहुभाग्यवान्। । २२९०।।

206 Chandra Kala Nadi
290. Immovable ascendant, with immov- 2297. The Moon in the second quarter of
able Navamsa, with Uraga Nadiamsa will cause © Uraga Nadiamsa will deprive the native of an
instant death. If the native survives, he will be elder brother. In case of former half, only one
quite fortunate. elder brother will survive.
उरगांशकमगे we त्वसितेन युतेक्षिते! उरगशे निशानाथे कर्मेशे शशिसयुते। ।
पूर्वभागे प्रजातस्य नाच्ववेष्टमादिशेत्॥ २२९९।। पूर्वभागे पजातस्तु gp तः। । २२९८। ।
सात्त्विको गुणसम्पन्नः श्रुतिस्मूिविचक्षणः।
2291. The Moon in aspect to or in associa- :
: विशालवदनो मानी देवब्राहम णभक्तिमान्। 1 २२९९। |
tion with Saturn, in case of birth in former half of
Uraga Nadiamsa, denotes birth entangled in un- Spree
2298-2299. Moon-Mars Conjunction: Birth
bilical cord.
in the former half of Uraga Nadiamsa while the
SRR पजातस्य वेष्टनं च न feed Moon is in association with Mars - with this yoga,
ya क्वचिच्चेति भृगुदुष्ठिवशात् सुखम्। २२९२॥ following effects will come to occur. The subject,
बलरिष्टभयं नास्ति उत्तरे क्वचित् क्वचित्। blood-red in complexion, will have an auspicious
SRY वनप्रन्त्ये जननं म्लेच्छपट्रणे । | २२९३। । appearance. He will be gentle, endowed with the
पूर्वभागे पुण्यदेशे SME प्रसूतिमन्। wealth of virtrues. He will be able to differentiate
ग्रन्थान्तरे पुण्यदेशे महादेवेपुरालये। between Sruthi (traditional laws heard directly)
प्रस्तु प्रसवं चैव एकाकी भ्रातृहीनवान्। । २२९४ । and 4700 (taditional laws recorded out of
2292-2294, In case of birth in second half, the 1 i a will cae Pa ite be
above result (vide sloka 2291) will not come 10 == (णतप and will Fespect Bods ane STANMINS.
pass. Birth in former half, with Venusian aspect उत्तरे चेतय
will bring happiness, and freedom from infantile उत्तरांशे चेर्यकृत्यं परस्त्रीभोगलोलुपः |
mortality. But in second half, such a fear may तदभावे दुष्टभायहितुम्लकलापवान् | | 2800] |
sometimes exist. Birth in second half of Uraga
Nadiamsa will be in a forest region, nearby a town 2300. Second half - Uraga Nadiamsa: One
of Mlechchas. In case of former half, birth willbe = should be born in this part of the zodiac to be a
ina Brahmins’ colonyinasacredtown(withsome thief and to derive pleasures by joining others’
mythological trace). According to some, sucha | women. In the absence of such results, the subbirth will be near a temple of Lord Siva. The = ject will incur infamy due to his wicked (quesnative of former half of Uraga Nadiamsa willbe = tionable) spouse.
lonely, bereft of coborn.
= पूर्वभागे शन्तुद्धिरविद्यावान् धनिकः सुखी। । २३०१।।
उरगांशे निशनाथे पूर्वभागे प्रजायते। उरगांशे निशानाथे पापयोगे BATA
विप्रजन्मा सुखी नित्यं द्वितीयोअयं प्रकीर्तितः! । २२९५। । अन्तः क्रोधी प्रसन्नात्मा हितशप्ुत्वकार्यवान्। | 23021 |
अथवा च तृतीयः स्यात् पश्चाद्भ्रातृविहीनरवान्। । २२९६।।
2301-2302. Wealth etc: If birth is in the
former half of Uraga Nadiamsa, one will be of
peaceful disposition, learned, rich and happy.
The Moon in this Nadiamsa, with a malefic association but aspected by a benefic, denotes that
the subject will be inwardly given to anger but be
a pleased soul. His enemies will also turn into
friends.
2295-2296. If the Moon joins Uraga
Nadiamsa, former half, birth will be in a
Brahmins’ family. The subject will be the second
issue. Or the third issue. He will be bereft of
after-born,
उत्तरांशे निशानाथे ज्येष्ठभ्रातृविहीनवान्। |
पूर्वभागे प्रजातस्य त्वेको ज्यष्टस्त जौवति॥ २२९७॥ उरगांशे निशानाथे उत्तरांश तु जायते।

Dey: Ker: ia ms
Deva Kergiam Re
पित्रर्जितविहीनश्च स्वभुजार्जितवित्तवान्। । २३०३। |
पूर्वभागे सत्कुटुम्बी पित्ररजितसुभाग्यवान्।
स्वभूजार्जितसम्पननो मध्ये वयसि भाग्यवान् ।! 230% I
2303-2304. The Moon in this Nadiamsa,
while birth is in its second half will lead to the
following events: The subject will be devoid of
paternal inheritance. He will earn by his own
efforts. Ifthe birth be in former half, one will have
paternal wealth and forms part of an excellent
family. He will have self- earned wealth as well.
From his middle age he will attain mentionable
prosperity.
भुजंगनकषत्रभवो भुजगे धनान्वितः साहसिकः कृतज्ञः
शुभाशगः pat सवर्णः (त
2305. Rahu in Aslesha Nakshatra: If Rahu
at birth is placed in Aslesha Nakshatra, he will
give following effects: The native will be endowed with wealth, be valorous, and be grateful.
If Rahu is in the company of another malefic and
is in a benefic’s navamsa, the subject will be
beautiful (Varna also means renown, property
etc.) and will eat anything. He will be ever given
to passion.
Notes: "“Sukhamsagah" is another reading
for "Subhamsagah" which denotes fourth place
from Navamsa ascendant (Sukha = 4th).
भ्रातुस्थानाधिपे शुक्रे ATTRA |
ूर्वापरविहीनश्च तृतीयोअसौ प्रकीर्तितः। 123081 |
2306. Venus: If the 8th from the ascendant,
or its trine, is occupied by the 3rd lord Venus, the
native will remain lonely, without having any
coborn before/after him. He will be the 3rd issue
of the family.
स्थिरांशे विक्रमे मन्दे Te कुजवीकिते।
तद्दशायां भ्रातृशोकं पूर्वार्धे नात्र संशयः। | VB! |
2307. Saturn dasa: The 3rd lord in aspect
to Mars while Saturn is in the 3rd house (Libra)
with an immovable Navamsa will cause loss of
coborn tn the first half of Saturn dasa.
SS निशानाय पृवंभगे प्रजायते।
मित्रारागे प्रजातः स मातृवंशे सुभग्यवान्! | २३०८। |
उत्तरांश मातृनाशो नास्तीति मनुरत्र्वात्।
ae, तयोरको द्विभायवान्। । २३०९। ।
वेको एकः पुत्रविहीन वान्
pink Si aM मातृवंशे त्वरिष्टकृत्। 1 23201 |
च तार्थ क्लेशं प्राप्नोति भूरिशः।
SORT WTA प्राबल्यं च्रोत्तसोत्तरम्। | २३१९ |
उत्तरंशे पूर्वभागे केतुयोगे Shea
बाल्ये मातृविनाशः स्यदुत्तराशे न संशयः । । २३९१२।
2308-2312. Mother’s Side: The Moon in the
former half of Uraga Nadiamsa. while the natal
ascendant is in a navamsa whose lord is friendly
to ascendant lord Sun (or in Leo Navamsa itself
as Mitramsa means so) will give the following
effects to a Leo native. His maternal family will
be quite prosperous. If in latter half, the birth
concerned will not destroy mother (early). The
native will have two maternal uncles, one of whom
will have two wives. One maternal uncle will have
many children while the other will be childless.
Birth in former half will cause destruction of
mother in the 2nd dasa. In case of birth in second
half, the (numerous) coborns of the native will
attain prosperity and greatness the difference
being in the increasing order from elder to
younger. (That is, the 3rd brother will be more
prosperous than the 2nd one; the 4th one will be
more prosperous than the 3rd one, and in that
order, the last brother will be the best placed of
all.) The native’s mother will die early in his
childhood if Ketu is connected with Mars by
aspect/association in case of birth in the first half
of Uraga Nadiamsa.
लग्नेशंशे तत्द्रिकोणे स्पुययोगं गते TN
जन्म तारादशाकाले मात्ररिष्टं विनिर्दिशेत्। । २३१३। |
कुम्भत्रिकोणगे सूर्य गोचरे रनप्रराशिगे।
मत्ररिष्टं विजानीयात् पूर्वभागे न संशयः । । २३९४। |
2313-2314. Danger to Mother: In the first
dasa when Jupiter comes in transit into such a sign

as represented by the natal position in Navamsa
of the ascendant lord, or a trine thereof, the
native’s mother will be endangered. The month
will correspond to the Sun’s transit in Aquarius,
the 8th from the ascendant, or its trine (Le.
Gemini/Libra). These hints apply to the native of
the first half of Uraga Nadiamsa.
SRR प्रजातस्य विपत्तारादशन्त।
गोचरे वृषभे मन्दे मात्ररिष्टं विनिर्िशेत्। । २३१५। |
2315. If birth be in the second half of Uraga
Nadiamsa, the mother of the native will be endangered with Saturn’s movement in Taurus,
coinciding with the concluding phase of the
native’s third dasa.
गुरूप्रथमपर्यये गोचरे ललने गुरे।
जन्म तारादशन्त्दौ मजीबन्धनमादिशेत्। । २३१६।।
2316. Thread Ceremony: When Jupiter in
his first round of zodiacal transit comes to Virgo
during the end of first dasa, the native’s thread
ceremony will take place.
सम्पत्तारदशाकाले पूरव॑भागे तु जायते।
लाभाधिपन्तरे काले विवाहोत्सवमादिशेत्। 1 २२३१७। |
2317. Marriage: The native of the first half
of Uraga Nadiamsa will get married during the
2nd dasa, in the sub period ruled by the 11th lord.
९ Ns भागे देशे वृषभंशके |
जन्मभूदक्षिणे भागे carta वा विवाहयुक्। । २२१८ । |
2318. Direction of Bride: If the 7th lord
(Saturn) is in Taurus Navamsa, the bride in case
of the native of former half of Uraga Nadiamsa
will hail either from the south or south-east referring to his birth land.
उत्तरांशे निशनाथे मायब्दे मधुमासगे।
ग्रीष्मान्ते वा विवाहः स्यल्लग्नधिपतिवासरे ।। २३१९॥
दाराधिपत्तिवारे वा दरिशांश्त्रिकोणगे।
दारजन्मर्षभं चेति पूर्वभागे फलं स्मृतम्। । २३२०।।
Chandra Kala Nadi
2319-2320. Period of Marriage: Ifthe Moon
is in the second half of Uraga Nadiamsa, in the
15th year of age, in summer time, in Chaitra
month, on a day ruled by the ascendant lord, Sun
(ie. Sunday) or on a day ruled by the lord of the
7th (1.6. Saturday), the native’s marriage will take
place. The bride’s natal Moon sign will correspond to the Rasi or its trine, identical with the
navamsa occupied by the dispositor of Saturn.
These apply to birth in first half of Uraga Nadiamउरगांशे निशानाथे पूर्वभागे BAR
दारवंशाभिव॒द्धिः स्यच्छुशुरस्यं चिरायुषम्। । २३२१।।
उत्तरांशे प्रजातस्य कन्यया पितृहीनया।
उद्वाहमिति च प्राहर्मायल्दे नात्र संशयः। । २३२२।।
पूर्वभागप्रजातस्य त्वष्टादश च वत्सरे।
गृहस्थगेह उद्राहः श्वश्रूश्वशुरवान् सुखी। । २३२३।।
2321-2323. The Moon in association with or
in aspect to benefics will cause prosperity for
in-laws. The parents-in-law of the native will be
endowed with longevity. This applies to birth in
first half of Uraga Nadiamsa. Whereas his bride
will not have her father alive at the time of her
marriage if he belongs to the 2nd half of Uraga
Nadiamsa. His marriage will take place at 15.
18th year will be the year of marriage for birth in
first half, and the native will have both the
parents-in-law alive, (at the time of marriage).
उरगाशे निशानाथे पूर्वभागे प्रजायते।
स्वस्त्रियामेव सन्तान विपदूदाये न संशयः। । २३२४।।
उत्तराशे धूर्तभायां चारोगदृटशलिनी।
जीवत्येव कुमार्ग सा मृता यदि पतित्रता। । २३२५।।
2324-2325. Children: The native of Uraga
Nadiamsa, first half, with the Moon therein will
have progeny in the third dasa through his wife.
The native of second half will have a wicked
spouse. She will possess a healthy and sturdy
physique. If she lives long she will take to questionable ways. Contrarily if she is a devout
spouse, she will die (early).

Deva Keralam
पूर्वभागे fear: स्यादुत्तरशेकभार्यवान्।
उरगंशे पूर्वभागे Pia चन्द्रे गुरूतोक्षिते। । 23261 |
Wes चिरायुष्यं ala तथा भवेत्।
उरगशे पूर्वभागे CAT । २३२७।।
विपत्तारदशाकाले चोत्तरार्धं पितुर्विपत्।
TORI तत्रिकोणे लग्नेशांश्त्रिकोणगे। । २३२८। |
2326-2328. Marriage, Progeny & Father:
The subject belonging to the first half of Uraga
Nadiamsa will have two wives whereas his
counterpart will have only one wife. The first half
native, with the Moon having Jupiterian
aspect/company, will have two sons and a
daughter who all will be long-lived. In case of
birth in the second half of Uraga Nadiamsa
predict danger to father in the 29th year (or) in
the latter half of the third dasa. In transit, ...... (the
concerned planet missing in the text) should be in
the Rasi represented by the navamsa occupied by
8th lord/ascendant lord, or a trine thereof.
उरगंशे पित्ररिष्टं मेषादित्रयमासमगे।
विपत्तारदशन्त्यादौ क्षेमदाये स्वभुक्तिषु। | 23281 |
देहपीडामवाप्नोति शान्तिं कुर्याद्यथाविधि ।
2329-23291/2. To cause danger to the father
of the native of Uraga Nadiamsa, the Sun in transit will be in one of the three signs from Aries. In
the end of third dasa, or in the first sub period of
fourth dasa, the subject will incur physical illness
for which remedies may be 65011609 to.
लग्नाधिपदशाकाले पूर्वभागे च जायते। । २३३०।।
उरगांशे प्रजातस्य बालारिष्टं विनिर्दिशेत्।
प्रत्पक्तारदशाकाले रन्ध्रेशांशत्रिकोणगे। | 2338 1 |
स्फुरयोगं गते जीवे द्वितीसेद्राहयोगवान्।
प्रत्यक्तारदशकाले त्वपरधं महत् सुखम्। । २३३२।।
2330-2332. The child born in the former half
of Uraga Nadiamsa will be endangered in the
dasa of ascendant lord. He will have second marriage in the 5th dasa when Jupiter traverses the
Rasi represented by the Navamsa occupied by the
8th lord’s dispositor. In the latter half of the said
dasa, the native will receive great happiness.
उत्तरांशे पूर्वभागे कठत्रान्तरपुत्रवान् |
उत्तरांशे प्रजातस्य त्वपमत्युभयं क्वचित्} | 32221 |
wees मृतिं चैति पतत्येवमघोगते।
कर्मेयोगफलाध्याये लग्नाधिपतिनाडिषु। | २३३४। |
उरगा प्रजातस्य फलं विस्तारमादिशेत्।
2333-23341/2. One born in the first half of
Uraga Nadiamsa will beget progeny through the
second wife. The one belonging to the second
half of Uraga Nadiamsa will be exposed to the
danger of untimely end. 56th year will be his year
of death, after which he will descend to lower
worlds (i.e. will not attain good worlds). In Lagnadhiapathi (ascendant lord) Nadi, results relating to Karma Yoga have been narrated, in respect
of Uraga Nadiamsa.
लग्नाधिपदशाकाले पूर्वभाग्स्य जातके! । २३२३५। |
अपरार्धे मनस्तापं शुभाशुभफलं समम्।
व्ययाधिपदशाकाले पचमाधिपभुवितषु। । २३२३६। |
स्वपुत्रह्ाहसि द्धिः ge se pe युक्ता pag त्रिका।
प्रत्यक्तारदशाकाले देशे रज्ञां कलापनम्। 1 |
अनावृष्टिहते देशे दुरभिक्षभयडम्ब्पम्। । २३३८ । |
2335-2338. Dasa Periods: For a native of
first half of Uraga Nadiamsa, the dasa of ascendant lord will cause a mix of good and bad results.
However, in the second half of the dasa, mental
agony will come to pass. The 12th lord’s dasa, and
5th lord’s bhukti (i.e. Moon dasa Jupiter bhukti)
will cause occurrence of two events, viz. (a) Marriage to the native’s son. (b) Birth of a son to the
native’s daughter. (The second line of sloka 2337
and the two lines of sloka 2338 are irrelevant and
a mix-up with natal astrology as they describe
famine etc.)
उरगांशे निशानाथे पूर्वभागे प्रजायते।
मीने सैम्यांशगे जीवे द्विकच्छत्रसुपुत्रवान्। । २३३९। |
वार्धके सौख्यप्तियौवने दारशोकवान्।
शुक्र दृष्टे परस्त्री संगपापवान्। । २३४० |
2339-2340. One born in the former half of
Uraga Nadiamsa with the Moon therein will have

two wives and a good son if Jupiter placed in
Pisces obtains Mercurian Navamsa (Virgo).
The subject will get happiness from his spouse
(only) in his old age (whereas) in his youth he will
incur grief on account of her. Venus joining
Saturn denotes adulterous nature of the subject.
उरगाशे प्रत्यक्तारादशान्त |
gar वृ a मासे कन्यमासे अथवा यदि!} २२३५१॥
उरगांशे पजातस्य देहजाडयं क्कचित् क्वचित्।
2341-23411/2. The native belonging to the
first half of Uraga Nadiamsa will in the 5th dasa,
and in its first sub period, incur physical illness to
some extent coinciding with the Sun’s journey in
Cancer, Virgo or Scorpio.
भग्ये लग्नाधिपे seed गुरूणा च ira २२३४२॥
जन्मप्रभृति च श्रीमान् न कदापि दरिद्रकः।
भाग्याधिपदशाकाले भाग्यवृद्िः Yaa: | | २३४३। |
वार्धके बहुभाग्याप्तिः पूत्रमूलात् सुसौख्यवान्।
2342-23431/2. The ascendant lord (Sun) in
deep exaltation in the 9th house in aspect to
Jupiter denotes that the native will be rich right
from birth, and will never experience poverty in
his life. In the dasa of the 9th lord (Mars) his
prosperity will multiply. He will obtain a son.
Even in his old age, he will see a great deal of
fortunes and will be happy thru his progeny.
aie शनिस्थिते काले तल्िकोणगतेअपि व| २३४४ II
म्लेच्छप्रभुविनाशः स्यदुरगांशे न संशयः।
2344-23441/2. When Saturn reaches Scorpio
or its trine, a Mlechcha king will be destroyed.
This yoga is with reference to Uraga Nadiamsa
native.
Note: This sloka may be disregarded as this
does not pertain to the native.
भाग्याधिपदशाकाले षष्ठाधिपतिभुवितषु। । २२४५। |
उरगशे पूर्वभागे देहजाडयं क्वचितु क्वचित्
उरगशे विप्रकाले चन्द्रे गुरूनिरीक्षिते। । २३४६ |
अष्टपंचांशगे मृत्युः पश्चाद्रैदिकजन्मवान्।
Chandra Kala Nadi
ब्रहमजन्मन्त्यकाले च त्वापत्सम्यासमादिशेत्। । २२४७; |
चन्द्रनादीफलं सत्यं प्रत्यक्षं देवकेरकछम्। | २३४८ |
2345-2348, The native of former half of
Uraga Nadiamsa will somewhat be ill in the sub
period of the 6th lord (Saturn) in the major period
of the 9th lord (Mars). If birth is in Vipra Kaala
(first quarter) of Uraga Nadiamsa, with the Moon
having Jupiterian aspect, it denotes death at 58
following which rebirth will be in a Vaidic family,
In the end of the present birth as a Brahmin, the
native will take to ascetic order due to a family
calamity. These effects as explained in Chandra
Nadi, explained in Deva Keralam will bear truth.
। । वृश्विकलग्नम् - (Gar)!
Scorpio Ascendant —
Sudha Nadiamsa
सुधाशे वृश्चिके लग्ने बुधत्रिशांशके तथा।
विप्रजन्मा सुखी नित्यं सीमन्तोअसौ प्रकौतिंतेः। | २३४९।
2349. Sudha Naidamsa: Sudha Nadiamsa,
Scorpio ascendant, with Mercury’s Trimsamsa
will cause birth of a Brahmin who will be the first
issue of the family.
Notes: For details of Sudha Nadiamsa, see
notes under sloka 454 supra.
सुधाशे TR लग्ने जीवे मेषादिमाश्रते।
शक्रे शनियुते ss नुधे तदंशगे। | २३५०।
तत्त्रिकोणे निशानाथे कुजराहुसमन्विते।
साम्राज्यप्रकरे योगे विप्रजन्मा स्वरूपवान्। | २३५१।
2350-2351. Ascendant being an immovable
sign with Sudha Nadiamsa, Jupiter in the beginning of Aries, Venus in aspect to or in association
with Saturn, Mercury in exaltation sign and
Navamsa and the Moon placed in a trine from
Mercury, being in the company of Mars and Rahu
- this planetary array will cause birth of a Brahmin
with Samrajya (kingdom) yoga. He will be
charming in appearance.

Deva Keralam
GaN त्वचे लग्ने भाग्यस्थानाधिपांशके।
GAC प्रजास्तु रक्तवर्णशुभाकृत्तिः। । २३५२।।
2352. The first part of the sloka is defective
inasmuch as it refers to birth Nadiamsas being
Sudha and Sumathi in one go. The other part of
the sloka means: The lord of the ascendant, an
immovable sign, occupying the Navamsa owned
by the 9th lord, will give blood-red complexion
and charming appearance to the native. (This
however applies to Sumathi Nadiamsa in Scorpio
ascendant.)
सुमत्यंशे पूर्वभागे वृश्चिके च प्रजायते।
विप्रजन्मा सुखी नित्यं सीमन्तोअयं प्रकीर्तितः ।। 2343 1
महानदीप्रानत्यदेशे शिवालयसमीपगे।
दक्षिणेत्तरवीथीषु प्राग्भागे जननं स्मृतम्। । २३५४। |
2353-2354. Sumathi Nadiamsa: One born
in the first half of this Nadiamsa in Scorpio ascendant, will be a Brahmin, be the first issue of the
family, born in the Mahanadi region, beside a Siva
temple, in the eastern part (of the town) in astreet
spread from south to north.
Notes: According to one source Sumathi
Nadiamsa extends from 17 deg. 36’ to 17 deg. 48”
of a movable ascendant; from 12 deg. 12’ to 12 deg
24 of an immovable ascendant; and from 2 deg.
36’ to 2 deg. 48’ of a common sign.
सुमत्यंशे परे भागे काले क्षात्रे च जायते।
विष्णुभक्तिर तो नित्यं सोदरश्रातृभ्रत्निमान्। । २३५५। |
2355. One born in the second half, in
Kshatriya Kaala, will be devoted to Lord Vishnu
and be endowed with brothers and sisters.
सुमत्यंशे पूर्वभागे pan i |
स्थिरलग्ने प्रजातस्य
2356. Alone: Mercury joining or being in
aspect to Mars denotes that the native of an immovable ascendant in the first half of Sumathi
Nadiamsa will be a lonely child of the family,
having no coborn.
भ्रातृहीनवान्। । BHI |
वक्रे स््याशगे चन्द्रे सुमत्यंरे aa
वाल्ये पितृविनाशः स्यात् पूर्वभागे न संशयः |
उत्तरांशे प्रजातस्य पितरौ Sasa | २३०५ ।
2337 Loss of father: Birth in the first half of
Sumathi Nadiamsa, Mars in a Navamsa of Mercury, the Moon in Sumathi Nadiamsa - this yoga
will destroy the native’s father in childhood. The
subject belonging to the second half of Sumathi
Nadiamsa will have a long-living father.
लग्नात् FAT जवे चन्द्रे च शकटे स्थिते!
सुमत्यंशे प्रजातः स यावज्जीवं सुसौख्यवान्। 1 २२३५८ ।
2358. Sakata Yoga: If the Moon is in Sakata
Yoga with reference to Jupiter, while the latter is
occupying the 10th from the ascendant, the native
of Sumathi Nadiamsa will be happy throughout
his life.
भ्रातृस्थानाधिपे मन्दे लग्नात् ऊन्द्रचतुष्टये।
चिरायुषी भगिन्येका पूर्वभागे न संशयः । । २३५९ |
उत्तरे प्रजातस्तु भगिनीद्रयसंयुतः।
मातृस्थूनाधिपे मन्दे युग्मे कुग्भनवांशके । । २३६० | |
ae माता र्षियुरदिशेत् |
मातुलद्रययेगः स्यात् केचित् पक्षेकमातुलः।
स॒मत्यंरो पूर्वभागे लग्ने तु वृश्चिके तथा। ¦ २३६२।
AT प्रजातस्य AGAVE क्षयं गतः।
मातुलद्वयमित्याहुस्तायेरेको द्विभार्यवान्। । २३६२ । |
2359-2363. Mother & Maternal Relatives:
The lord of the 3rd house, Saturn, placed in an
angle counted from the ascendant, will cause the
birth of along-living sister to the native of former
half of Sumathi Nadiamsa. In case of the native
of second half of this Nadiamsa, this yoga will give
two sisters. The 4th lord, Saturn, occupying a
dual sign with Aquarius Navamsa will give a long
lease of life to the mother of the native of former
half of Sumathi Nadiamsa. Mars, the 6th lord,
denoting maternal uncles, if found in the 11th
house (Virgo) with Aries Navamsa, denotes that
the native will have two maternal uncles; according to some the native will have only one maternal

Me
uncle. Birth in Sumathi Nadiamsa, former half,
in Scorpio ascendant, with a friendly Navamsa (or
Leo Navamsa, Mitra also means Sun) - as a result,
the maternal kinsmen will be destroyed. Further
there will be two maternal uncles, out of whom
one will have two wives.
सम्पद्दाये पूर्वभागे मातृवंशे ॐरिष्टकृत्।
सन्चितार्थविनाशेन शोक प्राप्नोति भूरिशः। । २३६४। |
सुमत्यंशे पूर्वभागे वृश्चिके लग्नजातके।
भग्यारूढे प्रजातस्य सम्पदूदाये सुसौख्यवान्॥ २२३६५॥
2364-2365, Second Dasa: For a subject
belonging to the former half of Sumathi Nadiamsa, the dasa which is the second from birth will
give following effects. Danger to maternal relatives, loss of the wealth gathered by the subject
and grief in abundance. If the ascendant Scorpio
itself becomes the ninth Aroodha Pada (i.e. the
Moon placed in Pisces, for birth in Scorpio), the
native of former half of Sumathi Nadiamsa in
Scorpio ascendant will enjoy comforts (as against
above evils, vide sloka 2364) in the second dasa.
सुमत्यंशे पूर्वभागे विप्रकालांशजात्कः।
सपत्तारदशाकाले मौजीबन्धनमादिशेत्। । २३६६। ।
2366. The second dasa will cause thread
ceremony to the native of Vipra Kaala, former
half, Sumathi Nadiamsa.
॥ मे FEARS भाग्येशाश्त्रिकोणगे।
ba गते जीवे विवाहोत्सवमादिशेत्। । २३६७।
2367. Note the Navamsa occupied by the
dispositor of Mars (i.e. lord of the ascendant).
When Jupiter comes into the said Rasi, or a trine
thereof, (or) in the middle of the 2nd dasa, the
native will get married.
षष्ठब्द् अष्षराभ्यासं सप्तमे मौजीबन्धनम्।
द्रादशब्दे विवाहः स्यात् सुमत्यंशे न संशयः ।। २३६८॥।।
2368. Sumathi Nadiamsa - General: 6th,
7th and 12th years of age will in order be for
Chandra Kala Nadi
thread ceremony, initiation into education and
marriage for the native of Sumathi Nadiamsa,
चापांशगे मदाधीशे सुमत्य॑शे प्रजायते।
स्वजन्मदेशे चोद्राहमाग्नेये पाणिसंग्रम्। । २३६९। |
2369. Seventh lord (Venus) in Sagittarius
Navamsa will cause the bride to hail from the
native’s own region, from the south-eastern
quarter. This applies to a Sumathi Nadiamsa
native.
उत्तरांशे प्रजातस्य मन्वब्दे नात्र संशयः
पूर्वभागे प्रजातस्य वत्सरे तु त्रयोदशे। | २३७०। |
2370, Timing of Marriage: One born in the
latter half of Sumathi Nadiamsa will get married
in the 14th year, while the one belonging to the
other half will have his marriage in the 13th year.
TIAN Tele apse सुखी।
सुखधिपे स्थिरांशस्थे क्षते। । २३७१।।
2371. The lord of the fourth in aspect to a
benefic, and placed in an immovable Navamsa
will cause marriage from a wealthy family. The
native’s parents-in-law will be alive at the time of
marriage and he will be happy (through marriage).
मदे चन्द्रे तत्तिकोषे दारवंशे सुभाग्यवान्।
उद्वाहानन्तरं सौख्यं सप्तमे च भृगुस्थिते। । २३७२।।
शनियेोगे विशेषः स्यात् 0 सुखी।
रतश्रुरश्च ध 7 व
2372-2374. The Moon in the 7th house, ...
[some word is missing before "Jathrikone"] in a
trine thereof will cause prosperity for the in-laws,
and the native will be happy after marriage.
Venus in the 7th, more so in the company of
Saturn, will cause fortunes through wife and the
native will be happy. For birth in the first half of

Deva Keralam 2 |.
Sumathi Nadiamsa, the 7th lord Venus in aspect
to a malefic will cause a father-in-law having two
wives. Further the native will have only one
maternal uncle. The native of second half of this
Nadiamsa will have two wives while the one
belonging to the first half will have one wife.
Notes: Who should be in trine to the 7th
containing is not mentioned in the text. It should
be Venus as the latter lines suggest.
सम्पत्तारदशकाले सुखेशंशत्रिकोणगे।
epee गते मन्दे श्वशुररिष्टमादिशेत्। । २३७५
कौयंशकते मन्दे चापन्त्ये संस्थितेअपि वा।
सुमत्यंशे प्रजातस्य मातुलारिष्टमादिशेत्।
जननीभ्रातृशेकेन क्लेशं WTA भूरिशः । । २२७६। |
2375-2376. Family Deaths: The native’s
father-in-law will be endangered if Saturn in transit is found in the Rasi represented by the Navamsa occupied at birth by the lord of the fourth
house, (or) in second dasa of the native. Danger
to maternal uncle be predicted if Saturn in transit
is seen in the last part of Sagittarius, with Scorpio
Navamsa. His mother will be distressed due to
loss of brother at that time. These apply to
Sumathi Nadiamsa native.
सम्पद्दाये मध्यखण्डे देशे रज्ञा च विग्रहम्
अनावृष्टिहते देशे दुर्भक्षभयादिशेत्। | २३७७। |
सम्पद्दाये तृतीयांशे विप्लवेन प्रजावधि।
राजामात्यजनारिष्टमे कोनविंशवत्सरे। | २३७८ ।
2377-2378. These two slokas are mix-up 06.
tween mundane astrology and natal astrology.
सम्पद्द्शन्तमारभ्य ।वपद्दाये स्वभुक्तु।
सुमत्यशे प्रजातस्य स्वजनरिष्टमादिशेत्।। । २२७९। |
2379. In the end of second dasa, or in the first
sub period of the third dasa, the native of Sumathi
Nadiamsa will see his kinsmen in danger.
कर्मे जीवे चरांशस्थे सुमत्यशस्य ITS |
मीनान्ते मेषगे जीवे पुत्रलाभं विनिर्दिशेत्। । २३८० | |
weet चिरायुष्यं पुत्रिका च तथा भवेत्।
2380.-23801/2. Progeny: For a Sumathi
Nadiamsa native, see if Jupiter at birth is in the
10th house with a movable Navamsa. In that case,
his transit in the last part of Pisces, or in Aries,
will cause birth of a son. On the whole, the said
natal position of Jupiter will bless the native with
two sons and one daughter, all of whom will be
long-lived.
गदुशे च सुखा्धाशे सुमत्यंशस्य जातके! | २३८१ । ।
THA भाय त्वधवा च, मू तप्रजा।
तत्पापपरिहासर्थं शन्तिं कुर्याद्यथविधि! | २३८२ । ।
प्रतिमां शिशुमारस्य श्रोत्रयाय कुटुम्बिने ।
गर्भपुष्टिकरं ब्रूयुर्मुनये मनुना Fae! । २३८३। |
2381-2383. Abortions: For a native of
Sumathi Nadiamsa, the 4th lord placed in Gada
Nadiamsa will cause abortions to the native’s
spouse. Or she will give birth to dead children.
To overcome this blemish, suitable remedies be
done.
Notes: For Gada Nadiamsa, see notes
under sloka 518 supra.
विपत्तारदशकाले शनिभौमान्तरान्तर |
सर्वासां RFA तु क्रूरमासे महाविपत्। | २३८४। |
2384. Saturn-Mars periods: In the 3rd
dasa, the sub periods of Saturn and Mars, and
malefics’ sub periods in all dasas, coinciding with
Sun’s adverse transits will cause a great danger
(to the native of Sumathi Nadiamsa).
TERR गोचरे सप्तमे ॥ |
राहुदाये वक्रभुक्तौ देहजाडयं ्। । २३८५। |
2385. Illness: When Saturn is in the 7th in
transit counted from the Navamsa Rasi occupied
by the natal Moon, or in the sub period of Mars
in the dasa of Rahu, the subject will contract
illness.
SORA स्थिरे लग्ने ag esl तिदेह वान्।
वातश्लेष्मस्वभावश्च किचित् :| | २३८६। |

214 Chandra Kala Nadi
मित्रेपतापपापेन ग्रहशंकाप्रपाडितः।
तत्पापपरिहासर्थं ग्रहचक्र प्रदापयेत्। । २३८७1 |
रकाशातिपदं चक्रं पलेनैकेन निर्मितम्
ap ५५ जां ग्रहाणां तु यथाक्रमम्| २३८८॥
स्वराक्षर त्वभिजित्संहिंत तथ।
दैवज्ञाय प्रदानेन रोगात् प्रमुच्यते । । २३८९।।
2386-2389. Birth in an immovable sign with
Cancer Navamsa will cause bilious natured body,
and due to imbalances of wind and phlegm, the
native will be troubled by bilious disorders. Due
to distress caused to his friends by him, he will
incur some planetary blemishes. To overcome
these, donation of an image of the zodiac be given.
Single-footed image of the zodiac be got made,
worship of the same in a prescribed manner be
done, names of Nakshatras including that of Abhiyit be written on it and be donated to an
astrologer. Following this, the patient wiil
recover.
सुमत्यंशे पूर्वभागे वृश्चिकं तु प्रजायते।
शिवद्रेहवशद्रोगी क दाये प्रपीडितः। । २३९० |
लक्षं मृत्युजयादीनां, जपेदीश्वरसन्नधौ।
नवग्रहमख चैव स्वगृहोक्तविधानतः। । २३९१ । |
कूत्वा सौख्यम वाप्नोति देहारोग्यं nal TTS |
तद्भावे व कोरिमत्युंजयं जपेत्। । २३९२।।
प्रतिष्ठाय तु लिंगस्य पित्तसोगः प्रशाम्यति।
2390-23901/2. One born in the first half of
Sumathi Nadiamsa will be troubled in the 3rd
dasa, due to sins committed against Lord Siva. As
a remedy for one hundred thousand times
Mrityunjaya be recited before the image of Lord
Siva. Nava Graha worship be done at home.
After these, the native will recover his health and
will experience auspicious results. In the absence
of these remedies, recitation of Mrityunjaya for a
crore times be done in a pilgrim centre dedicated
to Lord Siva and installation of a Siva Linga be
done. Then the native in the grip of bilious disorders will feel relieved.
कुटिलांशे निशानाथे गदाशे सुखनायक ¡ । २३९३।।
सुमत्यंशे प्रजातस्य क्षेमदाये महत्सुखम्।
सुखेशे स्थिरराशिस्थे कारके SORT । २३९४। |
सुखधिपदशकाले स्वभुक्तै १.
पूर्वभागे च तत्काले देहजाडयं ्। । २३९५। |
2393-2395. The Moon in Kutila Nadiamsa
while the 4th lord is in Gada Nadiamsa will cause
happiness to the native of Sumathi Nadiamsa in
his fourth dasa. The 4th lord placed in an immovable sign, while the significator for happiness
(Venus), is ina movable sign, the native in the first
sub period of the dasa of the 4th lord will have his
friends destroyed. During this period, the native
belonging to the former half of Sumathi Nadiamsa will be physically ill.
Notes: For Kutila Nadiamsa, see notes
under sloka 130-131.
विद्यास्थानाधिपे मन्द् स्थिरांशे भृगुवीक्षिते।
जात्यानुगुणविद्यप्िर्मणिरत्नपरीक्षकः। । २२३९६। |
2396. Saturn: Saturn ruling the 4th house,
signifying education, in aspect to Venus occupies
an immovable Navamsa - this yoga will enable the
native of former half of Sumathi Nadiamsa acquire education suitable to his caste. The native
will in addition be engaged in testing precious
stones.
सुमत्यंशे पूर्वभागे कर्मे ATT गुरो।
सत्कथप्रियवान् नित्यं धर्मशस्त्रपुराणवित्। | २३९७।।
इष्टपूर्तषु धर्िंष्टस्त्यागी सर्वजनप्रियः।
वातश्लेष्मप्रभावश्च पित्तप्रकृतिदेहवा्। । २३९८ |
द्विजायस्सत्यवान् रागी किपिसत्रसंगपापवान्।
2397-23981/2. Jupiter - Aries Navamsa:
Jupiter placed in the 10th house getting Aries
Navamsa will give the undermentioned effects in
respect of a native belonging to the former half of
Sumathi Nadiamsa: He will be fond of listening
to Pauranic or mythological stories. He will be
learned in jurisprudence and Puranas (sacred
works of olden times). His desires will be fulfilled. He will know his duties well, will be liberal
(charitable), be liked by all men, will be influenced by wind and phlegm (two of the three

Deva Keralam |
temperaments), will have a bilious physique, will
have two wives, be passionate and will tend to join
others’ women.
शुक्रे शनियुते दुष्टे भोगी स्याद्राजवल्लभः। । २३९९। |
धर्ममार्मरतो नित्यम युताधिकवत्तिवान्।
मन्दे क + क्रयुते दुष्टे कोशसंग्रहवान् धनी । | Wool |
SHER पूर्वभागै ज्ञानी ततत्वविवेकवान्।
किंचिद्रोगी प्रसन्नात्मा किचल्लुव्यस्वभाववान्। । २४०१।।
2399-2401. Saturn - Venus: Should the
planet Venus be related to Saturn by way of aspect
or association, the subject will enjoy pleasures, be
liked by the king, interested in treading the path
of virtues and be endowed with wealth exceeding
ten thousand, or even a myriad (gold coins).
Saturn remaining in aspect to or in association
with Venus will give following effects concerning
birth in former half of Sumathi Nadiamsa. The
native will be a wealthy and wise person (or an
astrologer, as the word Gnaani indicates), and a
philosopher. He will be somewhat diseased,
somewhat miserly and be a pleased soul.
कुटिलांशे गते 4५ सुमत्यंशे प्रजायते।
मनश्चाचल्यवान् | । २४०२।।
2402. The Moon: For a person born in
Sumathi Nadiamsa, the Moon placed in Kutila
Nadiamsa will give fickle-mindedness. The subject will be somewhat dullheaded. He will tend to
be short- tempered.
लग्नात् कर्मगते जीवे सेतुस्नानसुपुण्यभाक्।
गंगास्नानफलाधिक्यं त्रिवारं सेतुयात्रिकः। । २४०२३। |
वार्धक यौवने बाल्ये त्रिवारं नात्र संशयः।
गुरूनाडीफलाध्याये फलं विस्तारमादिशेत्। | २४०४। |
2403-2404. Pilgrimage: Jupiter in the 10th
from the ascendant will enable the native have a
dip in Sethu, and he will visit Sethu for three
weeks each time in childhood, youth and old-age.
He will earn abundant religious merits having
dips in the Ganges. These results (about Jupiter)
have been narrated in detail in Guru Nadi.
| । मौनलग्नम् ~ (वसुषंश) । ।
Pisces Ascendant — (Vasudha Nadiamsa)
वसुधांशे पूर्वभागे ¢ प्रजायते।
विप्रजन्मा सुखा नित्यं तृतीयो जन्मना तथा। । २४०८ ।
अथवा च चतुर्थः स्यात् पूर्वभागे न संशय ।
ai aliens पूर्वभागे गुरग्रिशंशजातके । । २४०६ । |
हं नगरे प्रसवः स्मृतः।
उत्तरशे ACR रम्यनूत्नमन्दिरे| | २४०७। |
Ware प्रसूतिं च नास्छवेष्टनमादिशेत्।
2405-24071/2. Pisces Ascendant: One born
in the former half of Vasudha Nadiamsa, in Pisces
ascendant, will be a Brahmin, be ever happy, and
be either the third issue or the fourth issue of his
family. Belonging to the Trimsamsa of Jupiter,
the subject will be born in a town near the region
of a great sea. In case of second half of this
Nadiamsa, birth will be in newly built house, near
a river, in an auspicious time with umbilical cord
around the body.
Notes: From hereon, the text deals with
Pisces ascendant. Vasudha Nadiamsa may be
referred to in the notes under sloka 1-2.
लग्नेशे मन्दरशिस्थे लभेशे कुजवीक्षिते। । २४०८ । |
विंश््रिंशात् परं ४: io TAA |
sree मीनलग्ने 15 शि प्रजायते। । २४०९ |
पूर्वभागे प्रजातस्तु बहृभाग्यवान्।
पंचविंशात् परं भग्यं गेहे लक्ष्मीकटाक्षवान् | | २४१० |
2408-2409. The ascendant lord, Jupiter, ina
sign of Saturn while the 11th lord, Saturn, is in
aspect to Mars will make the native prosper after
20 or 30 years of age; he will be bereft of diseases
and will possess a sturdy body. Birth in first half
of Vasudha Nadiamsa of Pisces, with Scorpio
Navamsa, will give abundant prosperity in youth,
particularly after the 25th year, and the native will
be blessed with the mercy of goddess Lakshmi.
वसुधांशे av चन्द्र॒ <नद्राशनाडिके।
श्पवान् म॑ cB
अदृष्टशाली ध्माल्मा राजयोगयुतौ भवेत्।
वाग्मी प्रसन्नमुखनेत्रवान्। | २४११ |

216 Chandra Kala Nadi
रक्तवर्णो HEAT कुन्जदेहस्वरूपवान्। | २४१२ |
2411-2412, The Moon - Indra Nadiamsa:
Birth in the former half of Vasudha Nadiamsa, as
the Moon is Indra Nadiamsa, will bless the native
with physical charm, intelligence, eloquence in
speech and a beautiful face. He will be fortunate,
charitable and be endowed with Rajayoga (leading to wealth, prosperity et cetera). He will possess a complexion which will be blood-red. He
will have a body of medium-build and be short in
stature.
Notes: Please see notes under sloka 1105
supra for Indra Nadiamsa.
Ge ul गुसुत्रिंशांशके Ta
वाग्मी देतब्राहमणपोषकः। 1 2231 |
अतीव ¡शवभक्तश्च त्यागी बन्धुजनप्रियः।
2413-24131/2. Jupiterian Trimsamsa: One
born in the former half of Vasudha Nadiamsa (in
Pisces) with Jupiter’s Trimsamsa, will also get
same effects (ie. blood-red in complexion,
medium-build and short stature) and will show
fondness for leading ascetics. He willbe eloquent
in speech and will honour gods and Brahmins.
He will be greatly devoted to Lord Siva, be
sacrificing in nature and will be fond of his
kinsfolk.
वसुधंशे परे भगे लाभेशे कुजवीक्षिते। । २४१४। |
मीनलग्ने प्रजातश्च पित्र्जितसुभग्यवान्।
दुष्टेषु Wears सूमन ARI | २४१
ती ष Paar ५। |
सत्कथाश्रवणे प्रीतः श्रीमान् दीनजनप्रियः। । २४१६। |
2414-2416. Paternal Properties etc.: If the
native belongs to the 2nd half of Vasudha
Nadiamsa, the aspect of Mars on to Saturn will
denote the following in respect of the native of
Pisces ascendant: He will be endowed with paternal properties and be quite prosperous. He will
be a fool before wicked, and will be evil to evil
men. He will help all and be endowed with valour
and fame. Mythological accounts will be of interest to him, He will be wealthy and be fond of the
poor.
वसुधांशे पूर्वभागे मीनलग्ने प्रजायते।
तुरगारोहचतुरो बहुसेनाश्चनायकः। । २४१७। |
2417. Horse-riding: The native of Vasudha
Nadiamsa’s former half, in Pisces ascendant will
be skilful in horse-riding and will own a huge army
and a vast number of steeds.
लग्नेशे कुजसंदृष्टे त्विष्ठसत्कर्मसिद्धिमान्।
राजन्तरफलं चेति राजमुद्राधिकारवान्। | २४१८ |
2418. Martian Aspect: The aspect of Mars
on to the ascendant lord (Jupiter) will enable the
native have his desires fulfilled. He will have
genuine callings and gain through a foreign king
and will attain power with authority.
प्रातुस्थानाधिपे शुक्रे चपि कर्कटकांशगे।
सर्वज्येष्ठनिरासकर॑स्त्वनुजग्रातृयोगवान् २४१९। ।
2419. Cancer Navamsa: The 3rd lord Venus
in Sagittarius with Cancer Navamsa will cause the
following effects to a Pisces ascendant native: He
will be the eldest issue, and will have after-borns,
He will be bereft of (material) desires.
भगिनीद्रयवांश्चेति पूर्वभागे न Gee |
उत्तरंशे Wasa भगिनीत्रयसंयुतः। । २४२० |
सुवासिनी भगिन्येका बाल्ये चारिष्टमाप्तुयात्।
एका क्लेशवतती चैव पुत्राभावद्विचारिणी। । २४२१।।
गर्भगे महाव्याधिरूदरव्साधिपीडिता।
तत्पापपरिहारार्थ शान्तिं कु्याच्यथाविधि। । २४२२। |
2420-2422. Sisters: One born in this
Nadiamsa’s former half, in Pisces ascendant will
have two sisters, and his counterpart three sisters.
One sister (in case of former half) will face evils
in her childhood while later on, she will live ina
respectable abode. Another sister will be (perpetually) troubled, and will be deprived of
progeny. She will have a great disease in her
womb. She will in addition be troubied by

Deva Keralam 217
stomachial disorders. To overcome these evils,
suitable remedies be done.
ob aid Se मीनलग्ने WRT
SA भ्रातृत्रययुतः सुखी। । 2x23 1 |
2423. Mars in Malefic Navamsa: One born
in the first half of Vasudha Nadiamsa in Pisces
ascendant, while Mars is in a malefic’s Navamsa,
will be endowed with coborns and be happy.
भग्येशे वृषेभांशस्थे Teer ter
वसुधांशे पजातः A गजान्तैश्वर्यभग्यवान्। | २४२४ ।
2424.Taurus Navamsa: Tne 9th lord
(Mars) in aspect to the 8th lord (Venus) and
occupying Taurus Navamsa will bless the Vasudhamsa native with elephants, wealth and fortunes.
भाग्यस्य नाथोअथ विलग्ननाथश्चतुर्थनाधेन तु कर्मनाथः।
अन्योन्यदृष्टास्तु यदा भवन्ति कवि तदाहृश्चतुरंगयानम्
2425. For a Pisces ascendant native, the
mutual aspects between the ascendant lord and
Oth lord, or between the 10th and 4th lords will
give poetic talents. Further, he will possess the
four kinds of traditional conveyances (i.e. menborne, horses, elephants and chariots).
लग्नाच्च चन्द्रादधिकेन्द्रयोगे जातो महासैख्यप्रतोअग्रगमी।
स्यान्मण्डलार्धी nas
2426. Adhi Yoga: One born with Adhi Yoga
either from the ascendant or from the Moon will
enjoy great happiness, will take lead (over
others), i.e. be a leader, will excel in a royal assembly.
पुष्करांशगते जीवे राज्येशे TTT |
जीवे कुजयुते दृष्टे योगश्चापरसंज्ञकः।
चापरे योगजातस्य द्राविंशन्दात् परं सुखम् २४२७॥
2427. Chaamara Yoga: The 10th lord
Jupiter in the 2nd house in Pushkara degree and
in the company of or in aspect to Mars causes
Chaamara Yoga. This yoga will give prosperity
after 22 years of age.
Notes: Pushkara degrees for a planet from
Aries to Pisces respectively are: 21, 14, 18, 8, 19,
9, 24, 11, 23, 14, 19 and 9, Jupiter should be
associated with Mars to produce Chamara Yoga
for a Pisces native.
ख्यातः स्यादधियोगजातमनुजः श्रीमान् प्रसिद्धो महा-
नश्वन्दोलकवाहनादिविभ्वैरनित्यत्रियं मन्दि,
1 दिकछत्रभग्यसाहितश्चन्द्रेण तुल्ये महा-
कीपिप्राभवशेयंसाहसयुतो देशान्तरे कार्तिमान्। । २४२८ ।
2428. One born in Adhi Yoga will be wealthy,
famous, great, and will enjoy abundant conveyances, viz. palanquins etc. His abode will ever be
full of wealth. He will equal the moon possessing
virtuous progeny and spouse. He will be endowed with great fame, influence, courage and
adventure. He will become famous in a foreign
country.
Teese जीवे घने सिंहांशसंस्थिते।
वसुधंशे इषि लग्ने योगः काहठसंज्ञकः। । २४२९। |
नहुधनधान्यसमुद्धि
सृगन्धमाल्यर्विभूषितैः सुखिनम्
कुरूते Heo
दिनकरसद्शं यशस्विनं पुरूषम् । | २४३० |
2429-2430. Kaahala Yoga: The 10th lord
Jupiter [some texts read "the Moon” instead of
"Jupiter" in which case the present verses will
apply to Libra ascendant instead of Pisces ascendant.] in the 2nd house with Leo Navamsa will
cause Kaahala Yoga for a native of Vasudha
Nadiamsa in Pisces ascendant. As a result the
subject will be endowed with abundant corn and
wealth, will have a good make-up with scents and
garlands, be happy and will be akin to the sun in
fame.
वसुधांशे पूर्वभागे मीनलग्ने प्रजायते।
मेषशकगते सूर्य स्वपितुः सोदरत्रयम्। | २४२३१ |

¬) 18 Chandra Kala Nadi
शुक्रे केत्वन्ते काले पितररिष्टं fattest
वसुधे पूर्वभागे मीनलग्ने प्रनायते। । २४२९ |
पितृसंस्कारकाले तु न तिष्टत्यादिमे दिने।
ghee पित्ररिष्टं विशब्दे वा मूतिरधुवम्। | २४४० | |
यातायातं wpa ipl gs म्।
पितुश्च मरणात् पूर्वं मात्ररिष्टं वि
2431. Aries Navamsa: The native’s father
will have three brothers. This applies to one
belonging to Vasudha Nadiamsa in Pisces ascendant, having the Sun in Aries Navamsa.
जन्म तारदशाकाले Wee मीनगे गुरो। ्। । २४४९१ | |
वसुधांशे प्रजातस्य मौर्जीबन्धनमादिशेत्। | २४३२। |
उत्तरांशे प्रजातस्य मेषन्ते वृषभे गुरो।
1 2438-2441. Parental Evils: The Sun in Sagittarius with Aries Navamsa will endanger the
Vasudha Nadiamsa native’s father in Venus dasa,
Ketu sub period. On the first day of the obsequies of his father, the subject will not be present.
Either the 22nd year, or the 20th year will cause
danger to father. Mother’s death will take place
prior to father’s. The native will have (wide)
travels (Yaathayaatha denotes going and coming).
These effects are for former half of the Nadiamsa
under discusion.
2432-33. When Jupiter in his first round of
the zodiac reaches Pisces, in the first dasa, thread
ceremony will take place for the native of former
half of Vasudha Nadiamsa, Pisces ascendant. In
case of second half of this Nadiamsa, Jupiter
should come to the concluding part of Aries, or
enter Taurus when he will receive instructions in
the Vedas. The months will correspond to the
Sun’s transit in Aries through Gemini.
रान्यस्थानाधिपे जीवे सूर्यभोमसमन्विते।
कमे वा हिबुके वापि भूसुतेन निरीक्षिते! । २४४२। |
सदा स्वामी सदा भोगी GR भवेन्नरः
नाटकालंकृतौ काव्ये प्रियः संगीतवल्लभः। । २४४२। |
वदान्यः सत्यवादौ च गन्धमाल्याम्बरप्रियः।
TMT परं भाग्यं षेडशाब्दे श्रियो वहम्। | २४४४ |
वत्सरे पचविंशानां राजयोगो भविष्यति।
नानाजातिवधूसंगं भोगस्त्रसंगमाप्नुयात्। । २४४५ |
रतिकाले विनोदी स्यात् कालांशकगते tay
महाराजसभामध्ये वाग्मी चातुर्ययुकितमान्। | २४४६ |
घटनाघटसामर्थ्य शिवानुग्रहहेतुना।
लक्षत्रयाधिकारी स्यान्निष्कलक्षद्रयस्य AL | २४४७ | |
राज्याधिकारजनि तां हितसौख्यवृद्ध
सर्वश्रियोअपि धनधन्ययुतं गृहं च।
सोञप्यन्यदारगमने शशिवत् प्रमत्तः
कामातुरो भवति चंचलकार्तिमांश्च। | २४४८ | |
जन्म तारदशाकाले लग्नाधिपतिभुक्तिषु।
भग्याधिपान्तरे काले विवाहं मनुरब्रवीत्। 1 २४३४ |
५५ ey तुलाशे वारनायके।
जन्मभूदक्षिणे भागे विवाहं मनुरब्रवात्। | २४३५। |
उत्तरे प्रजातस्तु जन्मदेशे विवाहवान्
पूर्वभागे ack wae मकरे गुरौ। । २४३६। ।
पित्ररिष्टमवाप्नेति मात्ररिष्टमतः परम्|
वसुधंशे पूर्वभागे जन्म तारदशन्त्यगे। । २४३७। |
गोचरे लाभगे जीवे गर्भाधानादिशोभनम्।
2434-24371/2. For a native of former halt of
Vasudha Nadiamsa, marriage will occur in the
first dasa, in ascendant lord’s sub period, and in
the sub-sub period of 9th lord. If the Sun is in
Libra Navamsa, the bride will hail from the
southern quarter of the region. The native of
second half of this Nadiamsa will beget a bride
from his own region. The one belonging to the
first half of this Nadiamsa will have two wives.
When Jupiter reaches Capricorn, the father of the
native of former half will be endangered and later
on, his mother will be endangered. This native’s
nuptials will take place when Jupiter reaches the
11th, in the first dasa.
चपे AWRY सूरये वसुधांशे प्रजायते। । २४२३८ । |
2442-2448. See if the 10th lord Jupiter is in
the company of the Sun and Mars. Or see if
Jupiter is in either 10th or m the 4th, in aspect to
Mars. Then the effects to occur are: The native
will be ever a lord. He will ever be a pleasureseeker and will be highly adulterous. He will be
fond of drama, poetry and music. Eloquent in
speecch, he will speak truth. He will be fond of
scents, garlands and robes. After 12 years of age,

Deva Keralam
he will prosper. In the 16th year, he will obtain
wealth. During the 25th year of age, he will beget
Rajayoga effects. He will join women of many
castes and will befriend whores. He will be sportive at the time of sexual enjoyment if the Sun is
in Kaala Nadiamsa. In the assemblies of
emperors, the subject will be skilful in speech and
will be resourceful of expedients. Lord Siva’s
blessings will enable him achieve even the most
unachievable thing. He will own two or three
hundred thousand (gold coins). He will have
comforts provided by the State and be endowed
with all kinds of wealth and grains. He will join
others’ wives, as the planet Moon does. Other
effects of this yoga are: Intoxicated, given to
sexual lust, and fame swinging up and down.
Note: For Kaala Nadiamsa, please see notes
under Slokas 2494-95 infra.
aga प्रजातश्च 4 |
पुत्राणां त्रयमायुष्यं पण्य द्रे सुजीवतः। । २४४९। |
2449. Children: The native of Vasudha
Nadiamsa will be endowed with progeny. He will
have three long-living sons and two long- living
daughters.
षष्ठभावपतौ सूर्यं TRA समन्विते।
षष्ठेशे कुजसंदुष्टे WIE प्रतापवान्। | २४५० । |
मित्ञातिजनैर्युक्तः षष्ठेशे भगुसंयुते।
वसुधंशे प्रजातश्च स्वपितुर्भग्ययोगवान्। । २४५१ ।
2450-2451. Lord of 6th: The Sun ruling the
6th house being in the company of the 8th lord
(Venus) and be in aspect to Mars will enable the
native destroy his enemies. The subject will be
valorous. If the 6th lord is with the 8th lord, the
native will be endowed with friends and relatives.
His father will enjoy prosperity. These effects are
for Vasudha Nadiamsa.
ae
कारकग्रहसयुक्ते FHACTSMTGM! | २४५८३ । |
2432-2453. Sukra Nadi narrates in its chapter on the 7th house the details about the spouse.
The 7th lord Mercury placed in an immovable
Rasi, with Libra Navamsa, and joining Venus
denotes two wives, for a Pisces native.
एकोनचत्वारिशेअन्दे पवत्रिंशति वत्सरे ।
दाररिष्टमवाप्नोति श्षप्रणेद्रहयोगवान्। | २४५४। ।
वसुधांशे पूर्वभागे त्वष्टचत्वारिवत्सर |
देहजाडय्रं च लभते शन्तिं कुर्याद्यथाविधि | eves!
वसुधशे पूर्वभागे मनलग्ने प्रजायते।
द्विकच्छतर सुतग्राप्तिः पूर्वभागे न संशयः । | २४५६ |
2454-2456. As a result of the above yoga, the
subject will have loss of wife in the 39th year, or
(even) inthe 35th year. Immediately after this, his
second marriage will take place. The native of
Vasudha Nadiamsa, former half, will incur physical illness in his 48th year which will be remediable. This native will beget progeny through his
second wife.
Full Life-span
अष्टमाधिपतै Us WS समन्विते!
पूर्णयुदीयवांश्चेति ष्ष्ठतारादशमृति। । २४५७। |
2457. Life-span: Ifthe 8th lord Venus joins
the 6th lord (the Sun) the native will enjoy full
span of life. He will die in the dasa ruled by the
6th asterism (1.6. the Vimsottari dasa which is 6th
in sequence).
ome
धर्मेशे यदि वारनाथसहिते स्वोच्चस्थिते. दुस्स्थलं स
त्यक्त्वा चापगते तु वीर्यगुरूणा दष्टे अथवा संयुते।
श्रीमानैकतयकगेपुरपुरोद्यानक्रूतूनां श्रियः
कुर्वन् सन्जनसंगतो विजयते Creat भूतले । | २४५८ ।
2458. Mars: The 9th lord in the company of
the lord of the day, i.e. the Sun, being in exaltation,
। | द्विकरत्ऋम्। ।
Two wives
जामित्रधिपतौ सोम्ये जुकांशे स्थिरराशिगे।

220 Chandra Kala Nadi
avoiding adverse or evil house, or if the 9th lord
is in Sagittarius in aspect to or in association with
a strong Jupiter, gives the following effects. The
subject will be wealthy and will construct tanks,
temple towers, towns, gardens etc., will perform
Yagnas and will befriend the virtuous. Anywhere
on the earth, he will be victorious in battlc-fields.
A मन्दराशिस्थे भाग्येशे नवमस्थिते।
वसुधंशे प्रातश्च सत्कर्माचारवुद्धिमान्। । २४५९। |
2459. Lords of 9th and 10th: For a Vasudha
Nadiamsa native, the 10th lord occupying the 7th
(Virgo) while the 9th lord is in the 9th itself good
conduct and intelligence will result.
षष्ठेशे कर्मराशिस्थे केनद्रंशकगतोअपि वा।
भेरीमदगवाद्यादि राजमुद्राधिकारवान्। | २४६० |
स्वन्येष्टश्रतमूलेन राज्यतन्रे सुबुद्धिमान्।
2460-24601/2. Royal authority: The 6th lord
in the 10th house, occupying an angular Navamsa
will bring royal authority. The native will be fond
of instruments like kettle-drum and Mridanga.
He will achieve politica! wisdom through his elder
brother, and be endowed with good thoughts.
राज्यस्थानाधिपे जीवे धने सिंहांशसंस्थिते। । २४६१ I |
मण्डलाधिपतिद्रारे स्वाध्यक्षधिकारवान्।
केशे म॑ंदरशिस्थे भग्योशे शनिवीकिते। । २४६२ । |
वसुधंशे प्रजातस्य पापपुण्यफलं समम्।
इह लोके सुपुण्यात्मा त्वन्ते स्वर्गपदं लभोत्॥ २४६३॥
यावादायुष्यमाप्नेति AAS TTA: |
वसुधंशे पूर्वभागे मौनलग्ने प्रजायते। | २४६४। |
SERA प्रजातस्य द्विषष्टिवत्सरे स्मृतिः।
वसुधांशे फलं सत्यं प्रत्यक्षं PASTS ।*२४६५। |
2461-2465. If the 10th lord Jupiter is in the
2nd house with Leo Navamsa, the native will get
wide powers through the king. If the 10th lord is
in the 7th house while the 9th lord is aspected by
Saturn, the native of Vasudha Naidamsa will have
even level of effects of good and bad nature. He
will be a meritorious person in his mundane journey and will attain heavens after death. The subject of former half of Vasudha Nadiamsa in Pisces
ascendant will die at 56, during his sixth dasa. As
for the native of second half of this Nadiamsa,
death will strike at 62. The effects stated for
Vasudha Nadiamsa in Deva Keralam will bear
truth.
सचन्द्रलगनस्त्वधियोगजाते
ज्ञानी सदा Seay A: |
ao |
aera तपुत्रयोगम्। | २४६६ |
पूर्वभागे प्रजातस्य जातो जातो मरिष्यति।
उत्तरांश ज्येष्टपुत्रनाशं च मनुरब्रवीत्। | २४६७ । |
2466-67. The native who has Adhi Yoga from
the Moon will be intelligent and be endowed with
predominance of Satva Guna (the quality of being
pure, the highest of the three Gunas). One born
in the Nadiamsa entitled Dhruva will have many
children, some of whom will be extinguished
(prematurely). For a native of former half of
Dhruva Nadiamsa, children will be dead as they
are born, while the native of second half will
(only) lose the eldest issue.
Notes: Please see notes under sloka 1313
supra for the Nadiamsa entitled ‘Dhruva’.
aa क्षीणचन्द्रे केसरौयोगसंस्थिते।
मिथुने धर्मकः श्रीमान् ज्येष्टश्रातृत्रयान्वितः। | २४६८ |
2468. Kesari Yoga in Gemini: Should (even)
weak Moon form Kesari Yoga in Gemini, the
native will be wealthy, righteous and be endowed
with three elder brothers.
अंशधियोगे शुभकीर्तियुक्तो
ध्रवांशनाडयां FAA च।
विपदटदटशायां नरवाहनाप्ति-
ज्येष्ठानुजभ्रातृवशात् पंसिद्धः। | २४६९। |
सर्वज्येष्ठानुजभ्रता क a |
2469-2470. One born in Amsadhi Yoga will
be endowed with fame. The native of Dhruva

Deva Keralam 22]
Nadiamsa will have abundance of prosperity. In in Navamsa chart. This does not apply to logic.
his third dasa, he will obtain men-borne con- Hence Amsadhi Yoga shoul be read as Adhi
veyances and will become famous through his Yoga.
elder and younger brothers. In the native’s
second dasa, the eldest of them will beget a son.
In the end of second dasa, the native will obtain । । लग्ने फंचग्रहयेगः। ।
effects of Raja Yoga and men-borne conveyances. Five Planets in Ascendant
लग्नाधिपदशाकाले नित्यश्रीभग्यमश्नुते | लग्ने पंचग्रहर्युक्ते मृ तापत्यनहुत्ववान्।
लक्षमौकयक्षमित्याहू्गेहे गोधान्यसंकुलम्। । Bett! गर्भस्रावातुरा भार्य सन्तानप्रतिबन्धकौ । । २४७८। |
gant मिथुने लग्ने दारभावफलं स्मृतम्।
2471. Throughout the dasa of ascendant = षष्ठयंशगे मदाधीशे eva थे राहुसंयुते | । २४७६ | |
lord, one will command wealth. His 2000८ willbe लग्नात् तृतीयगे मन्दे TERR RTT |
blessed with the mercy of goddess Lakshmi and
quadrupeds and grains. 2475-761/2. Five planets in the ascendant will
cause birth of many dead children. The native’s
कुस्भव्रिकोणगे चन्द्रे स्वोच्चे रिसं -यते। spouse, as aresult of this yoga, will have abortions,
and will have obstacles in begetting progeny. For
Gemini ascendant, Dhruva Nadiamsa, results for
F , 7th house have been expalined (as in this portion
2472. For an Adhi Yoga native, (anaddition- == 0 the text). Two or three children will face
al) Raja Yoga is caused by the Moon beinginthe —gestruction, if the 7th lord (from natal Lagna) is
company of the Sun in a sign which is a trine to = 17 the 6th Navamsa (i.e. in the 6th from Navamsa
Aquarius. At the same time, the Moon should be Lagna) while the two planets, Rahu and Saturn,
in exaltation Navamsa. (That is, Adhiyogainthis are in order in the 4th and 3rd counted from natal
case will be more powerful in effects.) ascendant.
राजयोगश्च भवति अधियोगस्य | | २४७२ |
Notes: "For an Adhi Yoga native" is corrupt
text. The Rajayoga suggested should be inter- = लग्नात सप्तमगे केतौ तदीञे राहुसंयुते | । २४७५७ | |
preted without ‘Adhi Yoga’. कलत्रस्योदरव्याधिर्म्भकोशे क्रिमिस्तथ,
तदभावे स्वभार्यां च गर्भं शंका प्रपीडिता। । २४७८ । |
चन्द्रधियोगजातश्च pa लात् सुभाग्यवान्।
अंशधियोगगे वापि धुवांशे श्रातृवत्सलः। | २४७३ । | 2477-78. Troubles to spouse: Ketu occupyस वाग्मी बुद्धिमान् रागी दारसौष्यविहीनवान् ing the 7th house, while the 7th lord is with Rahu
कुम्भे चन्द्रे सुकमी वा कचछत्रद्रयवान् सुखी ॥ २४७४॥ denotes the following. The wife of the native will
। 1 । । | incur stomachial disorders. She will have a
2473-74, Adhi Yoga: The subject having this worm- infected womb. In the absence of these,
yoga counted from the Moon will prosper तऽ will lurk about her child-bearing capacity.
through coborn. The Dhruva Nadiamsa native व g Capacily
even with Amsadhi Yoga will be affectionate 0 eae प्रनातश्च Get et |
his coborn. He will be eloquent in speech, intel- पश्चाद्भातृविहीनश्च < +
। पश्चाट्भ्रातृविहीनस्च ज | । २४७९ ।
ligent, passionate, but be devoid of happiness =, ५ *
through spouse. The Moon in Aquarius will स्थिरलग्ने प्रजातस्य पिता Sree वान् |
seer i दारद्रयमिति Wessel प्रजायते। (२४८० |
make the native eloquent. He will, in addition, राजयोगः
have two wives, and be happy. चरलग्न " स्वपितुरबहुभाग्यवान् |
Notes: "Amsadhi Yoga" is a meaningless 2479-801/2. Jupiter-Mars: The native will
term. Some interpret this as Adhi Yoga forming ११८ neither an elder brother nor a younger

222 Chandra Kala Nadi
brother, if Jupiter is in Virgo while Scorpio 1s
occupied by Mars. This yoga for an immovable
ascendant will cause a weak-bodied father. In
case of dual ascendant, it will give two wives. For
a movable ascendant it is a Raja Yoga apart from
being able to give a lot of prosperity to father.
Notes: Depending on the nature of the
rising sign, Jupiter in Virgo while Mars is in Scorpio will give different results as specified in the
text.
एकांशकमृते कामे रविचन्द्रयते फलम। । २४८१ |
एकांशगे दरिद्रः स्यान्जारचोरशिखभणि।
चन्द्रे राहुयुते जातश्चरलग्ने दरिद्रति। । २४८२। |
स्वोच्चराशिं विना राहौ चन्द्रयुक्ते सुभाग्यवान्।
चपि दस्िमाप्नेति तुलालग्नस्य जातकः। । २४८३ । ।
2481-2483. If the luminaries join in the same
degree (or Navamsa) in the 7th from natal ascendant, they may bring (early) death. Their being
in the same degree will cause poverty and will
make the native an expert m adultery and thieving. For an ascendant that is Movable in nature,
the conjunction of the Moon with Rahu will cause
penury. If in the process, Rahu does not obtain
his exaltation Rasi, the native will be highly
prosperous. In Sagittarius, this yoga of RahuMoon will cause poverty to a native of Libra
ascendant.
gay मिथुने लग्ने पूर्वभागे सुभाग्यवान्।
राजलक्षणसम्पन्नो लिपिलेख्यविशारदः। । २४८४ I
2484. Birth in Gemini ascendant, Dhruva
Nadiamsa’s former half, will cause a great deal of
prosperity. This apart, the native will be endowed
with royal trace of qualities and be skilful in writing etc.
लग्नत्तृततीयगे पपे तदीशे पापसंयुते ।
उद्राहानन्तरं क्लेशं दारवंशात् समुद्भवम्। | २४८५।
सन्तानूरिष्टमाप्नोति yay शन्तिमाचरेत्।
पूर्वभागे WHAT सत्कठत्रगुणाप्वितः। । २४८६ । |
2485-86. Third House: If the third house
from the ascendant is occupied by a malefic, while
ate
the 3rd lord is again conjunct a malefic, it wil]
cause post-marital grief in the family of the inlaws following the native’s marriage apart from
danger to (birth of) children. This will be applicable to a native of Dhruva Nadiamsa. Suitable
remedies may be of help. One born in the former
half of this Nadiamsa will be endowed with a good
wife and virtues.
लग्नात् सप्तमगे पापे दारपीडाविचारवान्।
तदीशे बलहीने च पापयुक्ते द्विभार्यवान्। | २४८७। |
TE Tras लेख्यविद्यासु जीवति।
gat विक्रमे मन्दे तदीशे राहुसंयुते। । २४८८ |
तद्दशायां AGM सन्तानत्पत्तिनाशनम्।
द्रादशाब्दात् परं चैव स्वतातारिष्टमादिशेत्। । २४८९।।
जननी दीर्धमायुष्यं मातृवंशो विनश्यति।
दशमान्दात् परे चैव जन्मदेशे प्रभे्मृतिः। । २४९०। |
जन्मदेशे अनावृष्ठिलोके दुरभिक्षाम्बरम्।
सम्पत्ताराधिपे मन्दे दशाया च स्वभुक्तिषं। | २४९१ |
स्वजन्म देशनृपतेनाशं च १ iT क
विपद्मुक्तौ तत्सुतश्च म SEL २४९२। |
दायादिवशमापन्नः पश्चानिरर्यणमादिशेत्।
TGR प्रबलश्चापि MPAA भाग्यवान्। । २४९३। |
2487-2493. ^ malefic in the 7th will cause
worries on account of wife. Ifthe 7th lord is bereft
of strength, and be with a malefic, the subject will
have two wives. But he will be worshipped during
his tenure with the king. He will be skilful in
writing and be learned. For birth in Dhruva
Nadiamsa, Saturn occupying the 3rd house, while
the 3rd lord is conjunct Rahu, predict grief on
account of coborn in Saturn’s dasa, apart from
loss of children born to the native. After the 12th
year of age, the native’s father will be endangered.
His mother will be long- lived, while there will be
destruction of her kinsfolk. After the native is 10,
his king will die(?) In his country, famine etc. will
strike. His king will be destroyed when the native
is in Saturn dasa, Saturn bhukti(?). In the 3rd
bhukti of Saturn’s dasa, the native’s son will be
struck by a serious disease and the native will be
endangered through his kinsfolk. Afterwards he
will quit the world. His son will become great and
will prosper through coborn.

Deva Keralam 25
Capricorn Ascendant — (Kala Nadiamsa)
कालशे मकरे लग्ने जातस्तरिशंशके WR |
विप्रजन्मा सुखौ नित्यं सामन्ततनयः स्मृतः। | २४९४ |
महानदीप्रानत्यदेशे AMA च जायते।
ूर्वपश्चिम'वीथीषु चोत्तरे च प्रजायते। । २४९५ । ।
2494-2495. Capricorn Ascendant: One born
in Jupiter’s Trimsamsa, in Capricorn ascendant,
with the Nadiamsa entitled ‘Kaala’ will be a Brahmin, be ever happy and be the eldest issue. His
birth will be in a big village, near Mahanadi, in a
north-facing house, in an east-west street.
Notes: Kaala Nadiamsa rules thus: From 6
deg. 12’ to 6 deg. 24’ of a movable sign; from 23
deg. 36° to 23 deg. 48’ of an immovable sign; and
from 21 deg. 12’ to 21 deg. 24 of a common sign.
उत्तरांशे TES तथा च प्रन्त्यगेहके |
दक्षिणेत्तर वीथीषु प्राग्भागे जननं स्मृतम्। । २४९६ । |
2496. In case of second half of the said
Nadiamsa, the birth will be in a region beside a
river, in an east-facing house, in a north-south
spread street.
कालांशे मकरे लग्ने पूर्वभागे WaT
रक्तवर्णो मध्यगात्र कृशदेहस्वरूपवान्। | २४९७। |
उत्तरांशे चरे लग्ने BA STOTT
शयामवर्णशरीरश्च अग्रह निवासवान्। । २४९८। |
2497-98. Physical Description: The native
of former half of Kaala Nadiamsa, Capricorn
ascendant will be of blood-red complexion, be of
medium-build and will have a weak body. In case
of second half of this Nadiamsa in a movable
ascendant, the native will be dark-bodied and will
live in a colony of Brahmins.
भातृस्थानाधिपे जीवे त्वसितेन निरंक्षिते।
पश्चादुभरातृविहीनश्च ज्येष्ठभ्रातृविहानवान्। | २४९९। |
भगिनीत्रसवान् रागी त्वेका मागल्यमश्नुते।
उत्तराशे प्रजातस्य भगिन्यै द्रे वितन्तुताम्1। २५००। |
2499-2500. Coborn: For birth in former half
of this Nadiamsa in Capricorn the 3rd lord Jupiter
in aspect to Saturn will deprive the native both
elder and younger brothers. He will have three
sisters one of whom will have (long) married life.
He will be passionate. For birth in the 2nd half of
this Nadiamsa, predict two widowed sisters.
Aare भेमे easy उनि वौक्षते।
कालांशके प्रजातस्य मातुदीघीयुरादिशेत्। । २५०९ |
2501. Long-lived Mother: For birth in Kaala
Nadiamsa, the 4th lord Mars in aspect to Saturn
will give a long lease of life to mother. The said
Mars should however be in a dual Navamsa
विपत्तारदशाकाले द्यूनाधिपतिभुक्तिष।
कालाशगे प्रजातस्य मात्ररिष्टे विनिर्दिशेत्! 1 २५०२। |
ia प्रजातस्य प्रत्यक्तारदशन्तै |
वृषभे मन्दे मात्ररिष्टे विनिर्दिशेत्। | २५०३। |
2502-2503. Danger to Mother: The native of
Kaala Nadiamsa will incur danger to mother
during his 3rd dasa, in the sub period of the 7th
lord (Mercury). For birth in first half, in the Sth
dasa, with Saturn’s movements in Taurus, danger
to mother will come to pass.
कालशे मकरे लग्ने 1 प्रजायते।
2504. Thread Ceremony: Predict this
ceremony in the very first dasa, if the native
belongs to the former half of Kaala Nadiamsa, in
Capricorn ascendant.
सम्पद्दाये Paes नक्र १. कालांशनाडिके।
विपदूदाये महत्सौख्यमु न संशयः । | २५०५। |
2505. Happiness: For the subject of second
half of Kaala Nadiamsa, in Capricorn, agreat deal
of happiness will accrue in the 2nd half of 2nd
dasa and in the entire 3rd dasa.
पुत्रस्थानाधिपे शुक्रे युग्मशि चरलग्नके।
कालांशके प्रजातश्च अल्पसन्तानयोगवान्। । २५०६। |

ee
2506. Limited Progeny: If the 5th lord
Venus is in a dual Navamsa, the native of Kaala
Nadiamsa belonging to Capricorn, will have
limited number of children.
विपद्दाये विपदुभुकतौ न्रे कालांशानाडिके |
कालान्ते AAMT: दारान्तरे भवेत्। | २५०७। |
2507. Child Birth: The said native will obtain a child through his second wife during his
third dasa’s first bhuktt.
नीचत्रिकोणगे जीवे तथा युग्पाश्कस्थिते।
THT प्रथमं विन्घात् कालांशे नत्र ATE | २५०८॥
2508. Female Child: For a native of Kaala
Nadiamsa, the first child will be afemale if Jupiter
begets a dual Navamsa, being placed in a trine to
his sign of debility, (i.e. in Taurus or in Virgo).
कालशे मकरेलग्ने सुतेशे मोहितांशके।
अल्पसन्तानमाप्नोति मृ तापत्साबहृत्व वान्। २५०९। |
2509. Dead children: The 5th lordin Mohita
Nadiamsa in case of Capricorn ascendant’s Kaala
Nadiamsa will give limited number of children,
with many dead children included.
कालांशे TE लग्ने पूर्वभागे प्रजायते।
वार्धके पुत्रशोकप्तिः कालांशे नात्र संशयः। | २५१०।।
2510. Grief: The native of first half of this
Nadiamsa will incur grief on account his son, in
his old age.
वाहनाधिपतौ भेमे युग्माशे शनिवीक्षिते।
कालांशगे प्रजातस्य सौम्मदाये सुवाहनम्। । २५११।।
2511. Conveyances: For a native of Kaala
Nadiamsa, predict conveyance in Mercury dasa,
if the 4th lord Mars is in aspect to Saturn. For this,
Mars should however be in dual Navamsa.
उत्तरांशे राजयोगं नरबाहन योगवान्
सेनामात्यजनस्नेहं विप्रमूलच्छियो वहम्। । २५९१२। |
Chandra Kala Nadi
धनधन्यादिलाभः स्यादत्तरांशे न संशयः। । २५१३।।
2512-13. Second half: Birth in this part of
the Kaala Nadiamsa will give the native menborne conveyances, apart from friendship with
army chief and minister. He will obtain wealth
through Brahmins. He will gain wealth and
erains.
qa चरे लग्ने ग्म तु शकटे तथा।
कालांशगे प्रजाश्च AMA! । २५१४ |
2514. Sakata Yoga: One born in the first half
of Kaala Nadiamsa with Sakata Yoga, will have an
emaciated physique due to destruction of his son.
This will apply to a movable sign ascending.
लग्नाद्भाग्यं गते पपे लग्नेशे धनराशिगे।
कालांशगे प्रजातश्च यावज्जीवं सुसोख्यवान्। | २५१५। |
2515. Life-long Happiness: The 9th house
having a malefic while the ascendant lord is in the
2nd house will give life-long happiness to the
native of Kaala Nadiamsa.
RAR मकरे लग्ने सुतेशेन निरीकषिते।
सम्पत्तारदशाकाले पित्ररिष्टं विनिर्दिशेत्। । २५१६। |
2516. Danger to Father: For a native of
Kaala Nadiamsa in Capricorn, see if the ascendant is aspected by 5th lord (Venus). In that case,
the native’s second dasa will cause danger to
father.
पूर्वभागे प्रजातस्य त्वापत्संन्यासवान् पिता।
उत्तरांशे प्रज्ञातस्य पुत्रसंस्कारहीनवान्। । २५९७। |
2517. One born in the first half of this
Nadiamsa will see his father taking to ascetic
order following a family disaster. In case of birth
in second half, the native will not perform
purificatory ceremonies for his sons (and therefore will become Vratya, or outcaste).
कालांशे मकरे लग्ने Te शनिवीकषिते।
पूर्वभागे प्रजातस्य द्विषष्टिपरमायुषम्। । २५१८। |

Dou Keralam eRe
2518, Life-span: The subject of former half
of Kaala Nadiamsa in Capricorn ascendant will
live a maximum life of 62 years if the 8th lord is in
aspect to Saturn.
उत्तरशे प्रजातस्य पापपुण्यफलं AAT
इह लोके सुपुण्यात्मा अन्ते स्वर्गपदं sayy । २५१९।।
लगननाफलं सत्यं प्रत्यक्षं CARTS! | २५२०। |
2519-2520. In case of second half of this
Nadiamsa, the good and bad effects will be even.
During his mundane journey, the native will perform meritorious deeds and will attain the
Heavens. Throughout his life he will be
prosperous. These effects stated by Lagna Nadi,
as repeated in Deva Keralam, will bear truth.
। । मकरलग्नम् - (Bane) । ।
Capricorn Ascendant ~ (Dhruva Nadiamsa)
he लग्ने पूर्वभागे Te
प्रजातश्च रक्तवर्णशुभाकृतिः। । २५२१। |
2521. The subject belonging to the first half
of Dhruva Nadiamsa in Capricorn ascendant will
be blood-red in complexion. His appearance will
be charming.
Notes: Please see notes under sloka 1313 for
Dhruva Nadiamsa.
कमलांशगते मन्दे लग्ने पापयुतेक्िते।
FATT प्रजातश्च सोदरभरतृहीनवान्। | २५२२।।
2522. No Coborn: If Saturn is in Kamala
Nadiamsa, with a malefic related to ascendant by
aspect/association, the above-mentioned native
will be devoid of coborn.
Notes: Please consult notes under sloka 778
for Kamala Nadiamsa. Saturn in this Nadiamsa
in any sign will deprive the Capricorn native of a
coborn while the ascendant is connected with
malefic.,
युग्मे रवियुते Sea gay मद्रे
पव॑भाने प्रजातश्च RSA | २५२३; |
2523. The conjunction of Sun-Mercury in
Gemini for a native of former half of Dhruva
Nadiamsa in Capricorn ascendant wil make him
bold, heroic and highly intelligent.
अपां TRE मन्द् धर्मिको नन्यकार्यवान्।
सर्वज्ञः सात्विकः
2524. Saturn: If Saturn is found in the
(Nadi) amsa called Apaampathi the subject will
not be religious, will do others’ jobs, will be a
knower of everything, be virtuous, given to anger,
indolent and a law-breaker.
Notes: Apaampathi is not enlisted in that
name as a Nadiamsa. Apampathi means Varuna.
In that case, Varuna Nadiamsa has been explained in the notes under sloka 188-189 supra.
Apampathi is also a Sahshtiamsa. This extends from 6 deg. to 6 deg. 30’ of an odd sign, and
from 23 deg. 30’ to 24 deg. of sn even Shashtiamsa.
In my view, Saturn’s position should be located in
the Shashtiamsa cited, for a subject of
Capricorn’s Dhruva Nadiamsa.
RIS मन्दे ya च BAAN
अन्तःकपटवान् कामी कमलायतलोचनः। । २५२५। |
पराक्रमी स्वतन्त्रश्च प्रेष व्यसनप्रदः।
ORM प्रसन्नात्मा कृशदेहस्वरूपवान्।। 2426 | |
2525-26. If the planet Saturn is in a malefic
Shashtiamsa, the native of Dhruva Nadiamsa will
be a stupid (or be wicked). He will be inwardly
cunning, be given to sexual lust and be endowed
with eyes resembling a lotus-petal. He will be
valorous, independent and will cause worries to
others, He will instantly be given to anger but will
be pleased. He will have an emaciated physique.
रुवांशे मकरे लग्ने लकष्मीयेगे प्रजायते!
उद्वाहानन्तरं सौख्यं विंशद्रर्षत् परं सुखम्। । २५२७।
2527. One born in Dhruva Nadiamsa, in
Capricorn ascendant will be blessed with
क्रोधी धर्मभेद च Aa । २८२४। |

Lakshmi Yoga; he will be happy after marriage
(and) after 20 years of age.
प्रजायते।
dill Basa pa मकरे लग्ने ' |
2528. He will have no paternal uncles if the
birth is in the former half of Dhruva Nadiamsa, in
Capricorn ascendant.
RIM गते मन्दे yar विप्रकालगे।
कालान्तरे सुपुत्रप्िर्दत्तपुत्रो अथवा भवेत्। । २५२९।
2529. Progeny: If Saturn is found in the 5th
house, the native of Vipra Kaala of Dhruva
Nadiamsa in Capricorn ascendant will obtain
progeny after alonginterval. Alternatively he will
obtain an adopted son.
Note: Putraarudhagathe is another reading
needing Saturn to be in Aaroodha of the fifth
house.
कुम्भत्रिकोणगे चन्द्रे युग्मांशे शुभसंयते।
पूर्वभागे राजयोगं लेख्यविद्याविचक्षणाः। । २५३०। |
2530. The Moon: If the Moon at brith is
found in a sign that is trine to Aquarius, joins a
benefic, and is at the same time in Gemini Navamsa, the native of former half of Dhruva Nadiamsa
will enjoy a Raja Yoga. He will be further skilful
in learning, and be an expert writer.
धरवांशे मकरे लग्ने माग प्रजायते|
मण्डलाधिपतिद्ररि t स्वतन्त्रवान्। । २५३९। ।
Wa मकरे लग्ने पूर्वभागे प्रजायते।
विंशद्रषीत् परं भाग्यं स्वप्राबल्यं धनागमम्। । 24321 |
2531-2532. Prosperity etc.: Birth in the first
half of Dhruva Nadiamsa, Capricorn ascendant,
will beget a leading position under the nuership
of a king. The subject will be independent and
will attain prosperity after 20 years of his age. He
will earn wealth through his own greataess.
लाभाधिपदशाकाले धृवांशं तु प्रजायते।
Chandra Kala Nadi
2533. Dasa of 11th lord: The 2nd half of 11th
lord’s dasa will cause great happiness while
wealth to the native of Dhruva Nadiamsa wil]
occur right from his boyhood.
gag मकरे लग्ने भाग्येशे पापसंयुते।
पूर्वभागे प्रजातश्च राजमुद्राधिकारवान्। । २५३४। |
2534. Royal Authority: If the 9th lord is
conjunct a malefic, the native of former half of
Dhruva Nadiamsa in Capricon ascendant will
earn authority under the aegis of a king.
धुवांशे मकरे io
अष्टष्ण्टिसमे
प्रजायते |
2535. Death: The native of Dhruva Nadiamsa, former half, rising in Capricorn will die at 68.
He will be endowed with wisdom, towards the end
of his life.
। । वृष्षमलग्नम् - (कन्याशनिशीतव्ांशः) | ।
Taurus Ascendant —
(Saturn in Virgo — Seethala Nadiamsa)
लग्नात् पंचमगे मन्दे MTR तु जायते।
पश्चादुभ्रातुविहीनश्च ज्येष्ठभ्रातृविनाशवान्। । २५३६ ||
युग्मे मन्दे शीत्छांशे १ त्रवान्
स्थिरलग्ने प्रजातश्च बाल्ये कर्शितः। | 24391 |
2536-2537. Coborn: Saturn in the Sth house
in Seethala Nadiamsa will deprive the native of
after-borns and will destroy pre- borns. Saturn in
Gemini in Seethala Nadiamsa will make the native of a fixed sign lonely (1.6. without coborn), but
endowed with sons and friends. He will have an
emaciated body due to troublesome childhood.
This applies to an immovable ascendant.
Notes: For Seethala Nadiamsa, please consult notes under sloka 1096 supra.
ea aoe a लग्नात् फंचमगे ध शीतव्शे तु सास्थिते।
अपराधं महत् सौख्यमा बाल्यं श्रीयुतः सुखी। । २५३३। । सम्पत्तारदशाकाले Bh | । २५३८। |

Deva Keralam 22
2538. Marriage: Saturn in the 5th house in
Seethala Nadiamsa will give marriage in the 2nd
dasa.
नीचे नवांशके सूर्ये vitae
द्विशब्दात् परं भाग्यं विपदूदाये श्रियो वहम्॥ २५३९॥
2539. Prosperity: One having the Sun in
debility in Navamsa while Saturn occupies
Seethala Nadiamsa will attain prosperity after 22
years of age. In his 3rd dasa he will earn wealth.
शीतव्टांशकगे मन्दे स्थिरलग्नं प्रजायते।
विपद्दाये चोत्तरार्धं पित्ररिष्टं विनिर्दिशेत्। । २५४०। |
2540. Danger to Father: Birth in a fixed sign,
while Saturn is in Seethala Nadiamsa will cause
danger to father in the second half of the native’s
third dasa.
VSS मन्दे क्षेम तारादशान्तर |
विशेषश्रियमाप्नोति गेहे लक्ष्मीकरक्षवान्। । २५४१। |
2541, Fourth Dasa: Saturn in Secthala
Nadiamsa will in the 4th dasa cause wealth, and
beget goddess Lakshmi’s mercy.
सम्पद्दाये FTAA देशे राज्ञां कलापवान्
सम्पद्दाये श्रियोभवाप्तिः शीतव्छंरे न सशयः॥ २५४२॥
2542. The last one-third part of his Vipat
(3rd) dasa will cause troubles to the king(?). The
native will get wealth in the dasa which is the third
from birth.
युग्मे मन्दे शीतव्ठांशे पुत्रीपुत्र समृद्धिमान्।
स्थिरलग्ने प्रजातस्य BREN परं सुखम्। । २५४३। |
याबदायुष्यमाप्नोति तावत्कालं सुजीवनम्।
शीतठांशकगे मन्दे त्विदमेव फलं स्मृतम्। | २५४४। |
2543-44. Progeny: Saturn in Gemini in
Seethala Nadiamsa will bless the native with many
sons and daughters. This applies to birth in a
fixed sign. The native will, in addition, have a
comfortable living throughout his life. These are
the effects for Saturn’s position in Seethala
Nadiamsa.
। । वृष्पलग्नम् - (कमलांशः) । I
Taurus Ascendant — (Kamala Nadiamsa)
कमलाशे YR लग्ने तु वृष्मे तथु।
विप्रकाले प्रजातश्च नवमोअसौ प्रकोर्तितः।
अथवा दशमो वापि पश्चाद्प्रातृविहीनवान्। । २५४५ |
कमलाशेत्तरे भगे वृषभे तु प्रननायते।
विप्रजन्मा सुखी नित्य द्वितीयोअयं भवेन्नरः | २५४६। |
2545-46. The native of former half of Kamala
Nadiamsa in Taurus ascendant, in Vipra Kaala
(first one-fourth part of the Nadiamsa), will either
be the 9th issue or the 10th issue. He will have no
younger brothers. if birth be in the second half of
the Nadiamsa in question, the native will be a
Brahmin, be ever happy and will be the second
issue of the family.
Notes: For Kamala Nadiamsa, please see
notes under sloka 778 supra.
लग्नेशे Bae कमलाशे प्रजायते।
TRE प्रसूतिश्च पूर्वभागे न संशयः । | २५४७। |
उत्तरंशे FOR जन्मब्दे कलहो महान्।
SAAR पूर्वभागे सोदरा नवसंख्यकाः। | २५४८ । |
अथवा द्रादशाख्याताः पूर्वभागे न संशयः।
उत्तरशे प्रजातस्य सोदरा वसुसंख्यकाः। | २५४९। |
षट्संख्या दीर्थमायुध्यं लभते नात्र संशयः।
2547-25491/2. Birth will be near a region of
river if the ascendant lord is in his exaltation, in
case of former half of this Nadiamsa. The place
of birth will be a city if it is second half of Kamala
Nadiamsa; great quarrels will be seen (in the city)
in his birth year. The native of first half of Kamala
Nadiamsa will have nine or twelve coborns while
his counterpart will have eight coborns out of
whom six will be long-lived.
START पूर्वभागे ei yin RAT! | २५५०1 |
पूर्वभागे प्रजातश्च विवाहवान्।
उत्तरांश प्रजातस्य विपदूदाये न संशयः। । २५५१। I

2550-2551. Marriage: The 8th lord
(Jupiter) in Sachira Nadiamsa will give marriage
in second dasa if birth is in former half of Kamala
Nadiamsa in Taurus ascendant, and in third dasa
to his counterpart.
ae lads ये fos क्वचित् क्वचित्।
2552. Father: In case of birth in second half
of the Nadiamsa in question, the native’s third
dasa will cause some troubles to father. His
health will however be restored early (due to
remedies).
पुत्रस्थानाधिपे Set मदंशे रविसंयुते।
कमलशे प्रजातस्य स्खलन् क्षणमादिशेत्। । २५५३ | |
पंचमे भैमसंयेगे शुल्लनाशेन कर्सितः।
वन्ध्यापतिभवेत् सत्यं जायते वा मृतप्रजा। | २५५४ |
2553-2554. One having the Sth lord Mercury
in the company of the Sun, and ina Navamsa ruled
by Saturn, will have instant sexual discharge. If
the 5th lord Mercury is conjunct Mars, the subject
will be emaciated due to seminal wastage (or
excessive discharge). Further the native’s wife
wil be barren, or she will give birth to dead
children. These apply to the native of Kamala
Nadiamsa.
शुक्रांगारकसंयोगे कमलांशे शनीिते।
अदुष्ट यत्नयोगेन कालान्तरसुपुत्रवान्। । २५५५। |
2555. The conjunction of Mars-Venus for a
Kamala Nadiamsa native will per chance, after a
great deal of efforts and delay bless the native
with a good son.
कमलांशे Yr वृषभे च प्रजायते।
प्रत्यक्तारदशाकाले मात्ररिष्टं fates । २५५६। |
2556. Mother: The subject belonging to first
half of Kamala Nadiamsa in Taurus ascendant will
see his mother in danger during his fifth dasa.
Chandra Kala Nadi
कमलांशे सुते राहौ तद्दशन्तर्दशासु च।
अपमृत्युभयप्राप्िः शन्तिं कुर्याद्विचक्षणः । | २५५७ । |
2557. Untimely Death: Rahu in the Sth
house will cause fear of: untimely death in his
dasa-bhukti to a Kamala Nadiamsa native.
Remedies may be sought.
कमलांशे पूर्वभागे AAA. |
कालमृत्युभयं सत्यं वृश्चिकादित्रिमासके। | २५५८ |
AA अथवा मृत्यु शुक्लपक्षे न संशयः।
पूर्वभागे प्रजातश्च पश्चद्विदिकजन्म वान्। । २५५९। |
2558-2559. Death: The native of former half
of Kamala Nadiamsa will die on a week-day
denoted by the dispositor of the 8th lord’s Navamsa, when the transit Sun is in Scorpio/Sagittarius/Capricon/Pisces, in a bright lunar half. His
rebirth will be in a Vaidic family.
उत्तरांशे स्थिरे लगने त्वष्टचत्वारिवत्सरे।
कालमृत्युभयं नित्यं, पतत्येवमधोग्ते।
लग्ननाड।फलं सत्यं प्रत्यक्षं देवकेरकम्। । २५६०। |
2560. The native of second half of Kamala
Nadiamsa of a fixed sign will die in his 48th year.
He will descend, after death, in a lower world.
These effects stated in Lagna Nadi, repeated in
Deva Keralam will bear truth.
पंकजांशे पूर्वभागे धनुर्लगने प्रजायते|
विप्रकाले प्रजातस्तु श्याम वर्णशुभाकृतिः। । २५६९। |
पंकजंशे पूर्वभागे धनुर्लगने प्रजायते। । २५६२। |
श्यामवर्णशरीरश्च त्व ग्रहारे निवासवान्।
न्यवसायपरो नित्यं सोदरभ्रातृहीनवान्। । २५६२।।
2561-63. One born in Vipra Kaala, first half
of Pankaja Nadiamsa, in Sagittarius ascendant,
will be dark-complexioned. He will have an auspicious appearance. The native of first half of this
Nadiamsa in Sagittarius ascendant will be dark in
complexion and will live in a colony of Brahmins.
He will be ever intent on pursuing agriculture
(Vyavasaya also means calling in general). He will
be bereft of brothers.

Deva Keralam
पकजाशे AR भागे ज्येष्टभ्रातृसमन्वितः।
: श्रीमान् बन्धुजनप्रियः।
2564-641/2. The native of second half of this
Nadiamsa will be endowed with elder brothers.
One belonging to the first half, having the 8th lord
in debility will be endowed with abundant
knowledge of good conduct, be wealthy, and be
fond of his kinsmen.
लग्ने जीवे कुजे मन्दे पंक्जशे प्रनायते। । २५६५। |
पितामहश्चरायुष्यं बाल्ये पितृविनाशवान्।
पितृस्थानाधिपे सूर्ये स्वोच्चे गुरूनिरीक्षिते। । २५६६। |
पंकजंशे पूर्वभागे त्वापत्संन्यासवान् पिता।
Sen च तत्काले मात्ररिष्टं विनिर्दिशेत्। | २५६७] |
2565-67. Jupiter, Saturn and Mars in Sagittarius ascendant will for a native of Pankaja
Nadiamsa destroy father in childhood. But his
patgernal grand-father will be longlived. The
native’s father will take to ascetism following a
family calamity if the the 9th lord, Sun, is in
exaltation in aspect of Jupiter. This applies to
birth in first half of Pankaja Nadiamsa. If it be
second half of the Nadiamsa in question, the Sun
as above will destroy the mother of the native at
once.
पंकजंशे पृत्॑भागे संपत्तारदशान्तरे |
विवाहोत्सवकार्याणि मेषदित्रयमासगे। | २५६८। |
अतिभाग्यकुलोद्राहं श्वश्रश्वशुरवान् सुखी।
2568-681/2. Marriage: The native of Pankaja
Nadiamsa, first half, will in his second dasa marry
in a very rich family. His marriage will be coincidental with the Sun in transit in the three signs
commencing from Aries. He will have parentsin-law (alive at the time of marriage) and be
happy.
सुतेशे मदराशिस्थे पंकजे प्रजायते। । २५६९ ।
एकपुत्रश्चिरायुष्पान्पृव॑भागे न संशयः |
उत्तराशे प्रजातस्य Sk egies मायुषः |
जाविते दीधमायुष्यमुत्यशे न संशयः। | २५७०। |
2569-70, Progeny: The native of former half
of Pankaja Nadiamsa, with 5th lord (Mars) in the
7th house, will have one long-living son. The
native of second half of the Nadiamsa in question
will be childless, or will have a short-lived son. If
the said child survives, then it will be a case of long
lease of life.
Notes: For Pankaja Nadiamsa, please see
notes under sloka 685 supra.
Teese पूर्वभागे व्ययो aol
WHAT व्याप जीवनं AAAI । २५७६ !
दुश्चिक्याधिपतो मन्दं तुच्चग्रहस्रमन्वितं।
वाधेके कमु लेन भग्यवाश्च TOME 1 २५७२। |
पंकजांशे त्वष्टमे पापवर्जिते।
ae च सप्तसप्तत्यां मीने मृत्युन संशयः । । २०७३। |
2371-2573. The 12th lord (Mars) in the 7th
house will give the native of first half of this
Nadiamsa wealth equal to 200 (gold coins). He
will live by trading. If the 3rd lord Saturn is in the
company of an exalted planet the native will gain
fortunes in his old age through his children.
Should the 8th house be devoid of a malefic, the
subject belonging to the first half of Pankaja
Nadiamsa will die in his //th year, with the transit
Sun in Pisces.
। । वृष्ष्मलग्नम् - (शिवदा) । |
Taurus Ascendant — (Sivada Nadiamsa)
शिबदाशे स्थरि लग्ने
विप्रजन्मा सुखी नित्यं
Terres शिवालयसमीपगे।
नन्धुगेहे प्रसूतिश्च नगरे नात्र संशयः। } २५७८। |
2574-2575. The native of former half of
Sivada Nadiamsa belonging to a fixed sign will be
a Brahmin, ever happy and be the eldest issue.
His birth will be in the region of Mahanadi, near
a temple dedicated to Lord Siva, in a relative’s
home in a city.
Notes: For Sivada Nadiamsa, please consult
notes under sloka 1501-1502 supra. Thses discussions now relate to Taurus ascendant.

230) Chandra Kala Nadi
उत्तरांशे प्रजातश्च पंचमोभयं प्रकीरतितः।
महानदीप्रान्त्यदेशे दक्षिणेत्तरवाधीषु। । २५७६ । ।
प्रण्भागे ' जननं चेति उत्तरंशे न संशयः।
2576-25761/2. Birth in second half of the
Nadiamsa in question denotes that he will be the
5th issue. His birth will be in the Mahanadi
region, in a street extending from south to north,
in an east-facing house.
शिवदशे पूर्वभागे स्थिरलग्ने प्रजायते। । २५७७। |
पूर्वभागे प्रजातस्य स्वपिता भ्रवृहीनवान्।
Sa वृश्चिके मन्दे भूमुतेन निरीक्षिते। | २५७८।
पितामहः प्रसिद्धश्च FRAT सुभग्यवान्।
तदभवे म्लेच्छसेवौ त्वन्नदानद्विजप्रियः। । २५७९। |
2577-2579. Father etc.: In case of the native
of former half of Sivada Nadiamsa, in fixed sign,
predict no brothers for the father of the native. If
Saturn is in Scorpio, with an even Navamsa, the
native’s paternal grand-father will be famous who
will make his fortunes through Soodras. In the
absence of these effects, the said relative will
serve a Miechcha king and be fond of Brahmins
and of poor-feeding.
लग्नेशंशाधिपे जवि हीनग्रहसमन्विते।
FAS च जन्मान्दे देहे जायं APSA २५८०॥
क eee व्याकुलं महत्|
लग ५) पद्रव LL । २५८१
way = ं प्राप्नोति भूरिशः।
2580-25811/2. If Jupiter, being in the company of a malefic planet, becomes the ruler of
Navamsa ascendant, the native will fall sick in the
first year (or) in the first dasa. He will be further
troubled by a Brahmin carrying out the order of
aking. If the ascendant is occupied by malefics,
the subject will have fear from the mean. He will
incur grief on account of enmity with relatives.
शिवदशे पूर्वभगे सुतांशे मंगव्णंशगे। । २५८२। |
स्वमाता दीधमायुष्यं बाल्ये Pai ag |
SHUT प्रजातस्य पितरो वना। | २५८३। |
2582-2583. Parents: For birth in former half
of Sivada Nadiamsa, the 5th lord in Mangala
Nadiamsa will grant a long life to the native’s
mother while he will lose his father in childhood,
If birth be in second half of the said Nadiamsa,
(with the Sth lord in Mangala Nadiamsa) the
native’s parents will be long-lived.
भ्रातृस्थानाधिपे चन्द्रे सिंहशि शनिवीकषिते।
शिवदांशे प्रजातश्च पश्चाद्प्रातृविहीनवान्। | २५८४। |
2584. Coborn: The 3rd lord Moon, if in
aspect to Saturn, should occupy Leo Navamsa to
deprive the native of after-born.
लग्नेशंशे तत्तिकोणे स्फटयोगं_ गते WA
सोदयेत्पत्तिनाशः स्यात् पूर्वभागे न संशयः। । २५८५। |
2585. See in which Navamsa, the lord of the
birth sign is placed. When Saturn in transit
traverses an identical Rasi, or a trine thereof, the
native will lose his brothers being born at that
time. This relates to former half of Sivada
Nadiamsa.
शिवदांशे स्थिरे लग्ने तूत्तशंशे प्रजायते।
सोदराः पंचत्वारस्ततः पश्चात् सहोदरी | २५८६ | |
2586. For a native of fixed sign, with first half
of Sivada Nadiamsa rising, predict death of
brothers when the native will be 45 years of age.
Later on, his sister will die.
लग्नेशात् केन्द्रगे जीवे भूसुतेन निरीक्षिते।
पश्चात् सोदरहानिश्च स्वल्पायुर्दायमादिशेत्। | २५८७। |
2587. It will be harmful to brothers who will
only have short lives if Jupiter in aspect to Mars
occupies a sign that is angular to the sign occupied
by the ascendant lord.
शिवदांशे पूर्वभागे जन्म तारादशान्तरे |
गोचरे वृश्चिके जीवे मौजीबन्धनमादिशेत्। | २५८८1 |
गुरुप्रथ॒मपर्याये गोचरे ia Ve |

Deva Keralam 231
2588-89. In the end of the first dasa, thread
ceremony will occur for the native of former half
of Sivada Nadiamsa, when Jupiter traverses Scorpio. (Without reference to the concerned half)
Jupiter in the 7th in transit will cause such an
event as above.
जन्म तागदशान्त्यद as or स्वभुक्तिषु।
पूर्वभागे प्रजातस्य विवाहत्सवमादिशेत्। । २५९०। |
2590. Marriage: Either in the end of first
dasa, or in the first sub period of second dasa, the
native of former half of Sivada Nadiamsa will get
married.
सुखधिपे व्यये संस्थे रन्ध्रे वा ललनाशमे।
स्वोच्चे चन्द्रे तत्तिकोणे तूद्राहानन्तरं सुखम् ।। २५९९ ॥
2591. There will be happiness following
marriage if the 4th lord is in the 12th/8th, but with
Virgo Navamsa, while the Moon is exalted.
सप्तमाधिपतौ भेमे pil a केतुसमन्विते।
उत्तरांशे प्रातश्च कछछत्द्रययोगवान्
शिवदंशे पूर्वभागे वृषभे च प्रजाय॒ते। । २५९३ । |
एक एव विवाहः स्यात् प्रत्यक्षं देवकेरक्म् |
2592-25931/2. The 7th lord Mars placed in
the ascendant in conjunction with Ketu will give
a dark-bodied spouse to a native of Sivada
Nadiamsa. There willbe two wives incase of birth
in the second half of Sivada Nadiamsa, Taurus
ascendant, while his counterpart born in first half
will have a single marriage.
TRIN तत्त्रिकोणे ५ dona गते शनौ। । २५९४ ।
FAR J जातस्य विनिर्दिशेत्
जीवे गते धनप्राप्ति राजद्वारे कलापकृत्। | २५९५। |
2594-2595. See in which Navamsa the 8th
lord (Jupiter) at birth is placed. When Saturn in
evil months comes to such a Rasi, or a trine
thereof, the native will fall sick. Ifit is Jupiter that
transits such a sign, the native will acquire wealth,
but he will have misunderstandings through royal
sources.
Tee जवे स्फुटयोगं गते सति।
सम्पत्तारदशकाले कलहश्च प्रनावधि। । २५९६ 1 |
2596. This sloka is irrelevant and a mix up
with natal astrology as it deals with Jupiter in the
10th causing quarrels among men etc...
सुखाधिपदशाकाले शिवदांशे प्रजायते|
विंशोपरि शरे वर्ष त्वृतुशन्त्यादिशोभनम्। | २५९७1 ।
विंशद्र्ष॑त् परं सख्यं स्वप्रावल्यं धनागमम्
देशन्त्यदिसंचारमादायादधिकल्ययम्। । २८९८ । |
2597-2598. One born in the Nadiamsa under
discussion will in the 4th dasa, after 20 years of
age, (but before or during) the 25 year, will
engage himself in auspicious functions like impregnation (for first child). After 20 years of age,
the native will become great, be happy, rich and
will increase his income by travelling in many
foreign regions.
कमीरूटगते चन्द्रे लग्नेशेन निरीक्षिते।
विपत्तारदशाकाले विशेषश्रियमादिशेत्। | २५९९ |
त्रिंशोपरिशैर्वषैः शिवदांशे प्रजायते।
पत्रोतसवफलप्राप्ति्जातपुत्रो मरिष्यति। । २६००। |
2599-2600. The native will become exceedingly wealthy in the 3rd dasa if the Moon in the
10th Aroodha (or in the 10th house) is in aspect
to the lord of birth sign. The native of Sivada
Nadiamsa will obtain a son who will die early.
This will be after 30 years of age (or after) 25 years
of age.
पुत्रस्थानाधिपे सैम्ये नीचांशे नीचरशिगे।
शिवदांशे WITS सन्तानप्रतिबन्धवान्। | २६०१ । |

अदृष्टयलयेगेन SARI |
गोपालप्रतिमादानं भनुवार प्रैयस्बकम्। । २६०२। |
कद्डीफलदनेन सन्तानप्राप्तमादिशेत्।
2601-26021/2. Progeny: The Sth lord in
debilitation both in Rasi and Navamsa will cause
obstacles in begetting progeny in respect of
Sivada Nadiamsa native. Afte efforts, due to fortunes, he will obtain a good son after some interval. remedies due to be perofrmed are: Charity
of an image of Lord Krishna, recitation of
Trayambaka (Mrityunjaya) on Sundays, and distribuiing plantains.
शव दांशे प्रजातस्य गभौत्पत्तिनं ॥ विद्यते। 1 २६०३।।
तदभावे GET च By i |
तत्पापरपारहारार्थं शन्तिं कुर्यादथाविधि। | २६०४। |
2603-2604. The native of Sivada Nadiamsa is
said to be bereft of virility. If not, his spouse will
have troubles relating to conception. To overcome this blemish, prescribed remedies be performed.
दारस्थानाधिपे + लग्ने पापसमन्विते।
वीक्षिते शनिसंयुक्ते गप्तकामातुरो भवेत्। । २६०५। |
2605. If the 7th lord Mars 15 in the ascendant
with a malefic, and related to Saturn by aspect/association, the subject will be secretively libidinous
(1.९. he will join others’ women clandestinely).
कामेशे सेम्यषष्टयंशे वृषभे WaT
गभ॑स्रावातुरा भाय सन्तानप्रतिन्धकं । । २६०६। |
maa किंचिद्भानुवरि व्रतं शुभम्।
उत्कृष्टपुत्रसिद्ध यर्थ बालकृष्णं प्रदापयेत्। | २६०७। |
निष्कद्रयसुवर्णेन कृष्णस्य ८.५९ ५ तम्|
जन्माददिवसे चैव दानं कुर्याद्यथाविधि।
सुदीर्घजीविनं पुत्रं लभते नात्र संशयः। । २६०८। |
2606-2608. Should the 7th lord, placed in the
ascendant occupy a Shashtiamisa owned by Mercury, the native’s spouse will have abortions and
AS Chandra Kala Nadt
will have obstacles in begetting progeny. To overcome this blemish, religious vows on Sundays be
performed. To obtain an excellent son, donation
of an image of Bala Krishna (i.c. Lord Krishna’s
image relating to His childhood) and (or) an
image of Lord Krishna got spending two gold
coins, on the native’s birth day be done. Following these, a long-living son will take birth.
Notes: In sloka 2606, Sauwmya Shashtiamsa
does not refer to a benefic Shashtiamsa. It requires the 7th lord Mars to be in Gemini/Virgo
Shashtiamsa ruled by Mercury who 15 the Sth lord
for Gemini ascendant.
शिवदांशे पूर्वभागे वृषभे तु प्रजायते|
grease नहन्त्याश्च गिरिं वज्रधरो यथा। । २६०९। |
2609. Onc born in the former half of Sivada
Nadiamsa, Taurus ascendant, will be bereft of
Balarishta (infantile mortality).
गुरूस्तृतीयपर्याये गोचरे सप्तमे गुरो।
नवमे ee स्यच्छिवरदांशस्य ATH) । २६६० |
ग्रन्थान्तरे त् पक्ष त्वेकपुत्री तु जीवति।। २६११।।
2610-2611. For a Sivada Nadiamsa native,
Jupiter in his third round coming to the 7th/9th
will cause birth of a son. According to some
others, he will have only one long-living daughter,
प्रत्यक्तारदशाकाले पूवाधं सौष्यमश्नुते।
mat त्वरिष्ट स्यच्छिवदाशे न संशयः। । २६१२।।
प्रत्यवतारदशाकाले ATT मनोल्यधा|
दारपीडामवाप्नोति श्षिप्रेणसेगयभाग्भवेत्। । २६६३। |
परत्यक्तारदशकाले विशेषश्रियमादिशेत्।
साधनेशदशाकाले गोचरे सप्तमे शनौ। । २६१४। ।
अपमृत्युभयं किचिच्छनेस्तु प्रार्थनां वदेत्।
मृत्युंजयायुतं जपत्वा AAS प्रदापयेत्। । २६१५। |
2612-2615. Dasa effects: For a subject
belonging to first half of Sivada Nadiamsa, happiness will cxist in the Sth dasa but his maternal
relatives will be endangered For second half of
this Nadiamsa, 5th dasa will cause mental agony
to the native apart from temporary illnesses to

Deva Keralam
spouse. The 5th dasa will give abundant wealth.
When Saturn comes to the 7th Rasi in the 6th
dasa, fear of untimely death will exist. To overcome this danger, praver to Lord Sani, recitation
of Mrityunjaya, and donation of blue clothes be
done.
प्रत्यदाये चोत्तरार्धं गेहे कल्याणसंभ्रमः।
धनधान्यदिलाभः स्यात् स्त्रीलाभः शुभशोभनः।। २६१६॥
सन्तानोत्पत्तिमाप्नोति प्रत्यग्दाये sail कतघु।
साधनेशदशकाले YS सौख्यमश्नुते। । २६१७। |
अपरार्धे स्वल्पसैौख्यमन्ते मृत्युर्न _ संशयः।
ग्रन्थान्तरे GH त्वष्टषष्टिसमे मृतिः
व्ययस्थानाधिपे सौम्ये वीक्षिते पुण्यलोकवान्॥ २६९८ ॥
2616-2618. For a native of Sivada Nadiamsa,
second half, the latter half of Sth dasa will cause
a family marriage, gain of wealth and corn, gain
through wife (or women) and auspicious functions. In the first half of the 6th dasa, he will get
happiness. But in the second half of this dasa, his
happiness will decline and he will face death.
According to some other authorities, the native
will die at 68. If the 12th lord is aspected by
Mercury (or a benefic) the native will attain
Heavens.
वृद्धतीसिष्टः-
‘As per Senior Vasishta
सुखे चन्द्रे व्यये सूर्यं शिवदांशे च संस्थिते।
पूर्वभागे प्रजातः स॒ आपत्सन्यासयोगवान्। । २६१९ ।
उत्तरंशे प्रजातस्य पुण्यपापफलं समम्|
wear लोके सुपुण्यात्मा अन्ते स्वर्गपद्ं ययौ।। २६२०॥
यावदाय् ah तावद्भाग्यं विनिर्दिशेत्
स्थिरे लग्ने विप्रकालाशके तथा। । २६२१।।
शिवदाशे पजातस्य 4 |
लग्ननाडीफलं सत्यं प्रत्यक्ष रे | | २६२२। |
“N
2619-2622. According to Vridhdha Vasishta: The Moon in the 4th and the Sun in the 12th
- this yoga for a person born in the first half of
Sivada Nadiamsa (of Gemini) will cause taking to
ascetic order following a family calamity. For the
we
native of second half of this Nadiamsa, the good
and bad effects will be even. In his mundane
journey, he will perform meritorious acts, and will
goto heavens after death. Throughout his Ife he
will enjoy fortunes. So also for birth in Vipra
Kuala of Sivada Nadiamsa. These effects stated
tor Sivada Nadiamsa in Lugna Nuc, retold in
Deva Keralam, will bear truth.
। । मिथुनलग्नम् ,-(कमलांश) 1 ।
Gemini \scendant — (Kamala Nadiamsa)
कमटशे पुवेभागे मधुने च पजायते!
Taya सुखा Mer द्रतायोअयं wanda | २६२३।
अथवा च तृतायः स्याज्ज्येष्ठश्नातावहःनवान्।
SARI WHATS ज्येष्ठश्रातृयुतः सुखा i २६२४ :
SAU FAW प्रसूतनात्र सशयः । । २६२५!
पूर्वभागे पुण्यदेशे त्व ग्रहे प्रसूतमान्।
ग्रन्थान्तरे पुण्यदेशे महद्ेवपुरालये। ¦ २६२६ ¦ |
2623-26. The native of the first half of
Kamala Nadiamsa, belonging to Gemini ascendant, will be a Brahmin, be ever happy and will be
the 2nd/3rd issue. He will be bereft of an elder
brother. The subject belonging to the second half
of this Nadiamsa will be endowed with an older
brother. The second halt native wilt be born ina
region of forests while the first half native’s birth
will be a pilgrim centre, in a colony of Brahmins.
But according to other ancient authorities, the
subject of former half will be born near a temple
of Lord Siva.
Notes: For Kamala Nadiamsa, please see
notes under sloka 778 supra.
जन्मलाभमिति wets श्रातृहीनवान्।
वर्गोत्तमे लग्ननाथ कर्मनाथे AUTH । २६२७। |
कमलांशे प्रजातस्य जनमदाये कलापनम्।
2627 -26271/2. The subject of former half of
Kamala Nadiamsa will be the only child of the
family, bereft of any coborn. Ifthe ascendant lord
is in Vargothama Navamsa while the 10th lord ts
in Sura Nadiamsa, the first dasa of the native will
cause strife.

लगनेशे-नीचरशिस्थे नीचांशे कुजसंयुते। । २६२८1 |
नदीप्रन्तये पुरे वासो जननं वा भविष्यति,
STAY पर भगे सूर्यशि कर्मनायके। । २६२९ |
आयुष्मन्तौ च पितरो धनधन्यसमृद्धिमान्।
वित्रयोगे सिते जीवे म Bain नहुवित्तवान्। । २६३० |
राजद्वारे प्रसिद्धश्च |
लग्नेशंशे तत्व्िकोणे स्कुटयोगं गते गुरे। । २६३१।।
सोदरोत्पत्तिकालः स्यज्जन्मदाये न संशयः।
2628-26311/2. [f the ascendant lord conjunct
Mars is in debility both in Rasi and Navamsa, the
native’s birth and living will be in a city beside a
river. In case of birth in the latter half, the 10th
lord’s position in Leo Navamsa will grant longevity to parents and the native will be endowed
with abundance of wealth and corn. Venus endowed with brightness (1.6. not combust in the
Sun to lose his rays) while Jupiter is in Sura
Nadiamsa will make the native exceedingly wealthy. He will be famous in royal service. His father
will be prosperous. During the native’s first dasa
when Jupiter arrives at the sign represented by
the Navamsa occupied by ascendant lord at birth,
or a trine thereof, birth of a coborn will occur.
एका स्वसा सेख्यवती भूषिता चापरा apa! २६३२॥
पुत्रिणी पतिभक्ता स्यात् पूर्वभागे न संशंयः।
उत्तराशे प्रजातस्य भगिन्येका व | । २६३३। |
लग्नाधिपे लग्नगते कुजमन्दसमन्विते।
स्वज्येष्ठभगिनीक्लेशमल्पायुदयमादिशेत्। | VERY |
2632-2634. One sister of the native of former
half of Kamala Nadiamsa will be happy, be endowed with daughters and be devoted to her
husband. The native of second half of this
Nadiamsa will have only one sister who too will be
short-lived. If the ascendant lord (Mercury) is in
the ascendant in the company of Saturn and Mars,
the native’s elder sister will be a troubled soul and
be short-lived.
Yoga for Prosperity
लग्नेशे चापराशिस्थे त्वसितेन निरीक्षिते।
STARTS भग्ययोगस्तु सत्कर्माचारबुद्धिमान्। । २६२५॥
Chandra Kala Nadi
2635. Bhagya Yoga: If the lord of the ascendant is in Sagittarius 17 aspect to Saturn, a yoga
called Bhagya Yoga is produced. As a result, the
native will be endowed with good acts and conduct.
2636. Second Dasa: One born in the first
half of Kamala Nadiamsa will in the 2nd dasa gain
happiness and wealth. His wealth and corns will
be in abundance. His father will also experience
a great deal of prosperity.
सम्पद्दाये सुखं धनम्।
स्वपित्रधिकभाग्यवान्। । २६३६ I |
पंचनिन्दुयुते जीवे कमलांशे कुजेक्षिते।
पिथुनाधिपसन्दष्टे पंचमन्दे क्व चिद्विपत्। | २६३७। |
2537. Danger in Sth Year: Jupiter having the
aspect of Mars, getting five Bindus in his
(Jupiter’s) Ashtaka Varga, and lastly being in
aspect to the lord of Gemini, Mercury, will be
somewhat dangerous in the Kamala Nadiamsa
native’s fifth year.
सुरंशगे विलग्नेशे विप्रनाडयां प्रजायते।
बाल्ये मान्दज्वरार्तश्च वसूरीज्वरगण्डवान्। । २६३८ |
2638. Childhood Diseases: The ascendant
lord attaining Sura Nadiamsa will cause to the
native of Vipra Kala of Kamala Nadiamsa danger
of indigestion, small pox etc. in childhood.
कमलांशे पूर्वभागे जन्म तारादशान्तर |
पंचमान्दात् परं चैव द्विव चोत्तरायणे। । २६३९।।
ब्रहमोपदेशमाप्नेति Ag मेषदिषुं त्रिपु।
गुरूप्रथसपयीये मेषन्त्ये वृषभे तथा। | २३४० |
STAR प्रजातस्य मौजीबन्धनमादिशेत्।
जन्म तारादशान्त्यादो
pa pic lb स्वभुक्तिघु। | २३४१। |
कमलांशे प्रजातस्य गेत |
2639-2641 1/2. Education etc.: One born in
the first half of Kamala Nadiamsa will in the first
dasa, after the 5th year of age, coinciding with the

Deva Keralam 235
Sun’s northerly course, be initiated into Vedic
studies. In this context, the Sun should (particularly) be in transit in the three Rasis commnecing Aries. His thread ceremony will occur
coinciding with Jupiter traversing in the last protion of Aries, or Taurus. In the end of first dasa,
or in the first sub period of second dasa, the
native’s marriage will occur.
living sister while other sisters will be destroyed.
Note: Hemavathi Nadiamsa is not listed in
the sources available to us.
Sara पूर्वभागे चेगितज्ञस्तु तत्पिता! | EX ।
सुमुखः कुशलो भीरूर्विद्यासोख्यविहीनवान्।
वाल्ये दुष्टस्वभावेन परस्त्रीसंगपापवान्। । २६४९ |
पश्चात्तप्तः पापभीरू्वैदिकाचारधर्मवान्।
जातकस्य गुणं कक्ष्ये श्यमवर्णः सुुद्रिमान्। | २६५० |
परोपकारनिरतो लिपित्रयविशारदः।
दिशे SATE कारके स्वोच्चरशिगे। । २६४२।।
आस्तिकः सर्वधर्मज्ञो वदान्यो SAAS! । २६५१। |
उद्वाहं जन्म देशेषु ००५२८. षु च।
मृदुकान्तवपुः सधु्मधुरम्लरसप्रियः।
पित्तरलेष्मस्वभावश्च पित्तप्रकृतिदेहवान्। | २६४४ |
fT सत्यवान् रागी परस्क्रसंगपापवान्।
2642-26441/2. The 7th lord (Jupiter) in
Gemini navamsa, while the significator (Venus) is
in Pisces Rasi, the native’s bride will hail from the
eastern part of his birth place. One born in the
former half will be endowed with eyes resembling
the petal of a lotus, will wed a softly disposed girl,
be himself gentle, be fond of sweet and sour
juices, be of bilious and phlegmatic temperaments (in predominance), will have two names,
be truthful, passionate, and will join others’
women.
शक्रागारकसंयेगे कमलांशे च संस्थिते। । २६४५। |
कामेशे SATS गुप्तकामातुरो भवेत्।
नीचांशगे विलग्नेशे भूसुतेन समन्विते! | २६४६। |
विद्याविनयसम्पननः कोपी कषिप्रप्रसादवान्।
HOA रागी दारेशे पपवीकषिते। | २६४७। |
चिरायुषी भगिन्येका शेषं नाशमि तीरयेत्।
2645-2647 1/2. One born in Kamala Nadiamsa having Venus in the company of Mars, while
the 7th lord (Jupiter) is in the Nadiamsa entitled
Hemavathi, will be secretively lustful (i.e. he will
secretly join others’ women). If the ascendant
lord joins Mars and begets Pisces Navamsa, the
native will be learned, highly modest and given to
anger to be only pleased instantly. If the 7th lord
is in aspect to a malefic, the subject will have two
wives, be passionate and will have only one long2648-2651. The father of the native of former
half of Kamala Nadiamsa is described thus. He
will be skilled in the interpretation of internal
sentiments by external gestures, will have a
charming face, be skilful (in general), timid,
bereft of learning and comforts, be crooked in
childhood and will join others’ women, will later
on regret and be afraid of committing (such a) sin
and will follow the codes prescribed by the Vedas.
Now about the native. He will be dark-bodied,
highly intelligent, be ever interested in helping
others, skilful in three scripts (1.6. languages), be
a God-believer, versed in all religions (or humanlaws), be generous, and be friendly to messengers.
लग्नेशे नीचराशिस्थे नीचांशे पापवीक्षिते।
SREP प्रसन्नात्मा किचिल्लुन्दस्वभाववान्। । २६५२। |
2652. If the ascendant lord is in debility both
in Rasi and Navamsa, and be in aspect to a
malefic, the native will be inwardly given to anger,
but be pleased. He will be somewhat miserly in
disposition.
सिते कर्मे aired तेजस्वी बुद्धमाननरः+
सुमुखः कुशलो मन्त्री वेदान्तज्ञान तत्ववित्। । २६५३ । |
चापांशके BY शक्रे वेदशस्त्राथ॑तत्त्ववित्।
जन्माधिपदशाकाले न |
2653-55. Venus: Venus in the 10th (Pisces)
with Pisces Navamsa denotes that the native will

236 Chandra Kala Nadi
be endowed with splendour and intelligence. He
will possess a charming face, be skilful, be a minister and be highly learned in Upanishads,
Philosophy etc. If Venus, placed in Pisces, attains
Sagittarius in Navamsa, the native will be highly
skilful in deciphering the meanings of the Vedas
and Sastras. He will please ascetics. If Venus 15
in Sura Nadiamsa, the subject will be highly rich.
He will have a second marriage after 22nd year in
the dasa of Mercury and in the bhukti of Sth lord
Venus.
कुम्भत्रिकोणगे जीवे युग्मांशकस्थितेअपि च।
Sas प्रथमं विद्यात् कमलशे न संशयः। । २६५६। |
2656. Female Issue: For the native of
Kamala Nadiamsa, Jupiter placed in a trine to
Aquarius, with Gemini Navamsa (or an even
Navamsa) will firstly cause birth of a daughter.
पंचमाधिपतै शुक्रे मीने चापांशसंस्थिते।
असितेन युते दृष्टे सन्तानप्रतिबन्धवान्। । २६५७ । ।
जायते मुतिमाप्नति पुरापातकहेतुना।
तत्पापपरिहारार्थं हरिद्रानागमर्चयेत्। । २६५८ । |
निष्कत्रयसुवर्णेन प्रतिमां विष्णुरूपिणीम्।
जन्मादिदिवसे चैव शन्तिं कुर्यद्विचक्षणः। । २६५९। |
क लभते नात्र संशयः |
गुरोस्तृर्त गोचरे वृश्चिके गुरो। । २६६०। |
Pact SAAT न संशयः।
2657-2660 1/2. Obstacle to Progeny: The Sth
lord Venus, if in aspect to or be with Saturn,
should be in Pisces with Sagittarius Navamsa.
Then the subject will face obstacles in begetting
progeny. If per chance, children are born, the
native on account of previous sins will lose them.
To overcome such a blemish, worship of Cobra
made of turmeric be done. Also of the image of
Lord Vishnu obtained spending three gold coins.
Propitiations on birth days etc. should be done.
Only then will the native obtain a good and longliving son. The native of Kamala Nadiamsa will
celebrate the birth of a son when Jupiter traverses
the sign Scorpio in his third round of the zodiac.
कालांशकस्थिते जीवे चापांशे मिथुने अथवा। | zesey |
विपत्तारदशाकाले देहजाडयं क्वचित्क्वचित् न |
तद्दोषपरिहारार्थं शन्तिं कुर्याद्यथाविधि। । २६६२। |
2661-2662. Jupiter should be in Kaala
Nadiamsa, or in Sagittartus/Gemini Navamsa.
Then during the 3rd dasa, the native will be somewhat sickly. To obtain freedom, suitable remedies
be resorted to.
भग्याधिपदशाकाले भाग्यवृद्धिः सुतोत्सवः।
पंच्रिंशात् पर es भाग्यं स्वप्राबल्यं धनागमम्। । २६६३। |
जद्वारजनस्नेहं वाहनाम्बर लाभवान्।
2663-26631/2. Dasa of 9th lord: In the dasa
ruled by the lord of the 9th, the native’s prosperity
will increase after his 36th year. He will obtain a
son (or will have auspicious functions relating to
his progeny). He will make friends with people
in royal employ. He will attain wealth and become
great. He will gain conveyances and robes.
विपत्तारदशाकाले पूर्वाधं व्याकुलं महत्। | २६६४ |
अपरार्धे पितारिष्टमापत्सन्यासमश्नुते।
कुलीरदित्रये मासे मन्दे वक्रेअतचारगे। । २६६५। |
सिंहरशिं गते सूर्य पितृनिर्याणमादिशेत्।
विपत्तारदशाकाले रविभमान्तरान्तरे | २६६६। |
URN वापि देहयासं धनक्षयम् |
चापं गते विलग्नेशे कर्मजीवान्तरान्तर |
कमलांशे प्रजातश्च स्वम ताचारधर्मवान्। | २६६७। |
2664-2667. Third Dasa: The dasa which is
the third from birth will in its first half cause
worries of a great order. In the second half of the
dasa in question, danger to father and the native’s
taking to ascetic order will come to pass. When
the Sun transits the three signs commencing Cancer, (particularly) in Leo, and when Saturn is in
retrogression or in accelerated motion, predict
danger to father. In the third dasa, the subperiods ruled by Sun, Mars and Rahu will cause
illness to the native apart from loss of wealth. The
ascendant lord in Sagittarius will enable the
Kamala Nadiamsa native follow virtuous and
religious path according to his caste.

Deva Keralaim ae
Notes: Karma Jeevantharanthare is not a
proper combination of words and is a misplaced
expression here. At best it could mean: the sub
and sub-sub periods of Jupiter in the 10th, which
meaning is insensible.
oo निवासं
योगं कमलांशजस्य।
अतीष सौख्यं मुनयो वदन्ति
विपद्दशन्त्ये तु सुभग्यवृद्धिम्। 1 २६६८ । |
शेमदाये महत्सौख्यं चत्वारिंशत् प्रं सुखम्।
द्विचत्वारिशतः पस्चाद्योगवान् कार्तिमान् सुखी ॥ २६६९॥
2668-2669. The native of Kamala Nadiamsa
(having ascendant lord in Sagittarius) will live in
a town on the banks of Mahanadi. He will enjoy
Yoga effects, and be very happy. His third dasa
will bring with it abundant fortunes. Fourth dasa
will cause great happiness. After his 40th year, he
will be happy. Following 42nd year he will beget
fame, position and happiness.
सुखधिपदशाकाले व्ययाधिपतिभुकितिषु।
SHAY प्रजातस्य मात्ररिषटं विनिर्दिशेत्। । २६७०।
2670. Danger to Mother: The native of
Kamala Nadiamsa will see his mother endangered in his 4th dasa and in the sub period
ruled by the 12th lord.
ATTRAC लग्नेशांशत्रिकोणगे,
SECS गते जीवे प्रबलोद्योगभग्यवान्। । २६७१ | |
2671. Professional Progress: When Jupiter
comes to a sign which is trine to the Navamsa
occupied by the lord of ascendant, during the
dasa of the ascendant lord himself, the native will
enjoy progress in work.
्रत्यक्तारदशाकाले रन्रधिपतिभुक्तिषु।
देहजाडयं प्रकुर्वीत शान्त्या शन्तिं प्रयास्यति।
प्रत्यक्तारदशाकाले शुभाशुभफलं समम्। । २६७२। |
नित्यानदानपुण्यात्मा हरिकामातुरे भवेत्। । २६७३। |
2672-2673. In the sub period of the 8th lord,
and in the dasa of the Sth lord, the native will fall
sick for which prescribed remedies be performed.
In this dasa, good and bad results will be equal.
Further the native will perform poor-feeding
uninterruptedly. His sexual lust will equal that of
a lion (Hari = lion, frog) (in this dasa).
सुताधिपदशाकाले Fe क्रूरमासगे।
अपमृत्युभयप्राप्तिः शन्तिं कुर्याद्विचक्षणः! | २६७४ ।
2674. Untimely End: The native’s mundane
journey may face an untimely threat in the dasa
ruled by the lord of the Sth house, in evil months
(denoted by transit Sun) and in evil years
denoted bv transit Jupiter). This danger will be
remed'able.
कमलशे पूर्वभागे सपापे शश्िनन्दने।
सुताधपदशमृत्युः FIRS सुजीवतति। | Fes | |
व सत्यं शक्रे मे पूरणे स्थिते(2) |
विप्रकाले फलं सत्यं प्रत्यक्षं देवकेरक्छम्। / २६७७। |
2675-77, Death: For a native of Kamala
Nadiamsa, first half, death will strike in the dasa
of the 5th lord, if at birth Mercury is conjunct a
malefic. He will live happily upto 56. Venus
placed in the 10th house will enabie the native
attain Brahma Loka. His father will also attain
Brahmaloka. These effects as per Deva Keralam
wil bear truth.
। । मेष्षलग्नम् - (चम्फकाशं) | |
Aries Ascendant — (Champaka Nadiamsa)
मेषलग्ने VTA मेषंशे तु प्रजायते।
विप्रजन्म सुखी नित्यं सीमन्ततनयो भवेत्।
अथवा च तृतीयः स्याज्ज्येष्ठश्तृविनाशवान्। | २६७८
चम्पकांशे पूर्वभागे गुस्त्रिंशंशके तथा।
पूर्वपश्चिम वीथीषु चोत्तरे तु प्रजायते। । २६७९। |
2678-2679. One born in Aries ascendant,
Aries Navamsa in Champaka Naidamsa will be a
Brahmin, ever happy and be the first/third issue
of the family. His elder brother will be destroyed.
Birth in Jupiterian Trimsamsa, in the first half of

this Naidamsa, will be in an east-west street, in a
north-facing house.
Notes: For Champakamsa please see notes
under sloka 1312 supra. The text now deals with
a movable ascendant.
गुरौ स्वोच्चे Buy कर्मनाथयुतेक्षिते।
चम्पकंशि पूर्वभागे य इदं फलमश्नुते। । २६८०। |
जातकस्य सुखवप्तिस्तारन्दानन्तरं सुखम्।
रराधिपदशाकाले राजन्यजनमेत्रवान्। । २६८१। |
सर्वाध्यक्षधिकारेण गेहे लक्ष्मीकयक्षवान्।
मा नक्षत्राधिपतेस्तदा। | २६८२। |
अन्तश्िद्रभयं क्वचित्
० SSM मेहव्रणभयं तथा। | २६८३ । |
हारार्थं शन्तिं कुर्याद्विचक्षणेः |
2680-26831/2. Jupiter being in the company
of Saturn in Cancer and occupying Pisces Navamsa will give happiness for the native of former half
of Champaka Nadiamsa, after his 26th year. In
the dasa of the 8th lord he will befriend people in
royal circles. He will obtain a post with wide
powers under the king and will be blessed with
wealth. In the sub periods of the lords of the 6th,
8th and the Moon in the dasa of the 8th lord, the
subject will have fear from enemies, mental distress and fear of destruction. His paternal uncle
will be endangered. The subject will have fear of
ulcer and urinary disorders. To be safe, remedies
be done as prescribed.
भग्यंशे कटके लग्ने परमं दानमाचरेत्। । २६८४। |
शतरुवर्गकुलच्छेदः कृष्णाश्वरथदानतः। |
मेषलग्नै प्रजातस्तु रक्तवर्णशुभाकृतिः। | २६८५। ।
2684-2685. 1169101107010 Cancer ascendant
will make the native highly charitable. He will
destroy his enemies. One born in Aries ascendant will be blood-red in complexion and be endowed with an auspicious appearance.
चम्पकशि चरे लग्ने गुरूत्रिंशंशसंयुते।
रक्तवर्णे मध्यगात्रः समदेहस्वरूपवान्। | २६८६। |
चम्पकांशे पूर्वभागे मेषलग्ने प्रजायते!
Chandra Kala Nadi
रूपवान् मतिमान् वाग्मी प्रसन्नमुखनेत्रवान्। । २६८७। |
अदुष्टशाली धर्मात्मा शजयेगयुतो भवेत्।
चम्पकांश पर्वभागे चरलग्ने प्रजायते। | २६८८ । ।
यदीश्वरप्रियौ वाग्मी देवब्रहमणपोषकः।
मितभाषी मितभाषी च मि तनिद्रोअतिजाग्रवान्। | २६८९।।
प्राज्ञ गत्तज्ञश्चतुरो नानाभाषविशारदः |
2686-891/2. The native of Champaka
Nadiamsa belonging to a movable sign in
Jupiterian Trimsamsa, will be blood-red in complexion. He will have a medium-build and symmetrical body. He will be endowed with beauty,
intelligence, eloquence and charming face and
eyes. He will be fortunate, religious and will enjoy
Raja Yoga effects. He will honour the leaders of
ascetics and gods and Brahmins. He will eat,
speak and sleep, all within limits. He will be very
careful, learned and will know the thoughts of
others. He will be skilful (in genenral) and will
excel in many languages.
लग्नेशे धनरशिस्थे सुखेशे केन्द्रराशिगे। । २६९०। |
चम्पकांश प्रजातश्च् यावदायुष्यसौख्यवान्।
्ातुस्थनाधिपे सौम्ये कुजसंयुतवीक्षिते। । २६९९। |
चम्पकांशे प्रजातश्च पश्चाद्भ्ातृविनाशवान्।
चम्पके TES चन्दर त्विन्द्रारानाडिगे। । २६९२। |
चरलग्ने प्रजातश्च हरिशंकरभवित्ान्।
सन्मार्गवृत्तिनिरत उक्कृष्टोधर्मसिद्धिमान्। । २६९३। |
कृषिपश्वादिलाभं च प्रामभूम्यदिसंयुतम्।
2690-26931/2. The ascendant lord in the 2nd
house while the 4th lord is in an angle from the
ascendant: the native of Champaka Nadiamsa will
be happy throughout his life. The 3rd lord Mercury joining Mars will deprive the Champaka
Nadiamsa native of after- borns. One born in the
first half of Champaka Nadiamsa in a movable
sign having the Moon in Indra Nadiamsa will be
a devotee of Lord Vishnu and Lord Siva. Further
he will follow the path prescribed for the virtuous
and will obtain excellent religious merits. He will
gain through agriculture, quadrupeds etc. and be
endowed with lordship over villages and landed
proerties.
चम्पकांशे पूर्वभागे लाभेशे भग्यराशिगे। । २६९४। ।

Deva Keralam
सम्पत्तारदशाकाले ममजीबन्धनमादिशेत्।
सम्पत्तारदशाकाले ९ कमशंशत्रिकोणगे व | २६९५ । |
Spear गते जीवे त्सवमादिशेत्।
जन्मभूदक्षिगे भागे case वा दिवाहवान्। । २६९६। |
2694-2696. One born in the first half of
Champaka Nadiamsa while the 11th lord is in the
Oth house will have his thread ceremonyin the 2nd
dasa. In the same dasa, his marriage will take
place, if Jupiter traverses the sign represented by
the 10th lord’s natal Navamsa position, or a trine
thereof. His bride will hail from the southern or
south-eastern part of his native region.
दारस्थानाधिपे शुक्रे युग्माशे ATT |
एक्तवर्णकखत्रं स्यद्विवाहानानन्तरं सुखम्। । २६९७। |
लक्ष्मीकयक्षवानिनत्यं गेहे गोधन्मसकुलम्।
उद्राहानन्तरं चेति नित्यश्रर्नित्यमंगलम्। । २६९८ | ।
2697-2698. If the 7th lord Venus is in an even
Navamsa, obtaining Mangala Nadiamsa, the
spouse will be blood-red in complexion and the
native will be happy following marriage. He will
be ever blessed with the mercy of goddess
Lakshmi, and will have abundance of grains and
quadrupeds. After marriage it will be wealth and
auspictousness for ever.
Notes: For Aries ascendant Venus 15 lord of
the 7th. He should be in even Navamsa (of any
Rasi). Additionally he should be in Mangaia
Nadiamsa (refer to notes under sloka 226 supra).
पुष्करांशगते जीवे रन्येशे |i
चम्पकांश पजातश्च यावदायुष्यभग्यवान्। । २६९९। |
2699. Life-long Fortunes: If Jupiter is in
Pushkara Navamsa while the 10th lord (Jupiter
himself) is in aspect to Mars, the native of Champaka Nadiamsa will enjoy fortune throughout his
life.
Notes: Pushkara Navamsa may be understood thus. If a planet is placed in the Rast and
Navamsa mentioned below, at one and the same
time, it is said to be in Pushkara Navamsa:
Rasi Navamsa
Aries Libra
Taurus Pisces
Gemini Pisces
Cancer Cancer
Leo Libra
Virgo Pisces
Libra Pisces
Scorpio Cancer
Sagittarius Sagittarius
Capricorn Taurus
Aquarius Taurus
Pisces Virgo
From the above, it is clear that planets in
Aries/Gemini/Leo/Scorpio/Capricorn/Aquarius
Navamsa are not entitled to attain Pushkara
Navamsa.
लगनाधिपो वाथ चतुर्थनाथतद्राशिनाथावथ भाग्यनाथः।
कर्मेशलभिश्वर योगद्ष्टा-
2700. Conveyances: The native will enjoy
four kinds of (traditional) conveyances (menborne palanquins, horses, elephants and
chariots) if the lords of ascendant, 4th and dispositors of these lords are in association by way
of aspect/conjunction with the lords of 10th and
11th. This effect will come to pass in the concerned planet’s dasa periods.
सम्पत्तारदशाकाले रम्भ्रेशांशत्रिकोणगे।
स्फुटयोगं गते मन्दे मात्ररिष्टं विनिर्दिशेत्। | wok! |
2701. Danger to Mother: During the rulership of second dasa, if Saturn traverses the sign
represented by the 8th lord’s natal Navamsa position, or a trine thereof, danger to mother will
strike.

Bet
संपद्दाये Basa TA TT
Chandra Kala Nad
पत्रभावपतौ सूय कुजसंयुतर्वक्षिते।
मिथुने बहुभाग्यं स्याच्चम्पकांशे न संशयः! ¦ २७०२। | चेम्पकांशे प्रजातश्च पुत्रीपुत्रसमृद्धिमान्। । २७०७। |
2702. Wealth: This is for a Champaka
Nadiamsa native. In the second dasa, he will
obtain wealth coinciding with Jupiter’s movements in the end of Aries, or in Taurus. Jupiter’s
movement in Gemini will bless the subject with
exceeding weaith.
कुजस्थानाधिपे जवे लग्नात् केन्द्रचतुष्टये।
स्वपितुः सोदरः पंच त्वथवा वेदसंख्यकाः। | २७०३। |
2703. Father’s Brothers: Jupiter should become the lord of the sign occupied by Mars at
birth, and should be in an angle from the ascendant. In that case, predict five, or four brothers
to the native’s father.
पितृव्याधिपतौ मन्द् चम्पकंशे स्थिते सति।
स्वपिता च पितृव्य वा गुणात्मा योगपुण्यवान्॥ २७०८ ॥
2704-2705. Saturn ruling the 11th house
placed in Champaka Nadiamsa denotes that the
native’s father and paternal uncles will be virtuous, prosperous and meritorious.
WIGS तु विपदूदशायं
षे तु लग्ने शुभशोभनाप्तिः।
मातामहो वा सुतदारपीडां
सचारकाले स्वपिताप्यरिष्टम्। । २७०५। |
2705. Dasa Periods: One born in Aries ascendant will in the 2nd and third dasas experience
auspicious events, But his maternal grand-father,
or the native’s spouse and progeny will be in
trouble. There will also be danger to his father
while on journey.
गोचरे ॥ मन्दे चम्पकांशक संस्थिते |
सिंहराशि गते सूरय पितृनिर्याणमादिशेत्। | २७०६। |
2706. Father’s Death: The father of Champaka Nadiamsa will die when Saturn is in transit
in Taurus, coinciding with Sun’s movement in
Leo.
पुप्रजात्रयमायुष्यं कन्यका sil: सुखजीविनौ |
पुत्रस्थानाधिपे aS FAO कुजेक्षिते। | २७०८। |
षष्ठेशे ` यम्छात्माजयोगवान्।
2707-27081/2. Progeny: The native of Champaka Nadiamsa will have many sons and many
daughters if the Sth lord Sun is related to Mars by
aspect or conjunction. Out of these, three sons
and one daughter will be long-lived. Predict birth
of twins if the Sth lord Sun being aspected by Mars
occupies Gemini Navamsa while the 6th lord
(Mercury) is (also) in aspect to Mars.
राज्यस्थाने यदि स्यातां सूयंसोम्यो eal [1 २७०९। |
कमे वा हिबुके वापि षु तेन निरीक्षिते।
अतिश्यमः सदा भोगी कमं गुरूनिरीक्षिते। | २५१०।।
2709-2710. Should the two planets, Sun and
Mercury, be of equal longitudes in the 10th house,
while the 10th or 4th house be in aspect to Mars,
the subject will be exceedingly dark-complexioned and will be ever devoted to enjoying
pleasures. Jupiter’s aspect on the 10th will
produce following effects (as mentioned in the
next six slokas).
8 त्वपरे ie Ba महोत्सवम् |
यौवने ag चत्वारिशात् परं सुखम्। । २७११ ।
क्षेम तारदशकाले विशेषश्रीयुतौ भवेत्।
नित्यन्नदानपुण्यात्मा चम्पकांशे न संशयः। । २७१२। |
कषेम तारदशाकाले गोचरे वृषभे MAT
योगभंगवशात् क्लेशं शान्तिं कु्याद्यथाविधि। | २७१३।।
प्रत्यक्तार् दशाकाले देशे राज्ञं कलापवान्।
अनावृष्टिहते देशे महानयम् | २७९४। |
परत्यक्तारदशाकाले पूर्वार्ध सोख्यमश्नुते।
अपरधै येगर्भगादपमृत्युभयं. महत्। । २७१५। |
तत्पापपरिहारा्थं शान्तिं कुर्याद्यथाविधि ।
चम्पकांशे पूर्वभागे प्रत्यक्तारदशान्तरे |
कालमृत्युभय सत्यं चम्पकशे न GRE! | २७१६ |
2711-2716. Dasa Periods: The 2nd half of
3rd dasa will cause great and happy events. In his
youth, he will enjoy abundant prosperity. After

Deva Keralam 241
40, he will be happy. In the 4th dasa, he will get
much wealth. He wil! uninterruptedly perform
poor- feeding and earn merits thereby. In the 4th
dasa, his prosperity will be interrupted, causing
grief, when Saturn traverses in Taurus. For this,
remedies as prescribed be done. In the 5th dasa,
there will be strife in the country (?) apart from
famine etc. (??) The first half of fifth dasa will
give comforts. And its second half will interrupt
prosperity and cause fear of untimely death of the
native. To overcome this phase, the native should
resort to remedies. In the end of Sth dasa, the
native of first half of Champaka Nadiamsa will
die.
ग्रन्थान्तरे भार्गवसंप्रदाये
लगने सुखे पापयुतेक्षिते च।
सत्कर्मचारी सुकुती धनाटयो
लग्न नाडीफलं सत्यं प्रत्यक्ष देवकेरव्छम्। । २७१८ |
2717-2718. According to Bhargava Nadi:
As per the school mentioned, the ascendant
(Aries) and the 4th being in occupation by, or in
aspect to malefics will enable the native follow
virtuous path, do good deeds and become wealthy. In the other world, he will be happy. These
effects from Lagna Nadi, retold in Deva Keralam,
will bear truth.
Notes: Malefics related to ascendant and
4th giving beneficial results may be noted. This
applies to only Champaka Nadiamsa in Aries
rising at birth.
[To be continued in Book IT]

242 Chandra Kala Nadi
THE TIMES OF ASTROLOGY
Most Informative Enlightener on
Hindu Astrology
Edited by R Santhanam [English translator of Saravli (2 vols), Brihat Parasara Hora (Vol. 1),
Deva Keralam (being published in 3 vols.)], Suka Nadi, Hora Sara, Essentials of Predictive Hindu
Astrology, etc....etc........
The monthly journal contains interesting Editorial, articles from many research scholars with a
lot of material to gain deeper and deeper insight in Hindu Vedic Astrology.
Your best guide.
You can subscribe and get you copies promptly.
Inland: Rs.110 (one Yr); Rs.220 (2 Yrs)
Overseas: One year US $ 35; Two year US $ 65 (By airmail)
(Rates revisable from time to time.)
Each year a special bulk number being introduced from 1992.
Send subscriptions giving relevant details on a plain paper by bank draft, money order, or IMO
tO:
R SANTHANAM ASSOCIATES
"Sri Bhavanam"
9/1040, Govind Puri
Kalkaji
NEW DELHI 110019
(India)
Phone: 6462777

Deva Keralam 243
Works of R. Santhanam
Deva Keralam - Book 1 - The most exhautive text book of Nadi astrology, describing many events
based on Nadiamsa (150th part of a Sign) and enlisting many rules unheard of so far. Has Sanskrit
slokas in original Devanagari script with English translation and easy-to-understand notes.
Essentials of Predictive Hindu Astrology - containes best researched editorials, research rules
and over 100 prctical horoscopes selected from the author’s works. Essence of 20 years of devoted
study and a must for every practsing astrologer.
Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra (Part 1 only)
Gospel Book of Hindu Astrology with masterkey to the art of prediction. First time in English
press. Original slokas in Devanagari and English translation with exhaustive commentary.
Saravali - Original by Kalyana Varma. Success ladder and encyclopaedia of astrology. Original
slokas in Devanagari and English translation with exhaustive commentary - 2 Vol.Set.
Hora Sara of Prithu Yasas, son of Varaha Mihira - an adorable masterpiece. Original slokas in
Devanagari and English translation and exhaustive commentary.
Garga Hora of Sage Garga. Helps partically to interpret any possible planetary conjunction
irrespective of Bhava and number of planets. English version with about 1400 conjunctions.
Nashta Jatakam (Lost horoscopy) - with Devanagari slokas and English translation. Helps
reconstruct unrecorded birth data.
Doctrines of Suka Nadi Retold. This book reveals Nadi system’s mysteries. Contains thrilling
information. English Version with notes.
Latitudes, Longitudes & LMTs for 5000 Places in India:
Copies can be had of:
Sagar Publications
“Ved Mansion’
72 Janpath
New Delhi 110 001
(India) Tel 3320648
