READABLE DATASET
================================================================================
Original file: chandrakala_nadi_2.json
Dataset number: 80 of 455
Format: valid JSON
Structure: Object / structured dataset
Original size: 1,407,829 bytes
Top-level fields: 11
Title: Chandrakala Nadi 2
Creator: —
Date: —
Description: —

CONTENT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
METADATA AND OTHER FIELDS
  • title: Chandrakala Nadi 2
  • creator: —
  • date: —
  • description: —
  • subject: —
  • identifier: —
  • source_folder: ckn-3
  • total_pages: 296
  • total_words: 160657
  • text_quality:
    • ocr_word_validity_score: 0.813
    • quality_tier: good
    • note: —

FULL TEXT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
कत्व DEMO : Purchase from www A-PDF com to remove the watermark

DEVA KERALAM

DEVA KRERALAM
(CHANDRA KALA NADI)
BY
ACHYUTA OF KERALA
& VENKATESA
BOOK II
(Containing Slokas 2719 - 3407
and Slokas 1 to 1997)
Translated by
R. Santhanam
SAGAR PUBLICATIONS
Ved Mansion
72, Janpath
New Dethi - 110 OO1

First Published 1993
© Publishers
Published by Narinder Sagar for Sagar Publications 72, Ved mansion
Janpath New Delhi - 110001
Typeset & Printed by Impact Compuprints
Binding by A.J. Book Binding House

Preface
I have great pleasure in presenting herewith Book II of Deva Keralam.
The encouragement given by the readers following appearance of Book I hereof is
thankfully acknowledged.
Although the original is popularly attributed to Achyuta, in actuality Venkatesa’s
name also appears as author at one stage. This Venkatesa need not be confused with
Sarvartha Chintamani’s author, vide notes given under sloka 1 infra. The original
authorship is actually divided as under:
Sloka No. 1 to 3407 by Achyuta in the first phase.
Sloka No. 1 to 4775 by Venkatesa in the later phase.
Thus there is a total of 8102 original slokas for which our arrangement of presentation
1S as under:
Sloka 1 to sloka 2718 of Achyuta in Book I.
Sloka 2719 to sloka 3407 of Achyuta, and sloka 1 to sloka 1997 of Venkatesa in Book
Ol.
Rest of the work from slokas from No. 1998 to 4775 of Venkatesa is being brought
out as Book III.
In the present volumealso, there are many general principles applicable to the various
ascendants, apart from Nadiamsa discussions confined to given signs. The reader will be
able to understand the same as he progresses with the study of the text, remembering at the
same time the general outlines given in the preface for Book I.
[have every hope that the kind reader will forgive me for my shortcomings if any and
accord a favourable reception to my present efforts.
R. Santhanam
(Editor,
The Times Of Astrology)
9/1040 Govindpuri
Kalkaji
New Delhi 110 019
(India)

Co: Sy
CONTENTS
Trailokya Nadiamsa, Capricorn ascendant,
prosperity, Saturn in Pisces.
Movable ascendant, Capricorn ascendant -
4th lord.
Coborn, 4th lord Mars, Mars-Saturn-Moon,
Jupiter in Pushkaramsa.
Second dasa, single marriage, other effects.
Third dasa, Trailokya Nadiamsa.
Ketu’s sub period, the Sun in an angle.
Raja Yoga, death, previous birth.
Pisces ascendant - Suprabha Nadiamsa, Venus
in a trine, Mars with Rahu, sister, progeny,
physique, Virgo Navamsa.
Treasurer, another school of thought, mother,
danger, Jupiterian Trimsamsa, sister.
Father, marrage, deformity, wicked spouse,
two wives, Mercury in Sth Arudha.
Dasaeffects, lord of 8th, 4th place in Navamsa,
increased wealth.
The Sun in an angle, 4th dasa, Venus - Mars,
6th dasa, life span.
Kalusha Nadiamsa, infantile mortality, instant
death, umbilical cord, Leo or Virgo Navamsa.
Venus - Mars conjunction, Jupiter in angle,
father, paternal grand father, Kalusha
Nadiamsa.
Kalusha Nadiamsa - 2nd half, Mercury in own
sign, dasa of 8th lord, Saturn in ascendant,
Jupiter in 4th.
Moon in Sundari Nadiamsa, Jupiter in said
Nadiamsa, obstacles to marriage, remedies.
Marriage, Jupiter as 7th lord, father, secretive
disposition, paternal uncle.
Danger to spouse, Ketu, coborn, dasa of 9th
lord, death etc.
Kalusha Nadiamsa - Pisces ascendant, Jupiter.
Kantha Nadiamsa - Pisces ascendant, Maala
Nadiamsa ~ movable ascendant, Venus in an
angle or in trine, mother and coborn.
Kanthaa Nadiamsa, first half, third dasa, Aries
Navamsa, Mars in 5th, father and paternal
uncle.
Pisces Navamsa, Jupiter in Cancer, marniage,
dasa effects.
Lord of 8th in 11th, Mars - Rahu periods,
Cancer ascendant - Pisces Navamsa, Saturn in
11th.
Danger through water, Mercury in Cancer
Navamsa, remedies, adverse bhukt.
Saturn’s transit, ill-health, other effects, lord
of sun sign, medium life-span.
Cancer ascendant - Pankaja Nadiamsa,
prosperity, life-span, Libra ascendant -
Champaka Nadiamsa, second half, first half.
Mother, father, marriage, remarriage,
conveyance, wealth.
Childlessness, remedy, prosperity, destruction.
Dasa effects for Libra ascendant, Jupiter in
10th.
Jupiter in Libra Navamsa, Sun’s Ashtaka
Varga, Saturn -Mars, dasa results, sub period
of 9th lord, Ashtaka Varga.
Importance of Moon and ascendant, Moon’s
Ashtaka varga, lord of ascendant.
Saturn’s blemish, Moon’s Ashtaka Varga.
Transit in Nakshatras - General, results of
week-days.
Tilness.
Dasa effects.
Saturn’s transit.
Rahu’s transit, untimely death, Navamsa
dispositors.
Jupiter in retrogression, immovable ascendant
- Kuntala Nadiamsa.
Moon in Uttara, trinal Jupiter, Chitrini
Nadiamsa, Aquarius ascendant, 4th house,
Rahu in ascendant, immovable ascendant -
Kuntala Nadiamsa.
Immovable ascendant - Chitrini Nadiamsa,
Nara Yoga, Rahu and Guru Chandala Yoga.

Immovable ascendant, Jupiter in Aquarius,
benefic planets - general, Saturn - Mars
conjunction.
Saturn’s transit in 12 houses from the
ascendant, Saturn’s effect according to others.
Father and Saturn’s transit.
Saturn’s transit, 4th Navamsa, Rahu’s transit,
Libraascendant - Saturn’s transit, Venus dasa.
Libra ascendant - mother, Jupiter’s position in
Navamsa, Gemini ascendant, Mudgara
Nadiamsa.
Gemini ascendant, Moon in Vargottama,
Mudgara Nadiamsa.
Jupiter in 10th, Satum’s transit, Mars in Libra,
Mantra recitation.
Fickle-mindedness, Saturn’s transit.
Remedy, Jupiter’s dasa - Libra ascendant.
Tenth lord’s period, urinary disorders, dasa of
9th lord.
Saturn’s dasa, Saturn’s transit, Gemini
ascendant - Mudgara Nadiamsa, 4th lord,
Jupiter’s transit.
Aswinianditstrines, Mercury’s Ashtaka varga,
Saturn in Sth, Rudra Yamala quoted.
Manu quoted, Jupiter dasa, Venus sub period.
Jala Yoga, abortion, Saturn dasa - Venus
bhukti, Jupiter’s 3rd round of transit.
Jupiter’s 4th round of transit, dasa of 8th lord,
Leo ascendant - Sivada Nadiamsa.
Jupiter in 3rd, Jupiter - Rahu conjunction,
other divisions, Jupiter in Virgo Navamsa,
Jupiter in Leo Navamsa.
Rahu aspected by Sun and Venus, The Moon
in Libra, Moon in Mohana Nadiamsa, Jupiter
in Leo,
Jupiter - Moon, maternal grand fathers, mother
described, maternal uncle, Sivakari Nadiamsa,
paternal uncles.
Sivada Nadiamsa, father, 5th lord, maternal
kinsfolk, Moon in Mohana Nadiamsa, Sun in
Aquarius.
Long-living parents, Sun’s dispositor, Saturn
in 12th house, sickness to mother, progeny,
other authorities; step-brother.
Venus sub period, bhava effects, Saturn in
3rd, Capricorn ascendant - Kalika Nadiamsa.
Kalika Nadiamsa, easy birth, maternal uncle,
related families, third dasa.
Infantile mortality, childhood, Moon with
benefics.
Paralysis and breathing disorders, Saturn and
Mars, maternal uncle.
First half - Kalika Nadiamsa, Saturn & Jupiter,
Saturn in 10th.
Three planets in 3rd, maternal uncle, family
lineage.
Dasa effects, lords of 10th and 8th, Saturn in
10th, Leo ascendant, Sama Nadiamsa, coborn.
Parents, paternal uncle, troubles to relatives,
spiritual initiation, 2nd dasa and 3rd dasa.
Sun ~ Mercury conjunction, father, Mercury
in 10th, second marriage, birth ofa son.
Other effects, mother, Sunin Aquarius, Saturn
in 12th, Immovable ascendant - Sama
Nadiamsa, Leo ascendant.
Libra ascendant- Nivruthi Nadiamsa, Venus -
Sun, Venus in 9th, destruction of brother,
infantile mortality, Lord of 10th in 12th,
father.
Nivruthi Nadiamsa - Libra ascendant.
Venkatesa - the co-author, astrologer’s place
of work.
Four kinds of Chakras.
Longevity computation as per Jaimini.
Another method, Ayur Lagna, Chaturthamsa
Rasi, counting of 8th house, destruction of a
Bhava, the 3 Khandas.
Matta Matanga Yoga, Malaviya Yoga.
Cancellation of Malaviya Yoga, Yoga with
debilitation Navamsa, other dignities of
planets.
Adhi Yoga.
Chandradhi Yoga, Saturn with a benefic,
planetary dignities.
Childlessness, lord of Sth, Chaamara Yoga.
Jupiter in Pisces, Venus in 11th, Lakshmi
Yoga.
Akhanda Samrajya Yoga and its cancellation,
yogas with reference to Moon.

Uttama Yoga etc., 3 planets in exaltation,
Maha Panditha Yoga.
Jupiter’s Navamsa position, Pushkaramsa.
Sun’s Navamsa position, danger to father,
evils to father, Amala Yoga.
Neecha Bhanga Raja Yoga, Chatra Yoga.
Royal favours, 2nd lord, 8th lord, evil lords.
Jupiter & Venus, Yoga for paramour, favour
from princess, joining a princess, Rayapooya
‘Yoga, lord of ascendant in dignity.
Emancipation, Knower of Almighty, Moon
and Sun.
Jupiter and 9th lord, Jupiter aspecting
luminaries, Mars aspecting Jupiter, Kahala
Lord of Arudhaascendant, conveyances, royal
honour, great fortunes, riches and fortunes,
royal authority, owner of chariots, MoonVenus, Venus in 2nd.
Mani Pravala Yoga, 10th from Moon sign.
Good features, long life, malefic in ascendant,
Saturn in Sth, 7th lord.
Concerning wife, 4th house, 2 wives, 3 wives,
Sun in.descendant.
Another marriage, high learning, Libra
ascendant, father.
Description of father, paternal uncle, paternal
grand-parents.
Libra ascendant - Vikrutha Nadiamsa, coborn,
position and wealth.
Vikrutha Nadiamsa - Libra ascendant, Jagathi
Nadiamsa - Libra ascendant, remedy.
Sun - Mars, Sun - Mercury, Venus in Leo or
Gemini, Leo ascendant - Jagathi Nadiamsa,
father, 3rd dasa.
Deha Rasi, Jeeva Rasi, Venus in Leo, Venus
in Sagittarius.
Venus in Sagittarius Navamsa, Saturn’s transit.
11th lord in Scorpio Navamsa, Saturn in transit,
Aries-Mars sub period in Libra-Venus dasa.
Gains, Rahuin 10th, first dasa, sub period of
11th lord, Vikrutha Nadiamsa.
Dasa of 2nd lord, lords of 6, 8 and 12th, sub
period of Aquarius, 4th lord in exaltation.
Capricorn Dasa, sub periods of Cancer,
Scorpio, Cancer and Taurus, dasas of 4th lord
and 5th lord, dasa of 6th Rasi, lord of the 7th.
Adopted son, Moon in Kinnara Nadiamsa.
Birth in Moon’s Hora.
Planets in ascendant, Self and father.
The Moon in Vargottama Navamsa, eye
disorders, Mars in 7th etc., dasa of Mercury.
Fever, Satum’s transit, 6th dasa, Leo ascendant
- Jupiter.
Jupiter in own sign, own Navamsa, Paryata
Yoga, 6th dasa.
Moon 1n Scorpio, strengths of planets,
Vargottama, evil houses.
Dispositor of Bhava, Vamsa Vicheda yoga,
obtaining a son.
Daughters, remedies, Vandhya yoga,
immovable ascendant.
Scorpio ascendant - Kutila Nadiamsa, Mars in
Leo Navamsa, Jupiter in Kutula Nadiamsa,
2nd dasa.
Rahu in ascendant, Durbhaga Nadiamsa,
marriage, paternal uncle and aunt.
Jupiter with Mercury, Jupiter in Kutila
Nadiamsa.
Grief, grief to sister, sub period of Venus,
Jupiter in Aquarius.
Kutila Nadiamsa - former half, Navamsa of
8th lord, urinary disorders, Mars in 3rd,
Mercury - Sun conjunction.
Betraying others, Navamsa of 4th lord,
Navamsa of 9th lord, transit of Jupiter, Saturn
and Rahu, dasa of 7th lord.
Scorpio ascendant - Kutila Nadiamsa, death,
Venus in Scorpio, Ashtaka Varga dasa periods.
Bhinnashtaka Varga, rectified Ashtaka Varga,
Moon’s Ashtaka Varga.
Dasa periods, destruction of wealth, Jupiter in
Pisces.
Navamsa occupied by Jupiter, Jupiterin 10th,
great prosperity, Jupiter in Libra Navamsa.
Sun’s Ashtaka Varga, early death of father,
sub periods.
Gemini ascendant - Mudgara Nadiamsa, dasa
of 10th lord, Saturn in Navamsa ascendant,
prosperity.

Saturn in Swathi, Saturn’s transit.
Janma Nakshatra, 3rd and Sth Nakshatra.
Lords of 6th and 8th, malefic in debility or in
combustion, Saturn’s transit in various
Nakshatras, Saturn’s transit in 12th house.
Saturn’s transit in 10th house, dispositors and
dasa effects.
Matters to be known from the 12 places,
Jupiter in watery Navamsa.
Moon in Uttara, Jupiter in Aquarius, 4 planets
in an angle, Jupiter in 4th, third dasa, Kuntala
Nadiamsa.
Chitrini Nadiamsa, 8thlord’s dasa, 11thlord’s
dasa, 3rd dasa, Saturn in 7th, Yama Yoga.
Saturn with an exalted planet, Rahu in
ascendant, Jupiter in Aquarius, transits.
Saturn’s transit effects, destruction of father,
malefics transiting 8th.
Directional influences, Jupiter in 10th, Jupiter
in Pisces.
3rd dasa, Moon in Libra, lord of 7th, Venus’
Ashtaka Varga, Leo ascendant - Mudgara
Nadiamsa.
Jupiter in 10th, Gemini ascendant - Mars in
Libra, Saturn in Sth.
Leo ascendant - Mudgara Nadiamsa, Saturn’s
transit in Libra, lord of ascendant in 6th.
10th lord’s dasa, 7th lord’s dasa, malefic’s
transit, diseases.
Dasa of 9th lord, dasa of Saturn, Saturn’s
transit, 4th dasa, Saturn in ascendant.
Navamsa of 4th lord, malefic in Aswin/
Makha/Moola, Mercury’s transit, Jupiter in
10th, remedies.
Abdominal sickness, immovable ascendant -
Mudgara Nadiamsa.
Friendly Vargas, immovable ascendant -
Mudgara Nadiamsa.
Saturn in Scorpio, Jupiter-Saturn conjunction,
Jupiter in 3rd house, Jupiter’s 4th round, 8th
lord’s dasa, 7th lord’s dasa, dasa of 10th lord,
Leo ascendant - Sivakari Nadiamsa.
Umbilical cord, happiness, complexion, Rahu
in ascendant, Sivakari Nadiamsa, Rahu -
Jupiter in ascendant.
Leo/Taurus ascendant, father, Rahu in
ascendant, Venus aspecting Rahu, Moon in
Libra, Moon - Saturn in Libra.
. Moon with Saturn, Jupiter in Leo, Moon and
Jupiter, maternal uncles.
Leo ascendant - Mohana Nadiamsa, Sivakari
Nadiamsa, Mercury in Leo, Jupiter with a
malefic.
Saturn in Navamsa, paternal uncles, Mars in
4th, Balarishta.
Sun in Aquarius, father, mother, Jupiter in
Sivada Nadiamsa.
Dasa effects, Saturn in 3rd.
Jupiter in Leo, Moon in Indra Nadiamsa,
Pisces dasa.
Sun in debility, Mercury in 12th, Kalika
Nadiamsa, father.
Jupiter in ascendant, umbilical cord, fortunes,
infantile mortality, remedies.
8th lord’s dispositor, short life, infantile
mortality, Capricorn ascendant - Kalika
Nadiamsa.
Saturn in aspect to Mars, Jupiter in 7th, first
dasa.
Saturn in 10th, destruction of spouses, 3 planets
in 3rd house, maternal uncle, Kalika Nadiamsa.
Jupiter in exaltation, danger to father, Saturn
in 10th, mother’s death.
Childhood, 9th lord’s dasa, prosperity, death.
Moon in Libra, father’s pitiable death,
consuming poison, Mudgara Nadiamsa, Sun
in Sth.
Dasa of 10th lord, Saturn with Sun and Mars,
fortunes, Hamsa Yoga, Mars-Saturn in Sth,
Bhava Lagna.
Jupiter with Libra Navamsa, Vargottama
Moon, Sakata Yoga, Venus in 7th, marriage,
Chitra Nakshatra.
Vargottama Moon in Libra, loss of father,
fatal death to father, remedy.
Venus in 7th, Rahu in 9th, progeny, mental
distress, death through enemy.
Remedy, evil sub periods.
Jupiter dasa, Hamsa Yoga, Jupiter in Cancer,
Saturn’s transit, 4th dasa, Ashtaka Varga,

Moon in an evil house.
Mantras, remedies.
लापा ascendant - Chirayivi Nadiamsa, long
life, Gemini ascendant - Dhanada Nadiamsa.
Dhanada Nadiamsa, longevity, foolish,
peaceful, 3 planets in 6th, Jupiter in 7th,
Saturn in 7th, Venus in 4th.
Mars in 5th, Saturn in Scorpio or Pisces,
Garga, Vriddha Parasara, parents, Kesari
Yoga, Mercury.
Mercury in 7th, Mercury in friendly Navamsa,
Jupiter’s transit, grief to kinsfolk.
Dasa of 8th lord, Dhanada Nadiamsa, 3rd
dasa, 4th dasa.
Mercury’s sub period, financial gains, father,
4th dasa, Kesar Yoga.
Dasa effects, Chirajivi Nadiamsa, danger to
father, destruction of coborn, Saturn’s transit,
Vishnu Yoga, Moon in Cancer, Mercury -
Moon.
Isaana Nadiamsa, Dhanada Nadiamsa,
Mercury in Scorpio, paternal grand parents,
Mercury in [52412 Nadiamsa.
Father, grand father, Venus in Libra, Mercury
in Scorpio, father, paternal uncles, Sun in
10th.
Physical deformity, Sun-Mercury, Sun in
Gemini Navamsa, Mars in 10th, Kalaagni
Shashtiamsa.
Vishnu Kalaamsa, Mercury in Aries, the Sun
in Upachaya.
Moon in Libra, Mercury in Isaana Nadiamsa,
Moon in Sagittarius, Naala Nadiamsa.
Jupiter dasa, Rabu in 4th, thread ceremony,
miscellaneous.
Venus sub period, Mercury in Isaana
Nadiamsa, sub periods of Moon, Mars and
Rahu.
Jupiter’ s dasa, luminaries’ sub periods, Isaana
Nadiamsa - Gemini ascendant, Ashtaka Varga
method, Jupiter in Libra.
Paternal grand mother, destruction of mother
and coborn, special rule of transit.
4th and Sth dasas, Saturn in Libra/Capricom,
Gemini ascendant - Mangala Nadiamsa and
Kamala Nadiamsa, astrology and philosophy.
Saturn in Kamala Nadiamsa, fortunes in
female’s rules, Mercury in own Navamsa,
Aquarius Rasi dasa.
Malefic Rasi dasa, second marriage to father,
change of place, Mercury in Kamalanadiamsa.
Mars - Moon in Scorpio, Scorpio Rasi dasa,
Libra Rasi dasa, obstruction by 10th lord,
Mars in 8th from Moon.
KCD periods, Libra - Venus dasa, last part of
Libra dasa, transit of Saturn, Jupiter in 9th
from Moon.
Saturn in Libra, Sth dasa, Saturn in Virgo,
general rule, death.
Aquarius ascendant - Champaka Nadiamsa,
Jupiter in Arudha ascendant, Saturn in 6th.
Saturn in Cancer, coborn.
Three wives to father, step-mother, loss of
uncles, father, Venus in Sth.
Results concerning father, Aquarius ascendant
- Champaka Nadiamsa.
Dasa of the Moon, the Moon 1n ascendant,
Satur in 8th Navamsa.
Saturn in 7th, Sunin 6th, transit Sun, marnage
etc.
Aquarius ascendant - Champaka Nadiamsa,
father’s death, paternal grand father, dasa of
10th lord, Saturn’s transit, Karma Samrajya
Yoga.
Dasa of 10th lord, Saturn in Champaka
Nadiamsa, Sakata Yoga, 4th dasa.
Interruption by the Sun, sub periods of Rahu
and Mercury, 12th house, 3 sons, 1 daughter.
Damini Yoga, Saturn in Mritavastha.
Mars in Mritavastha, Sun in debility, 2nd
dasa, 3rd dasa, father’s ill-health, remedy,
Moon in 6th.
Mudrika Nadiamsa, two marriages to father,
father and grand-father, Venus in 5th/9th.
Mohana Nadiamsa, loss of father, mother.
Mudrika Nadiamsa, 3 wives, Jupiter in Mohana
Nadiamsa.
Jupiter = Ketu conjunction, 2 malefics 1 end
of Sagittarius, Mohana Nadiamsa, Sukra Hora.
Ketu in Aries, Sun in Sth, Saturn in 5th, Rahu

in 9th.
Mohana Nadiamsa, dasa of 8th lord.
Soola Yoga.
Kesari yoga, Saturn in Libra, Mercury in
Pisces.
Aquarius ascendant - Mohana Nadiamsa,
Jupiter’s transit, 4th dasa, Mercury dasa.
Mercury’s dasa, Sumathi Nadiamsa and
Mohana Nadiamsa in Aquarius ascendant.
Maalini Nadiamsa.
Aries ascendant - Moon in debility, Aquarius
ascendant - Monana Nadiamsa, Saturn’s
transit, 7th lord’s dispositor.
Malefic planets, Scorpio Navamsa, danger to
mother and wife, 2nd lord, business
partnership.
Saturn -Rahu in 12th, Aquarius ascendant,
wealth through sisters, Mars dasa.
Kemadruma Yoga, Kartari Yoga, Moon’s dasa,
Sth dasa, Moon’s sub period, Koorma Yoga.
Destruction of co-born, Mars dasa, death,
Achala Nadiamsa.
Achala Nadiamsa - fixed sign.
Marriage, progeny, danger through water.
Sisters, Mars in Nirmala Nadiamsa, Venus in
7th, Moon in Vargottama, Moon in Nirmala
Nadiamsa.
Saturn in transit, ascendant lord’s dasa, Libra
ascendant -Jagathi Nadiamsa, Jupiterin Agada
Nadiamsa, Jupiter in Vargottama.
Venus - Saturn conjunction, Venus Navamsa,
Jupiter in Leo.
Sun in 9th, 2nd/Sth/11th, Rahu - Mercury in
9th.
Libra Ascendant - Agada Nadiamsa, danger
to progeny, Saturn, Venus and Jupiter in 8th
from Moon, dead children.
Satum’s transit, Jupiter in Agada Nadiamsa,
3rd dasa.
Prosperity, mother, inlaws’ family, dasa of
Rahu.
Vargottama Rahu, birth of cobor, obstruction.
3rd lord’s dasa, transit of Saturn, Jupiter in
1110, 4th dasa, Sakata Yoga, Saturn in
debilitation Vargas.
Mars - Mercury, Libra ascendant - Agada
Nadiamsa, 8th lord’s Navamsa, Deha & Jeeva
Rasis.
Untimely death, sickness, fortunes, in-laws,
mother’s death, fraternal grief.
5th dasa, Mudgara Nadiamsa - Libra ascendant,
Scorpio Navamsa, co-born.
Madhva school, Martian Navamsa, Libra
ascendant - Mohana Nadiamsa, father’s
profession, lordly father, royal friendship,
Venus in Aslesha.
Scorpio Navamsa, Vensuian Shashtiamsa, cobom, Venus 17) Mohana Nadiamsa, venus with
Ketu.
Jupiter in Kshama Nadiamsa, Mars in Manu
Shashtiamsa, Yama Shashtiamsa, spouse,
progeny
Devout wife, 7th Aroodhapada, 2nd dasa, 6th
lord’s dasa
Jupiter’s dasa and transits, Jupiter dasa - Rahu
bhukti, 2nd dasa - Rahu bhukti, Saturn’s
Navamsa
Rahu’s bhukti, Libra Navamsa, Scorpio
Navamsa, Kulaghna Shashtiamsa, SunMercury, Mercury’s and Venus’s Navamsa
dispositor.
Acquisition of son, bathing in Sethu, Mercury
in Melapa Nadiamsa, blemish to 7th house,
spouse and progeny.
Navamsa of 10th lord, sub period of Sun,
Mercury in Melapa Nadiamsa.
Dasa of Saturn, evils, diseased spouse, Jupiter
in 9th.
Saturn in strength, Libra ascendant - Mohana
Nadiamsa, 310 dasa, Saturn in 2nd.
Dasa of Saturn.
Dasa of Satum, loss of cobomn, Mercury in
Melapa nadiamsa, dasa of Mercury.
Jupiter in 9th, Moon in Aquarius, 12th lord’s
dasa, Bhava effects.
Mars, Mercury, Venusin Nadiamsas, Sobhana
Nadiamsa, Mohana Nadiamsa.
Sth lord’s dasa, Saturn in Leo, Ketu dasa, 4th
Dasa, Capricorn ascendant - Gopriya
Nadiamsa, Rahu - Mars.

Extensive trading, Venus dasa, grand father.
Marriage, fortunes and progeny.
Saturn’s transit, death of relatives, difficulties
to progeny, death of father, illness to father.
Capricorn ascendant - Gopriya Nadiamsa.
Dasa effects, Saturn in Gopriya Nadiamsa,
Leo ascendant - Bahudhanya Nadiamsa.
Moon in aspect to Mars, Sun in Dhanya
Nadiamsa, Saturn aspected by Rahu, Moon in
Aries, Moon related to Mars, father.
Jupiterin 11th, paternal grand-father, mother.
Maternal aunts, father’s health, Moon
associated with Mars, Sun in 6th.
Father’s illness, diseases of father, Saturn’s
transit.
Bride, progeny, son’s identity, 11th lord in
8th, Sun in 11th, Moon in Aries.
Saturn’s transit, Moon dasa, 6th lord’s sub
period.
Troubles from cats & rats, Rahu in Pasa
Nadiamsa, 2nd dasa.
Grief, father’s death, Moon with Mars, Sun in
Dhanya Nadiamsa.

॥ मकर लग्नम - [aera] ॥
त्रलोक्यांशे पूर्वभागे लग्ने च मकरे तथा |
नुधत्रिशांशके जातस्तृत्ीयोऽसो प्रकीर्तितः।
महानदीप्राततयदेशे दक्षिणोत्तरवीधिषु ॥२७१९ |
प्राग्भागे जननं चेति steered |
गेहेशे FATTY तद्राश्यं शत्रिकोणगे ॥२७२० ॥
तन्नवांशगृहद्ररे प्रसूतिरनात्र संशयः।
2719 - 27201/2. Trailokys Nadiamsa -
Capricorn Ascendant (Up to sloka 2769): (a) The
native of former half of Trailokya Nadiamsa in
Capricorn ascendant, in Mercury’s Trimsamsa, will
be the third issue of the family. His birth will be in the’
region of a great river, in a north-south spread street.
The house concerned will be in the eastern part (of the
town) and will be a north-facing one
(b) Find out in which Navamsa the 4th lord is
placed. The house of birth may (also) correspond to
the indications given by the said Rasi or one of its
trines.
Notes: (a) In Capricorn, Trailokya Nadiamsa
extends from 14° 48' to 15° 0.
Ignore Mercury’s Trimsamsa condition and follow only the relevant Nadiamsa stipulation.
(b) This is a general rule and can be applied to all
ascendants irrespective of the Nadiamsa, and is one
of the conditions stipulated for determining the home
of birth.
लग्नेशे धनराशिस्थे लाभेशे सुखराशिगे ॥२७२१॥
्रिशद्रर्षति परं भाग्यमरोगदृढगात्रवान् ।
2721 - 27211/2. Prosperity: If the lord of the
ascendant is in the 2nd house as the 11th lord (Mars)
is inthe 4th house (in Aries), he will attain prosperity
after the thirtieth year of his age. This yoga will also
give him a physique which is free from diseases and
13 Strong.
Notes: The effects given apply to the whole of
Capricorn ascendant irrespective of the Nadiamsa as
could be scen below.
Prosperity: Saturnin the 2nd house in Aquarius,
while Mars is in the 4th house will assure prosperity
Deva Keralam 1
right from youth. The influence of Saturn onthe 10th
house, Libra, is passed on through Mars. By himself,
Mars is a functional benefic for Capricorn. When he
is related to Saturn and the 10th house, the native of
Capricorn ascendant is sure to rise without obstacles.
Healthy Body: As the lord of the 11th house, 6th
from the 6th house, Mars has a definite say on health,
like Mercury the 6th lord. The association of Mars
with ascendant lord, Saturn, the latter placed in
Moolatrikona in the 2nd, is a plus point. Such a
person will be free from illness and will attain
prosperity.
Mercury in Aries, while Saturn is in the 2nd, will
also give similar effects for Capricorn natives. But
prosperity, though certain, will be through certain
odds caused by inimical activities as Mercury is also
the 6th lord, and gets his placement in a bitter
enemy’s sign. Certainty in prosperity is because
Mercury is the lord of the 9th for Capricorn and
bosom friend of Saturn.
युमांशकगते मन्दे मीनस्थे च प्रजायते ॥२७२२॥
बाल्ये दारिदमापतन्नो यौवने सौख्ययोगवान् |
पञ्चविंशात् परं भाग्यं गेहे लक्षमीकराक्षवान् 121623 ॥
2722 - 2723. Saturn in Pisces: Should Saturn be
found in Pisces, witha dual Navamsa, the subject will
be in the grip of penury during his childhood. He will
enjoy sound health and prosperity in his youth. After
25 years of age, goddess Lakshmi will bless his
family.
Notes : Yugmamsaka in this case is dual navamsa,
and notspecifically Gemini, as Pisces 1९885115 referred
to. Saturn in Pisces will get one of the other three dual
Navamsa, viz. Virgo, Sagittarius and Pisces.
The hints given hereof apply to Capricorn ascendant, in general. By his placement in the 3rd
house, Saturn will aspect the 9th house, denoting
father. Wealth or poverty in childhood depends on
father (or mother). Saturn in Pisces with Virgo
Navamsa will be in the 9th from natal ascendant. In
Sagittarius Navamsa, he will be in the 12th from natal
ascendant and in Pisces Navamsa, he will be in the
3rd in Vargottama. Saturn’s placement in Jupiter’s
sign or Navamsa will produce some adverse effects
about father, as Mercury, the lord of the 9th, does got

Chandra Kala Nadi
go well with Jupiter. Saturn in relation to the 9th from
a sign of Jupiter, for Capricorn, may in the initial
stage not give money through father, but is bound to
give good effects in the long run by virtue of his good
position and good rulership. For Saturn is a slow
planet in revealing good effects. As the lord of the
ascendant, he assumes the onus of protecting the 9th
house.
In my view, we should add Leo Navamsa as well
in which case father’s poverty will be intense.
In analysing a bhava vis a vis a planet’s placement we better take into note two important factors:
The occupant’s relationship with the significator of
that bhava, on the one hand. On the other hand, the
relationship of the Rasi dispositor and Navamsa
dispositor of the occupant with a given significator.
Generally, Saturn related to the 9th is notso good
as he is quite allergic to the Sun, the significator of
father.
्ैलोक्यांशे चे लगने बुधत्रिशांशके तथा |
THAT मध्यगात्रः समदेहस्वरूपवान् ॥२७२४ ॥
2724. Movable Ascendant: If birth be in a
movable ascendant in the subject Nadiamsa, in Mercury’s Trimsamsa, the subject will be blood-red in
complexion. He will be of medium build with a
symmetric body.
Notes: See 2719 (a) supra regarding Trimsamsa
condition.
Sees पूर्वभागे मकरे तु प्रजायते |
रूपवान् मतिमान् वाग्मी प्रसत्नमुखनेत्रवान् ॥२७२५ ॥
अदृष्टशाली धर्मात्मा राजयोगयुतो भवेत् |
Sara पूर्वभागे मृगे लग्ने च जायते ॥२७२६ ॥
यतीश्वप्रियो वाग्मी देवब्राह्मणपोषकः।
मिताशौ मितभाषी च मितनिद्रो जितेद्धियः॥२७२७॥
परेषधितशञश्चतुरो भूषितो भूषणप्रियः।
दुष्टेषु दुष्टुद्धिश्च क्रूरेषु क्रुरकृत्यवान् ॥२७२८ ॥
पितुभाग्यविहीनश्च स्वभुजामितवित्तवान् |
धर्मशासरार्थत््वज्ञो ज्ञानांशे सुखनायके ॥२७२९ ॥
सर्वेषामुपकारी च शोर्यसाहसकीर्षिमान्।
सत्कथाश्रव्णं नित्यं श्रीमान् दीनजनप्रियः॥२७२३० ॥
शिववतोपवासी च हरिशङ्रक्तिमान्।
सन्मार्गवृत्तिनिरतः उव्कृष्टधर्मसिद्धिमान् ॥२७२१ ॥
कृषिपश्चादिलाभेन म्रापभूम्यधिकारवान् |
2725 - 27311/2. Capricorn Ascendant: (a) One
born in this ascendant, in the former half of Trailokya
Nadiamsa, will be good-looking. intelligent, eloquent, be endowed with charming face and eyes, be
fortunate, religious and will enjoy effects of Raja
Yoga. He will be fond of superior ascetics and will
worship gods and Brahmins. he will eat limited food,
will speak within a limit and will sleep for limited
hours. He will conquer his Senses, and will be skillful
in understanding others’ thoughts. He will beautify
himself with ornaments and also be fond of ornaments. He will be an evil person to the evil and will
be unkind to unkind people. He will be bereft of
paternal fortunes (or happiness) and will have selfearned wealth.
(b) Ifthe 4th lord (noted in Rasi diagram) is inthe
9th place in Navamsa (1.6 9th counted from Navamsa
ascendant), he will be skillful in law and philosophy.
The native of the former halfofthe subject Nadiamsa
(without reference to 4th lord above) will be helpful
to all, will be endowed with valour, adventure and
fame, be fond of listening to mythological stories, be
ever wealthy, well-disposcd to the poor, will worship
Lord Siva by vows and fasts, and be devoted to Lords
Vishnu and Siva. He will ever take to virtuous path
and will have excellent religious attainments. He will
gain through agriculture, quadrupeds etc. He will
lord over villages and lands.
Notes: (a) Applicable only to the subject
Nadiamsa.
(b) Skill in law and philosophy applies to the 4th
lord’s position as specified in the text while the rest
applies to first half of Trailokya Nadiamsa with the
above mentioned placement of the lord of the 4th,
Mars.
For any ascendant, the 4th lord placed in the 9th
from the natal ascendant or from the Navamsa ascendant, will be good for legal and philosophical
attainments.

्रातूस्थानाधिपे जीवे लग्नात् ष्ष्त्रिकोणगे 121932 ॥
ूर्वापरविहीनश्च द्वितीये शनिसंस्थिते |
भगिन्येका चिरायुष्यमेका क्लेशवती भवेत् 12033 |
सुवासिनी मृतिं चेका पुतरीपुत्रसमन्विता |
2732-27331/2. Co-born: (a) If the 3rd lord Jupiter is in the 6th house from the ascendant Capricom,
ora trine thereof (i.c.2nd/10th), the subject will have
neither an older co-born, nor a younger one.
(b) If the 2nd (Aquarius) is occupied by Saturn,
he will have a sister endowed with longevity, and
anotherasynonymof difficulties, but living ina good
abode, and yet another endowed withsons and daughter.
Notes: (a) For Capricorn ascendant, if Jupiter is
placed in Aquarius, Gemini, or Libra, one will be the
lonely child of the family.
(b) Obviously this position of Satuin “enotes
three sisters, while Jupiter in 3rd altogether ceprives
one of co-born. We have no hints as to what Saturn
will do in this regard if he is placed in Gemini/Libra.
However, my suggestion is that Saturn as exalted
ascendant lord will normally not make the native a
lonely issue, nor will he do so while in Gemini, being
in direct aspect to the 3rd.
मातृस्थानाधिपे भौमे त्वसितेन युतेक्षिते ॥२७३४॥
्रलोक्यांशे प्रजातश्च बाल्ये मातृषिनाशवान् ।
ares रतरिसंयुक्ते रन्ध्रेशे स्वोच्चराशिगे |
SARI प्रजातश्च गजानतैशर्ययोगवान् 1121934 ॥
2734 - 2735. Mars: Should the 4th Jord Mars be
conjunct Saturn or be in aspect to Saturn, the native
of the subject Nadiamsa will lose his mother in his
very childhood. If Mars be with the Sun in Aries, the
latter in his sign of exaltation, the native will be
wealthy with elephants.
Notes: Mars in the 4th with Saturn’s connection
is bad for mother’s life-span, only when the ascending degree in Capricorn is Trailokya Nadiamsa.
Otherwise in general for this ascendant, Mars placed
in the 4th with Saturn’s connection cannot cause
short-life for the mother of the native.
Mars and the Sunin Aries isa yoga for wealthand
Deva Keralam 3
prosperity for Capricorn natives in general.
लग्नेशवहिशयुतेन्दुनाथो
भाग्यस्थितो वा यदि कर्मगो aT |
सामर्थ्यवान् वाहनलाभयुक्तः
कविः सभावाश्चतुरद्गयायी ॥२७३६ ॥
2736. Mars-Saturn-Moon: If these three planets conjoin in the 9th or 10th house, the native will be
a skillful person. He will gain conveyances, be a poet,
will hold the assemblage of men in charm and be
endowed with four kinds of traditional conveyances
(viz. chariots, horses, elephants and men-borne
palanquins).
Notes: The conjunction referred to here should
occur in Virgo/Libra, and is of three angular lords. It
will be far superior for a Capricom native occurring
in the 10th, the best of the angles for that matter,
where Saturn’s exaltation will add further weightage.
Asa result, the subject will receive the above effects
in an increased manner.
This yoga is also applicable to Capricorn ascendant in general as it is conjunction of lords of the Ist,
4th and the 7th in the 9th or the 10th. But for the
Nadiamsa, poetic skills may not be so evident 17 the
10th house, Libra. Inthe 9th house, apart from giving
the results mentioned in the original, poetic skills
may be abundant as the Moon, signifying imagination, occupies Virgo, a fertile sign of intellect, and the
3 planets aspect the 3rd house, ruled by Jupiter.
"Poetic skills" denoted need not necessarily
confine to poetry. The 3rd house denotes one’s
ability as a writer and even as a singer.
पुष्करांशे गते जीवे रन्धेशे स्वोच्चराशिगे |
SAHA प्रजातः स यावदायुष्यभाग्यवान् ॥२७२७ ॥
2737. Jupiter in Pushkaramsa: The native of
Trailokya Nadiamsa in Capricorn having the planet
Jupiter in Pushkaramsa will enjoy riches right from
birth till the end.
Notes: See notes under sloka No.2699, page 239,
Book 1. Jupiter’s sign position is not prescribed in the
current sloka. Hence he can be in any welcome sign,
but with Pushkara Navamsa.

4 Chandra Kala Nadi
सम्पत्तारदशाकाले कर्मेशांत्रिकोणगे |
स्फुटयोगं गते जीवे विवाहोत्सवमादिशेत् ॥२७३८ ॥
जन्मभदक्षिणे भागे त्वानेये वा विवाहवान्।
भावाध्याये दारफलं शुक्रनाडीषु विस्तृतम् ॥२७३९ ॥
2738 - 2739. Marriage: During the rulership of
the 2nd dasa, when Jupiter transits a trine counted
from the sign occupied by 10th lord (Venus), the
native’s marriage will take place with a girl hailing
from the southern or south-eastern part of his birth
place. These results have elaborately been narrated in
Sukra Nadi in the chapter devoted to the Bhava
concerned, i.e. 7th house.
Notes: Although the text qualifies Venus by his
10th lordship, he is al!-importnat in marriage as he is
the significator in principle. For any ascendant,
Jupiter’s trina] transit is essential with reference to
the following:
a) Venus. b) 7th lord from ascendant. c) the
Moon. d) the 7th lord from the Moon.
If Jupiter transit trinally with reference to more
than one of the above four, marniage will be expedited.
There are other factors like Navamsa ascendant
involving Jupiter’s transit. But the above is the
beginning point of the probe.
The girl hailing froma given direction is peculiar
to the Nadiamsa in question.
जामित्राधिपतो ast स्थिरांशे स्थिरराशिगे |
कारके स्थिरराशिस्थे वदेदेककर्प्रवान् ॥२७४० ॥
2740. Single Marriage: If the 7th lord Moon is
ina fixed sign with a fixed Navainsa (not necessarily
Vargothama), while the significator (Venus) is also
in a fixed sign, it is said, there will be only one
marriage to the native of the subject Nadiamsa.
Notes: This clue about the native remaining with
One marriage nullifying other combinations for a
remarriage can be applied in respect of any ascendant. Venus, the Moon, 7th lord and ascendant lord
being in fixed sign and fixed Navamsa disallow a
remarriage. This however does not define the quality
and length of first marriage.
निधनांशगतत्वेन परस्रीसङ्गपापवान्।
कामेशे सोमवत्यंशे मृगलग्ने प्रजायते ॥२७४१ ॥
FART पूर्वभागे गुप्तकामातुरो भवेत् |
निषिद्धदिवसे कामी स्वस्ीसब्गयुतो भवेत् ॥२७४२ ॥
रत्िकाते विनोदा स्यात् कान्तांशकगते भृगो |
कर्मेशे मुखराशिस्थे लग्ने च मकरे तथा ॥२७४२ ॥
त्रैलोक्यां प्रजातश्च सत्कर्माचारबुद्धिमान् |
2741 - 27431/2. Other Effects: (a) If the 7th lord
Moon (counted from natal ascendant) is in the 8th
house in Navamsa (i.e. inthe 8th place from Navamsa
ascendant), he will be sinful by joining others’
women.
(b) One bom in the former half of Trailokya
Nadiamsa in Capricorn ascendant, having Venus in
Somavathi Nadiamsa will have secretive lust for
sexual pleasures. He will be so sexually excited as to
join his spouse. even on prohibited days.
(c) If Venus is in Kanthaa Nadiamsa, he will be
full of merry during sexual union.
(d) Ifthe 10th lord (Venus) is in the 4th (Aries).
the subject of the said Kanthaa Nadiamsa will perform good deeds and will have good conduct.
Notes: (a) The 7th lord from any natal ascendant
occupying the 8th place from Navamsa ascendant
will show want of morality, more on the vart of the
spouse. The text takes specifically the Moon into
account as she is the 7th lord fro Capricorn.
(b) Prohibited days for sexual union, by Satsras
in gencra] are: 1. Ekadasi (11th lunar day) in either
fortnight.
2. Amavasya (30th lunar day).
3. Four days from the commencement of a
woman’s periods.
There are many more stipulations. The above is
a brief account.
(c) Kanthaa Nadiamsa occurs as under:
Movable signs 06° 00' to 06° 12'
Fixed signs 23° 48 to 24° 00!
Common signs 21° 00' to 21° 12.
विपत्तारदशाकाले सुखेशांश्त्रिकोणगे ॥२७४४ I
स्फुटयोगं गते जीवे पुत्रलाभं विनिर्दिशेत् |
विपत्तारादशाकाते Beat महत्सुखम् ॥२७४५ ॥

नृपे मित्रफलप्रप्पिगहि लक््मीकराक्षवान् |
airmen परं भाग्यं विप्रमूलाच्छियो वहम् ॥२७४६ ॥
विपदशान्त्ये यदि केतुदाये
स्वदेशभूपालकनाशमाहुः |
शुभेशदाये फर्लमाकरोति
THR सोख्यमिहाहुरायीः ॥२७४७ ॥
2744 -2747. Third Dasa: See in which Navamsa
the 4th lord is placed. When Jupiter comes to the Rasi
iden.ical with that Navamsa, ora trine thereof, during
the currency of the dasa that is the third from birth, the
native will get married. The second half of third dasa
will cause great happiness. He will befriend the king.
Goddess Lakshmi will shower Her mercy on his
family. After the age of 32, his prosperity will rise. He
will acquire wealth through Brahmins. In Ketu’s sub
period in the end of 3rd dasa, his country’s ruler will
be destroyed (?) and in the periods of the 9th lord, due
to change of ruler, comforts will prevail (?)
Notes: The 4th lord’s Navamsa position comes
in the picture only when Venus is in Aries in the 4th
house as stated in para “d” of slokas 2741 - 2743 1/
2 above in respect of timing marnage.
वृश्चिकेऽर्कसुते काले देशे Tat कलापनम्।
नीचे शूकरे जीवभुक्तौ कलहं पाण्डयदेशके ॥२७४८ ॥
तद्राजजनसन्तापो मानप्राणहरणि च|
म्लेच्छ्रभुविनाशः स्यात् कर्मेशस्य च राशिषु ॥२७४९ ॥
2748 - 2749. Irrelevant: When Saturn arrives in
Scorpio, the king will be involved in quarrels. With
debility of Venus, the sub period of Jupiter will
promote quarrels in Pandya kingdom. The kinsfolk
of the Pandya king will incur difficulties, will Jose
their honour and lives. The king of Mlechcha will be
destroyed when Jupiter travels in the sign occupied
by 10th lord.
गोचरे त्वष्टमे जीवे रलोक्यांशे स्थिते सति।
मृगलमने प्रजातस्य STAT TATA ॥२७५० ॥
पञ्चत्रिशात् परं भाग्यं राज्ये लश्मीकराक्षकृत् |
एकोनचत्वारिशेऽब्दे AEA वत्सरे |
Deva Keralam 5
दारपीडामवाणनोति श्षिप्रेणारोग्यभाग्यवान् ॥२७५१ ॥
राज्यधिकारजनतोषणसोख्यवृद्धि
सर्वग्रहेषु धनधान्यसमृद्धिमाहुः।
शुभेक्षितां भृगुदशां मुनयो वदन्ति
लक्ष्मीकटाक्षविभवेर्नृपभोगयुक्ताम् ॥२७५२ ॥
2750 - 2752. Trailokya Nadiamsa - Capricorn
Ascendant: The subject will beget a daughter when
Jupiter transits the 8th house (Leo). After the age of
35, his prosperity will be onthe rise and will cause the
mercy of goddess Lakshmi. Either his 39 year, or 38th
year, will endanger his wife but she will recover
health early. The subject will obtain rulership, happiness to his men and increase of wealth and grains.
Sages say, the dasa of Venus, who is in aspect to a
benefic, will beget himthe mercy of goddess Lakshmi
and royal kind of comforts.
Notes: The dasa of Venus related to a natural
benefic being able to confer good effects can apply to
Capricorn in general. Such dasa will cause wealth,
including properties, comforts, honour, name, fame
etc.
Also see notes under slokas 2753 - 2757 relating
to Venus dasa.
कर्माधिपदशाकाले त्वपरार्थे महत्सुखम् |
सेनामात्यजनद्रेषं समानजननाशनम् ॥२७५२ ॥
दशन्त्ये व्याकुलं किंचित क्षेमतारादशान्त्यके |
रतयक्तारादशाकाते TATRA जातके ॥२७५४ ॥
सत्कथाश्रवणं नित्यं राजप्रीति धनागमम् |
ूर्यपके चन््रभक्तो देशे राज्ञां कलापनम् ॥२७५५॥
दक्षिणायनगे सूर्ये पश्चिमे कलहो महान् |
चोक्कोड़णकाश्मीरम्तेच्छपीडाभयं नृणाम् ॥२७५६ ॥
महासमरमत्युग्रं सेन्यनाशनमेव च|
पश्चदुपशमं प्राहू राज्ञां तु धनदानतः॥२७५७ ॥
2753 - 2757. Capricorn ascendant - Dasa Effects: (a) The second half 10th Jord’s dasa will cause
great happiness, enmity with army chief, and destruction of relatives of the native.

(४) The concluding part of the fourth dasa will
cause distress. In the dasa which is the fifth in order,
the subject will be fond of listening to mythological
stories, will win the king’s heart and acquire wealth.
(c) In the Moon’s sub period during Sun’s major
period, the king will be involved in quarrel. When the
Sun is in his southerly course, great quarrels will
strike in the western part of the country. There will be
fear to the kings of Chola, Konkana, Kashmir and
Mlechcha. Fierce battle, untimely death, and loss of
army will come to pass, after which calm will exist.
Notes: (a) For Capricorn ascendant, the dasa of
Venus will cause increased happiness in the second
half but adverse effects like enmity with army chief
(i.e. men in administration) apart from death of near
and dear.
(b) The 4th dasa will inflict miseries before it
comes to an end. The dasa which is the fifth in
sequence will cause interest in mythology, (denotes
spiritual progress), governmental favours and wealth.
(c) These are irrelevant and interpolated.
सूर्ये केत्वन्ते काले रजकार्यमिति स्मृतम् |
जातकस्य विशेषेण सौख्यं भवति निश्चितम् ॥२७५८ ॥
मरुवृधाप्रान्त्यदेशे राजामात्यजनावधि |
चोठभूपति सन्तापो हताश्व सैनिके शवर ॥२७५९
जातकस्तु शुभाधिवयं जनैः सर्वैश्च पूजितः।
स्वप्रभोश्च फएलाधिक्यमादायादधिकव्ययम् ॥२७६० ॥
2758 - 2760. In the sub period of Ketu during the
Sun’s major period, the subject will be involved in
royal] assignments. He will acquire abundant happiness. In the kingdom of ....... (“Marudvrugha
praanthya dese” \s a corrupt addition, moreover not
amenable to translation). The native will receive the
attention of the kinsmen of the king and his minister.
The king of Chola will be distressed and his army
chief will be destroyed. The subject will further
receive abundant auspicious effects and will be worshipped by all. He will have many royal favours. But
his expenditure will exceed his income.
Notes: The effects given above are partially
irrelevant to natal horoscope. That the native will
reccive royal and ministerial attention, vide sloka
Chandra Kala Nadi
2759, should however be applied.
्र्यक्ताराधिपे सूरये लग्नात् केन्द्रचतुष्टये ।
तदशायां Feared पूर्वार्धे सोख्यमश्नुते ॥२७६१ ॥
राजमुद्राधिकारेण त्वग्रहारपरतिष्ठकः।
उत्कृष्ट धर्मवृद्धिश्च गोचरे त्वष्टमे गुर ॥२७६२ ॥
2761 - 2762. The Sun in an Angle: (a) Ifthe Sun
occupies an angle counted from Capricornascendant
which has Trailokya Nadiamsa, the dasa which is the
fifth in sequence will cause a great deal of fortunes.
The first half of the said dasa will produce much
happiness. The subject in the dasa will acquire power
backed by royal authority. He will establish a colony
for Brahmins. (b) When Jupiter transits the 8th,
religious attainments will be excellent.
Notes: (a) The 8th lord in an angle from the
ascendant (i.e. 151, 4th, 7th or 10th) or from the Moon
as the case may be will help the 5th dasa to give
beneficial effects for any ascendant in general. It is
quite difficult to explain the logic behind such an
experience. But I have seen specifically some horoscopes where this position gave specified effects.
(b) For Capricorn ascendant, the transit of Jupiter in the 8th in Leo is supposed to give beneficial
effects as could be observed. However if the Moon be
in Capricorn, this may not exactly apply.
प्रत्यक्तारादशाकाले ललने रहुसंस्थिते |
पाण्डयप्रभुविनाशः स्याच्यो्देशे नृपावधि ॥२७६३ ॥
2763. Rahu in Virgo: Dung the fifth dasa,
when Rahu transits in Virgo, the king of Pandya will
be destroyed (?) and the subject will receive the
attention of the ruler of Pandya kingdom.
Notes; When the 5th dasa is in operation, the
transit of Rahu inthe 9th house will beget royal] mercy
orattention for the native. Not only Rahu, butalso the
transit of favourable plancts in the 9th or Sth or
ascendant is bound to bring professional progress.
महोदधिप्रान्त्यादेशे कलहश्रोपशाम्यति |
अष्टमाधिपतौ स्वोच्चे सुखेशेन समन्विते |
ूर्णायुर्दायवाश्चेति साधनेशदशाविषत् ॥२७६४ ॥
2764. In the region of Mahodadhi, there will be

strife (?) If the 8th lord is exalted and be in the
company of the 4th lord Mars, the subject will be
endowed with full life-span. The sixth dasa will then
prove fatal.
Notes: In this context the 4th lord Mars features
because he is the exaltant dispositor of 8thlord. Their
conjunction in Aries where one is in exaltation and
another in own sign will prove helpful for lifespan.
Otherwise thcir conjunction should be carefully approached as it could cause fatal end if not short-life.
धर्मेशे यदि कारकेण सहिते तत्रस्य चोच्ये स्थिते
त्यक्त्वा दुस्थलशत्रुभं शुभयुते दृषटेऽथ वा स्वामिना |
परामानेकतटाकगोपुरपुयेद्यानक्रतूनां क्रियां
कुर्वन् सज्जनसन्रुतो विजयते भृपालचूडामणिः॥२७६५ ॥
2765. Raja Yoga: The 9th lord exalted and
joining the significator (Jupiter - the significator for
Dharma ruled by the 9th house, as the reference to
here is Dharma) along with a friendly planet. The
sign in question should not be an evil house, nor
inimical (to companions). He could be also conjunct
oraspected by another benefic or his dispositor. Then
the subject will construct many villages, tanks, temple-towers, towns and parks. He will be in the company of virtuous men and will win the hearts of
superior kings.
Notes: The 51018 has two expressions which are
not relevant and which affect the continuity of the
relevant and stipulated conditions. These are: Mitrasya
cha uchche stithe = posited in a sign that exalts the
friend of, here, Venus or the sign Aries which exalts
the Sun (Mitra). Swaamina means the lord. These are
omitted in translation.
The essence of the yoga thus is, for Capricorn
ascendant, the conjunction of Venus with Jupiter
supported by another benefic viz. Mercury or a
friendly planet in a good house 15 a powerful Raja
yoga as a result of which the native will construct
villages & C. That is, he will render social services,
will be inthe company of good menand bea recipicnt
of royal or governmental favours.
्रत्यक्तारादशाकाले कर्माधिपतिभुक्तिषु |
THA प्रजातस्य कालमृत्युभयं स्मृतम् ॥२७६६ ॥
Deva Keralam
यदि जीवति पुण्येन त्वष्टषष्टिसमे मृतिः।
वृषभादित्रिमासेषु मकरे वा न संशयः॥२७६७॥
शुक्रवारे भवेन्मत्युरुषः काले न संशयः।
2766 - 27671/2. Death: In the sub period of 10th
lord (Venus) during the operation of the fifth dasa, the
native of Trailokya Nadiamsa, in Capricorn ascendant, will have his timely death. Ifat all he survives due
to merits (of his past birth), death will certainly strike
in the 68th year. The month concerned (In the said
year of death) will coincide with the Sun’s transit in
the three signs commencing from Taurus, or with the
Sun in Capricorn. The final moment will be in the
early hours of Fnday.
र्ध्राधिपदशाकाले गदांशे विप्रकालगे ॥२७६८ ॥
पुरा ब्राह्मणजन्म स्यात् पश्द्रेदिकजन्मवान्।
भाविजन्मान्तरे मुक्तिर्व्यये गुरुनिरीक्षिते |
विप्रकाते फलं सत्यं प्रत्यक्षं TAAL ॥२७६९ ॥
2768 - 2769. He would have been a Brahmin in
his previous birth. His next birth will also be in a
Vaidik Brahmin’s family. He will attain emancipation after the next birth if Jupiter aspects the 12th (for
the Trailokya Nadiamsa native being discussed).
Notes: The following two lines out of tke above
four lines have not been provided with translation as
a part of the text.
Randradhipa dasa kaale gadaamse viprakaalage
which means “For native of Gada Nadiamsa, first
quarter, in the dasa of the 8th lord”.
Viprakaale phalam sathyam prathyaksham Deva
Keralam which means: The results stated for Vipra
Kaala (i.e. first quarter of a given Nadiamsa) in Deva
Keralam will be experienced in actuality.
These two lines are an interpolation and not
connected with the present Nadiamsa in any manner
and hence secluded.
aera ~ [सुप्रभाशः] ॥
सुप्रभांशे पूर्वभागे मीनलगने प्रजायते ॥२७७० ॥
शुद्रजन्मा सुखी नित्यं तृतीयो भवति धृवम्
महानदीप्रान्त्यदेशे नगरे प्रसवः स्मृतः ॥२७७१ |

2770 - 2771. Pisces Ascendant = Suprabha
Nadiamsa:(Upto sloka 2819). One belonging by
birth to the first half of this Nadiamsa will be a Soodra
and be the third issue of the family. His birth will be
in a city beside a great nver.
Notes: Suprabha Nadiamsa, in the sign Pisces is
सुप्रभांशे परे भागे शुक्रे लाभत्रिकोणगे ।
विप्रजन्मा सुखी नित्यं द्वितीयोऽसौ प्रकीर्तितः ॥२७७२ ॥
2772. Venus: If birth be in the later 0911 as Venus
is in a trine counted from Capricorn, one will be a”
Brahmin and be the 2nd issue.
Notes: The text relates the 3rd lord Venus with
11th house Capricorn. The 3rd rules younger co-born
while the 11th elder. Thus the 3rd lord in an angle to
the 11th house will cause the native not to either
oldest nor the youngest issue. That is he will have
both older and younger co-born. This rule can be
applied to any ascendant.
Angles to the 11th house are: the 2nd, 5th, 8th
and 11th.
गहेशे राहुसंयुक्ते दिणोततरवीथिषु।
प्राग्भागे जननं चेति चोत्तरद्रारगेहगे ॥२७७२ ॥
गेहेशे यन्नवांशस्थे तद्राश्यंशत्रिकोणगे |
THAMES प्रसूतिनतरि संशयः॥२७७४ ॥
2773 - 2774. Rahu:; Should the 4th lord (Mercury) be with Rahu, the street of birth will be spread
from south to north. The house concerned will be
located in the eastern part having a north-facing
entry. It may also correspond to the sign indicated by
the Navamsa occupied by the 4th lord or a trine
thereof.
लग्नेशे व्ययराशिस्थे गृेशे पापसंयुते |
नदीप्ान्तये पुरे वासो जननं च भविष्यति ॥२७७५ ॥
2775. णलि Aquarius: Ifthe ascendant lord
Jupiter is in the 12th in Aquarius while the 4th lord
Mercury is with a malefic, birth and livelihood will
be in a town near a river.
लग्नात्तृतीयगे रहौ सोदरोत्पत्िनाशवान् |
जयेष्ठभ्रातृविहीनश्च स्वमातुर्मरणं भवेत् ॥२७७६ ॥
Chandra Kala Nadi
2776. Coborn: Should Rahu be in the 3rd (Taurus) there will be destruction of coborn. The subject
will have no older coborns and will lose his mother
(early).
सुप्रभांशे पूर्वभागे युग्मे siete भवेत् |
पूर्वापरविहीनश्च भगिन्येका चिरायुषी ॥२७७७ ॥
2777. One born in the former half of Suprabha
Nadiamsa in a dual sign (here, Pisces) with Scorpio
Navamsa will have no pre-born and after-born (apparently brothers). One sister of his will be endowed
with longevity.
SRN प्रजातश्च पुत्रीपुत्रसमन्वितः।
सुप्रभे पूर्वभागे मीने नीचांशसंभवः॥ २७५७८ ॥
2778. Progeny: One belonging to the later half
of this Nadiamsa will have sons and daughters (i.e.
will have progeny). The one belonging to the former
half will be of mean birth.
Notes: Neechamsa Sambhava = having birth in
a mean family, and does not refer to a planet in
debility in Navamsa and the rendering is accordingly
done although the word Amsa is not an exactly
suitable one here.
पूर्वभागे श्यामवर्णः स्थूलदेहस्वरूपवान्।
राजद्वारे प्रसिद्धश्च प्रबलोद्योगजीवकः ॥२७७९ ॥
2779. Former Half: The subject will 09४८ dark
and stout physique. He will be famous in royal service
and will have a famous employment.
GAM पूर्वभागे मीने कन्यांशके तथा |
लेख्यजीवनवान् रागी द्याश्चवाहनभाग्यवान् ॥२७८० ॥
2780. Virgo Navamsa: One born in Pisces ascendant (between 6 deg 40' and 10 deg 0) with Virgo
Navamsa will live by writing activities, be passionate
and be endowed with a fleet of horses and other
conveyances,
Notes: Here no particular nadiamsa is referred
to, but Pisces ascendant with Virgo Navamsa which
will give writing skills, passion and conveyances of
a rich nature.
पूर्वभागे विष्णुक्तो वेष्णवाचारतत्परः।

चक्रवर्तिसकाशे तु कोशागारांधिपत्यवान् ॥२७८१ ॥
2781. Treasurer: One born inthe णाल 1911 of
the subject Nadiamsa will be devoted to Lord Vishnu
and will follow the path prescribed fora Vaishnavite.
He will be a treasurer under an empetor.
ग्रन्थान्तरे सुप्रभांशे मीनलग्ने प्रजायते |
स्वपित्रधिकभाग्याप्िः स्वेपितामहभाग्यवान् ॥२७८२ ॥
2782. Another School of Thought: According
to yet another source, the subject with the said
Nadiamsa in Pisces wiil beget following effects: His
father will be highly prosperous. Sv also his paternal
grand-father.
मातृस्थानाधिपे सौम्ये भाग्ये केतुसमन्विते |
सुप्रभांशे प्रजातस्य पातुरदीर्षायुरादिशेत् ॥२७८३ ॥
2783. Mother: If the 4th lord Mercury is in the
9th (Scorpio) along with Ketu, one will have a longlived mother. This applies to birth in Suprabha
Nadiamsa 11 Pisces.
Notes: But for this Nadiamsa, the 4th Jord Mercury inthe 9th ruled by Mars, his bitterenemy will not
prove favourable for mother’s life-span. Moreover
when he joins Ketu in Scorpio, the Pisces native will
not have a long-living mother.
पञ्चमाधिपतौ चन्द्रे मीन कीरांशसंयुते |
असितेन युते दष्टे पञ्चमान्दे महाविपत् ॥२७८४ ॥
2784. Danger: The native’s fifth year will endanger him greatly ifthe 510 1010 Moonin Pisces with
Saturn’s aspect or conjunction occupies Scorpio
Navamsa.
सुप्रभांशे पूर्वभागे Arey प्रजायते |
र्जोगुणप्रधानश्च बुद्धिमान् साधुवाचकः ॥२७८५ ॥
`भाषान्तरपरिज्ञाता द्रव्यार्जनसमर्थकः।
राजसेवापरो नित्यं भोगस्ीसरसप्रियः ॥२७८६ ॥
2785 - 2786, One born in the subject Nadiamsa
will be predominant with passion, be intelligent,
polite in speech, and be skillful in foreign languages
and acquisition of wealth. He will be intent upon
Deva Keralam 9
serving a king and be foud of seeking delight fiom
prostitutes.
सुप्रभांशे sh लगे ग॒स्त्रिशांशर॑स्थिते |
रूपवान् सुभगो दक्षः प्रसत्तमुखनेत्रवान् ॥२७८७ ॥
नाटयसंगी तरसिको गन्धमाल्याम्बप्रियः,
द्रात्रिशाब्दात् परं भाग्यं चत्वारिंशे विशेषतः॥२७८८ ॥
2787 - 2788. Jupiterian Trimsamsa: Onc born
in Pisces ascendant with Jupiterian Trimsamsa will
be charming in appearance, be fortunate, skillful (in
every respect) and will possess beautiful face and
eyes. He will delight in dance and music and be fond
of scents and garlands. His progress will show up
after 32, more so after 40 years of age.
Notes: The Nadiamsa does not come into play
here. The Trimsamsa of Jupiter rules above 12
degrees but below 20 degrees in Pisces. Tae ascendant should be anywhere in this space to give abovementioned effects.
दुश्चिक्याधिपतो शुक्रे तच्चग्रहसमन्विते |
सुवासिनी भगिन्येका बाल्ये चारिष्टमश्नुते ॥२७८९ ॥
सृतिकाग्रहदोपेण भगिनीमृतिमादिशेत् ॥२५९० ॥
2789 - 2790. Sister: If the 3rd lord Venus is
associated with an exalted planet, the native will have
a sister who will live ina good abode, but will face
evils in her childhood. Due to blemishes of the
delivery chamber, the said sister could even dic.
Note: It is difficult to say whether the one-line
sloka No. 2790, is actually a part of the current
discussion. This is because of the expression
“Suvaasini” in sloka 2789 which denotes that the
sister of the native will live ina good abode.
पुत्रस्थानाधिपे at मकरे भृगुसंयुते |
मुम्रभांशे प्रजातस्य पितृदीर्षायुरादिशेत् ॥२७९१ ॥
विपत्तारादशान््यादौ क्षेमदाये स्वभुक्तिषु ॥२७९२ ॥
fasts विजानीयात् पूर्वभागे न संशयः।
SHAY प्रजातस्य सम्पत्तागदशान्तरे ॥२७९३ ॥
पिताऽरिष्टमवाप्नोति wt न संशयः।
SHUN प्रजातस्य सम्पत्तारदशान्तरे ॥२७९४ ॥

10 Chandra Kala Nadi
पिताऽरिष्टमवापनोति wards state |
2791 - 2794 1/2. Father: Should the 5th lord
Moon be in Capricorn in the company of Venus, the
native of Suprabha Nadiamsa will have a long living
father, (Independent of this yoga) the native of
former half will see his father in danger in the
concluding phase of 3rd dasa or in the firstsub period
of 4th dasa. The subject of second half of this
Nadiamsa will incur danger to father in the second
dasa.
Notes: The text dealing with father in respect of
second half of Suprabha Nadiamsa repeats twice but
with slight changes. Thus the translation is confined
to mere second dasa, leaving aside reference to first/
second half of the second dasa.
From these three slokas we understand that the
native of first half of this Nadiamsa will have his
father alive as long as to the end of 3rd dasa or
beginning of 4th dasa while the subject ofsecond half
of this Nadiamsa will lose his father in the very
second dasa. This much we can differentiate.
सप्पत्तारादशाकाले मदेशांशत्रिकोणगे ॥२७९५ ॥
स्फुटयोगं गते जवे विवाहोत्सवमादिशेत् |
2795 - 27951/2, Marriage: One born in this
Nadiamsa in Pisces will get married in the 2nd dasa
when Jupiter comes to the Rasi occupied by Mercury’s Navamsa dispositor, or a trine thereof.
सुप्रभांशे पूर्वभागे सप्तमे भृगुसंस्थिते ॥२७९६ ॥
मीनलगे प्रजातस्य अद्गवेकल्यदारवान् |
केतुयोगे पदाधौशे वायुना बधिरामयः॥२७९७ ॥
तत्पापपरिहारार्थं शानि कुर्याद्यथाविषि |
2796 - 27971/2, Deformity: (a) For a native of
former half of this Nadiamsa, Venus in the 7th will
cause acquisition of a spouse with physical deformity.
(b) The native will be deaf if Ketu joins the 7th
lord Mercury.
(c) To overcome these ills, propitiations as prescribed be done.
Notes: (a) Physical deformity to spouse may
specially apply to Venus placed in the 7th for Pisces
ascendant, Nadiamsa cited. Even otherwise, Venus
in the 7th in debility cannot be of an asset in respect
of marriage. Such yoga will cause some notable
blemish for the spouse apart from delay in marriage.
(b) If Ketu and Mercury are in close orbs, this
conjunction - of Ketu and Mercury ~ will cause
deafness in case of a Pisces subject.
(c) The remedies are not mentioned clearly.
However, for blemish at “a”, the planet Venus, and
for blemish at “b” ihe planet Ketu should be propitiated by suitable Mantras and prayers.
उत्तरांशे धूर्तभार्या त्वरोगदृढशालिनी ॥२७९८ ॥
पूर्वभागे द्विभार्यः स्यादुत्तयंशेकभार्यवान् |
पुत्रभाव गते सौम्ये मेषांशे STAT ॥२७९९ ॥
सन्ततिस्तम्भयोगे तु सन्ततिप्रतिबन्धवान् |
कीरांशे च इषे लग्ने त्वसितेन समन्विते ॥२८०० ॥
कारके व्ययराशिस्थे सन्तानप्रतिबन्धवान् |
तत्पापपरिहार्थं प्रहचक्रं प्रदापयेत् ॥२८०१॥
एकाशीतिपदं चक्रं पलेनेकेन निर्मितम् |
कल्पोक्तविधिना GA ग्रहाणां च यथाक्रमम् ॥२८०२॥
स्वराक्षरं लिखेच्चक्रे त्वभिभित्सहितं तथा |
देवज्ञाय प्रदानेन सन्तानोत्पत्तिमादिशेत् ॥२८०३ ॥
2798 - 2803. (a) One born in the second half will
beget a wicked spouse, who will however be free
from diseases, with a strong physique.
(b) His counterpart, i.e. the native of first
half of the subject Nadiamsa, Pisces ascendant, will
have two wives.
(c) Mercury in the Aroodha of the 5th, in
the company of Ketu and in Arics Navamsa will
cause obstacles in acquisition of progeny. (Sone
texts read Putrabhave while some use the expression
Putraarodhe. 5th Aroodha is correct expression, as
Mercury in Sth in Cancer does not obtain Aries
Navamsa.) The same effect will come to pass if the
ascendant Pisces begets the aspect of Saturn and [alls
in Scorpio Navamsa. To remedy this ill, donation of
an image of the zodiac be done. The image of the
zodiacand the planets be worshipped as prescribed in
the Sastras. The names of the vowels, including the

Deva Keralam 11
name of Abhijit Nakshatra be written on the image of
zodiac and be given away to an astrologer. Then the
blemish in respect of progeny will be warded off.
Notes: “a” and “b” are clear.
(c) For Pisces ascendant, the 5th Aroodha will be
So many Signs away as the Moonis from Cancer (with
exceptions mentioned by me in my notes in Brihat
Parasara Hora, Part 1, English translation). Mercury’s position should be insuch place along with Ketu.
Unless Mercury in the yoga obtains Aries navamsa,
obstacles in acquiring progeny should not be expected. Alternatively Saturn should aspect Pisces
which should ascend between 13° 20' and 16° 40’
getting Scorpio Navamsa. Remedy suggested is donation of a zodiac’s image to an astrologer. The
image should contain inscription of the 28 Nakshatras
including Abhijit.
सनध्राधिपदशाकाले वेधकग्रहभूक्तिषु |
स्वसमानजनारिष्टं स्वगेहे शिशुनाशनम् ॥२८०४॥
जातकस्य महत्सौख्यं क्षेमदाये परार्धगे |
मुप्रभांशे पूर्वभागे स्श्राधिपतिदायगे ॥२८०५॥
गोचरे वृषभे मन्दे जननीमृतिमादिशेत |
शुक्रराहनतरे काले त्विदमेव फलं स्मृतम् ॥२८०६॥
2804 - 2806. Dasa Effects: (a) In the sub period
of an obstructive (or adversc) planet during the major
rulership of the 8th lord, the subject will lose relatives
of his age group.
(b) The 2nd half of the 4th dasa will cause
him great happiness.
(c) For birth in the former half of the
subject Nadiamsa, see if the 8th lord’s dasa is in
operation. If so, when Jupiter comes to Taurus in
transit, death of mother be declared. So also in the
intervals of Venus and Rahu (without reference to
Jupiter’s transit).
Notes: (a) Obstructive planets for Pisces ascendant are Venus, Mercury and Saturn. The sub period of
one of these planets, or that of occupants thereof will
cause danger to relatives in the main period of Venus.
The Nadiamsa need not be a considerationas the dasa
of 8th lord for any ascendant is capable of causing
grief.
(b) This axiom is a broad clue to this Nadiamsa.
(c) Linking death of mother in 8th lord’s dasa to
the transit of Jupiter applies only to the subject
Nadiamsa.
रन््राधिपे लाभगते सुभाग्यं
दशावसनि स्वसुतामयश |
मुखांशके वा धनलाभमेति।
द्वितीयवेवाहिकमाहरार्याः ॥२८०७ ॥
2807. Lord of the 8th: (a) Should the 8th lord
be inthe 1 1th (i.e. Venus in Capricorn) the native will
be very fortunate. In the end of such 8th lord’s dasa,
his son will fall sick.
(b) The 8th lord Venus obtaining the 4th
place in Navainsa will also give financial acquisition
apart from causing a second marrage.
Notes: Two combinations involving Venus are
discussed. (५) By being in the 1 1th house, he will give
fortunes to the native in general, and sickness in the
concluding part of Venus Dasa. Venus in the 11th
house for any ascendant except Scorpio is generally
a contributory factor for fortunes. The degree of
fortunes will depend on the circumstances prevailing
in a given case. Sickness to a son is applicable only
to the subject Nadiamsa.
(b) Without reference to Venus in Capricorn, his occupying the 4th house from Navamsa
ascendant will give financial gains and second marriage to the native. Venus being a Yoga Karaka, his
occupation of the 4th from Navamsa ascendant will
cause financial acquisition. The issue of second
marriage will get confirmed if the Navamsa ascendant is particularly a dual sign - one of Virgo, Sagittarius and Pisces. Here again, the Nadiamsa may many
times be not relevant.
पूर्वभागे प्रजातश्च धनधान्याभिवृद्धिमान्।
ane धर्मसिद्धि राजद्वारे प्रसिद्धिमान् ॥२८०८ ॥
2808. One born in the former half of Suprabha
Nadiamsa, Pisces will have increased wealth and
coms (eatingcomforts). Inthe 4th dasa he will obtain
religious advancement and fame through royal pa-

2 Chandra Kala Nadi
्रत्यक्ताराधिपे सूयं दशायां केन््रसंयुते |
अतीव श्रियमाप्नोति बहुधर्मार्थसिद्धिमान् ॥२८०९ ॥
2809. The Sun should be placed in an angle at
birth. Then his dasa, if 54 ^ sider, will give
40.04". wealth ap. ::fromscu. .ieligious advancement.
Notes: For the dasa of the Sun to be 5th in order,
birth should be in one of Pushyami, Anuradha and
Uttarabhadra. That is if Saturn’s dasa is the commencing one, the Sun in an angle will cause much
wealth and religious adv: ncement.
सुप्रभांशे क्षेमदाये त्वपरार्धं महत्सुखम् |
अयुताधिकवित्ताप्ती राजद्वारे प्रसिद्धिमान् ॥२८१० ॥
2810. The 2nd half of the 4th dasa will give great
happiness to the native of Suprabha Nadiamsa. He
will gain wealth over 10,000 (gold coins) and become
famous through roya! patronage.
अतिचारगते जीवे शनो am गते सति ।
हाहाकारं जगत्सर्वं विशेषादक्षिणादिशि ॥२८११॥
2811. Irrelevant: शाला प्रादा 1517 accelerated
motion as Saturn is retrograde, the entire world will
be wailing in grief, particularly the southern part.
Notes: Although this is irrelevant for natal astrology, this isa useful clue for mundane astrological
predictions.
URSA सुप्रभांशे प्रजायते ।
षेमतारादशाकाले विरोधादि TITY ॥२८१२ I
तदोषपीडाप्रतिभेदनार्थ
PAST लक्मप्रतिमप्रदानम् |
लक्षमीप्रसादं चतुरः करोति |
भाग्यं च तस्य प्रददाति नित्यन् ॥२८१२३ ॥
अलक्ष्मीं नाशयेत्सर्वा गेहे लक्ीप्रसादनम् |
राजद्वारे शुभं चेति शत्रुनाशं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥२८१४॥
पश्रात्सन्तानमाप्नोति रजामात्यप्रसादवान् |
2812 - 28141/2. Venus - Mars: The conjunction
of Venus and Mars for a Suprabha Nadiamsa native
will cause misfortunes, like enmity, in the dasa which
is fourth from birth. To overcome such misfortunes,
donation ofanimage of goddess Lakshmi be resorted
to. Asa result, long-lasting progress will be obtained.
In the absence of this, the person’s household will be
wholly deprived of the mercy of goddess Lakshmi.
The said remedy will bring auspicious effects in royal
service and cause destruction of enemies. Later on
due to mercy of King’s minister, the subject will
obtain progeny (?).
Notes: The conjunction of Venus - Mars for the
subject native will be destruciive in the 4th dasa, if
remedy as prescribed is not done. That is, this
conjunction will prove devastating in this context.
Obtainment of progeny after the remedy shouid
be read without “mercy of king’s minister”.
साधनेशदशाकाले विशेषश्रियमर्नुते ॥२८१५ ॥
तित्यश्रीबहुमानादि प्रबलोद्योगभाग्यवान् |
षट्पञ्चाशात्परं दुःख सापनेशदशान्ते ॥२८१६ ॥
देहे प्राणभयार्तश्च शाति कुर्याद्यथाविधि |
2815 - 28161/2, Sixth Dasa: The sixth dasa will
be specially capable of bringing abundant and firm
wealth, high esteem etc. After 56, in the 6th dasa,
grief will come to pass and the subject will be in the
grip of fear of death for which remedies be sought.
लाभे शुक्र व्यये जीवे दुष्टयोगशतेपु च ॥२८१७॥
सुप्रभांशे प्रजातश्च मालायोगे मुभाग्यवान् |
भाग्यादिमालिकायोगे SAMY TT तथा ॥२८१८ ॥
2817 - 2818 . One born in Suprabha Nadiamisa
with Venus in the 12th and Jupiter in the 11th will
enjoy Mala Yoga and will become fortunate and be
rid of a hundred evil yogas (emanating from other
sources). The same result will come to pass if there
is Malika Yoga from the 9th house, for a Pisces
native.
पूर्वभागे sarees पञ्चष्टिसुजीवनम् |
लग्नाडीफलं सत्यं प्रत्यधं देवकेरठम् ॥२८१९ ॥
2819. One born in the former half of Suprabha
Nadiamsa in Pisces ascendant will live upto 56. The
effects of Lagna Nadi quoted in Deva Keralam will
bear truth.

Deva Keralam 13
dane - [सु्दर्यशः]
सुन्दर्यशे निशानाथे गुरुणां संयुते्षते |
विप्रकाले प्रजातश्च विप्रजन्मा सुखी भवेत् ॥२८२० ॥
2820. Kalusha Nadiamsa: Should the Moon 0९
placed in Sundari Nadiamsa in aspect to or associa-
-tion with Jupiter, one born in Vipra Kala (of Kalusha
Nadiamsa) will be a Brahmin and be happy.
Notes: Now the text discusses birth in Kalusha
Nadiamsa in an immovable ascendant from sloka
2820 through 2887. When the Moon fe‘ures in the
discussion generally it is prescribed to be Sundan
Nadiamsa (of any sign), unless and until specified.
The text’s authority is Chandra Nadi.
Immovable ascendants are: Taurus, Leo, Scorpio and Aquarius. In these signs, Kalusha Nad‘amsa
rules from 24° 12' to 24° 28. Its first halfis from 24°
12' to 24° 18' and second half is from 24° 18' to 24°
24’ of arc in immovable signs.
The Moon is required to be in Sundari Nadiamsa
of any sign for which please refer to sloka 1584, Book
बालारिष्टं च लभते चदे कुजयुतेक्षिते |
सुन्दर्यशे निशानाथे श्रकाते प्रजायते ॥२८२१॥
शुद्रजन्मा सुखी नित्यं बालाण्ष्टं न विद्यते |
2821 - 28211/2. Infantile Mortality: In case of
birthin Vipra Kala of Kalusha Nadiamsa, the association of the Moon with Mars will cause infantile
mortality, while in case of Soodra Kala, there will be
no such adverse effect on account of this conjunction. Further the native will be ever happy.
कलुपांशे स्थिरे लगन स्थिरांशे वा प्रजायते ॥२८२२ ॥
सद्यो मरणमाप्नोति जीवितो बहुभाग्यवान्।
2822 - 28221/2, Instant Death: Birth in an
immovable ascendant with Kalusha Nadiamsa, with
an immovable Navamsa will cause instant death. If
at all he survives, he will be highly prosperous.
सु्दर्यशगते चन्दे भाग्ये राहुसमन्विते ॥२८२३॥
पूर्वभागे प्रजातस्य न्छेष्टनमादिशेत् |
उत्तरे प्रजातस्य वेष्टनं च न विद्यते ॥२८२४॥
पूर्वभागे क्वचिच्चेति गुरुदृष्टिवशात्सुखम्।
weed नास्ति ARASH HI Ul
2823 - 2825. Umbilical Cord: (a) Rahu in the
9th while the Moon occupies Sundari Nadiamsa will
cause birth entangled in umbilical cord in case of
former half of Kalusha Nadiamsa.
(b) But if birth be in the second half, this
yoga will be ineffective in this regard.
(c) Infantile Mortality: Jupiter’s aspect on
the ascendant incase of birthin former half will offset
effects of infantile mortality. The relief will however’
be less in case of second half of Kalusha Nadiamsa.
सिहांशे त्वचे लगने कन्यांशे च प्रजायते |
विप्रजन्मा सुखी नित्यं तृतीयो भवति धृवम् ॥२८२६ ॥
समांसश्यामदेहश्च व्येष्ठभ्रातृविरीनवान् |
पश्वाद््रातृयुतो मानी भगिन्या सहितः सुखी ॥२८२७॥
2826 - 2827. Leo/Virgo Navamsa: Birth 7791
immovable ascendant with Leo/Virgo Navamsa will
cause following effects. The subject will be a Brahmin, be ever happy and be the third issue of the
family. He will havea fleshy and dark body and will
have no eldercoborn. He will have younger coborns,
be honourable and be happy with his sister.
Notes: Nadiamsa condition should be ignored in
this context, Any one of the three immovable ascendaats should rise at birth begetting Leo or Virgo
Navamsa. That is Taurus 23° 20' to 30°; Leo 16° 40’
to 23° 20' or Scorpio 3° 20!' to 10° 0' should rise in
which case the Navamsa ascendant will be Leo/
Virgo. (Aquarius will not beget these Navamsas.)
Then the effects given in the text will become applicable.
सिंहांशे त्वचरे लग्ने कलुषांशे प्रजायते |
र्वपश्चिमवीथीपु दक्षिणे च प्रसूतिमान् ॥२८२८ ॥
2828. Kalusha Nadiamsa: The native of an
immovable ascendant, with Leo Navamsaand Kalusha
Nadiamsa will be born ina street spread from east to
south in the southern part (of the town).
शुक्राह्रकसंयोगे कलुषांशे च जायते |
प्रियन्ते ्रातग्छन्ये प्रात्रीजनसमन्वितः॥२८२९ ॥

14 Chandra Kala Nadi
2829. If birth be in Kalusha Nadiamsa of an
immovable ascendant, the conjunction of Venus -
Mars will destroy the native’s brother while sisters
will not be destroyed.
लग्नाक्केन्रगते जीवे Baar |
स्थिरांशे जनकः श्रीमान् रोगी श्यामतनुः FM: RCo ॥
बाल्ये दारिदय्रमापन्नो मध्ये वयसि भाग्यवान् |
पश्चादभ्रातृयुतो मानी ्येष्ठभ्रातृषिहीनवान् ॥२८२१ ॥
2830 - 2831. Jupiter in an Angle: For birth in
an immovable ascendant with immovable Navamsa,
see if Jupiter occupies an angle with Cancer Navamsa. If so, the native’s father will be wealthy,
sickly, and will have a dark and emaciated body. He
will experience poverty in childhood and be devoid
of older coborn.
Notes; The Nadiamsa is not relevant. The ascendantshould be inanimmovable sign with immovable Navamsa (whether Vargottama or not) while
Jupiter is in an angle from the natal ascendant, with
exaltation Navamsa. Needless to mention, the position of Jupiter in the sign Aquarius will not grant him
exaltation in Navamsa. So he should be in any other
immovable sign as an angle.
Many good effects about father are discussed
involving Jupiter, who is the 8th lord for Taurus/Leo.
ForScorpio and Aquarius he is the 2nd lord, ruling the
opposite sign of the 8th. His retrogression is specially
discussed again about father in the ensuing verses but
with the use of subject Nadiamsa.
कलुषांशेत्तरे भागे TY वक्रचारगे |
स्वपिता दुर्बलः साधुः कोपी शिप्रप्रसादवान् ॥२८३२ ॥
किंचित्कालं दुराचारो व्रणशख्प्रपीडितः।
पश्ा्तप्तः पापभीरर्दवव्राह्मणपोषकः॥९८३३ ॥
वेदिकाचारधर्मात्मा शिवलिङ्ग्पूजकः।
2832 - 28331/2. Father: For one bornin Kalusha
Nadiamsa’s second half, if the 8th lord is retrograde
at birth, following effects about father will come to
pass. He will have a weak body, be gentle, given to
anger, but be instantly pleased, will for some time
take to bad path, will ater regret, be troubled by ulcer
and weapons, will be afraid of committing sins, will
honour gods and Brahmins, will follow Vaidic path,
be religious and will worship lord Siva.
पितामहाधिपे शुक्रे निर्मलः स्वपितापहः॥२८२४ I
2834. Venus ruling the Sth (paternal grandfather) denotes that the native’s paternal grandfather
will be pure (in character).
Note: This line is a wrong placement here as
Venus does not signify paternal grandfather for any
immovable ascendant. Further, it does not specify
how Venus should be placed. This one line has crept
in here affecting the continuity of effects of slokas
2832-3312 above. the effects now continue in sloka
2835 etc. infra. using retrograde Jupiter.
कलुषांशोत्ते भागे शिवानुग्रहवान् पिता |
सास्विको गुणसम्पत्र श्रुतिस्मृतिविचक्षणः॥२८२५ ॥
याचके तु प्रसन्नात्मा बहुमित्रातवत्सलः।
कन्यारूढवशाद्धाग्यं जनकस्य नं संशयः॥२८३६ ॥
2835 - 2836. The native’s father will enjoy the
blessings of Lord Siva. He will be endowed with
Satva Guna and be virtuous and will be able to
differentiate betweenSmruti (recorded outof memory)
and Sruthi (directly beard). He will please those who
come to him for help, will have many friends and will
be fond of his kinsmen. (The 2nd line of sloka 2836
has something missing as the planet required to be in
Virgo, to give prosperity to father, is not cited).
जातकस्य विशेषण विपदाये च योगवान् |
सम्पदाये त्वल्पफलमुततरंो न संशयः॥२८३७॥
2837. Kalusha Nadiamsa: The 3rd dasa wil]
bring specially more prosperity. The second dasa
will not be so effective (for prosperity). These apply
to birth in second half of this Nadiamsa.
सिंहांशे त्वचे लगे कलुषे प्रजायते |
चन्द्रे गुरुयुते दृष्टे बालारिष्टं न विद्यते ॥२८३८ ॥
पूर्वभागे प्रजातः स चादिखण्डे तथैव च।
अल्पायुदयमापोति बालारष्टे मरिप्यति ॥२८३९ ॥
2838 - 2839. One born in an immovable ascendant with Leo Navamsa (or) Kalusha Nadiamsa will

Deva Keralam 15
not incur infantile mortality if the Moon begets the
company of Jupiter. Birth inthe former half will also
cause same result (Adikhande is a corrupt addition),
and the native will have a short life because of
Balarishta.
Notes: Sloka 2839 is defective in concept. Inone
breath it says there won’t be Balarishta and immediately short life is denoted due to Balarishta. Obviously there 18 some mix up.
उत्तरांशे मध्यखण्डे कलुषांशे तु जायते |
बाल्ये मसूरिकागण्डो मृतप्रायोऽपि जीवति ॥२८४० ॥
मान्दज्ववणेश्चपि पीडितोऽत्यन्तशोकवान् |
जन्मदायेऽपमृत्युश्च तृती याब्दात्परं सुखम् ॥२८४१ ॥
2840 - 2841. Kalusha Nadiamsa, 2nd half,
Immovable ascendant: One born in second half c.
Kalusha Nadiamsa will be troubled by smallpox and
will nearly die. (Madhyakhande Kalushamse 1s
corrupt entry.) He will also be troubled by indigestion, fever and will be much grieved. The first dasa
will prove dangerous for him. Only after the third
year, happiness will prevail.
स्वपिता भाग्यसंयुक्तो राजद्वारे सुकीरतिमान्।
जन्मतारदशाकाले सोदरोत्पत्तिमश्नुते ॥२८४२ ।
एकभ्रातृयुतश्चैव कलुषांशे न संशयः॥२८४३ |
2842 - 2843. Effects Continued: His father will
be endowed with fortunes and be famous serving a
king. The subject will acquire coborn inthe first dasa.
He will have one brother.
waa शशिपु्रसूर्यसहिते मन्दे विलग्नस्थिते
fae देवगुरौ निशाकगयुते वीर्ये शिखीभार्गवो |
स्वरभानर्नव्मे यथक्रममिदं जातस्य सौख्यं महत्
बाल्ये क्लेशयुतो वदन्ति भृगवो ह्यल्पप्रजासन्ततिम् ॥२८४४॥
भ्राता चैव तथा धवेत्कितिपतिस्ततुल्यभाग्यो धनी
श्रीमान् विंशतिवत्सरे फलमिदं द्रत्रिशदब्देऽथ वा ॥२८४५ ॥
तदर्धत्पिरतशचेति स्वपिता भाग्यमश्नुते |
तदर्षाद्योगभङ्ग स्यात् ताराब्दानन्तरं सुखम् ॥२८४६ ॥
2844 . 2846. Mercury occupying his own sign
alnng with the Sun, Saturn in Ascendant, Jupiter and
the Moon Leo, Ketu and Venus inthe 3rd, Rahu inthe
Oth - this type of planetary array will give great
happiness to the native. But his childhood will be
marked by difficulties. He will have limited progeny.
This is according to Bhargava school of thought. His
brother will also beget similar effects. He will be
equal to a king, wealthy, and prosperous either after
20 or after 32 years of age. For 10 or 16 years (half
01200132) from the birth of the native, his father will
see prosperity. After a similar number of years, his
prosperity will decline. Happiness will revive two
years later.
Notes: By a careful study, we can understand
that this horoscope should contain Taurus ascendant
with Saturn therein, Mercury and the Sun in Gemini,
Venus Ketu in Cancer, Jupiter and the Moon in Leo
while Rahu is in Capricorn.
Rahu in the 9th for any ascendant is found to
cause childhood with want of financial comforts in
the family.
रन्राधिपदशाकाले पूर्वार्धे सोख्यमश्नुते |
तदशायां जातकस्य विद्याभ्यासं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥२८४७ ॥
2847. Dasa of 8th lord: The first half of 8th
lord’s dasa will give happiness toa native of Kalusha
Nadiamsa in an immovable ascendant. In that dasa
the native will be initiated into learning.
लाभाधिपदशाकाले सुखाधिपतिभुक्तिषु ।
HN प्रजातस्य तवक्षराभ्यासमादिशेत् ॥२८४८ ॥
2848. One born in Kalusha Nadiamsa will be
initiated into education in the sub period of the 4th
lord, in the dasa of the 11th lord.
लग्ने मन्दे सुखे जीवे स्वोच्चांशे शुभवीकिते |
लिपित्रयप्रवीणश्च ख्यातविद्याविशारदः॥२८४९ ॥
नारकालडकृतौ काव्ये प्रियः सङ्गीतवल्लभः।
संस्कृतप्रियभाषी स्यादेवब्राह्मणभक्तिमान् ॥२८५० ॥
2849 - 2850. Saturn in the ascendant, Jupiter in
the 4th house in aspect to another benefic, and at the
same time getting Cancer Navamsa will make the
native skillful in three languages and will beget fame

16 Chandra Kala Nadi
for his learning. He will be fond of drama, rhetoric,
poetry and music. He will be an expert in speaking
in Sanskrit and will honour Brahmins and gods.
Notes: Jupiter in the 4th begetting Cancer Navamsa suggests that the birth ascendant should be
either Taurus or Leo or Aquarius, but not Scorpio.
सुन्दर्यशगते TA कलुषांशे च जायते |
बाल्ये विद्यासु निपुणो शजद्रारे सुकीर्विमान् ॥२८५१ ॥
fare राजयोगः स्वपित्रधिकयोगवान्।
सम्पदयये तृतीयांशे तथा खण्डे THAR ॥२८५२ ॥
अतीव श्रियमाप्नोति गेहे लक्ष्मीकटाक्षवान् |
जन्मतारादशाकाले गोचरे कटके शनो ॥२८५३ ॥
मात्ररिष्टं विजानीयात्कलुषांशे न संशयः।
स्वमातृसोदरः सप्त सापलीमातृयोगवान् ॥२८५४ ॥
2851 - 2854. Birth in Kalusha Nadiamsa while
the Moon is in Sundari Nadiamsa will cause the
native achieve excellent results in childhood. He will
also be famous in royal service. He will obtain
Rajayoga effects in the 3rd dasa. His father will also
prosper. In the last one third part of the second dasa,
the native will become exceedingly wealthy. During
the currency of the first dasa, when Saturn transits
Cancer, his mother will be endangered. She will have
seen brothers. The subject will have a step-mother.
मुन्दर्यशगते जीवे कलुषांशे च संस्थिते |
THI प्रजातश्च जन्मदाये विवाहवान् ॥२८५५ ॥
2855, Jupiter in Sundari Nadiamsa: For a
birth in the second half of Kalusha Nadiamsa (of an
immovable ascendant), if Jupiter occupies Sundari
Nadiamsa, predict marriage in the very first dasa.
Notes: The question of marriage in the very first
should be wisely made depending upon the 081216८
at birth. Alternatively, the next dasa should be
chosen. The text simply implies an early marriage.
सिहांशगे स्थिरे लमे युग्मे बूकांशगे भृगो ।
कलुषांशे प्रजातः स विवाहप्रतिमन्धवान् ॥२८५६ ॥
यस्यां नादयां प्रजातस्य तृतीये शनिवीश्िते ।
विवाहयलकाले तु विघ्नं भवति कर्मणा ecu |
द्वित्रिवासरयलेन पश्चादुद्राहयोगवान् |
कलुषांशे स्थिरे लगने कन्यया पिवृहीनया ॥२८५८ ॥
2856 - 2858. Obstacles to Marriage: Venus
should be in a dual sign with Libra Navamsa. The
ascendant should be an immovable one with immovable Navamsa for birth in Kalusha Nadiamsa. Then
the native’s marriage will face obstacles. For birthin
the same Nadiamsa, Saturn aspecting the 3rd house
will also cause similar obstacles. Marnage will
however occur after two or three weeks of trial. The
bride will have no father at the time of the marriage
of the said native.
उद्राहमिति च प्रार्दवज्ञं च प्रपूजयेत् |
THAME देहारोग्यं शुभावहम् ॥२८५९ ॥
सुवर्णेन यथाशक्ति सूर्यस्य प्रतिमां कृताम |
कृत्वा ध्यानादिभिः Gat होमान्ते दानमाचरेत् ॥२८६० ॥
दिवाकर नमस्तुभ्यं पापाङ्गानप्रणाशन ।
त्रयीमयार्कं विश्वात्मन् गृहाणार्ध्यं नमोऽस्तुते ॥२८६१॥
दरादशादित्यवारान्त्ये मण्डलान्त्ये च वा यदि।
दिवाकप्रसादेन देहारोग्यं न संशयः॥२८६२ ॥
निराहारो वर्षमेकं फलाहारस्िवार्षिकम् |
2859 - 2862 1/2. By worshipping the astrologer
and donating red-coloured clothes, health will prevail. According to one’s capacity, a golden image of
the Lord Sun be donated after performing prayers and
fire sacrifice (Homa). By worshipping the Sun God,
sins and ignorance and will disappear. For twelve
Sundays, or for 48 (continuous) days, worship of the
Sun God will bring back health. Food should be
avoided for one year (obviously one time fasting is
hinted). Forthree years one should live only on fruits.
Notes: The remedies suggested here have nothing to do in this part of the text as one could
understand. These have been wrongly appended.
जीवदाये सूर्यभुक्तो राजद्वारे क्वचिद्रयथा ॥२८६३ ॥
पशचा्स्वास्थ्यमवाप्नोति waa शुभाशुभम |
2863 ~ 28631/2. In the sub period of the Sun
during Jupiter’s major period the native will incur

Deva Keralam 17
royal wrath. Afterwards health will prevail (?). The
sub period of the Moon will give both good and bad
effects.
लभते च विवाहं सः fame च न संशयः॥२८६४॥
कलुषांशे स्थिरे लगमे कामेरे भृगुसंयुते |
उद्राहदीक्षासमये हयतिवृष्टिर्भविष्यति ॥२८६५ ॥
2864 - 2865. Then the native will get married in
his 20th year (overcoming obstacles). For the native
of Kalusha Nadiamsa, the 7th lord joining Venus will
cause heavy rains at the time of marriage.
Notes: The second line of sloka No. 2864 given
above should have appeared immediately after sloka
2858, as slokas 2859 - 28621/2 are not a part hereof.
दारारूढाधिपे जीवे स्वोच्चांशे शनिवीश्िते |
श्यामवर्णक्प्रं स्याद्िवाहानन्तरं सुखम् ॥२८६६ ॥
लक्मीकराक्षवन्नित्यं गेहे गोधान्यसङ्लम् |
2866 - 28661/2. Spouse: Jupiter begetting the
lordship of 7th Aroodha pada, being in aspect to
Saturn and obtaining Cancer Navamsa will give a
dark-bodied spouse, and happiness after mamnage.
कलुषांशे परे भागे सायनाद्दे fafa: neces ti
नवमाब्दे मनस्तापो क्तेशः स्यादष्टवत्सरे |
पूर्वभागे प्रजातस्य वसुवर्षं पितुर्विपत् ॥२८६८ ॥
जन्मतारादशान्त्यादो सम्पदाये स्वभुक्तिषु |
HAT प्रजातस्य त्वापत्सन्यासवान् पिता ॥२८६९ ॥
2867 - 2869. Father: For one born in the latter
part of Kalusha Nadiamsa (in an immovable sign)
father’s death will occur within one-and-a-half year
of birth of the native. His ninth yearwill cause mental
distress while the eighth year grief. Father will be
endangered in the native’s eighth year in case of first
half of the subject Nadiamsa. The native’s father will
take to ascetism following a calamity in the end of
first dasa or in the first sub period of the second dasa
of the native of first half of this Nadiamsa.
Notes: The expression “Saayanaabde” may be
interpreted by some as the year 27. This does not
apply to logic as “Ayana” is not part of Katapayadi
system of numerical.
कलुषांशे परे भागे पापयोगे शुभेक्षिते |
गृढचित्तः प्रसन्नात्मा गुप्तकामातुरो भवेत् ॥२८७० ॥
2870. The subject of second half of Kalusha
Nadiamsa having a malefic yoga (in the ascendant)
relieved by a benefic will be secretive in disposition,
be pleased and will maintain a secrecy of his lust.
नानाजातिवधूसङ्गी कामेशे शनिवीक्षिते ।
भृगुजे MAAS परख्रीसङ्गपापवान् ॥२८७१ ॥
कालान्तरे चित्तशुद्ध राजद्ररे प्रसिद्धिमान् |
बहुमित्रार्थसम्पत्नः rafter परं सुखम् ॥२८७२ ॥
2871 - 2872. Should the 7th lord be in aspect to
Saturn, he will join women of many castes. Venus
aspected by Saturn will make the native join many
women. After some time he will emerge purehearted, will become famous in royal service, will
have many friends, wealthetc. and will be happy after
the death of his father.
पितृव्याधिपतौ जीवे स्वोच्चांशे शनिवीकषते।
पितृब्येकोऽतिमेधावी कन्सरद्वययोगवान् ॥२८७३ ॥
क्रोधस्नीनायको नित्यं धर्माधर्मविचक्षणः।
बाल्ये aes स्तवपरर्थे सुसोख्यवान् ॥२८७४॥
2873 - 2874. Paternal Uncle: Jupiter ruling the
11th house (ascendant being Taurus or Aquarius, an
immovable sign) if aspected by Saturn and begets
Cancer Navamsa denotes that the native will have
only one paternal uncle. The uncle in question will
be extremely intelligent, will have two wives, will
husband women given to anger, and be skillful in
differentiating between the just and unjust. He will
suffer penury during his childhood and will enjoy
happiness in the second half of his life.
STMT दशाकाले तृतीये गण्डकालगो |
कलुषांशे प्रजाश्च स्वसोद्रविभागवान् ॥२८७५ ॥
2875. एणा Division: णाह the Jast one third
part ofsecond dasa, the subject of Kalusha Nadiamsa
(immovable sign) will incur a division with his
brother.
विपत्तारादशाकाले लग्नेशांशत्रिकोणगे |

18 Chandra Kala Nadi
स्फुटयोगं गते मन्दे दारपीडा विनिर्दिशेत् ॥२८७६ |
2876. Danger to Spouse: During his third dasa
when Saturn comes to the Navamsa Rasi occupied by
ascendant lord, ora trine thereof, the native’s spouse
will be in danger.
केतुयोगे मदाधीशे दि नेत्रकलिः स्मृतः!
ूर्वपापेन रोगी च किचिद्रोगकठ्त्रवान् क्वचित् ॥२८७७ |
2811. Ketu: The 7th lord in the company of Ketu
causes a floral mark inan eye of the spouse. She will
also be somewhatsickly. Due to sins of past birth, the
subject will also be sickly.
कलुषांशे परे भागे त्वनुजप्रीतिमान् क्वचित्|
ame भ्रातृवैरं विभागं द्वित्रिवासरम् ॥२८७८ ॥
Bae तृतीयांशे विभागं च विनिर्दिशेत्
लग्नाद् द्वादशगे चन्र कुम्भे मेषांशसंस्थिते ॥२८७९ ॥
fared महत्सौख्यं कलुषांशे न संशयः।
कामेशे शनिना दृष्टे सुतेशे Ta |
विपदाये सुतोत्पततदित्रिस्या सुजीवति ॥२८८० ॥
2878 - 2880. One born in the second half of
Kalusha Nadiamsa will be somewhat attached to his
coborn. In his fourth dasa, be will incur enmity with
his brother. In the 3rd dasa he will be greatly happy.
If the Sth lord joins the Sun while the 7th lord is with
the aspect of Saturn, the third dasa will cause of
children out of which (only) two or three will survive.
Notes: The two lines relating to sloka 2879 are
not included in the above translation as they are
irrelevant. The first line means: In the second dasa’s
last one-third part there will be family division. This
line is a repetition of sloka 2875. The second line of
Sloka 2879 relates to Pisces ascendant, a dual sign,
and that too is partial. The meaning is “The Moon in
the 12th in Aquarius, with Aries Navamsa” and is
incomplete.
GEM गुरभक्तिकाले
स्वदेशभूपालकनाशमाहुः।
शुभेशदाये एलमाकरोति
स्थिरांशजस्यान्यविधं फलं स्यात् ॥२८८१॥
रन्धराधिपदशाकाले व्ययाधिपतिभुक्तिषु |
परहोदधिप्रान्त्यदेशे पूर्वभागे भविष्यति ॥२८८२ ॥
लग्नेशांशत्रिकोणे वा RCO RINE CIDE
स्फुटयोगं गते मन्दे देशे राज्ञं कलापनम् ॥२८८३ |
अनावृष्टिहते देशे दुर्भिक्षभयडाम्बरम् |
कलुषांशे परे भागे ATTY प्रजायते ॥२८८४ ॥
्षमतारादशाकाले कालमृत्युभयं मृतिः।
अष्टपञ्चाशगे वर्षे योगवान् कीर्तिमान्धवेत् ॥२८८५ ॥
अंशायुशचैकषष्टिश्च दक्षिणायने मृतिः।
pat वृश्चिके मीने कन्यामासेऽथ वा यदि ॥२८८६ ॥
कलुषांशे प्रजातस्य शक्रे मन्दे मृतिं वदेत्
चन््नाडीफलं सत्यं प्रत्यक्षं देवकेरठम् ॥२८८७॥
2881 - 2887. In the sub period of Jupiter in the
second dasa the ruler of the native’s country will be
destroyed (?) The dasa of 9th lord will give good
effects. For immovable Navamsa, results should be
known through other sources. In the dasa of 8th lord
and in the sub period of 12th lord, for birth in former
half, near Mahodadhi region ..... The king will be
involved in quarrel when Saturn transits the Rasi or
trine, identical with the Navamsa occupied by ascendant lord or 8th lord. The country will reel under
drought and lack of rains. One born in Kalusha
Nadiamsa in Pisces ascendant, will die in the 4th
dasa. In his 58th year he will obtain name and fame.
According to Amsayu method he will live upto 61,
with the Sun moving in his southerly course, in
Cancer, Scorpio, Pisces (?) or Virgo. The conjunction of Venus-Saturn will cause death of the native of
Kalusha Nadiamsa. These effects culled out from
Chandra Nadi, produced in Deva Keralam will bear
truth.
Note: Most of the above seven slokas are either
defective, or meaningless, or wrongly appended.
The intelligent reader will take only applicable views
ignoring other parts of these slokas.
॥ Sra: ॥
कान्तांशे वृश्चिके मन्दे षले प्रजायते |

Deva Keralam
बाल्ये पितृषिनाशः स्यात्पश्ाटभ्रातृविहीनवान् ॥२८८८ ॥
ज्यष्ठभ्रातृविनाशेन मध्ये वयसि शोकवान्।
भगिनीद्रयमायुप्यमेका पुत्रवती सुखी ॥२८८९ ॥
ततः प्रभद्रारदेशे बाल्ये सौख्यं विनिर्दिशेत् ।
UMA वासं कुत्सितप्रभुसेवकः॥२८९० ॥
दारद्रये सुपुत्राप्तिरमलायोगजस्य च।
वेदोक्तकर्ममूतेन नरवाहनयोगवान् ॥२८९१ ॥
me महत्सौख्यं मध्यखण्डे धनागमम् |
अपरार्धे सुवाहापिर्घातिंशे AAA AAT ॥२८९२॥
2888 - 2892. Kanthaa Nadiamsa - Pisces Ascendant: (a) One born in this part of the zodiac with
Saturn in Scorpio (in the 9th house) will lose his
father in childhood and will be bereft of after- born.
He will incur grief due to loss of elder brother in the
middle of his life. He will have two sisters, out of
whom one will be long-lived, endowed with sons and
happiness. He will obtain happiness in early days by
serving a king. Afterwards he will go to forests (or
will migrate) and will serve a mean king. He will
have two wives and good (male) children.
(b) Due to Amala Yoga (caused by a benefic
being placed in the 10th in Sagittarius), he will obtain
men-borne conveyances by performing rituals as
prescribed in the Vedas.
(c) In the 4th dasa, he will be greatly happy. In
the middle part thereof, he will eam wealth. In the
second half of the said dasa, he will beget conveyance and villages (i.e. some properties or position of
eminence). (Dhaatamse is a wrong addition in sloka
2892. Dhaatamsa is cited as Ghaatamsa in some
parts of the text.)
Notes: (a) The above results for Saturn’s position in Scorpio should apply only when Kanthaa
Nadiamsa rises in Pisces. Otherwise Saturn in the 9th
for Pisces will just give troubles to father, and a
second marriage to the native (11th lord aspecting the
11th house, is a slow moving planet.
(b) Amala yoga giving conveyance can be applied to any part of Pisces, and also to other ascendants,
(c) The effects cited here should be read delinking Saturn in the 9th, and also Amala Yoga.
These just relate to Kanthaa nadiamsa, Pisces ascendant. Additional effects are cited in slokas 2897Kanthaa Nadiamsa occurs twice in each sign.
Movable sign: once from 6° to 6° 12', and again
Immovable sign: once from 23° 48' to 24° 0'" and
again from 19° 48' to 20° 0,
Common sign: once from 25° to 25° 12', and
again from 21° to 21° 12'.
मन्दे दावागनिषष्टयंशे वातप्रकृतिदेहवान् |
पश्वादारयुतो मानी राजद्वारे प्रसिद्धिमान् ॥२८९३ ॥
2893. Saturn: If Saturn is found in the
Shashtiamsa entitled Davagni, the subject will have
a body prone to windy troubles. He will havea second
wife (as well), be honourable, and be famous in royal
Service.
Note: Slokas No. 2893 -6 are wrongly appended
in this part of the text, and should be carefully and
profitably used without mixup.
GORY जीवे मन्दे घातांशनाडिके |
भाग्ययोयं च लभते हरिशड्रभाक्तिमान् ॥२८९४॥
धातांशे वृश्चिके मन्दे स्थूलगात्रो महामतिः।
मूर्खप्रकृतिमान् रागी कोपी किप्रप्रसादवान् ॥२८९५ ॥
SOME भाग्यं चत्वारिंशे सुवाहनम्।
द्विचत्वारिशगे वर्षे योगवान् कीर्तिमान् सुखी ॥२८९६ ॥
2894 - 2896 Jupiter: Should Jupiter be in
‘Pareswara’ (should be Parameswari) Nadiamsa,
while Saturn is in Ghaata Nadiamsa, the subject will’
be fortunate and be devoted to Lord Vishnu and Lord
Siva. After the age of 38, he will be fortunate, and
will acquire conveyances at 40. At the age of 42, he
will become widely famous, be happy and enjoy yoga
effects. |
Notes: Neither Ghaata nor Dhaata Nadiamsa is
enlisted as mentioned in notes under sloka 1207
(page 109, Book 1). My feeling is it should be
Kanthaa Nadiamsa.
TAT दारहानिर्मृतापत्यबहुत्ववान् |

20 Chandra Kala Nadi
व्येष्ठपुप्रश्िरंजीवी पत्नी कुशिप्रपीडिता ॥२८९७ ॥
मृतप्रजाबहत्वं स्याद्वगिनीद्रयवान् सुखी |
भेदभ्रातृयुतो मानी पितृशुश्रूषणे रतः॥२८९८ ॥
2897 - 2898. Pisces Ascendant ~ Kanthaa
Nadiamsa (Effects continued from sloka 2892):
The subject in his fifth dasa will lose his spouse. His
eldestson will be long-lived and his spouse will suffer
from abdominal diseases. He will beget many dead
children, and will have two full sisters apart from
(unspecified number of) half sisters. He will be
devoted to his father and be honourable.
Discussions on Kanthaa Nadiamsa in Pisces
ascendant end here, although the text lists upto sloka
2912 under this heading.
विद्चाविप्नयुतो नित्यं मालांशे नात्र संशयः।
तृतीयकोशे लिखितं फलाध्याये विचार्यताम् ॥२८९९ ॥
2899. Maala Nadiamsa: The native of Maala
Nadiamsa will face obstacles io his education. In the
third division, effects about this aspect are wnitten.
Note: This sloka does not give full clues and is
irrelevant. The 3rd division referred to here is of the
original consulted by the author, Achyuta.
बुधे सोमसुतं शस्थे स्वोच्चे रविसमन्विते।
चरलगने प्रजातश्च ग्येष्ठभ्रातृविहीनवान् ॥२९०० ॥
महानदीप्रान््यदेशे नगरे प्रसवः स्मृतः।
2900 - 29001/2. Movable ascendant: For a birth
in Kantha Nadiamsa in movable ascendant (specifi-
‘cally Cancer), if Mercury occupies Somavathi
Nadiamsa in Virgo in the company of the Sun, the
subject will be devoid of an elder coborn. His birth
will be near a great river in a town.
Notes: From sloka 2900 to 2912, the text deals
with Kanthaa Nadiamsa, Cancer ascendant, in contradiction to the chapter’s caption. This will be clear
from sloka 2907 and 2911 infra. In given cases, these
hints apply to other movable ascendants also.
For Kantha Nadiamsa, see notes given under
Sloka 2888 supra.
And the next chapter from sloka 2913 also deals
with Cancer ascendant, but witha different Nadiamsa.
“Somasuthamse” should read as “Somalatamse”
meaning: "in Somalatha Nadiamsa” the same as
Somavathi Nadiamsa which in Virgo rules from 3° 0'
to 3° 12’. The planet Mercury should be in this space
in the company of the Sun (whose degree is unspecified) while the ascendant is in Cancer in Kanthaa
nadiamsa. As a result, the subject will be the first
issue without an older coborn.
कान्तांशे चोत्तरे भागे शक्रे केन्द्रत्रिकोणगे ॥२९०१॥
विप्रजन्मा सुखी नित्यं सीमन्ततनयः स्मृतः।
गेहेशे यत्नेवांशस्थे तद्राश्यंशत्रिकोणगे ॥२९०२॥
aaa गृहद्वारे प्रसूतिरनात्र संशयः।
2901 - 29021/2. Should Venus be in an angle or
in a trine, the native of second half of Kantha
Nadiamsa ina movable ascendant will be a Brahmin,
be ever happy and be the eldest issue of the family.
The house of birth will correspond to the Rasi or its
trine with reference to the Navamsa occupied by 4th
lord.
Notes: Venus is the 1 1thlord for Cancer ascendant and hence his position is discussed in the context
of the subject being the eldest issue.
लग्नाततृतीयगे सूर्ये सोदोत्पत्तिनाशनम् ॥२९०३ ॥
ज्यष्ठभ्रातृविनाशश्च स्वमातुर्मरणं भवेत् |
पूर्वभागे प्रजातश्च भ्रातृद्वयसमन्वितः॥२९०४ ॥
2903 - 2904. Mother & Coborn: If the 3rd
house be occupied by the Sun he will lose his cobom
(early, following their birth). This position will also
destroy the native’s elder coborn as well as mother.
One born in the first half of Kanthaa Nadiamsa in
Cancer ascendant will have two brothers (without
reference to the Sun in the 3rd house).
SRT चरे लग्ने मीनांशे देवपूजिते |
राजद्वारे प्रसिद्धश्च प्रबलोद्योगजीवकः॥२९०५ ॥
2905. Jupiter in Pisces Navamsa: The native of
former half of the subject Nadiamsa, in a movable
ascendant, having Jupiter in Pisces Navamsa will be
famous in royal service and will have a prosperous
calling.
Notes: Jupiter is the lord of the 9th for Cancer

Deva Keralam 21
ascendant. His occupation of Pisces Navamsa will
grant prosperity in profession and in general, without
having anything to do with the Nadiamsa of birth.
Being in royal service may however depend on the
Nadiamsa.
पूर्वभागे विष्णुभक्तो वेष्णवाचारतत्परः।
चक्रवर्तिगृहद्रारे बराह्मणस्नेहयोगवान् ॥२९०६ ॥
2906. Kanthaa Nadiamsa - First half: This
native of a movable ascendant will be devoted to
Lord Vishnu and follow the path prescribed for the
Vaishnavites. He will befriend Brahmins in the
assembly of an emperor.
उत्तरांश प्रजातश्च fara सुभाग्यवान्।
मातृस्थानाधिपे शुक्रे जूके मेषनवांशगे ॥२९०७॥
पूर्वभागे प्रजातस्य स्वमाता चिरजीविनी |
SHIN प्रजाश्च बाल्ये मातृविनाशवान् ॥२९०८ ॥
2907 - 2908. The native of second half of this
Nadiamsa will prosper in the third dasa. One belonging to the former half will havea long living mother,
if Venus ruling the 4th house occupies Libra itself,
with Aries Navamsa. But if the birth be in the 2nd
half, death of mother will occur in the very childhood
of the native.
Notes: For Cancer ascendant Venus inthe 4th in
Libra is a contributing factor for mother’s longevity.
His position simultaneously in Aries Navamsa will
give longevity to mother in case of birth in the first
half of Kanthaa Nadiamsa, in Cancer ascendant,
while the same position will cause loss of mother in
childhood in case of birth in second half of the
Nadiamsa in Cancer ascendant.
Thus Venus in Aries navamsa, being in the sign
Libra, implies some danger to mother in general.
पञ्चमाधिपतो भोमे चापांशे स्थिरराशिगे |
चरलग्ने प्रजातस्य पञ्चमान्दे महाविपत् ॥२९०९ ॥
मात्ररिष्टमवापनोति सापलीमातृयोगवान् |
2909 -29091/2. Mars in 5th: For Cancerascendant, Kanthaa Nadiamsa, if Mars ruling the 5th house
is in a fixed sign which gives him Sagittarius Navamsa position, the subject will be greatly endangered
in the Sth year. Additional effects thereof will be:
danger to mother, and acquisition of a step-mother
(0.6. another marriage for father).
Notes: For Cancer ascendant, Mars in the 2nd
(Leo), Sth (Scorpio) or 8th (Aquarius), getting Sagittarius Navamsa is discussed above. Thus Mars
should be in one of the following spaces for a native
of Cancer:
पितृस्थानाधिपे जीवे त्वसितेन युतेक्षिते ॥२९१० ॥
afasise पितुर्नाशसख्रयोविशेऽथ वा भवेत्|
पितुयाधिपतौ शक्रे जूके मेषनवांशगे ॥२९११॥
पितृव्याः पञ्च तेषां दरौ प्रबलो भाग्यशालिनो |
पूर्वभागे प्रजातस्य पितुव्याभावमादिशेत् ॥२९१२॥
2910 - 2912. Father & Paternal Uncle: (a)
Jupiter ruling the 9th and related to Saturn by aspect
or conjunction will cause destruction of father in the
22nd or 2310 year of age.
(b) The 11th lord Venus, denoting paternal uncle, placed in Libra with Aries Navamsa will cause
five paternal uncles. Out of themtwo will be famous.
(This rule involving Venus applies to second half of
Kanthaa Nadiamsa, Cancer ascendant.)
(©) Incase of birth informer half of this Nadiamsa,
there will be no paternal uncles at all, i.e. the father
will be the lonely male issue of his family.
Notes: (a) The 9th lord Jupiter aspected by, or in
the company of Saturn will cause early death of
father.
(b) and (c) - Applicable only to the subject
Nadiamsa.
॥ कटकलगनम् ~ [पडूजाशः] ॥
मीनांशे कटके लगे कुजग्रिशांशके तथा |
रूपवान् सुभगो दक्षः प्रसन्नमुखनेत्रवान् ॥२९१२ ॥
नाटयसंगीतरसिको गन्धमाल्याम्बरप्रियः।
द्रत्रिशान्दात्परं भाग्यं त्रिंशोपरि विशेषतः॥२९१४॥
2913 - 2914. Cancer Ascendant - Pankaja
Nadiamsa: The native of Cancer Ascendant with

22 Chandra Kala Nadi
Pisces Navamsa and Martian Trimsamsa will be
good-looking, fortunate, skillful and will be endowed with charming face and eyes. He will enjoy
dance, music, scents and garlands. After 32, particularly 30, be will be prosperous.
Notes: From here onwards, upto sloka 2945, the
discussions relate to Pankaja Nadiamsa, Cancer ascendant. This Nadiamsa is also knownas Sri Pankaja
Nadiamsa.
Ignore the Trimsamsa and Navamsa conditions
and take only Pankaja Nadiamsa in Cancer ascendant.
For details of Pankaja Nadiamsa, see sloka 685686, Book I.
युग्मे मीनांशके जवे समगात्रः प्रगल्भवाक् |
इङ्धितज्ञो धार्मिकश्च धीरजञः सत्यवाचकः ॥२९१५ ॥
लेख्यकोऽतिपटुशैव सुस्वरो मतिमान् Fe: |
राजसेवापरो नित्यं स्वपितुर्बुद्धिजीवनम् ॥२९१६ ॥
2915 - 2916. Pisces Navamsa: Jupiter ina dual
sign with Pisces Navamsa will bestow on this native
an even body and gift of intrepid speech. He will
further be a skillful writer, be endowed with a mellifluous voice, be intelligent, and devoted to serving the
king. His father will also be an intellectual.
स्वोच्चस्थिते देवगुरो इषांशे
सदातिकामी नृपसेवकश्च |
saga धनिकः प्रसिद्धः
सपलिमातुः सुतवत्सलश्च ॥२९१७ ॥
2917. If Jupiter placed in the sign Cancer gets
exalted Navamsa, the native of Sri Pankaja Nadiamsa
in Cancer ascendant will always be highly libidinous.
He will serve a king, be wealthy, famous and be
affectionate to the children of his step mother.
जन्मतारदशाकाले गोचर द्वादशे गुरो |
स्फुटयोगं गते जीवे विवाहोत्सवमादिशेत् ॥२९१८ ॥
2918. Marriage: णाह 0८ currency of the first
dasa when Jupiter comes to the 12th house, marriage
of the subject will occur.
दारस्थानाधिपे मन्दे स्वोच्चे रविसमन्विते |
उत्तरांश प्रजातश्च कलतरद्रययोगवान् ॥२९१९ ॥
2919. Two Marriages: Should Saturn ruling the
7th be in the company of the Sun, there will be two
Wives.
Notes: For other ascendants in general, the
company of Saturn with the lord of ascendant, or of
2nd orof 7th will cause delay in marriage. Butin case
of Cancer ascendant, Saturn joining the Sun, the 2nd
lord, will promote two marniages.
सम्प्तारदशाकाले AAG महत्सुखम् |
Maas चेति स्वप्राबल्यं धनागमम् ॥२९२० ॥
पूर्वभागे प्रजातश्च धनधान्याभिवद्धिमान् |
amet धर्मसिद्धी राजद्वारे प्रसिद्धिमान् ॥२९२१॥
उत्तरांशे प्रजातश्च विपदाये सुभाग्यवान्।
मीनांशे कटके लगने स्पशे लाभराशिगे ॥२९२२ ॥
fared राजयोगं नरवाहनयोगवान्।
सेनामात्यजनसेहं राजद्वारे न संशयः॥२९२३ ॥
2920 - 2923. Dasa Effects: (a) The native (of Sri
Pankaja Nadiamsa in Cancer ascendant) will obtain
great happiness inthe 2nd halfof 2nd dasa. He as well
as his relatives will become famous. He will acquire
wealth.
(b) One born in the first half will have increase
of wealth and grains. He will have religious advancements in the 4th dasa and become famous in royal
service.
(c) The third dasa will bestow prosperity on the
native of the second half of this Nadiamsa.
(d) Fora native of Cancer ascendant with Pisces
Navaimsa the 8th lord (Saturn) placed in the 11th will
give Raja Yoga effects in the third dasa, apart from
men-borne conveyances. He will befriend ministers
involved in royal service.
Notes: (a) Generally, irrespective of first or
second half, the native of Pankaja nadiamsa, Cancer
will be wealthy et cetera.
(b) The subject of the first half of the said
Nadiamsa will have indestructible wealth (as against
the native of 2nd half) and will enjoy religious
advancements in his fourth dasa. These are peculiar
to first half of Pankaja Nadiamsa birth.

Deva Keralam 23
(c) As forthe second half of native, his speciality
will be general progress in the third dasa
(d) Ignoring the Nadiamsa condition, one belonging to Cancer ascendant with Pisces Navamsa
and having Saturn in Taurus will have advancement
in the third dasa & C.
Ta लाधगते सुधाग्य
दशावसाने स्वसुतामयं च |
श्रीपडजांशे धनलाभमेति
द्वितौ यवेवाहिकमाहुरर्याः॥२९२४॥
2924. Eighth Lord in 11th: Fora native of Sn
Pankaja Nadiamsa in Cancer, the 8th lord Saturn in
the 11th will give abundant fortunes. Inthe end of the
(third) dasa, the native will see his progeny in sickness, But he will gain wealth. There will be second
mariage for the native (during the third dasa).
Notes: In my opinion, here the Nadiamsa condition is an interruption and the effects cited should be
read in continuity of sloka 2923 above. Thus, when
the navamsa ascendant is Pisces fora Cancer nativity,
fortunes will be galore. Else, Saturn in the 11th, as
the 8th lord, will not be so helpful for gains (fortunes).
The key is Pisces Navamsa rising.
Further, the subject will have two marriages as
the 7th lord is in the 11th house in Taurus. And his
children will be diseased. Both these effects will
occur in the third dasa.
विपत्तारादशाकाले कर्मभोमान्तरान्तर ।
TET वापि देहजाइयं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥२९२५ ॥
2925, Mars - Rahu periods: If Mars at birth be
in 10th, (in Aries) then, during the third dasa, and in
the sub periods of Mars and Rahu, the subject will '
face physical ailments.
Notes: Saturn in the context of third dasa was
narrated earlier. Now the text specifies illness in the
two sub periods viz. of Mars and Rabu, in the third
dasa when Mars is in Aries in a Cancer nativity.
मीनांशे कटके लग्ने कुजत्रिशां शंस्थिते |
बन्धुप्रीतिकये नित्यं हरिशद्रभक्तिमान् ॥२९२६ ॥
मिताशी गृढहत्कामी पापभीरुः सुबुद्धिमान् |
वार्धके च महत्सो्यं बाल्ये क्लेशदरिद्रवान् ॥२९२७॥
RSM रागी Cera सुखम् |
स्वभुजा्ितसम्पन्नो राजद्वारेऽधिकारवान् ॥२९२८ ॥
विपदाये सुभाग्यापि योगं प्रापनोति भूरिशः।
नरवाहनयोगेन नित्यसन्तोषवान् भवेत् ॥२९२९॥
2926 - 2929. Cancer Ascendant - Pisces Navamsa: Birth should be in Cancer ascendant with
Pisces navamsa. Then the subject will cause happiness to his relatives, be devoted to Lords Vishnu and
Siva, will eat limited food, will have secretive sexual
lust, be afraid of committing sinful acts, be very
intelligent, will be quite happy in old age and be inthe
grip of difficulties and poverty in childhood. He will
be happy after marriage and will first beget a female
issue. He will have self-earned wealth, and will enjoy
a powerful position in the employ of the king. His
third dasa will bestow on him abundant prosperity.
He will enjoy men-borne conveyances (read only
conveyances) and will be ever happy (in this dasa).
Notes: The words “Kujatrimsamsa sansthithe”
insloka 2926 is a wrong appendage. It means “placed
in the Trimsamsa of Mars”. The position of the
ascendant is already fixed to be Pisces Navamsa.
“Jyeshtaputriyutho” reads as “Seemantha
putrimaan” in another text which correctly means
that the native’s first issue will be a daughter.
वितृव्यभवने मन्दे मेषांशे feat |
स्वपितृव्यश्च यः कश्चित् ANT दत्तपु्रवान् 112230 ॥
एकस्तु WAT बन्ध्याभर्तापरो भवेत्|
2930 -2930 1/2. Saturn in 11th: Saturn in the
11th (3rd from 9th) inimmovable Rasi (i.e. in Taurus,
the ascendant being Cancer) with Aries Navamsa
wil] give following effects: The native’s paternal
uncle wil] have to adopt a boy from his own family.
The said uncle will have one dead child after which
his spouse will become barren.
Notes: This sloka refers to Saturn’s position in
the 11th house in Taurus. He will get Aries Navamsa
if he is between 10° and 13° 20. As a result, the
native’s paternal uncle will experience birth of a
dead child consequent upon which he will have to go

24 Chandra Kala Nadi
in for adoption. The hint is towards childlessness of
father’s brother.
स्वपितृव्यसुतस्थाने TAT हालाहलांशगे USB UI
स्वपितृव्यसुतस्येव जलगण्डं विनिर्दिशेत् ।
2931 - 29311/2. Danger through Water: The
Sun in the 3rd house in Haalaahala Shasthiamsa
denotes danger through water for paternal uncle’s
son.
मीनांशे कटके AY सौभ्ये Saree ferry ॥२९२२ Il
बहुखीनायकः श्रीमान् वेश्यास्रीसक्तमानसः,
मातृप्रीतिकरो नित्यं भेदश्रातृसमन्वितः॥२९३३ ॥
भाभ्याधिपदशाकाले य इदं फलमश्नुते |
जातकस्य सुवाहापिस्ताराब्दानन्तरं सुखम् ॥२९३४ ॥
सन्ाधिपदशाकाले राजन्यजनमेत्रवा् |
सर्वाध्यक्षाधिकारेण गेहे लक्षमीकटाक्षवान् ॥२९३५॥
PSEA MR नक्षत्राधिपदायके |
श्त्रुभीर्तिमनस्तापश्ान्तश्छिद्रमयं क्वचित् ॥२९२६ ॥
पितृव्यद्रेषमाणोति मेहव्रणभयं तथा।
दोषपरिहारार्थं शान्ति कुर्याद्विचक्षणः ॥२९३७॥
2932 - 2937. Mercury in Cancer Navamsa:
Cancer Ascendant with Pisces Navamsa will lead to
following effects if Mercury obtains Cancer Navamsa simultaneously. The native will lord over many
women, be wealthy and be intent upon joining prostitutes. He will be everdevoted to pleasing his mother
but will have half-brothers (i.e. father will have
another marriage). These effects will materialise in
the dasa of the 9th lord. He will obtain conveyances
and be happy after the age of 27. Inthe dasa of 8th lord
he will befriend in royal circles and beget a chief
position. He will enjoy the mercy of Goddess Lakshmi.
In Moon’s dasa, during the sub periods of Jupiter and
Saturn, he will incur fear from enemies and destruction of peace. Further he will acquire the wrath of his
paternal uncle, urinary disorders (diabetes etc.) and
ulcer. To overcome the evils, suitable propitiations
be done.
Notes: The Rasi ascendant should be Cancer
while in Navamsa diagram, the ascendant should be
Pisces having Mercury in the Sth therefrom. As a
result, ina nutshell certain things are brought to light:
The native’s father will have a second marriage. The
subject will himself be related to many women and
will be of loose morals. He will be devoted to his
mother. The dasa of Moon will give him urinary
disorders and disputes with paternal uncle during the
sub period rulership of Jupiter and Saturn. His Mars
dasa will give him fortunes. 8th lord Saturn’s dasa
will introduce him in high circles. Remedies to
overcome urinary disorders and misunderstandings
are suggested in the following slokas.
भाग्यांशे कटके लग्ने परशुं दानमाचरेत्।
शतरुवर्गकुलच्छेदं कुठारस्य प्रदानतः NAVI? ॥
ममशतक्षयार्थाय तव पूजां करोम्यहम् |
शतुवंशक्षयार्थाय सर्वाभीषटर्थसिद्धये ॥२९३९ ॥
भयापमृत्युनाशाय कुठारं प्रददाम्यहम् |
given away to overcome this evils following which
the dangerous urinary disorder and enmity with
paternal uncle will be warded off. The following
Mantra should be recited (before the image ofa deity,
in Sanskrit): Mama Satrukshayaarthaaya thava
Poojaam karomyaham. Satruvamsa kshayaarthaaya
sarvaabhishtaartha siddhaye, Bhayaapa mrityu
naasaaya kuthaaram pradamamyaham.
Notes: “Kuthaara” and “Parasu” mean one and
the same thing, i.e. the axe of a wood-cutter. To
overcome urinary disorders and enmity with paternal
uncle, donation of an axe is suggested with recitation
of the Mantra given with Sanskrit transliteration in
the text above. The meaning of the Mantra is: To
obtain destruction of enemies, i.e. enmity with paternal uncle, I worship you (O Lord). Also fulfill all my
desires and save me from the danger of untimely
death (that could be caused due to diabetes).
सन्धराधिपदशाकाले THIS TT ॥२९४० ॥
स्वराज्ये च विरोधेन मनश्चाञ्चल्यभीतिमान्।
पूरवोक्तदानमत्रेण शुनां विनिर्दिशेत् ॥२९४१ ॥
2940 - 2941. Adverse Bhukti; During the sub

Deva Keralam 25
period of an adverse planet, in the dasa of the 8th lord
(vide sloka 2935), he will develop fickle-mindedness
due to enmity in his native country. He can obtain
destruction of enemies with the help of donation and
Mantra given just above (vide sloka 2938-39).
भराग्येशांशे तत्तिकोणे स्फुटयोगं गते शनौ |
विण्मूत्रदेहनाधादेः कषिप्रेणारोग्यभाग्यवान् ॥२९४२ ॥
2942. Saturn’s Transit: Saturn in transit in a
trine with reference to the Navamsa dispositor of 9th
lord (i.e. Jupiter) will cause excremental and physical
disorders of a temporary nature.
Notes: Jupiter is the 6th lord for Cancer ascendant. The planet owning the Navamsa occupied by
Jupiter should be located in the Rasi chart. When
Saturn reaches such a sign, or 5th or 9th therefrom,
the results mentioned will come to pass.
सध्राधिपदशाकाले वेधकग्रहभुक्तिषु ।
देहजादयं च लभते शान्ति कुर्याद्यथाविधि ॥२९४३ ॥
2943. Ill-health: During the sub period of an
adverse planet in the dasa of 8th lord (vide sloka
2940), the subject will incur ill-health for which
remedies be resorted to.
एकोनचत्वारिशेऽन्दे स्वप्रभोश्च मनोव्यथा |
चत्वारिंशत् परं भाग्यं गेहे कल्याणसंभ्रमः॥२९४४ ॥
षट्पञ्चाशात् परं कटं सुखेशस्य दशान्तर |
महाव्रणभयार्तश शान्ति कुर्याद्यथाविधि ॥२९४५ ॥
2944 - 2945. Other Effects: (Forbirth in Cancer
ascendant, with Pisces Navamsa), there will be mental distress due to royal displeasure in the 39th year.
Fortunes will rise after forty, coupled with a family
marriage. The years following fifty-six years of age
will cause difficulties. In the dasa (and sub) periods
of 4th lord (Venus), he wilkincur dangerous ulcer for
which remedies be resorted to.
भाग्येशे स्वोच्वराशिस्थे सुखे दानवपूजिते |
MAY प्रजातश्च यावदायुष्यभाग्यवान् ॥२९४६ ॥
2946. Movable Ascendant: One will enjoy fortunes throughout life if his ascendant being a movable one has the 9th lord in exaltation while the 4th
from ascendant is occupied by Venus.
Notes: This rule relates to Aries, Cancer, Libra
and Capricorn ascendants. Yet the following may be
noted as to how the condition forms:
1. Aries ascendant with Venus and Jupiter in
Cancer.
2. Cancer ascendant with exalted Jupiter while
Venus 15 in the 4th in Libra.
3. Libra ascendant with Venus in the 4th in
Capricorn while Mercury the 9th lord 15 required to
be in Virgo in exaltation.
4. Capricorn ascendant with Venus in the 4th in
Aries while the 9th lord Mercury is required to be in
Virgo itself, in exaltation.
Due to elongational impossibilities between
Venus and Mercury, combinations at 3 and 4 above
are not practical. Apparently the text implies only
Aries and Cancer ascendants.
ares स्वोच्चे सोम्ये पूर्णबलान्विते |
दशायां महद्धाग्यं पूर्वार्धं नात्र शंशयः॥२९४७ ॥
2947. Lord of Sun Sign: In case of a movable
ascendant, ifthe lord of Sunsignis in exaltation while
the planet Mercury is endowed with full strength, the
dasa of Mercury, particularly its first half will cause
advent of great fortunes.
Notes: "Taddasayam" can also mean the dasa of
the Sun’s dispositor. For all the four movable ascendants, Mercury owns a certain evil house. Although, in
the process, he may be endowed with strength, he
would need the help of the Sun’s dispositor to give
fortunes. Why the Sun’s dispositor comes in the
picture is difficult to be explained. However, this
principle applying to a movable ascendant deserves
special consideration.
्रहदरययुते भोमे धे पापयुतेक्षिते |
चरलगे प्रजातश्च मध्यमायुश्च विन्दति ॥२९४८ ॥
2948. Medium Life-span: Should Mars be in
the company of two planets while the 2nd house is
related to a malefic by aspect or company, one born
in a movable sign will have only a medium span of
life.

26 Chandra Kala Nadi
लग्ने कर्कटके जीवे स्वोच्चे मीननवांशगे |
यस्यां नाडयां WAIT ज्ञानवान् भाग्यवान् भवेत् ॥२९४९ ॥
सप्तविशात् परं भाग्यं स्वप्राबल्यं धनागमम् |
विद्यावान् युक्तिमाग्धैव सदा शिवपुराणवित् ॥२९५० ॥
कालान्तरे चित्तशुद्धिर्जवि स्वोच्चे प्रसिद्धिम् |
पञ्चविंशात् परं भाग्यं त्रिशोपरि सुकीर्तिमान् ॥२९५१॥
द्रात्रिशाब्दात् परं चेति योगप्राबल्यमादिशेत् ।
FRIST IT स्वभुक्तौ नात्र संशयः॥२९५२ ॥
2949 - 2952. Cancer Ascendant - Pankaja
Nadiamsa: In this case, if Jupiter is in Cancer itself,
with Pisces Navamsa, the subject will be endowed
with Knowledge and prosperity. His fortunes willrise
after 27 years of his age. His wealth will accrue
through his own mite. He will be learned, ingenious
and be an expert in Siva Purana. After some interval
he will attain purity of heart and be prosperous after
25. He will beget fame after thirty. After 32, his
prosperity will be of a higher rate. The sub period of
. Jupiter (or the first sub period, as it could be alterna-
। tively interpreted) in the Sth dasa will cause untimely
death.
_Notes: Prosperity showing up after 25 in one
hand, and after 27 on the other are a mix up. No
verbatim application should be made in case of
practical study in this matter.
लाभे मन्दे व्यये VA दुष्टयोगश्तेषु च।
USAT प्रजातश्च मालायोगे सुभाग्यवान् ॥२९५३ ॥
2953. Prosperity: Should Saturn be in the 11th
house while the Moon is in the 12th, the native will
be prosperous.
Notes: The condition of Mala Yoga stipulated is
an interruption and is not included in the translation.
लाभादि मालिकायोगे पडूजांशे च संस्थिते |
उत्तरांश प्रजातश्च पञ्चषषटिं सुजीवति ॥२९५४ ॥
पूर्वभागे प्रजातस्य विपत्तारादशान्तर |
कालमृत्युभयं सत्यं गुरुभुक्तौ न संशयः॥२९५५ ॥
बुधनाडीफलं सत्यं प्रत्यक्षं CARAT ॥२९५६ ॥
2954 - 2956. Life-span: One bom in the second
half of Pankaja Nadiamsa in Cancer ascendant will
live upto 56 years of age. But the one born in first half
will die in the first sub period or that of Jupiter during
the third dasa. These results culled out from Budha
Nadi, retold in Deva Keralam will bear truth.
Notes: The first line of sloka 2954 relating to
Malika Yoga does not form part of the text, hence
excluded.
॥ तुलालग्नम् - [ETAT] ॥
चम्पकांशे पूर्वभागे तुलालगे प्रजायते |
शूद्रजन्मा सुखी नित्यं सीमन्ततनयः Ba: |
अथवा च तृतीयः स व्येष्ठभ्रातुविहीनवान् ॥२९५७ ॥
महानदीप्रान्त्यदेशे दश्षिणोत्तरवीथिषु ।
प्राग्भागे जननं चेति पूर्वद्वारे प्रसूतिमान् ॥२९५८ ॥
2957 - 2958. Libra Ascendant - Champaka
Nadiamsa: The native of first half of this Nadiamsa
will be a Soodra. He wil] be either the first or third
issue of the family. He will have no elder brother. His
birth will be near Mahanadi ina street extending from
south to north, in a house located in the eastern part.
Notes: For Champaka Nadiamsa in Libra, a
movable sign, see sloka 1412, Book I.
उत्तरंशे नदीप्रान््ये ATA नूतनमन्दिरे।
भाग्यकाले प्रजातस्तु स्तवर्णशुभाकृतिः॥२९५९ ॥
2959, Second Half: The subject of second half
of this Nadiamsa will be born in a newly built house
in a village near a river. His complexion will be
blood-red and appearance charming.
Notes: The words “Bhagyakale” are a wrong
appendage and hence not included in the rendering.
चम्पकांश पूर्वभागे चदे तिवन््रांशनाडिगे |
रूपवान् मतिमान् वाग्मी प्रसन्नमुखनेत्रवान् ॥२९६० ॥
अदृष्टशाली धर्मात्मा राजयोगयुतो भवेत् |
रक्तवर्णो मध्यगात्रः समदेहस्वरूपवान् ॥२९६१ ॥
2960 . 2961. Champaka Nadiamsa - First
Half: The native of this part of the zodiac with the
Moon in Indra Nadiamsa will be beautiful. intelli-

Deva Keralam 27
gent, eloquent in speech, endowed with charming
face and eyes, fortunate, charitable and will enjoy
Raja Yoga effects (that is, position, wealth etc.). He
will be blood red in complexion, be of medium build
and will have a symmetric body.
मातृस्थानाधिपे मन्दे रविसंयुतवीिते ।
चम्पकांशे प्रजातश्च बाल्ये मातृतिनाशवान् ॥२९६२ ॥
कर्माधिपदशान््यादौ धनाधिपतिभुक्तिषु |
TREATS सापलीमातृयोगवान् ॥२९६३ ॥
उत्तरार्थे प्रजातस्य मातुरदीर्षायुरादिशेत्।
- 2962 -29631/2. Mother: One bornin Champaka
Nadiamsa, having the 4th Jord Saturn in relation to
the Sun either by aspect or by conjunction will lose
his mother in his childhood, (Alternatively), loss of
mother will occur in the sub period of the 2nd lord
(Mars) in the major period of the 10th lord (Moon)
and the native will beget a step-mother. However if
birth be in the second half ofthe concerned Nadiamsa,
the mother will be long-lived.
Notes: Leaving aside Nadiamsa, a clue emerges
to the effect that the sub period of Mars in the major
period of the Moon will prove adverse for mother in
case of Libra ascendant.
पितृस्थानाधिपे सौम्ये मीने रविसमन्विते ॥२९६४॥
असितेन युते दृष्टे विपदाये पितुर्मृतिः
चम्पकांशे पूर्वभागे तुलालगने प्रजायते ॥२९६५ ॥
विशब्दे वा पितररिष्टं द्वाविंशे नात्र संशयः।
उत्तरांशे विपदाये जुके कन्यागते एवौ ॥२९६६ ॥
पितारिष्टमवाप्नोति तत ऊर्ध्वं न जीवति |
2964 - 29661/2. Father: Mercury ruling the 9th
house if placed in Pisces in the company of the Sun
in aspect to association with Saturn will cause death
of father in the native’s third dasa. This applies to the
native of first half of Champaka Nadiamsa. (Alternatively) father’s death could occur when the native
will be 20 or 22 years of age, with the transit Sun in
Libra or Virgo. The father will not cross this period.
Notes: "Uttaramse" in sloka 2966 is a wrong
appendage.
चम्पकांशे पूर्वभागे तुलालग्ने प्रजायते ॥२९६७ I
facet विवाहः स्यान्मायाब्दे नात्र संशयः,
दारेशे राहुसंयुक्ते कारके THT ॥२९६८ ॥
स्वजन्मदेशे चोद्राहं HOTA |
TRY प्रजातस्य सम्पदायदशान्त्यगे |
विपद्वाये विवाहः स्यात् स्वभ्रतुर्नात्र संशयः॥२९६९ ॥
2967 - 2969. Marriage & Remarriage: The
native of former half of the subject Nadiamsa will get
married in the 3rd dasa (or) in the 15th year. If the 7th
lord Mars is conjunct Rahu while the significator
Venus is with Jupiter, the native will obtain a spouse
from his birth region, but this yoga will cause remarriage. Marriage will occur in the end of second dass
or in the beginning of third dasa if birth be in the
second half of the subject Nadiamsa.
लगनस्य वाहस्य तनोश्च नाथै
भग्यस्य नाथो यदि कर्मगो वा।
स धर्मवान् वाहनलाभयुक्तः
कविस्तथा श्वेततुरंगयायी ॥२९७० ॥
तुलालगे प्रजातश्च गर्भश्रीमान् महाधनी |
हेमाबम्बरसुभूषाप्तिः स्वगृहे स्वर्णपात्रवान् ॥२९७१ ॥
2970 - 2971. Conveyances, Wealth etc. : The
conjunction of lords of ascendant, 4th and 9th in the
10th house will make the native charitable. He will
enjoy gains of conveyances and be a poet. He will ride
on a white horse. The native will enjoy riches right
from birth and will be wealthy. He will obtain gold,
robes and ornaments. He will have golden utensils in
his home.
Notes: The two slokas give effects of Venus,
Saturn and Mercury - all favourable planets - joining
in the 10th in Cancer. The subject will as a result have
writing talents, be very rich and will acquire many
conveyances. His birth will be in a wealthy family.
(art तुलालगे चम्पकांशे तु जायते |
विष्णुकेदर्यधरमात्मा त्वग्रहारमतिष्ठकः॥२९७२ ॥
2972. Devoted to Lord Vishnu: One born in
Champaka nadiamsa of Libra ascendant will perform

28 Chandra Kala Nadi
duties related to Lord Vishnu’s worship, be charitable and will construct colonies for Brahmins (1.¢ he
will help others in housing matters).
Notes: “/ndramsage” meaning in Indra Nadiamsa
is not in proper place of relevance.
पुत्रस्थानाधिपे मन्दे BAT बुधवीकषिते ।
सन्ततिस्तम्भयोगापिः प्रतिबन्धकजातकः ॥२९७३ ॥
तत्पापरिहारार्थं बालकृष्णं प्रदापयेत् |
सुदीर्धजीविनं पुत्रं लभते नात्र संशयः॥२९७४॥
qed चिरायु्यं पुत्येका च तथा भवेत् ।
उत्तरांश प्रजातस्तु पुत्रहीनोऽल्पजीवकः॥२९७५ ॥
2973 -297§. Childlessness and Remedy: Should
Saturn ruling the 5th (Aquarius) be in aspect to
Mercury and obtain Gemini Navamsa, thesubject (of
former half of Champaka Nadiamsa) will incur obstacles in obtaining progeny. To overcome this sinful
event, donation of Bala Krishna (childhood image of
Lord Krishna) be done. As a result, he will obtain
long living progeny -twosons and one daughter. One
born in the second half of this Nadiamsa will be
(totally) childless and will live a short life.
पूर्वभागे प्रजातः स क्षेमदाये सुयोगवान्।
उत्तरर्ऽपमृत्युश्च शानि कुर्याद्यथाविधि ॥२९७६ ॥
्रत्यक्तारादशाकले दयूनाधिपतिभुक्तिषु।
कालमृत्युभयं सत्यं मास्सु कीरादिषु त्रिषु ei I
2976 - 2977, One born in the former half of
Champaka Nadiamsa will have a great deal of prosperity in the fourth dasa while the subject of second
half will face untimely death for which suitable
remedies be done. (After escaping untimely death) he
will die in the sub period of 7th lord (Mars) inthe dasa
thatis fifth from birth. The Sun will then be in transit
in one of the three signs - Scorpio, Sagittarius and
Capricorn.
सूर्ये कराक्षष्टयंशे चम्पकांशे प्रजायते |
स्वजात्यनुगुणं कर्म पश्चादुत्तमजन्मवान् |
लग्नाडीफलं सत्यं प्रत्यक्षं देवकेरव्म ॥२९७८ ॥
2978.Family Profession: Should the Sun be in
Karala (also knownas Danshtra Karala) Shashtiamsa,
the native of Champaka Nadiamsa will follow his
family profession. He will further have an excellent
rebirth. The effects quoted in Deva Keralam from
Lagna Nadi will bear truth.
घनेश्चरो हीनबलेन युक्तो
व्ययस्थितो वा द्रविणस्य नाशम् |
स्थानच्युतिं भूमिपतेश्च कोपात्
पश्वादिहानिं त्वथ भूमिनाशम् ॥२९७९ ॥
स्वजनारिष्टशोकादिस्वदेहायासविडवसम् ।
बलहीने दशानाथे व्याकुलं भवति धुवम् ॥२९८० ॥
2979 - 2980. Destruction: Lord of the 2nd, being
weak, if placed in the 12th will destroy wealth.
Further, the subject will lose his position due to royal
wrath. His 1911060 properties and quadrupeds will
face destruction.
Notes: For Libra ascendant, Mars in the 12th will
work as a factor of many losses including positional
dismissal irrespective of Nadiamsa. Such a native
will have checkered prosperity and will incur great
financial losses.
दशेश्वरो हीनबलेन युक्तो
विनाशयत्येव तनोश्च कान्तिम् |
शुभग्रह्थेच्छुभवाचमेति
लभेत्कथं चित्र सुखं पुमानसः॥२९८१ ॥
योगग्रहांशधिपसंयुतो वा
दशादिनाथोऽ्थगृहादिलाभम्।
कलत्रमित्रात्मजसंयुतं च
करोति भूपालकमान्यतां हि ॥२९८२ ॥
शतरग्रहंशस्थितदायकाले
RITE रिपुचोरभीतिः।
स्थानच्युतिः स्वेष्टजमेर्िरोधः
स्वराजकार्येऽपि विचारभाक् स्यात् ॥२९८३ ॥
दशाधिपे हीनबलेऽ्टमस्थे
तदीश्वरेणापि युतेक्षिते वा|

Deva Keralam 2८
स्ववृत्तिहानि घननाशमेति
सद्येदरभ्रातृिरोधजं च ॥२९८४ ॥
दशेशे शपरुराश्यंशे तत्सथानग्रहभुक्तिषु |
WTS वापि शतरुभीतिवशादव्यथाम् ॥२९८५ ॥
2981-2985. Dasa Effects - Libra Ascendant:
(a) Should the dasa lord be devoid of strength, one
will be deprived of splendour (i.e. he will turn pale,
without much blood). Through a benefic planet, only
benefic effects will come to pass; how come there
will be no happiness through it?
(b) If the dasa lord is conjunct the Navamsa
dispositor of a Yoga Karaka planet, the subject will
gain housing properties and the like. He will further
acquire spouse, progeny and friends and royal recognition.
(c) If the dasa lord is placed ina Navamsa of an
inimical planet, then in his dasa, in the sub period of
(another) malefic, there will be fear from thieves and
enemies, loss of position or displacement, enmity
with elders in the family and obstacles in performing
royal duties.
(d) If the dasa lord is weak, is placed in the 8th
and is related to 8th lord by aspect or association, one
will incur damage to his calling and money apart
from developing enmity with coborn. The lord of a
dasa placed at birth ina Rasi/Navamsa of an inimical
planet will in the sub period of his relevant dispositor
promote expenditure on account of enemies.
मीने जीवेऽल्पसन्तानः स्वराजप्रियधार्मिकः।
MMA रागी शान्तप्रकृतिमान् सदा ॥२९८६ ॥
(पीने कर्माशगे) जीवे कर्मगते वापि मित्रांशे राजवल्लभः।
बुषशुक्रंशगे क्तेशी राजन्यद्रेषकार्यवान्।
कर्मे मन्दांशगे जीवे मन्दबुद्धिः सदा अनृतः।
अनाचाररतो नित्यं नीचांशे बहुपापवान् ॥२९८७ ॥
राजतुल्येन Wat तत्कालस्नेहबुद्धिमान् |
तुलांशके स्थिते eet हयन्तश्िद्रविचारवान् ॥२९८८ ॥
` 2986 - 2988. Libra Ascendant - Jupiter: (a) If
Jupiter is in Pisces at birth, the subject of Libra
ascendant will be dear to his king, be religious,
learned in meanings of Sastras, passionate and eve
peaceful in disposition.
(b) One will be dear to king if Jupiter occupies
the 10th in Navamsa, or be in a friendly Navamsa
(while in the sign Pisces).
(c) If Jupiter, placed in Scorpio, begets Mercurian
or Venusian Navamsa (Virgo/Libra), he will do acts
that will displease the king.
(d) Jupiter in the 10th (in Cancer) with a Navamsa of Saturn will cause foolishness and the native
will be a liar. He will be unorthodox.
(€) If the Navamsa for Jupiter in Cancer is
specifically Capricorn, one will commit many sinful
acts, will have enmity with people equal to the king,
but will show immediate friendly gestures.
(0 Jupiter in the 10th with Libra Navamsa will
make one jealous, and give him secretly held destructive thoughts.
दिव्यश्रीनवरलकाञ्नगवामाधारलक्म्याश्रयः
क्रीडाकोतुकनूत्यगीतसकलव्यापारदीक्षागुरुः।
्ञातिद्रेषकलापवान् स्थिरमतिः सत्कीर्तिभाग्यान्वितो
जीवे कर्मगते भवेद्रणनिधिः सत्कर्मवारांनिधिः ॥२९८९ ॥
2989. Jupiter in 10th: The subject of Libra
ascendant having the planet Jupiter in the 10th will
beget following effects. He will possess wonderful
riches, nine kinds of precious gems, gold, and wealth,
will be fond of sports, festivals, dances and songs, he
will be skillful in various kinds of business activities,
will have enmity with his kinsmen, be firm in disposition, be endowed with fame and fortunes, be a
repository of virtues, and be interested in doing good
deeds.
चदे पूर्णबलोपेते तद्राशिस्थे सुरार्धिते |
वयोमध्ये महद्धाग्यं राजपुत्रभ्रियः सुखी ॥२९९० ॥
2990. Libra Ascendant: The Moon with full
Strength in association with Jupiter will cause prosperity in the middle of life and bestow friendship with
a king’s son (i.e. influential people).
मौने तुलांशगे जीवे स्वराज्यस्वसुतप्रियः।
मातृप्वसुसुतस्नेही पितृव्यद्रेषवान् भवेत् UWE

30 Chandra Kala Nadi
2991. Jupiter in Libra Navamsa: For a Libra
native if Jupiter is in Pisces with Libra Navamsa,
predict following effects. The native will be fond of
his country. He will love his children, befriend his
maternal aunt’s children and hate bis paternal uncle’s
children.
मूर्याष्टव्गे नवमे बिन्दुशून्ये प्रजायते |
पितृ्यद्रेषमूलेन स्वतातारिष्टमादिशेत ॥२९९२ ॥
2992. Sun’s Ashtaka Varga: If in the Sun’s
Ashtaka Varga, no Bindus are located, the native’s
paternal uncles will cause evils to his father.
सूरयाष्टव्गे संशोध्य नक्षत्रस्थे निशाकरे । २९९२ ॥
2993. If the Moon occupies the Nakshatra indicated... after reduction in Sun’s Ashtaka Varga.......
(the relevant line is missing).
Wage बाल्ये पितृमृततं वदेत् |
जननीव्याकुलं चेति पश्वाद्रतृविहीनवान् ॥२९९४॥
2994, Saturn - Mars: For Libra ascendant, the
conjunction of mars and Saturn will lead to loss of
father inchildhood, difficulties to mother and birth of
no after-born.
दशान्तरे Hes सूर्याशग्रहदायके |
सम्पूर्णबलयाशीशदशायां च महत्सुखम् ॥२९९५ ॥
2995. Dasa results: The dasa represented by the
Sun-occupied Navamisa will bestow great prosperity.
The dasa of the Rasi having full strength will cause
abundant happiness.
राजयोगं च लभते भाग्याधिपतिभूक्तिषु |
सुखाधिपदशाकाले धनकर्मायभुक्तिषु |
सत्कर्मधनपुत्राणां लाभो भवति निश्चयः॥२९९६ ॥
षष्ठाष्टमव्ययाधी शभूक्तिकाले शुभाशुभम् |
लग्नाधिपान्ते कले योगप्राबल्यमादिशेत् ॥२९९४॥
2996 - 2997. The sub period of 9th lord (the
relevant dasa not mentioned) will cause effects of
Raja Yoga. During the dasa of the 4th lord, Saturn,
and in the sub periods of lords of 2nd, 10th and 11th
(Mars, Moon and Sun), the native will perform good
deeds, and will gain progeny and wealth. The sub
periods of the lords of the 6th, 8th and 12th (in the
dasa of Saturn, for a Libra native) will lead to
begetting a mix of good and bad effects.
एकट्टित्रिफले यस्मिस्तद्राशीशान्तरे व्यथा |
अतीव क्लेशकार्याणि धनधान्यपशुक्षयः॥२९९८ ॥
बिन्दुपञ्चकयुक्तस्य राशीशस्यान्ते शुभम् |
यलकार्यार्थसिद्धिः स्यच्छेयोयोगे तु भाग्यवान् ॥२९९९ ॥
get फलाधिक्ये तद्क्तौ शोभनं महः |
विन्दुहीनस्थिते रशो भुक्तौ तु विफलं भवेत् ॥३००० ॥
्त्रद्यं कुजादीनां बिन्द्राधिक्यवशात्फलम् |
समे समफलं चेति दशा वाच्याष्टवर्गके ॥३००१॥
रविकषत्रे weds रविभुक्तिफलं वृथा
चन्र तथा विन्द्यादष्टवर्गेण योजयेत् 113002 Il
पञ्चमेशदशारम्भे बलाधिक्यस्वराशिपु।
निशाकराष्टके वँ योजयेत्कालवित्तमः॥२३००३ ॥
भिन्नाष्टवर्गे रव्यादिग्रहणां च पृथक् पृथक् |
प्रस्ताराष्टकमार्गेण निशाकरफलं स्मृतम् ॥२३००४॥
2998 - 3004. Ashtaka Varga: (a) Thesub period
of a planet in whose signs there are 1,2 or 3 Ashtaka
Varga dots (rectified) will be futile and the person
will experience much difficulties in his undertakings
apart from loss of money, grains and quadmpeds.
(b) Auspicious effects will occur in the sub
period of a planet that has five Bindus in his Ashtaka
Varga.
(c) Ifboth the signs owned by a planet (excepting
the Sun and the Moon) has excess Bindus in his
Ashtaka Varga, then his sub period will produce
exceedingly beneficial effects.
(d) The sub period ofa planet in whose sign there
are no Ashtaka Varga Bindus at all will be futile.
(€) From Mars etc. (1.6. Mars to Saturn) good
results will be obtained in their dasa periods if the two
signs owned by them are rich with Ashtaka Varga
Bindus (i.e. with more Bindus). If the dots are equal,
(i.e. neither less nor more - containing four Bindus)
effects will be even (i.e. neither good nor bad).

Deva Keralam 31
(0 The sign owned by the Sun (i.e. Leo) being
bereft of Bindus will make his sub period unproductive (of good). So also regarding the sign owned by
the Moon (i.e. Cancer).
(g) At the time of commencement of the dasa of
the 5th lord, in the signs that contain more Bindus....
the Moon’s Ashtaka Varga... The Bhinnashtaka Varga
of the planets from the Sun onwards should be studied
separately. The effects of the Moon (i.e. the Moon’s
transit) should be studied with the help of
Prastarashtaka Varga.
Notes: Instructions contained in “a” 10 “f” are
quite clear and are in line with generally available
information. These can be applied as a common
yard-stick.
Instructions in “g” are not clear. Apparently the
text wants to specify something about 5th lord’s dasa.
What all we could gather is that Bhinna and Prastara
Ashtaka Vargas should be used (as per rules laid
down in general).
Tas शरीरं स्याल्लग्नं स्यात्राणसंज्ञकम् |
ते उभे संपरीश्यैव सर्वनाडीफलं स्मृतम् ॥३००५॥
3005. The importance of the Moon & Ascendant: The Moon is the body while the ascendant (i.e.
ascending degree) is its breath (or spirit or vitality).
After an examination of both these elements, effects
of all the Nadiamsas be declared.
निशाकराष्टके वर्गे लग्नाधिपतिवर्णके |
तदशान्तर्दशाकाले फलानि परिचिन्तयेत् ॥३००६॥
3006. The Ashtaka Vargas of the Moon and the
lord of ascendant be examined while analysing the
effects of those dasas.
Notes: The words “TJaddasaayaam” may otherwise mean the dasas of the Moon and the lord of
ascendant. Yet it is more logical to depend on these
Ashtaka Vargas universally in respect of all dasas
generally in view of sloka 3005 above.
मीनांशे जूकलगने तु पुद्ररंशे प्रजायते|
Sees दशायां भाग्यवान् सुखी ॥३००७॥
3007. Libra ascendant - Pisces Navamsa: One
born in this part with Mudgara Nadiamsa will be
prosperous and happy in the dasa represented by the
Nakshatra denoted by processing the Ashtaka Varga
of the Moon.
Notes; In the first instance, Mudgara Nadiamsa,
be ignored for itis a corrupt addition. We should take
only Pisces Navamsa to be valid as ascending as part
of Libra ascendant.
Secondly the clue given for analysing the dasa
with the help of Moon’s Ashtaka Varga can be
applied to any ascendant, not just to Libra with Pisces
Navamsa. The meaning is explained below:
The use of the Moon’s Ashtaka Varga is explained ina brief manner by the text without referring
to a specific house. The word “Avasisnia” meaning
remainder tells us of the involvement some process
of division. With the help of know instructions, we
can understand the same thus:
There will be Bindus in the various signs, even
as low as zero, in the Moon’s Ashtaka Varga. Since
prosperity is referred to, we can take the Bindus inthe
pre-rectified Ashtaka Varga chart prepared for the
Moon. Her Sodya Pinda be multiplied by the said
numberof Bindus and dividend by 27. The remainder
will represent a Nakshatra counted from Aswini
which will yield a certain planet’s Vimsottari dasa.
This dasa will bring prosperity.
For example there are five bindus in the 9th
(counted from natal ascendant) inthe Moon’s Ashtaka
Varga, and her Sodya Pinda is, say, 80. Thus 5
multiplied by 80 and divided by 27 leaves a remainder of 25, which represents Poorvabhadrapada
Nakshatra. Thus, Jupiter’s dasa in this case will give
prosperity.
जन्मलग्नाधिपे सोम्ये कीरे सिहनवांशके |
अधेर्यप्रकृतिरभीरः किंचिद्रोगशरीरवान् ॥३००८ ॥
3008. General: If the lord of ascendant is a
natural benefic, is placed in Scorpio, with Leo Navamsa, the person will be devoid of courage, be timid
and will possess somewhat a diseased physique.
| aA कर्माधिपतिदायगे |
कार्यान्तरे महाधीर श्शतरुहन्ता प्रतापवान् ॥३००९ I
3009. The lord of the 10th (counted from the

32 Chandra Kala Nadi
natal ascendant) should join the natal ascendant lord
in the Navamsa chart (or should be in the Navamsa
owned by the said ascendant lord). In that case, the
dasa and sub period of the 10th lord will make the
subject quite valorous and victorious over enemies.
Note: “Karyanthare” should read as
“Karyapanthare” to mean the sub period of the lord
of the 10th.
जन्मलग्नांशदोषेण गोच मृतिगे wat ।
मेषूरणे धने वापि नृपेण सह वैरवान् ॥३०१० ॥
3010. Due to the blemish acquired by Satum
owing to his placement in the Navamsa ascendant,
his transit in the 8th house, 10th houce or the 2nd
house will cause enmity.
पोष्णश्रवणहस्ता्दरभरणीवायुभेष्वपि ।
शनेश्वर्रन् नृणां दुर्भिक्षभयदः स्मृतः ॥२०११॥
वर्गोत्तमे तुलाचदद्रे बिन्दु्रयसमन्विते |
पादाधिकबले चेति विपदाये सुभाग्यवान् ॥३०१२ ॥
तुलाशनो years लोके दुरभिक्षडाम्बरम् |
शङरुभीतिमवाप्नोति पश्चात्पौख्यं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥३०१३ ॥
शनो स्वात्यां स्थिते वापि बन्धुनाशो भयप्रदः।
विरोधजनमितरतवं त्रिषु ATT मृगादिषु ॥२०१४॥
मषादित्रिषु मासेषु स्वशत्रुजननाशनम् ।
` रकविंचिद्रयाकुलकार्याणि मिथुने सौख्यमादिशेत् ॥३०१५ ॥
मिथुनायनमारभ्य स्वकार्यप्रबलं स्मृतम् |
कुटीरायनगे सोष्यं तन्मध्ये व्याकुलं क्वचित् ॥३०१६ ॥
वैशाखेऽर्कमुते काले WES महत्सुखम् |
यलकार्यानुकूलं स्यात् क्रूरमासं विना सुखम् ॥३०१७॥
3041. Irrelevant: Saturn’s movementin Revathi,
Hasta, Arudra, Bharani and Svathi will usher conditions of famine in the country.
3042---3017. The Moon’s Ashtaka Varga for
Libra ascendant: Should the Moon bein Vargothama
in Libra and secure 3 (ormore) rectified Bindus in her
Ashtaka Varga, the third dasa will bring prosperity.
("Padadhikabale” denotes more than two dots.) In
this case when Saturn transits Libra, the native will
enjoy great prosperity. Simultaneously he will have
fear from enemies, but later on he will be happy
overcoming this fear. When Saturn transits in Swathi
Nakshatra, destruction of relatives and fear (from
elsewhere) will occur. During this time, coinciding
with the Sun’s transit in Capricorn through Pisces, the
native will have his enemies converted into friends.
During the next three months with the Sun in Aries
through Gemini, his enemies will be destroyed. In
Gemini however the Sun’s transit will bring forth
some worries but will cause fruition of one’s efforts.
In Cancer, the Sun’s transit will cause happiness and
distress (simultaneously). Saturn moving in Visakha
will bring the enemies into the fold of the native and
will cause great happiness except in the months
denoted by the adverse solar movements. Further,
one will beget success in the attempts he then makes
with Saturn in Visakha.
विपत्तारंशगे मन्दे गोचरे शतरुनिग्रहः।
सम्पत्तारांशगे भीतिर्विपत्राणभयं महत् ॥३०१८ ॥
्मेव्याकुलकार्याणि स्वराज्ये कलहं व्यथाम् |
प्रत्ये तु मनस्तापं पाण्डयभुपतिविग्रहम् ॥२०१९॥
सम्पदृक्षे फलं चेति क्षेमतारे विनाशनम् |
सम्पत्तरे क्षेमतारे मन्दे गोचारसंस्थिते ॥२०२० ॥
मण्डलाधिपतेर्मृत्युं बन्धुक्तेशं विनिर्दिशेत् |
आधानजन्म BHA पापाक्रान्ते स्थिते सति ॥२०२१॥
राजद्रारकलापेन व्याकुलं मनुरब्रवीत् |
तदभावे देहजाइयं स्वजनानामुपद्रवम् 1130 22 ॥
शुभग्रहाक्रान्तकाले शुभं भवति नित्यशः।
पापाक्रान्ते मनस्तापं प्रहोक्तगुणमार्गतः॥२०२३ ॥
जातिव्गानुगुण्येन फलं निश्चित्य वर्णयेत् |
तरिजन्मादयष्टमर्षषु पापीनामुदयेषु च ॥२०२४॥
्रूराब्दगे PUTS त्वतीव क्लेशमादिशेत्।
शुभाक्रान्ते महत्सौख्यं राजप्रीतिषनागमम् ॥३०२५॥
यलकार्यानुकूलं स्याद्वृत्तिमार्गे फलं वदेत् |
गोमासर्षं तु Te पापीनामुदये तथा ॥३०२६॥
अतीव क्लेशकार्याणि त्वष्टवरगे विशेषतः।

Deva Keralam
AMAA HAT शुभानामुदयेऽपि वा ॥३०२७॥
शुभमेव फलं सत्यं धनलाभं विनिर्दिशेत् ।
लाभाधिपतिमासे च द्रैक्काणाधिपतेस्तथा |
शुभमासे विशेषेण धनलाथमिति स्मृतम् ॥३०२८ ॥
3018 - 3028. Transit in Nakshatras - General:
(a) When Saturn transits the third Nakshatra fromthe
birth Nakshatra, the native will overpower his enemics.
(b) When he moves in the second star, he will
cause great fear, danger in general and danger to life.
(c) In his movement in the fourth star, he will
give distress, quarrels and grief.
(c) In the fifth star, the planet Saturn in transit
will give mental agony and enmity with Pandya king
(i.c.problems through government) and destruction.
When Satum is in transit in the 2nd/4th stars, the king
of the country will die and the native will undergo
much grief.
(d) If the birth star or the tenth therefrom is
occupied by a malefic at birth, Saturn’s transit in this
segment will create quarrels with king and consequent distress. In the absence of these effects,
physical illness to self, and nuisance from his own
men will come to pass. When a benefic transits in the
first or tenth Nakshatra, auspicious effects will occur
and malefics according to their natural disposition
will cause mental distress.
(€) Results should be understood according to
the caste etc. (or the circumstances of the native).
(f) Should malefics occupy birth star, second,
third or eighth from it, evil transits of Jupiter and the
Sun (Kroorabde, Kroora Masage) will produce abundant difficulties.
(g) If natural benefics occupy one of these three
Nakshatras, as at “f”, these transits will cause great
happiness, proximity to king, advent of wealth, success in efforts and progress in profession.
(0) If malefics occupy first, third or seventh
Nakshatra, the above referred transits will bring
abundant difficulties. These should be deduced with
the help of Ashtaka Varga.
(i) Auspicious effects and acquisition of wealth
will take place if benefics occupy favourable
Nakshatras. Advent of wealth will occurinthe month
of 11th Jord (1.6. the Sun’s transit in any Rasi occurring on the week day ruled by the 11th lord from
ascendant) or when the Sun transits the sign represented by the ascendant’s decanate. With the Sun’s
auspicious transits, acquisition of wealth will have to
be foretold.
Notes: Results of Saturn’s transit ina certain star
should be applied to the 10th and 19th stars froma
given staras well. Forexample Janma Nakshatra (i.e.
the star occupied by the Moon, the first Nakshatra)
includes the 10th and 19th therefrom. 2nd Nakshatra
includes 11th and 20th also. So on and so forth.
These apply to any given in nativity in general.
॥ वारफलम् ॥
aaa शुभवासरेण सहिते नानार्थसोख्यं वदेत्
देहात नृपकोपवित्तचलनं पापग्रहाणां दिने |
सञ्चारं नृपकोपजातविपदं भानोर्दिने योजयेत्
सौख्यं सोमदिने विचितरकुसुमं प्रेमारतिं भोजनम् ॥३०२९॥
दुःखं diner स्वनाशकलहं देहार्विपादभ्रमं
सोयं सोमजवासरे aged विद्याधनं सौख्यदम् |
Tee गुरुवासरे फलमथ द्रव्याप्िदेहोत्पवं
शुक्रे भूषणमद्गनारतिसुखं श्रीगन्धनानाम्बरम् ॥३०३० ॥
दुःखं क्लेशभयावहं शनिदिने भृत्यापदं जादयताम् 13028 I
3029 - 3031. Results of Week days: If the birth star
(containing the Moon) coincides with a week day
ruled by a benefic planet, the native will enjoy
various kinds of wealth and happiness. Birthona day
ruled by a malefic will cause physical illness, royal
wrath and financial instability. Ifit be ona Tuesday,
one will wander (aimlessly) and will incur danger
through royal anger. Monday birth will grant happiness, possession of wonderful flowers, sexual
enjoyments filled with love, and enjoyment of quality food. (Additional effects for) Tuesday birth will
be grief, self-destruction, and quarrels. Mercury’s
day, viz. Wednesday as the day of birth will cause
happiness, acquisition of (or enjoyment) intoxicant
drinks, and ghee apart from learning and wealth.
Thursday birth will cause acquisition of robes, wealth
and physical happiness. One will enjoy ornaments,
sexual pleasures, scents and a variety of clothes if the

34 Chandra Kala Nadi
birth be ona Friday - ruled by Venus. Saturday being
the day of birth will give grief, difficulties, fear,
troubles from servants and diseases.
Notes: In the first instance, week days are divided
between benefic and malefic planets, thus: Monday,
Wednesday, Thursday and Friday are benefic days
ruled in order by the Moon (irrespective of Paksha or
lunar half), Mercury (irrespective of his association),
Jupiter and Venus. Malefic week days are Sunday,
Tuesday and Saturday and are ruled by the Sun, Mars
and Saturn in that order. Now see the following
clarificatory notes.
Benefic week days will give wealth and happiness
in combination with other horoscopic influences.
“Birth star coinciding with week day ruled by.......”
is an unintelligible clause.
When the day of birth is ruled by a malefic it will
make one prone to illness depending on the other
yogas in the horoscope.
The following classical quotations may be of interest.
One born on Sunday will be endangered in either
the first month or the 6th month, or in the 22nd/231rd
year. His life span will be 60 years.
Monday-born will face danger in the 11th month or
in the 26th/27th year. His life span will be 84 years.
Tuesday-born will be in trouble in the 2nd or 22n
year. He will be always sick and will live upto 74
years.
Wednesday-bor will incur danger inthe 8th month
or in the 8th year. He will die after his 64th year.
Thursday-born will be in danger in 7th month,
16th/13th year. He will live upto 84th year.
Friday-born will never fall sick. He will die in the
60th year.
Saturday-born will incurdangerin the 1st month or
in the 13th year. His life will end in 100th year.
षष्ठष्टमाधीशवारे देहजाइयं स्वभुक्तिषु |
POTS देहजाइयं सर्वनाड़ीफलं स्मत् ॥२०३२ ॥
अन्तर्दशाधीशवारे दशाधिपतिवासरे।
देहजाइयारम्भमेति योजयेत्कालवित्तमेः॥३०३३ |
3032 - 3033. 1110655: (a) Should the day of birth
be ruled by one of the lords of 6th and 8th, the native
will fall sick in the sub period of the said planct and
in its major period.
(b) The month will correspond to the evil transit of
the Sun.
(©) Astrologers predict illness, (in the above casc)
to be materialising on the week days ruled by the lord
of the major and sub penods.
Notes: The following table will show the lords of
the 6th and 8th for the 12 ascendants.
Ascendant 6th Lord 8th Lord
Aries Mercury Mars
Taums §- Venus Jupiter
Gemini Mars Saturn
Cancer Jupiter Satum
Leo Saturn Jupiter
Virgo Satum Mars
Libra Jupiter Venus
Scorpio Mars Mercury
9211, Venus Moon
Capri Mercury Sun
Aqua Moon Mercury
Pisces Sun Venus
As an example if a person of Aries ascendant is
bom eitheron a Wednesday (ruled by Mercury) oron
a Tuesday (ruled be Mars) he will acquire illness in
the major period of Mars and sub period of Mercury,
or vice versa.
Similarly for other ascendants, one should make
suitable evaluation.
(b) The Sun’s evil transit with reference to the
Moon, ascendant, or other natal positions should be
properly linked. Insuch months during the rulership
of suggested dasa periods, the illness will be more
likely.
(c) The commencing week day will either be of the
lord of the 6th or of the 8th from the ascendant.
आरूढभागे त्वशुभेक्षिते वा
. पराजिते शत्रुगृहे स्थिते वा |
तत्पाकजन्यं फलमेव सर्व
करोति भेदो न शुभेक्षिते वा ॥३०३४॥
3034. Should the ascending degree be aspected or

Deva Keralam
occupied by a malefic planet, or by a planet that has
lost in a war with another, or be occupied by an
inimical planet, then in its periods the subject will be
involved in disputes provided the said yoga is
unaspected by a benefic planet.
Notes: “Occupation” ofa malefic is not in our text,
but is adopted from another version and added to the.
translation.
“Aroodha Bhaga” is ascending degree, that is the
sign ascending at birth.
Planetary war: When two planets (except the
luminaries) are on the same degree thee is sa ५10 be
a war between them. The one in the north is declared
victorious.
Amore clear picture is givenby C.G. Rajan. When
two planets out of the five, viz. Mars to Saturn, are in
one and the same sign with longitudes of identical
degree, minute and second, a planetary war occurs.
The victor will have higher latitude.
I give below an example.
On23rd August 23, 1992, Venus and Jupiter in Leo
attained the same degree, minute and second while
the latitude of Venus was 1° 17' North, and that of
Jupiter 1° 4. Hence Venus, with a higher latitude
should be treated as winner.
Another planet that could be connected with the
ascendant by aspect of association is one inimical to
the lord of the ascendant. Example: Capricom ascendant related to the Sun, dead enemy of ascendant
lord Saturn.
In each of these cases, the result is involvement in
quarrels, in the dasa periods of the concerned planet.
In case of the example of Capricorn, the dasa of the
Sun will give the said result.
Protection from the said adversity is a helpful
association of the ascendant with a benefic.
wae सुखभोजनं शुभफलं नानार्थदुःखावाहं
ऋक्षे सम्पदि वित्तसोख्यसुखभुड्नानाम्बरस्यायतिम् |
गोभूम्यर्थविनाशनं विपदि भे सन्तापनं चात्मनो
जाद्यं बन्धुविरोधनं च कलहं चाकस्मिकं कोपनम्
क्षमे क्षेमकरार्थसौख्यमुखभुडमात्रागमं पूजनं
राज्ञां क्रोधवशाद्धनार्थविषये दुःखं तथा प्रत्ये ॥३०३५॥
सिद्धं साधनखे सुखार्थविजयं भूम्यर्थमाल्याम्बरं
नानादुःखकारी त्रिदोषतनुरुग् ऋक्षे वधे FEAT |
मतरे मित्रसमानसत्रृपकुलात् संमानसंभषणं
यानारोहणदेवकर्मनिरतं शय्यासुखाप्ति वदेत् ॥३०३६ ॥
अत्यन्तं परमित्रभे नृपरतिं सद्रोष्ठिविद्यारतिं
ाजाज्ञापरिपालनं सुतसुहृद्रन्वागमं कोशलम् |
aaa परमित्रभे च वृषरीखरीपुत्रचिन्ताज्वरं
सञ्चारे कफदोषजं ज्वरभयं शय्यासनार्मि शुभम् Fo Be ॥
3035 - 3037. Dasa Effects: During the first Dasa
the native will have eating comforts, will beget
auspicious effects and various kinds of wealth apart
from grief. The second dasa will cause wealth,
happiness and apparels. Destruction of quadrupeds,
landed properties and money, and grief to one’s near
and dear will be produced by the third dasa. Additionally sickness, enmity with relatives, quarrels and
sudden outbursts of anger will follow. Inthe 4thdasa,
effects to occurare well-being, happiness, wealthand
worship. The fifth dasa will cause grief due to loss of
wealth following royal wrath. One will acquire inthe
sixth dasa happiness, wealth, success, lands, garlands
and robes. The seventh dasa will produce many a
kind of grief, difficulties and ailments due to vitiation
of three bodily temperaments viz. bile, wind and
phlegm. Acquisition of royal honours, ornaments,
conveyances, involvement in divine undertakings
and bed comforts will take place in the eighth dasa.
The last of all, the ninth dasa will cause friendliness
with the king and virtuous men, fondness for learning, obeying royal orders, arrival of sons, friends and
relatives and skill. These apart, one will be worried
on account of unwed progeny, will incur fever,
phlegmatic fevers and troubles to sitand to sleep, and
wanderaimlessly. (The word “Subham” is a corrupt
addition at the end of the sloka No. 3037.)
Notes: The above slokas give general hints about
the nine dasas commencing from the first dasa. The
relevant terms are not however exactly used. For
example, “Janmarkshe” means Moon sign and not
literally first dasa. But subsequent references are to
Sampath, Vipath etc. upto Parama Maitra. Thus
these refer only to Dasa sequences.
The summary of the effects of nine dasas given by

36 Chandra Kala Nadi
the text can be arranged as under ignoring certain
over-stated hints:
ist dasa: Happiness and grief.
2nd dasa: Financial progress
3rd dasa: Losses, grief, sickness, enmity and loss
of temper.
4th dasa: Wealth and happiness.
5th dasa: Grief, 1088 and troubles from government (or professional debacles) and other related
SOUICES.
6th dasa: Properties, wealth and general happlness
7th dasa: Various ailments and grief.
8th dasa: Royal honours, conveyances and spiritual progress.
9th dasa: Worry about progeny, illness, royal
association etc.
Refer also to Phala Deepika etc.
aad दधिसूपगोकृषिमनेोधैर्यं सुभूषान्वितं
त्वाधाने नृपकोपवित्तचलनं यानार्थभोज्यक्षयम् |
व्रैनाशेऽरिभयावहं सुतसुहदारार्तिभूपार्तिदं
सङ्घाते नृपशत्ुधोरविषमस्थानार्तिभूत्यार्तिदम् ॥३०३८ ॥
उत्थायोषसि चान्वहं निजहदि ध्यात्वा परां देवतां
Bert गणनं तथेव विधिवत् कृत्वाखिलं कर्म च।
इन्दोरष्टकवरगि बलयुते तद्धावजन्यं फलं
day: प्रवदेत्तथेव सकलं तावद्धवेत्नान्यथा ॥३०३९ ॥
3038 - 3039. (a) Saturn transiting in the 10th house
(read “Karmarkshe” instead of “Janmarkshe”) will
grant curd, sauce or vessels (i.e. eating comforts),
quadrupeds, agriculture (or professional gains), courage and ornaments. In Adhana ascendant, it will
bring royal wrath apart from causing mental infirmity
and destruction of conveyances, wealth and food. In
the 8th, there will be fear from enemies and troubles
relating to progeny, friends, spouse and king. In the
7th there will be troubles from king, enemies and odd
or unsuitable placements, apart from troubles from
servants.
(b) The astrologer should get up in the early hours
of the day and worship his family deity and then
calculate the planetary positions following which
only all (related to horoscope study) should be undertaken.
(c) The Bhava that has strength (or more dots) in the
Moon’s Ashtaka Varga will reveal its effects (positively).
Notes: In “a”, there is no clear mention as to the
fact that these results relate to Saturn’s transit. Buta
reference to sloka 486 infra which almost has
semblence to the present slokas will convince the
reader of my suggestions. Thus missing links are
supplied in the translation.
ताराबलविहीनरक्षं मन्दे गोचारगे तथा |
अतीव क्लेशकार्य च क्रूरमासे भविष्यति ॥३०४० ॥
3040. Saturn’s Transit: The signs that are weak,
when transited by Saturn, will be a cause of a great
deal of difficulties. The specific evil months (should
be traced with the help of adverse solar movements).
Notes: "Tarabala Viheenarksha" has been translated as weak sign So as to be practical in interpretation. Otherwise, this term means: the signs that have
weak (of afflicted) constellations.
Weak signs referred to here are those Bhavas
which fall short of Shadbala (or six source strength,
viz. Kala Bala etc.) and those that are deprived of
minimum Ashtaka Varga dots, and the effects of
relevant transits of Saturn will be only adverse. The
minute period of adversity will be specifically traceable with unfavourable transits of the Sun, narrowing
down to a month.
Prastharashtaka Varga is another method.
The Sun is adverse when he transits the following
places with reference to concerned natal positions,
according to Sphuji Dhwaja:
From ascendant: 3rd, Sth, 6th, 9th, and 12th.
From Saturn: 3rd, and 12th.
From Jupiter: 151, 3rd, 7th, 8th, and 12th.
From Venus: Ist, 3rd, 4th, 5th, 8th, 9th, and 10th.
From Mars: 3rd, 5th, 6th, and 12th.
From Mercury: Ist, 2nd, 4th, 7th, and 8th.
From the Moon: Ist, 2nd, 4th, 5th, 7th, 8th, 9th, and
12th.
राहुक्रान्तर्षराशीशक्रूरेधग्रहान्तरे |
राजमित्रकृतं चोर्यं निर्दिशेत् कालवित्तमः॥२०४१ ॥

Deva Keralam
3041. Rahu’s Transits: When the planet Rahu
transits the signs, as above, astrologers predict theft
caused by king and friends.
Notes: The effects are denoted by the words “Raja
Mitra Krita Chauryam” the meaning of which is as
above. However, the text actually seems to convey
danger through king, friends and thefts. That is
Rahu’s transit in weak houses will cause these effects.
प्रन्थानरे चोरभयं ग्रामोपकरणादिनाम्(2)।
नागेन FAM गहभोमान्ते तथा ०४
Raps व्रणोप्रवसग्भयम् |
शन्याराक्रान्ततरेशदशायामनतरे वा ॥३०४३ ॥
3042 - 3043. According to another source, fear of
theft and loss of village articles ignoie the word
"village"] and difficulties are denote’ « Rahu Dasa,
Mars bhukti. Debts, theft, ulcer and diseases will
follow. These effects can be expected also inthe dasa
denoted by the Nakshatra occupied by S.iurn (at
birth).
Notes: Rahu - Mars period indicated in 31019 3042
is replaced by “Rahu’s transits” in another version.
We have a very useful clue about Saturn’s natal
position. At birth, he should be in a particular
constellation, which in turn will relate toa Dasa. For
example, Saturn in Aswini will mean that Ketu Dasa
will be adverse, in Bharani Venus Dasa will ४५
adverse, so on and so forth.
ऋणचोरभयप्रापि प्रणोपद्रवमादिशेत् |
शुभग्रहदशाभुक्तौ शुभं भवति नित्यशः॥३०४४ ॥
3044. The said Dasa (ref. 81018 3043) related to
Saturn will cause debts, thefts and ulcers (ordiseases)
while the Dasa and sub-period of a benefic will ever
prove auspicious.
पापप्रहदशापाक्रे THT TTT ।
अपमत्युभयप्राप्तिः स्वजनारिष्टशोकवान् ॥३०४५ ॥
3045. Untimely Death: The sub period of the
strongest planet in the Dasa of a malefic will bring
about untimely deathand griefon account of evils to
one’s own men.
Notes: Untimely death means some danger to the
person’s life.
“Strongest planet” to cause the said evils should be
carefully identified. For practical purposes it is one
with potential Shadbala (6-source strength), and
placed inanadverse house at birth, i.e. 6th, 8th or 1218
from the ascendant, the Moon or the Dasa lord, whe
is a natural malefic. Then only these adversities will
be born.
समन्दमान्दिर्धेशनवां शपतयो ART: |
तेषां यो दुर्बलः खेटः सुखनाशप्रदो भवेत्
TY वा BEY वापि गोचरे चार्कनन्दने ॥३०४६ ॥
मोदयानि यान्ति तनुरूपगुणस्वभावस्वर्णादिलोचनकुटुम्बसुखाशनानि |
युद्धप्रभावबलवीर्यसकर्णकण्ठवक्षस्थलानि सुखमन्दिरवाहनानि ॥२३०४७॥
कुक्षौ तु नूनमतिभोजनजन्यगोगं
maga कठिमांसयुतं च नाभेः।
शखास्रपाटनवशोद्रतवीर्यहानिं
TY शनिस्त्बहितवीक्षितगह्ययेगम् |
शूक्रेण वीक्षितयुतो यदि देवमन्त्री
चद्धि तपांसि दनतासयशोऽभिमानम् ॥३०४८ ॥
आज्ञाधरत्वबलपोरूषमात्पशक्तया
निर्विघ्नसिद्धफल्मं भररीर्वियुक्तम् |
तिघ्नार्थनाश्यनाददखः ननाश
मारभ्य लृगनपनचिन्य यशु फेन ३०४२ |
3046 - 3049, Navaraca Disprcitors ete.: (a) Note
the Navamisa dispositorof Saturn. ot Mandiand of the
Rust disp osHor of 8th tard. The tot the three
will dicta the happiness of the naive,
(b) When Saturn transits the Sth koe, one will be
foolish (read Moodhammamurthy instead of
Maudhyaanias per other version), will have destructunof physique. appearanc”, virtues, gold (i.e wealth
sroperties and the like), eye-sight and family happi
ness. He will further experience troubles to ears, neck
and chest apart from abdominal disorders caused by

38 Chandra Kala Nadi
excessive eating. He will be deprived of happiness
relating to residence and conveyance. Hard flesh will
grow around his hands and navel. His prowess will
remain destroyed due to weapons.
(c) Saturn’s association with the 8th house (at
birth) will yield disorders of the privities. Jupiter
joining or aspected by Venus will cause penance,
living in forests, fame, self-respect, obedience to
elders, prowess, inherent power (Atma Sakti),
unobstructed fruits and fame.
Notes: (a) The strength ofa planet proving adverse
has been brought to light in sloka 3045 above. Now
the weakness is brought into play.
Three planets play a leading role in destroying
one’s happiness.
1) The Navamsa dispositor of Saturn.
2) The Navamsa dispositor of Mandi. [ Mandi and
Gulika are one and the same.|
3) The Navamsa dispositor of the planet in whose
sign the 8th lord is places. Example ~ Pisces ascendant gives the 8th lordship to Venus, who is, say, in
Leo. The dispositor of Venus is the Sun. The Sun is
in the Navamsa say of Mercury. Hence it is Mercury
that can spoil happiness in this case.
For exact calculation of Mandi, see sloka 70, ch.3
of Brihat Parasara Hora, part 1, English translation
by R. Santhanam. The position of Mandi is to be
calculated for the beginning Muhurta of Saturn, and
not ending Muhurta, as further justified in the example given in the notes for slokas 25 - 30, chapter 4,
ibid.
जीवः फलं सदृशवीर्यसमन्वितश
वक्रं गतो हि शुभदो न च नीचगः स्यात् ।
तद्धावकारकफलानि यथाक्रमं च
योगानुगुण्यफलमत्र विचारणीयम् ॥३०५० ॥
3050. Jupiter in Retrogression: The effects due
to Jupiter (mentioned above) will come to pass if he
is endowed with strength, or even if he is retrograde
without being indebility. Results relating to a Bhava
be deduced according to the association it has.
Notes: The results noted in “d” above (slokas 3046
- 49) will not come to pass, in spite of the fact that
Jupiter may be related to Venus if Jupiter is retrograde in Capricorn, or if he is short of minimum
strength.
If a weak or debilitated Jupiter in retrogression is
related to Venus, it will only spoil the good role of
Venus. This verse disproves the theory of Uttara
Kalamrita thata debilitated planet in retrogression is
eaual to an exalted one.
॥ दशाक्रमेण फलम् ॥
कुम्भे घटांशे जीवे कुन्तलांशे निशाकरे ।
स्थिरलमे WNIT ज्येष्टभ्रातृसमन्वितः॥२०५१ ॥
सहोदरी भर्तृमती सर्वभाग्यसमत्विता |
चन्दर कुन्दांशके जातो बन्धुमूलाद्धनी प्रभुः।
श्रीमास्तु सुभगः कामी स्वत्पविदयार्थकोविदः॥३०५२ ॥
बाल्येऽल्पनीचवान् कामी पत्रमूलेन कर्थितः।
भ्रातुः प्रणववान् धीरस्तेजस्वी स्वजनप्रियः 113043 ॥
प्रसत्नपापदुष्टात्मा क्रोधी WAH AAT |
3051 - 3053 1/2. Immovable Ascendants -
Kuntala Nadiamsa: Jupiter in Aquarius with
Vargottama Navamsa while the Moon is in Kuntala
Nadiamsa (in another version it is Kunda Nadiamsa)
will give the under-mentioned effects. The native
will have anelder brother. His sister will havea longliving husband. The Moon in Kunda Nadiamsa
(without reference Jupiter above) will bring abun-
* cains through relatives. The subject will be rich,
i. , given to sexual pleasures, will have limited
educauun and be an expert in matters relating to
material prosperity. In his childhood, he will be
mean. Later he will have worries about progeny and
be emaciated. His brother will be initiated with
Pranava Mantra (the sacred syllable "Om" - taught
to Lord Siva by His Son, Kartikeya), be bold, splendorous, be a pleased soul, (one time) a sinner, given
to anger and credited with valorous acts.
Notes: Kuntala Nadiamsa is Kunda Nadiamsa which
rules from 26° 24' to 26° 36' in movable signs, from
3° 24' to 3° 36' in immovable signs, and from 11° 24’
to 11° 36' of common signs.
उत्तराप्रथमे पादे कुन्तव्यंशे निशाकरे ॥२०५४ |
सदाचारविशेषङ्ञः श्रीमान् बन्धुजनप्रियः।

Deva Keralam 39
धरांशगे देवगुरौ घटस्थे BST ॥३०५५ ॥
3054 ~ 3055. The Moon in the first quarter of
Uttara (in Leo) while Jupiter is in Aquarius in
Vargottama will bestow special knowledge of good
conduct onthe native who will further be rich and will
gain through relatives. (This applies to an immovable ascendant.)
कोणस्थिते देवगुरौ प्रसिद्धः
प्रियंवदः सोम्यशरीरयष्टिः।
wit सदा मित्रजनप्रियश्च
गीर्वाणभाषसु विशारदश्च ॥३०५६ ॥
परकार्यकृतक्षा्रकृत्येक्लेशादिधर्मवान् ।
सप्तविशात् परं भाग्यं त्रिंशे चाद्दे सुकीर्तिमान् ॥२०५७॥
3056 ~ 3057. Trinal Jupiter: When the birth is
in immovable ascendant, Jupiter ina trine will make
one famous, charming in appearance, will have a soft
and thin body, be sickly, ever fond of friends and will
be skillful in the Sanskrit language. He will do
other’s jobs and also those that are peculiar to military tribe (i.c. will be related to military profession).
His prosperity will occur following his 27th year age.
At 30, he will become famous.
कुन्तव्छंशे घटे चन्द्रे ग्रह्नयसमन्विते |
चिग्रिण्यं शे प्रजातश्च कामी दुष्टस्वभाववान् ॥३०५८ ॥
3058. Chitrini Nadiamsa: For a native of this
degree (inanimmovable sign), the Moon in Aquanus
in Kuntala Nadiamsa in association with three planets, the effects are: given to sexual pleasures and
possessing a wicked disposition.
Notes: Vichitra Nadiamsa is known as Chitnini
Nadiamsa and occurs between Chitraa and Chirajivani
Nadiamsa.
Chitra (or Chitrini) Nadiamsa extends from 12° 0'
to 12° 12 in movable signs, from 17° 48' to 18° O' in
immovable signs, and from 27° 0! to 27° 12' in
common signs.
वित्तलाभाधिपे केन्द्रे भाग्ये कर्मेशसंयुते ।
बन्धुमूलात् सुपूज्यश्च राजसेवास्वरूपवान् ॥३०५९ ॥
FMAM सर्वदा धनलाभवान् |
स्वभुजा्भितसम्पन्नो विप्रपूज्यः प्रतापवान् ॥३०६० ॥
3059 - 3060. Aquarius Ascendant: The lord of
the 2nd and 11th (Jupiter) in an angle and the 9th is
occupied by 10th lord (Mars) will bring gains through
relatives, worshippability and royal service. The
native will have horses (conveyances), profitable
calling and incessant financial gains.
चतुर्थभावे तु ग्रहाः प्रसन्नाः
स्वबन्धुसंयोगस्वकार्यदक्षः
पित्तज्वराजीर्णशरीरकाश्य
TAM देवगुरौ दयादुः॥३०६१ ॥
3061. Fourth house: Planets happily placed inthe
4th house will give association with relatives. The
subject will be skillful in doing his work. Should
Jupiter be in Bala Nadiamsa, the native will be liberal!
in disposition but will incur bilious and digestive
disorders.
Notes: Bala Nadiamsa rules thus: 16° 36' to 16° 48'
of movable signs; 13° 12' to 13° 24' of immovable
signs; and 1° 36' to 1° 48' of common signs.
लग्नेशे स्वोच्चराशिस्थे लग्ने राहौ शनीक्षिते |
विपदाये मनस्तापं योगरोगादिसंभवम् ॥३०६२ ॥
3062. Rahu in ascendant: Should Rahu be 11, the
ascendant in aspect to Saturn, as the ascendant lord is
in exaltation, the subject will incur mental distress in
the third Dasa. This Dasa will bring forth diseases.
alert घटे ak त्वसितेन निरीक्षते |
कुन्तव्ठांशे प्रजातश्च देहकार््यप्रपीडितः॥२३०६३ ॥
लाभाधिप्दशाकाले लाभाधिपतिभुक्तिषु ।
ग्रहाधिपान्ते चापि विवाहोत्सवमादिशेत् ॥३०६४ ॥
3063 - 3064. Immovable Ascendant ~ Kuntala
Nadiamsa: (a) One born in this part, having the
Moon in Aquarius with Scorpio Navamsa will be
troubled by physical thinness.
(b) His marriage will occur in the 11th lord’s dasa
and in the very first sub period.
सुखाधिपदशाकाले धनाधिपतिभुक्तिषु |
चित्रिण्यंशे प्रजातस्य विवाहोत्सवमादिशेत् ॥३०६५ ॥

40 Chandra Kala Nadi
SRY मासे सुखेशांशस्य मासगे ।
तदंशे तत्तिकोणे वा स्फुटयोगं गते गुरो ॥३०६६ ॥
शुक्रांशमासे चोद्राहं केचित्पक्षे द्विभार्यवन् |
वर्गोत्तमे दारनाथे सत्वन्त्रयुतः सुखी ॥३०६७॥
3065 - 3067. Immovable Ascendant - Chitrini
Nadiamsa: (a) This native will get married in the 2nd
lord’s sub period during the dasa of the 4th Jord.
(b) According to some, the Sun transiting the
Navamsa Rasi of one of the three planets, viz. the 4th
lord, the 7th lord and Venus will denote the month of
marriage. Jupiter’s transit position at the time of such
a native’s marriage will be ina trine to Rasi denoted
by the Navamsa position of lord of 4th/7th.
(c) There could be two marriages for this native.
(d) If the 7th lord is Vargottama, one will obtain a
good spouse and be happy.
Notes: For Chitrini Nadiamsa, see notes under
sloka 3058 supra.
देशान्तरे महद्धाग्यं लाभाधिपतिदायके |
गहुभक्त्यन्तमारभ्य गुरुभुक्तोशुभाधिकम् ॥३०६८ ॥
शनिभुक्तौ व्याकुलं स्यात् त्रिशोपरि विशेषतः।
प्श्राधिपदशान्त्यादौ विपद्क्तौ दशा व्यथा ॥३०६९ |
स्ववन्धुसहितक्लेशं amas विनिर्दिशेत्
लाभाधिपदशाकाले योगः स्यात् द्वित्रिवत्ससम् ॥३०७० ॥
Wa च लभते स्वस्थानेऽत्पसुखान्वितः।
पञ्माव्दातपरं सोख्यं विपदाये श्रियोवहम् ॥३०७१ ॥
बन्धुमूलात्सुभायापि पुतरोतपत्तिविनाशवान्।
लग्नात्सप्तमगे मन्दे पुत्रनाशेन करित: ॥३०७१ ॥
स्रीप्रजादीर्धमायुष्यं स्थिरलग्नस्य जातके |
3068 - 3072 1/2. Immovable Ascendant - Chitrini
Nadiamsa: (2) The person will derive great fortunes
in foreign places during the 11th lord’s dasa; in the
sub periods of Rahu and Jupiter he will get more
auspicious effects, while in Saturn’s sub period he
will undergo distress, more so after 30th year of age.
(b) The dasa of 8th lord incombination withthesub
period indicated by the 3rd Nakshatra will cause
anguish. Along with his relatives be will be in
troubles and will incur obstacles to his prosperity.
(€) Inthe dasa of the 11thlord fortwo or three years,
there will be yoga; the native will incur troubles on
account of his relatives and scant happiness. After the
Sth year he will be happy.
(d) In the third dasa he will acquire wealth, and get
prosperity through his kinsmen, Childrenbornto him
will be destroyed. (€) Should Saturn be in the 7th, one
will be emaciated on account of destruction of sons.
However his daughters will be long lived. These
apply to an immovable ascendant.
लग्नात्सप्तमगे मन्दे तूच्चग्रहसहसमन्विते ॥३०७३ ॥
शुभदृष्टिविहीने च योगोऽयं नरनामकः।
पाठान्तरे —
उच्वयोगे महापापी परहिसार्थवश्चकः॥ ३०७४ ॥
नीचकृत्यपसे नित्यं ब्रह्मपातकपापवान्।
तस्य पापवशाद्रोगी पुत्रनाशेन कर्शितः ॥२०७५ ॥
3073 - 3075. Nara Yoga: If Saturn in the 7th house
without the aspect of a benefic planct joins an exalted
planet, a yoga called Nara Yoga is produced. The
native will be, as a result, a great sinner, will torture
and cheat others, will do base acts and kill (or trouble)
Brahmins. On account of these sins, he will incur
diseases and loss of sons and be emaciated.
Notes: This yoga does not apply to Aquarius
ascendant although it appears in this part. No planet
is exalted in Leo. This is a yoga generally applicable
to all ascendants but Aquarius, Taurus, Leo, Gemini
and Sagittarius. No planet is exalted in the 7th in
these cases.
“Uchcha Yoge” is a corrupt addition in sloka 3074
referring the source to be another authority.
लग्ने Ug: WHAT घातकः पापचेतनः।
गुरुचण्डालयोगोऽयं पापकृत्यशतं स्मृतम् ॥३०७६ ॥
3076. Rahu & Guru Chandala Yoga: (a) Should
Rahu be in the ascendant, the native will remain
pleased, be a killer (or of ruining disposition), and
will do sinful acts.
(b) The conjunction of Jupiter and Rahu produces
Guru Chandala Yoga which denotes that the person
will commit a hundred sins.

Deva Keralam
कुम्भे तुलांशगे जीवे कुन्तलांशे निशाकरे ।
चन्द्रलग्नाष्टमाधीशदशायां पितृनाशनम् ॥३०७७॥
मातुश्वानुमृतिश्चेति योगकाले न AeA: |
सोम्यदाये तृतीयांशे पितृमातृविनाशवान् ॥३०७८ ॥
बन्धुमूलात्सुसन्तोषी कनिष्ठभ्रातृमान् सुधीः।
देशान्तरे तु ज्येष्ठस्य बहुसञ्चारमादिशेत् ॥३०७९ ॥
3077 - 3079. Immovable Ascendant: Jupiter in
Aquanius with Libra Navamsa while the Moon is in
Kuntala Nadiamsa, will cause destruction of father in
the dasa of 8th lord counted from the Moon sign. In
this case the native’s mother will also follow sacrifice
herself immediately. (Or) in the last one third part of
Mercury dasa, parents will be destroyed. The ~erson
will be happy through his relatives. He will :ave a
younger brother and be intelligent. His older brother
will widely travel in foreign countries.
जलांशगे tat घटस्थे
देशान्तरे ्रातृवियोगद्खम् |
गेहे च पितरर्मरणं भवेच्च
कालान्तरे पुत्रवियोगदुखम् ॥२०८० ॥
3080. Jupiter in Aquarius: Should Jupiter be in
Aquarius with watery Navamsa, his older brother
will incur grief and separation ina foreign place. His
father will die at home (means, in birth place). Later
the person will face destruction of sons.
Notes: The hints given by the text could be sorted
out thus: For an immovable ascendant, if Jupiter is
placed in Aquarius with watery Navamsa (1.6. Pisces) he will cause troubles to elder brotherina foreign
country, death of father in his native place, and loss
of children to the native. Scorpio should not be
treated as a watery sign. It is the only insect or
centiped sign in the zodiac. Canceris another watery
Navamsa which Jupiter in Aquarius shal] not obtain.
जलांशगे देवगुरौ क्षयरोगेण aa: |
तुलाशनो मृतिं चेति पुत्रशोकेन कशितः॥३०८१॥
3081. (For an immovable ascendant) Jupiter in
Aquanius with watery Navamsa will cause tuberculosis. (The second line of the sloka has wrongly crept
into this part, while it irrelevantly deals with death
and Joss of children.)
ऋत्वग्निदिक्स्थश्च दिवाकरोऽपि
जन्माग्निषटसप्तगतश्च TE: |
वेदागििष्टस्थबुधोऽपि चेवं
नवाद्विभावे शुभकृदुरुः स्यात् ॥२०८२ ॥
एकादशगताः सर्वे गोचरे शुभदाः स्मृताः॥३०८२ ॥
3082 - 3083, Benefic Places - General: The Sun
is auspicious in the 6th, 3rd and 10th houses. The
Moon 15 favourable in ascendant, 3rd, 6th and 7th
houses. The 4th, 3rd and 6th houses are beneficial for
Mercury. Jupiter is favourable in the 9th and 7th
houses. All the planets are favourable in the 11th
house. These apply to transits.
Notes: As for the Sun, the Sanskrit word “Dik” is
translated as the 10th instead of 8th. Actually the
directions are ten including skyward and earthward.
Otherwise these are only eight.
“Agni” means three, denoting three sacrificial
fires.
“Adri” means seven denoting seven hills. Other
terms are simple enough.
The hints given here apply in general to transits of
planets.
The generally favourable positions for planets in
transit with reference to the Moon could be found in
transit-chapters of standard textbooks.
यदा wat भूमिसुतेन युक्ते
TH कुलीरे निधनस्य दाये |
कलत्रपुत्रादिषु सोगपीडां
देहस्य नाशं मुनयो वदन्ति ॥३०८४ ॥
3084. Saturn - Mars Conjunction: When Saturn
and Mars join inthe sign Cancer inthe 8th, the native
will see his spouse and sons in sickness and physical
decay according to sages.
Notes: This particular piece of instruction should
apply to Sagittanus ascendant. However there may
be such effects when these two joinin the 8th forother
ascendants, but not just in Cancer notwithstanding
the ascendant.

42 Chandra Kala Nadi
विपन्नषृधनं स्थानं कुष्ठरोगं महद्रयम् |
शतरक्षयं महदेन्यं मरणं देहशोषणम् ।
पीडनं लाभनष्टे च शनौ मूर््यादिषु स्थिते ॥३०८५॥
3085. Saturn’s Transit in 12 Houses From Ascendant; When Saturn is found in transit in the
respective bhavas counted from the ascendant, predict following effects in order: 1st - danger; 2nd loss
of money; 3rd - firm position; 4th - leprosy (or some
illness in general); 5th - great fear; 6th - destruction
of enemies; 7th - greatly miserable; 8th - death; 9th
- physical emaciation; 10th - distress; 11th - gains;
and 12th - expenditure.
ग्रन्थान्तरे -
wafer रविसुते कलहं विषादं
वितेऽर्थनाशमरिपीडनमाशु धते ।
र्ये तु भूक्तिमुखमात्मजबन्धुसोख्यं
युद्धे जयं विविधसोख्यमनोऽभिलाषम् ॥२०८६ ॥
बन्धौ सुहत्सुतविनाशनमिष्टनाशं
पश्चादिभूमिकृषिनाशनमानहानिम् |
पत्रे मतिभ्रममनेकविचारजालं
षष्ठेऽरिनाशनमतीव सुखार्विमाहुः ॥३०८७ ॥
कामे तु दारसुतभृत्यविनाशमेति
T विनाशनमरिव्यसनं च दुखम् |
धर्मे तु पापनिरतं शुभभाग्यनाशं-
मेषूरणेऽर्थविहतिं धनलाभनाशो ॥३०८८ ॥
एवं विलोक्य सहसा फलमत्र चिन्त्य
लग्नादितः सुमतिमान् कथयेत्फलाति ॥३०८९ ॥
3086 - 3089. Saturn’s Effects According to Others: If Saturn transits the natal ascendant, one will be
involved in quarrels and will incur grief. In the 2nd,
it will cause fear from enemies and destruction
wealth. One will enjoy food comforts, and happiness
of progeny and relatives with Saturn moving in the
3rd. Further, success in war (litigations etc.) and
various kinds of comforts and fulfillment of desires
will also materialise. The transit of Saturn in the 4th
will destroy friends, progeny and those that are dear
to the native. Loss of quadrupeds, lands, calling and
honour will follow. The 5th house having Saturn in
transit will cause wavering mind, and entanglement
in many (impracticable) thoughts (or plans). Destruction of enemies and great comforts will result 6th
house Saturn in transit. This planet moving in the 7th
will harm the native’s spouse, progeny and servants.
In the 8th destruction, enmity and vices will result.
Attachment to sinful deeds and destruction of fortunes and auspiciousness will be revealed by transit
Saturn in the 9th house. Obstructions to financial
gains and destruction of purpose will be brought
about by Saturn in the 10th. An intelligent astrologer
should declare such results for Saturn’s transit in
ascendant etc.
Notes: The concerned 11165 dealing with Saturn’s
transit in 11th and 12th from ascendant are missing,
as attributed to another source consulted by the
author. The deficit can be made up by sloka 3084
supra.
The following information on effects of Saturn’s
transit with reference to concerned natal positions
may be of use to the reader:
On natal Saturn - wounds and diseases; 2nd
thereof - loss of honour; 3rd - cure from illness and
trouble from enemies, gain of status; 4th - destruction
of virtues and friendly contacts; 5th - acquisition of
son and wealth; 6th - acquisition of position and
wealth; 7th - unfruitful movements, destruction of
spouse; 810 - diseases, destruction and enmity; 9th -
destruction of livelihood; 10th - no professional
gains; 11th- pleasures and wealth; 12th - wandering
and fear.
On natal Sun ~ happiness, wealth, joy and pleasure, 2nd thereof - wealth; 3rd - loss of honour, vigour
and physical beauty; 4th - increase of happiness from
kinsfolk; 5th - sickness to self, and anxicty about
children; 6th - difficulties; 7th - happiness from
spouse; 8th - destruction of diseases and confusion;
9th - evils; 10th - professional success; 11th - wealth
and good effects; 12th - loss of work.
On natal Jupiter - delusion; 2nd thereof - destruction of good effects; 3rd - conflict and quarrels; 4th
~ anxiety and loss of relatives; Sth - gives progeny,
honour, acquisition and glory; 6th - fame; 7th -
agitation and loss of wife; 8th - death; 9th - distress

Deva Keralam 43
from mean and low people; 10th - destroys beauty;
lith - easy money; 12th - increase of physical
strength.
On natal Venus: destroy beauty and spouse; 2nd
thereof - loss of wealth; 3rd - evils, separation, grief
and hatred; 4th - strife; 5th - imprisonment; 6th -
honour, lordship and wealth; 7th - anxiety and despondency due to spouse; 8th - diseases; 9th - poverty; 10th - loss of prosperity; 11th - position,
brilliance, joy, wealth, progeny and servants; 12th -
same as 11th.
On natal Mars - diseases, quarrels and
unrighteousness; 2nd thereof - loss; 3rd - destruction
of strength; 4th - loss on account of deceits; 5th -
begetting progeny, wealth and authority; 6th - increased position and virtues; 7th - quarrels, illness
and fatigue; 8th - wounds and burns; 9th - jealousy
and family division; 10th - success concerning
honour, progeny and wealth; 11th - financial progress
and acquisition; 12th - bodily pleasure.
On natal Mercury - loss and illness; 2nd thereof
- bewilderment; 3rd - separation from allies; 4th - Joss
of trust and friendship; 5th - confusion and improper
conduct by progeny; 6th - success, fame, virtues and
wealth; 7th - bad speech; 8th - pleasures; 9th -
righteousness and wealth; 10th - income through
intellect and speech; 11th - acquisition of lands and
quadrupeds; 12th - honour and learning.
On natal Moon - imprisonment, wandering, injuries, windy diseases, trouble from poison, fire and
enemies, disease, loss of wife, sons and property; 2nd
thereof - expenses and pain; 3rd - destruction of
enemies, acquisition of joy and wealth; 4th - disrespect from relatives; Sth - loss of position, of business, ofsons and of wealth; acquisition of hatred from
kinsfolk, and involvement in quarrels’ 6th - joy,
happiness, wealth and destruction of enemies; 7th -
fatigue, diseases of privities, loss of beauty, death of
spouse and friends, 8th - theft, hunger, bondage,
death, misery and disease; 9th - misery, hunger,
illness, quarrels, and fatigue, loss ofacquisition; 10th
- destroys authority and acquisition, and gives diseases and disrespect; 11th - glory, illicit relations
with other men’s wives; status, honourand success in
profession; 12th - loss of honour, fame and brilliance
and thinking power.
On natal ascendant - honour from rulers and
acquisition of wealth; 2nd thereof - reduction in
wealth and fame; 3rd - progress, success, respect,
health and destruction of evils; 4th - properties,
wealth, power and friendship with kinsfolk; 5th -
victory, wealth, prosperity, progeny and strength; 6th
- health, happiness, fame, power and destruction of
enemies; 7th - loss of spouse; 8th - loss of spouse, of
progeny, and of property, imprisonment, diseases
and death; 9th - diseases, coming under the grip of
enemies, unfruitful wanderings; 10th - honour, happiness, position and prosperity; 11th - acquisition of
metals and quadrupeds, also women, corns, slaves
and black dress; and 12th - poverty, despair and
misery.
चद्रलग्नादुरुस्थानं यातः सूर्यसुतो यदि |
पित्रोर्नाशं तथा काले वीक्षिते वार्कसंयुते |
रविद्रेक्काणगे मन्दे त्वंशे वा द्वादशांशे ॥३०९० ॥
गोचरे क्रूरमासेषु पितृपीडां विनिर्दिशेत् |
SIM स्वराज्येषु कलहं पुत्रनाशनम् ॥३०९१॥
3090 - 3091. (a) Father: When Saturn transits the
9th from the Moon sign, predict loss of father. This
will apply to his aspect on the said 9th house as well,
or to the time of his conjunction with natal Sun. (In
coincidence with one of the above conditions), destruction of father will take place when Saturn attains
the decanate, Navamsa or Dwadasamsa ruled by the
Sun. Further transit Sun will also be in adverse
placements.
(b) When Saturn transits the sign represented by
the Navamsa position of the 12th lord counted from
the ascendant, quarrels and destruction of suns (progeny) will come to pass.
Notes: In the first instance, three clues regarding
the transit of Saturn in connection with fatality to
father are discussed. Saturn should move in or aspect
the 9th counted from the Moon (or ascendant), or he
should come to the sign occupied by the natal Sun
(representing father). This is not enough. Saturn
should simultaneously be in Leo’s decanate or Navamsa or Dwadasamsa. Leo Dwadasamsa is available
ineachsign. Leo decanate applies to the signs Aries,
Leo or Sagittarius. Leo Navamsa does not occur for

44. Chandra Kala Nadi
the signs Gemini, Libra and Aquarius.
The third condition is the Sun in undesirable
houses.
Only then death of father be predicted.
(b) See in which Navamsa the lord of the 12th is
placed at birth. The transit of Saturn in the sign
denoted by the said Navamsa will promote quarrels
and will endanger one’s progeny.
मुखेशांशे was क्लेशं eta भूरिशः!
त्तद्धावाष्टमेशांशदृष्टिसंभवराशिषु ॥३०९२ ॥
तत्तद्धावदशापाके काले तद्धावनाशनम्।
THT योजयेत् कालवित्तभः॥२०९२ ॥
3092 - 3093, (a) When transit Saturn attains the
sign represented by the Navamsa position of the 4th
lord from natal ascendant, the person will have
quarrels with the king (or employer), and also difficulties.
(b) The Bhava concerned will incur destruction
when Saturn transits (1) the sign equal to the Navamsa position of the ruler of the 8th from the bhava
under consideration; (2) the sign that is in aspect to
the lord of the 8th from a given bhava.
(c) See if a Bhava lord attains more and more
divisions of the planet ruling the 8th therefrom. In
that case destruction of the original Bhava in question
will occur in the dasa of the (lord of) original Bhava.
Notes: (a) Difficulties and professional problems
will surface with Saturn’s movement in the sign
denoted by the Navamsa occupied by the lord of the
Ath at birth.
(b) Three clues are given in respect of transit
Saturn’s ability to destroy the indications ofa house.
Firstly, in the sign denoted by the Navamsa position
of such a planet which rules the 8th from a given
house, Example - the 9th lord rules the 8th from the
2nd. Hence the sign denoted by the Navamsa position
of the 9th lord will be the target of Saturn’s transit.
This will affect family happiness, financial progress,
eyes, education etc.
Secondly Saturn should transit such a sign that is
aspected by the loid of the 8th from a given Bhava.
Example: The 2nd rules the 8th from the 7th. Hence
Saturn moving in the sign denoted by the Navamsa
position of 2nd lord will affect spouse, partnership
efc.
(c) This part is translated after supplying certain
missing links. The ideas the lord ofa bhava should not
beget many divisions of the planet ruling the 8th
therefrom. Then the dasa of the original bhava lord
yield adverse effects. For example in case of Aries,
the 6th is ruled by Mercury. Mars rules the 8th from
Virgo. Mercury remaining in many of Martian
divisions will in Mercury dasa cause ill-health, loss
in litigations, enmity etc. - adverse effects concerming the 6th house.
लग्नाद्रा VAM लाभे राहौ च गोचे।
अतीव क्तेशकार्याणि स्वजनद्रेषानाशनम् ॥३०९४ ॥
3094. Rahu’s Transit: Should Rahu transit the
11th counted from either the ascendant or the Moon,
one will incur great grief and wil] incur enmity with
his own kinsmen and their destruction. (That is, the
person will lose his men or will have inimical terms
with them.)
लम्नेशांशत्रिकोणे वा लाभरशाश्रिकोणगे |
स्फुटयोगं गते मन्दे मातुलक्तेशमादिशेत् ॥३०९५ ॥
मातृवर्गे मनस्तापो लग्नाधिपतिदायगे |
व्ययाधिपान्तरे वापि कर्माधिपतिभुक्तिपु ॥३०९६ ॥
कर्माधिपदशाकाते मातुलप्रवलं सुखम् |
धनाधिपे तथा विन्दद्विक्रमाधिपतेरस्यथा ॥३०९७॥
3095 -3097. Libra Ascendant -Saturn’s Transit,
Venus dasa ete.: (2) When Saturn comes to the sign
represented by the Navamsa position of the lord of the
ascendant or of 11th, or a trine to one of these two
Navamsas, difficulties to mother be foretold. (b) The
ascendant lord’s dasa will bring in mental agony to
material relatives, during the sub period of 12th lord
of 10th lord.
(c) The dasa of 1 0th lord will cause great prosperity
for maternal uncles.
(d) So also the dasas of the lords of 2nd as well as
3rd.
Notes: (a) For Libra, the ascendant lord is Venus,
the 11th lord is the Sun. Hence the sign denoted by
the Navamsa occupied by Venus orthe Sin, ora trine

Deva Kceralam 45
thereof, transited by the Sun will trouble the mother.
Thus this points to a certain month which should be
read only with a relevant sub period.
(b) The second clue is for Libra ascendant, Venus
dasa causing grief to maternal relatives in the sub
period of the 10th lord Moon or the 12th lord Mercury.
In the following exampie, the maternal aunt of the
native had lost a growing daughter (about 15 years of
age) due to snake bite. This is in the native’s Venus
dasa, Moon’s sub period.
Native born on 17th February 1984, at 2235 hrs in
Delhi. Balance of Venus dasa at birth: 18 years 4
months and 22 days. Moon’s sub period in this dasa
ruled from November 1986 through July 1988.
Rasi positions: Taurus - Rahu; Leo - Moon; Libra
- ascendant, Mars, Saturn; Scorpio - Ketu; Sagittarius
- Jupiter, Capricorn - Mercury, Venus; Aquanius -
Sun.
Navamsa: Aries - Saturn; Taurus - Mars; Gemini
- Mercury, Rahu; Cancer- Jupiter; Leo - Moon; Libra
-ascendant; Scorpio - Sun; Sagittarius - Ketu; Aquarius
- Venus,
Further, from the clues given in the original vide
“a”, “c” and “d” above, we learn that the major
periods of the Moon, Mars and Jupiter are meant for
prosperity of the maternal relatives of a Libra native.
मातृपीडा सुखेशस्य लाभेशदायके |
लाभेशंशत्रिकोणे तु स्फुटयोगं गते शनौ ॥३०९८ ॥
स्वमातुलसुतादीनामरिष्टमिति चादिशेत् |
सर्वनादीफलं सत्यं योजयेत् कालवित्तमः॥२०९९ ॥
3098 - 3099. Libra Ascendant - Mother: The
person’s mother will be troubled in the sub period of
the lord of the 4th during the dasa of the 11th lord.
When Saturn in transit comes to the sign represented
by the Navamsa position of the 11th lord, predict
evils to the progeny of maternal uncles. These effects
are retold based on Sarva Nadi.
मीने जीवे शुभांशस्थे IA राजवल्लभः,
स्वदशयां महत्सौख्यं धर्मबुद्धि शुभावहाम् ॥३१०० ॥
मीने जीवे तुलांशस्थे लक्ष्मीः षष्टयंशजातकः।
विशालवदनो भोगी प्रियदारसुखे रतः॥३१०१॥
3100 - 3101. Jupiter in Navamsa: (a) For Libra
ascendant, should Jupiter in Pisces occupy the 9th
sign in Navamsa, (ora benefic’s Navamsa), one will
be dear to the king of his motherland. The dasa of
Jupiter as a consequence of above placement will
cause great happiness, just disposition and auspicious effects.
(0) Jupiter in Pisces with Libra Navamsa will make
the native broad-faced and grant him pleasures in
general and an affectionate wife.
Notes: (a) Jupiter being the 6th lord for Libra
ascendant can prove auspicious in his dasa if he is at
birth placed in Pisces with specified Navamsa position.
(b) Jupiter’s position in the 6th in Pisces (13° 20' to
16 40) with Libra Navamsa grants a happy marriage
to the Libra native. “Lakshmi Shashtiamsa" is a
redundant conditions, not incorporated in the rendering.
श्यामवर्णो गुणश्लाघी कुशलः HOTA |
मातृप्वसुकुले भाग्यं Aya: प्रियवान् सदा 13202 ॥
वनान्ते पुरे वासं वातप्रकृतिशान्तवान् ।
गूढकार्यप्रियो नित्यं लोभी प्रकृतिशान्तवान् 11320 3 ॥
धर्पपुण्यरसाभिञ्ञो विद्यावान् सरसप्रियः।
तटाकोद्यानधर्मात्मा देवव्राह्मणपोषकः॥३१०४ ॥
बन्धुप्रिययुतो नित्यं हरिशिड्रभक्तिमान् |
मिताशी गृढहत्कामी भीरर्गम्भीरवुद्धिमान् ॥२१०५ ॥
वयोमध्ये महद्धाग्यं बाल्ये क्लेशदरिद्रिकः।
पश्चाद्भ्रतृविहीनश्च मातृवंशजनप्रियः॥३१०६ ॥
मातामहः सुदीर्घायुर्मातृप्रियकरः सुखी ।
जयष्टपत्रीयुतो रग चोद्राहानन्तरं सुखी ॥३१०७॥
स्वभुजाजितसम्पन्नो राजद्वारेऽधिकारवान्।
विपद्दाये सुभाग्याप्तिर्भाग्याधिपतिभक्तिषु ॥२१०८ ॥
लग्नाधिपान्तरे काले पुत्रिकालाभमादिशेत्।
3102 - 3108 1/2. Gemini Ascendant - Mudgara
Nadiamsa: He will be dark-bodied, will have praiseworthy virtues. endowed with skills and will suffer
from stomachial disorders. His maternal aunt’s fam-

46 Chandra Kala Nadi
ily will be prosperous and herson will be affectionate
to the subject. The subject will live in a town betwixt
forests, will have a windy body, be fond of secretive
missions, be a miser and calm in disposition. He will
be skillful in religion, meritorious in acts, will have
knowledge of tastes (a branch of medical science),
will be well-educated, and fond of jokes. Tanks and
gardens will be constructed by him. He will honour
gods and Brahmins, be attached to his relatives,
devoted to Lords Vishnu and Siva, will eat limited
food, will have secretive lust for sexual pleasures, be
timid but majestic in disposition. In the middle of his
life, he will attain great prosperity while his childhood will be in the grip of poverty and troubles. He
will have no younger brother, and be fond of maternal
relatives. His maternal grand father will be endowed
with longevity. The person will do acts that will
please his mother. His eldest issue will be a female.
The native will be passionate, and be happy after
marriage. He will have self-eared wealth and will
serve the king. The sub period of the 9th lord in the
third dasa will cause great prosperity. The sub period
of lord of ascendant in the third dasa will cause
acquisition of a daughter.
Notes: This portion is mixed up with the effects for
Libra ascendant having Jupiter in Pisces. Actually
these relate to Gemini ascendant, Mudgara Nadiamsa
which will be clear from Slokas 3111,3116 and3121.
Hence the present slokas are separated with suitable
identity. Also see slokas from 3165 to 3210 for
Mudgara Nadiamsa, Gemini ascendant which occurs
from 19° 36' to 19° 48' of arc.
वर्गोत्तमे FATS शन्याङ्गारकसंयुते 113.209 I
wagardaed पिता भ्रातृविसेधवान्।
मातृष्वसेका सुगुणा भोगे asta TT ॥३११० ॥
उद्राहदेशे Herel जन्मदेशे विवाहवान्।
3109 - 31101/2. Gemini Ascendant - 06807 र
Vargothama: Should the Moon bein VargothamaJ
Libra, and join Saturn and Mars, the person’s mother
will have eye deformity and the father will incur
enmity with his (father’s) coborn. His maternal aunt
will be endowed with virtues. and will enjoy pleasures akin to a queen. The native will have quarrels (or
misunderstandings) in his in-laws’ place and will get
married in his birth region.
Notes: The Vargottama position applies only to the
Moon while Saturn and Mars should merely join her
in Libra. The Navamsa positions of these two planets
are not specified.
SRY लक्षमीषष्टयंशे Fey प्रजायते 113222 I
स्वजन्मदेशे चोद्राहं कन्यया पितृहीनया |
यावत्फलानि शुक्रस्य चन््राज्जामित्रकेऽथवा 113222 ॥
स्वदारसोदरश्ेति द्वित्रिसह्भयाचिरायुषम् |
स्वपितुः सोदराः सप्त ह्यथवा feta च ॥३११३॥
पितृव्यद्रयमायुष्यं सोदश्रोहपापवान्।
मातामहीविनाशः स्यात् सम्पदाये दद्दरिकः॥२११४॥
3111 - 3114. Mudgara Nadiamsa: One born in
this Nadiamsa with the 7th lord in Lakshmi
Shashtiamsa will marry in his birth region. His
spouse will be fatherless (at the time of marriage).
The number of brothers-in-law will be in correspondence with the Bindus (after reduction) in the Ashtaka
varga of Venus, or those in the 7th counted from the
Moon-occupied sign. Out of such numberof co-born,
two or three will be long-lived. The native’s father
will have seven brothers. Alternatively it will be 2 or
3 only. Two paternal uncles will be long-lived but be
disposed to cheat their brother (i.e. the native’s
father). The native’s maternal grand-mother will
face (early) destruction. He will incur poverty in the
second dasa.
Hes पूर्वभागे मातुलौ द्रौ द्विभार्यको |
faves सुभाग्यापिर्मातुलप्रनल सुखम् ॥३११५ ॥
3115. Mudgara Nadiamsa - First Half: One born
in this part will have two maternal uncles each of
whom would be twice-married. The native will beget
good fortunes in the third dasa, and will see his
naternal uncles in great prosperity,
तृप्वसृसुतस्थाने जीवे पूर्णबलाम्विते |
मातृष्वसृसुतायुष्यं गजानश्वर्यभूमिरार् ॥३११६ ॥
बहुस््रीनायकः श्रीमान् पुत्रीपुत्रसमृद्धिमान्।
मातृवाक्यपयो नित्यं भेदभरातृसमन्वितः॥३११७॥

Deva Keralam 47
कर्माधिपदशाकाले य इदं फलमश्नुते |
जातकस्य सुवाहाप्पिर्ताराब्दानन्तरं सुखम् ॥३११८ ॥
नूतनग्रहनिर्माणमर्थलाभं शुभावहम् |
लग्नाधिपान्तरे काले राजन्यजनसंग्रहम् 113.228 ॥
सर्वाध्यक्षाधिकारेण गेहे लक््मीकरक्षवान् |
3116 - 31191/2. Jupiter in 10th: If Jupiter is in the
5th from 6th, i.e. 10th (denoting progeny of maternal
aunt), endowed with strength, the persona] maternal
aunt’s son will have longevity, will have huge wealth
including elephants, bea ruler of the land (i.e. be very
powerful), will lead over many a woman, rich and
endowed with sons and daughters. The said relative
will be devoted to his mother. When the native will
be in the dasa of the 10th lord, the said relative will
acquire a step-brother (i.e. the native’s maternal sunt
will get a co-wife). The native will in the dasa of the
10th lord obtaina rich conveyance, be happy after 26
years of age. He will constructa new house, will have
financial gains and auspicious effects. In the sub
period of the lord of ascendant during the dasa of the
10th lord, he will join royal men and acquire a
position of wide presidentship (or headship). Goddess Lakshmi will shower Her blessings on him.
sub periods of the lords of the 6th, 8th or 12th in the
dasa of the Moon will also give same effects - enmity,
distress and quarrels.
(d) Saturn’s transit in the Moon sign, or in the sign
equal to Moon’s Navamsa at birth, will produce
danger from an inimical king (or powerful people).
Remedies as prescribed be sought. (Then) due to the
pleasure of kinsfolk (i.e. favourably disposed kinsfolk) enemies will turn into friends, and great happiness will come to pass.
(€) The native of Mudgara Nadiamsa, Gemini
ascendant, should donate an axe (as a remedy vide
“d” above) as a result of which the band of enemies
will be destroyed.
Notes: (a) Mars, the 6th lord, denotes thefts for
Gemini ascendant. His occupation of exaltation
Navamsa will lead to such losses.
(b) Royal enmity could be interpreted as enmity
with powerful people in connection with marriage.
Thus there will be stiff opposition to marriage if
Saturn and Jupiter are in Libra in the 5th, with
identical longitudes.
The original instructions contained in “c” to “e” are
also applicable to Gemini. These are clear and need
no further clarifications.
स्वोच्चांशे तोलिगे भोमे चोरग्रहसमन्विते ॥३१२० ॥
पिथुने लनजातश्च चोरापहतवित्तवान् |
लग्नात् पञ्चमगे मन्दे दारेशेन समे कले ॥२३१२१॥
alee राजकलहो रतरुभीतिर्मनोव्यथा |
षष्ठाष्टमाधीशदाये दुःस्थानग्रहभुक्तिषु ॥३१२२ ॥
स्वराजन्यजनद्रेषं शत्रुनाशात्परं FAA |
TSCA नक्षत्राधिपतेस्तथा ॥३९२३॥
शत्रुभीतिर्मनस्तपमन्तशिछट्रिकलापवान् ।
SRM मन्दे गोचरे जन््रगेऽथवा ॥३१२४॥
शत्रुरजभयं किचिच्छन्त्या शान्ति प्रयास्यति |
वनदुर्गप्रसादेन WARE महत्सुखम् ॥३१२५॥
मुद्रे प्रजातश्च परशोर्दानमाचरेत् ।
शतरुवर्गकुलच्छेदः कुठारस्य प्रदानतः 11322 Il
3120 - 3126. Gemini Ascendant: (a) One born in
Gemini ascendant, having the planet Mars in Libra
(Sth lord in 6th) with Capricorn Navamsa will lose his
wealth to thieves.
(0) Saturn in the Sth in Libra with the 7th lord
Jupiter will cause royal enmity, fear from foes and
mental distress - all related to marriage - provided the
said two planets are of identical longitudes.
(c) The sub period ofa planet placed in the 6th, 8th
or 12th will in the dasa of 6th/8th lord promote royal
enmity. Happiness will resume after destruction of
enemies (i.e. after solution to the royal wrath). The
aaa:
FA MARTA कल्पोक्तेन प्रपूजितम् |
शतुवंशक्षयार्थाय सर्वाभीष्टर्थसिद्धये ॥३१२७॥
भयापमृत्युनाशाय कुठारं प्रददाम्यहम् ।'
3127 - 31271/2. The following Mantra should be
recited while donating the axe: “Mama

48 Chandra Kala Nadi
Satrukshayaarthaya Kalpokthena prapujitham.
Satruvamsa kshayaarthaaya Sarvaabhishta siddhaye.
Bhaya apamrutyu naasaaya kutharam
pradamyaham.”
Notes: For correct pronunciation, the Sanskrit
text may be referred to in the sloka. The purpose of
this donation is to get the enemies destroyed, get all
desires fulfilled and overcoming untimely death and
fear.
कर्माधिपदशाकाले वेधकग्रहभुक्तिषु ॥२३१२८ ॥
स्वराजन्यविरोधेन मनशचाञ्चल्यमादिशेत् |
ूर्वोक्तदानमन्रेण MAE शुभावहम् ॥२१२९ ॥
3128 - 3129. The native will be fickle-minded
(i.e. will lose mental stability) due to enmity with the
king of his land during the dasa of the lord of the 10th
and in the sub period of an obstructive planet. Resorting to donation and reciting the Mantra earlier suggested, he will overcome such enmity and beget
auspicious effects.
Obstructive planet is the one that is not favourably disposed to Mercury, the lord of Gemini ascendant. Mainly these are Mars and Jupiter.
Planets not well-placed could also be obstructive
irrespective of their favourable relations with Mercury.
कवर्गपुरदेशेषु पिप्लवेन प्रजावधि।
AEROS: क्तेशमन्तश्चिधं महापदम् ॥३१२० ॥
स्वरजसामन्तनृपालशोकं _
तद्वारि मुख्यप्रबलेश्च हानिम् |
शुक्रान्ते राज्यकलापमेति
विपदृशायां HATTA: ॥३१३१॥
3130 - 3131. These two slokas are a corrupt
interpolation and a mix up with mundane astrology.
स्वबन्धुजनसन्तापं सामन्तनृपदर्शनम् |
स्वमातुलकन्छ्रादिपुत्रिकाजाडयमादिशेत् 113232 ॥
3132. (Following the remedies suggested vide
sloka 3129) he will visit a subordinate king, The sub -
period ofan obstructive planet in the dasa of the 10th
lord will also cause mental agony to the person’s
relatives and diseases to maternal uncle’s wife and
daughter.
तुलाशनिस्थिते काले लोकं दुरभिक्षडाम्बरम् |
तुलान्त्ये कलहं चेति ह्यादायादधिकव्ययम् 113233 |
3133. This is again a mix up with mundane
astrology which indicates famine in the country
during the journey of Saturn in Libra, strife when he
journeys in the end of that sign with a hopeless
interpolation - expenses beyond income.
देहालस्यं च लभते गोचरे वृश्चिके शनो |
लग्नाधिपे रिपुस्थाने तदीशे सुतराशिगे ॥३१३४॥
स्धराधिपेन संयुक्ते ह्यदगमयगोगवान् |
लगनाज्जमित्रगे शरे त्वसितेन युतेक्षिते 13234 ॥
कफोष्णवातरोगेण विण्मूत्रोपद्रवो भवेत् |
3134 - 31351/2. (a) When Saturn transits the sign
Scorpio, the native of Libra ascendant will develop
physical ineptitude or laziness.
(b) Should the lord of the ascendant be in the 6th
house while its lord is in the Sth in association with
the 8th lord, one will have diseased stomach.
(c) Should Venus be in the 7th from the ascendant with Saturn’s aspect or association, one will incur
phlegmatic disorders and illness caused duc to excessive heat. Further he will be troubled by impure
excretion and urinary disorders.
Notes: (a) This rule applies to Libra ascendant,
a sudden shift by the text from Gemini ascendant.
Satum moving inthe 2nd from Libra ascendant is said
to cause bodily inability.
(b) This is a general rule, not for Libra ascendant
alone. With the lord of the ascendant in the 6th while
the lords of 6th and 8th are in the 5th house, abdominal disorders are to be foretold.
(c) Phlegmatic disorders relate to lungs and
heart. Rectal and unnary disorders are also part of
Venus in the 7th linked to Saturn by aspect or
conjunction. This axiomis more effectively applicable to Libra ascendant, because of Saturn’s rulership
of 3rd (lungs) and 4th (heart). Venus rules the 8th
house in this case, and is the natural ruler of kidneys

Deva Keralam 49
(urine etc.) whose placement in Aries is bound to
create problems generated by excessive heat.
तदोषपरिहारार्थं भानुवा्रतं चरेत् ॥३१३६ ॥
द्रादशादित्यनामानि वारे वे प्रपूजयेत् |
भानुवारे निराहारं पूर्वजन्माधनाशनम् ॥३१३७ ॥
असाध्यमेहपेत्तादिमूर्वायुविनाशनम् ।
भानुव्रतारम्भकाले देवनं च प्रपूजयेत ॥३१३८ ।
THAIS देहारोग्यं शुभावहम् |
सोवर्णी प्रतिमां कृत्वा यथाशक्ति यथाविधि!
ध्यानासनादिभिः पूजां कृत्वा दानं समाचरेत् ॥३१३९॥
3136 - 3139, As a remedy, religious vows on
Sundays be observed. Every week (on Sunday), the
twelve Sun Gods be worshipped and ere should
spend Sundays without consuming 00८, Then the
sins of the previous birth be destroyed and incurable
disorders of urine, bile and wind will vanish. Before
commencing the vows, the astrologer should be
worshipped. Health will be recovered following donation of red clothes. The Sun God’s image should be
obtained made of gold according to one’s means (for
the worship). Meditation, Posture. etc. suitable to the
worship and donation be also done.
Notes: The remedy suggested applies to blemishes cited at “b” and “c” in slokas 3134-351/2.
॥ ग्रहार्ध्यम् ॥
'दिवाकर नमस्तुभ्यं पापाज्ञानप्रणाशन ।
त्रयीमयार्क विश्वात्मन् गृहाणार्ध्यं "नमोऽस्तुते ॥३१४० ॥
दरादशादित्यवारान्ते मण्डलान्ते च वा यदि।
दिवाकरप्रसादेन देहायेग्यं न संशयः॥३१४१ ॥
निराहासे वर्षमेकं फलाहारसिवार्षिकम् ॥३१४२ ॥
3140 - 3142. These slokas are just a repetition of
the above hints on the prayer, but in different words.
An incoherent addition here is to be without food for
one whole year, to live on fruits only for three years
etc.
जीवे सूर्यान्ते काले राजद्वारे क्वचिदव्यथा |
पश्चात् सौख्यमवापनोति चन््रभुक्तो शुभाशुभम् ॥३१४२ ॥
अजीर्णेनातिसारं च देहायासं विनिर्दिशेत् |
ज्ञातिवर्गे मनस्तापं स्वमातुलकुले व्यथाम् ॥३१४४॥
शुक्रान्तरे तथा विन्द्यात् सर्वज्ञातिकुलावधि।
स्वराजवंशे सन्तापं स्वमित्रजननाशनम् ॥३९१४५ ॥
कुजान्तरे पुत्रपीडां पुत्रिकोद्राहसं भ्रमम् |
Tey फलं चेति दारपीडां विनिर्दिशेत् seve |
WSR जीवदाये क्रूमासे स्वमातुलः।
शीतज्वरभप्राप्ति जननीव्याकुलं महत् ॥२१४७ ॥
जीवांशनाडीयोगेन जातकस्य महत्सुखम् |
Gag TTS कल्याणसंभ्रमः॥२९१४८ ॥
पश्चद्रयाकुलकार्येण राजद्वारे सुभाग्यवान् |
3143 ~ 31481/2. Jupiter Dasa - Libra Ascendant: The sub period of the Sun in the major period of
Jupiter will cause worries on account of royal sources.
Happiness will be restored later on. The sub period
of the Moon (in Jupiter dasa) will give a mix of good
and bad effects. Indigestion, dysentery, difference of
opinion with relatives, and distress to maternal kinsfolk will corne to pass. Inthe sub period of Venus. his
relatives will be in trouble while the king’s family (?)
will be in distress. His friends will be destroyed. In the
sub period of Mars, the native’s son will incur
troubles while his daughter will beget married. There
will be troubles to the person’s wife in Rahu’s sub
period of Jupiter dasa. The sub period of the Moon in
Jupiter’s dasa will endanger his maternal uncle in
(dangerous) cold fever during the Sun’s transit in evil
signs. His mother will also be in great distress. The
person will himselfenjoy great happiness. (Jeevamsa
Nadiyogena is not of proper composition, not amenable for translation.) Acquisition of a child in the
family, omaments and marriage function will also
materialise during the Moon’s sub period.
(Paschadvyakulakaryena does not fit the context. It
means, later due to performing distressful jobs.) He
will make good fortunes in royal association.
Notes: The sub periods of Venus, the Sun, the
Moon, Mars and Rahu in the main period of Jupiter
are discussed here in respect of Libra ascendant, |
without involving the Nadiamsa. A rough overview

50 Chandra Kala Nadi
is depicted below.
Venus' sub period - troubles to relatives.
Sun’s sub period - initial troubles from government which will soon be sorted out.
Moon’s sub period - indigestion, dysentery, enmity with relatives, danger to maternal relatives, and
distress to relatives in general. The subject will
receive a mix of good and bad, but be generally
happy.
Mars’ sub period - troubles to son, wedding of a
daughter (if of marniageable age).
Rahu’s sub period - troubles to wife.
कर्माधिपदशाकाले धनाधिपतिभुक्तिषु ॥३१४९ ॥
स्वप्रभोश्च सुसन्तानं सीमन्तोत्सवसंभ्रमः।
व्ययाधिपान्तरे काले ह्यादौ व्याकुलमादिशेत् ॥३१५० |
मध्ये सुसोख्यभूषाप्तिः स्वराजज्ञातिनाशनम् |
विक्रमेशान्तरे काले राजकार्यवशाटव्यथा ॥२१५१ ॥
भाग्याधिपान्ते सौख्यं योगं लगनाधिपान्तर |
दाराधिपदशासन्धौ SATA शोकवान् ॥२१५२ ॥
धिप्रेणोद्राहसोख्याप्ति योगप्राल्यवान् सुखी |
3149 - 31521/2. (a) The Major Period of 10th
Lord: During the sub period of the 2nd lord 12 the
dasa of the lord of the 10th the native will have his
first issue. ("Seemantha" is a Vedic function related
to birth of the first issue.) The sub period of the 12th
Jord, in the dasa of the 10th lord will in the initial part
cause mental distress and happiness in the middle
part. ("Swaraja gnatinasanam" is irrelevant denoting
destruction of royal relatives.) The sub period of the
3rd lord will cause distress in performing royal
duties. Happiness will come to pass in the sub period
of the 9th lord while there will be yoga (prosperity)
in the sub period of the ascendant lord.
(b) Remarriage: Destruction of wife will occur
in the junction of 7th lord’s dasa. Immediately,
happiness will be restored due to remarriage, and the
subject will have more prosperity.
Notes: (a) The Moon’s dasa, Mars sub period
will be favourable for obfaining progeny. Mercury;s
sub period in this dasa will give mixed effect. Jupiter’s sub period will lead to professional failures.
The sub period of Venus will grant prosperity.
The results of sub periods noted above are in the
Moon’s dasa, and for a person born in Libra ascendant.
(b) Junction of the 7th lord’s dasa is end of the
dasa of the Moon and the beginning phase of Mars’
dasa. Mars should be specially well-placed to give a
second marriage and more progress.
व्ययेशस्थितराशो वा A वा तक्तिकोणगे 113243 I
कलया सह संयोगे स्फुटयोगफलं स्मृतम् |
भाग्येशांशे तक्िकोणे स्फुटयोगं गते शनौ ॥३१५४॥
सामन्तराज्ये कलहः स्वप्रभोश्च शुभाधिकम् |
3153 - 31541/2. (a) Arriving at the sign occupied
by the 12th lord at birth, or the sign represented by his
Navamsa position or a trine thereof.....
(b) When Satur transits the sign represented by
the natal Navamsa position of the 9th lord, subordinate kings will declare and one’s ruler will gain.
Notes: The above lines are incomplete in the
initial stage and irrelevant in the later context. Hence
these have to be ignored.
केतुक्रान्तांशगे मन्दे जनमरक्षं संस्थिते यदि ॥३१५५॥
विण्मूतरदेहबाधादेः किप्रेणारोग्यमादिशेत् |
3155 - 31551/2. Urinary Disorders: Should Saturn be in the Moon sign and join Ketu in Navamsa,
the person will get disorders of excretion and urine,
but will have an early cure.
Notes: Any planet in the Moon sign, or natal
ascendant, or the 6th from either of the two, and
joining a malefic planet in Navamsa will be a source
of some illness. An intelligent student can make a
wide use of this guideline.
Here Saturn - Ketu association is said to cause
disorders of excretion.
भाग्याधिपदशाकाले लग्नाधिपतिभक्तिषु ॥२१५६ ॥
दारान्तरे Brahe: रजप्रीतिर्धनागमः।
HATH मनस्तापः BRT शुभाधिकम् ॥२३१५७॥
सूर्यान्ते राजकार्यं स्वदारादिसुतामयः॥
3156 ~ 31571/2. Dasa of 9th Lord: In the sub

Deva Keralam 51
period of the lord of th ascendant, during the dasa of
the 9th lord, the native will have a son through
remarriage. He will acquire wealth through royal
pleasure. The sub period of Ketu will cause mental
agony. There will be increase of auspicious effects
in the sub period of Venus, One will be involved in
royal duties in the sub period of the Sun, but will
experience sickness to wife and progeny.
मन्दे सूर्यान्ते काले ars विनिर्दिशेत् ॥३१५८ i
नानाव्याकुलकार्याणि SRT शुभाशुभम् |
भोमान्तरे व्याकुलं स्याच्छुभकार्यवशाद्व्यथा ॥३१५९ ।
मन्दे भोमानरे काले विरोधो बन्धुना भवेत् |
देहायासज्वराद्येश्च मनखेदं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥३१६० ॥
राहुभुक्तो महत्ोख्यं गेहे कल्याणसंभ्रमः।
जीवन्ते श्रियोऽवापििः पौत्रोत्सव इति स्मृतः॥३१; ॥
मन्दे शुक्रान्ते काले स्वपुत्रद्राहसं भ्रमम् |
स्वभुक्त्यन्ते वसन्तर्तौ पुत्रिकोद्राहमादिशेत् ॥३१६२ ॥
3158 - 3162. Saturn’s dasa: The sub period of
the Sun in the dasa of Saturn will obstruct prosperity.
The Moon’s sub period will involve him in many
unpleasant jobs, but will give a mix of auspicious and
inauspicious effects. There will be troubles in Mars
sub period due to involvement in some auspicious
functions. Further one will have enmity with relatives, physical illness like fever, and mental agony.
The sub period of Rahu will cause great happiness
and a family function of auspicious nature. Jupiter’s
sub period will cause wealth, and acquisition of a
grand child. The sub period of Venus in the dasa of
Saturn will cause son’s marriage. In Saturn’s sub
period of Saturn dasa, during spring, his daughter will
get married.
कुम्भे शनिस्थिते काले पुत्रिकोद्राहसं ्रमम्।
चापान्त्ये मकरे वापि स्वगेहे शुभशोभनम् ॥३१६३ ॥
तुलाशनो तथा विन््ाद्न्धुवरगे मनोव्यथाम् |
विपदयाये फलं सत्यं योगप्रावल्यमादिशेत् ॥२१६४॥
3163 - 3164. Saturn’s Transit: When Saturn is
in Aquarius in transit, there will be mariage. Even if
Saturn moves in the end of Sagittarius, or in the sign
Capricorn, there will be some auspicious functions at
the native’s home. So also when Saturn is in Libra. In
the 3rd dasa, the person will see quarrels in the
families of his kinsfolk. But his prosperity will be on
the increase.
Note: For the time being, hints on Libra ascendant end here.
मुदररांशे प्रजातः सः क्षेमदाये शुभाशभम्।
एकयोगे फलं किंचिद्योगं शकटमश्नुते ॥३१६५ ॥
लगेश्वरन्तरे वाऽपि ह्यल्पसौख्यं भविष्यति |
शृक्रान्ते विशेषः स्यात् पुत्रभराबल्यमादिशेत् ॥२१६६ ॥
3165 - 3166. Gemini Ascendant (Upto sloka
3210): The native of Mudgara Nadiamsa will get
both good and bad effects in the fourth dasa. The evil
effects will somewhat compare with that of Sakata
Yoga. Even in the sub period of the lord of the
ascendant, his happiness will be limited. The sub
period of Venus will cause more happiness to the
native and prosperity to his son.
Notes: From here, upto sloka 3210, Mudgara
Nadiamsa of Gemini ascendant is dealt with. Also
see Slokas 3102 - 3108 of which the present portion
is a continuity.
सुखेशस्थितगशो वा ast वा तत्तिकोणगे।
CHEAT गते मन्दे स्वरजक्तेशमादिशेत् ॥२३१६७ ॥
3167. Fourth lord: WhenSatum arrives the sign
occupied by the 4th lord at birth, or the sign identical
with the Navamsa occupied by the lord of 4th, ora
trine to one of these two, the subject will incur royal
wrath.
जीवे सौख्यं सुभूषापति राजानुप्रहशान्तिकम् |
लक्ष्मीकयक्षमापोति गोचरे फलमादिशेत् BLES ॥
3168. When Jupiter transits one of the above
places instead of Saturn, the person will acquire
ornaments, royal mercy and the mercy of Goddess
Lakshmi (i.e. become wealthy).
अश्चिनीमखमूलेषु पापानामुदेयषु च |
तदंशे गोचरे Hk देहायासो महाविपत् ॥३१६९ ॥

52 Chandra Kala Nadi
3169. Aswini & Its Trines: Should a malefic be
in Aswini, or Makha or Moola, the period of Moon’s
transit on that degree will cause illness and great
danger.
Notes: The transit of the Moon being quite brief,
it should be properly associated with a relevant sub
period of a suitable major transit.
नुधाष्टवर्गं निक्षिप्य बिन्दुहीनेषु राशिषु |
SHAT गते सौम्ये तक्तिकोणे निशाकारे ॥३१७० ॥
अतीव क्लेशकार्याणि देहायासं विनिर्दिशेत् ।
3170 - 31701/2. Mercury’s Ashtaka Varga:
Note Mercury transiting the Rasi which has zero
bindus in his Ashtaka Varga. When the Moon’s
transit coincides in a trine to such Mercury, the
subject will experience great difficulties in his work,
illness and great danger.
अष्टमाधिपतो मन्दे पञ्चमे मिथुनांशगे ॥२१७१ Il
सोम्यपके सौम्यभुक्तो शरत्कालेऽपमृत्युमान्।
वसन्ते वा मृति चेति कृष्णपक्षे AMET ॥३१७२ |
मन्दवरेऽथ वा मृत्युः सप्तपञ्चाशदब्दके |
3171 - 31721/2. Should Saturn as the 8th lord be
in the 5th (in Libra) with Gemini Navainsa, the
subject will face untimely death in Mercury’s dasa,
Mercury sub period, inthe months of Bhadra/Asvina
(autumnal season) or Chaitra/Vaisakha (Vasanta
Ritu), in a dark fortnight, on Friday or Saturday.
Death (as against untimely death) will be at fiftyseven.
व्ययभावगते जीवे सबलेन निरीक्षिते ॥२१७२ ॥
मुद्रे प्रजातश्च देहान््ये पुण्यलोकवान् |
व्ययाधिपे मदेशांशे गुरुसंयुतवीक्षिते ॥३१७४॥
महादेवप्रसादेन पुण्यलोकं प्रयास्यति |
पश्चादुत्तमजन्मा स्यात् कृतपुण्यस्य हेतुना ॥३१७५ ॥
पशचान्मोक्षमवाप्नोति जीवन्यक्तोऽथवा भवेत् |
खेचराणां बलं पूर्णं स्थानेषूपचयेषु च ।
उपचयस्था हि सर्वेप्यायुरारोग्यभाग्यदाः ॥२१७६ ॥
3173 - 3176. (a) Jupiter in strength placed in the
12th, or in aspect thereto, denotes that the native of
Mudgara Nadiamsa willattain Heavens after quitting
his mortal coil.
(b) The lord of the 12th being related to Jupiter
by aspect orconjunctionand occupying the Navamsa
of the 7th lord’s dispositor, will also cause attainment
of Heavens due to the mercy of Lord Siva. Due to the
merits of present birth, he will next time have an
excellent rebirth. Later he will be freed from rebirths.
(c) Only those planets that are in Upachaya
houses will have full strength and can bestow health
and longevity.
Notes: Instructions noted in “a” and “b” are
clear.
(c) This is a general rule applicable to any
ascendant. Planets with strength in 3rd, 6th, 10th or
11th can promote one’s health and life span.
However based on my experience, a strong
planet in the 6th house 15 found to be a source of
misery for physical well-being.
ग्रन्थान्तरे रुद्रयामले -
लग्नात् पञ्चमे सूरये स्वसुतेन समन्विते |
तिलपिष्टाकदानेन हयदरामयनाशनम् ॥३१७७ ॥
प्रतिमां तिलपिषटेन रलयुक्तकटद्रयीन् |
त्रिणेत्रां पद्महस्तां च रक्तवस्रादि भूषिताम् ॥२१७८ ॥
अर्कस्य विधिना पूजां कृत्वा दानं समाचरेत् ॥ ३१५७९ ॥
इति गृढमिदं दानं fafee शुद्रयामले |
दानपमरच्रः -
तिलपिष्टमयं दद्यामायुरवर्षीभिवृद्धये।
amet च सुसोभाग्यं सततं देहि मे प्रभो ॥३१८० ॥
3177 - 3180. According to Rudra Yamala: If
the Sun is in the Sth house in aspect to his son (i.c.
Saturn), donation of gingili cakes will cause relief
from abdominal disorders. The image should be
obtained made of gingili cakes, with two diamondstudded hands, three eyes and covered with red robes.
The Sun God should be worshipped as prescribed by
Sastras, before donating gingili cakes. This secret is
mentioned in Rudra Yamala. This will increase the
years of life span and will grant health and give good

Deva Keralam 53
fortunes.
Notes: There is some confusion in composition
of the relevant part of the text about the image. The
God concerned is not mentioned. Three eyes do not
denote the Sun-God. Could it be of Lord Siva?
The essence of the other portion is: The Sun in
the 5th associated with Saturn is capable of causing
dangerous abdominal disorders to the extent of curtailing life-span. This can be overcome by suitable
worship of the Sun God, and donation of gingili
cakes. Gingili comes under Saturn’s domain.
एकाशीतिपदे चक्रे मध्ये सूर्यादिकं क्रमात् |
ग्रहानाराध्यकल्पोक्तविधिना दानमाचरेत् ॥३१८१ ॥
ग्रहचक्रं महत्पुण्यं देवज्ञाय प्रदापयेत् |
नवग्रहप्रसादेन त्वायुरारोग्यभाक् सुखी ॥३१८२ ॥
राजवश्यकरं whet देहारोग्यं रिपुक्षयम् |
ग्रहचक्रफलं नृणामिष्टकाम्यार्थसिद्धये ॥३१८३ ॥
3181 - 3183. The image of one white-footed
zodiac be drawn and the images ofplanets fro the Sun
on be placed therein. They should be worshipped as
prescribed by the Sastras and donations be given
away. The zodiac’s image should be donated to the
astrologer which will bring abundant merits. Due to
the blessings of the Nava Grahas, health will be
recovered and the native will earn favours of the king,
will destroy his enemies and his desires will be
fulfilled.
एकाशीतिपदं चक्र ग्रहप्रीतिकरं शुभम् |
तस्मादस्य प्रदानेन सुप्रीतो मां समुद्धर ॥३१८४॥
स्वलंकृतं पूर्णकुम्भं नवधान्योपरि शपेत् |
तन्मध्ये पूजयेच्चक्रं होमान्ते दानमाचरेत् ॥३१८५ ॥
आयुरारोग्यसोख्याप्तिरपमत्युविनाशनम् ।
इष्टकाम्यार्थसिद्धिश्च भवतीह न संशयः ॥३१८६ ॥
3184 - 3186. According to Manu: The image of
one white-footed zodiac will please the Nava Grahas.
By donation of such image longevity. health and
happiness will result, and fear of untimely death will
be destroyed. A decorated pot filled with sacred
water should be kept on the heap of fresh grains and
the zodiacal image should be placed there. At the end
of Homa (worship of sacred fire), the donation suggested should be made.
TR प्रजातस्य लग्नगे सुरपूजिते ।
तदशायां शुक्रभुक्तो WS धनागमः।
यलकार्यार्थसिद्धिः स्याद्विप्लवेन क्वचिद्व्यथा ॥३१८७ 1
मृष्टान्नपानाम्बरभूषणाप्ति
राज्यार्थभूलाभमतीव सौख्यम्
धर्यं मनोत्साहमतीव शक्तिं
कुर्यादहो पावकसनिभोऽयम् ॥३१८८ ॥
3187 - 3188. Jupiter Dasa - Venus sub period:
For one born in Mudgara Nadiamsa, predict the
following effects in the sub period of Venus during
the dasa of Jupiter. His enemies will turn into friends.
He will acquire wealth. His undertakings will bear
fruits. Some distress will occur due to disaster. He
will consume sweet food and drinks, and acquire
costly robes and jewelry. He will gain wealth and
lands and be very happy. His valour, enthusiasm and
prowess will be on the increase and alas, he will ever
be close to Fire God (1.6. he will perform Homas etc.
ona regular basis).
Notes: These two slokas, and sloka 3192 describe effects of Jupiter’s dasa, Venus sub period.
Generally favourable description is made except an
abortion to wife.
पितरस्तु मित्रस्य et तदन्यः
शतरुग्रहो वा कुरुतेऽतिदुखम् |
समग्रराज्यं सुजनैः सुपूज्यं
विद्याविनोदाश्चितराजगोष्ठीम् ॥२१८९ ॥
दयातपश्राप्तिमचिन्त्यभाग्यं
कुर्यात् प्रगल्भं जलनामकोऽयम् ॥३१९० ॥
भाग्यराशेः कालचक्रे बोधकस्य फलं वदेत् |
मुद्ररं प्रजातस्य त्रिंशेऽब्दे फलमादिशेत् ॥३१९१॥
3189 -3191. (a) A friendly planet will give

54 Chandra Kala Nadi
friendly (favourable) effects while an inimical planet
will cause grief.
(b) Jala Yoga: One will obtain kingdom, honour
from virtuous men, learning, enjoyment, moving in
royal circles, mercy (to others), penance, unthinkable
fortunes and eminence ("Pragalbha").
(Although there is an expression at the end "This
is Jala Yoga", we do not have relevant definition in
the origina). It occurs to me that the effects given are
in continuation of the ones in sloka 3188, and the
firrst half of sloka 3189 is an interruption.)
दाराधिपदशाकाले सुताधिपतिभुक्तिषु ।
गर्भस्रावातुरं भार्या देहजाड्यं विनिर्दिशेत् |
पश्चादारोग्यसोख्यापि पुत्रलाभं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥३१९२ ॥
3192. Abortion; The sub period of the lord ofthe
5th in the dasa of the 7th lord will cause abortion and
illness to the native’s wife. Later she will recover
from illness and give birth to a male issue.
कीटे च पञ्चाननकर्करेषु
शनिस्थितो भोजनभीतिदः स्यात् |
वृषटेर्भयं वातजमगिनिजं वा
तथापि चापेऽन्त्यजनेषु दुःखम् ॥२१९३ ॥
कुम्भचक्रदशाकाले शनिवक्रातिचारगे |
काश्मीरातकलदशैव दक्षिणां दिशमेष्यति ॥३१९४॥
स्वातीतरयगते मन्दे स्वर्भानो च त्रिकोणगे |
काञ्चीपिनाकिनीमध्ये देशे राजान्तरं भवेत् ॥३१९५ ॥
चोक्देशे तथा विद्यात्पाण्डयदेशेऽथवा यदि |
मण्डलाधिपते्मृत्युस्तददररे मातृनाशनम् ॥३१९६ ॥
तदभावे योगभङ्गः संचितार्थविनाशनम्।
मरणादिफलं वाच्यं तद्द्रारि स्वजनावधि ॥३१९७ ॥
3193 - 3197, Irrelevant: When Saturn transits
inScorpio, Leo or Cancer, the populace will have fear
for food (shortage) and Jack of rains, and will suffer
from windy disorders caused by “fire”. So also in
Sagittarius, he will cause grief. During Saturn’s
retrogression in acceleration in Aquarius, there will
be quarrels in Kashmir and the South. When Saturn
moves in Swathi and its two adjacent constellations
(viz. Visakha and Anuradha) with Rahu in trine, the
regions of Kanchi and Pinakini will have change of
kings. So also the kingdoms of Chola and Pandya.
(The rest of the three lines upto sloka 3197 are corrupt
entries.)
मीने तुलांशके मन्दे दशायां शुक्रभुक्तिषु |
चक्रवर्तिगृहद्ररे पूर्वशोभाधिकं सुखम् ॥३१९८॥
तन्मूलात्पोख्यमाप्नोति स्वम्रभुश्च विशेषतः।
गजाश्चयानमानादि रिष्टासिद्धिन संशयः॥२३१९९ ॥
3198 - 3199. Saturn Dasa - Venus Bhukti:
Saturnshould be in Pisces with Libra Navamsa. Then
in his dasa, and in the sub period of Venus, one will
gain more auspicious effects than earlier through the
favours of the emperor. Thereby he will be happy,
will acquire elephants, horses, conveyances and honour and will have his desires fulfilled.
गुरोस्तृतीयपर्याये मुद्ररांशे प्रजायते |
नवमादौ श्रियोऽवापििर्लाभर शत्रुभयं क्वचित् ॥३२०० ॥
द्वादशे सोख्यसन्तोषं शोभनं जन्मनोऽष्टमे |
पुत्रोत्सवं च भूषापि ज्ञातिवर्गे सुतक्षयम् ॥३२०१॥
वृश्चिके शनिदोषेण कलहो राजसं भवः।
पश्चात सोख्यमवाप्नोति राजप्रीतिघनागमम् ॥३२०२ ॥
अमूल्यवस्तुवाहादिलाभो भवति नित्यशः
लाभेशांशे तत्तिकोणे स्फुटयोगं गते गुरो ॥३२०३॥
इदमेव फलं सत्यं कर्माधिपतिदायके |
तृतीये धेनुवस्रापिर्लाभान्त्यादौ शुभाधिकम् |
मदे गुरुयुते काले मण्डलाधिपतिर्भवेत् |
तत्काले जातकस्येव हयतिपाण्डित्यमादिशेत् ॥३२०४॥
तृतीये व्याकुलं किंचित क्रूरमासे शुभावहम् |
बन्धुवर्गे मनस्तापं तत्तिकोणे विदं फलम् 13204 I
सुखे सोख्यं सुपुत्रापतिः पञ्चमे व्याकुलं महत् |
राज्ये निष्ठुरकार्याणि पश्चात् सौख्यं विनिर्दिशेत् 13208 |
3200 - 3206. Jupiter’s 3rd Round of Transit:
For a native of Mudgara Nadiamsa, during the third

Deva Keralam 55
round of transit, Jupiter will give following effects: In
the 1st and 9th, he will give wealth. Inthe 11th - there
will be fear from enemies. Happiness, comforts and
auspiciousness will prevail during his transit in the
twelfth. When in the 8th he will cause birth of a son,
acquisition of jewels and loss of a boy for one of his
kinsfolk. Due to an afflicted Saturn in transit in.
Scorpio, royal enmity will come to pass. Later happiness, royal favour and wealth will be acquired.
When Jupiter comes to-the sign represented by the
Navamsa occupied by the 11th lord, the subject will
obtain invaluable articles, conveyances etc. When
Jupiter is in the 3rd house in transit, he will acquire
cows and clothes. Inthe 11th and 12th, the planet will
give more gains. In the 7th it will bestow rulership of
a region apart from a high degree of scholarship.
Again in the 3rd there will be some distress in general,
but auspicious results will mature during the Sun’s
transit in evil signs. Jupiter ina trine to 3rd will cause
unhappiness among relatives. In the 4th, he will give
happiness and birth of a son. Transiting in 5th, the
planet will cause great distress and involvement in
blameworthy deeds. Later happiness will prevail.
Notes: Jupiter in the 3rd round giving favourable
effects while in transit on the Moon sign is noteworthy. So also bad effects while transiting the 11th from
the natal Moon.
When Jupiter transits the 8th from the Moon, as
Saturn transits the 6th from the ascendant, will cause
professional debacles.
While moving inthe 11th fromthe Moon, Jupiter
is adverse in the third round; he will be auspicious
when he moves in the sign represented by the natal
Navamsa of the 11th lord from the ascendant, that is
Mars.
Even in the 12th from the Moon, transit Jupiter
will give gains.
In the 3rd from the Moon, the planet Jupiter will
give gains apart from distress. But he will prove
favourable during the adverse movements of Saturn.
Transiting in the 7th/11th, he will cause troubles
to relatives.
While Jupiter is in the 5th from the Moon, one
should protect himself from questionable deeds.
जीवे चतुर्थपर्ययि मुद्ररंशे तु जायते |
मीनाजादौ मनस्तापं वृषभे व्याकुलं महत् ॥२२०७॥
3207. Jupiter’s 4th Round of Transit: For a
native of Mudgara Nadiamsa, the 4th round of transit
Jupiter will cause following results. In the sign Pisces
and in the initial portion of Aries, he will cause
mental agony, and in Taurus distress of a great
magnitude.
Notes: In this round, the whole of Pisces will be
adverse for Jupiter’s transit. As for Aries, with his
advancing movements, he will become mild. But
again with transit Jupiter in Taurus in the 12th, the
person will be highly troubled.
रन्धाधिपदशाकाले स्वराज्ये प्रबलो TAT |
जातकस्य फलं किचिदल्पसौख्यं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥३२०८ ॥
मुद्रसंशे प्रजातस्य दयूनाधिपदशान्त्यगे ।
PU मनस्तापं मातामहविनाशनम् 113208 ॥
प्राबल्यं मातुलस्यैव कर्माधिपतिदायगे |
स्वमातृभगिनीपुत्रप्राबल्यं चोत्तरोत्तरम् ॥३२१० ॥
3208 - 3210. In the dasa of the 8th lord one will
become powerful in his native region. But his happiness will somewhat come down. During the dasa of
7th lord mental distress to self, and destruction of
maternal grand-father will come to pass coinciding
with the Sun’s evil movements. Maternal uncles will
become mighty in the dasa of the 10th lord. A son of
maternal aunt will also incur gradual progress.
Notes: Saturn’s dasa and Jupiter’s dasa are dealt ,
with in these three slokas.
॥ सिहलगनम् शिवदांशः ॥
शिवदांशे पूर्वभागे सिंहलग्ने प्रजायते |
विप्रजन्मा सुखी नित्यं सीमन्ततनयः स्मृतः ॥३२११॥
शिवदांशे पूर्वभागे fae वगोत्तिमांशके |
THT राहुसंयुक्ते नदीप्रान्तये प्रसूतिमान् ॥३२१२ ॥
3211-3212. Leo Ascendant- Sivada Nadiamsa:
One born in the former half of Sivada Nadiamsa in
Leo ascendant will be a Brahmin and be the eldest
issue of the family. If the ascendant is Vargottama
while the 8th lord Saturn is in conjunction with Rabu,
birth will be near a river.

56 Chandra Kala Nadi
Notes: Sivada Nadiamsa rules from 16° 12' to
16° 24' in movable signs; from 13° 36' to 13° 48' in
immovable signs; and from 1° 12' to 1° 24! of
common signs.
लग्ने पापयुते जीवे भुजे वर्गोत्तमांशके |
युशरीरसुदीर्घायू राजपूज्यप्रतापवान् 113223 ॥
3213. Jupiter in 3rd: Should the ascendant Leo
be occupied by a malefic, while the 3rd contains
Vargottama Jupiter, the native will be endowed with
sound body and longevity. He will be honoured by
the king and be valorous.
fas विलने गुरुराहुयोगे
कालान्तरे दुर्बलदेहभाग्यम् |
तोयाञ्जलो सौख्यसुदीर्षमायु-
भोगी सदा मातुनृपग्रियः स्यात् ॥३२१४॥
3214, Jupiter - Rahu Conjunction: In case of
Leo ascendant, (which is Vargottama), the conjunction of Jupiterand Rahu inthe ascendant will give the
following effects. With the passing of time, the
subject will develop a weak body. He will enjoy
happiness, longevity and pleasures. He will be dear
to his mother as well as the king.
वगोत्तमं विना लग्ने जीवे veda स्थिते |
सिंहे वृषांशके जातस्याल्पायुर्दायमादिशेत् ॥३२१५ ॥
3215, Taurus Navamsa: The ascendant Leo,
not being in Vargottama, but with Taurus Navamsa
will cause short life in case of the same Jupiter - Rahu
Yoga in the ascendant.
नीचारिक्ेत्रव्गाशे सिंहे जीवेऽल्पजीवकः।
आबाल्यं क्लेशमाप्नोति मातृसोख्यविहीनवान् ॥३२१६ ॥
3216. Other Divisions: Jupiter in Leo ascendant, with debilitation/inimical divisions (not necessarily Navamsa) will cause short life. Further right
from childhood, grief will exist. The subject will be
devoid of happiness concerning mother.
fae सिंहांशगे जीवे कन्यांशे गाहुसंस्थिते |
राजद्वारे Gates पिताबाल्ये सुकीर्पिमान् ॥३२१७ ॥
सुरूपगात्रः प्रमदाप्रियश्च
सदाऽतिकामी स्वजनैश्च पूज्यः।
अधार्पिकः साहसकार्यदक्षो
बहुस्थते रिक्षणलब्धभाग्यः॥३२१८ ॥
3217 - 3218. Jupiter in Virgo Navamsa: [he
ascendant should be Leo, with Leo Navamsa. Jupiter
Rahu should be in the rising sign while Jupitershould
be specifically in Virgo Navamsa. As a result of this
yoga, the person will prosper in royal service. His
father would be famous during the native’s childhood. The native will possess an attractive body, be
fond of women, be always libidinous, be regarded by
his kinsfolk, be not righteous, be skillful in performing valorous deeds and will have the fortunes of
acquiring education in many places.
Notes: The first line of sloka 3217 is rectified in
order to get proper concept of the yoga. Further the
words “Rahu Samsthithe” should read as “Rahu
Samyuthe”.
Three simultaneous conditions should exist as
under:
1. Leo ascendant (13° 20' to 16° 401) giving the
same Leo Navamsa for the ascendant.
2. Jupiter and Rahu in Leo.
3. Jupiter in Virgo Navamsa (i.e. in Leo 16° 40'
Then the person will reap the prescribed effects.
लग्ने राहुयुते जीवे सिहांशं राजपूजितः।
कन्यांशकगते रहो लेख्यविद्याविशारदः॥२२१९ ॥
लिपित्रयप्रवीणश्च धर्मशीलसुबुद्धिमान्।
अन्तक्रोधी MTA पापी लुब्यस्वभाववान् ॥२३२२० ॥
स्वपिता राजनिकटे कार्यकर्ता विचक्षणः।
अन्तकोपयुतो रागी स्वराजजनवञ्जकः॥३२२१ ॥
3219 - 3221. Jupiter in Leo Navamsa: The
ascendant being Leo with Rahu in it, while the planet
Jupiter is in Leo Navamsa (Jupiter’s sign position not .
mentioned), will make the native honoured by the
king. Rahu in Virgo Navamsa will give skills in
writing and learning. The native will be an expert in
threc languages, righteous in disposition, intelligent,

inwardly and instantly given to anger, sinful and
miser. His father will be irascible, passionate and will
deceive the king.
लग्ने कन्यांशगे राहो रविशुक्रनिरीकषिे ।
तृष्णावभूतक्लेशी च कटिरोगेण पीडितः॥३२२२ ॥
उत्साहविपुलः कामी स्वपित्रधिकभक्तिमान् |
जातकस्य गुणं वक्ष्ये मध्ये वयसि शोकवान् 13223 ॥
बाल्ये सुखविहीनश्च धर्मशीलस्सुमूर्मिमान्।
्षमावानर्थवांश्चेव हरिशङ्रभक्तिमान् ॥३२२४॥
3222 - 3224. Rahu aspected by Sun and Venus:
The ascendant Leo should fall in Virgo Navamsa
while Rabu is in Leo in aspect to the Sun and Venus.
The results of this yoga are: Excessive thirst, diseases
of the waist, extensive enthusiasm, lust for sexual
pleasures, and a high degree of devotion to father.
Additionally, the person will incur grief inthe middle
portion of his life. He will not be happy in childhood,
be righteous, will possess an attractive physique, be
patient in disposition, rich, and devoted to Lord
Vishnu and lord Siva.
Notes: In Leo 16° 48' to 20° should rise when
Virgo will be its Navamsa. Rahu's position is in the
Rasi ascendant.
Gait तौलिके we कुरिलः पापचेतनः।
असितेन युते भोगी वातरोगेण कर्शितः 13224 ॥
सुमुखः कुशलो मन्त्री नीतिज्ञः परदारगः।
इङ्धितज्ञः सदारेषी वृषभांशकगे शनो ॥३२२६ ॥
3225 - 3226. The Moon in Libra: For a Leo
native, the Moon in the sign Libra and in the 4th from
Navamsa ascendant predict crooked disposition, and
sinful deeds. Should the Moon be conjunct Saturn,
while the latter is in Taurus Navamsa, the person will
enjoy pleasures, be weak due to windy diseases, be
fair-faced, skillful, a minister, endowed with legal
knowledge and will violate other men’s beds. He will
have the ability to differentiate between nght and
wrong, and will be imposing in nature.
मोहनांशकगे wt त्वसितेन समन्विते |
दीर्घायुषौ च पितौ कठ्प्रदयवान् पिता 132% I
Deva Keralam
वार्धके च सुभाग्यप्ती राज्ञा तुल्यसुसोख्यवान्।
मोहनांशे निशानाथे शिवकैडर्यतत्परः॥३२२८ ॥
पितृव्यत्रयमायुष्यं केचित्पक्षे चतुष्टयम् |
पितुप्वसा पुत्रवती स्वल्पभाग्यवती शुभा ॥३२२९ ॥
कालान्तरे भ्रातृशोको भर्तुः पूर्वं मरिष्यति |
3227 - 32291/2. Moon in Mohana Nadiamsa:
(a) The Moon in Mohana Nadiamsa and conjunct
Saturn will produce the following effects for a Leo
native. His parents will be long-lived. His father
would have two marriages. The person will gain great
fortunes in his old age and will enjoy comforts like a
king.
Mohana Nadiamsa may be referred to in the
notes under sloka 1599, Book I.
(b) The Moon in Mohana Nadiamsa (without
reference to Saturn) will give the undermentioned
results for one born in Leo ascendant. The person will
be devoted to serve Lord Siva. He will have three
paternal uncles endowed with long lives. According
to some it will be four. His maternal aunt’s daughter
will be endowed with sons, limited fortunes and
auspiciousness. After some interval she will lose her
brother, and will predecease her husband.
Also see sloka 3235.
fae सिंहांशगे जीवे षष्टय॑शेन समे कले ॥३२३० I
विपदांशकनादयां तु योगवान् कीर्तिमान् सुखी |
3230 - 32301/2. Jupiter 171 Leo with Leo Navamsa
while the ascendant is in Sivada Nadiamsa will
produce prosperity and fame.
Notes: “Shashtiamsena Same Kale” is not amenable to a proper translation which means longitude
(of Jupiter) equal to Shashtiamsa. Further “Vishada”
should be Sivada (Nadiamsa).
शिवदांशकगे जीवे मोहनांशे निशाकरे 3232 I
शिवकर्यशजातस्य पितरो च चिरायुषो |
भेदश्रातृयुतो मानी सुजीवति पितामहः॥३२२२ ॥
भेदभ्रातृसुतशान्त्ये पितामह्या तु पोषितः।
पत्रिणी पतिभक्ता च ग्येष्ठभ्रातृप्रिया शुभा ॥३२२२॥
मध्ये पतत्केशयोगा पुत्रनारेन करशिता।

58 Chandra Kala Nadi
बहुभाग्यवती भर्तभूषिता सुगुणा सती ॥२२३४॥
3231 - 3234. Jupiter - Moon: These two planets
in Sivada and Mohana Nadiamsas respectively will
bless the native’s parents with long life-spans. He
will have a step-brother and be honourable. His
paternal grand-father will be endowed with longevity. His step-brother's son will in the end be brought
by his paternal grand-father. The native’s daughter
will be a devoted wife, be affectionate to her elder
brother, will incur loss of hair, will lose her son, be
very fortunate, adore her husband, chaste and be
virtuous.
Notes: In sloka 3232, first line, “Sivakaryamsa
Jathasya” is redundant.
मोहनांशकगे we त्वसितेन समन्विते |
मातामहो दीर्घजीवी मातुर्माता तथेव च ॥३२३५॥
3235, Maternal Grand Parents: For one born
with the Moon in Mohana Nadiamsa in conjunction
with Saturn, predict long-living maternal grand parents.
Note: See also sloka 3227 - 32291/2.
मोहनांश स्वजननी भ्रातृत्रयसमन्विता।
्रातृभाग्येन संतुष्टा भूषिता स्वसुताप्रिया 13236 ॥
स्वभेदपुत्रभायदिर्रषेणात्यन्तकर्शिता |
कालान्ते गृहं fat भ्रातृनाशेन करिता ॥३२२७॥
3236 - 3237. Mother Described: (The Moon) in
Mohana Nadiamsa (without reference to Saturn etc.)
will give the following effects concerning the mother
of a Leo native. She will have three brothers and will
be happy with her prosperity. She will adore ornaments and be fond of her daughter. Due to the
repugnance of her step-daughter-in-law, she will be
emaciated. After some interval, she wil] have a
broken home. Her brothers will be destroyed.
मेषांशे मकरे सौम्ये सुखे भानो धटांशगे।
सिहलग्ने प्रजातश्च मातुलत्रयवान् सुखी ॥३२३२८ ॥
Ta मोहनांशे पूर्वभागे च जायते |
मातुलत्रयमायुष्यं केचित्पक्षे चतुष्टयम् 13238 ॥
दारिद्ग्रेण मातृवंशे दुःखिता मातृसोदरी |
एका सुमङ्गली पूता क्लेशिता च तथापरा ॥३२४० ॥
जीवत्येका मातृप्वसा केचित्पक्षे फलं त्विदम् |
3238 - 32401/2. Maternal Uncles: Leo ascendant with Aries navamsa, a benefic in Capricom, and
the Sun in the 4th with Aquarius Navamsa - this yoga
will give three maternal uncles. According to some
other authorities, the native of Mohana Nadiamsa
will have three maternal uncles with long life-spans,
or even four. The native’s maternal relatives will be
in the grip of poverty. His maternal aunt will be in
grief; another maternal aunt will have long-lived
husband, be chaste. Another one will be in distress.
Only one maternal aunt will be long-lived.
शिवकर्यशनाइयां तु पूर्वभागे च जायते ॥२२४१ I
स्वमातुसोद्रश्चष्टौ द्वित्रिस्कयाश्चरायुषः।
चन्द्रस्य BH वर्गे TS यावकलर्युते ॥३२४२ ॥
TAG स्वमातुश्च जायन्ते भ्रातरस्तथा |
सूर्यस्य aes वर्गे पितुश्चापि तथा फलम् ॥३२४३ ॥
3241 - 3243. Sivakari Nadiamsa: The motherof
one bor in the former half of Sivakan Nadiamsa will
have eight sisters out of whom only two or three will
be long-lived. The number of brothers the native’s
mother will have will correspond to the bindus in his
Moon’s Ashtaka varga. So also from the Sun’s Ashtaka
Varga respecting father’s coborn.
Notes: All of a sudden, Sivakari Nadiamsa features in these two slokas, without reference to the
ascendant. Apparently the ascendant is Leo.
Sivakari (not Sivaasivakari as appearing in col 5
of the table concerned in Book I) rules thus: from 26°
0! to 26° 12' in movable signs; from 03° 48' to 04° 0
in immovable signs; and from 11° 0' to 11° 12' in
common signs.
योजये त्सपितृव्यदेः फलानि परिचिन्तयेत् |
पितृव्याधिपतो सोम्ये सिहारूढे प्रभांशके ॥३२४४ ॥
लग्ने वा पापसंयुक्ते पितृव्यो द्वो द्विभार्यको |
3244 - 32441/2. Paternal Uncles: See if the 11th
lord Mercury is in Leo in Prabha Nadiamsa with a
malefic. If so,the person’s paternal uncles will have
two wives.

Deva Keralam 59
Notes: Again Leo ascendant, Sivada Nadiamsa
is resumed.
Prabha Nadiamsa extends thus: from 3° 0' to 3°
12' in movable signs; from 26° 48' to 27° 0' in fixed
signs; and from 18° 0! to 18° 12' in common signs.
शिवदांशे पिता बाल्ये व्येष्ठभ्रातृविहीनवान् ॥३२४५ ॥
कनिष्ठत्रयमायुष्यं सहोदरिसमन्वितम् |
3245 - 32451/2. Sivada Nadiamsa - Father: For
a birth in Leo ascendant in Sivada Nadiamsa, predict
that the father would lose his elder brotherin his early
years. He would have three younger coborn including
a sister.
पूर्वभागे पितृव्यो at स्वपिता च द्विभार्यवान् seve ॥
वन्ध्यापती दरौ भवतः कालान्तरफलं स्मृतम्।
दारान्तरे सुतप्राप्तिः कन्खरद्रयमायुषम् ॥२ २४७ ॥
3246 - 3247. Sivada Nadiamsa - Leo Ascendant: If birth be n the former half of this Nadiamsa, the
native will have two paternal uncles. His father will
have two marriages. The said maternal uncles will
have barren wives. They will remarry and beget
progeny. Their wives will be long-lived.
सुतेशे पापसंयुक्ते त्रितये शनितारके ।
एकः पितुव्यमध्ये तु मृतसन्तानयोगवान् ॥२२४८ ॥
3248. The lord of the 5th with a malefic in one
of the 3 Nakshatras ruled by Saturn denotes that the
person will have one paternal uncle who will have a
yoga for obtaining dead progeny.
Notes: I do not personally subscribe to the view
of Nakshatras being ruled by planets (as per Vimsottan
scheme). Yet the above is the exact rendering in this
regard.
सूर्याशरारिगे मन्दे ware केतुसंस्थिते |
पापिनौ च पितृव्यौ द्रौ मातुलो भवतस्तथा ॥३२४९ |
3249. Relatives Sinful: Saturn should be in the
Rasi represented by the Sun-occupied Navamsa. |
Ketu should be in conjunction with the Moon in
Navamsa. In that case, two maternal uncles and two
paternal uncles will indulge in sinful deeds.
स्वपितृव्यफलं चिन्त्यं मातुलस्य तथा वदेत् ।
पापी जन्मदशानाथे कामेशसहितः सुखे ॥३२५० !
अरिष्टं मातृवंशस्य हिसया मातुलस्य च ।
मातामहस्य सन्तापो ज्वरोपद्रवपीडितः॥३२५१ ॥
तदभावे मातुलस्याप्यरिष्टमिति चादिशेत् |
तदोषपरिहारार्थं शानि कुर्याद्विचक्षणः॥२२५२ ॥
SRST कृत्वा राहुशानिि च कारयेत् |
नागपाशप्रदानेन मातृवंशे शुभं स्मृतम् ॥३२५२ ॥
3250 - 3253. Maternal Kinsfolk: So should be
decided about paternal and maternal uncles. If the
first dasa lord is a malefic, is conjunct the 10th lord
(Venus) and be in the 4th, there will be danger to
maternal relatives. Particularly a maternal uncle will
undergo great deal of troubles. Maternal grand father
will be distressed and will incur dangerous fever in
absence of which, the maternal uncle will be the
victim. To overcome this blemish, suitable remedies
be undertaken. Recitation of Mantras to please Mars,
and appeasement of Rahu be done. (Further) by
donating "Naga Pasa” (Varuna’s weapon), auspiciousness will prevail in the maternal families.
मोहनांशगते चन्द्रे पितृवंशो न दोषभाक् |
मातृवंशे स्वल्पदोषो जन्मदाये पितुर्व्यथा ॥३२५४॥
PAS जन्मदाये लग्नाधिपतिभुक्तिषु |
जातकस्य प्रपीडा च जननीव्याकुलं महत् ॥२२५५ ॥
3254 - 3255. The Moon in Mohana Nadiamsa:
This position of the Moon will not cause any blemish
to paternal relatives, but some blemish in maternal
families. However, the native’s father will be distressed in the native’s first dasa. He himself will be
troubled in evil months (Sun’s adverse transit) in the
first dasa and in the sub period of the lord of the
ascendant (i.e. the Sun).
SY तुलांशगे सूरये बालारिष्टं न विद्यते ।
तदीशो बलपूर्णशचेद दीर्षमायुरभविष्यति ॥३२५६ ॥
3256. The Sun in Aquarius: For a birth in Leo
ascendant, the Sun in Aquarius with Libra Navamsa
will not constitute Balarishta (or infantile mortality).
If his dispositor Saturn is strong, predict longevity.

60 Chandra Kala Nadi
AT चन्द्रे पञ्चग्रहयुते सति |
सर्याशकफलेनेव पितरौ सोख्यजीविनो ॥३२५७॥
3257. Parents Long-lived: If the Moon joins
five planets and be in own sign or own Navamsa, the
native’s parents will be long-lived.
सर्यलग्नाधिपे स्वोच्चे काव्ये च गुरुवीक्षिते।
शिवदांशे प्रजातस्य स्वपिता शिवभक्तिमान् ॥३२५८ ॥
शिवकेड्यधर्मात्मा प्रातृ्ात्रीसमवन्तिः।
शिवतत्वरसाभिज्ञो देवब्राह्मणपोषकः॥२२५९ ॥
3258 - 3259. For birth in Leo ascendant, the
Sun’s dispositor should be in exaltation while Venus
is in aspect to Jupiter. As a result, the native’s father
will be devoted to Lord Siva and will perform acts
relating to worship of Lord Siva. He will be charitable, will have brothers and sisters, will honour
Brahmins and Gods and will have knowledge of
literature related to Lord Siva.
wae पित्ररष्टं षोडशाब्दे व्यये शनो ।
द्रादशब्देऽपमृत्युश्च शान्त्या शानि प्रयास्यति ॥३२६० ॥
एकोनविंशे ae द्वादशे षोडशे तथा |
शिवदांशे पूर्वभागे पित्ररिष्टं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥३२६१॥
3260 - 3261. Sivada Nadiamsa - Leo ascendant: Should Saturn be inthe 12th house, the 2nd dasa
will bring danger to father. 12th or 16th or 21st year
may cause father’s untimely death for which remedies should be done.
दविपष्टिवर्षपर्यन्तं जननी चिरजीविनी |
द्िपञ्चाशेऽपमृल्युश्च तदर्धे वा प्रपीडिता ॥३२६२ |
अपमृल्युभयप्रापिर्मातृभावफलं स्मृतम् |
3262 - 32621/2. The native’s mother will live
upto 62. She may be untimely endangered in her 52nd
year or half of it (26th year).
लाभेशांशे तत्तिकोणे स्फुटेयोगं गते शनो 13263 ॥
' लाभैशदृष्टिरशो वा माता देहप्रपीडिता |
मातृवंशजनारिष्टं तत्काले नात्र संशयः॥२२६४॥
जननीव्याकुलं चेति योजयेत्कालवित्तमः।
3263 - 32641/2. Sickness to Mother: When
Saturn transits the Rasi identical with the Navamsa
position of the 11th lord (Mercury), or the sign
aspected by the 11th lord, the native’s mother will
incur sickness. It will cause distress to mother and
evil to her kinsfolk.
शिवदांशकगे जीवे मोहनांशे निशाकरे ॥३२६५ ॥
तुधभुक्तो चिरायुष्यसरप्रजाबहुलाभवान् ।
अल्पपुत्रफलप्राप्पिेकभार्यायुतः सुखी ॥३२६६ ॥
3265 - 3266. Progeny: Fora Leo native, Jupiter
in Sivada Nadiamsa, and the Moon in Mohana
Nadiamsa will cause many long-lived daughters.
Male issues will be limited. He will have only one
wife (meaning combinations for remarriage will be
nullified).
Tart जन्मदाये शिवदांशे प्रजायते |
Jews केचितपक्षे द्विभार्यवान् ॥२२६७ ॥
दारद्रये सुपत्रापिर्नरवाहनभाग्यवान् |
कालान्तरे द्विभार्यश्च पितृवात्सल्यवान् सुखी |
षष्ठाधिपदशाकाले रन्धराधिपतिभक्तिषु |
वित्तलाभेशभुक्तो वा ज्येष्ट्रातृविनाशनम् ॥३२६८ ॥
3267 - 3268. Other Authorities: According to
other authonities, the native of Sivada Nadiamsa in
Leo will have long-living step-brothers. The person
may have two wives, virtuous sons and men-borne
conveyances. He will be dear to his father. His elder
brother will be destroyed in one of the sub periods,
viz. of the 8th lord, 2nd lord and 11th lord, during the
major period of the 6th lord.
सुताधिपदशाकाले सुतेशांश्त्रिकोणगे ।
स्फुरयोगं गाते मन्दे भेदध्राता प्रपीडितः॥३२६९ ॥
मन्ददाये सौम्यभुक्तौ भोमस्याप्यन्तरे तथा |
Yemen पीडितो वा पितृव्यो वां प्रपीडितः॥२२७० ॥
3269 - 3270. Step-brother: During the sub
period of the 5th lord when Satur arrives in transit
the Rasi represented by the Navamsa position of the

Deva Keralam
Sth cord, the person’s step-brother will be troubled
(or endangered). This effect can also come to pass
during Saturn Dasa, Mercury sub period. Saturn dasa,
Mercury sub period can alternatively trouble the
native’s paternal uncle.
शुक्रान्ते सर्वदाये स्वपिता बहुभाग्यवान् |
मन्दान्तरान्तरे वापि USAR मनोव्यथा ॥३२७१॥
3271. Venus Sub Period: In any dasa, the sub
period of Venus favourable for Leo native’s father
bringing prosperity. Similarly Saturn sub period (in
any dasa) will cause difficulties for father in royal
तत्तद्धावाष्टमेशांशदशायां वा स्वभुक्तिषु।
तत्तद्धावप्रपीडादि योजयेत्कालवित्तमः॥२२७२ ॥
3272. General Clue: Take a Bhava. The dasa of
the lord of the 8th therefrom will adversely affect that
bhava in his very sub period.
Notes: This is a general rule. It is not restricted
to Leo alone.
The major period of the 8th lord from a given
Bhava will adversely affect the Bhava concerned.
While in some cases, this holds good in some it does
not. Sufficient skill is needed to apply this aphorism.
In case of Aries, the 3rd is Gemini. The 8th lord
therefrom is Saturn whose dasa can cause troubles to
one’s brother. For this ascendant, Sth house is Leo.
Jupiter is the 8th lord from Leo. His dasa affecting
progeny may not be that simple.
Similarly the reader can work out details for
other ascendants.
लग्नातृतीयगे मन्दे स्वोच्चे पूर्णबलान्विते ।
निशाकरेण संयुक्ते सोदख्रयमादिशेत् ॥२३२७३ ॥
भगिनीद्रयमायुप्यं तवोरेका सुजीवति |
कालान्तरे मातृनाशः सन्तानोत्पत्तिनाशवान् ॥३२७४॥
तदोषपरिहारार्थं शान्ति कुर्यात् प्रयलतः।
शिशुमारपरदानेन पुत्रायुर्वद्धिमादिशेत् ॥३२५७५ ॥
3273-3275. Saturn in the 3rd: For Leo ascendant, Saturn endowed with full strength in the 3rd
house in the company of the Moon will give three
(younger) brothers. Two sisters will be long lived.
After some time, mother will be destroyed. Children
born to him will not survive. To overcome this evil,
remedies be performed following which children
will be endowed longevity.
MAA मन्दे यस्यां ASAT प्रजायते |
तस्य पूर्णफलं सत्यं प्रत्यक्षं देवकेरम् ॥३२७६ ॥
3276. One born in Sivada Nadiamsa will obtain
full effects of Saturn’s position in the 3rd house. The
results given in Deva Keralam will be directly experienced. |
॥ मकरलग्नम् - (काल्ठिकशः)
काल्िकांशे पूर्वभागे मकरे तु प्रजायते |
शुद्रजन्मा सुखी नित्यं द्वितीयोऽयं प्रकीर्तितः ॥३२७७ ॥
अथवा च तृतीयः स्याज्ज्येष्ठभ्रातृविनाशवान् |
पितुः समीपे जननं नाच्छवेष्टनमादिशेत् ॥२२७८ ॥
3277 - 3278. Capricorn Ascendant - Kalikz
Nadiamsa: The native of first half of this Nadiamsa
will be a Soodra, 2nd or 3rd issue of the family and
will be destructive for his older brother. His fathe1
will be present at the time of his birth. During birth,
the child will be entangled in umbilical cord.
Notes: The subject belonging to Kalika
Nadiamsa’s first half in Capricorn ascendant cannot
be the first issue of the family. He will be either the
2nd or 3rd issue only.
His older brother/s will die prematurely.
His birth will be with some complications. There
will be no such complication if the conditions laid
down in sloka 3285 are available.
Kalika Nadiamsa rules as under: from 14° 2410
14° 36' in movable signs; from 15° 24 to 15° 36' in
fixed signs; and from 29° 24' to 29° 36' in common
signs.
ऋक्षेशेश्ितषष्टयंशे काक्िकांशे प्रजायते |
पूर्वभागे Suda बाल्ये देहप्रपीडितः॥३२७९ ॥
3279. He will have a thin body and will have
physical ailments in childhood.
Notes: “Rukshesekshita shashtiamse” means the
Shashtiamsa aspected by the Moon and is not a

62 Chandra Kala Nadi
sensible term. Hence excluded in the rendering.
वनान्ते पुरे वापि रम्यनूतनमन्दिरं ।
भाग्यकाले प्रसूतिश्च र्तव्णकृशाकृतिः॥३२८० ॥
3280. His birth will be in an auspicious time, in
a forest region, orin a town, He will be blood-red in
complexion.
Note: “Bhagyakale” meaning auspicious time
need not be given any specific importance. Such
expressions are a product of mere poetic freedom.
उत्तरांशे नदीप्रान्त्ये काठिकापुरमन्दिर ।
पितुः परोक्षे जननं farts प्रसूतिमान् ॥२२८१॥
स्वपिता मात्रिकः कामी नानदेशेषु संचर् |
अरोगद्ढगात्रश्च क्तेशजीवनवान् पिता ॥२३२८२ ॥
3281 - 3282. Second Half: The native of second
half of Kalika Nadiamsa, Capricorn ascendant, will
be born near a temple dedicated to Mother Kah, ina
dilapidated house, near the region of a river, with his
father not being on the spot. His father will be a
Mantrika (sorcerer), be libidinous, will wander in
many countries (or regions), will have a healthy and
sturdy body, but will be short of means of living.
TURK SHY TAT प्रजायते |
पितुर्मातुश्चिरायुष्यं भ्रातृरात्रीसमन्वितः॥२२८२ ॥
3283. According to other sources, the parents of
the native of second half of Kalika Nadiamsa, Capricorn ascendant, will live long. The native will be
endowed with brothers and sisters.
पूर्वभागे विदां ज्ञानी वेदिकाचारवान् सुधीः,
राजसेवापये नित्यं देवब्राह्मणधक्तिमान् ॥३२८४॥
3284. Former Half; One born in this half of the
said Nadiamsa will be learned, wise, will follow
Vedic conduct, be intelligent, intent upon serving the
king and will be devoted to Brahmins and Gods.
लग्ने गुरुयुते दष्टे लमेशे स्वोच्चराशिगे |
यस्यां नाड्यां प्रजातस्य नारदोषो न विद्यते ॥३२८५॥
3285. Easy Birth: Should Jupiter be related to
the ascendant by occupation or aspect while the lord
of the ascendant (Saturn) is in exaltation, the child
will not be entangled in umbilical cord.
नीचे नीचांशके Te षष्ठभावस्थिते wet
जन्माब्दे मातुलक्लेशं भाग्यनाशं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥३२८६ ॥
3286. Maternal Uncle: Should the Moon be in
debility in Rasi as well as Navamsa while Saturn is in
the 6th house, the native’s first dasa will be an index
of troubles and destruction concerning maternal uncle.
Notes: Saturn in Gemini in the 6th while the
Moon is in Vargottama in Scorpio will cause the said
effects. The Moon in this case will be in the 6th from
the ascendant lord, Saturn.
काक्िकांशस्य दोषेण मातृवंशेऽप्यरिष्टकृत् |
पितृवंशे महत्सौख्यं पितृव्यादिशुभावहम् ॥३२८७॥
कालिकांशे फलं चेति पितृसोख्यं विनिर्दिशेत्
3287 - 32871/2. Related Families: Due to birth
in Kalika Nadiamsa, Capricorn ascendant, evils will
prevail in maternal relatives’ families while great
happiness will occur for paternal relatives. His father
will also be happy.
Notes: This apparently relates to first half of the
subject Nadiamsa. The second half of the subject
Nadiamsa will give troubles to father.
प्रहोच्चे काल्ठिकंशे तु Arras निशाकरे ॥३२८८ ॥
गुरुदृ्टियुते भोगी fares सुभाग्यवान् |
3288 - 32881/2. Third Dasa: Birth in Kalika
Nadiamsa while the Moon is in own sign in aspect to
Jupiter will cause a great deal of prosperity in the 3rd
dasa.
Notes: “Grahochche” refers to an exalted planet,
presumably in the ascendant. Why then a direct
reference to Mars is not made is not understood, as he
is the one that exalts in Capricorn.
To avoid confusion, this term is not included in
the rendering.
अष्टमाधिपतो लगने शुभां शुभसंयुक्ते ॥३२८९ ॥
काल्ठिकांशे पूर्वभागे बालारिष्टभयं क्वचित् |
जन्मदाये द्वित्रिवारं सम्पद्याये स्वभुक्तिषु ॥२२९० ॥

Deva Keralam 63
बालारिष्टभयं चेति शान्त्या शानित प्रयास्यति |
बालारिष्टनिरासाय राजतं चन्द्रमर्चयेत् ॥२३२९१॥
कांस्यपात्रोपरि स्थाप्य दानं कुर्यद्विचक्षणः।
निर्मितां तु सुवर्णेन रक्तवस्रेण वेष्टिताम् ॥३२९२ ॥
रवेश्च प्रतिमां दद्यादायुरारोग्यवृद्धये |
3289 - 32921/2. Infantile Mortality & Remedies: For birth in the first half of Kalika Nadiamsa,
the 8th lord in the ascendant in a benefic’s Navamsa
and in the company ofa benefic will cause Balarishta
or infantile mortality. For two or three weeks in the
first dasa, orin the firstsub period ofthe 2nd dasa, this
fear will exist. To overcome this, worship of animage
of the Moon god made of silver placed ona bell-metal
vessel and the image of Sun-God made of gold robed
with red apparels be done. Donations after worship
should be given away. Following these measures,
health and longevity will improve.
रनधराधिपस्य दोपार्थं स्वगृहयोक्तविधानतः॥२२९२ I
जपहोमादिकं कृत्वा दानं कुर्याद्विचक्षणः।
काठ्ठिकांशे पूर्वभागे मकरे रविसंस्थिते ॥३२९४॥
रविशान्तिवशारोग्यं बालारिष्टं न विद्यते |
राजतप्रतिमादानं सवसं ARIES ॥२३२९५॥
दानेन सौख्यमाप्नोति देहपुष्टिकरं सुखम् |
पूर्वभागे प्रजातस्य शान्ति यलेन कारयेत् ॥३२९६ ॥
मातुलादिसुसोख्यापिर्बालारि्टं न विद्ये |
3293 - 32961/2. To overcome the blemish of the
8th lord, suitable remedies be done at home and
charities be given away. For birth in former half of
this Nadiamsa, pleasing the Sun-god will remove
Balarishta. To please the Moon god, silver image of
the Moon God be donated following which maternal
relatives will be happy and the native’s Balanshta
effects will vanish.
Note: These measures are a repetition of sloka
उत्तरंशे प्रजातस्तु बाल्यमारभ्य सोख्यवान् 132809 I
क्लेशजीवनवांशेति भ्रातृभरात्रीसमन्वितः।
रन्धेशाक्रान्तरयाशीशे चोच्कषेप्रे बलान्विते ॥३२९८ ॥
लग्नाभावगते जीवे शुभांशे देर्ध्यमायुपः।
पापांशे पापसंदृष्टे त्वल्पायुर्दायमादिशेत् ॥३२९९ ॥
3297 - 3299. Second Half: (a) For a native of
second half of Kalika Nadiamsa, Capricorn ascendant, childhood will commence with happiness (without Balarishta). He will be endowed with brothers
and sisters and will have a difficult calling.
(b) If the dispositor of the 8th lord is exalted and
strong while Jupiter occupies ascendant with a benefic Navamsa, the subject will enjoy longevity.
(c) If the said Jupiter placed in the ascendant is
in a malefic’s Navamsa, life-span will be limited.
Notes: (a) Professional upheavals are indicated
in this case.
(b) The Sun’s dispositor should be exalted. Jupiter though in debility in the ascendant should be in
a benefic’s Navamsa. With these two conditions lifespan will be long.
(c) Short life will come to pass if Jupiter in
Capricorn ascendant is in a Navamsa of a malefic
planet.
नवांशगे तथा विन्धाद्योजयेत्कालवित्तमः।
मृतावस्थं गते चन्द्रे BY पापवीक्षिते ॥३२०० ॥
शुभटृष्टिविहीने च बालरिषटं विनिर्दिशेत्
गुरुदृष्टियुते BS शुभग्रहसमन्विते 113302 Il
जीवे कामगते वापि बालरिष्टं न विद्यते |
3300 - 33011/2. Infantile Mortality: (a) If the
Moon js in extremis and be in Scorpio Navamsa,
without a benefic’s aspect, infantile mortality will
exist in case of birth in the 2nd half of the said
Nadiamsa.
(b) The Moon begetting the company of Jupiter
and being with another benefic or if Jupiter is in the
7th, this blemish will not exist.
Notes: (a) A planet is said to be in extremis or in
a dead state ifitis inthe last six degrees ofan odd sign,
or in the first six degrees of an even sign. To get
Scorpio Navamsa, remaining in extremis, the Moon
should be in Gemini, Libra or Aquarius only.
(b) The Moon joining two benefics - repeat two

64 Chandra Kala Nadi
benefics - including Jupiter will give longevity to a
Capricorn native; alternatively, Jupiter alone tn
Cancer will be sufficient.
लग्नस्थानगते जीवे चद्धार्को गुरुवीकितो 113302 I
कालिके पूर्वभागे मर्ये हालाहलां शके |
रक्ताङ्गसमगात्रश्च विशालाक्ष. मुनासिकः॥२३३०३ |
बाल्ये तु श्वासरोगी च पारश्ववायुप्रपीडितः।
तृतीयाब्दात्परं सौख्यं पञ्चमाब्दात्परं सुखी ॥३३०४॥
देहपष्टिसुखौख्याप्पि्रितीयाब्दे महाविपत् |
3302 - 33041/2. Paralysis & Breathing Disorders: Note if birth is in the former half of Kalika
Nadiamsa in Capricorn ascendant. In that case Jupiter should be in the ascendant aspecting the luminaries (the Sun and the Moon). The Sun should be in
Halaahala Shashtiamsa. This yoga will cause the
following effects. The person will possess a bloodred and symmetric body, broad eyes and a charming
nose. During childhood, he will suffer from breathing
disorders and paralysis. In the 2nd year he will be
greatly in danger. After 3rd or Sth year he will be
happy with a strong physique with sound health.
Notes: There is no Shashtiamsa as Halaahala
(great destructive poison emerged at the time of
churning Milk Ocean by gods and demons, and
swallowed by Lord Siva). There is however Garala
(poison) Shashtiamsa which extends from 4 deg ()' to
4 deg 30' of odd signs, and from 25 deg 30' to 26 deg
0' of even signs. Perhaps our author used this synonym.
raat विलमनेशे स्वोच्चे भृमिसुतेक्षिते 113304 I
वमुवर्षात्परं सोख्यमतिनाल्ये मुखान्वितः।
मिताशी भोगशीलश्च दाता कीर्तिसमन्वितः॥२२३०६ ॥
शिवभक्तिरतो नित्यं लेख्य्याविद्याविशारदः।
पञ्चाक्षप्रियो मानी नामकीर्तनशीलवान् ॥३३०७॥
द्रष्टा च शतचद्धाणां गोरीशप्रियधार्मिकः।
परोपकारवात्नित्यं स्वपित्रधिकबुद्धिमान् ॥३२०८ ॥
मातुलद्रयवान् रागी पितृव्यद्रयभक्तिमान् |
पितृप्वसेका माद्गल्यबहुप्रवती शुभा ॥३३०९ ॥
3305 - 3309. Saturn & Mars: Saturn in own
sign, own Navamisa or in exaltation in aspect to Mars
will cause a happy childhood. The person will be
happy after eight, in particular. He will eat limited
food, will be given to enjoyment of pleasures, be
charitable, famous, devoted to Lord Siva, be skillful
in writing and learning, be fond of Panchakshari
Mantra, be disposed to sing the praise of the Lord, and
be honourable. He will be attached to Lord Siva, be
charitable, be helpful to others, be passionate and will
be more intelligent than his father. He will have two
maternal uncles and two paternal uncles and be
attached to latter two. He will have a paternal aunt
who will have a long-living husband and be auspicious for the family.
Soe पूर्वभागे मातुलश्चप्यपत्रवान् |
तयोरेकस्य पूत्राप्तिमातुर्माता चिरायुषी 3320 ॥
पितामही तथा विन्यात्पितृव्यौ च सुभार्यक |
3310 - 33101/2. One particular maternal uncle of
the personborn inthe former half of Kalika Nadiamsa
in Capricorn ascendant (without reference to Saturn
and Mars above) will be childless. Another wil] have
ason. The native’s maternal grand-mother will be
long-lived. So also paternal grand-mother. His paternal uncles will have good spouses.
काल्िकांशे पूर्वभागे जामिप्रेऽमरपूजिते 113322 I
पितृव्यत्रयमायुप्यं दर कलत्रे सुजीवतः।
एको वन्ध्यापतिश्वेति दारान्तरसुपुत्रवान् 113322 ॥
पितृव्याणां तु यः क्चिद्राजद्वारे सुपृजितः।
अन्तकपरवान् रागी लोभप्रकृतिमान् गुणी ॥३३१३ ॥
परोपकारवातनित्यं देवत्राह्मणपोषकः।
दारद्रये सुपुत्रापिर्वाजिवाहनवान् सुखी ॥२२३१४॥
जनकं च तथा विन्धाद्प्रातृत्रयसुपूजितः।
कालान्ते Mat विभागे मनसो व्यथाम् ॥३३१५ ॥
जन्मदाये पितृव्यश्च सन्तानोत्पत्तिसौख्यवान् |
विचिद्रव्याकुलकार्याणि पश्ात्सोख्यं शुभाशुभम् ॥३३१६ |
3311 - 3316. Jupiter in the 7th: For birth in first

Deva Keralam 65
half of Kalika Nadiamsa, Capricorn ascendant, Jupiter in the 7th will give following effects. Three of the
native’s paternal uncles will be long-lived. One of
their spouses will be barren and the uncle concerned
will remarry and obtain a son. Through the good
offices of a paternal uncle, the subject will earn
honours in royal circles. The native will be inwardly
cunning, passionate, miserly and virtuous. He will be
helpful to others and honour Brahmins and gods. He
will have three brothers, two wives, good children
and horse-drawn conveyances. He will incur enmity
with brothers after some interval and undergo a
family division and distress thereof. During his childhood, a paternal uncle will beget a son. The uncle in
question will be initially grieved (on other counts) but
be later on happy.
कालिकांशे जन्मदाये पूर्वभागे प्रजायते |
पितृव्योद्राहसोख्यापिः सन्तानोत्त्तिमान् सुखी ॥३२३१७ ॥
स्वजन्मदेशे नृपतिरन्तिशिद्रमवापनुयात् |
द्वितीयन्दे महत्सौख्यं शत्रुनाशात्परं सुखम् ॥३३१८ ॥
पितृव्यश्च सुसन्तोषी सन्तानोत्पत्तिसोख्यवान् |
सचिवस्य स्थानलाभं राजप्रीतीकरं शुभम् ॥२२३१९ ॥
3317 - 3319. First Half- Kalika Nadiamsa: For
a native of Capricornascendant, in this part, the first
dasa will cause marriage to a paternal uncle and birth
of a child. The country's ruler will undergo many
difficulties(?). The native's paternal uncle will be
happy, will obtain progeny. The minister will gain
lands and will please the king(?) The native’s second
year will be of great comforts.
Note: The clues regarding the king and minister
may be ignored as not relevant.
“Happiness after destruction of enemies” is inconsistent in this part of the text.
मकरांशे तुलामन्दे यस्यां नाड्यां प्रजायते |
जन्मदाये त्वनावृष्टिलिकि धान्यक्षयो भवेत् 11332 ॥
पौष्णश्रवणहस्ता्द्रभरणीवायुभेप्वपि |
wae दु्भिक्षभयदः स्मृतः॥३३२१ ॥
3320 - 3321. Irrelevant: Saturn in Libra with
Capricorn Navamsa in case of birth in this Nadiamsa
causing famine, loss of grains etc. are irrelevant to a
person’s horoscope and should be ignored.
ay मन्दे मदे जीवे कुलीरांशे स्थिते सति।
रूपवान् स्वकुले दक्षो विप्रो वाग्मी विचक्षणः॥३२२२॥
नृत्तगीतकलाभिज्ञः सदा हास्यसभाप्रियः।
दुरालोचनवान्नित्यं स्वजनप्रियकार्यवान् ॥३२२२ ॥
गणितज्ञो नीचसेवी प्रामभूम्यधिकारवान् |
देशान्तरे सुभाग्याप्पिन्तन्रे कार्यसाधकः 1332 I
3322 - 3324. Saturn & Jupiter: Saturn in Libra
while Jupiter is in Vargottama in Cancer in the 7th
will make the native charming among his family
members. He will be skillful, learned (Vipra denotes
a person who is especially learned in theology),
eloquent in speech, discerning in disposition, will
have expertise in dancing, singing and arts, be ever
fond of jokes, will have constantly evil designs in
mind and will perform such acts that will please his
men. He will be an expert in mathematics and will be
in the service of (or will be associated with) mean
men. He will have lordship over lands and villages.
His prosperity will be ina foreign land. He will bean
achiever.
arora पूर्वभागे दशमे शनिसंस्थिते।
वनान्तरपुरे वासी कुत्सितप्रभुसेवकेः॥३३२५॥
aera मानी पुत्रीपुत्रसमृद्धिमान्।
3325 . 33251/2. Saturn in 10th: IfSatum (alone)
is in the 10th (without Jupiter in Cancer as stated
earlier), the subject will live in a town betwixt forests
and will serve a mean king. He will have two virtuous
wives and be endowed with sons and daughters.
Notes: The difference between Saturn alone in
the 10th on the one hand, and Saturn in 10th while
Jupiter is in 7th in Vargottama should be advantageously noted by carefully studying the effects given
in slokas 3322 and 33251/2.
जीवे धनुषि कन्यायां द्वितीये सप्तमेऽपि च ॥३२२६॥
असितेन युते दृष्टे कव्खद्रयनाशम् |
अकोंद्राहयुतशचेति सर्वनाडीफलं वदेत् ॥३३२७॥ ,

66 Chandra Kala Nadi
3326 - 3327. Birth in former half of Kalika
Nadiamsa in Capricorn ascendant while Jupiter is in
Sagittarius will be that of a girl who will be the 2nd
or the 7th issue of the family. Jupiter aspected by, or
being in conjunction with, Saturn will destroy both
the wives (referred to earlier).
areal पूर्वभागे विक्रमे खेचस्रये।
सोदराः पञ्च चत्वारि प्रातुत्रययुतः सुखी ॥३३२८ I
भगिन्येका सुमाङ़ल्या मध्ये प्रातृविनाशवान् |
दीर्घायुषी च अननी भ्रातृनाशे करिता ॥३२२९॥
Tut काल्छिकांशँ जनि रोगपीडिता |
पूर्वभागे सदा क्लेशी सम्पद्याये ज्वरार्दितः॥३२३३० ॥
पितामहविनाश तथा मातामहस्य च।
मातुलारिष्टशेकेन जननीव्याकुलं महत् ॥२२३२३१ ॥
3328 - 3331. Three Planets in the 3rd: In case
of birth in Kalika Nadiamsa, Capricorn ascendant,
three planets located in the 3rd house indicate the
following. The native will have 3, 4, or 5 brothers.
One sister will have long-living husband. The middle
brother will be destroyed. Mother will be long-lived
but she will be emaciated due to loss of her brother.
According to other authorities, the native’s mother
will be troubled by sickness. The subject will be
always in grief, and be troubled by fever. His paternal
` and maternal grand-fathers will be destroyed. Due to
death of his maternal uncle, his mother will be greatly
in grief.
द्विभार्यो मातुलश्चैव व्ययेशांशगते शनो | |
कालान्तरे सुतप्रापिर्मातुलस्य फलं सृतम् ॥२२३२ ॥
3332. The native’s maternal uncle will have two
wives if Saturn is found in the 12th lord’s Navamsa
(i.e. Jupiter’s Navamsa which is Pisces/Sagittarius)
and will obtain a son after a long interval.
उत्तरां प्रजातस्य वंशोऽपि क्रीयते TAT |
पूर्वभागे सोष्यकाले रवौ हालाहलांशगे 13333 ॥
पितृव्यवंशवृद्धिश्च द्राविंशाद्रातिभोगवान् |
स्वजन्मदेशनृपतिर्बहुकालं सुजीवति ॥३३३४॥
पितृव्यस्नेहमूलेन बहुस्रीपुत्रसोख्यवान् |
सप्तविशात्परं भाग्यं स्वप्राबल्यं महत्सुखम् 13334 ॥
विद्यावान् युक्तिमांश्ैव सदा शिवपुराणवित् |
कालान्तरे चित्तशुद्धि जनप्राबल्यामापनुयात् ॥३३३६ ॥
पञ्चादशे विवाहश्च षोडशाब्दे पितुरविपत्।
चन्द्रलग्नाष्टमाधीशदशायां पापभुक्तिषु ॥३३२३७ ॥
सुखेशांशगते मन्दे गोचरे पितृनाशनम् |
रन्धररशो पितृव्यस्य देहायासफलं स्मृतम् ॥३२३३८ |
तदभावे जन्मदाये राजन्यजनवेरवान् |
पश्चादायोग्यसौख्यापििर्दशासन्धौ मनोव्यथा ॥३३३९ ॥
3333 - 3339. Family Lineage: One born in the
second half of Kalika Nadiamsa will not have his
lineage grow (i.e. will be childless). The Sun in
Halahala Shashtiamsa will help the paternal uncle of
the native of former half Kalika Nadiamsa grow his
family. Further the native will enjoy many pleasures
after 22 years ofage. The king of his country will live
10112) The native through his paternal uncle will
enjoy comforts of many women and children(?) His
prosperity will increase after 27 and he will be much
happy. He will be learned, will be ingenious, knowledgeable about Siva Purana. His marriage will occur
in the 25th year. His 16th year will endanger his
father. The sub period of a malefic in the dasa of 8th
lord from the Moon could (also) endanger the father.
(Or) When Saturn arrives at the sign represented by
the Navamsa occupied by the 4th lord, father will be
destroyed. Saturn moving in the 8th sign will cause
sickness to the native’s paternal uncle. In the absence
of this effect, the native will incur royal enmity in his
first dasa. Later he will recover health and be happy.
In the junction period of first and second major
periods, he will be distressed.
Notes: Certain irrelevant hints relating to the
king etc. are found in the text above which may be
expunged,
For Halaahala Shashtiamsa. see notes under
sloka 3302 - 3304 supra.
्षमदाये पित्ररिष्टं तुलान्त्ये वृश्चिके शनो |
तक्तिकोणे देहपीडां पितृव्यारिष्टमादिशेत् ॥३२४० ॥

Deva Keralam 67
पश्चादागेग्यसोख्यं च भम्यर्थगृहसंयुतम् |
सम्पदाये काकिकांशे पितृव्येको मरिष्यति ॥२३४१॥
पितृव्यपुत्रसोख्यापिः स्वराजेद्राहसं ्रमः।
मण्डलाधिमतेर्मतयुतुलानते वृश्चिके शनौ ॥२३४२ ॥
3340 - 3342. The fourth dasa will endanger his
father. When Satum is in the end of Libra or in
Scorpio, danger to father’s brother be foretold. After
Satum quits this zone healthy condition will prevail.
The native will gather lands, houses and wealth. In
his 2nd dasa, one of the paternal uncles will pass
away. Saturn लात of Libra orinScorpio will destroy
the king(?)
प्रभुस्थानाष्टमाधीशस्फुटयोगं गते शनो ।
स्वजन्मदेशे नृपते राज्ये विप्लवमादिशेत् ॥२३४२ ॥
तक्तिकणे फलं वाच्यं योजयेत्कालवित्तम्ः।
दशासन्धो मनस्तापं ज्ञातिवरगे विचारकृत् ॥३२४४॥
तदभावे मातुलस्य सोदरभ्रातृनाशनम् |
अपमृत्युभयप्राप्तिः शान्त्या शान्ति प्रयास्यति ॥२२४५ ॥
3343 - 3345. Add the longitudes of 10th and 8th
lord. When Saturn comes to the resultant sign or a
trine thereof predict revolt against the ruler of the
country(?) In the junctions of two major periods, the
subject will be in distress and his kinsfolk will be
endangered. In the absence ofthis, his maternal uncle
will be in grief due to loss of his brother. To overcome
this untimely demise, remedies be done.
कर्मे मन्दे कषेमदाये सेतुस्नानफलं ART |
विपदाये मुखी नित्यं द्विवारं राजविप्रहम् ॥२२४६ ॥
तृतीयकोशे लिखितं सत्यं सम्यग्विचार्यताम् ॥३३४७ ॥
3346 - 3347. Saturn in the 10th will promote
bathing in Sethu in the 4th dasa. The native will be
happy in the 3rd dasa. For two weeks he will incur
royal enmity. Rest have been written in the 3rd
chapter (in the original consulted by the author.)
Fagor - (aa) ॥
समांशे चोत्तरे भागे सिंहलगे प्रजायते |
विप्रजन्मा सुखी नित्यं द्वितीयोऽसो प्रकीर्तितः!
अथवा च तृतीयश्च पश्चादभ्रातृविहीनवान् ॥२३४८ ॥
3348. Leo Ascendant - Sama Nadiamsa: One
born in the second half of this Nadiamsa will be a
Brahmin, be the 2nd or 3rd issue of the family and be
devoid of after-born.
Notes: Sama Nadiamsa in movable sign extends
from 20° 48' to 25° 0'; in fixed signs from 9° 0' to 9°
12'; and in dual signs from 5° 48' to 6° 0.
पूर्वभागे WES पश्चाद भ्रातृसमन्वितः।
समांशे चोत्तरे भागे लग्नेशे कर्मरशिगे ॥२२३४९ ॥
3349. First Half: One belonging to this part of
Sama Nadiamsa in Leo will have after-borns. When
the ascendant lord is in the 10th, incase of second half
of this Nadiamsa —— (results not mentioned).
पूर्वभागे प्रजातश्च TTA प्रसृतिमान् |
महानदीप्रान्त्यदेशे विण्वालयसमीपगे ॥३३५० ॥
पर्वपश्चिमवीथीषु हतर शे न संशयः।
3350 - 33501/2. Birth: Birth will be 16478 river
close to a temple of Lord Vishnu in case of first half
of Sama Nadiamsa. It will be in an east-west spread
street in case of second half.
समांशे चोत्तरे भागे सिंहलगने प्रजायते ॥३२५१ ॥
द्रे भगिन्यो सुमद्गल्यो मानी ज्यष्ठयुतो भवेत् |
पूर्वभागे प्रजातस्य भगिन्यौ द्वै वितन्तुके ॥३२५२ ॥
3351 - 3352. Co-born: (a) One born in the
second half of Sama Nadiamsa in Leo will have two
sisters both of whom will have long-living husbands.
The native will be honourable and will have an older
brother.
(b) Should the birth be in the first half, the person
will have two sisters both of whom will be (early)
widows.
समांशे चोत्तरे भागे सिहलगे प्रजायते |
स्वमातुदीर्घमायुप्यं बाल्ये पितृविनाशनम् ॥३३५३ ॥
पूर्वभागे प्रजातस्य पितुरदीर्घायुरादिशेत् |
सुते राहुदशाकाले भाग्ये चांशगते सति ॥२३५४॥
समांशे चोक्ते भागे स्वभूक्तो पितृनाशनम् |

Deva Keralam 69
3365. Irrelevant: The end of the dasa of the
Moon will give troubles to the king and will cause
lack of rains and famine in the country.
लग्ना्र्मगते सूर्ये यु्मांशे बुधसंयुते |
समांशगे प्रजातश्च कोपी किप्रप्रसादवान् ॥२३६६ ॥
POAT रागी लग्नेशे वृषभांशगे |
भगिनीद्यमायुप्यं ज्येष्ठभ्राता सुजीवति ॥३३६७॥
तथा च योगशालिन्यौ द्र भगिन्यौ भविष्यतः।
3366 ~ 33671/2. Sun - Mercury Conjunction:
For birth in Sama Nadiamsa, if the Sun is in the 10th
house, joining at the same time Mercury in a dual
Navamsa, the person wil] be given to anger and be
pleased instantly; he will have two wives and be
passionate. Instead of dual Navamsa, if the Sun so
placed joins Mercury in Taurus Navamsa, there will
be two long-living sisters and a long-living older
brother. The two sisters will enjoy abundant prosperity.
Notes: The Sun in this case in 8 dual Navamsa
denotes two wives to the native, while in Taurus
Navamsa two sisters are indicated, instead of two
wives. Thus the Sun in Taurus eliminates the possibility of a second marriage. A shrewd astrologer can
profitably understand different uses of Navamsa.
Also see sloka 3371 infra.
समांशे चोक्ते भागे स्वपिता चेङ्धितङ्ञवान् ॥२२६८ ॥
सुमुखः कुशलो भीरर्विद्याकीर्वियुतो भवेत् |
जातकस्य गुणं वश्ये श्यामवर्णः सुबुद्धिमान् ॥३२६९ ॥
परोपकारनिरतो लिपिद्रयसुवाचकः।
आस्तिकः सर्वधर्मज्ञो वदान्यो दृढसोख्यदः॥२२७० |
3368 - 3370. (a) Father: The father of the native
of second half of Sama Nadiamsa in Leo ascendant ts
described thus. He will be skilled in the interpretation
of internal sentiments by external gestures, be charming faced, skillful, timid, learned and famous.
(b) The Native: Now the native’s qualities are
explained. He will be black-bodied, intelligent,
helpful to others, learned in two languages, a believer
in God, learned in all religions, liberal (or eloquent)
and will have firm happiness.
लग्नेशे कर्मराशिस्थे युग्मांशे बुधसंयुते |
समांश चोत्तरे भागे किंचिल्लुन्धस्वभाववान् 13392 ॥
3371. Sun - Mercury Conjunction: The Sun in
the 10th house, joining Mercury in a dual Navamsa,
will make the native of second half of Sama Nadiamsa
somewhat miserly.
Note: Also see sloka 3366 - 33671/2 supra.
समांशे adit सौम्ये तेजस्वी बुद्धिमात्रः।
सुमुखः कुशलो भीरु्विद्याबुद्धियुतः सुखी ॥३२७२ ॥
3372. Mercury in 10th: The native of Sama
Nadiamsa of Leo with Mercury in the 10th house will
be splendorous, intelligent, charming, skillful, timid,
learned and happy.
सुखाधिपदशाकाले TA च प्रजायते |
दराविशाब्दात् परं चेति द्वितीयोद्राहयोगवान् ॥३२७३ ॥
3373. Second Marriage: For a native of Sama
Nadiamsa, the dasa of the 4th lord (or) the period after
22 years of age will cause second marriage.
मीनत्रिकोणगे जीवे समांशे चोत्तरांशगे ।
गोचरे तौलिके जीवे पुत्रलाभं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥२३७४ ॥
जीवे कीटान्त्यगे काले चापान्त्ये मकरेऽथवा।
पुत्रलाभं विजानीयात् समांशे नात्र संशयः॥३२७५ ॥
3374 - 3375. Birth of a Son: When Jupiter
traverses the sign Libra, the native of second half of
Sama Nadiamsa in Leo will gain a son. Or when the
transit is in the end of Scorpio or in the end of
Sagittarius or in (the whole of) Capricorn.
Note: The first line of sloka meaning “Jupiter in
transit in Pisces or its trine, for the native of Sama
Nadiamsa, second half” is not supported by relevant
effect/s.
समांशे चोत्तरे भागे feet प्रजायते |
पुत्र्यं चिरायुष्यं पुत्रिका च तथा भवेत् ॥३२७६ ॥
कनिष्ठभार्यासुतभाग्यवृद्धि
समांशनाडीजनकस्य पुण्यम् ।
सुदीर्धमायुरमुनयो वदन्ति
SRY जननी चिरायुः ॥२३७७ ॥

70 Chandra Kala Nadi
3376 - 3377. Other Effects - 2nd Half of Sama
Nadiamsa: One born in this degree of Leo ascendant
will beget the following effects. He will have two
long-living sons. So also daughters. The prosperity
of his second wife’s son will be on the increase, and
his father will be a meritorious person. The native
will have a long lease of life, so also his mother.
Notes: The first expression relating to long life
is attributable to the native and not to the father. See
sloka 3353 -3357 where itis stated that the father will
die in childhood while the mother will be long-lived.
षेमतारादशाकाले गोचरे मिथुने शनो ।
सिहायनगते सूर्ये मात्ररिष्टं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥३३७८ ॥
्र्यक्तरादशाकाले क्रूरेधग्रहान्तर |
teamed प्रकुर्वीत शानत कुर्याद्यथाविधि ॥३२३७९ ॥
3378 - 3379, Mother: When the said native will
be in his fourth dasa, coinciding with Satum’s transit
in Gemini, and the Sun in six signs from Leo, the
native’s mother will be endangered. She will fall
(seriously) sick for which remedies be resorted to.
sured विलमेशे कर्मे युग्मांशके स्थिते |
समांशे प्रजातश्च स्वमताचारधर्मवान् ॥२३८० ॥
पञ्चविशात्परं भाग्यं स्वप्राबल्यं धनागमम् |
3380 - 33801/2. Sun in Aquarius: For Leo
ascendant, Sama Nadiamsa, the Sun placed in
Aquarius with a position in dual Navamsa (i.e. in
Sagittarius, Pisces or Gemini Navamsa) will cause
prosperity after 25 years of age. The person will
follow the codes prescribed for his religion. He will
earn wealth and will have greatness.
समांशे चोत्तरे भागे सिहलग्ने प्रजायते 113322 ॥
कामेशे व्ययराशिस्थे गुप्तकामातुरो भवेत्|
निषिद्धदिवसे काले स्वदरिप्वतिकामुकः॥३३८२ ॥
3381 - 3382. Saturn in 12th: The person belonging to the 2nd half of Sama Nadiamsa, Leo ascendant
with Saturn, the 7th lord, placed in the 12th house,
will have secretive lust. He will join his spouse on
prohibited days (like Amavasya, Ekadasi, and on
days of Sraaddha, i.e. days of annual rituals to dead
ancestors).
समांशे त्वचरे लगने हयत्तरांशे प्रजायते ।
लाभेशे रविसंयुक्ते सोदद्रययोगवान् ॥३३८३ ॥
महानदीतीरपुरे निवासं
योगं वदेद् यस्य स्मांशजस्य |
अतीव सौख्यं मुनयो वदन्त
विपदशान्त्यादिषु भाग्यवृद्धिम् ॥३३८४॥
्रत्यग्दाये महत्सौख्यं चत्वारिंशे महत्सुखम् |
द्विचत्वारिशतः पश्चाद्योगवान् कीर्तिमान् सुखी ॥३२३८५ ॥
समांशे त्वचरे लगने प्रत्यम्दाये दशान्ते |
अपमृत्युभयप्राप्तिः शान्ति कुर्याद्यथाविधि ॥३२८६ ॥
3383 - 3386. Immovable Ascendant - Sama
Nadiamsa; Should the 11th lord be with the Sun one
born in the 2nd half of this Nadiamsa will have two
brothers, will live ina town neara great river, will be
abundantly happy and will attain great progress inthe
end of the 3rd dasa. So also in the Sth dasa, and during
the fortieth year. Following 42, his prosperity will
(further) increase. He will be famous. His fifth dasa
will cause untimely danger for which remedies be
done.
Note: These clues apply to Taurus, Leo, Scorpio
and Aquarius ascendants.
समांशे चोत्तरे भागे सिहलग्ने च संस्थिते |
उत्तरांशे प्रजातश्च wae सुजीवति ॥३२३८७ ॥
समांशे चोत्तरे भागे पूर्व ब्राह्मणजन्मवान् |
पश्चाज्जन्मान्तरं विन्द्यात् समांशे मात्र संशयः॥२३३८८ ॥
पश्चाज्जन्मान्ते APA गुरुनिरीभ्षिते
विप्रकाले फलं सत्यं प्रत्यक्षं देवकेरठम् ॥३२८९ ॥
3387 - 3389. Leo Ascendant: One born in the
2nd half of Sama Nadiamsa in Leo ascendant (as
against an immovable ascendant in general as above)
will live upto fifty-six. He would have been a Brahmin in the previous birth, so also will he be in the next
birth. Should Jupiter aspect (the 12th), he will attain
final emancipation in the next birth. The effects
described in Deva Keralam for Sama Nadiamsa will
bear truth.

Deva Keralam 7]
॥ तुलालग्नम् -(निवृत्यं्ः) ॥
निवृत्यंे तुलालगे पूर्वभागे प्रजायते ॥२३३९० ॥
वैश्यजन्मा सुखी नित्यं द्वितीयो भवति धृवम् ।
महानदीप्रान्यदेशे शिवालयसमीपगे ॥३३९१॥
पूर्वभागे प्रजातस्य THAT संशयः।
3390 - 33911/2. Libra Ascendant - Nivruthi
Nadiamsa: One bornin the former half of this degree
will belong to traders’ community and be the second
issue of his family. His birth will be neara temple of
Lord Siva near a river.
Notes: Nivruthi (or Nivriti) Nadiamsa in movable sign spreads from 19° 48' to 20° 0'. In case of
fixed signs, the area is from 10° 0' to 10° 12"; and in
common signs from 04° 48' to 05° 0’.
| निवृत्यंशे पूर्वभागे लगनेशे रविसंयुते ॥३२९२॥
तुलालगे प्रजातस्तु ACI TELAT |
SHA प्रजातस्य नदीप्रान्तये न AT: 113393 ॥
लग्नेशे भाग्यराशिस्थे निवृत्यंशे प्रजायते |
3392 - 3393. With the ascendant lord Venus
conjunct Sun, one belonging to first half will have his
birth near a river. So also the one belonging to second
half.
पूर्वभागे प्रजातश्च भित्नभ्रातृविहीनवान् ॥३३९४॥
पश्चादभ्रातृयुतो मानी भगिन्येका FART |
3394 - 33941/2. Venus in the 9th: The native of
former half of Nivruthi Nadiamsa, Libra ascendant,
will not have a step-brother with Venus in the 9th, but
will have (full) after-borns. He will be honourable.
His sister will have a long-living husband.
भ्रातृस्थानाधिपे जीवे लग्नात् केन्धरत्रिकोणगे 13384 I
निवृत्यंशे प्रजातश्च बाल्ये भ्रातृषिनाशवान् |
3395 -33951/2. Destruction of Brother: Should
Jupiter ruling the 3rd house be in an angle or ina trine
counted from the ascendant, the native will lose his
brother in his childhood.
रविराहुयुते मन्दे तदीशे सुत्राशिगे ॥३३९६ ॥
निवृत्यंशे प्रजातस्य बालरिषटं न विद्यते |
PRET पूर्वभागे लग्नेशे भाग्यराशिगे ॥३३९५७॥
तुलालगने प्रजातस्य बालरिष्टं न विद्यते |
3396 - 33971/2. Infantile Mortality: Should
Rahu, Sun and Saturn be in one sign while their
dispositor is in the Sth (Aquarius), there will be no
blemish of infantile mortality. Similar effect will
come to pass when Venus Is in the 9th. These apply
to birth in former half of Nivruthi Nadiamsa, Libra
ascendant.
FIST तुलालमे HAT व्ययराशिगे ॥३२९८ I
पूर्वभागे प्रजाश्च भ्रातृमूलात् सुसोख्यवान् |
स्वपितामहभाग्याप्तिभरतरीभ्रातृजनेर्युतः ॥२२९९ ॥
तदाकोद्यानधर्मात्मा बहुमित्रातमवत्सलः।
3398 - 33991/2, Lord of 10th in 12th: With the
10th lord in the 12th house, (i.e. the Moon in Virgo)
the native of former half of Nivruthi Nadiamsa, Libra
ascendant will be greatly happy through his brothers.
His maternal grand-father will be prosperous. The
native will be endowed with brothers and sisters. He
will be charitable constructing tanks and gardens. He
will have many friends and be affectionate to his
kinsfolk.
पितृस्थानाधिपे सौम्ये गुरुसंयुतव॑क्षिते ॥३४०० ॥
निवृच्यंशे प्रजातस्य पितुदीर्षायुरादिशेत् |
शनिद्धितीयपर्ययि गोचरे वृषभे शनो ॥२४०१॥
पित्ररिष्टं विजानीयात् पूर्वभागे न संशयः।
foster, परं भाग्यं मात्ररिष्टात् परं सुखम् ॥२४०२ ॥
3400 - 3402. Father: The 9th lord Mercury in
aspect to or conjunction with Jupiter will give a long
lease of life to father. In his second round when Saturn
comes to Taurus, danger to father will occur. The
person will prosper after father’s death. He will be
happy after mother’s death.
निवत््य॑शे पूर्वभागे त्वपरा्धे महत्सुखम् |
निवृत्य पूर्वभागे दारेशे सुतराशिगे ॥२४०३ ॥
कालान्तरे विवाहः स्याद्राल्ये विघ्नयुतो भवेत्
निवृत्तये पूर्वभागे सुतेशे धनराशिगे ॥२४०४॥

72 Chandra Kala Nadi
प्रत्यग्दाये सुतप्रापििरदवत्रिस्क्या सुजीवति |
PrP तुलालग्ने पूर्वभागे तु जायते ॥२३४०५ ॥
वार्धकेषु सुसोख्याप्पिर्मिवृत््यंशे न संशयः।
Pree चरे लम पूर्वभागे प्रजायते ॥३४०६ ॥
अष्टषष्टिसमे मृत्युः पश्चातदुत्तमजन्मवान् |
लग्नाडीफलं सत्यं प्रत्यक्षं देवकेरर्छम् ॥३४०७ ॥
3403 - 3407. Other Effects: (a) Birth in first half
of Nivruthi Nadiamsa of Libra will cause happiness
in the second half of the native’s life.
(b) Should the 7th lord be in the Sth house, this
native will get married after a long time; during his
young age, he will face obstacles for marriage.
(c) Should the 5th lord be in the 2nd house, the
subject will beget a son in the fifth dasa (that is very
belatedly). He will have two or three long-living
children. He will be happy in his old age. He will die
at sixty-eight following which he will have an excellent rebirth.
Results quoted from Lagna Nadiin Deva Keralam
will bear truth.

Deva Keralam
।वेडुरेशप्रणीतम् ॥
॥देवकेरकम् (चद्धकलानाडी) ॥
।द्वितीयो भागः॥
Deva Keralam
(Chandra Kala Nadi)
Part Two
by Venkatesa
अभिवन्द्य मतङ्खाख्यं श्रीमद्वडुटनायकम्।
काश्यपो वेद्भटेशोऽहं फलं वक्ष्यामि भूभुजाम् ॥१॥
1. I, Venkatesa, belonging to Kasyapa 6018,
respectfully salute Lord Venkateswara, the Glorious, and narrate effects (of astrological combinations) for the (pleasure of the) king.
Notes: For the part from sloka 1 above till the
end, 1.६. sloka No.4775 appearing hereafter, the
author's name is givenas Venkatesa. The name of the
author in the earlier portion is noted as Achyuta. We
do not know whether it is the same author with a
different name, or an entirely different author. But
the language used in the original seems to be from one
and the same person.
In the present context, the Gorra of the author is
given as Kasyapa and hence he was a descendant of
sage Kasyapa.
[Kasyapa was a mythical sage, husband of Aditi
and twelve other daughters of Daksha. By Aditi, he
was father of Adityas and of Maha Vishnu. By his
other twelve wives, he was father of demons, Nagas,
reptiles, birds and all kinds of living things. He was
one of the seven Great Rishis (Sapta Rishis) and 11651
of Parasu Rama and Lord Sri Rama Chandra.]
The author Venkatesa was apparently enthused
bysome royal patronage to compile the present work.
He should not be confuséd with Sarvartha
Chintamani's author, Venkatesa Daivagna, who in
fact belonged to Bharadwaja Gotra.
Lord Venkatesa invoked by our author is an
incarnation of Lord Vishnu and resides on Spatagins
the Seven Hills, in Tirupati
दुरात्मनां न वक्तव्यं भूपतीनां विशेषतः।
न देयं दुष्टशिष्याय नापुत्राय कदाचन ॥२ ॥
न देयाऽस्मिरचित्ताय धर्मिष्ठस्य महीभुजः।
देवज्ञो विजितक्रोधः सत्यवाननसुयकः॥३ ॥
2 ~ 3. This science should never be told to wicked
souls, particularly who are rulers. Nor should itever
be passed on to wicked students, nor to those that are
childless or fickle-minded. The astrologershould be
one who has won anger, is truthful and is nd of
jealousy.
शुचो रहसि देशे च स्थित्वा मोनी हदीश्वस्।
भावानालोच्य सकलान् यथावञ्च फलं वदेत् ॥४॥
4. One should occupya cleanspace, inaccessible
to others (i.e. one should remain immune to disturbances), and silently pray the lord of his heart, i.e. his
family deity. Aftera study of the Bhavas, everything
(relevant) should be declared (in respect of a given
horoscope).
चक्रं चतुर्विधं जञेयमाद्यमोदयिकं स्मृतम्|
द्वितीयं प्रकृताख्यं तु विकृताख्यं तृतीयकम् ॥५ ॥
Wea चतुर्थख्यमेवं चक्रस्य निर्णयम् |
बाहयद्रादशलग्नाद्रा चक्रमोदयिकं भवेत् ॥६ ॥
प्रकृतेर्वेपरीत्येन साध्यं विकृतिचक्रकम् ॥७॥
अथ राशिदशामाह -
विषमभेषु प्राचीनी प्रवृत्तिः परं वृत्तिरपरेषु सूत्रम् |
अथान्ते समग्रयेण | स्वस्थे द्वारं सुतस्थे जन्मस्वामियुक्तराशेः।

74 Chandra Kala Nadi
द्रादशवर्षात्मिका दशा le ॥
स्वामिनि सप्तमे, दशवर्षातमकेषु तनो क्वचिदोजे भावान्तदशान्तम् |
युग्मभावान्तमीश्वरात् |
एकेकराशिरेकेकं वर्षराशिदशां नयेत् ॥९ ॥
दशं द्वादशधा विभव्यं ओजयुग्मानुसारेण क्रमव्यु्रमाभ्या भुङ्ते |
5 - 91/2. Note: The concept given here is not full
and thus not clear. Unless relevant sutras are supplied, the meaning is difficult to grasp. The author
quite briefly introduces Jaimini's school.
From Sri I. Rangacharya's Jaimini Sutramritam
necessary quotations and clarifications for this part of
slokas help our job.
Firstly the relevant original portion is fully reproduced below as our author's Sutras are incomplete.
"Chakram Chaturvidham gneyam aadyam
audayikam smritham /
Dwiteeyam thu _—prakrithaakhyam
vikruthaakhyam truteeyakam |
Graha chakramchaturthakhyam evam chakrasya
nirnayah |
Bhaavaa dwaadasa lagnaadyaah krama
maudayikam bhaveth /
Yatra krama vyutkramaabhyaam gananam
thvojha yugmayoh /
Prakrutyaakhyam hitachchakram yatra
yugmauyjha yosthathaah |
Gananam tadvikruthaakhyam
chakramathochyate /
Lagnaadheesam samaarabhya choththaroththarathah sthithaan |
Gnaatwa grahaan chara vasaadraaseen chakra
kramenavai |
Grahaa evam hi bhaavaah syuh lagna vittadi
sangnitaah /
Evam navasu bhageshu vinyasya navasah
grahaan /
karma sthaane apilagnesa nyasya laabhedhana
sthitham |
Vyayethu shahsta rasistham vinyasyokta
vidhaanatah |
Graha chakramitham proktham phala gnanaaya
surtbhih // ^
graha
This relates to computation of Jaimini Dasa and
is a general yardstick for the various kinds of special
Dasas enunciated by the sage. For odd signs, viz.
Aries, Gemini, Leo, Libra, Sagittarius and Aquarius
the counting is in the straight ascending order. For
even signs, viz. Taurus, Cancer, Virgo, Scorpio,
Capricorn and Pisces, the counting is to be reversed.
This method of counting, that is in straight order for
odd signs and in reverse order णि even signs, is called
Prakrutt Chakra. |
Sometimes a converse method is to be adopted.
To wit, the counting is in the reverse order in case of
odd signs, and in straight order in case of even signs.
This is called Vikruti Chakra.
Whether odd sign or even sign, the counting is
universally in straight order. This is called Audayika
Chakra.
The 4th one is Graha Chakra, This is to be
counted, in a straight manner as per the rules prescribed, from the sign occupied by the lord of the
ascendant. The next planet inthe Rasichartis the 2nd
Bhava, its next is the 3rd Bhava. This way after
exhausting the 9 Bhavas with 9 planets, the lord of
the ascendant himself becomes the 10th bhava, the
2nd again becomes the 11th bhava, and the sixth
becomes the 12th Bhava.
From the Rasi of the Dasa concerned, the number
of signs counted up to the sign occupied by the lord
of the Dasa Rasi, minus one, will be the number of
years of the dasa. The Dasa years will never exceed
12. If the dasa lord is in the 7th from the dasa Rasi,
consider 10 years. The dasa years divided by twelve
will yield the durations of the various Buktis. According the Rasi being odd or even, the distribution
should be in direct or reverse order.
आयुर्दायनिर्णयः -
AAMT लमेन्धोर्तग्नहोरयोः।
सर्वदायुः परिग्राह्य विसंवादे तु कालतः॥१० ॥
तरयाणां भित्रभावे च लमनहोरकृतं स्मृतम् |
दिवामानं रतनिमानं जञात्वा प्रत्यकं द्वादशधा पिभज्य ओजयुग्मानुमेण
जन्मलग्नस्योजक्रमेण युगे oR इष्टजन्मकालघरिका यल्लगनं
भवति |

Deva Keralam
तदुक्तमभियुक्तैः -
साधद्विघरिकाकाला दिवारत्रिप्रमाणतः।
विभज्य लग्नं प्रत्येकं होरा द्वादशधा भवेत् ॥११॥
चरे चरे fet gant स्थिरे दरद्रस्थिरोभयचराः।
दीर्घमध्यात्पमायुषाः।
चरे चे स्थिरे दरनद्रमिति आयुर्विनिश्चयः॥१२॥
चरे जन्मलग्ने चरे दीर्घायुः। तत्र होरप्रथमभावे अतिदीर्घम् |
चरमभावे तु TIME मध्ये अनुपातः॥१२॥
अथ मध्यपायुर्विषये -
ROT जन्मलग्ने होरलगने स्थिरे मध्यमम्
तत्रापि प्रथमभागे पूर्णम्। अन्त्यभागे न्यूनम् |
एवमदृषटमेव द्रष्टव्यम् | अनुपातेषिदं द्रष्टव्यम् ॥१४॥
होरालग्नं ferent कृत्वा एकैकांशस्य ष्रशद्विनाटिका एकैकवत्सराः।
एवंप्रकरेण यावन्तोऽनुभगा गताः तावतां भागानां तत्तदायुश्रदा
Fell: |
तदुक्तमभियुक्तैः -
Way: Pie षटूषष्टिमध्यमं तथा ।
त्रयसिंशद्धवेदल्पं तत्तमध्येऽनुपाततः॥१५ ॥
धर्मे मोक्षे चिरयुष्यमान् धर्मकामे च मध्यमः।
धर्मे घने च स्वल्पायुरधमे भोगे गतायुषः॥१६ ॥
अस्यार्थः -
लगनचतुर्थत्रिकोणराश्योरमोक्षनाम । तृतीयत्रिकोणराशयो भोगना-
मकाः। भोगकाम इति पर्यायः। लग्नधनत्रिकोणराशयो घर्मनामानः।
लगनत्रिकोणराशयो धर्मनामानः। लग्नघनतृप्रीयचतुर्थतल्तिकोणराशयो
धरमार्थकाममोषसंजञाः क्रमेण द्रादशराशिषु लभन्ते ॥१७॥
ware समारभ्य षरिकाभिस्तु पञ्चकम्
उदयादिवि नाडीभिरयुर्लगनं प्रकल्पयेत् ॥१८ ॥
अस्यार्थः -
चन्द्रो यसिमत्रवांशे वर्तते, तदंशराशिमारभ्य सूर्योदयादिजन्मकालघरिकापर्यन्तम् एकैकांशस्य पञ्चपञ्चधरिकाक्रमेण उदययक्रवशेन गणने
यलगनं लभ्यते तदायुर्लग्नमित्या चक्षेत | तस्मत्नायर्लग्ने सपादघटिका
परिमितवशात् यावन्त अनुभूतस्तान् पूरवोक्तचद्रंशकराशिमारभ्य
एकांशस्य एकेकराशिक्रमेण जननसमये यल्लगं भवति तदायुर्लग्नं
भवति। तदायुर्लनं धर्मेशचतुर्थाशराशो मोक्ष पूर्णम्। ange
धर्मेचतुर्थाशराशो धर्मे अत्पतरमित्युपलक्षणम्।
एवम् अथ काममोक्षयोरपि चतुर्थाशसंख्यावशेन पूर्णमध्यात्पायुर्घा-
तव्यम्। आयुरनर्णयप्रकारमाह -
अष्टमेशस्थितो राशिर्होरलग्नमुदाहतम्।
लगनाधिपस्थितो राशिर्लग्नमित्यपि केचन ॥१९ ॥
लगनाधिपे कारके सति आयुर्दायं विशेषतः,
अन्यथा अष्टमेशस्थितो राशिरिति पूर्वश्लोकं कर्तव्यम् ॥२० ॥
वृषभे मिथुनं wi वृश्चिके चापमादिशेत्।
सिंहे च कन्यका रन्धं कुम्भे तु Tet विदुः॥२१॥
स्थिरलमे प्रसूतानां तततत्सप्तममारभ्य अष्टमं द्रष्टव्यम् |
अतित्यकारकलक्षणम्। -
भावेशाक्रान्तरयशीशो अरिसनधरान्तरगो भवति तदा ATT: |
यस्य भावस्याधिपति यत्र राशौ वति |
तस्याधिपतिस्तस्य भावान्तरस्य कारकः ॥२२॥
खण्डनिर्णयः
लग्नमारथ्य चतुर्थराशीनां यः संख्याक्रमः स प्रथमखण्डः। उपरि
चतुर्णां राशीनां यः क्रमः स द्वितीयखण्डः। उपरि चतुर्णां राशीनां
संख्या क्रमः यः स तृतीयखण्डः। तत्र यत्र खण्डे शुभग्रहयोगे
उच्चग्रहयोगे महाराजानां राज्यभिषेकः। अन्येषापपि तत्तजातकानु-
सरेण शुभं भवति। एवं पापनीचयोगे कष्टम् |
॥ इति खण्डनिर्णयः ॥
आरूढलगनं यावदीशाध्रयं पदम् ऋक्षाणामोजे लग्नं तदेव ।
लग्नम् युग्मे तु तत्तन्मुखो भवति।
10 -22. Longevity Computation: One's longevity should be found based on:
(a) lords of ascendant and the 8th;
(b) ascendant and the Moon;
(c) ascendant and Hora ascendant.

76 Chandra Kala Nadi
In case of mutual contradiction, the span given
by the pair of natal ascendant (Janma Lagna) and
Hora ascendant (Hora Lagna) should only be considered. The duration of day or night, as the case may
be, should be divided by 12 and the resultant number
should be counted from natal ascendant in direct or
reverse manner according to its being odd or even
signto get Hora Lagna. Two ghatikas anda half make
for one Hora Lagna. The ghatikas elapsed from the
time of sun rise orsunset to birth be distributed @ 2.5
ghatikas per sign from the ascendant in direct or
reverse manner depending on the ascending sign
being odd or even.
Should the lords of the ascendant and the 8th be
in movable signs, the life span will be full. So also
when the ascendant lord is in a fixed sign while the
8th lord is ina common sign, or the 8th lord ina fixed
sign while the lord of the ascendant is in a dual sign.
Life span will be medium if the two are in dual
signs, or one in fixed sign and the other ina movable
sign.
Short life will result if both of them are in
immovable signs, or one in movable sign and the
other in a common sign.
If these (lords ofascendant and 8th) are placed in
the initial portion, life span will be full. In the
conclusive portions of the signs concerned, these
minimise their contributions. If placed in the middle
portions, the contribution should be ascertained by
rule of three process.
One hundred years of life span is full. 66 yrs of
life span is medium. Short life is for 33 years. In
between the classification should suitably be understood.
Another Method: The ascendant is Dharma.
The 2nd is Artha, The 3rd is Kama. And the 4th is
Moksha. Their respective trines are also known by
similar names (and are called Dharma Artha Kama
Moksha Trikonas). If the Ayur Lagna (explained
below) is in Dharma Rasi as Chaturthamsa Rasi is in
a Moksha Rasi, full length of life will be granted,
When the Ayur Lagna is in Dharma Rasi while
Chaturthamsa Rasi is ina Kama Rasi, life span will
be medium. The Ayur Lagna and Chaturthamsa Rasi
failing in Dharma and Artha Rasis in that order will
give short life. Thatis if Chaturthamsa Rasi is in the
4th from Ayur Lagna , full life will come to pass; in
the 3rd medium life span, and in the 2nd short life be
predicted. Should the Ayur Lagna and Chaturthamsa
Rasi fall-in the same kind of sign of triad, 1.6. both
being Dharma, or Artha, or Kama, or Moksha, the
length of the life will be the least.
Ayur Lagna: Note the Navamsa occupied by the
Moon in a horoscope. Commencing from there
distribute five gahtis persign till birth ghatis from the
Sun rise are exhausted. The final sign arrived by this
count is called Ayur Lagna.
Chaturthamsa Rasi: 1.25 ghatis make up for for
one Chaturthamsa Rasi. The remainder obtained in
the process of Ayur Lagna evaluation should be
divided by 4, and distributed at the rate of 1.25 ghati
per sign commencing from the Navamsa of the Moon
to get the designated Rasi.
The sign occupied by the lord of the 8th is also
called as Hora Lgana and the one occupied by the lord
of the ascendant is Rasi Lagna. If the lord of the
ascendant becomes Karaka for longevity, the computation will be specially revealing. Otherwise, the sign
occupied by the lord of the 8th be considered as
instructed earlier.
Counting of 8th House - Fixed Signs: The 8th
house concerned for the four fixed signs are - Gemini
for Taurus; Sagittarius for Scorpio; Virgo for Leo;
and Pisces for Aquarius. That is the 8th house for
birth ina fixed sign is counted from the oppositesign
thereof in a direct manner.
Destruction of A Bhava: If the dispositor of a
Bhava is in the 6th, 8th or 12th counted from the
ascendant, the original Bhava in question is destroyed, .
The Three Khandas: The foursigns commencing from the ascendant form first Khanda; the next
four the 2nd Khanda, and the last four the 3rd
Khanda. The respective Khandas occupied by benefic or exalted planets will be congenial for the
incarnation ofan emperor. For others, the consideration should be according to the horoscope concerned.
Malefics or planets in debility in these Khandas will
cause difficulties.
Aroodha Lagna: Note the number of signs the
lord of a Bhava is away from the Bhava in question.
Count so many signs from the lord concerned to get

Deva Keralam 77
its Aroodha. In case of odd signs the counting is from
that very sign. Ifeven sign is involved, the counting
is from the opposite sign.
Notes: In these slokas, firstly the well-known
principle of life span being long, medium or short is
incompletely conveyed in the first instance. In the
second instance calculation of Savayana Hora Lagna
is prescribed.
(a) Use of lords of ascendant and 8th based on
Jaimini's Sutra "Aayuh pitru dinesaabhyaam": If
both these lords are in movable sign/s, long life is
indicated. If one is ina fixed sign while the other is
in a dual sign, then,again full life span will come to
pass. Medium life span will result if one is in a
movable sign and the other is inan immovable sign.
Short life is denoted by both these planets being in
immovable signs. The same is the case when one of
them is ina movable sign and the otherina dual sign.
(b) Use of ascendant and Moon sign should also
be done with the same guidelines, replacing the pair
of planets at "a".
(c) Again with the help of Janma Lagna (natal
ascendant) and Hora Lagna, similar assessment be
made.
If the indications as per the three methods are
identical, itshould be accepted as final. Should there
be contradictions, the indication given by the pair of
Janma Lagna and Hora Lagna 15 alone final.
(There is a school of thought that if two pairs
yield identical hints, that alone be considered.)
The method of Hora Lagna calculation given by
our text is used to find out what is called Saavayava
Hora Lagna.
Other matters discussed in the slokas are clear.
योगसारावली
FSM: कोणनाथाः स्वभवननिहिता लग्नाथस्य Ts
केन्द्रे वाथ त्रिकोणे यदि भवति तदा मत्तमातङ्योगः॥२३ ॥
जातोऽस्मिन् भेरिकाणां मदगजतुरगस्यन्दनानां निनादे
नित्यं नादस्य गानी प्रबलतरगृहाचारदेशप्रसिद्धः॥२४॥
23 - 24. Matta Matanga Yoga: The lords of
angles and trines should be in their own signs, or in .
a sign that exalts the lord of the ascendant, or should
be in angles/trines (i.e. angular lords in trines and
trinal lords in angles). Then the yoga produced goes
under the name of Matta Matanga Yoga. One bornin
मरत्तमातद्गयोगस्य लग्नेशे रिपुनीचगे |
Ws स्यात्तत्रजः श्रीमानयुताधिकवित्तवान् ॥२५॥
25. The said Matta Maatanga Yoga will be
nullified if the lord of the ascendant occupies an
inimical sign or the sign of his debility. One born in
the said yoga (when in tact) will be wealthy owning
limitless sums.
सवोचचेसव्ष्रकद्रे बलवति भृगुजे मालवीसंज्कोऽसौ
योगस्तत्र प्रजातो बहुगजतुरगस्यन्दनान्दोलठिनाथः।
्षोणीदुर्गादिनाथो गुणगणजलधिः सक्र्मरैसपेतः
अन्यस्रीसक्तयित्तो जयति जनपतिः प्रत्यहं भोगशाली ॥२६॥
26. Malaviya Yoga: Venus in strength in an
angle identical with his own signor signof exaltation
will cause what is called Malaviya Yoga. The person
born in this yoga will be the lord of a number of
elephants, horses, chariots and palanquins, apart
from lands, forts and the like. He will be an ocean of
numerous virtues, be endowed with an excellent
wife, attached to other women, will win over the lord
of men (i.e. the king) and will enjoy pleasures.
Notes: Malaviya yoga is formed in the following
ways.
Venus in Pisces in case of Gemini, Virgo, Sagittarius and Pisces ascendants (dual signs).
Venus in Libra in case of Aries, Cancer, Libra
and Capricorn ascendants (movable signs).
Venus in Taurus in case of Taurus, Leo, Scorpio
and Aquarius ascendants (immovable signs).
Thus al] the 12 ascendants enjoy this yoga with
Venus in a specified place.
It comes to our notice, in the course of our
studies, that Venus in debilitation Navamsa is greatly
crippled of its possible superior role through Malaviya
Yoga. So is again the case if he joins Mercury closely
in Pisces, oris combust in any of the signs concerned.
In case of the yoga formed by exalted Venus, his
dispositor, Jupiter, should not be in the company of
Saturn. If that be the case, the person will be in the
receiving end, instead of enjoying Maha Purusha
Yoga effects. (Refer to sloka 27 infra.)

78 Chandra Kala Nadi
When Venus in Libra or Taurus forms this yoga,
the question of dispositor does not arise. Here
Saturn’s influence onJupiterdoes notspoil the Yoga.
As per our text, Malaviya Yoga gives rich conveyances, landed and housing properties, association
with royal (or powerful) men and enjoyment of
pleasures.
Other effects stated elsewhere are as under. The
person with this yoga will have thin lips. He will have
wheatish complexion, thin waist, and will shine like
the moon in appearance. His voice in respect of
majesty will be comparable to an elephant’s voice.
His teeth will be white. He will obtain rulership of
certain kingdoms. His life span will be 70 and death
will be in a shrine.
His earnings will be by his own efforts.
जीवे शनियुते दृष्टे माक्वीयोगभङ्गवान् |
भृगुरुच्चफलं व्यर्थं प्रहच्छिद्रेण करशितः॥२७ ॥
27. Cancellation: In the process of the above
yoga being present, Jupiter joining Saturn will nullify
the yoga whereupon the exaltation (note the term
“exaltation”) effects of Venus will go in vain. And
the person will be troubled due to planetary blemishes.
Notes: It is to be noted that Malaviya yoga
caused by Venus being in Pisces in an angle will be
nullified by Jupiter’s association with Saturn. Thus
the underlying concept is Malaviya yoga caused by
Venus in Libra or Taurus, being angular, will remain
unaffected by Jupiter-Saturn conjunction.
समस्तखेटेषु च उच्चशो
स्थितेषु नीचांशगतेषु तेषु
महीशपुत्रोऽपि रसाधिपश्च
भिक्षाशनो मुख्यदिगम्बरः स्यात् ॥२८ ॥
28. Yoga With Debilitation Navamsas: Evena
son of the ruler of the (whole) earth will become the
head of underworld or Paataala (i.e. will have steep,
irreconcilable fall in position), will earn his meal by
beggary and will be chiefamong naked ascetics when
all the planets are in exaltation signs and debilitation
Navamsas.
स्वोच्चे नीचां शके दुःखी नीचे स्वोच्चाशगे सुखी ।
स्वांशे वर्गोत्तमे भोगी राजयोगो भविष्यति ॥२९॥
29. A planet in exaltation sign and debilitation
Navamsa will be grievous. The one in debilitation
sign with exaltation Navamsa wil] be a source of
happiness. Pleasures, and Raja Yoga will follow a
planet that is Vargottama in its own sign.
कष्टभावे freed द्विप्रहोच्येऽथवा यदि
क्लेशजीवनवानित्यं नीचांशस्थे विशेषतः ॥३० ॥
30. Two 0111166 planets at one and the same time
being exalted in evil houses will make one’s life
difficult; their debilitation Navamsa positions in this
yoga will be more troublesome.
fafa: sat भोगी योगांशे सुखजीवकः।
दुर्बले चापयोगांशे क्लेशजीवनवान्भवेत्
wee द्विमरहे भोगी योगांशे राजयोगवान् |
चर्तुग्रहे दरिद्रश्च स्वोच्चे तत्फलमादिशेत् ॥३१॥
31. Three planets in their respective own signs
will produce pleasures. Their being in the Navamsas
owned by Yogakarakas (significators of prosperity)
will give a comfortable life. Their weakness and
occupation of Navamsas owned by Avayoga Karakas
(obstructors to prosperity, contrary to Yoga Karaka)
will make living difficult. Two planets in own signs
will (also) give pleasures; in the Navamsas of Yoga
Karakas, one will be blessed with Raja Yoga. Four
planets in exaltation signs will usher abject poverty.
नीचोच्वभागे धनिकः सुभोगी
योगांशके भाग्यकुलप्रसूतः।
मानच्युतिः क्लेशसुधर्यबुदधिः
लोभी सदा रोगगुणप्रधानः॥२२॥
32. (a) Ifa planet is debilitated in Rasi but begets
his exaltation Navamsa, the person will be rich and
will enjoy many pleasures. If the said debilitated
planet is in the Navamsa of a Yoga Karaka, birth in
a prosperous family is denoted.
(b) Loss of honour, difficulties, courageous disposition, miserliness and prominently proneness to
diseases are the effects (for four planets in exaltation).

Deva Keralam 79
Notes: (a) Richness and pleasures will follow a
planet that occupies its exaltation Navamsa though
debilitated in Rasi. Example: Venus inthe sign Virgo
with Pisces Navamsa.
Again, being in debility, if the planet occupies a
Navamsa owned by a favourable planet with reference to a given ascendant, one’s birth will be ina
prosperous family. Example: Cancer ascendant, the
Moon in debility in Scorpio, but with a Jupiterian
Navamsa. Advanced students will well realise,
Scorpio Navamsa, though ruled by Mars, the best
planet for Leo, is not a welcome position in this case.
(b) Results given at “b” should strictly be included to the planet in debilitation sign, with Yoga
Karaka Navamsa. But that is nota sensible thing to
do. These are part of results of four planets in
simultaneous exaltation, vide 4th line in the original
81018 31 above. It is clear that these lines have
wrongly been appended in the present place. Hence
we can put the results as under in one place for easy
understanding.
Four planets simultancously exalted cause abject poverty, loss of honour, difficulties, miserliness,
and proneness {0 discascs apart from the only good
effect, viz. courageous disposition.
निशाकरः पूर्णकलांशभागे
way योगे च भवेत् प्रजातः।
भूपालतुल्यो बलवान् सुभोगी
गजान्तलक्ष्मीकरभाग्ययुक्तः॥३३ ॥
सोम्यै: स्मरारिनिधनेष्यधियोग इन्दोः
तस्मिन् चमूपसचिवक्षितिपालजनम |
सम्पत्तिसोख्यविभवाहतशत्रवश्व
दीर्घायुषो विगतयोगभयाश्च जाताः॥३४॥
33 - 34. Adhi Yoga: In the formation of
Chandradhi Yoga, should the Moon be endowed with
full rays, the person concerned will be the ruler of the
earth, be strong, will enjoy pleasures, will own
wealth, elephants etc. With benefics in the 7th, 6th
or (and) 8th from the Moon (orascendant, as “Tasmin”
reads as “Lagnam” in another version), Adhi Yoga 18
formed. As a result one will be an army chief,
minister or king and be endowed with wealth, comforts, might and vanquished enemies. He will be
long-lived and will be free from fear of illness.
Notes: The text refers only to Chandradhi Yoga.
Lagnadhiyoga being equally important and similar,
suitable addition in brackets is made by me.
Normally, commentators interpreted that
benefics (that is the three natural ones) in the 7th
produce an army chief, in the 6th - a minister, and in
the 8th - a king. One way they may be right. Then
the inference is that the 8th having the three benefics
produces the best Adhi yoga followed by 6th and 7th,
in that order.
Whether itis Lagnadhiyoga or Chandradhiyoga,
the Moon should have undiminished rays. In the first
line of sloka 33, we find the term “Poornamsabhaage”.
I have not tried to enrich the interpretation with some
new meanings. Removing redundant possibilities, 1
have given a practical interpretation.
Also see sloka 36 and others infra.
षष्ठे द्यूनमथाष्टमे शशिरवेः प्राप्तासमस्ताः शुभाः
क्रूराणां यदि गोचरे नरपतिर्भाग्यालये TAT: |
भूपालः प्रवदेत्स धन्यजलधेर्वेलावनान्तर्भव
सेनामात्यमाङ्गदाससहिता TAS: प्रीयते \३५॥
35. If the luminaries are found, along with all
benefics, inthe 6th, 7th and 8th, while (other) malefics
are confined to the 9th, the subject will be kingly,
learned, fortunate, strong, inwardly fearing
("Antarbhava" reads as "Antarbhaye" in another
version), and be endowed with army, ministers and
elephants.
लग्नाञ्चन्राधि योगेषु पञ्चमे तत्िकोणगे |
शुभे वा त्वशुभे वापि अधियोगो न विद्यते se ॥
36. Whetherin Lagnadhi Yoga, orin Chandradhi
Yoga, if the Sth from the concerned place (i.e. from
ascendant or from the Moon as the case may be) is
occupied by a “benefic” or by a malefic, the Yoga in
question goes in vain.
Notes: A benefic additionally mentioned for the
5th house position denotes that the text does not need
all the three natural benefics, viz. Jupiter, Venus and
Mercury, to be in the 6th, 7th and 8th. In my opinion

80 Chandra Kala Nadi
this yoga is formed by all the 3 benefics in the
specified houses, when the question of a benefic ina
house other than these does not arise.
According to Horasara, the fourth from the
ascendant should be free from malefic occupation, as
against the 5th house by Deva Keralam.
चद्धाधियोगे भटनायकस्य
लग्नाधियोगे नृपपूजितस्य |
विचिन्त्य सर्वानपि धीरवृन्दाः
statist विपुलं च भोगम् ॥३७॥
37. One born in Chandradhi Yoga will be an
army head, while the Lagnadhi Yoga will make one
worshipped by the king, endowed with wealth, lands,
kingdom and wide pleasures.
चद््राधियोगे जातस्य TST सप्तमगे रवो |
मध्यमायुर्विनिर्दिषटो बुद्धिमान् बहुपुत्रवान् ॥२८ ॥
38. In the formation of Chandradhi Yoga, the
Sun’s occupation of the 7th from the Moon denotes
that the person will enjoy a medium span of life (66
years as stated elsewhere in the earlier pages), be
intelligent, and will have many sons.
Notes: From this we understand that three
benefics in the 6th, 7th and or 8th begetting the
company of the Sun change the picture completely.
Medium life-span and many sons come in the picture
in the form of effects thereof.
लग्नाधियोगे जातस्य चन्द्रे पापसमन्विते |
राजयोगं वदेत् प्रा अत्पायु्दायमादिशेत् ॥३९ ॥
39. In the case of Lagnadhi Yoga, if the Moon
joins a malefic, it is a (mere or ordinary) Raja Yoga.
But the life span will be short.
Notes: Here again, as in the previous aphorism,
life-span is discussed.
यदार्पुत्रो बलवान् wat
योगांशके भार्गवसंयुतश्च ।
श्रीमान् धनाढयो मतिमान् यशस्वी
कामी सदा भपतिकार्यदक्षः ॥४० ॥
40. Saturn - Venus yoga: If the planet Saturn in
strength joins Venus and obtains its own divisions
including Yoga Karaka Navamsa, the person will be
wealthy, intelligent, famous, lustful and will be ever
skillful in accomplishing tasks assigned by the king.
व्गोत्तमांशके मन्दे शुभग्रहसमन्विते |
राज्यावस्थे प्रजातस्य राजयोगो भविष्यति ॥४१ ॥
41. Saturn in the company of a benefic and in
Vargottama Navamsa, in Rajyavastha(?) willcausea
Raja Yoga (leading position and prosperity).
पापा नीचगताः शुभा बलयुता केनद्रत्रिकोणश्रिताः
खेदाश्चेद्यदि कर्मभाग्यगृहपो भाग्येऽथवा कर्मणि |
राजा स्वक्षितिमान् महाबलयुतः ख्यातप्रतापन्वितो
दीर्घायुः परभूपवन्दितपदः सर्व्तुल्यः सुखी ॥४२ ॥
42. Malefics in debility while benefics instrength
occupy angles and trines as the lords of the 10th and
Oth are (together) in the 9th or 10th will give the
following effects. He will be a king ruling his own
land, be highly mighty, and be endowed with fame,
valour and longevity. Other kings will adore his feet
in reverence. He will be equal to a knower-of-all and
be happy.
waa स्वनवांशके सुहदि वा दीप्तांशभागेऽथवेा
स्वदरेक्काणचतुष्टयेषु मुदिताः मूलत्रिकोणेषु च ।
तत्तत्कालबलान्विताः सुखकरा व्गोत्तमांशेऽपि चा
ते सर्वे शुभदा भवन्ति च तदा स्वान्तर्दशायां वदेत् ॥४३॥
43. If all the planets occupy variously their own
signs, own Navamsas, friendly divisions, or be in
Deeptamsa (i.e. Deeptavastha), own decanates, angles, or be in Muditavastha, Moolatrikona positions,
or endowed with temporary strength (strength at the
time of birth), or be in Vargottama Navamsa, they
will cause auspiciousness and happiness in their
(dasas and) sub periods.
Notes: Deeptavastha: A planet in his exaltation
Sign attains this Avastha or state. (Deeptha = blazing.)
Muditavastha: Being in a close friend’s sign.
Mudita denotes happiness; also knownas Pramudita.
These two Avasthas or states are among nine
suchstates relating to the positions of various planets.

Deva Keralam
Temporary strength = Strong in Shadbala or six
sources of strength. These are Sthaana bala (positional
strength), Digbala (directional strength), Kaala Bala
(temporal strength inclusive of Ayana Bala), Cheshta
Bala (motional strength), Naisargika Bala (natural
strength) and Drikbala (aspectual strength), For
details consult relevant standard text books describing this aspect.
लग्नात् पञ्चमगे पापे असितेन युतेक्षिते |
तदीशे पापसंयुक्ते षष्ठे TY हयपुतरवान् ॥४४॥
तदीशो बलवान् यस्य पुत्रवान् बलवान् भवेत्।
राजद्वारे सुखी नित्यं धनधान्ययुतः सुखी ॥४५॥
44 - 45. (a) Childlessness: A malefic in the 5th
house in aspect to or in association with Saturn while
the 5th lord is in the 6th or 8th with a malefic will not
cause birth of a son (1.6. the person will be childless).
(b) Fifth Lord: If the Sth lord is endowed with
strength (without reference to the above yoga), one
will beget progeny, be mighty, be happy in royal
service and be endowcd with wealth and grains (food
comforts).
पञचमाधिपतो स्वोच्चे नीचे वा स्वनवांशके |
स्वक्षेत्रे शुभसंदृष्टे नीचे वा पञ्चमस्थिते ॥४६ |
राजयोगश्च भवति तत्समो वा धनी सुखी |
योगांशके फलं सत्यं योजयेत् कालवित्तमः॥४७॥
46 - 47. The lord of the 5th obtaining own
Navamsa, being either in his sign of exaltation or
` debilitation, or being in his own sign in aspect to a
benefic, or debilitated in the 5th(?) will cause a Raja
yoga. Alternatively itcan give a position equal to that
of a king. The native will be rich and happy.
Notes: The conditions given above are clear,
though, the confusion is regarding the third stipulation - 50 lord debilitated in the Sth house - about
which we should have doubts. Perhaps it should be
“Sth Jord in the 5th with debilitation Navamsa”. For
example for Taurus ascendant, Mercury in the 5th in
Virgo with Pisces Navamsa.
भाग्यस्थानाधिपे स्वोच्चे सुखेशेन समन्विते |
लग्नात् पञ्चमो शुक्रे योगश्चामरसंज्ञकः॥४८ ॥
Ave प्रजातष्च चामरीयोगभाग्यवान्।
षोडशाब्दात् परं भाग्यं भूपतिर्वा धनी सुखी ॥४९ ॥
Hart चामरीयोगे मेषलग्नेऽथवा यदि |
केद्धत्रिकोणगे शुक्रे राजयोगो भविष्यति ॥५० ॥
चामरीयोगजातस्य योगं द्वादशवत्सरम् |
तदन्ते चापमृत्युश्च चिरायुर्यदि जीवति ॥५१॥
48 - 51. Chaamara Yoga: (a) The lord of the 9th
in the company of the lord of the 4th and being in
exaltation while Venus is in the 5th from the ascendant, will cause Chaamara Yoga. The native of Aries
ascendant with this Yoga will enjoy prosperity (in
general) (and more so) after the age of sixteen. He
will be a king, or be rich and happy.
(b) In case of Chaamara Yoga occurring to
Cancer or Aries ascendant, with Venus inan angle or
a trine, there will be a “Raja Yoga”. The person
belonging to Chaamara Yoga willenjoy Yoga effects
fromthe age of 12. Butthe twelfth year will usher fear
from untimely death. If he survives this danger, long
life is assured.
Notes: (a) According to our text, the 9th lord
should be exalted and be with the lord of the 4th.
Venus should also be inthe 5th from ascendant. Then
the yoga in question forms.
Two more kinds of yoga with this name is
explained by Parasara thus.
First, the ascendant lord should be exalted in an
angle and be in aspect to Jupiter. Saturn, Mars, and
Mercury can be exalted this way; that is the ascendants concerned, according to this axiom, could be
Anes, Gemini, Virgo and Capricorn.
Parasara’s second type of yoga is two benefics
jointly should be in the ascendant, 7th, 9th or 10th.
The effects for either kind of Chaamara Yoga are:
royal status, royal honour, long life, scholarship,
eloquence and high rate of knowledge in all arts.
Mantreswara gives yet another situation for this
yoga. The ascendant should contain a benefic while
its lord be ina good house (Bhava) or in his exaltation
sign. The effects are long life, increasing prosperity,
fame, virtues and leadership.
Thus the Chaamara yoga is described in four
different ways by different authorities.

82 Chandra Kala Nadi
"Chaamara" is chowrie, a royal insignia.
(b) Itis not known why ourauthorall ofa sudden
adds angular position for Venus which is not specified in “a” above in the original. Then he calls it a
(mere) Raja Yoga relating to Canceror Anes ascending.
Anyway the clues given hereof will serve the
reader to suitably assess this yoga. At best one can
ignore the name and look upto effects laid down.
After alla rose is a rose, call it with any name.
मीनत्रिकोणगे जीवे निशाकरसमन्विते |
वीक्षिते वा प्रजातस्य षोडशाब्दात् परं सुखम् ॥५२ ॥
52. Jupiter in Pisces identical with a trine (correct term is “Meene Trikonuge” as appearing in
another version instead of “Meenatrikonage” above)
in aspect to orin association with the Moon will bring
prosperity after the 16th ycar of age.
लग्नारूढे भृगुयुते वीक्षिते वा प्रजायते |
भाग्यारूढेऽथवा चेति योगवान् कीर्तिमान् सुखी ॥५३॥
53. One will enjoy prosperity and fame if the
Aroodha Pada for the ascendant or for the 9th is in
relation with Venus either by aspect or association.
आरूढलाभे भृगुजे बलाद्ये
दष्टेऽथवा चन्दरयुते विले |
योगांशके वाहनवान् Gat
गजान्तसेनाधिपयोगवान् स्यात ॥५४॥
54. Should Venus be in the 11th from Aroodha
ascendant (Aroodha Laabhe) in strength, or aspect
the said 11th, or should Venus be in the ascendant
with the Moon, it will grant conveyances, ministership, elephants and headship of an army.
Notes: “Yogamsake” is redundant.
If the term “Aroodha Laabhe” is a wrongly
replaced version of “Labhaarodhe”, then it means
Venus in the Aroodha Pada for the 11th.
लक्षीयोगः -
स्वोच्चे नक्षत्रनाथे स्फुटनिकरकरालङ्ते ATTA
यूने सोमस्य पुत्रे यदि रिपुभवनं भास्करे संप्रयाते |
पुत्रस्थे दानवेल्ये गुरुरपि तनुगो सोरिभोमो तृतीये
जातो भूपतिनायको शशिधवलवश्चामरे राज्यलक्मीम् ॥५५ ॥
राज्यलक्ष्मीमहायोगे जातो विद्वान स भूमिमान्।
राजाङ्गनाप्रियो नित्यं गृहे लक्षमीकटाक्षवान् ॥५६ ॥
पञ्चविशात् परं भाग्यं त्रिशाद वषाद्विरोषतः।
अतीव श्रियमाप्नोति योगं षोडशवत्सपम् ॥५७॥
तदन्ते चापमृत्युं च समरे देह पातनम् |
जीविते सोख्यवा्नित्यमरोगदृढगात्रवान् ॥५८ ॥
एकसप्ततिवर्षाणि एकषषटिसमोऽथवा।
-कालमृत्युभयं सत्यं लक्ष्मीयोगस्य जातके ॥५९ ॥
55 - 59, Lakshmi Yoyva: The Moon in her
exaltation sign with radiant and multiple rays, Mercury in the 7th, the Sun in the 6th, Venus in the Sth,
Jupiter in the ascendant, and Saturn with Mars in the
3rd - the native with this planetary array will enjoy
Rajya Lakshmi Yoga and will be the lord of the earth.
Further he will be a learned person, owning lands, be
dear to the daughters of the king, and will be ever
blessed with the mercy of Goddess Lakshmi. After
the age of 25, his prosperity will be on the rise;
particularly after 30. He will acquire huge wealth in
the 16th year which will also be a year of fear of
untimely death and his body will be grounded to the
earth in a war. If he survives he will live happily
without diseases and with a strong physique. In his
71st year or in 61st year, he will incur death without
fail.
Notes: Minus the position of the nodes, this
seems to be a specific horoscope taken by the author
froma Nadi work. Calling the entire yoga as Lakshmi
Yoga or Rajya Lakshmi yoga is just not that important.
अखण्डसप्राज्ययोगः -
लाभेशकप्रेशधनेश्वराणाम्
एकोऽपि चन्ग्रहकेद्रवर्ती |
स्वपुप्रलाभाधिपतिर्गुरुश्च
अखण्डपाग्राज्यपतित्वमेति ॥६० ॥
60. Akhanda Samrajya Yoga: Out of the lords

Deva Keralam 83
of 11th, 10th and 2nd houses counted from the
ascendant, even if one is inan angle to the Moon, the
native will be the ruler of an undivided kingdom (i.e.
will be an emperor of large area). Simultaneously,
Jupitershould be the ruler of one of 2nd, 5th and 11th
houses counted from the ascendant.
Notes: Akhanda Samrajya Yoga giving rulership
of a vast united land is applicable to all the four
immovable ascendants (not tc Scorpio and Aquarius
alone as commonly taught by many writers, ancient
as wellas modern) if we carefully study the rulership
required for Jupiter. He can rule one of the threc
houses, viz. 2nd, Sth and 11th for Taurus, Leo,
Scorpio and Aquarius, For Taurus, he is the 1 1thlord.
For Leo he rules the Sth. For Scorpio he rules two
houses, viz. 2nd and Sth. For Aquarius, he is the lord
of 2nd and 11th.
Now, this yoga can form in one of the following
four manners.
(a) For Taurus ascendant, one among the three
planets, Mercury, Saturn and Jupiter should be in an
angle to the Moon.
(b) For Leo, one of the two planets, Mercury or
Venus should be in an angle to the Moon.
(c) For Scorpio, one of the three planets Jupiter,
Sun and Mercury should be in an angle to the Moon.
(d) For Aquarius, one of the two planets, Jupiter
and Mars should be in an angle to the Moon.
Akhanda Samrajya Yoga thus applies to neither
a movable ascendant nor a dual ascendant. That is,
Aries, Gemini, Cancer, Virgo, Libra, Sagittarius,
Capricomand Pisces do not obtain Akhanda Samrajya
Yoga.
लग्नाद् व्ययगते पापे स्थिरलग्नचतुष्टये ।
साग्राज्ययोगभ्गः स्याच्चद्धलग्नाष्टमे व्यये UGS
दुः खजीवी दुरात्मा वा किविदङ्तिकाखान् |
साप्राज्योगे दाद्द्िययोगहीनं प्रकल्पयेत् ॥६२ ॥
61 - 62. Cancellation of Akhanda Samrajya
Yoga: This yoga will stand nullified, if a malefic is
in the 8th or 12th from the immovable ascendant
(concerned), In that event (apart from not getting the
good effects) the native will live a grief-ridden life
and will have somewhat defective a physique. The
formation of a (true) Samrajya Yoga will nullify
other yogas causing penury.
Notes: When the said yoga is formed as persloka
60, there should be no maletic planet (Saturn, Mars,
Rahu, Ketu, weak Moon, ill-associated Mercury) in
the 8th or 12th from the said immovable ascendant.
The prohibition of a malefic in 8th or 12th should be
applied to only that immovable ascendant which
forms the basis of this Yoga. Looking fora maleficin
Sth/12th from all the four immovable ascendants will
be too much.
The Moon being weak if placed in the 12th or 8th
from the ascendant, while the other condition of this
yoga remains fulfilled, will nullify this yoga.
Samrajya Yoga is a short-term for Akhanda
Samrajya Yoga. As a result of this yoga, the person
will be wealthy and highly prosperous, if not literally
an emperor. This is a good yoga for occupying
prominent positions of national importance, political
or apolitical.
उत्तमं मध्यमं चेवाप्यधमाधममेव a |
ष्ठं चद्भकलांशेन योगभेदं चतुष्टयम् ॥६३ ॥
अधमाधमभागांशे दुर्बले योगजातके |
योगं निष्फलमाप्नोति दशाभेदेन कल्पयेत् ॥६४ ॥
सात्त्विको मतिमान् मानी न्यायार्जितसुजीवकः।
सत्कर्माचारवानित्यमुत्तमां शे निशाकरे ॥६५॥
TEM राजसेवी रजोगुणसमन्वितः।
पापपुण्यरतो नित्यं विद्यावान् बुद्धिमान् भवेत् ॥६६ ॥
अध्मांशे सदा रोगी हयधूर्मप्रियकामुकः।
अनाचाररतो नित्यमधमाधमजीवकः ॥६७ ॥
परस्पराधमांशे च दुःखी कामी च कुत्सितः।
ITA कलहप्रियश्च
पापी सदा दुष्टजनप्रियः स्यात् ॥
परात्रकादक्षीपरदारसक्तः
परेषु दोषं परिपश्यतीच ॥६८ ॥
63 - 68. (a) Yogas With Reference to Moon:
Four different yogas named Uttama (excellent),
Madhyama (moderate), Adhama (mean) and

84 Chandra Kala Nadi
Adhamaadhama (the meanest) are produced (when
planets are in the 10th, 7th, 4th and the Ist with
reference to) the Moon. With the last mentioned
yoga, (other) yogas in the horoscope become weak;
ineffectiveness thereof should be understood with the
help of directional influences.
(b) Uttama Yoga: One born in this yoga will be
a Satvika, be intelligent, honourable, will have wealth
eamed by fair means, will take to good path and be
orthodox.
(c) Madhyama Yoga: This native will serve a
king, be predominantly passionate, will mdulge in
both good and bad acts, be educated and intelligent.
(d) Adhama Yoga: One born in this yoga will
ever besickly, be attached to performing unrighteous
deeds, libidinous, unprincipled and will live a
wretched life.
(e) Adhamaadhama Yoga: He will be inflicted
by शारा, libidinous, mean, be given to severe anger,
fond of promoting quarrels, ever sinful, attached to
the wicked, will have an eye on others’ food and their
spouses and be given to faulting others.
Notes: In a way it can be said that the original’s
spirit is not fully maintained in these six slokas for it
has been recomposed by a later composer without
having any regard to fullness of the conditions and
without giving heed to proper astrological terms.
First of all there is no clear reference to the four
houses involved. These have been supplied by me in
line with the effects enlisted. Further I have my own
doubts about effects given for Adhamaadhama Yoga.
The reader will do well to consider natural
benefics and malefics that form the yoga and take
only relevant principles.
I do not know how the reader will react to my
suggestion that benefics form the firsttwo mentioned
yogas while malefics form the penultimate and last
yoga.
Phala Deepika’s Uttama, Madhyama and
Adhama Yogas may also profitably be seen in its
sixth chapter.
meee सुबुद्धिमांसिभिः east |
्िभिर्नचिगतेर्जडः। तरि्रहोच्चापयोगांशे दुखजीवी दुरात्मवान् |
नीचराशो सुयोगांे योगवान् भोगवान् भवेत् ॥६९ ॥
69. Three Planets: With three planets in exaltation, one will be highly intelligent. If three are inown
signs, he will be a minister. A dull-witted person is
born with three planets in debility. He will have gnefridden livelihood if three are exalted but in degrees
causing an adverse yoga. If three planets are in
debility butare indegrees causing a favourable yoga,
one will enjoy prosperity and pleasures.
एकर्षगो भानुशशाङ्ुत्र
एकांशके वा तनुगो Mae
स्वेच्चेऽथवा देवगु तनुस्थे
योगो महापण्डितसंज्ञकोऽसो ॥७० ॥
योगे जातः पण्डिताख्यो ats:
क्षेणीशाद्येः सतुतः UAB: log
70-71. Maha Panditha Yoga (Yoga for Great
Scholarship): If the Sun and Mercury join ina sign
which is the ascendant and is the place of exaltation
for one of them, or if Jupiter (alone) is in the
ascendantin exaltation, the yoga called Maha Panditha
Yoga is produced. As a result, the person will be a
scholar, ruler of men and land, wealthy, will be
scientific (ormaintaina scriptural viewpoint), learned,
be a good speaker in the assembly of Brahmins, a
protector of secrets, and be wise and virtuous.
Notes: This yoga forms in three ways.
Firstly, the Sun and Mercury can be in Anes
ascendant, where the Sun is exalted.
Secondly, the Sun and Mercury can be in Virgo
ascendant, where Mercury is exalted.
Thirdly, Jupiter can be alone in Cancer rising.
मेषूरणे वा HS वा शुभांशे देवपूजितः,
पापदृष्टिविहीनश्चेदधर्मशीलः सुबुद्धिमान् ॥७२ ॥
चापे जीवे Haid नीचे सिंहनवांशगे |
मीने तुलाशंके दुःखी विद्यासोख्यविहीनवान् ॥७३॥
निधनांशे धने जीवे नीचांशस्थे निशाकरे ।
आषोडशाब्दपर्यन्तमेकयोगफलं स्मृतम् ॥७४ ॥
अष्टमांशं परित्यज्य जीवे धनगते सुखी |
विद्यावान् मधुराभाषी विनीतो धर्मवत्सलः ॥७५॥

Deva Keralam 85
सोम्यांशगे धने जीवे निधने वा सुखी धनी ।
विद्या पदटुत्वमाप्नोति राजद्वारे सुबुद्धिमान् ॥७६ ॥
केन््रत्रिकोणगे जीवे पुष्करंरो सुभाग्यवान् |
षष्ठाष्टमनव्ययांशस्थे दुर्बले पुत्रशोकवान् ॥७७॥
एकर्विशमनुश्चैव एवत्रिशच्य वत्सस् |
मेषादिमीनपर्यन्तत्रिकोणानां "यथाक्रमात् ॥७८ ॥
72-78. Jupiter’s Navamsa Positions: (a)Should
Jupiter be in the 10th or 6th with benefic Navamsa,
-the person will be virtuous and highly intelligent.
(b) Jupiter in Sagittarius with Cancer Navamsa,
or in Capricorn with Leo Navamsa, or in Pisces with
Libra Navamsa will cause grief, and deprive the
native of learning and happiness.
(c) Jupiter in the 2nd house obtaining 8th Navamsa while the Moon is in Scorpio Navamsa will
from the age of sixteen cause the effects of “one
yoga”. (This part in sloka 74 is not clear, and is
defective in composition. The meaning is - it will
give effects of one yoga. Obviously this position of
Jupiter is mixed up with the Moon’s Navamsa. The
text wants apparently to suggest that Jupiterin the 8th
Navamsa, placed in the 2nd is not welcome, which
will be clear from “b” above and “d” below.)
(d) Avoiding the 8th Navamsa, Jupiter placed in
the 2nd will give happiness, education, sweet speech,
modesty and fondness for religious merits.
(£) Jupiter in the 2nd house or in the 8th house
with a benefic’s Navamsa will grant learning, cleverness in royal circles, and intelligence.
(f) Jupiter placed in an angle or ina trine, with
Pushkara Navamsa will bestow great prosperity. Ifin
the process the planet is weak, or is in 6th/8th/12th
sign from Navamsa ascendant, he will cause grief on
account of a son (or progeny) following the 21st or
31st year. The trinal signs from Aries to Pisces (i.e.
trinal signs counted from the ascendant) should similarly be estimated.
Notes: Here the text describes Jupiter in certain
Navamsas.
(a) Being in the 6th or 1Uth in Rasi, he should
occupy his own Navamsa, or that of Mercury/Venus.
He can also be in exaltation Navamsa if the Moon Is
full. As a result, the subject will be endowed with
Virtues and a high degree of intelligence.
(b) Jupiter in his Moolatrikona sign - Sagittarius
- (from 10° 0' to 13° 20') with exalted Navamsa is not
welcome for happiness and Icarning. So also his
position in the sign Pisces (13° 20' to 16° 40)’ with
Libra Navamsa, and the sign Capricorn - debilitation
sign - (23 deg 20 to 26 40') with Leo Navamsa.
Interestingly, Jupiter in the sign Cancer (23°20!
to 26° 40") with Aquarius Navamsa (the 8th Navamsa) is excluded. Obviously this does not stand in
the way of one’s learning and happiness unless the
Moon is in debility in Navamsa. Please see notes in
“ce” below.
See slokas 546 - 553 for effects of Jupiter in
Pisces with Libra Navamsa.
(©) Jupiterinthe 2nd house with eighth Navamsa
(23° 20' to 26° 40') while the Moon is in debilitation
Navamsa will from the age of 16 till the end cause
such effects as to lead to unhappiness and deprival of
learning. The mention of “one yoga” seems to be
wrong and the above interpretation makes sense
keeping the earlier sloka, No.73, in mind while the
8th Navamsa of Cancer (i.e. Aquarius Navamsa) is
not included. In the present context, the Moon in
specified Navamsa position is an additional requirement.
(d) Should Jupiter be in the 2nd (in any sign) he
should not be between 23° 20' and 26° 40'. Then he
wil] grant the specified results. That is, if Jupiter is
in the 2nd with eighth Navamsa, happiness, education, speech etc. will be affected adversely.
(£) If Jupiter in the 2nd/8th house gets his own
Navamsa or that of Mercury or Venus, or Cancer
(while the Moon is full in case of Jupiter in Cancer
Navamsa), the person will be well-educated, intelligent, clever enough to enter into high societies.
(f) For Pushkaramasa, see page 239 of Book 1,
Deva Keralam.
ख्यादयो Tet: सर्वो पुष्करांशे प्रजायते |
लक्षमीकटाक्षवान् भोगी धनिकः कीर्तिमान् सुखी ॥७९॥
` 79, Pushkaramsa: If all the planets from Sun
onwards are in Pushkara Navamsas the person will
enjoy the blessings of Goddess Lakshmi (i.e. be
opulent), and will enjoy pleasures, fame and happiness.

86 Chandra Kala Nadi
युग्मे नक्रांशगे सूर्ये चापे कर्कटकांशमे |
मीने जुकांशगे कन्ये मेषांशे स्वत्पमायुष ॥८० ॥
80. The Sun’s Navamsa Positions: Short life
will come to pass if the Sun js in:
(a) the sign Gemini with Capricorn Navamsa.
(b) the sign Sagittarius with Cancer Navamsa.
(c) the sign Virgo with Aries Navamisa.
Notes: This is a general rule applicable to any
ascendant meaning the Sun in dual signs, excepting
Pisces, has a certain role to play in respect of one’s
life-span.
(a) The Sun in Gemini 10° 0 to 13° 20' getting
Capricorn Navamsa will reduce life-span.
(b) So does he when in Sagittarius 10° 0' to 13°
20' getting Cancer Navamsa.
(£) Again life will be short if the Sun is in Virgo
10° 0' to 13° 20' obtaining Aries Navamsa. Please
note Aries, though the exaltation Navamsa of the
Sun, is prohibited being 8th from Virgo.
In these cases, the Sun’s Navamsa positions will
be 8th counted from his sign positions.
Why the Sun in Pisces - another dual sign - with
Libra Navamsa is not added to the list merits special
attention while Aries Navamsa of Virgo is. Practical
horoscopic studies can give us suitable guidance.
feck दिवाकरे ce मन्दे कामत्रिकोणगे |
मेषुरणे स्थिते वापि बाल्ये पित्राद्यरिष्टवान् ice
81. Danger to Father et cetera: Should the Sun
be in the 12th house, or if Saturn is in Aswini, or in
the 7th or its trine, or in the 10th there will be danger
to father etc. in the childhood of the native.
Notes: Father ef cetera includes paternal relatives.
The position of the Sun and Saturn are discussed
in the present case.
The Sun in the 12th will cause danger to father
and others in the form of sickness, not necessarily
death. Bhavartha Ratnakara’s dictum that a
significator in the 12th contributes to the growth of
the indications concerned, thus, gets a limited exception.
Saturn in Aswini Nakshatra will cause the same
effect.
Again Saturn features inthe 3rd, 7th, 10th or 11th
in respect of sickness to the said relatives. From the
3rd and 7th, he aspects the 9th. The 11this the house
of some paternal relatives. Why the 10th comes into
play could be understood with some examination.
The 10th is the 2nd from the 9th which denotes
father’s original family before his marriage.
Of course the two rules involving the Sun and
Saturn are quite general in nature. In the concerned
places, they should not enjoy strength so as to be
adverse.
सुते पापयुते चन्द्रे MTR ।
frase जन्मदाये दशांशग्रहभुक्तिषु ॥८२ ॥
82. Evils to Father: If the Moon is in the 5th
house in aspect to Saturn and Mars, the first dasa of
the native will endanger the father. The relevant sub
period will be that of the Dasamsa dispositor of the
first dasa lord.
Notes: Regarding the sub period concerned, we
should verify the Dasamsa chart and find out the
dispositor of the lord of the first dasa. In case that sub
period had already expired before birth, the sub
period of the Moon, Mars or Saturn may be relevant
in the first dasa.
The importance, inthis yoga, is for father’s death
in the very first dasa itself.
अपलांशः
यस्य जन्मसमये शशिलग्नात्
सदप्रहो यदि च कर्मणि स्थितः,
तस्य कौर्पिसला भुवि तिष्ठे -
दायुषान्त मविनाशसम्पदा ॥८३ ॥
Gat सुखे षष्ठे भाग्यांशे wafer |
Salar कर्मगे जीवे त्वमलायोग ईरितः॥८४॥
अमलायोगे जीवे तु लगने च भृगुवीषिते।
अतीव श्रिय माप्नोति धनिकः कीर्तिमान् सुखी ॥८५॥
83 - 85. Amala Yoga: (a) Ifthe 10th from lunar
ascendant, i.e, the Moon sign, is in occupation by a
benefic planet, the yoga going under the name Amala
Yoga is formed, giving indestructible and life-long
wealth to the person. The 2nd, 4th and 6th from the

Deva Keralam
Moon should be free from malefic occupation in this
yoga. So also the 9th sign in Navamsa.
(b) Jupiter (too) in the 10th house from the Moon
produces Amala Yoga. Inthe Amala Yoga caused by
Jupiter, if Venus aspects the ascendant, one will beget
abundant wealth, be famous and happy.
Notes: (a) Although it is a questionable practice
to find out Amala Yoga from the natal ascendant,
effective one is doubtlessly the one formed by a
benefic (viz. Jupiter, Mercury or Venus) in the 10th
from the Moon.
Two conditions are stipulated by the text which
are not found inothertexts. These are freedom forthe
2nd, 4th and - please note the word “and” - the 6th
from a malefic occupation, while the 9th from Navamsa ascendant should also be free from a malefic.
(Some may possibly interpret that all these four
places are in Navamsa chart.)
Parasara does not allow any other planet, 1.6. a
malefic, inthe 10th in the formation of this yoga. His
condition is described by the words “Kevalaischa
Subhairyuthe”, that is only benefic in the 10th, to the
exclusion ofa malefic. In the list of acquisitions, the
sage does not include wealth while Phala Deepika
does. Our text further enhances the value of this yoga
by the expression - indestructible and life-long wealth.
(b) Our text specially takes the Amala Yoga
caused by Jupiter in the 10th from the Moon in which
case the aspect of Venus on the ascendant causes
much wealth apart from fame and happiness.
Increased wealth, fame and happiness are additions to be caused by Venus in simultaneous aspect to
the ascendant.
नीचस्थितो जन्मनि यो WER:
तद्राशिनाथोऽपि तदुच्चनाथः।
स चद्धलग्नाद्यदिकेनद्रवर्ती ॥८६ ॥
नीचभङ्ग प्रजातश्च चक्रवर्ती महासुखी |
पञ्चत्रिंशत् परंभाग्यं अ्रयसंरोऽथवा भवेत् ॥८७॥
यो नीचभङ्खेऽमृतराजयोगे
पाकाधिपश्च परपीडनेन |
पादभिभूतो नरपालकानां
समृद्धिमान् काश्चनरलभाग्येः ॥८८ ॥
86 -88. Neecha Bhanga Raja Yoga: If the Ras!
lord, or the planet that will be exalted in the sign
containing a debilitated planet, occupies an angle
with reference to the Moon, the subject will become
a king or munificent emperor. One with a planet that
has cancelled debility will become an emperor and be
greatly happy. His prosperity will be on the nse from
his 33rd or 35th year. In the dasa of such a planet,
other rulers will adore the feet of the native, and he
will be plentiful, and his fortunes will consist of gold
and precious stones.
Notes: Although this yoga is quite popular, some
of the effects mentioned here are noteworthy.
The angular position of the planet concerned is
only from the Moon, to the cxclusion of the natal
ascendant, as per our author.
वितते we सिते भाग्ये वित्ते at विक्रमेऽपि वा।
लग्नाद्वययगते लाभे छत्रयोगो भविष्यति ॥८९ ॥
छत्रयोगे सुखी बाग्मी सुकुमारशरीरवान्।
राजलक्षणसम्पत्नो विद्यावान् बुद्धिमान् भवेत् ॥९० ॥
विद्याशाली युवतिमदनो भानुतेजाश्चिरायु -
विशत्सब्दोपरि शिवपदाम्भोजपूजप्रवीणः।
-नानामन्त्रागमपरिचितो वार्धके पुत्रवान् स्या -
च्छीमान् यानप्रमुखविभवो जायते राजपूज्यः॥९१॥
89 - 91. Chatra Yoga: The Moon in the 2nd
house while Venus is in the 9th, 2nd, 3rd, 12th or 11th
from the ascendant will cause Chatra Yoga. The —
person concerned will be happy, eloquent in speech,
soft-bodied, rich with royal features, learned, intelligent, will have stirring appeal for women, be radiant
akin to the Sun, endowed with longevity, will become
skillful in worshipping Lord Siva after the age of
twenty, be well introduced in the study of various
Mantras and Agama Sastras, will obtain a son in the
old age, be wealthy, will attain fame through journeys and be worshipped by the king.
Notes: "Chatra" means umbrella, rather a traditional royal symbol.
While the Moon and Venus form Chatra yoga as
per our work, this yoga is treated as part of Nabhasa
yogas by Parasara, Varaha Mihira etc. According to

88 _ Chandra Kala Nadi
them all the (seven) planets should be in seven
continuous houses commencing the 7th house. The
results thereof are the person will be long-lived, be
happy in the beginning and ending parts of his life,
will help his kinsfolk, be a king and be close to many
kings (i.e. will be opulent etc.) and be intelligent.
राजपूज्यांशगे शुक्रे पञ्चमे वा द्वितीयगे ।
तदीशे बलवान् यस्य महाराजप्रमादवान् ॥९२ ॥
92. Royal Favours: One will beget favours from
the emperor if Venus is in the Sth or in the 2nd while
his dispositor is strong.
Notes: “Rajapoojyamsage” does not convey any
sensible meaning. It simply means “in the Amsa or
degree of royal honour”.
Other confusing terms of this nature, viz.
Rajayogamsa (the degree of Raja Yoga) and
Rajanganamsa (the degree of royal woman) appear
infra.
वित्तेशे मदरारिगे बलयुते we कुटुम्बे स्थिते
भोमकषत्रगतेन्दुजे रवियुते मीने स्थिते arta
दीर्घायुर्धनवान् द्विदारसहितो ग्रामाधिपः पण्डित
स्त्यागी भोगसमन्वितो यदि भुवि ह्यास्थान कोलाहलः॥९२ ॥
93. The 2nd lord endowed with strength should
be inthe 7th house while the Moonis inthe 2nd house.
Mercury should be ina sign ruled by Mars (i.e. Aries
only). The planet Venus should be in Pisces in the
company of the Sun. All these existing at one and the
Same time will bless the native with longevity, wealth,
two wives, lordship over villages, scholarship, sacrificial disposition, pleasures and gaiety in an assembly.
उष्टशेऽष्टमगेऽरिगे मिथुनपेन इष्टखिलाः खेचरा
नानादानपरिग्रहैकनिरतः सोनदर्यलक्ष्मीयुतः।
afer च पीडितः कतिदिनं कालं बहुक्लेशवान्
पश्चाद्धाग्यसमन्वितो चरभवः प्रख्यातकीरिर्भुवि ॥९४॥
94. The 8th lord in the 8th while Mercury is inthe
6th will give the following effects. The subject will
be ever anxious to receive charities, be blessed by the
goddess of beauty, be troubled by penury, will undergo numerous difficulties, will attain prosperity
later on, will have fluctuating prosperity, and be quite
famous in the world.
Notes: This is not a good yoga and gives many
adverse effects. On the positive side, the person will
be beautiful and quite famous. He will have belated
prosperity.
TAY व्ययषष्ठगे रिपुपतौ wt व्यये वा स्थिते
रिफिशेऽपि तथेव सध्ररिुगे यद्रा त्रयः स्वर्षगाः।
सर्वेऽन्योन्यगृहाश्रिता यदि wer युक्तेकषितास्तत्र हि
जातो भूमिपतिः प्रशस्तविभवो राजाधिराजस्तुतः ॥९५ ॥
95. Evil Lords: The 8th lord in the 6th or 12th,
the 6th lord in the 8th or 12th, and the 12th lord in the
6th or 8th, or these three planets in their abovespecified own houses in mutual aspects only between
them (to the exclusion of other association) - this
yoga will make one a king, endowed with distinct
wealth and be praised by the king of kings.
Notes: The yoga simply requires evil lords in
evil houses.
In this context, Uttara Kalamrita’s much णण
lar Vipareeta Raja Yoga is to be noted.
Lord of 8th in 6th or 12th, lord of 6th in 8th or
12th, or lord of 12th in 6th or 8th or the said three evil
lords connected in any way by exchange, aspect or
conjunction, and simultaneously having no such
relationship with other planets - produces Vipareeta
Raja Yoga. The formation of this yoga is not that
simple; so also its effects. The person concerned will
be “the king of kings”. He will have fame and wealth.
Mahadeva in his Jataka Tatva lays down a
simple rule to the effect that the 8th lord and the 6th
lord interchanging places, or being angular, produce
a mighty and powerful person. This aphorism of
Mahadeva is somewhat akin to sloka 96 infra.
षष्ठाष्टमव्ययाधीशा अन्योन्यं यदि वीक्षितः।
क्षत्रे परस्पराक्रान्ता महाराजोभविष्यति ॥९६ ॥
96. Evil Lords Related: Should (two of) the
lords of 6th, 8th and 12th mutually aspect each other
or should these three planets be in one another such
evil houses, the person will be an emperor
राजयोगांशके जीवे निधने भृगुनन्दने |

Deva Keralam 89
लग्नाद्वित्तगते वापि कामी दुष्कृत्यदानवान् ॥९७ |
97. Jupiter & Venus: IfJupiterisinRajayogamsa
(?) while Venus is in the 2nd or 8th, the person will
be lustful, charitable and will indulge in wicked (or
questionable) deeds.
Note: Rajayogamsa is not a standard term.
षष्ठाष्टमाधीशयोगे त्वसितेन युतेक्षिते |
अल्पायुर्दायमाप्नोति सर्वनाडीफलं वदेत् ॥९८ ॥
98. Short Life: The lords of the 6th and 8th
joining together in aspect to, or in association with,
Saturn will reduce life-span.
Notes: The 8th lord alone related to Saturn gives
longevity. It is only when the 8th lord joins the 6th
lord and gets related to Saturn, that life span will
receive a reduction. Thus the culprit is the 6th lord.
कामत्रिकोणे सुरवेरिमनरी
राजाद्भनांशे यदि पापदृष्टे
सजारयोषिक्रयतामुपेत्य
प्राणोऽति भागानपि जीवहेतुन् ॥९९॥
99, Yoga fora Paramour: If Venus is inthe 7th
ora trine thereof in aspect to a malefic, the subject
will be the paramour of a married woman and will
indulge in buying females for his livelihood.
निशाकरेशस्सुरवेरिमन्री
मेपूरणे वा यदि aera
नृपालकान्ताकृतजीवनं स्या-
Bit सदायोख्यमुपेति कामी ॥१०० ॥
100. Favoured by a Princess; The two planets,
Moonand Venus, joining in the 10th ora trine thereof
denotes that the subject will live through the favour
of a king’s daughter. He will enjoy pleasures, be
lustful and will always be happy.
Notes: One with the Moonand Venus in the 2nd,
6th or the 10th will receive help from women of high
society. He will spend moncy on enjoying life’s best
aspects.
रनधर्रिकोणे मदने च शक्र
स्वोच्वेऽथ वा पापनिरीक्षते च)
मदेश्वरंशे भवति प्रसूतो
राजाद्गनासङ्खममाहूरार्याः॥१०१॥
101. Joining a Princess: Venus in the 7th, 8th,
12th or 4th either in aspect to a malefic, or in
exaltation, and occupying the Navamsa of the 7th
lord will cause union with a princess.
Notes: The union suggested could be through
marriage or otherwise. The native who has Venus as
described above will join a wealthy female.
भाग्याधीशे स्वतुङ्गेऽत्यतिबलसहिते वीक्षिते वा शशाङ्क |
लग्नात् ahah शथिसुतसहिते राजपूजा्योगः॥१०२ ॥
अस्मिञ्जातः समाङ्गोऽपि ह्युताधिकवित्तवान् |
WPA: प्रसिद्धश्च MTA पुत्रवान् भवेत् ॥१०३ ॥
102 - 103. Rajapooja Yoga: If the 9th lord is in
exaltation with exceeding strength, and in aspect to
the Moon, while an angle or trine from the ascendant
is occupied by Mercury, the yoga called Rajapooja
Yoga is produced. One born in this yoga will have
even limbs, will have wealth exceeding ten thousand
(gold coins), (i.e. be very rich), will have no brothers,
be famous, long-lived and will be endowed withsons.
Notes: The name suggested should be Rajapoojya
Yoga instead of Rajapooja Yoga. However royal
honour - true to the name - is not part of the effects,
which are otherwise quite interesting.
“Exceeding strength” refers to a higher number
of units in Shadbala.
Having no brothers (thus becoming the sole
inheritor of ancestral properties) and begetting male
offspring may be noted with special emphasis.
वर्गोत्तमांशे तनुभावानाथे
तुङ्ग गते वा भृगुणा च दृष्टे ।
अद्रैतमार्गेण निजस्वरूपी-
वेदान्तनिष्ठः परमात्मवेत्ता ॥१०४॥
104. Should the lord of the 1st house be in
exaltation or be in Vargottama Navamsa, and be in
aspect to Venus, the native will have self-realisation
through the school of Non-dualilty, be devoted to
Vedantha doctrines, and be a knower of the Almighty.

90 Chandra Kala Nadi
Notes: Advaita Philosophy = Identity of Brahma
(supreme soul) with Jeevatman (human soul).
Vedantha = complete knowledge of the Vedas,
the second and the most important part of Mimamsa,
or third of the three great divisions of Hindu philosophy.
An average reader not properly initiated into
astrology may run the risk of involving the planet
Venus ina lower level of material enjoyments. The
higher plane of Venus should never be missed, as he
is noted to be the able preceptor of demons knowing
many things that were not known even to Deva Guru
or Jupiter. Venus or Bhrigu is said to be the exclusive
knower of imparting life into the dead, known as
Mrita Sanjivani Mantra. He is an unparalleled expert
in Muhburta.
जीवन्पुक्तांशगे सोम्ये जीवे वा भृगुनन्देने।
केन्द्रत्रिकोणे वापि जीवन्मुक्तो न संशयः॥१०५॥
105. Moksha or Emancipation: If Jupiter or
Venus is inanangle ora trine, attaining the 12th sign
counted from Navamsa ascendant, the subject will be
relieved of mundane bonds, 1.6. will attain Moksha,
final emancipation.
देवां शधागे व्ययराशिनाथे
व्ययाधिपे वा सबले च तु|
नुधांशगे वा गुरुणा च दृष्ट
सत्कर्मनिष्ठो परमात्मवेत्ता ॥१०६ ॥
106. Knower of the Almighty: The lord of the
12th counted from the ascendant or the Moon sign
being in Deva Shashtiamsa, in exaltation or with
strength (of other kinds) should be aspected by
Jupiter and be in a Navamsa of Mercury. Then the
person will be interested in doing good deeds and be
a knower of the Almighty.
Notes: Deva Shashtiamsa extends twice in odd
signs - once from 1° 0' to 1° 30' and again from 12°
0' to 12° 30'. As for even signs, it is from 17° 30' to
18°0' and again from 28° 30' to 29° 0’.
ACACIA: बहुशिष्यप्ररिष्यवान् |
वेदान्तकर्मगो नित्यं विज्ञानांशे निशाकरे ॥१०७॥
107. Should the Moon be in Vignanamsa, the
native will have knowledge of essence of Vedantha,
will have many pupils who in turn will have pupils,
will ever do such routines as taught by the Vedantha.
Notes: Vignanamsa is not a specific standard
term. Seeing terms like Jeevanmukthamsa denoting
the 12th sign from Navamsa Lagna, the term of
Vignanamsa should denote the 9th sign counted from
Navamsa Lagna. The 9th house denotes Vignana or
scientific temper and achievements of a person. We
may not always be nght in taking out such meanings
for such terms, because some times they seem to be
wanting in proper editing in the original.
The following slokas containing such unusual
terms,for which we have no clear clues, will confirm
our doubts.
विज्ञानांशे कलं AAMAS AAT फलम्
जटिलांशे जटाधारी मारकांशेषु मारकः ॥१०८ ॥
Tas परपरष्वश्चन्द्रेण परिचिन्तयेत् |
दिव्ययोगीश्वरांशंस्थे सूर्ये शिवकलांशगे ॥१०९ ॥
सदाशिवप्रियो नित्यं रिष्फे हीनस्वरूपवान्।
108 - 1091/2. The effects for the Moon’s position
in Vignanamsa will be true as above, while her
position in Agnanamsa will give contrary effects.
The Moon in Jatilamsa will cause one grow bunches
of hair on his head. If she is in Marakamsa, she will
cause death. One will be a servant if the Moon is in
Preshyamsa. In Charamsa it will cause a great yoga.
The planet Sun in Sivakalamsa will make one dear to
Lord Siva. Ifthe Sunis inthe 12th, one will have poor
features.
सारस्वतांशे मतिमान् सुभोगी धार्मिको AT ॥११० ॥
राजाधिराजेर्बहुमानपूज्यः
गीर्वाणभाषाकविताप्रचण्डः।
भूपाल सेव्यो खकुले प्रसिद्धो
लोके महाखछ्यातिमुपेति जातः॥१११॥
शारदायोगजातश्च गीर्वाणांशे निशाकरे |
कविजीवनवान् नित्यं शारदांशे निशाकरे ॥११२॥
110 - 112. The Sun: In Sarasvathamsa, the Sun
will give intelligence, pleasures and virtuousness.
The native will be a king of kings and will deserve

Deva Keralam 91
high honours and worship. He will bea skillful poet
in Sanskrit. He will be served by the king and be
famous in his family and in the world. The native of
Sarada Yoga....... (portion incomplete). The Moon in
Geervanamsa .......... (again incomplete). The Moon
in Saradamsa will make one a poet.
Note: Thus, the clucs given in sloka 107 to 112
remain unusable. None of the terms like Saradamsa,
Geervanamsa and Sarasvathamsa follows a standard
pattern.
धर्मेशे धनकारके यदिसुहत्स्वोच्चं गते दुस्थलं
त्यवत्वा चान्यगतेऽपि वा शुभयुते ese वा स्वामिना |
परामानेकतरागगोपुरपुरोदयानक्रतूनां क्रियां
कुर्वन् सज्जनसङ्गतो विजयते AS: पुमान् भूतते ॥११२ ॥
113. Jupiter & 9th Lord: If the lord of the 9th
and Jupiter occupy friendly signs or their respective
exaltation signs or any other auspicious houses,
avoiding evil houses, and be conjuncta benefic, or be
in aspect to their dispositor/s, the native will construct many villages, tanks, towers, towns and gardens. He will befriend virtuous men and be an
excellent person on the earth.
Notes: The 9th lord and Jupiter should be wellplaced as stipulated. Both of them should be with a
benefic orbenefics as the case may be. Or they should
be in aspect to the owners of the signs they are in. For
example, Leo ascendant, the 9th lord Mars with
Jupiter in Virgo aspected by exalted Venus.
One having this yoga will be a successful professional builder. Other effects are company of virtuous
men and excellence in many ways.
माने च राशौ यदि वा दिनेशे
वित्ते शशङ्के गुरुवीक्षिते वा |
सत्कर्मचारी सुकृती धनाढ्यो
लोकान्तरे सौख्यमिवाहुरार्याः॥११४॥
114. Jupiter aspecting Luminaries: The Sunin
the 10th and the Moon in the 2nd, aspected by Jupiter
will give the following effects: He will perform good
deeds, be wealthy and be happy.
जीवे भोमेन दृष्टे यदि भवति महान् कर्कटे स्वोच्चगे वा
केद्रे वा यत्र संस्थे हयनगरगजनेकदुर्गाधिनाथः।
ूर्णायु्दन्तिदन्तोल्लसदुरुकनकान्दोलिकानृन्दराजगेहद्रापदेशे मणिमकुटलसत्कीर्णसामन्तसेव्यः॥११५ ॥
115. Mars aspecting Jupiter: If the planet
Jupiter is in Cancer in exaltation inaspect to Mars, the
person concerned will be the leader of horses, towns,
elephants and many forts. He will be endowed full
life-span. He will own an array of palanquins decorated with ivory and gold. Under the auspices of a
king he will adore a gem-studded diadem and be
served by subordinate kings. |
Notes: The netessence of exalted Jupiteraspected
by Mars is longevity, abundant wealth and fame.
Jupiter in Cancer should be aspected by Mars
either from Sagittarius (owned by Jupiter himself),
from Capricorn (Mars in exaltation) or from Aries
(ownership held by Mars).
Hes साहसी भोगी स्थिरचित्तप्रतापवान्।
चतुरङ्गबलोत्साही युद्धे वीरपराक्रमी ॥११६ ॥
116. Kahala Yoga: The subject having Kahala
Yoga will have firm thinking, be valorous, be enthused by four kinds of traditional armies and will `
show great courage in a war.
Notes: Kahala Yoga’s formation is not explained
here and we do not know how the original proposed
this yoga. But the effects are quite akin to Parasara’s
stipulation. ।
As perthesage, the yoga in question occurs when
the 4th lord and Jupiter are in mutual angles as the
ascendant lord enjoys strength. An alternative formation according to Parasara is by the 4th lord being
in his own or exaltation sign along with the lord of the
10th. The results thereof are: “The person will be
energetic, adventurous, cunning, endowed with a
complete army consisting of chariots, elephants,
horses and infantry, and will lord over a few गा.
“Foolishness” is also a part of Kahala Yoga
according to some Tamil textbooks.
The reader may further refer to Jatakadesa
Marga, Phala Deepika and Jataka Parijata for further information.

92 Chandra Kala Nadi
आरूढलग्नेशशुभे शुभक्ष
संकातयो नाडिविलगनहोरा |
जातो नरः सर्वधनाथिपः स्यात्
स्वबन्धुमुख्यत्वमुपेति काले ॥११७ ॥
117. The lord of Aroodha ascendant and Hora
Lagna should bea benefic and be ina benefic’s house.
Then the native will own all kinds of wealth and will
be an important person among his relatives.
स्थिररूढे तत्रच धने देवगुरो स्थिते |
लाभे वा बलसंयुक्ते वाहनाढयो भवेन्नरः ॥११८ ॥
118. Conveyances: The Moon in a fixed sign
which is the ascendant while Jupiter is in the 2nd or
11 with strength will bestow on the native rich
conveyances.
Notes: “Sthiraroodhe” can also be interpreted as
the Aroodha ascendant falling in a fixed sign, which
however does not appeal to me.
वाहेशे भाग्यनाथे वा गुरुणा संयुतेक्षते ।
राजपुज्यो वदान्यश्च सरवेश्वर्यसमन्वितः॥११९ ॥
119. Royal Honour etc. ; The lord of the 4th or
the 9th in aspect to or in association with Jupiter will
beget royal honours, munificent nature and all kinds
of wealth.
लग्नाधिपे लाभगते तदीशे भाग्यसंस्थिते।
तदीशे कर्मभावस्थे कर्मनाथेन संयुते |
विततेशेन युते वापि महाभाग्ययुतो AT Ro ॥
120. Great fortunes; The native willenjoy great
fortunes if the ascendant lord is in the 11th house
while the 11th lord is in the 9th, and the 9th lord is
either in the 10th, or is in the company of one of the
lords of 10th and 2nd.
तरिकोणकेन्द्रे यदि भाग्यनाथे
सौम्येक्षिते सोम्ययुते बलाय |
सुांशके वा यदि वाऽसुरंशे
जातोधनाढ्यो बहुभाग्ययुक्तः॥१२१॥
121. Riches & Fortunes: A strong lord of the 9th
in a trine or in an angle with the company or aspect
ofa benefic will grant abundant riches and fortunes.
Notes: Suramsa and Asuramsa are not standard
terms. Suramsa does not however mean Sura
Nadiamsa here.
लगने कर्कटके जीवे rea पापे सुते WA
राजमुद्राधिकाराप्ती राङ्गश्चातुर्यसेवकः॥१२२॥
122. Royal Authority: If the ascendant is
Cancer containing exalted Jupiter while a benefic is
in the Sth house, the subject will have an authority
with royal seal, be a king and be a skillful servant.
Notes: The word “Paape” meaning a malefic is
an orphaned piece of text and hence not included in
the rendering.
चनद्रशकगते US शुक्रसोम्यो तृतीयगो |
UST धने HS रथवाहनभाग्यवान् ॥१२३ ॥
123. Owner of Chariots: If the Moon is in
Moon’s Navamsa (i.e. Cancer Navamsa), Venus and
Mercury are in the 3rd ..... (text incomplete). The
planet Venus should be in an angle from the ascendant, and 2nd from the Moon to give ownership of
chariots to the native.
Notes: The first line is incomplete.
The second line requires Venus to be in the
ascendant, 4th, 7th or 10th while the Moon is in the
3rd or 6th or 9th or 12th from the ascendant. Such a
person will own many superior conveyances.
चनद्रशृक्रौ मिथो दृष्टौ घटे सिंहे स्थितौ तथा।
हरिणांशगतो चेव त्रिप्रहोच्चे प्रजायते ॥१२४॥
124. The 001 870 Venus should be in conjunction or in aspect to each other involving Leo and or
Aquarius. (The effects for this yoga are not given.)
The next line deals with some planet to be in Harina
Nadiamsa. In the next breath, 3 planets in exaltation
are referred to. Inall these three cases, effects are not
listed. Hence this sloka may be ignored.
बते शुक्रे धनगते राजयोगी भविष्यति
सोपि भार्यर्थसंयुक्तो मञ्गुवाहनवान् भवेत् ॥१२५॥
125. Venus in the 2nd: Should Venus with
Strength be in the 2nd house, the person will be
endowed with wife and wealth, apart from lovely
conveyances.

Deva Keralam 93
मणिप्रवाठयोगः -
उच्च द्वितीये सोम्ये वा पञ्चमे वा तथा शुभे ॥१२६॥
अष्टमे च तथा पापे नवमे च तथा YA
श्रीमन्तः पुरुषा लोके विपरीते विपर्ययः,
मणिप्रवाक्योगोऽयं तत्र राजा भवेन्नरः ॥१२७॥
126 - 127. Mani Pravala Yoga: (a) This yoga is
formed in one of the following three manners:
(1) A benefic exalted in the 2nd or the 3rd while
a malefic is in debility.
(2) A benefic exalted in the 4th or in the 5th.
(3) A malefic exalted in the 8th while a benefic
is so placed in the 9th.
As a result, the person will be wealthy and be a
king.
(b) A contrary situation will produce opposite
effects, that is the subject will be poor.
Notes: (a) Some may prefer to interpret that all
these three conditions should be simultaneously
present to form Mani Pravala Yoga. The condition
“Vipareethe Viparyayah” (vide condition at “b”
above) does not allow that interpretation as a contrary
situation is impossible to exist.
(1) The 2nd house or the 3rd house from the
Ascendant should have an exalted planet while a
malefic planet should be in debility anywhere. Thus,
two planets feature in this condition.
(2) Here only one planet features - that is the 4th
or the 5th should have an exalted planet.
(3) Here two exalted planets feature - benefic
exalted in the 9thand malefic exalted in the 8th house
from the Ascendant.
In any of the above cases, the subject will enjoy
a royal status with wealth and paraphernalia.
(b) Contrary: Now, a contrary situation in each
of the above three individual conditions should be
drawn thus:
(i) Contrary condition for “a1” above is: The 2nd
or the 3rd having a debilitated planet while a malefic
is exalted anywhere. This will deprive one of wealth
and status. In other words, in a horoscope where a
malefic planet is exalted, the 2nd or3rd should be free
from occupation by a debilitated planet.
(ii) Contrary for “a2” above ts: the 4th or 5th
from the Ascendant should have a debilitated planet
as a result of which one will be poor, without any
mentionable status.
(111) Contrary for“a3” above is: 8th house having
a debilitated malefic planet while the 9th house has
a debilitated benefic planet. This native will also be
in the grip of poverty and will have no important
position in life.
सिद्धारम्भः कर्मगे चन््रलगनाद
भानो भौमे साहसी पापबुद्धिः।
विद्वान् सोम्ये वाक्पतौ राजतुल्यः
शुक्रे भोगी भानुजे शोकतप्तः॥१२८ ॥
128. Tenth From The Moon Sign: The Sun or
Mars inthe 10th from the Moon will make the person
an achiever and valorous, but of sinful disposition;
Mercury produces a scholar. One equal to the king is
denoted by Jupiter; devotion to pleasures will result
Venus occupying 10th from the Moon. Saturn refines
one with grief if he happens to be in the 10th from the
Moon.
Notes: The Sun inthe 10th of the Moon will give
wealth and health. The person will help others, and
will enjoy royal status.
Mars in the 10th from the Moon sign will make
one live in foreign places. He will be intent upon
enjoying sensual pleasures, will have a cruel disposition and will have a mean conduct.
Should Mercury be in the 10th from the Moon,
the person will be rich, close to highly placed people,
famous, artistic and intelligent.
Jupiter in the 10th from the Moon, will give
success in all undertakings. The subject will be
righteous, wealthy, will have a famous history and
will enjoy ministerial positions. Also see effects of
Amala Yoga in the previous slokas.
Fortunes, beauty, success, riches and royal rec-
` ognition will follow Venus placed in the 10th of the
Moon.
Although evil effects like childlessness,
grief,poverty, sickness and emotional upsets are inherent of Saturm’s position inthe 10th from the Moon,
he will be an asset for political success in this
position. He should of course be well-placed.

94 Chandra Kala Nadi
` विलग्नप्रबले सोम्ये दुर्बले पापखेचरे |
दर्शनादर्शनाभ्यां च सम्पत्नः शुभलक्षणः॥१२९ ॥
नरश्चिरयुरृपपूजितःसुखी
लग्नं भवेत् सौम्यगृहं यथा तथा।
लग्ने शशी स्वामिनिरीक्षिते धनी
कुशाप्रबुद्धिः कुलकीर्तिवर्धनः ॥१३० ॥
129 - 130. Good Features, Long Life et cetera:
(a) A strong benefic in the Ascendant while maletics
are devoid of strength, will produce a person complete with pleasingly excellent and auspicious features (befitting physiognomically favourable descriptions). Further, he will be long-lived, worshipped
by the king and be happy. In this yoga, the Ascendant
should however be a benefic’s sign.
(b) The Moon in the Ascendant aspected by her
dispositor produces one who will be wealthy, whose
intelligence will be as sharp as the point of Kusa
grass, and who will be of a famous lineage.
Notes: (a) If malefics placed anywhere enjoy
strength, they will prove an obstacle for the benefic
in the ascendant in delivering the results suggested.
Comparatively malefics should be stripped of their
vigour. If malefics are stronger than the benefic inthe
ascendant, opposite effects will come to pass. If the
ascendant is ruled by a natural benefic, the advantages will be sure.
Ifthe sign ascending is a malefic, the disqualification can be offset by more than one benefic therein,
i.e. two or more benefics placed in the malefic sign
ascending; not that those who are born in Leo, Anes,
Capricorn etc. will be backward in these respects.
(b) This is acommonly found yoga and needs no
detailed explanation.
लग्ने पापप्रहे रोगी दुर्बलः शतरुपीडितः।
निधनाधिपसंदृष्टे दस्र व्याधिमान् भवेत् ॥१२१॥
सुखी दारेशदृषटे च दद्र रिपुवौकषिते |
पंचमे नवमे चैव वन्ध्यांशकगते शनो |
वन्ध्यापर्विभवेज्जातो FATA भवेदधूवम् ॥१३२ ॥
षण्डांशके मदाधीशे चतुर्थे राहुसंयुते |
लग्नाद्द्वितीयगे मन्दे द्वित्रिसन्ताननाशवान् 11233 ॥
131 - 133. (a) A malefic in the ascendant will
make one sickly, weak and troubled by enemies.
(b) A malefic in the ascendant in aspect to the
lord of the 8th house will cause penury and sickness.
(c) If the aspecting planet in the above case is the
Ath lord, instead of 8th lord, one will be happy.
(d) If the aspecting planet in the above case is the
6th lord, poverty will result.
(€) Saturn in the Sth or in the 9th house, with a
Navamsa which denotes barrenness (i.e. Leo Navamsa) will make the native marry a barren woman.
Alternatively, he may beget dead children.
(f) The 7th lord ina Navamsa owned bya eunuch
planet while the 4th house is occupied by Rahu, and
the 2nd by Saturn - this yoga will destroy two or three
children.
Notes: (a) If the occupant of the ascendant is a
major planet, being malcfic, like Saturn, Rabu, or
Ketu, sickness and inimical troubles will be perennial, and will not end soon. A benefic highly afflicted
wil] also give similar effects.
(b) This can affect the length of the life as well.
The person will be in perpetual sorrow.
(c) A malefic in the ascendant in aspect to the
lord of the 4th is said to give happiness. Perhaps it is
because the lord of the 4th holds key to one’s general
happiness. That way Venus will also do thesame job
like the 4th lord.
(d) The aspect of the 6th lord will further trouble
one with litigations, debts (different from poverty)
and incurable diseases.
(€) Classical texts describe Leo as barren. Practical experiences have generally not proved this
point.
(f) The 7th lord from the natal ascendant should
not be in Gemini, Virgo, Capricorn or Aquarius in
Navamsa. The 2nd from the ascendant denotes
fanuly. But the reader may be wondering why the 4th
house is involved in matters related to birth of
progeny. Although general text books like Jataka
Paryata, Saravalt, Parasara Hora, and Phala Deepika
have not referred to the 4th in respect of acquisition
of progeny, Nadi text books give importance to the
occupation of the 4th as well. Of course they have not

Deva Keralam 95
over-rated the 4th in preference to the 5th, nor did
they state that the 4th rules progeny.
For example see sloka 136 infra where the 4th
house is referred to in respect of children.
लग्नात् सप्तमगे पापे तदीशे पापसंयुते ।
भार्याया हयदरव्याधिर्गर्भकोशे कृमिः स्मृतः॥१३४॥
तदभावे स्वभार्याया गर्भशङ्कप्रपीडितः।
भाग्येशे सप्तम स्थाने गुरक्त्रे तदीश्वरे |
माने पापसमायुक्ते हयद्हीनवधूपतिः॥१३५ ॥
134 - 135. Concerning Wife: (a) Should one
have a malefic in the 7th house while the 7th lord is
conjunct another malefic, his wife will incur disorders of stomach and worm-infected womb. In the
absence of these, her conceivability will be in doubt.
(b) Ifthe 9th lord is inthe 7th house identical with
a sign owned by Jupiter, while the dispositor Jupiter
is in the 10th house with a malefic, the native will
marry a physically disabled woman.
Notes: (a) This is a simple yoga easy enough to
be understood. This yoga will cause obstacles in
begetting progeny. Else, the person’s spouse may
have abdominal disorders.
(b) The 7th house is ruled by Jupiter in case of
Gemini or Virgo rising. For Gemini, the 9th lord
Saturn in the 7th house while the 7th lord Jupiter is in
Pisces in the company of a malefic will cause marriage with a physically disabled girl. In case of Virgo,
the 9th lord Venus should be in Pisces, in exaltation
while Jupiter is in Gemini with a malefic to cause
marriage with a woman with physical defect.
There is also a rule that Venus in debility in the
7th will give a physically defective spouse.
पापान्तरे सुखे जीवे पञ्चमे वाल्पपुत्रवान्।
द्वितीये दारहानिः स्यान्मदे द्वित्रिकन्प्रवान् 1236 ॥
136. The 4th House: Ifthe 4th house is hemmed:
between malefics, Jupiter in the 5th will cause limited number of children. Instead of 5th, if Jupiter be
in the 2nd, he will harm the native’s wife. Lastly if he
be in the 7th, while the 4th is hemmed between
malefic,s the subject will have two or three marnages.
Notes: Three yogas are discussed here involving
the 4th house and Jupiter. In each yoga, the common
feature is that the fourth house should be hemmed
between malefics.
In the first place, Jupiter in 5th will cause limited
number of children. In the 2nd house, he will adversely affect the wife, normally will curtail her lifespan. In the 7th house, Jupiter will give two or three
marriages. All these, only when the 4th house has
malefics on both the sides. Otherwise, Jupiter alone
in such position should not be expected to give these
adverse results.
सप्तमे राहु सूर्यो चेद्रोगभार्याद्रयं तथा ।
गुरुणा वीक्षिते तत्र दारसौख्यं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥१२७॥
137. Two Wives: The Sunand Rahu together in
the 7th house will cause acquisition of two wives both
of whom will be sickly. If Jupiter aspects this combination, the wives concerned will be healthy.
लग्नात् सप्तमगे पापे SS पापसमन्विते |
भाग्ये पापे WAALS HOTTA ॥१२३८ ॥
138. Three Wives: One will beget three wives if
both the Ascendant and the 9th are occupied by
malefic planets while the Moon is also witha malefic.
अकोद्राहकलां शस्थे ह्यकद्ाहत्निभार्यवान् |
जामित्रारूढगे पपे जामित्रेशे धनेऽपि वा ॥१३२९॥
लग्नाद्धाग्यं गते पापे दारहानि विनिर्दिशेत्।
कठतरनाथे रिपुनीचंसस्थे |
मूढेऽथवा पापनिरीक्षिते च।
कठ्त्रभे पापयुतेऽथदृष्टे
कठ्छ्रहानिं प्रवदन्ति सन्तः॥१४० ॥
139 - 140. (a) The Sun attaining the degree of
descendant (i.e. 7th cusp) and begetting 7th sign in
Navamsa will cause three wives.
(b) Evils to wife should be foretold if a malefic
is inthe 7th house while the 7th lord is inthe 7th house
and the 9th house contains a malefic.
(c) One’s wife will obtain evils if the 7th lord is
in the 6th house, or is in debility, or is combust, or is
aspected by a malefic or if the 7th house is related to

96 Chandra Kala Nadi
a malefic planet by aspect or occupation.
| Notes: (a) This composition is somewhat defective. The above translation may be treated as the
nearest to the suggested concept.
(b) "Jaamitraroodhe Paape" is not to be interpreted as a “maleficinthe 7th Aroodhapada”. Aroodha
means mounted.
(c) The evils referred to in the originally could
generally be seen as sickness.
ped वा कुटुम्बे वा पापद्ग्योगसंभवे।
तदीशे बलहीने च HAAN भवेत् ॥१४१ ॥
141. Another Marriage: The 2nd house or the
, 9th house should be related to a malefic by aspect or
occupancy. The 2nd or 9th lord as the case may be
should be bereft ofstrength. Then the native will have
a remarriage.
विद्याधिपे वा यदि चन्धरसूनौ लगनेऽथ वा लग्नसंयुते वा।
बलान्विते पापदृशा विहीने विद्यायशशित्पि कुलप्रसूतः ॥१४२ ॥
142. High Learning: The 4th lord or Mercury
endowed with strength, joining the Ascendant or its
lord and being free from malefic’s aspect denote that
the native is born in a family of artisans and will be
famous for his learning.
तुलागन प्रजाश्च द्वितीयो भवति धृवम् ।
उत्तरां प्रजातस्तु चतुर्थां जायते तथा ॥१४२ ॥
arate जन्म HA तस्य सिध्यति।
पूर्वभागे प्रजातश्चेत् पट्टणे जन्मवान् भवेत् ॥१४४॥
143 - 144. Libra Ascendant: One born in Libra
Ascendant will be the second issue of the family. In
case of second half, birth will be ina small village on
the bank of a “mean” (or small) river and the native
will be the fourth issue. In case of former half, birth
will be ina city.
Notes: So far the text has been dealing with
general rules applicable to various ascendants, without taking Nadiamsa into consideration.
From now on, some Nadiamsa rules are discussed. |
Here, the text does not mention the Nadiamsa,
but Libra Ascendant. Only first half and second half
are mentioned. This inconsistency continues upto
sloka 164, infra.
From a careful reading, it will be evident that
these belong to Vikrutha Nadiamsa, Libra ascendant
as found from sloka 165 on.
पिता च राजगेहे च राजमानेन तोषितः।
उत्तरांश प्रजातस्य पिता देशान्तरे भवेत् ॥१४५ ॥
सञ्चारशीलवा fact किचित्सन्तापसंयुतः।
सोदरप्रानृमान् रोगी व्यवसायपरम्ुखी ॥१४६ ॥
उत्तरांशे प्रजातस्य स्वपिता पशुधान्यवान्।
पूर्वभागे प्रजातस्य पिता वाहनभाग्यवान् ॥१४७ ॥
बाल्ये दारिद््रदुःखात्मा सोदरभ्रातृनाशकः।
एकाकी स्वपिता कामी प्रचुर्ञातिवर्गवान् ॥१४८ ॥
जन्मदेशं परित्यज्य दक्षिणे राजसेवकः।
THE प्रसिद्धश्च धनाध्यक्षः स्वतन््रवान् ॥१४९ ॥
145 - 149, Father: (a) The father of the native
of first half would serve in royal circles and be happy
gaining royal honour (or recognition).
(b) The father of the native of second half would
earn his livelihood in foreign place, and would be
disposed to wandering (or frequently moving from
place to place for living). He would be somewhat
distressful. He would have uterine brothers, be sickly
and be attached to his calling (or agriculture). He
would be rch with quadrupeds and grains.
(c) The father of the native of first half would be
rich in conveyances. In childhood he would incur
poverty. He would be the lonely issue of his family,
be lustful and his kinsmen would be famous. He
would leave his birth place and serve a king in the
southern part. He would become famous in royal
circles, be the chief treasurer and be independent.
मातृष्वसुसुतो भूत्वा तद्धनस्याधिपत्यवान् |
धनाढ्यो SSAA देवव्राह्मणपूजकः ॥१५० ॥
विनीतो garrett युवतीकामुकः सदा |
सङ्गीतसाहित्यकलास्वभिङ्ञ
राजाङ्गनादिप्रियभोगवां श्च |
गम्भीरचेताः स्वपिता दयालु

Deva Keralam 97
भाग्यांशयोगे फलमाहुरार्याः॥१५१ ॥
संगीतसाहित्यकलास्वभिज्ः
स्वप्रीतये चापि रसेश्च गानी |
शेलूषिकायां कृतभिन्नगा्
सदा जनैः संयुतयुद्धगर्वी ॥१५२ ॥
मुक्ताहारेषु सततं प्रीतियुक्तो विशेषतः।
स्वच्छवलप्रियो नित्यं ahd प्रीतिमान् सदा ॥१५३ ॥
धनवद्धिकरो नित्यं मांसभोजनतत्परः।
भोगस्रीसङ्गवानित्यं तासां च प्रियवल्लभः ॥१५४ ॥
150 - 154. The father of the native of first half
would stay with his maternal aunt’s son and would
obtain rights on his wealth. He would be (later on)
wealthy, very intelligent, would honour gods and
Brahmins, be modest, soft-spoken, 2119८१५ 3 to women,
skillful in music, literature, and arts, and would join
royal women. He would perform profound acts and
be liberal. He would be fond of his kinsmen, would
have knowledge of tastes (a branch of medical science), would ever increase his wealth, be a flesheater, would join prostitutes and would be dear to
them.
युवतीनां दृष्टिमत्रैः पञ्चवाणवशगतः।
तासां गुप्ततिं कृत्वा तदीयधनमश्वुते ॥१५५ ॥
एवं पापसमायुक्तो बहुपुण्यकरः कृती |
AARC DIM: कोमटस्वच्छदेहवान् ॥१५६ ॥
मदनामयवान् किंचित कर्णसेगी च दुर्बलः।
अन्तः PIAA शनुपीडानतत्परः॥१५७ ॥
मर्मगोप्ययरः श्लाधी मर्मकर्मविचारकः।
155 - 1571/2. Description of Father (Continued): He would be ina position to "use the fivearrows
of Cupid on women by a mere sight" (1.6. would have
a heart-capturing appeal for women), would have
secretunions with them and would attain their wealth.
He would do sinful acts but would also do many
meritorious acts. He would have a dark, softand pure
physique. He would have some sexually transmitted
diseases as well as ear disorders. He would be inwardly cunning and would be intent upon troubling
his enemies. He would be secretive and be a celebrity. He would indulge in secretive deeds.
पितृष्वपि क्षमायुक्तः सुविचारितकार्यवान् ॥१५८ ॥
गम्भीरहदयो धीरः श्रूणामपि वल्लभः,
कालान्तरे शत्रुहन्ता कपटोपायमाश्रितः॥१५९ ॥
158 - 159. Paternal Uncle: The paternal uncle of
the native of former half of the subject Nadiamsa,
would be patient in disposition, would intend doing
good deeds, be deep in heart, valorous, affectionate
to enemies, after sometime would destroy his enemies, would take to means of cunning.
पितामहो दुर्मरणः दीर्घजीवा पितामही ।
मातामह! तथा विन्ात् सदा मातुलपोषकः ।। १९० ।।
मन्धुपूज्योऽतिमतिमां ल्लिपिले्यविशारदः।
स्वराजकार्येनिनुणः स्वकार्ये च विचक्षणः ॥१६१॥
धना्जितपरो नित्यं तदाकोद्यानकारकः।
अ्रहारप्रतिष्ठायामत्यन्तादरवान् सदा ॥१६२॥
शिव विष्णोः सदा भक्तो विशेषशिवभक्तिमान् |
वेदिकप्रियवान् रागी शास्रालोचनतत्परः॥१६२ ॥
सभापूज्यो TOT कार्यसाधकः।
दिवाकरप्रसादेन पुत्रलाभादिमौख्यवान् ॥१६४॥
160 - 164. Paternal Grand-parents: The native’s paternal grand-father will meet with a tragic
end while his paternal grand-mother and maternal
grand-father will be long-lived. (The native?) will
look after his maternal uncle, will honour his relatives, be intelligent, be skillful in languages, writing
and accomplishing royal orders. He will be intent
upon earning wealth, will construct tanks, gardens
and Brahmins’ colonies and will be highly respectful
of others. He will be devoted to Lords Siva and
Vishnu, more so to Lord Siva, will follow Vaidic
path, be passionate, will be interested in the injunctions of Sastras, be worshipped in the assembly, be
virtuous, will fulfill his task by tact and will by the
grace of Sun God obtain sons.
सुधांशे च विलगनेशे सुमत्यंशे freee |

98 Chandra Kala Nadi
विकृतांशे प्रजातस्य पितयो चिरजीविनो ॥१६५ ॥
मातृष्वसा पुत्रवती सुभाग्या
ह्याबाल्यसोख्यादिसुभूषणा स्यात् |
श्रीमान् धनी भूपतितुल्यभोगी
भाग्यांशयोगे बहुभाग्यवान् स्यात् ॥१६६ ॥
165 - 166. Libra Ascendant - Vikrutha
Nadiamsa: One born in this part of the zodiac while
Venus and the Moon are in order in Sudha and
Sumathi Nadiamsas will have long-living parents.
His maternal aunt will have progeny and will be
fortunate. She will be happy right from childhood and
will have ornaments. The native will be rich, will
enjoy pleasures like a king and will have abundant
prosperity. ।
Notes: Vikrutha Nadiamsa is not found in the
list.
Sudha Nadiamsa may be referred to the notes for
sloka 454, Book I.
Sumathi Nadiamsa may be referred to in the
notes for 81019 2353, Book I.
विकृतांशे तुलालगने भ्राता हङ्गविहीनवान् |
सोदराः सप्त तेषा द्रो प्रबलो राज्यवल्लभो ॥१६७॥
स्वञ्येष्ठभगिनी पूर्वा बहुकालं सुमङ्गली |
167 - 1671/2 Coborn: He will have seven brothers out of whom one will have physical defect. Two
will be famous and dear to king. His older sister will
have long marital life, with a long-living husband.
विक्रमांशद्गाणांशे भूसुतस्यांशकोणगे ॥१६८
अत्यन्त भवनं तापि भरातृजन्मर्ष॑जं fare: |
पित्रादिभावं नेत्रघनं तत्वालघरिकान्वितम्।
चरादिष्मिसंयुक्तं सप्तर्विशतिभिर्हरेत् ॥१६९ ॥
शेषं पित्रादिनक्षतरं धनिष्ठा चाश्विनी तथा।
तलतिकोणेऽथ वा चेति प्रत्यक्षं मनुख्रवीत् ॥१७० ॥
168 - 170. (4) The 3rd lord’s decanate position
(read “Vikramesa” for “Vikramamsa”, or the Navamsa position or its trine as for Mars, or the 12th sign
from the one occupied by Mars will be the natal sign
of one’s brother.
(b) The Bhavas ruling father (1.6, 9th house etc.)
should be multiplied by two, to which the time of
birth in ghatikas be added, “along with the rays for
movable signs etc." and divided by 27. The resultant
figure when counted from Dhanishta/Aswini will
indicate the birth Nakshatra of the relative concerned, Alternatively a trine thereof willalso besuch
Nakshatra. These views are accordding to Manu.
Notes: (b) The clues given here apparently relate
to Ashtaka Varga. But the original suffers from errors
as the term “Charadi Rasmi Samyuktha" is not proper.
The rays (or Rasmis) have nothing ic do with a sign
being movable, immovable or dual.
भराग्ययोगे विलग्नेशे पापांश त्त्रिकोणगे |
स्वराशिजन्मनकषत्रं योजयेत् कालवित्तमः॥१५९१ ॥
` 171. The composition of this 51013 does not
allow a proper rendering. Sce - “The lord of the
ascendant ina malefic Navamsa ... in Bhagya Yoga
.... itt Its trines ... will be one’s birth star according to
experts in astrology.
पज्यस्थानं पञ्चमं RAY राजचिन्तनम् |
watt शुभसंयुक्तौ शुभारूढौ बलान्वितौ |
शुभमेव कलं LAM राष्टसुखं महत् ॥१७२ ॥
172. The 5th house is Rajyasthana (denoting
position) while the 9th house deals with, the king.
Saturn in the 9th house in the company of a benefic
and endowed with strength will cause benefic effects.
In 8 king’s horoscope, it will cause happiness in the
country.
राज्याधिपे स्वोच्चगते शुभांशे
नीचस्थिते वा शुभमध्यगे aT |
राज्याभिषेकादि सुवाहनापि -
गजान्तलक्षमीकरयोगमाक् स्यात् ॥१७३ ॥
स्वपितरौर्जन्मतश्चैव स्वप्रभोश्च विशेषतः|
अतिश्रियं च भोगं च दीर्घकालं सुजीवनम् ॥१७४॥
173 - 174. Position and Wealth: If the 5th lord
(Saturn) is exalted and obtains a benefic’s Navamsa,
or debilitated but being in the midst of benefics, will
cause enthronement, conveyances, and wealth in-

Deva. Keralam 99
cluding elephants. His father will be wealthy right
from the beginning, will enjoy pleasures, and will
live for a long time.
Notes: Enthronement for practical purpose means
a far superior position.
Even if the 5th lord is in debility, his being
associated with benefics on either side (even longitudinally, if not sign-wise) will cause the above-mentioned effects. This is called Subhakartari yoga and
is generally quite effective.
जन्पदाये महाभाग्यं गृहे कल्याणसंभ्रमम् |
लग्नाधिपान्ते काले स्वप्रभोश्च इदं फलम् ॥१७५ ॥
175, Vikrutha Nadiamsa - Libra ascendant:
The person’s birth dasa will cause great fortunes
while the sub period ruled by ascendant lord wiil
cause mariage in the family. (Swaprobhoscha referring to the king is a defective addition here.)
मण्डलेश्वरसन्मानं गजवाजिधनागमम् |
हेमाम्बरसुभूषाप्ति बहुमानं विचिन्तयेत् ॥१७६ ॥
176. He will be honoured by the king, will
acquire elephants, horses, wealth, gold, robes, ornaments and high esteem.
स्राधिपतिदोषेण लग्नाधिपतिभुक्तिषु |
PUTS जातकस्य मान्दज्वरमुपद्रवम् ॥१७७ ॥
श्वपिता दश वर्षाणि योगं प्रापनोति भूरिशः।
तदर्र्धिं कचिद्धदं शुक्र भुक्त्यन्ते व्यथाम् ॥१७८ ॥
177 - 178. Due to blemish of Venus by owning
the 8th house, his sub period (in the first dasa) will
cause trouble from indigestion. His father will enjoy
yoga effects for ten years, but in Venus sub period he
will face distress.
स्वबुद्धिप्रबतं राजप्रसादं च ततः WA
सिंहस्थे दिवसकरे जातः ख्यातो भवेन्नरः |
मेधावी स्तकस्सत्रश्चश्लेष्मलो भूमिवल्लभः॥१७९ ॥
179. The native will on account of his own merits
gain king’s mercy. Should the Sun be in Leo, the
native of Libra ascendant will become famous, will
be intelligent, will obtain a virluous wife, will incur
phlegmatic diseases and be dear to the king. (Bhoomi
vallabhah should read as Bhoomisa vailabhah.)
वृश्चिकांशकगे fae जागत्यंशे प्रजायते |
जन्म प्रभृतिसंपन्नः किंचिद्रोगशरीरवान् ॥१८० ॥
पित्रादेश्चात्मसंतापी रोगेशांशे प्रजायते |
रेगाधिपान्तरे काले जले मृत्युं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥१८१॥
180 - 181. Jagathi Nadiamsa - Libra Ascendant; (a) The Sun in Leo (in 11th) with Scorpio
Navamsa will give wealth right from birth, but the
subject will be somewhat sickly.
(b) The Sun joining the Navamsa ruled by the 6th
lord wili cause distress to father; in the sub period
10160 by the 6th lord death through water be foretold.
Notes: (a) Placed in Leo 23° 20' through 26° 40,
the Sun gets Scorpio Navamsa.
(b) For the Sun’s position in Leo, the Navamsa
referred to here is Sagittarius, not Pisces. The stress
for Sagittarius is that it is owned by the 6th lord
Jupiter. The sub period of 6th lord Jupiter is in the
dasa of 8th lord Venus. Apparently the text cites
some possible Balarishta, not necessarily insurmountable end as a remedy 15 suggested below.
Jagathi Nadiamsa may be found in sloka 2128,
Book I.
व्योमाकारं लिखेच्चक्रं चतुर्दिक्षु त्रिशूलकम |
कृत्तिकादीनि विन्यस्य मध्ये शूलं च विन्यसेत् ॥१८२ ॥
यन््रं च शोधनं कृत्वा क्षीरकुम्भेषु निक्षिपेत् |
कल्पोक्तविधिमार्गेण पूजादानं समाचरेत् ॥१८३ ॥
महेशदेवदेवेश वासुदेव परात् पर।
्षीरकुम्भप्रदानेन ज्वरं PUT प्रशामय ॥१८४॥
द्वित्रिवारमिदं दानं ज्वरोपद्रव पौडितः।
वीरभद्रबलेस्तुल्य आयुरागोग्यवान् सुखी ॥१८५ ॥
182 - 185. Remedy: To overcome this danger,
the image of the sky (i.e. zodiac) be drawn and
tridents should be erected in all its four directions.
The Nakshatras from Krittika should be distributed in
the said space, placing another trident in the middle.
The said device (or image, as Pratima is another
reading) should be purified by pouring a pot of milk

by r 7 ५१. oad
100 Chiaridea Kala adh
(with relevant Mantras). Pra yen and donations sould
be dane as preseribed by Sastias. Due to the essays
of Lord Siva and Lord Vishau, the native wall overcome sickness. Donation of milk pots for एतत कि
weeks will help him recover and wil regain streycuk
equal to Veerabhadra (Lord Siva’s inciination for
destroying Daksha’s sacrifice, and Veersnhadre is
said to have thousand heads, thousand eves, thonsand
hands, and thousand fect, wielding a thousand clubs.
This form of Siva is specially worshipped in Maratha
region.)
सिंहस्थे दिवसकरे कुजेन संयुक्ते प्रधानविद्ान् |
लिपिलेख्यकमे विधवासेवी स पराक्रमानुपमः॥१८६ |
186. Sun - Mars: 9170४10 these two planets join
in Leo, the person will be the chief amongst scholars,
be a writer, will serve a widow and will be incompa
rable in valour.
दिवानाथे च सिंहस्थे सौम्ययुक्ते उ मान्विकः।
देवारामतराकादीन् कृत्वा यज्वा भवेत्तथा ॥१८४ |
देवो भवतति शुद्राणां ज्योतिष्टोमाधिकारवान् |
धरम सततमासक्तर्चि्तवृ्तिश्च सास्िकी ॥१८८ ॥
187 - 188. Sun - Mercury: These two plancts 11
Leo will make one endowed with Satwa guna. The
native will construct temples, tanks etc., will perform
worships and Jotishtoma sacrifice, and be always
interested in justice.
fae च मिथुने amt भार्गवेन समन्विते ¦
सपर्थः कार्यनाशो च दण्डाकारश्च तापदः॥१८९ ॥
189. Venus in Leo or Gemini: With Venus in
Leo or Gemini ascending, one will be skillful in
destroying undertakings and will cause distress to
others.
Notes: The expression “Danadaakaara”™ should
read as "Dandaadhikaara" which denotes that the
subject will bea chief judge endowed with punishing
powers. This should be added to the above translation.
` जगत्यंशकगे fae रवो त्रिग्रहसंयुतरे |
स्वपिता दौष्टिकः कामी राजस्थाने सुपूमितः ५१९० |
BA "पद्यं युद्धे चायुधःण्डलीन् |
{ह पद्रवदेहवान् ॥१९१ ॥
190-191. Leo aseendant - Jagathi Nadiamsa:
The father ot one borin this partefthe zodiac having
the Sus associated with three planets will be maligant in disposition, lustful, honourable in royal circles, skillful in achieving his undertakings, and prone
to hurt by weapon in a war, untimely death, and
urinary disorders,
Nete: Earlier it was ! ibra ascendant. Now it ts
Leoascendart; the Nadiamisa in both caves 15 Jagathi.
For details of subject Nadiamsa, ieler to sloka
2128, Book I.
विषूविभयमापत्नः पूर्वभागे च पयत |
संपत्तरदशान्मादौ विपदाये पितुर्विपत् es? ॥
जगत्यंशे फलं मत्यं तत्काले कलहं महत् ।
सूर्याशकोणे मासे वा लग्नां शस्यत्रिकोणगे ॥१५३ ॥
शुक्लपक्षे पित्ररिषटं नन्दाभद्रा तिथौ भवेत् .
ततः पश्चाज्जातकश्च क्लशं प्राप्नोति भूरिशः॥१९४॥,
192 - 194. He (i.e. the father) will be liable to
incur danger from sporadic cholera. The native of
former haif of Jagathi Nadiamsa will see his father in
danger in the initial or concluding phase of second
dasa. The month of death will correspond to his
transit in the sign represented by his natal Navamsa
position or when he is in transit in the sign identical
with Navamsa ascendant ora trine thereof, in bright
half, on Nanda or Bhadra Thithi, After this, the
subject will be in abundant grief.
Notes: The first line of sloka 1923 ts apparently an
orphan and is nota part of this sloka. The second line
means: Results forJagathi Nadiamsa will be true. “At
that time there will be quarrels.”
Nanda thithts : These are Padyami, Shashti and
Fkadasi of either fortnight.
Bhadra thithis: These are Dwitiya, Saptami and
Dwadasi of either fortnight.
पिपद्यये योगभद्गं राजद्रं धनशषयम् |
quae सौख्यमपि स्वस्थानप्रापिमादिरेत् ॥१९५ ॥
195. In his third dasa, his prosperity will be
boone a Bll Me J arg एका ॥ '
HEARN >

Deva Keralam 101
(१६०१६1५५, he will incur royal ५. 4 and lose wealil.
In the sub periods ruled oy beactics during the said
dasa, he will, however, be happy an! will regain his
position.
Te Say inne We ae. oe ‘ait ~ प्त
नीचे PGI we मिथुने जत उच्यते |
वृषभ द्युः कालच व्यवधा: ॥१९६।
GUY GaSe: कललक्र व्यवारद्ापः॥१९६॥
196. This is incobercni. The meaning is: “the
Moon in debility with Viigo Navamsa while the
planet Jupiter is in Gemini, Deha Rasi is
Taurus...Placed in zodiac...”
देहे पापे देहपीडा जीवे जीवविनाशनम्।
तयोः पापे महाकष्टं सेगमृल्युभयावहम् ॥१९७॥
197. Deha Rasi & Jeeva Rasi: A malefic in the
Deha Rasi will cause lack of physical of comforts and
in Jeeva Rasi, he will destroy life, i.e will kill. If both
these places are occupied by malefics, there will be
abundant difficulties, diseases and fear of death.
eee पित्रोश्चमरणं वदेत् |
प्रहचारानुगुण्येन निरीक्ष्य फलमादिशेत् ॥१९८ ॥
198. According to Dasa periods and transits,
father’s death be (suitably) foretold.
Note: This should be read with sJoka 194 above.
चक्रसन्धिदशासन्धौ तत्काले पापगोचर।
वेधाक्रान्ते देहजीवे ह्यशुभं MATE TAT ॥१९९ ॥
199. Deha Rasi & Jeeva Rasi: During the
junction periods of two Kalachakra dasas, Deha Rasi
and Jeeva Rasis being reduced to malefic transits will
cause inauspicious effects.
Note: After rectifying the somewhat ill-constructed sloka, the above mcaning emerges. The
sloka suggests that no malefic planet, of major category (like Saturn and Rahu) should be in transit in
either the Deha Rasi or the Jeeva Rasi to avoid
inauspicious effects during the time one Rasi dasa
ends and another begins as per KCD.
अष्टममाधिपतौ शुक्रे चापांशे सिहगशिगे |
चापचक्रदशाकाले मरणं त्त्र निर्दिशेत् ॥२०० ॥
कुम्भचक्रे देहजाडयं चापान्ते शुक्र संस्थिते |
carrey द्वित्रिवारं ज्वरद्धयम् ॥२०१॥
200 - 261. Libra Ascendant: (a) If Venus as the
Stk iord is in the sign Leo with Sagittarius Navamsa,
the native (of Libra ascendant) will incur death in the
uasa of Sagtiarius Rasi.
(b} Should Venus be in the end of the sign
Sagittanus (with Sagittarius Navamsa), the dasa of
Aquarius Rasi will cause physical ailments. Duc to
the blenush of his 8th lordship, Venus will cause fear
of fever for two or three weeks.
Notes: (a) The Navamsa occupied by Venus. the
8th lord, has become significant in formulating this
aphorism. It being Sagittarius, the dasa of Sagitianus
Ras: (for 10 years) as per KCD will prove fatal. The
relevant sub period among the nine should be selected suitably.
Venus in Leo 26° 40’ to 30° will obtain Sagitta1105 Navamsa.
(b} Venus as the lord of Ist and 8th in the 3rd,
Sagittarius 26° 40' to 30° with Sagittarius Navainsa
will cause ailments in the dasa of Aquarius Rasi (four
ycars).
“Fever for two or three weeks” is not a significant or clear clue.
पितृसोख्यं सुभूषापि धिवादोत्सवमादिशेत् । '
भाग्ययोगे भाग्ययक्रे नहुभाग्यमिति स्मृतम् ॥२०२ 1
स्वेजन्मदेशे THAT शुभम् |
नारकालद्ूतादीनि स्तबुद्धिमनलं महत् ॥२०३ ॥
किचिद्राज्यकलपेनं ह्यादायादधिकव्ययम् |
पश्चात् स्वस्थं महत् सौख्यं गेहे कल्याणमंभ्रपम् ॥२०४॥
भाग्योगे प्रजातस्य शुभराशिभुभान्ते ¦
अतीव प्रबलं चेति नृतमप्रभुदर्शनम् ॥२०५॥
स्वप्रभोश्च FI नूतनप्रबलं सुखम् |
तन्मूला दिष्टसिद्धि च राजकार्यार्थसाधिकाम् ॥२०६॥
पिता राजप्रसादेनं महतीं भ्रियमश्नुते |
पश्चमाधिपतो स्वोच्ये भाग्यांशे च प्रजायते ॥
स्वपिता राजरजेन्रटुर्बुद्धिविनिवर्तने ॥२०७
सन्मार्गवृक्तिसंप्राप्ति संपूर्णशरुतिसंग्रहम् |

TAHT रजेन्रफलमशनुते ॥२०८ ॥
202 248. (These sickas are not well understandable and are incorrectly placed. Yet a rendering is
made forits sake.) Paternal happiness, acquisition of
ornaments, and consummation of marriage will result. In Bhagya Yoga...Bhagya Chakra... great prosperity will come to pass. His country’s ruler will
acquire a pleasure-giving woman. The subject will
excel in drama etc. His expenditure will exceed his
income, Later on he will be happy. There will bea
marriage in his family. One born in Bhagya Yoga
under good directional influences will visit a new
king. He will gain strength in royal service and
thereby his desires will be fulfilled. He will successfully complete royal assignments. Due to the mercy
of the king, his father will carn much wealth ifthe Sth
lord is exalted and is inthe 9th Navamsa. His father
will change the mental coursc of the emperorand will
bring him to the right path He will attain full
knowledge in Sruthi and will attain much fame.
र्परेशांशस्य दोषेण विक्रमाधिपभुक्तिषु |
अतीव स्लेशकार्याणि तृतीयाव्दे मनोव्यथाम् ॥२०९॥
Are ज्वरं देहनाडयं श्षप्रेणारोग्यमादिशेत् |
तुलारशिदशाकाले केतौ च मकरे स्थिते |
मकरानतर्दशाकाले कलहेन मनोव्यथाम् ॥२१० ॥
209 - 210. Libra Ascendant: (a) Due to the
Navamsa blemish caused by 8th lordship of Venus,
the sub period of 3rd lord (Jupiter) wiil cause many
difficulties. In the 3rd year, the subject will be
mentally distressed and will incur disorders of digestion. But he will recover early.
(b) See if Ketu at birth is posited in Capricorn. In
that case, the sub period of Capricorm Rasiinthe main
period of Libra Rasi will cause distress due to quarTels.
Notes: (a) The condition above needs some
elaboration. The lord of Sth, Venus, should be in
Sagittarius Navamsa. In that case, Jupiter being the
Navamsa dispositor of Venus will cause difficulties
3rd year causing mental distress should be appled meaningfully and to a limited extent.
Chandra Kala Nadi
(b) This rule is clear and be applied through Kala
Chakra Dasa.
स्वजमदेशनृपतौ स्वपितृद्रेषमादिशेत् |
मासत्रयात् परं सौख्यं स पुनर्योगवान् पिता ॥२११॥
पितृभावाष्टमेशेन समे व्ययमादिशेत् |
स्वपिता राजनिकटे द्यतीववहुमानवान् ॥२१२॥
211 -212. His father willincurroyal wrath. After
3 months he will be happy and willagain enjoy effects
of yoga (1.6. royal patronage). In the company ofa
king, the native’s father will earn high honours.
Note: The first line of sloka 212 does not mean
anything, which reads “the 8th lord from the 9th....
expenditure in war is indicated...”
वृश्चिकान्ते चापशनो वुद्योगो जननिग्रहे |
दन्तद्रव्यसुभूषप्तिः स्वप्रभोश्च फलं स्मृतम् ॥२१३॥
213. When Saturn transits in the end of Scorpio
or in Sagittarius, the native will incur professional
enmity. There will be gains of ivory, wealth and
Jewels to (from?) the king,
Note: The results mentioned above should apply
to the native and not to the king. However, it is not
clear as to in what circumstances this applies. Such
instructions could be found elsewhere also in these
pages, but they can only be ignored, or be used after
a careful assortment.
Ivory is from the elephant, and the elephant is
ruled by Jupiter. However ivory specifically comes
under the domain of Saturn just as teeth, animal horn
etc.
लाभेशे वृरिचकांशस्थ लगेशे धनराशिगे |
वृश्चिकान्ते चापगुरो स्वप्रभोश्च सुतोत्सवम् ॥२१४॥
वहुख्ीसंग्रहे चेति द्वितीयद्राहसंभ्रमः।
कुम्भराश्यन्तरे काले शनो स्वोच्चे प्रजायते ॥२१५॥
पित्रादिसोख्यमापोति सोदरोसत्तिमादिभेत्।
स्वपितामहदायदिसोदरे वा ह्यरिष्टवान् ॥२६६ ॥
्ञातिव्े सुतरिष्टं शुभभुक्तौ फलं स्मृतम् |
शुक्रस्याद्यावसानेषु बन्धुवर्गे महाविपत् ze I
पितामह्याः पितुः पीडा स्वराजामयशोकवान् ॥

Deva Keralam
214 ~ 2071/2. With the 11th lord obtaining Scorpio Navainsa while the ascendant lord is in the 2nd
house, ike transit of Jupiter in the end of Scorpio cr
in Sagitta:us will cause birth of a son. The subject
will acquire (or join) many women. He will have a
second mariage. During the operation of Aquarius
Rasi dasa Saturn moving in his exaltation sign, father
and such other relatives will be happy. The native
will obtain a younger brother. There will be danger to
paternal grandfather or his brother. In the sub period
of an auspicious Rasi, dunng Aquarius dasa, one of
the nalive’s relatives will lose his son. In the veginning or concluding part of Venus period, the relatives
will be subjected to great danger. His great grand father will also be tm trouble while the ruler of the
native’s kingdom will incur diseases and grief.
कीटे शतिस्थितै काते ब्रणादिज्वरपीडितः।
पितामह स्वसुः पुत्रः ध्प्रिणासग्यवान् सुखी ॥२१८ ॥
पापयोगे पितररिषटं वक्रसन्धौ च कालगे |
स्वपितुर्मातुलादीति क्लशं reife मूरिशः॥२१९ ॥
218 - 219. Saturn coming in transit to Scorpio
wil] cause ulcer, fever etc. to a son of the nalive’s
grand-father’s sister who will however have early
recovery. When malefics transit the Chakra Sandht
(junctions of Cancer-Leo or its trines), abundant
difficulties will be evident to the maternal relatives of
father.
लग्नाधिपदशाकाले सुखराशीश्वरन्तरे |
स्वमातुलस्य सन्तानं स्वप्रमोश्च विशेषतः॥२२० |
अतीव श्रियमाप्नोति धनलाभं दिने दिने |
सुताधिपदशाकाले MTT वा मृगे शनो ॥२२१॥
स्वजन्मदेशे नृपतेः पितामह्याश्च नाशनम्|
पितामहोऽपि सत्त्रयोगं प्राप्नोति नित्यशः॥२२२॥
दिव्याभरणवख्रापित रबहु्रव्यार्जितादिभिः।
PATA: स्यादवृषभे चेक्रक्रालगे ॥२२३ ।
जन्मदाये फलं सत्यं भाग्य योगे प्रजायते |
220 - 2231/2. In the major period of the lord of
the ascendant, the sub period of the lord of the 4th will
cause distress to one’s maternal uncle. (However, the
native will) gain abundant wealth will financially
progress day by day. During the dasa of the 5th lord,
Saturn moving in the end of Sagittarius or in Capricom will cause distress to the paternal grand mother
of the king(?). The native’s grand-father will obtain
a son, fine jewllery, robes and much wealth. During
the Kalachakra dasa of Taurus, one will gain through
relatives and acquisition of villages. Effects cited for
the first dasa with reference to Bhagya yoga will be
truthful. (???)
चनद्रांशके तत्तिकोणे स्पुटयोगं गते शनो ॥२२४॥
स्वजन्मदेशे नृपतेः सन्तानारिष्टमादिशेत्।
मीनराश्यन्त्रे काले स्वपितर्गमनाणमम् ॥२२५॥
किचिद्राजविरोधेन ह्र्थनाशं वििर्दिेत् |
बन्धुवर्गे मनस्तापं स्वपिता मित्रवर्गगे ॥२२६ ॥
pore परित्यज्य विद्यारम्भं विनिर्दिशेत्
224-226 1/2. Saturn transiting the Rasi coinciding with Moon’s natal Navamsa ora trine thereof will
cause evils to the king’sson(?). During the sub period
ruled by Pisces Rasi, the native’s father will be
involved in journeys, and will incur destruction of
wealth due to royal enmity. He will also incur mental
distress due to relatives and friends. The native’s
education will commence with the Sun in favourable
transits.
तुलारशिदशाकाले मेषाद्वारकभुक्तिषुं ॥२२७॥
शुभाशुभफलं मिश्रं गेहे कल्याणसं्रमम्।
जन्मराशिदशाकाले लग्नराशिदशान्तर |
अशुभं तत्र जानीयाञ्ज्वरोपद्रवमादिशेत् ॥२२८ ॥
227 - 228. Inthe sub period of Aries - Mars, under
Libra - Venus dasa both good and bad results will be
felt. There will be a marriage in the family. The sub
period of ascending sign in the major of the sign
containing the natal Moon will be inauspicious and
will cause troubles from fever and the like.
मेषरसिहधनूराथो कुम्भवृश्चिकमासगे |
देहालस्यं WHAT सर्वदाये फलं स्पृतम् ॥२२९ ॥ .

229, In the Kalachakra dasa periods of Aries,
Leo and Sagittarius, the months denoted by the
transits of the Sun in Scorpio and Aquarius will cause
lack of physical energy.
लाभाधिपे भाग्यगते भाग्येशे लाभराशिगे |
तावुमो लाभगौ वापि भाग्यलाभमिदं स्मृतम् ॥२३० ॥
लनारूढवशात् सौख्यं योगं प्राणोति भूरिशः।
230 - 2301/2. Gains: With the lord of the 11th in
the 9th while the 9th lord is in the 11th, one will gain
fortunes. So also when both these lords are in the
11th. Ifthese two are in the ascending sign, they will
cause happiness and yoga (prosperity).
Notes: This is a general rule applicable to any
ascendant.
It is to be noted that the text does not prescribe
a yoga leading to fortunes if both the lords of the 9th
and the 11th are in the 9th. But it is a yoga for
fortunes.
कर्माधिपान्तरे काले कर्मे राहो च जायते ॥२२१॥
शुभाशुभ्रफलादीनि निर्दिशेत् कालवित्तमः।
TAB TAYE व्यवसायाद्धनार्जनम् ॥२३२ ॥
231 - 232. Rahu in the 10th: The sub period of
the 10th lord (in any dasa) will cause a mix of
auspicious and inauspicious events if Rabu is found
in the 10th at birth. The native will befriend people
living in Mlechcha countries and will earn money
through agriculture (or will have professional gains).
स्वप्रमे sree कर्मे रहुफलं स्मृतम् |
कर्पाधिपे धनस्थाने सुमत्यंशे च जायते ।
अन्मराशिदशाकाले स्वपिता प्रामलाभवान् 1233 ॥
233. He will also acquire lands in his birth place.
These are the effects for Rahu placed in the 10th
house.
Sumathi Nadiamsa: If the lord of the 10th is in
the 2nd house, the native of Sumathi Nadiamsa, the
first dasa of the native will bless his father with
acquisition of villages (i.e. Janded properties).
Notes: This sloka has three lines while the first
line deals with effects for Rahu in the 10th vide
previous sloka. The next two lines deal with Sumathi
Chandra Kala Nadi
Nadiamsa without reference to any particular ascendant. So also the following slokas upto 236 1/2.
जन्मकर्मधनाधीशभुक्तिकाले महत् फलम् |
लाभाधिपान्ते काले लाभो भवति नित्यशः॥२२४॥
गेहे सोदरकल्याणं विशेषधनलाभकृत् |
सहोदरीविवाहः स्यात् स्वप्रभोश्च विशेषतः॥२२३५॥
234 - 235, In the first dasa, the sub periods ruled
by the lords of the ascendant, 10th and 2nd will cause
very beneficial effects; the sub period of the 11th lord
will bring gains (to the native), marriages to his
brother and sister, and abundant financial progress.
in the dasa ruled by the ascending sign, and the 3 signs
(transited by the Sun) will...
Notes: The sloka is incomplete and of disorderly
construction. Hence this may be ignored.
लग्नरशिदशाकाले लाभाधिपतिभुक्तिषु |
भाग्येशान्तरमारभ्य राशित्रयफलं स्मृतम् ॥२२६॥
236. The sub period of the 11th lord, the beginning and ending phases of the 9th lord’s sub period,
व्ययेश्वरांशे सान्तापं व्ययाधिपतिभुक्तिषु ।
मन्दे जीवान्तरे काले विकृतांशे च जायते ॥२३७॥
राहुभुक्तयन्तमारभ्य Tee सुशोभनम् |
धनराशिदशाकाले धनेशे लाभराशिगे ॥२३८ ॥
प्रभूतधनलाभं च पुत्रादिश्रियमशुते |
जातकस्य Hania: स्वबुद्धिदृढमादिशेत् ॥२२९॥
237 - 239. Vikrutha Nadiamsa: The first three
lines do not give us a proper guidance, the meaning
of which is: (Transit of, obviously Saturn) in the sign
identical with 12th lord’s Navamsa position will
cause distress. The sub periods of 12th lord and of
Jupiter and Saturn will for a native of Vikrutha
Nadiamsa... The sub period of Rahu in beginning and
ending phases, and that of Jupiter will cause auspicious effects.
The next three lines out of the above six lines
mean: If the 2nd lord is in the 11th, the dasa of the
second Rasi (Kala Chakra Dasa) will cause abundant
wealth and acquisition of sons etc. The native will

Deva Keralam
acquire a high degree of leaning and will have firm
disposition.
Notes: In the above six lines, the last three lines
give a very useful clue which can be applied through
Kala Chakra Dasa. The dasa ruled by the 2nd Rasi
will cause abundant wealth, acquisition of sons and
firm mentality, if the 2nd lord at birth is placed in the
11th house. This is independent of the Nadiamsa.
TRY प्रजातस्य धनराशिदशा व्यथाम् |
अष्टमाधिपतिदोषेण देशत्यागं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥२४० ॥
ताताम्बिकादिस्वजनादिवेरं
क्तेशं वदेदप्रामजनादिभिश्च |
मानार्थभूम्यादिविनाशनं च
विदेशयाने फलमाहुरार्याः ॥२४१ ॥
उत्तरांशे फलं सत्यं कर्माद्रानन्तरं व्यथाम्
240 - 2411/2. One born inthe 27414110 Vikrutha
Nadiamsa Libra ascendant will undergo distress in
the dasa of the 2nd Rasi. Due to the blemish of the
8th lord, he will leave the country (or birth place in
search of green pastures). He will earn enmity of his
grand- mother and such other relatives. He will also
earn the wrath of his village men. His honour, wealth,
lands etc. will be destroyed following which he will
migrate.
पूर्वभागे धनाधीशदशायां सोख्यमादिशेत् ॥२४२ ॥
सहोदरीसुतप्रापि स्वराजस्य वशात् सुखम् |
्ञातिवर्गकलापेन स्वपिता व्याकुली क्वचित् ॥२४२ ॥
242 - 243. The 2nd lord’s dasa (as against 2nd
Rasi dasa, above) will prove beneficial fora native of
first half of the said Nadiamsa. His sister will obtain
a son and he will be happy through the ruler of the
land. Due to enmity with his kinsmen, his father will
be somewhat distressed.
विक्रमेशेदशाकाले दारेशांश त्रिकोणगे |
स्फुटयोगं गते जीवे दारलाभं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥२४४॥,
244. During the currency of the dasa ruled by the
3rd lord, Saturn’s transit in thesign represented by the
Navamsa occupied by the 7th lord, ora trine thereof,
will bestow marriage.
ATT दारेशस्थानगेऽथवा |
सुतेशस्थांशराशीशभक्तिकाले महत् सुखम् ॥२४५ ॥
245, Great happiness will come to pass in the
following sub periods: (a) Of the Navamsa dispositor
of the natal ascendant lord. (b) Of the Rasi dispositor
of 7th lord. (©) Of the Navamsa dispositor of the Sth
lord.
षष्ठाष्टमव्ययाधीशक्रान्तराश्यन्तरेऽथवा |
केदत्रिकोणेशभुक्तौ शुभं भवति नित्यशः॥२४६ |
246. The sub periods of the signs occupied by the
lords of 6th, 8th and 12th an those of angular and
trinal lords will be auspicious.
Notes: Two sets of clues are given here, as under:
(a) The sub periods of the signs occupied by the
lords of the 6th, 8th and 12th will be auspicious. This
is as per KCD. However, this is of doubtful origin.
(b) The sub periods ruled by lords of 1st/4th/7th/
10th (angles) and 5th/9th (trines) will cause auspicious effects. This isa popularand general aphorism.
कुम्भराश्यन्तरं त्यक्त्वा सर्वदाये शुभं भवेत् |
मध्यमं वृषभं सिंहं शेषं सर्वशुभावहम् ॥२४७ ॥
247, Except the sub period ruled by Aquanus,
the others are auspicious. However, the sub periods
of Taurus and Leo will be only moderately good.
Notes: This is not an independent rule and is a
drop out of a certain set of rules. Hence not clear.
मुखाधिपे स्वोच्चगते सुखराशिदशा सुखम् ।
जन्मयोगानुसरिण सौख्यं भवति नित्यशः॥२४८ ॥
लग्ने पापे सुखे पापे तदशायां महाविपत् |
पित्रादिस्वजनक्तेशं क्रूर्यशिदशान्तरे ॥२४९ ॥
248 - 249. Ifthe 4th lord is exalted, the dasa ruled
by the sign which is 4th from the ascending sign will
cause happiness, according to the yogas (auspicious
combinations) available at birth. The said dasa will
cause great danger if both the ascending sign and the
4th thereofare occupied by malefics. Inthe said dasa,
the sub periods ruled by malefic signs will cause
difficulties to father et cetera.
Notes: Theseareas per KCD, applicable to Libra

106 Chandra Kala Nadi
ascendant, (7 Saturn is exulied, the dasa of Capnicom
Rasi will .ause happiness according to the total
strength of horoscope. However the sub periods of
maleficsigns will in the said Capricoin dasa harm ue
nerson’s father.
नक्रराशिदशकते तुलालानस्य जातके |
जननी व्याकुलं चैति स्वराजन्यजनास्तथा ॥२५० |
250. Capricorn Dasa: For a native of Libra
ascendant, the dasa ruled by Capricorn will indicate
distress io his mother and also to the king (>)
ah कौटयपनक्रदशायानर्दशासु च ।
जननी व्याकुलं चति राजमाता तथैव च ॥२५१॥
251. The dasa and sub periods ruled by the signs
Cancer, Scorpio, Taurus and Capricorn will cause
distress {0 the native’s mother. So also to the mother
of the king (?)
चतुथेकेन््राधिपतेर्दशायां
योगो भवेतद्धाग्यसुभूषणाप्तिः।
Waa मुनयो वदन्त |
UMA वापि नृप्रसादात् ॥२५२ ॥
252. Dasa of 4th Lord: Sages decree prosperity
and acquisition of ormaments in the dasa ruled by the
lord of the 4th. In the sub periods of benefic planets
during this dasa, royal mercy will come to pass.
Notes: The dasa of 41h Inrd should read as dasa
of the 4th sign ^ i.e. Capricoin. See also notes for the
following sloka.
सुताधिपदगां faa सुते स्नोच्यररिगे ।
बरहुपुत्रार्थसम्पत्नो नृपसेवी Ga SAM ॥२५३॥
aaa स्वांशगे सोख्यमेवं फलमुदाहतम् |
253 - 2531/2. Dasa of Sth Lord: Ifthe lord of the
Sth is in exaltation, his dasa will cause birth of many
sons and acquisition of wealth. Such a native will
serve the king and will be endowed with virtues.
Should the said planet be in own sign or in own
Navamsa, his dasa will cause (mere) happiness (as
against the above “splendid effects”).
Note: Instead of dasa of Sth Jord, it should be
dasa of Sth Rasi which will be evident from the
sequence. Further, for Libra ascendant, Satum ऽ 1258
cannot be separated as 4th lord’s dasa and Sth lord’s
dasa.
Also see consolidated notes under slokas 256 -
257 infra.
रिपुराशिदशाकाले रिदवद्धिर्धनक्षयः॥२५४ |
भार्यायाः स्वात्मन्येव Frere भवन्ति हि |
ओजयुग्मानुसरेण याग॑रश्यन्तरे शुभम् ॥२५५ ॥
PRIN क्रूरं भावोक्तफलमुत्तमम् |
254 - 2551/2. Dasa of Sixth Sign: (a) The dasa of
the sixth sign (Rasi) (as counied trom the ascendant)
will increase enemies, and reduce wealth. The
spouse and progeny of the subject will be subjected
to diseases and difficulties.
(9) According to the sign being odd or even,
auspicious effects will materialise in the sub period
denoted by the Yoga Rasi.
(c) The sub periods of malefic signs will cause
adverse effects.
(d) Results stated forthe Bhava will be excellent.
Notes: There are certain missing links in these
lines. The clues given in “a” and “c” are meaningful.
Those in “b” and “d” need some more conditions in
the original and hence are unclear.
घूनाधिपे लग्नगते चूनाधिपदशा सुखम् ॥२५६ ॥
रवपुगद्राहसोख्याप्ती प्थ्रराशिदशा मृतिम् ।
SITS ALTA तथा ॥२५७॥
256 - 257. The Lord of the 7th: Should the lord
of the 7th be in the ascendant, the dasa of 7th lord will
cause happiness to the subject apart from marriage to
his son. The dasa of 8th lord will inflict death on the
subject - in the 48th or 54th year.
Notes; The clues regarding dasa periods for
Libra ascendant, from sloka 248 to 257 can be
arranged in an easy way as under:
1. Saturn in exaltation at birth will enable Capricorn - Saturn dasa give happiness depending on the
whole set of planets.
2. The ascendant Libra, and the 4th - Capricorn
- both occupied by malefic planets, will produce great
danger in the dasa of Capricorn - Saturn. Note the

Deva Keralam
inclusion of the ascendant.
3. Further, the sub periods of malefic Rasis will
endanger father and other relatives. (This isto he read
with point 2 above.)
4. For Libra ascendant, the dasa of Capricorn -
Saturn will generally harm the persoa’s mother.
5. The dasa and sub periods ruled by Cancer,
Scorpio, Taurus and Capricorn will also harm his
mother. That is two of the said four signs should rule
the major and sub periods.
6. The dasa of Capricorn ~ Saturn will give
prosperity and acquisition. The sub period of a
benefic’s sign will beget royal favours.
7, The dasa of Aquanus - Saturn will give many
sons, and acquisition of wealth provided Saturn is in
Libra at birth. Further the person will be inthe service
of the king and be virtuous.
8. The dasa of Aquarius - Saturn will give
happiness (instead of total effects as at 7 above) if
Saturn is in his own sign or own Navarnsa, as against
his being in Libra.
9. The dasa of Pisces - Jupiter will cause increase
of enemies and minimise one’s wealth. His spouse
and children will incur diseases and difficultics.
(This should equally apply to the native.)
10. {f Mars is in the ascendant Libra, the dasa of
Mars (Vimsottari) will cause marriage to his son.
11. Venus dasa, will inflict death in certain
circumstances. This should be applied when the dasa
is the first one or When Venus is in the grip ofa killer
planet.
The above instructions at S.No.1 to 9 apply to
Kalachakra Dasa analysis, while 10 and 11 are as per
Vimsottan dasa.
A discerning reader can extend these suitably to
the various other ascendants.
विकृततांशे पूर्वभागे कालमृ्युरितीरितः।
चन्द्रांशफलविस्तारं योजयेत् कालवितमः॥२५८ |
258. One born in the first half of Vikrutha
Nadiamsa wil! have timely death (i.e. will not face
untimely one). Those learned in astrology have
detailed effects of Moon’s Navamsa (part of which 1s
given below).
वद्धंशाधिपतौ जीव स्वकषत्रे शनियुते |
HEMT प्रजातश्च दत्तपत्रयुतो भवेत् ॥२५९ ॥
259. Adopted Son: The Moon should be ina
Navamsa of Jupiter who in turn should be in bis own
Rasi in the company of Satuin. This yoga will give
an adopted son (for a Libra native).
किन्नंशे निशानाथे वृश्चिके केतुसंयुते।
तदीशे राहुसंयुक्ते सिहांशे दततपुत्रबान् ॥२६० ॥
260. The Moon in Kinnara Shashtiamsa tn Scorpio along with Ketu, while Mars joins Rabu (in
Taurus) and begets Leo Navamsa will lead to going
for an adopted son.
Notes: Kinnara Shashtiamsa in Scorpio extends
from 2° 30' to 3° where the Moon is needed to be in.
Kunnara is a mythical being with a human head
in the form of a horse.
Mars in Taurus should be between 23° 20' to 26°
4()' to beget Leo Navamsa.
Thus for Libra ascendant, the Moon and Mars
should be in the above-mentioned spaces while Rahu
and Ketu are in order in Taurus and Scorpio. Asa
resuli, one will have an adopted issue.
स्वपिता च तथा विन््ादराल्ये क्तेशेन कर्शितः।
feat पूर्वभागे WAYS सदा भवेत् ॥२६१॥
काव्यातंकालाटकवेत्ता च तत्ववाधकः।
सुखे पापयुते चदे सुतेशे शमिसंयुते ॥२६२ ॥
बाल्ये च जननीक्तेशं पश्चादपभ्रातृविहीनवन् |
FRY प्रजातस्य pare विनिर्दिशेत् ॥
सन्धिकाले प्रजातस्य दीर्घजीवी पिता भवेत् ॥२६२॥
261 - 263. His father would have troubles in the
native’s childhood. Birth in former half of Kinnara
Nadiainsa will make one worshipped by the king. He
will be learned in poetry and rhetoricand bea teacher
of philosophy. The Moon in the 4th with a malefic

while the 5i lord is w ith Selura will cause worries to
mother in the native’s childhood. Birth msecond half
will result in evils to progeny. Cne born in “Sanuhu
Kala” will have a long living father.
Notes: These three slokas have nothing really
tangible to offer. In the first place Kinnara Nadiamsa
is not listed anywhere.
Secondly these are in a wrong place.
From the above we can take certain raw-material
kind of clues:
a) The Moon in the 4th house in the company of
a malefic as Saturn is conjunct the Sth lord will bring
troubles to the mother in the early years.
b) Sandhi kala does not convey a clear meaning.
It is not known whether it is Lagna Sandhi (junction
degrees of two ascendants) or twilight time. Normally it is twilight time, that 1s the junction of dawn
and dusk, or dusk and dawn.
स्यात् किन्रांशे जनितः सुरूपी
भूपालसेवी प्रियभाषणश्च |
मातृको पोपितलालितश्च
धनन्वितो टु खसदहोऽतिधीरः॥२६४ ॥
264. Kinnara Nadiamsa: One born in this
Nadiamsa will be charming in appearance. He will
serve a king and willspeak sweetly. He will have two
mothers, will be sportive, wealiby and will be able to
endure (any) grief.
Notes: Kinnara Nadiamsa 1s not enlisted.
शशाङ्होराजनितोऽतिसोम्यः
कान्तासमेतः स्वजनोपकारी |
विद्वान् सदाचाररतोऽतिरणी
स्वच्छद्गयष्टिश्व स चन्द्रयोगे ॥२६५ ॥
265. Birth in Moon’s Hora: One born in the
Moon’s hora (in general) will be soft (in disposition),
be endowed with women, be helpful to his kinsmen,
learned, of good conduct, and highly passionate.
चनद्रयोगे प्रजातस्य स्वपिता भाग्यवान् Wer |
जनको चात्मपितरो बाल्ये क्लेशेन कर्शितौ ॥२६६ ॥ ,
266. Chandra Yoga: The father of the native
having Chandra Yoga will ever be prosperous. The
Chandra Kala Nadi
native’. grand-parenis will be grieved dunng his
childhood.
Note: What kind of Chandra Yoga is referred tu
is not known. Does it refer to natal ascendant in
Moon’s Hora?
frat मातृशोकी नानाव्याकुलवान् भवेत् |
दरव्यनष्टादिभीतिश्च जन्मदाये भविष्यति ॥२६४ ॥
267. The native of Kinnara Nadiamsa will have
grief in respect of mether. He will undergo various
kinds of difficuluics and will be prone to financial
losses during first dasa.
fee प्रजातौ alc. eateries |
लोभी मिताशनो नित्यं स्वबन्ध्वाश्च fare |
तुलांशके प्रजातस्तु परख्रीभोगलालस. ॥२६८ ॥
268. The native of Leo will be a king, will give
up his religion, be devoid of wealth, be a miser, will
eat limited food and will incur enmity with his bride
(i.e.spouse). One born in Libra Navamsa will be fond
of union out of wedlock.
Notes: The clues given about Leo are of doubtful
origin.
The other aphorism relating to Libra Navamsa
should be applied after a careful study of the 7th
house, Venus and other related elements.
चन्द्रे केतुयुते बाल्ये ्यन्यस्रीस्तन्यपानवान् |
सपलीमातरो नैकाः कस्यांरिचत् प्रीतिमश्नुते ॥२६९ ॥
269. The Moon in the company of Ketu denotes
that during childhood the subject will be breast-fed
by another woman (than the mother). He will not
havee just one step-mother (i.e. will have many) out
of whom this subject will be dear to one.
Notes: The conjunction of the Moon with Ketu
in this case denotes many marriages to the native's
father. Out of many step-mothers one in partciular
will like the subject.
Further this conjunction will not allow the native
to be fed with his mother's milk during childhood.
उदयमुपगतेऽके facet च कामी
शशिसुतनिभवर्णो राजसेवी दयालुः |

Deva Keralam
भवति कटुकरसे प्रीतियुक्तोऽत्र जातः
पततमपि मनुप्यः प्रायशो दुश्चरः ॥२७० ॥
लग्नम्धेऽक facet ह्दारे
दष्टाचारो Taal सुमन्त्र |
मर्त्यो भूयो निग्रहे दत्तदृष्टिः
शुक्रे कामी पुत्रावान् प्रातृहीनः॥२७१॥
270 - 271. Planets in Ascendant: The प्रा inthe
ascendant will produce a bilious physique and the
subject will be lustful. His complexion will be like
that of Mercury (?); he willservea king and be liberal.
He will be fond of bitter juices and will have a bad
(questionable) history. He will be given to bad
conduct and will be a good minister. If Venus is in
the ascendant, one will be lustful, be endowed with
progeny and be devoid of coborn.
Notes: Bilious physique, liberal disposition and
serving a king are repeated again in sloka 271.
These clues seemto apply toa specificascendant
which is not clear.
However somc hints are generally applicable to
the various ascendants ina certain measure. The Sun
in ascendant will cause association with king (or
government), bilious body, bad history etc. Similarly
Venus in the ascendant will give a lustful disposition.
केचित् पक्षे fats मातृस्थाने निशाकरे |
गयेष्ठभ्रातृयुतश्चेति भगिन्येका प्रजायते ॥२७२ ॥
कालान्ते मृतिं fara किन्नरंशस्य सोदरः।
272 - 272 1/2. Kinnara Nadiamsa; According
to one school of thought, the subject of Kinnara
Nadiamisa having the Moon in the 4th house will have
one elder brother and one younger sister. His brother
will pass away after some lime.
किननरांे निशानाथे लमेऽर्के गुरुवीक्षिते ॥२७३ ॥
विद्यावान् मधुराभाषी सिंपित्रयतिशारटः।
कलव्रदयवान् वाग्मी बन्धुवर्गे सुपूजितः ॥२७४॥
पित्रार्जितार्थवान् भोगी स्वभुजाजितभाग्यवान् |
हृसिभिक्तिरतो नित्यं दयादािण्यशीलवान् ॥२७५ ॥ `
273 - 275. The native of Kinnara Nadiamsa
having the Moon in the ascendant while the Sua is
aspected by Jupiter will be leartied, will speak sweetly
and eloquently and will be an expert in three Janguages. He will have two wives, and will be respected by his relatives. He will have paternal
properties, will enjoy pleasures and will also have
self-earned wealth. He wiil be devoted to Lord
Vishnu and be kind to others.
लग्ने Yad जीवे किन्नरंशे प्रजायते |
स्वमित्र बन्धुवर्गादि देवव्राह्मणपोषकः ॥२७६ ॥
मण्डलाधिपतिद्रारे स्वपिता योगतरान्धवेत् ।
नर्वाहनवान्धोगी धनी सद्राजयल्लं भः ॥२७७ ॥
म्वपिताधिदःधर्मात्मा SISTA ।
सोदरभ्रातृरहितः किन्ररंशे पिता सुखी ॥२५८ ॥
्रव्यार्जनसमर्थश्च देवतोत्सवधार्मिकः।
ज्ञातिवरगे सुधाग्याप्पिर्ार्धके च सुभाग्यवान् ॥२७९ ॥
276 - 279. Selfand Father: Venus inthe ascendant while Jupiter is in Kinnara Nadiamsa will cause
following effects. The subject will patronise friends
and relatives and will honour Gods and Brahmins.
His father will gain through the head of the region
(i.e. king), will enjoy conveyances, be wealthy, dear
to a virtuous king, be highly charitable, devoted to
Lords Vishnu and Siva, be devoid of a coborm and be
happy. He will be skillful in gathering wealth and be
engaged in performing temple festivals. His kinsmen
will be prosperous and he himself will prosper.
भायाधिपे राहुयुक्ते पञ्चमे शनि संस्थिते |
स्वपिता वातरोगेण क्लेशं प्रापोति भूरिशः॥२८० ॥
280. Windy Diseases: The native’s father will
have troubles from windy disorders (paralysis, rheumatism, arthritis etc.) if the 5this occupied by Saturn
as the 9th lord is with Rabu.
aman निशानाथे किन्नरांशे च जायते |
कर्मेशांशकमे जीवे गाचरे मधुमासे ॥२८१॥
सम्पद्ाये सूर्यभुक्तौ मोञीबन्धनमादिशेत् |
सुखेशांशे तत्िकोणे सुखेशाक्रान्तराशिगे ॥२८२ ॥

110 Chandra Kala Nadi
स्फुटयोगं गते जीवे विद्यारंभं विनिर्दिशेत् |
अष्टमाब्दे विवाहः स्यादशमब्दे च वा यदि ॥२८२ ॥
wera मुखी नित्यं पञ्चाब्दे महाविपत्।
द्वितीया RETA बालरिष्टभयं कचित् ॥२८४॥
मान्दज्वरभयं किंचिदव्णरोगवान् सुखी भवेत्|
281 - 284 1/2. The Moon in Vargottama Navamsa: The subject of Kinnara Nadiamsa having the
Moon in Vargottama Navamsa will beget following
results. Transit Jupiter in the sign identical with the
Navamsa occupied by the 10th jord will cause thread
ceremony in the month of Aries. This can also be in
the Sun’s sub period of the second dasa. His education will commence when the transit Jupiler moves in
the sign occupied by ihe 4th lord, or in the sign
identical with the said planet’s Navamsa, or a trine
thereof. Mariage of the subject will occur inthe 8th
or 10th year. In the second dasa, he will be ever
happy. His fifth year will involve him in grave
danger. Coinciding with the Sun’s evi] transits, his
second year of age will cause uncertainty about his
life-span; he will suffer from indigestion and ulcers.
fae बुधयुते सूर्ये भार्गवेण समन्विते 224 |
भूमुतेन युते दृष्टे नेत्रोगप्रपीडितः।
यत्किचित्पुषिताक्षस्य क्षिप्रिणायेग्यमादिशेत् ॥२८६ ॥
285 - 286. Eye Disorders: The planet Mercury
in Leo in aspect to or in association with Mars, while
the Sun joins Venus (in one of the signs from Cancer
to Virgo) will produce troubles from eye disorders.
There is a possibility of the person having a floral
mark on the pupil of his eye. However, his eye
diseases will be curable early.
धनेशे गुरुसंदृषटे fees भृगुसंयुते |
वयोमध्ये नेत्रपीडां बाल्ये किचितलरपीडितः॥२८७ ॥
287. The Sun with Venus in Leo as Jupiter
aspects the 2nd lord will cause eye troubles in the
middle of one’s life. Some such troubles will also
exist in the native’s childhood.
चन््राज्जामित्रगे भौमे fees राहुसंयुते |
विपदयाये दारहानिद्वितीयोद्राहवान् सुखी ॥२८८ ॥
केचिदक्षे क्षेमदाये द्वितीयोद्राहयोगवान् |
सम्पदशादौ जनन्यास्तृतीरयाशे पितुर्विपत् ॥२८९ ॥
विपदृशांदो सन्तानं क्षेमदाये Bagi: |
THEY PRR TREAT ॥२९० ॥
सापलमातृफलहं मातृवं शजनावधि |
288 - 2901/2. Mars in the 7th of the Moon while
the Sun is with Rahu will endanger the native’s
spouse in the 2nd dasa and lead to remarriage.
According to some, the second marriage will only be
in the 4th dasa. His mother will be endangered in the
beginning or end of his second dasa while father will
experience danger in the last one third part of the said
dasa. Inthe second dasa, during the sub periods of the
Moon and Mars, the subject will have quarrels with
his step-mother and there will be troubles to maternal
relatives.
प्वराजन्यजन्रेषं WAC मकरंशगे ॥२९१॥
चापान्ते व्याकुलं चेति ओतर्यकलहं महत् |
ुद्रभूपतिसन्तापं कुत्सितप्रभुनाशनम् ॥२९२॥
291 - 292. Irrelevant: (When the planet Saturn?) in transitarnives in the Capricorn Navamsa, the
subject will have enmity with king’s relatives. If the
planet is in end of Sagittarius in transit, the native will
be distressed while there will be strife in the northern
region. A mean king will be distressed and destroyed.
Haat सोम्यदाये स्वपितृव्याकुलं महत् |
पित्रा सेवित्रराजस्य राज्ये विप्लवमादिशेत् ॥२९३ ॥
सञ्चितार्थविनाशः स्याद्रजवाजिभटादिषु |
अतीव क्लेशकार्याणि देशक्षोभं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥२९४॥
293 - 294. The dasa of Mercury and the sub
period of Ketu will cause great troubles to father and
there will be a revolt in the kingdom served by the
father. Wealth. horses, elephants and servants (of the
king) will be destroyed and protection of the country
will become greatly difficult.
तृतीयवर्षऽष्टमवत्सरे वा
दशान्त्यगे पञ्चमवत्से AT |

Deva xeralam ill
संवत्परे त्रिशति वा पिताब्दे |
ज्वरेणचासुभयं भवेत्रृणाम् ॥२९५ ॥
षटपञ्चाशत्समान्त्यादौ सप्तपञ्चाशवत्सरे |
HUT ज्वरं दाप क्लेशमाहुश्चतुष्टयम् ॥२९६ ॥
दोषपरिहारार्थं शानि कुयद्विचक्षणः,
एकपष्टिसमे मृत्युः Waa व्याकुलं महत् ॥२९७॥
295 - 297. The subject will be endangered by
fever in the 3rd year, 8th year, 5th year, 30th year,
5611 year and the 57th year. To overcome this
(dangerous) fever suitable reniedies be done. He will
die in the sixty-first year while sixtieth year will
cause great danger.
एजामात्यविरोधेन TITEL |
Trae प्रकुर्वीत राजप्रीतिधनागमम् ॥२९८ ॥
्रबलोद्योगसौख्याप्तिः स्वस्थो भवति निश्चयम् |
वापान्ते मकरे मन्दे गोचरे मकरे गुरो ॥२९९ ॥
अतीव क्तेशकार्याणि पश्चात्सोख्यं सुखावहम् |
298 - 2991/2, Due to enmity with king and
minister, be will face many troubles. Lateron be will
be happy and will acquire wealth due to royal pleasure. He will obtain a rewarding employment and will
surely be healthy (or contended). Saturn in end of
Sagittarius or in Capricorn while Jupiter is in Capricorn will (initially) cause great difficulties, but will —
bestow happiness later on.
लग्नाद्रा THAME चद्द्रेशांशत्रिकोणगे ॥३०० Il
स्फुटयोगं गते मन्दे देषोपद्रवमादिशेत् |
300 - 3001/2. Satum transiting the sign represented by the Navamsa occupied by the Moon’s
dispositor at birth, or a trine thereof, will cause
physical ailments.
Notes: The expressions “From the ascendant or
fromthe Moon” are not properly linked inthe original
with something apparently missing. As such these
are excluded in the rendering.
साधकेशदशासन्धिकाले TPT ANA: 130k I
amet महद्धाग्यं निलश्रर्द्धिमान् सुखी
PRR पूर्वभागे मायाब्दे राजदर्शनम् ॥३०२॥
मन्दान्तरे सुभाग्याप्तिः पञ्चमे मातुरादिसेत् |
सम्पात्तारदशा सन्धिविपददाये स्वभु्तिषु ॥२०३ ॥
ऋतुशान्त्यादिसो भाग्यं Hert विना शुभम्|
गुरोर्दितीयपर्यायि स्वोच्चे श्रीमान् सुखी भवेत् ॥३०४॥
गुरुद्वितीयपर्ययि गोचरे द्रादशे गुरो ।
301 - 3041/2. In the junction of the (Sth and the)
6th dasa, the native will incur death. The fourth dasa
will cause much prosperity, firm wealth and intelligence. One born in the Kinnara Nadiamsa will visit
the king (i.e will get royal links) in bis 15th year. In
the sub period of Saturn, be will obtain fortunes. In
the end of the 2nd dasa, or in the first sub period of the
3rd dasa, there will be functions in the family relating
to the puberty of a fernale. This sub period will give
auspicious effects except in the months denoted by
the evil transits of the Sun. The second round of
transit Jupiter (i.e. from 12th year to 24th year
approximately) he will gather wealth. In the said
second round when Jupiter reaches the 12th, he will
obtain a son, ornaments and royal honours.
Note: “Panchame Maturadiseth” is an out-ofcontext term and hence not included in the rendering.
पुत्रोत्सवसुभूषाप्ति राजसन्मानमादिशेत् ॥३०५॥
पञ्चमाधिपतौ जीवे स्वक्षत्रे शनिसंयुते ।
सिहलग्ने प्रजातस्य सीमन्तशिशुनाशनम् ॥३०६॥
दारद्ये सुसन्तानं भुक्तभाग्यांशसंख्यया |
पुत्र्यं चिरायुष्यं पुत्रिका च तथा भवेत्।
शेषं नाशमिति प्राहुः fees च जायते ॥२०७॥
305 ~ 307. Leo Ascendant: For Leo ascendant,
the 5th lord Jupiter in own sign in the company of
Saturn will cause destruction of the firstissue. He will
have two wives. The number of children (after the
said loss) will correspond to the number of Navamsas
past by 9th cusp (or Bhava Madhya), Two sons and
two daughters will be long-lived while others (born)
will (also) be destroyed (like the first issue). These
apply to Kinnara Nadiamsa in Leo ascendant.
wert ages जीवसोम्यान्ते तथा |

अतीव क्लेशकार्यणि देहपीडां विनिर्दिशेत् ॥३०८ ॥
368. This is again an incorrect sloka which
means: In all the dasas, the sub periods of the Moon,
Rabu, Jupiter and Mercury will be so. Due to very
difficult undertakings the native will incur physical
illness.
पञ्ममाधिपतो जीवे was शनिसंयुते |
एकर्विंशात् परं योगं वत्सरे षोडशे तथा ॥३०९ ॥
लक्ष्मीयोगफलं सत्यं frre धनागमम् |
राजान्तरे धनप्राप्तिः क्षेमदाये विशेषतः ॥३१० ॥
309 - 310. For a Leo native, with Kinnara
Nadiamsa, Jupiter in own sign in the company of
Saturn will cause prosperity in the 16th year, and after
2ist year. The native will enjoy effects of Lakshmi
Yoga (1.६. will be wealthy). In the third dasa he will
obtain riches, through a different king (or change of
country). More prosperity will exist in the 4th dasa.
पञ्चमाधिपतों जीवे स्वोच्वांशे शनिसंयुते।
लक्षमीषष्टयंशकं विन्दाद्योजयेत् कालवित्तपः॥२११ ॥
लक्षमम्यंशजः Maer: सुपुत्र
समस्तयोगेरुपसेव्यमानः।
विद्यान्वितो भूपतिरञ्कश्च
वधूद्रयाटयो हरिपादसेवी ॥३१२।
चापे शनियुते जीवे स्वोच्वांशे गजपूजितः।
कामितरर्थप्रदो नित्यं कामिनीनां विशेषतः॥२३१३ ॥
311 - 313. Jupiter, in joining Saturn, should
obtain his own Navamsa. Then the native of Leo
ascendant, with Kinnara Nadiamsa, will beget following effects. He will be endowed with spouse,
good children, all kinds of yogas that lead to prosperity, will be served by others, be well-educated, will
cause satisfaction to the king (i. €. will win over the
king), will have two wives, will worship Lord Vishnu,
and will be honoured by the king, All his desires will
be fulfilled with this Yoga.
Notes: Lakshmi Shashtiamsa is a redundant
condition, hence not included in the rendering.
जन्मलग्नाधिपे सूरये शुक्रसोप्यसमन्विे |
Chandra Kala Nadi
भाग्याधिपेन सन्दृष्टे योगोऽयं पारिजातकः 3 ey Il
लग्नेशे पारिजाते यदि भवति तथाध्यासते राजमान्यो
जातो धन्यप्रियोक्तिः सकलजनसुखोल्लासकृद्धूरिभोगी |
पत्रः पत्रैश्च युक्तो युवतिजन नयनेक्षुचापातिरम्यः
Tage: स चेलसयात्पकृतजननं पापबुद्धिः मदान्तः॥३१५ ॥
314 - 315. Parijatha Yoga for Leo Ascendant:
The lord of the ascendant Sun being in association
with Venus and Mercury in aspect to the 9th lord
(Mars) will cause what is called Parijatha Yoga. One
born thus will enjoy royal recognition, will deliver
auspicious and lovable words, will cause happiness
to all people, will enjoy abundant pleasures, be
endowed with progeny and grand-children, will possess eyes that are peculiar to women with eyelashes
resembling an arck, and will have a very beautiful
appearance. If this yoga is aspected bya malefic (than
Mars), questionable birth and sinful disposition will
come {0 pass.
Notes: The Yoga - Parijatha - applies irrespective of Nadiamsa. The yoga given hereof apparently
forms when the ascendant lord joins the lords of 2nd
and 10th in aspect to the lord of the 9th.
There is another kind of Parijatha Yoga given by
Jataka Parijatha of Vaidyanatha which could be
found in its chapter VII, sloka 156.
In our text, it is stated that Parijatha Yoga
aspected by a malefic denotes a questionable birth,
and the native will commit sins. The aspect should
be to the Sun and his associates, viz. Mercury and
Venus.
साधनेशदशासन्धोचापाने मकरे शनो |
वृश्चिकादि त्रिमासेषु कृष्णपक्षे मृतिं वदेत् ॥३१६॥
316. In the junction period of 6th dasa
(i.e.junctions of Sth and 6th dasas) when Saturn
transits the end of Sagittarius or in Capricorn with the
Sun moving in the three signs from Scorpio, the
native will face death. It will be further ina dark lunar
fortnight.
वित्ररांशे निशानाथे नीचे वगोत्तमांशके |
देहान्ते नरकं याति परलोको न विद्यते ॥३१७॥

Deva Keralam 113
मनोहरे किन्नंशे चैकत्र फलमादिशेत्
चन््रनाडीफलं सत्यं प्रत्यक्षं देवकेरव्छम् ॥३१८ |
317 - 318. For birth in Kinnara Nadiamsa in Leo
ascendant, the Moon in Scorpio in Vargottama Navamsa will throw one in the hell after death. Chandra
Nadi is the only one source where effects for Kinnara
Nadiamsa have been beautifully discussed. These,
repeated in Deva Keralam, will bear truth.
तित्यानित्यकारकभावफलानि |
TAY जायात्मजभाग्यभावाः
तृतीयषष्ठाष्टव्ययाश्च सर्वे|
कुर्वन दुःखं च सुखं च जन्तोः
स्वयोगतोऽन्ये विफलं दिशनति ॥३१९ ॥
319. The 7th, 5th and 9th; and the 3rd, 6th, 8th
and 12th cause grief and happincss to men based on
their own yogas. According to other authonties, it is
not so.
Notes: What is implicd in this sloka is not
understandable. 1 feel there is some missing condition, and the sloka is incomplete.
In most cases upto sloka 330, we do not get clear
instructions.
भावं च भावस्य च कारकं च
नित्यं तथानित्य बलत्वमेव |
वदेत् फलं सम्यगवेक्ष्य तत्र
स्यात् कारको ऽत्यन्तबलान्वितश्च ॥२२० ॥
भावेशाक्रान्तराशीनामधिपो नित्यकारकः।
शुभेधिते शुभकरः पापौ स्यात् पापवीक्षितः॥२३२१॥
यस्मिन् भावे त्वनित्याख्यः कारकः प्रबलो यदि |
तेन भावेन वृद्धिः स्यात् क्षेमलाभो भविष्यति 11322 I
अनित्यः पापसंयुक्तो दृष्टो वा पापखेचरः।
भावहानि वदेद्धीमान् भावानिष्टदशासु च ॥३२३ ॥
320 - 323. The natural and temporal strengths of
lords of the various Bhavas and their significators
Should be studied before declaring effects. The
dispositor of the lord of a Bhava becomes its permanent (or chief) signficiator. If the said dispositor is
related to a benefic by aspect, he will be auspicious;
and if to a malefic, he will turn inauspicious. The
house in which the lord of a Bhava is placed becomes
its Anitya (or temporary) Karaka. If this temporary
house is related to malefic planets by aspect or
occupancy, the original Bhava suffers annihiliation.
वर्गोत्तमे वा स्वगृहे as
स्यात् कारकः संस्थितिमाननित्यः।
अन्यान्समस्तानपि भावनाथान्
जित्वा प्रदीप्तो शुभमेव कुर्यात् ॥२३२४॥
324. Ifthe significatorofa Bhava isin Vargottama,
or in own sign or in exaltation, or become victorious,
auspicious results concerning the house will follow.
ज्ञात्वा योगं च नाडीमितप्रहगतिं प्रापयित्वा तदंशं
नीत्वा सम्यग्विमिश्रं विशदतरमिति वीक्ष्य भावान्तरद्गम् |
चक्र ज्ञात्वा दशां च प्रतिपुरुषमपि प्राकृतं वीक््यभेदं
बरूयाच्चेष्टामवस्थां निजनिजफलं चिन्तनीयं च तज्जः ॥३२५॥
325. The subtle nature of a Bhava should be
understood after evaluation of the Nadiamsa, planetary motions and their various divisions in an elaborate manner. Planetary Cheshtas, dasas etc. should
also be suitably studied before arriving at a true
conclusion.
THA स्वगृहे स्वतुध
दुस्थानगे वा शुभमेव ब्रूयात् |
यद्धावनाथा CIMT तत्स्थाः
पश्यन्ति वा तत्फल वृद्धिमाहुः॥३२६ ॥
326. Though planets may be in evil houses, they
will be auspicious if exalted, or placed in own signs,
or in Vargottama Navamsas. The lord of a Bhava
being placed therein (i.e. in the Bhava itself) (or when
he arrives in that house in transit) will cause prosperity of that Bhava. So also his aspect.
कालं च देशं तथा ग्रहाणां
योगं च दृष्टि बलाबलं च।
चेष्टं च चित्तं च तथगितं च

विज्ञाय तज्ज्ञा हि फलं वदति ॥३२७॥
327. Results should be decalreda after considering the following. Time (i.e. age in which we live),
country, planetary yogas or associations, aspects,
strength, weakness, and their movements.
भावधिनाथाश्रितराशिनाथो
ह्यानित्य संज्ञो किल कारकश्च |
फलस्य सर्वस्य स एव दाता
ह्यन्योपि मुख्यो न तदा बलीयान् ॥३२८॥
स्वकषत्रवर्गेत्तमतुद्मित्र
शुभग्रहाणां यदि मध्यवासः।
स कारको भद्रतरं करोति
नीचासिमूढोऽशुभदग् विहीनः ॥३२९ ॥
यद्धावनाथाः पितृमातृभाव
नाथान्तरस्था यदि हीन भस्थाः।
पित्रोः पुय ते मरणं भजेरन्
भाग्याधिकाश्चेन्मुनयो वदन्ति ॥३२० ॥
328 - 330. Importance of Dispositor of Bhava:
He, 1.¢., the dispositor of a Bhava lord alone is the
giver of effects (concerning the original Bhava). If
the Karaka is in own sign, or in Vargottama, or in
exaltation, or be placed amidst benefics, he will cause
more auspicious effects providedd he is nog in debility, combustion, and malefic aspects. The lords of
these Bhavas (?) placed between the lords of the 9th
and the 4th or in debility (weak degrees) will cause
the end of the subject prior to that of his parents
provided he is endowed with prosperity. (That is, if
prosperity is absent, death as above will not occur.)
परमोच्चगते सुता धिनाथे
ओजांशके वा शुभदष्टियुक्ते |
सुतभे त्वशुमेरदषटयुक्ते
वदन्तिसन्त बहुपुत्रमेनम् 332 I
331. The learned declare birth of many male
issues for one having the lord of the Sth in deep
exaltation in aspect to a benefic and at the same time
Chandra Kala Nadi
occupying an odd Navamsa. It is however essential
that the Sth house should be free from malefic
aspects.
Notes: Discussions on Leo end here for the time
being.
From here upto sloka 335, the rules are general
and not for a particular sign ascending.
In the present aphorism, the lord of the Sth can
be replaced by Jupiter.
Either of the two in deep exaltation, in aspect to
a benefic (Mercury or Venus, or Jupiter in case of 5th
lord’s deep exaltation) will give many sons. The
important condition is the said exalted planet should
be in odd Navamsa. By extension, if the deeply
exalted planet begets even Navamsa, daughters will
be numerous, instead of sons.
Aspect of a malefic on the 5th house (or the 5th
lord or Jupiter) will vitiate the suggested effects.
्रतृस्थाने सूर्यपुत्राधिरुढे
वन्ध्यावस्थां प्राप्य TASTY |
पुत्रस्थाने पापयुक्ते च दष्टे
पुत्रभावो वंशविच्छेदयोगः॥२३२ ॥
332. Vamsa Vichcheda Yoga: There will be no
birth ofa male issue causing Vamsa Vichcheda Yoga
(discontinuity of dynasty) if Satur is found in the 3rd
while the 8th lord is in Vandhyavastha and the Sth
house is in aspect to or in occupation by a malefic.
Notes: Vandhyavastha is not a standard astrological term like Deepta, Mudita etc. Apparently, the
text stipulates the 8th lord to be in such a position to
deny progeny like being in a barren sign, Leo.
Vamsa Vicheda Yoga specially denies birth of
male progeny.
Te त्रिकोणे दिननाथपुत्र
AAA तु वलेरविहीने |
जातस्य पुंसो ऋणपातकाख्यं
दुषपुत्रयोगं प्रवदन्ति BAT 1333 ॥
333. One will obtain a son who will ignore his
parental debts if Saturn without strength is in the 8th
house or in a trine from the ascendant or in the 8th
place from the Navamsa ascendant. The learned

Deva Keralam 115
additionally prescribe acquisition of an adopted son
for this yoga.
fra: प्रजारों यदि चेत् सुतेशो
तत्कारको वा तदनित्यकर्ता |
तत्र स्थिता वा शुभखेचराश्च
पुत्रयो भवेयुर्बहुसदुणाढयाः॥३३४ ॥
334. Daughters: If the 5th lord (counted from
the natal ascendant) or the significator (of progeny,
i.e. Jupiter), or a benefic planct is placed in the Sth
from Navamsa ascendant, one will obtain daughters
endowed with abundant virtues.
सुवर्णकल्पद्रुमदानमेवं
सुवर्णनागोज्ज्ललिङ्गदानम् ।
चतुर्भुजस्यापि हरः प्रदानं
पापापनोदाय वदन्ति सन्तः॥२३५ ॥ ,
335. Remedies: To overcome the blemish of
absence of progeny (vide sloka 332), donation of a
goldenimage of Kalpa Druma or the golden image of
a cobra orasplendorous Linga or the image ofa fourarmed Vishnu be done. This will rid one of sins
relating to absence of progeny.
Notes: Kalpa Druma = the Heavenly Tree granting fulfillment of all desires.
Cobra = Image of Nagaraja, preferably with
seven hoods.
Linga = Image of Siva Linga.
Four-armed Vishnu = Chaturbhuja with Divine
Disc capable of destroying evils wholly (1.e.Sudarsana
Chakra) and Divine Mace.
One of the above four images, made of gold,
according to one’s resources be given away in donation.
वन्ध्यांशयोगे यदि चेत् सुतेशे
सन्तानगोपालकदानमाहुः।
मृतप्रजांशे तु यदा सुतेशे
देयं च दानत्रयशिशुमारम् ॥३२६ ॥
कल्पद्रुमस्यापि च षडपतैश्च
भेदो नरस्यास्तिसुवर्णदाने |
तदर्धमर्धं यदि वा ततोऽपि
न्यूनं न कार्य मुनयो वदन्ति 1330 I
336 - 337. The 5th lord causing Vandhya Yoga
(i.e. 5th lord involved in a yoga denying progeny)
could be remedied by donating the image of Santhana
Gopala (i.e. Lord Krishna). If the yoga of the 5th lord
denotes acquisition of dead progeny donate the
Sisumara (explained elsewhere in relevant notes)
thrice. Gold weighing 6 units (Pala, a traditional
weight), or half of it, or one fourth of it should be
given in donation. Donating a quantity lesser than
this will not achieve the purpose according to sages.
Notes; Vandhyamsa Yoga and Mritha Prajamsa
yoga are improper terms. They denote childlessness
and dead progeny inorder. Itis a different matter that
some may interpret these as relevant degrees to which
interpretation I am not able to subscribe.
मीने सिहांशगे at HARTY घटेऽपि च।
स्थिरलपरे प्रजातस्य सजीवभगिनीद्रयम् ॥२३२८ ॥
एका भाग्यवती चेति पुत्ीपुत्रसमन्विता |
कालान्तरे WIM पुत्रनाशेन कर्शिता ॥३२९ ॥
भ्रातुः कलत्रमूलेन बहुभाग्यवती शुभा |
338 - 3391/2. Immovable Ascendant: There will
be two surviving (i.e. long-lived) sisters for one born
in an immovable ascendant who has the Moon in
Pisces, with Navamsa position in Cancer or Leo or
Aquarius. One of them will be prosperous endowed
with sons and daughters. The subject will after some
interval incur destruction of brothers and sons.
Notes: The last line of sloka 3391/2 above does
not convey proper meaning befitting the context. In
one version, this expression is replaced by: “The
sister will prosper through this native and be auspicious.”
This aphorism applies to Taurus, Leo, Scorpio or
Aquarius. The Moon’s position in Pisces 1s conditioned by her occupation of Cancer/Leo/Aquarius
Navamsa.
कीटलमरे प्रजातस्य सोदरी च FART ॥३४० ॥
कुम्भे मीनांशगे जीवे कुटिलांशेच नीडिगे |

116 Chandra Kala Nadi
विप्रजन्मा सुखी नित्यं भगिनीभ्रातृमान् सदा ॥३४१ ॥
340 - 341. Scorpio Ascendant - Kutila
Nadiamsa: One born in this degree of the zodiac will
have a sister who will have a long-living husband. If
Jupiter placed in Aquarius begets Pisces navamsa,
this native will be a Brahmin, be ever happy, and be
endowed with brothers and sisters.
Notes: For Kutila Nadiamsa, see notes under
कन्यांशे वृश्चिके लमे दुर्भगांशे च जायते |
बाल्ये दारििमापत्नो ग्येष्ठभ्रातृविहीनवान् ॥२३४२ ॥
342. Scorpio Ascendant: The native of Scorpio
ascendant with Virgo Navamsa will incur penury and
dangers in childhood and will be devoid of an elder
coborn.
Note: “Birth in Durbhaga Nadiamsa” isa redundant condition in the original.
लग्नात् तृतीयगे भोमे स्वोच्चे सिहांश संस्थिते |
सोदरभ्रातुरेकस्य देशत्यागं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥२३४२ ॥
तिस्रो सजीवा भागिन्य एका भाग्यवती शुभा |
343 - 3431/2. Mars in Leo Navamsa: One of the
brothers of the native of Scorpio ascendant having
Mars in the 3rd in exaltation, with Leo Navamsa, will
be banished from his birth country (i.e. will have to
leave his country inadverse circumstances). The said
native of Scorpio ascendant will have three longliving sisters out of whom one will be specially
fortunate and auspicious.
कुटिलांशकगे जीवे केचिव्यक्षे च भ्रातृमान् ॥२३४४॥
दरे भगिन्यो सजीवे च ह्येका क्लेशवती सदा |
344 - 3441/2. According to some authonities,
Jupiter in Kutila Nadiamsa will bless the (Scorpio)
native with brothers. Further two of his sisters will be
long-lived (i.e. other sisters will incur premature
death) one of whom will ever be grieved.
सिंहांशे विलगनेशे लग्नारुढे निशाकरे ॥३४५ ॥
अग्रहारे निवासः स्याद्राल्ये क्लेशदरिद्रावान् |
सप्ताविंशात् परं भाग्यं भगिनी भरवृहेतुना ॥२४६ ॥
माता गुणवती पूता भरा्रासहगमिष्यति |
भाग्यकाल पित्ररिषटं दशासन्थो न संशयः॥३४७ ॥
345 - 347. Scorpio Ascendant: Mars in Leo
Navamsa while the Moon is in the ascendant Scorpio
will lead to the following. The subject will live ina
colony of Brahmins, will face difficulties and poverty during childhood and will attain prosperity after
the age of 27 through a brother-in-law. His mother
will be a virtuous and pure lady.
Note: In sloka 347, certain portions are corrupt
and unclear. These relate to: “Bhratraa
sahagamishyathi” ~ a brother committing
“Sahagamana” which was done only by females.
They committed inemselves to pyre when their husbands died. Anotheraspect that is not clearis “danger
to father during the rise of the native and the junction
of a dasa”.
These are better ignored in this part of the text,
as there are clear views in sloka 349 infra.
कुटिलांशे कुन्तलांशे वृश्चिके च प्रजायते |
steal: फलं चेकं त्रिशब्द बहुभाग्यवान् ॥२४८ ॥
348. For Scorpio ascendant effects for birth in
Kutila Nadiamsa and Kuntala Nadiamsa are identical
whose native will prosper after 30th year of age.
Notes: Kuntala (Kunda) Nadiamsa may be seen
in sloka 3051 supra.
सम्पत्तारदशान्तायादो विपदाये पितुर्विपत्।
मातानुमरणं चेति योगवान् कीर्विमान् सुखी ॥३४९ ॥
349. Inthe end of the 2nd dasa or in the beginning
of the 3rd dasa, the native’s father will be endangered
and his mother will also commit herself'to death in the
same pyre. The subject will enjoy effects of yogas for
prosperity and fame.
मीने कन्यांशके चदे कुम्भे वा कटकांशके।
ुर्भगांशे प्रजातश्च मन्ददायेऽल्पसोखयवान् ॥३५० ॥
बाल्ये मसूरि मापत्नो ज्वरोपद्रव पीडितः,
ज्वरेण भीतिमापत्नो पश्चदारोग्यवांस्तदा ॥२३५१ ॥
350 - 351. Scorpio Ascendant - Durbhaga
Nadiamsa: One bom in this degree of the zodiac will
derive less happiness in the dasa of Satur, if the natal]
Moon is placed in Pisces with one of the three

Deva Keralam
Navamsas - Cancer, Virgo and Aquarius. Further he
will during childhood be troubled by smali-pox,
danger and fever. Later on (i.e. after some time) he
will recover health.
Notes: For deetails of Durbhaga Nadiamsa, please
see page 2 of Book I.
लग्ने राहु समायुक्ते ह्यसितेन युतेक्षिते ।
सर्वदा क्लेशचित्तः स्याद् विषाग्निज्वर पीडितः॥२५२ ॥
तदभावे चर्मरोगी कारागारे प्रपीडितः।
्रूरकृलच्छन्नपापी म्तेच्छाहिसापरो भवेत् ॥३५३॥
352 - 353, General; The ascendant occupied by
Rahu who is ineitherthe company oraspect of Saturn
will cause troubles from poisonous fever and fire. In
the absence of these, there will be skin diseases, fear
of imprisonment and a disposition to do secretively
sinful and cruel acts and will torture Mt. 1८185 or
foreginers.
Notes: These hints are generally applicable to
any ascendant. In sloka 353, the last expression
“Mlecchaa himsaparo bhaveth” is not properly constructed, and is not amenable to meaningful interpretation.
fae गुरस्थिते काले कन्यान्ते वा TATA |
मन्ददाये सिहशनौ मोञजीबन्धनमादिशेत् ॥३५४ ॥
मन्दे YR काले MTT रवो ।
शुक्लपक्षे वसन्ते च मोञ्जीबन्धनमादिशेत् ॥२५५॥
354 - 355. Scorpio Ascendant - Durbhaga
Nadiamsa: The native’s thread ceremony will occur
when transit Jupiter is found in Leo or in the end of
Virgo (i.e. transit in other parts of Virgo excluded),
or in Libra, or when Saturn is in Leo during the
currency of his dasa. (Alternatively) the sub period of
Venus inthe main period of Saturn canalso cause this
event, when the transit Sun is in his northerly course,
in Vasantha Ritu (the months of Chaitra and Vaisakha)
during bright lunar half.
ुर्भगांशकगे जीवे मोञ्जीबन्ध मुहूर्त |
aad वा ज्वरं चेति श्षप्रेणारोग्यमादिशेत् ॥३५६ ॥
356. Fora native of Scorpio, Durbhaga Nadiamsa,
the transit of Jupiter (ref. sloka 354) giving thread
ceremony will also cause fever (of significance) in
that particular year from which however the native
will recover early.
शुक्रंशधिपतो स्वोच्चे बाल्य उद्राहयोगवान् |
सप्तमे शनिदोषेण स्वदशान्त्ये विवाहकृत् ॥३५७ ॥ `
357. Marriage - General Rule: The Navamsa
dispositor of Venus being in exaltation sign will
grant marriage in the very childhood (i.e. very early
marriage). Saturn placed in the 7th house will cause
marriage in the end of his dasa.
दारेशांशे तन्निकोणे स्फुटर्योग गते शनौ ।
जन्मसम्पदृशाकाले पितृव्यस्य मनोव्यथा ॥३५८ ॥
पिवृष्वसुर्मनोटुःखं मातृवंशेऽत्यरिष्टकृत् |
सूर्ये यावत्फलानि VAS यावत्फलनि च ॥३५९ ॥
तावत्संख्या हि पित्रोश्च भविष्यन्ति च सोदगः।
358 - 3591/2. Paternal Uncle & Aunt: When
Saturn in transit arrives at the sign represented by the
Navamsa occupied by the 7th lord, ora trine thereof,
the native’s paternal uncle will undergo mental distress. So also a paternal aunt. There will also be
danger in the circles of the native’s mother. The
number of brothers his father will have will correspond to the net Bindus in the Ashtaka Varga of the
Sun (natural significator of father) and the Moon (9th
lord for Scorpio ascendant)
लग्नात् सप्तमगे केतावसितेन समन्विते ॥३६० ॥
पापांशगे तदी शे च कन्छत्रद्रययोगवान्।
कुटिलांशकगे जीवे मेषे मेषांशगे भृगो ॥३६१॥
afar चेकभार्या दीर्घमायुश्च विन्दति।
परसखरीसङ्खवान् पापी सप्तमे शनि संस्थिते ॥३६२॥
पुत्रशोकं च लभते दारसोख्यविहीनवान् | .
360 - 3621/2. Scorpio ascendant - Marriage:
The two planets - Ketu and Saturn - in the 7th house
while their dispositor (Venus) is in a malefic Navamsa will cause acquisition of two wives. Venus in
Aries with the same Navamsa will cause abortions to
wife apart from giving her longevity. Saturn in the
7th house will make the native join women outside

wedlock. He will also trouble the subject with grief
onaccount of progeny and will give him no happiness
through spouse.
पुत्रस्थानाधिपे जीवे रन्धराधिपसमन्विते 1363 |
लनात् सप्तमगे पपे पुत्रोद्प्तिविनाशवान् |
निपदाये पुत्रशोक सिहान्ते ललने शनो ॥३६४॥
देहकार्श्यकरव्याधिमेहसेगं विनिर्दिशेत् |
363 - 3641/2. The lord of 5th Jupiter being in the
company of the 8th lord (Mercury) will destroy
children as they are born. The native should additionally have a malefic in the 7th (in Taurus). Such grief
will come to pass in the 3rd dasa (or) when Satum
transits the end of Leo, or in Virgo. This yoga
involving Jupiter will also give hima disease that can
weaken him physically and also urinary disorders.
लाभे शनिस्थिते काले तच्रिकोणे क्रियेऽपि च ॥२६५॥
जन्म वा सप्तमे वापि राज्याधिपतिनाशनम्।
स्वजन्मदेशे TMA TTT ॥३६६ ॥
तृतीयान्ते स्थिते देशे राजपत्नी मरिष्यति |
365 - 3661/2. Irrelevant: When Satusn in transit
comes to the 11th, or a trine thereof, or in the
ascendant or the 7th, untimely destruction of the ruler
of the country will take place. When Saturn reaches
the end of the 3rd sign, the queen will die.
waar वषं feet वाथवपि Reo |
कुटिलांशे प्रजातस्य विप्लवेन महाविपत्।
सप्र्विंशात् सुभाग्याप्तिर्योगः स्याटट्धत्रिवत्सरम् ॥३६८ ॥
पश्चादव्याकुलमाणोति योग्गं विनिर्दिशेत् |
367 ~ 3681/2. One born in Kutila Nadiamsa of
Scorpio ascendant will incur great danger ina revolt
in his 29th or 30th year of age. He will have a
fortunate Yoga for about two or three years from his
27th year. Afterwards he will be mentally distressed
and incur obstacles to his prosperity.
मन्दांशगे तचचिकोणे स्वर्भानो च सितांशे ses |
स्फुटयोगं गते मन्दे लोके दुर्भिक्ष मादिशेत् |
कुठिलांशे पूर्वभागे जन्मदिदशवत्सरे ॥२७० ॥
Chandra Kala Nadi
अनावृष्टिभयं चेति त्रयस्िंशोपरिस्तथा |
चत्वारिंशात्परं चेति ह्यनावृष्टिमयं महत् ॥२७१ ॥
पौष्णश्रवणहस्ता्द्रभरणी वायुभेप्वपि ।
शनेश्चरश्चएनृणां afk भयदः स्मृत ॥३७२ ॥
जन्मसम्पदशायां च यत्कालेऽर्क नन्दने |
तत्तत्काले फलं वाच्यं योजयेत् कालवित्तमः॥३७३ ॥
राहोस्समकले मन्दे वृतीयेकादशस्थिते |
caus प्रजाक्षोभं भूलोके भीकरं महत् ॥३७४॥
369 - 374. Irrelevant: Rahu should be ina sign
that is trine to the Navamsa occupied Saturn. When
Satur in transit comes to that sign (occupied by
Rahu), there will be drought in the country. There
will be no rains for ten years commencing from birth
that is in the former half of Kutila Nadiamsa. After
33 years of age also, it will be so. After 42 years of
age, there will be scarcity of rains. When Satur
transits in Revathi, Sravana, Hastha, Arudra, Bharani
and Svathi (Vayu Deva or wind god is the regent of
Svathi and hence this Nakshatra is known after him),
there will be fear of drought in the country. Thus have
been stated effects for the first and second dasas vis
a vis Saturn’s transit. If Rabu attains the same
longitude as that of Saturn and is placed in the 3rd or
the 11th, physical decay and great fear will exist in
the world.
Note: These six verses are not meaningfully
placed, Neither they are of meaningful composition.
कुटिलांशकगे जीवे नदीप्रान्तस्थ पट्णे |
सम्पदाये सुभाग्याप्ति बन्धुप्राबल्यमादिशेत् ॥३७५ ॥
375. Scorpio Ascendant: One with Jupiter in
Kutila Nadiamsa will in the second dasa obtain
fortunes in a town located on the bank of a river.
पूर्वभागे प्रजातस्य स्थिरराशिचतुष्टये ।
स्फुटयोगं गते मन्दे मण्डलाधिपतेरषिपत् ॥३७६ ॥
376. This sloka is not amenable to meaningful
translation. The first line refers to birth in former half
of certain Nadiamsa, name not mentioned, ina fixed
sign while the second line is incomplete referring to
Saturn’s transit. Hence ignorable.

Deva Keralam
सूर्याशे तच्िकोणे स्फुटयोगं गते शनो ।
स्वजन्मदेशे नृपती राज्यनाशेन कर्शितः ॥३७७ ॥
377. Irrelevant; When Saturn in transit arrives
in the sign represented by the Sun-occupied Navamsa, or a trine thereof, the king of the native’s
country will be emaciated due to destruction of his
kingdom.
लन्धराधिपदशाकाले वेधकग्रहथक्तिषु |
FS क्रूमासेच स्वजनारिष्टशोकवान् ॥२७८ ॥
378. Grief: The native will incur griefto his men
in the sub period of an obstructive planet in the dasa
of the 8th lord.
Notes: Mercury’s dasa is referred to in the
context of loss of relatives. Obstructive planets for
Scorpio ascendant are Venus, Saturn and Mercury.
These three periods in the dasa of Mercury” “ill cause
such an event.
Jupiter, Mars and Venus in alliance with any of
the above three planets can also become adverse.
व्ययाधिपस्य स्फुटयोगकाले
सुखाधिपस्य स्फुटयोगभावे।
सहोदरीभर्ववियोगदुःखमन्तः स्फुटेनापि विचिन्तनीयम् ॥३७९ ॥
379. Grief to Sister: When Satum in transit
attains the (natal) degree of 12th lord (Venus) or the
sign occupied by the 4th lord (Saturn), the native’s
sister will be grieved on account of separation from
husband.
Note: The reference to 4th lord and 12th lord
could at best be put as above in the rendering. The
fourth line is not clear. It seems to me that the
longitudes of (Saturn) 4th Jord, and Venus (12th lord)
should be added. On this degree Saturn’s transit will
cause the same effect - grief to sister.
From the above statement we can conceive the
following instructions.
(a) Saturn’s transit on natal Venus’s degree.
(b) Satum’s transit on his own degree at birth.
(c) Saturn’s transit on the resultant longitude
arrived at by adding those of Venus and Saturn at
birth.
In each case the possibility is sister begetting
grief on account of marital tragedy.
सुखाधिपदशाकाले व्ययाधिपतिभुक्तिपु |
वेधग्रहान्तरे काले सोदर्याश्च मनोव्यथा ॥३८० ॥
तदभावे मुतारिष्टं Maat मनोव्यथा |
बन्धुवर्गे विचारः स्यान्मित्रव्गे विशेषतः॥३८१ ॥
380 - 381. The sub period of 12th lord (Venus) or
that 0181 obstructive planct in the main period of the
4th lord (Saturn) will cause mental distress to the
native’s sister. In the absence of this effect, the
person will incur evils to progeny and grief to kinsfolk and friends.
Notes: For obstructive planets for Scorpio ascendant, see notes under sloka 378 supra.
कुंभे मीनांशगे जीवे वृश्चिके च प्रजायते |
आयुणन्तौ च द्रौ पुत्रौ शेषं नाशमितीरयेत् ॥३८२ ॥
382, Scorpio Ascendant: For a Scorpio native
with Kutila Nadiamsa, Jupiter in the sign Aquarius
with Pisces Navamsa will bless two of the native’s
daughters with long lives while other children will be
destroyed.
Notes: Aquarius 16° 40' to 20° 0' will yield
Pisces Navamsa. Thus Jupiter, the Sth lord in the 4th
with the said Navamsa will allow only two daughters
to survive; other children will prematurely die.
कुरिलांशे पूर्वभागे पुरा पापस्य हेतुना |
सन्तानोत्पत्तिनाशः स्याच्छेत्म रोगप्रपीडितः॥३८३ ॥
रिशुमाखदानेनं Heat लभते सुखी |
तदभावे ARE स्यात् पुत्रभाव. प्रकल्पितः॥३८४॥
सेतुसानं शिशुमारं स्वर्णनागेश्ररार्चनम् |
कालङ्गस्य प्रदानेन दीर्धजीवितपुत्रवान् ॥३८५ ॥
एकाशीतिपंद चक्रं कल्पोत्तविधिमार्गतः।
अर्चयेद्धनमात्रेण श्लेष्मरोगोपशान्तये ॥३८६ ॥
कुटिलांशे पूर्वभागे वृश्चिके च प्रजायते |
प्रतिबिबप्रदानेन क्षयरोगनिवारणम् ॥२८७ ॥
नवग्रहमख शेव स्वगृहयोक्तविधानतः।

महारद्राभिषेकेणे मृत्युदोषो विनश्यति acc ॥
383 - 388. Kutila Nadiamsa - Former Half:
This native of Scorpio will lose bis children as they
are born apart from (himself) suffering from phlegmatic disorders. By donating a specified plant, the
native will be happy obtaining a surviving child. In
the absence of this remedy, evils to progeny will
exist. Other remedies suggested are bathing in the
Sethu and worshipping the golden image of Nageswara
and giving chanity to astrologer. These will bless one
with long-lived progeny. Phlegmatic disorders could
be avoided by worshipping the image of the zodiac.
By donating the image (of the zodiac), tuberculosis
(a phlegmatic disorder) will be destroyed. Worship
of Nava Grahas and Rudrabhisheka (rituals prescribed for Rudra, a form of Lord Siva), (untimely)
death will be surmountable.
Notes: Here no planetis involved, butthe degree
of birth alone.
Phlegmatic disorder indicated is to the tune of
killing the person untimely. Remedies for obtaining
long-lived progeny and for overcoming death are
suggested in the above verses.
Tau aerat सफुटयोगं गते शनौ ।
पशदृष्टिराशौ तु देहोष्रवमादिशेत् ॥३८९ ॥
389. Navamsa of 8th Lord: Physical distress
will result the transit of Saturn in the sign denoted by
the Navamsa occupied by the 8th lord, or a trine
thereof, or the sign aspected by the lord of the 8th at
birth.
क्षयावस्थे निशानाथे त्वसितेन निरीशषिते |
लगने Tet स्थिते जातः क्षयरोगातुसो भवेत् ॥२३९० ॥
तदोषपरिहारार्थं चन्द्रस्य प्रार्थनां वदेत् |
राजतं THATS] दानं कुर्याद्विशेषतः 1382
390 - 391. The Moon in Kshayavastha aspected
by Saturn will cause tuberculosis of the lungs provided Rahu is in the ascendant. To overcome this
blemish, worship of the Moon God be done apart
from donating a silver image of the Moon God.
Notes: Although Kshayavastha is nota standard
term, as for the Moon it can be said to denote her
Chandra Kala Nadi
decreasing state. For other planets this term cannot
denote something meaningful.
शनिद्वितीयप्ययि सिहान्ता दिषु तोलिषु।
मेहसेगं च लभते शान्ति कुर्यादविचक्षणः ॥३९२ ॥
392. Urinary Disorders: The subject belonging
to Kutila Nadiamsa in Scorpio will contract urinary
disorders during the second round of Saturn’s transit
coincidental with the beginning/end of Leo, or in the
sign Libra. Suitable propitiations will be helpful in
this respect.
Note: Urinary disorder like phlegmatic disorder
is inherent for this particular degree of Scorpio
ascending.
लग्नाधिपे स्वोच्चगते विक्रमेशनवांशगे |
पच्चत्रिशात् परं भाग्यं त्रिशब्द व्याकुल महत् ॥३९३ ॥
राजामात्यप्रसादेन वंशोपरि महत् सुखम्।
निधनाधिपदोषेण मध्ये मध्ये विचारवान् ॥३९४॥
393 - 394. For Scorpio ascendant, its lord Mars
in the 3rd and in Capricorn Navamsa_ will cause
prosperity after the age of 35, but distress in the 30th
year. The subject will also get progress after twenty
through the mercy of kings and ministers. In between
he will have obstacles due to 8th lordship.
Note: The lord of 8th is Mercury. But there is no
direct reference to Mercury in these slokas. Apparently it refers to the 6th lordship of Mars which is
capable of causing intermittent obstacles.
Incase of Scorpio, “Vikramesa Navamse” means
“in the Navamsa ruled by 3rd Jord Satur, i.e. Capricorn”.
अष्टमधिपतो सौम्ये कर्मेशेन समन्विते ।
अल्पयोगं प्रकुर्वीत सचिवांशे च जायते ॥३९५॥
395. Mercury - Sun Conjunction: Due to the
8th lordship of Mercury, his conjunction with the
10th lord (the Sun) will cause a limited amount of
prosperity to the native of Sachiva Nadiamsa, Scorpio ascendant.
Note: For Scorpio ascendant, irrespective of the
degree of birth, the association of Mercury with the
Sun - in not quite favourable a house - will restrict
professional prospenity.

Deva Keralam 121
च्रे शनियुते दष्टे लने पपे प्रजायते |
पटद्रोहादिधातेन PEAT सुजातुरः॥३९६ ॥
शतिवक्रंगते काले विमलो दृष्ट उच्यते |
इटमेव फलं सत्यं योजयेत् कालवित्तमः॥३९७॥
396 - 397. Betraying Others: A malefic in the
ascendant while the Moon is related to Saturn by
aspect or association will cause sickness as a result of
betraying others. Astrologeis declare such an effect
when Saturn in transit retrogrades, or is bright with
rays (i.e. uncombust in the Sun).
मुखेशांशे aera स्फुटयोगं गते शनौ |
सुखेशदृष्टिराशो वा बन्धुक्लेशं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥३९८ ॥
स्वप्रभोश्च मनस्तापं तद्वारा स्वजनावधि |
विशेषक्लेशकालं च योजयेत् कालवित्तमः॥२९९ ॥
398 - 399. Navamsa of 4th Lord: Difficulties to
relatives will come to pass when Saturn in transit
arrives in the sign denoted by the Navamsa occupied
by the lord of the 4th at birth, ora trine thereof, or the
sign(s) aspected by the lord of the 4th. This will be
a period of great distress for the subject himself.
Note: In the first line of sloka 399 reference to
king and his populace are irrelevant and excluded in
translation.
भाग्येशांशे त्रिकोणे स्फुटयोगं गते गुरो ।
भागयेशदृष्टिसशौ तु भाग्यकालं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥४०० ॥
लगनेशंशे तथा विन््ाल्लगनशाक्रन्तररशिगे |
लग्नेशदृष्टिरशौ तु योग कालं वदेत्तथा ॥४०१॥
400 - 401. (a) Navamsa of 9th Lord: It will be
a time of prosperity when Jupiter transits the sign
identical with the Navamsa occupied by the 9th lord
at birth, ora sign trinal thereof, or the sign(s) aspected
by the 9th lord.
(b) So also in respect of Jupiter’s transits in the `
following places:
(1) The Navamsa Rasi denoted by the occupation of the ascendant lord, or a trine thereof.
(2) the Rasi occupied by the lord of the ascendant.
(3) the Rasi aspected by the lord of the ascendant.
Notes: The combinations given are quite simple.
The planets involved are the Moon (9th lord) and
Mars (ascendant lord). Jupiter is one of the best
planets for the ascendant in question.
Since ten particular signs can be generated for
Jupiter’s transit to be favourable, a liberal approach
is not suggested. One should be quite selective,
keeping directional influences and other relevant
transits in mind.
Also see the following verses, for specific effects.
कुटिलांशे योगकाले रजसन्मानमोख्यवान्।
रजामात्यप्रसादेन ह्यार्थलाभं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥४०२॥
सुवल्लाम्बरभूषापि्यो गराशिगते गुरौ |
अतीव सोख्यकालः स्याद्योजयेत् कालवित्तमः॥४०३ ॥
402 - 403. When the time of prosperity arrives
through Jupiter’s transits (as above), the native of
Kutila Nadiamsa, Scorpio ascendant, will derive the
following. He willbe happy due to royal honours, and
will gather wealth due to the mercy of the ruler and
his ministers, superior robes and ornaments, and
much happiness and comforts.
शनिचारवशात् क्लेशं राहुचारवशा दभ्रमम्।
गुरुचारवशात् सौख्यं फलानि परिचिन्तयेत् ॥४०४॥ ,
404. Transit Nature of Saturn, Rahu & Jupiter: The (adverse) transit of Saturn will cause difficulties, of Rahu wandering (or perplexity) and the
(good) transits of Jupiter will usher in happiness.
Notes: These are general tendencies of these
planets which should be in adverse places with
reference to the Moon in particular.
दूनाधिपदशाकाले अपमत्युर्भविष्यति |
स्वभक्त व्याकुलं चेति क्रूरमासे न संशयः॥४०५ ॥ „,
405. Dasa of 7th Lord: The main period of the
7th lord will cause fear of untimely death (forScorpio
ascendant, Kutila Nadiamsa). His first sub period
will bea source of distress, particularly inthe months
denoted by adverse solar transits.
योगांशराशिगे जीवे शुभांशे शुभमश्नुते।
शुभशोभनकार्यणि शुभमासे न संशयः॥४०६॥

122 Chandra Kala Nadi
406. Jupiter (in transit) will prove auspicious in
the sign and Navarasa of a yogakaraka planet, particularly in the 9th Navamsa. In the months denoted
by favourable transits of the Sun, auspicious activities will follow.
एकचत्वारिंशका्दे कुरिलांशे च जाचते |
अपमृत्युभयप्राप्तिः शान्ति कुर्याद्विचक्षणः ॥४०७॥
407. The native of Kutila Nadiamsa, Scorpio
ascendant will incur danger of untimely death at the
age of 41 years for which suitable remedial measures
will be helpful.
कालचक्रादिदोषेण जातस्य कुरिलांशके |
तुलाशनौ बन्धुवगे ह्यरिषटमिति चादिशेत् ॥४०८ ॥
वृश्चिके वा मनस्तापं BTA शुभाशुभम् |
अष्टचत्वारिंशकान्दे कालमृत्युभयं महत् ॥४०९॥
चात्वारिशात् परं चेति द्यापमृत्युस्तदाश्रितः।
पञ्चाशदर्षपर्यन्तं योगायुनिश्चयं भवेत् ॥४१० ॥
अष्टाचत्वारिंशकाब्दे ग्रहपीडा भविष्यति |
चत्वारिंथात् परं ज्ञेयं महामार्गेण मारकम् vee
जीविते जन्मदेशेषु योगवान् AA सुखी |
408 - 4111/2. Scorpio Ascendant - Kutila
Nadiamsa: Due to blemishes caused by adverse
placements of planets in the zodiac, the native of
Kutila Nadiamsa, Scorpio ascendant will during
Saturn’s movement in Libra, incur evils to his kinsfolk. During Saturn’s journey in Scorpio, his prosperity will be checkered and he will be in distress. At
forty-eight he will face (timely) death. However after
forty, he will be in the grip of fear of untimely death
after which time he will survive due to favourable
planetary combinations contributing to life-span
(Yogayu). At the age of forty-eight, evil planets will
overtake him. There will be danger to him ona high
road during his fortieth year. If he survives this
danger, he will be famous, happy and prosperous in
his birth country.
Notes: Froma study of relevant verses of Kutila
Nadiamsa, Scorpio ascendant, we can gather that the
subject will be endangered in his forties. The life will
not be quite long.
तुलाशनो तु सन्तानं दीर्धमायुश्च विन्दति ive? ॥
412. For Scorpio ascendant, Kutila Nadiamsa,
Saturn placed in Libra at birth will grant long lives to
the person’s progeny.
Notes: As is being seen by us on various occasions inthis work, the 12th denotes death of children.
Saturn, signifying longevity, in the 12th will confer
long-lives to children of the native.
Thus, an adverse or weak planet in the 12th will
cut short progeny’s longevity.
चन्धंशमासे निर्याणं चन्धक्रान्तस्य मासगे |
शुक्लपक्षे शुक्रवारे सोम्यवरे पि वा Ala: ved tl
413. The death of the subject native (at 48) will
occur during Sun’s transit in the sign denoted by the
Rasi or Navamsa occupied by the Moon at birth.
मेषांशगे क्रिये शुक्रे वृश्चिके तु प्रजायते |
आपत्संन्यासवान्नित्यं जितेन्धियपरो भवेत् vey I
414. Venus in Scorpio: Should Venus be in the
divisions of Aries, while placed in Scorpio, the
subject of Scorpio ascendant will take to ascetism due
to a family calamity. He will further win his five
senses,
Note: “Meshamsa” is not translated as Aries
Navamsa because Venus in Scorpio cannot get such
Navamsa. Then it denotes the other possible division
of Aries.
Winning the senses is essential for a true Sanyasi
with fully severed mundane bonds. Venus is the lord
of the 7th, ruling one’s senses. His occupation of
Aries Vargas or divisions, placed in the ascendant
Scorpio, Should allow one’s senses to move toward
self-realisation.
In otherwise an afflicted horoscope, this position
of Venus will only misdirect the subject to enjoying
material pleasures of various kinds, instead of granting him true ascetism.
अष्टवर्गसंबन्धदशाफलानि |
मध्यात् फलाधिके लाभे लाभात्ीणफले व्यये |
यस्य व्ययाधिके लग्ने भोगवानर्थवान् भवेत् ॥४१५ ॥
415. Ashtaka Varga Dasa Periods: The person
will enjoy pleasures and be rich if the 11th house has

Deva Keralam
more Bindus thanthe 12th. But the 12th house should
have lesser Bindus than the 11th house while the
ascendant should have more Bindus than the 12th.
Notes: This is a common rule found in many
texts, and is applicable to any horoscope.
Many such general rules are given below (upto
Sloka 453).
लग्ने यावत् फला निस्युस्तावद्र्षात TST |
मर्त्यादिव्ययभावान्तं दृष्टा भावफलानि च ॥४१६॥
भित्रा्ट वर्गे लनेशे फलहीनस्य राशिषु |
सुटयोग गते जीवे" चत्पसोख्यं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥४१७॥
416 - 417. In the Bhinnashtaka Varga of the
ascendant, note the total Bindus. After that number
of years, the subject’s prosperity will be on the rise.
From the Ist to 12th, see if the lord of the ascendant
is posited ina sign that has less bindus. When Jupiter
comes to the said Rasi, happiness will decline.
एकद्वित्रिफलान्यस्मिन् लग्नेशाष्टकवगकि |
अतीव केल्लशकार्याणि तद्राशो गोचरे शनो lived ॥
पञ्चबिन्दुसमायक्ते लगनेशाष्टकवर्गके |
शुभग्रहस्थिते काले ह्यातीव भ्रियमादिशेत् ives ॥
पञ्चमादिफलाधिक्ये पापाक्रान्तरस्य कालगे |
योगदाये महाभाग्यं गृहे गोधनसद्कुलम् ॥४२० ॥
418 - 420. Rectified Ashtaka Varga: (a) When
Saturn transits the signs that have 1, 2 or3 Bindus in
` the Ashtaka Varga of the ascendant, intense difficulties will come to pass.
(b) Abundant wealth will be acquired if the sign
containing five Bindus in Ascendant’s Ashtaka Varga
is transited by benefic planets.
(c) During the currency of favourable dasa periods, if the signs containing five or more bindus are
transited by malefic planets, great prosperity will
occurapart from acquisition of wealth of quadrupeds.
Notes: The authordeals with use of Lagnashtaka
Varga (rectified with Ekadhipathya and trinal cortections).
(a) This rule is clear and applies to the various
rectified Ashtaka vargas, the net essence of which is
adversity.
(b) Benefic planets in transit on their own accord
can improve good effects even if the dasa periods are
somewhat adverse.
(c) As for malefics, to give the good effects cited,
the additional requirement is operation of favourable
dasa periods.
The reader will note the difference between
malefic and benefic transits.
चद्ा्टवर्म निश्षिप्य द्यष्टमांशविधानतः।
चदे पूर्णफलेर्यक्ते तद्राशीशदशा सुखम् ॥४२१॥
राजयोगं प्रकर्वीत कल्पयेत् कालवित्तमः।
दायेश्वये पूर्णफलेन युक्तो यदा तदानी तुरगं गजं च।
लभेत राज्ञां चतुर्गयानं
लोके च कीरिं हृदये च सौख्यम् ॥४२२॥
421 - 422. Moon’s Ashtaka Varga: Divide the
Bindus in Moon’s Ashtaka Varga by 8. The dasa of
the Rasi represented by the resultant remainder will
give happiness and effects of Rajayoga according to
expert astrologers. Forthis the Moonshould however
be endowed with full strength. Should the dasa lord
be endowed with full strength, one will acquire
horses and elephants. He will also be granted the four
kinds of conveyances by the king. He will be famous
in the world, and happy at heart.
दारोश्वयो मध्यबलेन युक्तो
वदन्ति वाक्षेमगति च भूतिम्
आरम्भकार्याणि फलन्ति मन्द
विघ्ने बलिष्ठे तु विनाशमाहुः॥४२३ ॥
दशेश्वरो हीनबतेन युक्तो
यदा तदानी द्रविणस्य नाशम्।
स्थानच्युतं च प्रवदन्ति सन्तो
जनापवादं पशुजीवहानिम् ॥४२४॥
कलत्रपुप्रादिषु रोगहेतो
रत्यन्तदुःखं प्रवदन्ति सन्तः।
पितृमातृसुतादीनां रोगो भवति चात्मनः
दशेश्वरेहीनबले व्याकुलं भवति धुवम् ॥४२५॥
` दशेश्वरो नष्टबलेन युक्तो

विनाशयत्येव शरीरसोख्यम्।
दशाधिपो पूर्णबलेन युक्तो
शुभान्वितो वा MASSA: ॥४२६ ॥ ,
423 - 426. Dasa Periods: (a) If however, the dasa
lord be seen with mediocre strength the undertakings
commenced by the person will incur slow effects;
obstacles of strong nature, and (even) destruction.
(b) If the dasa lord be located with Jeast strength,
one’s wealth will be destroyed; he will face loss of
position, calumny from others, loss of quadrupeds
etc., diseases to spouse, progeny and the like and
abundant grief. Further his parents and other kinsfolk
will fall prey to diseases and he himself will be
subjected to great distress.
(c) Should the dasa lord be deprived cf strength
in toto, one’s physical felicity will be completely
void.
(d) The lord of the dasa provided with full
strength, or being witha benefic planet, will increase
the auspicious effects.
Notes: “Kshema Gathi” denoting a certain motion of the dasa lord (vide sloka 423) is not a clear
term and ultimately unhelpful.
जीवेत्त् कथ् चित सुखतो विहीन
कलत्रपुप्रादिजनेर्विोधम् ।
योगप्रहांशो यदि चेद्धशायाम्
बहर्थलाभं भवतीह भूम्याम् ॥४२७॥
कलत्रमित्रातममजनान्धवाद्याः
स्वयं समेष्यनि नृपप्रसादात्।
शुत्रग्रहंशस्थितदायकाले
्रूरंशयोगे रिपुचोरभीतिः॥४२८ ॥
स्थानच्युति स्वेष्टजनेर्विरोधं
स्वराजकार्येण विचिन्तनीयम् ॥४२९ ॥
427 - 429. (When the Dasaa lord is capable
enough to cause physical decay) even if the person
somehow survives, he will be devoid of happiness. The
dasa of the planet that occupies the divisions of a
yogakaraka planet will grant much wealth. The
person will derive royal favours for himself, bis
Chandra Kala Nadi
spouse, friends and kinsfolk. The dasa of a planet
occupying inimical divisions wil] produce troubles
from enemies and thieves, loss of position, enmity
with one’s own men and worries in performing royal
duties.
em हीनबले च दुःस्थे
तदीश्वरेणापि युतेक्षिते at |
ytd दृष्टे घननाशमाहुः
सहोदररातृवियोग दुःखम् ॥४२० ॥
तदीशे शत्ररा्यंशे स्वस्थानग्रहभुक्तिषु ।
Wea वापि शत्रभीतिवशाद्व्यथा ॥४३१ ॥
430 - 431. Destruction of Weaith ete: Ifthe lord
of the dasa be bereft of strength, or be inanevil house,
viz. in one of 6th, 8th and 12th, along with the aspect
or company of its dispositor, without a benefic aspect, destruction of wealth will come to pass. Further,
the person will be separated from his coborn. Should
the dispositor of the lord ofa dasa be inenemy’s Rasi/
Navamsa, there will be fear and distress on account
of enemies. The sub period concerned will be of that
planet which is inimical to the lord of the dasa, or of
a planet that is in its own sign.
मीने जीवेत्पसन्तानं स्वराजः प्रियधार्मिकः।
WMATA रागी शान्तप्रकृतिमान् गुणी ॥४२२॥
432. Jupiter in Pisces: One having Jupiter in
Pisces will be liked by his king, be righteous, acquainted with higher knowledge, passionate, peaceful and virtuous.
Notes: As per Kalyana Varma, Jupiter in Pisces
will give expertise in ancient Sastras. The subject
will be honoured by friends and virtuous men. He will
enjoy a leading position under the king’s employ,
will be wealthy, will not incur defeat, and be skillful
in policy matters. His undertakings will prosper.
जीवे कर्मगते अमात्यो मित्रांशे राजवल्लभः।
बुधशुक्रांशगे क्लेशी राजन्यदवेषकार्यवान् ॥४३३ ॥
433. Jupiter in the 10th House: (a) Ifthe planet
Jupiter is found in he 10th house, one will be a
minister.
(b) Jupiter in the 10th with a friend’s Navamsa

Deva Keralam 125
will make one dear to king.
(c) Ifthe Navamsa in question is ruled by Mercury or Venus, Jupiter in the 10th will involve the
subject in trouble and will make him perform such
acts which will arouse the wrath of the ruler.
Notes: (a) This position of Jupiter in the 10th
refers to-no specific Navamsa. The text tersely
indicates a superior professional position for the
subject.
Jupiter 1 the 10th will further give wealth,
welfare and happiness in general, conveyances, favourable kinsfolk and fame. Whatever be the undertaking, the subject will complete it successfully. He
will be disposed to much eating. His sexual
enjoyments will be limited. He will be short-tempered and his contributions to the society will last
long. He will obtain patronage of influential men.
Richness is a part of this position of Jupiter. The
subject will be learned in many Sastras including The
Bhagavad Gita.
There are authorities to state that Jupiter in the
10th carries some inherent blemish to cause worries
about progeny.
Also see sloka 436 infra.
(b) If Jupiter in the 10th occupies a Navamsa
owned by the Sun, the Moon or Mars, the person will
be close to high-ups in power.
(c) In this context, Jupiter begetting Gemini,
Virgo, Libra or Taurus Navamsa, will cause professional difficulties from powerful people.
Also see the following slokas.
कर्मे मन्दांशगे जीवे मन्दबुद्धिः सदाऽनृतः।
अनाचाररतोनित्यं नीचांशे बहुपापवान् ॥४२४॥
स्वरजशुत्रनिकटे THAT SAT |
मातृवंशजनद्रेषी द्यान्तरिषठद्रविचारवान् ॥४३५ ॥
434 - 435. Navamsas Occupied by Jupiter:
One will be a dunce if Jupiter in the 10h begets a
Navamsa of Saturn. Jn addition, he willalways speak
untruth, and will take to unorthodox path. Capricorn
Navamsa (in preference to Aquarius Navamsa) in
particular in this context denotes one committing .
plenty of sinful acts; he will instantly befriend those
that are inimical to his ruler, will be inimical to his `
maternal relatives, and will have a secretively destructive disposition.
दिव्यश्रीनवरलकाञ्चन महाहारदिलक्ष्याश्चितः
क्रीडाकोतुकनृत्यगीतसकलव्यापारदीक्षागुरः।
्ञातिद्रेषकलापवान् स्थिरमतिसद्धूप मानान्वितो
जीवो कर्मगते भवेदुणनिधिः सत्कण्मवारां निधिः॥४३६ ॥
436. Jupiter in the 10th House: The person
having Jupiter in the 10th house will be blessed with
much wealth, the nine kinds of precious stones, and
large golden chains (or ornamenis); he will be an
expert teacher in sports, pastime, dance, songs, arts,
business activities ofall kinds and spiritual Initiation.
He will be firm in disposition, be honoured by a
superior king, and be himself an ocean of virtues and
good deeds. However he will incur enmity with bis
kinsfolk.
Notes: The resulis mentioned in this sloka and
the earlier ones should be declared after giving due
consideration to Navamsa and other divisional positions of Jupiter for which we have some basic instructions in the previous verses.
चन्दे पूर्णवलोपेते तद्राश्याधिपसंयुते |
वयोमध्ये महाभाग्यं राजपुप्रप्रियः सुखी ५४२७ ॥
437. Great Prosperity: Shouid the Moon join
her dispositor and be endowed with full strength, the
person will enjoy a great deal of prosperity in his
middle age, and be happy befriending the son of a
king.
मीने तुलांशगे जीवे स्वराजस्य सुतत्रयम् |
मातृष्वयुः सुतस्नेहीपितृव्यद्रेषवान् भवेत् ॥४३८ ॥
438. Jupiter in Libra Navamsa: Placed in
Pisces, the planet Jupiter should obtain Libra Navamsa. As a result one will be close to his maternal
aunt’s children but be inimical to his paternal uncle.
Notes: "Swarajasya Suta Trayam" denoting three
sons to the king is out of context. Perhaps it refers to
some other relative and the term "Swarajasya" could
be a wrong addition.
सर्याष्टवर्गे नवमे बिन्दुशुन्ये प्रजायते |
पितृव्यद्रेषमूलेन स्वपित्ररिष्टमादिशेत् ॥४३९ ॥

439. The Sun’s Ashtaka Varga: Locate zero
Bincus in the 9th place in the Ashtaka Varga of the
Sun and declare that the native’s paternal uncle will
be a source of trouble to his (i.e. the native’s) father.
सूर्या्टवर्गे संशोध्य नक्षत्रस्थे निशाकरे ।
शन्यग्डारकसंयुक्ते बाल्ये पितृमृतिभवेत् ॥४४० ॥
जननीव्याकुलं चैति पश्चदभ्रातृविहीनवान्।
देशान्तरमहद्धाग्यं दिवाकरदशासु च ॥४४१ ॥ ,
440 - 441. Early Death of Father: The Moon
should join Saturn and Mars and be in the Nakshatra
represented by the remainder in the process of multiplying the rectified Bindus in the 9th place in Sun’s
Ashtaka varga by the Sun’s Sodhya Pinda and dividing by 27. Furtheras a result of this yoga, the person’s
mother will be distressed. He will have no after-born.
His prosperity will be of a great order in the dasa of
the Sun, ina foreign land.
Notes: “Suryashtakavarga Samsodhya
Nakshatra” on its own has no specific meaning, as
given above. But such an interpretation is a part of
chapters related to use of Sodhya Pindas, Nakshatras
etc. in the Ashtaka Varga method. There may be
scholars who can give better interpretation to the
above condition.
संपूर्णं बलगशौशदशायां च ear |
राजयोगं च लभते भाग्याधिपतिभुक्तिषु ॥४४२ ॥
सुखाधिपान्तरे काले धनकर्माधिपेषु aT |
सत्कर्म वाहनादीनां लाभो भवित नित्यशः॥४४२ ॥
षष्ठाष्टमव्ययाधीशभुक्तिकले शुभाशुभम् |
लगनाधिपान्ते काले योगप्राबल्यमादिशेत् ॥४४४ ॥
एकद्वित्रिफल यस्मि तद्राशीशान्ते यथा।
अतीव क्लेशकर्याणि घनधान्यपशृक्षयम् ॥४४५ ॥
442 - 445. 9४१ Periods: Ifasignis endowed with
full strength, then its lord in his dasa will cause great
happiness, and effects of Raja Yoga, during the sub
period of the lord of the 9th. The sub periods of lords
of the 4th, 2nd and 10th (inthe above mentioned dasa)
will grant conveyances etc. ofa lasting nature. Mixed
cffects of good and bad will prevail in the sub periods
Chandra Kala Nadi
ruled by the lords of 6th, 8thand 12th. Prosperity will
strengthen in the sub period of the lord of the ascendant. Thesub period ofa planet which inits sign attains
only one, two or three Bindus will thrust many
difficulties in one’s undertakings, apart from causing
loss of wealth, grains and quadrupeds.
बिन्दुपञ्चकयुक्तस्य राशीशस्यानरेशुभम् |
यल कार्यार्थसिद्धिः स्यच्छेयो योगानुसारतः॥४४६ ॥
446. The sub period of a planet having five
Bindus will prove ausp:cious. Dung its tenure,
one’s attempts will end with fruition. The auspicious
effects that will accrue will be according to the Yogas
granted at birth.
dred फलाधिक्ये तद्क्तो शोभनं महत् |
हीने हीनबलं चेति शून्ये शुन्यफलं वदेत् ॥४४७ ॥
447. If more Bindus are found in (at least) two
signs, then the sub periods of their lords will cause
auspicious effects of a great order. The auspicious
effects will be moderate or nil according to the sub
period lords having in their signs less or no Bindus.
fefiferet कुजादीनां बिन्द्राधिक्यवशात् फलम् |
समे समफलं चेति दशावाच्याष्टवर्गके ॥४४८ ॥
far फ tas रविभुक्तिफलं वृथा |
चद्कषत्रे तथाविन्दादष्ट वर्गे र योजयेत् ॥४४९ ॥
448 - 449. From Mars (to Saturn), good results in
their periods will be dependent on the number of
Bindus their signs obtain - that is, with more bindus,
they give good results, with two or three bindus
adverse effects, with moderate bindus (i.e. 4 and
above) moderate effects. If the sign Leo gets no
Bindus, the sub period of the Sun will be futile. So
also the sub period of the Moon if Cancer is devoid
of Bindus.
पञ्चाधिकफले राशो दशारंभंतु WAT |
निशाकराष्टके वर्गे योजयेत्कालवित्तमः ॥४५० ॥
भित्राष्टवर्गे ख्यादिप्रहाणां च पृथक् पृथक् |
प्रस्थाराष्टकवर्गेणनिशाकरफलं स्मृतम् ॥४५१ ॥
450 - 451. The beginning of a dasa of a planet

Deva Keralam
whose sign has more than five bindus will be auspicious. The Ashtaka Varga of the Moon be also
considered according to experts in astrology. The
Bhinnashtaka vargas of the planets fromthe Sun etc.
Should again and again be studied. The Moon’s
Ashtaka varga effects should be evaluated through
Prastharashtaka Varga.
Weed शरीरं स्याल्लगन स्यात् ora |
तावुमौ संपरीक्ष्येव सर्वनाडीफलं स्मृतम् ॥४५२ ॥
निशाकराष्टके वर्गे लगनाधिपतिवग्कि।
तत्तत्काल दशादीनां फलानि परिचिन्तयेत् ॥४५२ ॥
452 - 453. The Moon is one’s physique, and the
ascendant life force. After estimating both these, the
effects of al] Nadi(amsas) should be declared. The
Bindus obtained by the sign occupied by the lord of
the ascendant in the Ashtaka Varga of the Moon will
reveal the effects due to occur ina given phase in the
dasa under consideration.
मीनांशे मिथुने लगने aR च जायते |
चन्द्रशोध्यावरशिष्ट्षदशायां भाग्यवान् सुखी ॥४५४॥
454. Forone born in Gemini ascendant, Mudgara
Nadiamsa, with Pisces Navamsa, the dasa indicated
by the Nakshatra obtained by multiplying the bindus
in the 9th inthe Moon’s Ashtaka varga by the Moon’s
Sodhya Pinda and dividing it by 27 will give prospenty.
Notes: Firstly the condition of Pisces Navamsa
should be rejected. Secondly, the expression in the
second line, viz. “Chandra soadhyashtakavarga dasa”
has to be liberally interpreted bringing the 9th house
into play as the effect dealt with is prosperity. Such
a process is a general practice in Ashtaka Varga.
Notes: Forthis Nadiamsa details, see notes under
3102 supra.
जन्मलग्नाधिपे सोम्ये धने सिहनवांशगे |
अधेर्यप्रकृतिभीरुः किंचिद्रोगशरीरवान् ॥४५५ ॥
455. Gemini Ascendant: The lord of the ascendant, Mercury, placed in Cancer with Leo Navamsa will deprive the native of courage. He will be
timid, and will have a sickly physique.
विलग्नाधिपयुक्तस्य कर्मेशस्य दशा शुभा।
कार्यान्तरेषु धीरोऽयं शत्रुहन्ता प्रतापवान् ॥४६ ॥
456. Dasa of 10th Lord: If the 10th lord is in the
company of the lord of the ascendant, the dasa of the
10th lord will prove auspicious. In the sub period of
the 10th lord, the subject will destroy his enemies and
be valorous.
Notes: Although there is no specific mention
that this rule applies to Gemini, the placement of this
sloka below a verse for a Gemini native being timid
& C makes me feel that this belongs to Gemini
ascendant. Here the conjunction of Mercury and
Jupiter enables the dasa of Jupiter give courage to the
subject and destroy his enemies.
जन्मलग्नांशदोषेण गोचरे जन्मगे शनो ।
सत्कर्म दानयुक्तोऽपि स्वराजन्यातिवेरवान् ॥४५७ ॥
457, If Saturn occupies the Navamsa Lagna at
birth, his movement in the natal ascendant will cause
great enmity with the king, although the native may
be engaged in good and charitable activities (due to
other combinations).
पोष्णश्रवणहस्ता्रा भरणी वायुभेष्वपि।
aie दुरभिक्षभयदः स्मृतः ॥४५८ ॥
458. Please see 51018 352 supra which is a
repetition.
वर्गोत्तमे gears बिन्दुत्रयसमन्विते |
पादाधिकबलं चेति विपदाये सुभाग्यवान् ॥४५९ ॥
459. Prosperity: The Moon in Vargottama in
Libra with more than three Bindus will in the 3rd dasa
cause much prosperity.
“Paadaadhikabalam” in Ashtaka Varga chapters means "more thantwo Bindus after Ekadhiapthya
and Trikona reductions". There is already a mention
about 3 Bindus and this expression is not required.
FGINCKR LCE COLE
शत्रुभीतिमवापनोति vary स्वस्थं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥४६० ॥
460. N.B: This 81018 is in a wrong place and illconstructed. It means: Saturn in Libra gives abundant

prosperity, drought inthe country, fear fromenemies
and later on health.
This may be ignored.
स्वात्यां शनिस्थिते काले बन्धुनाशो भयप्रदः।
विरोधजनमित्रत्वं त्रिषुमास्सु मृगादिषु ॥४६१ ॥
मेषादि त्रिषु मासेषु स्वशतरूजननाशनम्।
किंचिद् व्याकुलकार्यिणि मिथुने स्वस्थमादिशेत् ॥४६२ ॥
मीनायनं समारभ्य स्वकार्यप्रबलं महत्|
कुटीरायनगे सौख्यं तन्मध्ये व्याकुलं कचित् ॥४६३ ॥
461 - 463. Saturn in Svathi: When Saturn
transits Svathi, there will be destruction of enemics,
and incurring fear. One will befriend enemies from
the time the Sun moves in Capricorn through Pisces
(coinciding with Saturn’s stay inSvathi). Should the
Sun, then, be found in transit in the signs commencing from Aries, one’s enemics will be destroyed.
However with the Sun in Gemini, there will be some
distress and later on health will prevail. With the
Sun’s change of course in Pisces, one will attain
success in undertakings while happiness will prevail
with the change of Sun’s course in Cancer. In
between there will be distress.
Notes: Sloka 463 has an incompatible term
“Meenayana”, The Sun does not change his course
in Pisces. Hence this is a wrong term. His transit in
Meena or Pisces is part of his northerly course or
Uttarayana.
For ready information of the reader, the Sun
changes his course twice in a year. When he enters
Sayana (tropical) Capricom, he commences his northerly course, i.e. Uttarayana. When he enters Sayana
Cancer, he commences his southerly course,
Dakshinayana.
For Hindus' religious purposes, these courses are
detected on Nirayana (sidercal) basis.
वेशाखेऽर्कमसुते काले WE TES |
यलकार्यानुकूलं स्यात् क्रूरमासं विना सुखम् ॥४६४॥
464. Saturn in Visakha: The planet Saturn
moving in the Nakshatra Visakha will enable the
subject befriend enemies and enjoy great happiness
in general.
Chandra Kala Nadi
विपत्तारंशगे मन्दे गोचरे शतरनिप्रहम् |
सम्पत्तारांशके भीति विपत्तारेभयं महत् ॥४६५ ॥
ay व्याकुलकार्याणि स्वराज्ये कलहं व्यथा |
प्रजापीडा मनस्तापो पाण्डय्भूपति विग्रहम् ॥४६६ ॥
ayes फलं चेति क्षेमतारे विनाशनम् |
सम्पत्तरे क्षेमतारे मन्दाक्रान्तस्य कालगे ॥४६७॥
मण्डलाधिपतेर्मु्ुर्बन्धुक्तेशं विनिर्दिशेत् |
जन्मकर्म AMAA पापाक्रानतस्य कालगे |
राजद्रारकलपेन व्याकुलं मनुरब्रवीत् ॥४६८ ॥
तदभावे देहजाडयं स्वजनादेसुपद्रवम् |
शुभग्रहाक्रान्तकाले शुभं भवति नित्यशः॥४६९ ॥
पापाक्रान्ते मनस्तापं प्रहोक्तगुरुमार्गतः।
जातिवणनुगुण्येन फलं निश्चित्य बुद्धिमान् ॥४७० ॥
465 - 470. Saturn’s Transit: When Saturn moves
in the third Nakshatra from the birth Nakshatra, the
person will seize his enemics but he will also have
fear of a great order; if it is the second Nakshatra, he
willbe in the grip of fear. In the fourth Nakshatra, the
transit of Saturn will cause distress and quarrels in
native country, trouble to populace (?), mental worries and enmity with the king of Pandya country. This
transit will also cause the native’s destruction. The
2ndand 4th Nakshairas being in transit by Saturn will
cause death of the king (2), and trouble to relatives.
When malefics transit natal ascendant, 10th house
and Adhana ascendant, the subject will incur
misunderstanding with royal circles, or physical
illness to self, and troubles to his kinsfolk. If these are
in transit by bencfic planets, auspicious results will
come to pass, and if by malefics, mental distress will
be incurred. The wise should deduce the effects
according to caste, community ete.
Notes; Also see slokas 482 - 485 infra.
in all the cases of transits on a given Nakshatra,
the 10th and 19th thereof will also pass similar
effects. Final effects will depend on the age of the
native concerned.
त्रिजन्मादयष्टमर्रुषु पापक्रान्तस्य कासेगे |
्रुराब्दे क्रस्मासे च ह्यतीव क्लेशमादिशेत् ॥४७१ ॥

Deva Keralam 129
471. There will be abundant difficulties when
malefics transit the Janma Nakshatra (the one occupied by the Moon), the 3rd and the 8th thereof.
(“Kroorabde Krooramasage” may be treated as irrelevant for obvious reasons.)
शुभाक्रान्ते महत्सोढ्यं राजप्रीतिधनागमम् |
यलकारथिनुकूलं स्याच्युभदृषटौ फलं भवेत् ॥४७२ |
472. If these are transited by benefic planets
great happiness, ruler’s pleasure and acquisition of
wealth will materialise. Undertakings will yield
fruits if these are aspected by benefics.
Notes: A more meaningful translation for the
above verse would be if these Nakshatras are transited
by a benefic planet in aspect to another benefic
planet, the results cited will materialise.
Aspect on a Nakshatra may look strange. Here
is a field for vast study if we exactly follow’ the orb
restrictions for various planets.
विपल्मत्यग्जन्म सप्त पापाक्रान्ते च कालगे।
अतीव क्लेशकार्याणि cena विशेषतः ॥४७३ ॥
473. The 3rd, Sth and Janma Nakshatras transited
by malefic planets will cause abundant difficulties.
More so, the 8th star counted from birth star.
ताराबलानुकूलक्षं शुभाक्रान्ते च कालगे।
शुभमेव फलं सत्यं धनलाभं विनिर्दिशेत् iver Il
लाभाधिपाक्रान्तमासे द्रेक्काणांशे च मासगे।
शुभदृष्टियुते मासे विशेषेण धनागमः॥४७५ ॥
474 - 475. Only good effects and advent of
wealth should be predicted for the transit of a benefic
in the Nakshatras that are favourable to Janma
Nakshatra. Specially wealth will accrue in the following months: (a) When the Sun transits the sign
occupied by the lord of the 11th. ©) When the Sun
arrives in the Rasiidentical withascendant’s decanate.
(c) “Subha drishti yuthe maase” means the month
that has benefic’s aspect. (The concept behind this
condition is not clear.)
Notes: The 2nd, 4th, 6th and 8th are generally
considered auspicious ones with reference to birth
star in respect of transit evaluation. So also the 10th
and 19th fromeach of these. Thatis why Tara Chakra
1s prepared by discerning astrologers.
जन्पर्धवारसंबम्धफलानि।
जनमर्षशुभखेटवारसहिते नानार्थसोख्यं वदेत्
देहात नृपकोपचित्तचलनं पापग्रहाणां दिने |
wank नृपकोपवाक्यविपदं wafer जन्मभं
सोख्यं सोमदिने विचितरकुसुमप्रमारतिं भोजनम् ॥४७६ ॥
दुःखं भोमदिने स्वनाशकलहं देहार्गिपादग्रमं
सोख्यं सोमजवासरे seed विद्ाश्रवं सोख्यदम् ॥४७७ ॥
टुखं क्तेशभयावहं शनिदिने भृत्यापहं SEAT: lived ॥
476 - 478. The Janma Nakshatra coinciding with
a week day ruled by a benefic planet will cause
various kinds of wealth and happiness. Physical
distress, royal wrath, and infirm disposition will
follow birth ona week day ruled by a maletic planet.
Sunday birth denotes (aimless) wandering, royal
wrathand (futile) arguments. Happiness, acquisition
of wonderful flowers, affectionate cohabitation, and
good food will result birth on Monday. Grief, selfdestruction, quarrels, physical ailments and endless
wanderings are the effects for birth on Tuesday. One
born on a Wednesday will be happy and derive
pleasures through honey, ghee, learning, and listening to mythological stories. Jupiter’s day being birth
day will bless one with robes, fruits, honey, wealth (or
articles) and attending to temple festivals. Fridayborn will obtain ornaments, enjoyments from females, various kinds of clothes and lovely scents.
Grief, difficulties, fear, diseases and servitude will be
the effects for birth on Saturday.
Notes: Reference to Janma Nakshatra on a particular week day is made in the first line of sloka 476.
Whereas without a reference to Janma nakshatra,
these results could have directly been attributed to
week days. For there is no specific Nakshatra involved with a given day.
षष्ठाष्टमाधीशवारे देहजाद्यस्वमुक्तिषु |
PUA CEASA सर्वनाडीफलं स्मृतम् ॥४७९ ॥
अन्र्दशाधीशवारे दशाधिपतिवासरे |

देहजादयरम्भमेति योजयेत् कालवित्तमः॥४८० ॥
479 - 480. Note the lords of the 6th and 8th from
the ascendant. During the operation of their relevant
sub periods (in the various dasas) there will be
sickness on the days ruled by 6th or 8th lord as the
_case may be. The month concerned in the sub period
will coincide with the adverse transit of the Sun.
Disease will commence either on the week day ruled
` by the sub period Jord of the dasa lord.
पापग्रहे नीचविमूढभागे
पराजिते शतरुगृहस्थिते वा |
तत्पाकजन्यं फलमेव शुन्यं
करोति खेयो न शुभेक्षितश्चेत् ॥४८१ ॥
481. A malefic planet in debility or combustion,
that 1s defeated in planetary war or placed in inimical
Sign, without a benefic’s aspect, will in its dasa
periods give zero results. (That is, no auspicious
effects will forthcome.)
are नृपकोपवित्तचलनं नानार्थदुःखापहम्
ऋक्षे संपदि वित्तसोख्यविभवं भूषादिनानाम्बरम्
गो भूम्यर्थविनाशनं विपदिभे सन्तापनं देहरुक्
eared बन्धुवियोगभृत्यकलहं त्याकस्मिकं कोपनम् ॥४८२ ॥
्षमक्षेमकरार्थसोख्यसुखभग्दूतागमं भोजनं
रजञाक्रोधधनार्विकार्यविकलं दुःखं तथा प्रत्यरे ॥४८३ ॥
सिद्धि साधनभे सुतार्थविजयं भूम्यर्थमाल्यम्बरं
नानादुखकपत्रिदोषजनितामृक्षे वधे कष्टताम् |
मत्र मित्रसमागमं नृपकुलात् सन्माननं भूषणं
यानारोहणमेव कर्मनिरतं शय्यासुखाप्ति वदेत् ॥४८४॥
अत्यन्तं परमित्रभे नृपरितं सद्रोष्ठिविद्यारितं
राजाज्ञापरिपालनं Breet कौशलम् |
aaa परमित्रभेचवृषलीस््रीपुत्रचिन्ताज्वरं
संचारं कफदोष भुक्तिविरतिं शय्यासनातिं भृशम् ॥४८५ |
482 - 485. (a) Effects of Saturn in Transit in
Various Nakshatras: Saturn transiting the Janma
Nakshatra will produce royal wrath, grief and infirm
finances. If the transit be in the 2nd Nakshatra,
Chandra Kala Nadi
wealth, comforts, ornaments and robes will be galore. There will be destruction of quadrupeds, lands,
and wealth, grief, diseases, separation from relatives,
quarrels with servants and a temperament to lose
temper instantly, when it is the third Nakshatra. One
will be happy and rich, will enjoy food comforts and
will receive a messenger (with good news) if the 4th
Nakshatra is transited by Saturn. The 5th Nakshatra
in this respect creates royal anger, financial pressure,
obstacles to workand grief. Attainments, acquisition
of progeny, financial success, lands, wealth, garlands, and robes will be produced by Saturn in transit
in the 6th Nakshatra. Much grief, difficulties, and
diseases caused by the co-operative vitiation of the
three humours of the body will be the result of Saturn
transiting the 7th one from Janma Nakshatra. His
transit in the 8th Nakshatra will cause union with
friends, honours from royal circles, ornaments, conveyanices, devotion to one’s calling and bed comforts. If the 9th Nakshatra from Janma Nakshatra is
transited by Saturn, the subject will befriend the king,
will move with virtuous men, be engaged in learning,
will carry out royal orders, will have visits by his
progeny and relatives and be endowed with wellbeing.
(b) Saturn’s Transit in 12th House: [fSaturn be
in transit in the 12th house which happens to be his
close friend’s place, the subject will be engaged in
thoughts ofa low caste woman ("Vrishalu" apart from
meaning “low caste woman” also means an unmarried girl of 12 years of age whose menstruation has
just commenced, or a woman who is the mother of a
still-born child). He will think also of his progeny
(i.e. will be worried about them), will incur fever, will
wander aimlessly, will incur phlegmatic disorders,
will hate food and will obtain comforts galore.
ae दधिसूपगोकृषिमनोधै्यं मनोिग्रहं
त्वाधाने नृपकोपचित्तचलनं यानार्थभूनाशनम् |
वनाशे रिभयावहं सुतसुहदारर्थभूपार्दिं
संघाते नृपशतुचोरविषमस्थानादिभत्यार्दितम् |
एवं प्रत्यहमादरात् शितिभुजामाश्र्यहेत्वात्मकं
day: प्रवदेत्तथेव सकलं तावद्वेत्नान्यथा ॥४८६ ॥

Deva Keralam 131
486. Saturn transiting in the 10th house (read
“Karmarkshe” instead of “Janmarkshe”) will grant
curd, sauce or vessels (i.e. eating comforts), quadrupeds, agriculture (or professional gains), courage and
ornaments. In Adhana ascendant, it will bring royal
wrath apart from causing mental infirmity and destruction of conveyances, wealth and food. Inthe 8th,
there will be fear from enemies and troubles relating
to progeny, friends, spouse and king. In the 7th there
will be troubles from king, enemies and odd or
unsuitable placements, apart from troubles from
servants. When such forecasts are made by the
astrologer in the presence of a king, the king will be
surprised, and all that is told by such astrologer will
never go against truth.
Notes: Also see slokas 3038 - 3039 supra.
ताराबलविहीनर्षं मन्दाक्रान्ते तथेव च।
अत्रीव क्तेशकार्याणि क्रूरमासे वदन्ति हि ॥४८५ .
437. When Saturn transits a sign that is devoid of
Tara Bala, the subject will incur many difficulties, in
the months indicated by adverse solar transits.
Notes: Devoid of Tara Bala = transit in unfavourable Nakshatras.
The adverse effects for Saturn and other planets
will be revealed by the Sun in adverse transits.
Similarly the good effects denoted will materialise with the Sun moving in favourable places.
राहुणाक्रान्तराशीशक्रूरेधग्रहान्तर ।
राजशत्रुभयं सेगं निर्दिशेत् कालवित्तमः॥४८८ ॥
Te चोरभयं गृहोपकरणादिनाम् |
नाशेन क्लेशमाप्नोति स्वभनिर्दायके तथा ॥४८९ ॥
ऋणचोरादिपीडां च व्रणोपद्रवरुग्भयम् |
शन्याराक्रान्त रशीशदशायान्र्दशासु च ॥४९० ॥
ऋणचोरादिपीडां च व्रणोपद्रवमादिशेत्।
शुभग्रहाक्रान्तदाये शुभं भवति नित्यशः ॥४९१॥
पापग्रहाक्रान्तदाये वदेत् पापफलं तथा |
सनध्राधिपाक्रान्तदाये व्ययेशक्रान्तभुक्तिषु ॥४९२ ॥
अपमृत्युभयप्रापतिः स्वजनारिष्टशोकवान्।
मन्दमान्दिगतराशिरन्धपा-
स्तनवांशपतयोऽपि ये प्रहा :
तेषु दु्बलदशामृतिप्रदा
SEY चरतिसूर्यनन्दने ॥४९३॥
488 - 493. Dispositors & Dasa Effects: During
the sub period of an adverse planet, in the dasa of
Rahu’s dispositor, the subject will incurdiseases, and
fear from king and enemies. According to other
authorities one will lose household articles ina theft
and will incur destruction and difficulties. Further he
will be in debt and troubled by ulcers. In the sub
periods (of adverse planets) in the dasa of Saturn’s
dispositor, he will be troubled by debts, theft and
ulcer. The dasa of the dispositor ofa benefic will give
auspicious effects. Similarly the dasa of the dispositor of a malefic planet will give inauspicious effects.
The sub period of the dispositor of the 12th lord will,
in the dasa of the dispositor of the 8th lord, cause fear
of untimely death, and also grief on account of loss
of one’s kinsfolk. Among the dasas of the Rasi/
Navamsa dispositors of Saturn, Mandi and 8th lord,
the weakest will cause death. Saturn in transit in the
8th....(text incomplete).
Notes: The word “dasa” is understood in the
original sloka 488 with reference to Rahu’s dispositor
as could be seen in sloka 490 infra.
लग्नादिद्रादशभावसंज्ञाः।
लग्नात् स्वकी्तितनुरूपगुणस्वभावाः
स्वर्णादिलोचनकुटुम्बमुखाशनानि ।
युद्धप्रभावबलवीर्य कपोलकर्णवक्षस्थलादिमुखमन्दिरयानभोगान् ॥४९४ ॥
कुश्षिप्रदेशमतिपुत्रभु जादिशिष्य
सापलशत्रुवरण रोगविषं च नाभिम्
स्रीवस्तिमूत्रमदमन्मथतल्पमारगाः॥
श्रीधर्मदेवशुभभाग्यगुरुस्तपांसि
मानप्रवासक्रतुवृत्तियशोऽभिमानात् ॥४९५ ॥
मेषुरणास्पदजयादि च जीवनानि
निर्विघ्नसिद्धिविभवंभव कर्णदेशो |
विघ्नार्थनाशशयनादि सुखं च नाशं

लग्नादितः सुमतिमान् कथयेत् फलानि ॥४९६ ॥
494 . 496. The wise should deduce the following
fromthe 12 houses of a horoscope and declare effects
accordingly.
The ascendant - Fame, physique, figure and
disposition.
2nd house - Gold (i.e.wealth), eyes, family, face
and food.
3rd house - Ability in war, prowess, cheek and
ears.
4th house - chest, comforts, residence, conveyances and pleasures. (“Mukha” should be read as
“Sukha” to mean comforts. “Mukha” means mouth
which is ruled by the 2nd house and not by the 4th
house.)
Sth house: Stomachial region, mind, sons, hand
(?) and disciples.
6th house: Step-mother, enemies, ulcers, disease, poison, navel.
7th house: Wife, the lower belly or pelvis, urine,
sexual desire, amorous passion, sexual enjoyment.
8th house: Hole (Randhra itself means the 8th
house), calumny, death, lack ofcleanliness, secretive
diseases.
9th house: Fortunes, righteousness, gods, auspicious acts, prosperity, preceptors, and penance.
10th house: Honour, foreign residence, Yagnas
(Vedic rituals), profession, fame, self-conceit, authority and success.
11 thhouse: Attainment without obstacles, wealth
(or exalted position) and well-being.
12th house: Obstacles, loss of wealth, destruction and bed-comforts.
Notes: As for the8th house, which is called
Randhrasthaana, hole means the cavity through which
the life force leaves the body at the time of death.
There are nine holes in the body. Some recognise 10,
including the cavity at skull. That is why the 8th is
related to end of life. The ancients believed thatwhen
the life force left the body through the hole of the skull
- called Brahma Randhra - one attained Sathya Loka,
the world of Brahma and got rid of further births.
Should the life force leave the body through the hole
of rectal orurinary passage, the dead would go to hell
and would have rebirths.
Chandra Kala Nadi
Gal फलसदृशवीर्यसमन्वितेश्चद्द्धावपो यदि तदाशुभमन्यथा Ad |
तद्द्रावकारकफलानि च चिन्तयित्वा
योगानुगुण्यफलमत्र विचारणीयम् ॥४९७ ॥
497. The good effects of a Bhava depend on the
strength of the lord of that bhava; a weak planet will
give converse results. In analysing the effects of a
Bhava, the yogas (association, aspects etc.) involved
thereof should be given due consideration.
जलांशकगतगुरुफलानि ।
HY जलांशगे जीवे yeast निशाकरे |
स्थिरलगने प्रजातस्तु ज्येष्ठभ्रातृसमन्वितः॥४९८ ॥
श्यामवर्णशरीरथ्च त्वग्रहारे निवासवान्।
व्यवसायपरो नित्यं dete समन्वितः ॥४९९ ॥
498 - 499. Jupiter in Watery Navamsa: One
born in an immovable ascendant, having Jupiter in
Aquanus with a watery Navamsa (i.e. Pisces Navamsa) and the Moon in Mudgara Nadiamsa will have
elder coborn. His complexion will be dark. He will
live ina colony of Brahmins, will cbncentrate on his
profession (Vyavasaya also means agriculture) and
will have after-born as well.
जलांशगे tart प्रसिद्धो
सुभूषणो बान्धवत्सलश्च |
सहोदरीभर्तृवशात् सुभाग्यं
स्वबन्धुमूलाद्धनवान् प्रभुश्च ॥५०० ॥
सख्ीप्रजः सुभगः कान्तः स्त्वल्पविदयार्थकोविदः।
बात्येऽत्पसुखवान् कामौ पुत्रशोकेन करशितः॥५०१ ॥
waa: प्रावीण्यवान् वीरस्तेजस्वी स्वजनप्रियः
TAT दुष्टात्मा क्रोधी साहसकृत्यवन् ॥५०२॥
500 - 502. The above-mentioned native will
further be famous, be endowed with many ornaments, dear to his kinsfolk, will derive prosperity
through his brother-in-law, be wealthy through his
relatives, be lordly, will have daughters (as against
sons), be fortunate, splendorous, will have limited
education, be an expert economist, will have limited

Deva Keralam
happiness inchildhood, be passionate, will lamenton
account of loss of a son, be skillful, valorous, will do
sinful acts clandestinely, be wicked in disposition,
given to anger and will perform adventurous acts.
Notes: The technique adopted in slokas 498 to
502 is to consider the Nadiamsa position of the Moon
instead of the ascending sign.
उत्तरप्रथमे पादे कुन्तलांशे निशाकर |
सदाचारविशेषक्ञः श्रीमान् बन्धुप्रियः सदा ॥५०३ ॥
503. One will be an expert in matters related to
good conduct, be wealthy and be fond of his relatives
if the Moon is in Uttara first quarter in Kuntala
Nadiamsa.
तुलांशगे tat घरस्थे
केन्दर्रिकोणऽपि च संस्थिते वा।
प्रियंवदः सोम्यशरीरयष्टी
wh सदा मित्रजनप्नियश्च ॥५०४॥
परकार्यकृतप्राज्ञो नृपकोशाधिपत्यवान् |
सप्तविशात् परं भाग्यं त्रिंशब्दे वा सुकीर्तिमान् ॥५०५॥
504 - 505. Jupiter in Aquarius: Should Jupiter
be in an angle or ina trine identical with Aquarius,
and occupy Libra Navamsa, the following effects
will come to pass. The person will have a charming
face, soft physique, be sickly, be ever fond of his
friends, will involve himself in helping others, be
learned, and be the head of a royal treasury. He will
prosper after the age of 27 while fame will come to
him after thirty.
Notes: The hints given in these two verses apply
to Taurus, Gemini, Leo, Libra, Scorpio and Aquarius
ascendants, Jupiter in 0 deg 0' to 3 deg 20' will get
Libra Navamsa.
कुन्तलांशे घटे चद त्रिग्रहेण समन्विते |
चित्रिण्यंशे प्रजातस्तु कामी दुष्टस्वभाववान् ॥५०६ ॥
506. Immovable Ascendant: One born in
Chitrini Nadiamsa, while the Moon being in Kuntala
Nadiamsa in Aquanus joins three planets, will be
passionate and wicked.
वित्तलाभाधिपौ sx धाग्यकर्मेशसंयुतो |
बन्धुमूलात् सुपूज्यश्च राजसेवी सुरुपवान् ॥५०७ ॥
कोशाश्वयानं उद्योगं सर्वदा धनलाभवान् |
स्वभुजाजितसंपत्नो विप्रपूज्यः प्रतापवान् ॥५०८ ॥
507 - 508. Immovable Ascendant - Four Pilanets in an Angle: If the lords of 2nd and 11th join the
lords of 9thand 10th in an angle, the person will gain
respect through relatives, will serve a king and will
have a charming appearance. He will work in a
treasury or be involved in travelling jobs. His
financial gains will be firm. He will be wealthy by his
own efforts, be honoured by Brahmins and be valorous.
चतुर्थे वर्यधिपप्रसन्े
स्वबन्धुसंयोगस्वकार्यदक्षः।
पित्तज्वराजीर्णशरीरकार्श्य
जलांशगे देवगुरौ दयालुः॥५०९ ॥
509, Immovable Ascendant - Jupiter in the
4th: One having the planet Jupiter in the 4th house
with a watery Navamsa will have troubles from
enemies. He will be in the company of his kinsfolk,
be skillful in completing his undertakings, will suffer
from bilious disorders and fever and will have thin
physique.
Notes: Jupiter will again be an immovable sign.
Watery Navamsas are Cancer and Pisces.
Bilious disorders are for example indigestion,
Jaundice, yellow sweating, lunacy, premature gray
hair and the like.
लग्नेशे स्वोच्चराशिस्थे लगे wet शनीश्िते |
fared मनस्तापं मेहरोगादिसंभवम् ॥५१० ॥
510. Third Dasa: Foran immovable ascendant,
its lord in exaltation will cause distress in the third
dasa and also urinary disorders provided Rahu occupies the ascendant in aspect to Saturn.
HM घटे Te त्वसितेननिरीक्षिते ॥५११॥
कुन्तलांशे प्रजातस्तु देहकारश्यपरपीडितः
511. Immovable Ascendant - Kuntala
Nadiamsa: The Moonin Aquarius inaspect to Saturn
and in Scorpio Navamsa will cause an emaciated

physique for native of Kuntala Nadiamsa in an
immovable ascendant.
Notes: Aquarius 3° 20' to 6° 40' will yield
Scorpio Navamsa. The Moon wil] then be in debility
in Navamsa.
लाभाधिपदशाकाते लाभाधिपतिभुक्तिषु |
च्यूनाधिपान्तरे काले विवाहोत्सवमादिशेत् ॥५१२ ।
512. Immovable Ascendant: The native of
Kuntala Nadiamsa will get married in the sub period
of 11th/7th lord in the dasa of the 11th lord.
सुखाधिपदशाकाते धनाधिपतिभक्तिषु |
चित्रिण्यंशे प्रजातस्य विवाहोत्सवमादिशेत् 11423 ॥
दारेशांशके मासे सुखेशांशस्य मासगे।
जन्मदेशं परित्यज्य सम्पदाये विवाहवान् ॥५१४॥
तदंशे तत्निकोणे वा स्फुययोगं गते गुरो ।
शुक्रांशमास उद्वाहं केचिदपक्षे द्विभार्यकः॥५१५ ॥
513 - 515. Immovable Ascendant: The native
of Chitrini Nadiamsa will get married in the sub
period of the 2nd lord and in the dasa of the 4th lord
(or) in the 2nd dasa. His marriage will occur with a
girl hailing outside his native region. The month
concerned will coincide with the transit of the Sunin
the sign represented by the Navamsa of 7th or 4th
lord. According to some, the month concerned
should be known through the Sun’s transit in the sign
identical with the Navamsa occupied by Venus at
birth; he will have two marriages.
वर्गोत्तमे दारनाथे सत्कलत्रयुतः सुखी |
दशान्ते महद्धाग्यं लाभाधिपतिदायके ॥५१६ ॥
राहुभुक्त्यमारभ्य गुरुभक्तो शुभाधिकम् |
शन्यन्तरे व्याकुलं स्यात् त्रिंशोपरि विशेषतः ॥५१७ ॥
516 - 517. Immovable Ascendant: Should the
lord of the 7th be in Vargottama Navamsa, he will
obtain a virtuous wife and be happy. He will gain in
a foreign Jand in the dasa of the 11th lord. The
beginning and ending part of Rahu’s sub period and
Jupiter’s sub period will give abundantly auspicious
effects. The sub period of Saturn will cause distress,
particularly after the age of thirty.
Chandra Kala Nadi
रन्धाधिपदशन्त्यादिविपद्ाये दशाव्यथाम् |
स्वबन्धुसहितं क्लेशे योगभ्ं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥५१८ ॥
518. The dasa of the 8th lord in its beginning and
concluding portions will cause distress. The 3rd dasa
will give distress. In these phascs, the subject along
with his kinsmen will undergo difficulties; his prosperity will be checkered.
लाभाधिपदशाकाले योगः स्यादद्धित्रिवत्ससम् ॥
पश्चात् क्लेशं च लभते स्वस्थानेऽल्पसुखान्वितः॥५१९ ॥
519. Two or three years of the 11th lord’s dasa
will cause prosperity. Later on there will be difficulties. The subject will derive quite limited happiness
in his own place.
पद््रिशात् परं सौख्यं विपदाये श्रियायुतम् |
बन्धुमूलात् सुभाग्याप्ति पुत्रोत्पत्तिविनाशवान् ॥५२० ॥
520. The 3rd dasa will cause wealth after the age
of 35. His prosperity will be on the rise through his
kinsfolk. But children then born to him will quit the
world.
लग्नात् सप्तमगे मन्दे पुत्रनाशेन कर्शितः।
aire दीर्धमायुष्यं स्थिरलग्ने च जायते ॥५२१॥
521. Immovable Ascendant: Satum in the 7th
from the ascendant will destroy male issues. Daughters will however be long-lived.
लग्नात् सप्तमगे मन्दे चौच्चग्रहसमन्विते |
शुभदृष्टिविहीने च योगो यमलनामकः॥५२२ ॥
522. Yamala Yoga: Saturn being in the 7th and
getting the company of an exalted planet produces a
yoga called Yamala Yoga.
Notes: The effects of this yoga are not directly
giveninthe sloka. Yamala means twins. Apparently
the christening of the yoga itself implies that the
subject with this yoga will beget twins.
Since this yoga 15 discussed in the context of an
immovable ascendant, it applics only to Scorpio
ascendant from where the 7th, Taurus, can have an
exalted planet - the Moon. The other three immovable signs do not exalt any planet.
Also see the following sloka for further effects.

Deva Keralam
उच्वयोगे महापापी परहिसार्धवञ्चक, |
नीचकृत्यपसे नित्यं ब्रह्यघातकपापवान् ॥५२३ ॥
तत्पापवशतो रोगी पुत्रनाशेन कररितः।
523 - 5231/2. The conjunction of Saturn with an
exalted planet in the 7th (for an immovable ascendant, 1.€. Scorpio) will make the native a great sinner.
He will torture and cheat others, will indulge in mean
acts and will acquire the sin of killing a Brahmin. If
the said Saturn is with a malefic, be will incur
sickness, and be emaciated due to loss of sons.
लगने राहौ प्रजातस्तु घातकः पापचेतनः ॥५२४।
गुरुचण्डालयोगोऽपि पापकृत्यरतः FE: |
524 - 5241/2, Immovable Ascendant: Rabu in
the ascendant will give birth to a killer. Even the
conjunction of Jupiter and Rahu for an immovable
ascendant will produce one who will perform a
hundred sinful acts.
कुंभे जलांशगे जीवे कुन्तलांशे निशाकरे ॥५२५॥
चन्द्रलग्नाष्टमाधीशदशायां पितृनाशनम्।
मातानुमरणं चेति योगकाले न संशयः॥५२६॥
525 - 526. Jupiter in Aquarius with a watery
Navamsa while the Moon is in Kuntala Nadiamsa
will destroy the native’s father in the dasa of the
planet ruling the 8th from the Moon sing. His mother
will also commit herself to the pyre of her husband.
सोम्यदाये तृतीयांशे पितृमातृविनाशवान् |
बन्धुमूलात् सन्तोषं कनिष्ठभ्रातृमान् सुधीः ॥५२७॥
देशान्तरे ग्येष्टभ्रातृनहुसंचारमादिशेत् |
जलांशगे देवगुरौ gee}
देशान्तरे प्रातृवियोग दुःखम्
ताताम्बिकामृत्युभयं तदेव
कालान्तरे पुत्रवियोगदुखम् ॥५२८ ॥
जलांशगे देवगुरौ क्षयरोगेण कर्शितः।
तुलाशनो मृतिं चैति पुत्रशोकेन करशितः॥५२९ ॥
527 - 529. The last one third part of the dasa of
Mercury could also prove a killer of the parents, for
an immovable ascendant. The dasa in question will
give happiness through relatives. The person having
Jupiter in Aquarius in watery Navamsa will have a
younger brother, and be intelligent. His older brother
will move frequently in foreign lands. His paternal
grand-mother and brother will die in foreign lands.
The person willsuffer griefon account of loss ofa son
after some interval. Tuberculosis will be a source of
worry forbim. When Satur intransit comes to Libra,
he will incur grief of account of a son, and he will
himself die.
ख्यादीनांगोचरयुक्तदशाफलानि।
षटूत्रिदशस्थो भानुश्दशाय जन्मसप्तगः।
शीतांशुश्च तथा चैव षटचतुर्थष्टगतो ज्ञः।
गुरुरद्रिद्धिनवपञ्चभे शुभफलप्रदः ॥५३० ॥
एकादशे ग्रहाः सर्वे गोचरे शुभदाः स्मृताः।
यद्यमेशेनयुतोऽपि तत्स्थो दृष्टोऽथवा तस्यविपत्तदास्यात् |
योगद्वयं स्वात्तधनं यदेको योगस्तथा मृत्युसमत्वमाहुः ॥५३१ ॥
5230 - 531. General: The Sunin transit in 6th, 3rd
and 10th, the Moon in 10th, 11th, 15 and 7th,
Mercury in 6th, 4th and 8th, and Jupiter in the 7th,
2nd, 9th and Sth give auspicious effects. All the
planets will prove favourable in their transits in the
11th. However when Saturn joins or aspects such a
planet (moving in the 11th), there will be danger.
Two planets joining in the 11th will give wealth.
Notes: From here onwards, general rules without considering the ascendant are formulated.
The transit effects are to be counted from the
Moon sign unless and otherwise stated.
विपत्तिहानिसंपत्तिकुक्षियोगं महद्रयम्।
शक्षयं महाधेर्य मरणं देहशोषणम् ॥५३२ ॥
पीडां लाभं च ae च क्रमेण कुरूते शनिः।
जन्मस्थितो vga: कलहं विवादं
वित्तर्थनाशमरिपीडनमाशु धते |
धरये तु भृक्तिसुखमात्मजबन्धुसोष्यं
युद्धे जयं विविधसोख्यमनोभिलाषम् ॥५३३ ॥
बन्धो सुहत्सुतविनाशनमर्थनाशं

पश्चादिभूमिकृषिनाशनमानहानिम् |
पत्रे मतिभ्रमनेकविचारशल्यम्
षष्ठे धनागममतीव सुखाप्तिमाहुः ॥५३४॥
कामे तु दारसुतभृत्यविनाशमेति
TY विनाशन मरि व्यसनं कृशार्तिम्।
धर्मे तु पापनिरतं शुभभाग्यनाश
माकस्मिकं कृपणबुद्धिरतिक्रियातिम् ॥५२३५॥
सत्कीर्तिनाशकलिदोषभयं च माने
लाभे धनापिमतिसोख्यनृपाभिषेकम् |
रूपाङ्गनाशमतिटुस्तरकोपजालं
भृत्यावमानमतिरोगशरीरतापम्
एवं विलोक्य सहसा फलमत्र चिन्त्यं
लग्नाधिपस्य मतिमान् कथयेत् फलानि ॥५२६॥
532 - 536. Saturn’s Transit Effects: (a) Danger,
damage, wealth, abdominal disease, great fear, destruction of enemies, great courage, death, physical
decay, suffering, gains and 1085865 are the effects of
Saturn moving in 12 places in order.
(b) Saturn in the Ist (i.e. on the Moon sign) will
cause dispute and argument.
In the 2nd - loss of money and troubles from
enemies.
In the 3rd - eating comforts, happiness to progeny and kinsfolk, success in war, many kinds of
happiness and fulfilment of desires.
In the 4th - destruction of friends, progeny,
wealth, quadrupeds, lands, undertakings and honour.
In the Sth - mental aberration, various kinds of
worries, and faults.
In the 6th - advent of wealth aplenty and happiness.
In the 7th - destruction of wife, progeny and
servants.
In the 8th - destruction in general, trouble from
enemues, loss of weight on account of grief.
In the 9th - attachment to sinful acts, and sudden
destruction of auspiciousness and prosperity, pitiable
State or miserliness, and troubles on account of sexual
unions.
Chandra Kala Nadi
In the 10th - loss of fame (or honour), fear of
strife and blemish.
In the 11th - acquisition of wealth and installation as a king (i.e. getting superior position).
In the 12th - destruction of figure and limbs,
experiencing abundant grief, irritation, humiliation
in the hands of servants, victimisation through severe
diseases.
Seeing the transits of Saturn, one can off-handedly
declare effects.
चन्द्रलग्नादगुरुस्थानं यातो सूर्यसुतो यदि |
पितरोर्नाशं वदेत् काले वीक्षिते वात्र संयुते ॥५२७॥
रविद्रक्काणगे मन्दे त्वं वा द्वादशांशे |
गोचरे क्रूरमासेषु पितृपौडां विनिर्दिशेत् ॥५३८ ॥
537 - 538. Destruction of Father: When Satum
joins or aspects the 9th from the natal Moon sign in
the course of his zodiacal movements, the person’s
father will be destroyed. (In the process) with the
attainment of the Sun’s decanate, Navamsa or Dwadasamsa by Saturn, coupled with an adverse solar
transit (i.e. the month), destruction of father will
occur.
व्ययेशांशे स्वराज्येषु कलहं पुतरनाशनम् |
सुखेशांशे भपतिश्च क्लेशं प्राणोति भूरिशः॥५३९ ॥
539. Irrelevant: When Saturn comes to the sign
represented by 4th lord’s Navamsa, strife incountry,
trouble to king and destruction of son will occur.
तत्तद्धावाष्टमेशांशे SEAT च राशिगे |
तद्धावाष्टदशाकाले तततद्धावस्य नाशनम् ॥५४० ॥
540. (Some amount of liberty is to be taken to
interpret this somewhatill-constructed verse. Understandably the instruction contained is:) When malefics
transit the 8th from a given sign, or the sign identical
with the Navamsa occupied by the lord of the 8th
from a given bhava, the destruction of the bhava
under consideration will occur.
दशानुकूलकाले तु योजयेत् कालवित्तमः।
लग्नाद्रा चन्द्रलग्नाद्वा लाभेशस्य दशर |
मातृपीडा मनस्तापं लग्नाधिपतिदायगे ॥५४१ ॥

Deva Keralam
व्ययाधिपान्तरे वापि कर्माधिपदशासुच |
कर्माधिपदशाकाले मातुलप्रनलात् सुखम् ॥५४२ ॥
धनाधिपस्तथा विन््ाद्विक्रमाधिपतिस्तथा।
सुखाधिपे मातृपीडा लाभाधिपदशातथा ॥५४२ ॥
लाभोशांशपतेर्भक्तो स्फुटयोगांशगे शनो |
स्वमातुलसुतादीनामरिष्टमिति चादिशेत् ॥५४४ ॥
541 - 544. In deciding the effects of transits
given so far, the astrologer should also take into
consideration the directional influences prevailing at
that time. Either in the dasa of the lord of the
ascendant, orinthe dasa of the 1 1thlord counted from
the Moon or the ascendant, danger to mother be
foretold. Happiness through maternal relatives will
come to pass in the sub period of the 12th lord under
the dasa of the 10th lord. So also in the dasa periods
of the 2nd lord and 3rd lord. The dasa of 4th lord will
cause harm to mother; so also the dasa of the 11th
lord. One’s maternal uncle’s children will be destroyed when Saturn in transit comes to the sign
identical with the one occupied by the Navamsa
dispositor of the 11th lord.
Notes: In sloka 544, rendering is made after
eliminating confusing terms like “Bhuktau Sphuta
Yogamsage”.
सर्वनाडीफलं सत्यं योजयेत् कालवित्तमः।
माने जीवे शुभांशस्थे II राजबल्लभः ॥५४५ ॥
स्वदशायां Heated धर्मसिद्धिसुखावहम्।
545 - 5451/2. These effects stated in Sarva Nadi
will bear truth. Jupiter in the 10th in a benefic
Navamsa will make the native dear to the country’s
ruler. In the dasa of such Jupiter, great happiness and
religious attainments will come to pass.
मीने जीवे तुलांशस्थे लक्षमीषष्टयंशजे तथा ५४६ ॥
विशालवदनोद्योगी प्रियदारः सुखी Ta: |
श्यामवर्णगुणश्लाघी कुशलः कुक्षिरोगवान् ॥५४७ ॥
पितृष्वसुः कुले भाग्यं ततत्रप्रियवान् सदा |
वनान्तरपुरीवासी वातप्रकृतिदेहवान् ॥५४८ ॥
श्राद्धकार्यरतो नित्यं लोभप्रकृतिशान्तवान् |
धर्मपुण्यरतोऽभिङ्ञो विद्यावान् सरसप्रियः॥५४९ ॥
तटाकोद्यानधर्मात्मा देवब्राह्मणपोषकः।
बन्धुप्रियकरो नित्यं हरिशङ्रभक्तिमान् ॥५५० ॥
मिताशी गूढदहत्कामी भीरर्गम्भीरवुद्धिमान् |
वयोमध्ये Fears बाल्ये क्लेशदसिद्रवान् ॥५५१ ॥
पश्चाद्भ्रातृविनाशं च मातुरवंशजनप्रियः।
मातामही दीर्धजीवीमातुलप्रियवान् गुणी ॥५५२ ॥
सीमन्तपुत्रवान् रोगौ हुदराहानन्तरं सुखी |
स्वभुजाजितसंपत्नो राजद्राराधिकारवान् ॥५५३ ॥
546 - 553. Jupiter in Pisces with Libra Navamsa: One born in Lakshmi Shashtiamsa and with
Jupiter in Pisces having Libra Navamsa will beget the
following effects. The person will be broad-faced, be
employed, will have affectionate spouse,be happy,
dark incomplexion, of praiseworthy qualities, skillful,
and will have abdominal disorders. His paternal
uncle’s family will prosper. The subject will be fond
of his paternal uncle’s son. He will live in a town
surrounded by forests and will have a windy body.
Annual rituals to dead souls will interest him. He will
be a miser, be patient, be fond of and skillful injustice
and meritorious deeds, be learned, fond of fun, will
construct temples and gardens, will honour gods and
Brahmins, will please his relatives, will worship Lord
Vishnu and Lord Siva, will eat limited food, be
secretive, passionate, timid, profoundly intelligent,
will beget much prosperity in the middle age and will
suffer trouble and poverty in childhood. His afterborn will be destroyed. He will be fond of his
maternal rejatives. His maternal grand-mother will
be long-lived. He will be liked by his matcrnal uncle.
He will be the eldest issue, be sickly, be happy after
marriage, will have self-earned wealth, and will have
a position in royal palace.
Notes: There is no Lakshmi Shashtiamsa as
such. Apparently there is some compositional error.
विपदाये सुभाग्यापिर्भागयाधिपतिभुक्तिषु |
नरवाहनभूपापििर्योगः षोडशवत्सरम् ॥५५४ ॥
त्रिशोपरि सुपुत्रापिः सुताधिपतिभुक्तिषु |
लग्नाथिपान्तरे काले पुत्रिका जननं भवेत् ॥५५५ ॥

554 ~ 555. In the sub period of the 9th lord during
the currency of the 3rd dasa, the person will beget
much fortunes. His sixteenth year will grant him
conveyances and ornaments. Following 30, he will
acquire a son in the sub period of the Sth lord. The
sub period of the lord of the ascendant will bless him
with a daughter.
वर्गोत्तमे TAS शन्यङ्गाएकसंयुते ।
स्वमातु्े्रवैकल्यं पितृभ्रातृविरोधवान् ॥५५६ ॥
मातृष्वसेका सुगुणा भृपतेरभोगशालिनी ।
उद्वाहकाले कलहं जन्मदेशे विवाहवान् ॥५५७ ॥
556 - 557. The Moon in Vargottama in Libra and
in the company of Saturn-Mars will be the cause of
eye deformity to the mother. The subject will further
be inimical to his father and brothers. He will have
a maternal aunt who will be virtuous and will enjoy
pleasures. During the time of the native’s marnage,
there will be quarrels. His marnage will occur in his
birth country.
दारेशेलक्िपषष्टयंशे सप्पत्तारदशन्त्यगे |
विपदायेऽथवा चेति स्वभुक्तो पाणिसंग्रहः ॥५५८ ॥
558. The lord of the 7th in Lakshmi Shashtiamsa
will cause marriage either in the end of the second
dasa, or in the very first sub period of the third dasa.
दारेशे लक्षमीषष्टयंशे मुद्ररंशे च जायते |
स्वजन्मदेश उद्वाहं पित्ररि्टकलत्रवान् ॥५५९ ॥
559. Immovable Ascendant: The 7th lord in the
Shashtiamsa entitled Lakshmi will, for a native of
Mudgara Nadiamsa, give marriage in the birth country. His bride will prove ominous for her father (i.e.
she will have lost her father before marrying the
subject).
Note: A careful study will reveal that from sloka
559 to 664, the Nadiamsa dealt with is Mudgara and
the ascendant is Leo. Of course there is no clear
mention that the ascendant discussed is Leo. Simply
the preceding slokas discuss an immovable ascendant. Unless one applies his heart and soul, required
clues will not emerge from certain areas in the text.
That Leo is discussed can be somewhat understood
from the following sloka, No.560.
Chandra Kala Nadi
However in between this space, slokas belonging to other ascendants also interrupt. These are
clearly separated by me by necessary paragraph
captions.
शुक्रेयावत्फलानि Bees] वा |
दारेशे स्वोच्चराशिस्थे द्वि्रिसंख्याश्च जीविताः ॥५६० ॥
560. The number of Bindus in Venus’ Ashtaka
Varga or in that of the 7th lord from the Moon (will
denote the number of coborn the native will have).
Should the 7th lord (from the ascendant) be exalted,
only two or three (coborn) will be long-lived.
Notes: To get a proper meaning of this sloka, we
have to supply certain information ourselves. Involvement of 3rd lord Venus, 7th lord Saturn exalted
in the 3rd, and reference to long life - all these point
out to two things:
1. The ascendant discussed is Leo.
2. The issue in this verse is coborn.
स्वपितुः सोदराः सप्त ह्यथवा fea च।
पितृव्योद्धोसजीवो च सोदय्रोहपापवान् ॥५६१ ॥
मातामहीविनाशः स्यात् सम्पदाये दरििकः।
Tay पूर्वभागे मातुलौ द्रो द्विभार्यको ॥५६२ ॥
fre सुभाग्यापिर्मातुलप्रनलं सुखम् |
561 - 5621/2. Leo Ascendant - Mudgara
Nadiamsa: The native’s father would have seven
coborn out of whom only two or three would survive.
The maternal grand mother of the native would be
destroyed. In his second dasa he will incur poverty.
If birth be in the first half of Mudgara Nadiamsa, two
of the native’s maternal uncles would have two
spouses. The fortunes of the subject will be on the
increase during the third dasa. His maternal uncles
will also progress.
Notes; Mudgara Nadiamsa extends thus: from
4° 36' to 4° 48' in movable signs, from 25° 12' to 25°
24' in fixed signs, and from 19° 36' to 19° 48' in
common signs.
मातृष्वसुः सुतस्थाने जीवे पूर्णबलानिविते ॥५६३ ॥
तस्यापुतरोः दीर्घजीवी गजानतशवर्यभूमिराय् |
qa: श्रीमान् पुत्रपुत्रीसमद्धिमान् ॥५६४ ॥

Deva Keralam
मातृवाक्यरतो नित्यं भेदभ्रातृसमन्वितः।
कर्माधिपदशाकाले य इदं फलमश्नुते ॥५६५ ॥
जातकस्यसुवाहापिस्ताराब्दानन्तरं शुभम्|
नूतनगृहनिर्माणं हस्तिलाभं शुभावहम् ॥५६६ ॥
लग्नाधिपान्ते काले राजन्यजननिग्रहम् ।
सर्वाध्यक्षाधिकायापति गेहे लक्मीकटाक्षवान् ॥५६७ ॥
563 - 567. Leo Ascendant - Jupiter in 10th: The
10th house having Jupiter in full strength will give
long living children to maternal aunt. The person will
have wealth including elephants. He will lord over
many women, be wealthy, and will have plenty of
sons and daughters. He will obey his mother’s words
and will have half-brothers. These effects will come
to pass in the dasa of the tenth lord. Further, he will
beget costly conveyances and auspicious effects after
twenty-six. He will construct a new house and will
gain elephants. In the sub period of the lord of the
ascendant (during the 10th lord’s dasa), he will incur
enmity with royal men (?) and will obtain a position
having all-round headship. He willalso be blessed by
goddess Lakshmi (i.e. will become wealthy).
स्वोच्चांशे तोलिगे भौमे चोद्रेक्काणसंयुते ।
लग्ने च मिथुने जात ध्ोरापहतवित्तवान् ॥५६८ ॥
568. Gemini Ascendant: Mars in Libra with
Capricorn Navamsa will enable a Gemini native own
stolen wealth.
Note: “Chora Drekkana Samyuthe” inthe text is
quite difficult to exactly understand what the author
had in his mind. There is no Chora Drekkanaas such.
But Chara Drekkana is there, meaning a movable
decanate (Aries and its angles). However, the Nav11153 position of Mars restricts such extensions. To
do away the decanate condition, as an interpolation,
is a wise choice, if | am asked to sort out the issue.
लग्नात् पञ्चमगे मन्दे SRM भागके।
राजन्योद्राहकलहः शखभीतिर्मनोव्यथा ॥५६९ ॥
दशाधिपेऽरिप्धेशदु स्थानग्रहभुक्तिषु |
स्वराजन्यजनद्रेषं WAM परं सुखम् ॥५५७० ॥
षष्ठाष्टमाधीशभुक्तो नक्षत्राधिपतेस्था |
शङरुभीतिमनस्तापमन्तश्िद्रभयं क्वचित् ॥५७१ ॥
warrant मन्दे गोचरे जन्मगेऽथवा |
शतुराजभयं किंचिच्छन्त्याशान्ति प्रयास्याति ॥५७२ ॥
ACMI WE महत्सुखम् |
ARTY प्रजातस्य परशोदानिमाचरेत् ॥५७२ ॥
शतरुवर्गकुलच्छेदं FSI साधय |
मम शतृक्षयार्थाय सर्वाभीष्टप्रदाय च।
भयापमृत्युनाशाय कुठारं प्रददाम्यहम् ॥५७५ ॥
569 - 575. Saturn inthe 5th house in the Navamsa
of 7th lord (from natal ascendant) will cause quarrels
in the marriage of the king (2). It will further trouble
the native with fear from enemies and mental distress, The dasa lord..... in the sub periods of lords of
evil houses, enmity with royal people, and happiness
after destruction of enemies will come to pass. During the sub periods of the lords of the 6th and 8th, or
in the sub period of the Moon, fear from enemies,
mental distress and an inwardly growing fear will
have to be foretold. Saturn placed or moving in
transit in Cancer will bring forth fear from inimical
kings which could be overcome by suitable propitiations. By donating “forests and fortresses” enemies
will turn into friends and great happiness will follow.
One born in Mudgara Nadiamsa should donate anaxe
(to overcome this blemish) and to untimely death,
reciting the Mantra “Mama Satru kshayarathayaa
thava poojaam karomyaham / Satru kshayarthaya
sarvabhishta pradaya cha”.
Notes: These seven slokas are a result of confusioninthe placement of the slokas in anunconcerned
place and by composing the text without using proper
expression. For example - donation of forests and
fortresses.
कर्माधिपदशाकाले वेधकग्रहभुक्तिषु |
स्वराजन्यविरोधेन मनश्राञ्चल्यभीतिमान् ॥५७६ ॥
परवोक्तदानमन्रेण Wes शुभावहम् |
राज्ञामन्तुरे देशे विल्पवेन प्रजावधि ॥५७७ ॥
तद्द्र प्रबलं क्तेशमन्तश्िद्र महद्धयम् |
स्वराजसामन्तनृपालशोकं

तद्राज्यमनिप्रमुखेश्च हानिम् |
शुक्रान्ते राञ्यकलापजन्यं
विपदृशायां फलमाहूरा्याः ॥५७८ ॥
स्वबन्धुजनसन्तापं सामन्तनृपदर्शनम्।
स्वमातुलकलत्रादः पुत्रिकाजाइयमादि शेत् ॥५७९ ॥
576 -579.Leo Ascendant - Mudgara Nadiamsa:
In the dasa of the lord of the 10th and inthe sub period
of an adverse planet, the subject will earn the enmity
of the king. He willalso be fickle-minded during this
phase. By reciting the Mantra mentioned earlier,
auspicious effects could be obtained. There will be
a country-wide revolt because of which difficulties,
fear etc. will prevail (?) The king and minister of the
country will incur damage. The sub period of Venus
will produce strife in the country (?) These are the
effects for third dasa. Grief to relatives, and visiting
a subordinate king will come to pass. His maternal
uncle will have two wives; his daughter will be
sickly.
NB: Unfortunately thesc fourslokas are incoherent and mean nothing.
तुलाशनिस्थिते काते लोके दुरभिक्षजं भयम्|
Gard कलहं चेति ह्यादायादधिकव्ययम् ॥५८० ॥
देहालस्य च लभते गोचरे वृश्चिके शनो |
580 - 5801/2. When Saturn comes to Libra in
transit, there will be all-round drought. In the end of
Libra, he will cause quarrels and expenditure exceeding income. In Scorpio, Saturn will cause indolence.
लनाधिपे रिपुस्थाने तदिशे रिपुराशिगे ॥५८१ ॥
रध्राधिपेन संयक्तेप गुल्मरोगप्रपीडितः
लग्नाञ्जामित्रगे शुक्रे MPa युतेक्षिते ॥५८२ ॥
एक्तवातज्वरं चैव मू्ररोगप्रपीडितः।
तदोषपरिहारार्थं भानुवापवरतं चरेत् ॥५८२ ॥
द्रादशादित्यनामानि हरिवारे प्रपूजयेत् |
रक्तवस्प्रदानेन देहारोग्यं शुभावहम् ॥५८४॥
अर्करूपं सुवर्णेन शक्त्या कल्पोक्तमार्गतः।
सम्यक् पूजां तथा कृत्वा दानमन्ते च कारयेत् ॥५८५ ॥
Chandra Kala Nadi
दिवाकर नमस्तुभ्यं पापाज्ञानप्राणशन |
त्रयीमयार्कविश्वात्मन् गृहाणार्ध्यं नमोऽस्तुते ॥५८६ ॥
दरादशादित्यवारन्ते मण्डलान्त्ये च वा यदि |
दिवाकप्रसादेन देहारोग्यं न संशयः॥५८७ ॥
निराहाये वर्षमेकं फलाहारख्िवर्षकम् |
581 - 5871/2. The lord of the ascendant in the 6th
while the 6th Jord 15 in Ripu Rasi (i.e. in the 6th) in
the company of the 8th lord will cause disorders ofthe
spleen. Venus in the 7th house in aspect to or in
conjunction with Satum will lead to blood disorders
and windy diseases. To overcome this blemish,
observation of religious vows on Sundays should be
resorted to. The names of the twelve Suns should be
recited on Sundays. Donationofred coloured clothes
should be done. As a result health will prevail.
Golden image of the Sun God should be got made
according to one’s capacity. This should be worshipped, and in the end be given away. For twelve
Sundays, the Mantra given in sloka 586 ("Divakara
Namasthubhyam Papagnana Pranasana |
Trayeemayarka Viswathman Gruhanarghyam
Namosthuthe"). Following these, due to the mercy of
the Sun God, health will be recovered. Fora year one
Should be without "food", and for three years with
fruits only.
जीवे सूर्यान्ते काले राजद्वारे कचिदव्यथा ॥५८८ ॥
पश्चद्रोगस्य शमनं RR शुभाशुभम्
अजीर्णजातिसारेण देहायासं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥५८९ ॥
्ातिवरगे मनस्तापं देहायासं मनोव्यथा |
शुक्रान्तरे तथा विन्द्ात् सूरये ज्ञातिधनाधिपः॥५९० ॥
स्वराजवंशे सन्तापं स्वमित्रजननाशनम्।
कुजानतरे पत्रपीडां पुत्रिकोद्राहसं प्रम् ॥५९१ ॥
Teenie पितृवंशे मूरिर्भवेत्।
WaT जीवदाये HATS स्वमातुलः॥ ५९२ ॥
शीतज्वरभयप्राप्ि जननीव्याकुलं महत् |
जीवांशनाडीयोगेनन जातकस्यमहत्सुखम् ॥५९३ ॥
पुतरोत्सवसुभूषापिि्गेहे कल्याणसं ्रमः।

Deva Keralam
पश्ाद्रयाकुलकार्य च UAE शुभाशथम् ॥५९४ |
588 - 594, Leo Ascendant- Mudgara Nadiamsa:
Jupiter dasa, Sun bhukti will cause some fear in royal]
circles and later on relief from ill-health. In the sub
period of the Moon, there will be a mix of good and
bad effects apart from indigestion and dysentery. In
his relative’s circle also, mental] distress, grief and 11Ihealth will prevail. The same effects will prevail in
the sub period of Venus. One will beget ownership
of relatives’ wealth inthe sub period ruled bythe Sun,
apart from distress in king’s family (?) and destruction of friends. ‘In the sub period of Mars troubles to
son, and mariage to daughter will come to pass.
Rahu’s sub period will endanger the person’s spouse
and will cause a death in father’s circle. In the sub
period of the Moon, maternal uncle will be endangered, coinciding with adverse solar movements.
Further this sub period will cause cold fever to the
native, and agitation to mother. Due to birth in
Mudgara Nadiamsa and Jupiter in the 10th prevailing
together (“Jivamsa Nadiyogena"), the subject will
enjoy happiness (i.e. ultimate freedom from all these
dangers). He will obtain a son; there will be a
marriage in his family. Lateron mental agitation will
occurand he will derive a mix of good and bad effects
in royal circles.
कर्माधिपदशाकाले धनाधिपतिभुक्तिषु |
स्वप्रभोश्च सुसन्तान सीमन्तोत्सवसंभरमम् ॥५९५॥
595. Irrelevant: In the sub period ofthe 2nd lord
and in the dasa of the 1010 Jord, the king will obtain
a son and will be busy with functions related to birth
of first child.
व्ययाधिपान्तरेकाले त्वादोव्याकुलमादिशेत्।
मध्ये सुसोख्यभूषाप्ति स्वराजज्ञातिनाशनम् ॥५९६ ॥
596. In the initial portion of the sub period of the
12th lord (during the 10th lord’s dasa), the person will
remain agitated; in the middle part he will be happy
and be endowed with ornaments. Destruction of
king’s relatives will also take place in this part of the
। sub period (?)
विक्रमेशान्तरे काले रजकार्यवशादव्यथा |
भाग्यधिपान्ते सोख्यं योगं लग्नाधिपान्तरे ॥५९७॥
597. During the sub period of the 3rd Jord (in
10th lord’s dasa), one will be worried on account of
royal assignments. The sub period of the 9th lord will
give happiness. There will be progress in the sub
period of the lord of the ascendant.
दाराधिपदशासन्धौ दारनाशेन शोकवान्।
परिणो द्राहसोख्यं स्याद्योगप्राबल्यवान् सुखी ॥५९८॥
598. The end of 7th lord’s dasa will endanger the
native’s spouse. But he will instantly get remarried
and will enjoy progress and happiness.
व्ययेशाक्रान्तभवने क्लेशं वा तल्रिकोणगे |
peat गते पापे पुत्रपीडां विनिर्दिशेत् ॥५९९ ॥
INTE कलहं तत्सामन्तनपेषु वा
राजान्तरमिति प्रोक्तं व्ययेशस्यान्तरे तथा ॥६०० ॥
599 - 600. A malefic in transit in the sign
occupied by the 12th lord ora trine thereof will cause
difficulties to self, and harm to his son. There will be
strife in the country(?). The person will be honoured
by the king. Change of king will occur in the sub
period of the 12th lord (?).
भाग्येशंशे त्निकोणे स्फुटयोगं गते शनो ।
सामन्तराज्ये कलहं स्वप्रभोश्च सुखाधिकम् ॥६०१॥
601. Irrelevant: Saturn in transit in the sign
represented by the Navamsa occupied by the 9th lord,
ora trine thereof, will cause quarrels ina subordinate
domain and much happiness to the ruler of the
native’s country.
केतुक्रान्तांशगे मन्दे स्वदेहे जायते गदः।
विण्पू्देहबाधादेः ध्प्रेणारोग्यमादिशेत् ॥६०२ ॥
602. Disease: When Saturn comes to the sign
denoted by the Navamsa occupied by Ketu, diseases
will strike the person including impure excretion,
physical pain etc. Health will however be recovered
early.
Notes: This is one of the most important clues to
detect period of disease. Note the Navamsa position
of Ketu. With Saturn in transit in the sign identical
with the said Navamsa, one will suffer from diseases.
If the dasa of a disease-causing planet be in simulta-

142 Chandra Kala Nadi
neous operation, the person will have perpetual 11.
health condition.
“Recovering early” mentioned in the text may
have to be applied after a complete study of all the
planets.
भाग्याधिपदशाकाले स्वभुक्तौ व्याकुलं महत् |
एकोनचत्वारिंशाब्दे स्वप्रभोश्च मनोव्यथा ॥६०२३ ॥
चत्वारिंशात् परं भाग्यं गेहे कल्याणसंभ्रमम्।
भाग्याधिपदशाकाले लगनाधिपतिभुक्तिषु ॥६०४॥
दारान्तरेसुतप्राप्तिः राजप्रीतिर्धनागमः।
केतुभुक्तौ मनस्तापं YR शुभाधिकम् ॥६०५॥
सर्यान्तरे राजकार्यं कलत्रातमजपीडनम् |
603 - 6051/2. Dasa of 9th Lord: For the native of
Mudgara Nadiamsa, Leo ascendant, the first sub
period of the 9th lord’s dasa (i.e. Mars dasa, Mars sub
period) will cause much distress. In the 19th year
trouble from royal sources be foretold. After 24,
prosperity will dawn apart from a marriage in the
family. In the sub period of the lord of the ascendant
(i.e. in Sun’s sub period) during the dasa of the 9th
lord, a son will be born to him through his second
wife; there will also be advent of wealth through
royal sources. Ketu’s sub pcriod will cause distress.
Abundantly auspicious results will follow the sub
period of Venus. The sub period of the Sun will
involve him in royal assignments, but will harm his
Spouse and progeny.
मन्दे सूर्यान्तरे काले योगभ्गं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥६०६ ॥
नानाव्याकुलकार्य च चद्धभुक्तो शुभाशुभम् |
SR व्याकुलं स्याच्छुभकार्यवशादव्यथा ॥६०७॥
मन्दे भोमान्ते काले विरोधं बन्धुभिः सह ।
ज्वरस्य पीडयात्यासं मनक्लेशं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥६०८ ॥
Tee महत्सौख्यं गेहे कल्याणसंप्मम्।
जीवान्तरे श्रियावाप्तिः पत्रोत्सव इति स्मृतम् ॥६०९॥
606 - 609. Dasa of Saturn: Following are the
results of Saturn dasa for the native of Mudgara
Nadiamsa, Leo ascendant. The Sun’s bhukti will
interrupt progress, causing various kinds of worries.
The sub period of the Moon, in Saturn’s major period
will cause a mix of goodand bad effects. Distress will
occur during the sub period of Mars apart from
worries related to auspicious functions. Further, the
person will have enmity with his relatives and be
troubled by fever and meatal worry. Great happiness
will exist in the sub period of Rahu apart from a
family marriage. Jupiter in his sub period will cause
wealth and acquisition of a grand-son.
मन्दे शक्रान्तरे काले स्वपुत्रोद्राहसं भ्रमम् |
भुक्त्यने वा वसन्र्तौ पुश्रिकोद्राहमादिशेत् ॥६१० ॥
610. Continued: The sub period of Venus will
cause the marriage of a son while the concluding part
of this sub period, in spring, will cause the marriage
of a daughter.
कुम्भे शनिस्थिते काले पुत्रिकोद्राहसंभ्रमम् |
चापान्त्ये मकरे वापि स्वगेहे शुभशोभनम् ॥६११॥
तोला शनिस्थिते काले बन्धुवर्गे मनोव्यथा |
विपदाये फलं सत्यं योगप्राबल्यमादिशेत् ॥६१२॥
611 - 612. Saturn’s Transit: When Saturn is in
Aquarius, marriage ofa daughter will be possible. An
auspicious function is also likely with Saturn moving
in the end of Sagittarius, or in Capricorn. Saturn
transiting in Libra will cause distress to relatives. The
effects stated (elsewhere) for third dasa will bear
truth. The third dasa will increase the prosperity of
the native of Mudgara Nadiamsa, Leo ascendant.
मुद्ररंशेप्रजातस्य क्षेमदाये ATA |
एकयोगे एलं किंचिद्योगसडरमश्नुते ie 23 I
613. Fourth Dasa: In this dasa, there will be
good and bad effects and the prosperity will be
somewhat checkered for a person born in Mudgara
Nadiamsa.
लगनेशस्यान्तरे वापि हयल्पसोख्यं कचित् सुखम् |
शुक्रान्तरे विशेषस्यात् पुत्रमाबल्यमादिशेत् ॥६१४॥
614. IfSaturn is in the ascendant at birth, then his
sub period (in the 4th dasa) will give limited happiness. Venus’s sub period will denote great progress
for his sons.

Deva Keralam
मुखेशाक्रान्तभवनेत्वंशे वा ततलिकोणगे |
स्फुटयोगं गते मन्दे स्वराजक्लेशमादिरोत् ॥६१५॥
615. When Saturn comes to the sign denoted by
the Navamsa occupied by the lord of the 4th at birth,
ora trine thereof difficulties to (from?) king are to be
foretold.
जीवे सोख्यं सुभूषापि राजानुप्रहशान्तिकम् |
लक्मीकराक्षवानित्यं गोचरे फलमादिशेत् ॥६१६ ॥
616. If it is Jupiter that transits the above-said
place (vide sloka 615), one will obtain ornaments and
royal mercy. Further the subject will be blessed with
wealth.
अश्चिनीमखमूलेषु पापिनामुदयेषु च।
तदंशे गोचरे मन्दे देहायासो महाविपत् ॥६१७ ॥
617. General: See if a malefic is placed in
Aswini, Makha or Moola at the time of one’s birth.
When Saturn attains that degree, physical illness and
great danger will be experienced.
बुधाष्टवर्ग निक्षिप्य हीनबिन्दुषु राशिषु |
pea गते सौम्ये त्रिकोणे निशाकर ॥६१८॥
अतीव क्लेशकार्याणि देहायासं विनिर्दिशेत् |
अष्टमाधिपतौ मन्दे पञ्चमे मिथुनांशगे ॥६१९॥
सोम्यपाके सोप्यभुक्तो शरत्कालेऽपमृत्युमान् |
वसन्ते वा मृतिं चेति कृष्णपक्षे yes ॥६२० ॥
618 - 620, Gemini Ascendant: When Mercury
comes to the sign having the least Bindus in his
Ashtaka Varga, and the Moon simultaneously moving ina trine to the said Mercury, will produce intense
difficulties and illness. The 8th lord Saturn, in Libra,
with Gemini Navamsa will cause untimely death in
the dasa and sub period both of Mercury during spring
or autumnal part of the year, ina dark fortnight, ona
Friday.
मन्दवारेऽथवा मृत्युः सप्तपञ्चाशवत्सरे |
व्ययस्थानगते जीवे सबले शुभवीश्िते |
मुदररंशे प्रजाश्च देहान्ते पुण्यलोकवान् ॥६२१ ॥
621. Death in the above case could a Iso be onaSaturday. Timely death of this native will be at 56.
The native of Mudgara Nadiamsa, having a strong
Jupiter in the 12th in aspect to another benefic will
take the native to Heavens.
व्ययाधिपे मदे स्वांशे कर्मजीवे प्रजायते |
महादेवप्रसादेन पुण्यलोकं प्रयास्यति ॥६२२ ॥
पश्चदुत्तमजन्मा स्यात् पर्वपुण्येनहेतुना |
एकाशीतिपद चक्रं नर्वेधकसमन्वितम् ॥६२३ ॥
622 - 623. Jupiter in the 10th while 12th lord
Saturn is in the 7th in his own Navamsa will cause
attainment of Heavens due to the mercy of Lord Siva.
Later on he will have anexcellent rebirth. Due to the
merits of the previous birth, donation of the image of
a single-footed zodiac will remove obstacles in his
attaining the heavens.
Notes: This apparentiy belongs to Pisces ascendant, having Jupiter in the 10th and Saturn in
Virgo with Capricom or Aquarius Navamsa.
अर्चयेद्ध्यानमन्रेण महायोगोपशान्तये |
स्परे सुते वा जामित्रे स्थिते मन्दे प्रजायते ॥६२४॥
रविवा्रतेनाशु देहारोग्यं महत्सुखम्।
पश्चदुद्यापनं कुर्यात् कल्पोक्तविधिमार्गतः॥६२५ ॥
पेशाधिकभयं चैव गुल्मं frase तथा |
असाध्यसेगानिरमुक्त आयुरारग्यभाक् सुखी ॥६२६ ॥
624 - 626. Reciting the Mantra prescribed for
charity, worships be done which will remove the
great disease (in question). Saturn in the 8th, 5th or
7th will favourably respond to religious vows on
Sundays and will allow restoration of health. Fear
from devils, disorders of spleen and mental aberration will be cured and health restored.
Notes: These three slokas are misplaced in this
part of the text and is partial allowing no full understanding of the instructions.
What we can understand is Saturn in the Sth, 7th
or 8th will cause fear from devils, disorders of the
abdomen and mental aberration which can be cured
by worshipping the Sun God, repeat Sun God.
लगनात् पञ्चमे सूर्ये स्वसुतेन समन्विते |
तिलपिषटार्कदानेन ह्युदरामयनाशनम् ॥६२७ ॥

प्रतिमां तिलपिष्टेन रलयुक्तकरद्रयीम्।
्रिेत्रंपदमहस्तां च रक्तवसेश्चष्टिताम् ॥६२८ ॥
कत्पोक्तविधिमार्गेण होमान्ते दानमाचरेत् |
अत्युत्कृष्टमिदं दान॑निर्णतिं रुद्रयामले ॥६२९ ॥
तिलिपिष्टमयसूर्यं दद्यादायुष्यवर्धनम्।
आरोग्यं च सुसोभाग्यं सन्ततिं देहि मे प्रभो ॥६२० ॥
एकाशीतिपदं चक्रं मध्ये सूर्यादिचक्रमात् |
meds Ae पूजान्ते दानमाचरत् ॥६३१ ॥
आयुरारोग्यभाग्याप्तिरपमृत्युविनाशनम् |
प्रहचक्रं महतपुण्यंदेवज्ञाय प्रदापयेत् ॥६३२ ॥
नवग्रहप्रसादेन ह्यायुरायेग्यभाक् सुखी |
राजवश्यकरं सौख्यं देहासेग्यं रिपुक्चयम् ॥६३२ ॥
प्रहचक्रफलं नृणामिष्टकाम्यार्थ सिद्धिदम् |
एकाशीतिपदं चक्र प्रहप्रीतिकरं शुभम् ॥६३४॥
तस्मादस्य प्रदानेन सुप्रीतो मां समुद्धर |
सालीकृतं पूर्णकुम्भं नवधान्योपरि धभिपेत् ॥६३५ ॥
तन्मध्ये पूजयेच्चक्रं होमान्ते दानमाचरेत् |
आयुरायोग्यसौख्याप्तिमपमृत्युविनाशनम् ॥६३६ ॥
इष्टकाम्यार्थसिद्धि च कथयन्ति च यामले |
627 - 6361/2. The abdominal sickness caused by
Saturn-Sun conjunction in the 5th can be warded off
by donating gingilee cakes ("Tilapishtarkadanena"
should read as "Tilapsiita pradanena"). An idol
made of gingilee cakes, with three eyes and two
diamond-studded hands, with red robes and surrounded by horses be obtained. Homa (fire sacrifice)
as prescribed be done and charities given, which will
serve as the most excellent remedy according to
Rudra Yamala. The (worship of the) image of the Sun
God made of gingilee cakes will increase life span.
“Grant me health, prosperity and progeny.” (This is
the meaning of the mantra given inthe text.) The Sun
god should be placed in the middle of the image of the
zodiac. At the end of the Pooja, charity be given
away. This will increase health, prosperity and will
stall untimely death. To donate the image of the
zodiac to the astrology is among the most meritorious
Chandra Kala Nadi
deeds. Due to the mercy of the Nava grahas, he will
be endowed with longevity and health. His desires
will be fulfilled. The pot decorated as per Vedic
injunctions should be placed in the midst of Nava
Dhanyas (nine kinds of grains) along with the image
of the zodiac and be worshipped. At the end of the
Homa, charities be givenaway whereupon longevity,
health and fulfillment of desires will come to pass,
according to (Rudra) Yamala.
Notes: These slokas are also a mix up and are in
the wrong part of the text. The reader may take only
useful clues hereof and ignore the rest.
Apparently the remedy suggested for Sun-Saturn conjunction in the 5th is donation of gingilee
cakes and worship of Sun God. Asa result, abdominal diseases will not trouble the native.
मुद्ररं शे प्रजातस्य पावकः सुरपूमितः॥६२७॥
तदशायां BTS WE धनागमम् |
स्वप्रभोश्च विशेषेण ह्यर्थभूषाम्बराणि च ॥६३८ |
विवाहोत्सवसौख्याप्ति महानृपतिदर्थनम् |
विशेषम्रामभूलाभं सुजनप्रीतिसंभवम् ॥६३९ ॥
637 - 639. Immovable Ascendant: The native
of Mudgara Nadiamsa, in an immovable ascendant
will be bight in appearance and will be respectable.
In that dasa (?) during the sub period of Venus, his
enemies will turn into frends and he will acquire
wealth apart from acquiring ornaments and clothes to
(read “from”) the king. He will beget married and
will visit a great king and will earn abundant villages
and lands (i.e. immovable properties). Many virtuous people will like him. His undertakings will yield
fruits.
यलकार्यार्थसिद्धि च विप्लवेन कचिद्व्यथाम् |
मृष्टा्नपानाम्बरभूषणापि
राज्यार्थभूलाभमतीव सौख्यम् |
र्य मनोत्साहमतीवकीरपि
कुर्यादप्रहः पावकसंज्ञकोऽयम् ॥६४० ॥
640. He will procure sweet food, drinks, ornaments, robes, kingdom, wealth, lands and abundant
happiness. He will become bold, enthusiastic, very

Deva Keralam
famous. These are the effects to be given by Pavaka
Graha.
faaeq मित्रस्य फलं तदन्यः
We वा कुरूतेऽतिदुःखम्।
PRN बहुराजपूज्यं
विद्याविनोदाशचितराजगेष्ठीम्।
दयातपश्राप्िचिन््यभाग्यं
कुर्यात् फलंबोधकसंज्ञक श exe ॥
641. General: A planet placed in friendly divisions will give friendly (i.e. favourable) effects while
one inimical divisions will cause abundant grief.
Bodhaka Graha will give kingdom, honour from
many kings, learning, entertainment moving in royal
circles, kindness, penance, and prosperity.
भाग्यारशिदशाचक्रे बोधकस्य फलं वदेत् |
Hee प्रजातस्य त्रिंशाब्दे फलमादिशेत् ॥६४२ ॥
642. The effects mentioned for Bodhaka Graha
will materialise inthe dasa of the 9th Rasi (as per Kala
Chakra Dasa). The native of Mudgara Nadiamsa will
obtain (good) effects after his 30th year.
दाणाधपदशाकाले सुखाधिपतिभुक्तिषु |
भार्या च गर्भस्तावेण देहे रोगातुरा तथा ॥६४२ ॥
पश्चादारोग्यसोख्यापि पु्रलाभं विनिर्दिशेत् |
कीटाजपञ्चाननकर्कटेषु
चरन् शनिः क्षुद्भयदः प्रजानाम् |
qed वातजमग्निजं वा
तथापि जीवन्ति जनाः कथंचित् ॥६४४ ॥
643 - 644, Immovable Ascendant - Mudgara
Nadiamsa: (a) The sub period of the lord of the 4th
during the major period of the 7th lord will cause
troubles to the nalive’s spouse, by miscarriage and
disease. Later on she will recover and give birth to
a son.
(b) Irrelevant: The transit of Saturn in Scorpio,
Aries, Leo and Cancer will cause fear of hunger,
absence of rains, and diseases caused by windy
imbalances and danger from fire to the populace.
कुम्भचक्रदशाकाले शनौ वक्रातिचारगे |
ओत्तर्यदेशकलहो दक्षिणां दिशमेष्यति ॥६४५ ॥
स्वात्यादित्रयणे मन्दे स्वभानौतत्िकोणे।
काञ्चीपिनाकिनीमध्ये देशे राजान्तरं भवेत् ॥६४६ ॥
चोलदेशे विजानीयात् पाण्डयदेशेऽथवा यदि |
मण्डलाधिपतेरमत्युस्तद्वरे मातृनाशनम् ॥६४७ ॥
तदभावे ars संचितार्थविनाशनम् |
जनानां चेव मन्रीणां संचितार्थविनाशनम् ॥६४८ ॥
645 - 648. Irrelevant: The dasa of Aquarius in
operation with the simultaneous accelerated or retrograde motion of Saturn will produce quarrels in the
northern and southern parts of the country. Saturn’s
movements in Swathi, Visakha and Anuradha, with
Rahu in a trine thereof, changes of rulers will occur
in Kanchi, Pinakini and Central part of the land. So
also in Chola and Pandya kingdoms. The native’s
mother will die in aking’s place, or his prosperity will
be checkered, and wealth will be destroyed.
मीने तुलांशगे जीवे deat सितान्तरे |
महानृपति राज्ये च पूर्वसेनापतेः सुखम् ॥६४९ ॥
तन्मूलात् सौख्यमाप्नोति स्वपरभुश्च विशेषतः।
गजाश्वहुमानादि मिष्टासिद्धि विनिर्दिशेत् ॥६५० ॥
649 - 650. Irrelevant: Note it Jupiter is in Pisces
with Libra Navamsa. In that case, the sub period of
Venus in the dasa of Jupiter will give happiness to the
former army chief of a great king. The king will be
greatly happy with him. Elephants, horses etc. will
be given as gifts and one’s desires will be fulfilled,
गुरुः तृतीयपर्याये मुद्ररंशे च जायते |
त्रिकोणस्थोश्रियावापि लाभे शत्रुभयं क्वचित् ॥६५१॥
Be सोख्यसन्तोषं जन्मे सर्वसुखं महत् |
पतरोत्सवसुभूषापि ज्ञातिव्गे सुतक्षयम् ॥६५२ ॥
651 - 652. Immovable Ascendant - Mudgara
Nadiamsa: The third round of Jupiter’s transit will
give wealth but some fear from enemies. In the 12th
house he will give comforts and happiness, and in the
ascendant all kinds of happiness, birth of a son and

acquisition of ornaments, but loss of a child in
relative’s circles.
कीरस्थशनिदोषेण कलहं रजहेतुना |
पश्चात् स्वस्थानमापनोति राजप्रीत्या धनागमम् ॥६५२ ॥
अमूल्यवस्तुवाहादिलाभो भवति नित्यशः।
लाभेशांशे तत्तिकोणे स्फुटयोगं गते गुरो ॥६५४ ॥
इदमेव फलं सत्यं कर्पाधिपतिदायगे |
द्वितीये धनवस्नाप्ि लाभेऽन्तये च शुभाधिकम् ॥६५५ ॥
653 - 655. Saturn’s movement in Scorpio will
give quarrels (or misunderstandings) with the king;
later on the subject will be given back his position. He
will gain wealth through royal pleasure. He will also
acquire priceless articles, conveyances etc. when
Saturn comes to the sign represented by the Navamsa
position of the 11th lord, ora trine thereof. These are
the effects for the 10th lord’s dasa. (When Jupiter)
transits the 2nd house, one will gain wealth and robes,
and will beget abundantly auspicious effects with the
planet moving 11th and ascendant.
मन्दे गुरुयुते काले मण्डलाधिपतेर्विपत् |
तत्काले जातकस्येव हयतिप्रनलमादिशेत् ॥६५६ ॥
056. The time of Jupiter - Saturn conjunction in
transit will cause dangerto the king. At that time, the
subject will become quite famous.
तृतीये व्यकुलं किंचिल्नूप्मासे PTT |
THT मनस्तापस्तत्रिकोण इदं फलम् ॥६५७ ॥
सुखे सोख्यसुपुत्रापि पञ्चमे व्याकुलं महत् |
राजनिष्ठुरकार्याणि पश्चात् सोख्यं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥६५८ |
057 - 658. Jupiter moving in the 3rd house will
produce mental agitation. Coinciding with adverse
solar transits, during this year, he will cause a mix of
good and bad effects. Should he transit a trine with
reference to the 3rd, he will be the cause of mental
distress among kinsfolk. In the 4th, the planet will
give happiness and a son. Great distress duc to
performing acts to the king’s wrath will come to pass
with Jupiter going about in the 5th house; later on
happiness will prevail.
Chandra Kala Nadi
जीवे चतुर्थपर्याये मुद्ररांशे च जायते |
मीनान्त्याजे मनस्तापं वृषभे व्याकुलं महत् ॥६५९ ॥
659. Jupiter’s fourth round of transit will give the
following effects for a native of Mudgara Nadiamsa,
immovable ascendant. In the end of Pisces or in
Aries, mental distress will prevail, in Taurus, much
agitation.
रन्धाधिपदशाकाले स्वराजप्रबलं महत् |
जातकस्य फलं किंचिदल्पसौख्यं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥६६० ॥
660. During the dasa of 8th lord, the subject will
receive some happiness, but his king will become
greatly strong.
मुदररंशे प्रजातस्य दयूनाधिपदशान्त्यगे |
PUA मनस्तापं मातामहविनाशनम् ॥६६१ ॥
661. In the end of the dasa of 7th lord, in a
malefic’s sub period, the native’s maternal grandfather will be destroyed, and he will be distressed.
मातुलप्बलं चेति कर्माधिपतिदायके |
स्वामातृभगिनीपुत्रप्राबल्यं चोत्तरोत्तरम् ॥६६२ ॥
स्प्राधिपदशायां तु लग्नाधिपतिदायगे |
स्वान्ते चापमृत्युश्च शान्त्या शानि प्रयास्यति ॥६६३ ॥
सुखाधिपान्तरे मन्दे त्वेकचत्वारिवत्सरे |
जननी मृत्युमाणोति सप्तत्रिशेऽथवा यदि ॥६६४॥
662 - 664. His maternal uncle will hecome
strong in the dasa of the 10th lord. Gradually his
maternal aunt’s son will also become strong. In the
dasa of the 8th lord or ascendant lord, in the concerned first sub period, the native will have fear of
untimely death which can be overcome by propitiations. The sub period of the 4th lord in Saturn dasa,
or inthe 41st year or in 37th year, his mother will die.
सिहलग्नं शिवकर्यशक
शिवकर्यशके नादयां सिंहलग्न सुभाग्यवान् |
शूद्रजन्मासुखी नित्यं सीमन्तो भवति धवम् ॥६६५ ॥
665. Sivakari Nadiamsa - Leo Ascendant:
This native will be highly prosperous. He will be a
Soodra and be the eldest issue of the family.

Deva Keralam
Notes: For the subject Nadiamsa, see notes
under sloka No.3241 supra.
पितुर्जातः परोक्षस्य पूर्वभागे विचारवान् |
SHU प्रजातस्य समीपे स्वपिता सुखी ॥६६६ |
666. Onc belonging to the former half of this
degree will be born in the absence of his father and be
of wandering disposition. The person belonging to
the second half will have his father by his side at the
time of his birth.
पूर्वभागे वनप्रान्त्ये गिरििन्त्येऽथवा यदि |
मातामह्यस्मीपं तु BAA जननं स्मृतम् ॥६६७ ॥
667. Former Half: His birth will be near a forest
or hilly region in a small village with his maternal
grand-father being in attendance.
लगने रहयुते जीवे नालवेष्टनसंभवः।
वर्गोत्तमे शुभं प्राहुः स्वोच्चांशे वा विशेषतः ॥६६८ ॥
668. Umbilical Cord: The ascendant occupied
by Rahu and Jupiter will cause birth entangled in
umbilical cord. Should Jupiter be in Vargottama
Navamsa or own Navamsa, auspicious effects will
follow, 1.¢. birth will be free from such entanglement.
aay गुरुसंदृष्टे लमनेशे वा बलान्विते |
नाडी शिवकरीसंज्ञ पूर्वभागे महत्सुखम् ॥६६९ ॥
669. Happiness: The ascendant lord (1.6. the
Sun) in own sign and being in aspect to Jupiter or be
endowed with strength will cause great happiness to
the native of former half of Sivakari Nadiamsa, Leo
ascendant.
लग्ने वृषांशके राहौ गुरुणा च निरीक्षते |
तदीशो बलवान् यस्य रक्तवर्णशुभाकृतिः॥६७० ॥
670, Complexion: One will be blood red in
complexion and will have an auspicious appearance
if the ascendant is occupied by Rahu and aspected by
Jupiter, provided the said Rahu is in Taurus Navamsa.
लग्नाधिपेन संदृष्टे दीर्षायुर्भद्रातृमान् |
MAT TRAE लगनेवामरपूजिते ॥६७१ ॥
नालवेष्टन दोषस्य नाशनं भवति Ya
लग्नेशे स्वोच्चराशिस्थे IT वा बलानिवते |
गुरुदृष्टियुते वापि न दोषो नालवेष्टजः॥६७२ |
671 - 672. If Rahu in the ascendant is aspected
by the ascendant lord, the Sun, one will be endowed
with longevity and will have a step-brother. The
ascendant or its lord being in aspect to Jupiter will
free the native from being born with umbilical cord
around the body. The same result will come to pass
if the ascendant lord is in exaltation, or in own sign,
with strength. Even if he is aspected by Jupiter, such
blemish will be absent.
सोदरभातृमान् रागी भगिनीद्रयवान् सुखी |
पूर्वभागे प्रजातस्य राजन्यद्रेषवान् पिता ॥६७३ ॥
673. Sivakari Nadiamsa - Former Half: He
will have coborns, be passionate, and will have two
sisters. His father will earn royal wrath.
पितुः समीपे जननं ae तु जायते ।
महानदीग्रान्यदेशे नगरे वाप्रसूतिमान् ॥६७४ ॥
674. Second Half: This native will be born in the
region of a river in a big town, with his father being
present on the spot.
लगे राहुयुते जीवे भोगी वर्गोत्तमांशके ।
सुशरीरः Feta TAGS: प्रतापवान् ॥६७५ ॥
fae विलग्ने गुरुराहुयोगे
कालान्तरे दुर्बलदेहभाक् स्यात् |
ताताम्निके सोख्यसुदीर्घमायु
भोगी सदा मातृनृपप्रियः स्यात् ॥६७६ ॥
675 - 676. Rahu-Jupiter in Ascendant: This
conjunction will make one enjoy pleasures. Simultaneously if Rahu is in Vargottama Navamsa, one
will have a good physique, longevity, royal honour
and valour. Rahu and Jupiter coming to occupy the
ascendant Leo will however produce a weak body
after a long interval. The native’s paternal grandmother will be long-lived and he will be liked by his
mother and the king.
वर्गोत्तमे यदा जीवे विलग्ने राहुसंयुते |
सिंहे वा वृषभे जातो हयल्पायुर्दाययोगवान् ॥६७७॥

नीचारिपापव्गशे fae जीवे न जीवित।
आबाल्यक्लेशवान् रोगी मातृसोख्यविहीमवान् ॥६७८ ॥
677 - 678. Leo/Taurus Ascendant: Should Leo
or Taurus ascend with Rahu and Jupiter therein, while
the later is in Vargottama Navamsa, predict shori life
to the native concerned. If Jupiter in Leo ascendant
occupies the divisions of his debilitation or enmily or
that of a malefic, the subject will not live long. He
will be in trouble right from childhood, be sickly and
devoid of maternal happiness.
fae कीयंशगे जीवे कन्यांशे राहुसंयुते |
राजङ्रारे Hager पिता बाल्ये सुकीतिमान् ॥६७९ ॥
waist विपुलः कुचेल
धारी gaat eget कुमूरतिः।
अधार्मिकः साहसकार्यदक्षः
सेनासमेतः क्षितिभोगभाक् स्यात् ॥६८० ॥
679 - 680. Father: Jupiter joining Rahu in the
ascendant Leo, and begetting Virgo or Scorpio Navamsa will make the native famous in royal circles.
Further, during the native’s childhood, his father will
obtain wide fame. The subject will have diseases al]
over the body. He will be noble or respectable, will
wear torn clothes, will have diseased (or defective)
skin, be bereft of happiness, will have ugly appearance, be not righteous, be skillful in adventurous
deeds, be endowed with an army and will enjoy lands
(under his reign).
am राहुयुते जीवे सिंहांशे राजपूजितः।
कन्यांशकगते राहौ लेख्यविद्याविशारदः॥६८१॥
लिपित्रयप्रवीणश्च धर्मशीलः सुबुद्धिमान् |
अनज्रोधी सुकोरिल्यः कििद्धर्तस्वभावयान् ॥६८२ |
स्वपिता राजनिकटे कार्यकर्ता विचक्षणः।
अन्तकपरवान् रागी स्वराजजनरञ्जकः॥६८३ ॥
681 - 683. The ascendant Leo being in occupationby Rahu and Jupiter, as Jupiter is in Leo Navamsa
itself, will make the native receive royal respect. In
this yoga if Rahu is in Virgo Navamsa, the subject
will be skillful in writing and reading. He will be an
Chandra Kala Nadi
expert in three languages, be righteous, given to
anger inwardly, be highly crooked (or dishonest), and
be somewhat wicked 1) disposition. further his
father will serve in the proximity of the king, be clear.
sighted, inwardly cunning in disposition, passionate,
and will please king’s men.
लग्ने कन्यांशे राहौ रविशुक्रनिरीभिते ।
तृष्णाभिभूतः क्लेशीच कष्टकार्यविचक्षणः ॥६८४ ॥
उत्साही विपुलः कामी स्वपित्रधिकयुक्तिमान् |
जातकः सत्यवादी च मध्ये वयसि शोकवान् ॥६८५ ॥
बाल्ये सुखी विनीतश्च धर्मशीलः कुयुक्तिमान् |
कृशगाप्रोऽर्थवांश्चैव हरिशङ्करभक्तिमान् ॥६८६ ॥
684 - 686. Sun - Venus aspecting Rahu: Rahu
placed in 1.८0 ascendant with Virgo Navamsa will
make one intensely troubled by thirst. The person
concerned wil! be (often) in difficulties. He will be
capable of managing difficult lasks, be enthusiastic,
libidinous, be more expedient than his father, be
truthful, will incur difficulties in the middie of his
life, be happy in childhood, modest, righteous, will
use tricky expedients, will have a thin body, be
wealthy and devoted to Lord Vishnu and Lord Siva.
All these results will come to pass only if the planet
Rahu as above 1s aspected by the Sun and Venus
jointly.
कुम्भांशे det se कुटिलः wea: |
असितेन युते भोगी वातप्रकृतिरोगवान् ॥६८७ ॥
सुमुखः कुशलो Heat नीतिज्ञः परदारगः।
इद्धितज्ञः सदा रोषी वृषभांशकगे शनो ॥६८८ ॥
687 - 688. Leo Ascendant - Siva Kari Nadiamsa:
(a) The Moon in Libra with Aquarius Navamsa will
make one dishonest and sinful. [f the said Moon is in
association with Saturn (in Libra), tne person will
enjoy pleasures, will have a windy body and be prone
to diseases.
(b) The Moon and Saturn should join in Libra,
while Saturn in particular begets Taurus Navamsa.
Then thesubject willhave acharm ing appearance, be
skillful, ve a minister, well-versed in law, be addicted

Deva Keralam 149
10 others’ women, and be an expert in understanding
in:crnal sentiments by external gestures.
मोहनांशकगे ost त्वसितेन समन्विते |
have step-brothers, be honourable and will have
long-lived paternal grand-father. He will haveastepsister who will enjoy a long married life; she will be
well brought up by her paternal grand-father. She
आयुष्मन्तो च पितरो कलत्रद्यवान् पिता ॥६८९ ॥
वार्धके स्रीसुभाग्याप्तआबाल्यं च सुसौख्यवान्।
मोहनांशे निशानाथे शिवकर्यशजातकः।
आयुष्मन्तस्िपितृव्याः केचित्क्षे चतुष्टयम् |
पितृष्वसा पुत्रवती ह्यल्पभाग्यवती शुभा ॥६९० ॥
कालान्तरे भ्रातृशोकं भर्तः पूर्वं मरिष्यति |
689 - 6901/2. The Moon in Mohana Nadiamsa
and being in association with Saturn will give the
native Jong-living parents. Further his father will
have two spouses and will enjoy happiness from
women in oldage. The father will be in general happy
right from childhood. The native will have three,
even four according to some, paternal uncles with
long lives. The native’s maternal aunt will be endowed with progeny, be less fortunate, auspicious,
will after some interval be grieved on account of loss
of brother, and will predecease her husband.
fae सिहांशगे जीवे षष्टयंशे देवभागे ॥६९१॥
शिवकर्येशके नाडयां योगवान् sear सुखी |
शिवदांशके जीवे मोहनांशे निशाकरे ॥६९२ ॥
शिवकर्यशके तस्य पितरौ दीर्थजीविनो |
भेदभ्रातृयुतो मानी दीर्घजीवी पितामहः॥६९३ ॥
भेदस्वसा सुमाङ्ल्या पितामह्या सुपोषिता।
पुत्रिणी पतिभक्ताच ज्येष्ठभ्रात् प्रिया शुभा ॥६९४॥
मध्ये रोगक्लेशवती पुत्रनाशेन कशता |
बहुभाग्यवती भर्तृभूषिता सुगुणा सती ॥६९५ ॥
691 - 695. (a) Jupiter in Leo: Jupiter in Leo
ascendant with the same Navamsa, and in Deva
Shashtiamsa will cause fame, prosperity and happiness to the native of Sivakari Nadiamsa, [_eo ascendant.
(b) The Moon & Jupiter: The Moon in Mohana
Nadiamsa while Jupiter is in Sivada Nadiamsa will
cause long life spans to the parents. The subject will
will have daughters and be in between troubled by
diseases and grief. She will be liked by her husband
and elder brother and will be emaciated due to loss of
ason. She will enjoy abundant prosperity, be adored
by her husband, be virtuous and chaste.
मोहनांशकगे we त्वसितेन समन्विते |
मातामहश्चिरञ्ीवी मातामही तथेव च ॥६९६ ॥
मोहनांशे स्वजननी भ्रातृभ्रात्रीसमन्विता।
भ्रातृ भाग्येनसन्तुषं भूषिता स्वसुतप्रिया ॥६९७॥
स्वभदभ्रातृभार्यदिद्ेषणात्यन्तकर्रिता |
कालान्तरे गृहच्छिद्रं भ्रातृनारेन दुखिता ॥६९८ ॥
696 ~698. (a) The Moon in Mohana Nadiamsa in
association with Saturn will give longevity to maternal grand parents.
(b) The Moon in Mohana Nadiamsa (without
reference to Saturn) will bless the mother of the
native with brothers and sisters. She will be happy
through brother’s prosperity, will have ornaments,
fond of her progeny, will be emaciated due to enmity
with the wife of her step-brother and will incur
division in her family after some interval. She willbe
gricved on account of destruction of her brother.
मेषांशे मकरे सोम्ये सुखे भोमे घरांशगे |
सिहलगने ्रजातश्रच मातुलत्रयवान् सुखी ॥६९९ ॥
699. Three Maternal Uncles: Ascendant Leo,
Mercury in the sign Capricorn with Aries Navamsa,
and Mars in the 4th (in Scorpio) with Aquarius
Navamsa. This yoga will give three maternal uncles.
पूर्वभागे freed मोहनांशे च जायते |
त्रिमातुलाश्चायुष्मन्तः केचित्के चतुष्टयम् ॥७०० ॥
मातृवंशे च afte दुखिता मातृसोदयी।
एका सुमण्डली पूता क्लेशिता च तथापारा ॥७०९॥
मातुलैको दीर्थजीवी केचित् कालान्ते फलम्।

700 - 7011/2. Leo Ascendant - Mohana
Nadiamsa: One born in the former half of this
Nadiamsa will have three long-living maternal uncles. According to some, it could be four. Further,
there will be poverty in the families of maternal
kinsfolk. One of thesisters of the native’s mother will
be in (perpetual) grief. Another sister will have long
marital life, be pure (in character) and be in troubles.
So also yet another sister.
Notes: Refer tonotes under sloka 445, Book] for
Mohana Nadiamsa.
शिवकर्यशगे नाडयां पूर्वभागे च जायते ॥७०२॥
स्वभातृसोदराश्चाष्टौ जीवन्ति दोतरयस्तथा |
चन्दरस्याष्टकवर्गे च चन्द्रे यावत्फलैर्युते ॥७०२ ॥
तावत्संख्या सोदराणां जनन्याश्च भवेत्तथा |
सूर्यस्याष्टकवे च सूर्ये यावत्फलैर्युत ॥७०४॥
तावत्संख्या पितृव्यानां भवतीति मनीषिणः,
702 - 7041/2. Leo Ascendant - Sivakari
Nadiamsa: (a) The subject of first half of this
Nadiamsa (as against Mohana Nadiamsa, above) will
have one long-lived maternal uncle. Although he
willhave eight maternal uncles, only two or three will
be long-lived.
(b) Take the Moon’s Ashtaka Varga and note the
net bindus got by the sign occupied by the Moon
which will denote the number of brothers the subject’s mother will have.
(c) Similarly the number of brothers, father will
have to be deduced from the net bindus in the sign
occupied by the Sun, with reference to the Sun’s
Ashtaka varga.
Notes: The instructions given at “b” and “c” can
be used for other ascendants as well. The Ashtaka
Varga referred to is the finally rectified one.
Sivakari Nadiamsa is explained in notes under
sloka 3241 supra.
पितृव्याधिपतो सोम्ये सिंहारुढे क्रियां शगे ॥७०५॥
लगे पापसंयुक्ते पितृव्यौ at द्विभार्यको |
शिवदांशे पिता ज्ञानी ज्येष्ठभ्रातृषिनाशवान् ॥७०६ ॥
तरिभिकनिष्ठप्रातृभिर्युतश्चासो सुजीविभिः।
Chandra Kala Nadi
705 - 7061/2. Leo Ascendant - Mercury: (a) The
11th lord Mercury being in Leo, which ascends at
birth, should be in Scorpio Navamsa. Further, the
ascendant lord should be in the company of a malefic.
As a result of these, two of the native’s paternal
uncles will have two wives each.
(b) Mercury in Sivada Nadiamsa (in the ascendant Leo) denotes that the father will be a wise person
(or will have spiritual knowledge), will destroy his
elder brothers (i.e. will lose them prematurely), and
will have three long-living younger brothers.
Notes: (a) Mercury should be in Leo 23° 20' - 26°
40' so that he obtains Scorpio Navamsa.
The 11th and its lord denote one’s paternal
relatives.
Sivada Nadiamsa - see notes under sloka 3211
supra.
(b) Father’s wisdom, intelligence, memory etc.
are to be analysed from the native's natal ascendant,
which is the Sth (the bhava concerned) from the 9th
(father). Thus Mercury in the specified Nadiamsa in
the 5th from the 9th will not allow any older coborn
of father to survive.
पूर्वभागे पितृव्यो at खपिता च द्विभार्यकः॥७०७ I
वन्ध्यापतिद्रयं चेति कालान्तरफलं स्मृतम् |
दारन्तरे सुतप्रापि द्र भार्ये चिरजीविते ॥७०८ ॥
707 - 708 Leo ascendant - Sivakari Nadiamsa:
The native of former half of this Nadiamsa will have
two paternal uncles. His father will have two wives
both of whom will be (barren for a long time) and will
bear progeny after a long interval. He will beget
children after remarriage. Both his wives will be
endowed with longevity.
Notes: “Vandhyapatidwayam” is a corrupt composition. The meaning is given according to the
context of the whole expression.
सुतेशे पापसंयुक्ते वृत्रीये शानि संस्थिते ।
स्वपितृव्येषु यः कश्चिन्मृतसन्तानयोगवान् ॥७०९ ॥
709. The Sth lord Jupiter with a malefic while
Satum (the 6th lord) is in the 3rd house will cause
birth of dead children to paternal uncle.
सूर्याशराशिगे मन्दे चन्द्रांशे केतुसंस्थिते |

Deva Keralam
पापिनौ च पितृव्यौ at मातुलो at कथं भवेत् ॥७१०॥
710. Saturn occupying a sign which is identical
with the Navamsa occupied by the Sun, while Ketu
is in the Navamsa occupied by the Moon (or Cancer
Navamsa), will cause two sinful paternal uncles.
How then will be two maternal uncles? (That 1s,
maternal uncles will not be sinful with this Yoga.)
स्वपितृव्यफलं सत्यं एलं मातुलयोस्तथा |
जन्मपाके निशानाथे सुखे भोमे प्रजायते ॥७११ ॥
मातृवंशेप्यरिष्टस्या्ातुलाश्च प्रपीडिताः,
मातामही सु सन्तापं मातुलान्यः प्रपीडिताः ॥७१२॥
तदभावे मातुलस्याप्यरिषटमिति चादिशेत् |
दोषपरिहारार्थं शान्ति कुर्याद्यथाविधि ॥७१३ ॥
वक्रगहोर्जपं pated होमं यथाविधि |
नागपाशप्रदानेन शानिति कुर्यात् प्रयलः॥७१४॥
मातृवंशे ततः पश्चच्छुभं भवति नित्यशः,
711 - 7141/2. Effects stated about paternal uncles
will bear truth. So also about maternal uncles. The
Moon in the ascendant (Leo) while Mars is in the 4th
house will cause evil effects for maternal relatives,
will trouble maternal uncles and maternal grandfather. In the absence of these, evils to maternal
uncles (if not to other maternal relatives) will come
lo pass. To overcome these evils, suitable remedies
be resorted to, As prescribed by Sastras, Homa (fire
sacrifice) for Mars and Rahu should be performed.
Donation of Nagapasa (a sort of magical noose)
should also be done. After these, auspiciousness in
maternal relatives’ familics will prevail.
Notes: “Janma Pake Nisa Nathe” in sloka 711
means Moon in Janma Dasa which does not convey
a proper meaning. It should be MooninJanma Lagna,
j.c. natal ascendant, i.e. Leo. The translation is
accordingly rectified.
In the yoga for evils to maternal relatives, the
Moon in the ascendant and Mars in the 4th only
feature. But in remedy, Rahu is included and Moon
excluded. Rabu is Sarpa (or snake); hence donation
of Nagapasa is prescribed.
Donation of Nagapasa 15 notclearly understandable. Nagapasa is a divine noose used in the remote
past in large-scale battles which would bind the
inflicted by venomand deprive him of consciousness.
This weaponis attributed to Varuna by ourscriptures.
For example, Naga Pasa (or Nagaasthra) was used on
Lakshmana in Ramayana era whereupon Lord
Hanuman had to bring the Sanjivani plant.
After performing the prescribed Fire Sacrifice
(or Homa) for Mars and Rahu, one may donate an
image of Cobra, preferably golden, ifnota Nagapasa
precisely.
मोहनांशकगे चन्दे पितर वंशो न दोषभाक् lees ॥
मातृवंशे क्वचिच्चेति जन्मदाये पितुर्व्यथा |
PA जन्मदाये लग्नाधिपतिभुक्तिषु ॥७१६ ॥
प्रपीडया जातकस्य जननी व्याकुलं महत् |
715 - 7161/2, Ifthe Moon is in Mohana Nadiamsa
(being in Leo, as Mars 1s in the 4th, as above), there
will be no such blemishes in paternal relatives’
families. However, maternal families will to some
extent suffer apart from father incurring distress in
the native’s first dasa, in the months denoted by
adverse solar transits, or in the sub period of the Sun,
the lord of the ascendant. The native’s mother will
(also) undergo great distress.
Notes; From these relevant discussions, we can
foresee troubles for mother if the Moon is in the
ascendant while the 4th lord is in the 4th house itself,
ona general basis. Ifthe Moonis notin the ascendant,
the 4th lord in the 4th should not be treated as evil.
The Moon 15 significator for mother.
Mohana Nadiamsa - refer to sloka 445, Book I.
कुम्भे तुलांशे सूर्ये बालारिष्टं न विद्यते ॥७१७ ॥
तदीशो बलवान् यस्य दीर्घमायुश्चविन्दति |
अरोगो दार्दयवान् बाल्ये सुकुमारशरीरवान् ॥७१८ ॥
तुलांशकफ़लं सत्यं दिवाकरफलं स्मृतम् |
717 - 7181/2. Balarishta: The Sun in Aquarius
with Libra Navamsa will not cause Balarishta to the
native of Leo ascendant, Sivakari Nadiamsa. If
simultaneously , the dispositor of the Sun (i.e. Saturn)
is strong, long life will have to be declared. Further
the subject will be devoid of sickness, will have a

strong physique and will have soft body dunng
childhood. The effects stated for the Sun in Libra
Navamsa will be unfailing.
कुम् त्रिकोणगे सूर्ये तुलां शे कुजवीक्षिते ॥७१९ ॥
यस्यां नादयां प्रजातस्य दीर्धमायुर्मविष्यति ।
Bat स्वोच्चगे FR हयच्चम्रहयुते अथवा ॥७२० ॥
ूर्याशकफलं सत्यं पितरौ दीर्घजीविनो |
719 - 7201/2. The Sunin Aquanius or its trines,
with the aspect of Mars, and falling in Libra Navamsa
will bless the native of Sivakari Nadiamsa, Leo
ascendant, with longevity. The Moon, for the said
degree of ascendant, being in own sign, or in exaltation, or with an exalted planet will contribute to longliving parents. The effects for Sun’s position in Libra
Navamsa will bear truth.
सूर्यलग्नाधिपे स्वोच्चे कर्मेशे भृगवीक्षिते ॥७२१॥
शिवादांशे प्रजातस्य स्वपिता शिवाभक्तिमान् |
शिवकेक्टर्यधर्मात्मा भ्रातृभरात्रीसमन्वितः॥७२२ ॥
शिवरकैकर्यसभिक्ञो देवव्राह्मणपोषकः।
संपदाये पितररिष्टं षोडशाब्दे क्रिये शनो |
दरादशाब्देअपमृल्युश्व शान्तया शानत प्रयास्यति ॥७२३ ॥
एकोनविशके वरप द्वादशे षोडशेथवा |
शिवदांशे पूर्वभागे पित्ररिष्टं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥७२४॥
721 - 724. Sivada Nadiamsa ~- Father: The
native’s father will be devoted to Lord Siva when the
Sun’s dispositor is in exaltation as the 10th lord is in
aspect to Venus. In addition, the person’s father will
perform activities related to Lord Siva’s worship, be
righteous, endowed with brothers and sisters, be
learned in the philosophy related to Lord Siva, and
will honour gods and Brahmins. The native’s second
dasa will endanger his father, in the 16th year when
transit Saturn is in Scorpio. During the person’s
twelfth year of age, father will be in the grip of
untimely death which will be remediable by propitiations. 12th, 16th or 19th year will prove fatal for
father in case of the subject belonging to first half of
Sivada Nadiamsa.
Notes: These events do not relate to Leo ascendChandra Kala Nadi
ant as the 10th lord is required to be associated with
Venus. The other three immovable ascendants, viz.
Taurus, Scorpio and Aquarius will come under the
purview of this principle and the results will be as
described above.
आद्विषष्टि सुखी नित्यं जननी चिरजीविनी |
द्िपञ्चाशेअ पमृत्युं च तदर्धे वा प्रपीडिता ॥७२५॥
अपमृत्युभयगप्राप्िमातृभावफलं स्मृतम् |
लाभेशंशे तल्तिकोणे स्फुटयोगं गते शनो ॥७२६ ॥
लाभेशदृष्टरशौ तु माता रोगेण पीडिता |
मातवंशजनारिष्ट तत्काले नात्र संशयः॥७२७ ॥
जननी व्याकुलं चेति योजयेत् कालवित्तमः।
725 -7271/2. Leo Ascendant - Sivada Nadiamsa:
The mother of the said native will be long-lived. He
will be happy from second to sixtieth year of age,
excepting that he will see his mother facing fear of
untimely death at his age of 26 and 52, (One version
indicates this danger to the native himself.) The sign
denoted by the Navamsa occupied by the 1 1th lord,
ora {1716 thereof, when in transit by Saturn will cause
troubles to mother on account of diseases. At that
very time, maternal relatives will (also) be in danger.
Astrologers declare distress of a great order to mother,
with this transit.
शिवदांशकगे जीवे मोहनांशे निशाकरे ॥७२८ ॥
Tema चिरायुष्मान् सीप्रजा बहुलाः स्मृताः,
अल्पपुत्रफलप्रापिः कलतरस्येकवान् भवेत् ॥७२९ ॥
WHR नारदीये शिवदांशे च जायते |
भेदभ्राता चिरायुष्मान् केचित्पक्ष द्विभार्यकः॥७३० ॥
दारद्रये सुतप्रापि नरवाहनभाक् सुखी |
कालान्तरे द्विभार्यश्च पितृवात्सल्यवान् सदा ॥७३१॥
728 ~ 731. Leo Ascendant: Jupiter in Sivada
Nadiamsa while the Moon is Mohana Nadiamsa will
give rise to following effects: The person’s stepbrother will be long-lived, will have many daughters
but restricted number of sons. He will have a happy
mariage. But according to Naradeeyam, though the
step-brother will be long-lived, he will have two

Deva Keralam 1543
wives. He will have sons, conveyances, will remarry
after a long time and be devoted to his father.
पष्ठाधिपदशाकाले रन्धाधिपतिभुक्तिषु |
लाभे शस्यान्ते वापि ज्येष्ठभ्रातृविनाशनम् ॥७३२ ॥
सुताधिपदशाकाते सुतेशांशत्रिकोणगे ।
स्फुटयोगं गते मन्दे ज्येष्ठभ्राता तु रोगवान् ॥७३३।
अन्तरान्तर्दशाकाले मन्दे सौम्ये धरासुते |
प्रपीडितो भेदभ्रातापितृव्यो वा भविष्यति ॥७३४॥
शुक्रान्तरे सर्वदाये स्वपितुरव्याकुलं महत् |
मन्दान्तरान्तरे वापि राजद्वारे मनोव्यथाम् ॥७३५ |
732 735. (4) The sub periods of lords of 8th/1 1th
in the dasa of the 6th lord will destroy the person’s
elder brother.
(b) During the operation of the Sth lord’s dasa,
Saturn in transit in the sign identical with the Navamsa occupied by the 5th lord at birth or a trine,
thereof will cause diseases to elder brother.
(c) In this dasa of Sth lord, the sub periods of
Saturn, Mercury and Mars will cause sickness to
elder brother or paternal uncle. (d) The sub period of
Venus in any dasa will cause distress to father who
will also have fear of royal wrath in the sub periods
ruled by Saturn in general.
Notes: (a) The sub period of Jupiter or of Mercury in the major period of Saturn will harm older
brothers of a Leo native. Jupiter is the natural
significator for older co-born while Mercury is the
11th lord, having a sway over older co-born.
(b) Sth lord’s dasa is Jupiter’s dasa.
(c) The sub periods of Saturn, Mercury and Mars
in the major period of Jupiter are said to be adverse
forelder brother or paternal uncle. Mercury involved
is understandable. But Saturn and Mars playinga role
needs a special note.
(d) The sub period Venus and of Saturn in any
dasa is said to be generally adverse in certain respects, because they are evil lords for this ascendant.
तत्तद्धावाष्टमे मन्दे दशायामन्तरेषु वा |
तत्तद्धावप्रपीडां च योजयेन् कालवित्तमः॥७३६ ॥
736. General: When the dasa and (or) sub
period ruled by Saturn be in operation, the transit of
Saturn ina sign will destroy the good effects of that
Bhava with reference to which the transited sign is the
8th one. So say the learned in astrology.
Notes: Take the case of Leo ascendant for
example, having Saturn in transit in Taurus ata time
when Saturn dasa, or Saturn’s sub period in another
dasa is in operation. Taurus 15 the 8th from Libra.
Libra denotes brothers, sisters, journeys, writing
activities, arms, legs, lungs etc. for Leo ascendant.
Thus the transit of Saturn as above will play
havoc in these spheres.
लग्नात् तृतीयगे मन्दे स्वोच्चे पूर्णवलान्विते |
निशाकरेण संयुक्ते सोदखरयमादिशेत् ॥७२३७ ॥
आयुष्मत्यो च भगिन्यवेका तु चिरजीविनी |
कालान्ते भूमिनाशं सन्तानोत्पत्तिनाशनम् ॥७३८ ॥
तदोषपरिहारार्थं शानत कुर्यात् प्रयलतः।
शिशुमासरदानेन पुतरायुर्वृद्धिमादिशेत् ॥७३९ ॥
लग्नात् तृतीयगे मन्दे यस्यां नाड्या प्रजायते |
उद्वाहानन्तरं चेति दारवंशेऽर्थनाशनम् ॥७४० ॥
737 - 740. Sivada Nadiamsa - Leo ascendant:
Saturn in the 3rd in exaltation, in full strength, and
being with the Moon will give three brothers and one
sister, all with long life spans. After some time, the
person’s landed properties will be destroyed. So also
his children being born. To overcome the blemish of
progeny, donation of (the image made out of) a
specified plant (named Sisumara, cited in Varaha
Mihira’s Brihat Samhita, wherein it is referred to as
Sisumar1) should be given away. This remedy will
increase the life span of progeny. Because of Saturn
and Moon as above, the subject following his marriage will incur destruction of wealth in his in-laws’
family.
शिवदांशे पूर्वभागे सम्पदाये शुभान्तर |
मनुवषे विवाहः स्याद्धनं स्यात् पापकर्मणा ॥७४१ ॥
उत्तरायणगे सूर्ये साधनान्ते विबाहवान्।
वसन्तकाले मायाब्दे केचित्यक्षे एलं स्मृतम् ॥७४२ ॥
741 - 742. Former Half of Sivada Nadiamsa -
Leo Ascendant: In the 14th year (or) in the sub

period ruled by a benefic in the second dasa, the
person’s 19171106 will be possible. However, due to
his (previous) sins, the chances can be marred in
which case the fourth sub period in the second dasa
will give manage with the transit Sun attaining his
northerly course. According tosome it could bein the
spring season during the native’s 15th year of age.
fae वर्गोत्तमे जीवे सिंह लग्ने च जायते |
लग्नातृतीयगे मन्दे त्वेकपुतरस्तु जीवित ॥७४२ ॥
Put गर्गमते पुतरद्ययुतः सुखी |
पुत्रिकैका सुमाङ्गल्या दुखिता पितृसोदरी ॥७४४॥
743 - 744. Jupiter: For Leo ascendant, Jupiterin
Vargottama in Leo, as Saturn is in the 3rd house, will
grant only one Jong-living son. According to Garga’s
work, two such sons are indicated, apart from one
daughter blessed with long manital life. Further,
father’s sister will be in (perpetual) grief.
Maat पूर्वभागे लाभारूढे निशाकरे ।
water तदीशे च भाग्यांशे बहुभाग्यवाम् ॥७४५ ॥
राजयोगं च लभते भाग्येशंशस्य दायगे।
अतीव श्रियमाप्नोति योगकारकभुक्तिषु ॥७४६ ॥
क्लेशकार्य च लभते त्ववयोगं गृहान्तरे |
सोदरस्य कलापेन संचितार्थविनाशनम् ॥७४७ ॥
पञ्चामाब्दे दशासंघावल्पपौडां विनिर्दिशेत्
745 ~ 7471/2. The Moon: The Moon in Indra
Nadiamsa’s first halfinthe 11th, while her dispositor
Mercury is in Cancer Navamsa or in the 9th Navamsa
will cause Raja Yoga in the dasa ruled by the Navamsa dispositor of the 9th lord. The subject will
acquire abundant wealth during the sub period of
yoga karaka in the said dasa. He will be in great
difficulties in the sub period of an adverse planet
(Avayogam Grihantare should read as Avayoga Grahantare, to mean the sub period ofanadverse planet).
His wealth will b destroyed due to misunderstandings
with his brothers. In the 5th year, in the junction (of
first and second) dasa, some evils will come to pass.
मीनचक्रदशाकाले भेदभ्राता श्रियान्वितः॥७४८ ॥
Chandra Kala Nadi
सम्पद्दाये सुवाहाष्टिभदभ्रातृफलं स्मृतम् |
जन्मदाये पितासोख्यं व्यये वक्रगुरौ तथा ॥७४९ ॥
अतीव श्रियमाप्नोति जन्माब्दे शत्रुनाशनम् |
पित्रा सेवितभूपस्य विवाहेत्सवमादिशेत् ॥७५० ॥
कन्यागुरुफलं सत्यं सिहान्त्ये सोख्यमादिशेत् |
748 - 7501/2, The Kalachakra dasa of Pisces will
cause abundant wealth to a step-brother, and acquisition of conveyances (to the said relative) in the
native’s second dasa. His first dasa will give happiness to father when Jupiter retrogrades in the 12th
house. His first year will cause abundant wealth and
destruction of enemies (concerning the family members). His father will be in royal service. Jupiter
moving in the end of Leo, or in Virgo will bring
happiness.
नीचांशके विलगनेशे सिंहलग्ने च जायते ॥७५१ ॥
स्फुटयोगं गते मन्दे लोके दुरधिक्षजं भयम् |
सम्पत्तारे तल्रिकोणे विपत्तार्रिकोणगे ॥७५२ ॥
रजद्रारकलपेन विरोधादायमादिशेत्।
Tafa परं सौख्यं FAH सुखावहम् ॥७५३ ॥
स्वप्राबल्यं च लभते भ्रातृदरेषं क्वचित् क्वचित् |
विपदाये दोषहानिं धनाधिपतिभुक्तिषु ॥७५४ ॥
ूरवोक्तभुक्तिकालेऽपि मण्डलाधिपतेर्विपत्।
पूजाविग्रहनाशं च खण्डवष्टेरभयं क्वचित् ॥७५५ ॥
्षमदाये मनस्तापं पूर्वार्थे व्याकुलं महत्।
अपरर्े सुसोख्यापि प्रबलोद्योगवान् सुखी ॥७५६ ॥
प्रत्यग्दाये शुभं किंचित् साधनेशदशा शुभा।
पञ्चषष्टिसमे मृत्युजौविते HATA ॥७५७ ॥
सम्पदाये सेतुयात्रां स्वपित्रा सह यास्यति |
सहोदरं चायुष्मन्तं विपदाये सुभाग्यवान् ॥७५८ ॥
त्रिशोपरि महद्धाग्यं रजयोगशुभावहम् |
पुण्यतीर्थफलप्रपि राजद्वारे सुकीरतिमान् ॥७५९ ॥
चत्वारिंशेऽपमृत्यं च द्विचत्वारिंशगेऽथवा |
अतीव क्लेशकार्याणि प्रबलोद्योगवान् सुखी ॥७६० ॥

Deva Keralam
731 - 760. Sivada Nadiamsa - Leo Ascendant:
The Sun in the 3rd house in debility will cause
following effects. When Saturn comes to that degree
(occupied by the Sun), there will be drought(?)
Further, the person’s income will be obstructed to
enmity in royal circles. (Without referring to Saturn),
this native will be happy after 30 years of age, in
Mercury’s sub period (of 2nd dasa). He will be
famous, but will incur some enmity with coborn.
Blemishes will be destroyed in the 3rd dasa during the
sub period of second lord (Mercury). In the sub
period cited earlier, the head of the country will be
endangered(?) The idols kept in worship will be
destroyed. There will be fear of obstructed rains (2)
The 4th dasa will cause mental agony. The first haif
of this dasa will produce much distress while the later
half will bestow happiness and a prosperous calling.
The 5th dasa will be somewhat auspicious while the
6th dasa will (indeed) be auspicious. His death will
occur in 56th year, failing which 71st year will be
fatal. In his second dasa he will visit Sethu along with
his father. His coborn will be long lived. The native’s
third dasa will bring prosperity forthe brother. After
30, prosperity will be on the rise and auspicious
effects of Raja Yoga will be experienced. He will
visit shrines and become famous in royal service.
Fortieth or forty-second year will cause fear of
untimely death and abundant difficulties.
व्ययस्थानगते सोम्ये शिवदांशे सुलोकवान्।
स्वपिता च तथा विन्द्याद्यावदायुष्यभाग्यवान् ॥७६१ ॥
761, Mercury in 12th: Mercury in the 12th for
a native of Sivada Nadiamsa of Leo ascendant will
cause attainment of good worlds after death So also
for his father. This yoga will cause fortunes throughout the life of the native.
मकरलमे कालिकांशः
कालिकांशे पूर्वभागे मकरे च प्रजायते |
श्र जन्मा मुखी नित्यं द्वितीयगर्भसंभवः॥७६२ ॥
अथवा च तृतीयः स्याज्ग्येष्ठभ्रातृविनाशवान् |
पितुः समीपे जननं नालवेष्टनमादिशेत् ॥७६२ ॥
762 - 763. Capricorn Ascendant - Kalika
Nadiamsa: One born in this part of the zodiac will be
a Soodra, be 2nd or the 3rd issue of the family. He will
destroy his older coborn (i.e. they will not survive for
long). His birth will be in the proximity of his father,
with umbilical cord.
Notes; Kalika Nadiamsa - refer to notes under
Sloka 3277 supra.
नक्रेक्षितीशषष्टयंशे कालिकांशे प्रजायते |
पूर्वभागे कृश्श्चैव बाल्ये देहप्रपीडितः॥७६४॥
वनांन्तरपुरे ग्रामे स्ये नूतनमन्दिर |
भाग्यकाले प्रसूतश्च स्तवर्णकृशाकृतिः ॥७६५ ॥
764 - 765. Birth in former half of Kalika
Nadiamsa, with the ascendant Capricorn obtaining a
Martian Shashtiamsa, will cause a thin body, and
childhood sickness. The person will take birth in an
auspicious hour in a village surrounded by forests in
a newly constructed house. He will have blood-red
physique.
Note: The Shashtiamsa condition is redundant.
उत्तरांशे नदीप्ान्ते कालिकापुरमन्दिर |
परोक्षजननं चैव कालिकांशे प्रसूतिमान् ॥७६६ ॥
स्वपिता मात्रिकः कामी नानादेशेषु संचरन् |
अरोगदृढगात्रश्च क्तेशजीवनवान् पिता ॥७६७॥
766 ~ 767. In case of second half of the subject
Nadiamsa, birth will be in (or near) a temple dedicated to Kalika, father being absent at that time. His
father will be a sorcerer, be passionate, will wander
in many countries, be devoid ofsickness, will possess
a sturdy body and will lead a life of troubles.
TAC कालिकांशे TAU च जायते |
आयुष्मन्तो च पितरो भ्रातृभर््रीबहुत्ववान् eke ॥
768. According to otherauthonities, the native of
second half of this Nadiamsa will have long-living
parents and many brothers and sisters.
पूर्वभागे पिता ज्ञानी वेदिकाचारवान् सुधीः।
राजसेवापरो नित्यं देवब्राह्मणधक्तिमान् ॥७६९ ॥
769. Father Described: The father of one born
in the first half of Kalika Nadiamsa will have spiritual
knowledge, be intelligent of a great order and will

follow the path prescribed by the Vedas. He will
serve a king and will honour Gods and Brahmins.
लग्ने गुरुयुते दृष्टे aA स्वोच्चराशिगे ।
यस्यां नायां प्रजातस्य नालदोषो न विद्यते ॥७७० ॥
770. No Umbilical Cord: णादि in the ascendant or aspecting it as Satum is in exaltation will
protect the native of Kalika Nadiamsa, Capricorn
ascendant from being entangled with umbilical cord.
नीचे नीचांशगे ast ष्ष्ठेशांसकगे शनो |
जन्माब्दे मातुलक्लेशं द्रव्यनाशं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥७७१॥
771. Maternal Uncle: The Moon in debility or
in such Navamsa, as Saturn is ina Navamsa owned
by Mercury, will in the very first year of the native
trouble the maternal uncle and destroy family wealth.
कालिकांशे पूर्वभागे नीचांशस्थे निशाकरे |
नालवेष्टनदोपेण मातृवंशेऽप्यारिष्टकृत् ॥७७२ ॥
पितवंशे महत्सौख्यं पितृव्यादिशुभावहम्।
कालिकांशे फलं चेति पितृसोख्यं विनिर्दिशेत् ito? ॥
772 - 773. Umbilical Cord: In case of former
half of Kalika Nadiamsa, Capricorn ascendant, the
Moon in Scorpio Navamsa will entangle the child
with umbilical cord at the time of birth, apart from
causing evils to maternal kinsfolk. But she will be a
source of great happiness to paternal side of the
relatives; the person’s paternal uncles will receive
greatly auspicious effects. Birth in this Nadiamsa
will usher happiness to father.
्रिप्रहोच्चे कालिकंशे नीचक्षत्रे निशाकरे |
गुरुदृष्टियुते भोगी विपदाये मुभाग्यवान् ॥७७४ ॥
774. Fortunes: Birth in Kalika Nadiamsa, the
Moon in Scorpio with Jupiter’s aspect, and three
planets in exaltation - this yoga will in the 3rd dasa
cause much fortunes.
अष्टमाधिपतो art शुभांशे शुभवीक्षिते।
कालिकांशे पूर्वभागे बालरिष्टभयं क्वचित् ॥७७५ ॥
जन्मदाये द्वित्रिवारं सम्पदाये स्वभुक्तिषु |
बालािषटिभयं चेति शान्त्या शानि प्रयास्यति ॥७७६ ॥
Chandra Kala Nadi
बालारिषटप्रशान्त्यर्थं रजतं चनद्रमर्चयेत् |
SATA स्थाप्य दानं कुर्यादविचक्षणः॥७७७॥
775 - 777. Infantile Mortality & Remedies:
Should the 8th lord Sun be in the ascendant, with a
benefic’s aspect, and a benefic’s Navamsa, the child
will incur Balarishta or infantile mortality, to some
extent, for two or three weeks in the first year, or in
the first sub period of the 2nd dasa. For this, remedies
be done in the form of worship of the image of the
Moon god made of silver installed ona copper vessel.
Suitable charities be also given away (at the end ofthe
worship).
कालिकांशे पूर्वभागे मकरे रविसंस्थिे |
निर्मितां च सुवर्णेन रक्तवस्रेणवेष्टिताम् ॥७७८ ॥
अर्कस्य प्रतिमां दद्यादायुरारोग्यभाक् सुखी |
दिवाकरस्य कल्पोक्तस्वगृह्योक्तविधानतः॥७७९ ॥
जपहोमादिकं चेव शान्ति कुर्यद्विचक्षणः।
कालिकांशे पूर्वभागे मकरे रविसंस्थिते ॥७८० ॥
रविशान्तिवशारोग्यं बालारिष्टं न विद्यते |
सवसं प्रतिमां चान्रीं चन्द्रकल्पोत्तमार्गतः।
दानेन सौख्यमाप्नोति देहपुष्टिकरं शुभम् ॥७८१ ॥
पूर्वभागे प्रजातस्य शान्ति यलेन कारयेत् |
मातुलदिसुसोख्यापििर्गालारिष्टं न fart ॥७८२ ॥
778 - 782. For birth in the former half of Kalika
Nadiamsa, Capricorn ascendant, with the Sun in
Capricorn, the blemish of infantile mortality could be
overcome by propitiating the Sun God thus: An
image of the Sun God made of gold, decorated with
red apparels be worshipped at home with Japa (recitation of sacred spells) and Homa (fire sacrifice) as
prescribed by the Sastras. Pacifying the Sun God
thus, the blemish can be warded off. The Moon god”s
image decorated with robes should be worshipped as
prescribed by “Chandra Kalpa" which will bring
happiness to maternal relatives, and will remove the
balanishta effects of the child as well.
उत्तरांशे प्रजातश्च हालस्यादिमुसोख्यवान् |
क्लेशजीवनवांशचेति प्रातृभ्ात्रीसमन्वितः ॥७८२ ॥

Deva Keralam
783. One born in the second half of Kalika
Nadiamsa, Capricorn ascendant will be wanting in
energy. He will lead a life marked by troubles and be
endowed with brothers and sisters.
Notes: In the first line “A /asyaadisusaukhyavan”
appears. Alasya means want of energy. The effect of
being happy denoted by saukhya does not go well
with “want of energy and troubled life”. Hence such
an effect is not included in the rendering.
रथे शाक्रान्तराशौश उच्च. AT बलान्विते |
रन्ध्रस्थानगते जीवे शुभांशे दीर्घजीवितः॥७८४ |
784. Life Span: The dispositor of the 8th lord
being in exaltation and with strength will cause
longevity to the native of Capricorn, Kalika Nadiamsa.
Jupiter in the 8th, with a benefic’s Navamsa will also
bless one with longevity.
Notes: Some may like to club both the above
conditions into one to obtain longevity. However, a
purposeful interpretation does not deter splitting this
into two principles, each giving longevity. Because
each on its own merit can confer a long life.
पापांशे पापदृष्टे वा ह्यल्पायुर्दायमादिशेत् |
नीचां शके तथा विन्दाद्योजयेत् कालवित्तमः॥७८५ ॥
785. Short Life: Astrologers predict short life if
Jupiter in the 8th is aspected by a malefic, and
occupies debilitation Navamsa, or a Navamsa ruled
by a malefic planet.
Notes: This does not apply to Capricom ascendant as Jupiter in Leo in the 8th will not obtain
debilitation Navamsa. This should be applied tosuch
ascendants only where Jupiter in the 8th obtains
debilitation Navamsa.
मृतावस्थायां कींशे ax पापनिरीक्षिते ।
शुभदृष्टिविहीने च arene विनिर्दिशेत् ॥७८६ ॥
गुरुदष्टियुते चन्द्रे शुभखेचरसंयुते |
जीवितावस्थगे az वालारिष्टं न विद्यते isc |
786-7 Capricorn Ascendant - Infantile Mortality: For a native of Capricorn ascendant, Kalika
Nadiamsa, the Moon in extremis, with Scorpio Navamsa, and in aspect to a malefic planet, without that
of a benefic, will cause infantile mortality. Should
the Moon be in association with Jupiter or another
benefic, and be InJeevitavastha, there will be nosuch
effect.
Notes: The Moon will be in Mritavastha or in
extremis in the last six degrees ofan odd sign and the
first six degrees of an even sing.
“Jeevithavastha” is not a standard astrological
term, and hence defies proper identification. At best
it can be interpreted that the Moon should not be in
Mritavastha or in extremis. Opposite of Mrita (dead)
is Jeevitha (not dead, alive).
लग्नभावगते जीवे लग्नेशे गुरुवीक्िते |
कालिकांशे पूर्वभागे सूर्ये हालाहलां शके ॥७८८ ॥
The: समगात्रश्च विशालाक्षः सुनासिकः।
बाल्ये चाध कृशच्वैव पार्शव्याधिप्रपीडितः॥७८९ ॥
पच्चमाब्दात् परं सौख्य तृत्तीयाब्दात् परं सुखम् ।
देहपुष्टिसुसौख्यापिस्तृतीयाब्दे महाविपत् ॥७९० ॥
788 ` - 790. Capricorn Ascendant - Kalika
Nadiamsa: One born in the first half of this degree
with Jupiter in Capricorn, and Saturn in aspect to
Jupiter as the Sun is in Halaahala Shashtiamsa will
beget the following effects. He will have an even
physique which will be blood-red in complexion. His
eyes will be broad, and nose beautiful (i.e. sharp and
prominent). During childhocd, he will have an
emaciated body and be troubled by paralysis. After
3rd or Sth year he will be happy and will enjoy
physical felicity. In the 3rd year he will be greatly
endangered.
Notes; 31d year giving happiness, mentioned in
the first place, isto be treated as faulty. Only fromthe
Sth year, the subject should be said to be happy. His
third year will endanger him ina big way, as per the
text.
स्वनवांशे विलग्नेशे स्वोच्च भूमिसुतेषित |
वसुवर्षात् परं सोख्यमतिनाल्ये सुखासुखम् ॥७९१॥
मिताशी भोगशाली च दाता कीर्षियुतो भवेत्|
विधाविनयशीलश्च लेख्यविद्याविशारदः॥७९२ ॥
पंचाक्षरप्रियो नित्यं मानी च जपशीलवान्।

काव्यनिर्माणकुशलो गोरीशप्रियधामिकः॥७९३ ॥
परोपकारवात्ित्यं स्वपित्रधिकबुद्धिमान्।
मातुलद्धयवान् रागी पितृव्यत्रयभक्तिमान् ॥७९४॥
791 -794. Kalika Nadiamsa - Saturn in Aspect
to Mars: Saturn being in aspect to Mars and placed
in Libra, with his own Navamsa will give following
results for a Capricorn native. He will be happy after
eighth year of age. During childhood (i.e. upto 8 in
this case), there will be a mix of happiness and lack
of happiness. He will eat limited food, will enjoy
pleasures, be liberal, famous, fond of learning, modest, skillful in writing and learning, fond of
Panchakshari Mantra ("Om Namassivayah"), be honourable, inclined to perform Japa (recitation of sacred spells), be an expert in poetry, devoted to Lord
Siva and righteous. Further, he will be ever ready to
help others, and be more intelligent than his father.
He will have two maternal uncles, be passionate, will
have three paternal uncles, and be pious.
पितृष्वसा सुमाङ्ल्या बहुपुत्रवती BAT |
कालिकांशे पूर्वभागे जामितरेऽमरपूजिते ॥७९५ ॥
्रिपितृव्याच्चायुष्मन्तम्तेषामेको द्विभार्यकः।
एको वन्ध्यापततिश्चेति दारान्तरसुपुत्रवान् ॥७९६ ॥
स्वपितृ ay यः कश्चद्रजदवरे सुपूजितः
अन्तः कपटवान् रागी लोभप्रकृतिमान् गुणी ॥७९७॥
परोपकारवात्नित्यं देवव्राह्मणपोषकः।
Ree yatta वधिके श्रीमुभाग्यवांन ॥७९८ ॥
स्वपिता च तथा विन्द्याद्भ्रातृप्रयसुपूजितः।
कालान्तरे भ्रातृवेरं विभागे मनसि व्यथा ॥७९९ ॥
795 - 799. Jupiter in the 7th: For a Capricom
birth in Kalika Nadiamsa, Jupiter in the 7th gives
following results. The native’s paternal aunt will
have a long married life, will have many sons and be
auspicious. Three of his paternal uncles will be longhved. One of them will have two wives. Anotherwill
have a barren wife, but will acquire progeny after
remarriage. With the help of paternal uncles, the
subject will gain honour in royal service. He will be
inwardly cunning, be passionate, miserly, virtuous,
Chandra Kala Nadi
helpful to others, will honour gods and Brahmins,
will have two wives, will obtain good children and
will become wealthy and prosperous in old age. His
father will (initially) be honoured by his three
brothers, but will after some time develop enmity
with them, will undergo a family division and be
mentally distressed.
जन्मदाये पितृव्यस्तु सन्तानोतपत्तिसोख्यवान्।
किंचिद्रयाकुलकार्याणि पश्चात् सौख्यं शुभावहम् ॥८०० ॥
कालिकांशे जन्मदाये पूर्वभागे च जायते |
पित्ोद्राहसोख्याप्तिः सन्तानोप्तत्तिमान् सुखी ॥८०१॥
स्वजन्मदेशे नृपतिस्तश्द्रकलापवान्।
तृतीयाब्दे महत् सौख्यं शुनाशात् परं सुखम् ॥८०२ ॥
पितृव्यस्य सुवाहात्पी राजप्रीति करः सुखी |
800 - 8021/2. Dunng the native’s first dasa, his
paternal uncle will get married and obtain progeny,
be somewhat initially troubled, but later on will get
auspicious results. The country’s ruler will be inwardly belligerent(?). After 3rd year of age, he
subject will be greatly happy after destruction of
enemies (?) His paternal uncle will obtain conveyances and please the king.
मकरांशे तुलामन्दे यस्यां नाडयां प्रजायते ॥८०३ ॥
जन्मदाये त्वनावृष्टया लोके धान्यक्षयं वदेत् |
पौष्णश्रवणहस्तार्द्राभरणीवायुभेष्ठपि ॥८०४ ॥
शनै श्चर VAC नृणां दर्भ क्षमयदः स्मृतः।
803 - 8041/2. Irrelevant: Saturn in Libra with
own Navamsa in first dasa will cause drought and
destruction of grains. Saturn traversing in Revati,
Sravana, Hastha, Arudra, Bharani and Svathi will
cause drought.
कमे मन्दे मदे जीवे मकरेच प्रजायते ॥८०५ II
रुपवान् कुशलो दक्षो लेख्य विघाविचक्षणः
नृत्यगीतकलभिङ्ञः सदा हास्यरसप्रियः॥८०६ ॥
दुराललोचनवान्नित्यं स्वराजप्रियकार्यवान् |
गणितो नीचसेवी श्रमज्ञो वृद्धिकारवान् ॥८०७ |
देशान्तरे सुभाग्याप्ति रुपायातकार्यसाधकः।

Deva Keralam
805 - 8071/2. Capricorn Ascendant: Saturn in
the 10th and Jupiter in the 7th will lead to the
following. The person will be charming in appear;
ance, be skillful, will have clear concept in activities
related to writing and reading, be learned in dance,
songs and arts, be ever fond of jokes, will have evil
thoughts, will perform such acts that will please the
king, be an expert mathematician, will serve mean
people, will know to work hard, will increase his
possessions, will earn fortunes in foreign lands and
will get his jobs done with tact.
कालिकांशे पूर्वभगि दशमे शनि संस्थिते ॥८०८ I
वनान्तरपुरी मानी पुत्रीपुत्रसमद्धिमान् ॥८०९ ॥
808 - 809. Saturn in Tenth: The native of former
half of Kalika Nadiamsa in Capricorn ascendant,
having Saturn in the 10th will live in a town surrounded by forests, will serve a mean king, will have
two virtuous wives, be honourable and will have
many sons and daughters.
जीवे धनुषिकन्यायां द्वितीये सप्तमेऽपि |
असितेन युते दष्टे PASAT ॥८१० ॥
अकोद्राहं च लभते सर्वनाडीफलं वदेत्|
810 - 8101/2. Destruction of Spouses: Jupiter in
Virgo or Sagittarius, or in the 2nd/7th, with association or aspect of Saturn will destroy (i.e. will kill
early) the native’s two wives. The persons’s (first)
marriage will be during his twelfth year.
Notes: Apparently it is harmful for the life-span
of spouse in case of the native of Capricorn ascendant
who has Jupiter in Cancer, Aquarius, Virgo or Sagittarius in relation to Saturn.
कालिकांशे पूर्वभागे विक्रमे WAT ॥८११ ॥
सोदराः पञ्च चत्वारो भ्रातृद्यययुतः सुखी |
भगिन्येका GACT मध्ये भ्रातृविनाशवान् ॥८१२ ॥
811. 812. For one born in the first half of Kalika
Nadiamsa in Capricorn ascendant, with three planets
in the third house, there will be four or five coborns,
out of which two brothers and one sister will survive,
while the middle one will be destroyed. The sister
will be endowed with long married life.
जननी दीर्घमायुश्च भ्रातृनाशेन कशिता।
Tarde कालिकांशे जननी रोगपीडिता ॥८१३ ॥
पूर्वभागे सुतविलष्टा Hers ज्वरार्दिता |
पितामह्या विनाश्र मातुलोऽपि मरिष्यति ॥८१४॥
मातुलारिष्टशोकेन जननी व्याकुलं महत् |
813 - 8141/2. Capricorn Ascendant - Kalika
Nadiamsa First Half: The person’s mother will
enjoy long life but will be emaciated due to loss of
(her) brother. (There is another version to read that
the native will be emaciated due to loss of “his”
brother.) According to another text, the mother will
be troubled by sickness and be distressed on account
of her progeny. During the native’s second dasa, she
will fall sick. His paternal grand-father will be
destroyed. So also his maternai uncle. Due to the
death of her brother, mother will be distressed.
द्विभार्यको मातुलश्च व्ययेशांशके शनौ ces I
कालान्ते सुतप्राप्तर्मतुलस्य फलं स्मृतम्
815 - 8151/2. Maternal Uncle: Should Saturn be
in the Navamsa ruled by the 12th lord, Jupiter, the
native’s maternal uncle will have two wives and will
obtain progeny after some delay.
SHU प्रजातस्य मातृवंशः क्षयं FAT ॥८१६ I
$16. Second Half - Kalika Nadiamsa: For this
native, the maternal kinsmen will incur destruction.
पूर्वभागे सौम्यकालेरव हालहलांशगे ।
पितृव्यवंशवृद्धिश्र द्वाविशाब्दात् परं सुखी ॥८१७॥
स्वजन्मदेशे नृपतिर्बहुकालं सुजीवति |
पितृव्यस्नेहमूलेन बहुलीपुत्रभाग्यवान् ॥८१८ ॥
सप्तविशात् परं भाग्यं स्वप्राबल्यं महत् सुखम् |
विद्यावान् कीर्तिमांश्चैव सदा शिवपुराणवित् ॥८१९ ॥
817 - 819. For birth in the first half of the said
Nadiamsa, the Sun in Halaahala Shashtiamsa will
bring happiness in the paternal side of relatives, after
the native’s 22nd year. The country’s ruler will be
long-lived(?) Due to his association with a paternal
uncle, the subject will acquire many women and
children. After 27, he will prosper. His fame and

position will increase. He will be learned, famous,
and be learned in Siva Purana.
Notes: The expression “Saumya Kale” has not
been added to the rendering, which means in the time
of Mercury (or Mercury’s Hora?).
कालान्तरे चित्तशुद्धिः स्वोच्चे जीवे प्रसिद्धिमान् |
` विवाहः स्यात् पंचदशे षोडशाब्दे पितूर्विपत् ॥८२० ॥
820. Jupiter in Exaltation: For a native of
Capricom ascendant, Kalika Nadiamsa, Jupiter in the
7th will cause purity of mind after some time. His
marriage will be in the 15th year while his father will
be endangered during the native’s 16th year.
Notes: “Kalanthare Chittasuddhi” meaning to
emerge pure-hearted after sometime, does not seem
to apply to this part of instruction. It is an interpolation from somewhere else.
चद्रलनाष्टमाधीशदशायां पापभुक्तिषु।
सुखेशांकगे मन्दे गोचरे पितृपीडनम् cre ॥
821. Danger to Father: During the sub period
ruled bya malefic, and in the dasa of the planet ruling
the 8th from the Moon, (or) when Saturn arrives in
transit the sign identical with the sign denoted by the
4th lord’s Navamsa position, the person’s father will
be in danger.
स्वोच्चे जीवे प्रसिद्रश्च देहायासफलं स्मृतम् |
तदभावे जन्मदेशे राजन्य क्रोधमादिशेत् ॥८२२॥
TTA दशासन्धो मनोव्यथाम् |
्षेमदाये पित्ररिष्टं तुलानये वृश्चिके शनो ॥८२३ ॥
तल्लिकोणे देहपीडां पितृव्यारिष्टमादिशेत् |
Byers कालिकांशे पितृव्येको विनाशवान् ॥८२४॥
पितृव्यपुत्रसोख्यापिः स्वरजोद्राहंसभ्रमः।
मण्लधिपतेरमतयस्तुलांशे वृश्चिके शनो ॥८२५ ॥
822 - $25. Jupiter in exaltation will cause fame
but either sickness or royal wrath. His health will be
recovered later. In the junction period of (3rd and
4th) dasas, the subject will undergo mental distress.
Duning his fourth dasa, danger to father will occur
When Saturn comes to the end of Libra, or Scorpio,
Chandra Kala Nadi
or a trine thercof, illness to the native, and evils to
paternal uncles will come to pass. During the second
dasa, the native will lose one of his paternal uncles.
His paternal uncles’ sons will obtain happiness (on
other counts). His king will get married(?) When
Saturn reaches end of Libra or Scorpio, the ruler will
die(?)
्रभूस्थानाष्टमाधीशस्फुरयोगांशगे शनो ।
स्वजन्मदेशे नृपते राग्ये विप्लवमादिशेत् ॥८२६ ॥
CRIA फलं वाच्यं योजयेत् कालवित्तमः।
826 - 826 1/2. Irrelevant: Add the longitudes of
lords of 9th and 8th. When Saturn reaches the
resultant degree ora trine thereof, there will be revolt
in the country.
दशासन्धो मनसतापं ज्ञातिवर्गे विचारकृत् ॥८२७॥
तदभावे मातुलस्य सोदरभ्रातृनाशनम्।
अपमत्युभयप्राप्तिः शान्त्या शानि प्रयास्यति ॥८२८ ॥
827 - 828. During the junctions of the dasa
periods, the subject wiil be distressed and there will
be deliberations in the relatives’ circle (following
some disputation), or maternal uncles will incur
untimely death for which remedies be done.
Notes: “Matulasya Sodarabhratru” means maternal uncle’s coborn who could have straighiaway
been described as mother’s coborn.
कर्मे मन्दे क्षेमदाये सेतुस्नानफलं वदेत् |
विपददाये सुखं नित्यं द्विवारं राज विग्रहम् ॥८२९ ॥
829. Should Saturn be in the 10th house, the
subject will bathe in the Setu during his fourth dasa.
His third dasa will cause lasting happiness except for
“two weeks” of royal wrath.
्षेमधिपदशाकाते लाभेशांशकगे wat |
Tahara: पश्रान्मातृनाशो भविष्यति ॥८३० ॥
qed च वा पीडा जननीव्यकुलं महत् |
जातकस्य ज्वरस्तापो देहासोख्यात् परं सुखम् ॥८३१॥
830 - 831. Mother’s Death: During the fourth
dasa, when Saturn comes to the sign identical with the
Navamsa occupied by the 11th lord, (or) in the 33rd

year, mother’s end will occur. The native will be
troubled by fever and distress and will later on
recover.
बाल्ये मान्घज्वरादीनि वसूरीज्वरपीडितः।
जीविते मध्यमायुश्र वंशोपरि सुभाग्यवान् ॥८३२ ॥
832. During childhood, he will be troubled by
indigestion and small pox. Ifhe survives, he will have
a medium span of life. His prosperity will be after 20
years of his age.
Note: This sloka, it seems, does not belong to
this ascendant.
भाग्याधिपदशां सधिकाले सन्तानवान् सुखी |
लन्गाधिपे कर्मगते कर्माधिपतिदायगे ॥८३२ ॥
महता राजयोगेन बहुग्रामाधिकारवान् |
सर्वदाय Tey रविसोम्यान्तेऽपि च ॥८३४॥
चन््रभुक्तावरिट स्याद्राहुभुक्तौ विशेषतः।
सौप्यदाये राहुभृक्तो शुभाशुभफलं स्मृतम् ॥८३५॥
$33 - 835. In the junction period of the 9th lord’s
dasa, he wil] be distressed and (later on) be happy. If
the ascendant lord Saturn is in the 10th house, the
dasa of the 10th lord (Venus) will give Raja Yoga
effects, and lordship over many villages. In this case,
in all ihe dasas, the sub periods of Rahu, Sun, Moon
and Mercury will cause evils. More especially the
sub period of Rahu. The good and bad effects of Rahu
bhukti in Mercury dasa.......(text incomplete).
पञ्चविंशात् परं भाग्यं त्रिंशोपरि सुभाग्यवान्।
द्रात्रिशात् परतः कार्य योगप्राबल्य भाग्यवान् ॥८३६ ॥
836. His prosperity will be on the increase from
the age of 25, more especially after30. His undertakings following his 32nd year of age will bring him
wide progress.
TEAST KL शुभशोभनम् |
देशान्तरे व्याकुलं स्यात् पश्चात् स्वस्थ्यं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥८३७॥ .
्रत्यण्दाये राहुभुक्तौ जौवितेशनिनाशनम् |
साधनेशदशामृत्यु राहुभुक्तो मरिष्यति ॥८३८ ॥
837 - 838. Fifth Dasa: During the Sth dasa, he
will be endangered by fear of untimely death. The
first sub period in this dasa will give auspicious
effects. He will obtein only disiress in foreign
countries. Later on he will return to his native land.
In the sub period of Rahwu........... His death will occur
in the 6th dasa, in the sub period of Rahu.
Notes: The words “Jeevithe Sani Nasanam” in
sloka 838 relating to Rahu’s sub period of 5th dasa do
not convey any clear meaning. Perhaps, the text
wants to state that this sub period 11 the Sth dasa will
cause danger.
पञ्चपञ्चांशगे वर्षे कालिकांशे च जायते |
कालमृ्युभयप्राति FAY मास्मु वृषादिषु ॥८३९ ॥
अथवा कार्तिके मासे कृष्णे चादित्यवासरे।
सोम्यवारे मृतिश्रचति पुण्यर्लौक प्रयास्यति ॥८४० ॥
839 - 840. The native (of former half Kalika
Nadiamsa, Capricorn Ascendant) will incur death in
the 55th year, with the Sun’s transit in Taurus,
Gemini or Cancer. Or in the month of Karthika,
during dark lunar half, ona Sunday/Wednesday after
which he will attain heavens.
उतरांशे प्रजातस्य मित्रदारेशदायगे |
कालमृत्युभयप्रापिः क्लेशजीवनवान् सदा ॥८४१ ॥
उत्तरांश प्रजातश्रच पापेन नरकं FAT |
पूर्वभागे सुलोकापि पितातृत्तमजन्मवान् ॥८४२ ॥
$41 - 842. Second Half - Kalika Nadiamsa:
This native will die during the dasa of the 7th lord. He
will ever havea troubled life. Due to his sins, he will
attain the hell after death. His father will go to good
worlds after death, and will have anexcellent rebirth.
ast पूर्वभागे मिथुने च प्रजाचते ।
शुद्रजन्मा सुखी नित्यं पूत्रसीमतजः Ga: cw? ॥
पञ्चाद्धातृविहीनश्च बाल्ये क्तेशेन BA: |
स्वमात्रा विधावा भूत्वा बहुकालं च जीवित ॥८४४॥
843 - 844. Gemini Ascendant - Mudgara
Nadiamsa: The person belonging to the former half
of this degree will be a Soodra and be the eldest issue
of the family. He will have (neither) a coborn.

During his childhood, he will be emaciated due to
troubles. His mother will become a widow. She will
live for long.
तुलांशगे Tass शन्यज्रकसंयुते |
युग्मलग्र प्रजातस्य बाल्ये पितृविनाशनम् ॥८४५ ॥
845. The Moon in Libra: Should the Moon be
in the sign Libra with the same Navamsa, the native
of Gemini ascendant (Mudgara Nadiamsa, first half)
will Jose his father in his very childhood provided the
said Moon begets the joint company of Saturn and
Mars.
अथवा दुस्थगे सूर्ये शन्यगारकसंयुते ।
विष्वोराप्रिशसरेण पितुदर्मरणं भवेत् ॥८४६ ॥
846. Father’s Pitiable Death: With the Sun in
an evil house (6th, 8th or 12th,) in the joint company
of Saturnand Mars, the father of the native of Gemini
ascendant (first half of the said Nadiamsa) will have
a pitiable death due to poison, thieves, fire or weapउत्तरांशे प्रजातस्य विषभक्षणवान् पिता |
पञ्चादागोग्यमाप्नोति राजन्यद्रेषशोकवान् ॥८४७ ॥
847. Consuming Poison: In case of the native of
second half the subject Nadiamsa (without involving
the luminaries, Saturn and Mars as mentioned slokas
845 and 846 above), the father will consume poison
(and be in danger). Later on he will recover. The
father will further be grieved on account of royal
wrath.
ais पूर्वभागे पञ्चमे पापसंयुते |
शुभद्यष्टिविही ने च शसेण मरणं पितुः॥८४८ ॥
848. First Half - Mudgara Nadiamsa: Should
malefics be in the 5th from Gemini ascendant, without benefic planetary aspects, the person’s father will
die on account of weapons.
Notes: Mudgara Nadiamsa, Gemini, may be
found in the notes under sloka 562 supra.
आयुष्मती च जननी भ्रातृभराप्रीसमन्विता।
TU खजननी तवेकभ्रातृसमन्विता ॥८४९ ॥
मातृष्वसेका विधवा मातुलैकोऽपि पापवान् |
Chandra Kala Nadi
पूर्वभागे प्रजातस्तु बहुमातुलयोगवान् ॥८५० ॥
मातृष्वसा विष्लवेन देशत्यागं करोति च।
849 - 850 1/2. Mudgara Nadiamsa - Gemini
Ascendant: The subject of first half will have a longliving mother who will be endowed with brothers and
sisters. The native of second half of this Nadiamsa
will have only one brother and a widowed sister.
Even that brother will be a sinful person. The person
belonging to the first half will have a number of
maternal uncles. His maternal aunt will leave the
country due to a revolt.
मद्ररांशे पूर्वभागे पञ्चमे रवि सस्थिते ॥८५१ ॥
मातृष्वसा च दुःखार्ता विष्लवेन विनिर्गता |
देशत्यागं मानभड़ा दासी कृत्यं TITS ॥८५२ ॥
सिगमाद्राजपुत्रस्य पञ्चद्धाग्यवती सुखी |
मुद्ररं शे पूर्वभागे APSA: सुखी ॥८५२ ॥
851 - 853. The Sun in the 5th House: Incase of
birth in first half Mudgara Nadiamsa, the Sun placed
in the 5th house will trouble the maternal aunt with
grief who will have to leave the country. She will lose
her honour and will live by servitude. Later on she
will be happy. She will become fortunate after
befriending a king’s son. The children of the maternal aunt of the native of former balf of Mudgara
Nadiamsa will be happy (without relevance to the
Sun, ibid.)
राजयोगेन महता गाल्ये राज्याधिपत्यवान्।
तन्मूलाद्रहुभाग्यापििर्जातकरय महत् सुखम् ॥८५४॥
854. First Half - Mudgara Nadiamsa: He will
get abundant effects of Raja Yoga, and in childhood
he will attain rulership of a kingdom. Because of that
his fortunes will multiply greatly.
मातृष्वसुसुतस्थाने जीवे पूर्णलान्विते |
मातृष्वसा ways पौत्रभाग्यवती सती ॥८५५ ॥
855. Jupiter in the 10th: In case of Gemini
ascendant, Mudgara Nadiamsa, the planet Jupiter
with full strength and in the 10th house will bless the
native’s maternal aunt with husband, progeny and
grand-children. She will be a virtuous housewife.

Deva Keralam
कर्माधिपदशाकाले भाग्याधिपतिभुक्तिषु |
लग्राधिपदशाकाल वापि भाग्ययोगो भविष्यति ॥८५६ ॥
856. (With Jupiter in the 10th house), the native
will reap fortunes in the 10th lord’s dasa, in the sub
periods of Saturn, Mercury and lords of 9th and
ascendant.
भाग्यधिपे रविसुते रविभोमयुक्तं
दाराधिपेक्षितयुते भवति त्रिकोणे |
जातस्य YS जनकस्य मृत्युः
शसेण वा निशि निषादकृतेन वा स्यात् ॥८५७ ॥
857. The 9th lord Saturn, being in the company
of Sun and Mars in a trine in aspect/association of
Jupiter will cause the death of father in the hands of
enemies in a war, or due to sharp weapons.
वर्गोत्तमे धनाधीरे लाभेशेन समन्विते |
भागयधिपेन संयुक्त दिनेशे बहुभाग्यवान् ॥८५८ ॥
858. Fortunes: The 2nd lord Moon joining the
11th lord (Mars) and in Vargottama while the Sun
joins the 9th lord (Saturn) will bless the native of
Gemini ascendant with abundant fortunes.
लग्राम् कर्मगते जीवे हंसयोगे इतीरितः।
ARTS पूर्वभागे हंसयोगे च जायते ॥८५९ ॥
पञ्चाद्धातृविहीन राजपुप्रियः सुखी |
मातामहो चिरायुष्मान् मातृवंशाभिवृद्धिमान् ॥८६० ॥
खमातृभगिनीपुत्रो योगेन Bra मश्नुते |
859 - §601/2. Hamsa Y oga: Jupiter inthe 10th (in
Pisces fora Gemini native, inthe current discussions)
causes Hamsa Yoga. As a result of Jupiter being in
the 10th, the native of former half of Mudgara
Nadiamsa, Gemini ascendant will beget the following effects. He will have no after-borns. He will be
happy befriending a king’s son. His maternal grandmother will be long-lived and maternal kinsmen will
prosper. His maternal aunt’s son will derive Raja
Yoga effects and become wealthy.
Note: Also see sloka 911 infra.
पितृव्यधिपतौ भौमे पञ्चमे मकरांशगे ॥८६१ ॥
भाग्यधिपेन संयुक्ते खपितार्भातृसंयुक्तः
ARUN पूर्वभागे बहुमातुलवान् सुखी ॥८६२ ॥
स्वमाता नेत्र वेरप्या बहुकालं च जीविते |
861 - 8621/2. The 11th lord Mars joining the 9th
lord Saturn in the Sth house and begetting Capricom
Navamsa would denote (existence of) brothers to the
native’s father. (One version reads that the father
would have both brothers and sisters.) The native of
former half of Mudgara Nadiamsa will have a number
of maternal uncles and his mother will be endowed
with longevity but will suffer from eye disorders.
भावलग्राधिपे शुक्रे स्वनवांशे बलान्विते ॥८६३ ॥
भराग्यधिपेन das विपद्याये सुभाग्यवान्।
सम्पदाये व्याकुलं स्यात् पूर्वार्थे शुभदं महत् ॥८६४॥
उत्तरार्धे सुखं चेति राजद्वारे प्रवेशवान्
मातुष्वसुर्भृवशात् सुसोख्यं
तत्प्रयोगे न च भाग्यभाक् स्यात् |
अतीवसोख्यं मुनयो बटन्त
भोगी सदाभूषित भागेभाक् स्यात् ॥८६५॥
863 - 865. Bhava Lagna: Venus should become
the lord of Bhava Lagna, and, being in aspect to the
9th lord Saturn, should beget his own Navamsa. Then
the native will reap abundant fortunes in the 3rd dasa.
The 2nd dasa will (generally) give great distress. But
its first half will cause much auspicious effects and
the 2nd half of 2nd dasa will gain entry for the subject
in royal circles. He will attain happiness with the
good offices of his maternal aunt’s husband. The said
relative’s son will also earn fortunes ofa great order,
and much happiness, and will enjoy pleasures like a
king.
Notes: Bhava Lagna is one of the special ascendants. From Sun rise to the time of birth, every five
ghatis (or 120 minutes of clock time) constitute one
Bhava Lagna. In other words, the ghatis and vighatis
elapsed from sun rise to birth should be divided by
five and the quotient in terms of signs and degrees
should be added to the Sun’s longitude prevailing at
the commencement of the day.
Example: Sun’s longitude on the starting of the

day concerned = Virgo 15°.
Time of birth = 20 ghatis. Divided by 5 this
yields foursigns or 120°. When 120° are added to the
Sun (i.e. 165°), we get Bhava Lagna as 285° or
Capricorn 15°.
This is as per Brihat Parasara Hora.
For further details the reader may refertoJaimini
literature.
मीने तुलांशगे जीवे जामित्रे भृगुनन्दने ।
शुक्रदय्ट प्रजातुस्त राजकीरतिश्नतापवान् ॥८६६ ॥
योगोऽमलः स्याद्यदि राजकीये
राजानुवर्ती बहुमान युक्तः।
सदा प्रजारञ्जनतत्पच
राज्ञो रसज्ञो रसनामूदुश्रच ॥८६७ ॥
866 - $67. Jupiter in Pisces with Libra Navamsa,
as Venus is inthe 7th house, aspecting (the ascendant
Gemini), will produce a valorous person supported
by fame in royal circles. This Amala Yoga (not
ignoring the other combination cited) will involve
the person in politics who will follow the king’s
orders (i.e. be close the king). He will beget a lot of
honour and be always engaged in pleasing the populace. He will himself be (equal to) a king, will have
knowledge of tastes (a branch of medical science) (or
be an alchemist, a poet, a writer) and will havea soft
tongue.
वर्गोत्तमे निशानाथे राजकीर्याशयोगगे |
Use कीर्वयुक्तो मनत्रालोचनबुद्धिवान् ॥८६८ ॥
868. Vargottama Moon: The Moon in
Vargottama with “Rajakeeya Amsa’” will cause fame
through royal association. The native will be intelligent and will specialise in application of Mantras.
Note: Rajakeeya Yogamsa is not a standard
term.
WaT चन्धे शकटे च प्रजायते |
अन्तकपरवान् रागी लोभप्रकृतिमान् सदा ॥८६९ ॥
869. The conjunction of the Moon with three
malefics will produce Sakata Yoga as a result of
which the Gemini native will be inwardly cunning, be
passionate and miserly in disposition.
Chandra Kala Nadi
वृषभांशे मदे शक्रे त्वासितेन निरीक्षिते |
परसखीसद्वान् कामी सत्कलत्रप्रियः सुखी ॥८५७० ॥
870. Venus in 7th: If Venus is in the 7th in
Sagittarius in aspect to Saturn, and with Taurus
Navamsa, the subject will be libidinous, will join
others’ women and will be fond of his virtuous
spouse.
सम्पतारदशा यां तु दाराधिपतिदायतके |
जन्मदेशे विवाहः स्यात् पश्चात् सौख्य रत सुखी izes ॥
871. Marriage: The native of first half of
Mudgara Nadiamsa, Gemini ascendant, will get
married in the 2nd dasa, during the sub period of 7th
lord (Jupiter) with a girl bailing from his birth region
after which he will be happy.
मद्ररंशे पूर्वभागे चि्र्षं च प्रजायते |
antes निशानाथे हरिशक्करभक्तिपान् ॥८७२ ॥
शिवानुग्रहवानित्यं शिवभुक्ति युतः सुखी |
तारयोगी सुधर्मात्मा विशेषशिवभक्तिमान् ॥८७३॥
वैदिकप्रियवान्ित्यं देवत्राह्मणपोषकः।
किंचिच्छकटयोगेन शुत्रराजभयप्रदः॥८७४ ॥
शुत्रनिग्रहवांश्चेति स्वकार्यनिरतः सुखी |
चित्राप्रसूतः प्रियकार्य कर्ता
सुवसराधारी सुतनुः FAH |
पदटर्महाबुद्धिविशेषयुक्त
उद्यामवाग्वृत्तिसुलन्धचेताः॥८७५ ॥
872 - 875. Chitra Nakshatra: One born in the
former half of the subject Nadiamsa, with the Moon
in Vargottama in Chitra Nakshatra (3rd quarter) will
be a devotee of Lords Vishnu and Siva. He will ever
enjoy the mercy of Lord Siva and be particularly
devoted to Him. He will be charitably disposed, will
be fond of those who follow the path prescribed by the
Vedas and will honour gods and Brahmins. Due to
Sakata Yoga effects (due to the Moon being with
three 11181615, vide sloka 869 supra), he will have
some fear from enemies and the king, However he
will conquer his enemies. He will be devoted to

Deva Keralam
completion of his undertakings. The native having
the Moon in Chitra Nakshatra (apparently as described above) will do jobs that will please others,
will wear good robes, will possess a good physique
and eyes, be skillful, highly intelligent, be harsh in
speech but be soft at heart.
Gass तुलाशे च शन्यड़ारकसंयुते |
वयोमध्ये महाभाग्यं हव्यकव्यप्दः सुखी ॥८७६ ॥
पितृभाग्यविहीनश्च स्वभुजामितभाग्यवान्।
कालान्तरे शूत्रजेता कीरतिमाशरे्नसं शयः ॥८७७ ॥
दीर्थलोचनवान् रागी अन्तकुटिलकार्यवान् |
तुलां शके महाराज कार्यखद्प्रवीणवान् ॥८७८ ॥
कीर्गिमान् साधुसहत्तो रविद्रज्जनरतः सदा |
पराक्रमी महाप्ाङ्गस्तृतीयांशे च जायते ॥८७९ ॥
$76 -879. The Moon in Vargottama in Libra, 1110
in the company of Saturn and Mars, will inthe middle
of life usher great fortunes. The native will offer
oblations both to gods and deceased spirits of the
ancestors. He will be devoid of paternal happiness
and will have self-earned wealth. Aftersome interval
he will conquer his enemies and be famous. He will
be immersed in thoughts for long spells of time, be
passionate, will have secretively crooked plans, will
undertake royalassignments and beskillful in swordfighting. He will be famous, virtuous, good at heart,
ever fond of learned men, valorous and highly learned.
These are applicable to the native having the Moon
in Chitra third quarter (i.e. Vargottama in Libra).
Notes: “Truteeyamse” found in the second line
of sloka 879 refers to the Moon’s position in the 3rd
quarter of Chitra Nakshatra. Reference to Chitra
appears in sloka 875 supra.
तुलांशगे युते as बुद्धिमान् कीर्तिमान् सदा |
विद्यावान् मधुरभाषी बाल्ये पितृविनाशवान् ॥८८० ॥
880. Early Loss of Father: The Moon in Libra
Navamsa (sign position in Libra implied) will give
intelligence, fame, learning, and sweet speech. This
position of the Moon will destroy father in childhood,
in respect of a Gemini native.
Tay मध्यमे काले चन्द्रे पापद्वयेक्षते |
पितुरर्मरणं चेति निषादादिभयं महत् ॥८८१ ॥
तद्योषपरिहार्थ शानि कुयद्विवक्षणः।
Taq कालदण्डं रजतेन च भैरवम् ॥८८२ ॥
काल दण्डंच दत्वासावृक्ष दोषाद्विमुच्येत |
881 - 8821/2. Fatal Death for Father: The Moon
in Vargottama in Libra along with the aspect, on her,
of two malefics will cause fatal death of father who
will have great fear from Nishaadas. To overcome
this blemish suitable propitiations be done. Donation
of the image of Lord Bhairava made ofsilver, holding
Kala Danda (divine staff) along with a pair of robes
will cause relief from the said blemish.
Notes: "Nishaada" in sloka 881 means a nonAryan tribe regarded as hunters, robbers, fishermen
etc.
“Madhyame Kale” vide sloka 881 denotes the
middle portion of Chitra Nakshatra, 1.6. ending portion of second quarter and beginning portion of third
quarter. It practically means the 3rd quarter of Chitra
Nakshatra where the Moon is required to be. This
gives her Vargottama position in Libra.
भाग्यवृद्धिर्मध्काले नवमे पापखेचरे ॥८८२ ॥
लग्रत् पञ्चमगे पपे पि fee विनिर्दिशेत् |
लग्रात पञ्चमगे मन्दे भाग्येशांशे प्रजायते ॥८८४ ॥
तदशायां PARE बाल्ये वा नात्र संशयः।
883 - 8841/2. The performance of the remedy
suggested above will increase the native’s fortunes
(as well). Amalefic planet inthe 9th or inthe Sthfrom
the ascendant will bring evils to father. Saturn in the
5th house from Gemini ascendant, obtaining Aquarius
Navamsa will in his dasa or (even) inchildhood cause
evils to father.
Notes: Bhagyesamsa = the Navamsa ruled by the
Oth lord, Saturn, 1.6. Aquarius in the present context.
पञ्चमांशकगे राहो लगाद्धाग्यं गतेयदि ॥८८५ ॥
बाल्ये च FAM पश्चद्धाग्यार्थपुत्रवान् |
वनान्तरपुरे वासी कुत्मितप्रभुसेवकः॥८८६ ॥
885 - 886. Rahu in the 9th: Should Rabu be in

the 9th house, with 5th place from Navamsa ascendant, he will cause difficulties and penury during
childhood. Later on, the subject will acquire fortunes
and progeny. He will live in a town surrounded by
forests, and will serve a mean king.
Notes: Panchamamsakage could also be interpreted as Sth Navamsa of Aquarius, which gives the
planet Vargottama position. I prefer the interpretation that the planet should acquire Sth place from
Navamsa ascendant.
स्वराजङ्गातिमूलेन मनव्याकुलमादिशेत् |
मुद्ररं पूर्वभागे जामित्र भृगुनन्दने ॥८८७ ॥
887. Venus in the 7th: For a person bom in the
former half of Mudgara Nadiamsa, Gemini ascendant, the planet Venus in the 7th will cause distress to
the native due to enmity with king’s relatives.
लगनाद्धाग्यं गते राहो कलत्रयोगवान् |
दारदरये सुतप्रापिर्बहुसन्तानवान् सदा ॥८८८ ॥
कालान्तरे दारहानिं क्लेशं प्राप्नोति भूरिशः।
नूतनवेश्मनिर्माणं प्रामलाभं महत् मुखम् ॥८८९ ॥
नरवाहनभूषाप्ति खीप्रजालाभमादिशेत्।
888 - 8891/2. Rahu in the 9th: The native of
Mudgara Nadiamsa, Gemini ascendant, with Rahu in
the 9th will beget the following effects. He will have
three wives, and obtain many children through two of
them. After some interval, his spouses will be
endangered and he will incur abundant grief. He will
nstruct a new house, gain villages, be greatly
happy, and wil] acquire men-bome conveyances.
The person will have many daughters.
सुतेशांशे तत्िकोणे स्फुटयोगं गते शनौ ॥८९० ॥
सुते HTS वा सन्तानोत्सवमादिशेत् |
लगने गुरुस्थित काले कर्माधिपतिदायगे cee I
मुदरंशे प्रजातस्य खप्रजालाभमादिशेत् |
मुतेशांशे तलिकोणे चूनाधिपतिभुक्तिषु ॥८९२॥
शीते FAVS: स्यात् प्रभुनाशवशद्िपत् |
' -राजस्वजनद्रेषं स्ीमूलादृव्याकुलं महत् ॥८९३ ॥
Chandra Kala Nadi
890 - $93. Acquisition of Progeny: Saturn
transiting the sign represented by the Navamsa occupied by the Jord of the 5th, or a sign that 15 aspected
by the lord of the Sth, ora trine to either of these, will
cause birth of a son. The time of Jupiter’s transiting
the ascendant during the operation of the dasa of the
10th lord will cause birth of a female issue, in case of
Mudgara Nadiamsa native, Gemini ascendant. During Jupiter dasa, Jupiter bhukti, his transit ina sign
identical with the lord of the 5th, or a trine thereof,
will cause abundant difficulties. He willbe in danger
due to destruction of his king, and will acquire enmity
in royal circles. He will also be agitated due to his
spouse (or a female).
अष्टविशतिमारभ्य ह्यकोनर््रिशवस्तरे।
मुद्रे प्रजातस्य Uae मनोव्यथा ॥८९४ ॥
894. Mental Distress: From the age of 28
through 31, the person belonging to Mudgara
Nadiamsa, Gemini ascendant will undergo mental]
distress and will feel inwardly annihilated.
षष्ठाष्टव्ययगते ससिते Ws
दुस्थानगे कुजयुतेरविजेन दष्टे ।
जातः प्रसिद्धविभवो बहुशोर्ययुक्तः
कालान्तरे मृतिमुपेत्यरिशस्रवातैः॥८९५ ॥
895. Death Through Enemy - Gemini Ascendant: The Moon in the 6th, 8th or 12th along with
Venus, as Mars is also in one of these houses (not
necessarily in the company of the said twosome) in
aspect to Saturn, the person will be famously wealthy
(or will hold an exalted position) and be endowed
with much valour. After some time, he will fall
victim to the weapon ofan enemy and quit the world.
Notes: Remedies by way of worship Durga,
Rudra and Varuna will ward off danger fromenemies
and weapons are suggested in the following slokas,
॥ नवदुर्गावरणपूजा ॥
दोषपरिहारार्थं दुगविरणमीश्चरम् |
यामलोक्ताप्रकारेण दानं कुर्याद्विचक्षणः ॥८९६ ॥
कुलीन च सुदैवक्ञं वेदवेदादाङ्गपारगम्।

Deva Keralam
आचार्य वरायित्वैवननवदर्गप्रसाद दम् ॥८९७॥
स्वर्णपद्मासनासीन fort चन्रशेखम् |
शड्धारिवरदामीतिहस्तं पीताम्बरावृतम् ॥८९८ ॥
सुप्रसन्नमुखी दुर्गा वनमध्ये निवा सिनीम्।
महामायां भगवती ध्यात्वा पूजां समाचरेत् ॥८९९ ॥
पूजां गृहाण कृपया हारिशस्रभयापहे |
निर्मितं च सुर्वेणन नक्रवाहं जलेश्वरम् ॥९०० ॥
नागपाशं देवं बन्धमोचनदायक्रम |
बामभागो च देव्यास्तु वरुणं AT सुधीः ॥९०१॥
वृषे दक्षिणपादं च विष्टभ्य स्थितमीश्वर् |
शूलहस्तं त्रिणेत्रं च ह्युमया सहितं शिवम् ॥९०२ ॥
कपालपाणि TTT TAT |
देव्याश्च दक्षिणे भागे पूजयेदासनादिमिः॥९०३ |
नवदुर्गायाश्च पूजां जपहोमं च दारुणम् |
ध्यात्वा फलत्रयीं चान्ते दानं कुर्याद्विचक्षणः ॥९०४ I
परशवद्रये arene
नवाख्यदुर्गाधूत रक्तवसाम् |
ध्यात्वा Bat wa निवारणार्थमारोग्यभाग्यार्थसुखादिसिद्रये ॥९०५॥
896 - 905. To get rid of the said blemish, the
discerning should gift away an image of Iswara (i.e.
Siva, one of the Rudras) robed ina rough garment as
laid down in Rudra Yamala. A learned astrologer
belonging to an excellent race and learned in Veads
and its divisions should be appointed as preceptor for
the purpose which will beget the mercy of Mother
Durga who is seated on a golden lotus, adoring the
Moon on Her head, destructive of enemies, fulfilling
one's desires, displaying Her hands of fearlessness,
robed in yellow garments, endowed with a smiling
face, and living in the midst of forests. With Her is
personified and identified the illusory nature of the
worldly objects. She is Bhagavathi, the giver of
fortunes. Such Durga should be meditated and
worshipped which will eliminate fear from enemies
and weapons. A golden image of Varuna, the lord of
waters, whose vehicle is crocodile, and who holds
Naga Pasa (Nagasthra, described elsewhere in the
notes in the present volume), should be obtained (andworshipped) following which one will be relieved of
bondage. On the left side of Varuna, the image of
Devi should be installed. Lord Siva, holding a skull
in His hand, adoring the crescent Moon on His head,
along with Uma, His consort, should be installed and
worshipped. Worship, Japa, and Homa for Durga
will increase the effects three-fold. At the end of the
ritual, charities should be given away. Goddess
Durga's both sides should be occupied by Varuna and
Rudra. The image of Durga should be provided with
red robes. Prayerto Uma (i.e. Parvathi) willelminate
enemies and will bless the aspirant with health,
fortunes and wealth.
Notes: The remedies given in the above slokas
are connected with the planetary blemishes in the
preceding verse (1.6. sloka 895). As such we should
take it to be general involving the worship of Varuna,
Rudra and Durga. For further details, see Rudra
Yamala.
PUR क्रूप्काले द्रादशाष्टमजन्मभे |
स्फुटयोग गते मन्दे हाथशान्ति समाचरेत् ॥९०६॥
पश्चादारोग्यसोख्यापिि शत्रुबाधाविनाशनम्।
इष्टसिद्धिमवाप्नोति स्वकार्येषु जयं तथा ॥९०७॥
906-7 In the evil sub periods, coinciding with
Sun’s adverse transits, with Saturn’s transit in 12th,
Sth and ascendant (or Moon sign) suitable propitiations be done. As a result, the subject will regain
health, be happy and be rid of fear from enemies. His
desires will be fulfilled and he will obtain success in
his undertakings.
तुलाशनिस्थिते काले लोके दुर्भिक्षजं भयम्|
राजकार्यं च लभते मण्डलधिपतेर्विपत् ॥९०८ ॥
तुलान्ते वृश्चिके मन्दे गोचरे द्वादशे शनौ |
लोके धान्यक्षयेनोव प्रजापीडा विनिर्दिशेत् ॥९०९ ॥
908 - 909. Irrelevant: When Saturn transits
Libra, the world will reel under drought. The native
will obtain royal assignments. His king will be in
danger. Saturn moving in the end of Libra or in’

168 Chandra Kala Nadi
Scorpio or in the 12th, loss of grains and troubles to
populace will come to pass.
जीवे WRT काले स्वराजेद्राहसंभ्रमः।
पप्रोत्सवफलप्राप्ती राजप्रीतिकरं महत् ॥९१० ॥
910. In the sub period of Venus, in Jupiter’s dasa,
his king will get married(?) The subject will obtain a
son and he will do acts to please the king.
हंसयोगे विपदाये ह्यारिष्टशतनाशनम् |
राजयोगाभिवद्धिःस्याद्राजप्रीति करेण च ॥९११॥
911. Gemini Ascendant - Hamsa Yoga: The
native of Gemini ascendant with Hamsa Yoga (caused
by Jupiter in Pisces, vide sloka 859) will in the third
dasa incur destruction of a hundred evils. The effects
of his Rajayogas will be on the increase. He will
please the king (by his acts).
पञचत्रिशात् परं क्लेशं कटके च मनोव्यथा |
स्वराद्रेषकार्यणि ह्यल्पसोख्यं ततः परम् ॥९१२॥
912. [fJupiteris in Cancer, the native of Gemini
ascendant will experience mental distress after 35th
year of his age. His acts willdisplease the king. After
this, 113 happiness will decrease.
यद्धावस्याष्टमे मन्दे यद्धावस्या्टमेक्षिते |
तद्धावः क्लेशमाप्नोति गोचरेऽ्र प्रदृश्यते ॥९१३॥
913. Counted froma Bhava, ifSaturn transits the
8th thereof, or aspects the 8th thereof during his
zodiacal movements, the first-mentioned Bhava wil]
be destroyed.
मद्ररंशे क्षेमदाये शुभाशुभफलं समम्
रजयोगफलं ferret व्याकुलं महत् ॥९१४॥
914. Fourth Dasa: Fora person bornin Mudgara
Nadiamsa, Gemini ascendant, the 4th dasa will give
evenly auspicious and inauspicious effects. His Raja
Yogas will give less effects. In the end of the said
dasa, he will be greatly distressed.
लग्नाधिदाशाकाले रन्ध्राधिपतिभुक्तिपु ।
द्िसप्तिसमे मृत्युस्तदरधैनाप्रमृत्युमान् ॥९१५ ॥
एकेनत्रिशके वर्षे ्रयसिशातिवत्सरे |
मद्रारंशे शुत्रभयं राजप्रीततिवशात् सुखम् ॥९१६॥
915-916. He will die at 72 in the dasa of the lord
of the ascendant, and in the sub period of the 8th lord.
At 36 he will have fearofuntimely death. During the
29th or 33rd year, he will face fear of enemies, but
will be happy due to his pleasing the king.
अतीवश्रियमाप्नोति यावदायुष्यवान् सुखी |
गुरुनाडीफले ग्रन्थे विस्तेरण मयोच्यते ॥९१७ ॥
917. He will be highly rich and be happy throughout his life. These detailed effects are from Guru
Nadi as elaborately narrated by Maya.
Notes: Maya was the artificer of the Daityas, or
demons, and was versed in magic, astronomy and
military science. He was referred to inMaha Bharata
as the architect of Maya Sabha for Yudhishtira.
रविभोमार्कजाशचैसं्ययोगो पृथ्क् IR |
रिपुवृद्धिक्षयादि स्या तत्तत्कारकमिर्णयः॥९१८ ॥
918. By adding the figures (in the Ashtaka
Varga) of the Sun, Mars and Saturn separately, one
can know of the increase and destruction of enemies
and the relative significance.
Notes: Itis not clearas to what this solitary sloka
wants to convey. In the absence of other relative
slokas, it is difficult to have a clear grasp of the
instruction. Hence J leave it to the discerning reader.
षष्ठाष्टमव्यये we त्वसितेन युतेक्षेति।
शुभदृष्टिवहीने च क्षतयोगांशनाडिगे ॥९१९॥
शुतरवद्धिभयापन्न द्यायुधेन महावित्।
चन्द्रे शनियुते दृष्टे यस्यां नाडयां प्रजायते ॥९२० ॥
शुत्रवृद्धि मनस्ताप मायुधेनमहाविपत्।
कर्माधिपदशायां तु भाग्याधिप दशायु वा ॥९२१॥
पष्ठष्माधीशदाये दुःस्थानग्रहभुक्तिषु |
RU शुत्रभीतिदानिं कुर्याद्रचक्षण ॥९२२ ॥
919 - 922. The Moon in the 6th, 8th or 12th in
association with or in aspect to Saturn, without a
benefic’s aspect, will cause hurt. The subject will

Deva Keralam
incur the danger of increasing enemies and through
weapons ina great manner. The association of the
Moon with Saturn by aspect or conjunction, for this
Nadiamsa, will increase the enemies, and cause
mental distress and great danger through weapons. In
the dasa of the 10th lord, 9th lord, 6th lord or 8th lord
and in the sub periods of planets placed in evil houses
(6/8/12), coinciding with Jupiter’s adverse transits,
fear through enemies will strike. To overcome such
an evil, charities be given away.
Notes: “Kshatayogamsanadige” in sloka 919
actually means in the Kshatayoga Nadiamsa, which
Is not however a proper term. What the text wants to
say is, one born in Gemini, with Mudgara Nadiamsa,
with the Moonas above will be liable to be hurt. Also
see sloka 895 supra, bearing some similariiy with the
present instructions.
॥स्व्णपरशुदानविधिः ॥
जपहोमादिकं चैव परशोर्दानमचरेत् |
शुत्रभीतिपहातापं हानिष्टप्रहगोचरे ॥९२३॥
रहस्ये च भयावेश बलिष्टरिपुसङ्कर |
विदध्यातपरशोर्दनं सर्वारष्ठनिवारणम् ॥९२४॥
923. - 924. Recitation of Mantras, and performing Homa (sacred fire) and donation of anaxe should
be done. Due to evil transits, the above native will be
struck by fear from secret enemies, great agitation,
being in the grip of fear, trouble from powerful
enemics. All these will be overcome by donation of
an axe.
अष्टम्यां च चतुर्दश्यां तथा पर्वसु संक्रमे |
तरिजन्मकरक्षद्रादश्यां पापानां वासरे सुधीः ॥९२५॥
देवालये पुणदेशे नदीतीरे यथोचितम् |
सद्गवल्ल्यादिभिभूमौ मण्डपं परिकल्पयेत् ॥९२६॥
मध्ये द्रोणान् विनिक्षिप्य तस्योपरि च तण्डुलान् |
आच्छाद्य नववसरेण ATA SATA ॥९२७॥
शतनिष्कसुवर्णेन तदरधर्धिन वा पुनः।
अङ्गुलद्वयविस्तारं चतुरङ्ुलमायतम् ॥९२८ ॥
छिद्रेण BRAY यथाशक्ति च कारयेत् |
fat च राजतं दण्डं fara Ta वेष्टयेत् ॥९२९ ॥
कता च प्रादमुखासीनो दानसङडत्पमाचरेत् |
शुत्रवर्णकुलच्छेद PSMA ॥९३० ॥
मम शुत्रक्षयार्थाय तव पूजां करोम्यहम् |
सर्वशत्रुक्षयायेति परशुं पूजयेत्ततः ॥९३१॥
शुत्रक्षयकरयेति 'मध्यमं परिपूजयेत् |
्रुतिशासप्रियं नित्यं मूले त्वावाहयेत् सुधीः ॥९३२ |
भीषणं भार्गवं रामं प्रत्य्थेरधिरोकितम् |
नरमांसबलि प्रीतं भत्रियानत करोद्यतम् ॥९३२ ॥
वदान्यं Wey च बहममुख्यल्यशिविग्रियप् |
रक्तगन्धाक्षतरक्तपुष्पमाल्थाम्बरावृतम् ॥९३४॥
uns जटिलं चण्मेवं ध्यात्वा च प्रयत् |
करिचर्मधरानन्त कुटरेणारिपातक |
इदमर्ध्यं प्रदास्यामि प्रहाणत्वं नमोऽस्तुते
विक्रमीश्वररुपं च वसरादिभिरलंकृतम् ॥९३५ ॥
शुत्रवंशक्षयार्थाय सर्वाभीषटप्रसिद्धये |
भयापमृ्युनाशायं कुठारं प्रददाम्यहम् ॥९३६ ॥
स्व्ण्रययुंत चेव स्वर्णसूप्रं च दक्षिणाम्
समां परशुना चैव दक्षिणां मनुरब्रवीत् ॥९३७॥
925 - 937. Ona day of Ashtami, Chaturdasi,
Dwadasi, or Parva (the days of four changes of the
Moon; also Ashtami and Chaturdasi of either fortnight) coinciding with the native's birth star or its
trines, and the week day ruled bya "malefic", the wise
should choose a temple located ina shrine on the bank
ofa river. There should be erected a pavilion on the
ground in the midst of which a wooden vessel be
placed containing de-husked rice grains. This should
be covered with a new cloth. An axe with a silver
handle and a sum of 100 or 50 or 25 gold coins should
be given away in donation in order that the enemies
are destroyed. The donor should take his seat facing
the east and recite "Mama satru kshayarthaya thava
poojam karomyaham | Sarva satru kshayakaraayethi
madhyamam partpujayeth" (I worship you inorderto
have my enemies destroyed.) Parasu Rama, who was
fierce, who saw the blood of his enemies, who offered

their flesh, who destroyed members of royal clan,
who was chiefamong Brahmins and dearto Lord Siva
and who weore red robes, who adored elephant's skin
and who used the axe to destroy enemies. This ritual
will destroy enemies and save the subject from fear
of untimely death.
शु्रनाशकरं सत्यं भूपतीनां विशेषत्ः।
राजकृद्राजकार्यस्य परशुदानमवश्यकम् ॥९३८ ॥
भाग्याप्ति परशोदनि शुत्रवंशक्षयो भवेत्|
आयुरारोग्यवान् सत्यमीश्वरेण कृतं पुरा ॥९३९ ॥
938 - 939. Destruction of enemies will be certain,
more so for the kings. To attain fulfillment of royal
assignments donation of an axe is essential. By this,
additionally the subject will beget fortunes, and
destruction of the family of the enemy. He will also
be healthy and Jong-lived. Once upon a time this
donation was done by Lord Siva (Himself).
चिरजीवांशगे we Fast देवपूजिते |
रेवत्यंशे तिशानाथे चिर्जीवांशनाडिगे ॥९४० ॥
पुरतोरिपुहन्ता स्यात् सत्यनाइचां फलं स्मृतम्
940 - 9401/2. Gemini Ascendant - Chirajivi
Nadiamsa: One born inthis degree with the Moonin
the Nakshatra quarters of Revathi (i.e. the Moon in
any quarter of Revathi), while Jupiter is ina friendly
Navamsa, will be a leading killer of enemies, as
stated in Sathya Nadi.
Notes: In sloka 940, the terms “Chirajivamsage
Chandre” and “Revathyamse Nisanathe” contradict
each other. The Nadiamsa relates to birth and the first
term 15 corrupt. I have taken only the Nakshatra
position of the Moon for purpose of translation.
Chirajiva Nadiamsa extends thus: from 12° 24'
to 12° 36' in movable signs; from 17° 24' to 17° 36'
of immovable signs; andd from 27° 24’ to 27° 36' in
common signs. This Nadiamsa is actually known as
"Chiranjivini".
पूर्वभागे प्रजातश्च रक्तवर्णश्रतापवान् ॥९४१ ॥
स्वदारवंश भाग्यपतिर्भगिनीत्रयमेत्रवान् |
घनघान्यसमृद्धश्च वेदाध्यायी सुपण्डितः ॥९४२ ॥
Chandra Kala Nadi
महाकालगुरुदरारे सर्वाध्यक्षः स्वतन््रवान् |
परिवारप्रियो मानी राजद्रारे सुपूजितः ॥९४२ ॥
941 -943. Chirajiva Nadiamsa - Former Half:
The native of Gemini ascendant, of this degree, will
be blood-red in complexion, and be valorous. His
fortunes will be through his in-laws (or he will have
fortunate in-laws). He will have three sisters, plenty
of wealth and grains. He will be a student of the
Vedas and be learned (in general). He will be a
presiding person in the reign of a great Saiva teacher.
A person enjoying freedom, he will love his family,
be honourable and respected in royal circles.
Notes: “Mahakaala Gurudvare Sarvadhyakshah” needs some clarification. Mahakaala is
a form of Lord Siva in his character of "great destroyer". Thus, the native will hold a position with a
preceptor who propagates Saivism. In essence the
subject will be engaged in spreading Lord Siva’s
school of thought, distinctly opposed to Vaishnavism.
For those who want freedom to interpret this
complicated expression, the other meanings of
Mahakaala are supplied below.
Mahakaala = A place sacred to the destroyerSiva; a mythical mountain; a teacher so named;
Durga in Her terrific form; one of Herattendants; one
of the sixteen Vidya-devis; the Linga in Ujjayini; a
Goddess who executed the commands of fifth Arhat
of the present Avasarpini.
चन्द्रे वर्गोत्तमे लग्रे गुरुयुक्तऽथ वीक्षिते
दीरधायुर्ुतिमान् भोगी सदा सर्वजनप्रियः॥९४४ ॥
944, Gemini Ascendant - Long Life: The
Moon in Vargottama, while Jupiter is in the ascendant will grant a long lease of life. Further the person
concemed will be splendorous, will enjoy pleasures
and will be ever fond of all people.
ifrast यदैकस्था वेकनार्ड गतो तथा।
शुभग्रहयुतौ दृष्टौ धनदांशे सुभाग्यवान् ॥९४५ ॥
945. Gemini Ascendant - Dhanada Nadiamsa:
The Moon and the Sun occupying one and the same
Nadiamsa (1.6. within an elongation of 12' of arc in
one specific Nadiamsa) in aspect to or in conjunction

Deva Keralam 17]
with a benefic, will, in the case of the subject native
give much fortunes.
Notes: For Dhanada Nadiamsa, see notes under
sloka 714-716, Book I.
घनदांशे पूर्वसोदर SST |
अथवा Taga च भगिन्यो दीर्धजीविताः eve ।
सोदरभ्रातृचत्वारि ह्यथवा पञ्चसद्भुयया |
एको भ्राता चिरायुश्च WGA: सुबुद्धिमान् ॥९४७ ॥
भातृज्येष्ठः सुखी वाग्मी क्षिप्रकोपप्रसादवान् |
946 - 947 1/2. First Half - Dhanada Nadiamsa:
This native will have ten brothers (read co-born), or
eight out of whom (three) sisters will be endowed
with longevity. Out of the above coborn, four or five
will be brothers. Only one of them will be long-lived.
be the most excellent of al] brothers, and be highly
intelligent. The eldest one will be happy, eloquent,
will instantly be angered and pleased.
Notes: “Bhaginyo Deergha Jeevitaah” 15 1€-
placed in another version with “Bhagini thraya
maayushyam” meaning three sisters will be longlived.
मेत्रंशगे विलमनेशे जामित्रे भृगुसंयुते ॥९४८ ॥
दीर्ध जीवी च मतिमान् बहुशिष्यप्रशिष्यवान् |
948 - 9481/2. Longevity: The ascendant lord
Mercury joining Venus in the 7th house and at the
same time begetting a friendly Navamsa will bless
the person with longevity and intelligence. He will
have a large number of students who also in turn will
have students.
cae निशानाथे मूर्खप्रकृतिकोपवान् ॥९४९ ॥
गुरुदृष्टियुते वापि शान्तप्रकृतिमान् सदा |
949 - 9491/2. Foolish, Peaceful: The Mooninan
angle to Gemini ascendant wil] produce an irascible
fool. Jupiter’s aspect on the said Moon will make him
peaceful.
मीने मीनांशगे ast मिथुने च प्रजायते ॥९५० ॥
अतिविक्रमवान् भोगी धर्मपुण्यपुराणवित्।
950 - 9501/2. Moon in Pisces: One of Gemini
ascendant having the Moon in Vargottama in Pisces
will be highly valorous, pleasure-seeking and an
expert in religion, meritorious acts and mythology.
षष्ठे बुधयते सूर्ये स्वसुतेन समन्विते ॥९५१॥
विष्णुभक्तिसतो नित्यं गुरुदेवातिथिप्रियः।
प्रनथान्ते महाभोगी क्लेशेन कर्शितः ॥९५२ ॥
यतिप्रीतिकसे नित्यं कलत्रद्रयवान् सुखी |
951- 9521/2. Three Planets in 6th: The Sun in
the 6th (in Scorpio) along with Saturn and Mercury
denotes one devoted to Lord Vishnu, and fond of
preceptors, gods and guests. According to other
texts, his childhood will be marked by difficulties.
He will please ascetics and will have two wives.
धनदशे पूर्वभागे SRAM सुभाग्यवान् ॥९५३ ॥
विवाहनन्तरं सौख्यं रजद्ररे सुभाग्यवान्।
नीचे मन्दांशगे शुक्रे जामित्रे गुरुसंयुते ॥९५४॥
TAY प्रजातस्तु जारस्रीनायकः सुखी |
मनद जामित्र भांशे शुक्र राहुयुतेक्षिते ॥९५५ ॥
धनदांशे प्रजातस्तु दारवंशे कलङ्कान् |
नीचे मन्दंशगे YR स्वभार्यां गुप्तजारिणी ॥९५६ ॥
भार्या तत्सोदरी चोभे जारिण्यो धनदांशगे |
शुक्राष्टके केन्द्रयोगे फलं तिस्तारमादिशेत् ॥९५७ ॥
दारान्ते सुतप्रापतिदीर्घमायुश्च विन्दति |
953 - 9571/2. Gemini Ascendant - Dhanada
Nadiamsa: (a) The person bornin Dhanada Nadia msa,
former half, Gemini ascendant will have fortunate inlaws. He will be happy following his marriage and
will beget fortunes through royal association.
(b) Jupiter in the 7th (in Sagittarius) as Venus is
in debility in (the 4th in Virgo) with Saturn’s Navamsa will give a questionable woman as spouse in
respect of the native of Dhanada Nadiamsa.
(c) Saturn in the 7th house in aspect to or
association with Venus-Rahu combine, and getting a
Navamsa of Mars (i.e. Aries or Scorpio) will denote
that the wife’s family has (some indelible) blemish.
(d) Venus in the 4th (Virgo) with Saturn’s Nav-

amsa will give a spouse of easy virtues. Hersister will
also be of similar nature. The native will obtain
progeny through another wife and be long lived.
लग्नात् पञ्चमगे भोमे मन्दे षष्टत्रिकोणगे ॥९५८ ॥
सूिकागृहसेगेण erates विनिर्दिशेत् ।
धनत्रिकोणगे मन्दे स्वोच्चे वा नीचगे भृगो ॥९५९ ॥
मन्दांशगे सुतारिष्टं सीमन्तशिशुनाशनम्।
SRA सुतप्राप्िर्बहुसन्तानमदिशेत् ॥९६० ॥
958 - 960. Progeny: (a) Mars inthe Sth (in Libra)
while Saturn is ina trine to the 6th house (1.6. placed
in Pisces/Cancer) will cause evils to the person’s wife
due to blemishes in delivery chamber.
(b) Saturn in a trine to the 2nd house (i.e. in
Scorpio/Pisces) as Venus is in exaltation or in debilitation with a Navamsa of Saturn will promote evils to
progeny and destroy the first issue. The person will
then obtain progeny through another spouse (marriage) and as such he will have many children.
धनदाशे पूर्वभागे भागिन्येका सुमङ्गली ।
एका पुत्रविहीना च क्लेशिता च तथापरा ॥९६१॥
ग्रन्थान्तरे गर्गं मते जातस्य धनदांशगे । '
पूर्वभागे भगिन्येका बहुभाग्यवती सती ॥९६२॥
वृद्धपाराशरमते भगिन्यो द्व faye |
एका क्लेशवती नित्यं पुत्रनारेन करिता ॥९६३ ॥
961 - 963. Gemini Ascendant - Ist Half of
Dhanada Nadiamsa: (a) One of the native’s sisters
will be endowed witha long marital life. Anotherwill
be childless, Yet another one will be a troubled soul.
(b) As per the school of sage Garga, one sister of
the subject will be a faithful spouse and be highly
fortunate.
(c) According to Vriddha Parasara, two of the
sisters will have three sons. One sister will be ever
grieved, and will be emaciated due to destruction of
her progeny.
धनदांशे पूर्वभागे खपिता तेकभार्यकः।
सोदर द्रौ च त्वेके पुत्रविहीनवान् ॥९६४ ॥
Chandra Kala Nadi
स्वमाता गुणशीला च पुत्रैभाग्यसमत्विता |
प्रियजामातृभाग्येन भूषिता कनकप्रभा ॥९६५ ॥
964 - 965. Parents etc. : The father of the native
of former half of Dhanada Nadiamsa will have onc
wife (i.e. no two marriages). Father will have two
brothers who will have two wives. One of them will
be childless. The native’s mother will be virtuous and
will obtain happiness through children. She will have
a loving son-in-law, will wear ornaments and will be
splendorous like gold (or will wear a lot of golden
ornaments through which her physical shine will be
conspicuous).
भाग्यस्थानापिपे मन्दे केसरीयोगसंयुते |
TAT प्रजातश्च पूर्वभागे सुभाग्यवान् ॥९६६ ॥
आयुष्मन्तो च पितरो भगिनीभाग्यवान् सुखी ।
धनदांशे पूर्वभागे केसरीयोग जस्ताथा ॥९६७ ॥
दराविशन्दात् परं भाग्यं विशोपरि विशेषतः।
966 - 9671/2. Kesari Yoga & Saturn: The 9th
lord Saturn in relation to Kesan Yoga will cause
much prosperity to the subject of Dhanada Nadiamsa,
first half (Gemini ascendant). Further, his parents
will be blessed with longevity. The subject will attain
prosperity after 22, especially after 20 years of age.
Notes: The Moon in an angle of Jupiter causes
Kesari Yoga (Phala Deepika, ch IV). Saturn should
be related to the said yoga asa result of which parents
will enjoy longevity, and the native prosperity.
मेत्रंशगे विलग्नेशे पञ्चविशात् परं सुखम् ॥९६८ ॥
स्वप्राबल्यं च लभते नित्यश्रीः सौँख्यवान् सुखी |
चीनाम्बरसुभूषाप्तो धनधान्यसमृद्धिमान् ॥९६९ ॥
पितृमातृपरियो नित्यं सोदरभ्रातृवत्सलः।
968 - 9691/2. Mercury: The ascendant lord
Mercury ina friendly Navamsa will cause prosperity
after 25th year. The person will beget fame (or
prosperity), lasting wealth, happiness, silkenclothes,
ornaments and abundant money and grains. He will
be liked y his parents and will be affectionate to his
coborn.

Deva Keralam
चद््रंशधिपतोजीवे Fast मदराशिगे ॥९७० ॥
भाग्यगेहे विवाहःस्याच्छूशुरश्च द्विभार्यकः।
शुक्रांशनाडी योगेन भाग्यवान् श्वशुरः सुखी ॥९७६ ॥
सदा रोगभयार्तश्च परस्रीसङ्गलोलुपः।
970 - 9711/2. (Mercury) being in the 7th house
(Sagittarius) witha friendly Navamsa, as the Moonis
in a Navamsa of Jupiter, will give marriage in a
prosperous family. The person’s father-in-law will
have two wives. If the planet Mercury be in the
Navamsa of Venus, the father-in-law will be prosperous and happy but he will be ever in fear of diseases
and be attached to joining others’ women.
TAM सोदरपरात्री दायादिजनहीनवान् Iles? ॥
बहुपुत्रार्थसंपत्नो महाराजगुरु सुखी |
अरोगी वेदशालाणां TATA विशारदः ॥९७३ ॥
सोदरेषु च यः कोऽपि विद्यावान् धनवान् सुखी ।
सोदरः सप्त तेपां द्रौ प्रबलौ राजवल्लभो ॥९७४॥
एको भाग्योत्तमशचेति बहुपुत्रार्थावान् सुखी |
सम्तत्तरादशाकाले सोदगोत्पत्तिमादिशेत् ॥९७५ ॥
मोञ्जीबन्धसोख्यापिः कुम्भान्ते मीनगे गुरो ।
विपदाये विवाहः स्यातनित्ससोख्ययुतः पिता ॥९७६ ॥
स्वकेत्रथनभूषादि लाभेन सौख्यमश्नुते।
जनकस्य फलं सत्यं विपदाये न संशयः॥९७५७ ॥
972 - 977. Mercury in Friendly Navamsa; One
born in Gemini ascendant, Dhanada Nadiamsa, with
Mercury ina friendly Navamsa (sign not specified)
will be bereft of sisters and cousins. He will have
many issues, lot of wealth, be a king’s preceptor, be
devoid of sickness, and learned in Vaidic philosophy.
Out of (all) the brothers, the subject native will be
(comparatively more) irascible, learned, wealthy and
happy. He will have seven brothers out of whom two
will be famous, and be close to the ler, Another will
have excellent fortunes, endowed with many issues
and wealth. During the native’s second dasa, brothers aud sisters then born will face extinction and he
will have his thread ceremony with Jupiter moving in
the end of Aquarius or in Pisces. His third dasa will
give him marriage. His father will be ever happy
begetting lands, money and ornaments. The results
stated in respect of the native’s father to occur in the
third dasa will bear truth.
जन्मपाकर्दशान्त्यादो विप्लवेन महाविपत् |
लोके धान्यं विनाशेन प्रजाक्षोभो भविष्यति ॥९७८ ॥
कन्याशानिस्थिते काले Mera तौलिगेऽपि च।
महाहवे गुरुक्लेशं प्रजानां विप्लवो भवेत् ॥९७९ ॥
978 - 979. Irrelevant: During the first dasa’s
beginning and end portions, there will be great
dangerdue to revolt. Grains will be destroyed and the
populace will be in the grip of strife. Saturn moving
in Virgo or Libra will cause heavy grief to the people.
विद्यारम्भं पञ्चमा्दे सप्तमे Alara
विपदाये. विवाहस्याद्धाग्याधिपतिभक्तिषु ॥९८० ॥
980. The Sth year will cause commencement of
education, 7th year thread ceremony and the third
dasa in the sub period of 9th lord will promote _
mariage. (This sloka is apparently wrongly placed
here.)
चिस्जीवांशगे सूर्ये स्थिरराशिचतुष्टये।
पाण्डयदेशे ete स्यान्मण्डलाधिपतेरविपत् ॥९८१ ॥
981. Irrelevant: The Sun in a fixed sign in
Chirajiva Nadiamsa will cause evils in Pandya kingdom and danger to its ruler.
विपदयाये सुतेशांशे स्फुटयोगं गते गुरो |
तत्विकोणेऽथवा चेति प्रथमोद्राहपादिशेत् ॥९८२ ॥
982. Jupiter transiting the sign identical with 5th
lord’s Navamsa position, ora trine thereof, during the
operation of third dasa, will give first marriage to the
native of Gemini ascendant, Dhanada Nadiamsa.
चन्रलग्नष्टमाधीशदशायां पापभुक्तिषु ।
पितृव्यजनसन्तापं ज्ञाततिवर्गे सुतक्षयम् ॥९८३ ॥
983. Grief to Paternal Kinsfolk: During the
dasa of the 8th lord counted from the Moon sign, and
inthe sub period ofa malefic, relatives of the native’s

paternal uncle will be grieved. Loss of children
among the kinsfolk will have to be feared.
सुखेशांशे तात्रिकोणे स्फुटयोग गते शनो ।
मण्डलधिपतेर्मृ्यु सीराज्यं तदनन्तम् ॥९८४॥
तत्काले बहुभाग्यापि पितृसोख्यं विनिर्दिशेत् |
984 - 9841/2. Irrelevant: (a) Saturn in transit in
the sign denoted by the Navamsa position of the lord
of the 4th, ora trine thereof, will kill the ruler of the
country following which a female will come to
power.
(b) At that time prosperity and happiness will be
eared by the native’s father.
सन्धरपदशाकाले ह्यशुभग्रहभुक्तिषु ॥९८५ ॥
ra ae स्यान्मातुलस्य महाविपत्।
नानाव्याकुलसंप्राप्ति देहकार्श्य धनव्ययम् ॥९८६ ॥
985 - 986. The dasa of the lord of the 8th (from
the Moon sign) with the help ofa sub period ruled by
a malefic will promote evils among maternal relatives. The native’s maternal uncle will be greatly
endangered, will incur various kinds of distress,
physical decay and loss of money.
सहोदरी भाग्यसोख्य लाभं
ताताम्बिके सोख्यसुभूषणाप्तिम् |
इष्टार्थसिद्धि मुनयो वदन्ति
वेवाहिकानन्तरभाग्यवान् स्यात् ॥९८७॥
987. Dhanada Nadiamsa - Gemini Ascendant:
The native will see his sisters in prosperity and
happiness. His paternal grand-mother will obtain
happiness and ornaments. His desires will be fulfilled. He will get much prosperity after marriage.
सुखेशांशे तत्िकोणे स्फुटयोग गते शनो ।
मुखेशदृष्टि तु पितृपीडां विनिदिशेत् ॥९८८ ॥
मातृपीडाथवा चेति क्रूरमासे भविष्यति |
कषप्रिणायोग्यमित्साहूर्विदयाये फलं स्मृतम् ॥९८९ ॥
988 - 989. Third Dasa - Danger to Father:
Saturn in transit in the sign denoted by the Navamsa
Chandra Kala Nadi
occupied by the 4th lord, ora trine thereof, orthe one
that at birth is in aspect to the lord of the 4th, will
produce danger to father. Or else, the mother could
well be endangered during the adverse transits of the
Sun (coinciding with above transits of Saturn). She
will however instantly recover. These will be reflected in the dasa which is the third in sequence.
TY शनिस्थिते काले स्शंशेऽथ वापि च।
्षेमदाये दारहानिः श्वशुरश्च मरिष्यति ॥९९० ॥
सहोदरी मनस्तापवेधव्याभ्यांयां च करिता |
feos ताताऽम्बिके चैव द्वितीयोद्राहमादिशेत् ॥९९१ ॥
990 - 991. Fourth Dasa: During the currency of
the 4th dasa, Saturn coming to the 8th from ascendant, or moving on the sign denoted by the Navamsa
occupied by him at birth, will endanger the spouse
and will kill the father-in-law. Further, the native’s
sister will be widowed and grieved while his paternal
grand-mother will be in trouble. The subject will get
married for the second time.
धनदाशे पूर्वभागे युग्म लग्रे TWAT |
सप्तमाब्दे जनक्लेशं राज्याधिपतिनाशनम् ॥९९२ ॥
चतुर्धिशे तथा विन्दाद्राजपली मरिष्यति |
तत्पोतरः प्रबलश्चेति तत्काले बहुसोख्यवान् ॥९९२ ॥
992 - 993. Irrelevant: Fora birth in first half of
Dhanada Nadiamsa, Gemini ascendant, predict troubles to populace in the native’s seventh year, and
destruction of king as well. So also in the 24th year.
The queen will quit the world and her grandson will
become powerful when the native will beget much
happiness.
पौष्णश्रवणहस्तर्र भरणीवायुभेष्वपि ।
Ware नृणां दुर्भिक्षभयदः स्मृतः॥९९४॥
मिधुनान्त्ये कुलीरदो कन्यानते तौलिगेऽपि च।
तुलान्ते वृश्चिके चादावनवृष्टि भयं महत् ॥९९५ ॥
994 ~ 995. Irrelevant: Saturn transiting in
Revathi, Sravana, Hastha, Arudra, Bharani and Swati
willusher famine. Drought ofa great order will result

Deva Keralam
the movements of Saturn in end of Gemini, Cancer,
end of Virgo, Libra, end of Libra and in Scorpio.
षष्ठाधिपदशाकाते लाभाधिपतिभुक्तिषु ।
गर्भाधानफलप्राप्ति शशुरारिष्टमादिशेत् ॥९९६ ॥
996. The native’s nuptials will take place in the
sub period of the 11th lord during the dasa of the 6th
lord, followed by evils to father-in-law.
लोके धान्य क्षयेणेव प्रजाक्षोभो भविष्यति |
TOTEM मुखसोदर्दायगे ॥९९७ ॥
विप्तेवेन विनिर्गत्य पश्चिमां दिशमेष्यति।
पश्चात् स्वदेशमासाद्य शिशुदारसोख्यवान् ॥९९८ ॥
997 - 998. The country will reel under loss of
grains and the populace will be in strife. In the sub
period of the lord of the 3rd or 4th, during the dasa of
the 8th lord, western direction will be in the grip of
revolt after which the subject will return home and be
happy with his spouse and children.
बुधान्तर क्षेमदाये गोचरे क्षेमे शनौ ।
अतीव क्लेशकार्य च पलनीपुत्रविनाशनम् ॥९९९ ॥
999. Mercury’s Sub-period: In the 4th dasa, the
sub period of Mercury, with Saturn moving in the 4th
Nakshatra (counted from birth Nakshatra) will cause
much difficulties and destroy his wife and children.
तुला रशिस्थिते मन्दे दाराधिपतिभुक्तिषु |
लाभाधिपान्तरे वापि धनलाभं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥१००० ॥
1000. Financial Gains: Saturn’s journey in
Libra coinciding with the sub period of the 7th lord
(Jupiter) or 11th lord (Mars) - during the dasa of 4th
lord (Mercury) will usher financial gains.
तृतीयाब्दे त्रय्सिशे चतुर्विशतिवत्सर |
परटत्रिशाब्दे ह्यनावृष्टया लोके दुर्भिक्ष भयम् ॥१००१॥
द्वितीयोद्राहतः पश्ाद्भ्राता सोख्यान्वितसुखी |
गोचरे शनिदोषेण बन्धुभिः सह विप्लवः॥१००२ ॥
1001 - 1002. Irrelevant: In the 3rd year, 33rd
year, 24th year or 36th year there will be drought in
the country. His younger brother will be happy in
second marriage. When Saturn in transit....relatives
will be involved ina revolt.
्षेमाधिपदशायां तु प्रत्यग्दाये स्वभुक्तिषु |
जनकस्यमहायोगः स्थाननाशो महाविपत् ॥१००२॥
1003. Father: The end of 4th dasa, or the first
sub period of the 5th dasa will cause the following
effects to the father ofthe native of Dhanada Nadiamsa,
Gemini ascendant - a great disease, loss of abode (or
position) and a mammoth danger.
तुलाराशिस्थिते मन्दे fae वा गोचरे तथा।
विप्लवेन मनस्तापं द्वितीयोद्राहमादिशेत् ॥१००४॥
1004. Irrelevant: Saturn moving in Leo or Libra
will cause mental distress due toa revolt, and second
marriage.
्षेमदाये स्वभुक्तो च शुभाशुभफलं समम्।
शुक्रान्तरे स्वजननी व्याकुलानन्तरं सुखम् ॥१००५॥
1005. Fourth Dasa: The first sub period of the
4th dasa will give an even mix of good and bad
effects. In this dasa, the sub period of Venus will
produce worries on account of mother following
which happiness will however be revived.
चतुर्मिंशान्त्यमारभ्यपञ्चविशतिवत्सरे।
सुवृष्टिः सर्वदेशानामर्धवृद्धिसुभिक्षकृत् ॥१००६ ॥
1006. Irrelevant: The beginning and concluding portions of the 24th year, and the 25th year, will
cause abundant rains.
धनदांशे पूर्वभागे केसरीयोगजोऽपि च।
पञ्चत्रिशे फलं चेति विष्णुयोगफलं शुभम् ॥१००७॥
1007. Kesari Yoga: For a person born in the
former half of Dhanada Nadiamsa, Gemini ascendant, Kesari yoga will give its effects in the 35th year.
The results of Vishnu Yoga will be auspicious.
वृषभांशे सुखे राहो युमलग्न समुद्धवः।
विष्णुयोग इति ख्यातः पञ्चत्रंशात् परं सुखम् ॥१००८॥
1008. Rahu in 4th: For Gemini ascendant, Rahu

in the 4th with Taurus Navamsa will cause Vishnu
Yoga giving happiness after 35th year of age.
विपदाये सुवाहाप्तिरथवा क्षेमदायके |
शुभान्ते कौर्वियुक्तोनरवाहनवान् भवेत् ॥१००९॥
1009. Dasa Effects: The 3rd dasa will give
happiness. Inthe sub period ruled by a benefic in the
4ih dasa, the native of Gemini ascendant, will gain |
fame and conveyances.
्रत्यक्तारधिपे चने चिरजीवांशनाडिगे |
प्रत्यग्दाये सुपुत्रापपिश्चत्वारिशतिवत्रे ॥१०१० |
जीवे यावत्फलानि स्युस्तावत्पुत्रा भवन्ति हि ।
आयुणन्तौ च Valet GATT: सुखी ॥१०११॥
1010-11 Chirajiva Nadiamsa - Gemini Ascendant: The dasa of the Moon happening to be the 5th
one will cause acquisition of a son during the 40th
year. The number of Bindus in Jupiter's Ashtaka
Varga will denote the number of sons (or issues) to be
acquired by the native. Two sons and three daughters
will be long-lived.
्र्यक्तारधिपे चन्द्रे पके ह्यशुभभुक्तिपु |
गुरुशुक्रान्तरे वापि पित्ररिष्टं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥१०१२॥
1012. Danger to Father: Ina sub period ruled by
a malefic or even that of Jupiter or Venus during the
dasa of the Moon which is the Sth in sequence danger
to father will have to be forecast.
द्विचत्वारिशिगे af चत्वारिशतिवत्सरे |
सप्त््िंशेऽथ वा चेति भ्रातृनाशं वििर्दिशेत् ॥१०१२ Il
1013. Destruction of Co-born: 42nd year, 40th
year or 37th year will destroy brothers of the native
belonging to the said Nadiamsa.
तत्तदभावाष्टमांशे गोचरे शति स्थिते |
तत्तद्धावाविनारेन क्लेशं MANA भूरिशः॥१०१४॥
1014. Saturn’s Transit; From a given Bhava
see which planet rules the 8th. Note his Navamsa
position at birth. Saturn in transit in the sign identical
with the said Navamsa will destroy the first-mentioned Bhava and cause much grief thereof.
Chandra Kala Nadi
विष्णुयोग प्रजातस्य क्षेमदाय महत् सुखम् |
विपदायेऽपरार्धादौ योगवान् कीर्तिमान् सुखी ॥१०१५॥
सुताधिपदशायां तु विष्णुयोग समुद्धवः।
पुत्रलाभं महत् सौख्यं गेहे लक्षमीकयाक्षदम् ॥१०१६ ॥
1015 - 1016. Vishnu Yoga: (For a Gemini
native, having Rabu in the 4th with Taurus Navamsa,
ref sloka 1008) the 4th dasa will cause much happiness. The later half of 3rd dasa will give him Raja
Yoga effects and fame. Inthe dasa of Sth lord (Venus)
he will obtain a son; his family will prosper with
increasing wealth.
धनभावे WARS TS पूर्णबलान्विते।
स्वदशायां सौख्ययुक्तो धनधान्यसमृद्धिमान् ॥१०१७॥
MISA दशान्त्ये व्याकुलं महत् |
साधनेशदशाकले गृहैव विभज्यते ॥१०१८ ॥
1017 - 1018. Gemini Ascendant & The Moon:
Endowed with full strength if the Moon is placed in
the 2nd (in Cancer) (or) in an angle from the ascendant, the subject will beget much happiness in the dasa
of the Moon. He will gather plenty of wealth and
grains. However due to fraternal clashes, the concluding part of the said dasa will cause much distress.
The sixth dasa will usher a family division.
वगेत्तिमे लग्नकेन्द्रे धनभावे निशाकर |
लग्नाधिपेन Fes यावज्जीवं सुसौख्यवान् ॥१०१९ ॥
धनिकः कौतिमान् भोगी दारान्तरसुपुत्रवान् |
आयुष्मन्तो दधौ ant वार्धके बहूपुत्रवान् ॥१०२० ॥
एकसप्ततिवर्पाणि परमायुश्च विन्दति |
MASTS शान्त्याशान्ति प्रयास्यति ॥१०२१ ॥
परद्रिशाब्दे ज्वरभयं पोडशाब्दात् परं क्वचित् |
चतुष्पष्टिसमे मृत्यु्जीविते त्वेक सप्ततिः ॥१०२२॥
दशाभावफलाध्याये फलं विस्तारमादिशेत् |
1019 - 10221/2. Mercury - Moon: The native of
Gemini ascendant having the Moon in Vargottama in
the 2nd (or) inanangle to the ascendant, ard aspected
by Mercury will throughout his life enjoy happiness.

Deva Keralam
He will further be wealthy, famous, will enjoy pleasures and will beget a son through remarriage. He will
obtain many children in his old age. Two of his
brothers will live Jong. Seventy-one will be his full
life-span. But at 53 he will be confronted with
untimely death. Suitable remedies be resorted to.
During his 36th year he will have fear of (dangerous)
fever. The same kind of fear will exist to some extent
after his 16th year. 64th year will cause near-death
surviving which he may be led upto 71. More has
been told in the chapter relating to Dasa periods and
Bhava effects (in the text consulted by the author).
ईशानांशे क्रिये सोम्ये श्यामवर्णस्वरूपवान् [12023 I
1023 Isaana Nadiamsa: One born in Gemini
ascendant with Isaana Nadiamsa, having Mercury in
Scorpio will be dark-bodied.
Notes: The following sloka, No. 1024 relating to
Dhanada Nadiamsa is an interruption although‘ .as
its ownuse. Further dealings about Isaana Nadiamsa
can be seen in sloka 1025 etc.
धनदांशे पूर्वभागे विष्णुयोगसमुद्धवः।
देहान्ते विष्णुलोकाप्तिशुण्यक्षत्रे मरिष्यति ॥१०२४॥
1024. Dhanada Nadiamssa - Former Half: The
native of Vishnu Yoga (ref sloka 1008) will die ina
shrine and will attain the World of Lord Vishnu.
स्वमातृगेहे जननं नदीप्रान्तयेऽग्रहाणे |
पश्चादप्रातृविहीनः TALS: पितृभक्तिमान् ॥१०२५॥
अलसो निपुणः कामी मतिमान् गुणवल्लभः।
wast धर्मशीलश्च वेदाध्यायी च रूपवान् ॥१०२६ ॥
1025 - 1026. Isaana Nadiamsa - Gemini Ascendant: His birth will be in his mother’s home, ina
Brahmins’ colony beside a river. He will have no
younger brother, be long lived and be devoted to his
father. He will be indolent, but skillful, libidinous,
intelligent and will have a wealth of virtues. He will
be learned in Sastras, be righteous, will study the
Vedas and be beautiful.
Notes: Isaana (Isaani) Nadiamsa rules thus. From
25° 24' to 25° 36' of movable signs; from 4° 24' to 4°
36' of fixed signs; and from 10° 24' to 10° 36' of
common signs.
वृश्चिकोशे क्रिये सोम्ये निशाकरयुतेक्षिते |
बाल्ये मसुरिकाभीतिः पश्चादभ्रातृविनाशवान् ॥१० २७ ॥
आयुष्मन्तो च feat स्वपिता भ्रातृभ्रत्रिमान् |
पितृष्वसा FARM पुत्रभाग्यवतौ सती ॥१०२८ ॥
1027 - 1028. Mercury in Scorpio with the aspect
or association of the Moon and begetting the same
Navamsa will cause small-pox in childhood. This
yoga will also destroy brothers born after the subject.
His parents will be long-lived. His father will be
endowed with brothers and sisters. His paternal aunt
will have a long living husband, be fortunate through
her children, and be a faithful housewife.
कालिकांशगते सूर्ये चित्रिण्यंश गते शनो ।
ईशानां े प्रजातस्य दीर्घजीवा पितामही ॥१०२९ ॥
बाल्ये पितामहारिष्टं योगवान् स्वपिता सुखी |
वनान्तर TAA श्रमाबल्य संयुते ॥१०३० ॥
स्वपितुर्भाग्यवृद्धिः स्याद् द्वितीया्दे सुसोख्यवान् ।
1029 - 10301/2, Paternal Grand-parents: Birth
in Isaana Nadiamsa with the Sun in Kalika Nadiamsa
and Saturn in Chitrini Nadiamsa will give a longliving paternal grand-mother. But paternal grandfather will be in danger during the person’s childhood. His father will prosper, be happy and will
befriend Soodras in the regions abounding in forests
for increasing his fortunes. During the native’s
second year of age, father’s prosperity will come to
pass
ईशानांशकगे सोम्ये भाग्ययोगे च जायते ॥१०३१॥
जन्मदाये भाग्ययुक्तो गृहे लक््मीकराक्षवान् |
1031 - 10311/2. Mercury in 1589118 Nadiamsa
(position in Scorpio implied) will cause a yoga
leading to prosperity of the Gemini native. His first
dasa will bring wealth to the family.
सोम्यांशाधिपतौ भोमे ह्यसितेन युतेधिते 112032 I
ईशानांशे प्रजातस्य सशूद्रसनेहवान् पिता |
पितामहः क्लेशजीवी वाणिज्येन च जीवितः॥१०३३ ॥
कृमिरोगवशापत्रो ह्यल्पसन्तानवान् भवेत् |

मूर्खप्रकृतिमान् रागी TTT च कशितः॥१०३४॥
1032 - 1034. Father & Grand-father: Mars
Should be the ruler of the Navamsa occupied by
Mercury and be in association with or aspect to
Saturn. The result is the father of the subject of
Gemini ascendant will befriend Soodras. Further,
paternal grand-father would eke out his livelihood
with troubles, would live by trading, be endangered
by diseases born out of worm-infection, would have
limited progeny, be a fool, passionate and struck by
penury.
पितामहाधिपे शृङ्रे स्वक्षत्र ह्यसितांशगे |
पितामहस्य भ्राता तु प्रामभागे निवासवान् ॥१०२५ ॥
व्यवसायपसे नित्यं भ्रातूनाशेन कर्शितः।
बरह्यचर्यदशापत्रो ह्यल्पसन्तानवान् भवेत् ॥१०३६ ॥
जीवाष्टवरगे सन्तानं पितृव्याभावजं भवेत्।
पितामहानुजादीनां तततद्धावेनचिन्तयेत् ॥१०२३७ ॥
1035 - 1037. Gemini Ascendant: Venus ruling
‘the 5th, denoting paternal grand-father, should be in
own sign (here Libra itself, to the exclusion of
Taurus) and be ina Navamsa of Saturn. As a resulta
brother of paternal grand-father would live in a
village, be ever devoted to agriculture, be endangered during the phase of his celibacy, and would
have a limited numberof progeny. Jupiter’s Ashtaka
Varga would denote the (actual) number of children
(of the said relative). All about the respective coborn
of paternal grand-father should be deduced from the
respective Bhavas (i.e. 3rd from the Sth denotes first
brother of paternal grand-father, Sth from 5th the
second one, 7th from the 5th the third one, and so on
and so forth.)
ईशानां शके सोम्ये मातुलद्वययोगवान् |
केचित् पक्षे प्रयशेति चिरायुश्चैकमातुलः॥१०३८ ॥
स्वमाता गुणिनी पूता भ्रातृभ्रात्रीसमन्विता |
कालान्तरे प्रातृशोकं दुःखिता मातृसोदरी ॥१०२९ ॥
1038 - 1039. Gemini Ascendant: Mercury in
Isaana Nadiamsa (in Scorpio) will cause two maternal uncles. According to some, it will be three. One
Chandra Kala Nadi
out of the two (or three), one will be long-lived. The
person’s mother will be virtuous, pure in character
and be endowed with brothers and sisters. Aftersome
interval, she will be grieved on account of loss of a
brother. Her sister will be in (perpetual) grief.
भाग्यारूढे धनाधीशे भाग्ये शुभसमन्विे |
जन्मदाये गृहक्षेत्रलाभं च स्वपितुः सुखम् ॥१०४० ॥
श्रः स्वपितृमित्रस्यात् प्राबल्यं चेत् सुवाहनम् |
राजपुत्रप्रसादेन राजतुल्यप्रतापवान् ॥१०४१ ॥
द्रादशाब्दमिति प्रोक्तं जन्मदाये पिता सुखी |
शद्रः स्वपितृमित्रस्याद् धनधान्युपुत्रवान् ॥१०४२ ॥
1040 - 1042. Father: The lord of the 2nd (the
Moon) in the 9th in the company of a benefic will
cause in the native’s first dasa gains of lands and
houses to his father. The latter will befriend Soodras
and will obtain conveyances. Due to the favours
showered by the prince, he will equal a king in valour.
These effects will occur to father during the subject’s
twelfth year. Inthe native’s first dasa, his father will
be happy and will obtain wealth, grains and progeny.
आयुष्मन्तः पितृब्याश्च ईशानांशे च जायते |
केचि्पक्षे द्रयं चेति PHC MAT गतः॥१०४२ ॥
1043. Paternal Uncles: Birth in Gemini, with
Isaana Nadiamsa, will give long-lives to paternal
uncles. According to one school of thought two such
uncles will exist, one of whom would live ina foreign
land.
लग्नात् कर्मगते सूर्ये नालांशे स्वपिता सुखी ।
पितृव्येषुं च यः कश्चित् पापात्मा दुष्टचेतनः ॥१०४४॥
1044. The Sun in 10th: The Sun in the 10th (in
Pisces) and in Naala Nadiamsa will usher happiness
forfather. The person’s paternal uncle will bea sinful
soul performing wicked deeds.
Notes: Naala Nadiamsa is prevalent from 13° 0'
to 13° 12' in movable signs; from 16° 48' to 17° O' in
fixed signs; and from 28° 0' to 28° 12' of dual signs.
कर्मे सूरये सुखे पपे लगने वा धनगे शनौ ।
स्वपितुः सोदरप्रातुरङ्गवैकल्यमादिशेत् ॥१०४५ ॥

Deva Keralam
1045. Physical Deformity: The Sun in the 10th,
a malefic in the 4th, and Saturn in the ascendant orin
the 2nd denotes that a paternal uncle of the person has
some physica] deformity.
कर्मे नालांशगे gt ईशानांशे च खे बुधे।
नासिकाकर्णरमधरेषु पितृव्योऽद्विकारवान् ॥१०४६ ॥
1046. The Sun - Mercury: Should the Sun and
Mercury be in the 10th (in Pisces) in Naala Nadiamsa
and Isaana Nadiamsa respectively, the paternal uncle
of the native will have defects in the passages of the
ear and nose.
मिथुनांशकगे सूरये कुजे केतुसमन्विते |
ब्रह्मबीजादिरोगेण पितृव्यश्च प्रपीडितः leo ve ॥
तदभावे व्रणं कुष्ठं हस्तपादतलेपु च ।
पितामह स्य रोगस्तु पितृव्ये च भविष्यति ॥१०४८ ॥
1047 - 1048. The Sun should occupy Gemini
Navamsa. Mars should join Ketu (elsewhere). Asa
result of this yoga, the paternal uncle of the subject
will have huge testicles. Or else, he will be prone to
suffer from ulcers, leprosy or defects in palm orsoul.
His paternal grand-father will also suffer from diseases.
ईशानांशकगे सौम्ये वसुस्याः सहोदगः।
अथवा ऋतु AFAT चत्वारो दीर्घजीविनः ॥१०४९ ॥
शेषं नाशमिति sewer कश्चित् सुभाग्यवान्।
मुरेशंशे aa कुजांशे वा त्रिकोणगे ॥१०५० ॥
्रातृजन्मर्षभं चेति सबल शुभान्विते |
1049 - 10501/2. Fora native of Gemini ascendant,
the placement of Mercury in Isaana Nadiamsa denotes 8 coborns, orelse six. Fourof them will be longlived. Rest will be destroyed. One brother will
somewhat be fortunate. The natal Moon signs of
coborns will be identical with the Navamsas occupied by Jupiter and Mars, or trines thereof.
Notes: In sloka 10501/2, the expression
“Sabalarkshe Subhanvithe” meaning “the Rasi endowed with strength and begetting the company ofa
benefic” is not added to the rendering as it occurs to
me that it is not part of the sloka. This expression is
replaced by “Yojayeth kaalavittamah” meaning “astrologers say so”.
लग्नात् कर्मगते भोमे मेषांशे भ्रातृभ्रात्रिमान् ॥१०५१॥
सहोदरीसुतः कश्चित् पित्तरोगप्रपीडितः।
स्वपिता शिवभक्तश्च सोदरभातृपोषकः॥१०५२ ॥
बन्धुवर्गे सुपूज्यश्च राजद्वारे सुबुद्धिमान् |
राजन्यस्नेहवान् कामी वेदाध्ययनविष्नवान् ॥१०५३ ॥
1051 - 1053. Mars in 10th: Fora Gemini native,
Mars placed in the 10th and begetting the divisions of
Aries (not Aries Navamsa) will give brothers and
sisters. A son of the native’s sister will be somewhat
troubled by bilious disorders. His father will be
devoted to Lord Siva, would bring up his (i. e.
father’s) brothers and sisters, will be honoured by his
kinsmen, will serve in royal assembly employing his
intellect, will befriend the ruler, be lustful and will
incur obstacles in his studies of the Vedas.
सौम्य ष्ष्टयंशदोषेण पिता बाल्ये ह्यकिचनः।
सौम्ये कालाग्निषष्टयंशे ईशानांशे च जायते ॥१०५४॥
कुलस्ीसङ्गवान् कामी स्वपिता चलचेतनः।
भृगोः सप्तांशयोगेन राजद्वारे सुपूजितः ॥१०५५ ॥
राजन्यस्नेहवान् रागी एजाश्रयवशात् सुखम्।
ईशानां शके सोम्ये स्वपिता शिवभक्तिमान् ।१०५६ ॥
शिवपूजापयो नित्यं सेनामात्यप्रियः सुखी |
कुलस्ीसङ्गदोषाप्तपुत्रशोकेन करशितः॥१०५७॥
mga च लभते वार्धके क्लेशवान् क्वचित् |
1054 - 10571/2. (a) Kaalaagni Shashtiamsa -
Father: The father of the native of Gemini ascendant
with Isaana Nadiamsa, as Mercury is in Kaalaagni
Shashtiamsa would be poorin the native’s childhood,
and would have illicit connections with females
belonging to good families. He would be lustful and
fickle-minded.
(b) Should Mercury and Venus be together in
Saptamsa, in case of birth in Isaana Nadiamsa, Gemini,
father would befriend the ruler, be passionate, and
patronized by the ruler.
(c) Mercury in Isaana Nadiamsa denotes that the

person’s father would be a devotee of Lord Siva,
would regularly worship Him and will be close to the
king’s minister and army chief. Due to the blemish
of having joined virtuous women, he (1.6. the father)
would grieve losing his progeny. He would also lose
his brothers, and would incur difficulties in his old
age.
Notes: (a) Kaalaagni Shashtiamsa = Daavaagni
Shashtiamsa. This extends from 16° 0' to 16° 30' of
an odd sign, and from 13° 30'to 14° 0' ofanevensign.
वुधे विष्णुकलांशस्थे ईशानांशस्य नाडिगे ॥१०५८ I
पिता वेदिकधर्मात्मा हरिशङ्रभक्तिमान् |
शिवपूजाप्रभावेण वयोमध्ये सुभाग्यवान् ॥१०५९ ॥
शिवव्रतोपवासेन सर्वपापविनाशवान् |
देहान्ते पुण्यलोकाप्पिरिहजन्मनि सौख्यवान् ॥१०६० ॥
1058 - 1060. Birth should be in Isaana Nadiamsa
in Gemini while Mercury is in Vishnukalamsa. Then
the father will follow Vaidic path, be righteous,
devoted to Lord Vishnu and Lord Siva. Due to the
merits obtained by him worshipping Lord Siva, he
will beget prosperity in his middle age. All his sins
will be destroyed due to his observing vows and fasts
in devotion to Lord Siva. Quitting his mortal coil, he
will attain the Heavens and inthe present birth he wil!
be happy.
Note: Vishnukalamsa is not a standard term.
Obviously the text refers to Vishnu Shashtiamsa
which extends from 11° 0' to 11° 30' of an odd sign,
मेषे बुधे विष्णुकलांशयोगे
ताताम्बिके सोख्यसुभाग्यवत्यो |
वेदान्तशाखरागमत््ववेत्ता
त्वष्टादशे भूपत्तिेतरभाक् स्यात् ॥१०६१ ॥
शिवव्रतोपवासादिशिवर्धमपरायणः।
स्वपित्रधिकधर्मात्मा पित्रा्जितधनादयवान् ॥१०६२ ॥
1061 - 1062. Mercury in Aries: If Mercury is
in Aries in Vishnuakalamsa (read Vishnu
Shashtiamsa), the person’s paternal grand-mother
would be endowed with happiness and good fortunes.
Chandra Kala Nadi
The subject will be learned in Vedanta (Hindu Philosophy), Sastras (ancient sciences), A agama (Traditional Doctrines) and Tarva (True Principles of Philosophy or Vedantas). In his eighteenth year, he will
obtain royal friendship. He will be devoted to
maintaining vows and fasts in devotion to Lord Siva,
and be more righteous than his father. He will be rich
through paternal inheritances.
qe विष्णुकलांशस्थे इईशानांशस्य नाडिगे |
निशाकरेण सन्दृष्टे देवीस्तोत्रपरायणः॥१०६३ ॥
जातकस्य पिता चैव रामायणपुराणवित् |
यतिप्रीतिकरो नित्यं राजामात्यप्रसादवान् ॥१०६४ ॥
1063 - 1064. Should Mercury, being placed as
described above, be aspected by the Moon, the
subject will be devoted to reciting prayers dedicated
to a female deity, and his father would be an expert
in Srimad Ramayana. Further, his father would
ever honour saints and would have the privilege of
royal favours.
मिथुनांशकगे सूर्ये लग्नादुपचये स्थिते |
नालांशगे प्रजातश्च PEAS: सुबुद्धिमान् ॥१०६५ ॥
पश्चाद् भ्रातृविनाशः स्याद्भ्रातृद्रयसुपूजितः।
भगिनीद्रयवान् रागी विद्याबुद्धिसतः सुखी ॥१०६६ ॥
लिपित्रयप्रवीणश्च कषत्रम्ामाधिकारवान् |
धनाध्यक्षः सुखी वाग्मी विद्यावादे जयी तथा eo ky I
1065 - 1067. Father, The Sun in Upachaya:
Birth should be in Gemini’s Naala Nadiamsa while
the Sun is in 3rd/1 1th with Gemini Navamsa. Then
the father would be an excellent person, and be very
intelligent (or of good disposition). His younger
brothers would be destroyed and he would be honoured by his two brothers. He would have two sisters
(as well)m be passionate and intent upon acquiring
knowledge. He would be skillful in three languages
and will have lordship over villages and lands.. He
would bea chief treasurer, be eloquent in speech and
would be a winner in arguments (or litigations).
Notes: Upachayas are 3rd, 6th, 10th and 1{th.
The Sun’s position in the translation has been limited
to 3rd and 11th only, excluding 10th and 6th as

Deva Keralam 18]
Gemini Navamsa is a precondition for the Sun’s
position.
मेषांशगे Taree कुलीरेद्रादशांशगे |
THA WHAT जन्मदाये सुसोख्यवान् ॥१०६८ ॥
Tet RATS वा द्वितीयब्दे च वा यदि।
मान्दज्वरप्रपीडां च क्षिप्रणारोग्यवान् सुखी ॥१०६९॥
1068 - 1069. The Moon: One belonging to
Gemini ascendant with the Moon in Libra in Aries
Navamsa (or) in Cancer Dvadasamsa will have happiness in the first dasa. However, in the months
denoted by adverse solar transits, or in the 2nd year,
he will suffer from disorders of digestion from which
he will have early recovery.
ईशानांशकगे सौम्यरन्धाधिपतिदायगे |
बुधान्ते FA राजामात्यविनाशनम् ॥१०७० ॥
गुप्तकार्य THA राजपुत्रवशात् सुखी |
स्वपितु fryer योगप्राल्यमादिशेत् ॥१०७१ ॥
1070-1071. Mercury in Isaana Nadiamsa willin
the native’s 8th lord’s dasa and Mercury’s sub period
will destroy the king and minister(?). The native will
indulge in secretive deeds and will gain through the
prince. His father will prosper through Soodras.
चापारूढे निशानाथे amare ।
तृतीया्दे पितुः सोख्यं Tae शुभाधिकम् ॥१०७२ ॥
भूषणादिसुवखराप्ति नित्यसन्तोषमादिशेत् |
भृषणादिमुवस्राप्ति नित्यसन्तेषमादिशेत् |
पितृव्यमित्रयोगेन धनलाभं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥१०७२ ॥
1072 - 1073. The Moon in Sagittarius (or) in the
3rd house will give following effects. During the
person’s third year of age, his father will beget much
auspicious effects through royal sources, omaments,
and robes; and be ever happy. The person will gain
through the good offices of his paternal uncle’s
friends
व्ययेशाक्रान्तभवने व्ययेशांशस्य राशिगे |
स्फुरयोगं गते राहौ स्वपितामहनाशनम् ॥१०७४॥
1074. Destruction of Grand-father: Rahu in
transit in the sign occupied by 12th lord (Venus), or
the sign identical with the Navamsa occupied by the
said planet will cause the end of paternal grandfather.
लाभाधिपानतरे काले पितृव्यस्य शुभं वेदत्
सोदरोतपत्तिसन्तोषं गेहे कल्याणसंभ्रमम् ॥१०७५ ॥
स्वपितुर्भित्रवरगेषु सन्तानोत्पत्तिमादिशेत्।
नुधान्ते तृतीयांशे विष्णुदैवतदर्शनम् ॥१०७६ ॥
बराह्मणाप्रभुन्मानमर्थलाभं विनिर्दिशेत् |
ग्रामान्तरे FIAT राजसन्मानमादिशेत् ॥१०७७ ॥
1075 - 1077. Gemini Ascendant - Naala
Nadiamsa: The sub period of 11th lord will cause
auspicious effects for paternal uncles. The native
will obtain a younger brother and the household will
celebrate a marriage. There will be birth of children
in the circle of father’s friends. The Jast one third part
of the sub period of Mercury will bless the person
with sighting Lord Vishnu. He will be honoured by
Brahmins and kings, will gain wealth, will procure
clothes from another village (i.e. will gain articles
from a different place).
जनकस्य फलं सत्यं क्षेत्रलाभं महत् Faq
वृश्रिकांशकदोषेण जननी व्याकुलं महत् ॥१०७८ ॥
सहोदरादिसन्तापं पिटकादिञ्वराद्धयम् |
1078 - 10781/2, Effects stated concerning father
(in the relevant slokas, supra) will bear truth. The
native (in the 11th lord’s sub period) will acquire
lands and happiness. (Mercury’s placement) in
Scorpio Navamsa will greatly distress the motherand
brothers of the native of Gemini ascendant. There
will be fear from boils and fever.
तुलाराशिस्थिते मन्दे लोके SHAH भयम् ॥१०७९ I
प्रजाक्षोभं विजानीया म्मण्डलाधिपतेर्विपत्।
1079 - 10791/2, Irrelevant: Saturn’s transit in
Libra will produce drought, strife to people, and great
danger to the ruler of the country.
जीवे केत्वन्ते काले गृहकेत्रषनव्ययम् ॥१०८० ॥

पितृव्यस्य ज्वरं तापं क्रूरमासेऽशुभावहम्।
बुधान्तरे क्रूरमासे सोदयो रोगपीडितः ॥१०८१ ॥
1080 - 1081. Gemini Ascendant - Naala
Nadiamsa: During the sub period of Ketu inthe dasa
of Jupiter, Joss of home and Janded properties to self
be expected, apart from (dangerous) fever and distress to paternal uncle co-existing with adverse solar
transits. In the sub period of Mercury (during Jupiter’s dasa), adverse solar transits will tigger off
diseases to the person’s coborn.
लग्नाच्चतुर्थगे राहो केतुपुक्तो शुभाधिकम्।
जन्मदाये फलं वाच्यं TIT विरेषतः॥१०८२॥
बन्धुवर्गे yates बुधभुक्तौ फलं स्मृतम् ।
HTH सुतप्रापतिः स्वपितुरमितरवगकि ॥१०८२ ॥
1082 - 1083. Rahu in the 4th House: If Rahu is
in the 4th (Virgo) the sub period of Ketu in the first
dasa will give much auspicious effects. More specially the sub period of Mercury (Rahu’s dispositor).
However, the sub period of Mercury in the first dasa
will destroy children in relatives’ families. Ketu’s
sub period (as above) will cause birth of children in
the families of father’s friends.
जन्र्षधिपतो जीवे दशायां शतुभुक्तिषु।
युग्मलग्ने प्रजातस्य मोञ्जीबन्धनमादिरोत् ॥१०८४॥
1084. Thread Ceremony: In case of Gemini
ascendant, the sub period of an inimical planet,
during the dasa of Jupiter opening at birth, will cause
thread ceremony.
Notes: The words “Satru Bhuktishu” meaning
sub period of an inimical planet, should actually read
as, according to me, “Sukra Bhuktishu” meaning the
sub period of Venus.
स्वजन्मदेशे नृपतेस्तूर्वं पाणिसंग्रहः।
केतुभुक्तयन्तमारभ्य शुक्रभुक्ताविदं फलम् ॥१०८५ ॥
लोके धान्यक्षयादीनि पश्चात् स्वस्थं विनिर्दिशेत् |
स्वपितुरमित्रशुद्रस्य पुत्रोत्सवसुसंभरमम् ॥१०८६ ॥
पित्रा सेवितभूपस्य विवाहयत्सरमादिशेत्।
शुक्रान्तरे पाण्डयदेशे स्वपितुः प्रभुदर्शनम् ॥१०८७॥
Chandra Kala Nadi
सेनाधिपतियोगेन हयर्थलाभं विनिर्दिशेत् |
ईशानांशगते सोम्ये भ्राताप्राबल्यंसयुतः॥१०८८ ॥
पाण्डयदेशे पितुः सौख्यं राजसन्मानमादिशेत् |
केतुभुक्त्यन्तमारभ्य शुक्रभुक्ताविदं फलम् ॥१०८९ ॥
जीवे शुक्रान्तरे काले विप्लवेन प्रजादिषु |
पश्चात् स्वस्थं प्रकुर्वीत पित्रादीनां शुभावहम् ॥१०९० ॥
गुरुराहुयुते काले राजामात्यजनावधि |
राजन्यजनसन्तापो ब्राह्मणानां महद्धयम् ॥१०९१॥
पश्ादधूपतिनाशः स्यात् सिहादित्रयगे शनो |
पोष्णश्रवणहस्ताद्रा भरणीवायुभेष्वपि ॥१०९२ ॥
WAR नृणां दुरिक्षभयदः स्मृतः।
तुलाशनिस्थिते काले राहुवक्रंगते गुरो ॥१०९३ ॥
मरुदवृधाप्रान्त्यदेशे नृपाणां समये महान् |
कोल्लापुरीप्रान्त्यदेशे ह्यथवा चोलदेशके ॥१०९४॥
मण्डलधिपतेरमल्ु्जीविते कलहो महान्।
1085 - 10941/2. (a) Prior to this the marriage of
the ruler will have occurred. These are the effects for
beginning and concluding portions of sub periods of
Ketu and Venus. There will be drought conditions in
the country. One of the friends of father, a Soodra,
will obtain a son. The king, served by the person’s
father will beget married. (b) In the sub period of
Venus, his father will visita king and will gain wealth
through the good offices of the army chief. (c)
Mercury in Isaana Nadiamsa will cause prosperity of
coborns. (d) The person’s father will be happy in
Pandya kingdom and will receive royal honours. (e)
These are effects for sub periods of Ketu and Venus.
(f) In the sub period of Venus during Jupiter’s dasa
people will be troubled by revolt. Stability will result
later on. (g) Father and others will receive auspicious
effects in the said dasa periods. (h) The time of
Jupiter - Rahu conjunction will cause distress to king
and his ministers, and fear to Brahmins. Later on the
king will be destroyed with Saturn moving in Leo
through Libra. (i) Saturn’s movements in Revathi,
Sravana, Hastha, Arudra, Bharani and Svathi will
cause drought. (j) While Satur is in Libra, retrograde

Deva Keralam
Jupiter joining Rabu will cause martyrdom ina war
to the king of Marudh, Kolhapur or Chola. Ifthe king
survives in the war, the war will assume greater
proportions.
Notes: In these slokas, a lot of irrelevant material
has crept in. The reader will reject such instructions,
and will take those shown at: c, d, and g only.
शुक्रान्तरे पितृव्यस्य विवाहोत्सवमादिशेत् ॥१०९५ ॥
सोदरोत्पत्तिमाप्नोति जनकस्य महत् सुखम् |
जीवे सूर्याने काले पितृसोख्यं धनागमः॥१०९६ ॥
राजप्रीतिश्चय भवति स्वक्े्रादेर्धनागमः।
1095 - 10961/2. The sub period of Venus in
Jupiter dasa will promote marriage to a paternal
uncle. The native will beget a coborn and his father
happiness. In the sub period of the Sun, father will be
happy, will gain wealth, will satisfy the king and will
gain wealth in his region.
ईशानां शके सोम्ये जीवे केत्वन्तरान्तरे ॥१०९७ ॥
सर्यान्तरेऽथ वा चेति गृहदारवेशाद् व्यथा |
स्वराजराष् कलहो भृत्यामात्यजनेषु च ॥१०९८॥
पश्चात् सोयं च लभते शुक्रभुक्तौ शुभादिकम् |
कन्यामासे चाष्टमब्दे मास्सु कुम्भादिषु त्रिषु ॥१०९९ ॥
अतीव क्लेशकार्याणि जातकस्य ज्वराद्विपत्।
शुक्रान्तरे जीवदाये वेदाध्ययनमादिशेत् ॥११०० ॥
aa मिश्रफलं सोदयोतपत्तिमादिशेत् |
जीवे भोमान्तरे काले पितुपीडा धनक्षयः ॥११०१॥
अथवा सोदरश्चैव पितृव्यसुतनाशनम्।
1097 - 1101 1/2. Mercury in Isaana Nadiamsa:
(a) One born in Gemini ascendant with Mercury in
the specified Nadiamsa will incur troubles on account of home and spouse in the sub periods of Ketu
and the Sun, in the major period of Jupiter.
(b) There will be a civil war involving servants
and ministers after which normalcy will restore (?)
(c) In between the phase of distress indicated at
“a”, the sub period of Venus will give happiness and
abundant auspicious effects.
(d) During the eighth year, with the Sun moving
in Virgo, Aquarius, Pisces and Aries, the person will
be endangered by fever.
(€) The sub period of Venus in Jupiter dasa will
initiate him into study of the Vedas.
(f) The Sub period of the Moon will give mixed
effects, and birth of coborn.
(g) Jupiter dasa, Mars sub period will danger
one’s father and will destroy wealth. Or it could
destroy one’s coborn, or the progeny of a paternal
uncle.
चापे शनिस्थिते काले स्वप्रभोश्च महोत्सवः॥११०२ ॥
तुलाशनौ विवाहः स्याद् वृश्चिके व्याकुलं महत् |
जन्मनाथदशायां तु दाराधिपतिदायके ॥११०३ ॥
ईशानांशप्रजातस्य प्रथमोद्राहमादिशेत्।
रन्ध्राधिपदशासन्धिकाले मृत्युज्वरार्दितः॥११०४ ॥
दोषपरिहारार्थं शानि कुर्याद्विचक्षणः
स्वमातुलसुतारिष्टमथवा बन्धुनाशनम् ॥११०५ ॥
1102-1105. (a) Irrelevant: During the transit of
Saturn in Sagittarius, the ruler of the country will be
engaged in great celebrations.
(b) Gemini ascendant - Isaana Nadiamsa:
With Saturn in Libra in transit, the subject of Gemini
will beget married while the said planet in Scorpio
will give much distress. Marriage for the first time
can (also) take place in the sub period of the 7th lord
in the first dasa.
(c) One will be inflicted by deadly fever in the
junction period of the dasa of the 8th Jord Saturn. To
overcome this evil, necessary propitiations be resorted to. In the same phase of directional influences,
destruction of relatives, and danger to maternal uncle’s progeny will also come to pass.
जीवे राहृन्तर काले Beare विनिर्दिशेत् |
रन्धाधिपत्रिकोणक्षं रप्रेशांशत्रिकाणगे ॥११०६ ॥
सषुटयोगं गते मन्दे पितृव्यारिष्टमादिशेत् |
तदभावे पितृव्यस्य विभागमिति चादिशेत् ॥११०४॥
1106 - 1107. Rahu’s Sub Period: During the
main period of Jupiter, the sub period of Rahu will
cause grief as well as happiness. Evils to paternal

uncles be foretold when Saturn transits the sign
identical with his natal Navamsa or Rasi position, or
a trine to either of these. In the absence of expected
evils, the paternal uncle will be a part of family
division.
Notes: The words “Kheda Modam” in the first
line of sloka 1106 should actually read as “Kheda
Bhedam” meaning griefand enmity (or division etc.)
which are part of the last sub period, of Rahu, in the
dasa of Jupiter. Because happiness is something rare
in this phase of Vimsottari which can be verified in
practical horoscopes.
जन्मदाये फलं सत्यं पितृभावफलं Yq!
पितृव्यदारामयबन्धुशोक
स्व्भाुभुक्तौ गुरुदायकाले।
सूर्यान्तरान्त्यादिमनोषिचारं
चन््रान्तरे क्तेशफलं विदद्ुः॥११०८ ॥
1108. (a) Jupiter’s Dasa: When the dasa of
Jupiter happens to be the dasa opening at birth, the
effects stated for Gemini ascendant will bear truth
and the father will receive auspicious effects. Butthe
spouse of a paternal uncle will fall sick; grief to
relatives will come to pass - both these effects will
occur in the sub period of Rahu in the dasa of Jupiter.
(b) The Luminaries’ Bhuktis: The sub period
of the Suninthesaid dasa will inthe commencingand
concluding phase cause mental distress, and the
(whole of) sub period of the Moon troubles.
तततद्धावाष्टमेशांशस्फुरयोगं गते शनो |
तत्द्धावविनाशादि योजयेत् कालवित्तमः॥११०९ ॥
1109. Astrologers declare destruction ofa Bhava
when the lord of the 8th thereof is involved thus -
Saturn should transit the sign identical with the
Navamsa position of the said planet.
ईशानांशके भाग्य योगो ह्येकादशाब्दके |
जन्मदाये विवाहः स्यात् पितृप्राबल्यवान् सुधीः ॥१११० ॥
क्रमान्तवेदाध्ययनं सम्पदाये दृढं स्मृतम् |
शासखरभ्यासं प्रकुर्वीत सोदरोद्राहमादिशेत् ॥११११॥
Chandra Kala Nadi
सहोदरविवाहस्यात् पके जन्मदशान्तर ।
स्वजन्मदेशे नृपतेर्दासरिष्टं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥१११२॥
1110 - 1112. Isaana Nadiamsa - Gemini Ascendant: The person will enjoy a Yoga leading to
prosperity in his eleventh year. His marriage will
occur in the firstdasa. He will be very intelligent and
his father will prosper. During his second dasa, he
will firmly involve himself in the study of the Vedas.
He will learn Sastras. His coborn will get married.
The king will lose his spouse(?)
अन्तरान्तर्दशामारगे प्रस्ताराष्टकवर्गके |
ईशानांशे प्रजातस्य फलं विस्ताप्मादिशेत् ॥१११३॥
1113. Using the sub periods and the Ashtaka
Varga method, results for this native of Isaana
Nadiamsa, Gemini ascendant, be declared in detail.
तुलागुरुदशारम्भे तुलाचन्द्रे च संस्थिते |
स्वभृक्तौ व्याकुलं चेति स्वपितुर्मित्रवर्गके ॥१११४॥
1114. If Jupiter is placed in Libra at birth (in the
Sth), then the transit Moon found in Libra at the
moment of commencement of Jupiter’s dasa will
cause distress for the friends of father, in the first sub
period (of Jupiter).
Notes: The exact moment when a dasa or sub
period begins will reveal many important hints about
the events to come by in that dasa or sub period.
Detailed tables and method of such calculations
could be found in my English translation of Hora
Sara, by Pnthu Yasas. Forwant ofspace these are not
being reproduced here.
स्वमातुलसुतारि्टं सम्पदाये स्वभुक्तिषु |
नुधान्तरे सोख्यमेति विद्यालाभयुतः सुखी ॥१११५॥
WA मन्ददाये त्वेकविशतिवत्सर |
ईशानांशे प्रजातस्य स्वप्रामल्यं विनिर्दिशेत् sieges il
1115 - 1116. Saturn’s Dasa: The first sub period
of the second dasa (of Saturn) will usher evils to the
progeny of maternal uncle. Mercury’s sub period
will cause to the native happiness and gains of
learning. Venus’ssub period (or) 21st yearwill cause
progress.

Deva Keralam
चयूनेशांशे तत्िकोणे स्फुटयोगं गते शनो |
द्यूनाधिपदशाकाले पितामहाश्च नाशनम् ॥१११७॥
1117. Paternal grand-mother will be destroyed
when Saturn comes in transit in the sign identical with
the natal Navamsa position of Jupiter, or a trine
thereof.
तत्ररिकोणे जन्मदाये पितामह्याः सहोदरी |
तस्याः सोदरमृत्युं च योजयेत् कालवित्तमः॥१११८ ॥
1118. Paternal grand-mother’s sister or brother
will be destroyed in the native’s first dasa when
Jupiter’s natal Navamsa position’s trine is in transit
by Saturn.
Notes: “Jasyaah” is replaced by “Sahodare vaa
mrityuscha” inanother version. The translation is for
the other version.
ate fate सध्राधिपतिभुक्तिषु।
सुखादिपदशाकाले मातरवंशेऽप्यारिष्टकृत् 112228 ॥
1119. Danger to Father: During the 32nd year,
(or) in the sub period of 8th lord (Saturn) (in the dasa
of Saturn itself), the native of Gemini ascendant will
see his father in danger. The dasa of the 4th lord will
cause evils to maternal relatives.
लग्नाद्रा चद््रलगनाद्रा सुखेशांश त्रिकोणगे |
स्फुटयोगं गते मन्दे मातृनाशं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥११२० ॥
सहोदरभ्रातृशोकं कर्मेशांशत्रिकोणगे ।
स्फुटयोगप्रकारेण योजयेत् कालवित्तमः॥११२१ ॥
1120-1121. Destruction of Mother & Coborn:
When Saturn comes to the sign identical with the
Navamsa position of the lord of the 4th counted from
the natal ascendant or the Moon sign, or to a trine to
one of the said Navamsa positions, the person’s
mother will face her end. Similarly brothers will be
destroyed when Saturn’s transit involves as above the
Navamsa position of the lord of the 10th (Jupiter).
तत्तद्धावाष्टमेशांशद्रेकाणे द्रादशां शके ।
स्फुटयोगं गते मन्दे तत्तद्भावविनाशनम् ॥११२२ ॥
स्फुराशकं गते जीवे तत्तद्भावेमहत् सुखम् |
भावाभिवृद्धिमापनोति योजयेत् कालवित्तमः॥११२३ ॥
1122 - 1123. (a) Special Rule of Transit: In
respect of a Bhava, note the Navamsa, Drekkana and
Dwadasamsa positions of the lord of the eighth
therefrom. When Saturn transits in a sign identical
with any of these divisional positions, the Bhava in
question shall be destroyed.
(b) Jupiter (instead of Saturn) in transit in an
above place will cause great happiness in respect of
the Bhava, and the Bhava effects will progress.
Notes: (a) For example, take the 2nd house in
case of Capricorn ascendant. The 8th therefrom (i.e.
Virgo) is ruled by Mercury. The Navamsa, Drekkana
and Dwadasamsa positions of Mercury be noted.
And when Saturn comes to the Rasi identical with one
of these divisional positions of Mercury, the indications of the 2nd house (viz. family, finance, eyes etc.)
will be destroyed.
(b) Conversely when Jupiter transits such a
position relating to Mercury, the 2nd house will
reveal its effects favourably and ina great measure.
कर्मृशांश्रिकोणे वा कर्मेशद्रादशांशे |
स्फुटयोगं गते मन्दे राज्याधिपतिनाशनम् ॥११२४॥
सुतेशांशत्रिकोणक्षे दरेक्काणांशे च राशिगे ।
Spear गते मन्दे लोके दुरभिक्षज भयम् ॥११२५॥
कर्मेशांशत्रिकोणे वा गोचरेऽमरपूजिते ।
राजा राष्ट सुखं चेव दु्क्षभयनाशनम् ॥११२६ |
1124 - 1126. Irrelevant: Saturn moving in the
sign identical with the Navamsa or Dwadasamsa of
the 10th Jord, ora trine to one of these, will destroy
the ruler. Famine will result the transit of the said
planet in a sign identical with the Rasi, Navamsa, or
Drekkana position of the 5th lord, ora trine to one of
these three places. When Jupiter transits the sign
identical with the Navamsa position of the 10th lord,
or a trine thercof, happiness for the king and the
country will exist, destroying the fear of famine.
ईशानांशे भाग्ययोगे जायते स सुखी नरः।
आजन्मायुष्यपर्यन्तं भाग्यवांशचे संशयः॥११२७॥
्षेमाधिपदशान्तये च ह्यपमृत्युर्भविष्यति |
प्रत्यग्दाये कालमृल्यु सन्ध्राधिपतिभुक्तिषु ॥११२८ ॥

सप्तषष्टिसमे मृत्यु मापत्सन्यासमादिशेत् ।
1127 - 11281/2. One born in Isaana Nadiamsa,
Gemini ascendant will be fortunate and happy from
birth to death. He will have fear of untimely death in
the end of the 4th dasa. The 5th dasa during the sub
period of the eighth lord will bring his timely death.
His death will be in the 67th year. He may take to
ascetism following a family calamity.
कमलांशे सुते मन्दे भूसुतेन निरीक्षिते ॥११२९॥
युग्मलग्ने प्रजातस्य बाल्ये मातृविनाशनम् |
पश्चादभ्रातृविहीनश्र ज्येष्ठभ्रातृसमन्वितः॥११३० ॥
द्रे भगिन्यौ चिरायुष्यो स्वपिता च द्विधार्यकः।
1129 - 11301/2. Gemini Ascendant: Saturn
placed in Libra’s Kamala Nadiamsa, tn aspect to
Mars, will destroy mother in the native’s childhood.
Further he will be devoid of a coborn, but will have
older 6000. Two of his sisters will be long-lived.
His father will have two wives.
Notes: Matters relating to Kamala Nadiamsa
have been credited by the author to Guru Nadi.
For details of Kamala Nadiamsa, see notes under
sloka 778, Book I.
कमलांशकणे नक्रे मन्दे कुजनिरीकषिते ॥११३१॥
सापलिमातृजेश्ान्येर्भगिनीभरातृर्भियुतः
उद्राहानन्तरं माता परलोके प्रयस्यति ॥११२२ ॥
्रारवंशे सुभाग्याप्तिः स्वपिता भ्रातृहीनवान् | -
1131 - 11321/2. ऽवा in Capricorn’s Kamala
Nadiamsa (i.e. in the 8th from the ascendant Gemini)
in aspect to Mars will give the following effects. The
person will have full and half coborns. After his
marriage, his mother will quit the world. His in-laws’
family will be fortunate. His father will have no
coborn.
मङ्गला पूर्वभागे त्वमलांशकगे Wat ॥११३३ Il
sees प्रजातश्च भाग्यवांश्च सुबुद्धिमान् |
विष्णुभक्तिरतो नित्यं वेश्यश्चशुरभक्तिमान् ॥११२४॥
पितृभक्तिविहीनश्च स्वदारभ्रातृवत्सलः
1133 - 11341/2. Gemini Ascendant - Former
Chandra Kala Nadi
Half of Mangala Nadiamsa: Birth in this degree
while Saturn is in Libra’s Amala Nadiamsa will give
fortunes and abundant intelligence. The subject will
further be devoted to Lord Vishnu. He will honour his
father-in-law and dishonour his father. He will also
be fond of his brothers-in-law.
Notes: Mangala Nadiamsa may be found in the
notes under sloka 226, Book I.
बुधक्षेत्रे कुजांशस्थे मन्दे कुजनिरीश्षित ॥११३५॥
वन्ध्या योग इति ख्यातकमलांशे ह्यापुत्रवान्।
केचित् पक्षे गर्गमते कमलांशे सुते शनो gee ॥
गर्भखावातुरा पतली त्वसितेन निरीक्षिते |
अन्यगोत्रसुतप्राप्तिः कमलांशे सुते शनो ॥११३७॥
वन्ध्यावस्थाफलं चेति दत्तपुत्र प्रदं भवेत् |
1135 - 11371/2. Kamala Nadiamsa - Gemini
Ascendant: Saturn in a sign of Mercury, in aspect to
Mars, and beingin Anies/Scorpio Navamsa will make
the native childless. According to sage Garga, Saturn’s position in the 5th house in Kamala Nadiamsa
or his aspect to the 5th house will cause abortions to
the person’s wife. This involvement of Saturn can
however give progeny due to other Yogas (favourable for progeny) or can lead to adoption of a son (in
the absence of suitable yogas for obtaining a son).
Notes: “Vandhyavastha” is a peculiar term.
“Vandhya” denotes barrenness. Apparently the text
refers to state of barrenness caused by Saturn as
above.
सुतेशांशपतो wy भार्गवेण समन्विते ॥११३८ i
UTM MATAR: सोदर्यायाः FATA: |
कमलांशे सुतेजखि श्यामर्वणः शुधाकृतिः॥११३९ ॥
SEEM धर्मात्मा िचित्स्थूलशरीरवान् |
आदयो दाप्रियो रोगी मेहरोगेण दुःखितः ॥११४० ॥
1138 - 1140. (a) Astrology & Philosophy: In
case of Gemini ascendant, Venus joining Mars, and
begetting a Martian Navamsa will cause expertise in
astrology and philosophy. The subject will be fond
of his sister’s offspring. ("Sahodari suta priyah" is the
reading in another version.)

Deva Keralam
(b) The subject of Kamala Nadiamsa, Gemini
ascendant will be quite splendorous and auspicious in
appearance. He will be dark-bodied. Fortunate, he
will be righteous, will have somewhat stout a physique, be rich, fond of his spouse, will incur diseases,
particularly urinary ones to his grief.
कमलांशकगे मन्दे वातरोगी सुबुद्धिमान् |
कालान्तरे नेत्ररोगी ग्येष्ठभ्रातृविनाशवान् ॥११४१ ॥
ततत्रिकां पोषयित्वा बन्धुवर्गः सुपूजितः।
1141 - 11411/2.70ा 8 native of Gemini ascendant
Saturn in Kamala Nadiamsa (in Libra) will cause
windy disorders (rheumatism, arthritis, paralysis,
gastric troubles, lung disorders etc.). The subject will
be highly intelligent. After some interval he will
incur eye troubles. He will destroy his older coborn
(i.e. an elder brother will die untimely) and will
inherit the onus of bringing up elder brother’s daughter. Relatives will highly honour him.
कमलांशे निशानाथे कमलांशकगे शनो ॥१९४२ ॥
मङ्गलां शे प्रजातस्य पितरदर्युरादिशेत |
कमलांशे विलग्नेशे भूसुतेन निरीश्षिते ॥११४२ ॥
बाल्ये जल TMT ज्वरपीडितः।
उद्राहानरं भाग्यं दारवंशे सुखी भवेत् ॥११४४॥
1142 - 1144. Gemini Ascendant - Mangala
Nadiamsa: (a) Both Saturn and the Moon in Kamala
Nadiamsa will cause a long life to the native’s father.
(b) Mercury in Kamala Nadiamsa will cause
danger through water and small-pox during the said
native’s childhood provided he is in aspect to Mars.
His prosperity will increase following his marnage
and he will be happy with in-laws.
लग्नाधिपतिदरेक्काणराशौ yaad fag: |
शुक्रदरेक्काणराशौ वा दारजन्र्धभं Fag: ॥११४५ ॥
तत्िकोणेऽथ वा चेति कमलांश समुद्रवः।
सुकुमारशरीरःस SAGA: सुबुद्धिमान् ॥११४६ ॥
विद्यावान् मधुराभाषी विनीतो धर्मवत्सलः।
जन्मप्रभृति -श्रीमान्स्याद्यवदायुष्यभाग्यवान् ॥ ११४५७ ॥
1145 - 1147. Gemini Ascendant - Kamala
Nadiamsa: (a) His son’s Moon sign will correspond
to the decanate occupied by Mercury. The Moon sign
of the native’s spouse will correspond to the decanate
occupied by Venus. A trine thereof (in both the cases)
will also stand for similar consideration.
(0) The said native will havea soft physique, will
adopt a son, be highly intelligent, learned, eloquent,
modest, righteous and wealthy nght from birth. His
prosperity will exist till his death.
कमलांशे विलग्नेशे कर्मेशेन निरीक्षिते ।
सरीराज्यकाले भाग्यं स्याद्राजपल्या च पूजितः ॥११४८ ॥
1148. Fortunes in Female’s Rule: Mercury in
Kamala Nadiamsa in aspect to the 10th Jord (Jupiter)
will cause the Gemini native’s prosperity in the rule
ofa female. Alternatively he will be dearto the king’s
Spouse.
स्वशुक्रांशांशयोगेन fares सुभाग्यवान् |
चीनाम्बरसुभूषाप्तिः पित्रादि arya: सुखी ॥११४९ ॥
1149. Mercury in own Navamsa or that of Venus
will cause much prosperity in the third dasa. The
person will acquire silken robes, ornaments and
paternal wealth.
जन्मदाये कुम्भचक्रे जन्ममासे जलाद्धयम्।
कमलांशे रोगमाता मृतप्राया च जीवति ॥११५० ॥
1150. Kamala Nadiamsa - Aquarius Rasi Dasa:
The first dasa happening to be that of Aquarius -
Satum, will cause danger through water in the month
denoted by the moments of the Sun in the Rasi natally
occupied by him. His mother will incur sickness and
will survive early death.
Notes: “Kumbha Chakre” is not the specifically
used by various exponents to denote exactly the dasa
of Aquarius in Kala Chakra Dasa scheme. However,
the text used terms like Jeeva, Deha etc. which are
applicable only to KCD. Hence I interpreted the
present term and such other terms elsewhere in this
work as belonging to KCD although the ruling planet’s name is as a rule added to the name of the Rasi
indicating the Dasa.
` For obvious reasons, “Janma Maase” does not
indicate the first month of birth.

संपदाये पापचक्रे कन्यायां तैलिगे शनो |
कमलांशे मात्तृशोकपुद्राहानन्तरं वदेत् ॥११५१ |
1151. Gemini Ascendant - Kamala Nadiamsa:
During the second dasa, Saturn moving in Virgo will
cause death of the mother following his marnage.
Notes: “Paapa Chakre” is an interruption in
this part of the text, as it deals with second dasa as per
Vimsottan.
पापयक्रदशाकाते जतस्य कमलांशके |
मोञ्जीबन्धनकालः स्यानुलान्तये वृश्चिके गुरौ ॥११५२ |
स्वज्येष्टभ्रतुरुद्ाहो गेहे कल्याणसंप्रमः।
्रूरमासे देहजाद्यं मातृपीडा क्वचित् क्वचित् ॥११५३ ॥
पापचक्रदशाकाले स्वगोत्रे ज्ञातिनाशनम् |
अपरार्धे जातकस्य विवाहोत्सवमादिशेत् ॥११५४ ॥
1152 - 1154. Malefic Rasi Dasa: During the
dasa of a malefic sign (ruled by Mars, the Sun or
Saturn), the above said native’s thread ceremony will
occur, coinciding with Jupiter’s movement in end of
Libra or in Scorpio. Further, his elder brother will
beget married during this phase. However, his
mother will to some extent suffer from physical
ailments during the Sun’s adverse transition. In the
same dasa (without referring to Jupiter), his close
relatives will be destroyed. Inthe second half of such
dasa, the native’s marniage will occur.
जलांश Asa चन्दे च दृष्टम राहुसंयुते |
चापचक्रदशाकाले द्वितीयोद्राहवान् पिता ॥११५५ ॥
1155. Second Marriage to Father: In case of
Gemini ascendant, the Moon in the 8th in the company of Rahu in Jala Nadiamsa will cause second
mariage to father during the dasa ruled by Sagittarius.
भवेशाक्रान्तभवने कर्पाधिपतिचक्रे ।
अतीव श्रियमाणोति श्शुरस्य वशात् सुखम् ॥११५६ ॥
1156. The lord of the 2nd in the 10th house will
give much wealth. Happiness from father-in-law will
also follow.
Notes: The first line of the sloka is rather comChandra Kala Nadi
plicated. Bhavesa meaning the lord of the Bhava.
But it does not specify which Bhava it is. Noting
reference to wealth, [ understand it 15 the 2nd house.
For, particularly the Moon is referred to in sloka
1155. Anyway, this line leaves scope for more than
one interpretation.
Instead of straightaway calling the tenth house as
tenth house, the copyist has coined his own phrase in
a round-about and somewhat faulty manner as variously done throughout the work.
TAIT THAT च जातस्य कमलांशके |
स्वजन्मदेशे नृपतेर्मरणं तत्र तिर्दिशेत् ॥११५७ ॥
1157. Irrelevant: In the dasa junction denoted
by the Navamsa Rasi occupied the Moon, the native
of Kamala Nadiamsa will see his king quit the world.
Tatra कलहं प्रामान्तर निवासवान् |
लग्नेशे कमलांशस्थे केन्द्रलाभत्रिकोणगे ॥११५८ ॥
द्रादशान्दात् परं भाग्यं विपदाये श्रिया युतम्
1158 - 11581/2. (a) Change of Place: Inthe same
dasa (referred to in the above sloka), due to a strife in
the country, the subject will change his village (i.e.
place of calling).
(b) Mercury: Mercury in Kamala Nadiamsa, in
an angle or ina trine or in the 11th house, will cause
prosperity after the 12th year. Further the third dasa
will give wealth.
चापच्क्र द्वितीयांशे Fat निशाकरे ॥१९१५९ ॥
स्वजन्मदेशे नृपतिर्मसूरी ज्वरतापितः।
जीवांशे ततल्िकोणे स्फुटयोगं गते शनो ॥११६० ॥
कमलांशे प्रजातस्य राज्याधिपतिनाशनम्।
अमलांशकगे सूर्ये वृश्चिके च प्रजायते ॥११६१॥
इदमेव फलं सत्यं पितृभाग्यविहीनवान् |
1159 - 11611/2. (a) Irrelevant: The Moonshould
be in Capricorn Navamsa in which case the second
part of Sagittarius dasa will cause troubles to the king
on account of small-pox. Saturn in transit in the sign
identical with Jupiter’s Navamsa or a trine thereof
will destroy the ruler of the country.
(b) The Sun in Scorpio in Amala Nadiamsa will

Deva Keralam
give above results apart from giving no paternal
happiness.
SAAR चन्द्रे जातस्य कमलांशके ॥११६२ ॥
वहुभागयाभिवृद्धि स्यादारसोख्यं विनिर्दिशेत् |
भेदभ्रातृसुपुत्राप्ति ग्यष्टभ्रातुशुभावहम् ॥११६३ ॥
धनधान्यसमृद्धि च पित्रादीनां सुखं वदेत् |
कीटाजपश्चाननकर्केषु
चरन् शनिः क्षुद्भयदः प्रजानाम् |
Fees क्षुदगुदामयः स्यात्
तथापि जीवन्ति जनाः कथंचित् ॥११६४॥
शनिप्रथमपययि स्थिरराशिचतुष्टये |
स्फुटयोगं गते मन्दे जन्मदेशे जनावधिः॥ ११६५ ॥
रज्याधिपतिनाशादिप्रजाक्षोभं विनिर्दिशेत् |
कमलांशे तुलाचक्रे गोचरे नवमे शनो ॥११६६ ॥
जन्मदेशे राज्यपतेररिष्टमिति चादिशेत् |
मरीनांशगे मदाधीशे वृश्चिके कालचक्रे ॥११६७ ॥
स्वदारंवशे सन्तापं श्वश्रश्वशुरनाशनम् |
तुलाचक्रे दारवंशे प्रनलङ्ञातिनाशनम् ॥११६८ ॥
स्वदारसोदरभ्रातुरायुधेन महाविपत् |
राज्याधिपे भाग्यगते भाग्याधिपतिचक्रगे ॥११६९ ॥
अतीव क्लेशकार्याणि योगमद्गं शुभाशुभम् ।
1162 - 11691/2. (a) Mars - Moon in Scorpio:
The native of Gemini ascendant’s Kamala Nadiamsa
having the Moon and Mars in Scorpio (in the 6th) will
reap abundant prosperity and will have happiness
through spouse. His step-brother will acquire progeny while his full older brother will get auspicious
effects (in general). The subject will gain much
wealth and grains. He will be happy through his
father etc.
(b) Saturn’s Transit - Irrelevant: The planet
Saturn moving in Scorpio, Anes, Leo or Cancer will
cause stress of hunger to the populace. There will be
dearth of rains and occurrence of difficulties through
hunger and rectal disorders (to the public) in spite of
which people will survive (i.e. there will be no
casualty).
(c) Irrelevant: Saturn’s first round of transit in
fixed signs will cause distress to people. They will
mourn the death of their ruler.
(d) Irrelevant: Evils to king will come to pass
when Saturn is in the 9th, in case of a Gemini native,
during the dasa of Libra.
(e) Scorpio Rasi Dasa: The 7th lord (Jupiter) in
Pisces Navamsa will during the dasa of Scorpio will
cause sadness in the families of in-laws and will
destroy the father-in-law.
(f) Libra Rasi Dasa: During the dasa of Libra,
very important relatives will die in the in-laws’
family. His brother-in-law will be in the grip of great
danger through weapons.
(g) Obstruction by Tenth Lord: The lord of the
{Oth in the 9th will cause great difficulties and will
obstruct prosperity in the Rasi dasas ruled by the %th
lord (i.e.Aquarius or Capricorn, more specifically
Aquarius Rasi dasa, as per KCD). Results which are
a mix of auspiciousness and inauspiciousness will
also follow.
चन््रलग्नाष्टमे भोमे भाग्याधिपतिचक्रगे ॥११७०
amg द्वित्रिवारं स्थाननाशं जनक्षयम्।
तुलाचक्रे तृतीयांशे PRA महाविपत् Ng ese ॥
संचितार्थविनाशादि क्षेमदाये कुजान्तरे |
1170 - 11711/2. (a) Mars in the 8th From Moon:
The native of Gemini ascendant will in Aquarius
Dasa suffer obstacles to his prosperity fora period of
“two or three weeks”, and will lose his position and
men provided Mars is in the 8th counted from the
Moon.
(b) With the above yoga, the subject will additionally face a great danger in the sub period of Libra,
(or in the last one third part of) Libra dasa.
(c) The 4th dasa will cause destruction of wealth
in the sub period of Mars (as Mars is in the 8th from
the Moon).
स्परशाक्रान्तभवनं द्रैक्काणं स्वनवांशकम् ॥११७२ ॥
तद्राशिचक्रे सन्तापं योगभद्मवाप्तुयात्।
PUI काले देहरोगधनक्षयम् ॥११७२ ॥
अथवा कलहं चेति स्थाननाशं विनिर्दिशेत्

1172 -11731/2. The Kala Chakra Dasa periods of
the Rasis denoted by the sign, decanate and Navamsa
occupied by the 8th lord (Saturn) will give grief and
obstruct prosperity of a Gemini native. The periods
denoted by evil Rasis will cause ill-health and
financial upheavals. Else, there will be quarrels and
loss of place (or position)
Notes: Here we get one of the most precious
clues in the direction of using KCD effectively.
The. dasa periods denoted by decanate or Navamsa occupied by a certain planet - good or bad - will
give good or bad effects. For example 10th lord ina
given case is in his exaltation decanate or exaltation
Navamsa. The dasa indicated by the Rasi concerned
as per KCD will give excellent effects concerning the
10th house.
Similarly for other Bhavas. This clue can be
applied for the various ascendants.
कालचक्रे देहजीवौ MIL पापभे शनौ lg gov hi
स्वभेद भ्राता रोगी च fast जनक्षयम् |
बन्धुदरेषकलापेन व्याकुलं मनुरव्रबीत् ॥११७५ ॥
1174 - 1175. In the system of Kala Chakra Dasa,
the Deha and (or) Jeeva Rasis happening to be ruled
by malefic/s and transited by Saturn will cause the
following effects: (a) Disease to step-brother. (b)
Enmity with friends and relatives, loss of relatives
and distress thereby for self.
TRI ललने BS तुलचक्रे सुभाग्यावान्।
्रंशोपरि श्ेवपर्मध्ये भाग्याभिवृद्धिमान् ॥११७६ ॥
तुलाचक्रे तृतीयांशे राजनिष्ठुरमादिशेत् |
योगभडगं च लभते वांस ग्रामे वनान्तरे |
बन्धुद्रेषं बहुच्छद्रं संचितद्रविणव्यम् ॥११७७ ॥
अतीव क्तेशकार्याणि पश्चात् स्वस्थं विनिदिशेत्।
1176 - 11771/2. (a) Libra - Venus Dasa: The
dasa of Libra will yield prosperity in case the Moon
is in Virgo with Capricorn Navamsa, for a Gemini
native.
(b) Last Part of Libra Dasa: However (due to
the above position of the Moon) the last one third part
of the dasa will cause enmity with the king. His
Chandra Kala Nadi
prosperity will be checkered and he will have to live
in a village surrounded by forests (i.e. a change of
place not to one’s liking). He will incur enmity with
his relatives, annihilation of a great order and loss of
wealth saved. After a lot of troubles, he will recover
happiness.
तुलाचरे fet भ्रातृनाशवशाद्व्यथा ॥११७८ ॥
कन्याश धनच्छरेदं बन्धुद्ेषं बिनिर्दिशेत् |
्षेमदाये तुलाचक्रे कमलां श समद्धवः॥११७९ ॥
केद्रयोगफलं किचिद्रोचरे जन्रभे शनो |
1178 - 11791/2. Transit Saturn: During the dasa
of Libra, Saturn moving in Leo will destroy coborn
to the grief of the person. In Virgo, be will perish
wealth and will turn the relatives antagonistic to the
subject. Saturn moving in Gemini Ascendant will
give effects of Kendra Yoga to some extent (leading
to some prosperity) to the subject of Kamala
Nadiamsa.
Notes: “Kshema Daaye” denoting the fourth
dasa as per Vimsottari is not included in the rendering
as 1 feel it is redundant. Otherwise, one can refer to
the said Libra Dasa to be the fourth from birth.
चद््राद्धाग्यं गते जीवे कमलांश समुद्धवः॥११८० ॥
्रत्यग्दाये भाग्यवृदवर्योगश्चत्तलिगे शनो |
निधनाधिपदोषेण देहायांस महद्धयम् ॥११८१ ॥
सत्निपातज्वरेणोव ह्यपमृत्युभयं क्वचित् |
चक्रसन्धिदशाकाले ह्यपमृत्युज्वरार्तिदः ॥११८२ ॥
तदोषपरिहारर्थं शान्ति कुर्याद्विचक्षणः,
1180 - 11821/2. (a) The native of Gemini ascendant having Jupiter in the 9th from the Moon sign will
in his fifth dasa (Vimsottari) receive increased quota
of prosperity as Saturn moves in Libra. However due
to his 8th lordship, Saturn will simultaneously cause
physical ill-health, great fear, fear of untimely death
due to Samnipata - dangerous fever resulting from
morbid condition of the three humours (one of the
eight kinds of fever).
(b) Fearofuntimely death will (also) occurin the
junction periods of two Rasi dasas (KCD).

Deva Keralam
(c) To overcome these evils, one should resort to
suitable remedies.
कमलांशगते मन्दे धनाधिपतिदायगे ॥११८३ ॥
स्वभूक्तौ पितृनिर्याणं जौविते भगिनी व्यथा |
स्वभेदभ्रातृशोकादिक्तेशं च तौलिगे wat ॥११८४॥
मेहरोगं च लभते स्वपुतरोद्राहसं भ्रमम् |
जन्मदेशे सुभाग्याप्तिः प्रत्यग्दाये स्वभुक्तिषु ॥११८५ ॥
कन्याशनौ fate प्रत्यग्दाये बुधान्तर |
स्वभृक्तो यदि जीवेत् सः भेद्रातृविनाशवान् ॥११८६ ॥
्रत्यग्दाये मन्दभुक्तो जातस्य कमलांशके |
स्वदार सोदराणां च कन्याचक्रे मृति क्वचित् lig ec ॥
1183 - 1187. (a) Saturn should be placed in
Kamala Nadiamsa in Libra so that death of father
occurs inthe first sub period of the dasa of the 2nd lord
(Moon). Failing which grief to (full) sister, and stepbrother will show up. Urinary disorders (to self) and
marriage of the native’s son will follow.
(b) The first sub period of the 5th dasa will cause
prosperity to the native in his birth country.
(c) Saturn moving in Virgo, during the first sub
period or that of Mercury in the fifth dasa will
endanger the father. If not, the period will destroy a
step-brother.
(d) The sub period of Saturn in the fifth dasa will
cause the death of a brother-in-law during Saturn’s
movements in Virgo.
Notes: "Kanya Chakre" should read as "Kanya
Sanau", meseems, to have a meaningful instruction
as noted in “c” and “d” above.
प्राबल्ययोगेनैकस्य संबन्धाच्छियमश्नुते।
दि दिने भ्रातु वृद्धि धनरक्ताम्बराधिकम् ॥११८८ ॥
रजाधिकारजनिताधिकसंपदश्च
धर्माधिकारजनतोषितस्वप्वृ्तिः।
wd गृहेऽपि धनधान्यसमृद्धयश्च
स्युः सर्वथा गुरुदशागमने फलनि ॥११८९॥
1188 - 1189. General: Even a single powerful
yoga for prosperity will be capable of giving wealth,
will incessantly cause the progress of coborns and
will give an excess of money and red robes. The
wealth will be acquired by the powers invested by the
ruler. The person will beget a powerful position of
rendering justice. He will give happiness to men. His
entire household will spill with wealth and grains.
With the advent of Jupiter’s dasa these effects will be
specific.
Notes: Since the author has taken the verses for
Gemini ascendant, Kamala Nadiamsa, from Guru
Nadi, specific importance is laid on Jupiter’s dasa. It
is commonly to be understood that any relevant dasa
will give the good effects cited, the sum total of which
is wealth, position, happiness et cetera.
गुरनाडीफलग्रन्थे जातस्य कमलांशके |
अन्तर्दशादिमार्गेषु फलं विस्तारमादिशेत् ॥११९० ॥
1190. The effects stated for Kamala Nadiamsa
(Gemini ascendant) are from Guru Nadi which should
be extensively mixed with the sub periods (of relevant dasas).
कुलीरचक्रेनिर्याणं जातस्य कमलांशके |
सिहसू्येऽपमत्युश्च मकरान्ते घटे शनो ॥११९१॥
वृश्चिके देहबाधा स्यात् स्वसमानजनक्षयम्।
तत्रिकोणे कुलीरांशे गोचरे शनि संस्थिते ॥११९२॥
कालमृत्युभयप्राप्तिः WAH न संशयः।
eves निर्याणं तुलान्तये चक्राकालगे ॥११९३ ॥
कन्यान्तचक्रगे वापि कन्यामासे मरिष्यति ।
कमलांशकगे मन्दे मास्सु सहादिषु त्रिषु ॥११९४॥
कृष्णपक्षे सौम्यवारे ह्यतिसारज्वरान्मृतिः।
1191 - 1194102. Death: The native of Kamala
Nadiamsa, Gemini ascendant, will die with Saturn
moving in Cancer. But Saturn moving in the end of
Capricom, or in Aquarius, with the Sun in Leo, will
usher fear of untimely death. In Scorpio, Saturn in
transit, will cause pains of the body, and destruction
of men equal to the subject (in age). Ina trine to
Scorpio (i.e. in Pisces/Cancer) Saturn’s movement,
obtaining at the same time the Navamsa of Cancer,

canalso cause timely (insurmountable) death. Saturn
in Cancer in transit will cause death. Probability of
death will also exist with his movement in the end of
Virgo, orin the end of Libra, in the month denoted by
Sun in Virgo. The subject of Kamala Nadiamsa will
pass away in one of the three months commencing
Leo (i.e. the transit Sun in Leo through Libra), in a
dark fortnight, on a Wednesday, due to dysentery.
Notes: In these slokas, Kulira Chakre, Kanya
Chakre should actually read as Kulira Sanau, Kanya
Sanau etc. and the translation is for suggested corrections. This is done in order to keep a flow with the
sequence. In some places these of course refer to
respective Kala Chakra Dasa periods.
चग्पकांशे विलगनेशे षष्ठे केतुसमान्विते ॥११९५॥
चापारुदे प्रजातश्च गरम्रीमान् सुखी धनी |
लग्नारुढपदे जीवे लग्नेशे केतुसंयुते ॥११९६ ॥
चम्पकांशे प्रजातश्चभू्ते मानी खलप्रभुः।
असाध्यकार्यनिरतो गौरगात्रसुलोचनः॥११९७॥
राजराजस्य मन्त्री च सेनाध्यक्षः सुपूजितः।
चापारुढयुते जीवे सुकुमारः सुबुद्धिमान् ॥११९८ ॥
सरवशवर्ययुतः शान्तः सर्वधर्मकरः प्रभुः!
1195 - 11981/2. (a) Aquarius Ascendant -
Champaka Nadiamsa: The lord of the ascendant
(Saturn) with Ketu in the 6th house, with Sagittarius
becoming the Aroodha ascendant (as per Jaimini
school), will make the native wealthy right from birth
and happy.
(b) Jupiter in Aroodha Ascendant: In this yoga
if Jupiter also happens to be in the Aroodha ascendant, Sagittarius, the person will be wicked, honourable, will be the leader of bad men, be interested in
achieving difficult things, fair-complexioned, beautiful-eyed, be a king, minister, leader of an army, be
highly honoured, soft-bodied and very intelligent.
He will be endowed with all kinds of wealth, be of
peaceful disposition, will indulge in various kinds of
charities and be a lord.
Notes: (a) For Aquanius ascendant, its lord Saturn in the 6th therefrom in Cancer causes Sagittarius
to become the Aroodha ascendant. Saturn and Ketu
Chandra Kala Nadi
inthe 6th (Upachaya house) will thus give riches right
from birth, and the subject will enjoy happiness in
general.
(b) With the combination cited at “a” being fully
present, the Aroodha ascendant’s lord Jupiter in
Sagittarius itself will produce the additional effects
listed. The only adversity is wicked disposition.
Also see slokas 1203-1205 infra for a modified
version.
For Champaka Nadiamsa details, refer to notes
under 8018 1412. Book I.
चापारुढे कुम्भलगे क्रोधी मानी खलप्रियः॥११९९ il
अन्तकरुटिलवान् योगी परकार्ार्थवञ्चकः।
वातप्रकृतदेहश्च किचिद्क्षशरीरवान् ॥१२०० ॥
बाल्ये PMI: WHITH सुभूक्तिमान्।
1199 - 12001/2. Saturn in 6th - Champaka
Nadiamsa Birth: In case of Aquarius rising, with its
lord in the 6th, making the Aroodha ascendant fall in
Sagittarius predict the following, The subject will be
irascible, honourable, fond of wicked men, be inwardly crooked, sickly, will cheat others of their
wealth and undertakings, and will possess a thin body
thatis prone to windy diseases. During childhood, his
body will be lean. This native willbe learned and will
enjoy eating comforts.
Notes: In this yoga, Ketu and Jupiter are eliminated. The lord of the ascendant Saturn alone in the
6th in Cancer, with Sagittarius becoming the Aroodha
ascendant, will give many bad effects like sickness,
and cheating disposition.
"Kinchidooksha Sariravaan" insloka 1200should
read as "Kinchid Rooksha Sariravan" denoting a thin
or emaciated physique.
Honour, learning and eating comforts are only
positive effects.
चम्पकांशे पूर्वभागे राजद्वारे प्रसिद्धान् ॥१२०१॥
मनत्रालोचनवात्नित्यं महाराजप्रियः सुखौ |
Rigas मतिमान् सुखी च
राजाधिकारी बहुमानपूज्यः।
श्रीपङ्कजांशे च समश्चिरायु-

Deva Keralam
भुपालसेवी स्वकुले प्रसिद्धः॥१२०२॥
1201 - 1202. Champaka Nadiamsa - First
Half: Birth in this space in Aquarius (without reference to Saturn etc.) will make the native famous in
royal assembly. He will be an expert in giving
advices related to use of Mantras (sacred spells), and
be dear to the ruler. He will be able to understand
others’ thoughts by their mere gestures, be intelligent, will enjoy powers bestowed upon him by the
king and will receive great respect and reverence. He
will be endowed with longevity, will serve the ruler
and be famous among the men of his race.
Note: “Sripankajamse” meaning birth in
Sripankaja Nadiamsa in sloka 1202 is an unwanted
addition here oritshould read as “SriChampakamse”.
It was a custom for ancient writers to add the prefix
“Sri” to auspicious Nadiamsas and such other terms.
Any way the results mentioned in the sec~ .J half of
sloka 1202 should also belongto Champaka Nadiamsa
when carefully compared with the rest.
चापारूढगते जीवे fears भृगुवीक्षिते |
राजयोगं च लभते वाहनप्रयभाग्यवान् ॥१२०३॥
किंचित् कषुद्रभयं बाल्ये मान्दज्वरनिपीडितः।
कोपी भिप्रप्रसत्नात्मा षष्ठे मन्देसुरूपवान् ॥१२०४॥
frases: सदा शूरः पिततप्रकृतिकोपवान्।
वातदेही भोगशीलश्चम्पकांशे प्रजायते ॥१२०५॥
1203 - 1205. Aquarius ascendant, Saturn in
Cancer, Jupiter in Sagittarius in aspect to Venus and
simultaneously getting Leo Navamsa - together these
will cause a Raja Yoga, giving three conveyances.
The person will have some fear from mean people.
During his childhood he will incur disorders caused
by indigestion. Although irascible, he could be
instantly pleased and be charming in appearance.
(Breaking the flow, Saturn in 6th should not be
isolated to cause charming appearance. This position
is part of the Aroodha ascendant condition.) He will
be ever valorous, will have a bilious and windy body
(prone to disorders like abdominal illness, premature
gray hair, yellow sweating, jaundice, rheumatism,
and arthritis), and will enjoy pleasures of the world.
Notes: The Navamsa position in Leo is. for
Jupiter in the sign Sagittarius. That is Jupiter should
be between 13 deg 20' and 16 deg 40' of Sagittarius.
Ketu’s position is excluded and Venus is introduced in this yoga - a different version of what is
given in “b”, 1195 - 11981/2 supra.
“Enjoying pleasures of the world” shows a high
degree of material enjoyments accruing to the subject.
चम्पकांशकगे मन्दे चन्द्रे नागां शनाडिगे |
कुम्भलगे प्रजातश्च बहुभ्रातृसमन्वितः॥१२०६ ॥
स्वयंतृतीयगर्भः स्याञ्ज्येष्ठभ्रातृविहीनवान् |
भगिन्यो बहुलाः सन्ति सोदरभरातृवंशवान् ॥१२०७॥
1206 - 1207. Coborn: Satur in Champaka
Nadiamsa while the Moon is in Naga Nadiamsa will
give many coborns to the Aquarius native. The
person himself will be the third issue. Perhaps he will
have no older brother (i.e. he will be the first among
the sons and his elder coborn will be females). He
will have many sisters. The dynasties of his brothers
will expand; to wit his brothers will obtain male
issues.
Notes: Naga Nadiamsa rules from 29° 26' to 29°
48' of movable signs; from 0° 12’ to 0° 24' of
immovable signs; and from 14° 24' to 14° 36' of
common signs.
चम्पकांशे पूर्वभागे केचित्पक्कभ्रातृमान् |
भगिन्यो 2 सुपङ्गल्यौ शेष॑नाशमुदीरयेत् ॥१२०८ ॥
1208. According to some authorities, the person
of former half of Champaka Nadiamsa, Aquarius,
will havea single brother, and two sisters. The sisters
will have long-living husbands. Rest of the sisters
(born) will be destroyed.
सोदराः पञ्च सप्तेति भगिन्येका wise |
आयुष्मत्यसिसोदर्य एका पुत्रवती सती ॥१२०९॥ `
1209. (According to one version consulted by
the author) the above native will have five or seven
brothers. One sister will have a long-living husband.
Three sisters will be endowed with longevity, and
another will have progeny and be a virtuous spouse.
पितृस्थौनाधिपे शुक्रे पञ्चमे वृधिकांशगे |

चम्पकांश गते मन्दे कलत्यवान् पिता ॥१२१० ॥
1210. Three Wives to Father: The father of the
Aquarius native who has Saturn in Champaka
Nadiamsa, as the 9th lord is in the 5th with Scorpio
Navamsa will have three wives.
Notes: The 9th lord Venus, denoting father,
should be in Gemini inthe 5th, between 3 deg 20' and
6 deg 40' of space, getting Scorpio Navamsa.
पूर्वभागे प्रजातश्च सापलीमातु संयुतः।
दवि्रिभेदभगिन्यश्च तासामेका सुमङ्गली ॥१२११॥
1211. Step-Mother: Birth in first half of
Champaka Nadiamsa of Aquarius ascendant (itself)
will (without reference to Saturn/Venus as above)
give a step-mother. (That is father will not have a
third marriage.) The native will have two or three
step-sisters one of whom will have 8 long-living
husband.
पितृव्याधिपतौ जीवे स्वाहांरे चद्धरसंयुते।
निधनाधिपसंयुकते स्वपिता प्रातृशोकवान् ॥१२१२ ।
पितृष्वसर्वहुत्वं च fefragar चिरायुषी |
भर्वानुगमनं कुर्यात् क्लेशिता च तथापरा ॥१२१३॥
1212 - 1213. Loss of Uncles: The native of
Aquarius ascendant having the Moon, Meicury and
Jupiter together - the last one in Swaaha Nadiamsa -
will cause grief to father on account of loss of
brothers. Further, the person will have many paternal
aunts out of whom two or three will be long-lived.
One will sacrifice her life along with the death of her
husband. Another will be a troubled soul.
Notes: Swaaha Nadiamsa extends from 22° 00'
to 22° 12' of movable signs; from 07° 48' to 08° 00'
of fixed signs; and from 07° 00' to07° 12' of common
Signs.
wert सुखे सूर्ये चम्पकांशकगे शनो |
पूर्वभागे पिता भोगी दीर्षायुर्िकलत्रवान् ॥१२१४॥
पितामहश्चिरायुष्मान् पुत्रशोकेन करशितः।
स्वपितुः सोदरभ्रातृपत्रभावे मृतिं वदेत् ॥१२१५ ॥
1214 - 1215. Father: The Sun in the 4th in
Swaaha Nadiamsa while Saturn is in Champaka
Chandra Kala Nadi
Nadiamsa’s first half will make the native’s fathe
enjoy pleasures and long-lived. Further, father wi
have two wives. The person’s paternal grand-fathe
would be long-lived but will suffer gnef on accoun
of loss of progeny. The native’s father will die in th
absence of his brothers and children.
पितृस्थानाधिपे शक्रे पञ्चमे गुरुवीक्षते |
चम्पकांशे पूर्वभागे स्वपिता बहुभाग्यवान् ॥१२१६॥
लिपि वाक्यप्रवीणश्च राजद्रारे सुपूजितः।
अमात्यप्रियवान् यज्वा देवब्राह्मणपोषकः॥१२१५७ ॥
BATT रतो नित्यं हरिशङ्कभक्तिमान्।
अग्रहारतिष्ठाता वेदिकाचारवान् बहु ॥१२१८ ॥
मातृविश्वासवात्नित्यं ज्येष्ठभरातृसुपोषकः।
योगकाले भ्रात दुखी बन्धुसंरक्षको भवेत् ॥१२१९ ॥
1216 - 1219. Venus ruling the 9th, placed in the
Sth in aspect to Jupiter will give the following results
incase of the native of Champaka Nadiamsa, Aquarius
ascendant. His father will enjoy much fortunes, be
skillful in writing and speeches, will receive royal
honours, be dear to the ruler’s minister, will offer
Sacrifices, honour Brahmins and Gods, be delighted
in poor-feeding, devoted to Lords Vishnu and Siva,
will construct colonies for Brahmins, will faithfully
follow the codes prescribed by the Vedas, be an
ardent devotee of his motherand will protect his older
brother and relatives. Amidst prosperity he will
grieve the loss of a brother.
arate पूर्वभागे स्वाहांशस्थे निशाकरे |
स्वपिता धार्मिकः श्रीमान् जीवप्रीति करः सुखी ॥१२२० ॥
रद्रमन्रजपे निष्ठो धर्मपुण्यपुराणवित्।
देवालयस्य निर्माता हय्रहारतटाकयोः ॥१२२१॥
मध्ये भाग्यंसमृद्धश्च राजद्राराधिकारवान् |
सेनापतिर्वा म्री वा राज्यतन््रपरवर्तकः॥१२२२ ॥
स्वराज्यरष्टे सोख्यापित्दष्टिप्रहणोत्सुकः।
नाना मार्गे पराप्तधनोहयुपायात् कार्यसाधकः ॥१२२२ ॥
्रव्यार्जनसमर्थश्च नानादेशेषु कीर्मिमान्।
बाल्ये जन्मदशाकाले जातस्य चेपकांशके ॥१२२४॥

Deva Keralam
1220 - 1224. Results Concerning Father: The
Moon in Swaaha Nadiamsa will give following effects to the father of the native belonging to former
half of Champaka Nadiamsa, Aquarius. The father
will be a righteous person, wealthy and will be
affectionate to living beings. (Jeevapreetikarah need
not be interpreted as: pleasing the planet Brihaspathi.)
He will religiously recite the Rudra Japa (prayer to
Rudra, Lord Siva), be an expert in righteous and
meritorious acts, and be learned in Puranas (Hindu
mythology), and will construct temples, villages,
Brahmins’ colonies and tanks. In the middle part of
his life, fortunes will abound. He will begeta position
of authority under the king, will become an army
head, minister and will involve in political administration of the country. He will gain happiness in his
country and be enthusiastic in destroying the wicked
(or unlawful). His wealth will be acquired through
various means. He will accomplish an ५ ५ ,ertaking
with suitable expedients, and will be a skillful
gatherer of wealth. His fame will extend to many
countries during the early days of the native.
agers पिता बाल्ये पञ्चमब्दे सुयोगवान् |
प्रलोद्योगभूषाप्ति तत्व भ्रातृशोकवान् ॥१२२५॥
विषुचीभयमापन्नः स्वपिता प्रशोकवान् |
सम्पत्ताराधिपे चन्द्रे नागांशे रविसंयुते |
तदृशायां धनप्रापिः पितृसोख्यं शुभाशुभम् ॥१२२६॥
1225 - 1226. (a) Birth in Former Half of
Champaka Nadiamsa - Aquarius Ascendant:
(Without involving the Moon) the second dasa of the
native, or the 5th year, will give prosperity to father
who will beget a powerful job and ornaments. Prior
to these, the native will lose a brother and will be
endangered by indigestion (accompanied by evacuation in both directions, or cholera according to
some). The person’s father will grieve the loss of a
son.
(b) Moon’s Dasa: The Moonin Naga Nadiamsa,
being in the company of the Sun, will in her dasa,
which is the next to the opening dasa, give wealth,
happiness to father. and a mix of good and bad events.
लगनेशांशे वत्रिकोणे स्फुटयोगं गते शनो |
स्वपिता बन्धुनारेन राजन्यजनहेतुना 112 2209 I
अतीव क्लेशकर्याणी द्यायुधेन भयं क्वचित् |
स्वोच्चे चदे च॑पकांशे दशायां श्रियमश्नुते ॥१२२८ ॥
सहोद्रविनाशः स्याद् गेहे गोधनसंकुलम् |
स्वपितुर्मतृवंरेषु ह्यतीव क्लेशमादिशेत् ॥१२२९ ॥
पितः प्रयलात् कार्याणां सिद्धिर्भवति नित्यशः
सनध्राधिपेन संयुक्ते चन्द्रे नागांशजातकः।
स्वभेदमातृजान् हित्वा भ्रातृनाशं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥१२२३० ॥
स्वपितुर्यलसिद्धि च पश्चात् प्राबल्यमादिशेत्।
स्वराजन्यजनारिष्टं द्वितीयन्दे महाविपत् ॥१२३१ ॥
नूतनोद्योगसोख्याप्ती राजन्यप्रनलं सुखम् |
1227 - 12311/2. (a) Champaka Nadiamsa -
Aquarius Ascendant: Saturn in transit in the sign
represented by his natal Navamsa position, 078 trine
thereof will cause troubles to father on account loss
of relatives, royal wrath, difficult assignments and
danger from weapons.
(b) Moon’s Dasa: For the said native, the Moon
in exaltation will in herdasa give wealth. But the dasa
will destroy the person’s coborn. There will be
acquisition of quadrupeds and wealth in his family.
Much troubles will occur in paternal grand-mother’s
family. Due to efforts of father, undertakings
(responsibilities) will be fulfilled.
(c) The Moon in Naga Nadiamsa in the company
of Mercury will destroy brothers. Due to the good
offices of his father, the person will prosper.
("Naagamsa Jathaka" should not mean birth in
Naga Nadiamsa. The text refers to the Moon in such
a position in case of Aquarius ascendant, Champaka
Nadiamsa. Such briefings in many parts of the text
Should suitably be understood, and the rendering is
accordingly made keeping the spirit of the original in
tact.)
(d) Irrelevant: The 2nd year will cause evils
and great danger to the king’s people.
(€) Continuation of “C” above: The person will
obtain a new job and will flourish under the king.
नागांशे वृषभे WA राज्यावस्थेऽर्कसंयुते 112232 I

तदशायां तीर्थयात्रां पश्चात् प्राबल्यवान् पिता |
स्वभूक्तो व्याकुलं चेति पश्चात् सोख्यं महत् सुखम् ॥१२२३॥
पितृव्यस्य च प्राबल्यं च पितुः सोख्यं विनिर्दिशेत् ।
कुजभुक्तौ सुखं विन्दाद्राुभुक्तो शुभाशुभम् ॥१२३४॥
गुरुभक्तो व्याकुलं च पश्चात् सोख्यं महत् सुखम् ।
पितृव्यस्य च प्राबल्यं नानाविधधनार्जनम् ॥१२२३५ ॥
गुरुभक्तो तीर्थयात्रा word मनोव्यथाम् ।
शनिभक्तौ शुभं चेति राजप्रीतिं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥१२३६ ॥
1232 - 1236. (a) The native of Aquarius ascendant will attain kingdom (in general) If the Moon in
Naga Nadiamsa is in Taurus in the company of the
Sun.
(b) The Dasa of the Moon: In the dasa of the
Moon so placed (as at “a”) the person will go on
pilgrimage. His father will later on (in the course of
the dasa) become fortunate and happy. His paternal
uncle will grow strong. Mars sub period will give the
native happiness. There will bea mix of good and bad
effects inthe sub period of Rahu. Jupiter’s sub period
will cause distress (in the initia] stage). Later, great
happiness will prevail; his paternal uncle will grow
strong and will acquire various kinds of wealth. The
same sub period will help the paternal uncle go on
pilgrimage while its second half will give him mental
distress. In the sub period of Saturn, the subject will
obtain auspicious effects and will please the king.
चम्पकांशकगे मन्दे षष्ठे केतुसमन्विते |
पिता म्तेच्छकलपिन व्याकुलानन्तं सुखम् ॥१२२७॥
1237. Aquarius Ascendant: Birth in Champaka
Nadiamsa, as Saturn is in the 6th (in Cancer) with
Ketu will cause distress for father through Mlecchas.
Later on he will be happy.
चन्द्रस्यान्तर्गते TS लग्ने वा चम्पकांशके |
स्वपिता बन्धुमूलेन योगं प्राणोति भूरिशः,
सोदरोत्पत्तिसन्तोषं भेदप्रातृमनोव्यथाम् ॥१२३८ ॥
1238. For a native of Aquarius ascendant,
Champaka Nadiamsa, the Moon inthe ascendantwill
give the following effects. Inthe periods ruled by the
Chandra Kala Nadi
Moon, his father will be abundantly prosperous
through his relatives. The subject will beget coborn.
His step-brothers will undergo a great deal of mental
distress.
केतुयोगस्य दोषेण राजन्यजनहेतुना |
अतीवे क्लेशकार्याणि विरोधिभिरूपद्रवम् ॥१२३९ ॥
1239. (Referring to the Yoga in 51018 1237
supra), due to the blemish of joining Ketu, the
native’s father will have much difficulties due to
royal assignments and will experience adversities
through enemies.
लनगाष्टमांशगे मन्दे योगावस्थे बलान्विते |
STS व्याकुलं स्याद्योग भङ्गो न विद्यते ॥१२४० ॥
1240. Saturn in yogavastha in the 8th in Navamsa will cause distress in evil months. There may
however not be obstacles to prosperity.
Notes: Yogavastha is not a standard term.
विद्यारम्भं च लभते शनिभुक्तो शुभाशुभम् ।
कार्येषुचानुकूल्यं स्याद्भक्तयन्ते व्याकुलं महत् ॥१२४१ ॥
शनिभुक्तयन्तमारभ्य TAT बुधे।
अतीव क्तेशकार्याणि arg विनिर्दिशेत ॥१२४२ ॥
1241 - 1242. (Referring to sloka 1232 - 36) the
sub period of Saturn (in the dasa of the Moon) will
cause commencement of education. The results in
general will be a mix of good and bad. Undertakings
will prove successful. The concluding part of the sub
period will cause mental anguish ofa great order. The
sub period of Mercury in the dasa of the Moon will
cause many difficulties, and impediments to prosperity.
Notes: “Beginning and concluding parts of Saturn’s sub period” denoted in the first line of sloka
1242 15 not added to the translation to eliminate
confusion. This sub period has already been dealt
with in the previous sloka.
चम्पकांशे पूर्वभागे चने ATTA |
जन्मादिसप्तमे वर्षे मोञजीबन्धनमादिशेत् ॥१२४२ ॥
1243. Champaka Nadiamsa - Aquarius Ascendant; (Without referring to any planet) the sub-

Deva Keralam
ject will have his Investiture ceremony in his seventh
year.
Notes: The sub period of Mercury in Moon’s
dasa referred to in the sloka is unwarranted. Hence
cast off in the rendering.
भाग्येशांशो त्रिकोणे वा भाग्येशाक्रान्तराशिगे।
स्फुटयोगं गते मन्दे मोञ्जीबन्धनमादिशेत् ॥१२४४॥
1244, Thread ceremony can also occur when
Saturn transits the sign identical with the Navamsa
position ora trine thereof, or the Rasi position of the
9th lord (Venus).
लग्नात् सप्तमगे मन्दे सप्तमाब्दे पितुरव्यथा |
रजन्यद्रेषकार्येण ag विनिदिशेत् ॥१२४५ ॥
1245. If Saturn is in the 7th (in Leo) the person’s
seventh year will cause distress to father. Due to the
wrath of the king, father’s prosperity will be obstructed.
पश्चमाब्दे Tat षष्ठे जातस्यांशे च चम्पके |
पितः राजप्रसादेन बहुमानं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥१२४६ ॥
1246. Should Sun be in the 6th, father will gair
royal favours during the native’s fifth year of age.
सुतराधिपान्ते काते मास्सु मीनादिषु त्रिषु |
शुभकार्यं च लभते गेहे कल्याणसं्रमः॥१२४७ ॥
सनध्राधिपान्तरे काले रन्धेशांशत्रिकोणगे |
स्फुटयोगं गते सूर्ये स्वपितुर्व्याकुलं महत् ॥१२४८ |
1247 «1248. Transit Sun: The उप्र 1 movement
in Pisces to Taurus during the sub period of Mercury
will promote an auspicious function and mariage in
the family. During the rule of the 8th lord’s sub
period, the Sun transiting in the sign identical with the
Navamsa position of the 8th lord, ora trine thereof,
will greatly distress the native’s father.
Notes: The Sth and 8th lord is Mercury. The sub
periods referred to are in the dasa of the Moon, vide
Sloka 1242 above.
राहुचक्रस्थिते वापि राजकार्यवशादव्यथाम्।
चम्पकंशे पूर्वभागे कन्यान्ते तौलिगे शनौ ॥१२४९ ॥
स्वजन्मदेशे कलहो राजक्षोभो भविष्यति |
चोलदेशे ate स्यादोतर्यकलहेन च ॥१२५० ॥
तूलाशनिस्थिते काले मीनार्थे मेषगेऽपि aT |
त्रिकोणे चोलदेशे ह्यान्यो राजा भविष्यति ॥१२५१ ॥
1249 - 1251. (a) Rahu’s placement..... will lead
to sadness in performing royal duties.
(b) Irrelevant: Saturn moving in the end of
Virgo, or in Libra will cause quarrels in the country
and strife to the ruler. Due to civil war, the kingdom
of Cholas will incur evils. Saturn in Libra attaining
Pisces or Aries Navamsa will cause the end of the
ruler of Chola kingdom.
अष्टमाब्दे विवाहः स्यादथवानवमान्दे |
संपदाये फलं सत्यं लोके दुरभिक्षजं भयम् ॥१२५२ ॥
तुलाशनो धनप्राप्तिः षष्ठ्दे चोत्तरब्दगे ।
शनिभक्तो शुभं सत्यं सहस्रारिषटनाशनम् ॥१२५२॥
महादेवप्रसादेन पितृसोख्यं विनिर्दिशेत्।
1252 - 12531/2. For the native of Champaka
Nadiamsa, Aquarius ascendant, eighth or ninth year
will give marriage. The effects stated for 2nd dasa
will bear truth. The country will be in the grip of a
famine (?) Saturn in Libra will cause wealth. The 6th
year, or the next year will in Saturn’s sub period will
give auspicious results, destroying a thousand evils.
Due to the mercy of Lord Siva, father will revive
happiness.
Notes: These lines do not lead to any tangible
clue except the time of marriage, and Saturn’s transit
in Libra giving wealth to an Aquarius native.
दररिशांशत्रिकोणे च दारजनमर्षभं FE: ie Wey
उद्राहानन्तरं भाग्यं पश्चद्योगो भविष्यति |
्षमदाये दारहानिं शिपरेणोद्राहमादिशेत् ॥१२५५ ॥
विपदृशान्ते जननी भर्तृक्लेशेन करिता |
स्धराधिपान्तरे काले सम्पदाये पितुर्विपत् ॥१२५६ ॥
जीविते साधनेशान्ते पितृनिर्याणमादिशेत्।
सम्पदरशासन्धिकाते त्वेकादश च वत्सरे ॥१२५७॥
पितामहस्यारष्टं स्याततुलाने वृशिके शनो ।

कर्माधिपदशाकाले शुभाशुभफलं समम् ॥१२५८ ॥
1254 - 1258. Aquarius Ascendant - Champaka
Nadiamsa: (a) The Moon sign of the spouse will
correspond to the sign represented by the Navamsa
occupied by the 7th lord (Sun) or 8 trine thereof.
(b) The native will be happy and will prosper
after marriage.
(c) He will incur danger to spouse during his
fourth dasa and he will immediate get remarried.
(d) Father’s Death: During the concluding
phase of the third dasa, his mother will be emaciated
(i.e. grieved) due to loss of her husband. (That is, the
subject will lose his father.) Alternatively, the 2nd
dasa during the sub period of 8th lord will endanger
his father. If he survives the sub period that is the 6th
in order (in the second dasa) will cause father’s exit.
(“Saadhanesanthe” 5700010 read as
“Saadhanesanthare”.)
(£) Paternal Grand-father: During the 11th
year of age (or) in the junction period of the 2nd dasa,
(with the end of first dasa) danger to the said relative
will come to pass, with Saturn moving in the end of
Libra, or in Scorpio.
(f) Dasa of 10th Lord: This dasa will give
equally auspicious and inauspicious effects.
राजान्तरं प्रकुर्वीत aerated विनिर्दिशेत्
सहोदरीमनस्तापं विक्रमेशस्य दायगे ॥१२५९ ॥
बुधान्तरे व्याकुलं RCTS TH शुभावहम् |
1259 - 12591/2. The dasa of Mars: Due to
change of king limited happiness will exist. There
will also be distress to sister during this dasa. In the
sub period of Mercury, the person will be distressed.
Jupiter’s sub period will give beneficial effects.
सुखेशांशे तल्िकोणे west गते शनो ॥१२६० |
स्वपितुः क्लेशकालः स्यात् स्वप्रभोश्च विशेषतः,
संपदाये पाण्डयदेशे सर्वाध्यक््याधिकारवान् ॥१२६१॥
1260 - 1261. When Satur transits the sign
identical with the Navamsa occupied by the 4th lord
(Venus) or a trine thereof, his father will be in
difficulties, particularly related to royal assignments. During the 2nd dasa of the native, father will
Chandra Kala Nadi
beget an exalted position of all-round importance
under the king of Pandya.
चम्पकांशे पूर्वभागे शनिभुक्तौ फलं स्मृतम्।
स्वप्राबल्यं क्षेमदाये वंशोपरि सुभाग्यवान् ॥१२६२ ॥
नरवाहनभूषापिर्गुरपुक्तो विशेषतः।
1262 - 1262 1/2. (The first line just referring to
Saturn’s sub period without mentioning specific
effects may be ignored.) During the 4th dasa, the
native will greatly prosper. After the twentieth year
of age, he will beget much fortunes. During Jupiter’s
sub period (in 4th dasa), he will acquire conveyances
and ormaments.
कर्माधिपे ame धनलाभेश वीक्षिते ॥१२६२॥
स्थिप्लगे प्रजातश्च कर्मसाग्राज्ययोगजः।
सप्राज्ययोगे धनिकः प्रतापी
विख्यातकीर्वर्बहुसंपदाढ़यः।
सन्मार्गवान् मनरिनृपालसेवी
कामी सदा धर्मरतः TAH ॥१२६४॥
1263 - 1264. Karma Samrajya Yoga for Immovable Ascendant: The lord of the 10th, positioned in an angle to the Moon, and aspected by the
lords of the 2nd and 11th (both counted from natal
ascendant) will cause Karma Samrajya Yoga. Asa
result, the person will be rich, valorous, widely
famous and will be wealthy with a lot of possessions.
He will adopt a virtuous path and will serve the king
and his minister. He will be lustful, be ever righteous
and will enjoy much pleasures.
Notes: The yoga given above applies to an
immovable ascendant, viz. one of Taurus, Leo, Scorpio and Aquarius.
Example: Take Taurus as the ascendant. The
lord of the tenth from ascendant is Saturn. Lords of
‘2ndand 11th in orderare Mercury and Jupiter. Hence
the yoga is formed thus for this ascendant - Saturn in
the 10th from the Moon sign, and in joint aspect to
Mercury and Jupiter.
This yoga may not exactly apply to Leo whose
2nd and 11th lord is Mercury. Here instead of his
aspecting Venus, the 10th lord, it should be relaxed
to be a conjunction.

Deva Keralam 199
साप्राज्ययोगे कर्मेशे धनेशेन निरीक्षिते ।
तदशायां महद्भाग्यं राजान्तरफलं स्मृतम् ॥१२६५ ॥
्षेमदाये विशेषः स्यान्मध्ये भाग्याभिवृद्धिमान् |
रजन्ते सुतप्रापि्ित्यश्रीसोख्यवान् भवेत् ॥१२६६ |
1265 ~ 1266. In the above yoga, the dasa of the
10th lord, who is in aspect to 2nd (and 11th) lord(s)
will usher much prosperity due to change of the king.
The 4th dasa will specially be revealing. In the
middle of this dasa, the person’s prosperity will
increase, he will obtain a son and firm wealth and be
happy.
MAY चम्पकांशस्थे तथा साप्राज्ययोगजः,
भूपाल सेवी स्वपिता तततुल्याधिकभाग्यवान् ॥१२६७ ॥
1267. Aquarius Ascendant: SatuminChampaka
Nadiamsa, while there exists Samrajya Yoga in the
horoscope, will make the native’s father serve the
ruler. And the father’s fortunes will exceed that of the
ruler (i.e. father will be abundantly fortunate).
Notes: How (Karma) Samrajya Yoga - different
from Akhanda Samrajya Yoga - occurs has been
explained in slokas 1263-64 supra. In the present
sloka, the involvement of the lord of the ascendant,
placed in Champaka Nadiamsa, in any favourable
sign, will take the person’s father to dizzy heights in
terms of fortunes and progress.
चम्पकांशे भेदमाता स्वभर््ानुगमिष्यति ।
विपदशान्ते काले क्षमदाये स्वभुक्तिषु ॥१२६८ ॥
लाभाधिपदशाकाते स्वमात्ररिष्टमादिशेत् |
स्वभूक्तो व्याकुलं सत्यं विरोधिभिरुपद्रवम् ॥१२६९ ॥
इदमेव फलं सत्यं कन्यान्तादितुलाशनौ |
1268 - 12691/2. Birth in Champaka Nadiamsa,
Aquarius ascendant denotes that the step-mother will
sacrifice her life at the pyre of her husband during the
ending phase of native’s third dasa, or in the firstsub
period of the fourth dasa. The dasa of 11th Jord
(Jupiter) will cause danger to his mother. The first
sub period of the 11th lord’s dasa will greatly distress
the native and will produce fear through enemies.
These are the effects of Saturn moving in Virgo and
Libra. (That is during these events Saturn will transit
these signs.)
सम्पदाये स्वल्पदुखक्षेमदाये FAVA: le 290 ॥
किंचिच्छकटयोगेन कर्माधिपदशाव्यथाम् |
amet भाग्यवृद्धिः स्वभुक्तो व्याकुलं महत् ॥१२७१॥
राजन्यवेष्णवद्वेषं तन्मूलाद्व्याकुलं महत् |
्षमदाये मध्यभागे प्राबल्यं चोत्तरोत्तरम् ॥१२७२ ॥
चम्पकांश क्षेमदाये गेहे कल्याणसं भ्रमम् |
सन्तानोत्पत्तिनाशं च पलीपीडां विनिर्दिशेत् tie 293 ॥
धनाधिपदशाकाले लग्नाधिपतिभुक्तिषु |
धनधान्यसुभूषाप्ति पुण्यतीर्थाटनं शुभम् ॥१२७४॥
स्प्राधिपान्ते काले स्वदेहे जाढयमादिशेत्।
कलव्रपुत्ररोगेन व्याकुलानन्तरं शुभम् ॥१२५७५॥
केत्वन्तरे विरोधेन संचितार्थविनाशनम् |
POTS फलं चेति राजचोराग्निजं भयम् ॥१२७६ |
भराग्याधिपान्तरे काले भाग्यवद्धिुतोत्सवम्।
दारवंशे ae स्यात् स्वप्रमोश्च विशेषतः ॥१२७७॥
सर्यान्तरे रजकार्य देशत्यागं शुभाशुभम् |
a विशेषाप्ि स्वदेहामयशोकवान् ॥१२७८ ॥
1270 - 1278. Aquarius Ascendant - Champaka
Nadiamsa: (a) The 2nd dasa will give sadness ina
limited way while the 4th dasa will cause much grief
(in terms of family deaths).
(b) Sakata Yoga: Due to Sakata Yoga the dasa
of 10th lord will give some distress.
(c) Fourth Dasa: The 4th dasa will cause increase of prosperity, but the first sub period will
indicate much distress. The said sub period will
promote enmity with the king and Vaishnavites
(those belonging to the school of Lord Vishnu).
Gradually prosperity will be on the increase from the
middle of the 4th dasa. In this dasa, there will be a
family marriage, but children born (to the subject)
will be destroyed. His wife will incur evils.
(d) Jupiter’s Dasa: In the sub period of the lord
of the ascendant, during the dasa of the 2nd lord
(Jupiter) the person will acquire wealth, grains and’

ornaments. He will visit pilgrimage centers and
beget auspicious effects. In the sub period ruled by
the lord of the 8th (Mercury), he will incur physical
ailments. His spouse and progeny will face distress.
After a while happiness will revive. The sub period
of Ketu will destroy the wealth gathered. In the
months denoted by adverse solar transits, in the said
Ketu bhukti, he will incur fear from king, thieves and
fire. The sub period of the 9th lord (Venus) will
increase prosperity apart from happy events relating
to progeny; but there will be evils in the family of inJaws. In the Sun’s sub period due to royal assignments (rather wrath), he will have to leave the
country. More specially in the sub period of the
Moon. Further in the Moon’s phase, he will have
illnesses of the body.
लग्नच्चतुर्थगे सूर्ये जातो साप्राज्ययोगके |
वासं SN TART कुत्सितप्रभुराज्यके ॥१२७९ ॥
सूर्याशगे तत्विकोणे स्फुटयोगं गते शनो ।
इदमेव फलं सत्यं योजयेत् कालवित्तमः॥१२८० ॥
1279 - 1280. Interruption by the Sun: In the
case of Samrajya Yoga formed, the simultaneous
placement of the Sun in the 4th, the native will live
ina mean ruler’s kingdom. The time of interruption
will coincide with the transit of Saturn in the sign
denoted by the Sun-occupied Navamsa, or a trine
thereof. These effects declared by astrological experts will be true.
Note: For Samrajya Yoga, see sloka 1263 - 64
supra.
सर्वदाये राहुभक्ती GIT व्यथा भवेत् |
Ararat तथा विन्धात् फलं साप्राज्ययोगके ॥१२८१॥
1281. The Sub Periods of Rahu & Mercury:
The 2nd half of each of Rahu and Mercury sub
periods, in any dasa will cause sadness.
Notes: The reference to Samrajya Yoga givenin
this sloka is an interruption.
लग्नाधिपदशामृत्यूः स्धाधिपतिभुक्तिषु |
चम्पकांशे पूर्वभागे ज्वरेण मृतिमादिशेत् ieee?
1282. The subject of Aquarius ascendant’s
Chandra Kala Nadi
Champaka Nadiamsa wil] quit the world in the 8th
lord’s (Mercury’s) sub period during the main rule of
the lord of the ascendant (Saturn). One belonging to
the former half of this Nadiamsa will die out of
(dangerous) fever.
लग्नाद् व्ययगते राहौ परलोको न विद्यते |
पापसाग्राज्ययोगे च स्वपिता च तथा भवेत् ॥१२८२ ॥
1283. The 12th House: Rahu in the 12th (Capricorn) will not send the native to heavens (after
death). A malefic associated with Samrajya Yoga
(slokas 1263 - 64) will cause the same effect concerning the father.
चिरायुषलिपुतराश्च पुत्रिकैका चिरायुषी |
चम्पकांशे एलं सत्यं साप्राज्ययोगजस्य च ॥१२८४॥
1284. One will have three sons and one daughter, all long-lived, as a result of Samrajyya Yoga
(Slokas 1263 - 64). These effects for Champaka
Nadiamsa will bear truth.
चत्वारिंशो ऽपमृत्युश्च जीविते पुत्रेशोकवान् |
सहोदरक्लेशमेति हर्थनाशं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥१२८५॥
चम्पकांशकगे मन्दे पञ्चपञ्चाश वत्सरे ।
कालमृत्युभयप्राप्ति मास्म मीनादिषु त्रिषु ॥१२८६ ॥
1285 - 1286. (Continuation of sloka 1282) - The
subject belonging to Champaka Nadiamsa will incur
untimely death during his 40th year. If he survives,
he will be grieved on account of a son. He will also
incur troubles to (or on account of) brothers, and will
lose wealth. Saturn placed in the subject Nadiamsa
will timely kill the Aquamius native in 55th year with
the Sun traversing the three signs starting with Pisces.
ग्रन्थान्तरे कुंभमासे ह्यथवा वृश्चिकेऽपि च।
कृष्णपक्षमृतिं चेति नन्दाभद्रातिथीषु च।
पोडशान्दे मृत्युभंय gamed महाविपत्।
चत्वारिशोऽपमृत्युश्च शान्त्या शानत प्रयास्यति ॥१२८७॥
1287, Other Authorities: According to some,
the Sun going in Aquarius, or even in Scorpio will in
a dark lunar half, on Nanda or Bhadra Thithi, cause
the exit of the subject from the world. The same

Deva Keralam
authorities hold that 16th year will be a year of fear
of death. 40h year will usher danger from untimely
end. There will be a great danger in the 22nd year.
Suitable propitiations be done in these cases.
मृतावस्थागे लग्नेशे दामिनीयोगजस्तथा |
अतिमाल्ये महाभाग्यं किंचिच्छयामतनुः शटः॥१२८८ ॥
Maa कविर्मानी बहवस्तस्य सोदराः।
सोदर्यश्चतथा सर्वा मृताशचैकाऽवतिष्ठते ॥१२८९ I
एकैव कन्यका तस्या विवाहः पञ्चविशतो |
यत्रं करोति विंशाब्दे विघ्नं पपेन कर्मणा ॥१२९० ॥
जनको प्रियते art द्राविशब्दे प्रहान्तर।
षट्विशात् परतश्चस्याः समृद्धिरुपजायते ॥१२९१॥
विदेशे च तज्जननी मरिष्यत्यष्टविशके |
षष्ठे मन्दे विनीचांशे मातुर्दीर्धज्वराद्धयम् ॥१२९२ ॥
बाल्ये पितृविनाशेन क्लेशं प्राप्नोति भूरिशः,
केदापदामिनीयोगे sewer श्रियायुतः॥१२९३ ॥
्रिशोपरि सुभाग्यापिि wierd परं सुखम् |
1288 - 12931/2. Damini Yoga: (a) There should
be Damini yoga in the horoscope while the ascendant
lord Saturn is in extremis (Mritavastha). Such a
person will beget much fortunes in his early childhood. He will be somewhat dusky in complexion, be
crafty, an expert in use of weapons, a poet, be
honourable and will have many brothers and many
sisters. Out of the many sisters, all will die (prematurely) but one. He will have only one daughter
whom he will get married in 25th year. During 20th
year, his trial for her marriage will face obstacles due
to his (earlier) sins. His father will die en route during
his (native’s) 22nd year. During his 16th year he will
have abundance (of everything). During his 20th
year he will lose his mother in a foreign land.
(b) With Damini Yoga, Saturn placed in the 6th
with debility in Amsa (not Navamsa but other applicable Aries divisions) will cause a long-lasting fever
for the mother of the native. He will lose his father
during his boyhood and will incur much grief.
(c) Kedara-Damini Yoga will give wealth in the
16th year. After30 prosperity will be on the rise. His
happiness follow the destruction of his relatives.
Notes: (a) Damini yoga as per standard prescription occurs whenall the 7 planets are insixsigns. This
is a Sankhya Yoga. Saturn also being a part of the
yoga, Should be in Mritavastha, that is in the last six
degrees of an odd sign, or in the initial six degrees of
an even sign.
(b) In this Damini Yoga, Saturn instead of being
in Mritavastha, should be in Cancer with Aries
divisions.
(c) Kedara-Daminiis not one yoga. Kedara yoga
occurs when all the 7 planets are in four signs.
Apparently the author had some thing else in mind or
there is some compositional error.
मृतावस्थागे लग्नेशे लग्नात् षष्ठांशके स्थिते ॥१२९४॥
एजयोगस्य संप्रप्तिरत्पायुर्दायमादिशेत् |
जन्मदाये पितर्मृत्यु ्जनन्याश्चथवा भवेत् ॥१२९५ ॥
दद््रक्लेशमापत्नो मेहरोगेण कर्शितः।
विप्लवेन विनिर्गत्य नानादेशेषु संचरन् ॥१२९६ ॥
प्लेच्छसेवी महापापी बहुभ्रातृविनाशवान्।
यावज्जीवं कलेशितश्च जीवितो पापहेतुना ॥१२९७॥
1294 - 1297. Saturn in extremis (Mrithavastha)
in the divisions belonging to the 6th (Cancer) will
give Raja Yoga effects but a limited length of life. It
will cause the end of father or mother in the first dasa
of the subject. He will be troubled by penury, grief,
danger and urinary diseases. Due to a revolt (in the
country) he will be displaced and will wander in
many places. He will serve a Mlechcha king, be a
great sinner and will lose many of his brothers.
Throughout his life he will be grieved, and will live
through sinful means.
Notes: "Shashiamsake" means the divisions of
Cancer. That is Saturn in Shodasa Varga scheme
should obtain many of Cancer positions.
Shashtamsaka here does not refer to the one sixth
division, which is not recognised in the Shodasa
Varga.
मृतावस्थागे कर्मेशे पापांशे घोरनाडिगे |
धोरजीवनवात्नित्यं यावदायुष्माप्तुयात् ॥१:०२८

मृतावस्थागे लग्नेशे दशायां क्ररभुक्तिषु |
THAT कालेचापमृल्युस्तथा श्रितः ॥१२९९ ॥
1298 - 1299. The 10th lord (Mars) in extremis
with malefic divisions, and placed in Ghora Nadiamsa
will make the whole life miserable. (That is miseries
willbe endless.) Untimely death will occur in the sub
period of a malefic or of 8th lord during the dasa of
Saturn placed in extrentis.
Note: The condition of Ghora Nadiamsa be
ignored with the introduction of “Mrithavastha”.
STAM तुलासूर्ये षष्ठे Ts सुभाग्यवान्।
भ्रातृभा्रीबहुत्वं स्याज्येष्ठभ्रातृममन्वितः॥१३०० ॥
स्वपित्रधिकसंपन्नो राजमुद्राधिकारवान् |
संपदाये योगभद्गं वेष्णवद्रेषहेतुना ॥१२०१ ॥
नानाव्यकुलकार्याणि क्तेशं स्थाद्रसुवत्सर ।
राजान्तरवशाद्धाग्यं सोदयोद्राहतः परम् ॥१३०२॥
प्रलोद्राहसोख्याप्ति पितृसोख्यं विनिर्दिशेत्
सम्पदाये भाग्यनाशं स्वपितामहनाशनम् ॥१२०२ ॥
पञ्चमाब्दात् परं चेति नानाव्याकुलवान् पिता।
विपदायेमहत् सौख्यं द्यूनाधिपतिभुक्तिषु ॥१३०४॥
योगभद्गं प्रकुर्वीत जातकस्य क्वचित् सुखम्|
1300 - 1304 1/2. Aquarius Ascendant
Champaka Nadiamsa: The Sun in debility as the
Moon is in the 6th (Cancer) will give effects as
mentioned in “a” to “c” below.
(a) This yoga will cause much prosperity. Further results for this yoga are - One will have many
brothers and sisters, including one older brother. He
will be wealthier than his father and will enjoy
powers granted by the king.
(b) Second Dasa: Due to enmity with
Vaishnavites, he will have checkered prosperity in
the 2nd dasa. During the 8th yearhe will pass through
a very difficult phase. His fortunes will take a
favourable tum following change of ruler. His
brother will beget married. The person will derive
much happiness in his marital life. His father will live
a happy life. This dasa will destroy his general
fortunes and paternal grand-father as well. His Sth
Chandra Kala Nadi
year will give much distress to his father.
(c) Third Dasa: This dasa will give abundant
happiness in the sub period ruled by the 7th lord (the
Sun). There will be generally obstacles with scope
forsome happiness. (That is, the other sub periods in
this dasa will not be of great help.)
लग्नात् पञ्चमगे केतावसितेन निरीभ्षिते ॥१२०५॥
गुल्परोगेण च पिता काशरोगेण कर्शितः
तदोषपरिहारार्थ शान्ति कुर्याद्विचक्षणः ॥१३०६ ॥
द्वादशादित्यनामानि भानुवारे प्रपूजयेत् |
र्त पीताम्बरादीनि देवङ्गाय प्रदापयेत् ॥१२३०७॥
देहारोग्यं महत् सोख्यं नित्यश्रीनित्यमडगंलम्।
1305 - 13071/2. Father’s [ll-health & Remedies: In case of Aquarius ascendant, Champaka
Nadiamsa, Ketu in the 5th in aspect to Saturn will
cause enlargement of the spleen or glands and cough
(like tuberculosis of the lungs) to the native’s father.
Necessary remedies be sought to overcome these
diseases. On Sundays the names of the twelve Suryas
should be recited (i.e. reciting Dwadasaditya Stotra)
and donation of red silken clothes to an astrologer be
given. Following these, recovery of father’s health,
great happiness, firm wealth and lasting auspiciousness will accrue.
षष्ठे चन्द्रे शुभांशस्थे केसरीयोगजस्य च ॥१३०८ |
अपमूत्युभयप्राप्ति TRA महाविपत् ॥१३०९ ॥
कुंभलग्ने षोडशाब्दे ह्यथवा मनुवत्सर |
महारोगभयार्तश्च रोगाधिपतिभुक्तिषु ॥१२१० ॥
जीविते चिरजीवी च स्वल्पपुत्रो विवाहितः।
राजमुद्राधिकाराप्िर्महायोगरतः सुखी ॥१२११॥
रन्धाधिपदशाकाले मारकग्रहभक्तिषु |
कालमृत्युभयगप्रापि चतुश्वत्वारिवत्सरे 12322
एकचत्वारिंशकेऽब्दे चत्वारिंशतिवत्सरे |
चतुश्चत्वारिंशकेऽब्दे HUTA मृतिं वदेत् ॥१२१३॥
1308 - 1313. Aquarius Ascendant: The Moon
in the 6th, with a benefic’s Navamsa, and involved in
Kesari Yoga will cause fear of untimely death. Inthe

Deva Keralam
middle of the year (should be in the middle part of his
life) he will be greatly endangered. One born in this
ascendant in the 16th year or in the 8th year will be
troubled by a major disease during the sub period of
the 6th lord (Moon). If he survives, he will be longlived, be married and will have a limited number of
progeny. He will have powers undera king’s rule and
enjoy great prosperity. During the sub period of a
killer planet in the dasa of 8th lord (Mercury), (or) in
the 44th year, timely death will strike the person.
40th or 41st year also could be fatal.
मोहनांशे क्रिये जीवे तृच्चग्रहसमन्विते |
मुद्रिकांशे प्रजातश्च रक्तवर्णः शुभाकृतिः॥१२१४॥
मद्रिकांशे पूर्वभागे मोहनांकगे गुरो |
वीरशेवो दुराचारो नानाव्यापारजीवकः॥१३१५ ॥
भ्रातृद्रययुतो मानी भेदभ्रातृसमन्वितः।
भगिनीत्रयवान् गालत्ये भ्रातृनाशेन करितः॥१२१६ ॥
स्वपिता वार्धके दुखी पुत्रनाशेन करितः।
काशादिना नेत्रपीडां संचितार्थविनाशनम् ॥१२१७॥
1314 - 1317. Mudrika Nadiamsa: Birth in the
former half of this Nadiamsa ina fixed sign (specially
Aquarius) will obtain following results, if Jupiter is
placed in Mohana Nadiamsa. The subject will be a
staunch Saivite. Yet he will be of bad conduct. He
will live through various sources of business activities, will have two brothers and three sisters, be
honourable, endowed with a step-brother, and be
emaciated due to loss of a brother during his childhood. His father will be miserable during his old age,
will grieve the loss ofa son, will suffer from disorders
of lungs and eyes and will lose the wealth accumulated by him.
Notes: Mudrika Nadiamsa rules from 18° 24' to
18° 36' of movable signs; from 11° 24' to 11° 36' of
immovable signs; andd from 3° 24' to 3° 36' of
common signs.
मोहनांशकगे yp कलत्द्वयवान्पिता |
पितामहस्तथा FIM पूर्वभागे सपलीकः॥१३१८ ॥
Te पूर्वभागे स्वपिता च पितामहः।
बाल्ये क्लेशं च लभते मध्ये भाग्य युतो भवेत् ॥१३१९॥
TAA सुसन्तोषं वार्धके स्वापितामहः।
दारान्तरे Tata दस्यं रहसि भोगवान् ॥१३२० ॥
स्वपिता मध्यवयसि वनान्तरपुरे वसन् |
अतिश्रीमान् भाग्ययुक्तो धनघान्याम्बरी सुखी ॥१२२१॥
1318 - 1321. (a) Two Marriages to Father &
Grand-father: One born in Mudrika Nadiamsa of a
fixed sign and having Venus in Mohana Nadiamsa
will beget the following effects. His father, so also
paternal prand-father, will be twice-married.
(b) Step-mother: The native of former half of
Mudrika, fixed sign, will have a step-mother (without
involvement of Venus as in “a” above).
(c) Father & Grand-father: Other authorities
state that the father and paternal grand-father of the
native described in “b” would in early childhood
undergo difficulties and be prosperous in the middle
part of life. The paternal grand-tather would obtain
a son through another wife and would have secret
pleasures with his maid-servant. The native’s father
would live in a town surrounded by forests in the
middle of his life, would become very wealthy,
prosperous and endowed with money, grains and
robes.
जन्मदाये पिता सोख्यं SaaS: |
नानादेशे प्रसिद्धश्च राजप्रीतिप्रसादवान् 12322 ॥
1322. Birth in Fixed Sign - Mudrika Nadiamsa:
The first dasa of the subject will give much happiness
to father, who will become famous in many foreign
lands and obtain the mercy of the rulers.
पितृभावांशके शुक्रे लग्नात् कर्मत्रिकोणगे |
स्वापिता वार्धके काले नेत्रहानि युतो भवेत् ॥१२२३॥
पुत्रशोकवंशापत्नो भेदभ्रातृवशाद्रव्यथाम् |
कालान्ते Me भाग्यनाशं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥१३२४॥
1323 - 1324.-Venus should be in the 5th or 9th
counted fromthe 10th house. He should further be in
the 9th from Navamsa ascendant. As a result, the
subject’s father would have eye-disorders in his old
age, would be endangered losing his progeny, trou-

bled by step-brothers, and would later on lose his
brothers and prosperity.
मोहनां शे पूर्वभागे सुमत्यंशे निशाकरे।
स्वपिता मतिमान् रागी पुत्रीपु्रसमृद्धिमान् 19324 ॥
भेदमातृपियो नित्यं सत्कलत्रयुतो भवेत् |
वीरशेवागमप्रीतस्तन्माे प्रियवत्सलः॥१२२६ ॥
शिवभक्तिरतो नित्यं शिवकेडर्यधर्मवान् |
्रव्यार्जनसमर्थश्च ATTA धनार्जकः॥१३२७॥
1325 - 1327. Birth in Mohana Nadiamsa - First
Half: In this case, the Moon in Sumathi Nadiamsa
denotes the following about the native’s father. He
would be intelligent, passionate, endowed with sons
and daughters, be attached to his step-mother, would
have a virtuous spouse (i.e.native’s mother will be
virtuous), be a staunch Saivite, be fond of Sastras and
follow related paths. He would regularly worship
Lord Siva and would perform related deeds. He
would be skillful in earning wealth, and would eam
in several ways.
Notes: For Mohana Nadiamsa, please refer to
notes under sloka 445, Book I.
aaa गते राहो ware चन्द्रसंयुते ।
धर्माधर्मविचरेण स्वपिता च धनार्जकः॥१३२८ ॥
किंचित्कटोरपापेन संचितार्थविनाशवान् |
वार्धके बहुदारिषंयं पत्रनाशं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥१३२९ ॥
Tere राजपलीवशाद् व्यथाम् |
जातकस्य विपदाये ward पितुरविपत् ॥१३२० ॥
पञ्चविंशात् परं क्तेशं मोहनांरे पितुर्यथा |
संचितार्थव्ययादीनि भाग्यनाशं क्वचित् क्वचित् ॥१३३१॥
1328 - 1331. (a) Birth in Mohana Nadiamsa -
First Half: Rahu in the 9th house in the company of
the Moon and begetting a Navamsa ruled by Mars
denotes that the person’s father would know the
difference between a righteous and an unrighteous
thing (i.e. father would be a righteous person), would
(initially) earn wealth, would lose the same due to
somewhat grave a sin, would inold age be under great
overty, would lose his sons, and would incur enmity
Chandra Kala Nadi
with relatives and grief on account of the queen.
(b) When the subject will be in the 2nd half of his
third dasa, fatality to father be declared. After his
25th year, the subject will undergo difficulties, and
be worried on account of father, will spend his
savings, and will incur a partial loss of his fortunes.
ूर्याशके feet स्फुटयोगं गते शनो |
विपद्याये मोहनांशे पितृनिर्याणमादिशेत् 112332 ॥
सुखाधिपक्रातयाशो मोहनांशे पितुर्यथा |
वृश्चिकादित्रिमासेषु पितृतिर्याणमादिशेत् ॥१२३२ ॥
1332 - 1333. Loss of Father: The native of
Mohana Nadiamsa will in his third dasa lose his
father when Saturn transits the sign identical with the
Rasi occupied by 4th lord or Navamsa occupied by
the Sun, ora trine thereof.
संपदाये मातृनाशं तुलान्ते वृश्चिके शनो ।
अतीव क्लेश कालः स्यात् श्षप्रेणारोग्यवान् पिता ॥१३३४॥
1334. Mother: The 2nd dasa will destroy mother
when Saturn moves in the end of Libra or in Scorpio.
This will be a very difficult phase for (the health of)
father, but he will recover early.
भाग्यकाले दारनाशं जातस्य मोहनांशके |
जातकस्य फलं सत्यं स्वापितुश्च तथा भवेत् 12334 ॥
1335. The native of Mohana Nadiamsa will lose
his wife when his prosperity begins to rise. Results
Stated for the native of Mohana Nadiamsa, and his
father, as above, will bear truth.
सुमत्यंशके Ts मोहनांशकमे गुर |
मुद्रिकांशे पूर्वभागे ज्येष्टभ्रातृविनाशवान् 112336 ॥
उयेष्ठभ्राता सुधर्मात्मा पिता न ऋणमोचकः।
पुत्द्रययुतो मानी भित्नतिङ्गपपूजकः॥१२३७ ॥
पितृवाक्यरतो नित्यं किचिदज्गानपापवान्।
पुरा्राह्मणशपेन क्षयरोगप्रपीडितः॥१२३२३८ ॥
जातकस्य विपदाये मृतेः पूर्वं पितुस्तथा |
गयेष्टभ्रातृविनाथं च पश्चात् क्लेशं वितिरदिशेत् ॥१२३९ ॥
स्वभेदजननीमृत्युः पश्ादारविनाशनम्।

Deva Keralam
पितृव्यद्रयनाशं च विपदाये न AWA: ॥१२४० ॥
1336 - 1340. Mudrika Nadiamsa - Former
Half: (a) One born ina fixed sign in this space of the
zodiac, with the Moon in Sumathi Nadiamsa, and
Jupiter in Mohana Nadiamsa will lose (one of) his
older brother(s). His elder brother will be quite a
righteous person while father will never be relieved
of debts. The subject will be endowed with two sons,
be honourable, will worship Lord Siva, will honour
the words of his father and will commitsome sins due
to ignorance. Due to the curse of a Brahmin in an
earlier birth, he will be troubled by tuberculosis.
(b) Many Deaths in 3rd Dasa: He will die in his
third dasa following the death of his father. He will
incur grief on account of the destruction of his elder
brother. His step mother, wife and two paternal
uncles will also pass away (during this dasa).
मोहनांशे विपदाये दारुद्रयविनाशनम् |
तृतीयोद्राहतः पूर्वं प्रनथिरोगेण कर्शितः ॥१२४१ ॥
1341. Mohana Nadiamsa - Fixed Sign: The
subject belonging to this degree will lose his two
wives in his third dasa, and will havea third marriage.
Prior to this he will be emaciated due to diseases of
blood vessels.
Notes: Slokas 1336 - 41 show the possibility of '
deaths in the 3rd dasa separately in case of Mudgara
Nadiamsa and Mohana Nadiamsa. As could observed, these two Nadiamsas are simultaneously
dealt with in this part of the text.
दारेशे शनिसंयुक्ते नवमे राहु संस्थिते |
मोहनांशे पूर्वभागे कलत्रत्रयवान् भवेत् ॥१२३४२ ॥
Sods सन्ताने तृतीये पुत्रभाग्यवान् |
दारद्रयविनाशेन यौवने क्लेशवान् भवेत् ॥१२४२ ॥
1342 - 1343. Three Wives: Birth in the first half
of Mohana Nadiamsa, fixed sign will give three
wives provided the 7th lord is with Saturn, as the 9th
from the ascendant is occupied by Rahu. His first
wife will give birth to one child only while the third
one will be fortunate in respect of progeny (i.e. she
__ will have many children). Due to loss of two spouses,
the subject in his youth will incur grief.
मोहनांशकगे जीवे सप्तमे भौम संस्थिते ।
HSMM दीर्धायुर्भदभ्राता तथा भवेत् ॥१२४४॥
1344. Jupiter in Mohana Nadiamsa while Mars
is in the 7th from the ascendant will cause long lives
to the person’s younger brother(s). Soalso to his stepbrother(s).
मद्रिकोे पूर्वभागे त्रिभगिन्यश्चिरायुष्यः।
एका Agel चेव दत्तपुत्रवती भवेत् ॥१३४५ ॥
ग्रन्थान्तरे रिकांे पुत्रशोकवती सदा |
एकपुत्रवती सा च क्लेशिता च तथापरा ॥१२३४६ ॥
अमङ्गल्य द्वे भगिन्यौ त्वेका पुत्रवती भवेत् ।
पुत्रिके द्वे सुमद्गल्ये सोदरीफललक्षणम् ॥१२४७ ॥
_ 4345-1347. Mudrika Nadiamsa - First Half
= Sisters: The native of this space ina fixed sign will
have three sisters with long spans of life. One of them
will have a long married life and will beget adopted
progeny. According to another text, she will incur
grief on account of loss of progeny (of her own) and
will (ultimately) have one surviving child. Othertwo
sisters will be inauspicious (obtaining early
widowhood) and one of them will have progeny. Two
daughters (it is not properly related) will be auspicious, having long spans of marriage. These are the
effects concerning sisters.
सुमत्यंशकगे चन्द्रे स्वर्भानुयुतवीशषिते |
स्वभेदभगिनी क्लिष्टा भर्तुः पूर्व मरिष्यति egy
खपित्ररिष्टितः पूर्व स्वभेदजननीविपत्।
यदि जीवेत् सुमाङ्गल्या पुत्रीपुत्रसमन्विता ॥१३४९ ॥
1348 - 1349. Mudrika Nadiamsa - First Half:
The Moon in Sumathi Nadiamsa in the company of
or in aspect to Rahu will cause the following effects
incase of birth in the subject space ina fixed sign. His
step sister will be a troubled soul and will predecease
her husband. Before the death of his father, the said
sister will be involved in great danger. If she survives, she will be auspicious and will have sons and
daughters.
Notes: The present two slokas are related to”
sloka 1336 supra.

जीवे केतुयुते जातो मोहनांशे विशेषतः।
अन्तः क्रोधी कनिष्ठश्च पाषण्डाचारतत्परः ॥१३५० |
वीरशैव मते योगे जीवे केतुसमन्विे |
मोहनां शे प्रजातश्च वीर शेवो भवेद्रधुवम् ॥१३५१॥
सोद्रस्य विशेषेण जातकस्य क्वचित् क्वचित् |
स्वपिताधिकपाषण्डी सहोट्रविहीनवान ॥१३५२॥
1350 - 1352. Jupiter - Ketu Conjunction: This
conjunction particularly for Mohana Nadiamsa (fixed
sign) will act as under. The person will be inwardly
given anger, be the youngest issue of the family, be
a hypocrite and bea staunch Saivite. Compared to the
native, his brothers and father will be highly hypocritical innature. His father will be bereft of younger
brothers.
सुते Wed जातश्चापान्ते पञ्चमस्थिते |
सप्रजा बहुलाः सन्ति सोदरस्य फलं स्मृतम् ॥१२३५३ ॥
1353. For birth in Leo ascendant, two malefics
in the end of Sagittarius will give many daughters.
Wee शनिसंयुक्ते सोदरस्य सुतस्य च।
भगिनी पुत्रभार्याणां वदेदुर्मरणं तथा ॥१३५४॥
सुताधिपदशाकाले इदं फलमुदाहतम् |
तद्धावभावापिपेषु योजयेत् कालवित्तमः॥१३५५ ॥
1354 - 1355. Mohana Nadiamsa: The 7th lord,
in case of a fixed sign ascending, in the company of
Saturn will cause death by unnatural means 10 a son
of the native’s brother, or to the daughter-in-law of
the native’s sister. This wil! occur when the subject
will be in the dasa of the Sth Jord. This should be
understood according to (the strength of) the Sthlord.
ICON पूर्वभागे जातस्य मोहनांशके ।
कालान्तरे कनिष्ठश्च होकपुत्रयुतो भवेत् ॥१२५६ ॥
TTA व्यास मतेजातस्य मोहनां शके |
कनिष्ठस्य द्विपुत्रापिः खीप्रजा बहुलाः स्मृताः॥१२३५७॥
एकपुत्रिरयुष्मान् भविष्यति न संशयः
गर्गमते सोदरश्च मोहनांशे मृत प्रजः॥१३५८ ॥
Chandra Kala Nadi
कृच्छणादृष्टयलेन Taga श्विरायुष्मान् |
योवने भेदक भ्राता प्रान्धिरोगप्रपीडितः॥१३५९ ॥
देहकार्थं युतो नित्यं जीविते पुत्रपत्रिमान्।
1356 - 13591/2. Fixed Sign - Mohana Nadiamsa:;
A younger brother of this native will obtaina son after
a long spell of time. According to the school of sage
Vyasa, the said brother will have two sons, and many
daughters. One of them will be long-lived. As per
Garga, the brother in question will beget only dead
children and by his efforts, he will be fortunate
enough to have one child with long life. During the
native’s youth, his step brother will incur diseases of
blood vessels, and will lose weight. If he survives he
will be endowed with sons and daughters.
Notes: Reference to former half of Mudrika
Nadiamsa in sloka the first line of sloka 1356 is an
erroneous addition in the original and hence not
added to the translation.
शुक्रहोरे मुद्रिकांशे पूर्वभागे च जायते ॥१३६० I
भरद भ्राता चिरायुष्मान् पुत्र पुत्री समन्वितः
भवन्ति तिसरोभार्याश्च बह प्राबल्यययोगवान् ॥१३६१ ॥
1360 - 1361. According to Sukra Hora: The
step brother of the subject belonging to former half of
Mudnika Nadiamsa will be long-lived and will have
sons and daughters.......... He will be very famous.
मुद्रिकांशे पूर्वभागे मोहनांश गते गुरौ ।
SST पञ्च तेषां चिरायुषाः॥१३६२ ॥
भेदभ्राता चिरायुष्मान् सहोद्रविनाशकः।
किचिद्धोगभया तश्च ह्यल्पसन्तानभाग्यवान् ॥१२३६२ ॥
1362 - 1363. Mudrika Nadiamsa - First Half:
In this case of birth in a fixed sign, Jupiter in Mohana
Nadiamsa will give 6 or 8 brethers, out of whom five
will be long-lived. The person’s step brother will be
long-lived, will harm his brothers, will suffer from
diseases and will have limited number of children.
पेषे केतुयुते सूर्ये मोहनांश समुद्धवः।
अल्पसन्तानं युक्तश्च क्षेमदाये सुपुप्रवान् ॥१२६४॥
लग्नत्ञ्चमगे सूरये भूसुतेन Praha |

Deva Keralam
CAAA च कालान्तरसुपत्रवान् 112364 ॥
ग्रन्थान्ते गर्ग मते जातो जातो मृतो भवेत्
तदोषपरिहारा्थं स्वर्णलिद्ग प्रदापयेत् ॥१२६६ ॥
जीवांशे पञ्चमे मन्दे दिवाकरसमान्विते |
स्वर्णलिदप्रदानेन MTT च पुत्रकम् ॥१२६७ ॥
शनिप्रदोषे सायाहे VAX प्रदोषके |
नागलिङ्गपदानेन MTT च पुत्रकम् ॥१२३६८ ॥
तदभावे सप्रजा स्यात् Gras वदेत् |
गर्भस्रावातुरा भार्या दुर्ुरामयकरिता ॥१३६९ ॥
1364 - 1369. Mohana Nadiamsa - Fixed Sign:
(a) Ketu in Aries with the Sun will restrict the number
of issues. The subject will obtain a son in his fourth
dasa.
(b) The Sun in the 5th in aspect to or company
of Mars will prove an obstacle in respect of acquisition of progeny. Anyway, after a long interval, ason
will be obtained. As per Garga, this yoga will kill the
issues as and when they are born. To overcome this
evil, a Linga (idol of Lord Siva, or of Naga Raja, the
king of Cobras) made of gold be given away in
charity.
(c) Progeny’s life-span will be increased by
aonation of a golden (Naga) Linga if Saturn is in the
Sth house from the natal ascendant 1n the company of
the Sun, and begets a Navamsa ruled by Jupiter. The
suggested donation of Naga Linga should be givenon
a Monday evening (Pradosha). In the absence of this
remedy, the person will beget many daughters while
sons born to him will only find their instant exit from
this mortal world.
Notes: (c) Pradosha = the first part of the night;
evening personified as a son of Dosha, Blemish, and
associated with Nisitha and Vyushta. Vyushta is daybreak personified and is the son of Pushparna and
Dosha, or the son of Vubhavasu and Ushas.
मोहनांशकेगे जीवे पञ्चमे रवि संयुते |
WNT साध्येन ATA पुत्रकाः ॥१३७० ॥
1370. Birth in Mohana Nadiamsa: In case of a
fixed sign, Jupiter joining the Sun in the 5th house
will give long living sons due to the good effects of
Pradosha Vrata (or vow).
तृतीयदारे पुत्रापिक्षेमदाये न सशयः।
लग्नात् पञ्चमगे मन्दे पुत्राभावेकदारवान् ॥१३७१॥
पतरवां्चेत् त्रिभार्यश्च मोहनांशसमुद्धवः।
संपदाये सुभूषापति पित्रादिश्रियमश्नुते ॥१२३७२ ॥
1371 - 1372. (a) One will obtain progeny in the
4th dasa, through his third wife. (This relates to
Mohana Nadiamsa, vide sloka 1341 supra, and is
independent of sloka 1370.)
(b) Saturn in the 5th (for a fixed sign, with
Mohana Nadiamsa ascending) will give only one
spouse (i.e. no other marriages) but no progeny.
(c) The subject of Mohana Nadiamsa (without
reference to Saturn) of a fixed sign ascending will
have three wives and be endowed with progeny. In
his second dasa, he will beget ornaments and paternal
wealth. (To wit, Saturn in the Sth in case of birth in
Mohana Nadiamsa will stall additional marriages.)
भाग्ये राहौ प्रपतने च लग्नाधिपतिदायके |
अपराधं भाग्यनाशं पूर्वा सौख्य मश्नुते ॥१३७२ ॥
1373. (a) In case of a fixed sign, Rabu in the 9th
will make one distressed or poor.
(b) In the dasa of the lord of the ascendant,
prosperity will be destroyed in the 2nd half, while its
first half will cause happiness.
मीनांशगे तुलाचन्े जीवे केतुयुते क्रिये |
मोहनां शे प्रजातस्य जन्मसंपदशासुखम ॥१२३७४॥
मातृष्वसा-चायुष्यती मातामहिविनाशकः।
सम्पदाये खजननी मनुवर्षात् परं मृतिम् ॥१२७५ ॥
aha जनकश्चेति प्रा्ोति मरणं तथा |
aay जनकश्ेति चतुसिशेऽथवा यदि ॥१३५७६ ॥
स्वपितररिष्टतः पूर्वं ज्येष्ठप्रातृविनाशनम्।
PUTA क्लेशं प्राणोति भूरिशः ॥१३७७॥
ग्रामान्तरे नदीप्रान्ते लग्नाधिपतिदायके।
ada देहजाइयेन लाभमल्पं सुखासुखम् le gwd ॥

1374 - 1378. Mohana Nadiamsa - Fixed Sign:
With the Moon in Libra with Pisces Navamsa while
Jupiter and Ketu are in the sign Scorpio, following
results will come to pass. The first two dasas will give
happiness to the subject. His mother’s sister will be
endowed with longevity. His maternal grand-father
will be destroyed (die early). The 2nd dasa after the
age of eight will cause mother’s death. 32nd year will
kill father. Or the 34th year. Prior to father’s death,
elder brother will be destroyed. Losing two wives,
the subject will be greatly sad. According to other
texts, he will live ina river-bound region, suffer from
physical ailments, have limited gains and will incur
both happiness and unhappiness in life.
लग्नेशे रविसंयुक्ते द्वित्रिवारं ज्वराद्धयम् |
प्रान्थियेगप्रपीडां च शसबाधां विनिर्दिशेत् ॥१२७९ ॥
1379. If the ascendant Jord is conjunct the Sun,
one of Mohana Nadiamsa, fixed sign, willincur fever
fortwo orthree weeks (possibly in the first dasa). He
will suffer from disorders of blood vessels and incur
danger through weapons.
लग्नाद्रा चन्रलगनाद्रा नवमे राहु संस्थिते |
्रिशोपिर मनस्तापं क्लेशं च दशवत्रम् ॥१२८० ॥
1380. In case of a fixed sign ascending with
Mohana Nadiamsa, Rahu in the 9th either from the
ascendant or from the Moon will cause distress and
sadness for ten years after the age of 30.
महार्णवप्रान्त्यदेशे मोहनांश समुद्धवः।
अतीव क्लेशमाणोति वाणिज्ये विघ्नमादिशेत् ॥१२३८१॥
गृहक्षेत्रविनाशेन व्याकुलं भवति धवम् |
यत्रे यत्र च व्यापारस्तत्र विनश्यति ॥१३८२ ॥
लग्नापिपदशाकाले ह्यपरार्धत्िदं फलम् |
1381 - 1382 - 1/2. Mohana Nadiamsa - Fixed
Sign: Birth will be near the region of a great hill. He
will undergo a lot of distress, will incur obstacles in
business, and will lose landed and housing properties.
With every trial he will accrue losses in his business
undertakings. These effects are possible in the
second half of the dasa of the ascendant lord.
Notes: The instructions given here are without
Chandra Kala Nadi
reference to any particular planet, but only to birth in
a certain degree.
रन्धाधिपदशाकाले स्वभृक्तो व्याकुलं महत् ॥१२८२ I
ग्यष्ठभ्रातृसुतोद्राहं शुभाशुभफलं सृतम्
सहोदरीविचारं च ज्वरोपद्रवप्रादिशेत् ॥१३८४॥
कशचित् सहोदरभ्रातुः पुत्रो जाडया्मय तथा ।
दशासंधौ ज्वरं तापं शान्त्या शान्ति प्रयास्यति ॥१३८५ ॥
मधुकुम्भप्रदानेन देहारोग्यं विनिर्दिशेत्
1383 - 13851/2. Dasa of 8th Lord: The first sub
period of the 8th lord will cause much distress to the
above native. In this dasa, his older brother will beget
married, and results will be both auspicious and
inauspicious. There will be some worries about a coborn, due to trouble from fever. The progeny of a
brother will also incur illness. In the junction of the
dasa, fever and distress will result which could be
remedied by propitiatory measures. A honey-filled
pot be donated to regain health.
धनाधिपदशा सन्धौ राहुभुक्तो नृपावधि ॥१३८६ ॥
स्वजन्मदेशे नृपतिर्दाररिष्टात् परं मृतिम्।
तत्पुत्रः प्रमलश्चपि महायोगेण करशितः॥१३८७ ॥
दायादिवशामापन्नो विपद्ाये मृति लभेत्।
1386 - 13871/2. Irrelevant: The junction period
of 2nd lord’s dasa, or its Rahu bhukti will trouble the
king causing him loss of spouse. The king’s son,
though strong, will be troubled bya great disease. 3rd
dasa will cause his death due to evil designs of
relatives.
भदथ्रातृविरोधन खपितर्व्याकुलं महत् ॥१२८८ ॥
विवाहानन्तरं भाग्यं नाश्येद्द्रयवत्एे |
1388 - 13881/2, Mohana Nadiamsa = Fixed
Sign: (Ignoring the above interruption, the following
applies to the native.) Due to enmity with stepbrothers, the person’s father will be greatly distressed. After marriage, the native will prosper and
will gather wealth in many countries.
शूलयोगं प्रकुर्वीत पञ्चमे शनि संस्थिते ॥१३८९ ॥

Deva Keralam
दशायां महाक्लेशमपरर्थं न संशयः।
भार्यारिष्ठं प्रकुर्वीत mate तथैव च ॥१३९० ॥
पित्ररिष्ठात्परं दुःखं afte च विनिर्दिशेत् |
सर्वदाये राहुचन्द्रो बुधशुक्रौ विशेषतः ॥१२९१।
अन्तर्दायि क्लेशमेति मोहनांश समुद्धवः।
चक्रसन्धो SMT PTS RATT ॥१३९२ ॥
अतीव क्लेशकार्य च ज्वयोपद्रवमादिशेत् |
मधुकुम्भप्रदानेन देहारोग्य युतो भेवत् ॥१२९३ ॥
1389 - 1393. 50018 Yoga: Saturn in the 5th
causes Soola Yoga. In the second half of the dasa of
the said Saturn, one will be greatly in grief. His wife
as well as his brothers will incur danger. Following
death of his father (in Saturn’s Dasa), he will earn
grief and penury. Particularly the sub .iod of Rahu
and of Mercury, or in the concluding portion (in the
dasa of Saturn) will cause these untoward events
coinciding with adverse Jupiterian and solar transits.
Severe difficulties and dangerous fever will result.
Donating a pot of honey, this phase of ill-health can
be overcome.
कर्मेशांशे त्रिकोणे स्फुटयोगं गते शनो |
कर्मेशदृष्टिराशो तु राज्याधिपतिनाशनम् ॥१३९४॥
सहोदगप्पीडादि Tat वा सुतामयम्।
स्वराज्यदेशे नृपतिः Beart गते मृतिम् ॥१२९५ ॥
1394 - 1395. (a) Irrelevant: The ruler will be
destroyed when Saturn comes to the sign indicated by
the sign occupied by the 10th lord’s dispositor, ora
trine thereof, or the sign thatis at birth aspected by the
lord of the 10th.
(b) In the context of the said transit, the person’s
coborns will be in grief, due to illness of a child in
their families.
(c) The 2nd line of sloka 1395 is ungrammatical
and incomplete, dealing irrelevantly with the death
of the king.
Notes: Out of the 3 clues given above, only one
t“b” conveys a proper instruction. Saturn’s transit as
shown at “a” will involve the native’s coborn in grief
due to progeny’s illness.
चापांरो मिथुने मन्दे गोचरे ललनान्त्यगे |
तुलादौ तल्निकोणेषु स्फुटयोगं गते शनौ ॥१२३९६ ॥
लोके धान्यक्षयादीनि ह्यनावृष्टि भयं भवेत् |
दुष्टखेचरदोषेण भूकम्प जन्मदेशके ॥१२९७॥
पित्रादि श्रियमाणोति गेहे कल्याणसंभ्रमः।
्रिरोऽब्दे चाष्टमाब्दे च हषटत्रिशतिवत्सरे ॥१३९८ ॥
चत्वारिशेऽथ वा चेति लोके दुर्भक्षजं भयम् ।
अतीव क्लेशमाप्नोति प्रजाक्षोभं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥१३९९ ॥
यावन्मार्ताण्डसूनु Tages वृश्चिके मीनसिह
राश्यामन्वेषयन् स सुरगुरुसंहितो राहुवक्त्े स्थितो वा |
तावहुभक्षकालं नरपतिमरणं क्षुतिपासानराणां ।
परामारण्यश्मशाने नरशिरसंहिताः नर्तयन्तः पिशाचाः ॥१४०० ॥
कोणरारित्रिकोणे वा स्फुटयोगं गते शनौ ।
चोलभूपतिनाशः स्याद्योजयेत् कालवित्तमः॥१४०१॥
1396 - 1401. Irrelevant: Saturn moving in Gemini
with Sagittarius Navamsa, or moving inthe end of the
sign Virgo, or in Libra or its trines will cause loss of
grains, and drought. Due to evil planetary configuration, there will be an earth-quake in the country.
One will beget paternal wealth. There will be a
marriage at home. There will be famine in 30th, 8th,
38th, or 40th year. Many difficulties and strife to
populace will come to pass. The gravity of the famine
will be revealed according to the planet Saturn
moving in Taurus, Libra, Aquarius, Scorpio, Pisces
or Leo, or Jupiter Rahu conjunction in transit; the
ruler will quite the world; the people will be in the
grip of hunger; devils will wander in the villages,
forests and burial grounds flaunting human heads.
Saturn moving 17 trines will destroy the ruler of the
kingdom Chola.
मुरिकांशे पूर्वभागे स्थिरराशिचतुष्टये |
, रयोग गते मन्दे पाण्डयभूपतिनाशनम् ॥१४०२ ॥
म्तेच्छाराग्ये कलापने बहुसेनाश्वनाशनम्।
जन्मराशिस्थिते मन्दे गोचरेऽष्टम संस्थिते ॥१४०२ ॥
THA RS हताश्वो हतसेनिकः।

1402 - 1403 1/2. Irrelevant: In case of a fixed
sign among such four ascending with the former half
of Mudrika Nadiamsa, Saturn reaching......will deStroy the king of Pandya. A huge army will be
destroyed in the Mlechcha kingdom. Saturn moving
in the Moon sign or 8th thereof will cause a change
of king and will destroy horses and army-men.
सुमत्य॑शे TAS केसरीयोगजस्य च ॥१४०४॥
्षमदाये लक्षमीयोगं चत्वारिंशात् परं सुखम् |
तुलाराशिस्थिते मन्दे क्षेमदाये स्वभुक्तिषु ॥१४०५ ॥
उत्तरां शत्रुनाशं प्राबल्यं चोत्तेत्तम् |
अष्टत्रिशापरार्धदि योगारम्भं क्वचित् सुखम् ॥१४०६ ॥
पुतरोत्सवफलप्रापिः स्वभुक्तयन्ते न संशयः
विपत्तारदशान्त्यादो क्षेमदाये स्वभक्तिषु ॥१४०७॥
गृहच्छिद्रकलापेन भ्रातृमूलाद्विचारवान् |
तुलाराशिस्थिते मन्दे क्षेमदाये स्वभुक्तिषु ॥१४०८ |
महार्णवप्रदेशेषु अश्वगोगृहलाभवान् ।
व्यापारारम्भयलः स्यादर्थसिद्धिः शुभावहः॥१४०९ ॥
निधनाधिपदोषेण मित्रवर्गे मनोव्यथा |
स्वदेहायासमापनोति बन्धुनाशं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥१४१० ॥
1404 - 1410. Fixed Sign Ascending: (a) Birthin
Kesari Yoga with the Moon in Sumathi Nadiamsa in
Libra will cause influx of wealth in the 4th dasa, and
happiness after the age of forty.
(b) Should Saturn be in Libra, the second half of
his sub period in the 4th dasa wil] cause destruction
of enemies. The person will gradually progress.
After 38, his progress will commence and some
happiness will prevail. He will obtain a son inthe end
of the said sub period. In the end of the 3rd dasa, or
in the first sub period of the 4th dasa, family quarrels
will prevail followed by worries onaccount of coborn.
The person will gain horses (“Ashta” should be
“Aswa”), cows and housing properties in the region
of a great hill. He will commence a new business
undertaking and will get wealth and auspicious*effects.
(c) Due to blemish of 8th lordship (apparently
Jupiter ill-placed), he will see his friends in distress.
Chandra Kala Nadi
His health will decline and relatives destroyed.
Notes: (a) Because of the mention of Kesari
yoga, Jupiter should be in an angle to the Moon
placed in Libra.
तुलारशिस्थिते मन्दे विप्लवो कन्यकावधि।
प्रजाक्षोभं प्रकुर्वीत वासदेशेफलं वदेत् levee
भाग्यच्युतिः शत्रुभिश्च तदभावे मरिष्यति |
लक्मीयोगदशाकाले स्वप्राबल्यं विनिदिशेत् eve? ॥
1411 - 1412. Saturn in Libra: Saturn placed in
Libra will cause a revolt, and strife to people(?) The
native will lose fortunes on account of his enemies or
else will incur death. His prosperity will commence
with the dasa related to Lakshmi Yoga.
मीने सोम्यदशारम्भे जातस्य कुम्भलग्नके |
सवपत्रदराहसोख्यं च भुक्तिमध्ये शुभादिकम् ॥१४१३॥
भुक्त्यन्ते व्याकुलं चेति स्वगेहे शिशुनाशनम्।
रज्यंभ्रशकलापं च पश्चात् स्वास्थ्यं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥१४१४॥
शुक्रान्तरे क्षेमदाये विभक्तो सोदरेण च।
भेदभ्रातुश्च पत्रेण हयन्योन्यकल्हो भवेत् ॥१४१५॥
1413 - 1415. Aquarius Ascendant: (a) In the
beginning of the dasa of Mercury occupying Pisces,
the native’s son will beget married. In the middle of
the sub period (of Mercury), auspiciousness will
increase in the family circles. End of the said sub
period will produce distress and will destroy a child
in the family. The person will incur positional
displacement and his health will recover later on.
(b) The sub period of Venus in the 4th dasa will
cause a division amongst brothers, apart from mutual
quarrels between thesons of the person’s step-brother.
सुमत्यंशकगे TA लक्मीयोगे च जायते ।
मुताधिपदशाकाले ऋणमोचनमादिशेत् ॥१४१६ ॥
चत्वारिंशत् परं सत्यं यावज्जीवं सुखावहम् |
्ेमदाये केतुभुक्तौ agent पिनिर्दिरोत् eve
शुक्रान्ते कलापं च शुभाशुभफलं समम्।
पत्रिकोतपत्तिनाशेन क्लेशं च क्रूरमासके ॥१४१८ ॥
1416 - 1418. Aquarius ascendant: (a) The

Deva Keralam
Moon in Sumathi Nadiamsa will relieve the native of
Lakshmi yoga of his debts in the dasa of the Sth lord
(Mercury). From the age of 40 till the end of life, he
will live in happiness.
(b) In the sub period of Ketu during the 4th dasa,
he will gainabundantly. The sub period of Venus will
promote quarrels while good and bad results will
materialise in equal measure. He will lose a daughter
just born and be grieved, in a month denoted by
adverse solar transit.
रपरेशांशे तल्तिकोणे स्फुटयोगं गते शनौ ।
TUMEUR तु स्वजनारिष्टमादिशेत् ॥१४१९ ॥
1419. Note the sign occupied or aspected by the
8th lord (Mercury) at birth. When Saturn transits
such a sign or a trine thereof, the relatives of the
subject will be endangered.
मोहनांशे Tat HOTS रुजातुरः।
दारवंशे मनस्तापं दारपीडां क्वचित् क्वचित् ॥१४२० ॥
1420. Aquarius Ascendant - Mohana
Nadiamsa: With the transit of Saturn in the natal
Moon sign, the person will be troubled by sickness in
adverse solar months. There will be mental distress
in the families of in-laws, and the person’s spouse
will somewhat be subjected to miseries.
जीवे चतुर्थपर्यायि नवमे च शुभावहम्
एकादशे भाग्यवृद्धिः पुण्यतीर्थफलं विदुः ॥१४२१ il
दशमे शत्रुनाशं च द्वादशे तु भ्रियायुतम् ।
जन्मे क्लेशफलं विन्द्याद् द्वितीये धनलाभवान् ॥१४२२ ॥
तृतीये सोख्यमित्याहु्तुरथे बहु भाग्यवान् |
सुते शोभनकार्याणि गेहे कल्याणसंभ्रमः॥१४२३ ॥
गयेष्ठभ्रातूसुोद्राहमतीव श्रियमादिशेत् |
1421 - 1423 1/2. Jupiter’s 4th Round of Transit; During this transit, the learned in astrology
declare following effects. In the 9th - auspiciousness;
11th - increased prosperity and visits to shrines; 10th
- destruction of enemies; 12th - acquisition of wealth;
natal sign - difficulties; 2nd - financial gains; 3rd -
happiness; 4th - abundant prosperity; and Sth - auspicious functions including a family marriage, particularly marriage of elder brother’s son, and acquisition of wealth.
Wat क्षेमदाये ह्यल्पसीख्यं सुखासुखम् ॥१४२४॥
tart व्याकुलं च स्वजनारिष्टमादिशेत्।
SM भाग्ययोगमल्पसोख्यं सुखावहम् |
स्वपुत्रदेहजाडयादिशत्रुनाशं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥१४२५ il
1424 - 1425. Fourth Dasa: (a) The native of
Aquarius with Mohana Nadiamsa will inthe 4th dasa,
Sun’s sub period will acquire limited happiness, and
a mix of happiness and unhappiness.
(b) The sub period of the Moon will cause
distress to the subject, and evils to his men.
(c) Mars sub period will increase prosperity but
will restrict happiness; his son will incur sickness.
Enemies of the subject will face extinction.
WAS काले भृपतिक्तेशमादिशेत्।
कुजान्ते धनप्राप्ती राहुभुक्तो शुभाशुभम् ॥१४२६ ॥
ज्ञातिमध्ये कलापेन गृहच्छिद्रं विनिर्दिशेत् |
विद्यारम्भं स्वपुत्रश्च सन्तानं च स्वपुत्रिका ॥१४२५७ ॥
PO मनस्तापं वाणिग्ये विघ्नसंभवम्।
Sarat धनप्रापि बहव्यापारमादिशेत् ॥१४२८ ॥
मन्दान्तरे पुत्रपीडामपरार्धे महाविपत्।
पूर्वा सौख्यमाप्नोति स्वपुत्रद्राहसं भ्रमम् ॥१४२९ ॥
1426 - 1429. Aquarius Ascendant - Mercury
Dasa: (a) Inthis dasa, the sub period of the Moon will
cause royal wrath.
(b) Wealth will be acquired in the sub period of
Mars.
(©) That of Rahu will produce a mixture of
auspicious and inauspicious effects apart from a
family division following dispute with cousins; his
son will be initiated into education while his daughter
will beget an offspring; the months denoted by
adverse solar transits will inflict distress; the person’s business activities will be interrupted.
(d) Jupiter’s sub period will cause wealth, and
abundant business activities.
(€) The sub period of Saturn will produce evils to
the person’s son, apart from a great danger (to the

native) in its second half. The first half of Saturn’s
sub period will however give happiness to the person,
and mariage to his son.
afer लग्नाधिपतिभुक्तिषु ।
अतीव क्लेशकार्याणि क्रूरमासे महाविपत् ॥१४२३० ॥
स्वजनारिष्टसन्तापो स्वदेहायाससंभ्रमः।
अपमृत्युभयप्रापिः शान्त्या शान्ति प्रयच्छति ॥१४२१ ॥
1430 - 1431. Eighth Lord Mercury’s [asa: For
Aquarius ascendant, the dasa of Mercury, ruling the
8th, will in the sub period of the lord of the ascendant
(Saturn) bring forth many difficulties, and a great
danger in the month during which the Sun is in
adverse transit. The person’s relatives wil] incur
evils and distress. His own health will be a liability.
He will be in the grip of fearof untimely end forwhich
remedial measures be sought.
्रत्यक्तारदशाकाले सुमत्यंशे च जायते |
त्रिकोद्राहसोख्यापिमर्थलाभं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥१४२२ |
चतुष्पञ्चाशगे वर्षे पाके केतुदशान्त्यके।
एकषष्टिसमे मृत्युः साधनेशस्वभुक्तिषु ॥१४३३ ॥
AAT पापसंयुक्ते षटपञ्चाशात् परं व्यथाम् |
TEMA मनस्तापमर्थनाशं सुखासुखम् ॥१४२४॥
1432 - 1434. Aquarius Ascendant - Sumathi
Nadiamsa: (a) The fifth dasa will cause marriage to
the person’s daughter. It will grant him financial
gains. During his 54th year (or) in the end of Ketu
dasa in 61st year of age, death will strike him. The
sub period concerned will be that of the planet ruling
the dasa which is sixth in sequence.
(b) Should the lord of the ascendant (Saturn) be
witha malefic, the period following 56th year will be
a source of distress (1.6. fear of death). In that dasa
(i.e. in the Sth dasa, as Saturn is with a malefic at
birth) mental distress, loss of money and a mix of
happiness and unhappiness will result.
Although “Sumathi” Nadiamsa is prescribed in
the text, the sequence ofslokas suggests that itshould
be Mohana Nadiamsa, in Aquarius ascendant.
TET मोहनांशे गोचरेऽष्टमगे शनो ।
Chandra Kala Nadi
देहपीडा मनस्तापं वित्तनाशं सुतक्षयम् ews ॥
1435. Aquarius Ascendant - Mohana
Nadiamsa: During the currency of fifth dasa, Saturn
in transit in the 8th house will strike in the form of
physical troubles, mental distress, loss of money and
destruction of son.
्रत्यक्ताराधिपे केतौ शुभांशे गुभसंयुते |
शुभमेव फलं बृयात् Hy विनासुखम् ॥१४२६ ॥
शुभान्ते शुभं चेति शुभमासे शुभावहम् ।
धनधान्यसुतप्रा्िर्मोहनांशेद्धवस्य च ॥१४२७॥
1436 - 1437. Aquarius Ascendant - Mohana
Nadiamsa: Should the planet Ketu, being the ruler of
the 5th Nakshatra (read fifth dasa), be witha benefic,
and be ina benefic’s Navamsa, only good results will
follow (in place of above-mentioned evils). However, the sub periods of malefic planets, in the said
dasa, will counter happiness. The sub periods of
benefic planets will cause beneficial results; auspiciousness will follow the Sun’s favourable movements inthe formof acquisition of wealth and grains
and a male offspring.
साधनेशदशामृत्यः स्वभुक्तौ क्रूरमासके।
राहुक्रान्तादिमासे वा मरणं भृगुवासरे ॥१४२८ ॥
1438. Death: The subject native will face death
in the first sub period of 6th dasa, ina month denoted
by adverse Sun in transit. The month particularly will
be the one when the Sun transits the natal Rahu’s sign
position. The week-day will be of Venus, i.e. Friday.
मोहनांश पूर्वभागे द्येकपष्टिसमे मृतिः।
जीविते पुत्रयोगेन मृतिं चेकोनसप्ततो ॥१४३९ |
मद्रिकांशे पूर्वभागे मोहनांशोद्धवस्य च।
पापं पुण्यं समं चेतति परलोके तथा भवेत् ॥१४४० ॥
1439 - 1440. One of Mohana Nadiamsa, former
half, will quit the world in his 61st year. If he survives
this year due to the merits of his son, he will die at 69.
The native will enjoy results due to good and bad acts
in equal measure.
पश्च्ैश्यकुले जात इहलोके सुपुत्रवान् |

Deva Keralam
चत्वारिशे महाभाग्यं द्विपञ्चाशात् परं विपत् ॥१४४१ ॥
जन्मप्रभृति च श्रीमान् मध्ये क्लेशेन करशितः।
पश्चाद्धाग्याभिवृद्धिः स्यात् क्षेमदाये महत् मुखम् ॥१४४२ ॥
aya परं सौख्यं धनलाभं श्रियायुतम् ।
1441 - 1442 1/2. Mohana Nadiamsa - First
Half: His next birth will be in a family of traders. In
this birth (under discussion) he will obtain worthy
son(s). Fortieth year will usher great prosperity.
Following his 52nd year, a great danger will appear.
From birth he will be wealthy. In between he will be
emaciated due to grief. Afterwards his prosperity
will be onthe rise. His fourth dasa will give him much
happiness. Following destruction of enemies he will
be happy and endowed with financial gains and
wealth.
मालिन्यं पूर्वभागे कालकूटांशके गुरो ॥१४४३ ॥
HARA जातश्च रक्तवर्णः शुभाकृतिः।
गुरोस्वोच्चे इपांशस्थे भाग्विणः समन्विते ॥१४४४ ॥
HASAN जातश्च रक्तवर्णः शुभाकृतिः।
जीवे नक्रांशे विख्यातो योगप्राबल्यवान् सुखी ॥१४४५ ॥
1443 - 1445. Aquarius Ascendant - Maalini
Nadiamsa: (a) One born in the former half of this
Nadiamsa as Jupiter is in Kalakoota Nadiamsa will
be blood-red in complexion and will have an auspicious appearance. (b) If Jupiter is in Capricorn
Navamsa, (instead of being in Kalakoota Nadiamsa
as per“a”) the subject will be famous and will prosper
greatly.
Notes: From sloka 1443 to 1508, there is confusion in the original as to which ascendant these
discussions belong to. Moreover, along witha giver
Nadiamsa of birth, yogas like Matanga and Koorma
are also tagged as an additional condition. I feel these
additions are corrupt and hence excluded from translation as and when necessary. As far as possible, 1
tried to sort out these contradictions and explainina
suitable manner.
Generally these slokas belong to Aquanius ascendant, according to my understanding. The reader
will find clear reference to Maalini Nadiamsa,
Aquarius ascendant, in slokas 1505 - 6 infra.
चद्धत्रिकोणगे पापे मन्दराहुसमत्विते |
मालिन्यंशे प्रजातश्च मालिन्यकुलजम्मवान् ॥१४४६ ॥
1446. Aquarius Ascendant - Maalini Nadiamsa:
One belongs to a dirty (or mean) family by birth if
Saturn and Rahu are in 8 trine to the Moon.
मतद्गयोगे मालिन्यं सोदराणामसंभवम् |
भेदभ्रातुयुतश्चैव कलत्रतरयवान् पिता ॥१४४७ ॥
दी्ायुष्या च जननी ह्युच्यते सोदरीतरयम् |
माता पतिव्रता पूता गृहच्छिद्रेण कर्शिता ॥१४४८ ॥
बहुकालं PASM भ्रातृनाशेन दुखिता |
मतद्गयोग एकाकी HASTA गुर ॥१४४९ ॥
1447 - 1449. It will be impossible for the said
native to have any co-barn but he will have stepbrothers. His father will have three wives. His
mother will be long-lived and will have three sisters.
She will be a devout wife, be pure-hearted and be
emaciated due to domestic squabbles. She will live
a long married life (i.e. her husband, the native’s
father, will be long-lived) but be distressed due to
destruction of her brother. (The second line of sloka
1449 is a mix up and apparently it conveys that the
present native will be a loner, without any co-born.)
दीर्घायुषी भगिन्येका शेषं नाशमितीरयेत् |
पितृव्ये वा मातुले वा स्वगोत्रज्ातिवर्गके ॥१४५० ॥
1450. Only one of his mother’s (three) sisters
will enjoy longevity while others will be destroyed
(will die early). Either paternal uncle, or maternal
uncle, or some other close relative.... (text incomplete).
मतङ्गयोगेजातस्य स्वभार्यानुगमिष्यति ।
TA मतङ्गे मतङ्गयोगजस्य च ॥१४५१ ॥
स्वभेदभगिनी वापि स्वभत्रानुगमिष्यति |
वियोगवशतश्चैव नित्यदुःखेन करिता ॥१४५२ ॥
पितुरुद्राहनात् पूर्वं बाल्ये वा मृतिमादिशेत् |
1451 - 14521/2. The spouse of the subject native
will die along with him. According to another text,

his half-sister will also sacrifice her life at the time of
her husband’s death. She will be emaciated due to
separation from her husband. The native will lose his
father either before his marriage or during his childhood.
सुखाधिपे निशानाथे नीचे नक्रनवांशके ॥१४५२ ॥
भाग्याधिपेन संदृष्टे करिकरांशश्च नाडिगे |
दर्भगावस्थायां जातः सोदरभ्रातृहीनवान् ॥१४५४ ॥
1453 - 1454. Aries Ascendant: The 4th lord
Moon in debility (in Scorpio) occupying Karikara
Nadiamsa, with 9th lord’s aspect and begetting Capricorn Navamsa will not give any co-born.
Notes: These three lines of the original are an
interruption and belong to Aries ascendant.
आयुष्मती च भगिनी माता दीर्घायुषी तथा।
दुर्भगावस्थागे Te भगिन्येका च दुर्भगा ॥१४५५॥
भेदभ्रातृविनाशः स्यात् कलत्रद्रयवान् पिता |
पक्षान्तरे त्रयश्चेति स्वपिता बहुभाग्यवान् ॥१४५६ ॥
नानादेशेषु संचारं क्रयविक्रयजीवनम् |
पए्लधान्यसुवर्णाप्ति नानाव्यापारमादिशेत् ॥१४५७ ॥
वृद्धिजीवनवत्नित्यं भ्रत्रीभ्रातृयुतः पिता |
1455 - 1457 1/2. Aquarius Ascendant - Maalini
Nadiamsa (continued): (a) For birth in this degree,
one’s mother and (half) sister will be long-lived.
(b) The Moon: The Moon in Durbhagavastha
(read Durbhaga Nadiamsa) will make the sister unfortunate and destroy his coborns.
(c) Father: With birth in the subject degree, the
native’s father will have two wives. According to
another authority he will have three wives (vide sloka
1447) and be very fortunate. He will visit many
countries and will involve in buying and selling (i.e.
trading). He will acquire precious stones, grains and
classic robes and will have many business activities.
He will subsist through intelligence ("Vriddhi
jivanavaan" should be "Buddhi jivanavaan"). He
will have brothers and sisters.
सूर्याशके aera सुखेशांशत्रिकोणके ॥१४५८ ॥
स्फुटयोगं गते मन्दे पितृनाशं विनिर्दिशेत् |
Chandra Kala Nadi
जन्मदाये पित्ररिष्टं तदभावे PATENT ॥१४५९ ॥
स्वभुक्तौ मृतिमाप्नोति सम्पदाये सुजातुरः।
मालिन्यंशे पूर्वभागे मतद्गयोगजस्य च ॥१४६० ॥
1458 - 1460. When Saturn transits the sign
identical with the Navamsa occupied by the Sun or
the 4th lord, or a trine thereof, father’s death will
occur. The native will see his father in danger in his
first or third dasa. The first bhukti of the 3rd dasa will
cause father’s death while 2nd dasa will cause father’s sickness.
जन्मदाये afer hed मोञजीबन्धनमादिशेत्।
विपदाये विवाहं च कर्माधिपतिभुक्तिषु ewes I
वंशोपरि frat वा पञ्चविंशात् परं तथा |
मतङ्खयोगे चोद्राहो बाल्ये विघ्नयुतो भवेत् ॥१४६२ ॥
1461 - 1462. The said native of Aquanius will
somewhat be happy during his first dasa. In this dasa,
his Thread Ceremony willoccur. He will in his early
years face difficulties in respect of marriage, which
will occur in his third dasa inthe sub period of the 10th
lord, or within two years following 20th year of age,
or after the 25th year of age.
कालकृर्यंशगे जीवे AAA TTT |
सरीप्रजानां बहुत्वे च पंसंतानातुरो भवेत् ॥१४६३ ॥
1463. With Jupiter in Kalakoota Nadiamsa, the
subject of Aquanius will have many female issues and
be anxious about a son (that is birth of a son will be
difficult).
दरेशाक्रान्तराशीशो नीचराशिगतो ate |
SRA सुतप्रापिर्जयेष्ठभ्रातृविनाशवान ॥१४६४ ॥
1464. Ifthe 7th lord’s dispositor is in debility, the
person will obtain a son through second marriage.
However, as a result of this yoga, his older co-born
will be destroyed.
Notes: The dispositor of the Sun should be in his
sign of debilitation for a native of Aquarius ascendant; the above are the relevant effects.
व्यये पापद्यये वापि पुत्रभावेऽतिचञ्चलः।

Deva Keralam
दारसोख्यविहीनश्च प्रातनाशेन कर्शितः ॥१४६५ ॥
अमद्ली सोदरी च सर्वथा पापचित्तवान् |
1465 - 14651/2. Malefic Planets: Two malefics
in the 12th or in the 5th will make the said native
fickle-minded. Further he will be devoid of happiness from his spouse. His co-born will be destroyed.
His sister will be inauspicious (by obtaining early
widowhood). He will be sinful in disposition.
दारेशे वृश्चिकांशस्थे मतद्गयोगजस्तथा ॥१४६६ ॥
वेश्यास्रीसद्गमी कामी कलत्रद्ययोगवान् |
1466 - 14661/2. Scorpio Navamsa: Should the
7th Jord be in Scorpio Navamsa, the person belonging
to Aquarius ascendant will be addicted to whores, be
libidinous and will have two wives.
Notes: For Aquarius ascendant, the 7th lord
acquiring Scorpio Navamsa, will cause two wives,
addiction to prostitutes and lust.
(Similarly for Leo ascendant, Saturn acquiring
Taurus Navamsa.)
्रतयण्दाये FAST सुतेशांशत्रिकोणके ॥१४६५७ ॥
स्फुटयोगं गते मन्दे मातुदर्मरणं वदेत् |
पश्वादारविनाशेन क्लेशमाप्नोति भूरिशः॥१४६८ ॥
्रा्रंशेऽथवाष्त्िंे द्विचत्वारिशवत्पर |
चतुशचत्वारिशके वा दारारिष्टं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥१४६९ ॥
1467 - 1469. Danger to Mother & Wife: During his Sth dasa when Saturn transits a trine counted
from the natal Navamsa position of the Sth lord,
mother will face a violent end. Later on he wil] be
grieved duc to loss of his wife. 32nd, 38th, 42nd or
44th year will be fatal to his wife.
दुर्भगावस्थागे BR दशायां प्रावृनाशनम् |
aries च लभते शिशुक्लेशं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥१४७० ॥
्ेमदाये AAS सीप्रजालाधसोख्यवान् |
्रत्यग्दाये मनस्तापं पुत्रिकोद्राहतः परम् ॥१४७१ ॥
नीचग्रहदशाकाते मतङ्गयोगजातस्तथा |
अतीव क्तेशकार्याणि संचितार्थविनाशवान् lew? ॥
1470 - 1472. Aquarius Ascendant: (a) The
Moon in Durbhagavastha (should read Durbhaga
Nadiamsa) will destroy brothers in her dasa, will
endanger the person’s wife and will cause difficulties
to his progeny.
(b) The 4th dasa will give him daughters.
(c) The 5th dasa will cause mental distress to the
native, but will give marriage to his daughter.
(d) In the dasa of a debilitated planet, he will
incur many difficulties and lose his wealth.
धनाधिपे केन्द्रगते भाविण समन्विते |
मतङ्गयोगे जातेश्च त्रिशताधिकवित्तवान् ॥१४७३ ॥
1473. Lord of 2nd: Incase of the subject native,
the 2nd lord (Jupiter) in an angle with Venus will
grant wealth exceeding 300 (gold coins).
mfr पूर्वभागे कर्मेशे राहुसंयुते |
कुलीरांशे प्रजातस्य व्यापारो मित्रसंयुतः ॥१४७४ ॥
1474, Business Partnership: The subject of
Maalini Nadiamsa, first half, belonging to Aquarius
ascendant, will have friends (or partners, as the
expression Is replaced by “Sahavanijya jeevanam” in
another version) if the 10th lord joins Rahu and
begets Cancer Navamsa.
Notes: This sloka is rendered after some reconstruction (“Malinyamse poorvabhage prajathasya
karmese rahusamyuthe kuliramse...) to get the required instructions in a practical spirit. Apparently
this hints at possibility of partnership in business
activities, as against proprictorship, as in modern
times.
पशुधान्यधनाद़्यश्च लोभप्रकृतिमान् भवेत् |
अविश्वासपसे नित्यं नीचे चन्द्रत्रिभागगे ॥१४७५ ॥
प्रामान्तरेऽथ वा चेति नगरे बासमशनुते |
मालिन्यंशे पूर्वभागे यावदायुः सुभाग्यवान् ॥१४७६ ॥
1475 - 1476. (a) Wealth: Further, as a result of
the above yoga (sloka 1474), one will be wealthy with
quadrupeds, grains and money. He will be miserly in
disposition, and be not trustworthy.
(b) Place of Work: If the 10th lord (Mars) is in
debility and occupies the decanate of the Moon (i.e.

the first ten degrees of Cancer) one will live ina
different village or town (i.e. will not live in his birth
place).
(c) Life-long Fortunes: One born inthe first half
of Maalini Nadiamsa, first half, relating to Aquarius,
will be fortunate throughout life.
व्यये राहुयुते मन्दे विवाहान्दे धनक्षयः।
किंचिद्राणिज्यमूलेन प्रत्यग्दाये धनक्षयः ॥१४७७ ॥
राजकार्यवशात् किंचिद्धगिनीमित्रहेतुना |
अत्पभाग्यं च लभते मध्ये मध्ये क्वचित् सुखम् ॥१४७८ |
1477 - 1478. Saturn - Rahu in 12th: The native
of Aquarius ascendant, Maalini Nadiamsa, having
these two planets in the 12th house will lose wealth
in the first year of marriage. There will also be some
business losses in the fifth dasa. Further his fortunes
will intermittently decline due to (mishandling of)
royal assignments and due to friends of his sister.
Hapa जीवे मतद्गयो गजस्य च।
कन्याविक्रयवित्तापिर्भगिनी क्रयहेतुना ॥१४७९ ॥
1479. Aquarius Ascendant: Jupiterin Kalakoota
Nadiamsa will give money “by the sale of virgins as
well as of his sister”. (Sic)
मीने मन्दे कुलीरांशे तुलांसे प्रहसंयुते |
मालिन्यंशे प्रजातश्च भगिन्यार्जितवित्तवान् ॥१४८० ॥
पित्राजितधनर्यक्तो बाल्ये चैव भविष्यति |
स्वगोपरजञातिवित्तापिर्भगिनीसेहितेन च ॥१४८१ ॥
षट्शतं च तदर्धं च चतुःशतमथापि वा।
शताधिकधनं नित्यं वृद्धिवाणिज्यहेतुना ॥१४८२ ॥
1480 - 1482. Wealth Through Sister & Others:
Saturn in Pisces (in the 2nd) with Cancer Navamsa,
while Libra Navamisa is occupied by some planet will
give wealth contributed by sister. During his childhood, he will enjoy paternal wealth. Due to acquaintances of his sister, he will enjoy the wealth of his
kinsfolk. His business will prosper and he will
acquire, 600, or 300, or 400 or over 100 (gold coins)
(i.e. he will be wealthy).
कर्मेशांशग्रहदशाकाले पित्रविनाशनम् |
Chandra Kala Nadi
भगिनी क्लेशमाप्नोति मात्ररिष्टमतः परम् ॥१४८३ ॥
मालिन्यंशे स्वजननी वार्धके चित्तविभ्रमम् |
वनान्तरे मृति चेति व्या्रादिदुष्टजन्तुभिः॥१४८४॥
Ta AIST लाभेशे राहुसंयुते |
्रूरष्टयंशदोषेण मातुदुर्मरणं वदेत् ॥१४८५ ॥
स्वपिता च स्वबाल्ये च स्रीहेतोः क्लेशमृत्युमान् |
सत्रिपातज्वरे नैव देशादेशान्ते मृतिः।
मालिन्यंशे पूर्वभागे वयोमध्ये धनादयवान् ॥१४८६ ॥
वार्धके क्लेशदा, बाल्ये किंचित् सुखावहम् |
त्रिचत्वारिंशतः पश्चात् क्तेशः PART ॥१४८७ ॥
1483 - 1487. (a) Mars Dasa: During the time of
his undergoing the 10th lord’s dasa, his friends will
be destroyed; his sister will be troubled and his
mother subjected to danger.
(b) The mother of the native of Maalini Nadiamsa,
Aquarius, will be mentally deranged in her old age
(independent of “a” above). She will die ina forest,
struck by wild animals like a tiger.
(c) There are others who state that violent death
of mother (in the event of the condition at “b”) will
occur if the 11th lord is with Rahu in a malefic
Shashtiamsa. Further during his childhood his father
will die a pitiable death due to a woman (or) due to
delirium in a foreign land.
(d) The subject of former half of Maalini
Nadiamsa, Aquanus ascendant, will become rich in
the middle portion of his life. In his old age,
difficulties and penury will exist. Childhood will be
somewhat marked by happiness. After the age of 43;
perhaps for “three years”, he will be troubled.
प्रत्यग्दाये मध्यण्डे दारारिषटं विनिर्दिशेत् |
विपद्ाये अन्मदेशे वासदेशे च वा यदि ॥१४८८ ॥
राजान्तरं प्रुर्वति were तथेव च।
कालिकांशकगे मन्दे मीने राहुसमन्विते ॥१४८९ ॥
जन्मदाये जन्मदेशे विप्लवेन प्रजावधि |
मण्डलाधिपतरमत्युदशे राजान्तरं सुखम् |
षोडशाब्दात् परं चेति लोके दुर्भिक्षं भयम् ॥१४९० ॥

Deva Keralam
ूर्याशगे तत्रिकोणे स्फुटयोगं गते शनो |
मालिन्यंशे प्रजातस्य लोके दुर्भिक्षजं भयम् ॥१४९१ ॥
HAGA जातस्य प्रत््दाये तुलाशनौ |
लोके धान्यक्षयेणैव प्रजाक्षोभं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥१४९२ ॥
1488 - 1492. (a) His wife will be endangered
during the middle one-third part of his fifth dasa.
(b) Irrelevant: Dunng his first dasa, and also in
the 5th dasa, his country will have new rulers. Saturn
in Pisces in Kalika Nadiamsa in the company of Rahu
will cause revolt in the birth country, and change of
ruler due to the death of the existing ruler. After 16th
year of age, the country will be struck by famine.
When Saturn comes to the sign denoted by the Sunoccupied Navamsa, or a trine thereof, famine will
appear. Saturn moving in Libra, inthe fifth dasa, will
cause loss of grains, and strife to people.
व्यये राहुयुते मन्दे कालिकांशे शुभेक्षिते |
योगः केमिद्रुमो्ञेयो मनोदुःखं भवेत्तदा ॥१४९३ ॥
1493. Kemadruma Yoga: Saturn in the 12th in
Kalika Nadiamsa, in the company of Rahu and in
aspect to a “benefic” will cause Kemadruma Yoga,
the result of which will be grief for the native of
Aquarius ascendant.
व्यये मन्दे सुखे जीवे aed चन््रसंस्थिते |
कर्तरीयोगविख्यातो केमिद्रुमसमो फले ॥१४९४॥
1494. Kartari (Scissors) Yoga: Saturn in the
12th (in Capricorn), Jupiter in the 4th (in Taurus) and
the Moon in the 8th (in Virgo) will cause what ts
called Kartari yoga whose result will be akin to
(above-mentioned) Kemadruma Yoga (vide sloka
योगद्रये स्थिते wx दशायां गुरभुक्तिषु |
HARA जातस्य भार्यारिष्टं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥१४९५ ॥
कषप्रणोद्राहमाप्नोति पश्राच्छन्यन्तरे शुभम् |
गुरुभुक्त्यन्तमारभ्य शनिभक्तो शुभावहम् ॥१४९६ ॥
1495 - 1496. Aquarius Ascendant - Moon’s
Dasa: The sub period of Jupiter in the dasa of the
Moon will cause death of the spouse, and also the
native’s immediate marriage. Saturn’s sub period
will be auspicious. So also the beginning and ending
parts of Jupiter’s sub period.
Notes: “Yogadvaye sthithe” requires the Moon
to be part of Kemadruma and Kartan Yoga mentioned above. I believe the present condition is an illconceived one and hence not added to the rendering.
्रत्यण्दाये PATE: BARE केल्याणसंभ्रमः।
धनलाभं च भवति कर्मलाभं महत् सुखम् ॥१४९७॥
1497, In the fifth dasa, there will be a marriage
function in the family. The person will have professional and financial gains. He will be much happy
during the dasa in question.
Notes: The marriage referred to in the text is not
for the native. It is to a family member like son or
daughter.
सर्वदाये aa HTH च वा यदि ।
जीवान्तरे वा सन्तापं प्रत्यगदाये विशेषतः ॥१४९८ ॥
1498. In the case of the native of Maalini
Nadiamsa, Aquarius, the sub periods of the Moon,
Mars and Jupiter will in all dasas cause mental
distress. More so in the 5th major period.
Notes: These three planets are not favourable for
the ascendant Aquarius. Hence in any major period,
these three sub periods will give restricted results.
This axiom can generally be applied to Aquarius
ascendant notwithstanding the Nadiamsa of birth.
वूर्मयोगे दशाकाले ह्यपरा्ं महत् सुखम् |
बहुव्यापार वृद्धि च धनलाभं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥१५९९ ॥
1499, The dasa related to Koorma Yoga will in
the second half give much happiness. The person will
have multifarious business activities and will financially gain in abundance.
Notes: The dasa of Koorma Yoga is not a proper
term. See comments under slokas 1443- 45 in this
context.
In my opinion, the text refers to the fifth dasa.
लाभेशांशे तत्िकोणे षष्टेशांशत्रिकोणके |
स्फुटयोगं गते मन्दे सहोदरविनाशनम् ॥१५०० ॥
वत्सरे तवेकपञ्चाशे ह्यष्टचत्वारिवत्सरे।

मालिन्यंशे पूर्वभागे सहोदरविनाशनम् ॥१५०१ ॥
1500 - 1501. Destruction of Co-born: Saturn
transiting the sign identical with the natal Navamsa
position of either the 11th lord or the 6th lord, or a
trine thereof, will destroy co-born. 5151 year or the
48th year will be the phase ofsuch loss for the subject.
SHAT प्रजातस्य लग्नधिपदशा शुभा |
दारान्ते सुतप्रापिर्वा्धके स्रीसुसोख्यवान् ॥१५०२ ॥
1502. One born in Koorma Yoga (read Maalini
Nadiamsa, Aquarius ascendant) will beget auspicious effects in the dasa of the lord of the ascendant.
He will obtain a son through another wife (i.e.
through second wife, and not the first one). He will
enjoy happiness through wife in his advanced years
of age.
चन्द्रलग्नधिपे भोमे दशायां गुरुभक्तिषु |
अतीव क्लेशकर्याणि ह्यपमृत्युतस्याश्रितः ॥१५०२ ॥
स्वसमानजनारिषटं सीप्रजानाशमेव च।
तदभावे धनच्छेदं दशान्त्ये वा विनिर्दिशेत् ॥१५०४॥
1503 - 1504. Mars should be the lord ofthe Moon
sign. Then the dasa of Mars, in the sub period ruled
by Jupiter will cause many difficulties and will
involve the subject in danger of untimely death. He
will incur evils concerning relatives of his age group.
His daughters will be destroyed, or else his wealth
will perish in the end of the dasa in question.
Notes: For Aquarius ascendant, the Moon sign
should be either Aries or Scorpio. Then the results
cited will occur in the dasa of Mars, the dispositor of
the Moon.
कुंभलग्ने च BY भूसुतस्य दशासुखम्।
राहुदाये श्रिय चेति स्वपुत्रोद्राहसं्रमम् ॥१५०५ ॥
Start त्रिषष्टयन्दे मालिन्यंशोद्धवस्य च।
अपमृत्युभयप्रापिः शान्तया शानि प्रयास्यति ॥१५०६ ॥
1505 - 1506. (a) The dasa of Mars will give
happiness to the native of Aquarius with Scoprio
rising.
(b) Rahu dasa will give wealth to the native
apart from marriage to his son. The sub period of
Chandra Kala Nadi
Jupiter (ignore Malini Nadiamsa) will (in the dasa of
Rahu), or the 36th year, cause fear of untimely death
for which suitable remedies be resorted to.
AAR तथा योगे कालकूयांशजस्य च ।
सप्तसप्ततो वा मृल्यरनैधनेशदशान्त्यके ॥१५०७ ॥
वृषभादित्रिमासेषु ह्यथवा मकरेऽपि च।
सोमवरे भवेन्मृत्युरुषः काले न संशयः॥१५०८ ॥
1507 - 1508. Death: The person belonging to
Maalini Nadiamsa (instead of Matanga) in Aquarius
ascendant, having (Jupiter in) Kalakoota Nadiamsa
will live upto 77. End of seventh dasa will cause his
death. The Sun, at the time of the native’s death, will
be in one of the three signs commencing Taurus. Or
else the planet could be in Capricorn. Death will be
in the morning hours on a Monday.
Fag व्यये पपे दुर्गतिनत्रि Bea: |
पशचत्निकृष्ट जन्मा च वार्धके पुत्रशोकवान् ॥१५०९ ॥
1509. The person in question having a maletic in
the 12th will not attain good worlds after death and his
next birth will be a mean one. Inthe current birth his
old age will cause grief onaccount of loss of son (with
a malefic in the 12th).
अचलांशे स्थिरे लगे पूर्वभागे प्रजायते |
विप्र जन्मा सुखी नित्यं श्यामवर्णं कृशाकृतिः ॥१५१० ॥
ग्येष्ठभ्रातृप्रियः साधुर्गाल्ये क्लेशेन करशितः।
भगिनी भरतृमूतेन देशान्तरमुभाग्यवान् ॥१५११ ॥
1410 - 1511. Achala Nadiamsa - Fixed Sign
(upto sloka 1549); The native of former half of this
Nadiamsa will be a Brahmin. He will be dark in
complexion and will look emaciated. He will be dear
to his elder brother. During his childhood he will be
gentle, but will incur difficulties.
Notes: Achala (or Achalaprabha) Nadiamsa is
from 23° to 23° 12 ‘of movable signs; from 6° 48' to
7° of immovable signs; and from 8° to 8° 12' of
common signs.
लग्ने कुजे सिते जीवे हम्बरांशसमुद्धवः।
पश्चाद्भ्रातृविहीनश्च जातशचन्मृतिमादिशेत् ॥१५१२ ॥

Deva Keralam
1512. No Younger Co-born: Mars in the ascendant and Jupiter in the Sth will deprive the person
of younger brothers and younger sisters. Evenif there
be such births, they will only die.
Notes: The word “Sithe” meaning Venus, should
be “Suthe” meaning the 5th house. The text does not
imply three planets, viz. Mars, Jupiter and Venus in
the ascendant.
“Ambaramse” should read as “Achalamse”
meaning Achala Nadiamsa, not Ambara Nadiamsa.
भगिनीद्यवान् रागी हयेकभरातृमन्वितः।
पितृसोख्यविहीनश्च मातृसोख्यविहीनवान् ॥१५१३ ॥
1513. Achala Nadiamsa - Fixed Sign: The
native of former half will have two sisters, will be
passionate and will have one brother. He will be
devoid of happiness on account of father and mother.
Notes: This rule is general for this Nadiamsa,
and has nothing to do with the condition laid in sloka
The text hints at short-lived parents in case of
birth in first half of the Nadiamsa.
उततरांशे प्रजातस्य पितरौ च पिरायुषौ।
पूर्वभागो Shes भ्राता दीर्धमायुश्च विन्दति ॥१५१४॥
1514. Achala Nadiamsa - Fixed Sign: The
native of second halfof the Nadiamsa will have longliving parents. It is the elder brother that will be long
lived in case the birth is in first half of the said
Nadiamsa.
Notes: First half of the Nadiamsa gives shortlived parents but long-living elder brother. Birth in
2nd half will give longevity to parents.
कुग्रमे जननं चेति सम्पदयाये विनिर्दिशेत्
पश्िमार्णव तीरे च गोकर्णपरान््यदेशके ॥१५१५ ॥
बाल्ये संचारमाणोतति दारिप्रंण च करितः।
उत्तरांशे प्रजाश्च जन्मदेशे सुभाग्यवान् ॥१५१६॥
विप्लवेने विनिर्गत्य पशत् स्वस्थानमागतः।
मेषांशे कुंभलगे च पुण्यक्षेत्रे सुभाग्यवान् ॥१५१७॥
अन्ध atts निकटे प्राब्ल्यं चोत्तयोत्तम् |
पूर्वभागे मध्यखण्डे बाल्ये पितृतिनाशवान् ॥१५१८ ॥
आयुष्मती च जननी जातस्य त्वचलां शके |
1515 - 15181/2. (a) The native of first half will
live in a small village during his second dasa. In
childhood he will wander in the hilly region of the
West or in the region of Gokarna. He will be troubled
by poverty.
(b) One belonging to the second half will make
his fortunes in the birth region.
(c) The subject of first half will be displaced due
to 8 revolt and will later return to his birth region.
(d) One born in Aquarius with Aries Navamsa
will beget prosperity in a shrine. He will gradually
eam fortunes being close to the king of Andhra
region.
(€) The native of former half will lose his father
in the midst of his boyhood. His mother will be longlived. (The effect concerning mother is contradictory
to earlier statement.)
Notes: The rule at “d” is for birth in Aquarius
ascendant, Aries Navamsa. That is the ascendant
should be between 20° 0' to 23° 20' of Aquarius. No
Nadiamsa comes in the picture.
The instructions contain in “a” to “c” and “e”
apply to the given Nadiamsa, ina fixed sign including
Aquarius.
लाभे MT सूर्ये जातस्य त्वचलां शके 112428 ॥
सम्पदाये frafs देशत्यागं विनिर्दिरेत्।
चन्द्रलग्रा्टमाधीशदशायां पापभुक्तिषु ॥१५२० ॥
स्वपितारिष्टमाप्रोति मातररिष्टं ततः परम् ।
1519-1520 1/2. Fixed Sign - Achala Nadiamsa:
Should Saturn and the Sun be in the 11th house, death
of father will occur in the 2nd dasa. The person will
also abandon his birth region. Death of father will
occur in a malefic’s sub period during the major

period of the planet ruling the 8th from the Moon.
Following this, mother will die.
THAN पूर्वभागे दरिशे शनिवीक्षिते ॥१५२१॥
केचित facia दारसोख्यविहीनवान् |
अचलांशे पूर्वभागे दारेशे शनिवीक्षिते ॥१५२२ ॥
विवाहद्रयमित्याहु ज्येष्ठभार्या हयपुत्रिणी |
अचलांशे पूर्वभागे सुतेशे TRA ॥१५२३ ।
लाभे मन्दे प्रजातश्र सन्तानप्रतिबन्धवान्।
SHUT महायोगी स्येष्ठभार्याथ वापि च ॥१५२४॥
1521 - 1524. Marriage: (a) The Moon in the 7th
house will give two wives. According to some it
could be three. Further the person will lack happiness
from marniage.
(b) In case of birth in former half of the subject
Nadiamsa, Saturn aspecting the lord of the 7th will,
give two wives. The first wife will be childless.
(c) The said native having the Sth lord in aspect
to Rahu while Saturn is in the 11th house will have
obstacles in begetting progeny.
(d) The subject belonging to the 2nd half of the
said Nadiamsa, or his first wife, will suffer from a
great disease.
काकवन्ध्यापतिश्रैव पूर्वभागे हयपुत्रवान् |
ग्रन्थान्तरे पूर्वभागे जातस्य त्वचलां शके ॥१५२५ ॥
कालन्तरे सुतप्रापिर्दरान्तरफलं स्मृतम् |
1525 - 15251/2. One born inthe former halfofthe
subject Nadiamsa will be the husband of a woman
who will give birth only to one child (or) he may go
without a son. There is another authority to state that
this person will obtain a son after a long interval
through second wife.
लन्गात् पञ्चमगे जीवे पापद्वयनिरीकषिते ॥१५२६ ॥
अचलांशे AMAT पुरब्राह्मणशापवान् |
तत्पापपरिहार्थं सेतुस्नानं शिवार्चनम् ॥१५२७ ॥
नागलिङ्गपदानेन सन्तनप्राप्तिमादिशेत |
सोवर्णं afore च सोमवारे प्रदोषके ॥१५२८ |
उपोष्य विधिवत् पूजां सायाहे दानमाचरेत् |
Chandra Kala Nadi
अचलांशे पूर्वभागे लाभ सूरये च संस्थिते ॥१५२९ ॥
भानुव्रतादिपुण्येन पुतरपराप्तर्न संशयः।
1526 - 15291/2. Hurdles in Getting Progeny &
Remedy: (a) Jupiter in the 5th house in aspect to two
malefics denotes that the native of Achala Nadiamsa
obtained a curse from Brahmins due to his previous
life’s sins. (That is the reason which will pose problems in respect of progeny inthe present birth.) To get
rid of this sin, he should take bath in the Sethu and
worship Lord Siva and donate the image of a golden
Nagalinga on a Monday evening. Following these,
birth of children will come to pass.
(b) Should the Sun be placed in the 11th, the
native of former half of Achala Nadiamsa (will face
obstacles in begetting progeny and finally) will be
blessed with a son due to merits acquired by observing religious vows for the Sun God.
ज्यष्ठभ्रातृसुताधीशे नीचांशे कुजवीक्षिते ॥१५२० ॥
SSM सुतश्चापिजले मृतिमवान्पुयात् |
अचलां शे पूर्वभागे भगिनीपुत्रयोगवान् ॥१५२३१॥
स्वमातुल्वशात् सोख्यमानाल्यं प्रियवान् सुखी |
1530 - 15311/2. (a) Danger Through Water:
The lord of the 3rd aspected by Mars and begetting
debilitation Navamsa will cause death of a son of
elder brother through water.
(b) The person belonging to former half of
Achala Nadiamsa will bring up the progeny of his
sister. He will enjoy happiness through maternal
uncles right from his childhood.
Notes: (a) Lord of the 3rd, which is 5th (progeny)
from the 11th (older co-born) indicates progeny of
older brother or sister.
Mars in the sign Cancer or in Cancer Navamsa
will pose danger through water to the specified
relative. If Mars happens to be the lord of the
ascendant, the victim will be the native himself.
(b) Mars is notin the picture. Itis merely because
of the birth in this particular Nadiamsa.
SHU प्रजातस्य भगिन्यौ द्वे सुपु्रिके ॥१५३२ ॥
पूर्वभागे तथा विन्यद्वेधव्येन तु करिता |
निर्मालांशे विक्रमेशे जातस्यत्वमलांशके ॥१५३३ ॥

Deva Keralam
सोदगः पञ्च सप्तेति द्वितरिसह्ुयादाचिरायुषी |
SHUN स्वभगिनी त्वेका माङ्गल्यमश्नुते ॥१५३४॥
पूर्वभागे च वेधव्यं सोदर्य द्वे न संशयः।
1532 - 15341/2. (a) Two sisters of the native of
second half of Achala Nadiamsa will have two
daughters (each).
(b) The sister of the native of former half of this
Nadiamsa will be widowed (early).
(c) The lord ofthe 3rd (Mars) in Nirmala Nadiamsa
will give five brothers to the subject of Achala
Nadiamsa. Two or three of them will be endowed
with longevity.
(d) One sister of the native of second half of this
Nadiamsa will be auspicious (1.6. will have a longliving husband). Two of the sisters of the subject of
first half will be widowed (early).
a सप्तमगे शुक्रे त्वसितेन निरीक्षिते 243s I
अचलांशे प्रजातस्य मात्ररिष्टं विनिर्दिशेत्।
तुलाधिपदशाकाले होरादायेऽपि वा यदि ॥१५३६ ॥
पित्ररिषटात् परं माता परलोकं प्रयास्यति |
पूर्वभागे मध्यखण्डे मात्ररिषटात् परं पिता ॥१५२७॥
सम्पदाये मृतश्च स्यादशवर्षात् परं भवेत् |
अष्टमाब्दे द्वादशाब्दे MT वा पोडशाब्दके ॥१५३८ ॥
चतुर्विरोऽथ वा चेति मातापितृविनाशनम् |
1535 ~ 1538 1/2. Parents: (a) Venus in the 7th
from the Moon and in aspect to Saturn will forebode
(early) danger to mother. This will be in the dasa of
Venus. His father will predecease his mother. (This
concerns the native of second half of Achala Nadiamsa.)
(b) Incase of birth in former half, the above yoga
will lead to the death of mother in the middle portion
of (the 2nd dasa) inthe first instance, while father will
die later on. (Alternatively) 10th year, 8th year, 12th
year, 16th year or 24th year of the native will kil]
parents.
वर्गोत्तम निशानाथे जातस्य त्वचलांशके 11243 ॥
sei fared संधिकाले ह्यरिष्टकृत् |
जन्मदेशं परित्यज्य पूर्वं भागोद्धवस्य च ॥१५४० Il
देशान्तरे मातृपित्रोररिष्टं मनुख्रवीत्।
प्रहंशनाडीविस्तर प्रस्ताराष्टकवर्गके |
अचलांशे प्रजातस्य फलमन्यद्विचार्यताम् ॥१५४१ ॥
1539 - 1541. (a) The Moon in Vargottama Navamsa wil] cause evils to the subject of the 2nd half of
this Nadiamsa in the junction period of (2nd and) 3rd
dasa.
(b) (Inthis phase) the native of former half of the
said Nadiamsa will leave his birth region. His parents
will die in a foreign land. With the help of Prastara
Ashtaka Varga related effects be delineated in detail.
स्वोच्वांशगे तिशानाथे निर्मलांशे च संस्थिते |
वेदान्त MATA: सदा ह्यहिककर्मवान् ॥१५४२ ॥
अतिभक्तिरतो नित्यं निर्मलांशे निशाकरे |
साल्विको गुणवान् रोगी हरिशड्रभक्तिमान् ॥१५४२ I
विप्लवेन विनिर्गत्य दशवर्षात् परं मृतिम्
द्रादशाब्दात् परं श्रुत्वा नानादेशेषु संचरन् ॥१५४४ ॥
1542 - 1544. The Moon in Nirmala Nadiamsa
and in exaltation Navamsa will give following effects
to the person belonging to Achala Nadiamsa. He will
be knowledgeable in Vedanta and Tatva. He will
perform diurnal prayers required for bodily and
mental purification. He will be very pious, gentle,
virtuous, passionate and devoted to Lords Vishnu and
Siva. He will wander in many countries, be displaced
in a revolt and will die 10 or 12 years Jater.
पितृमातृविनाशेन क्लेशं प्रा्ोति भूरिशः।
महानदीतीरपुरे निवासं
योगं वदेदेवबलांश जस्य ।
अतीव सौख्यं मुनयो वदन्ति
विपदृशान्त्यादि सुभाग्यवृद्धिम् ॥१५४५ ॥
ares महद्धाग्यं चत्वारिंशे महाविपत्।
्रिशोपरि सुभाग्याप्ति राजान्तरवशात् सुखम् ॥१५४६ ॥
1545 - 1546. The native of Achala Nadiamsa of
a fixed sign will undergo much distress due to

222 Charidra Kala Nadi
parents’ deaths. He will live ina town on the banks
ofa great river. He will beget much happiness in the
beginning and concluding portions of the third dasa.
In the 4th dasa, he will beget much fortunes. In the
40th year he will be subjected to a great danger. His
fortunes will multiply after thirty and he will be
happy under a new king.
राज्येशंशे aera तत्सप्तमेऽथ गोचर ।
Anas मनस्तापं शनि चारवशात् फलम् ॥१५४७ ॥
TSMR स्फुटयोगं गते शनौ |
aaa क्लेशकार्याणि देशत्यागं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥१५४८ ॥
1547 - 1548. Saturn’s Transit: (a) One’s prosperity will be obstructed and he will undergo mental
distress when Saturn transits the sign identical with
the Navamsa occupied by the 10th lord, ora trine or
7th therefrom.
(b) Many difficulties and leaving one’s birth
region will be the effects of Saturn’s transit in thesign
identical with the Navamsa occupied by the 6th lord,
ora trine thereof.
लग्नाधिपदशाकाले त्वतीव श्रियमश्नुते ।
दूनाधिपदशा मृत्युरापत्सन्यासयोगवान् ॥१५४९ ॥
1549. The dasa of the lord of the ascendant will
give much wealth to the native. 7th lord’s dasa will
cause taking to ascetic order following a family
calamity; this period will also cause the person’s
death.
Note: Here ends discussion on Achala Nadiamsa
of a fixed sign.
THAT अगर्दाशः ॥
अगदांशकगे जीवे ash भृगु संयुते |
तुलालगने प्रजातश्च गौरवर्णः शुभाकृतिः॥१५५० ॥
1550, Libra Ascendant - Jagathi Nadiamsa:
Jupiter in Agada Nadiamsa, birth in Libra ascendant’s Jagathi Nadiamsa former half, and the Sun with
Venus in the 11th will give fair complexion and
auspicious appearance.
Notes: Jagathi Nadiamsa - refer to notes under
sloka 2128 of Book I.
Agada Nadiamsa - refer to notes under sloka
sloka 98, Book I.
जगत्यंशे पूर्वभागे त्वगदांशकगे गुरो ।
भृगुजेन युते दृष्टे सोदरभ्रातृभ्रत्रिमान् ॥१५५१ ॥
ज्यष्ठभ्रातृयुतो मानी जीवमातुयुतः सुखी |
मृतप्रजाबहुत्वं स्याद्राजवंशे सुभाग्यवान् ॥१५५२ ॥
1551 - 1552. Jupiter in Agada Nadiamsa being
associated with Venus by aspect or company will
deprive the person of younger brothers and sisters.
He will have older brothers, be honourable and will
have 8 long-living mother ("Maatru
deerghayushmaan" is the reading in another version). He will obtain many dead children. His
fortunes wil] multiply in royal families.
अगदांशकगे जीवे लाभे द्विमरहसंयते।
कनिष्ठभ्रातृमान् रागी ज्येष्ठभ्राता द्विभार्यवान् ॥१५५३ ॥
1553. The said Libra native with Jupiter in
Agada Nadiamsa while there are two planets in the
11th house will have younger co-bom, and be passionate. Further, his older brother will have two
wives.
fae सिहांशके जीवे wreafaenfaene: |
श्रीमान् वाग्मी सुखी गोग धर्मिष्ठः सात्तिकप्रियः॥१५५४ i
1554. If Jupiter is in Vargottama Navamsa. the
person will be expert in Sastras, be wealthy, eloquent
in speech, be happy, will enjoy pleasures, be righteous and fond of saintly people.
जगत्य॑शे पूर्वभागे जातस्य afer aes |
इदमेव फलं सत्यं जातस्य त्वगदांशके ॥१५५५ Il
1555. These are the effects that will bear truth in
respect of one born in the former half of Jagathi
Nadiamsa of Libra ascendant while Jupiter is in
Agada Nadiamsa.
fae सिहांशके जीवे मीनकाते प्रजायते |
विष्णुभक्तिरतो नित्यं देवब्राह्मणभक्तिमान् ॥१५५६ ॥
fae जीवे मीनकाले वेदिकाचारवान् सुखौ ।
अवेदिकमताचारं शनियोगे प्रजायते ॥१५५७ ॥

Deva Keralam
TU नारदीये ह्यगदांशसमुद्धवः।
हरिभक्तिरतो नित्यं मीनकाले सुभाग्यवान् ॥१५५८ ॥
चन्द्रकालाधिपे BER सूर्यकालाधिपे गुरो ।
अन्योन्य दृष्टियोगेन लाभे भाग्यप्रदौ च तौ ॥१५५९ ॥
चन्द्रकालाधिपे शुक्रे लाभेशेन समन्विते |
स्वजातिधर्मतत्वज्ञो मतभेदे कुयुक्तिमान् ॥१५६० ॥
1556 - 1560. Libra Ascendant: (a) If the birth be
in the “Kaala of Pisces” Jupiter while Jupiter is in the
sign Leo with Leo Navamsa the subject will be
devoted to Lord Vishnu and he will honour Brahmins
and Gods. He will follow the codes prescribed by the
Vedas.
(b) Ifin this yoga Saturn joins Jupiter (in the sign
Leo), he will disregard such prescriptions.
(c) As per Naradeeyam the subject of Agada
Nadiamsa of Leo ascendant will be devoted to Lord
Vishnu and be highly prosperous. This applies to
birth in Jupiter’s Hora.
(d) Venus and Jupiter should be in mutual aspects being the rulers in order of “Moon’s Kaala” and
“Sun’s Kaala” the result of which is fortunes.
(£) Venus ruling the “Kaala of the Moon” and
placed in the 11th will give knowledge in rules and
philosophy of one’s ownreligion. Further the person
will be adept in creating difference of opinion by
mean expedients.
Notes: Three peculiar terms like Meena Kaala
are used which are not widely used astrological
terms. None ofthese could be found instandard texts.
They certainly do not refer to planetary hours.
शुक्रे शनियुते जातः क्रोधी लुब्धो विचक्षणः,
स्रीलोलश्चपलः श्रीमान् तामसः सत्यविक्रमः॥१५६१ ॥
श्रीमान् WARIS त्वगदांशे सुबुद्धिमान् |
लिपित्रयप्रवीणश्च ह्यरोगदृढगात्रवान् ॥१५६२ ॥
1561 - 1562. Venus - Saturn Conjunction: One
born in the ascendant Libra with Agada Nadiamsa,
while Venus is conjunct Jupiter, will be irascible,
miserly, clear-sighted, addicted to women, fickleminded, wealthy, indolent, truthful and bold. He will
be possess attractive limbs (features), be skillful in
three languages, free from diseases and will possess
a sturdy body.
लन्गेशांशपतौ शुक्रे रविजेन युतेक्षिते |
जगंत्यशे प्रजातश्च रन्धान्वेषी सुबुद्धिमान् ॥१५६३ ॥
सिंहे वर्गोत्तमे जीवे मेषारुढेऽल्पपुत्रवान् |
मृतप्रजाबहृत्वं स्यच्छुक्रार्कियुतवीक्षिते ॥१५६४ ॥
1563 - 1564. (a) The Navamsa occupied by the
lord of the ascendant should be owned by Venus who
in turn Should be in association with Saturn by aspect
or conjunction (in Rasi chart). Then the subject will
be intent upon find others’ faults and be very intelligent. The ascendant should be in Jagathi Nadiamsa.
(b) Jupiter should be in Vargottama in Leo while
Aries 1s the Aroodha ascendant. The result is the
native will have limited number of offspring.
Notes: These two slokas, in my view belong to
Jagathi Nadiamsa in Leo. These do not belong to
Libra, if we scrutinize the expression - “Lagnesamsa
pathau Sukre”. In the first instance, if the ascendant
is Libra, Venus himself is the lord of the ascendant
and he will not be referred to in such indirect term.
From an understanding of related passages on
earlier occasions, I feel these two slokas deal with
Leo ascendant. Hence in “b”, the Sunas lord of natal
ascendant should be in Sagittarius as Jupiter is in
Vargottama in Leo.
जीवे शनियुते जातः शान्तः शा्र्थकोषिदाः।
AA: परकार्यज्ञशपलश्चञ्चलात्मवान् ॥१५६५ ॥
विदेशवासी मतिमान् पुत्रशोकेन कर्शितः।
जर्जराशकगे सूर्ये मीन काले सुभाग्यवान् ॥१५६६ ॥
1565 - 1566. Libra Ascendant - Jagathi
Nadiamsa: (a) Jupiter in the company of Saturn will
make the subject patient in disposition, learned in the
meanings of Sastras, and independent. He will be
skillful in completing others’ jobs, fickle-minded,
will live in foreign places, be intelligent, and will
grieve on account of loss of offspring.
(0) The Sun in 1910913 Nadiamsa will cause
abundant prospenity. (“Meena Kaale” is a doubtful
term as stated earlier. In one version “Meene Kaale”
appears which could mean “Saturn in Pisces”. But]

have not seen the author using the term "Kaala" to
denote Saturn. Hence this term should be treated as
corrupt entry.)
मीनांशे नवमे सूर्ये स्वपिता प्रातृहीनवान् |
कालन्तरे भ्रातृशोकमल्पानुजयुतः॥१५६७ ॥
सूर्ये यावत्फलानि BETH शकैस्तथा |
तावत् पितुः सोदराणां agaist परिचिन्तयेत् ॥१५६८ ॥
1567 - 1568. Libra Ascendant: (a) The Sun in
Oth: In case the Sun is in the 9th (in Gemini) and
begets Pisces Navamsa, the father of the person born
in Libra ascendant will be devoid of co-born (or) he
will lose co-born after some time (or) will have a
limited number of co-born.
(b) The number of co-born the father will have
will correspond to the net Ashtaka Varga bindus in
the Sun’s Ashtaka Varga (of the native). (The first
line of sloka 1568 is partially defective and the
meaning is given with the best possible concept.)
धनपुत्रमित्र तुये द्विजदेवार्चने तथा ।
Set पितृणां नवमे तपने त्वति कृष्णः स्यात् ॥१५६९ ॥
सुन्दरः सुखवान् रागी सत्कलतरेप्रियः सुखी |
भाग्ये बुधयुते सूर्ये मेधावीकुजसंयुते ॥१५७० ॥
1569 - 1570. (a) (The Sun) in the 2nd, 5th, 11th
or 4th denotes that the person will worship Brahmins
and Gods.
(b) The Sun in the 9th house will lead to the
person hating his father. The subject will in addition
be very dark in complexion.
(c) He will be charming appearance, be happy,
passionate and will be fond of his affectionate wife if
the Sun and Mercury are in the 9th.
(d) The Sunin the 9th with Mars will cause a high
degree of intelligence to the native.
भाग्ये राहो प्रसते च तदीशेन समन्विते |
पितृमावृविहीनश्च प्रतिबन्धकसंयुतः॥ १५७१ ॥
पित्ररिषटस्य काले वा मात्ररिषटेऽथ वा यदि |
देशान्तरे निवासश्च ह्यथ म्रामन्त रेऽपि वा ॥१५७२॥
1571 - 1572. Rabu - Mercury: Rahu in the 9th
Chandra Kala Nadi
with his dispositor (i.e. with Mercury) denotes a
satisfied soul (i.e the native will not be greedy).
Further the native will lose his parents cariy and will
face obstacles. At the time of death of his father or
mother, he will be ina foreign country or village.
वनान्तपपुरे वासी नवमे राहु संस्थिते |
नदीप्रान्त्येऽथ वा चेति स्वोच्चांशे भाग्यवान् सुधीः ॥१५७३ ॥
स्वभार्यासोदराणां च बहूनां नाशमीरयेत् |
दुःखिता दारमाता च पुत्रशोकेन करशिता ॥१५७४ ॥
1573 - 1574. Rahu in 9th: Should हतप be in the
9th house, the native of Libra ascendant will live in
a city surrounded by forests, or in a town located on
the bank of river. If Rahu be simultaneously in his
exaltation Navamsa, the person will be highly fortunate and intelligent. Many of his brothers-in-law will
be destroyed. His mother-in-law will be grieved on
account of loss of sons.
जगत्यंशे पूर्वभागे श्रश्र्शुरभक्तिमान्।
SRAM सुभाग्याप्तिशद्राहानन्तरं सुखम् ॥१५७५ ॥
पध्यायुर्योगवान् वाग्मी तेजस्वी गुरुधक्तिमान्।
1575 - 1575 1/2. One born in the first half of
Jagathi Nadiamsa, Libra ascendant will be devoted to
his parents-in-law. He will obtain much luck through
his in-laws and be happy after marriage. He will have
a medium length of life, be eloquent in speech,
splendorous and be devoted to his preceptors.
लाभे भृगुयुते जवे ह्यगदांशे धनी सुखौ |
शनियोगे प्रजातश्च मृतपुत्रबहुत्ववान् ॥१५७६ ॥
अदृष्टयलमूलेन पुत्रायुवृद्धिमादिशेत् |
अगदांशकगे जीवे पितृसोख्यविहिनवान् ॥१५७७ ॥
स्वमात्रा सह संयुक्तभरातुसोख्यसमन्वितः।
्रातृद्रयसुपूज्यश्च भगिन्येका सुमङ्गली ॥१५७८ ॥
एका क्लेशवती चेति सोदराभ्रातृभरात्रिमान् |
्ातृसोढ्यसमायुक्तः पुत्रशोकेन कशितः॥१५७९ ॥
्राृश्रष्ठः सुखी नित्यं पुत्रभाग्याभिवृद्धिमान्।
सन्तानाणिषटदोषार्थमगदांशोद्धवस्य च ॥१५८० ॥

Deva Keralam
शिशुमास्रदानेन पुत्रायुश्च प्रवर्धते |
1576 - 15801/2. 42208 Nadiamsa - Libra Ascendant: (a) Jupiter in the 11th house with Venus will
give wealth.
(b) If Saturn joins Jupiter in the 11th, one will
obtain many dead children. By suitable efforts, the
life-spans of children can be increased.
(c) Jupiter in Agada Nadiamsa will deprive one
of paternal happiness. His mother will live with him
(i.e. not with the father) and he will enjoy fraternal
happiness. He will have two honourable brothers and
one auspicious sister. Another sister will be in
troubles. The person will be grieved on account of
loss ofa son. He will be excellent among his co-bom
and his progeny will prosper. To overcome the
blemish in respect of progeny the native should
donate a specified plant called "Sisumaara", (whose
scientific name is Delphinus Gangeticus) 1 «wing
which his children will be blessed with longevity.
Note: Sisumaara also means a collection of stars
resembling a dolphin and held to be dear to Lord
Vishnu. The north-east point in the Heavens is also
called Sisumaara.
The plant in question seems to be in wide use in
traditional medicine and seems to grow abundantly in
Gangetic plains.
सुतेशांशके TA भूसुतेन निरीक्षिते ॥१५८१ ॥
विषाग्निना सुतां तदभावे जलेन च।
तदोषपरिहारर्थं चन्द्र शानि समाचरेत् ॥१५८२ ॥
उमामहेश्वरं कृत्वा कल्पोक्तविधिमार्गतः।
उमापतिं महादेवं ध्यात्वा चद्धकलाधरम् ॥१५८३ ॥
कालङ्ञाय प्रदातव्यं पुत्रभाग्याभिवृद्धये ।
1581 - 15831/2. Danger to Progeny: The Moon
aspected by Mars and occupying a Navamsa of
Saturn will usher danger to progeny through poison,
fire or water. To ward off the blemish, the Moon God
should be propitiated. The image of Lord Siva
adoring the lunar crescent should be obtained and
worshipped as prescribed. Astrologers should be
pleased with gifts. Following these measures children will prosper.
चन््रलग्नाष्टमे मन्दे गुरुशुक्रन्विते ॥१५८४ ॥
पुराब्राह्मणशापेन सन्तानारिष्टं संभवः।
दोषपरिहारार्थं सेतुस्नानमवश्यक्रम् ॥१५८५ ॥
सोवर्णनागदानं च प्रतिष्ठाजपसंयुतम्।
आयुष्मन्तं च तनयं लभते त्वगदांशजः॥१५८६ ॥
at पुत्रो कन्यकाप्येका दीर्धमायुश्च विन्दति
पराशरमते जीवे त्वगदांशे च संस्थिते ॥१५८७ ॥
आयुष्मन्तौ च पुत्रौ at शेषं नाशमितीरयेत् ।
1584 - 1587 1/2. (a) Incase of the subject native,
Saturn, Venus and Jupiter in the 8th from the Moon
will bring evils to progeny due to curse of Brahmins
in the previous birth of the native. To overcome this
blemish, he should have dips in the Sethu, donate a
golden image of Cobra and perform Japa (recitation
of divine names). Asa result he will get progeny with
long life-spans - two sons and one daughter.
(b) According to the school of Parasara, Jupiter
in Agada Nadiamsa will give two long-living sons
and will destroy other children.
चन्रलगनाष्टमे मन्दे लगनादेकादशेऽपि च ॥१५८८ I
पृतप्रजारिष्टशान्ति कारयेद्विधिवत् क्रमात् ॥
तदभावे गार्ग्य मते जातो जातो मृतो भवेत् ॥१५८९ ॥
शान्तिकर्म कृते चेव MAA जायते सुतः।
यद्धवस्याष्टमे मन्दे यद्धवस्य त्रिकोणके ॥१५९० ॥
तततद्धावस्य क्लेशश्च योजयेत् भविष्यति |
SATS चद्धलग्नाद्रा योजयेत् कालवित्तमः॥१५९१ ॥
गोचरेण फलं योज्यं दशाभुक्तिविधानतः।
दारेशसंबन्धदशाविपाके
लग्नेशसंबन्धदशान्तरे वा |
भाग्यभिवृद्धिश्रियमाकरोति
HATTA प्रवदन्ति सन्तः ॥१५९२ ॥
1588 - 1592. (a) Dead Children: Saturn in the
8th from the Moon sign, or in the 11th from the
ascendant will give dead children. To overcome this
blemish, remedies as prescribed be done. Or else,

sage Garga declares, children will only be dead as
they are being born. Remedies will ensure their
longevity.
(b) Saturn’s Transit: Counted from a given
Bhava if Saturn moves in the 8th, orina trine (Sth/9th
from the Bhava in question), he will destroy the
Bhava in the respective time periods. According to
experts in astrology, this has reference to the ascendant andthe Moon sign as the case may be. The
effects due to transits should be enumerated with the
help of directional influences.
(c) The Dasa periods related to the 7th lord orthe
ascendant lord will cause progress of fortunes and
acquisition of wealth and a life-partner.
Notes: The effects given in these slokas apply in
general to the various ascendants and not confined
only to the current Nadiamsa.
अगदांशकगे जीवे विपदाये स्वभुक्तिषु |
जीवान्तरेऽथ वा चेति विवाहोत्पवमादिशेत् ॥१५९२ ॥
सम्पदाये सप्तमान्दे मोञ्जीबन्धनमादिशेत् |
पश्चाज्जवर भयेनेव दशासन्धो प्रपीडितः ॥१५९४॥
बाल्ये मान्दज्वभयं श्षप्रेणारोग्यमादिशेत्।
ूर्वाब्दके ततः पश्चामसूरीज्वर तापितः॥१५९५ ॥
जननीव्याकुलंन चेति मातृवंशेऽप्यरिष्टजम्।
पितृव्यजनसन्तापं TIT शुभाशुभम् ॥१५९६ ॥
स्वमातृसोदरा णां च कतेशो भवति TTT: |
व्येष्ठभ्रातुर्विवाहश्च सम्पत्तारदशान्तयके ॥१५९७ ॥
विपदाये जातकस्य द्रादशाब्दात् परं शुभम्।
अगदांशकगे जीवे षोडशाब्दे विवाहवान् ॥१५९८ ॥
मुवर्ष॑ऽथवा चेति द्यकोन्विशवत्सरे।
विद्यालाभं ततः VASAT रतः सुखी ॥१५९९॥
दारवंशादाप्तभाग्यो विपदयाये श्रिया युतः।
1593 - 1599 1/2. Libra Ascendant - Jupiter in
Agada Nadiamsa: (a) Jupiter in his sub period or in
the first sub period during the third dasa will cause
marriage. (See “d” below.)
(b) There will be thread ceremony in the 7th year
(or) in the 2nd dasa. Later, in the junction periods of
Chandra Kala Nadi
first and second dasa, the person will be in fear of
fever. During childhood he will suffer from indigestion but will recover quickly. A year prior to this or
following this, he will incurcholera. His mother will
be distressed and evils will be experienced in his
maternal relatives’ families. His maternal uncle will
be in abundant difficulties.
(d) In the end of third dasa, the person’s older
brother will beget married.
(€) The native’s marriage will be inthe 16th year.
(See “a” above.)
(f) His 14th or 19th year will give him academic
gains. Later, he will involve himself in studies of
(£) Due to wealth obtained from in-laws, he will
be rich in his third dasa.
भाग्यराहुदशाकाले भाग्येशांशत्रिकोणके ॥१६०० ॥
स्फुटयोगं गते मन्दे पित्ररिष्टं विनिर्दिशेत्
स्वमाता विधवाभूत्वा चिरकालं सुजीवति ॥१६०१॥
1600 - 1601. Danger to Father: In case of Libra
ascendant, Rahu should be in the 91h. Then Satum
moving ina sign which is trine to the natal Navamsa
position of Mercury will cause danger to father. His
mother will live a long life as a widow (with Rahu in
9th).
विपद्याये दारवशे भाग्यवृद्धिवशात् सुखम्।
शशुराधिपतो जीवे सिंहे वरगोततमां शके ॥१६०२ ॥
अगदांशे प्रजातस्य श्वशुरश्च त्रिभार्यकः
स्वदारवंशप्राबल्यात् कीर्विभोगयुतः सुखी ॥१६०२ ॥
1602 - 1603. Agada Nadiamsa: (a) During the
third dasa of the person belonging to Libra ascendant,
his in-law’s family will attain much progress.
(b) Jupiter ruling the house of father-in-law ifin
Vargottama Navamsa will give three wives to the
native’s father-in-law. Further, the subject will beget
fame and pleasures with the influence of the family
of his in-laws.
Notes: (b) Jupiter, the ruler of Sagittarius is the
9th lord from the 7th for Libra ascendant. Hence he
denotes the father-in-law of the native of Libra
ascendant.

Deva Keralam
तृतीयाब्दे ह्यनावृष्टिलिकि दुर्भिक्षजं भयम् |
Gaal Aga सप्तविंशे च वत्सरे ॥१६०४॥
राहुयुक्तार्किंदोषेण लोके दुरभिक्षमादिशेत्।
अगदांशकगे जीवे स्थिररारिचतुष्टये ॥१६०५ ॥
स्फुटयोगं गते मन्दे राज्याधिपतिनाशनम्।
अष्टमाब्दे जन्मदेशे मण्डलाधिपतेर्विपत् ॥१६०६ ॥
1604 - 1606. Irrelevant: In the third year, the
country will reel under drought and famine. Famine
will be caused by Rahu’s conjunction during the 25th,
24th and 27th years. Jupiter in one of the fixed signs
in Agada Nadiamsa when transited by Saturn will
destroy the rulerofthe kingdom. During the 8th year,
the ruler will be greatly endangered.
aera भाग्यापििर्दारंवशे श्रिया युतः।
लाभेशांशे तल्रिकोणे स्फुटयोगं गते शनो ॥१६.\. ॥
लाभेशदृष्टिरशो तु जननी व्याकुलं महत् |
दारवंशे मनस्तापं ATA शुभाशुभम् ॥१६०८॥
1607 - 1608. (a) The subject’s prosperity will
increase ina female’s reign. His in-law’s family will
‘gather wealth.
(b) His mother will be in distress (or danger)
when Saturn is in transit in the sign that is at birth in
aspect to the lord of the 11th (the Sun), or in the sign
equivalent to the Navamsa occupied by the Sun or a
trine thereof. Further, sadness and obstacles to
prosperity will prevail in the family of the in-laws.
Auspicious as well as inauspicious effects will be felt.
Notes: (a) This is in continuation of effects given
in Sloka 1603 supra.
(b) This is independent of Jupiter’s Vargottama
position and is applicable to the person belonging to
Agada Nadiamsa, Libra ascendant.
साधनान्त्यात् परं चेति दारवंशेऽप्यरिष्टजम् |
धनेशांरो aera स्फुटयोगं गते शनौ ॥१६०९॥
धनेशदृष्टिराशो तु दारवंशजनावधि |
तदभावे कलत्रस्य देहजाडयवशाद्रव्यथा ॥१६१० ॥
सन्तानक्लेशमापनो श्वशुरादिप्रपीड FA |
भाग्यराहुदशाकाले कर्माधिपतिभुक्तिषु ॥१६११॥
धनाधिपान्तरे वापि धनलांभ विनिर्दिशेत्
भाग्यराहुदशाकाते रन्ध्राधिपतिभक्तिषु ॥१६१२॥
देशत्यागं मनस्तापं योगभद्गं शुभाशुभम्
USAR ततः पश्चत् स्वस्थानप्राप्तिमादिशेत् ॥१६१३ ॥
कुजान्तरे BIE स्थानच्युतिवशाद्व्यथाम्
षडविंशाब्दात परं भाग्यं लक््मीयोगं द्विवत्सरम् ॥१६१४ ॥
विशेषधनभूषापि पुत्रलाभं विनिर्दिशेत् |
1609 - 16141/2. (a) Evils in the in-law’s family
will strike six years (after the native’s marriage).
When Saturn transits the sign which is at birth
aspected by Mars, the 2nd lord, or the sign represented by the Navamsa occupied by Mars, ora trine
thereof, these evils will occur. Or else, bis wife will
incur physical ailments; his progeny will cause grief
and his father-in-law will be troubled.
(0) Dasa of Rahu: Rabu in the 9th will in his
Dasa, during the sub period of 2nd Jord Mars or 10th
lord Moon will cause financial gains. In the sub
period of 8th lord (Venus), the dasa of the said Rahu,
will produce mental anguish, leaving the country,
checkered prosperity and a mix of auspicious and
inauspicious effects. After these, the person will
restart living in his birth region during the sub period
of the Moon (in Rahu dasa). The sub period of Mars
will obstruct prosperity, and gnefdue to displacement.
After 26th year of age, Lakshmi Yoga will occur to
him giving wealth; he will beget abundant money,
ornaments and birth of sons.
भाग्ये भाग्यांशके राहो दशान्त्ये बहुलाभवान् ॥१६१५ I
दशामध्ये मनस्तापं दशादौ शुभमादिशेत।
सर्वदाये शुक्रभुक्तौ सर्वभुक्तौ च वा यदि ॥१६१६॥
अगदांशे प्रजातस्य स्वजनारिष्टमादिशत्।
स्वक्ष वर्गोत्तमे स्वांशे शुभाश वा दशोन्यके ॥१६१७॥
अतीव क्तेशमान्पोति दशासंधो न दोषभाक् |
अगदांशे विपद्याये संधिकाले शुभावहम् ॥१६१८ ॥
म्रामान्तरादिसंचारं धनलांभ विनिर्दिशेत्

1615 - 1618 1/2. (a) Vargottama Rahu: Rabu
in Vargottama Navamsa in the 9th (Gemini) will give
much gains in the end of his dasa. In the middle of
the dasa, mental anguish will prevail, while the
commencement of the dasa will be on an auspicious
note.
(b) In any dasa, the sub period of Venus (being
that of the 8th lord) will cause evils to the kinsfolk of
the native of Agada Nadiamsa, Libra ascendant.
(“Sarvabhuktau” is excluded in translation, as it
means all the sub periods.)
(c) Venus inownsign, own Navamsa, Vargottama
Navamsa or in another benefic’s Navamsa will cause
much grief in the end of the dasa (of Rahu). In the
junction of dasa (of Rahuand Jupiter) there will be no
blemish. (In my opinion, there is some confusion in
these assertions.)
(d) Gaining Wealth: The native of Agada
Nadiamsa will beget good effects in the junction
period of third dasa (i.e. concluding portion of third
dasa). He will move in villages and gain wealth.
HT aH स्फुटयोगं गते गुरो ॥१६१९॥
लमनेशदरिष्टशो तु सोदरेतपत्तिमादिशेत्।
भाग्येशांशे तथा विन्धाल्लाभेशांशे तथेव च ॥१६२० ॥
स्फुटयोगं गते जीवे भ्रातृलाभं इति स्मृतम्|
भाग्येशांशे तत्िकोणे TAA त्रिकोणके ॥१६२१॥
स्फुटयोगं गते जीवे सन्तानोत्पत्तिमादिशेत्।
1619 - 16211/2. Birth of Co-born: Jupiter’s
transit in the sign identical with the Navamsa occu-
~pied by the lord of the ascendant (Venus), or a trine
thereof, or the one that is in aspect to the lord of the
ascendant will cause birth of co-born. So also from
the lord of the 9th (Mercury).
(b) Birth of Off-spring: Note the Navamsa
occupied by the 9th lord Mercury at birth. Also see
in which Navamsa the dispositor of the 7th lord
(Mars) is placed. When Jupiter moves in one of the
signs identical with these positions, ora trine thereto,
the subject will beget an off-spring.
Notes: (a) Two planets feature here - Venus as
lord of the ascendant, and Mercury lord of the 9th.
Jupiter’s above transits involving the positions with
Chandra Kala Nadi
reference to these planets will give rise to acquisition
of co-born. These transits should be applied to the
native according to the age. Mercury is discussed in
“b” above in respect of obtainment of progeny as
well.
(b) Mercury as the 9th lord, and dispositor of
Mars as the 7th lord being discussed in respect of
progeny should be profitably noted. Mars comes in
the picture, perhaps because, he owns a trine from
each of the two signs of Jupiter. Aries is trine to
Sagittarius while Scorpio is trine to Pisces.
मेलापगांशगे AX VAT TAT ॥१६२२ ॥
योगभङ्गं मनस्तापं स्वस्थानच्युतिमादिशेत्।
अष्टविशे सुभाग्याप्ति लक्मीयोगवशात् सुखम् ॥१६२३ ॥
ततः पश्चात् क्लेशकालं पष्ठधिपतिदायके |
षष्ठेशांशे तत्रिकोणे स्फुटयोगं गते शनौ ॥१६२४॥
षष्ठेशदृष्टिराशो तु च्येष्टग्रातृमनोव्यथा |
स्वज्येष्ठभ्रातृ भायदिररिष्टमिति चदिशेत् ॥१६२५ ॥
कषप्रिणोद्राहतः पश्रात् संचितद्रविणव्ययम् |
1622 - 16251/2. (a) Obstruction: In the case of
Libra native, the Moon in Melapa (read Melapavarga)
Nadiamsa will cause obstacles to one’s progress in
the 29th year. Further, mental distress and loss of
place will result. 28th year will be one of good
progress giving the mercy of Goddess Lakshmi (i.e.
wealth). After the 28th year, it will be a phase of
difficulties.
(b) Saturn’s Transit: When Saturn is in transit
in the sign represented by the Navamsa of the 6th
lord, or the sign that is at birth aspected by the 6th
lord, or ina trine to either of these, the person’s elder
brother will undergo mental anguish. Further his
older sister-in-law will incur some evils. The native’s marriage will also take place in this phase. He
will spend away the wealth gathered.
विक्रमेश दशाकाले जातस्य त्वगर्दाशके ॥१६२६ ॥
कनिष्ठभ्रातृसन्तान दारसोख्यं शुभाशुभम्।
षष्ठाधिपदशाकाले गोचरे नवमे शनो ॥१६२७॥
अगदांशे Wa पुत्रशोकेन BA: |

Deva Keralam
श्शुरस्य मनस्तापं कन्यान्ते तोलिगे शनो ॥१६२८॥
देहायांस च लभते पश्चादारोग्यमादिशे।
1626 - 1628 1/2. (a) Third Lord’s Dasa: Fora
native of Agada Nadiamsa, the dasa of the lord of the
3rd will give the following effects. His younger
brother will obtain progeny, marital happiness and a
mix of good and bad effects.
(b) Transit Saturn: During the time of 6thlord’s
dasa, Saturn in movement in the 9th will cause grief
on account of loss ofa son. If Saturn transits Virgo
or Libra, his father-in-law will be anguished and will
fall sick to recover early.
लाभे जीवे प्रजातस्य स्वदशासुस्वभुक्तिषु ॥१६२९ I
पुण्यतीर्थफलप्रापििर्देवतादर्शनं भवेत्।
अगदांशकगे जीवे त्रिंशोपरि सुपुण्यवान् ॥१६३० ॥
तीर्थयात्रा फलप्रापि street मनोव्यथा |
षेमदाये क्षेमभूक्तौ सन्तानोत्पत्तिनाशनम् ॥१६३१।
मन्दान्तरेऽथ वा चेति पुत्रनाशेन करशितः।
्षमाधिपदशाकाले भाग्यधिपतिभुक्तिषु ॥१६३२ ॥
अगदांशे WIT पुत्रलाभं महत् सुखम् ।
बन्धुवर्गे मन्सतापं मित्रवर्गे तथेव च ॥१६३३॥
सोदरभ्रातृनाशं च पुत्रपीडां विनिर्दिशेत् |
1629 - 1633 1/2. (a) Jupiter in 11th: The native
of Libra ascendant, Agada Nadiamsa, having Jupiter
in the 11th will in the dasa and sub period of Jupiter
visit shrines and temples. After 30, his merits due to
good deeds will increase. 22nd year will cause
distress.
(b) Fourth Dasa: 4th dasa’s first sub period or
Saturn’s sub period will destroy progeny being then
born. In the sub period of Mercury, during 4th dasa,
he will obtain progeny and be greatly happy in
general. But (in the 4th dasa) he will (generally) see
his kinsfolk and friends in distress. His brothers and
progeny will be destroyed.
तुलाशनिस्थिते काले Wert गते गुरो ॥१६३४॥
लोके धान्यक्षयेणेव wares विनिर्दिशेत्
सुखाधिपान्तरे काले भाग्यधिपति भुक्तिषु ॥१६२५ ॥
मन्ददाये क्षेमदाये वासदेशे नृपावधि |
1634 - 16351/2. Irrelevant: When Saturn is in
Libra, Jupiter approaching transit Rahu will cause
strife to the populace due to destruction of corns. The
4th lord’s dasa and the sub period of the 9th lord or
of Saturn will cause change of king.
चद्लग्नाष्टमे जीवे योगश्च शकटाभिषः॥१६२३६ I
अगदांशे प्रजातस्य ह्यादिखण्डे मनोव्यथा |
fae सिंहांशके मन्दे दशायां च स्वभुक्तिषु ॥१६३७॥
वनान्तरपुरे वासं खेदमोदं शुभावहम् |
व्ययाधिपान्ते काले लोके दुरभिक्षजं भयम् ॥१६३८॥
प्रक्षोभं प्रकुर्वीत बन्धुवर्गे विशेषतः।
शनिद्ितीयपर्याये गोचरे स्वोच्चराशिगे ॥१६२९ ॥
बुधान्ते तृतीयांशे स्वस्थानप्राप्तिमान् सुखी |
नीचां शेक भाग्यदाये रन्धधिपतिदायके ॥१६४० ॥
भाग्याधिपान्तरे काले नीचभङ्ग महत् सुखम् ।
तुलाशंनो मातृवगँ पितृवर्गेऽथ वा यदि ॥१६४१ ॥
PUG मनस्तापं क्षेमदाये फलं स्मृतम् |
1636 - 1641 1/2. (a) Sakata Yoga: Jupiter placed
in the 8th from the Moon will cause Sakata Yoga. As
a result the native of Agada Nadiamsa will incur
mental distress during the first phase (i.e. boyhood).
(b) Saturn in Leo with the same Navamsa will in
his dasa and sub period cause residence in a city
amidst forests, grief as well as happiness and auspicious effects.
(c) Irrelevant: Inthe sub period of the lord of the
12th, the country will reel under fearof famine. Strife
to populace particularly to relatives will come to
pass.
(d) During the third round of Saturn when Saturn
comes to Libra, he will return to his native region in
the last one third part of Mercury’s sub period.
(©) If Saturn attains the divisions of debilitation
during the dasa of the 9th/8th lord, there will be
effects of Neecha Bhanga (f) Rajayoga caused by
debility under cancellation) in the sub period of the
9th lord (Mercury). Then the subject will be greatly
happy.

(g) Saturn in transitin Libra will produce griefin
the families of maternal and paternal kinsfolk, coinciding with adverse solar transits. This will be in the
4th dasa.
सप्तमाधिपतौ भोमे AY बुधयुते ॥१६४२ |
स्वभ्रातृकन्यकोद्राहं श्वशुर श्ाप्यपुत्रवान् |
ग्रन्थान्तरे गर्गं मते केचित्क्षेकपुत्रवान् ॥१६४३ ॥
धशुरस्य फलं सत्यं दीर्घमायुश्च विन्दति ।
1642 - 1643 1/2. Mars - Mercury: The lord of
the 7th, Mars, being conjunct Mercury and obtaining
a Navamsa ruled by Saturn will cause marriage to the
person’s brother’s daughter. The native’s father-inlaw will be bereft of a male issue; but according to
Garga he will have one son and will be long-lived.
भोमांशके तत्रिकोणे स्ुटयोगं गते शनो ॥१६४४॥
क्लेश TE देशे प्रकजक्षेभं विनिर्दिशेत्
मण्डलधिपतरमृतयु स्तुलान््े वृश्चिके शनो ॥१६४५ ॥
मेषान्ते वृषभे वापि कुलीरान्ते च सिहगे ।
मीनत्रिकोणगे मन्दे सेनामात्यनृपावधि ॥१६४६ ॥
पाण्डयदेशे प्रशस्तं स्यच्योलभूपतिनाशनम् |
सज्यस्यानं पञ्चमं स्यातं प्रभुस्थानं चतुष्टयम् ॥१६४७ ॥
अथवा नवमं चेति योजयेत् कालवित्तमः।
राज्यस्यानं समारभ्य रन्धाधिपतिभुक्तिषु ॥१६४८ ॥
राज्यक्षोभादिकलहं प्रजापीडां विनिर्दिशेत् |
व्ययेशे वा सुखेशे वा स्फुटयोगांशकालगे ॥१६४९ ॥
रन्ध्रधिपांशगे वापि राजामात्यजनावधि |
RUS HOTS वा ART गोचेर शनो ॥१६५० ॥
देहजाडयं च लभते OTL विशेषतः।
तदोषपरिहायर्थ शनि शान्ति समाचरेत् ॥१६५१॥
1644 - 1651. (a) Libra Ascendant - Agada
Nadiamsa: Saturn transiting the sign represented by
the Navamsa occupied by Mars, ora trine thereto will
cause difficulties.
(b) Irrelevant: This transit will also cause strife
to people in “Martian countries”. The ruler will die
with Saturn’s transit in the end of Libra orin Scorpio.
Chandra Kala Nadi
Loss of army chief and minister will come to pass
with Saturn’s transit in end of Aries, or in Taunus,
Cancer, Leo or in trines of Pisces. The kings of
Pandya and Chola kingdoms will be destroyed. The
Sth house and the 9th houses are called Rajya Sthaana.
In the sub period of the 8th lord strife and quarrels in
kingdom will exist. Royal ministers will face destruction when Saturn transits the resulting sign
represented by the sum of 12th and 4th lords’ positions or the sign represented by 8th lord’s Navamsa,
in evil years and evil months.
(c) Physical illness will come to pass in the sub
periods of malefics. To overcome this blemish
Saturn should be suitably propitiated.
Notes: In the above eight slokas, most clues are
irrelevant to natal horoscopy. In some places illconceived versions also exist. The reader can however get benefit from “a” and “c” above.
THM aera गोचरे पाप संस्थिते |
स्वदेहायासयोगादिं दारोपद्रवमादिशेत् ॥१६५२ Il
ुतरपीडां तथा चैव स्वजनोपद्र॑व तथा |
देहे पर्पेन संयुक्ते देहपीडामनोव्यथा ॥१६५२ ॥
जीवे तु जीवसन्तापं तावुभौ देहनाशको |
नक्रांशे वा कुलीरांशे वृश्चिको देह उच्यते ॥१६५४॥
मीनो जीव इति ्राहूर्योजयेत् कालवित्तमः।
1652 - 1654 1/2. (a) 8th Lord’s Navamsa: When
malefics in transit come to occupy a sign which is in
trine from the 8th lord’s natal Navamsa, one will
incur sickness to self, apart from troubles to spouse,
progeny. and kinsmen.
(b) Deha & Jeeva Rasis (as per KCD): A
malefic planet in the Deha Rasi will cause physical
ailments and mental anguish. In Jeeva Rasi, it will
promote distress to life force. Both the Rasis in
occupation will only destroy the physique (i.e. will
terminate the mundane journey). (These apply to
transit.)
(c) For Capricorn Navamsa or Cancer Navamsa,
Scorpio is Deha Rasi while Pisces is Jeeva Rasi. (This
is an uncontextual and incomplete clue.)
द्विचत्वारिंशेक क्लेशं पञ्चचत्वारिवत्सरे ॥१६५५ ॥

Deva Keralam
चतुसञ्चाशगे वापि ह्यपमृत्युभयं क्वचित् |
तदोषपरिहारर्थ Weak प्रपूजयेत् ॥१६५६ ॥
शान्त्याने दानमात्रेण देहायेग्यं शुभावहम् |
1655 - 1656 1/2. Untimely Death: The native of
Agada Nadiamsa, Libra ascendant, will have some
fear of untimely death in his 42nd, 45th or 54th year
ofage. To overcome this danger, one should worship
the image of the zodiac. Atthe end of the propitiatory
rituals, suitable Mantra commensurate with the charity be recited. Then the subject will regain health 6.6.
will not die) and will get auspicious effects.
शुक्रास्तमासगे काले मन्दास्तमनकालगे ॥१६५७ ॥
्रूरान्ते क्रूरकाले cesses विनिर्दिशेत्
ग्रहचारफल सत्यं योजयेत् कालवित्तमः॥१६५८ ॥
1657 - 1658. Sickness: He will fall sick in the
month when Venus or Saturn sets in the heavens.
Sickness will also be possible in malefic sub periods.
The effects described by the astrologers for the
various planetary transits will bear truth.
Notes: Setting in the heavens means remaining
in combustion. As planets almost regularly set, this
instruction should be used in association with suitable directional influences and transits.
However, combustion of Saturn, Venus etc. is
just not restricted to a month alone.
चतुखिंशब्दमारस्य पञ्च्रिंशतिवत्सरे ।
अगादंशे प्रजातश्च स्वस्थाने बहुभाग्यवान् ॥१६५९ ॥
1659. Fortunes: From the age of 34 through 35,
the subject of Agada Nadiamsa will acquire fortunes
of a great order in his birth region.
केतवन्तरे शुभं fret mers विनाशुभम्॥
स्वदारवंशाद्धग्यापि FTTH समादिशेत् ॥१६६० ॥
QAR HATS मातृपीडां मनोव्यथाम् |
शुभमासे धनप्रापि सन्तानोप्तिनाशनम् ॥१६६१ Il
1660 - 1661. Sub Periods: (In the 4th dasa), the
sub period of Ketu, barring the months ruled by
adverse solar movements, one will beget auspicious
effects. Mercury sub period will promote the progress
of in-laws. Venus sub period, with adverse solar
transits, will cause troubles and distress to mother; it
will give wealth in co-operation with auspicious solar
transits but will destroy progeny being then born.
अगदांशे क्षेमदाये पञ्च्रिंशातिवत्सरे।
नागयोगदशाभाग्यं क्षेमदाये न संशयः॥१६६२ ॥
1662. In the 35th year, in 4th dasa, the native of
Agada Nadiamsa will be prosperous.
Notes: “Naagayoga Dasaa Bhagyam’ is not a
properly constructed term. In sloka 1669, Naaga
Yoga is explained. Perhaps in the present sloka, it is
implied that one having Jupiter in 11th will attain
prosperity in the 35th year (or) in the 4th dasa.
कर्मेशांशे afar स्फुटयोगं गते शनो ।
श्वशुरस्य प्रपीडदि cat वा ह्यपद्रवः॥१६६३ ॥
विक्रमेशदशान्तादौ सुखाधिपतिदायके |
स्वभृक्तो AYA MAMAS च ॥१६६४॥
सुखाधिपदशाकाले लाभेशांशत्रिकोणगे ।
SHAT गते मन्दे मातुर्मरणमदिशेत् ॥१६६५ ॥
लाभे मन्दे प्राजतस्य षष्ठाधिपतिदायगे |
PUL Mg दशासंधो च वा यदि ॥१६६६ |
1663 - 1666. (a) In-laws: When Saturn moves in
the sign denoted by the natal Navamsa positioa of the
lord of the 10th (i.e. the Moon), there will be troubles
to father-in-law, or to his people. In the end orin the
beginning of the dasa of 3rd lord (Jupiter), or in the
first sub period of the 4th lord (Saturn), father-in-law
will be in danger.
(b) Mother’s Death: When Saturn arrives at the
sign indicated by the natal Navamsa position of the
11th lord (the Sun), his mother will quit the world.
This will be in the native’s 4th dasa. (That is in other
dasas, this transit will not be untoward for mother.)
(c) Fraternal Grief: In the dasa of 6th lord
(Jupiter) and in adverse sub periods, Saturn in the
11th (in Leo, in transit) will cause grief on account of
co-bom. Or it could be in the end of the said dasa.
एकोनचत्वारिशब्दे वरोश्च मोञ्जीबन्धनम् |
अगदांशे ततः पश्चात् स्वपुत्रोद्हसं भ्रमम् ॥१६६७ ॥

1667. In the 39th year, his son will have the
sacred Thread Ceremony and later marriage.
(“Vatoscha Maunji bandhanam” is replaced by
“Vrathopnayanam smritham” in another version
which means necessary Vedic Vows and thread
ceremony.)
रत्यग्दाये शुभं नित्यं गेहे गोधान्यसङ्कलम् |
पुत्रको द्राहसोख्यापि sigan. विनिदिशेत् ॥१६६८ ॥
1668. Fifth Dasa: This dasa will be fully auspicious and the family will have quadrupeds and grains.
Marriage to daughter, and enmity with co-born will
also follow.
लाभे जीवे नागयोगे Tareas च जायते |
वार्धिके पुत्रमूलेन बहुसोख्य युतो भवेत् ॥१६६९ ॥
उद्राहानन्तरं भाग्यं यावज्जीवं च सोख्यवान् |
आयुष्मन्तौ च द्धौ प्रौ धनिकः कीर्विमान् सुखी ॥१६७० ॥ ^
1669 - 1670. Naaga Yoga: Jupiter in the 11th
(for Libra ascendant) will cause Naaga Yoga. Asa
result, the person will reap much happiness through
his progeny in his old age. Further, the native will be
happy after marriage. This happiness will continue
till the end. He will have two long-living sons, be
wealthy and famous.
चेद्राधिपदशायां तु पापभुक्तिर्यदा भवेत् |
दशान्ते वा मृतिं दद्यात् कलीरादित्रिमासके ॥१६७१॥
चतुष्षष्टिसमे Heard पुण्यलोकवान्।
अगदांशफलं सव्यं प्रत्यक्षं देवकेरलम् ॥१६७२॥
1671 - 1672. The subject belonging to Agada
Nadiamsa, Libra ascendant, will die in the sub period
of a malefic planet, during the dasa of the lord of the
Moon sign. The month concerned will be coincidental with the Sun’s transit in Cancer, Leo or Virgo.
Death will (alternatively) be in the 64th year. He will
attain good worlds after death. The effects related to
Agada Nadiamsa, Libra ascendant, as retold in Deva
Keralam will be true.
तुलालनो मोहनांशः
जन्मलग्नाधिपे शक्रे दशमे मोहनांशके।
Chandra Kala Nadi
भाग्यधिपेन संयुक्ते भाग्यवंशे प्रसूतिमान् ॥१६७२ ॥
सत्ववान् सत्यावादी च स्वपित्राकृतिदेहवान् |
याचकेषु प्रसन्नात्मा त्यागभोगवदान्यवान् ॥१६७४ ॥
1673 - 1674. Mudgara Nadiamsa - Libra Ascendant: The ascendant lord Venus in the 10th in
Mohana Nadiamsa in the company of 9th lord (Mercury) denotes birth in a prosperous family. The
subject will be strong and truthful and will resemble
his father in physical appearance. He will please
those who come to him for alms (i.e. he will be quite
helpful to others), be sacrificing in disposition, will
enjoy pleasures and be munificent.
मोहनांशकगे YR परदाररतिप्रियः।
बहुसखीसङ्खवान् कामी वीणागानप्रियः सुखी ॥१६७५ ॥
1675. Venus in Mohana Nadiamsa will give
fondness to join others’ wives. Additionally, the
person will join many women, be lustful and be fond
of music played on Veena (a time-old musical instrument).
वृश्चिकांशे विलग्नेशे पापद्रयसमन्विते |
मेहप्रकृतिहेहः स्याद्राजसप्रकृतिः सदा ॥१६७६ ॥
1676. Scorpio Navamsa: Venus inthis position,
joining two malefics will promote urinary disorders.
The native will also be passionate.
Notes: This is a generally applicable aphorism.
Venus in the sign Scorpio, or Scorpio Navamsa, will
be a cause of some kindey disorder.
मुद्ररंशे पूर्वभागे लगनेशे मोहनां शके |
पश्रद्धातृविहीनः स्याज्ज्येष्ठभ्रातृसमन्वितः ॥१६७७ ॥
मुदररंशकगे शुक्रे भगिनयेका चिरायुषी |
्रातू्रयसुपूजश्च दत्तपुत्र युता शुभा ॥१६७८ ॥
1677 - 1678. Co-born: The native of former half
of Mudgara Nadiamsa, Libra ascendant, having Venus in Mohana Nadiamsa will be bereft of after-born
but be endowed with old co-born. Venus in Mudgara
Nadiamsa denotes that the native’s sister will be
long-lived, will receive affection from her three
brothers, will have an adopted son and be auspicious.

Deva Keralam
मुदररंशे विष्णुयोगे wat मोहनांशके |
विष्णुभक्तिरतो नित्यं मध्वाचारप्रियः सुखी ॥१६७९ ॥
1679. One born in the said Nadiamsa, having
Venus in Mohana Nadiamsa will ever be devoted to
Lord Vishnu. He will follow the school of
Madhvacharya.
Notes: Madhvacharya was the founder of a sect
of Vaishnavites in the south of India. He was a
Kanarese Brahmin called Ananda Tirtha
Bhagavthpada, or Madhu, said to have been born
about 1200 A.D. His doctrine is commonly called
Dvaita - i. e. “Duality” - (in opposition to the
“Advaita”, i.e. Non-duality of the great Vedanthist
Sankaracharya) and his sectarians are called Madhvas.
लग्नेशांशपतो भोमे नवांशेशनिरीक्षिते |
मेहवातज्वरेणेव देहोपद्रववान् सदा ॥१६८० ॥
1680. Martian Navamsa; The lord of the ascendant Venus should be ina Navamsa ruled by Mars
and should be aspected by Mars. As a result the
person will incur windy and urinary disorders and
will keep physically unfit.
भाग्येशांशपतो जीवे भाग्यस्थे स्वनवांशके |
मोहनांशे प्रजातस्य स्वपिता बहुभाग्यवान् ॥१६८१ ॥
1681. Mohana Nadiamsa - Libra Ascendant:
One born in this degree should have Mercury in
Jupiter’s Navamsa while Jupiter is in the 9th with
Sagittarius/Pisces Navamsa. His father will then be
a very prosperous man.
मेलापगांशे सोम्ये मोहनांशकगे गुरौ ।
ARN प्रजातस्य स्वपिता सेनिकेश्वरः॥१६८२ ॥
1682. Father’s Profession: The native of
Mudgara Nadiamsa, Libra ascendant, should have
Mercury in Melapa Nadiamsa, and Jupiterin Mohana
Nadiamsa. As a result, his father will head an army.
शुक्रे क्ितीश्वरंशस्थे मोहनांशे च नाडिगे
तुलालगे प्रजातस्य पित्ता भूपतिना समः॥१६८३ ॥
1683. Lordly Father: Venus should be in Mohana
Nadiamsa and join Mars for the Libra native to be
born of a person equal to a lord.
Notes: “Kshiteeswaramsasthe” means the Navamsa or Nadiamsa entitled “Kshiteeswara” which
makes no sense. Another version has the expression
“Khiteeswara Samyukthe” requiring Venus to be
with “king” which again makes no sense. Mars has
asynonym, “Kshitija” - born of the earth. Perhaps the
text means that Venus should be with Mars and be in
specified Nadiamsa - Mohana. The rendering is for
the supposed version.
स्ीराज्यकाते बहुभाग्ययोगं
क्षितीश्वर प्रबलं करोति
शुक्रंशकाले BHATT: ॥१६८४ ॥
1684. Further, the person’s father will enjoy
much prosperity and happiness in the reign of a
female, and grand-father will be famous.
Notes: In this sloka also we have an unclear term
- Sukramsakale - which literally translated means
“during the time of Venus Navamsa or division”.
Hence this term is excluded in the rendering.
जन्मलग्नांशगे शुक्रे भाग्येशांशम्रहे्षते ।
भूपालस्नेहवान् भोगी चीनाम्बरसुभूषितः ॥१६८५ ॥
1685. Royal Friendship: The planet that aspects Venus should be in the Navamsa of 9th lord
(Mercury) while Venus himself is in the Navamsa
ascendant. As a result, one will befriend a king, will
enjoy pleasures and be endowed with silken robes
and ornaments.
सर्पतारस्थिते शुक्रे दशमे मोहनांशके |
लाभाधिपेन संयुक्ते ग्येष्ठभ्रातृद्यान्वितः ॥१६८६ ॥
गर्भश्रीमान् महाभोगी गौरश्यामतनुर्मरः।
विशालनयनः कान्तः प्रसन्नवदनः सदा ॥१६८७ ॥
लध्वाशी धार्मिकः कामी वेश्यास्लीसरसः Fra: |
नृत्यगीतप्रियो मानी केतुयोगे कुमार्गवान् ॥१६८८ ॥
1686 - 1688. (a) Venus in Aslesha: The native
of Mohana Nadiamsa, Libra ascendant, having Venus in the 10th in Aslesha Nakshatra along with the
11th lord. (the Sun) will have two older brothers.
Additionally the subject will be rich right from birth,

will enjoy abundant pleasures, and will have a light
dark body, broad eyes, and pleasing face. He will eat
a limited quantity of food, be righteous, lustful, fond
of joking with prostitutes, dear to all, fond of dance
and songs, and be honourable.
(b) IfKetu joins Venus (in the 10thin Cancer, not
necessarily in Aslesha Nakshatra) one will take to
bad ways.
वृश्चिकांशकगे शुक्रे कुलीरे केतुसंयते |
मोहनांशे प्रजातश्र ह्यन्तः पुरवधुप्रियः॥१६८९ ॥
Pura राजपलनीसुभोगप्रियवान् सुधीः।
PEEP ATA स्यात्र न संशयः॥१६९० ॥
रललाभेन सन्तुष्टो राजा दास्यति वाहनम् |
शुक्रषष्ठयंश योगेन भृपतिप्रियमोवान् ॥१६९१॥
सोदराः पञ्चषट्सद्भयाचतुः Aga शिरायुषाः। .
1689 - 16911/2. (a) Scorpio Navamsa: The
native of Libra ascendant with Mohana Nadiamsa,
having Ketu and Venus in the 10th will be associated
with a girl living in royal palace. In this case Venus
Should simultaneously beget Scorpio Navamsa.
According to another authority this combination will
give fondness for pleasures through the queen. And
the subject will be very intelligent. He will befriend
a king who will be interested in performing vile acts.
The person will be happy gaining precious jewels.
(b) Venusian Shashtiamsa: Ifin the above yoga
of Venus-Ketu in the 10th house, Ketu begets a
Shashtiamsa ruled by Venus, the native will earn the
liking ofa king, will gain conveyances from the king
in return for gems (i.e. underground treasures handed
over to the Administration will fetch him rewards)
will have four to six brothers who will be long-lived.
Notes: (b) Shashtiamsa rulership is very simple
to be calculated. The first Shashtiamsa of a sign is
ruled by its very lord, the 2nd thereof by the lord of
the 2nd sign therefrom, the 3rd by the lord of the 3rd
therefromand so onand so forth. The 13th, 25th, 37th
and 49th of a sign will again be ruled by the lord of
that sign itself.
Example: The 1st Shastiamsa of Aries is ruled by
Mars, the 2nd one by Venus, the 3rd one by Mercury,
the 4th one by the Moon and so on and so forth.
Chandra Kala Nadi
Needless to mention, each Shashtiamsa is of 30'
of arc.
लाभाध्पिसुरांशस्थे लग्नेशे मोहनांशके ॥१६९२ ॥
SMA प्रसिद्धश्च बहुसेनाश्चनायकः।
लोभप्रकृतिमान् रागी युद्धे चायुधगण्डवान् ॥१६९३ ॥
सर्व भ्रातृणां प्रथमः स्वपित्रधिककीतिमान्।
बहुयोगी इति Gard: HARTI सुखी ॥१६९४॥
मोहनां शके UH तुलालग्नोद्धवस्य च |
सोदरेषु द्वितीयश्च कलत्रद्यवान् सुखी ॥१६९५ ॥
शुक्रे केतु समायुक्ते जातस्य मोहनां शके |
सहोदरभरातृपली सुखिन्येकान्यकामिमी ॥१६९६ ॥
सर्वज्येष्ठानुजभ्रातृभार्या TATA SAT |
कालान्तरे मृतिं चेति सन्तानोत्पत्तितः परम् ॥१६९७॥
पितुव्येकोभ्रिरायुष्मान् कलत्रत्रयवान् सुखी |
सर्पहिसादिदोषेण मृतपुत्रबहुत्ववान् ॥१६९८ ॥
1692 - 1698. Co-born: (a) The ascendant lord
Venus in Mohana Nadiamsa while the 11th lord (Sun)
is in Sura Nadiamsa, the person’s older brother will
be famous, be the head of an army and many steeds,
be miserly, passionate, and will be prone to danger
through weapons ina war. The eldest of all brothers
will be more famous than his father, be highly
prosperous and will have two wives.
(b) With Venus in Mohana Nadiamsa (not involving the Sunas at “a”), there will be two wives for
a brother who is the 2nd in series in the family.
(c) One born in Mohana Nadiamsa, Libra ascendant with Venus joining Ketu denotes that one of
the sisters-in-law of the native will desire another
man (i.e. will have illicit relations outside wedlock).
Further, his eldest brother’s wife will have pregnancy
problems, will however give birth to progeny and will
pass away after some interval. One of his paternal
uncles will be long-lived, will have three wives and
many of his children will die to trouble from snakes.
विक्रमाधिपतो जीवे क्षेमांशे भाग्यराशिगे |
वार्धके स्वपितृव्यश्र YAMA संशयः ॥१६९९ ॥

Deva Keralam
सप्तमाधिपतो भोमे मोहनांश समुद्धवः।
बाल्ये विवाहं लभते रक्तवर्णकलत्रवान् ॥१७०० ॥
1699 - 1700. (a) The 3rd lord Jupiterin Kshama
Nadiamsa in Gemini will cause birth of a son to the
person’s paternal uncle in old age.
(b) The 7th lord Mars in Mohana Nadiamsa will
give marriage to the native in his early years. His
spouse will be blood-red in colour.
Notes: (a) "“Kshemamsa" should read as
‘Kshamamsa" which means Kshama Nadiamsa. This
Nadiamsa extends from 6° 36' to 6° 48' in movable
signs; from 23° 12' to 23° 24' in fixed signs; and from
21° 36' to 21° 48' in common signs.
स्वदार जन्म लग्न च योजयेत् कालिवत्तमः॥ १७०१
1701. The natal ascendant of the spouse will
correspond to the Rasi or Navamsa occupied by the
7th lord.
मनुषष्टं शगे भोमे तुलाल ग्नोष्दवस्य च ।
स्वदारोद्राहतः पूर्व, सशुरारिष्टमादिशेत् ॥ १७०२
1702. Mars in Manu Shashtiamsa: In case of
birth in Libra ascendant, Mars in the Shashtiamsa
entitled “Manu” denotes that his bride would have
lost her father before marriage.
Note: Manu Shashtiamsa is not enlisted by
Parasara.
यमषष्टचंशगे मन्दे शोभनांशे च नाडिगे. ।
उद्राहानन्तरं भाग्यं बहुभग्यवती शुभा ॥ १७०३।
स्वदार सोदरभ्राता त्वेकः स्यादथ वान च |
APIS AUT स्वदारभ्रातृशोकवान् ॥१७०४॥
1703 - 1704. Yama Shashtiamsa: Satur in
Yama Shashtiamsa while Mars is in Sobhana
Nadiamsa will cause prosperity of the native following marriage and his spouse will be auspicious and
highly fortunate. His spouse will have only one
brother, or may not have one at all. Due to the
position of Mars in Manu Shashtiamsa, the native
will have grief on account of a brother-in-law.
Notes: Yama Shashtiamsa extends from 17° 0'to
17° 30' of an odd sign, and from 12° 30' to 13° 0' of
an even sign. Yama is death personified, son of the
Sun God and is the brother of Saturn.
मोहनांशे विलग्नेशे दारेशे शोभनांशके । ,
भार्या गुणवती पूता त्वेकभ्रातृसमन्विता, ॥ १७०५ I
कालान्तरे पुत्रवती भर्ृप्रियकरी गुभा।
शृक्रांशसस्थते मन्दे स्वर्भानुकुजवीश्षिते ॥ १७०६ ॥
कििद्रोगवती भार्या गर्भसत्रावेण करिता ।
तस्य दोषोपशान्त्यर्थं WA समाचरेत् ॥ १७०७ ॥
पश्चात सजीवसन्तानं गर्भस्रावो न विद्यते
1705 - 1707 1/2. (a) Spouse: The ascendant Jord
Venus in Mohana Nadiamsa as Mars the 7th lord is in
Sobhana Nadiamsa will give a spouse who will be
virtuous, chaste and be endowed with one brother.
She will give birth to offspring after some delay, will
please her husband 0.6. the native) and will be
auspicious.
(b) Progeny: Saturn in aspect to Mars and Rahu
and occupying a Navamsa of Venus will cause a
spouse who is somewhat sickly; she will be troubled
by abortions. To overcome these blemishes, (the
couple) should bathe in the Sethu. Following this,
progeny who can live long will be bornand the spouse
will be immune to abortions.
दारारुढपतौ जीवे A शोभनांशने ॥ १७०८ ॥
पापदृषिटविहीने च तस्य भार्या पतिव्रता ।
दारारुढपतो जीवे मोहनांशके भृगौ ॥ १७०९ ॥
दारद्रये Baa: स्वपिता त्वेकभार्यवान् ।
Wat zt द्विभार्यो च after त्वपद्रिणी ॥ १७१० ॥
द्पत्रीवती da प्राता कश्चत्रिभार्यक ।
पितृव्यच्र तथा विन्दाद्रार्धके पुत्रयोगवान् ॥ १७११ ॥
पितामहमसिद्रच् राजद्वारे सुपूजितः |
पुत्रपौत्रैः परिवृतो वार्धके पुत्र शोकवान् ॥ १७१२ ॥
पितामहफलं सत्यं जातस्य मोहनांशकगे ।
नवमाब्दे Pate कर्माधिपतिभुक्तिषु ॥१७१३ ॥
धनाधिपान्तरे वापि स्वमातानुगमिष्यति ।

236 Chandra Kala Nadi
पितामहप्रातृसुतामयादि
क्लेशं च दुखं स्वपितामहस्य |
स्वपुत्रशोकं मुनयो वदिन्त
सम्पदशादौ बहदु खभाक् स्यात् ॥ १७१४ |
1708 - 1714. (a) Devout Wife: Jupiter should be
the ruler of the 7th Aroodhapada in case of Libra
ascendant. Mars should be in Sobhana Nadiamsa,
without a malefic’s aspect. As a result the person’s
spouse will be chaste and devoted to him.
(b) Seventh Aroodhapada: If Jupiter becomes
the lord of the 7th Aroodhapada while Venus is in
Mohana Nadiamsa, the subject will have two wives
and will obtain good sons. His father will have one
marriage. The native will have two brothers both of
whom wil] have two wives each. One sister will be
childless and will have an adopted son. There is also
a possibility that a brother could have three wives. So
also his paternal uncle will have three wives and will
obtain progeny in old age. His grand-father will be
famous, will be honoured in royal assembly, will be
surrounded with children and grand-children, and
wil grieve in his old age on account of loss ofa son.
The effects stated concerning grand-father shall bear
truth. The subject will Jose his father in the ninth year
of his age, either in the sub period of the 10th lord or
2nd lord (in the first dasa). His mother will also
simultaneously offer herself to the pyre of her husband. Children of grand-father’s younger brother
will incur sickness and troubles. His grand-father
will also lose a son and be in much grief, during the
commencing phase of the native’s second dasa.
Notes: (a) For Libra ascendant, the 7th lord Mars
should be in Aquarius so that Sagittarius becomes the
7th Aroodha (or Dararoodha Pada). Jupiter will be
the lord of the said Pada. That is, Mars in Aquarius
in the 5th with Sobhana Nadiamsa, without malefic
aspect, will give the relevant effects.
(b) Again Mars in Aquarius, with Jupiter becoming the lord of the 7th Aroodha, while Venus is in
Mohana Nadiamsa will cause the effects mentioned.
Inthis case, the Nadiamsa position of Mars in Aquarius
is not restricted to Sobhana.
सम्पत्ताराधिपे जीवे दशाकालेऽष्टमे सिथते ।
तदशायां मनस्तापं शुभाशुभफलं स्मृतम् ॥ १७१५ ॥
बहूङ्ञातिविनाशेन क्तेशं प्रानोति भूरिशः ।
षष्ठाधिपदशाकाले राज विग्रहमादिशेत् ॥ १७१६ ॥
स्वज्येष्टभ्रातृसन्तापं दशारम्भे सुभाग्यवान् |
Who MT क्लेशयुतश्रच्ि भग्डयोगयुतः सुखी ॥ १७१७ ॥
1715 - 1717. (a) When Jupiter rules the 2nd dasa
he should intransitoccupy the 8th. Then in that Dasa,
distress apart froma mix of good and bad effects will
come to pass for the Libra native. Many of his
relatives will be destroyed and the person will as a
result be in much grief.
(b) In the dasa of the 6th lord (Jupiter) one will
earn royal wrath. His older brother will be in distress,
but will make much progress when the native is inthe
first phase of the said dasa. Afterwards he will be in
trouble and his progress checked.
पष्ठेशांशे तक्निकोणे स्फुटयोगं गते शनौ ।
षष्ठेशदृष्टिशो तु सोदरस्य मनोव्यथा ॥ १७१८ ॥
योगावयोगवांश्चेति तत्तत्काले फलं भवेत्
षष्ठेशाक्रान्तभवने स्फुटयोगं गते भृगो ॥ १७१९ ॥
षष्ठाधिपदशाकाले स्थाननाशं व्रिनिर्दिशेत् |
ज्वरोपद्रवपीडादि स्वदेहायासमेव च ॥ १७२० ॥
भ्रातृ्रषककलापं. च दारपीडां कचित् कचित्
गोचरे पंचमे मन्दे वष्ठाधिपतिदायके ॥ १७२१ ॥
इदमेष फलं सत्यं चतुर्थे व्याकुले महत् |
तरिकोणे कविच्चेति कुलीरांशे शुभाधिकम् ॥ १७२२ ॥
महाराजप्रसादेन लभते धनसम्पदः ।
शुक्रे भोमांशयोगेन भाग्येशांशेःपि दायके ॥ १७२३ ॥
शृक्रभुक्तो श्रिया युक्तो यने स्थानच्युतिभवेत् ।
विशब्दे सुमुहक्क्लेशं गोचर द्वादशे गुरो ॥ १७२४ ॥
एकोनविशदरर्पाने साधनाने विनिर्दिशेत्
षष्ठाधिपदशाकाते गोच हिबुके wat ॥ १७२५ ॥
राज्यान्तर प्रकुर्वीत राजपली मरिष्यति ।
aera विपदये लाभे वा गोचरे शनो ॥ १७२६ ॥

Deva Keralam
पदहोदभ्रातृशोकं जीविते प्रभुनाशनम् ।
तुलाशनो Waa, स्वस्थाने राजदर्शनम् ॥ १७२७ ॥
स्व्ञप्येष्ठप्रातृयोनेन नित्यश्रीसौँख्यमदिशेत् |
कन्याश्चनिसिथते काते ऋणप्रापति मनोव्य थाम् ॥ १७२८ ॥
ग्रामान्ते निवास च प्रात् स्वस्थानमादिशेत् ।
1718 - 17281/2. Effects of Transits during
Jupiter’s Dasa:
(a) Saturn: Distress to brothers willaccrue with
Saturn’s transit in the sign that is at birth aspected by
6th lord Jupiter, or the one that is identical with the
Navamsa occupied by Jupiter, ora trine thereof. The
subject will also acquire prosperity as well as obstacles to prosperity, 1.e. ups and downs.
(b) Transit of Venus: During the operation of
the 6th lord Jupiter’s dasa, when Venus comes to the
sign occupied by the 6th lord at birth, one will be
displaced. He will further be troubled by fever and
ill-health, misunderstandings with co-born, andsome
evils to his spouse.
(©) Transit Saturn: Saturn in transit in the 5th
(from the Moonsign) during the rulership of Jupiter’s
dasa will also give identical results (as at“b”). In the
4th he will cause great agitation. Ina trine to the 4th,
the same effect will materialise to some extent. But
when Saturn attains Cancer Navamsa, more auspIcious effects will be felt; due to mercy of the emperor,
the person will obtain wealth.
(d) Venus Sub-period: In the dasa of Jupiter, in
Venus’ sub period one will obtain wealth but will be
displaced in the end (of the sub period).
(£) Jupiter in 12th: 20th year orend of 21st year
will be one of great difficulties when Jupiter comes
to the 12th in transit.
(f) Transit Saturn - Irrelevant: During the dasa
of Jupiter, Saturn moving in the 4th will cause change
of king, and death of the queen.
(g) During the rulership of third (lord’s) dasa,
Saturn’s transit in the 7th or in the 11th, will cause
grief to the person’s co-born. Or else the king will
die(?)
(h) Saturn in Libra in transit will promote the
prosperity of the subject. He will also visit the king
of his country. Due to association with his older
brother he will acquire ever-lasting wealth.
(j) Saturn moving in Virgo will cause debts and
mental distress. The native will live ina different
village (or place). Later on, he will return to his birth
place.
शष्ठधिपदशाकाले गोचरे TAY भृगो ॥ १७२९ ॥
Tey धनप्रापित werent विनिर्दिशेत् ।
दशाधिपेअष्टमे राहौ लग्नादव्ययगते यदि ॥ १७३० ॥
पितृव्यदेहजाडयादिस्वदेहायासमादिशेत्
बन्धुवर्गे शुभं चेति ज्ञातिवे सुतोत्सवम् ॥ १७३१ ॥
Tee MAAS विनिर्दिशेत् |
1729 - 17311/2. Jupiter Dasa - Rahu Bhukti: In
the dasa of Jupiter and in the sub period Rahu, when
Venus moves in the 5th one will acquire money. But
the gains will be limited. If Rahu moves in the 8th
from the natal Jupiter, the dasa lord, or in the 12th
fromthe ascendant, the person and his paternal uncle
will acquire physical ailments. Yet, bis kinsfolk will
in general beget auspicious effects and celebrate
birth of children. In the months denoted by adverse
solar transits, in the said sub period, the subject will
be troubled by fever.
संपत्ताराधिपे जीवे दशायां राहुभुकितषु ॥ १७३२ ॥
HEART प्रजातस्य शुभाशुभफलं समम्
विक्रमेशदशांकालेमन्दांशग्रहभुकितषु ॥ १७३३ ॥
अतीव क्लेशकालः स्याद्भ्रातृपलीप्रपीडिता ।
भाग्ये जीवे तुलालग्ने दशायां राहुभुकितषु ॥ १७२४ ॥
दशान्ते सोदरभ्रातृसन्तानोत्मतित्ादिशेत् ।
पितृव्यस्य तथा विन्दाग्दर्भाधानमथापि च ॥ १७३५ ॥
पुण्यतीर्थफलप्रापितभ्रातृवर्े विशेषतः |
1732 - 17351/2. (a) 2nd Dasa - Rahu Bhukti:
Jupiter becoming the lord of the 2nd dasa will give a
mix of good and bad results in the sub period of Rahu,
in case of the native of Mohana Nadiamsa, Libra
ascendant.
(b) Saturn’s Navamsa: The sub period of a
planet occupying Saturn’s Navamsa will give extremely inauspicious results when the dasa of Jupiter

comes to rule the native. Additionally his sister-inlaw will also be in trouble.
(c) Rahu’s Bhukti: In case of Libra ascendant,
see if Jupiter is placed in the 9th (in Gemini). Then
the sub period of Rahu in the dasa of the said Jupiter,
will in its concluding phase, destroy the progeny of
the native’s brother being then born. So also in
respect of the progeny of his paternal uncle. This
phase could also destroy the prospects of their nuptials. - The persons’ relatives will be on visits to
shrines and acquire merits.
कुटिलावस्थगे मन्दे तुलांशे कुजवीक्षिते ॥ १७३६ ॥
अन्तक्रोधी प्रसन्नात्मा जञात्तिबन्धुषिरोधवान् ।
वित्ते मन्दे तुलालने वृश्चिकांश सभुभ्दवः॥ १७३७ ॥
कुतिसतप्रियवान् रागी कुमार्मप्रभुसेवकः।
स्व राज्यनृपतिक्रोधी पाप दुर्मागं मानतः॥ १७३८ । ।
Tent greta जौवहिंखाप्रदो भवेत् |
स्वप्रभोच्प गुणो वाच्यः कटिलावस्थगे शनौ ॥ १७३९ ॥
1736 - 1739. (a) Libra Navamsa: In case of
Libra ascendant, Saturn in aspect to Mars and obtaining Libra Navamsa will make the person given
inwardly to anger. He will be a pleased soul and will
have enmity with his kinsfolk.
(b) Scorpio Navamsa: The natal ascendant being Libra with Scorpio Navamsa will give following
effects if Saturn occupies Scorpio Rasi. He will be
attached to vile people, be passionate, will serve a
king who takes to bad ways, will incur the wrath of
the king, bea sinnerand will take to bad ways. He will
suffer from urinary disorders, be emaciated and will
torture living beings. He will sing the praise of his
king.
Notes: (a) Kutilavastha is not a standard term
ref.sloka 1736, and sloka 1739.
कुलघ्नाशादिदोषेण भ्रावृभार्यामुतामयम्।
मन्द कुलनधष्चटशे पापद्वयनिरीक्षिते ॥ १७४० ॥
स्वसोदरपिव्यादि सन्तानारिष्टमादिशेत् |
स्वदशायां फलं चिन्त्य ज्ञातिवरगे शिशक्षयम् ॥ १७४१ ॥
दारान्तरं च लभते जसतकरुय शुभं वदेत् ।
Chandra Kala Nadi
1740 - 17411/2. Kulaghna Shashtiamsa: The
blemish of Satur being in Kulaghna Shashtiamsa
will cause sickness to the native’s sister-in-law and
her son. Saturn in this Shashtiamsa in aspect to two
malefics will cause evils to the progeny of his brother
and paternal uncle. In the dasa of such Saturn,
children of kinsfolk will be destroyed. The native
will remarry and obtain auspicious effects.
Notes: Kulaghna Shashtiamsa extends from 3°
30' to 4° 0' of an odd sign, and from 26° 0' to 26° 30!
of anevensign. Kulaghna means ruining the family.
Generally a relevant planet in this Shashtiamsa will
be a stumbling block in obtaining progeny.
सुराशनाडिगे सूर्ये बुधे मेषागाशगे ॥ १७४२ ॥
विष्णुयोगे प्रजातस्य प्परविशात् परं सुखम् ।
लग्नशांशपदोश्षेण मोहनांशोध्रवस्य च ॥ १७५३ ॥
विशेब्दे स्थाननाशादिक्लेशं स्याद्रमुवत्सरे ।
धने मन्दैष्टमे भोमे पष्ठरधिपतिदायके ॥ १७४४ ॥
केकयोगफलं चेति महदैश्वर्व्यषणिडतम् |
भाग्येशाशपयोगेन पच्चरविशतिवत्सरे ॥ १७४५ ॥
एकोनविशतो चैव राजप्रीतिधनागमम् |
स्वज्येष्ठप्रातृयोगेन स्वस्थानप्रापितमादिशेत् ॥ १७४६ ॥
स्वराजदर्शनं चेति नित्यं सन्तोषमादिशेत् ।
1742 - 17461/2. (a) Sun - Mercury: The Sun in
Sura Nadiamsa and Mercury in Melaapa (or Melaa,
also Melapavarga) Nadiamsa will cause happiness to
the Libra native after the age of 25.
(b) Venus’s Navamsa Dispositor: Due to the
blemish of the Navamsa dispositor of ascendant lord
Venus, the native of Mohana Nadiamsa will be
grieved on account of displacement for eight years.
(c) Saturn in the 2nd and Mars in the 8th will give
effects of what is called “Keka Yoga” and will
destroy (even) great wealth.
(d) Mercury’s Navamsa Dispositor: Saturn
joining the Navamsa dispositor of 9th lord Mercury
will cause wealth through royal favours in the 25th
year or in the 19th year. With the help of his older
brother, he will resume living in his native place.
(This effect should be linked to “b” above.) Further
he will visit the king and will be ever happy.

Deva Keralam
सुखेशांशे तत्तिकोणे ुटयोगं गते शनो ॥ १७४७ ॥
तुलालगने प्रजातस्य पुत्रलाभं विनिर्दिशेत् ।
सुताधिपदशान्त्ये च हारंभे VS च ॥ १७४८ |
भाग्येशांशपयागेन पुण्यतीर्थं सुतोत्सवम् ।
जीवे TER काले मन्दे मन्दान्तरेपि च ॥ १७४९ ॥
सेतुस्नानफलप्रापित पुत्रलाभं विनिर्दिशेत् ।
तुलालग्मे feed जातो गोचेरेत्योच्चगे शनौ ॥ १७५० ॥
याम्यायने मोहनांशे गर्भाधानं च स्वसित्रयाम् |
पितृव्यस्य सुताप्रापितर्दशान्ते सोदरस्य च ॥ १७५१॥
सन्तानात्पतितमित्याहूर्बालाररिष्ट भयं कचित् ।
1747 - 17511/2. (a) Acquisition of Son: The
person belonging to Libra ascendant when Saturn
transits the sign indicated by his own natal Navamsa
position, or a trine thereof, will obtain birth of a son.
(b) In the beginning or ending of Saturn’s dasa,
when Saturn joins (in transit) the (natal sign position
of) 6th lord (i.e. Jupiter) or the (natal sign position of)
Navamsa dispositor of 9th lord, there will be visit to
a Shrine and (consequent) acquisition of a son.
(“Punyatheerthe Suthotsavam” means birth of a son
in a shrine. There is another version which 908
“Punyatheertham Suthotsavam”. The rendering
above 15 made keeping in view the following hints.)
(c) Bathing in Sethu: In the sub period of Rahu
during the dasa of Jupiter, or in the first sub period of
Saturn’s dasa, the native of Libra ascendant will have
dips in the Sethu and will acquire a son.
(d) One born in Mohana Nadiamsa, Libra ascendant, will have his first impregnation ceremony
with Saturn moving in Libra, during the Sun’s southerly course. His paternal uncle will also obtain
progeny. In the end ofthe dasa, his brother will beget
progeny. Children thus born will be somewhat
inflicted with Balarishta effects (infantile mortality).
मेलापगाशगे सौम्ये दशमे रविसयुते ॥ १७५२ ॥
तुलालग्ने प्रजातस्य ज्येष्ठभार्या सुपुत्रिणी ।
भाग्ये जीवे सुते VL पत्र युक्तो न संशयः॥१७५३ ॥
गयेष्ठभार्या त्रिसन्ताना होकोनाशं गमिष्यति ।
मन्दे कुलन्धषटयरे दशायां शुक्रभुकितषुं ॥ १७५४ ॥
तुलालग्ने प्रजातसय ज्येष्ठभार्या मूर्तिं वदेत्
तुधान्तेःपमृत्युख सूचिकावायुपौडिता ॥ १७५५
अगिनमादभयप्रापितः शन्त्या शानि प्रयास्यति |
1752 - 17551/2. (a) The native of Libra ascendant
having Mercury in Melaa Nadiamsa with the Sun in
the 10th will obtain a daughter through first wife.
(b) Jupiter in the 9th while the Moon is in the 5th
will cause birth of a male issue. The first wife will
give birth to three children. One of them will die.
(c) Saturn placed at birth in Kulaghna Shashtiamsa
will in his dasa, during the sub period of sine will
kill the first wife of the native of Libra ascendant.
There will however be fear of untimely death in the
sub period of Mercury and troubles from windy
disorders to the first wife. She will also incur
problems of indigestion. Suitable remedies (for
Mercury’s sub period) should be sought.
धन मन्दे सुते शुक्रे Aas संयुते ॥ १७५६ ॥
दारेशभावदोषेण ज्येष्ठभार्या विश्यति |
दोषपरिहारार्थं AH प्रपूजयेत् ॥ १७५७ ॥
देव ज्ञाय प्रदानेन दारारिषटीन विद्यते ।
1756 - 17571/2. Blemish to the Seventh House:
Incase of Libra native, Saturn in the 2nd while Venus
is in the Sth (Aquarius) with Capricorn Navamsa
causes blemish to the 7th house indication. As a
result, the person’s first wife will be destroyed.
Remedy lies in worshipping the image of the zodiac;
giving donations to the astrologer will ward off the
possible evils to the said spouse.
शोभनांशकगे भोमे तुलालग्नष्दव्स्य च ॥ १७५८ ॥
AAA कलत्र दरे दारन्तरसुख महत्
SREY सुतप्रापिः सप्रसन्तान योगवान् ॥१७५९ ॥
चिरायुषास्ेषु पच्चपुत्रसमनिवतः |
"सुताधिपदशाकाते तिवदमेव फलं स्मृतम् ॥ १७६० ॥
राजयोगं च लभते भ्रातृभाग्यं युतः सुखी ।
1758 - 17601/2. Spouses & Progeny: Fora Libra
native, Mars in Sobhana Nadiamsa will give two

long-living wives. The person will be happy after
second marriage. Both the wives will yield offspring.
He will have a total of seven children. Five of them
will be endowed with long life-spans. Five daughters
and (two) sons will be had by the native. These
effects will come to pass in the dasa of the lord of the
Sth (Saturn). Further he will enjoy effects of Raja
Yoga (due to the said position of Mars) and will enjoy
happiness on account of co-born.
Notes: “Aayushmathi Kalatre Dwe” is replaced
in another version by “Kalatradwayamaayushyam”
denoting two long-living wives. Similarly, the expression “Chiraayushaastheshu...” is replaced by
“Panchasamkhyaa chiraayushyam” hinting at five
long-living children.
SAMI मन्दे दशायां च स्वभक्तिषु ॥ १७६१ ॥
एजयोगं च लभते स्वस्थाने बहुभग्यवान् ।
लाभेशे Tra WET भृक्तिकाल महत् सुखम ॥ १७६२ ॥
बहुप्लसुवाहापितं पुत्रलाभं सुशोभनम् ।
भाग्येशनाडियोगेन कर्मेशांशदशा शुभा ।
अनेकधर्मसिद्धिः SAT SN संयुता ॥१७६३ ॥
1761 - 1763. (a) Navamsa of 10th Lord: If
Satur occupies the Navamsa occupied by the 10th
lord Moon (i.e. Satur and the Moon should be
together in navamsa), the dasa and sub period of
Satum will produce Raja Yoga (prosperity). The
person will make his fortunes in his native region.
(b) The sub period of the lord of the Navamsa
occupied by the 11th lord (Sun) will give great
happiness (in the dasa of Satu). Further, he will
procure many precious jewels, valuable conveyances, offspring and highly auspicious effects.
(c) One will attain merits due to numerous
charitable activities and will involve in repairing
dilapidated public places in the dasa of 10th lord’s
Navamsa dispositor (apparently Saturn dasa, vide
notes under “a”) provided Mercury, the 9th lord, is in
(the subject) Nadiamsa (that is Sobhana, vide sloka
Notes: (a) “Karmesasthamsage” as appearing in
the text only means that Saturn should be in the same
Navamsa as the 10th lord Moon is. However if the
Chandra Kala Nadi
expressionis “Karmesasyaamsage ”, itmeans Saturn
should be in the Navamsa owned by the 10th lord,
Moon, that is Cancer. The former as appearing in the
original seems to be more logical.
(b) “Yannavamsasthe Bhuktikaale” is replaced
by “Yannavamsesa Bhuktikaale” in another version.
The rendering - the sub period of the Navamsa
dispositor of the Sun - is for the second suggestion.
The first one is somewhat inconclusive.
(c) The conditions laid in sloka 1763 are not
straight but crooked. These are brought out in the
translation after some experience with the mind of
the author. One may or may not agree with me.
विष्णुयोगे तुलालगने बुधे मेलापगांशमे ।
सुताधिपदशाकाले TTA करः सुखी ॥ १७६४ ॥
कमे सुरांशके सूर्ये बुधे मेलापगांशगे ।
उत्कृष्ट धर्मवान् कामी स्थापको BART ॥ १७६५ ॥
मुताधिपदशाकाले Tat परं सुखम्।
साराब्दानन्तरं चेति विष्णुयोगे सुकीर्षिभान् ॥ १७६६ |
राजान्तपवशादभारग्यराजपली TAA: I
एजपुतर्रियो नित्यं विष्णयोगे सुभाग्यवान् ॥ १७६७ ॥
विष्णुयोगे तुललने लग्नेशे मोहनांशगे ।
सुखाधिपदशाकाले राजमुद्राधिकाए्वान् ॥ १७६८ ॥
लग्नेशस्यान्तरे काले भाग्येशस्यान्तरेथ वा ।
विष्णुयोगे महष्दाग्यं कर्मेशातरभुक्तिषु ॥ १७६९ ॥
1764 - 1769. (a) Mercury in Melaapa Nadiamsa
causing Vishnu Yoga will in the Sth lord’s dasa cause
the Libra native perform many charitable activities.
(b) The Sun inthe 10th (Cancer)inSura Nadiamsa
while Mercury is in Melaapa Nadiamsa will produce
excellent charitable activities through the native’s
hands. He will be lustful and will construct a colony
for Brahmins (i.e. will donate houses to deserving
people). After the age of 25, in the Sth lord’s dasa, the
Said native will be happy. Following the 27th year,
one with Vishnu Yoga will be famous. He will make
his fortunes from a new king, and favours from the
queen and be close to the princess.
(c) One born in Mohana Nadiamsa, Libra as-

Deva Keralam
cendant will obtain a powerful position under the
king in the dasa of the 4th lord, Saturn. (Vishnu Yoga
seems to be a redundant condition.)
(d) In the sub period of Venus, the ascendant
lord, that of Mercury, the 9th lord, and thatof the 10th
lord Moon, the person will enjoy great prosperity (in
Saturn’s dasa).
Notes: (a) Vishnu Yoga is a redundant term
which appears in many places in this part. In my
opinion this has no relevance.
विपत्ताराधिपेन मन्दे स्वनवांशे द्वितीये ।
धपाधिपेन Cee कोशार्थमणिलाभवान् ॥ १७७० |
तद्रदशायां फलं योज्यं योगांशग्रहभुक्तिषु ।
1770 - 17701/2. Dasa of Saturn: Saturn should
be in aspect to Mars, and should be inthe sign Scorpio
with Capricorn/Aquarius Navamsa. Lastly heshould
be the ruler of the third dasa (the first being that of
Rahu). The result ofall these is gaining lordship over
treasury, wealth and precious jewels in the sub period
of the planet that is placed in a favourable Navamsa.
Notes: “Yogamsa graha bhuktishu” being a
round-about term is provided witha feasible meaning
as above.
य्टावस्याष्टमे मन्दे यष्दावस्याष्टमेक्षिते ॥ १७७१ ॥
तध्दावः क्लेशमाणोति मव्यादीना फलं वदेत् ।
CHUA area स्फुटयोगं गते शनो ॥ १७७२ ॥
प्धेशदृष्टिरशो वा स्वजनारिष्टमादिशेत् |
रोगेणयासमाप्नोति राप विग्रहमेव च ॥ १७७३ ॥
अतीव क्लेशकार्याणि योजयात् कालवित्तमः।
स्धेशाक्रान्तभवन दृष्टरश्यशकोणगाः ॥ १७७४ ॥
PUTA इति ख्याताः HU योजयेत क्रमात्,
तत्तद्धावाषुमाधीशं कन्त राश्यंश त्रिकोणे ॥१७७५ ॥
स्फुटयोगं गते मन्दे तटम्दावविनाशनम् ।
दृष्टराशो फलं सत्यं योजयेत् कालवित्तमः ॥ १७७६ |
सर्वनाडीफले चैव गोचरे प्रदृश्यते ।
तत्तष्दावार्थर्धरशकार्येशपतिदायेगे ॥ १५७७ ॥
स्फटयोगांशगे मन्दे वेद्यकप्राभुक्तिषु ।
1771 -17771/2. (8) Adversities relating toa given
Bhava will occur when transit Saturn reaches or
aspects the 81 thereof.
(b) Evils to one’s kinsmen will result the transit
of Saturn in the sign identical with the Navamsa
occupied by the 8th lord at birth, ora trine thereof, or
in the sign that is aspected by the said 8th lord.
Diseases, royal wrath and intense difficulties are also
predicted by the astrologers in this context with
(Saturn’s movement in the) sign occupied oraspected
by the lord of the 8th (Venus), ora trine thereof (will
be revealing) correlated with adverse months and
years (1.6. adverse transits of the Sun and Jupiter in
order).
(c) Agiven Bhava’s effects will be destroyed by
transit Saturn in the sign or Navamsa occupied by the
lord of the 8th from that Bhava, or a trine to either of
these. These effects declared by astrologers in Sarva
Nadi will become true in the dasa periods denoted by
the dispositors of the lord of 2nd, 8th or the 7th. The
sub periods will be of obstructive planets.
लग्नात् साप्तमगे मन्दे स्वरभातुकुजवीश्षिते ॥ १५७८ ॥
किचिद्रोगवती भार्या दृष्टभूतादिपीडिता .
तदभवे ASA प्रतिबन्धप्रपीडता ॥ १७७९ ॥
कालान्ते सुतप्रपितर्दारन्तरमहामुखम् ।
1778 - 17791/2. Diseased Spouse: The Libra
native of Mohana Nadiamsa having Saturn in the 7th
in joint aspect to Rahu and Mars will have a sickly
wife who will also be troubled by evil devils (cr
spirits) etc. Jn the absence of these, she will have
obstacles (for obtaining progeny). The person will
anyway be happy and will beget offspring in remarriage.
कलांशाधिपतो जीवे भाग्ये पूर्णबलानिवते ॥ १७८० ॥
विष्णुयोगे प्रजातच्छ विपदाये श्रिया युतः |
पितृयोगप्रभावेण हाजन्मजाद्यन्तभोगवान् ॥ १७८१ ॥
प्रातृभाग्यार्ितार्थादि लाभे भवति नित्यशः |
कलांशेशदशाकाते स्वत्पलाभं शुभाशुभम् ॥ १७८२ ॥
जन्मदाये महासोख्यं विपदाये विशेषतः
1780 - 17821/2. Jupitershould be in the 9th in full

strength and be the lord of “Kalaamsa” (part of a
part). Then the native with Vishnu Yoga will in the
3rd dasa will become wealthy. Due to the good
offices of his father, he will enjoy prosperity from
birth to death. He will ever gain through the fortunes
of his co-born. In the dasa denoted by the lord of
“Kalaamsa” his gains will be restricted and a mix of
good and bad effects will prevail. He will be happy
in the first dasa, more especially in the 3rd dasa.
Notes: Strange terms like “Kalaamsa” and
“Kalaamsesa” appear in this part, defying scope of
translation. We can make some partial gains out of
these instructions as under:
The native of Libra ascendant having a powerful
Jupiter in the 9th house will reap wealth in the 3rd
dasa, and will obtain uninterrupted prosperity with
the help of father. His brothers will be responsible for
his progress.
As for the dasa of restriction, the secret is
unsolvable.
The next clue about Ist and 3rd dasa 15 clear.
TRUTH RAM मन्दे पूर्णबलानिवते ॥ १७८३ ॥
विष्णुयोगे मोहनं शे राजपलनीप्रसादवान् ॥ १७८४ ॥
राजान्तरवशाभ्टाग्यं विपदाये Brat युतम् ।
TERR क्रूरमासे दारपीडा कन्विदव्यथा ॥ १७८५ ॥
स्वदारवशे सन्तापं स्यालकस्य सुतोत्सवम् ।
WATTS फलं चेति प्रवासं BATT ॥ १७८६ ॥
पण्यतीर्थाटनं सोख्यमत्पलाभं सूशोभनम् ।
विपदाये मोहनांशे स्वभुक्तो क्षामजं भयम् ॥ १७८७ ॥
स्वगोप्रदायादिकलत्रपीडां
नाशंवदेद्वि्तगतेअर्किदाये ।
सहोदरभातृविभागमेति
राजान्वरत् सोख्यमुभूषणाप्तिम् ॥ १७८८ ॥
1783 - 1788. (a) Saturn with full strength in an
angle to the Moon will in his dasa and sub period
cause great prosperity.
(b) One born in Mohana Nadiamsa, Libra ascendant, will obtain the mercy of the queen. Due to
change of the king, he will obtain wealth in the third
Chandra Kala Nadi
ce 29
dasa. In Saturn’s sub period (“a” above) during
adverse solar transits, he will be somewhat distressed
due to troubles to his spouse. There will be grief in
his in-laws’ famuly, but his brother-in-law will celebrate the birth of a son. The native will beget
auspicious effects in the months coinciding with
auspicious solar transits. In adverse months he will
be banished, will visit shrines and will beget limited
happiness. (Susobhanam is a contradictory term.)
(c) In the 3rd dasa’s first bhukti there will be fear
out of famine.
(d) Jn the dasa of Saturn placed in the 2nd, the
wives of the natives relatives will be subjected to
evils and be destroyed. His brothers will undergo a
family division. The native will however obtain
happiness and jewels (i.e. wealth) through a change
of king.
Notes: (a) Here Saturn is required to be in
“Cheshta Kendra” of the Moon, as per the original
whereas it should yust be “Kendra” or angle from the
Moon. For the term “Cheshta Kendra” does not
apply to the Moon and the Sun
कीटे कुम्भांशगे मन्दे दशायां क्रूरभुक्तिषु ।
PRAT ज्वरे तापमथवा राजविग्रहम् ॥ १७८९ ॥
स्वराजास fears तीर्थकषत्राटनं चेत् |
ज्ञातिवर्गे विषभयं राजचोरिग्निजं भयम् ॥ १७९० ॥
FTE फलप्रापितः WRT शुभाशभम् |
राजद्रारजनद्रेषं भुक्त्यन्ते व्याकुलं महत् ॥ १७९१ ॥
सूर्यान्तरे व्याकुलं स्या दादायादधिव्ययम् ।
शुक्रभुक्त्यन्ारभय मन्दे YARN ॥ १७९२ ॥
गुदनेगओरोदीरव्यराधिकृमिपीडां विनिर्दिशेत् ।
मन्दे श्रान्ते काले स्वगेहे शुभशोभनम् ॥१७९३ ॥
पश्रचद्व्याकूलकार्याणि क्रूरमासे विनिर्दिशेत् ।
aR राजकार्यं स्वप्रभोश्रच् महाविपत् ॥ १७९४ ॥
Wa जातकस्य व्याप्योग विनिर्दिशेत् ।
स्वपुत्रद्राहसोख्यापितं Sa शुभाधिकम् ॥ १७९५ ॥
प्रलोद्योगलाभादि शत्रुनाशं विनिर्दिशेत् |
चन्दान्ते सुखं किचित् सर्वथा मनसि व्यथाम् ॥ १७९६ ॥

Deva Keralam
कुजान्तरे शुभं चेति भुक्त्यन्ते व्याकूलं महत् ।
मन्दे UST काले स्वप्रभोख महाविपत् ॥ १७९७ ॥
अमात्यजनसन्तपि स्वराजन्यजनावृधि ।
UST बन्धुनाशं कुजथुक्तौ शुभक्षयम् ॥ १७९८ ॥
रजचोरकलापेन व्याकुलानन्तरं शुभम् ।
मन्दे राहन्ते काले क्रूरंशे मोदे शनौ ॥ १७९९ ॥
मोहना Bae स्वजनारिष्टमादिशेत् ।
पितृव्यस्य मनस्तापं स्वगोत्रङ्ञातिनाशनम् ॥ १८०० ॥
1789 - 1800 1/2. Dasa of Saturn: Saturn in the
2nd in Scorpio, with Aquarius Navamsa will in his
dasa, and the sub period of a malefic, coinciding with
adverse solar transits, cause fever, distress and royal
wrath. The native will visit shrines along with his
king (?) and there will be fear from poison, thieves
and fire for his kinsfolk. The sub period of Ketu will
give these effects (or will be specially revealing as
against other malefic sub periods in the dasa of
Saturn). The sub period of Venus (in the dasa of
Saturn placed as defined) will give a mix of good and
bad effects. The adverse effects will include enmity
with people in the king’s employ. The concluding
part of the sub period of Venus will cause much
distress. The sub period of the Sun will also cause
much distress apart from expenditure beyond resources. The sub periods of the Sun and Venus will
cause diseases of the rectum and sight. In the sub
period of Venus in Saturn dasa, an auspicious function in the family will occur following which great
distress will prevail in adverse months. In the sub
period of the Sun, he will be engaged in royal duties,
and his king will be a victim of great danger. The sub
period of the Moon will give extensive diseases.
Mars sub period will promote marriage of his son,
much auspiciousness, professional advancements and
destruction of enemies. Although the sub period of
the Moon will give some happiness, there will be
perpetual mental strain. The sub period of Mars will
prove auspicious but its end will be distressful. The
sub period of the Moon will endanger the king greatly
apart from troubling.the minister and relatives. Rahu’s sub period will destroy the native’s relatives.
The sub period of Mars will destroy the good effects,
will give happiness after a spate of events like fear
from king and thieves. When Satur moves in transit
in adverse degrees (or Navamsa) during Rahu’s sub
period, one will incur evils to 115 kinsfolk in evil
months apart from distress to paternal uncle, and
destruction of close relatives. Jupiter’s sub period
will give a mix of good and bad effects.
Notes: We can rearrange the whole thing in a
nutshell as under to have a better picture:
In case of Libra ascendant, Saturn being in the
sign Scorpio, between 23° 20' and 26° 40' of arc, with
Aquarius Navamsa, will give the undermentioned
effects in the relevant sub periods.
1. Malefic’s Sub Period - Fever, distress and
professional troubles to self; Danger from poison,
thieves, fire and government to his relatives.
2. Venus’s Sub Period - Good and bad effects in
general, enmity in high circles, diseases of eyes and
anus, auspicious function in the family. The sub
period concludes with distress.
3. Sun’s Sub Period: Distress, expenditure,
diseases of eyes and anus, engagement in government duties.
4. Moon’s Sub Period: Extensive diseases,
happiness in general, but mental stressful.
5. Mars’s Sub Period: Initially troubles through
king, fire and thieves, later on marriage to son,
professional progress, destruction of enemies.
6. Rahu’s Sub Period - Destruction of relatives.
7. Jupiter’s Sub Period - Mix of good and bad
effects.
जातकस्य शुभंविन्द्ादुरुभुक्तो शुभाशुभप् |
लग्नात् कर्मायजंमित्रभाग्याधिपतिभुक्तिषु ॥१८०१ ॥
सुतेशस्य दशाकाले स्वगेहे शुभशोभनम् |
STRAHL दशान्त्य वा निधनेशान्तरेऽथ वा ॥१८०२ ॥
दारपीडां मनस्तापं सोदरदिमनोव्यथाम् |
शुभष्यानेन्तरं दुःखं दुःखस्यानन्तरं शुभम् ॥१८०२ I
गुरुभुक्तौ फलं चेति कुम्भराश्युद्धवस्य च।
कुम्भे मन्दांशगे TS मन्दे जीवांशके तथा ॥१८०४॥
अशुभं दशायां तु शुभं चेति क्वचित् क्वचित् |
कुम्भे ITT BH दशायां गुरुभुक्तिषु ॥१८०५ ॥

देहारोग्यं प्रकुर्वीत sag न विद्यते |
कुग्भत्रिकोणजातस्य चन्धचेष्टाफलं समम् ॥१८०६ ॥
मन्ददाये शुभं चेव तुलालगे प्रजायते |
1801 - 1806 1/2. (a) Dasa of Sth Lord Saturn:
In this dasa, the native of Libra ascendant will obtain
auspicious effects in the family during the sub perods of the lords of 10th (Moon), 11th (Sun), 7th
(Mars) and 9th (Mercury). In the sub period of the
Moon, or in the end of the (Saturn’s) dasa (i.e. last
phase of sub period of Jupiter), orin the sub period of
8th lord Venus, evils to wife, mental distress to self
and to co-born will come to pass. The sub periods of
benefic planets will yield inauspicious effects while
contrary will prevail in the ones ruled by malefics (in
the dasa of the 5th lord Saturn). Jupiter’s sub period
will (also) be inauspicious.
(b) The Moon: Incase of Libra ascendant, see if
the Moon is in Aquarius (in the 5th) with a Navamsa
of Saturn, while Saturnis ina Navamsa of Jupiter. As
a result, the dasa of Saturn will give inauspicious
effects, with intermittent good effects.
(c) If the Moon is found to be in Vargottama
Navamsa in Aquarius, the sub period of Jupiter (in the
dasa of 5th lord) will give sound health and will not
be an obstacle to one’s prosperity.
(d) The Moon ina trine of Aquarius (i.e. Gemini/
Libra) will cause Saturn dasa to be even in respect of
effects. (This relevant clue is made best use of though
it is not as clear as it should be.)
Notes: General guidelines are formulated for
Saturn’s dasa with reference to Libra on the horizon.
The sub periods of Mercury, Sun and Mars will
be favourable. Venus and Moon in their sub periods
will give inauspicious effects. So also Jupiter.
It is significant that the sub periods of benefic
planets, particularly Venus and Jupiter, will be inauspicious in Saturn dasa, while the ones ruled by
malefics, viz. Sun and Mars (also by Rahu and Ketu)
will give good results for a Libra native in Saturn’s
dasa.
However, the text specially makes Mercury
auspicious, by an exception, though he is a benefic.
विपत्तारदशान्त्ये च सोदरभातृशोकवान् ॥१८०४॥
Chandra Kala Nadi
तुलालगने चनद््रदाये षष्ठेशांशत्रिकोणगे ।
स्फुटयोगं गते मन्दे भ्रातृशोकं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥१८०८ ॥
तुलालम्ने दारहानिर्दशान्ते व्याकुलं महत् |
सोम्यदायेऽपमत्युश्च तुलालग्ने न विद्यते ॥१८०९ ॥
1807 - 1809. (a) Loss of Co-born: The concluding phase of Jupiter’s dasa will cause grief onaccount
of loss of co-born.
(b) Loss of Mother: In the course of the dasa of
the Moon, when Saturn comes to the sign identical
with the Navamsa occupied by the 6th lord (Jupiter)
ora trine thereof, the person will lose his mother. The
end of the Moon’s dasa will produce evils to his
Spouse and great distress to him. Mercury dasa will
cause fear of untimely death excepting for Libra
ascendant.
मेलापगांशगे सोम्ये कुम्भे GX geist |
्षेमदाये महाभाग्यं स्वभुक्तौ रजविग्रहम् ॥१८१० ॥
चन्द्रलग्नाष्टमाधीशदशायां च स्वभुक्तिषु |
्रूरमासे मनस्तापं स्वजनारिषटमादिशेत् ॥१८११॥
1810 - 1811. Mercury in Melaapa Nadiamsa as
the Moon is in Vargottama Navamsa in Libra will in
the 4th dasa cause great fortunes. Yet in the first sub
period, enmity with king will come to pass; in evil
months (denoted by adverse solar transits) mental
distress to self, and danger to relatives will result.
लाभेशस्य नवांशेशदशायां धनलाभदा।
राजयोगं विभूषाप्ि पुत्रलाभं सुशोभनम् ॥१८१२ ॥
वार्धके श्रीसुभाग्याप्ति भाग्येशस्य दशशुभा।
पुत्रिकोद्राहसिद्धि च पौत्रलाधं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥१८१३ ॥
1812 - 1813. (a) Financial gains, Raja Yoga
(prosperity), acquisition of ornaments, progeny and
auspicious effects will result in the dasa of the
Navamsa dispositor of the 11th lord, Sun. Further, in
his old age, he will gain wealth and fortunes.
(b) The dasa of the 9th lord (Mercury) will prove
auspicious and will give marriage to daughter, apart
from grand-children to the native.
भाग्ये जीवे प्रजातस्य भाग्याधिपतिदाये।

Deva Keralam
राजामात्यप्रसादेन धनलाभं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥१८१४॥
1814. Jupiter in 9th: The dasa of the 9th lord
(Mercury) will cause financial gains through royal
ministers’ mercy provided Jupiter is in the 9th
(Gemini).
Notes: In “b” at sloka 1812-1813, Mercury dasa
is said to be auspicious in case of Libra ascendant as
for marriage of the native’s son. Further grandchildren will be born to the subject according to his
age.
But in the current sloka, an essential condition is
laid down for Mercury dasa to be favourable to the
subjectin terms of financial gains - that Jupitershould
be in the 9th at birth. This means with Jupiter in the
9th, the Libra native’s Mercury dasa will not be so
helpful for progress.
Jupiter is one of the most adverse planets for
Libra ascendant. Mercury is also the lord of the 121
though simultaneously of 9th, and can cause some
mischief in his dasa at some stage or the other. To
counter his partial evil propensities, anequally tough
evil lord is needed. And that is none other than
Jupiter.
This kind of hidden clues in the Nadi texts stand
apart and prove quite helpful in analysis ofa practical
horoscope.
Insloka 1816-1817, forexample, Mercuryas the
12th lord is said to be dangerous forthe progeny of the
native in his own dasa and own sub period. The text
does not call Mercury the 9th Jord in that context.
This shows how a “favourable planet” can also be
unfavourable.
कुम्भे ST चन्र तुलालगे प्रजायते |
्षमदाये शुभं चेति स्वपुत्रस्य सुतोद्भवम् ॥१८१५ ॥
1815. The Moon in Vargottama in Aquanus will
help the 4th dasa give auspicious effects. Further, the
native’s son will obtain a male child.
व्ययाधिपदशाकाले स्वजन्मर्षशभुक्तिषु |
व्ययाधिपान्तरे वापि पुत्रनाशं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥१८१६ ॥
व्ययाधिपदशाकाले स्वजन्मर्षशभुक्तिषु |
व्ययाधिपान्तरे वापि पुत्रनाशं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥१८१७॥
1816 - 1817. (a) Inthe dasa of the lord of the 12th
(Mercury), the sub period ruled by the dispositor of
the Moon, or that of Mercury itself will destroy the
native’s son.
(b) If the dasa of Mercury happens to be the 4th
one, the sub period of Venus thereof will cause loss
of a daughter.
यद्धवेशदशाकाले TRAM FRAY |
षष्टाधिपान्तरे वापि तद्धावफलनाशनम् ॥१८१८ Il
1818. General: Note the lord of a given Bhava
and see when his dasa operates. The sub periods ruled
by the lords of the 6th/8th from that Bhava will
destroy the effects thereof.
Notes: This is a very important clue. As an
example, take Libra ascendant. The Moon rules
Cancer, the 10th, indicating one’s profession. From
Cancer, the 6th and 8th in order are Sagittarius and
Aquarius. Hence the sub periods of Jupiter and
Saturn, in the dasa of the Moon, will generally give
adverse effects about profession for a Libra native.
भाग्याधिपदाशाकाले सुखेशांशत्रिकोणगे ।
CHEST गते मन्दे राज्याधिपतिनाशनम् ॥१८१९ ॥
कर्पापिपदशयां तु व्ययधिपतिभुक्तिषु |
स्वप्रभुश्च महारोगमपमृत्युं तथाश्रितः ॥१८२० ॥
1819 - 1820. Irrelevant: During the dasa of the
lord of the 9th, when Saturn comes to the sign
identical with his own Navamsa position or a trine
thereof, the ruler of the country will be destroyed. In
10th lord Moon’s dasa, and in the sub period of the
12th lord Mercury, the king will be greatly endangered by a major disease and fear of untimely death.
भाग्याधिपे कर्मगते बलाद्ये
दशाविपके लभतेऽर्थभूमीः।
स्वपुत्रभाग्यं मुनयो वदन्ति
राजान्तरे भाग्यसुभूषणाप्तिम् ॥१८२१ ॥
1821. Should the 9th lord with strength be in the
10th, his dasa periods will usher gains of money and
lands. Sages declare fortunes to the said native’s son

apart from fortunes and ornaments through a different king (or employer).
Notes: The 9th lord Mercury in the 10th in
Cancer and with strength will be favourable not only
for the native but also for his son. In horoscopes with
professionally favourable indications the gains could
be from foreign lands and assignments.
व्ययाधिपदशाकाले वेधकम्रहभुक्तिषु |
राजा राष्टकलापेन देशान्तरनिवासवान् ॥१८२२ ॥
व्ययपिपदशाकाले वेषकग्रहमुक्तिषु |
राजा रष्टकलापेन देशान्तरनिवासवान् ।१८२३॥
1822 - 1823. (a) Irrelevant: In the sub period of
an adverse planet and in the dasa of the 12th lord, the
ruler of the country due to national strife will live in
a different country (7) Later on in the sub period ofa
benefic, he will come back to his own kingdom(?)
(b) In the said directional influences, the subject
of Libra ascendant will gain wealth and will please
his ruler.
Notes: (b) Wealth and winning over one’s employer will occur inthe sub period of'a benefic planet
during the major period of Mercury. Another hint ts
that the person will resettle in his native region.
शोभनांशकगे भोमे बुधे मेलापगांशगे |
मोहनांशकगे शुङ्रे त्रिमरहांशफलं स्मृतम् ॥१८२४॥
1824. Following are the effects for the positions
of Mars, Mercury and Venus in order placed in the
Nadiamsas entitled Sobhana, Melaapa and Mohana
in case of birth in Libra ascendant.
Note: The effects are explained in slokas 1825 -
1830, infra.
चन्द्रलगनाष्टमाधीशदशायां शनिभुक्तिषु ।
मेतापगांशे जातस्य कालमत्युं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥१८२५ ॥
1825. Melaapa Nadiamsa: The native of Libra
ascendant with (Mercury) in Melaapa Nadiamsa will
incurunavoidable death in Saturn’s sub period during
the dasa of the lord of the 8th counted fromthe Moon
sign.
Note: The Nadiamsa position is for Mercury and
Chandra Kala Nadi
not for the ascendant. The word “Mercury” is
deficient in the original and ts to be understood as
existent, when read in sequence with other parts.
शोभांनाशकगे भोमे पञ्चचत्वारिवत्सर ।
अपमृत्युभयप्राप्तिः शान्त्या शान्ति प्रयास्यति ॥१८२६ ॥
1826. Sobhana Nadiamsa: Mars in this space
will cause untimely death in the 45th year for which
suitable remedies be resorted to.
Notes: Sobhana Nadiamsa extends from 16° 0'to
16° 12' of movable signs; from 13° 48' to 14° 00' of
immovable signs; and from 01° 00' to 01° 12' of
common signs.
मोहनांशकगे शक्रे हयकपञ्ाशवेत्सरे |
पट्पञ्चाशेऽपमृत्युश्च समानजनशोकवान् ॥१८२७ ॥
तदर्थे प्रातृशोकः स्पद्द्त्रिंशब्देऽथ वा यदि।
मन्ददाये चापशनौ कीटान्ते वा मनोव्यथा ॥१८२८ ॥
एकषष्टिसमे मृत्युः मास्सु कुम्भदिषु त्रिषु ।
्रिपरहांशफलं योज्यं प्रत्यक्षं देवकेरलम् ॥ १८२९ ॥
पितृदेहभयव्याधिपात्ररिष्टतः परम् |
ैलोक्यांशे फलं चेति cadet पितुिपत् ॥१८३० ॥
1827 - 1829. Mohana Nadiamsa: Venus in
Mohana Nadiamsa will endanger the subject untimely in the 51st year or 56th year. Furthér relatives
of his age group will die (in these years). In the 28th
yearor in the 32nd year, he will losea co-born. Noting
Venus in the above specified degree, one should
declare mental distress when Saturn moves in the end
of Scorpio or in Sagittarius. Further, his death will be
unavoidable in the 61st year. The month concerned
will be coincidental with the Sun’s transit in Aquarius
through Aries. These are the effects for the said three
planets (viz. Mercury, Mars and Venus) in the specified Nadiamsas (in case of birth in Libra ascendant).
Moreover Venus in Trailokya (i.e. Mohana) Nadiamsa
will in the junction period of Saturn (with that of
Mercury) endanger father by physical ailments following which the mother will also die.
प्रशस्य दशाकाले सन्तानोतपत्निभोग्यकान्।

Deva Keralam
पुत्रनाशं च लभते ज्ञापद्रेषकलापवान् ॥१८३१ ॥
fad शानिस्थिते काले ग्रच्छिद्रं शुभाशुभम्
विवाहो सोदरप्रातुः पितृव्येन सुवेरवान् ॥१८३२ ॥
विपत्तारधिपकेतु दशायां भाग्यमश्नुते |
दातिद्रेषकलपेन पृथग्व्यापारमादिशेत् ॥१८२२ ॥
कन्याशनिस्थिते काले नवमे राहु संस्थिते |
अतीव क्लेशकार्याणि ज्ञाति मूलेन दुःखितः ॥१८२३४॥
केतोर्दशायां स्वभुक्तौ स्वबन्धुमरंण भवेत्।
षेमाधिपदशाकाले स्वभुक्तो व्याकुलं महत् ॥१८३५ ॥
मध्यखण्डे च दुःखं स्यात् सहोदरसुतामयः।
शुक्रांशभावनारडीषु रैलोक्यांश दशाफलम् ॥१८३६ ॥
प्रोक्तं चै aq स विस्तारं योजयेत्कालवित्तमः।
(Saturn) will cause birth of children and also destruction of (Some) child or children. The native will
acquire enmity with relatives.
(b) When Saturn attains the sign Leo during his
zodiacal movements, destruction in the family (i.e.
possibly a family division) and 8 mix of good and bad
effects will materialise. His brother will beget married, and he will be on inimical terms with - his
paternal uncle. (“Graha” should read as “Griha”.)
(c) The dasa of Ketu being the third in series will
cause fortunes. He will however have a separate
business due to enmity with his kinsfolk.
(d) His relatives willbe a source of much trouble
when Saturn and Rahu in order transit the 12th and
910. He will as a result be grieved.
(€) In the dasa and sub period of Ketu, death of
a relative will come to pass.
(f) The first sub period of the 4th dasa will usher
much distress. The middle portion of this dasa will
bring grief, apart 0150176 illness to one’s co-born.
(g) The above effects from “a” to “f” are for the
position of Venus in Trailokya (i.e. Mohana)
Nadiamsa as declared by the learned in astrology (in
addition to the earlier stated ones).
मकरलग्र गोप्रियांशः
गोप्रियांशे इषांशे च मृगलग्नसमुद्धवः॥१८३७॥
प््तवर्णतनुम्राज्ञो भोगी वर्गोत्तमे सुखी |
मीने मीनांशगे मन्दे मृगलग्नसमुद्धवः॥१८३८ ॥
1837 - 18381/2. Capricorn Ascendant -Gopriya
Nadiamsa: The subject belonging to this space of the
zodiac, as Saturn is in Vargottama in Pisces will have
a blood-red physique, be learned, will enjoy pleasures, will have (only) one brother and many sisters,
and be wealthy.
Notes: The first two lines of the Sanskrit text
need some reconstruction which has been done with
the help of the clues in the next two lines. Otherwise,
the first two lines do not tell us as to who should be
in Vargottama and where. Further “Jhashamse”
meaning Pisces Navamsa cannot also be properly
allied.
एकभ्रातृयुतः श्रीमान् सहोदरी बहत्ववान्।
rae मिथुने राहो भूसुतेन समन्विते ॥१८३९ ॥
मीने मन्दे प्रजातश्च भाग्यवानेक भ्रातृमान् |
AAT द्रादशाशे सोदयेत्पतिमान् भवेत् ॥१८४० ॥
aad सोदराभ्रातृनाशश्चैव भविष्यति |
वर्गोत्तमे विलग्रेशे तृतीये पापवर्जिते ॥१८४१ ॥
एकभातृप्रियो नित्यं बहुवित्ताम्बरः सुखी |
1839 - 18411/2. (a) Rahu - Mars: The native of
Capricom having Saturn in Pisces, while Rahu in
Gemini in aspect to Mars is in Aries Navamisa, will be
fortunate and will have one brother. In the 2nd dasa
(or) in the 12th year (not “Dwadasamse”) he will
obtain a (surviving) brother. Prior to this, brothers
born will die.
(b) Saturn: The lord of the ascendant, Saturn, in
Vargottama Navamsa in the 3rd, without being in
connection with a malefic, will give one brother,
much wealth and robes.
Notes: (b) “Ekabhratrupriyo” should read as
“Ekabhratruyutho”.
Saturn in Pisces from 26° 40' to 30° will be in
Vargottama Navamsa. He should be free from
malefic connection. If however he is related to a
malefic, his ability to give wealth and acquisition will
be paralysed, and he will prove quite ordinary.

वाणिज्यावस्थगे मन्दे मीने वरगोत्तमांशगे ॥१८४२ |
THATS प्रजातस्य बहुव्यापारजीवनम्।
गोप्रियांशगते मन्दे गणेशंशकमे गुरो ॥१८४३ ॥
सम्पदाये Tey सोदरोततिमान् भवेत् |
सोदरारिष्टोषार्थ पूवोक्तशान्तिमदिशेत् ॥१८४४ ॥
1842 - 1844. (a) Extensive Trading: Saturn in
Vargottama in Pisces will in the case of the native
belonging to the subject Nadiamsa in Capricorn,
while Jupiter is in the Nadiamsa called Ganesa, will
cause livelihood through extensive trading activities.
(b) Co-born: During the second dasa’s Rahu
bhukti, the native will obtain co-born. To overcome
the blemish in respect of co-born (passing away till
his age of 12), remedy suggested earlier (read
suitable remedy) should be undertaken.
(b) “Poorvoktha” reads as “Poorvokthe” referring to the blemish cited earlier, not to the remedy.
तस्य भ्रातफलं वध्ये ज्येष्ठभ्रातुप्रियः सुखी ।
भगिनीप्रयवान् रागी ह्यथवा वेदसह्यकाः॥१८४५ ॥
स्वपित्रधिकधर्मात्मा स्वपितामहतुल्यवान् |
पितृवाक्यग्तो नित्यं देवब्राह्मणपोषकः॥१८४६ ॥
मातृविश्वासवान् रागी राजद्वारे सुपूजितः,
एकदाररतो नित्यं हरिशङ्करभक्तिमान् ॥१८४७ ॥
पितृपुण्यप्रथवेण यौवने बहुभाग्यवान् |
बहुपुत्रार्थसम्पत्रो भगिनीभ्रातृपोषकः॥१८४८ ॥
ग्येष्ठभ्रातृसुतद्रेषी ज्ञातिव्गे प्रसिद्धिम् |
एवंभूतः स्वभ्राता च दीर्धायुरतिधार्मिकः॥१८४९ ॥
1845 - 1849. Effects about his co-born are now
narrated. The person will be dear to his older brother.
He will have three or foursisters, be passionate, more
charitable than his father, equal to his paternal grandfather (in status), will honour his father’s words, and
will patronize brahmins and Gods. He will be faithful
to his mother and be honoured in royal circles, will
have one wife, and be devoted to Lords Vishnu and
Siva. Due to the good deeds of his father, he will
enjoy prosperity in his youth. He will be endowed
with many sons (or children) and much wealth, will
Chandra Kala Nadi
bring up his brothers and sisters, will hate his older
brother’s son, be famous among his kinstolk, long
lived and very charitable.
लग्नारुढपतौ शुक्रे दशायमुत्तरार्धके |
अतीव क्लेशमाप्नोति MA समुद्धवः॥१८५० ॥
1850. Venus Dasa: The native of Gopriya
Nadiamsa, Capricorn ascendant, will have many
difficulties inthe second halfof Venus dasa, provided
Venus is the lord of the Aroodha ascendant.
प्रमोदांशे सुताधीशे लग्नेशे THAT ।
पितामहः प्रसिद्धश्च मध्ये भाग्यसमृद्धिमान् ॥१८५१ ॥
बहुभ्ातृयुतस्त्यागी वैदिकग्राह्मणप्रियः।
स्वकुलाचारथधर्मज्ञः स्वगोत्ङ्गातिपोषकः ॥१८५२ ॥
बन्धुवर्गे सुपूज्यश्च स्वपितापहपुण्यवान्।
1851 - 18521/2. (a) Grand-father: Saturn in
Gopriya Nadiamsa as the 5th lord Venus is in Pramoda
Nadiamsa will produce the following effects. His
grand-father will be a famous person.
(b) The Native: Further, as a result of the above
yoga, the native’s fortunes will be abundant in the
middle part of his life. He will have many a co-born,
be sacrificing in disposition, be fond of Brahmins
who follow the Vedic codes, be an expert in the
conduct prescribed for the family of his birth, will
patronise his kinsfolk, be honourable among his
relatives and will enjoy favourable effects duc to the
good deeds of his grand-father.
भाग्याधिपे गुरोरंशे प्रमोदांशे सुताधिपे ॥१८५३ ॥
लग्नेशे गेप्रियां wel भोगी यन्मत्रय सुखी |
पितामहसुलोकाप्तिः पश्रादुत्तमजन्मवान् ॥१८५४ ॥
स्वपिता भूपतिश्रैव पश्चाञ्जन्मनि धार्मिकः।
जन्मन्यस्मिन् Ta स्वपिता पूजाकालये ॥१८५५ ॥
चित्तविक्षेपदोषेण पश्चा्धूपतिजन्मवान् |
वीरस्वर्गफलप्राप्तिः पश्चाद्राजन्यजन्मनि ॥१८५६ ॥
1853 - 1856. Mercury - Venus - Saturn: Incase
of birth in Capricorn ascendant, the 9th lord in a
Navamsa of Jupiter while Venus and Saturn are in

Deva Keralam 249
order in the Nadiamsas entitled Pramoda and Gopriya, the person will enjoy pleasures and be the third
issue of the family. His grand-father will attain good
worlds after death and will have an excellent rebirth.
The native’s father will be equal to a king and will
later on be reborn as a righteous person. Due to
mental distraction at the time of worship in the
present birth, the father will attain Heavens as a
martyr and be reborn as a king.
Note: Mental! distraction at the time of worship
and rebirth as a king in consequence thereof are quite
inconsistent.
apart सुताधीशे aaa सविसंयुते |
लग्नेशे गोप्रियांशस्थे पश्चच्छु्रकृलोद्धवः॥ VC ॥
सुतेशंशफलं सत्यं योजयेत् कालवित्तमः।
1857 - 18571/2. One will be reborn 85 a Soodra if
the 5th lord Venus is in own sign (Taurus) in the
company of the Sun and obtains debilitation Navamsa (Virgo) while the ascendant lord Saturn is in
Gopriya Nadiamsa. The effects declared for the
Navamsa position of Venus will turn true.
गोप्रियांशे विलगनेशे चन्द्रे पापांशनाडिगे ॥१८५८ ॥
संपदाये विवाहं च राहुभुक्तयन्त्यमादिशेत् |
मीने वर्गोत्तमे मन्दे तुलालगनसमुद्धवः ॥१८५९ ॥
संपदाये सिंहशनो मीनमासे विवाहवान्।
शनि वक्रं गते काते मीनानते मेषगे गुरो ॥१८६० ॥
avert विवाहश्च मास्सु मीनादिषु त्रिषु |
1858 - 18601/2, Capricorn Ascendant - Marriage: (a) Saturn in Gopriya Nadiamsa as the Moon
is in“Paapaamsa Nadi” (should be Paasa Nadiamsa)
will cause marriage in Rahu bhukti of 2nd dasa.
(b) Saturn in Vargottama in Pisces will cause
marriage to the native of Libra ascendant (should be
Capricorn ascendant) in the 2nd dasa when Saturn
transits in Leo. The concerned month will be Pisces
(i.e.Sun moving in Pisces). Alternatively, it could be
when Jupiter moves in the end of Pisces or in Anes,
as Saturn is retrograde. In this case, the months
concerned will coincide with Sun’s transit in Pisces
through Taurus.
Notes: (a) “Paapaamsa Nadige” refers to the
Nadiamsa so named, which is not enlisted. It should
be “Paasa” Nadiamsa. The Moon should be in this
Nadiamsa.
(b) “Makare Lagna Jathake” is another version,
in place of “Thula Lagna Samudhbhavah’, referring
to Capricorn ascendant, which is only correct.
षष्ठे पापद्ये जातः कलत्रद्रययोगवान् ॥१८६१ I
अथवा त्रयमित्याहूर्व्यये मन्दे शनि संस्थिते सति।
गोप्रियांशे विलग्नेशे तृतीये शनि संस्थिते ॥१८६२ ॥
भाग्ययोगं च लभते ह्यत्पसन्तानवान् सुखी |
मृतप्रजावहुत्वं स्यादल्पसन्तानशोकवान् ॥१८६३ ॥
ग्रन्थान्तरे विलगनेशे गोप्रियांशे समुद्धवः।
पितृ धर्मस्वपुण्येन पु्रीपत्रसमृद्धिमान् ॥१८६४ ॥
गोप्रियाक्षरसद्वयाश्च सोदरस्तु चिरायुषः।
पुतर्योग तथा विन्द्ाच्छेषं नाशमितीरयेत् ॥१८६५ ॥
1861 - 1865. (a) Marriages: Two malefics inthe
6th will cause two marriages for the native of Capnicorn ascendant, Gopriya Nadiamsa; Saturn in the
12th will cause three marriages.
(b) Fortunes & Progeny: Saturn in the 3rd in
Gopriya Nadiamsa will cause fortunes. The person
will have limited number of children to his grief (i.e.
contrary to his desire of having many children) orwill
obtain dead children. According to other authorities,
with this position of Saturn, the subject will beget
sons and daughters due to the good deeds of his father.
Further he will have co-born equal to the number of
letters in the word “Gopriya” (1.6. three co-born) all
of whom. will be long-lived. So also he will have three
children and the rest will be destroyed.
चद्धांशे तत्रिकोणे च स्फुटयोगं गते शनो |
जन्मदेशे BSE स्या ञ्जातस्य गोप्रियांशके ॥१८६६ ॥
स्वपिता धनलाभादिव्यापाप्रबलं सुखम् |
गोप्रियांशकगे मन्दे तुलालग्नोद्धवस्य च ॥१८६७ ॥
सम्पदयाये सिहशनो मातामहविनाशनम् |
कन्याशनिस्थिते काले स्वपिता: MTT ॥१८६८ ॥

अतीव क्लेशकार्याणि राजवंशेऽप्यारिषटदम् |
तुलाशनो पितृव्यस्य क्रूरमामे महाविपत् ॥१८६९ ॥
तच्िकोणे मृतिश्च स्यात् स्वपितृव्यजनावधि |
1866 - 18691/2, Saturn’s Transit: (a) The native
of Gopriya Nadiamsa, Capricorn ascendant, will
incurevils in his country when Saturn transits the sign
identical with the Navamsa occupied by the Moon or
a trine thereof. However, his father will gain wealth
through extensive business activities.
(b) Destruction of Grand-father: Saturnshould
at birth be placed in Gopriya Nadiamsa in case of
birth in Libra ascendant (“Capricorn” as per another
version, which is correct). Then when he transits Leo
during the second dasa, the person’s paternal grandfather will be destroyed.
(€) Troubles to Father: During Saturm’s transit
in Virgo, his father will face evils from his enemies
or from the king.
(d) Great danger to paternal uncle will come to
pass coinciding with adverse solar transit as Saturn
moves in Libra. Ina trine thereof (i.e. in Aquarius/
Gemini) this transit of Saturn will cause the end of the
paternal uncle, and difficulties to the near and dear of
the said relative. `
स्वर्भानुराशिगे मन्दे WANT त्रिकोणगे ॥१८७० ॥
स्वगोत्रप्रबलङ्गाते गोचरे मृतिमादिशेत्।
व्ययेशांशे तत्रिकोणे व्ययेशदृष्टिरशिगे ॥१८७१ ॥
स्फुटयोगं गते मन्दे सन्तानक्लेशमादिशेत् |
गोप्रियांशकगे मन्दे कषेमतारदशान्तरे ॥१८७२ ॥
स्वपितुः eR क्रूरमासे भविष्यति ।
ल्श्राधिपदशाकाले स्वपितुर्वेधभुक्तिषु ॥१८७२ ॥
पितुर्व्याधिभयं च स्याच्छान्त्या शान्ति प्रयास्यति |
सन्तोनोत्यत्तिनाशश्च स्वदेहायासपीडितः॥१८७४ ॥
1870 - 1874. (a) Death of Relative: When
Satur moves in the sign occupied by Rahu at birth,
(or) in the sign which is the 6th in Navamsa, ora trine
thereof, a close relative of the subject will pass away. `
(b) Difficulties to Progeny: Note the sign which
is identical with the Navamsa occupied by the 12th
Chandra Kala Nadi
lord (Jupiter) at birth. Also the one that is aspected
by the 12th lord. When Saturn comes in transit to one
of these signs, ora trine thereto, his offspring will be
in for much trouble.
(c) Death of Father: Should Satum be in Gopriya
Nadiamsa, the person’s father will incurtimely death
during the fourth dasa. (The sub period seems to be
the first one as the term is unclear.)
(d) [11९55 to Father: In the sub period of an
adverse planet during the dasa of the 8th lord (the
Sun), his father will incur fear from disease, for which
remedies should be resorted to. The person will lose
offspring then born, and will also acquire ailments.
गोप्रियांशे विपद्ाये स्वुभुक्तो प्रलं सुखम् |
्षमदाये महाकीरतीं राजद्वारे सुभोगवान् ॥१८७५ ॥
अयुताधिक वित्तेन नित्यश्रीसौख्यवान् सुखी |
पापग्रहान्ते काले TASTY कुलीरे ॥१८७६ ॥
स्फुटयोगं गते मन्दे सिंहे वा धननाशनम्
शनिप्रथमपर्यये वृश्चिके गोचरे शनो ॥१८७७ ॥
स्वप्राबल्यं क्वचित् पीडां स्वपितुर्देहपीडनम् |
अतीव श्रियमाप्नोति चापे गोचरगे शनौ ॥१८७८ ॥
1875 - 1878. (a) The person belonging 6 (णा $
Nadiamsa, Capricorn ascendant, will in the first sub
period of the third dasa be prosperous.
(b) The 4th dasa will grant wide fame, and
enjoyment in royal service; one’s acquisition of
wealth will exceed ten thousand (gold coins) and he
will be endowed with uninterrupted wealth and bappiness.
(c) In the sub period of a malefic, in the dasa
which is the 4th in sequence, Saturn’s journey in
Cancer and Leo will destroy his wealth.
(d) In his first round of transit in Scorpio, Saturn
will to some extent contribute to the person’s fame,
but will trouble his father with physical ailments.
(€) In Sagittarius, this planet will prove a source
of great trouble.
मेषत्रिकीणराशीषु स्फुटयोगं गते शनो ।
तद्राश्याधिपतिक्लेशं विप्लवेन प्रजावधि ॥१८७९ ॥
देशराश्यष्टमे भौमे सुखे वा दशमेऽपि वा |

Deva Keralam
स्वर्भानुयोगे तत्काले तत्तदेशे प्रजावधि ॥१८८० ॥
देशाधिपतिराशौ वा विप्लवेन महाविपत्।
सर्वनाडीफलं चेव निर्णयं गोप्रियांशके ॥१८८१ ॥
1879 - 1881. Irrelevant: Saturn coming to the
Rasi will cause troubles to the king, and due to a
revolt, to the people. Mars in the company of Rahu
in transit in the 4th or 10th from the Rasi of the
country will cause troubles to the people of the
respective country. If the said transit is in the Rasi of
the king, revolt will cause great danger and death.
These effects are from Sarva Nadi.
सुखाधिपदशान्त्यादौ साधनेशस्वभुक्तिषु |
as च गोभियांशस्थे सुताधिप दशासु वा ॥१८८२ ॥
मातामहविनाशादि मातृवंशे महाविपत्।
स्वपितुर्भाग्यवृद्धिः स्याल्लक्मीयोगवशात् सुखम् ॥१८८३ ॥
1882 - 1883. In the beginning and ending part of
the dasa of the 4th lord, in the sub period that will be
ruled by the lord of the 4th dasa, or in the 5th lord’s
dasa, maternal family will be in great danger, and
maternal grand-father will face death. The native’s
father will attain increased prosperity and wealth.
Notes: The dasa periods denoted need some
clarifications. The dasa of Mars in its beginning and
concluding portions will cause danger in maternal
family. Second alternative is to note the planet that
will rule the 6th dasa and locate his sub period in the
dasa of Mars. Third alternative is the dasa of 5th lord
Venus.
Remember the gap between the dasa of Venus
and Mars. This warrants a judicious use of this
principle.
वर्गोत्तमे विलग्नेशे लग्नारुढे भृगुस्थिते |
शनिद्धितीयप्ययि लक्मीयोगफलं शुभम् ॥१८८४॥
त्रयो्विशात् परं भाग्यं वृद्धिस्तस्य fer fer |
Wey पञ्चमे शक्रे लग्नेशे विक्रमे स्थिते ॥१८८५ ॥
जन्मादायुष्यपर्यन्तं धनिकः कीर्तिमान् सुखी ।
मधुमासे इषे मन्दे गेप्रियांश समुद्धवः।
लग्नारुढधिपे शुक्रे पशुधान्यसमृद्धिमान्
भूषणाद्यो महाभोगी ताकोधानधर्मकृत् ॥१८८६ ॥
1884 - 1886. Capricorn ascendant - Gopriya
Nadiamsa: (a) Saturn should be in Vargottama as
Venus occupies the Aroodha ascendant. In this case
Saturn’s second round of transit (i.e. after he crosses
his natal position, or Moon’s natal positionas the case
may be) will give auspicious effects relating to
Lakshmi Yoga (i.e. acquisition of wealth). After the
age of 23, the person’s prosperity will increase by the
day.
(b) Incase of Capricorn ascendant (“Mandabhe”
is to be treated as Capricorn ascendant, seeing the
flow of the text), Venus in the Sth (Taurus) and Saturn
in the 3rd (Pisces) will make one wealthy right from
birth till the end. He will be further famous, and
happy.
(c) Venus becoming the lord of the Aroodha
ascendant, will give plenty of quadrupeds, corns,
ornaments, and pleasures. The subject will construct
tanks and gardens.
Notes: (b) This yoga is on account of two
planets. One, Saturn in the 3rd in Pisces, and second,
Venus is in the 5th in Taurus. The yoga at “c” is
without reference to the position of Venus, but with
exclusive reference to Saturn in Pisces.
(c) The 2nd line of sloka 1886 - “Madhu Maase
Jhashe Mande Gopriyamsa Samudbhavah” - is indicative of two things. First the birth should be in
Gopriya Nadiamsa, which meaning has already been
adopted. Another clue that is expelled from the
translation is Saturn in Pisces and the month of
Chaitra to disallow incoherent and incomplete tnstructions.
‘Venus will become the lord of Aroodha ascendant, fora Capricorn native, if Saturn is in the 3rd in
Pisces. Thatis, the effects cited at“c” are for Saturn’s
placement in Pisces in case of Capricorn ascendant.
The importance is of course given to Venus ruling the
Aroodha ascendant.
साधनैशदशाकाले य इदं फलमश्नुते |
सम्पततारदशान्त्यादौ योगवान् कीर्तिमान् सुखी ॥१८८७ ॥
्षेमदाये विदेपः स्याद्रहुव्यापारलाभवान् |
गोपियांे इषे मन्दे तुलालमसमुद्धवः ५१८८८ ॥

वार्धके क्लेशवान् किचित् पुत्रशोकेन करशितः।
्विषष्ठयब्दात् परं म्यर्वषभस्थे दिवाकरे ॥१८८९ ॥
शुक्लपक्षे पापवारे वृषभस्थे दिवाकरे |
उषकाले मृतश्चैव Mechs गमिष्यति ॥१८९० ॥
परमायुस्तृतीयांशे सप्तचत्वारिवत्ससम् ।
अपमृत्युभयं किचिच्छन्त्या शान्ति प्रायास्यति ॥१८९१ ॥
परलोकफलाध्याये लोकान्तरफलं स्पृतम् |
गोप्रियांशकगे मन्दे द्वादशे केतुसंस्थिते ॥१८९२ ॥
देहान्ते नरकं किचिद्धूलोक प्राप्तिसोख्यवान् |
1887 - 18921/2. (a) The results mentioned above
will occur in the sixth dasa.
(b) In the beginning and concluding portion of
the 2nd dasa, the person will enjoy fame and wealth.
(c) In the 4th dasa he will reap abundant business
gains.
(d) The subject belonging to Libra ascendant
(Capricorn as per another reading, which only is
correct) having Saturn in Pisces will undergo much
difficulties in old age. He will somewhat be grieved
on account of death of a son.
(€) (Without reference to planetary positions)
the death of the native of Gopriya Nadiamsa, Capricor ascendant, will occur in the 62nd year with
transit Sun in Taurus, in a bright fortnight; on the
morning of a week day ruled bya malefic planet. He
will after death attain an excellent world. During the
47th year, in the last one third part of his full life span
(said to be 62 as above) he will incur fear of untimely
death for which remedies be done. His destiny in the
next world has been explained in the chapter relating
to “Para Loka” (inthe work consulted by the author).
(f) Saturn in Gopriya Nadiamsa (in Pisces) as
Ketu is in the 12th will send one to hell after death.
However in the present mundane journey he will be
somewhat happy. (“Bhooloka” is replaced by
“Bhooloke” in another version which means on the
earth, or in the present mundane journey).
सिहलगे बहुधान्य शः।
बहुधान्यंशगे सूर्ये सिंहलग्नसमुद्धवः ॥१८९३ ॥
वेश्यकाले प्रजाश्च वेश्यजन्मा सुखी भवेत् |
Chandra Kala Nadi
बहुधान्यंशके माता भेदनामयुता भवेत् ॥१८९४॥
1893 - 1894. Leo Ascendant - Bahu Dhanya
Nadiamsa: Birth in Leo ascendant with the Sun
therein in the Vaisya Kala of the subject Nadiamsa
(which is also known as Dhanya Nadiamsa) denotes
that the person belongs to traders’ community. His
mother will have a second name (will be known by
another name).
Notes: The Nadiamsa can be treated to be housing the Sun elsewhere. But seeing the expression
“Vaisyakala” it should be interpreted as above only.
नहुधान्यं शके सूर्ये लाभे त्रिग्रहसंयुते |
सिहलग्ने प्रजातश्च गर्भश्रीमान् सुखी भवेद् ॥१८९५ ॥
भ्रंशे वाथ रक्षांशे फलमेकमुदाहतम्।
सिहकाले दिवासूर्ये मीनांशे लाभराशिगे ॥१८९६ ॥
बहुभाग्यार्थसंपत्न एकाकी भ्रावृहीनवान् |
स्वपिताच तथा विन्द्राज्जातस्य सिंहलग्नके ॥१८९७ ॥
बहुधान्यंशगे सूर्ये लाभे भद्रांशके तथा |
धान्यांशे बहुधान्याप्तिः पित्राजितघनाढ्यवान् ॥१८९८ ॥
वृषभांशे res पापांशे कुजवीश्षते |
रामचन्दरभरसादेन जननी पुण्यहेतुना ॥१८९९ ॥
षण्मुखवतपुण्येन धान्यांशजननं स्मृतम् |
1895 - 18991/2. (a) Birth in the said Nadiamsa in
Leo (“Bahudhanyaamsaka prajaatasya” is another
reading) with the Sunin the 11th (Gemini) with three
planets will make one wealthy right from birth.
(b) The Sun inthe 1 1th with Pisces Navamsa will
grant abundant wealth. He will be the Jonely child,
devoid ofany co-born. He will have much grains (i.e.
eating comforts) and paternal wealth.
(c) The Moon in Aries (in the 9th) with Taurus
Navamsa, (or) in the Nadiamsa entitled Paasa with
Martian aspect denotes that the subject is born due to
the mother’s worship of Lord Rama and Lord
Subrahmanya, the six-faced God (progeny of Lord
Siva).
Notes: In these slokas certain repetitions and
irrelevant terms occur. These are excluded in the
rendering for the sake of clarity. For example

Deva Keralam
Bhadramsa and Rakshamsa disturb the flow of the
text without relevance.
पार्पाशगे पूर्वभागे Uk कुजसमन्विते ॥१९०० ॥
वेश्यजन्मा सुखी नित्यं सीमन्ततनयः स्मृतः।
धान्यांशकगते सूरये Te पापांशसंस्थिते ॥१९०१॥
सिहलगे प्रजातश्च पश्चाद्भ्रातृविहीनवान् |
एकाकी मतिमान् भोगी श्यामवर्णशरीरवान् ॥१९०२ ॥
बहुखीसद्धवान् कामी उष्णग्रलिप्रपीडितः।
कामेशे राहुसंदृष्टे स्वोच्चांशे भृगुनन्दने ॥१९०२ ॥
माल्ये Gaga बहूस्ी सङ्गवान् भवेत् |
मेषे स्वोर्च्वांशके चद्धे Stee: सुरतप्रियः॥१९०४ ॥
तदीरेन युते दृष्टे कामतो प्रन्थिोगवान् |
धनाधिपे लाभगते कर्मेशेन समन्विते ॥१९०५॥
धान्यां शके प्रजातश्च ्ययुताधिकवित्तवान् |
पितामहभ्रातुधनं स्वपिता लभते धुवम् ॥१९०६ ॥
1900 - 1906. Leo Ascendant: (a) The Moon in
aspect to Mars and being in the first half of Paasa
Nadiamsa denotes birth in traders’ community. The
native will be the eldest issue of the family.
(b) The Sun in Dhaanya Nadiamsa while the
Moon is in Paasa Nadiamsa will deprive the Leo
native of an after-born. He will be the lonely child,
be intelligent, will enjoy pleasures and will have a
body with black complexion. He will join many
women, be lustful and will suffer disorders caused by
heat as well as those of blood vessels.
(c) The 7th lord (Saturn) in aspect to Rahu while
Venus is in his exaltation Navamsa causes the following. The subject will in his childhood take to bad
ways. He will join many women.
(d) The Moon in Aries (in the 9th) with Taurus
Navamsa will make him addicted to women and
wine.
(€) The Moon in aspect to or in association with
Mars will cause diseases of blood vessels (through
infectious) sexual acts.
(f) The native of Dhaanya Nadiamsa will earn
over ten thousand (gold coins) with the 11th lord in
the 2nd inthe company of the lord of the 10th. Further
his paternal grand-father’s wealth will be available to
his father.
Notes: Paasa Nadiamsa - from 4° 48' to 5° 0! of
movable signs; from 25° 0' to 25° 12' of immovable
signs; and from 19° 48' to 20° 00' of common signs.
धान्यांशके प्रजातश्च हेमरलसुभूषितः।
धनधान्यसमायुक्तो स्वपिता कीर्तिमान् सुखी ॥१९०७॥
मेहप्रकृतिदेहश्च सोदरभ्रातृहीनवान् |
स्थूलदेहस्वरूपश्च बृहत्कुक्षिः सुधार्मिकः ॥१९०८ ॥
सत्कलत्रप्रियो नित्यं हरिशङ्रभक्तिमान्।
धान्यांशके पिता भीरुः कोपी कषिप्रप्रसादकः॥१९०९ ॥
वस्लव्यापारवान् रागी वृद्धिजीवनवान् सदा |
seared निशानाथे मत्रेशे लाभराशिगे ॥१९१० ॥
शुभत्रयेण संयुक्ते ह्ययुताधिकवित्तवान्।
लग्नाद्व्ययगते केतो तदौशे कुजसंयुते ॥१९११॥
स्वर्भानुयुतसंदृष्टे स्वपिता ज्ञातिवश्चकः।
अन्याया्जितवान् किचित् किंचिन्यायार्जितः सुखी ॥१९१२ ॥
स्वपिता फलमाप्नोति माता पुण्यवती सती |
ascendant, with the Nadiamsa entitled Dhaanya,
one’s father is described as under. He will be endowed with gold, diamonds, quality jewels, wealth
and grains. He will be famous, be prone to urinary
disorders, devoid of co-born, big-bodied, big-bellied, very righteous, fond of his wife (i.e. the native’s
mother), devoted to Lord Vishnu and Lord Siva,
timid, and irritable but be instantly pacifiable. He
will be engaged in the trade of clothes, be passionate
and be an intellectual.
(b) The Moon in exaltation as the 4th lord (Mars)
is in the 11th house (Gemini) in the company of three
benefics will cause wealth exceeding ten thousand
(gold coins) to the native’s father.
(c) Ketu in the 12th (Cancer) while his dispositor
(Moon) is with Mars and in aspect to or association
with Rahu denotes that the native’s father will deceive his relatives, will have wealth earned by unfair
means, apart from having some wealth gathered
through somewhat fair means.

These are the effects concerning father.
(d) Mother: The mother ofthe native of Dhaanya
Nadiamsa, Leo ascendant, will be a person with good
deeds of the past life to her credit and be a faithful
wife.
पितामहाधिपे जीवे Hear लाभराशिगे ॥१९१३ I
पितामहश्रातृभाग्यं स्वपिता भ्रातृमान् सुखी |
लाभे धान्यांशगे सूर्ये धान्यांशे भृगुनन्दने ॥१९१४॥
कश्चित् पितामहभ्राता भ्रातृद्रयसमन्वितः।
भगिनीद्रयवान् रागी द्रव्यार्जनसमर्थकः॥१९१५ ॥
बाल्येऽल्पसुखवान् कामी पुत्रभावात् सुधार्मिकः,
पुत्री युतो प्रसिद्धश्च राजद्वारे सुपूजितः ॥१९१६॥
स्वर्णापहारक Het TAT SATS: |
aerara निर्माता वेष्णवत्राह्मणप्रियः।
किंचिद्रेदिकविश्वासी सोदरभरातुपोषकः॥१९१७॥
Fett प्रसन्नात्मा दानशोण्डो दयापरः।
1913 - 19171/2. (a) Jupiter in 11th: Jupiter
signifying paternal grand-father (ruler of 9th from
Oth, i.e. Sth, «hich is Sagittarius) being in the 11th
(Gemini) with Aquarius Navamsa will cause prosperity to paternal grand-uncle. Also the native’s
‘father will be endowed with co-born.
(b) Paternal Grand-uncle Described: The Sun
in the 11th (Gemini) in Dhaanya Nadiamsa while
Venus is also in Dhaanya Nadiamsa will lead to the
following effects concerning the person’s paternal
grand-uncle. He would have two brothers and two
sisters, be passionate and skillful in acquisition of
money. During his childhood days, his happiness
would be limited. He would be lustful. Due to
absence ofa male child, he would turn righteous. He
would have daughters, be famous and honoured in
teyal circles. He would befriend those who steal
gold, would earn money through deals in precious
stones, would construct tanks and parks, be fond of
Vaishnava Brahmins, be somewhat faithful to Vedic
injunctions and would bring up his co-borns. He
would suffer from urinary diseases, be a pleased soul,
be passionately fond of (receiving) charity, be kind to
Chandra Kala Nadi
others.
Notes: (a) Jupiter in Gemini 13° 20' to 16° 40’
begets Aquarius Navamsa. Apart fromcausing wealth
to a paternal relative, Jupiter here is said to give no
coborn to the native’s father. The 11this 3rd from 9th
and hence 15 involved in this regard.
(b) This portion describes the various events in
the life of the native’s paternal grand-father’s brother.
In sloka 1916, the term “Putrabhaavaath” meaning
“from the Putra Bhava, i.e. 5th house” should read as
“Putraabhaavaath” = Putra + Aabhaavaath, meaning due to absence of male issue.
धान्यांशकगते सूर्ये लाभस्थाने पितामहः॥१९१८ ॥
भ्रातृमूलात् Wess भ्रातृद्यसुपूजितः।
पितामहस्वसा क्वचिद् बहुकालं सुजीवति ॥१९१९ ॥
पुत्रक्लेशवती साध्वी भ्रातृशोकेन करित ¦
एका पुत्रवती चेति बहुकालं सुमङ्गली ॥१९२० ॥
पितामहस्वसाये दर केचितक्षे मृत प्रजे |
लाभे धान्यांशकगे सूर्ये मातृष्वसृबहुत्ववान् ॥१९२१ ॥
स्वमातृद्वयवान् रागी द्येकमातुलनाशकः।
1918 - 1921 1/2. (a) Paternal Grand-father:
The Sun in the 11th in Dhaanya Nadiamsa would
bring fame to the said relative (to the native’s paternal
grand-father) through his brother. He would have
two brothers and be worshipped. His mother-in-law
will somewhat live for a long time. She will incur
grief on account of a son and a brother, be a devout
spouse, would have one son, two according to some
authorities, and would obtain dead children. She
would have a long marital life (long-lived husband).
According to some, the native’s paternal grandfather will have two sisters who would beget dead
children.
(b) Mother: The Sun in the 11th in Dhaanya
Nadiamsa (ascited above) would give many sisters to
the native’s mother. The native will have two
mothers (i.e. will have a step mother), be passionate,
and be inauspicious for one of his maternal uncles.
लग्नादव्ययगते मन्दे कुम्भांशे सहुवीकिते ॥१९२२ ॥
अयुष्मती स्वमाता च भ्रातृशोकेन करिता |

Deva Keralam
FATT मध्ये त्वेका दीर्धमुमद्गली ॥१९२३ ॥
श॒पं नाशमितिप्राहुमातृष्वसृफलं स्मृतम् ¦
धान्यांशकगते सूर्ये जातस्य सिहलग्नके ॥१९२४॥
मातृष्वसा च या काचिदत्तपुत्रवती भवेत्|
1922 - 19241/2. Maternal Aunts: (a) The native
of Leo ascendant having Saturn in the 12th in aspect
10 Rabu, and being in Aquarius Navamsa, will contribute to longevity to the native’s mother. She will
grieve on account of loss of herbrother. She will have
three sisters, the middle one of whom will have a
long-living husband. Rest will be destroyed. These
are the effects described for the sisters of the native’s
mother.
(b) The Sunin Dhaanya Nadiamsa (inthe 11thin
Gemini) will give an adopted son to the sister of the
native’s mother.
Notes: (a) The Navamsa position prescribed is
for Saturn in Cancer. Saturnshould be in Cancer from
23° 20' to 26° 40' and in aspect to Rahu.
लग्राच्चतुर्थगे मन्दे तदीशे Tea 112824 I
स्वपिता व्याप्योगेण क्लेशं प्राप्नोति भूरिशः,
पाशांशगे निंशानाथे भूसुतेन समन्विते ॥१९२६ I
पिता महो ज्वरयुतो बहुमूम्रप्रपीडितः।
तदभावे च दुर्मन्धिसर्वाड़्लव्रणरोगवान् ॥१९२७॥
तद्रोगपरिहारंर्थं शान्ति कुर्यद्विचक्षणः।
लम्रात् षष्ठंरामे सूर्ये सोगस्थाने शुभाविनते ॥१९२८ ॥
धान्यांशे प्रजातस्य स्वपिता मूत्रकृच्छवान्।
मेहादिमूत्रकृच्छणि पितुर्धान्यांशजस्य च ॥१९२९॥
स्वपितुरव्यधिशान्तर्थं येग मूर प्रदापयेत् |
दामोदरं दीर्धकायं रक्तास्यं रक्तलोचनम् ॥१९३० ॥
टक्षित्रिशिरस्कं च केणलवेदनान्वितेम् |
TASS पाशर्धर UTP च गन्धकम् ॥१९३१॥
SUM कुठारं च CAAT तदा।
पूरुषाकार रुपं च मुक्तकेशास्थिधारिणम् ॥१९३२॥
एवंविधा रोगमूर्ि ध्यात्वा पूजां विधानतः |
तिलगन्धाक्षतेः पुेनेविद्यं सतिलोदकम् ॥१९३२ ॥
दशनिष्कप्रमाणेन कृत्वा पूजां समाचरेत् |
त्रिगुणं प्रतिमायाश्च दक्षिणात्वेन कल्पयेत् ॥१९३४॥
ये ये रोगाः प्रबाधन्ते देहस्थाः सततन्तुमां | |
तत्सर्वं नाशय क्षिप्रं ोगमूर्तिप्रदानः॥१९३५ ॥
शान्ति देहि सुखं देहि त्वारोग्यं देहि मे सदा।
आयुर्बलं च कान्ति च देहि मे सर्वसम्पदः ॥१९३६ ॥
1925 - 1936. (a) Father’s Health: Saturn in the
4th (Scorpio) while his dispositor Mars is associated
‘with Rahu by aspect or conjunction will make the
father a synonym of diseases and will give him much
difficulties thereby.
(0) The Moon in Paasa Nadiamsa being in association with Mars would cause (dangerous) fever to
paternal grand-father who would be troubled by
excessive urination. Alternatively, his body would
emit bad smell and in its entirety be inflicted by
ulcers. To overcome this blemish, suitable remedies
be resorted to.
(c) The Sun in the 6th, with a benefic, and being
in 6th in Navamsa will cause obstructed urinationand
other urinary disorders to the native’s father. To
remove these illnesses of the father, one should
donate “Roga Moorthy”. (This obviously hints ata
deity, as described below, who should be pacified.)
The idol made of sulfur should be of the following
description: Adoring a lotus in the navel (Damodara
does not refer to Vishnu, in this context), having a
` “long physique, bloody face, bloody eyes, six eyes,
three heads, horrible teeth, standing on a corpse,
holding a noose and axe, brandishing destructive fire
(“Kapalagni” reads as “Kalagni’), adoring food
soaked inblood, resemblinga male, and wearing hair
and bones that were cast off. Such an idol should be
worshipped and donated. Itshould be offered gingilee,
scents, (uncooked) yellow rice particles, flowers and
sacred water. Spending about ten gold coins, the
above worship be done. If the idol, three times of the
usual size, is installed in the southern direction
prosperity will result. Whatever diseases are there in
the father’s body will all disappear and instant recovery will come to pass. The idol should be given away

with the recitation of “Saanthim Dehi, Sukham Dehi
Twaarogyam Dehi Me Sadaa Aayurbalam Cha
Kaanthim Dehi MeSarva Sampadah’ (seeking peace,
happiness, health, life-span, vigour, splendour and
all kinds of wealth in exchange of the whole ritual).
Notes: (a) The adjective “Vyaapya” relating to
diseases of father conveys incurable diseases that
will remain throughout his life in such a manner as
inseparable fire and heat. Thus the father of the
native will perpetually be unhealthy.
For remedy to overcome to this blemish, also
refer to sloka 1940 infra.
धान्यांशकगते सूये लग्नद्रेश्मगते शनो |
मध्वाज्यकुम्भदानेन देहाद्रोगः प्रशाम्यति ॥१९२७ ॥
मृत्युञ्जयं त्वेकलक्षं जप्तवा प्रयाक्षरिसंयुतम् |
तदशंशं च हवनं तर्पणं तु ततः परम् ॥१९३८ ॥
स्वपिताऽऽरोग्यमाप्नोति दी्मायुश्च विन्दति।
एकाशीतिपदं चक्रं पूजान्ते दानमाचरेत् ॥१९४० ॥
स्वापिताऽऽरोग्यभाग्यापिि ह्यापमृल्यरविनश्यति |
1937 - 19401/2. Father’s illness: The Sun in
Dhaanya Nadiamsa while Satur is in the 4th house
could be propitiated by donating pots of honey and
ghee following which father’s illnesses will be destroyed. A hundred thousand recitations of
Mrityunjaya Mantra followed by Havana (sacred
fire) with another ten thousand, Tarpana (offer of
Pinda to dead ancestors), and feeding of Brahmanas
in the end will bring happiness (i.e. relief to father).
After concluding the Homa, the planets Saturn and
Mars (vide sloka 1925) should be propitiated which
will grant health and longevity to father. Worship of
single-footed zodiac and charities will cause health
to father, warding off the blemish of untimely death.
कर्माधिपदाश्काले भाग्यधिपतिभुक्तिषु ॥१९४१ ॥
पितुश्च योगवृद्धिः स्यच्छिनि कु्द्विक्षणः।
fae शनिस्थितेकाले जातस्य सिहलग्नके ॥१९४२ ॥
स्वपितुरेहजाडयं स्यात् संचितार्थविनाशनम् |
बहुधान्यां शे सूर्ये षोडशाब्दे पितुर्विपत् ॥१९४२ ॥
एकर्विंशाब्दमारभ्य saree पिता र्जम् |
Chandra Kala Nadi
षडविशाब्दे तथा विन्द्याद् विपदं च दशातन्यगे ॥१९४४॥
पाशंशके निशानाये बहुधान्यंशके गुरो ।
षडविशब्दे पितारिष्टमत ऊर्धं न जौवित ॥१९४५ ॥
1941 - 1945. (a) The diseases of father will
increase when the native will be in the sub period of
the 9th lord (Mars) during the major period of 10th
lord (Venus). Suitable remedies be done.
(b) Satur moving in Leo will produce illness to
father and destroy his wealth.
(c) The Sun in Bahudhaanya Nadiamsa will
usher danger to father when the native will be 16.
Beginning of 21st year, or the 22nd, or the 26th year
willindicate illness to father. End of the (10th lord’s)
dasa wil] cause a danger to father.
(d) The Moon in Paasa Nadiamsa as Jupiter is in
Bahudhaanya Nadiamsa will usher evils to father in
the 16th year. He will not live beyond this phase.
सूर्ये लगे सूर्यकाले पापदृष्टियुते तथा |
यस्या नाडयाप्रजातस्य पितृपीडा भविष्यति ॥१९४६ ॥
1946. One born in Dhaanya Nadiamsa, Leo
ascendant, with the Sun therein in association witha
malefic by aspect or conjunction will incur evils to
father
सुखेशांशे तत्िकोणे सुटयोग गते wt |
स्वपितुर्ेहजाडयं च व्याकुलं भवति धुवम् ॥१९४७ ॥
1947. Saturn in movement in the sign identical
with the natal Navamsa position of the lord of the 4th
(Mars), ora trine thereof, will cause illness to father,
and abundant distress
शुभत्रययुते सूर्ये MYT धान्यांशजो भवेत् |
सर्वलक्षणसंपत्र स्त्ष्टशर्ययुतश्च सः ॥१९४८ ॥
wae विवाहं च ATT परं सुखम् ।
कुम्भांशके सुखाधीशे चतुर्थे कीटरारिगे ॥१९४९ ॥
ईशन्यथागे Teel मातुलस्य गृहे शुभम्|
गुरुद्ितीयप्ययि स्वोच्चदित्रयरशिगे ॥१९५० ॥
मधुमासे शुक्लपक्षे विवाह भवति धुवम् |
1948 ~ 19501/2. (a) The Sun in the 11th in

Deva Keralam
Dhaanya Nadiamsa being in the company of three
benefics will bless the subject with various auspicious (physical) features and wealth of all kinds. His
18111206, as a consequence of this yoga, will occurin
the 2nd dasa. He will be happy after 8.
(b) Bride: Mars in the 4th (Scorpio) with
Aquarius Navamsa will cause marriage (to occur
with a bride hailing from) north-east. Auspicious
effects will also follow in the family of the maternal
uncle. Jupiter’s second round of transit in any of the
three signs commencing Cancer will promote marriage, in Chaitra Sukla Paksha.
सुतेशे लाभराशिस्थे लग्नेशेन समान्विते ॥१९५१ ॥
बहुपुतरार्थसंपतरो रक्तवर्णकलत्रवान् ।
धान्यांशे वसुसन्तानं पञ्चसङ्कयाचिरायुषा ॥१९५२ ॥
शेषं नाशमिति प्राहुः सीप्रजाद्रयवान् सुखी ।
एकविशान्त्यमारभ्य Brey दक्षिणायने ॥१९५३ ॥
लाभाधिपानन्तरे काले पुत्रोत्पत्ति भविष्यति |
सीमन्त पुत्रो ह्यायुष्मान् पापांशजनितस्य च ॥१९५४॥
1951 - 1954. Progeny: (a) The lord of the Sth
(Jupiter) in the 11th (Gemini) along with the lord of
the ascendant (the Sun) will give many issues, and the
spouse will be blood-red in complexion.
(b) The native of Dhaanya Nadiamsa, Leo ascendant, with the above yoga will have eight children
out of whom five will be long-lived. Rest will face
extinction. Two of these will be daughters. In the end
of 21st year, or in the 22nd year, during the Sun’s
northerly course, with the sub period of the 11th lord
(Mercury) he will obtain his first son. (In sloka 1954,
the term Paasamsa should read as Dhaanyamsa.)
सुतेशांशे तत्तिकोणे पुत्रजन्मर्धभं fae: |
सुतेशाष्टराशीषु पुत्रलग्नं भवेदधूवम् ॥१९५५ ॥
1955. Son’s Identity: The Moon sign of the first
son of the native will be identical with the natal
Navamsa of Jupiter, or a trine thereof; the natal
ascendant will be identical with the eighth sign
counted from Jupiter.
लाभेशे निधनांशस्थे शुभग्रहसमन्विते।
स्वभार्यासुतिकाकाले बहुक्लेशवती भवेत् ॥१९५६ ॥
पुत्रत्रयवतीभार्या पूत्रिकाद्रयंसयुता |
सहोदरभरातृयुता भगिनीपुत्रसंयुता ॥१९५७ ॥
दीर्धमाङ्गल्ययुक्ता च मध्ये भ्रात्रा च दुखिता।
1956 - 19571/2. The 11th lord Mercury in the 8th
place in Navamsa in the company of a benefic will
cause many difficulties to the wife at the time of
delivery. The couple will have 3 sons and 2 daughters. The wife will have co-born. Her sister will,
acquire sons and be endowed with long-married life.
Due to middle brother, she will be in grief.
लाभे प्रभूतधनवान् बहुधान्यां शके रवो ॥१९५८ ॥
प्रसन्नयोगजातश्च विप्राजितधनाढयवान् |
1958 - 19581/2. The Sun in the 11th in Dhaanya
Nadiamsa will give plenty of wealth and happiness.
He will have paternal wealth of a rich order.
(“Vipraarjitha” meaning wealth earned by Brahmins
Should be replaced by “Putraaryita” - paternal wealth.)
मेषे स्वोच्चंशके चन्द्रे त्वापतन्नव्ययकामुकः॥१९५९ ॥
कालान्तरे धर्मबुद्धिर्बहुव्यापारवान् सुखी |
दायादिवशमापन्नपापांशे पापचेतनः॥१९६० ॥
सम्पदाये पापफलं देहालस्यं क्वचित् क्वचित् |
विपदाये भाग्यवृद्धिः स्वनुद्धिप्रनलो भवेत् ॥१९६१॥
लगनाधिपदशाकाले दशादौ बहुभाग्यवान् |
स्वप्राबल्यं च लभते धनवृद्धिश्रिया युतः ॥१९६२ ॥
गुरुतृतीयपर्याये धनवृद्धि युतः सुखी |
लग्नाधिपदशाकाले नित्यश्रीसोख्यमश्नुते ॥१९६३ I
1959 - 1963. (a) The Moon in Anes, obtaining
Taurus Navamsa, will give the following effects in
case of birth in Leo ascendant. The person will spend
on undeserving counts, be lustful, will after some
interval turn righteous and will have multifarious
business activities.
(b) He will incur danger through relatives and
perform sinful acts during the rulership of his second
dasa, if the Moon is in Paasa Nadiamsa. He will
somewhat be indolent. His prosperity will be on the

ascendent in his third dasa with the aid of his own
intelligence (strength). In the begging of the dasa of
the lord ofthe ascendant (the Sun) he will enjoy much
fortunes, establish himself strongly and will have
increased wealth. During the third round of Jupiter,
his financial progress will be marked. In the dasa of
the lord of the ascendant, he will have uninterrupted
riches.
शनिप्रथमपर्यायि धान्यांशे च प्रजायते |
मिथुने व्याकुलं चेव सहश धनक्षयम् ॥१९६४॥
स्वगोत्र ज्ञातिवरगेषु सन्तानक्लेशमादिशेत् |
लग्नाद्रा चन्द्रलग्नाद्रा फलमेवं विचिन्तयेत् ॥१९६५ ॥
1964 - 1965. Saturn’s Transit: (a) The subject
belonging to Dhaanya Nadiamsa in Leo will be in
much distress when Saturn transits Gemini for the
first time.
(b) In Leo, the planet will destroy wealth.
(c) In the 2nd (or in own sign) Saturn in transit
will cause grief relating to progeny 11 the circles of
relatives. These effects should be estimated from the
Moon or the ascendant as the case may be.
स्वर्भानुराशि कोणे च AAT तलतिकोणके |
स्फुटयोगं गते मन्दे धान्यांशे जाति विग्रहम् ॥१९६६ ॥
स्वजन्मदेशे कलहं राज्याधिपतिनाशनम्।
अनावृष्टिभयं चापि प्रजापीडां विनिर्दिशेत् ॥१९६७॥
1966 - 1967. Saturn in transitin the sign occupied
by Rahu, or in the sign identical with Rahu’s Navamsa position or a trine thereof will promote misunderstandings with the members of his family/race.
There will be strife in his birth country and destruction of the ruler(?) Fear of drought and troubles to
people will also come into effect(?)
कुजे मूढे च कलहो स्वापिता देहजाडच वान् |
स्वप्रभोश्च विशेषेण क्रूरमासे भविष्यति ॥१९६८ ॥
1968. At the time of the combustion of Mars,
quarrels, illness to father, especially to the king(?)
will come to pass, coinciding with adverse solar
transits.
्ेमतारधिपे चन्दे भाग्याधिपसमन्विते।
(1181101५ v.ala Nadi
धान्यांशे बहुभाग्यापिर्गेह कल्याणसं ्रमः॥१९६९ ॥
सन्तानोत्पत्तिनाशादि स्तममूलात् क्लेशवान् भवेत् |
पके सर्वदशा संधो क्लेशं प्रापनोति भूरिशः॥१९७० ॥
1969 - 1970. (a) The Moon’s Dasa: Should the
Moon at birth be in the company of 9tb lord (Mars),
then the dasa of the Moon when 4th in sequence will
cause acquisition of fortunes, and a marriage in the
family. However in this dasa children born to the
subject will be destroyed much to his trouble.
(b) The junction phases of all the dasas will give
much troubles.
Notes: (a) The Moon should be in Aswini or
Makha or Moola, ina trine from the ascendant along
with Mars for the Yoga to give fruits.
षष्ठषटमाधी शभुक्तो सन्िकाले मनोव्यथाम् |
PUTS धनच्छेदं किंचिदव्यापारविष्नवान् ॥१९७१ ॥
1971. The concluding phase of the 6th lord’s sub
period will cause mental distress. It will destroy
wealth if it coincides with adverse movements of the
Sun, apart from causingsome professional obstacles.
Notes: The sub period of the 6th lord Saturn
referred to here is in the dasa of the Moon, for a Leo
native.
व्यये केतौ प्रजातेश्च व्ययेशे कुजसंयुते ।
मार्जारमूषिकादीनां विषपीडाञ्वरातुरः॥१९७२ ॥
्षेमदाये फलं सत्यं शान्त्या शान्ति प्रयास्यति |
सुखधिपदशाकाले धान्यांशे जनितस्य च।
waa waa मात्ररिष्टं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥१९७२ ॥
पितामहस्य वा मृत्युः सम्द्ाये बुधान्तरे |
केत्वन्ते मृतिचैव मातुलस्य सुतक्षयम् ॥१९७४॥
्ञतिरवरगे विवाहं च बुधभृक्तौ महत् सुखम्।
सम्पदाशाधिपे मन्दे पितामहसुतक्षयम् ॥१९७५ ॥
तुरो पापिनो चैव निर्धनेन च दुखितो।
कालान्तरेऽल्पसोख्यं रयान्मूलयेगेण कर्शितौ ॥१०५७६॥
पितामहपरातुसुतः कश्चिद्रोगशरीरवान् |
कश्चिदालस्य युक्तश्च स्वभुजार्भितसोख्यरवान् ॥१९७७ ॥

Deva Keralam
1972 - 1977. (a) Troubles from Cats & Rats: The
planet Ketu should be in 12th (Cancer) while his
dispositor joins Mars (elsewhere). As a result, the
native will be troubled by cats, rats and poisonous
fevers. The effects stated forthe 4th dasa will be true;
for overcoming the evils effects concerned, suitable
remedies be done.
(b) The dasa of the 4th lord from the ascendant
or from the Moon sign will endanger the mother of the
native of Dhaanya Nadiamsa. Alternatively his
paternal grand-father will die in the sub period of
Mercury or of Ketu, during the rulership of the 2nd
dasa. A maternal uncle will lose bis son. In the sub
period of Mercury, there will be a family marnage,
and much happiness (on other accounts).
(c) The 2nd dasa b=‘ng that of Saturn will cause
the destruction of the “sou of paternal grand-father”
(i.e some paternal uncle will die). His sons will be
sinful and be grieved by poverty and piles. Vt ey will
be happy aftersome time. The son of paternal grandfather’s brother will be somewhat sickly, and indolent and will experience happiness through his own
efforts.
भाग्यापिदशाकाले स्वदेशप्रभुनाशनम्।
जन्मदाये तथा विन्द्यात् स्वापिता धनलाभवान् ॥१९७८ ॥
कर्मापिपदशाकाले प्रभद्रयविनाश्नम् |
जन्मदेशे द्विवारं च दायादि कलहो महान् ॥१९७९ ॥
प्रभुवर्गे विशेषस्यात् कोशाश्वदिधनक्षयम् |
सवभुक्तौ व्याकुलं चेति बुधभूक्तौ विशेषतः ॥१९८० ॥
वृषभांशे त्रिये ae स्थिररशिचतुष्टये |
स्फुटयोगं गते मन्दे पाण्डयदेशेषु विप्रहः॥१९८१ ॥
तदद्रारमुख्यप्रमुखेः क्लेशं प्राणोति भूरिशः।
सम्पदाये जन्देशे भाग्याधिपति भूक्तिषु ॥१९८२ ॥
इदमेव फलं सत्यं पापांशे जनितस्य च।
1978 - 19821/2. Irrelevant: In the dasa of the 9th
lord, the king will be destroyed. In first dasa father
will financially gain. Inthe dasa of the 10th lord, two
kings will be destroyed. The native’s relatives will be
involved in great quarrels; especially in the royal
circles, the treasury, steeds, money etc. will be
destroyed. Inthe first period, and also more specially
in Mercury’s sub period distress will come to pass.
The Moon in Aries with Taurus Navamsa will cause
quarrels in Pandya kingdom when Saturn moves in
one of the four fixed signs; kings of the respective
kingdoms will be introuble. These are the effects for
9th lord’s sub period in the 2nd lord’s dasa fora native
of Paasa Nadiamsa.
स्वरभानुदाये WT पुत्रमरनाल्यमादिशेत् ॥१९८३ ॥
यावदायुष्याप्रोति तावद्धाग्यं शुभधिकम् |
घान्यांशकगते सूर्यं पापांशे च निशाकरे ॥१९८४॥
स्वपिता सुकृती नित्यं शूद्रस्य सेहहेतुना |
वैदिकाचारधर्मात्मा देवव्राहमाणपोषकः॥१९८५ ॥
1983 - 1985. (a) Rahu in 4853 Nadiamsa will
cause increasing progress for the sons of Leo native.
Throughout his life he will enjoy wealth and increased auspicious effects.
(b) The father of the native with Sun in Dhaanya
Nadiamsa while the Moon is in Paasa Nadiamsa will
perform good acts, will follow Vedic codes due to his
association with Soodras (it should actually mean
that he will befriend Soodras, follow Vedic codes), be
righteous and will honours gods and Brahmins.
लग्नाद्रा TRA TAT शुभसंयुते |
स्वापिता safes ज्ञानधर्म युतः सुखी ॥१९८६ ॥ `
सम्पदाये जन्मशनो स्वपितुर्मत्रवकि।
अतीव क्लेशमाप्नोति मिथुने व्याकुलं महत् ॥१९८७ ॥
1986 - 1987. Fora native of Leo ascendant, the
3rd from the ascendant or from the Moon sign, will
cause righteousness, wisdom, and chanitability to
father. In his 2nd dasa, Saturn in the 1st place
(ascendant or Moon sign) will cause evils to father’s
friends. In Gemini much distress will be experienced.
लाभेशांशे aera सफुटयोगं गते शनो |
स्वापिता मित्रवर्गेषु क्लेशं प्राणोति भूरिशः॥१९८८॥
बन्धुवर्गे व्याकुलं स्यादारवंश जनाविधि |
स्वपिता मित्रवर्गेण विपदाये श्रियान्विताः ॥१९८९ ॥

सम्पदशान्त्यमारमभ्य मित्रवर्गे महत् सुखम् ।
1988 - 19891/2. Much grief will be seen in the
circle of father’s friends when Saturn moves intransit
in the sign indicated by the 11th lord’s Navamsa, or
a trine thereof. Further there will be troubles in bis
relatives’ and in-laws’ circles. In the native’s third
dasa, financial gains to father through friends will
accrue. In the beginning and end parts of the 2nd
dasa, father’s friends will be greatly happy.
Note: The clues relating to father’s friends are
somewhat strange.
रन्ध्राधिपदशाकाले बहुघान्यांशजस्तथां ॥१९९० ॥
स्वभूक्तौ मृतिमाप्नोति तुलामासे न संशयः।
तत्िकोणे कृष्णपक्षे मन्दवारे मृति वदेत् ॥१९९१॥
धान्यांशकगते सूर्ये स्वपिता पुण्यलोकवान्।
जातकोऽपि तथा चेव निधनेशदशाविपत् ॥१९९२ ॥
1990 - 1992. (a) Father’s Death: In the firstsub
period of 8th lord Jupiter’s dasa, the native of Leo
ascendant, Bahudhaanya Nadiamsa, will lose his
father with the Sun in transit in Libra, or a trine
thereof, in a dark lunar half, on a Saturday.
(a) The Sun in Dhaanya Nadiamsa denotes that
his father will attain meritorious worlds. The native
will also be in danger in the 8th lord’s dasa.
सुखेशे चन्द्रसंयुक्ते पापांशे च प्रजायते |
पश्चादरेश्यकुले जन्म पूर्वजन्म तथा भवेत् ॥१९९३ ॥
पितुश्च जातकस्यैव त्विदं फलमुदाहतम् |
सत्पात्रदानपुण्येन भाग्यजन्मत्रयं विदुः ॥१९९४ ॥
Chandra Kala Nadi
स्वपिता जननं fest स्वगर्भे न्रे dere:
1993 - 1994 1/2. The Moon inthe company of the
4th lord (Mars) in Paasa Nadiamsa will cause his next
birth intraders’ community. This yoga indicates that
in the previous birth also the person had belonged to
the same community. These are the effects for the
native and his father. Due to the good deeds, his
father will have three lucky births. The native’s
father after his death, will be reborn to the very loins
of the present native.
Notes: This relates to only Bahudhaanya
Nadiamsa, Leo ascendant. The Nadiamsa referred to
in the text is for the Moon’s position although a litera]
translation would mean birth in Paasa Nadiamsa.
धान्यांशकगते सूर्ये द्वादशे केतु संस्थिते ॥१९९५ it
तदीशे कुजसंयुक्ते agar सुलोकवान् |
नरकं च तथा विन्द्याज्जनकस्य फलं त्विदम् ॥१९९६ ॥
वार्धके पुत्रनाशश्च व्यये केतौ च संस्थिते |
बहुधान्यके भाग्ये सूर्यनाडीफलं स्मृतम् ॥१९९७॥
1995 - 1997. If the Sun is in Dhaanya Nadiamsa
(elsewhere) while Ketu is in the 12th (Cancer), and
the Moon is with Mars, the native’s father will dwell
fora long time in other worlds including the hell (i.e.
will not take rebirth immediately). Due to the good
deeds father will enjoy prosperity in the whole of his
life (in the current birth). With Ketu inthe 12th, grief
to father on account of loss cf a son in old age will
come to pass. The effects for the Sun’s position (and
birth} in Bahudhaanya Nadiamsa are from the work
entitled “Surya Nadi”.
(To be Concluded)

Deva Keralam 261
Index for Verses of Book I
and Book II
A
Aquarius ascendant - Agada Nadiamsa (S. 130,
Jupiter in benefic’s Navamsa (S. 143 : BI)
Jupiter in Viswambhara Nadiamsa (S.138,
Moon in Kutila Nadiamsa (9. 139 - 142 : BI)
Moon in Kutila Nadiamsa with Mercury’s
aspect (S.132 - 135 : BI)
Moonin Kutila Nadiamsa, Sun in Manjuswana
Nadiamsa (S. 137 : BI)
Sun without benefic’s aspect (S. 154 - 157%:
BI)
Sun in Manjuswana Nadiamsa (9. 151 - 15314
: BY)
Aquarius ascendant - Champaka Nadiamsa (S.
Damini Yoga (9. 1288 - 12934 : BIT)
: BIT)
Jupiter in Aroodhaascendant(S.1195 -1198'Ab
` BIT)
Ketu in Sth aspected by Saturn (S. 1305 -
Mars in extremis (S. 1298 - 1299 : BID
Moon in ascendant (S. 1238 : BID)
Moon - Mercury - Jupiter conjunction (S.
Moon in Naga Nadiamsa (S. 1206 - 1211,
Moon in Swaaha Nadiamsa (S. 1220 - 1224:
BIT)
Abbreviations: S = Sloka or Verse number.
BI = Book I; BIJ = Book II
"—" between sloka numbers indicates "to".
Saturn in Leo (S. 1245 : BIT)
` BID)
BID)
Sun’s transit (S. 1247 - 1248 : BIT)
Sun in 6th (S. 1246 : BIT)
Venus aspected by Jupiter (S. 1216-1219:
BIT)
Aquarius ascendant - General
Jupiter in an angle, Mars in 9th (S. 3059 - 3060
: BID
Jupiter in Kalakoota Nadiamsa (S. 1479 : BIT)
Miscellaneous (1413 - 1419 : BID)
Aquarius ascendant - Guha (or Dhruva) Nadiamsa
Jupiter’s Navamsa (S. 1271 : BI)
Jupiter & Ninth lord (S. 1234 - 1237: BY
Jupiter in 10th (७. 1251 : BI)
Mars in 3rd (ऽ. 1320 - 1321: BD
Moon connected with malefics (S. 1269, 1293
Moon in exaltation/own sign (S. 1326 - 1329
-BI)
Moon in Saturn’s Navamsa (S. 1330 - 1332:
BD
Ninth & eleventh lords (S. 1238 - 1240 : BI)
Saturn’s transit (ऽ. 1305 - 1307 : BI)
Third dasa (S. 1290 : BI)
Venus in an angle (S. 1285 : BD)

Chandra Kala Nadi
Venus with Jupiter (S. 1287 - 1288 : BI)
Venus with Mars (S. 9. 1286 : BI)
Venus related to 9th from Moon (S. 1270: BI)
Aquarius ascendant - Kunda Nadiamsa (S. 1912 -
Aquarius ascendant - Maalini Nadiamsa (S. 1443
: BID)
Jupiter in Kalakoota Nadiamsa (S. 1463 : BI)
Kartari Yoga (S. 1494 : BI)
Kemadruma Yoga (S. 1493 : BID
Koorma Yoga (७. 1502 : BID
Malefics in Sth (S. 1465 - 14654 : BII)
Saturn in Pisces (S. 1480 - 1482 : BID)
Saturn - Rahu in 12th (S. 1477 - 1478 : BI)
Sun’s dispositor (9. 1464 : BIT)
Sun in Scorpio Navamsa (S. 1466 - 146614:
ए)
Aquarius ascendant - Mohana Nadiamsa (S. 1439
Dasa effects (७. 1424 - 1425, 1438 : BID
Jupiter’s transit (S. 1421 - 1423% : BID)
Saturm’s transit (ऽ. 1420 : BI)
Aquarius ascendant - Nirmala Nadiamsa (S. 1875
Jupiter in Sth (9. 1906 - 19074 : BI)
Mercury in Aries/Leo Navamsa (S. 1884 : BI)
Mercury with Ketu (S./ 1889 - 1893, 2056 -
Saturn - Moon in 11th (S. 1887 - 1888 : BI)
Sun in Pisces Navamsa (S. 1894, 2050 - 20554
: BY)
Venus in Capricorn Navamsa (S. 2059 - 2060
` BY)
Venus-Jupiter in Saturn’s Navamsa (S. 1895,
Venus in Nirmala Nadiamsa (S. 1886 : BI)
Venus related to Saturn ( ऽ, 1899 : BI)
Aquarius ascendant - Sumathi Nadiamsa
Dasa effects (S. 1432 - 1434 : BIT)
Aries ascendant - Champaka Nadiamsa (S. 2690
Aries Navamsa (S. 2678 - 2679 : BI)
Jupiter in Cancer Navamsa (S. 2684 - 2685:
BI)
Jupiter in Pushkaramsa (S. 2699 : BI)
Jupiter with Saturn (9. 2680 - 26834 : BI)
Saturn in Champaka Nadiamsa (S. 2704 -
Saturn in transit (S. 2706 : BD)
Sun - Mercury with identical longitudes in
Venus in even Navamsa (S. 2697 - 2698/4 : BI)
Aries ascendant - Dhanada Nadiamsa (S. 1511 -
Fourth dasa (S. 1542 - 15424 : BI)
Jupiter’s dasa (S. 1547 : BI)
Jupiter’s transit (S, 1541 - 15414 : BI)
Moon in an angle or in 1ith (S. 1519-1521:
BI)
Moon in 5th house (S. 1522 - 1529 : BI)
Saturn in Scorpio (ऽ. 1545 : BI)
Sun’s dasa (ऽ. 1540 - BI)
Aries ascendant - General
Cancer Navamsa (S.49, 50 : BI)
Moon in Karikara Nadiamsa (S. 1453 - 1454
` BIT)
Aries ascendant - Sama Nadiamsa (S. 1548 - 1554,
Fourth dasa (S. 1573 - 15734 : BI)
Jupiter’s dasa (S. 1578 - 15784: BI)
Mercury aspected by Mars (S. 1555 : BI)
Mercury exalted (S. 1565 - 1566 : BI)
Moon in Gemini Navamsa (S. 1567 - 1568 :
BI)
Moon with Ketu (S. 1561 - 1562/4 : BI)
Saturn’s transit (S. 1580 - 1583 : BI)
Second dasa (S. 1563 - 15644 : BI)
Venus aspected by Jupiter (S.1570-1572 : BD)

Deva Keralam 263
Aries ascendant - Mangala Nadiamsa (S. 2205 -
Bride’s Rasi (S. 2254 : BI)
Fourth dasa (S. 2277 : BY
Jupiter aspecting 10th (S. 2240 : BI)
Jupiter in 2nd (S. 2242 - 22434 : BI)
Jupiter in 6th (७. 2222 - 22224 : BI)
Mars in 7th from Moon (S. 411 : BI)
Mercury with a benefic (S. 2256 : BI)
Mercury in Kunda Nadiamsa (S. 2239 : BI)
Moon in Arics with Virgo Navamsa (S. 2253
: BI)
Moon conjunct Mercury, and placed in Virgo
Rasis related to lords of 9th and 10th (S.345 -
Rahu in 8th (9. 2278 : BI)
Saturn in Aquarius etc... (S. 2225 : BI)
Saturn in direct motion (S. 213 - 22154 : BI)
Saturn in 10th from the Sun (S. 2216 - 2219:
BI)
Second dasa (ऽ. 2260 - 2260/4 : BI)
Third dasa (S. 2251. 2276 : BI)
Venus with Mars (9. 2241 : BI)
Venus with Mercury (S. 2223 - 2225 : Bi)
Venus in Pisces Navamsa (9. 2257-2258: BI)
Venus in 4th with Leo Navamsa (9. 2249. -
Cancer ascendant - Champaka Nadiamsa (S, 1412
Chamara Yoga (S. 1810 - 18104: BI)
Jupiter in Capricorn (S. 1818 - 18184 : BI)
Jupiter - Mars in Sagittarius, Pisces or Cancer
Jupiter’s periods (S. 1483 - 1491 : BI)
Jupiter’s transit (S. 1473 - 1475 : BY)
Kendradi Yoga (9. 1811 - 1812 : BJ)
Mercury in 8th (S. 1804 - 1806: BJ)
Moon in Indra Nadiamsa (S. 1793 - 1794 : BY)
Moon with Mars (S. 1803 - 1803/4: BI
Moon in Sagittarius (S. 1425 - 14254 : BI)
Moon in Vargottama (S. 1453 : BI)
Rahu’s periods (S. 1480 - 1482 : BJ)
Saturn with a malefic (S. 1438 - 1440 : BI)
Saturn’s transit (S. 1465 - 1470, 1479 : BI)
BI)
Sun in Kantha/Kamini Nadiamsa (S. 1441,
Sun - Mars conjunction (S. 1456 - 1464 : BI)
Sun - Mars in 10th/4th (S. 1446 - 1450 : BI)
Sun in Pisces Navamsa (S. 1419 - 1424 : BI)
Venus in Leo Navamsa ( S. 1802 : BI)
Venus - Mercury in 6th (9. 1819 - 18204 : BI)
Venusian Trimsamsa (S. 1795 - 1801 : BI)
Cancer ascendant - General
Eighth lord in last degrees of ascendant (S.
Jupiter in Cancer, Virgo, Sagittarius or
Aquarius (ऽ. 810-8104: BIJ)
Mars dasa - Jupiter bhukti (S-47, 48 : B-I)
Maleficsin 2nd, Rahu in 9th (S. 608 - 609 : BI)
Mercury & Venus in ascendant (S. 574: BD
Moon in 3rd with Ketu (S. 572 - 573 : BJ)
Moon related to Rahu (S. 624 - 627% : BI)
Navamsa ascendant - Pisces (S. 2926 - 2929,
Rahu in 9th in Virgo Navamsa (S. 621 - 623 :
BI)
Rahu’s transit in Deha Rasi (S. 643 - 645: BI)
Saturn in Aquarius with Libra Navamsa (S.
Saturn in Capricorn, Moon in Pisces (9. 587 -
Saturn with Mars and in Libra Navamsa ($.

Chandra Kala Nadi
Saturn in Sachira Nadiamsa (S.577 - 579,583
BI)
Saturn in 2nd, Mars in 4th (S. 2721 - 2721”:
Saturn in 310,111 dual Navamsa (9. 2722 - 2123
: BIT)
Saturn in 8th as 9th & 10th lords are angular
Saturn in 10th, Jupiter in 7th (S. 805 - 8074:
BID)
Saturn’s transit (S. 595 - 60214 : BI)
Saturn in 2nd, Rahu in 9th etc. (S. 594: BI)
Scorpio Navamsa (५. 986 - 99414 : BI)
Venus in Capricorn, Gemini Navamsa(S.570
Cancer ascendant - Kantha Nadiamsa (S. 2900 -
Jupiter in Pisces Navamsa (S. 2905 : 817)
Jupiter - Saturn relation (S. 2910 : BIT)
Sun in Virgo (S. 2903 - 2904 : BID)
Venus in an angle/trine (S. 2901 - 290244: BI)
Capricorn ascendant - Dhruva Nadiamsa (S. 2521.
Dasa effects (S. 2533 : BI)
Moon in Gemini Navamsa (S. 2530 : BI)
Ninth lord with a malefic (S. 2534 : BI)
Saturn in Apampathi Nadiamsa (S. 2524 : BI)
Saturn in Kamala Nadiamsa (9. 2522 : BI)
Saturn in malefic Shashtiamsa (S. 2525 -2526
` BI)
Sun - Mercury in Gemini (S. 2523 : BI)
Capricorn ascendant - Gopriya Nadiamsa (S. 1839
Dasa effects (ऽ. 1850 : BIT)
Capricorn ascendant - Jagathi Nadiamsa (5. 2128
Dasa of 8th Rasi (KCD) (S. 2150 -21504: BI)
Moon with Ketu (9. 2136 - 21374: BI)
Moon aspected by Mars (S. 2143 - 2146 : BI)
Moon in Pisces (ऽ. 2151 - 21544 : BI)
BI)
Saturn-Marsin Navamsa (5. 2138 -2139'4: BI)
Saturn in transit (S. 2140 - 21404 : BI)
Capricorn ascendant - Kala Nadiamsa (S. 2494 -
Jupiter aspected by Saturn (S. 2499 - 2500:
BI)
Jupiter in dual Navamsa (S. 2508 : BI)
Malefic in 9th house (S. 2515 : BI)
Mars aspected by Saturn (S. 2501, 2511 : BI)
Sakata Yoga (S. 2514 : BI)
Venus in dual Navamsa (S. 2506 : BI)
Capricorn ascendant - Kalika Nadiamsa (S. 3277
Jupiter in ascendant, aspecting luminaries (S.
Jupiter related to ascendant (S. 3285 : 21)
Jupiter in Cancer (S. 820 : BII)
Jupiter in Sagittarius (S. 3326 - 3327 : BIT)
Moon & Balarishta (S. 3200 - 32014 : BII)
Moon in debility (S. 3286, 771 - 774 : BIT)
Saturn in aspect to Mars (S. 3305 - 3309, 791
BID)
Satum in Libra, Jupiter in Cancer (S. 3322 -
BID)
Three planets in 3rd house (S. 3328 - 3331:
BIT)
Capricorn ascendant - Kantha Nadiamsa (S. 1336
: BY)
Dasa effects (S. 1359 - 1365 : BI)
Jupiter in own sign (S. 1343 - 13454 : BI)
Mars with Ketu (S. 1346 - 1349 : BI)
Saturn in 12th (S. 1337: BI)
Sun in Leo (S. 13504 : BI)

Deva Keralam
Venus with Moon (S. 1351 - 1353 : BD
Venusian Trimsamsa (S. 1338 - 1342 : BI)
Sth lord in 6th (S. 1350, 1355 :BI)
Capricorn ascendant - Pankaja Nadiamsa (S. 1777
Dasa effects (S. 2920 - 2923 : BIT)
Jupiter’s transit (S. 1784 - 1786 : BD)
Jupiter in Cancer Navamsa (S. 2917 : BIT)
Jupiter in Pisces Navamsa (S. 2915 - 2916,
Mars in 7th aspected by Jupiter ( 9. 1782 -
Mars in 10th (S. 2925 : BIT)
Saturn with Sun (S. 2919 : BID)
Satur in 111th (ऽ. 2924, 2953 : BID
Venus - Moon in debility (S. 1775 - 17764: BI)
Venus in Sth with Pisces Navamsa (S. 1779 -
Capricorn ascendant - Sachira Nadiamsa
Dasa and sub periods (S. 613 - 618 : BI)
Fourth lord (S. 554 - 5594 : BI)
Mars in ascendant (S. 548 : BI)
Mercury in ascendant (S. 582 : BI)
Moon in fateful degree (S. 549 : BY)
Saturn in Aquarius with Mars/Jupiter (S. 550
Capricorn ascendant - Sundara Nadiamsa (S.
Jupiter in Cancer or 5th/9th (S. 1589 : 21)
Jupiter’s transit (S. 1597 - 15084 : BI)
Jupiter in twelfth from Moon (S. 1593 - 1594
: BY
Rahu dasa (S. 1590 - 1592 : BY)
Capricorn ascendant - Trailokya Nadiamsa (S.
Dasa effects - general (S. 2753 - 2760; 2766 -
Fourth/fifth dasa (S. 1710 - 1711: BI
Gemini Navamsa (S. 1642 - 16434 : BI; 2738
Jupiter’s transit (ऽ. 1686 - 1687 : BI)
Jupiter in Pushkara Navamsa (S. 2737 : BID
Ketu in Libra/Scorpio Navamsa (S. 1729 -
BI)
Ketu in Virgo (S. 1733 : BI)
Mars in an angle or 6th (S. 1708 - 1709 : BI)
Mars in Aries, related to Saturn (S. 2734 -
Mars connected with Venus, Saturn etc. (S.
Mars and Saturn in Pisces (S. 1725 : BI)
Mars - Saturn - Moon in Libra (S. 2736 : BIT)
Mars in 9th from Navamsa ascendant (S. 2725
Mercury exalted, with Jupiter (S. 2765 : BIT)
Moon in Aries (S. 1630 - 163144 : BI)
Moon’s dasa (S. 1702 - 17034 : BI)
Moon in an immovable sign and Navamsa (S.
Moon in 8th from Navamsa ascendant (S.
Rahu dasa (S. 1716 - 1717 : BI)
Rahu in Virgo (S. 2763 : BIT)
Saturn’s transit (S. 1683 - 1685 : BI)
Secand dasa (S. 1640 : BI)
Sun in angle (S. 2761 - 2762 : BI)
Venus in Kantha Nadiamsa (S. 2741 - 2743140),
d: BIT)
Venus aspecting 11th (S. 1648 - 16524 : BI)
Capricorn ascendant - Visha Nadiamsa
Mars in Taurus Navamsa (S. 564 : BJ)
Mercury in Capricorn (S. 563 : BI)

Chandra Kala Nadi
Moon in ascendant (S. 554 - 559% : BI)
Saturn with Mars (ऽ. 560 - 561 : BD)
Saturn in Sachira Nadiamsa (S. 562, 569 : BI)
Common Sign
Mercury in Jharjhara Nadiamsa (9. 2109 -
D
Durbhaga Nadiamsa - birth in (S. 8-14 : B-DJ)
G
Gemini ascendant - Chiranjivini Nadiamsa (S.940
Dasa effects (S. 1010 -1012 : BIT)
Vishnu Yoga (S. 1015 - 1016 : BIJ)
Gemini ascendant - Dhanada Nadiamsa (S. 945 -
: BID
Jupiter in 7th (S. 953 - 95714 : BI)
Kesari Yoga (S. 966 - ०6114, 1007 : BII)
Mars in 5th (S. 958 - 960a : BIJ)
Mercury in the Navamsa of a friend (S. 968 -
Mercury with Venus (S. 948 - 94814 : BIT)
Moon in angle (S, 949 - 950% : BI)
Rahu in 4th (S. 1008 : BIT)
Satu in Scorpio/Pisces (S. 958 - 960b : BID
Saturn’s transit (S. 1000 : BID)
Satum in 7th (S. 953 - 9574८ : BIT)
Sun - Satum - Mercury in 6th (S. 951 - 9524:
BID `
Venus in 4th (S. 953 - 957d : BID)
Gemini ascendant - Dhruva Nadiamsa (S. 2466 -
Gemini ascendant - General
Jupiter in ascendant, Moon in Vargottama (S.
Mars in Libra (S. 568 : BID
Mercury in Cancer/Leo Navamsa (S. 455:
BI)
Mercury’s periods (S. 618 - 621 : BIT)
Mercury - Jupiter association (S. 456 : BIT)
Mercury’s transit (S. 618 - 620 : BII)
Saturn in Kamala Nadiamsa (S. 1129 - 11324,
Saturn’s transit (S. 457 : BID)
Venus with Mars (ऽ. 1138 - 1140 : BID)
Gemini ascendant - Isana Nadiamsa (S. 1023,
Mercury in Aries (S. 1061 - 1064 : BIT)
Mercury in Mars’s Navamsa (S. 1032 - 1034
: BID
Mercury in Scorpio (S. 1027 - 1028, 1031 -
Moon in Leo or Sagittarius (S. 1072 - 1073:
Moon in Libra (ऽ. 1068 - 1069 : BIJ)
Rahu’s transit (S. 1074 : BIT)
Saturn’s transit (S. 1117, 1120 - 1121 : BID
Sun in Upachaya (S. 1065 - 1067 : BIJ)
Venus in Saturn’s Navamsa (S. 1035 - 1037:
BID
Gemini ascendant - Kamala Nadiamsa (S. 2623 -
Ashtaka Varga (S. 2637 : BI)
Jupiter in Gemini Navamsa (S. 262 - 264414,
Jupiter’s transit (S. 2660 - 266014, 2671 : BI)
Mars and Moon in Scorpio (S. 1162 - 1160948
` BID)
Mercury aspected by Jupiter (S. 1148 : BID)
Mercury’s Navamsa position (S. 1149 : BID
Mercury in Sagittarius (S. 2635 : BN)

Deva Keralam
Mercury in Pisces (S. 2652 : BI)
Mercury in Sura Nadiamsa (S. 2638 : BI)
Moon in 8th (S. 1155 : BID
Moon in 10th (S. 1156 : BID)
Saturn’s transit (9. 1178 - 1179% : BID
Venus with Mars (S. 2645 - 26474 : BI)
Gemini ascendant - Sivada Nadiamsa (S. 2619 -
Gemini ascendant - Sura Nadiamsa (S. 2085 -
Fourth dasa (S. 2104 : BI)
Jupiter in 5th (S. 2090 - 2091 : BI)
: 21) Mercury dasa (S 2105 : BI)
Gemini ascendant - Mangala Nadiamsa (S. 1142 - Moon in Libra (S. 2095 - 2096 : BI)
Gemini ascendant - Mudgara Nadiamsa (S. 3102 Third dasa (S. 2092, 2100 - 2102 : BI)
BID)
Ashtaka Varga (S. 918 : BII)
Bhava Lagna (S. 863 - 865 : BID
Chitra Naksahtra (S. 872 - 879 : BIT)
Jupiter in Cancer (S. 912 : BI)
Jupiter’s transit (S. 3168, 3200 - 3210: BII)
Malefics in 5th (S. 848 : BIT)
Mercury’s Ashtaka Varga (S. 3170 - 3170%:
BII)
Moon in Libra (S. 845 : BID
Moon with Mars (S. 858, 895 - 905 `: BID)
Moon in Vargottama (S. 3109 - 311014, 868,
Moon in 6th, 8th or 12th (S. 919 - 939 : BIT)
Sakata Yoga (S. 869 : BIT)
Saturn in Gemini Navamsa (9. 3171-3172:
BID)
Saturn with Sun - Mars (ऽ. 857 : BIT)
: BIT)
Sun in 6th, 8th or 12th (S. 846 : BIJ)
Venus in 7th (S. 870, 887 : BIT)
Gemini ascendant - Naala Nadiamsa (S. 1075 -
Dasa effects (S. 1095 - 11014 : BIT)
Adhi Yoga (S. 33 - 39 : BIT)
Akhanda Samrajya Yoga (S. 60 - 62 : BID)
Amala Yoga (S. 83 - 85 : BII)
Arudha Pada (S. 54: BIT)
Arudha Pada & Hora lagna (S. 117 : BIT)
Ascendant lord in Capricorn Navamsa (9.
Ascendant lord exalted (S. 104 : BIT)
Ashtaka Varga (S. 1997 - 1998 : BI; S. 415 -
Aswini and its {11165 (5. 3169 : BIT)
Bhava analysis - some clues (9. 320- 330,494
Chamara Yoga (ऽ. 48 - 51: BID
Chatra Yoga (S. 89 - 9] : BID)
Daridra Malika Yoga and exception (S. 505 -
Debilitation Navamsa (S. 28 - 29 : BID)
Dispositors & Dasa effects (S. 488 - 493
Eighth lord from a Bhava (S. 3272 : BIT)
Eighth lord in sixth (S. 1996 : BI)
Exalted planet with a debilitated planet (S.
Exalted planets in evil houses (S. 30 : BID
Exchange of lords of 9th and 11th (S. 230 -
Friendly & Inimical planets (9. 31892 : BID)
General features (S. 129 - 130 : BIT)
Guru - Chandala Yoga (S. 3076b : BII)
Jupiter in Aquarius (S. 498 - 503, 504 -:505

Chandra Kala Nadi
Jupiter in Bala Nadi (S. 3061 : BIT)
Jupiter in Libra Navamsa (ऽ. 438 : BID)
Jupiter & luminaries (S. 114 : BIT)
Jupiter - Mars yoga (S. 2479 - 2480 : BI)
Jupiter's Navamsa (S. 72 - 78,434 - 435 : BIL)
Jupiter in Pisces (S. 52, 432, : BID)
Jupiter with Venus (S. 105 : BIT)
Jupiter - 4th & 9th lord (S. 119 : BID
Jupiter & 9th lord (S. 113 : BID
Kahala Yoga (S. 116 : BII)
Knower of Almighty (S. 106 : BI)
Koorma Yoga (S.41, 46 : BI)
Lakshmi Yoga (S. 55 - 59 : BI)
Lord of ascendant (S. 3008, 3134a : BIT)
Lord of 10th (S. 3009 : BID)
Mars aspecting Jupiter (S. 115 : BIT)
Mars with malefics (S. 2948 : BII)
Maha Pandita Yoga (S. 70 - 71 : BIT)
Malaviya Yoga (S. 26 - 27 : BIT)
Malefic in ascendant, Moon related to Saturn
Malefics in debility (S. 42 : BIT)
Mani Pravala Yoga (S. 126 - 127 : BII)
Malefic in 5th (S. 44 - 47: BID
Mercury’s dispositor with Ketu (S. 412 : BI)
Miscellaneous (S. 2 - 4: BI)
Miscellaneous Yogas (S. 93, 131 - 133 : 87)
Moon’s dasa (9.35, 40 ` B-I)
Moon’s dispositor (S. 437 : BIT)
Moon in Kuntala Nadiamsa (S. 503 : BIT)
Moon in Srikara Nadiamsa (S. 8-14, B-I)
Moon sign of bride (59.218 : BI)
Moon in immovable sign (S. 118 : BID)
Moon’s importance (S.3005 - 3006, 452-453
: BID)
Moon’s tenth sign (S. 128 : BI)
Moon in Virgo with Capricorn Navamsa (S.
Navamsa dispositor (S. 3046 - 3050, : BID)
Neecha Bhanga Raja Yoga (S. 1986 - 1992:
Ninth lord in 4th, Venus and Saturn in 6th (S.
Ninth & tenth lords in conjunction (S.255 -
Planets in ascendant (S. 270 - 271 : BII)
Planets in own signs et cetera (७. 31 - 32, 43,
Planets in 3/6/10/11 (S. 3173c : BI)
Planets in 4th (S. 3061 : BID
Progeny (S. 331 - 337 : BI)
Prosperity (S. 1188 - 1189 : BI)
Pushkaramsa (S. 79 : BIT)
Rahu in ascendant (ऽ. 3076a : BIT)
Rahu in Aslesha Nakshatra (S. 2305 : BY)
Rahu’s transit (S. 3041 - 3044, 3094 : BID)
Rahu in 4th (ऽ. 3062 : BIT)
Rahu in 10th (S. 231 - 233 : BID)
Rajapooja Yoga (royal honour) (S. 102 - 103
: BID)
Sakata Yoga (S. 1995 : BI)
Saturn with a benefic (S. 41 : BI)
Saturn with Ketu in Navamsa (S.3155- 315514
: BIT)
Saturn - Sun conjunction (S. 627 - 6364 : BIT)
Saturn in Swati (S. 461 - 463 : BID)
Saturn - Venus yoga (S. 40 : BID)
Saturn in Visakha (ऽ. 464 : BIT)
Saturn in 7th (S. 357 : BID)
` Saturn in 8th etc. (ऽ. 626 : BIT)
Sun in exaltation (S. 2947 : BID
Sun’s Navamsa positions (S. 80 : 87)
Sun in 3rd in Halaahala Shashtiamsa (S. 293 1
Transits - counted from Moon (S. 3082-3083,
Transits of malefics (S. 540 : BIT)
Transits in Nakshatras (S. 3018 - 3028, 471 -
Transits of Saturn, Rahu & Jupiter (S. 404,
Venus - Moon related to Leo (S. 124 : BID)
Venus’s Navamsa dispositor (S. 357 : BID)
Venus in 2nd (ऽ. 125 : BIT) .
Venus in4th, lord of 9th exalted (S. 2946: BID)
Venus in Sth (S. 92 : BID

Deva Keralam
Venus in 7th (S. 99 ; BIT)
Venus in 7th lord’s Navamsa (S. 101 : BII)
Venus in 10th (S. 100 : BID)
Yoga for owning conveyances (S. 123 : BII)
Yogas bearing certain houses (S. 134 - 136,
Yogas bearing evil planets/houses (S. 94 - 96,
Yogas concerning father (S. 81 - 82: BIT)
Yoga for fortune (S. 120 - 121 : BID)
Yoga for learning (S. 142 : BIT)
Yogas bearing Moon (S. 63 - 68 : BII)
Yoga for royal authority (S. 122 : BIJ)
Yogas by Sun - Moon - Rahu (S. 2481 - 2483
: BI)
Yogas for 2 or 3 wives (S. 137 - 138, 141: BID)
Week days - results of (S. 3029 - 3033 : BII)
Immovable ascendant - Achala Nadiamsa (S. 1510
Jupiter in Sth (S. 1526 - 1529142 : BI)
Moon in Nirmala Nadiamsa (S. 1542 - 1544:
श)
Saturn’s transit (9. 1547 - 1548 : BID)
Immovable ascendant - Ambuja Nadiamsa (S.
Immovable ascendant - Cancer Navamsa (S. 2386
Immovable ascendant - Chitrini Nadiamsa (S.
Immovable ascendant (specially Aquarius) -
Durdhara Nadiamsa (S. 438 - 44414, 455 - 458: BI)
Ascendant lord aspected by Jupiter (S. 468 -
Ascendant lord in Mohana Nadiamsa (S. 445
dasa effects - miscellaneous (9. 503 -504: BI)
Eleventh lord (ऽ, 478 - 479 : BI)
Jupiter in Durdhara Nadiamsa (S. 451 - 4514,
Jupiter in Pisces (S.452 -45314,462- 4634: BI)
Jupiter’s transit in Sagittarius (S. 523, 524 :
BJ)
Ketu dasa (S. 498 - BI)
Malefic in 12th (S. 501 : BJ)
Mars in an angle (S. 450 : BI)
Mercury with Sun (S. 488 - 491 : BI)
Miscellaneous (534 - $47 : BI)
Moon in Sudha Nadiamsa (S. 454 : BI)
Saturn in Virgo, Jupiter in Pisces (S.448 -449
: BI)
Saturn in 8th (S. 519 - 522 : BI)
Second dasa (S. 494 - 49414 : BI)
Third dasa (9. 480, 499 : BI)
Third lord’s Navamsa dispositor(S.485 - 4874
: BY)
Venusin 11th & dasaeffects §.509 -515'4: BI)
Venus in 1 1thinGada Nadiamsa(S.518-518%4
: BI)
Venus in 11th, Jupiter in 2nd/4th/10th (S.532
Venus in 11th lord’s Navamsa (S. 492 - 493 :
BI)
Immovable ascendant - Gada Nadiamsa (S. 1928
Immovable ascendant - General
Childlessness (S. 1765 : BI)
Children - Navamsa (S. 1781 : BI)
Dead children (S. 17656 - 11664 : BI)
Ears - matters relating to(S. 1740-1746, 1767
Jupiter in Aquarius (9. 3077 - 3081, 5225 - 526
: BY)
Jupiter in a trine (S. 3056 - 3057 : BII)
Jupiter in Pisces (S. 546 - 553 : BIT)
Jupiter in 4th (S. 509 : BID)
Karma Samrajya Yoga (S. 1263 - 1266, 1279
Moon in Pisces (S. 338 - 3394 : BID

Moon in Uttara 1st quarter (S. 3055 : BIT)
Moon in Vargottama (S.556-557:B )
Moon in 8th (७. 1243 : BI)
Mars in ascendant, Jupiter in Sth (ऽ. 56: BI)
Navamsa ascendant, Virgo/Leo (S. 2826 -
Rahu in ascendant (S. 524 - 524% : BID)
Rahu in 9th (S. 1373b, 1380 : BID)
Raja Yoga (S. 1956 - 1957 : BI)
Saturn in 11th (S. 2930 - 29304 : BID)
Immovable asc.-Guha Nadiamsa(S.1739 : BI)
Immovable ascendant - Kalusha Nadiamsa (S.
: BID
Jupiter in an angle (S. 2830 - 2831 : BID)
Jupiter in Sundari Nadiamsa (S. 2855 : BID)
Jupiter in 11th (S. 2873 - 2874 : BID
Ketu with 7th lord (S. 2877 : BID)
Retrograde 8th lord (S. 2832 - 28334, 2835,
Immovable ascendant (specially Aquarius) -
Fourth dasa (ऽ. 2187 : BI)
Fifth dasa (S. 2193, 2198 : BI)
Fifth lord with Sun (S. 2195 - 219644 : BJ)
Jupiter’s dasa (S. 2194 : BI)
Jupiter in Mrityubhaga or in Capricom
Navamsa (9. 2197 : BY)
Jupiter related to Mars (S. 2169 -2170% : BI)
Mercury’s sub period (S. 2201 : BI)
Second lord’s dasa (ऽ. 2200 : BI)
Seventh lord in 6th (S. 2182 : BJ)
Sixth dasa (ऽ. 2199 : BD
Immovable ascendant - Kuntala Nadiamsa (S.
Moon in Aquarius (S. 3058 : BID)
Immovable ascendant - Mohana Nadiamsa (S.
Chandra Kala Nadi
Jupiter - Sun in 5th (9. 1370: BID)
Ketu - Sun in Aries (S. 1364 - 1369a : BIJ)
` BY)
Soola Yoga (S. 1389 - 1393 : BI)
Sun with ascendant lord (S. 1379 : BI)
Immovable ascendant - Mudgara Nadiamsa (S.
Jupiter - Saturn conjunction (S. 656 : BIT)
Jupiter’s transit (S. 651 - 652, 657 - 659 : BID)
Saturm’s transit (S. 653 - 655 : BID)
Immovable ascendant - Mudrika Nadiamsa (S.
Dasa effects (S. 1341, 1354 - 1355 : BID)
Jupiter - Ketu conjunction (S. 1350 - 1352:
BID)
Rahu in 9th (S. 1342 - 1343 : BID)
Venus in trine from 10th (S. 1323 - 1324: BID)
Immovable ascendant - Nirmala Nadiamsa (S.
Immovable ascendant - Sama Nadiamsa (S. 3383
Immovable ascendant - Seethala Nadiamsa (S.
Satur in Seethala Nadiamsa (S. 2540 - 2544
: BY)
Immovable ascendant - Sivada Nadiamsa (S. 2574
Immovable ascendant - Sudha Nadiamsa (S. 1824
J
Jaimini school (S. 5 - 22 : BI)
Jupiter
- in Scorpio, with Pisces Navamsa (S. 97 - 98
: BJ)
- in Scorpio, with Virgo Navamsa (S. 101 -
-in Viswambhara Nadiamsa (5. 99, 100 : BI)

Deva Keralam 211
Leo ascendant - Kinnara Nadiamsa (ऽ. 305 - 313,
Kalachakra dasa (S. 528 - 52814, : BI; 5. 197 Leo ascendant - Mohana Nadiamsa (S. 700 - 1014
Kalakoota Nadiamsa (5.19 : B-I) Leo ascendant - Mudgara Nadiamsa (S. 561 - 56214,
Leo ascendant - Bahudhanya Nadiamsa (9, 1893 - 9 pi pba si # +
oo - व “ee me ; Saturn’s transit (S. 611 - 612 : BIT)
on “re ( ve re 1969 - 1970, Leo ascendant - Sama Nadiamsa (S. 3348 - 3353,
Jupiter in 11th (S 1913 - 1917148, 195] - 19< ' Dasa effects (S 3373: BID)
Mars in 4th (S. 1948 - 19509 : BIT) Jupiter’s transit (S. 33/4 - 3375 : BID)
Mars in combustion (S. 1968 : BIT) Mercury in a trine (S. 3358 - 3359 : BID)
Mercury in 8th (9. 1956 - 19574 : BII) Mercury in 10th (S. 3372 : BID
Saturn’s transit (S. 1947, 1964 - 1967 : BIT) Saturn’s transit (S. 3378 - 3379 : BII)
Sun in 11th (S. 1913 - 19174, 1918 - 192144, Saturn in 12th (ऽ. 3381 - 3382 : BIN
1922 - 19244}, 1948 - 1950404, 1958 - 19584: Sun in Aquarius (S. 3380 - 33804 : BIN
BIN) Sun - Mercury conjunction (S. 3366 - 33674
Leo ascendant - Champaka Nadiamsa (S. 2022 - 1 षा) "भ र
2023, 2033 क 2038 : BI) Leo ascendant = Sivada Nadiamsa (S. 3211 - 3212,
Mars in an immovable sign (S. 2015 : BI) 3238 - 32404. 3244 - 3249. 3265 - 3268. 3273
Mars with Saturn (S. 2021 - 202114 : BI) Dasaeffects(S. 3250 - 3253, 3269 - 3271, 732
Moon in 11th (ऽ. 2039 - 2039 : BI) J 16 ind bilitat nee ] divisi
Satu in Leo (S. 2017 . 20184 BY 7 ebilitation/inimical divisions (3.
Saturn’s transit (S. 2025, 2043 - 2048 : BI) Jupiter in Leo Navamsa (S. 3219 - 3221 : ठा)
Satum in a trine to 11th (8. 2016 : BI) Jupiter and Moon (S. 3231 - 3234 : BID)
Venus joining Jupiter (S. 2013 - 2014 : BI) Jupiter - Rahu conjunction (S. 3214 : BI)
Leo ascendant । General | | 7 Jupiter in Sivada Nadiamsa - 2100111 Mohana
Jupiter with a malefic, Saturn in 3rd (S. 709: Nadiamsa (S. 728 - 731 : BID)
811) Jupiter i Var ttama (S 3230 - 32304, 743 -
Mercury in Leo (9. 705 - 1064 : BID) 0 छा) — iis
= in Capricorn, Mars in Scorpio (S. Jupiter in Virgo Navamsa (S. 3217 - 3218 :
Moon in Leo, Mars in 4th (S. 711 - 7164 : BI) 1, in 3rd (S. 3213 : BID)
Taurus Navamsa rising (S. 3215 : BI) Moon in Indra Nadiamsa ($. 745 - 747% : BI)
Parijatha Yoga (S. 314 - 315 : BI) Moon in Libra (S. 3225 - 3226 : BIN)
Saturn - Ketu in Navamsa (5. 710: BI) | Moon in Mohana Nadiamsa (S. 3227 32294,
Leo ascendant - Jagathi Nadiamsa (S. 190 - 196: 3235 - 3237, 3254 - 3255 : BI)
ए) | Moon with 5 planets (S. 3257 : BID

Chandra Kala Nadi
Rahu aspected by Sun- Venus (9. 3222 - 3224
: BIT)
Saturn’s transit (५, 3263 - 32644 : BII)
Sun in Aquarius (S. 3256 : BIJ)
Sun’s dispositor (ऽ. 3258 - 3259 : BIJ)
Leo ascendant - Sivakari Nadiamsa (S. 3241 -
Moon in Libra (S. 687 - 688 : 21)
Moon in Mohana Nadiamsa (S. 689 - 69044,
Moon - Jupiter (S. 681 - 685b : BIT)
Jupiter in Leo (S. 691 - 6959 : BI)
Rahu/Jupiter in ascendant (S.675 - 683 : BIT)
Rahu aspected by Sun-Venus (S. 684 - 686 :
BII)
Leo ascendant - Uraga Nadiamsa (S. 2306 - 2348* :
BI)
Libra ascendant - Agada Nadiamsa (S. 1561 -
: BI)
Jupiter in Agada Nadiamsa (S. 1593 - 159914:
BID
Jupiter/Satum in 11th (S. 1576 - 15604, 1629
Mars - Mercury conjunction (S. 1642 - 164344
` BI)
Moon in aspect to Mars (S. 1581 - 1587 : BI)
Sakata Yoga (S. 1636 - 1641142 : BI)
Libra ascendant - Champaka Nadiamsa (S. 2957 -
Dasa effects (S. 2981 - 2985 : श}
Jupiter in Navamsa (S. 2986 - 2988 : BID)
Jupiter in 10th (S. 2989 : BIT)
(*) These slokas belong to Pisces, not Leo, which
was was not mentioned in the original.
Mercury in Pisces with the Sun (9. 2964 -
Saturn in Gemini Navamsa (S. 2973 - 2975:
BII)
Saturn related to 4th lord (S. 2962 - 29634:
BII)
Sun in Karala Shahstiamsa (S. 2978 : BIT)
Venus - Saturn - Mercury in 10th (S. 2970 -
Libra ascendant - General
Dasa periods’ effects (S. 1061 - 10684 : BI;
Jupiter’s dasa (S. 3143 - 3148% : BI)
Jupiter with Moon ($. 2990 : BI)
Jupiter in Navamsa diagram (S. 3100 - 3101:
Jupiter in Pisces with Libra Navamsa (5. 2991
: BY)
Mars in 12th, with weakness (S. 2979 : BI)
Moon in Jupiter’s Navamsa while Jupiter &
Saturn are in Sagittarius/Pisces (S.259 : BIT)
Moon in Melapa Nadiamsa (S. 1622 - 1625124
` BIT)
Mercury’s dasa (S. 3156 - 315744 : BI)
Pisces Navamsa (S. 3007 : BID)
Rahu dasa (ऽ. 1615 - 1618144 : BIL
Saturn - Mars (ऽ. 2994 : BJ)
Satum - Mars in 8th (ऽ. 1057 : BD)
Satum’s transit (S. 1090 - 109014 : BI; 3134a,
Libra ascendant - Indra Nadiamsa (S. 1042- 1046,
Libra ascendant - Indra Yoga (S. 1013 - 1029, 1032

Deva Keralam 273
Libra ascendant - Jagathi Nadiamsa (S. 1550 -
Jupiter with Satum (9. 1565 - 15662 : BIJ)
Jupiter in Vargottama Navamsa (S. 1554:
BI!)
Sun in Jarjhara Nadiamsa (S. 1565 - 1566b:
BII)
Libra ascendant - Kinnara Nadiamsa (S. 261 -267,
Libra ascendant - Kutila Nadiamsa (S. 978 - 983,
Naraka Yoga (S. 1010: BI)
Libra ascendant - Mohana Nadiamsa (S. 1778 -
Libra ascendant - Mudgara Nadiamsa (S. 1681 -
Dasa effects (S. 1715 - 1717 : BID
Jupiter dasa - Rahu bhukti (S. 1729 - 17354 :
BID)
Saturn in Kulaghna Shashtiamsa (S. 1740 -
Saturn in Yama Shashtiamsa (S. 1703 - 1704
: BI)
Transit effects (S. 1718 - 17284 : BID)
Venus in Aslesha (S. 1686 - 1688a : BIT)
Venus with Ketu (S. 1686 - 1688b : BII)
Venus in Martian Navamsa (S. 1680 : BIT)
Venus in Mohana Nadiamsa (S. 1673 - 1675,
Venus in Scorpio Navamsa (9. 1676 : BII)
Libra ascendant - Nirmala Nadiamsa (S. 847-855,
Jupiter aspecting Libra (S. 896 - 897 : BI)
Jupiter in Vargottama (S. 911 - 914 : BD
Jupiter in 7th (७. 927 - 9314 : BI)
Mercury, Sun & Venus in 11th (S. 898 - 902
: BI)
Moon & delivery (S. 855 - 8584 : BI)
Moon, Rahu and Sun (S. 938 - 944 : BJ)
Moon in Scorpio (S. 860 : BI)*
Rahu in 2nd, Sun in 10th (ऽ. 889 - 891 : BI)
Sakata Yoga (S. 925 : BI)
Saturn joining benefics (S. $92 - 893 : BI)
Saturn in Leo (S. 904 : BY)
Saturn in Libra (S. 882 - 883 : BI)
Satum with Mercury (S. 888 - 8884 : BI)
Saturn with Venus (S. 926 : BJ)
Saturn’s transit (S. 920 : BI)
Saturn in Sth or Sagittarius/its trines (S. 874 -
Venus & Aroodha (S. 969 - 9704 : BI)
Venus with Mercury (S. 966 - 967 : BI)
Venus in Taurus (S. 968 : BI)
Libra ascendant - Nivruthi Nadiamsa ( 9. 3390 -
Jupiter in an angle or ina trine(S. 3395 -339514
: BIT)
Mercury related to Jupiter (S. 3400 : BID)
Moon in Virgo (S. 3398 - 339914 : BH)
Rahu - Sun - Saturn (S. 3396 - 339734 : BID)
Saturn’s transit (S. 3401 - 3402 : BIT)
Venus in 9th (ऽ. 3394 - 339414 : BIT)
Libra ascendant - Sumathi Nadiamsa (S.233-2364
` BID)
Libra ascendant - Vikrutha Nadiamsa (S. 143 -
Dasa effects - General (9. 242 - 245, 246, 252
Sun - Mars (ऽ. 186 : BID)
Sun - Mercury (9. 187 - 188 : BID
Venus in Leo or Gemini (S. 189 : BIT)
M
Malini Nadiamsa (S.24, 27, 28, 45, B-D)
Jupiter in Kalakoota Nadiamsa with Matanga

274 Chandra Kala Nadi
Malefics in a trine of Moon, as Saturn joins
Rahu (S.3 : B-I)
Saturn- Jupiter in Cancer Navamsa (S.20:BI)
Matanga Nadiamsa - death (9.51, 52 : BI)
Jupiter (S. 6-7 : B-I)
Malefic in 12th (S.53 : BI)
lith lord & Rahu (S.25-26 : B-I)
Satum’s transit (S.30 : B-I)
Movable ascendant - General
Moon - Saturn (S. 1333 - 1335 : BD)
Saturn in Aries (S. 1574 - 1576 : BI)
Scorpio Navamsa (S. 971 - 972 :BI)
Sun in Taurus Navamsa (9. 2183 : BI)
Movable ascendant - Champaka Nadiamsa (S.
Movable ascendant - Kunda Nadiamsa (S. 2178 -
Movable ascendant - Trailokya Nadiamsa (S. 1599
Mercury in Aries (S, 1623 - 1626 : BI)
Rahu with 11th lord (S. 1627 : BJ)
Saturn in 3rd (1603 - 16032 : BN)
Sun’s Ashtaka Varga (S. 1628 : BI)
P
Pisces ascendant - General
Jupiter in 10th (S. 622 - 623 : BID
Saturn in Scorpio, with Libra Navamsa (S.
Moon in Capricorn Navamsa (S. 1173 : BI)
Virgo Navamsa rising (S. 2780 : BIT)
Pisces ascendant - Kamala Nadiamsa
Eighth Rasi (Libra) dasa (S. 838 - 83814, 844 -
Fifth Rasi (Cancer) dasa, 5th lord in 5th (S.
Fifth lord aspected by Jupiter (S. 823 : BI)
Gemini Rasi dasa (S. 818 : BN)
Lagna Rasi dasa (S. 808 - 809% : BI)
Leo Rasi dasa (S. 834 : BI)
Mars in visible half (S. 824 : BI)
Mars in 4th (S. 819 :BI)
Mars in 4th with an exalted planet (S. 795 -
Rahu in 10th (S. 842 - 843 : BD
Saturn in Aries/Pisces (S. 807 - 807% : 81)
Saturn in Aries, with Leo Navamsa (S. 778 -
Saturn in Kamala Nadiamsa (S. 779 : BI)
Saturn in Martian Navamsa (S. 788 - 7844: BI)
Saturn - Mercury in Aries (S. 804 - 8054 : BD)
Saturn-Sun in Aries (S. 780 - 7814 : BI)
Second Rasi dasa (S. 813 - 815 : 81)
Sixth Rasi dasa (S. 82414 - 8334 : BD)
Third lord (S. 797 - 79814 : BJ)
Two exalted planets (S. 801 - 803 : BI)
Virgo Rasi dasa (S. 835 - 837 : BI)
Pisces ascendant - Kantha Nadiamsa (S. 2888 -
Saturn in Davagni Shashtiamsa (S.2893, 2897
Pisces ascendant - Kunda Nadiamsa
Capricorn Navamsa (S. 651 - 6544 : BI)
Kesari Yoga (S. 655 - 65514 : BI)
Jupiter in Pisces (S. 710 - 713 : BY)
Mercury and Jupiter (S. 638 - 651, 701 - 707
: BY)
Mercury in Kunda Nadiamsa (S. 708 : BI)
Mercury with Saturn (S. 656 - 658 : BD
Saturn’s transit (659 - 66214 : BY)
Tenth lord’s dasa (9. 709 : BI)
Pisces ascendant - Mukunda Nadiamsa (S. 663 -
Benefic in 10th (S. 679 : BI)
dasa of 8th lord from Moon (S. 682 - 683 : BI)
First dasa (S. 668 - 671 : BI)
Mars - Venus in Scorpio (S. 696 : BD
Mercury in Kunda Nadiamsa (S. 699 - 700:
BI)
Mercury in Mukunda Nadiamsa (S. 697 : BI)
Moon, Jupiter, Venus’ positions (S. 693 - 695
: BY)
Moon’s dasa (S. 674 - 675 : BI)
Moon in Kunda Nadiamsa or Cancer (S. 677

Deva Keralam 275
Moon’s Navamsa (S. 673 : BI)
Navamsas of lords of 2nd and 8th (9. 676: BI)
Second dasa (S. 672 : BI)
Sun in Harina/Ambuja Nadiamsa (S. 685 -
Sun - Mercury conjunction (S. 665 - 66714, 698
` BI)
Third dasa (ऽ. 679 - 681 : BY)
Venus dasa (S. 692 : BJ)
Pisces ascendant - Seethala Nadiamnisa
Jupiter's dasa (S. 1167, 1174 - 11814: BI)
Jupiter’s transit (S.1129 - 11304 : BI)
Moon in Virgo ($. 1172: BD
Raja yoga effects, death (S. 1182 - .191: BI)
Saturn - Jupiter conjunction (S. 1098 - 1099%
: BI)
Saturn /Jupiter/Venus concerning father (S.
Saturn - Ketu (S. 1101 - 1104 : BI)
Saturn in Seethala/Mahamari Nadiamsa (S.
: BY)
Saturn - Venus conjunction (S. 1096 - 109714,
BI)
Pisces ascendant - Suprabha Nadiamsa (S. 2770,
Jupiter’s Trimsamsa (S. 2787 - 2788 : BI)
Jupiter in 12th (S. 2775 : धा)
Mala Yoga (S. 2817 - 2818 : BIT)
Moon in Capricorn, with Venus (S. 2791 -
Mercury with Ketu in 9th (S. 2783 : BID)
Mercury with Rahu (S. 2773 - 2774 : BID)
Rahu in 3rd (S. 2776 : BID)
Seventh house, planets in (S. 2796 - 21074 :
ए)
Venus in Capricorn (9. 28078 : BID)
Venus with exalted planet (S. 2789 - 2790 :
BI)
Venus in a trine to Capricorn (S. 2772 : BII)
Venus with Mars (S. 2812 - 281414 : BI)
Venus in 4th from Navamsa ascendant (S.
Pisces ascendant - Uraga Nadiamsa (S. 2288 - 2304
` BY)
Pisces ascendant - Vasudha Nadiamsa (S. 2405 -
Chaamara Yoga (S. 2427 : BI)
Jupiter related to Sun or Mars, or placed in 4th/
Jupiter’s transit (S. 2432 - 2433 : BD)
Jupiter’s Trimsamsa (S. 2413 - 2413% : BI)
Jupiter in Virgo (S. 2459 : BI)
Jupiter in 2nd/7th (S, 2461 - 2465 : BY)
Kahala Yoga (S. 2429 - 2430 : BI)
Mars aspecting Jupiter (S. 2418 : BI)
Mars in a malefic Navamsa (S. 2424 : BI)
Mercury in Libra Navamsa (S. 2452 - 2453:
BI)
Moon in Indra Nadiamsa (S. 2411 - 2412: BI)
Sun with Venus (S. 2450 - 2451 : BJ)
Venus in Cancer Navamsa (S. 2419 : BD)
R
Rahu - General
- in ascendant, aspected by Sun (ऽ. 104, 105:
BI)
- in ascendant, Jupiter in Viswambhara
Nadiamsa (S. 106 - 107 : BI)
S
Sagittarius ascendant - Dhaata Nadiamsa (S. 1207

Sagittarius ascendant - General
Rahu in Aquarius with Jupiterian Navamsa
Saturn - Mars in 8th (S. 3084 : BIT)
Virgo Navamsa (S. 320 : BI)
Sagittarius ascendant - Kalakoota Nadiamsa (S.
Sun with Rahu (S. 1500 : BI)
Sun in 7th Navamsa (S. 1497 - 1499 : BI)
Sagittarius ascendant - Kantha Nadiamsa (S. 1366
Mercury in 3rd/6th/8th, Saturn related to Sun
Sagittarius ascendant - Kokila Nadiamsa
Moon in Sagittarius related to Saturn/Rahu
Saturn’s transit (ऽ. 1202 : BI)
Sagittarius ascendant - Kumara Nadiamsa
Sun-Mercury in 10th (8.314 - 317: BI
dasas of lords of 6th, 8th and 12th (S. 318-319
: BY)
Satum’s transit (9. 321 - 3234 : BI)
Sagittarius ascendant - Mudgara Nadiamsa (S.
Amala Yoga (S. 1406 : BY)
Ascendant lord’s dasa (S. 1395 : BI)
Fifth dasa (ऽ. 1407 - 1407% : BI)
Ketu dasa (S. 1382 - 1383 : BD)
Mars in comfortable divisions (S. 1389 -
Mars dasa (S. 1394 : BI)
Mercury dasa (ऽ. 1408 - 1411: BD)
Mercury with Sun (S. 1405 : BY)
Moon in Pisces (S. 1381 : BI)
Sun in Aquarius (S. 1397 : BD
Sun in malefic Navamsa (S. 1396 : BI)
Sagittarius“ascendant - Pankaja Nadiamsa (S.
Jupiter, Mars & Saturn (S. 2565 - 2567 : BI)
Sagittarius ascendant - Prabha Nadiamsa (234 -
Chandra Kala Nadi
Dasa of Ketu-occupied Rasi (S. 339 -340: BI)
Jupiter in ascendant (S. 240 - 241 : BJ)
Jupiter in Kumara Nadiamsa (S. 247 - 248 :
BI)
Jupiter in Varuna Nadiamsa, Sun in Kumara
Sun in 7th (S. 341 - BI)
Saturn in 3rd (ऽ. 242 : BI)
Second dasa (S. 249 : BD
Sun with malefics ($.243 : BI)
Sagittarius ascendant - Sivada Nadiamsa (S. 1503
Mercury dasa (S. 1508 - 1510 : BJ)
Satumn’s transit (S. 1507 : BJ)
Sagittarius ascendant - Varuna Nadiamsa (S.205
Dasa effects (S. 346 - 350 : BI)
Dasa of 9th lord’s dispositor (S. 342 -343: BI)
Deha - Jeeva signs (S. 329 - 3344 : BI)
Eighth lord’s dasa (293 - 295, 303 - 304 : BI)
Fifth lord in Mangala Nadiamsa (S. 273 : BI)
Fifth lord’s Navamsa (S.291 : BY)
Jupiter in ascendant, with Mars (S. 192 - 194
: BI)
Jupiter in aspect to Mars (9. 214 - 215, 262:
BI)
Jupiter in ascendant, with Moon (S. 188 - 189
Jupiter in ascendant, Venus in 4th with Ketu
Jupiter in ascendant, Venus in 4th, malefic in
Jupiter in Brahma Shashtiamsa, Venus in
Aquarius Navamsa (5. 217: BY)
Jupiter’s dasa (S. 257 - 25844 : BD
Jupiter retrograde in Gemini Navamsa(S. 190
Jupiter in Varuna Nadiamsa (S. 228, 230 -
Jupiter in Varuna Nadiamsa, Sun in Kumara
Nadiamsa (S. 271 - 272 : BJ)
upiter in Varuna Nadiamsa (S, 196 - 199,204
: BI)
Miscellaneous (S. 252 - 254 : BI)

Deva Keralam 277
Moon in 3rd (S. 274 - 276 : BI)
Moon with Jupiter (S. 250 - 2514 : BI)
Mars in Aries Navamsa (9. 228, 230 - 233 : BI)
Mars in Mangala Nadiamsa (S. 229, 335, 360
Ninth lord in Kumara Nadiamsa (S. 259 - 261
Ninth lord’s dasa (७. 288 - 290 : BI)
Ninth lord’s Navamsa (S. 291, 292 : BJ)
Rahu-Sun in Aquarius (9. 357 - 359 : BI)
Saturn aspecting Aquarius (S. 328 - BI)
Saturn in 3rd (S. 220 - 223 : BI)
Satum in 3rd in Varuna Nadiamsa ( ऽ. 200:
BI)
Saturn in Aquarius with Capricorn Navamsa
Saturn in Capricorn Navamsa (S. 268 - 270:
BI)
Sun in Venus’ Navamsa (S. 357 - 359 : BI)
Sun in Kumara Nadiamsa, Rahuin Scorpio (S.
Tenth lord’s dasa (296 : BI)
Tenth lord in Mangala Nadiamsa (S. 292 : BI)
Twelfth lord in Deva Shashtiamsa (S. 364 -
Saturn in the degree of “Sun + 4th lord”
Saturn related to 8th (S. 1058 : BI)
BI)
Scorpio ascendant - Durbhaga Nadiamsa (S. 350 -
Scorpio ascendant - Gada Nadiamsa (S. 1918 -
Moon’s strength (ऽ. 1970 - 1971 : BD
Saturn - Mars in 9th (S. 1978 - 1983 : BI)
Sun in 9th (S. 1976 : BI)
Scorpio ascendant - General
Jupiter in Kutila Nadiamsa (S. 375 : BIJ)
Mars in 3rd (S. 393 - 394 : BID)
Mercury with the Sun (S. 395 : BID
Moon in debility, Mars in Leo Navamsa (S.
Navamsas of 4th and 9th lord (S. 398 - 401 :
Saturn dasa - Venus bhukti (S. 380 - 381: BIT)
Scorpio ascendant- Kutila Nadiamsa (S.342-3444,
ए)
Dasa effects (S. 405 : BIT)
Jupiter in Aquarius (S. 382 : BI)
Jupiter’s transit (S. 406 : BIT)
Venus in Scorpio (S. 414 : BI)
Scorpio ascendant - Mangala Nadiamsa (ऽ. 2262
Scorpio ascendant - Sudha Nadiamsa (S. 2349 -
Scorpio ascendant - Sumathi Nadiamsa (5. 2353 -
Jupiter in Leo (S. 2403 - 2404 : BI) |
Jupiter 1 Leo in Aries Navamsa (S.2397 -
Jupiter in Leo in a movable Navamsa(S. 2380
Jupiter’s transit (S. 2367 : BI)
Mars in a Navamsa of Mercury (S. 2357 : BI)
Mercury with Mars (S. 2356 : BJ)
Moonin Kutila Nadiamsa (S. 2393 - 2395 : BI)
Moon in 7th house (S. 2372 - 2374 : BI)
Sakata Yoga (9. 2358 : BY)
Saturn in Gada Nadiamsa (S. 23811 - 2383 :
BI)
Saturn’s transit (9. 2385 : BI)
Saturn related to Venus (S. 2396, 2399 - 2401
: BY)
Second dasa (S. 2364 - 2365 : BI)
Venus in Sagittarius Navamsa (S. 2369 : BI
Scorpio ascendant - Suprabha Nadiamsa (S. 2002
Moon- Saturnin anangle (S. 2007 - 2012: BI)
Scorpio Ascendant - Uraga Nadiamsa (S.370-372,

278 Chandra Kala Nadi
375 - 3814 388 - 390, 392 - 397,400-410,413 Saturn’s transit (S. 168 - 170 : BI)
- 416, 418, 419, 421, 425, 428 - 431 : BI) Sun in Manjuswana and Jupiter in
Jupiter as Moon’s Navamsa dispositor (S.385 Viswambhara Nadiamsas (S.123-124,161
Jupiter in 6th (S. 417 : BN) Third dasa (S.174 : BI)
Leo Navamsa (S. 398 - 399 : BI) Taurus ascendant - Kamala Nadiamsa (S. 2545 -
Moon related to Jupiter (S. 387 - 3874 : BI) 25491, 2552, 2556, 2558 - 25644 : BI)
Rahu in Arudra’s 4th quarter (S. 391 : BI) Jupiter in Sachira Nadiamsa (9. 2550 - 2551 :
Rahu with 10th lord (S. 384 - 3844 : BI) Mars with Venus (S. 2555 : BI
Saturn’s transit (S. 420, 422, 423 : BI) Mercury with Sun (७. 2553 - 2554 : BI)
Second lord’s dasa (S. 426 : BJ) Rahu in 5th (S. 2557 : BI)
Sun in debility (433 - 43714 : BY) Taurus ascendant - Mangala Nadiamsa ( ऽ. 224 -
Third dasa (S. 424 : BI) 225 : BY)
Umbilical cord (७. 373 - 374: BI) Mars in Mangala Nadiamsa, Sun in Aries
Specific Horoscope (S. 201 - 203 : BI) Navamsa (S. 226: BI)
T Taurus ascendant - Seethala Nadiamsa (S. 1823,
Taurus ascendant - Gada Nadiamsa (5. 2061 - 1828 - 1830, 1860 - 1865 : BI)
2065, 2068, 2069, 2072, 2073, 2079, 2080, Jupiter in Taurus, Sun in Pisces Navamsa (S.
Fourth dasa (5. 2074 - 2076 : BI) Jupiter’s transit (S. 1846 - 1847 : BI)
Jupiter’s Ashtaka Varga (S. 2077 : BI) Luminaries (S. 1871 - 1872 : BI)
Jupiter with Rahu (ऽ. 2070 - 2071 : BI) Mercury with Venus (S. 1855 - 1858)
Satu exalted (S. 2081 : BI) Moonin Nirmala Nadiammsa(S. 1852- 185214
Sun in 10th (S. 2067 : BI) : BI)
Venus in 12th (S. 2066 : BI) Saturn with Mars (S. 1837, 1839, 1848 : BI)
Taurus ascendant - General Saturn’s transit (S. 1842 - 184214: BI)
Mars in 5th, 9th lord with a malefic (S. 125 - Satum in Virgo (S. 2536 - 2538 : BI)
128 : BI) Sun in Libra (S. 2539 : BI)
Birth in Sun’s Hora, Mars with Sun (5. 125 - Sun with Mercury (S. 1850 : BI)
128 : BI) Sun in Pisces Navamsa(S. 1845, 1859 - 185914
Taurus ascendant - Abala Nadiamsa (S.54, 55 -96, : BY)
Eighth Lord’s dasa (S. 181 - 183 : 81) Venus in Gemini (S. 1831 - 18324 : BI)
First dasa (1711 - 173 4 : BI) Venus with Mercury (S. 1836 - 18364 : BI)
Fourth dasa (S. 185 - 186 : BI) Venus with Moon (S. 1833 - 18354 : BI)
Ninth Rasi dasa (KCD) (S. 184 : BD)
Jupiter in Viswambhara Nadiamsa(S.111, = Taurus ascendant - Sivada Nadiamsa (S. 2584 -
Mars in Sth, dispositor in 8th (S. 178 - 1804: Dasa effects (ऽ. 2612 - 2618 : BI)
BI) Jupiter in debility (5. 2601 - 26024 : BI)
Moon in Kutila Nadiamsa (S. 163 - 16744: BI) Jupiter in transit (S. 26100 - 2611 : BI)
Rahu in ascendant, Jupiter in 10th (S. 112 - Mars in ascendant (2605 - 2608 : BI)

Deva Keralam 279
Uraga Nadiamsa - General (S. 368 - 369%: BI)
Venaktesa, the author (S.1 : BID)
Virgo ascendant - Dhanada Nadiamsa (S. 714 -
Jupiter’s transit (S. 728, 762 - 76214 : BI)
Mercury in Sura Nadiamsa (S. 724 - 72414, 734
Mercury in 2nd house (S. 742, 745 : BI)
Saturn and Mars (S. 718 - 7184, 730-7304: BI)
Saturn’s transit (S. 757 - 76114 : BI)
Second dasa (S. 733 - 733% : BI)
Sun in Libra (S. 743 - 744: BD
Sun in Virgo (S. 746 - 748 : BD)
Venus - Moonconjunction (S. 719 - 71914 : BY)
Venus in Virgo, Mercury in Cancer (S. 722 -

THE TIMES OF ASTROLOGY
Most Informative Enlightener on
Hindu Astrology
Edited by R. Santhanam (English translator/author of Deva Keralam (3 | ,
Brihat Parasara Hora (Part 1), Saravali (2 parts), Suka Nadi, Garga Hora, Nashta
Jatakam, Essentials of Predictive Hindu Astrology and Latitudes, Longitudes &
LMTs for 5000 places in India).
The monthly journal contains interesting editorials, articles from many research
scholars with a lot of materials to gain deeper and deeper insight into Hindu Vedic
Astrology. It is your best guide.
You can get your copy by sending subscriptions to the publishers.
Rates: Inland - Rs.110 (one year); Rs.220 (2 years).
Overseas (by airmail) : US$ 35 (one year); US$ 65 (2 years)
Each year, January issue will be special bulk number.
Send subscription (as per current rates)giving relevant details on a plain paper by
bank draft, money order or IMO to publishers:
R. Santhanam Associates,
9/1040 Govindpuri, Kalkaji PO,
New Delhi 110 019 (India)
Phone 6462777
