READABLE DATASET
================================================================================
Original file: chappanna_or_prasana_sastra_b_suryanarain_rao_1946.json
Dataset number: 81 of 455
Format: valid JSON
Structure: Object / structured dataset
Original size: 145,631 bytes
Top-level fields: 11
Title: Chappanna or Prasana Sastra - B Suryanarain Rao 1946
Creator: —
Date: —
Description: —

CONTENT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
METADATA AND OTHER FIELDS
  • title: Chappanna or Prasana Sastra - B Suryanarain Rao 1946
  • creator: —
  • date: —
  • description: —
  • subject: —
  • identifier: —
  • source_folder: Sarvartha Chintamani XML
  • total_pages: 91
  • total_words: 25731
  • text_quality:
    • ocr_word_validity_score: 0.933
    • quality_tier: good
    • note: —

FULL TEXT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
USEFUL BOOKS BM A SI ROLiOS-TY
s\
EMMF.NI AUTHORS,
1 Nadi Jyohsha or The Stellar system o* Astrology bv
Meena 9 Parts Rs 4/8 (Postage As 8 }
9 Prenatal Astrology— F C* Dutc A practical Exposition
of the principles of Astrological Biology Rs 0 2 4
(Postage As 6
° Perpetual Ephemendes — for calculation of the
positions of piarets Eclipses Horoscope, tor any
date past oresett or future Rs 4 # - (Postage
^ Predictive Astrology A masterpiece on Directional
asi-clog* Rs ? (Postage As b
o 1 he Indian Epnemnenes lor 19^6 A D bv M C uahm
VI S Rs 1 8 Postage As, 4l)
6 Conaensed Ephemenes— Contains planetary positions
from 1890 to 1940 A 0 D Rs 4 ('Postage As, 6 1,1
Perpetual Ephemenes of the planetary cycles by
L ''•aravana Rao M A. Contains planetar - positions
noa 1854 1926 Rs- 8 3 (Postage Re- )
^ Biibdt jrtaA b\ IN Cmdemba a lv<=* Rs 9 3 (Postaae
1 all jmouiit plus o^siace shouio oe err itted r
jdvdnc^ \o ' P
1*1 BLir ATIO> IMBnr.
ME 3 \fi ilHUE
tWftlK
P* O. B \S \\%a l dJl
kS IttlO J }

SRI
(Sfrappamta ur prastta ^aatra
(Horary Astrology)
ENGLISH TRANSLATION
BY
Prof. B SURYANARAIN RAO, b.a , M.R A.S., F.R.H.S.
Editor , The Astrological Magazine ; Author of the Never-To-Be
Forgotten Empire \ Hyder Ah or Sultan of Mysore ; The
Astrological Self -Instructor : Astrological Mirror; Astrological Primer : Karma and Chemistry ; An Introduction to the study of Astrology : Royal
Horoscopes ; Illustrative Horoscopes ; Female Horoscopy : English Translation
of Brihat Jafaka , J aiminisutras ,
J at aka Chandrika , Saiayo -
gamanjan, Jatakakalanidhi , gfc., e’fc., e£c.
SECOND EDITION
Thoroughly Revised by
B. N. Vijaya Deva, M.A., Barrister-at-Law
Publishers *
THE ASTROLOGICAL OFFICE
(B. S. CHANDRAN)
Publishers & Book Sellers
P. O. BASAVANGUDI (S. India)
AW Rights Reserved
Price Rs. 3/R \
or Sh. 6 or Dol*.,2 )
Postage Extra

CHAPPANNA OR PRASNA SASTRA
CONTENTS
Page
Publisher’s Note
A Note by the Editor
Preface to Chappanna ... ... i
Introduction ... ... ... 1
CHAPTER I.
Invocation ... ... ... 7
CHAPTER II.
On Victory and Defeat ... ... 34
CHAPTER III.
On Good and Bad ... ... ... 39
CHAPTER IV.'
On Return of a Traveller ... ... 44
CHAPTER V.
On Mixed Results ... ... ... 58
Conclusion ... ... ... 72
APPENDIX.
Final Conclusion .., ... ... 81

PUBLISHER’S NOTE
It gives me great pleasure in presenting herewith
the second revised edition of my father’s English
translation of Chappanna or Prasna Sastra. The
book was entrusted for revision and recasting in the
light of present day knowledge to Mr. B. N. Vijaya
Deva, M.A., Barristei-at-Law, Bangalore City,, who
was a close associate of my revered father for a long
time. He was kind enough to accept the task amidst
his multifarious work.
The book is out of print since a long time and
due to paper restrictions, it could not be brought out
earlier, though there was a demand for a second
edition. I was compelled to use buff paper as no
white printing paper was available.
I have to thank Mr, B. N. Vijaya Deva, for
revising the work. I trust, the reader will appreciate,
his interesting Notes. Any useful suggestions for
further improvement of this work will always be
thankfully received by me. *
“ SURYALAYA ”,
P.O. Basavangudi, -
THE ASTROLOGICAL OFFICE,
(B S. Chandran).

A NOTE BY THE EDITOR
When Mr, B. S. Chandran the son of the Translator, Prof. B. Suryanarayana Rao approached me to
revise the work. I expressed a doubt whether I should
undertake the task. I felt diffident for more than
one reason because I have not been a practitioner in
the art and though I have been studying the subject
for upwards of thirty years in general, I have not
devoted much time towards Prasna or Horary Astrology. However I yielded to the temptation and the
revision is before the] readers.
I have ventured to differ from the learned translator as can be seen from my Notes which appear
below the notes of the professor in brackets [ ] .
Where I have differed from the Professor I trust
that I have put forward what in my humble opinion,
was a better view advancing reasons and arguments in
support thereof. We have before' us two excellent
translations of the same work Chappanna or Shatpanchasika by N. Chidambara Iyer, B.A., and Pandita
Bhushan V. Subrahmanya Sastri, B.A., I must here
acknowledge my indebtedness to these two translations. My work of editing has been made easier
thanks to these writers. The publisher and myself
will always thankfully receive suggestions or corrections to make the work more useful to the readers.
B. N. VIJAVA DEVA.

PREFACE TO CHAPPANNA
A MONG the Astrological works, those relating to
Horary or jPrasna, have a special value and
a use which cannot be underrated, A person
engaged in any work, will naturally be anxious to know
how far he would be successful, what would be the
obstacles on the way to success, and whether the'
success will be qualified or unqualified and whether .
with all his care, attention and diligence, he would
ever be successful at all. If there are obstacles on the
way, how to find out their nature and extent, and the
ways and means, by which he would be able to remove
them and smoothen his way to future progress and
prosperity. Any hints or knowledge which throws
some light on these important subjects, cannot be said
to be useless. The great Maha Rishis of India, the
intellectual giants, who have made India, on the
intellectual and religious plane, the greatest country
in the world, devoted much of their attention and
divine vision or Divya Dristi into this branch of
Astrology and have left valuable and educative works
for the benefit of their future generations. Chappanna
or as the name signifies 56 Slokas, was a compilation
of the ancient works prevalent, at the time when its
author Prithuyasas, flourished, and as he is the son
of Varaha Mihira, he must have lived in the latter
part of the first century A.D. The necessity, for
a liberal translation with valuable notes and illustrations of any good book on Prasna by competent hands,
had been keenly felt during all these years and for
want of time, I had to put off undertaking such works
till now- I am glad I have translated a really useful
book on this branch of Astrology which was so urgently
needed by the public. There are three main divisions
or Skanda Thraya in Astrology, viz., (1) Astronomy or
the mathematical portions, (2) Astrology or the predictive portions and (3) Muhurtha and Prasna. I have
t

extensively dealt with the second division or Phalabhaga and now I have ushered my first book in Prasna
before the public. I mean to take up the mathematical
portion or Siddhantha Bhaga at an early date and
thus contribute my quota of valuable books for public
* benefit and instruction. How far I have been successful in these directions is a matter for the educated'
public to judge and somehow I feel in my innermost
heart, that the verdict of the future generations cannot
and will not be against me. One who does his duty
to the best of his capacity and diligence will certainly
be a valuable man and his services, though humble,
will have their own value and place in the future public
literature. I have made my best attempts to make
the translation of Chappanna easy, clear, intelligible
and explanatory and I trust my honest labours in this
line of Astrological publications will have their own
value. My works have been highly appreciated by the
intelligent public all over the world and in the future
my publications will stand or fall by their own intrinsic
value. There are not so many works on Prasna as
there are on Phalabhaga and I may name a few here
for the information of my numerours readers. Kerala
Prasna, Jinendra Mala and Pancha Pakshi are valuable
in their own way, and these differ radically from the
principles laid down in Chappanna by Prithuyasas.
If time permits me from my heavy literary engagements, I may translate the most valuable among them
for the public benefit.
“ SURYALAYA,”
Y
Hunsamaranahalli,
Yelahankciy India , *
B. SURYANARAIN RAO.

II S R I II
Chappanna or Prasna Sastra
(HORARY ASTROLOGY)
ENGLISH TRANSLATION
BY
B. SURYANARAIN RAO.
INTRODUCTION
P RASNA or putting questions to Astrologers with
a view to know how a certain event would be
successful or not, forms a prominent part of
Astrology and will be a valuable branch of knowledge
by which many future events may, beforehand, be told
and in what manner they have occurred, and who have
been the principal actors whether in good or bad
deeds and how they would terminate. A thing is
stolen and it would be very interesting and profitable
to know, when, how and by whom the theft has been
committed, and what are the chances for recovery of
the article stolen and in what directions the search has
to be made and what will be the nature of person or
persons, who were concerned in its commission.
Whether a man would be successful if he went in for
certain lands, houses, service or speculations, and in
what directions and how they should be worked to
obtain success. A person may be anxious to know
whether and when he will get a son or a daughter,
whether he finds hidden treasures or not, whether
water can be had by digging a well and so forth.
In fact every event in human life, whether good or
bad, can be ascertained by this branch of Astrological

CHAPPANNA
knowledge and hence its importance in the economy
of human existence and the countless transactions they
are engaged in. On the importance of maintaining
Astrological experts in every Government, Varaha
Mihira, thus observes in his Brihat Samhita. “ The
determination of fortunes of men and Princes
( including Governments of all forms and constitutions)
generally depends upon matters explained in the previous paras. “ He gives a long list of qualifications and
characteristics of the true Jyotishkas and how they
should be devoted, religious, learned, well-formed in
body and mind, moral and God-fearing.” The fortunes
and misfortunes "of men and Governments keep continually changing from day to day. It therefore behoves
a ruler or a leader to employ Astrologers solely upon
this work. As it is impossible for a single Jyotishi to
observe and determine all the Natural Phenomena,
occurring day and night, the work must be entrusted to
four competent and honest Astrologers, they should be
well paid and kept above want, so that they may not
be bothered by domestic cares and anxieties. There
'are eight cardinal directions, and each should be given
two sides, so that he may constantly watch them and
note the particular Phenomena which may happen
from time to time. The fall of meteors, comets and
the like are often sudden and unexpected, and they
'should be carefully watched /to escape notice. Maha
Rishi Gargi thus observes in his Samhita on the importance of Astrologers, “ That Prince or Government
will meet with grief, rui,n and destruction, who does
not maintain a Jyotishka, well read in all the divisions
and sub-divisions of Astrology, Astronomy and
Samhita. Even Yogees who have renounced the
■worldly concerns and live in the forests desire to
question a learned Jyotishka, regarding their futurd.
The service which a single Astrologer can render to a
Prince cannot be done by thousands of men, horses or
elephants.” Therefore to know the future and adjust
our movements to the best advantages- possible, by
averting dvils attd augmenting good, ,we must, have

CHAPPANNA
Astrologers who are well skilled in the Skanda
Thraya or the three main divisions of Astrology. I shall
refer my readers to my able Introduction to the Astrological Self-Instructor, 10th Ed., for more elaborate
information on these important points. The Author
of Chappana is Prithuyasas {world fame), the illustrious son of Varaha Mihira, and this work has been
commented upon by the learned Brahmin Utphala,
one of the finest commentators we have on Astrology.
As the name Chappana implies, the whole area of
Prasna — horary — has been covered by 56 Stanzas, a
task not easy for an ordinary writer, and a task that
could be accomplished only by a cultured and
comprehensive intellect like that Prithuyasas. The
son and father are noted -for their compressiveness
and suggestiveness. Very few writers in Astrology
have surpassed them in these characteristics, excepting the Maha Rishis whose Sutras stand unrivalled
and unapproachable in comprehensiveness. Prithuyasas invokes his Deities in the first Stanza as
his father has done. The value of the work is
unquestionable and my labours in this field have been
before the public for nearly half a century and I make
no apology for ushering another useful and instructive
translation which has been so badly wanted in this
department of Astrology. The original and the Sanskrit
commentaries have been before the world for many
centuries, but their purport, with useful and intelligent
notes and illustrations, have not been before the
educated public in the English garb. I think I have
tried my best to supply this long felt want, and how
far I have succeeded in my attempts will be a matter
for mj' readers to judge. English translations of
Sanskrit works are difficult jobs for any brains and
much more so when the translator has some deep
knowledge of both the languages. The audacity of
some of the Europeans, who pretend translate Vedic
literature into* English seems to me simply unrivalled,
and I really admire their ignorance, while I sincerely
pity their translations.

CHAPPANNA .
OR
PRASNA SASTRA
(HORARY ASTROLOGY) •
INVOCATION
CHAPTER I.
Stanza 1.
The famous son of Varaha Mihira, Prithuyasas,
invokes the help of the Sun, bowing his humble head
before the Glorious orb and composes this work on
Prasna, containing deep meaning, for the benefit of
humanity.
Notes
His boast is amply justified when he says that his
work is very significant, and has been written for the
benefit and enlightenment of mankind. His invocation is short and sweet. Pie bows his humble head
before the Glorious Sun. This is very significant and
comprehensive as the Sun represents the whole energies of the Infinite Wisdom.
Removal, Increase and Travel.
Stanza 2.
From the rising Lagna, the removal from a place,
increase from the 4th house, travelling from the 10th
and return from travel from the 7th house, and the
time of return, etc., from the 4th house should be
predicted.
Notes
Sanskrit language is capable of -expressing in
great brevity, large ideas and the same, therefore

CHAPPANNA
cannot be rendered into English with that facility for
want of suitable expressions. Mangala Sloka or
Invocation stanza has been given and I shall also give
the purport of Bhattotpalas invocation in short. “ I
the learned Brahmin Utpala invoking the blessings on
my humble head, of Brahma, Ravi, Chandra, Kuja,
Buda, Guru, Sukra and Sani, Vighnasa, my own
Guru, and Devi Saraswati, with commentaries, for the
benefit and joy of the learned public, in the world, on
Chappana composed by the renowned son of Varaha
Mihira called Pruthuyasas.”
Notes
Bhatotpalas’ commentaries on this work are
called Jagad Chandrika or Moonlight to the world.
When a question is put to an astrologer by a person,
the astrologer finds out the rising sign, ’and it is called
Prasna Lagna as the birth sign is called the Janma
Lagna. Sarwartha Chintamani, Ch. I, Stanza 5,
observes — “ All those results which may be predicted
by consulting the birth time (horoscopes) may also be
t predicted by consulting the question time. There is
' no difference in consultations based on birth or question times and they give the same certain results.” I
observe thus in my notes there — “ consultations for
horoscopes are based upon the birth time, while those
for Prasna are based upon question time. In both
cases time is the most important element. The superstructure is built upon it. In the one the birth of the
child is taken, while in the other the birth time of the
question, hence the subject is taken. It, therefore,
stands to reason that both are equally important and
that the science of astrology deals with both alike and
makes predictions past, present and future with the
same definiteness of knowledge.” The' significations
of signs, horas, Drakkanas, Navamsas and other subdivisions have been given in other works and the author
of Chappana rightly expects a fair knowledge of the
preliminaries in his readers. All these cannot be
given in short notes. From the Prasna Lagna and

CHAPPANNA
the combinations and aspects of planets there, the
removal from a place has to be predicted. From
the fourth house, increase in lands, estates, education,
mother, conveyances, houses, tanks, etc., has to be
guessed, from the '7th house return of a person from
his travels and from the 10th house travelling have to
be predicted. The author has given only Kendras.
When the rising house is occupied by its own lord or
benefics or has their aspects, there will be no disturbance from the place. If the evil planets occupy or
aspect the rising sign, he will be disturbed from his
place. When the 4th house is occupied by its lord or
by benefics, or is aspected by them, there will be
increase in lands, estates, prosperity to mother and so
forth. But evil planets reverse these results and
destroy the events indicated by that Bhava. Good
planets or the lord of the 7th in it or their aspects to
the 7th will determine the safe return of the traveller,
and evil planets, give the opposite results. Good
planets m the 10th or its lord or their aspects to the 10th,
will give him safe travelling and evil planets give
danger and death. By consulting the benefics in the
4th the safe return of the person may be predicted.
Evil planets show the negative result. The measure
of the time of his return may be guessed by the time
of the entry of a benefic into the 4th house or the
travellers return may be predicted after the same
number of days at which the benefic would enter the
4th house. Guru and Kuja, Guru and Sukra or Guru
and Buda, are respectively in it. Will the results be
the same in all these cases. Chara Rasis produce
quicker results, double-bodied, more modrate, and fixed
signs slow results as their names imply. One general
principle may be remembered, viz., the lord of the
house and the benefics give good while malefics and
their aspects produce evil. Suppose the lord of Lagna
is an evil planet. Does he give good or evil ? When
the lord of a house aspects or conjoins it he will do
good. But the good he does will differ from that
which will be done by benefics. What are good and

CHAPPANNA
bad may be easily determined by our common sense
and daily experience.
The English Versions by the learned Professor
of the original Sanskrit slokas and the notes have been
left intact. My own remarks are to be found in
brackets [ ] . [In this sloka I would, slightly alter the
last sentence as “the time of return of the traveller by
the entry of a planet into the 4th house.” This rendering is in accordance with the text “Griham Privishto
Hibuke Pravasi”. True enough the idea has been
brought out by the Professor in his notes. It is interesting to observe that Manthreswara, the renowned author of Phala Deepika in Chap. 20, SI. 63, states.
“In the case of a nativity (Jataka) one ought to
consider the effects (results) after reference to Saravali
(by Kalvana Varma) Varaha Mihira’s Hora Sastra
(Brihat Jataka and Laghu Jataka) and the Nakshatra
Dasa (as enunciated by Parasara). While so considering one must refer to the position (and strength) of
the planets at the time of query (Prasna) or of birth
and then attempt his predictions. There will not he
any material d 'ijferenee between the Prasna Lagna and
the Janma Lagna .”]
Stanza 3.
General Principles
All such Bhavas as are occupied by their lords or
benefics or have their aspects, will prosper, while those
which have reverse influences will suffer. This holds
good both in horoscopy and also in Prasna.
Notes
This is a grand principle of Astrology, which has
an unfailing application in all cases. Whether in
consulting horoscopes or dealing with Prasna or
questions whichever Bhava is occupied by its lord or
benefics, will prosper while any Bhava, which
has malefic conjunctions and aspects will suffer.
The principle enunciated is that any Bhava will

CHAPPANNA
prosper under its lord and beneficial conjunctions or
aspects and will suffer when there are evil combinations
or aspects. We shall take an example. Take Mesha
as the rising Lagna and find the 6th Kanya occupied
by Guru and Sukra. These are benefics and on the
principle explained above, there should be an increase
in the events indicated by the Bhava, viz., debts,
diseases and enemies. If Buda is there, the same
should be predicted. But suppose Sani or Kuja
occupies, these events will be destroyed. Now the
increase in debts, diseases and enemies will be a positive and serious evil while their destruction will be
positive relief, gain and source of peace and happiness.
[The point is that the significations of a house
(Bhava) are increased if either the lord of the
house occupies or aspects it or a benefic planet occupies or aspects it. If, on the other hand, a malefic
planet occupies or aspects the house the significations
of the house suffer or are destroyed. There are
exceptions to this rule. Both in Brihat Jataka, ch. _ 1,
si. 19 and Laghu Jataka, ch. 1 si. 14, Varaha Mihira
expresses himself thus : — “The Rasi or sign becomes
strong if it is occupied or aspected by its lord or by
Jupiter or Mercury.” He does not take into account
either Venus or (waxing) Moon. Compare what his
son says in the Sloka under the consideration. Varaha
touches the point again in Brihat Jataka, ch. 20, si. 10
when he says “ Satyacharya says
that benefic planets posited in any bhava increase
(advance or augment) the significations of the bhava,
while malefic planets in a bhava bring about the ruin
or decay of their significations. The reverse is the
case with respect to 6th, 8th and 12th bhavas.” At
first sight it appears that Varaha approves what
Satyacharya says. This seem to be the opinion of
several writers. But Laghu Tataka, the other work of
Varaha Mihira throws light on this matter. He says
in that work, ch. 10. “Pushnanti subha bhava
murthyadin ghnanthi samsthitha papah. Soumyah
shaste arignah, sarve neshta vyayashtamagha.’'

CHAPPANNA
This sloka may be rendered thus: — “If benefic
occupy bhavas they augment, increase or promote
their significations whereas malefics occupying the
bhavas destroy the significations connoted by them.
Benefics in 6th bhava destroy enemies. No planets
(either benefic or malefic) are desirable in 8th or
12th houses.” It is important to observe that
Varaha Mihira in his Brihat Jataka in Chap. 20 is
consistent throughout and follows the above principle
of benefics in'6th house. Manthreswara in Phala
Deepika (Chap. 8) follows the principle of Varaha.
Saravali differs from Varaha and states that benefics
increase or give enemies (Chap. 30). As regards 8th
and 12th houses, Varaha seems to make an exception
in the case of Mercury which if in 8th makes the
person widely known for his good qualities and in the
case of Venus in 12th “ makes the person rich ”.
According to Saravali and Phala Deepika the effects
of all planets in 8th and 12th are generally bad.
Mercury or Jupiter or Venus in 8th house, according
to these works, make a person longlived and Venus in
the 12th makes the person enjoy happiness.]
Stanza 4
Success and Failure
If the rising sign is beneficial and joins beneficial
Shadvergas, or if the rising sign be Sirshodaya , the
object of question will be successful. If the reverse,
there will be failure. If mixed, the success will be
gained by great exertions and difficulties.
Notes
Beneficial sign must rise at the time of question and
it must occupy beneficial Shadvergas. Shadvergas are
1 Lagna, 2 Hora, 3 Drekkana, 4 Navamsa, 5 Dwadasamsa, and 6 Thrimsamsa. Here he refers only to the
rising sign and its beneficial sub-divisions and does not
•refer to planetary occupations there- Sirshodayas are
signs which are rising with their head and they are
Simha, Kanya, Thula, Kumbha. Vrischika and
Mithuna. With the exceDtion of Mithuna these are

CHAPPA'NNA
also called Dinabalas or powerful during the day.
(See P. 19, Br. Ja.). Kanya, Thula and Mithuna are
beneficial Rasis and the first portion of the Stanza
includes them. Simha, Vrischika and Kumbha are evilsigns, but they have been included in the rising signs,
which indicate success. The best of the signs, viz.,
Dhanas and Meena and Vrishabha, have fallen under
beneficial signs and indicate success. The only signs
not included in his list are Makara, Kanaka, ( doubtful
as it becomes beneficial or malefic as the moon its lord
is full or new) and Mesha. If a beneficial sign rises
and malefic joins it or it gets some beneficial and some
malefic Vergas, the object of the questions will succeed
with great difficulty and exertion. If it is completely
evil, there will be a thorough failure. As the author
goes on giving special peculiarities, he presumes in the
reader a complete remembrance of the past Stanzas r
and it should be borne well in mind that the general
principles should always be reconciled and not treated
as so many contradictions.
[This is an important Sloka and requires further
elucidation. Whether the querent (the person who
puts the question) succeeds in his object, whether he
fails in his object and whether he succeeds after hard
attempts are answered by this Sloka. With due
respect to the Professor I must point out that his
rendering of text “ Soumye vilagne yadi vasya varge”
is not happy. It seems to me that it is better put as
“ if the lagna (prasna) be occupied by benefic planets
or if the lagna occupies benefic vargas ”. Sirshodaya
signs — are signs which rise by their head or face. They
are Simha, Kanya, Thula, Vrischika and Kumbha.
Planets in these signs give results. in the beginning or
at the very outset.
Among the benefic planets Jupiter and Venus are
always considered benefics. Budha is a neutral
planet, if associated with a benefic planet he becomes
a benefic, if associated with a malefic planet he
becomes a malefic. Budha alone must be considered

CHAPPANNA
a benefic Moon becomes a benefic when she is waxing
(from the 5th day of New Moon till 5 days after Full
Moon). If becomes a malefic planet when she is
waning (5 days after Full Moon to 5 days after New
Moon).
Let us say the Prasna Lagna is Mesha 20° and
find out the Shadvargas of the Lagna. Lagna is in
the Rasi of Mesha ruled by Mars a malefic, in the
Hora of Moon (which may be benefic or malefic as
sated above) in the Drekkanna of Dhanus, ruled by
Jupiter a benefic, in the Navamsa of Thula ruled by
Venus a benefic, in the Dwada&am&a of Dhanus ruled
by Jupiter a benefic, in the Thrimsamsa of Mithuna
ruled by Mercury which may become a benefic or
malefic according to its association. We say therefore
that the Lagna has beneficial Vargas because out of
the six Vargas the majority of the Vargas are the
Vargas of benefics. According to the Sloka therefore
\the Prasna Lagna indicates that the querent will gain
his object.
Let us suppose that Jupiter or Venus waxing
Moon or Mercury alone is posited in the Lagna.
Apart from and irrespective of the lagna being in
benefic Shadvargas we must answer similarly by
saying that the object of the querent will be gained.
Suppose the Prasna Lagna falls in any of Sirshodaya
Signs, (Simha, Kanya, Thula, Vrischika or Kumbha),
we must pronounce success for the object of the
querent.
There will be failure of the object of the querent
if the Lagna is not occupied by a benefic or if the
Lagna does not occupy benefic Shadvargas or if the
Lagna is not a Shirshodaya sign.
We are told that the object of the querent will
succeed after hard attempts if the yoga e is of mixed
character that is (1) if the rising sign be occupied by
both benefic and malefic planets, (2) or if the rising
varga be at the same time that of a benefic and male-

CHAPPANNA
fic planet, (3) or if a malefic planet occupy the Prasna
Lagna when it is a Sirodaya sign, (4) or if malefic vargas
of a Sirodaya sign rise at the time of query, (5) or if a
benefic planet occupy the Prasna Lagna when it is a
Pristodaya sign (Mesha, Vrishabha, Mithuna, Kataka,
Dhanus, Makara), (6) or if benefic vargas of a Prishto-
.daya sign rise at the time of query, (7) or if the
Prasna Lagna be the sign of Meena, (Ubhayoda
sign.) ]
Stanza 5.
Dhatu, Moola and Jeeva
Reference to Dhatu, Moola, and Jeeva must be
ascertained by the Navamsa, in the odd signs respectively and they should be predicted in the reverse
order by the Navamsas in the even signs. I have
given very briefly the ideas for fear of undue expansion.
Notes.
Take the Navamsa of the rising sign at the time
of question and proceed regularly to decide whether
it relates to Dhatu, minerals, Moola, vegetables and
Jeeva, animals. There must first be a rough idea
about the subject about which the person has put the
question and this is determined in the odd signs, by
the rising Navamsas, Thus — if the first Navamsa rises,
the question refers to minerals, if the Navamsa is the
second, it refers to vegetables if third it refers to
animals and so on.
[This sloka enables us to determine the nature of
object of query -(Prasna). Whether the object belongs
to the mineral, vegetable or animal kingdom is to be
determined by the astrologer. Dhatu means mineral,
Moola means vegetable matter, Jeeva means animal
being. I suggest that the translation of the sloka
should run thus. — “ The Navamsas of the odd signs
represent respectively Dhatu, Moola and Jeeva over
and Over again. The Navamsas of the even signs
.respectively represent these objects in the inverse

CHAPPANNA
order. The object denoted by the query (Prasna) 1
will be that represented by the rising Navamsa. The
above is a brief rule. The same objects divide into
various sub-divisions ”.
The odd signs are Mesha, Mithuna, Simha,
Thula, Dhanus and Kumbha.
The even signs are Vrishabha, Kataka, Kanya,
Vrischika, Makara and Meena.
The 1st Navamsa in an odd sign represents
Dhatu or minerals.
The 2nd Navamsa in an odd sign represents
Moola or vegetable matter.
The 3rd Navamsa in an odd sign represents
Jeeva or an animal.
The 4th Navamsa in an odd sign represents
Dhatu.
The 5th Navamsa in an odd sign represents
Moola.
The 6th Navamsa in an odd sign represents
Jeeva and so on.
The 1st Navamsa in an even sign represents a
Jeeva or animal.
The 2nd Navamsa in an even sign represents a
Moola or vegetable matter.
The 3rd Navamsa in an even sign represents a
Dhatu or mineral.
The 4th Navamsa in an even sign represents a
Jeeva or animal.
The 5th Navamsa in an even sign represents
Moola.
The 6th Navamsa in an even sign represents.
Dhatu and so on.
Questions relating to lands, houses, stones or
metals refer to Dhatu or minerals. *
Questions relating to trees, crops, timber, etc,,,
-refer to Moola or objects of Vegetable Kingdom.

CHAPPANNA
Questions relating to biped, quadruped or centiped
class namely inen, animals or worms refer to Jeeva or
animals.J
Stanza 6.
Minerals, Animals and Vegetables
If a planet occupying its own Navamsa, aspects
any planet m the rising t Lagna, or its ThriKoia-., or
any other planet which joins its 'own Navaivwi, the
question refers to Dhatu. If a pi met in any other
Navamsa, aspects a planet in the rising sign or its
Thrikonas, or any planet which occupies its own
Navamsa, the query indicates Jeeva. If a pi met in
other Navam-i.i, aspects planets in the rising sign or
its Thrikonas, who are also in other Navamsas, the
question refers to Moolas.
No IKS
The brevity and suggest! veness of Sanskrit verses
cannot easily be rendered into English in such a comprehensive style and for a stanza of 16 easy words in
Sanskrit, 1 have given 86 words in English, and even
then long nptes are wanted to make the meaning clear
to my readers. From the English, ideas can eu-my be
put into concise Sanskrit, but the reverse is extremely
difficult. If a planet joining its own Navamsa, aspects
any planet,* in the rising sign or its 5th or 9th or any
other planet, who also has joined his Navamsa, the
query refers to Dhatu. The nature of the query can
also be ascertained by the planet occupying the
rising sign or its Thrikonas. S >me give a d. .Threat
interpretation thus. If a planet in its own Vnsa,
occupies the rising sign or its Thrikonas
and aspects any planet, who joins his own Navamsa,
the query refers to Dhatus. If a planet in other than
its own N vvamsa aspects the planet in the rising -,ign
or its 5th or 9th or any planet, who has joined m ; own
Navamsa, ll\e question refers to Jeeva. If them are
no planets in the rising sign or its Thrikonas, then if
he (the planet in other Navamsa) aspects the Lagna

CHAPPANNA
or Thrikonas, when they occupy their own Navamsas,
the query refers to Jeeva. This can qlso be ascertained
by the planetary natures, already explained by me
above. The nature of the animals, has to be guessed
by the Navamsa, occupied by the planet, such as men,
beasts, serpents, etc. Thula, Kanya, Kumbha and the
first halt of Divan as, for bipel R isis. Men, devalas,
birds, etc., should be ascertained from these Rasis.
Vnshabha, Simha, Meshaand the second halt of Dhanas
form quadrupeds and they have to be ascertained by
these signs. Kutaka, Vrischika and Meena, form
legless animals, and serpents and those which crawl
on the ground have to be ascertained by the above
Rasis. When a planet in other Navamsa, aspects, the
planets in the rising sign or its Thrikonas, when such
planets or those signs occupy other than their own
Navamsas, the Prasna refers to Moolas ; when such
Rasis happen to be Kataka, Makara, Meena and
Vrischika, the nature of the trees or plants will partake
of wet growth. In other Rasis they belong to open
soils.
[I suggest that the sloka should be rendered thus.
“ If a planet occupying its own Navamsa aspects the
Lagna occupying its own Navamsa or aspects the 5th
or 9th house the object of the query refers to Dhatu
(Mineral Kingdom). If a planet occupying any
Navamsa (except its own) aspects Lagna occupying
its own Navamsa or aspects the 5th or 9th house the
query refers to Jeeva (animal kingdom). If a planet
in any Navamsa (except its own) or the 5th
house or 9th house the query refers to Moola (Vegetable Kingdom)”. The reader is reminded of the
fact that a planet in its own Navamsa is strong and
that Lagna in its own Navamsa is Virgottama hence
strong. In the first case a strong planet aspects
Virgottama Lagna which is strong. In the second
case a planet is made to aspect Virgottama Lagna.
In the third case neither the Lagna nor the aspecting
planet are strong.]

CHAPPAtfNA*" U ' 19
A i
Stanza 7. . * nM
Recovery of Lost Property
When Full Moon occupies the rising sign aspected
by Guru or Sukra, there will be speedy recovery of
the lost property. Recovery may also be predicted by
the 11th house being occupied by a powerful bene fie.
Notes
Moon is full from the 10th day of the bright half
of the Lunar month lo the 5th of the dark half of the
Lunar month. Benches are Guru, Sukia, well asso-.
ciated Buda and Poorna Chandra or Full Moon. If
any of these with all the sources of strength mentioned
in the astrological works, occupies the 11th house from
the rising sign then the property lost will be recovered
early according to their respective powers. Suppose
Guru joins the 11th with all the powers, but there is
also Sani in it. Then, there will be not only some
delay, but the whole property may not be recovered*
The principles of Astrology must be well understood,
carefully analysed, and intelligently applied. In the
balancing of the sources of strength and weakness of
the planets, signs constellations and their numerous
sub-divisions, consists the skill of the astrologer, and
where he does his work honestly and to the best of his
ability, he will be surely successful and will bring credit
to the science and also fame and name to himself.
[This sloka closes the first Chapter of Chappanna
or Shatpanchasika in other editions. Prithuyasas has
been discussing the general principles applying to
Prasna or Horary Astrology. In this sloka we are given
two cases when we can predict the immediate recovery
of stolen property. The Prasna Lagna must be occupied, in my opinion, by waxing Moon (not necessarily
Full Moon) and at the same time aspected by either
Jupiter or Venus. Then we may predict the immediate
recovery of the stolen property. Similarly we may predict
if 11th house is occupied by a powerful benefic planet.

CHAPPANNA
To assess correctly a planet’s strength or power we
must find its Sthana, Dik, Chesta, Kola, Naisargika
and Drik balas the Shatbalas or six sources of strength.
This is certainly a tedious process. But for all
practical purposes, if we want to be satisfied with
finding out the approximate strength of planets the
following principles will help us. “ A planet is strong
if it occupies (a) the sign of its friend. ( b ) its own sign,
(c) its exalted sign (.< d) its own Navamsa or if it is
aspected by a benefic planet. Planets other than
Moon and Venus get strength if in male rasis or signs.”
Moon and Venus get strength if they are m female
rasis. “A planet gets strength if it is (l) in the sign
of its friend, (2) m its exaltation sign, (3) in its own
hora, (4) in its own sign, (5) in its Moolathrikona
sign, (6) in its own Drekkana, (7) in its own Navamsa
(Varaha Mihira’s Laghu Jataka, Chapter II).
Life, Death, Travel, Return and Shanti.
Stanza 8.
On Travel
If the rising sign at the time of query is fixed, it
should be predicted that the traveller has not left the
place, he went in, has not died, has not suffered from
diseases, has not suffered loss and has not suffered
defeat from his enemies. If the rising sign falls in
moveable houses, the person will have suffered from
disease, loss, death, emigration from the place and
defeat from his enemies. If the rising sign happens
to be double-bodied, mixed results must be predicted
for the man.
If the rising sign and Chandra are occupied or
aspected by benefics, good results must be predicted.
If both of them are combined or aspected by
malefics, the results will be unfavourable, if they
have mixed combinations and aspects, the results
will be mixed.

CHAPPANNA
Notes
The stanza is easily rendered and does not require
much explanation. Here in the first halt, the author
takes only the strength of the zodiacal signs and not
that of the planets. In the latter half, he takes the
strength of the planets, and adds Chandra Lagna also.
Fixed signs are Vrishabha, Simha, Vnschika and
Kumbha. Movable signs are Mesha, Kataka, Thula
and Makara. Dwiswabhava or double-bodied signs
are Mithuna, Kanya, Dhanas and Meena. Fixed signs
produce success, health and residence in the place to
which the person has gone. Movable signs indicate
misfortunes and double-bodied signs pioduce mixed
results or some good and some bad results. Refeience
here is made to sign influences, and they cannot be
ignored. I will refer to them again in the next verse.
The author now takes the re iders to Lagna and
Chandra as ascertained for the time being at the
question time. If Chandra Lagna or Lagna is well
aspected or combined, partial good must be predicted ;
if both of them are well combined and well aspected
excellent results must be suggested. Here so many
combinations and permutations arise that it is not
possible to give them all. Even in t h ese beneficial
aspects and combinations, the sources ol strength and
weakness must be well examined before results can be
safely predicted. Say Kataka is occupied bv Chandra
and Guru is there; but both of them have the aspect
of Sam who is in Vrishabha. Chandra is in Vrischika
and Guru joins him there and has the aspect of Budha
and Sukra, Makara has Chandra and Guru combined
there. I can multiply instances. In all these cases,
the results vary and unqualified success should not be
predicted sirnoly because a benefic is there or asuectsit.
{This sloka enunciates a general principle of
Horary Astrolpgy. If any of the Sthira Rasis (Fixed
signs) rise at the time of query then we h ive to
predict that no change in the existing state of affairs
takes place. In other words status Quo Ante is

CHAPPANNA
preserved. The author illustrates the application of
the pi mciple thus : — If the query is about change of
piesent position the answer is that the present on
existing position will not be changed if any of the
fixed signs Vrishabha, Simha, Vrischika or Kumbha
rises at the time of query. If the query* refers to
shifting or moving out or travelling we are asked to
say th it no shifting, moving or travel takes place. It
the query refers to a person being alive or dead we
shall nave to say that the person is not dead. If we
are asked whether a thing or article is lost (or stolen),
we have to answer that the thing or article is not lost
(or stolen). If the query refers to a person who is ill
we have to predict that the illness will not be cured.
If the question is whether the person engaged in
a fight, battle, litigation or encounter will suffer defeat,
if the Lugnn at the time of query is a fixed sign Sthira
R t'i the answer is that the person will not suffer
defeat.
The author next considers the case of Chara
Rasis (cardinal or moveable signs Mesha, Katnka,
Thula or Mtkna) or Dwiswabhava Rasis (Dual signs
Mitrmni, Kinya, Daanus or Meena) rising at the
time of queiy.
If Chara Rasis rise then we have to declare the
opposite of what was stated in the case of Sthira
Rasis. That is to say we have to predict that there
will be a shift or change of position, or travel, that
the poison quesiled is dead, that the article is lost or
stolen, that there will be recovery from the illness,
that the person engaged in the litigation, fight, battle
or encounter will suffer defeat.
If the rising sign is a Dwiswabhava (Dual) one
mixed results will accrue. The commentator Bhattotpala has cleverly interpreted “mixed results” as
follows : — »
If the first half of a dual sign rise at the time of
query the prediction shall be the same as for a fixed

CHAPPANNA
sign. If the latter half of the dual sign rise the prediction shall be the same for a moveable sign.
Lastly we are told that success for the query is to
be predicted if the Lagna or Moon is aspected by
a benefic and that failure is indicated if the Lagna or
Moon are aspected by a malefic planet.]
Stanza 9.
Advent of Enemies.
If a query refers to the advent of the enemies,
they will go back when the 5th and 6th houses from
the rising sign are occupied by the evil planets,
and when the 4th house from the rising sign is occupied
by malefics, the enemies after close approach go away
disappointed or disorganised.
Notes.
This stanza refers to the coming of the enemies,
and hence it must be mostly political and militaiy. But
suppose there is a rich landlord, on inimical terms
with his neighbour, a powerful landlord, then he may
head a depredation and come to ruin or destroy his
estates. Their coming or leturn will have to be determined by the 4th, 5th and 6th houses, when they are
combined with malefics. The strength of the malefics
determines the extent of their advance, disorganisation
and shameful retreat.
[ I would slightly interfere with the translation.
The Professor has stated that the 5th and 6th houses
must be occupied by malefics. “ If a malefic or malefics
occupy 5th or 6th houses” would be in consonance
with general principles. It is not necessary, I think,
that malefics.should occupy both 5th and 6th houses.
The result indicated will be brought about, in my
opinion, if either the 5th house or 6th house is
occupied by a malefic.]

CHAPPANNA
Stanza 10.
Enemies Degradation.
If Meena, Vrischika, Kumbha and Kataka, fall in
the 4th house from the rising sign, the invading enemy
will retreat in degradation.
Notes.
When a query is made about the invading enemies,
if Meena, Vrischika, Kumbha or Kataka, happens to
fall in the 4th house from the rising sign, then the
invading enemies will suffer defeat, get disorganised
and run away. Mesha, Simha, Vrishaba or Dhanas
becomes the rising sign, the above named signs in the
verse will fall in the 4th Bhava. All these are quadruped signs excepting Dhanas, the first half being
biped and the other half being quadruped.
[ I Relieve that two separate facts or ideas are
brougnt out in the sloka namely the enemy being
vanquished in the battle field and secondly after being
vanquished running away from the battle field. In
the first case the remnants of the enemy are still ~ on
the battle field either to be captured or annihilated.
In the second case the enemy chooses to flee and
leave the battle field. Hence the rendering of the
Sloka would be : — “ If the 4th house from the rising
sign be Meena, Vrischika Kumbha or Kataka the
enemy suffers defeat. If such 4th house be a quadruped Rtsi the enemy runs away.” Quadruped signs are
Mesna, Vrishabha, Simha, the latter half of Dhanus
and the first half of Makara. The above rendering of
the Sloka is in accordance with the view of the commentator Bhattotpala.]
[ After Sloka 10 the Professor seems to have
missed a sloka which is to be found in other editions
of Shi toon chasika. H are it is “ Charodaye Subhah
Sthithah Subham Karothi Yayinam ! Asobhanii
Asobhanam Sthirodayepi va Subham.”

CHAPPANNA
“If the Lagna or Ascendant at the time of the
query be a cardinal (chara) sign and a benefic planet
occupies it success is assured to the person who has
set out on a journey or travel. If the lagna is occupied by a malefic planet the effect will be inauspicious,.
If the Lagna be a fixed (Sthira) sign and is occupied by a malefic planet the effect will still be auspicious ” Ot.vjr editions of this work have noticed
another reading “Sthire Ashtame apt va Subham ”
which may be translated thus : — “ If a fixed sign is
on the cusp of 8th house and be occupied b)- a malefic
planet the result is auspicious.” ]
Stanza 11.
Defeat of the Local Party.
If the rising sign is Chara and Chandra occupies
a fixed Lagna, then the enemies do not come. If the
Lagna is fixed md Chan Ira occupies a moveable sign,
the, enemies come in strength and inflict defeat on the
party.
Notes.
These stanzas refer to political conditions and are
highly important for rulers and leaders of armies.
When the rising sign is movable and Chandra joins
a fixed sign, then the enemies do not come. But when
Chandra is in a moveable sign and’ Lagna falls in a
fixed Rasi, then the enemies come in force and inflict
a he ivy defeat on the local party. Here also other
com ini itions and aspects must be taken into consideration. Supply beciuse Lagna falls in Chara Rasi and
Chandra joins Sthira, the astrologer should not run
avviy with the answer at once. He must take all
other combi nitions mentioned in the astrological
works and then judge carefully.
[ The sjoka is clear enough and answers a simple
query “ Whether the enemy will come to fight or not”?
I would translate the sloka as follows : — “ If the Lagna
(Ascendant) at the time of query is a chara (cardinal)

CHAPPANNA
sign and Moon occupies a Sthira (Fixed) sign the
enemy will not come to fight. If (on the other hand)
the Lagna occupies a fixed sign and Moon occupies
a cardinal sign the enemy turns up to flight.” I think
there is no scope in the sloka for the idea given out by
the Professor for saying that the enemy comes in
strength and inflict defeat on the party” ]
Stanza 12 .
Return of the Enemy.
When the rising sign falls in a fixed Rasi and
Chandra falls in a double-bodied sign, the enemy will
return back though he may have advanced a great
distance in the direction of invasion.
Notes
The enemy may have come a great distance to
invade the territory, but if Lagna falls in Sthira and
Chandra joins Dwideha, he will be compelled to
return back to his country for various reasons.
[ The idea conveyed in the sloka seems to be simple
under the conditions given out in the sloka the enemy
even after coming a long way to evince fight will turn
back and will not encounter the opponent.
I will suggest that Dwideha be put as “ doublebodied ” (sign) namely Mithuna, Kanya, Dhanus,
Meena.]
Stanza 13 .
Defeat of the Enemy
If Lagna falls in Dwideha and Chandra joins
Chara, the enemy after having come hall the distance
will return back to his own place. If Lagna falls in
Chara and Chandra joins Dwideha, the enemy may
go away alter coming half the distance or may go back
after coming close to the place. If the Chara Lagna
and Chandra in Dwideha, are aspected by -powerful
evil planets the enemy goes back after suffering a
great defeat.

CHAPPANNA
Notes
Two conditions are given, Lagna in Chnra and
Chandra in Dwideha and Chandra in Ciiara and Lagna
in Dwideha. In these cases the enemy will return
after having marched half the distance or even marching close to the place. If such a Lagna and Chandra
are combined or aspected by malefics, he will beat
a retreat after a defeat.
[ For the sake of clearness I would substitute
Double bodied for Dwuieha. (Dwi-double Deha-body.]
Stanza 14.
Enemy’s Stoppage
If the rising sign is movable, and Ravi, Sani,
Buda or Sukra combines in it, the enemy, alter coming
some distance, will return back, but, Sani, Buda, or
Sukra join Lagna in retiograde, the enemy will peimanently stop there.
Notes
Ravi never gets Vakra as also Chandra. The
other five planets get retrogression. Kuja is subjected
to retrogression very often and sometimes sta_\s in
a Rasi tor about 8 or 9 months, whereas he ought to
move in each house in about 45 days.
[ I will substitute the following translation for the
sloku. “ If the Lagna is chara and Ravi or Sani or
Budha or Sukra occupies it declare that the enemy
will march quickly. If the planet (occupying the
Lagna) is retrograde declare otherwise.” >
The original sloka is plain enough and I ha\e
literally translated it. The idea given out by the Professor that “ the enemy ” will permanently stop there,
is not borne out by the original text which is — ‘‘Vakra
Gathi Nethi Vakthavyam." It seems to me that if
the query "assumes the form “will the enemy come
with a slow march or a quick march the sloka answers
whether it is going to be a slow or quick march. ]

CHAPPANNA
Stanza 15.
Personal Attack
If the Lagna falls in fixed sign and is aspected by
Guru and Sam, there will be no movements of the
enemies. If in the above combination, the 3rd, 5th,
and 6th are combined by evil planets, the enemy will
attack in person. If there are evil planets in the 4th
in the above combination, the enemy will run away.
Notes
If the rising sign falls in fixed Rasis and is
aspected by Guru and Sani, the enemy will not leave
his country and will make no movements. In the
said combination, if there are evil planets in the 3rd,
5th and 6th houses from the Lagna, there will be a
vigorous attack on the part of the enemy. Here the
author does not say whether the evil influences will
give victory to the enemy. Evil planets in the 4th
house from the Prasna Lagna show that the enemies
will run away.
[ In this sloka the better rendering of the last
portion would be “ If there are evil (malefic) planets
in the 4th house the enemy will retreat”.]
Stanza 16.
Coming of the Enemy
If the Lagna is fixed and Guru or Sani combines
in it, the enemv do js not co ne. If it is a movable
sign, combined by R ivi or Guru, the enemy will come
well prepared to fight.
[This sloka finds its place after sloka 20 in other
editions.]
Stanza 17.
Coming with Force
If there are G iru and Sukra in the 2nd or 3rd
house from the Ligna, the enemy will come with all
his ( axes, or some moving enemy will come.

CHAPPANNA
[I would substitute the following translation for
sloka 17. “If Jupiter or Venus occupies 2nd or 3rd
house from the Lagna at the time of query the
army that has gone out to fight will return immediately; also a traveller who has gone abroad will soon
return.”
Stanza 18.
Territorial Extension
If there are Ravi and Chandra in the 4th house,
he will get territorial extensions. If in the 4th house
there are Guru, Buda and Sukra, he will get fresh
territories early.
[ I cannot accept the translation of the Professor.
The original sloka is “ Na Gacchati Parachakram ,
yadarkachandrow chathurtha Dhavanasthow Guru,
Budha Sukra Hibuka, Yada Tada, Seegrahmayathi
Para means hostile, Chakra means army. Hence
the simple meaning of the sloka is the hostile army
will not arrive if the Sun and Moon occupy the 4th
house from Prasna Lagna. But if the 4th house is
occupied by Guru Budha or Sukra the hostile army
will arrive soon or quickly." There seems to be no
basis for the English rendering of the Professor.
More over the author has been discussing throughout
the question whether the enemy will or will not come
to encounter as admitted by the Professor in his notes
to slokas 16 to 19. Hence there cannot arise here any
question of acquiring territory, etc.]
Stanzas 19.
Enemy’s Retreat
If the rising sign falls in Mesha, Simha, Vrishabha
and Dhanas, or if they become the 4th houses from
the rising sign whether there are any planets in them
or not, the enemy cannot stand and will retreat early.
Notes
Stanza, 16 to 19 inclusive.
The verses are rendered into easy English and

CHAPPANNA
do not require any elaborate explanations. This
chapter exclusively relates to the advent of the enemy,
their movements and preparations, their attacks and
reverses. Hence the necessity for the rulers to employ
cou 1 1 aslmlogers, gu e them decent pensions, enable
them to studv these principles carefully and use their
knowledge in detet mining the enemy’s movements and
tactics, and whether they are coming to invade and
so with what chances of success.
[ I would say “ the enemy will retreat ” in the last
sentence. I will draw the attention of the reader to
the notes of the Professor under Stanzas 16 to 19 and
emphasize the words therein “ This chapter exclusively relates to the advent of the enemy”. ]
Stanza 20.
Time for Return
The enemy will return to his land within those
number of months, which are obtained by reckoning
from the rising sign to the planet, who are fully,
possessed of the Shadbalas.
Notes
The Shadbalas or che six sources of strength are
1 Sthana Bala, 2 Digbala, 3 Kala Bala, 4 Dristibala,
5 Chesta Bala and 6 Bhava Bala. For these sources
of strength, I beg to refer my readers to my notes in
Brihatjataka, pp. 44 to 46. Take the most powerful
planet in the Diagram you have prepared for the
quest'on time and find out the number of signs
separating the Lagna from this planet. This number
represents months and the enemy will leave the
invaded country within that time. Take Mesha as
the rising sign and suppose Guru in Kataka is the
most powerful planet m possessing the Shadbalas,
Kataka, is the 4th sign from Mesha and the enemy
will clear out within 4 months. Suppose Guru is in
Mesha the rising sign and possesses all his sources of
power better than any other planet, then the enemy
will clear out of the country in a very short time.

CHAPPANNA
[ The question propounded, it seems to me, is
when will a person who has gone to fight return. The
answer to this question as given in the sloka runs
thus — “ Find out the strongest planet in the fimire or
horoscope erected for the time of Prasna or queiy. See
how far it is removed in signs from the Lagna (Prasna);
Snv that the man will return in so many months.”
“ Taking the example given out by the Professor the
man who has gone to fight will return in 4 months.
1 would not confuse the readers by introducing,
‘ the enemy will return.” As stated by me it refers
to any person who has gone out to fight, it may be the
querent’s friend or relative or the enemy. ]
Stanza 21.
Clearing out of the Enemy
The enemy will clear out of the country in that
period of time in which the lord of the 7th house from
the rising sign will get rid of his retrograde.
Notes
Take the lord of the 7th from Lagna and find out
in what peiiod he gets over his retrograde. Since he
takes the lords of the 7th and their retrogrades,
Makara and Kumbha, wall never have their lords of
the 7th in Vakra. The 7th from Makara is Kataka
and its lord is Chandra. The 7th from Kumbha is
Simha and its lord is Ravi. Ravi and Chandra have
no Vakra and hence this stanza applies only to ten
signs other than Makara and Kumbha. Since Rahu
arid Ivethu have no houses and since they move in
Vakra or backward direction, the stanza could only
apply to the other five planets, Kuja, Buda, Guru,
Sukra and Sani. When the lord of the 7th has no
Vakra, the Verse does not apply to him or his Rasi.
[In other editions this sloka comes after the next
sloka and embodies the principle of another school of
Krishnacharya. The translation of the Professor
seems to be wrong. The translation presupposes that

CHAPPANNA
at the time of the query one of the 5 planets (Mars to
Saturn) is Retrograde tn motion. Such a position
will not generally be the case and besides there is no
warrant for such an assumption in the sloka. The
plain rendering of the sloka is : — “ According to the
opinion of others the person who has gone out to fight
will return at the time when the lord o£ 7th house
(from the Prasna Lagna) begins to retrograde”.]
Stanza 22.
Measurement of Time
If the most powerful planet, occupies a movable
Nrivamsa, the number of months will be as declared
in stanza 20, if he falls in a fixed sign, the number of
months will be doubled, if he falls in a double-bodied
sign, the number of months will have to be trebled.
Notes.
■ In my notes on stanza 20, I have explained what
is meant by the Shadbalas or the six different sources
of energy the planets have. Find out the most powerful planet in the diagram, cast for the question time
and count from the rising sign to him. Take an
illustration. If the rising sign is Mesha and Ravi is
in Dhanas possessed of the Shadbalas more than any
other planet, then count up to- Dhanas from Mesha,
we will get 9. It such a sun occupies Chara Navamsa
(movable) like Mesha, Kataka, Thula or Makara, it
will take 9 months for the invading enemy to get back
to his native country. If the Sun here occupied a
Sthira Rasi — fixed sign — then the enemy will return
in 18 months, and these fixed signs are Vrishaba,
Simha, Vrischika, and Kumbha. If the Sun occupies
a Dwiswabhava Rasi, like Mithuna, Kanya, Dhanas
and Meena, it will take 27 months for the enemy to
return to his place.
[It is better to take up this sloka after sloka 20 as
ve will not be broking up the sequence of ideas.
The translation of the sloka be better put as : —
“ Jf the planet (referred to in sloka 20) occupy

CHAPPANNA
a Chara Navamsa the time is as stated (in the sloka
20) ; if it occupy a Sthira Navamsa such time (as
indicated in sloka 21) shall be doubled and if it,
occupy a Dwiswabhava Navamsa it shall be trebled,”
Chara= Cardinal or moveable sthira= Fixed Dwiswa
bhava= common or double bodied.J
Stanza 23
Time Limit for Coming,
The enemy will come within the number of days
which is obtained by counting from the question
Lagna to the position occupied by the Moon if there
ire no planets m the middle.
Notes,
Prepare the diagram for the query, and count
rom the Lagna to the sign occupied by the Moon at
he time. This will indicate the number of days
vithin which the enemy may be expected to arrive.
Take an illustration. Suppose Prasna Lagna falls in
■Cataka, counting from Kataka to Kanya we get the
lumber 3 and therefore the enemy will come within
» days provided there is no planet in the middle. But
f there is any planet in the middle, i.e., between the
ising sign and the Moon, then the learned Commentitor Bhatotpala observes that the enemy will not
;ome. In the illustration given above, suppose there
3 a planet in Simha then the enemy will not come.
According to this verse, the number of days will never
xceed twelve as the interval between the Lagna and
Ihandra can never exceed the number twelve. It
trikes to me that some margin may be allowed for
he position and the strength and power of Lagna and
'handra. Suppose Kataka is Lagna with Guru in it
t exaltation and Chandra is in Vrishaba in exaltation
Iso and there is no planet in the middle. Suppose
ilesha is Lagna with Sani in it in debilitation and
Ihandra is in Vrischika also in debilitation and there
3 no planet in the middle, how would the astrologer
roceed to make the prediction and fix the number of

CHAPPANNA
days. In all such cases, the strength of the rising sign,
the planetary combinations and their aspects, cannot
be and ought not to be overlooked in venturing future
predictions.
[I would put the matter thus : — “ If there are no
planets between the Prasna Lagna and the sign occupied by the Moon the enemy will arrive after as many
days as the latter sign {sign of the Moon) is removed
from the former (Prasna Lagna). The commentator
adds that if there are planets between the Prasna
Lagna and the sign of Moon the enemy will not
arrive.]
CHAPTER II
Stanza 24.
Victory and Defeat
Benches in the 10th, 7th and rising sign signify
Victory to the querent King or Person. Kuja and
Sani in the 9th inflict defeat on the enemy. Guru,
Buda and Sukra in the 9th give the enemy victory.
Notes
There are two readings in the latter part of the
stanza. Ararki and Arkarki. Ara means Kuja, Arki
denotes Sani. Arka signifies the Sun and Arki
means Sani. Since the three planets Ravi,
Sani and Kuja are classified as evil, both readings
may be accepted without piejudice to the Astrological Principles. Benefics in the 1st, 7th and
10th give victory to the person who puts the question either for himself or to the person who sent him.
In war there are always two parties, the ruler of the
country and the invading enemy. The ruler of the
country naturally, on intimation "from the enemy or mlormation from the secret servants learns that the
enemy would be coming to invade him atid wrest thp
country from him. He sends for the Astrologer and
asks him about the advent of the enemy, his movements*

CHAPPANNA
the time of his invasion and the chances he has
for fighting his enemy with the results, namely, victory
to him or his defeat. Therefore when benefics are in
1 — 7— 10th houses, at the time of question, the local
King or Ruler will get victory, so also will he^be
successful if Sani and Kuja or Sam and Ravi are in
the 9th. But if benefics, Buda, Guru and Sukra are in
the 9th, victory will be for the enemy. Some commentators interpret success in that case also to the
resident rulers. This does not fit properly with the
original stanza. In such a case, al! the combinations
mentioned above will give victoty to the querent.
Then instead of the expressions Dasamodaya Saptamaga, the Author could have said Dasamodaya Saptamanavamaga, including the 9th also in the first half
of the stanza. If the benefics in the 10th give him
. victory, in the 9th or the 12th from the 10th, they must
indicate loss to him. This means success to his enemy
who invades his territory. My readers may carefully
read the original and satisfy themselves about such
differences.
[As pointed out by the Professor that there are
differences in the translation of the sloka, is a fact.
The alternative translation of the sloka is : — “ If benefic planets occupy 10th house, from Lagna at the time
of query the governor, whose town is attacked by an
enemy, will gain victory. If Kuja or Sani were to
occupy 9th house there will be defeat to the Governor.
If Guru or Sukra, or Budh'a occupy 9th they will cause
victory to the Governor. I would prefer this translation for the reason that the sloka attempts to answer
the question propounded whether the ruler of the town
will gam success or victory or suffer defeat when the
town is attacked by an enemy. Therefore an answer is
given which which must be consistent, relevant and
rational. Therefore the results of the positions of
all planets in *1 , 7, 10, and in 9, whether benefics or
malefics, must refer to the fortunes of the ruler of the
town.]

CHAPPANNA
Stanza 25.
Success to Citizens and the Enemy
Benefics in the six signs from the 3rd will give
victory and favourable results to the citizens and
rulers, Benefics in the six signs from the 9th will give
victory to the enemies. Evil planets in the 10th, 11th
and 12th from the rising sign will give defeat to the
local rulers and victory to the invaders. Evil planets
in the two halves will give defeat to the party
concerned.
Notes
The Zodiac is divided into twelve equal divisions
called signs or Rasis and here it is divided into two equal
halves, viz., 6 signs forming the first half from the 3rd
to 8th inclusive and the second half containing 6 signs
from the 9th to the 2nd inclusive. The first half, viz.,
3rd, 4th, 5th, 6th, 7th and 8th containing benefics will
give success to the local rulers and citizens and benefics in 9th, 10th, 11th, 12th, 1st and 2nd will give
success to the invaders. Evil planets m the first half,
viz., from 3rd to 8th will give defeat to the local rulers
and they will in the 9th to 2nd inclusive will give
defeat to the invaders. Evil planets in the 10th, lllh
and 12th will give defeat to local rulers and victory to
invaders. There are some inconsistencies in this
stanza. They may be superficial. The first half from
the 3rd is favourable to the local and the second half
from the 9th to 2nd to the invading party. Evil
planets in the second half give defeat to invaders. But
the author specifies a combination which is favourable
to the invader and prejudicial to the local ruler. Evil
planets in the second half must give defeat to the invading but he says evil planets in 10th, 11th and 12th
houses will give him success and defeat to local rulers.
So it stands thus. Evil planets in the 9th, 1st and
2nd alone will give defeat to the invader and in the
other 3 houses, viz., 10th, 11th and 12th, will give him
victory. The qu“stion arises, what will a mixture of
evil and good planets give in the two different divisions.

CHAPPANNA
By inference and logic we have to say the local rulers
and their enemies will get a mixture of victory and
defeat.
[This is an important sloka and I would put the
matter thus. “ The Six houses beginning with the
3rd house relate to the citizens and the ruler of the
town (attacked). The six houses beginning with 9th
and relate to the enemy attacking. The parties will
gain victory if their respective houses are occupied by
benefics.
But — thjs is an exception to the above principle — if
malefic planets occupy 10th, 11th or 12th house from
Prasna Lagna the town and the people attacked will
suffer defeat and the enemy attacking will gain
victory.]
Stanza 26 .
Accommodation with the Enemy.
If Lagna falls in male sign, and benefics occupy it
or benefics are found in 11th and 12th from Lagna,
there will be accommodation between the two parties.
Evil planets in double-bodied sign will cause fighting
and enmity.
Notes.
Male signs are Mithuna, Thula, Kanya and
Kumbha and if the Lagna falls in any one of them
being joined by benefics, the fighting parties will come
to some terms, and peace will be restored. Benefics
are Guru, Sukra, well associated Budha and Purna
Chandra or Full Moon. The same results may be
foretold when benefics are found in the 11th and 12th
houses from Lagna. The brevity and suggestiveness
of the original stanzas stagger any sober translator.
Sometimes a verb is used by which we have to understand a geat deal. By implication, we cannot omit
Lagna from Gur calculations, and in this stanza, the
11th and 12th house seem also to be included. If so,
it means, that if Lagna falls in a dbuble-bodied sign

CHAPPANNA
3S
with evil planets in it and in the 11th and 12th, the
parties will continue fighting without coming to any
accommodation. Evil planets are weak Moon, Sun,
Mars, Saturn, Rahu and Kethu. The question now
will be whether all the evil planets should be in the
Lagna and the other two houses, 11th and 12th and
whether all the benefics should be in the male Rasi
with Lagna falling in it. When all the planets are
there, evil or good, the results will be intensified for
good or bad, but when they are distributed, the results
will be modified according to the intensity.
[The translation is not happy. I suggest the translation should run as follows — “ If the Prasna Lagna
falls in a biped sign and a benefic planet occupies it or
11th or 12th house the contending parties will come ro
terms. The parties will not come to terms if malefic
planets occupy dual or double bodied signs.” The
question propounded seems to be “will the parties
fighting come to terms and desist from fighting or will
the fight continue ? Biped signs are Mithuna, Kanya,
Thula which the Professor wrognly calls Male Signs.
Dual signs are Mithuna, Kanya, Dhanus, Meena.
Male signs are odd signs namely Mesha, Mithuna,
Simha, etc. Female signs are even signs namely
Vrishabha Kataka, Kanya, Vtischika, etc., so to use the
term male for what is really a biped sign is misleading.
The terms used in this and the next %loka are Nre Rasi
and Nri Lagna which mean a biped sign and Lagna
occupying a biped sign.]
Stanza 27.
Peace between the Parties.
If benefics occupy Kendras, or occupying the
male Rasis have beneficial aspects, there will be peace
between the parties. -If evil planets occupy Kendras
or Purusha Rasis, possessing malefic aspects, they will
fight with each olfier.

CHAPPANNA
Notes.
Benefics in Kendras give peace, Malefics in
Kendras give fighting. If benefics occupy male signs,
viz., Thula, Mithuna, Kanya and Kumbha, and have
beneficial aspects, they will induce peace and prosperity. If evil planets are in Kendras, there will be
fighting, as also if they arc in male signs and possess
malefic aspects. Suppose there are malefics and
benefics combined in Kendra, then mixed results must
be predicted. There will be some fighting and some
accommodation the results may be said to be mix'ed.
[I would put the sloka thus : If benefics occupy
Kendras, or occupy the Lagna falling in a human or
biped sign and at the same time be aspected by benefics there will be peace between the contending parties.
If malefics occupy the above places and be aspected
by malefics the contending parties will continue the
fight ”. Biped signs are also called human signs.]
CHAPTER III.'
Stanza 28.
On Good and Bad.
If benefics occupy Kendras and Thrikonas, and
evil planets are not in Kendras apd the 8th the
querent will gain all that he desires in full. If evil
planets are in Kendras and the 8th, the person will
have a complete failure in his desires and meet with
dangers.
Notes.
This is a general stanza and the planetary combinations indicate success or failure in a general way
referring to the success or failure of any object- The
person who puts a question to an Astrologer, will
always have some object of objects in view about
whose success or failure, he will be anxious to know.

CHAPPANNA
The object may refer to anything in general. When
auspicious planets are in 1 — 4 — 5 — 7 — 9 and 10 and evil
planets are not in 1 — 4 — 7 — 8 and 10, the object or
objects which a person thinks in his mind and about
which he asks the Astrologer for future results, will be
completely successful and profitable. But when evil
planets are found in the Kendras and the 8th house
from the rising sign, they will be completely ruined.
If bencfics and malefics are mixed up in all these
houses, he will have some gains and some losses or the
objects will have partial success. Even here allowances must be made for the strength and weakness of
benefics as well as malefics. Suppose Kanya Lagna
rises with Sukra in it at the time of question. Guru
in Makara, and Buda in Thula with Ravi in it. Here
Sukra is in a Kendra and Guru will be in a Thrikona.
Will the success be the same as when the rising sign
falls in Meena with Sukra in it and Guru in Kataka.
Both the benefics here are in exaltation while in the
first case both are in debilitation. Again suppose
Buda is in Kanya with Sukra in it, the case will be
altered. Take Buda again in Meena with Sukra in
it. Here there will be some change. The exaltation
of each planet, produces certain peculiar results, which
others do not, and so also debilitations. The sighifications of planets are different, and they affect the
phenomena for godd or evil which are connected with
matters governed by them. These complications
should not be neglected by the expert. The principles of Astrology must be carefully studied and
applied with referenee to Kala or Time, Desa or
Country and V artamana or surrounding circumstances. One who neglets these in his calculations will
cut a sorry figure in himself and mislead the people
who come or consult him.
The translation and Notes of the Professor are
alright and do not call for any comment.

CHAPFANNA
Stanza 29.
Gains and Losses
Benefics in 3 — 5 — 7 and 11 give gains and success.
Malefics in them produce losses. If the rising sign
falls in Mithuna, Kanya, Thula and Kumba, with
benefics in it, success must be foretold.
Notes
This stanza refers to general success and failure.
A person may think of commerce and put the question
to an Astrologer. If benefics are found in ihe 3rd,
5th, 7th and 11th from the rising sign, he will have
unqualified success in his undertakings. If evil planets
are there, he will suffer great losses. If there is a
mixture of good and evil planets in these houses, his
gains and losses will be proportionate to the strength
or weakness of the planets thus combined. It is
hardly possible to think that all the benefics will be
found always without evil conjunctions or aspects. If
the rising sign be Mithuna, Kanya, Thula or Kumba,
and is occupied by benefics, he will be successful.
Suppose these are occupied by evil planets, by implication they produce loss. Sources of strength in all
cases, must be taken into careful consideration in
making future predictions.
[In this sloka we are told, definitely, -that Mithuna
Kanya, Thula and Kumbha are Nru or Nara (humar
or biped) signs and that if a benefic occupies ths
Lagna falling in one of these Nara or biped Signs
success arises. Hence this sloka is a guide to what is
meant in the slokas 26 and 27 of the previous chapter/
Stanza 30.
Acquisition of Lands.
Benefics in 7th and 10th give him his lands. Benefics in 2nd, 5th and 1st give wealth from Kings and
noble persons, with great honor. Malefics in 11th
and 12th houses, do not give success. If Moon is, in
Lagna, he will not give good, but in the 10th he will
produce prosperity.

CHAPPANNA
Notes.
• Reading carefully the valuable commentaries of
Bhatotpala, the stanza becomes intelligible. When
there are powerful benefics in the 7th and 10th houses
from Lagna, the querent will get back to his own land
safely if he is in a foreign country, or he will easily
and profitably get back his landed properties, when
they are in other hands. Auspicious planets in the
1st, 2nd and 5th give him great honour from the
Sovereign and wealth through such honours. The
querent will be quite unsuccessful if bad planets are
found in the 11th and 12th houses. The original text
simply names sasi meaning Chandra in Lagna as
causing loss and Chandra in the 10th house as producing good. The learned commentator in his Jagat
Chandrika or Moonlight to the World, explains that
weak Moon with evil planets in Lagna causes loss and
Full Moon in the 10th gives wealth and success. Suppose Vrishabha is Lagna with Chandra in it, and
suppose Vrishika is Lagna with Chandra in it, can one
consistent] y say that the losses would be equal. In
the former, Chandra is exalted, and in the latter he is
debilitated. Results cannot be equal in both.
[The translation by the Professor is not happy so
far as the first portion of the sloka goes. The word
used in the sloka is “ Sthana Prada” and “ Mana
Arthada.” The plain meaning of the sloka (1st portion) is “ Benefics in 7th or 10th houses give the
querent a status or appointment or position, while in
2nd, 5th or 1st house. (Lagna) give him honour and
wealth ”. There is no basis for importing “ lands” or
“ from Kings and noble persons with great honour.”]
Stanza 31.
Success through Females
If Chandra in 2 — 3 — 6 — 7 — 10 or 11 is aspected
by Guru, success will come through fem'ale agency.
II evil planets are m Lagna, 3rd, 9th, 5th and 8th,
they will cause loss to the objects entertained in the

CHAPPANNA
querent’s mind, inflict pecuniary losses, and cause
great fear. If benefics are found in these houses, they
will produce good in all these respects.
Notes.
In the first case, the strength of Chandra and
Guru must be taken. If Chandra is exalted or has the
aspect of Guru, the success will be great and will flow
through the influence of a high and exalted woman.
If Chandra is debilitated or is aspected by deblitated
Guru, some small success accrues through the exertions
of a poor or humble lady. In sustaining losses, a man
may have great differences. A has a lac of rupees
and invests ten thousand in a venture and loses them.
It is a loss, but one which he can bear. Suppose he
has ten thousand only to his credit and loses the
whole. The situation is intensified. Suppose he loses
twenty thousand, the situation is very serious causing
disgrace, fear and despair. All such states have to be
ascertained by the strength and weakness of the
planets. Benefics in these houses, if -powerful will
give much more than he dreams in his speculations or
expects in his human calculations. The science is
very interesting and our readers must try and understand these facts well.
[I would introduce.no change in the translation or
the notes of the Professor.
An analysis of slokas 28 to 31 reveals the following
principles : —
Benefics namely Guru, Sukra, Budha alone or
with another benefic Waxing Moon (Moon from 5th
day of dark fortnight up to 5th day of bright fortnight)
in all places except 6 and 12 indicate good results.
While Malefics namely Sun, Mars, Saturn Waning
Moon (Moon from 5th day of bright fortnight to
5th day after New Moon) and Budha with a malefic
• seem to yield good results only in 6th house.]

CHAPPANNA
Stanza 32.
Recovery from Illness
If benefics in Lagna, 5th, 8th and 7th have beneficial aspects and Chandra is found in 3rd, 6th, 10th or
11th, the person will recover safely from his illness.
Notes
This stanza refers to queries about the recovery
or death of persons suffering from serious diseases.
Benefics in Lagna may aspect or be aspected by good
planets in the 7th, and benefics specially Guru in the
5th or Lagna will aspect benefics in Lagna or the 5th.
Other planets cannot do so. When Chandra is in 3rd,
6th, 10th or 11th, and benefics are situated as stated
above and possess beneficial aspects, then only the
speedy and complete cure of the sick person should be
predicted. The commentator hints, that in Chara
Rasis or moveable signs, the benefics give early recovery, in double-bodied signs, it will be later, and in
fixed signs, the recovery will be slow. The text does
not touch upon this subject. Suppose in the houses
named above evil planets are found with evil aspects
and Chandra occupies the house indicated then,
I suppose early death of the person may be predicted.
This is my suggestion and may be taken for what it is
worth. The sick person may put the question of
recovery himself or his triend or relation may do so on
his behalf. Kerala Pr.isna deals with the number o
letters uttered by the querent. The Chapters have
been divided rather indifferently by the various writers,
and I have followed the best authority. By some,
this i Vapter is made the fourth instead of the Third.
CHAPTER IV
Stanza 33.
On Return of a Traveller
The return of a traveller, who has gone to a distant
country, has to be predicted by the planets in the 2nd,

CHAPPANNA
3rd and 5th houses from Prasna Lagna. By benefics in
these houses predict that the traveller will return with
property and riches he has lost or which has been in
adverse possession to him. Predict speedy return of
the traveller if Guru and Sukra are in these houses.
Notes
The stanza, in my humble opinion seems to be
vague. By using planets all the nine planets are to be
understood. Evil planets in these houses may delay
the return while good ones will expedite his return. In
the former case his return may be predicted while in
the latter case he will return quickly with all the lost
property or property which has been in adverse possession to him in the distant countries.
[My own view of the sloka is as follows: — As
translated by the Professor we have to determine the
return or not of the traveller by planets (benefics or
malefics) occupying 2nd, 3rd or 5th house from the
Prasna Lagna. If the query is whether the traveller
who is missing will be found or not the answer is that
if benefics (other than Jupiter or Venus) are found in
these houses the traveller is located as living in a particular place. If Jupiter or Venus occupy these houses
the traveller will return soon.]
Stanza 34
Speedy Return
If there are planets in the 6th or 7th, Guru in
a Kendra, and Buda or Sukra in a Thrikona, the
speedy and safe return of the traveller may be forqtold.
Notes
He gives another combination about the speedy
return of the traveller. There must be a planet in the
6th or 7th from Lagna, Guru must be in one of the
Kendras and Buda or Sukra in one of the Konas. If
•Guru is powerful, and Buda and Sukra are both in
Thrikonas, and there are powerful planets in the 6th
or 7th, not only speedy returu, but also safe and
wealthy return may be predicted.

CHAPPANNA
[The plain meaning of the Sloka is : — “ If a planqt
is in 6th or 7th house and Guru is in a Kendra house
or Mercury and Venus occupy 5th or 9th house the
traveller will return.” The Professor wants us to hold
that Guru must be in a kendra and at the same time
Venus and Mercury must be in Thrikona houses.
This is not supported by the sloka, on the other hand
the translation goe c against it.]
S'ianza 35
Return with Honor
Moon in the 8th house, and Kendras free from
evil planets, will give a safe return to the traveller. If
the Kendras are occupied by benefics, the person
will return laden with wealth and honor.
Notes
If there is Chandra in the 8th from Lagna, and
all the Kendras 1st, 4th, 7th and 10 are free from evil
planets, the traveller will have a safe return. But this
does not signify any gains or honors. If Chandra
occupies the 8th and the Kendras are conjoined by
auspicious planets, he will return not only quickly but
will come with wealth, honor and happiness.
Stanza 36
Bondage and Beatings
If Lagna falls in Pristodaya and is aspected by
malefics, the traveller will have had bondage and
beating. Evil planets in the 3rd, 6th and Kendras,
possessing no beneficial aspects, will make the traveller
leave the country he first went to, die in the other place,
or taken away by robbers respectively.
Notes
The stanza is well composed and contains much
meaning. Pristodayas are— Vrishabha, Mesha,
Dhanas, Kataka and Makara. If Lagna falls in' one
of these signs and is aspected by evil planets, thp
traveller will have beating and bondages. Evil planets*

CHAPPANNA
in the 3rd, having no beneficial aspects, will send away
the traveller to another country, evil planets in the 6th
without beneficial aspects, will kill the man, and evil
planets in the Kendras without beneficial aspects will
subject him to the cruel treatment of robbers. This
stanza refers to persons who have gone to remote
ioieign countries and have not been heard oi for a long
time. ( See my Eng. Tr. of Bri.J., ft. 19.)
[What is lacking in clearness in the translation is
made up by the Professor in the notes. I would render the sloka thus : — “ If a Prishtodaya sign rise at the
time of query and is aspectcd by a malefic planet the
traveller has been suffering bondage and torture. If
malefic planets occupies 3rd house and are not aspected
by benefics the traveller has left the place where he had
gone to. If inalefics unaspected by benefics occupy
the 6th house the traveller is dead. If malefics occupy
the Kendia houses unaspected by benefics the traveller
is decoyed or removed from the place (to which he had
gone) by thieves or robbers.]
S 'LANZA 37.
Time Limit for Return.
The tiaveller will return in that number of days
which is indicated by the interval between the Lagna
and the next planet to it, multiplied by the number of
Dwadasa, Rasi or 12. If the next planet is in Retrograde, he will start after that number of daysNotes
Concisely expressed in Sanskrit, the stanza requires some clear explanation. The Author flow
gives the time before which the traveller may be
expected to return safely to his- native place. About
his return and no'n-return and death he has given combinations. This verse gives the limit of time when he
would return. Take the Prasnar Lagna. Find out
the number of Rasis intervening between the' Lagna
and the next planet, which is in advance of it. Take
this figure, and multiply this by the number of Rasi?

CHAPPANNA
in the Zodiac, viz., 12 and the figure thus obtained
will show the number of days for his return. But if
that next planet is in Vakra or retrograde, then hq will
start from the foreign country after that number of
days.
Take an illustration so that the verse may easily
he understood. A man puts a question about the
return of a traveller at about 3-30 p. m., on Wednesday on the 27th July 1921 and the following is the
diagram for that time.
The Prasna or the rising
sign falls in Vrischika, and
the next real planet from
him is Chandra. Rahu and
Kethu are dark or shadowy
planets, and I do not know
if they are taken into account. But whatever it is,
I shall here indicate the
process and the results can
easily be obtained by understanding the principle. Chandra is the planet next to
the sign. Counting from Lagna to Chandra we get 6,
and this has to be multiplied by 12, the number of
Zodiacal signs. We get 72 as the result. The traveller will return in 72 days from the day of question.
Suppose in this diagram, instead Chandra, we have
Kuja in Mesha in retrograde. Then te will start
from the foreign place after 72 days, and will take
some time more according to distance and modes of
locomotion. Ravi and Chandra have no Vakra, and
Rahu and Kethu move in the reverse order. I think
I have made the meaning quite clear.
[The translation is not happy and correct. I would
render the sloka thus : — Note how far rerpoved .from
the Lagna the first sign that is occupied by a planet is.
This number multiplied by 12 will indicate the number
of days in which a traveller returns. This is the rule
Kethu
Chandra
Sukta
Buda
Rasi
Diagram
Ravi
Kuja
Guru
Sani
Rising
Sign
Rahu

if the planet is direct in its motion. If the planet is
retrograde in motion the traveller will return in as many
days as are indicated by the number of signs from the
Lagna to that occupied by the planet].
[In the example given by the Professor the planet
Kuja being Vakra or retrograde I would say that the
traveller will return in 6 days. I do not agree with the
Professor because his rendering is not in accordance
with the Sloka or with principles already enunciated
by the author and other translators have translated the
Sloka on the above lines.]
Stanza 38
ON THEFTS
Theft by a Relation
If the Lagna falls in fixed signs, or in a fixed
Navamsa or in a Vargottama Navamsa, the stolen
article will be in the place, having been stolen by a
<close relation of the querent.
Notes
Fixed signs are Vrishabha, Simha, Vrischika and
Kumbha. It Lagna falls in any one of these or if
Lagna falls in any other sign, occupying a fixed Navamsa there, or if it joins Vargottama Navamsa, then
the article lost will be in the same place where it was
kept, but stolen by a close relation and necessarily
concealed iiom his view. The Vargottamamsas are,
the first Navamsas in movable signs, the 5th Navamsa
in the fixed signs and the 9th Navamsas in the doublebodied signs. The results are, Mesha m Mesha,
Vrishabha in Vrishabha, Mithuna in Mithuna, etc.,
become their Vargottamamsas.
Stanza 39
Place of Deposit of Stolen Article
The stolen article will be deposited m the front,
middle or end of the house as the 1st, 2nd or 3rd
Drekkana rises in Lagna.

Notes
Every house will have three main divisions*
whether it is a grand place or a poor man’s hut. If
the first Drekkana rises in Lagna, the stolen property
will be in the front portion of the house. If the second
Drekkana rises at the time, the property will be concealed in the middle part of the house. If the third
Drekkana rises in the Lagna, then it will be at the
back portion of the house or beyond it. The Zodiac
contains 363 degrees as a circle. This divided by 12
signs, gives each sign 30 degrees. When a sign is
divided into 3 equal parts, each of the parts is called a
Drekkana. As we go on, Drekkanas are constantly
referred and I shall explain their significance in the
proper place. In Brihat Jataka, Ch. 27 is completely
devoted to the explanations of the Drekkanas and I
would refer my readers to my English Translation of
Brihat Jataka pp. 260 to 267.
[I would suggest dropped or left or deposited
in the translation.] •
Stan/\ 40
Recovery of Stolen Thing
If full Moon or a benefic occupies the Lagna
aspected by a benefic, the stolen propel ty will be
rccoveied. If a Sirshodava Rasi falls as a Lagna
joined by the Full Moon or a benefic, and aspected by
the benefic, or if a powerful benefic occupies the 11th
house, the stolen property will be ieco\ered early.
Notes
Sirshodavas are — Mithuna, Simha, Kanya, Thula.
Vtischika and" Kumbha. It Lagna falls in any one of
them having Full Moon or a benefic m it, or if the 11th
house from the rising sign is occupied b}' a powerful
auspicious planet, or if Full Moon, or a benefic occupy
the Lagna and ts aspected by a benefic, the stolen
piopcrty will soon be lecovered.

[There is a little confusion in the translation,
I would suggest the following rendering in accordance
with the spirit of the Sloka : — “ If Moon in full strength
occupies Lagna or if the Prasna Lagna falling in
Sirshodaya signs is occupied by a benefic and is also
aspected by a benefic or the 11th house from Prasna
Lagna is occupied by a strong or powerful benefic the
article stolen will soon be lecmered].
Stanza 41
Direction taken it the Stolen Articles
The direction taken by the lost property must be
ascertained by the planets in the Kendras or by the
Lagna rising, at the time. The distance it has been
removed must be ascertained m Yojanas, by the number of Navamsas, which ha\e passed from the 5th in
the Lagna.
Notes
This requires clear explanation. When there are
planets in the Kendras, the stolen property has gone
in the direction go\emcd by that planet. But when
there are no planets in the Kendi.ts then the direction
should be found out by the rising sign itself. When
there are mine than one planet m the Kendias, the
direction will be tint which is eoveined by the most
powei ful among them. W hen the Lagna is powerful
and thcie are al-o pi inets in ITndia®, themosi powerful among them Tonic! be selecttd. ( See my trans. of
Br.Ja. Ch. 1 1 Si. J p. .4/ ) 1 sh oi gnu them here for
readv reitienct.
Sun goceins La it
\ onus do S. K.
Mats do South
Rahu do S. W .
Satmn do West
* ” Moon do N. W.
Mercury do North
Jupiter do N. E.

Makara, he gives all colors mixed in equal proportion.
Kumbha is a mixture of three colors in equal proportion.
The color of the Rasi must be predicted for the
lost article. Here suppose Meshamsa rules, .then
the color of the article must be blood red in color. But
suppose in the Nautmsa, Sam, Kuja and Guru are
located. Then the colors of all these must be ascribed
to the various articles lost. Generally in thefts more
than one article is lost and therefore the various
influences must be taken into account. If the Lagna
falls in Simha, Kanva, Thula oi Vrischika, the article
will be long, if the Lagna falls in Mithuna, Karkata,
Dhanas or Makara, the article will be broad, if the
Lagna falls in Meena, Vrishabha, Mesha and Kumbha,
it will be small. If the lord of the Navamsa is powerful and possessed of the six sources of strength, the
article lost will have great strength and be valuable,
if he is ordinary, the article will be so and with some
holes in the middle if he is powerless, or debilitated or
occupies 8th, it will be without much value, not well
recognisable or old and dilapidated or, worn out.
The characteristics of the 36 Drekkaits iff ill be given
in appendix at the end of the book and may be conveniently consulted. From the Lagna should be
consulted the nature of the place, or country, the time
of removal and the direction in which the stolen
articles have been removed. Among the Rasis, it has
already been remarked, that some are strong during
the day, some are powerful during the night, and some
are always vigorous. Vrishabha, Mesha, Dhanas,
Kataka, Mithuna and Makara are powerful during the
day. Meena is called Oobhayodaya and is always
strong. If the rising sign falls m Dinabala the theft
takes place during the day and if it falls m Nocturnal
sign, the property will have been stolen in the night.
In the 40th stanza, the directions governed by the
planets have been explained, as also the directions by
the planets in the Kendras. They have fo be applied
properly. The place or country to which the property
has been removed or where it is deposited will have to

bp identified by the nature of the country or places,
indicated by the rising sign. In Stanza 5 of Chap. 1.
Brihat Jataka, the nature of the signs is thus explained. “ The places most congenial to their natures will
be controlled by them, and they also have a great
likeness for such regions and the products of these
regions. Watery surfaces are liked by crabs, fishes
and crocodiles, ordinary jungles and grassy plains are
for rams and bulls. Deep forests and caves are for
the lion. Streets m the cities are for balances. Towns
are for men and women, or the couple. Military
grounds for archers. (See p. 14 of my notes on Brihat
Jataka). Batotphala quotes Yavanaswara who is clear
on these points, and whose translation is given here
for ready reference.
1. Aries — first sign resembles ram, the head of
Kalapurusha or time personified, places frequented by
sheep, goats, and where shrubs and small hills and
minerals are found.
2. Taurus— second sign, face of Kalapurusha,
fields and wet grounds, mountains, grazing fields and
-culturable and grassy lands.
3. , Gemini — neck and shoulders of Kalapurusha,
a woman with Veena and a man with a club, sexual
enjoyment, places, dancing and gambling -places,
musical and theatrical Jocalties.
4. Cancer — crab, watery places, chest of Kalapurusha, wet cultivation, sandy places, places frequented by Devatas and their female companions.
5. Leo — Lion, mountains, heart of Kalapurusha,
forests, impregnable elevations, caves and places of
danger, hunters and deaths.
6. Virgo — A girl with a light in her hand seated
in a boat on the ocean in the act of sailing to reach
the other shore, stomach of Kalapurusha, places of
sexual enjoyments, fine gardens and places of
entertainment,

7. Libra — Balances, a man seated with scales in
hand in a street in the city, navel and waist of Kalapurusha, making trades and bargains.
8. Scorpio — Scorpion, sexual organ and anus of
Kalapurusha, caves, holes, places where reptiles creep
in and covered places and anthills, mole hills.
9. Sagittarius — Centaur, thighs of Kalapurusha,
places where military operations and wars are waged.
10. Capricornus — Crocodile, knees of Kalapursha, living in watery places, rivers, forest and
wilderness.
11. Aquarius — Water bearer, a person holding
a pot of water, water sides and bunds, places growing
inferior grains and shrubbery, buttocks of Kalapurusha,
places where birds, women and gamblers gather.
12. Pisces — Fish, two fishes one with the face
and the tail of the other, watery places, shrines, rivers,
ponds and sacred and religious men meet.
The stolen property will have been concealed, if
Mesha rises as Lagna, places frequented by sheep and
goats, if Vrishabha in cattle sheds, if Mithuna, in
theatres; if Kataka near watery places, if Simha in,
deep forests, if Kanya near boats and ships, if Thula,.
in the house, if Vrischika near lakes or ponds, if
Dhanas in the midst of the town, if Makara near
watery places, if Kumbha in places where painting
and drawing are going on, and if Meena, in watery 1
places.
Now the Author goes on to describe the age,,
caste and creed of the thief. From the lord of the
Lagna, the age and caste of the thief will have to be
found out.
If Chandra is the lord of Lagna, the thief will be
a babe, suckling milk, if Kuja, he will be a little boy*

if Budha, he will be within 12 years and will be an'
unmarried boy, if Guru, he will be below 15 years, if
Sukra he will be within 32 years, if Ravi, he will be
within 70 years, and if Sani, within 80 or 90 years. His
caste and creed will be determined by the castes
ascribed to tne planets. Guru and Sukra are Brahmins.
Ravi belongs to the Kshatriya or warlike caste,
Chandra is Vaisya caste, Budha governs the Sudras and
Sam governs all the other mixed castes. All these
details must be well remembered, and results should be
predicted with great care and caution.
[This is a very important Sloka and requires
further elucidation. I would render the Sloka into
English as follows : — “ The nature of the article stolen
is to be determined by the Navamsa of the Prasna
Lagna the description of the thief by the rising Drek j
kana of the Lagna, the time of theft of the article, its
direction and place to which it has been removed shall
be determined by the nature of the rising sign and the
age, caste, colour, etc., of the thief by the Lord of the
rising sign.
As regards the kind of article or thing whether
it is of vegetable, mineral or animal Kingdom is to be
determined by the rising Navamsa according to
Chapter I. sloka 6 supara.
For colours of the 12 signs vide Brihat Jataka
Ch. I. si. 20. The colors given by the Professor
follow Br. Jataka.
The time of theft is determined by the nature of
the sign rising, Mesha, Vrishabha, Mithuna, Kataka,
Dhanus, Makara indicates that the article was stolen
at Night while Simha, Kanya, Thula, Vrischika,
Kumbha and Meena would indicate day time.]

CHAPTER V
On Mixed Results
Pregnancy, Nature of Issues, Marriage
Stanza 43.
Sex of the Child
If Saturn joins odd signs from Lagna, _ the
pregnant woman will have a male issue, if he joins
even signs from Lagna, she will bear a female child.
If Saturn is found in the 7th house, the querist will be
married. If otherwise there will be no marriage.
Notes
This stanza refers to two points, first whether a
pregnant woman will have a male or female issue, and
second, whether a man will be married or not. When
Sani joins odd signs from the Prasna Lagna, viz.,
3rd, 5th, 7th, 9th or 11th, she will have a son. When
Sani joins 2 — 4 — 6 — 8 — 10 or 12 she will get a female
•child, Lagna is also an odd sign as it is counted
as 1 and therefore odd. But it has been omitted or
rejected by Varaha Mihira as also by his son Prithuyasas. ( See Ch. IV St. 12, P. 50 Br. J. by me.)
When a query refers to the marriage celebration
or not, the following should be noted. At the time
of question, if Sam occupies the 7th from Lagna, that
is Samasaptaka, or mutual 7th, the marriage will be
•celebrated. When Sani is not m the 7th, there vvill
be no marriage. In all these cases the querist may
himself be the party concerned, or he may put the
question on behalf of another person near or dear to
him or even as a servant or clerk under another man.
These facts should be studied by the astrologer.
[There is difference of opinion between the
Professor and other Translators regaiding the latter
portion oi the Sloka. The Professor says: — ? If Sat&rn is
found m the 7th house the querist will be married ”.
Other Translators render this portion of the Sloka

as follows: — “Again if Saturn occupies an even sign
from Prasna Lagna, a person who* questions about
rparriage, will get married and not otherwise The
original Sloka (latter part) runs thus “ Labhya Varasya
Naree Sama Sthithe Atho Anyatha V amain'' There
seems to be no basis for importing 7th house in the
Sloka. On the other hand there seems to be a warrant
for translating the latter portion as above] .
Stanza 44.
On Marriagr
If Chandra, in 3, 5, 6, 7 or 11 is aspected by Guru,
Ravi and Budha, the marriage will be celebrated. If
benefics occupy Kendras or Thrikonas, the marriage
will be speedily celebrated.
Notes
This refers to the query about the marriage to be
performed or not. There are many instances, where
the attempts to get sons or daughters married will be
unsuccessful, and often crowned with disappointments
of a keen nature which work heavily on the minds
of the parents or guardians concerned. Naturally
they will go to an astrologer and put him a question
as to whether a certain marriage takes place or not,
and if it does take place, where, when, and how. All
these points are answered by the verse. Chandra
must be in 3, 5, 6, 7 or 11, aspected by Guru, Ravi
and Budha to get the marriage celebrated early. When
the, conjunctions are not so, the marriage will not be
performed. If Kendras and Thrikonas ate occupied
by benefics, there will be early marriage. But suppose
benefics are not in these Kendras and Thrikonas, but
aspect them, what will be the result. Here beneficial
aspects must be interpreted as favourable for marriage.
[I would render the Sloka into English thus.
“ If Moon occupies 3rd, 5th, 6th, 7th or 11th house
from* Prasna Lagna and is aspected by Guru, Ravi or
Budha marriage will come to pass. The same result
arises if benefics occupy Kendras (1, 4, 7, 10) or

Thrikonas (1, 5, 9) houses There is no basis in the
Sloka for stating fhat the marriage will be speedily'
celebrated. In my view it is not necessary for all
the three planets to aspect Moon.]
Stanza 45
On Rains in Winter
If Sani and Sukra occupy the 7th house from'
Chandra and Ravi respectively, or if these two occupy
the 4th and 8th respectively, or if the 2nd and 3rd have
tl ese planets or both of them occupy the second or the
third, predict early rain in the rainy season.
Notes
The author apparently means that these combinations will produce rain in the rainy season, and not in
the hot weather or summer. Three combinations are
given tor predicting rain. Sani must be in the 7th
from Chandra and Sukra in the 7th from Ravi'
respectively.
In the second combination, Sani must be in the
4th and the Sukra must be in 8th to produce rain, or
Sani should be in the 2nd and Sukra should be in the
3rd or both of them may be in the 2nd or 3rd to>
produce immediate rain. This will have to be predicted
only in the rainy season.
[The Professor, I am afraid, has fallen into an*
error. Hence his translation, as I will show presently,,
cannot be accepted. Following the original Sloka the*
translation is : — “If Venus and Saturn occupy 7th
house from Moon and Sun respectively or occupy the
4th and 8th houses or the 2nd and 3rd houses from
Prasna Lagna, one should predict early rain in the*
rainy season.”
Where is the Professor wrong? By stating
“Sukra in the 7th from Ravi.” This is an astronomical
error for Sukra or Venus is never more than 48 degrees
from the Sun] .

.Stanza 46
Production of Rain
Benefics in the 2nd, 3rd and the Kendras produce
plenty of rain in the waning half of the Lunar month,
when they are in Poorna Jalarasis, Chandra in Lagna
in Poorna Jalarasis will produce rain.
Notes
Benefics, viz., Full Moon, well associated Budha,
Guru and Sukra in 1-2-3-4*7-10 when these signs
happen to be full watery signs, viz., Kataka, Meena
and Makara, produce plenty of rain when the query is
made in the bright half of the Lunar month, but if the
question is put in the dark half of the Lunar month
there will be rain but not so plentiful. The second
combination is when the Full Moon occupies the rising
Lagna when it happens to be a watery sign, theie will
be rain and the moon will be full in the bright half of
the Lunar month from the 10th day afterwards.
[The translation is incorrect. It must run thus : —
“One should predict rain if the benefic planets
occupying watery signs are posited in 1st, 2nd,
3rd, 4th, 7th or 10th house from Prasna Lagna and
the query is put in the bright half of the month. The
same result arises if Moon occupies the Lagna in a
watery sign.” Bright half of the month is the translation of “Sitha” occurring in the text.
The Jala rasis or watery signs are Kataka, Meena,
Makara and also Kumbha. According to some
Makara and Kumbha are watery signs while decidedly
according to all writers, Kataka and Meena are
Jalarasis.]
Stanza 47
Sex of the Child Born
If the Lagna is aspected by a powerful male
planet occupying masculine Shadvaigas, and falls in a
male sign, predict the birth of a male child. If the
Lagna falls in a feminine sign, joining feminine

vz
Shadvargas, and aspected by a powerful planet, _ the
birth of a female should be predicted. If Budha joins
the Lagna, then predict that delivery has not taken
place.
Notes
All odd signs, viz., Mesha, Mithuna, Simha, Thula >
Dhanas and Kumbha, are masculine. All even signs,
viz., Vrishabha, Kataka, Kanya, Vrischika, Makara
and Meena are feminine signs. When the Lagna is
masculine, occupies masculine Shadvergas, and is
aspected by a powerful masculine planet, possessing
all the six sources of strength, already named, a male
child should be predicted. If Lagna is feminine,
occupies feminine Shadvergas and has the aspects of a
feminine planet, possessing all the six sources of
strength, then the child born will be a female. If the
Lagna is occupied by Budha, then say that there has
not yet been any delivery.
[This is an important and requires further
elucidation. The notes must be amplified. “ Pum
varge Lagna Gallic. Pum Graha Dnshte Balanvithe
Puritshah.” So runs the 1st part of the Sloka. The
meaning is “ If Lagna falls m Male Shadvargas
and if it is aspected by a stiong male planet — declare
the child to be a male.” The readers will remember
the six \argas (shad vargas) as Rasi, Hora, Drekkana Navamsa, Lhuidnsanisa and Thrimsamsa. The
meaning of the 1st part of the Sloka therefore is that
if all orthtj majority of the Shadvargas of the Lagna
.ire m male signs and the Lagna is aspected by a
strong male planet the child is a male.
? bile sings aio odd signs namely Mesha, Mithuna,
Simha, Thula, Dhanas, Kumbha. Female signs,
are Vmhubha, Kitdka, Kanya, Vrischika, Makara,
Im tna.
M de Planets are, the Sun, Mars, Jupiter. Female
Planets are Moon, Venus, Eunuchs, Mercury,
Saturn. I would translate tike last sentence as “ If

the Lagna is occupied by Mercury the women must
be declared as pregnant.”]
Stanza 48
Age of Women
If Bala Chandra and Budha aspect or occupy
Lagna, the question refers to young girls. If Sani
aspects or joins Lagna, the question indicates old
women. Ravi and Guru in Lagna or aspecting it,
make the query refer to woman confined after delivery.
If Kuja and Sukra join or aspect Lagna, the question
refers to troublesome and immoral woman. Similarly
the age of the males must be predicted.
Notes
This is a difficult stanza and in the last part,
etc., seems to be incomplete though highly suggestive.
Planets have their various ages which are determined by their position and movements.
The ages of the planets are thus determined —
(1) Bala or infancy (2) Kumar a or boyhood
(3) Yuva or Youth and manhood (4) Vriddha or
old age and (5) Mitra or dead or dying. These states
have to be found out in the following way: — (see
Jataka ParijataCh.il, St. 72 and Sar. Chintamani,
Eng. Tr. by me Ch. I, St. 44, P. 49). In Sarwartha Chintamani 6 stages are given, viz., Bala, Kumara,
Tharuna, Vriddha, Alasa {debility or ailing) and Mnta
dead. Ahisa is extra. A sign is divided into 30'
degrees. Divide this into 5 divisions and we gel
6 degrees for each division. The first division in
all odd signs, gives infancy to all the planets.
The second division makes them boys. The third
division gives them manhood, fourth part makes them
old and the fifth division makes them dead. In even
signs the order must be reserved. The first six
degrees give the planet death, the next six degrees
make them old, the next six degrees give them manhood, the next six degrees indicate their boyish state,
and the last six degrees give them infancy. Bhatotphala

gives a different interpretation — Budha is called
Bala or infant, within the first fifteen degrees of the
Rasi. Chandra is called Bala from the 1st to the
10th of the bright half of the Lunar month, from the
11th of the bright half of the Lunar month to the
5th of the dark half of the Lunar month, he will be
in manhood, and from the 6th of the dark half to the
end of it or to the Amavasya, he will be old. When
Chandra and Budha are in manhood, the question
relates to grown up women, when they are in old age,
the query refers to old women. If Sam aspects or
occupies the Lagna, the woman will be old. If the
Lagna is occupied or aspected by Ravi and Guru, the
question tefers to woman who have delivered a child
and aie confined. If Kuja and Sukra join or aspect
Lagna, the query refers to women who are hard-hearted and quarrelsome. When this question relates
to males, only their age must be predicted by the
combinations given above and nothing else.
[We are unable by thisSloka to determine the age
of the woman or person quesited (i.e., the person about
whom the question is put). We are asked to declare
the quesited to be an young girl or boy if young Moon
or Mercury occupy or aspect the Prasna Lagna, if
Saturn occupies or aspects the Lagna the quesited is
an old woman or man, if the Sun or Jupiter occupies
or aspects the Lagna it refers to a woman confined
after delivery (in the case of a man, I would say, confined or convalescent after illness), if Mars or Venus
occupies oi aspects the Lagna it indicates a woman or
man who is tough or uncouth or hard-hearted or cruel
person. The original word is “ Karkasa ” which
means hard, rough, firm, hard-hearted, stern or cruel.
Both physical and mental or moral qualities are
indicated Hence translate “ Karkasam Streem" as a
worn in possessing a rough, uncouth exterior or possessing tin- qu ihties of hard-heartedness, firmness or
cruel t\ . Young Moon means Moon from 1st day to
the 10th Day of the bright half of the month — that is

CHAPPANNA
from 1st day of New Moon till 10 days thereafter.
The age of a person whether it be the thief or any
person quesited can thus be found.]
Stanza 49
Nature of Persons Questioned
By the planets in Lagna, it must be predicted
that the person thought of would be similar to the
querent. From the planets in the 3rd, the querent
will have thought of brothers, from the planets in the
5th, the question refers to children, from the planets in
the 4th, the question will refer to mother or sisters, the
enemies must be ascertained from the planets in the
6th house.
Notes
All houses refer to the rising sign or Prasna Lagna.
If there are planets in the Lagna, the querent will
have thought of men like himself, if there are planets
in the 3rd, the query refers to brothers, if there are
planets in 4th, it refers to mother or sisters, if the 5th
has planets, then the query refers to children, and by
the planets in the 6th enemies must be guessed. But
suppose some or all these houses have planets, then I
suppose, the strongest and the most powerful planet
must be found out, and the persons referred to in the
Stanza by the house must be predicted.
[See my notes below Sloka 50.]
Stanza
Bhavas Indicate Their Personages
By the planets in the 7th house, wife, by planets
in the 9th about charitable persons, by planets in the
10th about his own preceptor, and by the Navamsa
lord in Lagna, about the querent himself must be
predicted, ^he friendship, enemity, acquaintanceship,
etc., should be ascertained by the planetary relations,
occupying the several Bhavas,

CHAPPANNflf
Notes
By the planets in the 7th, the query must be stated
to relate to wife, by the planets in the 9th, to & charitable person and by the planets in the 10th it would
relate to his preceptor or Guru. The second, 8th, 11th
and 12th houses have been omitted and I cannot
easily understand the reason why such an omission
should have been made. Probably these houses were
not taken care of by the ancient writers for reasons
best known by the help of their Divya Dristi or expanded mental vision. When the Navamsa lord occupies
the Lagna, then the question relates to the querent
himself. Any planet occupying any house must either
be a friend, foe or neutral, with the shades of relations
explained in Stanzas 16 & 37 Ch. II of Brihat Jataka
43 & 4 in Eng. Translation. Suppose Sani occupies
Simha, the rising sign, he will be in an unfriendly
house.
[The principle or method of discovery of
the subject of query is given out by Slokas 49 and 50
and I would render the 2 Slokas into English thus.
“ If a planet, in strength occupies the Prasna Lagna the
subject of query is about one similar or equal to or
related to, or connected with the querent ; if it occupies
the 3rd house the query will indicate the brothers
of the querent ; if the planet occupies the 4th house the
query relates to the mother or sister of the querent ; if
the planet occupies the 5th house the subject of the
query will be the issue of the querent, if it occupies
the 6th house it will refer to the enemy of the querent,
if it occupies the 7th hou->e it will relate to his wife, if
it occupies the 9th house the subject of the query will
be a person engaged in virtuous deeds, if it occupies
10th house it refers to the querent’s preceptor or some
one held in veneration by him.
As regards, the last part of Sloka 50, there.seems
to be divergent 'views. One view is “If the planet
occupying the Prasna Lagna is the lord of the rising
Navamsa and be powerful the query relates to the

CHAPPANNA
querent himself ; if the planet occupying the Lagna is
a friend of the lord of the rising Navamsa the query
refers to a friend of the querent; if the planet is an
enemy of the lord of the rising Navamsa the query has
reference to the enemy of the querent.” The other
view is : — “ If the planet occupying the Prasna Lagna
be its lord and is powerful the query is about
the querent himself ; if the planet occupying the Lagna
is friendly to the lord of the Lagna the query is about
his friend ; if the planet in the Prasna Lagna is an
enemy of the lord of the Lagna the query relates to the
enemy of the querent. Both views seem to be tenable
and experience alone will reveal which view is correct.
Stanza 51.
On Sexual Union
If Ravi, Sukra or Kuja joins the 7th house, say
the querent has committed adultery with another
man’s wife, if Guru occupies the 7th, the connection
will be with his own wife, if Budha occupies the 7th,
the sexual union will be with a prostitute, if Sani joins
the 7th, the adultery will be with a woman from the
lowest caste or status. The age, form, complexion,
and beauty of the woman enjoyed will be similar to
that of the planet or planets who cause the sexual
union.
Notes
This stanza may look queer in the opinions of
some readers. This, I beg to say, proceeds from
ignorance of human nature and its various workings ;
some of which defy all sane or sensible reasoning and
logic. Brutes confine to their own species in sexual
matters, and then they cohabit only at stated and
reasonable times when they are in heat. Monkeys on
the other hand, are reckless about times. Man violates
all rules of decency, and his brutal nature sometimes
commits most horrible sexual irregularities, not only
with his species but with other brutes also. Under
the heading Rufie in Archibald’s Criminal Pleadings,
the most horrible and shocking cases are related, of

CHAPPANNA
the violation and commission of sexual rules, and
those who have the misfortune to read the history of
the Androguynes, Eunucks, and other Brutal women,
will see to what depth of degradation human nature
can go in the gratification of their sexual passions and
morbid desires. If an astrologer is an expert, many
will go to him, and put questions about their
sexual vagaries and other matters connected with
them. Here the author gives hints to find out what
sort of woman the querent had enjoyed. Ravi, Kuja
or Sukra in the 7th from the rising sign indicate
adultery with others’ wives. When Guru is In the 7th,
he will have had enjoyment with his own lawful wife,
if Budha is found in the 7th, sexual union with prostitutes or dancing women must be predicted. If Sani
occupies the 7th, then the connection will be with low
caste women. In societies where there are no castes
or creeds as there is in India and such societies are
really rare, in this World, adultery takes place, with
women, who are held in low or degraded and despicable position. There is no place without sdme forms
of aristocracy, democracy and despicable or depressed
classes. Suppose a noble man commits adultery with
his scavenger’s or sweeper’s wife or daughter, the
society will at once hold him as a renegade to his caste,
position and surroundings and treats him with
contempt. The age, manner and agreeableness or
otherwise of the woman and the man will have to be
found out by the different stages of life attributed to
Chandra and Budha in the previous stanza {see ftp. 53
and 54 of my Eng. Tr. of Br. Ja.) Girls before puberty
and old women after sixty are sometimes found guilty
of sexual irregularities, and a deep study of human
mind, will reveal a flood of light on human scandals,
too horrible to be condoned.
[The Sloka in its 3rd and 4th lines runs thus: —
u Vayah Sasivath Provadeth" which jueans„that the
age of the woman sexually enjoyed is indicated by the
Moon, If Moon is young the woman indicated is
young, if the Moon is old the woman is old.]

CHAPPANNA
Stanza 52
Person gone to Foreign Lands
If the Lagna falls in a chara Rasi, and occupies
achara Navamsa after its 5th Navamsa, the query
relates to a man who has gone to foreign land. If
there is any retrograde planet from the 8th from
Lagna to the 12th, the return of the person may be
predicted.
Notes
If Achara Navamsa after the 5th Navamsa, in the
movable signs, viz,, Aries, Cancer, Libra or Capricornus, falls as the Navamsa in these^Lagnas, then the
query refers to a man who has gone to a foreign land.
Thus in all these movable signs, the first five Navamsas should be rejected. Take Mesha as the rising
Lagna. The first five Navamsas are Mesha, Vrishabha,
Mithuna, Kataka and Simha. These should be
omitted. If the next Achara Navamsa, viz., Thula
rises in Mesha, then say that the question refers to a
man who has gone to a foreign land. If there is any
retrograde planet in the next five houses after the 7th,
the traveller’s return may be predicted. Take Mesha
as the rising Lagna. If there is any retrograde planet
in the 8th, viz., Vrischika, 9th Dhanas, 10th Makara,
11th Kumbha or 12th Meena, the person who has
gone out will come back. This stanza again refers to
persons who have gone to distant lands and their
return.
[The translation of the latter part of the Sloka is,
in my opinion, opposed to the Sloka. I would translate
the Sloka thus: — “ If the Prasna Lagna is a cardinal
(chara) sign and occupies a Chara Navamsa past the
5th Navamsa of the lagna the_ query relates to a
person who has gone abroad. If a planet direct in
motion leavirjg* 7th house has entered the 8th house
the person gone abroad will return. If the said planet
is retrograde the person will not return.]

70 CHAPPANNA \
Stanza 53 ]
Change of Country j
If the Sun occupies the 8th from Lagna, combined |
with or aspected by benefics, the father of the querent j
will have left the first country he went and has gone to i
another country. The combination is not so, he will >
be in the first country. , j
Notes 1
A person goes to an astrologer to find out whether 1
his father, who has gone to a foreign country, is there -
or gone to another country. If the 8th house from i
Lagna is occupied by the Sun combined with or j
aspected by benefics, the father will have gone to ]
another country than the first he went to. Otherwise j
he will be there. The author does not say whether j
he will return or not.
[The last sentence in the translation has no foundation in the Sloka. But it is permissible to infer i
or deduce the position.]
. Stanza 54
Bhavas refer to their Persons respectively
If the Sun aspected by benefics, joins the 8th '
from Lagna, the father of the querent has gone to
another country. The query refers to those other
persons who are governed by other planets in the 8th.
Notes
The first seems to be a repetition. When the 8th
from the Lagna is occupied by the Sun, the query
refers to father. When it is occupied by the Moon,
the question must refer to mother or motherly relations. Kuja indicates cousins and brothers, Budha
indicates maternal uncles ; Guru indicates children and
preceptors ; Sukra refers to wife and female relations.
Sani refers to servants and dependents. When the
planet in the 8th is aspected by benefics, the safe and
prosperous return of the party referred* to must be
predicted. When evil and powerless planets aspect,
by inference, danger and death must be predicted.

CHAPPANNA
[I cannot find this Sloka anywhere in other editions. Hence I am not able to.offer any suggestions.]
Stanza 55
Traveller’s Diseases
If Saturn conjoined by malefics occupies the 9th
without beneficial conjunctions or aspects, the traveller
will be suffering from various diseases. If Saturn combined with malefics joins the 8th house, the person, who
has gone to the foreign land, will die from diseases.
Notes
Sani must be in the 9th, combined with malefics,
and uncombined or unaspected by benefics to make
the traveller fall sick and suffer from diseases. By
inference, if there are also beneficial conjunctions or
aspects, the intensity of the evil will be lessened and he
may fall sick off and on, but not to a serious extent.
Sani in the 8th from Lagna combined with malefics will
kill the person who has gone to a foreign country. If
he is powerfully aspected by the benefics or has their
conjunction, then he will pass through the jaws of
death but will not die. The last is ventured on my
own responsibility in the light of general principles.
[I have one or two suggestions to make. Instead
of “ beneficial conjunctions or aspects ” I would suggest “ without the conjunction or aspect of benefic
planets,” and the latter part of the Sloka would be
better put, in accordance with the original, as follows :
“ If Sani combined with malefics is in the 8th house it
indicates death.”]
Stanza 56
Prosperity and Adversity to the Traveleer
If the question Lagna falls in a movable sign and
is occupied by a benefic, the traveller will get prosperity. If evil planets join the Prasna Lagna, evil will
befall on the traveller. If the Lagna falls in a fixed
sign and is combined with evil planets the results will
be mixed.

n
CHAPPANNA
Notes
This is the last stanza and is not very difficult to
understand. Movable signs are Mesha, Kataka,
Thula and Makara. If the Lagna falls in any one of
these Rasis and it is conjoined by a benefic — Guru,
Sukra, good Budha or Poorna Chandra, then good -will
come to the traveller. If the Lagna falls in a fixed
sign and it is occupied by evil planets, then the
Author says, the results will be mixed, some good and
some evil will happen to the person who has gone to a
foreign country. Here, evil planets may be in their
own houses, exaltations, Moolathrikonas or friendly
houses, in. which case good must be predicted.
But if they are badly situated or combined or aspected, evil will have to be predicted. The author has taken
us over a large area of queries, concerning human
events and has, in short and sweet language, expressed
a great deal of meaning which was the motto of his
illustrious father Varaha Mihiracharya, the author of
so many works on astrology and astronomy. The
commentaries of Bhatotphala are simply invaluable,
and his labours in the cause of astrology are valuable
and priceless. He has done immense service to
humanity, and I cannot sufficiently thank him for his
lucid, learned and authoritative quotations and able
explanations. It is my humble opinion that the works
of Varaha Mihira and his son Prithayasas, would not
have obtained such wide popularity, but for his
invaluable commentaries.
[I offer no remarks on this Sloka as I cannot
trace it in other editions.]
Conclusion
I, Bangalore Suryanarain Rao, B.A., M.R.A.S., &C.,
completed this English translation of Chappanna with
the help of the commentaries of Bhatotphala on the
8th August, Monday, 1921, on the 5th day of the
bright half of the Lunar month Sravana, in the Cyclic
year Durmati, at 10’ to 6 p.m. in the first padam of
Chitta, in Salivahanasaka 1843 and the Kaliyuga

CHAPPANNA
5022, at my own residence in Hunsamaranahalli, near
Bangalore, India. I have given my pedigree, in the
Eng. Translation of Brihat Jataka and my own autobiography by myself. My kind readers may refer to
them, if they care to know more about me and my
work. The following are the Graha Kundalis at the
time I finished my present translation and attach it
for ready reference.
Kethu
Venus
RASI
Sun
Mars
Mercury
Rising
Sign
Jupiter
Moon
Saturn
Rahu
Kethu
Rising
Sign
NAVAMSA
Sun
Venus
Moon
Jupiter
s
Mars
Mercury
Kahn
The lord of the rising sign Makara is in the 9th
with Rahu and Chandra, Guru is in the house of
longevity. The house of wealth is aspected by Guru.
In the Navamsa, the lord of the sign is exalted in the
house of happiness. Rahu and Kethu are in Vargottamas. Jupiter aspects the Lagna and the Moon. The
house of wealth is aspected by Venus and the Sun.
I most humbly and gratefully dedicate my work to
that Final Intelligence, the Great Para Bramha, who
gave me intellect, vitality, capacity, and true devotion to
Him to draw inspiration, and to complete this translation of a valuable ancient work. To write books for
the use of humanity, in a clear, agreeable, attractive
and instructive way, is not given to every body. Only
the blessed few get this capacity and if they used such
power for t^e benefit and instruction of mankind, they
will be really blessed. This work has been finished in
my 66th year.
THE END

CHAPPANNA
Appendix
36 Drekkanas
To ask my readers to refer to my notes on the
Drekkanas, may be inconvenient to -many, as some of
them may not have my English Translation of Bnhat
Jataka. I therefore give the characteristics of the
thirty-six Drekkanas as given by Varaha Mihira in his
Brihat Jataka Ch. 27. They must be used in places
where their services are called tor. Each Rasi contains
30 degrees, and when divided into 3 equal parts, we
get a Drekkana, of course measuring 10 degrees and
forming one-third of a Rasi. Each Rasi has 3 Drekkanas and the total number of Drekkanas in the
Zodiac will therefore be 36.
1. Mesh a
1. Drekkana in Mesha —
A man with a white cloth round his waist, dark,
pretending to protect, fearful red eyes, and a lifted
axe, ruler Mars, masculine and armed.
2. A woman with a red cloth, pot belly, fond of
ornaments and food, horse face, thirsty and singlefooted ; quadruped, feminine, ruler Sun. Some say
this is a Vihaga or bird Drekkana. A quadruped
must have four feet.
3. Man, cruel, skilled in arts, yellowish, fond of
work, unprincipled, lifted up stick, angry and covered
with purple clothes, armed, masculine, ruled by Jupiter.
2. Vrishabha
1. Woman, torn ringlets, pot belly, burnt cloth,
thirsty, fond of food and ornaments, feminine, fiery in
nature and governed by Venus.
2. Man possessed of knowledge of laq,ds, grains,
horses, cows, arts, carts, ploughing, hufigry, sheepfaced, dirty clothes, and shoulders like the hump of
an ox, masculine, quadruped, governed by Mercury.

CHAPPANNA
3. Man with an elephantine belly, white teeth,
legs like Sarabha, yellowish, clever in capturing sheep
and deer, masculine, quadruped, ruled by Saturn.
Notes
Sarabha is an animal at which the lion gets
frightened. Amara says in derivation — Srinathi Simham or Sarabha or that which kills the lion. This
animal possesses eight legs of great size and strength.
Mahabharata thus refers to this animal — Astapadurd
va Natnaha Sarabha V aneyocharaha — it has eight
legs, eyes in the top and lives in the forest. Another
animal is mentioned, called Sardula and a tremendous
bird Gandabherunda. Probably this species is now
extinct, or may be living in forests, which have not yet
been discovered by the modern globe-trotter.
3. Mithuna
1. Female, handsome, fond of needle work,
ornamentations, issueless, lifted hands, in menses;
feminine, ruled by Mercury.
2. Man living in garden, in armour with a bow,
warlike, armed with weapons, face of Garuda, fond of
play with children and ornamentations, and wealth,
masculine, bird Drekkana ruled by Venus.
Notes
Garuda, is of the kite variety, with white head and
a long nose or beak, commonly called the Vahana of
Vishnu.
3. Man adorned and decked with gems, armed
with quiver and bow, skilled in dancing, drumming,
arts and poetry, masculine and armed, ruled by Saturn.
•4. Kataka
^ ^rl^Man holding fruits, roots and leaves, elephant
"bodied, residing on sandal trees in a forest, legs like
Sarabha, horse-necked, quadruped, masculine, governed
by the Moon.

CHAPPANNA
2. Female worshipped on the head by lotus
flowers, with serpents, full blown youthfulness, living
in forests on the branch of Palasa and crying,
feminine, ruled by Mars.
Note
Palasa is Butea Froadosa, is a fair sized tree with
large leaves much used for taking meals in S. India.
3. A man covered with serpents, flat-faced, and
crossing the Ocean in a boat in search of wife’s jewels,
masculine and serpent, ruled by Jupiter.
5. Simha
1. A vulture and a jackal on a sandal tree, a dog
and a man dressed in dirty garments, forsaken by
parents and crying, masculine, quadruped, and bird,
ruled by the Sun.
2. A man having a horse’s body with white
garlands on the head, wearing Krishnajena and Kambalam, fierce as a lion, with a bow in the hand and a
bent nose, masculine, armed, ruled by Jupiter.
3. A man with a bear’s face, actions like those of
a monkey, long beard, curled ringlets and holding a
stick, fruit and flesh, masculine, armed, ruled by Mars.
Note
There are two readings Krishnajena and Kambala
and Chivara.
Krishnajena is the hide of a dark deer, used by
holy men in doing religious devotion. Kambala means
i woollen blanket, Chivara means a torn cloth.
6. Kanya.’
1. A female with a pot, full of flowers, ^v^ipg,
he body with dirty raiments, fond of money and
lothes, and going to the house of the preceptor, femi :
tine, governed by Mercury.

CHAPPANNA
2. A man with a pen in the hand, dark, head
tied round by a cloth, counting gains and expenditure,
covered over the body with dense hair and holding a
big bow, masculine, armed, ruled by Saturn.
3. Female, yellowish, covered by a white silk
cloth, tall, holding a pot and a spoon, going to a
temple with great sanctity, feminine, ruled by Venus.
7. Thula
1. A man seated in a shop in the middle of the
road, holding balances, clever in weighing and measuring with a small scale for weighing gold, diamonds,
and thinking of his capital and prices of the articles in
the shop, masculine, ruled by Venus.
2. A man with a vultures face, hungry and
thirsty, holding a pot which is ready to fall, and
thinking of his wife and children, * >' • <\ d i i > .
3. Man decked with gems, wearing golden quiver
and armour, and frightening the animals in the wilderness, resembling a monkey and holding fruits and flesh
ruled by Budha.
Notes
Fruits refer to mangoes, plantains, etc. There are
two readings.
1. Kanchana Thuna Varma Brit — wearing gold
quiver and armour.
2. Kinnara Rupa Brinnaraha — wearing the
forms of Kinnaras or a set of celestial beings with
horse-like faces.
In Sanskrit sciences, various forms of celestials
have been named and I shall mention a few of them.
1 Kinnaras, 2 Kimpurushas, 3 Gandharvas,
Yakshas, 5 Siddhas, 6 Sadhyas, 7 Nagas and
so forth. Masculine, quadruped, ruled by Mercury.

CHAPPANNA
8. VRISCHIKA
1. A woman naked, without ornament, coming
from the middle of a great ocean to the shore, dislocated from her original place, the feet bound by
serpents and handsome, feminine, serpent, ruled by
Mars.
2. Woman, fond of happiness, and home for her
husbands sake, and covered by serpents with a body
resembling a tortoise and a pot; feminine, serpent,
ruled by Jupiter.
3. A lion with a broad flat face resembling a
tortoise, frightening dogs, deer, boars and jackals,
protecting localities covered with sandalwood trees,
masculine, quadruped, lion Drekkana, ruled by the
Moon.
9. Dhanas
1. A man with a human face and horses’ body
with a bone in hand, residing in a hermitage, protecting sacrificial articles and Maha Rishis, masculine,
quadruped, armed, ruled by Jupiter.
2. A woman, handsome, with the color of Champaca or gold, picking up the gems from the ocean and
sitting in the Bhadrasana fashion, feminine, ruled
by Mars.
Notes
There are several postures in which the devotees
in Yoga practice are required to sit in their contemplation and concentration. This is technically called
Asatia which means a position of the body in which
steadiness and concentration can be secured in search
of knowledge after Para Brahma. I shall name a few
Asanas here tor ready reference to my readers.
1. Padmasana, 5.
2. Swastikasana, 6.
3. Bhadrasana, 7.
4. Gomukhasana, 8.
9. Simhasana.
Vyaghrasana,
Kukku{asm?<lMayurasana,
Kapulasana,

CHAPPANNA
3. A man with along beard, complexion like that
of Champaca or gold, holding a stick, sitting in a
splendid posture, and keeping silks and deer skins,
masculine, armed, ruled by the Sun. ’
10. Makara
1. A man covered with much hair, teeth like
those of a crocodile, body like that of a pig, keeping
yokes, nets and bandages, camel face, masculine,
Nigala Drekkana, ruled by Saturn.
Notes
Bandages include ropes and chains. Nigala
means chains or ropes.
2. A woman skilled in arts, broad eyes like lotus
petals, greenish dark, searching all kinds of articles
and wearing iron ear ornaments, feminine, ruled by
Venus.
3. A man with a body like that of Kinnaras,
with a Kambalam, with a quiver, arrows and bow, and
bearing a pot on the shoulder, decked with gems,
masculine, ruled by Mercury.
11. Kumbha
1. A man with a mind disturbed by oils, \frines,
water and food being brought to him, with a Kambala,
silk cloth and deer skin and a face resembling that of
a vulture, masculine, ruled by Sani.
2. A woman covered with a dirty cloth in a
forest, bearing pots on her head and dragging metals
in a burnt cart loaded with cotton trees in it. Fiery,
feminine, ruled by Mercury.
jnan dark with ears covered with long hair,
wefnng a 'Town and wandering with pots filled with
iroAskin h aves, gum and fruits, masculine, governed
by fvenuSr

CHAPPANNA
12, Meena
1. A man decked with ornaments, holding in
hand sacrificial vessels, pearls, gems, conch shells and
crossing the ocean in a boat, in search of jewels for his
wife, masculine, ruled by Guru.
2. A woman with a color more beautiful than
that of Champaca, surrounded by her attendants, and
sailing in a boat decked with long flags, in search of
the coast of the ocean, feminine, ruled by the Moon,
Note
Champaca is a beautiful yellow strongly scented
flower pertaining to Mongolia species. There are
several varieties. Some are light yellow, some yellow
and some are reddish yellow, of a very strong odour.
3. A man crying in a pit in a forest, naked and
covered over his body by serpents and with a mind
distracted by fires and thieves, masculine, serpent,
ruled by Mars.

CONCLUSION
It is extremely difficult to understand wliat all
these exactly mean, and how they have to he pioperly
applied, Varaha Mihira in la's Yatra Paiala or treatise
on travelling, thus remarks and this is quoted by the
illustrious commentator Bhatotphala — The OMilt of
the rising Drekkaiu at the time of journey, must be
predicted with re I ere nee to their* form actions and
nature. If the Drekkana is agieeable, bearing lloweis,
fruits, gems or treasures, or it it is aspected by benofics,
then prosperity will attend the traveller’s march. 1 f the
Diekkanas are armed, lie will be victorious, if asf ected
by malefics, he will be defeated or beaten. If the
Drekkana happens to be the serpent or bandage, the
traveller will be disgraced or imprisoned or will die.
These Drekkanas also will enable one to know the
nature, place and form of the thieves. I shall quote lieie
my own observations from the Brihat Jataka p. 206
for read} perusal. Fix the Lagna and its Vargas correctly for the time of query or travel. After doing this,
ascertain the nature of the article lost by the rising
Navamsa and the nature ot the thieves by the DroLkaua.
By the Lagna find out the time of the article lost, the
direction it has taken, the place from which it was
removed, and the locality where it has been deposit! d.
Find out theage and caste of the thieves In the Loici of
Lagna. In journeys, if the Drekkana is good, he will boprosperous, if it is evil, he will suffer loss, if it is very
bad, he will even die. The strength, position, lordship,
conjunction and aspect must be carefully consulted for
all the Shadvargas. The uses of Drekkanas are more
com nief^ nsive than what I have stated here. In the
hgcT'jA-atd third Chapters of Brihat J alalia, many
d> 'e given and they must be studied well.
A, born in a cruel Drekkana will be bad,

CHAPPANNA
hardhearted, and miserable. A girl who first attains
her age, in an evil Drekkana will trun out an immoral
or quarrelsome woman. One who has sexual union in
a bad Drekkana will beget criminal children. A
speculation started in an evil Drekkana wall end in
failure, loss and danger. A king or officer who first
takes charge in an unfavourable Drekkana, will meet
with defeats, dangers and difficulties and eve% death.
The nature of the disease which accounts for death
will have to be determined by the Drekkana which
rises at birth. This will fall in the 8th -house.
In Ch. 25, Verse 11, of his Brihat Jataka (my Eng.
Translation p 141) he says — The learned in Astrology
indicate the 22nd Drekkana as the cause of death
to the person. The death will be caused by the
manner attributed to the lord of this Drekkana, or the
lord of the Rasi to w'hich it belongs. Jaya Deva clearly
says that death will ensue from such causes which are
attributed to the planets in the 8th, to the planets who
aspect it, to the lord of the Navamsa which rises in the
8th, and if none of these are present, then the lord of
the 8th and the lord of the 22nd Drekkana from birth.
Drekkana whoever is stronger will determine the
causes, diseases and dangers which kill a man. Dundi
Raja, an elaborate compiler, quotes from ancient
authorities, about the particular forms of diseases, each
of these 36 Drekkanas, produces, and he may be perused
with advantage by those who want greater information
on these interesting subjects.
The End
Mod! P. P. Works, B.-City

BEST BOOKS OH AS ISQL06Y
Bsf
Piq{ B STJRYANARAIN RAc >
Am
Dr Be V, RAMAN
1 Bnhat Jatakd— English Translation with lull commem
lanes of Bhatotphala. (Jq print! Rs. 10 -
2 Sarwarthdchmtamam — English Translation. Exhaustive
notes» Part 1, Rs. 6'*. Part 3 Rs 6 * (part >
out of print” 1
3„ Jataka Ghandnka -5 edr* a ) Fis. 3
4. Astrological Mirror t Pocket edn ) As. 8
5. Jataka Kalanidhi - Treasure store tor Astrological
Science A$ 0 1 2.
6 Astrological Sell . Instructor HGEcin. • Zoohcui Map
Author's Photo Rs 4 -
7 Hindu Predictive Astrology Contains a dear expo si
lion of all branches of Astrology m a graduateo
form, casting the horoscopes, finding Dasas, predicting all events, correctly Rs, 7 '8.
y, A Manual of Hindu Astrology a clear ana
concise account of the essential principles o:
Astrology Rs 4 '8
9. Varsbaphdl or the Hindu Progressed Horoscope gives
an easy method ior deciphering yearly zesulb
scientifically Rs. 2 4
10 lour Next l\uie Years 1944 to l952 Rs ! 4
^usrAiaE pm packing' sxr-\
THE ASTROLOGICAL OFFICE
$ s tmmum
f 0 0, )8ASA¥A»GUHI
IS, Mia *

ANNOUNCEMENT’!
k:^ you pie? j e j 4 if-n d? d he ntalei roih itj
^stunhujuaf SrtfiHt
HfHl IS OUt QhFbH IQ you 1
8 *> uppu duntta i J idy As f doq\ n four leisure
r ii *- i a < nsi your two Horoscopes
Htan l brary cut rs*- teaches \ou t develop the
iuat^j'jndmq ne-fts^dr* tat conertairo pmrhc^l dppli
ar A Astn |/ t< daily nfe It includes the following
f#o k?
) A v hit rod u non to me otudy A Astrsloqv Be 1 -
1 Astrologies pum^r Rs 18
*1 AnboioqiCci Seif-Insinnior Rs 4
+ Sc’dv >qd Oan]dry Rs 3
] c r im stPn Rs 3 i ?
ir r f inpendiurn of Astrology ftp » 4
/ G» i hd in 3 Bhdv'i f> las Rs 2 12
How t Judge * itaioscope Part I Rs ■* 1 }
’ Br c vdf^ d RsM Ac*m Rs 4 R
• i Pnhat Ia i dkd Hs 8 8
I i GnMdeepika Rs 4 8
\J Si ip iti Pc i ell a T Rs 2 J >
i * utld’dki .Tinta Rs 3 1?
-3 J i 1 a inkdtc Rs I S
S p pd ,r St! Astrolc gy Rs l
U‘ P-rp^tui Ephemerioe* Rs 4
i <- ci sr -J t J A Books w II cone LCi Rs 52 8
i *■ v. s l ioe I"ti ihe dboi - ^6 item* ncludiia
j-dio Rs 4b oi Y V p P VWy Inured sets
"'Hf r *v
T S i K IsTUOtAHnlV \L (WViVE
B S CH4N0IUM
Publishers' Book Sellers,
l\ O. II \SA\ AMU'DI
fiuflid ?
