READABLE DATASET
================================================================================
Original file: ckn_3.json
Dataset number: 84 of 455
Format: valid JSON
Structure: Object / structured dataset
Original size: 1,787,418 bytes
Top-level fields: 11
Title: CKN 3
Creator: —
Date: —
Description: —

CONTENT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
METADATA AND OTHER FIELDS
  • title: CKN 3
  • creator: —
  • date: —
  • description: —
  • subject: —
  • identifier: —
  • source_folder: ckn-3
  • total_pages: 322
  • total_words: 191692
  • text_quality:
    • ocr_word_validity_score: 0.892
    • quality_tier: good
    • note: —

FULL TEXT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
(CHANDRA KALA NADI
Translated by
R. SANTHANAM
Soa Jupiter
Saturn

DEVA KERALAM
(CHANDRA KALA NADI)
BY
ACHYUTA OF KERALA
& VENKATESA
BOOK III
(Containing slokas 1998 to 5774)
Translated by
R. Santhanam
SAGAR PUBLICATIONS
Ved Mansion
72, Janpath
New Delhi 110 001

First Published 1994
Reprint 1998,
Reprint 2003, 2004
© Publishers
Published by Narinder Sagar
for Sagar Publications
72, Ved Mansion. Janpath, New Delhi - 110 001
Printed by Jay Kay Offset Printers, Delhi - 110 041

Contents
Immovable ascendant - Kutila Nadiamsa;
Leo ascendant - ibid; placement of the lord
of the ascendant.
Kutila Nadiamsa - 1st half, Arudha pada in
a dual sign as Leo with Virgo Navamsa
rises; Kutila Nadiamsa - 2nd half.
Jupiter in aspect to Saturn and Mars; Jupiter
related only to saturn; about father.
Saturn - Mars in Aries in connection with
father; death of grand-father; progress to
father, miserable with the employer.
Second dasa, paternal uncles, co-born,
happiness to co-born, sister’s husband -
quarrels, fortunes etc., progeny.
Curse of previous birth; marriage;
interrupted affection to wife, attached to
prostitutes.
Thieving in own home; wandering in foreign
lands etc; returning in vain; other effects for
Kutila Nadiamsa - Leo ascendant;
remarriage, two long-living wives, enmity
with spouse; family of poverty; progeny
through second wife.
Scorpio ascendant - Sama Nadiamsa; Mars
in an angle or in Leo with Aries Navamsa;
birth place; no after-born; children; two
sisters; mental derangement to brother.
Ketu in 3rd and younger brother;
questionable history; Scorpioascendant with
Virgo Navamsa; attached to whores, one
brother versed in Vedas; another being
childless; details of last brother.
10. One brother having mean profession, childless,
hit by diseases and being a trouble maker;
Immovable ascendant - Sama Nadiamsa;
Scorpio ascendant - ibid; Rahu in the 9th
giving longevity, knowledge of scriptures
etc., Saturn in the 2nd giving crooked
disposition, untruthfulness etc.
Learning in astrology; fame; lust; wealth;
patronizing brothers; holy speech; being a
lamp of the family; blessed by Lakshmi;
memory of past birth; skill in astrology with
Saturn and Venus in 5th in Pisces; worldwide fame.
Sacred dips in Ganges; performing Yagnas,
skill in Vedanta; ulcers on right side of the
body; Kemadruma Yoga; Arudha Lagna
having exalted Moon; Kemadruma yoga
giving wealth; evil effects; the Sun in Libra
Navamsa cancelling other good Yogas.
Performing Yagnas etc., prosperity;
opulence; world after death; effect of Rahu
in the 9th concerning father; father living by
beggary; long-living grand-mother.
Special rulefor Kali Yuga; 3rddasa; mother’s
life-span; brothers, uncles, beggary during
boyhood days.
Maternal uncles; three wives; involvement
with other women; wife’s sister; delirium,
conveyances etc.
Father's death; Panchakshari Mantra;
teaching profession, fourth dasa, 3rd
marriage to self; three marriages to co-born;
evils to progeny; relief from debts.
Saturn’s dasa; transits; Gemini ascendant -
Indra Nadiamsa; birth surroundings.
Physique; childhood; Raja Yoga effects;
trading activities; royal service; ministership
etc; blessings of goddess Lakshmi; Rajayoga
effects after 30; wealth after 2nd marriage;
involvement in own undertakings, enmity
with brother; shunning orthodoxy; betrayal
of friends, stealing others’ wealth; wealth
through truthful means, marriage ina famous
family; enthusiasm in non-Vedic séct;
presidential position; marriage in northern
region; happiness after marriage.
Fear of death; long life; mother-in-law’s
death following marriage; destruction of inlaws; about father-in-law; brother-in-law.
Brothers; family of in-laws; sisters; 4th
dasa; 2nd marriage.
Venus in the 3rd; four children; 2nd
marriage, begetting twins; blemish of ears
and eyes to a son; destruction of first issue;
children through re-marriage; daughter’s
lives; enmity with relatives; windy diseases;
many children.
Enmity with older brother; elder brother

having progeny; sister incurring
widowhood; sisters’ daughter; widowhood
to mother, mother living for a long time,
mother’s loss of sons in old age; Ashtaka
Varga; father’s life span; progeny to the
native after the age of 40; Venus in Arudha
Lagna causing favourable effects.
Leo ascendant- Mudgara Nadiamsa; diseases
to father; charitable father; native having no
brothers; happiness to father; danger to
grand-father.
Danger to mother and father; prosperity;
father-in-law; professional happiness to self;
father performing good deeds; death in a
shrine; rebirth as Soodra; devoted to Lords
Vishnu and Siva.
Difficulties through brother; expenditure;
belief and disbelief in gods; good conduct;
worship of Lord Siva; prosperity through
sons; much progress, wealth; son obtaining
twins.
Fire Sacrifices, performing good acts; male
issues; co-born; sons and daughters; one
sister being childless; another leading a
happy life; progeny in old age.
Death of father; wealth in old age; enmity
with mother and own children; transit effects
of Saturn inthe 12 signs; 2nd dasa; separation
from brother; Aquarius KCD; Capricorn
KCD.
Birth of son in Mercury’s dasa; marriage;
birth of son with Jupiter’s transit in Deha
Rasi; Saturn in 12th causing adverse effects;
happiness after 35; Kala Chakra Dasas of
Scorpio, Libra, Scorpio, Libra, and Virgo.
KCD of Virgo; transit in Deha Rasi; Saturn
in Deha Rasi; world after death; rebirth;
Aries ascendant - Kutila Nadiamsa.
Moon in 4th aspected by Saturn and Mars;
Mars in exaltation, fortunes and prosperity;
general effects for Aries ascendant;
happiness in boyhood days; widowhood to
mother; grief to her on account of progeny.
A detailed account of brother; father; paternal
uncles and aunts; prosperity to relatives;
visit to Ganges; loss of spouse; destruction
of brother through a female.
Sinful deeds; delayed performance of last
offices to father; remedy for mother; dynasty
of mother; marriage of native’s daughter,
daughter experiencing poverty and grief,
scriptural injunctions.
Remedies for son’s marriage; daughter’
marriage; accumulation of wealth; 5th dasa;
Ashtaka Varga; wife bearing one child only,
children to relatives; brother’s son;
patronage to brother’s son; enmity with
Vaishnavites; loss of spouse, 2nd marriage;
loss of sister.
Child birth; professional fortunes, making
wealth; danger to father.
Mother’s death; paternal uncle in grief,
danger to the native; windy diseases, birth
of grand-son; difficulties in KCD junctions,
5th dasa; Deha Rasi.
Remedies for malefic transits in Deha Rasi;
Libra dasa; death in Mars dasa; attaining
hell; distress in Libra dasa followed by
happiness.
Saturn’s transit; commencement of a dasa,
Rahu’s transit; prayer to Lord Mrityunjaya;
Jupiter’s transit, Saturn’s transit; 5th dasa.
Special transit rule; Venus dasa; dasa of Sth
lord; 8th lord’s dasa; Moon’s dasa; Saturn’s
transits.
4th Lord’s dasa; Jupiter’s transit; evils to
progeny; sub periods in the 4th lord’s dasa,
46th year, Moon sign of son-in-law; distress
to friends and relatives; authoritative post,
gain of a son in relative’s circle, fear of
untimely death, death of mother.
Sub periods of Venus and the luminaries;
junction of dasas of Moon and Mars; Saturn
moving in Aquarius; sub period of Mars;
sub period of a planet in the 8th; sub period
of the 9th lord; Jupiter moving in Pisces.
Sub periods of Saturn, Sun and Jupiter;
Chandra Kriya; Chandra Avasthas.
Effects for sixty Chandra Kriyas; Chandra
Gunas based on signs.
Chandra Avasthas; commencement of an
undertaking; different Avasthas.
Different Avasthas; success; query about
food.
Transit in Janma and other Nakshatras;
special rules for transit.
Special rules for transit - continued.
Special rules for transit - continued.

More rules for transit; Sagittarius ascendant
= Champaka nadiamsa; Gemini Navamsa;
birth details; mother’s death.
Maternal family, living in other’ house;
Rahu in Arudha Pada; journeys; birth on
malefic’s week-day.
Sagittarius ascendant - Champaka
Nadiamsa; a sinner, addicted to salacious
pleasures etc., devoted to Lord Siva; two
wives; separation for brother, being a best
father, debilitated Sun leading to difficulties
to father; debilitated Venus causing
happiness to father; paternal uncles; Sun in
fixed Navamsa.
Second Dasa; progeny of first and second
wives.
Poverty; third dasa.
Dasa of debilitated planet; 4th dasa; honour
by ministers.
Fourth dasa,; Rahu in Arudha Pada; Rahu
in the 9th; death of wife; fifth dasa, dasa of
Mars.
Dasa periods of malefic and benefic planets;
sub period of a malefic planet; enmity with
king; Sth dasa; Rahu dasa, 5th dasa’s
conclusion.
Dasa of Mars.
Remedies according to Guru (Brihaspathi).
Bhrigu (Venus) and Manu; Deha lord in 6th
or 8th; conclusion of Mars dasa.
Family marriage; friendship with ruler; 6th
dasu; Rahu dasa; Rahu in Leo; sub period of
Jupiter.
Dasa of ascendant lord.
First sub period of 6th dasa; Dasa periods of
Moon, Mars and Rahu.
Death of wife in 15 dasa; 4th lord with
malefic at the time of commencement of a
dasa; middle of Mars dasa; Saturn and Mars
aspecting the ascendant; Venus dasa;
Nakshatras in transits.
Intelligent younger brother; devotee of Lord
Vishnu; fortunes; wealth, windy diseases;
full life-span; loss of children; strained
relations, elimination of occupational
hazards; conveyances; cruel deeds; Sri Gauri
Yoga.
Venus in 3rd; Venus in the 4th along with
the Moon; fame and wealth; exhaustion of
riches; lords of 9th and 10th; lord ofthe 10th
in Leo.
Movable ascendant - Dhananjaya Nadiamsa;
views of sage Kasyapa; trading activities;
fame; wealth; prosperity; wealth; Saturn
aspecting Moon.
Royal fortunes; happiness through grandmother; truth and miserliness; mental
perturbation, addiction to women, cheating
people; full-fledged wealth; Movable
ascendant - Kubera Nadiamsa; royal service;
Caner ascendant with exalted Mars; views
of Kasyapa.
Anaccount of Grand-father (being involved
in Tantrik rituals having bad history, losing .
wife and details of his death); brother’s
marriage; happiness throughout life.
Kesari Yoga; Cancer ascendant - father
described; Jupiter in Martian Navamsa.
Father’s enmity with his co-born; Mars
aspected by Venus; sage Garga’s views;
node in Sth causing expertise in philosophy
to father; views of sage Kasyapa; number of
paternal uncles.
Paternal aunt; father; paternal uncle
remaining unmarried; an in-law being mad;
mother.
Mother pre-deceasing father, maternal
uncle; maternal uncle having eye diseases,
grief etc., co-born.
Elder brother having two wives; being
childless; wealth-gatherer; adopting a male
issue; Aquarius Navamsa rising; obstacles
to brother in getting progeny.
Details relating to brother, Aquarius
Navamsa; Saturn in exaltation.
Venus & Mars in Aries; Mercury & Mars in
Aries; Venus in Scorpio; in-laws; many
sons; son incurring poverty; two sons and
two wives; planetary evils; blemishes
concerning progeny; wealth; excellent
fortunes; grief in old age.
Wandering disposition of son; grief to
daughter; prosperity and diseases; hidden
wealth; emaciated body, dyspepsia, disorders
of limbs; obstacles to good deeds and
worship; hidden wealth; indestructible
wealth; Kesari Yoga.
Fortunes; death of mother, brother, uncle,

grand-father, paternal uncle etc., 4th dasa:
father’s death due to dropsy; life after 40;
lord of 9th Arudha pada; dasa of Rahu in
5th; 3rd dasa; 8th lord’ dasa.
Life-span details; mental perturbation;
remedies; death at 51; 5th dasa; Arudha of
the 6th.
Sick for long durations; abdominal disorders;
Jupiter’s dasa; sage Kasyapa’s views;
Arudha of the 12th house; Gaja Kesari
Yoga; Movable as.endant - Kshama
Nadiamsa.
Birth surroundings; sage Kasyapa’s view;
loss of father and grand-father in childhood;
happiness through brother, timely marriage;
self-earned wealth.
Grand-father, sister; brother-in-law.
In-laws’ family; father.
Father, his prosperity, preceptor etc.
Paternal uncle; loss of father; step-mother;
prosperity.
Happiness right from birth; father’s troubles;
abdominal troubles, Vedic knowledge;
Brahmopadesa.
Abdominal disorder in 7th year; remedies;
infantile mortality; Taurus ascendant - Visva
Nadiamsa. \
Danger to mother; paternal uncle; sage
Garga’s: views; maternal family; early
marriage.
Gemini Navamsa; Virgo Navamsa; Cancer
Navamsa; Rahu in 2nd giving wealth etc.,
educational impediments; brothers and
sisters; evils to mother, infantile mortality.
End of mother, remedial measures; first
dasa, brother’s marriage; marriage of the
native; dasa of planet occupying Leo in
Navamsa; bhava analysis; Saturn’s transit.
Taurus ascendant - Yama Shashtiamsa; grief
to aunt and father; happiness to father;
Venus sub period; virtuous wife, Taurus
KCD; Gemini KCD; Mercury’s dasa; Sun’s
dasa, father’s death; father becoming an
ascetic.
Father’s death; brother’s happiness; Ketu’s
dasa; 3rd dasa; sub periods of Moon and
Rahu; Venus dasa, fear of untimely death,
death at 50; sub periods of Rahu and Jupiter;
bilious and windy disorders; hell after death.
Moon in Poorvbhadra; Manu’s views; Kalpa
Druma Yoga; Parijata Yoga.
Mandara Yoga; royal service; ownership of
a kingdom: abundant fortunes and wealth;
prosperity.
Male issues; fame; princely status; some
happiness; dead children; loss of co-born;
Mars in Cancer with Capricorn Navamsa;
Movable ascendant - Parameswari
Nadiamsa.
Effects for Parameswari Nadiamsa; fortunes,
wealth; many daughters and limited number
of sons; early death of two brothers; marrying
a wicked female; spouse begetting infamy;
many children; destruction of in-laws’
family.
Fathcr-in-law having two wives; native’s
marriage in 3rd dasa, long-lasting
prosperity; happiness through sons and coborn; sinning disposition; virtuous path of
living; meritorious and munificent; sickness;
evils; increased fortunes; prosperity of son;
financial gains.
Venus in Aries with Sagittarius Navamsa;
Venus in the end of Aries; Saturn in Leo in
transit; Jupiter’s transit in Aries; Mercury’s
sub period; Rahu in the 3rd; movements of
Saturn and Jupiter, wealth; mercy of Lord
Siva; happiness after 35.
Charitable and fortunate; 3rd, 4th and 5th
04525; 5th dasa’s sub periods; Saturn in
transit in Virgo and Cancer.
6th dasa, Navamsa dispositor of Venus; 9th
lord’s periods; happiness right from birth,
lasting prosperity; much wealth; eye
diseases; 8th lord’s sub period; death at 62;
Venus in 9th.
Lagnadhi Yoga; Capricorn ascendant - Sura
Nadiamsa; Manu's views; adopting an issue;
child breast-fed by another woman.
Scorpio ascendant - Durbhaga Nadiamsa:
Capricorn ascendant - Sura Nadiamsa:
Immovable ascendant - Durbhaga
Nadiamsa.
Long-living twins; full span of life;
cancellation of infantile mortality; childhood
troubles and remedies; being the 3rd issue;
childhood troubles.
Special rules for Capricorn and Scorpio

ascendants.
Scorpio ascendant - Durbhaga Nadiamsa;
Monday birth and Saturn; Capricorn
Navamsa; older brother and older sister;
destruction of co-born.
Moon in Leo Navamsa, Moon with Mercury;
Mars and Jupiter in Aquarius as Saturn is in
Leo; Sun in Arudha Lagna; 4th lord
retrograde; Ist dasa lord in exaltation
navamsa; Capricorn ascendant - Sura
Nadiamsa;
Sun in Taurus; Saturn in Leo; the Sun in
Aries Navamsa; grand-father; Scorpio
ascendant - Durbhaga Nadiamsa.
Elder brother; Mercury’s Navamsa position;
Rahu in the 2nd aspected by Venus;
Capricorn Navamsa; Capricorn ascendant -
Sura Nadiamsa; Scorpio ascendant -
Durbhaga Nadiamsa.
Plurality of wives; many sons; twin sons;
Capricorn Navamsa causing twins;
Sagittarius Navamsa; Moon in Libra
Navamsa; Moon and Mercury in same
Navamsa; Moon in Durbhaga Nadiamsa.
Moon in Libra Navamsa; Venus in Gemini;
Venus in 6th or 8th; Jupiter being the lord
of the Sun sign; the Sun in a fixed sign;
synonyms of Yamala Nadiamsa; Moon and
Mercury in Libra Navamsa; Mars being the
lord of Bhava Lagna.
Transits of Rahu, Saturn and Jupiter; first
dasa; Rahu’s sub period; danger through
ulcers; Venus dasa and Saturn’s sub period.
Venus dasa and Mercury’s_ sub period;
Ketu’s sub period in first dasa; 2nd dasa; sub
periods of Mar and Mercury.
Sub periods of Mercury and Mars; 3rd dasa;
Saturn’s transit; Jupiter’s transit; dasa
periods of planets related to Saturn; Moon
in Aries with Libra Navamsa; mother’s
death and longevity; marriage at 16 or 18;
5th dasa endangering father.
Moon in Aries or Sagittarius; Scorpio
ascendant with Capricorn Navamsa; Saturn
and Mars in leo.
Dasa of 9th lord; Jupiter’s transit; father;
Moon’s Navamsadispositor’s dasa; 4th dasa;
Rahu’s Navamsa dispositor’s dasa;
Mercury’s sub period; Sth lord’s dasa.
Jupiter’s dasa - Saturn’s sub period; death
in 2nd lord’s dasa; bad death; Immovable
ascendant - Nisakara Nadiamsa.
The Sun in a sign of Saturn while Saturn
joins the Moon; the Sun in Nisakara
Nadiamsa; Saturn in Kalagni Shashtiamsa,
loss of inheritance; two benefics in Taurus
in Indu Shashtiamsa.
6th dasa; Scorpio ascendant - Nisakara
Nadiamsa; marriage; natal star of bride; the
Moon and the Sun in Scorpio and Cancer
Navamsas; Rahu inthe 7th for an immovable
ascendant.
Mars with Rahu; danger through fire etc.,
paternal kinsfolk; sub period of Mercury,
Jupiter in the ascendant and Rahu inthe 7th,
the Moon aspected by Saturn; Kusuma Yoga.
Saturn’s transit in Sun sign; paternal uncle;
danger to mother; abortion to spouse; dead
children; Jupiter and Ketu in Aquarius; 3rd
dasa; lord ofa movable sign inan immovable
sign.
Untimely death at 54; Scorpio ascendant -
Visva Nadiamsa; troubles in childhood;
early marriage; small-pox; danger through
water; Saturn and the Sun in Aries; danger
to brother through water; destruction of
family members through wells and tanks.
Lagnadhi Yoga; A specific horoscope with
Scorpio ascendant having Jupiter in Taurus
(in the 7th), the Moon (in the 2nd) in
Sagittarius, Venus in Pisces (in the 4th) and
the Sun and Mercury in Aries (in the 6th);
lords of evil bhavas; other effects for Visva
Nadiamsa in Scorpio ascendant.
Dasa effects for Visva Nadiamsa in Scorpio
ascendant.
Effects of 3rd dasa.
Effect of 3rd dasa (continued); Mars dasa;
Mercury dasa.
Junction of two dasas; 4th dasa; Saturn’s in
transit in Taurus.
5th dasa, 5th dasa lord in Kala Nadiamsa,
4th dasa, Shashtiamsa position of Sth dasa
lord; Venus being lord of Shodasamsa |
ascendant.
Saturn’s transit in 8th; 5th dasa.
Venus sub period, Dvadasamsa position of
Venus; last part of Sth dasa; Saturn’s journey

in Virgo and Libra.
Venus in 5th lord’s Navamsa; end of Sth
dasa; junction of 5th and 6th dasas; Mars
dasa; malefic’s sub period in Jupiter’s dasa;
Saturn transiting in an evil house.
Jupiter’s dasa; Saturn’s transit in Aries,
Aquarius and Pisces; transit of Jupiter; the
three parts of Jupiter’s dasa.
Saturn in Aries/Taurus in transit; Jupiter
dasa - sub periods of Rahu and Mars; Saturn
in Lagnadhi Yoga; Saturi dasa.
Mar sub period in Jupiter’s dasa; Saturn
dasa - Saturn sub period; Mercury and
Saturn in transit in Aries; 3rd and 6th lords;
Sun’s transits.
Saturn causing death as Moon sign lord; the
Moon in Purvashadha Nakshatra; 5th lord’s
dasa; Saturn in Aries Navamsa.
Sub periods of Jupiter and Saturn; Venus in
Pisces; Saturn in Gemini; untimely death.
Mercury’s sub period in Mars dasa; Saturn
and Mercury sub. periods in Saturn dasa;
65th year causing death; deatn in Bhadra
Thithi; death at 52 or 58; attaining Brahma
Loka; Libra ascendant - Indava Nadiamsa;
Moon’s sub period in Jupiter’s dasa.
Sub periods of the Moon, Mars and Rahu in
Jupiter’s dasa.
Sub period of Rahu (continued); loss of
wealth; Saturn’s transit on Moon sign during
sub periods of Marsand Rahu; Saturn moving
in the end of Gemini; Rahu in 2nd causing
loss of wealth in his sub period; sub period
of Mars and of Rahu; Rahu’s transit in 9th.
Rahuand Saturn joining in the 8th in transit;
royal anguish; Jupiter’s dasa and Rahu’s
sub period; Mars in debility, remedies for
Rahu’s evils; 3rd dasa and Rahu’s sub
period.
Rahu in Vargottama; fear from king; evils in
in-laws’ family; quarrels and fear from
thieves when Jupiter enters Capricorn
Navamsa or in combustion.
Rahu in the 2nd; Rahu in the 2nd as Mars is
in fall; Rahu in the 2nd with Saturn’s
Navamsa; Jupiter’s transit in Sagittarius;
4th dasa; loss of wealth; obtainment of
progeny; Raja Yoga effects; adverse Sun’s
transits for Libra ascendant.
Signs in Sun’s Ashtaka varga without
Bindus; Mercury’s sub periods in the 4th
dasa as well as Saturn’s dasa; Moon and
Mercury in the 9th; the Moon in Durbhaga
Nadiamsa; Vichitra and Durbhaga
Nadiamsas being identical; wealthy right
from birth.
Co-born; obstacles in education; Jupiter in
Scorpio with Virgo Navamsa; stepmother; Rahu in Lagna with Sun and Mars
causing destruction of wealth and other
effects; mother indulging in sinful deeds;
Aquarius ascendant - Agada Nadiamsa.
Step-brother and related events.
Father incurring ulcers and injuries; father’s
death in a distant land; mother being
involved in quarrel; maternal relatives.
Widowhood to sister; sister’s sickness and
her loss of children; her husband; na‘ ews
father cheating his own children; brother
and sister-in-law.
Relief from obstacles; penury to step-brother,
much learning and lordship; fame in royal
service by the Moon in Pisces; vehicles and
fortunes; mother’s death.
Saturn’s transit and mother; destruction of
wealth and first child; dead children; grief
toco-born; fear ofuntimely death to relatives.
Malefic subperiod in 8th lord’s dasa; Mercury
in Virgo in transit at the time of Venus dasa
beginning; 4th dasa giving fame; 3rd dasa
giving conveyances; death at 56; Sagittarius
ascendant - Varuna Nadiamsa; small-pox
during childhood; danger of untimely death
in first dasa; father’s prosperity.
Jupiter’s Ashtaka Varga; infantile death of
younger co-born; brother with longevity;
having only one brother; Saturn in 3rd
giving no younger brother but sister; a
specific horoscope and results.
Results for father; loss of co-born; education;
Venus in Aquarius Navamsa giving skill in
languages and literature; authorship and
learning; obstacles to education.
Marriage; obstacles to marriage; danger to
father-in-law following marriage; Mars in
the 7th in Gemini giving auspicious effects;
maternal uncle.
Grand-parents; parents; father’s prosperity,

fame etc.
Fortunes; troubles to father, Raja Yoga
effects.
Pilgrimage; Jupiter’s dasa; Sun and Mars
yoga; Jupiter in Sagittarius ascendant in
aspect to Mars; a superior Raja Yoga; Sunin
Scorpio giving favourable effects.
Father interested in ancient subjects; paternal
relatives; the native having limited issues;
longevity; progeny; destruction offirst issue.
Birth sign of son; dasa periods of Mercury,
Moon and Sun.
Mother subjected to evils; father’s death;
evils and mental distress to father, the native
being highly intelligent and earning royal
favour.
Dasa ofMercury, 3rdand 4th dasas; diseases;
other dasa effects; Saturn transiting Jeeva
rasi, Virgo and Libra; remedies, Sagittarius
KCD.
Sun’s adverse transits; Mercury or Jupiter
combust in transit; death in 6th dasa; Kala
Chakra Dasa periods of Taurus and Gemini;
Sun’s dasa.
Special rules for dasa periods; transit of
Jupiter; dasa of Mars giving fortunes;
Saturn’s transit.
Prosperity,. wealth, Navamsa positions of
Sun and Mercury; life-span of 56; danger at
28; death on Thursday.
World after death; birth of Brahmin or
Soodra; birth conditions.
Mother’s diseases and death; the Moon and
Rahu; Rahu in Leo Navamsa causing
poverty; learning; wealth; illicit relations;
Rahu in Aslesha Nakshatra.
Wealth by unscrupulous means; abundant
blemish; long-living father; maternal family,
burdened with debts; ever-diseased wife;
questionable wife; two wives. ;
Long-living children; having no Gandanta
dosha; long life to father and father-in-law,
father’s death; Mercury dasa and father’s
death; auspicious effects in 3rd dasa; death
at 56; Lagnadhipathi Nadi.
Dasa periods of Jupiter and 10th and 11th
lords; longevity; Aquarius ascendant -
Durdara Nadiamsa.
Saturn in Mohana Nadiamsa; Malika Yoga
commencing from the 6th giving urinary
disorders; progeny; sisters and brothers;
righteous deeds, diseases; mother’s lifespan.
Father; maternal family; Naradeeyam
quoted; long-living grand-mother, Jupiter’s
dasa; first dasa.
Saturn’s evil transit; dasa periods,; maternal
relatives; childlessness to maternal uncle.
Family members being corrupt; grief in
mother’s family; cousins; grand-father;
maternal family.
Maternal family; paternal uncle; evils in
2nd dasa; Malika Yoga turning evil.
Venus in 2nd and Jupiter in 11th; Rahu in
10th; pilgrimage; obstacles to progeny.
Diseases; fortunes; enemies; parents;
progeny; Saturn’s transit; physical ailments
through Deha Rasi.
Manu quoted; Jupiter in 2nd/10th and Venus
in 11th.
Venus in Gada Nadiamsa; life-span.
Capricorn ascendant, Visha Yoga; Saturn
in Sachira Nadiamsa; blemish in brother’s
family; sister having illicit ties; unfortunate
sister, mother long-lived but corrupt;
maternal family highly prosperous; mother
having brothers but not sister.
Moon’s Ashtaka Varga; 7 or 8 co-born to
mother; grand-father being a famous person;
tuberculosis ‘to maternal uncle; mother
indulging in secretive acts; four paternal
uncles; Sun’s Ashtaka Varga.
Venus in Gemini Navamsa; Moon in
Aquarius Navamsa; fortunes in 3rd dasa;
Sun with two benefics causing death in the
very lst year; learning and modesty; two
wives; self-made wealth; long-lived sisters
and brothers; maternal uncle.
Sister’s husband; maternal uncle; mother
incurring prosperity; brother’s marriage;
Saturn’s evil transits for Capricorn
ascendant.
Saturn’s transit and evils to progeny,
maternal uncle, mother and co-born; Saturn
and the Sun; lords of the 9th and 10th
joining in 8th obstructing prosperity; troubles
in old age.
4th dasa; sub periods of Jupiter and Mars,

Rahu in the 9th causing prosperity; 3rd dasa
causing children and affecting prosperity;
5th dasa; anguish at 39 or 40 or 30.
6th dasa; 7th dasa causing death; Rahu in
Deha or Jeeva Rasi; Sun dasa; conjunction
oflords of the 9thand 10th; Pisces ascendant
- Kutila Nadiamsa; Vipra Kala.
Kshatriya Kala; Vaisya Kala; Soodra Kala;
no after-born; fortunes through father;
devoted to Lord Vishnu and Lord Siva; fame
in royal circles; difficulties through
Brahmins; grief to father at birth.
lst dasa; Kesari Yoga; 2nd dasa; Saturn’s
transit in Scorpio and Libra; Sthlord’s dasa;
grief to father in 151 dasa; Saturn moving in
Leo; mother incurring small-pox; royal
enmity.
2nd dasa; Saturn’s transit in the Navamsa of
natal Moon and Venus; Mercury found
between malefics; evils to father in first
dasa; danger to father; Surya Nadi; prosperity
in 4th dasa.
Sub periods of Ketu and Sun in Rahu dasa;
Saturn’s sub period in the 4th dasa; 4th dasa
giving prosperity; Jupiter’s transit in Aries;
Moon and Mars in Scorpio; loss of wife; 3rd
marriage.
Giving food to others; enjoying more wealth
than father, Moon’s dasa; Jupiter’s dasa;
sub periods of Sun and Jupiter; death; world
after death; sickness; remedies; death at 57.
Virgo ascendant - Dhanada Nadiamsa;
grand-father; father; enmity with kinsfolk;
long-living parents, Chitra Yoga.
Birth of co-born; happiness to father; happy
sister; coborn with longevity; good deeds;
increased wealth; Venus dasa; qualities of
the native; Venus in Virgo Navamsa;
Mercury in benefic Navamsa; the Sun in
Libra Navamsa.
Wealth to family; Mercury’s dasa; natal
Mercury aspected by transit; Virgo KCD;
father incurring evils; Leo KCD; troubles to
father.
Transits of Saturn and Jupiter, KCD of
Cancer, Gemini, Taurus and Aries.
KCD of Pisces, Aquarius and Capricorn;
Pisces ascendant - Kamala Nadiamsa; Saturn
in Leo Navamsa; prosperity in another
country; Saturn in malefic Shashtiamsa.
Lakshmi Yoga; Saturn with Leo navamsa;
Saturn with a benefic,; Saturn in Kamala
Nadiamsa; Mars in the 4th giving difficulties
in mother’s family in 19 dasa; paternal
uncle.
Two planets in exaltation; Saturn with
Mercury; Venus in Pisces; Lakshmi Yoga;
KCD of Pisces and Aries.
Mars - Ketu conjunction; KCD of Taurus,
Gemini, Cancer and Leo.
KCD of Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpio and
Sagittarius.
Sani Nadi quoted; Libra ascendant - Nirmala
Nadiamsa.:
Balarishta; danger tofather; remedy to Moon
God; father.
Cousin, aunt and paternal uncle’s son.
Blemish of Mars; untimely death of father;
health problems for father; grand-father.
Wealth and happiness; co-born; longevity to
brother and three sisters, Ashtaka Varga of
Mars; Jupiter in Vargottama in Aries.
4 sisters; long-lived mother; destruction of
mother’s family; mother predeceasing
father; 3rd dasa; loss of father in 3rd dasa or
8th,10th or 20th year; Sakata Yoga giving
wealth and skill in logic; a gem-examiner,
mythological stories.
Ancient laws and scriptures; prosperity;
longevity; Balarishta; illicit ties with
females; Venus and Saturn in conjunction;
Rahu - Moon yoga.
Sun in Cancer; Sun in 6th; Venus dasa;
marriage; Mars in Aries Navamsa; Indra
Yoga.
Saturn in 11th; transit of Saturn; Arudha of
9th; Indra Yoga; 2nd, 3rd, 4th and Sth
dasas; sub periods of lords of 6th and 8th;
death in Mars dasa; world after death.
Venus in Aquarius Navamsa causing Raja
Yoga; Mercury - Jupiter - Venus causing
Raja Yoga; foolishness; Vishnu Yoga;
poverty in childhood; ten brothers.
Venus in Aquarius Navamsa; Vishnu Yoga;
royal authority and sinful deeds;
Vaishnavism.
Cancer ascendant - Scorpio Navamsa; a
great disease in the 4th dasa; Moon in Virgo

with Capricorn Navamsa; Sth lord Mars
aspected by Rahu giving excessive limbs to
one's child; brothers; 3rd dasa; danger to
father.
Raja Yoga; Saturn transiting Gemini or
Leo; Saturn retrograde; Vishnu Yoga; Saturn
in 12th; Libra ascendant - Indra Nadiamsa;
the Moon in Scorpio along with Rahu; the
Moon in Capricorn Navamsa; the Moon in
Uttara Phalguni Nakshatra.
Fame through co-born; professional
impediments to father; long-lived parents,
father thieving at home; mother enjoying
long married life; father indulging in foolish
deeds; father and uncle.
Saturn’s transit; remedy; sub period of Rahu
in Jupiter’s dasa; small-pox; Venus - Saturn
conjunction; eye troubles; Venus - Saturn in
Leo; facial diseases; Arudha of the 9th;
Venus in Indra Nadiamsa.
Sister having an adopted son; wealth; fame;
happiness; Jupiter’s sub period in the dasa
of Moon’s dispositor; Bhava analysis; Deha
and Jeeva signs; Mars moving in Jeeva Rasi.
Indra quoted; 2nd dasa; Ketu in 8th; 2nd sub
period; underground treasure; business
activities; Sun’s dasaand Ketu’s sub period;
Jupiter’s sub period; half of sub periods of
Ketu and Venus.
Uncomfortable effects in the end of 2nd
dasa; great fortunes; Venus dasa - Rahu’s
sub period; Rahu not being Vargottama
causing debt burdens to one's son; general
rules for dasa analysis.
Analysis of sub periods; Moon’s dasa;
Saturn’s transit; Mars dasa; 6th dasa; rebirth; Pisces ascendant - Kamala Nadiamsa;
co-born etc., Saturn - Venus Yoga.
Saturn - Ketu Yoga; Saturn in 5th causing
distress to father; another authority on
remedy.
Venus in Caner; Libra Navamsa; Saturn
and Venus in Sth; transits of Saturn and
Jupiter.
Jupiter’s transit in Aries; Saturn’s transit in
Cancer; happiness from father; Saturn in
the 7th; Transit effects.
Jupiter in Aries and Rahu in Libra; anguish
to father; 2nd dasa giving endless wealth;
Saturn’s transit in Aquarius and Cancer,
Saturn’s transit and dasa periods effects
Rahu dasa; Saturn’s sub period; the Moon in
Virgo; re-marriage in 4th dasa, danger to
spouse; Saturn’s transit in Leo; progeny;
death of a son; family danger.
Venus sub period; Saturn’s transitin Scorpio,
10th lord’s dasa; life-long fortunes,
prosperity in 4th dasa; death at 56.
Chandra Nadi quoted; world after death;
Jupiter in own Navamsa causing Raja Yoga;
Vriddha Parasari Hora quoted; effects of
Saturn in Kokila Nadiamsa.
Saturn in Scorpio; Saturn in Davagni
Shashtiamsa; Jupiter in Paramesvari
Nadiamsa.
Results for brothers; transit of Saturn; Rahu
dasa; Mars dasa; Rahu in 9th: anguish after
50; blemish from the age of 46; happiness
after 52.
Dasa of Venus; Saturn in Davagni
Shashtiamsa; Rahu dasa; Moon in Aquarius;
Venus in 2nd.
Rahu dasa; 6th dasa; Saturn in Davagni
Shashtiamsa; Saturn in Scorpio Navamsa;
Sth round of Jupiter’s transit; Venus in
Sobhana Nadiamsa.
Saturn in Davagni Shashtiamsa; Rahu dasa,
Saturn’s transit; sub period of Venus; other
sub periods.
Saturn’s transit in Pisces; Moon’s dasa;
Mercury in Aquarius Navamsa; Saturn in
Scorpio Navamsa; 71 years of age; Saturn in
12th; attaining world of Brahma or heavens;
death on Monday; acquisition of wealth;
Aries ascendant - Achala Nadiamsa.
The Sun and Rahu in Leo giving a number
of sisters but no elder co-born; 4th issue of
the family; Sun’s Ashtaka Varga; paternal
uncle; longevity to parents; all kinds of
fortunes; virtues in mother’s family; grandmother being of a questionable character.
Long-lived father; poverty to father, grandmother abusing her husband; the native
being libidinous; attached to material
pleasures; royal enmity; increase of fortunes;
no self-made wealth for father; planetary
evils; bad dreams; Saturn in 6th giving
wealth, long-lived maternal relatives etc.

2nd dasa; step-mother; maternal uncle; coborn to father, Mercury’s Ashtaka Varga;
ulcers for sister; Saturn’s transit; anguish,
long-living husband and limited issues for
sister.
12th lord’s Navamsa et.; 4th dasa; 11th
lord’s Navamsa; Saturn’s transit in Virgo;
danger to parents; 2nd dasa; Saturn’s transit
in Scorpio and the Sun sign; 3rd dasa; 8th
lord’s Navamsa; limited pleasures; evil
designs; praising in unusual manner.
Jupiter’s transit in Virgo; Jupiter in Pisces
with Leo Navamsa; Moon’s dasa; Mars
dasa; Rahu dasa; a node in the 8th with
Saturn’s aspects causing great diseases and
bad end; Aquarius ascendant - Mala
Nadiamsa; intelligence; learning; royal
favours.
Co-born; sinful deeds; wealth; birth
surroundings; painful delivery; long-lived
parents; Malika Yoga from the Moon; Moon
in Cancer’s last Navamsa; Saturn in the 8th
in the context of Malika Yoga; infantile
mortality; remedy to the Moon God.
Moon in own Navamsa giving longevity,
birth in Gandanta; Venus in 11th; Sun in
Libra along with the 8th lord Mercury; first
dasa.
Co-born; longevity; 3rd dasa; fame through
relatives; knowledge in three languages;
skilful writer.
The Sun in Libra with Capricorn Navamsa,
9th lord’s dasa; Saturn’s transit; Saturn
aspecting Jupiter; 10th lord’s Navamsa;
Mercury dasa - Mars sub period; Jupiter in
own sign; Rahu in the 10th.
Venus in the 1 1th; world after death, Mercury
in exaltation; Harina and Somavalli
Nadiamsa being similar in effects.
Mercury in Somavalli Nadiamsa; the Sun in
Harina Nadiamsa; Venus in Somalata
Nadiamsa; Mercury in exaltation; Ketu in
the 9th house.
Parasara quoted; dasa ofthe 9th lord; Mercury
in exaltation; 4th dasa; 2nd dasa; dasa of
11th or 10th lord causing brother’s death;
Saturn’s transit.
Setting periods of Jupiter and Venus causing
ailments; Moon in Pisces with Scorpio
Navamsa; sub periods of Rahu in various
dasas; dasa analysis - special rules; 6th dasa.
Loss of fortunes in the 8th lord’s dasa; dasa
of 10th lord; dasa of 2nd lord; malefic in the
12th; 12th house hemmed between malefic,
ascendant containing a malefic.
Papa Kartari Yoga; Neecha Kartari Yoga;
Chandradhi Yoga; lord of the 5thin debility;
ascendant lord’s dasa; weak Moon in aspect
to Saturn; two malefics in the 12th being a
source of pains; going to hell after death.
Scorpio ascendant - lunar trines; Indra Yoga;
paternal relatives; limited number of
friends;royal patronage; indigestion and
small-pox.
Lunar blemish; Moon conjunct Rahu; Indra
Yoga; Mars in 10th; Cancer ascendant -
Dhanada Nadiamsa.
Moon in exaltation, Navamsa of Venus;
Moon aspected Mars; the Sun in the 4th;
high degree of affluence; co-born.
Venus in Libra; Mars in Libra; diseases and
remedies; Saturn in the 2nd..
Saturn in a fixed sign as Venus is in a
movable sign; life-span of 72; 2nd dasa;
Libra ascendant - Manohara Nadiamsa;
conceptional phenomena; previous birth;
current birth.
Effect for Manohara Nadiamsa; Indra Yoga
- Libra ascendant.
Facial marks; great danger, Saturn in the
8th causing dysentery etc., longevity; fear
from dog; early loss of mother; effects for
father.
Mercury with the Sun causing Raja Yoga;
father attached to young women; father
having plenty of every thing; danger to
father; step-mother; Avatara Yoga ahd
effects.
Hari Hara Brahma Yoga and effects;
Lakshmi Yoga and effects.
Kubera Yoga and effects; virtuous wife;
many wives; Raja Yoga; Yoga for seven and
ten wives (i.e. multiple marriages); brides
from various castes; evil to wife; early
marriage.
2nd and 3rd dasas; Kahala Yoga and effects;
Sankha Yoga and effects.
Bheri Yoga and effects; Saturn ina benefic’s

sign; Ketu in Aquarius ass Saturn is in the
8th; Jupiter with a malefic promoting
progeny through re-marriage; Jupiter in
9th; Jupiter in Gemini Navamsa; 4th dasa.
Sri Matsya Yoga; Movable ascendant -
Kalanidhi Yoga and effects; 6th lord in
strength; full life span; living upto 60; 8th
lord with Rahu; Rudrasana Yoga.
Effects for Rudrasana Yoga; Venus - Rahu
conjunction; Mars in the ascendant.
Sub periods of Mars, Rahu, Jupiter, Saturn
and Mercury in the dasa of Mars.
Karma Samrajya Yoga; sub periods of Ketu,
Venus, Sun and Mars in the dasa of Mars;
Rahu dasa giving abundant financial gains;
Akhanda Samrajya Yoga and effects.
Sub periods of Rahu, Jupiter and Saturn in
the dasa of Rahu.
Chamara Yoga; Rahu dasa - Mercury Yoga;
Bhagya Yoga for Libra ascendant.
Sub periods of Ketu, Venus and the Sun in
Rahu dasa.
Sub periods of the Moon and Mars in Rahu
dasa; Koorma Yoga of three different kinds.
Effects of Koorma Yoga; Jupiter’s dasa;
annihilation of Koorma Yoga; sub periods
of Jupiter and Saturn in Jupiter’s dasa.
Sub periods of a malefic, Mercury and Ketu
in Jupiter’s dasa.
Sub periods of Venus, the Sun and the Moon
in Jupiter’s dasa.
Sub periods of Mars and Rahu in Jupiter’s
dasa.
Rudrasana Yoga and effects; Sub periods of
Saturn, Mercury, and Ketu in Saturn’s dasa.
Sub period of Venus in Saturn’s dasa; Gemini
ascendant - Kamini Nadiamsa.
Previous birth; Moon in exaltation; financial
prosperity through the 2nd house.
Venus with Saturn; 3rd and 4th dasas;
Jupiter’s transit, Ashtaka Varga of Saturn,
3rd house in aspect to Saturn and Mars; two
wives; Mars in the 3rd house in a female
Navamsa.
co-born; brought up by two mothers; Mars
and Venus in Vargottama; Mercury in Aries,
planets in 9th or 10th; lords of Sth and 9th,
lord of Sth ina sign of Mars; Rahu in the 4th.
Venus with Saturn; Mother’s death; Saturn’s
transit with reference to the 10th lord; sub
period of the 11th lord; two wives; Jupiter’s
dasa.
Various Yogas for Gemini ascendant.
Saturn’s transit; 7th lord in the Sth; yoga for
two wives; Venus joining Saturn.
Loss of spouse at 22; illicit associations; two
wives from own community; bride from
traders’ community; joining Mlechcha
women; 7th lord in strength; Jupiter’s dasa
- Moon’s sub period.
Sub period of Rahu in Jupiter’ dasa; Saturn
dasa and Saturn’s sub period; full life span;
Saturn in Aries; Neecha Bhanga Raja Yoga;
Samrajya Yoga.
Effects of Samrajya Yoga; dasa effects.
List of Nadiamsas.
List of Nadiamsas (continued).
Effects to be read from Nadiamsa; Planets
described.
Planetary description (continued); Rasi
divisions.
Calculating Bhava, Chandra Lagna etc.,
Chandra Ayur Lagna; Hora Lagna; Ghatika
Lagna.
Shastiamsas.
Meaning of the word “Kaala”.

Preface
Presented herewith is Book III of Deva Keralam (Chandra Kala Nadi) from sloka No. 1998 to
5774 (1.6. 3796 slokas) - the portion compiled by Venkatesa.
The arrangement of the book goes thus:
Sloka No. 1 to 2718 by Achyuta in Book I.
Sloka No. 2719 to 3407 of Achyuta, and sloka No.1 to 1997 of Venkatesa in Book II.
Sloka No. 1998 to 5774 by Venkatesa in Book III.
These 3 volumes put together have a total of 9181 slokas in all (3407 by Achyuta and 5774 by
Venkatesa) for which complete English translation has been provided by me.
As the discerning reader understands, the work covers two areas of delineation. A particular
space of rising degree called Nadiamsa is used to depict a series of events to occur in the native’s life,
one of the subtle techniques of handling a horoscope. On the other hand, countless general principles
are enumerated on the lines done by popular series of text-books like Parasara Hora, Phala Deepika,
Saravali, Jataka Parijata and Sarvartha Chintamani dealing with natal horoscopy including dasa
effects, transits and the like. In some cases, general principles that do not consider Nadiamsa
technique are incorporated in the Nadiamsa reading. To avoid confusion to the reader, these have
been separated by me in the translation, as far as possible. Further, these have been more clearly
sorted out in the index given at the end of the present volume. The index now given embraces all the
3 parts.
As the reader knows, each sign has 150 Nadiamsas and the 12 signs have a total of 1800
Nadiamsas. It is not humanly possible to bring out a work dealing with all the 1800 Nadiamsas. To
the extent possible, the authors Achyuta and Venkatesa, gathered a‘large amount of information on
this most subtle division. An intelligent reader can multiply the use of a Nadiamsa four-fold keeping
in mind the three classifications of the 12 zodiacal signs into movable, fixed and common signs.
For example, a rule given for a certain Nadiamsa for Aries can be suitably extended to the other
three movable signs, viz. Cancer, Libra and Capricorn. Similarly the four fixed signs Taurus, Leo,
Scorpio and Aquarius can be brought under the second category. The three dual signs Gemini, Virgo,
Sagittarius and Pisces form part of the 3rd group. While doing so, the involvement of planets should
be judiciously understood. This is because the same planet plays a different role for each sign
ascending.
The text excels in merits in tactfully combining the usage of Vimsottari dasa and Kala Chakra
dasa. So also in applying transits with reference to the signs caused by certain Navamsa positions.
Many such rare techniques are available in this wonderful work. One who uses such techniques
frequently will be able to issue successful predictions.
I sincerely believe that the reader will find our present efforts useful and forgive me for my
shortcomings if any.
Mr. Narinder Sagar of Sagar Publications deserves special thanks for undertaking the task of
bringing out this voluminous work considering the huge amount of money that the production of a
book of this size requires.
एर. Santhanam,
9/1040 Govindpuri,
Kalkaji, New Delhi 110 019
Telephone 6462777
Dated January 14, 1994

-कुटिलांशे स्थिरे लग्ने पूर्वभागे saree |
शूद्रजन्मा. सुखी नित्यं द्वितीयगर्भजः स्मृतः ॥१९९८ ॥
1998. Immovable Ascendant = Kutila Nadiamsa: The native of this degree will be born as a
Spodra and will be the second issue of the family.
. Notes: For details of Kutila Nadiamsa, see
page 15, Book 1.
“सिदे Yar: स्यात् कुरिलांशे प्रतापवान् |
उत्तरंशे प्रजाश्च पञ्जमोऽयं प्रकीर्तितः ॥१९९९ ॥
पश्चाद्धातृयुतो मानी रक्तवर्णशरीरवान् |
1999 - 199914. Leo Ascendant - Kutila Nadiamsa: One born (in the former half) in this Nadi-
‘amsa in Leo ascendant will be the eldest issue and
will be valorous. The subject belonging to second
half of the said degree will be the Sth issue of the
family, will have younger co-born and will have a
physique with blood-red complexion. _
पूर्वभागे प्रजातश्च ज्येष्ठभ्रातृविहीनवान् ॥२००० ॥
वनान्तरपुरे वासो जननं वा भविष्यति ।
दक्षिणोत्तरवीध्योश्च पश्चिमे प्रसवं भवेत् ॥२००१॥
अथवा पूर्वदिग्भागे पूर्वभागे प्रसूतिमान्।
पूर्वभागे मध्यखण्डे पूर्वपश्चिमवीथ्योश्च ॥२००२ ॥
स्वगृहे जननं चैव ह्यन्यगेहेऽथ वा भवेत् |
कुटिलां शे सिंहलग्न पूर्वभागे प्रजायते ॥२००३ Il
नालवेष्टनमाप्नोति MAT न विद्यते |
रूपवान् मतिमान् वाग्मी प्रसत्नमुखनेत्रवान् ॥२००४ ॥
अदृष्टशाली धर्मात्मा शुद्र जन्मा सुखी भवेत् ।
नीलवर्णो मध्यगात्रः किंचित् स्थूल शरीरवान् ॥२००५ ॥ .
विद्यावान् युक्तिमान् वाग्मी लेख्यविद्याविचक्षणः। `
स्वभाषायां कविर्वाग्मी त्यागभोगवदान्यवान् ॥२००६ ॥
कुटिलांशे सिंहलगने पूर्वभाग समुद् भवः।
एकभ्रातृयुतः श्रीमान् मांसाहारप्रियो भवेत् ॥२००७॥
नानाविद्याप्रियो नित्यं हरिशङ्करभक्तिमान् |
विष्णुभक्तिविशेषेण मातृवाक्यवियोधकः॥२००८ ॥
न श्रृणोति पितुर्वाक्यं राजसप्रकृतिर्भवेत्।
2000 - 2008+. First Half: (a) The one belonging to the first half will have no older co-born. He
would be either born, or will live, in a town
surrounded by-forests. The street of his birth will
be south-north spread, and the house will be westfacing. Or the house could be in the eastern part.
If the birth be in the middle of the former half of the
said Nadiamsa, it will be in a street spread from east
to west, either in his own house (i.e. parental house)
or in others’ house.
(b) He will be entangled in umbilical cord at the
time of birth. But the subject of second half of the
said Nadiamsa will not have such a birth.
(c) The native of former half of Kutila Nadiamsa
of Leo ascendant will be good-looking, intelligent,
eloquent, and will have charming face and eyes.
He will be fortunate, charitable and be a Soodra by
birth. His complexion wilt be dark-bluish. He will
have a stout body, with medium build, will be well
educated, expedient, eloquent and skilful in writing and learning. He will be a poet in his mother
tongue, be of sacrificial and charitable disposition,
will enjoy pleasures and be the best of the givers.
He will be endowed with one co-born, be wealthy,
and fond of eating flesh. He will have many kinds
of learning and be devoted to Lord Vishnuand Lord
Siva. Due to his devotion to Lord Vishnu, he will
not listen to the words of his mother and father (i.e.
he will be so devoted to divine rituals that he will
not care much for his parents). He will be passionate in disposition.
ara शुभसंयुक्ते किचित् सात््विकबुद्धिमान् ॥२००९ Il
कुजदृष्टिवशात् कोपी दुष्टबुद्धिः क्वचित् क्वचित्
पितामहस्य सन्तोषी पितृभाग्यसमन्वितः॥२०१० Il
मातृसोख्यसमायुक्तो भ्रतृभरा्रीजनेर्ुतः।
2009 - 2901014. Lord of Ascendant: (a) In the
above case, if the lord of the ascendant, Sun, is
associated with a benefic, the native instead of
being passionate will be Satvic in disposition. (b)
Related to Mars: Should Mars aspect the Sun, the
subject will be irritable, be somewhat wicked and
be endowed with happiness concerning paternal
grand-father and fortunes through father. He will
also be happy in respect of mother and be endowed
‘with brothers and sisters.
कुटिलांशे पूर्वभागे सिंहलग्नेसमुद्धवः॥२०११ Ml
पितृमूलाल्लन्धभाग्यो भ्रातृसोख्यसमन्वितः।
~ भ्रातृद्दयसुपूज्योऽपि हयकभ्रातृयुतो भवेत् ॥२०१२ ॥

2 Deva Keralam
2011 - 2012. Kutila Nadiamsa - First Half:
The native of Leo ascendant will acquire fortunes
bequeathed by his father and will be happy in
respect of his co-bom. Two of his brothers will
honour him, yet he will be endowed with one
brother (i.e. one brother may incur premature
danger?).
सिंहलग्ने कन्यकांशे saree च जायते |
वेश्यावाक्यरतो नित्यं स्वदारस्य प्रियः सुखी ।
कुटिलांशे पूर्वभागे सिंहलग्न समुद्धवः॥२०१३ ॥
कन्यांशे चैकपुत्रश्च सन्तानप्रतिबन्धवान् |
WER सुपूज्यश्च मरवाहनभाग्यवान् ॥२०१४॥
दर्गतिप्रदवृच्या च जीवनं राजसेवया |
2013 - 2014142. Arudha Pada: Birth in Leo
ascendant with Virgo Navamsa while the Arudha
ascendant falls in a dual sign denotes that the
subject will be attached to his wife and will also
play to the tunes of a whore. He will have one son,
although there will be difficulties in obtaining
progeny. He will be honoured in royal service and
be endowed with men-borne conveyances.
उत्तरांशे ग्रामणीः स्यादव्यवसायपरो भवेत् ॥२०१५ ॥
धनिकः कीर्तिमान् भोगी सत्कलत्रप्रियः सुखी |
नरवाहनहीनश्च TRAY सदा धनी ॥२०१६॥
बहुभ्रातयुतस्त्यागी ज्येष्टभ्रातृविनाशवान् |
ध्रातृत्रयसमायुक्तो भ्रातृप्राबल्यमश्रुते ॥२० १७ ॥
जातको जननात् पूर्वं पितामहविनाशकः।
पितामही नाशयुतो TTY प्रजायते ॥२०१८ ॥
2015 -2018. Second Half of Kutila Nadiamsa
- Leo Ascendant: The native will professionally
face a bad end, will serve the king, will live by
agriculture in a village, be rich, famous, will enjoy
pleasures, be fond of his virtuous wife, but be
devoid of men-borne conveyances (i.e. will not
own conveyances). He will be ever rich and be
endowed with many an after-born. His elder coborn will be destroyed (or will face pre-mature —
death). The person will have three brothers who
will be prosperous. Before his birth, his paternal
grand-father would have quit the world. His paternal grand-mother will also be destroyed.
पूर्वभागे मध्यखण्डे जननं लभते हि यः।
देवब्राह्मणभक्तश्च वेष्णवद्विजभक्तिमान् ॥२०१९ ॥
वीरवेष्णववान् पापी शिवनिन्दापयो भवेत् |
तस्य पापवशादन्ते दन्तहानि विनिर्दिशेत् ॥२०२० ॥
2019 - 2020. This native born in the first half
of the said Nadiamsa will be devoted to gods and
Brahmins. He will be particularly fond of Brahmins belonging to Vaishnava order. He will be a
staunch Vaishnavite, (but) be a sinner, and be ever
against Lord Siva because of which sin he will in
the end lose his teeth.
Notes: These two slokas should actually belong to effects of birth in second half of the subject
Nadiamsa.
मध्यखण्डे TTI हरिशङ्करभक्तिमान् |
कालान्ते देहसौख्यं मध्ये क्लेशेन STA: NR tl
बाल्ये सौख्यमवाप्नोति पितुमूलात् सुखी भवेत्।
कुटिलां शे पूर्वभागे मध्यखण्डसमुद्धवः॥२०२२ ॥
देवतागुरुभक्तश्च कृषिपश्वादिभाग्यवान् |
वाहनद्रयवान् रागी हयष्णदेहसमन्वितः ॥२०२२ ॥
वातप्रकृतिमान् किंचिन्मथ्ये वातप्रपीडितः।
बाल्ये सोख्यप्रपन्नश्च मध्ये क्लेशेन कशितः॥२०२४॥
परङ्गितज्ञशचतुरः स्वबन्धुजनपोषकः।
चिरजीवी प्रसन्नात्मा SAT रतिप्रियः॥२०२५ ॥
वेष्णवस्नेहवानित्यं वेश्यासरीगृहवासवान् |
पिशुनश्चपलो भीरुः पापकर्मा निरामयः ॥२०२६ ॥
कालान्तरे वातरोगी मध्यखण्डसमुद्धवः।
2021 - 20264. The native of first half of Kutila
Nadiamsa will be devoted to Lords Vishnu and
Siva, be troubled by grief in the middle of his life,
and will after some time enjoy physical felicity. He
will be healthy (or happy) during childhood and
will enjoy paternal happiness. He will be devoted
to gods and preceptors and will be fortunate in
terms of agriculture and quadrupeds. He will have
two conveyances, be passionate and will have a
body with warm and windy temperament. In
between he will be troubled by windy disorders. He
will have a happy childhood, The middle part of his
life will cause grief. (This is a repetition.) He will
understand the minds of others; be skilful (in
- general), will patronise his kinsfolk, be long-lived,
be a satisfied person, will secretly indulge in sins,
be fond of sexual union, will befriend persons

Chandra Kala Nadi
following Vaishnavite order, will live in the dens of
prostitutes, be miserly, fickle-minded, timid, sinful, free from diseases but will at the end incur
windy disorders.
पितामहाधिपे जीवे शन्यङ्खारकवीक्षिते ॥२०२७॥
पितामहश्च दीर्घायुभ्रतृ्रात्रीसमन्वितः।
कृषिजीवनवात्नित्यं SA वासवान् भवेत् ॥२०२८ ॥
वार्धके पुत्रमूलेन hers मनुरब्रवीत् |
पितामहश्चिरायुष्मान् TIAA करशितः॥२०२९ ॥
2027 - 2029. Paternal Grand-father: Jupiter
owning the house of paternal grand-father (owning
the Sth which is 9th from 9th) and being in aspect
to Saturn and Mars denotes the following. The said
relative would enjoy a long lease of life, be endowed with brothers and sisters, would live through
agriculture, would live in a remote village and
would be happy through his sons in his old age. He
would be emaciated through filial grief. (These
apply to first half of Kutila Nadiamsa, Leo ascendant.)
कुटिलांशे पूर्वभागे मध्यखण्डोद्धवस्य .च ।
सुतेशे शनिसंदृषटे दरिद्रश्च पितामहः ॥२०३० Il
पत्रमूलात् सुसन्तोषी वार्धके श्रीयुतः सुखी ।
2030 - 20304. Jupiter Related only to Saturn: If the said Jupiter is aspected by Saturn
(instead of jointly by Saturn and Mars), the said
relative would incur abject poverty in his childhood. But he would be happy on account of his
children and would acquire wealth in his old age.
पितृस्थानाधिपे भोमे स्वक्षेत्रे शनिसंयुते 12038 Il
स्वपिता नीलवर्णश्च प्रमाणोत्नतदेहवान् |
भ्रातृक्लेशप्रदो मानी बाल्ये दारिद्यकरितः॥२०३२ Il
कुरिलांशे पूर्वभागे जातस्य मध्यखण्के |
देवालयाधिपत्येन पश्चात् प्राबल्यवान् पिता ॥२०३३ ॥
कुरिलांशजस्य पिता विष्ण्वंशे राजपूजितः।
बाल्ये दारिद्यमापत्नः प्रेष्यजीवनवान् सुखी ॥२०३४॥
पत्रोत्सवात् परं भाग्यं वनस्थलनृपप्रियः।
देवालयाधिकारी च राज्यस्थानाधिपत्यवान् ॥२० 34 ॥
पश्चद्राजप्रसादेन ह्यमात्यप्रियवान् सुखी |
वनान्तरप्रभुद्रारे प्रबलोद्योगभाग्यवान् ॥२०३६ ॥
राजलक्षणसंयुक्तो द्रव्यार्जनसमर्थकः।
राजद्वारे सुकीर्तिश्च ह्यन्यायार्जितवित्तवान् ॥२०३७ ॥
सास्विकप्रियवान् रागी शिवके्यधर्मवान् |
पतितान्यजनस्नेही तन्मूलाद्धनलाभवान् ॥२०३८ Il
महानदीशिवक्षत्रे तराकोद्यानधर्मकृत् |
भिन्नालयप्रतिष्ठाता देवनब्राह्मणपोषकः ॥२०३९ ॥
पापद्रव्यवशाद्धर्म पिता तस्य करोति च।
2031 - 2039144. Father: Mars ruling the 9th,
placed in own sign (Aries or Scorpio), and being
conjunct Saturn would cause a physique to father
which will be. bluish and humpbacked (or back
resembling that of bull). Further, father would be
a cause of difficulties to his (father’s) brothers, be
honourable and would be poor during childhood.
He would prosper following his headship of a
temple and would be honoured by aking. During
his childhood he would be poor, endangered and
would live by servitude. After the birth of ason, his `
prosperity would commence. He would be liked by
aking ruling a forest-surrounded region and would
have headship of a place under the king. He would
also earn the favours of a minister through the good
offices of the king. He would have a prosperous
calling under a king ruling a forest-surrounded
region, would be endowed with royal attributes, be
skilful in amassing wealth, would earn fame in
royal assembly and would have wealth acquired by
questionable means. He would be fond of the
virtuous, be passionate, will befriend fallen people
and others and will thereby make financial gains.
He would take interest in deeds prescribed for men
of Lord Siva’s sect. He would construct tanks and
gardens for a Siva temple near Mahanadi (or great
river), would install a temple and worship gods and
Brahmins. His charities would be through illacquired wealth.
मेषे कुजयुते मन्दे गुरुणा च निरीक्षिते ॥२०४० ॥
स्वपिता छन्नपापी स्याद्रार्धके धर्मवान् सुधीः।
रहस्यधर्मवान् दाता PAY प्रजायते ॥२०४१ Il
मध्यखण्डे फलं सत्यं सोदरभातृशोकवान् |
पञ्चमाब्दात् परं सौख्यं वसुवर्षात् परं श्रियम् ॥२०४२ ॥
कुटिलांशे सिंहलग्ने दशवर्षात् परं पिता । .
अतीव सोख्यमाप्नोति सम्पदाये सुवाहनम् ॥२०४३ Il
योगं द्वादशवर्षाणि ह्यतीव श्रीयुतः पिता ।

4 Deva Keralam
2040 - 204314. Saturn - Mars in Aries: Should
Saturn be with Mars in Aries in aspect to Jupiter, the
following effects will accrue in respect of the father
of the subject belonging to Kutila Nadiamsa, first
half, in Leo ascendant. He would be secretively
sinful, would turn religious (i.e. be sinless) in old
age, would be munificent but without the knowledge of others, be religious in old age andbe happy.
He would be grieved on account of loss of brothers.
After the native’s Sth year of age, the father would
be happy, after the 8th year he would be wealthy,
after the 10th year he would acquire much wealth
and in the native’s.2nd dasa he would acquire a
conveyance. After the 12th year he would achieve _
` prosperity and wealth.
लग्नाधिपदशाकाले द्राविशान्दात् परं यदि ॥२०४४ ॥
पितामहस्य निर्याणं पञ्चविशतिमध्यमे |
जन्मदाये वृषे मन्दे यवनप्रभुनाशनम् ॥२०४५ Il
काञ्चीपिनाकिनी पथ्यदेशे राजान्तरं भवेत् |
वायव्यां दिशमाश्रित्य कलहः समुपैष्यति ॥२०४६ ॥
तदेशाधिपतेः सौख्यं राजभ्रमणमादिशेत्।
पाण्डचदेशे afte स्याद्राज्याधिपतिविस्मृतिः ॥२०४७ ॥
तद्भ्राता प्रबलं चैति राज्यभ्रंशमतः परम् ।
पश्चिमां दिशमाश्रित्य कलहः पाड़्यदेशके ॥२०४८ ॥
अराजकं च भवति म्लेच्छः WARTS |
पश्चात् पूर्वनृपतिस्तु नष्टराज्यार्थलाभवान् ॥२०४९ ॥
चोलपाण्डयपुराधीशौ भीत्या च नाशसंयुतौ ।
पित्रा सेवितनृपतिर्गजाश्वाम्बरलाभवान् ॥२०५० Il
राजयोगाभिवृद्धिः स्यात् स्वपितुः सौख्यमादिशेत् |
दशवर्षात् परं चैव चोत्तरे राज्यविप्लवः॥२०५१ ॥
अमात्यव्राह्मणक्लेशं म्लेच्छमूलादुपद्रवम ।
रिपुक्षोभवशाच्चैव लोके दुरिक्षमादशेत् ॥२०५२ ॥
2044 - 2052. (a) Between the 22nd and 25th
years of the native’s life, (or) in his ascendant lord’s -
dasa, his paternal grand-father will pass away.
(b) Irrelevant: During the native’s first dasa, -
with Satum moving in Taurus, destruction of a
Yavana king will occur. In the region between
Kanchi and Pinakini, there will be a change of king.
There will be quarrels in the north-western direction. The king of the said region will be happy. In
the Pandya region, the king will quit the world; his
brother will become stronger. In the west of
Pandya quarrels and anarchy will be marked;
Mlecchas will take over after which the original
king will recover his lostkingdom and wealth. The
rulers of Chola and Pandya will be in the grip of fear
and destruction.
(c) The native’s father will gain elephants,
horses and robes through the king. His Raja yoga
effects will be on the increase and he will acquire
happiness after the 10th year of the native.
(d) Irrelevant: Ministers and Brahmins will be
in grief through the evil influences of Mleccha
kings. There will be strife and drought (poverty)
caused by enemies.
मेषे शनिस्थिते जातो द्रादशाब्दात् परं यदि।
लोके दुर्भक्षमप्नोति प्रजाक्षोभं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥२०५३ ॥
मीनान्ते वृश्चिकान्ते च युग्मे fae च मध्यमे |
यावत् स्थितौ मन्दजीवौ तावहुर्भिक्षमादिशेत् ॥२०५४ ॥
लग्नाद्धाग्यं गते मन्दे भूसुतेन समन्विते |
स्वप्रभोश्च महाक्रो धस्तृतीयां शे प्रकीर्तितः ॥२०५५ ॥
जन्मदाये स्वनृपति राज्ये कलहमादिशेत्।
पश्चाच्छाग्यति कलहो राजासन्तानमश्रुते ॥२०५६ ॥
तत्काले पितृसौख्यं स्यात् पश्चात् प्राबल्ययोगवान् |
द्रादशाब्दात् परं लोके धान्यनाशस्रिवत्सरम् ॥२०५७ ॥
प्रजाक्षोभश्च भवति देशे राजान्तरं भवेत् |
सम्पतारदशाकाले जनकस्य महत् सुखम् ॥२०५८ Il
राजयोगं च लभते राजामात्यप्रसादवान् |
एवंभूतोऽस्य जनकः सप्तविशात् परं मृतिम् ॥२०५९ ॥
यदि जीवति पुण्येन द्वात्रिंशे पितृनाशनम् |
ततः पूर्वममात्यस्य नाशेन स्वपितृव्यथा ॥२०६० ॥
पश्वाद्धाग्यसमायुक्तो राजपुत्रवशाद्धवेत् |
पितृभावफलाध्याये फलं विस्तारमादिशेत् ॥२०६१ ॥
2053 - 2061. (a) Irrelevant: With Saturn moving in Aries, the country willreel under drought and
strife. The extent of drought will correspond to
placements of Jupiter and Saturn in the end of
Pisces/Scorpio, or in Gemini or in the middle of
Leo.
(b) Saturn in the 9th from the ascendant in the
company of Mars denotes that the subject will show
anger against his king (i-e. will misbehave with the
employer).

Chandra Kala Nadi 5
(c) Irrelevant: The first dasa will cause strife
in kingdom. After strife, peace will be restored and
‘the king will have birth of a son.
(d) During the above phase, the native’s father
will attain happiness and increased prosperity.
(e) Irrelevant: After the twelfth year, destruction of food grains will exist for a period of three
years. The populace will be in the grip of strife and
change of king will occur.
(f) The second dasa of the native will cause
great happiness to the native’s father who will
obtain Raja yoga effects and favour from the king.
The native will lose his father in his 27th year of
age. Even if he escapes death, 32nd year will surely
cause hisend. Prior to this, the father will be mental
distress due to the destruction of royal minister,
after which he will prosper through the prince of the
State.
सूर्ये यावत्फलानि स्युस्तावत्सङ्या पितृव्यकाः।
पितुःसहोदराणां च विस्तारेण फलं स्मृतम् ॥२०६२ ॥
कुटिलांशे पूर्वभागे जातस्य मध्यखण्डके |
विलम्बसोदगोत्प्िर्ृहद्रीजश्च सोदरः॥२०६२ ॥
ज्येष्ठभ्रातृप्रियो नित्यमेकभ्रातृसमन्वितः।
भ्रातृभावगते मन्दे भूसुतेन समन्विते ॥२०६४॥
सुराचार्योण संदृष्टे भ्रातृभाग्ययुतो भवेत् ।
सोदराः पञ्चसह्वयाश्च ह्यथवा त्रयमेव च ॥२०६५ Il
कुटिलां शे पूर्वभागे मध्यखण्डेकभ्रातृमान् |
एका स्वसा सोख्यमेति भूषिता कनकप्रभा ॥२०६६ Il
भाग्यवंरो विवाहश्च भर्तुपत्रवती भवेत् |
भावुकाधिपतौ भोमे स्वक्षेत्रे शनिसंयुते ॥२०६७ Il
भर्तुवैरमवाप्नोति भावुकश्च न संशयः।
भावुकांशाधिपे भौमे नीचग्रह समन्विते ॥२०६८ ॥
ˆ भावुकज्येष्ठभ्राता च भ्रातृद्रेषयुतो भवेत् |
कुरटिलांशे भावुकस्य ज्येष्ठभ्राता सदानृतः॥२०६९ ॥
भर्तुदरोहवशाद्धाग्यं नाशं च मनुरब्रवीत।
भर्ता चैव ततः पश्चात् क्षेमदाये सुभाग्यवान् ॥२०७० ॥
भ्रातृशोकं frre संधिकाले न संशयः।
दशामार्गोषु विस्तरि भावुकस्य फलं वदेत् ॥२०७१॥
2062 - 2071. (a) Paternal Uncles: The number
of paternal uncles will correspond to the number of
Bindus in the Ashtaka Varga of the Sun.
(b) Co-born: The subject of Kutila Nadiamsa,
first half, in Leo ascendant will have delayed
obtainment of after-born. One of them will have
large testicles. The native will have one older `
brother whom he will be fond of.
(c) Saturn in the 3rd house in the company of
Mars and in aspect to Jupiter will cause happiness
through co-born. There will be three or five of
them.
(d) (Without reference to Saturn & C) the
native will have one brother and one sister. The
said sister will be endowed with golden ornaments,
will marry into a prosperous family and will be
endowed with (long-living) husband and sons.
(e) Mars ruling the house of sister’s husband
(i.e. the 9th house which is the 7th from the 3rd)
should be in own sign in association with Satur.
Then the sister of the native will be involved in
quarrels with her husband.
(e) The said Mars joining a debilitated planet
will denote that the sister’s older brother-in-law
(i.e. husband’s brother) will have enmity with her
husband. ४
(0 An ever truthful older brother-in-law is
denoted for the sister of the native of Kutila
Nadiamsa, Leo ascendant. -
(2) He will gain fortunes by betraying his
employer and will also incur destruction. In the
native's 4th dasa fortunes will revive.
(0) In the 3rd dasa, or in the junctions of 2nd and
3rd dasas, the native will incur grief on account of
aco-born. Results about brother-in-law should be
told in detail with the help of operating dasa
periods.
लग्नाच्चतुर्थ चन्द्रे सिहलग्ने प्रजायते ।
सुतेशे शनिसंदृषटे सन्तानप्रतिबन्धवान् ॥२०७२ ॥
2072. Progeny: The native of Leo ascendant
having the Moon in the 4th, while the 5th lord
Jupiter is aspected by Saturn, will have difficulties
in obtaining progeny.
मीनांशगे तुलाजीवे शन्यङ्गारकवीक्षते |
HAR प्रजातस्तु पुरा ब्राहमाणशपवान् ॥२०७२ ॥
तत्पापपरिहार्थं सेतुस्नानं त्रिवारकम् |
अथवा त्वेकवारेण कुटुम्बसहितः शुचिः ॥२०७४ ॥
मासत्रयं atta स्नानं च विधिवत् क्रमात् ।

6 Deva Keralam
सूर्योदयात् परं चैव शुदरशचत् स्नान माचरेत् ॥२०७५ ॥
कुर्यादर्धोदये विप्रसिमासं स्नानमुत्तमम् |
काम्यार्थमेव कर्तव्यमधश्शय्या विधिक्रमात् ॥२०७६ ॥
मोक्षार्थी प्रियवस्तूनि भोजनेषु विवर्जयेत् |
पुत्रार्थी प्रत्संह कुर्याद्हरिवंशस्य पाठनम् ॥२०७७ ॥
शूद्रस्य श्रवंण प्रोक्तं ब्राह्मणस्य मुखेन च |
मासान्ते काम्यमुदिश्यव्यासपूजां विधिक्रमात् ॥२०७८ ॥
मासत्रयं प्रदोषेषु निराहारो शिवार्चनम् ।
इन्दुवारे विशेषण कल्पोक्तविधिमार्गतः॥२०७९ ॥
पश्चात् सन्तानमाप्नोति कुरिलांश समुद्धवः।
मृतप्रजाथवा भार्या ज्येष्ठभार्या च पुत्रिणी ।२०८० ॥
पूर्वोक्तशान्तिकार्येण हाल्पपुत्रवती भवेत् |
तदभावे ज्येष्ठभार्या पुत्रं न लभते धुवम् ॥२०८१ ॥
दारान्तरे सुतप्राप्ति श्रत्वारिंशात् परं भवेत्। ।
शन्यङ्गरकोदोषार्थं पृथ्वीलिङ्खं द्विमण्डलम् ॥२०८२ ॥
शतधिकसहख्रश् ब्राह्याणेस्तु भरपूजयेत् |
नमोऽन्तेन च मन्त्रेण शुदरश्द्रिधिवत्रमात् ॥२०८३ ॥
वेदोक्तं निष्फलं चैव न शास्रीयमिति स्मृतम् ।
2073- 2083/2, Curse of Previous Birth: Jupiter in Libra in aspect to Saturn and Mars, and
begetting Pisces Navamsa would denote one with
the curse of a Brahmin in the previous birth (and™
consequent delay in obtainment of progeny in the
current birth). To overcome this blemish, one
should take sacred dips in the Setu for a period of
3 weeks. Or else, it should be done with purity in
the company of family members for a period of one
week, 3 months, or one year. A Soodra should take
dips after sun-rise. For a Brahmin dips for three
months are considered the best. To attain final
emancipation, things that are dear to the native
should be abandoned in the meal. To obtain a son,
recitation of “Hari Vamsa Kavya” should be done.
A Soodra should listen to this account through a
Brahmin. At the end of the month, Vyasa should be
worshipped as per rules. For 3 months, on Pradosha
days, Lord Siva should be worshipped, particularly
on Mondays as stated in Kalpa. After these rituals,
the native of Kutila Nadiamsa will obtain progeny.
Or else, he will obtain dead children. His first wife
will give birth to (only) female children. Due to the
performance of these remedies, she will, obtain
limited number of sons. In the absence of these
remedies, his first wife will never obtain sons. He
will however beget sons through second wife after
the age of 40..-Because of the blemish of Saturn -
Marsrelationship as stated earlier, the sacred Linga
should be worshipped for 96 days and Brahmins
should be honoured with gifts of over a hundred
coins. `
दाराधिपे कुजयुते कुटिलांश समुद्धवः॥२०८४॥
कलत्रद्रयमाप्नोति क्षेमदाये न संशयः।
जन्मादाये Mayet सम्पद्दाये स्वभूक्तिषु ॥२०८५ ॥
अथवा शुक्रभुक्तो तु प्रथमोद्रहमादिशेत् |
कुटिलांशे पूर्वभागे मध्य खण्डे च जायते ॥२०८६ Il
वसन्तकाले चोद्राहं शुक्ल पक्षे न संशयः।
उत्तरांशे सिंहमासे त्वथवा मिथुनेऽपि च ॥२०८७॥
विवाहोत्सवमाप्नोति सम्पदाये न संशयः।
पूर्वभागे त्वादिखण्डे मिथुने च विवाहवान् ॥२०८८ Il
प्रथान्ते युग्ममासे मध्यखण्डे विवाहवान् |
2084 - 2088142. Marriage: (a) The 7th lord
Saturn in the company of Mars denotes acquisition
of two wives, the second one being in the 4th dasa.
The first marriage will occur in the first dasa, in the
sub period of Jupiter, or in the 2nd dasa during the
first sub period or Venus’s sub period, in spring
during abright lunarhalf. This applies to the native
of first half of Kutila Nadiamsa. (Also see point “c”
below.)
(b) The native of second half of the subject
Nadiamsa will beget married in the second dasa,
with the Sun moving in Leo or Gemini.
(c) The person belonging to first half will have
his marriage in the month of Gemini. (See point “a”
above.)
दारेशे कुजसंयुक्ते गुरुणा च निरीक्षिते ॥२०८९ ॥
सिहलप्रे प्रजातस्य दारप्रीतिः कचित् कचित् ।
चन्द्रे राहुयुते दृष्टे वेश्यास्री भोगेलोलुषः ॥२०९० ॥
2089 - 2090. (a) Interrupted Affection to Wife:
The 7th lord (Saturn) in conjunction with Mars and
in aspect to Jupiter denotes that the native of Leo
ascendant will show affection to his wife now and
then. (That is the affection will be limited to certain
occasions and will not be uninterrupted.)
(b) Attached to Prostitutes: The Moon in

Chandra Kala Nadi
aspect to or conjunction with Rahu will give addiction to pleasures from prostitutes in case of a Leo
native.
स्थिरराशिगते चन्द्रे शन्यङ्गरकवीक्षिते ।
वारसखीगमनार्थं च स्वगेहे चौर्यकृत्यवान् ॥२०९१ ॥
स्वपितुः कोपमूलेन देशमन्यं प्रपद्यते |
पश्चात् स्वदेशमायाति सम्पदाये त्विदं फलम् ॥२०९२ ॥
2091 - 2092. Thieving in Own Home: The
Moon in an immovable sign in joint aspect to
Satur and Mars denotes that the native of Leo
ascendant will indulge in thieving in his own home
in order to derive pleasures from prostitutes. Further incurring the wrath of his father, he will go
away to a foreign country; later on he will return to
his own place. These are the effects for the dasa that
is second in order.
पिदेशसञ्चार स्वभावशीलः
स्थिरे wast शनिभोमदृष्टे ।
अकृत्यकार्याणि बहूनि कृत्वा
बाल्ये विदेशात् पुनरागतश्च ॥२०९३ ॥
2093. Other Effects: The yogadescribed above
(sloka 2091) will further give the undermentioned
effects. The subject will generally be disposed to
wander in foreign lands (out of family misunderstandings). He will do many acts which are not to
be done. In his childhood (i.e. early years) he will
go away to a foreign place only to return to his
original place.
स्थिरराश्यंशगे aX पापद्वयनिरीक्षिते |
कृत्वा च दूरयात्रां तु शीघ्रं चैवागमिष्यति ॥२०९४॥
2094. The Moon ina fixed sign in aspect to two
malefics will cause (futile) journeys to distant
places. Soon will such a person come back to his
birth place. (That is he will be a failure in foreign
lands.)
कुटिलांशे पूर्वभागे जातस्य मध्यखण्डके |
श्यामवर्णं कलत्रं स्याद्ध्ृ्रियवती भवेत् ॥२०९५ Il
भार्या गुणवती श्यामा भ्रातृभ्राप्रीसमन्विता |
पत्रविध्नवती चैव त्वेकभ्रातसमन्विता ॥२०९६ ॥
Ta भ्रातरौ द्रौ भवेतां च न संशयः।
तयोरेकश्चिरायुष्मान् जातस्य कुटिलांशके ॥२०९७ ॥
दारान्तरे सालकाश्च द्वित्रिसङ्कयाश्चिरायुषाः।
सालकानां तु aga कारकाष्टकवर्गगे ॥२०९८ ॥
सालकस्य फलं चैव विस्तारं मनुरबरवीत |
द्विकलत्रं चिरायुष्यं कुटिलांशस्य जातके ॥२०९९ ॥
पक्षान्तरे FATA पञ्चाशद्रत्सरात् परम् |
Sorat मृतिं चैति मध्यखडोद्धवस्य च ॥२९०० ॥
पूर्वभागे तृतीयांशे विपदाये दशान्त्यगे ।
मध्ये वा ज्येष्ठधार्यायाः सन्तानोत्पत्तिनाशनम् ॥२१०१ Il
उत्तरार्थं प्रजातस्य विशाब्दे दारनाशनम् ।
विरोधं कलत्रभावे कुटिलांशसमुद्धभवः॥२१०२ ॥
2095 - 2102. First Half - Kutila Nadiamsa
(upto “e”),
(a) The native of former half of Kutila Nadiamsa,
Leo ascendant will beget a dark-bodied spouse who
will be quite attached to him. She will be a virtuous
woman, endowed with brothers and sisters. Out of
these co-bor, one will be a brother and the lady
will incur obstacles in giving birth to children.
Other authorities prescribe two brothers for her.
One of them is said to be long-lived.
(b) The subject will have a re-marriage in
which case he will have two or three brothers-inlaw. The actual number of such brothers-in-law
should be deduced from the Ashtaka Varga.
(c) The said native will have two long-living
wives. `
(d) According to another view, after the native’s 50th year, the first wife will quit the world.
(e) In the end of his second dasa, children born
to his first wife will face destruction.
(f) Second half - Kutila Nadiamsa: One bom in
this part in Leo ascendant will lose his wife in the
20th year.
(£) The native of Kutila Nadiamsa.(irrespective of first or second half) will incuz enmity with
his spouse.
fae विलग्ने कुटिलांशजातो
दारिद्यगेहे च विवाहसिद्धिम् ।
दारान्तरे पुत्रसुदीर्धमाहुः
श्रीमान् धनादयः स्वपितुः समः स्यात् ॥२ १०२ ॥
2103. The native of Kutila Nadiamsa, Leo
ascendant, will marry in a family of dire poverty.
He will obtain progeny following second marriage,
will be rich and be equal to his father (in terms of

8 Deva Keralam
prosperity, position etc.)
वृश्चिकलगने TEM:
सपांशे वृश्चिके लप्रे ब्रह्मांशे च प्रजायते ।
विप्रजन्मा सुखी नित्यं सीमन्ततनयः स्मृतः॥२१०४॥
2104. Scorpio Ascendant - Sama Nadiamsa:
The native in question will be a Brahmin and be the
first issue of the family.
Notes: “Brahmamsa” in this part of the text
relates to birth in Brahmin family. Brahmin or
Brahmana in Vedic ages means - relating to or
given by Brahman who was supposed to be required to know the three Vedas to supervise sacrifices and set right the mistakes; aman belonging to
the Ist of the 4 original divisions of the Hindu body
but often in the present day a layman engaged in
non-priestly occupations although the name is
strictly only applicable to one who knows and
repeats the Veda. Thus the text implies birth in a
Brahmin family by words such as “Brahinamsa
yoga jatake”.
The words “Brahmamsa” need not be confused
with Brahma Nadiamsa as such.
For Sama Nadiamsa, please see page 141,
Book 1. ।
समांशगे वृश्चिकलग्ननाथे
केर त्रिकोणे गुरुवीश्षितेवा |
भागयाधिपे स्वोच्चगते बलाद्ये
ब्रह्मांशयोगं मुनयो वदन्ति ॥२१०५ ॥
सिंहे मेषांशगे भौमे समे area ।
2105 - 21054. Sama Nadiamsa - Mars: (a)
Birth in Sama Nadiamsa in Scorpio with ascendant
lord Mars in an angle or in a trine in aspect to Jupiter
will be that of a Brahmin.
(b) The same effect will come to pass with Mars
in Leo getting Aries Navamsa.
Notes: (a) For birth in a Brahmin’s family, this
yoga requires Jupiter’s aspect on Mars who should
be in Ist, 4th, 7th, 10th, Sth or 9th from the
ascendant Scorpio.
(b) In this case Mars in Leo should get Aries
Navamsa, but need not be connected with Jupiter.
In modern ages, such a combination should be
interpreted as capable of giving knowledge related
to the Supreme Being.
पूर्वभागे प्रजातश्च रक्तवर्णशुभाकृतिः॥२१०६ ॥
समांशे पूर्वभागे लग्ने च वृश्चिके तथा ।
महाशिवालयक्षत्रे नगरे चाप्रहारके ॥२१०७॥
पूर्वपश्चिमवीथ्योश्च दक्षिणस्यां प्रजायते |
समांशगे ब्राह्मायोगे सुखेशे गुरुसंयुते ॥२१०८ ॥
महादेवप्रसादेन नगरे प्रसवं स्मृतम् |
2106 - 2108/2, Sama Nadiamsa - First Half:
(a) One born in this part in Scorpio ascendant will
have an auspicious appearance with blood-red
complexion. His birth will be in a famous shrine
dedicated to Lord Siva, in a colony of Brahmins, in
a street extending from east to west and in a house
facing the south.
(b) Should Saturn, the 4th lord, be with Jupiter,
the birth due to the mercy of the Lord Siva will be
in a city.
समांशगे AMAT FA च प्रजायते ॥२१०९ ॥
amet प्रसूतिश्च गर्भे च पञ्चमोद्धवः।
सप्तमे पञ्चमे वापि नवमे ब्रह्मयोगगे ॥२११० ॥
जननं सोख्यमित्याहुः पश्ादभ्रातृविहीनवान् |
2109 - 2110142, Sama Nadiamsa - Second `
Half: This native of Scorpio ascendant will कै born
in a Brahmins’ colony as the 5th, 7th or 9th... ue of —
the family. His birth will be an auspicious one and
he will have no after-born.
Notes: The quintessence of these slokas is as
under. The subject will be the last issue of the
family which will have a minimum of five children
and maximum of nine children. His birth will be a
cause of auspicious progress of the family.
समांशगे ब्राह्यायोगे पूर्वभागे च जायते ALLE
पश्चाद् भातत्रयं चेति भगिनीद्रयवान् सुखी ।
तृतीयसोदरभ्रातुर्जातमात्रे मृतिं वदेत् ॥२११२ ॥
कनिष्ठ भ्राता दीर्धायुर्मष्ये चित्तभ्रमं लभेत् |
2111 - 21122. Sama Nadiamsa - Co-born:
One belonging to Scorpio ascendant will have
three brothers and two sisters (as against none in
case of second half). One of the brothers will have
instant death at the time of birth. One will be longlived. The middle of the brothers will have mental
derangement.
Notes: There is some confusion about events
relating to sequence of brothers. The translation is

Chandra Kala Nadi 9
provided eliminating such a confusion. Instant
death and long life are apparently applicable, in
order, to the first and third of the three brothers.
The middle one is destined to suffer from maladies
of the mind.
समांशगे पूर्वभागे तृतीये केतु संस्थिते ॥२११३ ॥
पश्रात् सहोदरभ्रातृभार्या पुत्रवत्ती शठा |
भाग्येशे केन्द्रभावस्थे स्वर्भानुयुतवीक्षिते ॥२११४ ॥
सहोदरभ्रातृभार्या कचिदुशचरिताप्रिया |
कन्यांशे वृश्रिके लग्ने भाग्ये राहौ प्रजायते ॥२११५ ॥
सहोदरभ्रातृभार्या श्वश्र्चशुरदूषिणी |
एका वन्धात्वमाप्नोति पतिभक्तिविवर्जिता ॥२११६ ॥
एका शरीरदोषापि पुत्रद्रयसुपूजिता |
पत्रिकाद्रयसंयुक्ता TATA BETA ॥२११७ ॥
ort भ्रातुप्रियवती मध्ये क्लेशेन करशिता।
2113 - 21174. (a) Ketu in 3rd: The wife of the
younger brother of the said native will be blessed
with sons but will be crafty if Ketu is in the 3rd.
(b) The Moon in an Angle: If the 9th lord
Moon is posited in an angle along with Rahu, the
sister-in-law will be somewhat disposed to be fond
of questionable history.
(c) Virgo Navamsa: Should birth be in Scorpio
ascendant begetting Virgo Navamsa as Rahu is in
the 9th from ascendant (i.e. in Cancer), the native’s
sister-in-law will blame her parents-in-law (i.e. she
will be disobedient to them). One of the sisters-in_ law will further be unable to bear progeny and will
not care for her husband. Yet another will have
some physical defect, will have two sons and two
daughters, be well honoured, and will be weakbodied due to some abortions. She will be fond of
her brothers and sisters and will occasionally be
subjected to troubles.
समांशे वृश्चिके लग्ने मकरे केतुसंस्थिते ॥२११८ ॥
कामेशे कुजसंदृष्टे वेश्यासरीसङ्गपापवान् |
समांशगे पूर्वभागे वेदाध्यायौ सहोदरः ॥२११९ ॥
एको वन्धयापति शैव ह्यपरस्तु त्रिभार्यकः।
भरातृत्रयकनिष्ठश्च भार्याव्यसनतत्परः॥२१२० ॥
मूढात्मा याचकः कोपी क्लेशपञ्चाद्गजी वकः।
स्वभुजाजितवान् किंचिद भ्रातृमूलाद्रनादयवान् ॥२१२१ ॥
मध्ये भ्रातृविरेघेन विभागानन्तरं व्यथाम् ॥
देशान्तरे वासमति ह्यल्पसोख्ययुतो भवेत् ॥२१२२ ॥
ततः पश्रादभ्रातृपीडा त्वम्रहारे निवासवान्।
व्यवसायपरो नित्यं वेदिकस्मार्तजीवकः॥२१२३ ॥
ततः पश्राद् भातृफलं जन्मप्रभृति पापवान् |
Seas: कोपी कार्यसाहसवान् सुखी ॥२१२४॥
उम्भाचाररतो नित्यं भ्रातृद्रोहादपुत्रकः।
भ्रातृविश्वसरहितो ह्यन्तकपटपापवान् ॥२१२५ ॥
याचकावत्ति कुरुते नानाजातिगृहे गृहे |
wget फलं चेति मध्ये हयुन्मादरोगवान् ॥२१२६ ॥
2118 - 2126. Sama Nadiamsa - Scorpio Ascendant: (a) The subject, will be sinful being in the
company of whores if Ketu is in the 3rd in Capricorn as the 7th lord (Venus) is aspected by Mars.
(b) Brothers: A brother of the native of first
half of this Nadiamsa will be versed in the Vedas.
Another will beget a spouse who will never be
able to give birth to a child.
The last one will have three wives who will be
domineering. He will be a fool, a beggar, given to
anger, will have a troubled life which he will eke
out through the use of almanacs, will lead selfearned wealth apart from some riches through
brothers, will also incur grief through a division
with brothers, will migrate to foreign lands and will
enjoy limited happiness. Afterwards, there will be
some troubles to his brothers while he will shift to
live in a coly of Brahmins. He will be attached to
his profession, will live through Vedic calling, will
commit sinful acts, will be the husband of a wicked
woman, be irritable and be adventurous in his
deeds, will indulge in arrogant acts, will go without
progeny due to the sins of betrayirg his brothers,
will not be grateful to his brothers, be inwardly
cunning and will go begging from house to house
belonging to men of various castes.
The middle one of the brothers will be mad.
भाग्ये राहो प्रजातस्य द्वितीये रविसंयुते |
समांशे सोदरभ्राता हीनवृत्याच जीवति ॥२१२७॥
पुरा पापस्य दोषेण त्वेकः पुत्रविहीनवान् |
मुखोन्मत्तविकारी च स्वदेहात्मादिवञ्चकः ;. १२८ ॥
अन्तः क्रोधी प्रसत्रात्मा साधुवद् दुष्ट कृत्यवान् |
2127 - 2128142. Co-born: Rahu in the 9th (in
Cancer) while the Sun is in the 2nd (in Sagittarius)

10 Deva Keralam
denotes the following. One of the brothers of the
native will have mean professions while another
will be childless due to previous birth’s sins, will
suffer from disorders of the mouth or face, will
cheat his kinsfolk, be inwardly given to anger but
outwardly happy, will trouble the virtuous and will
indulge in wicked deeds.
समांशगे पूर्वभागे स्थिरलगनोद भवस्य FR? Il
स्वग्येष्ठभ्रातृमूलेन भाग्यं wet भवेत् ।
कालान्तरे भ्रातृवैरमन्योन्यं च भविष्यति ॥२१३० ॥
वेषेण क्लेशमाप्नोति देशत्यागं विनिर्दिशेत् ।
भ्रातृ भावफलाध्याये भगिनीलक्षणं स्मृतम् ॥२१२१॥
सहोदरभ्रातृफलं प्रोक्तं विस्तारमेव च |
समांशे भगिनी चैव बहुकालं समुङ्गली ॥२१३२ ॥
पत्रशोकवती चैव त्वेका क्लेशेन करशिता।
2129 - 21321. Immovable Ascendant - Sama
Nadiamsa: One born in the first half of this Nadiamsa will have three brothers and will prosper
through elder brother. After some interval, he will
incur enmity with brothers which will cause him
troubles and he will leave the country. One of his
sisters will have long-living husband but will be
grieved on account of progeny. Another will be
emaciated due to miseries.
कर्मे भौमे सुखे wel स्थिरलग्नोद्धवस्य च ॥२१३३ Il
सहोदरी क्लेशमति पुत्रशोकवती स्मृता |
सहोदरीसुतः कश्चित् पुरा पापस्य हेतुना ॥२१३४॥
ब्रह्मचर्याश्रमे बाल्ये चोन्मादेन मरिष्यति |
समांशे भगिनीपुत्रर्वशे पापस्य हेतुना ॥२१३५॥
2133 - 2135¥2. Immovable Ascendant - Sama
Nadiamsa: Mars in the 10th and Rahu in the 4th
will give the undermentioned effects. The native’s
sister will undergo miseries and will be grieved on `
account of loss of a son. Her son will, due to
previous birth’s sins, take to Brahmacharya in
childhood and will die due to madness. There will
be a lot of poverty, difficulties and madness in the
said family.
` अतीव क्लेशदरिदयमुन्मांद लभते धुवम् ।
समांशे चोत्तरे धागे करीटलग्नोद्धवस्य च ॥२१३६ ॥
सर्वज्येष्ठः सुखी भ्राता वेदाध्ययनशाख्रवित् |
तस्य भार्या च कुलटा सन्यासिप्रियभोगिनी ॥२१३७ ॥
सहोदरभ्रातृभार्या यतिमूलात् सुभाषिता |
TRY फलं सत्यं ज्येष्ठभार्या पतिव्रता ॥२१३८ ॥
2136 - 2138. Scorpio Ascendant _ Sama
Nadiamsa: The native born in Sama Nadaimsa’s
second half in Scorpio ascendant will be the first
issue. His brother will be learned in the Vedas. The
second wife of the said brother will be unchaste,
attached to enjoyments from an ascetic. The first
wife (of the said brother) will be chaste.
समांशे चोत्तरे भागे नवमे राहुसंस्थिते |
भ्रातरो दरौ चायुष्मन्तावग्रहारे निवासवान् ॥२१३९ ॥
पुराणतत्वधर्मजञो ज्येष्ठभ्रातृप्रियः सुखी |
उत्तरांशे फलं सत्यं TAY च समुद्धवः॥२१४० ॥
समे ब्राह्मयांशयोगेन शिवानुग्रहभक्तिमान् |
WHAT: प्राज्ञो हयन्तश्शुद्धः सधार्मिकः॥२१४२ Il
पापत्पाकृशदेहश्च बीजप्रान्त्ये सुलक््मकः।
2139 - 21421. Rahu in 9th: The subject of -
second half of Sama Nadiamsa, Scorpio ascendant,
with Rahu in the 9th house will beget the following
effects. He will have two brothers, be long-lived,
will live in a colony of Brahmins and will have.
knowledge of Puranas, philosophy and justice. He
will be fond of his elder brother, be devoted to Lord
Siva, will have much hair on his physique, be
learned, of pure consciousness, highly munificent,
fond of ascetics, devoted to gods, firm in prosperity
and endowed with justice and expedients. He will
be widely famous, will enjoy pleasures, be indolent, will have good qualities, will also indulge in
sinful deeds, be emaciated and endowed with
auspicious marks.
वित्ते मन्दे वक्रबुद्धिरभक्षणभक्षणप्रियः॥२१४३ ॥
असत्यवाचकः कामी ह्यन्तश्शुद्ध शुभान्वितः।
पापांशे पापसन्दषटे पापी दुर्मार्गवुद्धिमान् ॥२१४४ ॥
सत्यशोचविहीनश्च वित्ते मन्दे च जायते |
2143-2144. Saturn in 2nd: If Saturn isin the
2nd house, declare the following effects. The
person will be of crooked disposition, be fond of
eating things that are eatable as well as uneatable,
be untruthful, lididinous, pure in mind and be
fortunate. If Saturn is in a malefic’s Navamsa and
acquires malefic aspects, the subject will take to
bad path. He will be devoid of truth and purity.

Chandra Kala Nadi 11
वृषभांशकगे मन्दे चपि गुरुसमन्विते ॥२१४५ ॥
समांशे वृश्चिके लग्नो ज्योतिश्शारूविशारदः।
अलसः कीर्तिमान् कामी छन्नपापरतिप्रियः॥२९४६ ॥
2145 - 2146. Saturn with Jupiter: Should
Saturn be in the 2nd in Sagittarius with the company of Jupiter and occupy Taurus Navamsa, the
person will be learned in astrology. He will be
indolent, famous, lustful and will indulge in questionable deeds as well as sexual pleasures in a
secretive manner.
वित्ते गुरुयुते मन्दे तेजस्वी धनधान्यवान् |
अल्पाशी परदारेषु बाल्ये क्लेशदरिद्रवान् ॥२१४७ il
ब्राह्मयांशयोगे धर्मात्मा मनस्वी प्रियदर्शनः।
शरीरदोषवान् किचिन्मिताशी भरातृपोषकः॥२१४८ ॥
2147 - 2148. Saturn in the 2nd with Jupiter will
cause one to be splendorous and endowed with
wealth and grains. He will eat limited food, be
involved with others’ wives and will incur difficulties and poverty in childhood. He will be charitable, intelligent, charming in appearance, will have
some physical defects and will patronize his brothers. 1
लग्नात्तृतीयगे मन्दे धनेकेतौ प्रजायते |
सुतेशे शनिसंयुक्ते किचित्पावनवाक्यवान् ॥२१४९ ॥
2149. Saturn - Jupiter - Ketu: With Saturn
and Jupiter in the 3rd (in Capricom) while Ketu is
in the 2nd house, the subject will be somewhat
purificatory or holy in speech.
भृगौ स्वोच्चोऽथवा भाग्ये दशमे भूमिनन्दने |
सुराचार्येण संदृष्टे सुपुत्रः कुलदीपकः ॥२१५० ॥
2150. Venus - Mars: One will be a worthy son
and a lamp of the family if Venus is in exaltation in
the 5th (in Pisces) or is in the 9th (in Cancer). In
either case, Mars is to be in the 10th house.
दशामाङ्गारको यस्य लग्ने वा सप्तमेऽपि वा।
न विमुञ्चति तं लक्मीर्लज्जाकुलवधूमिव ॥२१५१ il
2151. Goddess Lakshmi (i.e. wealth), like a
spouse caring for the family’s honour, will never
discard the person, should Mars be in the 10th, or
the ascendant or the 7th. (Thatis, one born in Sama
Nadiamsa of Scorpio, with Mars in Scorpio, Taurus
or Leo will be opulent till death.)
ब्राह्मयांशयोगे सौम्यांशे समांशे वा प्रजायते ।
लग्नात् त्रिकोणगे शुक्रे पुरा ब्राह्मणजन्मवान् ॥२१५२ It
चन्द्रंशेष्यथ सौम्यांशे समांशे च प्रजायते ।
भृगौ स्वोच्चे त्रिकोणे वा त्रिजन्यज्ञानबुद्धिमान् ॥२१५३ ॥
2152 - 2153. (a) The native of Sama Nadiamsa
in Scorpio ascendant, with Mercury’s Navamsa
would have been a Brahmin in previous birth
provided Venus is in a trine.
(b) If the Navamsa in question belongs to the
Moon or Mercury while Venus is in a trine or in
exaltation, the subject will have memory of three
previous births.
Note: These two verses are confusing because
of unclear reference to Navamsas of Mercury and
the Moon.
सुखेशे भृगसुसंयुक्ते पञ्चमस्थेय जायते |
समांशगे पूर्वभागे ज्योतिश्शख्प्रवीणकः॥२१५४ ॥
शिवपूजाप्रभावेण देवानुप्रहरेतुना |
फलभागे प्रवीणश्च जातकस्कन्धनेपुणः॥२१५५ ॥
चातुर्व्णमताचारे तत््वनिष्कर्षं बुद्धिमान् |
महादेवप्रसादेन कालज्ञानयुत STS ॥२१५६ ॥
2154 - 2156. Scorpio Ascendant: One will be
a skilful astrologer if the 4th lord Satur joins
Venus in the Sth in Pisces. Due to worship of Lord
Siva, he will be skilful in horoscopy. He will follow
the codes prescribed for the four traditional castes,
be skilful in philosophy, intelligent and happy.
लग्नात् त्रिकोणगे शुक्रे चन्द्रे पापविवर्जते |
वित्ते जीवेऽथ वा षष्ठे सदानिर्मलायित्तवान् ॥२१५७ ॥
एतद्योगे प्रजातश्च सदा दाक्षिण्यबुद्धिमान |
परोपकारवान् रागी लोके प्रख्यातिमान् सुखी ॥२१५८ ॥
2157 - 2158. Scorpio Ascendant: Should Venus be in a trine from the ascendant, Jupiter in the
2nd or the 6th, and the Moon is free from malefic
conjunction, the subject will have a pure history, be
ever considerate, helpful to others, passionate and
be famous in the world.
समांशगे धने जीवे वीक्षिते वा प्रजायते ,
सिवपूजारतो नित्यं प्रदोषवतपुण्यवान् ॥२१५९ ॥
2159. Jupiter Related to 2nd: If Jupiter is in

12 Deva Keralam
the 2nd or aspects it, the native of Sama Nadiamsa
in Scorpio ascendant will be devoted to worship of
Lord Siva. He will earn merits due to religious
rituals.
समांशे वृश्चिके लग्ने पूर्वभागे प्रजायते ।
कर्मे कुजे शुभे राहौ गङ्खस्नानादिपुण्यवान् ॥२१६० ॥
2160. Rahu - Mars: One born in the former
half of the subject Nadiamsa in Scorpio ascendant
with Mars in the 10th and Rabu in the 9th will earn
the merits of sacred dips in the Ganges.
कर्मेशे स्वोच्चराशिस्थे कर्मे भोमे शुभेक्षिते ।
गङ्धायात्राफलप्राप्तिः भाग्ये च HTH] सुखी ॥२१६१॥
2161. Exalted Sun: So also when the 10th lord
Sun is in his sign of exaltation while Mars is in the
10th in aspect to a benefic. Should Mars be in the
9th (instead of in the 10th), the subject will perform
Yagnas.
वेदान्तनिपुणश्चैव युत्तरांश्समुद्धवः।
अग्निष्टोमादि कार्येषु सिद्धिर्भवति नित्यशः॥२१६२ ॥
गङ्खस्नायी पूर्वभागे समांशे च प्रजायते। .
ब्रह्मचर्याश्रमे बाल्ये भिक्षाशी क्लेश मश्नुते ॥२१६३ ॥
2162 - 2163. Should the native belong to
second half of the subject Nadiamsa, the person
will be skilful in Vedanta and will have attainments
in performing Vedic sacrifices like Agnishtoma.
The native of former half of this Nadiamsa will
have dips in the Ganges, will study Vedas under a
Guru observing Brahmacharya in his early years,
will acquire food by begging and will lead a
difficult life.
लग्ने कुजयुते दृष्टे दशमे पापखेचरे |
जठरे वाम भागे च त्वतिबाल्ये व्रणाडतिः॥२१६४॥
तदभावे यौवनेषु व्रणोपद्रवमादिशेत्।
आस्यरोगेण सन्तापं वार्धके वा न संशयः॥२१६५ ॥
2164 -2165. Mars Related to Ascendant: One
will suffer from ulcers on the right side of the
stomach in his childhood if Mars aspects or occupies Scorpio ascendant while the 10th is tenanted
by amalefic. If there is no such disease in childhood, ulcers will strike him in youthful days. Or he
will suffer from facial disorders in his advanced
age.
लग्नारूढ गते चन्द्रे स्वर्भानुयुतवीक्षिते।
आरूढाष्टमगे पपे योगः BHA भवेत् ॥२१६६॥
योगे केमिद्रुमे जातः क्लेशी याचकजीवकः।
फलाकालपरित्यागी नानादेरोषु संचरन् ॥२१६७ ॥
2166 - 2167. Kemadruma Yoga: The Moon in
Arudha Lagna in aspect to or in association with
Rahu while the 8th from the Arudha Lagna is
occupied by a malefic will cause a specific kind of
Kemadruma Yoga. As a result, the native will be in
difficulties, will live by beggary and will wander in
various countries.
Notes: “Phala Kaala Parityagi’ is not amenable to proper rendering. It simply denotes that the
person will abandon “effects and time”.
आरूढे स्वोच्चगे चनद्रे यत्किचिद्धनलाभवान्।
तदष्टमगते जीवे वस्त्रवाहनधान्यवान् ॥२१६८ ॥
2168. If the Arudha Lagna happens to be
Taurus with exalted Moon, the person will have
some financial acquisitions. In this yoga, if Jupiter
is simultaneously in the 8th therefrom (i.e. in
Sagittarius), one will enjoy robes, conveyances
and food comforts.
sae सुसम्पन्नो बहुकषत्रन्याधिपः सुखी |
केमद्रुमफलं विन््यात् पूर्वभागे कचित् कचित् ॥२१६९ ॥
2169. One born in the second half of Sama |
Nadiamsa, Scorpio ascendant, with Kemadruma
yoga, will be very wealthy and will own vast landed
properties. The native of former half will somewhat be troubled by the evil effects of Kemadruma
Yoga.
स्वोच्चे नीचांशगे सूर्ये कीरलग्नसमुद्धवः।
राजयोगशतं चैति समांशे तु न. योगवान् ॥२१७० ॥
क्लेशजीवनवात्नित्यं समांशे पूर्वभागके |
गङ्गास्नानजपुण्येन शिवभक्तितरतो भवेत् ॥२१७१ ॥
2170 - 2171. The Sun in Libra Navamsa: In
case of birth in the first half of the subject Nadiamsa,
the Sun in exaltation but with debilitated Navamsa
will cause no Yogain spite of the fact that there may
be a hundred Raja Yogas (emanating from other
sources). Such a person will lead adifficultlife. He
will worship Lord Siva due to the merits obtained
by dips in the Ganges.

Chandra Kala Nadi 13
समांशे चोत्तरे भागे बहिराचारडाम्भिकः।
अनेकक्रतुमान् रागी प्रामद्रव्यापाहारवान् ॥२१७२ ॥
2172. One born in the 2nd half of Sama Nadiamsa, Scorpio ascendant, will be hypocritical, will
perform many Yagnas, be passionate and will steal
the village properties.
समांशे पञ्चमाधीशे असितेन समन्विते |
पूर्वभागे प्रजातश्च स्वपितमहभाग्यवान् ॥२१७३ ॥
दारारीष्टेन दुखी च नानादेशेषु संचरन् | ।
विप्रस्त्रीविधवासडगी tear मरिष्यति ॥२१७४ tl
2173 - 2174. In case of first half of Sama
Nadiamsa, Scorpio ascendant, the 5th lord (JJupiter) being with Saturn will cause prosperity through
paternal grand-father. The person will incur evils
to his spouse, will wander in many countries, will
have illicit connections with Brahmin widows and
will die in Ganges.
पितामहाधिपे जीवे स्वक्ष वरगोत्तमांशगे ।
असितेन युते श्रीमान् महाराजपुरोहितः॥२१७५ ॥
देहान्ते नरकं याति पौत्रमूलात् सुलोकवान् |
पितृस्थानाधिपे चन्द्रे स्वोच्चे पापविवर्जिते ॥२१७६ ॥
स्वपिता धार्मिकः साधुरेकदारवरतः सुखी |
समांशे नवमे राहौ स्वपिता स्वभुजार्जितः ॥२१७७ ॥
ज्योतिश्शस्त्रे प्रसिद्धश्च ह्यत्पजीवनवान् सुखी |
पितामही मृत्युकाले स्वपिता सोदरद्रयी ॥२१७८ ॥
शुक्रवारे मृतिं चैति सजीवा प्रपितामही |
पुण्येन प्रपितामह्याः AAR जनकस्य च ॥२१७९ ॥
जीवने सौख्यमित्याहु रेकाकी स्वपिता सुखी ।
विवाहानन्तर सौख्यं राजामात्यप्रसादवान् ॥२१८० ॥
द्विचत्वरिंशपर्यन्तं पुण्यक्षेत्रे वसिष्यति ।
पश्ादरनान्ते वासं पुत्रमूलात् सुसोख्यवान् ॥२१८१ ॥
पूर्वभागे पितृफलं सूर्यानड्यां च विस्तृतम् |
2175 - 2181: (a) Jupiter ruling the 5th house
should join Satur and occupy his own sign in
Vargottama. As a result the native of Scorpio
ascendant will be opulent, be aking’s preceptor but
will attain hell after his death. He may attain
heavens (only) due to the good deeds of his grandsons.
(b) Father: The lord of the 9th, the Moon,
being in exaltation without malefic association
will cause following effects concerning the native’s father. He will be liberal, saintly, will be
attached to his wife (without any illicit associations) and be happy.
(c) Father: Rabu in the 9th house will give
following effects:in respect of the native’s father.
He will have self-earned wealth, be a famous
astrologer and will have a moderate living. At the
time of his mother’s death he will have two sisters.
She will die on a Friday during which time, the
native’s paternal great grand-mother will be alive.
The native’s father will be happy, will prosper after
marriage, be lonely, will earn favours from kings
and ministers. Following the age of 42, he will live
inashrine. After this, he will migrate to forests and
enjoy much happiness through his sons.
In Surya Nadi, effects concerning father have
been narrated in full for birth in the former half of
Sama Nadi, Scorpio ascendant.
उत्तरांशे पिता तस्य याचकश्च frase: 112822 ॥
केरलप्रान्त्यसञ्चारी भारधृदत्तिजीवकः।
पश्रात् स्वदेशमासाध प्रियते पुत्रसन्निधौ ॥२१८३ ॥
पितामही दीर्धजीवा gare युता सती |
पुत्रिका च तथा विन्द्या ज्जातस्य चोत्तरां शके ॥२१८४ ॥
2182 - 2184. In case of birth in the latter half
of Sama Nadiamsa, Scorpio ascendant, the father
will live by beggary. The native’s paternal grandfather would live in the region of Kerala, by
carrying loads. After some time he will return to his
native place and die before his son. His paternal
grand-mother will be long lived and would have
three sons and three daughters.
समांशके पूर्वभागे दीर्घायुः स्वपितामही ।.
उपनयनात् परं मृत्युः पिता तस्याश्च कर्मकृत् ॥२१८५ ॥
2185. One born in the first half of Sama Nadiamsa will havea long-living paternal grand-mother.
She will die after the native’s thread ceremony.
The native’s father will perform her last offices.
.जन्मदाये दशान्त्यादौ Aa स्वभुक्तिषु । “
पितामह श्च निर्याणं वृद्धे गोदावरीतटे ॥२१८६ ॥
2186. The native will, in the end of his first dasaor in the first sub period of the second dasa, lose his

14. Deva Keralam
paternal grand-father whose final rites will be `
performed on the banks of the river Godavari.
्रिप्रहोच्चे प्रजातस्य नीचाभावे च खेच ।
राजयोगफलं नास्ति कलो गर्गमतं स्मृतम् ॥२१८७॥
कलौ निचग्रहाभावे निष्फलं स्वोच्चखेचर |
उच्चनीचौ राजयोगं नीचाभावे दरिद्रकः॥२१८८ ॥
2187 - 2188. Special Rule - Kali Yuga:
According to sage Garga, one born (even) with
three exalted planets will not beget Rajayoga effects unless there is a planet in simultaneous debility. This applies to the Kali Yuga. In the said Yuga,
without a debilitated planet, an exalted planet will
become ineffective. Only with simultaneous presence of exalted and debilitated planets, Raja Yogas
will fructify. Without debilitated planet, one with
only an exalted planet will incur poverty.
Notes: This seems to be a general rule applicable to various ascendants.
विपदाये विदेशानामुत्तरं दिशमेष्यति |
मातामहीप्रसादेन स्वपिता सौख्यमश्नुते ॥२१८९ ॥
2189. In the third dasa, one of Scorpio ascendant, Sama Nadiamsa, will be desirous of going toa
foreign country located in the northern direction. In
this dasa, his father will derive happiness through
his (the native’s) maternal grand-mother.
मातृस्थानाधिपे मन्दे चापे गुरसमन्विते।
बराह्मयंशयोगे जातस्य स्वमाता चिरजीविनी ॥२१९० ॥
चन्द्रे यावत्फलानि स्युस्तावनम्मातृसहोदराः।
समांशगे पूर्वभागे मातुलद्रययोगवान् ॥२१९१ ॥
मातृष्वसा काचिदेव द्येकपुत्रसमन्विता |
सुमङ्गली मतिं चैति मातामही चिरायुषी ॥२१९२ ॥
2190 - 2192. (a) Mother’s Life-span: If the 4th
lord Saturn is in Sagittarius along with Jupiter, the
mother of the said native will be endowed with
longevity.
(b) The number of brothers that his mother
would have will correspond to the number of
bindus in the Moon’s Ashtaka Varga.
(c) One bom in the former half of Sama
Nadiamsa in Scorpio ascendant will have two
maternal uncles. His maternal aunt will possibly
have a son. She will pre-decease her husband.
(d) His maternal grand-mother will also be `
long-lived. `
समांशे मातुलश्चैको प्रामणीर्व्यसायकः।
एकोऽध्यायी स्मृतिज्ञश्च गोलकाश्रमजीवकः 12283 ॥
2193. Maternal Uncles: One of the maternal
uncles of the native of Sama Nadiamsa, Scorpio
ascendant, will live by agriculture in a village. One
will be a student of the Vedas, versed in Smriti
(ancient knowledge transmitted by memory) and
will live in a hermitage.
समांशके पूर्वभागे मातुलौ at च बाल्यके |
भिक्षाटनं च कुरुतो विवाहानन्तरं सुखम् ॥२१९४ ॥
2194. If birth be in the former half of Sama
Nadiamsa, Scorpio ascendant, two maternal uncles
will live by beggary during their boyhood days.
Following their marriages, they will be happy (i.e.
will give up begging).
मातुलाधिपतौ भौमे मेषांशे गुरुवीक्षिते ।
मातुलेकश्चिरायुष्मान् मातृनाशेन करशितः॥२१९५ ॥
मातुलौ द्वौ पुत्रवन्तो पुत्रिकाशोककशितौ |
गार्हस्थ्य जीवनं चेति वेदाध्यायी च मातुलः ॥२१९६ ॥
विप्लवेन विनिर्गत्य वनान्तरपुरे वसन् |
वाणिज्ये शुद्रमूलेन उम्भाचार धनार्जकः ॥२१९७ Il
2195 - 2197. Mars in Aspect to Jupiter: Mars
ruling the house of maternal uncles (i.e. the 6th -
Aries) should be in aspect to Jupiter and be in Aries
Navamsa, in case of birth in Sama Nadiamsa,
Scorpio ascendant. Then a maternal uncle of the
subject will be endowed with longevity. The
subject will be emaciated due to early loss of
mother. Two other maternal uncles will be blessed
with male issues. They will lose their daughters
and be in grief. One maternal uncle will lead family
life as a married man and be a student of the Vedas.
He will be displaced in a political calamity and will
live in a town surrounded by forests by trading
activities with Soodras. प्र will be hypocritical and
will earn wealth.
समांशे भाग्यगे राहौ व्ययेशे कुजवीक्िते ।
पूर्वभागे मातुलस्य भार्या दुष्टचसित्रिका ॥२१९८ ॥
म्लेच्छा्रान्तस्य कालेषु क्लेशं प्राप्नोति विप्लवात् |
AAAS मन्सतापं देशत्यागमतः परम् ॥२१९९ ॥

Chandra Kala Nadi
पुत्रशोकेन सन्तापं भर्तृक्लेशेन कर्शिता |
2198 - 219914, Maternal Uncle’s Wife: Birth
in former half of Sama Nadiamsa, Scorpio ascendant with Rahu in the 9th house, as the 12th lord
Venus is aspected by Mars will give the following
effects. One’s maternal uncle’s wife will be of
questionable history. She will be in troubles when
foreigners attack her country; her modesty will be
outraged. Later on she will leave the country in
grief. She will be sad losing her son and husband.
मातुलारुढगे मन्दे समांशे गुरसंयुते ॥२२०० Il
पूर्वभागे मातुलस्य मृतिं चैवाश्रामान्तरे ।
ब्रह्मलोकप्राप्िफलं TRY तथा भवेत् ॥२२०१॥
2200 - 2201. For birth in former half of Sama
Nadiamsa, Scorpio ascendant, see if Saturn isin the
Arudha Pada of the 6th house in the company of
Jupiter. In that case, a maternal uncle will die in a
hermitage. Such maternal uncle will attain Brahma
Loka in case of the native of second half of the
subject Nadiamsa.
Notes: In sloka 2201, the reading is “Brahma
Loka Praapti-ruttaramse....” in place of our above
text.
भाग्ये राहौ तदीशे च सप्तमे स्वोच्चराशिगे ।
शुक्रे कुजयुते हृष्टे त्रिभार्यो SAMPARA: ॥२२०२ ॥
स्वदारभगिनी क्लिष्टा विधवा दुष्टचारिणी |
तदभावे मातुलस्य भार्या च वा यदि ॥२२०३॥
fave पूर्वखण्डे द्वित्रिवारं विवाहवान् |
विपद्ाये पूर्वखण्डे द्वत्रिवारं ज्वराद्धयम् ॥२२०४ ॥
त्रयोदशेऽपमृत्युश्च मृतप्रायोऽपि जीवति |
2202 - 2204142. Rahu - Moon - Venus: Rahu in
the 9th, the Moon in the 7th in exaltation, and
Venus associated with Mars by aspect or company
will produce the following results.
(a) The native will have three wives. He will
also be involved with others’ women.
(b) His wife’s sister will be molested, will
become a widow and will have a questionable
history. In the absence of these effects occurring to
a Sister of the person’s wife, these can happen to a
daughter of his maternal uncle.
(c) The native will beget married in the last one
third part of the 3rd dasa. The first one third of the
said dasa will cause fear from dangerous fever.
13th year will usher fear of untimely death but the
subject will survive.
लग्नाद्धाग्यं गते राहौ सप्तमे चन्द्र संस्थिते ॥२२०५॥
विषूचीज्वभीत्या च मृतप्रायोऽपि जीवति ।
स शूद्रपरभुसन्मानं विपदाये शुभाश्रयम् NRE ॥
वाहनाम्बरभूषाप्िम धनलाभं च विन्दति।
वर्षद्रंय महत् कष्टं मनुवर्षात् परं व्यथाम ॥२२०७॥
देशान्तरे निवासेन स्वभुजाभजित वित्तवान् | :
2205 - 220714. Rahu - Moon: Rahu in the 9th
while the Moon is in the 7th house will give the
following effects for a person born in Sama
_ Nadiamsa, Scorpio ascendant. He will nearly die
due to delirium (in the early years). He will be
patronized by a Soodraking. In the 3rd dasa, he will
join auspicious men and will gain conveyances,
robes, wealth and ornaments. For two years during
the said dasa he will be in extreme difficulties. The
period following his 14th year of age will produce
much distress. He will live in a different country.
He will gather self-made wealth.
कन्याशनिस्थिते काले समांशे प्रभुनाशनम् ॥२२०८ ॥
देशान्तरे निवासेन स्वभुजार्जित वित्तवान् |
कन्याशनिस्थिते काले स्वपित्ररिष्टपूर्वके 112208 Il
विपत्तारदशासन्धौ arate विनिर्दिशेत् |
2208 - 220914. When Saturn transits Virgo, his
king will be destroyed. In a trine thereof, the planet
Saturn will cause famine. When in Libra, the
native’s father will incur evils. Prior to this, and in
the end of the third dasa, the person will lose his
spouse.
लग्नात् त्रिकोणगे शुक्रे दशमे कुज संस्थिते ॥२२१० ॥
स्वपितुर्मृतिकाले च देशान्तरनिवासवान् |
सप्तविंशे fared द्वितीयोद्वाहयोगवान् ॥२२११॥
राजाश्रयं च लभते प्राबल्यमपि चादिशेत् |
महाशिवालयक्षेत्रे विशेऽब्दे पुण्यभूमिषु 12222 Il
महायोगिप्रसादेन पार्थिव लिङ्गमर्चति ।
पज्चाक्षरस्य AA ह्युपदेशयुतः सुखी ॥२२१३॥
तस्य पुण्यप्रभावेण विश्वनाथकृतेषु च ।
वुक्हुद्विर्ज्योतिषज्ञान वृद्धिस्तस्य दिने दिने ॥२२१४॥

16 Deva Keralam
2210 - 2214. Venus in a Trine: If Venus is in '
2 trine (Pisces or Cancer) while Mars is in the 10th
(Leo), the subject will be in a foreign country at the
time of his father’s death. In his 27th year, in the
third dasa, he will have a re-marriage. He will
attain fame through royal patronage. In a sacred
shrine of Lord Siva, he will be initiated into recitation of Panchakshari Mantra (Om Namassivaya,
- ॐ नमः शिवाय) . Because of this, he will attain the
power of forecasting accurately and will progress
in astrology day after day.
समांशगे पूर्वभागे कर्मेशे गुरुवीक्षिते ।
भृगुस्वोच्चे प्रजातस्य विद्याजीवनमादिशेत् ॥२२१५ ॥
2215. Teaching Profession: In case of birth in
former half of Sama Nadiamsa, Scorpio ascendant,
the 10th lord (Sun) with Jupiter will cause livelihood by teaching provided Venus is in exaltation.
कुम्भे शानिस्थिते काले समांशे क्षेमदायगे ।
दारारिष्टमिति प्राहुस्तृतीयोद्राहवान् सुखी NAVE Il
2216. When Saturn moves in Aquarius, during
the native’s fourth dasa, he will see his (second)
spouse in danger. He will have his third marriage
and be happy.
समांशे दशमे भोमे राहौ च नवमे स्थिते ।
कश्चित् ALM: कलत्रत्रययगोवान् ॥२२१७ ॥
प्रत्यग्दाये सूर्यभुक्तौ सोदरारिष्टशोकवान्।
yay विवादश्च ज्वरपीडा कचित् कचित् ॥२२१८ ॥
सर्वदाय सौम्यभुक्तौ समांशे पूर्वभागे |
HATA ज्वरं चैति शषिप्रेणारोग्यभाग्यवान् ॥२२१९ ॥
2217 - 2219. Mars - Rahu: Mars in the 10th
(Leo) and Rahu in 9th (Cancer) will probably cause
three marriages to the co-born of the native. In the
sub period of the Sun during the fifth dasa, the
native’s brother will be endangered. In Venus sub
period, his marriage will occur. He will have some
troubles on account of fever. The sub period of
Mercury (the 8th lord) in any dasa will cause fever
(or some illness) but instant recovery.
समांशे चन्द्रनाडीषु नाडयां सून्वाधिपस्य च ।
विस्तारेण फलं वश्ये देशाकालदिसं भवम् ॥२२२० ॥
2220. In Chandra Nadi, results concerning the
Sth lord Jupiter for Sama Nadiamsa, Scorpio ascendant, have been explained in more detail. These
should be declared according to time periods and
culture of the country.
व्ययेशे पञ्चमस्थाने तदीरो शनिसंयुते |
दारान्तरसुतारिंष्ट समांशे सूतिकागृहे ॥२२२१ ॥
तृतीयदारि पुत्रापििर्दीर्घायु्यपुत्रवान् |
पूर्वभागे त्वेकपुत्रो ह्यायुष्मत्यसिपुत्रिकाः ॥२२२२ ॥
2221 - 2222. Venus - Jupiter - Saturn: The
12th lord in the Sth while Sth lord Jupiter is with
Saturn will cause evils to the progeny of second
wife at the time of delivery. The third wife will give
birth to male issues who will be long-lived. For
birth in former half of the subject Nadiamsa, one
sone and three daughters will be blessed with
longevity.
्रत्यग्दाये धनप्रापििर्विदयाप्राबल्यहेतुना |
स शुद्राश्रयसन्मानं प्राबल्यं चोत्तरोरम् ॥२२२३ ॥
2223. In the Sth dasa, the person will earn
wealth through his learning. He will earn honour
and fame through Sudras and prosper gradually.
समांशगे पूर्वभागे पूर्वजन्मनि मित्रवान् |
इह जन्मनिमेत्री च पश्चाञ्जन्मनि मित्रवान् ॥२२२४ ॥
ऋणानुबन्धीपाप्नोति समांशे पूर्वमित्रवान्।
चन्दराशगे तत्रिकोणे सूर्यराशित्रिकोणगे ॥२२२५ ॥
समांशे. asad पूर्वजन्मानुसारत |
देहान्तर पुण्यभूमो ब्रह्मावर्तनदेशके ॥२२२६ ॥
तावुभौ sad चेतो वेदान्ताभ्यास संयुतो ।
चापे शािंस्थिते काले प्रत्यक्तारदशान्त्यगे UAW |
मित्रशूद्रविनाशािक्लेशं प्रापनोति भूरिशः।
सुतेशांशे पुत्रभावे लग्नाधिपतिनाडिगे ॥२२२८ ॥
इह जन्मफलं चैव विस्तारेण तु कथ्येत ।
समांशगेः पूर्वभागे सुतेशांशस्य APSA ॥२२२९ ॥
भविष्यजन्मसाफल्यं विस्तारेण फलं तथा ।
2224 - 22294. (a) One born in the first half of
Sama Nadiamsa, Scorpio ascendant had (useful)
friends in the past birth and will have such friends
in the present and future births. He will be relieved
from all kinds of debts.
(b) His friend’ ऽ Nakshatra will be in trine to that
of the Moon or the Sun. Both of them (i.e. the native

Chandra Kala Nadi 17
and his friend) will be born in a shrine. They will
study Vedanta together.
(c) Saturn in transit in Sagittarius, during the
end of the 6th dasa, will destroy the friend and will
cause grief in an abundant measure.
(d) In Lagnadhipathi Nadi, effects for the current birth have been given in detail. In the Nadi
relating to the planet owning the Navamsa occupied by Jupiter, future birth is discussed in detail.
Notes: These slokas are partially defective and
incoherent. Eliminating such portions, suitable
translation has been given as above.
(b) Reference to Nakshatras are wrongly obtained in one case by Moon’s Navamsa and in
another by Sun’s Rasi. It should obviously refer to
the Nakshatra occupied by the luminaries.
चतु पञ्चाशगे वर्षे त्वेकषष्टिसमेऽथ वा ॥२२३० ॥
समांशे पूर्वभागे मातृनिर्याणमादिशेत् |
लाभेशांशे तल्निकोणे स्फुटर्योग गते शनौ ॥२२३१॥
समांशगे मातृपीडा मृत प्रायोऽपि जीवित |
तुलाशनिस्थिते काले ह्यतीव क्लेशमादिशेत् ॥२२३२ ॥
कन्याशनौ मन्ददाये पुण्यदेशे सुभाग्यवान् |
पत्रोपनयनादिनि मित्रवर्गे महत् सुखम् ॥२२३३ ॥
लोकिकप्रभुमूलेन विशेषप्रबलं सुखम् |
समांशगे पूर्वभागे साधनेशस्य दाये ॥२२३४ ॥
पञ्चषष्टिसमादूर्ध्वं वृषभायनगे गुरो ।
YR गुर्दयि त्वापत्संन्यासमश्नुते ॥२२२५ ॥
पुण्यक्षेत्रे नदीप्रान्तये मध्याहे गुरुवासरे |
ब्रह्मलोकं च लभते क्षिप्रेण जननं स्मृतम् ॥२२३६ ॥
2230 - 2236. During the 54th year or the 61st
year, the mother: of the native of former half of
Sama Nadiamsa will be endangered. Saturn
transiting the sign identical with the Navamsa of
the 11th lord, ora trine thereof, could also endanger
the said native’s mother. During Saturn’s movement in Libra, much difficulties will follow. In
Saturn dasa, with Saturn moving in Virgo (the
11th), the native will earn much fortunes. There
will be thread ceremony for his son. His friends
circles will enjoy great happiness. He will obtain
good results through a king. In the 6th dasa,
following 56th year, with Jupiter in Taurus, during
the sub period of Venus in the dasa of Jupiter, he
will take to ascetic order due to some family
calamity. He will quit the world in a shrine located
on the banks of ariver, ona Thursday afternoon and
go to Brahma Loka. He will be instantly re-born.
पिथुनलम्ने sais:
इन््रांशे चोत्तरे भागे युग्मलग्ने प्राजयते |
शूद्रजन्मा सुखी नित्यं गर्भे च सप्तमो भवेत् ॥२२३७ ॥
अथ वा षष्ठ इत्याहुस्तत्वषृमो व प्रसूतिमान्।
पश्चात् सहोदये नास्ति ज्येष्ठभ्रातृ समन्वितः॥२२२३८ ॥
भगिनी च तथा विन्द्ात्नदीप्रान्ते प्रजायते |
पुण्यक्षेत्रे नदीप्रान्तये मध्याहे जननं स्मृतम् ॥२२३९ ॥
बाल्ये पितृविनाशः स्याज्जननी चिरजीविनी |
2237 - 2239142; Gemini Ascendant - Indra Nadiamsa: The native of second half of Indra
Nadiamsa, Gemini ascendant will be a Soodra. He
will be either the 7th, 6th or the 8th issue of the
family. He will have younger co-born but be
endowed with only elder brothers and elder sisters.
His birth will be in the afternoon, in the region of
a shrine with a river. He will lose his father in
childhood. His mother will be long-lived.
Notes: For Indra Nadiamsa, please see notes
under sloka 1105, p.100, Book 1.
पूर्वभागे वनप्रान्त्ये देवालयसमन्विते ॥२२४० ॥
तृतीयगर्भं संजातः पश्चाद्धातृसमन्विते |
2240 - 22402; One belonging to the former
half of the subject Nadiamsa will be born in a forest
region near a temple. He will be the third issue of
the family and be endowed with younger co-born
as well.
Sahay मन्दे स्वांशे पूर्णबलान्विते ॥२२४१ ॥
नीलवर्णशरीरश्च बाल्ये सोख्यविहीनवान् |
चन्द्रंशयोग TSR पूर्वभाग समुद्धवः॥२२४२ ॥
राजयोगं च लभते पश्चाद्धातृवशात् सुखम् |
उत्तरांशे वेैश्यवृत्तया धनं संपादयिष्यति ॥२२४३ ॥
पूर्वभागे राजसेवी सचिवो दण्डनायकः
दशवर्षात् परं सोख्यं गृहे गोधनसडकुलम् ॥२२४४ ॥
लक्षमीकटाक्षमित्याहुर्जातस्य चोत्तरांशके |
पूर्वभागे राज योगो त्रिंशद्रर्षात् परं भवेत् ॥२२४५ ॥
उत्तरांश प्रजातस्तु द्वितीयोद्राहतः परम् ।

18 Deva Keralam
धनधान्यदिवद्धिं च यावज्जीवं च सौख्यवान् ॥२२४६ ॥
पत्रत्रयस्य संप्राप्तिः विशेषधनभाग्यवान् |
त्रिंशोपरि महत् सौख्यं गृहे गोधनसंकुलम् ॥२२४७ ॥
2241 - 2247. (a) Saturn in an angle or in a trine,
endowed with full strength and occupying his own
Navamsa will cause a bluish physique to the native
of former half of the subject Nadiamsa. Such a
native will not enjoy happiness in his childhood.
(b) If Saturn is in the Navamsa of the Moon, the
said native will enjoy Rajayoga effects. He will
experience happiness through after-born.
(©) One belonging to the second half of the
subject Nadiamsa will earn money through trading
activities.
(d) The subject of former half will earn wealth
through royal service, as a minister or a justice.
After the age of ten, he will be happy and his home’
will abound in quadrupeds and wealth.
(€) One of second half of the subject Nadiamsa
will enjoy the blessings of goddess Lakshmi, 1.6.
will be opulent.
(f) The person belonging to former half will
beget Rajayoga effects after the age of 30.
(g) One belonging to second half of this
Nadiamsa will gather wealth after his second marriage and be happy throughout his life. He will
have three sons and abundant fortunes and wealth.
After 30, he will enjoy great happiness, quadrupeds
and wealth.
we शनियुते दृष्टे स्वकार्यनिरतः सुखी |
ज्येष्ठभ्रातृविरोधी च ह्यान्तकपटवान् सुखी ॥२२४८ ॥
2248. The Moon Related to Saturn: The
native of Indra Nadiamsa, Gemini ascendant, will
be involved in his own undertakings if the Moon is
related to Saturn by aspect or association. He will
have enmity with his older brother and will be
inwardly cunning:
शन्यङ्गारकसंदष्टे चन्द्रे शुभविर्विजते |
किञ्चित्कालमनाचारी सर्वदा पापचित्तवान् ॥२२५९ ॥
पूर्वभागे विशेषण मित्रदरोहं नृपाद्धयम् |
राजकार्यपते न्नित्यं परवित्तपहारकः ॥२२५० ॥
2249 - 2250. (a) The Moon in aspect to Saturn
and Mars, and being devoid of benefic association,
willmake the native shun orthodoxy for some time.
He will be ever engaged in sinful deeds.
(b) If the person belonging to former half of the
subject Nadiamsa has this combination, he will
betray his friends and will invite troubles from the
king. He will be engaged in royal service and will
steal others’ wealth.
उत्तरां शे प्रजातस्तु कोपी श्षिप्रप्रसादकः।
सत्यव्रतवानित्यं द्रव्यार्जनपरो भवेत् NRL ॥
शरीर रोगवान् रागी रोगभार्यायुतः सुखी ।
प्रसिद्धगेहे Darel संपदाये वनान्तरे ॥२२५२ ॥
2251 - 2252. The subject belonging to second
half of Indra Nadiamsa, Gemini ascendant, will be
irascible but be instantly pleased. He will earn
wealth through truthful means. He will incur
physical diseases, be passionate and will have a
diseased wife. He will marry in his second dasa in
a famous family in a forest region.
पूर्वभागे नदीप्रान्त्ये द्वादशाब्दे विवाहवान् |
अवेदिकमतोत्साही सर्वाध्यक्षः स्वतन््रवान् ॥२२५३ ॥
2253. One belonging to former half of this
Nadiamsa will marry in his 12th year in a region of
river. He will be enthusiastic of non-Vedic sects.
He will hold a presidential (or chief) position and
be independent.
उत्तरांशे प्रजातस्य मनुवर्षात् परं सुखम् ॥
जन्मभूमेः सोम्यदिशि विवाहोत्सवसं भ्रमम् ॥२२५४ ॥
पक्षान्तरे नारदीये वायव्योद्राह इत्यपि |
SI चोत्तरे भागे विवाहो बहुसंप्रमः॥२२५५ ॥
2254 - 2255. The native of first half of Indra
Nadiamsa will enjoy happiness after his 14th year.
His marriage will occur in his native region and the
bride will hail from the northern direction. According to Naradeeyam, the bride will be from the
north-western direction. The marriage of the native of Indra Nadiamsa will be grandly celebrated
with a girl from the northern direction.
दरेशे केतुसंयुक्ते भूसुतेन निरीक्षिते ।
दारवंथे GRE स्यादुद्राहानन्तरं सुखम् ॥२२५६ ॥
2256. The 7th lord (Jupiter) joining Ketu in
aspect to Mars denotes much evils in the family of
the in-laws. However, there will be happiness after
marriage.
चन्द्रांशे चोत्तरे भागे त्रिवारं मृत्युभीतिमान्।

Chandra Kala Nadi 19
संपदाये मृतिं चैव स्वपीडरिष्टमादिशेत् ॥२२५७ ॥
2257. In case of second half of this Nadiamsa,
there will be fear of death (in the family of in-laws)
for three weeks (after the native’s marriage). The
2nd dasa will cause death (in the in-laws’ family)
and evils to self.
Notes: “Chandramse” should read as
“Chendramse” (Cha + Indramse) keeping continuity with the previous verse. The implied portions
should be properly understood, as above.
पूर्वभागे प्रजातस्य श्वशुरश्च चिरायुषः।
तद्धार्याया विनाशश्च विवाहानन्तरं भवेत् ॥२२५८ ॥
परन्थान्तरे पूर्वभागे VaR तु समुद्धवः।
स्वदारजननी भर्ता तो द्रौ दीर्धायुषौ स्मृतो ॥२२५९ ॥
2258 - 2259. The father-in-law of the native of
former half of Indra Nadiamsa, Gemini ascendant,
will be long-lived. The native will lose his motherin-law immediately after marriage. Elsewhere it is
stated that the mother-in-law of the native of
former half of Indra Nadiamsa, Gemini ascendant,
will have two husbands both of whom will be longlived.
Fat चोत्तरे भागे चोद्रहात् पूर्वमेव च।
उद्राहानन्तरं चापि दारवंशे जनक्षयः॥२२६० ॥
2260. There will occur destruction of in-laws’
family members, in case of the native of second
half of Indra Nadiamsa, Gemini ascendant, even
prior to his marriage, and also after marriage.
श्रशुराधिपतौ सूर्ये मित्रांशे बुधसंयुते |
लग्नात् तृतीयगे शुक्रे श्वशुरश्चातिधार्मिकः॥२२६१ ॥
बहुपुत्रयुतो मानी श्वशुर श्राल्पसोदरः।
बहूपुत्रार्थसंपन्नो गुणवान् राजवल्लभः॥२२६२ ॥
वेदिकाचरधर्मात्मा बाल्ये क्लेशेन कशितः।
मध्ये भाग्यसमृद्रश्च पश्चादाचार तत्परः ॥२२६३ ॥
2261 - 2263. Results for Father-in-law: If the
Sun ruling the father-in-law (3rd is the 9th from the
7th) joins Mercury and begets a friendly Navamsa
while Venus is in the 3rd, the native’s father-in-law
would be highly charitable. He would have many
sons, be honourable, and would have limited number
of brothers. He would be endowed with much
wealth, be virtuous and dear to the king. He would
follow Vedic codes and would face troubles in
childhood. His prosperity would increase in the
middle part of his life following which he would
turn orthodox.
स्यालकाथिपतौ मन्दे fas चापनवांशगे |
USA प्रजातश्च स्यालकस्य बहुत्ववान् ॥२२६४॥
शुभांशगे भाग्यनाथे सुखेशे सप्तमांशके |
दारसोदरसङ्कयाश्च सप्त चैकादश्स्था WEY It
Fay चोत्तरे भागे पञ्चमे राहुसंस्थिते |
स्यालक श्च महारोगी पुत्राभावे द्विभार्यवान् ॥२२६६ Il
स्यालकेषु च यः कश्िद्रहुपत्रुत्रिमान् |
मन्दप्रकृतिदष्टुत्मा भ्रातृद्रेष युतो भवेत् URE I
तेषामेको दुर्बलश्च पुत्रक्लेशेन कशितः।
वार्धके पुत्रलाभं च मृतप्रजाबहुत्ववान् ॥२२६८ ॥
विलम्बेन सुतोत्पत्तिर्भार्या दोषदपुत्रवान् |
2264 - 2268". Results for Brother-in-law: (a) `
Saturn ruling the house of brother-in-law (9this 3rd
from 7th) and placed in the sign Leo with Sagittarius Navamsa will cause many brothers-in-law to
the native of Indra Nadiamsa in Gemini ascendant.
(b) The lord of the 9th in a benefic’s Navamsa
while the 4th lord attains the 7th Navamsa denotes
that one will have eleven brothers-in-law.
(c) Foranativeof second half of Indra Nadiamsa,
Gemini ascendant, Rahu in the Sth will cause a
great disease, childlessness and two wives to the
brother-in-law.
(d) One brother-in-law will have many sons
and daughters. He will be dull-witted, wicked and
will hate his brothers.
(e) Another will be weak-bodied and will be
grieved on account of loss of sons. He will beget
progeny in his old age. Many of his children will
be born dead. There will be delay in acquisition of
progeny due to sins or defects of the wife.
प्रन्थान्तरे-
Fa चोत्तरे भागे स्वभार्या सोदरद्रया |
पुराकृत महापापदोषेणामयशोकवान् ॥२२६९ ॥
दत्तपुत्रफलप्रापिि््रयोः स्यालकयोर्भवेत्।
एकोऽल्पसुतवान् रोगी बाल्ये दुष्टस्वभाववान् ॥२२७० ॥
2269 - 2270. According to another.authority,
the wife of the person belonging to the second half
of Indra Nadiamsa, Gemini ascendant, will have

20 Deva Keralam
two brothers who will incur grief on account of
diseases caused by great sins of their previous
births. Both of them will have adopted progeny.
One will have limited progeny, be sickly and
wicked in boyhood. After some time, he will
emerge pure-hearted.
कालान्ते चित्तशुद्धिधर्मात्मा स्यालकः स्मृतः।
स्वदारवंशे बहुधर्मयुक्ते
लग्नाततृतीये भृगुजे प्रजातः।
tarsal जनकस्य पापी
चाचारहीनो बहुभ्रातृमान् स्यात् ॥२२७१ ॥
2271. Venus in the 3rd will cause many
charitable activities in the in-laws’ family. The
father of the native of Indra Nadiamsa will be a
sinner, be devoid of good conduct and will have
many brothers.
इन्द्रंशे चोत्तरे भागे स्वदारभगिनीद्रयम् |
frat वा दीर्धमाङ्गल्यं तासामेका सुपुत्रिणी ॥२२७२ ॥
स्वदारभागिनी काचिद्रहुशः क्लेश संयुता |
वार्धके पुत्रमूलेन काचित् सौख्यवती भवेत् ॥२६७३ ॥
2272 - 2273. The wife of the native of second
half of the subject Nadiamsa will have two or three
sisters who will be endowed with long-living husbands. One of them will have an excellent daughter. Another will undergo many difficulties but
will acquire some happiness through her son in her
old age.
इन्दरांशे चोत्तरे भागे युग्मलग्नोद्धवस्य च ।
स्वभार्याभगिनी कचित् क्षेमदाये त्वमङ्गली |
्षेमदाये भोगयुता चेदमेवं फलं विदुः ॥२२७४॥
स्यालकानामरिष्टं च मध्यखण्डादिवत्सरे |
यदि जीवन्ति पुण्येन ह्यायुष्मन्तस्तु स्यालकाः॥२२७५ ॥
- 227442275, Fourth Dasa: (a) During the 4th
dasa of the native of second half of Indra Nadiamsa,
Gemini ascendant, his sister-in-law will receive
somewhat inauspicious effects (relating to her
husband’s life-span) but will be endowed with
(other kinds of) pleasures.
(b) His brother-in-law will be endangered during the first year in the second one-third part of the
said dasa. If he survives this phase, he will be longlived due to his meritorious deeds.
स्वदारवंशे बहुशोऽप्यरिषठं
स्वस्यालकादेश्च जनस्य दुःखम् |
स्व बन्धुदायादफलं करोति
हीन्द्रंशनाडयां भृगुजांशजस्य ॥२२७६ ॥
2276. During this dasa, there will be many evils
in the in-laws’ fatnily, viz. for brother-in-law etc.
Notes: The last two lines of this verse are
corrupt in that there is included Venus’ Navamsa
along with the subject Nadiamsa. Further the
effects due to the native’s own relatives are not
clear, whether these are malefic or beneficial.
जातकस्य FERNS क्षेमदाये सुखावहम् |
धनधान्यसमृद्धि च स्वपुत्रोद्राहमादिशेत् ॥२२७७ ॥
weg जातकस्यापि विपदायान्तरकालके |
द्वितीयोद्वाहमाहुः क्षेमभुक्तो च वा यदि ॥२२७८ ॥
gare चोत्तरे भागे द्वितीयोद्राहकन्यका ।
SREY चोत्पन्ना त्वल्पभ्रातृसमन्विता ॥२२७९ Il
द्वितीयभार्या जनकस्य पापी
सहोदरभ्रातृविरोध युक्ताम् |
अल्पानुजां चेति वदन्तितज्जञा
द्वितीयभार्याभगिनी कुलघ्नाम् ॥२२८० ॥
2277 - 2280. (a) In the 4th dasa, the subject will
enjoy much prosperity and happiness. He will have
plenty of wealth and grains (food comforts). His
son will beget married.
(b) Prior to this, in the sub-period corresponding to the 4th dasa, during the operation of the 3rd
dasa, (i.e. in the second sub period of the 3rd dasa),
the native will have his second marriage. The
second wife of the native will belong to an extremely poor family and will have limited number
of co-born. Her father will be a sinner. She will be
inimical to her co-born. Her sister will destroy the
descent.
द्वितीयभार्या भवनं नवमं परिकीर्तितम् ।
तदीशे शुभारशिस्थे स्वांशे पापविवर्जिते ॥२२८१ il
2281. House of 2nd Marriage: It is said that
the 9th house rules one’s second marriage. When
its lord is in a benefic’s sign and own Navamsa,
without being associated with malefics ......
Notes: The text is not complete.

Chandra Kala Nadi 21
It is suggested that the 9th house rules second
marriage. The 11th house featuring in this context
can also be noted elsewhere in our text.
लग्नात् तृतीयगे शुक्रे त्वसितेन युतेक्षित |
ज्येष्ठभार्या गुणवती पुत्रद्रयसमन्विता ॥२२८२ ॥
महारोगवती चैव भ्रातृक्लेशवती सदा |
कालान्ते क्षेमदाये भर्त पूर्वं मरिष्यति ॥२२८३ ॥
2282 - 2283. Venus in the 3rd: In case of Indra
Nadiamsa, Gemini ascendant, Venus should be in
the 3rd in Leo with Saturn’s aspect. This combination will make the native’s first wife a virtuous
person. She will be endowed with two sons, will
suffer from a great disease and will be ever grieved
on account of her brothers. She will die when the
native will be in his 4th dasa.
इन्दरांशे चोत्तरे भागे ज्येष्ठपतनी WT |
पुत्र्यं चिरायुष्यं मुख्या भारयोत्तमोत्तमा ॥२२८४॥
aed च लभते मातृवंशे विवाहवान् |
ज्येष्ठभार्याज्यष्टपुत्र स्तिवन्रांशे दैरध्यमायुषः॥२२८५ ॥
कालान्तरे केतुदोषात् पुत्रौ यमलसंधवौ ।
ज्येष्ठभार्यासुतः कश्चित् कर्णवैकल्यावान् सुधीः ॥२२८६ ॥
अक्षिरोगयुतश्ैव प्रातृमलेन सौख्यवान्।
2284 - 228612. (a) In the absence of Venus
being as above, the first wife of the native of Indra
Nadiamsa, Gemini ascendant, will have four children. Two sons among them will be long-lived.
She will be the most excellent among women.
(b) The person will marry twice and the brides
will hail from his maternal family.
(c) The first son of his first wife will be longlived. After along interval, due to blemish of Ketu,
he will beget twins. Ason of the first wife will have
some blemish relating to ears and eyes, and be very
intelligent. He will be happy through brothers.
इन्दरांशे चोत्तरे भागे युग्मलग्नोद्धवस्य च ॥२२८७ ॥
दारान्तरे सुतस्थाने afar शुभवर्जिते |
सीमन्तपुत्रनाशः स्यादारान्तरफलं विदुः ॥२२८८ ॥
दारान्तरे पञ्चसंख्या स्न्तानोत्पत्तिमादिशेत्।
frst दीर्धमायुष्यम् इनदरांशजनितस्य च ॥२२८९ ॥
2287 - 2289. Venus in 5th: In case of the
subject belonging to second half of Indra Nadiamsa, Gemini ascendant, Venus in the 5th house in
Libra without association with another benefic will
destroy the first issue. It will also promote second
marriage of the subject. He will obtain five children through the second wife. Three of them will
be endowed with longevity.
काश्यप
दारान्तरे पुत्रसंख्या वेदसड्खया चिरायुषाः।
पुत्रिकाद्वयमित्याहुः पुत्रयोगचतुष्टयम् ॥२२९० ॥
Red चोत्तरांशे कृत्तिकाशऋक्षसडखयया |
हढसन्तानमाप्नोति SPIT समुद्धवः॥२२९१ ॥
2290 - 2291. According to sage Kasyapa, four
children obtained through re-marriage will be longlived. There will be a total of two daughters and
four sons. (According to yet another school), three
children will (only) be long-lived.
लग्नात् पञ्चमगे wets च प्रजायते ।
एका पुत्री सुमाङ्गल्यमेका क्लेशेन कशिता ॥२२९२ ॥
पुत्रभावे सुमाङ्गल्यं पुत्रयोगे विन्तुताम् ।
दारन्तारे सुतः कश्चित् पुषितान्यां तु सद्धमी ॥२२९३ ॥
2292 - 2293. Rahu in the 5th: For a native of
-Indra Nadiamsa, Gemini ascendant, if Rahu is in
the Sth house from the ascendant, one daughter will
be endowed with a long-living husband. Another
will undergo many ordeals. Long-living husband
will be possible only when she is childless. If she
acquires a child, it will cause her widowhood as
well.
(b) The second line of verse No.2293 is 10 `
clear. The meaning is: “He will obtain progeny
through his second wife.. After attaining puberty
she will join other men.”
कल्रद्रयवान् पापी ज्ञातिद्रेषकलापवान् |
गुणी कश्चिद् ग्रहस्थश्च भेदमातृसुतप्रियः॥२२९४ ॥
कालान्ते वातरोगी बहुसन्नानवान् भवेत् |
2294 - 22941. One born in the second half of
Indra Nadiamsa, Gemini ascendant, will have two
wives, be a sinner and will incur enmity with his
relatives. He will be virtuous, be a family man, and
be fond of his step-brothers. After some interval,
he will suffer from windy diseases. He will have
many children.
SHY चोत्तरे भागे लाभेशे शुभवीश्षिते ॥२२९५ ॥

22 Deva Keralam
लग्नात् पञ्चमगे पपे ज्येष्ठभ्रातृवियोगवान् |
जयेष्ठद्रयौ पुत्रवन्ताविन््रां शे जनितस्य ॥२२९६ ॥
शुक्रदाये मध्यखण्डे भ्रातृशोकयुतो भवेत् |
कुजभुक्तयन्तमारभ्य राहुभक्तयन्तमेव FH Il
sary चोत्तरे भागे दे भ्रातृनिर्याणमादिशेत्।
एकभ्राता चिरायुष्मान भगिन्येका त्वमङ्कली ॥२२९८ ॥
ane फलं सत्यं मध्यखण्डे न संशय ।
इनद्रंशे चोत्तरे भागे द्वे भगिन्यौ च great ॥२२९९ ॥
एका दारिघ्रमापत्ना त्वेका सौख्यवती भवेत् |
भावाध्याये पूर्वभागे भगिनीफल मुच्यते ॥२३०० ॥
2295 - 2300. (a) Enmity with Brother: In the
case of the said native, the 11th lord (Mars) is in
aspect to a benefic, while the Sth from the 1 1th 6.6.
the 3rd from ascendant) is occupied by a malefic,
will cause enmity with older brother.
(b) Without reference to Mars & C above, two
of the subject’s elder brothers will have progeny.
(c) The middle part of Venus dasa, or the sub
periods of Mars and Rahu will cause loss of coborn. One of the older brothers will be long-lived.
One of his sisters will incur early widowhood.
(d) Effects stated for the 4th dasa for the subject
Nadiamsa will be unfailing.
(e) Two of his sisters will have daughters. One
will incur penury. Another will enjoy happiness.
(f) In case of first half of this Nadiamsa, effects
have beén stated in the chapter concerned (in the
work consulted by the author).
लग्नाच्चतुर्थगे भौमे राहू युक्ते क्रियांशगे |
स्वपाता विधवा भूत्वा बहुकालं सुजीवति ॥२३०६ ॥
भ्रातृशोकवती चेव भ्रातृभ्रात्रीसमन्विता।
पत्रमूलात् सुसन्तुष्टा सदा रोषवती स्मृता ॥२३०२ ॥
पुत्रशोकवती चैव वार्धके नात्र संशयः।
2301 - 2302/2. Mother: Mars in Virgo (in the
4th) along with Rahu and obtaining Aries Navamsa
will cause widowhood to mother. She will live for
along time. She will have brothers and sisters and
will incur grief losing aco-born. She will be quite
happy through her sons, and will be ever irascible.
In her old age, she will incur loss of sons.
इनद्रांशे चोत्तरे भागे भावाध्यायाष्टवर्गके 112303 ॥
पत्रशोकवती चैव वार्धके नात्र संशयः।
FST चोत्तरे भागे भावाध्यायाष्टवर्गके ॥२२०४॥
शोध्यावशिष्टद्याश्च पितृव्याश्च चिरायुषाः।
कुजांशरिशमसङ्कयाश्च स्वपितुश्च सहोदराः ॥२३०५ ॥
भवेयुरिति च भ्रोक्तमिन्द्रांशे जनितस्य च।
दशामार्गे पितृव्यस्य त्वायुर्दायं च कथ्यते ॥२६०६ ॥
2303 -2306. (a) Ashtaka Varga: In the chapter
on Ashtaka Varga, effects for Mars Ashtaka Varga,
have been stated in connection with results for
father’s brothers. The number of such uncles
endowed with longevity will correspond to the
number of final Bindus after reductions in Mars
Ashtaka Varga.
(b) The number of brothers his father will have
will correspond to the sign position or Navamsa
position of Mars (counted from Aries).
(c) With the help of Dasa periods, father’s lifespan should be known.
These apply to birth in second half of Indra
Nadiamsa, Gemini ascendant.
Fat चोत्तरे भागे चन््रंशयोगजस्य च।
चत्वारिंशात् परं चैव पुतरोत्प्तिर्भविष्यति ॥२३०७ tl
पञ्चमाधिपतौ शुक्रे लग्नारुढे प्रजायते |
लग्नात् त्रिकोणगे वापि दशायां प्रियमश्नुते ॥२३०८ ॥
वर्षे वषं शुभधिक्यं व्यापारे धनलाभवान् |
वार्धके राजसन्मानं पुत्रमूलात् सुसोख्यवान् ॥२३०९ ॥
स्वभुजार्जितसंपन्नो दरिद्यध्वंसकोभवेत्।
2307 - 2309142. (a) The native will obtain progeny after the age of 40.
(b) Venus in Arudha Lagna: If the Sth lord
Venus is in the Arudha Lagna, orin 8 trine from the
ascendant, his Dasa will cause desirable effects.
Year after year, auspicious effects will increase.
The subject will gain in his business activities. In
his old age he will be honoured by the king and
enjoy happiness through his sons. He will have
self-earned wealth and will destroy penury.
Notes: (a) The term “Chandramsa Yogaja”
adds to confusion.
(b) Venus being a favourable planet for Gemini
ascendant, his occupancy of a trine or the Arudha
Pada of the ascendant, will be capable of causing
good effects in his dasa.
कन्खशनिस्थिते काले लोके दुर्भिक्षजं भयम् ॥२३१० ॥

Chandra Kala Nadi 23
area शुक्रभुक्तौ जन्मदेशे प्रभोर्विपत्।
AGATA भूत्वा तद्राज्ये पालको भवेत् ॥२३११॥
2310 - 2311. (a) Irrelevant: During Saturn’s
transit in Virgo, the world will reel under famine
conditions. The sub period of Venus in the 2nd dasa
will endanger the king. The king’s son will become
strong and will rule the country. After the age of 30,
the populace of the Chola kingdom will face destruction.
सिहलग्ने मुद्रराशः
्रिशोपरिशेवर्वषे चोलदेशे प्रजाक्षयः।
ware वृषभे सूर्ये राहुयुक्ते कुजेक्षिते ॥२३१२ ॥
मुद्रगंशे प्रजातस्य स्वपिता रोगदेहवान् |
सर्वाशे वृषभे सूर्ये दुर्गलांशे कुजेक्षिते |
स्वपिता कीर्तिमांश्चेति तराकोद्यानधर्मकृत् ॥२३१३ ॥
2312 - 2313. Leo Ascendant - Mudgara Nadiamsa: (a) The Sun in Taurus in Sarva Nadiamsa,
being in the company of Rahu and in aspect to Mars
will cause diseases to the father of the subject
native.
(b) His father will perform charitable acts like
construction of tanks and gardens (for public benefit) if the Sun in Sarva Nadiamsa is in aspect to
Mars.
Notes: (a) Details of Mudgara Nadiamsa could
be found in the notes under sloka 1379, page 125,
Book 1.
Sarva Nadiamsa is not found in our list. This
may be another name for Mudgara Nadiamsa, as it
is clubbed together under one heading in the following verses.
(b) The placement for Mars in “Durbala
Nadiamsa” is to be ignored.
स्वक्षेत्रगे भूमिसुते शुभांशे
सर्वाशगे भानुबलान्विते च |
्रीमुद्ररंशे च समुद्धवो यः
सोहदरभ्रातृविहीनभाकं स्यात् ॥२३१४॥
मीनद्रेक्काणगे भोमे चापांशे वृश्चिके तथा ।
सिहलग्ने प्रजातश्च सोदरभ्रातृहीनवान् ॥२३१५ ॥
2314 - 2315. Brothers: (a) Should Mars be in
his own sign with benefic divisions while the Sun
in strength occupies Sarva Nadiamsa, the subject
native will have no brothers.
(b) Mars in Scorpio with Sagittarius Navamsa,
or Pisces Drekkana, will also cause the same effect.
Notes: (b) Mars in Scorpio 16° 40' to 20°
acquires Sagittarius Navamsa. In the same sign,
the space from 10° to 20° gives Pisces decanate.
For Leo ascendant, Mars in the 4th with Sagittarius
Navamsa is a powerful hindrance for acquisition of
co-born. The rule concerning decanate should be
used only after giving attention to Venus as well.
तुलाराशि स्थिते ga वृषभे वा प्रजायते |
WAM प्रजास्तु ज्येष्ठभ्रातृसमन्वितः॥२३१६ ॥
2316. Taurus Ascendant: This improperly
constructed verse belonging to Taurus Ascendant
apparently means the following: One born in Taurus ascendant with a Navamsa of Saturn as the Sun
is in Libra in Navamsa will be endowed with older
brothers.
Notes: Taurus ascendant should rise with Capricorn or Aquarius Navamsa while the Sun is in
Libra Navamsa. As a result, the person will have
elder brothers and sisters.
सूर्यलग्ने धने केतौ शुभद्रयनिरीक्षिते ।
स्वाक्षेत्रगे कलानाथ मिथुनांशे पिता सुख ॥२३१७ ॥
2317. Leo Ascendant: Ketu in the 2nd with
reference to the Sun in aspect to two benefics while
the Moon in Cancer occupies a division of Gemini
will cause happiness to father.
कालेशांशे तल्िकोणे स्फुटयोगं गते शनौ ।
पिताम होऽरिष्टमेति मास्सु मीनादिषु त्रिपु ॥२३१८ ॥
2318. Danger to Grand-father: Saturn in
transit in the sign identical with the Navamsa
occupied by the Sun, or a trine thereof, will cause
evils to one’s paternal grand-father. The corresponding months will be indicated by the transit of
the Sun in Pisces through Taurus.
संपदाये मातृहानिः कन्यादित्रयमासगे ।
क्षेमाधिपदशाकाले चापान्ते मकरे शानौ ॥२३१९ ॥
watery पित्ररिषटं मुक्तिक्ेत्रे न संशयः।
सूर्यकालाष्टमे मन्दे दाये तृतीयभागके 11232 ॥
सर्वाशके प्रजातश्च त्रिंशोपरि सुभाग्यवान्।
मध्यखण्डे व्याकुलं स्यात् सीमन्तशिशुनाशनम् |
विक्रमाधिपतो शुक्रे शन्यङ्गरकवीभ्रिते ॥२३२१॥
fared दार वंशे स्वदारजननी मृता |

24 Deva Keralam
अपलनीको aye बहुकालं सुजीवति ॥२३२२ ॥
वार्धके पुत्रशोकेन क्लेशं प्राप्नोति भूरिशः।
स्वप्राबल्यं च लभते पृथण्व्यापारसौख्यवान् ॥२३२३ ॥
सर्वाशके fared तृतीयांशे महत् सुखम् ।
करम सर्वाशगे सूर्ये गुरुणा च निरीक्षिते ॥२३२४॥
सत्कर्मी स्वपिता बाल्ये दारिद्येण च करशितः।
रोगेण पीडितो मध्ये प्रीतो धार्भिकवान् सुखी ।२३२५ ॥
2319 - 2325. Danger to Mother: (a) Saturn’s
similar transit with reference to the Moon-occupied Navamsa will kill the mother of the native in
the 2nd dasa. The corresponding months will be
denoted by the Sun’s transit in Virgo through
Scorpio.
+ (b) Danger to Father: During the 4th dasa
when Saturn moves in the end of Sagittarius or in
Capricorn, his father will die in a shrine.
(c) The second line of verse 2320 is abruptly
interrupted without completing the instructions
concerning Saturn’s Dasa.
(d) Prosperity: The native of Sarva Nadiamsa,
Leo ascendant, will prosper after the age of thirty.
The middle of Saturn’ s Dasa will cause distress and
loss of the first issue.
(e) Father-in-law: The 3rd lord Venus in
aspect to Saturn and Mars will endanger the native’s mother-in-law during the third dasa. His
father-in-law will live as a widower fora long time.
He will incur a lot of grief in his old age due to loss
of progeny.
(f) The Native: Under the same combination,
vide €", the native will obtain much prosperity and
will enjoy professional happiness in the said Dasa
The last one third part of the said Dasa will cause
great happiness to the subject
(g) Father: The Sun in the 10th in aspect to
Jupiter denotes that the father of the person will
perform good deeds. During his childhood, he
would be emaciated due to poverty and troubled by
diseases. He would be fond of liquor, and be
virtuous and happy.
मुद्रगंशे सूर्यनाइयां कथ्यते फलविस्तरम् |
कालधिपदशाकाते व्ययाधिपतिभुक्तिषु ॥२६२६ ॥
water प्रजातस्य युग्ममासे मृति वदेत्।
तदभावे LATA चन्द्रांशस्य च मासके ॥२३२७ ॥
कृष्णपक्षे त्वरिषटक्षं पुण्यक्षेत्रे मरिष्यति |
2326 - 23271. (a) Mudgara Nadiamsa has
extensively been dealt with in Surya Nadi
(b) The native of Sarva Nadiamsa, Leo ascendant, will die in a shrine in the sub period of the 12th
lord (Moon) during the Dasa of the Sun. The transit
Sun will then be in Gemini. Or else the death will
be coincidental with the Sun moving in a malefic
Rasi or in the sign represented by the Navamsa
occupied by the Moon. The fortnight will be
Krishna Paksha.
व्ययेशारुढगे शुक्रे गुरुणा च निरीक्षिते ॥२३२८ ॥
पापद्रयेन संदृष्टे पापं पुण्यं समं भवेत् ।
पुण्यलोके तथा विन्द्यातलग्ने पापिनि संस्थिते ॥२३२९ ॥
RIT भवेत् पश्चात् कर्मनक्षत्रभे तथा |
2328 - 23291, (a) “Venus in the Aroodha of the
12th lord” (7) along with Jupiter and in aspect to
two malefics denotes that the native’s meritorious
and sinful deeds will be equal in measure and he
will attain heavens after death.
(b) Amaleficin ascendant will cause his rebirth
as a Soodra.
(c) The same result as per “b” will materialise
if a malefic is in the 10th Nakshatra counted from
the one occupied by the natal Moon.
हरिणांशकणे सौम्ये लाभे त्रिप्रहसंयुते ॥२३३० Il
fat चन्द्र प्रजातश्च हरिशङ्करभक्तिमान् |
कुम्भांशे वृषभे सोम्ये मेषे शुक्रे प्रजायते ॥२३३१॥
अविश्वासपरो नित्यं मीने केतौ च संस्थिते |
विक्रमारूढगे जीवे वीक्षिते राहुसंयुते ॥२३३२ ॥
हरिणांशकगे सौम्ये सत्यवादी दृढव्रतः
सर्वज्येष्ठानुजभ्रावृतन्मूलात् क्लेशभाग्यवान् ॥२३३३ ॥
तत्ुत्दरेषबाहुल्यं त्रयत्रिशात् परं वदेत् ।
व्ययेरो हरिणां शस्थे व्ययारूढे शुभग्रहे ॥२३३४॥
स्थिरलग्ने प्रजातस्य धर्ममूलाद्धनव्ययम् |
2330 - 2335. (a) Immovable Ascendant: Mercury in Harina Nadiamsa while the 11th house is
occupied by three planets and the 2nd by the Moon,
will make one a devotee of Lord Vishnu and Lord
Siva.
(b) Taurus Ascendant: Should Mercury be in
Taurus with Aquarius Navamsa while Venus is in

Chandra Kala Nadi 25
Aries, the native will not trust anybody.
(c) Ketu in Pisces, Jupiter in the Arudha Pada
of the 3rd house in aspect to or association with
Rahu, and Mercury in Harina Nadiamsa - this yoga
will make one truthful and firm in his undertakings.
He will incur difficulties through the eldest brother
as well as younger co-born, and be grieved due to
abundant blemishes concerning progeny after the
age of 33.
(d) Immovable Ascendant: The lord of the
12th in Harina Nadiamsa while the 12th Arudha
Pada is occupied by a benefic will cause expenditure through charitable activities.
(e) If Venus is in the said Arudha Pada, expenditure will be on excellent charities.
Notes: (a) For details of Harina Nadiamsa,
please refer to notes under sloka 685, Book 1.
(©) "Dvesha Bahulyam" should read as "Dosha
Bhaulyam" to denote abundant blemishes.
उत्कृष्टधर्मसिद्धिः सौम्ये शिवपूजापरः सुखी ।
तटाकोद्यान निर्माता गृहकषत्रप्रदानवान् ॥२३२६ ॥
देवबराह्माणविश्वासीप्यविश्वासी कचित् कचित्।
हरिर्णाशकगे भौमे कर्मे वित्तेशसंयुते 12330 ॥
सूर्ये सशुक्रे जातश्च सत्कर्माचारबुद्धिमान् |
। मेषूरणे दैत्यपूज्ये शुभांशे पाप वीक्षिते ॥२३३८ ॥
प्रसद्धि कार्येण भवेद्धानाद्यो सत्कर्मकारी शिवपूजकश्च |
तदीश्वरे लाभगते नलादये सत्यानृतावृत्तिकुजीवकः स्यात् Il
पित्रादिसोख्यं' मुनयो वदन्ति
स्वपुत्रमूलाधिक भाग्यलाभम् ॥२३३९ ॥
2336 - 2339. Immovable Ascendant: (a) One
belonging to a fixed sign ascending will worship
Lord Siva if Mercury is in Harina Nadiamsa. He
will construct tanks and parks and will donate
houses and lands to others. He will believe in Gods
and Brahmins; yet sometimes he will disbelieve
them.
(b) Mars in Harina Nadiamsa in the 10th in the
company of the lord of the 2nd while the Sunis with
Venus will make one indulge in good deeds and
possess good conduct.
(c) Jupiter aspected by amalefic and in the 10th
with a benefic Navamsa will give the following
effects. The subject will perform famous and good
deeds, be wealthy and will worship Lord Siva.
(d) If the 10th lord occupies the 1 1th in strength,
one will be fond of truth as well as untruth, will eke
out his livelihood through bad means and will earn
abundant prosperity through his sons.
हरिणांशकगे सोम्ये देवता कर्मकार्यवान्।
अतीव सुकृती नित्यं देवब्राह्मणपोषकः॥२३४० Il
हरिणांशकगे भौमे त्वष्टविंशात् परं सुखम् ।
स्वप्राबल्यं च लभते THAN सुभाग्यवान् ॥२३४१ ॥
हरिणांशकगे भौमे प्रत्यग्दायेऽपरार्धगे |
अतीव श्रियमाप्नोति पष्टसहरधनाद्यवान् ॥२२४२ ॥
ग्रन्थान्ते
Gah परे भूरि धनं संपादयिष्यति |
षट्छताधिकसाहस्रतदर्धेन धनाद्यरान् ॥२३४३ ॥
2340 - 2343. Immovable Ascendant: (a)
Should Mercury be in Harina Nadiamsa, the person `
will involve himself in deeds related to gods (or
temples). He will ever perform exceedingly good
acts and will patronise gods and Brahmins.
(b) Mars in Harina Nadiamsa will usher prosperity and growth after the age of 28. Particularly
after 35, his fortunes will incur much progress.
(c) Mars in Harina Nadiamsa will cause abundant wealth in the 2nd half of the fifth dasa to the
tune of 6,000 (gold coins). According to another
authority, the subject will earn over 600, or 1000,
or 500 gold coins after his 35th year.
हरिणांशकगे सौम्ये वित्ते चन्द्रे प्रजायते |
तदीशे लाभराशिस्थे द्विसहस्रधनाद्यवान् ॥२३४४ ॥
2344. For a native of immovable ascendant,
Mercury in Harina Nadiamsa, the Moon is in the
2nd house and the 2nd lord in the 11th house will
cause wealth to the tunc uf 2000 gold coins.
सुतेशांशाधिपे मन्दे नीचांशे aah |
कालान्तरे स्वपुत्रस्य कन्यके यमले तथा ॥२३४५ ॥
2345. Taurus Ascendant: The 5th lord (Mercury) should be in a Navamsa owned by Saturn
while Saturn is Vargottama in the 12th in debilitation. As a result, the person’s son will obtain twin
girls after some initial delay.
हरिणांशकगे सौम्ये ag विघ्नवान् । `
द्वित्रिवारं सेतुयात्रा कृता चेत् तत्फलं समम् ॥२३४६ Il

26 Deva Keralam
2346. Immovable Ascendant: Mercury in
Harina Nadiamsa will cause obstacles in journey to
Ganges (in the Northern India) but the person will
attain equal merits by visiting Setu (in the Southern
India) for two or three weeks.
fat aX प्रजातस्तु लाभे षष्ठे दिवाकरे ।
गङ्गास्नानफलं पुण्यं लभते नात्र संशयः॥२ २४७ ॥
2347. Immovable Ascendant: The Moon in
the 2nd while the Sun isin the 6th or 11th will cause
merits due to bathing in the Ganges.
लग्नेशे शनिसंदृषटे हरिणांशकमे बुधे ।
वेदोक्तयज्ञकर्मार्थद्रव्यदानरतो भवेत् MIS ॥
संकल्पपूर्वकं दानं यज्ञार्थं च प्रशस्यते |
कर्मान्ते च विशेषेण गोदानं तु फलाधिकम् ॥२३४९ ॥
दानं ब्रह्मोपदेशाय श्राद्धार्थं च तथैव च।
मन सूर्वप्रदानेन दुर्गतिरनात्र संशयः ॥२३५० ॥
कर्मत्रयादि amd याचन तु न दोषकृत् |
विक्र्रष्टस्य निकटे कलौ दोषो न विद्यते ॥२३५१ ॥
2348 - 2351. Immovable Ascendant: One will
perform fire sacrifices as stipulated in the Vedas
and be fond of donating money if the 11th lord is in
aspect to Saturn while Mercury is in Harina Nadiamsa. In the context of Sacrifice, donation should
be given with Resolution. At the end of the rituals,
donation of a cow will bring forth more auspicious
effects. The donation should be given after proper
spiritual initiation, with a full heart. (Even) begging for the sake of these three deeds (viz. Sacrifice
etc.) is nota blemish. In Kali Yuga, a Brahmin in
the vicinity will ward off blemishes
हरिणांशगे सौम्ये स्वपिता सुकृती सुखी ।
स्वपिता पुण्येन वंशे पुत्राभिवृद्धयः॥२३५२ ॥
2352. Immovable Ascendant: Mercury in
Harina Nadiamsa denotes that the person’s father
will perform good acts and be happy. Due to the
meritorious deeds of paternal grand-father, the
dynasty will have prosperity of male issues.
हरिणांशकगे सोम्ये जीवभौमार्कसंयुते |
बाल्ये दुर्गाश्रयं यज्ञे कृत्वा पुण्यफलः सुखी ॥२३५३ ॥
2353. The person will resort to living in forts
and obtain merits due to performing Vedic sacrifices if Mercury 15 .in Harina Nadiamsa in the
company of Jupiter, Mars and the Sun.
हरिणांशकगे सोम्ये ceragar: सहोदराः।
अथवा सोदराः सप्त चत्वारस्तु चिरायुषाः ॥२३५४ ॥
मासृद्रयात् समुपत्रबहुभरातृविनाशवान् |
आयुष्मती भगिन्येका बहुपुत्रवती भवेत् ॥२२५५ ॥
2354 -2355. Immovable Ascendant: Mercury
in Harina Nadiamsa will cause ten or seven co-born
out of whom four will be long-lived. The subject
will lose many brothers obtainéd through his two
mothers. One sister will be endowed with longevity and will obtain many sons.
Notes: Slokas 2355 to 2360 have not been
properly imported from the manuscript in the original version and there is some confusion.
हरिणांशगते जीवे त्वेकपुत्रयुतः सुखी ।
तल्निकोणेऽथ वा विन्द्यात्चतुष्टयसुपुत्रवान् 12346 ॥
पुत्र्य चिरायुष्यं हरिणांशोद्धवस्य च ।
स्रीप्रजा भाग्यवत्योऽपि पुत्रीपत्रसमन्विताः ॥२३५७ ॥
एका पुत्रविहीना स्यादेका क्लेशेन कशता |
हरिणांशकगे सौम्ये गर्गाचिार्यमतं स्मृतम् ॥२२५८ Il
भवेयुः SS Fea: पुत्रस्त्वेकः सुजीवति |
हरिणांशकगे सौम्मे एकभ्राता सुपुत्रवान् ॥२३५९ ॥
एकः पुत्रविहीनश्च कलव्रद्ययोगवान् |
वार्धके पुत्रवान् कश्चित् सौम्यनाडीफलं स्मृतम् ॥२३६० ॥
सुतेशांशे तच्तरिकोणे स्फुटयोगं गते शनौ ।
2356 - 23604. Immovable Ascendant: (a)
One with Jupiter in Harina Nadiamsa will have one
son. He will have four excellent sons if ...... isina
trine thereof, two of whom will be long-lived.
(b) His sister will be fortunate to have female
issues as well, and be endowed with both sons and
daughters. Another sister will be childless. Yet
another will be in grief. The views on Harina
Nadiamsa are as per the school of sage Garga.
(d) One sister will have many daughters and
one son and will lead a happy life.
(e) Mercury in Harina Nadiamsa will cause
childlessness (in the initial stage) to a brother who
will marry twice. He will obtain progeny in his
advanced age. These have been stated in Budha
Nadi.

Chandra Kala Nadi 27
Notes: (a) Reference to the planet that should
be in a trine to Jupiter is missing.
पित्रोर्विनाशः स्याच्चापि हरिणांशोद्धवस्य च ॥२३६१ ॥
स्वर्भानुरंशगे कोणे स्फुटयोगं गते शनौ ।
सोरारिष्टमाप्नोति प्रत्यग्दाये फलं स्मृतम् ॥२२३६२ ॥
2361 - 2362. Immovable Ascendant - Harina
Nadiamsa: (a) Saturn in transitin the sign identical
with the Navamsa occupied by the lord of the 5th,
or a trine thereof will cause death of father.
(b) Co-born will be destroyed in the Sth dasa
with the transit of Saturn in the same manner with
reference to the Navamsa occupied by Rahu.
हरिणांशक गते सोम्ये सुतेशेन समन्विते |
भाग्याधिपेन संयुक्ते पुत्रश्री भाग्यवुद्धिमान् ॥२३६३ ॥
वार्धके Sty पुण्यात्मा सर्वदा दुर्बलः He: |
गृहच्छिद्रकलापेन भ्रातपुत्रविरो धवान् ॥२३६४ ॥
2363 - 2364. One will attain prosperity and
progeny if Mercury in Harina Nadiamsa is with the
lord of the Sth (or) the 9th. He will earn wealth in
his old age but be ever thin in constitution. Due to
family quarrels, he will have enmity with his
mother and his own sons.
लग्नाद्रा GRATE गोचरे शनिचारगे |
. राशीना द्वादशानां कथ्यन्तेऽथ फलानि च ॥२३६५ ॥
विपत्तिहानिसंपत्तिकुक्षिरोगं महद्धयम |
शुत्रक्षयं महाधैर्यं मरणं देहशोषणम् ॥२३६६ ॥
पीडनं लाभनष्टे च क्रमेण कुरुते शानिः।
2365 - 2366/2. General: Now stated are the
effects of Saturn in the 12 signs in order, counted
from the ascendant or the Moon as the case may be.
(1) Danger (2) Harm (3) Wealth (4) Abdominal
disorders (5) Great fear (6) Destruction of enemies
(7) Great courage (8) Death (9) Dehydration of the
physique (10) Troubles (11) Gains (12) Losses.
हरिणांशकमगे सोम्ये सिहेन्दौ वृश्चिकांशके ॥२३६७ ॥
सम्पदाये पितुः सोख्यं गेहे गोधनसङ्कलम् |
विवाहोत्सवकार्याणि पित्ररिष्टं विनिर्दिशेत ॥२३६८ ॥
2367 - 2368. The person with Mercury in
Harina Nadiamsa and the Moon in Leo with Scorpio Navamsa will see his father enjoying happiness
in the 2nd dasa. Quadrupeds and wealth will
accumulate in his house. Danger to his father will
also prevail during a marriage function.
शन्यङ्गारकसंदृष्टे चन्द्र नीचनवांशगे |
स्वपिदररिष्टतः पूर्वं मातुर्मरणमादिशेत् ॥२३६९ ॥
ज्येष्ठभ्रातवियोगेन क्लेशं प्राणोति after: |
2369 - 2369144. Should the Moon be in aspect to
Saturn and Mars, and be in Scorpio Navamsa, the
native’s mother will predecease his father. The
subject will incur much grief on account of separation from his elder. brother.
कुम्भचक्रदशाकाले हरिणांशोद्धवस्व च ॥२३७० ॥
विनाशयोगं fasta सोदरारिष्टमादिशेत्।
कुम्भे शनिस्थिते काले कुम्भचक्रे महाविपत् ॥२२३७१ Il
सन्तानोत्पतिनाश च विप्लवेन धनक्षयम् |
शनिचक्रदशाकाले मकरे व्याकुलं महत् ॥२३७२ ॥
शुभाशुभफलं चैव पापबहुल्यमादिशेत् |
2370 - 2372144. The native of Harina Nadiamsa
will incur destruction of his father and evils to his
co-born in the dasa of Aquarius (KCD). During this
Dasa, Saturn’s transit in Aquarius will cause great
danger; children being bom to him will die and he
will lose wealth. Saturn’s transit in Capricorn will
produce a great deal of distress. The person will
receive both good and bad effects. However, evil
effects are indicated in a greater measure.
मृगचक्रदशाकाले हरीणांशे महत् सुखम् ॥२२७३ ॥
मेषे गुरुस्थिते काले त्वायुष्मान् जायते सुतः
weed पुत्रिकालाभं विशद्रर्षत् परं सुखम् ॥२३७४ ॥
वृश्चिकाङ्गारके चक्रे मीनान्त्ये मेषगे गुरौ ।
्रत्यग्दाये सुतोपतिर्बुषभक्तो न संशयः ॥२३७५ ॥
Wan tensa दारपीडा कचित् कचित् |
पश्चादारोग्यभाग्यं च तत्पूर्वं मनसिव्यथाम् ॥२३७६ ॥
गृहच्छद्रकलापिन व्याकुलं च तथा भवेत् |
सोम्यान्ते मध्यखण्डे व्यापारप्रनलं सुखम् ॥२३७७ ॥
2373 -2377. Immovable Ascendant: (a) In the
Dasa of Capricom, the said native will enjoy much
happiness.
(b) With the transit of Jupiter in Aries, he will
obtain a son who will be long-lived. Prior to this,
he will beget a daughter. His happiness will
commence after his 20th year of age.
(c) In the Kala Chakra Dasa of Scorpio - Mars,

28 Deva Keralam
when Jupiter moves in the end of Pisces or in Aries
{दन (incomplete).
(d) He will beget a son in the sub period of
Mercury during the 5th dasa. The sub period of
Saturn will produce some slight sickness. Later on
his health will recover. Prior to these, he will be in
mental distress due to family quarrels. The middle
part of the said Mercury’s sub period will produce
much professional gains.
मीने गुरुस्थिते काले स्वपुत्रोद्राहसौख्यवान्।
पुतरोत्त्तित्रयावाप्तिः कीटचक्रे च सौख्यवान् ॥२२७८ Il
देहे गुरुस्थिते काले दीर्घायुः पुत्रभाग्यवान् |
.धनधान्यसुतप्रापिं देहसौख्यं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥२३७९ ॥
2378 - 2379. (a) During Jupiter’s transit in
Pisces, the native’s son will get married.
(b) The native will obtain three sons during the
_KCD of Scorpio.
(c) During Jupiter’s transit in Deha Rasi, the
native will obtain a son who will be endowed with
long life. Wealth will also follow this transit.
व्यये मन्दे समायुक्ते ग्येष्ठभ्रातृविनाशवान् |
स्वदारवंशे सन्ताप उद्वाहः कलहो भवेत् ॥२३८० ॥
मृतप्रजाबहुत्वं च सीमन्तशिशुनाशनम्।
वार्धके पुत्रनाशेन क्लेशं प्राप्नोति कशितः॥२३८१ ॥
तदभावे दारपीडा विप्लवेन धनक्षयम् |
2380 - 2381142. Immovable Ascendant -
Harina Nadiamsa: Saturn in the 12th will destroy
elder brother, will cause grief in the in-laws’ family
and strife in respect of a family marriage. The
native will have many dead children, particularly
the first one will be destroyed. In the absence of
this, his wife will incur evils and he will lose wealth
वृश्चिकाद्गारके चक्रे चन्द्रे नीचांशके तथा ॥२३८२ ॥
पञ्चत्रिंशत् परं सोख्यं स्वप्राबल्यं धनागमम् |
सिंहे नीचांशगे चन्द्रे स्थिरराशिचतुष्टये ॥२३८३ ॥
स्फुटयोगं गते मन्दे जन्मेदेशे च विग्रहः।
ज्ञातिद्रेषं गृहच्छिद्रं पश्चात् सौल्यं सुशोभनम् ॥२३८४॥
स्वकार्यप्रनलं चेति स्वपुत्रोद्राहतः परम् |
2382 - 2384. (a) The Moon in Scorpio Navamsa will cause happiness after 35 years of age.
The native will obtain wealth and increased prosperity.
(b) In case of any of the four immovable
ascendants, note the Moon being in Scorpio
Navamsa. Saturn arriving in .... in transit will cause
strife in the country, enmity with kinsmen and
strife in family. Later on happiness and auspicious
effects will occur. All his undertakings will expand
following the marriage of his son.
Notes: (a) Reference to Scorpio KCD makes
the principle confusing.
(b) Saturn’s transit position is not prescribed
rendering the instruction unusable.
जीवे चतुर्थपर्याये हरिणांशोद्धवस्य च ॥२३८५ ॥
वृश्चिकाङ्गारके चक्रे प्राबल्यं चोत्तरोत्तरम् |
तुलाचुक्रे महत् सोख्यं चत्वारिंशे श्रिया युतम् ॥२३८६ ॥
स्वल्पपुत्रफलं चेति मध्यखण्डे न संशयः।
वृश्चिका्गरके चक्र ह्युत्तरं शे स्वपुत्रिका ॥२३८५७ ॥
स्यात् सन्तानवतीत्याहुस्तुलाचक्रे महत् सुखम् |
तुलाचक्रदशाकाले पुत्रिणी सोख्यमश्ुते ॥२३८८ ॥
पुत्रिकोद्राहसौरख्यं च गृह गोधनसङ्कुलम् |
तुलाचक्रान्त्यकालेषु योजयेत् कालवित्तमः॥२३८९ ॥
कन्याचक्रदशाकाले पुत्रपराबल्ययोगवान्।
चक्रान्ते मृत्युमाप्नोति मास्सु कुम्भादिषु त्रिषु ॥२३९० ॥
2385 - 2390. (a) Scorpio dasa: During the
currency of Scorpio - Mars (KCD), when Jupiter is
in his 4th round of transit, the native’s prosperity
will gradually increase.
(b) Libra Dasa: The Dasa of Libra - Venus will
produce much happiness. 40th year will give
wealth.. The middle of Libra Dasa will cause
limited number of children.
(c) Scorpio Dasa: During the Dasa of Scorpio
- Mars, the native’s daughter will obtain progeny.
(d) Libra Dasa: In his Libra - Venus Dasa,
much happiness will occur to his daughter. This
Dasa will give her marriage, and acquisition of
quadrupeds and wealth in the native’s family.
(d) Virgo Dasa: Virgo - Mercury dasa will
cause much prosperity to his sons. In the end of this
Dasa, the native will die, with the transit Sun in
Aquarius, Pisces or Aries.
कन्याचक्रदशाकाले द्रादशान्त्यादिजन्मगे |
स्फुटयोगं गते मन्दे ह्यपमृत्युश्च चक्रगे |
देहालम्यं च लभते कालमृत्युभयं कचित् ॥२२३९२ Il

Chandra Kala Nadi 29
2391 - 2392. During the operation of Virgo -
Mercury dasa, Saturn’s movements in the 12th or
in the ascendant will bring his timely death. Ina
trine thereof, there will be fear of untimely death
and physical tiredness apart from fear of timely
death to some extent.
देहे पापे स्थिते काले गोचरे हरिणांशगे |
तच्चिरकोणे देहजाडयं क्षिप्रेणारोग्यसौख्यवान् ॥२३९३ ॥
मध्यान्तयांशगते मन्दे हरिणांशे मृति वदेत्।
पुण्यलोकफलप्रापि्व्ययारूढे भृगौ स्थिते ॥२३९४ ॥
व्यये पापे व्ययाधीशे शुभांशे पापवीक्षिते।
भागवि पुण्यलोकाप्तिः पश्चाज्जन्मनि सौख्यवान् ॥२३९५ ॥
2393 - 2395. (a) Amalefic in transit in the Deha
Rasi or a trine thereof will cause physical illness to
the native of Harina Nadiamsa, but he will instantly
recover.
(b) Saturn in the middle degrees or concluding
degrees of Deha Rasi will promote the death of the
said native. :
(c) Venus in the Arudha Pada of the 12th house
will consign him to the Heavens.
(d) Amalefic in the 12th, the 12th lordin aspect
to amalefic and in a benefic division will send one
to heavens. Later on he will have a happy rebirth.
Notes: (d) Reference to Venus is incomplete.
मेषलम्ने कुटिलांशः।
हरिणांशकगे जीवे शुभांशे वृषभे सुखी |
भूसुतेन युते दृष्टे विप्रजन्मा प्रतापवान् ॥२३९६ ॥
2396. Jupiter in Harina nadiamsa with
benefic division(?) in Taurus will cause happiness.
(b) If the said Jupiter is in association with Mars
by aspect or conjunction .............. (incomplete)
Notes: The current discussions on immovable
ascendant end here.
वेदशास्रार्थसंपत्नः सोदरभ्रातृपोषकः।
महानदीप्रान्त्यदेशे त्वप्रहरे निवासवान् ॥२३९७ ॥
प्रामणीर्व्यवसायी च राजद्वारे प्रसिद्धिमान् |
कुलीरांशे पद्मभागे मेषलग्ने प्रजायते
शूद्रजन्मासुखी नित्यं भवेत् सीमन्तपुत्रवान् ॥२३९८ ॥
गर्भजातकम् |
ग्रन्थान्तरे द्वितीयो वा ज्येष्ठभ्रातुविहीनवान् |
पश्चाद् भ्रातृयुतश्चेति BA प्रसवः स्मृतः२३९९ ॥
2397 - 2399. Aries Ascendant - Kutila Nadiamsa: (a) The native will be a valorous Brahmin.
He will be learned in Vedas and other Sastras, will
patronise his brothers and will live in a colony of
Brahmins. His profession will be in a village. He
will obtain fame in royal service.
(b) One born in Aries ascendant with Asvini
(4th quarter) with Cancer Navamsa will bea Soodra
and be the eldest issue. There is another authority
to state that he will be the 2nd issue, will not have
(living) elder co-born but will have younger ones.
Notes: From the caption given in the text, the
current verses and the following ones deal with
Aries ascendant.
For details of Kutila Nadiamsa, please consult
notes under sloka 130 of Book 1.
मेषलग्ने पद्मभागे wa कुटिलांशगे ।
जायते FSA ज्येष्ठहीनश्शुभाकृतिः ॥२४०० Il
कुम्रामे vst चैव विश्वयोनो तु जायते |
एकः कनिष्ठयुक्तस्य पितुर्देशान्तरे मृतिः॥२४०१ ॥
असितांशे स्थिते सूर्ये कुन्तलांशे निशाकरे ।
कुटिलां शे प्रजातस्य सुतो वा संभवे च्चिरात् ॥२४०२ ॥
2400 - 2402. Aries Ascendant - Kutila Nadiamsa: (a) He will be a Soodra, happy in disposition,
will not have an elder co-born, be handsome in
appearance, be born in a remote village or a town,
and will have one younger co-born. His father will
die in a distant land.
(b) The Sun ina Navamsaruled by Saturn while
the Moon is in Kutila Nadiamsa denotes that the
person is born to his parents after a great deal of
delay (or longing).
Notes: The discussions on 2nd half of the
subject Nadiamsa extend upto sloka 2425 infra.
The conditions laid down in the first line of
sloka 2400, viz. Aries ascendant, Asvini Nakshatra,
.... Shashtiamsa and Cancer Navamsa are impracticable. Thus it should only relate to Kutila
Nadiamsa, Aries ascendant.
लग्नेशे रविसंयुक्ते कारकेन निरीक्षिते ।
पापकर्मरतो नित्यं राजसेवी धनार्जकः॥२४०३ Il
2403. Aries Ascendant = Kutila Nadiamsa:
The lord of the ascendant Mars being in the
company of the Sun and in aspect to Saturn (signifi-

30 Deva Keralam
cator concerned) will make one indulge in sinful
deeds. He will serve a king to acquire wealth.
लग्नाच्चतुर्थगे चन्द्रे शन्यङ्गारकवीश्िते ।
अलसो मतिमान् रागी परवित्ताङ्गनाप्रियः॥२४०४ Il
वेश्याख्रीसङ्गवान् कामी प्रेष्यो ऽमात्यस्य लोलुपः।
कुष्टी सुजातुरो वाग्मी चोष्णमेहशरीरवान् ॥२४०५ ॥
2404 - 2405. The native with the Moon in the
4th (Cancer) in joint aspect to Saturn and Mars will
be indolent, intelligent, passionate and disposed to
damage others’ wealth. He will be libidinous, will
join whores, be a servant and be after ministers (or
powerful people). He will suffer from leprosy and
other diseases and be eloquent in speech. His body
will be affected by heat and urinary disorders.
Notes: In sloka 2405, "Amatya Preshya
Lolupah" is another reading. which means the native will be a minister's servant and will possess
destructive instincts. The word "Jolupa" has two
meanings, thus: destructive, longing.
लग्नेशे स्वोच्चराशिस्थे शुभारूढे शुभान्विते ।
तेजस्वी मतिमान् धीरः स्वकार्यनिरतः सुखी ॥२४०६ ॥
2406. The lord of the ascendant - Mars - should
be in his exaltation sign (in the 10th, Capricorn).
The 9th Aroodha Pada should containa benefic. As
a result the native will be brilliant, intelligent,
courageous and fond of good deeds.
वृषभांशे विलग्नेशे स्वोच्चे रविसमन्विते |
कोपी कषिप्रप्रसन्नात्मा ज्ञातिभाग्यसुयोगवान् ॥२४०७ ॥
2407. Mars at birth should be in Capricorn in
the company of the Sun and beget Taurus Navamsa.
Such a native will be given to anger but be pleased
instantly. He will be fortunate in respect of his
kinsfolk and will enjoy a great deal of prosperity.
स्यासेषलग्ने जनितोऽतिरक्तः मेहप्रधानः सुकुमारदेहः।
कामी नित्यं साहसी भ्रातृ वेरी।
लुन्धश्चसो ज्ञातिबाहुल्ययुक्तः॥२४०८ ॥
2408. General: One belonging to Aries ascendant will have much blood, will be prone to
incur urinary disorders, will have a soft body, be
lustful, adventurous, inimical to mother, miserly
and will have numerous relatives.
मेषलग्नेऽर्कहोरायां सिह्रेक्काणजस्तथा |
लग्नाद्वित्तगते मन्दे बाल्ये सौख्यविहीनवान् ॥२४०९ ॥
शिवभक्तिरतो नित्यं शिवकर्मपरः सुखीः।
मातृस्थानाधिपे चन्द्रे स्वक्षेत्रे कुन्तलांशगे ॥२४१० Il
स्वमाता विधवा भूत्वा बहुकालं सुजीवति |
पुत्रशोकवती माता भ्रातृनारोन कशिता ॥२४११ ॥
देशान्तरे भ्रातृयुता ज्ञातिवर्गेणं पोषिता |
कर्मे रवियुते भौमे मीने शुक्रे कुजांशगे eve? ॥
स्वीयभ्रात्रा तु गङ्गायां स्नातो बहुदिनं सुखम् ।
पुंसोक्तं पुत्रमुत्पाद्य क्षयरोगेण नश्यति ॥२४९३ ॥
देशान्तरे भ्रातृशोकज्ञातिवर्गेण जीवति ।
दाराक्षोभप्रदो नित्यं ज्येष्ठभ्रातृवियोगवान् ॥२४१४ ॥
नानाविधक्लेशमेति भ्रातृभावफलं स्मृतम् |
पितृस्थानाधिपे जीवे कुम्भे वर्गोत्तमांशगे ॥२४१५ ॥
स्वपिता विप्रसेवी स्याद्भ्रातृमान् सोदरीयुतः।.
वाणिज्यशूद्रसेवादि जीवनं स्वपितुः कचित् ॥२४१६ ॥
देशत्यांग च कुरते पितुदर्मरणं भवेत् ।
कुन्तलांशकगे चन्द्रे पितृव्यैको हयपुत्रवान् ॥२४१७ ॥
एको मुख्यः प्रसिद्धश्च राजद्वारे सुपूजितः।
शिवभक्तिरतो नित्यं द्विकलत्रः सुपुत्रवान् ॥२४१८ ॥
स्वपितुः सोदरभ्राता कश्चित् पापी त्रिपुत्रवान् ।
वेदसद्याथवा चेति पुत्रपुत्री समृद्धिमान् ॥२४१९ ॥
आयुष्मनतौ पितृव्यौ द्वौ कश्चिदारान्तरेऽपि च
कालान्तरे सुतप्राप्िदुःखिता पितृसोदरी ॥२४२० ॥
आयुष्मत्यो द्वत्रिसङ्कया एका पुत्रवती भवेत् |
पितृष्वसृद्रयोरेका वेधव्येन च कंशिता ॥२४२१९ ॥
कालान्तरे पुत्रवती त्वेकापुत्रसमन्विता |
एकः स्वपितृव्यसुतो राजमुद्राधिकारवान् ॥२४२२ ॥
बहुपुतरार्थसंपन्नो भेदभ्रातयुतः सुखी । ।
2409 - 242214. Aries Ascendant: (a) The Native: Aries ascendant, with solar Hora and Leo
decanate rising (i.e. the ascendant being anywhere
between 10° and 15°) while Saturn is in the 2nd
from the ascendant (i.e. in Taurus) will deprive one
of happiness ir ooyhood days. He will be devoted
to Lord Siva.
(b) Mother: The 4th lord Moon in Cancer in
Kuntala Nadiamsa will cause widowhood to mother
who will live for a long time. She will be grieved —
on account of loss of progeny and emaciated due to
loss of co-born. Her co-born will live in distant

Chandra Kala Nadi 31
lands and she would be brought up by other relatives.
(c) Brother: One will obtain the following
results in respect of a brother if Mars is in the 10th
with the Sun, while Venus is in Pisces with a
Navamsa of Mars (i.e. Scorpio). The brother will
be happy for many days due to dips in the sacred
Ganges (i.e. he will go on a long time pilgrimage).
His sons will be destroyed due to tuberculosis. He
will incur grief on account of mother in a foreign
country and will live with his kinsfolk. He will
cause perpetual distress to his spouse and will be
separated from elder co-bom and will incur various
kinds of grief. These are the effects concerning a
brother.
(d) Father: If the 9th lord Jupiter is in Vargottama in Aquarius, the native’s father will serve
Brahmins, will have brothers and sisters. He will
eke out his livelihood by trading, and also by
serving Soodras. He will leave his country and die
a bad death.
(e) Paternal Uncles & Aunts: The Moon in
Kuntala Nadiamsa will give the following effects.
One of the paternal uncles of the native will be
childless. Another will be a chief and a famous
person receiving royal honours. He will be devoted
Lord Siva, will have two wives and good sons. One
will be somewhat sinful and will have three or four
sons or will have many sons and daughters. Two of
the paternal uncles will be endowed with long
lives. One paternal aunt will obtain progeny after
along time and will be in grief. Two or three aunts
will be long-lived. One will have male issues. Two
aunts will be widowed. A paternal uncle’s son will
enjoy authority under a king and will have many
sons, much wealth and step-brothers.
Notes: (a) In sloka 2410, the expression "Siva
Varma Gharah" isacorrupttext. It should be "Siva
Karma Parah" meaning that the ssubject will be
devoted to Lord Siva's services.
विपदायेऽपरार्धादौ ज्ञातिप्राबल्यादिशेत् ॥ २४२३ ॥
पितृव्यपुत्रयोगेन भाग्यवृद्धिः शुभावहा |
लग्नाधिपे कर्मराशौ स्वोच्चे सूर्यसमन्विते ॥२४२४॥
GRR प्रजातस्तु USAT फलं लभेत्।
SRI प्रजातस्तु य इदं BHATT ॥२४२५ ॥
2423 - 2425. Aries Ascendant - Kutila Nadiamsa: (a) The beginning and concluding parts of
the second half of the native’s third Dasa will cause
prosperity of his relatives. Due to association with
a son of paternal uncle, the native’s fortunes will
progress and auspicious results will come forth.
(b) The lord of the ascendant (Mars) in the 10th
in exaltation together with the Sun and in aspect to
the Moon will cause dips in Ganges.
(c) These effects are for the 2nd half of the
subject Nadiamsa.
पूर्वभागे विशेषेण भ्रातृलक्षणमुच्यते |
यस्यकस्यापि यो जातो गङ्ख गत्वा गयां व्रजेत् ॥२४२६ ॥
सोऽप्यासप्तमकुलानि पूर्वोत्तराणि चोद्धरेत् |
भाग्ये च राहुणा दृष्टे भ्राता स्यादारशोकवान् ॥२४२७ ॥
तेन शोकेन तद्भ्राता क्षीणायुर्मरकं व्रजेत् |
भाग्येशे कालकूटांशे रविजांशेऽथवा स्थिते ॥२४२८ ॥ `
लग्नद्धिक्रमगे राहौ स्रीमूलाद्भ्रातनाशनम् |
इदमेव फलं योज्यमुत्तरांशोद्धवस्य च ॥२४२९ ॥
2426 - 2429. (a) Now specially the effects
‘concerning brother are told. (But the text does not
speak of any such thing in detail but refers to dips
in Ganges and getting rid of sins of the last seven
births. Apparently, there is a loss of text.)
(b) The 9th house aspected by Rahu will cause
grief to a brother on account of loss of spouse. Due
to such grief, the said brother’s life-span will
diminish and he will go to hell.
(c) The 9th-lord (Jupiter) in Kalakoota
Shashtiamsa or in Satum’s Navamsa while Rahu is
in the 3rd (in Gemini) will destroy the brother
through a female.
These effects are applicable to birth in 2nd half
of Kutila Nadiamsa, in Aries.
पूर्वभागे प्रजातस्य सोदरः पापकर्मवान् |
भाग्येऽष्टमे वा स्वभानो तृतीये रविनन्दने ॥२४३० ॥
भूगो स्वोच्चे प्रजातम्तु नाशयेत् पेतृकक्रियाम् |
कालान्तरे पुण्यदेशे पितृसंस्कारमादिशेत् ॥२४३१ ॥
्रद्धाभक्तियुतः पश्चद्रत्सरान्ते क्रियां चरेत् ।
सुख राशीशराशौ तु गुरौ बुधसमन्विते ॥२४३२ ॥
राहुदष्टे स्वमाता च प्रणवाद्रै शिवार्चनम् |
तेन पापेन तस्याः स्तु पुत्रशोकादि दारुणम् ॥२४३३ ॥

32 Deva Keralam
तस्यास्तु वंशवृद्धिश्च न भवेनित्यं भवेत्।
2430 - 2433142. Kutila Nadiamsa - First Half:
(a) Birth in this segment denotes that the native’s
brother will indulge in sinful deeds.
(b) If Rahu is in the 8th or the 9th, Saturn is in
the 3rd and Venus is in exaltation, the native will
not be able to perform last offices to his father. But
after some time in the end of the year, he will do
related rituals in a shrine with devotion.
(d) If the dispositor of the 4th lord is conjunct
Jupiter and Merury in aspect to Rahu, the mother
should worship Lord Siva with excluively the
Pranava Mantra by which she will be rid of tragedies like grief concerning progeny and will have
her family grow.
षष्ठस्थे च निशानाथे भूसुतेन निरीक्षिते ॥२४३४ ॥
पितृवंशस्य वृद्धिः स्यान्मातृवंशक्षयं भवेत् |
पञ्चमेशे रन्धपेन समेते तच्चिकोणगे ॥२४३५ Il
मन्दे राहुयुते पुत्रीविवाहे विध्नमादिशेत् |
कालान्तरे च भर्तारं दारिद्यं प्राप्य तत्सुता ॥२४३६ ॥
अलक्मीप्रतिमादानत्तभ्दर्ता भारयवान् सुखी |
बहुदुःखा बहून् कालानल्पपुत्रवती भवेत् Uw ॥
एवं च गर्भहोरायं प्रोक्ता पुत्रवती सुता ।
बहुपुत्रवती नित्यं पितृभाग्येन जीवति ॥२४३८ ॥
2434 - 2438. (a) Should the Moon be in the 6th
in aspect to Mars, the native’s father’s dynasty will
expand while that of the mother will be impeded.
(b) The lord of the 6th (Mercury) in aspect to
the 8th lord (Mars) while Rahu and Mars are ina
trine from Mercury will bring obstacles in the
marriage of the native’s daughter. She will marry
after delay and be in poverty. By donating the’
image of Goddess Lakshmi, her.husband will earn
fortunes. She will experience a lot of grief and will
beget a daughter after some time. These have been
stated in “Garbha Hora” (read Garga Hora). Due to
the good fortunes of her father (i.e. the native), she
will obtain many daughters and be long-lived.
धर्म> चातुर्रण्येषु जातानां कन्यानां प्रागृतृदयात् |
कार्यो विवाहो नान्यासां कन्यका नियमस्तथा ॥२४३९ ॥
यस्तु कन्यामृतुमतीं चातुर्वरण्यसमुद् भवाम् |
उद्राहात् पतिताद्याददहेदासप्तमं कुलम् ॥२४४० ॥
इत्थं मनुना प्रोक्तं पाराशर्येण चोदितम् |
होराशास्रे तथा प्रोक्तमिदमेव फलं स्मृतम् |
अष्टवर्षा भवेत् कन्या नववर्षा तु रोहिणी ॥२४४२ ॥
शूदस्यरोहिणि गौरी विवाहस्तस्य चोच्यते |
पुत्राणामथ पुत्रीणां विवाहो fafera सति ॥२४४३ ॥
सुमड्लीमहालक््मीगौरी पूजाविधीयते | ।
क्षीरर्वाप्यथाहारिद्रेरिभषेकं रमाम्बयोः॥२४४४ ॥
सुमङ्गल्ये seer परमाननिवेदनम् |
सवृद्राचासकृत पूजा BSA AT ww ॥
2439 - 2445. Scriptural Injunctions: In case
of births relating to the 4 castes (i.e. Brahmin,
Kshatriya, Vaisya and Soodra), marrriage of a girl
should be done only after her attaining puberty.
Otherwise, following such a marriage, (the merits
of) seven past generations will be burnt. So had
been said by Manu and Parasara. The science of
astrology also declares such effects. A girl of 8 is
known as Kanya, of 9 Rohini, of 10 Gauri and
above 10 Rajasvala (who attained her puberty and
is fit for marriage). For Brahmins, Kshatriyas and
Vaisyas, the giving away of a Kanya is important
(i. e. is recommended). For Soodra, marrriage is
allowed of a Rohini or Gauri. If there be obstacles
in performing the marriage of a son or daughter,.
worship of a Sumangali (a female whose husband
is alive), Maha Lakshmi and Gauri (i.e. Lakshmi
and Parvati) should be done as prescribed by
Sastras. Lakshmi and Parvati should be offered
Abhisheka (ritual bath) with milk and turmeric.
Clothes should be given away to a Simnagali.
These should be done once, and many times (i.e.
again and again), with purity. Then the hurdles will
be removed and marriage will take place.
Notes: An eight year old girl is called Gauri
(and not Kanya) anda ten year old girl is Kanya (not
Gauri). Apparently, the text in question has been
wrongly copied. Thus the first 3 castes were
pemnitted to marry off their daughter after 10 while
Soodra can marry off his daughter even at 8 or 9, as
per Sastras. More suh information can be found in
Brihad Daivagna Mano Ranjanam.
तस्य विष्नविनाशः erste पाणिग्रहो भवेत् |
कुन्तलांशे निशानाथे शन्यङ्गारकवीक्षिते ॥२४४६ ॥
पत्रोद्राहादिविष्नं स्यात्तस्येमां शान्तिमाचरेत् |

Chandra Kala Nadi 33
भाग्येशे लाभाराशिस्थे विक्रमेशेन संयुते ॥२४४७ ॥
तल्लाभे गोचरे मन्दे पुत्रिकद्राहंसभ्रमः।
विक्रमेशे यदंशस्थे तद्राशौ वा निरीक्षिते ॥२४४८ ॥
तत्तिकोणांशमसेषु पुत्रिकोद्ाहंससभ्रमः।
दारषिपदशाकाले दारलाभश्शुभावहः॥२४४९ ॥
2446 - 2449. (a) The Moon in Kuntala Nadiamsa in aspect to Saturn and Mars will cause
obstacles in the performance of son’s marriage for
which remedies should be done.
(b) The 9th and 3rd lords should be together in
the 11th from the ascendant. When Saturn transits
the 11th thereof (i.e. 9th from the ascendant), the
native’s daughter will get married. Alternatively,
Saturn can also aspect the sign identical with the
Navamsa occupied by the 3rd lord. The corresponding months will be denoted by the Sun
transiting in a sign which is a trine to such Navamsa.
(c) The Dasa of the 7th lord will cause marriage
and other auspicious effects.
sare श्रियावाप्तिः सोदसोद्राहसं भ्रभः।
प्रत्यग्दशायां कन्यातुद्धििविध्नात् परं सुखम ॥२४५० Il
विवाहे सर्वकर्मणि सन्तानादि भवेत्ततः।
यावता बिन्दुना युक्तो भाग्येशः शुभसंयुतः॥२४५१ ॥
2450 - 2451. Aries Ascendant - Kutila Nadiamsa 2nd Half: (a) The native will accumulate
wealth. He will be involved in the marriage of his
brother in his Sth Dasa. Marriage will be settled
after two or three obstacles. So also in respect of all
undertakings and acquisition of progeny.
(b) The lord of the 9th should be associated
with a benefic. In that case, the number of Bindus
in his Ashtaka Varga will denote the number of
issues for the native. His daughter will be charming.
Notes: (a) The relevant text is not clearly
composed. Apparently it suggests that the native’s
brother will incur obstacles in respect of marriage,
progeny and other auspicious events.
तावत्कुमारा जायेरन् पुत्रिका रम्यरूपिणी ।
असितां शे सुताधीशे काकवन्धयापतिः सुखी ॥२४५२ ॥
भार्या गुणवती श्यामा त्वेकभ्रातृसमन्विता |
कलत्रसोदरभ्राता त्वेकपुत्रयुतो भवेत् ॥२४५३ ॥
सहोदये द्वित्रिसुतो बाल्ये दुष्टस्वभाववान् |
नालारिष्ट भयं किचिच्छान्त्या शान्ति प्रायस्यति ॥२४५४ ॥
2452 - 2454. The lord of the 5th (the Sun) ina
Navamsa of Venus denotes that the subject will
marry aperson who will give birth toonly one child `
and then become barren. She will be charming,
virtuous, dark in complexion and will have one
brother. The native’s brother-in-law will have one
son. His sister-in-law will have two or three sons
and would be wicked in her childhood. She would
also incur danger to her survival due to planetary
blemishes for which remedies would be sought.
लग्नेशे स्वोच्चरशिस्थे भ्रातपुत्रः सुखी भवेत् 1
कलत्रद्रयावान् भोगी पितृव्याजितवित्तवान् ॥२४५५ ॥
स्वभुजार्जितसंपन्नो ज्ञातिभाग्य युतः सुखी |
कर्मे कन्यांशगे सूर्ये जातस्य मेषलग्नके ॥२४५६ ॥
द्रव्यार्जनसमर्थश्च भ्रातृपुत्रस्तु पोषकः।
घनाधिपदशाकाले गोचरे द्वादशे शनो ॥२४५७ ॥
वेष्णवद्रेषमूलेन राजोपदवशोकवान्।
जन्मदाये पितृव्यस्य दारारिष्टं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥२४५८ ॥
द्वितीयोद्राहमाप्नोति पितृसोख्यं विनिर्दिशेत्।
पश्चात् सहोदरीमृत्युरभातृलाभो ह्यतः परम् ॥२४५९ ॥
विद्यारम्भं च लभते सौम्ये मन्ददशान्तरे |
जन्मतारदशान्त्ये च स्वपितुर्व्याकुल महत् ॥२४६० ॥
ज्वरोपद्रवमाप्नोति ज्ञातिवरगे मनोव्यथाम् |
2455 - 2460". (a) Brother’s Son: If the lord
of the ascendant Mars is in exaltation, the native’s
_ brother’s son will be happy, will have two wives, ;
will enjoy pleasures and will inherit paternal uncle’s wealth. He will also have self-earned wealth
and will enjoy fortunes through his kinsfolk.
(b) One born in Aries ascendant with the Sun in
the 10th house with Virgo Navamsa will be skilful
in gathering wealth and will patronize his brother’s
son.
(c) In the Dasa of Venus, when Saturn transits
the 12th, the subject will incur troubles from the
king due to enmity with Vaishnavites.
(d) During the native’s first dasa, his paternal
uncle will lose his spouse and will have second
marriage. The native’s father will be endowed with
happiness. Later on, the subject will lose a sister

34 Deva Keralam
and will acquire a brother. His education will ।
commence in Mercury - Saturn periods. The end
of the first dasa will cause distress to father due to
troubles from fever. Also his kinsfolk will be
mentally disturbed.
मण्डलाधिपतेर्मत्युयैतर्य कलहो महान् ॥२४६१ ॥
गुरुशन्यारकालेच देशे दक्षिणभागगे |
मण्डलधिपते नाशो भवेत् सेनाधिपस्य च ॥२४६२ Il
चापान्ते मकरादौ च तत्ररिकोणे गुरो शनौ ।
पाण्डयभूपतिसन्ताप श्चापमृत्युभयं भवेत् ॥२४६३ ॥
मृगानने तत्तिकोणे स्फुटयोगं गते शनौ |
स्वर्ण नगरे चैव भवेद्राजातरं तथा ॥२४६४ ॥
यस्मिन् देशे पटूणे प्रामभे वा
जन्मे वित्ते ae मे च त्रिकोणे ।
यद्रा कर्मण्यगते सूर्यपुत्र
राजक्षोभो देशपीडा विपत्तिः ॥२४६५ ॥
` एकमेव पुरप्रामपडृणानां तु सर्वशः।
तत्तनामानुसरेण फलं जञेयं बुधोत्तमैः ॥२४६६ ॥
असितांशकगे सूर्ये स्थिराशि चतुष्टये ।
स्फुटयोगं गते मन्दे पाण्डयभूपतिनाशान् ॥२४६७ Il
तल्पत्रस्यभवेन्मृत्युस्तथा सेनाधिपस्य वा।
मीनत्रिकोणगे मन्दे चोलभूपतिनाशनम् ॥२४६८ ॥
स्वसेनानृपतीनां तृ ह्यरिष्टमिति चादिशेत्
सुतेशांशे तत्विकोणे मीने वा गोचरे शनौ ॥२४६९ ॥
स्ववासदेश नृपतेर्व्याधि वा नाशमीरयेत्।
अष्टमे गोचरे मन्दे भाग्येशांशेऽथ यदि ॥२४७० ॥
स्वराजज्ञातिवर्गेण क्लेशं प्राप्नोति भूरिशः।
2461 - 24704. Irrelevant: The head of the
region will die and a war will break in the northern
part of the country. In the periods of Jupiter and `
Saturn, the king in the southern part of the country
and the army chief will perish. When Jupiter and
Saturn journey in the end of Sagittarius or in the
beginning of Capricorn, the land of Pandya king-.
dom will be in grief and there will be fear of
untimely death. Saturn’s transit in the end of Capricorn ora trine thereof will cause a change of ruler.
Saturn in the ascendant, 2nd, 8th or 10th will bring
sorrow and danger to the king. The Sun in one of the
four immovable signs, with a Navamsa of Venus
त while the planet Saturn transits a trine ..... the
king of Pandya country will be destroyed. The
king’s son and the army chief will face untimely
death. When Saturn transits Pisces or the sign
identical with the Navamsa occupied by the Sth
lord, the king of the native’s country will incur
diseases and be destroyed. When Saturn comes to
the 8th, or the Navamsa of the 9th lord, there will
occur quarrels among the king’s relatives.
दयूनाधिपदशाकाले भाग्यधिपतिभुक्तिषु ॥२४७१ ॥
असितांशे प्रजातस्य ख्रीप्रजालाभमाधिशेत्।
राहुदोषेण वा पश्चात् सन्तानप्रतिबन्धकम् ॥२४७२ ॥
कालान्तरे सुतप्रापििं केचित्पक्षे विनिर्दिशेत्।
2471 - 2472142. One born in Aries ascendant
with a Navamsa of Venus will gain daughters in the
Dasa of the 7th lord (Venus) during the sub period
of the 9th lord Jupiter). Due to blemish caused by
Rahu, subsequent child births will be obstructed.
After delay, he will obtain a son according to some.
सुताधिपदशायां तु सुखाधिपतिदायगे ॥२४७३ ॥
राजान्तरवशाद् भाग्यमुद्योगप्राप्तिमादिशेत् |
स्वपितृव्ययुतः कश्चित् क्लेशं चेदशवत्सरम् ॥२४७४ ॥
पश्चात् प्राबल्यमाप्नोति बन्धुवर्गे श्रिया युतम् |
विपदाये flatts त्रयोविंशतिवत्सरे ॥२४७५ ॥
सप्तविशेऽथ वा चेति कुटिलांशोद् भवस्य च।
मेषे शनिस्थिते काले मीने वापितृनाशनम् ॥२४७६ ॥
2473 - 2476. (a) The sub period of the 4th lord
in the Dasa of the Sth lord will bring professional
fortunes under a changed ruler.
(b) For about ten years, his paternal uncle’s son
will be in difficulties after which he will prosper
and the kinsfolk will make wealth.
(c) During the 33rd or 27th year of age, in the
3rd dasa, the native’s father will be endangered. At
that time Saturn will be in transit in Aries or in
Pisces.
सप्तमे मकरे माता परलोकं प्रयास्यति ।
पञ्चमे सोदरक्लेशं प्रत्यग्दाये सुतामयम् ॥२४७७ ॥
wheat मनस्तापं खपितृव्यसुतामयम् |
जन्मे शनिस्थिते काले द्रादशान्तेऽथवा यदि ॥२४७८ ॥
धनाधिपदशाकाले पितृव्यक्लेशमादिशेत्।
सुखधिपदशाया तु रन्ध्राधिपतिदायगे ॥२४७९ Il

Chandra Kala Nadi 35
agent: पितृव्यस्य विनाशनम् |
waa तत्तरिकोणे स्फुटयोगं गते शनौ ॥२४८० ॥
प्रत्यग्दाये कुतलांशे MATYAS महत् |
चापे शनिस्थिते काले वातरोगप्रपीडितः।
पुत्रिकोद्वाहमाप्नोति पोत्रलाभं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥२४८१ ॥
2477 - 2481. (a) Saturn’s transit in the 7th (read
10th) in Capricorn will cause mother’s death.
(b) Troubles to co-born, mental distress to
relatives and destruction of a paternal uncle will
result the transit of Saturn in the 5th (in Leo).
(c) When Saturn moves in the ascendant or in
the end of the 12th during the Dasa of the 2nd lord,
the person’s paternal uncle will be in grief. If the
Dasa of the 4th lord (the Moon) and the sub period
of the 8th lord (Mars) be in operation, paternal
uncle will be endangered by fear of untimely death.
(d) Saturn in transit in the sign identical with
the Navamsa occupied by the lord of the 8th (Mars),
the native of Kuntala Nadiamsa will be greatly
endangered by fear of untimely death provided the
Dasa is the 5th one.
(€) When Saturn transits in Sagittarius, he will
be troubled by windy diseases. But his daughter
will beget married and he will obtain a grand-son.
मीने धनुर्युवतियुग्मगतेऽर्कपुत्रः
सोम्यर्युतो वा बलिभिस्त्ववलोकितो वा |
दु्भक्षशखानलचोरभयानि यानि
प्रोक्तानितानि न भवन्ति भवन्ति पापैः ॥२४८२ ॥
2482. Irrelevant: Transit Saturn in Pisces,
Sagittarius, Virgo and Gemini, as the case may be,
and in association with or aspect to a strong benefic
will cause famine and fear from fire and thieves.
कन्याचक्रदशासंधिकाले क्लेशफलं विदुः।
्रत्यग्दाये शुक्रचक्रे Seared विनिर्दिशेत् ॥२४८२ ॥
कुन्तालांशे गते चन्द्रे दशायां देहरशिगे ।
पापग्रहाक्रान्तकाले क्रुरमासे रुजातुरः॥२४८४ ॥
दोषपरिहारार्थं शान्ति कुर्याद्यथाविधि |
अष्टविशोत्तरशतं चतुष्षष्टिपलंच वा ॥२४८५ ॥
Bay त्पलमात्रं वा गृहीत्वाकांस्यपात्रकम् |
राजतं चन्द्रबिम्बं च पलषोडशसंयुतम् |
तण्डुलं षोडश प्रस्थं द्विगुण परिगृह्य च ॥
मण्डपं च तथा कृत्वा वसरेराच्छाद चोपरि ।
कांस्यपात्र च निक्षिप्य चन्द्रस्य प्रतिमां क्षिपेत् ॥२४८६ ॥
धुपदीपार्ध्यं युक्तश्च पुष्पगन्धाक्षतादिभिः।
स्वर्णपुषपरविशेषेण पूजयेदमृताक्षैरः॥२४८७ ॥
सोवर्णसूर्य प्रतिमां ताप्रपात्रे निधाय च।
पूर्वोक्तविधिना पूजामाचरे दिन्दुना समम् ॥२४८८ ॥
परमान्नं भागवतो भानो मैविद्यमाचरेत् ।
शरावनीतं क्षीरानं कदलीफल मिश्रितम् ॥२४८९ ॥
नैवेद्यमिन्दोः कलयन् मुच्यते STA: |
यश्चरदुक्तविधिना परिहारं समन्रकम् ॥२४९० ॥
तस्य रोगा विनश्यन्ति ह्यायुश्च परिवर्धते |
TARE च न भवेदपमृत्युभयं च न ॥२४९१ ॥
dead वर्धते नित्यं कीर्तिः स्यादनपायिनी ।
नित्यवंशाभिवृद्धिः स्याद भवेच्छनरुपराभवः॥२४९२ ॥
स्वपुत्रिका समाङ्गल्या भर्वृसोख्यवती भवेत् |
चनदरसूर्यप्रसादेन वाज्छितार्थो भवेत् सदा ॥२४९३ ॥
एव संपूज्य विधिवत् प्रतिमाधिकदकषिणाम् |
दद्याच्च ज्योतिषज्ञाय द्यकेन्दुप्रतिमां तथा ॥२४९४ ॥
तेन दानेन ware सुप्रसन्नो दयान्वितौ |
दिशेतां दीर्धमायुष्यं स्वदशासु स्वभुकतिषु ॥२४९५ ॥
क्रूरमहदशाकाले गोचर ब्रूरकालगे |
PA चैव च इद् STATA ॥२४९६ ॥
चन्द्रसूर्यप्रसादेन तस्य सर्वे शुभप्रदोः।
आयुरासोग्यसो भाग्यं दिशेयुः कीर्तिमुत्तमम् ॥२४९७ ॥
इटं रहस्यं पापघ्नं लोकानां हितकारणम् |
नारदेन सुताऽध्याये कथितं परमर्षिणा ॥२४९८ ॥
तेनाच्युताय विप्राय प्रसन्ेनाभिभाषितम् |
तां पूजामाचरेत् प्राज्ञो मनुजः स. सुखी भवेत् ॥२४९९ ॥
मृत्युञ्जयं महामन जपेदरममुखेः सुखी ।
मार्कण्डेयः पुरा जप्त्वा मृत्युपाशाद्विमोचितः॥२५०० ॥
मण्डलं वा तदर्थं वा जपेन्मृत्युविनाशानम् |
आयुरारोग्यसोभाग्यवद्धिस्तस्य दिने दिने ॥२५०१॥
2483 - 2501. (a) The learned prescribe difficulties in the junction periods of two Kala Chakra
Dasas.
(b) Physical emaciation is denoted in the 5th
dasa. (The term “Sukra Chakra” is to be excluded
for better understanding.)
(c) Should the Moon be in Kuntala Nadiamsa,
the transit of malefics in Deha Rasi will cause

36 Deva Keralam
diseases of the body, coinciding with adverse solar
movements. To overcome this blemish, remedies
should be resorted to.
(d) Remedies: A vessel made of bell-metal
weighing 128 or 64 or 32 Palas should be obtained
in which an image of the Moon-God made of silver,
weighing 16 Palas should be placed on rice grains
of 16 Prasthas and should be covered with clothes,
in a pavilion and should be worshipped with incense, lamps and flowers. The image of the SunGod made of gold should also be placed in a copper
vessel and worshipped as stated earlier for the
Moon-God. The Sun-God should be offered rice
boiled in milk with sugar while the Moon-God
should be offered with rice cooked in milk mixed
with plantains following which the fear of untimely
death will vanish. Reciting the remedial Mantras
as per rules will destroy diseases and increase lifespan. Then there will be no infantile mortality, nor
untimely death. His wealth and fame and dynasty
will grow. His enemies will be humiliated. His
daughter will enjoy long marital life and husband
willlive long. By praying to the Sun and the Moon,
one’s desires will always be fulfilled. By the
donation of the images of the Sun-God and MoonGod to an astrologer, these Gods will be wellpleased and will bless the person with longevity.
These donations should be given away in the dasa
periods of the luminaries, or during malefic plan-
. ets’ periods, or during malefic transits or in bad
times. With the mercy of the Sunand the Moon, the
native will ever enjoy auspicious effects. Longevity, health, fame etc. will prevail in an excellent
manner. This sin-destroying secret has been revealed by sage Narada for the welfare of the world.
These are spoken by the Brahmin Achyuta with
happiness. Those wise men who perform this
worship will live happily. Mrityunjaya Maha
Mantra should be got recited with the help of a
Brahmin. Once upon a time, Markandeya recited
this and got relieved of the noose of death. By
reciting this for 48 or 24 days, death will be
destroyed. As a result, longevity, health and prosperity will grow day by day.
कुन्तलांशकमे चन्द्रे कुरिलांशोद् भवस्य च |
सूर्यचन््रप्रसादेन Taras प्रियं वदेत् ॥२५०२ ॥
नूतनप्रहनिर्माणं ज्ञातिवर्गे सुतोत्सवम्।
पितृव्यपुत्रयोगेन धनलाभं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥२५०३ ॥
मीनभुक्त्यमन्तमारभ्य कीटान्ते भुकितिकालके |
त्रिपञ्चाशात् परं मृत्युः सार्धे द्विवत्सरेभवेत् ॥२५०४ ॥
2502 - 2504. One born 17.165 ascendant,
Kutila Nadiamsa, with the Moon in Kuntala Nadiamsa will be happy in the Dasa of Libra - Venus due
to the mercy of Sun God and Moon God. He will
construct a new house. His relatives will celebrate
birth of a child. He will make money with the help
of his paternal uncle’s son. In the sub period of
Pisces or Scorpio, he willincur death. From the age
of 27, he will be in danger for a period of 2 years.
Notes: For Kuntala Nadiamsa (also known as
Kunda Nadiamsa), please consult notes under sloka
अष्टमधिप भौमस्य दशायां शनिभुक्तिषु |
मेषलग्ने प्रजातस्य कालमृत्युर्भविष्यति ॥२५०५ ॥
2505. The native of Aries ascendant will face
death in the sub period of Saturn in the dasa of 8th
lord Mars.
यदष्मे शनियुतेऽथ दृष्टे जातस्य वा तस्य भवेच्च FEA |
योगद्वयं स्यानिघंन यदेको ।
योगस्तथा मृत्युसमत्वमाहुः ॥ २५०६ ॥
2506. One with Saturn’s aspect or association
in respect of the 6th or 8th house will be in
difficulties. Should the two be in operation (i.e.
Saturn in the 6th aspecting 8th, instead of being in
the 8th), death will occur. One of these in existence
(i.e. Saturn in the 8th) will cause difficulties equal
to death.
वृश्चिकांशे व्यये शुके स्वोच्चे दुर्गतिभागगे |
देहान्ते नरकं याति कुटिलां शसमुद भवः॥२५०७ ॥
2507. Venus exalted in the 12th with Scorpio
Navamsa will consign the said native to hell after
death.
गुरुतृतीयपर्ययि मीनादौ श्रियमश्नुते ।
तुलादौ व्याकुलं चेति मेषादित्रिषु व सुखम् ॥२५०८ ॥
2508. Jupiter’s third round of transit in the
initial part of Pisces will cause wealth. In the initial
part of Libra distress will be caused. In the 3 signs
commencing Aries, he will produce happiness.

Chandra Kala Nadi 37
स्वजन्मराशिमारभ्य शनिचारेण योजयेत् |
गोचरे शनिचारेण राश्युक्तफलमादिशेत् ॥२५०९ ॥
2509. When saturn transits the various signs
commencing from the Moon sign, results prescribed for the various positions be declared.
लगनाद्रा चद्रलग्नाद्रा TTT कोणगे |
पापवेधाक्रांन्तकाले सामान्यफलमादिशेत् ॥२५१० ॥
तत्कालगोचरग्रहस्थितिजन्मकाललग्नस्थिति समावलोक्य च सूक््ममदृष्टया |
अन्तर्दशाधिपदशेशबलं च बुदघवा
निर्णीय तादृशफलं विफलं च ब्रूयात् ॥२५११॥
2510 - 2511. Note the 8th lord from the ascendant or the Moon sign and note in which Navamsa
the said 8th lord is placed. When Saturn transits the
sign identical with that Navamsa or a trine, with
Vedha (obstruction in transit) by a malefic, moderate results (instead of completely good results) be
declared. Planetary positions prevailing at the time
of the said transit and those of the birth should be
minutely examined. Strengths of the dasa lord and
sub period lord should also be studied. Otherwise
the effects willbe futile.
ये प्रहाजन्मकाले तु यस्मिन् राशौ स्थितिं गताः।
तस्मिन् राशौ दशारम्भे गतास्ते शुभदायिनः॥२५१२ ॥
2512. Ifa planet, at the time of commencement
of its dasa, attains its natal position (signwise) in
transit, then its dasa will prove auspicious.
Notes: This is a useful clue for analysing the
possible good of a particular dasa. Say Mercury
dasa commences at a certain time. If transit
Mercury reaches the sign occupied by him at birth,
his dasa will deliver auspicious results.
लग्नाद्रा चन्द्रलग्नाद्रा गोचरे लाभगे तमः।
तस्मात् सूर्यबलाभावन्मासि प्राणभयं भवेत् ॥२५१६ ॥
2513. When Rahu is in transit in the 11th
counted from the Moon or the ascendant, the transit
Sun becoming weak will bring about the death of
the native.
जन्मद्रादशरन्धगेसति महाक्रूरेऽति पापे शनौ
प्रप्ते कष्टदशाविरामसमये तत्कालचेक्रेऽथ वा |
कालान्तकेऽधिषेचनं च ह्यथवा मूत्युञ्जयप्रार्थनं
यद्रा स्वर्णसुदर्शनाय विधिवत् पूजाप्रदानं चरेत् ॥२५१४ ॥
य इदं परिहारं तु कुरुते श्रद्धयान्वितः।
तस्येदं विजयः श्रेयः कीर्विरन्यादृशी भवेत् ॥२५१५ ॥
2514 - 2515. General: Note a great malefic
moving in the ascendant, 12th or the 8th. Saturn in
transit should also be exceedingly adverse, and the
Dasa should be one capable of causing difficulties.
Then prayer to Lord Mrityunjaya should be offered
or worship and donation of a golden image of
Sudarsana (the disc of Lord Vishnu) should be
undertaken. If this remedy is done with devotion,
one will acquire success, benefits and fame.
जन्मकालग्रहस्थित्या दशेशस्यबलेन च।
प्रहारेण वक्तव्यं शुभाशुभफलं नृणाम् ॥२५१६ ॥
2516. General: Auspicious and inauspicious
effects should be applied based on the positions of
planets at birth and the strength of the lord of the
Dasa concerned.
लाभाधिपांशगे जीवे भाग्येशांशकगेऽथ वा।
गोचरे सौख्यमाप्नोति द्यद्योगधनवान् भवेत् ॥२५१७ ॥
धनेशांशे aaa लाभेशांशत्रिकोणेगे।
स्फुटयोगं गते जीवे धनलाभं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥२५१८ ॥
धनेशाशे तत्िकोणे स्फुटयोगं गते शनौ ।
लाभेशांशे तलिकोणे ज्ञातिवर्गे महाविपत् ॥२५१६ ॥
स्वदारदेहजडयादि प्रत्यक्तारदशान्त्यगे |
प्रबलज्ञातिसन्तापं दारवंशे ह्यरिष्टदम् ॥२५२० ॥
2517 - 2520. General: (a) When Jupiter transits the sign identical with the Navamsa occupied
by the 11th lord or the 9th lord, happiness, employment and wealth will occur.
(b) Wealth will come to pass if the said transit
is in a sign that 15 identical with the. Navamsa
occupied by the 2nd lord or the 11th lord.
(c) Should Saturn replace Jupiter as at “b”
above, the person’s relatives will be greatly endangered.
(d) Aries Ascendant - Kutila Nadiamsa: The
end of the Sth dasa will produce sickness to the
native’s wife. His relatives will be in great distress
and in-laws will be subjected to evils.
देहधर्मव्ययेशानां स्फुटयोगं गते गुरौ ।
चन्द्रे वाप्यथवा सौम्ये पुण्यतीर्थाटन भवेत् Use Il
देवतादर्शनं चैव देवब्राह्मणपूजनम् |

38 Deva Keralam
तत्तत्काले गोचरेषु फलान्युह्यानिसूरिभिः॥२५२२ ॥
2521 - 2522. Mercury, the Moon or Jupiter
transiting the degree represented by the sum total
of the longitudes of ascendant lord, 9th lord and
12th lord (i.e. of Mars and Jupiter) will cause visits
to shrines for dips in sacred rivers. The native will
offer prayers to gods and will worship Brahmins as
well. The learned should guess these effects based
on the transits occurring at that.time.
मीनशुक्रदशाकाले मकरे रविभुकित्तषु ।
सेतुस्नानफलप्राप्ति जातकस्य विनिर्दिशेत् ॥२५२३ ॥
2523. During the Dasa of Venus who at birth
is placed in Pisces and in the sub period of the Sun,
one will take dips in the Setu.
चापान्ते मिथुनान्ते वा तन्मध्ये वा शनौ स्थिते ।
कुटिलांश प्रजातस्य राजोपद्रवं मादिशेत् ॥२५२४॥
2524. One born in Kutila Nadiamsa will face
royal wrath when Saturn moves in the end of
Sagittarius or Gemini or when Saturn is between
these signs. ।
्रत्यग्दाये मध्यखण्डे पञ्चमे गोचरे शनौ |
. षष्ठांशे व्याकुलं चेति सप्तमे प्राणसंशयम् ॥२५२५ ॥
पर्वोक्तशान्तिकार्येण ह्यरिष्टशतनाशनम् |
आयुरारोग्यसौभाग्यं राजप्रीतिशुभावहम् ॥२५२६ ॥
2525 - 2526. In the course of the 5th dasa,
Saturn moving in the 5th or 6th from the ascendant
will cause much distress. In the 7th, the planet will
cast doubts on the very survival of the native. If
remedies stated earlier (vide slokas 2485 - 2581
supra) are performed, the evils of Saturn will be
destroyed and the person will enjoy life-span,
health and prosperity, apart from auspicious effects
through royal patronage.
वत्से वाष्टपञ्चाशे निधनेशदशान्त्यगे ।
क्रूरमासे कालम्ल्यरगुरुधौमार्कवासर ॥२५२७ ॥
नाडिपञ्चग्रहफलं कुटिलाशोद् भवस्य च।
रन्धाधिपदशामृत्युं यावज्जीवं सुभाग्यवान्।
WARTS TAY फलं विस्तारमुच्यते ॥२५२८ ॥
2527 - 2528. The end of 8th lord’s Dasa, in the
58th year will bring about death on a day ruled by
Jupiter, Mars or the Sun. These are effects of
“Pancha Graha Nadi” for a native of Kutila
Nadiamsa. His death will occur in the 8th lord’s `
dasa. He will enjoy prosperity throughout his life.
Effects should be understood in detail with the help
of sub periods.
पश्चग्रहनाडी फलम् | ।
सुखाधिपे सुखस्थाने दशायां सुखंजीवनः।
नूतलगोहस्य निर्माणं धनधान्यादिक भवेत् ॥२५२९ ॥
2529. Aries Ascendant - Kutila Nadiamsa: If
the 4th lord (the Moon) is in the 4th house, her Dasa
will give a happy life. The native will construct a
new house and will enjoy wealth and grains (food
comforts).
पापांशगे सुखाधीशे पापग्रहनिरीश्षिते ।
HATA तदशायां स्वराजोपद्रवो भवेत् ।२५२३० ॥
2530. Should the 4th lord be in a malefic’s
Navamsa and be in aspect to a malefic, one will
incur royal wrath in the Dasa of the 4th lord.
सुखेशांशे तत्तिकोणे स्फुटयोगं गते शनौ ।
सुखेशद्ष्टिराशौ वा नृपतिक्षोभमादिशेत् ॥२५३१ ॥
कर्मेशांशे तत्रिकोणे स्फुटयोगं गते शनौ ।
कर्मेशदृष्टिराशौ वा सोदरभ्रातृनाशनम् ॥२५३२ ॥
RETA च तत्पूर्वे स्वपितृव्यसुतामयम्।
ज्ञातिशोकफलप्राप्तिमशुभं तत्र निर्दिशेत् ॥२५३३ ॥
्ञातिव्गे gate बन्धुवर्गे सुतक्षयम्।
सहोदरभ्रातृपीडां मातृशोकां विनिर्दिशेत् ॥२५२४ ॥
2531 - 2534. (a) One will incur difficulties from
the king when Saturn comes into the sign represented by the Navamsa occupied by the lord or the
Sign that is aspected by 4th lord (at birth).
(b) Saturn’s similar transit involving the 10th
lord will destroy one’s co-born. Prior to this, his
paternal uncle’s son will be destroyed in a month
denoted by the Sun’s adverse transit. There will be
loss of progeny in the relatives’ circle, and troubles
to co-born and mother.
षष्ठाष्माधीशभुक्तौ सुखाधिपतिदायगे |
राजामात्यजनस्नेहमुद्योगादि धनागमम् ॥२५३५ ॥
ततः पश्चादेहजाइयं भ्रातृपुत्रस्यनिर्दिशेत् |
तद्रोचरे शुभे जीवे शुभसन्तापमाप्नुयात् |
जीवे शनियुते काले पुत्रपीडां मनोव्यथाम् ॥२५३६ ॥
अन्तर्दशाधिपे दुष्टे गोचरे क्रूरमासगे |

Chandra Kala Nadi
स्वजनात्मप्रपीडादि भवेद्रन्धुनृपव्यथा ॥२५३७ Il
2535 - 2537. (a) During the Dasa of the 4th lord
(the Moon) and the sub periods of the lords of the
6th and 8th (i.e. Mercury and Mars), the native will
befriend the king and minister and will gain work
and wealth. Following these, his brother’s progeny
will incur physical illness.
(b) When Jupiter comes to the 9th, the native
will obtain excellent progeny.
(c) The time of Saturn - Jupiter conjunction in
transit will cause evils to his progeny and distress
to him
(d) The lord of the sub period being in adverse
transits will cause evils to the native’s kinsfolk and
royal wrath to him
Notes: (d) This part of the text is corruptly
constructed and the relevant translation is made
taking available hints in the text.
स्वसेवितनृपद्रारे दायदिकलहः कचित् |
HATHA स्वराजामात्यव्याकुलम् ॥२५३८ ॥
2538. Irrelevant: There will be strife among
the king’s relatives to some extent. Due to internal
confusion, the king and minister will be distressed.
कर्माधिपान्ते काले षष्ठेशस्यान्तरे व्यथा |
इदमेव फलं सत्यं योजयेत् कालवित्तमः॥२५३९ ॥
2539. The sub periods of 10th, 6th and 8th lords
(in the Dasa of the 4th lord) will cause distress.
These results will bear truth according to the
learned in astrology.
पत्रिकोद्वाहसन्तोषं षट्चत्वारिंशवत्सरे |
जामातृ सोख्यमाप्नोति स्वगेहे श्रियमश्नुते ॥२५४० ॥
2540. During the native’s 46th year, his daughter will beget married. His son-in-law will be
happy and wealth will accrue to the subject.
लाभशांशे aH, दृष्टराश्यंशगे |
जामातृभवनं चैव जन्मर्ं च विनिर्दिशेत् ॥२५४१ ॥
2541. The Moon sign of the son-in-law will
correspond to the sign represented by the Navamsa
occupied by the 11th lord. Alternatively it could be
atrine thereof, or the sign aspected by the 11th lord.
Notes: The 11th is the Sth from the 7th and
hence denotes daughter-in-law or son-in-law as the
case may be.
लाभे राहुस्थिते काले षष्ठे गोचरगे शनौ ।
राजद्वारे कलापः स्याममित्रात्मस्वजनावधि ॥२५४२ ॥
2542. Rahu in the 11th and Saturn in the 6th in
transit will cause quarrels apart from distress to
friends and relatives.
पश्चात् स्वस्थं महत् सौख्यं ज्ञातिवर्गे शुभाधिकम्।
सर्वाध्यक्षाधिकारादियोगं प्राप्नोति भूरिशः ॥२४४२ ॥
2543. Afterwards, health (or well-being) will
_ prevail and the subject will be greatly happy. He
will beget an authoritative post and will enjoy great
prosperity.
मण्डलाधिपतेर्मत्युलेकि दुर्भिक्षजं मयम् ।
शनिभुक्तौ फलं बूयात् सुखाधिपतिदायगे ॥२५४४ ॥
GUAR स्वसामन्तसन्तानप्राप्तिमादिशेत्।
मन्दान्ते ज्ञातिवर्गे पुत्रलाभं महत् सुखम् ॥२५४५ Il
अपमृत्युभयप्राप्तिः शान्त्या शन्ति प्रयास्यति ।
सुखाधिपदशाकाले पापवेधग्रहान्तरे ॥२५४६ ॥
मेषलग्ने प्रजातस्य मातृनाशं विनिर्दिशेत् |
चन्द्रे WSR काले शुभाशुभफलं समम् ॥२५४७ ॥
जामातृवंशे सन्तापं ज्वरोपद्रवमादिशेत्।
चन्द्रे शुक्रान्ते काले कुन्तलांशसमुद् भव ॥२५४८ ॥
अतीव सौख्यमाप्नोति क्रूरमासं विना सुखम्।
शुक्रान्तर HUTS राजोपद्रवमादिशेत् |
विप्लवेन मनस्तापं पश्चात् स्वस्थं शुभाशुभम्।
पञ्चाशद्रत्सरे क्लेशं कालचक्रदशाभयम् |
` कालचक्रप्रदानेन देहारोग्यं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥२५५० ॥
2544 - 2550. (a) Irrelevant: In the sub period
of Saturn during the Dasa of the 4th lord, the head
of the region will die and famine will spread. In the `
sub period of Mercury, the subordinate king will
obtain progeny.
(b) The sub period of Saturn (in the 4th lord’s
Dasa), there will be gain of a son in the relatives’
circle.
(c) The native will in the said sub period be
endangered with fear of untimely death for which
remedies be resorted to.
(d) In a malefic’s sub period, during the 4th
lord’s Dasa, the native’s mother will die.
(e) The Dasa of the Moon (4th lord) will give .
equal measure of good and bad effects in the sub

40 Deva Keralam
periods ruled by inimical planets. There will be
grief in the family of the native’s son-in-law due to
trouble from fever (in the said sub periods).
(f) In the sub period of Venus during the 4th
lord’s dasa, extreme happiness will prevail except
in the months denoted by adverse solar movements. In such excepted months, troubles from
king will come to pass apart from distress. Later on,
well-being and auspicious and inauspicious effects
will follow. In the ensuring year, trovbles will
occur to the native. By donating an image of the
zodiac, health will recur.
Notes: (e) In the first line of sloka 2550, the
term “Kalachakra Dasamayam” has no proper
meaning and is out of context.
चद्रूर्यान्तरे काले पुत्रिकासौख्यमशनुते ॥२५५१ ॥
पत्रोतसवफलप्रापितिर्बन्धुवर्गे मनोव्यथा |
TATA कुन्तलांशे सुखाधिपदशान्त्यगे ॥२५५२ ॥
स्वजनात्पजनक्लेश राजवर्गेऽप्यरिषटंदम्।
कुम्भेशनिस्थिते काले दशासन्ध्योर्मनोव्यथाम् ॥२५५३ ॥
विप्लवेन मनस्तापं स्वपितृव्यस्य नाशनम् |
लग्नाधिपदशाकाले कुन्तलांशोद भवस्य च ॥२५५४॥
धनधान्यसुत प्राप्तिराजप्रीतिं विनिर्दिशेत् |
पितृव्यसुतयोगेन स्वप्राबल्यं धनागमम् ॥२५५५ ॥
प्रनलोद्योगसौख्याप्ितपत्रः प्रबलो भवेत् |
कुजान्तरे क्रूरमासे व्रणोपद्रवमादिशेत् ॥२५५६ ॥
कुम्भे शनिस्थिते काले पुत्रिकाज्वरमादिशेत् |
सूतिकावातरोगेण देहजाड्यं मनोव्यथाम् ॥२५५७ ॥
पश्चादायेग्यमाप्नोति देहकार््य विनिर्दिशेत् |
लाभाधिपदशाकाले पापभुक्तो तथा भवेत् ॥२५५८ ॥
RA देहजाड्यं शान्त्या शानत प्रयास्यति ।
रन्धाधिपदशाकाले TET पापदायगे ॥२५५९ ॥
अपमृत्युभयप्राप्ति स्वजनारिष्टमादिशेत् |
लग्नाधिपदशाकाले भाग्याधिपतिभुक्ततिषु ॥२५६० ॥
राजामात्यप्रसादेन धनलाभं विनिर्दिशेत् |
स्वगेहे शुभसन्तानं बन्धुवर्गे विनिर्दिशेत् ॥२५६१ ॥
2551 - 2561. (a) During the “sub periods” of the
Moon and Sun (read the sub period of the Sun, in
the Dasa of the Moon), the native’s daughter will
be bappy and will obtain a male issue. His son-inlaw will also remain pleased.
(b) The junction period of the Dasas of the 4th
lord (Moon) and Mars will cause auspicious events
in the family and birth of ason will occur. But the
native’s kinsmen will be distressed (for other reasons).
(c) In another text, for birth in Kuntala
Nadiamsa, Aries ascendant, the end of the 4th
lord’s Dasais said to inflict sadness on relatives and
evils in (from) king’s circles.
(d) Saturn moving in Aquarius in the junction
periods of Moon and Mars will cause mental
worries. The native’s paternal uncle will die.
(e) The Dasa of ascendant lord Mars will cause
wealth, grains (food comforts) and progeny. The
person will prosper on account of his association
with the son of his paternal uncle. He will obtain
prosperous employment and a good son.
(f) The sub period of Mars (in the dasa of Mars)
will cause fever during the periods of adverse
movements of the Sun.
(g) Saturn’s stay in Aquarius will cause (troublesome) fever to one’s daughter. She will incur
illness due to delivery of a child and also mental
distress. Later on her health will be normal but she
will be emaciated. Malefics’ sub periods i ‘1th
lord’s (i.e. Saturn’s) Dasa will also cause 1. ise
events. Illness will occur with adverse movements
of the Sun. Suitable remedies be performed.
(0) If a malefic is placed in the 8th, its sub
period in the Dasa of the 8th lord will produce fear
of danger from untimely death.
(i) Financial gains will occur through ministerial favours in the sub period of the 9th lord during
the Dasa of the lord of the ascendant. Further there
will be an auspicious eventin the form of child birth
in the relatives’ circle.
मीने त्विष्टफलप्राप्तिरधर्मेशेऽतिधनागमम् |
रन्धाधिपदशाकाले मन्द भुक्त्यन्त्यकालगे ॥२५६२ ॥
मेषलग्ने प्रजातस्य प्रबलज्ञातिनाशनम ।
भूसुतस्य दशाकाले दुखी स्याद्रविजान्तरे ॥२५६३ ॥
जीवान्तरेऽपमृत्युश्च जीविते देर्ध्यमायुषः।
कुन्तलांशे प्रजातस्य प्रत्यक्षं देवकेरलम् ॥२५६४ ॥
2562 - 2564. (a) For an Aries native, when the
9th lord (Jupiter) moves in Pisces, desires will be
fulfilled and he will bave advent of wealth.

Chandra Kala Nadi 41
(b) In the sub period of Saturn during the Dasa
of the 8th lord (Mars), important relatives will die.
(c) The sub period of the Sun in the Dasa of
Mars will cause grief.
(d) The sub period of Jupiter in the said Dasa
will usher fear of untimely death.
Results stated for Kuntala Nadiamsa in Deva
Keralam will bear truth.
चदरक्रियावस्थाफलानि
इतः पर प्रवक्षामि तत्कालेन्दुपरिस्फुरम्।
चराचरत्रिलोकस्य यज्ज्ञानेन फलं लभेत् ॥२५६५ ॥
लाभालाभौ सुखं दुःखं जीवितं मरणं तथा ।
विजयापजयं चैव गमनागमनं तथा ॥२५६६ ॥
लोकोचितां तथा वृष्ट राजावस्थादिकोतुकम् |
एतत् सर्वं तथा चान्यं जायतेन्दुपरिस्फुटात् ॥२५६७ ॥
ततश्चनदरस्यावस्थादिनिर्णयः कथ्यतेऽधुना |
तथा विलिप्तिकाः सृष्टा हत्वा शिष्टा तैस्तथा ॥२५६८ ॥
2565 - 2569; Chandra Kriya, Chandravasthas & Effects: After this, I now state of the
(Avasthas, Kriyas etc. based on the) Moon's longitude at a given time by the knowledge of which
effects for the movable and immovable beings of
the 3 worlds can be obtained. Gain, absence of
gains (i. e. loss), enjoying happiness, grief, life,
death, success, defeat, coming, going, rains sufficient for the country and pleasures like royal state
et cetera - these and many other things ought to be
known of the Moon. Inow tell ways of deciding the
Avasthas of the Moon. In that manner, the viliptikas
(1/3600th part of a degree which means of arc of a
second,) be found out ... deducted .... remainder ...
Notes: This portion attempts to instruct us on
the 12 Avasthas and 60 kinds of Kriyas of the
Moon. These and the 36 Chandra Velas are welldiscussed coherently in texts like Phala Deepika
and by Pandit late M. R. K. Bhat in his work,
Essentials of Horary Astrology. But in our present
text, in these slokas there are utter confusion,
copying errors and the like making the clues unintelligible.
The methods of finding out Chandra Kriyas
and Chandra Avasthas are put forth by me as under
so that my job is completed in a satisfactory
manner.
Chandra Kriya (Moon's actions): One Nakshatra is 13° 20' or 800' of arc. Divide 800 by 60
and find out in what part of such a portion is the
Moon placed. That will be Chandra Kriya.
Example: Say the Moon is 2° 40’ of Aswini, i.e.
160th minute of longitude in Aswini. 160 divided
by 60 yields the 3rd Chandra Kriya. The result
mentioned for the 3rd Kriya will apply to the
Moon's particular position.
Also see slokas 2570 - 2578 infra for effects of
Chandra Kriyas. Our text gives another methd of
Chandra Kriya which are five per sign, and 60 in all
for 12 signs, which are found from sloka 2579
onward.
Chandra Avasthas (Moon's states): There
are 12 specific Avasthas for the Moun which
should be found out by dividing 800 by 12. In
which of the 12th part is the Moon located in that
particular Nakshatra should thus be known which
will tell of Chandra Avastha.
(Similarly for Chandra Vela, the divisor is 36
as there are 36 Chandra Velas, or the Moon's
periods.)
These can be used in respect of birth horoscope,
query horoscopes, Muhurta etc.
स्थानादभ्रष्टस्तपरवी च PASAT लम्पटः।
द्ूतकृच्च गजारूढः सिहासनस्थितरतथा ॥२५७० ॥
Wheaten च दण्डनेता गुणी तथा |
निष्माणच्छिन्नमूर्था च क्षतपादकरस्तथा ॥२५७१ ॥
बन्धनस्थो विनष्टसुत नृपतिरवेदपाठकः।
सुप्तः सुचरितश्चैव स्मृतिमान् धर्मकार्यवान् ॥२५७२ ॥
wee निधिसंयुक्तः श्रुतवंशोऽर्थबो धकः।
शत्रुहन्ता च रोगी च ह्यरिनिर्जित एवं च ॥२५७३ ॥
स्वदेशाच्चलितो भृत्यो विनष्टार्थक इत्यपि |
आस्थानी च सुमन्री च परदेशपतिस्तथा ॥२५७४ ॥
. सभार्यो गजभीतश्च संयुगे भीतिमांस्तथा । `
भयाधिकश्च क्रीडी च ह्यनदाताग्निरक्षकः ॥२५७५ ॥
षुद्धाधासहितश्चानविचरन् मांसभोजकः।
असखक्षतश्च सोद्राहो धृतकञ्चुक द्यूतकृत् ॥२५७६ ॥

42 Deva Keralam
राजा ' च दुखितश्चैव शय्यास्थो रिपुसेवितः।
मित्रेण युक्तो ेगी च भार्यायुक्तश्च मृष्टाशी ॥२५७७ ॥
पयपायी पुण्यकर्ता स्वस्थश्चास्ते सखी तथा |
नक्षत्रे षष्टिकार्याणि चन्द्रस्य तु शुभानि च ॥२५७८ ॥
2570 - 2578. (Now stated are effects for sixty
such Chandra Kriyas). (1) Loss of position, (2)
performing penance, (3) attachment to others’
women, (4) covetousness, (5) gambling, (6) riding
on an elephant, (7) occupying a throne, (8) royal
Status, (9) destruction of foes, (10) lord of justice,
(11) virtuousness, (12) lack of life (state of being
dead), (13) bereft of upper portion (or being headless), (14) being with injured feet and arms, (15)
being in confinement, (16) loss, (17) kingly status,
(18) reader of Vedas, (19) in a state of deep sleep,
(20) having a good history, (21) having knowledge
of Smrithi (or orally transmitted scriptures), (22)
charitability, (23) birth in a good family, (24)
endowed with wealth, (25) birth in a famous family, (26) teacher of concepts, (27) destroyer of
enemies, (28) a sickly person, (29) won over by an
enemy, (30) one who goes away from his birth
place, (31) aservant, (31) one who loses his wealth,
(32) employed in the king's assembly, (33) a good
minister or adviser, (34) owner (or usurper) of
others' lands, (35) has a wife, (36) fear of elephants, (37) cowardice in fights, (38) very timid
in disposition, (39) sportive, (40) giver of food,
(41) maintains sacred domestic fire ("agnipaalaka"
and "Agnirakshaka", i. e. will perform fire rites
regularly), (42) troubled by hunger, (43) thinks
about food, (44) eats flesh, (45) injured by weapons, (46) blessed with a marriage, (47) holds a ball
in his hand, (48) a gambler, (49) a minister, (50) a
grieved person, (51) sleeping on a bed, (52) honoured by foes, (53) endowed with friends, (54)
sickly, (55) endowed with wife, (56) eats sweet
food, (57) drinks milk, (58) performs meritorious
deeds, (59) enjoys health and (60) enjoys happiness. The Nakshatra occupied by the Moon should
be divided into sixty parts and the good (and bad)
be known thus (through 60 Chandra Kriyas).
प्रकारान्तरमस्थानाच्च्युतस्तपस्वी च परनारीरतिं गतः।
स्तेयी गजाधिरूढश्च मेषे पञ्चगुणा विधोः ॥२५७९ ॥
सिंहासनस्थितो राजा राज्ञं मध्यतस्तथा |
शुत्रहन्तां च सेनानीर्वृषे पञ्चगुणा विधोः ॥२५८० ॥
प्राणच्युतो भग्नशिराः पाणिपादव्रणाङ्कितः।
बन्धी तु देहनाशी च युग्मे पञ्चगुणा विधोः॥२५८१ ॥
भूपत्वं ब्रेदपाठित्वं मद्यपान विनिन्दिताम् |
धर्मकर्ता च कर्मी च कर्कटे शशिनो गुणाः ॥२५८२ ॥
सद्रंशजो निधियुतः सुकीर्तियुतवंशजः।
व्याख्याता Weds सिंह पञ्चगुणा विधाः ॥२५८३ ॥
ज्वरार्तः स्थाननाशी च परे्जितस्तु भृत्यकः।
SITE सक्तः कन्यायां शशिनो गुणाः ॥२५८४ ॥
आस्थानी च सुमन्त्र च हयन्यदेशपतिस्तथा |
विवाही च गाजारूढस्तुलायां शशिनो गुणाः॥२५८५ ॥
मन्त्री स्वमन्िभिर्योद्धा त्रस्तः समरभीतिमान्।
निद्रायुक्तोऽग्निपालश्च कीटे तु शशिनो गुणाः॥२५८६ ॥
्षुधार्तस्त्वनभोक्ता च मांसभुक् चासखरताडितः।
निवासीचान्यदेशेषु चपे पञ्चगुणा विधोः ॥२५८७ ॥
स्वसियां कन्दुकक्रीडी स्वस््रीहस्तपरहान्वितः।
दूती विहारी राजा चा मृगे पञ्चगुणाविधोः॥२५८८ it
शिशिरः पुण्यदेहश्च मित्रवर्गेणसंयुतः।
चक्रपाणिर्गृहे राजा कुम्भे पञ्चगुणा विधोः ॥२५८९ ॥
मृष्टाशी क्षीरपायी च पुण्यकर्मकरस्था |
स्वस्थश्चापि सुखी चेव मीने पञ्चगुणा विधोः ॥२५९० ॥
चन्द्रस्य द्वादशावस्था राशौ राशौ प्रकल्पयेत् |
नाडीपदे च युक्ताभिरेकादशाभिरेव च ॥२५९१ ॥
2579 - 2591. Chandra Kriyas (or Chandra
Gunas) Based on Signs: There is another kind of
Chandra Kriya (which are 5 per sign).
(a) Aries: (1) Loss of position, (2) performing
penance, (3) interest in others' women, (4) courage
("Saurya" is the correct text as per another version)
and (5) riding on an elephant are the five Gunas of
the Moon in Aries.
(b) Taurus: (1) Occupation of a throne, (2)
king, (3) being amidst kings, (4) destroyer of
enemies and (5) an army-man are the five Gunas of
the Moon in Taurus.
(c) Gemini: (1) Loss of life, (2) has broken or
curved head, (3) has injured hands and legs, (4) one
in confinement and (5) destroyed body are the five
Gunas of the Moon in Gemini.
(d) Cancer: (1) Kingship, (2) Study of Vedas,

Chandra Kala Nadi 43
(3) bad name due to consuming liquor, (4) charitable acts, (5) dutiful are the five Gunas of the Moon
in Cancer.
(e) Leo: (1) Birth in a good family, (2) Endowed with wealth, (3) wide-spread fame, (4)
commentator and (5) destroyer of adversaries are
the five Gunas of the Moon in Leo.
(f) Virgo: (1) Troubled by fever, (2) destruction
of place, (3) won by others, (4) servant and fondness for joining girls are the five Gunas of the Moon
in Virgo.
(g) Libra: (1) Member of royal assembly, (2) a
good minister, (3) lord of another others’ lands, (4)
a married person and (5) one equal to a person
Sitting on an elephant are the five Gunas for the
Moon in Libra.
(h) Scorpio: (1) Minister, (2) warrior, (3) fears
battles, (4) state of sleep and (5) maintains sacred
doemstic fire are the five Gunas of the Moon in
Scorpio.
(i) Sagittarius: (1) Troubled by hunger (2) eater
of food, (3) eater of flesh, (4) pierced by weapons
and (5) lives in foreign lands are the five Gunas of
the Moon in Sagittarius.
(j) Capricom: (1) Plays ball with his wife, (2)
Holds the hands of his wife, (3) a gambler, (4)
wanders for pleasure and (5) a king are the five
Gunas of the Moon in Capricorn.
(k) Aquarius: (1) Cool in dispoition, (2) a
meritorious person, (3) endowed with friends, (4)
devoted to Discus-holder, i.e. Vishnu and (5) being
aking are the five Gunas of the Moon in Aquarius.
(1) Pisces: (1) Eats sweet food, (2) drinks milk,
(3) performs meritorious deeds, (4) healthy and (5)
happy are the five Gunas for the Moon in Pisces.
These states for the Moon in different signs
should be understood thus.
Notes: The Moon's positions for every 6 degrees give five various positions as above.
प्रवासनषाख्यम्ताजयाख्यहास्यारतिक्रडति सुप्तभुक्तिः।
ज्वराहयाकम्पितसुस्थिरे च |
द्विष्टकसख्याश्च विथोरवस्थाः ॥२५९२ ॥
2592. Chandra Avasthas: The 12 Avasthas of
the Moon should be variously understood. These
are: (1) Pravasa (going abroad), (2) Nashta (loss),
(3) Mrita (dead), (4) Jaya (success), (5) Haasya
(ridiculous or comical), (6) Rathi (enjoying camal
pleasures), (7) Kreeda (sportive) (8) Supta (state
of deep sleep or numbness), (9) Bhukti (cating),
(10) Jvara (fever), (11) Kampita (trembling) and
(12) Susthira (very firm) are the 12 Avasthas for the
Moon. *
Notes: How these Avasthas are to be calcula
is not clearly given. Since certain Avasthas are
restricted to Moon's exaltation in the following
verses, the confusion is confounded.
सुस्थिरे शुभसंदृष्टे शुभवर्गे स्थिरे विधौ ।
सर्वारम्भाः प्रसिध्यन्ति लग्ने च शुभवर्गके ॥२५९३ ॥
2593. If at the commencement of an undertaking the Moon is with benefics’ aspects and in
benefics' divisions while the ascendant should be in
beneficial divisions, the Avastha is Susthira. (Asa
result, the undertaking will be fruitful.)
भानुक्षेत्रगते मन्दे यदि भौमसमन्विते |
अवस्थाकम्पिते चन्द्रे निप्रही वित्तभीषणः॥२५९४॥
2594. If Saturn along with Mars is in the Sun's
sign it gives Kampita Avastha to the Moon, causing
restraint and mental terror to the person.
स्वकषत्रगते मन्दे यदि भौमसमन्विते |
शोभनं सर्वकार्येषु लाभालाभादि, कर्मसु ॥२५९५ ॥
2595. Should the Moon be in her own sign, it is
Jaya Avastha, whereby she will grant success and
auspiciousness in all undertakings, and gains and
losses (7) in work.
स्वतुङ्गे निशानाथे हास्यावस्यथा शुभप्रदा |
पुत्रार्थी लभते पुत्रं धनाथीं लभते धनम् २५९६ ॥
कार्यार्थी कार्यसिद्धि च सर्वप्रश्नशुभाशुभम्।
परमोच्चांशगे चन्द्रे रत्यावस्ता शुभप्रदा ॥२५९७ ॥
2596 - 2597. (a) The Moon will be in Hasya
Avastha in her sign exaltation sign and will be
auspicious, will give a son to the one that seeks a
son, wealth to him who seeks it and fruition of
efforts in one's undertakings.
(b) Should the Moon be in di +p exaltation it is
Rathi Avastha, proving auspicious.
्रूरराशिगते चन्द्रे तदधीशसमन्विते |
प्रवासं कुरुते कार्य विफलं सर्वकर्मणि ॥२५९८ ॥

44 Deva Keralam
2598. The Moon will be in Pravasa Avastha, in
amalefic's sign along with her dispositor and will
destroy one's undertakings.
्रूरराशिगते चन्द्रे यदि भौमसमन्विते |
ज्वरावस्था ज्वरं तापं शुभदृष्टः शुभप्रदा ॥२५९९ Il
्रूरदृष्टिस्तु मरणं रहस्यं साम्प्रदायिकम |
बुधकषत्रगते चन्द्रे यदि भौमसमन्विते |
सुप्तावस्थाविनिर्दिषठा हानिशोकभयप्रदा ॥२६०० ॥
2599 - 2600. (a) The Moon will be in Jvara
Avastha in a malefic's sign along with Mars and
will cause fever and heat. If she is, in the process,
in aspect to abenefic, she will prove auspicious, i.e.
will not cause fever etc. If the Moon as above is
aspected by another malefic, death of the person
will occur secretively. ।
(b) The Moon will be in Supta Avastha, in a
. Sign of Mercury when in the company of Mars and
will cause harm and grief.
गरुराशिगते चन्द्रे गुरुयुक्तेऽथ athe |
भुक्तावस्थादिनिर्दिष्टं सर्वकार्यशुभप्रदम् ॥२६०१ ॥
सुभोजनसुसौख्यापिं स्रीभाग्यं च सुखानि च ।
स्नानदानादिसिद्धिः स्याञ्जायते च शुभप्रदा ॥२६०२ ॥
2601 - 2602. The Moon will beget Bhukta
Avastha in a sign of Jupiter, with Jupiter's aspect or
company which will give auspicious effects in all
undertakings, good food, happiness, fortunes in
respect of wife, sacred dips and giving away charities.
भृगुक्षेत्रे चन्द्रे तदीशेन समन्विते |
शुभदृष्टियुते TA क्रीडावस्था सुखप्रदा ॥२६०३ ॥
2603. The Moon in a sign of Venus along with
Venus and with beneficial aspects will be in Kreeda
Avatsha which will bestow happiness. `
चरराशिगते चन्द्रे शुभग्रहसमन्विते |
शुभदृष्टियुते प्रश्ने ज्यो जयति निश्चयः ॥२६०४॥
2604. If at the time of a query, the Moon is in
a movable sign with aspect and company of benefics, it is her Jaya Avastha whereby she will give
success to the querist.
स्थिरराशिगते चन्द्रे लग्नेशेन समन्विते |
मिथुनग्रहसंदृष्टे स्थायी जयति नित्यशः॥२६०५ ॥
2605. The Moon will be in Susthira Avastha in
a fixed sign provided -she joins the lord of the
ascendant and gets the aspect of a planet placed in
the sign Gemini. As a result, sure success is
denoted.
Notes: This will apply to Aquarius rising with
the Moon and Saturn therein as Jupiter is in Gemini.
Alternatively to Leo rising with the luminaries
therein, and Saturn placed in Gemini.
द्विखभावगते चन्द्रे भृगुभौमाभिवीक्षिते
स्थायी जयमवाप्नोति विपरीते विपर्ययः॥२६०६ ॥
मेषाच्िवृषराशिस्थे चन्द्रे स्थायी जयं लभेत्।
अष्टोत्तरशतावस्था TH गच्छत्यहर्मिशम् ॥२६०७ il
साधयेदिनचर्याया फलं सम्यावदाम्यहम् ॥२६०८ ॥
2606 - 2608. (a) The Moon in a dual sign in
aspect to Venus and Mars begets Susthira Avastha
whereby success is granted. In a situation contrary
to this there will be no success.
(b) The Moon in Aries, Scorpio and Taurus will
beget Jaya Avastha which will give success (to the
querist).
(c) In a day consisting of day and night, the
Moon undergoes 108 Avasthas. The effects should
be understood with the help of Dina Charyas which
I am now explaining below.
Notes: The text concerning Dina charya is
apparently missing as the next slokas deal with
queries relating to food.
भोजनप्रश्नः प्रवासवस्थागे SS प्रोढानं लभते बुधः।
लवणं चाधिकं वापि vectra विवर्जितम् ॥२६०९ Il
अजीर्ण भोजनं दुःखं मानसक्षीणभोजनम् |
नष्टास्थायुते चन्द्रे शाकपाकविवर्जितम् ॥२६१० ॥
शुष्काडगाशनप्राप्तिस्तु प्रश्नकालवशात् फलम् ॥
मृतावस्थागते चन्द्रे प्रदुष्टं लभते नरः।
अजीर्णस्थ विकासेऽत्र व्याधिपीडां विनिर्दिशेत् ॥२६११।
2609 - 2611. Query about Food: If the Moon
is in Pravasa Avastha, one gets luxurious food with
more salt but bereft of six tastes (Shadrasas). If the
Moon is in Nasthavastha, one will not be able to
digest the food served; he will be grieved and will
mentally decline; the food concerned will be dry
and bereft of vegetables etc. all of which should be
known through query horoscope. If the Moon is in
Mrita Avastha, one will get very inferior food, will

Chandra Kala Nadi 45
incur indigestion and diseases.
॥ इति चन्द्रावस्था ॥
॥अथ भावफलानि ॥
तृतीयभावनाथानां लग्नाच्चन््राच्च कारकात् |
तत्र भावपतीनां वा ह्ंशेशानामथापि वा ॥२६१२ ॥
स्फुटयोग गते सौम्ये तत्र योगं विनिर्दिशेत् ।
पापारिनीचगे मूढे त्वशुभं तत्र निर्दिशेत् ॥२६१२३ ॥
2612 - 2613. Add the longitudes of the lords of
the 3rd counted from the three places, viz. ascendant, the Moon and Karaka (2) or the longitudes of
Navamsa dispositors of the said three places. When
a benefic transits in the resultant place, Yoga (or
prosperity) will occur.
Notes: The present two slokas are apparently
defective in composition.
सलाभस्थस्थिति ज्ञात्वा निर्दिशेत् कालवित्तमः।
आधानजन्मकर्मार्थसंप्रदायं गुरोर्मुखात् ॥२६१४ ॥
2614. One should know of the beneficial places
for transits (viz. Janma, Sampat, Vipat Nakshatras
etc.) with the directions of a teacher and apply the
effects of planetary transits in Janma Nakshatra
group, Karma Nakshatra group and Adhana Nakshatra group.
Notes: There is a popular method of seeing
planetary transits, which in particular is in vogue in
Andbra and Kerala regions. Janma, Sampath,
Vipath, Kshema, Pratyak, Sadhaka, Vadha (or
Naidhana), Maitra and Parama Mitra are the nine
Nakshatras counted from the birth star. These
repeat again twice thus completing 27 stars. However, the 10th Nakshatra from the one occupied by
the Moon is specially known as Karma Nakshatra
while the 19th one as Adhana Nakshatra. Commencing from Janma Nakshatra, transits are alternatively badand good. This is just a briefidea and
the entire scheme cannot be reproduced here.
While on the subject, I must rectify a mistake
of mine committed in the translation of sloka 486,
Book 2, vide p. 131. Karmarksha means the 10th
, Star (and not the 10th house), Adhana means the
19th from birth star and not Adhana ascendant, and
Vainasa is 8th star and not 8th house. The reader
will kindly give forgive me for my lapse.
सुतस्य चन्रगर्वोश्च स्फुटयोम गते शनौ ।
पत्रप्राप्तस्तु तत्काले सुतेशे शुभवीक्षिते ॥२६१५ ॥
तत्तत्सुतेशयोगेन पुत्रप्ापि विनिर्दिशेत्
सुखदेहाय नाथानां स्फुटयोगं गते शनो ॥२६१६ ॥
अतिसोख्यं धनप्रापि निर्दिशेत् कालवित्तमः।
धन देहायनाथानां स्फुटयोगं गते गुरौ ॥२६९१७॥
लाभं च धनधान्यानां निर्दिशेच्छुभवीक्षिते |
धनबुद्धिक्षितीशानां स्फुटयोगं गतेशनो ॥२६१८ ॥
धनथान्यपशूनां च हानिं. तत्र विनिर्दिशेत्।
देहनुद्धिप्रियेशानां स्फुटयोगं गते शनौ ॥२६१९ ॥
कर्मसिद्धिस्तु तत्काले तत्कर्मेशनिरीक्षिते ।
धनकर्मायनाथानां स्फुरटयोगं गते गुरौ ॥२६२० ॥
स्रीलाभं ह्यथवा भोगं निर्दिशेदुरुवीश्षिते ।
वित्तायकर्मनाथानां स्फुटयोगं गते गुरौ ॥२६२१ ॥
प्रभूतधनलाभं च निर्दिशेत् सोमवीक्षिते ।
ेत्रादिधनलाभानां स्फुटयोगं गते शनौ ॥२६२२ ॥
स्रीलाभं भूमिलाभं च ह्यथवा नरवाहनम् |
धनभाग्यव्ययेशानां स्फुटयोगं गते शनौ ॥२६२३ ॥
धनहानि महदुखं निर्दिशेच्छुभवीक्षिते |
देहपुत्रव्ययेशानां पुत्रहानिविनिर्दिेत् ॥२६२४ ॥
2615 - 2624. Special Rules for Transit: (a)
Add the longitudes of the Sth lords counted from
the Moon and Jupiter. When Saturn transits the
resultant place, birth of a child is to be declared
provided the 5th lord at that time is in aspect to a
benefic.
(b) Add the longitudes of the 4th lord, 11th lord
and ascendant lord. Saturn moving in the resultant
` place will cause much happiness and acquisition of
wealth.
(c) Add the longitudes of the 2nd lord, 11th lord
and ascendant lord. Jupiter moving in the resultant
place with another benefic’s aspect will produce
gain of wealth and grains.
(d) Add the longitudes of Mars, 2nd lord and
5th lord. The time of Saturn’s transit in the
resultant place will harm wealth, grains and quadrupeds. ।
(€) Add the longitudes of lords of 1st, Sth and
7th. When Saturn’s transit occurs in the resultant
_ Space, the native will have professional fulfilment.
Transit Saturn should then be in aspect to 10th lord.
(f) Saturn’s movement, in aspect to Jupiter, in

46 Deva Keralam
the space resulting the addition of the longitudes of
the lords of the 2nd, 10th and 11th will give gain of
a woman (i.e. marriage). Or else one will enjoy
pleasures.
(g) Add the longitudes of the lords of the 2nd,
11th and 10th. When Jupiter in transit occupies this
space, with the aspect of the Moon, the native will
have abundant financial gains.
(h) Add the longitudes of (the lords of) 4th, 1st,
2nd and 11th. Saturn’s transit in the resultant space
will cause marriage, gain of lands or men-borne
conveyances.
(i) Add the longitudes of the lords of the 2nd,
9th and 12th. Loss of wealth, and great grief will
result the transit of Saturn in the resultant space.
There should, however, be aspect of a benefic on
the said Satur.
(j) Saturn moving in the space caused by adding the longitudes of the lords of ascendant, 5th and
12th will cause evils in respect of progeny.
देहश्रातृव्ययेशानां भ्रातृहानिं विनिर्दिशेत् |
परभातृव्ययेशानां भ्रातृहानिं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥२६२५ ॥
व्ययकामधनेशानां स्फुटयोगं गते शनौ ।
धनहानिं महटु खं निर्दिशेच्छुभवीक्षिते ॥२६२६ ॥
देहपुतरव्ययेशानां पुद्रहानिं विनिर्दिशेत्
मन्दे राहुसमायोगे भार्याहानिं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥२६२७ ॥
2625 - 2627. Special Rules for Transit (continued): (a) Add the longitudes of lords of ascendant, 3rd and 12th. The transit of Saturn in the
resultant space will cause harm to co-born.
(b) The same effect as at “a” will come to pass
through the transit of Saturn in the space resulting
the addition of lords of the 6th, 3rd and 12th.
(c) Add the longitudes of the rulers of 12th, 7th
and 2nd. Saturn’s transit in the resultant space will
bring about loss of wealth and great grief provided
he is aspected by a benefic.
(d) Add the longitudes of the lords of ascendant, 5th and 12th. Declare evils to one’s progeny
out of Saturn’s movement in the resulting space. If
transit Rahu joins Saturn in the said context (i.e.
during the said transit), evil to wife be feared.
इति मन्दकुटुम्बानां चनद्रलग्नाच्च भागवि ।
स्फुटयोगं गते शुक्रे Mery निर्दिशेद्नुधः॥२६२८ ॥
2628. The constitution of this verse suffers
from want of clarity because of the words “Manda
Kutumbaanaam”. Possibly the hint is: Add the
longitudes of the 2nd lord from the Moon and
Venus, When Venus transits the resultant space (in
appropriate dasa periods), one will gain a woman
(will be married). —
देहकर्मायनाथानां स्फुटयोगं गते गुरौ ।
चन्द्रे वाप्यथवा सौम्ये तीर्थसिद्धि विनिर्दिशेत् ॥२६२९ ॥
विक्रमायव्ययेशानां स्फुटयोगं गते फणौ |
भ्रातृहानिं महारोगं मिर्देशेद्रिपुवीश्षिते |
कुजमन्दफणीनां च स्फुटयोगं गते फणौ ॥२६३० ॥
महारोगं मनस्तापं निर्दिशेद्रन्धराशिगे |
व्ययपुत्रायनाथानां स्फुटयोगं गते कुजे URI Il
Grea महदुख निर्दिशेद्रिपुवीकिते |
देहार्थलाभनाथानां लग्नाच्चन््रबृहस्पतो ॥२६३२ ॥
स्फुटयोगं गते मन्दे धनलाभं विनिर्दिशेत् ।
तच्तिकोणेऽथ वा चन्द्रे जीवे शुक्रे शुभेक्षिते ॥२६३३ ॥
त्रयाणांमृत्युनाथानां स्फुटयोगं गते ध्वजे |
कर्महानि महाक्लँश स्थानाच्चलनतोऽपि वा ॥२६३४॥
स्फुटयोगं गते मन्दे मरणं तत्र निर्दिशेत |
त्रयाणां कर्मनाथानां निर्दिशेद्राहुवीश्िते ॥२६३५ ॥
2629 - 2635. Special Rules for Transit (Continued): (a) Jupiter, the Moon or Mercury in transit
in the space denoted by addition of longitudes of
lords of Ist, 10th and 11th will cause pilgrimage.
(b) Add the longitudes of lords of the 3rd, 11th
and 12th. When Rahu moves in the resultant space
with the aspect of a planet that is inimical to him,
the person will incur loss of co-born and a great
disease.
(c) Add the longitudes of Mars, Saturn and
Rahu as seen at birth. When Rahu transits the 8th
from the resultant space, great disease and great
distress will come to pass.
(d) Evils to progeny and incurring great grief
will be experienced with the transit of Mars in the
space denoted by the addition of the longitudes of
the lords of 12th, Sth and 11th.
(e) Add the longitudes of the lords of 1st, 2nd
and 11th counted from the ascendant, the Moon or
Jupiter as the case may be. Saturn journeying in the
resultant space or a trine thereof will bring finan-

Chandra Kala Nadi 47
cial gains. The Moon, Jupiter and (or) Venus
should then be aspected by a benefic.
(f) Ketu transiting the place caused by adding
the longitudes of the two planets, viz. lords of 3rd
and 8th, will cause professional obstacles apart
from much difficulties and change of place.
(g) Should Saturn (instead of Ketu) move in the
space as mentioned at “f” above, death will strike
the person.
(h) The 2nd line of sloka 2635 is incomplete in
respect of effects. ^ Rahu aspecting the lords of 3rd.
त्रयाणां भाग्यनाथानां गुरोः चन्द्राच्च लग्नतः।
स्फुटयोगं गते राहौ भाग्यहानिं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥२६३६ ॥
2636. When Rahu transits the space denoted by
the sum caused by addition of the longitudes of the
lords of the 9th with reference to natal Jupiter, natal
Moon and natal ascendant, predict deline ine one's
fortunes.
षष्ठाष्टमव्ययेशानां स्फुटयोगं गते शनो ।
मरणं निशि जातानां दिनजानां तदस्तगे ॥२६३७ ॥
मन्दमान्धाहिसंयोगे स्फुटयोगं शनैश्वरे |
कुजे वा राहुपुच्छे वा मरणं तत्र निर्दिशेत् ॥२६३८ ॥
2637 - 2638. (a) Add the longitudes of the lords
of the 6th, 8th and 12th. When Saturn moves in the
resultant space, death will occur to a day-born
person. For anight-born, Saturn should be moving
in the 7th from the resultant space.
(b) Add the longitudes of Saturn, Gulika and
Rabu. The resultant space should be in transit by
Saturn or Mars or Ketu. The result will be death.
लग्नचद्रसुखेभ्यश्च षष्ठेशानां स्फुटे शनो |
मातुर्वियोगं तत्काले निर्दिशेत् कालवित्तमः॥२६३९ ॥
त्रयाणां भाग्यनाथानां लग्नाच्चन्द्राच्च भास्करात् |
स्फुटयोगं गते मन्दे पितृहानिं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥२६४० ॥
त्रयाणां पुत्रनाथानां पुत्राच्चद्राच्च लग्नतः
स्फुटयोगं गते जीवे पुत्रलाभं वििर्दिशेत् ॥२६४१ ॥
त्रयाणां कामनाथानां शुक्रच्चन््राच्च लग्नतः।
स्फुटयोगं गते शुक्रे भार्यालाभं विनिर्दिशेत ॥२६४२ ॥
2639 - 2642. (a) Saturn moving in the sign
denoted by the sum of longitudes of 6th lords
‘counted from the ascendant, the Moon and the 4th
lord will cause separation from mother.
(b) Evil to father will result the transit of Saturn
in the space indicated by the addition of the lords
of the 9th, counted from the ascendant, the Moon
and the Sun.
(c) Add the longitudes of the lords of the Sth
counted from the Sth house, the Moon and the
ascendant. Jupiter’s journey in the resulting space
will cause gain of birth of a son. ।
(0) One will beget a wife when Saturn moves
in the space indicated by the addition of longitudes
of the lords of 7th counted from Venus, the Moon
or the ascendant.
त्रयाणां सुखनाथानां भौमाच्चन्द्राच्च लग्नतः।
स्फुटयोगं गते भौमे भूमिलाभं विनिर्दिरोत् ॥२६४६ ॥
त्रयाणां रिपुनाथानां लग्नाच्चन्द्राच्च भास्करात् |
स्फुटयोगं गते सूर्ये शसख्रपीडां विनिर्दिशेत ॥२६४४ ॥
त्रयाणां धननाथानां गुरोश्चन्दराच्च भास्करात् |
पुभूतधनलाभं च निर्दिशेत् कालवित्तमः॥२६४५ ॥
त्रयाणां सुखानाथानां सौम्याच्चन््राच्च भास्करात् |
स्फुटयोगं गते जीवे विद्यालाभं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥२६४६ ॥
त्रयाणां राज्यनाथानां चन्द्राद् लग्नाद् बृहस्पतेः।
स्फुटयोगं गते जीवे राजपूज्यं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥२६४७ ॥
त्रयाणां व्ययनाथानां भौमान्मन्दाच्च लग्नतः।
स्फुटयोगं गते भौमे खड्गबाधां विनिर्दिशेत् ॥२६४८ ॥
त्रयाणां कर्मनाथानां लग्नाच्चनदराच्चभास्करात् |
स्फुटयोगं गते मन्दे व्याधिभ्रंशं विनिर्दिशेत् २६४९ ॥
त्रयाणां लाभनाथानां शुक्राज्जीवाच्च भास्करात् |
स्फुटयोगं गते चन्द्रे धनप्रापि विनिर्दिशेत् ॥२६५० ॥
भाग्यायकर्मनाथानां स्फुटयोगं गते बिधो | |
पापदृष्टिविहीने च मनोऽधीष्टार्थलाभकृत् ॥२६५१ ॥
॥इति देवकेरटे द्वितीयभागे प्रथर्मोऽशः॥
2643 -2651. (8) Gains of landed properties will .
be the result when Mars moves in the space indicated by adding the longitudes of the 4th lords from
Mars, the Moon or the ascendant as the case may
be.
(b) Troubles frcm weapons will come to pass
when the Sun passes on the space denoted by the
addition of longitudes of the 6th lords counted from
the ascendant, the Moon and the Sun.
(c) Add the longitudes of the 2nd lords from
Jupiter, the Moon and the Sun. Astrologers declare

48 Deva Keralam
advent of plenty of money (by the transit of Jupiter
in the said space).
(d) Educational gains will occur with the transit
of Jupiter on the space denoted by addition of
longitudes of the 4th lords counted from Mercury,
the Moon and the Sun.
(e) One will be worshipped by the king during
the transit of Jupiter on the space caused by adding
the longitudes of the 10th lords reckoned from the
Moon, the ascendant and Jupiter.
(f) Add the longitudes of the lords of the 12th
from Mars, Saturnand the ascendant. Mars moving
in the said space will cause trouble from knife.
(g) Add the longitudes of the lords of the 12th
counted from the ascendant, the Moon and the Sun.
Satum moving in the said space will cause fear
from tiger.
(h) Acquisition of wealth will result the transit
of the Moon on the space caused by the addition of
longitudes of the 11th lords counted from Venus,
Jupiter and the Sun.
(i) Add the longitudes of the lords of the 9th,
11th and 10th (counted from the ascendant). When
the Moon transits the said space, without a malefic’s aspect, one will have gains and fulfilment of
desires.
॥ धनुर्लग्ने चप्पकांशः ॥
चम्पकांशे धनुर्लग्ने SY प्रजायते ।
विप्रजन्मासुखी नित्यं पञ्चमोऽयं प्रकीर्तितः ॥२६५२ ॥
अथवा च द्वितीयः स्याद्रक्तवर्णः शुभाकृतिः
कु्रामे जननं चैति नदीम्रान्ते पुरीषु च ॥२६५३ ॥
2652 - 2653. Sagittarius Ascendant -
Champaka Nadiamsa: The native of 2nd half of
Champaka Nadiamsa in Sagittarius ascendant will
be a Brahmin and be the fifth or the second issue of
his family. He will be blood-red in complexion, be
auspicious in appearance and be born in a remote
village or in a town in a river region.
Notes: For Champaka Nadiamsa, please see
notes under sloka 1412, p.128, Book 1.
मिथुनांशे धनुर्लग्ने चापद्रेक्काणजस्तथा |
भाग्येशे गुरुसंयुक्ते बाल्ये पितृविनाशवान् ॥२६५४ ॥
पश्चाद्धात्विहीनः स्याज्ज्येष्ठभ्रातृप्रियः सुखी |
बाल्ये दारिद्यपापनो ज्येष्ठभ्रातृसमन्वितः॥२६५५ ॥
मातामहीगृहे वासं मातृसौख्यं कचित् सुखम् ।
2654 - 26552. Gemini Navamsa (or) Sagittarius Decanate: The native of Sagittarius ascendant
with Gemini Navamsa (or) Sagittarius decanate
will lose bis father early in his childhood if the 9th
lord (the Sun) is with Jupiter (the lord of the
ascendant). He will have no after-born but will
‘have older co-born and be liked by them. His
childhood days will be marked by poverty and
danger. He will live in his materna grand-mother’s
“home. His mother will be somewhat happy.
पूर्वभागे प्रजातस्तु चतुर्थः परिकीर्तितः ॥२३५६ ॥
सीमन्तपुत्र इत्याहुः क्वचित् पक्षान्तरे मतः
चम्पकांशे पूर्वभागे शित्रिंशांशजस्य च ॥२६५७ ॥
वनप्रान्ते प्रसूतिः स्याद्विपरजन्मसुखं भवेत् |
महानदीप्रात्यदेशे जननं चाग्रहारके ॥२६५८ It
2656 - 2658. The native of first half of the
subject Nadiamsa will be the 4th issue of his
family. There are authorities to state that he will be
the first issue. If birth be in Saturn’s Trimsamsa it
will be in a forest region in a colony of Brahmins.
He will be a Brahmin.
mrafearctearat दक्षिणे भाग एव च।
उत्तरांशे तथा विन्दयानमध्य खण्डोद्धवस्य च ॥२६५९ ॥
aware पितृनाशः स्याच्वम्पकांशे न संशयः
नीचे भौमांशगे सूर्ये भूसुतेन समन्विते ॥२६६० ॥
देशान्तरे नदीग्रान््ये पितुर्मरणमादिशेत्।
सम्पदशान्ते जननी मध्ये वा मृतिमाप्नुयात् ॥२६६१ ॥
2659 - 2661. (a) Birth will be in a sweet spread
from east to west in a south-facing house.
(b) The native of second half of Champaka
Nadiamsa, Sagittarius ascendant, will lose his father in the first year of birth.
(c) The Sun in debility (in the 11th, in Libra)
together with Mars and obtaining a Navamsa of
Mars will cause death of father in a region of river
in a foreign place. ^.
(0) His mother will die either in the end of 2nd
Dasa or in its middle portion.
पूर्वभागे तृतीयांशे मातृ वंशविर्वधनम् ।
कनिष्टभ्रातृसिद्धिः स्याच्चम्पकांशोद्धवस्य च ॥२६६२ ॥
उत्तरांशे मातृवंशे बाल्ये वासं विनिर्दिशेत् ।

Chandra Kala Nadi 49
क्लेशजीवनमित्याहुः YRATAM सुखम् ॥२२६३ ॥
2662 - 2663 (a) The maternal family of one
born in the former half of the subject Nadiamsa will
progress. The subject will obtain younger co-born.
(b) One of 2nd half of this Nadiamsa will live
with his maternal kinsfolk during his childhood
experiencing difficulties. He will be happy through
a Soodra king.
Notes: “Third part” of 1st half, 2nd half etc.
should be ignored as they appear to be interpolations and are impractical.
प्रन्थान्तरे-
चम्पकांशे धर्नुलग्ने बाल्ये शूदरपरभुप्रियम् |
पर गेहे निवांस च भ्रातृमूलात् क्वचित् सुखम् ॥२६६४ ॥
2664, Champaka Nadiamsa - 2nd Half: There
is another authority to state that this native of
Sagittarius ascendant will be liked by a Soodra king `
and will live in others’ house. He will receive some
happiness through co-born.
भाग्यारूढे SAI भाग्ये यावत् फलैर्युत |
'तावदर्षात् परं भाग्यं योगवान् कीर्तिमान् भवेत् ॥२६६५ ॥
2665. There are certain missing links in this
verse apart from some deficiency in its constitution. The apparent clue is that the native of
Sagittarius ascendant will prosper after such number
of years as denoted by the Ashtaka Varga Bindus in
the 9th house in Sarvashtaka Varga.
आरूढे राहुदोषेण बाल्येऽल्पसुखबुद्धिमान् |
कालान्ते चम्पकांशे रवनबुद्धयायुक्तिमान् गुणी ॥२६६६ ॥
2666. Rahu in the Arudha Pada (of the ascendant) will be a blemish as a result of which, one will
have limited happiness and limited intelligence in
childhood. With the passing of time, he will be
more intelligent and expedient. He will also be
virtuous.
विद्याभ्यक्ठसं च लभते वेदाध्ययनवर्जितम् |
चम्पकांशे राजसेवी कोपी शषिप्रप्रसादवान् ॥२६६७ ॥
राजद्वारे प्रसिद्धश्च CIT कार्यसाधकः।
राजप्रकृतिमान् धीरो रागी दुष्टस्वभाववान् ॥२६६८ Il
स्वपक्षवादी परकार्यदक्षः
श्रीचम्पकांशे परकार्यसक्तः
सुलोचनस्तीक्ष्णमतिः प्रसिद्धः
समीरपैत्यामयदेहवान् स्यात् ॥२६६९ ॥
2667 - 2669. He will receive education but be
bereft of Vedic studies. He will serve a king, be
irritable but instantly pleased, will attain fame
through royal service, will tactfully achieve his
aims, be of royal disposition, valorous, passionate .
and wicked. He will argue in his own favour, be
skilful in achieving for others and interested in
others’ jobs. He will have beautiful eyes and sharp
mind, and be famous. His body will have windy
and bilious imbalances.
चापे मेषांशगे चन्द्रे त्वगम्यागमनोत्सुकः
गृढकामातुरः प्राज्ञश्म्पकां शे प्रजायते ॥२६७० ॥
2670. The Moon in Sagittarius with Aries
Navamsa will cause enthusiasm to undertake journeys. The person will be secretively lustful and be
learned.
पापवरि चम्पकांशे धीरः साहसकार्यवान् |
कोपी श्षप्रप्रसन्नात्मा स्वभुजाजजितभाग्यवान् ॥२६७१ ॥
राजवित्तापहारी स्यादवृहत्नेत्रः सुरूपवान् |
स्थूलकेशः प्रसन्नात्मा देवब्राह्मणपोषकः।
उत्तरांशे फलं सत्यं हरिशङ्करभवित्तमान् ॥२६७२ ॥
2671 - 2672. Birth on a Malefic’s Week Day:
Should birth be on a malefic’s week day, the said
native will be valorous, will perform adventurous
deeds, be irritable but instantly pleased and will
have fortunes made by dint of his efforts. He will
steal royal wealth, will have large eyes, be charming in appearance, will have thick (or heavy) hair
and will honour Gods and Brahmins. He will be
devoted Lords Vishnu and Siva. These effects for
2nd half of Champaka Nadiamsa will bear truth.
Notes: Malefic weekdays are Sunday, Tuesday
and Saturday. Monday and Wednesday will also
fallin this category ifthe? ‘on and Mercury are in
order malefic planets as ] या standard rules for a
given horoscope. The ap orisms discussed apply
to Sagittarius ascendant ` . particular.
Ta
सतृपात्रदानप्रियकार्यदक्षः
श्रीचम्पकांशे बहुमानपूज्यः।
प्रहृष्टचेता मृदुदेहपुष्टिः

50 ` Deva Keralam
कालान्तरे भाग्यसुपुण्यभाक् स्यात् NRE? ॥
2673. Sagittarius Ascendant - 2nd Half of
Champaka Nadiamsa: According to another authority, the native will be fond of being munificent
towards deserving people. He will be skilful in
undertakings, will receive a lot of honour and be
eligible to be worshipped (or honoured). His deeds
will be exceedingly rejoiceable. He will havea soft
and strong physique. With the progress of time, his
prosperity and merits will be on the increase.
पूर्वभागे महापापी देवत्राह्माणपोषकः
सदा रोषमदोन्मत्तह्यपात्रव्ययडाम्भिकः॥२६७४ ॥
चम्पकांशे पूर्वभागे कामी विषयलोलुपः।
स्वभावमानकार्येषु दुष्टकृत्यः Wet भवेत् ॥२६५७५ ॥
तमोगुणप्रधानश्च पूर्वभागेशठः खलः।
नीचकार्वरतो नित्यं नीचसेवी दुरात्मकः॥२६७६ ॥
2674 - 2676. Champaka Nadiamsa - Ist Half:
One of Sagittarius ascendant rising in this segment
will be a great sinner. He will honour gods and
Brahmins, be ever irascible, inebriated and will
spend his wealth on unworthy causes. He will be
hypocritic, lustful, addicted to salacious pleasures,
wicked, crafty, predominantly ignorant, will indulge in mean deeds, will serve mean men and be
ill-disposed.
sa घनुर्लग्ने हरिभक्तिविशेषवान् |
कलव्द्रयवान् रागी ज्येष्ठभ्रातृवियोगवान् ॥२६७७ ॥
चम्पकांशे TAT TAT प्रजायते |
एकभ्रातृयुतः श्रीमान् पितृश्रष्ठ सुपुत्रवान् ॥२६४७८ Il
2677 - 2678. Champaka Nadiamsa - 2nd
Half: This native will be devoted to Lord Vishnu
and Lord Siva. He will have two wives, be passionate and will incur separation from his older brother.
He will have one brother and be wealthy. He will
prove to be a best father and will have very good
sons.
पितुस्थानधिपे नीचे स्वपितुः क्लेशजीवनम् |
पितामहानुजः कश्चिद्योगप्राबल्यवान् सुखी ॥२६७९ ॥
2679, Debilitated Sun: The lord of the 9th (the
Sun) in debility denotes that his father will lead a
difficult life. A paternal grand-uncle will have
some prosperity and happiness.
पितृव्याधिपतौ शुक्रे नीचे, स्वोच्चांशसंस्थिते |
स्वपित्रधिकसौख्यं स्यात् पितृव्यैको न संशयः॥२६८० ॥
पितृष्वसुद्रयं चेव ह्येका पुत्रवती भवेत्।
पितृभावफलाध्याये चम्पकांशोद्धवस्य च ॥२६८१ ॥
पितृव्यफलविस्तारं सद्भयालक्षणमुच्यते |
पितृस्थानाधिपे सूर्ये स्थिरांरो शुभराशिगे ॥२६८२ ॥
लग्नदद्रादशगे मन्दे सीमन्तशिशुनाशनम् |
पश्चात् पुत्र श्िरंजीवी मितसन्तानवान् भवेत् ॥२६८३ ॥
2680 - 2683. (a) Debilitated Venus: Venus,
ruling the house of paternal uncles (i.e. the 11th),
in debility (in the sign Virgo) and with exaltation
Navamsa (Pisces) will cause much happiness to
father. The native will have one paternal uncle and
two paternal aunts. Out of the latter two, one will
be endowed with progeny. Effects relating to paternal uncle have been told in the concerned chapter
(in the work consulted by the author). Therein
explained are the ways and means to ascertain the
` number (of paternal uncles).
(b) The Sun in an Immovable Navamsa: The
lord of the 9th, the Sun, in a benefic’s sign with an
immovable Navamsa while Saturn is in the 12th
from the ascendant will destroy the first issue (of
the paternal uncle). The son born later will be longlived. He will have limited number of issues.
Notes: (b) These instructions apparently relate
to the paternal uncle of the native.
सम्पदाये चम्पकांशे शद्रप्रभुसमागमम्।
बाल्ये देशान्तरं गत्वा निषादप्रभुराज्यके ॥२६८४ ॥
नगरे tera च ज्वरपीडाभयं क्वचित् |
पश्चात् स्वदेशमासाद्य मासमेकं ज्वाराद्धयम् ॥२६८५ ॥
पश्चदारोग्यमाप्नोति विवाहोत्सवमादिशेत्।
सम्पद्याये तृतीयांशो लग्नाधिपतिभुकतिपु ॥२६८६ ॥
चम्पकांशे विवाहश्च षोडशाब्दात् परं भवेत् |
TARR राहुभुक्तो मायान्दादौ च वत्सरे ॥२६८७ ॥
विवाहोत्सवकार्यणि चम्पकांशेनसंशयः।
पूर्वभागे चम्पकांशे द्वादशाब्दे विवाहवान् ॥२६८८ Il
राहुदोषवशाद्विप्नं विंशाब्देनात्रसंशयः।
विवाहानन्तरं भाग्यं राजद्वारे सुभाग्यवान् ॥२६८९ ॥
उत्तरांशे फलं सत्यं प्रत्यक्षं देवकेरलम् |
बाल्ये सम्पदशाकाले स्वाश्रितप्रभुनाशनम् ॥२६९० ॥

Chandra Kala Nadi 51
तद्र वा मृतिश्च स्याद्राजपुत्रवशात् सुखम् |
काञ्चीपिनाकिनीमध्ये देशे राजान्तरं भवेत् NESE ॥
सम्पदाये मध्यखण्डे स्वराजक्लेशमादिशेत् |
सम्पदाये मध्यखण्डे ज्येष्ठभ्रातुर्महत् सुखम् |
अनाचारवशादव्याधिर्मध्ये मध्ये प्रपीडयेत् ॥२६९२ ॥
2684 - 2692. (a) Champaka Nadiamsa - 2nd
Half: During his second Dasa, the person will join
a Soodra king. In his childhood, he will live in
another country ruled by a hunter. There will be
some fear of (epidemic) fever in the city (concerned). Later on he will return to his native
country and will incur fever for a period of one
month. His health will recover later on. His
marriage will take place in the sub period of the lord
of the ascendant (Jupiter) during the 2nd Dasa.
There are divergent views that the marriage will be
in the sub period of Rabu, or in the 16th year or in
the 14th year.
(b) For one born in the Ist half of the subject
Nadiamsa, marriage will be in the 12th year. .
(c) Champaka Nadiamsa - 2nd Half: There
will be obstacles in the 20th year due to blemishes
caused by Rahu. The native’s prosperity will
follow his marriage and he will acquire good
fortunes due to royal service. Effects stated in
Deva Keralam for the 2nd half will bear truth.
During the native’s early days in the course of his
2nd dasa, the ruler patronising him will incur
destruction. There will be a death in the king’s
circle. Perhaps the subject will acquire happiness
through the princes. Possibly, in the Pinakini
region, there will be change of ruler (2) The middle
of 2nd dasa will cause grief to the king (?) The
native’s older brother will enjoy greater happiness
during this phase but due to misconduct, he will
occasionally be troubled by diseases.
कृष्णागोदावरीमध्येयवनप्रभुपद्रणे ।
विप्रो प्राबल्यमापन्नो द्वादशाब्दे भविष्यति ॥२६९३ ॥
दशवर्षात् परं चैव त्विदं फलमुदाहतम् |
लाभाधिपदशाकाले विशब्दे शुभमादिशेत्।
द्रादत्रिशाब्देऽथ वा चेति दारसौख्यं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥२६९४ ॥
2693 - 2694. (a) In his 12th year or 10th year,
Brahmins will be greatly endangered in the city of
Yavanas situated between the rivers Krishna and
Godavari.
(b) In the Dasa of 11th lord (Venus) during the
20th year, auspicious effects should be declared.
After 22nd year, the native will be happy in respect
of his spouse.
Notes: (a) “Yavanas in the region of Krishna
and Godavari in the southe:n India” emerging from
the current verse should be carefully noted. This
clue from Deva Keralam explodes the baseless
myth that the Yavanas referred to in the context of
famous astrological works were Greeks or aliens.
This goes to prove that Yavanas lived in India itself
and were not the Greeks.
Yavanas also clearly means people of a certain
caste legitimately generated by a Kshatriya and a
Vaisya.
सम्पदशान्ते बुधभुक्तिकाले
HAR वाथ सुतोत्सवः स्यात् |
ततूर्वभागे मृतिमाकरोति
श्रीचम्पकांशे शुभसंप्रजातः॥२६९५ ॥
2695. In the sub period of Mercury or of Ketu
during the 2nd Dasa, the person will obtain a son.
Prior to that a death will occur.
ज्येष्ठपल्याश्च जातानां पुत्राणां नाशमीरयेत् |
एकपुत्रशचिरायुष्मान् ह्यायुष्मत्यौ द्वपुत्िके ॥२६९६ ॥
दारान्तरे जातपञ्चपुतरीपुत्रसमन्वितः।
द्विपुत्रकन्यकैका स्तु लभन्ते देरध्यमायुषः॥२६९७ ॥
चम्पकांशे धरनुलग्ने द्यत्तरांशोद्भवस्य च ।
इत्थं च ऋतुसह्याकाः पुत्रीपत्राश्चिरायुषाः॥२६९८ ॥
Tat पञ्चसङ्कया द्रौ पुत्रौ कन्यकात्रयम्।
दीर्ायुर्योग इत्याहुः केचित्पक्षैकपुत्रवान् ॥२६९९ ॥
2696 - 2699. (a) Progeny of First Wife: Sons
obtained through his first wife will not survive.
(Only) one son and two daughters will be longlived.
(b) Progeny of Second Wife: He will have a
total of five sons and daughters through second
wife, out of whom two sons and one daughter will
be long-lived.
(c) For one born in the 2nd half of the subject
Nadiamsa, six sons and daughters in all will be
long-lived. There is another authority to state that

52 Deva Keralam
it will be only five - two sons and three daughters
- that will be endowed with longevity.
aad पूर्वभागे मध्यखण्डोदभवस्य च।
उक्तस्य त्वेकपुत्रस्य राजयोगं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥२७०० Il
पूर्वखण्डे दरिद्रः स्यादेको राहो द्विकन्यकः
कन्यके बुद्धियुक्ते च विद्याभागेन जीवतः॥२७०१ ॥
2700 - 2701. (a) One born in the middle one
third part of first half of the subject Nadiamsa will
have three wives.
(b) Out of the sons referred to, one will have
kingly prosperity.
(c) The native of former half of the Nadiamsa
will be in the grip of poverty. Perhaps he will have
one marriage and two daughters. He will be
intelligent and will eke out livelihood through
education.
उततारंशे मध्यखण्डे द्विपुत्रौच त्रिकन्यकाः।
दीर्षायुषा इति प्रोक्तं चम्पकाशोद् भवस्य च ॥२७०२ ॥
एकपुत्रमपुत्रस्य दत्तपुतरप्रदो भवेत् |
कलत्रदयमित्याहुः पूर्वखण्डेकपुत्रवान् ॥२७०२ ॥
2702 - 2703. (a) One bom in the middle one
third part of second half of the subject Nadiamsa
will have two sons and three daughters and will be
long-lived. One of his sons will be childless and
will adopt a son.
(b) The subject of first half of the said Nadiamsa will have two wives and one son."
चम्पकांशे धनुर्लगेद्ुत्तरांशोद भवस्य च |
पापे शुक्रे पूर्वखण्डे पाण्डयदेशेप्रभोर्विपत् ॥२७०४ ॥
मीनेऽर्कनन्दने काले तल्तिकोणस्य सप्तमे |
चोलदेशे alte स्यान्मण्डलाधिपतेर्विपत् ॥२७०५ ॥
fae शनिस्थिते काले पाण्डयदेशप्रभोर्मृतिः।
जनकस्येष्टदेशे च ह्यराजकमिति स्मृतम् ॥२७०६ Il
विपदाये पाण्ड्यदेशे ख्रीराज्यं च शुभाधिकम्।
ब्राह्मणः प्रबलः स्याच्चतत्काले भाग्यमादिशेत् ॥२७०७ ॥
जनकस्येष्टतद्राज्ये चम्पकांशे सुभाग्यवान् |
नरवाहन युक्तश्च क्ेमदाये न संशयः॥२७०८ ॥
सम्पदयाये तृतीयांशे गोचरे दशमे गुरो ।
लोके घान्यक्षयादीनि ह्यनावृषटिर्भविष्यति ॥२७०९ ॥
प्लेच्छप्राबल्यमित्याहुर्विपदायेनसंशयः।
सम्पददयि तृतीयांशे विपदाये न संशयः॥२७१० ॥
2704 - 2710. Irrelevant: For one born in
Sagittarius ascendant, Champaka Nadiamsa first
half, Venus is a malefic.... danger to the king of
Pandya ... When Satum transits Pisces or its trine
or the 7th, evil to Chola kingdom will occur.
Perhaps its ruler will be endangered. Saturn moving in Leo will kill the king of Pandya. In the 2nd
Dasa, Pandya kingdom will have a female ruler
and more auspicious effects will follow. Brahmins
will grow in prosperity. During that time, progress
will occur. He will obtain fortunes in a kingdom
dear to his father. In the 4th Dasa, he will acquire
conveyances. In the 2nd Dasa, Jupiter moving in
the 10th will cause famine and loss of crops.
Mlechchas will prosper in the 3rd Dasa. In the
2nd’s last part....... in the 3rd dasa .......
Notes: Outof these verses, we can make out the
following relevant instructions.
(a) Venus will give mutilated adverse effects
for the native of first half of the subject Nadiamsa.
(b) His 2nd Dasa will cause prosperity.
(c) His 4th dasa will give him conveyances.
विपदाये मध्यखण्डे ज्येष्ठभ्रातृविनाशनम्
स्वराजद्वेषमित्याहूरविप्रमूलाद्विरो धवान् ॥२७११ ॥
स्थानच्युति मनस्तापं दक्षिणे गमनं तथा |
यातायातं च लभते विपदाये न संशयः ॥२७१२ ॥
2711 - 2712. Third Dasa: The said native’s
elder brother will be destroyed in the middle of the
3rd dasa. The native will incur royal wrath and
enmity with Brahmins. His (professional) position |
will be lost. He will be distressed and will set off
to the southern part of the country. He will move
hither and thither in this dasa.
प्रत्यक्षभाग्याधिपतेर्दशायां
स्थानच्युतिं मित्रविरोधिदु खम् |
तदन्यभूपालसकृत्मसादं
शुभाशुभं क्लेशफलं च दद्यात् ॥२७१३ ॥
2713. In the dasa of the 9th lord (in debility), he
will lose his position and be grieved while his
friends will turn into foes. He will earn the mercy
of the ruler of another country. The dasa in
question will (thus) give auspicious and inauspicious effects and difficulties.
Notes: If the 9th lord is debilitated, the person

Chandra Kala Nadi 53
will initially suffer debacles in the dasa of 9th lord.
Changes will occur in his life at a later part for
better. This instruction can in general be applied in
respect of fortunes for all ascendants.
नीचम्रहदशाकाले कुत्सितप्रभुसेवया |
जीवनं कानने वासमल्पसौख्यं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥२७१४॥
पश्चाद्राजान्तरस्नेहं प्रामन्तरनिवासवान् |
ares फलं सत्यं PTET शुभाशुभम् ॥२७१५ Il
दशान्ते क्लेशकार्याणि पुत्रपीडा भविष्यति |
सन्तानोत्पत्तिनाशः स्यात् स्वपुत्रस्य शुभं क्वचित् ॥२७१६ ॥
2714 - 2716. (a) During the dasa of a debilitated
planet, the person will serve a mean king. He will
live in forests. His happiness will be curtailed.
Later on he will befriend a different king and will
live in a different village.
(b) Effects stated for 4th dasa will bear truth.
The 3rd dasa will give both auspicious and inauspicious effects. End of 3rd dasa will cause difficulties in work and evils concerning progeny. Children being then born will be destroyed while the
native’s son (depending on his age) will receive
some happiness.
Notes: (a) The dasa of a debilitated planet will
cause association with mean and questionable men.
One will have change of place to his dislike and will
lose much of his happiness.
्षेमाधिपदशाकाले चम्पकांशोद् भवस्य च ।
नूतनप्रभुसन्मानमर्थलाभं शुभाधिकम् ॥२७१७ ॥
प्रबलोद्योगकार्याणि ब्राह्मणस्नेहमादिशेत् |
चम्पकांशे क्षेमदाये बाल्यस्नेहप्रभोर्मृतिः।
स्वसेवितनृपक्लेशं तत्पुत्रस्य वशाद्व्यथाम् ॥२७१८ ॥
2717 - 2718. Fourth Dasa: The dasa of which
is the 4th in sequence will cause association with a
new king and will beget honours and wealth. The
native will experience auspicious effects in an
abundant measure. He will earn a more prosperous
employmentand will befriend Brahmins (or learned
men). During this dasa, a ruler will die who would
be a childhood friend of the subject native. The
king served by him will be in grief and the king’s
son will be a source of trouble.
Notes: Some of the events relating to king
should be wisely replaced. The relevant portion
should be understood thus. The native in this dasa
will lose an important childhood friend following
which some relatives of that family will trouble
him.
भूमीशकार्येण मनोविचारं
चतुर्थदाये मलिनं paw: |
वर्षत्रयं क्लेशफलं ददाति
पश्चात् सुसौख्यं शुभशोभनाप्तिम् ॥२७१९ ॥
स्वात्माश्रितभूमिपतेश्चराज्ये
दायादिवर्गा समरोत्सुकाः स्पुः।
कोशादिनाशं चतुरङ्गनाशं
चतुर्थदाये फलमाहुरार्याः॥२७२० ॥
2719 - 2720. Fourth Dasa (continued): (a)
The native of Champaka Nadiamsa, Sagittarius
ascendant, will undergo mental distress due to
royal assignments in the 4th dasa. He will be dirty
and grateful. For three years, difficulties will exist
following which much happiness and auspiciousness will come to pass.
(b) Irrelevant: The kinsfolk of the king patronising the native will be enthusiastic to fight a
war amongst them. The king’s treasury and army
will be destroyed. So say the learned about the 4th
dasa.
नष्टराज्याद्धनप्राप्तिरषटा्विंशतिवत्सरे |
स्वप्रभोश्च मनस्सौख्यं aged क्षेममादिशेत् ॥२७२१॥
अमात्यजनसन्मानं विप्रस्नेहं शुभाधिकम् |
यलकार्यार्थसिद्धि च गेहे कल्याणमादिशेत् ॥२७२२ ॥
योगे चत्वारिविंशेऽब्दे चत्वारिंशतिवासर |
चम्पकांशे शुभाधिक्यं धनुर्लग्नोद भवस्य च ॥२७२३ ॥
2721 - 2723. During the 28th year, the person
will earn wealth from a defeated kingdom. His
king will receive happiness and after that his wellbeing will prevail. The native will be honoured by
ministers. He will befriend Brahmins. His undertakings will bear fruits. A marriage will occur in his
family. His 40th year will bring him prosperity.
The native of Champaka Nadiamsa in Sagittarius
ascendant will receive more auspicious effects (in
the 4th dasa).
रन्धाधिपदशाकाले त्रयस्तरिशतिवत्सरे |
एकोनचत्वारिंशेऽब्दे प्रभुनाशं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥२७२४॥

54 Deva Keralam
स्वराजपुत्रदेहार्पिः पञ्ज्रिंशतिवत्सरे |
देहकार्श्य च लभते प्रत्यण्दाय इदं फलम् ॥२७२५ Il
स्वशत्रुजननाशश्च पाण्ड्यदेशे भविष्यति |
चम्पकांश क्षेमदाये चत्वारिंशात् परं श्रियम् ॥२७२६ Il
नरवाहनभूषाप्ति राजयोगं द्विवत्सरे |
Ta frat च योगप्राबल्यमादिशेत् ॥२७२७ Il
्षेमदाये तृतीयांशे योगं प्राप्नोति भूरिशः।
गेहेशे लाभराशिस्थे कर्मभाग्येशसंयुते ॥२७२८ ॥
ेत्रगो धान्यवृद्धिः स्यात् Teas सुभाग्यवान् |
अनायासेन च लब्धविशालगृहलाभवान् ॥२७२९ ॥
aqd नीचदोषेण बहुगेहनिवासवान् |
परगेहे निवासं च गृहेशे नीचसंयुते ॥२७३० ॥
चत्वारिंशात् परं सोख्यं गृहे कषेत्रधनागमम्।
आरूढे राहुदोषेण प्रत्यग्दाये मनोव्यथा ॥२७३१ ॥
अल्पयोगमिति ख्यातं चम्पकांशोद् भवस्य च ।
गार्हस्थ्यजीवनं चैति प्रत्यग्दाये शुभाशुभम् ॥२७३२ ॥
2724-2732. Irrelevant: During the dasa of 8th
lord (Moon) in the 33rd year or in the 39th year, the
king will be destroyed. During the native’s 35th
year, the king’s son will be physically ill and be
exnaciated. These are the results for the 5th dasa.
The native’s enemies will be destroyed in Pandya
kingdom. ,
(b) In the 4th dasa, following 40th year of age,
wealth will accrue. He will acquire men-borne
conveyances. For two years he will enjoy Raja
Yoga effects. There is another authority to state
that during the said two years, the subject will grow
stronger in terms of prosperity.
(c) The last one third part of the 4th dasa will
cause plenty of prosperity.
(d) If the 4th lord (Jupiter) is in the 11th house
(in Libra) in the company of the lords of the 9th and
10th (ie. the Sun and Mercury), the person will
effortlessly gain a.large-sized house. Prior to that
because.of the blemish of debility, he will live in
many houses owned by others. This will be due to
the 4th lord’s association with a debilitated planet
(i.e. the Sun).
(e) After his 40th year, he will be happy and
will acquire landed properties. `
(f) Rahu in the Arudha ascendant being a
blemish will cause mental distress in the Sth dasa.
The effects of Yoga (prosperity) will be minimised
and he will receive a mix of good and bad effects
in this Dasa.
AAAS गते राहौ तदीशे नीचराशिगे ।
क्लेशं क्षेमदशान्त्यादौ दुर्निमित्तवशाद्धिपत् 12033 ॥
स्वगेहे विषसर्पादिदर्शनेन मनोव्यथा |
्षेमदाये सुभाग्यं स्याद्प्रहशङ्कप्रपीडिता-॥२७३४ ॥
दारशङ्कनिवृत्तिः स्याद्रिपरमूलात् सुसौख्यवान् |
लग्नादभाग्यं गते राहौ नीचे स्वोच्चांशगे भृगो ॥२७३५ ॥
सुतिकागृहदोषेण भार्यामरणमादिशेत् |
प्रत्यग्दाये पूर्वखण्डे वेदचत्वारिवत्सरे ॥२७३६ ॥
दारारिष्टमिति प्रोक्तं श्षिप्रेणोद्राहमादिशेत्।
प्रत्यक्तार दशाकाले स्वभुक्तौ दारनाशनम् ॥२७३७ Il
द्वितीयोद्राहमाप्नोति चम्पकांशसमुदभवः।
दारारिष्टात् परं किंचिद् भाग्यक्षीणं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥२७३८ ॥
2733 - 2738. (a) Rahu in the 9th while its lord
(Sun) is in debility will be a source of difficulties
in the initial and concluding phases of the 4th dasa.
There will be danger on account of evil reasons.
Mental distress will occur due to sightof poisonous —
snakes at home.
(b) His fortunes will improve in the 4th dasa but
his wife will have some troubles due to planetary
blemishes which will be overcome through Brahmins. Then happiness will recur.
(c) The native’s wife will die due to shortcomings in the delivery chamber if Rahu is in the 9th
while Venus isin debility (in Virgo) with exaltation
Navamsa.
(b) Fifth Dasa: His son will celebrate acquisition of progeny. Two or three children being born
then will be destroyed (i.e. grand-children of the
native will be lost). Asaresult, the native’s son will
be in grief. Due to fortunes and (remedial) efforts,
the son’s longevity will be ensured. In the end of
this very dasa, the native’s daughter will obtain
surviving children but she will turn to be indigent.
Her happiness will also decline.
(c) Dasa of Mars: In the dasa of Sth lord (i.e.
Mars), the native of Champaka Nadiamsa will
obtain progeny through his second wife. In the end
of this dasa, he will gain male issues. His fortunes

Chandra Kala Nadi 55
and prosperity will progress and enemies will face
destruction. He will visit pilgrim centres in the
48th year. He will be troubled by windy diseases
for which remedies have to be sought.
(d) During the Sth dasa, in the 44th year, his
spouse will pass away. Instantly he will be remarried. The destruction of first wife could also be in
the first sub period of the Sth dasa. After the said
death, his fortunes will somewhat decline.
स्वमित्रप्रभुनाशः स्यात् पाण्ड्यदेशे धनक्षयः।
पश्चात् स्वप्रामकार्याणि यलकार्यार्थसाधनम् ॥२७३९ ॥
2739. His friends and king will be destroyed.
Wealth will decline in the Pandyakingdom(?) after
which the native will pursue routines related to his
village. Then the undertakings attempted by him
will be successful.
Notes: This verse hints at bad time to friends.
His employer will incur great debacles and as a
consequence he will have to come back to his
native place. Thereafter he will be prosperous.
क्लेशावस्थायां पुत्रेशे दीनावस्थाम्रैरयुते |
TEMA महाक्लेशो TTT जायते ॥२७४० ॥
2740. The Sth lord in Klesa Avastha (2) and
joining a planet which is in Deenavastha (7) will
cause much grief repeatedly in its dasa periods.
पापदाये चम्पकांशे त्वशुभं प्राप्नुयाद् धृवम् |
शुभदाये शुभाधिक्यं राजामात्यप्रसादतः॥२७४१ ॥
पापदाये पापभुक्तौ त्वशुभं प्राप्ुयादधूवम्।
राजामात्यविरोधादि fares विनिर्दिशेत् ॥२७४२ ॥
चम्पकांशे धनुर्लग्ने TAT MTG: |
मित्रद्विजविरोधेन राजद्वारे विरोधवान् ॥२७४३ ॥
पापदाये पापभुक्ताविदं फलमुदाहतम् |
चम्पकांशे राहुदाये राजयोगो भवेदधुवम्
प्रत्यग्दाये विचारः स्यादादायादधिकव्ययम् ॥२७४४ ॥
्रत्यग्दशान्त्ये च ह्यतीव सौख्यं
सुक्षेत्रधान्याधिकभाग्यवृद्धिः।
श्रीचम्पकांशे फणिराजकाले
स्वमित्रपुत्रात्मसुयोगभाक् स्यात् ॥२७४५ ॥
2741 - 2745. (a) The dasa of a malefic planet
will surely produce inauspicious effects for a native of Champaka Nadiamsa, Sagittarius ascendant.
(b) Abundantly auspicious results and favours
from the king and ministers will occur in the dasa
. of a benefic planet.
(c) The sub period of a malefic planet during a
malefic’s dasa will be evil. Enmity with the king
and minister and hatred of Brahmins will also
result.
(d) One belonging to 2nd half of this Nadiamsa
will lose alliance with friends and Brahmins and
consequently earn enmity of the king.
Thus should be stated concerning a malefic’s
dasa and sub period.
(€) Rahu dasa will give prosperity. =.
(f) In the Sth dasa, expenditure will exceed
income. The end of the Sth dasa will produce much
happiness. One will acquire increase of excellent
landed properties, crops and fortunes.
(2) In the dasa of Rabu, prosperity will occur to
his friends, progeny and kinsfolk.
were तृतीयांशे शतुप्राबल्यशोकवान् |
स्वजनाप्तजनक्लेशं as विनिर्दिशेत् ॥२७४६ ॥
प्रत्यण्दाये चम्पकांशे स्वपुत्रस्य सुतोत्सवम्।
्वित्रिसङ्कया विनाशः स्यात् पुत्रक्लेशं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥२७.४७ ॥
पश्चाददृष्टयलेन स्वसूनोश्च चिरायुषम् | ।
स्वपुत्रिकासुसन्ताना प्रत्यग्दाये दरिद्रिणी lieve tt
दशान्ते पुत्रसन्ताना ह्यल्पसोख्यवती भवेत् |
सुताधिपदशाकाले चम्पकांशसमुदभवः॥२७४९ ॥
दारान्तरे सुसन्तानं दशान्ते पुत्रलाभवान् |
भाग्ययोगाभिवद्धि च शत्रुनाशं विनिर्दिशेत् |
पुण्यतीर्थफलप्राप्तिरष्टचत्वारिवत्सरे ॥२७५० ॥
परत्यग्दाये चम्पकांशे वातरोगप्रपीडितः।
तद्ोषपरिहारार्थ प्रायश्चित्तं विधीयते ॥२७५१ ॥
2746 - 2751. (9) Fifth Dasa’s Conclusion: The
native will experience grief on account of increase
of enemies during the last one third part of the Sth
dasa. His near and dear will be in grief. His
prosperity will be checkered.
(b) Fifth Dasa: His son will celebrate acquisition of progeny. Two or three children being born
then will be destroyed (i.e. grand-children of the
native will be lost). Asaresult, the native’s son will
be in grief. Due to fortunes and (remedial) efforts,

56 Deva Keralam
the son’s longevity will be ensured. Inthe endof = destruction. He will visit pilgrim centres in the
this very dasa, the native’s daughter will obtain 48th year. He will be troubled by windy diseases
surviving children but she will turn to be indigent. for which remedies have to be sought.
Her happiness will also decline. $^"
(c) Dasa of Mars: In the dasa of Sth lord (i.e. गुरुः —
Mars), the native of Champaka Nadiamsa will समीरपैत्यामयहेतुकरम- ्रोणतिलपरदानम् । |
obtain progeny through his second wife. In the end हुकम प्रशान्तये द्र तिलदानम् |
of this dasa, he will gain male issues. His fortunes ्ीरमसेतो तिलदीपदानं
and prosperity will progress and enemies will face श्रीचम्पकांशे शुभहेमपात्रे ॥२७५२ ॥
=. gift to the world of English Astrology!
Procure your full set today!!
DEDAKRERATAM
(Chandra Kala Nadi)
देव केरक्छम् (चन्द्रकला नाडि )
by Achyuta and Venkatesa
containing 9181 Sanskrit slokas and
English translation with notes and Index:
By R. Santhanam
Publishers:
Sagar Publications
72 Janpath, New Delhi 110 001

Chandra Kala Nadi 57
2752. According to Guru: To overcome the
disorders of wind and bile, one Drona of sesamum
should be donated. Donation of golden vessel,
sesamum and earthenware lamps should be done in
Ramesvaram.
Notes: “Drona” is an ancient measure of 4
Adhakas or 1024 pistfuls. Ramasetu denotes
Ramesvaram in Tamil Nadu. Before constructing
hi historic floating bridge in the ocean to proceed
to Lanka, Lord Rama worshipped Lord Siva in this
place.
'हेमपात्रे तिलज्योतिर्दशनिष्कपरमाणतः।
तदर्धेन कृतं चैव प्रतिमासमदक्षिणाम् ॥२७५३ ॥
अशेषरोगशान्त्यर्थं तिलदानमवश्यकम्।
रामसेत्तौ स्वजन्मक्षं प्रदोषे शनिवासरे ॥२७५४॥
सर्वपापविनिर्मुक्तो रोगनाशं लभेद्धवम् |
दशनिष्कसमद्रव्या तिलज्योतिषि दक्षिणा |
तदधं तिलदानस्य दक्षिणाभागमादिशेत् ॥२७५५ ॥
WaT: —
स्वर्णपात्र प्रकुर्वीत निष्कद्रयप्रमाणतः।
तिलज्योतिभ्रदानेन रोगी रोगात् प्रमुच्यते ॥२७५६ Il
2753 - 2756. According to Bhrigu: A golden
vessel worth five or ten gold coins along with
sesamum lamps should be donated. Gift equalling
the cost of the “image” should be given away (to the
Brahmin). To overcome the trace of the disease,
donation of sesamum is essential on the early night
of a Saturday coinciding with one’s ruling star and
Pradosha in Ramesvaram. As a result, the subject
will be relieved of all his sins and the disease will
be destroyed. There is an authority to state that the
golden vessel could be worth two Nishkas (gold
coins) and by donation of sesamum, the patient will
be freed from the diseases.
Notes: “Tila Jyoti” and Tila Jyotisha” occur in
these verses which are only corrupt terms. “Tila”
means sesamum seeds; “Jyoti” means lamp and
“Jyotisha” an astrologer.
मनुः-
रहस्यकृतपापानि ज्ञानाज्ञानकृतानि च ।
तिलदानेन नश्यन्ति प्रत्यक्षं ेवकेरलम् ॥२७५७ ॥
स्वगृ्योक्तविधानेन शान्ति कृत्वा यथाविधि ।
चम्पकांशे रामसेतौ शनिम्रार्थनमादिशेत् ॥२७५८ Il
2757 - 2758. According to Manu: Sins
committed knowingly or unknowingly will be
warded off by donation of sesamum. The remedies
should be undertaken as due to family tradition.
The said native of Champaka Nadiamsa should
pray to Lord Saturn in Ramesvaram.
oR -
देहेशे रिपुरन्गेऽपि च तथा पापैर्युते वीक्षिते
जातस्तत्र स्वपूर्वकर्मजनितैरोगिर्मुहर्पीटियते |
रोगाणां प्रशमायचोदितमिदं सेतौ शनिप्रार्थनं |
कार्य काञ्चननिर्मितस्य विधिवद्दानं तिलज्जोतिषः॥२७५९ ॥
2759. As per Parasareeyam, if the Deha lord
(as per KCD) is in the 6th or 8th with malefic aspect
or company, one will be troubled by diseases due
to the bad deeds of his past life. Prayer to Lord
Saturn should be offered in Ramesvaram and donation of a golden vessel with sesamum should be
done (to keep good health).
शुभग्रहयुते भौमे नीचग्रहसमम्विते |
दशान्ते सौख्यमित्याहुः राहुदाये शुभान्विते ॥२७६० Il
2760. This verse has some corrupt mixture.
“Neecha graha samanvite” in the first line means
“joining a debilitated planet’. “Subba Graha yute”
means joining a benefic planet. “Rahu daaye
Subhanvite” reads as “Rahu daaye striyanvite” in
another version. We-can however take one clue at
least concerning Mars dasa which is said to cause
happiness in the end for a Sagittarius native, if Mars
at birth is with a benefic planet.
व्ययाधिपतिदोषेण दशान्ते पुत्रपीडनम् |
RATS मनस्तापं चोलदेशेऽप्यरिष्टदम् ॥२७६१ ॥
स्वराजन्यजनानां तु रोगशोकादिसं भवम् |
कुम्भे राहस्थिते काले मिथुनान्ते शनौस्थिते ॥२७६२ ॥
लोके धान्यक्षयादीनि चोलदेशेऽप्यरिष्टकृत् |
कुलीरेऽर्कसुते काले चोलभूपतिनाशनम् ॥२७६३ ॥
कलहेन विचारः स्यात् स्वप्रभोश्च विशेषतः।
अपमृत्युभयप्राप्तिः शान्त्या शान्ति प्रयास्यति ॥२७६४ ॥
2761 - 2764. (a) The concluding part of Mars
dasa will endanger the native’s son due to blemish
of 12th lordship (if Mars is unrelated to a benefic

58 Deva Keralam
(vide sloka 2760). There will be mental distress in
the months denoted by adverse Sun in transit.
(b) Irrelevant: This dasa will cause evils to the
Chola kingdom. The king’s relatives will be troubled by diseases and grief. Rahu staying in Aquarius
as Saturn traverses the concluding part of Gemini
will usher famine in the country and evils to Chola
kingdom. The king of Chola will be destroyed
when Saturn moves in Cancer and will be involved
in wars and strife. He will have fear of untimely
death for which remedies should be resorted to.
जीवे पञ्चमपर्याये लग्नादित्रयसंस्थिते |
उच्चांशे भाग्यवृद्धिः स्याच्चम्पकांशेःद भवस्य च ॥२७६५ ॥
2765. During the course of his fifth round,
Jupiter transiting the 3 signs counted from Sagitta-.
rius ascendant, and begetting Cancer Navamsa and
also the aspect of Venus ......... (incomplete).
चापे गुरुस्थिते काले गेहे कल्याणसंभ्रमः।
राजप्रीतिमवाप्नोति चम्पकांशसमुद् भवः ॥२७६६ ॥
2766. Jupiter in Sagittarius will be a transit for
a family marriage. Further one will earn royal
favours.
सिंहे च रहौ च दशाविपाके
भाग्योत्तमं भूपतिमेत्रजन्यम् |
स्वपुत्रभाग्यं मुनयो वदन्ति
श्रीचम्पकांशे शनिरुच्वभागे ॥२७६७ ॥
2767. (a) Should Rahu at birth be in the 9th
(Leo), one will obtain excellent fortunes in Rahu
dasa through the ruler’s friendship.
(b) Saturn in his exaltation degree will cause
fortunes to the Champaka Nadiamsa native’s son,
according to sages.
साधनेदशाकाले स्वभुक्तौ व्याकुलं महत् |
कलहेन विनिर्गत्य प्रामान्तरनिवासवान् ॥२७६८ ॥
2768. The first sub period in the 6th dasa will
produce much distress. Due to quarrels, the person
will move on to another village.
सिंहे शनिस्थिते काले पाण्डयदेशप्रभो्मृतिः।
कुलीरे विषमृत्युं च राज्यक्षोभं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥२७६९ ॥
संसप्तकस्य दोषेण देशे राजा कलापवान् |
ओत्त्ये कलहेनैव देशारिषटं भवेद्धुवम् ॥२७७० ॥
2769 - 2770. Irrelevant: Saturn journeying in
Leo will kill the king of Pandya. In Cancer he will
cause poisonous death and strife in the kingdom. In
the northern part, evils will prevail.
भाग्यराहुदशाकाले पुत्रभाग्यं महत् सुखम् |
चम्पकांशे श्रियोऽवाप्त्या प्रतिबन्धविमोचनम् ॥२७७१ ॥
नित्यानदानपुण्येन लभते नात्र संशयः।
सिहारूढे धनुर्लग्ने सिंहे राहौ धनाद्यवान् ॥२७७२ ॥
तदशायां महायोगं सचिवो दण्डनायकः।
राजद्वारे प्रसिद्धश्च सर्वाध्यक्षः स्वतन्त्रवान् |
पञ्चाशद्रत्सरं योगं पाण्ड्यदेशेनसंशयः॥२७७३ ॥
स्वर्भानुदाये गुरुभुक्तिकाले
श्रीचम्पकांशे शुभशोभनानि।
पुत्रोत्सवं वा मुनयो वदन्ति
स्वभुक्तिमध्यान्तफलं त्विदं च ॥२७७४ ॥
मन्दभुक्तो विशेषः स्यादद्विपञ्चाशात् परं शुभम्।
पत्र्राबल्यमाप्नोति चम्पकांशसमुद् भवः ॥२७७५ ॥
2771 - 2775. Rahu dasa: (a) The dasa of Rahu
who at birth is placed in the 9th will produce much
happiness and wealth. Obstacles of the subject will
also be removed. He will daily donate food (to the
poor).
(b) For Sagittarius ascendant, the Arudha Pada
should be Leo (i.e. Jupiter at birth should be in
Aries). Rahu should occupy Leo, the Arudha Pada.
As aresult, the subject will be affluent. Further in
the dasa of such Rahu, he will enjoy abundant
prosperity and become a minister or justice. He
will be famous in king’s service, be a chief and be
independent. In a later year, his prosperity will be
in the Pandya kingdom (i.e. he will have a change
of place for good).
(c) He will obtain auspicious effects and birth
of ason in the sub period of Jupiter or in the middle
and concluding portions of Rahu’s sub period.
After the 35th year, (or) in Saturn’s sub period, his
progeny will have progress.
अन्तर्दशातिमार्गेषु फलविस्तारनिर्णयः।
भावाध्याये वदिष्यामि साधनेशदशाफलम् ॥२७७६ ॥
2776. Effects in detail should be understood
with the help of sub periods. Those for the 6th dasa
are detailed in the chapter on Bhavas.

Chandra Kala Nadi 59
लग्नाधिपदशाकाले क्षेमदायन्त्यवत् फलम् |
पत्रपौत्राभिवृद्धिश्च चम्पकांशे सुभाग्यवान् ॥२७७७ ॥
लग्नाधिपदशाकाले लग्नाधिपतिभुक्तिषु |
अपमृत्युभयप्राप्तिरेकसप्ततिवत्सरे ॥२७७८ ॥
राहुदाये द्वित्रिवारमपमृत्युभयं तथा |
सहोदरीमनस्तापो दशासन्धो भविष्यति ॥२७७९ ॥
दशारिष्टफलानि स्यू राहुप्रार्थनमादिशेत् |
कालचक्रदशारीत्या मध्ये मध्ये भवत् सुखम् ॥२७८० Il
अपमृत्युभयं किंचिच्छान्त्या शान्ति प्रयास्यति |
लग्नाधिपदशाकाले त्वेकशीतिसमे तथा ॥२७८१ ॥
स्वपितारिष्टमाप्नोति चापत्संन्यासवान् मृतिम् |
संन्यासादब्रह्मणः स्थानं चम्पकांशे न संशयः॥२७८२ Il
2777 - 2782. Dasa of Ascendant lord: (a)
Results of the dasa of the lord of the ascendant (i.e.
Jupiter) will be akin to those due at the end of the
4th dasa.
(b) In the 71st year, during the currency of the
sub period of ascendant lord (Jupiter) and in the
dasa of Jupiter, the native of Sagittarius ascendant,
Champaka Nadiamsa, will have fear of untimely
death.
(c) Such fear will exist in the dasa of Rahu also.
The subject will have misunderstandings with his
sister in the end of the Dasa of Rahu. To overcome
the evils of the dasa of Rahu, prayers to Rahu
should be offered.
(d) Intermittently, the native will be happy due
to (favourable phases occurring in) Kala Chakra
Dasa system.
(€) To overcome the evils of untimely death,
necessary remedial measures should be undertaken.
(f) His father will be endangered in the 81st
year and he will take to ascetic order following a
family death. ४
चम्पकांशे धनुर्लग्ने प्रत्यग्दाये मनोव्यथा |
Oras इति प्राहुः पशुधान्यार्थनाशनम् ॥२७८३ ॥
THY प्रजातस्य प्रत्यग्दाये परार्धगे |
क्लेशकालं इति प्राहू राहुः चारवशादव्यथा ॥२७८४ Il
TH शनिस्थिते काले द्वितीये राहुसंस्थिते ।
गोचरेऽल्पसुखं चेति म्रामारण्यकलापनम् ॥२७८५ ॥
2783 - 2785. (a) The Sth dasa will cause mental
distress for a native of Sagittarius ascendant. His
prosperity will be checkered. His quadrupeds,
grains and wealth will be destroyed.
(b) For one born in the 2nd half of Champaka
Nadiamsa, the 2nd half of 5th dasa will be a time
of troubles. He will be grieved on account of evil
transits of Rahu. Saturn coming to the 8th as Rahu
is in the 2nd in transit, bis happiness will be limited.
पाण्ड्यदेशे त्वरिष्टं स्यात् सेनाधिपतिविप्रहः।
ब्राह्मणः प्रबलं चैति बहुद्रव्यव्ययं सुखम् ॥२७८६ ॥
यदा हि मन्देन युतश्च केतु-
स्तदा भवेद्भूपतिघोरयुद्धम् |
तथा भवेत्तस्करसेनिकेवा
दाहादिकृत्यं जननाशनं च ॥२७८७ ॥
कुलीरेऽर्कसुते काले पाण्ड्यदेशस्य राज्ञांविपत्।
ACE प्रमुखक्लेशं प्रजापीडार्थनाशनम् ॥२७८८ ॥
ग्रन्थान्तरे —
गते कुलीरेऽर्कसुते धरित्री
संपूर्णसस्यादिफलान्वितापि |
यदा हि पञ्च च खेचरास्तदा
मन्देन युक्तास्त्वतिकष्टदाः स्युः ॥२७८९ ॥
पञ्चाशद्रत्से काले राहुचक्रे सुराचिते |
संसप्तकस्य दोषेण प्रजाक्षोभं विनिर्दिशेत् |
पञ्चग्रहसमायोग दुर्भिक्षं नृपनाशनम् ॥२७९० Il
राजपीडां तत्काले लोक उत्पातमादिशेत् |
शनिकषत्रेऽथ वा व्याधिश्चन्द्रक्षत्रे जलागमः॥२७९१ Il
संसप्तकस्य दोषेण राज्ञामन्योन्यविग्रहः।
तदभावेऽर्घनाशः स्यान्मध्यदेशजनावधि ॥२७९२ ॥
चोलदेशे विशेषः स्यान्मण्डलाधिपतेर्विपत् |
दशासन्धौ फलं चैति चम्पकांशोद् भवस्य च ॥२७९३
2786 - 2793. Irrelevant: The kingdom of
Pandya will incur evils and the army chief will turn
inimical. Brahmins will grow in strength. Much
expenditure and happiness will prevail. Saturn in
the 8th and Ketu in the 2nd will involve the king in
a fierce war. Thieves and army men will set things
on fire. People will be destroyed. Saturnin the sign
Cancer will barm the queen of Pandya kingdom.
Great calamity will strike the royal palace and
destruction of people and wealth will occur. According to another authority, Saturn moving in

60 Deva Keralam
Cancer will establish truth wholly. When five
planets join him, a lot of difficulties will come to
pass. In the SOth year, in the dasa of Rahu ......
(incomplete). During the conjunction of five planets (in Cancer with Saturn), famine and loss of king
will occur. Troubles to the ruler, calamities in the
country ..... (incomplete). Diseases will occur in
Saturn’s sign and deluge in Moon sigo ...........
(incomplete). Quarrels in the south-eastern quarter
.... incomplete). Danger in Chola kingdom will
persist and the king will especially be endangered.
These are the effects for the junction of dasa
periods for the native of Champaka Nadiamsa.
देशकालविपर्यासं साधनेशस्वभुक्तिषु |
पत्रादिदेहपीडा स्यात् क्रूरमासे न संशयः ॥२७९४॥
गुरुचारवशात् सौख्यं धनु र्लग्नोद भवस्य च।
दशासंधौ फलं चैति स्वगृहे शुभशोभनम् ॥२७९५ ॥
राजद्वारे शुभं विन्धाद्यलकार्यार्थसिद्धिमान् |
अष्टमाधिपतौ चन्द्रे मेषांशे लग्नकेन्द्रगे ॥२७९६ ॥
अमलायोगजातस्तु TKI सुभाग्यवान् |
2794 - 2796. In the first sub period of the 6th
lord, the native’s son and others will fall sick during
adverse solar transits. Happiness will be restored
with favourable transit of Jupiter. In the junction
period of the Sth and 6th dasas, auspicious events
will occur in the family. He will obtain good results
through royal association. His undertakings will
bear fruits.
चन््रांशाधिपतेर्दयि योगः स्याद्रत्सरद्रयम् ॥२७९७ ॥
मध्यान्ते क्लेशमित्याहू राहुदाये सुभाग्यवान् |
राहुभुक्तौ मनस्तापं मित्रपरभुजनामयम् ॥२७९८ ॥
राजान्तरपसादेन योगप्राबल्यमादिशेत्।
सिहराहुदशाकाले स्वभुक्तौ व्याकुलं महत् ॥२७९९ ॥
स्वर्भानुराशिगे सूरये gears ज्वराद भयम् |
अथ वा ह्युदरव्याधिः स्वपुत्रादिजनामयम् ॥२८०० ॥
पत्रोत्सवफलं विन्धाच्छुभमासे महत् सुखम् ।
विचित्राम्बरभूषाप्ति धनलाभं सुशोभनम् ok Il
2797 - 2801. (a) Moon’s Dasa: The Moon
ruling the 8th should be in an angle from the
ascendant with Aries Navamsa. With Amala Yoga,
his Moon’s dasa will give good fortunes.
(b) Mars’ Dasa: This position of the Moon in
Navamsa will enable the dasa of Mars to give
prosperity fortwo years. The beginning and ending
portions of Mars dasa will cause troubles.
(c) Rahu’s Dasa: Rahu dasa will proauce
fortunes. The sub period of Rah, in his own dasa
will be distressful and will cause discases to his
friends(?) and the ruler(?). The native will have
increased fortunes due to the mercy of replaced
king (i.e. undera different employer). The first sub
period in the dasa of Rahu occupying 1.८0 will
cause much distress. When the Sun transits the said
Leo, the person will suffer from fever and abdominal diseases. His children and others will also be
sick. With auspicious transits of the Sun, he will
obtain a son and be greatly happy with excellent
robes, ornaments, wealth and auspiciousness.,
राहुभुक्तौ फलं चेति चम्पकंशोद् भवस्य च ।
राहुदशाप्रवेशः जन्मादिमासः ४९ दिनम् १० |
दशेशाक्रान्तराशीशो नीचो दीनफलप्रदः।
आ षष्ठेशाधमं विन्द्ादुच्वाधिपशुभाशुभम् ॥२८०२ ॥
2802. (a) Thus have been stated the effects for
the sub period of Rahu (in Rahu’s dasa) fora native
of Champaka Nadiamsa, Sagittarius ascendant.
(b) Rahu dasa commences at the end of 49
months (i.e. 4y 1m), 10 days and 52 ghatis.
(¢) If the lord of the sign occupied by the Dasa
lord is in debility, then the dasa in question will give
poor effects.
Notes: (b) The text indicates when Rahu dasa
commences for a certain horoscope the Nadi was
referring to and abruptly ends without any use of
the information.
Apart from the indications given by a planet as
to how its Dasa should be when it occurs, it is
important to note as to when exactly a dasa commences. A horoscope for that moment is drawn
which will throw more light on events to come.
This chart is called “Dasa Arambha Kala Kundali”
preparing which is anyway very cumbersome and
much exactitude is required. Sloppy and slipshod
methods will destroy the analysis.
Prithu Yasas in Hora Sara also advocates locating the planets m the horoscope cast for the moment

Chandra Kala Nadi 61
at which a given dasa commences. I have given
elaborate details and tables in this context in my
English translation of Hora Sara which cannot be
reproduced here for fear of enlargement of our
present work.
(c) The 2nd line of sloka contains the expression "Aashashtesadadhamam" which means "from
the 6th lord, it is the worst." Another expression
"Uchchadhipasuabhasubham" means "the exaltant
dispositor is auspicious and inauspicious". This
defective line thus does not provide meaningful
clues.
we धनुषि मेषांशे चम्पकांशोद भवस्य च।
प्रत्यण्दाये दारहानिर्योगभद्भो ह्यतः परम् ॥२८०३ Il
2803. The Moon in Sagittarius with Aries
Navamsa will cause death of wife in the first dasa,
for a native of Champaka Nadiamsa. Following
this, his prosperity will be interrupted.
दशारम्भे च दारेशे पापयुक्तेऽल्पसौख्यवान् |
तदभुक्तो च फलं चेव भूगृहक्ेत्रनाशनम् ॥२८०४ ॥
राजद्वारे कलापं च fares विनिर्दिशेत् |
दारशब्दो वर्णपरश्चतुर्थस्थानमित्यपि ॥२८०५ ॥
2804 - 2805. At the time of the commencement
of a dasa, if the 4th lord is conjoined with a malefic,
the dasa will give less happiness. In its sub period
(i.e. in the first sub period), the native’s lands and
housing properties will be destroyed. He will incur
enmity with royal circles and friends. The word
“Daara” by reversal (i.e. Katapayadi system) denotes the 4th house in this context. (The 4th house
denotes friends for it is "Suhrit Sthaana" which
mention could be found in almost every standard
classical text-book.)
वृषभांशे वृषे भोमे दशायां मध्यभागगे।
वेष्णवब्राह्मणद्धेषं राजद्वारे मनोव्यथाम् ॥२८०६ ॥
पशुधान्यविनाशेन निरुद्योगविचारवान् |
उत्तरार्धे फलं सत्यं क्लेशः स्याद्रत्सरत्रयम् ॥२८०७ ॥
2806 - 2807. Note if Mars is in Vargottama in
Taurus (the 6th). Then the middle of Mars dasa will
produce enmity with Vaishnava Brahmins (say
men of learning) and mental distress in relation to
royal duties. The native’s quadrupeds and grains
will be destroyed. He will be disposed to remain
unemployed for three years. These will be true in
case of the 2nd half of Champaka Nadiamsa.
शन्यङ्गारकसंदृष्टे दशारम्भगृहे व्यथा ।
देहे वातोपद्रवं वा ह्यग्निमान्द्प्रपीडनम् ॥२८०८ ॥
निरापवादकार्य च तदशायां फलं स्मृतम् ।
दशारम्भफलग्रन्थे विस्तृतं चम्पकाशके ॥२८०९ Il
2808 - 2809. Should Saturn and Mars aspect the
ascendant that commences a dasa, one will incur
windy diseases and indigestion. In that dasa, the
native will perform in blame-worthy deeds. More
details have been stated in “Dasarambha Phala” for
Champaka Nadiamsa.
Notes: The effects stated for the beginning of
a dasa can be applied in general with proper care.
The name of the book suggested seems to be
defective.
षष्ठेशस्य फलाध्याये फलविस्तार उच्यते |
प्रत्यग्दाये फलं नास्ति क्षेमदाये महत् सुखम् ॥२८१० ॥
साधने योगमित्याहुः प्राबल्यं मनुरब्रवीत् |
दशेशाक्रान्तनक्षत्राज्जन्मरषान्तं च गुण्यते ॥२८११॥
सप्तभिर्गुणितं चैव त्वष्टभिर्भागमाहरत्।
रोगं लाभं क्रमेणैव प्रहाणामष्टधा गतिः ॥२८१२ ॥
तदभेदेन च तत्कार्य गतिभेदं फलं स्मृतम् ।
दशेशछक्षमारभ्य THATS च गुण्यते ॥२८१३ ॥
सप्तभिर्गुणितं कृत्वा ह्यष्टभिर्भागसमादत् |
रोगं लाभं तथाध्वानं बन्धनं धनमेव च ॥२८१४॥
देश्वर्यमर्थनाशं च ह्यपमत्युं तथा वदेत् ।
सर्वनाडीफलं सत्यं योजयेत् कालवित्तमः॥२८१५ ॥
2810 - 2815. (a) For the dasa of the 6th lord
(Venus), effects have been widely mentioned in the
chapter dealing with effects. One willreceive great
happiness in the 4th dasa. In the 6th dasa, prosperity will occur.
(b) Count the number of Nakshatras from the
one occupied by the lord of a Dasa through the birth
Nakshatra and multiply the same by 7 and divide by
8. The remainder will indicate eight kinds of
different effects, viz. disease, gain etc. Accordingly, the result of the dasa should be understood.
(c) Count the number of Nakshairas from the
dasa lord through the sub period lord. Multiply the
said figure by 7 and divide by 8. Disease, gain,

62 Deva Keralam
murmuring (out of pains), confinement, riches,
exceeding affluence, loss of money and untimely
death are the 8 kinds of effects to be based on the
remainder as per Sarva Nadi.
दुश्चिक्यं च गते केतौ बुद्धिमान् सहजो भवेत् ।
तदीशो बलवान् यस्य सङ्खीतप्रियवल्लभः॥२८१६ ॥
2816. Should Ketu be in the 3rd, the native’s
younger brother will be intelligent. The strength of
its lord will give fondness for music.
तपस्थानेगते राहौ तदीशे लग्नराशिगे।
सुराचार्येण संदृष्टे हरिशङ्करभक््तिमान् ॥२८१७ ॥
2817. Rahu in the 3rd and his dispositor in the
ascendant with Jupiter’s aspect will make one a
devotee of Lords Vishnu and Siva.
aay षष्ठे भूसुतेन निरीक्षिते ।
अथवा RASS सानुजो जनभाग्यवान् ॥२८१८ ॥
2818. If the lord of the Moon sign is in the 6th
(from Sagittarius ascendant) in aspect to Mars or
Jupiter, the person will have younger co-born and
be fortunate.
सोम्यांशकगदे भौमे लग्नेशेन समन्विते |
अथवा गुरुसंदृष्टे कोपी क्षिप्रप्रसादकः॥२८१९ ॥
प्रन्थान्ते --
दीनेष्वालोचनश्रीमान् बाल्यस्मेहजनप्रियः।
उष्णवायुप्रपीडाचेत् पापपुण्यं समं भवेत् ॥२८२० ॥
2819 - 2820. Mars with the aspect of Jupiter,
or in a Navamsa of Mercury with Jupiter will cause
instant anger. But he will immediately be pleased.
According to another authority, he will be wealthy,
be fond of childhood friends, be troubled by heat
and windy diseases and will have meritorious and
sinful acts in equal measure.
अष्टमाधिपतौ केन्द्रे पूर्णायुर्योगभाग्यवान् |
पुत्रशोकमवाप्नोति दायादिकलहं तथा ॥२८२१ ॥
सुतेशाक्रान्तराशीशे कर्मस्थाने शुभेक्षिते ।
तद्दोषो विलयं यातिगिरिर्वज्रहतो यथा ॥२८२२ ॥
2821 - 2822. Should the 8th lord Moon be in an
angle, one will be endowed with full span of life
and be prosperous. But he will incur grief on
account of loss of children and will have strained
relations with his men. Liquefaction of these
blemishes will occur with the occupation of the
10th house by the dispositor of the Sth lord witha
benefic’s aspect, just as the thunderbolt destroys
the hills.
we वाहनस्थानेशे स्वांशे वा बल संयुते ।
नरवाहनवान् भोगी त्यागी सर्वजनप्रियः 112223 ॥
वाहनत्रयसंयुक्तो जीवान्तं सौख्यवान् भवेत् |
पापदृष्टिवशान्मध्ये मध्ये भङ्गस्तु योगस्य ॥२८२४॥
2823 - 2824. Should the 4th lord (Jupiter) be
strong in own sign, or own Navamsa, the subject
will have conveyances, will enjoy pleasures, be
sacrificing in disposition and be dear to all. He will
have three conveyances and will be happy throughout his life. A malefic interrupting this Yoga will
interrupt the effects half the way.
व्ययभावगतैः पापैः कर्तरीयोगसंभवः।
्रूरकार्यरतो दक्षो बन्धुवर्गे प्रपीडितः ॥२८२५ ॥
2825. 1216065 in the 12th (in Scorpio) cause
Kartari Yoga. As a result, the native will be
interested in performing cruel deeds and be troubled by his relatives.
मेषकोणगते चन्द्रे पाताले भृगुनन्दने ।
श्रीगौरीयोगविख्यातो भवेद्राजसमो नरः॥२८२६ ॥
श्रीगौरीयोगे च भवेत् प्रजातो
नरोऽतिभोगी रिपुमर्दनश्च |
त्यागी महानीतिपरः प्रतापी
AMY जनरक्षकश्च ॥२८२७ ॥
नित्यं लालयति स्वदारतनयान् कुम्भेऽथ वा वृश्चिके
श्यामः स्थूलकटिर्विंशालनयनः सोन्दर्ययुक्तोऽलसः।
भोगी स्याननरवाहनाद्यः हिबुके शुक्रे शशाङ्गे स्थिते
त्यागी मत्स्ययवाड्ुशाङ्कितिकरः श्रीगौरियोगोद् भवः।२८२८ ॥
देवब्राह्मणसाधुपूज्यनिरतः पृष्ठे च पारश्वेऽङ्कित
त्यागी योगमनाः प्रभुः ककुदवान् सोौन्दर्यदारात्मजः।
सेनानाथसुखी दृढाङ्गरसिको बाहुप्रतापोनतः
सर्वज्ञो रसचित्तभोगरसिकः श्रीगोरियोगोद भवः॥२८२९ ॥
2826 - 2829. Sri Gauri Yoga: (a) With the
Moon in a trine to Aries (i.e. in Leo or Sagittarius)
while the 4th (i.e. Pisces) is occupied by (exalted)
Venus, a yoga called Sri Gauri Yoga is formed.
Then the person will be equal to a king. He will

Chandra Kala Nadi 63
enjoy abundant pleasures, will destroy his adversaries, be of sacrificing disposition, highly just,
valorous, enthusiastic, heroic and a protector of
men. He will be attached to his progeny and
spouse.
(b) Venus in the 3rd with Aquarius Navamsa
i.e. in Vargottama, (while the Moon is placed as at
“a’’) will give the following effects. The person
will be ever affectionate to his spoue and progeny,
be dark in complexion, will have a stout (or promi-—
nent) waist and broad eyes. He will be beautiful,
indolent, will enjoy pleasures, and be rich with
conveyances.
(c) Venus in the 4th along with the Moon
causing (another kind of) Sri Gauri Yoga will
reveal the undermentioned results. The subject
will have (favourable physiognomical) symbols of
fish, barley and Ankusa (elephant-driver’s hook)
on his palm. He will be interested in honouring
gods, Brahmins and saints. Further, he will have
special symbols on the back and sides of the body,
be of sacrificing mind, attached to Yoga systems
(i.e. Dhyana, Hatha etc.), be lordly, will have a
hump on the shoulder and will have attractive
spouse and progeny. He will be the head of an
army, be happy, will have strong limbs, be lustful
and be endowed with great physical strength.. He
will be a knower of everything, be discriminating
in taste and will enjoy pleasures.
Notes: (b) "Kumbhe athava Vrischike" vide
sloka 2828 above rightly reads as "Kumbhamse
Dushikye" in another version which is included in
the translation at the cost of our text.
॥राशिदशारम्भफलम् ॥
शुद्धपापदशामेषे शुभग्रहसमन्विते |
मेपूरणगते जीवे कीर्तिमान् धनवान् भवेत् ॥२८३० ॥
2830. (a) The sign Aries with a benefic planet
while the 10th (Virgo) is occupied by Jupiter will
cause fame and wealth.
(b) Two malefics in the 4th (Pisces) will cause
exhaustion of riches.
पापद्वय वेश्मगते महदैश्वर्यखण्डितः।
॥चरलग्नम् GAA: ॥
भाग्याद्भाग्यकर्मपौ च मिलितौ स्वक्षत्रनीचोच्चगो
लग्नेशे बलसंयुते शुभखगेरालोकिते संयुते |
भूपालप्रभवो भवेदथ महाराजेन तुल्यस्थिति
्यदरास्याद्रहुरलधान्यकनकादेश्वर्यलक््मीपतिः॥२८३१ ॥
लग्नात् कर्माधिनाथे शशितनयगृहे स्वोच्चामित्रांशगे वा
व्यापाराजीवनं स्याद्यदि जनितनरो राजकार्यप्रवेशी |
विप्रश्चेद्राजपूज्यः सकलगुणनिधिर्वैश्यमूलाद्धनादयो
` लोके प्रख्यातकीर्िर्यदि जनितनरो राजतुल्यप्रभावः॥२८३२ ॥
2831 - 2832. (a) The lords of the 9th and 10th
counted from the 9th should join in a sign which is
the own or exaltation sign of one of them. The
ascendant lord being in strength should be aspected
by a benefic planet. As a result, the subject will be
kingly and will enjoy the status due to an emperor.
He will be endowed with many gems, riches,
grains, gold etc. and be a lord of wealth.
(b) The lord of the 10th from the ascendant
should be in Leo with a Navamsa that exalts him or
is owned by him ora friend. In that case, the native
will live by business activities, be engaged in royal
service, be learned, honoured by the king, an ocean
of all virtues, will become rich through Vaisyas
(men of trading community), be widely famous in
the world and be so efficacious as a king.
Notes: Contrary to the caption given, theses
two verses do not relate to Dhananjaya Nadiamsa
of a movable sign, but to Sagittarius ascendant in
general. These can also be applied to other ascendants according to the situation.
In the first line of sloka 2831, the text refers to
lords of the 9th and 10th counted from the 9th being
in debility. This expression is untenable and hence
omitted in the rendering to avoid confusion.
(a) The hints given can also be applied to the
native’s father.
(b) This should be specifically understood as
Mercury being in the sign Leo with Virgo Navamsa, Taurus/Libra Navamsa.
धनञ्जयांरो पूर्वार्थे कुलीरे चन्द्रसंस्थिते |
BRIT सुखी नित्यं द्वितीयोऽयं प्रकीर्तितः॥२८३३ ॥
अथ वा च तृतीय स्याज्येष्ठभ्रातृयुतो भवेत्
पश्चाद्भ्रातृस्वसृणां तु बहुत्वं च विनिर्दिशेत् ॥२८३४ ॥
उत्तरांशे प्रजातश्च नवमोऽयं प्रकीर्तितः।
दशमश्च भवेत् पुत्रो रक्तवर्णशरीरवान् ॥२८३५ ॥

64 Deva Keralam
धनज्जयांशे जातस्तु पूर्वार्धे कृशदेहवान् |
उत्तरार्थे स्थूलकायः श्रीमान् वाग्मी दयापरः ॥२८३६ ॥
धनञ्जयांशे कृशदीर्घदेहः
कामी सदा भ्रातृविरोधभाक् स्यात् |
अल्पाशनो तामसकृत्यकृच्च
तमोगुणी सात्विकवच्च दृष्टः ॥२८३७ ॥
2833 - 2837. Movable Ascendant -
Dhananjaya Nadiamsa: (a) The native of first
half of this Nadiamsa, having the Moon in Cancer,
will be a Soodra and be the second issue of the —
family. Or he could be the third. He will have older
brother(s) and many younger brothers and sisters.
(b) One born in the 2nd half of this Nadiamsa
will be the 9th or 10th issue of the family. He will
be of blood-red complexion.
(c) One belonging to the first half will have a
thin body.
(d) His counterpart will have aheavy physique,
be wealthy, eloquent in speech and kind in disposition.
(e) The native of first half of Dhananjaya
Nadiamsa will have an emaciated and long body.
He will be libidinous and will be ever inimical to
his co-born. He will consume limited food, be
malignant in actions, ignorant, and will look like a
` genuine person.
Notes: Dhananjaya Nadiamsa extends as under: ina movable sign from 24° 24' to 24° 36'; in an
immovable sign from 5° 24' to 5° 36'; and ina dual
sign from 9° 24' to 9° 36,
काश्यपः —
धनञ्जयांशे पूर्वार्थे लग्ने शनिनिरीक्षते |
तमोगुणस्वभावः स्यात् सर्वदा दुर्बलो भवेत् ॥२८३८ ॥
उत्तरार्धे सात्त्विकः स्याद्राजसमप्रकृतिर्भवेत् |
अरोगी दृढभाग्यश्च ब्रह्मं शे राजपूजितः ॥२८३९ ॥
2838 - 2839. According to Sage Kasyapa: (a)
One belonging to the first half of the subject
Nadiamsa, with Saturn’s aspect on the ascendant,
will be predominantly a malignant person. He will
be ever weak.
(b) The native of 2nd half will be genuine, be
passionate, devoid of diseases and will enjoy firm
fortunes. He willbe honoured by the king.
Notes: (b) Reference to’ “Brahmamsa’” is redundant.
धनञ्जयांशे पूर्वार्धे वणिग्वृत्या च जीवितः।
उत्तरार्थे तथा विन्द्यादव्यवसाये प्रसिद्धिमान् ॥२८४० Il
सत्यानृते वणिग्धावं पूर्वार्धे धनधान्यवान् |
शिशोश्च जननात् पश्चाज्जनकश्च सुभाग्यवान् ॥२८४१ ॥
2840 - 2841. 2) One born in the first half of the
subject Nadiamsa will eke out his livelihood by
trading activities while that of 2nd half will be
famous in his calling.
(b) The native of first half of this Nadiamsa will
be endowed with wealth and grains. After his birth,
his father’s prosperity will multiply.
Notes: The expression “Satya + Anrithe +
Vanik + Bhaavam” in sloka 2841 does not convey
anything tangible. These words in order mean:
“Truth, untruth, trading and Bhava (a house of the
horoscope).
स्थानच्युतिं जन्मदशाविपाके
दुर्भिक्षकालं जनशोकमाहुः।
श्रीचोलदेशे नृपतेश्च मृत्यु
राजान्तरं म्लेच्छकलापनं च ॥२८४२ ॥
` -कुबेरांशे चरे लग्ने ह्यत्तरांशोद् भवस्य च ।
जन्मदाये पाष्डयदेशे मण्डलाधिपतेर्विपत् ॥२८४२ ॥
2842 - 2843. Irrelevant: There will be loss of
position in the first dasa. The country will reel
under famine and the populace will be in grief. The
king of Chola country will quit the world and a
change of king will occur. The native of Kubera
Nadiamsa in a movable sign .... in the first dasa,
king of the Pandya region will be endangered.
` जन्मलग्नाधिपे चन्द्रे तुलांशे शनिवीक्िते ।
्रिग्रहोच्चे प्रजातस्तु धनवांश्च न संशयः॥२८४४ ॥
नीचग्रहाभावकाले राजयोगो न विद्यते |
राजतुल्यसुभाग्यं स्याद भ्रातृमूलाद्धनान्वितः ॥२८४५ ॥
2844 - 2845. Cancer Ascendant: The Moon
ruling the ascendant should be aspected by Saturn
and occupy Libra Navamsa while three planets are
in exaltation. Such a person will be wealthy.
Without the presence of a debilitated planet, there
will be no Yoga. (That is, in Kali Yuga, a debili-

Chandra Kala Nadi 65
tated planet is a mustso that exalted planets are able
to cause Raja Yoga, acording to sage Garga). His
fortunes will be akin to that of a king. He will
acquire wealth through his co-born.
धनञ्जयांरो धनिकः प्रतापी
ताताम्बिकासोख्यसुभूषणाप्तः।
उर्वीचरः सत्यवचश्च लुन्धो
शुभग्रहेथऽर्तुरगूढवान् स्यात् ॥२८४६ ॥
क्रोधात्मा चित्तविभ्रंशी etre भ्रातृवञ्चकः।
अत्मकौटिल्यवानित्यं लग्नेशे शनिवीक्षिते ॥२८४७ ॥
अत्याग्रहीदुर्गतिमांक्रोधी सात्विक वञ्चकः।
बहु्ञातिजनेर्युक्तः कुबेरांशे प्रजायते ॥२८४८ ॥
2846 - 2848. (a) One born in Dhananjaya
Nadiamsa, ina movable ascendant will be rich, and
valorous. He will enjoy happiness through his
paternal grand-mother and will acquire ornaments.
He will have excellent conduct, be truthful and
miserly.
(b) Should Saturn aspect the lord of the ascendant, one will be irascible, mentally perturbed, -
addicted to women, will cheat his co-born, be
crooked, very whimsical, will goto hell (or will fall
_ to bad days), be given to anger and will cheat
genuine people. He will have many relatives.
शुभेश्चतुभिर्बलिभिर्धनभाग्यायकर्मभिः।
संपूर्णवित्त सततं कुबेर इव जायते ॥२८४९ ॥
2849. The four planets, viz. the lords of the 2nd,
Oth, 11th and 10th, endowed with strength will
grantone complete wealth. The native will ever be
equal to Kubera (the god of wealth).
कुबेरांशे पूर्वभागे लग्नेशे शनिवौक्षिते।
पूर्वपश्चिमवीथ्योश्च सोमस्य दिशि जायते ॥२८५० ॥
नदौप्रान्ते पुरे प्रमे प्रसूतिश्च भविष्यति ।
वनस्थलनिवासं च जननं वा भविष्यति ॥२८५१ ॥
SRY नदीप्रान्ते नगरे जन्मवासवान् |
तत्पिता राजसेवी स्यात् पूर्वार्धे राजवल्लभः॥२८५२ ॥
2850 - 2852. Kubera Nadiamsa - Movable
Ascendant: (a) The subject of the first half of this
part of the zodiac with the ascendant lord in aspect
to Saturn will be born in astreet extending from east
to west and in a house facing the direction ruled by
the moon, that is the north-west. His birth will be
in a village or a town in the region of a river. He
willlive ina forest area or alternatively will be born
there.
(b) One belonging to the 2nd half will be born
in the region of a river in a town and will live there.
His father will be in royal service.
(c) The native of former half of the subject
Nadiamsa will be dear to the king.
Notes: “Kubera Nadiamsa” used in this portion
of the text denotes thé subject Nadiamsa, which is
Dhananjaya Nadiamsa. This need not be confused
with Kubera Shashtiamsa.
पितामहाधिपे भोमे स्वोच्चे द्विरहसंयुते |
भाग्याधिपेन संदृष्टे पितामहश्चिरायुषः॥२८५२ ॥
तदेशाधिपतिर्बाल्ये ह्यतिदारिद्यसंयुतः।
पितामहश्च दीर्घायुर्बहुभ्रातृयुतो भवेत् ॥२८५४ ॥
धनञ्जयांशे पूर्वार्थे भारकश्च पितामहः।
क्लेशजीवनमाप्नोति पुत्रमूलश्रियान्वितः॥२८५५ ॥
2853 - 2855 (a) Cancer Ascendant: The native’s paternal grand-father will be endowed with
longevity if the ruler of the house denoting the said
relative, viz. Mars (the ruler of 9th from 9th, i.e. the
5th) is in exaltation, in the company of two planets
and in aspect to the lord of the 9th (Jupiter). (That
is, Mars in Capricorn in the company of two planets
and with the aspect of Jupiter.) In his childhood, the
said relative would be extremely poor. He would
have many co-bom and many burdens. His life
would be troublesome. He would earn wealth
through his children.
काश्यपः —
पूर्वार्धे भारकश्चैव समुद्रपरान्तवासवान् |
वार्धके सौख्यमाप्नोति GATE सुभाग्यवान् ॥२८५६ ॥
2856. According to sage Kasyapa, the said
relative of the native of Dhananjaya Nadiamsa,
first half, would live in the region of a sea and
would carry loads. He would be happy m his old
age. Incase of second half of the subject Nadiamsa,
the said relative would be very fortunate.
धनञ्जयांशे कटके विलग्ने पितामहस्तान्त्िककर्मसक्तः।
शिवार्चनाद्रा कुचरितरयुक्तो
मध्ये सुभार्ग्यं रतिमात्रवान् स्यात् ॥२८५७ ॥

66 Deva Keralam
तान्िककर्मदोषेण भार्यारिष्टं विनिर्दिशेत् |
बहुकालमपलीको दारिदयं प्रापनुयादधुवम् ॥२८५८ ॥
तत्पिता धनिकश्चैव वेश्यास्ीपत्रुत्रिमान् |
तस्य दोषवशाच्चैव cates स्वपितामहः॥२८५९ ॥
पुण्यतीर्थवशाद् भाग्यं शिवानुग्रहधर्मवान् |
शिवलिङ्गप्तिष्ठात्वं पितामहफलं वदेत् ॥२८६० ॥
2857 - 2860. The paternal grand-father of the
subject native would be fond of Tantrik rituals and
would worship Lord Siva. He would have a bad
history. In between he would enjoy good fortunes
and carnal pleasures. Due to the ills of his Tantrik
rituals, his wife would incur early death. For along
time, he would be without spouse and be in the grip
of acute poverty. His father would be rich, and
would beget sons and daughters through a prostitute. Due to this blemish, the native’s grand-father
would be indigent. By visiting sacred places, his
fortunes would revive due to the mercy of Lord
Siva.
धनञ्जयांरो पूर्वार्धे पितामहः सुपुण्यवान्।
स्वपुत्रसहितश्चैव गङ्गास्नानात् परं सुखम् ॥२८६१ ॥
दरिद्रमोचनं चैति वंशे भाग्याभिवृद्धिदम्।
पुत्रपौत्रसमृद्धिश्च कोवेरांशेद्धवस्य च ॥२८६२ ॥
पितामहस्य पुण्येन स्वपिता कीर्तिमान सुधीः।
बहुसोदरयुक्तोऽपि हयेकभ्रातृयुतो भवेत् ॥२८६३ ॥
2861 - 2863. The paternal grand-father of the
native of first half of the subject Nadiamsa would
be a meritorious person and would visit Ganges
along with his son. His poverty would be cured and
fortunes would spread in his family. He would
obtain sons and grand-sons. Due to the merits of his
(the native’s) paternal grand-father, his father will
earn fame and be intelligent. Although he may
.have many co-born, he will be left with only one.
मन्दांशगे सुताधीशे कुबेरंशोदभवस्य च।
पितामहश्च धर्मात्मा कुबेरंशोद् भवस्य च ॥२८६४॥
उत्तरांश प्रजातस्य पितामहश्च धर्मकृत् |
गङ्खायात्राफलं नास्ति शिवलिङ्घप्रतिष्ठावान् ॥२८६५ ॥
भावाध्यायेषु विस्तारं पितामहफलं तथा |
पूर्वभागे विशेषः स्याननाडीयोगे क्वचित् क्वचित् ॥२८६६ ॥
2864 - 2866. Kubera Nadiamsa: (a) Paternal
grand-father would be charitable in disposition if
the Sth lord is in a Navamsa of Saturn.
(b) Birth in the above-mentioned Nadiamsa’s
second half would also indicate similar effect. But
the paternal grand-father will not visit Ganges. He
will instal a Siva Linga.
In the chapter on Bhava, effects have been
given in detail in respect of the said relative,
particularly for the first half of this Nadiamsa.
Yoga effects have also been told in a scattering
manner.
कुबेरांशे पूर्वभागे सम्पदायेऽन्त्यभागके |
विपन्नक्षत्रदशादौ पितामहमृतिं वदेत् ॥२८६७ ॥
जन्मादिद्रादशाब्दान्ते षोडशाब्दादद्विवत्सरे |
पितामहस्य निर्याणं ज्येष्ठ भ्रातृविवाहके ॥२८६८ ॥
2867 - 2868. Kubera Nadiamsa - First Half:
Death of paternal grand-father will occur in the end
of the 2nd dasa or in the beginning of the 3rd dasa
of the native. From birth till the end of the 12th year
(i.e. before the 12th year) or within 2 years following 16th year of age of the native, death of paternal
grand-father will occur and marriage to older coborn will take place.
पाठान्तरे --
कुबेरांशोत्तरे भागे जातरयोद्राहतः परम् ।
जन्मादिद्रादशे वर्षे ज्येष्ठ भ्राता विवाहित ॥२८६९ ॥
2869. According to another authority after the
marriage of the native of second half of Kubera
Nadiamsa ..... Before the 12th year of the subject,
his older brother will get married.
Notes: The first line is independent of the 2nd
line. Its instruction is incomplete. The 2nd line of
the verse suggests the time of marriage of older
brother.
अथवा षोडशाब्दे वा तत्पूर्वे TIT |
पितामहस्थानगते च राहौ
तदीश्वरे स्वोच्चगते बलादये
शुभान्विते शोभनदृष्टियुक्ते |
नरौ भवेदामरणान्तसौख्यः॥२८७० ॥
2870. (a) Either in the 16th year or the 14th year
of the subject (his paternal grand-father would die).
(b) The native will enjoy happiness throughout
his life in the following case. Rahu should be in the
5th house (in Scorpio). His dispositor (Mars)

Chandra Kala Nadi 67
should be in strength with exaltation (in Capricom), in the company of and aspect to benefics.
Notes: (a) This part of the verse is incomplete.
It suggests the time of death of grand-father.
पितृस्थानाधिपे जीवे केसरीयोगसंयुते |
कुबेरांशे प्रजातस्य जनकश्च सुभाग्यवान् ॥२८७१ ॥
शिशोश्च जननात् पूर्वं दारिद्ेण च कशितः।
पश्चात् सौख्यमवाप्नोति गृहे लक्ष्मीकराक्षवान् ॥२८७२ ॥
2871 - 2872. The lord of the 9th, viz. Jupiter,
should be involved in Kesari Yoga. Asa result, the
father of the native of Kubera Nadiamsa (Cancer
ascendant) will enjoy good fortunes. Prior to the
birth of the native, he would be emaciated due to
poverty. Afterwards, he will be happy and his
family will receive the blessings of the goddess of
wealth.
स्वपिता श्यामवर्णश्च स्थूलकर्णः सुबुद्धिमान् |
राजद्वारे प्रसिद्धश्च देवब्राह्मणपोषकः॥२८५७३ ॥
वैदिकाचारवानित्यं स्वसुतस्थापको भुवि ।
स्वपितुर्रातृपुत्रस्तद्येकश्चातिसुखी भवेत् ॥२८७४ ॥
स्वजातिधर्मकार्येषु निर्णेता च भविष्यति |
2873 - 2874/2. Cancer Ascendant - Kubera
Nadiamsa: The native’s father will be black in
complexion and will have stout (or large) ears. He
will be highly intelligent, famous in royal service
and will honour gods and Brahmins. He will
incessantly follow the Vedic codes of conduct, will
firmly establish the native (i.e. will contribute to
his prosperity) and will be in a position to decide
what the men of his race should do (i.e. he would
be an eminent social figure).
पितृस्थानाधिपे जीवे स्वोच्चे कुजनवांशगे ॥२८७५ ॥
सूर्यात्मजेन संदृष्टे वातरोगप्रपीडितः।
किंचित् कालमनाचारी पश्चाद्रेदिकमार्गकः॥२८७६ ॥
आदो शेवप्रियश्चैव पश्चाद्रेदिकवान् सुधीः।
बहुभ्रातृयुतो मानी स्वपितृभ्रातृपोषकः॥२८७७ ॥
बाल्ये दारिद्यसंयुक्तः स्वभुजार्जितभाग्यवान् |
देशे केरले सञ्चारं विवाहानन्तरं सुखम् ॥२८७८ ॥
पुतरोत्सवात् परं सोख्यं पुत्रमूलात् सुभाग्यवान्।
धनञ्जयांशे पूर्वार्धे जनकस्य महत् सुखम् ॥२८७९ ॥
राजद्वारे सुकीर्मिश्च बहुगेहनिवासकृत् |
मध्ये भाग्यसमृद्धश्च वनस्थलगतः सुखी ॥२८८० ॥
वनान्तरपरभुद्रारे कीर्तिमान् बन्धुपोषकः।
सात्विको गुणवान् रागी पुरप्रामाप्रणी भवेत् ॥२८८१ ॥
TRY च जनकः सोदरभ्रातृवैरवान् |
तस्य दोषवशात् क्लेशं रोगी पुत्रवियोगवान् ॥२८८२ ॥
पूर्वभागे क्वचिचैव भरातरुमूलाद् fade |
विभागकाले सन्तापो जनकस्य न संशयः॥२८८३ ॥
धनञ्चयांशे पूर्वार्धे कुजे शुक्रनिरीक्षिते |
मध्ये बन्धुविरोधेन राजोपद्रववान् पिता ॥२८८४ ॥
गार्ग्यः —
धनञ्जयांशे जनकस्य सौख्यं
पत्रोत्सवानन्तरभाग्यवृद्धिम् |
सुभ्रातृवृद्धि मुनयो वदन्ति
वनान्तरे पुरे निवासम् ॥२८८५ ॥
नानादेशप्रसिद्धश्च बहुव्यापारवान् पिता |
सन्मार्गवृत्ति निरतः कालान्तरसु भाग्यवान् ॥२८८६ ॥
गुरुद्रयप्रियो ज्ञानी सदाशिवपुराणवित्।
जनकस्य फलं विन्द्यात् कुबेरांशोद भवस्य च ॥२८८७ ॥
लग्नात् पञ्चमगे राहौ यस्यां नायां प्रजायते |
स्वपिता गुरुनिन्दावान् गुरुदृष्टिविवर्जिते ॥२८८८ ॥
2875 - 2888. The undermentioned effects
would occur to the father of one born in Dhananjaya
Nadiamsa, Cancer ascendant.
(a) Jupiter in Martian Navamsa: Note if the
9th lord Jupiter is aspected by Saturn and occupies
a Navamsa of Mars. Then the father of the said
native would be troubled by windy diseases. For
some time, he would take to unorthodox ways and
later on shift to the Vedic path. Initially he would
be fond of Saivites (i.e. the followers of the school
of Lord Siva) and then follow Vedic codes of
conduct. He would be very intelligent, would have
many brothers, be honourable and would patronise
hiscoborn. During his childhood he would be in the
grip of poverty and would gather wealth by his own
efforts. He would wander in the region of Kerala
and be happy after marriage. Following the birth
of ason, his happiness would increase. His fortunes
would improve through his son.
(b) 2nd Half of Kubera Nadiamsa: The father
of the native of second half of Dhananjaya Nadi-

68 Deva Keralam
amsa would be greatly happy. He would attain
much fame in royal circle and would live in many
houses. In between, his fortunes would increase
and he will be happy in a forest region. His fame
would increase through the king of another forest
region. He would patronize his kinsfolk, be gentle,
virtuous, passionate and be a chief person of a town
or village. He would be inimical to his co-born and
as a consequence be in grief. He would incur
diseases and suffer separation from his son.
(c) Ist Half of Kubera Nadiamsa: The father
of the subject belonging tothe 1sthalf of the subject
Nadiamsa would be somewhat grieved on account
of enmity with co-born and would have two wives.
At the time of family property division, he would
be distressed (i.e. be at a disadvantage).
(d) Mars Aspected by Venus: If birth be in the ©
1st half of Kubera Nadiamsa while Mars isin aspect
to Venus, the native’s father would incur enmity
with his kinsfolk in the middle of his life and be
troubled by royal wrath.
(e) Dhananjaya (Kubera) Nadiamsa: According to sage Garga, the father of the subject of
Dhananjaya Nadiamsa (apparently applicable to
either half) would receive following effects. He
would be happy whose prosperity would increase
following the birth of a son (or the native). His coborn would prosper. Hé would live in a town or
village between forests, would be famous in many
countries and would have varied kinds of business
activities. He would be attached to a gentle path of
living and would make his fortunes after some
interval (or initial debacles). He would have two
loving preceptors, be honourable and be an expert
in Siva Purana
(f) If Rahu is in the Sth without Jupiter’ s aspect,
the native’s father would blame his preceptors.
TSI eI पञ्चमं मनुरब्रबीत् ।
तत्र राहुश्च केतुर्वा स्वपित्रोश्च गुरुद्रयम् ॥२८८९ ॥
2889. One’s Sth house deals with the preceptor
of his father for it is the 9th from the 9th. Rahu or
Ketu in the Sth house of the native denotes that his
father will have two preceptors.
Notes: The 9th house denotes one’s preceptor
or Guru who initiates him spiritually or otherwise
for gathering knowledge. From this verse we can
formulate a principle that Rahu or Ketu in the 9th
will cause two preceptors to the native.
वेदान्तशाखतत््वज्ञो धीरः शिवपुराणवित् |
कोबेरंशे पितृव्यस्य पुत्रोऽपि ज्ञानवान् भवेत् ॥२८९० ॥
पितृव्याधिपतौ शुक्रे यावद्विनदुभिरन्विते |
तावत् सद्कयापितृव्याश्च दीर्घायुषा भवन्ति हि ॥२८९१ ॥
2890 - 2891. (a) Rahu or Ketu in the Sth `
indicates that one’s father will be an expert in
Vedas and Philosophy. He will be bold and an
expert in Siva Purana.
(b) The native’s paternal uncle’s son will be a
person of wisdom.
(c) Such number of paternal uncles will be
long-lived as the number of Bindus in the Ashtaka
varga of Venus, the ruler of the house paternal
uncles (the 11th, Taurus).
काश्यपः ~
गतेऽन्यदेशंजनके जायते पितृसोदरः।
मेषाद्यंशभुक्तसङ्कयाः पितृव्याश्च भवन्ति हि ॥२८९२॥
2892. (a) According to sage Kasyapa, the native’s fatherand paternal uncles (i.e. father’s brothers) will live in distant lands.
(b) The number of paternal uncles will correspond to the Navamsas past from Aries
Notes: (b) As regards the number of paternal
uncles, sage Kasyapa implies use of the position of
Venus in Navamsa. Thatis, the numberof Navamsas
covered by Venus from Aries in Navamsa will
indicate the number of co-born the native’s father
will have. For Cancer ascendant, Venus is the lord
of the 11th which is the 3rd from 9th.
धनञ्जयांशे पूर्वार्धे कुलीरे च प्रजायते ।
मुतिसङ्कयाः पितृव्याश्च ऋतुसङ्कयाथवा स्मृताः ॥२८९३ ॥
एका पितृष्वसा चेव ayaa त्वमङ्गली |
सदा क्लेशवती चैव बहुकालं सुजीवति ॥२८९४ ॥
2893 - 2894. The native of first half of
Dhananjaya Nadiamsa, Cancer ascendant, will have
7 paternal uncles or 6 uncles and one paternal aunt.
The said aunt will be childless and be inauspicious
(i.e. will become a widow early). She will be ever
in troubles and will live for a long time.
ग्रन्थान्ते —
पितृष्वसा सदा क्लिष्टा तद् भर्ता पापचेतनः।

Chandra Kala Nadi
पत्रशोकवती चैव पुत्रिकाशोक संयुता ॥२८९५ ॥
2895. According to another authority, paternal
aunt will be ever in troubles. Her husband will
perform sinful deeds. She will be grieved on
account of loss of son and loss of daughter.
उत्तरांशे प्रजातस्य भगिनीद्रयवान् पिता।
एका वैधव्यमाप्नोति ह्येका पुत्रवती भवेत् ॥२८९६ ॥
भावाध्यायेषु विस्तारं पितृव्यस्य फलं वदेत् |
धनञ्जयांशे पूर्वार्थे पितृव्यैकाश्चिरायुषः ॥२८९७ ॥
स्वपिता मध्यमायुश्च पितृव्येकस्तथा भवेत्।
तीर्थयात्रामवाप्नोति पितृव्यैकअपुत्रकः ॥२८९८ ॥
, 2896 - 2898. (a) The father of the native of later
half of the subject Nadiamsa will have two sisters.
One will become a widow and another be endowed
with sons. In the chapter on “Bhava” effects conceming paternal uncles have been stated in detail.
(b) In case of birth in first half of the subject
Nadiamsa, one paternal uncle will be long-lived.
The native’s father will have medium life-span. So
also another paternal uncle. Visits to pilgrim
centers are also indicated (for them). Another
paternal uncle will be childless.
पितृव्यौ द्वौ भवेतां वा ह्येको वा भवति धुवम् ।
अपत्नीकस्तथा विन्द्ादरार्धके पितृसोदरः॥२८९९ ॥
2899, Paternal uncles could be two, or surely
one, for the native of Dhananjaya Nadiamsa. In
case of birth in first half of this Nadiamsa, paternal
uncle will be unmarried.
पितुव्यभावान्मदने स्वर्भानौ शशिजांशके ।
पितृव्यभार्या चोन्मादं पूर्वपापस्य हेतुना ॥२९०० ॥
2900. Rahu should be in the 7th from the house
of paternal uncle, and should be in Mercury’s
Navamsa. As a result, the wife of the native’s
paternal uncle will be mad due to sins of previous
birth.
Notes: The 11th rules one’s paternal uncle. 7th
from there is 5th from ascendant. Hence Rahu
should be in Scorpio in this case. Placed in Scorpio
6° 40' through 10° he can obtain Virgo Navamsa
tuled by Mercury.
सर्वज्येष्ठः पितृव्यश्च कुबेरांशे दरिद्रवान् ।
बहुपुत्रा भविष्यन्ति द्विभार्यश्चैकपुत्रकः॥२९०१ ॥
सर्वज्येष्ठपितृव्यस्य हयनुजश्च सुपुत्रवान्।
तद्भ्राता पापकर्मात्मा कोपीवाधिकशोकवान् ॥२९०२ Il
कामी सर्वज्चवान् रागी मध्ये भाग्यसमृद्धिमान् ।
तान्निकाचारदोषेण afte वार्द्धके व्यथाम् ॥२९०३ ॥
पितृव्याणां च यः कश्चिद् द्वि भार्यापुत्रुत्रिमान् |
वन्ध्या युक्तो मृतिं चेति ह्यायुषान्तं सुसोख्यवान् ॥२९०४॥
सर्वजेष्ठपितृव्यस्तु भ्रातद्रेषी Taw: |
तस्य पापवशात् क्लेशं वार्धके भाग्यनाशनम् ॥२९०५ ॥
पत्रमृलादनर्थं स्यात् स्थानच्युतिमनोव्यथे |
भावाध्याये पितृव्यस्यदशामार्गे विशेषतः ॥२९०६ ॥
विस्तरेण फलं प्रोक्तं नाडीयोगे क्वचित् क्वचित् |
2901 - 29064. The eldest paternal uncle of the
native of Kubera Nadiamsa will be indigent. He
will have many sons, two wives and one son
(through the second wife). The brother next to him
(i.e. 2nd uncle) will have prosperous children. Yet
the next to him (i.e. 3rd uncle) will indulge in sinful
deeds, be irascible and will incur much grief. He
will be lustful and a knower of all, be passionate
and will in between have increased fortunes. Due
to Tantrik activities, he will be in poverty and in his
old age will be distressed. Out of paternal uncles,
this particular one will have two wives and will
have sons and daughters. He will be happy
throughout his life. The eldest uncle will hate his
coborn and will be a great cheat. Due to his sins,
he will be in grief and his fortunes will be destroyed
in his old age. He will incur evils due to his sons,
will lose his position and be mentally distressed.
Using Dasa periods, the chapter on Bhava extensively deals with this aspect apart from some Clues
with Nadiamsa.
मातृस्थानाधिपे शुक्रे सार्धग्रहसमन्विते ॥२९०७ ॥
भाग्याधिपेन संदृष्टे कुबेरांशोद भवस्य च ।
माता गुणवती पुता भर्तृप्रीतियुता सदा ॥२९०८ ॥
बहुपुत्रीसमेता च भ्रातृश्रात्रीसमन्विता।
सुवस्रभूषणेर्युक्ता किचिद्रोगशरीरिणी ॥२९०९ ॥
2907 - 2909. Mother: The lord of the 4th,
Venus, joining a planet with strength and receiving =
the aspect of the 9th lord (Jupiter), will cause a
virtuous mother to the native of Kubera Nadiamsa
(Cancer ascendant). She will be pure and will ever

70 Deva Keralam
receive the affection of her husband. She will have
many daughters and be endowed with brothers,
Sisters, Classic robes and ornaments. She will be
somewhat sickly.
Notes: In verse 2907, “Saargha (Sa + Argha)
graha” is translated as a planet with strength.
“Argha” is value or worth. A planet with value
means a planet with strength. Hence Venus is
required to be with a strong planet.
धनञ्जयांरो भृगुजे भूसुतेन समन्विते |
सदा सौख्यवती माता aga मरिष्यति ॥२९१० ॥
2910. The mother of the native of Dhananjaya
Nadiamsa will ever be happy and will pre-decease
her husband if Venus joins Mars.
मातुलाधिपतौ जीवे शन्यङ्गारकवीक्षिते ।
कारके भृगुसंयुक्ते दीर्घायुश्चेकमातुलः॥२९११॥
2911. Jupiter, the planet ruling the house of
maternal uncles, should be in aspect.to Saturn and
Mars while the signifying planet (Mercury) is with
Venus. As aresult one of the maternal uncles of the
native will enjoy longevity.
कुबेरांशे मातुलः स्याद्राल्ये सौख्ययुतः सुखी |
दारिद्यक्लेशवांश्चान्त्ये स्वल्पसन्तानवान् भवेत् ॥२९१२ ॥
मातृष्वसा पुत्रवती भर्तृ भाग्ययुता सदा |
धनञ्जयां शे जननी त्वेकभ्रातृसमन्विता ॥२९१३ ॥
नेत्ररोगी सदा क्लेशी गुणवान् भाग्यवान् भवेत् ।
स्फुटाक्षमातुलश्चैव कुबेरांशोद् भवस्य च ॥२९१४॥
मातृष्वसा भाग्यवती पुत्रीपुत्र युता भवेत् |
मातामहाधिपे सौम्ये शुक्राङ्गारकसंयुते |
मातामहस्य गार्हस्थ्यं मातुलस्य दरिद्रताम् ॥२९१५ ॥
मातामहः प्रातृजनेर्विरोधं
दारिद्ययुक्तोऽपि च मातुलश्च |
तत्कर्मदोषेण भवेदरिद्रतां
धनञ्जयांशे मुनयो वदन्ति ॥२९१६ ॥
2912 - 2916. (a) The maternal uncle of the
native of Kubera Nadiamsa will in his childhood be
happy. In the end he will incur poverty and grief.
He will have limited progeny.
(b) The native’ s maternal aunt will be endowed
with sons and be fortunate in respect of her husband.
(c) The mother of the native of Dhananjaya
Nadiamsa will have one brother. He will have eye
diseases, be ever in grief, virtuous and fortunate.
He will have strange (or bright) eyes.
(d) The sister of the native’s mother will be
fortunate, be endowed with sons and daughters.
(e) Mercury ruling the house of materna grandfather (i.e. Gemini which is 12th from Cancer
ascendant) should be in the company of Venus and
Mars. As a result the said relative will be a
householder (fulfilling one of the 4 Asrama Dharmas
prescribed by Hindu scriptures) while a maternal
uncle will be indigent. The said grand-father will
have enmity with his coborn and due to his sins, the
maternal uncle will be in poverty.
sae मातुलश्च धनिकः कीर्तिमान् भवेत् ।
मातृष्वसा च दारिद्रयं तत्पुत्रो वा न संशय ॥२९१७॥
मातामहादिवंशस्य भावाध्याये सुविस्तरम् |
सोदरस्य फलं वक्ष्ये कुबेरांशोद भवस्य च ॥२९१८ ॥
2917 - 2918. The maternal uncle of the subject
of the 2nd half of the said Nadiamsa will be rich and
famous. Maternal aunt and her son will be poor.
Effects relating to the family of maternal grandfather have been detailed in the chapter on “Bhava”
while narrated below are effects concerning cobom of the subject.
भ्रातृस्थानाधिपे सोम्ये तद भावे केतुसंस्थिते ।
कारके स्वोच्चराशिस्थे दशसद्वयाः सहोदराः॥२९१९ ॥
अथ वा रुद्रसह्कयाश्च कुबेरांशोद् भवस्य FI
पञ्चसङ्कयाश्चायुष्मन्तो वेदसङ्कयास्तथेव च ॥२९२० Il
2919 - 2920. Co-born: The lord of the 3rd,
Mercury, being in the 3rd along with Ketu while
significator Mars is in exaltation, indicates that the
subject of Kubera Nadiamsa in 10 or 11 coborn. 4 or 5 of them will be endowed with long
lives.
Notes: Mercury (along with Ketu) 3 ood in
the 3rd Arudha Pada instead of 3rd house a¢cording
- to another version.
धनञ्जयांशे जातस्य ज्येष्ठभ्राता द्विभार्यकः।
ज्येष्ठभ्रातृसुतस्थाने पापाक्रान्ते प्रजायते 112822 ॥
धनञ्जयांशे जातश्चेदेको वन्ध्यापतिभवित्। `
ज्येष्ठ भ्राता पापयुक्तः पुरा ब्राह्मणशापवान् ॥२९२२ ॥

Chandra Kala Nadi 71
सर्वज्येष्टभ्रातनाथे नीचांशे कुजसंयुते |
जन्मान्तरे विप्रपत्नी सङ्गदोषी भवेन्नरः॥२९२३ ॥
तस्य पापवशादभार्या पुत्राभावा प्रचक्षते |
श्वशुरश्चेन्महापापी पिण्डादी नात्र संशय ॥२९२४ ॥
sw भावनाथे गुरुणा च निरीक्षिते |
द्रव्यार्जनसमर्थश्च रोगी मातृप्ियो भवेत् ॥२९२५ ॥
पितृप्रियश्च सन्तोषी वेश्यास्री सङ्गपापवान् |
दत्तपुत्रयुतश्चैव महारोगेण कशितः॥२९२६ ॥
2921 - 2926. (a) The elder brother of the native
of Dhananjaya Nadiamsa will have two wives.
(b) Malefics in the 11th will give a barren wife
to elder brother. He will be sinful due to curse of
Brahmins in previous birth.
(c) The 11th lord (Venus) joining Mars (in one
sign) and begetting debilitation Navamsa (Virgo)
would be inflicted by the blemish caused by union
with a Brahmin woman in a previous birth. Due to
that sin, (i.e. due to such an afflicted Venus), his
wife will be childless (in the current birth). His
father-in-law will be a great sinner and will not
receive oblations after his death.
(d) If the 11th lord (Venus) is in aspect to
Jupiter, the elder brother will be skilful in gathering
wealth, and be dear to his parents. But he will be
sickly. He will be endowed with happiness, will
have liaison with prostitutes, will adopt a son and
be emaciated due to a great disease.
धनञ्जयांशे जातस्य ज्येष्ठभ्राता च दत्तवान् |
पुत्रस्वीकारमाप्नोति ज्येष्ठभ्राता तथेव च ॥२९२७॥
कन्यांशकगते राहौ भार्गवेण समन्विते |
धनञ्जयांशे जातस्य ज्येष्ठभ्राता अपुत्रकः॥२९२८ ॥
एको मृतप्रजायुक्तो धूर्तभार्यासमन्वितः।
एकपुत्रयुतश्चैव सदा पुत्रविचारवान् |
कालान्तरे SAGA राजसप्रकृतिर्भवेत ॥२९२९ ॥
2927 - 2929. (a) The elder brother of the native
` of Dhananjaya Nadiamsa will adopt a male issue.
(b) Rahu being in association with Venus and
being in Virgo Navamsa denotes that one elder
brother will be childless while another will obtain
dead children. He will have a wicked wife, will
have one son and be ever in sadness on account of
progeny.
कटकलम्ने कुबेरांशः
कुम्भांशे कटके लग्ने कुनेरांशसमुद Aa: |
द्विसोद्रयुतो वाग्मी पुत्रस्वीकारवान् भवेत् ॥२९३० I
सर्वज्येष्ठसुतश्चैव ह्यगम्यागमनोत्सुकः।
कालान्तरे च तद्रोगं स्वपितामहहेतुना ॥२९३१९ ॥
तस्य दोषोपशान्तयर्थ सेतुस्नानं विनिर्दिशेत् |
कुटुम्बेन युतश्चैव शान्तिं कुर्याद्यथाविधि ॥२९३२ ॥
तिलदानं प्रकुर्वीत सर्वज्येष्ठसुतस्य च।
आयुरारोग्यसन्तानं लभते नात्र संशयः॥२९३३ ॥
एकश्च भ्रातृसन्तानवृद्धयर्थ भानुवासरे |
सेतुमूले मृतश्चेति पुत्रीमांश्च न संशयः॥२९३४॥
2930 - 2934. One born in Kubera Nadiamsa,
Cancer ascendant, Aquarius Navamsa, will have
two brothers, be eloquent in speech and will have
an adopted issue. The eldest son (of the family) will
be enthusiastic in treading impeccable paths. After
some time, he will fall sick due to sins of paternal
grand-father. To overcome this blemish, dips in
Setu should be undertaken. He will be endowed
with family. Donation of sesamum should also be
done. Following these, he will enjoy health and
progeny. For obtaining progeny to another coborn, on a Sunday ..... death in Setu ... and he will
obtain daughters. |
Notes: There are some interruptions and interpolations in these verses and the rendering is after
eliminating doubtful additions.
In verse 2934, the useful suggestion is that
another brother will be childless in the initial
Stages, and will obtain female issues after some
rituals. This verse can be linked to the following
three verses.
मनुः-
कुबेरंशे कनिष्ठस्तु कश्चित् सन्तानविध्नवान् |
तस्य दोषोपशान्तयर्थं सेतौ भानुव्रतं चरेत् ॥२९३५ ॥
माघमासे भानुवारे सप्तमीतिथिसंयुते ।
अर्कस्य प्रतिमां दद्यात् काञ्चनी वख्रसंयुताम् ॥२९३६ ॥
तिलदानं प्रकुर्वति शतब्राह्मणभोजनम् |
पश्चात् सन्तानमाप्नोति दीर्घमायुश्च विन्दति ॥२९३७ ॥
2935 - 2937. The last brother of all will have
some obstacles in begetting progeny. To overcome
this blemish, vows to Sun God on a Sunday coin-

72 Deva Keralam
ciding with Magha Saptami should be maintained
in Setu. A golden image of the Sun god, with
suitable robes should be worshipped. Donation of
sesamum should be undertaken and a hundred
Brahmins should be fed. Following these rituals,
he will obtain long-living progeny.
aera eaqat दीर्घमायुश्च विन्दति |
कुबेरांशे पूर्वभागे सोदरश्च द्विभार्यकः॥२९३८ ॥
एकभायों पुत्रयुक्तो द्विभार्यो दत्तपत्रन् |
धनञ्जयांशे पूर्वार्धे बालकौ द्रौ च नश्यतः॥२९३९ ॥
सहोदरीदयं विन्ाद्राल्यारिष्टं विनिर्दिशेत |
भगिन्यौ दवे चिरायुष्ये एका रोगवती भवेत् ॥२९४० ॥
एका दारिद्यमाप्नोति जायेते यमलौ सुतौ ।
जायेतां द्रे च सोदर्यौ पुत्रपत्रीसमन्विते ॥२९४१ ॥
किंचिद्भ्रातृफलं वश्ये कुबेरांशोद् भवस्य च।
रक्तवर्णं शरीरी च बाल्ये दुष्टस्वभाववान् ॥२९४२ ॥
पश्चात्तपस्वी ज्ञानी च शिवपुजाप्रणी भवेत् |
पुराणधर्मश्रोता च बाल्ये मातृप्रियः सुखी ॥२९४३ ॥
उत्कृष्टधर्मवानित्यं वैदिकाचार संयुतः
मृतप्रजाबहुत्वं च ह्यल्पपुत्रयुतो भवेत् ॥२९४४ ॥
भ्रातृशोकेन सन्तप्तः ह्यन्तकापट्ययुक्तिमान् ।
कंचित्कालमस्वतन्त्रः पश्चात् स्वातन्त्यभाग्यवान् ॥२९४५ ॥
श्रीयुक्तश्च महाभोगी धूर्तस्रीनायको भवेत् |
MERAY पापात्मा पाषण्डाचारतत्परः ॥२९४६ ॥
2938 - 2946. (a) His (brother’s), adopted son
will be long-lived.
(b) The brother of the native of former half of
Kubera Nadiamsa will have two wives. One wife
will have sons and the second one will adopt
progeny.
(c) Incase of birth in former half of Dhananjaya
Nadiamsa, the brother will have two sons.
(d) Two of the native’s sisters will be inflicted
by infantmortality. Two sisters will be long-lived.
One will be sickly. Another will be in poverty and
will have twin-sons. His sisters will have sons and
daughters.
(e) Some effects concerning co-born of one of
Kubera Nadiamsa are stated below. His brother
will be blood-red in complexion and will be wicked
in childhood. Afterwards he will perform penance
and be endowed with wisdom. He will be the best
among worshippers of Lord Siva and be an excellent donor. He will follow Vedic conduct. He will
have many dead children and limited progeny. He
will be grieved due to loss of co-born, be inwardly
cunning, be independent for some time and will
make fortunes on his own. He will be wealthy, will
enjoy much pleasures, and be the husband of a
wicked woman. His in-laws will be sinful and
hypocritic.
काश्यपः —
कुम्भांशे कटके लगने कुम्भराश्यंशजस्तथा |
सहोदरभ्रातृभार्यावंरो पापबहुत्ववान् ॥२९४७ ॥
तस्य पापवशादप्रातां पुत्राभावो मृतप्रजः।
भ्रातृणां चैव सर्वेषां भार्यावंशस्य लक्षणम् ॥२९४८ ॥
2947 - 2948. Aquarius Navamsa: As per sage
Kasyapa, the ascendant being Cancer with Aquarius
Navamsa, while the Moon is also in the sign
Aquarius and in Aquarius Navamsa, will cause
many sins in the in-laws’ family of the native’s
brother. Because of those sins, the brother will be
childless and will obtain dead children.
दारस्थानाधिपे मन्दे स्वोच्चे वा मकरांशगे ।
उद्राहमेको लभते कुबेरांशोद भवस्य च ॥२९४९ ॥
सम्पदाये विवाहः स्याद्रहुली सङ्गवान् भवेत् |
गृढकामातुरः श्रीमान् दारेशे स्वोच्चराशिगे ॥२९५० Il
पञ्चत्रिशाब्दपर्यन्तं गुढकामातुरः सुखी ।
प्रन्थान्तरे कुबेरांशे पञ्चचत्वारिवत्सरे ॥२९५१ ॥
जन्मादिविशतेः पश्चात् परस्रीसङ्गटोषवान् |
कामस्थानं गते शुक्रे TAIT समन्विते ॥२९५२ ॥
बहुकामातुरश्चैव ह्यसौ पापयुतो भवेत् |
तत्र सौम्ये कुबेरे वार्धके नष्टवीर्यवान् ॥२९५३ ॥
तन्मूलघ्रव्याकुलं चैव मध्ये मध्ये क्वचित् क्वचित् |
लग्नात् पञ्चमगे शुक्रे हयष्णरोगयुतो भवेत् ॥२९५४॥
वीर्यनाशमवाप्नोति कामवृद्धिं क्वचित् क्वचित्
स्वभार्यां श्यामवर्णा स्यादल्पभ्रातृसमन्विता ॥२९५५ ॥
बहुसोदरियुक्ता च बहुकालं समृङ्गली ।
। 2949 - 2955142. Cancer Ascendant - Kubera
Nadiamsa: (a) One born in this part of the zodiac
with Saturn in his exaltation sign, or in Capricom
Navamsa will have only one marriage. His marriage will occur in his 2nd dasa. He will have

Chandra Kala Nadi 73
liaison with many women and be secretively lustful. He will be rich if the 7th lord Saturn is exalted.
The said lustful disposition will exist upto the age
of35. According to another authority it willbe upto
the age of 45. After the age of 20, he will join
others’ women.
~. (b) Venus & Mars in Aries: Venus in the 10th
(in Aries) in the company of Mars will make one
_highly libidinous. He will be sinful (due to illicit
` associations).
(c)Mercury & Marsin Aries: Mercury therein
(i.e. in Aries, along with Mars) will cause loss of
semen in old age. Because of that, the person will
occasionally be in distress.
(d) Venus in Scorpio: Venus in the 5th from
the ascendant (i.e. in Scorpio) will cause diseases
generated by heat. The person will incur loss of
semen and his lustfulness will somewhat increase.
His wife will be dark in complexion and will have
limited number of brothers and many sisters. The
native will live for a long time. ।
कुम्भांशे कटके लगे कुबेरांशोदभवस्य च ॥२९५६ Il
श्वशुरः स्यालकश्चैव पापदारिद्यसंयुतौ ।
स्यालकस्यविशेषः स्यादगम्यागमनोत्सुकः॥२९५७ ॥
अल्पसन्तानमाप्नोति स्यालकस्य फलं स्मृतम् |
पुत्रस्थानाधिपे भौमे कुम्भांशे गुरुवीक्षिते ॥२९५८ ॥
धनञ्जयांशे जातस्तु बहुपुत्रयुतो भवेत् |
GA त्वेककस्तु दरिद्रश्चाल्पुत्रवान् ॥२९५९ ॥
विवाहानन्तरं कश्चिक्लङ्गग्रन्थिव्रणान्मृतः
पुत्रस्थानाधिपे भौमे शनिसंयुक्तवीक्षिते ॥२९६० ॥
स्वपुत्रौ at द्विभार्यो च ह्येको शङ्काप्रपीडितः।
द्विभार्यो ह्येकभार्यो वा HAT समुद् भवः॥२९६१॥
2956 - 2961. (a) The native’ s father-in-law and
brother-in-law, particularly the latter, will incur
penury. He (i.e. brother-in-law) will be enthusiastic of going to impeccable places and will have
limited number of children.
(b) The lord of the 5th, Mars, in aspect to Jupiter
and obtaining Aquarius Navamsa will give many
sons to the native of Dhananjaya Nadiamsa. One of
his sons will incur poverty and will have limited
number of issues. The native will die following
marriage due to ulcers of blood tubes of genital
organ. ~
(©) If the Sth lord Mars is aspected by or
associated with Saturn, the native will have two
sons and two wives. One of the wives will be of
doubtful disposition. One born in Kubera Nadiamsa, may have one wife or two wives, i.e. the
possibility of two wives is also there.
पूर्वभागे प्रजातस्तु प्रहपीडाप्रपीडितः।
उत्तरांशे सुतारिष्टबाहुल्यं भवति रुवम् ॥२९६१॥
पूर्वभागे क्वचिच्चेति स्वपितुः पापहेतुना |
पुत्र नाशनिवृत्यर्थं सेतुस्नानं समाचरेत् ॥२९६३ ॥
तिलदानं रोगहरं तीर्थाचरणमादिशेत्।
क्षीराभिषेकं गोदानं तिल धेनुं तथेव च ॥२९६४॥
Haat दानं सुतशङ्कानिवारणम् |
धनञ्जयांशे पूर्वार्धं कुलीरे च प्रजायते ॥२९६५ ॥
द्विपुत्रो धनिकः श्रीमान् कलत्रद्रयवान् भवेत्।
लग्नात् पञ्चमगे पपे यस्यां नाडयां प्रजायते ॥२९६६ ॥
दत्तपुवरद्रयोर्मध्य एको भाग्योत्तमोत्तमः।
इतरो भाग्ययुक्तस्तु गार्हस्थ्ये धनवान् भवेत् NEL Il
पुत्रशोकफलप्रापिर्वार्धके च न संशयः।
मध्यपादे त्विदं सत्यं कुबेरंशोद भवस्य च ॥२९६८ ॥
2962 - 2968. (a) The native of first half of this
Nadiamsa will incur planetary evils.
(b) One belonging to 2nd half will have many
blemishes concerning progeny.
(c) In case of birth in first half, fear of destruction of progeny will existto some extent, due to sins
committed by his father. To ward off this evil,
bathing in Setu should be done. Donation of
sesamum will destroy diseases. Ritual bath offered
to (the prescribed) deity with milk, and gifting of a
cow and sesamum in Ramesvaram will vanish the
blemishes in question.
(d) The native of Cancerascendant, Dhananjaya
Nadiamsa, Ist half, will have two sons, be wealthy
and will: have two wives.
(e) Kubera Nadiamsa - Cancer Ascendant:
Should there be a malefic in the 5th, he will have
two adopted sons out of whom one will enjoy
excellent fortunes. The other one will be fortunate
(of a moderate order), be a householder and be
wealthy. The native will in his old age incur grief
on account of loss of progeny.

74 Deva Keralam
Notes: (e) “Madhya Pade” in the last line of
sloka 2968 defies proper application.
लग्नात् पञ्चमगे राहौ तत्पदाष्टमगे शनौ ।
पुत्रस्तु भ्रान्तिमाप्नोति पुत्रिकाक्लेशमादिशेत् ॥२९६९ ॥
2969. Rahu in the Sth house from the ascendant
while Saturn is in the 8th house will cause wandering disposition to the native’s son. The native’s
daughter will be in grief.
भावाष्टवर्गे विस्तारं स्वपुत्रफलनिर्णयम् |
नाडीग्रन्थे क्वचिच्चेति लक्षणानि विनिर्दिशेत् ॥२९७० ॥
2970. With the help of Ashtaka Varga, results
concerning the native’s son be elaborately decided.
Nadi texts somewhat explain these.
were स्थितरीत्या च लग्नांशे कुम्भसंस्थिते |
तदीशे स्वोच्चराशिस्थे योगवान् रोगवान् भवेत् ॥२९७१॥
2971. Cancer rising with Aquarius Navamsa
while the ascendant lord (Moon) is inhis exaltation
sign will cause prosperity and diseases.
Notes: The term "Grahamsa Stita Reetya"
meaning “according to the Navamsa positions of
planets" does not have a proper link with the -
conditions stipulated in the sloka.
विलग्नारूढगे शुक्र भाग्येशेन निरीक्षिते ।
धनञ्जयांशे Fateh कामी गुप्तथनादयवान् ॥२९४५२ ॥
2972. One born in the first half of Dhananjaya
Nadiamsa while Venus is in the Arudha Pada of the
ascendant with the aspect of Jupiter, the 9th lord,
will be lustful and will own hidden wealth.
विलग्नांशकगे भौमे षष्ठेशे लग्नकेन््रगे |
लग्नाधिपेन संदृष्टे रोगी दुर्बलदेहवान् ॥२९७३ ॥
त्रिशंदर्णात् परं चेति देहे मेहविकारवान् |
` अग्निमान्द्यं च लभते हाङ्गरोगप्रपीडितः॥२९७४ ॥
2973 - 2974. Mars in the Navamsa ascendant
while the 6th lord from the ascendant Cancer (i.e.
Jupiter) is in an angle in aspect to the Moon will =
cause an emaciated body. After the age of 20, the
person will incur urinary troubles, dyspepsia and
disorders of limbs.
कामारूढपदे मन्दे कर्मेशे गुरुवीक्षिते |
सत्कर्मपूजा विघ्नं च कोपी गुप्तधनादयवान् ॥२९७५ ॥
2975. With the 10th lord (Mars) aspected by
Jupiter as the Arudha Pada of the 7th is occupied by
Saturn, the subject will face obstacles to his good
deeds and worship. He will be irascible and will
possess hidden wealth.
गुप्तद्रव्यः सुभुषादयः कुलीरे गुरुसंस्थिते |
कुम्भांशगे प्रजातस्तु वातप्रकृतिदेहवान् ॥२९५७६ ॥
2976. For a native of Cancer ascendant, the
planet Jupiter in exaltation in the sign Cancer, with
Aquarius Navamsa will give hidden wealth, rich
omaments and a physique prone to windy imbalances.
यस्य जन्मसमये शशिलग्नात्
सट्ग्रहो यदि च कर्मणि स्थितः।
तस्य कीर्तिरमला भुवि तिष्ठे
दायुषोऽन्तमविनाशितसम्पत् ॥२९७७ ॥
2977. He who has a beneficin the 10th from the
Moon at the time of birth will possess flawless fame
and wealth that will remain indestructible till the
end of his life.
Notes: This Yoga is popularly known as Amala
Yoga. There are authorities who prefer Amala
Yoga from the Moon rather than the one from the
ascendant.
केसरीयोगजातस्तु कुलीरांशे धनी भवेत् |
चन्द्रे पापयुते दृष्टे ह्यन्तः कपटवान् सदा ॥२९७८ Il
2978. The native of Kubera Nadiamsa with
Kesari Yoga will be wealthy. A malefic aspecting
or occupying an angle will produce inwardly cunning disposition.
Notes: “Kuliramse” (referring to Cancer Navamsa) in the first line should read as “Kuberamse”
meaning Kubera Nadiamsa.
जन्मसम्पद्विपत्केमदशायां च यथोत्तरम् |
भाग्यवृद्धिमवाप्नोति प्रत्यग्दाये विशेषतः ॥२९७९ ॥
शनिद्धितीयपर्याये प्रत्यग्दाये घने स्थिते |
जननी मृतिमाप्नोति मकरे पितृमारकम् ॥२९८० ॥
ततः पश्चाद् भातृशोकं पितृव्यारिष्ट संभवम् |
ज्ञातिवरगे मृतिं चैव षटित्रंशाब्दात् परं वदेत् ॥२९८१ ॥
रन्धेशांशे तत्रिकोणे स्फुटयोगं गते शनो ।
पितामहस्य निर्याणं विपद्दाये भविष्यति ॥२९८२ ॥

Chandt'a Kala Nadi 75
सर्वज्येष्ठपितृव्यस्य मारकं च ततः परम्।
विपदाये कुलीरांशे सिह्मदौ नात्रसंशयः॥२९८३ ॥
मकरे वृषभे fee तुलायां तत्रिकोणगे |
अतीव क्लेश कालः स्यात् स्फुटर्योग गते शनौ ॥२९८४ ॥
क्षामक्षोभादिकार्याणि देशाधिपतिनाशनम्।
सम्पत्तारदशान्त्यादो विपदाये शुभाधिकम् ॥२९८५ ॥
जनकस्य सुतप्राप्तिः क्षेमदाये विशेषतः।
लग्नाच्चतुर्थगे मन्दे निशाकरनिरीक्षिते ॥२९८६ ॥
अम्महोदररोगाच्च जनकस्य मूतिं वदेत्।
पित्राजितधनप्राप्िः प्रत्यग्दाये शुभान्तरे ॥२९८७ ॥
चत्वारंशात् परं लाभं स्वन्तत्रो धनवान् सुधीः
त्रिचत्वारंशतः पश्चाद्भ्रातुदरेषकलापवान् ॥२९८८ ॥
तत्काले कृत्रिमेणैव पुत्रशोके भविष्यति ।
2979 - 2988142. Kubera Nadiamsa = Cancer
Ascendant: (a) From the first to fourth dasa, the
native’s fortunes will gradually improve. The Sth
dasa will specially increase his fortunes.
(b) Saturn’s 2nd round of transit in Leo will
cause death of mother. In Capricorn he will destroy
father. Following this, the subject will lose his
brother and paternal uncle, in that order. After his
36th year, death will occur in the relatives’ circle.
(c) Saturn moving in a sign identical with the
Navamsa occupied by the 8th lord (i.e. of Saturn
himself) ora trine thereof will bring about the death
of the native’s paternal grand-father, during the 3rd
dasa. After this, the eldest of the paternal uncles
will quit the world in the native’s third dasa with
Saturn moving in Leo etc. These apply to Kubera
Nadiamsa (read “Kuberamse” meaning Kubera
Nadiamsa instead of “Kuliramse” - Cancer Navamsa).
(d) Irrelevant: Saturn’s journey in Capricorn,
Taurus, Leo and Libra or trines thereof will be a
period of intense difficulties. Famine and strife
will destroy the king.
(e) The end of 2nd dasa or beginning of 3rd dasa
will cause much auspicious effects to the subject.
His father will obtain a son in the 4th dasa. (This
should be applied to exceptional cases.)
(f) Saturn at birth occupying the 4th from the
ascendant Cancer and in aspect to the Moon will
cause death of father due to dropsy. The native will
obtain paternal wealth in his Sth dasa, in an auspicious planet’s sub period.
(g) He will have gains after his 40th year, will
become independent, wealthy and intelligent. After
the age of 43, he will have clashes with his brother.
During that phase he will become shrewd. He will
incur grief on account of loss of progeny.
भाग्यारूढपदाधीशे स्वोच्चे भृगुसमन्विते ॥२९८९ ॥
जन्मप्रभृति सम्पनः कुलीरांशे सुभाग्यवान् |
पुत्रस्थानं गते राहौ दशायां पुत्रनाशनम् ॥२९९० Il
विप्लवेन धनच्छेदं पश्चात् सौख्यं विनिर्दिशेत्।
विपद्दाये सुत प्राप्तिं त्रयोविंशात् परं लभेत् ॥२९९१॥
कुबेरांशे विपदाये ह्यादौ सन्तानलाभवान्।
आमध्यमाद्विपत्तारप्रत्यगृक्षदशावधि ॥२९९२ ॥
सन्तानोत्पत्ति कालं स्यात् कुबेरांशोद भवस्यच |
पश्चात् पुत्रश्रियं विन्द्यात् साधनेशदशासुखम् ॥२९९३ ॥
पत्रभराबल्यमाप्नोति कनिष्टभ्रातृसौख्यवान् |
तत्पुत्रस्य श्रियं विन्द्यात् स्वपुतरदरेषसं भवः॥२९९४ ॥
2989 - 2994. Kubera Nadiamsa: (a) The lord
of the 9th Arudha Pada being in exaltation and
being in the company of Venus will give wealth
right from birth. The native will be very fortunate.
(b) Should Rahu be in the Sth house, his Dasa
will destroy the native’s son. He will lose wealth.
After these debacles, he will recover his happiness.
(c) His 3rd dasa will give him progeny after
36th year. Orit could bein the beginning of the said
dasa. From the middle of the 3rd dasa through the
Sth dasa, it will bea phase of obtainment of progeny
for the native of Kubera Nadiamsa. Afterwards he
will enjoy progeny’s wealth. In his 6th dasa he will
be happy. His children will be prosperous. His
younger brother will cause him happiness and his
(i.e. younger brother’s) son will earn wealth but be
inimical to the native’s son.
Notes: (a) “Kuliramse” should read as
“Kuberamse” meaning Kubera Nadiamsa.
अष्टमेशदशाकाले फलमेवमुदाहतम् |
अन्तर्दशादिमार्गेषु फलं विस्तारमादिशेत् ॥२९९५ ॥
2995. Effects for the dasa of the 8th lord have
been stated in such a manner (as at “c” above).
More details should be understood with the help of
sub periods.

76 Deva Keralam
Notes: The 6th dasa referred to above seems to
be of Saturn, the lord of the 8th for Cancer ascendant.
धनज्जयां रो पूर्वार्धे फलनिर्णयमादिशेत्।
अष्टमाधिपतौ मन्दे स्वोच्चे वा स्वनवांशके ॥२९९६ ॥
लग्नेशे चरराशिस्थे दीरघायुर्योगमापनुयात् |
कुम्भांशे कटके लग्ने कुबेरांशोद् भवस्य च ॥२९९७ ॥
मध्यपूर्णान्तपर्यन्तमायुर्दायं विनिर्दिशेत् |
कुबेरांशे पूर्वभागे सप्ततिः परमायुषः॥२९९८ ॥
पञ्चाशद्त्सरादूर्ध्वं चक्रसन्धिः प्रवर्तते |
देहायासं प्रकुर्वीत तत्काले शान्तिमाचरेत् ॥२९९९ ॥
2996 - 2999, (a) Saturn in his sign of exaltation
or in own Navamsa while the ascendant lord is in
amovable sign will bless the native of Dhananjaya
Nadiamsa, Ist half, Cancer ascendant, with longevity.
(b) Kubera Nadiamsa: Should the Navamsa
ascendant fall in Aquarius, life span will range
from middle to end of full extent. The full length
of life for this native will be 70. After the age of 50,
he will incur physical illness for which immediate
remedies should be undertaken.
प्रत्यग्दशान्ते कुजभुक्तिकाले
चनद्रान्तरात्यादिमनोविकारम् ।
स्वदेह कार्श्यं मुनयो वदन्ति
TRAN जनितस्य पुंसः ॥३००० Il
समीरणांशे तच्छान्तिनिर्णयं च विनिर्दिशेत्
स्वर्भानुकुजजी वार्कप्रतिमां कारयेत् पृथक् ॥३००१॥
स्वगृह्योक्तविधानेन शान्तिं कु्येद्धिचक्षणः।
उत्तरांशे कालमृत्युरेकपञ्चाशवत्सरे ॥३००२ Il
gate ह्यपमूत्युश्च शान्त्या शान्तिं प्रयास्यति |
3000 - 30024. (a) Mental perturbation will
come to pass in the sub period of Mars or in the end `
of the sub period of the Moon, in the Sth dasa.
Physical emaciation will also be experienced by
the native of Dhananjaya Nadiamsa.
(b) Suitable remedies have to be directed to be
performed. The images of Rahu, Mars, Jupiter and
the Sun separately and remedies be performed as
per family tradition.
(c) The native of 2nd half of this Nadiamsa will
have timely death at the age of 51. But the one
belonging to first half of the said Nadiamsa will
face untimely death which should be remedied.
Notes: (b) Reference to Sameerana Nadiamsa
is out of context. Neither there is such a zodiacal
division.
लग्नात् केन्द्रगते चन्द्रे तुलांशे मेषराशिगे ॥३००३ Il
सूर्यात्मजेन संदृष्टे दशासंधौ महद्भयम्।
प्रत्यग्यदशासंधिकाले ह्यपमृत्युस्तथा भवेत् ॥३००४ Il
SHUN काल मृत्योर्नाडयोर्दयाश्च संदेहः।
शान्तिकर्मणि सिध्यन्ति ह्युत्तरं शोद् भवस्य च ॥३००५॥
प्रत्यग्दायान्तरमारभ्य साधनेशस्य भुक्तिषु |
| पूर्वर देहजाड्यं स्यात् कुबेरांशोद् भवस्य च ॥३००६ ॥
3003 - 3006. (a) First Half - Dhananjaya
Nadiamsa: The Moon in Aries, an angle from the
ascendant, in aspect to Saturn and begetting Libra
Navamsa will instil great fear in the junction of the
(Sth) dasa. During the junction of 5th dasa, fear of
untimely death will persist.
(b) In case of birth in 2nd half, death will be
timely (i.e. there will be no fear of untimely death)
due to remedial measures.
(c) Kubera Nadiamssa - First Half: The beginning and ending portion of the 5th dasa, or during
the sub period representing the 6th dasa (i.e. the 2nd
sub period of Sth dasa), the native will incur
षष्ठधिपपदे सूर्ये afar शनिस्थिते |
निशाकरेण संदृष्टे क्षयरोगार्दितो नरः॥३००७॥
3007. The Sun in the Arudha Pada of the 6th
house in aspect to the Moon while Saturn is in a
trine from the Sun will cause tuberculosis of the
lungs.
Notes: The text uses a strange term
“Shashtadhipa Pade” which strictly rendered leads
to the Arudha Pada owned by the 6th lord which
otherwise is the 6th itself counted from the ascendant. In my view, to make proper sense, it should
read as “Shashtarudha Pade” denoting the Arudha
Pada obtainable for the 6th house.
उत्तरार्थे दीर्धरोगी कुबेरांशसमुद भवः
Bart हिबुके मन्दे ह्यदरव्याधिसं भवम् ॥३००८ ॥
पश्चादारोग्यमाप्नोति सर्वनाडीफलं वदेत् |

Chandra Kala Nadi TI
भाग्याधिपदाशाकाले द्विपञ्चाशात् परं सुखम् ॥३००९ Il
स्वपुत्रः प्रबलं चैति जातकस्तु सुधर्मकृत् |
धनञ्जयांशे पूर्वार्धे पाके जीवे सुखाधिकम् ॥३०१० ॥
स्वान्त्दशां विना सौख्यं जीवनं स्यान संशयः
परत्यग्दशान्तमारभ्य पाके जीवस्य TTT ॥३०११ ॥
पितृव्योऽरिष्टमाप्नोति स्वपुत्रशिशुनाशनम् |
धनञ्जयां शे पूर्वार्धे सप्ततिः परमायुषः ॥२०१२ ॥
उत्तरांशे Tease: परमायुश्च विन्दति |
एकपञ्चाशगे af हयकषष्टिसमेस्तथा |
अन्त्यात् पूर्वं मृतिं चेति कुबेरांश समुद्भवः ॥३०१४॥
काश्यपः
चन्द्रांशकत्रिकोणेषु मासे निर्याणसं भ्रमम् |
चरराशिगते चन्द्रे तस्मिन् मासे मृतिं वदेत् ॥३०१४॥
3008 - 3014. (a) The native of 2nd half of
Kubera Nadiamsa will be sick for long durations of
time.
(b) Saturn in the 4th gives heart diseases.
Abdominal disorders are also possible with Saturn
in the 4th. After some time, good health will
prevail.
(c) Effects for the whole of the subject Nadiamsa are now stated. In the dasa of the 9th lord,
after the age of 52, happiness will prevail. The
native’s son will attain prosperity and the native
will perform highly charitable deeds.
(d) Incase of birth in the 1st half of Dhananjaya
Nadiamsa, the dasa of Jupiter will give much
happiness except in the sub period of Jupiter. In the
5th dasa, the sub period of Jupiter will cause evils
to father’s brother, and loss of one’s own grandson.
(e) 70 will be full life-span for a native of
. Dhananjaya Nadiamsa, 1st half whereas one born
in the later half will live upto 61 or 51 at the
maximum.
(f) According to’sage Kasyapa, the Sun’s tranSit in a sign equal to the Navamsa occupied by the
natal Moon will cause death. At that time, the
transit Moon will be in a movable sign.
मनुः
चन्द्रांशराशिगे सूर्ये तच्रिकोणेऽथ वा यदि |
कुबेरांशे च निर्याणं पूर्वभागे न संशयः ॥३०१५ ॥
3015. Thenative of Kubera Nadiamsa, Ist half,
will die when the transit Sun arrives the sign
represented by the Navamsa of the natal Moon, or
a trine thereof, according to Manu.
चन्द्रलग्नादव्ययारूढे पापाक्रान्ते प्रजायते ।
लोकान्तरसुखं नास्ति गुरुदृष्टौ क्वचित् क्वचित् ।३०१६ ॥
3016. If the Arudha pada of the 12th house
counted from the Moon is occupied by malefics,
the native will not be happy. If Jupiter aspects the
said Pada, some happiness will exist.
Notes: The text suggests Arudha Pada counted
from the Moon which is unheard of. At least in
available original Jaimini and Parasari literature, I
have not come across such an expression. Hence I
have my own doubt about the authenticity of this
instruction.
Possibly there is a copying error. The original
could have read as “Janmalagnaad vyayaarudhe”
(which could have been simply done away with the
expression “Vyayaarudhe”) instead of “Chandra
lagnaad vyayaarudhe”.
गजकेसरियोगेन स्वल्पज्ञानयुतो भवेत् ।
फलं लोकान्तराध्याये निर्णयं भवति धुवम् ॥३०१७॥
निर्णयं समवाप्नोति patter समुद् भवः।
प्रस्ताराष्टकवरगेषु फलं विस्तारमादिशेत् ॥३०१८ ॥
3017 - 3018. Gaja Kesari Yoga: This yoga
will give the subject some wisdom. Results have
to be ensured based on the chapter “Lokaantara”
(relating to the “other world”, following death).
Details should be told with the help of Prastara
Ashtaka Varga for the native of Kubera Nadiamsa.
RA AAT: |
सिंहे क्षमांशगे सूर्यँ पूर्वभागे प्रजायते |
विप्रजन्मा सुखी नित्यं द्वितीयोऽयं प्रकीर्तितः ॥३०१९ ॥
ज्येष्ठभ्रातृविनाशः स्यात् पश्चादभ्रातृयुतो भवेत् ।
वनान्ते पुरे वासो जननं भवति धुवम् ॥३०२० ॥
FHT त्वचे TR क्षमांशे पूर्वभागगे ।
वनान्तरेऽग्रहारे वा जननं नात्र संशय 113022 Il
3019 - 3021. Movable Ascendant - Kshama
Nadiamsa: (a) One born in a movable sign in the
first half of Kshama Nadiamsa, while the Sun is in
Leo will be a Brahmin. He will be the second issue
of the family. His older co-born will be destroyed

78 Deva Keralam
(i.e. will not live for a long time). He will have
after-born (who will live long enough). He will
either be born or will live in a town of forest region.
(b) The rising sign being a movable one as the
Moon is in an immovable sign with Libra Navamsa
will cause birth in a colony of Brahmins near a
forest region.
Notes: (a) The Nadiamsa position is for the
ascendant and not for the Sun in this particular case.
The birth is to be treated as Kshama Nadiamsa, first
half, in a movable sign.
Kshama Nadiamsa extends thus: from 6° 36'
to 6° 48' of a movable sign; 23° 12' to 23° 24' ofa
fixed sign, and from 21° 36' to 21° 48° of a dual
sign.
काश्यपः
नदीतीरेऽग्रहरास्य कानन प्रान्त्यदेशके |
जननं वासमित्याहुः क्षमांशे भाग्यवान् सुधीः ॥३०२२ ॥
दक्षिणोत्तर वीथ्योश्च गेहे परश्चिमद्रारके |
वीथ्यन्ते जननं चैति पूर्वद्रारगृहेऽपि वा ॥३०२२ ॥
see नदीप्रान्ते पूर्वपश्चिमवीथ्योश्च |
जननं दक्षिणे भागे जीर्णयुक्तगृहे तथा ॥३०२४॥
्षमांशे चोत्तरे भागे चतुर्थो भवति धुवम् ।
अथ वा सप्तमो वापि पश्चाद् भ्रातृविहीनवान् ॥३०२५ Il
3022 - 3025. (a) Ist Half: According to sage
Kasyapa, the subject of 1st half of Kshama Nadiamsa, in a movable sign, will be born and will live
in acolony of Brahmins, on a river bank, in a town
enriched by forests. He will be fortunate and
intelligent. The street of his birth will be spread
from south to north and house facing the west or the
east. The house of birth will be in the end of the
street.
(b) 2nd Half: This person’s birth will be in a
region of river. The street concerned will extend
from east to west. The house will be a dilapidated
one facing the south. He will be the 4th issue of the
family or the 7th one and will have no younger
brothers.
चपे क्षमांशगे ax मेषे fee च वा यदि।
पश्चाद् भ्रातृविहीनश्च ज्येष्ठभ्रातृसमन्वितः॥३०२६ ॥
3026. A malefic in Kshama Nadiamsa (i.e. the
ascending degree éxactly occupied by a malefic) as
the Moon is in Aries or Leo will deprive one of
younger brothers but will give older brothers.
पूर्वभागे प्रजातस्तु कनिष्ठभ्रातृभात्रिमान् |
श्यामवर्णशरीरः स्यात् स्वपिता वेदपारगः ॥२०२७ ॥
3027. One belonging to the Ist half of this
Nadiamsa will have younger brothers and sisters.
He will be black in complexion. His father will be
learned in the Vedas.
aay चोत्तरे धागे बाल्ये पितृविनाशवान् |
ज्यष्भ्रातृवशात् सौख्यमल्पकालं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥३०२८ ॥
क्षमां शे चोत्तरे भागे रक्तवर्णशरीरवान् |
जन्दाये महाक्लेशं पित्ररिष्टं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥३०२९ ॥
स्वज्येष्ठभ्रातुरुद्राहकाले तत्पूर्वमेव वा।
सन्निपात ज्वरान्मृत्युः स्वपितुनत्रि संशयः 1130 Fo Il
पश्चाद्भ्रातृ सहोदर्योरन्यत्रोद्राहकृत् सुधीः।
बाल्ये दारिद्यमापन्नः पितामहवियोगवान् ॥२०३१ ॥
3028 - 3031. The native of 2nd half of Kshama
Nadiamsa will lose his father in his very childhood.
He will be happy through his older brother for some
time (i.e. will be brought up by him for some time).
He will be of blood-red complexion. His first dasa
will produce intense difficulties, and destruction of
father. His younger sisters will marry elsewhere
(possibly in another religion or country). He will .
be intelligent, will incur poverty in early days and
will suffer loss of paternal grand-father.
Notes: Insome places the text denotes “Kshema
Nadiamsa” which is otherwise Kshama Nadiamsa.
fae क्षेमांशगे ws क्षेमांशे च पितुः पितुः।
पूर्वभागे जन्मदाये जन्माब्दे नाशमीरयेत् ॥३०२२ Il
3032. Both the Moon and the Sun in Kshama
Nadiamsa will cause loss of paternal grand-father
in the very first year of birth.
‘anid at चद पूर्वभागे विवाहवान् |
पराननियमे निष्ठः स्वभुजार्जितवित्तवान् ॥३०३३ ॥
बहुकालं ब्रह्मचर्य स्वपितामह आचरेत् |
पश्चाद्विवाहमाप्नोति वार्धके दारनाशवान् ॥३०३४॥
3033 - 3034. With the Moon in the former half
of Kshama Nadiamsa of an immovable sign, one
will marry (on time). He will! eat others’ food and
will have self-earned wealth. His paternal grand-

Chandra Kala Nadi
father would maintain celibacy for a long time,
would marry afterwards and would lose his spouse
in his old age.
पूर्वभागे मध्यखण्डे ait स्वपितामहः॥
दरिद्रवृत्तिः पञ्चाङ्गी बहुकालमभार्यकः 113034 ॥
पुत्रशोकेन सन्तप्तः सोदरभ्रातृशोकवान् |
स्वज्येष्ठभगिनीभर्तृगेहे वास युतः सुखी 113026 ॥
भगिनी भर्वुमूलेन सौख्यं चैति पितामहः।
वैश्यमूलाद्धनप्राप्तिं नियमान्नयुतो भवेत् ॥३०३७ Il
स्वपक्वानत्रं च पापध्नं सौख्यदं चापराश्रयम्।
काशीवासे सुखं पुण्यं गार्ग्यस्य वचनं मतम् ॥३०३८ ॥
art पूर्वभागे मध्यखण्डोद् भवस्य च।
पिता महोऽन्ननियमादापत्सन्यासवान् मृतः॥३०३९ ॥
वेदाब्दे जन्मदायेषु चतुष्पाञ्जीवहेतुना |
पितामहस्य निर्याणमापत्संन्यासकालके ॥३९४० ॥
Wt दशा सन्धौ पञ्चमाब्दान्त आदिके |
षष्ठाब्दे च महत्क्लेशं स्वपितामहनाशनम् ॥३०४९१ ॥
3035 - 3041. Paternal Grand-father: The
paternal grand-father of the native of first half of
the subject Nadiamsa would have an exceedingly
poor livelihood. He would eke out his bread
through Panachangas (i.e. would be a small time
“astrologer”). He would have no wife for a long
time, and be grieved on account of loss of son and
co-born. He would live in the homes of his older
brother and sister. His happiness would be through
his sister’s husband. He would earn wealth through .
men of business community and would eat regulated diet. He would depend on others and would
live in Kasi. These views are of Garga. Due to
specified food habits, he would take to ascetic
order and would die. During the course of ascetic
order, his death would occur in the 4th year of the
native due to quadrupeds. According to another
text, death would be in the beginning or concluding
part of the 5th year or the 6th year of the native and _
amidst great difficulties.
Notes: “Madhya Khanda” in sloka 3035 and
others in this portion of the text are redundant.
पूर्वभागे मध्यखण्डे क्षमांशे जनितस्य च ।
सहोदरी समाङ्गल्या स्वभर््रानुगमिष्यति ॥३०४२ ॥ |
3042. The sister of the native of former half of
Kshama Nadiamsa, movable ascendant will give
up her life on the pyre of her husband.
Notes: Seeing the sequence, the sister should
be of the native’s paternal grand-father, and not of
the native himself.
पितामहानुजः करश्चिदग्रहारे निवास्नवान्।
कुग्राम वासं लभते तत्पुत्रश्च सुपुत्रवान् ॥३०४३ Il
3043. One younger brother of the paternal
grand-father will live in a colony of Brahmins ina
remote village. He will have a worthy son.
समांशगे नीचनाथे पूर्वभागे पितामहः।
क्वचित् कालं भेक्षभोजी ब्रह्मचर्याश्रमे तथा।
मध्ये सोख्यं च लभते भ्रातृपुत्रविनाशवान् ॥३०४४ ॥
3044. The native’s paternal grand-father would
go begging for food for some time. He would
maintain celibacy for some time. In between he
would be happy. His co-born and son would be
destroyed.
Notes: This verse has three lines and conveys
what has already been conveyed.
The first line has certain defects. Sama Nadiamsa, first half should read as Kshama Nadiamsa,
_ first half.
“Neecha Naathe” meaning “lord of debility” is
meaningless.
` विदेशवासी स्वपितामहश्च
परान्न निष्ठवरतयाचकश्च ।
wards भ्रातृवियोग दुखी
स्वपुत्रमूलाद्धनलाभवान् स्यात् ॥३०४५ Il
3045. The paternal grand-father would live in
a foreign region (out of distress) and would beg for
food from others. In his old age, he would be `
grieved due to separation (death) of co-born. He
would gain money through his son.
पितामहस्यालकश्च धर्मशास्प्रवर्तकः।
` राजद्वारे प्रसिद्धश्च वेदिकाचारतत्परः ॥२०४६ ॥
क्रोध भार्यायुतः श्रीमान् पुत्रपुत्रीसमन्वितः।
वार्धके नेत्रहानिः स्यात् स्मार्तविद्या सुजीवकः॥३०४७ Il
3046 - 3047. The brother-in-law of the said
relative would be a promoter of Dharma Sastras, `
would be famous in royal service and would follow

80 Deva Keralam
the ‘codes set by the Vedas. His wife would be
short-tempered. He would be wealthy, be endowed
with sons and daughters and would lose his eye
sight in his old age. He would have a good
* livelihood through the learning meant fora Smartha.
Notes: “Smartha” denotes an orthodox Brahman guided by traditional law and usage, especially a follower of Sankaracharya and Vedanta
doctrines. Thus the relative under discussion would
be a priest of the town performing recommended
Vedic rituals for its inhabitants.
कोपना दुष्टशीला च पितामहसहोदरी |
तद्भर्ता पापकार्येण वार्धके क्लेश जीवकः॥३०४८ ॥
3048. The sister of paternal grand-father would
be irascible and wicked. Her husband would live
through sins and would experience much difficulties in his old age.
स्यालकस्य सुताधीश अपुत्रांशस्थले यदि |
पितामहस्यालकस्य वंशक्षीणं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥३०४९ ॥
3049. The dynasty of the brother-in-law of
paternal grand-father would not continue if his Sth
lord is in a Navamsa denying progeny.
Notes: This does not relate to the native’s
horoscope as such.
कर्मलोपवशात् पापं स्वपितामहस्यालकः।
- इह जन्मन्यपुत्रश्च भार्यापुत्रविनाशवान् ॥३०५० Il
प्रेतकार्ये मन्रलोपपापान्नाशः प्रजायते ।
वंशक्षयमवाप्नोति भार्यारिष्टं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥३०५१ ॥
नारदः
पुरम्रामउपाध्यायी wat पातकं लभेत् |
पापेन वंश्षीणः स्याच्छुभकार्ये न दोषवान् 112042 ॥
3050 - 3052. (a) Due to defective past Karma,
abrother-in-law of the paterna grand-father will be
childless and will incur destruction of spouse and
progeny (the latter though born will be destroyed
early). His wife and dynasty will incur destruction
due to his dealings with spirits and reciting destructive Mantras. =.
(b) According to sage Narada, the said relative
will be a religious preceptor of the town and will
later indulge in sinful deeds. Due to sins, his
dynasty will be destroyed. By performing good
deeds, he could get rid of the evils.
Notes: These 3 verses also deal with a brotherin-law of the native’s paternal grand-father.
पितामहस्यालकभावयोगे
फलाफलं कर्मविचित्रमाहुः।
विस्तार भावं मुनयो वदन्ति
क्षेमांश नाडयां तु क्वचित् फलं च ॥३०५३ ॥
3053. Effects concerning the brother-in-law of
the native’s paternal grand-father have been told in
great detail while those for Kshama Nadiamsa (i.e.
the native) have been minimum.
क्षेमांशे जनकः श्रीमान् श्रौतस्मार्तम्रवर्तकः।
वेदाध्ययनसंपन्नो बहुशिष्य प्रशिष्यवान् ॥३०५४ ॥
सत्कर्मणि प्रियो मानी ज्येष्ठभ्रातृवियोगवान् |
विद्याजीवनवान् रागी गढ्कार्यप्रवर्तकः 13044 ॥
Teer प्रसिद्धश्च विप्रमूलाद्धनार्जितः।
स्वपित्रा्जितसंपन्नः स्वभार्यां निरतः सुखी ॥३०५६ Il
पुत्रोत्सवात् परं भाग्यं क्षत्रगोधान्यभाग्यवान् |
पूर्वभागे पितुः श्रेष्ठो बहुपुत्रार्थमित्रवान् ॥३०५७ ॥
पितृमूलाद्धनप्राप्तिं राजपलनी farsa |
तन््राध्यक्षः सुखी नित्यमिष्टि वैदिककर्मवान् ॥३०५८ ॥
वातप्रकृतिकदेहश्च पैत्याधिकशरीरवान् |
तयो राधिक्यदोषेण बाहुमूले विचारवान् ॥३०५९ II
नत्रपीडा युतश्चैव मध्य मध्ये ज्वरं क्वचित् |
अथवा बाहुमूले च पीडावान् धनवान् सुधीः॥३०६० Il
क्षत्रगोधान्यवान् रागी वेदाध्ययनजीवनः'
भ्रातृभ्रात्रीविवाह कृदुद्रव्यार्जनसमर्थकः॥३०६१ ॥
एवं भूतस्स जनको जन्मदाये ज्वराद् भयम् |
देवज्ञविप्रमूलेन पुरापुण्यस्य हेतुना ॥३०६२ ॥
विद्या दानं spared ज्वररोगनिवर्तये |
पूर्वभागे च जनको दीर्घमायुर्न संशयः 113063 ॥
3054 - 3063. Father: The father of the native
of former half of Kshama Nadiamsa, movable
ascendant, will be wealthy. He will be a promoter
of ancient traditions, be well-informed of the Vedas
and will have many students. He will be fond of
good deeds, be honourable and will lose his older
brother. He will eke out his livelihood by his
learning, be passionate, and will promote secret
activities. He will be famous in royal service, will `
earn wealth through Brahmins, will have paternal

Chandra Kala Nadi 81
wealth and be fond of his wife. After birth of a son,
he will obtain landed properties, quadrupeds and
grains. He will have many sons and friends and
much wealth. He will be an excellent personage,
will earn money through his father and be liked by
the queen. He will be chief among Tantriks and be
fond of performing Vedic deeds. He will have a
windy body, with excess of bile. Due to these, he
will have troubles with shoulders. He will also
incur eye disorders. Occasionally he will incur
fever, or shoulder pains. He will be wealthy,
intelligent and will possess lands, quadrupeds and
corns. He will be passionate and will live through
Vedas. Inthe native’s first dasa, he will incur fever.
With the good offices of astrologers and due to the
meritorious deeds of his past birth, he will impart
free education and will overcome the fever. He will
be endowed with longevity.
चन्द्रलग्नशुभाधीशे भूसुते रविसंयुते |
स्वपिता शिवभक्तश्च शिवपूजाव्रती भवेत् |
गुरुदेवप्रसादेन GOT सुभग्यवान् ॥३०६४॥
शिव वरतध्यानफलेन तस्य
क्षेमांशनाडी जनकस्य भाग्यम् ।
स्यात् पूर्वभागे जनितस्तस्य
सुपुत्रपोत्रार्थं सुखं च नित्यम् ॥३०६५ ॥
3064 - 3065. Mars ruling the 9th from the Moon
sign and joining the Sun denotes that the native’s
father will be devoted to Lord Siva and will perform His worship. Due to the blessings of his
preceptor, he will obtain progeny and fortunes.
Due to worship of Lord Siva, he will beget fortunes.
He will have worthy sons and grand-sons and be
ever happy.
क्षमांशगे निशानाथे स्वपिता धार्मिकः सुखी |
पञ्चाक्षरमहामंत्रं जप्त्वा भक्ति पुरस्सरम् ।२०६६ ॥
पुत्रोत्सवादि संतोषी गेहे लक्षमीकराक्षवान् |
fas क्षमांशगे चन्द्रे द्येक एव पितुर्गुरः॥३०६७ Il
वेदाध्ययनसंपन्नो भ्रातृशोक युतो भवेत् |
कालान्तरे पुत्रतापं लभते स्वपितुर्गुरः॥३०६८ Il
प्रपितामहस्य पुत्रयाभर्तातु पापचेतनः।
पत्रोशोकवती चैव पुत्रिकाक्लेशमादिशेत् ॥२०६९ ॥
प्रपितामहस्य पुत्री भावे फलमिति स्मृतम् |
तत्पुत्र भर्तृपापेन बहुपुत्रविनाशनम् ॥३०७० ॥
3066 - 3070. (a) Father: Should the Moon be
in Kshama Nadiamsa, the native’s father will be
charitable, happy and will recite Panchakshari
Mantra with devotion. He will celebrate birth of a
son, be happy and wealthy.
(b) Father’s Preceptor: The Moon in the
subject Nadiamsa in Leo denotes that the father
will have only one preceptor who will have rich
knowledge of the Vedas. He will incur grief on
account of loss of brothers. After some time, grief
on account of loss of progeny will also come to
pass.
(c) The son-in-law of the native’s paternal
great grand-father (i.e. grand-father’s brother-inlaw discussed earlier) will be a sinful person. The
said person’s wife will incur grief on account of
loss of son and daughter. Thus should be understood effects about the daughter of paternal great
grand-father. She will lose many sons due to her
husband’s sins.
भार्यारिष्टमिति प्राहुस्तद्रंशे फलमादिशेत् |
पितामहस्वसृ भावे स्वर्भानुयुतवीश्षिते ॥३०७१ ॥
तत्पत्रपापबाहुल्यं तद्रच्चारिष्टमादिशेत् |
क्षमांशगे निशानाथे स्वपिता बहुपुण्यवान् ॥३०७२ ॥
क्षमांशे स्वपिता श्रीमान् वेदाध्ययनशीलवान् |
यष्टा वेदिककर्मात्मा बन्धुमित्रात्मपोषकः॥३०७३ ॥
पुत्रमूलात् सुसन्तोषी सद्विद्याकालयापकः।
एकदारव्रतो नित्यं किंचित् पाप करो भवेत् ॥३०७४ Il
गृढहत् कार्यवादी च मित्रमूलापकी्तिमान् |
राजामात्यप्रसादेन विप्रमूला च्छ्ियान्वितः॥३०७५ ॥
इष्टानुजमहदभाग्यं मध्ये सौख्यं धनागमम् ।
परान्न नियमे सिद्धि जनकश्च न संशयः ॥३०७६ ॥
3071 - 3076. (a) In the family of the said
daughter, evils to the spouse of a relative will
persist.
(b) The house denoting the father-in-law of
one’s paternal grand-father being in aspeci to Rahu
will cause many sins to the son of the said relative.
(c) Native’s Father: He will be a highly meritorious person if the Moon is in Kshama Nadiamsa.
He will be quite wealthy and be disposed to study
the Vedas and perform such deeds as prescribed by

82 Deva Keralam
the Vedas. He will patronise his kinsfolk and
friends. He will be happy through his sons and will
spend his time in acquisition of learning, will have
one spouse, be somewhat sinful, of secretive disposition, attached to his undertakings and subjected
to loss of fame through friends. He will gather
wealth through Brahmins, with the mercy of the
king and minister. He will have amicable co-born,
be highly fortunate, will in between incur advent of
wealth and will be disciplined in eating others’
food.
उत्तरांशे प्रजातस्य पितृव्यस्तु चिरायुषः
पितामहश्रातृमूलाज्जीवनं कष्टमेव हि ॥३०७७ ॥
पितृव्यभार्या कुटिला कुरूपा विकृतानना |
कालान्तरे सुतप्राप्तिरु्तरांशोद् भवस्य च ॥३०७८ Il
3077 - 3078. Movable Ascendant - Kshama
Nadiamsa - 2nd Half: The native’s paternal uncle
will be long-lived and will eke out his livelihood
through a brother of paternal grand-father. His life
will be marked by hardships. His wife will be
crooked, unsightly and ugly-faced. He will have
progeny after initial delays.
-पितामहभ्रातृभार्याभावेशे कुजसंयुते |
अपलीकौ च द्रौ चैव पितामहसहोदरौ ॥३०७९ ॥
उत्तरे apr पूर्वभागेकपुत्रवान् |
पितामहस्ठ सुपुत्र बहुकालं समुङ्गली ॥३०८० ॥
3079 - 3080. If the lord of the 11th joins Mars,
_ the native’s paternal grand-uncle will remain unmarried. Paternal grand-father will have two sis--
ters. If the subject belongs to 2nd half of the
Nadiamsa under discussion, paternal grand-father
will not have a male issue. But in case of Ist half,
the said relative will have one son. His daughter
will be endowed with a long-living husband.
उत्तरांशे प्रजातस्य स्वपितुर्भगिनीव्यथाम् |
अल्पकालं भ्रातृसौख्यं पुत्रक्लेशवती भवेत् ॥३०८१॥
उत्तरांशे च जनकः सौदकसमन्वितः।
बहुभ्रातृयुतश्चैव सपत्नी मातृमान् भवेत् ॥३०८२ ॥
उत्तरे पितृव्यश्च सदा क्लेशेन afer: |
व्यवसायपरो नित्यं प्रामणीः पापचेतनः ॥३०८३ ॥
3081 - 3083. Kshama Nadiamsa - 2nd Half:
(a) The native’s paternal aunt will lead an unhappy
life. For some time she will receive happiness
through her brothers. She will incur grief on
account of loss of son.
(b) Father: The native’s father will have only
one sister, but many brothers apart from a stepmother.
(c) Paternal Uncle: He will lead a perpetually
difficult life, will live through agriculture, be the
chief of a village and be sinful.
उत्तरांशे जन्मदाये जन्माब्दे पञ्चमेऽथ वा।
स्वपितारिष्टमाप्नोति पूर्वभागे प्रपीडितः ॥३०८४ ॥
3084. The native of 2nd half will lose his father
in the first year of the first Dasa, or in the 5th year.
One belonging to the 1st half will incur lot of evils
to father (instead of death as above).
पूर्वभागे भेदमातुर्जन्मदाये महत् सुखम् |
तृतीय सोदगोत्पत्त्या जनकश्च श्रियान्वितः ॥३०८५ ॥
स्वपिता यत कार्येषु राजद्रारेऽनुकूलवान् |
मित्रानुकूल्यं लभते तन्मूलात् पितृसौख्यवान् ॥३०८६ ॥
3085 - 3086. Kshama Nadiamsa - Ist Half:
During his first dasa, the native’s step-mother will
enjoy a great deal of happiness. He will have birth
of 3rd brother. His father will acquire wealth and
will achieve success in his undertakings through -
royal help. Further his friends will also be a source
of gain.
wyatt जनक्लेशं पूर्वाश्रितजनावधि |
नूतनप्रबलं चेति तृतीयान्दे न संशयः॥३०८७ Il
3087. Irrelevant: People in royal circles will
incur grief. The third year of birth will be a source
of newly acquired strength.
तृतीयाब्दान्तमारभ्य योगः स्यादद्वित्रिवत्सरग् |
स्वपितुर्मित्रभाग्याप्तिः पूर्वालोचनहेतुना ॥३०८८ ॥
3088. From the 3rd year of the native, (vide
sloka 3086), his father will enjoy prosperity for 2 or
3 years. He will earn fortunes through his friends
due to his previous schemes.
राजपत्या Bw च तदद्रारप्रमुखावधि |
aera चैति पाण्ड्यदेशेनसंशयः॥३०८९ ॥
यवनाधिपते रमृतयर्वृषभां शे शनिस्थिते |
मिथुने धूनयनाशं च लोके दुर्भिक्षमादिशेत् ॥३०९० ॥

Chandra Kala Nadi 83
3089 - 3090. Irrelevant: Evils to the king’s
spouse will come to pass. Chief men in royal
circles will be in trouble. The Pandya king’s son
will become strong. The Yavana king will die
when Saturn begets Taurus Navamsa. In Gemini,
Saturn will destroy crops and will usher famine in
the country.
जन्मप्रभृति सन्तोषं विप्रमूलाद्धनागमम् |
भाग्यवृद्धिमवाप्नोति दशान्ते क्लेशमादिशेत् ॥३०९१ ॥
3091. (Continuation of sloka 3086): The subject will be happy right from his birth. He will have
financial gains through Brahmins. His fortunes
will improve (in the first dasa). Its end will cause
difficulties.
SEY जन्मदेशे क्लेशं सर्वजनावधि |
कलहेन विचारः स्यात् प्रभुवर्गे ह्यरिष्टकृत् ॥३०९२ ॥
स्वपितुरमित्रसामन्तो पञ्चमा्दे प्रपीडनम् ।
भरभुवर्गे शिशुक्लेशं राजपुत्रीविनाशनम् ॥३०९३ ॥
3092 - 3093. Irrelevant: In the 2nd dasa, the
country will be in difficulties. He will incur grief
due to quarrels. Evils will exist in the king’s
family. A subordinate king, who is friendly to his
father, will incur great evils in the Sth year. Loss
of child in royal family will occur. The wife of the
king will be destroyed.
सममासे पञ्चवर्षे स्वपिता ज्वरपीडितः।
षष्ठब्दे च विचारं च सोदरोत्यत्तिमादिशेत् ॥२०९४ ॥
दशान्ते सोदरोत्पर्तिगर्भाधानमथापि वा ॥
विद्यारम्भात् परं चैव षष्ठाब्दे नात्र संशयः॥३०९५ ॥
3094 - 3095. The native’s father will be troubled by fever in an even month of the Sth year. The
6th year will cause worries but acquisition of a
younger brother or conception to mother. During
this year, he will be initiated into learning.
्षमांशाधिपतौ शुक्रे त्वसितेन निरीधिते।
उदरव्याधिमान् बाल्ये पितृमूलात् सुसोख्यवान् ॥२०९६ ॥
सोदराः सप्ततेषां दो प्रबलौ भाग्यशालिनो |
आयुष्मन्तो भ्रातरो द्रौ विद्यानुद्धिसमन्वितौ ॥३०९७ ॥
Femme प्रवीणो च राजद्वारे सुपूजितौ |
3096 - 3097142. Venus in aspect to Saturn will
cause abdominal disorders in the native’ s boyhood
days. He will obtain happiness through father. He
will have seven brothers two of whom will be quite
prominent. Two brothers will be endowed with
longevity, education and intelligence. They will be
skilful in the Vedas and will receive royal honours.
Notes: Venus is referred to here as the lord of
Ksbhama Nadiamsa which is far from truth and
suggests a clear possibility of corruption in transmission. Apparently it refers to the lordship of the
Sth lord Venus, for Capricorn, as abdominal disorder is the prime theme of the verse. Since the
ascendant dealt with is a movable one, the reference is to Capricorn ascendant, Kshama Nadiamsa.
लग्नादव्ययगते TR चन््राद्व्यः्यगते भृगो ॥३०९८ ॥
श्रौतस्मार्तप्रवीणश्च क्षमांशे वेदपारगः।
धार्मिकोऽत्यन्तमेधावी वसुवर्षात् परं सुधीः॥३०९९ ॥
3098 - 3099. The Moon in the 12th from the
ascendant, as Venus is in the 12th from the Moon,
will produce the following effects for the native of
Kshama Nadiamsa of a movable ascendant. He
will be skilful in knowledge related to the Vedas
and traditional laws. He will be charitable and
exceedingly intelligent. His intelligence will flourish after the age of eight.
मन्दांशकगते शुक्रे बाल्ये मन्दगतिर्भवेत्।
सम्पदाये सप्तमान्दे ऋतुवर्षात् परार्धगे ॥३१०० ॥
ब्रह्मोपदेशकर्माणि चौलं पञ्चमवत्सरे |
पूर्वभागे तृतीयाब्दे पञ्चाब्दे च वा यदि ॥३१०१॥
amit चौलकर्माणि agate विनिर्दिशेत् ।
्षमांशे TAC भागे चौलोपनयनं शुभ् ॥३१०२ ॥
अष्टमान्दे त्वेक काले पूर्वभागे पृथक् पृथक् |
3100 - 3102142. (a) Kshama Nadiamsa - 2nd
Half: Venus aspected by Saturn and placed in a
Navamsa of Saturn denotes that the native will
walk slowly in his boyhood days. In his second
dasa, in the 7th year or in the later half of the 6th
year, he will receive Brahmopadesa (initiation into
spiritual order). In his 5th year, his tonsure ceremony will take place:
(b) Ist Half: In his 3rd or Sth year, tonsure
ceremony of his brother will occur.
(c) For the native of 2nd half, tonsure ceremony
and thread ceremony will occur simultaneously in

84 Deva Keralam
the 8th year while for the subject of first half, these
will be separately held.
fae तुलांशगे ae भार्गव त्वसि्तांशगे 113203 ॥
ऋतुवर्षान्दपर्यन्तमुदरामयरोगवान् ।
तदोपपरिहारार्थं शुक्रस्य प्रार्थनां वदेत् ॥३१०४॥
लक्ष्मीस्तोत्रं प्रकुर्वीत पिण्याकबलिमाचरेत्।
पिण्याकान्बलिं चेव सप्तविंशदिनानि च ॥३१०५ ॥
तिल दानेन चायोग्यमुदरव्याधिनाशनम् |
मीने तुलांशगे चन्द्रे सिंहे तत्तिकोणगे ॥३१०६ ॥
बालारिष्टभयप्रापिर्जन्मदाये न संशयः।
जीविते दीर्धमायुष्यं सोदरभ्रातृमान् सुखी ॥३१०७ ॥
पित्रार्जितधन प्राप्िर्विद्यावान् बुद्धिमान् भवेत् |
3103. - 31072. (a) The Moon in Leo with Libra
Navamsa while Venus occupies a Navamsa of
Saturn will cause abdominal disorders for a period
of one year from the age of 6. To overcome this
blemish, prayers to Venus should be offered, and
recitation of praises of Goddess Lakshmi be undertaken. Oil-cakes (of sesamum seeds) should be
donated for 27 days. Donation of sesamum will
revive health and destroy abdominal disorders.
(0) The Moon in Pisces with Libra Navamsa
while Venus (read “Sukre” for “Simhe’) is in a
trine from the said Pisces will cause fear of infantile
mortality during the first dasa. If he survives, he
will be long-lived. He will have co-born, paternal
weaith, learning and intelligence.
वृषभलने वित्तांशः
वित्ताशे वृषभे लग्ने पूर्वभागे प्रजायते |
विप्र जन्मा सुखी नित्यं रूपवान् मतिमान् भवेत् ॥३१०८ ॥
महानदीप्रान्तदेशे त्वग्रहारे प्रसूतिमान् ।
अयं तुरीयपुत्रो वा पञ्चभो वा विनिर्दिशेत् 13208 ॥
सोदरभ्रातृमान् वाग्मी सहोदरसमन्वितः॥३११० ॥
वित्तांशजातो वृषपूर्वभागे
नित्यं घनैकार्जनतत्परः स्यात्।
संप्राप्तनिक्षेपउदारभागः
शिवस्यपादाम्बुरुहेऽतिभक्तः॥३१११ ॥
3108 - 3111. Taurus Ascendant = Vitta Nadiamsa: The subject of first half of this Nadiamsa
will be born as a Brahmin, in the region of Maha
Nadi (or a great river) in a colony of Brahmins. He
will be charming, intelligent and be the 3rd or the
Sth issue of the family. He will have male co-born,
be eloquent in speech and intent upon gathering
wealth. He will locate underground treasure and be
liberal in disposition. He will be a great devotee
of Lord Siva.
Notes: The name of the Nadiamsa referred to
in this part of the text, is Vitta Nadiamsa. It should
be Viswa Nadiamsa (as given in 3553 etc. in the
ensuing pages).
Viswa Nadiamsa rules thus: from 7° 12' to 7°
24' of a movable sign, from 22° 36' to 22° 38' of a
fixed sign, and from 23° 12'to23° 24’ of adual sign.
लग्नाधिपे वा शुभखेटयुक्ते
स्वयोग्यवृत्या धनमाददाति |
सत्पदानं कुरुते सुभोगी
वेदोक्तमार्गेण शिवार्चनं च ॥३११२ ॥
3112. The ascendant or its lord being in the
company of a benefic will indicate the following.
The native will gather wealth as per the profession
prescribed for his family. He will enjoy pleasures
and will please Lord Siva by worshipping him as
per Vedic teachings.
Notes: “Lagnadhipe Va” in the first line reads ©
as “Lagne atha naathe” in another version.
“Satpadaanam kurute” (performing seven kinds of
Great Charities) in the 3rd line reads as “Siva
Prasanna kurute” (pleasing Lord Siva) in another
version.
लग्ने वर्गोत्तमे च्रे रन्ध्रे लग्नांशगे गुरो ।
ग्रामणीर्धनधान्यादिकीर्तिमान् पशुमान् भवेत् ॥३११३ ॥
3113. The ascendant being in Vargottama
Navamsa, the Moon in the 8th house and Jupiter in
the Navamsaascendant (orthe Moon in Vargottama
in the ascendant Taurus while Jupiter in the 8th -
Sagittarius - obtains the Navamsa ascendant) will
make the native head of the village. He will be
endowed with wealth, grains, fame and quadrupeds.
जन्मदाये पिता बाल्ये धनलाभ शुभान्वितः।
मातादेहभयं व्याधि शान्त्या शान्तिं प्रयास्यति ॥३११४॥
3114. Taurus Ascendant - Vitta Nadiamsa:
During the native’s first dasa, his father will gain
wealth and other auspicious effects, but his mother

Chandra Kala Nadi 85
will be physically endangered due to diseases for
‘which suitable palliative measures be resorted to.
This applies to birth in first half of the subject
Nadiamsa.
SUN प्रजातस्तु तृतीयोऽयं प्रकीर्तितः।
जन्मदाये मातृहानिर्दितीयोद्वाहवान् पिता ॥३११५ ॥
3115. Vitta Nadiamsa - 2nd Half: The subject
will be the 3rd issue. His first dasa will cause
danger to his mother (i.e. she will die). His father
will marry for the second time.
पूर्वभागे पितृव्यस्य कलत्रद्रयमादिशेत्।
वेदशास्रादिसम्पन्नो विनयी च निरामयः॥२३११६ ॥
Ta गर्गमते वित्तांशे जनितस्य च।
स्वपिता च पितृव्यश्च कलब्रह्यसंयुतौ ॥३११७॥
रागी च स्वपिता विद्वानिष्टिवेदिक कर्मवान्।
शिवपूजारतो नित्यं रुद्राध्यायविधानतः॥३११८ ॥
पितृव्यभवने चन्द्रे भूसुतेन निरीक्षिते ।
पितृप्वसेका विधवा बहुकालं सुजीवति ॥३११९ ॥
3116 - 3119. (a) 1113 paternal uncle (and not the
father) that will have two wives if the birth is in the
former half of the subject Nadiamsa. The native
will be learned in the Vedas, be modest and free
from diseases.
(b) There is another work that quotes sage
Garga indicating that both the father and paternal
uncle will have two wives.
(c) His father will be passionate, learned, will
follow the Vedic path and will worship Lord Siva.
एका सुमङ्गली नित्यं दारिद्ेण च aera |
वित्तशनाडीजातस्य पितामहकुलक्षयः ॥३१२० Il
मातृवंशं तथा विन्द्यात् पितृव्यश्च श्चिरायुषः
दारान्ते सुतप्रापििर्दर्दानप्राप्तिमान् सुखी ॥३१२१॥
पितृव्यस्य फलं सत्यं स्वपिता सोख्यमान् भवेत् |
3120 - 3121142. (a) Should the Moon be in the
11th in aspect to Mars, one of the paternal aunts will
be widowed and will live for along time. Another
will have a long-living husband but be emaciated
due to utter poverty.
(b) The family of paternal grand-father will be
destroyed. So also the mother’s family. One
paternal uncle will be long-lived, will have progeny through re-marriage and will receive charities
from questionable sources. Effects stated for paternal uncle will bear truth.
(c) The native’s father will enjoy happiness.
लग्नाष्टमगते जीवे बहु्रहसमन्विते ॥३१२२ ॥
दुष्मतिप्रहनाहुल्यं तद्वंशे नात्र संशयः।
वृषभे यदि wast जातो विद्वान् सुखी धनी ।
दुरान्नभोक्ता सततं दुष्मतिग्रहसंयुतः॥२३१२३ ॥
3122 - 3123. Effects stated for paternal will
bear truth. The native's father will enjoy happiness.
Should Jupiter be in the 8th with many planets, one
born in Taurus ascendant would have many members in his family who would have ill-received
donations. The native of the subject Nadiamsa
(Shashtiamsa is a wrong entry) will be learned,
happy, wealthy, will eat bad food and will ever
have ill-received donations.
स्वतन््रशीलो द्विजदेवभक्तो
धीरः प्रगल्भो बहुशासरवेत्ता |
मानी कलाकाव्यविशुद्धवुद्धि-
मनोहरो वा वृषभे प्रजातः॥३१२४ ॥
3124. He will be of independent disposition,
devoted to gods and Brahmins, be bold, confident,
learned in many Sastras, honourable, will have
clear concept of art and literature, and will possess
charming looks. This applies to a native of Taurus
ascendant (in general).
वृषभलग्ने जातः क्लेशसहिष्णुसुखरिपुहन्ता बाल्ये |
संप्राप्तयुवत्या ह्युदरामयवस्तिरोगदारवान् भवति ॥३१२५ ॥ `
परोपकारशीलश्च भविष्यज्ञः सुबुद्धिमान् |
वृषभे मिथुनांशे च जनितः क्िप्रकोपवान् 13226 ॥
वेदाध्याने प्रियः कान्तः श्रौतस्मार्तविशारदः।
कन्यांशे वा विलग्ने भाग्ये गुरुयुतेक्षिते ॥३१२७ ॥
लग्नाधिपे कुलीरांशे दिवाकरसमन्विते |
रक्तवर्णो मध्यगात्रो भाग्यस्थाने सुभाग्यवान् BRR ॥
धनिकः कृतकर्मा च प्रतिग्रहपरः सदा ।-
पिशुनश्चपलो नित्यं वित्ते राहौ प्रजायते ॥३१२९ ॥
3125 - 3129. (a) One born in Taurus ascendant
will endure difficulties and will have his happiness(?) and enemies destroyed. He will acquire a
spouse in his boyhood days who will incur diseases
of stomach and waist. He will be disposed to help.

86 ` Deva Keralam
others, will be a knower of the future (i.e. be an.
astrologer) and be quite intelligent.
(b) If the Navamsa ascendant in Taurus is
Gemini, the person will be instantly given to anger.
He will be fond of Vedic studies, charming, splendorous and be skilful in Vedas.
(c) The ascendant lord in Virgo Navamsa while
the 9th is aspected or occupied by Jupiter ..... (text
incomplete).
(d) The lord of the ascendant with the Sun in
Cancer Navamsa will cause a blood-red body
which will be of medium build.
(e) If the lord of the ascendant is in the 9th, one
will be very fortunate.
(f) Should Rahu be in the 2nd, one will be
wealthy, will complete his undertakings and be
ever disposed to receiving gifts. He will further be
a miser and of unstable disposition.
वितांशगे पूर्वभागे द्वितीये राहुसंस्थिते |
उत्तरांश प्रजात स्तु विद्या विष्नयुतो भवेत् ॥३१३० Il
पूर्वभागेऽथ विद्यावानग्रहारनिवासवान् |
देशान्तरे महाभाग्यं स्वपिता च तथा लभेत् ॥३१३१॥
शुभांशगे धने vet विद्यावान् धनिकः सुखी ।
पापांशे पापराशिस्थे विद्याबुद्धिविहीनवान् ॥३१३२ ॥
3130 - 3132. Taurus Ascendant = Vitta Nadiamsa: (a) Rahu in the 2nd house will cause impediment in learning if the person belongs to the 2nd
half of this Nadiamsa.
(b) If birth be in the first half, Rahu in the 2nd
will make him well-educated and cause him to live
inacolony of Brahmins. His father will earna great
deal of prosperity in distant lands.
(c) Rahu in the 2nd with a benefic Navamsa
will promote learning, wealth and happiness. Should
the planet instead beget a malefic’s Navamsa,
being in a malefic’s Rasi, one will be bereft of
learning and intelligence.
विक्रमाधिपतौ चन्द्रे मीने तौलिनवांशगे ।
भरातूत्रययुतो मानी भगिन्यश्च तथा स्मृताः ॥३१३३ ॥
शेषं नाशमिति प्राहर्जयेष्ठ भ्राता चिरायुषः।
प्रनथान्ते नारदीये भगिन्यौ च सुजीवतः॥३१३४ ॥
एका क्लेशवती नित्यं दुःखिता च तथा भवेत् ।
भ्रातृज्येष्ठ श्चिरायुष्मान् देशत्यागात् परं सुखी ॥३१३५ ॥
3133 - 3135. The lord of the 3rd, Moon, in
Pisces with Libra Navamsa will cause three brothers and three sisters. Rest of the co-born will be
destroyed. Perhaps, the oldest co-born will be
long-lived. The subject will be honourable. According to Naradeeyam, sisters will be long-lived.
One of the sisters will be distressed and ever in
grief. The eldest brother will be long-lived and will
beget happiness after leaving the birth country.
भोमे यावत् फलानि स्युस्तावत् सङ्घयाः सहोदराः।
दीघीयुषा इति प्राहुः शेषं नाशमितितीरयेत् ॥३१३६ ॥
3136. The number of co-born endowed with
longevity will correspond to the number of Bindus
in the (rectified) Ashtaka Varga of Mars. Rest
(exceeding such number) will face destruction.
सहोदरारिष्टदाये गोचरे क्रूरकालगे |
वदेत् सहोदरक्लेशं नाडीवित्तांशाजस्य च ॥३१३७॥
3137. The native of the subject Nadiamsa will
see his co-born in grief in the dasa periods of
planets that are capable of causing harm to them
and with relevant malefic transits.
लाभेशांशे तत्रकोणे स्फुटयोगं गते शनौ ।
गते भ्रातर्यन्यदेशं मातृपीडां विनिर्दिशेत् ॥३१३८ ॥
3138. Transit Saturn reaching the sign identical with the Navamsa occupied by the lord of the
11th at birth, or a trine thereof, will cause evils to
‘mother and will remove co-born to a foreign land.
बालारिष्ट भयं किचिद्यमषष्ठांश जस्य च।
RU जन्मदाये क्रूरमासे भविष्यति ॥२१३९ ॥
तद्ोषपरिहारार्थं शान्तिं कुर्याद्विचक्षणः।
राजतं चन्द्रमभ्यर्च्य दानं कुर्याद्यथाविधि ॥३१४० ॥
जातकस्य जनन्याश्च दयायुरारोग्यमादिशेत् ।
3139 - 3140142. Taurus Ascendant - Yama
Shashtiamsa: One born in this part Taurus will
have fear of infantile mortality in a malefic’s sub
period in the first Dasa, coinciding with the Sun’s
transit in an adverse sign. To overcome this
blemish, the discerning should seek suitable remedy. A silver image of the Moon-God should be
worshipped, and donations as prescribed by Sastras
shouldbe done. Themother of the native will (also)
be in good health and be blessed with longevity
(following these remedies).

Chandra Kala Nadi 87
Notes: The word “Shashthamsa” (denoting 1/
6th part 02 sign) should read as “Shashtiamsa” (1/
60th part of a sign. Yama Shashtiamsa in Taurus
extends from 12° 30' to 13° (an even sign). One
sixth part of a sign (in equal measures of 5°) is not
a part of traditional Hindu natal astrology.
मीने तुलांशगे चन्र भूसुतेन निरीक्षिते ॥३१४१ ॥
स्वपित्ररिष्टतः पूर्वं मातुर्मरणमादिशेत् |
चन्द्रारिष्टोपशान्त्यर्थं स्वगृह्योक्त विधानतः ॥३१४२ ॥
RUT मन्ददाये विधिवच्छान्तिमाचेत् |
ताताम्बिकादिसौख्याप्तर्बालारिष्टं न विद्यते ॥३३४३ ॥
स्वपितृव्यसुतारिष्टं जन्मदाये नसंशयः।
लग्ने गुरुस्थिते काले विद्यारम्भं विनिर्दिशेत् 3 ewe ॥
जन्मलग्नांशगे जीवे मोञ्जीबन्धनमादिशेत्।
धनूराश्यंशगे जीवे लग्नाशांशत्रिकोणगे ॥३१४५ ॥
गोचरे जन्मदायेऽस्य सोदरोद्राहमादिशेत् |
मन्दे जीवान्तरे काले वित्तांरो जनितस्य च ॥३१४६ ॥
उत्तरायणगे सूर्ये प्रथमोद्राहमादिशेत् |
विवाहसमये वापि तत्पूर्वं वा ज्वरार्तिमान् ॥३१४७ ॥
पसूरिकाभयप्राप्तिः क्रूरमासे न संशयः ।
सुखेशस्थांशगे दाये लग्नाधिपतिभुक्तिषु ॥३१४८ ॥
वित्तांशगे प्रजातस्य दारलाभं विनिर्दिशेत् |
स्वपितुर्धनवस्रादिलाभो भवति नित्यशः॥३१४९ ॥
जन्मदाये फलं सत्यं Pe विना सुखम् ।
जन्मादिभावाधिपतेर्दशायां
क्रमात् त्रिषष्ठाष्टमभुक्ततिकाले |
तदभाव दुखं च शुभेक्षितश्चेत्
केन््रत्रिकोणाधिपसौख्यमेति ॥३१५० ॥
पितुभ्रातृकलत्राणां त्रयाणां च यथाक्रमम् |
तत्तद् भवाष्टमेशांशे त्रिकोणे वाथ वा भवेत् ॥३१५१ ॥
स्फुटयोगं गते मन्दे तत्तदभावविनाशनम् |
3141 - 3151. (a) The Moon in Pisces in aspect
to Mars, and begetting Libra Navamsa, will cause
the end of the mother prior to that of the father. To
overcome this blemish of the Moon, one should
conduct suitable remedial rituals according to his
family traditions.
(b) Remedial measures as prescribed should be
sought during the sub period of amalefic in the dasa
of Saturn. This will ensure happiness to paternal
grand-mother, and will counteract blemish of infantile mortality for the subject.
(c) During the native’s first dasa, paternal
. uncle’s son will be subjected to evils.
(d) When the planet Jupiter moves in the
ascending sign, the native’s education will com-. |
mence.
(€) Jupiter in transit attaining the sign identical `
with Navamsa ascendant will cause investiture of
sacred thread.
(f) The person’s brother will beget married
with Jupiter moving in the 7th or its Navamsa or the
sign identical with the Navamsa occupied by the
lord of the ascendant, or a trine thereof. This transit
should occur in the first dasa of the subject.
(g) The native’s first marriage will occur in
Jupiter’s sub period during the dasa of Saturn.
Then the Sun will be in his northerly sojourn. At
the time of marriage or prior to that, he will be
troubled by (wild) fever. He will also be endangered by smallpox (or haemorrhoids) during the
adverse transits of the Sun. `
(h) Note the planet occupying the 4th lord’s
Navamsa (i.e. Leo Navamsa). In the dasa of the
said planet and in the sub period of the lord of the
ascendant, the native of Vitta Nadiamsa (Taurus
ascendant) will be married. His father will also
gain wealth, clothes and the like.
(i) Effects stated for the first dasa will bear
truth. One will be happy in this dasa but for malefic
sub periods thereof.
(j) General Principle: Take a Bhava and note
the 3rd, 6th and 8th thereof. In the dasa of the said
Bhava lord and in the sub periods of the said lords
of 3rd, 6th and 8th, injury to the (good) effects of
the Bhava concerned will occur. This estimation
should be done in respect of the various Bhavas
commencing from the ascendant. With an aspect
froma benefic, or from the lord of a trine or an angle
(from a Bhavaunder consideration), happiness will
only follow.
(k) So also concerning the 9th, 3rd and the 7th.
0) Saturn’ s transit in the sign identical with the
Navamsa occupied by the lord of the 8th from a
given Bhava or in a sign that is in a trine to the said
Navamsa, will destroy the (2060) effects due to that
Bhava.

88 Deva Keralam
वृषभे यमषष्टयंशे जन्मर्षं च दशान्त्य ॥३१५२ ॥
सम्पदाये स्वभुक्तौ वा पितृव्यस्य विनाशनम् |
स्वपिता भगिनी दुःखं गोचरे मकरे शनौ ॥३१५३ ॥
चापान्ते वाथ कुम्भे वा स्वपितुर्व्याकुलं महत् |
पितृष्वसुः खकालं योजयेत् कालवित्तमः॥२१५४ ॥
3152 - 3154. Taurus Ascendant - Yama
Shashtiamsa: (a) In the end of the first dasa, or in
the first sub period of the 2nd dasa, one’s paternal
uncle will meet with his end.
(b) Saturn’s transit in Capricorn will cause
grief to father’s sister.
(c) Saturn journeying in the end of Sagittarius
or in the sign Aquarius will cause great distress to
father due to grief to paternal uncle.
भाग्याधिपदशाकाले महानृपतिनाशनम् |
RUA क्षामतां च लोके बहुजनावधि ॥३१५५ ॥
स्वपितुः सौख्यमित्याहुः पितामह्यास्तुनाशनम् |
पितृव्यस्य सुतादीनां देहजाड्यं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥३१५६ ॥
3155 - 3156. (a) Irrelevant: In the dasa of the
9th lord (Saturn) a great king will be destroyed. In
malefic sub periods, famine and troubles to men
will spread.
(b) The native’s father will receive happiness
in general in the said dasa but his paternal grandfather will die. Paternal uncle’s progeny etc. will
be ill.
धनाधिपदशाकाले वित्तांशे जनितस्य च।
विवाह्येत्सवकार्याणि लग्नाधिपतिभुक्तिषु ॥३१५७ ॥
3157. Taurus Ascendant - Vitta Nadiamsa:
In the dasa of the 2nd lord (Mercury) and in the sub
period of the ascendant lord (Venus), marriage of
the subject will occur.
जामित्रारूढगे शुक्रे कुम्भांशे रविसंयुते |
सम्पद्दाये विवाहः स्यात् सत्कलत्रयुतो भवेत् ॥३१५८ ॥
3158. The planet Venus in the 7th Arudha Pada
and begetting Aquarius Navamsa along with the
Sun will cause marriage in the 2nd dasa. The
person will get a virtuous wife.
लग्नराशिदशाकाले स्वपिता सौख्यमशनुते |
्रूरमासं परित्यज्य धनलाभं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥३१५९ ॥
धनराशिदशाकले aad शुभं वदेत्।
वित्तांशगे प्रजातस्य विवाहोत्सवसं भ्रमम् 113260 Il
3159 - 3160. (a) In the dasa of the ascendant
Rasi (i.e. Taurus - Venus in KCD), the native’s
father will enjoy happiness. Except in the months
with adverse Sun in transit, he (i.e. father) will
financially gain.
(b) The 2nd half of the 2nd Rasi dasa (i.e.
Gemini - Mercury) will be auspicious. The native’ s
marriage can also occur during this phase.
द्वितीये राहुदोषेण क्रूरराशिग्रहान्तरे |
धनधान्यपशूनां च हानिस्तत्रोपजायते ILE ॥
3161. During the dasa of Rahu placed in the 2nd
house (i.e. Gemini) and in the sub period of a
malefic planet, harm to wealth, grains and quadrupeds owned by the subject will come to pass.
सुताधिपदशाकाले लाभाधिपतिभुक््तिषु
दशान्ते वा सुतोत्पत्तर््राविंशाब्दात् परं सुखम् ॥३१६२ ॥
सुखराशिदशाकाले स्वप्राबल्यं महत् सुखम् ।
धनधान्यसुभूषाप्ति क्षेत्रलाभं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥३१६३ ॥
3162 - 3163. (a) In the dasa of the 5th lord
(Mercury) and in the sub period of the 11th lord
(Jupiter), or in the end of the said dasa (i.e. in
Saturn’s sub period), the subject will enjoy birth of
ason. He will earn happiness after the age of 22
years. ।
(0) During the dasa of the 4th lord (the Sun), he
will greatly prosper gaining wealth, grains, ornaments and landed properties.
सुखराशिदशाकाले सुखाधिपतिदायके |
कुलीरेऽर्कसुते काले पित्ररिष्टं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥३१६४ ti
3164. The native’s father will die with Saturn
moving in transit m the sign Cancer, during the
dasa and sub period of the 4th lord (Sun).
पितृस्थानाधिपे मन्दे त्वापत्संन्यासभागगे |
सम्पत्तारदशामध्ये त्वापत्संसन्यावान् पिता ॥३१६५ ॥
3165. Should Saturn ruling the 9th be in the
“degree (or division) of ascetism” then father will
take to ascetic order following a family calamity
during the middle of the native’s 2nd dasa.
Notes: In the first line “Aapatsanyasa bhagage”
is not an intelligently construed term. This does not
lead to knowledge of any specific position of
Saturn with known terminology.

Chandra Kala Nadi 89
सम्पदाये तृतीयांशे वित्तांशे जनितस्य च।
भाग्याधिपान्ते काले ह्याश्रमानन्तरं पिता ॥३१६६ ॥
मारकं लभते तत्र भ्रातृसौख्यं विनिर्दिशेत् |
विपत्तारधिपे केतौ व्यायांशे निधने स्थिते ॥३१६७ ॥
तदशायां मनस्तापं wages विनिर्दिशेत्
मीने चन्दरांशयोगेन वित्तांशे जनितोऽपि च ॥३१६८ ॥
विपदाये महद भाग्यं गुरुभुक्ति विना सुखम् |
सर्वदाये चन्द्र राद्यरन्तदयि मनोव्यथाम् ॥३१६९ Il
देहजाइयप्रपीडादि योजयेत् कालवित्तमः।
3166 - 31691. (a) Following the said ascetic
order in a hermitage, when the native will be in the
last one third part of 2nd dasa, or in the sub period
of the 9th lord, his father will die. But the native’s
brother will enjoy happiness in general.
(b) Ketu should be in the 8th from the ascendant
with position in the 12thin Navamsa. Then his dasa
will cause mental distress and enmity with brothers.
(c) The 3rd dasa, except in the sub period of
Jupiter, will produce great fortunes if the Moon is
in Pisces Navamsa.
(d) The sub periods of the Moon and Rahu, in
all dasas, will produce mental distress (fora Taurus
native). Astrologers declare physical illness to
follow these sub periods.
Notes: (©) “Meena Chandramsa” ‘is an illtranscribed term. Obviously the requirement is
that the Moon should be in Pisces Navamsa.
लग्नाधिपदशाकाले नित्यश्रीसौख्यवान् भवेत् ॥३१७० ॥
पत्रोतसव ayaa द्वितीयोद्राहमादिशेत् |
षष्ठाधिपदशाकाले ्रूरवेधग्रहान्तरे BVO ॥
ज्येष्टभ्रातृसुतादीनामरिष्टं वा समादिशेत् |
तद्ोषपरिहारार्थे शान्ति कुर्याद्विचक्षणः ॥३१७२ ॥
3170 - 3172. (a) In the dasa of the lord of the
ascendant (Venus) thé subject will enjoy incessant
wealth. He will celebrate birth of a son and will
acquire ornaments. His second marriage will also
take place.
(b) In the dasa of the 6th lord (again Venus),
during the sub period of malefic and obstructive
planet, his elder brother’s son and other relatives
will be subjected to evil. To ward off this blemish,
suitable remedies. be undertaken.
Notes: Venus is the lord of the ascendant and
of the 6th. The text hints at possible adverse results
in bad sub periods due to the 6th lordship of Venus.
waiter धनाधिपतिभुक्तिषु |
वित्तांशगे प्रजातश्च ह्यपमृत्युं समश्नुते 113203 ॥
TRY प्रजातस्य दशामध्ये मृति वदेत् |
दशादावपमृत्युश्च शान्त्या शन्ति प्रयास्यति ॥३१७४॥
3173 - 3174. (a) The native of Vitta Nadiamsa
(Taurus ascendant) will have fear of untimely
death in the sub period of 2nd lord Mercury during
the dasa of the Navamsa dispositor of the Moon.
(This relates to former of half of the subject
Nadiamsa.)
(b) In case of birth in the 2nd half of this
Navamsa, this fear will come to pass in the middle
of said dasa (instead of Mercury’s sub period).
(c) Suitable remedies be done in either case.
अष्टमाधिपतौ जीवे स्वक्षेत्रे वृषभांशगे |
वित्तांशे च प्रजातस्य पञ्चाशद्रत्सरे मृतिम् ॥३१७५ ॥
बुधकेत्वन्ते काले चन्द्रश प्रहदायके |
मीनकुम्भतुलामासे गुरुवारे मृतिं वदेत् ॥३१७६ ॥
यदि जीवति पुण्येन विक्रमेशस्य दायगे |
राहुजीवान्तरे काले कालमृत्युर्भविष्यति ॥२१५७७ ॥
3175 - 3177. (a) The native will die in the 50th
year if Jupiter ruling the 8th is in his own sign
(Sagittarius) with Taurus Navamsa.
(b) Death can (alternatively) occur in the dasa
of the dispositor of the Moon and in the sub period
of Mercury or of Ketu, with the Sun in transit in
Pisces, Aquarius or Libra, on a Thursday.
(c) If at all the person survives due to his
meritorious deeds, the dasa of the Moon and the sub
period of Rahu or of Jupiter will usher unavoidable
death.
मीने तुलांशगे चन्द्रे पित्तवायुप्रपीडितः।
देहान्ते नरंक याति दुष्मतिग्रहहेतुना ॥३१७८ ॥
3178. Should the Moon be in Pisces with Libra
Navamsa, the native will be troubled by diseases of
bile and wind. Having received undeserving donations, he will enter the hell after death.
ूर्वाभाद्रप्रजातश्च ह्यष्टचत्वारिवत्सरे |
चतुर्विशेऽथ वा चेति ह्यपमृत्युं च विन्दति ॥३१७९ ॥

90 Deva Keralam
अंशायुर्दाययोगेन त्वेकषष्टिसमे Aha: |
शान्तिकांशगते SS MA नीचनवांशगे ॥३१८० ॥
मिथुने वा प्रजातश्च वाममार्गप्रपूजकः।
देवभक्तिरतो नित्यं तान्त्िकाचारतत्परः॥३१८१ ॥
वीरशेवप्रियो मानी सदा पशुपतिप्रियः।
सोदरभ्रातृ हीनश्च प्रणवोक्तप्रपूजकः॥३१८२ ॥
तस्य दोषवशात् क्लेशं लभते PRAM धुवम् ।
पत्राभावयुतश्चैव कुलरादारनायकः ॥३१८३ ॥
वारस्रीसङ्गवान् कामी fare गमनोत्सुकः।
दुराचारे तीष्णबुद्धिजातिधर्मविरो धकः ॥३१८४ ॥
3179 - 3184. (a) One born in Taurus ascendant,
Vitta Nadiamsa, as the Moon isin Porrvabhadrapada
Nakshatra, will incur fear of untimely end in his
48th year or in 24th year. His full life span will be
61 as arrived at Amsayurdaya.
(b) The Moon in “Santikamsa” while Mars is in
Cancer Navamsa or in Gemini (in Navamsa) denotes that the subject will follow left-hand Tantric
doctrines (Vama Marga). He will be ever devoted
to the Almighty and interested in Tantric activities,
fond of Saivites, honourable and specially devoted
toLord Siva. He will have no step-brother. He will
recite the Pranava Mantra. A Soodra reciting this
Mantra will be in trouble. The native will not have
male issues. His wife will be of questionable
character. He will join harlots, be libidinous and
enthusiastic of union with Brahmin females. He
will have bad conduct, sharp-minded and will be
inimical to the men of his own race.
Notes: (b) “Santikamsa” is not a proper term
and is not hence amenable to suitable interpretation. The implication could be that the Moon
should be in Sri Sakti Nadiamsa (vide sloka 3185
infra which has however a different Yoga) while
Mars is in Gemini or Cancer in Navamsa.
“Vamamarga” (also known as Vaamaachaara)
indicates left hand doctrines of the Tantras, i.e. the
worship of the Sakti or Female Energy personified
as the consort of Lord Siva, as opposed to
“Dakshinaachaara” or “Dakshina Marga” (right
hand doctrines of the Tantras, i.e. the worship of
Siva, Male Energy).
मनुः
वेदादिूरवप्रणवादि मन्त्र शिवार्चन चापि परोपतापम्।
श्रीशक्तिकांशे मिथुने शशाङ्क
नीचांशगे दुर्गतिकर्म युक्तः ॥३१८५ ॥
नीचांशे मिथुने चन्द्रे तदीशेन समन्विते ।
वृषलग्ने प्रजातश्च चापांशे च धनाढ़यवान् ॥३१८६ ॥
3185 - 3186. (a) According to Manu, the Moon
in Gemini’s Sri Sakti Nadiamsa, with debilitation
Navamsa, will give the following effects. The
person will burt others’ feelings although he may
recite the Pranava Mantra. He will perform such
deeds leading to his bad end.
(b) The Moon in Gemini along with Mercury
and obtaining Scorpio or Sagittarius Navamsa will
cause wealth to a Taurus native.
कल्पद्रुमादि महायोगाः |
राज्याधिपे स्वोच्चगते बलाद्ये-
शुभेन युक्ते सुतभेशयुक्ते |
राज्येश्वरेराज्यगतेऽपि लग्ननाथे तु कल्पद्रुमनामयोगः॥३१८७ ॥
3187. Great Combinations like Kalpa
Druma: The lord of the 10th with strength occupying his exaltation sign in the company of the two
planets viz. a benefic and the Sth lord will cause
Kalpa Druma Yoga. This yoga is also formed by
the conjunction of lords of 10th and ascendant in
the 10th house.
जातः कल्पद्रुमाख्ये सकलनृपवरैः स्तूयमानो बलाढ़्यो
लोके प्रख्यातकीर्तिः प्रभुसमविभवः पञ्च विंशादिवर्षात् |
द्ात्रिशद्रत्सरान्तं वनभुवि वसति मण्डल स्याधिपत्यं
सेनाधिक्यं नृपत्वं नृपकरकमलैः प्राणुयात् सोऽभिषेकम् ॥३१८८ ॥
3188. One with this Yoga will be honoured by
all the kings. He will be very strong, widely famous
and endowed with sovereignty. From the age of 25
to end of 32, he will enjoy headship of a region, of
army and royal status. The king will confer an
authoritative position upon him.
भाग्येश्वरस्थांशपति स्थिरांशे
तन्नाथ राशीशतदुच्चनाथाः।
लग्नेश्वरात् केन्द्रगता यदि स्यु
शुक्रेण युक्तस्तु च पारिजातः ॥३१८९ ॥
3189. Parijata Yoga: The Navamsa dispositor
of the 9th lord should be in an immovable Nav-

Chandra Kala Nadi 91
amsa. The exaltant dispositor of the said 9th lord,
and the dispositor of the dispositor of 9th lord
should be in an angle from the sign ocupied by the
ascendant lord in the company of Venus. As a
result of these phenomena, Parijata Yogais formed.
राजा धर्मविशारदो नृपजनैर्वन्यो धनुश्शास्रवित्
कालज्ञः करुणानिधि fe विनयी सत्पुत्रवित्तान्वितः।
सोमतुल्यजनाभिरामनयनः प्रख्यातकीतिर्भुवि
भुक्त्वा भोगान् सुपारिजातजनितो विशायुषान्तं तथा ॥३१९० ॥
3190. One with Parijata Yoga will be a king,
knowledgeable in the branch of justice, be honoured by the kings, skilful in archery and astrology,
a repository of mercy, modest, endowed with virtuous sons and wealth and be charming as the moon
is. Further his fame will spread in the world till he
attains the age of 20.
चन््रलग्नाधिपे स्वोच्चे चन्द्रारूढे शुभेक्षिते |
मन्दारयोग इत्याहुः ख्यातो वित्ते निशाकरे ॥२३१९१ ॥
मन्दारयोगवृषभे विलग्ने
भूपालसेवी धनिकोवदान्यः।
गजाश्वनाथः सुकृती गुणादयो
देवद्विजाराधनपुण्यभाक् स्यात् ॥३१९२ ॥
3191 - 3192. Mandara Yoga: The lord of the
Moon sign in exaltation while the Moon sign is in
aspect to a benefic will cause Mandara Yoga.
However, the Moon should be in the 2nd from the
ascendant. One born in Taurus ascendant with
Mandara Yoga will be served by the ruler. He will
be wealthy, munificent, will own elephants and
horses, will perform good deeds and be highly ‘
virtuous. He will earn merits by worshipping gods
and Brahmins.
Notes: Although the text refers to Taurus ascendant in the context of effects cf this yoga,
applicability to other ascendants in varied degrees
is not ruled out.
कर्मेशे रिपुराशिस्थे राजसेवी सुबुद्धिमान् |
षष्ठाधिपेन संयुक्ते षष्ठे राज्याधिपत्यवान् ॥३१९३ ॥
अथ वा सैनिकाध्यक्ष अमात्यजनमित्रवान् |
SAF युतश्चैव भाग्यवांश्च न संशयः॥२३१९४॥
3193 - 3194. (a) The 10th lord in the 6th (in
Libra) will cause royal service and intelligence of
a high order.
(b) Should the said planet in the process be in
the company of the 6th lord (Venus), one will enjoy
ownership of a kingdom. Else he will preside over
army. He will befriend in ministerial circles. He
will have three wives and be fortunate.
कर्मस्थानाधिपे मन्दे भाग्येशेन समन्विते ।
बहुभाग्यार्थसम्पन्नो भूपांशे भूपतिः स्मृतः ॥३१९५॥
अमात्ययोगे सचिवो राजद्राराधिकारवान् |
भटांशगे कर्मनाथे बहुसेनाश्वनायकः॥३१९६ ॥
रन्धाधिपेन संयुक्ते त्वल्पयोगी भेवद्धुवम् |
धर्मकर्मादिनेतारौ राज्यलाभाधिपौ यदि ॥३१९७॥
तयोः संबन्धमात्रेण न योगो भवति धुवम् ।
कर्माधिपे दरिद्रांशे सदा दारि संयुक्तः॥३१९८ ॥
उच्छवृत्ति करोतीह भिक्षाशी वा न संशयः
कर्मेशे यत्रे कुत्रापि राजामात्यांशगस्थिते |
षष्ठाधिपेन संयुक्ते राजसेवी सुभाग्यवान् ॥३१९९ ॥
3195 - 3199. (a) The 10th lord Saturn being in
the company of the 9th lord will cause abundant
fortunes and wealth. If Saturn is in “royal degree”,
one will be aking, a minister and will have authority under a king. —
(b) Saturn in “servant’s degree” will cause
lordship over army and horses.
(c) Saturn joining the 8th lord will reduce the
tempo of the Yoga.
(d) Lords of the 9th and 10th, or the 10th and
11th having mutual association (one of the recognised Sambandhas) do not cause a Yoga.
(e) The 10th lord in “the degree of penury” will
ever promote pennilessness. The native will beg
and gather his food.
(f) The 10th lord joining the lord of the 6th will
make one serve the king. He will incur prosperity.
Notes: The special degrees (or divisions) referred to here are not understandable and are
erroneous.
कर्माधिपे कर्मगते बलादये
शुभांशगे राजसमाननुद्धिः।
श्रीमान् धनाढ्यो वृषभेऽल्पपुत्रो
मेषे प्रजातो ACTA स्यात् ॥३२०० ॥
3200. (a) The lord of the 10th in the 10th, -
endowed with strength and occupying a benefic

92 Deva Keralam
Navamsa, will cause royal disposition. One will be
illustrious and opulent.
(b) Such a disposition of the 10th lord for a_
Taurus native will cause limited number of male
issues. But if the ascendant be Aries, instead of
Taurus, the subject will have many sons.
कर्मस्थानाधिपे जीवे केन्रलाभत्रिकोणगे ।
पापान्विते प्रसिद्धश्च नीचे राजसुतप्रियः॥३२०१ ॥
स्वोच्चे राजाश्रयं सौख्यं पित्रार्जितधनाढ़यवान् |
दयूनयोगे कर्मनाथे भिक्षाशी नात्र संशयः॥३२०२ ॥
लाभाधिपेन संयुक्ते कचित् सौख्यं कचित् सुखम् |
कर्मस्थानाधिपे भोमे त्वोच्चांशे नीचराशिगे ॥३२०३ ॥
भानुक्ेतरे प्रसिद्धश्च परवित्तापहारवान् |
मृतप्रजाबहुत्वं स्यादथवा भ्रातृशोकवान् ॥२२०४ ॥
स्वमित्रनान्धवज्ञातिवित्तापहरणात् सुखी |
कालन्तरे ह्यग्निमान््यज्वरेण मृतिमादिशेत् ॥३२०५॥
3201 - 3205. (a) Jupiter ruling the 10th and
occupying an angle, the 11th or a trine, in the
company of a malefic will cause fame.
(b) If he is debilitated, one will be liked by the
prince.
(c) Jupiter in exaltation will obtain royal patronage, general happiness and paternal wealth.
(d) Jupiter in the 7th, as the 10th lord, will
doubtless make the person earn his food by beggary.
(e) If he is conjunct the 11th lord, happiness
will somewhat exist.
(f) The lord of the 10th, being Mars, in the sign
Cancer with exaltation Navamsa, or in the sign
Leo, will bring fame. The person concerned will
steal others’ wealth. He will obtain many dead
children, or else he will grieve on account of loss
of co-born. He will find happiness in stealing the
wealth of his friends and relatives. After some time
he will die due to indigestion and fever.
Notes: Aphorisms from “a” to “e” apply to
Gemini and Pisces ascendants while the last one
under “f” relates to Aquarius and Cancer ascendants.
कर्माधिपे लाभगते aaa वा सुधार्मिकः।
एक पु्रश्चिरायुष्मान बहुपुत्रवियोवान् ॥३२०६ ॥
3206. The lord of the 10th in the 11th in own
sign (i.e. Aries being the ascendant) will make one
highly charitable. He will have a long-living son
but will lose many sons.
चरलग्ने परयेश्वरांशः |
एेश्वर्या शे क्रिये शुक्रे चरराशिचतुष्टये |
चरलग्ने प्रजातश्च गौरवपूर्णः शुभाकृतिः।
मेषे शुक्रे वृषे भोमे मिथुने शानिसंस्थिते ॥३२०७॥
परमेश्वरांशे जातश्च बहुवाणिज्यजीवकः।
कर्मे पापांशगे शुक्रे तदीशे लाभराशिगे ॥३२०८ Il
सत्यानृतावृत्तिजीवी सोदरस्वसु भ्रातृमान् |
शिवभक्तिरतो नित्यं तटाकोद्यानधार्मिकः॥३२०९ ॥
ज्येष्ठभ्रातृसुतद्रेपी गृहकृत्यकलापवान्।
गार्हस्थ्य जीवितो नित्यं शिवार्चनपरः सुखी ॥३२१० ॥
वैदिकाचारसंपनः पित्रार्जितधनाढ़यकः।
भार्गवारूढगे मन्दे नीचांशे पारश्वनाडिगे ॥३२११॥
दयावान् वादवान् बाल्ये कामी विषयलोलुपः।
अनाचारी कचित् कालं पश्चात् सन्मार्गवृत्तिमान् ॥२२१२ ॥
उद्वाहकाले कलहः स्वपितुः क्लेशमादिशेत्।
लाभभावगते मन्दे नीचांशे SRA ॥३२९१३ ॥
ज्येष्ठभ्राता महारोगी दत्तपुत्रयुतो भवेत् |
भरातद्वयौ Grande: करचदद्विभार्यकः॥३२१४ ॥
कालान्तरे पुत्रवांश्च ह्याथ वा दत्तपुत्रवान् |
सर्वज्येष्ठानुजो भ्राता बहुपत्रार्थसंयुतः॥३२१५ ॥
कालान्तरे क्षयं चैति crafter परं मृतिम्।
3207 - 3215142. Movable Ascendant -
Paramesvara Nadiamsa: (a) One born in
Paramesvari Nadiamsa in one of the movable
ascendants, as Venus is in Aries will be of fair
complexion and auspicious appearance.
(b) Venus, Mars and Saturn in order occupying
Aries, Taurus and Gemini will cause livelihood
through various kinds of trading activities.
(c) Venus in the 10th in a malefic Navamsa
while his dispositor is in the 11th will cause livelihood through truthful and untruthful means. He
will have brothers and sisters, be devoted to Lord
Siva, will perform charitable activities like constructing tanks and gardens, be inimical to his elder
brother’s son and attached to domestic duties. He
will follow the path prescribed by the Vedas, be
wealthy through paternal inheritance.
(d) Saturn in the Arudhaof Venus and in Parsva

Chandra Kala Nadi 93
Nadi (read Paramesvara Nadiamsa) will give the
following effects. The person concerned will be
merciful, argumentative, libidinous, addicted to
material pleasures, and be unorthodox for some
time. Later on he will adopt a good path. During
the time of his marriage, there will be some misunderstandings. His father will also be in troubles.
(e) Should Saturn be in the 11th house with
Aries Navamsa, one’s older brother will be afflicted by a great disease and will have an adopted
son. The native will have two brothers, out of
whom one will have sons, and possibly two marriages. The said childless brother will after some
time obtain or adopt a male issue. The eldest
brother will have many sons and much wealth.
After some time, he will suffer from lung tuberculosis and will die, losing his wife.
Notes: (a) Paramesvara Nadiamsa is known as
Isvarya (wealth) Nadiamsa also, apart from “Isa”
(Lord). Other names given to this Nadiamsa are
Devi (goddess), Paramesvari (feminine gender),
Soolini (i.e. Durga) and Isvara (Lord), vide sloka
3232 infra.
At some places, this Nadiamsa is referred to as
“Visha Nasa Nadiamsa” for Lord Siva swallowed
and destroyed the Great Poison, called “Kaalaahala”
during the process of churning of Milk Ocean.
The present information is collected by the
author from Sukra Nadi. It could be seen that
Venus is the center of the current discussion.
Generally, the clues refer to Cancer ascendant. Yet
the other three movable signs can also suitably be
considered.
Extent of the subject Nadiamsa could be found
in the notes under sloka 1213, page 109, Book 1.
(e) Reference to a dual sign is only out of
context. In case of a movable sign, the 11th is an
immovable one. Hence this condition is excluded
in the rendering.
देवी नामांशगे शुक्रे भाग्यांशे कर्म भावगे ॥३२१६ ॥
बहु भाग्यार्थसम्पन्नो ज्येष्ठ दारे सुपुत्रवान् |
कनिष्ठभ्रातृमात् रागी भ्रातद्रयविनाशवान् ॥३२१७ ॥
एक भ्राता चिरायुष्मानीश्वरांशकगे भृगो |
भाग्यांशगे सुताधीशे द्वादशे शनि संस्थिते ॥३२१८ ॥
ata बहुलाश्चेव रल्पपुत्रयुतो भवेत् |
मित्रप्रजाबहुत्वं स्यात् पुत्रद्रययुतः सुखी ॥३२१९ Il
3216 - 3219. (a) Venus in the 10th house from
the natal ascendant and the 9th from Navamsa
ascendant will produce much fortunes and abundant wealth. The native will beget sons through his
first wife. He will have younger brothers and be
passionate. Two of his brothers will be destroyed.
His elder brother will be long-lived.
(b) Saturn in the 12th while the 5th lord (in Rasi
chart) is in the 9th in Navamsa will cause birth of
many daughters and limited sons. The native will
have many dead children. He will ultimately have
two sons (and many daughters).
Notes: (a) The Nadiamsa position for Venus is
irregular.
(b) “Mitra Praja Bahutvam’” should read as
“Mrita Praja Bahutvam” denoting dead children.
शुक्रांशाधिपतौ जीवे भूसुतेन समन्विते ।
चरलग्ने प्रजाश्च भूर्वस्रीनायकः सुखी ॥३२२० ॥
ग्रन्थान्ते मदाधीशे नीचांशे द्र्द्रराशिगे ।
पाशांशगे प्रजातश्च हयपवादकलत्रवान् ॥३२२१ ॥
3220 - 3221. (a) Jupiter should be the Navamsa
dispositor of the planet venus and should be in the
company of Mars. As a result, the subject belonging to a movable ascendant will marry a wicked
woman.
(b) There is yet another authority to state that
the lord of the 7th occupying a dual sign, with
debilitation Navamsa, will be the cause of one’s
spouse begetting infamy.
सुतेश लाभराशिस्थे भाग्येशेन समन्विते |
बहुप्रजालाभमेति पु्रद्रययुतः सुखी ॥३२२२ Il
3222. The lord of the 5th joining that of the 9th
in the 11th house will cause birth of many children
including two sons.
सप्तमेन तदीशेन भृगुणादारचिन्तनम् |
नीचांशे दारनाथे दारवंशः AA MA: URW? ॥
3223. One’s spouse should be known through
the 7th, its lord and Venus. The 7th lord obtaining
his debilitation Navamsa will promote destruction
of in-laws’ dynasty.
लग्नात् तृतीयगे राहवंशराशि गते भूगो |
-श्वशुरस्य तृतीयगे दारान्तरसुतः स्मृतः॥३२२४॥

94 Deva Keralam
3224. Venus joining the sign and Navamsa
occupied by Rahu, which is identical with the 3rd
from the ascendant will cause two wives to one’s
father-in-law, who will beget male issues through
the second wife.
अचरांशगते शुक्रे विषनाशांशजस्य च ।
facet विवाहः स्यान्मात्ररिष्टात् परं हि वा ॥३२२५ ॥
ज्येष्ठभ्रातृवियोगादिक्लेशं प्राप्नोति भूरिशः।
कर्मेशे लाभराशिस्थे भाग्येशेन समन्विते ॥३२२६ ॥
जन्मप्रभृति सम्पन्नो यावज्जीवान्तभाग्यवान् |
कर्मे शुक्रे तदीशे च स्वोच्चांशे गुरुसंयुते ॥३२२७ ॥
पत्रमूलात् सुसंन्तोषी वार्धके बहु भाग्यवान् |
देवीनामांशगे शुक्रे तच्चिरकोणे निशाकरे ॥३२२८ ॥
पापद्रयेन संदृष्टे यन्त क्लेशविचारवान् |
भ्रातृमूलेन सन्तोषी पापांशे पापवान् कचित् ॥३२२९ ॥
चन्द्राद् भाग्यं गते शुक्रे चापांशे मेषराशिगे |
पापदृष्टि विहीने च सदा सन्मार्गवृत्तिमान् ॥३२३० Il
सेतुस्नानं त्रिवारं स्याद्रङ्गायात्राफलप्रदम् |
अल्यन्तसुकृत श्चैव त्वीश्वरांशे सुधार्भिक ॥३२२१॥
3225 - 3231. (a) Should Venus be in an immovable Navamsa, one born in a movable sign with
Vishanasa (read “Paramesvara”) Nadiamsa will
marry in the 3rd dasa, after the expiry of his mother.
He will experience abundant grief due to loss of
elder brother and such other calamities.
(b) If the lord of the 10th is found in the 11th in
the company of the 9th lord, predict wealth right
from one’s birth. His prosperity will last till the end
of his life.
(c) Venus in the 10th, while its lord joining
Jupiter is in his exaltation Navamsa, will cause
much happiness through one’s sons. The person
will enjoy much fortunes in his old age.
(d) The planet Venusin Devi (i.e. Paramesvara)
Nadiamsa while its angle is occupied by the Moon
in aspect two malefics will produce grief towards
the end of one’s life. He will receive happiness
through co-born.
(€) Venus in amalefic’s Navamsa will produce
one with somewhat sinning disposition.
(f) If Venus is in Aries with Sagittarius Navamsa, bereft of a malefic aspect, the person will
take to virtuous path of living. However, the said
position of Venus in Aries should be in the 9th from
the Moon (i.e. the Moon should be in Leo). Further,
he will take sacred dips in the Setu and will
undertake pilgrimage to the Ganges. He will have
exceedingly good deeds to his credit and be quite
munificent.
देवीनामाशपर्याय ईश्वरांश इति स्मृतः।
परमेश्वरी शूलिन्यौत्वीश्वरंशकसंञ्चिके 13232 ॥
3232. Isvara Nadiamsa has another name, viz.
Devi Nadiamsa. Paramesvari, Soolini and Isvara
are also its synonyms.
“apie त्रिकोण स्फुटयोगं गते wat
स्वदारदेहजाडयादि दारवंशे ह्यारिष्टजम् 113233 ॥
3233. Saturn arriving in transit the sign identical with the Navamsa occupied by Venus at birth,
or a trine thereto, will cause physical sickness etc.
to one’s spouse. His in-laws’ family will be
subjected to evils.
भोमांशगे पित्ररिष्टं मातुश्च भार्गवांशगे ।
सोम्यांशगे तच्तरिकोणे सोदरारिष्टमादिशेत् ॥३२३४ ॥
3234. One’s father and mother will in order be
endangered when Saturn affects the Navamsa occupied by Mars and Venus on the same lines as
above.
fag नीचांशगे चन्द्रे मेषे पापांशगे भृगौ ।
प्रत्यग्दाये भाग्यवृद्धिः स्वप्राबल्यं भवेद् धुवम् ॥३२३५॥
उत्तरार्थे विशेषं च पुत्रप्राबल्यमादिशेत्।
पञ्चत्रिंशात् परं भूरि धनं संपादयिष्यति 113236 ॥
पञ्चविशात् परं चेव यत्किचिद्धनलाभावन् |
3235 - 3236142. (a) One’s Sth dasa will increase
fortunes and prosperity if Venus is in a malefic’s
Navamsa as the Moon is in the sign Leo with
Scorpio Navamsa.
(b) Should the person belong to the 2nd half of
Paramesvara Nadiamsa in a movable ascendant,
the above yoga will cause prosperity of his son. He
will earn a lot of money after his 35th year. After
25, there will however be some financial gains.
कर्मे चापांशगे शुक्रे सदाज्ञातिकलापवान् 11323 ॥
कालान्तरे शुत्रनाशं स्वप्राबल्यं महत् सुखम् |
मेषान्त्यभागगे शुक्रे पञ्चमे काल संस्थिते ॥३२२८ ॥
वार्धके ज्ञातिवित्ताप्ति प्रत्यग्दाये परार्धगे ।

Chandra Kala Nadi 95
बहुव्यापारसिद्धिः स्यानित्यश्रीधनलाभवान् ॥३२३९ ॥
महादेवप्रसादेन धनलाभं दिने दिने।
प्रत्यग्दाये मध्यखण्डे सिंहे गोचरगे शनौ ॥३२४० Il
अतीव क्लेशकार्याणि यलकार्यार्थ नाशनम् |
बुधभुक्तयपरार्थादिर्योगकाल इति स्मृतः॥३२४१ ॥
विशेषधनलाभादिगृहे गोधनसद्ुलम् |
बुधान्ते सुपुत्रप्िर्गोचरे मेषगे गुरो ॥३२४२ ॥
पश्चादभाग्याभिवृद्धिः स्यात् प्रत्यग्दाये न संशयः।
व्ययाधिपान्तरे काले व्ययेशे पापसंयुते ॥३२४३ ॥
दारपीडां मनस्तापं शिशुपीडां विनिर्दिशेत् ।
3237 - 3243142. Cancer Ascendant -
Paramesvara Nadiamsa: (a) One will have endless quarrels with his relatives if Venus is in the
10th house with Sagittarius Navamsa. After some
interval, his enemies will incur-destruction and he
will prosper with great happiness.
(b) Venus placed in the end of Aries will obtain
wealth of the relatives in one’s old age, coinciding
with the later half of the 5th dasa. His business
activities will expand and he will have permanent `
wealth. Due to the blessings of Lord Siva, he will
earn wealth everyday (i.e. uninterruptedly).
(c) Saturn moving in Leo during the middle
part of Sth dasa will produce much difficulties and
will damage one’s undertakings. The beginning
and ending phases of Mercury’s sub period will
cause one’s rise. Special gain of wealth will occur
for the family including acquisition of cattle. _
(d) When Jupiter arrives in the sign Aries,
during the operation of Mercury’s sub period, one
will beget ason. Following this, his prosperity will
increase in the 5th dasa.
(e) Should Mercury, the 12th lord, join a malefic in transit during the rule of his own sub period,
one will experience evils to his spouse and child
and mental distress for himself.
Notes: “Panchame kala samstite” insloka 3238
is an interruption as the text deals with Cancer
ascendant - a movable one - and not Sagittarius
ascendant.
लग्नात् तृतीयगे राहौ दशायां भाग्यमश्नुते ॥३२४४ I
तदीशे लाभराशिस्थे परार्थे च श्रियावहम् |
षष्टष्टमव्ययाधीशभुक्तिकाले दशाव्यथा ॥३२४५ ॥
स्वजनारिष्टमाप्नोति ज्ञातिवगे विशेषतः।
सुतेशांशे aaa स्फुटयोगं गते शनौ ॥३२४६ ॥
परत्यग्दाये सोदरस्य सन्तानारिष्टमादिशेत्।
सुतेशांशे तच््रिकोणे सुखेशांशत्रिकोणगे ॥३२४७ ॥
स्फुटयोगं गते मन्दे ज्ञातिवर्गे सुतक्षयः।
प्भुवर्गे तथा विन्द्यादारवंशे ह्यरिष्टजम् ॥२२४८ ॥
कलसत्रदेहजाडयादि श्षिप्रेणारोग्यमशनुते ।
दारेशांशत्रिकोणरक्ष स्फुटयोगं गते गुरौ ॥३२४९ ॥
3244 - 3249. (a) Rahu in the 3rd: One having
the planet Rahu in the 3rd from the ascendant will
gain fortunes in Rahu’s dasa. If, in this Yoga,
Rahu’s dispositor is in the ascendant, 2nd half of
Rahu dasa will produce wealth. The sub periods
owned by the lords of the 6th, 8th and 12th will be
troublesome in this dasa. Further, relatives will
face evils.
(b) Saturn’s Movements: Saturn. arriving in
the sign, represented by the natal Navamsa of the
5th lord, or a trine thereof, will produce evils to the
progeny of one’s brother. This transit should be in
the native’s 5th dasa.
(c) The transit of Saturn as above, with reference to the Sth lord or the 4th lord, as the case may
be, will destroy one of the relatives’ sons.
(d) Jupiterian Movement: Evils in the inlaws’ family will come to pass and spouse will be
physically ill but will recover soon. These effects
will result Jupiter’s sojourn in the sign denoted by
the Navamsa of the 7th lord at birth, or a trine
thereof.
चिरायुर्जायते पुत्रो देवीनामांशजस्य च ।
अर्थलाभं च लभते शिवानुम्रहवान् भवेत् ॥३२५० ॥
3250. The son of one belonging to Paramesvara
Nadiamsa will enjoy long life. The native will gain
wealth and earn the mercy of Lord Siva.
ईश्वरांशे क्रिये शक्रे Vea Tae |
बहुभाग्यं च लभते पञ्चत्रिशात् परं सुखम् NI Il
3251. Venus in Aries will multiply one’s
fortunes during the 2nd haif of the 5th dasa. He will
enjoy happiness after the age of 35.
सूर्यकालाधिपे शुक्रे दशमे धार्मिकः सुतः।
कुजक्षेत्रे भाग्यवांश्च देवीनामांशजस्तथा ॥३२५२ ॥

96 Deva Keralam
परत्यग्दाये धर्मबुद्धिः स्वपुरापुण्यहेतुना |
उत्तरार्धे विशेषः स्याल्लोके प्रख्यातकीर्तिमान् 113243 ॥
aed सुतप्राप्तिरल्पसोख्यं शुभाशुभम् |
अस्वतन्त्र इति प्राहुः सोदरस्य विवाहकृत ॥३२५४ ॥
विपदाये पापनुद्धिः प्रत्यग्दाये सुबुद्धिमान् |
विशेषज्ञानसिद्धिः स्यार्धर्मबुद्धिः श्रियावहा ॥३२५५ ॥
व्यापारप्रबलं चैति ane न संशयः।
शुक्रान्तरे महत् सौख्यं बुधभुक्तौ दलं व्यथाम् ॥२२५६ ॥
केतुभुक्तो शुभाधिक्यं सोम्ये पुत्रस्य शोभनम्।
पश्चाद् भाग्याभिवृद्धिः स्याद्रविभुक्तौ शुभाशुभम् ॥२२५७॥
Tat मनस्तापं कुजभुक्तो दलं व्यथाम् ।
शुक्रांश नाडीदोषेण ह्यष्टमर्षश भुक्तिषु |
दारपीडां मनस्तापं स्वपुत्रादि प्रपीडनम् ॥३२५८ ॥
3252 - 3258. Cancer Ascendant: (a) Venus in
the 10th will make one charitable and fortunate.
(b) 5th Dasa: In the Sth dasa, he will develop
acharitable disposition due to the merits of his past
birth. More so in case of birth in the 2nd half of
Paramesvara Nadiamsa. He will become famous in
the world.
(€) 4th Dasa: His 4th dasa will give limited
happiness, acquisition of a son and good and bad
effects.
(d) 3rd Dasa: In his 3rd dasa he will be sinful.
(e) 5th Dasa & Sub Periods: He will change
for good in the Sth dasa, and will earn abundant
wisdom. He will develop charitability and will
earn wealth. His business activities will grow. In
the sub period of Venus, great happiness will come
to pass. Mercury’s sub period will cause division
and distress. Increased auspicious effects will be
given by the sub period of Ketu. Mercury’s sub
period will, however, cause auspicious effects for
his son. After this, the native’s fortunes will
register progressive trends. Perhaps the sub-sub
period of Mercury (in Mercury’s sub period) will
cause evil and auspicious effects. The Moon’s sub
period will usher distress. Mars sub period will
cause division and grief. Due to the blemish of
Venus position in Nadiamsa, the sub period of 8th
lord (Saturn) will cause troubles to wife and progeny apart from mental distress.
कन्याशनिस्थिते काले गृहे कल्याणसंभरमम् |
स्वपुत्रिकासुसन्तापं सिंहांशे शुभशोभनम् ॥२२५९ ॥
3259. Saturn transiting in the sign Virgo will
promote a family marriage. The native’s daughter
will receive much happiness and auspicious effects
when Saturn gets, in the process Leo Navamsa.
Notes: “Susantaapam” meaning much distress
should read as “Susantosham” meaning much happiness, in respect of the daughter, seeing the immediately following effect in the text. Further, the
noun “Santaapam” is never qualified by the adjective “Su”.
जन्मदेशे कलापं च राजविप्लवमादिशेत् |
दारारूढाथिपे भोमे स्वोच्चां शे स्थिरराशिगे ॥३२६० ॥
एक भार्यामवाप्नोति देवीनामां शजस्तथा |
प्रत्यग्दाये मध्यखण्डे स्वकलत्रं तु दुर्बलम् ॥३२६१॥
देहायासं द्वित्रिवारं सूतिकावायु पीडनम् |
तद्दोषपरिहारार्थं शान्ति कुर्याद्विचक्षणः॥३२६२ ॥
3260 - 3262. (a) Irrelevant: The above transit
of Saturn will cause quarrels and revolutions in the
country.
(b) Mars ruling the 7th Arudha Pada and placed
in a fixed sign with a movable Navamsa, will |
indicate one wife. In the middle of the native’s Sth
dasa, she will lose her physical strength and acquire
physical illness. For 2 or 3 weeks, she will suffer
windy disorders in the process of delivery. To
overcome this blemish, remedies should be sought.
जन्मे शनिस्थते काले विषनाशांश जस्तथा |
देहायासं च लभते शान्त्या शान्ति प्रयास्थति ॥२२६३ ॥
3263. Saturn’s transit in the ascendant will be
the cause of physical illness for the native. Necessary remedies in this context should be done.
साधनेशदशाकाले मेष शुक्रे च संस्थिते ।
पत्रमूलात् सुसन्तोषी गृह गोधनसंकुलम् ॥२२६४॥
शुक्रांशेशदशाकाले देवीनामांशजस्य च ।
बहुभाग्याभिवृद्धिः स्यात् स्वभुक्तौ व्याकुलं क्वचित् ॥३२६५ ॥
रन्धाधिपान्तरे काले षष्ठाधिपतिदायके |
दारपीडां मनस्तापं पश्चदायोग्यमादिशेत् ॥३२६६ ॥
~ बुधान्तरेऽपमृत्युः स्याच्छान्त्या शान्तिं प्रयास्यति |
शुक्रांगेशदशाकाले भोगं रोगं च निर्दिशेत् ॥२३२६७॥
भाग्याधिपदशाकाले स्वभुक्तो प्रभुनाशनम् |

Chandra Kala Nadi 97
रन्धाधिपान्तरे काले विप्लवेन मनोव्यथा ॥३२६८ ॥
3264 - 3268. (a) Should Venus be in Aries, the
6th dasa will bring happiness to the native through
his son. He will gather wealth of cattle.
(b) In the dasa ruled by the Navamsa dispositor
of Venus, one’s prosperity will expand abundantly.
But the first sub period will produce some consternation.
(c) The sub period of the 8th lord during the
dasa of the 6th lord will usher health troubles to
wife and mental distress. Later on, the female will
recover her health. The sub period of Mercury will
bring in fear of untimely death which should be
remedied.
(d) In the dasa referred to at “b” above, one will
enjoy pleasures attended by diseases.
(e) The dasa and sub period of the 9th lord will
destroy one’s employer(?) The sub period of the
8th lord will produce mental distress due to revolution.
ईश्वगंशकगे शुक्रे मेषे पापविव्िते |
जन्मप्रभृति सौख्यं च यावदायुष्यभाग्यवान् ॥३२६९ ॥
3269. Venus in Aries without being in the
company of a malefic will give happiness to the
subject of Paramesvara Nadiamsa right from his
birth. His prosperity will last his whole life.
भाग्याधिपदशाकाले पुत्रमूलेन सोख्यवान् |
परत्यग्दशापरार्धदो साधनेशदशासुखम् ॥३२७० ॥
3270. In the dasa of the 9th lord, one will beget
happiness through his son. Happiness will exist in
the 2nd half of Sth dasa and in the 6th dasa.
वेधप्रहान्तरे काले क्रूरमासे महाविपत्।
नानाव्याकुलकार्याणि पश्चात् सौख्यं महत् सुखम् ॥३२७१ ॥
` 3271. (In the 6th dasa) during an adverse
planet’s sub period, in a month denoted by the
Sun’s inauspicious movement, one will be a victim
of great danger. He will incur much troubles in his
undertakings and will recover happiness later on.
मेषे चापांशगे शुक्रे कुलीरे च प्रजायते |
जीवे कुजयुते काले बहुवित्तयुतः सुखी ॥३२७२ ॥
3272. One born in Cancer ascendant with Venus in the sign Aries, subject to his being in
Sagittarius Navamsa, will obtain much wealth
when Jupiter joins Mars. (This applies to 6th dasa.)
वार्धके नेत्र सेगी च वयो मध्येऽग्निमान््यवान्।
वार्धके पुत्रमूलेन ह्यतिसौख्ययुतः सुखी ॥३२७३ ॥
आयुष्मन्तौ च पुत्रौ द्रौ साधनेशदशासुखम्।
पश्चाद् भूपतिजन्मा स्यान्मण्डलत्रयनायकः॥३२७४ ॥
3273 - 3274. In his old age, he will face eye
diseases. In the middle of his life, he will be
troubled by indigestion. He will experience much
happiness in his old age on account of his son. He
will have two long-living sons and be happy in the
6th dasa. He will later be born as aruler or the head
of a region.
नैधनेशदशाकाले रन्धाधिपतिभुक्तिषु |
दविषष्ठयब्दे मृति चेति कुम्भादित्रयमासगे ॥३२७५ ॥
मेषमासे कृष्णपक्षे रन्धाधिपतिवासरे |
स्वपित्ररिष्टदेशेषु पुण्यक्षेत्रे भविष्यति ॥३२७६ ॥
3275 - 3276. (a) In the sub period ruled by the
8th lord (Saturn) during the dasa which is the 7th
from birth, he will die when he will be 62. The Sun
will then be journeying in one of the 3 signs
commencing Aquarius (the 8th).
(b) His father will die in a shrine in his own
country with the transit Sun in Aries, in dark halfon
the day ruled by Saturn.
चन्द्राद् भाग्यं गते शुक्रे लग्नादभाग्यं गतेऽथ वा।
जात्यानुगुण्यलोकादि सत्याचारसु भाग्यवान् ॥३ २७७ Il
परेश्वरांशगे शुक्रे Wagar गते सति।
ईश्वरंशे राजयोगः पश्चाज्जन्मनि संभवेत् ॥३२७८ ॥
जन्मनीहसुखं चेति वार्धके बहुवित्तवान् |
आयुष्मन्तो च पुत्रौ द्रौ पुत्रिकात्रयवान् भवेत् ॥३२७९ ॥
महार्णवग्रान्तदेशे स्वपुत्रश्व श्रियायुतः।
धनधान्यसमृद्धिः स्यादेकभ्रातृयुतः सुखी ॥३२८० ॥
3277 - 3280. Venus in the 9th either from the
ascendant or from the Moon will cause truthfulness, conduct and prosperity according to one’s
family of birth. This position from the Moon will
cause a Raja Yoga (royal status). The person will
have rebirth. He will be happy from birth and will
gather much wealth inhis old age. He willhave two
long-lixing sons and three daughters. His sons will

98 Deva Keralam
make fortunes in a hilly region. The native will
obtain wealth and grains. He will have one brother.
ईश्वरांशे फलं सत्यं शुक्रनाडीफलं स्मृतम् ।
लगनाधियोगजातश्च प्रजेशांरो सुभाग्यवान् ॥३२८१॥
प्रजापालनवानित्यं गजान्तैश्वर्ययोगवान् |
स्थिरलग्ने प्रदेशांशे लग्नयोगाधिसंभवः।
राजवंशे सुराजाप्तिरितस्तु सुभाग्यवान् ॥३२८२ ॥
3281 - 3282. (a) Effects stated for Isvara
Nadiamsa, based on Sukra Nadi, will bear truth.
(b) One born in Lagnadhi Yoga will enjoy
much prosperity. He will protect men, will have
elephants and wealth. For a fixed sign ascending,
Lagnadhi Yoga will be possible. One born in royal
family with this yoga will obtain a great kingdom.
Notes: Why a fixed sign is mentioned is not
understandable. Further the terms of Prajesa and
Pradesa concerning the Nadiamsa should actually
mean Paramesvara Nadiamsa.
वृश्चिक मकरलग्नयोः AUT:
सुरांशे मकरे लग्ने पूर्वभागे प्रजायते ॥३२८३ ॥
विप्रजन्मा सुखी नित्यं तुरीयगर्भसंभवः।
गर्भस्रावातुरा माता पूर्वं च क्लेशसंयुता ॥३२८४ ॥
मुरांश जस्य जननी प्रसूर्यमलपुत्रको |
सुरांशाधिपतौ जीवे कुम्भे मेषांशके तथा ॥३२८५ ॥
शन्यङ्गारकसंदृष्टे योगोऽयंयमलः Ba: |
fae मेषांशगे मन्दे चापांरो भूमिनन्दने ॥३२८६ ॥
प्रसवे लग्नभेदः स्यात् सुरांशे यमलौ स्मृतो |
लग्नाष्टमगेत मन्दे भृसुतेन समन्विते |
द्वितनुस्थौ यमलौ भवतः नालवेष्टितौ ॥३२८७ ॥
3283 - 3287. Capricorn Ascendant - Sura
Nadiamsa: (a) The native belonging to the Ist half
of the subject Nadiamsa will be a Brahmin and be
the 4th issue of the family. Prior to his birth, his
mother would have abortions and difficult pregnancy. She will give birth to twin children.
(b) Jupiter in the sign Aquarius with Aries
Navamsa, and with the aspects of Saturn and Mars,
will cause Yamala Yoga (birth of twins).
(c) Saturn in Leo with Aries Navamsa and Mars
(apparently in Leo) with Sagittarius Navamsa (forming part of the above yoga, aspecting Jupiter) will
cause births of twins in two different ascendants.
(d) With Saturn in the 8th from the ascendant
along with Mars (i.e. in Leo), the twins will be
entwined by umbilical cord.
मनु>
मीनांशे मकरे लग्ने स्वद्रेक्काणे य जायते |
मेषांशे विलग्नेशे fae कुजसमन्विते ॥३२८८ ॥
योगोऽयं यमलो नाम जेष्ठोप्यस्य तु दत्तकः।
बालारिष्टभयं किंचिद्वाल्ये मान्दप्रपीडितः॥३२८९ ॥
3288 - 3289. According to Manu, the sign
Capricorn ascending with the same decanate and
Pisces Navamsa while Saturn joins Mars in Leo and
obtains Aries Navamsa will cause Yamala Yoga
(birth of twins). Though he may be the eldest issue,
he may be given away in adoption. The native will
have fear of infantile mortality. In his childhood,
he will incur complaints of indigestion.
Notes: Reference to Capricorn decanate is just
an addition. The subtle clue is Pisces Navamsa in
the ascendant.
मीनांशे पकरे लग्ने सुरंशे च प्रजायते |
सप्तमांशकगे मान्दौ नवमे दत्तपत्रवान् ॥३२९० ॥
3290. With the ascendant Capricorn begetting
Pisces Navamsa as Mandi is in the 9th, one will be
an adopted issue.
Notes: The term Spatamamsa remains unrelated to a planet. Hence the aphorism is not complete in translation.
तुलांशगे निशानाथे मेषांशे भानुनन्दने ।
मीनांशे मकरे लग्ने द्विमात्रोरपि पोषकः॥३२९१ ॥
अन्यस्रीस्तन्यपानं स्यान्मीनांशे जनितस्य च।
3291 - 3291144. (a) The Moon and Satum should
in order be in Libra and Aries Navamsas while the
ascendant Capricorn falls in Pisces Navamsa. This
Yoga will ensure that the subject is brought up by
two mothers.
(b) The Navamsa of the ascendant being in
Pisces will denote that the child will be breast-fed
by another woman (than the mother).
कीटे नक्रांशगे जातो दुर्भगांशसमन्वितेः॥३२९२ ॥
लग्नाद्वेश्मगते च्रे स्वमातृपितृपोषकः।
दर्भगांशे सुरंशे च पूर्वभागे समुद्भवः॥३२९३ ॥
3292 - 3293. (a) Scorpio Ascendant -

Chandra Kala Nadi 99
Durbhaga Nadiamsa: One born in Scorpio ascendant with Capricorn Navamsa, as the Moon is
in the 4th, will look after his parents.
(b) The 2nd line of sloka 3293 is incomplete:
Birth in first half of Sura Nadiamsa, as... is in
Durbhaga Nadiamsa .....
Notes: Durbhaga Nadiamsa of Scorpio ascendant intervenes the present discussion on Capricomm
ascendant’s Sura Nadiamsa. Sometimes, reference to a fixed sign with Durbhaga Nadiamsa can
also be found in this part. These are easily identifiable with sub-headings provided in the translation.
लग्नेशे गुरुसंदृष्टे वेप्रजन्मा सुखी भवेत् |
वनान्तरेपुरे जन्मवीथ्योश्च यमसोमयो ॥३२९४॥
नदीप्रान्त्यपुरे वापि वारुण्यां दिशि जायते ।
दर्भगांशस्थिते सौम्ये चापांशे चन्द्रसंयुते ॥३२९५ ॥
चापारूढवशाद् भाग्यं दृढदेहस्वरूपवान् |
सिंहे शुक्रयुते GR तुलांशे बुधसंयुते ॥३२९६ ॥
3294 - 3296/2. Scorpio Ascendant - Durbhaga
Nadiamsa: (a) Should the lord of the ascendant be
in aspect to Jupiter, one born will bea Brahmin. His
birth will be in a street spread between the southern
and north-eastern quarters, in a town surrounded by
forests. Or birth could be in a town ofa river region
in the western quarter.
(b) With Mercury in Durbhaga Nadiamsa while
the Moon is in Sagittarius Navamsa, one will make
fortunes (source unclear). His physique will be
sturdy and attractive.
(c) Venus in Leo, and Rahu in Sagittarius,
while the Moon being in the company of Mercury
acquires Libra Navamsa will deprive one of happiness during his boyhood days.
am wel प्रजातश्च बाल्ये सौख्यविहीनवान् |
wera महद् भाग्यं जन्मदाये क्वचित् सुखम् ॥३२९७ ॥
तृतीयांशे परार्थादौ पितृसोख्यं विनिर्दिशेत् |
सुरांशके क्षेमदाये ह्यपमृत्युभयं क्वचित् ॥३२९८ ॥
भोमे गुरुयुते दृष्टे शान्त्या शान्ति प्रयास्यति |
SAMY जन्मदाये केतुदोषवशाद्विपत् ॥३२९९ ॥
तृतीयेऽब्दे क्रूरमासे शान्त्या शान्तिं प्रयास्यति |
्रत्यग्दाये AAT AUN च प्रजायते ॥३३०० ॥
कालमृत्युभयगप्रापतिः क्षेमदायेऽपमृत्युमान् |
सुरांशे चोत्तरे भागे पृगलग्नोद भवस्य च 113302 ॥
सिंहे कुजयुते मन्दे विशद्ररषे मृति वदेत् ।
अल्पायुर्दायमित्याहुरथ ऊर्ध्वं न जीवति ॥३३०२ ॥
3297 - 3302. Capricorn Ascendant - Sura
Nadiamsa: (a) One will have great fortunes in the
5th dasa: His first dasa will give less happiness. In
the later part of the first dasa, his father will enjoy
happiness. The subject will be in the grip of fear of
untimely death in the 4th dasa.
(b) Mars related to Jupiter by aspect or conjunction should be pacified with remedial measures (for it can promote untimely death).
(c) During the first dasa, the subject will be
endangered due to blemish caused by Ketu. In the
3rd month from the time of birth, with the Sun
moving ina malefic sign, remedies for this blemish
be sought.
(d) One born in the 2nd half of the subject
Nadiamsa will face unavoidable death in the Sth
dasa. His 4th dasa will register possibility of
untimely death.
(e) The said native will die at the age of 20 if the
sign Leo contains Mars and Saturn. He will have
short life and cannot cross 20.
दर्भगांशे स्थिरे लगने ह्यतरांश समुद्भवः,
केतुदोषवशारिष्टं पापे जन्म दशान्त्यगे ॥३३०३ |
` जन्मताराधिपे शक्रे हयच्चग्रहसमन्विते |
लगनात् षष्ठाष्टमे मृत्यु दुर्भगां शेद् भवस्य च ॥३३०४॥
3303 - 3304. Immovable Ascendant -
Durbhaga Nadiamsa: (a) For a native of 2nd half
of the subject Nadiamsa, due to Ketu’s blemish, ...
a malefic .. first dasa will cause evils.
(b) Venus should be the ruler of 2nd dasa, and
be with an exalted planet in the 6th or 8th. Asa
result, one will face (early) death.
Notes: (a) The 2nd line of sloka 3303 has some
confusion. “Paape” meaning amalefic should read
as “Chaape” meaning “in Sagittarius”. Seeing the
instruction contained at “b” the first dasa should be
of Ketu placed in Sagittarius. Thus the hint given
hereof is: For a fixed sign ascending, Ketu in
Sagittarius will cause evils in his dasa, if it happens
to be the first one.

100 Deva Keralam
पूर्वभागे च यमलौ दुर्भगांशे चिरायुषौ |
सुरांशगे तथा विन्द्ादगुरुदृष्टिफलं स्मृतम् ॥३३०५ ॥
3305, (a) Births of long-living twins will occur
in the first half of the Durbhaga Nadiamsa (Scorpio). So also in Sura Nadiamsa (Capricorn).
(b) Thus have been stated of the effects of
Jupiter.
Notes: (b) This is enjoined in a wrong place and
has nothing to do with the aphorism at “a” above.
विलग्नाष्टमकर्मेशाः केन्द्रलाभव्रिकोणगाः।
शनिस्तु बलवान् यत्र पूर्णमायुर्भविष्यति ॥३३५६ ॥
3306. General: Saturn enjoying strength as the
planets ruling the ascendant, the 8th and the 10th
are disposed (individually or in any combination)
in angles and trines will bless one with full span of
life.
दर्भगांशे सुखे जीवे मेषे चन्द्रे तुलांशगे ।
पूर्वभागे प्रजातस्य बालरिष्टं न विद्यते ॥३३०७ ॥
3307. In case of birth in the lst halfof Durbhaga
Nadiamsa (immovable ascendant), Jupiter in the
4th and the Moon in the sign Aries - the latter in
Libra Navamsa - will not produce infantile mortality.
रन्धराधिपतिदोषेण बाल्ये किचित् प्रपीडितः।
शशिनोऽरिष्टनाशार्थं चन्द्पार्थनामादिशेत् ॥३३०८ ॥
शद्भकास्यप्रदानेन बाल्ये रोगाद्विमुच्यते |
चन्द्रकल्पोक्तमार्मेण दानं कुर्याद्विचक्षणः 13308 ॥
दर्भगांशे पूर्वभागे षष्ठे चन्दे न दोषभाक् |
बुधयोगवशात् किंचिच्छान्तिं कुर्याद्विचक्षणः ॥३३१० ॥
जन्मताराधिपे शुक्रे गुरुणा च निरीश्िते।
बालारिष्टशतं नश्येदीधर्मायुश्च विन्दति ॥३३११॥
3308 - 33111; (a) Due to blemish of the 8th
lord, the person will be troubled in his childhood.
To overcome the lunar evils, prayers to the Moon
god should be offered and donation of conch shells
and brass be undertaken which will counter childhood diseases. The discerning should perform
charities as mentioned in the work “Chandra Kalpa”.
(b) For one of the Ist half of the subject
Nadiamsa, the Moon in the 6th will not be the cause
of any biemish (for health and life-span). Should
the said Moon be associated with Mercury, remedies will be somewhat essential.
(€) Should the first dasa be of Venus. his dasa
will not cause infantile mortality proviued he is in
aspect to Jupiter. Further the child will be endowed
with longevity.
(d) These apply to first half of Sura Nadiamsa
as well. So also for one born in Capricorn ascendant with Pisces Navamsa as the Moon is in Aries
with Libra Navamsa.
सुरांशगे तथा विन्द्यात् पूर्वभागे फलं स्मृतम्।
तुलांशे च क्रिये चन्द्रे न्रे मीनांशजस्तथा ॥३३१२ ॥
सुरांशगे पूर्वभागे रक्तवर्णः शुभाकृतिः।
जन्मलग्नांशगे मन्दे वीक्षिते वा प्रजायते ॥३३१३ ॥
नीचांशगे विलग्नेशे तृतीये गर्भसंभवः।
जन्मांशनाडी योगेन जन्माब्दे दत्तपुत्रवान् ॥३३१४ ॥
वन्ध्यास्रीदोषकावस्थां लग्नेशे सकुजे गते |
अष्टमे गरुदृष्टिश्चेत् किंचिद्राल्ये प्रपीडितः 13324 ॥
. 3312 - 3315. Capricorn Ascendant - Sura
Nadiamsa: (a) The subject belonging to the 1st half
of this Nadiamsa will be blood-red in complexion
with an auspicious appearance.
(b) Satum in the Navamsa ascendant, or
aspecting the natal ascendant, or his being in
debilitation Navamsa, denotes that the person will
be the 3rd issue.
(c) If Saturn joins the natal Nadiamsa (i.e. rises
in the same Nadiamsa in Capricorn), one will be
given away in adoption in the very first year of his
birth.
(d) Saturn joining Mars as the 8th (Leo) is
aspected by Jupiter will cause troubles to some
extent in childhood.
Notes: (0) The Avastha specified as “Vandhya
stree Dosha” meaning “the blemish of a barren
woman” is not indicative of any standard term.
मीनारूढे विलग्नेशे सुखलाभेशसंयुते |
वित्ते जीवे प्रजातश्च विद्यावान् बुद्धिमान् सुखी ॥३३१६ ॥
धनवान् राजसेवी च सुवपुः शान्तचित्त।
लग्नाद्धनगते जीवे सुखभुग् द्वत्रिभाग्यवान् ॥३३१७ Il
लग्नाच्चतुर्थ चाये वा जीवे भाग्ययुतः सुखी |
वहिशेनयुते दृष्टे नरवाहनयोगवान् ॥३३१८ ॥
लग्नेशे कर्मराशिस्थे वाहेशेन युतेक्षिते |

Chandra Kala Nadi
लग्नाच्चतुर्थगे जीवे स्थिरराशो सुबाहनम् ॥३२३१९ ॥
3316 - 3319. (a) Saturn in Pisces joining the 4th
and 11th lord Mars as Jupiter is in the 2nd (Aquarius)
will make the person well-educated and intelligent. He will be wealthy, will serve the king,
possess a sound physique and be of peaceful mind.
(b) Jupiter in the 2nd will cause happiness and
prosperity.
(©) Should Jupiter be in the 4th or 11th, one will
be blessed with prosperity.
(d) If Jupiter acquires the company of the 4th
lord (Mars), one will have palanquins (i.e. conveyances).
(e) One will possess excellent vehicles if the
lord of the ascendant is in the 10th in aspect to or
association with the 4th lord as Jupiter is in the 4th.
Notes: (b) “Dwi-tri Bhagyavan” is a wrong
copy. “Dwi” means 2, “Tri” means 3. Hence only
“prosperity” is included in the translation.
©) Jupiter’s position is wrongly mentioned as
“in animmovable sign”. For Capricorn ascendant,
the 4th is only amovable sign. To avoid confusion,.
this term is excluded from the rendering.
मेषांशगे सुखे जीवे बाल्येऽल्पसुखवान् wT!
मध्ये भाग्यसमृद्धिं च भ्रातमूलात् सुकीर्मिमान् ॥३२३२० ॥
जनपरिभूते राजसेवी भोगार्थसंयुतोऽतिमातिमान् |
मातृप्रियो मन्िसमबुद्धिरभातृमान् हिबुके स्थिते जीवे ॥३२२१॥
मेषांशगे वा कुम्भे वा राजद्रारे स्वतन्त्रवान् |
राजप्रतापयुक्तश्च शुरो धीरः सुबुद्धिमान् |
नक्रांशे वृश्चिके लग्ने कुम्भे जीवे सुभाग्यवान् ॥३३२२ ॥
वाहनढयो राजतुल्यो लिपित्रयविशारदः।
मीनांशे मकरे लग्ने कुम्भे जीवे सुबुद्धिमान् |
रविजेनयुते दृष्टे पुत्रशोकेन करशितः॥३३२३ ॥
लेख्यविद्यासुनिपुणः कलब्रद्रयनाशवान् |
्षेमदाये महद भाग्यं प्रत्यग्दाये सुबुद्धिमान् ॥३२३२४॥
मेषांशगे घटे जीवे पापद्रयनिरीक्षते |
मृगलग्ने प्रजातश्व क्रोधी मानी सुसात्विकः॥३३२५ ॥
Tarr गर्गमते मूर्खः शूरोऽतिवित्तमान् |
श्रीमान् सदानृतः कामी ह्यन्तकुटिलानुद्धिमान् ॥३३२६ ॥
त्यागी भोगी समानी च दयादक्षिण्यनुद्धिमान् |
मेषांशे हिनुके जीवे सत्कलत्रद्रयः सुखी ॥३३२७ ॥
3320 - 3327. (a) Capricorn Ascendant: Jupiter in the 4th (Aries) with Aries Navamsa (i.e. in
Vargottama) will deprive one of happiness in childhood. In the middle of his life, fortunes will
increase. He will be famous through a brother, be
surrounded by men (attending upon him), will
serve aking and be endowed with pleasures, wealth
and a high order of intelligence. He will be dear to
his mother. His brother will have sharp brain of a
minister. All these when Jupiter is in the 4th (as
above).
(b) Capricorn Ascendant: Jupiter in Aquarius
with Aries Navamsa will grant service with independent authority under a king. The person’s valour will be like that of aking. He will be bold and
intelligent.
(c) Scorpio Ascendant: Should Scorpio ascend with Capricorn Navamsa, Jupiter in Aquarius
will cause much prosperity. One will have rich
conveyances, be equal to a king and be an expert
three languages.
(d) Capricorn Ascendant: Jupiter in Aquarius
for Capricorn ascendant which has Pisces Navamsa will make the person very intelligent.
(e) Capricorn Ascendant: If Jupiter (in
Aquarius as at “d”’) is related to Saturn by association or aspect, the person will be emacisted due to
loss of ason. He will be skilful in authorship and
learning. Both of his wives will be perished. He
will make a good deal of progress in the 4th dasa
and will develop intelligence (or will be endowed
with good disposition) in the 5th dasa.
(f) Capricorn Ascendant: Jupiter begetting
two malefics’ aspects and being in Aquarius with
Aries Navamsa will make one irascible, honourable and gentle. According to sage Garga, quoted
by another text, the subject will be a fool, valorous
and opulent. He will also be illustrious, be ever
truthful and inwardly of crooked disposition. He
will enjoy pleasures, be sacrificing in nature, honourable and kind to others.
(g) Capricorn Ascendant: Jupiter in the 4th
with Aries Navamsa will give two virtuous wives.
वृश्चिकलग्ने दुर्भागांशः
साधुकाले सोमवारे कीटलग्नसमुद् ya: |
लग्नात् कर्मगते जीवे भ्रातृत्रयसुपूजितः॥३३२८ ॥

102 Deva Keralam
प्रसन्नवदनः कामी स्रीणां च प्रियदर्शनः,
मृदुकायोऽल्पवचनः सोमवारे च जायते ॥३३२९ ॥
3328 - 3329. Scorpio Ascendant - Durbhaga
Nadiamsa: Should Jupiter be in the 10th (Leo), the
person will have three brothers and be highly
worshipable. He will have an impressive face, be
libidinous and be liked by women for his appearance. He will have a soft body, will speak within
a limit. His birth will be on a Monday. |
Notes: The first line of sloka 3328 has some
deficiency. Its exact meaning is: “Birth in a good
time, on a Monday, in Scorpio ascendant”. The
concluding part of sloka 3329 reads in another text
as “Somavarasya 1219156". All these refer to one
born in Scorpio ascendant, on a Monday, with the
subject Nadiamsa.and having Jupiter in the 10th.
From sloka 3328 to sloka 3491, the Nadiamsa
mostly dealt with is Durbhaga in the ascendant
Scorpio with intervening slokas concerning Capricorn ascendant.
Durbhaga Nadiamsa has two other names, viz.
Sura and Yamala. For Durbhaga Nadiamsa, please
see notes under sloka 8, page 2, Book 1.
मन्दे लग्ने सोमवारे कोपप्रकृतिमान् सदा |
परदाररतो भोक्ता कृतघ्नः क्रूरवाग्धनी ॥३३३० Il
मन्दप्रकृतिवातात्मा शोर्यसाहसकृत्यवान् |
वाराधीशे तुलारूढे Steet: सुरतप्रियः॥३३३१ ॥
3330 - 3331. (a) Saturn in the ascendant for a
person born on Monday will give an irascible
temper. He will be fond of others’ wives, be
ungrateful, cruel in speech, wealthy and lazy. He
will have a windy body and will perform valorous
and adventurous acts.
(b) If the lord of the week day, {i.e. the Moon)
occupies Libra, one will be addicted to women and
intoxicants.
नक्रांशे वृश्चिके लग्ने सोमवार समुद्भवः।
प्रच्छनापापवान् रागी क्रोधी मानी सुभाग्यवान् 113332 ॥
3332. One belonging to Scorpio ascendant
which has Capricern as its Navamsa will secretly
indulge in sinful deeds. He will be passionate,
irascible, honourable and very fortunate. These
effects will come to pass only when the day of birth
is Monday. :
दर्भगांशे पूर्वभागे ज्येष्ठभ्राता प्रसिद्धिमान्।
राजद्वारे सुपूज्यश्च यमलभ्रातृमान् सुखी 113333 ॥
सोदराः सप्त तेषां st प्रबलौ राजवल्लभौ |
द्रे भगिन्यो चिरायुष्यौ दीर्घमाङ्गल्यसंयुते ॥३३३४॥ ८.
3333 - 3334. Birth in the 1st half of the subject
Nadiamsa will bring fame to older brother. The
native will be estimable in royal circles and will `
have twin brothers. He will have a total of 7
brothers, two of whom will be close to the king and
will prosper. Two sisters will be endowed with
long lives and will have long-living husbands.
स्वज्येष्ठभगिनी पूता बहुभ्रातृसमन्विता |
पत्रिणी पति भक्ता च श्वश्रूश्वशुरसंयुता 113334 Il
भ्रातुमूलात् सुसन्तुष्टा भर्तृभाग्यसमन्विता |
पितृभाग्यसमा युक्ता पितृमातृप्रिया सदा ॥३३३६ ॥
3335 - 3336. Elder Sister: His elder sister will
be pure in character and be endowed with many
brothers. She will have daughters and will be
devoted to her husband. She will have parents-inlaw and be happy through her brothers. Her
husband will be fortunate. So also her father. She
will be dear to her parents.
Wat दुर्भगांशे पूर्वभागोदभवस्य च।
आयुष्मत्यशिभगिन्यस्त्वेका क्लेशेन BAT ॥३३३७ ॥
3337. There is yet another authority to state that
the subject will have 3 sisters with long lives. One
of them will be grieved and emaciated. Male coborn, with long lives, will be 4 in number. Rest will
perish.
सहोदरभ्रातृयोग चतुष्टयमिति स्मृतम् |
दीर्घायुयोग इत्याहुः शेषं नाशमितीरयेत् ॥३३३८ ॥
पितृस्थानाधिपे चन्द्रे तुलांरो मेषराशिगे ।
दर्भगांशे पूर्वभागे पिता सोदरशोकवान् ॥३३३९ ॥
सोट्रभ्रातृहीन पादे चक्राद्धितः स्मृतः।
वेष्णवाचारवान् किंचित् पश्चाद्रैदिकमार्गवान् ॥३२३४० ॥
पितृस्थानाधिपे चन्द्रे निधनाधिपसंयुते |
स्वपिता कृश देही च दयासत्यभिमानवान् ॥३३४१ ॥
दर्भगांशे पिता रोगी गृहच्छिद्रकलापवान् |
पितृसौख्यविहीनश्च पितृभाग्यविहीनवान् ॥३३४२ ॥
मातृसौख्यविहीनश्च ह्यन्यखरीस्तन्यपानवान् |

Chandra Kala Nadi 103
स्वभुजा्जितसम्पन्नो राजद्वारे प्रसिद्धिमान् 13263 ॥
बुधसंयुतदोषेण देष्णवद्धेषहेतुना |
राजद्वरिऽप कीर्त्या च क्लेशं प्राणोति भूरिशः॥३३४४ ॥
3338 - 3344. (a) The Moon, ruler of the 9th in
Aries with Libra Navamsa denotes that the native’s
father will be grieved on account of loss of a brother
and thus will have no male co-born. He will have
asymbol of wheel on sole. He will follow the codes
prescribed for Vaishnavas and then will take to
Vedic path.
(b) Should the Moon join the 8th lord (Mercury), the father will have an emaciated body and
be kind, truthful and proud. The subject will not
enjoy happiness and fortunes through his mother.
Nor will he be happy on account of mother. He will
be breast-fed by another woman. He will acquire
wealth through his own sweat and will become
famous through royal service. Due to the blemish
of the Moon’s conjunction, he will earn the wrath
of Vaishnavites and consequent infamy in royal
circles and be troubled very much.
कुम्भारूढे विलग्नेशे fae शनिसमन्विते |
कुम्भे जीवे प्रजातस्य स्वपिता राजपूजितः ॥३३४५ ॥
द्वितीयाब्दान्तमारभ्य जन्मदाये सुभाग्यवान् |
मित्रमूलात् सुसन्तोषी नरवाहनयोगवान् ॥३३४६ ॥
3345 - 3346. Mars and Jupiter in the sign
Aquarius while Saturn is in Leo will bring reverence to his father from royal circles. During the
beginning and ending phases of the 2nd year of the
native in his first dasa, father will see his fortunes
on the increase. He will be quite happy through
friends and will acquire palanquins (conveyances).
लग्नारूढपदे सूर्ये स्वोच्चांरो च प्रजायते |
स्वपितुर्भाग्यवृद्धिः स्यात् तृतीयाब्दे न संशयः॥३२४७ ॥
द्वितीयान्दान्तमारभ्य Fart पञ्चवत्सरे |
मध्ये सुवाहप्राप्ति च कीटलग्नोद् भवस्य च ॥३३४८ ॥
स्वपिता दीर्धमायुष्यं पुत्रमूलेन सौख्यवान् |
TEM वक्रयोगेन कीरलग्नोद् भवस्य च ॥३३४९ ॥
उच्चांशजन्मतरेशदशायां भाग्यमशनुते |
तृतीयांशे सुभाग्याप्ति पितृभाग्यं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥३३५० ॥
3347 - 3350. (a) One’s 3rd year of age usher the
fortunes of his father, if the Sun in the Arudha Pada
of the ascendant and in Aries Navamsa apart from
a good deal of prosperity in the 2nd and Sth years.
In between these years, he will acquire an excellent
conveyance. This applies to Scorpio ascendant.
(b) If the 4th lord is retrograde, the native’s
father will be long-lived and will be quite happy
with his sons.
(c) Should the lord of the 1st dasa be in his
exaltation Navamsa, prosperity will occur (in the
first dasa). Particularly in the last one third part,
much fortunes will come to exist. (These should
apply to the native’s father and not to the native
himself.)
सुरांशपूर्वभागे तु कीटलग्नोद् भवस्य च।
उच्चग्रहांश योगेन क्लेशी वन्ध्यापतिः पिता ॥३३५१ ॥
सोदरभ्रातृहीनस्व सपत्नीभ्रातृमान् सुखी |
भिन्नोद्रस्व सुर्योगं व्ययं चेति विनिर्दिशेत् ॥३३५२ ॥
केतुप्रकृतिमान् रागी पुराब्राह्मणशापवान् |
सुरांशे दत्तजनकः प्रतिबन्धप्रपीडितः॥३३५३ ॥
अल्पभाग्यं च लभते पितृमूलात् सुसौख्यवान |
दृष्टप्रकृतिमान् कोपी शिवार्चनपरः सुखी ॥३३५४ ॥
दत्तपुत्रवशात् सौख्यं वार्धके श्रीधनान्वितः।
जातिप्राबल्ययोगेन सुरांशे पितृसौख्यवान् 113344 ॥
3351 - 3355. Capricorn Ascendant - Sura
Nadiamsa: One born in the Ist half of Sura Nadiamsa in Scorpio ascendant, will undergo difficu!-
ties due to the Navamsa of an exalted planet. His
father will be the husband of a barren woman. The
native will not have any full co-born, but halfbrothers and half-sisters. He will have expenditure, be irascible, passionate and will due to the
curse of previous birth incur obstacles. He will
have limited fortunes, and will enjoy much happiness due to his father. He will be wicked, shorttempered, will worship Lord Siva, be happy through
his adopted son and will acquire wealth in his old
age.
Notes: Although “Keeta Lagna” or Scorpio
ascendant appears in the Ist line of sloka 3351, the
translation is made as Capricom ascendant because
the entire first line is replaced by “Suramse
Purvabhage tu Makare Lagna Jatake” clearly referring to 1st half of Sura Nadiamsa, Capricorn ascendant. Thus all of a sudden, here is a shift from
Scorpio to Capricorn ascendant.

104 Deva Keralam
The 2nd line of sloka 3351 is not also quite
clear. “Navamsa of exalted planet” does not convey anything sensible.
Nor the reference to father being the husband
of a barren woman. Apparently, the text refers to
“Kaka Vandhya”, i.e. the mother becoming barren
following the birth of the native who will have no
full co-born, and then the father will remarry. Stepbrothers and step-sisters are referred to in the next
verse.
In verse 3353, “Ketu Prakritiman” appears
which means “disposition akin to Ketu’s”. It
should be “Kopa Prakritiman” meaning “irascible”.
लग्नात् पञ्चमगे सूरये त्वसितेन निरीक्षिते ।
सुरंशगे प्रजातश्व पञ्चमाद्धित्रि वत्सरम् ॥३३५६ ॥
अतौव क्लेशकार्यणि पितृपीडां विनिर्दिशेत्।
पितामहध्रातृदोषं नक्षत्रेशदशान्त्यगे ॥३३५७ ॥
स्वपिता व्याकुलं चैति जननी च तथा भवेत्।
लग्नाष्टमगते मन्दे भानौच पञ्चमस्थिते ॥३३५८ ॥
स्वपिता बुद्धिहीनश्व क्लेशजीवनवान्भवेत् |
उच्चांशंक गते सूर्ये पञ्चमेशनिरीक्षिते 1334s ॥
स्वपिता क्लेश युक्तश्च बहुकालं सुजीवति |
शुक्रे केतुयुते जातो मृगरशिगते तथा ॥३२६० ॥
पितामहप्रसिद्धश्च विधवागमनोत्सुकः।
आयुधेन भयं किचिद्बहुसोदरिसोदरः॥३३६१ ॥
उच्चांशकं गते शुक्रे सोदरभ्रतृपोषकः।
एकपुत्र युतः श्रीमान् दारान्तरसुपुत्रवान् ॥३३६२ ॥
वार्धके क्लेशबाहूल्यं ऋणग्रस्तप्रपीडितः।
सुरांशगे पञ्चमाब्दे मृति विन्द्यात् पितमहः॥२३६३ ॥
अथवा जन्मवर्षे च संन्यासे मृतिमादिशेत् ।
पुरास्वकृतपुण्येन सुरांशे स्वपितुः पितुः॥३३६.४॥
3356 - 33642. Capricorn Ascendant: (a)
Should the Sun be in the Sth from Capricorn
ascendant, i.e. in Taurns, in aspect to Saturn, the
native will incur difficulties and evils to his father
for two or three years from the age of five. In the
end of the Moon’s dasa, paternal grand-father’s
brother will be inimical. On account of this, his
parents will be distressed.
(b) Taurus, the Sth house, containing the Sun
while the 8th (Leo) has Saturn denotes that the
father of the native will be foolish and will live a
trouble-ridden life.
(c) The Sun aspected by the Sth lord and
obtaining Aries Navamsa shows that his father will
be laden with troubles but will live for a long time.
(d) Paternal Grand-father: Venus and Ketu
joining in Capricorn (ascendant) denotes that his
paternal grand-father would be famous, fond of
joining widows, would face fear from weapons and
have numerous brothers and sisters.
(e) Paternal Grand-father: Should Venus be
in exaltation Navamsa, paternal grand-father would
nurture his co-born. He would have only one son
(who obviously should be the native’s father), be
wealthy and would have sons through second wife.
In his old age, he would undergo much difficulties
and be troubled by debts. During the native’s 5th
year, the said relative will pass away. Or else, he
may pass away in the very first year of the native
while in ascetic order. Due to the merits of his
previous birth, he would be disposed to take to
ascetic order following a family calamity. Or he
may die in the native’s 2nd dasa.
आपत्संन्यासनुद्धिः स्यात् सम्पदाये मृति वदेत्।
दर्भगांशे पूर्वभागे कीटलग्नोद् भवस्य च ॥३३६५ ॥
सुतेशे शनिसंयुक्ते दीर्घायुः स्वपितामहः।
भ्रातृमूलात् सुसन्तोषी मध्ये दारवियोगवान् ॥३३६६ ॥
पत्रमूलात् क्वचित् सोख्यमपल्ीकश्चिरं भवेत् |
वार्धके नेत्र हानिं च ह्यापत्संन्यासमादिशेत् ॥३३६७ ॥
शिशोश्च जननात् पूर्व दुर्भागांशे पितामहः।
अरिष्टं लभते सोऽपि दुर्भगास्त्रीरतिप्रियः॥३३६८ ॥
पितामहौ द्रौ यमलौ समुत्पनौ तथा स्मृतौ ।
दुर्भगास्रीरतो नित्यं बहुकामातुरो भवेत् ॥२३६९ ॥
स्वपिता विधवा ast दुर्भगांशोदभवस्य च!
स्वमातरि विरोधी च वंशदोषबहूत्ववान् ॥२३७० ॥
3365 - 3370. Scorpio Ascendant - Durbhaga
Nadiamsa: When the birth is in the 1st half of the
Nadiamsa in question and the Sth lord (Jupiter) is
found with Saturn, declare long life to the native’s
patemal grand-father. Further, the said relative
would be happy through his co-born. He would lose
his spouse in the middle of his life, be happy
through his son and be without wife fora long spell.

Chandra Kala Nadi 105
He would incur damage to his ey2 sight in his old
age and would take to ascetic order following a
calamity. Prior to the birth of the subject native, he
would incur evils and be fond of union with an illtempered (or bad or unfortunate) woman. The
native will have twin paternal grand-fathers. The
said grand-father would be interested inbad women
and be highly libidinous. The native’s father will
join widowed women and be inimical to the native’s mother. He will suffer from blemishes in
respect of the family’s growth.
लाभेशे शुभसंयुक्ते दुर्भगांशोद्भवस्य च |
ज्येष्ठ भ्राता प्रसद्धिश्व वाहनत्रयभाग्यवान् 113308 ॥
विशद्र्षत् परं सौख्यं स्वावित्रथिकभाग्यवान् |
दर्भगांशे विपदाये ज्येष्ठ भ्राता श्रिया युतः॥३३७२ ॥
नरवाहनभूपरापिर्बहुसन्ताननाशवान् ।
HOTA कामी ह्य्नदानप्रदः सुखी ॥३३७२ ॥
पितृमातुप्रियो नित्यं सोदरभातृपोषकः।
ज्येष्ठभ्राता चिरायुष्मान् यमलां शोद्धवस्य च ॥३३७४ ॥
3371 - 3374. Elder Brother: If the 11th lord
(Mercury) is with a benefic, his elder brother will
be famous and will have 3 conveyances. He will be
happy after the age of 20 and will enjoy abundant
paternal wealth. The native’s 3rd dasa will produce
much wealth for the said brother. He will acquire
palanquins (conveyances) and landed properties.
Many of his children will be destroyed. He will
have two wives, be libidinous, disposed feed the
poor and attached to his parents. He will be longlived. .
Notes: “Yamalamsa” found in the 2nd line of
sloka 3374 means “Durbhagamsa’”’ as instructed in
slokas 3405-6 infra. Yamala Nadiamsa also referes
to Sura Nadiamsa.
लाभेशे यलवांशस्थे सप्तमे तत्विकोणगे |
ज्येष्ठ wre a जन्मनक्षत्रभं विदुः 13304 ॥
मूर्याशे तच्रिकोणेऽपि पितृनक्षत्रमुच्यते |
TUM फलं सत्यं दुर्भगांशे तथा भवेत् ॥३३७६ ॥
3375 - 3375. Note the Navamsa position of the
11th lord Mercury. The sign which is the 7th ora
trine thereof will be the Moon sign of the person’s
elder brother. Father’s Moon sign will be trinal to
the Navamsa occupied by the Sun. These two clues
ॐ
apply to Sura Nadiamsa (Capricorn ascendant) and
Durbhaga Nadiamsa (Scorpio ascendant).
दर्भगांशे धने राहौ भार्गवेणेश्ितेयुते ।
म्लेच्छराज्ये महद भाग्यं म्लेच्छसेवापरो भवेत् ॥३३७७ ॥
तदभावे म्लेच्छगोष्ठीत्यागमोदवदान्यवान् |
परवित्तच्छुं fe नित्यं बहुस्रीसङ्गतत्परः॥२२३७८ ॥
3377 - 3378. Scorpio Ascendant - Durbhaga
Nadiamsa: Should Rahu be in the 2nd in aspect tc
or in association with Venus, the person will make
a lot of fortunes in Mlechchas’ kingdom and will
serve Mlechchas. In the absence of these, he will
join(?) Mlecchchas. He will be sacrificing in .
disposition, will enjoy pleasures, be munificent,
will have an eye on others’ wealth and be interested
in union with many a woman.
giant कीटे मक्ंशे च जायते ।
दर्भगासरीरतो नित्यं जनयिष्यति पुत्रिकाम् ॥३३७९ ॥
राजयोगं च लभते ह्यथवा रूपवान् सुखी ।
Be च प्रजातश्च ह्यनाचारी कचित् कचित् ॥३२३८० ॥
पश्चात् पाप शरीरश्च वार्धके ज्ञानवान् भवेत्।
मृतप्रजाबहुत्वं स्यात् पुत्रद्रयसमन्तितः RICE ॥
पुत्रिका च तथा विन्द्यात् सुरभे पूर्वभागगे।
3379 - 3381144. (a) Scorpio Ascendant: One
born in Scorpio ascendant with Capricorn Navamsa will be fond of joining bad women. He will
beget daughters, will enjoy Raja Yoga (position
with authority) and be with charming looks.
(b) Capricorn Ascendant: One belonging to
1st half of Sura Nadiamsa will be somewhat unorthodox and sinful but will become wise in his old
age. He will have many dead issues and be endowed with two sons and two daughters.
दर्भगांशे पूर्वभागे कीटलग्नोदभवश्य च ॥३३८२ ॥
पुत्रिकाद्रयमायुष्यं पुत्राणां तु चतुष्टयम् ।
दीर्घायुषमितिप्राहरदरद्वयसुपुत्रवान् ॥३३८३ ॥
3382 - 3383. Scorpio Ascendant - Durbhaga
Nadiamsa: One belonging to the 1st half of this
Nadiamsa will have two daughters and four sons all
of whom will be long-living. He will have two
wives.
लग्नाच्चन््रात् सुते मन्दे भूसुतेन समन्विते |
सुताधिपेन संदृष्टे बहुखीपुत्र संयुतः ॥३३८४ ॥

106 Deva Keralam
3384. Saturn in the 5th from the ascendant or
the Moon but in aspect to Mars will cause plurality
of wives and many sons.
चन्द्रसौम्यौ यदेकस्थावेकांशौ पापराशिगो ।
प्रहदृष्टि विहीनौ च द्विसुतौ यमलौ स्मृतौ ॥३३८५ ॥
` 3385. The Moon and Mercury together in a
malefic sign, and with one and the same Navamsa,
will cause birth of twin sons. However these two
planets should remain unaspected by others.
कुलीरे वृश्चिके मीने मकरे तच्रिकोणगे ।
मकरंशे प्रजातश्च स पापे यमलौ स्मरतो ॥३३८६ ॥
चापांशगे चन्त्यभागे मकरांशादिभागगे ।
लग्नांशगे पापभागे यमलः स्यान संशयः ॥ ३२८५७ Il
3386 -3387. (a) Capricom Navamsa rising in
any of the four signs, viz. Cancer, Scorpio, Pisces
and Capricorn will cause birth of twins provided a
malefic too ascends in the said sign.
(b) The concluding part of Sagittarius Navamsa or the initial part of Capricorn Navamsa
rising along with a malefic will also produce the
same effect.
Notes: (a) “Tattrikonage” meaning “trines
thereof” in the 1st line of sloka 3386 is an intrusion
because 3 signs (Scorpio - Cancer - Pisces) are
particularly cited which are themselves mutual
trines.
(b) “Paapa Bhaage” in sloka 3387 meaning a
“malefic degree” should read as “Sa paape” - with
a malefic - in line with 2nd line of the previous
sloka. ait वत
मेषत्रिकोणगे चन्द्रे तुलांशे बु ।
स्थिरलग्ने प्रजातश्च यमलो भाग्यवान् सुखी ॥३३८८ ॥
कुम्भत्रिकोणगे चन्द्रे स्वसुतेन समन्विते |
एकांश प्रजातश्व क्लेशी यमलसंभवः॥३३८९ ॥
वित्तत्रकोणणे चन्द्रे यमलांशे च संस्थिते |
स्थिरलग्ने प्रजातश्च भोगभाग्यसुतः सुखी ॥३३९० ॥
तेजस्वी मतिमान् कामी विद्रज्जनसुभाषितः।
सेनामात्यप्रियो नित्यं नरवाहनयोगवान् 13332 ॥
देशान्तरे भाग्ययोगं पित्रा सह गमिष्यति |
पुण्यतीर्थं गतो बाल्ये कीर्िमांल्लोकपूजितः॥३३९२ ॥
वृश्चिके यमले योगे नानाभाषाविचक्षणः।
कोड्णे केरलप्रान्ते सञ्चारी धनलाभवान् ॥३३९३ ॥
वनान्तरे प्रभुस्नेहं बाल्ये किंचित् सुखावहम् |
बहूकषत्रार्थसंपन्नो मध्ये वयसि योगवान् ॥३३९४॥
सेनामात्यद्विजस्नेहं महाराजश्रिया सुखम् |
पुरपालाधिकार च राजामात्यप्रसादनम् ॥२३९५ ॥
3388 - 3395. Scorpio Ascendant: (a) The
Moon in Aries or its trines and begetting Libra
Navamsa containing Mercury will cause one to be
among twins. This applies to an immovable ascendant. The native will be fortunate and happy.
(b) Should the Moon, being in the same Navamsa as Mercury is, be in Aquarius or its trine, one
will be among twins and be troubled. (Here again,
the ascendant should be a fixed sign as in “a’”’.)
(©) The Moon in Durbhaga Nadiamsa and in a
trine from the 2nd will usher pleasures, fortunes
and happiness in case of an immovable ascendant.
in case of twin births. The native will be radiant,
intelligent, libidinous and be well-referred to by
mean of learning (i.e. he himself will be quite
learned). He will be liked by the army chief and
minister, will enjoy palanquins (i.e. conveyances)
and will make his fortunes, along with his father, in
adistant land. He will visit shrines in his childhood.
He will also be famous and honoured by people at
large, will be versed in many languages, will
journey in the regions of Konkana and Kerala and
will gain wealth. He will befriend a king of a
different forest and will enjoy some happiness in
his childhood days. He will possess a lot of lands
and wealth. His prosperity will commence in the
middle of his life. He will befriend army chief,
ministers and Brahmins (or learned men). He will
make wealth through an emperor and will acquire
lordship over a city. He will earn the mercy of the
king and minister.
मेषत्रिकोणगे चन्द्रे तुलांशे ear तथा ।
श्रीमान् सुकीर्तिमान् भोगी हेमरलसुपूजितः ॥३२३९६ ॥
युवती प्रियावान् कामी कुलस्रीसङ्गपापवान् |
शुक्रे पापयुते जातो मिथुने मेथुनप्रियः॥३२३९७ ॥
weet क्वचिच्चेव भवेतां अग्रजौ तथा।
पष्ठाष्टमगते शुक्रे गुरुसंयुतवीक्षिते ॥३३९८ ॥
बाल्ये स्वपुत्रकार्थ्येन ayer च कशता ।
मेषत्रिकोणगे चन्द्रे तुलांशे स्वपिता सुखी ॥३३९९ ॥

Chandra Kala Nadi 107
वेदिकाचारवान् कामी यागकृत् पुण्यतीर्थवान् |
जन्मदाये तृतीयांशे यमलाशोद् भवस्य च Boo Il
स्वपिता भाग्य युक्तश्च ज्येष्ठभ्रातृसुसोख्यवान्।
3396 - 3400142. (a) The Moon in Aries or in a
dual sign (i.e. Gemini, Sagittarius or Pisces) with
Libra Navamsa will give the following results. The
native will be wealthy, very famous, and will enjoy
pleasures, gold, precious stones and honour. He
will be liked by women, be libidinous and will be
sinful by joining women of honourable families.
(b) Venus with a malefic in the sign Gemini
will create fondness for sexual union. His wife will
have some blemish. His elder brothers will also
beget these effects.
(c) Venus in the 6th or the 8th in relation to
Jupiter by aspect or association will lead to the
following effects (apparently to a sister, as feminine gender occurs). Her son will be emaciated in
childhood and she will incur widowhood.
(0) The Moon in Anes or its trines with Libra
Navamsa will cause happiness to the native’s father. He will follow the codes suggested by the
Vedas, be libidinous, will perform Yagas (sacrifical
rites) and will visit shrines. During the last one
third part of the first dasa of the native, father will
earn fortunes and be happy through his older
brother.
सूर्यलग्नाधिपे जीवे लग्नात् केन्द्रत्रिकोणगे ॥३४०१ ॥
लग्नाधिपेन संदृष्टे स्वपिता राजपूजितः।
जातकस्य विशेषेण fared श्रिया युतः ॥३४०२ ॥
विवाहोत्सवकार्याणि गृहे लक्ष्मीकटाक्षवान् |
बहुपुतरार्थसन्पन्नो भ्रातृभाग्ययुतो भवेत् ॥२३४०३ Il
3401 - 3403. Scorpio Ascendant - भाण) ०४
_Nadiamsa: Jupiter becoming the lord of the Sun
Sign and placed in an angle or a trine from the
ascendant with Martian aspect denotes that the
native’s father will receive royal honours. The
native will also gain wealth specially in his 3rd
dasa; there willbe a family marriage and the family
will make wealth. Lie will have many sons, much
wealth and be happy through his brother.
उच्चांशगे स्थिरे सूर्ये कालेशात् केन््रमाश्रिते।
स्वसुतेन दृष्टे स्वपिता शुग्रपीडितः॥३४०४ ॥
स्वदशायां महद भाग्यं यमलांशे पितुः सुखम् |
3404 - 3404144. The Sun being in a fixed sign
which is an angle from the lord of the ascendant
(Mars) and receiving the aspect of Saturn will
cause troubles from enemies to the native’s father.
However, in this yoga, the Sun should be in-his
exaltation Navamsa. As aresult of this entire yoga,
the dasa of the Sun will usher 2reat fortunes to the
subject and general happiness to father.
यमलाशदुर्भगांशौ पर्यायाविति संस्मृतौ ॥३४०५ ॥
सुरंशगे पूर्वं भागो यमलांश इति-स्मृतः।
यमलांशे क्रिये चन्द्रे तुलांशे बुधसंयुते ॥३४०६ ॥
यमलभ्रातमान् भोगी भ्रातृमूलात् सुभाग्यवान्।
भावलग्नाधिपे भौमे रविजेन समन्विते avo Il
यमलांशे प्रजातश्च मसूरीज्वर भीतिमान्।
गुरुदृष्टिवशारोग्यं द्वित्रिवारं ज्वरद भयम् ॥२४०८ ॥
बाल्ये व्ययभयं किचितुष्पाञ्जल भीतिमान्।
मध्ये कारागृह प्रापिर्देशत्यागवशादव्यथा ॥३४०९ ॥
केरले क्लेशबाहुल्यं विप्लवेन fafa: |
स्थानच्युति द्विवारं च नानादेशेषु संचरन् ॥३४१० ॥
पश्चात् स्वदेशमासाद्य स्वगृहे सौख्यमश्नुते ।
शुभशोधनकार्याणि ह्यादायादधिकं व्ययम् ॥२३४११ ॥
3405 - 3411. (a) Synonyms: Yamala Nadiamsa and Durbhaga Nadiamsa are synonyms. Sura
Nadiamsa’s Ist half is also known as Yamala
Nadiamsa.
(b) Scorpio Ascendant: For one belonging to
Durbhaga Nadiamsa, the Moon in Aries and joining Mercury in Libra Navamsa will cause birth of
twin brothers. The native will enjoy pleasures. He
will make good prosperity through his brothers.
(c) Mars becoming the lord of Bhava Lagna
and associated with Saturn will cause small-pox. If
Jupiter aspects this yoga, he will recover his health;
the fear of ill-health will only be for two or three
weeks. (Without the aspect of Jupiter) the said
yoga will cause decaying (or disappearance) of the
native in childhood and he will somewhat have fear
of danger from quadrupeds and water. In the middle of his life, he will be imprisoned, will leave the
country and be grieved. He will undergo a lot of
difficulties in the region of Kerala and will be
displaced due to a revolution. He will wander in

108 Deva Keralam
many acountry. After these, he will return to his
country and be happy. He will have expenditure,
beyond his income, in auspicious functions.
भावलग्ने त्रिकोणेऽपि नवमे राहुसंस्थिते |
जन्मदाये जन्मदेशे भूपते्व्याकुलं महत् MBSR? ॥
राहुप्रथमपर्यायि गोचरे जन्मलग्नगगे ।
जन्मान्ते व्याकुलं चैति राज्ये विप्लमादिशेत् aves ॥
जन्मदेशे नृपद्वारिसेनामात्यजनावधि |
योगभद्गं च लभते जन्मदाये न संशयः॥३४१४ ॥
स्वपितुर्भितरबन्धूनां प्राबल्यं जन्मदायगे |
कन्याशनौ महद भाग्यं YAR महत् सुखम् ॥३४१५ ॥
प्रबलोद्योगलाभं न पितृसौख्यं विनिर्दिशेत् |
गोचरे स्वोच्चगे जीवे तत्रिकोणे पितुः सुखम् ॥२४१६ il
विद्यारम्भं जातकस्तु तत्काले पितृभाग्यकृत्।
कन्याजीवे स्थिते काले दुर्भगांशोद् भवस्य च ॥३४१५७ Il
उपनयनमित्याहुः पश्चादुद्राह मेव च ।
3412 - 3417144. (a) Irrelevant: Rahu in a trine
from the Bhava Lagna will cause distress to the
king(?) in the native’s first dasa.
(b) Rahu’s Transit: When Rahu arrives in
transit in the sign ascending (i.e. Scorpio), the
subject will be troubled till Rahu’s transit in the end
of the ascendant. There will be a revolution in the
country. The army chief and minister of the country
will be changed. The native’s first dasa will
interrupt his progress.
(©) In the native’ s first dasa, his father’s friends
and relatives will prosper.
(d) Saturn’s Transit: Should the planet Saturn
be moving in Virgo, the native’s father will acquire
great fortunes, destruction of adversaries and acquisition of happiness. Further, he will gain a
prosperous employment and be happy.
(e) Jupiter’s Transit: When Jupiter reaches
Cancer or its trine, his father will be happy. The
native’s education will commence and at the same
time his father’s fortunes will pick up. Jupiter
journeying in Virgo will cause Sacred Thread
Ceremony to the native followed by marriage. `
सुरंशे मकरे लग्ने वृश्चिके यमलांशके ॥३४१८ ॥
उच्चराश्यन्त्यगे जीवे चौलोपनयनं स्मृतम् ।
शक्रे जीवान्तरे काले जीवे राहृन्तरान्तरे ॥३४१९ ॥
तुलांशके प्रजातश्च शनिभुक्तौ शुभं लभेत् ।
3418 - 3419142. (a) Jupiter reaching the end of
Cancer in transit will cause tonsure ceremony and
sacred thread ceremony. This applies to the native
of Sura Nadiamsa of Capricorn ascendant as well
as Durbhaga Nadiamsa in Scorpio ascendant.
(b) Should the Navamsa be Libra, Rahu’s subsub period in the sub period of Jupiter in the dasa
of Venus, and Saturn’s sub period (in the dasa of
Venus) will cause auspicious effects.
Notes: (b) “Tulamsake Prajatascha” in sloka
3419 should, in my opinion, read as “Suramsake
Prajatascha” denoting the native of Sura Nadiamsa, in Capricorn ascendant, for whom both the
sub periods of Jupiter and Saturn in the dasa of
Venus will prove auspicious.
कीटलग्ने प्रजातस्य जन्माब्दे दक्षिणायने ॥३४२० ॥
Wat स्वगोत्रेषु पुत्र स्वीकरणं स्मृतम्।
जीवे कुजयुते दृष्टे वणपीडा क्वचित् क्वचित् ॥३४२१ ॥
बाल्ये कृशत्वमाप्नोति द्वितीयाब्दे प्रपीडितः।
वन्ध्या मातामहीवंशे द्वितीयाब्दे महाविपत् ॥३४२२ ॥
स्वजनारिष्टमाप्नोति वन्ध्या माता मनोव्यथाम् |
शन्यन्तरे शुक्रदाये कीटलग्नोद्भवस्य च IY? Il
स्वमातामहसन्तापं देहालस्यं विनिर्दिशेत् |
जननीव्याकुलं चैव सुखाधिपतिभुक्तिषु ॥३४२८ ॥
शुक्रे मन्दान्तरे काले कीटलग्नोद भवस्य च |
उत्तरार्धे पितुः सौख्यं गृहे कल्याणसं भ्रमम् ॥२४२५ ॥
3420 - 3425. (a) One born in Scorpio ascendant
(Capricorn is referred to in another version) will, in
the first dasa, with the Sun’s southerly course, go
in adoption into a family belonging to his own
Gotra. This will be in the sub period of Jupiter (in
the dasa of Venus). :
(b) Jupiter joining or in aspect to Mars will
show some possibility of danger through ulcers. In
childhood, he will be thin-bodied. The 2nd year of
his age will cause troubles and there will be great
danger in the family of his maternal grand-mother.
The native’ 5 kinsfolk will incur evils, great danger
and mental distress.
(c) In the dasa of Venus and in the sub period
of Saturn, the maternal grand-father of Scorpio
native will enjoy happiness but will incur physical
illness. The person’s mother will be distressed in

Chandra Kala Nadi 109
the sub period of the 4th lord (Saturn). The second.
half of Saturn’s sub period in the dasa of Venus will
cause happiness to the native’s father followed by
a family marriage.
Notes: (b) “Vandhya” meaning “barren” is
found in the 2nd line of sloka 3422 dealing with
maternal grand-mother. This is a} truthless reference. This term also occurs in the next line.
Further, the word “Mata” (mother) in the first line
of sloka 3423 is replaced by “Mahadvipat” meaning “great danger” in another text.
स्वजन्मदेशे कलहं विचित्रं
देशान्तरे भूपतिनाशमाहुः।
अमात्यसेनाधिपयोश्च वेधां
भाग्यक्षयात् स्वप्रभुशोक कालम् ॥३४२६ Il
3426. Irrelevant: There will be a wonderinstilling quarrel in his birth country. The king of
another country will be destroyed. The minister
and army chief will face troubles. His king will be
2116४60 due to decaying fortunes.
शुक्रसोम्यान्तरे काले कीटलग्नोद् भवस्य च ।
RTA ज्वरभयं श्षप्रेणारोग्यमादिशेत् ॥३४२७ ॥
शन्यन्तरे तृतीयांशे सोदरोत्पत्तिमेव च ।
ज्यष्ठभ्रातृविवाहादि पितृसोख्यं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥३४२८ ॥
3427 - 3428. The sub period of Mercury in
Venus dasa will cause fear, with the Sun’s adverse
transit, of fever for a Scorpio native. The last one
third part of Saturn’s sub period will cause birth of
a younger brother, marriage to older brother and
happiness to father.
तारर्केशाधिपे waa नीचे वाथ प्रजायते ।
राजयोगं च लभते क्षेमदाये महत् सुखम् ॥३४२९ ॥
3429. This is not a logically constructed sloka.
Neither the planets involved are clear. “Tara” =
Nakshatra; “Arka” = Sun;
“Isa” = Lord; “Adhipa” again is lord. Thus the
term “Tara + Arka + Isa + Adhipa” yields nothing
sensible. These planets, if at all they mean something clear, should be in own sign or debilitation,
giving a Raja Yoga and great happiness in the 4th
dasa.
दूनाधिपदशाकाले लाभाधिपतिभुक्त्तिषु ।
विद्यारम्पं च लभते तथोपनयनं ततः ॥३४३० ॥
सुरांशे वृश्चिके लग्ने यमलांशोद भवस्य च ।
जन्मदाये केतु भुक्तावुपनयनमिष्यते ॥२३४३१ ॥
दर्भगांशे प्रजातस्य लाभाधिपतिभुकतिषु ।
महानदीग्रान्तदेशे मौञ्जीबन्धनमाचेत् ॥२४२२ ॥
3430 - 3432. Scorpio Ascendant = Durbhaga
Nadiamsa: (a) In the sub period of the 11th lord
(Mercury) and in the dasa of the 7th lord (Venus),
one’s education will commence followed by sacred thread ceremony.
(b) Capricorn Ascendant: For one born in
Capricorn ascendant’s Sura Nadiamsa, Ketu’s sub
period in the first dasa will cause sacred thread
ceremony.
(©) For one born in Scorpio ascendant, vide “a”
above, the said ceremony in the 11th lord’s sub
period will occur in the region of a great river.
Notes: (b) “Vrschike Lagne” is replaced by
“Makare Lagne” in another version, which is only
correct.
सम्पदाये शुक्रभुक्तो कीरलग्नसमुद्भवः |
वसन्तकाले चोद्राही पितृभाग्यः सुखी ॥२३४३३ ॥
3433. Scorpio Ascendant: The native will
beget married during the season of spring in the sub
period of Venus in the 2nd dasa. His father will also
prosper (during this sub period).
कर्माधिपदशाकाले वासदेशे नृपावधि |
पष्ठाष्टमाधीयुक्तौ देशे राजान्तरं भवेत् ॥३४३४ ॥
स्वपिता क्लेशकार्याणि वर्षमेक मनोव्यथाम् ।
प्राबल्यं लभते पश्चाद् भ्रातृयोगवशात् सुखम् ॥२४३५ ॥
3434 - 3435. The sub periods of either the 6th
or 11th lord (i.e. of Mars or Mercury) in the dasa of
the 10th lord (Sun) the king will be replaced(?) In
these sub periods, the native’s father will be in
difficulties and will be distressed for a period of one
year after which he will prosper on account of his
co-born.
ade सौम्यभुक्तो भूसुतस्यान्तरेऽथ वा।
अतीव क्लेशकार्याणि देहजाड्यां विनिर्दिशेत् ॥३४२६ ॥
eine पूर्वभागे कीटलग्नोद्धवस्य च |
बुधान्तरे व्याकुलं स्यादुरुभुक्तौ क्वचित् क्वचित् ॥३४३७ ॥
शन्यन्तरे श्रिया युक्तो स्वप्राबल्यं विपदशा ।
ज्येष्ठभ्रातृविशेषं च प्राबल्यं चोत्तरोत्तरम् ॥२४२८ ॥

110 Deva Keralam
विपदशापसार्धादौ ज्येष्ठभ्राता श्रिया युतः।
पुतरोत्सवादिसन्तोषं पितृसौख्यं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥३४३९ ॥
वृश्चिकान्ते चापशनौ गोचरे पितृपीडनम्।
सम्पदाये क्रूर yar पितुः पौडा भविष्यति axxo ॥
मीने शनिस्थिते काले मेषान्ते वृष्भेऽय वा।
दुर्भगांश्जस्य चरि विपद्दाये पितुर्विपत् ॥३४४१ ॥
3436 - 3441. Scorpio Ascendant: (a) The sub
periods of Mercury and Mars in all dasas will cause
physical illness due to troublesome undertakings.
(b) One born in the first half of Durbhaga
Nadiamsa will be distressed in the sub period of
Mercury. So also to some extent in that of Jupiter.
(This applies to 2nd dasa.)
(c) The later half of the 3rd dasa will bring
wealth and acquisition of a son for the native’s
older brother. His father will also enjoy happiness.
(d) Saturn’s Transit: Saturn’s sojourn in the
end of Scorpio, or in Sagittarius will cause evils to
father. This may also be in a malefic’s sub period
in the 2nd dasa. During the native’s 3rd dasa, with
saturn moving in Pisces, end of Aries or in Taurus
will endanger his father.
` पितृभावाष्टमे जीवे कीरलग्नोद् भवस्य च।
सप्तमाब्दे पित्ररिष्टमष्टाविशेऽथ वा यदि ॥३४४२ ॥
3442. During the native’s 7th or 28th year,
Jupiter moving in the 8th from the 9th (i.e. in
. Aquarius which is the 4th from Scorpio ascendant)
‘will cause death of father.
सुखेशसंबन्धदशाविपाके
चन्द्रात् सुखे भानुसुते च काले ।
जन्मान्तरे पापवशाच्च दुखं |
तातम्बिकारिष्टमितिब्रुवन्ति ।३४४३ ॥
3443. In the dasa periods of a planet related to
4th lord, note Saturn in movement in the 4th place
from the natal Moon. Then the native -will be in
grief for his sins and his paternal grand-mother will
be endangered. -
तुलांशगे क्रिये se कुलीरे गोचरे शनौ ।
'क्षेमदाये पित्ररिष्टं मास्सु मेषादिषु त्रिषु ३४४४ ॥
स्वमाता विधवा भूत्वा बहुकालं सुजीवति |
्रत्यग्दाये पापभुक्तौ जननीमृत्युमादिशेत् ॥३४४५ ॥
3444 - 3445. Should the Moon be in Aries with
Libra Navamsa, Saturn’s movement in cancer during the 4th dasa will endanger his father. The
months concerned will be when the Sun moves in
Aries and the next two signs. His mother will
become a widow and will be long-lived. She will
die when the native will be ina malefic’s sub period
of 5th dasa.
सुरंशे वृश्चिके लग्ने पञ्च्विंशतिवत्सरे |
एकत्रिंशोऽथ वा चेति स्ववन्ध्यामातृनाशनम् ॥३४४६ ॥
स्वपित्रिरिष्टतः पूर्वं सुरांशेजनितस्य च।
माता सुमङ्गली मृत्युं पिता पश्चाटभार्यकः ॥३४४७ Il
3446 - 3447. in case of Sura Nadiamsa, Scorpio
ascendant (another version rightly suggests Capricom ascendant), mother will die in the native’s
25th or 31st year. This death of mother will occur
prior to the death of father who then will remain
unmarried.
Notes: “Vandhya” (barren) in relation to mother
is an inadmissible expression.
मीनांशे वृश्चिके लग्ने यमलांशोद्भवस्य च।
दीर्धायुश्चापि जननी ? भेदमाता विनश्यति ॥३४४८ ॥
घोडशाब्दे Torquay क्वचित् ।
ततः पश्चाद्विवाहः स्याद् द्ूनाधिपतिदायके ॥३४४९ ॥
3448 - 3449. For one born in Scorpio (Capncorn is found in another version) ascendant,
Durbhaga (or Sura) Nadiamsa, mother will be
endowed with longevity. But his step-mother will
be destroyed (early). The said step-mother will die
adangerous death when the native will be 16. Later
on, in the 7th lord’s dasa, his marriage will occur.
Notes: Reference to Pisces Navamsa is redundant in the Ist line of sloka 3448 above.
सुरांशे षोडशे वर्षे त्वष्टादशे च वत्सरे ।
प्रत्यक्षपितृमूलेन वदेदुद्राह कर्म च ॥३४५० Il
3450. The 16th or 18th year of age will cause
marriage to the native of Sura Nadiarisa (Capricom) through the good offices of his full father.
(Thatis, a step-father is indicated, vide next sloka.)
sere पित्ररिष्टं सुरांशेजनितस्य च।
शन्यन्तरे क्लेश कालः स्वभेदपितृकर्मकृत् ।३४५१ ॥
3451. The 5th dasa will endanger his father.
The sub period of Saturn will be a time of troubles

Chandra Kala Nadi 111
and the native will perform last offices to his halffather.
चापारूढे क्रिये चन्द्रे तुलांशे क्षेमदायके |
स्वप्राबल्यं ` विशेषं च भ्रातृमूलात् सुवाहनम् ॥२४५२ ॥
राजामात्यप्रसोदन भ्रातृयोगाभिवृद्धिमान् |
गृहे लक्ष्मीकटाक्षेण नित्यश्रीसौख्यमश्नुते ॥३४५३ ॥
3452 - 3453. The Moon in Aries or Sagittarius
with Libra Navamsa will specially increase one’s
prosperity in the 4th dasa. He will acquire conveyance through his brothers. Due to favours of the
king and minister, his brother will enjoy prosperity:
The family will receive the blessings of the goddess
of lucre and happiness will prevail.
नक्रांशे वृश्चिके लग्ने यमलांशोदभवस्य च।
भाग्याधिपदशाकाले भ्रातृप्राबल्यमादिशेत् ॥२४५४ ॥
लग्नाधिपदशाकाले जातकश्च श्रिया युतः।
सन्तानोत्पत्तिमाप्नोति दारसौख्यं शुभाशुभम् ॥३४५५ ॥
3454 - 3455. Scorpio ascendant with Capricorn
Navamsa will bring prosperity to brother when the
native will be in the dasa of the Moon. In the dasa
of the lord of the ascendant (Mars), he will himself
gather wealth, will acquire a son and be happy with
his wife. Good and bad results are possible (in the
dasa of Mars).
शन्यङ्गारकसंयोगे दशमे TREAT |
wert प्रजातस्य बुद्धियोगी भविष्यति ॥३४५६ ॥
बुद्धियोगप्रजातस्य भ्रातृप्राबल्यहेतुना |
भाग्याधिपदशाकाले बहुभाग्यं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥३४५७ ॥
कर्माधिपदशाकाले पितृसोख्यं महत् सुखम्।
जन्मदाये तृतीयांशे तातादिश्रियमश्नुते ॥३४५८ ॥
यावदायुष्यमाप्नोति तावदभाग्यं विनिर्दिशेत्
बुद्धियोगे सुखे जीवे पशुधान्यसमृद्धिमान् ॥२३४६० Il
रात्रिश दारनाशः स्यात् क्लेशं प्राप्नोति भूरिशः।
द्वितीयोद्राहसिद्धिः स्यात् पश्चात् प्रनलयोगवान् ॥३४६१ ॥
3456 - 3461. Saturn and Mars joining in the
10th (in Leo) with the aspect of Jupiter will cause
what is called “Buddhi Yoga” as a result of which,
the native will obtain great prosperity in the dasa of
the 9th lord through the hétp of his brother. The
dasa of-the 10th lord (Sun) will cause much
happiness to father. The last one third part of 1st
dasa will cause wealth to father. Throughout his
life, the native will enjoy fortunes. In the said
Buddhi Yoga, Jupiter being in the 4th, will cause
increase of quadrupeds and corns, and will grant
palanquins (conveyances) and ornaments, apart
from fortunes through brother. The Sth dasa will
cause a family division and some enmity with
brother. In the native’s 32nd year, his wife will die
and he will incur plenty of grief. His 2nd marriage
will follow, following which he will see great
prosperity.
Notes: The yoga is referred to as “Buddhi
Yoga’. Buddhi means intelligence and has directly
nothing to do with Bhagya or prosperity. It should
read as Bhagya or Vriddhi Yoga in line with the
combination suggested although the title of the
yoga is not that important. Apart from giving
prosperity, the conjunction of Mars - Saturn in Leo
in aspect to Jupiter has other events as could be
seen.
सुखेशे सिहराशिस्थे दुर्भगांशोद् भवस्य च ।
सर्वदाये मीनराशौ तश्िकोणेऽथ वा यदि ॥३४६२ ॥
स्फुटयोगं गते मन्दे स्वप्रभोश्च महाविपत्।
स्वसेवितनृपक्लेशात् क्लेशमाप्नोति भूरिशः॥३४६३ ॥
कन्यादो जन्मदेशेषु राज्याधिपतिनाशनम्।
तत्त्रिकोणेऽथ वा चेति योजयेत् कालवित्तमः॥३४६४ ॥
3462 - 3464. One bor in Scorpio ascendant,
Durbhaga Nadiamsa, will incur great danger to his
king if the 4th lord Saturn at birth is in Leo and
reaches in transit Pisces or its trine. Due to the said
troubles to the king, the native will himself be in
great troubles. The king will be destroyed when
Saturn reaches the initial part of Virgo, or a trine
thereof.
Notes: The important clue here is that one will
have great professional troubles with Saturn moving in the sign Pisces or a trine, if at birth he
occupies Leo, the 10th.
मायाब्दान्तादिमारभ्य ज्येष्ठभ्राता श्रियान्वितः।
रन्धराधिपान्ते काले भाग्यधिपतिदायगे ॥२३४६५ ॥
स्वजनारिष्टमाप्नोति भगिनीपुत्रनाशनम् ।
गुरुद्धितीयपर्याये वृषे मेषे महत् सुखम् ॥३४६६ ॥
स्वपिता नित्यसन्तोषं राजप्रीतिशुभावहम्।
गुरुप्रथमपर्यायि वृषभादौ वा श्रियान्वितः ॥३४६७ ॥

112 Deva Keralam
द्वितीये वृषभादौ . वा भ्रातृप्ाबल्यमादिशेत् |
मेषत्रिकोणगे जीवे सूरये स्वोच्चांश संयुते ॥३४६८ ॥
स्वपितुर्देहजादयादि पितृवर्गे महाविपत् ॥३४६९ ॥
ज्ञातिवर्गे कष्टकालो मित्रवर्गे महत् सुखम् ।
स्वमित्रसुतसोधाग्यं वृषभादौ विशेषतः ॥३४७० ॥
नुद्धियोगी स्थिरे लग्ने गोचरे वृषभे गुरौ ।
स्वपितुरमित्रतनयः योगवान् कीर्तिमान् सुखी ।३४७१ ॥
गुरुतृतीयपर्याये मिथुनान्ते कुलीरगे ।
UAT मनस्तापमु्योगार्थविनाशनम् ॥३.८७२ ॥
चापान्ते मकरे काले निरोधादि मुपद्रवम्।
स्वपुत्रदारशोकादिक्लेशं प्राणोति भूरिशः॥३४७२ ॥
3465 - 3473. (a) During the beginning and
concluding parts of the native’s 14th year, his elder
brother will gather wealth. In the dasa of the 9th
lord and in the sub period of the 8th lord, relatives
will be harmed and a son of his sister will die.
(b) Jupiter’s Transit: In the 2nd round of
transit, Jupiter arriving in Taurus or Aries will
cause much happiness. His father will be continuously happy, will please the king and will experience auspicious effects. In the first round, Jupiter
in the initial part of Taurus will cause advent of
wealth. Ir. second round, in the same space, Jupiter
will promote brother’s growth.
(c) Father: Jupiter at birth in Aries or as trine
thereof as the Sun begets his exaltation Navamsa
will cause illness to father, and great danger to
paternal kinsfolk. Relatives will be in the grip of
troubles. But happiness will prevail in friends”
circle. When Jupiter arrives in the beginning of
Taurus, his friends’ progeny will be fortunate,
famous and prosperous. When in 3rd round Jupiter
moves in the end of Gemini or Cancer, he will incur
enmity with the king, mental distress and loss of
position and wealth. In the end of Sagittarius or in
Capricom, Jupiter will cause obstacles and his son
will suffer loss of spouse leading to much grief..
मन्दांशेशदशाकाले बुद्धियोगोद् भवस्य च ।
सहोदरः क्लेशमेति पित्ररिष्टं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥३४७४ tt
पितृस्थानाधिपे चन्द्रे तुलांशे मेषराशिगे |
स्वसुतेन युते दष्टे त्वापत्संन्यासवान् पिता ॥३४७५ ॥
सुखेशांशदशाकाले सप्तविशतिवत्सरे |
मेषे जीवे मेषमासे शुक्लपक्षे मृतिं वदेत् ॥३४७६ ॥
3474 - 3476. In the dasa of the Moon’s
Navamsa dispositor, the native’s brother will incur
difficulties and his father will be subjected to evils
and will die. During the time of this death, the
native will be of 27 years of age and be in the dasa
of the 4th lord’s Navamsa dispositor. In transit,
Jupiter will be in Aries along with the Sun, when
bright lunar half rules.
ane सुतारिष्टं बुद्धियोगोद भवस्य च।
युग्मे शनिस्थिते काले पुत्रारिष्टं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥३४७७ ॥
मेषकन्याधनु्मीनि बुद्धियोगदभवस्य च।
पुत्रशोकफलप्राप्ती राज विग्रहवान् क्वचित् ॥३४७८ ॥
3477- 3478. The native’s son will be subjected
to evils in 4th dasa with Saturn’s movement in the
sign Gemini. Grief on account of loss of son will
occur with .... (planet not mentioned) in Aries,
Virgo, Sagittarius or Pisces apart from royal displeasure.
गहुस्थितेशांशदाये Tey ज्वराद भयम् |
जननी क्लेशकार्याणि भ्रातृपीडा क्वचित् क्वचित् awe ॥
3479. In the dasa of Rahu’s Navamsa dispositor, and in the sub period of Rahu, one will be
troubled by fever; his mother and brother will also
be subjected to evils.
Notes: “Rahu sthitesamsa daaye” should read
as “Rahu sthitesa amsesa daaye”.
अष्टमेशस्थितां शेश दशायां बुधभुक्तिषु |
अपमृत्युभयप्राप्ि कीटलग्नोद् भवस्य च ॥३४८० Il
3480. In the sub period of Mercury during the
dasa of the Navamsa dispositor of the 8th lord, the
native of Scorpio ascendant will be in the grip of
fear of untimely death.
सुताधिपदशासंधिकाले स्वर्भानुभुक््तिषु ।
्रूरान्तरान्ते काले ज्येष्ठभ्रातृविनाशनम् ॥३४८१ ॥
ग्रन्थान्तरे वृद्धियोगे सुताधिपतिदायगे |
स्वज्येष्टभ्रातृसन्तान भाग्यनाशवशादव्यथा ॥३४८२ ॥ `
3481 - 3482. His older brother will be destroyed in the junction of the Sth lord’s dasa
(Jupiter’s dasa) and in Rahu’s sub period. The subsub period rulership will go to a malefic planet.
There is another authority to state that the 5th dasa
will destroy the fortunes of the native’s older
brother’s son.

Chandra Kala Nadi 113
जीवे शन्यन्तरे काले ज्येष्ठभ्रातृविनाशनम् |
कीरलग्ने प्रजातस्तुक्लेशं प्राणोति भूरिशः॥३४८३ ॥
तुत्रप्रलं चैति सुताधिपतिदायके । -
प्रत्यग्दशान्त्ये सन्तापं भेदभ्रातृविनाशनम् ॥३४८४ ॥
दशामध्ये ऽपमृत्यं च शान्त्या शान्तिं प्रयास्यति |
भाग्याधिपदशान्त्यादौ SSAA युतः॥३४८५ ॥
त्रिदशायोगवृद्धिं च बुद्धियोगोद भवस्य च।
भाग्यवृद्धिः श्रिया युक्तो गृहे लक्ष्मीकराक्षवान् ॥३४८६ ॥
3483 - 3486. (a) Jupiter dasa, Saturn’s sub
period will be the cause of death of one’s older
brother and the native of Scorpio ascendant will be
grieved much. His son will get great prosperity in
this dasa. End of the Sth dasa (different from Sth
lord’s dasa) will cause distress and will destroy
step-brothers. In between the dasa fear of untimely
death (for step-brother) will prevail for which
remedies be done.
(b) The native’s brother will acquire wealth in
the beginning and end of the 9th lord’s dasa.
Prosperity and wealth of the family will increase.
Notes: (b) The Ist line of sloka 3486 is illconstructed and is not amenable to a proper rendering.
धनाधिपदशाकाले दुर्भगांशोदभवस्य च।
केतुभुक्त्यन्तमारभ्य शुक्रभुक्तौ मृतिं वदेत् ॥३४८७ ॥
जीवे शुक्रान्तरे काले कीटलग्नोदभवस्य च।
अष्टपञ्चाशगे वर्षे तुलामासत्रिकोणगे ॥३४८८ ॥
कृष्णपक्षे शुक्रवारे प्रातकाले मृतिं वदेत्।
लग्नाष्टमगते शुक्रे मित्रप्रहसमन्विते ॥३४८९ ॥
दर्भगांशे पूर्वभागे परलोको न विद्यते ।
दुर्गतिं चाष्टमे शुक्रे यस्यां नाड्यां प्रजायते ॥३४९० ॥
व्ययाष्टमगते केतौ गच्छत्येवअधोगतिम् |
दर्भगांशे फलं सत्यं प्रत्यक्षं देवकेरलम् ॥२४९१ ॥
3487 - 3491. (a) Death: The native of Scorpio
ascendant, Durbhaga Nadiamsa will die in the 2nd
lord’s dasa and in the beginning and ending of sub
period of Ketu or in the sub period of Venus. Death
occurring in Venus sub period in the dasa of Jupiter
will be in the 58th year, with the transit Sun in Libra
or its trine, in a dark fortnight, on a Friday morning. ©
(b) One born in the first half of Durbhaga
Nadiamsa, Scorpio ascendant, with Venus in the
8th along with a friendly planet, will die a bad
death. One will beget bad end if Ketu is in the 8th
or the 12th.
(c) Whatever has been stated in Deva Keralam
about Durbhaga Nadiamsa will be truthful.
fercrragqga निशाकरांशः
निशाकरांशगे सूर्ये स्थिरराशिचतुष्टये |
स्थिरलग्ने प्रजातस्तु शूद्रजन्मा सुखी भवेत् ॥३४९२ ॥
सूर्यकालाधिपे शुक्रे त्वसितेन निरीक्षिते ।
शूद्रकाले शद्रजन्मा राजयोगे तु सङ्करः ॥३४९२ ॥
जीवदृष्टियुते विप्रकाल समुद भवः।
विप्रजन्मा सुखी नित्यं क्षत्रियादौ यथाक्रमम् ॥३४९४ ॥
3492 - 3494. Immovable Ascendant- Nisakara
Nadiamsa: With the Sun in an immovable sign,
one born with this Nadiamsa in any of the four
immovable signs will be a Soodra. While the
Soodra Kala of the subject Nadiamsa (i.e. its last
one fourth part) rises, if Venus becomes the lord of
the day time and gets the aspect of Saturn, one born
will be a Soodra and will enjoy Raja yoga effects.
The Sun in aspect to Jupiter will cause birth of a
Brahmin in the Vipra Kala (1st one fourth part) of
the said Nadiamsa. Kshatriyas and others will be
born in the respective parts, i.e. a Kshatriya in
Kshatriya Kala, a Vaisya in Vaisya Kala and a
Soodra in Soodra Kala, of the Nadiamsa.
Notes: Nisakra (known as Nisakari as well as
Nisachari in some versions) extends thus: from 19°
36' to 19° 48' of amovable sign, from 10° 12' to 10°
24' of an immovable sign and from 4° 36' to 4° 38°
of a dual sign.
निशाकारांशगे सूर्ये बुधशुक्रसमन्विते ।
स्वसुतेनयुते दृष्टे शुद्रजन्मेति कथ्यते ॥३.४९५ ॥
जीवनं वेश्यवृत्या च बाल्ये क्लेशेन करशितः।
स्वपिता च तथा विन्दयान्मध्येवयसिभाग्यवान् ॥३४९६ ॥
श्यामवर्णशरीरी च बहुभ्रातृविनाशवान् |
पञ्चसङ्कया भगिन्यश्च भविष्यन्ति चिरायुषाः।३४९५७ ॥
3495 - 3497. It is stated that a Soodra will be
born if the Sun joins Mercury and Venus in aspect
to or in association with Saturn. He will live by
trading activities and be emaciated in childhood
due to troubles. So also will his father be. The
native will make his fortunes in the middle of his

114 Deva Keralam
life. He will be black in complexion and will incur
destruction of many brothers. He will have six
long-living sisters.
सूर्यलग्नाधिपे मन्दे मीने कालाग्निनाडिके |
निशाकरेण संयुक्ते सोदरभ्रातृनाशवान् ॥३४९८ ॥
भगिन्यो बहवश्चैव केचित्यक्षे ह्यसोदरः।
बाल्ये मन्दमतिः साधुः कामुको बुद्धिमान् सुखी ॥३४९९ ॥
योवने बहुभाग्याप्तर्वार्धके क्लेशवान् भवेत् |
निशाकरांशगे सूर्ये तदीशे शनिसंयुते ॥३५०० ॥
अल्पविद्यो शठः कामी क्षिप्रकोपी प्रवृत्तिमान्।
वयो मध्ये सुसामर्थ्यं कटुकाम्लरसप्रियः 1340 & ॥
ज्ञानवान् धर्मबुद्धिश्च रजोगुणसमन्वितः।
तामसप्रकृति बाल्ये वयोमध्ये सुसात्विकः॥३५०२ Il
धर्ममार्गरतो नित्यं वैदिकाचारबुद्धिमान् |
देवब्राह्मण विश्वासी विशोपरि सुभाग्यवान् ॥३५०३ ॥
3498 - 3503. Immovable Ascendant: (a) Satum becoming the lord of the Sun sign and associated with the Moon will destroy one’s brothers.
The native will have many sisters. According to
some, there will be no co-born. During his childhood, he will be dull-headed. He will be gentle,
libidinous and (later on will become) intelligent. In
his youth, his fortunes will be plenty. Old age will
bring forth troubles.
(b) The Sun in Nisakara Nadiamsa, while his
dispositor joins Saturn, denotes the following. The
person will have limited education. He will be
crafty, libidinous and be instantly irascible. In the
middle of his age, he will become smart. He will be
fond of bitter juices, wise, munificent and passionate. In his childhood he will be indolent and in
youth gentle. He will be ever interested in taking
to the path of justice and will follow the Vedic
codes of conduct. He will have faith in gods and
Brahmins. His fortunes will register increase after
his 20th-year.
Notes: (a) “Kalagni Nadiamsa in Pisces” is an
interruption and a wrong copy for some other text
while the Shashtiamsa with this name appears
rightly in sloka 3504.
मन्दे कालाग्निषष्टयंशे मलिनः क्रूरकर्मवान् |
सम्पदाये महायोगं जन्मदाये च दुःखितः॥३५०४ Il
विप्लवेन धनच्छेदमग्निदाहेनवातथा ।
भाग्यक्षीणमवाप्नोति षोडशाब्दान्तमेव च ॥३५०५ ॥
पश्चादल्पसुखी चैव मन्ददोषो न विद्यते ।
3504 - 35054. The native of an immovable
ascendant, with Saturn placed in Kalagni
Shashtiamsa, will indulge in dirty and cruel acts.
His 2nd dasa will cause much prosperity, but the
first dasa will usher grief. He will lose wealth in a
calamity or in a fire accident and his fortunes will
be on the decline upto the end of his 16th year.
Afterwards, he will enjoy limited (or some) happiness and the blemish of Saturn (being in the said
Shashtiamsa) will not exist. ।
सितांशगे विलग्नेशे ताराधिपसमन्विते ॥३५०६ ॥
, सम्पदशायां नष्टं च स्वपित्रार्जितनाशनम्।
वृषभे TARA शुभद्रयसमन्विते ॥३५०७ ॥
निशाकरांशजातश्च विपदाये सुभाग्यवान् |
स्वप्राबल्यं च लभते क्षेमदाये फलं सुखम् ॥३५०८ ॥
प्रत्यग्दाये मनस्तापं दारिद्येण च करशितः।
साधनेशदशाकाले बहुभाग्य युतः सुखी ॥३५०९ ॥
क्षेमतार दशान्त्यादो क्लेशः स्याद्वसुवत्सर |
विपदाये धनप्राप्तिः क्षेमदाये महत् सुखम् ॥३५१० ॥
3506 - 3510. (a) The lord of the ascendant,
which is an immovable sign, begetting the company of the Moon and occupying a Navamsa of
Venus, will cause losses in the 2nd dasa including
paternal inheritances. ।
(b) One born in the subject Nadiamsa having
two benefics in Taurus in Indu Shashtiamsa will
enjoy much fortunes in his 3rd dasa. He will enjoy
prosperity and happiness in the 4th dasa. His 5th
dasa will cause mental distress and will physically
weaken him due to penury. In the 6th dasa, he will
make much prosperity and happiness. In the beginning and ending parts of the 4th dasa, he will be in
grief for about 8 years. 3rd dasa will give wealth
and 4th dasa (2) much happiness.
मीनत्रिकोणगे चन्द्रे वृश्चिकांशोद् भवस्य च।
इदमेव फलं सत्यं साधनेशदशासुखम् ॥२५११ ॥
पाके सौम्यदशान्त्यादौ fare सुभुक्तिषु |
ज्वरभीतिं च लभते मृतप्रायोपजीवति ॥२५१२ ॥
3511 - 3512. An immovable ascendant having
Scorpio Navamsa, while the Moon is in Pisces ora

Chandra Kala Nadi 115
trine thereof, will give the above effects, and
happiness in the 6th dasa. In the beginning or
ending portions of Mercury’s dasa, or in the sub
period of a benefic planet in the 3rd dasa, there will
be fear of fever and the native will nearly die.
Notes: “Above effects” means the ones denoted at “b” of slokas 3506 - 3510. To wit, two of
the following combinations will give identical
results.
(1) The Moon in Taurus & C.
(2) An immovable ascendant which has Scorpio Navamsa & C.
The second yoga has an additional effect of
giving happiness in the 6th dasa.
wars afar स्फुटयोगं गते शनो |
स्वजन्मदेश नृपतिर्मृतः स्यान्नात्र संशयः॥३५१२ ॥
निशाकरांशगे सूरये वृषभे च स्थिते सति।
मूलत्रिकोणगे मन्दे हाथ वा दृष्टिराशिषु ayer tt
चन््ा्रान्तर्षगे वापि चन्द्रांशे वा विशेषतः।
चन्रदष्टेषु राशीषु स्फुटयोगं गते शनौ ॥३५१५ ॥
3513 - 3515. Irrelevant: Saturn moving in the
sign that is identical with the Moon’s Navamsa of
birth, or its trine will kill the king. If the Sun is in
Nisakara Nadiamsa in Taurus, Saturn in his Moola
trikona Rasi .....in the sign aspected by .. when
Saturn transits the sign identical with the Moon’s
natal Navamsa, or a trine thereof, particularly the
said Navamsa sign ... in the sign aspected by the
Moon .... (Incomplete text).
सप्तमाधिपतौ शुक्रे द्विम्रहेण समन्विते |
निशाकरंश नादयां तु जातश्चैव द्विभार्यकः॥३५१६ ॥
मायान्दे षोडशाब्दे वा स्वसोदर्याश्च शोभनम्।
सम्पदाये विवाहः स्यात् स्वविवाहो ह्यतः परम् ॥३५१७ Il
सम्पदाये तृतीयांशे दारिशस्यांशके तथा |
स्फुटयोगं गते जौवे प्रथमोद्राहमादिशेत् ॥३५१८ ॥
मन्दांशे संस्थिते चन्द्रे मीने शनियुतेक्षिते ।
षोडशान्दात् परं चैव feat पाणिसंग्रहम् ॥२५१९ ॥
दरिशांरो त्रिकोणे दारजन्मर्षमं fay: |
दारिशदृष्टिशो तु योजयेत् कालवित्तमः॥३५२० ॥
3516 - 3520. Scorpio Ascendant - Marriage:
(a) One born in Nisakara Nadiamsa, Scorpio ascendant (one of the immovable signs) having the
7th lord Venus in the company of two planets will
have two wives. During his 14th or 16th year, his
sister’s marriage will occur. After this, in the last
one third part of his 2nd dasa, his first marriage will
occur which will coincide with Jupiter’s transit in
the sign identical with the Navamsa occupied by
the 7th lord (Venus) at birth.
(b) Marriage will occur within two years after
the 16th year if the Moon is in a Navamsa of Saturn
while the sign Pisces is related to Saturn by aspect
or position.
(c) The natal birth star of his bride will correspond to the Navamsa occupied by he 7th lord
(Venus) or a trine thereof.
Notes: (a) “Sobhanam” means a propitious
function. Here it is to be interpreted as marriage.
कीटांशगे निशानाथे कुलीरांशे दिवाकरे |
सम्पद्दाये विवाहः स्यादरोचरे वृषभे गुरौ ॥३५२१॥
अथवा मिथुने वापि मेषादित्रयमासगे |
लग्नात् सप्तमगे राहौ BRIM भवरय च ॥३५२२ ॥
जन्मदाये विप्लवेन स्वपितुः क्लेशमादिशेत्।
पितामह्या विनाशेन क्लेशं प्राणोति भूरिशः॥३५२३ ॥
सम्पदाये शुक्रभुक्तो केतुभुकत्यन्तरेऽपि च।
स्वपितृव्य विनाशेन ह्यतीव क्लेशवान् पिता ॥३५२४ ॥
ततः पश्चादरिद्रः स्यात् पितृव्यसुतनाशनम् ।
पितृव्यस्य मनस्तापो भवत्यत्र न संशयः ॥३५२५ Il
3521 - 3525. (a) For anative of Scorpio ascendant, the Moon and the Sun in order occupying
Scorpio and Cancer Navamsas, marriage will occur in his 2nd dasa. The possibility is, transit Jupiter
will then be in Taurus (the 7th). Or else, he could
be in Gemini (the 8th). The corresponding months
will see the Sun in transit in any of the 3 signs
commencing from Aries.
(b) Immovable Ascendant - Nisakara Nadiamsa: If Rahu is in the 7th from the ascendant,
one’s father will be grieved due to some calamity.
The grief, which will be abundant, will be due to
loss of the native’s paternal grand-mother. The
native will be in much grief due to loss of father, in
the 2nd dasa, in the end of Ketu’s sub periad or in
Venus’ sub period. Following this, there will be
penury in the family, death of paternal uncle’s (i.e.
father’s brother’s) son and distress to the said

116 Deva Keralam
uncle.
Notes: (b) The name of the Nadiamsa in the
first line of sloka 3522 should read as Nisakara
Nadiamsa.
विक्रमाधिपतो wt स्वर्भानुयुतवीक्षिते |
पश्चात् सहोदरभ्रातृनाशं च मनुरब्रवीत् ॥२३५२६ ॥
3526. Aquarius Ascendant: Mars being the
3rd lord and be in association with Rahu by company or aspect will destroy the native’s younger
brothers.
Notes: This applies to Aquarius, as Mars is the
ruler of 3rd for an immovable ascendant.
पितृव्यसुतमावेशे राहुसंयुतबीक्षिते ।
स्वपितृव्यसुतारिष्टं विषाग्निजलहेतुना ॥३५२७ ॥
स्वपित् द्वेषमूलेनजिह्वच्छेदं विनिर्दिशेत् |
मसूरिज्वर भीत्या च स्वज्येष्ठभ्रातृनाशम् ॥३५२८ ॥
चन्द्रांशे जननात् पूर्वं ज्येष्ठभ्रातृविनाशनम् |
भगिन्यो बहुलाश्चैव मातुलाभावमादिशेत् ॥३५२९ ॥
3527 - 3529. Immovable Ascendant- Nisakara
Nadiamsa: Should the 3rd house denoting the son
of father’s brother be aspected or occupied by
Rahu, danger to the said son through poison, fire or
water be foretold. Further due to enmity with the
said uncle, the native’s tongue will be cut off. His
elder brother would die due to haemorrhoids (or
small-pox), prior to the native’s birth. He will have
many Sisters but not a maternal uncle. ।
Notes: Nisakara Nadiamsa is at times referred
to as “Chandramsa”. The Moon’s natal Navamsa
position as well as Cancer Navamsa are also denoted by the term “Chandramsa”. Suitable care is
taken in the sendering.
पितामहस्य भ्राता च नास्ति चन््रंशगे रवौ ।
पितामहस्वसाप्येका पुत्रिणीदीर्थं जीविनी ॥३५३० ॥
पितामह्यास्तु वार्धक्ये नेत्रक्लेशं विनिर्दिशेत्
दीरधायुर्योगमित्याहुः पौत्रनाशेन करिता ॥३५३१ ॥
एकः कश्चित् पितृव्येषु दुष्टपुत्रयुतो भवेत् |
भाग्यमूलात् सुसन्तोषी त्वगम्यागमनोत्सुकः ॥३५३२ ॥
तस्य पापवशात् क्लेशं वार्धके व्रणमादिशेत्।
भाग्यक्षीणं च लभते संपद्ाये त्विदं फलम् ॥३५३३ ॥
3530 - 3533. For one born in the subject
Nadiamsa, the Sun in Cancer Navamsa would not
cause a brother but a sister to the native’s paternal
grand-father. The said sister’s daughter will be
long-lived. The native’s paternal grand-mother
will incur eye troubles in her old age. She will be
long-lived but emaciated on account of (premature) loss of grand-sons. One paternal uncle will
have a wicked son, will be happy through his
prosperity and be enthusiastic of travels. Due to his
sins he will incur ulcers in his old age and his
fortunes will decline. These effects will be evident
when the native will be in his 2nd dasa.
सम्पत्ताराधिपे सौम्ये दशायां च स्वभुकित्तषु |
विद्यारम्भं च लभते ह्यथ वा शुक्रभुक्तिषु ॥३५३४ ॥
तत्काले च पितृव्यादि क्लेशं arena भूरिशः।
लग्ने जीवे मदे राहौ मलिनः पापचेतनः ॥३५३५ ॥
चन्द्र शनियुते दृष्टे बाल्ये दारिद्ययोगवान् |
विशद्र्षात् परं सौख्य मेकयोगो न विद्यते ॥३५३६ ॥
fare भाग्यवृद्धिं पुत्रसोख्यं विनिर्दिशेत्
लग्ने केतुयुते जीवे तदीशे चन्द्रसंयुते 113430 ॥
सीतांशनाडिगे भाग्ये योगः कुसुमनामकः।
अचरे कुसुमे योगे वित्ते चद्रे च संस्थिते ।
विशोपरि महद्भाग्यं सप्तत्रिंशात् परं व्यथाम् ॥३५३८ ॥
3534 - 3538. (a) The sub period of Mercury in
his own dasa, which is the 2nd dasa from birth, will
commence one’s education. During this time,
much grief to paternal uncle will come to pass.
(b) Jupiter in the ascendant as Rahu is in the 7th
will make one dirty and sinful.
(c) The Moonaspected by Saturn, or being with
him, will cause poverty during childhood. He will
be happy after the age of 20. His fortunes will
increase in the 3rd dasa and he will be happy
through his son. ("Eka Yogo Na Vidyate" in sloka
3536 is a corrupt ccopy.)
(d) With Ketu in the ascendant in the company
of Jupiter, while their dispositor is with the Moon,
Kusuma Yoga leading to prosperity is caused. In
the said Yoga, if the Moon is placed in the 2nd,
one’s fortunes will expand after 20th year of age.
But grief will strike him after 37.
सूर्यलग्ने तत्रिकोणे मकरान्ते च वा शनौ ।
विपदाये पित्ररिष्टमत sed न जीवति ॥३५३९ ॥

Chandra Kala Nadi 117
क्लीबे शनिस्थिते काले सम्पत्तारादशान्त्यगे ।
अपमृत्युभयप्राप्तिः शान्त्या शान्तिं प्रयास्यति ॥३५४० ॥
3539 - 3540. Saturn moving in the natal Sun
sign, a trine thereto, or in the end of Capricom, will
cause death of father when the native will be in-his
3rd dasa. Father will notsurvive beyond this phase.
But when Saturn moves in a weak sign coinciding
with the end of the 2nd dasa, father will have fear
of untimely death. Suitable remedies be adopted.
कन्यान्ते वृश्चिकादौ च मेषान्त्ये वृषभादिके |
स्फुटयोगं गते मन्दे पितृव्यस्य विनाशनम् ॥२५४१ ॥
3541. Destruction of paternal uncle will come
to pass with Saturn moving in the beginning of
Virgo, end of Scorpio, end of Aries or beginning of
Taurus.
लाभेशांशे ara स्फुटयोगं गते शनौ |
लाभेशदृष्टिरशो तु मातृपीडां विनिर्दिशेत् ॥३५४२ ॥
निशाकरांशगे सूर्ये कीटलग्नोद भवस्य च |
क्षेमदाये मध्यखण्डे मात्ररिष्टं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥३५४३ ॥
3542 = 3543. (a) Danger to mother will exist
with Saturn’s transit in the sign identical with the
Navamsa occupied by 11th lord, a trine thereof, or
the sign aspected by 11th lord at birth.
(b) Scorpio Ascendant: Should birth be in
Scorpio ascendant (instead of any fixed sign discussed so far) and the Sun be in Nisakara Nadiamsa, the middle part of the 4th dasa will endanger
mother.
सुतेशे सुतभावस्थे निधनाधिपसंयुते ।
गर्भस्रावातुरा भार्या जातं जातं मृतप्रजा ॥३५४४ ॥
3544. Immovable Ascendant: The Sth lord in
the 5th in the company of the 8th lord will cause
abortion to the native’s spouse. Else, children will
be dead as they are born.
कुम्भे जीवे केतुयुक्ते सोम्ये भृगुसमन्विते
निशाकरांशे जातश्च पुत्रवांश्च न संशयः BAW ॥
स्वपित्ररिष्टतः पश्चान्मात्ररिष्टच्च पूर्वे |
षटित्रिशाब्दे दारहानिः सूचिकावात रोगतः ॥३५४६ ॥
ततः पश्चान्महत् सौख्यं श्षप्रेणो द्राहमादिशेत् |
WIR जीवयोगे चन्द्रांशे जनितस्य च ॥३५४७ ॥
ज्येष्ठभार्या द्विसन्ताना दीर्धमायुश्च विन्दति |
शेषं नाशमिति प्राहुः पुत्री चेका चिरायुषी ॥३५४८ ॥
3545 - 3548. (a) One will doubtless have
progeny if the sign Aquarius is occupied by Jupiter
and Ketu, as the two planets Mercury and Venus are
together (elsewhere). Further, the native’s mother
will die following his father’s end. The subject will
lose his spouse in his 36th year due to haemorrhoids
or windy diseases. After this phase, his happiness
will be great and he will soon remarry.
(b) There is another authority to state that one
born in the subject Nadiamsa with Jupiter’s involvement as at “a” above will have two longliving children through his first wife. And the rest
(of male issues) will be destroyed. One long-living
daughter is also denoted.
योगनाडी फलाध्याये नाडयान्तुवित्तपस्य च |
आयुर्योगं च पुत्रादेः फलं विस्तरमादिशेत् ॥३५४९ ॥
3549. In the chapter dealing with effects in the
Yoga Nadi, using the 2nd lord, a lot of combinations have been cited in respect of life-spans of sons
and others.
fare सुपुत्राप्तिव्यापारप्रबलं सुखम् |
चरेशयोगे WR द्विसहस्रधनाद्यवान् ॥३५५० ॥
द्रौ पुत्रौ कन्यके तस्य दीर्घमायुश्च विन्दतः।
कर्मेशांशे तत्रिकोणे स्फुटयोगं गते शनो ॥३५५१ ॥
कर्मेशदृष्टिराशो तु भगिन्याश्च मनोव्यथा |
चक्रसन्धौ दशासन्धौ क्लेशकालं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥३५५२ ॥
सोदरस्य विशेषेण क्लेशं सम्पदशान्त्यगे ।
भाग्यारूढाधिपे जीवे कुसुमे योगसंस्थिते ॥३५५३ ॥
तस्य नाडी फलाध्याये विस्तरेणादभुतं फलम् ।
चतुसञ्चाशगे वर्षे कीटलग्नोद् भवस्य च ॥३५५४ ॥
निशाकरांशे जातश्च ह्यपमृत्युं च विन्दति ।
षष्ठाधिपदशाकाले मीनान्त्ये मेषगे शनौ |
मीनकन्यालिके मासे शुक्लपक्षे मृतिं वदेत् ॥३५५५ ॥
3550 - 3555. (a) His 3rd dasa will cause excellent sons and business progress.
(b) The lord of amovable sign in an immovable
sign will cause wealth exceeding 2,000.
(c) His two sons and daughters will be longlived.
(d) Saturn moving in the sign identical with the
Navamsa occupied by the lord of the 10th, a trine
thereof, or the one in aspect to the 10th lord, will

118 Deva Keralam
cause distress to the native’s sister. Especially
grief will occur to ‘her in the junction period of the
dasa (i.e: the native’s 2nd and 3rd dasas). 2nd Dasa
ending will particularly cause troubles to co-born.
(e) The lord of the 9th Aroodha Pada being
involved in Kusuma Yoga .... (incomplete).
(f) Effects have been wonderfully explained
for this Nadiamsa.in the Chapter on effects (in the
work consulted by the author).
(g) One born in Scorpio ascendant, Nisakara
Nadiamsa, will incur fear of untimely death in his
54th year. His death will occur in the dasa of the 6th
lord (Mars) when Saturn in transit is found ini the
end of Pisces or in Aries. The Sun in transit will
then be in Pisces, Virgo or Scorpio with the currency of bright lunar half.
Notes: (b) “The lord of a movable sign” is a
faulty description. This doubtful aphorism is also
an interruption between “a” and “c” above.
afraaan विष्वांशः
विश्वांशे वृश्चिके लग्ने गोरकान्तः सुलोचनः।
धार्मिकोऽत्यन्तमेधावी समगात्रो प्रगल्भवान् ॥३५५६ ॥
पित्तप्रकृति देही च वाताधिक्यशरीरवान् |
अल्परोगी भयार्तश्च शिरोरोगी च वा भवेत् ॥३५५७ ॥
विप्रजन्मा सुखी नित्यं stat विद्वान् विचक्षणः।
मितभाषी मातृ भक्तो बाल्ये पितृविनाशवान् ॥३५५८ ॥
ज्येष्टभ्रातृवशात् सौख्यं ब्रह्यचर्यादिकर्मणि |
विदेशे भेक्षवृत्यासौ बाल्येऽध्ययनतत् परः॥३५५९ ॥
वेदाध्ययनसंपनो नानाशास्रविशारदः।
बाल्ये दुष्टस्वभावश्च प्रसिद्धश्चैव योवने ॥३५६० ॥
3556 - 3560. Scorpio Ascendant = Visva Nadiamsa: One born in this part of the zodiac will be
fair in complexion and will have charming eyes.
He will be righteous, exceedingly intelligent, evenbodied and proud. He will have predominantly
bilious and windy physique. He will incur diseases
of the head. His diseases will be limited, i.e. not
very serious.
learned, discerning, will spéak within limits and be
devoted to his mother. He will lose his father in
childhood, be happy through his older brother. He
will go to a distant land, maintain celibacy and beg
for alms in order to undertake study of the Vedas.
By birth a Brahmin, he will be |
He will be rich in Vedic studies, skilful in many
branches of Sastras, wicked in boyhood and become famous in his youth.
बाल्ये शद्रप्रभुः पीडां जीवनोद्राहमादिशेत्।
अंशधिपतिदोषेण मसूरीज्वर भीतिमान् ॥३५६१ ॥
यदि जीवति पुण्येन जलभीतिस्ततः परम् ।
भ्रातृस्थानाधिपे मन्दे नीचे रविसमन्विते ॥३५६२ ॥
पश्चादभ्रातृविहीनश्च सोटरीभ्रातृमान् भवेत्।
चत्वारः सोदराः पञ्चसप्त वा स्युर्यथा बलम् ॥३५६३ ॥
at ज्येष्ठो पुत्रवन्तो च भार्याद्वययुतौ तथा ।
एकास्वसापुत्रवती किचित्कालं सुमङ्गली ॥३५६४ ॥
पश्चादरधव्यमाप्नोति सुचरित्रवती भवेत् |
3561 - 35644. (a) The native will be troubled
by a Soodra king in his childhood and will marry
early. He will be Due to the blemish of lord of the
Navamsa ascendant, he will incur fear of smallpox. If he survives this danger, he will be later
endangered through water.
(b) Saturn, who is the lord of the 3rd joining the
Sun and occupying the sign of his debility (Aries),
will deprive one of younger brothers. However he
will have younger sisters. If Saturn is strong, 4, 5
or 7 brothers will be possible depending on his
strength.
(c) Two of his older brothers will have sons and
will have two wives. One sister will have sons and
will have her husband living for some time. Later
she will be widowed. She will be endowed with a
good history.
Notes: "Jeevana" in sloka 3561 should read as
“Yauvana" denoting youth, and hence early marriage is indicated.
विश्वांशे वृश्चिके लग्ने aX भानुनिरीक्षिते ॥३५६५ ॥
जलभीतिं विजानीयात् सोदरस्य तथैव च।
वापीकूपतराकेषुं स्ववंश्यजननाशनम् ॥३५६६ ॥
लग्नाधियोगे जातस्य लग्ने यावत् फलैर्युते ।
mast सर्वभाग्यं धनवाहनवान् भवेत् |
यावदायुष्यमाप्नोति तावद् भाग्यं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥३५६७ ॥
3565 - 3567. (a) For one born in the subject
Nadiamsa, the Moon in aspect to the Sun will cause
danger to brother through water. His family members will be destroyed through wells and tanks (i.e.

Chandra Kala Nadi 119
water).
(b) Note if Lagnadhi Yoga exists in the horoscope and if so the number of (Sarva) Ashtaka
Varga Bindus obtained by the sign ascending. In
the year denoted by that number, the subject will
enjoy all kinds of fortunes, wealth and conveyances. His prosperity will last throughout his life.
Notes: (b) This can be applied to the Moon if
there is Chandradhi Yoga.
वित्तेशे मदराशिगे बलयुते चन्द्रे कुटुम्बस्थिते |
भोमकषत्रगतेन्दुजे रवियुते मीनस्थिते भार्गवि |
दीर्घायुर्धनवान् द्विदारसहितो प्रामधिपः पण्डितः
कामी भोगसमन्वितो दिवि भुवि प्रोदामकोलाहलः॥३५६८ ॥
विद्याशाली युवतिमदनो भानुतेजाश्चिरायुः
विंशत्यब्दे परमशिवपदाम्बोज पूजाप्रवीणः।
नानामन्त्रागमपरिचितो वार्धके पुत्रवांश्षं
श्रीमान् यानप्रमुखविभवो जायते राजपूज्यः॥३५६९ ॥
3568 - 3569. The 2nd lord (Jupiter) should be
in strength in the 7th (Scorpio), as the Moon is in
the 2nd (Sagittarius), Mercury is in the company of
the Sun in a sign of Mars (Aries) and Venus is in
Pisces (exaltation). Asa result of this entire set-up, -
one born in Scorpio ascendant will be endowed
with longevity, wealth, two wives, lordship over a
village and scholarship. He will further be libidinous, endowed with enjoyment of pleasures. He
will be educated, will attract women, will have the
radiance of the sun, and long-lived. In his (read
“from his”) 20th year, he will be skilful in offering
worship to the lotus feet of Lord Siva. He will have
acquaintance with various Mantras and Agama
Sastras.. He will beget sons (or progeny) in his old
age, be illustrious, will have an array of vehicles
and be revered by the ruler.
षष्ठेशेऽष्टमगेऽरिपे निधनगे वान्योन्यदृषटे पुमान्
जातसिरिकालवित् सुरूपवनितायुग्मप्रयुक्तः सुखी ।
हीनानन्तरजो विदेशगमनश्छिन्नाघ उन्मादवान्
विप्रश्चेद्धनीबाहुजो यदि धनी दाताचिरायुर्भवेत् ॥३५७० ॥
3570. Lords of Evil Bhavas: The lord of the
6th in the 8th while the 8th lord is in the 6th, or these
two planets in mutual aspects, will act as under.
The person will be a knower of the past, present and
future (i.e. an astrologer). He will possess two
charming wives andbe happy. He will visit foreign
lands, be mad (or alternatively extravagant), learned
and will have self-made wealth. He will be liberal
and long-lived.
विश्वांरो जनितः पुमान् सुनिपुणो यष्टाखिलश्रौतवित्
सद्वदरानपरिम्रहैक निरतः सोन्दर्यलक्ष्मीयुतः।
after च पीडितः कतिपयः त्कालं बहुक्लेशवान् |
पश्चाद्भाग्यसमस्तभोगविभवः प्रख्यातकीर्त्या युतः ॥३५७१ ॥
3571. One born in the subject Nadiamsa will be
highly skilful and will have a “second birth” (obtainable by a Brahmin) due to knowledge of the
Vedas (i.e. versed in the Vedas). He will be a great
scholar, a renouncer, and be endowed with beauty
and wealth. After some time he will be in the grip
of poverty and be in a lot of difficulties. Again later
on, he will be blessed with all kinds of prosperity
and enjoyments. He will have wide fame.
Notes: “Aparigraha” also means one destitute
of a wife, i.e. unmarried; here it denotes a person
who renounces everything including the utensils
allowed for ascetics. Two marriages are indicated
for the person vide sloka 3576 infra.
As far as one’s wealth is concerned, it is
evident, that there will be great swings.
विश्वांशे विष्णुभक्तश्च देवतब्राह्मणपोषकाः।
मध्ये यतिप्रसादेन बहुशिष्य प्रशिष्यवान् ॥३५७२ ॥
मीमांसान्यायतत्त्वज्ञो नानाविधिविशारदः।
प्रन्थकर्ता धनी श्रीमानुद्रव्यार्जन समर्थकः 11343 ॥
वेदान्तशाख्रनिपुणो राजद्वारे सुपूजितः।
यष्टा वेदिकमार्गेण विद्याजीवनवान् भवेत् ॥३५७४ ॥
देवालयप्रतिष्ठादितराकोद्यानधर्मकृत् |
अननदाता सुखी नित्यं पञ्चयञ्चपरायणः॥३५७५ ॥
कलत्द्रयवान् वाग्मी वार्धके बहुपुत्रवान् ।
सीमन्तपुत्रनाशः स्यात् कचिद्रन्ध्यापतिर्भवेत् ॥३५७६ ॥
दारान्तरे सुतप्राप्तिः पुत्रीपुत्रयुतो भवेत् |
स्वमाता विधवा भूत्वा बहुकालं सुजीवति ॥३५७७ ॥
3572 - 3577. Further, he will be a devotee of
Lord Vishnu and will honour gods and Brahmins.
In the middle of his life he will receive the blessings
of a saint and (thereby) will have students and
students’ students (i.e. numerous students). He
will be well-versed in Meemamsa (examination of

120 Deva Keralam
the Vedic texts), justice, philosophy and various
kinds of Commandments. He will be an author, be
wealthy, illustrious and skilful in financial pursuits. He will be an expert in Vedanta (essence of
the Vedas) and be honored by royal circles, will
make sacrificial offerings (or worship) as prescribed by the Vedas and will eke out his livelihood
through his learning. He will undertake charitable
activities like construction of temple, tanks and
gardens. He will have two wives, be an eloquent
speaker and will have many sons (issues) in his old
age. His eldest son will be destroyed. The native’s
(first) spouse will possibly be a barren woman. He
will beget progeny through second wife. He will
have sons and daughters. His mother will be
widowed and be long-lived.
मात्ररिष्टात् परं भाग्यं पित्ररिष्टात् परं व्यथाम् |
विवाहान्तरं सौख्यं क्षेमदायेऽग्निसिद्धिमान् ॥३५७८ ॥
वाजपेयादिकर्माणि area भविष्यति |
्रत्यग्दायेऽथवाचैव देशान्तरसुभाग्यवान् ॥३५७९ ॥
दवितीयोद्राहमाप्नोति ब्राह्मणप्रभुसत्कृतः।
स्वपतस्थापको नित्यं विद्यया नव्यभाषया ॥३५८० ॥
बाल्ये पुराणवृत्ति च महाराजपुरे वसन् |
विद्या वादे जयग्रापिि्द्रविंशोपरि सौख्यवान् ॥३५८१ ॥
ेत्रलाभं च लभते ब्राह्मणप्रभुसौहदात् |
अग्निष्टोमादिकार्येषु सिद्धिर्भवति नित्यशः॥३५८२ ॥
जन्मदाये त्वनावृष्टिलेकि दुर्भिक्षजं भयम् ।
ज्येष्ठभ्रातृमनस्तापं जननीव्याकुलं तथा ॥३५८३ ॥
स्वदेहायासमाप्नोति TITRA न AMA: |
तत्काले वृषभे मन्दे म्लेच्छप्राबल्यमादिशेत् ॥३५८४.॥
परच्छिद्रं च लभते राज्ञामन्योन्ययुद्धजम् |
3578 - 3584/2. After the deaih of his mother, his
fortunes will pick up. He will incur grief in the
phase occurring after father’s death. He will
receive happiness following his marriage. In his
4th and Sth dasas, he will perform Fire Sacrifices
including the one called “Vajapeyi” and will make
his fortunes in a different country. He will have a
second marriage and be honoured by a Brahmin
tuler. He will firmly establish (the canons of) his
religion with the help of anew language. During his.
childhood. he will have a profession related to the
Puranas and will live in a city ruled by an emperor.
He will beget success in learning and arguments.
He will be happy after his 20th year of age.
Through a Brahmin ruler, he will gain lands and
will ever attain Siddhi through Agnishtoma sacrifice and others. During his first dasa, famine will
strike his country(?) and his older brother will be
destroyed. His mother will incur grief. In the sub
period ruled by Mercury in the first dasa, his health
will have setbacks. Saturn’s movement in Taurus
will cause strength to Mlechcha kings and kings
will mutually fight(?)
Notes: “Vajapeya” is one of the seven Soma
Sacrifices offered by kings or Brahmans to attain
the highest position, preceding the “Rajasuya” and
“Brihaspati Sava”: One who has performed
“Vajapeya” yagna is called “Vajapeyi”. Kings
attain strength required for a battle while Brahmins
are blessed with Supreme Knowledge with this
Yagna, so say Sastras.
सम्पत्ताराधिपे सूर्ये नीचप्रहसमन्विते ॥३५८५ ॥
क्लेशजीवनमाप्नोति प्रामान्तरनिवासवान् |
जीवान्तरे सौख्यफलं वदन्ति
ततोऽल्पसौख्यं च ददिद्रितां a
विपदशायां च नितान्तकष्ट
मतीव दुःखं गृहभूमिनाशम् ॥३५८६ ॥
सम्पत्तारदश्यत्यादौ विपद्दाये च यौवने |
वेदाध्ययनसम्पन्नो भिक्षाशनवशात्सुखम् ॥३५८७ ॥
3585 - 3587. Other Dasas: (a) The Sun ruling
the 2nddasa and being with a debilitated planet will
make one’s life difficult. He will migrate to
another village. In Jupiter’s sub period he will
receive happiness. Later, his happiness will be less
and poverty will strike. (All these will occur in the
2nd dasa, of the Sun.)
(b) His 3rd dasa will cause endless difficulties
and abundant grief. His home and lands will be
destroyed.
(c) In the beginning and ending of 2nd dasa, and
in the 3rd dasa, during his youth, he will be rich with
Vedic studies and be happy obtaining alms by
begging,
चोलदेशेऽपयरिष्टं स्यात् संप्राप्ते राष्टूविप्लवे।
सम्पदाये मध्यखण्डे चोलभूपतिविग्रहम् ॥३५८८ ॥

Chandra Kala Nadi 121
राज्यक्षोभवशात् क्लेशं पाडयभुपतिहेतुना |
पश्चात् स्वस्थ समायुक्तः स्वदेशं FACET ॥३५८९ ॥
नष्टराज्यात् सुभूषाप्तिश्चोलदेशाधिपस्य च ।
विपदाये जातकश्च देशान्तरनिवासवान् ॥३५९० ॥
WMA च लभते गृहस्थाश्रमसंयुतः।
विद्यार्थी नगरे गरामे द्यहित्वा वारभोजनम् ॥३५९१ ॥
3588 - 3591. Chola kingdom will be subjected
to evils including a national calamity (?). The
native will incur enmity with the Chola king during
the middle part of his 2nd dasa. He will incur grief
due to national adversities and due to Pandya king.
Afterwards he will recover and will return to his -
native land. The Chola king will gain ornaments
through the lost kingdom(?) In the 3rd dasa, the
native will have a change of country. He will learn
Sastras and enter into family life. During his student days, he will eat in others’ homes by turn on
weekly basis (as was the practice in remote past in
case of indigent students desirous of studying
विपद्ाये राहु भुक्तौ भ्रातृसौख्यं धनागमम् |
ज्वरपीडामवाप्नोति स्वजनोद्राहसंभ्रमम् ॥३५९२ Il
कन्याशनिस्थिते काले विपदाये शुभाशुभम् |
Tae प्रणाशश्च पाण्डयदेशे भविष्यति ॥३५९३ ॥
agente युक्तस्य राजपुत्रस्य चैवहि ।
राज्यप्राप्तिः सुभूषाप्तिरत्पकालं भविष्यति ॥२३५९४॥
तत्पुत्रश्च महासौख्यं राज्यलाभं धनागमम् |
विवाहोत्सवमाप्नोति जातकश्च प्रभोः समः॥३५९५ ॥
3592 - 3595. In the 3rd Dasa, Rahu’s sub
` period, his co-born will be happy and wealth will
be acquired. The native will be troubled by fever.
There will be a family marriage. Good and bad
effects will occur with Saturn’s transit in Virgo
during the 3rd dasa. A sage-turned-king will be
destroyed in Pandya kingdom(?) The prince will
obtain a large army and ornaments, be greatly
happy and will gain kingdom(?). In this dasa, the’
native’s marriage will occur and he will be equal to
a king.
, कन्यान्ते च तुलादौ च मन्दे वक्रातिचारगे ।
देशभङ्गं प्रजाक्षोभं लोके दुर्भिक्षजं भयम् ॥२३५९६ ॥
अनावृष्टिहते देशे दुर्भिक्षं वत्सरद्रयम् |
पश्चात्सोख्यं प्रकुर्वीत विदेशे चान्तरे तथा ॥३५९७ ॥
काञ्चीपिनाकिनीमध्ये सेन्यनांशश्च जायते |
महायुद्धे भवेत्तत्र सेनाधिपतिनाशकृत् ॥२५९८ ॥
देशान्तेऽष्यरिष्टं स्यादप्रामाधिपतिनाशनम् |
` अशनच्छादनेनैव ज्येष्टभ्रातत्रादिनाशनम् ॥२५९९ ॥
3596 - 3599. Irrelevant: Saturn moving in the
end of Virgo, or in the beginning of Libra in
retrogression or accelerated motion, will affect the
kingdom, cause troubles to populace and famine.
For two years, there will be famine in the country
due to lack of rains. Later on happiness will
resume. The army chief and army will be destroyed. Evils will existin another country also and
» the head of the village will incur destruction. Due
to lack of food and clothes, elder brother will be
destroyed.
विश्वांशे वृश्चिके लग्ने विपदाये शुभाशुभम् |
कृमिद्रुम फलप्राप्तिमल्पसौख्यं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥३६०० ॥
gare च महत्कषटमुत्तरार्धं शुभाशुभम् |
मध्यखण्डे त्वनावृष्ि्टुिक्ष च भविष्यति ॥३६०१ ॥
3600 - 3601. For a native of Visva Nadiamsa,
Scorpio ascendant, the 3rd dasa will give good and
bad effects. His happiness will be limited. The first
half of the dasa will give great difficulties. 2nd half
will give both evil and auspicious effects. In the
middle of the dasa, lack of rains and will follow(?)
Notes: “Krumidruma” does not convey anything proper. Itmeans “insects and trees”. Itshould _
be “Kemadruma” meaning that due to such yoga,
the native will receive checkered happiness.
. बन्धुवर्गे मनस्तापं स्वदेहायाससंभ्रमम्।
पश्चादारोग्यमाप्नोति भरातृपीडा भविष्यति ॥३६०२ ॥
3602. Further, the native’s kinsfolk will be
under mental distress; his health will decline to -
recover after some time. His brother will incur
evils.
लाभे शनिस्थिते काले पाण्ड्यदेशे जनावधि ।
तद्वारि प्रमुखे क्लेशं राजोपद्रवामादिशेत् ॥३६०३ ॥
ब्राह्मणप्रभुसन्तापः पाण्ड्यदेशे भविष्यति |
यवनाधिपतेर्मृत्युस्तत्पत्रभरबलो भवेत् ॥२३६०४ ॥
` तद्राज्ये न्यायनाशश्च महायुद्धं भविष्यति ।
विशोपरि शरे वर्षे वृश्चिकान्ते शनौ स्थिते ॥३६०५ Il

122 Deva Keralam
प्रकृतेः कर्मदोषेणे हयार्यावर्तजनावधि |
काशीप्रयागनगरीदेवब्राह्मणक्षोभकृत् ॥३६०६ ॥
म्लेच्छाक्रान्ते च नगरे शिवद्रोहं विनिर्दिशेत् |
तद्ररताश्रवणं चैव दशासन्धौ भविष्यति ॥३६०७ ॥
3603 - 3607. Irrelevant: Saturn moving in the
11th (in Virgo) will cause difficulties to men of
importance in royal circles and cause royal wrath.
Brahmin ruler in Pandya country will be grieved.
Yavana king will die and his son will become
powerful. Justice will incur destruction in that
country. Four years later, after 20th year of age,
Satum moving in the end of Scorpio, troubles to
men in Aryakingdom will come to pass. Brahmins
and gods in Kasi and Prayaga will be troubled.
These towns will be seized by Mlechchas and
atrocities and on Siva temple will occur. The
native will hear of all these events in the junction
of the 3rd and 4th dasas.
विपदशान्त्यमारभ्य क्षेमदाये सुसौख्यवान् |
शद्र्रभुवशाल्लाभं कषेत्रगोधान्यसद्कुलम् ॥३६०८ ॥
स्वबुद्धिप्रबलं सौख्यं महाराजावलम्बनम् |
यलकार्यार्थसिद्धि च राजमन्त्रीप्रसादजम् ॥३६०९ ॥
3608 - 3609. In the beginning and end of the 3rd
dasa, and in the 4th dasa, the native will be happy.
He will gain through a Soodra king and will gather
lands, quadrupeds and wealth. His intelligence
will grow and he will be happy following the
footsteps of an emperor. The undertakings attempted by him will end in success. He will earn
the favours of the king and his ministers.
लग्नाधिपदशाकाले पाण्ड्यदेशे महत्सुखम |
राजद्वारे SARS धनवान्याम्बरादिकम् ॥३६१० ॥
निधनस्थानदोषेण शुभभुक्तो मनोव्यथाम् |
पापभुक्तौ महत्सौख्यं गृहे गोधनसंकुलम् ॥३६११ ॥
भ्रातृपीडामवाप्नोति राजसन्मानमादिशेत्।
लग्नाधिपदशाकाले जीवे पञ्चगवत्सरे ॥३६१२ ॥
सप्तमे वाष्टमे वापि यज्ञकर्मरतः सुखी |
पश्चाद भवति सन्तोषश्चाल्पलाभो धनागमं॥३६१३ ॥
भ्रातृद्रेषमवाप्नोति गृहच्छिद्रं विनिर्दिशेत् ।
पश्चिमां दिशमाश्रित्य गमन धनलाभदम् MBE LY ॥
ग्रामान्तरे निवासी च शिवार्चनरतः सदा |
मृष्टानदानसन्तोषं राजदर्शनसंभ्रमम् ॥३६१५ ॥
अयलनेन फलं चैव दारसौख्यं विनिर्दिशेत्।
दराविशाब्दात् परं चेव योगः स्याद्रसुवत्सरे ॥३६१६ ॥
तन्मध्ये शुभकर्मणि कृत्वा पुण्यानि भूरिशः।
3610 - 3616. (a) Mars’ Dasa: The native of
Scorpio ascendant, Visva Nadiamsa, will be greatly
happy in the Pandyakingdom, during his ascendant
lord’sdasa. He will befriend people in royal circles
and will acquire grains, clothes, wealth and the
like.
(b) Mercury’s Dasa: (During the dasa of
Mercury) because of his 8th lordship, the sub
period of a benefic will cause mental distress while
that of a malefic will bring forth much happiness,
royal honour and cause acquisition of quadrupeds
and wealth for the family, anyway followed by
adverse effects viz. evils to brothers.
(c) Mars’ Dasa: In the dasa of the lord of the
ascendant, during the Sth, 7th or 8th year of age, the
native will be fond of performing deeds related to
Yagna (Vedic sacrifices). He will have enmity
with his co-born in this dasa and evils to family will
occur. He will acquire wealth by resorting to
journeys to the western part of the country. He will
live in a different village, be fond of worshipping
Lord Siva, will enjoy happiness serving needy
people with sweet food and will meet aking. He
will obtain fruits of his labour effortlessly and be
happy with wife (i.e. will beget married). His.
prosperity will commence from the age of 22 and
may exist for 8 years. In between this time, he will
perform auspicious deeds and earn a lot of merits.
Notes: (a) This belongs to the dasa of ascendant
lord Mars.
(b) Reference to Mercury dasa is an interruption, but is an independent and useful clue.
(c) In sloka 3612, reference to Jupiter occurs
without a proper connection. Whether it is in place
of some other useful word remains unknown.
मीनेऽर्कनन्दने काले एकोनत्रिशवत्सरे ॥३६१७ ॥
चोलदेशेऽप्यरिष्टंऽस्यात् पाण्डयभूपतिहेतुना |
मण्डलाधिपतेर्मृत्युः समरे च भविष्यति ॥३६१८ ॥
तस्य पुत्रस्य भायदिः सङ्खातमरणं भवेत् |
चोलभूपतिमूलेन देशधान्यफलं विदुः ॥३६१९ ॥

Chandra Kala Nadi 123
3617 - 3619. Irrelevant: During the 19th year
with transit Saturn in Pisces evils will occur in the
Chola kingdom, perhaps on account of the ruler of
Pandya kingdom. The king of Chola will die in the
war and his son and daughter-in-law will be hit to
death.
अष्टविंशे दशासन्धौ सामान्यफलमश्नुते ।
देहायासं च लभते स्वजनामयशोकवान् ॥३६२० ॥
पश्चादारोग्यसन्तोषं नित्यं मृष्टानभोजनम्।
केत्रलाभं समाप्नोति पश्चादाप्तजनावधि ॥२३६२१ ॥
3620 - 3621. During the native’s 28th year, the
junction of the dasa will give ordinary effects,
physical illness to self and he will experience grief
due to his men being troubled by diseases. Later on,
health will be recovered and he will enjoy good
food and will gain lands.
्ेमाधिपदशाकाले स्वभुक्तौ सौख्यमश्नुते ।
स्वान्तभूरवितत विना भाग्यं मध्ये किचिदृणं भवेत् ॥३६२२ ॥
frre राहुदोषेण मित्प्रभुवशादृणम् |
अन्त क्लेशं मनस्तापं राहुभुक्तौ शुभाशुमम् 13623 ॥
3622 - 3623. The first sub period of the 4th dasa
will cause happiness. Its concluding sub period
will go without granting fortunes. In between (the
dasa), one will be in debts. During his 30th year,
he will fall in debts due to a friendly king due to illplaced Rahu. In the end, he will be grieved and feel
distressed. Rahu’s sub period will cause good and
bad effects.
सेनाधिपतिनाशश्च पाण्ड्यदेशे भविष्यति ।
पाण्डयभूपतिसन्तापो चोलदेशे तथैव च ॥३६२४॥
अन्याक्रान्तं भवेच्चापि चोव्छराज्यं नसंशयः।
मेषे शनिस्थितेकाले पाण्ड्यदेशे जनावधि ॥३६२५ ॥
स्वबन्धुं व्ययंमापनोति तद्राज्याधिपतेर्विपत् |
स्वयं कृतादनर्थः स्यात्पाण्डयदेशाधिपस्य च ॥३६२६ ॥
मेषेशनिस्थिते काले फलमेवमुदाहतम् |
तद्वारि प्रमुखैः क्लेशं संचितार्थविनाशनम् ॥३६२७ ॥
राजद्वेषाणि कार्यणि तन्मूलाद्रेधमाप्नुयात् |
उत्तरां दिशमाश्रित्य बहुसेनागमं तथा |
परचक्रं प्रकुर्वीत काञ्चीदक्षिण भागके ॥३६२८ ॥
अन्योन्ययुद्धं क्षितिपालकाना-
माकस्मिकं भूपतिवेधमाहुः।
पाश्चात्यकांश्चाप्यवान् एति ।
क्लेशं वदेदभूपतिसैन्य नाशात् ॥३६२९ ॥
3624 - 3629. Irrelevant: The army-chief will
be destroyed in the Pandya kingdom causing grief
to the king and the kingdom. The Chola kingdom .
will be seized by other kings. During the transit of
Saturn, the people of Pandya will be troubled.
Relatives will disappear and the Pandya king will
be endangered which will be due to his own fault.
With Saturn moving in Aries, chief men in royal
circles will be troubled and wealth gathered will be
destroyed. Due to activities that will displease the
king, the native will face obstacles. Huge army will
arrive in the northern direction. The southern part
will be seized by others. All of a sudden, kings will
fight among themselves. During the march towards western direction, humiliation will occur.
The king’s army will be destroyed.
वृषे शनिस्थिते काले जातकस्य महत् सुखम् ।
धनलाभं च लभते नरवाहनसंयुतम् MBE Fo ॥
प्रत्यक्ताराधिपे राहौ दशाकाले विलग्ने ।
राजप्रसादमाप्नोति देशान्तरफलं वदेत् ॥३६३१ ॥
वनान्तपभुद्ररे राहुभुक्तौ श्रियं वदेत् ।
विद्याविनोदगोष्ठी भिर्वसल्रलाभं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥३६३२ ॥
परत्यकारदशाकाले मिथुनान्तेऽष्टमे शनौ |
मात्ररिष्टं विजानीयाच्छनि भुक्तौ न संशयः॥३६३३ ॥
BAN चोत्तरं गत्वा सकुटुम्बः सबान्धवः।
शिष्यैः परिवृतश्चापि राजामात्यप्रपूजितः॥३६३४ ॥
आर्जयित्वा धनं भूरि प्रामांश्चावाप्यभूरिशः।
आहर्ता सर्वयज्ञानां कर्तान्येषां च कर्मणाम् ।
सर्वसम्पत्समृद्धश्च योगः स्यादशवत्सरे 113634 ॥
मध्ये वयो वा यदि राहुपाके
विश्वांशयोगे भवति प्रसूतः।
प्राकारतो मन्दरचित्रकूरः
पर्यङ्गशय्यामणिवस्तुलाभः ERE ॥
चित्राम्बरो भूषणमाल्यहारो
चीनाग्बरो वा यदि स्वर्गपात्री |
संबन्धियुक्तः स च बन्धुभोग्यो
दिवा च रात्रो यदि राहुपाके ॥३६३७ ॥
3630 - 3637. (a) The native will enjoy much
happiness with Saturn’s stay in Taurus in transit.

124 Deva Keralam
He will gain wealth and conveyances.
(b) 5th Dasa: Should Rahu be in the ascendant,
‘and his Dasa be the Sth in order, one will earn the
mercy of the ruler and will migrate to another
kingdom. Due to a king ruling a forest region, he
will make wealth in the sub period of Rahu and will
gain knowledge, entertainment, robes and the company of the learned men. In the sub period of Saturn
under the said 5th dasa, his mother will be endangered with Saturn moving in the 8th (Gemini).
After the age of 32, he will be surrounded by his
family members, kinsfolk and students, and will
beget royal mercy. He will earn plenty of money.
For ten years he will be endowed with prosperity
and all kinds of wealth. Rabu dasa occurring in the
middle of life will grant beds, gems and other
articles. He will gain wonderful robes, ornaments, -
garlands, silken clothes, golden and vessels, be
with his.relatives and will enjoy pleasures day and
night.
परत्यक्ताराधिपे HA स्वोच्चांशे शुभदायके |
वाहनानि धनं भूरि गृहे लक््मीकटाक्षवान् ॥३६३८ ॥
नित्योत्सवादिसन्तोषं शुभशोभनसंभ्रमम्।
कलांशकवशादभाग्यं भ्रातृसौख्यं शुभाधिकम् ॥३६३९ ॥
रत्रिंशोपरि विशेषेण प्रत्यग्दाये शुभं वदेत्।
्षेमदायान्तमारभ्य योगः स्यान्मनुवत्सरे ॥३६४० Il
सोदरस्य विशेषेण पुत्रोत्सवफलं वदेत् ।
जातकस्य कलांशेन सन्तानप्रतिबन्धकम् ॥३६४१ ॥
तन्मूलाद् व्याकुलं चैव भाग्यकालं विनिर्दिशेत्
षष्ट्यंयशाधिपदोषेण प्रत्यग्दाये शुभान्तरे ॥३६४२ ॥
समानजनशुत्रत्वं पापभुक्तौ मनो व्यथाम् |
प्रत्यग्दाये मध्यखण्डे प्रथमान्त्यादि भागके ॥२३६४३ ॥
शाक्तेयजनशतुत्वं THE भविष्यति |
राजामात्यविरोधी च यलकार्यार्थविष्नवान् ॥३६४४ ॥
3638 - 3644. (a) If the Sth dasa lord is in an
angle or in his own Navamsa, he will prove auspicious granting conveyances, plenty of money, and
the blessings of goddess Lakshmi. He will enjoy
happiness everyday and auspicious events.
(b) If the said planet is in Kala Nadiamsa, one
will be endowed with prosperity (in the 5th dasa),
happiness for co-born and exceedingly auspicious
effects.
(c) The Sth dasa will specially give auspicious
effects after the age of 30.
(d) The beginning and ending portions of the
4th dasa will give prosperity, perhaps, for 8 years.
His co-born will particularly obtain progeny.
(e) The native will face obstacles in begetting
progeny as aresult of the position mentioned at “b”
above. Because of that he will be distressed.
` (f) Due to the blemish caused by Shashtiamsa
position for the Sth dasa lord, one will incur enmity
with men equal to him, in the sub period ruled by
a benefic. An evil planet’s sub period will cause
mental distress and enmity with people in royal
circles and with the king and the minister. His
undertakings will face obstacles.
दशेशांशपयोगेन स्वकार्यविजयी भवेत् |
कलांशाधिपतौ शुक्रे लग्नात् केन्द्रत्रिकोणगे ॥३६४५ ॥
प्रत्यग्दाये तत्फलं स्यादेकत्रिंशाब्दतः परम् |
कृष्णागोदावरीमध्ये यवनप्रभुपद्णे ॥३६४६ ॥
तद्वारि सचिवस्नेहाद् ग्रामभम्यर्थ लाभवान् |
यवनप्रभुसन्मानं ब्राह्मणप्रभुहेतुना ॥३६४७ ॥
कार्यसिद्धि genta गजान्तैश्वर्यमापुयात्।
विचित्रमणिमाप्नोति स्वर्णभुषणमेव वा ॥३६४८ ॥
प्रत्यग्दाये फलप्रापिर्मध्यखण्डे विशेषतः।
wrens धनं भूरि मध्यदेशे फलाधिकम् ॥३६४९ ॥
तत्रापि वसतस्त धनलाभो महान् भवेत् |
देशान्तरे निवासः स्यात् सुखतो दश वत्सरान् ॥३६५० ॥
तद्राज्ये त्रिचतुर्वारं गमनागमनं शुभम् ।
~ द्रयात्राफलप्राप्ि दक्षिणायां भविष्यति nage il
3645 - 3651. Scorpio Ascendant: (a) Venus
being the lord of the Shodasamsa ascendant and
being in an angle or trine from the ascendant will
give the said results(7) in the Sth dasa, perhaps after
the 21st year. Due to friendship of a minister in the
kingdom of the Yavana region situated between the
, Tivers Krishna and Godavari, the person will gain
villages, lands and wealth. He will be honoured by
the Yavana king. His undertakings will be fruitful.
He will gather wonderful gems and golden ormaments.
(b) The Sth dasa will specially reveal good
effects in its middle part. In the 32nd year, one will
` make 8 lot of money and obtain more good effects

Chandra Kala Nadi 125
in the middle part of the country and will reside
there. He will gain much wealth, will live in a. .
foreign country happily for ten years, will travel in
that country for 3 or 4 weeks and beget auspicious
effects. He will undertake long distance trips to the
southern part of the country.
Notes: (a) “Kalaamsa” is another name for
Shodasamsa, according to sage Parasara. But the
mention “above results” is not clear as the relevant
portion is not present in our version.
अष्टमे शनिदोषेण क्रूरमासे ज्वराद् भयम् ।
मित्रशुत्रत्व कार्येण ast विनिर्दिशेत् ॥३६५२ ॥
प्रत्यग्दाये तृतीयांशे सत्कर्मफलमशनुते |
मध्यखण्डान्तमारभ्य तृतीयांशे त्रिवत्सरे ॥३६५३ ॥
अतीव सौख्य कार्य च विशेषकृतसिद्धिदम् |
दारान्तरं च लभते महानृपतिसक्कियाम् ॥३६५४ ॥
अतीव श्रियमाप्नोति महादेवीप्रसादतः।
प्रत्यण्दाये द्वादशाब्दे नित्यश्रीर्नित्यमङ्गलम् ॥३६५५ Il
राजप्रसादमाप्नोति ह्यधियोगवशात् सुखम् |
3652 - 3655. (a) When Saturn journeys in the
8th from the ascendant, one will be troubled by
(serious) fever while his undertakings will bring
forth enmity with friends and he will be inwardly
hurt.
(b) In the last one 3rd part of the 5th dasa, he
will indulge in good deeds. He will be extremely
happy for three years in the beginning and ending
parts of the middle of the said dasa. He will have
another marriage and will obtain the mercy of a
great ruler. Much wealth will be possessed by him
due to the blessings of a goddess. In the 12th year,
in the 5th dasa, he will ever have wealth and
auspicious effects. The ruler will be kind to him.
He will be happy due to Adhi Yoga.
Notes: (b) “Maha Nrupati Satkriyaam” should
read as “Maha Nrupati Satkripaam”.
प्रत्यग्दाये मध्यखण्डे गोचरे नवमे शनो ॥३६५६ ॥
पाण्डयदेशेऽत्त्यरिष्टं स्यात्पश्चिमपुराधिपात्।
कुलीरान्त्ये च सिहादौ पाण्ड्यदेशे जनावधि ॥३६५७ ॥
तद्द्रारि प्रमुखैः क्लेशमन्तर्छिद्रवशाद्रयथा |
ओततर्यकलहं किंचित् कावेरीतीर एव च ॥३६५८ ॥
तद्राज्याधिपतेः सौख्यं नष्टराज्यधनागमम्।
तत्पश्चिमपुराधीशसेन्यानाशश्च जायते ॥३६५९ ॥
सेनाधिपसुसन्तान arg विनिर्दिशेत् ।
तदरार्ता श्रवणेनैव पाण्डयभूपतिनाशनम् ॥३६६० ॥
चोलपाण्डयपुराधीशवन्योन्यस्नेहमश्रितौ |
लभते तावुभौ मृत्युं कालगत्यानुसारतः॥ ३६६१ ॥
fae शनिस्थिते काले ह्यवन्त्यां यवनाधिपः।
योगप्राबल्यमाप्नोति नानादेशाधिपत्यवान् ॥३६६२ ॥
परत्यग्दये परार्धेति सिहान्त्यादित्रिराशिषु |
म्लेच्छः प्राबल्यमाप्नोति शनिचारवशात् फलम् ॥३६६३ ॥
शाखाभूपतियोगेन लोके दुर्मिक्षजं भयम्।
ब्रह्मण्य क्षोभकार्येण बहुदेशजनावधि ॥३६६४॥
देवव्राह्मणसन्तापं देशत्यागं सुखक्षयम् | |
3656 - 36644. Irrelevant: In the 5th dasa’s
middle part, when Saturn arrives in the 9th, evils in
Pandya kingdom will occur due to aking of a town
situated in the west. When Saturn moves in the end
of Cancer or in the beginning, people will be in
trouble. Important people in royal circle will be
grieved, and will be distressed due to internal
strife. There will be quarrels in the northern part
27102150 on the banks of the river Kaveri. The kings
of these regions will be happy and will recover lost
kingdoms. The happiness of the ruler of the
western part thereof will be destroyed. The prosperity of the progeny of the army chief will also be
destroyed. After hearing this, the king of Pandya
will collapse. The kings of Chola and Pandya
regions will become mutual friends. Both of them
will die in the course of time. When Saturn reaches
Leo, the rulers of Avanti and Yavana will enjoy
increased prosperity. In the 2nd half of the 5th dasa -
Saturn moving in the three signs from the end of
Leo will cause prosperity of Mlechchas. These are
the effects of Saturn;s transit. There will be famine
in the world. Due to strife caused to Brahmins,
people of many regions of the world will be in
trouble. Gods and Brahmins will be destroyed, will
leave thé country and lose happiness.
जातकस्य विचारः स्याच्चत्वारिशात् परं व्यथा ॥३६६५ ॥
परत्यग्दाये तृतीयांशे त्वेकचत्वारिवत्सर |
द्विचत्वारिंशगे चेव शुक्रभुकितिवशाद्विपत् ॥३६६६ ॥
मित्राप्तप्रभुसन्तापं म्लेच्छमूलादुपद्रवम् |
सर्वस्वनाशमाप्नोति जातकश्च विचारवान् ॥३६६७ ॥

126 Deva Keralam
कलहेन विनिर्गत्य स्वदेशाभिमुखे वसन् ।
शुक्रांशकस्य दोषेण नानाव्याकुल संभ्रमम् ॥२३६६८ ॥
मार्गमध्ये मनस्तापं चोरशस्रेण पीडनम् ।
प्राणसंशयभाप्नोति सर्वाभरणनाशनम् ॥३६६९ ॥
पश्चात् स्वप्राप्तनगरे किंचिद्राज्ञा च सत्कृतः।
अशनासदनं प्राप्यमारायोः दयमावसेत् ॥ ३६५७० Il
पश्चादल्पसुखप्राप्तिः पुनरेति स्वमन्दिरम् ।
तद्राज्याधिपतिस्नेहं विद्यागोष्ठी धनागमम् ।३६७१ ॥
धनं बहुविधं प्राप्यद्विजेभ्यः संप्रयच्छति |
परोपकार कार्येषु श्रद्धा च द्रययत्सरम् NIE? ॥
दवादशांशवशात् सौख्यं हेमाम्बरसुवाहनम् |
3665 - 3672"4. Venus’ Sub-period: In the said
5th dasa, the native will have achange of place. He
will be distressed after his 41st year. In the last one
third part of the Sth dasa, in 41st or 42nd year, in
Venus’ sub period, he will be endangered. He will
be in grief due to a ruler, a close friend of his, and
be troubled through a Mlechcha king. Everything
of his will be lost and he will have a change of place.
He will be extinct in a quarrel and will come back
to his own place. Due to the Navamsa blemish of
Venus, he will incur various kinds of distresses and
will wander. He will be grieved on his way and be
endangered through thieves and weapons. All his
ornaments will incur destruction and his mundane
journey will be doubtful. Following these, he will
come back to his home town and will somewhat
undertake royal assignment. He will obtain food
and shelter and will beget some happiness. He will
befriend the ruler of the region and will acquire
learning and wealth. He will help others for two
years.
बराह्मणप्रभु योगेन लभते वाञ्छितं फलम् Ie? ॥
पुनश्चैवोत्तरं गत्वा प्रयाणे विष्नमाप्तुयात्।
सर्वेषां जातके मन्दे कन्याराशित्रिकोणगे ॥३६७४॥
देशकालविपर्यासं मुनिभिः परिकर्पितम् |
परचक्रं च ` लभते म्लेच्छप्राबल्यमादिशेत् ॥३६७५ ॥
जातकस्यज्वरं किंचित् प्रत्यग्दाये YATRA |
बन्धुक्लेशफलप्राप्तिः स्वजनादिप्रपीडया ॥२६७६ ॥
3673 - 3676. With the Dvadasamsa position of
Venus he will gain happiness, gold, robes and
conveyances. His desires will be fulfilled due to a
Brahmin king. He will again proceed to the north
and will incur obstacles in journey with Satum
moving in the 3 signs commencing Virgo,
Mlechchas will prosper. In the Sth dasa, in a
benefic’s sub period, the native will incur fever.
His relatives will be troubled and be subjected to
evils.
परत्यग्दाये तृतीयांशे मध्यभागे मनोव्यथा ।
विप्लवेनविनिर्गत्य दक्षिणां दिशमेष्यति ॥३६५७७ ॥
तुतीयांशस्य योगेन द्विचत्वारंशतः परम्।
जन्मदेशे महत् सौख्यं राजामात्यप्रसादनम् ॥३६७८ ॥
धनधान्यसुभूषाप्तिः पाण्ड्यदेशे क्वचिद् भवेत् |
पुरा सत्कृतराज्ये च फलं ब्रूयात् क्वचित् क्वचित् ॥३६७९ ॥
तीर्थयात्रापदेशेन दक्षिणां दिशमेष्यति |
तत्रासौ सत्कृतो राज्ञा प्रत्यण्दाये YATRA ॥३६८० ॥
शाक्तीकराजसन्मानं नववस््रादि संयुतम् |
स्ीसौख्यं नित्यसन्तोषमीया ज्ज्येष्ठदिमास्सु च ॥३६८१ ॥
पश्चात् स्वेशमासाद्य eae द्रयं च ATI
कलांशकस्य दोषेण विद्यावादकलापवान् ॥३६८२ ॥
3677 - 3682. In the last part of the Sth dasa, he
will be mentally disturbed and be extinct. He will
proceed towards the south. After the age of 42, he
will prosper. He will enjoy much happiness in his
country due to the mercy of the king and the
minister, will obtain wealth, grains and omaments.
These will be to some extent in the Pandya kingdom. He will move towards the south on a pilgrimage. There, the native will be honoured by a king
and be endowed with new robes etc. in a benefic’s
sub period. He will enjoy happiness through his
wife and be happy in the month of Jyeshta and
others (i.e. onwards). Afterwards he will return to
his country. Due to the blemish of Shodasamsa(?)
he will have quarrels in respect of education and
learning.
प्रत्यग्दाये तृतीयांशे मध्यभागे तुलाशनौ |
कन्यान्त्यादिं समारभ्य वनस्थलगतः सुखी ॥३६८३ ॥
तत्र राजप्रसादेन कुटुम्बभरणे सुखम् |
कषेत्रलाभसुखं नित्यं नदीप्ान््ये निवासवान् ॥३६८४ ॥
3683 - 3684. With Saturn’s movements in the
end of Virgo or in Libra, the subject will migrate to
a forest region and be happy, during the last part of

, Chandra Kala Nadi 127
Sth dasa. There he will maintain his family with the
mercy (patronage) of a ruler. He will gain landed
properties and reside in a river region.
सुतेशांशकयोगेन सन्तानोत्पत्तिनाशनम् ।
पुनश्चैवोत्तरं गत्वा दूरदेशं प्रयास्यति ॥३६८५ ॥
पूर्वाश्रितवशाल्लाभं हेमाम्बरधनादिकम् |
पश्चात् स्वदेशमाप्नोति धनलाभं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥३६८६ ॥
3685 - 3686. Venus joining the Navamsaowned
by the Sth lord will cause destruction of progeny. `
He will again proceed to a bad kingdom situated in
the north and seek patronage from his earlier
sources, and will gain gold, ornaments and wealth.
प्रत्यग्दशान्ते परमोच्चभागे ॥
मन्दे सुवस्राभरणादिलाभम् |
जनान्तरम्रामपुरीश मूलात् |
सौख्यं सदा जीवनमाहुरार्याः॥३६८७ ॥
3687. During the end of the Sth dasa, Saturn in
transit attaining the degree of his deep exaltation,
will grant the native quality robes, ornaments etc
through a ruler. The native will be ever happy.
सुतादिपशाकाले जीवे पञ्चमसंस्थिते ।
स्वभुक्तौ पुत्रलाभः स्याद् गृहे गोधान्यसंकुलम् RECS ।
3688. During the dasa of the Sth lord (i.e.
Jupiter’s dasa), and in his sub period, he will bless
the native with a son quadrupeds and wealth, with
his transit in Pisces.
परत्यण्दशासधिकाले मित्रादिप्रभु विग्रहम् ।
महानृपति नाशश्च पाण्ड्यदेशे भविष्यति ॥३६८९ ॥
अराजकमिति प्राहुः सरीमूलात् पोडशाब्दकम्।
ब्राह्मणः प्रबलं चैति पश्चाद्राजसुतोऽपि च ।३६९० ॥
कुलटा राजपलनी च विप्रान् सा घर्षयिष्यति।
काममोहवशापन्ना राज्यं स्वं पालयिष्यति ॥३६९१ ॥
तत्पोत्रो लभते पश्चात्तदराज्यं वञ्जयिष्यति।
विश्वांशे च तत्फलं स्यात् शेषमन्यद्धिचार्यताम् ॥३६९२ ॥
3689 - 3692. (a) The junction period of 5th dasa
(with the 6th dasa), the native will have enmity with
a king.
(b) Irrelevant: The ruler of Pandya kingdom
will face destruction. For a period of 16 years,
anarchy will spread on account of a female. Brahmins will grow in strength, so also the princes ina
later period. The queen will be immoral. The
kingdom will be destroyed due to lust for pleasures.
Her grand-son will later recover the kingdom.
These are the effects for Visva Nadiamsa. Rest
should be guessed with the help of other books.
षष्ठाधिपदशाकाले स्वभुक्तो सौख्यमापुयात्।
चन््रलग्नादभाग्यलाभदशायां भाग्यमश्नुते ॥३६९३ ॥
ज्येष्ठभ्रातृकलत्रस्य tessa भविष्यति |
पत्रवृद्धि करा चैव धनधान्याम्बरप्तिदा ॥२६९४ ॥
जातकस्य महत् सौख्यं राजामात्यप्रसादजम् ।
शुभशोभनकार्याणि भ्रातृपुत्रश्च सौख्यवान् ॥३६९५ ॥
सुताधिपदशाकाले पापभुक्तौ भवेत्तथा |
दुस्थे शनिस्थिते काले ज्येष्ठभ्रातृविनाशनम् |
, तन्मूलादव्याकुलं चैव aed पुत्रलाभवान् ॥३६९६ ॥
3693 - 3696. (a) In the 6258 of the 6th lord
(Mars) and in the sub period of Mars, happiness will
prevail.
(b) The dasa of the (lords) of the 9th and 11th
from the Moon sign will produce prosperity. His
older sister-in-law will be physically ill. His
progeny will incur prosperity, wealth, corn and
clothes. The native will be exceedingly happy `
through the mercy of the ruler and the minister.
(c) His brother’s son will be happy on account
of auspicious functions in a malefic’s sub period
during the dasa of Jupiter.
(d) Saturn moving in an evil house will cause
destruction of elder brother and the native will be
grieved on account of this. Earlier he will gain birth
of a son.
विश्वांशयोगे मकरांशजातः
परत्यग्दशायां च सुतेशदाये |
पापान्तरान्त्ये धनभूमिलाभं
महानदीप्रान्त इति बरुवन्ति ॥३६९७ ॥
महानृपतिसन्मानं ब्राह्यणप्रभुमित्रताम् |
प्रामलाभमवाप्नोति नदीप्रान्त्ये विशेषतः BESS ॥
जीवपाके मध्यखण्डे बहुधान्यधनागमम्।
शुभशोभनकार्याणि पुत्रस्यैव विनिर्दिशेत् ॥३६९९ ॥
जीवांशकस्य दोषेण पुत्रिकाक्लेशसं भवम् |
पश्चात् सन्तानमाप्नोति योगं वै पञ्चवत्सरम् ॥२७०० ॥
3697 -3700. (a) One born in Scorpio ascendant,
Capricorn Navamsa will, in the Sth dasa or in

128 Deva Keralam
Jupiter’s dasa, gain wealth and lands in a river
region, during the operation of a malefic’s sub
period. He will be honoured by a great king and
will befriend a brahmin ruler.
(b) He will specially gain of villages in the
region of ariver. In the middle of Jupiter’s dasa, he
will gain plenty of wealth and grains and celebrate
auspicious functions relating to his son.
(c) His daughter will cause grief due to (bad)
Navamsa position of Jupiter. He will obtain
progeny later and will enjoy prosperity for five
years.
Notes: (a) “Visvamsaka yogena” reads as
“Shashtadhi Yoge” in another version, obliquely
pointing to Adhi Yoga.
धनाधिपदशाकाले दुस्थाने रविनन्दने |
मित्रप्रभु विनाशः स्यातततपु्रोऽल्पसुखी भवेत् ॥३७०१ ॥
दायादिवशमापत्नः क्लेशं प्राणोतिभूरिशः।
देशान्तरे महत् सौख्यं तत्काले जातस्कय च ॥३७०२ ॥
धर्मसिद्धिमवाप्नोति पूर्वार्धे सौख्यदो गुरः।
WAAR क्लेशं भ्रातद्रेषकलापनम् ॥३७०३ ॥
विभागयलमाप्नोति स्वकार्यप्रबलो भवेत्।
जीवपाके मध्यखण्डे पूर्वार्धे शुक्रभुक्तिषु ॥२७०४ ॥
3701 - 3704. (a) During the operation of the
dasa of the 2nd lord (Jupiter), transit Saturn reaching the 6th (Aries) will destroy a king with whom
the native is acquainted. His son will enjoy reduced
happiness. He will be endangered through his
relatives and be in much grief. He will be happy in
another country during this transit.
(b) In the dasa of Jupiter, the subject will gain
knowledge of law. In the first half of the dasa,
happiness will prevail. He will be troubled by
enemies and misunderstandings with co-born.
Attempts to family division will be made, His
undertakings will grow in the middle portion of the
first half of Jupiter’s dasa.
कुम्भे शनिस्थिते काले राजद्वारे भविष्यति |
स्थानच्युतिर्मनस्तापो . मित्राप्तजनविग्रहः॥ २७०५ ॥
प्रभुवर्गेऽपचारंच तन्मूलाद् व्याकुलं भवेत्।
जीवपाके परार्थे च मध्यखण्डान्त एव च ॥३७०६ ॥
पत्रोत्सवादिसन्तोषं गृहेचोद्राहसं भ्रमम् |
मीने शनिस्थिते काले व्याकुलं च फलं वदेत् ॥२७०७ ॥
पाण्ड्यदेशेप्यरिष्टं स्यात् सेताधिपतिनाशनम् |
चोलदेशे विशेषेण स्वशत्रुजननाशनम् ॥३७०८ Il
गुरुचारवशात् सौख्यं जातकस्य धनागमम् |
शुभशोभनकार्याणि कृत्वा धर्माश्च भूरिशः॥३७०९ ॥
पू्वाश्रितराजमूलात् क्षत्रलाभं शुभाधिकम्।
्रातृक्लेशमवाप्नोति GATT फलं तथा ॥३७१० ॥
पूर्वार्धे बुधभुक्तौच करपादेषु रोगवान् |
देहायासमवाप्नोति शान्त्या शानि प्रयास्यति ॥३७११ ॥
जीवपाके तृतीयांशे नवांशकफलं शुभम् |
पश्चिमां दिशमाश्रित्य प्रयाणे राजदर्शनम् ॥३७१२ ॥
विशेषधनवस्रापिं क्षेत्रलाभं विनिर्दिशेत् |
नूतनप्रभुसन्मानं मित्रप्रभुविनाशनम् ॥३७१३ ॥
शुभशोभनकार्याणि गृहे सन्तानलाभवान् |
तृतीयांशे मध्यखण्डे विरोषफलमश्नुते ॥३७१४ ॥
धनधान्याम्बर प्रापि धर्मसिद्धि विनिर्दिशेत्।
3705 - 37142. (a) During Saturn’s transit in
Aquarius, the native will lose his position in royal
circles, be distressed and will incur enmity of
friends and relatives. Offenses will occur in royal
family and the native will be distressed in the 2nd
half of Jupiter’s dasa. There will be birth of son,
and marriage in the family circles.
(b) Saturn journeying in Pisces will produce
distress. Evils in the kingdom of Pandya and
destruction of the army chief will also take place.
Especially enemies in the Chola kingdom will face
destruction.
(c) The transit of Jupiter(in favourable places)
will cause happiness (with the above adverse transit of Saturn). The subject will incur wealth and he
will perform auspicious and charitable deeds. He
will gain lands from the king patronising him
earlier.
(d) In the 2nd half of Jupiter’s dasa, the subject
will incur grief on account of brother.
(e) In the first half of the said dasa, the.person
will have bodily diseases including those of hands
and legs.
(0 The last part of Jupiter’s dasa will give
auspicious effects due to his (good) position in
Navamsa. He will journey towards the west and
meet aking. He will gain much wealth, robes and
landed properties. He will be honoured by a new

Chandra Kala Nadi 129
king. The friendly king will be destroyed. He will
have gain of a son and auspicious family functions.
The middle portion of the last one 3rd part of the
dasa will give specially good effects in terms of
wealth, grains, clothes and knowledge of law.
मेषे शनिस्थिते काले वृषभे च तथैव च ॥३७१५ Il
ROTA ज्वरं चैव स्वभार्यापुत्र पीडनम् |
सुताधिपदशाकाले wept मनोव्यथा |
ज्येष्ठभ्रातृसुतक्तेशो भविष्यति न संशयः IVE ॥
स्वर्भानुभुक्तौ गुरुदायकाले
भूपालसन्मानमतीव सौढ्यम्।
प्रामाधिपत्यं धनलाभमेति
पर्वा्रितब्राह्यणमन्िमूलात् ॥३७१७ ॥
शालीवाहशके लङ्कदधितर्काद्यकतेः परम् |
यवनाधिपते्मृत्युस्तत्पौत्र प्रबलो भवेत् ॥३७१८ ॥
उत्तरायणगे सूर्यँ सिंहस्थे देवपूजिते । .
अन्योन्ययुद्धं कुरुतः चोलपाण्डयपुराधिपौ ॥३७१९ ॥
नर्दोत्तरगे भागे बहुसेनाश्वनाशनम् |
जीवे केतुयुते काले तच्िकोणे शनिस्थिते ॥३७२० ॥
फलमेवं प्रशंसन्ति लोके effet भयम्।
पाण्डयदेशेऽप्यरिष्टं स्याद्राजामात्यविनाशनम् ॥२७२१ ॥
यस्मिन् देशे पुरे प्राम द्वितीयाष्टमजन्मगे ।
चतुर्थे दशमे वापि मन्दे स्वर्भानुसंयुते ॥३७२२ ॥
तद्राज्ये कलहः क्षोभं शुत्राजभयं वदेत् |
सेन्यनाशमवापनोति सेनाधिपति विप्रहम् ॥३७२३ ॥
शाखभूपतियोगेन देशकालफलं विदुः।
3715 - 37234. (a) The above will happen with
the transit of Saturn in Aries and Taurus. With
adverse solar movements during the said transits of
Saturn, the person will incur fever. His wife and
progeny will also be subjected to evils.
(b) In Rahu’s period of Jupiter’s dasa, mental
distress will come to pass. His older brother will
lose his son.
(c) Irrelevant: In the said Rahu’s sub period,
the king’s progeny will be exceedingly happy, will
gain lordship over villages and acquire wealth due
to a Brahmin-minister. The Yavana king will die
and his grand-sons will become strong. With the
Sun in his northerly course, and Jupiter in Leo,
kings of Pandya and Chola will mutually fight.
Huge army will be destroyed in the northern part of
Narmada. When Jupiter joins Ketu in a trine to
Saturn, the country will reel under famine conditions; evils will occur in the Pandya region and the
king and minister will be destroyed. In the said
country, its towns and villages, there will be strife,
and fear from inimical kings, with Rahu joining
Saturn in 2nd, 8th, Ist, 4th or 10th. Army will be
destroyed and enmity with army chief will occur.
षष्ठाधिपदशाकाले स्वभुक्तौ LTT 302 I
ममश्चापल्यमाप्नोति पुत्रपीडा भविष्यति |
देहायासं मनस्तापं कलहेन विचारवान् ॥३७२५ ॥
HUTA फलं ब्रूयादल्पलाभं विनिर्दिशेत्
लग्नाधियोगराशिस्थे शनौ कर्मश संयुते ॥३७२६ ॥
राजयोगफलप्राप्तिगहि लक्ष्मीकटाक्षवान् |
AAA मन्दो दशाकाले फलप्रदः ॥३७२७ ॥
राजवंशे तु राज्याप्तिरितरश्चेच्छु भान्वितः।
षष्ठाधिपदशाकाले स्वभुक्तौ चोत्तरायणे ॥३८२८ ॥
धनधान्यसमृद्धिश्च शुभशोभनसं TA: |
उत्कृष्ट धर्मसिद्धिश्च विश्वांशे प्रनलो शनिः॥२३७२९ ॥
अग्निष्टोमफलप्राप्तिः पुत्रस्य फलमादिशेत् |
HTT विशेषेण स्वपुत्रश्शुभशोभनम् ॥३७२० Il
लक्ष्मीकटाक्षमाप्नोति जातकस्य फलं वदेत् |
पश्चिमां दिशमाश्रित्य बन्धुमूलाच्छुभाधिकम् ॥३७३१॥
वाहनाम्बर yaa पुत्रस्तु श्रियमश्नुते |
विश्वांशे वृश्चिके लग्ने पापी मन्दोऽपि सौख्यकृत्।
स्वभुक्तौ श्रियमाप्नोति गृहे कल्याणसंभरमम् 13032 ॥
विश्वांशयोगे रविजस्य दाये स्वभुक्तिकाले शुभशोभनाप्तिम्।
राजप्रसादेन Yaa मिष्टार्थसिद्धि मुनयो वदन्ति ॥३७३३ ॥
3724. - 3733. (a) One will be mentally distressed and will incur evils to progeny during the
Sun’s southerly course, in the sub period of Mars,
and the dasa of 6th lord (Mars). He will also fall
sick and be troubled by s ne His gains will be
reduced with adverse Sun’s transits.
(b) Saturn occupying the sign causing Lagnadhi
Yoga, in the company of the 10th lord, will cause
a Raja Yoga and abundant prosperity.
(c) Saturn dasa will give good results if Saturn
is aspected by the lord of the ascendant (Mars).
With this, one born in royal family will acquire a

130 Deva Keralam
kingdom. Others will beget auspicious effects.
(d) With the Sun’s northerly course in the dasa
and sub period of Mars, the 6th lord, one will have
plenty of wealth, and grains and will be busy with
auspicious functions. He will obtain excellent
moral wisdom, will perform Agnishtoma sacrifice
and experience good effects for his son. There is
another authority to stress specially auspicious
effects for the native’s son. The subject will obtain
abundant wealth, and also much auspicious effects
through his kinsfolk from the western direction.
His son will gain wealth, conveyances, robes and
ornaments.
(e) Although Saturn is a malefic for Scorpio
ascendant, he will give happiness (in his dasa). In
his sub period, wealth and auspicious functions
will result. Due to the mercy of the king, he will
gain quality robes and his desires will be fulfilled.
नीचराशिगते मन्दे निधनाधिपसंयुते |
देहजाड्यं च लभते क्रूरमासे रुजाधिकम् Bway ॥
स्वजनाप्तजनक्लेशं भृत्यवर्गे मनोव्यथाम् |
बन्धुक्लेशफलप्राप्िर्ुधसूर्यान्तरान्तरे ॥३७३५ ॥
3734 - 3735. When the 8th lord Mercury joins
Saturn in Aries (both in transit) one will fall sick.
His illness will increase with the adverse Sun’s
transits. His kinsfolk will be in grief and his work-
. force be distressed. The sub periods of Mercury
and the Sun will cause grief to kinsfolk.
त्रिषष्ठनाथो कुरुतोऽशुभं च
मन्दांशयोगे तु महत् सुखं च।
हेमाम्बरं स्वर्णसुभूषणापि
पुत्रादिलाभं बहुभाग्ययुक्तम् 13936 ॥
3736, The lords of 3rd and 6th are evil. Great ।
happiness will prevail because of the conjunction
with Saturn’s degree (or Navamsa). Golden ornaments and robes will be obtained apart from progeny and abundant prosperity.
Notes: “Mandamsa Yoge” is notexplicit enough
‘to obtain a clear meaning. For Scorpio, 3rd lord
Saturn and 6th lord Mars are discussed here.
शनिभुक्तौ पाण्ड्यदेशे हताश्वो सेनिकेश्वरः।
शूद्रः प्राबल्यमाप्नोति राजपुत्रस्य विग्रहः ॥३७३७ ॥
चोलपाण्ड्य पुराधीशावन्योन्यद्रेषमश्रितौ ।
समयुद्धं भवेत्तत्र सेैन्यनाशश्च जायते ॥३७३८ ॥
वृषभांश गते मन्दे गोचरे मिथुने स्थिते |
सेतुप्रान्ते विशेषः स्यात्तद्राज्याधिपतेर्विपत् ॥३७३९ ॥
उत्तरां दिशमाश्रित्य कलहः समुपैष्यति |
परचक्रं भवेत्तत्र शनिभुक्तौ न संशयः॥३७४० Il
पर्वाश्रितस्य शूद्रस्य प्राबल्यं शनिभुक्तिषु |
पाण्ड्यदेशे फलप्राप्तिरमात्यजन FST ॥३७४१ ॥
यद्भावस्याष्टमे मन्दे यद् भावस्याष्टमेक्षिते |
तदभावः क्लेशमाप्नोति व्याधिना नाशमेव वा ॥३७४२ ॥
द्राविडान्धप्रदेशेषु राज्ञामन्योन्यविग्रहः।
कर्णाटककोङ्कणे देशे त्वमात्यजनविग्रहः॥२७४३ ॥
3737 - 3743. Irrelevant: In Saturn’s sub period, the army chief of the Pandya kingdom will be
destroyed. Soodras will grow in strength. The
kings of Chola and Pandya will be destroyed and
army will be destroyed in the war. When Saturn
moves in Taurus and Gemini, the king of Setu will
be destroyed. Quarrels will occur in the northern
direction. Soodras will grow in strength. Ministers
will fight in the Pandya region. From a Bhava,
Saturn’s aspect to or position in the 8th thereof will
destroy that bhava. The kings of Dravida and
Andhra will turn mutually inimical. The ministers
of Karnataka and Konkana will have enmity.
सुखस्थानाधिपो मन्दो स्वभुक्तौ tenga |
RAM परित्यज्य देहारोग्यं धनागमम् ॥३७४४ ॥
RAM मनस्तापं देहायासं धनव्ययम्।
राजामात्यविरोधेन क्लेशं बन्धुविनाशनम् ॥२३७४५ ॥
पशुधान्यव्ययं चैव विप्लवेन मनोव्यथाम् |
पत्रदारादिपीडां च दुरमिमित्तं वदेत्तदा ॥३७४६ ॥
स्वप्रभोश्च मनस्तापं तदद्रारस्थजनावधि |
राजकार्यविरोधेन धनधनायमुदीरयेत् ॥३७४७ ॥
3744 - 3747. Saturn as the lord of the 4th will
in his sub period cause physical sickness. Health
and wealth will accrue when the Sun is not in
adverse transits. But with the Sun’s bad transits,
mental distress and loss of relatives, of quadrupeds
and of grains will come to pass. His spouse and
progeny will be subjected to evils. The king and his
men will be distressed. The native will undertake
royal deeds (“Rajakarya prakurvanti” is another

Chandra Kala Nadi 131
reading, which is right). He will gain wealth and
com.
-चन्द्रलग्नाधिपे मन्दे दशायां च स्वभुक्तिषु |
लग्नात् सुखेश्वरो यस्य HAT संशयः॥२७४८ ॥
सुखाधिपदशाकाले पापभुवितिर्यदा भवेत् |
पित्ररिष्टं विजानीयाममित्रप्रभुविनाश नम् ॥३७४९ ॥
हुद्रोगादिमनस्तापं क्षेत्रो धान्यनाशनम् |
चन्द्र लग्नेशदोषेण फलानि परिचिन्तयेत् ॥३७५० ॥
3748 - 3750. Saturn, who is the 4th lord, will
cause death in his sub period (in his own dasa) if he
becomes the lord of the Moon sign. The relevant
sub period can also be of another malefic. Danger
to father and toa friendly king willalso follow. The
native will incur cardiac diseases, distress and loss
of lands, quadrupeds and grains. These evil results
are due to Saturn’s acquisition of Moon sign lordship.
पूर्वाषाढे च शन्यंशे विश्वांशे जायते नरः।
मन्ददाये मन्दभुक्तौ पितृभाग्यं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥३७५१ ॥
अगनिषटोमादिसत्कर्म गृहे कल्याणसंभ्रमम् |
पत्रश्च फलमाप्नोति जातकस्तु महत् सुखम् ॥३७५२ ॥
ज्येष्ठभ्रातृ सुतादीनां सन्तानोत्पत्तिसं भ्रमः।
धनधान्याभिवृद्धिः स्याद्गृहे लक्षमीकटाक्षवान् ॥३७५३ ॥
शनिभुक्तौ तुलाजीवे मध्यखण्डे धनागमम् |
पत्रप्ाबल्यमाप्नोति पितृसौख्यं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥३७५४॥
शनौ पश्चिमदिग्भागे स्वभुक्तौ फलप्रदः।
राजपुत्रपरसादेन लभते भूरिशो धनम् ॥२७५५ ॥
3751 - 3755. (a) Father: In case of birth in
Scorpio ascendant, Capricorn Navamsa, with the
Moon in Poorvashadha Nakshatra, the native’s
father will attain fortunes in Saturn’s sub period (of
Saturn dasa). He will perform Agnishtoma sacrifice. There will be a family marriage. The native
will be very happy. His father’s elder brother’s son
will obtain progeny and increased wealth and
grains. Mercy of goddess lucre will prevail in the
native’s family.
(b) During the middle part of Saturn’s sub
period, Jupiter transiting in Libra will give wealth.
One’s son will obtain prosperity and his father will
be happy. Good effects will emanate for the native
from western direction. He will make much wealth
through royal favours.
सुताधिपदशाकाले स्वभुक्तो सप्तमे शनौ ।
गोचरे फलमाप्नोति गजान्तैश्वर्य संयुतम् ॥३७५६ ॥
3756. During the dasa of the Sth lord (i.e. in
Jupiter’s dasa), note the sub period of Saturn in
currency. Asa coincidence, if Saturn moves in the
7th (Taurus), he will be capable of giving (good)
effects in the form of huge wealth.
Notes: Some may like to interpret the term
“Swabhukti” as the sub period of the dasa lord,
Jupiter. But in my opinion it refers to Saturn’s sub
period.
नीचराशिगते मन्दे तदीशे चनद्रकन्द्रगे |
नीचभङ्गफले प्रापि दशायां योगमाप्नुयात् ॥२७५५७ ॥
शनिभुक्तो चोत्तरार्धे गजान्तैश्वर्य भाग्यवान् |
महाराजप्रसादेन स भूरिश्रियमश्नुते ॥३७५८ ॥
विचित्रवस्राभरणार्थलाभं
राजप्रसादेन च भाग्यलाभम्।
विश्वांशयोगे त्वचरोद् भवस्तु
भाग्यं लभेत् स्पष्टदशाफलं च ॥३७५९ ॥
3757 - 3759. If at birth Saturn is in his debilitation Navamsa, while his (Navamsa) dispositor
(i.e. Mars) is in an angle from the Moon, itamounts
to neecha Bhanga. As a result, Saturn’s dasa will
grant prosperity. The 2nd half of Saturn’s sub
period will give huge wealth, superior clothes,
Ornaments and fortunes through the mercy of a
greatking. These apply to birth in Visva Nadiamsa
of an immovable ascendant.
Notes: Here the author resorts to identifying a
cancellation of debility occurring in Navamsa.
This is an important clue and worth putting to
practical use in a general context.
The angular position of Mars (or the planet
concerned) is better noted only in the Rasi chart.
जीवे सप्तमपर्याये कन्यादित्रयमासगे |
भाग्यकाल इति प्रोक्तो विश्वांशे जनितस्य च ॥२३७६० Il
उत्कृष्टधर्मसिद्धिः स्यात् पुत्रस्य YAMA |
अतीव श्रियमाप्नोति गुरुभुक्तिवशात् फलम् ॥२७६१ ॥
जीवास्तमनमासे च क्रूरमासे च वा यदि।
शनिभुक्तौ विचारं च देहायासं क्वचित् क्वचित् ॥३७६२ ॥
चतुष्पष्टिसमान्त्या दौ राजामात्यप्रसादवान् |

132 Deva Keralam
कर्मसिद्धिमवाप्नोति पुत्रस्य फलमादिशेत् ॥३७६३ ॥
वसन्तकाले रविजस्य भुक्तौ
विश्वांशयोगे शुभकर्म सिद्धिम् ।
म्लेच्छदिसेवाफलमाकरोति
तुलागुरौ भाग्य विभूषणाप्तिम् ॥२७६४ ॥
3760 - 3764. (a) Jupiter’s Sub-period: When
Jupiter is in his seventh round of transit; the Suns’
movements in the three signs commencing from
Virgo will be a period of fortunes. The native will
attain excellent moral merits. Auspicious effects
concerning his son will take place. Much wealth
will prevail in his family. These are during the
operation of Jupiter’s sub period (in the dasa of
Jupiter).
(b) Saturn’s Sub-period: When the planet
Jupiter attains combustion, or with adverse solar
transits, the sub period in question will cause a
change of place and some physical illness. in the
64th year, one will gain the mercy of the king and
minister. His son will perform final rites. In the
spring season, the native will perform auspicious
deeds and will serve a Mlechcha king. With
Jupiter’ s transit in Libra, he will enjoy fortunes and
ormmaments.
कुम्भे राहुस्थिते काले मीनादित्रयमासगे |
राजसन्मानसन्तोषं विद्यागोष्ठीप्रसङ्तः॥३७६५ ॥
पञ्चषष्टितमे वर्षे कारकांशे शुभाशुभम्।
पूर्वाश्रितप्रभुप्ीत्या पश्चिमे फलमादिशेत् ॥३७६६ ॥
श्वेतवर्णस्वभुषादिलाभो भवति नित्यशः।
स्वपुत्रस्य सुवाहाप्ति Stated शुभशोभनम् ॥३७६७ ॥
मीनशुक्रवशाच्चैव त्विदं फलमुदाहतम्।
कुम्भे राहुस्थिते काले तच्िकोणे शनिस्थिते ॥३७६८ ॥
स्वमित्रनृपतिक्लेशं तदद्रारस्थजनावधि |
पाण्डयदेशे विशेषं च देशाधिपतिविग्रहम् ॥३७६९ ॥
अमात्यजनसन्तापं शूद्रः प्राबल्यमश्नुते |
युग्मे शनिस्थिते काले कीट लग्नसमुद् भवः॥३७७० ॥
देहायासं च लभते वातपैत्यरुगुद् भवम् |
HAST गृहच्छिद्रमादायाधिकव्ययम् ॥३७७१ ॥
देहकारश्य च लभते दारपुत्रप्रपीडितः।
लोके धान्यक्षयेणेव प्रजाक्षोभं शुभाशुभम् ॥३७७२ ॥
3765 - 3772. (a) Rahu’s Transit: Rahu journeying in Aquarius while the Sun is in transit in the
3 signs from Pisces will bring forth royal honours,
happiness, learning and association with men of
letters. Good and bad effects will come to pass in
the 65th year. Good effects will be through the
earlier known ruler in the western direction. He
will ever gain ornaments etc. His son will obtain
conveyances and will enjoy auspicious effects.
(b) Venus in Pisces: With Venus in transit in
Pisces (as Rahu is in Aquarius), the native will
continue to gain golden ornaments. His son will
beget an excellent conveyance, happiness through
spouse and auspicious events. :
(c) Irrelevant: Should transit Saturn be in a
trine to transit Rahu in Aquarius, aking friendly to
the native will be in trouble. Men in royal circles
will be in grief. Ministers will be in grief. Soodras
will prosper.
(9) Saturn in Gemini: With Saturn’ s transit in
Gemini (while Rahu’s transit isin Aquarius), the
following effects will occur for one born in Scorpio
ascendant. He will suffer from physical diseases
caused by imbalances of wind and bile. He will hate
food and incur family strife. His expenditure will
cross his income limits. He will be bodily emaciated. His spouse and progeny will be subjected to
evils.
(e) Irrelevant: Grains in the country will perish; people will be in grief. Good and bad effects
will come to pass.
विश्वांशे वृश्चिके लग्ने पूर्वभाग समुद् भवः।
मन्दपाके मन्दभुक्तावपमृत्यर्भविष्यति ॥३७७३ ॥
माताब्दे च महत् क्लेशं पित्ताधिक्यवशाद्रुजम् |
महादेवप्रादेन देहारोग्यं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥३७७४ ॥
3773 - 3774. Death: The native of former half
of Visva Nadiamsa, Scorpio ascendant, will face
fear of untimely death in the dasa and sub period of
Saturn. In his 25th year, he will be greatly anguished and will incur diseases of bilious excesses.
Due to the kindness of Lord Siva, he will recover
his health.
नैधनेशदशासन्धौ पुत्रश्च सुखमश्नुते |
सन्तानोत्पत्तिसन्तापं खेदमोदं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥२७७५ ॥
3775. In the 7th dasa, his son will receive

Chandra Kala Nadi 133
happiness. He will be distressed on accountof birth
of a son and will experience happiness as well as
grief.
विश्वांशे वृश्चिके लग्ने मन्दे बुधसमन्विते |
आपत्संन्यासवांश्चैव षष्ठाधिपदशासु च ॥३७७६ ॥
षष्ठाधिपदशाकाले विश्वां शे जनितस्तथा |
आपत्संन्यासमाप्नोति बुधभुक्तो न संशयः॥२७७७ ॥
3776 - 3777. For a native of Scorpio ascendant
in Visva Nadiamsa, the conjunction of Saturn and
Mercury at birth will cause ascetic order following
a family calamity in the dasa of the 6th lord (Mars).
This will be in Mercury’s sub period in the dasa of
the 6th lord.
यवन 7
शनिभुकत्यन्त्यमारध्य मन्दे सौम्यान्तरान्तर |
आश्रमान्तरमाश्रित्य नदीप्रान्ते मृतिं लभेत् ॥३७७८ Il
3778. According to Yavana, in the sub periods
of Saturn and Mercury, in the dasa of Saturn, one
will live in a hermitage. He will die in the region
of a river.
ग्रन्थान्ते
विश्वांशे वृश्चिके लगने हयत्तरांशसमुद् भवः।
शंभुपर्वतमासाद्य गुहायां निवसिष्यति ॥३७७९ ॥
पञ्चषष्टिसमे मृत्युरुत्तरायणगे रवौ ।
नक्रे सूरये स्थिते काले कृष्णपक्षे मृतिं वदेत् ॥२७८० ॥
3779 - 3780. There is another authority to state
that one born in the 2nd half of Visva Nadiamsa,
Scorpio ascendant, will live in a cave in the region
of Sambhu Hills. He will quit the world in his 65th
year with the Sun’s northerly sojourn, in the sign
Capricorm, in dark lunar half.
निधनाधिपसंयुक्ते भद्रायां च तिथौ तथा।
विश्वांशे चोत्तरे भागे स्थिरलग्ने दिवं गतः॥३७८१ ॥ _ ,
3781. The death of the native of 2nd half of
Visva Nadiamsa in an immovable ascendant will
occur on a Bhadra Thithi.
Notes: “Nidhanadhipa Samyukte” means “joining the 8th lord”. It is not clear who should join
Mercury. Perhaps, the Sun in transit in Capricorn
will be with Mercury. From this sloka, we have to
take only the Thithi and Mercury joining the Sun,
and then read with dark lunar half & C, vide the
above two slokas.
पूर्वभागे प्रजातस्य संन्यासश्च न विद्यते |
षष्ठाधिपदशामृत्युं निधनाधिपभुक्तिषु ॥३७८२ ॥
द्विपञ्चाशात् परं वापि पञ्चपञ्चाशवत्सरे |
अथवा सप्तपञ्चाशे शुक्लपक्षे मृतिं वदेत् ॥३७८३ ॥
3782 - 3783. One born in the 1st half of the
subject Nadiamsa will not take to ascetic order. In
the sub period of the 8th lord (Mercury) and in the
dasa of the 6th lord (Mars), his death will come to
pass, in the 52nd year or in the 55th year, or in the
57th year, in a bright lunar half.
व्ययेशे स्वोच्चराशिस्थे विश्वांशे ब्रह्मलोक्रवान् |
कैवल्यं लभते चैव पूर्वभागे न विद्यते ॥३७८४ ॥
3784. Should the lord of the 12th (Venus) be in
his exaltation sign, the native of Visva Nadiamsa
will attain Brahma Loka and freedom from transmigration for his soul. But this will not happen in
case of the Ist half of the said Nadiamsa.
विपत्ताराधिपे जीवे त्वैन्दवांशसमुद भवः।
तृतीयांशे मनस्तापं सञ्चितद्रविणव्ययम् ॥३७८५ ॥
चन्रभुक्तौ देहजाड्यमग्निमान्द्मरोचकम्।
सदा व्याकुलकार्य च राजन्यद्वेषमादिशेत् ॥३७८६ ॥
राज्येऽपि स्वात्माश्रित भूपतेश्च
तत् द्वारिमुख्यप्रबलैश्च हानिम् |
कुजान्तरे क्लेशफलं तथेव
हयमात्ययोगार्थविनाशमाहुः ॥३७८७ ॥
चन्द्रान्तरान्त्यादि विपदशायां
कुजान्तरे बन्धुविरोधमेव |
स्वराजसौख्यं मुनयो वदन्ति
स्वप्रामकार्यर्थकलापनं च ॥३७८८ ॥
यवनप्रभुमूलेन कुजभुक्तो धनव्ययम्।
म्रामलाभमवापोति ह्यल्यपसौख्यं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥३७८९ ॥
3785 - 3789, Libra Ascendant: (a) Foranative
of Indava Nadiamsa, Libra ascendant, the last one
third part of Jupiter’s dasa, which is the 3rd from
birth (i.e. for one born in Rahu dasa), mental
anguish and loss of accumulated wealth will come
to pass. ;
(b) In the sub period of the Moon (in Jupiter’s
dasa), he will incur illness, troubles of indigestion
and loss of appetite. He will be ever in distress in
respect of his undertakings and will incur the wrath.
of the ruler. The king and chief men in his circles

134 Deva Keralam
will be harmed(?).
(c) The sub period of Mars will cause anguish
apart from destruction of wealth and friendship in
ministerial circles.
(d) The beginning and end parts of the Moon’s
sub period, and the sub period of Mars, in the 3rd
dasa (of Jupiter), one will have enmity with kinsfolk. His ruler will receive happiness(?) and the
native will face impediments in the undertakings
related to his village. He will spend his money on
account ofa Yavanaking, and will gain villages but
less happiness.
Notes: Slokas from 3785 to 3789 occur under
“Scorpio ascendant - Visva Nadiamsa” in the original. But these belong to Libra ascendant, Indava
Nadiamsa, as the following ones.
All of asudden discussion on Jupiter’s dasa, the
3rd from birth, suggests missing of a number of
introductory slokas, which introduction is other-
‘wise characteristic of Nadi literature.
तुलालम्ने Year:
नीचरारिगते भौमे तुलालग्नोद्भवस्य च।
fared धनच्छेदः कुजभुक्तौ न संशयः ॥३७९० ॥
स्वप्रभोश्च स्वभार्यायां सन्तानोत्पत्तिनाशनम् |
कुजभुक्त्यन्तमारभ्य राहुभुक्ताविदं फलम् ॥३७९१ ॥
कुजभुक्तौ क्रूरमासे द्यादायादधिकव्ययम्।
प्रामकार्यकलपेन सदा व्याकुलमादिशेत् ॥३७९२ ॥
अनावृष्टिहते देशे लोके दुर्भिक्षजं भयम् |
चन्दरभुक्त्यन्तमारभ्य कुजभुक्तो फलं वदेत् ॥३७९३ ॥
राजद्वारे Wet कुजभुक्तौ पशुक्षयम् |
देशान्तरे प्रामलाभं क्रयमूलात् फलं वदेत् ॥२७९४ ॥
जीवे भोमान्तरे काले राजद्वारे कलापनम्।
राजन्यद्विजमूलेन यलरकार्यार्थ नाशनम् ॥३७९५ ॥
देवतादर्शनं यात्रां कुटुम्बसहितस्तथा |
ज्ञानसिद्धिमवाप्नोति धर्ममूलाद्धनव्ययम् ॥२७९६ ॥
द्विजहोमान्तमारभ्य क्रत्वन्ते धर्मसिद्धिमान् |
कुजभुक्तो शुभं किंचिच्छुभमासे धनागमम् ॥२७९७ ॥
पर्वग्रामविनाशश्च जीवे चन्दरान्तरान्तरे |
इतरग्रामलाभादि कुजभुक्तौ विशेषतः॥२७६८ ॥
शन्तिकांशे विपदाये द्ूनाधिपतिभुक्ततिषु |
खेदमोदं च लभते PETA विना शुभम् ॥३७९९ ॥
मित्राप्तजनसन्तापमादायादधिकव्ययम् |
गृहच्छिद्रकलापेन प्रवासं चापि निर्दिशेत् ॥३८०० ॥
कुजान्तरान्तमारभ्य राहुभुक्तौ महाविपत् |
नानाव्याकुलकार्याणि चेन्दवांशसमुद् भवः॥३८०१ ॥
स्वप्रभोश्च सुतक्लेशं चतुष्पाज्जीवनाशनम् |
अमात्यजनपीडां च त्रयसिशतिवत्सरे ॥३८०२ ॥
यवनप्रभुसन्मानं स्वप्रभोश्च धनागमम् |
गजाश्वाम्बरभूषापिं HART फलं वदेत् ॥३८०३ ॥
3790 - 3803. Libra Ascendant - Indava Nadiamsa: (a) His wealth will decline in the sub period
of Mars during the 3rd dasa (i.e. Jupiter’s dasa) if
Mars is in debilitation.
(b) Irrelevant: The king’s spouse will lose her
children in the process of their births.
(c) Loss of wealth for the native will occur in
the beginning and concluding parts of the sub
period of Mars, and also in the sub period of Rahu
(That is Mars and Rahu sub periods will cause
financial loss in 3rd dasa.) In the months denoted
‘by adverse solar transits during the sub period of
Mars, one’s expenditure will exceed his income
He will be continually distressed due to the routines
of the village (i.e. professional tension)
(d) Irrelevant: Lack of rains will usher a
famine throughout the country. The sub periods of
the Moon and Mars are being described.
(e) In the sub period of Mars, the native will
incur enmity with the people in royal circles. His
quadrupeds will perish. He will gain villages in a
different kingdom and will incur benefits through
purchasing activities. His undertakings will be
destroyed due to Brahmins in royal circles. He will
visit temples, will go on pilgrimages along with his
family members and will attain Wisdom. His
money will be spent on charities and activities of
Vedic Sacrifices. The sub period of Mars will
(thus) prove auspicious. It will give wealth when
the Sun has favourable transits.
(f) In the sub period of the Moon, in Jupiter’s
dasa, the villages headed by him earlier will be
destroyed (i.e. loss of authority). In the sub period
. of Mars, he will gain alternative villages. The
subject will experience sadness as well as happiness. Auspiciousness will come to pass except

Chandra Kala Nadi 135
when the Sun moves in adverse signs. He will see
his friends and relatives in anguish while his expenditure will be beyond his resources of income.
Family strife and living in a different place will
take place.
(g) The sub period of Rahu will involve him in
a great danger and he will face much anguish in his
undertakings. His king will be grieved on account
of loss of ason(?) The native’s quadrupeds will be
destroyed and he will incur troubles through
ministers in his 33rd year. He will be honoured by
a Yavana king and will gain horses, elephants,
clothes and ornaments in the sub period of Mars.
Notes: (f) The term “Santikamsa” is wrong and
‘is in place of “Indava Nadiamsa”.
षष्ठधिपदशाकाले धनाधिपतिभुकतिषु |
दर्व्याज्यमामकार्येण हर्थनाशं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥३८०४ ॥
3804. In the dasa of the 6th lord (Jupiter) and in
the sub period of the 2nd lord (Mars), one will lose
his wealth in relation to village’s undertakings. His
expenditure will exceed his income due to his
efforts to fulfil royal transactions.
Notes: In a nutshell, this verse suggests loss of
money and facing obstacles in work in the sub
period of Mars, in the dasa of Jupiter by a Libra
native.
जीव धौमान्ते काले क्रयमूलाश्चलाभवान्।
गजव्यापारयलेन ह्यादायादधिकव्ययम् ॥३८०५ ॥
जन्मे शनिस्थिते काले नानाव्याकुलसं भवम् |
HoT फलं सत्यं राहुभुक्तौ विशेषतः॥३८०६ ॥
3805 - 3806. Saturn coming in transit on the
Moon sign will cause various kinds of anguish in
the sub periods of Mars and Rahu. In the sub period
of the Moon in Jupiter dasa, commerce will decline. Mars sub period will promote famine to the
grief of all people.
Notes: “Janma Sani” generally means transit
Saturn on the natal Moon sign. Transit of Saturn
can also be applied to the ascendant and related
houses but with a different yardstick.
The present instruction can be applied in general and not to Libra ascendant only. When Saturn’s evil transit occurs, bad sub periods in currency will only promote the evils, and good sub
periods will fail to deliver good results inexpected
measure.
लोके त्वर्षक्षयादीनि जीवे चन्दरान्तरान्तरे |
कुजभुक्तौ बहुक्षामं दुःखिताः सर्वजन्तवः ॥३८०७ ॥
गोचरे मिथुनान्त्यादौ कुलीरे रविनन्दने |
चोलदेशे ae स्यात्तद्राज्याधिपतेर्विपत् ॥३८०९ ॥
ज्ञातिशदुकलपिन चोलराज्यविनाशनम् |
TRH फलं सिद्धमोत्तरं कलहं वदेत् ॥३८१० Il
3807 - 3810. When Saturn moves in the end of
Gemini, prices of commodities will go up. Healthy
conditions will prevail in the north. People of the
Chola region will be tormented. Loss of grains will
occur. Saturn’s movements in the beginning and
ending of Gemini, and in Cancer, will promote
evils to Chola region’s populace and endanger its
king who will be destroyed due to quarrels with his
kinsfolk. In Rahu’s sub period, the northern part of ,
the country will be involved in quarrels.
लग्नाद्वि्तगते राहौ भुक्तिकाले धनक्षयम् |
राज्यनिष्ठुरकार्याणि राजन्यजनहेतुना ॥३८११ ॥
3811. Should Rahu be in the 2nd (in Scorpio),
his sub period will cause loss of wealth through the
king and royal displeasure.
कुजान्तरान्तमारभ्य स्वयजन्यजनामयम् |
राहुभुक्तावरिष्टं च शत्रुनाशं विनिर्दिशेत् nace? ॥
3812. The sub period of Mars will cause diseases to king’s people. Rahu’s sub period will
usher evils and will destroy enemies.
विपदाये राहुभुक्तौ क्लेशं च मासविशतौ |
गोचरे नवमे राहावेन्दवांशे शुभाशुभम् ॥३८१३ ॥
प्रभुवर्गप्यरिष्टं च स्ववंशङ्गाति नाशनम् |
त्रयस्िशान्त्यमारभ्य चतुखिशतिवत्सरे ॥३८१४ ॥
मन्देन संयुते राहावष्टमे मनसि व्यथा |
कलहेन विचारं च म्रामान्तरविनाशनम् ॥३८१५ ॥
दारसौख्यविहीनः स्याद्राहौ THR तथा |
स्थानच्युतिमवाप्नोति तुलालग्न समुद्भवः॥३८१६॥
3813 - 3816. (a) In the 3rd dasa (of Jupiter) and
in Rahu’s sub period, one will be anguished for a
period of twenty months.
(b) For a native of Indava Nadiamsa, Rahu’s
transit in the 9th will be auspicious as well as

136 Deva Keralam
inauspicious. Evils in royal circles, and destruction
of one’s own kinsfolk will surface during the 33rd
and 34th years.
(c) Rahu and Saturn joining in the 8th in transit
will produce distress in one’s mind. He will have
a change of place due to conditions of strife. He
will live in another village and will not enjoy
happiness from his spouse. These will be applicable to the sub periods of the Moon as well as Rahu
(in the dasa of Jupiter). Further, he will lose his
position.
Notes: (c) “Gramantara Vinasanam” should
read as “Gramantara Nivasam” meaning that one
will live in another village or place.
नीचांशे मिथुने चन्द्रे विपद्ायान्तरान्तरे |
राहु भुक्तौ महत् क्लेशं स्वप्रभोश्च विशेषतः ॥३८१७ ॥
अंशाष्टमे जन्मशनेश्च दोषात्
कुजान्तरान्त्यादिमनोविकारम् ।
WAT वासमिति ब्रुवन्ति
स्वर्भानुभुक्तौ स्वजनाप्त वेधाम् ॥३८१८ ॥
पाठान्तरम्-
शरीरे व्याधिमापोति मासानां विंशतेः परम् ।
राहुभुक्तौ महत् क्लेशं धन नाशं न संशयः॥३८१९ ॥
अतिवृष्टि मनावृष्टं प्रजापीडां विनिर्दिशेत् ।
देन्दवांशे तुलालग्ने वर्षमेकं मनोव्यथा ॥३८२० ॥
अतीव क्लेश कार्ये च राहुभुक्तौ भविष्यति,
कुजान्तरेऽरिष्टमेति नीचदोषवशाद्रयथाम् ॥३८२१ ॥
राहुभुक्तौ वर्षमेकं क्लेशं प्राप्नोति भूरिशः।
दोषपरिहारार्थं राहुप्रार्थनमादिशेत् ॥३८२२ ॥
स्वर्भानुकुजजीवार्किप्रार्थनेन लभेत् सुखम् |
पुराणोक्तप्रकारेण जपेन्मृत्युञ्जयं मनुम् ॥३८२३ ॥
वर्षमेकमिमां शानि प्रत्यहं शिवसन्निधौ |
जपेत् सहस्र मेकं तु सर्वोपद्रवशान्तये ॥३८२४॥
तिलाक्षतैः शमीपत्रर्मिल्वपत्रसहस्रकैः। ।
अर्चयेन्मूलमन््रेण देहायोण्यार्थसिद्धये ॥३८२५ ॥
eat तुलालग्ने चोत्तरांशसमुद् भवः।
विपद्दाये राहुभुक्तौ प्रार्थनेन शुभैर्युतः॥३८२६ ॥
तिलज्योतित्रयं दीप्तवा प्रत्यहं शिवसन्निधौ |
मृत्युञ्जयं जपेत् पूर्वं दीपाराधन संयुतम् ॥३८२७ ॥
अपमृत्युभयं नास्ति सर्वशत्रुविनाशनम् ।
यतलकार्यार्थसिद्धि च लभते वाञ्छितं फलम् acre ॥
विपद्दाये राहुभुक्तौ स्वगेहे प्रहयज्ञकम् |
शान्तिकर्म प्रकुर्वीत सर्वपापैः प्रमुच्यते ॥३८२९ ॥
तथा बाल्ये Fees मानार्थप्राणनाशनम् ।
स्वप्रभोश्च तथा विन्द्यादिमां शानि समाचरेत् ॥३८३० ॥
3817 - 3830. (a) Note if the Moon is in the sign
Gemini, with Scorpio Navamsa. In that case,
Rahu’s sub period in Jupiter’s dasa, will cause
much anguish, particularly through the king.
(b) The sub period of Mars will lead to mental
sickness if Saturn moving on the Moon sign begets
8th Navamsa. The. subject will live in another
village. In Rahu’s sub period, one’s kinsfolk will
confront obstacles.
(c) Jupiter Dasa - Rahu Bhukti: According to
another version, the sub period of Rahu will cause
physical diseases to the subject particularly after 20
months. Great anguish and destruction of wealth
will also occur. People will be subjected to evils on
account of heavy rains as well as drought(?) For
one year, the native will be mentally anguished and
will face much difficulties in his undertakings in
the sub period of Rahu.
(d) Should Mars be in debility at birth, his sub
period will lead to evils and anguish.
(e) Rahu’s sub period will cause anguish for
one year. Toremove this blemish, prayers to Rahu
are prescribed. By offering prayers to Rahu, Mars,
Jupiter and Saturn, happiness will be available.
Mrityunjaya Japa should be recited as ordered in
the Puranas (ancient literature). Remedies by way
of recitation of 1000 (rather 1008) names should be
resorted-to in a temple of Lord Siva for a period of
one year using sesamum seeds, Sami firewood and
Bilva leaves. Lord Siva should be worshipped with
the Mula Mantra. By doing so, all obstacles will be
removed and physical felicity will reappear.
(b) One born in the 2nd half of the subject
Nadiamsa will be endowed with auspicious effects
in the sub period of Rahu during the 3rd dasa with
the help of prayers. On a daily basis, three earthen
lamps using gingili oil should be lit in a Siva
temple. Mrityunjaya Japa should be recited and
offers with “Deeparadhana” (worshipping with
earthen lamps) should be made. These will elimi-

Chandra Kala Nadi 137
nate fear of untimely death, and destroy the entire
band of foes. Success in undertakings and fulfilment of desires will also occur. Suitable Vedic
sacrifices for Grahas (planets) should be got done
at one’s home during the sub period of Rahu in the
3rd dasa which will destroy all sins. During the
native’s childhood much grief, danger to honour
and life will exist. Necessary remedies be undertaken.
वरगत्तामांशे स्वर्भानो विपद्दाये शुभं वदेत् ।
राजामात्यप्रसादेन त्विष्टसिद्धिर्भविष्यति ॥३८३१ ॥
पूर्वभागे राजभयं पशुधान्यार्थनाशनम् |
राहुभुक्तौ फलं सत्यमुत्तरांशे पृथक् पृथक् ॥३८३२ ॥
3831 - 3832. (a) Should Rahu be in Vargottama
Navamsa, his sub period in the 3rd dasa is said to
be auspicious. One’s desires will be fulfilled due to
royal and ministerial favours. (These apply to 2nd
half of the subject Nadiamsa.)
(b) However, in case of birth in the 1st half of
Indava Nadiamsa, Libra ascendant, (even with the
Vargottama position of Rahu), one will incur fear
from the king and loss of quadrupeds, grains and
money.
The effects stated for Rahu’s sub period will be
atruth. These should be applied for 1st and 2nd
halves differently.
गहुभुक्तौ west ह्यराजकमिति स्मृतम्।
उत्तरां दिशमाश्रित्य कलहः समुपैष्यति ॥३८३३ ॥
मण्डलाधिपतिक्लेशं बहुसेनाश्वनाशनम् |
राहुणा संयुते जीवे तृतीयैकादशस्थिते ॥३८३४ ॥
देशभङ्गं प्रजक्षोभं नृपाणां समरं वदेत् |
राहुभुक्तौ पाण्ड्यदेशे त्वराजकमिति स्मृतम् ॥३८३५ ॥
3833 - 3835. Irrelevant: Anarchy will spread
in the Pandya region during Rahu’s sub period.
Strife will prevail in the north. The head of the
region will be anguished. A lot of horses and armymen will be destroyed. Jupiter and Rahu joining in
the 3rd or the 11th at birth will cause obstacles to
prosperity, difficulties to people and an invoivement in a war for the king. In Rahu’s sub period,
the Pandya kingdom will be in the grip of anarchy.
Notes: From the above factors, one particular
result applies to natal horoscopy. And that is in the
form of obstacles to prosperity of a Libra native
having Rahu and Jupiter in the 3rd (Sagittarius) or
41th (Leo). The following effects are in continuity
hereof.
भ्राता प्राबल्यमाप्नोति ब्राह्मणः प्रबलो भवेत्।
नूतनप्रभुसन्मानं राहुभक्तौ शुभाधिकम् ॥३८३६ ॥
अन्ते सन्तानमाप्नोति ear समुद् भवः।
भ्रातृदारगतो URSIN प्रपीडकृत् ॥३८३७ ॥
शुभशोभनकार्याणि स्यालकस्य न संशयः।
पितृष्वसुरदेहपीडा चतुर्विंशतिवत्सरे ॥३८३८ ॥
ज्ञतिप्राबल्यनाशं स्यादैन्दवांशोद भवस्य च।
मिथुनान्ते कुलीरादौ मन्दे वक्रातिचारणे ।
सेतुप्रान्ते कलापेन तद्राज्याधिपतेर्विपत् ॥३८३९ ॥
3836 - 3839. (a) His co-born will flourish. 90 `
also Brahmins(?) The native will receive royal
honours and (other) auspicious effects in Rahu’s
sub period. In the end he will obtain progeny.
(b) Rahu will cause evils in the in-laws’ family
if heis in the 7th from the 3rd, i.e. the 9th - (“Bhratru
Dara gathe”). His brother-in-law will incur obstacles in respect of auspicious functions.
(©) The native’s father’s sister will incur physical illness during his 24th year. The prosperity of
his kinsfolk will be destroyed.
(d) When Saturn reaches the end of Gemini, or
Cancer, in retrogression or accelerated motion, the
king of the Setu region will be endangered.
नीचांशे देवगुरौ च मूढे
दशावसाने समरोत्सुकाः स्युः।
स्वर्भानुभुक्तौ नृप चोरभीत्या
स्वेदशराज्याधिपतिश्च दुःखम् ॥३८९० ॥
तद्वारि प्रमुखानां च ह्यथवा भूमिपस्य तु ।
महारोगभयप्राप्तिः शान्त्या शानि प्रयास्यति ॥३८४१ ॥
3840 - 3841. (a) When the dasa of Jupiter is
about to end, if he attains his debilitation Navamsa
or gets combust in transit, one will be enthusiastic
of involvements in quarrels. If Jupiter joins Rahu,
one will have fear from the king and thieves.
(b) Irrelevant: The king will be grieved. He
or the principal members in his circles will ve
subjected to great diseases. For these evils, remedies be done.

138 Deva Keralam
धनस्थानं गते राहावन्तर्दयि धनव्ययम्।
तदीशे नीचराशिस्थ ऋणव्याज्यकलापनम् ॥३८४२ ॥
प्रामान्तरे वासमेति क्रूरमासे मनोव्यथाम् |
वित्तं गते यदा राहयमन्दांशे चपलोत्तमः॥३८४३ ॥
ABTS कार्येण धनव्यययुतो भवेत् |
जीवपाके मनस्तापं राहुभुक्तौ धनक्षयम् ॥३८४४ ॥
RAM परित्यज्य राहुभुक्तौ शुभं वदेत्।
चापे गुरुस्थिते काले Seater समुद् भवः॥२८४५ ॥
धनलाभं च लभते विप्रभराबल्यामादिशेत्।
चापारूढे तुलालग्ने Meare समुद् भवः॥३८४६ ॥
ane महत् सौख्यं राजयोगं लभेददृढम्।
्षेमभुक्तौ PUTS सञ्चितद्रविणव्ययम् ॥३८४७ ॥
किंचिदव्याकुलकार्याणि ज्वरपीडां विनिर्दिशत्।
पूर्वभागे प्रजातस्य क्षेमदाये स्वभुक््तिषु ॥३८४८ ॥
संचितार्थं विनाशं च स्थानाच्च च्युतिमादिशेत् |
चन्द्रलग्नाष्टमाधीशदशायां च स्वभुकित्तषु ॥३८४९ ॥
पितुर्वा पितृतुल्यस्य देहजाड्यं विनिर्दिशेत् |
पितृष्वसा Tae ह्यपमृत्युं च विन्दति ॥३८५० ॥
मातृशपेन पूर्वार्धे पुत्रोत्पत्तिविनाशनम्।
उत्तार सुतोत्पत्तितुला लग्नसमुदभवः॥२८५१ ॥
राजयोगं च लभते क्षेमदाये स्वभुक्तिषु |
OTS परित्यज्य चापजेनाश्रयं वदेत् ॥३८५२ ॥
उत्तरायणगे सूर्ये क्षेमदाये स्वभुक्ततिषु |
गजाश्वाम्बर yatta धान्यलाभं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥३८५३ ॥
युद्धसन्नाह कार्येण पश्चिमे भाग्यवान् भवेत्।
वृश्चिके वृषभे कुम्भे कुलीरे च दिवाकरे ॥३८५४ ॥
क्रूरमासमिति प्रोक्तमैन्दवां शोद् भवस्य च।
POA मेषकन्यातुला कीटेषु भास्करे ॥३८५५ ॥
्रूरमासमिति प्रोक्तं पूर्वं भागोद् भवस्य च।
3842 - 38551. (a) Rahu placed in the 2nd will
cause expenditure of money in his sub period.
(b) If in the process his dispositor (Mars) is in
debility (in Cancer) one will be involved in debts
and disputes. He will live ina different village 6.6.
have a change of place). Mental distress will be
produced by adverse solar transits.
(c) Rahu in the 2nd in a Navamsa of Saturn will
cause fickle-mindedness. Due to his own inwardly
cunning disposition, the native will incur expenditure of his wealth. Jupiter’s period will cause
mental distress while that of Rahu will destroy
wealth. Except in the months with adverse transits,
one will receive auspicious effects.
(d) Jupiter’s transit in Sagittarius will cause
economic gains. Brahmins will prosper.
(€) The 4th dasa will cause great happiness and
Raja Yoga effects of a firm nature. In the first sub
period, evil transits of the Sun will cause expenditure of wealth. Due to distressful undertakings, one
will incur fever. (These apply to birth in 2nd half of
the subject Nadiamsa.)
(f) One born in the first half of the subject
Nadiamsa will lose the wealth stocked by him and
will lose his position.
(g) In the dasa of the planet owning the 8th from
the Moon sign, and in its very first sub period, the
native’s father, or someone equal to father, will be
physically ill. In case of birth in the first half of the
subject Nadiamsa, this phase will cause fear of
untimely death to father’s sister.
(h) Under the very influences mentioned at “g”
above, the native of first half of will lose progeny ,
due to the curse of his mother while his counterpart
will obtain progeny and Raja Yoga effects (leading
to prosperity) except in the months denoted by
adverse solar movements. When the Sun is in his
northerly course, the said dasa and sub period will
help acquire elephants, horses, clothes, ornaments
and grains. He will gain prosperity in undertakings
related to war in the western direction.
(i) For a native of Indava Nadiamsa, the adverse months represented by the Sun’s transits are
in Scorpio, Taurus, Aquarius and Cancer. There is
another view to specify Aries, Virgo, Libra and.
Scorpio. These are for the Ist half of subject’
Nadiamsa.
Notes: (c) “Chapalottama” is not a proper
conjunction of meaningful words. “Chapala” is
fickle-minded while “Uttama” is excellent. The
later expression is excluded in the English version. `
(h) The good effects mentioned hereof applies
to the native of 2nd half of Indava Nadiamsa.
` सूर्याष्टवरगे यद्राशौ शून्यः संवत्सरोऽपिच ॥३८५६ ॥
शुभकर्माणि मासेऽस्मिन् वत्सरे परिवर्जयेत् |
PM देहजाड्यमथ वा ह्यर्थनाशनम् ॥३८५७ ॥

Chandra Kala Nadi
THE कलापः स्यादृणव्याज्यप्रसङ्गतः।
शुभमासे शुभाधिक्यं धनलाभं महत् सुखम् ॥३८५८ ॥
राजामात्य प्रसादं च हन्दवांशसमुदभवः।
ares सौम्यभुक्तौ .सित्यश्रीसौख्यमादिशेत् ॥३८५९ ॥
लग्नाद्माग्यं गते TR -भाग्याधिपसमम्विते |
धनलाभं च लभते हन्दवाशसमुद् भः।
मन्दस्यार्न्तगते सौम्ये विद्या गोष्ठ्या धनागमम् ॥३८६० ॥
पशुधान्यसमृद्धि च सन्तानप्राप्तिमादिशेत् |
लग्नाद् भाग्यं गते चन्दर भाग्यधिपुसमुन्विते ॥३८६१ ॥
teat भाग्यवृद्धि क्षेमदाये न संशयः।
्षेमभुक्त्यन्तमारभ्य बुधभुक्तो त्रिया युतः ॥३८६२ ॥
व्ययाधिपतिदोषेण पितृपीडा भविष्यति |
रूरमासं परित्यज्य 'हयन्दवांशे धनागमः ॥३८६३ ॥
राजयोगाभिवैद्धि च यावदायुष्यमाप्तुयात् |
इदमेव फलं At प्रत्यक्षं देवकेरलम् ॥३८६४॥
3856 - 3864. (a) The concerned month (denoted by Sun’s transit) and the year (Jupiter’s
transit) should be avoided where there are no
Bindus in the Sun’s Ashtaka Varga. Evil months
will cause illness, loss of money, misunderstandings in royal circles, debts and litigations. Increased auspiciousness will resultauspicious months
(i.e. Sun’s transits) apart from financial gains and
much happiness. Further, one will beget the mercy
of the king and the minister.
(b) The sub period of Mercury in the 4th dasa
will cause continuing wealth and happiness. If the
Moon joins Mercury in Gemini, one will gain
wealth (in Mercury’s sub period).
(c) Saturn’s dasa, Mercury’s sub period will
cause wealth through learning and assemblies. The
native will have increase of quadrupeds and grains.
He will beget children.
(d) Should the Moon be with Mercury in the 9th-
(Gemini), the 4th dasa will cause increase of prosperity. Particularly the sub periods of Saturn and
Mercury will give wealth. Since Mercury is the
lord of the 12th, this blemish will cause evils to
father. Except in evil months (i.e. with adverse
solar movements), the native will get wealth. His
prosperity will be on the increase throughout his
life (because of the Moon - Mercury conjunction in
the 9th in Gemini).
तुलालगने निशाकरदुर्भगांशः
einige चन्द्रे जीवे केन्धत्रिकोणगे |
सुखेशे पापसंयुक्ते ह्यन्यबीजप्रजातवान् ॥३८६५ ॥
परेण जनितो भोगी दुर्भगांशे निशाकरे |
पूर्वभागे भ्रातृहीनस्त्वेकाकी दुष्टकृत्यवान् ॥३८६६ ॥
उत्तरांशे भाग्यवृद्धिः पितरौ दीर्घजीविनो ।
राजप्रियः सुखीवाग्मी राजस प्रकृतिर्भवेत् ॥३८६७ ॥
ग्रन्थान्तरे
विचित्रांश दुर्भगांशे त्वेकमेव फलं वदेत्।
पाराशर्यफलं सत्यं प्रत्यक्षं देवकेरलम् ॥३८६८ ॥
कन्यांशे वृश्चिके जीवे बुधे स्वोच्चे aT |
विप्रकाले प्रजातस्तु गर्भश्रीमान् सुखी धनी aces ॥
वैश्यकाले वैश्यवृतिः क्षत्रियस्तु महीपतिः।
शूद्रकाले तथा विन्द्यात् dare तथेव च ॥३८७० ॥
3865 - 3870. Libra Ascendant - The Moon in
Durbhaga Nadiamsa: (a) One belonging to Libra
ascendant, while the Moon is in Durbhaga Nadiamsa as Jupiter is in a trine or an angle is to be
declared as having been born out of other’s loins.
The 4th lord should also be with a malefic to
complete the Yoga.
(b) The Moon in the Ist half of Durbhaga
Nadiamsa indicates that the native is an illegal off- ,
spring. He will enjoy pleasures, be devoid of coborn, only child of the family and will indulge in
wicked deeds.
(c) The Moon in the 2nd half of the said
Nadiamsa causes increase of prosperity. The native’s parents will be long-lived, dear to the king,
be happy, eloquent and passionate.
(d) For Vichitra Nadiamsa and Durbhaga Nadiamsa, identical effects are declared. Parasara’s
statements will bear truth as reflected in Deva
Keralam.
(d) Jupiter in Scorpio and Mercury in Virgo
with Virgo and Pisces Navamsas in order will make
one born in the Ist quarter of the said Nadiamsa
wealthy right from birth. A professional trader,
lord of the earth and one of mixed caste are
respectively born in the 3rd, 2nd and 4th quarters
hereof.
विश्वभरांशः
विश्वं भरांशगे जीवे रन्धरलाभत्रिकोणगे |

140 Deva Keralam
पश्चाद्भ्रतृविहीनः स्याद्भेदभ्रातृयुतो भवेत् ॥३८७१ ॥
विश्वं भरंशगे जीवे गोरवर्णः शुभाकृतिः।
श्यामवर्णशरीरश्च विद्याविष्नयुतः सुखी ॥३८७२ ॥
कीटे कन्यांशगे जीवे समगात्र प्रगल्भवाक् |
धार्मिकस्त्विद्गितज्ञश्च धैर्यवान् सत्यवाचकः ॥३८७३ ॥
लेख्यको विकटश्चैव सुस्वरो मतिमान् दृढी ।
राजसेवापरो नित्यं स्वपिता वृद्धिजीवकः ॥३८७४ ॥
पित्रे देवगुरौ quit सदातिकामी नृपसेवकश्च।
विश्वं भरांशे धनिकः प्रसिद्धः सापलिमातुः सुतवत्सलश्च ॥३८७५
राहौ विलग्ने रविवक्रयोगे
समीरपेत्यामयदेहभाकस्यात्।
कालान्तरे बन्धुजनेरषिरोधी ।
स्वमातृमुलादतिशोकभाक् स्यात् ॥३८७६ ॥
बाल्ये क्लेशं पित्ररिष्टं भेदभ्रातृवशात् सुखम् |
पश्चाद्विरोधमाप्नोति शूद्रमूलार्थनारनम् ॥३८७७ ॥
विश्वं भगंशगे जीवे लग्नेराहौ प्रजायते |
स्वमाता पापकृत्येन शूद्राचारयुता भवेत् ॥३८७८ It
ज्येष्ठभार्या सुतद्रेषि स्वपिता शुद्रमित्रवान् |
वाणिज्येन गृहं भूरि धनं संपादयिष्यति ॥३८७९ ॥
3871 - 3879. (a) Jupiter in Visvambhara Nadiamsa in 8th, 11th or 8 trine from the ascendant will
deprive one of after-born. He may perhaps have
step-coborn.
(b) Jupiter in Visvambhara Nadiamsa will make
one fair-complexioned and handsome in appearance. He will be black-bodied(?) and will face
obstacles in education.
(c) Jupiter in Scorpio with Virgo Navamsa will
give an even body and pride in speech. He will be
discerning in respect of virtues and fame, be bold
and truthful. He will be a writer, be dreadful in
appearance, garrulous, intelligent and firm. He
will be interested in serving the king. His father
will be an intellectual.
(d) Jupiter in Visvambhara Nadiamsa, and in a
friend’s sign will give the following effects. The
person will be ever libidinous, will serve the king,
be wealthy, and famous. He will have a stepmother and will be fond of his children.
(e) Rabu in the ascendant with the Sun and
Mars will cause a windy and bilious body. At one
time, the native will incur enmity with his kinsfolk.
He will incur a lot of grief on account of his mother.
During his childhood, he will be in distress, will
lose his father and will be happy through his stepbrother. Later on, he will have enmity with his halfbrother and will destroy his wealth through Soodras.
(f) Jupiter in Visvambhara Nadiamsa while
Rahu is in the ascendant denotes that the native’s
mother will indulge in sinful deeds and will have
such a conduct characteristic of people born in a
mixed caste. The native’s first wife will hate her
progeny. His father will befriend Soodras. The
family will earn a lot of money on account of
business activities.
Notes: No caption in the original is given as to
which ascendant the present nine verses relate.
These are for Libra ascendant. The ones from 3880
are for Aquarius ascendant.
(d) “Vadhamsa” in sloka 3875 seems to be a
misplaced word for some other unknown word.
erat अदुदाशः
amet पूर्वभागे कुंभलग्न समुद् भवः।
सापलीमातृसंजातज्येष्ठभ्रातयुतो भवेत् ॥३८८० ॥
विश्वंभरांशे लाभेशे त्वङ्गदाशोद भवस्य च।
भेदभ्राता सुदीर्घायुर्भगिनीद्रयसंयुतः॥३८८१ ॥
लग्ने राहौ प्रसन्ने च लाभेशे कर्मराशिगे ।
राहूपरकृतिमान् ज्येष्ठभ्राता च पापचेतनः ॥३८८२ ॥
भेदभ्रातृफलं सत्यं कामी विषयलोलुपः।
शुद्राचारप्रियो नित्यं सत्यवाचा विवर्जितः ॥३८८३ ॥
अपात्रव्ययवान् कामी हयुष्णग्रन्थिप्रपीडितः।
पितृवाक्यं तृणीकृत्य परवाक्यार्थतत्परः॥३८८४ ॥
दासीषु रमते नित्यं स्वदादद्रेषसंयुतः।
3880 - 388412. Aquarius Ascendant - Angada
Nadiamsa: (a) The native of former half of the
subject Nadiamsa will have a step-mother and an
elder brother.
(b) The 11th lord in Visvambhara Nadiamsa
denotes that the native will have a half-brother.
There will also be two long-living sisters.
(c) Rahu in the ascendant makes him a pleased
person.
(d) Elder Brother: The 11th lord in the 10th
(Scorpio) will give “Rahu’s nature” to his elder
brother. He will be sinful, libidinous, attached to

Chandra Kala Nadi 141
material pleasures, be fond of a conduct characteristic of Soodras, devoid of truthfulness and will
spend money on undeserving counts. He will
neglect his father’s words and will value others’.
words (i.e. heed to others’ advice). He will ever
join harlots and will hate his own spouse.
Notes: “Angada Nadiamsa’” in this part of the
text should actually read as “Agada Nadiamsa”
comments on which could be found in the notes
under sloka 98, page 11, Book 1.
(d) The term “Rahu Prakritiman” meaning the
` nature of Rahu is a very strange term. Ihave never
seen any text explaining one’s nature in terms of a
planet. This is apparently a misnomer.
भेदभ्रातृसुताधीरो पञ्चमे वृषभांशगे ॥३८८५ ॥
मृतप्रजाफलप्राप्त्या सन्तानप्रतिबन्धवान् ।
अङ्गदांशे पूर्वभागे भेदभ्राता TAA ॥३८८६ ॥
जायते मृतिमाप्नोति पुरापातकटेतुना |
तस्य पापोपशान्त्यर्थं सेतुस्नानं शिवार्चनम् ॥३८८७ ॥
षष्ठीव्रतोपवासेन सन्तानप्राप्तिमादिशेत् |
TTT व्यासमते हयगदांशेयदाहतम् ॥३८८८ ॥
भेदभ्रातुसुखं नित्यं लभते नात्र संशयः,
गोपाल प्रतिमां चैव कल्पोक्तेन प्रपूज्य च ॥३८८९ ॥
दैवज्ञाय प्रदानेन त्वायुरायोग्यपुत्रवान् {
3885 - 3889142. (a) The lord of Sth counted from
the 11th - indicating progeny of half-brother - being
in the Sth from the ascendant with Taurus Navamsa
denotes that the step-brother will obtain dead progeny and will incur impediments in having children.
(b) The step-brother of one bom in the Ist half
of the subject Nadiamsa will be childless. Evenif -
they be born, they will only die (soon) because of
the last birth’s sins of the said relative. To overcome this sin, dips in the Setu and worship of Lord
Siva are to be done. Maintaining religious vows
and fasting on the Thithi Shashti (6th day ofa lunar
fortnight) will cause birth of children. This particular Nadiamsa has been dealt with in another text
based on the school of sage Vyasa. By these
remedies, the step-brother will obtain happiness.
He should worship the idol of Gopala (Lord Krishna)
and give charities to the astrologer. As a result he
will beget healthy and long-living children.
Notes: (a) The text considers the 11th house as
the house of half-brother (or sister) as will be
evident from sloka 3890 infra. The Sth from the
11th, i.e. the 3rd from the ascendant deals with the
said person’s children. In this case the planet
concerned is Mars who should be in Gemini’s 8th
Navamsa, 1.6. 23° 20' to 26° 40' of Gemini.
While on the subject, I would like to rectify a
mistake of mine. I have earlier wrongly understood
that the Sth is the house of step-brother’s children
instead of the 3rd house. Hence “Sth lord” stands
corrected as “3rd lord” in sloka 114, page 13, Book
1. Similar errors if noticed in this context may
kindly be corrected on these lines. I offer my
apology to my esteemed reader.
. लाभेशांशे तत्रिकोणे भेद भ्रातुश्च जन्भम् ॥३८९० ॥
लाभेशदृष्टिसशौतु जन्मलग्नं विनिर्दिशेत् |
नवमेनतदीशेन स्वपितुर्जन्मभं वदेत् ॥३८९१ ॥
सूर्याशगे तल्रिकोणे योजयेत् कालवित्तमः।
मञ्जुस्वनांशगे सूरये सिंहे केतुसमन्विते ॥३८९२ ॥
अङ्गदाशे पूर्वभागे बाल्ये पितृविनाशवान् |
स्वपिता भ्रातृहीनश्च व्रणोपद्रवदेहवान् 113283 ॥
जन्माधिपदशान्त्यादौ सपदाये विनिर्दिशेत् |
मज्जुस्वनांशगे सूरये जीवे विश्वंभरांशगे ace tl
जन्मदाये पितुः क्लेशं व्रणोपद्रवमादिशेत्।
ज्येष्ठभार्यासुतद्वेषं विभागं च विनिर्दिशेत् ॥३८९५ ॥
सच्चितार्थविनाशेन क्लेशं प्रापोति भूरिशः।
लग्नात् पञ्चमगे भौमे भाग्येशे पापसंयुते ॥३८९६ ॥
स्वपिता मृतिकाले च देशान्तरगते भवेत् |
मञ्जुस्वनांशगे सूर्ये कुम्रामे स्वपितु रमतिः ॥३८९७ ॥
अर्जर्णच्छर्दिमूलेन स्वपिता व विनश्यति |
3890 -389714. (a) The step-brother’ ऽ ascendant
will be the sign denoted by the Navamsa occupied
by the 11th lord, a trine thereof, or the one that is
aspected by the 11th lord. Similarly the 9th and its
lord denote.the ascendant of the father. So also the
Navamsa occupied by the Sun or a trine therefrom.
(b) The native’s father will die in childhood if
the Sun is in Leo in Manjusvana Nadiamsa, in the
company of Ketu. He will be devoid of a co-bom
and will suffer from bodily ulcers and injuries. His
death will occur when the native will be in the end
of the ascendant lord’s dasa or in the 2nd dasa.

142 Deva Keralam
(c) The father will be subjected to evils if the
Sun and Jupiter are in order in Manjusvana and
Visvambhara Nadiamsas. He will incur ulcers and
injuries and will have enmity with the progeny of
his first wife the consequence of which will be
family division. He will be greatly anguished due
to loss of the wealth gathered by him.
(d) Mars in the Sth from the ascendant while the
9th lord (Venus) is with a malefic denotes that the
native’s father will die in a distant land.
(&) The Sun in Manjusvana Nadiamsa will
cause father’s death in a remote village due to
indigestion and vomiting.
Notes: (a) Father’s natal ascendant could be a
trine from the 9th, or the one originating through
the 9th lord, as done above with the help of 11th
lord concerning step-brother. The instructions to
be used with the help of the Sun are clear.
(b) “Janmadhipa dasa antyaadau” actually reads
“Janma dasa antya adi”. This expression is only
correct. Thus it indicates that one will lose his
father in the junctions of 1st and 2nd dasa periods.
(c) For Manjusvana Nadiamsa, see notes under
slokas 121 - 122. page 14, Book 1.
असत्निधौ सूर्यलग्ने भाग्यनाथेन भूसुते ॥३८९९ ॥
षष्ठाष्टमगते वापि ह्गदां दद् भवस्य च।
शुभदृष्टिविहीने च मार्गमध्ये पितुर्विपत् ॥३९०० ॥
पापांशगे दुर्मरणं शुभांशे श्षिप्रमारकम् |
पित्ररिष्टस्य समये माता देशान्तरं गता ॥३९०१॥
3899 - 3901. (a) The father of the subject
Nadiamsa will die en route if the 9th lord (Venus)
and Mars are not close to the solar ascendant.
(b) A malefic Navamsa in the above context
will cause a bad end to father while a benefic’s .
Navamsa will cause instant death (without prolonged illness). At the time of father’s death, the
native’s mother will be in a distant land.
fara जीवे भाग्येशस्य त्रिकोणगे |
देवताकषेत्रयात्राप्तां मध्ये पितृविनाशनम् ॥३९०२ ॥
3902. Jupiter in Visvambhara Nadiamsa and
being trinal to the 9th lord (Venus) will cause a
pilgrimage during the course of which, one’s father
will die en route.
अद्गदांशे पूर्वभागे कुटिलांशे निशाकरे ।
मातृभावे पापयुक्ते स्वमाताकलहप्रदा ॥३९०३ ॥
3903. For a native of Angada Nadiamsa’s Ist
half in Aquarius ascendant, the 4th (Taurus) being
with a malefic as the Moon is in Kutila Nadiamsa,
denotes that the mother will promote quarrels.
कुटिलांशकमे चन्द्रे क्लिष्टा मातृसहोदरी |
कुलरा च दिवारात्रं पापी मातामहः स्मृतः॥३९०४॥
3904. Should the Moon be in Kutila Nadiamsa,
mother’s sister will be of a tormented disposition
and be unchaste. His maternal grand-father will
indulge in sins day and night.
Notes: For Kutila Nadiamsa, please see notes
under slokas 130 - 131, page 15, Book 1.
मातुलाधिपतौ we कुटिलांशे बुधेक्षिते |
आयुष्मन्तौ मातुलौ द्रौ केचित् पक्षे विमातुलः॥३९०५ ॥
दुश्चरित्रवती माता भ्रातुः क्लेशेन करिता । `
भेदपुत्रविरोधेन बाल्ये वैधव्यमापुयात् ॥३९०६ ॥
बहुकालममाङ्गल्या जननी चिरजीविनी ।
मध्यपुत्रात् सु सन्तुष्टा चन्द्रनाडीफलं स्मृतम् ॥३९०७ ॥
एवमेव स्वमातुश्च शुक्रनाडीफलं स्मृतम् |
शुकनाडीफलाध्याये मातृवंश फलाफलम् ॥३९०८ ॥
मातुलादिफलं चैव विस्तरेण च कथ्यते |
3905 - 3908/2. Maternal Relatives: The Moon
as the significator of maternal uncles (being the 6th
lord) placed in Kutila Nadiamsa with the aspect of
Mercury will give two maternal uncles who will be
endowed with longevity. According to some, there
will be none. Further, the native’s mother will be of
aquestionable history and will be emaciated due to
loss of a brother. She will live as a widow fora long
time and be endowed with a long span of life. She
will be happy with her middle son. These effects
are from Chandra Nadi. Sukra Nadi also describes
effects in the same way. In the chapter on effects,
Sukra Nadi states good and bad things extensively
about maternal relatives etc.
TAMA PMN शनिसंयुते ॥३९०९ ॥
भेदप्रातृस्वसा चैव बहुकालं सुमङ्गली |
कुटिलांशकगे चन्द्रे सूर्ये मञ्जुस्वनांशगे ॥३९१० ॥
स्वभेदभगिनी चैव बाल्ये वैधव्यमाप्नुयात्।
विश्वम्भरांशगे जीवे त्वङ्गदांशोद् भवस्य च ॥३९११९ ॥
स्वभेदभगिनी चैव ह्यल्पपुत्रवती शुभा |

Chandra Kala Nadi 143
3909 - 3911142. Half-sister: (a) Should the 11th
lord (Jupiter) be in Aquarius Navamsa along with
Saturn, one’s step-sister will have a long-living
husband.
(b) The Moon and the Sun in order in Kutila and
Manjusvana Nadiamsas will cause widowhood to
one’s half-sister in her very girlhood (or early
days).
(c) Incase of one of Angada Nadiamsa, Aquarius
ascendant, Jupiter in Visvambhara Nadiamsa will
cause a limited number of issues to his half-sister.
She will be an auspicious (or fortunate) person.
कुटिलांशकगे we क्वाचिद भेदसहोदरी ॥३९१२ ॥
युग्मपुत्रविनाशेन् क्लेशं प्राप्नोति भूरिशः।
तद्भर्ता रोग युक्तश्च सोदरभ्रातृहीनवान् ॥३९१२ ॥
मध्ये भाग्यवियोगेन afer च कशितः।
स्वभेदभगिनी भर्ता राजद्रारेऽवमानितः॥३९१४॥
नरवाहनभूषप्पिर्योगवान् कीर्तिमान् सुखी |
3912 - 3914142. Sister: The Moon in Kutila
Nadiamsa will cause somewhata sickly sister. She
will be abundantly grieved due to loss of two of her
sons (or due to twin sons as “Yamala Putrah” is
another reading). Her husband will suffer from
diseases and be devoid of co-born. He will lose his
fortunes in the middle of his life and incur utter
penury and be emaciated. The native’s stepbrother-in-law will be humiliated in royal circles.
He will enjoy conveyances, ornaments, prosperity
and fame.
जीवांशाधिपतो सौम्ये स्वोच्चे नीचनवांशगे ॥३९१५ ॥
स्वभेदभगिनीभ्राता पुत्रवान् पुत्रिमान् भवेत् |
सम्पदाये जातकस्य पञ्चमान्दात् परं तथा ॥३९१६ ॥
अथवा ऋतुवर्षान्ते भगिनीभर्तृभाग्यवान्।
अङ्खदांशे जन्मदाये जन्मान्दे जन्मवत्सरे ॥३९१७ ॥
स्वभेदभगिनी चैव क्लेशं प्राप्नोतिभूरिशः।
सपलनीमातृमूलेन भेदश्रातृमनोव्यथा ॥३९१८ ॥
3915 - 3918. Mercury should be exalted in Rasi
and be in Pisces Navamsa while Jupiter is in turn in
Mercury’s Navamsa. Asa result, one’s step-brotherin-law will have sons and daughters. After the
native’s 5th year of age, or in the end of the 6th year,
or in the 2nd dasa, his sister will obtain a husband.
In his very first year of life in the first dasa, his stepsister will be abundantly anguished. His stepbrother will be mentally distressed on account of
step-mother.
agen सूर्ये स्वपिता पुत्रवञ्जकः।
तस्य पापवशान्मृत्युः ATTA न संशयः ॥३९१९ ॥
विश्वम्भरांशगे सूर्ये त्वङ्गदांश समुद्भवः।
दशवर्षात् परं भेदभ्रातृ भाग्यवशात् सुखम् ॥३९२० ॥
जन्मदाये qe दशासन्धेश्च कालगे |
गृहच्छिद्रकलापेन क्लेशं प्रापणोतिभूरिशः॥३९२१॥
3919 - 3921. (a) The Sun in Manjusvana Nadiamsa denotes that the native’s father will cheat his
progeny: Because of this sin, he will die during the
nhative’s 2nd dasa.
(b) The Sun in Visvambhara Nadiamsa will
give happiness to the native after his 10th year .
through step-brother. He will incur much grief in
the 3rd year of birth at the time of end of the 1st dasa
due to family strife.
विश्वम्भरांशे लाभेशे लाभांशे सप्तमाधिपे ।
वसुवर्षात् परं भ्राता चित्तशुद्धियुतो भवेत् ॥३९२२ ॥
तस्य भार्या भानुवारव्रतेन श्रियमश्नुते |
भर्तृसोख्यवती चेति बहुकालं सुमङ्गली ॥३९२३ ॥
3922 - 3923. Brother & Sister-in-law: One’s
brother will emerge pure-hearted (after a sinful
phase of life) if the 11th lord (Jupiter) is in
Visvambhara Nadiamsa as the 7th lord from the
natal ascendant is in the 11th from the Navamsa
ascendant. His wife will beget wealth due to ber
observation of religious vows on Sundays. She will
enjoy marital happiness and her husband will be
long-lived.
` मञ्ुस्वनांशे तरेशे प्रतिबन्धविमोचनम् |
स्वदेह्रातृदारदिसोख्यं चेति न संशयः॥३९२४॥
भानुवतोपवासेन सेतुस्नानादिहेतुना |
भेदभ्रातृरिचत्तशुद्धिररिष्टं नश्यति धुवम् ॥३९२५ Il
पश्चात् सन्तान वृद्धि च गार्हस्थ्यसुखजीवनम् |
तदभावे दरिद्रः स्यादभेदभ्रातुः स्मृतं फलम् ॥३९२६ tl
भेदभ्रातुसुतारूढे सूर्ये केतुसमन्विते |
शुभदृष्टिवि हीने च प्रतिबन्धप्रपीडितः॥३९२७ ॥
शुद्रलेखकमूलेन भाग्यनाशेन कशितः।
तस्य नाशात् परं सौख्यं भेदभ्राता शुरभैर्युतः॥३९२८ ॥

144 Deva Keralam
वसुवर्षान्तमारभ्य ह्यथवा दशवत्सरे |
स्वपितुर्मितरशुद्रस्य नाशः स्यान्नात्र संशयः॥३९२९ ॥
ततः परं महत् सौख्यं भेदभ्राता Praga: |
स्वभेदभगिनी afer योगमादिशेत् ॥३९३० Il
3924 ~ 3930. (a) The Moon in Manjusvana
Nadiamsa will grant relief from obstacles. The
brother of the native will obtain happiness on
account of spouse, etc. Religious vows for the Sun
God and dips in the Setu will cause purity of heart
to half-brother (leading to a united family) and will
destroy all evils. Increase of progeny and happy
domestic life will also follow. In the absence of
these, there will prevail penury.
(b) The Sun and Ketu in the 3rd from the
ascendant, without a benefic’s aspect will cause
obstacles in obtaining progeny by the half-brother.
His prosperity will be destroyed due to a “Soodra
author’. After the destruction of the said author,
step-brother will receive auspicious effects. From
the age of 8 to 10, father’s Soodra friend will die.
Following this, step-brother will be greatly happy
and wealthy. Prior to this, the native’s step-sister’s
husband will obtain prosperity.
शुभभाग्याधिपे शुक्रे षष्ठे शनिसमन्विते |
जातकस्य सुविद्यापितिर्बहुम्रामाधिकारवान् ॥३९३१ ॥
लेख्यविद्यासमर्थश्च लिपित्रयसुवाचकः।
राजयोगयुतो नित्यं हरिशङ्करभक्तिमान् ॥३९३२ ॥ .
जन्मादिसप्तमे वर्षे सम्पदाये क्वचित् सुखम् ।
स्वभेदभ्रातुमूलेन मौञ्जीबन्धनमादिशेत् ॥३९३३ ॥
faery विवाहः स्यात् स्वभुक्तो नात्रसंशयः।
षष्ठाब्दे त्वक्षराभ्यासं सप्तमे मोञजिबन्धनम्।
द्वादशाब्दे विवाहं च ह्यथ वा मनुवत्सरे ॥३९३४॥
3931 - 3934. Venus & Saturn in Cancer:
Venus ruling the 9th and placed in the 6th along
with Saturn will grant much learning and lordship
over many villages to the native. He will be skilful
in writing and learning, well-read in three languages, will enjoy effects of Raja Yoga and be
devoted to Lords Vishnu and Siva. He will be
somewhat happy upto the 7th year of age. His
Sacred Thread ceremony will take place through
his step-brother. His marriage will be celebrated in
his 3rd dasa, perhaps in the very first sub period
which will coincide with the 12th or 14th year of his
‘age.
कुटिलांशे धने चन्द्रे कुटिलालोचने fire:
वाचालको राजसेवी राजद्वारे सुकीर्तिमान् ॥३९३५ ॥
बालरिष्टभयं किचिन्मसूरीज्वर पीडितः।
जीविते भाग्यमभ्येति जीवे विश्वम्भरांशगे ॥२३९३६ ॥
3935 - 3936. (a) The Moon in Pisces: For a
native of Aquarius, the Moon in the 2nd in Kutila
` NadiamfSa will give the following effects. He will
be crooked in thoughts, garrulous, will serve the
king and earn fame in royal service.
(b) Should Jupiter be in Visvambhara Nadiamsa, one will have some fear of infantile mortality
and be troubled by small pox (or haemorrhoids). If
he survives, fortunes will be availed of by him.
चापांशगे धने चन्द्रे जीवे केन्द्रत्रिकोणगे |
विंशोपरिशे र्वर्षमध्ये वाहनभाग्यवान् ॥३९३७ ॥
स्वप्राबल्यं च लभते षोडशाब्दात् परं क्वचित् |
एकोनविशवर्षादौ बुद्धिप्राबल्ययोगवान् ॥३९३८ ॥
द्वाविंशे च दशासन्धौ पञ्चविंशे तथैव च।
ae ह्यपमृत्युं च शान्ति कुर्याद्विचक्षणः ॥२९३९ ॥
3937 - 3939. Sagittarius Navamsa: The Moon
in the 2nd in Pisces with Sagittarius Navamsa while
Jupiter is posited in an angle or trine from the
ascendant will lead to possession of vehicles and
fortunes between the 20th and 25th years of age. He
will attain predominance to some extent after 16.
From the age of 19, he will beget intellectual
superiority. So also from 22nd and 25th years, and
in the junction of dasas. He will be endangered by
fear of untimely death at 32 for which remedies `
should be sought.
प्रत्यक्तारदशासन्धिकाले मातृविनाशनम् ।
अष्टचत्वारिंशकेऽन्दे जीवे विश्वम्भरांशगे ॥३९४० ॥
जनन्याः कालमृत्युश्च ह्यपमत्युस्तदर्धके |
लाभेशांशे तचिकोणे स्फुटयोगं गते शनौ ॥३९४१ ॥
जननी व्याकुलं चेति बन्धुक्लेशं विनिर्दिशेत् |
लाभेश दृष्टिराशौ तु बन्धुवर्गे मनोव्यथाम् ॥२९४२ ॥
3940 - 3942. (a) Should Jupiter be in
Visvambhara Nadiamsa, one’s mother will die
during the junction of (4th and) Sth dasa, in his 48th
year. This will be her timely death. She will have,

Chandra Kala Nadi 145
however, fear of untimely death during the native’s
24th year of age.
(b) Note the Navamsa position of natal Jupiter.
Transit Saturn in the sign represented by the said
Navamsa, or a trine thereof, will cause distress to
mother and anguish to kinsfolk. Even if Saturn
transits the sign that is in aspect to Jupiter at birth,
kinsfolk will be mentally distressed.
सुखेशांशे sear सुखेशाक्रान्तराशिगे |
सुखेश दृष्टिरशो तु भुपनाशमितीरयेत् ॥३९४२ ॥
जन्मदाये जन्मदेशे महानृपतिनाशनम् ।
तद्भ्राता प्रबलोभूयाद योगी च दशवत्सरम् ॥२९४४॥
अथवा TEM पश्चाद् राजान्तरात् सुखम् |
जन्मदाये waaay किंचिहुर्भिक्षमादिशोत् ॥३९४५ ॥
सम्पदाये तथा विन्द्याल्लोके दुर्भिक्षजं भयम् |
जन्मदाये जन्मशनो निरोधेन हयुपद्रवम् ॥३९४६ ॥
3943 - 3946. Irrelevant: The king will be
destroyed when Saturn transits any of the following
four places - the sign represented by the Navamsa
occupied by the 4th lord, a trine thereof, the sign
occupied by the 4th lord and the sign aspected by
the 4th lord. In the first dasa, the king of the country
will be destroyed. His brother will come to prominence for a period of ten or twelve years. Later on
happiness will prevail due to change of ruler. Lack
of rains and partial famine will come to pass in the
Ist dasa. In the 2nd dasa, famine and grief will
exist. In the 1st dasa, when Saturn comes to the
Moon sign, the kingdom will be under siege.
Notes: This kind of verses are obviously a
result of unintelligible copying of the manuscript.
These should not lend credence to the use of dasa
periods in mundane astrology.
रन्धाधिपत्रिकोणेषु किंचिदर्थविनाशनम् |
Bawa जन्मशनौ AGEs बुधान्तरे ॥३९४७ ॥
केत्वन्तरेऽथ वा चेति दारारिष्टं विनिर्दिशेत् ।
विश्वम्भरांशगे जीवे कलत्र्रययोगवान् ॥३९४८ ॥
सीमन्तशिशुनाशश्च पश्चाज्जीवत्सुपुत्रवान् ।
त्रयोविंशे सुतप्राप्तिस्तदूर्वं च मृतप्रजः ॥३९४९ ॥
दारान्ते पुत्रवृद्धिरित्रिसद्याश्चिरायुषाः।
जीवे यावत्फलानि स्युस्तावत् सन्तानयोगवान् ॥३९५० ॥
आयुष्त्यो च द्वे पुत्रयो fegat च चिरायुषौ |
3947 - 395014, (a) When Saturn tranisits a trine
of the 8th lord at birth, wealth will be to sorhe extent
destroyed. Saturn’s journey on Moon sign in the
end of 22nd year, (or) in the sub period of Mercury
or Ketu in the 3rd dasa, one’s spouse will be
subjected to evils.
(b) Jupiter in Visvambhara Nadiamsa will give
three wives. The first child will be destroyed and
the following ones will survive. 23rd year will give
a son. Prior to this, one will obtain only dead
children. Through subsequent wives 6.6. excepting the first wife), one will have increase of progeny. Two or three of the sons will be long-lived.
The number of surviving children will correspond
to the number of Bindus in Jupiter’s Ashtaka
~ Varga. Two daughters and two sons will be endowed with longevity.
लग्नात् पञ्चमगे भौमे तदीशेऽष्टमराशिगे ॥३९५१ ॥
कालान्तरे पुत्रलाभो मृतसह्कयाबहुत्ववान् |
तदोषपरिहारार्थं कुमारव्रतमादिशेत् ॥३९५२ ॥
सेतुस्नानफलेनैव दीर्घायुः पुत्रलाभवान्। ,
सुखाधिपदशाकाले चत्वारिंशतिवत्सरे ॥३९५३ ॥
भेदभ्रातृविनाशेन क्लेशं प्राप्नोति भूरिशः।
चन््रलग्नष्टमाधीशदशायां चन्द्रभुक्तिषु ॥३९५४ ॥
जीवान्तरेऽथ वा चेति स्वसमानजनावधि |
अपमृत्युभयगप्राप्तिः शान्त्या शान्ति प्रायस्यति ॥३९५४॥
RUS क्रूरमासे रन्धराधिपतिदायके |
क्रूरान्तरे ज्वरभयं शान्त्या शान्ति प्रयास्यति ॥३९५५ ॥
3951 - 3955. (a) Mars in the 5th while his
dispositor is in the 8th from the ascendant will
delay birth of children and will cause many a dead
issue. To overcome this blemish, vows to Lord
Kartikeya and dips in the Setu be undertaken.
Consequently, long-living sons (or children) will
be obtainable.
(b) During the 24th year of age in Venus dasa,
one’s step-brother will be destroyed and much grief
will occur. :
(c) Relatives equal to the native will be troubled by fear of untimely death when he will be in
the sub period of the Moon or Jupiter, in the dasa
of the planet ruling the 8th from the natal Moon.
Suitable remedy should be sought.
(d) During the pendency of a malefic planet’s

146 Deva Keralam
sub period in the dasa of the 8th lord, one will be
reduced to fear of fever. Adverse year (transit of
Jupiter) and adverse month (transit of the Sun)
should also be noted in this context. Necessary
remedial measures should be performed to pacify
the evil.
भाग्याधिपदशारम्भे सुतेशे स्वोच्चराशिगे |
जन्मादायुष्यपर्यन्तं भाग्ययुक्तो न संशयः ॥३९५६ ॥
अयुताधिकवित्तापिं क्षेमदाये qatar |
fared सुवाहापिं पञ्च्विंशतिवत्सरे ॥३९५७ ॥
ततः परं महद भाग्यं प्रनलोद्योगजीवनम् |
यावदायुष्यमाप्नोति तावद्भाग्यं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥३९५८ ॥
3956 - 3958. The lord of the 5th (Mercury)
moving in his sign of exaltation at the time of
commencement of the dasa of the 9th lord (Venus)
will produce unending fortunes. His acquisition
will exceed ten thousand (gold coins).
(b) The 4th dasa (independent of “a”) will give
fame (because of birth in Angada Nadiamsa,
Aquarius ascendant).
(c) The 3rd dasa will give a superior conveyance in the 25th year. After this age, his prosperity
will be great. He will obtain a superior employment. His fortunes will last his whole life.
Notes: (a) “Janmaath aayush paryantam” means
from birth to end of life. This term is conveyed as
“unending” in the translation as the dasa of the 9th
lord may not always be the birth dasa.
विश्वम्भरंशगे जीवे रवौ मञ्जुस्वनांशगे ।
षट्पञ्चाशे कालमृत्युः कन्यामासे भविष्यति |
अथवा मीनमासे च भौमवारे मरिष्यति ॥३९५९ ॥
3959. The planets Jupiter and the Sun in order
posited in Visvambhara and Manjusvana Nadiamsas
will cause one’s death at the age of 56. The transit
Sun will then be in Virgo or else in Pisces. The day
of death will be Tuesday.
धर्नुलग्ने वारुणांशः
चापे जीवे वारुणां शे निशाकरसमन्विते |
भूम्यात्मजेन संदृष्टे सोदरोत्पत्तिनाशवान् ॥३९६० ॥
वारुणांशकगे जीवे निशाकरसमन्विते |
प्रसूतिकाले वर्षश्च त्रिरात्रं वा भवेदधुवम् ॥३९६१ ॥
मीनांशकगते जीवे वक्रे RST तथा |
शूद्रजन्मा सुखी नित्यं श्यामवर्णस्वरूपवान् ॥३९६२ ॥
पित्तप्रकृतिदेहः स्यान्मधुराम्लरसप्रियः।
मन्दप्रकृतिमान् साधुर्गार्दभस्वरवान् सुधीः ॥२३९६६ ॥
3960 - 3963. Sagittarius Ascendant = Varuna
Nadiamsa: (a) In case of birth in Varuna Nadiamsa, Sagittarius ascendant, Jupiter joining the
Moon in aspect to Mars will destroy after-born.
(b) There will be rains for three nights at the
time of birth of the subject with Jupiter. in Varuna
Nadiamsa, in conjunction with the Moon.
(c) Jupiter begetting Pisces Navamsa while
Mars is in the last quarter of the subject Nadiamsa
will cause birth of a Soodra. The native concerned
will have a dark and bilious body. He will be fond
of sweet and sour juices, be indolent and gentle. His
voice will be akin to that of an ass. He will be very
intelligent.
Notes: For Varuna Nadiamsa, please consult
notes given for sloka 188 - 189, page 20, Book 1.
लग्नेशे वारुणांशस्थे स्वक्षेत्र कुजवीश्िते ।
बाल्ये मसुरि भीत्या च मृतप्रायोपजीवति ॥३९६४ ॥
मान्ज्वर व्रणक्लेशेः पीडितोऽत्यन्तशोकवान् |
जन्मदायेऽपमृत्युश्च तृतीयाब्दात् परं सुखम् ॥३९६५ ॥
स्वपितुर्भाग्यवृद्धिः स्याद् बन्धुमूलाच्छ्ियागमः।
राजद्वारे सुकीर्विश्च बहुमानावमानवान् ॥३९६६ ॥
3964 - 3966. (a) The Native: If the lord of the
ascendant, i.e. Jupiter, is in the subject Nadiamsa
in own sign and with an aspect of Mars, it will cause
fear of small-pox during one’s childhood. He will
nearly die. He will also incur disorders of digestion
and ulcer (or injury) and be extremely saddened
(i.e. pained). His first dasa will endanger him with
fear of untimely death. After the 3rd year of age, he
will feel happy.
(b) Father: Further, as a result of the said
combination, his father’ sprosperity will register an
increase. Probably kinsfolk will contribute to the
family’s wealth. The native’s father will obtain
. wide fame and honour in royal circle and also be
humiliated in the said circle.
aurea जीवे तच्छनुगृहदायगे ।
पितुव्यारिष्टमाप्नोति राजोपद्रववान् पिता ॥३९६७ ॥
3967. Jupiter in Varuna Nadiamsa, in case of

Chandra Kala Nadi 147
Sagittarius ascendant, will cause evils to father’s
brothers and the native’ s father will incur nuisance
from the royalty in the dasa of the sign ruled by a
planet (KCD) who is inimical to Jupiter.
पञ्चविन्दुयुते जीवे वारुणांशे pated |
निधनाधिपसंयुक्ते पञ्चमान्दे महाविपत् ॥३९६८ ॥
पश्चात् सहोदरारिष्टं मसूरीज्वरहेतुना |
नवमे सोदरोत्पत्ति बालारिषटे मृति वदेत् ॥३९६९ ॥
3968 - 3969. (a) Should Jupiter be in the said
Nadiamsa with the 8th lord and in aspect to Mars,
one will be in great danger in the Sth year. However, note 5 Bindus in Jupiter’s Ashtaka Varga.
Later on, his co-born will be subjected to evils due
to small-pox.
(b) Jupiter in the 9th will cause after-born but
with infantile death.
Notes: (b) Only Jupiter in the 9th is referred to.
His connection with the Moon and Mars is implied
as at “a” above. Ashtaka Varga Bindus are not a
part of this yoga.
` वारूणांशकगे जीवे जन्मतारदशान्त्यगे ।
सोदरा जनिताश्चैव भविष्यन्ति चिरायुषाः॥३९७० ॥
सम्पदाये तृतीयांशे त्वायुष्मन्तं च सोदरम्।
एकभ्रातृयुतं चैव वारूणांशफलं स्मृतम् ॥३९७१ ॥
3970 - 3971. (a) Jupiter in Varuna Nadiamsa
will cause birth of brothers endowed with longevity, in the end of the first dasa. The last one third
part of 2nd dasa will also cause long-living coborn. `
(b) The native of Varuna Nadiamsa, Sagittarius
ascendant, will have only one brother.
Notes: Combinations at “a” and “b” are different from each other. One emanates from the
position of Jupiter while the other does not.
TR वारुणांशे लग्नाद्धिक्रमगे शनौ ।
पश्चादभ्रातृविहीनः स्यात् सोदर्या चैकया युतः॥३९७२ ॥
3972. Another authority states that one born in
the subject Nadiamsa with Saturn in the 3rd
(Aquarius) will have no younger brother. Perhaps
he will have one younger sister.
gar कषितिपुत्रसूर्यशशिजे मन्दे तृतीयर्षगे
लगे देवगुरौ निशाकरयुते गेहे cantata |
स्वभानो दशमे यथाक्रममसौ जातः सुसौख्यो महान् |
बाल्वे क्लेशयुतो वदन्ति कवयो ह्यल्पप्रजासंयुतः॥२३९७३ ॥
भ्राता चैव तथा गुणी क्षितिपतिस्तत्तुल्यभाग्यो धनी
श्रीमान् विशतिवत्सरे भवति वा द्व््रिंशदब्दे तथा ।
विद्यावादविनोदसद्वरसिको भार्यात्मजैरन्वितः
ख्यातः शाख्रविचक्षणो दिवि भुवि प्रख्यातकीर्त्यान्वितः॥३९७४ ॥
तदर्धात् परतश्चैव स्वपिता सोख्यमशनुते ।
तदर्धा्धे योगभद्ं वसुवर्षे मनोव्यथाम् ॥३९७५ ॥
3973 - 3975. (a) The trio - Mars, the Sun and
Mercury - in an evil house, Saturn in the 3rd, Jupiter
and the Moon in the ascendant, Ketu and Venus in
the 4th, and Rahu in the 10th - one bom with this
horoscope will be greatly happy, bea greatman and
be troubled in childhood. He will be a poet and will
have a limited number of issues.
(b) Brother: As a result of the said yoga, the
following results will occur concerning his brother.
He will be a virtuous person, will enjoy kingly
fortunes, be wealthy and be an illustrious person
after the age of 20 or 32. He will be endowed with
learning, discourses, entertainment, spouse, progeny and fame, and will delight in association with
others. He will be versed in a particular school of
the Veda (“Sakha Vichakshana”). His fame will
spread “in the heavens and on the earth”, (i.e. he
will be exceedingly famous). After the 10th or the
16th year, his father will be happy. From the Sth or
8th year, father will be mentally distressed for a
period of 8 years.
Notes: (a) The position of Mars, Mercury and
the Sun in an evil house should be understood as to
be in the 6th only (not 8th or 12th) as Venus is
supposed to be in the 4th.
There is no mention of the ascendant in the
verse concerned. It is to be deemed as Sagittarius
for the current dealing is with this ascendant and
reference to Jupiter and the Moon (8th lord) occurs
in the nearest verses. This link can be established
from sloka 3982 infra.
Individual combinations of the present horoscope are also discussed by the original, in the
ensuing slokas.
(b) “Sakha” denotes a school of the Veda, each
school adhering to its own traditional text and

148 Deva Keralam
interpretation and the scholar recites that particular
version of the Veda. According to sage Saunaka’s
“Charana Vyuha”, 5 Sakhas exist in the Rig Veda;
42, 44 or 86 in the Yajur Veda; 12 (out of original -
1000) in the Sama Veda, and 9 in the Atharva Veda.
“Sakha” isrecognisedas anastrological Samhita
by Varaha Mihira. Thus “Sakha Vichakshana” can
also denote one versed in a certain branch of
astrology.
वारुणांशकगे जीवे त्वष्टादशच वत्सरे |
स्वपितुर्भाग्यवृद्धिः स्याद्राजान्तरवशाच्छ्यम् ॥३९७६ ॥
वैष्णवप्रनले काले त्वल्पसौख्यं विनिर्दिशेत्।
वसुवर्षात् परं क्लेशं सायनाब्दे क्वचित् सुखम् ॥३९७७ ॥
3976 - 3977. Father: Jupiter in Varuna Nadiamsa will bring forth prosperity for the father from
the native’s 18th year of age probably through.a
replaced ruler. His happiness will be reduced when
Vaishnavites become powerful. After the 8th year `
of the native, father will be anguished and will
recover some happiness 18 months later.
निधनाधिपदोषेण षष्ठाधिपतिदायगे |
कर्माधिपान्तरे काले स्वपिता योगभङ्खवान् ॥३९७८ ॥
श्रीवेष्णवजनद्ेषं बन्धुवर्गे विशेषतः।
राजद्रारेऽवमानादिक्लेशं प्रापनोति भूरिशः॥२९७९ ॥
सोदरोत्पत्ति नाशं कर्माधिपतिभुक्तिषु |
नवमाब्दे मनस्तापं भ्रातृक्लेशं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥३९८० ॥
3978 - 3980. (a) Due to the blemish of 8th lord
(i.e. Moon is assumed to be in the ascendant,
Sagittarius), the dasa of 6th lord (Venus) will check
father’s prosperity during the sub period of the 10th
lord (Mercury). Father will incur enmity with
Vaishnavites, particularly from his kinsfolk. He
will face a great deal of humiliation, anguish etc. in
royal circles.
(b) In the said sub period of Mercury, the
subject will lose his brothers and sisters being born
at that time. He will be mentally distressed in his
9th year and will incur difficulties for his co-born.
भाग्याधिपदशाकाले तृतीयांशे महत् सुखम् ।
स्वपिता भाग्य युक्तश्च राजद्वारे सुकीर्तिमान् ॥३९८१ ॥
3981. 17161851 one third part of the dasa of the
lord (Sun), great happiness will rule the native. His .
father will be endowed with fortunes and willearn .
wide fame in royal circles.
भाग्यधिपे पष्ठगते सुतेशेन waa |
तदशायां जातकस्य विद्याभ्यासं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥३९८२ ॥
लाभाधिपदशाकाले धनाधिपतिभुकतिषु |
वारुणांशे प्रजातस्य त्वक्षराभ्यासमादि शेत् ॥२९८२ ॥
3982 - 3983. Education: (a) The 9th lord (Sun)
joining the Sth lord (Mars) in the 6th (Taurus) will
in the Sun’s dasa commence one’s education. _
(b) Education can also commence in the dasa of
the 11th lord (Venus) in the sub period of the 2nd
lord (Saturn).
लग्ने जीवे सुखे शुक्रे कुम्भांशे केतुसंयुते।
लिपित्रयप्रवीणश्च लेख्यविद्याविशारदः॥३९८४ Il
नारकालङ्कतौ काव्ये प्रियः सङ्गीतवल्लभः।
संस्कृतप्रियवादी च देवब्राह्मणभक्त्तिमान् BSC ॥
3984 - 3985. Venus in Aquarius Navamsa:
Jupiter in the ascendant and Venus with Ketu in the
4th (Pisces) will make one skilful in three languages apart from giving him expertise in authorship and learning. However, Venus should obtain
Aquarius Navamsa. Further, one will be fond of
drama, literature and music. He will transact impressively in the Sanskrit language and be devoted
to gods and Brahmins.
असितां शे इषे शुक्रे पञ्चग्रहसमन्विते |
लेख्यविद्यासुनिपुणो मन्दबुद्धिः क्वचित् क्वचित् ॥३९८६ ॥
3986. Saturn’s Navamsa: Venus joining five
planets in Pisces and begetting (for himself) a
Navamsa under the lordship of Saturn will make
one highly skilful in authorship and learning. But
he will be somewhat a dunce.
्रन्थान्ते वारुणांशे जीवे APRA ।
विद्चाविघ्नमवाप्नोति राजद्वारे सुकीर्तिमान् ॥३९८७ ॥
विपदाये राजपूज्यो नरवाहनभाग्यवान् |
स्वपित्रधिकयोगः स्याद्राजद्रारे न संशयः॥२९८८ ॥
सम्पदाये वारुणांशे तृतीये खण्डकालगे |
अतीव प्रबले गेहे विवाहोत्सवसंभ्रमम् ॥३९८९ ॥
3987 - 3989. There is another authority to
instruct that Jupiter in Varuna Nadiamsa in aspect
to Mars will obstruct the process of education.
However, the person concerned will be quite fa-.
mous in royal circles. In his 3rd dasa, he will be

Chandra Kala Nadi _ 149
worshipped by the ruler and will exceed his father
in terms of prosperity, perhaps in royal circles. The
last one third part of the 2nd dasa will cause great
eminence. There will be a family marriage as well.
सिहांशगे मदाधीशे शुक्रे कुम्भांशके तथा ।
स्वजन्मदेशे चोद्राहो ह्यथवा चोत्तरे भवेत् ॥३९९० ॥
दरिद्रां afer दारजन्मर्धभं fag: |
दरिशदृष्टिरशौ वा योजयेत् कालवित्तमः॥३९९१ ॥
3990 - 3991. The 7th lord (Mercury) in Leo
Navamsa while Venus isin Aquarius Navamsa will
bring forth marriage in one’s own country or region
(i.e. bride will be from his own region), or else from
the northern direction. The bride’s birth sign will
correspond to the one occupied by the 7th lord
(Mercury), a trine thereof, or the one that is aspected by him.
Notes: “Daridrajaam” in sloka 3991 is not a
proper term. It should read as “Darese” denoting
the 7th lord. “Daresa drishti rasau” meaning “thesign aspected by the 7th lord” confirms this conclu-
‘sion without any doubt. —
meray मन्दे मीने कुम्धांशगे भृगो ।
वारुणांशे प्रजाश्च विवाहप्रतिबन्धवान् ॥३९९२ ॥
यस्यां नाडयां प्रजातश्च तृतीये शनिसंस्थिते |
, विवाहयलनमात्रेण विघ्नं च पापकर्मणा ॥३९९३ ॥
्वित्रिवारं प्रयलेन पश्चादुद्राहयोगवान् |
जामाता पापदोषेण दारवंशेऽप्यरिष्टकृत् ॥२३९९४ ॥
तृतीये श्वशुरस्थाने पापाक्रान्ते च जायते ।
तस्य कन्याप्रदानेन शव शुरस्य महाविपत् ॥२९९५ Il
शुभांशे शुभसंदृष्टे विक्रमेशे बलान्विते |
सदोषोऽपि विवाहश्च श्वशुरस्य शुभाशुभम् ॥३९९६ ॥
3992 - 3996. (a) Saturn in Capricorn Navamsa
while Venus in the sign Pisces in Aquarius Navamsa will cause obstacles to the marriage of the
native of the subject Nadiamsa.
(b) For the subject native, Saturn in the 3rd
(Aquarius) will cause obstacles the moment marriage is sought. This will be because of his sins (of
the past birth). After a trial of 2 or 3 weeks, he will
succeed. Due to the sins of his brother-in-law, evils
will exist in the in-laws’ family.
(c) The 3rd house is the house of father-in-law.
When the said house is in possession of a malefic
by occupation, the native’s father-in-law will be
endangered once he gives his daughter to the native,
in marriage.
(d) Note if the said occupant is in a benefic’s
Navamsa, or is in aspect to a benefic, as the 3rd lord
is strong. Then in spite of the blemish of giving
away his daughter in marriage to the native in
question, the father-in-law will receive auspicious
and inauspicious effects. (That is inauspiciousness
will come down.)
दारारूढगते भौमे नाड्यां तु ARTS |
रक्तवर्णकलत्रं स्याद्विवाहानन्तरं सुखम् ॥२९९७ ॥
लक््मीकटाक्षवान्नित्यं गृहे MATa |
उद्वाहानन्तरं चैव नित्यश्रीरनित्यमङ्गलम् ॥३९९८ ॥ _
3997 - 3998. Mars in the 7th (Gemini) in
Mangala Nadiamsa will cause a spouse with bloodred complexion. The person will be happy following his marriage and will endlessly enjoy wealth
and auspicious effects. His family will acquire
quadrupeds and wealth.
मेषांशगेऽरिगे भोभे नाड्यां तु मङ्गलांशके |
श्वशुरश्च द्विभार्यः स्यादेकमातुलयोगवान् ॥३९९९ ॥
षष्ठाधिपदशाकाले षष्ठेशांशत्रिकोणगे |
लग्नेशे स्वांशपे वापि मातुलारिष्टमादिशेत् ॥४००० ॥
वारुणांशकगे जीवे त्वेकमातुलयोगवान् |
बाल्ये भ्रातृवियोगेन क्लेशं प्राप्नोति भूरिशः॥४००१॥
3999 - 4001. Maternal Uncle: (a) One will
have (only) one maternal uncle while his father-inlaw will have two wives if Mars is in the 6th
(Taurus) with Aries Navamsa and Mangala Nadiamsa. `
(b) The said maternal uncle will incur evils
during the 6th lord’s dasa if the ascendant lord
(arrives in transit) in the sign represented by the
Navamsa occupied by the 6th lord (i.e. Aries
Navamsa as at “a” above), or a trine thereof. The
same way Navamsa occupied by Jupiter (at birth
-will also have to be considered).
(c) Jupiter in Varuna Nadiamsa will give only
one maternal uncle. Further one will be much
grieved on account of loss of brother in childhood.
Notes: (a) For Mangala Nadiamsa, see notes
under sloka 226, page 24, Book 1.
(b) There is no clear mention of transit in this

150 Deva Keralam
verse. The dasa of the 6th lord (Venus) is referred
to which leads to such a possible interpretation.
मातामहाधिपे A नायां तु मङ्गलां शके ।
माता महश्चिरायुष्मान् बहुभ्रातृविनाशवान् ॥४००२ ॥
वार्धके पुत्रशोकापि किंचिदरर्हस्थ्यजीवनम् ।
वारुणांशकगे जीवे स्वमाता चिरजीविनी ॥४००३ ॥
माता महश्चिरयुष्मान् तथैव च पितामही |
पितामहाधिपे भोमे मेषांशे मद्गलांशगे ॥४००४ ॥
पितामहः प्रसिद्धश्च सोदरी भ्रातृसंयुतः।
उद्राहानन्तरं भाग्यं स्वपितामहसौख्यवान् ॥४००५ Il
वनान्तरपुरे वासी यावदायुष्यसोख्यवान् |
मेषांशगे सुताधीशे शशिजेन समन्विते ॥४००६ Il
प्रभांशगे प्रजातस्य seats: पितामहः।
4002 - 40064. (a) Maternal Grand-father:
Mars ruling maternal grand-father (the 12th from
the ascendant which is the 9th from the 4th) and
posited in Mangala Nadiamsa will ensure longevity to the said relative who would lose many a
brother. He would incur much grief on account of
loss of progeny in his old age. He would somewhat
be in the order of a house-holder.
(b) Grand-parents: Jupiter in Varuna Nadiamsa will give longevity to mother. His maternal
grand-parents would also be long-lived.
(c) Paternal Grand-father: Mars, the planet
denoting paternal grand-father, (as the Sth lord)
should be in Mangala Nadiamsa and Aries Navamsa. As aresult, the said relative would be famous
and would have co-bom. He would acquire prosperity following his marriage and be happy. He
would live in a town surrounded by forests and be
happy throughout his life.
(0) The lord of the Sth (Mars) in the company
of Mercury, begetting Aries Navamsa, denotes that
one’s paternal grand-father would have large testicles. This applies to Prabha Nadiamsa.
Notes: (d) Since Prabha Nadiamsa and Varuna
Nadiamsa for Sagittarius ascendant appear in the
. game breath, identical effects for both the divis:ui.~
are to be understood for this sign ascending. Such
a mention for two different Nadiamsas has been
made earlier.
वृषभांशे धनुर्लग्ने तदीशे वारुणांशगे ॥४००७॥
निधनाधिपसंयुक्ते पितरो च चिरायुषो |
वंशोपरि सुभाग्याप्तिः पञ्चविंशे सुवाहनम् ॥४००८ ॥
अष्टादशे श्रियं विद्यां स्वपितृयुत भाग्यवान् ।
प्रभांशे चोत्तरे भागे वारुणांशकगे गुरौ ॥४००९ ॥
नवमाब्दे मनस्तापं क्लेशं चेदष्टवत्सरम्।
पूर्वभागे प्रजातश्च वसुवर्षात् परं सुखम् ॥४०१० ॥
स्वपिता भाग्य वृद्धि च ह्यद्योगं दशवत्सरम् |
पश्चादरिद्रमापोति वसुव्षत् परं विपत् Iso Rk ॥
उत्तरांशे प्रजातस्य सायनाब्दात् परं सुखम् |
स्वपिता बहुभाग्यप्ि भाग्याधिपदशात्यगे ॥४०१२ ॥
4007 - 40012. (a) Birth in Sagittarius ascendant
with Taurus Navamsa while Jupiter is in Varuna
Nadiamsa in the company of the 8th lord Moon,
will grant longevity to parents. The native’s prosperity will occur after the age of 20. At 25 he will
beget a superior conveyance. Through his learning, he will make wealth at 28 (read from 28) along
with his father.
(b) One born in the 2nd half of Prabha Nadi- _
amsa, Sagittarius ascendant while Jupiter is in
Varuna Nadiamsa will undergo mental distress for
a period of 8 years from his 9th year.
(©) The native of 1st half of the said Nadiamsa
will enjoy happiness after the 8th year. His father
will have increased prosperity and will be in employment for 10 years. After this, he will incur
poverty and be endangered 8 years later.
(d) One of 2nd half will be happy after 18
months and his father will earn much prosperity in ।
the end of the native’s Sun dasa.
लग्ने जीवे सुखे शुक्रे कर्मे भाग्ये न संशयः।
स्वपिता वाहनाद्यश्च WHS सुकीर्तिमान् ॥४०१३ ॥
सोदरभ्रातृमान् रागी ज्येष्ठभ्रातृवियोगवान् |
त्रिसोदराश्चायुष्मन्तो भगिन्या चैकया युतः ॥४०१४॥
4013 - 4014. Father: (The first line of sloka
No. 4013 stands incomplete.) The ascendant is
“required to contain Jupiter while the 4th has Venus.
(But the 9th and 10th are mentioned without completing the condition.) This yoga is said to cause
rich vehicles and wide fame in royal circles to one’s
father. He will nave co-bom, be passionate and will
suffer loss of older co-born. Three brothers and one
sister will be long-lived.

Chandra Kala Nadi 151
सूर्यकलाधिपे मन्दे तृतीये मकरंशगे |
धनुर्लगने प्रजातश्च स्वपितामहभाग्यवान् ॥४० १५ Il
4015. Saturn being the lord of the day (Cf. day
and night) should be placed in the 3rd (the sign
Aquarius) with Capricorn Navamsa. As a result,
one of Sagittarius ascendant will enjoy fortunes (or
happiness) through paternal grand-father.
सूर्यलग्ने सूर्यकाले पापक्रान्तोदभवस्य च।
शुभदृष्टिविहीनस्य aera विनिर्दिशेत् ॥४०१६ Il
चन्द्रयोग धनुर्लग्ने तदीरो वारुणांशगे |
भाग्याधिपेकुमारांशे भाग्ययुक्तो न संशयः॥४०१७ Il
स्वपित्रधिकभाग्याप्ि विवाहानन्तरं सुखम् |
बाल्ये सौख्यं विजानीयात् कौमारेऽल्पसुखान्वितः॥४०१८ ॥
योवने भाग्यमाप्नोति facet श्रियायुतम् ।
रन्धराधिपतिदोषेण पितृपीडा क्वचित् क्वचित् ॥४०१९ ॥
पितामही विनाशेन स्वपिता क्लेशवान् सुखी |
कुमारांशगते सूर्ये कर्म शनिसमन्विते ॥४०२० Il
खण्डद्वयं तदशायां amg विनिर्दिशेत् ।
जन्मतारादशान्त्यादौ खण्डाधिपतिदायके ॥४०२१॥
निधनाधिपदोषेण सम्पदाये न योगवान् |
4016 - 4021142. (a) Limited Fortunes: Birth in
Sagittarius should be during day time while the Sun
sign is occupied by a malefic. Fortunes will then
be meagre provided the Sun sign is bereft of a
benefic’s aspect.
(b) One will be fortunate if the ascendant
Sagittarius begets the Moon’s occupation while
Jupiter and the 9th lord (Sun) are in order in Varuna
and Kumara Nadiamsas. The person will obtain
fortunes, subsequent to marriage, which will exceed that of his father. He will be happy in his early
days while in his pre-youth days he will not be so
happy. Fortunes will rise along with his adolescence. Wealth will come to him in his 3rd dasa.
(c) Father: The yoga mentioned at “b” above
will cause some troubles to father because of the
Moon’s 8th lordship. Following paternal grandmother’s death, his father will be grieved. (“Sukhi”
denoting happiness to father in a contradictory
term in the present context.)
(d) The Sun in Kumara Nadiamsa and joining
Satum in the 10th .... in that dasa, one’s prosperity
will be checked. In the end of the first dasa, in the
dasa of .... due to blemish of 8th lordship, the 2nd
dasa will not grant prosperity.
Notes: (0) “Khanda” means deficient, crippled
or a chapter. None of the meanings suits our
context in the expression “Khanda Dvaya”. The
word “dvaya” means two.
Similarly, “Khandadipati dayake” meaning “the
dasa of Khanda” leads us nowhere. No house in a
horoscope is called “Khanda” although this term
occurs in Ashtaka Varga for a group of four houses.
Perhaps, the reference is to the 2nd dasa which is of
the Moon. So naturally the first dasa checking
prosperity should be of the Sun who is in the 10th
with Satum. This assumption of dasa periods is
corroborated by the ensuing sloka.
अष्टमाधिपतौ FS लग्नेशेन समन्विते ॥४०२२॥
वारुणांशे चक्रयोगे विपदाये श्रियायुतः।
राजयोगं च लभते तत्समो वा सुखी भवेत् ॥४०२३ Il
नरवाहनभूषापि प्रबलोद्योगजीवनम्।
सन्तानोदत्तिमाप्नोति सोदरी श्रियमश्नुते ॥४०२४॥
4022 - 4024. Raja Yoga Effects: The 8th lord
Moon in conjunction with the ascendant lord (Jupiter), while the latter is in Varuna Nadiamsa, will
cause wealth in the 3rd dasa. The native will get
Raja Yoga effect (leading to kingly prosperity) or
something equal to that. Conveyances, ornaments,
powerful employment, happiness and birth of children will all result. His sister will also become
wealthy.
Notes: The condition of Chakra Yoga seems to
be an interruption because Chakra Yoga by itself is
a far superior one. Also please see notes under
sloka 244, page 27, Book 1 hereof for further
details.
वारुणांशकगे जीवे चक्रयोग समुद्भवः।
लाभाधिपदशाकाले स्वपित्रा सह यात्रिकः ॥४०२५ ॥
लग्नेशांशे aera स्फुटयोगं गते शनौ |
सेतुयात्रा फलप्रापितिर्लाभाधिपतिदायके ॥४०२६ ॥
area तथा विन्द्यात् प्रत्यग्दाये तथेव च।
सेतुयात्रात्रिवारं च गङ्गास्नानफलं स्मृतम् ॥४०२७॥
लग्नात् कर्मगते राहौ गङ्खास्नानसुपुण्यवान् |
तदभावे सेतुयात्रा त्रिवारं नात्र संशयः ॥४०२८ ॥

152 Deva Keralam
महादानफलप्रापिर्भाग्यकर्मेशसंयुतौ ।
अग्रहारप्रतिष्ठाता कीर्तिमांश्च न संशयः ॥४०२९ ॥
4025 - 4029. Pilgrimage: (a) The native of
Sagittarius ascendant having Jupiter in Varuna
Nadiamsa will undertake a pilgrimage along with
his father in the dasa of the 11th lord (Venus).
(b) When Saturn transits the sign denoted by
the Navamsa of the lord of the ascendant 6.6.
Jupiter), or a trine thereof, one will go to Setu (on
pilgrimage) in the dasa of the 11th lord (Venus).
(c) The 4th dasa and Sth dasa will also give
pilgrimage to Setu etc. for a period of three weeks.
Dips in sacred Ganges will also be the result
concerned.
(0) Rahu in the 10th will enable one to undertake pilgrimage to the Ganges or else to the Setu,
for a period of three weeks.
(e) The subject will get the fruits of a great
donation if the 9th and 10th lords are conjunct at
birth. Further he will construct a colony of Brahmins and acquire fame.
Notes: (€) “Maha Dana” means a certain valuable or great gift. Sastras like “Pancharatra” have
enlisted sixteen such Gifts. Some recognize seven —
Gifts.
Some of the Gifts are - offering libations to
ancestors (Pinda Dana), giving away a girl in
marriage (Kanya Dana), donating a cow (Pasu
Dana), and poor-feeding (Anna Dana).
लग्नाधिपदशाकाले शुभाशुभफलं समम्।
बुधान्ते ORE स्याच्छान्त्या शानि प्रयास्यति ॥४०३० Il
रन्धाधिपान्तरे काले लग्नाधिपतिदायगे ।
वारुणांशे प्रजातस्य BATT संशयः॥४०३१॥
4030 - 4031. Dasa of Jupiter: (a) In the dasa of
Jupiter (placed in Varuna Nadiamsa), the native of
Sagittarius ascendant, will experience good and
bad effects in an equal measure.
(b) Mercury’s sub period thereof will produce
evils which are probably remediable.
(c) He will have to die in the sub period of the
8th lord (Moon) in the dasa of the said dasa of
Jupiter.
भाग्याधिपे कुमारांशे मङ्गलांशे सुताधिपे |
वारुणांशे प्रजातश्च पूर्वजन्मनि शूद्रकः ॥४९ ३२. ॥
पश्चाज्जन्म तथा विन्द्रादस्मिञ्जन्मनि कीर्तिमान् |
पितृवाक्यरतो नित्यं राजसप्रकृतिः सुखी ॥४०३३ ॥
धर्मे च निरतश्चेव किचित्तामसकृत्यवान् |
4032 - 40331. The 9th lord (Sun) and the Sth
lord (Mars) placed in order in Kumara and Mangala
Nadiamsas denote that the native would have been
a Soodra in his previous birth. So also in the next
birth. In this birth, he will be a famous personage.
He will honour his father’s words and be passionate `
and happy. He will stick to a virtuous path but be
somewhat indolent in disposition.
लग्ने जीवे वारुणांशे भृसुतेन निरीक्षिते ॥४०३४ Il
रजोगुणसमायुक्तः किंचित्तामसकृत्यवान् |
लग्ने जीवे सुखे शुक्रे तृतीये पापखेचरे ॥४०३५ ॥
राजमुद्राधिकारी च बहुदेशाधिपत्यवान् |
सदा राजसधर्मज्ञः कीर्तिमांश्च पुराणवित् ॥४०३६ ॥
शिवभक्तिरतो नित्यं शिववेद्भर्यभक्तिमान् |
कुमारंशके सूर्ये वृश्चिके कालसंस्थिते ॥४०३७ Il
धर्नुलगने प्रजातश्च हरिशङ्करभक्तिमान् |
सन्मार्गवृत्तिमानित्यं वैदिकाचारतत्परः ॥४०३८ ॥
` देवी भक्तो विशेषेण धर्मपुण्यपुराणवित् |
स्वपिता च तथैव स्याद्रन्धुवर्गे सुकौर्विमान् ॥४०३९ ॥
4034 - 4039. (a) Jupiter in Sagittarius ascendant with the aspect of Mars will cause passionate
and somewhat indolent dispositions.
(b) A Superior Raja Yoga: Jupiter in the
ascendant, Venus in the 4th (in Pisces), and a
malefic in the 3rd (Aquarius) will give a royal
assignment with authority. One will rule over
many countries, be versed in the just duties that are
due to a king, will attain fame and be an expert in
ancient scriptures. A devotee of Lord Siva, he will
perform service expected of a devotee of Siva.
(c) The Sun in Scorpio in Kumara Nadiamsa
will make a Sagittarius native 4 devotee of Lords
Vishnu and Siva. He will ever take to a good path
of conduct and be interested in the Vedic conduct.
He will be specially devoted to Devi (female deity)
and be versed in justice and meritorious deeds. So!
also will his father be. He will be quite.famous in
‘the circle of his re‘itives.
भाग्यारूदाधिपे . पन्दे स्वक्षेत्रे मकरांशगे |

Chandra Kala Nadi 153
अन्तक्रोधी प्रसन्नात्मा लोभप्रकृतिमान् पिता ॥४०४० ॥
परोपकारनिरतो वाचाधर्मपरायणः।
पितृव्यौ द्रौ महापापी एकः पुण्य युतोऽपरः॥४०४१ ॥
पितृष्वसा सुमाद्गल्या बहुपुत्रवती सती ॥४०४२ Il
पितृष्वसा पुत्रयोगं प्राबल्यं चोत्तरोत्तरम् |
ज्ञातिभाग्यवशात् कर्ति नरवाहनभाक् सुखी ॥४०४२ Il
4040 - 4043. (a) Father: One of the signs of
Saturn should become the Arudha for the 9th.
Saturn should be in the said Pada and beget Capricorn Navamsa. As aresult, the native’s father will’
beget the following effects. He will be inwardly
irascible, but be pleased and be a miser but be ever
ready to help others. He will be interested in sacred
texts and ancient laws.
(b) Paternal Relatives: Further, as a result of
the said Yoga, the native will have two paternal
uncles one of whom will be a great sinner. Another
will be meritorious. Father’ s sister will have alongliving husband, will have many sons and her progeny will acquire period after period. Fame and
conveyances will be acquired by her sons through
the kinsfolk.
वारुणांशकगे जीवे चक्रयोगोद भवस्य च।
कुमारंशे फलं सत्यं पितृब्यौ द्वावपुत्रको ॥४०४४ ॥
कालान्तरे तयोरेकः सन्तानोत्पत्तिमान् सुखी |
कुमारांशे गर्गमते पितृव्येकः सुपुत्रवान् ।४०४५ ॥
4044 - 4045. The effects stated for Kumara
Nadiamsa will be truthful. Two of the native’s
paternal uncles (father’s brothers) will be childless.
After a long time one of them will have progeny.
According to sage Garga, one particular paternal
uncle will have a good son.
Notes: There is some mix up here. These two
may have to be read with the Sun’s position in
Scorpio in Kumara Nadiamsa, vide sloka 4037
supra.
गर्गः
वारुणांशकगे जीवे कुमारांशकगे रवौ |
स्वपितुः सोदरस्त्वेकः पुत्रवांश्च न संशयः ॥४०४६ ॥
वन्ध्यापति दयोरेको मृतप्रजायुतस्तथा |
कालान्तरे सुसन्तानं वृद्धगारग्यमते स्मृतम् ॥४०४७ ॥
, मङ्गलांशे सुताधीशे रविसौम्यसमन्विते |
ARTY प्रजातश्च ह्यल्पसन्तानयोगवान् ॥४०४८ Il
लग्नाच्तृतीयगे मन्दे वारुणांशोद् भवस्य च ।
मृतप्रजाबहुत्वं स्यादेकः पुत्रश्चिरायुषः ॥४०४९ ॥
दारद्रये सुतप्रापिर्वारुणांशकगे गुरौ ।
आयुष्मन्तौ च पुत्रौ at पूत्रिण्यौ द्रे च जीविते ॥४०५० ॥
सुतेशे मङ्गलां शस्थे प्रभांशे चक्रयोगगे |
दारद्रये सुतप्राप्िर्बहुसन्तानयोगवान् ॥४०५१ ॥
एकोन्विशवर्षादौ विपदाये सुपुत्रवान् |
तृतीयशनिदोषेण सीमन्तशिशुनाशनम् ॥४०५२ ॥
4046 - 4052. The following are according to
sage Garga.
(a) Paternal Uncles: Jupiter in Varuna Nadiamsa while the Sun is Kumara Nadiamsa will give
sons to a brother of the native’s father. The other
of the two uncles will have a barren wife or will
beget dead issues. After some time, he will obtain
long-living progeny. This view has been held by
senior Garga.
(b) The Native: The Sth lord Mars in Mangala
Nadiamsa in the company of the Sun and Mercury
will give a limited number of issues to one born in
Varuna Nadiamsa, Sagittarius ascendant.
(c) Saturn in the 3rd (Aquarius) will give many
dead children. Perhaps one son will be endowed
with longevity.
(d) Jupiter in Varuna Nadiamsa will give two
wives and also progeny. Two sons and two daughters will be long-lived.
(e) The Sth lord (Mars) in Mangala Nadiamsa
will also cause two wives and progeny to the native
of Prabha Nadiamsa. His children will be many in
number. In the 19th year, during the 3rd dasa, he
will obtain a son. Due to Saturn’s placement in the
3rd (Aquarius) his first issue will be destroyed.
Notes: (€) Prabha Nadiamsa and Varuna Nadiamsa in Sagittarius are capable of giving identical
effects, as mentioned earlier.
धनेशांशे तच्िकोण स्फुटयोगं गते शनो ।
धनेशद्ष्टिराशो तु स्वप्रभोश्च महाविपत् ॥४०५३ ॥
भाग्येशांरो सप्तमे वा द्वादशांशे च जन्मभे।
स्फुटयोगं गते मन्दे नृपतिक्लेशमादिशेत् ॥४०५४ ॥
भाग्याधिपदशाकाले गोचरे ललने शनौ ।
स्ववासदेशनृपति FARA संशयः ॥४०५५ ॥

154 Deva Keralam
जन्मदाये मीनशनौ मेषान्ते वृषभेस्थिते |
स्ववासदेशे नृपतेरपमृत्युर्भविष्यति ॥४०५६ ॥
वृश्चिकान्ते जन्मशनौ वारुणांशोद भवस्य च |
स्वेन सेवितभूपस्य मृत्युस्यान्नात्र संशयः ॥४०५७ Il
जीवितेऽश्वादि नाशः स्यादायादिकलहो महान् |
4053 - 40571. Irrelevant: (a) Note the Navamsa position of 2nd lord (Saturn). When Saturn
himself comes to the sign identical with that Navamsa, or a trine thereof, or the sign aspected by him
at birth, the king will be greatly in danger.
(b) Add the longitudes of the lords of the 9th,
7th and 12th counted from the ascendant. Saturn in
transit in the resultant sign will cause anguish to the
king.
(©) During the operation of the dasa of the lord
(Sun), the planet Saturn moving in Virgo will cause
the death of the native’s country.
(d) In the Ist dasa, Saturn’s transit in Pisces or
in the end of Aries, or in Taurus, will cause the same
effect as at “c” above.
(e) The transit of Saturn in the end of Scorpio
on the Moon sign will again cause the said effect.
If the king survives, horses etc. will be destroyed.
The king will be involved in strife with his kinsfolk.
सुतेशांशे frames स्वपितुर्जन्मभं विदुः ॥४०५८ ॥
सुतेशांशे त्रिकोणर्षे पुत्रजन्मर्षभं fag: |
राज्याधिपे मङ्गलांशे भाग्यकर्मेशसंयुते ॥४०५९ ॥
तदशायां महद्भाग्यं बुधभुक्तौ निरोधवान्।
रन्धाधिपदशाकाले कर्माधिपति भुक्तिषु ॥४०६० ॥
सहोदर मनस्तापं राजद्वारे कलापवान् |
स्वदारदेह पीडां च PTAA विचारवान् ॥४०६१ ॥
स्वप्रभोश्च मनस्तापं तदद्रारिस्थजनावधि |
भाग्याधिपदशाकाले त्विदं फलमुदाहरेत् ॥४०६२ ॥
प्राबल्यं वेष्णवक्लेशं बुधभुक्तो फलं स्मृतम्।
स्वपिता मित्रवर्गेण क्लेशं प्राणोति भूरिशः॥४०६३ ॥
पश्चात् प्राबल्यमाप्नोति शुक्रभुक्तौ पिता सुखम्।
fae शनिस्थिते काले भाग्याधिपतिदायके ॥४०६४ It
पितृव्यपुत्रिकोद्राहयो पितृव्यश्च प्रपीडितः।
4058 - 406412. (a) The birth sign of one’s son
will correspond to the Navamsa occupied by the
Sth lord.
(b) Mercury’s Dasa: The lord of the 10th
(Mercury) joining the 9th lord in Mangala Nadiamsa will in his dasa bring forth much fortunes.
Obstacles will crop up in the sub period of Mercury.
(€) Moon’s Dasa: The Dasa of the 8th lord
(Moon) will cause differences with co-born and in
royal service, during the sub period of the 10th lord
(Mercury). The native’s spouse will incur physical
illness and he will have a change of place with an
adverse transit of the Sun. Distress to the king and
his men will also result(?)
(d) Sun’s Dasa: The following are the effects
of the dasa of the 9th lord. His father will obtain
predominance and will be abundantly anguished
due to Vaishnavites and friends’ circles in the sub
period of Mercury. Later in the sub period of
Venus, father will become predominant and be
happy. During the dasa of the Sun, with the
movement of Saturn in Leo, marriage of the daughter of one’s paternal uncle will take place. But the
said uncle will be subjected to evils.
Notes: (b) “Karmesa” is a wrong addition as
already the 10th lord is denoted by the term
“Rajyadhipa”’.
रध्राधिपदशाकाले चापान्ते मकरे शनो ॥४०६५ ॥
कलत्रदेह पीडा च दारवंशे महाविपत्।
लाभांशे तच्तरिकोणे स्फुटयोगं गते शनो ॥४०६६ ॥
लाभेश दृष्टिराशो तु मातृपीडां विनिर्दिशेत्।
मेषान्ते वृषमे मन्दे गोचरे क्षेमदायके ॥४०६७ ॥
सूर्याशमासकोणेषु पितृनिर्याणमादिशेत्।
सूर्यलग्ने सूर्यकाले सुखेशांशत्रिकोणगे ॥४०६८ ॥
स्फुटयोगं गते मन्दे पितृपीडां विनिर्दिशेत् |
भाग्याधिपदशाकाले रन्धराधिपतिदायके ॥४०६९ ॥
कीटे शनिस्थिते काले स्वपितुर्मनसि व्यथा |
अपमृत्युभयप्राप्तिः शान्त्या शानि प्रयास्यति ॥४०७० ॥
राजयोगं च लभते तत्कालेऽमात्यसंशयः।
व्ययेशांशे तच्तिकोणे स्फुटयोगं गते शनो ॥४०७१ ॥
व्ययेश दृष्टिराशौ तु पितृपीडां विनिर्दिशेत् |
तदभावे जन्मदेशे राज्याधिपतिनाशनम् ॥४०७२ Il
मातृवर्गजनारिष्टमथ वा रोगपीडनम् |
स्ववासदेशनृपतेरिदं फलमुदाहरेत् ॥४०७३ ॥
4065 - 4073. Evils: (a) Saturn moving in the

Chandra Kala Nadi 155
end of Sagittarius or in Capricorn, when the dasa of
the 8th lord (Moon) is in operation will promote
evils to one’s spouse. There will also be a great
danger in the in-laws’ family.
(b) One’s mother will be subjected to evils as
Saturn passes through the following places - the
sign equal to the Navamsa occupied by the 11th
lord, a trine thereof and the sign aspected by the
11th lord.
(c) Father’s death will occur in the 4th dasa
with Saturn moving in the end of Aries or in Taurus.
The corresponding month will be shown by the Sun
transiting in the sign equal to his natal Navamsa
position or a trine thereof.
(d) Evil to father will persist during Saturn’s
transit in the Sun sign. The same will also occur
with Saturn’s transit in the sign caused by the
Navamsa position of the 4th lord, or a trine thereof.
(€) One’s father will mentally be distressed
with Saturn’s transit in Scorpio. The relevant dasa
will be that of the 9th lord (Sun) and the sub period
will be of the 8th lord (Moon). Further, there will
exist fear of father’s untimely death for which
remedies should be attempted.
(e) At the time of Saturn’s transit in the sign
equal to the Navamsa position of the 12th lord ora
trine from there, or in the sign aspected by the 12th
lord, evils to father will have to be experienced. In
the absence of evils to father, the country’s ruler
will be destroyed (?) Evils to the members of the
mother’s family and diseases will follow. This
way, effects for one’s king are foretold(?)
Notes: (d) “Surya Kala” is a redundant term.
(e) The first line of sloka 4071 is not included
in the translation. It indicates fruition of Raja Yoga
and at that time ... the minister... Apparently, there
is something incoherent.
जन्मेशस्य दशान्त्यादौ मिथुनान्त्याष्टमे शनो ।
अनावृष्टिहते देशे किंचिहु्भिक्षमादिशेत् ॥४०७४ ॥
सम्पत्तारदशान्त्यादौ विपद्दाये तुलाशनो |
अनावृष्टिश्च महती लोके दुर्भिक्ष जं भयम् ॥४०७५ Il
चापे जीवे वारुणांशे मिथुनान्त्यत्रिकोणगे |
स्फुटयोगं गते मन्दे Waray विनिर्दिशेत् ।
° विप्लवेन मनस्तापं स्वप्रभोश्च विशेषतः ॥४०७६ ॥
कन्याशनिस्थिते काले चन्द्रयोग समुदभवः।
कृष्णागोदावरीमध्ये हताश्वो हतसेनिकः ॥४०७७ ॥
मीनेऽर्कनन्दने काले पाण्ड्यदेशे तथा भवेत्।
वृषभे म्लेच्छनाश स्यात् कुलीरे चोलदेशगे ॥४०७८ Il
तच्िकोणेऽथ वा चेति पाण्ड्यभूपतिनाशनम्।
4074 - 407814. Irrelevant: In the end of the
ascendant lord’s dasa, with Saturn’s journey in
Gemini’s end, or in the 8th (Cancer), the country
will reel under partial famine due to absence of
rains. In the beginning and ending of 2nd dasa, or
in the 3rd dasa, Saturn’s transit in Libra, intense
shortage of rains and fear of famine will come to
pass. Lack of rains will coincide with Jupiter’s
transit in Sagittarius ... Saturn in end of Gemini ..
Acalamity will occur to one’s distress, particularly
to one’s king. Saturn’s stay in Virgo, for a native
of Chandra Yoga(?) will cause loss of army and
horses in the region placed between Krishna and
Godavari. The same will occur in Pandyakingdom
when Pisces is transited by Saturn. In Taurus, he
will destroy Mlechchas. Chola kingdom will perish with Saturn coming to Cancer. In the trines of
Cancer, Saturn’s movements will kill the king of
Pandya.
प्रभुस्थानाधिपे सूर्ये राज्यपेन समन्विते ॥४०७९ ॥
कर्माधिपेन संयुक्ते कुमारांशमुद् भवः।
सुकुमार शरीरी च स्थूलकायो महामतिः ॥४०८० ॥
aera नृप विश्वासी महाराजप्रियः सुखी |
AEN प्रनलश्चेव राज्याधिपतिदायके ॥४०८१ ॥
राजन्यद्रेषवान् किंचित् त्रिवारं राजविग्रहम् |
विपदात्वेकवारं स्यात् क्षेमदाये तथा भवेत् ॥४०८२ ॥
wearers विशेषेण वेधकग्रहभुक्तिषु |
षष्ठाष्टमव्ययाधीशराश्यंशे गोचरे रवो ॥४०८३ ॥
वेधकस्यान्तरे काले राजोपद्रवमादिशेत्।
कारागृहभयप्राप्तिः संचितार्थविनाशनम् ॥४०८४ Il
क्लेशकालं विजानीयाद भुक्तिमार्गेण योजयेत् |
4079 - 4084142. The Sun in Kumara Nadiamsa
_ and joining the 10th lord (Mercury) will give the
following effects for a Sagittarius native. He will
have a soft and huge body, be greatly intelligent,
will earn a lot of trust and affection of the ruler and
will become predominant through the king in the

156 Deva Keralam
10th lord’s dasa. For about three weeks, he will be
subjected to royal wrath. Soalso for one week in the
3rd dasa as well as the 4th dasa. Royal wrath will
be specially evident in the 5th dasa, during the subrulership of a planet of obstacles (i.e. a planet illdisposed to Sagittarius). When the transit Sun
comes into the signs denoted by the Rasi and
Navamsa positions of the lords of the 6th, 8th and
12th, misfortune from royal circles will be present.
The subject will be imprisoned, willlose his wealth
and be anguished. These should be estimated with
the help of sub periods.
Notes: “Rajyapa” and “Karmadhipa” both indicate the 10th lord only.
The present slokas continue to deal with Varuna
Nadiamsa of Sagittarius ascendant, and not with
Kumara Nadiamsa. The Sun’s position in Kumara
Nadiamsa is now dealt with, as done on earlier
occasion. This position is finally mentioned in
slokas 4100 and 4101 also. The current text thus
deals with 3 different Nadiamsa positions for 3
different planets as mentioned in sloka 4101.
Kumara (or Kumari) Nadiamsa has been discussed in the notes under sloka 244, p 26, Book 1. -
चपे कन्यांशगे जीवे कुम्भे चन्द्रे च संस्थिते ॥४०८५ ॥
कन्याजीवे घटे चन्द्रे तयोः पाके BANAT |
जन्मदाये जन्मभुक्तो मृतप्रायोपजीवति ॥४०८६ ॥
रन्धाधिपदशाकाले ह्यपम्त्यर्भविष्यति |
चक्रसन्धौ दशासन्धौ काले वा गोचरे शनौ ॥४०८७ ॥
जीवराशि गते मन्दे स्वजनारिष्टमादिशेत् |
तुलाचक्रदशान्त्यादौ वृश्चिके चक्रदायके ॥४०८८ ॥
अतीव क्लेशकार्याणि कन्यान्ते तौलिगे शनौ |
अपमृत्युभयप्राप्तिश्चक्रदानं समाचरेत् ॥४०८९ ॥
एकोनविंशे विंशे वा द्येकविशतिवत्सरे।
कालचक्रदशासन्धो वारुणांशे ह्युपद्रवः॥४०९० ॥
तद्दोषपरिहारार्थं शानत कुर्याद्विचक्षणः।
एकाशीतिपदं चक्रं देवज्ञाय प्रदापयेत् |
अपमृत्युभयं नास्ति दीर्घमायुश्च विन्दति ॥४०९१ ॥
स्वसमानजनारिष्टं ज्ञातिवरगे शिशुक्षयम्।
मातामहविनाशेन मातुलक्लेशमादिशेत् ॥४०९२ ॥
4085 - 4092. Jupiter in Sagittarius with Virgo
Navamsa while the Moon is in the sign Aquarius, |
(or Jupiter and the Moon being in order in Virgo and
Aquarius) will in their dasa periods trouble the
native by diseases. In the first dasa, the first sub
period (whichever sub period rules the native as the
opening one) will nearly kill the subject. The 8th
lord’s sub period will cause fear of untimely death.
When Saturn comes to the Jeeva Rasi at the time of
junctions of two dasas (KCD), the person’s kinsfolk will confront evils. In the beginning and
ending of Libra dasa, or in Scorpio dasa, intense
difficulties will exist. Saturn moving in the end of
Virgo or in Libra will cause fear of untimely death.
To overcome this fear, donation of an image of the
zodiac be done. In the 19h, 20th or 21st year, when
the junction of Kala Chakra dasas of two Rasis
occurs, misfortune will strike the native of Varuna
Nadiamsa. To surmount this phase, remedies have
to be sought. By donating the image of a zodiac to
the astrologer, fear of untimely death will vanish.
The adversities of the dasa junction include evils to
people equal to the native, loss of a child in the
relatives’ circle and anguish to maternal uncles
because of death of maternal grand-father.
Notes: In sloka 4086, “Kanya Jive Ghate
Chandre” occurs which may otherwise look to be
in excess of what has been stated as in the 2nd line
of sloka 4085 - Jupiter in Sagittarius & C. One of
the two conditions can only apply but both cannot
at one and the same time exist. It however occurs
to me that the condition of the two planets, Jupiter
and the Moon, in mutual 6 and 8 positions in Virgo
and Aquarius is logical. As reference to Kala
Chakra dasa occurs simultaneously, Virgo and
Aquarius could be Jeeva and Deha Rasis, or vice
versa. In that case, the dasa references are to that of
the signs concerned.
कुम्भे शनिस्थिते काले देहपीडां मनोव्यथाम् |
चाप चक्रदशारोगं सन्तानोत्पत्तिनाशनम् ॥४०९३ ॥
देहे पपे देहपीडा जीवे पपे तथैव च।
तावुभौ पाप संयुक्तो तत्कालेचदशान्त्यगे ॥४०९४ ॥
प्राप्तायां मृतिभुक्तो च मारकश्च न संशयः।
विपरीते मृतिर्नास्ति देहायासाद्युपद्रवः ॥४०९५ ॥
4093 - 4095. Saturn reaching Aquarius will
produce troubles to.body and mind. The dasa of
Sagittarius will cause diseases and loss of children

Chandra Kala Nadi 157
being born. A malefic in transit in Deha Rasi will
cause diseases of the body. So also a malefic in
Jeeva Rasi. If both the signs are transited by .
malefics death will immediately strike in the said
dasa, in the sub period of a Maraka sign. In a
contrary Situation (i.e. transit in only one place)
will not give death but physical illnesses and
misfortunes.
कुम्भकन्या धनुमीनमिथुनेषु दिवाकरे |
प्रत्यब्दं कूर मासश्च देहायासं क्वचित् क्वचित् ॥४०९६ ॥
्रुराराशौ चापयोगे क्रूरमासे भवेद्यदि |
विशेषोपद्रवं चेति योजयेत् कालवित्तमः॥४०९७ Il
4096 - 4097. (During the above malefic transit), the Sun adversely moving in Aquarius, Virgo,
Sagittarius, Pisces and Gemini will every year (i.e.
within the transit period of a malefic) cause some
physical illness. In malefic signs, the Sun’s transit
will cause specially physical troubles.
Notes: “Chaapa Yoge” reads as “Paada Yoge”.
Both the expressions are unintelligible for our
purpose.
बुधास्तमयकाले वा जीवास्तमयगेऽपि च।
षष्ठाष्टमाधीशवारे देहोपद्रवमादिशेत् ॥४०९८ ॥
सहोदरप्रपीडादि मथवा स्वजनामयम्।
TAY RAT य इदं फलमश्नुते ॥४०९९॥
4098 - 4099. Physical illness will occur when
Mercury or Jupiter gets combust, on a week day
ruled by the lord of the 6th or 8th. Evils to co-born
and diseases among relatives will come to pass
every year with the adverse transits of the Sun
(when Deha and Jeeva Rasis are ill-transited).
मङ्गले मङ्गलांशस्थे कुमारांशे दिवाकरे ।
चक्रयोगे वारुणांशे ह्यपम्त्युर्मं विद्यते ॥४१०० ॥
साधनेशदशामृत्युं मेषान्ते वृषभे शनो ।
तत्तिकोणऽपमूत्युं च शान्ति कुर्याद्विचक्षणः ॥४१०१ ॥
4100 - 4101. Mars in Mangala Nadiamsa while
the Sun is in Kumara Nadiamsa will not cause
untimely death in case of birth in Varuna Nadiamsa, Sagittarius ascendant. His death will occur
only in the 6th dasa. However when Satum reaches
the end of Aries or Taurus, or a trine thereof, fear
of untimely death will exist which are to be remedied.
प्रहचारफलं चेति त्रिग्रहांशफलं स्मृतम् |
वृषभे च दशारम्भे तदीशे स्वोच्चराशिगे ॥४१०२ ॥
राजयोगं च लभते fared श्रियायुतम् ।
केतुयोगवशात् क्लेशं तृतीयांशे परार्धे ॥४१०३ ॥
स्वपिता amas च क्लेशं च विष्ठवत्सरम् |
युग्मराशिफलं चेवं सम्पदाये प्रभांशगे ॥४१०४ ॥
रन्धेश दृष्टिदोषेण स्वप्राबल्यं न विद्यते |
जामित्रभवने सूर्ये दशायां मध्यखण्डगे ॥४१०५ Il
स्वपिता राजसन्मानं विवाहोत्ससं भ्रमम् |
भाग्येशांशत्रिकोणक्ष दशारम्भे तदीश्वरे ॥४१०६ Il
लग्नाधिपेन संयुक्ते तदशायां शुभं भवेत्।
चक्रयोगे वारुणांशे विशेषफलमश्नुते ॥४१०७ ॥
स्वप्राबल्यं च लभते नरवाहनभाग्भवेत् |
4102 - 41071. (a) These are the effects for
transits and for the Nadiamsa positions of the 3
planets (Jupiter in Varuna Nadiamsa, Mars in
Mangala Nadiamsa and the Sun in Kumara Nadiamsa).
(b) When the dasa of Taurus (KCD) commences, its owner Venus transiting his exaltation
sign will produce effects of Raja Yoga. The 3rd
dasa (Vimsottari) will give wealth. Because of
Ketu’s association (with Venus at birth, vide sloka
3973 - 3975 supra), the dasa of Taurus will cause
anguish in the last 1/6th part. Further his father will
incur obstacles to his prosperity.
(c) The dasa of Gemini, as the 2nd one (following Taurus dasa as the first one), will not give
predominance to the native of Prabha Nadiamsa
because of the aspect of the 8th lord Moon on it
(from Sagittarius, vide slokas 3973 - 3975).
(d) The dasa of the Sun placed in the 7th
(Gemini) will in the middle of Sun’s dasa cause
royal honour to father and a family marriage. At the
time of the commencement of the Sun’s dasa, if the
transit Syn is conjunct Jupiter in a sign that is trinal
to the natal Sun’s Navamsa position, the dasa will
give auspicious effects. Further, one will beget an
eminent position and conveyances
Notes: (c) Normally, terms like Janma, Sampat,
Vipat etc are used only to denote the order position
in Vimsottari. Here in respect of KCD also, such
terms are used. Perhaps it is because we have nine

158 Deva Keralam
sequences in KCD as in Vimsottari.
(d) This is independent of slokas 3973 - 3975.
दशां द्वादशधा कृत्वा ओजयुग्मानुसारतः॥४१०८ ॥
अन्तर्दशाफलं चेति योजयेत् कालवित्तमः।
लग्नाधिपेन संदृष्टराशो सोख्यफलं विदुः ॥४१०९ ॥
भाग्य कर्मश राशीशावाक्रांतौ दृष्टिराशिषु |
वारुणांशे चक्रयोगे शुभं भवति नित्यशः॥४११० Il
सम्पदशान्त्यमारभ्य चतुष्के्द्रदशाशुभम् |
4108 - 4110. (a) Making a dasa into twelve
parts according to the sign being odd or even, the
results for sub periods are declared by astrologers.
(b) The sign aspected by the ascendant lord will
give auspicious effects.
(c) So also the signs aspected or occupied by
the 9th and 10th lord.
(d) The 2nd dasa and the dasas of the four
angular signs will yield auspicious effects.
Notes: (a) This is an incomplete clue and
belongs to Jaimini school of astrology.
(d) Same as “a” above.
मिथुनान्ते भ्रियावाप्तिः कुलीरे बहुभाग्यवान् ॥४१११॥
. सहोदरी विवाहः स्यात् feed ललने गुरो ।
राजयोगं च लभते पितुमूलाच्छुभावहम् ॥४११२ ॥
पापाक्रान्तान्तारे काले पूर्वोक्तक्रूरकालगे |
अतीव क्लेशकार्याणि arias विनिर्दिशेत् ॥४११३ ॥
4111 - 4113. (a) Transit of Jupiter: Jupiter’s
transit in the end of Gemini will give wealth. With
his movement in Cancer, much prosperity will
come to pass apart from marriage to sister. He will
give Raja Yoga effects and auspiciousness through
father while moving in the end of Leo or in Virgo.
(b) In the sub periods of malefics and in earlier
mentioned adverse months, one will undergo a lot
of difficulties in undertakings and incur obstacles
to prosperity.
Notes: These apply to Jupiter’s transits while
the 2nd dasa operates for a Sagittarius native.
Certain transits.of the Sun are noted as adverse,
vide sloka 3842 - 55% for Libra ascendant. It is not
known whether the same apply here.
fae सिहांशके ata लग्नेशेन निरीक्षिते ।
TEMA महद्भाग्यं धनुर्लग्नोद् भवस्य च ॥४११४॥
4114. The dasa of Mars will produce great
fortunes if he is in Vargottama in Leo with Jupiter’s
aspect, for a native of Sagittarius ascendant.
द्वितीयोद्वाहमाप्नोति चक्र योगसमुद्भवः।
विपद्दाये तृतीयांशे पूर्वार्धे क्षेमदायगे ॥४९१५.॥
मकरान्ते घटे मन्दे द्वितीयोद्राहमादिशेत् । `
दशाकालादि निश्चित्य फलानि परिचिन्तयेत् ॥४११६ Il
4115 - 4116. In the last one third part of the 3rd
dasa, or in the 4th dasa, when Saturn transits the
end of Capricorn, or Aquarius, the native of Sagittarius ascendant will-have his 2nd marriage. This
should be declared after analysing the dasa periods.
Notes: Results in continuation of this yoga are
mentioned in two more verses, i.e. 4119 and 4120
infra. Thus slokas 4116 to 4118 are independent of
the present yoga featuring Mars.
गोचरे स्फुटयोगांशे फलं योज्य विचक्षणः।
सुताधिपदशाकाले पितृव्यस्य महाविपत् |
रन्ध्राधिदशाकाले स्वपितुः सोदरीव्यथाम् ive ze ॥
4117. (a) Looking at transits with reference to
“added longitudes” (read sensitive degrees), results should be declared.
(b) In the dasa of the lord of the Sth, great
danger to paternal uncle will occur.
(©) In the dasa of the lord of the 8th, father’s
sister will be distressed.
Notes: (a) “Added longitudes” refers to the
sum total of the degree positions of lords of specified houses and or specified planets, as done, for
example, in slokas 4053 - 4057144.
We can understand these in a better way, thus.
We add the longitudes of the lord of the Sth and
Jupiter and scrutinise the same with future transits
to know about progeny. The present hint is a
general given by the text stressing the importance
of transits on sensitive degrees.
तत्तद भावाष्टमेशंशे स्फुटयोगं गते शनौ ।
तत्तन्मारकदोषेण तत्तत्िर्याणमादिशेत् ॥४११८ ॥
4118. Note a house ruling a specific relative
and also the planet ruling the 8th from that house.
Locate the Navamsa position of the said 8th lord.
When Saturn transits the sign represented by the
said Navamsa, or a trine thereof, death of the said —

Chandra Kala Nadi 159
relative will occur according to the blemish of
killer-planets (Marakas).
Notes: In this verse, Saturn’s transit is used to
know about the time of death of one’s relatives.
For example, take a Pisces ascendant horoscope. Leo, the 6th therefrom denotes maternal
uncle or aunt. The 8th from Leo is Pisces whose
lord is Jupiter. Say Jupiter is in Gemini Navamsa.
Hence when Satum transits the sign Gemini (not
the Navamsa Gemini) or Libra, or Aquarius, the
person’s maternal uncle or aunt will die.
However another condition is added, because
Saturn’s transit in one sign or the other, out of the
said three, is not rare. Simultaneous Maraka
influences i.e. predominance of a killer planet in
respect of the said uncle, along with Saturn’s
specified transit, are a part of the event. In the
absence of such Maraka influences, death of the
relative should not be foreseen. But some kind of
illness, misfortune etc. to a maternal relative can
occur.
This way, the various family members should
be connected with Saturn’s transit.
पञ्चत्रिशात् परं भाग्यं वारुणांश समुद् भवः।
गजान्तैश्वर्यमाप्नोति प्राधान्यं नात्र संशयः ॥४११९ ॥
राज्याधिपतिसन्मानं युद्धे जयति शात्रवान् |
अतीव बहुमानादि कीर्तिमांश्च न संशयः॥४१२० ॥
4119 - 4120. The native’s prosperity will rise
after 35, He will acquire wealth, importance and
honours from the ruler of the kingdom and will
conquer his foes in a battle.
Notes: The present two verses are in continuation of sloka 4115'supra where Vargottama Mars
in Leo is required to be under Jupiter’s aspects.
कामेशांशपतौ सूर्ये कुम्भांशे स्वांशकेऽपि वा।
परस्रीगमनं किंचिद्रातरोगशरीरवान् ॥४१२१ ॥
कालान्तरे चित्तशुद्धया परस्री भोगवर्जितः।
धर्ममार्गरतो नित्यं किंचिद्रोगशरीरवान् ॥४१२२ ॥
सर्वदा रोगिणी भार्या मध्ये मध्ये क्वचित् सुखम् ।
शुक्राष्टवर्गे विस्तारं दारसौख्यफलं स्मृतम् ॥४१२२ ॥
4121 - 4123. Navamsa Positions of Sun &
Mercury: Should the 7th lord Mercury be in Leo
Navamsa while the Sun is in Aquarius or Leo in
Navamsa, the native will have illicit relations with
women. He will have somewhat windy a physique.
After some interval, he will emerge pure-hearted
and will give up illicit ties. He will adopt a just
path. He will suffer from diseases to some extent.
His spouse will ever be troubled by diseases. Butin
between she will recover. With the help of the
Ashtaka Varga of Venus, happiness of spouse
should be elaborately understood.
चक्रयोगे वारुणांशे कुमारांशे दिवाकरे ।
मद्गलांशकगे भोमे पञ्चषष्टिः सुजीवति ive ev ॥
तदर्थे देहजाडयं स्यात् षटत्रिशाब्दे महाविपत्।
द्वाविंशे ज्वरपीडां च सन्तानोत्पत्तिनाशनम् ॥४१२५ ॥
मेषचक्रदशाकाले लग्नाधिपतिदायके |
वारुणांशे मेषशनौ धनुर्मासे मृतिं वदेत् ॥४१२६ ॥
अथवा मिथुने मासे कन्यामासेऽथ वा यदि।
शुक्लपक्षे सोमवारे तिर्याणमिति चादिशेत् ॥४१२७॥
ग्रन्थान्तरे कुमारांशे मङ्गलांश समुद् भवः।
गुरुवारे मृतिं चैति शुक्लपक्षे न संशयः॥४१२८ ॥
4124 - 4128. Mars & the Sun: (a) The native
of Varuna Nadiamsa having the Sun and Mars in
order in Kumara and Mangala Nadiamsas will live
` upto the age of 56. He will incur physical illness at
28. A great danger will strike him during his 36th
year. Trouble from fever and death of children
being born will come to pass at the age of 22.
(b) The death of the above native will occur in
the dasa of Aries (KCD) or in the dasa of ascendant
lord (Vimsottari). Saturn in transit will be in Aries
(the KCD sign), while the Sun will be in Sagittarius, Gemini or Virgo. Death will be on a Monday
in bright lunar half.
(c) There is another authority to state that the
day of death of the said native will be a Thursday
in bright lunar half.
Notes: In sloka 4128, the term “Kumaramse
Mangalamsa Samudbhavah” means the Sun and
Mars ‘respectively placed in these Nadiamsas as
Stated earlier, and not birth in these Nadiamsas.
सूर्ये करालषष्टयंशे कुमारां शोद भवस्य च।
वारुणांशेशलग्नेशौ पापपुण्यसमौ स्मृत were ॥
पुण्यलोकं तदा विन्द्यात् किंचित्पक्षे न लोकभाक् ।
व्ययेशे देवपष्ट यंशे नाड्यां तु मङ्गलांशजः॥४१२० Il
स्वजात्यानुगुणं लोकमन्ते ज्ञानयुतो भवेत् |

्रिप्रहांशफलं चैव प्रत्यक्षं देवकेरलम् ॥४९३१ ॥
4129 - 4131. After Death: (a) With the Sun in
Karala Shashtiamsa while Jupiter is in Varuna
Nadiamsa, one’s sins and meritorious deeds will be
equal in measure. He will attain the Heavens after
death. According to some, he will attain none, (i.e.
neither the Heavens nor the Hell - will have rebirth).
(b) Ifthe 12th lord Mars is in Deva Shashtiamsa,
he will attain such world according to his race of
birth and be a wise person.
(c) Thus have been brought to light the effects
of the Nadiamsa positions of the 3 planets.
Notes: (a) Reference to Kumara Nadiamsa is
not essential with reference to the Sun.
(b) Similarly Mangala Nadiamsa for Mars.
“Attaining a world according to race of birth”
is not a clear expression.
(c) These refer to Jupiter, Sun and Mars in order
in Varuna, Kumara and Mangala Nadiamsas, as
have so far been dealt with
With this, the discussions on Varuna Nadiamsa, Sagittarius ascendant ends.
धर्नुलगने उरगांश
उरगांशे निशानाथे सौम्ये गुरुसमन्विते |
विप्रकाले प्रजातश्च विप्रजन्मा सुखी भवेत् ॥४१३२ ॥ .
बालारिष्टं च लभते चन्द्रे कुजयुतेक्षिते |
उरगांशे निशानाथे PRT समुद् भवः॥४१३३ ॥
शूद्रजन्मा सुखी नित्यं तृतीयगर्भसंभवः।
अथवा च तुरीयः स्यात् पश्चाद्भाग्यविनाशवान् ॥४१३४ ॥
4132 - 4134. Sagittarius Ascendant: (a) With
the Moon in the Vipra Kala of Uraga Nadiamsa
while Mercury is conjunct Jupiter, a Brahmin will
be born.
(b) The Moon in the Soodra Kala of the said
Nadiamsa and with aspect or conjunction of Mars
will cause Balarishta or infantile mortality. The
native is a Soodra by birth and will be the 3rd or the
4th issue of the family. He will have no after-born.
Notes: (a) From here upto sloka 4188, the
ascendant dealt with is Sagittarius without any
Nadiamsa specified as rising. However, the Moon’s
_ position in Uraga Nadiamsa is a simultaneous
requirement.
Deva Keralam
(b) “Paschat bhagya vinasavan” should read as
“Paschat bhratru vinasavan”. Since the number of
issues is being discussed it should relate to co-born
(“Bhratru”’) and not to fortunes (“Bhagya’”’).
उरगांशकगे SR कर्मे गुरुनिरीक्षिते ।
पूर्वभागे राहुयोगे नालवेष्टनमादिशेत् ॥४१३५ ॥
TRIN प्रजातस्य वेष्टनं च न विद्यते ।
पूर्वभागे च यत्किचिद् गुरुदृष्टिवशात् सुखम् ॥४१३६ ॥
4135 - 4136. The Moon in the 10th in the first
half of the said Nadiamsa in the company of Rahu
and with Jupiter’s aspect would cause birth of the
child entwined in umbilical cord. The Moon in the
2nd half of this Nadiamsa will not cause this
blemish: Due to aspect of Jupiter in the first case,
the child will be happy, i.e. free from troubles at the
time of birth
बालारिष्ट भयं किंचिदुत्तरांशे क्वचित् क्वचित् |
उत्तरांशे वनप्रान्त्ये जननं म्लेच्छपडणे ॥४१३७ ॥
पूर्वभागे पुण्यदेशे त्वम्रहारे प्रसूतिमान् |
ग्रन्थान्तरे पुण्यदेशे महादेवपुरालये ॥४१३८ Il
जननं समितौ प्राहुेकाकी भ्रातृनाशवान् |
TRAY प्रजातश्च सोदरी WIAA: eI ॥
बाल्ये पितृविनाशः स्याज्ञयेष्ठभ्रातृत्रयः सुखी |
ज्येष्ठभ्राता पूर्वभागे त्वेकाकी सोख्यवान् सुखौ ॥४१४० ॥
भार्यापुत्रयुतो मानी व्यापारे बहु भाग्यवान् |
उत्तरांशे ्रजातश्च वसुवर्षे पितुर्विपत् wee ॥
जीविते दशमे at पित्ररिष्टं भवेद् धुवम् ।
पोडशाब्दे शुभं चेति ToT फलं स्मृतम् ॥४९४२ ॥
4137 - 4142. (a) The Moon in the 2nd half.
Uraga Nadiamsa will cause fear of infantile mortality to some extent. The birth of the child will be in
a town under the rulership of Mlechchas, near a
forest region
(b) The Moon in the Isthalf of Uraga Nadiamsa
will cause birth in a country of meritorious deeds,
in a colony of Brahmins. Another authority mentions birth in a temple of Lord Siva. The subject will
probably be the only issue of the family while his
co-born will be destroyed
(c) One having the Moon in the 2nd half of
Uraga Nadiamsa will have sisters and brothers. He
will lose his father in his childhood. Probably he

Chandra Kala Nadi 161
will have three older brothers. He will be endowed
with wife and sons. He will be honourable and will
have much fortunes through business activities.
During his 8th year, his father will be endangered.
Ifhe survives this period, there will be surely death
of father in the 10th year. His 16th year will prove
auspicious.
Notes: (c) The 2nd line of sloka 4140 denotes
one elder brother to the person with the Moon in the
1st half of Uraga Nadiamsa, which is not included
in the translation to avoid conflict with the result
mentioned at “b” above. This line seems to be an
interruption to the effects for 2nd half.
पूर्वभागे पितायुष्मान् जननी रोगपीडिता।
विपद्याये मृतिं चेति तुलांशे वृश्चिके शनो vex? ॥
4143. Where the Moon is in the Ist half of
Uraga Nadiamsa, one’s father will be long-lived.
Mother will be troubled by diseases and will die in
the native’s 3rd dasa. Transit Saturn will then be
in Scorpio, with Libra Navamsa.
उरगांशे निशानाथे दशमे राहुसंयुते |
पूर्वभागे नीलवर्णः सुशरीरः सुबुद्धिमान् ॥४१४४ ॥
विशालनयनो वाग्मी श्यामवर्णकलत्रवान् |
अल्पपत्रार्थसंपनो TT प्रसिद्धिमान् ॥४९१४५ ॥
, 4144-4145. The Moon & Rahu: The Moonin
the 10th (Virgo) in the first half of Uraga Nadiamsa
in the company of Rahu will cause a bluish (i.e.
dark) but sound physique. He will be quite intelligent, will have broad eyes, be eloquent in speech
and will acquire a dark-bodied spouse. He will
have limited: wealth and limited progeny and be
famous.
` सिहौशे दशमे राहौ कर्मेशेन समन्विते |
दशाधिपतिना दुष्टे बाल्ये क्लेशदरिद्रिवान् ॥४९१४६ ॥
4146. Rahu in the 10th (Virgo) along with the
10th lord (Mercury) and begetting Leo Navamsa
will cause difficulties and poverty in childhood.
Notes: “Aspected by dasa lord” appearing in
the 2nd line of the sloka is an unrelated term. For
what it is, is not known.
चन्द्रंशाधिपतौ जीवे स्वक्षेत्रे स्वनवांशके |
शनियोगे पापकर्मा तामसप्रकृतिर्धनी ॥४१४७ ॥
4147. The Moon should be in a Navamsa of
Jupiter while Jupiter is in his own sign and inown `
Navamsain the company of Saturn. As aresult, one
will indulge in sinful deeds and be indolent and
wealthy.
उरगांशे निशानाथे पापयोगे शुभेक्षिते |
अन्तज्रोधी प्रसन्नात्मा हितशतुर्िकार्यवान् |
उरगांशे निशानाथे गुरुसंयुतेवीश्षिते ॥४१४८ ॥
पूर्वभागे शान्तनुद्धिरविद्यावान् धनवान् सुखी |
SRI चौर्यकर्ता परस्रीभोगलोलुपः॥४१४९ ॥
तदभावे दुष्ट भायहितुमूलात् कलापवान् |
पूर्वभागे सत्कुटुम्बे पितृ भाग्यविहीनवान् ।
स्वभुजाजितसंपन्नः पितृमातृपियः सुखी ॥४१५० ॥
4148 - 4150. (a) The Moon in Uraga Nadiamsa
in the company of a malefic but receiving the
aspect of a benefic will give the following effects.
The person will be given to anger inwardly, be a
pleased soul, will be favourable even to enemies
and will have two undertakings.
(b) The Moon in the Ist of the said Nadiamsa
with Jupiter’s conjunction or aspect will give a
peaceful disposition, learning and wealth.
(c) In case the Moon is in the other half of the
subject Nadiamsa, one will be a thief. He will be
fond of illicit pleasures with women in the absence
of which he will have quarrels because of his
wicked wife.
(d) With the Moon in the Ist half one will
belong to a good family. He will be devoid of
paternal fortunes, will have self-earned wealth and
be dear to his parents.
Notes: (a) “Dvi-karyavan” should read as “dvibharyavan” indicating two wives. “Karya” means
undertaking while “Bharya” means wife.
भुजङ्गनक्षत्रभवो YAR
धनान्वितः साहसिकः Hag: |
स्वरांशके पापमतिस्त्वधर्मी
स्वमित्रमोही ह्यथ सर्वभक्षकी ॥४१५१ ॥
4151. General: Rahu in Aslesha Nakshatra
will give the following effects. The native will be
wealthy, valorous and grateful. He will be disposed to commit sins, be irreligious, infatuated by
his friends and will eat anything.
Notes: Also see sloka 2305, p. 207 of Book 1
hereof. °

162 Deva Keralam
चतुर्थचरणे मध्ये ह्यरगांशे सुहतत्रयी |
पूर्वभागे वैश्यवृत्त्या ्यन्यायार्जितवित्तवान् sea? ॥
न्यायार्जितः पितृव्यस्तु ह्यतरांशे फलं स्मृतम् |
म्लेच्छसेवापरो नित्यं बहुव्यापारसंयुतः॥४१५३ ॥
4152 - 4153. (a) The first line of sloka 4152 is
not quite clear. “In the middle(?) of the 4th quarter,
... Uraga Nadiamsa .... three friends ....”
(b) One having the Moon in Ist half of Uraga
Nadiamsa will be a trader and will gather wealth by
unscrupulous means.
(c) In case of the Moon in 2nd half of Uraga
Nadiamsa, paternal uncle will possess wealth gathered by fair means, will serve Mlechchas and will
have wide business activities
ज्येष्ठभ्रातृत्रययुतो weir द्विभार्यवान् ।
पूर्वभागेकभगिनी बहुकालं समुङ्गली ॥४१५४ ॥
गुरुदृष्टिफलेनैव पूर्वभागोदभवस्य च।
TRIN प्रजातस्य जननी दीर्धजीविनी ॥४१५५ ॥
पितामहश्चिरायुष्मान् तथेव च पितामही ।
पितामहमृतिश्चैव वसुवार्षात् परं भवेत् ॥४१५६ ॥
4154 - 4156. (a) The Moon in the 2nd half of
Uraga Nadiamsa will cause 3 elder brothers and
two wives to the native.
(b) In case of 151 half, there will be one sister
who will have a long-living husband due to Jupiter’s aspect (on the Moon).
(c) Mother as well as paternal grand-parents
will be long-lived with the Moon in 2nd half of
Uraga Nadiamsa. After the 8th year of the native,
paternal.grand-father will die.
उत्तरांशे षोडशाब्दे पितामह्यास्तु नाशनम् |
पूर्वभागे पिता चैव दीर्घायुश्च न संशयः॥४१५७ ॥
उत्तरंशे षोडशाबदे पिताह्यास्तु नाशनम् |
पूर्वभागे प्रजातस्य पितामहोऽप्यरिष्टवान् ॥४१५८ ॥
some निशानाथे पूर्वभागे कुजेक्षिते।
मित्रांशगे प्रजातस्य मातृवंशः क्षयं गतः॥४१५९ ॥
उत्तरांशे मातृवंशे प्रजावृद्धिर्महत्सुखम् |
मातुलत्रयमित्याहुस्तेषामेको द्विभार्यवान् ॥४१६० ॥
सम्पदाये पूर्वभागे afte मातृवंशके |
संबन्धार्थविनाशशेन स्वपिता ऋणशोकवान् ॥४१६१ ॥
उत्तरांशे भ्रातृयोगं प्राबल्यं चोत्तरोत्तरम् |
तन्मूलादिष्टसिद्धि च विवाहादिश्रियान्विताम् ॥४१६२ ॥
4157 - 4162. (a) Forone having the Moon in the
2nd half, the blemish of Rabu will be in abundance.
The native’s father will be long-lived. Paternal
grand-mother will die in the native’s 16th year.
(b) Evils to paternal grand-father will exist
with the Moon in the Ist half Uraga Nadiamsa.
(c) One’s maternal family will be destroyed if
the Moon as at “b” is in aspect to Mars and is ina
friend’s (or Leo) Navamsa
(d) The Moon in the 2nd half of the subject
Nadiamsa will cause expansion of maternal family
and great happiness. He will have three maternal
uncles one of whom will have two wives.
(e) Evils tomaternal family will exist in the 2nd
dasa of the native who has the Moon in the former
half of Uraga Nadiamsa. Losing relatives and
wealth, his father will be saddened with debts. The
native’s brothers will gradually prosper from time
to time and as a result he will acquire fulfilment of
desires, marriage and wealth.
Notes: (d) Expansion of maternal family indicates acquisition of sons and their sons by one’s
maternal grand-father.
उत्तरांशे पूर्वभागे सदा रोगकलत्रवान् ।
केतुयोगे मदाधीशे SAT व्रणं भवेत् ॥४१६३ ॥
स्वपुराकृतदोषेण किंचिद्रोगकलत्रवान् |
saa धूर्तभार्या त्वरोग दृढशालिनी ॥४९१६४॥
कुलटा चेज्जीविता स्यान्मृतिं चेति पतिव्रता |
SRY द्विभार्यः स्यात् पूर्वभागैकदारवान् ॥४१६५ ॥
अष्टौ पुत्रा भविष्यन्ति ह्यथवा दश qaqa: |
4163 - 41654. Wife: (a) The Moon in the Ist
half of Uraga Nadiamsa will cause a wife who will
be ever in the grip of diseases.
(b) Ketu in the company of the 7th lord (Mercury) will cause eye diseases to one’s wife. Due to
sins of his previous birth, he will beget a spouse
who will suffer from health problems.
(c) The Moon in the 2nd half of Uraga Nadiamsa indicates that one’s spouse will be wicked but
will have a sound body free from diseases. She will
be a questionable woman during her life-time. The
native will have two wives.
(d) Only one wife is denoted if the Moon is in

Chandra Kala Nadi 163
the 1st half of the subject Nadiamsa. He will have
eight or ten sons.
उरगांशे पूर्वभागे चन्द्रे गुरुनिरीश्षिते ॥४१६६ Ul
पुत्रद्वयं चिरायुष्यं पुत्रिका च तथा भवेत्।
उद्राहदीक्षामध्ये TRY सुवृष्टिकृत् ॥४१६७ ॥
पूर्वभागे राजपीडा बन्धुवर्गे विशेषतः।
षष्ठे जीवे सुरांशे च दशमे चन्द्रसंस्थिते ॥४१६८ ॥
नक्षत्रगण्डदोषश्च नास्तीति मनुरब्रवीत् |
उरगांशे पितायुष्मान् श्वशुरस्तु विशेषतः॥४१६९ ॥
पूर्वभागे जनन्यास्तु विपदाये मृतिभवित्।
उरगांशे पूर्वभागे Saas पितुर्विपत् ॥४१७० ॥
दराविशाब्देऽथ वा चेव षरित्रशाब्दे न संशयः।
सूर्याशगे तच्चिकोणे शुभेशांशत्रिकोणगे |
स्फुटयोगं गते मन्दे पितृनिर्याणमादिशेत् ॥४१७१ ॥
पितृव्यस्य तु विशब्दे मात्रारिष्टफलं वदेत् |
स्वपित्ररिष्टतः पश्चात्श्वशुरारिष्टमादिशेत् ॥४१७२ ॥
कर्माधिपदशाकाले कर्मेशांशत्रिकोणगे ।
स्फुटयोगं गते मन्दे पितृनिर्याणमादिशेत् ॥४१७३ ॥
तृतीयांशत्रिकोणे च श्वशुरोरिष्टमाप्नुयात् |
रन्धाधिपदशा काले लाभाधिपतिभुक्तिषु ॥४१७४ ॥
मेषे शनिस्थिते मत्युं पूर्वभागे पितामहः।
4166 - 4174144. (a) The Moon in the Ist half of
Uraga Nadiamsa in aspect to Jupiter will cause
longevity to two sons and two daughters. At the
time of the native’s marriage, there will be heavy
rains. His kinsfolk will incur troubles from royal
circles.
(b) The Moon in the 10th while Jupiter is in the
6th (Taurus) in Sura Nadiamsa, there will be no
Gandanta blemish. (That is the ascendant is assumed to be in the junction of Scorpio and Sagittarius.)
(c) The Moon in Uraga Nadiamsa will cause
long life to father and father-in-law.
(d) Should the Moon be in the Ist half of the
subject Nadiamsa, mother will die in the native’s
3rd dasa. Danger to father (i.e. death) will occur in
the 21st year or 22nd year. Otherwise, 36th year
will doubtlessly cause death of father.
(e) Saturn transiting the sign identical with the
Navamsa occupied by the Sun or the 9th lord, or a
trine thereof, will promote father’s death.
(f) In the 20th year, mother and paternal uncle
will be endangered. After his father’s death, his
father-in-law will quit the world.
(g) During the operation of the dasa of Mercury, the transit of Saturn occurring in the sign
identical with the Navamsa position of Mercury, or
a {16 thereof, father’s death can take place.
(h) Father-in-law’s death will occur when Saturn influences the Navamsa of the 3rd lord as at “g”
above. |
(i) Saturn moving in Aries in the dasa of 8th
lord and sub period of 11th lord, will cause death of
paternal grand-father in case the Moon is in the 1st
half of the subject Nadiamsa.
विपत्तारदशाकाले TITY शुभावहम् ॥४१७५ ॥
स्वबुद्धेश्च बलेनैव स्वप्राबल्यं विनिर्दिशेत् |
उरगांशे पूर्वभागे वार्धके क्लेशमश्नुते ॥४१७६ ॥
साधनेशदशाकाले ह्यपमृत्युभयं क्वचित् |
उत्तरांशे प्रजातश्च धनाधिपतिदायगे ॥४१७७ ॥
षटपञ्चाशे मृतिं चेति प्राणोत्येव ह्यधोगतिम्।
4175 - 4177142. (a) The Moon in the Ist half of
Uraga Nadiamsa will cause auspicious effects during the later half of 3rd dasa. He will obtain
prominence on the strength of his own intelligence.
Oldage willbe asource of troubles for him. He will `
be somewhat in the grip of fear of untimely death .
in the 6th dasa.
(b) The Moon in the later half of Uraga Nadiamsa will cause a bad end in the dasa of 2nd lord
(Saturn) during the 56th year.
अथ कुर्मफलाध्याये नादयां लग्नाधिपस्य च ॥४१७८ ॥
उरगांशे पूर्वभागे फलविस्तारमादिशेत् |
लग्नाधिपदशाकाले पूर्वभागोद् भवस्य च ॥४१७९ ॥
अपरार्धे शुभाधिक्य स्यालकः प्रबलः सुखी |
लाभाधिपदशाकाले शनिभुक्तो महाविपत् ॥४१८० ॥
गुरुभुक्तौ मनस्तापं शुभाशुभफलं समम्।
कर्माधिपदशाकाले वातरोगभयं क्वचित् ॥४१८१ ॥
धनधान्याभिवृद्धि: स्यात् स्यालकः प्रबलः सुखी |
शुक्रशन्यन्तरे काले षष्ठाधिपतिभुक्तिषु ॥४१८२ ॥
अतीव क्लेशकार्यादि प्रत्यग्दाये फलं स्मृतम् |
4178 - 418214. (a) Lagnadhipati Nadi: Now
stated are the effects collected from the chapter on

164 Deva Keralam
“Effects” from Lagnadhipati Nadi narrating in
detail about the first half of Uraga Nadiamisa.
(b) Jupiter’s Dasa: In the 2nd half of the dasa
of Jupiter, the ascendant lord, the native’s brotherin-law will become predominant.
(c) 11th Lord’s Dasa: Venus dasa, Saturn’s
sub period, will endanger the native to a great
extent. Jupiter’s sub period will produce mental
distress but an equal measure of good and bad
effects.
(d) 10th Lord’s Dasa: Mercury’s dasa as the
5th one will cause fear of windy diseases to some
extent. Increase of wealth and grains, and prosperity toa brother-in-law will come to pass. The sub
period of Venus intense difficulties will occur.
Notes: “Koorma” means tortoise. “Koorma
Phala” is apparently conveys no sense. It should be
“Karma Phala" dealing with livelihood.
सुखेशांशे aera व्ययेशांशत्रिकोणगे ॥४१८३ ॥
स्फुटयोगं गते मन्दे देशे राज्ञां कलापनम्।
अनावृष्टिहते देशे दुर्भिक्षफलमादिशेत् ॥४१८४ ॥
4183 - 4184. Irrelevant: Strife and famine due
to lack of rains will prevail in the country when
Saturn transits the sign denoted by the Navamsa
position of the 4th lord or a trine thereof.
उरगांशे निशानाथे पूर्वभागे प्रजायते ।
नीचे नीचांशगे सूर्ये दीर्घमायुश्च विन्दति ॥४१८५ ॥
एकसप्ततिवर्णणि योगायुर्दायनिर्णयम् |
अंशायुप्त्वेक षष्टिश्च दक्षिणायनगे मृतिः ॥४१८६ ॥
कुलीरे वृश्चिके मासे कन्यामासेऽथवा यदि ।
देहान्तरे पूर्वभागे पापपुण्यफलं समम् |
TAMA नक्षत्रे शृद्रजन्मा प्रतापवान् ॥४१८७ ॥
उत्तरांशे महापापी परलोको न विद्यते ।
पूर्वभागे मित्रफलमुरगांशे सुखासुखम् ॥४१८८ ॥
4185 - 4188. (a) The Moon in the Ist half of
Uraga Nadiamsa, while the Sun occupies his debilitation sign and Navamsa will bless one with
longevity. 71 years will accrue tohim by Yoga Ayu
method. By Amsayu method, it will only be 61.
Death will be during the Sun’s southerly course.
The Sun will be in Cancer, Virgo or Scorpio. His
sins and meritorious deeds will be in an equal
measure. Later he will be born as a valorous Soodra
in the Nakshatra of Indra (Phalguni).
(b) With the Moon in the 2nd half of Uraga
Nadiamsa, one will be a great sinner and will not
attain good world after death.
(©) One having the Moon in the Ist half of the
said Nadiamsa will beget ... effects, and happiness
and unhappiness.
Notes: (a) “Indresa Nakshatra” reads as
“Indrasya Nakshatra”, which indicates the
Nakshatra of Indra, i.e. Phalguni.
According to Parasara, Indra is the presiding
deity for Svathi and Anuradha.
Yoga Ayu indicates life-span arrived at by
certain planetary dispositions. Amsayu is one of
the systems of calculating life span, like Pindayu
and Naisargika Ayu as discussed in Brihat Parasara
Hora.
(c) The last line of sloka 4188 contains “Mitra
Phalam’”. Mitra means friends, “Phala” effects. It
should read as “Idam Phalam” meaning “thus, the
effects”. However this is not important.
SrA दुर्दरंशः
दर्दरांशकगे जीवे शनिसंयुतवीक्िते ।
स्थिरलग्ने प्रजातस्तु ज्येष्ठभ्रातृविनाशवान् ॥४१८९ ॥
पश्चादभ्रातृयुतः श्रीमान् बाल्ये क्लेशेन कशितः।
कलब्रद्यवान् रागी कोपी क्िप्रप्रसादवान् ॥४१९० ॥
विद्याबुद्धिरतो नित्यं मधुराम्लरसग्रियः।
कामी मातृप्रियस्त्यागी युवतीजनवल्लभः॥४१९१ ॥
पित्रार्जितार्थसंपन्नः कनिष्टभ्रातृवत्सलः।
पितृव्यनाशवान् बाल्ये मसूरीज्वरपीडितः॥४१९२ ॥
वरणाङ्कितिशरीरश्च खण्डवायुप्रपीडितः।
रजोगुणयतः कामी किंचित्तामसकृत्यवान् ॥४१९३ ॥
` अभक्ष्यभक्षणं नित्यं किचित्सात्विकबुद्धिमान् |
द्रव्यार्जन समर्थश्च सीमन्तशिशुनाशवान् ॥४१९४॥
दारान्तरे Yate: पुत्रिण्यौ द्वे च जीविते ।
पत्रयोगं तथा विन्ात् सहोदरफलं तथा ॥४१९५ ॥
4189 - 4195. Aquarius Ascendant - Durdara
Nadiamsa: One born with this Nadiamsa rising in
a fixed sign, as Jupiter joins or receives the aspect
of Saturn, will beget the following effects. His
elder will be destroyed (will die early). He will
have younger brothers, be wealthy and emaciated
in childhood. He will have two wives, be passion-

Chandra Kala Nadi 165
ate and given to anger but immediately pacified.
He will be fond of learning, of consuming sweet
and sour juices, be libidinous, dear to his mother,
sacrificing in disposition and attached to young
women. He will have paternal wealth, fond of his
younger co-born, will lose his paternal uncle and be
troubled by small-pox in childhood. He will have
injuries on his body and be troubled windy disorders. He will be passionate, somewhat indolent and
will eat uneatable things. He will also be somewhat
gentle, be skilful in earning wealth and will lose his
first son. He will have increase of sons through his
second wife. In all, he will have two surviving sons
and two daughters. His brother will have similar
number of children.
Notes: Though reference to fixed sign occurs,
most of the current slokas - upto sloka 4308 -
specially apply to Aquarius ascendant. The other
three fixed signs should also be suitably incorporated.
Notes: For details of the subject Nadiamsa,
pleas consult notes under sloka 438, p. 44, Book 1.
मोहनांशे विलग्नेशे निधने गुरुवीक्षिते |
बालारिष्टभयं किचिच्छान्त्या शान्ति प्रयास्यति ॥४१९६ it
षष्ठादिमालिकायोगे मेहरोगस्वरूपवान् |
मोहनांशे प्रजातश्च परकार्यार्थवञ्जकः ॥४१९७ ॥
पितृवाक्यरतोनित्यमग्निमान्दप्रपीडितः।
परोपकारवान् रागी किंचिद्धर्मरतः सुखी ॥४१९८ ॥
4196 - 4198. (a) The ascendant lord in the 8th
(particulary Saturn) in Mohana Nadiamsa in aspect to Jupiter will cause fear of infantile mortality
to some extent. This blemish can be removed by
palliative measures. ।
(0) Malika Yoga commencing from the 6th
from the ascendant will cause urinary disorders.
(c) One with the ascendant lord in Mohana
Nadiamsa will cheat others of their undertakings
and wealth. He will obey his father’s orders, will
incur disorders of digestion, will help others, be
passionate and somewhat justly disposed.
कन्यामन्दे इषि जीवे दुरदरांश समुद् भवः।
अल्पसन्तानमाप्नोति मृतप्रजाबहुत्ववान् ॥४१९९ ॥
एकपुत्रशच दीर्घायुः पुत्रिका च तथा भवेत् |
भ्रातृस्थानाधिपे भौमे तुलांशे BAUM ॥४२०० ॥
आयुष्मत्यौ द्वे भगिन्यावेका क्लेशवती सदा ।
दर्दरंशे खगे जीवे भगिन्येका सुमङ्गली ॥४२०१॥
कश्चित् सहोदरभराता धूर्तख्रीनायकः सुखी |
सन्तानप्रतिबन्धी च भ्रातृद्रेषयुतो भवेत् ॥४२०२ Il
4198 - 4202. (a) Progeny: Saturn in Virgo (8th)
and Jupiter in Pisces (2nd) will cause a limited
number of children. The native will obtain many
dead children. One son and one daughter will be
endowed with longevity.
(b) Sisters: The lord of the 3rd, Mars, being in
an angle from the ascendant with Libra Navamsa
will cause two long-living sisters. One of them will
be ever anguished.
(c) Sister & Brother: Jupiter in the 10th will
cause along-living husband toa sister. One brother
will marry a wicked woman, will have obstacles in
begetting progeny and will not be well-disposed to
his coborn.
मीने जीवे सुधर्मात्मा दुर्दरंशे सुभाग्यवान्।
धूर्तकार्यरतो नित्यं सदा रोगशरीरवान् ॥४२०३ Il
सहोदरक्षयं किंचित् कलत्रद्रयमादिशेत् |
पुत्रवान् बुद्धिमांश्चेति द्रव्यार्जन समर्थकः ॥४२०४॥
4203 - 4204. One born in Durdara Nadiamsa
with Jupiter in Pisces will be highly fortunate,
interested in righteous deeds, ever in the grip of
diseases, will lose his coborn to some extent and
willhave two wives. He willbe endowed with sons,
intelligence and skills to earn wealth.
सुधांशगे निशानाथे wax गुरुवीक्षिते ।
कुम्भलग्ने प्रजातश्च मातुरायुष्यवर्धकः॥४२०५ ॥
4205. Mother’s Life-span: The Moon being in
Sudha Nadiamsa in Cancer with Jupiter’s aspect,
will increase the life-span of the mother of an
Aquarius native. `
Notes: For Sudha Nadiamsa, please see notes
under sloka 454, page 45, Book 1.
चन्द्रे यावत्फलानि स्यु. सूर्ये यावत्फलानि च।
तावत्सङ्खयाश्च पित्रो भविष्यन्ति हि सोदराः॥४२०६ ॥
ग्रन्थान्तरे दुर्दरांशे स्वपिता भ्रातृनाशवान् |
कालान्तरे भाग्य युक्तो बाल्ये क्लेशेन BETA: vo ॥
पिता मातुलगेहेषु बाल्ये वसति सर्वदा |
स्वपिता भगिनी भ्रातृ स्नेहेन सुखजीवकः॥४२०८ ॥

166 Deva Keralam
4206 - 4208. Father: The number of father’s
co-born will correspond to the number of (rectified) Ashtaka Varga Bindus obtained by the Moon
and the Sun. There is another authority to state that
the father of the native of Aquarius ascendant,
Durdara Nadiamsa, will lose all his co-born. He
will obtain fortunes after some time (with initial
obstacles). During childhood, he will be emaciated
and will live well in his maternal uncle’s home.
मातुलाधिपतौ चन्द्रे स्वांशे गुरुनिरीकषिते ।
मातृवंशाभिवृद्धिः स्यान्मातुलद्रययोगवान् ॥४२०९ ॥
दर्दरांशकगे जीवे त्वसितेन निरीक्षिते ।
कुम्भलग्ने प्रजातश्च केचित् पक्षैकमातुलः॥४२१० ॥
मातृष्वसृद्रयं चैव ह्यन्यकालेऽधिकच्छति |
दर्दरंशकगे जीवे नारदीयमतेऽपि च ॥४२११॥
मातुलाभावमित्याहर्मातुर्माता चिरायुषी |
शुक्राचार्य कृते मन्थे ह्यायुष्मन्तौ च मातुलो ॥४२१२ ॥
मार्तुभगिन्यो 2 चैव सपुत्रैका सुजीवति |
किंचिद्रोगवती माता भ्रातृक्लेशेन करिता ॥४२१३ ॥
कालन्दरे पुत्रयोगाद्रहु भाग्यवती सती ।
4209 - 4213142. Maternal Family: (a) The 6th
lord Moon in aspect to Jupiter and obtaining Cancer Navamsa will cause expansion of the maternal
family of Aquarius native. Perhaps, he will have
two maternal uncles.
(b) Some authorities including the work
Naradeeyam state that in case of birth in Durdara
Nadiamsa of Aquarius ascendant, Jupiter in aspect
to Saturn will give only one matermal uncle, but two
maternal aunts in another context (or occasion) i.e.
when Jupiter is not aspeted by Saturn.
(c) Thus has been said about the house of
maternal uncle (the 6th).
(d) The maternal grand-mother of the native of
subject Nadiamsa will be long-lived.
_ €) Ina work of Sukracharya (the legendary
preceptor of Demons), long lives to maternal uncles have been indicated. Mother will have two
sisters one of whom will be endowed with sons and
longevity. She will be somewhat sickly, be emaciated due to loss of brother and will obtain much
fortunes due to her sons’ rise.
Notes: (b) “Adhikacchati" vide sloka 4211
should read as "Adhigacchati"
मीने कुम्भांशगे जीवे भाग्ये शुक्रे सुभाग्यवान् ।४२१४ II
तदशायां महद् धाग्यमुत्तरांशे सुवाहनम् |
स्वपिता भगिनीभ्रातृयोगकाले सुकीर्तिमान् ॥४२१५ ॥
तद्द्वारा प्रबलश्चैव नरवाहनयोगवान् |
मोहनांशे लग्ननाथे मेषारूढ़े शुभेक्षिते ॥४२१६ ॥
जन्मदाये महद भाग्यं तृतीयान्दे शुभाधिकम्।
स्वपितुर्भगिनी भ्रातभावेशे भाग्यराशिगे ॥४२१७ ॥
तद्दशायां महद् भाग्यं द्वितीयान्दे भ्रियायुतम् ।
मोहनांशे विलनेशे गुरुणा च निरीक्षिते ॥४२१८ ॥
स्वपितुर्भगिनीपुत्रो वाहनत्रययोगवान् |
विपददाये फलं पूर्णं स्वप्राबल्यं सुवाहनम् ॥४२१९ ॥
4214 - 4219. (a) Jupiter’s Dasa: The subject
will be highly fortunate if Jupiter in the sign Pisces
acquires Aquarius Navamsa, while Venus is in the
9th from the ascendant (i.e. in the sign Libra). In
the dasa of Jupiter, abundant fortunes will come to
(b) One belonging to the 2nd half of the subject
Nadiamsa will obtain vehicles. He will beget wide
fame at the time of the prosperity of his paternal
uncles and aunts. He will become predominant as
well.
(c) First Dasa: Saturn, the ascendant lord, in
Mohana Nadiamsa in Aries and receiving the aspect of abenefic will produce much fortunes during
the first dasa. Third year of birth will be more
auspicious (for the family).
(d) Dasa Effects: If the 11th lord (Jupiter),
denoting father’s co-born, is in the 9th (Libra), the
dasa of Jupiter will usher much fortunes. The 2nd
year will give wealth (to the family).
(e) Ascendant lord (Saturn) in Mohana Nadiamsa (in Aries as stated earlier) with Jupiter’s
aspect will give 3 vehicles to ason of father’s sister.
The 3rd dasa will give beneficial results and one
will obtain predominance and conveyances.
कन्याशनौ जन्मदेशे भूपतिक्लेशमादिशेत् |
अमात्यजनशोकं च THEN प्रजावधि ॥४२२० ॥
अतिचारगते जीवे शनौ वक्र्षमागते |
हाहाकारं जगत्सर्व विशेषादक्षिणादिशि ॥४२२१ ॥ ।
4220 - 4221. Irrelevant: Saturn moving in
Virgo will cause anguish to the king, grief to
ministers, and troubles to the inhabitants. Jupiter

Chandra Kala Nadi 167
and Saturn in accelerated motion and reaching a
sign of Mars will produce furore in the entire
country, particularly in the south.
व्ययेशांशे तच्चिकोणे स्फुटयोगं गते शनो ।
पुतरनाशो भवेत्तत्र राज्याधिपतिविग्रहम् ॥४२२२ ॥
अमात्यप्राणनाशः स्यात् स्वपितृव्यपीडितः।
विरुद्धायामवस्थायां लग्नेशे मोहनां शगे ॥४२२३ ॥
विपद्दाये विरोधेन राजोपद्रवशोकवान् |
्षेमदाये त्रिवारं स्यात् स्थाननाशो मनोव्यथा ॥४२२४ ॥
पश्चात् स्वस्थानमाप्नोति राजामात्यप्रसादवान् |
water जीवे seers शनौ स्थिते ॥४२२५॥
आयुष्मन्तौ मातुलौ द्रौ भगिन्यो मातुरेवहि |
मातुलौ at ततः स्यातामथ वाप्येक एव च ॥४२२६ ॥
कालान्तरे मातुलश्च भ्रातृशोकयुतो भवेत् |
मातृष्वसासेदरे धन्ये पुत्र पुत्री समन्विते ॥४२२७ Il
एका क्लेशवती चैव भ्रातृनाशेन करिता |
WI दुर्दरांशे स्वमातृभगिनीव्यथाम् ॥४२२८ ॥
पत्रशोकवती चैव भ्रातृशोकेन कशिता।
एका समुद्गली चेति बहुपुत्रवती सती ॥४२२९ ॥
4222 - 4229. (a) Evils: Saturn transiting the
sign identical with the Navamsa occupied by the
12th lord, or a trine thereof, will cause loss of a
child and enmity with the king (i.e. professional
enmity). The minister will lose his life(?) The
native’s paternal uncle will incur evils.
(b) Dasa periods: Saturn in Mohana Nadiamsa
in Viruddha Avastha(?) (apparently in an enemy’s
sign) will cause grief to the native due to enmity
with royal sources in the 3rd dasa. Loss of position
and mental anguish will prevail fora period of three
weeks in the 4th dasa. Afterwards he will return to
his place and will earn favours from the king and
minister.
(c) Maternal Relatives: Saturn placed in
Durdara Nadiamsa as the Moon occupies a Navamsa of Jupiter will cause two brothers and two
sisters, all long-lived, to the mother of the native.
There may be oné maternal uncle instead of two
(according to some). After some time, maternal
uncle will be in grief due to loss of brother. Two
of the maternal aunts will be blessed with sons and
daughters. One will be anguished and be emaciated
due to loss of brother.
(d) His mother’s sister will be emaciated due to
loss of brother and son in his (i.e. the native’s) 2nd
dasa. One of the maternal aunts will have a longliving husband and many sons.
पितव्यभवने शुक्रे मेषांशे मृत्युचेष्टगे |
शिशोश्च जननात् पूर्वं स्वपिता भ्रातृशोकवान् ॥४२३० Il
स्वपितुर्मातुलानी च वन्ध्यायोगयुता स्मृता।
ज्येष्ठभ्रातृविनाशेन स्वपिता क्लेशभाग्भवेत् ॥४२३१ ॥
विपदाये कनिष्ठस्य नाशेन भ्रावृशोकवान् |
दर्दरांशकगे जीवे त्वसितेन निरीक्षिते ॥४२३२ ॥
स्वपितुर्मातुलानी तु वन्ध्यायोगयुता तथा |
क्लेशीनी मातुलवधूर्यत्किचिद् गूढचारिणी ॥४२३३ ॥
मातृवंशेकलडश्च दुर्दरांशे न संशयः।
पितुर्मातुल पुत्री स्यादथवा च स्वपुत्रिका ॥४२३४॥
दर्दरांशे जारिणी स्यात् स्वमाता तु पतिव्रता ।
भाग्येशांशे तच्रिकोणे स्फुटयोगं गते शनौ ॥४२३५॥
स्वमातृभगिनीपुत्रनाशं च मनुरब्रवीत् |
लाभेशांशे तच्िकोणे स्फुटयोगं गते शनो ॥४२३६ ॥
मातृवंरो जनारिष्टं क्तेशं प्रापनोति भूरिशः।
पितृष्वसु सुतांरेशे केन्रलाभत्रिकोणगे ॥४२३७ ॥
पितृष्वसृसुतः श्रीमान् सोदरीभ्रातुसंयुतः।
भेदभ्रातृयुतो मानी पित्राजितधनाद्यवान् ॥४२३८ ॥
द्िभार्यजनकस्यापि सोदयोत्पत्तिसंभवः।
पितृष्वसृसुतस्यापि विवाहो रविवत्सरे ॥४२३९ ॥
वसुवर्षात् परं चैव विवाहे बहुसंभ्रमः।
4230 - 42391. (a) Venus in the 11th with Aries
Navamsa in “Mrityu Cheshta” will cause loss of
brother in case of the native’s father, prior to the
native’s brother. Father’s maternal uncle will be
childless. Father would be in grief due to loss of an
elder brother. When the native will be in his 3rd
dasa, father will be grieved due to loss of younger
brother.
«(b) In case of birth in Aquarius ascendant,
Durdara Nadiamsa, Jupiter in aspect to Saturn will
cause childlessness to father’s maternal uncle. Due
to grief thereof, (i.e. childlessness), the said relative’s spouse will somewhat become impure. This
Yoga will bring a blemish for the maternal family
of the father. Or else (i.e. in the event of the said

168 Deva Keralam
aunt of the father being pure in character), father’s
maternal uncle’s daughter, or alternatively the
native’s sister, will be corrupt. (That is, the present
yoga will lead to existence of a questionable woman
in father’s maternal family. Or'else, the native’s
sister will be immoral.) The native’s mother will
be a chaste woman.
(c) Saturn journeying in the sign identical with
the Navamsa position of the 9th lord, or a trine
thereof, will destroy the progeny of mother’s sister.
(d) Similarly Saturn’s journey with reference
to the 11th lord will produce much grief in the
mother’s family.
(e) Cousin: The Navamsa dispositor of the 3rd
lord Mars occupying an angle or a trine counted
from the ascendant (Aquarius) will cause following effects to a son of the sister of the native’s father
(i.e. to acousin of the subject). He will be wealthy,
endowed with full and half co-born and will acquire paternal inheritance. His father will have two
wives. He (i.e. the said cousin) will marry atthe age
of 12. After his 8th year, many efforts will be made
for his marriage.
Notes: (a) The condition laid down is faulty.
“Meshamse” reads as “Meshantye” meaning “end
of Aries”. Further there is no standard term as
“Mrityu Cheshta” which is obviously indicative of
“Mritavastha” or a planet being in the last six
degrees of an odd sign. If Venus is required to be
in the end of Aries, reference to his position in the
11th (Sagittarius) is inadmissible. Hence ignoring
the condition of “end of Aries” and naturally
“being in extremis”, the implication is: Venus
should be in the 11th in Sagittarius (within first 3°
20), thus begetting Aries Navamsa.
(e) “Pitrushvasu Sutamsese” should read as
“Pitrushvasu Sutesa Amsese”. Thus we have to
locate the Navamsa dispositor of Mars, the 3rd
lord, who indicates the progeny of the paternal aunt
in case of an Aquarius subject.
पितामहाधिपे सौम्ये भाग्ये रविसमन्विते ॥४२४० ॥
भाग्ये जीवे जातकश्च स्वपितामहभाग्यवान् ॥४२४१ ॥
पितामहः क्लेशजीवी ज्येष्ठभ्रातृसमन्वितः।
भगिन्येका दीर्घजीवा सोदरीभ्रातृनाशवान् ॥४२४२ ॥
कालान्तरे पुत्रशोकं वार्धके दारनाशनम् ।
पितामहो भ्रातृपुत्रवार्धके क्लेशसंयुतः॥४२४३ ॥
पितामहस्वसा चैव पुत्रपुत्रीसमन्विता |
शिशोश्च जननात् पूर्वं वैधव्ये मृतिमादिशेत् ॥४२४४॥
4240 - 4244. Paternal Grand-father: Mercury (the Sth lord) ruling the native’s paternal
grand-father should be placed in the 9th (Libra)
along with the Sun, as Jupiter is in the 2nd, one
would enjoy happiness through the said relative.
Paternal grand-father would lead a difficult life and
be endowed with elder brother and long-living
sister. He would also be long-lived and would lose
his co-born. After some time, in his old age, he
would be grieved due to loss of progeny, spouse and
co-born. Prior to the native’s birth, grand-father
would have lost his spouse.
Notes: “Bhagye Jive” in sloka 4241 (containing one line only) reads as “Vitte Jive” in another
version requiring Jupiter to be in the 2nd.
लाभे गदांशगे शुक्रे व्ययेशे मोहनांशगे ।
मातामहश्चिरायुष्मान् मातुर्माता तथेव च ॥४२४५ ॥
मातामहानुजः कश्चिदत्तपुत्रयुतो भवेत् |
मातुलैकश्चिरायुष्मान् भगिनीत्रयवान् गुणी ॥४२४६ ॥
सम्पदाये दुर्दरांशे स्वमातुलगृहे व्यथा |
मातामहः क्लेशमेति जामात्र रिष्टहेतुना ॥४२४७ ॥
मातृष्वसा गर्भिणी तु ह्यकाले मृतिमाप्नुयात् |
4245 - 42474. Maternal Family: With Venus
in the 11th (in the sign Sagittarius) in Gada
Nadiamsa while the 12th lord (Saturn) is in Mohana
Nadiamsa, one’s maternal grand-parents will be
long-lived. A younger brother of maternal grandfather would possibly adopt a son. One of the
native’s maternal uncles will be endowed with
longevity and will have 3 sisters. The 2nd dasa will
cause distress in maternal uncle’s home. Maternal
grand-father will be grieved losing his son-in-law.
The native’s mother’s sister will die an untimely
death during the course of pregnancy.
दर्दरांशकगे जीवे मीने शनिनिरीक्षिते ॥४२४८ ॥
मातृष्वसारौ 2 चैव गर्भवत्यौ after: |
अथवा मातुलवधु हयन्तर्वली मरिष्यति ॥४२४९ ॥
तेन क्लेशेनचाप्नोति मातुर्माता मनोव्यथाम् |
fared पुत्रशोकादुःखितश्च पितामहः ॥४२५० Il

Chandra Kala Nadi 169
गदांशके सुखाधीरो हिबुके शिखि संयुते ।
ARMA पापमुक्तावरिष्टं मातुवंशके ॥४२५१ ॥
मातामहारिष्टकालो fare भविष्यति ।
मदेशांशे AST स्फुटयोगं गते शनौ ॥४२५२ ॥
मदेशदृष्टिराशो तु मातामहविनाशनम् ।
लग्नेशांशे aera स्फुटयोगं गते शनौ ॥४२५३ ॥
मातामह्यास्त्वरिषटेन मातुल्य मनोव्यथा ।
मातृष्वसूर्भर्तृभावे पापाक्रान्ते च जायते ॥४२५४ ॥
मातृष्वसा सुतन्तप्ता मृतपुत्रा त्वमङ्गली ।
विपद्याये दुर्दशंशे सम्पत्तारदशान्त्यगे ।४२५५ ॥
इदमेव फलं सत्यं योजयेत् कालवित्तमः।
पितुर्भगिन्या भर्ता च दीर्घायुर्धनवान् सुखी ॥४२५६ ॥
जन्मतारदशान्त्यादौ सम्पत्तारदशाश्रियम् ।
द्वितीयान्दे फलं पूर्णं योगारम्भं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥४२५७ ॥
4248 - 4257. Maternal Family: (a) In case of
birth in Durdara Nadiamsa, Jupiter posited in Pisces in aspect to Saturn, will cause death of two
maternal aunts (mother’s sisters) during pregnancy.
Or the spouse of maternal uncle will have such
death. On account of such grief, maternal grandmother will be mentally distressed. During the
native’s 3rd dasa, his paternal grand-father will be
grieved on account of loss of a son.
(b) The 4th lord in the 4th (Taurus) in Gada
Nadiamsa in the company of Ketu will bring forth —
evils in maternal family in the dasa of Venus and in
a malefic’s sub period. 3rd dasa will endanger
maternal grand-father.
(c) Saturn’s sojourn in the sign identical with
the Navamsa of the 7th lord (Mercury) or a trine
thereof will endanger one’s maternal grand-father.
(d) Saturn’s movement with reference to ascendant lord’s Navamsa on the same lines will
cause mental distress to maternal uncle due to loss
of maternal grand-mother.
(e) A malefic in the house concerning the
husband of mother’s sister (i.e. in the 12th from the
ascendant) will cause dead children and widowhood
to mother’s sister. As a consequence, she will be
quite saddened. The 2nd dasa’s concluding part,
or the 3rd dasa has been described thus by the
astrologers.
(0 Paternal Uncle: Father’s sister’s husband
will be long-lived, rich and happy. The end of Ist
dasa, or 2nd dasa will cause wealth. The 2nd year
will give full effects, and prosperity (to the said
relative) will commence. :
षष्ठे चन्द्रेऽष्टमे मन्दे संपदाये महाविपत् ।
पञ्चमान्दात् परं चेति वत्सरद्रयदुःखभाक् ॥४२५८ ॥
बालारिष्टभयं चैव शान्त्या शानि प्रयास्यति |
अरिष्टं च पितृवंशे ज्ञातिक्लेशं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥४२५९ ॥
बन्धुवर्गे मनस्तापं स्वपितुरमित्रवर्गके |
अतीवक्लेशकार्याणां सम्पदाये फलं वदेत् ॥४२६० ॥
4258 - 4260. Evils in 2nd Dasa: The Moon and
Saturn in order in the 6th and 8th will greatly
endanger one in his 2nd dasa, for a period of 2 years
from the age of 5. This blemish, of infantile
mortality, should be suitably remedied. Father’s
family will also incur adversities in the form of
quarrels with kinsfolk. Father’s friends and relatives will pass through an evil phase. 2nd dasa will
thus produce a series of upsets.
षष्ठेशाक्रान्तराश्यादौ मालिकायोगजस्य च।
दारिद्ययोगमित्याहुर्बाल्ये क्लेशं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥४२६१ ॥
दारिद्यमालिकायोगे निधने पापखेचरे ।
शुभदृष्टिविहीन च दारिद्यं प्राप्नुयाद् धुवम् ॥४२६२ ॥
दारिद्यमालिकायोगे ह्यष्टमे शनिसंस्थिते |
वित्ते जीवे प्रजातश्च भाग्यवान् स्यान संशयः ॥४२६३ ॥
वार्धके बहुदारिद्यं मध्ये किचिच्छुभाविन्तः।
महाभाग्यसमृद्धश्च नरवाहनभाग्यवान् ॥४२६४ Il
4261 - 4264. Malika Yoga Turning Evil: (a)
If Malika Yoga commences with the sign occupied
by the lord of the 6th (i.e. the Moon), Daridra Yoga
(yoga for utter poverty) forms. The native’s childhood will (also) be marked by difficulties.
(b) When Daridra Malika Yoga is formed (as at
“a” above), the 8th from the ascendant having a
malefic, without beneficial aspect, will unfailingly
promote penury.
(c) If Daridra Malika Yoga forms while Saturn
is in the 8th and the 2nd is occupied by Jupiter, one
will become prosperous (instead of incurring poverty). His old age will be significant for penury.
Intermittently he will enjoy auspicious effects and
great fortunes, including conveyances.
Notes: (a) Malika Yoga, a favourable one, for

170 Deva Keralam
prosperity can also turn adverse and cause poverty
- not fortunes - if the 6th through the 12th are
occupied by 7 individual planets. The 6th house
should necessarily have the Moon.
(c) In this part, a proper understanding is
necessary. Only 7 planets (to the exclusion of the
nodes) are authorized to cause Malika Yoga. Naturally, by implication, Daridra Malika Yoga should
as well be restricted to 7 planets only. Hence the
right interpretation is that Saturn in the 8th should
begin the yoga to be concluded by Jupiter in the
2nd. Thus, the present yoga is bound to be independent of the one cited at “b” above.
लाभे शुक्रे धने जीवे त्ववयोगशतैरपि ।
धनिकः कीर्विमांश्चेति राजद्वारे प्रसिद्धिमान् ॥४२६५ ॥
fare महद भाग्यमुत्तरार्धे विशेषतः।
नित्यश्रीबहुमानादिप्रबलोद्योगवान् भवेत् ॥४२६६ ॥
पितुष्वसुः पुत्रयोगेकाले सौख्यफलं विदुः।
क्षेमदाये विशेषः स्यात् प्रत्यग्टाये दलं व्यथा ॥४२६७ Il
शुभाशुभफलं चेव योगं रोगं विनिर्दिशेत् ।
द्विपञ्चाशत् परं कष्टं नेधनेशदशाव्यथाम् ॥४२६८ ॥
अपरार्धे तु arte पुत्रशोकं विनिर्दिशेत् |
दशान्ते मृतिमाप्नोति दशामध्ये ऽपमृत्युमान् ॥४२६९ ॥
सम्पदाये सेतुयात्रां पितुः पित्रा च गच्छति |
मार्गमध्ये मनोदुखी सेतुमूले ज्वरा्दितः॥४२७० ॥
तद्ोषपरिहारर्थ क्षीरकुम्धं प्रदापयेत् |
पश्चादारोग्यमाप्नोति स्वदेशं पुनरेष्यति ॥४२७१ ॥
4265 - 4271. Venus in 2nd & Jupiter in 11th:
Let there be a hundred evil combinations at birth.
If the 11th and 2nd are in occupation by Jupiter and
Venus in order, one will be wealthy, famous and
will beget name in royal circles. His 3rd dasa will
greatly accelerate his fortunes. Particularly its
later half. He will enjoy continual wealth, high
esteem and prosperous employment. Beneficial
effects will occur during the time of prosperity of
one’s paternal aur?’ son, particularly during the
4th dasa. In the Sth dasa, half of the period will
cause distress. Good and bad will come to pass;
prosperity and diseases will be included. Troubles
` will show up after tne age of 52. The dasa of the 8th
lord (Mercury) will be distressful. 2nd half of
Mercury’s dasa will usher poverty and grief on
account of loss of a son. In the end of Mercury’s
dasa, death of the native will result. Fear of
untimely death will exist in the middle of the said
dasa. In the 2nd dasa, father will proceed on a
pilgrimage to Setu. On the way, he will be in grief.
In Setu 6.6. in the destination) he will be troubled
by fever. To overcome this blemish, a milk-pot
should be gifted away. Health will prevail later on
and he will return to his native place.
कर्मे राहौ प्रजातश्च fared सुयात्रिकः।
पुण्यतीर्थे फलं सत्यं गङ्गास्नानफलं समम् ॥४२७२ ॥
4272. Rahu in 10th: The native with Rahu in
the 10th will undertake pilgrimages in the 3rd dasa.
He will visit shrines and earn the merits of having
had dips in the Ganges.
दर्दरांशकगे जीवे गङ्खायात्रासु विध्नवान् |
सेतुस्नानं त्रिवारं स्याद्रङ्गास्नानफलं समम् ॥४२७२ Il
4273. Pilgrimage: Jupiter in Durdara Nadiamsa willbe an obstacle for dips in the Ganges. But
the native will visit the Setu and will earn the merits
of having had dips in the Ganges.
लाभे गदांशगे शुक्रे योगकाले गदातुरः।
अग्निमान्दप्रपीडादि यातायातं त्रिवत्सरम् ॥४२७४ ॥
4274. Obstructed Prosperity: Venus in the
11th (Sagittarius) in Gada Nadiamsa will cause
troubles through diseases just at the time of one’s
prosperity. Indigestion and futile journey, the latter
for a period of 3 years, will come to pass.
लग्नाष्टमगते मन्दे विषुचीज्वर पीडितः।
सनिपातभयं किचिदतिसारप्रपीडितः॥४२७५ ॥
क्षेमदाय इमान्येव फलान्यूह्यानि सूरिभिः।
सर्वदाये जीवभुक्तो कुजभुक्तौ विशेषतः॥४२७६ ॥
PAN देहजाड्यं बुधभुक्तौ क्वचित् क्वचित् |
शन्यन्तरे क्रूरमासे शन्यस्तमनकालगे ॥४२७७ ॥
स्वदेहायासमाप्नोति सोम्यार्किगुरुवासरे |
चापे गुरुस्थिते काले मेषे वा मिथुनेऽपि वा ॥४२७८ ॥
विपदाये महद्भाग्यं पित्रादि श्रियमश्नुते |
गुरोस्तृतीयपर्ययि तुलान्ते वृश्चिके गुरौ ॥४२७९ ॥
्षेमदाये महाघोरं राजविगप्रहमादिशेत्।
गदांशगे सुखाधीशे त्रिशेऽब्दे पितृनाशनम् ॥४२८० Il
पञ्चत्रिरोऽथ वा चेति चतुर्विंशे महाविपत्।

Chandra Kala Nadi 171
चत्वारिंशे मृतामाता प्रत्यग्दाये मदे शनो ॥४२८१ ॥
चापान्ते मकरे मन्दे गोचरे मिथुने गुरौ ।
कुलीरे वा मृतामाता तत्िकोणे प्रपीडिता ॥४२८२ i
व्ययेशांशे तत्िकोणे स्फुटयोगं गते शनो ।
व्ययेशदृष्टिराशो तु सन्तानारिष्टमादिशेत् ॥४२८३ ॥
4275 - 4283. Diseases: (a) Saturn in the 8th
(Virgo) will cause fear of small-pox and “Sannipata”
(acomplicated derangement of the three humours,
causing utter collapse, sometimes literally death).
To some extent, one will suffer from dysentery as
well. The wise should guess these effects in the 4th
dasa.
(b) The sub periods of Jupiter and Mars, in all
the dasas, will cause physical ailments (for one
born in Durdara Nadiamsa, Aquarius ascendant).
The corresponding months should be known through
the Sun’s evil transits. Mercury’s sub period will
also to some extent be capable of causing illness.
During Saturn’s sub period, in an evil month, when
Saturn gets combust, one will fall sick, ona Wednesday, Tuesday or Thursday.
(c) Fortunes: The 3rd dasa will be a source of
great fortunes with Jupiter transiting in Sagittarius,
Aries or Gemini. Father etc. will also obtain
wealth.
(d) Enmity: Jupiter’ ऽ 3rd round of transit in the
end of Libra or in Scorpio, in the 4th dasa, produce
calamitous enmity with the king.
(e) Parents: The 4th lord (Venus) in Gada
Nadiamsa will destroy father in the native’ s 30th or
35th year of age. 24th year will greatly endanger
one’s father. In the Sth dasa, with Saturn moving in
Gemini, one will lose his mother in the 24th year.
Or Saturn moving in the end of Sagittarius or in
Capricorn, as Jupiter transits Gemini or Cancer,
will kill the mother. She will be extremely troubled
when these transits are in trine thereof.
(f) Progeny: At the time of Saturn’s sojourn in
the sign caused by the Navamsa position of the 12th
lord, or a trine thereof, or the sign that is aspected
by the 12th lord at birth, evils to one’s own children
will be experienced.
तत्तद्भावाष्टमेशांशे स्फुटयोगं गते शनौ |
दृष्टिशौ तथा चेति तत्तनिर्याणमादिशेत् ॥४२८४ ॥
मूर््यादिव्ययभावान्तं योजयेत् स्फुटयोगगे |
ग्रहचारफलं सत्यं प्रत्यक्षं देवकेरठे ॥४२८५ ॥
देहे पापागरहैर्युक्ते देहपीडां विनिर्दिशेत् |
जीवे पापे जीवबाधादशासन्धौ महाविपत् ॥४२८६ ॥
चक्रसन्धौ मनस्तापं योजयेत् कालवित्तमः।
राज्यस्थानं पञ्चमं स्यानवमं प्रभुरुच्यते ॥४२८७ ॥
दशमं मित्रभवनं चतुर्थं बन्धुमादिशेत्।
स्वराज्यराष्टनृपते र्बन्धुमित्रारिवर्गगे |
तत्तद् भावाष्टमेशांशफलानि परचिन्तयेत् ॥४२८८ ॥
4284 - 4288. (a) The respective relative will die
when Saturn transits the sign represented by the
Navamnsa occupied by the lord of the 8th from the
relevant Bhava. The sign aspected by the 8th lord
from the said Bhava will also be applicable for
Saturn’ s transit in the same manner. This should be
guessed from the ascendant through the 12th house
(for the various relatives).
(b) Deha Rasi containing a malefic will cause
physical ailments. A malefic in Jeeva Rasi will
produce danger to life. In the junctions of (Kala
Chakra) dasas, great danger and mental distress
will come to pass.
(c) The Sth is called Rajya Sthana. The 9th is
called Prabhu Sthana. The 10th is called the house
of friends. Relatives are indicated by the 4th house.
(Danger to) relatives, friends and enemies of the
king should be understood from the Navamsa
occupied by the 8th lord from the Bhava concermed.
Notes: The instructions given at “a” and “b”
have appeared more than once in the whole text.
However, the one at “c” should look to anyone
to be somewhat strange. Except kinsfolk denoted
by the 4th house, the other three houses have been
designated in rather a peculiar way. Rajya Sthana
and Prabhu Sthana both are denoted by the 10th
house. Friends are denoted by the 11th house.
Further dealing with the king’s life from another
native’s horoscope sounds quite illogical. After’
all, each citizen of a kingdom (or a country) is
bound to have conflicting influences of planets at
one and the same time. What then will indeed
transpire in the king’s life is beyond imagination.

172 Deva Keralam
मनुः
मूर््यादिभावाष्टमनाथदाये
स्फुटांशगे भानुसुतेन युक्ते |
सदृष्टिराशौ मरणं च वाच्यं
शुभाशुभं तत्र विचारणीयम् ॥४२८९ ॥
4289. According to Manu: Note the positions
of the lords of the 8th of the various houses from the
ascendant and others (i.e. upto the 12th), and the
signs aspected by each of these 8th lords. Saturn’s
transit (in the relevant place) will cause death (of
the relevant relative). Good and bad effects (concerning the relevant relative) should accordingly
be estimated.
Notes: In sloka354, Book 1, the text has given
the use of the Navamsa dispositors with Saturn’s
transits in regard to danger to specific relatives.
In the present case, (a) the sign position of the
concemed 8th lord, and (b) the sign aspected by the
said 8th lord, from a given Bhava, is brought into
play in the context of impending danger by Saturn’s transit. In my notes on p.37, Book 1, the
reader could find description of relatives by each
house and the 8th from each of such Bhava.
Saturn transiting (a) or (b) as above will endanger the particular kinsfolk by way of illness, death,
calamity, accident etc.
We will have an exathple thus. The 12th from
the ascendant is the 8th for the Sth. To wit, the 12th
from the ascendant is the spot for danger to one’s
progeny. So also the sign or signs aspected by the
lord of the 12th. When Satur transits the 12th
house, or the sign/s aspected by the 12th lord, or the
sign denoted by the Navamsa occupied by the 12th
lord, one’s children will become a matter of concern - by danger, illness, running away from home,
death etc.
Also see slokas 4284 - 88 supra in this context.
लाभे शुक्रे धने जीवे भाग्यस्थे दशमे तथा।
दर्दरांशे प्रजातश्च मालायोगे सुभाग्यवान् ॥४२९० ॥
महानदीप्ान्त्यदेशे नगरे भाग्यमशनुते |
विदेशे योगवान् भोगी नीचग्रभुनिषेवकः॥४२९१ ॥
वाणिज्ये मोहवान् रागी त्यागभोगवदान्यवान्।
विपदाये सुवाहाप्तिः सन्तानोत्पत्तितः परम् ॥४२९२ I.
महायोगं च लभते Fara Fafa |
Le
'पुत्रिकोद्राहसोख्यापिि पुत्ोदराहं ततः परम् ।
जन्मभूमिं परित्यज्य नित्यश्री सोख्यवान् सुखी ॥४२९३ ॥
वंशोपरि शैर्व्षे स्वप्राबल्यं क्वचित् सुखम् |
षड्विशाब्दात् परं भूरि धनं संपादयिष्यति ॥४२९४ ॥
मित्रप्रभुविनाशादि क्लेशं प्रापोति भूरिशः।
राजान्तरवशाद भाग्यं क्षेमदाये श्रियायुतम् ॥४२९५॥
प्रत्यग्दाये फलं सत्यं fase परं व्यथाम् ॥४२९६ ॥
सोदरोत्पत्तिसन्तोषं सम्पदयाये तुलाशनौ |
कन्याशनौ भाग्यवृद्धिर्बन्धुवरगे विशेषतः ॥४२९७ ॥
स्वपिर्तुभगिनी भर्तुयोगकाले पितासुखम् |
तुलाशनौ धनप्राप्तिः कन्यामध्ये शुभं क्वचित् ॥४२९८ ॥
वृश्चिकान्ते स्थिते मन्दे पितामहास्तु नाशनम् |
बन्धुवर्गे विचारः स्यान्मातृवंश जनावधि ॥४२९९ ॥
4290 - 4299. Jupiter & Venus: For the native
of Aquarius ascendant, Durdara Nadiamsa, Venus
in the 11th as Jupiteris in the 2nd or 10th, will cause
great fortunes through Mala Yoga. (That is, the
present Yoga is described as Mala Yoga giving
great fortunes.) His fortunes will be in a town near
the region of a great river (i.e. watery zone). He
will prosper in a foreign land. He will enjoy
fortunes and will serve a mean king, be deeply
attached to trading activities, passionate, sacrificing in nature and eloquent in speech. His 3rd dasa
will give him conveyances following birth of children. Abundant prosperity and wide fame will
follow the 4th dasa. He will leave his birth country
and will enjoy uninterrupted wealth and happiness
(in a foreign land). Between 20 and 25, his
prominence will occur, and he will enjoy some
happiness. He will gather a lot of wealth following
his 26th year of age. Enormous grief on account of
loss of friends and employer will have to be experienced by him. The 4th dasa will cause him wealth
through a change of ruler (or employer). In this
dasa, his daughter’ s marriage will take place, which
will be followed by son’s marriage. The Sth dasa ।
will cause mental agony due to enmity with friends.
When Saturn moves in Libra, during 2nd dasa, he
will obtain co-born. Saturn’s journey in Virgo will
increase his fortunes; more so of his kinsfolk. His
father’s happiness will coincide with the time
prosperity of a son of his (i.e. father’s) sister.

‘Chandra Kala Nadi 173
Satum transiting in Libra will give wealth (to
father) while in the middle of Virgo, some auspi-
` cious results will come to pass. Transit of Saturn
in the end of Scorpio will destroy the native’s
paternal grand-mother apart from producing troubles to maternal relatives and unpleasant changes
for relatives in general.
Notes: In the 1st line of sloka4290, “Bhag yasthe
Dasame Thatha” reads as “Athava Dasameshu
cha” meaning Jupiter should be in the 2nd (Capricom) or the 10th (Virgo). The translation is
accordingly provided.
waa क्षामदुखं विपदाये विशेषतः।
कीटे शनिस्थिते काले महानृपतिनाशनम् ॥४३०० Il
afar चोलदेशे प्रजाक्षोभं विनिर्दिशेत् |
राज्याधिपत्योर्मध्ये तु देशे राजान्तरं स्मृतम् ॥४३०१ ॥
शनिनाडीफलाध्याये राज्य राष्टफलानि च।
सविस्तरं वर्णितानि विचित्राणि फलानि च ॥४३०२ ॥
4300 - 4302. Irrelevant: Famine will occur in
the 2nd dasa. Saturn’s movements in Scorpio will
destroy a great king. In its trine, he will cause strife
to the inmates of Chola and the king will be
changed. Sani Nadi describes the effects for the
country in a detailed and wonderful manner.
भाग्याधिपे तथा लाभे गदांशे विप्रकालगे ।
पुरा ब्राह्मण जन्मा च पश्चाल्लोकिकजन्मवान् ॥४३०३ ॥
विप्रजन्मान्त्यकाले च हापत्संन्यासमादिशेत् |
तस्य पुण्यप्रभावेण पश्चाद्रैदिकजन्मवान् ॥४३०४ ॥
पश्चाञ्जन्मान्तरे मुक्तिर्व्ययेशे गुरुवीक्षिते ।
4303 - 4304/2. The 9th lord (Venus) in the 11th
(Sagittarius) in Gada Nadiamsa indicates that the
‘native was a Brahmin in his previous birth. His next
birth (following the current one) will be one with
material outlook (i.e. in the present birth, he has no
yoga for Emancipation). In the ending phase of
Brahmin birth, taking to ascetic order following a
family calamity is indicated. (That is in the previous birth he took to such order). Thereby he would
eam merits of a good deed. Or else, he would be
next born as a person following the Vedic path.
After completing the next birth, he will attain
Emancipation, if the 12th lord (Saturn) is in aspect
to Jupiter.
Notes: “Vipra Kala” is not included in the
translation to avoid confusion. “Vipra Kala” is the
first quarter of a Nadiamsa.
लग्नेशाक्रान्तराशीशेशुभांशे भाग्यराशिगे ॥४३०५ ॥
मालांशे मालिकायोगे ह्यायुर्दायमिति स्मृतम् |
मोहनांशे विलग्नेशे त्वष्टमे गुरुवीक्षिते ॥४२३०६ ॥
चतुःसप्ततिवर्षाणि ह्यंशायुरिति कथ्यते |
योगश्चेति तदर्थः स्यादेकपर्यायसंयुतम् ॥४३०७ Il
मृतिरेकोनपञ्चाशे द्विपञ्चाशेऽपि वा यदि ।
भाग्यनाथयुते जीवे मरणं चैकसप्ततौ |
गुरुनाडीफलं सत्यं प्रत्यक्षं देवकेरलम् ॥४३०८ Il
4305 - 4308. (a) The dispositor of Saturn in the
9th (Libra) with a benefic Navamsa will contribute
to one’s life-span.
(b) Saturn in the 8th (Virgo) in Mohana Nadiamsa with the aspect of Jupiter will give a life-span
of 74 years through Amsayu or Yogayu, which are
synonymous terms (in giving effects, only in this
case).
(©) 49th year or 52nd year will cause death.
(d) Jupiter joining Venus will cause death at 71.
Deva Keralam has thus brought to light the effects
mentioned in Guru Nadi.
Notes: (a) “Maalamsa” and “Malika Yoga”
appear to be redundant terms. These are excluded
in the translation. The yoga mentioned is favourable for a long life.
(b) Life span will be 74 in this case and Yogayu
method and Amsayu method will yield the same
age for this particular native.
(c) The Ist line of sloka 4308 is possibly
missing. Hence only the effect - life span being 49
or 52 - is found without the relevant condition.
(d) This is by itself another Yoga to know of
one’s length of life.
मकरलग्ने सचिवांशनाडीफलम् ।
मीने शनिकेतु |
लग्नेशे सचिवांशस्थे विषाख्यांशोद् भवस्य च।
मीने केतुयुते चन्द्रे विषाख्यांशोद् भवस्य च ॥४३०९ Il
दुःशीला जननी दुष्टा स्वकुलेषु च जारिणी |
लग्नेशे सचिवांशस्थे भूसुतेन समन्विते ॥४२१० Il
माता दूषितदेहा च स्वज्येष्ठभगिनी तथा ।

174 Deva Keralam
विषाख्यांशकगे चन्द्रे मीने केतुसमन्विते ॥४३११॥
सहोदर्याः स्वमातुश्च जारत्वं परिकल्पयेत् |
सचिवांशे घटे मन्दे भूसुतेन समन्विते ॥४३१२ ॥
मृगलग्ने प्रजातश्च भ्रातृवंशे कलङ्गवान् |
भाग्येशे मिथुनांशस्थे नवमे राहुसंस्थिते ॥४२३१३ ॥
निशाकरेण संदृष्टे सोदरी wae |
सिंहांशे मकरे लग्ने तदीशे कुजसंयुते ॥४३१४॥
स्वसुता दुर्भगा भूत्वा भर्तृवाक्यं श्रृणोति न।
जारावस्थां गतेधीशे त्वसितेन समन्विते ॥४३१५ ॥
आयुष्मती स्वमाता चं गूढजारवती शुभा |
सचिवांशे विलग्नेशे सुखेशेन समन्विते ॥४३१६ ॥
मातृवंशे महद् भाग्यं स्वपिता तद्धनं लभेत् ।
चापरूढे सुखाधीशे कुम्भे शनिसमन्विते ॥४३१६ ॥
मातृवंशे महद् भाग्यं स्वपिता तद्धनं लभेत् |
चापारूढे सुखाधीरे कुम्भे शनिसमन्विते ॥४२३१७ Il
चपे जीवे प्रजातस्य पितामातुः सुभाग्यवान्।
बहुपुत्रार्थसंपननोसोदरी भ्रातृ संयुतः ॥४३१८ ॥
्रनथान्तरे विलग्नेशे राजयोगग्रहैरयुत ।
स्वमातुः सोदरी नास्ति माता भ्रातृसमन्विता ॥४३१९ ॥
4309 - 4319. Capricorn Ascendant: (a) The
ascendant lord in Sachiva Nadiamsa as Ketu is in
Pisces (in the 3rd) along with the Moon will
produce “Visha” Yoga. As a result, the native’s
mother will be evil, wicked among her family
members and of questionable character.
(b) Saturn in Sachiva Nadiamsa and conjunct
Mars will cause a mother with a polluted body (i.e.
an immoral mother). So also her older sister.
(c) In the Yoga mentioned at “a”, the conjunction of the Moon with Ketu implies immorality on
the part of sisters of the mother.
(d) One born in Capricorn while Saturn is in
Sachiva Nadiamsa in the company of Mars leads to
existence of blemish in the family of brothers (of
the native).
(e) The 9th lord (Mercury) in Gemini Navamsa
while the 9th house (Virgo) is occupied by Rahu, in
aspect to the Moon (from Pisces in the company of
Ketu) will cause one’s sister have illicit association
with other men. :
(f) Capricorn ascendant with Leo Navamsa,
while the ascendant lord Saturn is in the company
of Mars, will give an unfortunate sister who will not
care for her husband’s words.
(g) Venus in the company of Saturn will give
the following effects in respect of mother. She will
be long-lived and be handsome but corrupt in
character.
(h) The maternal family will be highly prosperous if Saturn is in Sachiva Nadiamsa and in the
company of the 4th lord (Mars). Further, his father
will obtain the wealth of the mother.
(i) With the 4th lord (Mars) and Jupiter obtaining the sign Sagittarius, while Aquarius is held by
Saturn by occupation, one’s paternal grand-father
would be highly fortunate and would have many
sons and co-born and much wealth.
(j) There is another authority with the view that
Saturn joining Raja Yoga planets will give no
sisters to the native’s mother. But she will have
male co-bom. `
Notes: (a) “Vishakya amsa udbhavasya cha”
appearing twice in sloka 4309 is possibly a misconStrued term for Visha Yoga or Poisonous Yoga or
for Visha Nadiamsa. It is difficult to guess what
exactly the term is. However, Visha yoga denotes
a “poisonous” woman or one with undesirable
effects bringing disgrace to the family. Such a
Yoga, particularly applicable to a female, could be
found in many standard text books. To enable a
proper utility of the instruction, some liberty is
bound to be taken over-stepping the text.
Also see slokas 548 etc. (page 53 onwards) in
Book 1 where the present Nadiamsa is termed as
“Sachira”.
Saturn’s position in the particular Nadiamsa is
to be understood to be in Capricorn, aspecting the -
duo - Ketu and the Moon - in Pisces. The result is
a bad mother as above who is as destructive as
poison or “Visha”. Her sisters also will be so as
mentioned at ^€.
(b) The association of Mars with Saturn, while
the whole Yoga as at “a” is present will include the
older sister of the mother in the list of corrupt
persons.
(2) “Jaaravastha” is nota standard term. “Jaara”
in respect of woman shows her corrupmess and the
result is mentioned by the term “Jaara vathi”.

Chandra Kala Nadi 175
Another term “Gatedhise” reads as “Suthadhise”
elsewhere denoting the Sth lord (Venus). Thus the
conjunction of Satum and Venus will give said
results.
(i) “Chaapa” denoting Sagittarius appears separately in case of occupation by Mars as well as
Jupiter. Hence it is to be interpreted that these two
are to be together in Sagittarius.
(j) It is not understood why Raja Yoga causing
planets will act this way.
चनद्राष्टवर्गं निक्षिप्य चन्द्रे यावत्फलैर्युते ।
चिरायुषाः मातुलाश्च तावत्सङ्कया भवन्ति हि ॥४३२० ॥
मीनारूढे विलग्नेशे स्वोच्चांशे कुजसंयुते |
स्वमातुः सोदराः सप्त ह्यथवा वसुसद्कयकाः॥४३२१ ॥
आयुष्मन्तौ मातुलौ द्रौ शेषं नाशमितीरयेत्।
स्वक्षेत्रे वृषभांशस्थे लग्नेशे सचिवांशके ॥४३२२ ॥
मातामहः प्रसिद्धः स्यादग्रहारस्य स्थापकः।
मातुलाधिपतौ सोम्ये मकरे रविसंयुते ॥४२२३ ॥
क्षयावस्यागेजातस्य मातुलः क्षयरोमवान् |
वृषभांशे सुखाधीशे लग्ने शनिसमन्विते ॥४३२४ ॥
क्षयरोगो मातृवंशे मातुलद्वयनाशनम् |
राजावस्थागे सुखेशे त्वसितेन समन्विते ॥४३२५ ॥
माता पुत्रवती चैव स्वकुले गूढजारिणी |
स्वज्येष्ठभगिनी चैव जायते मृतपुत्रिणी ware ॥
जारावस्थाफलं सत्यं स्वपितासोदीर्युतः।
जारावस्थां गते भौमे पितृव्येशेऽर्किसंयुते ॥४३२७ ॥
स्वपितृव्येषु यः कश्चिज्जारचोरशिखामणिः।
मेहप्रकृति देही च मृतसन्तानयोगवान् ॥४३२८ ॥
पितृव्यो at पुत्रवन्तावेकोवन्ध्यापतिवर्भवेत् |
सचिवांशे विलग्नेशे विषाख्यांशोदभवस्य च ॥४३२९ ॥
मुकुन्दांशकगे जीवे स्वपितृव्यचतुष्टयम् |
सूर्ये यावत्फलानि स्युस्तावत्स्कयाः पितृव्यकाः ॥४३२० ॥
आयुष्मन्तस्िपितृव्याः मुकुन्दांशगे रवौ |
भाग्यधिपेन शुक्रे मकरे मिथुनांशगे ॥४३३२ ॥
भाग्याधिपेन संयुक्ते राजसेवी पितामहः।
विदेशवासी रागी च व्यवसायपरः सुखी ॥४३३३ ॥
अग्रहारेनिवासी स्यात् किंचिदुद्योगजीवनम् ।
लग्नततृतीयगे चन्द्रे कुम्भांशे केतुसंयुते ॥४३३४ ॥
आयुष्मत्यस्थिगिन्यो भ्रातरौ द्वौ चिरायुषौ ।
शेषं नाशमिति प्रोक्तं तत्तन्मारकदायके ॥४३३५ ॥
4320 - 4335. (a) Somany number of brothers of
one’s mother will be endowed with longevity as the
number of the Bindus obtained by the Moon in her
own Ashtaka Varga.
(b) Saturn in Pisces with Libra Navamsa and in
the company of Mars will cause 7 or 8 brothers to
one’s mother. Two of them will live long while the
rest will incur destruction.
(c) One’s maternal grand-father would be a
famous personage and would construct a colony of
Brahmins if Saturn is in his own sign with Taurus
Navamsa.
(d) Mercury denoting maternal uncles (by 6th
lordship) and placed in Capricorn in the company
of the Sun will cause lung tuberculosis to a maternal uncle.
(e) Saturn in the ascendant (Capricorn) while
the 4th lord (Mars) is in Taurus Navamsa will lead
to tuberculosis of the lungs to the members of `
mother’s family, As a result two maternal uncles
will incur death.
(f) The 4th lord in thé company of Saturn in
Rajavastha (7) will cause birth of sons to the mother
(i.e. native will have brothers). She will indulge in
seret activities against her own family members.
Her older sister will obtain dead children. The
native's father would have brothers.
(g) If Mars is in Jaaravastha (7) in the company
of Saturn, one of the paternal uncles will be an
expert in illicit association with women and thieving. He will suffer from urinary disorders and will
obtain dead children. The native will have two
paternal uncles (father’s brothers) one of whom
will be endowed with progeny.
(h) Saturn and Jupiter in order appearing in
Sachiva and Mukunda Nadiamsa at birth will cause
four paternal uncles.
(i) The number of paternal uncles can also
correspond to the number of Ashtaka Varga bindus
found in the sign occupied by the Sun in his own
Ashtaka. Varga.
(j) The Sun in Mukunda Nadiamsa will cause
three long-living paternal uncles.
(k) One’s paternal grand-father would be famous if Saturn and the Sun respectively occupy

176 Deva Keralam
Sachiva and Mukunda Nadiamsas. Further he
would have brothers and sisters.
0) Royal service, living in a foreign land,
passionate disposition, and attachment to agriculture will result the position of the Sth lord Venus in
the sign Capricorn with Gemini Navamsa. Mercury should also join Venus in Capricorn. Additional effects of this Yoga are the said relative will
live in acolony of Brahmins and will be somewhat
disposed to be in service.
(m) The Moon in the 3rd from the ascendant
and in Aquarius Navamsa along with Ketu will give
3 sisters and 2 brothers, each endowed with longevity. Rest of the co-bom will be destroyed (prematurely) in such dasas which will be capable of
inflicting death upon them.
Notes: (k) Details about Mukunda Nadiamsa
could be found in the notes given for sloka 603, on
page 59, Book 1.
भाग्यकर्माधिपौ लग्ने तदीशे सचिवांशगे |
विशद्र्षात् परं भाग्यं विपदाये सुकीर्तिमान् ॥४२३६ tt
4336. Fortunes after the age of 20 and wide
fame in the 3rd dasa will be the results of the 9th
lord (Mercury) in the ascendant while its lord
Saturn in Sachiva Nadiamsa.
अष्टमाधिपतौ लग्ने शुभद्रयसमन्विते |
जन्माब्दगे जन्मदाये मृतप्रायोऽपि जीवति ॥४२३२७ ॥
4337. The 8th lord (Sun) in the ascendant in the
company of two benefics will nearly kill the subject
in the first year during the very first dasa, but he will
survive.
स्वोच्चांशगे विलग्नेशे yaar समन्विते |
विद्याविनयसंपन्नः कोपी कषप्रप्रसादकः॥४३३८ ॥
4338. Saturn in Libra Navamsa in the company
of Mars will bless one with learning and modesty.
The native will be irascible but instantly pleased.
सचिवांशे fara राजद्वारे सुबुद्धिमान् |
कलत्रद्यवान् भोगी स्वभुजार्जित वित्तवान् ॥४३३९ ॥
fared महद भाग्यं ज्येष्ठभ्रातुः शुभावहम् |
गृहे लक्ष्मीकटाक्षेण नरवाहनयोगवान् ॥४३४० ॥
प्रनलोद्योगवान् कामी लग्नेशे सचिवांशगे |
आयुष्मन्त्यौ दवे भगिन्यौ सचिवांशोद भवस्य च ॥४३४१ ॥
4339 - 4341. Saturn’s occupation of Sachiva
Nadiamsa will give wide fame in royal service.
Further, one will have two wives, will enjoy pleasures and will build up wealth by his own efforts.
His fortunes will rise in his 3rd dasa will his older
brother will also beget auspicious results. The
goddess of wealth will shower her mercy on the
family. He will obtain conveyances and a prosperous employment and will have two long-living
sisters.
Notes: “Subuddhimaan” denoting high intelligence should read as “Sukirtimaan” denoting wide
fame, vide sloka 4339.
स्वोच्चांशके विक्रमेशे भ्रातारो द्रौ चिरायुषो ।
मातुलाधिपतौ सोम्ये क्षयावस्थां गते शनो ॥४३४२ ॥
सचिवांशे मातुलश्च क्षयरोगेण कर्शितः।
मातुलो द्रौ पुत्रवन्तौ पुत्रभावमिति स्मृतम् ॥४२४२ ॥
आयुष्मान् मातुलेष्वेकः सचिवांशोदभवस्य च।
षोडशाब्दात् परं भाग्यं स्वज्येष्ठभगिनीसुखम् ॥४२४४ ॥
दीर्घायुष्या पुत्रिणी च भर्तृभाग्ययुता सती |
4342 - 4344142. (a) If the 3rd lord (Jupiter) is in
his exaltation Navamsa, one will have two longliving brothers.
(b) The 6th lord Mercury in Kshayavastha (?)
in the ascendant (“Vilagnage” is included in another version for Mercury) while Saturn is in
Sachiva Nadiamsa will give the following effects.
He will have two matemal uncles who will have
progeny. One will be emaciated due to tuberculosis. These are the effects for the 5th house(?)
(c) Saturn in Sachiva Nadiamsa (while Mercury is placed as stated earlier) will give prosperity
to a maternal uncle after the age of 16. His older
sister will be happy. His daughter will be endowed
with longevity and will be fortunate in respect of
her husband.
सचिवांशे विलग्नेशे लाभेशेन समन्विते ॥४३४५ ॥
स्वज्येष्ठभगिनीभर्ता दीर्घायुरभरतृहीनवान् |
भेदभ्रातृयुतो मानी मृतसन्तानयोगवान् ॥४३४६ ॥
कालान्तरे सुतप्राप्पिर्योगवान् भाग्यवान् सुखी ।
सचिवांशे विलग्नेशे त्वष्टादश च वत्सरे ॥४३४७ ॥
स्वज्येष्ठभगिनी भर्ता पितृमूलात् सुखान्वितः।
कनिष्ठभगिनीभर्ता किंचिद्रोगेण कशितः॥४३४८ ॥

Chandra Kala Nadi 177
बहुसन्तानवां श्चैव ह्यल्पयोगयुतः सुखी |
4345 - 4348144. (a) Sister’s Husband: Saturn in
Sachiva Nadiamsa in the company of the 1 Ith lord
(Mars) will give following results. His elder sister’s husband will be long-lived. He will have no
full brother but half-brother and be honourable. He
will (initially) obtain dead children. Later on
children born will survive. He willincur prosperity
and fortunes.
(b) Saturn in Sachiva Nadiamsa (implying
association with Mars as well) will cause happiness to the said brother-in-law through his father in
his 18th year. The native’s younger sister’s husband will be somewhat thin-bodied due to diseases,
will have many children but limited prosperity.
मीने कुम्भांशगे चन्द्रे कुम्भे मन्दे च संस्थिते ॥४३४९ ॥
जन्मदाये मीनशनौ जन्मदेशे नृपावधि |
मातुलश्च सुसन्तानं क्षयरोगेण कशितः॥४३५० ॥
मातृवंशे भाग्यवृद्धिः faq: सौख्यं क्वचित् सुखम् ।
सहोद्रविवाहश्च दशान्ते मौञ्जबन्धनम् ॥४२५१ ॥
सम्पदाये विवाहश्च faced. श्रियान्वितः।
4349 - 4351144. If Saturn and the Moon are
respectively in the signs Aquarius and Pisces, the
latter being in Aquarius Navamsa, the following
effects will come to pass. The maternal uncle will
be greatly distressed and will suffer from tuberculosis when Saturn reaches the sign Pisces during the
native’s first dasa. The native’s mother’s family
will experience prosperity and his father will be
somewhat happy. His brother’s marriage will take
piace. In the end of the first dasa, his thread
ceremony will be celebrated. He will marry in the
2nd dasa. Wealth will accrue in the 3rd dasa.
Notes: “Kumbhe Mande cha samstite” reads as
“Kumbhe Mandasya Jatake” loosely denoting Saturn in the sign Aquarius.
केत्वंशगे तच्तिकोणे स्फुटयोगं गते शनो ॥४३५२ ॥
सचिवांशे जन्मदेशे सेनाधिपतिनाशनम्।
कुम्भे तुलांशगे मन्दे स्थिरराशिचतुष्टये ॥४२५३ ॥
स्फुटयोगं गते मन्दे जनमदेशे नृपावधि ।
तद्वारि प्रमुखैः क्लेशं मातृवंशे महावित् ॥४३५४ ॥
स्वजनारिष्टमूलेन प्रनलक्लेशवान् भवेत् |
सचिवांशे विपद्दाये मातुलज्ञातिवर्गगे ॥४३५५ ॥
विशेषभाग्यमित्याहुः पुत्र भाग्यादिवृद्धिमान् |
4352 - 4355142. Irrelevant: (a) Saturn’s transit
in the sign identical with the Navamsa occupied by
Ketu or a trine thereof will destroy the army chief
of the country. If he is in Aquarius with Libra
Navamsa, his transit in an immovable sign will
trouble the king. Important men in royal circles will
be anguished and great danger in mother’s family
will occur. He will be in grief due to adversities to
his men, will greatly prosper and acquire happiness
through progeny.
धने मन्दे शुभे राहौ दारेशे पापसंयुते ॥४६५६ ॥
विपद्दाये हानिः क्िप्रणोद्राहयोगवान् |
धनेशांश तच्तिकोणे स्फुटयोगं गते शनो ॥४३५७ ॥
धनेशदृष्टिराशौ तु दारहानि विनिर्दिशेत |
व्ययेशांशे afer स्फुटयोगं गते शनौ ॥४३५८ ॥
व्ययेशदृष्टिराशौ तु सन्तानारिष्टमादिशेत् |
लग्नेशांशे तच्तिकोणे रन्धेशां शत्रिकोणगे ॥४३५९ ॥
स्फुटयोगं गते मन्दे मातुलारिष्टशेकवान् |
तदभावे मातृवंशे प्रबलज्ञातिनाशनम् ॥४२६० ॥
बन्धुवर्गे विचारः स्यात् HATA न संशयः।
लाभेशांशे तत्िकोणे स्फुटयोगं गते शनो ॥४३६१॥
जननीव्याकुलं चैति argh हयुपद्रवः।
कर्माधिपदशाकाले कर्मेशांशत्रिकोणगे ॥४३६२ ॥
सहोदरभ्रातृपीडा स्फुटयोगं गते शनौ ।
सुखेशांशे तत्तिकोणे स्फुटयोगं गते शनो ॥४३६३ ॥
स्वपितुर्देहजाडयादि दृष्टिराशो महाविपत् |
सचिवांशे विपदाये सुखेशां शत्रिकोणेगे ॥४३६४ ॥
स्फुटयोगं गते मन्दे feats विनिर्दिशेत् ।
जननीव्याकुलं चेति पितृव्योऽपि तथेव च ॥४२३६५ ॥
पितुश्च पितृतुल्यस्य विपदाये मृतिं वदेत् ।
4356 - 436514. Saturn’s Evil Transits for
Capricorn Ascendant: (a) One will lose his spouse
in the 3rd dasa, if Saturn is in the 2nd (Aquarius)
and Rahu is in the 9th (Virgo) as the lord of the 7th
(the Moon) is with a malefic. He will immediately
get re-married.
(b) Saturn moving in the sign denoted by the
Navamsa occupied by the lord of the 2nd, or a trine
thereof, or the sign aspected by the 2nd lord will kill
one’s wife.

178 Deva Keralam
(c) One will incur evils to his progeny when
Saturn is in transit in the sign identical with the
Navamsa occupied by the 12th lord, or a trine
thereof, or the sign that is at birth aspected by the
12th lord.
(d) Evils and grief concerning one’s maternal
uncle will come to pass when Saturn journeys in
any of the following places: the sign represented by
the Navamsa occupied by either the lord of the
ascendant or the 8th, or a trine thereof. In the
absence of these results, destruction of some important relative from the mother’s side will have to
be foretold. Unpleasant changes for kinsfolk can
also occur with the Sun’s undesirable transit (when
the planet Saturn is in said movement).
(e) Saturn’s sojourn in the sign equal to the
Navamsa occupied by the 11th lord, or a trine
thereto, will produce distress to one’s mother. Her
kinsfolk will be subjected to some calamity.
(f) The dasa of Venus should be in operation
when Saturn transits the sign denoted by the Navamsa occupied by 10th lord (Venus), or a trine
thereof. These zodiacal phenomena will usher
evils to one’s co-born.
(g) One’s father will fall ill when Saturn’s
movements prevail in the sign caused by the Navamsa occupied by the 4th lord, or a trine thereof.
(bh) Saturn’s journey in the sign aspected by the
said 4th lord will cause a great danger to father.
(i) If the 3rd dasa simultaneously operates
when the yoga at “h” above exists, one will lose his
father. Further, distress to mother and paternal
uncle will also be included in the effects. Father or
someone equal to father will die in the said dasa.
सचिवांशकणे मन्दे मुकुन्दांशे दिवाकरे ॥४२६६ ॥
विपदाये पित्ररिषटं वृश्चिकान्त्यकगे शनो |
अथवां मकरे YY: HU क्रूरमासगे ॥४३६७ ॥
स्वमाता विधवा भूत्वा बहुकालं सुजीवति |
विपत्तारदशान्त्यादो क्षेमदाये स्वभुक्तिषु ॥४२६८ ॥
मात्रिष्टमिति प्राहुः स्फुटयोगं गते शनौ ।
4366 - 4368142. Saturn & The Sun: Satum and
the Sun in Sachiva and Mukunda Nadiamsas at
birth will produce the following effects to a Capri-
- com native. There will be danger to father when
Scorpio’s concluding space is transited by Satum. |
Or else Saturn in transit can be in Capricorn. This
will coincide with the adverse journeys of Jupiter
and the Sun. The native’s mother will, as a result
of these Nadiamsa positions of Saturn and the Sun,
become a widow and will live for a long time.
Danger to mother can occur in the last part of 3rd
dasa or in the first sub period of the 4th dasa.
Notes: “Sphuta Yogam Gathe Sanau” in the
last line is not connected with this part and is for
something else.
कर्मभाग्याधिपौ Sf रन्धेशेन समन्वितौ ॥४३६९ ॥
aga इति प्राहुरल्पभाग्ययुतः सुखौ |
चतुर्विंशात् परं भाग्यं योगं च ऋतुवत्सरम् ॥४२७० ॥
अथवा वसुवर्षाणि पश्चात् क्लेशं विनिर्दिशेत्
घने पापद्रययुते नवमे राहुसंस्थिते ॥४३७१ ॥
वार्धके क्लेशमाप्नोति व्ययेशे भाग्यवान् क्वचित् |
दारान्तेऽल्पसन्तानं योगवान् रोगवान् भवेत् ॥४३७२ ॥
मृतप्रजाबहुत्वं स्यादद्धित्रिसन्तानयोगवान् |
सुतेशरश्मिसह्याश्च भुक्तभोग्यांशकास्तथा ४२७३ ॥
तावत्पत्रा भविष्यन्ति ह्यायुष्मन्तो न संशयः।
क्षेमाधिपदशाकाले राजद्रारेऽवमानवान् ॥४२३७४ ॥
सञ्चितार्थविनाशादि योगयुक्तसिवत्सरम् |
सर्वदाये staat कुजभुक्तो च वा यदि ॥४२७५ ॥
अतीव क्लेशकार्याणि शनिभुक्तौ शुभाशुभम्।
जीवान्तरान्तरे काले शनिभोमान्तरेषु च ॥४२३७६ ॥
सर्वदाये क्रूरभुक्तौ क्रूरमासे महद् भयम् |
शुक्रदायेऽर्कभुक्तौ स्वजनारिष्टशोकवान् ॥४२७७ ॥
4369 - 4377. (a) The conjunction of the lords of
the 9th and the 10th in the 8th from the ascendant
will be a reason for obstacles to prosperity which
will be limited as such. This Yoga will give
fortunes (as due) after the age of 24 for a period of
6 or years following which grief (i.e. loss of fortunes) will come to pass.
(b) Rahu in the 9th (Virgo) as two malefics are
in the 2nd (Aquarius) will produce troubles in old
age.
(c) The 12th lord ..... (Status not mentioned, but
seems to be in the 9th in Virgo) will cause some
prosperity. He will obtain progeny through a remarriage. Prosperity and diseases will also result

Chandra Kala Nadi 179
this position. One will beget many dead children.
Maybe two or three will survive. The number of
children with longevity will correspond to the
number of Navamsas passed by the Sth lord (Venus).
(d) In the 4th dasa, (while at birth Saturn and the
Sun are in Sachiva and Mukunda Nadiamsas, vide
sloka 4366), one will be humiliated in royal assembly. The wealth accumulated by him will perish.
He will incur prosperity for 3 yeers (only) in the
said dasa.
(e) In case of Nadiamsa positions of Saturn and
the Sun as above, one will be in intense difficulties
in the sub periods of Jupiter and Mars, in any dasa.
Saturn’s sub period will cause a mix of auspicious
as well as inauspicious effects. Great fear will exist
in the sub periods of Jupiter, Saturn and Mars. The
sub period of the Sun in the dasa of Venus will
produce grief on account of evils to one’s kinsfolk.
स्वजन्मदेशे नृपतेः शुक्रभुक्तौ महाविपत् |
सुखेशांशदशाकाले भाग्येशांशदशान्तयमे ॥४३७८ ॥
स्वजन्मदेशे नृपतिः क्लेशं प्राप्नोति भूरिशः।
व्ययेशांशदशाकाले स्वभुक्तो मातृवंशगे ॥४३७९ ॥
अतीव क्लेशकर्याणि प्रबलारिष्टमादिशेत्।
स्वजन्मदेशे नृपतिर्मृतप्रायोपजीवति ॥४३८० ॥
स्वबन्धुजनविद्रेषात् सेनामात्यविरो धवान् |
लग्नाद्भाग्यं गते राहौ भूसुतेन निरीक्षिते ॥४३८१॥
स्ववासदेशे नृपतिः क्रूरकृत्यस्वभाववान् |
उग्रदण्डपरो नित्यं नित्यगानरतः सुखी ॥४३८२ ॥
4378 - 4382. (a) Irrelevant: Venus sub period
will endanger the king greatly. The king will be
troubled during the dasa of the (Navamsa dispositor
of the) 4th lord or of the 9th lord.
(b) The dasa of the (dispositor of the) Navamsa
lord of the 12th Jord will produce extreme anguish
to the members of the mother’s family. The
relevant sub period wiill be the first one of the dasa.
(c) Irrelevant: The king of the country will
face near-death. Due to enmity with one’s own
people, one will incur enmity with the army chief
and-minister. Rahu in the 9th in aspect to Mars will
denote that the king of the country will be disposed
to perform cruel deeds, will give serious punishments and will be ever interested in music.
Notes: (b) For Capricon. ascendant, the first
sub period in the dasa of the planet ruling the
Navamsa occupied by Jupiter is said to cause the
said results.
वृषभांशकगे भाग्ये कन्याराहौ प्रजायते |
बिशद्रषात् परं भाग्यं चतुर्विंशात् परं सुखम् ॥४३८३ ॥
fared सुतोत्पत्तिर्योगः स्याद्रसुवत्सरम् |
पश्चाद भाग्यच्युते क्लेशं क्षेमदाये दलं व्यथा ॥४३८४ ॥
्रत्यग्दाये महत् सौख्यं राजान्तरवशात् सुखम्।
पुत्रोत्पत्तिविनाशेन क्लेशं प्रापनोति भूरिशः॥४३८५ ॥
प्रत्यक्ताराधिपे चन्द्रे स्वर्भानुयुतवीश्षिते |
केतुयुक्ते फलं सत्यं शुभाशुभफलं समम् ॥४२८६ ॥
एकोनचत्वारिंशेऽब्दे चतुर्विंशतिवत्सरे |
अतीव क्लेशकार्याणि मीने चन्द्रे प्रजायते ॥४३८७ ॥
मीने मन्दांशगे we विषाख्यांशोदट् भवस्य च ।
त्रिशेऽन्दे सुमहत् क्लेशं ahi जातिविग्रहम् ॥४३८८ ॥
aga शुभं चेव क्षिप्रेण क्लेशमादिशेत्।
wees द्विवारं स्यात् सञ्चितार्थविनाशनम् ॥४३८९ ॥
Sa वासमाप्नोति स्वस्थानच्युतिशोकवान् |
साधनेशदशाकाले नवमे राहुसंस्थिते ॥४२९० ॥
अतीव क्लेशदारिद्यं राजन्यद्वेषमादिशेत् |
अपरार्धे क्वचित् सौख्यं शुभाशुभफलं समम् ॥४२९१ ॥
दशान्ते ह्यपमृत्युश्च wat महाविपत् |
4383 - 4391144. (a) Rahu in the 9th (Virgo) with
Taurus Navainsa will cause prosperity after the age
of 20, and happiness after 24. 3rd dasa will cause
birth of children, for a period of 8 years. Afterwards his prosperity will be at stake. The 4th dasa
will cause anguish for half of its duration. Much
happiness will come to pass in the 5th dasa. Due to
a changed king, he will be happy. He will be
abundantly grieved due to loss of children being
born.
(b) If the lord of the Sth dasa, being the Moon
(in Pisces), is associated with the nodes (i.e. one
node in Pisces and the other in Virgo), good and bad
effects will be equal.
(c) The Moon in Pisces in her dasa will cause
much anguish in the 39th or 40th year.
(d) The Moon in Pisces with Aquarius Navamsa will produce much anguish in the 30th year,

180 Deva Keralam
and enmity with own people in the 32nd year.
Auspicious results will exist in the 34th year which
will instantly transform into anguish. Royal enmity will prevail for two weeks and wealth gathered will perish. The subject will live in a remote
village and will grieve losing his position.
(e) Rahu being in the 9th (in the sign Virgo,
witb Taurus Navamsa) will promote anguish, penury
and royal wrath in the 6th dasa. Its 2nd half will
give some happiness and create a balance between
good and bad effects. End of this dasa will instil
fear of uutime:ydeath. The sub period of the Moon,
thereof, will itivolve him in great danger.
सचिवांशे कर्मनाथे नैधनेशदशामृतिः ॥४२९२ ॥
रनध्राधिपदशाकाले वेधकग्र भुक्तिषु |
अपमृत्युभयप्राप्तिः HUT नात्रसंशयः॥४२९३ ॥
वार्धके नेत्रहानिः स्यात् सचिवांशोद् भवस्य च।
मध्ये मध्ये नेत्ररोगी ह्यथवा दन्तरोगवान् ॥४२३९४ ॥
षटपञ्चाशत्समान्त्यादौ तथा सार्धँ द्विवर्षके ।
सचिवांशकगे मन्दे मीनमासे मृतिं वदेत् ॥४२३९५ ॥
रन्धेशांशकमे मन्दे HT क्रूरमासगे |
देहे जीवे राहुयुते हयमृत्युभयं क्वचित् ॥४२९६ ॥
रन्धाधिदशासन्धौ सुमहत् क्लेशमादिशेत् |
जीवन्ते सर्वदाय क्रूरमासे मनोव्यथा ॥४३९७ ॥
भाग्यकर्मेशयोगेन योगः स्याद्रसुवत्सरम् |
योगरोगं च लभते योगकाले रुजातुरः॥४३९८ ॥
तदोषपरिहारार्थं चक्रदानं समाचरेत् |
सचिवांशकगे मन्दे जातस्य मृगलग्नके।
इटमेव फलं सत्यं प्रत्यक्षं देवकेरलम् ॥४३९९ ॥
4392 - 4399. (a) Should the 10th lord (Venus)
be in Sachiva Nadiamsa, the 7th dasa will cause
death. A sub period owned by an adverse planet in
the dasa of the 8th lord (Sun) will promote probability of untimely death. The month will correspond to Sun’s adverse movements. He will incur
harm to his eyes in his old age. In between, he will
suffer from disorders of eyes and teeth. The
beginning or end of the 56th year will kill him.
Saturn in Sachiva Nadiamsa will cause death in the
month when Pisces is transited by the Sun.
(b) Saturn obtaining the Navamsa ruled by the
8th lord (i.e. in Leo Navamsa) whilt Deha or Jeeva
Rasis is occupied by Rahu, will cause fear of
untimely death. This will coincide with the adverse
transits of Jupiter and the Sun.
(c) The concluding part of the dasa of the Sun
will cause much distress.
(d) The sub period of Jupiter in all dasas will
produce mental distress with adverse transits of the
Sun.
(e) The conjunction of the lords of the 9th
(Mercury) and the 10th lord (Venus) will give
prosperity for a period of 8 years. This yoga will
also produce diseases when the native is about to
prosper. Toovercome this blemish, donation of the
image of zodiac be done.
These are the effects for Saturn’s position in
Sachiva Nadiamsa, in case of Capricom ascendant,
as reflected in Deva Keralam.
Notes: (a) “Karma Nathe” indicating 10th lord
should read as “Lagna Nathe” to mean Satum, the
ascendant lord.
GAA FUT:
कुन्दांशके सुखाधीशे स्वक्षेत्रे रविसंयुते ।
कर्मीधिपेन संदृष्टे मीनलग्ने सुभाग्यवान् ॥४४०० Il
4400. Pisces Ascendant - Kunda Nadiamsa:
In case of one born in Pisces ascendant, note the 4th
lord Mercury in his own sign (Gemini) in the
company of the Sun. The said Mercury in aspect to
the 10th lord Jupiter will cause rise of fortunes.
Notes: For Kunda Nadiamsa, please see notes
under sloka 638, page 62, Book 1.
चन्द्रलग्नाधिपे सौम्ये कुन्दांशे गुरुवीधिते |
विप्रकाले प्रजातश्च पित्रा्जितधनादयवान् ।४४०१ Il
कुन्दांशकगते सौम्ये क्षात्रकालसमुद भवः।
विष्णुभक्त्तिरतो नित्यं महानृपतिसेवकः॥४४०२ ॥
वैश्यवंशे समुत्न्नो धातुव्यापारजीवकः।
धनधान्य समृद्धश्च ब्राह्मणस्नेहवान् सुखी ॥४४०३ ॥
शूद्रकाले राजसेवी भूमिप्रामुधिपत्यवान् i
व्यवसायपगे नित्यं पशुधान्यसमृद्धिमान् ॥४४०४ ॥
4401 - 4404. (a) Vipra Kala: One should
belong to the first quarter of the subject Nadiamsa
as Mercury becomes the lord of the Moon sign and
is aspected by -upiter. As a result, he will be
wealthy through paternal inheritances.

Chandra Kala Nadi 181
(a) Kshatriya Kala: The naiive of 2nd quarter
of Kunda Nadiamsa, Pisces ascendant, will be
devoted to Lord Siva. He will serve a great king.
(b) Vaisya Kala: If birth be in the Vaisya Kala
(3rd quarter of the said Nadiamsa), the person will
have business activities related to metals. He will
also be endowed with plenty of wealth and grains
and befriend Brahmins.
(c) Soodra Kala: In case birth is in the last
quarter of the Nadiamsa in question, the native will
be in the service of a king and will lord over landed
properties and villages. He will be an agriculturist
and will have abundant cows and corns.
Notes: The position of the Moon is implied in
Gemini or in Virgo. But Mercury should simultaneously be aspected by Jupiter. These two conditions apply to all the four cases.
्ररंशगे विप्रकाले सौम्ये गुरुनिरीक्षिते |
मीनलग्ने प्रजातश्च पश्चाद् भ्रातृविनाशवान् ॥४४०५ ॥
ज्येष्ठभ्रातयुतो मानी पितृभाग्यसमृद्धिमान् |
भेदप्रातृयुतश्चैव सोदरभ्रातृमान् भवेत् ॥४४०६ ॥
4405 - 4406. Should Mercury be in aspect to
Jupiter and occupy a malefic Navamsa, one born in
the Ist quarter of the said Nadiamsa in Pisces
ascendant will have no after-born. He will however
have older co-born, be honourable and will enjoy
fortunes through father. He will also have step-cobora.
कुन्दांशगे पदाधीशे गुरुणा च निरीक्षिते ।
मीनलग्ने प्रजातश्च हरिशङ्करभक्तिमान् ॥४४०७ ॥
देवब्राह्मण भक्तश्च पितृमातृप्रियः सुखी ।
राजद्वारे प्रसिद्धश्च वाहनत्रययोगवान् ॥४४०८ ॥
स्वपितान्दोलिकादीनि वयोमध्ये सुभाग्यवान्।
आत्मस्तुतिपरो नित्यं परोपकृतिकार्यवान् ॥४४०९ ॥
स्वपितुः सोदराः पञ्च भगिनीद्रयवान् सुखौ ।
ज्येष्ठभ्रातृवियोगेन स्वपितुः क्लेशमादिशेत् ॥४४१० ॥
ततः शेषु दक्षिणे बहुभाग्यवान् |
महतो नृपतेर््रारिब्राह्मणस्नेहयोगवान् ॥४४११ ॥
वनान्तरपुरे वासी कुत्सितप्रभुसेवकः।
वैष्णवद्वेषमूलेन ह्यतीवक्लेशवान् पिता ॥४४१२ ॥
4407 - 4412. The native will be devoted to Lord
Vishnu and Lord Siva if Mercury is aspected by
Jupiter. He will be devoted to gods and Brahmins
and be dear to his parents. He will earn fame in
royal circles and will own three conveyances.
Simultaneously, the following results will occur in
respect of father. His father would in the middle of
his life enjoy conveyances and great fortunes,
would be addicted to boasting and would help
others. He would have five brothers and two
sisters. Due to loss of an older brother, he would
incur grief. He would make a lot of fortunes in the
southern direction and enjoy the good luck of
meeting Brahmins in a royal assembly. He would
live in forest regions and would serve a mean king.
Due to enmity with Vaishnavites, he would undergo a lot of difficulties.
जन्मकाले पिता दुःखी कुन्दांशे सोमनन्दने ।
मकरांशस्य दोषेण वेदवर्ष॑ मनोव्यथाम् ॥४४९१३ ॥
पश्चादभाग्याभिवृद्धिश्च शत्रुनाशं विनिर्दिशेत् |
भेदरातृसुतप्राप्तिः सहोदर्या महत् सुखम् ॥४४१४॥
4413 - 4414. If Mercury is in Capricorn Nadiamsa, it denotes much grief to father at the time of
native’s birth. For four years, father will be mentally distressed. Afterwards, he would obtain
fortunes and his enemies would be destroyed. The
native will have step-brothers and his sisters will be
very happy.
जन्मदाये मातुलस्तु सन्तानोत्पत्तिमान् सुखी |
भेद भ्रातर्विवाहः स्याद् भेदभ्रातृशिशुक्षयः॥४४१५ ॥
मातामही Tene मृतप्रायापि जीवति।
लग्नात् सप्तमगे चन्द्रे केसरीयोगजोद् भवः ॥४४१६ ॥
आयुष्मन्तौ च पितरौ मातुलद्वयवान् भवेत् |
सम्पत्तारदशाकाले लग्नेशांशत्रिकोणगे ॥४४१७ ॥
स्फुटयोगं गते मन्दे मातुलारिष्टमादिशेत् |
जननी भ्रातृशोकेन सम्पदाये मनोव्यथाम् ॥४४१८ ॥
मन्दे कीटान्त्यगे काले जननीव्याकुलं महत् |
तुलाशनिस्थिते काले लग्नेशे स्वोच्चकालगे ॥४४१९ ॥
मिथुनान्त्यगते वापि कुन्दांशे मौञ्जबन्धनम् ।
सुताधिपदशाकाले कुन्दांशे बहुसौख्यवान् ॥४४२० ॥
स्वपिता राजसन्मानं शत्रुनाशात् परं सुखम् |
नरवाहनभूषापि नित्यं सन्तोषवान् भवेत् ॥४४२१ ॥
भेदभ्राता शुभं चेति पितृमूलात् सुभाग्यवान् |

182 Deva Keralam
स्वपितुर्पित्रवर्गेषु योगं प्राणोति भूरिशः॥४४२२ ॥
पितृमूलादिष्टसिद्धिर्मातुलस्य शुभाधिकम् |
सुताधिपदशाकाले कुन्दांशे जनितस्य च ॥४४२३ ॥
स्वमातुलशिशुक्लेशो मृतप्रायोपजीवति |
स्वभेदभगिनीभर्ता अ्रबलोद्योगभाग्यवान् ॥४४२४ ॥
4415 - 4424. (a) In the Ist dasa of the native, his
maternal uncle will lose his children. The native’s
step-brother will beget married and will incur loss
of children. His maternal grand-mother will be
troubled by diseases and will escape near-death.
(b) The Moon in the 7th (Virgo) causing Kesari
Yoga will give long lives to parents. He will have
two maternal uncles.
(c) In the 2nd dasa, Saturn arriving in the sign
denoted by the Navamsa occupied by Jupiter, or a
trine thereof, will destroy maternal uncle. His
mother will be greatly grieved due to this loss.
(d) Saturn’s transit in the end of Scorpio will
produce abundant troubles to mother.
(e) Saturn moving in Libra while Jupiter is in
Cancer or in the end of Gemini will cause thread
ceremony to the subject.
(f) Sth Lord’s Dasa: The dasa of the Moon will
cause much happiness to the native. His father will
receive honours from the king and will enjoy
happiness after the destruction of his enemies. He
will obtain conveyances, omaments and continuous happiness. The native’s step-brother will
enjoy happiness and good prosperity through his
father. Father’s friends will also enjoy abundant
prosperity. The native will have his desires fulfilled. His maternal uncle will enjoy many auspicious results but will be grieved due to loss of a
child and will nearly escape death. The native’s
Step-sisters’ husband will obtain a prosperous employment following the birth of a son and become
famous.
पत्रोत्सवात् परं चैव योगवान् कीर्तिमान् सुखी |
कुन्दांशे सुखाधीशे रिपुनाथेन संयुते ॥४४२५ Il
जन्मदाये पिता क्लेशी क्रूराब्दे ज्वरपीडितः।
सिंहे शनिस्थिते काले स्वपिता व्याकुलं महत् ॥४४२६ ॥
अतिसारप्रपीडादि सोदसोत्पत्तिनाशनम्।
मसूरिका waren मातृपौडा क्वचित् क्वचित् ॥४४२७ ॥
पशुधान्यविनाशेन व्याकुलं भवति धुवम् ।
राहुस्थितांशगे मन्दे गोचरे तच्िकोणगे ॥४४२८ ॥
जन्मदाये जन्मदेशे राज्याधिपतिविग्रहम् |
कन्याशनिस्थिते काले जन्मदेशे नृपावधि ॥४४२९ ॥
राजामात्यजनक्लेशो दशासन्धौ महाविपत्।
शुक्रान्तरे जन्मदाये सोदरोत्पत्तिमादिशेत् ॥४४३० ॥
स्वजन्मदेरो नृपतिर्वातरोगेण aera: |
बन्धुवर्गे व्याकुलान्तरं सुखम् ॥४४३१ ॥
स्वमातुलप्रपीडादि स्वपितुर्जननी सुखम् ।
सम्पद्दाये श्रियोऽवापिर्मेषान्ते वृषभे गुरो ॥४४३२ ॥
मिथुने बहुभाग्यं स्यादभ्रातृसोख्यं श्रियान्वितम् ।
qatar तत्वरिकोणे स्फुटयोगं गते शनौ ॥४४३३ ॥
स्वपितुर्देहजाडयादि योगकाले विनिर्दिशेत् ।
विवाहोत्सवकार्याणि स्वज्येष्ठभगिनी सुखम् ॥४४२३४ ॥
्रूरमासं परित्यज्य कन्याशनिफलं समम् |
तुलाशनौ भाग्यवृद्धिः कुन्दांशे चन्द्रदायगे ॥४४३५ ॥
Ut विना सौख्यं स्वपिता बहुभाग्यवान्।
रन्धरशांशे तच्तिकोणे धनेशांशत्रिकोणगे ॥४४३६ ॥
स्फुटयोगं गते मन्दे स्वजनारिष्टमादिशेत्।
RMT दारनाथे गुरुणा च निरीक्षिते ॥४४३७ ॥
दशवर्षात् परं चैव द्वादशाब्दे विवाहवान् |
Wart मीनलग्ने स्वक्षेत्रे सोमनन्दने ॥४४३८ ॥
अतिबाल्ये विवाहः स्यात् सम्पदाये शुभाब्दगे |
अतिभाग्यकुलोद्राही सत्कलत्रयुतः सुखी vere ॥
विपदयाये सुतोत्पत्ती राजद्वारे प्रवेशवान् |
सम्पदाये विद्यारम्भमक्षराभ्यासमादिशेत् ॥४४४० ॥
लिपित्रयप्रवीणश्च काव्यनाटकशास्रवित् |
गीर्वाणान्धकवि मानी क्षेमदाये सुकीर्मिमान् ॥४४४१ ॥
राजयोगाभिवद्धिः स्यादद्राविशाब्दात् परं सुखम् |
4425 - 4441142. (a) Mercury joining the 6th lord
Sun will cause grief to father in the native’s first
dasa. During the period of evil solar transits, fever
will trouble the father. Saturn’s journey in Leo will
cause much anguish and dysentery to father. The
native will lose his co-born. His mother will be
somewhat subjected to fear of small-pox. Quadrupeds and grains will be lost and much anguish will
follow.
(b) Saturn moving in the sign caused by the
Navamsa position of Rahu, or a trine thereof will
cause royal enmity in the first dasa. Saturn moving

Chandra Kala Nadi 183
` in Virgo will trouble the king(?) The concluding
part of the dasa will cause anguish through the king
and minister. Co-born occurring in Venus sub
period in the first dasa will be destroyed. The king
will be troubled due to windy diseases. The
native’s relatives will initially be distressed and be
later on happy. His paternal grand-mother will
enjoy happiness but a maternal uncle will be subjected to evils.
(c) The 2nd dasa will cause wealth with transit
Jupiter in the end of Aries or in Taurus. In Gemini,
he will produce much fortunes, wealth and fraternal happiness.
(d) When Saturn transits the sign identical with
the natal Moon’s Navamsa, or a trine thereof, his
father will incur troubles from fever. There will be
a family marriage. His older sister will enjoy
happiness. Except in evil months, Saturn in Virgo
will give balanced effects. Transiting in Libra, he
will improve one’s fortunes. These apply to Moon’s
dasa. Further in this dasa, his father will enjoy
much prosperity, and happiness expectin the months
denoted by evil transits of the Sun.
(e) Saturn’ s transit in the sign identical with the
Navamsa occupied by Venus, ora trine thereof will
cause evils to one’s relatives.
(0 The 7th lord Mercury placed betwixt malefics and in aspect to Jupiter will cause marriage
in the 10th year or the 12th year. There is another
version to state that the Moon in Cancer will cause
marriage in early boyhood days, possibly in the 2nd
dasa itself, with an auspicious transit of Jupiter.
The native will marry in a very prosperous family
and will beget an excellent spouse. His 3rd dasa
will cause birth of a son and he will enter royal
service. 2nd dasa will cause beginning of education. He will be an expert in three languages and
be learned in literature, drama and Sastras. He will
be a poet in Sanskrit and Telugu and be honourable.
The 4th dasa will give him wide fame. His professional prosperity will multiply and he will perhaps
be happy after his 22nd year.
चनद्रलग्नाष्टमाधीशदशायां पितृपीडनम् ॥४४४२ ॥
RUS व्याकुलं चेति विपत्तारदशान्त्यगे |
मेषे शनिस्थिते काले मीनान्ते तच्तिकोणगे ॥४४४३ ॥
कुन्दांशगे प्रजातस्य पित्ररिष्टं विनिर्दिशेत् ।
कुन्दांशगे शुभाधीशे क्षेमदाये स्वभुक््तिषु ॥४४४४ ॥
मीनान्ते मेषगे मन्दे पित्ररिष्टं विनिर्दिशेत्।
हरिणांशकगे सूर्ये कुन्दांशे जनितस्य च ॥४४४५ ॥
सूर्यनाडीफलं श्रेष्ठं योगायोगं विनिर्दिशेत् |
अम्बुजांशकगे सूरये हरिणांशकगे गुरो ॥४४४६ ॥
नाडीत्रयफलं श्रेष्ठं योजयेत् कालवित्तमः।
कुन्दाशगे वाहनेशे कर्मे शनिनिरीक्षिते ॥४४४७ ॥
क्षेमदाये महद् भाग्यं वाहनत्रययोगवान् ।
अम्बुजांशफलं चिन्त्यं क्षेमदाये सुकीर्तिमान् ॥४४४८ ॥
शमिद्वितीयपर्याये कुलीरान्त्ये च सिंहगे।
क्ेमदाये महारोगी शान्त्या शान्ति प्रयास्यति ॥४४४९ ॥
4442 - 4449. (a) His father will be subjected to
evils in the dasa of the 8th lord counted from the
Moon. Jupiter’s adverse transit in the end of the 3rd
dasa will produce much distress.
(b) Death of father will occur with Saturn
moving in Aries, or in the end of Pisces or a trine
thereof.
(c) The 9th lord placed at birth in Kunda
Nadiamsa will during his sub period covered by the
4th dasa cause danger to father. Then Saturm’s
movements will be noted in the end of Pisces or in
Aries.
(d) Surya Nadi attributes excellent results for a
Pisces native with Kunda Nadiamsa and the Sun in
Harina Nadiamsa. It prescribes prosperity and
decline as well. The three Nadiamsas featuring
together thus, viz. ascendant in Kunda Nadiamsa
(Pisces), the Sun in Ambuja Nadiamsa and Jupiter
in Harina Nadiamsa, will be a source of excellent
prosperity.
(e) The 4th lord, Mercury, in the 10th, in aspect
to Saturn will contribute to much prosperity in the
4th dasa. One will acquire three conveyances and
much fame. When Saturn in his second round of
transit arrives in the end of Cancer or in Leo, one
will acquire a great disease. Suitable remedies be
sought in this context.
केतुभुक्तौ राहुदाये HUY च प्रजायते |
सुर्यभुक्तो महाकष्टं योगगेकोण पीडितः ॥४४५० ॥
अम्बुजांशकगे सूर्ये सौम्ये कुन्दांशके तथा।
लाभधिपान्तरे वापि क्षेमदाये सुयोगवान् ॥४४५१ ॥
सुखेशान्तरगे मर्ये गृह लक्ष्मीकटक्षवान् |

184 Deva Keralam
राजयोगाभिवृद्धिः स्याद्रहुपुत्रार्थवान् सुखी ।४४५२ ॥
तुलाचक्रदशाकाले ser सुयोगवान् |
बुधान्तरे सुकीर्तिः स्यात् सदा राजप्रसादवान् ॥४४५२ ॥
4450 - 4453. (a) The sub periods of Ketu and the
Sun in the dasa of Rabu will produce much difficulties for one born in Pisces ascendant with a malefic
Navamsa.
(b) The sub period of the 11th lord Saturn
during the currency of the 4th dasa will produce
much prosperity provided the Sun and Mercury are
in order in Ambuja and Kunda Nadiamsas.
(c) The dasa of the Sun and the sub period of
Mercury will bring forth wealth to the family.
Much prosperity and many sons will be enjoyed by
the native.
(d) The 4th dasa will cause much prosperity.
The sub period of Mercury thereof will cause much
fame and continuous royal favours.
Notes: Reference to the dasa of Libra (“Tula
Chakra Kale”) is an interruption and hence not
added to the rendering.
मेषत्रिकोणगे जीवे कन्याचनदरे सुभाग्यवान् |
मकरांशे सुकीर्तिः स्यात् सप्तविशात् परं सुखम् ॥४४५४ ॥
मीनत्रिकोणे जातश्च जीवे मेषत्रिकोणगे ।
कन्याचद्दे महद्भाग्यं तुलाचक्रे न संशयः ॥४४५५ ॥
योगगेगं च लभते स्वबन्धुजनपोषकः।
नित्यानदानवान् रागी बहुकामातुरो भवेत् ॥४४५६ ॥
4454 - 4456. (a) Should the Moon at birth be in
Virgo, transit Jupiter in Aries or its trine will cause
much prosperity. ‘If the Moon is in Capricorn
Navamsa (while in Virgo), one will enjoy much
fame. Probably he will be happy after 27.
(b) Jupiter in transit in Aries or its trine will
cause abundant fortunes while the natal Moon is in
Virgo. Prosperity and diseases will occur. The
native will patronise his kinsfolk. He will ever
donate food to others, be passionate and highly
libidinous.
Notes: (b) “Meena trikonage jaatascha” meaning “one born in Pisces or its trine” . “Tula Chakra
Kalage” means “in the Kala chakra dasa of Libra”.
These do not meaningfully form part of the sloka.
Hence these are excluded in the translation.
चन्द्रे कीरे वक्रयुते स्वमित्रपभुनाशनम्।
राजान्तरवशाद् भाग्यं TTS सुकीर्तिमान् ॥४४५७ tl
कुन्दांशगते सोम्ये योगः स्यादश वत्सरम् |
any मध्येखण्डे बहुधाग्ययुतः सुखी ॥४४५८ ॥
दारेशे रविसंयुक्ते सप्तमे चन्द्रसंयुते |
कलत्रद्ययोगः स्यात् केचित्पक्षे त्रिभार्यकः ॥४४५९ ॥
कुन्दांशगे दारनाथे धनाधिपतिदायगे |
स्वपित्ररिष्टतः पूर्वं दारारिष्टं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥४४६० ॥
लाभे राहुदशाकाले तृतीयोद्राहयोगवान् |
दारन्तरे पुत्रसिद्धिर्धनधान्यसमद्धिमान् ॥४४६१ ॥
स्वक्षेतरस्थे कर्मनाथे स्वोच्वांशे बुधवीक्षिते |
नित्याननदानपुण्यात्मा स्वपित्रधिकभाग्यवान् ॥४४६२ ॥
भाग्याधिपदशाकाले शुभाशुभफलं समम्।
RET परित्यज्य राजद्वारे प्रवेशवान् ॥४४६२ ॥
सुताधिपदशाकाले ह्यतीव श्रियमश्नुते |
कुन्दांशगे पिता योगं भेद्रातृशुभावहम् ॥४४६४ ॥
जन्मदाये महाकष्टं स्वपिता व्याकुलं महत् |
कर्माधिपदशाकाले धनाधिपतिभुक््तिषु ॥४४६५ ॥
अपरार्धे भाग्यनाशं कुन्दाशगे क्लेशवान् WaT |
कर्माधिपदशाकाले पूर्वां सौख्यमशनुते inves ॥
कनिष्ठभ्रातृभार्या च तनयश्च प्रपीडितः।
स्वदेहायाससन्तापः स्वप्रभोश्च विशेषतः ॥४४६७ ॥
नुधान्तरे महाकष्टं कर्माधिपतिदायगे |
अबलांशफलं चिन्त्यं मिथुने रविसंस्थिते ॥४४६८ ॥
4457 - 4468. (a) The Moon in Scorpio in the
company of Mars will cause destruction of one’s
friends and employer (or king). The native will
earn fortunes through a changed king. The Moon
in Libra will give wide fame.
(b) Mercury in Kunda Nadiamsa will cause
prosperity for a period of ten years (in the 4th dasa).
The middle part of this dasa will usher a high
degree of fortunes.
(c) The 7th lord Mercury in association with the
Sun, as the 7th is in occupation by the Moon will
cause two wives. Some say it could be three wives.
(d) The 7th lord Mercury in Kunda Nadiamsa
will cause loss of wife, prior to that of father, in the
dasa of the 2nd lord (Mars).
(€) Rabu in the 11th (Capricorn) will in his dasa
cause 3rd marriage to the native. He will obtain
progeny through re-marriage (i.e. not through first

Chandra Kala Nadi 185
wife) and will enjoy abundance of wealth and
grains.
(f) The 10th lord Jupiter receiving Mercury’s
aspect and in his own sign and Navamsa will give
merits of feeding others continually. He will enjoy
wealth which will be more than that of the father.
(g) In the dasa of the 9th lord (Mars), good and
bad effects will be in equal measure. This will not
apply to sub periods ruled by malefics. In this dasa,
he will enter in royal service.
(h) The dasa of the 50 lord (Moon) will give
much wealth. His father will prosper and stepbrothers will beget good effects.
(i) The 1st dasa will give abundant difficulties.
The native’s father will be highly anguished.
(j) Fupiter’s Dasa: The later half of the sub
period of the 2nd lord (Mars) in the dasa of the 10th
lord (Jupiter) will destroy one’s wealth. The first
half of Jupiter’s dasa will usher happiness, but the
native’s younger brother’s wife and son will be
subjected to evils, The native himself will incur
physical troubles. Mercury’s sub period in the 10th
lord’s dasa will produce great difficulties.
Notes: The 2nd line of sloka 4468 is not very
clear and does not seem to be-in relation to the
current discussion. “Mithune” reads as “Jataka” in
another version. Reference to Abala Nadiamsa is
found and it is not known whether it is the same as
Kunda Nadiamsa.
चन्द्राशेशदशाकाले ह्यम्बुजांशे दिवाकरे |
कुन्दांशगे बुधे रोगी स्वभुक्तौ मारकं भवेत् ॥४४६९ ॥
कर्माधिपदशान्त्यादौ लाभेशस्य स्वभुक्तिषु ¦
warmer निर्याणं स्यात् कन्यामीनयोरपि ॥४४७० ॥
4469 - 4470. (a) The Sun in Ambuja Nadiamsa
while Jupiter is in Kunda Nadiamsa will cause
diseases and death in their sub periods. The main
dasa will be that of the Navamsa dispositor of the
Moon.
(b) The end or beginning of Jupiter’s dasa, or
the sub period of the 11 thlord will cause death. The
month concemed wil! coincide with the Sun’s
movement in Virgo or Pisces or in the sign denoted
by the Moon’s Navamsa dispositor.
व्ययेशारूढगे जीवे स्वोच्चांशे पुण्यलोकवान् |
स्वपितर्बह्यलोकाप्िरभरातृद्रययुतः सुखी ॥४४७१ ॥
चक्रसन्धिदशासन्धिकाले देहप्रपीडितः।
ठदोषरिहारार्थं शान्ति कुर्याद्विचक्षणः ॥४४७२ ॥
RUS क्रूरमासे च रन्धेशांशत्रिकोणगे |
स्फुटयोगं गते मन्दे शान्ति कुर्यात् प्रयतनतः॥४४७३ ॥
कन्याराशिगते चन्द्रे मकरांशे च जायते |
विपन्तादशासन्धौ शान्ति कुर्याद्विचक्षणः ॥४४७४ ॥
सप्तपञ्चाशगे मृत्युः पश्चादब्रा्यणजन्मवीन् |
कुन्दांशकगते सौप्ये त्विद्धयातनवान् fra
विप्रकाले फलं सत्यं प्रत्यक्षं देवकेरलम् ॥४४७५ ॥
4471 - 4475. (a) After Death: Jupiter in the
Arudha Pada of the 12th lord will send the subject
to the Heavens after death.
(b) Father: As a result of the said position of
Jupiter, his father will have two brothers and will
attain the world of Brahma after death.
(c) Sickness: The native will be troubled due to
bad health, in the Kala Chakra dasa junctions. To
overcome this blemish, the discerning should adopt
remedial measures. Note the adverse transits of
Jupiter and the Sun. Also that of Saturn in the sign
represented by the Navamsa position of the 8th
lord, or in a trine thereof. This will be the time
during which remedial measures be attempted (in
order to get desired results concerning health.
(©) Note the Moon in Virgo with Capricom
Navamsa. The junction of the 3rd dasa will then be
the proper one for remedies.
(d) The native’s death will occur in the 57th
year. He will later be born as a Brahmin.
(e) Mercury in Kunda Nadiamsa indicates that
the father of the native will attain the abode of Indra
after death. ("Indra + Yaatana" should read as
"Indra + Aayatana” meaning the abode of Indra,
heavens.)
HAA YU:
ante लग्ननाथे gee धनराशिगे ।
धनदांशो प्रजातश्च विप्रजन्मा सुरूपवान् ॥४४७६ ॥
गणितज्ञो राजसेवी Say प्रजायते i
सुरंशगे तदीशे च द्वितीयोऽयं प्रकीर्तितः ॥४४७७ ॥
अथवा च तृतीयः स्याज्ज्येष्ठभ्रातृयुतः सुखी |
PA जनितश्चासौ श्यामवर्णशरीरवान् ॥४४७८ ॥
anita लग्ननाथे कर्मनाथे सुरांशमे ।

186 Deva Keralam
स्वपिता भाग्यवान् साधुः सोदरभ्रातृहीनवान् ॥४४७९ ॥
4476 - 4479. Virgo Ascendant - Dhanada
Nadiamsa: The ascendant lord in Vargottama
Navamsa with Sura Nadiamsa in the 2nd (Libra)
will cause the birth of a good-looking Brahmin. He
will be an expert astrologer, be in royal service and
be the 2nd issue of the family. Or else he will be
the 3rd issue. He will have elder brother. His birth
will be in aremote village. He will be dark-bodied.
His father will be fortunate, saintly and be devoid
of co-born.
Notes: In this part, Dhanada Nadiamsa of
Virgo ascendant is discussed while the caption
refers to Sura Nadiamsa. Of course there are
reference to Mercury’s position in Sura Nadiamsa
on some occasions.
For Dhanada Nadiamsa, please see notes under
sloka 714, page 69, Book 1.
Vargottama position of Mercury is redundant
in the face of his Nadiamsa position.
सुतेशे वृश्चिकांशस्थे भूसुतेन समन्विते ।
पितामहः प्रसिद्धश्च शुद्रपरामाधिपत्यवान् ॥४४८० Il
तदभव प्लेच्छसेवी ह्यनदानद्विजप्रियः।
लग्नेशांशाधिपे शुक्रे नीचांशे चन्द्रसंयुते ॥४४८१ ॥
RRR शूद्रसेवौ स्वपिता भाग्ययोगवान्।
पितामहस्तथैव स्यामम्तेच्छप्रामाधिकारवान् ॥४४८२ ॥
स्वसमानद्विजः शतरुस्तन्मूलाद्रयाकुलं महत् |
कारगृह प्रवेशं च TAN स्वपितामहः॥४४८३ ॥
पश्चाद् भाग्यभिवृद्धिः स्यात् सेवकावृत्तिजीवकः।
लग्नेशाल्लाभगे शुक्रे नीचांशे शत्रुराशिगे ॥४४८४ ॥
ज्ञातिवर्गे विरोधेन क्लेशवान् स्वपितामहः।
कु्रामनासी स्वपिता नीचांशे भाग्यनायके ॥४४८५ ॥
निशाकरेण संयुक्ते म्लेच्छराज्ये सुभाग्यवान्।
धनदांशे पूर्वभागे सुरांशे लग्ननायके ॥४४८६ ॥
आयुष्मन्तौ च पितरौ धनधान्यसमृद्धिमान् |
चित्रयोगे धने सौम्ये सुरांशे बहुवित्तवान् ॥४४८७ ॥
राजद्वारे प्रसिद्धश्च स्वपित्रधिक योगवान् |
mega मानी भगिनीद्रयवान् सुखी ॥४४८८ ॥
शेषं नाशमिति प्राहूर्वसुसंख्याः सहोदराः।
सुरंशगे चित्रयोगे धनदांशोदभवस्य च ॥४४८९ ॥
सोदराः पञ्च तेषां द्रौ प्रथितौ भाग्यशलिनौ ।
4480 - 448914 (a) Grand-father: The 5th lord
(Saturn) in Scorpio Navamsa in the company of
Mars denotes that the native’s paternal grandfather would be a famous man, heacing a village
resided by Soodras. Or else he would be serving 8
Mlechcha king.
(b) Father & Grand-father: With Venus and
the Moon in Virgo Navamsa, as Mercury is in a
Navamsa of Venus, the person’s father will serve
Soodras in Mlechcha kingdom and will enjoy
prosperity. So also would be his paternal grandfather who would be the head of a village tenanted
by Mlechchas. He would be greatly anguished due
to enmity with Brahmins equal to him. He would
also be jailed. Afterwards, his prosperity would
increase but he would live by servitude.
(c) Venus should be in the 11th place with
reference to Mercury and be in an inimical sign
with Virgo Navamsa. As a result, the native’s
paternal grand-father would be grieved acquiring
enmity with his kinsfolk.
(d) If the 9th lord (Venus) is in debilitation
Navamsa, father will live in a small village. If
Venus joins the Moon, father’s prosperity will be in
a Mlechcha kingdom.
(e) In case of birth in the former half of Dhanada
Nadiamsa, Mercury’s position in Sura Nadiamsa
will cause long-living parents. The family will
have increase of wealth and grains. Mercury
causing Chitra Yoga (being in Libra as above) will —
give a lot of wealth to the subject. He will be
famous in royal service and will earn prosperity
exceeding that of father. He will have three
brothers and two sisters and be honourable. Rest of
the co-born will be destroyed. There may be a
possibility of 8 co-born (out of whom 3 may die
prematurely). He will have five brothers two of
whom will be well-known and prosperous.
Notes: (e) There is some confusion in the text
about number of co-born.
लगनांशगे तच्तिकोणे स्फुटयोगं गते गुरौ ॥४४९० ॥
सोदगोत्पत्तिकालः स्यात् सम्पदाये पिता सुखम्।
एका स्वसा सोख्यवती भूषिता कनकप्रभा ॥४४९१ ॥
मकरे पतिभक्ता स्यात् क्लेशिता च तथापरा |
लग्नेशाद् भाग्यगे मन्दे भूसुतेन समन्विते ॥४४९२ ॥

Chandra Kala Nadi 187
पश्चात् Beker: स्यादल्पायुर्दायमादिशेत् |
लग्नाधिपे तुलांशस्थे सोदरीभ्रातृसंयुतः॥४४९३ ॥
दीर्घायुर्योगमित्याहूर्जयेष्ठभ्राता सुकीर्विमान्।
भाग्यस्थानाधिपे शुक्रे कर्मनाथेन संयुते ॥४४९४॥
भाग्ययोगमिति प्राहुः सत्कर्माचारवुद्धिमान् |
धनदांशे पूर्वभागे सम्पदाये पिता सुखम् ॥४४९५ ॥
धनाधान्यसम् द्धश्च स्वपिता हदि शुद्धिमान् |
सुरंशगे विलग्नेशे विप्रनाडयुद्भवस्य च ॥४४९६ ॥
धनाधिपदशाकाले विवाहोत्सवमादिशेत् |
पञ्चमाब्दात् परं चैव feat चोत्तरायणे ॥४४९७ ॥
बरह्मोपदेशकर्माणि पेषादित्रयमासगे |
गुरुप्रथमपर्याये मेषान्ते वृषभे तथा । ४४९८ il
धनदांशे ज्येष्ठभ्रातृविवाहोत्सवमादिशेत्।
जन्मतारदशान्त्यादि ATTA स्वभुकित्तषु ॥४४९९ ॥
ज्यष्ठभ्रातृशुभं चेति मौञ्जीबन्धनमादिशेत्।
धनदाशे पूर्वभागे चेद्धितज्ञो भवेत् पिता ॥४५०० Il
सुमुखः कुशली मन्त्री वेदातज्ञानततत्ववान् |
4490 - 45001. (a) Jupiter in transit in the sign
equal to the Navamsa ascending, or a trine thereof,
will cause birth of co-bom. The 2nd dasa will cause
happiness to father.
(b) The native will have one sister who will be
happy possessing the splendour of gold and decorated with ornaments. (In Capricorn?) she will be
devoted to her husband and will after some time be
anguished.
(c) Saturn in the 11th (Cancer) in the company
of (debilitated) Mars will deprive one of after-bom.
If they are born, they will be short-lived. His elder
co-born will be endowed with longevity and wide
fame.
(d) Should the 9th lord Venus be in the company of the 10th lord (Mercury), he causes Bhagya
Yoga - one for prosperity. As a result, the person
will undertake a path of good deeds ‘and good
conduct.
(e) If birth be in the Ist half of the subject
Nadiamsa, father will be happy in the 2nd dasa, will
have increased wealth and grains and a pure heart.
(f) Birth in the 151 quarter of the subject Nadiamsa, as Mercury is in Sura Nadiamsa will cause
marriage in the dasa of Venus. पाऽ spiritual
initiation will occur within 2 years after the Sth
year. Then the Sun will be in his northerly course.
Elder brother’s marriage will occur with Jupiter in
his first round of transit in the end of Aries or in
Taurus, when the Sun is anywhere from Aries
through Gemini. Elder brother’s thread ceremony
will occur in the end of the native’s Ist dasa, or in
the Ist sub period of 2nd casa. His father will be a
knower of others’ minds, will have an attractive
face, be skilful, a minister and an expert in Vedanta
and Wisdom.
जातकस्य गुणं TA श्यामवर्णः सुबुद्धिमान् ॥४५०१ Il
परोपकारनिरतः पञ्चयज्ञपरायणः।
आस्तिकः सर्वधर्मज्ञो वदान्यो दृढसौहदः॥४५०२ ॥
4501 - 4502. Now described are the qualities of
the native belonging to Dhanada Nadiamsa, Virgo
ascendant. He will be black in complexion, be
highly intelligent, fond of helping others and performing 5 kinds of Yagnas. He will be a believer
in the Almighty, will have knowledge of various
kinds of moral codes, be eloquent in speech and be
firm in friendship.
लग्नेशे भार्गवांशस्थे a नीचांशरसंस्थिते |
अन्तक्रोधी प्रसनात्मा किचिल्लो भस्वभाववान् ॥४५०३ ॥
वित्ते सौम्ये शुभांशस्थे तेजस्वी बुद्धिमान् we: |
सुमुखः कुशलो धीरो विद्यानुद्धियुतः सुखी ॥४५०४॥
तुलांशे तौलिगे सूर्ये वेदशास््रर्थतत्ववित्।
यतिप्रीतिकोर नित्यं सुरांशे कर्म शुद्धिमान् ॥४५०५ ॥
ज्येष्ठस्य पुत्राश्चत्वारः कनिष्ठस्य सुतद्वयम् |
भ्रातृद्रयं तथा विद्याद भगिन्यो द्वे सजीविते ॥४५०६ ॥
4503 - 4506. (a) Venus in debilitation Navamsa
while the planet Mercury occupies a Navamsa
ruled by Venus will give the following effects. The
person will inwardly be irascible but be pleased.
He will be somewhat miserly.
(b) Mercury placed in the 2nd house with a
benefic Navamsa will make one radiant, intelligent, craft, good-looking, skilful, bold and learned.
(c) The Sun in the sign Libra with Libra Navamsa will cause expertise in the meanings of the
Vedas and Philosophy. One will please the saints
and will perform pure acts. His older brother will
have four sons while his younger one will have two.

188 Deva Keralam
Two brothers and two sisters will be blessed with
longevity.
yon चित्रयोगे वित्ते aha च जायते ।
बहुप्रामाधिकारी स्यात् स्वपितामहभाग्यवान् ॥४५०७ Il
वसुवर्षात् परं पित्रोर्विशेषश्रीप्रदः सुखी |
कन्यालग्ने धने सौम्ये तुलांशे पापवर्जिते ॥४५०८ ॥
लग्नेशस्य दशाकाले स्वपिता भाग्यभोगवान्।
्ररयुक्तदशाकाले व्याकुलं ज्वरपीडनम् ॥४५०९ ॥
Taree सोदरोत्पत्तिः सप्तमान्दे क्वचिद्वयथा |
विप्लवेन विचारः स्यादशवर्षात्परं सुखम् ॥४५१० ॥
निधनाधिपसंदृषटे वत्सरे स्वपिता सुखम् |
प्रामकार्यकलापेन व्याकुलानन्तरं सुखम् |
लगनराशिदशाकाले नवमान्दात् परं मुखम् ॥४५११ ॥
विवाहोत्सवकार्याणिस्वपितु भाग्यकालगे |
शुभाब्दे शुभं नित्यं क्रुराबदे व्याकुलं महत् ॥४५१२ ॥
4507 - 4512. (a) Mercury in Sura Nadiamsa in
the 2nd would confer lordship over many villages
and fortunes to paternal grand-father. After the 8th
year of the native, a great deal of wealth will accrue
to father’s family.
0) The ascendant being in Virgo as Mercury is
in the 2nd (Libra) with Libra Navamsa will produce
prosperity to father in the dasa of Mercury. But
Mercury should not be, in the process, related to
malefics. If at all Mercury is with a malefic, the
dasa of the said malefic will promote anguish and
troubles from fever. The native will have aco-born
in the 6th year. Some worries will come to pass in
his 7th year of age. A change of place will occur
due to some calamity. Perhaps, happiness will be
experienced after the 10th year of age.
(c) Father will be happy in the period when
natal Mercury is aspected by transit Mars but only
after debacles in undertakings related to the village. Happiness will also exist after the 9th year of
age, in the dasa of Virgo (KCD). Following marriage activities, father’s prosperity will rise. With
favourable transits of Jupiter, auspiciousness will
prevail, while his evil transits will promote anguish.
लग्नरशिदशान्त्यादौ स्वपति कीर्तिमान् सुखा ।
धनराशिदशाकाले ह्यथवा वित्तपस्य च ॥४५१३ ॥
सुरांशगे महद् भाग्यं गृहे लक्ष्मीकटाक्षवान् |
द्रादशाब्दात् परं चैव व्ययाधिपतिदायगे ॥४५१४ ॥
क्रुरमासे पितुः क्लेशं HOTA न संशयः।
व्ययाधिपे BAS लग्नेशे धनराशिगे wags ॥
लग्नराशिदशासौख्यं व्ययराशिदशाव्यथा |
लाभराशिदशाकाले मनुवर्षात् परं सुखम् ॥४५१६ it
RAI त्यक्त्वा लाभराशिदशासुखम् |
जयेष्ठभ्रातृसुतप्राप्तिः कनिष्टभ्रातृसौख्यकृत् ॥४५१७ ॥
विवाहोत्सवकार्याणि भ्रातृमूलात् सुसोख्यवान् |
सूर्याशगे तच्िकोणे स्फुटयोगं गते शनौ ॥४५१८ ॥
स्वपिता देहजाडयेन ह्यादायादधिकव्ययम् |
कन्यान्ते तौलिगे मन्दे सुरांशे जनितस्य च ॥४५१९ ॥
लग्नराशिदशाकाले देशे राजान्तरं भवेत् ।
लोके धान्यक्षयादीनि विप्लवेन प्रजावधि ॥४५२० Il
fee शनिस्थिते काले त्वर्धवृद्धिः प्रजासुखम् |
ग्रामकार्य कलापेन स्वपिता व्याकुलं महत् ॥४५२१ ॥
4513 - 4521. (a) In the concluding part of the
Virgo dasa (KCD), his father will become famous.
It could also be in the dasa of Libra (KCD) or that
of Venus (Vimsottari). This phase will produce
great prosperity, and wealth to the family.
(b) After the 12th year of age, father will be
subjected to evils. This will coincide with a
malefic sub period in the dasa of the 12th lord (Sun)
when the transit Sun will be moving in adverse
Signs.
(c) The 12th lord Sun in an angle from the
ascendant while the ascendant lord (Mercury) is in
the 2nd (Libra) will cause happiness in Virgo dasa,
and distress in Leo dasa. The dasa of Cancer will
cause happiness after 14 years (of its commencement). Except with adverse Jupiterian movements,
the dasa of Cancer will promote happiness. During
this time, bis elder brother will obtain a son and the
younger brother will enjoy happy effects. The
person will enjoy much happiness through his
coborn due to marriage activities.
(d) Saturn transiting in the sign denoted by the
natal Navamsa position of the Sun, or a trine
thereof, will trouble father through physical ailments.
(e) Irrelevant: The country’s ruler will change
in the dasa of Virgo when Saturn is found in the end

Chandra Kala Nadi 189
of Virgo or in Libra in transit. The country will reel
under loss of crops and the population will be in the
grip of a calamity. Saturn moving in Leo will
promote commercial activities and the people will
be happy. The native’s father will be anguished
due to reversals in village undertakings.
रन्धरशांशे afar स्फुटयोगं गते शनौ ।
RA जातकस्य पित्रादीनां मनोव्यथा ॥४५२२ ॥
जौवयोगे धनप्राप्ती user सुखाधिकम् |
रहक्रान्र्षगे जीवे स्फुटयोगं गते शनौ ॥४५२३ ॥
विप्लवेन विनिर्गत्य ग्रामान्तरनिवासवान् |
लाभराशिदशाकाले YT जनितस्य च ॥४५२४॥
विशद्र्षात् परं सौख्यं स्वप्राबल्यं धनागमम् ।
gure च परित्यज्य पितृसौल्यं महत् सुखम् ॥४५२५ ॥
कर्मराशिदशाकाले सुरांशे व्याकुलं महत् |
अपरार्धे पित्ररिष्टमापत्संन्यासवान् पिता ॥४५२६ ॥
सुरंशगे सप्तर्विशे fase जनकस्य च।
्रुरवत्सरदोषेण पितृपीडां विनिर्दिशेत् ॥४५२७ ॥
4522 - 4527. (a) Transit of Saturn: Saturn’s
sojourn in the sign caused by the Navamsa position
of the 8th lord (Mars) or a trine thereof will produce
mental distress to father and others, with the Sun’s
transit in adverse places.
(b) If Jupiter joins Saturn in transit, one will
gain wealth and be exceedingly happy in royal
circles.
(c) Jupiter occupying the sign held by Rahu (at
birth) and transited by Saturn will cause a displacement to the native due to calamity and he will
migrate to another place.
(d) Cancer - Moon Dasa: The dasa of Cancer
will give happiness, prosperity and wealth after the
20th year (of age, instead of its commencement).
_His father will also be greatly happy in such years
except when Jupiter will be in adverse transits.
(e) Gemini - Mercury Dasa: The dasa of
Gemini will throw up much distress. Its 2nd half
will endanger one’s father who will take to ascetic
order as a result of some calamity.
(f) 30th or 27th year of age of the native will
endanger his father if Mercury is found in Sura
Nadiamsa (in Libra). This will be finally caused
with Jupiter’s adverse movements within the said
age bracket.
कर्माधिपे शुभयुते भाग्येशेन निरीकिते ।
लाभराशिदशान्त्यादौ विशेषकर्म सिद्धिमान् ॥४५२८ ॥
नित्यानदानसिद्धिः स्यात् स्वप्राबल्यं महत् सुखम् ।
त्रिशोपरि शरवर्षैः सोदरेण विभागवान् ॥४५२९ ॥
अतीव श्रियमाप्नोति नरवाहनवान् भवेत् ।
भाग्यराशिदशाकाले सुरांशे बहुभाग्यवान् ॥४५३० ॥
दशग्रामाधिकारत्वमनदाने सुकीर्तिमान्।
्रूराब्दगे महाकष्टं विप्लवेन धनव्ययम् ॥४५३१ ॥
शुभाब्दगे धनप्रापि प्रबलोद्योगभाग्यवान् |
रन्धराशिदशाकाले चत्वारिंशात् परं व्यथाम् ॥४५३२ ॥
चतुश्चत्वारिंशकेऽब्दे विशेषक्लेशवान् भवेत् |
मदराशि दशाकाले मदेशे लग्नकेन्द्रगे ॥४५३३ ॥
स्वपुत्रोद्राहसिद्धिः स्यात् पुत्रिणी च सपुत्रिका |
कुम्भराशिदशाकाले शुभाशुभफलं समम् ॥४५३४॥
ज्येष्ठभ्रातृवियोगेन GAR परं व्यथाम् |
सुतराशिदशामृत्युः पञ्चषष्टिः सुजीवति ॥४५३५ ॥
ब्रह्मलोकफलं सत्यं व्ययेशे शुक्रसंयुते |
सुतराशिदशाकाले क्रूरा्दे क्रूरमासगे ॥४५३६ ॥
अपमृत्युभयप्राप्तिः शान्त्या शान्ति प्रयस्यति |
धनदांशे पूर्वभागे सुरांशे शशिनन्दने ॥४५३७ ॥
लाभराशिदशान्त्यादौ योगवान् कौर्विमान् सुखी ।
धननाडीफलं सत्यं प्रत्यक्षं देवकेरलम् ॥४५३८ tt
4528 - 4538. (a) Cancer - Moon Dasa: Mercury should join a benefic (i.e. only Jupiter) and be
in aspect to the 9th lord (Venus). Asaresult, the end
of 11th Rasi’s dasa (i.e. Cancer dasa) will usher
performance of specially notable deeds. He will
feed the poor continually. His fame will increase
and he will be abundantly happy. Within 5 years
after the age of 30, he will have division with his
brother and will procure much wealth and conveyances.
(b) Taurus - Venus Dasa: The dasa of Taurus
will cause much prosperity. He will head over ten
villages, will feed the poor and be widely famous.
But the years denoted evil transits of Jupiter will
bring forth intense troubles and he will lose money
in some calamity. Good transits of Jupiter will give
him wealth and a prosperous employment.
(c) Aries - Mars Dasa: The dasa of Aries will,
after the 40th year, cause anguish. His 44th year
will be marked by abundant anguish.

190 Deva Keralam
(d) Pisces - Jupiter Dasa: The dasa of Pisces
will stand to get his son married and his daughter
will give birth to a female baby. During this phase,
transit Jupiter should be in an angle from the
ascendant.
(e) Aquarius - Saturn Dasa: The dasa of
Aquarius will balance the good and bad effects.
But distress will come to pass due to loss of a child
for older brother.
(f) Capricorn - Saturn Dasa: The dasa of
Capricorn will cause death. His life span will be
56 years.
£) The 12:h lord joining the Sun will consign
one to Brahma’s world after death.
(b) The dasa of Capricorn (vide “f” above) will
register a fear of untimely death with adverse
Jupiterian and solar movements. Suitable remedies be sought in this context.
(i) Mercury in Sura Nadiamsa will produce
prosperity and fame in the dasa of Cancer.
0) Results culled from Dhana Nadi (meaning
the Nadi dealing with 2nd house, as Lagna Nadi
deals with ascendant) are reflected in Deva Keralam
which will bear truth.
मीनलग्ने कपलांशः
कमलांशे मीनलग्ने मेषे बुधयुते शनौ |
रक्तवर्णतनुः प्रज्ञः WAT क्रिये शनौ ॥४५३९ ॥
सिंहांशे मतदरेषी स्वमतान्तर निष्ठकः।
कमलांशकगे मन्दे मेषे बुधसमन्विते ॥४५४० ॥
विष्णुभक्तिरतो नित्यं सोदरभ्रातृहीनवान् |
मेषे रवियुते मन्दे कमलांशे च संस्थिते ॥४५४१ ॥
युग्मे भोमे प्रजातश्च धीरः शूरः सुबुद्धिमान् |
देशान्तरे भाग्ययोगं पञ्चमे बहुवाचकः॥४५४२ ॥
अपांपत्यंशगे मन्दे offers स्वकार्यकृत |
सर्वज्ञः afer: क्रोधी मर्मभेदी च तापसः॥४५४३ ॥
क्रूरषष्टयंशगे मन्दे कमलां शे सुबुद्धिमान् |
अन्तकपटवान् कामी कमलायतलोचनः ॥ ४५४४ ॥
पराक्रमे स्वतन््रश्च परेषां व्यसनप्रदः।
कषप्रकोपी प्रसन्नात्मा कृशदेहस्वरूपवान् ॥४५४५ ॥
4539 - 4545. Pisces Ascendant = Kamala
Nadiamsa: (a) For one bom in this space of the
zodiac, Saturn joining Mercury in the sign Aries
will give a blood-red physique. He will be learned
and will cause distress to his enemies.
@) If Saturn obtains Leo Navamsa (in the
above Yoga), he will hate his religion and will show
interest in other religions.
(c) He will be devoted to Lord Vishnu and will
have no co-born. (This has no bearing with Leo
Navamsa.)
(d) Saturn in the company of the Sun while
Mars is in Gemini will make one bold, heroic and
highly intelligent. His prosperity will pick up in
another country. Mars in the Sth will make hin
garrulous.
(e) Saturn in Apampathi Nadiamsa will make
one righteous. He will be able to perform his job
well, will be a knower of everything, be gentle,
irascible, will break secrets and perform penance.
(f) Saturn in a malefic Shashtiamsa will bless
one with a high degree of intelligence. He will be
inwardly cunning, be libidinous, will have eyes
resembling a lotus petal, be valorous, independent
and will have secretive vices. He will be instantly
irascible but be pleased. His body will be thin.
Notes: For Kamala Nadiamsa, please see notes
under sloka 778, page 74, Book 1.
कर्मे राहौ धने मन्दे सिहांशे लध्षमियोगगे ।
कमलांशे प्रजातश्च किचिन्मूर्खस्वभाववान् ॥४५४६ ॥
अन्तज्रोधी प्रसनात्मा राजन्यजनमेत्रवान् |
स्वपिता भाग्ययुक्तश्च पुत्रभाग्यविहीनवान् ॥४५४७ |
स्वभुजाजजितसंपन्नो मध्ये वयसि शोकवान्।
मेषे सिहांशगे मन्दे नाड्यां तु कमलां शके ॥४५४८ ॥
बाल्ये दारिद्यमापनसििशेऽब्दे बहुभाग्यवान् |
वातप्रकृतिदेहश्च पूर्छावायुप्रपीडितः॥४५४९ ॥
सोद्रक्लेशवान् रागी त्वङ्गवैकल्यपुत्रवान् |
तदभावे च यमलसन्तानोत्पत्तिमादिशेत् ॥४५५० ॥
भोमांशकगते मन्दे भोमक्षत्रेशुभान्विते |
भातृसौख्यविहीनश्च पश्चात् सोदरहीनवान् ॥४५५१ tl
कोपप्रकृतिपान् रागी मातामहमताश्रितः।
बाल्ये चक्राह्तिश्चैव पश्चात् पितृमताश्रयः॥४५५२ ॥
उद्वाहानन्तरं भाग्यं विशद्र्षात् परं सुखम् ।
मातुलारिष्टतः पश्चात् स्वपितुर्गृहवासवान् ॥४५५३ ॥
आयुष्मन्तस्िपितृव्याः मातुलद्वययोगवान् |
मातृष्वसा भाग्यवती पितृव्यश्च festa: ॥४५५४ ॥

Chandra Kala Nadi 191
4546 - 4554. (2) Rahu in the 10th (Sagittarius)
as Saturn is in the 2nd (Aries) with Leo Navamsa
causes Lakshmi Yoga, leading to acquisition of
wealth. The subject will be somewhat foolish with
this yoga, be inwardly short-tempered, but pleased.
He will have friends in royal circles, will enjoy
fortunes through father but be bereft of happiness
concerning children. He will have self-eamed
wealth and be grieved in the middle part of his life.
(b) Saturn in Aries with Leo Navamsa will
cause poverty in childhood. After the age of 30, he
will acquire much prosperity. He will suffer from
windy disorders and loss of consciousness. He will
incur grief in respect of his brother, be passionate
and will have a deformed son. Alternatively, he
will have twin children.
(c) Saturn should be in a sign and Navamsa of
Mars and should join a benefic. As aresult, one will
not be happy concerning co-born and will have no
after-born. He will be short-tempered, passionate
and will follow the religion of maternal grandfather. In his childhood he will be initiated into
Vaishnavite order and will later on switch over to
his father’s religion. His prosperity will rise after
marriage. He will be happy after his 20th year of
age. Following the death of his maternal uncle, he
will resume his father’s home. He will have three
long-lived paternal uncles and two maternal uncles. His mother’s sister will be fortunate. One of
the paternal uncles will have two wives.
Notes: (a) “Swa Pita Bhagya” in sloka 4547
should read as “Swapitru Bhagya”.
कमलांशके मन्दे स्वपितृव्यचतुष्टयम् |
तेषां at पुत्रहीनौ च ह्यपरौ पुत्रसंयुतौ ॥४५५५ ॥
मातृष्वसुर्भर्तृभाग्यं कमलांशे स्वमातुलः।
जीवनत्वमिति प्राहुः कमलांशोद् भवस्य च ॥४५५६ ॥
कमलांशे जन्मदाये क्लिष्टा मातृष्वसा व्यथाम् I
लभते भाग्यनाशं च हयन्यदेशे पितामहः ॥४५५७ ॥
4555 = 4557. Saturn in Kamala Nadiamsa will
cause four paternal uncles. Out of them, (the first)
two will be childless. The last two will be blessed
with sons. His maternal aunt will be fortunate in
respect of her husband. During the native’s first
dasa, she will undergo mental anguish. Paternal
grand-father’s prosperity will be destroyed in a
foreign land.
लग्नाच्चतुर्थगे भोमे game समन्विते |
जन्मदाये मातृबन्धुवंशोपद्रवमादिशेत् ॥४५५८ ॥
पितामही दीर्घजीवा पितव्यैकश्चिरायुषः।
पितृव्यस्य तु जन्मरक्षं मन्दांशे तच्चिकोणगे ॥४५५९ ॥
स्वजन्म पितृव्यस्य द्विभार्यश्चैक पुत्रवान् ।
आयुष्मत्यौ पुत्रिके द्रे शोषं नाशमितीरयेत् ॥४५६० ॥
पितृव्यसुताभावेशे नीचांशे स्वोच्चराशिगे ।
पितृव्यपुत्रिका क्लेशं पुत्रनाश इति स्मृतः ॥४५६१ tl
पितृव्याधिपतौ मन्दे सिंहांशे नीचराशिगे ।
पितृव्यश्च दुराचारी राजद्वारे प्रसिद्धिमान् ॥४५६२ ॥
तत्पुत्रो Weary कामी वन्ध्यास्री सक्तिमान् सदा |
पीडितः प्रतिबन्धेन दत्तपुत्रविनाशवान् ॥४५६२ ॥
4558 - 4563. (a) Mars in the 4th in the company
of a malefic planet will cause difficulties in the
mother’s family during the native’s first dasa. His
maternal grand-mother and one of the paternal
uncles will be endowed with long life.
(b) The natal ascendant of paternal uncle will
correspond to the Navamsa occupied by Saturn or
a trine thereof. The said relative will have two
wives, one son and two long-living daughters. Rest
(of the progeny) will be destroyed.
(c) The lord of the 3rd, denoting the issues of
paternal uncle, being in exaltation sign and debilitation Navamsa will cause anguish about daughters
and destruction of sons.
(d) Satum holding charge of one’s paternal
uncle (being the 1 1th lord for Pisces ascendant) and
placed in the sign Aries with Leo Navamsa will
cause a paternal uncle with bad conduct (addicted
to vices). But he will be famous in royal assembly.
His (paternal uncle’s) son will incur illness, be
libidinous, associated with barren women, ever in
trouble due to obstacles and will lose his adopted
progeny.
द्विमरहोच्वे शनौ नीचे कमलांशोद भवस्य च ।
पितृव्यपुत्रिका काचिज्जारिणी त्वल्पपुत्रिणी ॥४५६४ ॥
दारिद्यवशमापनना मध्ये भर्तृविनाशिनी |
कमलांशे पितृव्यस्य स्वभार्यावंश एव च ॥४५६५ ॥
STA: HAR स्यात् स्वभ्रात्रा गूढकामिनी |

192 Deva Keralam
कमलांशके मन्दे शशिजेन समन्विते ॥४५६६ ॥
मीनलग्ने प्रजातश्च सत्कलस्रोधनैर्युतः।
दारवंशे कलङ्कश्च स्वदारभ्रातुपापवान् ॥४५६७ ॥
शूद्रस्रीवशमापन्नः पतितःशतु्त्यवान् |
कालान्तरे दरिद्रश्च fraser त्वपुत्रकः ॥४५६८ ॥
मीने नीचांशे शुक्रे कर्मे रौ प्रजायते |
स्वदारभगिनी क्लिष्टा दुष्टा दुर्भगचारिणी ॥४५६९ ॥
मेषे सिहांशगे मन्दे मीने चापांशजस्य च।
चत्वारिंशात् परं भाग्यं लक्ष्मीग्रोगमिति स्मृतम् ॥४५७० Il
लग्नारूढे निशानाथे लगनराशिदशाव्यथा |
जननी क्लेशमाप्नोति मातुः सौख्यं न विद्यते ॥४५७१ ॥
अष्टमाधिपतौ लगे स्वर्भानुयुतवौक्षिते |
गुरुदृष्टिविहीने च crate विनिर्दिशेत् ॥४५७२ ॥
लग्नाच्रिकोणगे जीवे AY लग्नकेन्द्रगे |
लगनराशिदशाकाले मृतप्रायोपिजीवति ॥४५७३ ॥
स्वपित्रधिक afta क्लेशं प्रापोति भूरिशः।
पितृ्योद्राहसोख्याप्तिः क्लेशश्च ज्ञातिवग्कि ॥४५७४ ॥
धनाधिपे केन्द्रगते राहुसंयुतवीक्षिते ।
धनराशिदशाकाते धनलाभं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥४५७५ ॥
4564 - 4575. (a) Two planets in exaltation
while Saturn is in Aries will be the source of the
following events. One’s paternal uncle’s daughter
will be somewhat immoral. She will have limited
number of daughters. She will be in the grip of
poverty and will lose her husband in the middle of
her life. Further there will be (such) blemish
conceming the females of paternal uncle’s wife.
(b) Saturn in Aries in the company of Mercury
will give the native an excellent wife and wealth.
But there will exist blemish (of immorality) in his
wife’s family. His brother-in-law will be sinful, be
attached to a low class woman, morally fallen, will
indulge in inimical deeds, incur penury after some
time, betray his father and be bereft of a son.
(c) Venus in Pisces (in the ascendant) with
Virgo Navamsa while २20४ is placed in Sagittarius
(10th) will torment one’s wife’s sister. She will
further be wicked and unfortunate. ~
(9) Lakshmi Yoga: The native will obtain
fortunes after his 40th year through the formation
of what is called Lakshmi Yoga. The said yoga is
caused by Saturn in Aries (2nd) with Leo Navamsa,
or in Pisces (in the ascendant) with Sagittarius
Navamsa.
(e) Pisces - Jupiter Dasa: The Moon in the
ascendant (or in the Arudha of the ascendant) will
act in a different manner in the dasa of the ascendant. His mother will be anguished and will not,
enjoy happiness.
(f) The 8th lord (Venus) in the ascendant
(Pisces) with an aspect or association from Rahu,
but without Jupiter’s aspect, will kill the wife
(prematurely).
(g) Pisces - Jupiter Dasa: If the 8th lord is in
an angle while Jupiter is in a trine - both with
reference to the ascendant - one will nearly die in
the dasa of the ascendant. Further, the person will
incur more poverty than his father has, and will be
in the grip of deep anguish. His relatives will also
be in anguish. His patemal uncle will enjoy the
happiness of getting married.
(h) Aries - Mars Dasa: The 2nd lord Mars in
an angle in association with Rahu by company or
aspect will give wealth in the dasa of Aries.
Notes: (€) The dasa referred to is Pisces -
Jupiter in KCD.
(g) Reference is to Kala Chakra Dasa of Pisces
- Jupiter.
(bh) Reference is to Kala Chakra Dasa of Aries
- Mars.
कमलांशे विप्रकाले धनेशे केतुसंयुते |
धनराशिदशाकाले मौञ्जीबन्धनमादिशेत् ॥४५७६ ॥
विद्यारम्भं च aad जीवनं क्लेशजीवनम् |
स्वमातुलस्य सन्ताने विप्लवेन विनिर्गते ॥४५७७ ॥
जन्मदेशे कलापं स्याद्राजान्तरमिति स्मृतम् |
विक्रमाधिपतौ शुक्र स्वोच्चे नीचां शसंस्थिते ॥४५७८ ॥
तद्राशीशदशाकाले मातृवंशे वधुमृतिः।
मातामही विनाशः स्यान्मातृवंशे महाविपत् ॥४५७९ ॥
पितृवंशे च दारिद्यं पितृव्यस्य क्वचित् सुखम् ।
सुखाधिपे धनस्थाने मीनलग्नसमुद् भवः॥४५८० ॥
सुखाराशिदशाकाले वदेदुद्राहकर्मवान् |
चतुर्थभावे क्रूराः स्युर्भूगृहक्षेत्रनाशनम् ॥४५८१ ॥
तत्तद्राशिदशाकाले स्थानच्युतिंविनिर्दिशेत् |
उद्राहानन्तरं सौख्यं ज्वयोपद्रववान् क्वचित् ॥४५८२ ॥
, लग्नाच्चतुर्थगे भौमे गृहच्छिद्रकलापवान् |

Chandra Kala Nadi 193
पितृपीडा भयं किंचिज्जन्मदेरो महाविपत् ॥४५८३ ॥
विवाहनन्तरं चैव स्वभार्यामातृनाशनम् |
सुतराशिदशाकाले श्वशुरस्तु विवाहवान् ॥४५८४ ॥
पितृव्यस्तु महत्सौख्यं भ्रातृशोकेन करशितः।
सुतेशे सुतराशिस्थे कर्मेशेन निरीक्षिते ॥४५८५ ॥
सुखराशिदशान्त्यादौ राजधा प्रवेशवान् |
सुतराशिदशाभाग्यं योगं च द्वित्रिवत्सरम् ॥४५८६ ॥
पुत्रलाभं च लभते स्वपित्ररिष्टमादिशेत्।
मीनांशगे सुखाधीशे गुरुणा च निरीक्षिते ॥४५८७ ॥
तदशायां महत्सौख्यं राजद्वारे शुभाधिकम् |
चतुखिशात् परं क्लेशं चतुर्थे कुज संस्थिते ॥४५८८ ॥
षष्ठराशिदशाकाले दारिद्ेण च aise: |
मेषे सूर्ये मीनलग्ने दशमे राहु संस्थिते ॥४५८९ ॥
षष्ठराशि दशाक्लेशं राजद्वारेऽवमानवान्।
षष्ठथिपे स्वोच्चगते भाग्यांशे बुधसंयुते ॥४५९० ॥
षष्ठराशिदशाकाले पुत्रिका च asta |
क्लेशकाले शुभं चैव तृच्चराशिफलं समम् ॥४५९१ ॥
दशान्ते पुत्रिकोद्राहं वृतीयांशे सुशोभनम् |
स्वपुत्रोद्राहसोख्यापिमित्रवगेँ महत्सुखम् ॥४५९२ ॥
4576 - 4592. (a) Mars - Ketu Conjunction:
Birth in the first quarter of Kamala Nadiamsa,
Pisces, will cause thread ceremony in the Dasa of
Aries - Mars provided Mars at birth joins Ketu. In
addition to this, his education will commence. His
life will be marked by troubles. His maternal
uncle’s progeny will beget a bad end due to a
calamity. The king of the country will change(?)
(b) Taurus - Venus Dasa: The 3rd lord (Venus) in exaltation (in the ascendant, Pisces) with
debilitation Navamsa will cause the death of a
bride in mother’s family in the dasa of Taurus. His
maternal grand-father will pass away. Perhaps a
great calamity will hit mother’s family. Father’s
family will pass through a phase of utter poverty.
However, paternal uncle will be somewhat happy.
(c) Gemini - Mercury Dasa: The native will
be busy in marriage rituals in this dasa if the 4th lord
(Mercury) is in the 2nd (Aries)
(d) Gemini - Mercury Dasa: Malefics in the
4th will be'a source of loss of landed and housing
properties. In the said dasa, the native will lose his
place of living (and migrate to another place).
However, he will be happy after marriage. He will
be somewhat troubled by fever.
(e) Mars in the 4th will destroy family peace,
evils to father and great dangers to self in birth
region. Following his marriage, his wife will lose
her mother.
(f) Cancer - Moon Dasa: The dasa of the Sth
Rasi will cause (second) marriage to one’s fatherin-law. One’s paternal uncle will receive much
happiness (on other counts) but be grieved due to
loss of co-born.
(g) Cancer - Moon Dasa: The lord of the Sth
(Moon) in the Sth in aspect to Jupiter will allow
entry in royal service in the captioned dasa. This
period will also help one to prosper for a period of
two or three years. He will beget a son but lose his
father.
(h) The 4th lord (Mercury) in aspect to Jupiter
and begetting Pisces Navamsa will produce much
happiness in the dasa of Gemini - Mercury. Further
many auspicious events will accrue to the native in
royal service.
(i) Mars in the 4th (Gemini) will produce
anguish after the age of 34.
(j) Leo - Sun Dasa: This dasa will cause
physical thinness due to penury.
(k) One will be humiliated in royal assembly in
the dasa of Leo - Sun occurring under the following
conditions. The ascendant is Pisces, the Sun is in
Aries and Rahu is in the 10th (Sagittarius)
(1) Effects for One’s Daughter: One’s daughter
will beget auspicious effects in the dasa of Leo -
Sun, if the Sun is in Aries along with Mercury.
Further the Sun should be in the 9th from the
Navamsa ascendant. The phase of anguish will be
compensated by auspicious effects and the exaltation effects (of the Sun) will remain even. The end
of the dasa will give marriage to her. Further, the
‘native’s son will also get married and his friends
will receive happiness.
उज्वकषेत्रफलं da तृतीयांशे फलानि च ।
नीचयोगफलं चैव खण्डद्वयफलं वृथा ॥४५९३ ॥
मध्यखण्डान्तमारभ्य तृतीयेशत्रुनाशनम्।
तृतीयांशे मध्यखण्डे योगवान् कीर्तिमान् भवेत् ॥४५९४॥
4593 - 4594. The present two slokas are not

194 Deva Keralam
amenable to a proper rendering as they consist of
groups of meaningless words like: for the 3rd part
of Nadiamsa .. results of exaltation sign ... results
of debility ... effects of two Khandas ... from the
beginning of Madhya Khanda .... in the 3rd ...
destruction of enemies will ocur ... in the 3rd part
of the middle Khanda ... one will attain prosperity
and fame ...
राहौ वा गोचरे वापि स्वशुत्रजनपीडितः॥४५९५ ॥
षष्ठामव्ययेशानां स्फुटयोगं गते शनो |
स्वप्रभोश्च मनस्तापं देहायासं धनक्षयम् ॥४५९६ ॥
कमलांशकगे मन्दे मीनलग्नोद्भवस्य च।
सिंहराशिदशाकाले वेष्णवद्रेषमादिशेत् ॥४५९७ ॥
तृतीयांशे शुत्रनाशं स्वराजन्यजनावधि ।
देशे राजान्तरं चेव पश्चादभाग्यं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥४५९८ ॥
कन्याराशिदशाकाले मीनलग्नोद् भवस्य च।
कमलांरो प्रजातस्य बहुभाग्यं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥४५९९ ॥
4595 - 4599, (a) Leo - Sun Dasa: Saturn or
Rahu in transit in the sign denoted by the Navamsa
position of the 6th lord (Sun) will torment one’s
adversaries. But the dasa of the Leo - Sun shall be
in currency at that time.
(b) General: When Saturn transits the space
caused by the sum of longitudes of the lords of the
6th, 8th and 12th, he will produce mental distress,
physical ailment and financial decline.
(c) In the Dasa of Leo - Sun, one will ear
enmity of Vaishnavites as Saturn at birth is in
Kamala Nadiamsa (in Aries). The last one third
part of the dasa will be congenial for destruction of
enemies. One’s fortunes will rise after a change of
the ruler.
(d) Virgo - Mercury Dasa: This dasa will
produce much prosperity.
सप्तमारूढगे जीवे स्वांशे पूर्णबलन्विते ।
कमलांशे प्रजातश्च नरवाहनवान् भवेत् ॥४६०० ॥
4600. Conveyances: Jupiter in the Arudha of
the 7th house, with a Navamsa of his own and in full
Strength will contribute to acquisition of conveyances.
रन््रराशिदशाकाले लक्ष्मीयोगोद् भवस्य च।
पुत्रयोगाभिवृद्धिः स्याच्ृतीयांशे महाविपत् ॥४६०१ ॥
अष्टमाधिपतौ स्वोच््वे नीचांशे गुरुवीकषिते |
मीनलग्ने प्रजातस्य मध्यमायुरितीरितः॥४६०२ Il
ज्ञातिवर्गे मृतिश्चैव पुत्रपीडा भविष्यति |
क्रूरमासे दारपीडा श्षिप्रेणारोग्यभाग्यवान् ॥४६०२ Il
भाग्यराशिदशाकाले ल्मी योगसमुद्भवः।
पत्रप्राबल्ययोगेन बहुभाग्ययुतः स्सुखी ॥४६०४ Il
कर्मराशिदशाकाले at राहौ च संस्थिते |
लक्मीयोगे मीनलग्ने कर्मराशिदशाविपत् ॥४६०५ ॥
तत्रिकोणदशाकाले मृतप्रायोपजीवति |
चन्द्रराशिदशासन्धो स्वजनारिष्टशोकवान् ॥४६०६ Il
कर्मराशिदशाकाले रन्ध्राधिपतिवत्सरे |
कु्ीरमासे निर्याणमथ वा ततिकोणगे ॥४६०७ ॥
भावाधिपफलाध्याये लक्ष्पीयोगोद् भवस्य च ।
शनिनादयांफलं स्वल्पं Yea तु विस्तृतम् |
वर्षचर्याफलादीनि योजयेत् कालवित्तमः॥४६०८ Il
4601 - 4608. (a) Libra - Venus: For one born
in Lakshmi yoga (vide 4546 - 54 and 4564 -75), this
dasa wil] cause prosperity of one’s progeny. But
the last one third part of the dasa will produce great
calamity.
(b) The lord of the 8th (Venus) getting the
aspect of Jupiter and being in his exaltation sign
(Pisces) with Virgo Navamsa will cause medium
life-span. There will be (untimely) death in relatives’ circle and evils to one’s own progeny. His
wife will be subjected to evils with adverse transits
of the Sun but will recover her health early.
- (c)Scorpio - Mars Dasa: One born in Lakshmi
Yoga will see his sons greatly prospering. He will
also enjoy prosperity and happiness.
(d) Sagittarius - Jupiter Dasa: If Rahu is
found in the 10th at birth, the said Rasi’s Dasa will
be a source of calamity.
(e) In the dasas that are trine to Sagittarius (i.e.
in Leo - Sun and Aries - Mars dasas), one will be
nearly involved in death.
(f) The junction of the Dasa of the Moon sign
will cause evils to one’s kinsfolk and consequent
grief.
(g) Death of the native will occur in the Dasa of
the 10th sign (i.e. Sagittarius - Jupiter) in the “year”
ruled by the 8th lord (i.e. the phase held by Libra -
Venus). The corresponding month will be re-

Chandra Kala Nadi 195
flected by the Sun journeying in Cancer, Scorpio or
Pisces.
(h) Sani Nadi is brief on the effects of Bhavas
in connection with Lakshmi Yoga while Sukra
Nadi is quite elaborate. Astrologers should understand these effects through solar return horoscopes.
Thus end the effects for Kamala Nadiamsa in
Pisces ascendant.
॥ तुलालग्ने निर्मलांशः ॥
निर्मलांशे तुलालग्ने पूर्वभाग समुद् भवः ॥४६०९ ॥
शूद्रजन्मा सुखी नित्यं नवमोऽयं प्रकीर्मितः।
मकरांशकगे चन्द्रे नीचे राहुसमन्विते ॥४६१० ॥
लगनेशे शनिसंयुक्ते वनप्रान्ते प्रसूतिमान् |
तुलालग्नेऽर्किसंदष्टे निर्मलांशोद भवस्य च vere ॥
वनप्रान्ते पुरे वासं जननं च विनिर्दिशेत्
निर्मलांशे पूर्वभागे वीथ्योस्तु यमसोमयोः ॥४६१२ ॥
प्राग्भागे जननं चैव TRE गृहे |
SRY प्रजातस्य वीथ्योस्तुचक्रपाशिनोः ve 23 ॥
महानदीप्रान्तदेशे नगरे प्रसवो TAT |
निर्मले चोत्तरे भागे पञ्चमोऽयं प्रकीर्तितः ive ew ॥
अथवा च द्वितीयः स्यानदीप्रान्ते प्रसूतिमान् |
निर्मलांश सत्कुलीनः पूर्वभागे शुभाकृतिः॥४६१५ ॥
उत्तरांशे श्यामतनुः कृशदेहस्वरूपवान् |
परनथान्तरे निर्मलांशे तुलालग्नसमुदभवः॥४६१६ ॥
Tee सुदीर्घायुः स्थूलभूतशरीरवान् |
गुरुदृष्टिफलं पूर्णं पूर्वभागोद् भवस्य च ॥४६१७ ॥
4609 - 4617. Libra Ascendant - Nirmala
Nadiamsa: (a) One belonging to the Ist half of the
subject Nadiamsa will be born as a Soodra. He will
be the 9th issue of the family.
(b) The Moon in conjunction with Rahu and
being in debility (in the 2nd) with Capricorn Navamsa while the ascendant is held by Saturn by
occupation will cause one’s birth in a forest region.
(c) Ifthe ascendant Libra is aspected by Satum,
birt and living will be in a town of a forest region.
(d) One of the former half of this Nadiamsa will
be born in a street extending from south to northeast. The house will be located in the eastern -
direction with north-facing entry. In case of the
latter half, birth will be in a city near ariver region.
He will be the 5th or 2nd issue of the family.
("Veethyostu Chakrapaassinoh" in the second line
of sloka 4613 denotes nothing -understandable.
Veethi means street; Chakra means wheel and
Paasa means noose.)
(e) The native of first half will belong to an
excellent family and be handsome in appearance.
One of the 2nd half will be black in complexion and
thin-bodied.
(f) There is another authority to specify longevity and a fat physique in case of Jupiter’s aspect on
Libra ascendant. The native of 1st half will receive
full effects of Jupiter’s aspect.
प्रसूतिसमये विप्रकालज्ञो च समीपगौ |
SHI मन्दफलं भिषग् fast समीपगौ ॥४६१८ ॥
वसन्तः सूतिकागेहे सूतिकाले गृह धनम् ।
निर्मले चोते भागे तुलालग्ने शनीश्षिते ॥४६१९ ॥
प्रसूतिकाले जननी वेदनाधिक संयुता ।
पूर्वभागे क्वचिच्वेति क्षिप्रेण प्रसवः स्मृतः॥४६२० Il
गुरुदृष्टिवशात् सोख्यं बालरिषटं न विद्यते |
सिंहे मन्दे क्रिये जीवे मेषांशे पापवर्जिते ॥४६२१॥
निर्मलांशे पूर्वभागे चन्द्रदोषः क्वचिद भवेत् |
नीचे मन्दांशगे चन्द्रे निर्मलांशसमुद् भवः॥४६२२ ॥
पित्ररिष्टोपशान्त्यर्थे स्वर्णदानं प्रदापयेत् |
गां दद्यादेन््नक्षत्रे बालारिष्टोपशान्तये ॥४६२३ ॥
आयुष्मन्तौ च पितरौ तुलालग्नोद भवस्य च ।
वित्ते राहुयुते चन्द्रे तदीशे भाग्यराशिगे ॥४६२४॥
चन्द्रारिष्टोपशान्तयं्थ राजतं चन्द्रमर्चयेत् |
स्वर्णनागप्रदानेन बालारिष्टं न विद्यते ॥४६२५ ॥
निर्मलांशे पूर्वभागे चनद्रदोषो न विद्यते ।
उत्तरांशे बहुत्वं स्यादोषं मासत्रयं वदेत् ॥४६२६ ॥
पूर्वभागे क्वचिच्वेति शान्त्या शान्ति प्रयास्यति |
4618 - 46261. (a) At the time of birth of the
native of Vipra Kala ("Viprakalagnau" shouldread `
as "Viprakalajau") .... will be present. In case of
birth in 2nd half, "results will be slow" and doctors
and Brahmins will be present.
(b) Saturn aspecting Libra ascendant with 2nd
half of the subject Nadiamsa will cause pains to
mother at the time of delivery. In case of 1st half,
pains will be less and delivery instant. Jupiter’s
aspect will usher happiness (to the child and mother)
and remove the blemish of infantile mortality.

196 Deva Keralam
(c) Saturn in Leo while Jupiter is in Aries with
Aries Navamsa, bereft of malefic relations, will
produce blemish of the Moon (i.e. Balarishta) to
some extent.
(d) The Moon in Scorpio with a Navamsa of
Saturn will endanger the child’s father. The remedy lies in donating gold. In case the birth star is
Poorva or Uttara Phalguni (it is Jyeshta according
to another version), remedies should be sought for
a Libra ascendant native. Then the parents will be
long-lived.
(e) Should Rahu be in the 2nd with the Moon
while Mars is in Gemini, Balarishta is produced for
a Libra native: To overcome this blemish, the
Moon-God’s image made of silver should be worshipped and a cobra’s image made of gold should
be donated.
(f) The blemish of the Moon (i.e. Balarishta)
will not (fully) exist if birth is in the 1st half of the
subject Nadiamsa. But in the other case, blemish
will be aplenty for a period of three months. The
partial blemish in case of the native of former half
can be overcome by remedies.
Notes: The original's instructions available at
"2" are not quite coherent.
` तुलालग्ने क्रिये जीवे मेषांशे धार्मिकः सुधीः ॥४६२७ ॥
स्वपिता शिवभक्तश्च देवब्राह्मणभक्तिमान् |
कालान्तरे भाग्यवृद्धिस्त्पत्रदेषमादिशेत् ॥४६२८ ॥
भाग्याभिवृद्धिमान् रागी धर्मपुण्यपुराणवित् |
निर्मलांशे पिता बाल्ये भ्रातृद्यप्रपीडितः॥४६२९ ॥
स्वपितामहभाग्याप्तिःसोदरी भ्रातृसंयुतः।
तटाकोद्चान निर्माता वैदिकाचारतत््ववित् [४६३० ॥
लग्नाद्भाग्यं गते भोमे निर्मलांशोद्भवस्य च ।
्रूरहा स्वपिता क्रोधी भ्रातद्रेषकलापवान् ॥४६३१ ॥
अस्वतन्त्रोऽल्पकालं च पश्चात् स्वात्यभाग्यवान्।
बाल्ये दुष्टस्वभावश्च परसीसङ्गपापवान् ॥४६३२ ॥
चोरकृत्यं क्वचित् कालं यौवने प्रन्थिरोगवान् ।
पश्चात्तापी सुधर्मात्मा शिवलि््गप्पूजक ॥४६३३ ॥
निर्मलां शे पूर्वभागे वयोमध्ये पिता सुखी ।
धर्मकार्यरतो नित्यं जञातिद्वेषकलापवान् ॥४६३४ ॥
वार्धके पुत्रमूलेन बहुभाग्ययुत सुखी |
निर्मलांशे पूर्वभागे स्वपितुर्दश सोदराः ॥४६३५ ॥
अथवा द्रादशश्चैव दततपुत्रप्रदो भवेत् |
पितृष्वसेका माङ्ल्या रोगिणी पुत्रसंयुता ॥४६२३६ ॥
4627 - 4636. Father : (a) If birth is in Libra
ascendant while Jupiter is in the sign Aries with
Aries Navamsa, the native’s father will be righteous and intelligent. He will be a devotee of Lord
Siva and will honour gods and Brahmins. After
some interval, his fortunes will increase but he will
have enmity with his son. He will be passionate and
be learned in moral law, meritorious acts and
Puranas,
(b) Birth in Nirmala Nadiamsa, Libra ascendant, would cause troubles to father in his early days
on account of his two brothers. He would earn a
great deal of prosperity and be endowed with sisters
as well. He would construct tanks and gardens, and
would follow the code of conduct prescribed by the
Vedas.
(c) For the subject native, if Mars is in the 9th
from the ascendant (i.e. in Gemini), declare the
following. The native’s father would be a cruel and
short-tempered person and would incur enmity
with co-born. For some time he would not be
independent, i.e. would be in servitude. Later on,
he would seek fortunes with independence. In
childhood, he would be wicked and would acquire
the sin of having illegal ties with women. For some `
time, he would be a thief. In his youth, he would
suffer from diseases of blood vessels. He would
repent for his sins, turn righteous and would worship Lord Siva.
(d) If the birth is in the former of half of the
subject Nadiamsa, father would be happy in the
middle of his life. He would be ever attached to
righteous deeds but would have enmity with his
kinsfolk. In his old age, he would acquire a lot of
` prosperity through his offspring. He would havea
total of ten or twelve brothers and would have an
adopted son (as well). One of his sisters will have
long-lived married life, be sickly and endowed
with offspring.
Notes: The results mentioned in the above ten
slokas apply to the native’s father.
पितृष्वसृसुतः कश्चित् सपलनीमातृयोगवान् |
बहुभाग्यर्थसम्पन्नो भेदभ्रात्विरो धवान् ॥४६३७ ॥

Chandra Kala Nadi 197
निर्मलांशे पूर्वभागे स्वपितुर्भगिनीसुतः।
राजयोगं च लभते लोके ब्राह्मण्यमुत्तमम् ॥४६३८ ॥
पितुः कनिष्ठभगिनीतत्सुतस्य फलं स्मृतम् |
स्वपितु्ज्येष्ठभगिनी वैधव्येन च करिता ॥४६२९ ॥
ततपत्रस्त्वेति afters: कश्चिद्द्विभार्यवान् |
निर्मलांशे पूर्वभागे लाभे मन्दे च संस्थिते ॥४६४० ॥
स्वपितृव्यसुतौ द्रौ च स्वगोत्रे दच्तपुत्रकौ |
दरमा्गवृक्तिमान् कश्चिन्मितरप्रभुबहुत्ववान् ive se ॥
स्वभेदमातृकार्येण पु्रोत्पत्तिविनाशनम् |
अदृष्टयतने पुत्रापििर्मध्ये गण्डाद्विमोचितः॥४६४२ ॥
भेतभ्रातृसुतद्रेषी तस्य पुत्रफलं स्मृतम् |
eed च लभते भाग्यवान् पापचेतनः ॥४६४३ ॥
4637 - 4643. (a) Cousin: As a result of birth in
the 1st half of the said Nadiamsa, following is.to be
predicted about the native’s paternal aunt’s son.
` He will have a step-mother, will enjoy much prosperity and wealth and be inimical to his stepbrother. He will beget Raja Yoga effects and be
devoted to acquire a high degree of sacred knowledge. These are the effects relating to the son of
father’s younger sister.
(b) Aunt: Further to the above, father’s elder
sister will be emaciated due to widowhood. Her
son will be in the grip of utter poverty and will
probably have two wives.
(c) Saturn in the 11th (Leo) will cause two sons
the native’s paternal aunt. There will be two
adopted sons in the family. This applies to the Ist
half of Nirmala Nadiamsa. The native’s cousin
will be of bad conduct and will possess many
friends and employers. Due to undertakings related to step brother, he will lose his sons. After
some efforts, he will obtain a son who will be
endangered in between. He will have two wives
_and be sinful.
स्वपितुव्यसुतस्थाने मन्दे चापत्रिकोणगे |
स्वपितृव्यसुतः कश्चिद्प्रहशङ्कप्रपीडितः ॥ ४६४४ ॥
चोरकृत्ययुतो नित्यं ज्ञातिवित्तापहारकः।
तस्य दोषवशाच्चैव सन्तानारिष्टमादिशेत् 1४६४५ ॥
भानुव्रतादिपुण्येन देहारोग्यं क्वचित् सुखम् |
सन्तानो त्पत्तिमाप्नोति ह्येकपुत्रयुतः सुखी |
लाभे स्वोच्चांशगे मन्दे भार्गवेण समन्विते ॥४६४६ ॥
स्वपितुव्यसुतः कश्चिद्राजद्रारे प्रसिद्धिमान् |
कलत्रद्रयवान् रागी पुत्रशोकेन कशितः॥४६४७ ॥
पितृव्यद्रेषपापेन पुत्रोत्पत्तिविनाशनम् |
कालन्तरे सुतप्राप्तिर्जन्मप्रभृति सौख्यवान् ॥४६४८ ॥
मध्ये वयसि सन्तापी वातरोगेण कशितः।
ज्ञातिद्रेषकलापेन क्लेशं प्राप्नोति भूरिशः॥४६४९ ॥
निर्मलां शे पूर्वभागे स्वपितृव्यसुतस्य च।
लाभस्थशनिदोषाच्च जन्मदाये मृतिं वदेत् |
एका कनिष्ठभगिनी समाङ्गल्या मृति लभेत् ॥४६५० ॥
जन्मदाये फलं चैव पितृव्यस्य तुलाशनौ |
जीविते जन्मदायान्ते प्रबलज्ञातिनाशनम् ॥४६५१ ॥
सम्पद्दाये शुक्रभुक्तौ दशामध्येऽथ वा यदि ॥
निर्मलांशे पितृव्यस्य नाशं च मनुरब्रवीत् ॥४६५२ ॥
अपरेवयसिपिता विशेषन्ञानबुद्धिमान् |
धनधान्याभिवृद्धि स्याघ्योगप्राबल्यवान् सुखी ves? ॥
4644 - 4653. Paternal Uncle’s Son: (a) Saturn
in the 3rd (or) “in a trine to Sagittarius” (that is, in
the 7th in Aries or in the 11th in Leo) will cause the
following effects concerning paternal uncle’s son.
He will incur planetary evils, be a thief and will
steal the wealth of his kinsfolk. Due to these
blemishes, he will face loss of progeny. By maintaining vows to the Sun-god, his health will be
normal; he will be somewhat happy and will beget
a son.
(b) Saturn in the 11th (Leo) in the company of
Venus and begetting Libra Navamsa will cause
some fame to a paternal uncle’s son in the royal
assembly. He will have two wives, be passionate
and be grieved on account of loss of progeny due to
the sin accruing out of enmity with a paternal uncle.
After some delay, he will beget a son. He will be
happy right from his birth. In the middle of his life,
he will be somewhat distressed and emaciated due
to windy diseases. He will face much grief due to
misunderstandings with his kinsfolk.
(c) Due to the blemish caused by Saturn being
in the 11th, the native will lose cousin in the very
first dasa. One of the native’s younger sister will
also pre-decease her husband. If she survives (i.e.
lives after husband’s death), some important relatives will die in the end of the native’s first dasa.
(d) In the sub period of Venus in the 2nd dasa,

198 Deva Keralam
or in the middle of the said dasa, one’s paternal
uncle will quit the world. In the later years, father
will acquire special (or mentionable) wisdom.
Wealth and grains will be on the increase in the
native’s family and he will acquire a prosperous
employment.
नवमे कुजदोषेण जन्माब्दे व्याकुली पिता।
आ बाल्यं च मनस्तापं स्वपितुर्भाग्यमादिशेत् ॥४६५४ ॥
उत्तरांशे विशेषेण स्वपिता हयपमृत्युवान् |
स्वपितृव्यसुतारिष्टं प्रबलज्ञातिनाशनम् ॥४६५५ ॥
पूर्वभागे पिता जाड्यं क्षिप्रेणारोग्यभाग्यवान्।
ताताग्निके सौख्ययुक्ते ज्येष्ठभ्राता शुभान्वितः ॥४६५६ ॥
पितामहाधिपे मन्दे स्वोच्चांशे बुधसंयुते।
पितामहः प्रसिद्धश्च बहुभ्रातृसमन्वितः॥४६५७ ॥
लग्नादद्धितीयगे राहौ कर्मे सूरये च संस्थिते ।
बाल्ये पितामहः क्लेशी दारिद्येण च करशितः॥४६५८ ॥
दक्षिणोत्तरवीथीषु सञ्चारं स्वपितामहः।
विवाहानन्तरं भाग्यं सौख्यं पुत्रोत्सवात् परम् ॥४६५९ ॥
तुलालग्ने निर्मलांशे ज्ञानी स्यात् स्वपितामहः।
यौवनान्ते सुभाग्यापििर्वनस्थलगतः सुखी ॥४६६०॥
4654 - 4660 (a) Due to the blemish of Mars
being in the 9th (Gemini), one’s father will be
‘distressed in the very first year of his (native’s)
birth. Right from the native’s childhood, his father
will be mentally tormented but will enjoy fortunes.
(b) If the birth be in the 2nd half of Nirmala
Nadiamsa, Libra ascendant, one’s father will face
untimely death. His paternal uncle’s children will
incur evils. So also other kinsmen.
(c) In case of Ist half of the subject Nadiamsa,
father will be subjected to diseases but will recover
health early. Paternal grand-mother will enjoy
happiness. Elder brother will beget auspicious
effects.
(d) Grand-father: The 5th lord Saturn in the
company of Mercury and betting Libra Navamsa .
will cause a famous paternal grand-father who
would have a number of co-born.
(e) Grand-father: Rahu in the 2nd (Scorpio)
while the Sun is in the 10th (Cancer) would cause
anguish to paternal grand-father in childhood who
would be emaciated due to penury. He would
wander in a street spread from south to north. After
his marriage, he would acquire happiness following birth of a son.
(f) Birth in the subject Nadiamsa will cause
wisdom to paternal grand-father. In the end of his
youth, he would acquire fortunes and live happily
in a forest region.
Teed पूजयति वैदिकाचारधार्मिकः।
अनाचारी क्वचित् कालं पश्चात् सन्यार्गवृत्तिमान् ॥४६६१ ॥
4661. Thenative’s paternal grand-father would
worship two teachers (i.e. would have two teachers), would follow Vedic code of conduct, be
righteous, would earn fortunes towards the end of
his youth and would migrate to a forest region.
पितामहाधिपे मन्दे शुभद्रयसमन्विते |
निर्मलांश पूर्वभागे निर्मलः स्वपितामहः॥४६६२ ॥
भ्रातश्रेष्ठः सुखी नित्यं सत्कल्रैकवान् सुखी ।
बन्धुवर्गे सुपूज्यश्च सोदरभ्रातृपोषकः ॥४६६३ ॥
एकभ्रातृयुतो मानी सत्पुत्रधनधान्यकवान् |
निर्मलांशे पूर्वभागे गुरुणा च निरीक्षिते ॥४६६४ ॥
प्रपितामहपुण्येन वंशे भाग्याभिवर्धनम्।
पितामहाधिकं भाग्यं ज्येष्ठ भ्रात्रधिकं घनम् ॥४६६५ ॥
4662 - 4665. Libra Ascendant = Nirmala
Nadiamsa = Ist Half: (a) Should Saturn, as a muler
of the house of paternal grand-father (the Sth) be
conjoined with two benefics, he (the said relative)
would be a pure person, would be the best among
his co-born, ever happy, would have one virtuous
wife, would be highly revered among his kinsfolk
and would honour his co-born.
(b) If Jupiter aspects the said Saturn, paternal
grand-father would have only one co-born, be
honourable and endowed with virtuous sons, wealth
and grains. Due to the meritorious ‘deeds of the
native’s paternal great grand-father, the paternal
family would acquire waxing prosperity. Paternal
grand-father would be highly prosperous and would
acquire wealth in excess of his older brother’s
earnings.
जातकस्य फलं चैव निर्मलांशे धनी सुखी ।
लाभे बुधयुते मन्दे भार्गवेण समन्विते ॥४६६६ ॥
निर्मलांशे पूर्वभागे ज्येष्ठभ्राता सुयोगवान् |
लिपित्रेयप्रवीणश्च रक्तवर्णः शुभाकृतिः॥४६६७ ॥

Chandra Kala Nadi 199
aera भोगी सहोदर्या बहुत्ववान् |
निर्मलांशे ग्येष्ठभ्राता बहुव्यापारचिन्तकः॥४६६८ ॥
पितृवाक्यरतो नित्यं देवब्राह्मणपोषकः।
अल्पपुतरार्थसन्तोषी पुत्रत्रययुतो भवेत् ॥४६६९ ॥
ary वस्तूनि स्वर्णव्यापारजीवकः।
सम्पदाये जातकश्च ज्येष्टश्रातृश्रियायुतः ॥४६७० ॥
विशेषप्रबलो भूत्वा गृहे लक््मीकटाक्षवान् |
उत्तरांशे प्रजातस्य वयोमध्ये सहोदरः ॥४६७१ ॥
ज्येष्ठभ्रातृविनाशेन क्लेशं प्राप्नोति भूरिशः।
fee मन्दे तुलालग्ने ज्येष्ठभ्रातृवियोगवान् ॥४६७२ ॥
पापदृष्टियुते चैव फलमेतद्विचिन्तयेत् |
निर्मलांशे पूर्वभागे ज्येष्ठभ्राता चिरायुषः ॥४६७३ ॥
सहोदरीविहीन स्यातज्ज्येष्टभ्रातृविनाशवान् |
त्रिभगिन्यश्चिरायुष्यस्त्वथ वा वेदसङ्कयकाः॥४६७४ ॥
उत्तरांशे प्रजातस्य पश्चादभ्राता चिरायुषः।
निर्मलांशे पूर्वभागे सन्ति द्वादश सोदराः॥४६७५ ॥
दशसङ्कयाथ वा चैव वेदसङ्कयाः सहोदराः।
दीर्घायुषाः भविष्यन्ति सोदर्यौ द्वे समाङ्गल्ये ॥४६७६ ॥
शेषं नाशमिति प्राहूर्जयेष्ठभ्रातृवशाच्छियम् |
परन्थान्तरे निर्मलांशे पूर्व भागोदभवस्य च ॥४६७७ ॥
त्रिभगिन्यश्चायुष्मत्यः पश्चाद्भ्रातृविनाशवान् |
भौमे यावत् फलानि स्युस्तावत्संख्यारिचरायुषाः ॥४६७८ ॥
वंशे भाग्यभिवृद्धिः स्यानिर्मलांशे सुखी धनी ।
वर्गोत्तमे विक्रमेशे सप्तमे पापवर्जिते ॥४६७९ ॥
ज्येष्ठ भ्राताचिरायुष्मान् बहुभाग्ययुतः सुखी |
केषांचित्सोदराणां तु सन्तानोत्पत्तिनाशनम् ॥४६८० ॥
पुत्राभावं प्राप्नुवन्ति सलीप्रजाबहुसंयुताः।
4666 - 46804. (a) The native of Nirmala
Nadiamsa, Libra ascendant will be wealthy and
happy.
(b) Elder Brother: The 11th (Leo) having
Mercury, while Saturn is conjunct Venus (elsewhere) will cause great prosperity to the elder
brother of the person belonging to the Ist half of
subject Nadiamsa. He will be skilful in three
languages, be blood-red in complexion and handsome. He will have two wives, will enjoy pleasures, will have many sisters and be disposed to
think of (or indulge in) various business activities.
He will ever honour his father’s words, will respect
gods and Brahmins, be happy with limited progeny
and wealth and will have three sons. He will earn
his livelihood by trading in gold in another island
(i.ein a foreign region). The 2nd dasa of the native
will cause wealth to the older brother who will
become very prosperous with servants and a lot of
wealth.
(c) The native of 2nd half of the subject Nadiamsa will acquire co-born in the middle of his life.
(That is, there will be a wide gap between the
subject and his after-born.) He will lose his elder
co-born and will grieve aplenty.
(d) Saturn in Leo will cause destruction of older a
co-born for a person born in Libra ascendant
provided Saturn is in aspect to a malefic planet.
(e) The older brother of one born in the Ist half
of subject Nadiamsa will be endowed with longevity. But he will have no sister and will lose brothers
born prior to him. Three or four of his sisters will
be endowed with longevity. in case of birth in
second half, the younger brother will be long-lived. `
For birth in Nirmala Nadiamsa's firt half, four
brothers with long lives are indicated. Two sisters
will have long-living husbands.
(f) There is another authority to state that three
sisters will be long-lived while younger brothers
will incur destruction.
(g) The number of long-living co-born will
correspond to the number of Bindus obtained by
Mars in his Ashtaka Varga.
(h) The family of the native of Nirmala Nadiamsa will enjoy increased prosperity. The native
will be happy and rich.
(i) The 3rd lord (Jupiter) in Vargottama Navamsa in Aries, without the association of a malefic,
will give a long life-span to older brother, much
prosperity and happiness. Some of the brothers will
lose progeny. He-will have nomale issues but many
female issues.
निर्मलांशे पूर्वभागे तुलालग्नोद भवस्य च ॥४६८१ ॥
द्रे भगिन्यौ पुत्रवत्यावेका भाग्यवती शुभा |
क्लेशिता च परा चैव दारिदयेण च कशिता ॥४६८२ ॥
पूर्वभागे फलं सत्यं सोदर्याश्च चतुष्टयम् |
मातृस्थानाधिपे मन्दे स्वोच्चांशे गुरुवीक्षिते ॥४६८३ ॥
निर्मलां शे प्रजातस्य स्वमाता चिरजीविनी |

200 Deva Keralam
मीने चन्द्रे सिते लाभे चरलग्नोद् भवस्य च ॥४६८४ ॥
त्रिषडायगते मन्दे मातृवंशः क्षयंगतः।
माता गुणवती पूता भ्रातृभाग्यसमन्विता ॥४६८५ ॥
मातृसौख्यविहीनश्च मातृभागयविवर्जितः।
भेदभ्रातृयुतश्चेव पितृभाग्ययुत सुखौ ॥४६८६ ॥
उत्तरांशे प्रजातस्य निर्मलांशे तथेव a
स्वपित्र fies: मातु पश्चार्मरणामादिशेत् ॥४६८७ ॥
जननी मृतिमाप्नोति तुलांशे वृश्चिके शनो ।
शमनिद्वितीयपर्ययि तुलान्ते मातृनाशनम् ॥४६८८ ॥
विपत्तारदशासंधौ जननीनाशमादिशेत्।
शनेः प्रथमपर्ययि गोचरे मिथुने शनौ ॥४६८९ ॥
तत्तिकोणऽपमृत्युश्च शान्त्या शान्ति प्रयास्यति ॥४६९० ॥
4681 - 4690. (a) Sisters: One born in the Ist
half of Nirmala Nadiamsa, Libra ascendant, will
have a total of 4 sisters (vide sloka 4683). One of
the two sisters will be blessed with sons, be prosperous and handsome and the other one will be anguished and emaciated due to penury. These
effects will turn true.
(b) One’s mother will be long-lived if the 4th
lord is aspected by Jupiter and is in exaltation
Navamsa.
(c) Movable Ascendant: The Moon in Pisces,
Venus in the 1 1th and Saturn in the 3rd, 6th or 11th.
This disposition of the said three planets will cause
destruction of the mother’s family. This applies to
a movable sign ascending. Moreover, the mother
will be a virtuous and pure female, enjoying fortunes of co-born. But the native will be devoid of
maternal happiness and be unfortunate concerning
mother. He will have half-co-born and will acquire
happiness through father. Such are the effects for
birth in the 2nd half of Nirmala Nadiamsa. His
mother will predecease her husband. Her death
will occur with Saturn journeying in the concluding part of Scorpio during his 2nd round of transit.
This will coincide with the junction period of the
3rd dasa. The native will lose his father when
Saturn is in Gemini in his Ist round of transit,
during the middle of the 3rd dasa. Saturn’s transit
in a trine thereof (i.e. in Libra and Aquarius) will
be asource of untimely death for father, for which
remedies should be done.
Notes: (a) Out of the 4 sisters, the text gives
some effects for 2 sisters only.
(c) The events given hereof are applicable the
1st half Nirmala Nadiamsa of a movable ascendant, particularly to Libra, and in general to the other
three, viz. Capricorn, Aries and Cancer.
आयुष्मन्तौ च पितरौ पूर्वभागे. न संशयः।
उत्तरांशे प्रजातस्य दशमाब्दे पितुर्मृतिः were ॥
अष्टादशोऽथवा चेति विंशाब्दे वा मरिष्यति |
पूर्वभागे च तत्काले स्वपितुर्जाडयमादिशेत् ॥४६९२ ॥
ज्ञातिवर्गे ae स्याच्छान्त्या शान्ति प्रयास्यति |
वित्ते राहुयुते चन्द्रे शकटे च प्रजायते ॥४६९३ ॥
बहुविद्यार्थसंपन ऊहापोहपटुः सुखी |
विद्यास्थानाधिपे मन्दे स्वोच्चांशे भृगुसंयुते ॥४६९४॥
जात्यानुगुण्यविद्याप्र्मणिरतपरीक्षकः
निर्मलांशे पूर्वभागे सप्तमे देवपूजिते ॥४६९५ ॥
सत्कथाप्रियवानिित्यं धर्मशाख्पुराणवित्।
इष्टापूर्तसुधर्मिष्टस्त्यागी सर्वजनप्रियः ॥४६९६ ॥
पितामहाधिकं भाग्यं महादान प्रदः सुखी |
विद्यारम्भं पञ्चमा्दे तृतीयाब्दे ज्वराद् भयम् ॥४६९७ ॥
बाल्ये मान्ज्वरादीनि मसूरीज्वरपीडितः।
तदोषपरिहारार्थं चन्दरपार्थनमादिशेत् ॥४६९८ il
नागस्य बिम्बदानेन देहारोग्यं महत्सुखम् |
4691 - 46984. Libra Ascendant - Nirmala
Nadiamsa: (a) In case the birth is in the 1st half of
the subject Nadiamsa, parents will be long-lived.
One belonging to the 2nd half of the subject
Nadiamsa, will lose his father in his 10th, 8th or
20th year of age.
(b) The above-mentioned years of age will
cause illness to father if birth is in the 1st half of the
subject Nadiamsa. Further, evils will spread among
relatives. For both of these, suitable remedies be
resorted to.
(c) Rahu in the 2nd (i.e. Scorpio), while the
Moon is in “Sakata”, will give a lot of learning,
wealth and reasoning skills.
(d) The 4th lord Saturn joining Venus and
begetting Libra Navamsa will grant learning to the
subject according to his family traditions. He will
be an expert gem examiner.
(e) Jupiter in the 7th will cause fondness for
listening to mythological stories. The subject will

Chandra Kala Nadi
be an expert in ancient laws and scriptures, will
Store the merit of sacred rites and be very righteous
and sacrificing in disposition. He will earn the
liking of all. He will enjoy more prosperity in
comparison to his paternal grand-father and be
highly charitable. His education will commence in
the 5th year. Fear of fever etc. will occur in his 3rd
year. In his childhood, he will be troubled by
indigestion and small-pox. To overcome this
blemish, prayer to the Moon-god should be offered.
Donation of Cobra’s image (serpent god) be also
done.
Notes: (c) “Sakata” position of the Moon occurs when Jupiter and the Moon are in mutual 6th
and 8th positions or vice versa. Moon in the 12th
from Jupiter or vice versa is not considered as
“Sakata” by many standard writers of ancient times
which is quite logical.
The results given from “b” to “e” above apply
to the 1st half of Nirmala Nadiamsa, Libra ascendant
वर्गोतमांशगे जीवे सप्तमे दीर्घजीवितः॥४६९९ ॥
बालारिष्ट भयं नास्ति गिरिर्वज्रहतो यथा ।
उत्तरां शे प्रजातस्य TNE भविष्यति ॥४७०० ॥
जीविते दीर्मायुष्यं भावनाइयां तु विस्तृतम् |
पूर्वभागे प्रजातश्च कमलायतलोचनः॥४७०१ ॥
मृदुः कान्तवपुः साधुः मधुराम्लरसप्रियाः।
वातश्लेषमस्वभावश्च पित्तप्रकृतिदेहवान् ॥४७०२ Il
द्विनामा सत्यवान् रागी किचित्खीसद्गपापवान् |
शुक्रे शनियुते जातो भोगी स्याद्राजवल्लभः।
वैश्य्ी्गवान् कामी पश्चात्तापाज्जितेन्दियः ॥४७०२ ॥
ज्यष्ठासुसन्ततुष्टमनाः प्रजातः स्यादल्पमित्रः कृशदीर्घगात्रः।
शुचिर्महानुद्धिरतीव भीरु व्यथान्वितो धर्मपरायणश्च ॥४७०४
धर्मशासप्रियो नित्यं निर्मलांशे सुधार्मिकः।
मन्दे भृगुयुते जात ज्ञानी ततत्वविवेकवान् ॥४७०५ ॥
दान्तः शुचिः वाग्मी निर्मलांशे सुनीतिमान् |
किंचिद्रोगी प्रसन्नात्मा कोशसंग्रहवान् धनी ॥४७०६ ॥
4699 - 4706. (a) Jupiter in the 7th in Vargottama will grant longevity and will remove fear of
infantile mortality.
(b) Birth in the 2nd half ग € subject Nadiamsa will cause fear of Balarishta. If he survives,
long life will come to pass. These have been told
in detail in “Bhava Nadi”.
(©) One born in the Ist half will have eyes
resembling a lotus petal. He will be endowed with
asoftand radiant physique, be gentle, fond of sweet
and sour juices, and will have imbalances of the
three bodily temperaments, viz. wind, phlegm and
bile. He will have two names, be truthful, passionate and will somewhat be sinful of illicit ties with
females.
(d) Venus and Saturn in conjunction will cause
adisposition to enjoy pleasures. Such a person will
be dear to the king, will join harlots, be libidinous
and will later on conquer his senses due to repentance. He will be happy with his elders, will have
a limited number of friends, be tall, emaciated,
pure, highly intelligent, very timid, distressed and
righteous in conduct. He will be fond of ancient
laws, be endowed with wisdom, be philosophical,
subdued, pure, crafty, eloquent and blessed with a
high degree of charitability. He will be somewhat
sickly, bea satisfied soul, attached to accumulating
wealth and be wealthy.
मकरांशकगे Sx नीचे राहुसमन्विते |
मनश्चाञ्चल्यवान् किंचिन्मन्दप्रकृतिकोपवान् ॥४७०७ Il
4707. Debilitated Moon: The Moon joining
Rahu and being in her sign of debility with Capricorn Navamsa will cause fickle-mindedness. The
native will be somewhat a dunce and be shorttempered.
चन्द्रे राहुयुते जातो राजचोरभयातुरः।
निर्मलांशे वयोमध्ये भ्रातृद्रेषकलापवान् ॥४७०८ ॥
4708. Rahu - Moon Yoga: The conjunction of
the Moon with Rahu will cause fear from the king
and thieves for a native of Nirmala Nadiamsa,
Libra ascendant. In the middle of his life, he will
` incur enmity with co-born.
लग्नात् कर्मगते सूर्ये सेतुस्नानसुपुण्यवान् |
गङ्गास्नान फलप्राप्तये त्रिवारं सेतुयात्रिकः॥४७०९ ॥
वयोमध्ये सुधर्पिष्ठस्तटाकोद्यानकारकः।
वार्धके सेतुमूलेषु कपिलादानपुण्यवान् ॥४७१० ॥
गङ्गातीरे सुधर्मात्मा निष्काम्यार्थे सुधा्मिकः।
गङ्खायात्रोपकारेण धर्मसिद्धियुतः सुखी ॥४७११॥

4709 - 4711. The Sun in Cancer: One will
acquire merits by having dips in the Setu if the Sun
is in the 10th (Cancer). He will also bathe in the
Ganges. He will be on a pilgrimage to the Setu for
a period of three weeks. In the middle of his life,
he will be highly charitable and construct tanks and
parks for public use. In his old age, he will donate
a brown cow in the region of Setu. On the banks of
the Ganges, he will give charities, without motive
for any gains. He will help others to visit the
Ganges and will thereby acquire moral merits.
मीने सूर्ये निर्मलांशे तुलांशे दीर्घजीवितः।
कर्माधिपदाशाकाले त्विदं फलमुदाहतम् ॥४७१२ ॥
4712. The Sun in 6th: The Sun in Pisces with
Libra Navamsa will bless one with longevity.
These effects will be due in the dasa of the 10th
lord.
Notes: The dasa referred to should be for the
effects mentioned, vide slokas 4709 - 4711, due to
the Sun’s position in the 10th (Cancer). To wit, the
dasa of the Moon will reflect those results. But this
should not be applied to long lease of life due to the
Sun being in Pisces with Libra Navamsa.
लग्नाधिपदशाभाग्यमुत्तरार्थे सुधार्मिकः।
विशेषे धर्मसिद्धिः स्याल्लग्नाधिपतिदायके ॥४७१३ ॥
4713. Venus Dasa: The native of Nirmala
Nadiamsa will gain fortunes in the 2nd half of the
ascendant lord’s dasa. He will be righteous and
charitable in the said dasa.
निर्मलांशे पूर्वभागे मधुमासे विवाहवान् |
सम्पदाये द्वादशाब्दे वेदे न दशवत्सरे ॥४७१४ ॥
निर्मलांशे पूर्वभागे मधुमासे विवाहवान् |
सम्पदाये द्वादशाब्दे वेदे च AMAT ॥४७१४ ॥
निर्मलांशे पूर्वभागे मधुमासे विवाहवान्।
मेषांशगे मदाधीशे निर्मलांशोद भवस्य च ॥४७१५ Il
उद्राहो जन्मभूम्यां तु प्राग्भागे नगरेषु च।
मित्रत्रिकोणगे चन्द्रे दारजन्मर्षभं विदुः ॥४७१६ ॥
निर्मलांशे पूर्वभागे मधुमासे विवाहवान् |
मेषांशगे मदाधीशे निर्मलांशोद् भवस्य च livery il
गार्हस्थ्यगेह उद्वाहं कलत्रान्तरयोगवान् |
लग्नाधिपदशाकाले चतुरविशतिवत्सरे ॥४७१८ ॥
Premed दारनाशः स्यात् क्षिप्रेणोद्वाहयोगवान् |
Deva Keralam
4714-4718. (a) One born in the Ist halfof the
subject Nadiamsa will get married in the month of
Chaitra, in the 12th or 14th year, during 2nd dasa.
(b) The 7th lord (Mars) in Aries Navamsa will
cause marriage in one’s native region. The bride
will hail from the eastern part of the town. The birth
sign of the bride will be a trine to the natal Sun. The
native will have a re-marriage in his twenty-fourth
year, during the dasa of Venus. In his 30th year, he
will lose his wife and will marry again.
Notes: (b) There is some confusion about the
age of marriage. It should be understood that the
first marriage will take place in the 24th year. The
wife will die in his 30th year as a consequence of
which immediately re-marriage will take place.
These events are due to Mars occupying Aries
Navamsa.
Some of the lines are repeated without any
change conveying identical meanings. These are
avoided in the rendering.
भाग्यांशगे विलग्नेशे लाभे भाग्यपसंयुते ॥४७१९ ॥
सुखाधिपेन संयुक्ते योगोऽयमिन्द्रनामकः।
इन््रयोगे तुलालग्ने भोगी स्याद्राजवल्लभः॥४७२० ॥
धर्ममार्गरतो नित्यमयुताधिकवित्तमान् |
भ्राकारगोपुरादीनां कर्ता धर्मयुतःसुखी ॥४७२१ ॥
योगनाडीफलाध्याये फलं विस्तारमादिशेत् |
4719 - 4721144. Indra Yoga: The ascendant
lord Venus should be in the 11th (Leo) in the
company of the 9th lord (Mercury) and the 4th lord
(Saturn) and be in the 9th house in Navamsa. Asa
result Indra Yoga is formed for a native of Libra.
Such a native will enjoy material pleasures, be
liked by the ruler, will take to right path of living
and will enjoy illimitable wealth. He will construct
temple towers etc. and be charitable. More details `
have been stated in the Yoga Nadi.
Notes: In simpler terms, this Yoga is caused by
the conjunction of Venus, Saturn and Mercury in
the 11thin Leo. Venus should, however, be in the
9th from the Navamsa ascendant.
लाभे मन्दे तुलालग्ने द्विकलत्रेऽपि पुत्रवान् ॥४७२२ ॥
आयुष्मत्यशिकन्याश्च Byard जीविताः।
वार्धके पुत्रशोकेन क्लेशं प्रापनोति भूरिशः॥४७२३ ॥
जन्मदाये पितुः सौख्यं द्वितीयान्दे श्रियावहम् |

Chandra Kala Nadi 203
प्रथमान्दे ज्येष्ठभ्रातुरुद्राहानन्तरं सुखम् ॥४७२४॥
4722 - 4724. Saturn in 11th: In case of Libra
ascendant, Saturn in the 11th will cause two wives.
The person will have 3 long-living daughters and 4
long-living sons. In his old age, he will be in much
grief due to loss of his son. In the 1st dasa, he will
enjoy happiness through father. 2nd year will give
wealth (to the family). In his 1st year of age, his
older brother will beget married.
THM तत्रिकोणे स्फुटयोगं गते शनौ |
स्वदेहायासमाप्नोति पित्रादीनां मनोव्यथा ॥४७२५ ॥
चद्राशगे तत्िकोणे स्फुटयोगं गते शनौ |
जन्मदेशे aE स्यादमात्यादिजनावधि ॥४७२६ ॥
ज्ञातिवरगे मनस्तापं प्रभुवगे विशेषतः।
जन्मे शनिस्थिते काले स्वपिता व्याकुलं महत् ॥४७२७ ॥
4725 - 4727. Transit of Saturn: (a) Saturn’s
transit in the sign denoted by the Navamsa occupied by Venus, or a trine thereof, will spoil the
native’s health and his father and others will be
distressed.
(b) Saturn transiting as above with reference to
the Moon’s Navamsa will produce evils in the birth
country. Ministers etc. will be troubled(?). The
native’s relatives will be anguished.
(c) Saturn’s transit on the Moon sign will
distress his father to a great extent.
भाग्यरुढाधिपेशांशदशायां चन्द्रभुक्तिषु ।
जन्मदाये भाग्यवृद्धिः स्वपिता बहुभाग्यवान् ॥४७२८ Il
4728. Note who is the lord of the 9th Arudha
Pada. The dasa of the Navamsa dispositor of such
a planet will cause increase of prosperity to father.
The relevant sub period will be that of the Moon.
Notes: Reference to first dasa found in the
original is not included in the translation. Or itmay
be an alternative dasa.
दशाभावफलाध्याये योगनाडीदशाफले |
निर्भलांशे पूर्वभागे फलविस्तारमादिशेत् ॥४७२९ |
4729. The Yoga Nadi narrates in detail about
the Dasa periods for a native of first half of Nirmala
Nadiamsa, Libra ascendant, in the chapter dealing
with “Effects of Dasa periods and Houses”.
इद्रयोगे प्रजातश्च गर्मश्रीमान् महाधनी ।
हेमाम्बरविभूषाप्तिं वृश्चिकादित्रिमासगे ॥४७३० ॥
सम्पदाये निर्मलांशे स्वगेहे स्वर्णपात्रवान् |
विपद्दाये फलं पूर्ण क्षेयदाये विशेषतः ॥४७३१ ॥
were विशेषाप्तिर्मियुताधिकवित्तवान् |
निर्मलांशे चक्रसन्धौ दशासन्धौच कालगे ॥४७३२ ॥
षष्ठाष्टमाधीशभुक्तौ स्वदेहायासमादिशेत्।
निर्मलांशे पूर्वभागे धनाधिपदशान्त्यगे ॥४७३२ ॥
कालमत्युभयप्रापिर्मास्सु करादिषु त्रिषु |
इन्द्रयोगे निर्मलांशे षष्ट्यब्दे मृतिमादिशेत् ॥४७२४॥
चतुः पञ्चाशगे वर्षे ज्येष्ठभ्रातृविनाशवान् |
तदर्धे हयपमृत्युरच शान्तिं कुर्याद्विचक्षणः ॥४७३५ II
yen क्लेशबाहुल्यं स्वशरीरसमं वदेत् |
निर्मलांशे फलं सत्यं देहान्ते Bela: स्मृता ॥४७३६ ॥
4730 - 4736. (a) Indra Yoga: One bornin Indra
Yoga (vide sloka 4719 etc.) will be exceedingly
wealthy right from his birth. He will enjoy golden
ormmaments and robes. The 2nd dasa will help the
family acquire golden vessels. The 3rd dasa will
give full effects concerning wealth. The 4th dasa
will be special in this regard. The Sth dasa will give
limitless wealth.
(b) The sub periods of the lords of the 6th
(Jupiter) and 8th (Venus) will cause physical ailments in the junction of Dasa. The native will die
in the end of Mars dasa with the transit Sun in
Scorpio, Sagittarius or Capricorn. This will be in
his 60th year. In his 54th year, his older brother will
die. The said older brother will incur fear of
untimely death in the native’s 27th year for which
remedies should be sought. 36th year of age will
cause the subject much anguish and physical ailments. After his end, he will attain a good world.
Effects for Nirmala Nadiamsa will bear truth.
Notes: (a) Mention of 3 months commencing -
from Scorpio vide sloka 4730 - Vrischikaadi traya
maasage - does not serve any purpose.
व्ययेशे भृगृसंयुक्ते लाभे सौम्येऽकिसंयुते |
देहान्ते पुण्यलोकाप्तिः पश्चादुत्तम जन्मवान् |
निर्मलांशे फलं सत्यं प्रत्यक्षं देवकेरलम् wore ॥
4737. One will attain a good world, if the 12th
(Virgo) is occupied by Venus while Saturn and
Mercury are in the 11th (Leo). Later on, he will

204 Deva Keralam
beget an excellent birth. The effects for Nirmala
Nadiamsa will be a truth as reflected in Deva
Keralam.
॥कटकलग्ने कुटिलांशः ॥
। वृषथशुक्रराजयोगनाडीफलम् ॥
कुम्भांशे वृषभे शुक्रे राजयोगांशके स्थिते |
चरलग्ने प्रजातस्य सप्तविशात् परं सुखम् ॥४७३८ Il
4738. Movable ascendant: Venus in the sign
Taurus with Aquarius Navamsa will be a source of
Raja Yoga if birth is in a movable ascendant
(Cancer, Libra, Capricorn or Aries). Such a person
will prosper after the age of 27.
Notes: “Raja Yogamsake” is an erroneous
term but apparently it conveys the capability of
Venus causing a Raja Yoga.
In relevant places, from now onwards upto
sloka 4780, the Nadiamsa is Kutila in Cancer
ascendant. In some places, a movable ascendant
only features, ignoring Nadiamsa requirement.
For Kutila Nadiamsa, please refer to the notes
please refer to page 15, Book 1.
लग्नादभाग्यव्ययाधीशौ भार्गवेण युतेश्षितौ ।
राजयोग इति ख्यातो राजा वा तत्समोऽपि वा ॥४७३९ ॥
राजयोग प्रजातश्च SE भवेन्नरः।
नाटकालंकारकाव्यप्रियः सङ्गीतवल्लभः॥४७४० ॥
वदान्यः सत्यवादी च गन्धमाल्यांबरप्रियः।
वृश्चिकांशे चरे लग्ने नीचे भौमे प्रजायते ॥४७४१ ॥
लग्नात्तृतीयगे चन्द्रे रोगी दुर्बलदेहवान्।
रक्तकासक्षयेणैव योगकाले प्रपीडितः ॥४७४२ ॥
4739 - 4742. (a) Cancer Ascendant: The
native of Cancer ascendant will enjoy Raja Yoga if
the lords of the 9th (Jupiter) and the 12th (Mercury)
are aspected by or conjunct Venus. As a result, the
person will be a king or equal to aking. He will be
courageous, valorous and fond of drama, rhetoric,
poetry and music, be eloquent, truthful, and fond of
scents and garlands.
(b) Scorpio Navamsa: When a movable ascendant prevails, Scorpio should be its Navamsa.
Then Mars in the sign Pisces and the Moon in the
3rd from the ascendant will make one sickly and
weak-bodied. He will'suffer from bleeding cough
and tuberculosis and will be troubled at the time of
prosperity.
Notes: (a) The trio - Jupiter, Mercury .and
Venus - being together will bestow on the native
much prosperity, akin to that of a king, and specialisation in fields like poetry and drama. He will
have a taste for good things in life. He will remain
truthful while his speech will be marked for its
eloquence. This aphorism can be applied to Cap--
_ ricorn ascendant also, and with some caution to
Taurus. In case of Taurus, Mars is the 12th lord.
Libra ascendant is to be excluded because the 9th
and 12th houses are ruled by only one planet, 1.6.
Mercury. Hence the question of conjunction of 9th
and 12th lords does not arise.
लग्नेशे मकरांशस्थे मूरखप्रकृतिकोपवान् ।
सिहांशके क्रिये सूर्ये जीवे केतुसमन्विते ॥४७४३ ॥
विष्णुयोग इति ख्यातौ वैष्णवाचारभाग्यवान् |
लग्ने इति ख्यातो वेष्णवाचारभाग्यवान्।
लग्ने कुजे व्यये मन्दे विष्णुयोगसमुद् भवः॥४७४४ ॥
बाल्ये क्लेशं च दारिद्ग्र सप्तविंशसमावधि |
विष्णुयोगे कृशाङ्गश्च श्यामवर्णः कृशाकृतिः॥४७४५ Il
ब्रह्मविद्धनिकः शुरो मेधावी कलहप्रियः।
सोदरा दश तेषां द्रौ प्रबलौ राजवल्लभ ॥४७४६ ॥
भगिन्य 2 चिरायुष्यौ कनिष्ठभ्रातृयोगवान् |
4743 - 4746142. (a) The lord of the ascendant in
(वात्मा Navamsa produces an irascible and foolish man.
(b) Vishnu Yoga: The Sun in the sign Aries
with Leo Navamsa, as Jupiter is conjunct Ketu,
causes what is called Vishnu Yoga. Its subject will
be fortunate to follow Vaishnavism (the order of
Vishnu).
(c) Mars in the ascendant and Saturn in the 12th
also produce Vishnu Yoga. Asa result, one born in
a movable ascendant will (particularly Cancer)
incur anguish and poverty in childhood. His-27th
year will be troublesome. He will be weak-bodied
and dark in complexion. He will possess Sacred
Knowledge, be rich, valorous, intelligent and fond
of promoting quarrels. He will have ten brothers
out of whom two will be dear to the king. He will
also have two sisters both of whom will enjoy
longevity. His co-born will include younger ones.

Chandra Kala Nadi 205
Notes: (b) This is a Yoga for spiritualism in a
broad sense.
राजयोगांशगे शुक्रे लाभेकुम्भनवांशगे ॥४७४७ ॥
कनिष्ठभ्रातृमान् रागी ज्येष्ठभ्रातृसमन्वितः।
सप्तविंशतिवर्षणि क्लेशजीवनवान् भवेत् ॥४७४८ ॥
ततः पश्चाद्राजयोगं विंशोपरि विशेषवान्
कुटिलांशे विष्णुयोगे राजयोगोद भवस्यच ॥४७४९ ॥
दिर्धायुषीच जननी भगिन्येका ह्यभर्तृका |
वेष्णावांशे विष्णु योगे क्लेशिता स्वसहोदरी ॥४७५० ॥
एका समुङ्गली मृत्युं क्षेमदाये सुकीर्विमान् |
4747 - 4750. In case of Cancer ascending,
Venus in the 11th with Aquarius Navamsa (vide
sloka 4738 supra) will cause younger brothers. The
subject will be passionate and will have older
brothers (as well). He will lead a difficult phase in
his 27th year. After that, he will enjoy Raja Yoga
effects, particularly after 30. His mother will be
long-lived. One of his sisters will be bereft of
husband and be anguished. Another will be blessed
with a long-living husband. She will die in the
native’s 4th dasa. The native will beget wide fame.
Notes: Certain terms like Vishnu Yoga and
Kutila Nadiamsa are an interruption found in the
original which are not included to the translation:
HUTS विष्णुयोगे हास्यावस्था गतेऽमृते ॥४७५१ ॥
बाल्ये क्लेशादिदारिद्मरं कथाकार्यप्रवर्तकः।
हास्यावस्था गते चन्द्रे सदांहास्यकथाप्रियः।
परेङ्धितज्ञश्चतुरो मित्रवञ्चन बुद्धिमान् ॥४७५२ ॥
स्वकार्यचतुरः श्रीमान् शत्रकार्यविघातकः।
स्वराजपिशुनश्चापि परकार्यविघातवान् ॥४७५३ ॥
4751 - 4753. Cancer Ascendant: For Vishnu
Yoga caused by the Moon in Virgo the following
effects be declared. During childhood days, the
person will be in the grip of anguish and poverty.
He will live by narrating mythological stories and
will be fond of fun-filled accounts. He will be ina
position to read others’ mind, disposed to cheat his
friends, skilful in completing his undertakings,
wealthy, an impediment to the undertakings of his
adversaries and be miserly. He will also obstruct
others’ work.
Notes: The Moon in Virgo is a partial condition. According to sloka 4739 - 4742 (b), the
complete Yoga is: The Moon in the 3rd in Virgo,
Mars in the 9th in Pisces, and the ascendant Cancer
having Scorpio Navamsa.
“Haasyavastha” presently referred to is not a
standard term.
हास्यावस्थाराजयोगे लग्ने पापे च संस्थिते ॥४७५४ ॥
राजमुद्राधिकारी स्याद्रहुपापयुतोभवेत् |
हास्यावस्थां गते चन्द्रे विष्णुयोगसमुद् भवः॥४७५५ ॥
श्रीवेष्णमतावलम्बी स्वबन्धुजनपोषकः।
राजवश्य करो नित्यं स्वदारे ह्यति कामुकः ॥४७५६ ॥
निषिद्धदिवसे काले स्वसखीसङ्गरतो भवेत् |
4754 - 4756142. (a) In the formation of Raja
Yoga caused (by Venus in Taurus with Aquarius
Navamsa), a malefic in the ascendant will give the
following effects. The person will enjoy royal
authority but will commit many sinful deeds.
(b) The Moon (vide sloka 4739 - 42 b) will
produce a person who will follow the order of
Vaishnavites. He will patronise his kinsfolk, will
subdue the king and be lustfully attached to his
spouse. He will have sexual union even on prohibited days.
कुलीरलग्ने कीटांशे हयष्णप्रकृतिदेहवान् ॥४७५७ ॥
वातश्लेष्मविकारी स्यात्किचितिपित्तोल्बणातुरः।
परतापनपापेन पैत्यकाशम्रपीडितः॥४७५८ ॥
तत्पापरिहारार्थं ग्रहचक्रं प्रपूजयेत् |
एकाशीति प्रहच्रकं प्रपूजयेत् |
एकाशीति पदं चक्रं पलेनैकेन निर्मितम् ॥४७५९ ॥
वेदोक्तविधिना पूजा प्रहारधनपूर्वकम् |
स्वराक्षरं लिखेच्चक्रेह्यभिजित्यादिसंयुतम् ॥४७६० ॥
देवज्ञाय प्रदानेन महारोगाद्विमुच्यते |
परतापी राजांशे विष्णुयोगे च जायते ॥४७६१ ॥
शिवद्रोहवशाद्रोगी क्षेमदाये प्रपीडितः।
ग्रहचक्रं द्विवारं तु पूजादानं समाचरेत् ॥४७६२ ॥
लक्षं मृत्युजजयं मन््रं जपेदीश्वरसन्निधौ |
नवम्रहमखं चैव स्वगृह्योक्तविधानतः॥४७६३ ॥
दानेन सौख्यमाप्नोति देहारोग्यं शुभावहम् |
तदभावे शिवक्ेत्र कोरिमृत्युञ्जयं जपेत् ॥४७६४ ॥
शिवलिङ्गपरतिष्ठेव रक्तकाशं प्रणश्यति |
मेहरोगोपशान्त्य्य रक्तकासो पशान्तये ॥४७६५ ॥
मधुकुम्भाज्यदानं च कुर्यादारोग्यसिद्धये |

206 Deva Keralam
4757 - 4765142. (a) Cancer ascendant with Scorpio Navamsa will cause a warm body. The native
will incur aberration of the two temperaments -
wind and phlegm. He will suffer from imbalancing
of bile due to the sin of distressing others. To
overcome these blemishes, one should worship the
image of the zodidc made on a single-footed plank.
Worship of planets should be done as prescribed in
the Vedas. The names of the Nakshatras including
Abhijit should be written in the said image. This
should (after the worship) be donated to the astrologer. As a result, the great disease about to strike
will vanish.
(b) The 2nd line of sloka 4761 is unclear. “He
will not distress others if Vishnu Yoga is present for’
one born in Rajamsa.”
(c) One will suffer from a great disease in the
4th dasa due to betrayal committed to Lord Siva.
For remedying this ill, the image of the zodiac be
worshipped for two weeks and donated at the end.
Recitation of Mrityunjaya Mantra for a hundred
thousand times be undertaken in a temple of Lord
Siva. Nava Grahas should be worshipped according to one’s family traditions. Donations will cause
happiness and bring back health. In the absence of
all these, Maha Mrityunjaya should be recited for
one crore (or ten million) times. By installing a’
Siva Linga, bleeding cough will disappear. Donation of a pot filled with honey and ghee will ward
of urinary complaints.
कन्याचनद्रे राजयोगो मकारांशे च संस्थिते ॥४७६६ ॥
्षेमदाये राजयोगो ह्ययपरार्थे न संशयः ॥४७६७ ॥
सीप्रजा बहुली भावं पुंस्मरजास्वल्पमादिशेत् |
चतुर्थे पञ्चमे भूयाद्विष्णुयोगे सुपुत्रकः॥४७६८ ॥
4766 - 4768. The Moon in Virgo with Capricorn Navamsa will in the later half of the 4th dasa
promote Raja Yoga effects. The subject will have
many female issues but limited number of sons.
His 4th child will be an excellent son.
Notes: “Chaturthe Panchame” reads in another
version as “Chaturthe Garbhe” denoting the 4th
issue.
सुतेशे नीचराशिस्थे चापांशे राहुवीक्षेते ।
अधिकाङ्गसुतप्राप्तिर्दन्त युक्तोऽथ वा भवेत् ॥६४६९ ॥
4769. The Sth lord (Mars) should be aspected
by Mars and be in the sign Cancer with Sagittarius
Navamsa. As a result, one will beget a child with
excessive limbs or with teeth at birth.
afea विष्णुयोगे ज्येष्ठभ्राता festa: |
रोगीवन्ध्यापतिचेवसन्तान प्रतिबन्धवान् |
विष्णुयोगे कनिष्ठस्तु सत्कलत्रैकभार्यकः ॥४७७० ॥
भ्रातृमूलात् प्रसिद्धिश्च बहुपुत्रार्थवान् सुखी |
राजयोगे षोडशाब्दे पित्ररिष्टमिति स्मृतम् vows ॥
faved मृतिं चेति तत ऊर्ध्व न जीवति ।
लग्नेशांशे तत्तरिकोणे स्फुटयोगं गते शनौ ॥४७७२ ॥
राजयोगे पित्ररिषटं मितरप्रभुविनाशनम् |
- पश्चात् प्राबल्यमाप्नोति क्षेमदाये बुधान्तरे ॥४७७३ ॥
4770 - 4773. (a) Brothers: In case of Cancer |
ascendant, Kutila Nadiamsa, declare two wives for
older brother. He will be sickly, will marry a barren
female and will face obstacles in obtaining offspring. The younger brother will have only one
wife who will be virtuous, become famous through
co-born and will have plenty of wealth and many
sons.
(b) The native will lose his father in the 16th
year of age during the 3rd dasa. He will not survive
beyond this phase.
(c) Saturn transiting the sign represented by the
Navamsa position of the ascendant lord, or a trine
thereof, will endanger one’s father. Friends and
employer will also incur destruction. Afterwards
the native will be prosperous in Mercury’s sub
period of the 4th dasa.
लाभे शुक्रे राजयोगे योगं च वसुवत्सरम्।
सिंहेऽर्कनन्दने काले महारोगेण कशितः॥४७७४ ॥
मिथुने च तथा विद्यात् सूर्यभुक्तो महद्भयम् |
तद्ोषपरिहारार्थं दानं कुर्याद्विचक्षणः ॥४७७५ ॥
राजयोगे प्रजातश्च कुरिलांशसमुद्भवः।
सूर्यचन्द्रौ यदेकस्थौ सिंहान्ते वक्रगे शनो ॥४७७६ ॥
क्षयरोगान्मृतिं विन्द्ाद्राजयोगे त्वधोगतिः।
अष्टविशे षट्रिंशे वा द्येकचत्वारिवत्सरे ॥४७७७ ॥
कालमृत्युभयं चेति राजयोगसमुदभवः
आ द्वत्रिंशादपमृत्युं षटर्रिशाब्दान्तमेव च ॥४७७८ ॥
जीविते राजयोगेषु चत्वारर मरिष्यति |

Chandra Kala Nadi 207
विष्णुयोगे पाञ्चरात्रमतानुष्ठानतत्परः ॥४७७९ ॥
देहान्ते नरकं याति पतत्येव ह्यधोगतौ ।
विष्णुयोगे व्यये मन्दे पुत्रसंस्कारहीनवान् ॥४७८० ॥
सुतेन पालनं नैव हयन्त्यकाले न संशयः।
व्यये मन्दे स्वपुत्रश्च मृत्युकाले विशेषतः ॥४७८१ ॥
ग्रामान्तरे वासमेति स्वपुत्रफलमादिशेत् |
4774 - 478114. (a) The Raja Yoga caused by
Venus by being in the 11th (with Aquarius Navamsa) will last for a period of 8 years.
(b) Saturn moving in Leo or Gemini will inflict
a great diseases on a Cancer native with Kutila
Nadiamsa. The sub period of the Sun (in the 4th
dasa) will cause much fear. To overcome these,
donations should be made.
(c) One born in Kutila Nadiamsa, Cancer ascendant, while Saturn is retrograde, as the luminaries are in the end of Leo will die of tuberculosis of
the lungs and will meet a bad end. 28th, 36th or 41st
year will cause his death. From 32 to 36, he will be
in the grip of fear of untimely death. Even if he
survives, he will die in the 40th year.
(d) One born in Vishnu Yoga will perform
religious ceremonies for 5 nights. He will meet a
bad end and will go to hell after death.
(e) Saturn in the 12th will deprive one of final
rites by his son who will not look after him in his
last days and will live in another village at the time
of the native’s death.
FIT Tai
इन्द्रंशगे त्विद्धयोगे शुक्रे शनिसमन्विते ॥४७८२ ॥
तुलालग्ने प्रजातश्च गर्भश्रीमान् महाधनी ।
दीर्घबुद्धिर्विंशालाक्षी धनिकः पुत्रमित्रवान् ॥४७८३ ॥
इन्द्रयोगे सुदीर्धायुः कीर्तिमान् पण्डितः सुखी ।
इन्द्रयोगोद्धवः श्रेष्ठः कान्तश्च धनधान्यवान् ॥४७८४ ॥
कामी विद्वांश्च मानी च चञ्चलो धार्मिकः सुखी ।
4782 - 47844. Libra Ascendant - Indra Nadiamsa: One born in this space of the zodiac, as
Venus and Saturn are together will be wealthy right
from his birth. He will be far-sighted, wide eyed
and will enjoy sons and daughters. He will be longlived, famous, scholarly, happy, an excellent personage, radiant and endowed with wealth and
grains. He will be libidinous, learned, honourable,
, fickle-minded and righteous.
Notes: In this part of the. text, in some cases
“Indra Yoga” is an interruption and hence removed
from the English rendering. At some places, this is
a replacement for Indra Nadiamsa, Libra ascendant.
For Indra Nadiamsa, please refer tonotes under
sloka 1105, page 100, Book 1.
चन्द्रे राहुयुते नीचे त्विद्रयोगसमुद् भवः॥४७८५ ॥
नीचसेवापरो नित्यं नीचराज्ये सुभाग्यवान्।
नीचे नक्रांशगे चन्द्रे तिवन्द्रयोगसमुद् भवः॥४७८६ ॥
दान्तः शुचिः शठो मानी भोगी गीतप्रियः,. सुखी |
मरन्थान्तरे स्वल्पपापी तिविन्द्रयोगेऽतिकामुकः।
कालान्तरे धर्मनुद्धिर्ेवनब्राह्मणपोषकः ॥४७८७ ॥
ज्येष्ठासु सन्तुष्टमना: प्रजातः सुनासिको वा कृशदीर्घगात्रः।
शुचिर्महाबुद्धिरतीव भीरुः श्रद्धान्वितो धर्मपरायणश्च ॥४७८८ ॥
4785 -4788. (a) The Moon in debility in the 2nd
and being with Rahu will make one serve a mean
employer. His prosperity will be in a base kingdom
(i.e. under a base employer)
(b) The Moon in Scorpio with Capricorn Navyamsa will produce a subdued person who will be
pure, crafty, honourable, attached to pleasures, and
fond of music. There is another version to mention
that this native will be less sinful but highly libidinous. After some time, he will turn righteous and
honour gods and Brahmins. He will be happy with
his elders, will have an attractive nose and a tall,
emaciated physique. He will be pure, highly
intelligent, very timid, be devoted to his work and
fond of charitable acts.
इन्द्रयोगेन्द्रदेवक्षे मकरांशे निशाकरे |
नृपतेश्च प्रियो रागी वाग्मी कुशलबुद्धिमान् ॥४७८९ ॥
4789. The Moon in Uttara Phalguni Nakshatra
with Capricorn Navamsa will make one dear to the
king. The person will be passionate, eloquent and
skilful.
Notes: Indra Nakshatra means Phalguni
Nakshatra which includes Poorva Phalguni and
Uttara Phalguni. But Capricorn Navamsa occurs
only to the 2nd quarter of Uttara Phalguni.
aM प्रजातस्य ज्येष्ठभ्राता सुबुद्धिमान् |

208 Deva Keralam
अनेिकमित्रसंपत्नो भ्रातृमूलात् सुकीरतिमान् ॥४७९० ॥
4790. Libra Ascendant - Indra Nadiamsa: -
His older brother will be highly intelligent, will
have many friends and will achieve fame though
his co-born.
-इनद्रयोगे शुभे पापे गर्भाधानात् परं पितुः।
जञातिद्रेषकलपेन वृत्तिच्छेदं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥४७९१ ॥
पितृमातृप्रपीडादि माधानान्तरं व्यथाम् ।
इन्द्रयोगे जन्मदाये जन्माब्दे स्वपितुर्व्यथा ॥४७९२ Il
ज्ञातिवर्गे विशेषेण पितृव्यस्तु शुभान्वितः।
पुत्रोत्सवादिसन्तोषः पितृव्यस्य फलं स्मृतम् ॥४७९३ ॥
कश्चित् पितृव्यपुत्रस्तु स्वगृहे चौर्यकृत्यवान् |
कश्चिज्जञातिजनद्रेषी ज्ञातिवित्तापहारकः ॥४७९४ ॥
4791 - 4794. If the ascendant is occupied by
both benefic and malefic planets, the native’s
father will incur professional impediments, immediately after nuptial ceremony, due to misunderstanding with his kinsfolk. Further, both the
parents would be subjected to evils. The Ist year
of the native will cause anguish to शल्य. ` But
auspicious effects will prevail among his kinsmen,
particularly to paternal uncle who will celebrate
birth ofason. The said son will indulge in thieving
in his own home, will incur enmity with his relatives and will steal the possessions of his kinsmen.
इन्द्रयोगे तुलालग्ने भाग्याधिपसमन्विते |
पितरौ च चिरायुष्यौ ज्येष्ठभ्राता तथा भवेत् ॥४७९५ ॥
पितृष्वसुः सुतः कश्चित् सपत्नीमातृयोगवान् |
बहुभाग्यार्थसम्पन्नो बहुपुत्रयुतः सुखी ॥४७९६ ॥
इन्द्रयोगे पिता बाल्ये स्वगृहे चौर्यकृत्यवान् |
दारापवादमूलेन स्वपिता क्लेशवान् क्वचित् ॥४७९७ ॥
sah त्विन््रयोगे शुक्रे शनिसमन्विते i
जननी दीर्धमाद्गल्या स्वपिता धार्मिकः सुधीः॥४७९८ ॥
नवमे कुजदोषेण स्वपिता मूर्खकृत्यवान् |
मध्ये वयसि सन्तापमग्निमान्द्प्रपीडितः॥४७९९ ॥
तदोषपरिहारार्थं शान्तिं कुर्याद्िचक्षणः।
ग्रहचक्रप्रदानेन ह्ययुरारोग्यवान् पिता ॥४८०० ॥
4795 - 4800. (a) One.born in the subject Nadiamsa will have long-lived parents if (Venus) joins
the 9th lord. So also his older brother. His paternal
uncle will possibly have two wives, be endowed
with abundant fortunes, much wealth and many
sons.
(b) Father: The father of the native of subject
Nadiamsa would indulge in thieving at home in his
childhood. Due to calumny caused by his wife (i.e.
the native’s mother), he will be somewhat anguished.
(c) Incase Venus is conjunct Saturn, the mother
will enjoy long married life. Father will be highly
righteous and very intelligent.
(d) Mars in the 9th will be a blemish (for father)
as a result of which father will indulge in foolish
deeds. To ward off this blemish, remedies should
be sought. Father’s health will be sound by the
donation of an image of the zodiac.
Notes: (a) There is no mention in the original
‘as to who should be with the 9th lord. Itis only my
guess that the ascendant lord Venus should join the
9th lord Mercury.
saa तुलालग्ने त्वेकोने विंशवत्सरे |
स्वपिता AVIS च शान्त्या शान्तिं प्रयास्यति ॥४८०१॥
तदर्धे स्वपिता ज्येष्टभ्रातृशोकेन करितः।
जन्मदाये जीवभुक्तौ पितृव्यश्च प्रपीडितः॥४८०२ ॥
अपमृत्युभयं किंचित् पश्चादायोग्यमाप्नुयात्।
FSA जन्मदाये सुखेशां शत्रिकोणगे ॥४८०३ ॥
स्फुटयोगं गते मन्दे पितृव्यस्य महाविपत्।
ज्ञातिवर्गे सुतारिषटं स्वपिता क्रूरमासगे ॥४८०४ ॥
देहायासं च लभते जन्मदेशे नृपावधि |
स्ववासदेशनृपतेः स्वपितृज्यस्य चैव हि ॥४८०५ ॥
जन्मदाये सुखेशांशे त्वरिष्टं मन्दयोगके |
पितृव्यारिष्टदोषार्थं शनिप्रार्थनमादिशेत् ॥४८०६ ॥
लोहपरतिमादानेन ह्यायुरारोग्यसौख्यवान् |
राहुभुक्त्यन्तमारभ्य गुरुभुक्ताविदं फलम् ॥४८०७॥
स्वजन्मदेशे नृपतिः क्लेशं प्राणोति भूरिशः।
THAN तृतीयान्दे चतुर्थे षष्ठवत्रे ॥४८०८ ॥
रन्ध्राधिपत्यदोषेण मसूरीज्वर पीडितः।
षष्ठाष्टमाधीशवारे क्रूरमासेन्द्रयोगके ॥४८०९ ॥
RUA जन्ममासे मसूरीज्वरमान्द्यवान् |
तद्दोषपरिहारार्थं शान्ति कुर्याद्विचक्षणः ॥४८१० ॥
4801 - 4810. (a) Father & Uncle: One born in
Indra Nadiamsa, Libra ascendant, will in his 19th

Chandra Kala Nadi 209
year find his father in danger of untimely death to
overcome which remedies should be undertaken.
In the 10th year, father will be grieved due to loss
of older brother. During the sub period ruled by
Jupiter, in the very first dasa, the subject will incur
evils to his paternal uncle who will somewhat be
endangered by untimely death. But later on he will
enjoy sound health.
(b) Saturn’s Transit: Note the sign identical
with the Navamsa occupied by the 4th lord (Saturn)
at birth. When Saturn himself comes in transit to
the said sign, or its trine, paternal uncle will be
involved in a great danger. There will be loss of
progeny for some relative. His father will incur
physical illness in a month when the Sun will be in
bad transit. Troubles to the king (2) and to paternal
uncle will come to pass.
(€) Remedy: To overcome the blemish to
paternal uncle due to Saturn’s transit inflicting the
4th lord (vide “b” above), prayers to Saturn God
should be offered. Donation of an iron image of
Saturn will bring forth health and happiness and
ensure longevity.
(d) The sub periods of Rahu and Jupiter (in the
first dasa) has been described as above. The ruler
of the country will be much anguished(?)
(e) The subject will be afflicted by small-pox in
his 3rd, 4th or 6th year coinciding with a malefic’s
sub period, with the transit Sun in an adverse place,
or on his natal sign position and on a Thursday. To
eliminate such a blemish, necessary remedies should
be adopted.
dane त्विन्द्रयोगे शुक्रे शनिबुधान्विते ।
TMA प्रजातस्य सहस्रारिष्टनाशनम् ॥४८११ ॥
4811. Venus - Saturn Conjunction: For Indra
_ Nadiamsa, Libra ascendant, the conjunction of
Venus and Saturn will ward off a thousand evils
(relating to life-span).
जन्मदाये च जन्माब्दे साधनेशस्य भुक्तिषु |
- नेत्रपीडामवाप्नोति शिप्रेणारोग्यमादिशेत् ॥४८१२ ॥
4812. Eye Troubles: The subject will be troubled by eye problems in the first year of birth, or in
_ the sub period ruled by the owner of the 6th dasa
from birth. The relevant dasa will be the very first
one.
Notes: Suppose, one is born in the dasa of
Mars. Sadhaka dasa will be the 6th from that of
Mars, which works out to be the dasa of Ketu.
Hence, Ketu should be known as “Sadhanesa” or
6th dasa lord. Eye diseases in this case will be in
Ketu’s sub period in the 1st dasa, i.e. of Mars. If the
required sub-periodis already past in the womb, the `
child will suffer in the Ist year of age.
Similarly, “Sampat bhukti” means the bhukti
identical with the 2nd dasa. Hence “Sampat Bhukti”
of “Sampat Dasa” means the Ist sub period of 2nd
dasa, which for example occurs in sloka 4832 infra.
fae शनियुते शुक्रे fester त्विन्द्रयोगके |
बाल्ये स्वनेत्रपीडा स्यात्नागदानवशात् सुखम् ॥४८१२ ॥
शिरश्रदेशे जंघाया हदये वा व्रणाह्कितः।
लग्नादद्वितीयगे wet मुखरोगः सुदुस्सहः॥४८१४ ॥
बाल्ये नागप्रदानेन वक्तररोगो निवर्तते।
बालरिष्टभयं नास्ति नेत्रारोग्यकरं शुभम् ॥४८१५ ॥
। 4813 - 4815. (a) Venus - Saturn in Leo: This
yoga will cause troubles to eyes in one’s childhood.
By donating the image of a Cobra, happiness
(concerning eyes) will prevail. Troubles could also
occur (on account of the said Yoga) to head, shanks
and heart.
(b) Facial Diseases: Rahu in the 2nd from
ascendant (i.e. in Scorpio) will cause unbearable
disease of the face in childhood. Donation of a
cobra’s image will cure facial diseases. Health of
eyes (as at “a” ) will prevail and there will be no
` infantile mortality.
भाग्यारूढे तिविन्द्रयोगे भोगी भाग्यकुलोद भवः।
इन््रांशकगते शुक्रे कत्प्रद्रययोगवान् ॥४८१६ ॥
ज्येष्ठभ्राता तथा विन्द्यादुभौ तौ रोगशालिनौ ।
एका स्वसा क्लेशवती मध्ये चैवतथापरा ॥४८१७ ॥
द्रे भगिन्यौ सुमाङ्गल्यौ yea च भविष्यतः।
4816 - 48171. (a) The Arudha Pada of the 9th
being occupied by Venus, Saturn and Mercury
denotes birth in a prosperous family. The native
will enjoy pleasures.
(b) Venus in Indra Nadiamsa will cause two
wives for a Libra native. His older brother will
have two sickly wives. He will have two sisters
both of whom will be in grief in between. The two

210 Deva Keralam
sisters will have long-living husbands and daughters.
Notes: (a) Indra Yoga in relevant places means
the conjunction of Venus, Saturn and Mercury `
which applies to Libra ascendant.
इन््रंशकगते शुक्रे त्वसितेन समन्विते ॥४८१८ ॥
एका स्वसा सोख्यवती दत्तपुत्रवती शुभा ।
tat त्विन्द्रयोगे च fae शुक्रेऽर्किसंयुते ॥४८१९ ॥
भाग्याधिपेन संयुक्ते नरवाहनवान्भवेत् |
वाहनद्रयवान् रागी धनिकः कीर्तिमान् सुखी ॥४८२० ॥
इन्द्रयोगदशाकाले त्वपरार्धं इदं फलम् |
चन्द्रलग्नाद्व्ययाधीशदशायां गुरुभुक्तिषु ॥४८२१ ॥
इन्द्रयोगे पित्ररिष्टं पश्चात् प्रबलयोगवान् |
शुक्रास्तमनकाले वा कुजमूढेऽथवापि च ॥४८२२ ॥
गोचरे वृषभे सौम्ये भाग्यगे वा स्थितेऽपिवा।
बुधे कुजयुते दृष्टे प्रहचारफलं व्यथाम् ॥४८२३ ॥
RA घरासूनो शुक्रे वास्तंगते यदि ।
Raith त्विन््रयोगे तत्काले क्लेशमादिशेत् ॥४८२४॥
देहायासं मनस्तापमर्थनाशं शिरोरुजम् ।
्रूरकाले फलं चेति तिविन्द्रयोगसमुद् भवः॥४८२५ ॥
4818 - 4825. (a) Venus in the subject Nadiamsa
in the company of Saturn denotes happiness to a
sister who will be handsome and will have an
adopted son.
(b) For a native of Indra: Nadiamsa, Libra
ascendant, the 3 planets, viz. Venus, Saturn and
Mercury joining in the 9th, causing Indra Yoga will
give twoconveyances. The person will be passionate, wealthy, famous and happy. These effects will
occur in the later half of the Dasa of Indra Yoga (i.e.
the dasa of one of the 3 planets).
(c) Jupiter’s Bhukti: The sub period of Jupiter
in the dasa ruled by the Moon’s dispositor will
endanger one’s father following which prosperity
of the native will occur. The said danger (during
Jupiter’s sub period) will come to pass at a time
when Venus or Mars is combust. Distress (danger
to father) will (alternatively) occur with Mercury’s
transit in Taurus or Gemini, or when Mercury is
conjunct or aspect to Mars. Anguish will be
. experienced by the subject in the form of physical
illness, mental distress and head-aches with adverse solar transits when Mars or Venus is combust.
यद्य्टमे शनियुते प्रजातः प्राप्नोति दृष्टे विपदं च दुःखम् |
योगद्रयोश्च निधनं च कश्चित् |
योगोऽपरो मृत्युसमानदुःखम् ॥४८२६ ॥
4826. This sloka suffers compositional defects
and apparently has missing links which could be
known from the following: "Saturn in the 8th ... the
aspect of Saturn brings peril and grief. Should both
be there, there may be death. The latter one causes
grief akin to death.”
यद्भावस्याष्टमे मन्दे यद भावस्याष्टमेक्षिते |
तदभावः क्लेशमाप्नोति मूर्त्यादिफलमीरयेत् ॥४८२७ ॥
4827. Ranging from ascendant, count the 8th
place from a given Bhava. If the said place is
related to the planet Saturn by aspect or occupation,
the Bhava in question is destroyed.
नीचे चन्द्रे चेन्द्रयोगे मकरांशे च संस्थिते ।
मिथुनो जीव इत्याहर्वृषभो देहमुच्यते ॥४८२८ ॥
देहे पापग्रहे काले गोचरे देहजाडयकृत् |
जीवे तु जीवबाधा स्याद् द्वयोः पापे महाविपत् ॥४८२९ ॥
जीवराशिगते भौमे जन्माब्दे जन्मदायगे |
मान्यज्वरव्रणादीनि नेत्रपीडा क्वचित् क्वचित् ॥४८३० Il
4828 - 4830. Deha & Jeeva Signs: (a) If the
Moon is in her sign of debility with Capricorn
Navamsa, the sign Gemini is Jeeva Rasi while
Taurus is Deha Rasi. When amalefic planet comes
to the Deha Rasi in transit, it will be a period of
physical illness. Trouble to life-span will occur
with amalefic moving in Jeeva Rasi. Both transited
by malefics will cause a great calamity.
(b) Mars moving in Jeeva Rasi, during the Ist
year of birth will produce indigestion, ulcer and eye
troubles to some extent.
Notes: (a) The position of the Moon is in
Jyeshta 2nd quarter forming part of Mrigasira
group, Apa Savya Nakshatra, as per Kala Chakra
Dasa scheme. Then the Jeeva and Deha signs will
be as mentioned above.
इन्द्र>
मीनसौम्यदशारम्भे योगवान् कीर्तिमान् सुखी |
जन्मदाये पितासौख्यं द्वितीयाब्दे शुभावहम् ॥४८३१ ॥
सम्पदाये विवाहः स्याज्ज्येष्ठभ्रातुः श्रियावहः।

Chandra Kala Nadi 211
सम्पद्भुक्तौ eases गृहे गोभूषणक्षयम् ॥४८३२ ॥
सम्दाये पितृव्यस्य कश्चित् पुत्रपीडितः।
तस्य दारवियोगेन क्लेशं प्राणोति भूरिशः॥४८३३ ॥
4831 - 4833. According to Indra: (a) The dasa
of Mercury (Vimsottari) who at birth is in the sign
Pisces will cause prosperity and fame to one of
Indra Nadiamsa, Libra ascendant.
(b) The 1st dasa will bring forth happiness to
father. The 2nd year will produce auspiciousness.
(c) Second Dasa: Marriage of the native will
occur in this dasa. His elder brother will acquire
wealth. The first sub period of this dasa will cause
illness to the native, apart from loss of quadrupeds `
and ornaments for the family. The paternal uncle
will see his son under a spell of evils, due to loss of
spouse to his utter grief.
लग्नाष्टमगते केतावष्टमांशे च afer |
तदशान्तर्दशाकाले चोराद् भीतिः क्वचित् क्वचित् ॥४८३२४ ॥
धने राहौ धनच्छेदः स्वदशान्तर्दशासु च ।
ज्ातिकार्यकालपेन पश्चात् सौख्यं विनिर्दिशेत् cas ॥
सम्पदाये विपदभुक्तौ स्वपितृव्यसुतामयम् |
किंचित् प्राबल्यमाप्नोति eat भार्याविनाशवान् ॥४८३६ ॥
मातृपीडां मनस्तापं प्रबलज्ञातिनाशनम्।
तन्मूलादव्याकुलं चेति स्वपुत्रो नात्र संशयः॥४८३७ ॥
पूर्वार्धे जातकस्यैव भ्रातृपौडां विनिर्दिरेत्।
उत्तरार्धे सोख्यमेति ज्यष्ठभरातृसुतोत्सवम् ॥४८३८ ॥
4834 - 4838. (a) Ketu in the 8th both from natal
ascendant and Navamsa ascendant will produce,
fear from thieves to some extent during Ketu dasa,
Ketu’s sub period.
(b) Rahu in the 2nd will destroy one’s wealth
due to enmity with relatives in Rabu dasa, Rahu’s
sub period. Happiness (i.e. recovery of financial
losses) will occur after some interval.
(c) The 2nd dasa’s 2nd sub period will cause
illness but some prosperity to one of the sons of
paternal uncle. Another son will lose his spouse,
will be distressed due to troubles to mother and loss
of an important relative. As for the native, he will
see his own brother in the grip of evils, during the
first half of the 2nd dasa. Happiness will existin the
2ad half of the said dasa and the older brother will
obtain a progeny.
exam विपदाये क्षेमदाये च वा यदि।
लाभे शुक्रे प्रजातस्य निधिग्राप्तर्न संशयः॥४८३९ ॥
लाभस्थानगते काव्ये नीचांशरविवरिते |
शनिदृष्टियुते वापि निधिज्ञपरदारगः॥४८४० ॥
इन्द्रयोगे महद्भाग्यं बुधांशे वेश्यजीवनम् |
शूद्रश्चेदेति प्राबल्यं बहव्यापारवान् भवेत् ॥४८४१ ॥
4839 - 4841. Underground Treasure: (a)
Venus in the 11th will help the native locate
underground wealth in the 3rd or 4th dasa.
(b) Venus in the 11th (Leo) in aspect to Saturn
and avoiding debilitation Navamsa as well as the
Sun’s company (1.6. not being combust) will also
lead to knowledge of underground treasure. Further, the subject will be greatly prosperous and will
have illicit ties with others’ wives.
(c) Venus in the llth, with a Navamsa of
Mercury, will give livelihood through business
activities. A Soodra will attain fame as well as
abundant business gains.
रक्तवातज्वरं घोरं विदेशगमनं तथा |
राजचोरभयं दुखं केतोरन्तर्गते रवो ॥४८४२ ॥
सम्पदाये राहुभुक्तावेन्द्रांशकगते भृगो ।
इदमेव फलं चैव गुरुभुक्तौ शुभाशुभम् ॥४८४३ ॥
4842 - 4843. In the dasa of the Sunand in Ketu’s
sub period, the native will be troubled by worst
disorders of blood and windy imbalances. He will
migrate to a foreign land and will incur sadness on
account of the ruler and thieves. These effects will
occur also in Rahu’s sub period of the 2nd dasa in
case Venus is Indra Nadiamsa. Jupiter’s sub period
will cause a mix of good and bad results.
इन्द्रयोगे सर्वदाये पष्ठाधिपतिभुक्तिषु | ।
RAT व्याकुलं स्यादेहपीडां विनिर्दिशेत् ॥४८४४ ॥
केत्वन्तरेऽथ चैव शुक्रभुक्तो दलं व्यथा |
सम्पतारदशासन्थिकाले क्लेशफलं विदुः ॥४८४५ ॥
4844 - 4845. (a) The sub period of the 6th lord ©
Jupiter in various dasas will produce physical
ailments. With evil transits of the Sun, distress and
physical illness will prevail (in Jupiter’s sub period).
(b) One particular half of each of the sub
periods of Ketu and Venus will be a source of

212 Deva Keralam
distress.
(c) The learned prescribe uncomfortable effects for the end of the 2nd dasa.
चन्द्रदृष्टिग्रहातार ताराक्रान्तेषु राशिषु |
इन्द्रयोगे महद भाग्यं राजयोगो भविष्यति ॥४८४६ ॥
4846. In case of Indra Yoga occcurring in the
sign aspected by the Moon, great fortunes and Raja
Yoga will arise.
Notes: "Chandra dishti graha taara" should
read as "Chandra drishti griheetaaram" while the
expression "Taaraakranteshu" is a misplaced one.
शुक्रपाके चेन्द्रयोगे राहुभुक्तौ महाविपत्।
ज्वरभीतिं च लभते Baya तथेव च ॥४८४७ ॥
राजतं चन्द्रमभ्यर्च्य दानं कुर्यद्विचक्षणः।
रन्ध्राधिपदशाकाले त्वत्यन्तं क्रूरमादिरोत् ॥४८४८ ॥
स्वसमानजनक्लेशं सर्वनाडीफलं वदेत् |
सर्वयोगे BAY शुभाशुभफलं समम् ॥४८४९ ॥
4847 -4849. (a) Venus dasa, Rahu’s sub period,
will cause a great danger and fear of fever. So also
the sub period ruled by the Moon. The silver image
of the Moon god should be worshipped and donated
(o overcome these evils).
(b) The dasa of the 8th lord will be exceedingly
malefic. It will cause anguish to people equal to the
native (in the family).
(c) In case of second half of the Nadiamsa in
question, good and bad effect will be equal. ("Sarva
Yoge" meaning "in all yogas” is not a proper
expression.)
इन्द्रयोगे धने राहौ भोगी वर्गोत्तांशगे ।
वाल्ये सुजार्वदेहः स्यान्मध्ये प्रबलयोगवान् |
ऋणवान् वार्धके किंचित्परवित्तापहारकः ॥४८५० ॥
कुलाभिमानी स्वकुले प्रसिद्धो
रोगेण सन्तप्त शरीरभाक् स्यात् |
राजाधिराजैर्बहुमानितश्च
विद्रज्जनैः पूजितकौर्विमान् स्यात् ॥४८५१ ॥
वगेत्तिमं विना राहौ द्वितीये ऋणवान् सुतः।
वर्गोत्तमे शुभं चैति शुभयोगे सुकीर्षिमान् ॥४८५२ ॥
4850 - 4852. Rahu in 2nd: (a) Should Rahu be
in the 2nd (Scorpio) in Vargottama Navamsa, the
Subject will be given to enjoy pleasures. He will
incur diseases in childhood. In the middle of his
life, he will enjoy a great deal of prosperity. Old
age will place him in debts and he will, to some
extent, steal others’ wealth. He will be attached to
his race, be famous among his family members and
will suffer from physical illnesses. He will be
honoured by the king of kings, be revered by
scholars-and will earn fame.
(b) If the said Rahu is not in Vargottama, the
native’s son will be in the grip of debts. Vargottama
position will be auspicious.
(c) Rahu conjunct a benefic (in Scorpio) will
lead to fame.
लग्नाधिपस्य यः WAM सर्वदायगे |
अतीव क्लेशकार्याणि मित्रभुक्तौ धनागमम् ॥४८५३ ॥
समग्रहान्ते काले शुभाशुभफलं समम् |
तात्कालिकमित्र्रहस्यान्तरदयि शुभाधिकम् ॥४८५४ ॥
शुभयोगे शुभं चैति Gait च प्रजायते |
Rarer Baa लग्नाधिपदशासुखम् ॥४८५५ ॥
भाग्याधिपदशाकाले तृतीयांशे शुभाधिकम्।
लाभाधिपदशाकाले रन्धराधिपदशान्त्यगे ॥४८५६ ॥
मात्ररिष्टं च लभते तिवन्द्रयोगसमुद् भवः।
सर्वदाये चनद्रभुक्तावन्तरान्तर्दशेऽथ वा ॥४८५७ ॥
विषचोरभयप्राप्तिः स्वगेहे नात्रसंशयः।
भोमान्तरे देहजाड्यं बलवानन्यमासके ॥४८५८ ॥
स्वपिता व्याकुलं चैति पश्चात् सौख्यं तथेव च।
लाभाधिपशाकाले कर्माधिपतिभुकतिषु ॥४८५९ ॥
राहुदोषवशात् क्लेशमादायादधिकव्ययम् |
भ्रातृक्लेशं गृहच्छिद्रं लाभाधिपतिदायगे ॥४८६० ॥
दशान्ते व्याकुलं चैति दशासन्धो क्वचिद् भवेत् |
कर्माधिपदशाकाले चेन्द्रयोगोदभवस्य च ॥४८६१।
पत्रप्राबल्ययोगेन नित्यं सन्तोषमादिशेत्।
षष्ठेशांशे तत्िकोणे स्फुटयोगं गते शनौ ॥४८६२ ॥
सोदरादिजनक्लेशो ज्ञातिशोको भविष्यति |
अन्तरान्तर्दशामार्गे कर्मलाभेशदायगे ॥४८६३ ॥
फलं विस्तारमाप्नोति हयन्रांशजनितस्तथा |
4853 - 4863142. (a) General: The sub period of
a planet that is an adversary to the lord of the
ascendant will in the various dasas cause much
anguish in one’s undertakings. The sub period
ruled by frieridly pianet will lead to acquisition of

Chandra Kala Nadi 213
wealth. A planet that is neutral to the ruler of the
ascendant will only produce such effects which are
just neutral. The sub period of a planet which is a
temporary friend to the lord of the ascendant will
give exceedingly auspicious results in various dasas.
A planet that is conjunct a benefic will in its sub
period prove auspicious.
(b) For a native of Indra Nadiamsa, Libra
ascendant, the dasa of the lord of the ascendant will
give happiness. Exceedingly auspicious effects
will occur in the dasa of the 9th lord. The end of the
8th lord’s dasa (i.e. Venus dasa) will produce evil
effects concerning one’s mother.
(c) The sub periods as well as sub-sub periods
of the Moon in various dasas will cause fear from
poison and thieves to the family members.
(d) The sub period of Mars will cause physical
ailments except when the Sun is in strong (or
favourable) transits. Distress to father to be followed by happiness (or recovery) will also form
part of the adverse effects.
(e) The dasa of the 11th lord (Sun) and the sub
period of the 10th lord (Moon) will cause anguish |
and expenditure crossing one’s income. This will
be due to blemished Rahu. The said dasa will cause
troubles to brother and other family members. End
of the Sun’s dasa will result in distress. Its junction
(with the Moon’s dasa) will, to some extent, cause
distress.
(f) The dasa of the Moon will cause uninterrupted happiness due to prosperity of one’s son.
(g) Saturn moving in the sign caused by the
Navamsa occupied by the 6th lord (Jupiter) or a
trine thereof will lead to anguish to co-born and
grief to relatives. With the help of sub periods, the
‘dasas ruled by the lords of the 10th and 11th be
estimated in detail.
धनाधिपदशाकाले स्वदारादिसुतामयम् ॥४८६४ II
इन्द्रयोगे स्वपुत्रस्य द्वितीयस्थग्रहान्तरे |
FRAY कालमृत्युः साधनेशदशाविपत् ॥४८६५ ॥
इन्द्रंशकतेग शुक्रे तिविन्द्रयोगसमुदभवः।
पश्चादुत्तमजन्मा स्यान्मधुमासे मृतिं वदेत् ॥४८६६ ॥
योगनाडीफलं सत्यमेनद्राशे जनितस्तथा |
+ वंशोपरि सुभाग्यापिं त्रिषष्टिपरमायुषम् ॥४८६७ Il
4864 - 4867. (a) The dasa of Mars will cause
illness to wife etc. In this dasa, the sub period of the
planet placed in the 2nd (Scorpio) will lead to the -
native’s timely end. `
(b) The 6th dasa will lead to great calamity.
(c) Venus in Indra Nadiamsa will cause an
excellent re-birth. The native’s death will occur in
the month of Chaitra. Effects reproduced from
Yoga Nadi will bear truth.
(d) The subject will achieve great prosperity
after the age of 20. His total life-span will be 63.
॥पीनलग्ने शीतलांशः ॥
॥शनिशुक्रफलम् ॥
सुधाषष्ठंयशगे मन्दे चरराशिचतुष्टये |
शीतव्छांशे प्रजातश्च गौरवर्णः शुभाकृतिः॥४८६८ ॥
4868. Pisces Ascendant - Seetala Nadiamsa:
Saturn in one of the four movable signs in Sudha
Shashtiamsa will give fair complexion and a handsome appearance to one born in Pisces ascendant,
Seetala Nadiamsa.
मीने लग्ने सुते मन्दे भार्गवेण समन्विते |
शीतलांशे प्रजातश्च श्यामवर्णशरीरवान् ॥४८६९ ॥
4869. One born in Pisces ascendant while
Saturn is in Cancer in the Sth along with Venus will
be black-bodied.
हरिणांशकगे जीवे शीतलांशेऽर्कनन्दने |
मीनलग्ने प्रजातश्च ज्येष्टभ्रातृयुतः सुखी ॥४८७० ॥
स्वयं तृतीयगर्भः स्यात् पश्चाद् भ्रातृविनाशवान् |
सोदरैश्चयुतो मानी पितृभाग्यप्रतापवान् ॥४८७१ ॥
शीतव्छंशकगे मन्दे चरराशिचतुष्टये |
शुक्रयोगे Gerad विद्यावान् बुद्धिमान् सुखी ॥४८७२ ॥
4870 - 4872. One will be endowed with older
brothers if Jupiter and Saturn are in order in Harina
and Seetala Nadiamsa. He will be the 3rd issue of
the family, will lose his younger co-born, be honourable and be valorous (i.e. arrogant) because of
his father’s prosperity.
केतुयोगे पिता बाल्ये क्लेशेनात्यन्तकरशितः।
पश्चाद् ्रातृविही नश्च ज्येष्ठभ्रातृविनाशवान् ॥४८७३ ॥
4873. Saturn - Venus Yoga: For one born in
the subject Nadiamsa, the planet Saturn in a movable sign in the company of Venus will usher a great

deal of wealth. One will be educated, intelligent
and happy.
देशान्तरे भाग्ययोगं भगिनीद्रयवान् पिता ।
कलत्रद्यवान् रागी वातप्रकृतिदेहवान् ॥४८७४ ॥
स्वभुजाजितसंपन्नो नरवाहनयोगवान् |
मन्दे केतुयुते जातः पिता वैष्णवहेतुना ॥४८७५ |
अतीव क्लेशमाप्नोति राजद्वारे कलापवान् |
केतुशुक्रो यदेकांशा वसितेन समन्वितौ ॥४८७६ ॥
शीतलांशकगे मन्दे वेष्णवद्वेषवान् पिता |
तन्मूलादव्याकुलं चेति प्रामभूम्यर्थनाशवान् ॥४८७७ ॥
जन्मदाये मनस्तापं जननात् पूर्वगे तथा ।
सार्धद्विवर्षपर्यन्तं स्वपिता क्लेशभाग्भवेत् ॥४८७८ ॥
लग्नात् पञ्चमगे मन्दे क्लेशं चत्वारि वत्सरम् |
पश्चाद् भाग्याभि वृद्धि च योगं जन्मदशान्त्यगे ॥४८७९ ॥
लग्नात् पञ्चमगे मन्दे शीतलांशे पिता व्यथाम् |
शीतज्वरभयार्तश्च ह्यतिसारप्रपीडितः॥४८८० ॥
जन्मदाये मनस्तापं नानाव्याकुलवान् पिता |
सोदयोत्पत्तिनाशादि मसूरीज्वरपीडनम् ॥४८८१ ॥
चन्द्रक्ेत्रगदोषेण स्वपिता ज्वरपीडितः।
तद्ोषपरिहारार्थं शान्ति कुर्याद्विचक्षणः ॥४८८२ ॥
लग्नात् पञ्चमगे मन्दे शीतालंशोद् भवस्य च।
तिलपात्रपरादनेन पिता आरोग्यादिसौख्यवान् ॥४८८३ ॥
श्रीलक्षमीप्रतिमादानात् पश्चाद्भाग्ययुतः पिता।
राजद्वारे शुभं चेव शत्रुनाशं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥४८८४ ॥
rat —
श्रीलक्षमीप्रतिमादानं केनकाज्यनिरीक्षणम् |
पश्चाद्भाग्याभिवृद्धिः स्यात् पिता सोख्ययुतः सुखी ॥४८८५ ti
या मेऽलक्मर्यश्च दौस्थ्यं स्ाङ्गषु व्यवस्थितम् |
तत्सर्वं शमयाज्य त्वं श्रियं पुष्टि च वर्धय ॥४८८६ ॥
कांस्यपात्रे प्रकुर्वीत ह्याज्यं प्रस्थचतुष्टयम् |
निष्कमात्र प्रमाणं च दक्षिणादानमाचरेत् ॥४८८७ ॥
देवज्ञाय प्रदानेन ह्यायुरारोग्यवान् सुखी |
अलक्ष्मीनाशनात् सद्यः पिता लक्ष्मीकटाक्षवान् ॥४८८८ ॥
4874 - 4888. (a) Saturn - Ketu Yoga: Should
Ketu be with Saturn in a movable sign, the Yoga
would cause the following effects in respect of
one’s father. He would have a very thin body due
to anguish in the native’s childhood. He would not
have any younger co-born. His older ones would
Deva Keralam
also incur destruction. His prosperity would be in
a foreign land. He would have two sisters, two
wives, be passionate and will have a windy physique. He would become wealthy due to his own
efforts, possess conveyances, incur much enmity
with Vaishnavitesand as a consequence would face
troubles with the king.
(b) If Saturn and Ketu join in one and the same
Navamsa and are in the company of Venus (in Rasi
chart), the native’s father would dislike
Viashnavites. As a result, he would face distress,
and will lose villages, lands and wealth. Prior to the
native’s birth, or in the first dasa of the native,
father would incur the said losses. For a period of
214 years, father would be anguished.
(c) Saturn in the 3rd in Navamsa will cause
anguish for 4 years after which father’s prosperity
will increase. The end of the native’s Ist dasa
would cause prosperity to father.
(d) Saturn in Cancer in the Sth would cause
distress to the father of the native of Pisces ascendant, Seetala Nadiamsa. He would suffer from fever
with cold fits and from dysentery. The native’s first
dasa will cause mental worries and various kinds of
anguish to father. His co-born would not survive.
He would be troubled by small-pox. Due to his
position in the sign owned by the Moon 6.6.
Cancer), Saturn will acquire the blemish of causing
fever (i.e. the above health problems) for which
remedies be sought. Donation of a vessel filled
with sesamum seeds will cause health etc. to father.
Donation of an image of Goddess Lakshmi will
cause him wealth at a later phase. He would incur
auspicious effects in the royal circle and will
destroy his enemies.
(e) Another Authority: Donation of an image
of Lakshmi and sight of one’s face in ghee in a
golden vessel will cause prosperity to father later
on, and will cause him happiness. The Mantra
given in sloka 4886 should be recited by father.
Brass vessel filled with ghee weighing one “Adhaka”
along with a gold coin should be gifted away to the
astrologer whereupon health and destruction of
poverty will occur, and will father tum wealthy.
Notes: The results mentioned from “a” to “e”
above apply to father of Pisces native. ;
(€) “Kanakaajya Nirikshanam” strictly means

Chandra Kala Nadi 215
seeing gold and ghee which makes no sense. Hence
ithas been interpreted as “vessel filled with ghee”.
Donation of such a vessel is also discussed in the
ensuing slokas.
“Aajya Nirikshanam” is a classical remedy in
the context of which father sees the face of his
inauspicious baby in a ghee-filled vessel for the
first time. This is done at the end of the prescribed
Vedic ritual for birth of a child, for example, in
Mula Nakshatra.
Prastha = 1/4th of an Adhaka or 32 Palas;
Prastha Chatushtaya = 1 Adhaka (128 Palas) - an
ancient measurement.
लग्नात् पञ्चमगे शुक्रे पापद्रयसमन्विते |
कनकाज्यप्रदानेन गृहे लक्ष्मीकराक्षवान् ॥४८८९ ॥
पञ्चमान्दात् परं भाग्यं स्वपितानित्यसोख्यवान् |
वेदान्दान्ते क्वचित् सौख्यं पञ्चमाब्दे शुभाशुभम् ॥४८९० ॥
4889 - 4890. Venus in Cancer: Seen from
Pisces ascendant, if Venus is found in Cancer with
two malefics, donation of ghee in a golden vessel
. will bring forth wealth to the family. After the Sth
year of the native, prosperity will occur and his
father will endlessly be happy. The 4th year will
give him some happiness while the 5th year will
record mixed trends.
जन्मदाये जन्मदेशे विप्लवेन प्रजावधि ।
सम्पदाये शीतलांशे मन्दे भाग्याभिवृद्धयः॥४८९१ ॥
राजामात्य जनक्लेशं मध्यखण्डे विशेषतः।
तृतीयांशेऽपमृत्युश्च स्वपितुः पितुनाशनम् ॥४८९२ ॥
पितृसौख्यं ततः पश्चाज्जन्मतारदशान्त्यगे |
पितृसोख्यं धनप्राप्पिर्भेदभ्रातृश्रियावहा ॥४८९३ ॥
तुलांशे कटके मन्दे मीनलग्नोद्भवस्य च।
शनौ जन्मांशपर्यन्तं पितृसोख्यं न विद्यते ॥४८९४ ॥
कन्याशनिस्थिते काले सिहान्त्यादौ क्वचित् सुखम् |
सपितुः पितृनाशः स्याद भाग्यजन्मदशान्त्यगे ॥४८९५ ॥
लग्नात् पञ्चमगे मन्दे भार्गवेण समन्विते |
जन्मतारदशान्त्यादौ विदेशे भाग्यवान् पिता ॥४८९६ ॥
कन्याशनिस्थिते काले जन्मदाये श्रियायुतः।
4891 - 4896142. (a) Irrelevant: The first year of
birth will cause calamity to people of the country.
(b) Saturn (in Cancer) will cause prosperity in
the 2nd dasa,in case of Pisces ascendant, Seetala
Nadiamsa. The middle part will cause anguish
through kings and ministers in a special manner.
He will face fear of untimely danger during the last
one third part of the said dasa and will lose his father
after which he will experience happiness. End of
the native’s first dasa will cause happiness to father
apart from acquisition of wealth. He would beget
step-brother’s wealth.
(b) Libra Navamsa: Saturn in Cancer with
Libra Navamsa will deny happiness to father till he
crosses in transit the sign denoted by the Navamsa
of the natal ascendant. In the end of Leo and in
Virgo, he will grant some happiness to father, but
the native’s paternal grand-father will die in the
end of the first dasa.
(c) Saturn and Venus in the Sth from the
ascendant Pisces will cause prosperity to father in
a foreign land.
(d) Saturn transiting in Virgo will cause wealth
to father in the native’s first dasa.
Notes: Results mentioned above also apply to
father of the native.
(b) “Sapitu’” should read as “Svapituh” and
“Bhagya Janma dasa” as “Janma Dasa” only.
` कन्याशनिस्थिते काले गोचरे मिथुने गुरौ ॥४८९७ ॥
सम्पदाये जातकस्य मौञ्जीबन्धनमादिशेत् |
जन्मदाये जन्मभ्रातृगोचरे लग्नगे शनो ॥४८९८ ॥
मेषान्ते वृषभे जीवे विवाहोत्सवसंभ्रमम्।
मेषे गुरुस्थिते काले जन्मदाये पितुः सुखम् ॥४८९९ ॥
भेदभ्रातुसुतप्राप्तिः पितृसौख्यं विनिर्दिशेत् |
मीने गुरुस्थिते काले सोदरोत्पत्तिभ्रातृमान् ॥४९०० ॥
स्वज्येष्ठभगिनीपीडां मीनान्त्यादौ क्रिये क्वचित् |
शीतलांशकगे मन्दे पश्चात् सोदरनाशनम् ॥४९०१ ॥
स्वभेदभगिनी भर्व राजद्वारे प्रवेशवान् |
सम्पदाये महदभाग्यं स्वभेदभगिनीसुखम् ॥४९०२ ॥
तद्भर्ता प्रबलश्चैव शीतलां शोद्भवस्य च।
कश्चित् स्वभेदभगिनीभर्ता पितृवियोगवान् ॥४९०३ ॥
4897 - 4903. (a) When Saturn moves in Virgo,
Jupiter found in Gemini will cause thread ceremony to the native of Pisces ascendant in his 2nd
dasa.
(b) His marriage will occur with Satum moving
in the ascendant while Jupiter is in end of Aries or

216 Deva Keralam
in Taurus.
(c) Jupiter’s transit in Aries during the 1st dasa
will cause happiness to father. Progeny will be
born to a step-brother. In Pisces, Jupiter will cause
evils to one’s elder sister.
(d) Saturn (in Cancer) will destroy younger coborn in case of birth in Seetala Nadiamsa, Pisces
ascendant. The native’s step-sister’s husband will
enter in royal service. His 2nd dasa will give great
fortunes. His step-sister will achieve happiness.
Her husband will prosper but he may face the
possibility of losing his father.
Notes: (b) “Janma Daye Janma Bhratru
Gochare” however disallows a meaningful interpretation of this part of instructions.
स्वभेदश्रातृमूलेन सोख्यवान् पितृहेतुना |
शीतलांशकगे मन्दे महाभाग्यंशगे शशी ॥४९०४॥
सोदर्यौ दे चिरायुष्यौ भ्रातृत्रयसुपूजितः।
भेदभ्राता चिरायुष्मान् भगिनीद्रयवान्ऽमृते |
मृतवन्ध्यापतिश्चैव कालान्तरसुपुत्रवान् ॥४९०५ ॥
स्वग्येष्ठभगिनीभर्ता विपदाये श्रिया युतः।
सम्पदाये तृतीयांशे भगिनीशस्तु सोख्यवान् ॥४९०६ ॥
4904. 4906. (a) The native will enjoy happiness on account of his step-brother (and) father.
(b) For a native of Seetala Nadiamsa, Pisces
ascendant, Saturn in Cancer and the Moon in Maha
Maya Nadiamsa will give the following effects. He
wilk have two long-living sisters and be respected
by his 3 brothers. His step-brother will be endowed
with longevity, will have two sisters, will marry a
barren female and will beget progeny after delay.
The native’ selder sister’s husband will beget wealth
in 3rd dasa. He will be happy in the last part of 2nd
dasa through brother-in-law.
Notes: (b) Maha Bhagyamsa should read as
Maha Maya Nadiamsa which is again a misnomer
for Mahamari Nadiamsa. “Sasi” in sloka 4904
should read ac “Sani”, a repetition for “Manda”.
Thus the condition is the involvement of Saturn
only, to the exclusion of the Moon. The aphorism
now will be: Satum in Mahamari Nadiamsa in
Cancer will give the said effects to one born in
Pisces Nadiamsa. = |.
Also see sloka 4907 infra.
Seetala Nadiamsa could be found in the notes
under sloka 1096, page 99, Book 1, while Maha
Maya (rightly Mahamari) Nadiamsa could be located in the under sloka 1133, page 102, Book 1.
लग्नात् सप्तमगे मन्दे महामायांशनाडिगे ।
महामारी भयप्रापिर्बाल्ये सोदरनाशनम् ॥४९०७ Il
मातामहीचिरायुष्या मातुलद्रययोगवान् |
मातुलैको विनाशः स्यात् चिरायुष्योऽपरः स्मृतः ॥४९०८ ॥
4907 - 4908. Saturn in the 7th (Virgo) in Maha
Maya (read Maha Mari) Nadiamsa will cause
troubles from cholera during the childhood. His
cobom will be destroyed. His maternal grandmother will be long-lived. He will have two
maternal uncles out of whom one will be destroyed
and the other will be blessed with longevity.
लग्नेशांशे तत्िकोणे स्फुटयोगं गते शनौ ।
माहवुलारिष्टमाप्नोति मातुर्माता मनोव्यथाम् ॥४९०९ ॥
सम्पददाये शीतलांशे तुलांशे चापगे शनो ।
मातामह्यस्त्वरिष्टं स्यान्मातुलश्च विचारवान् ॥४९१० Il
SUM जन्मदाये मातुलस्य सुतोत्सवः।
स्वभेदभगिनी चैव ह्यायुष्मन्तं च पुत्रकम् ॥४९११॥
स्वपितुर्भाग्यकालः स्यात्तुलाराहौ क्रिये गुरो ।
जन्मदाये भाग्यवृद्धी राजद्वारे शुभाधिकम् ॥४९१२ ॥
शनिप्रथमपर्ययि जन्मराशो महत् सुखम् |
स्वपिता राजयोगं च विशेषण तुलाशनो ॥४९१३ ॥
षष्ठेशांशे तत्तिकोणे स्फुटयोगं गते शनौ |
स्वपिता मित्रवर्गेषु क्लेशं प्रापनोति after: ive ex tl
षष्ठाधिपदशाकाले षष्ठेशांश्त्रिकोणगे |
स्फुटयोगं गते मन्दे स्वपितुः पितृनाशनम् ॥४९१५ ॥
जयेष्ठभ्रातुः स्वल्पपीडा बन्धुवर्गे हयुपद्रवः।
पितृष्वसुः सुतादीनि दशान्ते व्याकुलं महत् ॥४९१६ tl
4909 - 4913. Transits: (a) When Saturn transits the sign represented by the Navamsa occupied
by the lord of the ascendant (Jupiter) or a trine
thereof, one’s maternal uncle will face evils and
maternal grand-mother will be mentally distressed.
(b) In the 2nd dasa, Saturn moving in Sagittarius with Libra Navamsa will cause the death of
maternal grand-mother and as a consequence (the
other) maternal uncle will have a change of place.
(©) In the 1st dasa, Saturn moving in Virgo will
give a son to his maternal uncle. So also, his step-

Chandra Kala Nadi 217
sister will beget a long-living son.
(d) Jupiter in Aries and Rabu in Libra will cause
prosperity and exceedingly auspicious effects
through the king, to the native’s father during Ist
dasa
(e) Saturn’s Ist round of transit on the natal
Moon sign will give abundant happiness and Raja
Yoga effects (prosperity) to one’s father. If it
happens to be Libra, these effects will multiply.
(f) When the Sun-occupied Navamsa or its
trine is in transit by Saturn, one;s father will face
much anguish through his friends. In the dasa of the
Sun, the said transit will kill one’s father. Elder
brother and kinsfolk willalso incursome evils. End
of the dasa will cause distress to a paternal uncle on
account of his offspring.
अनावृष्टिहते देशे लोके effet भयम्।
देशे राजान्तरं स्याच्च तत्काले भाग्यवान् पिता ॥४९१७ tl
4917. Lack of rains and famine will spread in
the country and the king will be changed(?) At that
time, father will become prosperous.
सम्पदाये श्रियं नित्यं तुलान्ते वृश्चिके शनौ ।
मधुमासे शुक्लपक्षे शीतलां शे विवाहवान् ॥४९१८ ॥
4918. The 2nd dasa will give endless wealth.
His marriage will occur with Saturn moving in the
end of Libra or in Scorpio, in the month of Chaitra,
in bright lunar half.
विपदाये तृतीयांशे कुम्भान्ते मीनगे शनौ ।
शीतलांशे पितारिष्टं रयोविशतिवत्सरे ॥४९१९ ॥
4919, Saturn’s journey in the end of Aquarius,
or in Pisces, will cause death of father. At that time,
the native will be 33 years of age and be in the last
one third part of the 3rd dasa.
शीतलांशकगे मन्दे ह्यापत्संन्यासवान् पिता ।
भाग्याधिपदशाकाले मृतिं च क्रूरभुक्तिषु ॥४९२० ॥
4920. Saturn (in Cancer) will cause ascetism to
father due toacalamity. He will die in the 9th lord’s
dasa (i.e. of Mars), and in a sub period of a malefic.
सूर्याशगे तत्तरिकोणे स्फुटयोगं गते गुरौ ।
स्वपिता दहेजाद्यादि PUTS मनोव्यथाम् ॥४९२१ ॥
शीतलांशकगे मन्दे क्रूरराशिविनिर्णयः।
क्रूरमासमिति प्राहुर्यं जयेत् कालवित्तमः॥४९२२ ॥
कुलीर्सिहालिङ्ञषे कुम्भे नक्रे दिवाकरे |
्रुरशिमिति परोक्तं क्रूरमासं तथेव च ॥४९२३ ॥
गोचरे क्रूररशीषु राहुकेतुशनैश्चराः।
स्फुटयोगं गतास्तत्र स्वजनादिग्रपीडिताः॥४९२४॥
स्वपिता क्रूरमासेषु क्रूरराशौ शनैश्चरे |
सञ्चारकाले क्लेशं च पित्रादीनां मनोव्यथा ॥४९२५ ॥
सर्वदाये फलं चैव क्रूप्रहदशान्तरे।
पित्रादिदेहजाडयं च स्वजनारिष्टमादिशेत् ॥४९२६ ॥
मेषराशिगते मन्दे शीतलां शोद्भवस्य च।
पितृसौख्यं सुभाग्याप्तिः शुभखेचरदायगे ॥४९२७ ॥
राजयोगं च लभते क्षेमदाये विशेषतः।
चतुर्विंशात् परं भाग्यं स्वप्राबल्यं भवेद धुवम् ॥४९२८ ॥
4921 - 4928. (a) Saturn’s journey in the sign
denoted by the Navamsa occupied by the Sun or a
trine there of will cause physical illness to father.
He will be in anguish with evil transits of the Sun.
For this position of Saturn, malefic signs should be
decided. Cancer, Leo, scorpio, Pisces, Aquarius
and Capricorn transited by the Sun are the evil
months according to learned astrologers for the
subject Nadiamsa.
(b) The nodes and Saturn in the said evil signs
will cause evils to one’s kinsfolk. When Saturn and
the Sun transit in the said signs, father and others
will be anguished.
(c) The sub periods ruled by malefics in the
various dasas will cause physical illness to father,
and evils to one’s own men.
(d) Saturn moving in Aries will cause happiness and prosperity to father. This will be in the
dasa of a benefic planet.
(e) 4th dasa will cause Raja Yoga effects. The
period after 24th year will bring forth prosperity for
the native.
शुभराशीं गते चन्द्रे जीवे केन्द्रत्रिकोणगे |
शीतलांशे राजयोगं नरवाहनवान् भवेत् ॥४९२९ ॥
सप्त्विशात् परं भाग्यं गृहे गोधनसङ्कलम् ।
प्रबलोद्योगलाभादि राजद्वारे सुकीर्तिमान् ॥४९३० ॥
4929 - 4930. The Moon in a benefic’s sign
while Jupiteris in an angle ora trine will cause Raja
Yogaand conveyances. After 27th year, prosperity will dawn. The family will accumulate cows

218 Deva Keralam
and grains. Wide fame will come to him due toa
powerful job in the royal circle.
राहुदाये मन्दभुक्तौ Haat तथेव च।
स्वदेहायासरोगेण योगकाले प्रपीडितः ॥४९३१ ॥
सूर्यान्तरिऽपमत्युश्च योगकाले महाविपत् |
श्वासकासज्वरेणेव देहपीडां विनिर्दिशेत् ॥४९३२ ॥
दोषपरिहारार्थं शान्ति कुर्याद्विचक्षणः।
are मन्दभुक्तौ मित्रपरभुविनाशनम ॥४९३३ ॥
ज्वरपीडा क्वचिच्चैव राजान्तरवशात् सुखम् |
शीतलांशे राहुदाये कन्याचनद्रोद् भवस्य च ॥४९२३४ ॥
राजयोगफलं सत्यं मध्यखण्डे न संशयः।
अग्रहार प्रतिष्ठाता नित्यं राजोपचारवान् ॥४९३५ ॥
मित्रद्रोहवशाद्रोगी राहुदाये प्रपीडितः।
पश्चादारोग्यमाप्नोति दशान्ते क्लेशवान् सुखी ॥४९२३६ ॥
4931 - 4936. (a) Rahu Dasa: The sub periods
of Saturn and Ketu in the dasa of Rahu will give the
said results. At the time of prosperity, one will be
troubled by physical illness. The sub period of the
Sun will promote fear of untimely death, apart from
causing a great danger, at the time of prosperity,
due to disorders of lungs. To overcome this
blemish, remedies should be undertaken.
(b) Saturn’s sub period in the 4th dasa will
cause destruction of friends and the ruler due to
fever(?) After a change of the king, the native will
be happy.
(c) Incase of Seetala Nadiamsa, Pisces ascendant, the Moon should at birth be in Virgo. As a
result, the middle one-third portion of Rahu’s dasa
will give effects of Raja Yoga. One will construct
a colony for Brahmins (i.e. will do some public
service) and will be at the services of the ruler.
However, this dasa will cause him (health) troubles
due to betraying friends. Later on, he will enjoy
sound health. The end of the dasa will promote
anguish.
कर्माधिपदशाकाले कीरान्ते धनुषिशनौ |
मात्रारिषटं विजानीयाल्लाभेशां श त्रिकोणगे ॥४९२७ ॥
4937. Danger to Mother: The dasa of Jupiter
will cause danger to mother, when Saturn moves in
the end of Scorpio or in Sagittarius in a trine to his
natal Navamsa position.
शीतलांशकगे मन्दे भार्गवेण समन्विते |
्षेमदाये राजयोगं द्वितीयोद्राहयोगवान् ॥४९३८ ॥
4938. Raja Yoga: The conjunction of Saturn
and Venus will cause effects of Raja Yoga and remarriage in the 4th dasa.
धनेशांशे तत्ररिकोण स्फुटयोगं गते शनो ।
दारारिष्टं च लभते दृष्टराशौ तथेव च ॥४९३९ ॥
amet सिंहशनो aoe विनिर्दिशेत् |
मिथुने दारपीडा स्याततद्रंशे जननाशनम् ॥४९४० |
PU क्रूरमासे मन्दे गोचरकालगे |
SRE च लभते क्षेमदाये न संशयः॥४९४१ ॥
4939 - 4941. Danger to Spouse: (a) Saturn
journeying in the sign identical with the Navamsa
occupied by the 2nd lord (Mars), or a trine thereof,
or in a sign aspected by Mars, will kill the native’s
wife (in the 4th dasa).
(b) When the 4th dasa is in operation, Saturn’s
sojourn in Leo will (alternatively) kill one’s spouse.
While in Gemini, Saturn will cause anguish to her
destroying the members of her family. Her death
will occur when Saturn is in adverse signs with
simultaneously adverse solar movements.
सख्ीप्रजाबहुलाः सन्ति कन्याचन्द्रेद्विपुत्रवान् |
PTET सुसन्तानं द्वौ पुत्रो चिरजीविनो ॥४९४२ ॥
4942. Progeny: The Moon in Virgo (in the 7th)
will give a number of female issues and two male
issues. Two daughters will have worthy progeny
out of whom two sons will be long-lived.
मीनलग्ने सुताधीशे मकरांशे च संस्थिते ।
मसूरिकाज्चरेणेव पुत्रनाशेन कशितः॥४९४३ ॥
4943. Death of Son: For Pisces ascendant, the
Sth lord in Capricorn Navamsa (apparently in the
sign Virgo) will cause an emaciated body to the
native due to death of his son on account of smallpox.
कर्माधिपदशाकाले लाभाधिपतिभुक््तिषु |
भेदभ्रातुररिष्टं स्याच्चतुश्चत्वारिवत्सरे ॥४९४४ ॥
4944. Family Danger: When the native will be
in his 44th year, in the dasa of the 10th lord (Jupiter)
and in the sub period of the 11th lord (Saturn), his
step-brother’s son will be endangered.

Chandra Kala Nadi 219
लाभे राहुदशाकाले रन्धराधिपतिभुक्तिषु।
Few: प्रपीडा स्यात् षट््रिंशाब्दे मनोव्यथा ॥४९४५ ॥
4945. Should Rahu at birth be in the 11th, his
dasa and the sub period of 8th lord (Venus) will
cause intense evils and mental distress, in the 36th
‘year, to the step-brother.
कनिष्ठभरातृपीडादि तुलांशे वृश्चिके शनौ |
चापे शनिस्थिते काले कर्माधिपतिदायगे ॥४९४६ ॥
मीनलने प्रजातस्य रन्ध्राधिपतिभुक्तिषु |
प्रदभ्रातृपरपीडा स्यात् षटत्रिंशाब्दे मनोव्यथा ॥४९४७ Il
कनिष्ठभ्रातृपीडादि gat वृश्चिके शनो |
भेदभ्रातृविनाशेन क्लेशं प्राप्नोति भूरिशः॥४९४८ ॥
भेदभ्रातृवधुमृत्युः स्वभर्तानुगमिष्यति |
स्वसोदरस्य भार्या च स्वभर््रानुगमिष्यति ॥४९४९ ॥
कर्माधिपदशाकाले शीतलांश इदं फलम्।
स्वप्रभोश्चैव तत्काले atte च विनिर्दिशेत ॥४९५० ॥
4946 - 4950. (a) Saturn moving in Scorpio with
Libra Navamsa will produce evils to one’s younger
brother etc.
(b) The effects mentioned in sloka 4945 can
also occur in the dasa of 10th lord and in the sub
period of 8th lord when Saturn moves in Sagittarius
in the 36th year. The person will incur a lot of grief
due to loss of step-brother whose wife will also give
up her life on the pyre of her husband. Thus have
been declared the effects for the dasa of the 10th
lord. In this dasa his king will also be endangered(?)
Notes: The Ist line of 4946 and that of 4948 are
identical. The 2nd liné of sloka 4949 is also a
repetition with partial change of 1st line unless and
until it relates to full brother and his spouse.
प्रत्यगे प्रभुनाशः स्यात् क्षेमदाये तथेव च।
बहुखीवधपापेन राजपुत्रस्य चामयम् ॥४९५१ ॥
जातकस्य महद् भाग्यं कर्माधिपतिदायगे |
कनिष्ठभ्रातृभार्यादिज्ञातिवर्गे सुतामयम् ॥४९५२ ॥
मन्देन संयुते शुक्रे ह्यारूढाल्लाभराशिगे |
यावज्जीवं सुभाग्यं स्याद्योगमासे रणाङ्क्तिः॥४९५३ ॥
amet परार््यादो योगं प्रत्यग्दशाशुभम्।
साधनेशदशाकाले स्वभुक्तावपमत्युमान् ॥४९५४ ॥
तदोषपरिहारार्थं शानि कुर्याद्विचक्षणः।
राशिचक्रपदानेन देहारोग्यं भविष्यति ॥४९५५ ॥
षट्पञ्चाशत् परं मृत्यु भवेद्भार्गव पक्षगे।
तत्काले शान्ति कार्येण ह्यपमृत्यर्विनश्यति ॥४९५६ ॥
4951 - 4956. (a) Irrelevant: The 4th and Sth
dasas will destroy the king. Due to killing of many
~ women, the prince will fall sick.
(b) 10th Lord’s Dasa: The dasa of Jupiter will
bless the subject with much fortunes. Children in
the in-laws’ family of younger brother will incur
illness.
(€) Life-iong Fortunes: Satum and Venus
joining in the 1 1th house from the Arudha (i.e. from
the Arudha ascendant) will cause fortunes throughout life. But the native will be injured in a month
when the Sun in transit is about to promote one’s
prosperity.
(d) Prosperity will come to pass in the beginning and 2nd haif of the 4th dasa. The 50) dasa will
be an auspicious one. The Ist sub period of the 6th
dasa will entangle one in untimely death. To
overcome this danger, remedial measures should
be sought. By donating an image of the zodiac,
health will be sound.
(e) Death: According to sage Bhargava, death
of the subject (Pisces ascendant, Seetala Nadiamsa) will occur in his 56th year. Timely remedies
will ward off untimely death (which isalso possible
मन्देशाक्रान्तकाले च -शीतलांशस्य दायगे |
कन्यामासे मृतिं चेति afar ह्यथापि च ॥४९५७ ॥
सप्तषष्टिश्च वर्षाणि परमायुश्च विन्दति ।
क्लेशं च सप्तपञ्चाशे ह्यष्टचत्वारिवत्सरे ॥४९५८ ॥
4957 - 4958. The dasa of Saturn’s dispositor
will cause the death when the Sun moves in Virgo
or its trine. 66 years will be his full life-span. 48th
and 56th years will cause anguish (of untimely
death).
Notes: The first line of sloka 4957 is defective
and the translation is provided after estimating the
possible implication.
पाके सर्वदशासन्धौ क्लेशं प्राप्नोति भूरिशः।
चन्द्रानाडीफलाध्याये शीतलांशोद् भवस्य च ॥४९५९ ॥
राजयोगफलादीनां विस्तरं मनुरब्रवीत् |

220 Deva Keralam
स्वोच्चांशगे व्ययाधीशे चपे स्वोज्वांशगे गुरौ ॥४९६० ॥
शीतलांशे प्रजातश्च पुण्यलोकयुतो भवेत् |
स्वपितुर्बह्मलोकाप्तिः शीतलांशकगे शनो ॥४९६१ ॥
शुक्रयोगे फलं सत्यं जीवे स्वोच्चांशसंस्थिते |
राजयोगं च लभते यमलश्चैव जायते ॥४९६२ ॥
ततः पश्चात् पुण्यलोकं पश्चादुत्तमजन्मवान् |
शीतलांशकगे मन्दे चोच्चग्रह समन्विते ॥४९६३ ॥
शुक्रयोगे पापपुण्यं समं चेन्मनुरब्रवीत् |
वृद्धपाराशरे FI मन्दे शुक्रशिखीयुते |
साधुप्रियस्तपस्वीच देहान्ते पुण्य लोकवान् ॥४९६४ ॥
4959 - 4964. (a) The junctions of various dasas
will cause much anguish. Chandra Nadi in its
chapter on Raja Yogas has stated a host of effects
for Seetala Nadiamsa (Pisces ascendant).
(b) The native will go to the Heavens if the 12th
lord (Saturn) is in Libra Navamsa, while Jupiter is
in Sagittarius with own Navamsa. His father will
reach the reign of Brahma if Saturn is in the
company of Venus (lord of the 12th counted from
the 9th) in case of birth in Seetala Nadiamsa.
(c) Jupiter in own Navamsa will cause a Raja
Yoga. The subject will be one of the twins. After -
death, he will go to heavens and will have an
excellent rebirth if Saturn 9th 12th lord) is in the
company of an exalted planet.
(d) Joining Venus, Saturn will keep one’s sins
and meritorious deeds in an equal measure.
(e) As per Vriddha Parasara Hora, Saturn joining Venus will cause a liking for saints. One will
perform penance and will reach the heavens after
discarding his mortal coil.
nee मेषशनिकोकिलांशफलम् ॥
लग्नात् पञ्चमगे मन्दे कोकिलांशे च संस्थिते |
पश्चाद् भ्रातृविहीनःश्च ज्येष्टभ्रातृविनाशवान् ॥४९६५ ॥
मेषेमन्दे कोकिलांरो त्वेकाकी पुत्रमित्रवान् |
धनुर्लग्ने प्रजातश्च बाल्ये क्लेशेन करशितः॥४९६६ ॥
स्वपिता रोगदेही च परगेहे निवासवान् |
बन्धुमूलात् सुसन्तोषीदयुद्राहान्तरं सुखी ॥४९६७ ॥
alae पित्ररिष्टं विशेऽब्दे वा भविष्यति |
पश्चात् स्वमातृहानि स्यात् त्रिंशोपरि सुसोख्यवान् ॥४९६८ ॥
चापे चापंशके जीवे कोकिलांशेऽर्कनन्दे |
कार्पासविक्रयेणेव त्रिंशोपरि सुजीवनम् ॥४९६९ ॥
लगने राहुयुते चन्द्रे मूर्खप्रकृतिकोपवान् |
सप्तविशात् परं सौख्यं विपदाये विवाहवान् ॥४९७० Il
पत्रोत्सवाद् परं भाग्यं क्लेशं क्षेमदशान्त्येगे।
प्रत्यग्दाये धनप्रापिं स्वपुत्रोद्राहसोख्यवान् ॥४९७१ ॥
साधनेशदशाकाले स्वभुक्तो मारकं स्मृतम् |
RAM कालमृल्युरमेषमासत्रिकोणगे ॥४९७२ Il
Tey afar स्फुटयोगं गते शनौ ।
देहालस्य प्रकुर्वीत सर्वनाडीफलं वदेत् ॥४९७२ ॥
कोकिलांशकगे मन्दे पुरा शूद्र समुद् भवः।
पश्चाज्जन्म तथा विन्दादर्तमानं तथा भवेत् ॥४९७४ ॥
मेषे मन्दे कोकिलांशे पुत्रीपुत्रसमृद्धिमान् |
धनुर्लगरे प्रजातश्च त्रिशद्रर्षात् परं सुखम् ॥४९७५ ॥
यावदायुष्यमाप्नोति तावत् कालं सुजीवनम्।
शतद्रयधनाढ़यश्च व्यापारे जीवनं स्मृतम् ॥४९७६ ॥
4965 - 4976. Effects of Saturn in Aries in
Kokila Nadiamsa for Sagittarius Ascendant: (a)
Saturn in Aries as above will deprive one of younger
brothers. His older brothers will also be destroyed.
The native will be lonely (i.e.only issue) but endowed with sons and friends. He will be emaciated
due to childhood anguishes. His father will be
sickly and the native will live under others’ shelter.
He will be happy through his relatives and after
marriage. In his 22nd or 20th year, he will lose his
father. Later on, he will be deprived of his mother
as well. After 30, he will enjoy happiness.
(b) Locate Saturn placed in Aries in Kokila
Nadiamsa, as Jupiter is in Vargottama in Sagittarius. This combination will be a source of comfortable living by trading in cotton.
(c) The Moon and Rahu in the ascendant will
cause foolishness and irascible temper. One will
receive happiness after 27. His marriage will take
place in his 3rd dasa. His prosperity will follow the
birth of a son. End of 4th dasa will cause distress.
The 5th dasa will give wealth to the native and
marriage to his son. The native will die in the Ist
sub period of the 6th dasa (or his) death will be in
the sub period of Ketu (in the 6th dasa). The Sun
in transit will then be in Aries or its trine.
(d) One will turn physically indolent (i.e. possibly disabled) when Saturn comes into the sign

Chandra Kala Nadi 221
represented by the Navamsa occupied by the 8th
lord (Moon) or a trine thereof.
(e) Saturn in Kokila Nadiamsa (in Aries, the
5th) denotes that the person would have been a
Soodra in the last birth. The current and next births
will also be that of a Soodra. In the current birth,
he will be endowed with sons and daughters and
will receive happiness after the age of 30. He will
enjoy a good living throughout his life. He will
earn two hundred (gold coins) in his business
activities.
(f) Guru Nadi describes the effects in detail
(concerning the captioned subject).
Notes: For Kokila Nadiamsa, please see notes
under sloka 1194, page 107, Book 1.
गुरुनाडीफलाध्याये फलं विस्तारमादिशेत् |
॥धरनुलम्ने घातांशशनिफलम् ॥
घातांशे वृश्चिके मन्दे धर्नुलग्न समुद भवः॥४९७७ Il
बाल्ये पितृविनाशी च पश्चाद्भ्रातृविहीनवान् |
ज्येष्ठभ्रातृविनाशेन मध्ये वयसि शोकवान् ॥४९७८ ॥
आयुष्मत्यौ द्वे भगिन्यावेका पुत्रवती शुभा ।
MITER बाल्ये सौख्यं विनिर्दिशेत्।
पश्चाद्वनान्तरे वासी कुत्सितप्रभुसेवकः ॥४९७९ ॥
दारदये सुपुत्राप्तिममलायोगजस्तथा |
माध्ववेदीकमूलेन नरवाहनयोगवान् ॥४९८० ॥
क्षेमदाये महत्सौख्यं मध्यखण्डे धनागमम् |
अपरार्धे सुवाहापि घातांशे प्रामलाभवान् ॥४९८१ ॥
4977 - 4981. Sagittarius Ascendant: Saturn in
Scorpio in Ghaata Nadiamsa will destroy one’s
father in childhood and deprive him of after-born.
He will lose his older brother in the middle of his
life and will be grieved. He will have two longlived sisters. One of them will be blessed with
progeny and be handsome. The person will be
happy through the ruler of Andhraregion. Later on
he will live in forest regions and will serve a mean
king. He will have two wives and virtuous sons.
His birth will be in Amala Yoga. He will beget
_ conveyances through Madhvas (followers of
Madhvacharya) and Vaidikas (followers of Vedic _
codes). In the 4th dasa, he will be greatly happy. In
the middle one-third part of the said dasa, wealth —
will accrue tao him. The 2nd half of the said dasa
will give conveyances and gain of lordship over
villages.
Notes: The present slokas, from 4977 through
5056 have been attributed to Sani Nadi by the
original. Saturn’s position in “Ghaata” Nadiamsa
often appears but not in every case. The ascendant
referred to is Sagittarius. Twelve slokas discussing
“Dhaata” (instead of “Ghaata) Nadiamsa, vide
Book 1, pp. 109 - 110 also form part of the present
set though with some slight modifications. Bot
these Nadiamsas are not traceable in the list.
मन्दे दावाग्निषष्टयंशे वातप्रकृतिदेहवान् |
दारद्वययुतो मानी राजद्वारे प्रसिद्धिमान् ॥४९८२ ॥
4982. Saturn in Davagni Shashtiamsa: For a
native of Sagittarius ascendant, Saturn in Davagni
Shashtiamsa will cause a windy physique. The
subject will have two wives, be honourable and
famous in royal circles.
परमेशांशगे जीवे मन्दे घातांशनाडिगे |
भाग्ययोगं च लभते हरिशङ्करभक््तिमान् ॥४९८३ ॥
` 4983. Jupiter in Paramesvari Nadiamsa while
Saturn is in Ghaata Nadiamsa will be a source of
Bhagya Yoga. The person will be devoted to Lords
Vishnu and Siva.
घातांशे वृश्चिके मन्दे स्थूलगात्रो महामतिः।
मूर्खप्रकृतिमान् रागी कोपी श्िप्रप्रसादकः॥४९८४ ॥
अष्टालिशात् परं भाग्यं चत्वारिंशे सुवाहनम् |
द्विचत्वारिंशगे वापि योगवान् afar सुखी ॥४९८५ ॥
परत्यग्दाये दारहानिर्बहुमित्रो Sere: |
ज्येष्ठभ्रातृचिरायुष्यं बाल्ये कुक्षिपीडितः॥४९८६ ॥
मृतप्रजाबहुत्वं स्याद् भगिनीद्रयवान् सुखी |
भेदभ्रातृयुतो मानी पितृशुश्रूषणे परः॥४९८७ ॥
विद्चाविष्नयुतो नित्यं पित्रार्जितधेर्युतः।
घतांशे वार्धके बाल्ये ज्येष्ठभार्या सुपुत्रिणी ॥४९८८ ॥
साधनेशदशाकाले दीर्धायुयुत्रवान् सुखी |
द्विपञ्चाशात् परं भाग्यं पुत्रयोगं महत् सुखम् ॥४९८९ ॥
4984 - 4989. (a) The Native: Saturn in Scorpio
(12th) in the said Nadiamsa will cause aheavy body
anda high degree ofintelligence. He will be foolish
(as well), be passionate and irascible but instantly
pleased. He will prosper after the age of 28. 40th
year will give him a conveyance. He will be

222 Deva Keralam
prosperous, famous and happy in the 42nd year. In
the 50 dasa, he will lose his wife. He will have
many friends and many children.
(b) Results for Brother: As a result of Saturn
being placed in Scorpio as above, one’s older
brother will enjoy long life but will incur stomach
disorders in childhood. He will have many dead
children.
(c) The native will have two sisters, stepbrother, be honourable and devoted to serve his
father. He will face obstacles in education, will
have paternal wealth. He will obtain daughters
through his first wife, in his early days as well as in
his old age. In his 6th dasa, a long-living son will
be born. He will enjoy fortunes on account of his
sons after his 52nd year of age and be greatly happy.
-शनिद्धितीयपर्याये मिथुनान्त्यादिशोकवान् |
राशित्रयमिदं क्लेशं वेष्णवदवेषहेतुना ॥४९९० ॥
कन्यादिश्रियमाप्नोति राहुदाये सुभाग्यवान्।
भाग्यराहुद्रशाकाले स्वभुक्तो व्याकुलं महत् ॥४९९१ ॥
गुरुभुक्त्यन्तमारभ्य शनिभुक्तौ सुसौख्यवान् |
अष्टमाधिपतो लग्ने मेषांशे चापराशिगे ॥४९९२ ॥
भूसुतस्य दशाक्लेशमपरार्थे महाविपत् |
रन्धाधिपांशदोषेण दशान्ते योगसंभवः॥४९९३ ॥
fae चापांशगे राहौ धनुर्लग्नसमुद्भवः।
गुरुभुक्त्यन्तमारभ्य राहुदाये सुयोगवान् ॥४९९४ ॥
शुक्रभांशगते चन्दर कर्मे चापांशगे शनौ |
धनुर्लगने प्रजातस्तु गुरुभुक्तो श्रियान्वितः ॥४९९५ ॥
्रत्यक्तारदशान्त्यादौ साधनेशदशावधि |
स्वभुक्तौ व्याकुलं सत्यं राजद्वारे कलापवान् ॥४९९६ ॥
~~ ` 4990 - 4996. (a) Transit of Saturn: In the 2nd
round of transit, Saturn in the end of Gemini will
‘cause grief to the subject. His journey in 3 signs
(from Gemini through Leo) will cause enmity with
Vaishnavites. While in Virgo, Saturn will give
wealth.
(b) Rahu Dasa: His Rahu dasa will cause much
prosperity. If Rahu is in the 9th, his sub period in
his own dasa will produce much distress. The sub
periods of Jupiter and Saturn will cause much
happiness (in Rahu dasa).
(c) Mars Dasa: Should the lord of the 8th
_(Moon) be in the ascendant (Sagittarius) with Aries
Navamsa, the dasa of Mars will be a source of
anguish. Its 2nd half will cause great calamity. Due
to the blemish of Navamsa position of the 8th lord,
the endof Mars dasa will cause a Yoga (prosperity).
(d) Rahu in 9th: Rahu in Leo with Sagittarius
Navamsa will cause much prosperity in the sub
period of Jupiter in Rahu dasa. The Moon in a sign
and Navamsa of Venus while Saturn is in the 10th
with Sagittarius Navamsa, the sub period of Jupiter
will produce wealth.
(e) Fhe initial and concluding portions of the
5th dasa, and the 6th dasa’s first sub period will
cause distress and troubles in royal circles.
Notes: (c) It is not understood why the term
“blemish” is used in the context of giving Yoga.
However, prosperity seems to occur in Mars dasa
because of his lordship over the Navamsa position
of the Moon.
(d) Saturn in 10th (Virgo) cannot be in Sagittarius Navamsa.
चापांशकगते सूर्ये घातांशे रविनन्दने ।
अतीव क्लेशकार्याणि पञ्चाशद्रत्सरात् परम् ॥४९९५७ ॥
घातांशनाडिदोषेण पट्चत्वाविंशतः परम् |
शत्रुवृद्धर्मनस्तापं क्लेशं सप्तकवत्सरम् ॥४९९८ ॥
सुप्रभांशकयोगेन द्विपञ्चाशात् परं सुखम् ।
शनिद्वितीयप्ययि कन्यामध्ये सुभाग्यवान् ॥४९९९ ॥
सिहान्ते WAT: स्यात् कन्याराशौ च वा यदि।
शनिवक्रंगते काले शत्रुनाशं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥५००० ॥
देशान्तरे महद् भाग्यं बन्धुमूलात् श्रियावहम् |
महाराजप्रसादेन योगवान् कीर्तिममान् सुखी ॥५००९ Il
4997 - 5001. (a) With the Sun in Sagittarius
Navamsa as Saturn is in Ghaata Nadiamsa, much
anguish will prevail after 50.
(b) Saturn’s blemish of being in Ghaata Nadiamsa will cause increase of enmity and anguish for
a period of 7 years from the age of 46.
(c) If Saturn is in Suprabha Nadiamsa, happiness will occur after the age of 52. Prosperity will
increase during the stay of Saturn in Virgo in his
2nd round of transit. Enemies will be destroyed
with Saturn’s moving in the end of Leo or in the
sign Virgo. When Saturn retrogrades (in these
Signs), foes will vanish. Fortunes will occur in a
different country and wealth through kinsfolk. He

Chandra Kala Nadi 223
will enjoy prosperity and fame with the favours of
an emperor.
Notes: (c) For Suprabha Nadiamsa, please see
notes under sloka 2002, page 180, Book 1.
शोभानांशके शुक्रे नीचे स्वोच्चांशसंस्थिते |
TEMA महत् सोख्यमान्धप्रभुवशात् सुखम् ॥५००२ ॥
लग्नेशनाडियोगेन त्रिपञ्चाशात् परं सुखम् |
पुनस्तद्योगमाप्नोति लग्नाधिपतिभुक्तिषु ॥५००३ ॥
धनाधिपान्तरे काले विशेषप्रनलं सुखम् |
लग्नाधिपान्त्यमारभ्य भुक्तिकाले सुसोख्यवान् ॥५००४ ॥
5002 - 5004. Dasa of Venus: Venus in Virgoin
Sobhana Nadiamsa and with Pisces Navamsa will
in his Dasa cause much happiness through he king
of Andhraregion. Happiness will also prevail at the
age of 35 if Venus and Jupiter are in the same
Nadiamsa. This Yoga (of happiness) will recur in
the sub period of Jupiter (in the dasa of Venus). The
sub period of Saturn will cause special (i.e. notable)
prosperity. The beginning and end of Jupiter’s sub
period will cause much happiness.
Notes: Sobhana Nadiamsa is aredundant term.
Only the Navamsa position of Venus is relevani.
मन्दे दावाग्निषष्टयंशे षडब्देऽष्टाब्दतः परम् |
क्लेशं दावाग्निदोषेण शतरुवृद्धिवशाद्व्यथाम् ॥५००५ ॥
स्वदेहायाससन्तापं मध्ये क्वचित् क्वचित् |
सन्तानोत्पत्तिनाशादि स्वपुत्रस्य विशेषतः ॥५००६ ॥
सुतेशनाडियोगेन साधनेदशाशुभम्।
दारान्तरे Gana: स्वभुक्तौ नात्र संशयः॥५००७॥
जीवान्तरे gate चतुष्पाज्जीवनाशनम् |
पशुधान्यक्षयादीनि राहुभुक्तौ महाविपत् ॥५००८ ॥
भाग्यराहुदशाकाले स्वभुक्तौ सेतुयात्रिकः।
प्रत्यक्तारदशान्त्यादो पुण्यतीर्थफलं स्मृतम् ॥५००९ ॥
नित्यानदानवान् भोगी ह्यमलायोगजस्तथा |
साधुप्रियः सत्यवादी मित्रस्वजनपोषकः ॥५० १० Il
5005 - 5010. (a) Saturn in Davagni Shashtiamsa
will cause anguish and distress after the age of 68
due to increase of enemies. Intermittently, the
person will incur some physical illness and mental
distress. Children born particularly to his son will
be destroyed.
(b) 6th Dasa: Saturn joining the 5th lord (Mars)
in one and the same Nadiamsa will cause auspicious effects in the dasa which is the 6th from birth
(in respect of progeny); he (i.e. the native’s son)
will obtain children through another wife, in the 1st
sub period thereof. Jupiter’s sub period will cause
loss of progeny, loss of quadrupeds and grains.
Rahu’s sub period will be a source of great danger.
(c) Rahu Dasa: The dasa of Rahu who is placed
in the 9th (Leo) will cause a pilgrimage to Setu in
his sub period. In the Sth dasa, one born in Amala
Yoga will undertake visits to shrines, will provide
food to the poor, will enjoy pleasures, be fond of
saints, be truthful and will patronize friends and
relatives.
स्वप्रभांशे निशानाथे घटे चापांशके शनो |
धनुर्लगने प्रजातश्च सर्वदा बन्धुपोषकः॥५०११ ॥
5011. The native will ever patronize his men if
the Moon is in Aquarius with Suprabha Nadiamsa,
while Saturn is in Sagittarius Navamsa.
Notes: “Svaprabha Nadiamsa” should read as
“Suprabha Nadiamsa”.
धनेशारूढगे शुक्रे सुप्रभांशसमुद् भवः।
सुताधिपतिदाये च बहुवित्ताम्बराप्तिमान् ॥५०१२ ॥
राजोपकारकार्यार्थं स्वहस्तधननाशवान् |
मित्रदरोहं क्वचिच्चेति घातांशे धनदायणे ॥५०१२ ॥
तस्य दोषवशाच्चैति क्लेशं प्रत्यग्दशान्त्यगे |
साधनेशदशाभुक्तो सञ्चितार्थविनाशनम् ॥५०१४ ॥
5012 -5014. One belonging to Sagittarius ascendant, Suprabha Nadiamsa, as Venus is in the
2nd, will obtain much wealth and robes in the Sth
dasa. He will lose his wealth in completing assignments to help the king. To some extent he will
deceive his friends in Saturn’s dasa. As a result of
this misdeed, his Sth dasa’s end will cause anguish.
The 1st sub period of 6th dasa will cause loss of
wealth.
Notes: “Dhanesa + Arudhage” is a defective
expression which means Venus should be in the
Arudha Pada of the 2nd lord. Apparently, the text
should read as “Dhanarudhage Sukre”. Similarly,
“Dhana dayage” in sloka 5013 is nota proper term.
It should read as “Dhandhipati Dayage” denoting
the dasa of 2nd lord, Saturn.
लाभेशे शोभनांशस्थे घातांशे धनदायगे |
भाग्यराहुदशाकाले योगप्राबल्यवान् भवेत् ॥५०१५ ॥

-224 Deva Keralam
लग्नाधिपान्तरान्त्यादौ धनाधिपतिभुक्तिषु |
शोभनांशस्य योगेन धनलाभं महत् सुखम् ॥५०१६ ॥
गृहशोभनकार्याणि नित्यसन्तोषवान् सुखी |
कल्याणोत्सवसम्पत्ति नित्यं राजप्रसादवान् ॥५० १७ ॥
तत्काले मित्रवर्गाच्च स्वमूलां श्रियमश्नुते |
राजद्वारे शुभं चैव गृहे गोधनसंकुलम् ॥५०१८ ॥
ज्येष्ठभ्रातृसुवाहाप्तिः शोभानांशोद् भवस्य च।
धनाधिपान्ते काले साधनेशदशाशुभम् ॥५०१९ ॥
घातंशनाडिदोषेण राजकार्यवशाद्व्यथाम् |
योगकाले मनस्तापं धननाशं क्वचित् क्वचित् ॥५०२० ॥
सन्तानोत्पत्तिसन्तोषं मित्रवर्गे सुशोभनम् |
द्वीपान्तरे मित्रवर्गात् क्लेशं प्राप्नोति भूरिशः॥५०२१ ॥
MAY द्वादशे मन्दे स्वभुक्तौ क्रूरमासगे |
स्वपुत्रदेहजाडयादि ARE दारवंशके ॥५०२२ ॥
5015 - 5022. (a) The 11th lord in Sobhana
Nadiamsa ... in Ghaata Nadiamsa ... in the 2nd
dasa. (he text is incoherent and incomplete.)
(b) The dasa of Rahu in the 9th will produce
increase of prosperity.
(c) 6th Dasa: Venus in Sobhana Nadiamsa will
contribute to wealth and happiness in the sub
periods of the lord of ascendant and 2nd. Further,
uninterrupted happiness will prevail due to auspicious functions in the family including marriage.
The subject will earn royal favours. He will also be
responsible for his friends acquiring wealth. Auspicious effects through royal association, and acquisition of quadrupeds and wealth for the family
will also come to pass. His older brother will beget
conveyances. The sub period of the 2nd lord
(Saturn) in the 6th dasa will cause auspicious
effects. Due to Saturn’s position in Ghaata Nadiamsa, the subject will incur obstacles in undertakings ordered by he king. At the time of prosperity,
-he will face distress and to some extent financial
losses. But he will be happy due to birth of
offspring. Auspicious effects will occur to his
friends. He will be anguished due to friends
residing ina different island (i.e. a foreign land). In
the sub period of Saturn, placed in the 12th in
Ghaata Nadiamsa, the native’s son will incur illness and inlaws’ family will be subjected to evils
with the Sun’s adverse movements.
व्यये दावाग्निषष्टयंशे wat विततत्रिकोणके |
गोचरे स्वपितुः क्लेशं वासदेशप्रजावधि ॥५०२३ ॥
राजामात्यप्रपीडादि लोके दुर्भिक्षजं भयम् ।
स्वशतुजननाशः स्यात् पश्चात् प्राबल्ययोगवान् ॥५० २.४ Il
धनेशे वृश्चिकांशस्थे गोचरे कटके शनौ ।
अतीव क्लेशकार्याणि ततल्तिकोणे क्वचित् क्वचित् ॥५०२५॥
जीवे पञ्चमपर्ययि मेषादौ श्रियमश्नुते |
वृषभे बहुभाग्यापि शुक्रनाडीवशात् सुखम् ॥५० २६ Il
लक््मीकटाक्षवान्नित्यं सुतेशे लाभराशिगे ।
भाग्यधिपेन संयुक्ते बहुभाग्ययुतःसुखी ॥५०२७ ॥
शोभनां शस्य "योगेन कर्माधिपतिभुक्तिषु |
साधनेशदशाकाले बहु कार्यप्रसाधनम् ॥५०२८ Il
WAR PATA साधनेशस्य दायगे |
योगकाले महारोगं शान्त्या शान्ति प्रयास्यति ॥५०२९ ॥
मन्दे दावाग्नि दोषेण स्वभुक्तौ बन्धुनाशनम् |
वातज्वरभयं किंचित् स्वगेहे शिशुनाशनम् ॥५०३० ॥
पत्रिकाऋतुशान्त्यादि गृहे कल्याणसं भ्रमम् |
सौम्यान्तरे स्वपुत्रस्य Tanita: श्रियावहा ॥५०३१ ॥
प्राबल्यमेति तद्भर्ता दशामध्ये श्रियावहम्।
स्वपुत्रश्च विशेषेण योगप्रागल्भ्यवान् भवेत् ॥५०३२ ॥
5023 - 5032. (a) If Saturn is placed in Davagni
Shashtiamsa in the 12th, his transit in Capricorn, or
a trine thereof, will endanger the native;s father.
(b) Irrelevant: As a result of the said transit,
the people, king and minister of the country will
face troubles. Famine will spread. His enemies’
kinsfolk will be destroyed. Afterwards, the subject
will prosper.
(c) Note Saturn being in Scorpio Navamsa in
case of a Sagittarius native. Saturn moving in
Cancer will cause much anguish. But in Scorpio
and Pisces, Saturn will denote less anguish.
(d) The Sth round of Jupiter’s transit in the
initial portion of Aries will give uninterrupted
wealth.
(€) The 5th lord (Mars) in the 11th (Libra) with
the 9th lord (Sun) will cause abundant fortunes.
(f) Venus should be in Sobhana Nadiamsa. As
aresult, the 6th dasa in combination with 10th lord
Mercury’s sub period will help the person achieve
success in his undertakings. The said dasa’s Saturn
sub period will cause a severe disease at the time of

Chandra Kala Nadi 225
one’s prosperity when the Sun is in his adverse
movements. Suitable remedies will stall the disease.
(g) If Saturn is in Davagni Shashtiamsa (in
Scorpio) his sub period in the 6th dasa will perish
one’s kinsfolk. He will be himself a victim of
windy diseases to some extent. A child being born
then will instantly die. The family will be busy with
auspicious functions like procreational ceremony
of his daughter. The sub period of Mercury will
cause wealth and offspring to his son. His daughter’s husband will prosper in the middle of the 6th
dasa and become wealthy. The native’s son will
especially prosper.
केत्वन्तरे राहुदाये घातांशे जनितस्य च।
विशेषधनलाभं च नित्यश्रीसोख्यमादिशेत् ॥५०३२ ॥
गोचरे वृश्चिके मन्दे घातांशे जनितस्य च।
TRY GRE स्याच्छान्त्या शान्ति प्रयास्यति ॥५०३४॥
शनितृतीयपर्याये घातांशे जनितस्य च |
पुत्रसौख्यं धनप्राप्ति भाग्यवृद्धिं श्रियावहाम् ॥५०३५ ॥
सन्पशांशे तत्िकोणे स्फुटयोगं गते शनौ ।
अपमृत्युभयगप्राप्तिः स्वरनाडीफलं वदेत् ॥५०३६ ॥
साधनेशदशाकाले WHT महत् सुखम् |
शोभनांशवशादभाग्यं राजप्रीतिं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥५०३७ ॥
षष्ठाधिपतिदोषेण दारपीडां क्वचित् क्वचित् |
HUTA जातकस्य पुत्रिका दुःखमेव च ॥५०३८ Il
सूर्यान्ते व्याकुलं स्याद्भुक्त्यन्ते देहजाडयवान् |
राहुदाये चन््रभुक्तौ क्लेशं घातांशजातकः ॥५०३९ ॥
कुजान्तरे सौख्यमेति पुत्रभराबल्यहेतुना |
दशावसानदोषेण राजा राष्टविनाशनम् ॥५०४० ॥
राजान्तरे स्वपुत्रस्य प्रबलोद्योगहेतुना |
्रूरमासं विना भाग्यं नित्यश्रीसौख्यवान् सुखी ॥५०४१ ॥
देहावसानदोषार्थं शान्ति कुर्याद्विचक्षणः।
5033 - 5041142. (a) Rahu Dasa: In case of birth
in Sagittarius ascendant, Ghaata Nadiamsa, Ketu’s
sub period in Rahu’s dasa will cause abundant
financial gins which will be uninterrupted. The
native will also be happy. When Saturn transits
Scorpio, the said dasa will lead to evils. These
should be remedied.
(b) Saturn’s 3rd round of transit (i.e. from the
beginning of 3rd round) will cause the following:
happiness from progeny, wealth and increase of
fortunes.
(c) Saturn journeying in the sign denoted by the
Navamsa occupied by the 8th lord (Moon) ora trine
thereof will cause fear of untimely death.
(d) The sub period of Venus in the 6th dasa will
be a source of great happiness. Due to his position
in Sobhana Nadiamsa, one will please the king.
Because of rulership of the 6th, Venus will to some
extent cause grief on account of daughter.
(e) The sub period of the Sun (in the 6th dasa)
will produce distress and physical illness.
(f) Other Sub-periods: Rahu dasa’s Moon
bbukti will be a source of anguish. The sub period
of Mars-will cause happiness due to the progress
achieved by his son. The end of the dasa will
destroy the country. The native’s son will obtain
powerful employment under anew king. Fortunes
and continual wealth will exist except in the periods ruled by adverse transits of the Sun. To ward
off the blemish of (untimely) end of mortal journey, remedies should be sought (during the conclusion of Rahu dasa).
सुप्रभांशे निशानाथे व्यये घातांशगे शनौ ॥५०४२ ॥
मीने शनिस्थिते काले कालमृत्यु भविष्यति |
नैधनेशदशाकाले धातांशग्रहभुकितिषु ॥५०४२ ॥
द्विसप्ततिसमादूर्वं धनुर्मनि मृतिं वदेत् |
चापायनगते सूर्ये कुलीरयनगेऽथ वा ॥५०४४ ॥
शुक्लपक्षे मृतिं चेति नन्दारिक्तातिथीषु च।
कुम्भांशगे कर्मनाथे नवमे राहु संस्थिते ॥५०४५ ॥
व्यये घातांशगे मन्दे ह्यापत्संन्यासमादिशेत्।
वृश्चिकांशे चापशनावपमृत्युभयं क्वचित् ॥५०४६ Il
शोभनांशकयोगेन ह्यायुयायोग्यभाग्यवान् |
सुप्रभांशे FETT TA रविनन्दने Io we ॥
धनुर्लग्ने प्रजातश्च त्वेकसप्तति जीवति |
अपमृत्युभये काले मारकं च न विद्यते ॥५०४८ Il
सुप्रभांशकयोगेन दीर्घमार्युभविष्यति |
रन्धेशारूढगे शुक्रे दशमे शोभनांशगे ॥५०४९ Il
दीर्धायुर्योगमाप्नोति चापमृत्युः शनैरपि |
घातांशगे प्रजातश्च रन्धेशारूढपांशगे ॥५०५० Il
स्फुटयोगं गते मन्दे मन्दे नैधनेशदशाविपत्।

226 Deva Keralam
व्यये मन्दे प्रजातश्च वार्धके पुत्रशोकवान् ॥५०५१ ॥
वार्धके पुत्रसन्तापं दशासन्धौ न संशयः।
5042 - 5051142. Death: (a) The Moon in
Suprabha Nadiamsa and Saturn in Scorpioin Ghaata
Nadiamsa will cause unavoidable death of the
person when Saturn transits the sign Pisces.
(b) In the dasa of the 8th lord (Moon) and in the
sub period of Saturn placed in Ghaata Nadiamsa,
death will occur following the age of 72, in bright
lunar half, with the transit Sun in Sagittarius or
Pisces or in the Sun’s southern course. The lunar
day concerned will be one of Nanda or Rikta.
(c) Mercury in Aquarius Navamsa, Rahu in the
9th (Leo) and Saturn in Scorpio’s Ghaata Nadiamsa will cause ascetism following a calamity.
(d) Saturn in Scorpio Navamsa at birth will
usher death during his movements in Sagittarius.
(€) One will enjoy health and fortunes with
(Venus) in Sobhana Nadiamsa.
(f) The person’s life-span will be 71 if the Moon
and Saturn are respectively in Suprabha and Ghaata
Nadiamsas. He will not die in times of indication
of untimely death. The Moon in Suprabha Nadiamsa will bless one with longevity. Saturn’s transit
in Sagittarius will be a source of his death..
(g) When Saturn transits the sign equal to the
Navamsa position of the 8th lord (Moon), it will
cause danger in he 8th lord’s dasa
(bh) Saturn placed in the 12th will cause grief
due to progeny in old age. This will be in the
junction of dasa
Notes: (b) Sloka 5044 contains confusion regarding Sun’s transit using an incorrect term like
“Chaapa + Ayana”.
परमोच्चं गते जीवे शोभनांशकगे भृगौ ॥५०५२ ॥
मन्दे घातांशके जातस्त्वेकसप्तति जीवति |
ब्रह्मलोकफलं सत्यं THY त्वीश्वरांशगे ॥५०५३ ॥
सुप्रभांशकगे चन्द्रे हीन्द्रयातनवान् क्वचित् |
घातांशनाडीदोषेण देहान्ते तिविन्द्रयातनाम् ॥५०५४ ॥
ब्रह्मलोकं ततो गत्वाब्रह्मध्यानपरः सदा |
पुण्यक्षेत्रे नदीतीरे वृश्चिके शनिसंस्थिते ॥५०५५ ॥
सोमवारे मृतिश्चैव भवतीति न संशयः।
शोभनांशकगे शुक्रे ह्यन्ते पुत्रात् सुखी धनी ।
मन्दनाडीफलं सत्यं प्रत्यक्षं देव केरलम् ॥५०५६ ॥
5052 - 5056. (a) One’s life-span will be 71
whereas Jupiter is in his deep exaltation, Venus is’
in Sobhana Nadiamsa, and Saturn is in Ghaata
Nadiamsa.
(b)The 8th lord Moon in Isvara (i.e.
Paramesvara) Nadiamsa will take one to the reign
of Lord Brahma, after death.
(c) The Moon in Suprabha Nadiamsa will caue
attainment of heavens (Indra's abode). Because of
the "blemish" of being in Ghaata Nadiamsa, afte
death, he will go to heavens. (Indra yaatana sshould
read as Indraayatana meaning heavens.)
(d) Saturn in Scorpio will cause death on a
Monday in an auspicious fortnight.
(e) Venus in Sobhana Nadiamsa will cause
happiness through one’s son towards the end of life
apart from acquisition of wealth.
Effects as stated in Sani Nadi will bear truth as
_feflected in Deva Keralam.
।पिषलग्ने STARTS ॥
प्रभांशके स्थिरे सूर्ये त्वसितेन निरीक्षिते ।
पितुर्जातः परोक्षस्य राहुयोगे विदेशिनः॥५०५७ ॥
मातामहगृहेवासं जननं च तथा भवेत् |
स्वपिता जन्मसमये देशान्तरनिवासवान् ॥५०५८ Il
5057 - 5058. Aries ascendant - Achala Nadiamsa: (a) In case of birth in this segment of this
zodiac, if the Sun in a fixed sign (Taurus & C)
receives Saturn’s aspect, birth will be in the absence of father being on the spot. If Rahu joins the
said Sun, the child’s father would be in a foreign
land.
_(b) One born in this Nadiamsa will live in his
maternal grand-father’s home apart from taking
birth therein. At the time of birth, father would be
dwelling in a foreign country.
Notes: “Prabha” and “Vikata” Nadiamsas are
other names used to indicate “Achala Nadiamsa”
by the text. Thus wherever this Nadiamsa occurs,
it can be used for all movable (immovable as well
as dual) ascendants (as the case may be). In some
versions, “Achala” is referred to as “Abala” Nadiamsa. For Prabha (or Achala) Nadiamsa, please
see notes under sloka 54, page 7, Book 1.
सिंहराशि स्थिते सूरये राहुयोगे शुभेक्षिते |
गिरिप्रान्त्येऽरण्यभागे नगरे जननं स्मृतम् ॥५०५९ ॥
भान ceil

Chandra Kala Nadi 227
चतुर्थगर्भे संजातो ह्यथवा पञ्चमोद्भवः।
भगिन्यो बहुलाश्च स्युज्येष्ठभ्रातृविहीनवान् ॥५०६० ॥
सिहांशगे क्रिये शुक्रे त्वचलांशे प्रजायते |
विप्रजन्मा सुखी नित्यं चतुर्थो गर्भजः स्मृतः ॥५०६१ Il
सूरये यावत्फलानि स्युस्तावद्रभे प्रसूतिमान् |
कालधिपे राहुयुते स्वपिता सोदौर्युतः॥५०६२ ॥
भ्भांशगे दिवा सूर्ये कुम्भांशे शनिवीक्षिते।
गुरुदृ्टियुते चैव पितरौ दीर्घजीविनौ ॥५०६९३ ॥
स्वपिता त्वसमर्थः स्यात् सोदरीसोदर्युतः।
तामसप्रकृतिश्चैव विद्यासौख्यविहीनवान् ॥५०६४ ॥
5059 - 5064. (a) The Sun in Leo along with
Rahu and begetting the aspect of a benefic denotes
birth in a town of a hilly region containing forests.
He will be either the 4th or the 5th issue of the
family, will have a number of sisters and be devoid
of older co-born.
(b) Venus placed in Aries, with Leo Navamsa,
denotes a Brahmin’s birth as the 4th issue of the
family.
(c) Note the number of net (post-rectified)
Bindus obtained by the Sun in his own Ashtaka
Varga. The native’s birth will follow such number
of children. (Thatis, he will have so many older coborn.)
(d) The conjunction of the Sun with Rahu
denotes existence of brothers for the native’s father.
(e) Birth in day time, with the Sun begetting the
aspect of Saturn or Jupiter and being placed in
Aquarius Navamsa, will be a source of longevity to
parents. His father would not be a skilful person,
would have brothers and sisters, be indolent and
bereft of learning and happiness.
प्रजांशके स्थिते सूर्ये गुरुणा च निरीक्षिते |
सर्वसौभाग्यसंयुक्तः कामी दानरतः सुखी ॥५०६५ ॥
राहुयोगेऽर्किसंदृष्टे दुश्शीला स्वपितामही |
पितृवंशे कलङ्कः स्यानिर्दोषो मातृवंशके ॥५०६६ ॥
अचलांशे पूर्वभागे लग्नेशे शनिसंयुते |
गुरुदृष्टिफलं सत्यं सद गुणं मातृवंशके ॥५०६७ ॥
राहुयोगफलं पित्रोः पितामह्या गुणं तथा |
मीने मीचांशगे जीवे विकटांशे कुजेक्षिते ॥५०६८ ॥
वंशे कलङ्क इत्याहूर्जारिणी स्वपितामही |
स्वपितुः सोदरी चैव तथेव च भविष्यति ॥५०६९ ॥
पितामहभ्रातृभार्या जारिणी नात्र संशयः।
माता गुणवती पूता GAA पतिव्रता ॥५०७० ॥
पितृभाग्यवती चैव भ्रातृभाग्यसमन्विता।
भर्तृभाग्यविहीना च किंचिदभर्तृसुखान्विता ॥५०७१ Il
एकभ्रातृसामायुक्ता सोदर्या द्येकया युता |
मातृसौख्यविहीना स्यात्पितृसौख्यसमन्विता ॥५०७२ ॥
एवंभूता सतीशेन बहुकालं समुङ्गली |
पितृस्थानाधिपे जीवे शन्यङ्गारकवीक्षिते ॥५०७३ ॥
विकटांशे प्रजातस्य पितुः दीर्घायुरुच्यते |
भाग्येशे विकटांशस्थे शन्यङ्गारकवीक्षिते ॥५०७४ ॥
मेषलग्ने प्रजातस्य पिता दारिद्यरयोगवान् |
सीमूलाञ्जीवनं चेति मातुलस्यवशात् सुखम् ॥५०७५ ॥
पितामहीकुले भाग्यं तन्मूलाज्जीवनं स्मृतम् ।
पितामहीभ्रातृभार्या ह्यथवा स्वपितामही ॥५०७६ ॥
विकटांशकगे जीवे जारिणी पतिदृषणी |
पितामहीफलं सत्यं कामी विषयलोलुपः॥५०७७ ॥
कलत्रद्रयवान् रागी बहुपुत्रार्थभाग्यवान् |
बाल्ये दारिद्ग्रमाप्नोति राजन्यद्वेषशोकवान् ॥५०७८ Il
मध्ये भाग्यभिवृद्धि च ह्यन्ते पुत्रात् सुखं भवेत्।
5065 - 5078142. (a) The Sun placed in the subject
Nadiamsa with the aspect of Jupiter will bless one
with all kinds of fortunes. Further he will be lustful,
munificent and happy.
(b) Should the Sun join Rahu and earn Saturn’s
aspect, paternal grand-mother would be devoid of
good qualities (i.e. of aquestionable nature). There
would be some blemish (i.e. women of disrepute
would exist) in the father’s family. The mother’s
family would be devoid of any such blemish.
(©) Birth in the 1st half of the subject Nadiamsa,
while the lord of the ascendant (which is amovable
Sign) is conjunct Saturn, with Jupiter’s aspect, |
denotes virtues (for the women) of mother’s family.
(d) The said ascendant lord with Rahu causes
virtues to paternal grand-mother.
(e) Jupiter in Pisces in aspect to Mars and with
Capricorn Navamsa indicates blemish in paternal
family. - Paternal grand-mother would reflect a
questionable character. So also sisters of the
person’s father. Without doubt, the spouse of

228 Deva Keralam
father’s brother will be a questionable woman. The
native’s mother will be virtuous, pure in character
and be a chaste wife. She will be fortunate in
respect of her father and brothers, be somewhat
deprived of luck through husband but endowed
with some happiness thereof. She will have one
brother and one sister, be devoid of maternal
happiness, endowed with paternal happiness.and
will have a long-lived husband.
(f) Long-lived Father: It is stated that the
father of the native of Vikata (or Achala) Nadiamsa
will live long if Jupiter, ruling the house of father
(i.e. the 9th from Aries, a movable ascendant), is in
(joint) aspect to Saturn and Mars.
(g) Father: The 9th lord (Jupiter) in Vikata
‘Nadiamsa in aspect to Saturn (lord of 10th and
11th) and Mars (lord of the ascendant and 8th) will
cause poverty to the person’s father. Further, he
would live through women and be happy on account of maternal uncle. Paternal grand-mother’s
family would be endowed with prosperity which
will be a source of livelihood to father. ।
(bh) Jupiter’s position in the subject Nadiamsa
indicates that the wife of paternal grand-mother’s
brother, or paternal grand-mother herself, would
be corrupt and would abuse her husband. Effects
concerning paternal grand-mother will bear truth.
(i) Further, as a result of the said position of
Jupiter, the native will be libidinous and attached
to material pleasures. He will have two wives, be
passionate, endowed with many sons and much
fortunes. He will be indigent in childhood days and
` be grieved on account of royal enmity. In between,
his fortunes will register an increase. Towards the
end of his life, he will enjoy happiness from his
sons.
कीटे प्रभांशके सूर्ये मेषलग्नोद भवस्य च ॥५०७९ ॥
स्वपिता सौख्यहीनः स्यात्स्वा्ितं न विद्यते |
पितृभाग्यार्थसन्तोषी दानभाग्यसमन्वितः॥५०८० Il
किचिद्रोग शरीरी च प्रहशङ्काप्रपीडितः।
दु स्वपवशतोदुःखमग्रहारे निवासवान् ॥५०८१ ॥
ध्रातृप्राबल्ययोगेन मध्ये भाग्यभिवृद्धिमान्।
प्रन्थान्तरे भ्रातृनाशं भगिनीक्लेशवान् क्वचित् ॥५०८२ ॥
पाराशरमते चोक्तं स्वमते भ्रातृनाशनम्।
5079 - 50822. (a) For an Aries-born, the Sun in
Scorpio with Prabha Nadiamsa will deprive one’s
father of who will have no self-made wealth. The
native will be happy with his father’s fortunes and
wealth (whatever that be) and be endowed with
fortunes of giving charities. He will be somewhat
sickly, troubled by planetary evils, be grieved on
account of evil dreams and will live in a colony of
Brahmins. He will in the middle part of his life
prosper due to the strength of his co-born.
(b) Another authority mentions loss of brother
and anguish to sister to some extent.
(©) These (as per “a’”) are as per sage Parasara.
According tome, (the author), destruction of brother
will come to pass (as at “b”).
षष्ठे मन्दे धनाढयश्च वातप्रकृतिदेहवान् ॥५०८३ ॥
दायादिवशमाप्नोति वार्धके भ्रातृशोकवान् |
मातुलैकश्चिरायुष्मानेका मातृष्वसायुषी ॥५०८४ ॥
तद्भर्ता राजयोगी स्याद्रहुपुत्रः सु भाग्यवान् |
कनिष्ठभ्रातृमान् रागी पितृव्येन सुखान्वितः ॥५०८५ ॥
5083 - 5085. Saturn in 6th: One will ४६.
wealthy with Saturn in the 6th (in Virgo) and will
possess a body with windy temperament in predominance. He will be in the custody (i.e. at the
mercy) of his kinsfolk and will incur grief on
account of co-born. He will have a long-lived
maternal uncle and a maternal aunt (i.e. mother’s
co-bom). The said maternal aunt’s husband will
enjoy Raja Yoga effects, will have many sons and
be very prosperous. The native will have younger
brothers, be passionate and be happy on account of
father’s younger brother.
षष्ठे भूमिसुते मन्दे मातुलश्चाप्यपुत्रकः।
मृतप्रजोऽथ वा चैव प्रतिबन्धयुतो भवेत् ॥५०८६ ॥
सम्पदाये मातुलस्तु पितुमूलात् सुभाग्यवान्।
स्वभुक्तौ वाहनप्रापिर्मध्यखण्डे शुभान्वितः ॥५०८७ ॥
मातामहस्तु सन्तोषी राजद्रारे शुभाधिकः।
प्रबलोद्योगभाग्याप्तिः ICH न संशय ॥५०८८ ॥
पितामहस्तु सन्तापं ज्ञातिवर्गे द्युपद्रवम् ।
बन्धुक्लेशमवापनोति स्वपितुर्व्याकुलं क्वचित् ।५०८९ ॥
5086 - 5089. Saturn and Mars in the 6th (in
Virgo) will deprive one’s maternal uncle of prog-

Chandra Kala Nadi 229
eny. Else, the said uncle will obtain dead children
or will incur obstacles in begetting progeny. In the
native’s second dasa, the native’s father will be a
source of good fortunes to the native’s maternal
uncle. In the 1st sub period of 2nd dasa, the subject
will acquire conveyances. The middle part of the
dasa will prove auspicious. Happiness, auspicious
effects in royal circles and a prosperous employment will occur to maternal grand-father in the 1st
sub period of 2nd dasa of the native. Grief to
paternal grand-father and troubles and anguish to
kinsfolk will also come to pass. His father will be
somewhat distressed.
चापे कुन्दांशगे चन्द्रे स्वसुतेन समन्विते |
भूम्यात्मजेन संदृष्टे भेदमातुलयोगवान् ॥५०९० ॥
स्वमातुलश्च दीर्घायुर्बाल्ये जठररोगवान् |
विवाहानन्तरं भाग्यमल्पकालं क्वचित् सुखम् ॥५०९१ ॥
मित्र पुत्रयुतश्चैव मातुलस्य फलं स्मृतम् |
चपे कुन्दांशगे wx भसुतेन निरीक्षिते ॥५०९२ ॥
पूर्वभागे भ्रातृयुक्तः स्वपिता च तथा भवेत् ।
उत्तरांशे च जनकः सोदराभ्रातृहीनवान् ॥५०९२ Il
जातकस्य तथा विन्द्याद् भगिन्यो बहुलाः स्मृताः।
चन्द्रनाडीफलाध्याये विस्तृतं WIAA ॥५०९४॥
5090 - 5094. (a) The Moon in Sagittarius in
Kunda Nadiamsa along with Mercury and being in
aspect to Mars will cause a step-mother.
(b) Maternal Uncle: As a result of the above
Yoga, long life to maternal uncle and disorders of
spleen in childhood will come to pass. He will
prosper after marriage, be happy for some time and
be endowed with sons and friends. These effects
are for the maternal uncle.
(b) The Moon in Sagittarius in Kunda Nadiamsa in aspect to Mars will cause brothers to the
native of former half of Prabha Nadiamsa, Aries
ascendant. So also to his father. In case of birth in
second half of the subject Nadiamsa, the said Yoga
of the Moon would deny co-bom to father. Chandra
Nadi narrates in detail the effects concerning coborn.
बुधे यावत्फलानि स्युस्तावत्सङ्कयाः सहोदराः।
दीर्षायुषाः भविष्यन्ति सुप्रभांशे दिवाकरे ॥५०९५ ॥
सूर्ये यावत्फलानि स्युस्तथा भुक्तांशसद्कयकाः।
सुप्रभांशे प्रजातस्य स्वपितुः सोदराः स्मृताः ॥५०९६ ॥
ग्रहां शरश्मिसङ्खयाश्च चिरायुष्याः भवन्तिहि |
पितृमातृभ्रातृफलं योजयेत् कालवित्तमः॥५०९७ ॥
5095 - 5097. (a) The number of long-living coborn will equal the number of net Ashtaka Varga
bindus obtained by Mercury.
(b) The number of Ashtaka varga bindus obtained by the Sun or the Navamsa passed by the Sun
would denote the number of father’s co-bom.
Long-living co-born of father will equal the
Navamsas and rays obtained by the planet, Sun.
These are the effects of paternal uncles.
Notes: (a) The Sun’s position in Suprabha
Nadiamsa is mentioned in the 2nd line of sloka
5095 which cannot be properly connected either
with Mercury at “a” or to the Sun at “b”.
लाभेशे कुजसंयुक्ते TS गुरुनिरीश्षिते ।
स्वज्येष्ठभगिनीपीडां व्रणोपद्रवमादिशेत् ॥५०९८ ॥
षष्ठेशांशे तत्िकोणे रन्प्रेशांशात्रिकोणगे |
स्फुटयोगं गते मन्दे सोदराणामुपद्रवम् ॥५०९९ ॥
स्वज्येष्ठभगिनीयोगे षष्ठे मन्दे च संस्थिते ।
शुभदृष्टि विहीने च क्लेशिता ज्येष्ठसोदरी ॥५१०० ॥
जीवे दृष्टे सुमाङ्गल्यमल्पसन्तानमादिशेत् |
शनिनाडी फलाध्याये विस्तृतं सोदरीफलम् ॥५१०१॥
5098 - 5101. (a) The 1 1th lord Saturn in the 6th
(in Virgo) along with Mars and receiving Jupiter’s
aspect will be a source of troubles from ulcers for
one’s older sister.
` (b) Saturn in transit in the sign denoted by the
Navamsa occupied by 6th lord (Mercury) or 8th
lord (Saturn) or a trine thereof, will produce troubles to one’s co-born.
(c) Saturn in the 6th will cause yoga for obtainment of older sister. But if he be bereft of a
benefic’s aspect, the said sister will be subjected to
anguish. Should Jupiter aspect the said Saturn,
sister will have a long-living husband but limited
number of issues. Sani Nadi mentions in detail the
effects relating to one’s sister.
व्ययेशांशे afar स्फुटयोगं गते शनौ ।
व्ययेशदृष्टिरशौ FORE स्वपितामहः॥५९०२ ॥
स्वपुत्रारिष्टयोगश्च क्षेमदाये भविष्यति |

230 Deva Keralam
SEY सुप्रभांशे पूर्वोक्तशनिकालगे ॥५१०३ ॥
पितामहोऽरिष्टमेति पितुर्माता तथा भवेत् |
लग्नेशंशे तत्तिकोणे स्फुटयोगं गते शनौ ॥५१०४ ॥
मातुलेन मनस्तापं क्रूरमासे महद्भयम् |
प्रभाशे वृश्चिके सूर्ये मेषलग्नोद भवस्य च ॥५१०५ Il
कन्याशनौ भ्रातृपीडा चापे भ्रातृविनाशवान् |
एकोनरविंशगे वर्षे विंशे जीवे प्रभांशगे ॥५१०६ ॥
प्रामुतोपितरौऽरिष्टं नवमान्दे क्वचिद्धिपत्।
सुखेशांशे तत्ररिकोणे स्फुटयोगं गते शनौ gow il
स्वपिता क्लेशबाहल्यं सम्पदाये न संशयः,
विपदशान्त्यमारभ्य क्षेमदाये स्वभुक्त्िषु ॥५१०८ ॥
प्रभांशके प्रजातस्य पित्ररिष्टं विनिर्दिशेत् ।
कीटे शनिस्थिते काले सम्पदाये पितामहः ॥५१०९ Il
अरिष्टफलमाप्नोति जीविते चापगे शनो ।
सूर्यलग्ने सूर्यकाले स्फुटयोगं गते शनौ ॥५११० ॥
ततिकोणेऽथ वा चेति पितृपीडां विनिर्दिशेत्
5102 - 5110444. (a) Paternal grand-father will be
endangered when Saturn transits the sign identical .
with the Navamsa occupied by the 12th lord (Jupiter), a trine thereof, or the sign that is aspected by
the 12th lord.
(b) In the 4th dasa, the native will find his son
in the grip of evils. In the 2nd dasa, evils to paternal
grand-father or paternal grand-mother will come to
pass with Saturn’s movements mentioned at “a”
above.
(c) Mental anguish will occur to maternal uncle
with Saturn’s transit in the sign identical with the
navamsa occupied by the 11th lord (i.e. Saturn
himself) or a trine thereof. During this transit, the
Sun’s journey in an evil sign will cause great fear.
(d) With the Sun at birth in Prabha Nadiamsa in
Scorpio (the 8th), Saturn’s journey in Virgo will
cause evils to co-born; in Sagittarius, Saturn will
kill the co-born.
(e) Jupiter in Prabha Nadiamsa will, in the 19th
or 20th year, endanger one’s parents. Some danger
will however come to pass in the 9th year.
(f) In the 2nd dasa, when Saturn journeys in the
sign identical with the Navamsa occupied by the
4th lord (Moon) oratrine, one’s father will be much
anguished. Father will be endangered in the end of
the 3rd dasa, or in the lst sub period of 4th dasa.
(g) Saturn’s transit in Scorpio coinciding with
the 2nd dasa will endanger paternal grand-father
and will cause evils. If he survives, Saturn’s
journey in Sagittarius will be decisively evil.
(h) Saturn’s movement in the Sun sign will be
an evil in respect of one’s father.
भेदमातुलयोगेन विपदाये महत् सुखम् ॥५१११ I
प्राबल्यं चैव लभते TE FATT |
रन्धेशद्ष्टराशीषु TIT HTT ॥५११२ ॥
स्फुटयोगं गते मन्दे स्वजनाप्तजनावधि |
कन्याशनिस्थिते काले जन्मदेशे नृपावधि ॥५११३ ॥
शनिचारवशा्रोगी पीडितोऽत्यन्तदुःखवान् |
भाग्येशे विकटां शस्थे शन्यङ्गारकवीक्षिते ॥५११४॥
अल्पभोगं च लभते राजद्वारे कुयुक्तिमान् |
कुत्सितप्रभुराज्येषु तद्वारि विकटोक्तिमान् ॥५११५ ॥
5111 - 5115. (a) The 3rd dasa will bring forth
much happiness and prosperity due to association
with step-brothers. The 4th dasa will cause employment.
(b) Saturn’s moving in the sign reflected by the
Navainsa of the 8th lord (Mars), or a trine thereof,
or the sign aspected by the 8th lord, will trouble
one’s Close relatives.
(c) In Virgo, Saturn’ s transit will be a source of
trouble to the ruler. The native will be subjected to
illness, evils and abundant grief.
(d) The lord of the 9th (Jupiter) in Vikata
Nadiamsa in aspect to Saturn and Mars will cause
limited pleasures. The person will resort to evil
designs while in royal service. He will serve a
mean king with praises of unusual nature.
कन्यागुरुस्थिते काले ह्यथवा गुरुवक्रगे ।
मोञ्जीबन्धनमाप्नोति तत्काले पितृसौख्यवान् ॥५११६ ॥
बालारिष्ट भयं किंचिच्छान्त्या शान्तिं प्रयास्यति |
पोडशाब्दे विवाहः स्यादथवा मनुवत्सरे ॥५११७ II
स्वमातुलकुलो राही पुत्रपुत्रीसमृद्धिमान् |
सिंहांशके पूर्वभागे मीने जीवे प्रजायते ॥५११८ ॥
बालारिष्ट भयं नास्ति चतुरब्दे महाविपत् |
जन्मादिसप्तमे मासे ह्यष्टमेकादशेऽथ वा ॥५११९ ॥
मासे त्रयोदशे क्लेशं मान्द्यज्वरभयं क्वचित् |

Chandra Kala Nadi 231
aes द्वितीयाब्दे ज्येष्ठभ्राता शुभान्वितः ॥५१२० ॥
सुताधिपदशान्त्यादौ सुखाधिपतिदायगे |
अबलांशे प्रजातस्य states विनिर्दिशेत् ॥५१२९१॥
5116 - 5121. (a) With Jupiter’s transit in Virgo,
or during his retrogression movement, the person
will have his thread ceremony and see his father in
happiness. He will be subjected to infantile mortality to some extent, for which remedies will have
to be resorted to. His marriage will take place in his
16th year or in the 14th year with a bride hailing
from his maternal uncle’s family. He will have a
number of male and female children.
(b) Jupiter in Pisces with Leo Navamsa will
cause no fear of infantile mortality to the native of
first half of the subject Nadiamsa, in Aries ascendant. However, there will strike a great danger in the .
4th year of birth. ‘The 7th, 8th or 11th month from
birth will to some extent cause troubles, on a
Trayodasi day (13th day of either fortnight), due to
indigestion. In the 2nd dasa, during the 2nd year,
his older brother will enjoy auspiciousness.
(c) The (beginning of the) dasa of the 4th lord
(Moon) ‘or the end of the 50 lord (Sun) will
endanger the mother of the native.
भूसुतस्य दशान्त्यादौ राहुदाये स्वभुवित्तषु |
पञ्चचत्वारिंशकेऽन्दे ह्यपमृत्युभयं स्मृतम् ॥५१२२ ॥
सन्निपातभयप्रापितर्धनुर्मासे मृतिं वदेत्।
प्रभांशे वृश्चिके सूर्ये चापे कुन्दांशकेऽमृते ॥५१२३ ॥
मेषलग्ने प्रजातस्य राहुदाये मृतिं वदेत्।
लग्नाष्टमगते राहौ केतौ वा शनिवीक्षिते ॥५१२४॥
महारोगभयार्तश्च ह्यन्ते दुर्गतिमादिशेत् |
भूसुतस्य दाशान्त्यादौ राहुदाये स्वभुक्तिषु ॥५१२५।
अल्पपूरणे मध्यकाले ह्यपमृत्यर्भविष्यति |
जीविते पञ्चशत्वारिपरमायुश्च विन्दति ॥५१२६ Il
5122 - 5126. (a) The end of the dasa of Mars,
or the Ist sub period of Rahu dasa, will cause fear
of untimely death of the native, during his 45th
year. He will be threatened by delirium or dangerous vitiation of the three bodily humours and will
die with the Sun journeying in Sagittarius.
(b) The Sun in Prabha Nadiamsa in Scorpio and
the Moon in Kunda Nadiamsa in Sagittarius will
cause the death of an Aries-born in the dasa ruled
by Rahu. .
(©) Rahu or Ketu in the 8th in aspect to Saturn
will cause a great disease and a bad end. The end
of the dasa of Mars or the first sub period of Rahu
will kill him in the middle (i.e. untimely). If at all
he survives, 45 will be his maximum life-span.
।कुम्पलम्ने मालांशः ॥
मालंशके तुलासूरये कुम्भलग्ने प्रजायते |
श्यामवर्णशरीरी च मेधावी विक्रमान्वितः ye VW
कुम्भलग्ने तुलासूर्ये मीनांशे बुधसंयुते |
स्वयं सीमन्तपुत्रश्च नीलवर्णः शुभाकृतिः॥५१२८ ॥
सूर्यांशाधिपतौ जीवे त्वसितेन निरीक्षिते ।
लग्नाद्धनगते भोगी विद्याबुद्धियुतः सुखी ॥५१२९ ॥
मालांशे मालिकायोगे द्वितीये शुभखेचरे |
राजद्वारे प्रसिद्धश्च राजामात्यप्रसादवान् ॥५१३० ॥
5127 - 5130. Aquarius Ascendant - Mala
Nadiamsa: (a) One born in this part of the heavens
with the Sun in Libra will have a dark physique, be
highly intelligent and be valorous.
(b) The Sun in Libra along with Mercury and
obtaining Pisces Navamsa will make the subject as
the Ist issue of the family. He will have a bluish
body with handsome appearance.
(c) The Sun in the 2nd (the sign Pisces), aspected by Saturn, and acquiring a Navamsa of
Jupiter will bless one with pleasures, learning and
intelligence.
(d) With Malika Yoga present, a benefic in the
2nd house, will help one to beget fame in royal
circles and bring forth the mercy of the rulerand his
minister.
Berea तुलासूर्ये मीनांशे कुम्भकालगे |
घातांशगे प्रजातश्च सोदरीसोदीर्युतः ॥५१३१ ॥
बुद्धिमान् कुशलो वाग्मी ह्यन्तकोपी प्रगल्भवाक् |
कुम्भलग्ने पापकर्मा तुलासूर्ये धनाद्यवान् ॥५१३२ ॥
मालांशगे कुम्भलग्न ST जननं स्मृतम् |
अग्रहिऽथ वा चैव जीर्णगेहे प्रसूतिमान् 14233 ॥
इन्द्रपश्चिमीवीध्योश्च दक्षिणोत्तरभागगे ।
द्वारयुक्ते गृहे चैव मालांशे प्रसवः स्मृतः ॥५१३४॥
पूर्वभागे कुम्भलग्ने भूसुतेन निरीक्षिते |
प्रसूतिकाले जनन्या बहुवेदनमादिशेत् ॥५१२५ ॥
5131 - 5135. (a) The Sun in Libra with Pisces

232 Deva Keralam
Navamsa will cause brothers and sisters to the
native of Ghaata (or Maala) Nadiamsa, Aquarius
ascendant. he will further be intelligent, skilful,
eloquent, inwardly irascible and be proud in speech.
(b) The Sun in Libra will contribute to one’s
sinful deeds. He will be wealthy.
(c) One with Maala Nadiamsa, Aquarius ascendant, will have his birth in a remote village, in
a colony of Brahmins and in a dilapidated house.
The house concerned will be located in a street
spread from east to the west with an entry from the
south or north.
(d) Birth in the former half of the subject
Nadiamsa while the ascendant is aspected Mars
will be a source of much pains to the mother.
सुधांशगे निशानाथे मालिकायोगजस्य च |
आयुष्मन्तौ च पितरौ स्वपिता भ्रातृशोकवान् ॥५१३६ ॥
पितृष्वसा भाग्यवती भूषिता कनकप्रभा |
पत्रिणी भर्तृयुक्ता च बहुकालं सुजीवति ॥५१२३७ ॥
चन्दरादिमालिकायोगे चन्द्रे गुरुनिरीक्षिते |
राजलक्षणसन्पन्नो बाल्ये स्वल्प प्रपीडितः ॥५१३८ ॥
जन्मदाये क्रूरमासे लग्नाधिपतिभुकितिषु ।
मान्धज्वरभयार्तश्च मारीज्वरसुपीडितः॥५१३९ ॥
wad मीनांशगे च्रे गुरुभुक्तौ प्रजायते |
बालारिष्ट भयं किंचिच्छनिभुक्तौ प्रजायते ॥५९४० Il
जन्माब्दगे तृतीयान्दे मालांशे क्रूरमासगे |
बालारिष्ट भयप्राप्तिः शान्त्या शान्ति प्रयास्यति ॥५१४१ ॥
5136 - 5141. (a) The Moon in Sudha Nadiamsa
will cause long-living-parents to one bornin Malika
Yoga. His father will be grieved due to loss of acoborn. His paternal aunt will be fortunate, bedecked
with ornaments, will shine like gold, be endowed
with daughters and husband and will live well for
a long time.
(b) In case of Malika Yoga commencing from
the Moon, if Jupiter aspects the Moon, the subject
will be blessed with kingly appearance. During his
childhood, he will be subjected to some evils. In
the sub period of the ascendant lord (Saturn) during
the currency of the first dasa, with the Sun’s
adverse transits, indigestion and small-pox will
trouble the native.
(c) The Moon in Cancer with Pisces Navamsa
will in the sub period of Jupiter or Saturn in the first
dasa produce danger of infantile mortality.
(d) For a native of the subject Nadiamsa, the
3rd year in the first dasa will cause the same result
as above when the Sun is in adverse an adverse sign.
For this, suitable remedy be adopted.
लग्नाधिपेऽष्टमे स्थाने मालिकायोगजस्य च।
TIP दशन्त्यादावपमृत्युभयं क्वचित् ॥५१४२ ॥
तदोषपरिहारार्थं शनिप्रार्थनमादिशेत्।
षष्ठाष्टमव्यये चन्द्रे गुरुदृष्टिविवर्जिते ॥५१४२ ॥
बालरिष्टभयं सत्यं जन्मदाये न संशयः।
षष्ठे सुधांशगे चन्द्रे गुरुणा च निरीक्षिते yer ॥
बालारिष्टभयं नास्ति sarees |
राजतं चन्द्रमभ्यर्व्य देवज्ञाय प्रदापयेत् ॥५१४५ ॥
arene निहत्याशु गिरिर्वज्रहतो यथा |
लग्नाष्टमगते मन्दे स्वांशे गुरुनिरीक्षिते ॥५१४६ ॥
शनिप्रतिमादानेन देहारोग्यार्थसोख्यवान् |
wae नवांशगे चन्द्रे मालिकायोगजस्तथा ॥५१४७ ॥
गुरुृष्टे चिरायुष्मान् भवतः पितरौ तथा |
लाभेशे शनिसंदृष्टे ऋक्षसंधौ प्रजायते ॥५१४८ ॥
पित्ररिष्टो पशान्त्यर्थं दानं कुर्याद्विचिक्षणः।
सुवर्णहयदानेन पितृव्यारिष्टनाशनम् ॥५१४९ ॥
तदभावे क्लेशमेति पितृव्यस्तु न संशयः।
ऋक्षशानि प्रकुर्वीत पश्चादानं समाचरेत् ॥५१५० ॥
स्वर्णनिष्कप्रमाणेन ह्यश्वदानादि वृद्धिदम् |
$142 - 5150142. (a) Saturn placed in the 8th when
Malika Yoga is formed will be a source of untimely
death in the. beginning or end of the dasa of the 8th
lord (Mercury). Toeliminate such a danger, prayer
to the Saturn God should be offered.
(b) It will be true that one will be in the grip of
fear of infantile mortality in the very first dasaif the
Moon is placed in the 6th, 8th or 12th sans Jupiter’s
aspect.
(c) The Moon in the 6th (Cancer) in Sudha
Nadiamsa with an aspect from Jupiter will not be a
source of infantile mortality. Yet prayer to, the
Moon God, and worship of a silver image of the
Moon and donation of the same to an astrologer is
directed. As a result, the blemish will be crushed.
(d) Saturn in the 8th in aspect to Jupiter and

Chandra Kala Nadi 233
begetting his own Navamsa will promote physical
felicity and happiness by prayer to Saturn God (and -
will not be a blemish for the life of the person).
(e) The Moon in his own Navamsa, when
Malika Yoga is formed, will give longevity to one’s
parents.
(f) One born in the junctions of Cancer (with
Leo), Scorpio (with Sagittarius) or Pisces (with
Aries) will invite (untimely) danger to his father
(read paternal uncle), if the 11th lord (Jupiter) is
subjected to Saturn’s aspect. The discerning should
donate an image of golden horse. This act will ward
off the impending danger to the said paternal uncle.
If resorting to donation is shunned, paternal uncle
without doubt will pass through an evilsome phase.
Donation should be given after pacification ceremony of Nakshatra (concerned). Donation of a
borse made of gold worth a golden coin will cause
prosperity (of the uncle). ।
Notes: (0 Nakshatra Santhi means remedial
measures recommended for birth in last portions of
Cancer & C, That is for the Nakshatra Devatas of
Aslesha, Jyeshta or Revati as the case may be.
पितृव्यभवने शुक्रे तदीशे शनिवीक्षिते ॥५१५१ it
सुवर्णाश्वप्रदानेन पितृव्यारोग्यसोख्यवान्।
तदभावे जातकस्य पिता पितृसमोऽपि वा ॥५१५२ ॥
पाके जन्मदशान्त्यादो सम्पदाये विनाशनम् |
मालांशगे तुलासूर्ये निधनाधिपसंयुते ॥५१५२ ॥
पितृव्यस्य महारोगः शान्त्या शानत प्रयास्यति |
अरोगदृढगात्रश्च स्वपिता सात्विकः सुखी ॥५१५४ tt
व्यवसायपयो नित्यं प्रामद्रव्यापहारकः।
कालान्तरे WM स्वपिता नात्र संशयः॥५१५५ ॥ -
facet फलं चैति भ्रातृशोकयुतः पिता |
जन्मदाये द्वितीयान्दे जातकस्य महाविपत् ॥५१५६ ॥
तृतीयाब्दे क्वचिच्चैति क्रूरमासे न संशयः।
स्वपिता भगिनी भर्तृयोगेन श्रीयुतोभवेत् ॥५१५७ ॥
5151 - 5157. (a) If Venus is placed in the 11th
(Sagittarius) while his dispositor (Jupiter) begets
Saturn’s aspect, gifting of the image of a golden
horse will bring forth health and happiness to
paternal uncle. In the absence of this, the native’s
father, or someone equal to father will be destroyed
in the very first dasa.
(b) Birth in the subject Nadiamsa while the Sun
in Libra is conjunct the 8th lord (Mercury) will be
a source of a great disease to paternal uncle.
Suitable remedy should be tried in this regard. The
native’s father will possess sound and sturdy body,
be virtuous, happy, devoted to agriculture (or profession) and will always indulge in swindling the
village’s funds. After some interval, he will be
grieved on account of loss of a co-born in the
native’s 3rd dasa. The 2nd year of the Ist dasa will
involve the subject in a great danger. To some
extent, this can occur in an evil month in the 3rd
year. His father’s sister will be endowed with
wealth on account of her husband.
मालांशगे सौख्यमेति द्वितीयाब्दे न संशयः।
जन्माब्दगे जन्मदेशे मालांशे जन्मगेहगे ॥५१५८ ॥
महारोगातुरश्चेति भूपतिर्नात्र संशयः।
रन्ध्राधिपे भाग्यगते रन्धराधिपदशान्त्यगे ॥५१५९ ॥
स्वजन्मदेशे नृपतिर्महारोगातुरो भवेत् |
तदभावे पितृव्यश्च व्याप्यरोगप्रपीडितः॥५१६० Il
स्वपितामातुलक्लेशं तत्सुतो रोगसंयुतः।
नीचे मालांशगे सूर्ये जन्मनक्षत्रदायके ॥५१६१ ॥
स्वजन्मदेशे नृपतिः क्लेशं प्राणोति भूरिशः।
5158 - 5161. (a) The 2nd year will doubtless
cause happiness ... in the Ist year, there will be a
great diseases in the native’s family ... for the king
... (2) The 8th lord in the 9th will in his dasa trouble
the king with a disease (7). In the absence of this,
the native’s paternal uncle will be troubled by a
pervading illness. His father will be grieved on
account of his mother. Diseases will strike his son.
(b) The Sun in debility will in the first dasa
cause abundant anguish to the ruler of the country.
मीने मन्दे पूर्वभागे कुम्भलग्न समुद् भवः॥५१६२ Il
नीचे मालांशगे सूर्ये जन्मदाये नृपावधि ।
पितृव्यश्च तथा विन्द्यात् स्वपिता सौख्यभाग्भवेत् ॥५१६३ ॥
मालांशके जन्मदाये चामात्यप्राणनाशनम् |
पितृष्व सुर्भरतृभाग्यं योगप्राबल्यभादिशेत् ॥५१६४॥
5162 - 5164. In case of birth in former half of
Mala Nadiamsa, Aquarius ascendant, Saturn in
Pisces and the Sun in Libra will cause troubles to
the ruler (?) and to paternal uncle in the first dasa.

234 Deva Keralam
This dasa will cause happiness to one’s father, kill
the minister (7) and cause prosperity to the spouse
of paternal aunt.
Notes: From the above slokas, after removing
unconcemed portions, we can deduce the following. For Aquarius ascendant, Saturn in the 2nd and
the Sun in the 8th will cause happiness to father and
paternal uncle during the Ist dasa.
मालांशगे तुलासूर्ये मीनांशे जनितस्य च।
सोदराः सप्त संख्याश्च भगिन्यौ द्वे सजीविते ॥५१६५ ॥
आयुष्मन्तौ भ्रातरौ द्रौ शेषं नाशमितीरयेत्।
कर्मे राहुयुते दृष्टे सोदरभ्रातृवत्सलः॥५१६६ ॥
बुद्धिमान्नीतिमांश्चेति मकरांशे सुकोपवान् |
गुरुदृष्टया सुदीर्घायुः देवब्राह्मणपोषकः॥५१६७ ॥
वयोमध्ये भाग्यवृद्धिर्हरिशङ्करभक्ततिमान् |
षष्ठादिमालिकायोगे द्वितीये शुभखेचरे ॥५१६८ ॥
frre महद्भाग्यमपरा्धं ्रियायुतम्।
` §165 - 51684. (a) For one born in Mala Nadiamsa, the Sun in Libra and in Pisces Navamsa
denotes 7 brothers out of whom 2 will live long.
The rest will die early. 2 sisters with longevity will
also come to pass.
(b) The Sun in the 10th in association with
Rahu by aspect or conjunction will give fondness
for one’s brother. The subject will be intelligent
and justly disposed.
(c) If the Sun in the 10th occupies Capricorn
Navamsa, one will be highly irritable.
(d) The Sun in the 10th with Jupiter’s aspect
will be a source of longevity. The subject will
patronize (honour) gods and Brahmins. His prosperity will pick up in the middle part of his life. He
will be devoted to Lords Vishnu and Siva.
(e) The 3rd dasa will cause great prosperity and
its second half wealth if the 2nd is occupied by a
benefic planet as Malika Yoga commences from
the 6th house.
Notes: (€) Malika yoga is required to commence from the 6th house (“Shasta + Adi’) while
the 2nd is to be occupied by a benefic. Since only
7 planets can participate beginning the 6th house,
the Yoga will end with the 12th (Capricorn). In that
case there cannot be a benefic in the 2nd house.
Hence the text should read as “Sahsta + Adhipa”
denoting the 6th lord Moon instead of the 6th
house, Cancer. Then there can be a benefic in the
2nd house, simultaneously completing Malika Yoga.
दर्दरंशगते जीवे स्वक्षेत्रेशनिवीश्षिते ॥५१६९ ॥
कुम्भलग्न प्रजातश्च बन्धुमूलात् सुकीतिमान्।
, स्वपितुर्भगिनीपुत्रीयोगेन श्रियमश्नुते ॥५१७० ॥
विशद्रर्षात् परं भाग्यं त्रिंशोपरि विशेषतः।
दर्दरांशकगे जीवे चतुर्थे केतु संस्थिते ॥५१७१ ॥
लिपित्रयज्ञानमेति लेख्यविद्याविशारदः।
राजद्वारे कीर्तियुक्तः प्राधान्यप्रियान् गुणी ॥५१७२ ॥
विपद्याये सुवाहाप्तिस्तृतीयांशे सुभाग्यवान् |
बहुप्रामाधिकारी च प्रामणी व्यवसायकः॥५१७३ ॥
मौञ्जीबन्धनकर्माणि सम्पदाये न संशयः।
द्वादशाब्दे विवाहः स्यादथवा वसुवत्सरे ॥५१७४ ॥
विपदाये फलं सत्यं योगवान् कीर्मिमान् सुखी |
नीचे मृगांशगे सूर्ये दुर्दरंशकगे गुरो ॥५१७५ ॥
कुम्भलग्ने WA कलक्रद्रययोगवान् |
्षेमाधिपदशाकले स्वभुक्तौ दारनाशनम् ॥५९७६ ॥
कषिप्िणोद्राहमाप्नोति कन्यान्ते तौलिगे शनौ |
ज्येष्ठभार्याद्विसन्ताननाशं चैव भविष्यति ॥५१७७ ॥
दारान्ते सुतप्राप्तिरल्पसन्तानयोगवान् |
भाग्याधिपदशाकाले लग्नेशांशत्रिकोणगे ॥५१७८ ॥
स्फुटयोगं गते मन्दे पितृव्यस्य विनाशनम् |
पितृष्वसा दशामध्ये मीनान्ते मेषगे शनौ ॥५१७९ ॥
अतीव क्लेशकार्य च तत्िकोण क्वचित् क्वचित् ।
जन्मदाये पितृव्यस्य विवाहो यलविध्नितः॥५१८० ॥
पश्चाद्विवाहमाप्नोति fare मरिष्यति |
5169 - 51804. (a) Jupiter in Durdhara Nadiamsa and receiving the aspect of Saturn who is in
his own sign will cause much fame through one’s
relatives. He will make wealth through ason of his
father’s sister. His prosperity will rise after 20,
more so after 30.
(b) Jupiter in Durdhara Nadiamsa in the 4th
(Taurus) along with Ketu denotes knowledge in
three languages. He will be a skilful writer, will
achieve fame in royal circles, be fond of impor- `
tance and be virtuous. In the 3rd dasa, he will beget
aconveyance. In its last one third part, he will earn
much prosperity, will lord over many villages and

Chandra Kala Nadi 235
have agricultural gains. His 2nd dasa will cause his
thread ceremony. 12th or 14th year will give him
marriage. Effects for 3rd dasa will bear truth, in
which one will prosper, become famous and will
enjoy happiness. .
(c) The Sun in Libra with Capricorn Navamsa,
as Jupiter is in Durdhara Nadiamsa, will give two
wives an Aquarius-born. The subject will lose his
spouse in the first sub period of the 4th dasa. His
re-marriage will immediately take place, with Satum moving in the end of Virgo or in Libra. Two
children obtained through the first wife will be
destroyed. Progeny will occur through the 2nd
wife, but this will be limited.
(d) During the operation of the dasa of the 9th
lord, Saturn journeying in the sign equal to his own
natal Navamsa position or a trine thereof will kill
one’s paternal uncle. Father’s sister will be highly
anguished in the middle of the dasa, with Saturn
moving in the end of Pisces or in Aries. Anguish
will be less with. Saturn’s transits in the trines
thereof. - During the Ist dasa of the subject, there
will be hurdles to the marriage of father’s brother.
Later in his marriage will however take place. The
said paternal uncle will die in the 3rd dasa of the
native.
भाग्याधिपदशासन्धौ मालांशे eaftafarg ॥५१८१९ ॥
जीविते दीर्धमायुष्यं प्रत्यग्दाये मरिष्यति ।
सूर्याशगे त्रिकोणे स्फुटयोगं गते शनौ ॥५१८२ ॥
मालांशगे पित्ररिष्टं विपत्तारदशान्त्यगे | |
परत्यग्दाये मातृहानिश्चापे मन्दे च संस्थिते ॥५१८३ ॥
दर्दरंशकगे जीवे त्वसितेन निरीक्षिते ।
द्विचत्वारिंशगे माता परलोकं प्रयास्यति ॥५१८४ ॥
सुधांशगे निशानाथे विप्रकालोद्भवस्य च |
परं ब्रह्मोपदेशाच्च विनश्येच्च पितामही ॥५१८५ Il
5181 - 5185. (a) In the junction of the 9th lord’s
dasa (with the next one), one’s father will be in
danger. If he survives this phase, he will be
endowed with long life to die in the native’s Sth `
dasa.
(b) Saturn transiting in the sign identical with
the natal Sun’s Navamsa, or a trine thereof, will
cause evils to father if simultaneously the 3rd dasa
comes to an end. The Sth dasa will endanger his
mother with Saturn’s position (read “transit”) in
Sagittarius.
(c) Saturn aspecting Jupiter in Durdhara Nadiamsa at the time of one’s birth will cause mother’s
end in the 42nd year.
(d) Should the Moon be in Sudha Nadiamsa,
one born in the first quarter of Mala Nadiamsa,
Aquarius ascendant, will lose his paternal grandmother soon after his “Brahmopadesa” (or Spiritual Initiation).
कर्मेशांशे तत्तिकोणे स्फुटयोगं गते शनौ ।
स्वदेहायासरोगादि क्रूरमासे भविष्यति ॥५१८६ ॥
5186. Saturn’s transit in the sign identical with
the Navamsa occupied by the 10th lord (Mars), or
atrine thereof, will cause physical illness etc. to the
native coinciding with the Sun’s adverse movements.
नैधनेशदशाकाले कर्माधिपतिभुकतिषु |
मालांशगे प्रजातस्य दक्षिणायनगे मृतिः ॥५१८७ ॥
5187. One born in Mala Nadiamsa in Aquarius
ascendant will die in the sub period of the 10th lord
(Mars) during the currency of the dasa of the 8th
lord (Mercury) with the Sun’s southerly course.
` मालांशकगते जीवे स्वक्षेत्रे शनिवीश्षिते |
एकसप्ततिवर्षाणि परमायुश्च विन्दति ॥५१८८ ॥
तदर्धे ह्यपमत्युश्च शान्त्या शान्ति प्रयास्यति ।
अपमृत्युभयं नास्ति दीर्घायुरनत्र संशयः॥५१८९ ti
5188 - 5189. Jupiter in his own sign in Mala
Nadiamsa with Saturm’s aspect will contribute to
71 years of total life. In the 36th year, however, the
person will face a threat to his life. Once remedies
are resorted, there will be no such fear and he will
doubtless enjoy the prescribed life-span (i.e. 71
years).
लग्नात् कर्मगते राहौ द्वितीये शुभखेचे ।
स्थापको ह्यम्रहारस्योद्यानानां सरसां तथा ॥५१९० ॥
5190. Rahu in the 10th (Scorpio) while the 2nd
(Pisces) is occupied by a benefic will help one
construct a colony for Brahmins, apart from gardens and lakes.
लाभे शुक्रे प्रजातश्च योगवान् कीर्विमान् गुणी ।

236 Deva Keralam
्षेमदाये महद् भाग्यं विपद्दाये क्वचित् क्वचित् ॥५१९१ il
धनाधिपतिनाडीषु लग्नाधिपतिनाडिगे |
मालांशे मालिकायोगे फलं विस्तरमादिशेत् ॥५१९२ ॥
ब्रह्मलोकफलप्राप्तिरापत्संन्यासयोगवान् |
सूर्यनाडीफलं सत्यं प्रत्यक्षं देवकेरलम् ॥५१९२ ॥
5191 - 5193. (a) Venus in the 11th (Sagittarius)
will cause prosperity and fame. The 4th dasa will
yield much fortunes. The 3rd dasa will contribute
to limited fortunes.
(b) In Guru Nadi and Sani Nadi, effects for
Malika Yoga relating to birth in Mala Nadiamsa,
Aquarius ascendant have been stated in detail.
(©) One with Venus in the 11th will attain the
world of Brahma after death. He will take to ascetic
order due to a family calamity. These effects as
statedin Surya Nadi, and reflected in Deva Keralam,
will be unfailing.
कन्यावुधसोपलतांशनाडी फलम्।
बुधे सोमलतांशस्थे स्वोच्चे चन्द्रनिरीक्षते।
BRR प्रजातश्च शुद्रजन्मा सुखी भवेत् ॥५१९४॥
विप्रकाले प्रजातश्च वैश्यो वा ब्राह्मणोऽपि वा |
वैश्यकाले वैश्यवृत्तिः क्षत्रियश्च तथा भवेत् ॥५१९५ ॥
शुद्रसङ्कजातीषु जीवनं वैश्यवृत्तिना |
विप्रादिपञ्चजातीषु योजयेत् कालवित्तमः॥५१९६ ॥
हरिणांशसोमवल्ल्योः फलैक्यं मनुरब्रवीत् |
नाडीद्वयफलं चैकं ब्रह्मणा निर्मितं पुरा ॥५१९७ Il
भाग्येशे हरिणांशस्थे त्वसितेन निरीक्षिते |
चत्वारिंशात् परं शोकं बाल्येऽल्पसुखवान् भवेत् ॥५१९८ ॥
5194 - 5198. (a) Mercury in his exaltation sign
with Somalata Nadiamsa and begetting the aspect
_ of the moon will cause the birth of a Soodra, in the
last one fourth part of the Nadiamsa concerned. In
the first quarter of a Nadiamsa, the birth will be that
of a trader or a Brahmin. One born in the 3rd
quarter will have a trading profession while the one
belonging to 2nd quarter will be aruler. A Soodra
or one of mixed caste will also live by trading
profession.
(b) Similarity in effects for Harina as well as
Somavalli Nadiamsa have been stated by Manu.
Once Lord Brahma ordained identical effects for
these two Nadiamsas.
Notes: Slokas from 5194 to 5270 deal without
mention of any specific ascendant. However it
occurs to me that these slokas refer to Capricorn
ascendant whereof Mercury is the 6th and 9th lord
while some extremely rare but useful aphorisms
are also included independent of the caption. The
6th lord is the significator of maternal uncles
(“Matula” appears in sloka 5199) and the lord of the
9th in the captioned Nadiamsa is referred toin sloka
In sloka 5221, Libra ascendant is applied.
Hence as is common Nadi literature, these slokas
should apply to these two movable ascendants.
Importance is mostly given to the position of
exalted Mercury in Soma Lata Nadiamsa which is
also called Harina Nadiamsa. Somalata is also
called Somavalli and Somavathi. Thus.these four
names denote one and the same Nadiamsa.
(Somalata or Somavalli is a certain kind of creeper
while Harina means a deer.)
मध्ये भाग्यसमृद्धश्च वंशोपरि सुसोख्यवान् |
` बुधे सोमलतांशस्थे बाल्ये मातुलनाशनम् ॥५१९९ ॥
स्वपिता भ्रातृहीनः स्यात् सोदरी सुसमन्वितः।
पितृष्वसुः सुतः कश्चिदेवद्रव्यापहारकः॥५२०० ॥
धर्मध्वजी बुद्धिजीवी बालशिक्षाप्रदो भवेत्।
हरिणांशगते सूर्ये बुधे सोमलतांशगे ॥५२०१ ॥
स्वपिता रोगदेही च सम्पदाये मृतिं लभेत् |
सूर्याशके तत्तरिकोणे स्फुटयोगं गते शनौ ॥५२०२ ॥
सम्पदाये पित्ररिष्टं पश्चादुद्राहमादिशेत्।
सितांशगे सुखाधीशे बुधे सोमलतांशगे ॥५२०३ ॥
जननी दीर्घायुष्यं सोदरीसोदीर्युतः।
विक्रमेशस्य नाडीषु विस्तृतं WATT ATL ॥५२०४ ॥
पत्रयोगफलं चैव वदेदुद्राहलक्षणम् |
हरौ सोमलतांशस्थे सौम्ये रन्धे च संस्थिते ॥५२०५॥
बहवः सोदराश्चैव सन्तानानि तथेव च।
श्रीमन्तौ भ्रातरो ज्येष्ठावेकः पुत्रविहीनवान् ॥५२०६ ॥
कलन्रद्वयवांश्चैव पुत्रीभिश्च समन्वितः।
सर्वज्येष्ठानुजभ्राता पुत्रवान् THA भवेत् ॥५२०७॥
भरातृप्रियः सुसन्तोषी गूढकामरतः सुखी |
5199 - 5207142. (a) The lord of the 9th in Harina
Nadiamsa in aspect to Saturn will cause grief to the

Chandra Kala Nadi 237
native after the age of 40. He will enjoy limited
happiness in his boyhood days. In the middle of his
life, prosperity will increase. After 20, he will be
happy.
(b) Mercury in Somalata Nadiamsa will cause
loss of maternal uncle in one’s boyhood. Further,
his father will be bereft of brothers; perhaps he will
have sisters. Paternal aunt’s son will be somewhat
disposed to steal god’s (temple’s) wealth. The
native will be a synonym of virtues and be an
intellectual. He will impart education to kids.
(c) The Sun in Harina Nadiamsa while Mercury
is in Somalata Nadiamsa (i.e. both the planets with
similar Nadiamsas) will cause a diseased body to
one’s father who will die in the native’s 2nd dasa.
When Saturn moves in the sign identical with the |
Navamsa occupied by the Sun in the 2nd dasa,
father will be endangered. After father’s death, the
subject’s marriage will take place.
(d) Mercury in the subject Nadiamsa while the
4th lord is in a Navamsa of Venus will ensure
longevity of mother. The person will additionally
be endowed with co-born. In Guru Nadi, co-born
have been dealt with in detail.
(e) Venus in Somalata Nadiamsa while Mercury is in the 8th will cause a number of brothers
and children. One’s brothers will be wealthy. One
of his older brothers will have no male progeny but
daughters and two wives. Another brother immediately following the eldest will have both sons and
daughters, be fond of his co-born, be quite happy
and be secretively libidinous.
Notes: (e) “Hari” is indicative of Leoin Varaha
Mihira’s Brihat Samhita which does not however
suit our purpose as a planet is denoted by the term
in our text. “Hari” means “Venus” according to
Wm. Moniersas attributed to native lexicons though
such a view is yet unpublished.
स्वोच्चे कुम्भांशगे सौम्ये त्वसितेन निरीक्षिते ॥५२०८ ॥
सर्वज्येष्ठानुजभ्रातृत्रयवान् धर्मवत्सलः।
शूद्रेण स्नेहवान् रागी बहुमित्रयुतः सुखी ॥५२०९ ॥
बन्धुवे सुपूज्यश्च देवब्राह्मणपोषकः।
हरिणांशकगे सूर्ये हरिशङ्कर भक्तिमान् ॥५२१० Il
गुरुभक्तिरतो नित्यं सदा दीनजनप्रियः।
वैदिको धर्मवान् साधु वैदिकाचारवुद्धिमान् ॥५२११ ॥
5208 - 5211. (a) Mercury in exaltation with
Saturn’s aspect and with Aquarius Navamsa denotes existence of brothers following the oldest.
The person will fondly pursue moral merits. He
will befriend soodras, be passionate and will have
numerous friends. He will be highly honoured by
his kinsmen, and will patronize gods and Brahmins.
(b) The Sun in Harina Nadiamsa will make one
a devotee of Lords Vishnu and Siva. He will
honour his preceptors and be ever fond of the
indigent. He will be virtuous and will follow the
path specified by the Vedas.
नीचांशकगते सौम्ये शुभे केतौ च संस्थिते ।
SA वासमाप्नोति ह्यथ वा जननं स्मृतम् ॥५२१२ ॥
कालान्तरे पुण्यदेशे वासं च वार्धके श्रियम् ।
ज्येष्ठभ्रातृविनाशेन क्लेशं प्राप्नोति भूरिशः॥५२१२॥
5212 - 5213. Ketu in the 9th house while
Mercury isin his debilitation Navamsa denotes that
the person will live or is born in a remote village.
After some interval, he will shift to a shrine. He
will acquire wealth in his old age. Grief will come
_to pass due to loss of older brother.
बुधे सोमलतांशस्थे बहुसन्तानयोगवान् |
एकपुत्रश्चिरायुष्मान् पुत्रिकाः पञ्चसंख्यकाः॥५२१४ ॥
ग्रन्थान्तरे गर्गमते बुधे सोमलतांशगे |
at पुत्रौ कन्यकाः पञ्च दीर्धायुष्यो भवन्तिते ॥५२९१५ ॥
मनुसंख्याकसंख्याश्च सन्तानोत्पत्तय स्तथा |
नश्यन्ति बहवश्चैव ह्येकः पुत्रश्चिरायुषः ॥५२१६ ॥
वृद्धपाराशरे ग्रन्थे बुधे सोमलतांशगे ।
पुरापातकदोषेण मृतपुत्रबहुत्ववान् ॥५२१७ ॥
एकः पुत्रश्चिरायुष्मान् whet द्विपुत्रवान् ।
स्वमते द्यकपुत्रश्च पुत्रिका पञ्च जीवति ॥५२८१ ti
त्रिपुत्रिकाः सुमङ्गल्यःशेषं क्लेशयुतेऽपि च।
स्वजन्म सुतोत्पत्तरदर्धिमायुश्च विन्दति ॥५२१९ ॥
5214 - 5219. Mercury in Somalata Nadiamsa
(in Virgo) will give a lot of children. Only one son
will be long-lived. Daughters will be five in
number. According to sage Garga, two sons and
five daughters will be blessed with longevity; a
.total of 14 children will be born to the subject.
Many will die and one son will be long-lived.

238 Deva Keralam
(b) Sage Parasara’s work prescribes a number
of dead children due to sins of the previous births
if Mercury is found in the subject Nadiamsa. Only
one long-living son is denoted by Parasara, while
sage Gargarefers to two such male issues. According to me (the author), one son and five daughters .
will be long-lived. Three of the daughters will be
blessed with long-living husbands while the rest
will be anguished (due to untimely widowhood).
Children born in the native’s birth Nakshatra will
live long.
Notes: (a) The first line of sloka 5216 has an
alternative reading, thus: “ Manu samkhyaani
_ Santaanetaataattimaadiseth”
धर्माधिपदशाकाले पुत्रप्रापि विनिर्दिशेत् |
धनाधिपदशाकाले पुत्रप्राबल्यमश्नुते ॥५२२० ॥
अतीव सौख्यमाप्नोति पुत्रयोगं शुभावहम् |
व्यये सोमलतांशस्थे स्वोच्चे सोम्ये सुपुण्यवान् ॥५२२९ ॥
स्वदशायां तु सोख्यापििर्विपदाये ala: |
्षेमदाये दलं सौख्यं तृतीयांशे धनक्षयम् ॥५२२२ ॥
प्रत्यग्दाये दले चैव दारिदग्रेण च कशितः।
भाग्येशे त्वसितांशस्थे क्लेशं क्षेमदशान्त्यगे ॥५२२३॥
अतीव क्लेशदारिदय देशत्यागं विनिर्दिशेत्
्षेमाधिपदशाकाले गोचरे जन्मगे शनौ ॥५२२४॥
द्वितीये द्वादशान्त्ये वा मातृनिर्याणमादिशेत् |
सम्पत्तारदशासन्धौ सोमवल्यंशजस्तथा ॥५२२५ ॥
अपमृत्युभयप्रापि मृतप्रायोपजीवति |
रन्धराधिपदशाकाले भाग्यधिपतिभुक्तिषु ॥५२२६ ॥
प्रातृशोकं च लभते दरिद्रेण च afer: |
लाभाधिपदशन्त्यादो कर्माधिपतिदायगे ॥५२२७ ॥
मन्दे तुलान्त्यगे कीटे भ्रातृनिर्याणमादिशेत्।
_ rat सुतेशांशे स्फुटयोगं गते शनौ ॥५२२८ ॥
हरिणांशे प्रजातस्य भ्रातृशोकं विनिर्दिशेत् |
AH मनस्तापं भ्रातृपुत्रवशादव्यथाम् ॥५२२९ ॥
सहोदरसुतादीनामरिष्टं च विनिर्दिशेत् ।
5220 - 522912. (a) Birth of children is denoted
in the dasa of the 9th lord. In the dasa of 2nd lord,
children will prosper. The person will be exceedingly happy due to auspicious effects accrning to
his children. ।
0) Mercury in the 12th in exaltation and in the
captioned Nadiamsa will in his. dasa cause happiness. The 3rd dasa will give wealth. Half of the 4th
dasa will give happiness, while the last one third
part of the dasa will destroy wealth. Half of the 6th
dasa will cause an emaciated physique due to utter
penury.
(c) The end of the 4th dasa will cause anguish
if the 9th lord is placed in a Navamsa owned by
Saturn. Due to highly anguishing poverty, he will
leave his native country. Death of mother will
occur in the 4th dasa when Saturn reaches the Moon
sign, the 2nd or the 12th thereof.
(d) The concluding part of the 2nd dasa will
instil fear of untimely death if Mercury is in
Somavalli Nadiamsa. One will escape death.
(€) The sub period of the 9th lord during the
dasa of the 8th lord will usher grief on account of
loss of co-born. He will be emaciated due to
penury.
(f) Brother’s death can occur in the dasa of the
11th lord or the 10th lord.
(g) Saturn transiting the resultant sign caused
by adding the longitudes of the lords of the 8th and
5th will cause grief on account of loss of co-born if
Mercury is placed in Harina Nadiamsa. In a trine
to the said sign, Saturn’s transit will cause mental
agony apart from grief on account of co-born and
progeny. Evils to brother’s progeny is also denoted.
बुधांशगे तत्तरिकोणे षष्ठेशांशत्रिकोणगे ॥५२३० ॥
स्फुटयोगं गते मन्दे ह्यतिमित्रजनावधि ।
लाभाधिपदशाकाले स्वमित्रजननाशनम् ॥५२३१॥
कर्माधिपदशाकाले पूर्वोक्तस्फुटमार्गतः।
कर्मशांशे तत्रिकोणे व्ययेशांशत्रिकोणगे ॥५२३२ ॥
स्फुटयोगं गते मन्दे सहोदरमनोव्यथा |
$230 - 52324. (a) Saturm’s transit in the sign
denoted by Mercury’s Navamsa position or a trine
thereof will trouble one’s friends. In the dasa of
11th lord, one’s friends will be destroyed. In the
dasa of the 10th lord, Saturn transiting the sign
identical with the Navamsa occupied by the 10th
lord, as stated earlier, or the Navamsa of the 12th
lord, will cause mental distress to co-born.
केत्वंशगे afar सोमवल्यंश जस्य च 14233 ॥

Chandra nala Nadi 239
स्फुटयोगं गते मन्दे देशाधिपतिनाशनम्।
भूपतिःसमनाशो वा जन्मदेशे जनावधि ॥५२३४॥
अमात्यजनशोकादिं शनिचारेण योजयेत् |
जीवास्तमनकाले वा शुक्रास्तमयकालके ॥५२३५ ॥
RUS क्रूरमासे देहायासं विनिर्दिशेत् ।
TM तत्िकोणे चापराशौ च संस्थिते ॥५२३६ ॥
RUST HOTA स्वजनारिष्टमादिशेत् |
स्वदेहायासमथवा मित्रवर्गे विशेषतः ॥५२३७ I
बन्धुवर्गे प्रपीडादिं योजयेत् कालवित्तमः।
मीने नीचांशगे चन्द्रे स्वोच्चे कुभांशगे बुधे ॥५२३८ ॥
कर्माधिपदशासौख्यं लाभधिपदशाव्यथाम्।
उत्तरार्धं शुभं किंचित् पञ्चाशद्रत्सरान् परम् ॥५२३९ ॥
सर्वदाये राहुभुक्तावतीव क्लेशमादिशेत्।
aay क्वचिच्चैव कुजभुक्तो शुभाशुभम् ॥५२४० ॥
सूर्यदाये राहुभुक्तावतीव क्लेशमादिशेत् |
चन्द्रदाये विशेषेण राहुभुक्तौ महाविपत् ॥५२४१ ॥
तदोषपरिहारार्थं शान्ति कुर्याद्विचक्षणः।
पञ्चपञ्चाशगे वर्षे षटपञ्चाशे च वत्सरे ॥५२४२ ॥
अन्तर्दशारिष्टशानि कारयेद्िधिवत् क्रमात् |
वृषभान्ते चक्रसन्धौ चक्रदानं समाचरेत् ॥५२४३ ॥
5233 - 5243. (a) Irrelevant: For a birth with
Mercury in Somavathi Nadiamsa, Saturn’s journey
in the sign identical with the Navamsa occupied by
Ketu, or a trine thereof, will destroy the ruler of the
country or someone equal to him apart from causing troubles to the inmates. With Saturn’s transits,
grief to the minister and others can be deduced.
(b) At the time of the setting periods of Jupiter
and Venus, coinciding with evil transits of Jupiter
(year) and the Sun (month), the native will incur
physical ailments (in the dasa of the lord of the
(c) His kinsfolk will be subjected to evils when
Saturn moves in the sign identical with the Navamsa occupied by the lord of the 8th, or a trine
thereof, or in Sagittarius coinciding with the adverse transits of Jupiter and the Sun. The native
particularly people from his friends’ circle will also
incur physical diseases.
(d) The Moon in Pisces with Scorpio Navamsa
as Mercury is in his sign of exaltation with Aquarius
Navamsa will help the lord of the 10th give happiness in his dasa. But the dasa of the 11th lord will
be asource of distress. Its 2nd half will however be
auspicious, following the age of 50.
(e) The sub periods of Rahu in the various dasas
will cause anguish (for natives of Capricorn and
Libra). The Moon’s sub period will be a source of
some anguish while that ruled by Mars will produce
an admixture of good and bad effects. The Sun’s
dasa in combination with Rahu’s sub period will
promote anguish. The sub period of Rahu in the
dasa of the Moon will specially involve the person
in a great danger. To overcome this, palliative
measures be sought. During the 55th and 56th
"years, suitable remedies as prescribed by the Sastras
be done to ward off the blemish of relevant sub
period. Donation of an image of the zodiac (ora
mystical Tantrik diagram) be given (when Saturn
journeys) in the endof Taurus or in the end of Pisces
(the junction point with Aries).
साधनेशदशाकाले aE ।
चक्रसन्धो च संप्राप्ते ह्यपमृत्युर्भविष्यति ॥५२४४ ॥
ज्येष्ठभ्रातृवियोगादिस्वजनारिष्ठमादिशेत् |
तत्काले जातकस्यापि मारकश्च न विद्यते ॥५२४५ ॥
, मीने नीचांशगे चन्द्रे स्वोच्चे कुम्भांशगे बुधे ।
साधनेशदशान्त्यादौ नैधनेश दशाविपत् ॥५२४६ ॥
5244 - 5246. (a) Note the planet ruling the dasa
that will be the 8th from the commencing one. In
the sub period equal to that, during the dasa that is
the 6th from birth, Saturn moving in the end of
Pisces will produce fear of untimely death of the
person. Further, one may be separated from (or
lose) his older brother and see his men in the grip
of evil effects. But this phase is not stated to be a
death-giver for the native.
(b) The end of the said sub period (vide “a”
above) in the 6th dasa will usher a danger if at birth
the Moon in Pisces begets Scorpio Navamsa while
Mercury is exalted with Somalata Nadiamsa position.
Notes: (b) “Naidhanesa dasa” in the 2nd line of
Sloka 5246 is a faulty text. It only denotes the sub
period as above.
नैधनेश दशाकाले Tea भुक्तिषु |
कुलीरचक्रे निर्याणं चन्द्र्षमासकोणके ॥५२४७ ॥

240 Deva Keralam
5247. Note the sub period as stated in “a”
above. This phase within the dasa that will be
eighth from birth (some may interpret it as 8th
lord’s dasa), death will occur with Saturn in Cancer. The transit Sun will then be in the Moon sign
or a trine thereof.
Notes: “Kulira Chakra” poses a riddle to detect
the exact implication. Whether it refers to Cancer
- Moon dasa (as per KCD) or to Saturn’s journey in
Cancer. Such difficulty occurs in the later pages
also. Earlier part of the text has been so pliable that
it can be interpreted either way. In some places it
offers no acceptable meaning.
रविशुक्रौ सुधांशस्थो बुधे सोमलतांशके |
निधनाधिपतेश्चक्रे भाग्यक्षीणं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥५२४८ ॥
तृतीयांशे स्वल्पसौख्यं गेहे कल्याणसंभ्रमम् |
सुपुत्रोद्राहसौख्यापिं मेषांशे वृषभे गुरौ ॥५२४९ ॥
तृतीयांशे स्वल्पसोख्यं गेहे कल्याणसंभ्रमम्।
सुपुत्रोद्राहसौख्याप्ति मेषांसे वृषभे गुरौ ॥५२४९ ॥
Waren त्रिपञ्चाशे स्वपुत्रोद्राहसं भ्रमम् |
शुक्रशक्ष तृतीयांशे मध्यखण्डे न संशयः॥५२५० ॥
5248 - 5250. The Sun and Venus in Sudha
Nadiamsa as Mercury is Somalata Nadiamsa will
cause loss of fortunes in the 8th lord’s dasa. Its last
one third part will give some happiness and a
marriage function in the family circles. The native’s son will be married with Jupiter in transit in
Taurus with Aries Navamsa. Another authority
States that during the native’s 35th year, his son’s
marriage will take place.
Notes: The term “Sukerasarkshe” is a hurdle to
translate the 2nd line of sloka 5250.
कर्माधिपदशाकाले भाग्याधिपतिचक्रके |
अतीव भाग्यवृद्धिः स्याद्व्रणमोचनमादिशेत् ॥५२५१ ॥
5251. The dasa of the 10th lord and the sub
period of the 9th lord will cause a great improvement in prosperity and one will be relieved of his
debts (not ulcers as indicated by “Vrana” - a
misnomer for “Rina” or debt.)
लाभाधिपदशान्त्यादौ कर्माधिपदशासुखम्।
धनधान्याभिवृद्धि च पुनर्योगं समश्नुते ॥५२५२ ॥
5252. The dasa of the 10th lord and the
beginning and ending parts of the 11th lord’s dasa
will accelerate acquisition of wealth and grains and
help in enjoying Yoga effects again.
धनाधिपदशाकाले त्वष्टमर्षंशभुक्तिषु |
कालमृत्युभयप्रापिर्देहान्ते पुण्यलोकवान् ॥५२५३ ॥
5253. In the dasa of the 2nd lord and in the sub
period identical with the 8th dasa, the person will
inescapably die. Quitting the mortal coil, he will
go to the Heavens.
लग्ने जीवे व्यये मन्दे दशमे राहुसंस्थिते ॥
अतीव क्लेशदारिद्ये देशत्यागं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥५२५४॥
5254. One will be much anguished, will suffer
from penury and will leave the country if the
ascendant is in occupation by Jupiter, as Saturn and |
Rahu are in order in the 12th and 10th.
व्ययेऽशुभसंयुक्ते वा कर्तरीयोगजस्तथा |
मध्यमायुरिति ख्यातः पुत्रभावेऽतिचञ्चलः॥५२५५ ॥
सशुभे कर्तरीयोगे चन्दर पूर्णबलैर्युति |
राजयोगं च लभते दत्तपुत्रयुतो भवेत् ॥५२५६ ॥
12th having a Kartari yoga (i.e. malefics on either
side of the 12th) will only cause a medium span of
life. Further, one will not have progeny (or male
issues) and be highly fickle-minded.
(b) With the 12th house hemmed between
benefics while the Moon is endowed with full
strength, a Raja Yoga is caused apart from adoption
of a male issue.
Notes: (a) “Putra + Bhava” should read as
“Putra + Aabhava” to denote childlessness.
लग्ने पापे व्यये सौम्ये दशमे राहुसंस्थिते ।
मध्ये वयसि भाग्यापिं वार्धके क्लेशमादिशेत् ॥५२५७ ॥
चत्वारिंशे मनस्तापमपमत्युं तथेव च।
अथवा भाग्यनाशं च क्लेशं प्रापनोति भूरिशः॥५२५८ ॥
5257 - 5258. The ascendant occupied by a
malefic planet while the 12th and 10th are occupied
by a benefic planet and Rahu in order will produce
prosperity in the middle of one’s life. But old age
will be distressful. Mental anguish and fear of
untimely death in the 40th year or destruction of
fortunes and acquisition of anguish will come to
pass additionally.
लग्ने शुभे व्यये पापे पापांशे पापकर्तरी।

Chandra Kala Nadi 241
शोर्यकृत्यपयो नित्यं रागी विश्वासघातकः ॥५२५९ ॥
5259. Papa Kartari Yoga: This yoga is
formed (even) if the ascendant is occupied by a
benefic, while the 12th has a malefic that begets a
malefic’s Navamsa. As a result, the native may
perform valorous deeds but he will be passionate
and will betray the confidence reposed in him by
others.
लग्ने नीचे व्यये पापे स्वोच्चांशे नीचकर्तरी |
उग्रकार्यपरो नित्यं रागी महारोगेण कशितः॥५२६० Il
5260. Neecha Kartari Yoga: The ascendant
occupied by a debilitated planet as there is a
malefic in the 12th with debilitation Navamsa
causes what is called “Neecha Kartari Yoga”. One
who has such a combination will ever perform
. fierce deeds and. be emaciated due to a great
disease.
चन्द्रात् पञ्चमगे पपे चन्द्राधियोगजस्तथा |
त्िंशोपरि सुभाग्यापि योगवान् रोगवान् भवेत् WYRE Il
5261. One born with Chandra Adhi Yoga, but
with a malefic in the Sth from the Moon, will enjoy
fortunes after the age of 30. He will incur prosperity and disease as well.
सुतेशे नीचराशिस्थे व्यये पापद्रयाश्रिते ।
यमलोत्पत्तिनाशं च भाग्यारिष्टं मतः परम् ॥५२६२ ॥
agg भ्रातृशोकश्च स्वप्रोभश्च महाविपत् |
गोचरे शनिदोषेण स्वराजभ्रातूनाशनम् ॥५२६३ ॥
दारद्यविनाशेन क्लेशं प्राप्रोति भूरिशः।
रन्धाधिपदशासंधौ कर्माधिपतिभुक््तिषु ॥५२६४ ॥
इदमेव फलं सत्यं योगमामरणं भवेत् |
लग्नाधिपदशाकाले पुण्यतीर्थाटनं शुभम् ॥५२६५ ॥
मारकस्थानदोषेण स्वभुक्तौ मृतिमादिशेत्।
क्षयावस्थां गते चेन्द्रावसितेन निरीक्षिते ॥५२६६ ॥
लग्नाज्जामित्रगे जीवे मूलार्शक्षयरोगवान् |
Ba ह्यमृत्युश्च शान्त्या शान्ति प्रयास्यति ॥५२६७ ॥
चत्वारिंशे मनस्तापं देहारोग्यं सुखासुखम् |
कालचक्रादिदोषण ह्येकचत्वारिवत्सरे ॥५२६८ ॥
aaa मृतिं सत्यं स्वभुक्तो नात्र संशयः।
अन्तर्दशादिमार्गेण फलमन्याद्विचार्यताम् ॥५२६९ ॥
व्यये पापद्वय पीडां देहान्ते नरकं व्रजेत् ।
चेष्टा केन्रफलाध्याये चन्द्राधियोगजस्य च ।
मित्रोपतापपापेन सन्ततिक्षीणमादि शेत् ॥५२७० ॥
5262 - 5270. (a) The lord of the Sth in his sign
of debility, as the 12th is occupied by two malefics,
will destroy twins born to the native. After this, his |
fortunes will also vanish. Prior to these, he will lose
his brother and see his employer in a great danger.
Due toadverse transits of Saturn, the king’s brother
will die (?) Anguish in abundance will occur due
to loss of wives (to the native). The end of the 8th
lord’s dasa and the sub period of the 10th lord will
give these effects. But the native will enjoy
prosperity till the end of his life (7)
(b) In the dasa of the lord of the ascendant, he
will undertake a pilgrimage and beget auspicious
effects.
(c) With the Moon in decline in aspect to Saturn
while the planet Jupiter occupies the 7th from the
ascendant, one will incur piles, intestinal disorders
and lung tuberculosis. Further, there will be a
danger of untimely death at 32. Suitable remedies
will have to be done to enjoy protection. At 40,
mental anguish will exist while health will have ups
and downs. The 41st year coinciding with the Ist
sub period of the 4th dasa will undoubtedly kill him
due to blemish of “Kalachakra etc. (7) Results
should be understood with the help of sub periods.
(d) Two malefics in the 12th will be a source of
pains. These planets will consign him to the hell
following death. In the chapter entitled “Cheshta
Kendra’s Effects (in the work consulted by the
author), decline of one’s dynasty is mentioned due
to causing distress to friends by one having
Chandradhi Yoga.
वृश्चिकलम्ने चनद्धत्रिकोणभावफलम्।
स्निग्धांशगे निशाने शीतलांशकगे गुरौ ।
सुमदांशे प्रजातश्च श्यामवर्णः कृशाकृतिः॥५२७१॥
तृतीयगर्भे संजातो ह्यथवा च चतुष्टये |
लाभे गुरुयुते श्रीमाञ्ज्येष्ठभ्रातृसमन्वितः॥५२७२ ॥
शीतलांशकगे जीवे लग्नात् केन्द्रत्रिकोणगे |
आयुष्मन्तौ च पितरौ सोदरीसोदौर्युतः॥५२७३ ॥
स्वक्षेत्रगे सुते जीवे चतुर््रहयुतेक्षिते |
स्थिरलग्ने प्रजातस्य VAT इति स्मृतः॥५२७४ ॥

242 Deva Keralam
शीतलांशे त्विद्रयोगे वृश्चिके च प्रजायते |
गर्मश्रीमान् महान् भोगी ज्येष्ठभ्रात्रा सुकीर्मिमान् ॥५२७५ ॥
ated स्वपिता बाल्ये पितृनाशेन कर्शितः,
मध्ये भ्रातृवियोगेन क्लेशं चैति द्विभार्यकः॥५२७६ ॥
5221 - 5276. Scorpio Ascendant - Lunar .
Trines: (a) The Moon and Jupiter respectively
placed in Snigdha and Seetala Nadiamsas will
cause ablack thin physique to one born in “Sumada”
Nadiamsa, in Scorpio ascendant. He will be the 3rd
or the 4th issue of the family.
(b) Jupiter in the 11th (Virgo) will make one
wealthy and will cause older brothers.
(c) Jupiter in Seetala Nadiamsa, in an angle or
trine from the ascendant, will contribute to longliving parents. The native will have brothers and
Sisters.
(d) Indra Yoga: Jupiter in the 5th in his own
sign and be in aspect to or in conjunction with four
heavenly bodies will cause what is called “Chandra
Yoga” (read Indra Yoga) applicable to a fixed sign
ascending (i.e. to Leo and Scorpio only). One born
in Indra Yoga with Scorpio ascendant will have an
older brother who will be wealthy right from his
birth, be a great man, will enjoy pleasures and be
widely famous. The native’s father would be
indigent, would lose his father in childhood, become thin-bodied, would iose his brother in the
middle of his life to his anguish and would have two
wives.
Notes: From sloka 5271 through 5294, the
ascendant dealt with is Scorpio.
(d) Chandra yoga in the text should read as
Indra Yoga. “Seetala Nadiamsa” in sloka 5275 is
redundant as it describes effects of Indra Yoga. In
the following slokas, in some places, the term
“Indra Yoga” redundantly appears which is excluded from the rendering.
शीतलांशकगे जीवे स्वपितुः सोदरीद्रयम् |
एकापुत्रवती चैव बहुकालं सुमङ्गली ॥५२७७.॥
पत्रीशोकवती चेका वैधव्येन च कर्शिता |
आयुष्मन्तौ मातुलौ द्रौ मातामहश्चिरायुषः॥५२७८ ॥
5277 - 5278. Jupiter in Seetala Nadiamsa would
Cause two sisters to one’s father. One of them will
have male issues and a long-living husband. Another one will incur grief on account of ioss of ason
and be emaciated due to widowhcod. Further, the
subject will have two long-living maternal uncles
and his maternal grand-father will enjoy longevity.
स्निग्धांशके तुष्टमनाः प्रजातः। स्यादल्पमित्रः कृशदीर्धगात्रः।
शुचिर्महानुद्धिरतीवे भीरु रवृद्धान्वितो धर्मपरायणश्च ॥५२७९ ॥
सिग्धांशगे निशानाथे राहुयोगे शनीक्षिते ।
नालवेष्टनमाप्नोति बालरिष्ट भयं क्वचित् ॥५२८० ॥
राजोपजीवी शूरश्चेन्द्रयोगे सुबुद्धिमान् |
दान्तः शुचिः शठो वाग्मी भोगवान् दैवचिन्तकः ॥५२८१ ॥
शीतलांशकगे जीवे शन्यङ्गारकवीकषिते |
सुमदांशे प्रजातश्च बाल्ये मान्द्ज्वरातुरः ॥५२८२ ॥
मसूरिकाभयं किचिज्जन्मदाये ह्युपद्रवम् |
चन्द्राष्टमेशदोषेण मृतप्रायोपजीवति ॥५२८३ ॥
चन्द्रारिष्टविनाशाय चन््ाप्रार्थनमादिशेत् |
राजतं चन्द्रमभ्यर्च्य दानं कुर्याद्विचक्षणः ॥५२८४ ॥
जन्मदाये द्वित्रिवारं बाल्ये देहे प्रपीडितः।
तदयोषपरिहारार्थं दानं कुर्याद्विचक्षणः ॥५२८५ ॥
सवसं चान्द्रप्रतिमां कांस्यपात्रोपरि स्थिताम् |
सिततण्डुलशाकादिनवनीतयुतां तथा ॥५२८६ ॥
मनुः
अमृतायोक्तमन्रेण सितपुष्पः स्वहस्तकैः।
राजतं चनद्रमभ्यर्च्य देवज्ञाय प्रदापयेत् ॥५२८७ ॥
महारोगक्षयादेश्च बालारिष्टशतादपि |
क्िप्रेणारोग्यमायुष्यं पिप्रोश्चेव शुभाधिकम् ॥५२८८ ॥
5279 - 5288. (a) The Moon in Snigdha Nadiamsa will produce the following results. The
native will be a pleased person, will have a limited
number of friends, an emaciated and tall physique,
be pure (or honest), highly intelligent, timid, endowed with elder descendants and be charitable.
(b) The said Moon joining Rahu and begetting
the aspect of Saturn will cause birth with umbilical
cord and to some extent fear of childhood mortality. He willlive through royal patronage, be heroic,
be highly intelligent, subdued, pure, crafty, eloquent, will enjoy pleasures and will be pious.
(©) Jupiter in Seetala Nadiamsa and being in `
aspect to Saturn and Mars will trouble one of
Sumada fdadiamsa, Scorpio ascendant. with indigesiion and small-pox during childhood. The Ist

Chandra Kala Nadi 243
dasa will somewhat cause a calamity. Jupiter,
being the lord of the 8th from the Moon sign (i.e.
the Moon should be in Taurus or Leo), will nearly
kill the person. To ward off his lunar blemish, a
silver image of the Moon god should be worshipped and donations given. For two or three
weeks (i.e. for a brief duration), in the Ist dasa, the
subject will incur physical ailments which can be
surmounted by charities. The image of the Moongod duly robed should be placed on a copper vessel `
accompanied by white rice grains, vegetables etc.
along with butter. According to Manu, one should
with his own hands worship the Moon-god with
white flowers reciting the “Amritaya” Mantra and
should donate it (the image) to the astrologer.
Tuberculosis or other great diseases will vanish and
the blemish of infantile mortality will be eliminated. The child will instantly recover its health,
and auspicious effects in an increased measure will
occur to parents.
लग्ने राहुयुते चन्द्रे शन्यङ्गारकवीधिते ।
जलाग्निविषभीतश्च मसूरीज्वरपीडितः॥५२८९ ॥
5289. The Moon in the ascendant (Scorpio) in
conjunction with Rabu and in aspect to Saturn and
Mars will cause fear from water, fire and poison,
and trouble from small-pox.
इन्द्रयोगे निशानाथे लग्ने मन्दे शुभेक्षिते ।
पर्णेनुप्रदानेन दीर्घमायुश्च विन्दति ॥५२९० ॥
मातापित्रोः सुतस्यापि सहस्नारिष्टनाशनम् |
ज्येष्ठभ्रातुः सुदीर्घायुरिनद्रयोगोद् भवस्य च ॥५२९१ ॥
विदांशके विलग्नेशे दशमे बहुकीर्तिमान् |
बाल्ये स्वल्पसुखं चेव fared सुकीर्मिमान् ॥५२९२ ॥
सूर्यकालाधिपे चन्द्रे सिहांशे नीचराशिगे |
स्वपिता मनसि क्लेशं योगभङ्गवशादव्यथाम् ॥५२९३ ॥
तृतीयान्दे जन्मदाये स्वपिता भाग्यमश्नुते |
पितामहारिष्टदेशे योगप्राबल्यमादिशेत् ॥५२९४ ॥
5290 - 5294. (a) The Moon in Indra Yoga (?)
while Saturn is in he ascendant in aspect to a
benefic will cause longevity with the donation of a
“strong” (healthy) cow; the parents and the child
will be relieved of a thousand blemishes.
(b) One born in Indra Yoga will have a long- -
living older brother.
(c) The lord of the ascendant (Mars) in the 10th
(in Leo) will produce wide-spread fame particularly in the 3rd dasa. His childhood will restrict his
happiness.
(d) The Moon in the sign Scorpio with Leo
Navamsa, and begetting the lordship of the day,
will cause mental distress to father due to interruption in prosperity. During the native’s 3rd year,
father will earn prosperity in a region where his
father (i.e. the native’s paternal grand-father) incurred great evils.
कटकलम्ने धनदांशफलम्।
धनदांशे पूर्वभागे कुलीरे च प्रजायते |
पूर्वपश्चिमवीथ्योश्च देवालयसमीपके ॥५२९५ ॥
बहवृक्षसमीकर्णे जलसंयुतदेशके |
AMA पुरे जातः सीमान्ततनयः स्मृतः ॥५२९६ ॥
अथवा च द्वितीयश्च पूर्वभागे प्रजायते |
उत्तरांशे प्रजातश्च पञ्चमोऽयं प्रकीर्तितः ॥५२९७ ॥
5295 - 5297. Cancer Ascendant - Dhanada
Nadiamsa: One belonging to the Ist half of this
Nadiamsa will be the Ist or 2nd issue of the family.
His birth will be in a street spread from the east to
west, near a temple located in a place surrounded
by water and many a tree. The one born in the 2nd
half of the subject Nadiamsa will be the Sth issue.
लग्नेशे स्वोच्चराशिस्थे लग्ने गुरुयुतेक्षिते ।
लग्नेशे गुरुसंदृष्टे समगात्रस्वरूपवान् ॥५२९८ ॥
मितांशे मितभाषी च मितनिद्रोऽतिजाग्रकः।
राजसेवापयो नित्यं बहुभ्रातृजनान्वितः ॥५२९९ ॥
वाचालकः सत्यवादी दिव्यनामा सुरूपवान् |
नानाशास्रकलाभिज्ञो Teast कोविदः ॥५३०० Il
गीतवाद्यरसाभिज्ञो ASAT: |
विद्रत्सभायाः कर्ता च काव्यनारटकवल्लभः॥५३०१ Il
सत्कथाश्रवणो नित्यं देवब्राह्यणपोषकः।
यथार्थवादी तत्त्वज्ञः कलाशाख्रविचक्षणः 1430 2 ॥
निषिद्धदिवसे काले ह्यन्यस्रीसद्गचित्तवान् |
अदृष्टशाली धर्मात्मा राजयोग युतो भवेत् ॥५३०३ ॥
रक्तवर्णो मध्यगात्रः कुन्जदेहस्वरूपवान् |
दुष्टेषु दुष्टबुद्धिश्च क्रूरेषु क्रूरकृत्यवान् ॥५३०४ ॥
पितृभाग्यविहीनश्च स्वभुजार्जितवित्तवान् |

244 Deva Keralain
सर्वशास्र्थतत््वज्ञो मन्दांशे सुखनायके 14304 Il
सर्वेषामुपकारी च शौर्यहास्य सुकीर्िमान् ।
सत्कथाश्रवणो नित्यं श्रीमान् दीनजनप्रियः॥५३०६ Il
विष्णुव्रतोपवासी च विष्णुगानरसप्रियः।
देवालयतराकादे रूत्कृष्ट धर्मसिद्धिमान् ॥५३०७ ॥
सन्मार्वृत्तिनिरतो ह्यश्वान्दोल्यादिभाग्यवान् |
` युरग्मांशकस्य योगेन जीवनं राजसेवया ॥५३०८ ॥
5298 - 5308. (a) The native of Cancer ascendant will have a symmetric physique if the lord of the
ascendant (the Moon) is in exaltation, or if the
ascendant is occupied by Jupiter. So also when the
ascendant or its lord begets Jupiter’s aspect.
(b) Navamsa of Venus: Birth in Dhanada
Nadiamsa of Cancer as the Moon in a Navamsa of
Venus will make one talk in a limited manner. He
will have limited sleep and be highly wakeful. He
will ever be in royal service, will have a number of
brothers, be garrulous, truthful, and will have a
beautiful name and appearance. He will be an
expertin various branches of learning, aris, singing
and musical instruments, and be a scholar of Philosophy and Advaita (Non-duality, the school that
identifies supreme soul with human soul; Cf Dvaita
or duality preaching that the said two souls are
separate from each other). He will be addicted to
illicit union with women. He will organize meetings of learned men and be fond of literature and
drama, will daily listen to mythological stories and
will honour Brahmins and Gods. He will take the
side of truth and be a connoisseur of arts and
Sastras. He will be intent upon coition with outside
women on prohibited days, be lucky, virtuous and
will experience Raja १०९६१ effects. He will be
blood-red in complexion, of medium build and
short-statured. He will be wicked to wicked people
and will repay cruel men in the same coin. He will
not enjoy prosperity through father. His wealth
wil! accvuc by his own efforts.
(c) Saturn’s Navamsa: Venus, the 4th lord,
being in a Navamsa of Saturn will give the following effects. The subject will be an expert in the
meanings of various Sastras. He will help one and
all and be endowed with valour, jocular disposition
and wide fame. He will ever listen to mythological
accounts, be wealthy and well-disposed to the
destitute. He will hold vows and fast to please Lord
Vishnu and be fond of hearing songs in praise of
Vishnu. He will earn religious merits by constructing temples, tanks and the like, be attached to
taking virtuous path and enjoy fortunes of horses
and palanquins (i.e. conveyances).
(d) If Venus joins Gemini Navamsa, he will
live by serving the king.
लग्नेशे कुजसंदषट चेष्टसत्कर्मसिद्धिमान् |
` राजान्तरफले चैव राजमुद्राधिकारकः।५३०९ ॥
5309. The (ascendant lord) Moon aspected by
Mars will enable fulfilment of one’s desires through
change of a king and will grant a position of
authority under the king
वित्तस्थानाधिपे सूर्ये चतुर्थे भृगुसंयुते ।
स्वसुतेन युते दृष्टे कुजगाहुसर्मान्वते ॥५३१० ॥
दयावान् AAA: साधुबन्धुजनान्वितः।
वीरः साहसिको दक्षश्चायुताधिकवित्तवान् ॥५३११ ॥
5310 - 5311. The Sun ruling the 2nd house,
occupying the 4th in the company of the trio -
Venus, Mars and Rahu - and being in aspect to
Saturn will make one kind, revered, valorous,
adventurous and endowed with the company of
kinsfolk and virtuous men. He will enjoy limitless
wealth.
धनदांशे प्रजातश्च कुबेरसदृशो भवेत् |
भ्रातृस्थानाधिपे सोम्ये स्वोच्चे गुरुयुतेक्षिते ॥५३१२ ॥
पापमध्यगते वापि द्येकभ्राता चिरायुषः।
शेषं नाशमिति प्राहर्धनदांशोद भवस्य च ॥५३१३ ॥
5312 - 5313. (2) High Degree of Affluence:
One bor in Dhanada Nadiamsa, Cancer ascendant, will be equal to Kubera, the god of wealth.
(b) Co-born: Mercury ruling the 3rd may be
betwixt malefics. His being in exaltation (in Virgo)
in aspect to or in the company of Jupiter, will give
one long-living brother while the rest will face
destruction. This aphorism applies to birth in
Dhanada Nadiamsa.
Te वाहनेसंस्थे बहुखेचरसंयुते |
स्वमाता विधवा भृत्वा यौवने मृति माप्नुयात् ॥५३१४॥
बाल्ये पितृविनाशः स्याद्धनदांशोद् भवस्य च!
स्वोच्चे देवगुरौ निंशाकरयुते स्वोच्वांशके भार्गवे ।
ae मेषगते तथा दिनमणौ लाभे कक्युदभवः।

Chandra Kala Nadi 245
धीमान् धर्मपरायणो गुणनिधिः श्रीमान् प्रसिद्धो महान् |
अश्वान्दोलनवाहनादिविभवेर्मित्यश्रियं मन्दिरे ॥५३१५ ॥
5314 - 5315. (a) The lord of the 4th (Venus) in
the 4th (Libra) with many planets will cause
widowhood to mother. He will lose his mother in
his youth, and father in his childhood.
(b) Jupiter in exaltation in the ascendant along
with the Moon, Venus in exaltation, Mars in Aries
and the Sun in the 11th (Taurus) will lead to the
following. The subject will be born with fine hair
on his head. He will be intelligent, be charitable,
an ocean of virtues, wealthy, famous and a great
personage. His abode will be a synonym of everlasting wealth including horses, palanquins etc.
सुतेशे सुखराशिस्थे पापग्रहसमन्विते |
सूर्यपुत्रेण संदृष्टे कारके नीचराशिगे ॥५३१६ ॥
काकवन्धया भवेद्भार्या गर्भगोले कृमिस्तथा |
दत्तपुत्रादियोगं च धनदांशे च संशयः॥५२१७ ॥
5316 - 5317. The lord of the 5th (Mars) in the
4th (Libra) along with a malefic and be in aspect to
Saturn while Jupiter is in debility will trouble one’s
wife with worms in uterus. She will give birth only
to one child. Without doubt, the need for adoption
of progeny will exist.
wey नीचराशिस्थे हाङ्गारकयुतेक्षिते |
ज्ञातिशल्यविहीनः स्यादुदरामयरोगवान् ॥५३१८ ॥
मेहरोगशरीरी च सदारोगेण करशितः।
तदोषपरिहारार्थं यथोक्तांशान्तिमाचरेत् ॥५३१९ ॥
भानुवारव्रतं कुर्यात् स्नात्वा सम्यग्विचक्षणः।
द्वादशादित्यनामानि वरे वारे प्रपूजयेत् ॥५३२० ॥
भानुवारे निराहारं पूर्वजन्पाघनाशनम् |
असाध्यमेह रोगादेः गुल्मरोगस्य नाशनम् ॥५३२१॥
भानुव्रताम्भकाले दैवज्ञाय प्रदापयेत् |
गौकमपत्रेण संवेष्टय चतुरङ्गलमात्रतः॥५३२२ ॥
लिङ्ग मारकतं पूज्य देहारोग्यकरं शुभम्।
सुवर्ण च यथाशक्ति कल्पोक्तविधिमार्गतः 14323 ॥
ध्यानमावाहनादीनि YS दानमाचरेत् |
दिवाकर नमस्तुभ्यं प्राण्यज्ञानप्रणाशन ॥५३२४ ॥
त्रयीमयार्कं विश्वात्मन् ग्रहनाथ नमोऽस्तुते |
द्रादशादित्यवारान्त्ये मण्डलान्त्ये च वा यदि ॥५३२५ ॥
दिवाकर प्रसादेन देहारोग्यं न संशयः।
5318 - 53251. Diseases & Remedies: The
native will be bereft of any torment (or trouble)
from his kinsfolk but will suffer from abdominal
and urinary disorders if the 6th lord (Jupiter) is in
debility (in the 7th) in relation to Mars by aspect or
union. He will become thin with endless diseases.
To overcome these blemishes, palliative measures
be adopted. Religious vows reciting the names of
the 12 Adityas (Mitra, Daksha etc. representing the
Sun in the 12 months of the year) repeatedly on
Sundays. No food shall be consumed on Sundays
(during the currency of Vow). Sins of the past birth
and incurable diseases of the urine and glandular
(or splenary) enlargement will, as a result, be
destroyed. The astrologer should be honoured with
gifts before the commencement of vow for the Sun
god. By worshipping a Linga (of Lord Siva) of 4
Angulas (an ancient measurement) length covered
by “Rukma” leaves (scientific name of Rukma is
Messua Roxburghii), one will obtain physical wellbeing and auspicious effects. According to one’s
resources, as prescribed in the Vedangas (Cf
Mundakopanishadetc.), gold should be given away
in charity, preceded by Dhyana (Prayer), Avaahana
(Invocation) etc. with the prayer to the Sun God
with the following recitation:
“Divakara Namstubhyam Praanyagnaana
Pranasavaan /
Trayimayarkam Visvaatman Grahanaatha
Namostuthe //”
After the end of the Vow for 12 or 48 Sundays,
physical felicity will exist due to the mercy of the
Sun-God.
जामित्रस्याधिपे मन्दे वित्ते पापः निरीक्षिते 14326 II
स्वक्षत्रकारके स्वोच्चे द्येकदारम् विनिर्दिशेत् । . ..
भावाध्याये दारफलं रन्धनाडीषु कथ्यते ॥५३२७॥
5326 - 5327. The 7th lord Saturn in the 2nd
house in aspect to a malefic while the signifcator
(Venus) is in his own sign or exaltation denotes
only one wife. In “Randhra Nadi” effects of spouse
have been detailed in the “Bhava chapter”.
Notes: The first line of sloka 5327 reads in
another version as “Karake Svochcha Swakshetre
Va .....” which is correct and the translation is
accordingly provided.

246 Deva Keralam
स्थिरराशिगते मन्दे कारके चरराशिगे |
अन्यस भोगरसंल्लापी सत्कलत्रे. च भाग्यवान् ॥५२३२८ Il
5328. For Cancer ascendant, Saturn in an immovable sign while Venus is in a movable sign will
give a virtuous spouse as well as enjoyment of
pleasures outside the wedlock.
धनदांशे प्रजातश्च द्विसप्ततिसमायुषः।
जन्मातारदशाकाले TENA ह्यल्पभाग्यवान् ॥५३२९ ॥
संपत्तारदशाकाले क्रूरे ध्रहान्तरे |
देहायासं मनस्तापं विद्यालाभं क्वचित् सुखम् ।
बरह्मोपदेशकाले तु दशान्ते राजनिष्ठुरम् 114330 ॥
भ्रातृसौख्यं देहजादयं राजमूलाद्धनव्ययम् |
विपत्तारदशाकाले ह्यपमृत्युर्भविष्यति ॥५२३३१ ॥
5329 - $331. One belonging to Dhanada Nadiamsa in Cancer will enjoy a life-span of 72. In the
Ist dasa, he will possess less wealth and less
fortunes. In the sub period of an adverse planet
during the 2nd dasa, he will be troubled by illhealth and mental distress, and will earn less happiness. In the end of the 2nd dasa, during his
Spiritual Initiation, he will face royal wrath, hap_piness through co-bom, ill-health and expenditure
on account of a royal decree. His 3rd dasa will
cause fear of untimely death.
तुलालग्ने पनोहरंशः
इन्द्रयोगे तुलालग्ने तुलांशे च प्रजायते ।
मनोहरांशगे जातो गर्भश्रीमान् महाधनी ॥५३३२ ॥
दीर्धबुद्धिर्विंशालाक्षो धनिकः कीर्षिमान् सुखी |
लग्नेशे लाभराशिस्थे कुन्दांशस्वनवांशगे |
गुरुदृष्टयुते चैव राजजन्मा सुखी भवेत् ॥५३३३ ॥
5332 - 5333. Libra Ascendant = Manohara
Nadiamsa: (a) One born in this space of the zodiac
will be rich from the time of his birth and be greatly
wealthy. He will be lofty-minded, wide-eyed,
wealthy, famous and happy.
(b) The lord of the ascendant (Venus) in the
11th (Leo) with own Navamsa and endowed with
the aspect of Jupiter will cause a royai birth.
Notes: (a) Indra Yoga and Tula Navamsa are .
redundant and interrupt the continuity of the text.
(b) Kundamsa meaning Kinda Nadiamsa again
interrupts the Yoga.
॥गर्भोत्पत्तिलक्षणम् ।
आश्विजे कृष्णपक्षे तु चतुर्थ्यां सौम्यवासरे |
रोहिण्यां मकरे लग्ने गभात्प्तर्न संशयः ॥५३२४॥
आधानलग्नादशंम जन्मलग्नं विनिर्दिशेत्।
पुराब्रह्मकुले जातस्तपस्वी विष्णुपूजकः ॥५२३५ Il
दृढभक्तः प्रसन्नात्मा सदा धर्मपुराणवित् |
अन्नदानपरो नित्यं कुटुम्बी बहुपोषकः॥५२३६ ॥
बहुपुत्रार्थसंपनो बहुकालं सुजीवति ।
एकषष्टितमे वर्षे त्वनायसमृति वदेत् ॥५३३७ ॥
इह जन्मनि जननं तुलालग्ने भविष्यति ।
मनोहरांशे पूर्वार्धे तिवि््रांशे च प्रजायते ॥५३३८ ॥
राजजन्मा सुखी नित्यं गर्भसीमन्तसं भवः।
5334 - 53381. (a) Conceptional Phenomena:
The child in question enters bis mother’s womb in
the month of Asvina, on Krishna Paksha Chaturthi
(4th day of dark lunar half) coinciding with Wednesday and Rohini Nakshatra with Capricorn rising.
His birth ascendant will be the 10th from Adhana
Lagna (Capricorn), that is he will be a Libra native
(with Manohara Nadiamsa).
(b) Previous Birth: His previous birth was of
a Brahmin. Then he performed penance and worshipped Lord Vishnu. He was firmly devoted to the
Almighty, was a pleased soul and was learned in
moral law and ancient stories. He would donate
food to others, was a house-holder and patronised
many. He had much wealth and many children and
lived well upto 61 and died painlessly. ~ ^
(c) Current Birth: His present birth will be in
the Ist half of Manohara Nadiamsa, Libra, in a
royal family. He will be the first issue and be ever
_ bappy.
लग्नेशे लाभराशिस्थे लग्ने कुजसमन्विते 1433 ॥
रन्धरस्थानगते मन्दे त्वेकाकी भ्रातृहीनवान् |
मनोहरांशे पूर्वार्धं तिवन्द्रंशे VATS ॥५३४० ॥
महानदीप्रान्त्यदेशे देवालयसमीपके |
प्राकारैः शोभिते रम्ये ह्यनतप्रान्त्यपट्णे ॥५३४१ ॥
ूर्वपश्चिमवीथ्योश्च ह्यत्तरदवारमन्दिर ।
जननं तस्य च प्राहुः पूर्वभागे न संशयः ॥५२३४२ ॥
5339 - 5342. (a) The ascendant lord in the 11th
(in Leo), Mars in the ascendant, and Saturn in the

Chandra Kala Nadi 247
8th denote that the person will be the only issue of
the family, bereft of a co-born.
(b) In case of the first half of the subject
Nadiamsa, birth will be near a temple in the region
of a great river. The temple in question will be
beautiful with lofty compound and in a prominent
(or big) city. Birth will be in a street spread from
east to west in a north-facing house.
रूपवान् मतिवान् वाग्मी प्रसत्नमुखनेत्रवान् |
अदृष्टशाली धर्मात्मा श्यामवर्णः शुभाकृतिः ॥५३.४२ ॥
मितोन्नतिर्मध्यगात्रः कमलायतलोचनः।
मिताशी मितभाषी च मितनिद्रोऽतिनुद्धिमान् ॥५३४४ ॥
चक्रा्कितिकरश्चैव पादयोश्चक्रशोभितः।
राजा तु पृथिवीपालो बहुभृत्यजनान्वितः॥५३४५ ॥
वाचालकः सत्यवादी नानाशाख्विशारदः।
दिव्यनामा्कितिवरो देवब्राह्मणपोषकः॥५२४६ ॥
यथार्थवादी तत्वज्ञो हन्यस्रीसङ्गलोलुपः।
स्वभुजा्जित विच्तश्च am: कार्यसाधकः ॥५३४७ ॥
सज्जनप्रियवादी च दुर्जनानां निषुदनः।
बन्धुपूज्योऽतिमतिर्माल्लिप्यालेख्यविशारदः ॥५३.४८ ॥
चतुर्विद्यासुनिपुणः स्वकार्ये च विचक्षणः।
धनार्जनपरो नित्यं तटाकोद्यानधर्मकृत् ॥५२३४९ ॥
अग्रहार प्रतिष्ठायामत्यन्तादरवान् सदा |
शिवविष्ण्वोः सदा भक्तो देव्यां चैव विशेषतः ॥५३५० ॥
वैदिकप्रियवान् रागी ह्यन्यालोचनवान् fra: |
सभापूज्यो गुणप्राही चोपायैः कार्यसाधकः ॥५३५१ ॥
बाल्ये कष्टमाप्नोति पञ्चमाब्दात् परं सुखम् |
लग्नेशे लाभराशिस्थे भाग्येशे कर्मसंयुते। ।
यस्यां नाडयां प्रजातोऽपि भाग्यवंशे प्रसूतिमान् ॥५३५२ ॥
5343 - 5352, (a) One born in the subject Nadiamsa will be charming in appearance, intelligent,
eloquent in speech and be endowed with attractive
face and eyes. He will be fortunate, virtuous,
black-bodied, handsome, and of medium build.
His eyes will resemble a lotus petal. He will
consume limited food, will speak in a limited
manner, willhave limited sleep and be exceedingly
intelligent. He will have symbols of wheel on his
palm afd sole. A king and ruler of the earth, he will
have many servants. He will be garrulous in
speech, be truthful, skilful in many branches of
learning. He will have an attractive name and will
patronize gods and Brahmins. He will speak truth,
be knowledgeable in Philosophy and illicitly addicted to females. He will gather wealth by dint of
his own efforts and will achieve his aims by suitable expedients. He will take the side of good
people, will shun the wicked, be honoured by his
kinsfolk, be highly intelligent, be an expert writer,
be skilful in four branches of learning and be
discerning in his undertakings. He will be ever
intent upon gathering wealth and will construct
temples, tanks and Brahmin’s colonies for charity
purposes. He will be devoted to Lords Vishnu and
Siva, particularly to Devi (female deity), fond of
following the Vedic path, be passionate, will think
of others (i.e. be a well-wisher of others) and be
dear (to others). He will receive honours in assemblies, will appreciate others’ merits and achieve his
aims by suitable expedients. He will be troubled in
childhood and be happy after the Sth year.
(b) Birth in the subject Nadiamsa will be in a
prosperous family if the lord of the ascendant is in
the 11th (Leo) as the 9th lord (Mercury) is in the
10th (Cancer).
योगांशगे विलग्नेशे लाभभाग्यपसंयुते |
कर्माधिपेन संदृष्टे योगोऽयं चेन्द्रनामकः 14343 ॥
इन्द्रयोगे तुलालग्ने भोगी स्याद्राजवल्लभः।
धर्ममार्मरतो नित्यं कुबेर इव जायते ॥५३५४ ॥
प्राकाराट्रादिनिर्माता धर्मसिद्धियुतः सुखी |
जन्मादिषष्ठगे वर्षे कुलीरे रविसंयुते ॥५३५५ ॥
तस्मिन् मासे महत् सौख्यं राजमुद्राधिकारवान् |
राज्याधिपत्यं सत्कीति VAY न संशयः ॥५३५६ ॥
5353 - 5356. (a) Indra Yoga - Libra Ascendant: The ascendant lord in “Yogamsa” in the “11th
& 9th” (read 11th or 9th) in aspect to the 10th lord
causes Indra Yoga (for Libra ascendant). One born
in this Yoga in Libra ascendant will enjoy pleasures, be dear to the king, will take to the path of
virtues and will ever be equal to Kubera (in riches).
He will earn religious merits by constructing temple compounds, market-places (or watch-towers)
etc. and be happy.
(b) During the 6th year of age, when the Sun
transits the sign Cancer, the person will enjoy great

248 Deva Keralam
happiness and acquire a power of authority under
the king. The said Indra Yoga will bestow headship
of a country (or a region) and spotless fame.
Notes: (a) This sloka needs some rectification.
“Yogamsa” may be a misprint for “Yugmamsa”
meaning Gemini Navamsa (which has been discussed earlier also and appears in ensuing verses).
Thus, Venus should be in the 11th (Leo) or the
9th (Gemini) with an aspect of the 10th lord Moon.
While being so, Venus should be in Gemini in
Navamsa. As a result, one particular kind of Indra
Yoga is formed for Libra ascendant. The native in
question will enjoy material pleasures, will perform charitable activities, be close to men in power
and be opulent.
(b) The age mentioned poses a riddle. Further
“Shashtage” means only the 6th house. The word
“varshe” adds to the confusion. Apparently we
should understand the relevant Dasa from a given
horoscope and find out which transit of the Sun in
the sign Cancer will denote the month to upgrade
the subject to royal power.
मनोहरांशे gate लग्नेशे राहुसंयुते |
लग्नकेन्द्रगते भोमे मसूरी मुखलाज्छनः ॥५२५७ ॥
5357, Small-pox and facial marks will result
the conjunction of Venus with Rahu as Mars is in
an angle from the ascendant Libra, in case of birth
in the former half of Manohara Nadiamsa.
लगने कुजेऽष्टमे मन्दे VHA केतुसंयुते |
जन्माब्दे रोगभीतिश्च द्वितीयाब्दे महाविपत् ॥५३५८ ॥
5358. Great Danger: Mars, Saturn and Ketu
placed respectively in the ascendant, 8th and Sth
will produce fear of a disease in the very first year
of birth. The 2nd year will be a source of great
danger.
लग्नादष्टमगे मन्दे विषूचीज्वरपीडितः।
अतिसारप्रपीडादिं सनिपातज्वरं क्वचित् ॥५३५९ ॥
रन्ध्रे चायुष्कारको हि दीर्घमायुश्च विन्दति ।
लग्ने पापसमायुक्ते षटपञ्चाशात् परं व्यथा ॥५३६० Il
5359 - 5360. (a) Libra Ascendant: Should
Saturn be in the 8th (in Taurus), the person will be
troubled by small-pox, dysentery and danger of
. vitiation of the three humours. _
(b) General: Longevity will come to pass if the
8th is occupied by the significator (i.e. Saturn).
(c) Libra Ascendant: Malefics in the ascendant will be a source of distress after the age of 56.
सुखेशे रन्धभावस्थे लग्ने भौमसमन्विते |
बाल्ये शुनकभीतिश्च वसुवर्षात् परं क्वचित् ॥५३६१ ॥
5361. Fear from Dog: The lord of the 4th
(Saturn) in the 8th while Mars is in the ascendant
will cause fear from dogs in childhood. The 8th
year will (also) be a cause of such fear to some
extent.
मातृस्थानाधिपे मन्दे चन्द्रात् पञ्चमसंस्थिते |
कारके मातृभावस्थे बाल्ये मातृविनाशवान् ॥५३६२ ॥
लगनाच्वतुर्थगे चन्द्रे तदीशे मृत्युराशिगे ।
स्वमाता मृत्युमाप्नोति ह्यपमात्रा तु रक्षितः ॥५२६३ ॥
माता गुणवतीपूता पतिभक््तिपरायणा |
सात्विकी धर्मबुद्धिश्च सर्वैश्वर्यसमन्विता ॥५३६४ ॥
5362 - 5364. (a) Early Loss of Mother: Saturn
indicating mother should be in the Sth counted
from the Moon sign while the signifcator of mother
should be in the 4th from the ascendant. Asaresult,
the child will lose its mother in childhood.
(b) The Moon in the 4th and Saturn in the 8th
will cause early death of mother and being brought
up by a foster-mother (not necessarily step-mother).
The native’s mother will be virtuous, pure and be
devoted to her spouse. She will be gentle, religious
and be endowed with all kinds of prosperity.
Notes: The Moon should be in the 4th from
Libra (i.e. in Capricorn) while Saturn is in Taurus
(i.e. Sth from the Moon). This Yoga is directly
repeated in sloka 5363. Then danger to mother
during the early years will have to be feared, apart
from other results mentioned above at “b”.
पितृस्थानाधिपे सौम्ये कारकेण समन्विते |
कर्माधिपेन संदृष्टे स्वपिता राजयोगवान् ॥५३६५ ॥
पूर्वभागे प्रजातस्य पिता भूपतितुल्यवान् |
एकाकी स्वपिता कामी राजमानेन तोषितः ॥५३६६ ॥
राजद्वारे प्रसिद्धश्च ह्यश्वाध्यक्षः स्वतन्रवान् |
धनादयो बुद्धिसंपन्नो देवब्राह्मणपोषकः ॥५३६७ ॥
विनीतो मृदुवाग्धीरो युवतीकामुकसुधीः।
5365 - 5367142. Effects for Father: The lord of

Chandra Kala Nadi 249
the house of father, Mercury, joining the significator
concerned, i.e. the Sun and begetting the aspect of
the 10th lord (Moon) will cause Raja Yoga to
father. He will be equal to a king, with this Yoga,
if the native belongs to Ist half of Manohara
Nadiamsa, Libra ascendant. Further, he would be
lonely (issue of his family), be libidinous, happy
with royal honours, famous in royal service, be the
head of royal stable and be independent. He will be
wealthy, highly intelligent, will honour gods and
Brahmins, be modest, soft in speech, valorous,
passionately attached to young women and be
intelligent.
असितेन युते दृष्टे प्रचुरः शत्रुवर्गवान् ॥५३६८ ॥
सद्गीतसाहित्य कलास्वभिज्ञो राजाङ्गनादिप्रियभोग्ांश्च |
गम्भीरचेताः स्वपिता दयालु-
भाग्यांशयोगे फलमाहुरार्याः॥५३६९ ॥
5368 - 5369. Mercury related to Saturn by
aspect or conjunction and be in the 9th in Navamsa
(not necessarily Gemini Navamsa), will produce
the undermentioned effects concerning father. He
will have plenty of everything, will have foes, be
learned in music, literature and arts and will enjoy
pleasures with royal women. His acts will be
majestic and disposition kind.
पितृभावाष्टमे चन्द्रे तदीशे व्ययराशिगे ।
जन्मतारदशाकाले युग्मे मन्दसमन्विते ॥५३७० Il
स्वपितारिष्टमाप्नोति तत्काले नात्र संशयः।
ततः पश्चाज्जातकश्च योगं प्राप्नोति भूरिशः ॥५३७१ ॥
राजमुद्राधिकारी च विद्याबुद्धियुतः सुखी |
मातृस्थाने निशानाथे युग्मांशे रविवीश्षिते ॥५३७२ ॥
चन्द्रात् कर्मगते भौमे सापत्नीमातृयोगवान्।
मात्ररिष्टात् परं चैव पितुर्दारद्रयं वदेत् ।
सापत्नीमातृमूलेन जातकस्य सुखं भवेत् ॥५३७३ ॥ `
5370 - 5373. (a) Danger to Father: The Moon
placed in the 8th from the 9th (i.e. in Capricorn
which is the 4th from the ascendant Libra) while
her dispositor Saturn is in the 12th (Virgo) will
cause danger to father. The impending danger will
be reflected when Saturn transits the sign Gemini
(the 9th) during the currency of the very first dasa
of the native. After this, the native will enjoy
abundant prosperity, will earn position with authority under the king, be endowed with learning
and intelligence and be happy.
(b) Step-mother: The Moon in the 4th in
aspect to the Sun and occupying Gemini in Navamsa, as the planet Mars is in the 10th from the
Moon (i.e. in Libra ascendant) will cause a stepmother following the death of mother. His father
will (thus) have two wives. The subject will be
happy through his step-mother.
॥ अवतारयोगः॥
सूर्यात् केन्द्रगते भौमे चन्द्रात् केन्द्रगते कुजे ।
लग्नात् केन्द्रगते सौम्ये योगः स्यादवतारकः॥५३७४ ॥
फलम्-
श्रीमत्करे चाङ्कितपुण्डरीकश्रीचक्रदण्डाङ्कितिपाणिपादः।
श्रीवत्सवक्षः. स्थलगात्रयष्टिः
श्रीमन्महाकीर्विगुणाभिरामः॥५२७५ ॥
धर्मदानपरो नित्यं सर्वभूतदयापरः।
व्रतानुसेवी वाग्मी च. कालज्ञानी भवेन्नरः ॥५३७६ ॥
5374 - 5376, Avatara Yoga & Effects: With
Mars in an angle from the Sun as well as from the
Moon while Mercury is angular to the ascendant,
Amsavatara Yoga is formed. Its effects are: On the
native’s radiant palm, a symbol of white lotus
(“Pundarika’”) will be found. His palm and sole will
have the marks of Sri Chakra and “Danda” (i.e.
club). On his chest, “Sri Vatsa” mark will exist.
His body will be erect like a staff. He will be an
illustrious person with a great deal of fame, will
please others with his virtues, be intent upon giving
away charities, kind to all living beings, will follow
religious vows, be eloquent and be an astrologer.
Notes: From sloka 5374 to 5599, the ascendant
generally discussed is Libra. In some cases, movable ascendant also features, widening the scope of
applicability to all the four movable signs ascending. A judicious use of certain Yogas - to a limited
extent - can however be made to other ascendants.
Coming to the present Yoga, vide first line of
sloka 5374, reference to Mars appears from the Sun
as well as from the Moon. Apparently, the Sun and
the Moon should be in mutual angles (or in harmless conjunction) so that Mars is angular to both of
them.

250 Deva Keralam
“Sri Vatsa” is one of the three rarest symbols
explained in ancient physiognomy. The other two
are “Nandy-Avarta” and “Mauktika”. One having
such a symbol will be an illustrious person blessed
with incomparable prosperity and be historical.
Lord Vishnu is known as “Sri Vatsa” - favourite of “Sri” - thatis Lakshmi. His chestis Lakshmi’s
abode.
Sri Vatsa also denotes a curl of hair on the
breast of Vishnu or Sri Krishna.
The essence of Amsavatara Yoga is that the
subject will have some of the most specially auspicious symbols - though not exactly the same as
described in the original - on his palms and soles
which would be rare. He will have a straight body
and will be an illustrious man whom the world will
praise. Other effects enlisted are easy enough to
follow.
॥ हरिहस्रह्मयोगः॥
गोपुरांशकगे शुक्रे गुरौ पारावतांशगे |
पारावतांशके चन्द्रे योगो हरिहरामिधः॥५३७७ ॥
अआरोग्यभाग्यधनधान्यसमावृतोऽसौ |
लोके प्रधानपुरुषो विजयी aT: |
कल्याणवाक्कमलनेत्रगुणाभिरामो |
भोक्ता गुणैः सकलबन्धुजनेरवृतो ऽसौ ॥५३७८ ॥
शक्त्या पाणिपदाम्बुजोऽमृतवपुः कामातुरो भोगवान् |
प्रख्यातोऽखिलभूमिनाथनिचयर्वन््यो महादानकृत् |
कालज्ञः कमलाभिरामनयनो देवप्रियो भक्तिमान् |
आ चद्रार्कगुणाभिरामविभवः प्रख्यातकीर्तिर्भुवि ॥५३७९ ॥
5377 - 5379. Hari Hara Brahma Yoga: Venus
in Gopuramsa, Jupiter in Paravatamsa and the
Moon again in Paravatamsa cause Hari Hara Brahma
Yoga. The native with this Yoga will be endowed
with health, prosperity, wealth and grains aplenty.
He will be the chief of men in the world and a
successful ruler. His speech will be auspicious and
eyes will resemble a lotus petal. He will possess
pleasing virtues, will enjoy pleasures and will be
surrounded by all his kinsfolk. He will have a
beautiful physique, be torn by lust, will enjoy
pleasures, be famous, honoured by all kings of the
world, highly charitable and be an astrologer. His -
eye will be beautiful like a lotus. He will be
devoted to the Almighty. The wealth of his pleasing virtues will last as long as the moon and sun
exist. He will enjoy wide fame on the earth.
Notes: “Hariharaadija” is the term used in
another version. “Aadija” denotes Brahma as he
was the’ “chief-of-the-Beings”. Brahma is also
known as “Aja” - unborn.
Characteristic of ancient literature, effects of
various rare combinations are quite exaggerated.
We should take quitessential clues behind them
and apply with wisdom, and not liberally.
॥महालक्ष्मीयोगः॥
पारावतांशगे जीवे कर्मेशे च तथा स्थिते |
गोपुरांशकगे शुक्रे लक्ष्मीयोग इतीरितः ॥५३८० ॥
पारावतांशगे सूर्ये कर्मेशेन युतेक्षिते ।
वाहने शुभसंयुक्ते लक््मीयोग इतीरितः ॥५२३८१ ॥
फलम्-
गुणाभिरमो बहुदेशनाथो
विद्यामहाकीर्िमनोऽभिरामः।
दिगन्तविश्रान्तनृपालवन्द्यो |
राजाधिराजो बहुदारपुत्रः ॥५३८२ ॥
कीर्त्याक्रान्तजगत्रये नृपचयेर्वन्धो भवेदभूमिपो
देवब्राह्मणसाधुपूजनिरतो देवालयस्थापकः।
लोके स्यात् परदारसक्तमनसो सर्वोपकारी महान् ।
लक्ष्मीयोगसमुद् भवो गुणनिधिर्दानाय वारां निधिः॥५३८३ ॥
5380 - 5383. Lakshmi Yoga: (a) Jupiter as well.
as the Moon in Paravatamsa while Venus is in
Gopuramsa will produce Lakshmi Yoga.
(b) Alternatively, Lakshmi Yoga is formed by
the Sun in Paravatamsa in conjunction or aspect to
the 10th lord (Moon) while the 4th (Capricorn) is
occupied by a benefic.
(c) Effects: This Yoga - either one of the above
two - will bless one with pleasing virtues, learning,
wide fame and charming looks. He will be the lord
of many countries. He will be honoured by the
kings extending to the ends of the various directions. He will be the leader of the king of kings and
will have many wives and sons. His fame will
extend to the three worlds (viz. earth, heaven and
nadir). He will be engaged in worshipping gods,
Brahmins and saints and will construct temples. He
will be attached to the wives of other men, will help

Chandra Kala Nadi 251
one and all, be a great man and be an ocean of
virtues and charitability.
Notes: The firstkind of Lakshmi Yogais called
Hari Hara Brahma Yoga, vide sloka 5377 supra.
॥ कुबेरयोगः॥
दशमभवननाथः BAT सुखे वा
भवति धनदतुल्यो राजराजाधिपो वा।
हयगजनरनाथो नृत्तगीतापनोदो
भवति च सुकलत्रः षोडशाच्चैव वर्षात् ॥५२३८४ ॥
फलम्-
एतद्योगवशात् सौख्यं पश्चमाब्दात् परं सुखम् |
राजमुद्राधिकारी च राजयोगो भवेद धुवम् ॥५३८५ ॥
जन्मादिषोडशे at त्वतीव श्रियमश्नुते |
भावैश्चतुधिर्बलिभिर्धनभाग्याय कर्मभिः॥५३८६ ॥
सम्पूर्णविभवे गेहे कुबेर इव जायते |
5384 - 5386/2. Kubera Yoga: One will be
equal to Kubera (god of wealth) or an emperorif the
10th lord (the Moon) is in the 4th, or a trine or an
angle. He will be the lord of elephants, horses and
servants, will enjoy music and dance and will
obtain a good spouse after the age of sixteen. Due
to this yoga, he will beget happiness after the Sth
year. He will obtain a position of authority with the
king. In the 16th year, he will gather a lot of wealth.
Should the four Bhavas, viz. the 2nd, 9th, 11th and
10th be strong, the native will be equal to Kubera
and will possess full-fledged wealth.
दारस्थानाधिपे भौमे भावात् केन्द्रत्रिकोणगे ॥५३८७ ॥
दाराद भाग्यं गते जीवे सत्कलत्रसमन्वितः।
दारेशे लग्नभावस्थे कारके लाभराशिगे ॥५३८८ ॥
दारे गुरुयुते दृष्टे बहुदारसमन्वितः।
दरिशेतवि्द्रयोगस्थे कारके गोपुरांशगे ॥५३८९ ॥
बहु भार्यानरं विन्दाद्राजयोगसमुद भवम् |
मनोहरांशगे जातः पञ्चसङ्कयाकलरत्रवान् ॥५३९० ॥
अथवा सप्तसद्कयाश्च पूर्वभागसमुद् भवः।
शक्रे राहुयुते जातो SAGA: फलं तथा ॥५३९१ ॥
5387 - 5391. Libra Ascendant: (a) Mars,
ruling the 7th, and placed in an angle or a trine
counted from the 7th (i.e. in the Ist, 4th, 10th, 11th
or 3rd house) while Jupiter is in the 9th from the 7th
(i.e. 3rd from ascendant) will give a virtuous wife.
` (b) The 7th lord (Mars) in the ascendant, the
significator Venus in the 110), and the planet
Jupiter related to 7th by aspect or placement will
cause many wives.
(c) The lord of the 7th involved in Indra Yoga
while the significator (Venus) is in Gopuramsa also
will cause many wives. Further, the person will be
born with a Raja Yoga (combination for royal
status).
(d) One born in the Ist half of Manohara
Nadiamsa with Libra ascendant will have five or
seven wives.
(e) The conjunction of Venus with Rahu will
give ten wives.
Notes: (c) The 7th lord Mars being in Indra
Yoga is not understandable. Another version adds
to further confusion; it states Mars should be in
“Indra Bhava”. There is no such house known to
us.
(d) & (€): Combinations at ^" and “e” are quite
typical and can be applied in the contextof multiple
marriages provided the exact ascendant degree is
available.
दारेशे लग्नभावस्थे पापांशे चन्दरकेन्द्रगे |
कुटुम्बे शनिसंयुक्ते नानाजातिवधूपति ॥५२३९२ ॥
5392. Brides from Various Castes: The lord
of the 7th, Mars, should be in a malefic’s Navamsa
and occupy a sign which is equal to an angle from
the Moon and also the 11th from the ascendant.
(That is Mars being in a malefic’s Navamsa should
be in the sign Leo while the Moon is in an immovable sign.) Such a native will beget brides from
various castes.
कुटुम्बेशे लग्नगते कुटुम्बे शनिवीकिते।
कारके राहुसंयुक्ते स्वभार्यारिष्टमादिशेत् ॥५२९३ ॥
5393. Evil to Wife: The lord of the 2nd (Mars)
` inthe ascendant while Saturn aspects the 2nd house
will be a source of evil to one’s spouse.
दारादभाग्यं गते जीवे चन्द्रात् कर्मगते कुजे |
बाल्ये विवाहमाप्नोति समीपे सद गृहेऽपि च ॥५३९४॥
5394. Early Marriage: Jupiter shouldbe in the
- 9th from the 7th house (i.e. in Sagittarius, the 3rd
from the ascendant) as the planet Mars (ruling the
7th) is in the 10th from the Moon. As a result, the

252 Deva Keralam
person will be married in his boyhood. The bride
will hail from a good family and from a nearby
place.
सम्पत्तारदशान्त्यादौ विपदाये स्वभूक्तिषु |
विवाहोत्सवकार्याणि राजयोगसमुद् भवः॥५३९५ ॥
विवाहानन्तरं भाग्यं राजयोगयुतः सुखी |
षोडशाब्दात् परं चैव राजश्रीविजयान्वितः॥५३९६ ॥
स्वशक्तया राज्यलाभं च बहुकीरतिः प्रतापवान् |
5395 - 539612. For a native of Manohara Nadiamsa, Libra ascendant, the end of the 2nd dasa or
the first syb period of the 3rd dasa will cause
marriage apart from Raja Yoga effects. His prosperity and attainment of royal status will commence following his marriage. After the age of 16,
success and royal kind of wealth will occur. He will
gain kingdom (or status) according to his capacity,
apart from much fame and valour.
॥ काहलयोगः॥
विलग्ननाडीस्थितराशिनाथस्तद्राशिनाथो यदि केन्द्रसंस्थः।
निशाकरात् केद्रगतो यदि स्या-
द्योगो महान् काहलसंज्ञकोऽसो ॥५३९७ ॥
5397. Kahala Yoga: Let “the sign dispositor
of the Nadiamsa of the ascendant be called “a”.
Call the sign dispositor of “a” as “b”. The planet
denoted by “b” should be in an angle from the rising
sign or the Moon sign. In effect, Kahala Yoga is
formed.
Notes: “Vilagna Nadi” denotes the Nadiamsa
rising in the ascendant. The Nadiamsa does not
however fall in another sign. It can only be in the
sign - any sign - rising. Obviously it denotes the
Navamsa of the ascendant and the correct text
sbould then be: “Vilagnaamsa sthita rasi natha”
etc. In that case, the planet denoted by “a” should
be known thus - the owner of the rising Navamsa.
Only then the Yoga can be properly produced.
Otherwise not.
` फलम्-
श्रीमान् काहलसंज्ञके विजययुग्दानार्द्रपाणिः सदा-
कामी भोगसमन्वितो बहुयशाः स्यादष्टविशात् परम् |
विद्यावादविनोदसद्वरसिकः स्रीणां पतिर्नायकः
सौधाग्यवात्मजमित्रबन्धुधनवान् राजा भवेद्धार्मिकः ॥५३९८ ॥
गजवाजिभैर्युक्तो भूपालो दानमण्डलः।
करोत्यसौ तुलादानं धर्मी स्यान्मण्डलेश्वरः ॥५३९९ ॥
` इ398 - 5399, Effects of Kahala Yoga: The
subject will be wealthy, endowed with success, .
will have wet (or perspiring) palms because of
giving (endlesss) donations, be ever libidinous, and
endowed with pleasures. He will earn abundant
fame after the age of 18. He will enjoy learning, the
play of musical instruments, entertainment and
assemblies, be a leader (or head) of women, be
endowed with prosperity, progeny, friends, kinsfolk, elephants, horses and servants and be a charitable king. He will perform “Purusha Dana” and be
the head of a region.
Notes: In the 2nd line of sloka 5399, the term
“Tula Dana” means “Purusha Dana” which seems
to be one of the gifts or charities given at the end of
specified religious ritual. I could gather no meaning more than this. For practical utility, it is to be
understood that the subject will be a donor of
religious note. Alternatively, Tula Dana could be a
misprint for Tula Bhara which means weighing a
person with gold, silver etc.
॥ शद्भयोगः॥
पूर्वपक्षे दिवा जन्म चन्द्रकन्द्रसमन्विते ।
लग्नेशे राहुसंयुक्ते योगःशङ्ख इतीरितः ॥५४०० ॥
त्रिचतुपञ्चराशिस्थे शुभखेचरसंयुके |
बुद्धिस्थानगते पापे योगः शङ्कं इतीरितिः॥५४०१ ॥
फलम्-
श्रीमान् शङ्खभवो विचक्षणमतिवेदान्तविद्धार्मिको
लोके स्याद् बहुनायकः क्षितिपतिर्मार्ताण्डतेजद्युतिः
अन्यैर्भूपतिभिर्दिगन्तरगतैः संस्तूयमानः सदा
स्रीणां नायक ऋद्धिमान् खलभुवि त्वाकल्पपुण्यादिकृत् ॥५४०२॥
पुण्यकृत् कृशदेही च wag प्रियवाग्भवेत्।
मनोवेगी महाधीरः WANT भवेन्नरः ॥५४०३ ॥
5400 - 5403. Sankha Yoga: Birth should be in
day time during a bright lunar half. The ascendant
should be in an angle to the Moon while the
ascendant lord (Venus) is with Rahu. Whatis then
formed is Sankha Yoga. Another kind of Sankha
Yoga will existif the 3rd, 4th and Sth signs from the
natal ascendant are occupied by benefic planets, as
a malefic is in the 5th. (That is the 5th should

Chandra Kala Nadi 253
contain both a benefic and a malefic.) The native
of Sankha Yoga will be wealthy, discerning in
disposition, learned in the branch of Vedanta or
Philosophy, charitable, leader of many people, be
aking, and endowed with the splendour of the sun.
Other kings from the various directions will ever
sing his praises. He will be a leader of women, be
prosperous, will perform meritorious acts and will
have a slender and charming body. He will speak
agreeably, will possess great mental velocity and
be highly valorous.
॥ भेरीयोगः॥
मन्दात् षष्ठाष्टमे भौमे भौमात् षष्ठाष्टमे शनो |
गुरोः षष्ठाष्टमे सूरये भेरीयोग इतीरितिः॥५४०४ ॥
फलम्-
भेरीयोगे वाद्यघोषी समन्ता
न्म्तेभानां वाजिनां aE घोषैः।
सद्भिश्चायं स्तूयभानो नृपालो
दीर्घायुः स्यादभूमिपालैः सुवन्द: ॥५४०५ ॥
5404 - 5405, Bheri Yoga: Mars in the 8th/6th
from Saturn, Saturn in the 60/80 from Mars, and
the Sun in the 6th/8th from Jupiter will produce
Bheri Yoga. The native concerned will be welcomed to the tune of musical instruments by subordinate kings in the company of elephants and
horses. He will be a king praised by virtuous men,
and be long-lived.
Notes: This yoga requires 6/8 positions between two pairs of planets, viz. Saturn-Mars and
Jupiter-Sun. Rich status, wide honours and long
life will be the results.
॥ पुत्रभावः॥
` पुत्रस्थानाधिपे मन्दे शुभक्षेत्रे शुभांशके |
कारके बलसंयुक्ते Gat संशयः ॥५४०६ ॥
सुतेशे रन्ध्रभावस्थे सुते केतु समन्विते |
सुतेशे कुजसंदृषटे पुत्रविध्नकरो भवेत् ॥५४०७ ॥
कारके बलसंयुक्ते कालान्तरसुपुत्रवान् |
भाग्येश्वरे कर्मगते कारके भाग्यसंस्थिते ॥५४०८ ॥
भाग्यांरो शुभसंयुक्ते कालान्तरसुपुत्रवान् |
कारके पापसंयुक्ते ह्न्यदारसुतोद भवः ॥५४०९ ॥
पत्रद्रयं चिरायुष्यं पुत्रिका च तथा भवेत् |
पुत्रेशे योवनांशस्थे कारके यौवनां शगे ॥५४१० ॥
पुत्रसंख्या विनिर्दिष्टा बलाबलविचिन्तनात् |
दारेशाद भाग्यराशिस्थे कारके बलसंयुते ॥५४११ ॥
भाग्यांशे शुभसंयुक्ते स्वदारे पुत्रलाभवान् |
5406 - 5411142. Libra Ascendant- Manohara
Nadiamsa: (a) The Sth lord, Saturn, placed in a
benefic’s sign with a benefic Navamsa, as Jupiter,
the significator, is strong, will doubtlessly enable
acquisition of a son (or progeny).
(b) Ketu placed in the Sth (Aquarius) as Saturn
is in the 8th (Taurus) with the aspect of Mars will
cause obstacles in begetting progeny. If, however,
the significator (Jupiter) is with strength, children
will be born after delay. Alternatively, the 9th lord
(Mercury) should be in the 10th (Cancer) while
Jupiter is in the 9th (Gemini). However, Jupiter
should be in the 9th place in Navamsa diagram with
the company of another benefic.
(c) Jupiter with a malefic will promote acquisition of children through re-marriage. The native
will have two sons and a daughter who all will be
long-lived.
(d) The lord of the Sth (Saturn) and the
significator (Jupiter) in “Yauvana amsa”(7) ......
through strength and weakness should be understood the number of children. (This part of the text
is apparently incoherent.)
(e) One will obtain progeny through his wife if
Jupiter in strength is in the 9th from the 7th (i.e. 3rd
from the ascendant), at the same time being in the `
9th place in Navamsa in the company of a benefic.
कारके मिथुनांशस्थे द्वित्रिसन्तानयोगवान् ॥५४१२ ॥
आदौ स्री भावमाप्नोति पश्चात् पुत्रस्य लाभवान् |
केतुयुक्तवशेनैव सीप्रजारिष्टमादिशेत् ॥५४१३ ॥
क्षेमतारदशाकाले दशाधिपतिभुक्तिषु |
गोचरे मिथुने जीवे स्वदारे पुत्रलाभवान् ॥५४१४ ॥
स पुत्रः प्रबलश्चैव राजयोगोदभवस्य च। `
5412 - 5414142. (a) Jupiter in Gemini Navamsa
will give two or three children. Initially one will
beget female issues, and later on male issues.
Jupiter in the company of Ketu (or the 5th house
being occupied by Ketu as noted earlier) will be a
source of loss of female children.
(b) The native will beget such a son in the first
sub period of the 4th dasa, with transit Jupiter in the

254 Deva Keralam
sign Gemini who will be prosperous and will enjoy
Raja Yoga effects.
॥ मत्स्ययोगः॥
भाग्यनाथस्थितेशांशे गर्वा भृगुजोऽपि वा ।
स्वक्षेत्रे बलसंयुक्तो मत्स्ययोग इतीरितः ॥५४१५ ॥
कालज्ञः करुणाकरो गुणनिधिः कान्ताभिरामो नृपः
चार्वङ्गः स्थिरधीर्मनोहरतनुरविद्याविनोदप्रियः।
पुरर्दरसमन्वितो बहुधनैः संयोजितः सर्वदा
राजाध्यक्षसमानदेश विभवः श्रीमत्स्ययोगोद् भवः ॥५४१६ ॥
5415 - 5416. Sri Matsya Yoga: Jupiter or
Venus should be in the Navamsa occupied by the
9th lord (Mercury) to cause Matsya Yoga, the
effects of which are as under. The subject will be
an astrologer, be merciful, an ocean of virtues, will
attract females, be a king, blessed with a beautiful
physique, firm in disposition, fond of learning and
entertainment, be ever endowed with sons, spouse
and abundant wealth, and will enjoy prosperity .
akin to the head of a country.
॥ कलानिधियोगः॥
लग्नेशे केन्द्रभावस्थे गुरुशुक्रयुतेक्षिते |
चरलगने दिवा जातो योगोऽयं सकलानिधिः॥५४१७ ॥ `
फलम्
दाता महीदानकृत्दरहस्तो
लोके प्रसिद्धश्च गुणाभिरामः।
स्वबन्धुपोषी तु विशालनेत्रः
श्रीमत्स्यरेखा्कितहस्तपादः ॥५४१८ ॥
5417 - 5418. Movable Ascendant - Kala
Nidhi Yoga: The ruler of a movable ascendant
being in an angle in aspect to or combination with
Jupiter or Venus will give birth to one with Kala
Nidhi Yoga during day time. One with this Yoga
will be munificent, will donate lands, will have wet
palms (perspiring because of giving incessant donations), be famous in the world, be endowed with
pleasing virtues, will patronize his kinsfolk, be
wide-eyed and will have symbols of fish on his
palms and soles.
षष्ठाष्टमव्ययेशानामंशनाथाः शुभा यदि ।
सिंह दृष्टा पलायन्ते शत्रवो द्विरदा यथा ॥५४१९ ॥
5419. If the Navamsa dispositors of the lords of
the 6th, 8th and the 3rd are natural benefics, one’s
foes will run away akin to an elephant by the sight
of a lion.
Notes: Thisrule is applicable to any ascendant.
रोगस्थानाधिपे जीवे AAI बलसंयुते |
शुभांशे शुभसंयुक्ते ह्यरोगदृढगात्रवान् ॥५४१० Il
5420. The lord of the 6th, Jupiter, endowed
with strength and being in his own sign, along with
a benefic planet and with a benefic Navamsa, will
give a strong physique that shall be immune to
illnesses.
विलग्नाष्टमकर्मेशाः केन्द्रलाभत्रिकोणगाः।
शनिश्च बलवांस्तस्य पूर्णमायुर्विनिर्दिशेत् ॥५४२१ ॥
5421. Full life will come to pass if the lords of
the ascendant, the 8th and 10th are disposed in
angles, trines and the 11th while Saturn at birth is
in strength.
Notes: This is also a general rule appliccable
to various ascendants.
Tay लाभराशिस्थे रन्ध्रे मन्दसमन्विते |
शुभांशे स्वांशगे वापि वर्षषष्टि सुजीवति ॥५४२२ ॥
5422. One will live upto 60 if the 8th lord is in
the 11th while Saturn is in the 8th with a Navamsa
owned by him or a benefic.
रन्धेशे राहुसंयुक्ते लग्ने कुजसमन्विते |
रन्ध मन्दसमायुक्ते मध्यमायुर्विनिर्दिरेत्।
चतुयञ्चाशगे वर्षे देहायासं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥५४२२ ॥
5423. The 8th lord with Rahu while the ascendant and the 8th are in order occupied by Mars and
Saturn will cause a medium span of life. Such a
native will be inflicted by (fatal) illness at the age
॥ रद्रासनयोगः॥
- षष्ठाष्टमव्ययस्थं स्याल्लग्नमुच्चग्रहं यदि |
तस्य रुद्रासनपदं निर्दिष्टं पूर्वसूरिभिः ॥५४२४ ॥
5424. Rudrasana Yoga: If the 6th, 8th and
12th contain planets in (simultaneous) exaltation,
Rudrasana Yoga (or Rudrasanapada Yoga) is
formed.
Notes: In this part, this yoga is not correctly
expressed whereas it occurs again in right form, as
: per the translation, in sloka 5579 infra.

Chandra Kala षता =` 255
A craeful perusal will allow this yoga to be
formed for Aquarius and Leo ascendants only
योगेऽस्मिन् सार्वभोमत्वं वदन्ति यवनादयः।
एतद्योगवशात् सौख्यमाजन्म सुखभाग्यवान् ॥५४२५ ॥
राज्याधिपत्यसोख्यं च षोडशाब्दात् परं सुखम् ।
जन्मतारदशाकाले जन्ममाब्दे जन्मासगे ॥५४२६ ॥
मात्ररिष्टमवाप्नोति तत्काले नात्र संशयः।
जन्मान्दे TTA च मान्द्यज्वरभयं क्वचित् ॥५४२७ ॥
द्वितीयाब्दे मनस्तापं स्वपिता रोगपीडितः।
जातकस्य भयं किचिच्छुभाशुभफलं समम् ॥५४२८ ॥
कर्माधिपदशाकाले रन्धधिपतिभुक््तिषु |
गोचरे मिथुने मन्दे तत्काले पितृनाशनम् ॥५४२९ ॥
जातकस्य महाकष्टं शुभाशुभफलं समम्।
राज्यस्थानं पञ्चमं स्यात्तत्रिकोणगते शनो ॥५४३० Il
राज्यक्षोधादिकार्याणि स्वराज्ये कलहो भवेत् |
जन्मतारदशाकाले त्विदं फलमुदाहतम् ॥५४३१ ॥
5425- 5431. (a) Effects of Rudrasana Yoga:
One born in Rudrasana Pada (or Rudrasana) yoga,
according to Yavanas, will be the ruler of the entire
earth. Because of this Yoga, he will be happy and
prosperous right from his birth.
(a) Venus - Rahu conjunction & C (continued from sloka 5423); The native will enjoy
happiness on account of rulership of a country and
be happy after the age of 16. He will lose his mother
in the first month, during the first year of the first
dasa (i.e. within one month of birth). In the 8th
month of the Ist year, he will incur fever (or illness)
caused due to digestive deficiency. During the 2nd
year, his father will be mentally distressed and be
troubled by sickness. This period will somewhat
endanger the native and will give both good and
bad effects. The dasa of the 10th lord (Moon) and
the sub period of the 8th lord (Venus) will prove
fatal to his father when Saturn comes to Gemini in
transit and the native will be highly troubled and
will experience good and bad effects in an equal
measure. The 5th house is the house of kingdom.
When Saturn attains a trine from the ascendant,
strife will exist in the country due to reversals in
royal assignments. These are the effects for the
first dasa.
Notes: “Happiness after the age of 16 years”
vide sloka 5426 compels us to delink the present six
verses from Rudrasana Yoga which stipulates happiness etc. right from birth. Thus the present slokas
are in continuity of sloka 5423 which deals with
Venus - Rahu conjunction & C. It will be clear that
Rudrasana Yoga has nothing to do with the kind of
presently mentioned effects. Iam well aware of the
term “Cha” used in the first line of sloka 5426, But
this is the only way of reviving this vital portion.
The 1st dasa referred to here is apparently of the
Moon. The 2nd dasa is noted as that of Mars, the
3rd of Rahu, the 4th of Jupiter, the 5th of Saturn and
the like as the reader will note progressively reaching sloka 5599 infra. These are all for Libra
ascendant. In between some special yogas are
discussed.
दयूनाधिपे लग्नगते दयूनाधिपदशा सुखम् |
स्वप्राबल्यं च लभते जातकस्य महत् सुखम् ॥५४३२ ॥
5432. Mars in the ascendant (Libra) will cause
happiness in his dasa. The native will prosper and
will enjoy a great deal of happiness.
Notes: This is an independent clue, like sloka
5433. The instructions in 5434-(a) are in continuation of effects mentioned earlier for Venus - Rabu
conjunction & C.
इनद्ंशकगते भोमे तिविन््रयोगसमुद् भवः।
मनोहरां शके जातो भूपतिनत्रि संशयः ॥५४३३ ॥
5433. Mars in Indra Nadiamsa will make one
born in Manohara Nadiamsa, Libra ascendant, a
king.
सम्पत्तारदशाकाले स्वभुक्तौ रोगपीडितः
स्वराज्ये कलहं चेव राजोपद्रवमादिशेत् ॥५४२४ ॥
सम्पत्तारदशाकाले UST महत् सुखम् |
राज्येशे कुजसंदृष्टे राज्याधिपतिनाशनम् ॥५४२३५ ॥
अन्यद्राज्यमवाप्नोति तत्काले नात्र संशयः।
पञ्चमाब्दात् परं सोख्यं जातकस्तु महत् सुखम् ॥५४३६ ॥
नष्टराज्यधनप्राप्ती राजमुद्राधिकारवान् | ।
fas राहुफलं सत्यं शुभग्रहयुतेक्षिते ॥५४३५७ ॥
तद्भुक्तौ सोख्यमाप्नोति तदशायां महत् सुखम् ।
जन्मादिषष्टिवर्षे च त्विदं फलमुदाहतम् ॥५४२३८ ॥

256 Deva Keralam
5434 - 5438. Sub-periods of Mars & Rahu:
(a) The first sub period of 2nd dasa (apparently of .
Mars) will be a source of sickness. Strife will exist
in his country apart from danger from theking. The
sub period of Rahu in the 2nd dasa will cause much
happiness.
(b) Irrelevant: The lord of the 5th in aspect to
Mars will destroy the king. Following this, immediately there will be a change of ruler.
(c) After the age of 5, the native will be greatly
happy. He will recover his lost kingdom and will
enjoy royal authority. (d) The effects (being) stated
for Rabu’ s position with a benefic’s conjunction or
aspect will bear truth. The sub period of Rahu
during the 2nd dasa will cause much happiness.
(That is, Rahu in Leo should be with a benefic to
give happiness.) Thus has to be said about the 6th
year from the time of birth.
Notes: (b) The 10th house is known as “Rajya
- sthana” whereas in some cases our text calls the 5th
house as “Rajya sthana”.
` सम्पत्तारदशाकाले षष्ठाधिपतिभुक्तिषु |
षष्ठेरो बलसंयुक्ते तदभुक्तो सोख्यमादिशेत् ॥५४३९ ॥
देहारोग्यं महत् सौख्यं धनधान्यादिसम्पदः।
वसरवाहनभूषादयः सर्वसौख्ययुतो भवेत् ॥५४४० It.
ब्राह्मणप्रभुमूलेन जातकश्च महत् सुखम् । ।
जन्मादिसप्तमे वर्षे गुरुभुक्ताविदं फलम् ॥५४४९ ॥
5439 - 5441. Jupiter’s Sub-period: The sub
period of the 6th lord (Jupiter) who is strong will
give happiness in the 2nd dasa. One will enjoy
health, wealth, grains etc, robes, conveyances and
all kinds of happiness. A Brahmin ruler will be the
cause of great happiness for the subject. These
effects will occur in the 7th year in Jupiter’s sub
period.
दयूनाधिपदशाकाले सुखाधिपतिभुक्तिषु |
सुखेशे रन्ध्रभावस्थे मन्दभुक्तौ महद भयम् ॥५४४२ ॥
ज्वरस्फोटव्रणादीनि रोगबाधाभयं वदेत् |
दुष्टजन्तुभयं चैव हयन्यस्थलनिवासकृत् ॥५४४३ ॥
मन्दे स्वांशगते चैव देहारोग्यं महत् सुखम् ।
नूतनग्रहनिर्माणं प्रामभूम्यादिलाभवान् ॥५४४४ ॥
जन्मादि चाष्टमे वर्षे मन्दभुक्तिविदं फलम् |
5442 - 5444142. Saturn’s Sub-period: The 4th
lord Saturn should be in the 8th in Taurus. Then his
sub period will cause great danger in the dasa of
Mars. He will be troubled by illness like fever, boil,
ulcer etc. and be endangered through wild animals.
He will be compelled to live in another place. If
Saturn, being in Taurus, is in his own Navamsa,
much happiness will come to pass apart from one’s
maintaining sound health. He will construct a new
house and will gain lordship over villages and
lands. These results for Saturn’s bbukti will materialise in the 8th year from birth.
Notes: In discussing the sub periods of Rahu,
Jupiter and Saturn, only one year each is considered
which is strange. Further some of these results are
against age factor.
धनाधिपदशाकाले भाग्याधिपतिभुक्तिषु ॥५४४५ ॥
भाग्येशे कर्मराशिस्थे तद्भुक्तौ सोख्यमादिशेत् |
विद्याबुद्धिसुकीर्मिश्च देहपुष्टिकरो भवेत् ॥५४४६ ॥
भाग्यवृद्धिमवाप्नोति राज्यलाभं महत् सुखम् |
लाभाधिपेन संयुक्ते धनलाभं विशेषतः ॥५४४७ ॥
कर्माधिपेन संदृष्टे कर्मसाप्राज्ययोगवान् |
शुभशोभनकार्याणि गृहे लक्षमीकाक्षवान् ॥५४४८ ॥
5445 - 5448. Mercury’s sub-period: (a) Mercury should be in Cancer at birth. Then his sub
period in the dasa of the 2nd lord (Mars) will
produce happiness, learning, intelligence, fame,
physical soundness, increase of prosperity and gain
of kingdom (authority).
(b) If Mercury is conjunct the Sun, then the
person will have financial gains.
(c) If Mercury is in aspect to the 10th lord, one
will gain kingdom, will celebrate auspicious functions at home and will gather wealth.
Notes: Ketu’s sub period in Mars dasa is discussed in sloka 5452 etc. interrupted by Samrajya
Yoga.
॥ कर्मसामप्राज्ययोगः॥
कर्माधिपे केन्द्रगते धनलाभेशवीक्षिते |
चरलग्ने प्रजातस्तु कर्मसाम्राज्ययोगवान् ॥५४४९ ॥
फलम्-
साम्राज्ययोगे धनिकः प्रतापी
विख्यातकीर्िर्बहुमानपूज्यः।

Chandra Kala Nadi 257
सन्मार्गवाञ्शत्रुनृपालसेवी
कामी सदा भूपतिकार्यदक्षः ॥५४५० ॥
एतद्योगवशात् सौख्यं सत्कर्माचारबुद्धिमान् |
अष्टमान्दात् परं चैव योगं पोडशवत्सरे ॥५४५१ ॥
5449 - 5451. Karma Samrajya Yoga: In case
ofamovable ascendant, the lord of the 10th, placed
inan angle, in jointaspect to the lords of the 2nd and
the 11th will cause Karma Samrajya ०६३. The
native concerned will be wealthy, valorous, widely
famous, highly honoured, will take to virtuous
path, will serve a ruler, be ever libidinous and be
skilful in fulfilling royal duties. Further, he will be
happy on account of this Yoga, and will perform
good deeds. He will enjoy prosperity after the age
of 8 for a period of 16 years.
सम्पत्तारदशाकाले केतुभुक्तो शुभाशुभम् |
विद्याबुद्धिसुकौर्मिश्च सर्वसोख्ययुतो भवेत् ॥५४५२ ॥
5452. Ketu’s Sub-period - Libra Ascendant
(Continued): The sub period of Ketu in the 2nd
dasa will cause both good and bad effects. It will
give learning, intelligence, fame and all kinds of
happiness.
दयूनाधिपदशाकाले रन्घराधिपतिभुक्ततिषु |
गोचरे feet मन्दे तद्भुक्तौ कष्टमादिशेत् ॥५४५३ ॥
देहरोगं मनस्तापमुष्णादिज्वरपीडनम् |
आत्मबन्धुजनारिष्टं कलहाद्राजविग्रहम् ॥५४५४ ॥
शुक्रे स्वांशगते चैव देहारोग्यं महत् सुखम् ।
विद्याबुद्धियुतश्चैव बन्धुकल्याणसम्पदम् ॥५४५५ ॥
जन्मादिदशमे वषे राजयोगयुतः सुखी |
5453 - 5455144. Venus’ Sub-period: In the 2nd
dasa, the sub period of the 8th lord (Venus) will
cause difficulties, physical unfitness, mental distress, heat and fever when Saturn comes to Leo in
transit. Further, his men will incur evils, strife and
royal enmity. If Venus is in his own Navamsa,
health and great happiness will exist. The native
will acquire learning and intelligence while his
people will experience auspicious effects and
wealth. 10th year from birth will cause Raja Yoga.
धनाधिपदशाकाले लाभाधिपतिभुक्तिषु ॥५४५६ ॥
दशाधिपेन संदृष्टे चन्द्रभुक्तो महत् सुखम्।
जन्मादिरुद्रव्षे च चन्दरभुक्ताविदं फलम् ॥५४५७ ॥
5456 - 5457. (a) Sun’s Sub-period: In the 2nd
lord’s dasa, the sub period of the 11th lord ..... (text
incomplete).
(b) Moon’s Sub-period: If the Moon is aspected by the dasa lord, her sub period in the 2nd
dasa (of Mars) will produce great happiness, at the
age of 11. This is the result for the Moon’s sub
period.
सम्पत्तारदशाकाले त्विदं फलमुदाहतम् |
इन्द्रयोगे fare शुक्रराहुसमन्विते ।
प्रभूतधनलाभं राजयोगं लभेदधुवम् ॥५४५८ ॥
5458. The above are the effects for the 2nd dasa
(ruled by Mars). The 3rd dasa (ruled by Rahu) will
give abundant financial gains followed by Raja
Yoga effects if Venus and Rahu are together at
birth.
॥ अखण्डसाम्राज्ययोगः॥
लाभेशधर्मेशधनेश्वराणां
कलानिधिः केन्द्रगृहस्थितो वा।
स्वपुत्रलाभेषु च दैत्यमन्त्री
ह्यखण्डसाम्राज्यपतित्व मेति ॥५४५९ ॥
5459 Akhanda Samrajya Yoga: If the lords of
the 1 1th, 9th and 2nd are in anangle from the Moon,
or if Jupiter is in the 2nd, Sth or 11th (from the
ascendant), one obtains unbroken kingdom.
Notes: For proper understanding of this yoga,
please see page 83, Book 2.
योगे तत्र प्रजातो बहुगजतुरगस्यन्दनान्दोलिकादयः
क्षोणीदुर्गाधिनाथो गुणगणजलधिः सत्कलत्ररुपेतः।
अन्यस्रीसद्गचिपं जयति जनपतिः प्रत्यहं भोगशाली
नानासाम्राज्ययुक्तो लसति स पुरुषः कीर्तिमान् धर्मनिष्ठः ॥५४६० |
एतद्योगवशात् सौख्यं emer परं सुखम् ।
5460 - 54604. The native having Akhanda
Samrajya Yoga will be endowed with numerous
elephants, horses, chariots, palanquins and the like.
He will lord over forts etc., be an ocean of virtues,
will have a virtuous spouse, be intent upon illicit
ties with women, will win the ruler, will ever enjoy
pleasures, be endowed with various kingdoms under his rulership, be famous and righteous. He will
be happy after the age of 16.
स्वमित्रराज्यलाभं च विपद्ाये न संशयः ॥५४६१ ॥

258 Deva Keralam
विपत्तारदशाकाले स्वभुक्तौ सुखमादिशेत् |
लभते विजयं राज्यं विवाहोत्सवसं भ्रमम् ॥५४६२ ॥
दिव्याम्बरसुभूषापिं महैश्वर्यं सुसम्पदाः।
शुभग्रहयुतो राहुः प्रेक्षितो वा शुभेन च ॥५४६३ ॥
प्रभूतधनलाभं च स्वराज्ये सुखमादिशेत्।
, ्रयोदशब्दे सौख्यं च राहुभुक्ताविदं फलम् ॥५४६४ ॥
5461 - 5464. Rahu Dasa - Rahu’s Sub-period:
In the 3rd dasa, he will gain the kingdom of his
friends (i.e. will gain a good position through
friends). In the 1st sub period, he will experience
happiness, success, kingdom, marriage, beautiful
robes, omaments, great wealth provided Rahu is
related toa benefic by conjunction or aspect. These
apart, much financial gains and happiness in his
own country willcome to pass. 23rd year will cause
happiness. These are the effects for Rahu’s sub
period.
रहुदाये जीवभुक्तौ गोचरे तोलिगे शनौ ।
तद्भुक्तौ राजयोगं च शोर्यधेर्यपराक्रमम् ॥५४६५ ॥
लक्ष्मीकटाक्षचिह्वानि शत्रुनाशं जयं तथा |
देवब्राह्मणभक्तिश्च दानधर्मविशेषकृत् ॥५४६६ ॥
देवोत्सवादिकार्याणि देवतादर्शनं तथा |
तटाक गोपुरादीनां निर्माणं देवमन्दिरे ॥५४६७ ॥
वाग्मी चातुर्यबुद्धिश्च देहकान्तर्यशो भवेत् |
महदेश्वर्यसम्पन्नो राजयोगयुतः सुखी ॥५४६८ ॥
शुभशोभनकार्याणि दिव्यस्रीसङ्गमं तथा |
षष्ठाधिपत्यदोषेण किंचिद् व्याकुलसं भवम् ॥५४६९ ॥
विप्रवर्गे विरोधं च देहपीडां क्वचित् क्वचित् |
पूर्वार्धे सौख्यमाप्नोति ह्यपरार्ध इदं फलम् ॥५४७० ॥ `
5465 - 5470. Jupiter’s Sub-period: The sub
period of Jupiter in the dasa of Rahu will produce
Raja Yoga, when Saturn transits the sign Libra.
Further, the native will develop courage. He will
financially gain. His foes will be destroyed. He
will honour gods and Brahmins and will give
liberal donations. He will be involved in temple
` festivals and will construct temples, towers, tanks
and the like. He will develop eloquence of speech,
skilful disposition, and physical splendour and will
become famous. Much opulence will accrue to him
and he will enjoy Raja Yoga effects. Auspicious
functions and association with beautiful women
will also follow. ‘However, due to blemish of 6th
lordship, Jupiter’ s sub period can cause some amount
of distress, enmity with Brahmins, and physical
ailments to some extent. Its first half will give
happiness, while these adverse effects will be felt
in the 2nd half during the 16th year of age. Prosperity and happiness will occur, with the Sun’s
transit in Sagittarius, during the 16th year.
जन्मादिषोडशे वर्षे गुरुभुक्ताविदं फलम् |
षोडशाब्दे VAS स्वप्राबल्यं महत् सुखम् ॥५४७१ ॥
स्वतन््रराज्यलाभं च राजयोगसमुद् भवः।
विपत्तारदशाकाले राज्याधिपतिभुक्तिषु ॥५४७२ ॥
गोचरे लाभगे मन्दे मन्दभुक्तौ महत् सुखम् ।
स्वतन्त्रराज्यलाभं च राजमुद्राधिकारवान् ॥५४७२ ॥
रुद्रासनाभिधे योगे योगसाग्राज्यजस्तथा |
fared मन्दभुक्तौ योगं प्राप्नोति भूरिशः॥५४७४ ॥
बहुकीर्तिप्रतापं च बहुराज्ययुतः सुखी |
बहुदेशप्रसिद्धश्च बहुद्रव्यादिलाभवान् ॥५४७५ ॥
नानाकार्येषु निपुणो हयष्टश्वर्यसमन्वितः।
शुभशोभनकार्याणि दारसौख्यं विशेषतः ॥५४७६ ॥
अन्यसरीसङ्गवान् कामी भोगभाग्ययुतः सुखी |
दानधर्मपरो नित्यं देवब्राह्मणपोषकः ॥५४७७ ॥
अग्रहारप्रतिष्ठाता देवमन्दिरकारकः।
रन्रस्थानगता दोषात् किंचिद् व्याकुलसं भवम् ॥५४७८ ॥
मातृबन्धुजनारिष्टं देहपीडां क्वचिद् भयम् |
एकोनविशगे वर्षे मन्दभुक्ताविदं फलम् ॥५४७९ ॥
5471 .- 5479. Saturn’s Sub-period: One will
gain an independent kingdom. Much happiness
.will prevail with the transit of Saturn in the 11th,
apart from acquisition of royal power. For one bom
in Rudrasana Yoga or Samrajya Yoga, this sub
period in the 3rd dasa will produce much prosperity, wide fame, valour, extended kingdom, name in
many countries and acquisition of a great order.
One will exhibit skill various undertakings, will
gain eight kinds of wealth and will enjoy auspiciousness and much happiness through spouse. He
will join others’ women, be libidinous, endowed
with pleasures and fortunes, be charitable and will
honour gods and brahmins. He will construct colonies for Brabminsand temples. Saturn’s placement
in the 8th will however cause some distress to the

Chandra Kala Nadi 259
native, evils to maternal kinsfolk and physical
ailments. These effects will be due at the age of 21
in Saturn’s sub period.
॥ चामरयोगः॥
वर्गोत्तमगते सूर्ये लग्नेशे शुभराशिगे ।
लग्नात् कर्मगते सौम्ये योगश्चामरसंक्िकः ॥५४८० ॥
फलम्-
राजा भवेद्भपतिवंशजानां
दिगन्तविश्रान्तमहीपतीनाम् |
किरीटकोरिस्थितरलनभाभिः।
प्रकाशमानादिश्रविराजमानः ॥५४८ १ । <
योगेऽस्मिश्चामरे जातो दीर्घायुदीर्ध बुद्धिमान् |
बहुदेशाधिनाथश्च धर्मिष्ठो वेदवित् सुखी ॥५४८२ ॥
5480 - 5482. Chamara Yoga: The Sun in
Vargottama, the lord of the ascendant in a benefic
sign, and Mercury in the 10th from the ascendant
will produce Chamara Yoga. The effects thereof
are: One born in a royal family will become a king
whose feet will be resplendent with the brilliance
of diamonds studded it the crowns of millions of
prostrating kings drawn from various directions.
Further he will be long-lived, high-minded, be the
ruler of many countries, be virtuous and learned in
the Vedas.
विपत्तारदशाकाले भाग्याधिपतिभुक्तिषु |
कर्माधिपेन संदृष्टे सौम्यभुक्तो शुभं वदेत् ॥५४८३ ॥
देवद्विजाराधनतत्परत्व
कृतार्थलाभं प्रियकोशलं च।
देशाधिपत्यं नरवाहनं च
राहोर्दशायां बुध भुक्तिकाले ॥५४८४ ॥
5483 - 5484. Rahu Dasa - Mercury Bhukti:
Auspiciousness is indicated in this sub period if the
9th lord (Mercury) is aspected by the 10th lord
(Moon). Additionally, he will be disposed to
worship gods and Brahmins, will have financial
gains, skills, lordship of a country, and conveyances.
लाभभाग्येश्वरौ युक्तौ कर्माधिपतिवीक्षितो |
सुखाधिपेन संदृष्ठो भाग्ययोग इति स्मृतः॥५४८५ ॥
तराकगोपुरादीनां निर्माता धर्मकः सुखी ।
देवोत्सवादिकार्याणि बन्धुकल्याणसम्पदः ॥५४८६ ॥
दानधर्मपरो नित्यं देवब्राह्मणपूजनम् ।
दिव्यक्षतरादिसञ्चारं बुधभुक्तौ विशेषतः ॥५४८७ ॥
दिव्यस्री भोगमाप्नोति पुराणश्रवणादिकम् |
नीचांशे पापंसयुक्ते त्वसितेन युतेक्षिते ॥५४८८ ॥
देहपीडां मनस्तापं बन्धुवर्गे विशेषतः।
अन्योन्यकलहं किंचिन्मातृबन्धुविनाशनम् ॥५४८९ ॥
गोचरे द्वादशे मन्दे त्वेकविशतिवत्सरे ।
fared सौम्यभुक्ताविदं फलमुदाहतम् ॥५४९० ॥
5485 - 5490. (a) Bhagya Yoga - Libra Ascendant: Bhagya Yoga is formed as the lords of the
11th and the 9th (the Sun and Mercury) join in
aspect to the lords of the 10th and 4th (the Moon and
Satur). As aresult, the person will be responsible
for construction of tanks, towers etc., be charitable,
happy and associated with temple festivals. Much
auspiciousness will accrue to his kinsfolk. He will
be intent upon giving donations, will worship
Brahmins and gods and will visit shrines, especially in the sub period of Mercury (in Rahu’s
dasa). He will enjoy charming women and will
listen to mythological stories.
(b) If Mercury is conjunct a malefic apart from
being related to Saturn by conjunction or aspect,
and begetting Pisces Navamsa, will lead to the
following results, during the period under discus- `
sion. The subject will confront physical ailments.
More so his kinsfolk. He will be involved in
quarrels with his men. Some possibility of destruction of maternal relatives will also be there. These
effects have to be foretold for Saturn’s simultaneous transit in the 12th during the age of 21.
Notes: (a) Bhagya Yoga or a combination for
prosperity and fortunes can be drawn for other
ascendants also when the lords of the 9th and 11th
are together with a joint aspect of the lords of the
4th and 10th.
विपत्तारदशाकाले केतुभुक्तौ महत् सुखम् ।
गोचरे जन्मगे मन्दे देहपीडां क्वचिद् भयम् ॥५४९१ ॥
कलहं शतरुभीति च मित्रवर्गे क्वचिद् भयम् |
शुभग्रहेण संदृष्टे सत्कर्माचारसिद्धिमान् ॥५४९२ ॥
चित्रविद्याविनोदं च पुराणश्रवणादिकम् |
तीर्थयात्रागमं चैव प्रबलप्रभुदर्शनम् ॥५४९३ ॥
स्वगृहे शुभकार्याणि पुत्रदारादि सम्पदः।

` 260 Deva Keralam
दानधर्मजपादीनि देवतागुरुभक्तिमान् ॥५४९४ ॥
पापक्षत्रगते केतौ पापचित्तः क्वचित् क्वचित् |
अन्यस्रीसङ्गमं चैव कलहं मित्रबन्धुषु ॥५४९५ ॥
शुभाशुभफलं चैव राजयोगयुतो भवेत् ।
5491 - 5495142. Sub-period of Ketu: (a) This
will be a source of much happiness. But when
Saturn transits the natal Moon sign, there will be
some fear of physical sufferings followed by quarrels, trouble from foes and some fear for friends.
(b) Ketu in aspect to a beneficial planet will
help the person do good deeds and take to virtuous
path. He will enjoy excellent learning and entertainment, will listen to mythological accounts, will
visit pilgrim centres and will meet a powerful king.
There will accrue auspicious furictions, apart from
much happiness on account of progeny and spouse.
One will give charities, will perform meditation
and be devoted to gods and brahmins.
(c) Should Ketu be in a malefic’s sign, one will
be somewhat sinful. He will develop illicit ties
with others’ women and will quarrel with friends
and relatives. Good and bad results will occur apart
from Raja Yoga..
विपत्तारदशाकाले रन्धाधिपतिभुक्तिषु ॥५४९६ ॥
गोचरे नक्रगे मन्दे चतुर्विशतिवत्सरे |
राज्यसौख्यं यानलाभं धनस्रीलाभमेवच ॥५४९७ ॥
उत्साहकीर्विसम्पन्नो दिव्याभरणलाभवान् |
मणिविद्रुममुक्तादिदिव्यवस्तुसमागमम् ॥५४९८ ॥
स्वराज्ये सुखमाप्नोति बन्धुकल्याणसम्पदः।
दशाधिपेन संयुक्ते ह्यन्यस्रीसौख्यदायकः॥५४९९ ॥
उत्तमस्रीलाभमेव नाना जातिवधूपतिः।
बहुद्रव्यव्ययं चैव बहुकार्यार्थसाधकः ॥५५०० ॥
नानादेशप्रसिद्धश्च नानाश्रमविशारदः।
महान्तं राजयोगं च पहालक्ष्मीकटाक्षवान् ॥५५०१ ॥
शुक्रे राहु सुसंयुक्ते स्रीमूलात् कलहं क्वचित् |
अपवादभयं किंचिदेहपीडां क्वचिद् भयम् ॥५५०२ Il
आप्तबन्धुजनक्लेशं दुष्टकर्मादिसं भवम् |
गुरुदृष्टिवशात् सौख्यं राजयोगयुतो भवेत् ॥५५०३ ॥
मनोधैर्यं महोत्साहमिदं फलमुदाहतम् |
5496 - 5503. Sub-period of Venus: (a) In the
3rd dasa (of Rabu) during the sub period of the 8th
lord (Venus), when Saturn moves in Capricom
during the 24th year of age of the native, he will
acquire royal kind of happiness, conveyances,
wealth and spouse. Abundant enthusiasm and
fame, gain of beautiful ornaments, and charming
articles like gems, corals and pearls. He will be
happy in hiskingdom. His kinsfolk will experience
much auspicious effects.
(b) Should Venus be together with Rahu at
birth, the sub period under study will give happiness on account of union with others’ females. This
apart, he will acquire an excellent spouse and
women of various castes. A lot of his money will
be spent away. He will achieve many things, be
famous in many countries, and skilful in many
kinds of efforts (or jobs). He will enjoy Raja Yoga
and the blessings of the goddess of lucre. The
conjunction of Venus with Rahu will, however,
promote some quarrels on account of women,
accompanied by infamy and some fear of illhealth. His relatives will be anguished. Involvement in wicked deeds will also be possible.
(c) Jupiter’s aspect (on Venus) can produce
happiness and Raja Yoga. The person will be
courageous and enthusiastic.
लाभस्थानगते राहौ लाभाधिपतिभुक्तिषु ॥५५०४ ॥
watts संयुक्ते सूर्यभुक्तो महत् सुखम् ।
स्वबन्धुदारपुत्राणामारोग्यं भूषणादिकम् ॥५५०५ ॥
दिव्यवस्तुफलप्रापि राजपूज्यो जयावहः
राज्याधिपतिसन्मानं बहुकीर्तियुतः सुखी ॥५५०६ ॥
देवोत्सवादिकार्याणि सञ्चारं वनगह्वरे |
मनोधैर्यं महोत्साहं प्रबलप्रभुदर्शनम् ॥५५०७ ॥
अनेककार्यसिद्धि च राजयोगयुतो भवेत् |
सप्तविंशति वर्षे च त्विदं फलमुदाहतम् ॥५५०८ ॥
5504 - 5508. Sub-period of the Sun: Should
Rahu be in the 1 1th (in Leo) while the 1 1th lord (the
Sun) is with the 9th lord (Mercury), the sub period
of the Sun (in Rahu’s dasa) will produce much
happiness. The native’s spouse, progeny and kinsfolk will enjoy health. Abundant ornaments, acquiSition of beautiful articles, honours from the king
and much fame will follow the native. Due to
temple festivals, he will undertake journey to forests and caverns. He will be courageous, and

Chandra Kala Nadi 261
enthusiastic and will meet a powerful king. Many*
of his undertakings will attain fruition. He will `
experience Raja Yoga effects. All these will come
to pass in the 27th year.
विपत्तारदशाकाले कर्माधिपतिभुक्तिषु |
गोचरे नक्रगे मन्दे चनद्रभुक्तौ शुभाशुभम् ॥५५०९ ॥
सुखभोगी whet स्वराज्ये सुखमाप्नुयात् |
परस्रीसङ्गवाननित्यं देशग्रामाधिकारिताम् ॥५५१० ॥
तटाकारमधर्मे च देवब्राह्मणपूजनम् ।
दायेशात् TST चन्द्रे सौम्ये रविसमन्विते ॥५५११ ॥
देहपीडां मनस्तापं मातृबन्धुविनाशनम् |
दुष्टकर्मादिसंप्रापििं शत्रुपीडां क्वचिद् भयम् ॥५५१२ ॥
अपवादभयं किंचिदष्ट्विशतिवत्सरे।
5509 - 55124. Sub-period of the Moon: (a) In
the 3rd dasa, during the sub period of the 10th lord
Moon, coinciding with Saturn’s transit in Capricorn, good and bad results will both come to pass.
The person will enjoy endless happiness and pleasures in his country. He will join others’ women and
will acquire lordship over a country or villages,
will construct tanks and gardens and will honour
gods and brahmins.
(b) With the Moon in the 6th from Rahu as
Mercury is conjunct the Sun, the effects for the sub
period of the Moon should be physical ailments,
mental distress, destruction of maternal relatives,
involvement in wicked deeds, trouble from enemies and to some extent fear of infamy possibly in
the 28th year.
विपत्तारदशाकाले धनाधिपतिभुकित्तिषु 14423 ॥
गोचरे मेषगे मन्दे त्वेकोनत्रिशवत्सरे |
देहपीडां मनस्तापं कलहं राजविग्रहम् ॥५५१४ ॥
आप्तबन्धुजनारिष्टं धनधान्यव्ययं तथा |
सुखसौख्यविहीनं च कुम्टुम्बे रोगपीडनम् ॥५५१५ ॥
कलहं बन्धुवैषम्यं यत्नकार्यविघातकृत् |
इन्द्रासनपदे भौमे मनोधैर्यं महत् सुखम् ॥५५१६ ॥
मनोह्ादं महोत्साहं विद्याभरणलाभतः।
शत्रुनाशं जयं चेव शुभाशुभफलं समम् |
विपत्तारदशाकाले त्विदं फलमुदाहतम् ॥५५१७ ॥
5513 - 5517. Sub-period of Mars: (a) In the
3rd dasa (of Rahu) during the sub period of the 2nd
lord (Mars), physical ailments, mental distress,
quarrels, royal displeasure, evils to kinsfolk, loss of
money, grains and happiness, troubles from diseases to family members, differences with relatives and obstacles to one’s undertakings will
occur. These will be in the 29th year, along with
Saturn’s movements in the sign Aries.
(b) Should Mars be in Indra Nadiamsa, mental
courage, great happiness, enthusiasm, learning,
ornaments, destruction of enemies, success and a
mix of good and bad effects will come to pass
(during the sub period in question).
Thus should be described the 3rd dasa (ruled by
Rahu, for a Libra native).
Notes: (b) “Indrasana Pada” is an unusual term
- not described in our text. Apparently, it can only be
interpreted as “Indra Nadiamsa” which has been
-oft-occurring.
॥ गुरुदशाफलम् ॥.
कूर्मयोगः
तृतीयैकादशे जीवे स्वक्षेत्रे बलसंयुक्ते ।
लग्नाधिपे लाभगते कुर्मयोग इतीरितः ॥५५१८ ॥
चरलग्ने तदीशे तु स्थिरराशिस्थिरांशगे |
-गुरुशुक्रयुते दृष्टे कूर्मयोग इतीरितः ॥५५१९ ॥
5518 - 5519. Koorma Yoga: (a) A strong
Jupiter in his own sign identical with either the 3rd
or the 11thas the lord of the ascendant is in the 11th,
will produce Koorma Yoga.
(b) Alternatively, a movable sign can ascend `
whose lord occupies a fixed sign with fixed Navamsa. The said ascendant lord should also be
related to Jupiter and Venus either by aspect or
conjunction. Here again, Koorma Yoga forms. `
Notes: (a) This aphorism applies to Libra
ascendant while Jupiter is in Sagittarius (3rd) with
strength and Venus is in Leo (11th).
The other ascendant that comes under the
purview of this Yoga is Taurus. Here, Jupiter with
strength should be in Pisces along with exalted
Venus.
(b) Another form of Koorma Yoga occurs to a
movable ascendant (Aries, Cancer and Capricorn
only) whose lord should be related to Jupiter and
Venus and occupy a fixed sign (Taurus, Leo,
Scorpio or Aquarius) with one of such Navamsas.

262 Deva Keralam
The reader can well understand that this does not
apply to Libra ascendant for which Koorma Yoga
of a different kind is already listed.
फलम्-
विख्यातकीर्तिर्भुवि राजपूज्यो
धर्मे रतः सत््वगुणप्रधानः।
नित्यं सुखी सात्विककार्यकर्ता
AeA मनुजाभिरामः॥५५२० ॥ ॥
5520. Effects: The subject born with Sri Koorma
Yoga (of any of the three kinds cited above) will
enjoy wide fame on the earth, will be honoured by
the ruler, attached to virtues, be primarily gentle in
disposition, ever happy, will perform gentle deeds
and be charming among men.
्षेमतारदशाकाले जीवे मूलत्रिकोणगे ।
जीवाद् भाग्यं गते शुक्रे शुभांशे राजयोगवान् ॥५५२१।
5521. Jupiter’s Dasa: This dasa occurring as
the 4th one will generate a Raja Yoga if Jupiter at
birth is in his Moolatrikona while Venus is in the
90 thereof (i.e. in Leo) with a benefic Navamsa.
Notes: This is one particular kind of Koorma
Yoga discussed specially for Libra ascendant in a
previous verse.
Wगुरोः षष्ठाष्टमे पापे शुक्रे राहुसमन्विते |
चनद्रादष्टमगे शुक्रे योगभद्गं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥५५२२ ॥
5522. Annihilation of Koorma Yoga: A
malefic in the 6th/8th counted from Jupiter while
Venus and Rahu are (in Leo) in the 8th from the
Moon (in Capricorn) will resist the formation of
Koorma Yoga.
जीवदाये मध्यखण्डे रन्धाधिपतिभुक्त्तिषु |
स्वराज्ये गष्टमापनोति मनक्लेशं महद् भयम् ॥५५२३ ॥
दशान्ते सोख्यमाप्नोति राजयोगयुतः सुखी ।
्षेमतारदशाकाले स्वभुक्तौ सर्वसम्पदः ॥५५२४ ॥
गोचरे मेषगे मन्दे जन्मादित्रिंशवत्सरे |
तत्काले राजवैरं च यल्नकार्यविघातवान् ॥५५२५ ॥
मित्रवर्गविरोधं च धननाशं मनोभयम्।
आत्मबन्धुजनक्लेशं पुत्रदारादिपौडनम् ॥५५२६ ॥
galt व्याकुलं . चैति wart महत् सुखम् ।
गोचरे मिथुने जीवे सर्वसोख्ययुतः सुखी ॥५५२७ ॥
महान्तं राजयोगं च बहुकीरतिः प्रतापवान् |
गोचरे वृषभे मन्दे दुर्भिक्षं TAMA ॥५५२८ Il
हाहाकारं जगत् सवे क्षामक्षोभादिबाधया |
स्वराज्ये सुखमाप्नोति त्वकेत्रिंशतिवत्सरे ॥५५२९ ॥
5523 - 5529. (a) One will lose his kingdom
(0०५1५०५) in the sub period of the 8th lord (Venus)
during the middle part of Jupiter’s dasa. He will
also be anguished and be subjected to great fear.
The concluding part of Jupiter’s dasa will give
happiness and Raja Yoga effects.
(b) All kinds of wealth will occur in the first sub
period of Jupiter’s dasa.
(c) During the 30th year, Saturn transiting in
Aries will cause royal enmity and obstacles to
one’s undertakings. He will develop enmity with
friends, will lose his wealth and be subjected to
fear. His kinsfolk, spouse and progeny will be
anguished. The first half of Jupiter’s dasa will be
distressful while the later half will be a source of
much happiness. Saturn’s movements in Gemini
will bless one with every kind of happiness and a
great deal of Raja Yoga, wide fame and valour. |
(d) Irrelevant: Saturn’s journey in Taurus will
usher famine and will destroy the state. The entire
world will cry in grief. The native will be happy in
his country in the 31st year.
क्षेमतारदशाकाले राज्याधिपतिभुक्ति |
गोचरे वृषभे मन्दे मन्दभुक्तौ महत् सुखम् ॥५५३० Il
नगरग्रामनाथश्च सेनानीर्मृपवन्दितः।
परोपकारनिरतो नूतनप्रभुदर्शनम् ॥५५२३१ ॥
कलत्रपत्रसौख्यापि बन्धु वर्गे महत् सुखम् ।
शुभशोभनकार्याणि हयन्यस्रीसद्गसौख्यवान् ॥५५३२ ॥
5530 - 5532. During the currency of Saturn’s
sub period, the transit of Saturn in Taurus will give
much happiness to the person. He will head over
towns and villages, be honoured by army chief and
king, be intent upon helping others, will meeta new
king, and enjoy happiness on account of spouse and
progeny. His kinsfolk will also be greatly happy.
There will be auspicious functions in his family and
he will join others’ women.
गुरोः षष्ठगते मन्दे लग्नादष्टमगेऽपि वा ।
पापग्रहयुते दृष्टे पापभुक्तौ महद भयम् ॥५५३३ Il

Chandra Kala Nadi
वातरोगादिपीडां च ह्यन्यप्रभुविरोधताम् |
कलहं मित्रमूलेन ह्यात्मबन्धुविनाशनम् ॥५५३४ Il
बहुमूलादद्रव्यनष्टं शुभाशुभफलं समम् |
चतुशिशतिवर्षे च त्विदं फलमुदाहतम् ॥५५३५ ॥
5533 - 5535. A malefic’s sub period in Jupiter’s.
dasa will cause much fear if Saturn occupies the 6th
from Jupiter, or even the 8th from the ascendant
(Libra). Additionally, the person will be inflicted
by windy diseases, will incur enmity with other
kings, be troubled by quarrels with friends and will
lose his relatives. His wealth will decline in many
away. Good and bad effects will be equal in the
said sub period occurring in the 24th year.
क्षेमाधिपदशाकाले भाग्याधिपतिभुक््तिषु |
गोचरे मिथुने मन्दे सोम्यभुक्तिः शुभप्रदा ॥५५३६ ॥
शुधसन्तोषकार्याणि बन्धुवर्गे महत् सुखम् |
दारपुत्रादिसौख्यं च दिव्यस्रीभोगमिच्छति ॥५५३७ ॥
स्वराज्ये सुखमाप्नोति प्रभूतधनलाभवान् |
दानधर्मजपादीनि षटकर्मज्ञानसिद्धिमान् ॥५५३८ ॥
देवोत्सवादिकार्याणि देवतादर्शनं तथा |
प्रयाणं शुभदं चैव यलकार्यार्थसिद्धिकृत् ॥५५३९ ॥
गुरोः षष्ठाष्टमे सौम्ये पापग्रहयुतेक्षिते |
बन्धुवे मनस्तापो frat तथा भवेत् ॥५५४० ॥
अन्यप्रभुविरोधं च स्वराज्ये कलहं तथा ।
आत्मन्धुंजनक्लेशं बहुमूलधनव्ययः॥५५४१ ॥
कर्माधिपेन संदृष्टे राजयोगो भवेद धुवम् |
मनोधैर्यं महोत्साहं षष्ठत्रिंशतिवत्सरे ॥५५४२॥ `
5536 - 5542. Mercury’s Sub-period: (a) The
sub period of Mercury in the 4th dasa (of Jupiter)
will give auspicious effects with Saturn’s sojourn
in Gemini. One will be much happy due to auspicious and pleasurable deeds and through spouse
_and progeny. He will like to join beautiful women.
Happiness will accrue to him in his own country.
` He willhave abundant financial gains. He will give
charities, perfom meditation and will attain fruits
due to fulfilment of "Shatkarmas". He will visit
temples in connection with divine festivals. His
travels will prove auspicious and his undertakings
will yield expected results.
(b) Should Mercury be in the 6th or 8th trom
Jupiter, in relation to a malefic by aspect or conjunction, the sub period in question will cause
distress among one’s kinsfolk and circle of friends.
The native will earn enmity with another ruler.
There will be strife in his own country. His people `
will be anguished and his money will be spent on
many counts.
(c) Should Mercury be aspected by the 10th
lord (Moon), Raja Yoga effects will be experienced
in the former’s sub period including courage and
enthusiasm in the 36th year.
Notes: "Shatkarma" needsa clarifiation. Vedic
literature prescribes six kinds of duties for a Brahmin. These are Adhyayana (studying or repeating
of the Vedas), Adhyapana (teaching of the Vedas),
` Yajana (offering sacrifices), Yaajana (conducting
sacrifices for others), Dana (giving donations) and
Pratigraha (accepting gifts). Thus, the native in
question will accomplish these duties and will
attain spiritual wisdom.
षष्ठाधिपदशाकाले राज्यस्थः केतुभुक्ततिषु |
गोचरे कटके मन्दे केतुभुक्तौ महद्भयम् ॥५५४३ ॥
` स्वराज्ये कलहं चैव भृत्यवर्गविरोधजम् |
यातायातभयं चैव स्थानभ्रष्टं महद् भयम् ॥५५४४ Il
कलहं शत्ुभीति च ह्यादायादधिकव्ययम् |
शौर्यधेर्यविहीनश्च दुर्घटः कार्यसं भवः॥५५४५ ॥
मूत्ररोगभयं चैव सप्पत्रिशतिवत्सरे |
5543 - 55454. Sub-period of Ketu: If Ketu at
birth is in the Sth house, the transit of Saturn in
Cancer will be the cause of great fear, in the sub
period of Ketu in Jupiter’sdasa. There will be strife
in one’s country. He will develop enmity with his
relatives, will lose his position or place and be»
subjected to great fear. His travels will also cause
fear. He will face quarrels, fear from enemies,
more expenditure than his income, loss of courage
_ and willindulge in calamitous deeds. He will incur
disorders of urine at the age of 27.
षष्ठाधिपदशाकाले रन्धराधिपतिभुक्तिषु ॥५५४६ ॥
गोचरे ह्यष्टमे मन्दे शुक्रभुक्तौ महद भयम्।
शुक्रे राहुयुते चैव चन्द्रलग्नाष्टमस्थिते ॥५५४७ ॥
तत्काले व्याकुलं चेति राज्यनाशं धनक्षयम् ।
अकस्मात् कार्यनष्टं च लाभद्रव्यविहीनताम् ॥५५४८ ॥
देहजाड्यं मनक्लेशं बहुकार्यार्थचिन्तनम् |

264 Deva Keralam
अपमानभयं किंचिद्यतलकार्यविघातजम् ॥५५४९ ॥
सिहे शनिस्थिते काले लोके दुर्भिक्षजं भयम्।
हाहाकारं जगत् सर्वं क्षामक्षोभादिबाधितम् ॥५५५० ॥
शुक्रे स्वांशगते चैव at क्वचित् सुखम्।
मनोधैर्यं महोत्साहं शुभाशुभफलं समम् ॥५५५१ ॥
षष्ठत्रिशात् परं चैव त्वकेचत्वारिवत्सरे |
5546 -555114. Sub-period of Venus: (a) When
Saturn comes to the 8th, the sub period of Venus,
in the dasa of 6th lord (Jupiter) will produce great
fear. If Venusand Rahuare together in the 8th from
the Moon, the said transit will destroy the kingdom
and wealth. His undertakings will be destroyed
suddenly and he will have no profits. His health
will decline. He will be anguished, and be worried
about many of his undertakings, be humiliated and
will face obstacles to work.
(b) Irrelevant: Saturn’s movements in Leo
will usher a famine in the country. The people will
cry in distress due to drought and strife.
(c) If Venus is in own Navamsa (while being
with Rahu & C as at “a” above), the 2nd half of the
sub period will cause some happiness. One will
beget courage, show enthusiasm and will experi--
ence good and bad effects in an equal measure after
the age of 36 and 41. (This should be independent
of the sub period in question.)
क्षेमाधिपदशाकाले लाभाधिपतिभुक््तिषु ॥५५५२ ॥
गोचरे ललने मन्दे सूर्यभुक्तो महत् सुखम् |
प्रबलप्रभुमूलेन यलकार्यार्थसिद्धिमान् ॥५५५२ ॥
विक्रमं साहसं सौख्यं राजसन्मानवैभवम्।
धनलाभं AMG सदरोष्ठीप्रियभाषणम् ॥५५५४ ॥
स्वर्णसूत्रोतवस्रादिभूषणानां सुलाभवान् |
कर्माधिपेन संदृष्टे मित्रभरभुवशात् सुखम् ॥५५५५ ॥
दायेशाद्रन्धराशिस्थे स्वकार्ये तामसो भवेत् |
दहेपीडां मनस्तापं क्वचित् सौख्यं शुभाशुभम् ॥५५५६ ॥
्षेमातारदशाकाले कर्माधिपतिभुक्तिषु |
5552 - 5556\4.. The Sun’s Sub-period: (a)
When Saturn moves in Virgo, the sub period of the
Sun in Jupiter’s dasa will produce much happiness.
One’s undertakings will be fruitful due to a powerful king. The person will acquire courage,
adventurism, happiness, royal honour, economic
gains, increased fame and agreeable talks with
virtuous men. He will have abundant gains of gold
and clothes.
(b) If the Sun is in aspect to the 10th lord
(Moon) one will gain happiness through a friendly
ruler.
(c) Should the Sun be in the 8th from the dasa
lord (Jupiter) one will display ignorance in his
undertakings. Physical troubles, mental distress,
limited happiness and an equal measure of good
and bad effects will occur.
गोचरे ललने मन्दे HPUTEPTAAA ॥५५५७ ॥
पूर्वार्धे व्याकुलं चैति मातृबन्धुविनाशनम्।
दुष्टकर्मादिसंप्रापि यातायातं धनव्ययम् ॥५५५८ ॥
अनाचारो मनः पीडां यलकार्यषिनाशनम् |
देहालस्यं मन्दबुद्धि पूर्वार्धोक्तं फलं विदम् ॥५५५९ ॥
शशाङ्के मिथुनांशस्थे तदंशे गुरूसंयुते |
गोचरे मिथुने जीवे गोचरे तौलिगे शनौ ॥५५६० ॥
अपरार्थे महत् सौख्यं राजसन्मानवेभवम्।
नूतनप्रभुसन्मानं यलकार्यार्थलाभतः॥५५६१ ॥
नष्टराज्यधन प्राप्ति महदैश्वर्यसम्पदः।
अर्थयोगमवाप्नोति स्वराज्ये सुखमाप्नुयात् ॥५५६२ ॥
स्वतन्त्रराज्यलाभं च बहुकीर्तिप्रतापवान्।
द्विचत्वारिंशगे वर्षे युग्मादिद्रयमासगे ॥५५६३ ॥
तत्किणगते मासे तत्काले सोख्यमादिशेत्।
प्रबलप्रभुमूलेने पत्रिकागमनं तथा ॥५५६४ ॥
राज्यलाभं महत् सौख्यं महालक्ष्मीकराक्षवान् |
चन्द्रे कुजयुते दृष्टे दुष्टजन्तु भयं क्वचित् ।५५६५ ॥
भाग्याधिपेन संदृष्टे भाग्यवृद्धि महोत्सवम् |
लाभाधिपेनसंदृष्टे धनलाभंविशेषतः ॥५५६६ ॥
द्विचत्वारिंशगे वर्षे त्विदं फलमुदाहतम् |
5557 - 55661. (a) The Moon’s Sub-period:
_During the currency of the Ist half of the sub period
of the 10th lord (Moon), Saturn’s movements in
Virgo with a malefic’s aspect will cause anguish,
destruction of maternal kinsfolk, indulgence in bad
deeds, expenditure in (unfruitful) travels, bad conduct, mental troubles, loss of work, indolence and
dullheadedness.
(b) The Moon joining Jupiter in Gemini Navamsa will cause much happiness in the 2nd half of,

Chandra Kala Nadi 265
the said sub period with ‘upiter and Saturn in order
journeying in the signs Gemini and Libra. The
native will enjoy a good deal of royal honours
including from a new ruler. The undertakings
aimed at by him will materialise. He will gain
wealth through a captured kingdom (i.e. will recover lost wealth), enjoy abundant wealth, be
happy in his country and will gain an independent
kingdom, wide fame and valour in the 42nd year.
with the transit Sun in Gemini and Cancer. The Sun
moving in trines to these two signs will also cause
happiness. The native will receive communication
from a powerful king and will gain wealth.
(c) Should the Moon be related to Mars by
aspect or company, one will be troubled by wild
animals to some extent, in the said sub period. The
Moon aspected by 9th lord (Mercury) will increase
prosperity in her sub period. Aspected by the 11th
lord (Sun), she will produce much financial gains
in the sub period under consideration. These
effects are to be stated for the 42nd year.
क्षेमतारदशाकाले दाराधिपतिभुक्तिषु ॥५५६७ ॥
गोचरे तौलिगे मन्दे कुजभुक्तौ महत् सुखम् ।
आयुरागेग्यपुत्राप्तिं राज्यबन्धुसमन्वितः ॥५५६८ ॥
स्वदारपुत्रलाभं च बहुकीर्तिप्रतापवान् |
मनोधीरो महोत्सादी राजयोगयुतो भवेत् ॥५५६९ ॥
द्ितीयद्यूनदोषेण देहजाइयं क्वचिद् भयम् |
व्रणोष्णादिज्वराद् भीतो दारबन्धुविनाशवान् ॥५५७० ॥
इन्द्रासनगते भौमे राजयोगयुतो भवेत्।
यत्नकार्यार्थसिद्धि च योगं प्राप्नोति भूरिशः ॥५५७१ ॥
पापांशकस्थिते भौमे प्रयाणं कलहं क्वचित् |
मित्रबन्धुविरोधं च कोपाधिक्यं भयं तथा ॥५५७२ ॥
त्रिचत्वारिंशगे वर्षे त्विदं फलमुदाहतम् | |
5567 - 5572५42. Mars sub-period: (a) Saturn
moving in Libra will be a source of much happiness
in the sub period of Mars during the dasa of Jupiter.
He will enjoy life-span, health, acquisition of
progeny and be endowed with kingdom and kinsfolk. His fame and valour will be on the increase.
He will display courage and great enthusiasm and
will beget Raja Yoga effects.
(b) Due to 2nd and 7th lordship of Mars, he will
_be somewhat endangered by ailments, ulcer, heat
and fever and will lose his spouse and progeny.
(c) Mars in Indra Nadiamsa (instead of
Indrasana) will cause Raja Yoga, success in undertakings and much prosperity.
(d) If Mars be in a malefic’s Navamsa, travels
and strife will come to pass (in his sub period).
These effects are for the 43rd year.
Notes: (©) For Indrasaua, see notes under “b”
of sloka 5513 - 5517 supra.
्षेमतारदशाकाले लाभस्थराहुभुक्तिषु ॥५५७३ ॥
गोचरे तौलिगे मन्दे राहुभुक्तौ महत् सुखम् ।
दशाधिपेन संदृष्टे स्वराज्ये सुखमाणुयात् ॥५५७४ ॥ `
भाग्यवृद्धि महोत्साहं दारपुत्रादिसंपदम् |
शुभसन्तोषकार्याणि प्रयाणं शुभदं लभेत् ॥५५७५ ॥
सत्कर्मधर्मकीरिं च राजयोगयुतो भवेत् |
Tater संयुक्ते गोचरे तोलिगे शनो ॥५५७६ ॥
अपरार्धे क्वचित् कष्टं देहपीडां क्वचिद् भयम् |
अन्यप्रभुविरोधं च कलहं राजतिग्रहम् ॥५५७७ ॥
आत्मबन्धुजनक्लेशं दशासन्धाविदं फलम् |
पञ्चचत्वारिंशकेऽब्दे त्विदं फलमुदाहतम् |
्षेमतारदशाकाले शुभाशुभफलं समम् ॥५५७८ ॥
5573 - 5578. Rahu’s Sub-period: (a) If Rahu
is in the 11th (Leo) at birth, his sub period in the 4th
. dasa (of Jupiter) will cause much happiness. The
dasa lord’s aspect on Rahu will produce happiness
in one’s own country, apart from increased prosperity, great enthusiasm, acquisition of spouse and
progeny, auspicious undertakings, auspicious journeys, performance of good deeds, charitability and
Raja Yoga.
(b) Rahu’s conjunction with the 8th lord Venus
(in Leo) will cause troubles, physical ailments and
some fear in the 2nd half of Rahu’s sub period (in
Jupiter’s dasa) with the transit of Saturn in Libra.
The native will find other kings turning inimical to
him and be involved in strife and royal wrath. His
kinsfolk will be anguished. These are the effects
for the junction of dasa occurring at the age of 45
(i.e. for Rahu’s sub period in Jupiter’s dasa which
will give way to Saturm’s dasa).
(c) In the 4th dasa (of Jupiter) good and bad
effects will take place in a balanced manner.

266 । Deva Keralam
॥ गुरुदशाफलं सम्पूर्णम् ॥
॥ शनिदिशाफलम् ॥
शुद्रासनयोगः -
षष्टाष्टमव्ययेशास्ते लग्नादुच्चंगता यदि ।
तस्य शुद्रासनो योगो निर्दिष्टः पूर्वसूरिभिः ॥५५७९ ॥
5579 Rudrasana Yoga: If the 6th, 8thand 12th
from the ascendant contain planets in (simultane- `
ous) exaltation, Rudrasana Yoga is formed.
Notes: The Ist line reads in another version
correctly thus: "Shashtashtamavyayastham
syallagnaduchcha graham"
योगेऽस्मिन् सार्वभोमत्वं वदन्ति यवनादयः।
एतद्योगवशात् सोख्यं प्रत्यग्दाये विशेषतः ॥५५८० ॥
महान्तं राजयोगं च पुत्रदारादिसम्पदः।
स्वराज्ये सोख्यमापनोति पूर्वार्धे सर्वसौख्यवान् |
are देहकषटं तुलालग्नोद्धवस्य हि ।
प्रत्यक्तारदशाकाले सुखाधिपतिभुक्तिषु ॥५५८१ ॥
गोचरे चापगे मन्दे स्वभुक्तौ राजयोगवान् |
महदेश्वर्य संपन्नो महालक्ष्मीकटाक्षवान् ॥५५८२ ॥
यलकायार्थसिद्धि च दास्पुत्रादिवर्धनम् |
कुजदृष्टियुते मन्दे देहजाड्यं महद्धयम् ॥५५८३ ॥
अपमृत्युभयं किचिद्ारवगे विशेषतः।
तदोषपरिहारार्थं मृत्युञ्जयजपं चरेत् ॥५५८४ ॥
मन्दे स्वांशगते चैव देहारोग्यं महत् सुखम् ।
स्वराज्ये सुखमाप्नोति द्यष्टचत्वारिवत्सरे ॥५५८५ ॥ .
5580 - 5585. (a) The native having this Yoga
will be a ruler of the earth, according to Yavanas.
The Sth dasa (of Saturn) as a consequence will give
Yoga of a special order. The subject will enjoy
happiness through spouse and children in his own
country. In the first half of the dasa, all-round
happiness will prevail. The 2nd half will cause
physical troubles for one born in Libra.
(b) Saturn’s sub-period: In the Sth dasa (of
Saturn) and in his own sub period, Raja Yoga
effects will occur with his transit in Sagittarius.
The native will acquire abundant wealth. His
undertakings will be fruitful and his spouse and
progeny will prosper.
(c) Physical ailments and much fear will be the
result in the said sub period, if Saturn at birth is in
aspect to Mars. Fear of untimely death, particularly in in-laws’ family will exist. To overcome
this, recitation of Mrityunjaya Japa should be
undertaken.
(d) If Saturn is in his own Navamsa, his sub
period will cause health and great deal of happiness. *One will be happy in his country during the
48th year.
राज्यौधिपदशाकाले भाग्याधिपतिभुक्तिषु |
गोचरे, नक्रगे मन्दे तत्काले सुखमाप्नुयात् ॥५५८६ ॥
सर्वसोभाग्यसम्पत्ति पुत्रदारादिवर्धनम् |
बहुकीर्िप्रतापौ च स्वराज्ये सुखमादिशेत् ॥५५८७ ॥
नीचांशे बुधसंयुक्ते शुत्रवर्गान्महद्धयम् |
अन्यप्रभुविरोधं च धनमूलाद्विषादवान् ॥५५८८ ॥
आत्मबन्धुजनक्लेशं भुक्त्यन्ते कष्टमादिशेत् |
कर्माधिपेन संदृष्टे राजयोगयुतो भवेत् ॥५५८९ ॥
अनेकधर्मसिद्धिश्च ज्ञानं भक्तिर्यशो भवेत्।
एकपञ्चाशगे वर्षे त्विदं फलमुदाहतम् ॥५५९० Il
5586 -5590. Mercury’s Sub-period: (a) In the
dasa of the 5th lord Saturn, the sub period of the 9th
lord (Mercury) will give happiness, all kinds of
prosperity (to self), prosperity to spouse and children, wide fame, valour and happiness in own
country when Saturn transits Capricorn.
(b) If Saturn is in Aries Navamsa along with
Mercury, the sub period of the latter will produce
abundant fear from enemies. Other rulers will be
inimical to him. He will be financially distressed.
His relatives will be anguished. The end of the sub
period will be his s6urce of difficulties.
(c) If Mercury is aspected by the 10th lord
(Moon), there will be Raja Yoga effects. He will
perform various kinds of charitable activities and
will earn wisdom, piety and fame. These effects
will be due in the 5151 year.
राज्याधिपदशाकाले राज्यस्थकेतुभुक्तिषु |
स्वराज्ये कलहं चैव भृत्यवर्गे विरोधवान् ॥५५९१ tt
अन्यप्रभुविरोधं च यातायातभयं तथा |
देहजाडयं मनक्लेशमात्पवर्गे महद्धयम् ॥५५९२ ॥
शुभाशुभफलं चैव द्विपञ्चाशकवत्सरे |
5591 - 559214. Ketu’s Sub-period: If Ketu is
in the Sth at birth; his sub period in Saturn’s dasa

ॐ
Chandra Kala Nadi
will produce strife in the country and enmity with
servants. One will incur enmity with other rulers
and be subjected to fear in journey. Physical
ailments, mental distress and great fear will follow.
§2nd year will give a mixture of good and bad
effects.
सुताधिपदशाकाले रन्ध्राधिपतिभुक्तिषु ॥५५९३ ॥
गोचरे कुम्भगे शुक्रभुक्तो शुभाशुभम् |
देहपीडां मनस्तापं कार्यविध्नं धनक्षयम् ॥५५९४ ॥
कलहं शुत्रभीतिं च ह्यादायादधिकं व्ययम् |
आत्मबन्धुजनारिष्टं दारवर्गे विशेषतः ॥५५९५ ॥
कुटुम्बकलहं सत्यं शुभाशुभफलं समम् |
शुक्रे स्वांशगते चैव राजयोगयुतः सुखौ ॥५५९६ ॥
5593 - 5596. Sub-period of Venus: (a) In the
dasa of the 5th lord (Satur), the sub period of the
8th lord (Venus) will give good and bad effects with
the movements of Satum in Aquarius. 1111685,
distress, obstacles to work, loss of wealth, quarrels.
fear from foes, expenditure beyond income, evils
to kinsfolk particularly to in-laws, family quarrels
and an equal measure of good and bad effects will
come to pass.
(b) Should Venus be in his own Navamsa,
effects of Raja Yoga will be revealed.
स्धचक्रदशाकाले Tee
लग्नरन्धेशभुक्तौ तु त्रिपञ्चाशकवत्से ॥५५९७ ॥ `
दक्षिणायनगे सूर्ये सिंहादित्रयमासगे ।
शुक्लपक्षे मन्दवारे दिवाकाले मृतिं वदेत् ॥५५९८ ॥
इह जन्मनि पुण्यात्मा ह्यन्ते विष्णुपदं व्रजेत् |
मनोहांशके सत्यं प्रत्यक्षं देवकेरलम् ॥५५९९ ॥
5597 - 5599. (a) In the-dasa of Saturn, who at
birth is placed in the 8th, and in the sub period of
the lord of ascendant and 8th (i.e. Venus), the
native will die in his 53rd year, with the southerly
course of the Sun in Leo, or Virgo, or Libra, in
bright lunar half, on a Saturday morning.
(b) In this birth, he will be a meritorious soul
and will attain the feet of Lord Vishnu. The effects
reflected for Manohara Nadiamsa in Deva Keralam
will be‘truthful.
Notes: (a) “Randhra Chakra dasa Kaale” is an
interruption to the whole set of slokas so far occurring, which discussed the Ist to 5४ dasas in a
sequence for Libra ascendant. Hence this is removed from the translation.
॥ पिथुनलग्ने कापिन्यंशः 11
कामिन्यंशे पूर्वभागे युग्मलग्ने प्रजायते |
शुद्रजन्मा सुखी नित्यं तारतीर्यि गर्भसंभवः ॥५६०० ॥
5600. Gemini Ascendant - Kamiri Nadiamsa: In Gemini ascendant. Kamini Nadiamsa’s
Ist half, a Soodra will be born as the third issue of
his family.
Notes: For Kamini Nadiamsa, see notes under
slokas 1441, page 131, Book 1.
लग्नेशे लाभराशिस्थे लाभेशे धैर्यराशिगे ।
कामिन्यंशे पूर्वभागे ज्येष्ठभ्रातृविहीनवान् ॥५६०१ ॥
पश्चादभ्रातृयुतो मानी पूर्वभागे न संशयः।
सुखेशे लाभराशिस्थे चापांशे शुभसंयुते ॥५६०२ ॥
जननं पश्चिमे भागे पूर्वस्यां दिशि जायते ।
पुरे प्राकाररम्ये च नद्याश्चोत्तरशोभिते ॥५६०३ ॥
तन्मध्ये जननं तस्य पूर्वभागे न संशयः।
लग्नेशे गुरुसंदृषटे देवालयसमीपगे ॥५६०४ ॥
ूर्वपश्चिमवीथ्योश्च Gee प्रजायते |
देवताप्रारथनेनैव शिवानु्रहहेतुना ॥५६०५ ॥
जननं च तथा प्राहुः पूर्वभागे न संशयः।
भाग्येशे लाभराशिस्थे बुधशुक्रसमन्विते ॥५६०६ ॥
कर्माधिपेन संदृष्टे पुरा क्षत्रकुलोद्धवः।
वर्गोत्तमांशगे मन्दे सेनानाथोऽथ मन्तिः ॥५६०७ ॥
अष्ट ार्यायुतःसोख्यं पञ्चपुत्रयुतो भवेत् |
एकषष्टितमे वर्षे त्वतिसारज्वरे मृतिः ॥५६०८ ॥
इह जन्मनि युग्मे च कामिन्यंशे प्रजायते |
5601 - 56081. (a) He will have 10 older coborn if the lord of the ascendant (Mercury) is in the
11th (Aries) while the 3rd is occupied by 1 1th lord
(Mars). He will have younger ones and be honourable.
(b) The 4th lord (Mercury) in the 11th (Aries)
in the company of a benefic, and begetting Sagittarius Navamsa, denotes birth in a street spread
from the west to east. The town concerned will
have beautiful compound with a river in the north
as the town’s ornament. His birth will be in such
surroundings.
(c) If the lord of the ascendant is aspected by

268 Deva Keralam
Jupiter, predict birth beside a temple due to divine
worship and the blessings of Lord Siva.
(d) Previous Birth: The lord of the 9th in the
11th along with Mercury and Venus and in aspect
to the 10th lord (Jupiter) denotes his previous birth
in a royal clan. If Saturn is in Vargottama Navamsa, he was an army chief or a minister. He had
eight wives, happiness and five sons. He died in the
6151 year due to dysentery. His present birth is in
Gemini’s Kamini Nadiamsa.
रूपवान् मतिवान् वाग्मी प्रसननमुखनेत्रवान् ॥५६०९ ॥
अदृष्टशाली धर्मात्मा रक्तवर्णः शुभाकृतिः।
मिताशी मितभाषी च मितनिद्रो विचक्षणः ॥५६१० ॥
राजसेवापरो नित्यं बहु भूत्यजनान्वितः।
वाचालकः सत्यवादी नानाशाख्विशारदः॥५६११ ॥
दिव्यनामङ्धितश्चेव वेदान्ते ज्ञानसिद्धिमान् |
सत्कथाश्रवणं नित्यं देवब्राह्मणपोषकः॥५६१२ ॥
यथार्थवादी तच्ज्ञो ह्यन्यस्रीसङ्गलोलुपः।
पितृभाग्यविहीनश्च स्वभुजार्जितवित्तवान् ॥५६१३ Il
चक्ररेखा्कितिपदपाणिमिस्तु सुशोभितः।
सज्जनप्रियवादी च दुर्जनानां शठो भवेत् ॥५६१४॥
सोदरावसुसंख्याश्च तेषामेकश्चिरायुषः।
शेषं नाशमिति प्राहू राजयोगयुतो भवेत् ॥५६१५ ॥
5609 - 5615. The present native will be charming, intelligent, eloquent, endowed with attractive
face and eyes, be fortunate, virtuous, blood-red in
complexion and handsome. He will have limited
food and sleep, will speak within limits and be
discerning. He will be inclined to serve the ruler,
will have many an attendant, be garrulous, truthful,
learned in many ancient branches, will have a
beautiful name, be philosophical and will attain
Wisdom. He will be fond of listening to divine
Stories, will honour gods and Brahmins, be knowledgeable in Philosophy, addicted to joining females, devoid of paternal fortunes, and will have
self-earned wealth. Symbols will be found on his
palms and soles. He will be fond of good people, be
crafty towards the wicked and will have eight
brothers out of whom one will be long lived while
others will be destroyed. The native will enjoy Raja
Yoga effects:
धनेशे स्वोच्चराशिस्थे तदीशे लाभराशिगे |
शुभग्रहयुते दृष्टे त्वसंख्याधनलाभवान् ॥५६१६ Il
भवेश्चतुिर्बलिर्भिधनभाग्याय कर्मभिः।
सम्मर्णवित्तगेहे च कुबेर इव जायते ॥५६१७ ॥
धनराशेस्तु देशे वा धनेशस्याथ वा यदि |
द्रव्यवुद्धिरभवेत्तस्मिनक्रगे सर्वदिक्ष्वपि ॥५६१८ il
सर्वाषटवर्गे यत्र स्याद्धिग्राशीषु फलोननतिः।
तस्मिन् देशे द्रव्यवृद्धिर्भविष्यति न संशयः ॥५६१९ ॥
लाभस्थानं गते काव्ये नीचांशकविवरभिते ।
शनिदृष्टियुते वापि निधिप्राप्तिर्नं संशयः ॥५६२० ॥
शुक्रे शनियुते जातो भोगी स्याद्राजवल्लभः।
अन्यसख्रीसङ्गवान् कामी पश्चात्तापी जितेन्दियः॥५६२१ ॥
शुक्रे शनियुते जातो ज्ञानी ततत्वविवेकवान् |
वेदान्तज्ञानसम्पन्नो धनदांशे सुकी्तिमान् ॥५६२२ ॥
इन्द्रयोगे fared क्षेमदायेऽथ वा यदि ।
लाभे शुक्रे प्रजाश्च बहुवित्ताधिकारवान् ॥५६२३ ॥
कर्मेशेन युते दुष्टे निधिप्राप्तिर्न संशयः।
लग्नेशे Tease भाग्यारूढे सुभाग्यवान् ॥५६२४ Il
आयुष्मन्तौ च पितरौ सोदरीभ्रातृसंयुतः।
षोडशाब्दात् परं भाग्यं भूमो स्थापितवित्तवान् ॥५६२५ ॥
धनेशांशे तत्िकोणे स्फुटयोगं गते गुरो ।
लाभेशदृष्टिराशौ तु धनलाभमुदीरयेत् ॥५६२६ ॥
5616 - 5626. (a) The 2nd lord (Moon) in
exaltation while her dispositor (Venus) is in the
11th related to a benefic by aspect or conjunction
will cause abundant financial gains.
(b) One will be replete with uninterrupted
wealth like Kubera (god of wealth) if the 4 houses
viz. the 2nd, 9th, 11th and 10th are in strength. (The
2nd line of sloka 5617 has another reading -
"Sampumna vittam satatam". This sloka also occcurs
under S. No. 5387 supra.)
(c) General: One’s financial prosperity will be
in such a country denoted by the 2nd house or the
sign occupied by the 2nd lord. If Capriorn be the
2nd house, he will have universal gains. Financial
prosperity can also take place in such a country
denoted by the sign having the highest bindus in
Sarva Ashtaka Varga.
(d) Gemini Ascendant (Continued): One will
locate treasure if the 11th house is occupied by
Venus who enjoys the aspect of Saturn. However,

Chandra Kala Nadi 269
Venus should in the process be not in his debilitation Navamsa.
(e) Venus in the company of Satum will cause
enjoyment of pleasures and proximity to the ruler.
The person will join other women, be libidinous,
will repent for his sins and will (later) conquer his
senses. He will be wise, endowed with philosophical knowledge and be famous.
(f) Venus in the Lith (in Aries) will give
abundant finances in 3rd dasa and 4th dasa. (The
term “Indra Yoga” is to be ignored.)
(g) Venus related to the 10th lord (Jupiter) by
aspect or conjunction will cause acquisition of
treasure.
(h) The lord of the ascendant in the 9th (orin the :
9th Arudha pada) in aspect to Jupiter will produce
much prosperity. Moreover, one will be endowed
with co-born and long-lived parents.
(i) Jupiter arriving in transit in the sign identical with the Navamsa occupied by the 2nd lord
(Moon), or a trine thereof, or the sign that is
aspected by the 2nd lord, will cause financial
upliftment.
धनायकर्मनाथानां स्फुटयोगांशभुक्तिषु ।
तदशायां महद् भाग्यं विशेषधनलाभवान् ॥५६२७ ॥
विपद्ाये क्षेमदाये त्वसंख्याधनलाभवान्।
बहुकीर्विप्रतापौ च त्विष्टसत्कर्मसिद्धितः॥५६२८ ॥
कामिन्यंशे पूर्वभागे त्विदं फलमुदाहतम् |
` 5627 - 5628142. (a) Add the longitudes of the
lords of the 2nd, 11th and 10th and find out the
Navamsa indicated by the resultant sum. The sub
period of such a Navamsa lord will give abundant
financial gains in Jupiter’s dasa.
(b) Venus in 11th: The 3rd and 4th dasas will
give abundant financial gains (if Venus is in the
11th, vide sloka 5623 supra). Further, the person
will enjoy wide fame and valour and will have his
undertakings fulfilled. The effects so far discussed
are for Kamini Nadiamsa, Ist half, in the ascendant
Gemini.
Notes: (a) Instead of the 2nd lord (Moon), the
lord of the ascendant (Mercury) is denoted in
another version.
विक्रमे कुजसंयुक्ते वीक्षिते वा प्रजायते ॥५६२९ ॥
कामिन्यंरो पूर्वभागे सत्यवादी विचक्षणः।
भरातृभावगताः क्रूराः शोर्यायुर्धननुद्धिमान् ॥५६३० ॥
5629 - 5630. (a) The 3rd house aspected or
occupied by Mars will make the subject truthful
and discerning.
(b) General: Malefics in the 3rd will contribute to valour, longevity and strong mind.
भ्रातृस्थानाधिपे सूर्ये भावकेन्द्रत्निकोणगे |
स्वोच्चग्रहेण संयुक्ते सोदरी भ्रातृसंयुतः ॥५६३१ ॥
5631. Gemini Ascendant (Continued): The
lord of the 3rd - the Sun - ina trine or an angle from
the 3rd, in the company of an exalted planet, will
give co-born.
द्नद्रलग्ने नरो जातश्चरराशिगते शनो ।
त्रिचतुरबिन्दुसंयुक्ते सोदरोत्तरनाशनम् ॥५६३२ ॥
भौमेन सूर्यपुत्रेण भ्रातृस्थानिरीक्षिते ।
सोदरोत्पत्तिनाशं च लभते नात्र संशयः॥५६३३ ॥
ओजराशो च पुरूषो युग्मे योषिच्च नश्यति |
भावेशे कारके वापि द्विभार्याफलमादिशेत् ye ay ॥
भोमे तृतीयगे पश्चाद्युग्मांशे स्रियमादिशेत्।
ओजेपुरुषः पश्चान्नास्ति तस्यापि जीवितम् ॥५६३५ ॥ .
भ्रातृनाथनवांशेन भातृसंख्यां विनिर्दिशेत् |
कारकस्य नवांशेन भ्रातृसह्यां विनिर्दिशेत् ॥५६३६ ॥ `
रविचन्द्रौ यदेकस्थावेकांशकसमन्वितौ |
द्विमातृभ्यां पोषितोऽपि सपत्नीमातृयोगवान् ॥५६३७ ॥
भेदभ्रातृयुतो मानी ऋतुस्वयाः सहोदराः
अथ वा ऋषिसङ्कयाश्च भेदभ्रातृफलं स्मृतम् ॥५६३८ ॥
5632 = 5638. (a) Birth in Gemini ascendant
while Satur is in a movable sign with 3 or 4 A.V.
Bindus will kill younger co-born.
(b) The 3rd house in aspect to Saturn and Mars
will cause death of younger co-born. These two
planets in male signs (while aspecting the 3rd) will
kill younger brothers. If these are in female signs,
younger sisters will pass away.
(c) Should these two aspect the 7th lord Jupiter,
or the significator Venus, the native will have two
Wives.
(d) Mars in the 3rd house with female Navamsa
will not allow female co-born to live long; his
position in male Navamsa will affect male co-born
in a similar manner.

270 Deva Keralam
(e) The number of Navamsas obtained by the
3rd house or Mars will indicate the number of
younger co-born.
(f) One will be brought up by two mothers if the
Sun and the Moon be together in a sign and get one
and the same Navamsa. Further, he will have a
step-mother and step-brothers, be honourable and
will have six or seven co-born. These are the
effects concerning half-brothers.
चापाजसिह राशीषु वरगोत्तमकुजेसिते |
बहुवित्ताधिकारी च शोर्यधेर्यपराक्रमी ॥५६३९ ॥
स्वनामदेवताभक्त्या स्थिरचित्तः प्रतापवान् |
मातृस्थानाधिपे सौम्ये लाभस्थानं गते यदि ॥५६४० ॥
गरुशुक्रयुते दृष्टे मातुदीर्घायुरादिशेत् |
कारके स्वोच्चराशिस्थे तदीशे लाभराशिगे ॥५६४१ ॥
मातृस्थाने राहुयुते मातृसौख्यं विनिर्दिशेम्।
वहेशो भाग्यनाथो वा गुरुशुक्रयुतेक्षितौ ।
राजपूज्यो वदान्यश्च सर्वैश्वर्यसमन्वितः ॥५६४२ ॥
5639 - 5642. (a) Mars and Venus being in
Vargottama in any of the three signs, viz. Sagittarius, Aries or Leo (either jointly or individually)
will give ownership of abundant wealth apart from
valour. The native will worship a deity having a
name akin to his, be firm in disposition and valorous.
(b) The lord Of the 4th, Mercury, in the 11th
(Aries) in relation to Jupiter and Venus by aspect or
conjunction will bless one’s mother with longevity. :
(c) Should the planet signifying mother, i.e. the
Moon, be in exaltation while the owner of that sign
is in the 11th (Aries) and Rahu is in the 4th (Virgo),
happiness concerning mother will come to pass.
(d) The lords of the 4th and the 9th related to
Jupiter by conjunction or aspect will bring royal
honour. Further, the person will be munificent,
endowed with all kinds of wealth.
-लग्नेशवाहेशसुतेश्वरा हि
भाग्येऽथ वा कर्मणि संस्थिता वा।
सद्धर्मवान् वाहनलाभगश्च
शुक्रेण युक्ताश्चतुरङ्गयानम् ॥५६४३ II
5643. The lords of’ascendant, 4th and Sth
placed in the 9th or the 10th will give the undernoted
results. The subject will ve highly virtuous and will
gain conveyances. Venus joining this Yoga will
lead one by elephants, horses, chariots and infantry. ।
भाग्येश्वरेणापि युते सुतेशे. ˆ . ` +
देवेन्रपूज्येन युते च दृष्टे । `
वैशेषिकांशे यदि वा बलादये
सर्वार्थभाग्यान्वितवाहयुक्तः ॥५६४४ ॥
5644. The lord of the 5th joining the 9th lord,
or related to Jupiter either by aspect or conjunction,
and begetting Vaiseshikamsa or. otherwise being
strong, will give all kinds of wealth, prosperity and
conveyances.
भूसूनुराशौ यदि वा सुतेशे
राज्यार्थसोख्याभरणार्थलाभम् ।
सेनाबहुत्वं समुपेति जातो-
ह्यसङ्खययानादियुतः प्रसिद्धः ॥५६४५ ॥
5645. The lord of the Sth in a sign of Mars will
give the following effects. The person will enjoy
kingdom, wealth, happiness, ornaments, huge army,
countless conveyances and fame.
मातृस्थाने राहुयुते कारके रविसंयुते |
तदीशे शनिसंयुक्ते स्वमाता दीर्घजीविनी ॥५६४६ ॥
माता गुणवती पूता पतिभक्त्िपरायणा |
कामिन्यंशे पूर्वभागे युग्मलग्नसमुद् भवः॥५६४७ ॥
सुखे राहुसमायुक्ते सुपुत्रः कुलदीपकः।
ग्रामभूम्यादिलाभं च गृहक्षेत्राभिवृद्धिमान् ॥५६४८ il
महाराजप्रसादेन त्विष्टसिद्धिसुखावहा |
अश्वं चान्दोलिकालाभं छत्रचामरवे भवम् ॥५६४९ ॥
5646 - 5649. (a) Rahu in the 4th as the Moon
is with the Sun and Mercury is with Rahu will cause
long life to mother who will be virtuous, pure and
devoted to her husband.
(b) For a native of Kamini Nadiamsa, Ist half,
in Gemini ascendant, the placement of Rahu in the
4th (Virgo) will make the native a deserving son.
He will be the light of the family, and will gain
villages, lands etc. all of which will prosper. His
desires will attain fruition due to the mercy of an
emperor. He will gain horses, palanquins and such
status symbols as royal umbrella and chowrie.

Chandra Kala Nadi 271
सुतेशे शनिसंयुक्ते गजान्तैश्वर्ययोगवान् |
क्रीडावस्थां गते चन्द्रे रतिक्रीडासुखी भवेत् ॥५६५० ॥
दिव्यस्ली भोगयुक्तश्च सदा गां भीर्यचित्तवान् |
लिपित्रयप्रवीणश्च कीर्मिमान् बन्धुपोषकः॥५६५१ ॥
5650 - 5651. (a) The lord of the 5th (Venus) in
the company of Saturn will cause wealth ending
with elephants.
(b) The Moon in “Krida Avastha” will give
happiness through sexual enjoyment. The subject
will join beautiful women and be ever profound in
disposition. He will be skilful in three languages,
be famous, and will patronize his relatives.
चन्द्रलग्नाष्टमाधीशदशायां पापभुक्तिषु ।
अतीव क्लेशकार्याणि arate विनिर्दिशेत् ॥५६५२ ॥
कर्मेशांशे तच्तरिकोणे स्फुटयोगं गते शनौ |
कर्मेशदृष्टिराशौ तु मातृनिर्याणमादिशेत् ॥५६५३ ॥
्षेमतारदशाकाले लाभाधिपतिभुक्ततषु ।
गोचरे वृश्चिके मन्दे तुलादिद्रयमासगे ॥५६५४ ॥
अथ वा मीनमासे च मात्ररिष्टं विनिर्दिशेत्।
5652 - 5654144. Mother’s Death: (a) Note the
lord of the 8th from the Moon sign. During the said
planet’s dasa and in the sub period of a malefic
planet, indicate mother’s death in the thick of many
difficulties.
(b) When Saturn moves in the sign denoted by
the Navamsa occupied by the 10th lord, or ina trine
thereof, or in the sign that is aspected by the 10th
lord, mother’s death will occur.
(c) During the sub period of the 11th lord in the
4th dasa, with Saturn moving in Taurus and the Sun
in Libra, Scorpio or Pisces, danger to mother be
declared.
पुत्रस्थानगते शुक्रे परिपूर्णबलान्विते ॥५६५५ ॥
दष्टे ेवेद्रगुरुणा पुत्रप्रप्तर्न संशयः
अन्नदानपरो नित्यं पञ्चमे शुभसंयुते ॥५६५६ ॥
तदीशे गोपुरांशस्थे तीवबुद्धिः प्रतापवान् |
राजमन्त्री भवेज्जातो वाक्पतौ बलसंयुते ॥५६५७ ॥
5655 - 5657. (a) Birth of a Son: Venus in the
5th with full strength in aspect to Jupiter will ensure
acquisition of a son.
(b) Poor-feeding: The subject will be disposed
to feed the poor if the Sth is occupied by a benefic
planet.
(c) If the Sth lord is in Gopuramsa, one will be
sharp-minded and valorous.
(d) Should Jupiter (the 10th lord) be strong, one
will be a king’s minister.
Notes: The Sth lord in the 50 may generally
be a good augury for betting progeny. However,
Venus in the 5th may be pre-disposed to give
female issues. He needs Jupiter’s support to cause
a male issue.
लाभे मन्दे युग्मलग्ने द्विकलत्रः सुपुत्रवाम् |
पुत्रिके द्रे चिरायुष्यो चत्वारः सूनवः स्मृताः ॥५६५८ ॥
5658. Two Wives: Saturn in the 11th for
Gemini ascendant will cause two wives, four sons
and two long-lived daughters.
कामिन्यंशे पूर्वभागे गुरौ पारावतांशगे ।
हंसयोगे सुते जीवे स्वदशायां महत् सुखम् ॥५६५९ ॥
भग्याधिपान्तरे काले योगं arena भूरिशः,
नवमन्दिरनिर्माता ग्रामभूम्यादिलाभवान् |
नरवाहनभूषाप्तिं सीप्रजालाभमादिशेत् ॥५६६० ॥
` 5659 - 5660. Jupiter’s Dasa: Fora person born
in the former half of Kamini Nadiamsa, Gemini
ascendant, Jupiter in the 5th in Paravatamsa will
produce much happiness in his dasa. The sub
period of the 9th lord (Saturn) will cause prosperity
(in Jupiter’ s dasa). The subject will construct anew
house, will acquire lordship over villages, landed
properties, conveyances, ornaments and female.
offspring.
Notes: Hamsa Yoga is caused by Jupiter, only
when he is in his own sign or exaltation, identical
with an angle but not when he is in the Sth. Hence
the word “Hamsa Yoga” appearing in sloka 5659 is
erroneous and omitted from the rendering.
॥ योगसारावली ॥
भाग्याधिपे लाभगते बलाद्ये
कर्माधिपे राज्यगृहस्थिते चेत् ।
राज प्रसादाच्च सुवाहनाप्ति-
गजान्तलक्ष्मीकरयोगवान् स्यात् ॥५६६१ ॥
मण्डलेश्वरसन्मानं गजवाजिधनागमम् ।
हेमाम्बरसुभूषापि बहुवाहनसंयुतः॥५६६२ Il
गुरुसंयुतराशीशे गुरोः केन्द्रत्रिकोणगे |

272 Deva Keralam
एकद्वित्रिफलेर्युक्तो गार्हस्थ्यधनलाभवान् ॥५६६३ ॥
गुरोः HANI शुक्रे लग्नाल्लाभव्रिकोणगे |
अन्योन्ययुतदृष्टौ च राजा वा तत्समोऽपि वा ॥५६६४ ॥
पूर्वादिषु चतुर्दिक्षु यदृक्षं तु फलाधिकम् |
AA फललाभादि वाहनाम्बरभूषणम् ॥५६६५ ॥
मन्दिरं तत्र कर्तव्यमन्यक्षत्रे विनश्यति |
गुरोस्तु पञ्चमस्थाने यावद्विनदुसमन्विते ॥५६६६ ॥
तावत् पुत्रादिलाभश्च पापदृष्टे मृतिर्भवेत् |
पुत्रेशे FAME कारके यत्नवां शके ॥५६६७ ॥
पुत्रसंख्या विनिर्दिष्टा भावकारकनायकेः।
5661 - 5667142. Various Yogas: (a) Having the
9th lord in the 11th with strength while the 10th lord
is in the Sth, the subject will gain superior conveyances and abundant wealth due toroyal favours. He
will be honoured by the head of a region and will
acquire elephants, horses, wealth, gold, robes,
ormaments and numerous conveyances.
(b) The dispositor of Jupiter being in an angle
or a trine with reference to Jupiter and obtaining 1,
2 or 3 Ashtaka Varga Bindus will give headship of
family and wealth
(c) Venus being in angle to Jupiter, identical
with the 1 1th ora trine from the ascendant, or these
two aspecting each other, will produce a king or
one equal to a king.
(d) Note the sign containing maximum number
of A.V. Bindus. That of the four directions ranging
from the east, as indicated by the said sign, will be
the source of conveyances, robes and ornaments.
One should construct a house in that direction. In
other directions, destruction of the house will
result.
(e) One will obtain such number of offspring as
indicated by the number of A.V. bindus found in
the 5th place from Jupiter. Children born in excess
of this will only die.
(f) The number of Navamsas past by the 5th
lord, or significator (Jupiter) will indicate number
of children.
सप्तसंख्यासुतप्राप्तिरथवा वसुसंख्यकाः॥५६६८ ॥
आहत्य नवसंख्याकाः पुत्रभावफलं स्मृतम् |
असितेन युते दृष्टे पुत्रारिष्टं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥५६६९ ॥
पुप्रजाः पञ्चसंख्याश्च स्रीप्रजास्तिस्र एव च।
सुतेशांशे तत्विकोणे कारकांशत्रिकोणगे ॥५६७० ॥
स्फुटयोगं गते जीवे पुत्रलाभं विनिर्दिशेत |
5668 - 56701. (a) One born in the Ist half of
Kamini Nadiamsa, Gemini ascendant, will have 7
or 8 children. 9 of his children 0) will be destroyed.
(b) If Venus is aspected by.Saturn, evils to
progeny be foretold.
(c) The native will have 5 sons arid 3 daughters.
(d) Note the Navamsa occupied by the Sth lord
(Venus) or the significator (Jupiter). When transit
Jupiter comes to the sign identical with the said
Navamsa, one born in Gemini will gain a son.
रोगस्थानाधिपे भौमे भाव केन््त्रिकोणगै ॥५६७१ ॥
fads शुभांशस्थे ह्यरोगदृढगात्रवान् |
सिंहराशिगते भौमे चापांशे शुभसंयुर्ते ॥५६७२ ॥
लग्नात् तृतीयगे वापि कार्यसाधक धैर्यवान् |
षष्ठाष्टव्मययेशानामंशनाथाः शुभा यदि ॥५६७३ ॥
सिंहस्वप्ने पलायन्ते शत्रवो द्विरदा इव ।
षष्ठस्थानाधिपे भोमे लग्नाद्विक्रमसंस्थिते ॥५६७४ ॥
तदीशेन युते दृष्टे शुत्रहन्ता प्रतापवान् |
कुजेन मेहरोगश्च रवणिग्रन्थिरामय ॥५६७५ ॥
चन्द्रेण वातरोगश्च रोगचिन्तादिकं वदेत् |
5671 - 5675142. (a) One will have a sound and
sturdy physique if the 6th lord Mars is in an angle
or trine from the 6th house in a friendly sign, and
obtains a benefic Navamsa.
(b) Ability to achieve an undertaking and valour will be given by Mars in the 3rd in Leo with
Sagittarius Navamsa.
(c) If the Navamsa dispositors of the lords of the
6th, 8th and 12th are benefics, one’s foes will run
away like an eiephant that has dreamt of a lion.
(d) One will be valorous and will destroy his
enemies if the 6th lord Mars isin Leo in conjunction
or aspect to the Sun
(e) Mars indicates urinary disorders while the
Sun rules diseases of the blood vessels. The Moon
causes windy disorders and more worries because
of diseases.
षष्ठेशांशे तत्िकोणे स्फुटयोगं गते शनौ ॥५६७६ ॥
अतीव क्लेशकार्याणि देहजाडयं महद् भयम्।
षष्ठे रन्धराधिपे सोम्ये चापांशे कुजसंयुते ।

Chandra Kala Nadi 273
कुजक्षेत्रगते वापि तद्भुक्तौ रोगसम्भवः ॥५६७७ ॥
5676 - 5677. (a) When Saturn reaches by transit
the sign identical with the sign denoted by the
Navamsa occupied by the 6th lord (Mars), one will
face much difficulties, physical ailments and great
fear.
(b) With the 8th lord (Saturn) in the 6th (Scorpio) while Mercury being in conjunction with Mars
(in a particular sign) and obtains Sagittarius Navamsa, or when Mercury is in a Martian sign, the sub
period of Mercury will produce diseases.
दारेशे सुतराशिगे बलयुते तद्राशिनाथे्षिते
भौमकषेत्रगतेन्दुजे भृगुयुते भार्याधिपेनेक्षिते।
दीर्घायुर्धनवान् द्विदारसहितो प्रामाधिपः पण्डित
स्त्यागी योगसमन्वितो दिवि भुवि ह्यास्थानकोलाहलः ॥५६७८ ॥
एतद्योगवशात् सौख्यमाजन्म सुखभाग्यवान् |
बहुदारयुतः श्रीमानन्यसख्रीसङ्गचित्तवान् ॥५६७९ ॥
दारद्रययुतो मानी दारतुल्ये तथा स्मृते |
तन्मूलाद भाग्यसंपत्तिस्तत्ुत्रः TAH भवेत् ॥५६८०
अन्यस्रीगुणसंयुक्ता पतिभक््तिपरायणा |
सात्विकी बुद्धिसंयुक्ता बहु भाग्यसमन्विता ॥५६८१ ॥
आचारशीला विदुषी भर्तृप्रीतिकरा शुभा।
पत्रीपुत्रसमायुक्ता दारतुल्य फलं स्मृतम् ॥५६८२ ॥
5678 - 5682. If the 7th lord (Jupiter) is in the Sth
(Libra) in conjunction with or aspect to its lord
(Venus) as Mercury is ina sign of Mars (only Aries)
in the company of Venus and in aspect to 9th lord
(Saturn), the subject will enjoy longevity, will have
two wives, be the head of a village, be ascholar and
of sacrificing disposition. He will gather prosperity and be involved with exciting activities in royal
assemblies. Because of this Yoga (caused by
Jupiter & C), he will be happy and prosperous right
from birth. He will have many wives (7), be
wealthy, disposed to join others’ women, will have
two wives, be honourable and associated with a
woman equal to spouse (i.e. will have concubine).
As a result the said female’s prosperity will increase and her progeny will become prosperous.
She (i.e. the lady beyond wedlock) will be virtuous,
devoted to the native, be gentle, intelligent, highly
fortunate, ०2600 conduct, learned, handsome and
will please the native. She will have sons and
daughters. These are the effects concerning the
female akin to spouse of the native.
दारेशे पञ्चमस्थाने तदीशे लाभसंयुते |
दाराधिपेन संदृष्टे कलत्रद्रययोगवान् ॥५६८३ ॥
5683. Yoga for 2 Wives: If the 7th lord is in the
50 while the Sth lord is in the 11th (or is) in aspect
to the 7th lord, one will have to wives.
Notes: Two different yogas are implied in this
partially defective sloka.
The first one is: The 7th lord (Jupiter) is to be
in the 5th (Libra) while the Sth lord (Venus) is in
11th (Leo).
The second one is: The 7th lord (Jupiter) is to
be in the Sth (Libra) and be aspected by Venus
(from Aries). To wit, Jupiter should be aspected by
Venus.
शुक्रे शनियुते जातो दारतुल्याङ्गनाद्रयम् |
HAIN सुतस्थाने सुतेशे शनिसंयुते ॥५६८४ ॥
नीचग्रहयुते दृष्टे ज्येष्ठभार्या ह्यपुत्रिणी ।
कोपिनी मूर्खशीला च जातकस्य विरोधकृत् ॥५६८५ Il
पुरापातकदोषेण ज्येष्ठभार्या मृताभवेत्।
मन्दे नीचांशसंयुक्ते पल्यादुर्मरणं भवेत् ॥५६८६ ॥
कूपाश्च मरणं चेति ह्यथ वा विषभक्षणात्।
5684 - 56861. (a) In case of Gemini ascendant,
Venus joining Saturn will cause association with
two women equal to spouse.
(b) Note : if the 7th lord (Jupiter) is in the 5th
(Libra) while the 5th lord (Venus) is with Saturn,
with the company or aspect of a debilitated planet.
As a consequence, the person’s first wife will be
issueless, irascible, foolish and will have enmity
with the native. Due to the native’s sins of previous
birth, she will incur (premature) death.
(c) Saturn in the Navamsa of his debility will
cause a bad end to one’s spouse. Her death will be
in a well or due to consumption of poison.
Notes: (c) This is to be read with the Yoga
mentioned at “b” and is not independent.
राहुदाये मन्दभुक्तौ द्वाविंशाब्दात् परं Ala: ॥५६८७ ॥
दारतुल्यसुखं चैव भाग्यवृद्धिर्महत् सुखम् ।
कारकेबलसंयुक्ते ह्यन्यखलीसङ्गलोलुपः॥५६८८ ॥
वेदसंख्या कलत्रस्य ह्यथ वा सप्तसंख्यकाः।

274 Deva Keralam
दारस्थानाधिपे जीवे युग्मांशे चरराशिगे ॥५६८९ ॥
anes स्वजातो च कारकेण युतेक्षिते |
अन्यजातौ कलत्रस्य MAHA स्मृतम् ॥५६९० ॥
5687 - 5690. (a) The native (of Gemini ascendant, Kamini Nadiamsa) will lose the said spouse
after his 22nd year of age and will enjoy happiness
through hisconcubine. His prosperity willincrease
and he will enjoy much happiness.
(b) If Venus is endowed with strength, the said
native will be fond of illicit associations with
women. He will have either four or seven wives.
(c) Should the 7th lord Jupiter be in a movable
sign with Gemini Navamsa, there will be two wives
hailing from one’s own community. The association of Jupiter with Venus will cause the spouses
` hail from other communities.
_ These are the effects relating to spouse.
बुधेन वेश्यजातिश्च वेश्या भृगुनन्दने |
शनिना दुष्टजातिश्च दारतुल्य फलं स्मृतम् ॥५६९१ ॥
सुखे रहुसमायुक्ते म्लेच्छस्ीसङ्गचित्तवान् |
कर्माधिपेन संदृष्टे महात्मा स्वान्तश्शुद्धिमान् ॥५६९२॥
5691 - 5692. (a) In the above context, Mercury
denotes a bride from the community of traders,
Venus a prostitute and Saturn one from a wicked (or
base) community.
(b) Rahu in the 4th (in Virgo) will give a
tendency to join Mlechcha women. If the said
Rahu is aspected by Jupiter, the person will be a
great man and be pure in his heart.
HAT पूर्णबले तुङ्गवक्रादिहेतुभिः ॥५६९३ ॥
बहुभाग्यसमायुक्तो राजयोगसमुद् भवः।
राहुदाये रहुभुक्तौ विवाहोत्सवसं भ्रमम् ॥५६९४ ॥
अष्टादशात् परे at मेषे मिथुनसिंहयोः।
तस्मिन् काले विवाहः स्यादयुग्मलग्नोद् भवस्य च ॥५६९५ ॥
द्वितीयभार्याभवनं नवमं च प्रकीर्तितम् ।
तदीशेऽशुभसंयुक्ते द्विभार्यालाभमादिशेत् ॥५६९६ ॥
स्वजन्मदेशे भवनं पञ्चविंशात् परं शुभम् ।
स्वधार्या रक्तवर्णा च मूर्खप्रकृतिशालिनी ॥५६९७ ॥
धर्तृप्रतीतिकरा स्वल्पं पुत्रीपुत्रसमन्विता |
पत्रद्ययुता चैव पुत्रिकाद्वयसंयुता ॥५६९८ ॥
खीप्रजा नाशमाप्नोति युग्मलग्नोद् भवस्य च।
दारतुल्यङ्खगनायाश्च वेदसद्कयासुतोत्सवम् ॥५६९९ ॥
स्रीप्रजा नाशमाप्नोति पुम््रजादीर्घमायुषम् |
गुणशीला भाग्यवती भयभक्तिसमन्विता ॥५७०० Il
द्ितीयदारतुल्या च पु्रीपुत्रयुता भवेत् |
पत्रिकाद्वयलाभर्च aah: पुत्रश्चिरायुषः॥५७०१ ॥
वाचालश्चं चमत्कारयुक्तिसाहसबुद्धिमान् |
महाभाग्यवती चैव दारतुल्यफलं स्तृतम् ॥५७०२ Il
5693 - 5702. (a) If the 7th lordis in full strength,
due to exaltation or retrogression, (in the above
Yoga involving Rahu), the person will be endowed
with much prosperity and will enjoy Raja Yoga
effects. His marriage will occur in the dasa and sub
period of Rabu. After the age of 18, Jupiter coming
in Aries, Gemini or Leo will cause marriage for a
Gemini native with Kamini Nadiamsa.
(b) The 9th house is the house of 2nd wife. If the
lord of the 9th is with a benefic, one will have two
wives. He will have a house in his own region and
be happy after the age of 25. His spouse will be
blood-red in complexion, foolish in disposition,
will please her husband to some extent and be
endowed with male and female issues - two each.
Female issues will be destroyed for the subject
native. He will obtain four children from a girl
equal to his spouse. Male issues will live long while
daughters will die premature deaths. The other
woman referred to above will be equal to the
native’s second wife, be virtuous, prosperous, devoted to the native and will fear him. He will gain
two daughters. One of the sons will be long-lived.
Concerning the woman akin to 2nd wife, she will
be garrulous, skilful, expedient, intelligent and
highly fortunate.
दारारिष्टदशाकाले फलमेवमुदाहतम् |
जीवदाये wR yt दारारिष्टं महद् भयम् ॥५७०३ ॥
देहजाड्यं च लभते तत्काले शान्तिमाचरेत् |
जीवदाये राहुभुक्तो स्वभार्या रोगिणी भवेत् ॥५७०४ ॥
जातकस्य महत् कष्टं देहजाड्यं भविष्यति ।
दोषपरिहारार्थं राहुप्रार्थनमाचरेत् ॥५७०५ ॥
मन्ददाये मन्दभुक्तौ दारतुल्यविनाशनम् ।
` सप्रजा नाशमाप्नोति जातकस्य महद्भयम् ॥५७०६ ॥
5703 - 5706. (a) Jupiter’s dasa, Moon’s sub
period will produce evils to his spouse. She will fall
sick for which immediate remedies be sought.

Chandra Kala Nadi 275
(b) In Rahu’s sub period of Jupiter’s dasa, she
will incur sickness. The native will be highly
troubled and will fall sick. To overcome this blemish, prayer to Rahu be offered.
(c) Saturn’s dasa, Saturn’s sub period, will
destroy the other woman equal to spouse. His
daughters will be destroyed and he will be subjected to great fear in this phase of time.
भावत्रिकोणगे मन्दे भावादष्टत्रिकोणगे ।
स्फुटयोगं गते सौरौ भावहानिर्न संशयः ॥५७०७ ॥
5707. Satum moving in a trine either from a
Bhava or a trine to 8th from the Bhava will destroy
the Bhava. `
विलग्नाष्टमकर्मेशाः केन्द्रलाभत्रिकोणगाः।
शनिश्च बलवान् यस्य पूर्णमायुर्विनिर्दिशेत् ॥५७०८ ॥
5708. The lords of the ascendant, 8th and 10th
in order in an angle, the 11th and a trine will give
full life span provided Saturn is strong.
Toe लाभराशिस्थे लाभेशे विक्रमस्थिते ।
शुभग्रहयुते दष्टे यावज्जीवान्तसोख्यवान् ॥५७०९ ॥
5709. One will be happy throughout his life if
the 8th lord (Saturn) is in the 11th (Aries) as the
11th lord (Mars) is in the 3rd (Leo) in relation to
a benefic by aspect or conjunction.
अष्टमाधिपतो लाभे बुधशुक्रसमन्विते |
कर्माधिपेन संदृष्टे जीवनं सुकरं भवेत् ॥५७१० ॥
भाग्यरन्धाधिपे मन्दे लाभस्थानगते यदि |
शुभग्रहयुते दष्टे सर्वसौख्ययुतो भवेत् ॥५७११ ॥
Ta नीचराशिस्थे तदीशे चन्द्रकेन्द्रगे।
वर्गोत्तमांशगे मन्दे यावज्जीवं सुभोगवान् ॥५७१२ ॥
नीचभङ्ग राजयोगे चक्रवर्तिसमो भवेत् |
पञ्चविंशात् परं भाग्यं धनिकः कीर्तिमान् सुखी ॥५७१३ ॥
5710 - 5713, (a) The person willlead a good life
if the 8th lord is in the 11th (Aries) along with
Mercury.
(b) Saturn, the lord of the 8th and the 9th,
placed in the 11th in aspect to or association with
a benefic will bless one with all kinds of happiness.
(c) Neecha Bhanga Raja Yoga: The lord of the
8th (Saturn) in debility with Vargottama Navamsa,
while its lord (Mars) is in an angle to the Moon will
give pleasures of a great order throughout one’s
life. With this Neecha Bhanga Raja Yoga, the
subject will be equal to an emperor. His prosperity
will rise after 25. He will enjoy wealth and fame.
रन्परेशभाग्येशसुतेशनाथा
लग्नेशयुक्ता यदि लाभसंस्थाः।
पत्रस्थकर्माधिपवीक्षिता हि
साम्राज्ययोगं मुनयो वदन्ति ॥५७१४ ॥
5714. Samrajya Yoga - Gemini Ascendant:
The dispositors of the lords of the 8th-cum-9th and
5th placed in the 110 in the company of the lord of
the ascendant, and be in aspect to the lord of the
10th who in turn is placed in the Sth house cause
Samrajya Yoga (to a Gemini native) according to
sages. .
Notes: This yoga for kingdom is formed thus.
The lords of the signs occupied by Saturn and
Venus should be in Aries along with Mercury and
be aspected by Jupiter from Libra.
योगे साप्राज्यके जातः षोडशाब्दात् परं सुखम् |
अतीव प्रियवान् योगी योगं षोडशवत्सरम् ॥५७१५ ॥
तदन्ते BIAS च समरे देहतापवान्।
शुभग्रहयुते मन्दे ह्यतीव श्रियमश्नुते ॥५७१६ ॥
जन्मदाये महत् सख्यं पितृमातृसुखावहम् |
विद्याबुद्धिसुकीर्तिश्च धनधान्यविवर्धनम् ॥५७१७ ॥
सम्पदाये श्रियोऽवार्पि गृहे लक्मीकराक्षजाम् |
जातकस्तु महत् सौख्यं वस्रवाहनभूषणम् ॥
विद्यानुद्धिसुकीर्मिश्च स्वपित्रादि महत् सुखम् |
विपत्तारदशाकाले ह्यतीव श्रियमश्नुते ॥५७१८ Il
राजद्वारे प्रसिद्धि च मित्रप्रभुवशात् सुखम्।
दिने दिने वृद्धिमेति सितपक्षे शशी यथा ॥५७१९ ॥
सर्वाध्यक्षः स्वतन्त्रश्च प्रबलो राजकर्मणि |
मान्दिग्रहयुतो राहक्रूरभुक्तौ महद् भयम् ॥५७२० Il
राहुदाये ाहुभुक्तौ गोचरे वृश्चिके शनो |
तद्भुक्तौ सोख्यमाप्नोति विवाहोत्सवसं भ्रमम् ॥५७२१ ॥
पश्चिमोत्तरभागे च प्रयाणं राजदर्शनम् |
नूतनोद्योगलाभं च धनलाभं विशेषतः ॥५७२२ Il
राहुदाये जीवभुक्तौ गोचरे चापगे शनौ ।
तदभुक्तो सोख्यमाप्नोति मित्रप्रभुवशात् सुखम् ॥५७२३ ॥
बराह्यणप्रभुमूलेन चोद्योगं प्रबलं तथा |
राजद्वारे Fas च ह्यन्यखरी भोगमिच्छति ॥५७२४॥

276 Deva Keralam
agaifarat च धनलाभं विशेषतः। will be endangered through foes, thieves and fire:
सत्कर्मधर्मसिद्धि च जीवमुक्तौ न संशयः॥५७२५ ॥ There will occur enmity with anotherking, coupled
with evils to relatives and danger in journeys. if
विपत्तारदशाकाले सनधराधिपतिभुक्तिषु | Saturn is conjunct a benefic, enemies will be
गोचरे मकरे मन्दे त्वेकविशात् परं व्यथाम् ॥५७२६ Il destroyed and success will adore the native. He
घातपातभयं चैव शत्रुचोराग्निजं भयम् | will gain happiness through a friendly king and his
अन्यप्रभुविरोधं च राजद्वारे कलापनम् ॥५७२७ Il undertakings will attain fruition.
आत्मबन्धुजनारिष्टं यातायातभयं तथा | ॥ अनुबन्धः ॥
शुभग्रहयुते मन्दे शत्रुनाशं जयं तथा । APPENDIX
मित्र्रभुवशात् सौख्यं यत्रकार्यार्थसिद्धिदम् ॥५७२८ ॥ स्वपञ्न्दुमिता नाडयश्चरभे व्यत्यये स्थिर |
5715 - 5728. (a) Effects: The above-men- = पट्सप्तति समारभ्य द्विस्वभावेषु राशिषु ॥५७२९ ॥
tioned native will prosper after the age of 16, ४८ १. वसुधा २. वेष्णवी ३. ब्राह्मी ४. कालकूटा ५. शङ्करी ६.
श व कः she a 8 सुधाकरसमा ७. सोम्या ८. सुरा ९. माया १०. मनोहरा ११. माध्वी
erity for a period 0 ears. In the end of this
Yoea (1 at 32), he will incur danger of 8 घोरा १४. कुम्भिनी १५. कुटिला १६. प्रभा १५.
untimely death and will be physically troubled ina परा १८. पयस्विनी १९. माला २०. जगती २९. जर्जरी २२. धवा ९३. /
(b) Saturn’s conjunction with a benefic will २९. कलुषा ३०. कमला 3X. कान्ता ३२. काला ३३. करिकरा ३४.
give much wealth. The first dasa will giveagreat = क्षमा ३५. दुर्धरा ३६. दुर्भगा २७. विश्वा ३८. विशीर्णा ३९. fem
deal of general happiness including from parents. ४०. अनिला ४१. भीमा ४२. सुखप्रदा ४३. स्निग्धा ४४. सोदरा ४५.
Learning, intelligence, fame, wealth and grains सुरसुन्दरो अमृतप्राशिनी कामदृक्करवीरणी
will increase. The 2nd dasa will give wealth to the SETS Ss SUL BO RIM 11
native and his family. He will be greatly happy, = गहरा ५०. कुण्डिनी ५१. कान्ता ५२. विषाख्या ५२. विषनाशिनी ५४.
with robes, conveyances and ornaments. He will = निर्मदा ५५. शीतला ५६. निम्ना ५७. प्रीता ५८. प्रियविवर्धनी ५९.
enjoy learning, intelligence and fame. His विफल मानधा ६०. दुर्भगा ६१. चित्रा ६२. विचित्रा ६३. शिरजीविनी ev.
etc. will be very much happy. He will earn fame in भूपा ६५. गदाहरा ६६. AST ६७. गावी ६८. निर्मला ६९. नदी
royal service and be happy through a friendly king. भगनग काटी कालिका
He will progress by the day like the Moon of the Bos. LAE WR, SCLMRTT ७१, काठ 9. त शतत ON.
bright half. He will enjoy headship, be independ- = कलुषाड्रा ७५. ्रेलोक्यमोहनकरी ७६. महामाया ७७. Tilda ७८. ,
ent, and powerful in royal service. 1 एकप joins सुखदा ७९. सुप्रभा ८०. शोभा ८१. शोभना ८२. शिवदा ८३. शिवा |
Mandi (Gulika), a sub period णत by amaleficin ८४. बला ८५. ज्वाला ८६. गदा ८७. गाढा ८८. सूतना ८९. |
the 2nd dasa will be 2 source of great danger. With सुमनोहरा ९०. सोमवक्ली ९१. सोमलता ९२. मङ्गला ९३. मद्रिका
Saturn’s movement in Scorpio, the sub period of
Rahu in Rabu dasa will cause marriage. He wil = ९४. सुधा ९५. FST ९६. अपवर्गा ९७. पश्यता ९८. नवनीता ९९.
undertake a journey to the north-west to meet a निशाचरी १००. निवृतिः १०१. निर्गता १०२. सारा १०३. समगा
king and will gain a new job and abundant wealth. १०४. समदा १०५. समा १०६. विश्वम्भरा १०७. कुमारी १०८.
Jupiter’ s sub period in this dasa will givehappiness =कोकिला १०९. कुञ्जराकृतिः ११०. इन्द्रा १११. स्वाहा ११२. स्वधा
through a friendly King, with Satur ’s§ movement in ११३. वद्धिः १९४. पीता ११५. यक्षा ११६. अचलप्रभा ११७. सारिणी
Sagittarius. He will gain a better job with the help ११८. मधुरा ११९. an १२०. हरिणी १२१. हारिणी १२२. AEM
ofa Brahmin ruler, will gain fame in royal service, a
will desire illegal union with women, will enjoy १२३. धनञ्जया १२४. धनकरी १२५. धनदा १२६. कच्छपा १२७;
much fame, valour and much financial gains. He अम्बुजा १२८. ईशानी १२९. शूलिनी १३०. रोद्री १३१.
will perform good and charitable acts. 10650459 = शिवाशिवकरी १३२. कला १३३. कुन्दा १३४. मकुन्दा १३५. परता
during Saturn’s sub period will cause distress after १३६. कदली १३७. स्मरा १३८. बसिता १३९. RGB १४०.
the age of 21, when Saturn will be moving in कोकिलांशा ।
Capricorn. He will have fear of injury, fall etc. He कोकिलांशा १४१. कामिनी १४२. कलशोदभवा १४३. FTA: १४५. |
सङ्गरा १४५. शतयज्ञा॒ १४६. शतावरी १४७. Mat १४८. पाटलिनी

Chandra Kala Nadi 277
नागपङ्कूजा १५०. परमेश्वरी
एता नाडयः समाख्याताः प्रोक्ता या ब्रह्मणे पुरा ।
नाडीफलमविज्ञाय न शक्यो लग्ननिर्णयः॥५७३० ॥
5729 - 5730. Calculation of Nadiamsas: In
movable signs, there are 150 Nadiamsas (in the
order mentioned below). The order is to be reversed in case of immovable or fixed signs. In dual
or common signs, these commence from the 76th
Nadiamsa.
(The names of the 150 Nadiamsas are given
below
as in the original.)
Vasudha
Vaishnavi
Brahi (should be "Brahmi")
Kalakoota
Sankari
Sudhakarasama
Saumya
Suraa
Maaya
. Manoharaa
Madhvi (or Madhavi)
. Manjusvana
. Ghoraa
. Kumbhini
. Kutilaa (or Kutila)
. Prabhaa (or Prabha)
. Paraa
. Payaswini
. Maalaa (also Ghaataa or Dhaata?)
. Jagathi
. Jarjari
. Dhruvaa
. Musalaa
. Mudgala (or Mudgara)
. Pasaa (or Pasa)
. Chambaka (or Champaka)
. Daamini
. Mahi
. Kalushaa
36. Durbhagaa
37. Viswaa
38. Visirnaa
39. Vihvalaa
40. Anilaa
41. Bhima ~
42. Sukapradaa
43. Snigdha
44. Sodaraa
45. Surasundari
46. Amrutaprasini
47. Kaalaa
48. Kaamdrukkaravirini
49. Gahwaraa
50. Kundini
51. Kanthaa
52. Vishakhya (or Visha)
53. Vishanasini
54. Nirmada
55. Seethala
56. Nimnaa
5/. Preeta
58. Priyavardhani
59. Maanadha (or Maanaghna)
60. Durbhaga
61. Chitraa
62. Vichitra
63. Sirajivini (or Chirajivini)
64. Bhoopa
65. Gadaaharaa
66. Naalaa
67. Gaalavee
68. Nirmalaa
69. Nadi (river)
70. Sudha
71. Amritamsuga
72. Kaali
73. Kaalikaa
74, Kalushankura
75. Trailokyamohanakari (or Trailokya or
Mohana)
76. Mahaamaaya (or Mahamari)
77. Suseethala
78. Sukhada
79. Suprabha
80. Sobha
81. Sobhana

278 Deva Keralam
82. Sivada 129. Soolini
83. Siva 130. Raudri
84. Balaa 131. Sivaaasivakari
85. Jwalaa 132. Kalaa
86. Gada 133. Kundaa
87. Gaadaa 134. Mukundaa
88. Sootana (or Nootana) 135. Paratha (or Bharatha)
89. Sumanohara 136. Kadali
` 90. Somavalli 137. Smaraa
91. Somalata 138. Basitha
92. Mangala 139. Kodala
93. Mudrika 140. Kokilamsa (or Kokila)
94. Sudha 141. Kaamini
95. Melaa 142. Kalasodbhava
96. Apavarga 143: Viraprasoo
97. Pasyathaa 144. Sangaraa (or Sankara - mixed caste)
98. Navaneetha 145. Satayagna
99. Nisachari (or Nisakari) 146. Sataavari
100. Nivrithi 147. Sragvi
101. Nirgathaa 148. Paatalini
102. Saaraa 149, Nagapankaja
103. Samagaa 150 Parameswari
104. Samadaa These are the Nadi(amsas) as once stated by
105. Samaa Lord Brahma. Without knowing the effects of the
106. Visvambhara Nadiamsa, the ascendant cannot be decided. (That
107. Kumari is effects based on ascendant will be futile without
108. Kokila | the help of rising Nadiamsa.)
109. Kunjarakriti Notes: The way the 150 Nadiamsas should be
110. Indra known have been fully explained in the preface in
111. Swaahaa Book 1. These are not being repeated here to avoid
112. Swadha verbosity.
: A ae अज्ञाते च पुनलग्ने मृषा वाङ्न फलप्रदा |
115. Yaksha तस्मात्नाडया परीक्षेत कुर्याज्जातकनिर्णयम् ॥५७३१ ॥
116. Achalaprabha 5731. Again, without the knowledge of the sign
117. Saarini ascending, only untruth will arise; such predictions
118. Madhuraa will be unfrutiful or useless. The ascendant's
119. Maitri Nadiamsa should be examined and the effects of a
120. Harini ` horoscope be decided.
121. Haarini Notes: In the present sloka, the point that
122. Maruthaa Nadiamsa and ascendant are mutually complimen123. Dhananjaya tary is driven home. Mere ascendant is not enough
124. Dhanakari without knowing the exact Nadiamsa rising in it.
125. Dhanada In the location of the correct Nadiamsa, the accu126. Kachchapa racy of the ascendant is implied.
127. Ambuja
128. Isaani राजयोगो भाग्ययोगः परजातकलक्षणम् |

Chandra Kala Nadi 279
aerate योगाश्च विपरीतजनिस्तथा ॥५७३२ ॥
दरिद्रजातकश्चैव कर्मजीवनमेव च।
लोकयात्रापरिज्ञानं दशानां निर्णयं तथा ॥५७३२ ॥
अन्तर्दशाविचारश्च दशारिष्टफलं तथा |
दशारिष्टप्रशमनं वृत्तिलक्षणमेव च ॥५७३४ ॥
तथा लोकान्तरप्राप्तिरुच्यतेऽस्मद् गुरोर्मते |
आयुर्दायपरिज्ञानमपमृत्योश्च लक्षणम् ॥५७३५ ॥
परिव्राजकयोगश्च पदभ्रंशकरस्तथा |
द्विजन्मकुलयोगश्च पुत्राणां जननं तथा ॥५७३६ ॥
देवतोपासनाक्त्तवमुपास्या देवतास्तथा |
पित्रोर्मरणकालं च परित्यक्तजनस्तथा ॥५७३७ ॥
पितृकर्मकरत्वं च प्रोच्यते भार्गवे मते |
स्वदेशकालभेदेन स्वदेशनृपलक्षणम् ॥५७३८ ॥
Teast च भङ्गं च दुर्भिक्षं च सुभिक्षकम्।
महावातविधानं च प्रोक्तं साम्बशिवे मते ॥५७३९ ॥
5732 - 5739. Yogas for royal status, fortunes,
illegal births, physical defects, peculiar births,
poverty, livelihood, worldy affairs, effects of major periods and sub periods, evils due in a major
period, remedies for such evils, profession, and
world after death are to be known (through the use
of Nadiamsas) according to my preceptor. Lifespan, untimely death, ascetism, loss of position,
birth in a Brahmin's family, birth of sons, worship
of a deity, time of father's death, discarded kinsfolk, final rites to father etc. (can also be known
through Nadiamsas) according to Bhargava's school
of thought. Effects due to occur to the king in
accordance with the time period (i.e. the age of
living) and the country, its well-being, alien rule,
famine, plentifulness etc. can also be studied
(through the relevant horoscope) according to the
injunctions of Lord Siva.
॥ ग्रहाणां स्वरूपकथनम् ॥
चतुरश्रो नृपो भानुर्युमणिश्च दिवाकरः ॥५७४० ॥
वहिस्त्वर्कश्च SUE जगदानन्दकारकः |
पीतः पशुः स्वर्णवर्णश्चतुष्पात् पूर्वदिक्पतिः॥५७४१ ॥
निशाबलशशी गौरो युवा वायव्यदिक्पतिः।
क्षारः शुभस्तपस्वी च श्लेष्मलो जलरूपधृक |
क्षयवृद्धितनुः प्रज्ञो मृदुवाक् चारुलोचनः॥५७४२ Il
भोमो वहयाकृतिस्तीक्षो कोणो दक्षिणदिक्पतिः।
नरो युवा चतुष्कोण; क्षत्रियः कनकः परः ॥५७४३ ॥
वक्रश्च रक्तरूपी च क्रूरनेत्रः कृशोदरः।
बुधो ्राम्यशुभो नित्यं धीरो धातुत्रयात्मकः॥५७४४ Il
प्राज्ञः श्यामोत्तरस्येशः सङ्गी सर्वरसप्रियः।
तारापुत्रोऽतिमेधावी धीरोहास्यरसप्रियः॥५७४५ ॥
विप्रो जितेन्द्रियः प्रीतो यागकृच्चसुरालये |
SEIT मधुरो भावज्ञश्च सुधार्मिकः ॥५७४६ ॥
स्वर्णाधिपो मध्यवयाः वैदिकश्चेशदिग्पतिः।
शुक्रः शुभो जलमयो राजसो सरसप्रियः॥५७४७ ॥
योषिन्मध्यवयो विप्रः श्यामवर्णोऽग्निदिक्पतिः।
गीतप्रियः स्निग्धतनुर्रीपवासी सुलोचनः ॥५५७४८ ॥
शनिः शद्राद्गनासक्तः पश्चिमाशापतिस्तथा |
Rad पङ्कुपादो वृद्धो स्थूलतनुस्तथा |
राहुः शीर्षार्धभुजगः शनिवद्रजनीचरः ॥५७४९ ॥
शिखी भोमसमश्लेष्मा चित्रवर्णस्तु चञ्जलः।
5740 - 57491/2: Planets Described: (a) The
Sun has a symmetric body. He is a king and has
other names, viz. Dyumani and Divakara. Heis fire
(personified), fierce and causes happiness to the
world. He is the ruler of bile ("Peeta” reads as
"Pitta" in another version which is used in the
rendering), quadrupeds and the direction east. His
hue is golden.
(b) The Moon is strong in the nights. She is fair
in complexion and is the ruler of north-west. She
is perishable by nature (i. e. she wanes periodically), is handsome (when waxing), sagely, phlegmatic, is watery (Jit. has the form of water), has a
body subject to decrease and increase, is learned,
soft-spoken and has attractive eyes.
(c) Mars resembles fire. He is sharp and is
(known as) "Kona". The direction south is ruled by
him. He is a youth, of royal scion and has a square
body. He is known as "Vakra" (or crooked) and has
blood-red complexion. His eyes are fierce and his
belly depressed.
(d) Mercury resides in villages, is handsome,
courageous and has a composition of all the three
humours (viz. wind, phlegm and bile). He is
learned, dark in complexion, the lord of the northern direction, and fond of music and all kinds of
tastes. He is Tara's son, highly intelligent, courageous, and fond of jokes.

280 Deva Keralam
(€) Jupiter is a Brahmin, winner of senses,
attached to performing sacrificial rites, highly phlegmatic, sweet, knower of feelings (or truth) and very
righteous. He rules gold, is of middle age, follows
Vedic path and is the lord of north-east.
(f) The planet Venus is handsome, is formed of
water ("Jalamaya"), passionate, fond of love and
is a middle-aged female. She is a Brahmin, is the
lord of south-east, and fond of music. Her body is
resplendent. She lives in islands and has charming
eyes.
(g) Saturn is fond of Soodra females and is the
lord of the western direction. He is harmful in
disposition, lame, old and has a "stout" body.
(0) Rahu'shead is like that of a snake. Heis like
Saturn and wanders during nights (like demons).
Ketu is equal to Mars, is phlegmatic, of variegated
hue and is fikle-minded.
Notes: (b) The word "Kshara" relating to the
Moon has various meanings like medicinal salt,
molasses, perishable, mutable and dissoluble. Since
the Moon wanes in the dark fortnight, the meaning
chosen in the rendering may be treated as appropriate although this quality is reflected in the words
("Kshaya Vriddhi Tanuh".)
(c) The word "Kona" for astrological purposes
has twomeanings. Itisa synonym of Saturnas well
as Mars. Most of the texts however denote only
Saturn by this term while Mars is never indicated.
(f) Although it is a tradition in English translations to use masculine pronoun "he" for Venus, in
this portion "she" is used as an exception to remain
in line with the context.
(h) Rahu is compared to Saturn and Ketu to
Mars, in line with the misused popular adage -
"Sanivadrahu kujvatketu". The comparison is
restricted to the general disposition of the two
nodes and does not allow swapping Rahu with
Saturn and Ketu with Mars for every convenient
purpose on the earth.
त्रिशदभगात्मकं लग्नं होरा तस्यार्धमुच्यते ॥५७५० ॥
राशित्रिभागो SHH नवांशो नवमांशकः।
दवादशांशो द्वादशांशसखिशांशखिशदंशकः॥५७५१ ॥
चरे स्वपुत्रनवपाः स्थिरे धर्मस्वपुत्रपाः।
aed स्वपाज्ञेया द्वेक्काणं विन्यसेत् क्रमात् ॥५७५२ ॥
मेषसिहधनुषी त्वजादयः मृगवृषकन्यामकरादयः।
` तौलिकुम्भमिथुने तुलादयः
कर्किंकीटमीने कटकादयः ॥५७५३ ॥
5750 - 5753. Rasi Divisions: (a) Thirty degrees
constitute a Rasi (Jit. ascendant).
(b) Half of it is called Hora.
(c) Drekkana is a third of the sign.
(d) Dvadasamsa is one twelfth of a sign.
(e) Trimsamsa is constituted by thirtieth parts.
(f) The drekkana distribution should in order be
done thus: (to) the lords of the Ist, 5th and 9th in
case of movable signs, the lords of the 9th, Ist and
5th in case of immovable signs, and the 5th, 9th and
the Ist (in case of dual signs).
(g) For positions in Aries, Leo and Sagittarius
count from Aries. For Capricom, Taurus and Virgo
count from Capricorn. For Libra, Aquarius and
Gemini, count from Libra. For Cancer, Scorpio
and Pisces, count from Cancer. (Thus are the
Navamsa distribution to be understood.)
Notes: In these verses, Rasi, Hora, Drekkana,
Trimsamsa, Dvadasamsa and Navamsa calculations are casually touched. The reader is already
aware of these in a fuller measure. Yet clarifications on two points are necessary as under.
(a) The word "ascendant" should not be misinterpreted that the ascendant is always 30 degrees in
length irrespective of interruption by another sign,
and that no Bhava divisions be made with the help
of the meridian as taught by the likes of Parasara
and Sripathi. Our author just took some liberty and
used the word "ascendant" which means a sign.
(d) The drekkana distribution suggested is partially different from what we already know. Incase
of immovable and dual signs, an unknown concept
is introduced. Serious probe is a must whether we
so far know the right thing. According to this text,
for example, in Taurus, a fixed sign, the 3 decanates
are in order ruled by Saturn (Capricorn), Venus
(Taurus) and Mercury (Virgo) and not Venus (Taurus), Mercury (Virgo) and Saturn (Capriorn). In
case of a dual sign, for example Gemini, the three
decanates are ruled by Venus (Libra), Aquarius
(Saturn) and Gemini (Mercury) instead of traditionally known rulers Mercury (Gemini), Venus
(Libra) and Saturn (Aquarius).

Chandra Kala Nadi 281
केन्द्राणि लग्नदशसप्तचतुर्थभानि
तस्मात् परं पणपरं च वदन्ति तज्ज्ञाः।
आपोक्लिमं च परतो यदि तत्र भावाः
कष्टा वदन्तिरिपुन्धरव्ययस्तृतीयाः ॥५७५४ Il
5754. Bhavas: The Kendras are the ascendant,
10th, 7th and the 4th. Panapharas are those next to
Kendras, and Apokilmas are the next to Panapharas.
The 6th, 8th, 12th and the 3rd houses are troublesome.
इन्दुस्थमेव शशिलग्नमिति प्रसिद्धं
लग्नादियद् गृहगतस्तनुपश्च तावत् |
आरूढचनद्रतनुपा यदि लग्नमेव
पश्यन्ति पापरहिताः स तु दीर्घजीवी ॥५७५५ ॥
5755. The sign occupied by the Moon is called
Chandra Lagna. Note the number of signs intervening between the ascendant and its lord. So
many signs from the ascendant lord will be the
Arudha Lagna. If the ascendant is unaspected by
malefics but by the Moon and acendant lord, long
life will come to pass.
भावलगनम्-
वारपस्थांशमारभ्य SHAT तु पञ्चकम् |
प्रयाति लग्नपर्यन्तं भावलग्नमुद्राहतम् ॥५७५६ ॥
5756. Bhava Lagna: Commencing from the
Sun's degree (as at Sun rise), progress at the rate of
5 ghatikas (or 120 minutes) per sign till the time of
birth to get Bhava Lagna (sphuta or longitude). `
चन्द्रा्युलग्नम्-
चन्द्रांशकं समारभ्य घरिकाभिस्तु पञ्चकम् |
उदयादिविनाडीभिरायुर्लग्नं प्रकल्पयेत् ॥५७५७ ॥
5757. Chandra Ayur Lagna: Note the Moon's
Navamsa position (at Sun rise) and distribute the
birth time in ghatikas (from Sun rise) till the time
of birth at the rate of 5 ghatikas per sign to beget the
Ayur Lagna 6. e. ascendant for life-span).
होरालग्ननिर्णय--
होरालग्नं समाख्यातं सार्धद्विषिकात्मकम् |
दिवारत्रिप्रमाणेन क्रियेत लग्ननिर्णयः ॥५७५८ ॥
दिवामानं च Ua च ज्ञात्वा प्रत्येकं प्रत्येकं द्वादशधा विभज्य
ओज-युग्मार पारेण जन्मलग्ने सिद्धे ओजक्रमेण ओजे युग्मे व्युक्रमेण
इष्टजन्मकालघ। तां शेन यल्लग्नं भवति तत् होराल्गनं भवति ॥५७५९ ॥
5758 - 5759, Hora Lagna: Commencing from
the natal asccendant, distribute the time of birth in
ghatikas etc. at the rate of two ghatikas and a half
per sign to get Hora Lagna. Divide the day or night
duration by 12 and distribute in the direct order if
the birth ascendant is an odd sign, and in the reverse
order in.case of an even sign asending.
Notes: The 2nd line of sloka 5758 has another -
version thus: "Vilagnabhaak prayaati lagnam
tannama hora lagnamihochyate".
घटिकालग्नम्--
सूर्योदयं समारभ्य चैकैकघटिकाक्रमात् |
प्रयाति लग्नपर्यन्तं नाडीलग्नमुदाहतम् ॥५७६० Il
विलग्नघटिकालग्नं होरालग्नं तथेव च ।
उच्चग्रहे राजयोगो लग्नद्रयमथापि वा ॥५७६१ Il
5760 - 5761. Ghatika Lagna: At the rate of
one ghatika per sign, distribute the time of birth `
commencing from the Sun to obtain Nadi Lagna
(or Ghatika Lagna). If the natal ascendant, Ghatika
Lagna and Hora Lagnaare all occcupied by exalted
planets, or two of them be so, a Raja Yoga is
formed.
टशारम्भलग्नम्-
अथ चन्द्रेण एेश्वर्ययोगप्रकारस्तु--
चन्द्रनक्षत्रपतयस्तुद्गराशिमुपाश्रिताः।
नीचराशिगता वापि प्रदिशन्ति श्रियं नृणाम् ॥५७६२ ॥
लग्ननेयाः पञ्च पञ्च घटिकाः स्थिरकादितः।
नक्षत्राधिपतौ केतौ कल्पयेल्लग्नव्युक्रमात् ॥५७६३ ॥
केतुव्यतिरिक्तनकषत्राधिपतिषु क्रमेण गणयेत् केतो व्युक्रमेण गणयेत्
प्रथमनक्षत्राधिपतेः स्वराश्युच्चनीचचरराशिस्थिति यदि भवति तदा
रेश्वर्ययोगो द्रष्टव्यः ॥५७६४ ॥
5762 - 5764. N.B. Although the caption de-
, hotes the acendant prevailing at the time of commencement of a dasa, nothing is given in the text in
this respect. The next line states: "Now about
yogas for opulence through the Moon sign." The
other part of the slokas which are again defective
and mutually unrelated conveys the following.)
If the lord of the Moon's Nakshatra is exalted,
or even debilitated (?), wealth will be acquired by
the person. Distribute at the rate of 5 ghatikas from
the ascendant. If the Nakshatra lord is Ketu the

distribution is to be done in the reverse order.
Except for Ketu, the calculations should be done in
ascending order while for Ketu, it should be reversed. If the lord of the first Nakshatra is exalted
or debilitated or is in a movable sign, Yoga for
wealth (Isvarya Yoga) should be drawn. ।
घोरंशको राक्षसदेवभागौ
कुबेररक्षोगणकिन्नरां शाः।
We: कुलघ्नो गरलाग्निसंधौ
मायांशकः प्रेतपुरीशभागः॥५७६५ ॥
अपां पतिर्देवगणेशभागौ
लोकाहिभागावमृतांशुचन््रौ |
मृद्रशकः कोमलपद्मनाभौ
लक्ष्मीशवागीशदिगम्बरां शाः ॥५५७६६ ॥
देवार्घभागो कविनार्षभागो
क्ितीश्वरांशः कमलाकरांशः।
क्रमेण मन्दात्मजमृत्युकाला
दावाग्निघोरौ यमकण्टकांशः॥५७६७ ॥
`सुधामृतांशौ परिपूर्णचन्द्र
द्विषः प्रदिग्धाकुलनाशमुख्याः।
वंशक्षयोत्पातककालरूपा
सोम्यांशमद्रंशसुशीतव्ं शाः ॥५७६८ ॥
दंष्टाकराडेन्दुमुखीपुरीश्री-
कालाग्निदण्डायुधनिर्मलांशाः।
शुभाशुभांशावतिशीतलांशो
सुधापयोधिभ्रमणेन्दुराकाः॥५७६९ ॥
जेयाः क्रमादव्यत्ययमेव युग्मे
शुभान्वितांशा यदि शोभनाप्तिः॥५७७० ॥
क्रूरः WAM: सव नाशयन्तीह खेचराः।
यदि पूर्णबलैर्युक्ताः स्वोच्चमूलत्रिकोणगाः॥५७७१ ॥
5765 - 5771. Shashtiamsas: (Now explained
are the 60 Shahtiamsas of a sign). (1) Ghora, (2)
Rakshasa, (3) Deva, (4) Kubera, (5) Rakshogana,
(6) Kinnara, (7) Bhrashta, (8) Kulaghna, (9) Garaala,
(10) Agnisandhi, (11) Maaya, (12) Pretapurisa,
(13) Apampathi, (14) Deva, (15) Ganesa, (16)
Loka, (17) Ahi, (18) Amritamsu, (19) Chandra,
(20) Mridu, (21) Komala, (22) Padmanabha, (23)
Lakshmisa, (24) Vagisa, (25) Digambara, (26)
Deva, (27) Ardra, (28) Kalinasa, (29) Kshiteeswara,
Deva Keralam
(30) Kamalakara, (31) Mandatmaja (or Gulika),
(32) Mrityu, (33) Kaala, (34) Davagni, (35) Ghora,
(36) Yamakantaka, (37) Sudhamrita, (38)
Paripoorna Chandra, (39) Visha, (40) Pradigdha,
(41) Kulanasa, (42) Vamsakshaya, (43) Utpataka,
* + (44) Kalaroopa, (45) Saumya, (46) Mridu, (47)
Susitala, (48) Damshtrakaraala, (49) Indumukhi,
(50) Purisri, (51) Kalagni, (52) Dandayudha, (53)
Nirmala, (54) Subha, (55) Asubha, (56) Atiseetala,
(57) Sudha, (58) Payodhi, (59) Bhramana and (60)
Induraka (read Indurekha). Thus should be known
in order (the various Shashtiamsas in an odd sign).
Reverse the order in case of an even sign. Planets
in beneficial Shashtiamsa will grant good effects
while the ones in an evil Shastiamsa will destroy
everything. If planets are endowed with full strength,
be in exaltation, in Moolatrikona ...... (text incomplete).
Notes: The first line of sloka 5767 should
contain the expression "Deva + Ardra bhagau
Kalinasaa bhago" providing for Ardra Shashtiamsa
placed in between Deva and Kalinasa, as per
standard literature. But for "Ardra” shashtiamsa,
we will be short of one Shashtiamsa, or will have
to make some unscrupulopus manipulation.
Further, some of the Shashtimsas in this work
are named in a different style which may be noted.
. Sometimes, a synonym is used, and yet some times
a totally different name is given.
ज्ञात्वा योगं च नाडी गृहपतिपदवी प्रापयित्वा तदंशं
नीत्वा सम्यग्विशेषं बलमपि च गुणं वीक्ष्य भावान्तरदम् |
चक्रं ज्ञात्वा दशां च प्रति फलविषयां प्राकृतां चापि वीक्ष्य
बरूयाच्चेष्टामवस्थां निजनिचयफलं चिन्तनीयं वचोभिः ॥५७७२
5772. One should consider the Yogas, Nadiamsa, status of the lord of a sign (or Bhava), its
dispositor, strength, virtues (association etc.),
ocupation of a Bhava, dasas, Cheshtas, Avasthas,
and accumulation of effects (by various means).
कालज्ञानं विना लोके यो नरः फलबोधकः।
तत्फलं व्यर्थमाप्नोति तैलहीनप्रदीपवत् ॥५७७३ ॥
5773. Declaration of effects (of a horosope)
without considering the Time period (i.e. relevant
age) will be futile akin to a lamp sans oil. |

Chandra Kala Nadi 283
काशब्देन तु कारणं त्रिजगतां पश्चाल्लयं चेत्यतः
मात्रार्भिर्गदितं हितत्रयमयं ब्रह्मैव कालात्मकम्।
तज्जानं कमलोदभवाद्यमुदित पुण्यैकलब्धं सतां
यस्तद्वेति स तत्त्ववित् स च गुनिर््रह्याहमयः कालवित् ॥५७७४ ॥
5774. (In the word "Kaala" - काठ - meaning
time), the letter "Kaa" - का - is the reason for the
three worlds, while the other letter "La" - ठक -
stands for Great Dissolution. The Matras (one Guru
and two Laghus, equalling three Laghus) denote
the three Benefactors (Brahma, Vishnu and
Mahesvara). Brahma is of the nature of Kaala. i. e.
he is himself Kaala. Knowing of Kaala ever leads
to attainment of Punya or merits. One who knows
of it is the knower of Tatva, is a sage and appellation of Brahma
Finis

Chandra Kala Nadi
INDEX
(For all verses in Book I,
Book Hi and Book I)
S = Sloka Number
BI = Book I
BI = Book II
BIT = Book II
“.“ between sloka numbers indicates “to”.
Aquarius ascendant - Agada (or “Angada”)
3959 : BIID
Jupiter in benefic’s Navamsa (S. 143 : BI)
Jupiter in Viswambhara Nadiamsa (S. 138,
Moon in Kutila Nadiamsa (S. 139 - 142: BI)
Moon in Kutila Nadiamsa with Mercury’s
aspect (S.132 -
Moon in Kutila Nadiamsa, Sun in
Manjuswana Nadiamsa (S. 137 : BI)
Sun without benefic’s aspect (S. 154 - 157%
Sun in Manjuswana Nadiamsa (9. 151 -
Aquarius ascendant - Champaka Nadiamsa
Damini Yoga (S. 1288 - 12934 : BID
Jupiter in Aroodha ascendant (S.1195 -
Ketu in 5th aspected by Saturn (S. 1305 -
Mars in extremis (9. 1298 - 1299 : BID)
Moon in ascendant (S. 1238 : BIT)
Moon - Mercury - Jupiter conjunction (S.
Moon in Naga Nadiamsa (S. 1206 - 1211,
Moon in Swaaha Nadiamsa (S. 1220 - 1224
: BID)
Moon in 6th (S. 1308 - 1313 : BID
Saturn with Ketu (S. 1195 - 1198'4a, 1237,
Saturn in Leo (S. 1245 : BIT)
Saturn’s transit (S. 1227 - 1231%a, 1260 -
: BID
Sun’s transit (S. 1247 - 1248 : BIT)
Sun in 6th (S. 1246 : BID
Venus aspected by Jupiter (S. 1216 - 1219:
Aquarius ascendant (also see immovable asc.) -
Durdara Nadiamsa (S. 4189-4195; 4206-42134
: BID
Jupiter & Venus (S. 4290 - 4299; 4308d :
BIT)
Saturn’s dispositor (S. 4305 - 4308a : छा)
Saturn in Virgo (S. 4308b : छा)
Venus in Gada Nadiamsa (S. 4303 - 43044%
: BI)
Aquarius ascendant - General
Jupiter in an angle, Mars in 9th (S. 3059 -
Jupiter in Kalakoota Nadiamsa (S. 1479 :
BID
Mars = Rahu (S. 3526 : छा)
Miscellaneous (1413 - 1419, 3205f : BID
Aquarius ascendant - Guha (or Dhruva)
: BD
Jupiter’s Navamsa (S. 1271 ; BI)
Jupiter & 9th lord (S. 1234 - 1237 : BN)
Jupiter in 10th (S. 1251 : BD
Mars in Sth (S. 1300 - 13024 : BD
Moon connected with malefics (S. 1269,
Moon in exaltation/own sign (S. 1326 -
Moon in Saturn’s Navamsa (S. 1330 - 1332
: BD
Ninth & eleventh lords (9. 1238 - 1240 : BI

Deva Keralam
Saturn’s transit (ऽ. 1305 - 1307 : BD
Third dasa (S. 1290 : BI)
Venus in an angle (S. 1285 : BI)
Venus with Jupiter (S. 1287 - 1288 : BI)
Venus with Mars (S. S. 1286 : BI)
Venus related to 9th from Moon (S. 1270:
Aquarius ascendant - Kunda Nadiamsa (S. 1912
Aquarius ascendant - Maalini Nadiamsa (S. 1443
Jupiter in Kalakoota Nadiamsa (8. 1463 :
BID
Kartari Yoga (S. 1494 : BID
Kemadruma Yoga (S. 1493 : BID
Koorma Yoga (S. 1502 : BID
Malefics in 5th (ऽ. 1465 - 14654 : BII)
Saturn in Pisces (S. 1480 - 1482 : BII)
Saturn - Rahu in 12th (S. 1477 - 1478 : BID
Saturn’s transit (S. 1458 - 1460, 1467 -
Sun’s dispositor (8. 1464 : BID
Sun in Scorpio Navamsa (S. 1466 - 1466%
: BID
Aquarius ascendant - Mala Nadiamsa (S. 5127 -
Benefic in 2nd (S. 5130d : BIID
Jupiter in Durdhara Nadiamsa (S. 5169 -
Jupiter in own sign (S. 5188 - 5189 : छा)
Rahu in 10th (S. 5190 : ठा)
BIID
Sunin Libra (S. 5130b, 5135aandb, 5157b,
Sun in Scorpio (9. 5168'4b-d : छा)
Sun in Pisces (S. 5130c : BIII)
Moon related aphorisms (S. 5136 - 5141,
Aquarius ascendant - Mohana Nadiamsa (5.
Dasa effects (S. 1424 - 1425, 1438 : BID
Jupiter’s transit (S. 1421 - 14234 : BI)
Saturn’s transit (S. 1420 : BID
Aquarius ascendant - Nirmala Nadiamsa (S.
Jupiter in Sth (S. 1906 - 1907% : BI)
Mercury in Aries/Leo Navamsa (S. 1884 :
BI)
Mercury with Ketu (S./ 1889 - 1893, 2056 -
Saturn - Moon in 111) (S. 1887 - 1888 : BI
Saturn in 11th (S. 1907 - 1907% : BI)
Sun in Pisces Navamsa (S. 1894, 2050 -
Venus in Capricorn Navamsa (S. 2059 -
Venus-Jupiter in Saturn’s Navamsa(S. 1895,
Venus in Nirmala Nadiamsa (S. 1886 : BI)
Venus related to Saturn ( S. 1899 : BI)
Aquarius ascendant - Sumathi Nadiamsa
Dasa effects (S. 1432 - 1434 : BIT)
Aries ascendant - Achala (Prabha) Nadiamsa (S.
: BI
Ashtaka Varga (S. 5095 - 5097 : BIII)
Dasa effects & Transits (S. 5111 - 5126:
BIII)
Moon in Kunda Nadiamsa (S. 5090 - 5094
: BID
Saturn & Mars in the 6th (S. 5086 - 5089 :
Sun in Aquarius Navamsa (S. 50466 : BIID)
Sun’s Ashtaka Varga (S. 5064b : रा)
Sun in Leo with Rahu (S. 5059 - 5064a, d:
Sun in Prabha Nadiamsa (9. 5079 - 5082:4
: BID
Venus in Aries (ऽ. 5064b : BIID
Aries ascendant - Champaka Nadiamsa (S. 2690
BI)
Aries Navamsa (S. 2678 - 2679 : BI)
Jupiter in Cancer Navamsa (S. 2684 - 2685
: BD

Chandra Kala Nadi 286
Jupiter in Pushkaramsa (S. 2699 : BI)
Jupiter with Saturn (S. 2680 - 26834 : BI)
Saturn in Champaka Nadiamsa (S. 2704 -
Saturn in transit (S. 2706 : BI
Sun - Mercury with identical longitudes in
Venus in even Navamsa (S. 2697 - 26984 :
BI)
Aries ascendant - Dhanada Nadiamsa (S. 1511 -
Fourth dasa (S. 1542 - 1542% : BI)
Jupiter’s dasa (S. 1547 : BI)
Jupiter’s transit (S. 1541 - 15414 : BI)
Moon in an angle or in 11th(S. 1519 - 1521
: BD
Moon in 5th house (S. 1522 - 1529 : BI)
BI)
Saturn in Scorpio (S. 1545 : BI)
Sun’s dasa (S. 1540 - BI)
Aries ascendant - General
Cancer Navamsa (S.49, 50 : BI)
Moon in Karikara Nadiamsa(S. 1453 - 1454
: BID
Saturn in 11th (S. 3206 : छा)
Aries Ascendant - Kutila & Kuntala Nadiamsas
Aries ascendant - Sama Nadiamsa (S. 1548 -
Fourth dasa (S. 1573 - 1573% : BD
Jupiter’s dasa (S. 1578 - 1578% : BI)
Mercury aspected by Mars (S. 1555 : BI)
Mercury exalted (S. 1565 - 1566 : BI)
Moon in Gemini Navamsa (S. 1567 - 1568
: BY
Moon with Ketu (S. 1561 - 1562'4 : BI)
Saturn’s transit (S. 1580 - 1583 : BI)
Second dasa (S. 1563 - 1564% : BI)
Venus aspected by Jupiter (S. 1570 - 1572:
BI)
Aries ascendant - Mangala Nadiamsa (S. 2205 -
Bride’s Rasi (S. 2254 : BI)
Fourth dasa (S. 2277 : BI)
Jupiter aspecting 10th (S. 2240 : BI)
Jupiter in 2nd (S. 2242 ~ 2243% : BI)
Jupiter in 6th (8. 2222 - 22224 : BI)
Mars in 7th from Moon (S. 411 : BI)
Mercury with a benefic (S. 2256 : BI)
Mercury in Kunda Nadiamsa (S. 2239 : BI)
Moon in Aries with Virgo Navamsa (S.
Moon with Mercury, and placed in
Virgo Navamsa (S. 2261 - 22614 : BI)
Rasis related to lords of 9th and 10th (S.345
Rahu in 8th (S. 2278 : BD)
Saturn in Aquarius etc... (S. 2225 : BI)
Saturn indirect motion (S, 213 -2215'%: BI)
Saturn in 10th from the Sun (S. 2216 -2219
: BD
Second dasa (S. 2260 - 22604 : BI)
Third dasa (S. 2251. 2276 : BI)
Venus with Mars (S. 2241 : BI)
Venus with Mercury (S. 2223 - 22254 : BI)
Venus in Pisces Navamsa (S. 2257 - 2258 :
BI)
Venus in 4th with Leo Navamsa (S. 2249 -
Cancer ascendant - Champaka Nadiamsa (S.
Chamara Yoga (S. 1810 - 1810% : BI)
Jupiter in Capricorn (S. 1818 - 18184 : BI)
Jupiter - Mars in Sagittarius, Pisces or Cancer
Jupiter’s periods (S. 1483 - 1491 : BD
Jupiter’s transit (S. 1473 - 1475 : BD
‘BN
Kendradi Yoga (S. 1811 - 1812 : BI)
Mercury in 8th (S. 1804 - 1806 : BI)
Moon in Indra Nadiamsa (S. 1793 - 1794:
BI)
Moon with Mars (S. 1803 - 18034 : BI
Moon in Sagittarius (S. 1425 - 1425% : BI)
Moon in Vargottama (S. 1453 : BI)
Rahu’s periods (S. 1480 - 1482 : BI)
Saturn with a malefic (S. 1438 - 1440 : BI
Saturn’s transit (S. 1465 - 1470, 1479 : BI)
: BI

Deva Keralam.
Sun in Kantha/Kamini Nadiamsa (S. 1441,
Sun - Mars conjunction (S. 1456 - 1464 : BI)
Sun in Pisces Navamsa (S. 1419 - 1424 : BI)
Venus in Leo Navamsa ( S. 1802 : BI)
Venus - Mercury in 6th (S. 1819 - 1820%
BI)
Venusian Trimsamsa (S. 1795 - 1801 : 87)
Cancer ascendant - Dhanada Nadiamsa (S. 5295
Jupiter & Venus in exaltation (S. 5314 -
5315b : BIID
Jupiterin Capricorn (S. 5318 - 53254 : ठा)
Mars in Libra (S. 5317 : ठा)
Moon in aspect to Mars (S. 5309 : छा)
Saturn in Leo (S. 5326 - 5327 : BID
Saturn’s Navamsa (S. 5308c : BIID
Venus in Libra (S. 5314 - 53158 : BIT)
Venusian Navamsa (S. 5308b, d : ठा)
Cancer ascendant - Dhananjaya Nadiamsa (See
movable ascendant - Dhananjaya Nadiamsa)
Cancer ascendant - General
Eighth lord in last degrees of ascendant (S.
Jupiter in Cancer, Virgo, Sagittarius or
Aquarius (S.810- 810%: छा
Jupiter (S. 3205f : हा)
Jupiter - Mercury - Venus conjunction (S.
Mars dasa - Jupiter bhukti (S-47, 48 : B-I)
Malefics in 2nd, Rahu in 9th (S. 608 - 609
> BD
Mercury & Venus in ascendant (S. 574 : BI)
Moon in Capricorn Navamsa (S. 4743 -
Moon in 3rd with Ketu (8. 572 - 573 : BI)
Moon related to Rahu (S. 624 - 62714 : BI)
Moon related to Saturn (S. 2844 - 2845 :
Navamsa ascendant in Scorpio (ऽ. 4742 :
BI}
Navamsa ascendant in Pisces (S. 2926 -
Rahu in 9th in Virgo Navamsa (S. 621 - 623
: BD
Rahu’s transit in Deha Rasi (S. 643 - 645 :
BI)
Saturn in Aquarius with Libra Navamsa (S
Saturn in Capricorn, Moon in Pisces (S. 587
Saturn and Venus in fixed and movable
signs (S. 5328 : छा)
Saturn with Mars and in Libra Navamsa (S.
Saturn in Sachira Nadiamsa (S. 577 - 579,
Saturn in 2nd, Mars in 4th (S. 2721 -2721%
: BI)
Saturn in 3rd, in dual Navamsa (S. 2722 -
Saturn in 8th as 9th & 10th lords are angular
Saturn in 10th, Jupiter in 7th (S. 805 - 80744
Saturn’s transit (ऽ. 595 - 602% : BI)
Saturn in 2nd, Rahu in 9th etc. (S. 594 : BI)
Scorpio Navamsa (3. 986 - 9944 : BI; 4757
Venus in Taurus with Aquarius Navamsa
Venus in Capricorn with Gemini Navamsa
Vishnu Yoga (S. 4746140 and c, 4751 -
Cancer ascendant - Kantha Nadiamsa (9. 2900 -
Jupiter in Pisces Navamsa (S. 2905 : BID)
Jupiter - Saturn relation (S. 2910 : BID)
Mars in 5th (S. 2909 - 29094 : BID
Sun in Virgo (S. 2903 - 2904 : BIT)
Venus in an angle/trine (S. 2901 - 29024
Cancer ascendant - Kutila Nadiamsa (5. 4770 -
Cancer ascendant - Paramesvara Nadiamsa (ऽ
Rahu in 3rd (S. 3244 - 32498 : BIII)

Chandra Kala Nadi 288
` Jupiter's transit S. 3249d : BIID
Saturn’s transit (S. 3249b-c, 3259, 3263 :
BIID
Venus in Aries (S. 3251, 3264 - 3268a,
Capricorn ascendant - Dhruva Nadiamsa (S.
BI)
Dasa effects (S. 2533 : BI)
Moon in Gemini Navamsa (S. 2530 : BI)
Ninth lord with a malefic (S. 2534 : BI)
Saturn in Apampathi Nadiamsa (S. 2524 :
BD
Saturn in Kamala Nadiamsa (S. 2522 : BI
Saturn in malefic Shashtiamsa (S. 2525 -
Sun - Mercury in Gemini (S. 2523 : BI)
Capricorn ascendant - General
Moon - Mercury (S. 3385 : BHI)
Saturn - Jupiter - Mars related aphorisms (S.
Saturn’s transits (S. 4356 - 43654 : BIID
Saturn in 5th (S. 3384 : BIT)
Pisces Navamsa (S. 3288 - 32914 : BIT)
Capricorn ascendant - Gopriya Nadiamsa (S.
Dasa effects (ऽ. 1850 : BIT)
Capricorn ascendant - Jagathi Nadiamsa (S.
Dasa of 8th Rasi (KCD) (S. 2150 - 21504 :
BI)
Moon with Ketu (S. 2136 - 21374 : BI)
Moon aspected by Mars (S. 2143 -2146 : BI)
.Moon in Pisces (S. 2151 - 2154% : BI)
: BD
Saturn-Mars in an immovable Navamsa (S.
Saturn in transit (S. 2140 - 21404 : BI)
Capricorn ascendant - Kala Nadiamsa (S. 2494
BI)
Jupiter aspected by Saturn (S. 2499 - 2500 :
BD .
Jupiter in dual Navamsa (S. 2508 : BI)
Malefic in 9th house (S. 2515 : BI)
Mars aspected by Saturn (S. 2501, 2511: BI)
Sakata Yoga (S. 2514 : BI)
Venus in dual Navamsa (S. 2506 : BI
Capricorn ascendant - Kalika Nadiamsa (S.
BII)
Jupiter in ascendant, aspecting luminaries
Jupiter related to ascendant (S. 3285 : BID)
Jupiter in Cancer (S. 820 : BIT)
Jupiter in Sagittarius (S. 3326 - 3327 : छा)
एठा)
Moon & Balarishta (S. 3200 -32014 : BIT)
Moon in debility (S. 3286, 771 - 774 : BID
Saturn in aspect to Mars (S. 3305 - 3309,
: BID
Saturn in Libra, Jupiter in Cancer (S. 3322
: BID
Three planets in 3rd house (S. 3328 - 3331
: BID
Capricorn ascendant - Kantha Nadiamsa (S.
Dasa effects (S. 1359 - 1365 : BI)
Jupiter in own sign (S. 1343 - 13454 : BI)
Mars with Ketu (S. 1346 - 1349 : BI)
Saturn in 8th (S. 1356 - 13564 : BI)
Saturn in 12th (S. 1337 : BI)
Sun in Leo (S. 13504 : BI)
Venus with Moon (S. 1351 - 1353 : BI)
Venusian Trimsamsa (S. 1338 - 1342 : BI)
5th lord in 6th (S. 1350, 1355 :BI)
Capricorn ascendant - Pankaja Nadiamsa (S.
Dasa effects (S. 2920 - 2923 : BID
Jupiter’s transit (S. 1784 - 1786 : BI
Jupiter in Cancer Navamsa (S. 2917 : BID)
Jupiter in Pisces Navamsa (S. 2915 - 2916,

Deva Keralam
Mars in 7th aspected by Jupiter ( S. 1782 -
Mars in 10th (S. 2925 : BID)
Saturn with Sun (S. 2919 : BID
Saturn in 11th (S. 2924, 2953 : BID
Venus - Moon in debility (S. 1775 - 1776%
: BH
Venus in 5th with Pisces Navamsa (S. 1779
Sun’s Ashtaka varga (S. 4335i : BIT)
Sun in Mukunda Nadiamsa (S. 4334} : BI)
_Capricorn ascendant - Sundara Nadiamsa (S.
Jupiter in Cancer or 5th/9th (S. 1589 : BI)
Jupiter’s transit (S. 1597 - 15984 : BI)
Jupiter in twelfth from Moon (6. 1593 - 1594
: BE
Rahu dasa (S. 1590 - 1592 : BD
- 1780 : BI) Capricorn ascendant - Sura Nadiamsa (S. 3283
Capricorn ascendant - Sachira (or Sachiva) = 3287, 3297 - 3302, 3312 - 3315, 3351 -
Dasa and sub periods (S.613 -618 :BI;4369 Capricorn ascendant - Trailokya Nadiamsa (S.
Fourth lord (S. 554.- 559'4 : BI)
Ketu with Moon (S. 4309 - 4319a, c ande:
Jupiter in Cancer Navamsa (8. 4342 - 4344142
: BIN
Mars in ascendant (5. 548 : ए)
Mars & Jupiter in Sagittarius (S. 43191 :
Mercury in ascendant (8. 582 : BI; 43356,
Mercury = Venus in ascendant (S. 43351 :
BIID
Moon’s Ashtaka Varga (S. 4320 - 4335a :
Moon in fateful degree (७. 549 : BI)
Moon in Aquarius Navamsa (S. 4335m :
Moon in Pisces (ऽ. 4391:48-6 : ठा)
Saturn in Aquarius with Mars/Jupiter (S.
Saturn in Aquarius - Moon in Pisces (S.
Saturn & Jupiter (S. 4335h : छा)
Saturn in Libra Navamsa (S. 4335b, 4338 :
Saturn in Taurus Navamsa (8. 43356 : BIII)
Saturn with Mars (S. 4319b, d, f, : ठा)
Saturn in Sachiva Nadiamsa (S. 4339 -
Saturn with Venus (8. 4319 : ठा)
Sun in ascendant (S. 4337 : BIID
Dasa effects - general (S. 2753 - 2760, 2766
Fourth/fifth dasa (S. 1710 - 1711 : BI
Gemini Navamsa (S. 1642 - 16434 : BI;
Jupiter’s transit (S. 1686 - 1687 : BI)
Jupiter in Pushkara Navamsa (S. 2737 : BI)
Ketu in Libra/Scorpio Navamsa (S. 1729 -
: BD
Ketu in Virgo (S. 1733 : BD
Mars in an angle or 6th (S. 1708 - 1709 : BI)
Mars in Aries, related to Saturn (S. 2734 -
Mars connected with Venus, Saturn etc. (S.
BI) ;
Mars and Saturn in Pisces (S. 1725 : BI)
Mars - Saturn - Moonin Libra (S. 2736 : BID
Mars in 9th from Navamsa ascendant (S.
Mercury exalted, with Jupiter (S. 2765 : BIT)
Moon in Aries (S. 1630 - 16314 : BI
Moon’s dasa (S. 1702 - 17034 : BD
Moon in an immovable sign and Navamsa

Chandra Kala Nadi 290
Moon in 8th from Navamsa ascendant (S.
Rahu dasa (S. 1716 - 1717 : BI)
Rahu in Virgo (S. 2763 : BID)
Saturn’s transit (S. 1683 - 1685 : BI)
Saturn in 2nd (ऽ. 2732 - 2732%b : BII)
Second dasa (S. 1640 : BI)
Sixth dasa (S. 1714 - 1715 : BI)
Sun in angle (S. 2761 - 2762 : BII)
Venus in Kantha Nadiamsa (S. 2741 -
Venus aspecting 11th (S. 1648 - 16524 : BI)
Capricorn ascendant - Visha Nadiamsa
Mars in Taurus Navamsa (S. 564 : BI)
Mercury in Capricorn (S. 563 : BI)
Moon in ascendant (S. 554 - 55914 : BI)
Saturn with Mars (S. 560 - 561 : BI)
Saturn in Sachira Nadiamsa (S. 562, 569 :
BI)
Common Sign
Mercury in Jharjhara Nadiamsa (S. 2109 -
Durbhaga Nadiamsa - birth in (S. 8-14 : B-I)
Gemini ascendant - Chiranjivini Nadiamsa (S.
Dasa effects (S. 1010 -1012 : BI)
Vishnu Yoga (S. 1015 - 1016 : BII)
Gemini ascendant - Dhanada Nadiamsa (S. 945
Jupiter in 7th (S. 953 - 957'4b : BIN
Kesari Yoga (S. 966 - 967%, 1007 : BID
Mars in Sth (S. 958 - 960a : BID)
Mercury in the Navamsa of a friend (S. 968
Mercury with Venus (S. 948 - 9484 : BID
Moon in angle (S. 949 - 9504 : BII)
Rahu in 4th (S. 1008 : BIT)
Saturn in Scorpio/Pisces (S. 958 - 960b :
BID)
Saturn’s transit (S. 1000 : BII)
Saturn in 7th (S. 953 - 95746 : BID)
Sun - Saturn - Mercury in 6th (S. 951 -9524
: BID
Venus in 4th (S. 953 - 957'4d : BID
Gemini ascendant - Dhruva Nadiamsa (S. 2466
Gemini ascendant - General
Benefic in Libra (S. 5655 - 5657b : BIH)
Dasa effects (S. 5652 - 5654'4, 5677४ : BIII)
Diseases (S. 5675146 : BIT)
Jupiter in ascendant, Moon in Vargottama
Jupiter-related aphorisms (S. 3201 -3205ae : BIII)
Jupiter’s dispositor (S. 5667400 : BIII)
Jupiter in Libra, Mercury-Venus in Aries in
relation to Saturn (S. 5678 - 5682 : ठा)
Jupiter in Libra, Venus with Saturn etc. (S.
Jupiter in Libra, Saturn in Aries (S. 5661 -
Jupiter’s strength (S. 5657d : BIT)
Jupiter’s transit (S. 5626i, 5627 - 5628148 :
Jupiter - Venus Yoga (S. 5683 : ठा)
Mars in an angle/trine from 6th (S. 5671 -
Mars in Leo (8. 5675489, 0 : BIID
Mars in Libra (S. 568 : BIT)
Mars - Venus Vargottama (S. 5639 - 5642a
: BID
Mars aspecting 3rd (S. 5629 - 5630a : ठा)
Mars in 3rd with odd/even Navamsa (S.
5638d : BIID)
Moon in 2nd (S. 1017 - 10224 : BIN
Moon in 12th, Venus in 11th (S. 5616 -
Moon in 12th, Venus in 11th, Rahu in 4th
Mercury in Cancer/Leo Navamsa (S. 455:
एठा)
Mercury’s periods (S. 618 - 621 : छा)
Mercury - Jupiter association (S. 456 : BII)
Mercury = Saturn - Jupiter (S. 5642d : ठा)
Mercury’s transit (S. 618 - 620: BIT) `
Mercury - Venus - Saturn Yoga (S. 5643 :
Mercury in 9th (8. 56261 : BIID
Mercury in 11th (ऽ. 5642b : रा)

Deva Keralam
Neecha Bhanga Raja Yoga (9. 57136 : ठा)
Rahu - Mercury in 4th as the Sun is with
Saturn in Aries (S. 5658 : BIII)
Saturn in Aries Navamsa (S. 5686409 and c
: BI)
Saturn in Aries with a benefic (S. 5713b:
Saturn in Aries, Mars in Leo (8. 5709 : BIE)
Saturn in Aries with Mercury (S. 5710 -
Saturn in Kamala Nadiamsa (8. 1129 -
Saturn - Mars aspecting Jupiter/Venus (S.
5638c : BIII)
Saturn - Mars aspecting 3rd (S. 5638b: खा)
Saturn in a movable sign (S. 5632 - 56382 :
षठा)
Saturn’s transit (S. 457 : छा; 5654'4b-c
Sun - Moon together (S. 5638f : ठा)
Sun ina trine/angle from 3rd (S. 5631 : ठा)
Venus angular to Jupiter (S. 5667'4c : ठा)
Venus in Gopuramsa (S. 5655 - 5657c :
Venus - Jupiter relation (S. 56268 : BIII)
Venus - Jupiter/Saturn relation (S. 5644
BI)
Venus with Mars (S. 1138 - 1140 : BID
Venus with Saturn (S. 56266, 5650 - 565 1a,
. Venus in 5th (S. 5655 - 5657 : BIE)
Venus in 11th (ऽ. 5626f, 56284 : BIII)
Venus in 1 Ith/6th (S. 5645 : BIII)
Venus in 11th, with Saturn’s aspect (S.
5626d : BIII)
2nd, 9th etc. in strength (S. 5626b.: ठा)
Gemini ascendant - Indra Nadiamsa (S. 2237 -
षठा)
Ashtaka Varga (3. 2303 - 2306 : छा)
Mars-related Yogas (S. 2295 - 2302: BIII)
Moon-related to Saturn (S. 2248 - 2250:
Rahu in Sth (8. 2292 - 2293 : BIE)
Gemini ascendant - Isana Nadiamsa (S. 1023
Mars in 10th (S. 1051 - 1053 : BID
Mercury in Aries (S. 1061 - 1064 : BIT)
Mercury in Mars’s Navamsa(S. 1032 - 1034
: BID
Mercury in Scorpio (S. 1027 - 1028, 1031 -
Moon in Leo or Sagittarius (S. 1072 - 1073
: BID
Moon in Libra (ऽ. 1068 - 1069 : BIT)
Rahu’s transit (S. 1074 : BID
Saturn’s transit (ऽ. 1117, 1120-1121: BID
Sun in Upachaya (S. 1065 - 1067 : BIT)
Venus in Saturn’s Navamsa (S. 1035 - 1037
: BID)
Gemini ascendant - Kamala Nadiamsa (S. 2623
Ashtaka Varga (S. 2637 : BI)
Jupiter inGemini Navamsa (S. 262 - 264414,
Jupiter’s transit (S. 2660 - 26604, 2671: BI)
Marsand Moon in Scorpio(S. 1162 -1169%a
: BID
Mercury aspected by Jupiter (S. 1148 : BIT)
Mercury’s Navamsa position (S. 1149: BID
Mercury in Sagittarius (S. 2635 : BE)
Mercury in Pisces (9. 2652 : BI)
Mercury in Sura Nadiamsa (S. 2638 : BI)
Moon in 8th (ऽ. 1155 : BIT)
Moon in 10th (S. 1156 : ठा)
Saturn’s transit (S. 1178 - 11794 : BID
Venus with Mars (S. 2645 - 26474 : BI)
Venus in Pisces (S. 2653 - 2655, 2657 -
Gemini ascendant - Kamini Nadiamsa (S. 5600

Chandra Kala Nadi 292
Dasa effects (S. 5703 - 5706 : BIII)
Jupiter’s dasa (S. 5659 - 5660 : BIH)
Jupiter in a movable sign (S. 5690c, 5691 -
Jupiter with Rahu (S. 5693 - 5702a : सा)
Rahu in 4th (S. 5649b, 5692b : सा)
Saturn with a benefic (S. 5702b : हा)
Gemini ascendant - Mangala Nadiamsa(S. 1142
Gemini ascendant -Mudgara Nadiamsa (S. 3102
Ashtaka Varga (S. 918 : BID
Bhava Lagna (S. 863 - 865 : BII)
Chitra Nakshatra (S. 872 - 879 : BII) ,
Jupiter in Cancer (S. 912 : BI)
Jupiter’s transit (S. 3168, 3200 - 3210 : BID
Malefics in 5th (S. 848 : BID
Mercury’s Ashtaka Varga (S. 3170-3170%
: BID
Moon in Libra (S. 845 : ठा)
Moon with Mars (S. 858, 895 - 905 : ठा)
Moon in Vargottama (S. 3109 -3110'4, 868,
Moon in 6th, 8th or 12th (S. 919 - 939 : BIT)
Sakata Yoga (S. 869 : BID
Saturn in Gemini Navamsa(S. 3171 -31724
BID
Saturn with Sun - Mars (S. 857 : BIT
Sun in 6th, 8th or 12th (S. 846 : BID
Venus in 7th (S. 870, 887 : BI)
Gemini ascendant - Naala Nadiamsa (S. 1075 -
Dasa effects (S. 1095 - 1101% : BID)
Gemini ascendant - Sivada Nadiamsa (S. 2619 -
Gemini ascendant - Sura Nadiamsa (S. 2085 -
Fourth dasa (S. 2104 : BI)
Jupiter in Sth (S. 2090 - 2091 : BI)
Mercury dasa (S 2105 : BI)
Moon in Libra (S. 2095 - 2096 : BI)
Second dasa (S. 2093 - 2094 : BI) ५
, General
Adhi Yoga (S. 33 - 39 : छा)
Akhanda Samrajya Yoga (S. 60 - 62 : शाः
Amala Yoga (S. 83 - 85 : BII)
Arudha Pada (S. 54 : BIT)
Arudha Pada & Hora lagna (S. 117 : BID
Ascendant lord in Capricorn Navamsa (S.
Ascendant lord exalted (S. 104 : BIT)
Ashtaka Varga (S. 1997 - 1998 : BI; ऽ. 415
Asvini and its trines (S. 3169 : BII)
Bhavas (S. 5754 : ठा)
Bhava analysis - some clues (S. 320 - 330,
Capricorn Navamsa (S. 3386 - 3387 : छा)
: BID
Chandra Kriya, Vela & Avastha (S. 2565 -
Chatra Yoga (ऽ. 89 - 91 : BID
Daridra Malika Yoga and exception (S. 505
Dasa effects (S. 1993 : BI; 3034 - 3037,
Debilitation Navamsa (S. 28 - 29 : BII)
Different Lagnas - Bhava, Hora etc. (S. 5755
Dispositors & Dasa effects (S. 488 - 493
Eighth lord from a Bhava (S. 3272 : BID
Eighth lord in sixth (S. 1996 : BI)
Exalted planet with a debilitated planet (S.
Exalted planets in evil houses (S. 30 : BII)
Exchange of lords of 9th and 11th (S. 230 -

Deva Keralam
General (Continued) General (Continued)
Evil lords (S. 3570 : छा)
Friendly & Inimical planets (S. 3189a : BIT)
General features (S. 129 - 130 : BID
Guru - Chandala Yoga (S. 3076b : ठा)
Jupiter in Aquarius (S. 498 - 503, 504 - 505
Jupiter in Bala Nadi (S. 3061 : BII)
Jupiter in Libra Navamsa (S. 438 : BID)
Jupiter & luminaries (S. 114 : BIT)
Jupiter - Mars yoga (S. 2479 - 2480 : BI)
Jupiter’s Navamsa (S. 72 - 78, 434 - 435 :
Jupiter in Pisces (9. 52, 432, : BII)
Jupiter with Venus (S. 105 : BID
Jupiter - 4th & 9th lord (S. 119 : BID
Jupiter & 9th lord (S. 113 : BID
Jupiter in 10th (S. 433, 436, 5454 : BID)
Kaala - Meaning of (S. 5774 : BID
Kahala Yoga (S. 116 : BIT)
Kali Yuga (2187 - 2188 : BIII)
Kalpa Druma Yoga (S. 3187 - 3188 : BIID)
Knower of Almighty (S. 106 : BID
Koorma Yoga (S.41, 46 : BD
Malefics in 3rd (S. 5630b : ठा)
Lakshmi Yoga (S. 55 - 59 : BIT)
Lord of ascendant (S. 3008, 3134a : BID
Lords of Ist, 8th and 10th (S. 54211 : ठा)
Lords of 3rd, 6th and 8th (S. 5419 : BIH)
Lord of 8th (S. 5422 : BID
Lord of 10th (S. 3009 : BII)
Mars in ascendant (S. 5432 : BIID
Mars aspecting Jupiter (S. 115 : BID)
Mars with malefics (S. 2948 : BID)
Mars, Saturn & 8th lord (ऽ. 5423 : BIID
Maha Pandita Yoga (S. 70 - 71 : BII)
Malaviya Yoga (8. 26 - 27 : BIT)
Maleficin ascendant, Moon related to Saturn
Malefics in debility (S. 42 : BID
Mandara Yoga (S. 3191 - 3192 : ठा)
Mani Pravala Yoga (S. 126 - 127 : ठा)
Malefic in Sth (S. 44 - 47 : BID
Mercury’s dispositor with Ketu (S. 412 : BI)
Mercury in exaltation with Somalata
Miscellaneous (S. 2 - 4 : ठा; S. 3233 -
Miscellaneous Yogas (S. 93, 131 - 133 : छा)
Monday birth (S. 3330 - 3331 : BID
Moon’s dasa (S.35, 40 : B-I)
Moon’s dispositor (S. 437 : BID
Moon in Jyeshta (S. 4828 - 4830 : ठा)
Moon in Kuntala Nadiamsa (S. 503 : BIT)
Moon in Srikara Nadiamsa (S. 8-14, B-I)
Moon sign of bride (8.218 : BI)
Moon in immovable sign (S. 118 : ख)
Moon’s importance (S. 3005 - 3006, 452 -
Moon’s tenth sign (S. 128 : BIT)
Moon in Virgo with Capricorn Navamsa (S.
Nadiamsa calculation & list (S. 5729 - 5730
: BID)
Nadiamsa - importance of (S. 5731, 5732 -
Navamsa dispositor (S. 3046 - 3050, : स)
Neecha Bhanga Raja Yoga (S. 1986 - 1992
Ninth lord in 4th, Venus and Saturn in 6th
Ninth & tenth lords in conjunction (S.255 -
Parijata Yoga (S. 3189 - 3190 : BIII)
Planets in ascendant (S. 270 - 271 : BID)
Planetary descriptions (S. 5740 - 5749 :
Planets in own signs et cetera (8.31 - 32, 43,
Planets in 3/6/10/11 (S. 31736 : BID
Planets in 4th (S. 3061 : BIT)
Progeny (S. 331 - 337 : BII; 5667'4f : BIII)
Prosperity (S. 1188 - 1189 : BID
Pushkaramsa (S. 79 : ठा)
Rahu in ascendant (S. 3076a : BIT)
Rahu in Aslesha Nakshatra (S. 2305 : BI)
Rahu’s transit (S. 3041 - 3044, 3094 : BID
Rahu in 4th (S. 3062 : ठा)
Rahu in 10th (S. 231 - 233 : BID
Rajapooja Yoga (royal honour) (8. 102 - 103
: BI)
Rasi divisions (S. 5730 - 5733 : BIH)
Rudrasana Yoga (S. 5424, 5425, 5579 -
Sakata Yoga (S. 1995 : BI
Saturn with a benefic (S. 41 : BII)
Saturn with Ketu in Navamsa (S. 3155 -

Chandra Kala Nadi
General (Continued)
: BID
Saturn’s strength (S. 3306 : छा)
Saturn - Sun conjunction (S. 627 - 6364
Saturn in Swati (8. 461 - 463 : BII)
Saturn - Venus yoga (S. 40 : BID
Saturn in Visakha (S. 464 : BID
Saturn in 7th (S. 357 : BI)
Saturn in 8th etc. (S. 626 : BIT)
Shashtiamsa detailed (S. 5765 - 5771 : हा}
Sun in exaltation (S. 2947 : BID
Sun’s Navamsa positions (8. 80 : BII)
Sun in 3rd in Halaahala Shashtiamsa (S.
Transits - counted from Moon (S. 3082 -
Transit of malefics (S. 540 : BID
Transits in Nakshatras (S. 3018 - 3028, 471
Transits of Saturn, Rahu & Jupiter (S. 404,
Transits - special rules (S. 2612 - 2651
BID
Venus - Moon related to Leo (S. 124 : BID
Venus’s Navamsa dispositor (S. 357 : BID
Venus in 2nd (ऽ. 125 : BIN)
Venus in 4th, lord of 9th exalted (S. 2946 :
BID
Venus in Sth (S. 92 : BID
Venus & 7th lord (S. 3223 - 3224 : BIEN
_ Venus in 7th (S. 99 : BIT)
Venus in 7th lord’s Navamsa (S. 101 : ठा)
Venus in 10th (ऽ. 100 : BID
Yoga for owning conveyances (S. 123 : BII)
Yogas bearing certain houses (S. 134 - 136,
Yogas bearing evil planets/houses (S. 94 -
Yogas concerning father (S. 81 - 82 : BID
Yoga for fortune (S. 120 - 121 : ठा)
Yoga for learning (S. 142 : BII)
Yogas bearing Moon (S. 63 - 68 : BID)
Yoga for royal authority (S. 122 : BID
Yogas by Sun - Moon - Rahu (8. 2481 -2483
BI)
General (Continued)
Yogas for 2 or 3 wives (S. 137 - 138, 141:
BID .
Week days - results of (S. 3029 - 3033 : BHD)
Immovable ascendant - Achala Nadiamsa (S.
BID)
Jupiter in 5th (S. 1526 - 152948 : BID
Moon in Nirmala Nadiamsa (S. 1542 - 1544
: BID)
Saturn’s transit ($. 1547 - 1548 : BID
Immovable ascendant - Ambuja Nadiamsa (S.
Immovable ascendant - Cancer Navamsa (5.
Immovable ascendant - Chitrini Nadiamsa (S.
Immovable ascendant - Durbhaga Nadiamsa (S.
Immovable ascendant (specially Aquarius) -
Durdhara Nadiamsa (S. 438 - 44414,
Ascendant lord aspected by Jupiter (S. 468
Ascendant lord in Mohana Nadiamsa (S
4196 - 4198a and c: BIII)
Dasa effects - miscellaneous (S. 503 - 504:
BI)
Eleventh lord (S. 478 - 479 : BI
Jupiter in Durdhara Nadiamsa (S. 451 -
Jupiter in Pisces (S. 452 - 4534, 462 - 463%
Jupiter in 10th (S. 42026 : ठा)
Jupiter’s transit in Sagittarius (S. 523, 524
: BD
Ketu dasa (S. 498 - BI)
Malika Yoga (S. 4198b; 4261 - 4264 : BIID
Malefic in 12th (S. 501 : BI)
Mars in an angle (S. 450 : BI; 4202b: BIII)
Mercury with Sun (S. 488 - 491 : BI)
Moon in Sudha Nadiamsa (8. 454 : BI; 4205

Deva Keralam
: BIT)
Saturn in Virgo, Jupiter in Pisces (S. 448 -
Saturn’s transit (S. 470 - 472'A, 483 - 4844
Second dasa (S. 494 - 494% : BD
Third dasa (S. 480, 499 : BI)
Third lord’s Navamsa dispositor (S. 485 -
Venus in 11th & dasa effects S. 509 - 515%
: BD
Venus in 11th in Gada Nadiamsa (S. 518 -
Venus in 11th, Jupiter in 2nd/4th/10th (S.
Venus in 11th lord’s Navamsa (S. 492 - 493
BI)
Immovable ascendant - Gada Nadiamsa (S. 1928
Immovable ascendant - General
Childlessness (S. 1765 : BI)
Children - Navamsa (S. 1781 : BD
Dead children (S. 17654 - 1766% : BI)
Ears - matters relating to (S. 1740 - 1746,
Jupiter in Aquarius (S. 3077 - 3081, 5225 -
Jupiter in a trine (S. 3056 - 3057 : BII)
Jupiter in Pisces (S. 546 - 553 : BID
Jupiter in 4th (S. 509 : ठा)
Karma Samrajya Yoga (S. 1263 - 1266,
Moon - Mercury (8. 3388 - 3395a-b : रा)
Moon in Pisces (8. 338 - 339% : BID
Moon in Uttara Ist quarter (S. 3055 : BIT)
Moon in Vargottama (S. 556 - 557 : BID)
Moon in 2nd (S. 2347 : BID
Moon in 8th (S. 1243 : BI)
Mars in ascendant, Jupiter in Sth (S. 56 : BI)
Navamsa ascendant, Virgo/Leo (S. 2826 -
Rahu in ascendant (S. 524 - 524% : BI)
Rahu in 9th (S. 1373b, 1380 : BID
Raja Yoga (S. 1956 - 1957 : BD
Saturn’s transit w.r.t. 11th lord (S. 3542 -
Saturn in 7th (8. 521 - 523% : BIN
Saturn in 11th (S. 2930 - 29304 : BID
Sun in Nisakara Nadiamsa (S. 3543b : BID)
5th Lord & 8th lord (S. 3544 : BIN
Immovable ascendant- Guha (Dhruva) Nadiamsa
Immovable ascendant - Harina Nadiamsa (S.
Immovable ascendant - Kalusha Nadiamsa (S.
Jupiter in an angle (S. 2830 - 2831 : BIT)
Jupiter in Sundari Nadiamsa (S. 2855 : BIT)
Jupiter in 11th (S. 2873 - 2874 : BID
Ketu with 7th lord (S. 2877 : BID
Retrograde 8th lord (S. 2832 -283314, 2835,
Immovable ascendant (specially Aquarius) -
Fourth dasa (S. 2187 : BI)
Fifth dasa (S. 2193, 2198 : BD
Fifth lord with Sun (S. 2195 - 21964 : BD
Jupiter’s dasa (S. 2194 : BI)
Jupiter in Mrityubhaga or in Capricorn
Navamsa (S. 2197 : BD
Jupiter related to Mars (S. 2169 -217014 :
BI)
“Mercury’s sub period (S. 2201 : BI)
Saturn’s transit (S. 2172 - 21734, 2184 -
Second dasa (S. 2174 - 21754 : BI)
Second lord’s dasa (S. 2200 : BI)
Seventh lord in 6th (S. 2182 : BD
Sixth dasa (S. 2199 : BI)
Immovable ascendant - Kuntala Nadiamsa (S.
Moon in Aquartus (8. 3058 : BID)
Immovable Ascendant - Kutila Nadiamsa (S.
Immovable ascendant - Mohana Nadiamsa (S.

Chandra Kala Nadi
Jupiter - Sun in 5th (S. 1370 : BID
Ketu - Sun in Aries (S. 1364 - 13698 : BID
: BIN
Sun with ascendant lord (S. 1379 : BID
Sun in 5th (S. 1364 - 1369b : BIN
Immovable ascendant - Mudgara Nadiamsa (S.
Jupiter - Saturn conjunction (S. 656 : BID
Jupiter’s transit (S. 651 - 652, 657 - 659 :
BID
Saturn’s transit (S. 653 - 655 : BID
Immovable ascendant - Mudrika Nadiamsa (S.
Dasa effects (S. 1341, 1354 - 1355 : BID
Jupiter - Ketu conjunction (S. 1350 - 1352:
BID
Rahu in 9th (S. 1342 - 1343 : BID
Venus in trine from 10th (S. 1323 - 1324:
BI}
Immovable ascendant - Nirmala Nadiamsa (S.
Immovable ascendant - Nisakara Nadiamsa (3492
Dasa effects (S. 3534 - 3541 : ठा)
Jupiter - Ketu (S. 3545 - 3548 : छा)
Immovable ascendant - Sama Nadiamsa (S. 3383 `
Immovable ascendant - Seethala Nadiamsa (S.
Saturn in Seethala Nadiamsa (S. 2540 -
Immovable ascendant - Sivada Nadiamsa (S
: BID
Immovable ascendant - Sudha Nadiamsa (S.
Isvara Nadiamsa -
Other names (S. 3232 : BIID
Jaimini school
Jupiter:
- in Scorpio, with Pisces Navamsa (S. 97 - 98
: BD
- in Scorpio, with Virgo Navamsa (S. 101 -
- in Viswambhara Nadiamsa (S. 99, 100 :
BI)
Kala chakra dasa (S. 528 - 52814,
Kalakoota Nadiamsa (S.19 : B-I)
Leo ascendant - Bahudhanya Nadiamsa (S. 1893
Mars in 4th (ऽ. 1948 - 1950%b : BID)
Mars in combustion (S. 1968 : BID
Mercury in 8th (S. 1956 - 1957% : BIT)
Saturn’s transit (S. 1947, 1964 - 1967 : BID
Leo ascendant - Champaka Nadiamsa (S. 2022 -
Mars in an immovable sign (S. 2015 : BI)
Mars with Jupiter (S. 2040 - 20424 : BD
Mars with Saturn (S. 2021 - 20214 : BI)
Saturn in Leo (S. 2017 - 2018 : BI)
Saturn’s transit (S. 2025, 2043 - 2048 : BI)
Saturn in a trine to 11th (S. 2016 : BD
Venus joining Jupiter (S. 2013 - 2014 : BI
Leo ascendant - General
Jupiter with a malefic, Saturn in 3rd (ऽ. 709
Mercury in Leo (S. 705 - 7064 : BID)
Mercury in Capricorn, Mars in Scorpio (S.
Moon in Leo, Mars in 4th (S. 711 -7]6%
Bil)
Taurus Navamsa rising (S. 3215 : BID
Parijatha Yoga (S. 314 - 315 : BID
Saturn - Ketu in Navamsa (S. 710 : BH)

297 Deva Keralam
Leo ascendant - Jagathi Nadiamsa (S. 190 - 196
: BID
Leo ascendant - Kinnara Nadiamsa (S. 305 -313,
Leo ascendant - Kutila Nadiamsa(S. 1999-2029,
Jupiter related to Saturn (S. 2030 - 2030% :
Mars in own sign (S. 2031 - 20394 : BIII)
Saturn - Mars in Aries (2040 - 20431 : BIT)
Leo ascendant - Mohana Nadiamsa (S. 700 -
Leo ascendant - Mudgara Nadiamsa (S. 561 -
Jupiter’s transit (S. 616 : BIT)
Jupiter in 10th (S. 563 - 567 : BIT)
Saturn’s transit (S. 611 - 612 ; BID)
Leo ascendant - Sama Nadiamsa (S. 3348 - 3353,
BID
Dasa effects (S. 3373 : BI)
Jupiter’s transit (S. 3374 - 3375 : BID
Mercury in a trine (S. 3358 - 3359 : BID
Mercury in 10th (S. 3372 : BIT)
Saturn’s transit (S. 3378 - 3379 ; BID
Sun in Aquarius (S. 3380 - 33804 : BII)
Sun - Mercury conjunction (S. 3366 -3367'4,
Leo ascendant - Sivada Nadiamsa (S. 3211 -
BI)
Jupiter in debilitation/inimical divisions (S.
Jupiter in Leo Navamsa (S. 3219 - 3221:
BID
Jupiter and Moon (S. 3231 - 3234 : BIT)
Jupiter - Rahu conjunction (S. 3214 : BID)
Jupiter in Sivada Nadiamsa - Moon in
Mohana Nadiamsa (S. 728 - 731 : BII)
Jupiter in Vargottama (S. 3230 - 323014,
Jupiter in Virgo Navamsa (S. 3217 - 3218 :
BID
Jupiter in 3rd (S. 3213 : BID
Moon in Indra Nadiamsa (S. 745 - 74714
BID
Moon in Libra (S. 3225 - 3226 : BH)
Moon in Mohana Nadiamsa (S. 3227 -
Moon with 5 planets (S. 3257 : BID
Rahu aspected by Sun - Venus (S. 3222 -
Saturn - Moon (S. 737 - 740 : BIT)
Saturn’s transit (S. 3263 - 32644 : BII)
Saturn in 12th (S. 3260 32624 : BID)
Sun in Aquarius (S. 3256 : BID)
Sun’s dispositor (S. 3258 - 3259 : BID)
Leo ascendant - Sivakari Nadiamsa (S. 3241 -
Moon in Libra (S. 687 - 688 : BIT)
Moon in Mohana Nadiamsa (S. 689 -690%
Moon - Jupiter (S. 681 - 685b : BIT)
Jupiter in Leo (S. 691 - 695a : BID
Rahuw/Jupiter in ascendant (S. 675 - 683 :
BII)
Rahu aspected by Sun-Venus (S. 684 - 686
: BID)
Leo ascendant - Uraga Nadiamsa (S. 2306 - 2348
: BI) (Should actually belong to Pisces.)
Libra ascendant - Agada Nadiamsa (S. 1561 -
Jupiter in Agada Nadiamsa(S. 1593 - 15994
BID
Jupiter/Saturn in 11th (S. 1576 - 15804,
Mars - Mercury conjunction (S. 1642 -
Moonin aspect to Mars(S. 1581 - 1587: BID)
Sakata Yoga (S. 1636 - 1641'4a : BIT)
BID
Saturn’s transit (S. 1626 - 1628'4b, 1644 -
Libra ascendant -Champaka Nadiamsa (3. 2957

Chandra Kala Nadi
Dasa effects (S. 2981 - 2985 : BIT)
Jupiter in Navamsa (S. 2986 - 2988 : BIT)
Jupiter in 10th (ऽ. 2989 : BID
Mercury in Pisces with the Sun (S. 2964 -
Saturn in Gemini Navamsa (5. 2973 - 2975
: BID
Saturn related to 4th lord (S. 2962 - 2963%
: BI)
Sun in Karala Shashtiamsa (S. 2978 : BID
Venus - Saturn - Mercury in 10th (S. 2970
Libra ascendant - General
Amsavatara Yoga (S. 5374 - 5376 : ठा)
Bhagya Yoga (S. 5485 - 5490 : BIID
Bheri Yoga (8. 5404 - 5405 : BIII)
Dasa periods’ effects (S. 1061 - 1068" : BI;
Hari Hara Brahma Yoga (S. 5377 - 5379 :
Jupiter’s dasa (ऽ. 3143 - 31484 : BD
Jupiter with Moon (8. 2990 : BI)
Jupiter in Navamsa diagram (S, 3100-3101
: BI)
Jupiter in Pisces with Libra Navamsa (S.
Jupiter in Sagittarius, Mars in 10th from
Jupiter’s transit (S. 214 - 21714,
Jupiter in Visvambhara Nadiamsa (8. 3871
Kahala Yoga (S. 5397 - 5399 : ठा)
Kubera Yoga (S. 5384 - 53864 : BIII)
Lakshmi Yoga (S. 5380 - 5383 : छा)
Mars - Jupiter (S. 5387 - 53918 : छा)
Mars - Jupiter - Venus (S. 5391b : BIII)
Mars in malefic Navamsa (S. 5392 : BIII)
Mars with Saturn's aspect (S. 5393 : BIII)
Matsya Yoga (S. 5415 - 5416 : BIID
Mars in 12th, with weakness (S. 2979 : BI)
Moon’s dasa (S. 3149 - 3152% : BI)
Moon in Jupiter’s Navamsa (S. 259 : BII)
Moon in Melapa Nadiamsa(S. 1622 - 1625'4a
: BID
Libra
Libra
Moon in Durbhaga Nadiamsa (S. 3865 -
3870 : BIID
Moon in Uttara Phalguni (S. 4789 : BIT)
Mercury’s dasa (S. 3156 - 31574 : BI)
Pisces Navamsa (S. 3007 : BID
Rahu dasa (ऽ. 1615 - 1618'4a : BII)
Rahu in ascendant (S. 3879e : BIID
BID
Sankha Yoga (. 5440 - 5403 : BIID
Saturn - Mars (S. 2994 : BI)
Saturn - Mars in 8th (S. 1057 : BI)
Saturn’s transit (S. 1090 - 10904 : BI;
Venus in Indra Nadiamsa (S. 4817'4b, 48188
: BID
Venus - Rahu conjunction (S. 53१1८ : ता)
ascendant - Indava Nadiamsa
Dasa effects (S. 3785 - 3864 : BID
ascendant - Indra Nadiamsa (S. 1042 -
Benefics & Malefics in ascendant (S. 4791
Jupiter’s sub period (S. 4825c : BIII)
Mars in 9th (S. 4800d : BIII)
Moon in Scorpio (S. 4785 - 4788 : ठा)
Saturn’s transit (S. 4863148 : BIII)
` Venus in Arudha of 9th (S. 4816 - 48174:
Venus in Leo (S. 4839 - 4841 : BIII)
Venus - Mercury Yoga (S. 4795 - 4800a and
b: BIT)
Venus - Saturn in Leo (S. 4813 -4815a :
BIII)
Venus - Saturn - Mercury in 9th (S. 4825b
: BID
Venus - Saturn Yoga (S. 48006, 4811 : छा)
Libra ascendant - Indra Yoga (S. 1013 - 1029,
Libra ascendant - Jagathi Nadiamsa (S. 1550 -

299 Deva Keralam
Libra ascendant - Nirmala Nadiamsa (S. 847 -
Jupiter with Saturn (S. 1565 - 15668 : BII)
Jupiter in Vargottama Navamsa (S. 1554 :
BID
Sun in Jarjhara Nadiamsa (S. 1565 - 1566b
: BID
Libra ascendant - Kinnara Nadiamsa (S. 261 -
Libra ascendant - Kutila Nadiamsa (S. 978 - 983,
Naraka Yoga (S. 1010 : BI)
BI)
Libra ascendant - Manohara Nadiamsa (S. 5332
Mars in Indra Nadiamsa (S. 5433 : ठा)
Mars in Libra, Saturn in Taurus (S. 5361 :
BID
Mars - Saturn - Ketu (S. 5358 : ठा)
Mercury - Sun (S. 5365 - 53674 : BII)
Mercury - Saturn (S. 5368 - 5369 : BIII)
Moon in Capricorn (S. 5370 - 5373 : BIII)
Moon - Saturn (S. 5362 - 5364 : BIII)
Libra ascendant - Mohana Nadiamsa (S. 1778 -
Libra ascendant - Mudgara Nadiamsa (S. 1681
Dasa effects (S. 1715 - 1717 : BIT)
Jupiter dasa - Rahu bhukti (S. 1729 - 17354
: BID
Saturn in Kulaghna Shashtiamsa (S. 1740 -
Saturn in Yama Shashtiamsa (S. 1703 -
Transit effects (S. 1718 - 17284 : BII)
Venus in Aslesha (S. 1686 - 1688a : BII)
Venus with Ketu (S. 1686 - 1688b : BIT)
Venus in Martian Navamsa (S. 1680 : BII)
Venus in Mohana Nadiamsa (S. 1673 -
Venus in Scorpio Navamsa (S. 1676 : BIT)
Balarishta (S. 46264 : ठा)
Jupiter in Aries (S. 4627 - 46368 : BIII)
Jupiter aspecting Libra (S. 896 - 897 : BI)
Jupiter aspecting Saturn (S. 4665b : सा)
Jupiter in Vargottama (S. 911 - 914 : BI)
Jupiter in 7th (S. 927 - 931% : BI; 4698%e
: BID
Mar in Aries Navamsa (S. 4718'4b : ता)
Mercury, Sun & Venus in 11th (S. 898 - 902
: BD
Moon & delivery (S. 855 - 8584 : BI)
Moon, Rahu and Sun (S. 938 - 944 : BD
Moon in Scorpio (S. 860 : BI; 4626140, 4707
: BIT)"
Rahu in 2nd, Sun in 10th (S. 889 - 891 : BI;
Rahu - Moon Yoga (S. 4708 : हा)
Rahu - Moon in 2nd (S. 4626%e : BIII)
Sakata Yoga (S. 925 : BI)
Saturn’s aspect (S. 4618 - 4626'4b : BIII)
Saturn joining benefics (S. 892 - 893 : BI;
Saturn in Libra (S. 882 - 883 : BI; 4690b :
Saturn with Mercury (9. 888 - 88814 : BI;
Saturn with Venus (S. 926 : BI; 4698146 :
Saturn’s transit (8. 920 : BI; 4725 - 4727:
Saturn in Sth or Sagittarius/its trines (S. 874
Sun in Cancer (S. 4709 - 4711 : छा)

Chandra Kala Nadi
Sun in Pisces (S. 4712 : ठा)
Venus & Aroodha (S. 969 - 9704 : BI)
Venus with Mercury (S. 966 - 967 : BI)
Venus in Taurus (S. 968 : BI)
Libra ascendant - Nivruthi Nadiamsa ( S. 3390 -
Jupiter in an angle or in a trine (S. 3395 -
Mercury related to Jupiter (S. 3400 : BIT)
Moon in Virgo (S. 3398 - 33994 : BID
Rahu - Sun - Saturn (S. 3396 - 33974 : ठा)
Saturn’s transit (S. 3401 - 3402 : BII)
Venus in 9th (S. 3394 - 33944 : BID)
Libra ascendant - Sumathi Nadiamsa (S. 233 -
Libra ascendant - Vikrutha Nadiamsa (S. 143 -
Dasa effects - General (S. 242 - 245, 246,
Kalachakra dasa (S.237 - 2414, 246, 247 -
Sun - Mars (ऽ. 186 : BII)
Sun - Mercury (S. 187 - 188 : BID
Venus in Leo or Gemini (S. 189 : BID
Malini Nadiamsa (S.24, 27, 28, 45, B-I)
Jupiter in Kalakoota Nadiamsa with
Matanga Yoga (S. 1, 2, 21, 22 : B-I)
Malefics in a trine of Moon, as Saturn joins
Rahu (S.3 : B-I)
Saturn-Jupiter in Cancer Navamsa (S.20 :
Matanga Nadiamsa
Death (8.51, 52 : BI
Jupiter (S. 6-7 : B-I)
Malefic in 12th (8.53 : BD
11th lord & Rahu (S.25-26 : B-I)
Saturn’s transit (S.30 : B-I)
Movable ascendant - Champaka Nadiamsa (S.
Movable ascendant - Dhananjaya Nadiamsa (S.
Movable ascendant - General
Kala Nidhi Yoga (S. 5417 - 5418 : ठा)
Karma Samrajya Yoga (S.5449-5451 : रा)
Koorma Yoga (S. 5518 - 5522 : BIID
Loré of 6th (S. 5420 : ठा)
Miscellaneous (S. 3219 - 3222 : BHI)
Moon - Saturn (S. 1333 - 1335 : BI)
Saturn in Aries (S. 1574 - 1576 : BI)
Scorpio Navamsa (S. 971 - 972 :BI)
Sun in Taurus Navamsa (S. 2183 : BI)
Venus in Taurus (S. 4738 : ठा)
Movable ascendant - Kshama Nadiamsa (S. 3019
Mars with 11th lord (S. 3079 - 3080, 3100
Moon in Aries/Leo (S. 3026 : शा)
Moon in immovable sign (S. 3033 - 3034 :
Moon & Sun (8. 3032 : BID
Venus aspected by Saturn (S. 3096 - 309714
: BID
Movable ascendant - Kunda Nadiamsa (S. 2178
Movable ascendant - Nirmala Nadiamsa (S. 4681
Movable ascendant - Paramesvari Nadiamsa (S.
Movable ascendant - Trailokya Nadiamsa (S.
BID
Mercury in Aries (S. 1623 - 1626 : BI)
Rahu with 11th lord (S. 1627 : BI)
Saturn in 3rd (1603 - 16034 : BI)
Sun’s Ashtaka Varga (S. 1628 : BI)
Pisces ascendant - General
Jupiter-related aphorisms (S. 3201 - 3205aJupiter in 10th (S. 622 - 623 : BID
Saturn in Scorpio, with Libra Navamsa (S.
Moon in Capricorn Navamsa (9. 1173 : BI)
Virgo Navamsa rising (S. 2780 : BII)
Pisces ascendant - Kamala Nadiamsa
Second Rasi dasa (S. 4575h : BIID
Eighth Rasi (Libra) dasa (S. 838 - 83814, 844
Fifth Rasi (Cancer) dasa, Sth lord in Sth (S.

Deva Keralam
Fifth lord aspected by Jupiter (S. 823 : BI)
Fourth Rasi dasa (S. 818 : BD
Jupiter in 7th Arudha (S. 4600 : BIIT)
Kala Chakra Dasa - further clues (S. 4576 -
Lagna Rasi dasa (S. 808 - 809" : BI; 45756,
f: BID
Leo Rasi dasa (S. 834 : BD
Mars - Ketu conjunction (S. 4576 - 4592 :
Mars in visible half (5. 824 : BI)
Mars in 4th with an exalted planet (S. 795 -
: BHD ,
Saturn in Aries, as 2 planets are exalted (S.
Saturn in Aries/Pisces (S. 807 - 8074 : BI)
Saturn in Aries, with Leo Navamsa (S. 778
Saturn in Kamala Nadiamsa (S. 779 : BI;
Saturn in Malefic shashtiamsa (4545f: ठा)
Saturn in Martian Navamsa (S. 788 - 7844
Saturn - Mercury in Aries (S. 804 - 805%:
Saturn’s Navamsa (S. 4563b : BIID
Saturn - Sun in Aries (S. 780 - 7814 : BI;
Second Rasi dasa (S. 813 - 815 : BI)
Sixth Rasi dasa (S. 82414 - 833% : BI)
Third lord (S. 797 - 798% : BI
Two exalted planets (S. 801 - 803 : BI)
Virgo Rasi dasa (S. 835 - 837 : BI)
Pisces ascendant - Kantha Nadiamsa (S. 2888 -
Saturn in Davagni Shashtiamsa (S. 2893,
Pisces ascendant - Kunda Nadiamsa
Birth in different quarters (S. 4401 - 4404 :
Capricorn Navamsa (8. 651 - 65414 : BI)
Kesari Yoga (S. 655 - 655% : BI)
Jupiter in Pisces (S. 710 - 713 : BD
Mercury in Capricorn Navamsa (S. 4413 -
Mercury and Jupiter (S. 638 - 651, 701 - 707
Mercury in Kunda Nadiamsa (S. 708 : BI
Mercury with Saturn (S. 656 - 658 : BD
Saturn’s transit (659 - 662" : BI)
Tenth lord’s dasa (S. 709 : BD
Transits & Dasa effects (S. 4415 - 4475 :
Pisces ascendant - Mukunda Nadiamsa (3. 663 -
Benefic in 10th (S. 679 : BD
dasa of 8th lord from Moon (S. 682 - 683 :
BD
First dasa (S. 668 - 671 : BD
BI)
Mars ~ Venus in Scorpio (S. 696 : BI)
Mercury in Kunda Nadiamsa (S. 699 - 700
: BD
Mercury in Mukunda Nadiamsa (S. 697 :
BI)
Moon, Jupiter, Venus’ positions (S. 693 -
Moon’s dasa (S. 674 - 675 : BN
Moon inKunda Nadiamsa or Cancer (S. 677
Moon’s Navamsa (S. 673 : BD
Navamsas of lords of 2nd and 8th (S. 676 :
BI)
Rahu dasa (S. 689 - 6894 : BD
Second dasa (S. 672 : BD
Sun in Harina/Ambuja Nadiamsa (S. 685 -
Sun - Mercury conjunction (S. 665 - 66714,
Third dasa (S. 679 - 681 : BI)
Venus dasa (S. 692 : BI)
Pisces ascendant - Seethala Nadiamsa (S. 4888c,
BI)
Jupiter’s transit (8.1129 - 11304 : BD
Moon in Capricorn Navamsa (8.4943 : BIT)

Chandra Kala Nadi 302
Moon in Virgo (S. 1172 : BI; 4942 ` BIID
Raja yoga effects, death (S. 1182 - 1191: BI;
Saturn’s dispositor’s dasa (S. 4957 - 4958 :
Saturn - Jupiter ४०९३ (ऽ. 1098 - 10994 : BI;
Saturn / Jupiter / Venus concerning father
4878a and b : BIII)
Saturn - Mars (S. 1136 - 11404 : BD
Saturn in Seethala/Mahamari Nadiamsa (S.
Saturn in Sudha Nadiamsa (S. 4868 : ठा)
Saturn’s transit (S. 1143 - 11464, 1169 -
Pisces ascendant - Suprabha Nadiamsa (S. 2770,
Jupiter’s Trimsamsa (S. 2787 - 2788 : BIT)
Jupiter in 12th (S. 2775 : BIT
Moon in Capricorn, with Venus (8. 2791 -
Mercury with Ketu in 9th (S. 2783 : BID
Mercury with Rahu (S. 2773 - 2774 : BIT)
Rahu in 3rd (S. 2776 : BIT)
Seventh house, planets in (S. 2796 - 27974
: BIN
Venus in Capricorn (S. 2807a : ठा)
Venus with exalted planet (S. 2789 - 2790 :
BID ।
Venus in a trine to Capricorn (9. 2772 : BIT)
Venus with Mars (S. 2812 - 28144 : BH)
Venus in 4th from Navamsa ascendant (S.
Pisces ascendant - Uraga Nadiamsa (S. 2288 -
Pisces ascendant - Vasudha Nadiamsa (S. 2405 -
Adhi Yoga (S. 2426, 2428 : BI)
Chaamara Yoga (ऽ. 2427 : BI)
Jupiter related to Sun or Mars, or placed in
Jupiter’s transit (S. 2432 - 2433 : BI)
Jupiter’s Trimsamsa (S. 2413 - 24134 : BD
Jupiter in Virgo (S. 2459 : BI)
Jupiter in 2nd/7th (S. 2461 - 2465 : BI)
Kahala Yoga (S. 2429 - 2430 : BI)
Mars aspecting Jupiter (S. 2418 : BI)
Mars in a malefic Navamsa (S. 2424 : BI)
Mercury in Libra Navamsa (S. 2452 - 2453
: BD
Moon in Indra Nadiamsa (S. 2411 - 2412:
BI)
Sun with Venus (S. 2450 - 2451 : BD
Venus in Cancer Navamsa (S. 2419 : BD
Rahu - General
= in ascendant, aspected by Sun (S. 104, 105
- in ascendant, Jupiter in Viswambhara
Nadiamsa (S. 106 - 107 : BI)
Sagittarius ascendant - Champaka Nadiamsa
Birth on Malefic days (S. 2671 - 2672 : BIII)
Dasa commencement (S. 2804 - 2805; 2808
Debilitated Sun (S. 2679 : छा)
Debilitated Venus (S. 2680 - 2683a : BIII)
Moon in Aries (S. 2803 : ठा)
Moon’s Dasa (S. 2797 - 28012 : BID)
BIII)
Jupiter’s Dasa (S. 2777 - 2782 : BIII)
Sun in fixed Navamsa (S.2680-2683b : BIID

303 Deva Keralam
Venus Dasa (S. 2810 - 28152 : BIED
Sagittarius ascendant - Dhaata Nadiamsa (3.
Sagittarius ascendant - General
Benefic in Aries (S. 2830a : BIII)
Jupiter in own sign (S. 2823 - 2824 : BIID
Kartari Yoga (S. 2825 : छा)
Lords of 9th & 10th (S. 2831 - 2832 : BIH)
Malefics in Pisces (S. 2830b : छा)
Mars - Jupiter (S. 2819 - 2820 : BIID
Moon in an angle (S. 2821 - 282 : छा)
Moon’s Dispositor (S. 2818 : BIID
Moon in Uraga Nadiamsa (S. 4132 - 4188 :
BID
Rahu in Aquarius with Jupiterian Navamsa
Saturn - Mars in 8th (S. 3084 : BI)
Sri Gauri Yoga (S. 2826 -2829a and c: BIH)
Venus in Aquarius (S. 2826 - 2829b : हा)
Virgo Navamsa (S. 320 : BI)
Sagittarius ascendant - Kalakoota Nadiamsa (S.
Sun with Rahu (S. 1500 : BD)
Sun in 7th Navamsa (S. 1497 - 1499 : BI)
Sagittarius ascendant - Kantha Nadiamsa (S.
Mercury in 3rd/6th/8th, Saturn related to
Sagittarius ascendant - Kokila Nadiamsa
Moon in Sagittarius related to Saturn/Rahu
Saturn’s transit (S. 1202 : BI
: BD
Sagittarius ascendant - Kumara Nadiamsa
Sun-Mercury in 10th (S.314 - 317 : BI
dasas of lords of 6th, 8th and 12th (S. 318 -
Saturn’s transit (S. 321 - 323% : BD
Sagittarius ascendant - Mudgara Nadiamsa (S.
Amala Yoga (S. 1406 : BI)
Ascendant lord’s dasa (S. 1395 : BI)
Fifth dasa (S. 1407 - 1407% : BI)
Ketu dasa (ऽ. 1382 - 1383 : BI
Mars in comfortable divisions (S. 1389 -
Mars dasa (S. 1394 : BD
Mercury dasa (S. 1408 - 1411 : BI)
Mercury with Sun (S. 1405 : BD)
Moon in Pisces (S. 1381 : BD
Sun in Aquarius (S. 1397 : BI)
Sun in malefic Navamsa (S. 1396 : BI)
Sagittarius ascendant - Pankaja Nadiamsa (S.
Jupiter, Mars & Saturn (S. 2565 - 2567 : BI)
Sagittarius ascendant - Prabha Nadiamsa (234 -
Dasa of Ketu-occupied Rasi (S. 339 -340:
BI)
Jupiter in ascendant (S. 240 - 241 : BD)
Jupiter in Kumara Nadiamsa (S. 247 - 248
: BD
Jupiterin Varuna Nadiamsa, Sun in Kumara
Nadiamsa (S. 244 - 24614: BI)
Sun in 7th (S. 341 - BI)
Saturn in 3rd (S. 242 : BD
Second dasa (S. 249 : BI)
Sun with malefics (8.243 : BI
Sagittarius asc. - Saturn in Davagni Shashtiamsa
Sagittarius ascendant - Saturn in Ghaata
Sagittarius ascendant - Saturn in Kokila
Nadiamsa
Moon - Rahu in ascendant (4976c : ठा)
Sagittarius ascendant - Sivada Nadiamsa (S.
Mercury dasa (S. 1508 - 1510 : BI)
Saturn’s transit (ऽ. 1507 : BI)
Sagittarius ascendant - Varuna (or Prabha)
Dasa of 9th lord’s dispositor (S. 342 - 343 :
BI)
Deha - Jeeva signs (S. 329 - 334% : BD

Chandra Kala Nadi 304
Eighth lord’s dasa (293 - 295, 303 - 304 : BI)
Fifth lord in Mangala Nadiamsa (S. 273 :
BI)
Fifth lord’s Navamsa (S.291 : BI)
Jupiter in ascendant, with Mars (S. 192-194
: BD
Jupiter in aspect to Mars (S. 214 - 215, 262
Jupiter in ascendant, with Moon (S. 188 -
Jupiter in ascendant, Venus in 4th with Ketu
Jupiter in ascendant, Venus in 4th, malefic
Jupiter in Brahma Shashtiamsa, Venus in
Aquarius Navamsa (S. 217 : BI)
Jupiter’s dasa (S. 257 - 258% : BI; 40304031: BIID
Jupiter in Gemini Navamsa (S. 190 - 191:
BI)
Jupiter/Mercury combust (S. 4098 - 4099 :
Jupiter’s transit (8. 4111 - 4113 : छा)
Jupiter in Varuna Nadiamsa (S. 196 - 199,
Jupiter in Varuna Nadiamsa, Sun in Kumara
Nadiamsa (S. 271 - 272 : BN)
Mars in Aries Navamsa (ऽ. 228, 230 - 233
: BY
Mars in Mangala Nadiamsa (S. 229, 335,
Mars in Vargottama (S. 4114; 4119 - 4120
BID
Mercury in Leo Navamsa (S. 3990 - 3991;
Miscellaneous (S. 252 - 254 : BI)
Moon in 3rd (S. 274 - 276 : BI)
Moon with Jupiter (S. 250 -251% : BI; 4022
Ninth lord in Kumara Nadiamsa (S. 259 -
Ninth lord’s dasa (S. 288 - 290 : BI)
Ninth lord’s Navamsa (S. 291, 292 : BI)
Rahu-Sun in Aquarius (S. 357 - 359 : BI)
Raja Yoga (S. 4039b : छा)
Saturn aspecting Aquarius (S. 328 - BI)
Saturn in 3rd (S. 220-- 223 : BI)
Saturn in Varuna Nadiamsa ( S. 200 : BI)
Saturn in Aquarius with Capricorn Navamsa
Saturn in Capricorn Navamsa (S. 268 - 270
: BD
Sun in Venus’ Navamsa (S. 357 - 359 : BI)
Sun in Kumara Nadiamsa, Rahu in Scorpio
Ninth Arudha Pada (S. 4040 - 4043 : BIII)
Tenth lord’s dasa (S. 296 : BI)
Tenth lord in Mangala Nadiamsa (S. 292 :
BI)
Twelfth lord in Deva Shashtiamsa (S. 364 -
Venus in Saturn’s Navamsa (S. 3984 - 3986
: BID
Saturn in the degree of “Sun + 4th lord”
Saturn related to 8th (8. 1058 : BI)
Scorpio ascendant - Durbhaga Nadiamsa (S. 350
Jupiter in 10th (S. 3328 - 3329 : छा)
Transits (S. 3412 - 34194 : BIID
Scorpio ascendant - Gada Nadiamsa (S. 1918 -
Moon’s strength (S. 1970 - 1971 : BI)
Saturn - Mars in 9th (S. 1978 - 1983 : BI)
Sun in 9th (S. 1976 : BI)
Scorpio ascendant - General’
Capricorn Navamsa(S. 3332, 3379 - 3381 ‘4a,
Jupiter in Kutila Nadiamsa (S. 375 : BIT)
Marriage (S. 360 - 3624 : BID)
Mars - Saturn association (S. 34116, 3456 -
3461 : BIID
Mars in 3rd (ऽ. 393 - 394 : BID)
Mercury with the Sun (S. 395 : BII)

305 Deva Keralam
Miscellaneous rules (S. 5271 - 5294 : BIT
Moon in debility, Mars in Leo Navamsa (S.
Navamsas of 4th and 9th lord (S. 398 - 401
: BID).
Progeny (S. 363 - 3644 : BIN)
Saturn dasa - Venus bhukti (S. 380 - 381 :
Saturn with Jupiter (8. 2145 - 21.8 : ठा)
Sun in Libra Navamsa (5. 2170-2: 71: सा)
Venus - Jupiter - Saturn (S. 2221 - 2222 :
Venus in trine (6. 2210 - 2214 : ठा)
Venus - Mars (S. 2150 : छा)
Virgo Navamsa (8. 2113 - 2117146 : BHD
णि) Scorpio ascendant - Sudha Nadiamsa (5. 2349 -
Saturn - Mars conjunction (S. 3736 : BIII)
Saturn - Mercury transit (8. 3734 - 3735: Scorpio ascendant - Sumathi Nadiamsa (3. 2353
BHD
Sun in fixed sign (S. 3404 - 34044 : ठा)
Yogas of Moon & Venus (3395c, 3396 -
Scorpio ascendant - Kutila Nadiamsa (S. 342Dasa effects (S. 405 : BIT)
Jupiter in Aquarius (S. 382 : BIT)
Jupiter’s transit (S. 406 : BIT)
Venus in Scorpio (S. 414 : BID
Scorpio ascendant - Mangala Nadiamsa(S. 2262
Scorpio ascendant - Nisakara Nadiamsa (S. 3516
Scorpio ascendant - Sama Nadiamsa (S. 2104 -
Exalted Moon (S. 2168 : ठा)
Exalted Sun (S. 2161 : BID
Kemadruma Yoga (S. 2166 - 2167, 2169 :
Jupiter in Leo (S. 2403 - 2404 : BD
‘Jupiter in Leo in Aries Navamsa (S.2397 -
Jupiter in Leo in a movable Navamsa (S
Jupiter’s transit (S. 2367 : BD
Mars ina Navamsa of Mercury (S. 2357: BD
Mercury with Mars (S. 2356 : BD)
Moon in Kutila Nadiamsa (S. 2393 - 2395 :
BI)
Moon in 7th house (S. 2372 - 2374 : BD
Sakata Yoga (S. 2358 : BI
Saturn in Gada Nadiamsa (S. 23811 - 2383
BI)
Saturn’s transit (S. 2385 : BD
Saturn related to Venus (S. 2396, 2399 -
Second dasa (9. 2364 - 2365 : BI
Venus in Sagittarius Navamsa (S. 2369 : BI
BIID Scorpio ascendant - Suprabha Nadiamsa (S.
Ketu in 3rd (S. 2113 - 2117%a : BIID
Mars aspected by Jupiter (S. 2195 - 2197:
Moon - Saturn in an angle (S. 2007 - 2012
BI)
Mars in 7/10th (S. 2151 : छा) Scorpio Ascendant - Uraga Nadiamsa (S. 370 -
Mars related to ascendant (S. 2164 - 2165:
Rahu in 9th (S. 2139 - 21424 : BHD
Rahu - Moon - Venus (S. 2202 - 22044
Jupiter related to 2nd (ऽ. 2159 : छा) .
Saturn in 2nd (S. 2143 - 21444 : BIID
Saturn - Jupiter - Ketu (S. 2149 - BID
Saturn’s transit (S.2208-2209'4, 2216 : BIT)
Jupiter as Moon’s Navamsa dispositor (S.
Jupiter in 6th (S. 417 : BD
Leo Navamsa (S. 398 - 399 : BI)
Moon related to Jupiter (S. 387 - 3874 : BI)
Rahu in Arudra’s 4th quarter (S. 391 : BD
Rahu with 10th lord (S. 384 - 384% : BD
Saturn’s transit (S. 420, 422, 423 : BD

Chandra Kala Nadi 306
Second lord’s dasa (ऽ. 426 : BD
Sun in debility (433 - 437% : BN
Third dasa (S. 424 : BI)
Umbilical cord (S. 373 - 374 : BI
Scorpio ascendant - Visva Nadiamsa (S. 3556 -
Specific Horoscope (S. 201 - 203 : BI; 3973 -3975
Taurus ascendant - Gada Nadiamsa (5. 2061 -
Fourth dasa (S. 2074 - 2076 : BI)
Jupiter’s Ashtaka Varga (8. 2077 : BI)
Jupiter with Rahu (S. 2070 - 2071 : BI
Saturn exalted (S. 2081 : BI)
Sun in 10th (S. 2067 : BI)
Venus in 12th (S. 2066 : BI)
Taurus ascendant - General (S. 3125 - 3129 :
Birth in Sun’s Hora, Mars with Sun (8. 125
Capricorn Navamsa (S. 2316 : शा)
Mars in 5th, 9th lord with a malefic (8. 125
Mercury in Saturn’s Navamsa (S. 2345 :
Saturn related aphorisms (8. 3193 - 3200 :
BHI)
Yama Shashtiamsa (S. 3139 - 31404; 3152
Taurus ascendant - Abala Nadiamsa (S.54, 55 -
Eighth Lord’s dasa (S. 181.- 183 : BI)
First dasa (1711 - 173 4 : BI)
Fourth dasa (S. 185 - 186 : BD
Ninth Rasi dasa (KCD) (S. 184 : BD
Jupiter in Viswambhara Nadiamsa (S. 111 |
Mars in Sth, dispositor in 8th (S. 178 - 180%
: BD
Moon in Kutila Nadiamsa (S. 163 - 1674
BN)
Rahu in ascendant, Jupiter in 10th (S. 112 -
Saturn’s transit (S. 168 - 170 : BI
Sun in Manjuswana and Jupiter in
Viswambhara Nadiamsas (3. 123 - 124,
Third dasa (S.174 : BI)
Taurus ascendant - Kamala Nadiamsa (S. 2545
Jupiter in Sachira Nadiamsa (5. 2550-2551
: BD
Mars with Venus (S. 2555 : BI
Mercury with Sun (S. 2553 - 2554 : BD
Rahu in Sth (S. 2557 : BI)
Taurus ascendant - Mangala Nadiamsa (3. 224
Mars in Mangala Nadiamsa, Sun in Aries
Navamsa (S. 226: BI)
Taurus ascendant - Seethala Nadiamsa (3. 1823,
Jupiter in Taurus, Sun in Pisces Navamsa
Jupiter’s transit (S. 1846 - 1847 : BI)
Luminaries (S. 1871 - 1872 : BI)
Mercury with Venus (S. 1855 - 1858)
Moon in Nitmala Nadiamsa (S. 1852 -
Saturn with Mars (S. 1837, 1839, 1848 : BI)
Saturn’s transit (S. 1842 - 18424 : BI)
Saturn in Virgo (S. 2536 - 2538 : BI)
Sun in Libra (S. 2539 : BD
Sun with Mercury (S. 1850 : BI)
Sun in Pisces Navamsa (S. 1845, 1859 -
Venus in Gemini (S. 1831 - 18324 : BI)
Venus with Mercury (S. 1836 - 18364 : BI)
Venus with Moon (8. 1833 - 18354 : BI)
Taurus ascendant - Sivada Nadiamsa (S. 2584 -
Dasa effects (S. 2612 - 2618 : BI)
Jupiter in debility (S. 2601 - 26024 : BI)
Jupiter in transit (S. 26100 - 2611 : BI)
Mars in ascendant (2605 - 2608 : BI)
Mars with Ketu (S. 2592 - 25934 : BI)
Taurus ascendant - Viswa Nadiamsa (S. 3108 -
Dasa effects (8. 3157 - 3174 : शा)
Jupiter in 8th (S. 3122 - 3124 : BIL)
Miscellaneous (S. 3141 - 31514 : शा)

Deva Keralam
Moon in Gemini (S. 3185 - 3186 : BIII)
Moon & Jupiter (S. 3113 : छा)
Moon in Poorvabhadra (S. 3179 - 3184a:
BIII
Saturn’s transit (S. 3138 : छा)
Uraga Nadiamsa - General (S. 368 - 3694 : BI)
Venaktesa, the author (S.1 : BII)
Virgo ascendant - Dhanada Nadiamsa (S. 714 -
BIN)
Jupiter’s transit (S. 728, 762 - 7624 : BI
Mercury in Sura Nadiamsa (5. 724 - 72414,
Mercury in 2nd house (S. 742, 745 : BI,
Saturn’s transit (S. 757 - 76114 : BI; 4522 -
4527a and b : BIII)
Saturn in 11th (ऽ. 4500'4c : BIII)
Sun in Virgo (S. 746 - 748 : BI)
Venus - Mercury’s Navamsa exchange (S.
Venus - Mercury Yoga (S. 4500'Ad : शा)
Venus - Moon conjunction (S. 719 - 719%
Venus in Virgo, Mercury in Cancer (S. 722
Venus in Virgo Navamsa (S. 4489146, d :
