READABLE DATASET
================================================================================
Original file: encyclopaedia_of_hinduism.json
Dataset number: 115 of 455
Format: valid JSON
Structure: Object / structured dataset
Original size: 568,470 bytes
Top-level fields: 11
Title: Encyclopaedia of Hinduism
Creator: —
Date: 1999
Description: —

CONTENT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
METADATA AND OTHER FIELDS
  • title: Encyclopaedia of Hinduism
  • creator: —
  • date: 1999
  • description: —
  • subject:
    1.
      copyrighted
    2.
      rama
    3.
      dance
    4.
      material
    5.
      gods
    6.
      yajurveda
    7.
      agni
    8.
      samhita
    9.
      ravana
    10.
      indra
    11.
      copyrighted material
    12.
      yajurveda samhita
    13.
      folk dances
    14.
      material yajurveda
    15.
      yuddha kanda
    16.
      material tribal
    17.
      great plains
    18.
      material yuddha
    19.
      folk dance
    20.
      lord krishna
  • identifier: bub_gb_1XiqW-8dhdEC
  • source_folder: bub_gb_1XiqW-8dhdEC
  • total_pages: 284
  • total_words: 95612
  • text_quality:
    • ocr_word_validity_score: 0.961
    • quality_tier: good
    • note: —

FULL TEXT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
This multivolume Encyclopaedia is a
pioneering attempt to bring together all
aspects of Hinduism and contains so many
multifarious things to afford us an insight
into the deepest depths of the soul of
Hinduism. This encyclopaedia is essentially
a compilation of the terms and concepts
covering various aspects of Hinduism. Many
words borrowed for more general usage
have been endowed with very special
meaning. This encyclopaedia has been
compiled, edited and arranged in
alphabetical order by a keen scholar of
Hinduism. In mis encyclopaedia, Hinduism
as a religion has been distinguished from
Hinduism as a social organisation. On the
one hand Hinduism regards god as a super
fluity while on the other hand it sponsors a
deeply emotional theism as the noblest form
of religion. In mis encyclopaedia, the entries
have been represented in a clear and
explanatory style to provide both straight
forward definitions and invaluable
background information. This encyclopaedia
includes material from various Indian and
foreign sources which has been compiled
and edited by the author to make the set
interesting.
This encyclopaedia is for the benefits
of students, teachers, and research scholars
as well as laymen who wish to know the key
aspects of Hinduism as a religion as well as
also a social organisation.
Rs. 3500 (Set of 5 Vols.)

Encyclopaedia of Hindu
This On®
49DC-YUK-T0FU
* Copyrighted material

Encyclopaedia
of
Hinduism
VoIume-5
Sunil Sehgal
Sarup & Sons
New Delhi

Published by:
Sarup & Sons
4740/23, Ansari Road,
Darya Ganj, New Del5 1 10002
Enryclopaedia of Hinduism (5 Vols.)
© Reserved
1st Edition 1999
Printed in India
Published by Prabhat Kumar Sharma for Sarup & Sons. Laser
Typesetting at Anna Computers, Delhi and Printed at Roshan Offset
Press, Delhi- 110053.
Copyrighted material

Preface
This multivolume Encyclopaedia is a pioneering attempt to bring
together all aspects of Hinduism and contains so many multi farious
things to afford us an insight into the deepest depths of the soul of
Hinduism. This encyclopaedia is essentially a compilation of the terms
and concepts covering various aspects of Hinduism. Many words
borrowed for more general usage have been endowed with very special
meaning. This encyclopaedia has been compiled, edited and arranged in
alphabetical order by a keen scholar of Hinduism. In this encyclopaedia,
Hinduism as a religion has been distinguished from Hinduism as a
social organisation. On the one hand Hinduism regards god as a
superfluity while on the other hand it sponsors a deeply emotional
theism as the noblest form of religion. In this encyclopaedia, the entries
have been represented in a clear and explanatory style to provide both
straight forward definitions and invaluable background information.
This encyclopaedia includes material from various Indian and foreign
sources which has been compiled and edited by the author to make the
set interesting.
This encyclopaedia is for the benefits of students, teachers, and
research scholars as well as laymen who wish to know the key aspects
of Hinduism as a religion as well as also a social organisation.
Copyrighted material

T
Taditakara {lightning)
Goddess of light. Buddhist. Colour: green. Attributes: lightning in
the form of a creeper. Also Vidyddhara.
Takkiraja
God. Buddhist. A dikpala or guardian of the south-eastern quarter.
Colour: blue. Attributes: blue staff, jewel, lotus staff, sword and
trident. Also Vajrajvalanalarka and Vajrayaksa.
Taksaka
Snake god. Hindu (Epic and Puranic). One of a group of seven
mahanagas. Attributes: rosary, swastika and water-jar.
Tantras, Chakras & Kundalini Power
The Tantras are a branch of Hinduism. Most. Tantra literature is
still kept a secret and the real meaning of much that is known is
still an enigma. Most Hindu, including great scholars, generally do
not discuss Tantra.
The Sanskrit word Tantra means "to expand". Unlike the rest of
Hinduism, a part of Tantra believes in the enjoyment of material
life. No one knows exactly when Tantrism started or the saints who
started it. Evidence shows thai Tantrism existed during the Vedic
age, Even Sankara mentions its existence in his book Saundarya
Lahari. There are about 108 books on Tantras. Tantrism and
Shakhism are almost one and the same. In Tantrism, the deity is
Siva-Shakti, a combination of Lord Shiva and his consort Parvati. It
is a system of practices used for spiritual upliftment. The best part
Copyrighted material

Tantras, Chakras & Kundalini Power
of Tantrism is its knowledge about the vast untapped energy in the
human body. This power is known as Kundalini power or Serpent
power. Tantrism also researched into alchemy (chemistry),
astrology, astronomy, palmistry, cosmology and even in atomic
theory. Manras are the gift of Tantras to Hinduism and the world.
Yantras, the geometrical figures and sketches associated with
Mantras, are also equally important gifts of Tantrism to humanity.
As per Tantras, the three important nerves Sushmna, Ida and '
Pingala start from Muladhara Chakra, the base of spinal column.
Sushumna is the most important of all nerves or Nadis and is
invisible and subtle. It runs through the central channel of the
spinal column and extends to the topmost point of the head. Ida and
Pingala run parallel to Sushumna on the left and right side of the
spinal column respectively. Ida and Pingala nerves or Nadis meet
Sushumna at Ajna Chakra, the point situated between the
eyebrows. They then separate again and flow through the left and
right nostrils respectively.
Along Sushumna, there are seven psychic centres starting with
Muladhara Chakra. They cannot be seen with naked eyes. They
are believed to look like lotus flowers with different colours and
each controls a sense organ's activity.
Muladishthana Chakra-base of spine — 4 petals — controls Smell
Svadishthana Chakra — base of genitals— petals -Taste
Manipura Chakra— oppoite to navel — 10 petals -Sight
Anahata Chakra— at the level of heart— 12 petals— Touch
Visuddha Chakra — at medulla oblongata — 16 petals-Hearing
Ajna Chakra— between eyebrows— 2 petals— controls Mind
Sahasrara — located above the topmost point of head has 1.000
petals — Yogi attains cosmic consciousness.
SON : What is Kundalini Power?
DADDY: According to Tantric literature, there is a very mysterious
and powerful force in the human body called Kundalini Power or
Copyrighted

Tantras. Chakras & Kundalini Power
Serpent Power. It is lying like a Serpent in a coiled or inactive form
at the base of the spine called Muladhara Chakra. (The three
important nerves of the human body, Sushumna, Ida and Pingala
also originate from the same point.) As per Tantras, since this
mighty force remains dormant throughout one's life-time, most
people are unaware of its existence. It is believed that as a person
evolves spiritually by meditation or Pranayama exercises, this
power slowly rises up through the Sushumna nerve. This rise of
Kundalini power is known as Awakening of Kundalini.
This power rises slowly and steadily and does not shoot up in a
straight line. When it passes through each psychic centre, the
person will have complete contol of one of the sense-organs. For
example, if it reaches Manipura Chakra opposite to the navel, the
person will have complete control of sight. No Samadhi
(Sam=wiih; Adhi=Lord- Union with God) is possible without the
awakening of this power. It is said, the Kundalini power passes
along the six chakras and eventually gets united with Sahasrara at
the crown of the head. When that happens the person attains
cosmic consciousness, the highest form of realization.
Unhappily Tantras also deal with black magic and sexo-yogic
exercises between male and female devotees. As per Tantrism such
an act will help both devotees to explore their senses rather than be
subdued by them and actually make use of their sexual energy for
spiritual uplifit. The woman devotee who takes part in these erotic
exercises is considered as Shakti (Mother Goddess). Apart from
what I have discussed above, in a particular kind of Tannic
practice, devotees follow the Five M's. They are Madya (wine) ,
Mamsa (meat), Matsya (fish), Mudra (Parched rice) and Maithuna
(sexual union). During the performance of certain Tantric rituals,
devotees even resort to the use of drugs and chemicals.
All these practices are against the basic fundamentals of Hinduism.
Now, you know exactly the reason why many Hindu scholars do
not want to discuss Tantras. At the same time, anyone will wonder
why a scripture which gave us the knowledge of Kundalini power

Tara
in the body, Mantras and Yantras resorts to wine and sex.
Tara {power of hunger)
1. Goddess, Hindu (Vedic, Epic and Puranic). May originally have had
astral connotations, since the word can be interpreted as 'star'. One
of a group of mahavidyas personifying the Sakti of Siva. She may
also be the consort of Candra (Soma). Aspects include Krodharatri.
Attributes: knife, skin, skull, snakes and sword. Three-eyed.
2. Goddess. Buddhist (Mahayana and Vajrayana). An epithet of the
mother of the Buddha, Maya. Also one of a series of female deities,
the dhyanibuddliasakti considered to be aspects of the Sakti of
Avalokitesvara or a Amogashiddhi. She may also be die Sakti of
Adibiddha and of the various dhyanibuddhas, in which case she is
characterized by their colours. These Taras thus become "White
Tara' and so on. See also Bhrkuti, Ekajata, Kurukulla, Sitatara and
Syamatara. In Tibetan Buddhism she is known as sGrol-ma.
Tathatavasita {control of the such-ness)
Minor goddess. Buddhist. One of a group of vasitas personifying
the disciplines of spiritual regeneration. Colour: white. Attribute:
white lotus,
Tejosnisa {sharp)
God. Buddhist. Apparently connected with the guardian deities or
dikpalas in the south-eastern quarter. Colour: whitish red.
Attribute: sun disc.
Thirukural-Holy Bible of Saivaites
It is indeed a great Hindu scripture but it is unknown to Hindus in
general since this scripture, unlike others, is written in Tamil
language. It is indeed a part of Dravidian civilization of South
India. Thirukural can be considered as the Holy Bible of Saivaites
(people who worship Lord Siva -the Lord of Annihilation) and it
was written by weaver named Thiruvalluvar during the first century
B.C. In Tamil language, Tiru means Holy and Kural means voice.
This scripture consists of short couplets. In fact the entire scripture
consists of 133 chapters and each chapter consists of 10 couplets.
Copyrig

Transcendental Meditation (TM)
So totally there are 1330 couplets in this sacred literature. Even
though Thirukural is considered to he the Holy Bible of Saivaites,
the scripture itself is universal in nature. It teaches a man the values
of life. In a way it is an enlarged version of Ten Cotmnandments.
Almost all who come across with this scripture will fall in love
with it, due to its simplicity and universality of expression of facts.
Followers of Jainism love to read this, because this scripture
exemplifies the ideals of Ahimsa or non-violence. The Christians
of South India like to read it, since many things written in this
scripture are similar to the Sermon on the Mount. The late Dr.
Albert Schweitzer called it: One of the grandest achievements of
the human mind. I hope you will definitely read this lovable
scripture.
T i ksnosn isa {hot and sharp)
God. Buddhist. Apparently connected with the guardian deities or
dikpalas in the north-western quarter. Colour: sky green (possibly
meaning overcast'). Attributes: book and sword.
Tirumal {the excellent black one)
Creator god. Early Dravidian (Tamil). Thought to reside in trees
and equating with Vishnu. In later Hinduism used as an epithet of
Vishnu.
Trailokyavijaya {lord of three worlds)
God. Buddhist (Mahayana). Seen standing on the Hindu deities
Mahesvara (Siva) and Gauri. Colour: blue. Attributes: arrow, bell,
bow, club, hook, noose, prayer wheel, staff and sword. Also an
alternative name for Acala.
Transcendental Meditation (TM)
r
TM was started by Maharshi Mahesh Yogi in 1956. It is essentially
the Mantra Yoga which Maharshi revived and introduced to die
world. TM promised a drugless, stressless state of mind with inner
peace and knowledge. Many of TM's meditation techniques are
guarded secrets. The procedure is very simple and straightforward.
First go and meet the Maharshi or one of his selected instructors.
The instructor (teacher) will ask you questions about your health,
Copyrighted material

Trayasirinsa
feelings, education, and marital status. After listening to your
answers, the teacher will advise you to chant a special Mantra. As
you may know, there are several Mantras, so you may he given a
particular Mantra that will help you the most. After receiving the
Mantra, you must mentally chant the Mantra for 20 minutes each
morning and evening. As a result, your stress problems will vanish
and you will be a better person according to the Maharshi. TM
definitely has a lot of positive aspects. TM also received a lot of
negative publicity.
Its 'secrecy', and special attraction to it for celebrities make it look
like a phony 'Celebrity Religion'. But as per the Maharshi, "TM is
not a religion, but a science." Whatever the critics may say, TM
has saved many lives from spiritual decline.
I do not think even advocates of TM make such a claim. Maharshi
Mahesh Yogi indeed revolutionised the whole concept of
meditation. He made it very simple and lovable by all. He indeed
took meditation out of all religious dogmas and presented it to the
world on a silver platter but at the same time nobody can say that
TM is the only right method of meditation. If that was the only
method. Lord Krishna would not have resorted to 18 chapters and
700 verses of advice to Arjuna (his disciple) explaining different
methods of meditation and pat lis of God-realization. TM will suit
some but for some it may not suit at all. For some, very rigid,
ritualistic and highly ascetic Hare Krishna methods may suit well.
For some Mr. J. Krishnamurti' s intellectual methods of seeking
truth may be the answer. Please also understand that some of the
claims of TM have been questioned by many including
Prabhaupada (of Hare Krishan movement), J. Krishnamurti, etc.
Mr. J. Krishnamurti has gone to the extent of saying that repetition
of "Om" or even "Coca Cola" will have the same effect on the
mind. Anyway my idea is not to belittle the great gift of Maharshi
to the world. I just want to tell you that there are so many ways of
right meditation.
Tray a s tr insa {the thirty-three)
Collective name for the group of deva gods. Hindu (Vedic). One of
the many lists of deities in Hinduism, this one is contained in the
Copyrighted material

Tribal and Folk Dances
Rg Veda and includes thirty- three names divided into three groups
of eleven in each of the three worlds. Subsequently, the devas were
separated into eight vasus, twelve adityas, eleven rudras and two
asvins. In later Hinduism the number thirty-three is increased
hyperbolically to 330 million and deva refers to gods excluding the
major triad of Brahma, Vishnu and Siva.
Tribal and Folk Dances
Folk-art has sprung out of the creative urge of the people, ethnic
groups, races and tribes that are uneducated and unlettered or little
educated and outside the pale of urban, cultured and civilized
living. They lack refinement and artificiality. Thus, folk dance is a
term which covers various dance-forms originated, developed and
maintained by the villagers, farmers, peasants, shepherds,
fishermen and tribals living in hamlets, countryside and farflung
areas. Their dances are neither codified, stylized, performed on the
stage in traditional sense, nor taught by a professional guru and
artist. It is out and out for the pleasure and enjoyment of the
performers and not for the entertainment of others. It is
characterized most by its spontaneity, collective impulse and
participation, simplicity, freshness and lack of restraint.
The difference between a dialect and a language suitably
examplifies the difference between a folk dance-form, and a rigid,
stylized and sophisticated classical dance. Folk means natural,
untutored, free, spontaneous, unconscious, uncouth, original and
not artificial. Here we find correspondingly far greater free play
and expression of feelings, emotions and sentiments than in the
classical forms. The folk people are born dancers: their gait,
movement and various activities specially those of women betray
their rhythmic tempo and sculpturesque and statuesque poses and
postures. Folk dance-forms are intimately connected with the
performer's life, daily activities, environs and physical
surroundings, nature and its various moods and seasons. That is
why diversity of climate, topography, etc. is so well reflected in
them. They are not something separate and aloof from their life and
living, but are like a beautiful design of various colours woven
inextricably into the fabric of their life.
Copyrighted material

Tribal and Folk Dances of Desert Region
Being instinctive, unconscious and an expression of primitive
genius, folk-dances arc ever fresh, fragrant and imbued with a
wonderful capacity to renew and to imbibe new influences and yet
to maintain tradition and continuity. Indian folkdances are part and
parcel of rich cultural heritage and immense artistic wealth of the
cuntry. A folk dance is always a community and collective affair, a
celebration shared by all, sometimes very simple, nothing beyond
rhythmic shuttling of the feet containing very thin element of
footwork and at times very complex, complicated, breath-taking
and dramatic Similarly in respect of costume, it may range from
near nudity to very colourful, rich, gay and spectacular
phenomenon, peculiar to the region and area.
Rooted in antiquity, the Indian folk-dances, in their incomparable
multiplicity, variety and diversity, pose a big problem as far as their
classification and categorisation is concerned. They are at once
thoroughly religious, social, ceremonial, seasonal, martial and
ritual, and always inspired by mythology, legends, scriptures, and
above all by the most primitive instinct to express pain and
pleasure through linear and sculpturesque stances and rhythmic
movements. They overlap and merge to some extent into one
another. Their staggering variety and richness inspire awe and
wonder. But it is not possible to cover all of these here, and so only
most representative ones are taken on regional basis for the sake of
convenience. They all are accompanied by songs and music and
drumming. The drumming can be said to be ubiquitus. The drum
has been given a great sanctity since remote antiquity.
Tribal And Folk Dances of Desert Region (Rajasthan and Gujarat)
The desert region comprising the whole of Rajasthan and Gujarat
can be divided into two parts for the sake of convenience. These
are the Great Desert and the Little Desert. The former extends from
the Luni River in Rajasthan upto the edge of the Rann of Kachchh
in Gujarat. The entire Rajasthan-Sindh frontier runs through it. The
Little Desert sprawls from the river Luni between Jaisalmer and
Jodhpur upto the northern wastes. This entire zone is totally sterile
comprising rocky, arid, sandy land cut up by ridges and other
wastes. South-east of the Aravali flow the Banas and the Chambal
Copyrigf

rivers making the land relatively fertile, green and hospitable.
Again the Rann of Kachchh can be divided into Great Rann and
Little Rann. The entire Rann is a vast stretch of salt-soaked
wasteland.
Rajasthan
Rajasthan, a rainbow within Indian Union, the legendary land of
Rajas and Maharajas, is the second largest State of the Indian
Union. It is a country of sand dunes, desert and rocks interspersed
with wonderful people, palaces, forts, myriad colours, placid lakes,
secluded sanctuaries, gardens, fertile tracts, forests and superb
scenery. The Aravali ranges, one of the oldest on the planet, divide
the State into ruggest south- east and sterile north-west. Its Thar
Desert sprawls across the border for into Pakistan.
The spectacular best of Rajasthan can be seen and enjoyed in its
folk dances, fairs and festivals. Each season has its plethora of
folk-music, dances, fairs, festivals, ceremonies and rituals, and
each occasion is a time of aesthetic expression of the genius and
spirit of its exuberant culture. There is always a time for
celebration, merry-making, frolick, fun and dancing. Rajasthan is
the land of most ornate people and great oriental splendour. The
people here still live in their picturesque legendary and historical
past and that is why the country abounds in colours, gaiety.
Rajasthan is the home of the Rajputs, the heroic warrior clan, who
ever perferred death to dishonour. They carried on and continued
the martial, social and political traditions of their forefathers. Their
towering individuality and valour have been instrumental in
shaping the destiny of the country which has been in the melting
pot several times since the days of the Ramayana and the
Mahabharata to our own days.
Ethnically, Rajasthan presents a picture of myriad colours, hues
and shades in the form of its varied tribes. There are Bhils, Minas,
Bhopas, Jats, Jogis, Gujjars, Baoris, Banjaras, Kalbelias, Kanjars,
Sansis, Grasias, and many other professional communities of
dancers, singers and performers. They all are gay, hardy, run,
dance and music-loving. Their stock of folklore, music and dancing
Copyrighted material

Tribal and Folk Dances of Desert Region
is extensive and rich. The hard and hostile living conditions of
Rajasthan have shaped the life-style of different communities in a
different manner in different regions of the State. Accordingly the
catalogue of the Rajasthan folk-dances is endless.
Ghootnar and Jhoomar are two most colourful dances of
Rajasthan. Ghoomar is performed by women on the occasion of
estivals like Teej and Gangaur and such other celebrations in
village and town squares and courtyards of the houses. The ladies,
dressed in customary colourful flowing skirts, choli and odhani and
adorned with myriad silver and gold ornaments dance in a ring.
This dance is found throughout the length and breadth of die State
but its forms vary from place to place in accompanying songs and
footwork. Marked by pirouettes, long and rapid swirls and dancing
in a circle, Ghoomar is an extremely captivating dance. The only
musical accompaniment is the singing and clapping of the dancers
themselves.
Equally fascinating and colourful is Kachhi Ghori dance done by
male professional performers. They ride the dummy ghoris or
mares made of sticks and two baskets. The heads of the animals are
prepared very artistically to create the impression of die real horses.
The dancers, generally two of three in numbers, attach and adiust
the horses to their waists very skillfully and dance and prance about
merily dressed like heroes with swords in their right hands. Dhol
and a kind of trumpet called turahi are the accompanying
instruments. They provide a rich enterainment by their mock fights
and acts of chivalry on the occasion of marriages, etc., when they
are engaged to delight the guests and other spectators.
The elaborate and ritualistic Tera Tali dance is performed by
women folk. Two or three dancers squat on the floor with a number
of small bronze cymbals tied to their various parts of the body and
naked swords held between the teeth by each of the dancers. Their
faces are veiled. They also have two-three small brass-pots each
balanced on their heads one upon the other. With two cymbals in
their hands they strike the other cymbals tied to the their bodies. It
involves a lot of difficult, vigorous and complex sliding and
moving on the ground in the squatting position. A man
Copyrighted material

1 292 Tribal and Folk Dances of Desert Region
accompanies the dance on ektara, also provides vocal support by
singing a song.
Khayal is a popular dance-drama of Rajasthan. It is generally
performed by professional artistes. Its history is traced far back to
four centuries from our times. The female roles are done by men.
The theme, generally in ballad forms, is from the Hindu
mythology, legend, chivalric lore and numerous social concerns
and happenings. Thus, the thematic scope and range is wide
enough. The people of Bhavai community, an offshoot of the Jats,
performs these dance-dramas to the accompaniment of drum,
sarangi and cymbals. Sometimes the undercurrent of satire is very
bitter but it is enjoyed by all the crosssections of audience in a good
and humorous spirit. The romance of Dhola and Mam is another
popular theme of the Bhavai dancers. The troupes travel from one
village to another after the rainy season is over and entertain their
patrons with the dance-drama full of music, mime, dance and
acrobatics.
The Dandiya dance is another very popular dance-form of
Rajasthan. It a kind of Rasa-nritya done in a circle by a group of
men with small sticks in their hands. They make pairs and strike
the sticks in pairs which change with the progress of the dance. The
drummer stands in the centre of the ring and leads the performance
with the rhythmic drumming. Though begun with simple shuffling
of steps, the dance grows swifter and swifter with the faster beat of
the drum. They dance round and round shouting in between
"Ho-ho" to accentuate the emotioncharged atmosphere. The
accompanying songs sung by the dancers revolve round Krishna
legends. An expression of pure joy and rhythm of life, the Dandiya
dance can be performed on any festival when the crop is ready for
harvesting and the spring begins.
The Kathpulali dance is performed with string puppets. The
director or the Kathputaliwalla manipulates the dances of the
various puppets by their strings held in his hand. While he makes
the puppets dance, his wife plays on the drum and sings the story.
The stories relate with heroic deeds of the historical or legendary
heroes. A Kathpulali show generally begins after dinner at about
Copyrighted material

Tribal and Folk Dances of Desert Region
eight in the night and lasts for about two hours.
The Palmji'ki'par is another typical Rajasthani folk-form which is
painted sung and danced. The story of Pabuji, the hero and Deval
Devi, the heroine, is painted beautifully on a scroll. The scroll is
hung on the wall and the story, in a ballad form, is sung and danced
involving a lot of acting, mime, acrobatics and dancing. In this
performance the Bhopa is assisted by his wife Bhopan. The song
and dance drama is accompanied by a drum and a string instrument
which like a sarangi is played by a bow. The final scene in which
Deval Devi commits Sati following the defeat and death of noble
and heroic Pabuji at the hands of Jind Raj is full of pathos and great
tragic beauty. Ultimately they are shown reuniting in the heaven.
The use of painted scroll coupled with abhinaya, music and
dancing makes Pabuji-ki-par a unique Rajasthani multimedia
folk-form.
Besides these there are many other dances done by various
wandering tribes and nombads like Kalbelias (snake charmers),
Nats, Doms, Kanjars, Banjaras, Sansis, Bhils, etc. For example,
take the Kalbelia dance done to the accompaniment of a typical
musical instrument called Pungi and a daphali. The Pungi is made
of dried gourd and is played like a flute. They sing tunes on the
Pungi, play on the daphli and dance to the great delight of the
spectators. A daphali is small drum of a wooden fram Held in one
hand played by the palm and fingers of the other.
Gujarat
Gujarat in the northwest corner of India throusts out into the
Arabian Sea. Geographically it consists of three distinct pans — the
main region with its big towns and cities, the peninsular Kathiawar
or Saurashtra, and the Rann of Kachchh, a low lying marshy
region. It is an ancient land and its history goes far back to
legendary and prehistoric times beyond the Mohanjodaro and
Harappan civilization to Mahabharata age or even earlier. Gujarat
has been a great maritime and mercantile land since times
immemorial.
Ethnically, Gujarat is both rich and a colourful state. Inhabited by
Copyrighted material

1 294 Tribal and Folk Dances of Desert Region
such tribes as Parodies, Meramis, Thebas, Kolis, Dangs, Ahirs,
Vaghris, etc., it has also been a home of a number of professional
dancers, singers, performers and musicians. Many other
communities and sub-communities connected with agriculture and
cattle-breeding complete its ethnical picture. Its various folk-forms
are based on mythology, legend and religious themes. Many of the
tribals and adivasis have much in common with the tribes and
aboriginals of Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh and share in their
religious practices and folk traditions. The Garba is a popular and
well-known women's folk-form of Saurashtra region of Gujarat. It
is a Lasya nritya and its history is traced back in remote antiquity to
the reign of Lord Krishna in Dwarka. Garba may be performed on
several occasions but the chief one is the Navaratra celebrations at
the beginning of Aswin before Dusserah festival. It takes its name
both from the song which accompanies it and the garbi, and
ornamented earthen pot with a light within which is ceremonially
placed in every house during these nine days. The pot has its sides
cut into beautiful floral and leaf designs. The pot, illuminated from
inside, and its light filtering out through the cutout patterns,
presents a charming sight.
The village belles carrying these garbi earthen-lamps on their heads
in a procession go from one house to another performing the Garba
dance. The leader of the troupe sings the first line of the song and is
followed by its repetition by the rest in a chorus. The song is
accompanied by dance and rhythmic clappings and beating of a
drum (dholak). While dancing, the women bend gracefully
sideways and the arms and hands sweep and sway beautifully
sideways, upwards and downwards in order to keep the timing by
clapping. It is a socio-religious dance in which every woman or girl
can take part irrespective of caste or social status.
The Goph Gunthan dance is a folk-form of Saurashtra in which a
braid of coloured strings is woven and. unwoven by the dancers
resulting into complex and beautiful choreographical patterns. One
end of the string is tied to a roof and the other is held by the
dancers. These coloured and tasselled strings are often decorated
with mirrors and ribbons. This dance requires a lot of practice,
precision and meticulous exactness.
Copyrighted material

Tribal and Folk Dances of Great Plains
The Tippani dance is done by women of a particular caste. It is a
community dace in which the women beat and level up an
imaginary floor with Tippanis or sticks with rounded bases and
small bells at the top end. They dance in a circle or a semicircle.
They dance round and round in a ring shaking their Tippanis in
perfect unison and rhythm as they beat the floor. Their
synchronised work movements, deft manipulation of belled sticks
and dancing present a exuberant performance resulting in a great
delight both to the dancers and the beholders. The Padhara dance is
performed by fishermen. The fishermen in a group dance with
sticks in their hands and imitate the action of rowing of the boat.
The Dandiya Ra is most characteristic dance of Gujarat. It is
performed mostly by men holding sticks with tiny bells tied to one
end. They sing songs and strike their sticks rhythmically which
produce sweet jingling sound because of their tiny bells. The dance
in a circle begins with a simple shuffing of feet. The dance being
associated with harvesting, reaping and sowing is performed on
Basant Panchami, Navaratra and Sharad Purnima. The musicians
standing outside the circle, accompany the dance on drums, etc.
The dance involves complex circular movements in which various
floor designs and patterns are formed resembling those painted on
the walls of the mud houses in the villages. These designs and
patterns traced out on the floor by the dancing feet and by the
mimble and dextrous fingers on the hut-walls are considered to
possess a great magical significance and auspiciousness. The
accompanying songs are of great antiquity and have been
traditionally handed down from one generation to another. In a
Dandaya Rassa-dawn from one generation to another. In a Dandya
Rassa-dance, the dancers have the opportunity to display their
individual skills in solo and smaller dances performed within the
larger circles.
Tribal and Folk Dances of Great Plains
{Punjab, Haryana, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal)
Below the high Himalayana Ranges lie the great plains of the
Indus, the Ganga and the Brahmaputra. These plains are one of the
greatest stretches of flat alluviam and also one of the most densely
Copyrighted material

Tribal and Folk Dances of Great Plains
populated areas of the planet. Not unlike other parts of the country,
these plains have unbroken folk dance and music tradition of
several millennia. These folk-forms derive their themes from
religion, mythology, legends and folk-literature. The folk-dances of
the region, though separate and distinct from the classical ones,
cannot be considered in isolation for they are part and parcel of the
larger organic whole. Ethnically, the pattern is relatively simpler
but consists of many races, castes, sub-castes and communities.
The Punjab
The Punjab, the land of five vivers or waters, and rich golden
harvests, is the granary of the country. Once the gateway to India,
the Punjab is a prosperous state because of sheer hard work,
virility, courage, single-mindedness and exuberance of its people.
Sikhs make up the majority and they do possess along with their
Hindu brethren bom the energy of religious ferver and warlike
temperament. They have and still can dare to suffer a lot for their
faith. They are masters in following the plough and taking up the
sword against the enemy. The Punjab, the cradle of Sikhism, is also
the land of rich culture, history and folk- dances and music. The
folk dances of Punjab are simple expressions of simple
peasant- folk.
The Bhangra and the Giddha are the two most popular and famous
dance-forms of the region. They are two community dances of
Punjab in the real sense of the term. Bhangra, though associated
with Baiskhi celebrations after the Rabi harvest, is performed on all
occasions and festivals or on any occasion fit for festivity and run.
It is dance of harves and joy unalloyed. Exclusively confined to
men, it continues for hours together and if one or other of the
participants gets exhausted and falls out of the dance, his place is
taken by another waiting eagerly outside the dancing circle. It
begins with the lust drumming. As the drummer beats vigorously,
the participants form a big ring round him and the ring grows
begger and still begger as more and more people join it. It begins
with slow momentum and pace, but gradually it is transformed into
a vigorous, exciting and sinoius dance item. It is characterized by
abrupt forward bendings, leaping on one leg, throwing of legs here
Copyrighted material

Tribal and Folk Dances of Great Plains
and there and hands above their heads, the snapping of fingers
while they dance in a circle round and round the dummcr. Dome of
the dancers have bright coloured sticks which they raise over their
heads, place them on their shoulders and do captivating acrobatics.
One of the dancers sings a couplet from folk-poetry and then it is
taken up as a refrain by others in a chorus. One by one all the
participants sing die refrain by turns which is repeated by the rest
of the dancers. In between they yell and shout "Balle balle;
Oai-Oai\ Uh-uh" etc. When the dance has reached its climax a
couple of the dancers comes forward and dances a kind of duet in
the centre of the circle followed by many more couples one each at
a time. The pair presents a variety of dance movements including
spinning, pirouettes, jumping, leaping and some complex
acrobatics. The total effect of Bhangra is that of virility, bigour and
gay abandon.
The costume of the dancers is very attractive and colourful. They
wear lungi or tahmat, a flowing kurta, a bright red, yellow or blue
waistcoat and a matching turban. The lugni is always coloured or a
piece of check length. The shoes they put on are equally beautiful,
being richly embroidered. The accompanying orchestra consists of
dholak (percussion instrument), cymbals, a big pair of reed pipes
called alghoza, a chimta (a big pair of iron tongs). The theme of the
song of Bhangra offers a wide scope of subjects which ranges from
love and romance to everyday village life and peasantry.
While the Bhangra is exclusively a male affair, the Giddha is
confined to women only. Like Bhangra it is a dance of pure joy.
gay abandon, merriment and exuberance. The dancers dressed in
colourful long skirts (lahanga) kurtas and veils of various colours
and shades form a circle. They also put on many kinds of jewellery.
It begins with the playing on a dholak by a woman followed by a
chorus and rhythmic clapping. The dance is characterized by
simple movements, clapping and striking of each others palms,
dancing in a circle and then in groups. As the dance progresses, the
pairs from the ring come forward in the centre and execute
different types of dance movements including piourettes and spins
in which two together join their extended hands and perform what
Copyrighted material

is known as kikli. They sing many songs one after the other which
relate to love and romance, everyday life and problems and
household chores. A Giddha song runs:
I was taught neither to read and write, nor was sent to a hermitage
for learning. But still I compose new songs everyday at sunrise and
sunset. My songs spring out of an inner urge over which I have no
control. Oh guest! come and enjoy some of the Giddha dance.
Haryana
Haryana, once a part of the Punjab is predominently agriculural
land inhabited by such martial races as the Jats, the Ahirs and the
Rajputs. They are brave and industrious and know how to wield
both the sword and the scythe with the same dexterity. The ancient
land of Haryana is rich in tradition, culture, legend and lore. It was
here on the sacred soil of Kurukshetra that Lord Krishna imparted
the eternal and celestial message of Bhagvad Gita to dejected and
depressed Arjuna amidst the din and clattering of the Mahabharata
war, more then 5000 years ago. Haryana, the gateway to Delhi, east
and central India, has witnessed many battles at Panipat and
Karnal, but three of these have been most historic and decisive.
Haryana has been the cradle of ancient Vedic civilization. There
are many laudatory references to its rivers and places in early
Indian literature. The famed but now lost river Saras wati once
flowed through this land. Many of Haryana's dances are closely
associated with harvesting and the change of seasons. The Daph
dances are very popular here. These are performed either by men or
women separately or by both in a mixed way. Daph dances are
done at harvesting and other social and religious occasions like
Holi, etc. The songs accompanying the dance deal with love,
romance and valour and are full of subtle humour and satire. Daph
is a kind of big percussion instrument held in one hand and played
gently by the other. While one person plays on the Daph, the others
in a group form a row or a ring and commence the dance at a slow
tempo which increases as the dance progresses. The dancers sing
the song to the rhythm of the feet and the accompanying
instruments.
Copyrighted material

Tribal and Folk Dances of Great Plains
In a mix-dance women dance, clap, sing, spin and pirouette while
men play on dapK dholak, cymbals, etc. When the momentum
reaches its height, the individual dancer comes forward in the
centre of the ring and shows her individual skills in the art, and
then retreats to her place and another comes forward. And thus the
dance continues for a long time at a stretch. The women put on
long and flowing loose skirts, kurtis and odhnis and adorn
themselves with many kinds of ornaments. The song is sometimes
in a simple question answer dialogue- form. The Holi and Lahoor or
Loor dances are purely female affairs. Khoria and Phag are other
folk-forms of Haryana.
Uttar Pradesh
Rich in history, legend and culture, this state of India is the biggest
in terms of population. The variety of interests, the number of hill
resorts, centres of pilgrimage, form of dances, etc. that it offers are
unrivalled both in number and magnificence. No other part of the
country has to offer more in terms of political involvement,
geographical variations, religious fervour and cultural diversity. It
is here, in this State that Rama and Krishna were born and Lord
Buddha delivered his first sermon. The Ganges, the holiest of the
holy rivers, and the backbone of India's prosperity waters this
province. It is here, in the north-west corner of the State mat the
loftiest Indian peaks of the Himalayas stand in their matchless
glory and splendour. It is a land of the highest peaks and the flattest
and extensive plains in the world.
The ethnic picture of Uttar Pradesh presents a phenomenon of great
variety. In the mountainous and hilly region in the north there are
many tribes, castes and classes including aborigines, Khasas,
Bhotiyas, Doms, Bavaras, etc. In the sprawling plains there are
Jats, Ahirs, Dhobis, Chamars, Banjaras, Hindus, Musalmans,
Sikhs, Christians, Jains, Kabirpanthis, and a number of
professional dancers and musicians like Bhands, Miracis and
Natuvas. The agricultural community also consists of a variety of
castes and subcastes. All these castes and communities are a great
lover of dance and music. They follow various faiths and worship
several local and not so local gods and goddesses and observe
Copyrighted material

Tribal and Folk Dances of Great Plains
numerous feasts, festivals and celebrations full of music, dance,
mime and merry-making.
Rattialila and Rasalila are two most popular dance-dramas of Uttar
Pradesh. The former is associated with Rama and the later with
Krishna. Ramalila is celebrated for ten days ending on Dussehra
festival which falls on the tenth day of the bright half of Ashvin
(September-October). Ramalila is based on the epic story of the
Ramayana. Ramalila is staged as a dancedrama at various places in
most of the cities, towns and villages of Uttar Pradesh with great
fervour as a ritual. During the performance the Ramayana is
constantly recited accompanied by dance and music. It presents a
fine blending of dance, music, mime, abhinaya and poetry before
an enthusiastic and religious audience.
Struggle between the forces of good and evil, and the eventual
victory of the former over the latter is basic to the Ramayana
theme. Rama symbolizes the best in humanity and Ravana the evil
forces. The ten-headed Ravana obducted Sita, the consort of Rama
with the help of another demon Maricha. Ravana persisted in
making Sita his wife, but she always thought of her husband Rama.
Rama sent his messengers to Ravana and urged him to return Sita,
his wife, but the wicked Ravana refused to do so. Rama fought a
fierce battle and ultimately routed and killed Ravana and all his
associates and regained Sita.
The annual Ramlila celebrations of Ramanagar in Vara nasi is
something very special. The lila is enacted on an area covering
over three square miles across the Ganges for thirty days. It is a
spectacular performance enjoyed by thousands of people every day
for full one month. The large audience sitting in a semicircle enjoys
the thrilling performance punctuated with fights, bouts, sword
dances, acrobatics, etc. The local Maharaja presides over the
function and offers worship to Lord Rama daily. It was started over
125 years ago by the men Maharaja Udit Narain Singh of Varanasi.
It is a ritual, dance-drama spectacle and a great celebration all
rolled into one.
Rasalila folk-dances are performed with great pomp and pagentry
in various parts of Uttar Pradesh, in general and in Braja Mandala,
Copyrighted material

Tribal and Folk Dances of Great Plains
that is Mathura, Vrindavana and adjoining areas in particular. They
form a real and extensive of folk-form. They commemorate in
music and movement the most cherished divine love of Radha and
Krishna. In dance and song are enacted the gegends connected with
the childhood, adolescence and early youth of Krishna with
cowmaids and cowherds. The dances are highly developed in terms
of footwork, mime and music, all requiring great skill and
technique. There are only a few other folk-dances which can
compete favourably with these lilas in popularity. Rasalila is a
group dance performed in a mandala or a ring to the
accompaniment of songs relating to Krishna legends and the music
of drums, cymbals, and flutes. Many of the steps of this complex
dance-pattern are common with those of the Kathak. The liladances are characterized by pure nritta sequences, quick footwork,
spinning, acting, pirouetting, stamping of the foot, supple arm
movements and nimicry to the accompaniment of sweet music both
vocal and instrumental. Disguised as Radha, Krishna and
gop-gopis, the actor-dancers express the various mood and
sentiments by gestures, acting and mime and glide gracefully on
the toes, bend forwards, backwards and sideways while dancing.
Only young boys take part in it. They at first make a single file
open circle and then a close one by holding one another's hand and
per form the dance in a group, solo, or as a duet.
During Holi celebrations also mere are much dancing activities.
Men and women in separate groups throw with big syringes
coloured water on each other and also coloured powder. They
dance merrily with light and lively steps throwing coloured water
and powder all around to the accompanyment of joyous singing in
chorus and music of drum, daf, cymbals and harmonium. Their
clapping, fast footwork, swaying, pirouetting, bending forwards
and sideways gracefully present a beautiful scene. This springtime
colour carnival is an occasion of much joy. singing, dancing fun
and feasting.
With the coming of rainy season, begins the Kajri dance to the
accompaniment of swing-songs. As if intoxicated with the smell of
wet earth, the village and town belles and women commence their
Kajri songs and dances. The theme is love and romance. After the
Copyrigf

Tribal and Folk Dances of Great Plains
long scorching summer, rains are most welcome and so are these
dances always fresh, light and invogorating.
Virile, vigorous and martial Ahir dance is performed in the Ahir
community on the occasions of birth and marriage. The dance is
always accompanied by song and instrumental music of dholak
(drum) and kansi (cymbals). The male dancers wear short tight
knickers, the rest of the body is left bare, except for the adronment
of some ornaments like armlets, necklaces, etc. In place of usual
ankle-bells, a band of small brass bells is tied around the lower
waist. These jingling bells accentuate the complicated footwork by
underlining the time-patterns of the dance movements. The theme
or the song presents a good variety. Now it is the tale of heroism
and chivalry of the community, now the dangers and difficulty of a
journery now the problem of a daily life. Ahir dance involves a lot
of skipping and fast movements to the sound patterns of the music.
Their songs show good artistic and lyrical accomplishments.
Similarly, the dances of the Chamar community are simple
performances consisting of a few pure dance sequences punctuated
with much buffoonery and jesting. The theme revolves round
religious myths and legends with an undercurrent of subtle- satire,
humour, wit and repartee. The songs are characterized by a lot of
pun, double meaning, coarseness and humour bordering vulgarity
and lewdness. These forms are more dramauc and mimetic and
have not much of dancing.
The Dlwbis form another such community which believes in
singing and dancing on any occasion of celebration, a birth, a
marriage, a festivity, a festival and the like. The theme is related
with family affairs, quarrelling among relations, love and romance
and mythology. They dance to the accompaniment of dholak and a
sort of sehani and obviously the song. With characteristic hip
movements and sharp knee dips, they dance in various formations.
The Banjaras, a nomadic tribe, have their own dance-form which
they do around a communal bonfire outside their improvised tents
in the countryside or just across the bounds of a town or a city.
They collect honey, medicinal roots and herbs and perfumes from
the forest to eke out their living. Naturally, the theme of their
Copyrighted material

Tribal and Folk Dances of Great Plains
accompanying songs is the hazards of the collection of honey, the
roots and the perfumes from the animals. The women wear long
and loose skirts called lahanga, a tight bodice or choli, and a length
of coarse cloth as a veil. Their dance is slow but charming, which
they perform to the accompaniment of a dholak.
There are a number of professional communities in U.P. which
sing, dance and perform on stage against payment. The
professional nautch girls with their highly skilled and beautiful
dances are very popular with the upper middle class people. They
are in great damand on the occasion of marriages, births and such
other social and family celebrations. Though sensual and devoid of
spiritual elements, they are by no means cheap or vulgar. These
dancing girls wear long, loose and flowing skirts, gathered and tied
securely at the slim waste. They also wear a choli of matching silk
or velvet and a fine veil thrown above the head and the shoulders.
This three-piece costume is tastefully and richly embroidered with
silver and gold threads. The charm of the costume is further
enhancea by a number of ornaments and jewellery. Nautanki is a
form of dance-drama, again performed by the professionals on the
stage. The theme of Nautanki revolves round chivalry, patriotism
and conflict between good and evil- drawn from the scripture.
Nautanki is a popular dance-drama in vogue throughout the
province.
The Bhands are another such professional community of singers,
dancers and performers. Formerly they were very popular with
aristocracy and were well known for their jesting, buffonery,
repartees and bouts of wit and also for music and dance. Their
dance was never a piece of art as such, but had a lot of fireworks in
the form of foolery, horse-play, jesting and joking. They were
mainly entertainers and jesters employed by the rich, sometimes
permanently.
The Uttarakhanad region of U.P. comprising Garhwal and Kumaon
is inhabited by Khasas, aboriginals and other tribes. They are
mainly cultivators, peasants, cattle-breeders and she pherds. The
majority of them are the Hindus. These simple hilly people have a
rich stock of folk-music and dances. The Chnapeli is one of the
Copyrighted material

Tribal and Folk Dances of Great Plains
most popurar variety of Kumaon folk dances. In every fair the
Chhapeli is a common phenomenon. There you can find a number
of Chhapeli singer-dancer groups competing with one another
spread out in the open green. It is performed at a brisk tempo to the
accompaniment of hurka of dholak, manjira and flute. Sometimes,
a bagpipe may also accompany the dance. Its them is related with
love and romance. The dancers perform in twos, holding mirrors
and coloured handkerchiefs in their hands. They wave these
gracefuully as they move forwards and back wards to the gay
rhythmic footwork, they refrain in chorus and the instrumental
music. There is much room for improvisation both in
accompanying songs and the dance itself. The quick tempo coupled
with romantic theme accounts for its mass appeal and popularity.
Sometimes the Chhapeli may be in pure song and music form and
may not be accompanied by a dance. It is exclusively a male
peformance.
The Jhora on the contrary is a mixed performance done by both
men and women. It is a community Kumaon dance in which a large
number of men and women participate. They dance in a ring
interlocking their arms. It is a lovely and lively dance done with
simple foot-work. It is always accompanied by songs sung by men
and women in a duet form to the rhythm of the hurka (drum) and
manjira (cymbals). The text of the song grows as it sung. The
leading singer provides the next line by improvising it on the spot.
Thus, it has a lot of spontaniety and improvisation. The dancers
prance, sit down, crouch, stand up in unison maintaining a regular
time cycle.
The Jagar dances are connected with exorcist ritualistic practices.
These are done by a particular class of people to drive away evil
spirits and to invoke the spirit of certain local deities. The recitation
of ballads is accompanied by exotic beats of the hurkas and the
thalis (brass plates) followed by a dance by the medium involving a
lot of fanatic leaping, jumping and shouting. The ritual ends with
the bidding of farewell to the invoked spirit by the singer.
West Bengal
West Bengal, relatively a small, a small, long and narrow region,
Copyrighted material

Tribal and Folk Dances of Great Plains
most of its land comprising central and southern flat alluvial plain,
is a gift of the river Ganga. The northern region of Darjeeling is
hilly and the river Teesta (three-streamed) flows through it.
Hooghly, one of the two forkes of Ganga in the lower reaches, is
the life line of West Bengal.
Bengal takes its name from king Banga, the son of the
mythological king Bali. Music and dances of West Bengal have
been determined by the religion and the occupation of the people
they follow coupled with the toprogaphy and ethnic pattern. In the
north live many hill thribes like the Lapchas, the Tibetan Bhutias
and the Nepali Sherpas. In the central plains and southern
marshlands and tropical region covering the entire 24-Parganas and
Midnapur we find such tribes as the Santhals, the Orans, etc. Most
of these tribes are common to Bihar, Orissa and West Bengal. The
Lepchas and the Bhutias are the Buddhists and the rest of the tribes
follow Hinduism. Then there are many rural and urban
communities. The rural communities depend mainly on agriculture,
fishing, and vegetable plantation. Paddy, jute and tea are the main
agricultural products of the state. The forest products include
timber, bamboo, firewood and honey. A popular Bengali saying
'Baro Mas Tero ParbarC meaning thirteen festivals in twelve
months, very well reflects how the people of Bengal have fairs,
festivals and celebrations for all conceivable occasions. They are
common to all, city-bred elite and cultured, rural and tribal people.
Music is a passion and obsession for them. But in terms of folk
dances, their contribution is relatively meagre. However, the rural
communities have many danc- forms, religious in nature and
connected with chivalry, war, love and romance, devotion to gods
and pastoral affairs.
The Jatra, a prominent but a common phenomenon, is more of an
opera than a dance performance. This term also underlines the fact
that these dramatic and operatic shows were performed by the
itinerant troupes. Originally, it was based on Radha-Krishna
legends, but now its range and scope has been so widened as to
accommodate many other themes. It is visualized in its form and
contents as a pilgrimaged though the lives of the divine beings
around whom the Jatra revolves. Young boys play the roles of
Copyrighted material

Tribal and Folk Dances of Great Plains
Radha and her intimate friends, the cowmaids. A Jatra
performance reminds one of the Nautanki of Uttar Pradesh, the
Tamasha of Maharashtra and Bhavai of Gujarat. Acting and
singing are main in the performance and dancing a kind of
concomitant. Its origin can be traced back to Chaitanya
Mahaprabhu, a great Vaishnava saint who used to ddance and sing
the enchanting songs composed in praise and devotion to Krishna.
He would often enter into trance while dancing and singing.
Following in the footsteps of Sri Chaitanya, many Vaishnavite
poets wrote poems in devotion of Krishna which were dramatised
and acted on the stage to the accompaniment of dancing and the
music. The Jatra troupes are managed and administred by a man
known as Adhikari The Jatra is a fully developed operatic form
performed by men and boys travelling from place to place.
The Kirtan dances are another popular folk of West Bengal.
Spiritual in nature, all people join it with great religious fervour
without any distinction of caste, age, social status, etc. It makes the
Kirtan dance very popular and democratic in character. Danced to
rhythm of khol or mridanga (drum), cymbals and chanting of
sacred lyrics in a chorus. It is characterized by dancing in a circle
with very simple but graceful fottwork, swaying of the body and
lowering and raising of hands in an ecstatic way. Sometimes it
takes the form of a procession taken through the town or village. Its
origin is also traced back to the advent of Chaitanya Deva.
The Kathi is another dance-form of Bengal done by men in groups.
Each of mem holds a pair of sticks in his hands. They strike each
stick with the other in perfect rhythm while dancing and singing in
a chorus to the beating of a drum called Madhole. They produce
varying patterns by playing and striking the sticks in many difterent
ways.
The Baul dances is purely for entertainment and expression of the
joy and rhythm of life. The Baul dances are as extensive as they are
popular throughout West Bengal among the Hindus. It may be
performed solo or as a group dance by wandering performers any
time and anywhere. The characteristic features of the dance are
simple but lively footwork, and joyous small songs sung to the
Copyrighted material

Tribal and Folk Dance of Himalyana Zone
accompaniment of a single string instrument called Ektara or
Gopi-jantra. The wandering groups of dancersingers can be seen
here and there and everywhere in West Bengal eking out their
living by means of these dances. The Raibeshe is an important
folk-dance done by men-folk of the western parts of West Bengal.
It is a martial dance and is popular among Domes, Bauris and such
other low caste people. The accompanying instruments are a dhol
(drum) and a kansi (a gong). It marked by vigorous, exerting and
acrobatic movements often punctuated by wild shrieks and
imitative actions of fight life the shooting of the arrow, the
throwing of spears, and flourishing of swords, scimitar and knives.
Now the dancers imitate the hunting on the horsebacks, now
perform tortuous acrobatics, and now they surge forward towards
the centre of the circle in a crouching position.
Tribal and Folk Dance of Himalyana Zone
{Ladakh Kashmir and Hitnachal Pradesh)
The great Himalayan Zone, the land of lofty mountains, most
magnificent scenery, of fascinating valleys, snow-fed perennial
rivers and streams, is also the land of rich and colourful cultural
life. The great mountain wall of the Himalayas over-look the areas
of Ladakh, Jammu and Kashmir and Himachal Pradesh.
Ladakh
Ladakh, the land of monks, monasteries and mysteries, is a part of
Jammu and Kashmir of Indian Union. Ladakh is also known as the
Lunar Landscape, the last Shangrila and the Little Tibet. It
occupies the 70 per cent of the total area of the Sate. The stark,
sun-baked, barren, forboding, windsewept. rugged yet exciting
region is the abode of lamasaries, yaks, hoary palaces perched on
pinnacles and Buddhistic arts — colourful dances, colossal statues,
tanakas, frescoes, mystery plays, palaces, stupas. monasteries, etc.
Ladakhis are of Tibetan descent and depend for their livelihood on
agriculture and nomadic herds. They rear sheep and goat and
migrate from one region to another and higher altitude to lower
according to the season. They are great dance enthusiasts and find
any occasion good enough for dancing. They are Buddhist by faith
Copyrighted material

Tribal and Folk Dance of Himalyana Zone
and their whole life revolves round the castle-like monasteries
perched on the hill tops and the ridges. These monasteries are the
centre arts and culture and they are also the upholder of the
religion. It was Padma Sambhava who founded the Byingmpa sect
of Buddhist here in the 8th century. It is also known as the Red
Hat-sect. Later on another sect Gulugpa, popularly known as Yellot
Hat-sect was also introduced towards 14th century.
The monasteries here, among other things, have attached
courtyards surrounded by galleries. These are meant for
maskdances and mystic plays. These religious dances cannot be
categorised either as folk or tribal. They form a different class of
their own and have much in common with those performed in
Tibet, Sikkim and Bhutan. These colourful dance-dramas of great
weired beauty are performed annually in different monasteries at
different times of the year. For example at Hemis the famed mask
dance-drama called Tscham-dance is held during June every year.
It celebrated the victory of Buddhism over Bon-creed as well as the
birthday of Padma brocade costumes and strange masks and
perform their exorcising ritual dances with grat pomp and show to
the accompaniment of large cymbals, gongs, trumpets, horns and
drums. The dancers wearing the masks of divine beings, gods,
demons and animals stage a fierce fight. Obviously, gods, represent
the dharma and good, and the devils the evil and adharma. These
dance drama begin at and maintain a slow tempo and are
characterized by wide positioning of, and whirls in a large circle by
the participants. These dance-plays, simulating a combat between
good and evil are also performed to exorcise the evil spirits and to
protect the followers of the faith against wicked spirits. These have
become now so famous that people from far off places in India and
abroad come to Ladakh to witness these dance-dramas and mystic
plays braving all sorts of difficulties and incurring heavy expenses.
There are over 100 monasteries in Ladakh region. Some of other
famous monasteries besides Hemis are those of Alchi, Lamayuru,
Likir, Mulbekh, Phyang, Rizong, Spituk and Thiksey.
Kashmir
The valley of Kashmir, the paradise on earth, the Super
Copyrighted material

Tribal and Folk Dance of Himalyana Zone
Switzerland of Asia, is inhabited by manye ethnic groups, races,
sub- races including Aryan Dogras, Mangol Muslims, Buddhists,
nomads, and the several tribes like the Wattals, the Gujjars and the
Bakkarwals. They all are handome, hardworking, simple, funloving, and music and dance enthusiasts. The majority of the
population consists of the followers of Islam. The traditional
culture of Kashmir continues to live and flourish in its fol-songs,
music and dances besides in its temples, mosques, paintings and
crafts. From this picturesque valley we have such folk dance-forms
as the Rouf, the Hafiza, the Hikat, the Bacha Nagma, the
Bhandpather and some tribal ones.
The Rouf is a simple but a fascinating spring harvesting dance of
the valley of Kashmir. The female dancers attired in rich skirts, and
draperies and laden with silver jewellery face each other in two
rows, and dance forwards and backwards holding one another by
arms over the head and shoulder. While they dance their bodies
bend above the waist delicately forward like creepers laden with
flowers and fruits. The accompanying song is either in the form of
a chorus or a simple question-answer dialogue form. These may
sometimes have a philosophical and mystical touch. The Hikat is
again a simple harvest and spring time dance performed by the
boys and girls in groups and pairs. It is danced annually in
April-May. The participant boys and girls interlock their arms and
perform the simple dance to the accompaniment of melodic chants
sung by the dancers. These songs full of sheer joy and gay
abundance of life, are from local stock and pertain to the various
aspects of nature there; the fascinating plants and trees, rivers,
streams, lakes and lotuses in them, snow and village greens and the
like. Occasionally there is also a strand of love and romance mixed
with that of nature and environment. The girls wear ghaghara, a
brocade cap called taich, chunari and various kinds of silver and
gold ornaments. It begins with a slow tempo but gradually hots up
into a fast dizzying footwork and speed requiring perfect balancing
and timing on the part of the performers.
The Hafiza dance, as the name signifies, is performed by the
female dancers called Hafizas. This dance-form dating back to
antiquity reminds of the Devadasis of the South India. In the
Copyrighted material

medieval period Hafua became very popular when the dancers
performed while singing in Sufiana Kalam, consisting of ragas or
melodies called muqams based on rich Persian literary tradition full
of deep thoughts. The orchestra which accompanied it consisted of
santoor (a string instruments) and called the "Veena of Kashmir",
tablas (dukra), shetar, etc. Later on Hafizas were relegated to the
position of professional nautch girls and were engaged to perform
on many a social and ceremonial occasions.
Bacha Nagma, an offshoot of Hafiza dance-form, has been very
popular as an item of sheer entertainment. Here boys perform
instead of the women. The boys of tender age and delicate voice
disguised as women, wearing long hair perform it. It is very
popular and draws large crowd and as much applause.
Accompanied by rabab, sarangi, shenai and drums, it involves
quick spinning movements and pirouettes resembling those of
Kathak. There is much expression^ dancing as well, and the
dancer has to interpret the song related to love and romance.
Hafizas remind us of the Devdasis, and Bacha Nagma revives the
memory of the Gotipuas of Orissa.
Bhand Pather is an ancient traditional folk form of Kashmir still
extant and also very important. It is not bound to any time and
place, and so it can be performed anywhere and a anytime as a
dance-drama.
The various nomad tribes of Kashmir are also great dancers.
Among the Wattals a dance-form closely connected with fertility
rites is very popular. It is purely a male performance in which the
participants dance in a circle round a pole topped with banner. It is
enjoyed on many auspicious occasions to the accompaniment of
instrumental music of nagara (a drum) and surnai or sehnai and
some other instruments. The dancers sing as well. It begins at a
slow pace and tempo but soon picks up the speed and tempo
culminating into acrobatic leaps, jumps and a very loud music.
Again it is a spring dance and here the pole symbolizes creation,
fertility continuity, ebb and flow of life. They dance in circle,
around it.
Copyrighted material

Tribal and Folk Dance of Himalyana Zone
Himachal Pradesh
Nestled in the nort-west lap of the great Himalayas, Himachal
Pradesh, a mountainous region, is Nature's own child. Himachal
Pradesh, with its Lahul-Spiti immersed in barren and rugged
splendour, fascinating valleys like Kangra, Kulu and Chamba, can
rightly boast of a unique folk dance and music heritage. Dancing
and singing is a favourite pastime of the people of this land. It is in
their blood. The ethnic scenerio of Himachal presents a rich variety
of races, religions and tribals. They all indulge in several forms of
charming folk-dances. The dances are performed by both men and
women either together or separately.
In me Chamba valley of Himachal Predesh live the Gaddis, equally
beautiful and colourful tribe. The Gaddi women and men perform
fascinating dances but separately. The female performances are
tender and langurous, and those of men are vigorous and fast. The
men-folk dance in a circle going round and round and singing
songs of gallantry and romance. They do it on various festivals and
other annual occasions and fairs. The Gaddi women, dressed in
pretty costumes of skirts, shawls and head-gears and adorned with
ornaments, dance in a circle going round and round to the
accompaniment of songs sung in a chorus. While they dance they
bend sideways and make beautiful hand and arm gestures. The
theme of the songs is invariably a romance between a Gaddi lass
and a youth and domestic affairs.
The Gaddis, like their counterparts the Gujjars and the Bakkanvals
in Kashmir, are pastoral people and cattle-breeding is their main
occupation. They are Hindus by faith and believe Shiva to be their
originator of this universe. Besides Shiva they also worship many
other gods and goddesses of the Hindu pantheon. They migrate
trom one place to another in search of new pastures and fodder for
their cattle. In short, they are livery and gay and love to dance on
any and every occasion they can find.
Kulu is another charming valley of Himachal Pradesh. It is also
known as the Valley of the Gods because of the fact of many
temples and shrines deicated to various deities are located there.
Every now and them some festival is held there which is invariably
Copyrighted

Tribal and Folk Dance of Himalyana Zone
accompanied by song, music and dancing. Of these Dusserah
festival is the most famous. During this festival, held in October, all
the gods and goddesses from the different parts of the region are
brought in a procession in their respecitve gay palanquins to an
appointed open place in the valley. The palanquins are richly
decorated with flowers, garlands, buntings and umbrellas above,
and incence sticks are burnt before the images of the deities.
Thousands and thousands of people, men and women, young and
old, children and householders assemble here in their Sunday best
colourful garments and enjoy the celebrations to their hearts'
content.
During this ten-day festival a variety of dances are performed
which includes sword dances and a few others. The men-folk
lavishly draped in tunics and trousers, shawls and plumed round
caps form a dancing circle and commence with slow steps, which
gradually gathers speed and tempo. The dancers hold handkerchiefs
in their right hands which they wave gracefully to the rhythm of
rochestra. The accompanying orchestra consists of dholak,
narsigha, shehnai and Karnal. As the musicians sing of chivalry,
patriotism and in praise of the deities and the warriors, the dance
reaches a crescendo and climax, and then some of the dancers,
come forward from the circle in the centre and commence, their
sword dance brandishing their their bright weapons, moving
continuously in a frenzy and at a very fast speed. These martial
dances, performed against a back-drop of snow-peaked Himalayan
mountains of Dholadhar and Kailash, also involve a lot of
pirouettes and spinning at one place. The fesitval is celebrated with
all the pomp and splendour and homage is paid to the deities.
Bazars are set up for the sale of sweets, toys, household goods and
endless knickknacks, and mere is a lot of excitement, gaiety,
marry- making and revelry.
Some other better known and popular folk-dances of the region are
Pangi and Sangla. Pangi known after the valley of the same name,
is a female dance in which a group of women perform in a circle
with charming body turns to either side and hand raised above the
head swaying in suple movements to the rhythm of the song and
the dance. It is done seasonally in honour of the goddess Devi.
Copyrighted material

Tribal and Folk Dances of North-East India
There are many famous Devi shrines in the area. On full moon day
people visit these sharnes to pay their homage to the goddess and
then these dance sare per formed. On these occasions fairs are held
and the deities propitiated. Sangla is a mixed affair, and so men
and women join together to pay homage to the local deities and
mythological heroes. The men and women participants at first
stand in separate rows facing each other, but with the progression
in the dance they comingle. The accompanying songs are in a
dialogue form of question -answer. One party sings on behalf of one
character and then the other answers on behalf of the respondent
character. As usual, these dances begin at slow tempo but gradually
gather speed and momentum leading to the climax full of dizzy
spinning and pirouettes. There are many other dance-forms either
confined solely to men or women performers or done by both
together. Many of these dances are done on the occasion of Yatras
or pilgrimages to various shrines.
Tribal and Folk Dances of North-East India
{Assam. Manipur, Meghalaya, Nagalandand Tripura)
The north-east India, popularly known as the "Land of Seven
Sister' \ is characterized by simple and exotic tribals, lofty
mountains, lush valleys,dense forests teeming with varied flora and
fauna, fascinating scenery and pastoral life amidst isolated
splendour. Ethnically, the area, very rich and varied in dance and
music, presents a complex pattern of large tribal population. The
multilayered and intricate cultural design makes difficult if not
impossible the classification and categorization of the hill and tribal
folk comprising over seventy-five per cent of the total population
of the area.
Assam, remote, exotic and an extravaganza of landscape scenery,
lies in the extreme north-east corner of India. Assam is ounded in
the north by Bhutan and Arunachal Pradesh, in the east by
Nagaland and Manipur, in the south by Mizoram, Tripura and
Meghalaya, and in the west by Bangladesh and West Bengal.
Drained by the mightly River Brahmiputra and a network of its
tributaries, Assam presents a vast canvass of varied tropical flora
and flora and fauna including the last of that endangered species,
Copyrighted material

Tribal and Folk Dances of North-East India
the one horned Indian rhino, sprawling tea carpets, lofty hills, deep
valleys and a simple but spectacular tribal life.
Lying at the foothills of the Himalaya, the abode of gods, Assam is
linked to the rest of India by an isthmus winding its way between
Bhutan, Bangladesh and Nepal. Assan is a land where clouds float
at your feet, hills emerge from its bosom and soar high like a
chorus, and panorma changes with unbelievable frequency. It is
here that one feels the freshness of they very first dawn of creation
and has the ecstasy of almost touching the sweet dreams with his
fingers. Far from the madding crowd, it is altogether another
would, a walking reverie you are travelling through.
Meghalaya is inhabited chiefly by Khasi, Jaintia and Garo Tribes;
in these tribes power and land, etc. are inherited only through
women. They have their distinct culture in spite of the fact that
most of them have been converted to Christian faith. They still
follow their time honoured traditions such as erecting monolithic
stones ot their honoured traditions such as erecting monolithic
stones to their ancestors and celebrating the festival of Great
Sacrifice marked with tribal rituals, dances, colour and gaity. Over
80 per cent of its population are engaged in agricultural activities.
Nagaland with its administrative seat at Kohima is a narrow long
suip of hills running almost parallel to the River Brahmputra. The
entire region is covered with hills, spurs, ridges and mountain
slopes. The highest and awe-inspiring mountain peak Japvo, 2,995.
metres, lies south of Kohima. It is a fascinating country with
healthy climate, fertile soil, well-cultivated, drained and manured
terraced fields of paddy. Rice is Naga's staple diet supplemented
by meal and fish.
The term "Naga" is derived from Sanskrit "Nag" and literally
means "hill-men". Nagaland is the home of Indo-Mongoloid hilltribe known as Nagas. While the majority of the Nagas live here, a
great number of them remain outside in the border states of Assam,
Arunachal and Manipur. The term "Naga" covers many tribes.
They are a warrior race, tall, robust, hardworking, gay, brave,
self-reliant, artistic, freedom-loving, good looking and possess an
inborn intinct for colour and intricate designs. They are also noted
Copyrighted material

Tribal and Folk Dances of North-East India
for their keen sense of humour, splendid war dances and songs. The
grisly sport of Head-hunting was in vogue till recently in some
tribal pockets, but it has now completely died out Most of the
Women are held in high and honourable position. Over 90 per cent
of Naga population depend on agriculture. And over 70 per cent of
people are Christian by faith.
Tripura is named after a tribe. "Tipra", That inhabited the state
and to which the ruling house of Tripura belonged. Tripura is
actually a Sanskritized form of early Bodo name, Tipra by which
the aborigines were known.
Arunachal Pradesh, rich in varied flora and fauna, is the home of a
large number of tribes of different socio-economic and religious
pattern. These are Buddhist tribes, Vaishnavite tribes and others
with their own distinctive ways of life, living side by side in perfect
communal harmony and peace. Studded with hills and valleys and
comprising frontier divisions of Kameng. Tirap, Subansiri, Lohit
and Siang, Arunachal is predominantly rural and pastral. About 94
per cent of its total population of 6,31,839 live in 3,257 villages.
About 62 per cent of its area is under forest cover.
The tribes of Mizoram are of Mangolian stock and the Lushais
form the main tribal group. Lushais are the dominant tribe and most
of Mizo chiefs of old were from this ethnic group. Over 90 per cent
of the population is Christian.
Bihu is the most important festival of Assam; Equally popular both
among tribal and non-tribal population of the State. It is celebrated
three times every year both by men and women. Of these three,
Baisakh Bihu is of the greatest significance. It is observed during
first week of the Indian New Year. The other two Karuka and
Megha Bihu come in autumn equinox and winter solstice
respectively.
On these occasions, after early morning ablutions, the people visit
each other exchanging sweets, gifts and good wishes; worship the
cows and other cattle and then follows in the evening the sessions
of dance and music in groups called the Husari. They collect in the
open and begin at slow tempo in a circle. One of the participants
Copyrighted material

Tribal and Folk Dances of North-East India
sings the refrain and the rest follow him in a chorus. Gradually the
tempo increases leading to a crescendo. The musical
accompaniment includes the drun (dhol), the cymbals (tala), the
bamboo clappers (tokka), the paupa (buffalo-horn) and fluts.
This very captivating and pulsating performance is also held under
the shade of huge trees to the accompaniment of thrilling
instrumental music and vocal songs comprising couplets which are
repeated over and over again. They begin in a circle but break up
into groups and execute fine choreographic designs, patterns and
figures. The drummer leads the performance by singing the refrain
and drumming and dancing it.
It is really an unforgettable experience to participate and watch
these dances in the night illuminated by torches. The dancers, men
and women, boys and girls, from far and near congregate and
converge at one appointed place in the open or under a huge tree
and begin the ritualistic dance. They dance and interpret the songs
pertaining to love and romance with their gestures, mime and
mimble footwork. The songs are marked with their liquid lyrical
charm, rich poetical strain and ideas and enchanting melody. But
these songs vary in contents from tribe to tribe and place to place.
For example, the neotribal songs are different from those of the
Bodos, the Garos, or the Ahoms.
The Jatras offer another occasion for dance and music. The Jatra
festival commences with the celebration of Holi when the image of
Lord Krishna is taken out on a journey in a palanquin and then
back after two days amidst dancing, music and theatrical
performances. It is celebrated in many parts of Assam, but the
festival observed at Berpeta in Kamrupa district is of special
significance. It is a great centre of Vaishnava Bhakti cult and the
occasion is observed with great enthusiasm, devotion, singing and
dancing sessions. Lord Krishna is taken out from and his shrine in a
big procession and the people play Holi with must gaiety and
exuberance to the accompaniment of devotional songs,
instrumental music and dancing. Being without much codification
and rules, the Jatra dances provide a great occasion for rich
enjoyment of secular and erotic singing, dancing and theatrical
Copyrighted material

Tribal and Folk Dances of North-East India
performances.
The dance-drama known as Bhaona is another popular item of
Assam. The performance which may sometimes run for several
nights, generally begins after night meals around nine p.m. and
continues till day-break. It begins with the playing on khols
(drums), invocative Kirtan and the appearance of the director or the
Sutradhar who narrates the synopsis of the play through song and
dance. He is generally present on the stage throughout the
performance and provides missing links in between by his
expressional singing and dancing. The female roles are played by
the males. The theme of these dance-dramas is invariably from
Krishna legends. The plays, composed and written by Shankardeva,
a great Vaishnava saint leader, are performed by troupes of various
Stattras or monasteries established by Shankardeva. These troupes
meet their expenses from the donations and other subscriptions
made by the devotees for whom they enact these- drama full of
religious fervour and exuberance.
The Oja Palli dances are perhaps the oldest Assamese traditional
performances. Their scope and range is wide enough and it
includes themes belonging to the Ramayana, the Mahabharata and
the various Puranas. They may be performed on the occasion of the
worship of the snake-goddess Mansa Devi or any other occasion.
The Oja, with the help of his two assistants called Pallies, enacts
these dances to the accompaniment of Khanjani a pair of small
cymbals. They sing and dance and interpret the story through
gestures of hands and other limbs and facial expressions. Their
dance consists of simple broad rhythmic footwork to the beat of
cymbals.
The Nati'Nritya revives the memory of Devadasis of South India.
The Natis are temple dancing girls who perform in temples on
certain occasion. The female dancers, financed and supported by
the temples, have to lead unmarried life and perform in the temples.
Such Natis are still there in certain temples as in Hazar Haya Griva
Mandir, near Nalbari at Hazu in Kamrupa district, the Kamakhya
temple at Gaughati and Vishvanathghat temple at Darrang in
Shibsagar district. Many other Shiva temples in Assam had their
Copyrighted material

1318 Tribal and Folk Dances of North-East India
own dancing girls in the past. These female dancers enacted and
danced before the temple deity to the accompaniment of religious
songs, drums and cymbals in the Devadasi tradition of South India.
The Naga is a generic term under which come many tribal
communities spread all over the hills and plains of north-east India.
Their dances have been conditioned by their environ, occupations,
religious beliefs and practices and the social setup. Their culltural
activities and especially their dances reflect varied aspects of their
life-style in rhythmical movements and choreographical designs.
Their dance repertoire is as rich as varied. Most of these dances are
war-like and martial in essence.
The head-hunting or war dance in the most important. It is in vogue
in almost all the Naga tribes with slight variation from one
community to another. The dancer, dressed in ceremonial war
costume and adorned with many silver, brass and iron ornaments,
enter the dancing arena in a single file to the chant of a chorus.
Soon they form single circle and attack the imaginary enemy with
their spears held in the hands. They also thrust their spears at
themselves in imitation of enemy attack and deftly avoid the attack.
As the dance terminates there is a crescendo of shouts, cries and
calls. Obviously, there is no musical accompaniment and the chant
and shouts of the dancers themselves provide the background
music. Characterized by primeval grandeu, brandishing of flashing
spears and many attacking stances and postures, it is a apectacular
performance which only the Nagas can do.
The Bamboo dance is popular among the Kuku and the Mizo
Nagas. In it four long bamboo poles are used across one another so
as to form squares which can be closed and opened by the men
holding the bamboo poles at the ends to the beating of the drums.
The dancers deftly hop on one foot outside the cross when it is
closed and then inside the squares when they are open. Generally
done by girls and women, it presents a complex spectacle with two
or more dancers performing skilfully in and out of the squares to
the fast beating of the drums. The dance begins at a slow tempo but
as the drumming increases, the dance grows faster and faster into a
vortex of very quick footwork, clapping and fast drumming.
Oopy righted material

Tribal and Folk Dances of North-East India
A solo dance is an exception among the Nagas and the group
dances are the rule. The Kabuis have many colourful and inspiring
dances. Both men and women, boys and girls perform together to
the loud beating of a big drum. The audience collect in the village
green and stand around the dancers. The Kabui women also have a
dance done only by themselves. They begin in a squating posture
singing and waving their arms and hands in a very supple manner
in the air and on the ground. Gently and gradually they stand up
and perform a very lively and graceful dance involving some very
difficult rotating movements of the hips and left footwork, change
of positions and kicking high up of the legs in the air. It is
performed as a ritual to propitiate the local deities.
Nongkrem is an important dance of the Khasis. It is danced
annually at Smit, near Shillong during a week long ceremonial rites
and rituals when many fowls and goats are scrificed to propitiate
the mother goddess. In the dancing arena of the shrine a number of
unmarried and virgin girls perform this dance on the occasion of
the Puja rituals to the accompaniment of cymbals, drums and
flutes. The Nongkrem dance is done on main Puja day from early
morning till evening. The girls dressed in their ceremonial best and
adorned with various costly jewellery dance with their hands
hanging on both sides and the eyes looking down. They shuffle
their feet forward and back ward in the centre while an equal
number of male dancers dance a kind of manual dance around
them in a circle. When they recede two semicircles are formed and
when come forward a full circle is made. The movements of the
male dancers comprising whirls, pirouettes and spins are larger.
They hold naked swords and shields in their hands which they
brandish rhythmically. Sometimes they hold flywhisks instead and
wave them towards the dancing girls. The orchestra-men called the
Dhulias play their instruments in the corner of the arena on a raised
platform while the dance continues. The audience sits or stands up
around the arena.
The Nruira Lim or Cock-fighting dance is full of great excitement
and run. Popular among the young Naga boys and girls, it can be
performed anywhere and at anytime of the year. The boys and girls
stand opposite each other in two rows and stage a mock cock-fight
Copyrighted material

leaping and jumping back and forth and their heads raised and
hands in motion like claws of the cocks. Similarly, there are many
other dances performed as a sport. The are related to hunting in
which various birds like hornbill, cock, etc. and animals like
mithun, tiger, etc. are imitated and , songs pertaining to these
creatures are sung. Accompanied by songs, drums and cymbals,
these dances done for the sheer joy of life and as an expression of
community living, create a rich spectacle of rhythm and sound.
Inspired and conditioned by their ecology, these imitative dances
reveal their intimacy and close affinity with nature.
The Khamba Lim dance is a harvest dance performed both by men
and women together. Popular among the Zemis, the Angamis and
the Kabuis, it is enjoyed at the beginning of the harvesting time to
pay their tributes to the Mother Earth for her bounty and blessings.
Danced ritualistically in two opposing rows of the male and female,
the dancers may change their position but the rows are never
broken. They do it to the beating of drums, sounding of horns and
singing of the songs shuffling and stamping their feet, going round
and round.
In Arunachal Pradesh also such dances as imitate the movements of
the birds and animals are very popular. Besides the mock-fight,
they indulge in the dances centred around the yak, the peacock, the
deer and the tiger. The recreational value of these dances can
hardly be overemphasized. The yak is an important animal for the
hill tribes of Arunachal Pradesh. In the yak dance the story of a
young man is interpreted who has been driven away from home
and hearth by father and how he comes across a yak and befriends
him. Similarly in other animal dances some beautiful stories
underlining the intimacy and love between man and beasts are told
and danced and their movements imitated. In the cock-fighting, the
dancers use masks of the cocks and perform to the loud beating of
drums, cymbals and gongs. The people of Arunchal also have their
harvest, ritual, religious, marriage and birth dances too numerous to
be recounted here. The female dances are characteristic for their
delicate slow movements, small steps and interlocking at the waist,
while those of men are without such interlocking patterns.
Copyrighted material

Tribal and Folk Dances of Plains Plus Plateaux
In Tripura there are many non-Naga tribes and they are
agriculturists and practice shift or jhoom cultivation. Many of their
dances are concerned with sowing and harvesting. A well known
dance of Riang tribe of Tripura is performed to propitiate and
worship Lakshmi, the goddess of wealth and plenty. It is done
during harvesting time. They call Lakshmi as the goddess Hajagiri
and so the dance is known as Hajagiri dance. In it both men and
women participate. The dance begins at slow but terminated at a
very fast tempo.
In the valley of Manipur live many non-Naga tribes and they have
their own distinct dance and music traditions. Besides the famous
Lai Haraoba, they have numerous other dances connected with
hunting, harvesting, animal and bird life, rituals, rites and various
ceremonies. The Lam is a generic term which is applied to very
chan Lam and so on. The Keet Lam is a cricket dance and the
Khongi Lam is concerned with birds in which their gaits, etc. are
initiated and danced. Chawng Chan Lam is a significant and very
popular ceremonial dance of the hill tribes of manipur performed
by men of a particular village and the neighbouring villages. It has
many touches of a maritial dance and is followed by a grand
feasting at the expenses of a tribal chief. The generic term Lam also
remind us the so well-known Poong Cholam and Karial Cholam.
the tandava dances of the drums and the cymbals respectively. This
valley has given us, above all, one of the most famous classical
dances popularly known as Manipuri based on noblest dance
traditions and philosophical thinking.
Tribal and Folk Dances of Plains Plus Plateaux
(Madhya Pradesh, Bihar and Orissa)
Madhya Pradesh, the largest state of Indian Union, constitutes the
heartland the central highlands of the country. It separates the Great
plains from the plateaux and coastal plains of the Southern
Peninsular India. The great central plateau of Madhya Pradesh,
streaked with the ranges of the Satpuras and Vindhyas, the river
systems of the Narmadas, Tapti, Chambal, Sone, Betwa, Mahanadi
and Indravati, and possessed of some of the richest tropical forests,
has a varied natural setting of great charm. The Malwa region is
Copyrighted

Tribal and Folk Dances of Plains Plus Plateaux
rich in black cotton soil, the low lying areas of Gwalior, etc. have
lighter soil, whereas the Narmada is made up of rich alluvial
deposits.
Bihar in the north-east of Madhya Pradesh is characterized by the
Gangetic Valley, sprawling alluvial flat plains and hilly forests. In
the south begins the Deaccan Plateau. The rivers Kosi and Gandak
from the north and Sone from the south join the Ganga. The river
Damodar winds its way through the plateau of Chhotanagpur, and
its valley has righly been termed as the Ruhr of India. Bihar is one
of the richest states of India in mineral wealth and accounts for
about 40% of the country's total mineral wealth.
Ever washed by the blue waters of the Bay of Bengal in the east,
Orissa is bounded in the north by Bihar, in the north-east by West
Bengal, in the south by Andhra Pradesh, and in the west by
Madhya Pradesh. This rural riverine land of multi-splendours, is
watered by the rivers Mahanadi, Brahmani and Vaitarni flowing in
the south-esternly direction before merging in the Bay of Bengal.
These rivers and their tributaries provide the state with rich alluvial
tracts.
Orissa is possessed of an extensive plateau in the interior with
sprawling coastal plains in the foreground. This plateau, an
undulating upland, gently slopes down towards the Bay of Bengal.
Its extensive palm fringed coast-line running to 482 kms, serene
holiday beaches, pronounced rural environs, charming blue hills
rising here and there abruptly from the plains and the plateau, green
wood-lands, rock caves, so rascinatingly sculptured temples and
other monuments, picturesque mud villages set in greens, modern
industrial leviathans, colourful and gay tribals and so rich and
varied handicrafts make Orissa a miniature India. Here is Bharata
in a capsule.
Madhya Prdesh
Historical and geographical attractions apart, the tribal and
aboriginal people of Madhya Pradesh are no less gay and colourful.
These exotic ethnic groups and communities have their own
distinctive folk-lore, traditions, rituals, fairs, festivals, music and
Copyrighted material

Tribal and Folk Dances of Plains Plus Plateaux
danc-forms. There are about forty-eight tribals in all in Madhya
Pradesh and they constitute twenty per cent of the total population
of the State. They live in hills and plains and also in towns.
Predominently they are small agriculturalists or agricultural
labourers. In the hill areas they depend on forests, its produce and
hunting for their living. Primarily they are concentrated in the
districts of Bastar, Bilaspur and Jhabua, however their presence is
uniquitorus throughout the region. They include the Gonds, the
Maria and Muria, the Baiga, the Bhi Is. the Banjaras, the Dh an wars,
the Savras, the Karias, etc. The village community consists of the
craftsmen, the professional performers like Nats, dancers,
musicians, the drummers called Dholis, etc. They all have festivity
in their blood and make very good dancers and musicians. The
tribal population is Hindu by faith and believes in various gods and
goddesses including the village deities and offer them then prayer
and worship in the form of dancing and music as well.
The Karma dance of the Gonds is done both by men and
women-folk together. The Gonds dwell in the Maikal Hills of the
Satpura ranges in Madhya Pradesh. They have many charming
dance-forms and the Karma is one of them. The men and women
stand separately in two rows facing each other and then commence
the dance in graceful and well measured steps. The dancers
interlink thein arms and sway rhythmically to the beating ol drums
called "Timiks." The men dance in front of the women making
various acrobatic moverments to show their prowess. As the dance
progresses and the tempo increases, they climb up the shoulders of
others and perform to the claps of the women, who by they make a
dancing ring around them.
The another folk-form of the Gonds is the Jhoomar dance. The
Jhoomar dances are accompanied by love-songs and by those with
social and domestic themes. The stilt dances are fairly common and
popular among the tribals. The dancing on stills (gandi) is done
during the rainy season particularly by young boys. It is both a
dance and a pastime and its main attraction lies in balancing and
skilled manipulation of feet. There are many attractive forms
performed on the tall stilts.
Copyrigf

The Saila is another dance-form of the Gonds noted well for its fast
and vigorous movements. The Saila has many varieties. In essence
it is a martial dance and reminds of the times when the Gond tribes
used to march against the enemy. It combines entertainment, art
and physical exercise all three into one. Men dance it with spears,
swords, etc in their hands and shuffle their feet, stamp them on the
ground, skip and jump vigorously. In olden days a Saila dance was
followed by the female dance called Rina when the male
performers stopped theirs out of utter exhaustion and fatigue. It is
accompanied by a song, but there is not much singing in
comparison to dancing.
The Kaksar dance is done by the Maria tribe of Bastar before the
rainy season sets in. It is a ritual group dance in which blessings of
the deities are sought. The young boys and girls dance together to
the beating of large drums, small timki and playing of the flutes
and select their life-partners followed by marriage ceremony.
The Gaur or Bison dance is another popular and captivating dance
of the Murias of Bastar. Is is a virile and vigorous dance reflecting
jory, gaiety abundance and rhythm of life and performed on the
occasion of marriage, etc. The men wear aheadgear of a pair of
bison-horns topped by peacock feathers. Their faces are veiled with
strings of beads and cowrie shells. They also wear a short length of
loincloth and its one end is allowed to hang in front. The women
dressed in dhotis and adorned with head jewellery and heavy
anklets carry sticks. They together dance forming many complex
patterns including that of a figure of eight. The women begin in a
row and then go through and round the male dancers making
beautiful designs. The accompaniment is the large and long drums
suspended around the men which they beat loudly and lustily as
they dance round and round in a circle. Religious and ritualistic in
essence, the Bison or Gaur dance is performed primarily to
propitiate the goddess of Shakti.
The Bilma dance of the Baigas tribe is danced during social
ceremonies to the loud beat of the large Mandar drums. Bilma
literally means joining or coming together. The Baigas of one
village go to the Baigas of another village and they together
Copyrighted material

Tribal and Folk Dances of Plains Plus Plateaux 1 325
perform the dance in gay abundance in which men, women and
children all participate in a perfect amity and harmony to the
accompanying song in a chorus.
The Sua (parrot) dance of the Baiga women is a ritualistic
performance. It is popular in Chhatisgarh in Maikal hills. In this
imitative dance the gait and flight of the parrot are imitated and
danced. The woman carries a basket on her head in which is
placed an earthen pot lighted within with a lamp and its mouth
covered with mango leaves. The basket is filled with paddy. The
women dance in a group to the accompaniment of the clappings
and singing. The theme of the song is the new bride's sorrow at her
separation from her husband and the joys in expectation of the
early reumon. It is done during harvesting season at a slow and
languorous tempo imitating the movements of the parrot.
There are numerous other tribal dances like Beej Putani, Goda,
Lakshmi Jagar, Dagla, Phag and Lola dance. The Murias of Bastar
perform Beej Putani at the time of sowing seeds. Goda is done
during the rainy season in the month of Shravan, and Chai. Danda
in the month of Chaitra. The Lakshmi Jagar is performed to please
Lakshmi the goddess of wealth and prosperity. Young men and
women from nearby villages dance before an image of the goddess
placed under a tree for the whole night, and disperse at day-break
and then again assemble at night for a full one month.
The Dagla dance is performed by the Bhils. Only men take part in
it but the Pali dance is a mixed performance. The latter is more
vigorous involving speedy spins, turns and skilled footwork on toes
and flat foot. The Banjara menfolk have their Langi dance
performed during July- August (Shravan) to the accompaniment of
songs of patriotism and bravery. It is also performed on Rakhi
Purnima, the full moon day of Sharavan when the sisters tie
colourful threads and rakhis on the hands of their brothers for their
long life and prosperity.
The Phag dance is done by the menfolk during Holi celebrations.
The dancers carry swords, spears and other weapons, as they dance
marching forwards or retreating backwards they reel and revolve
about to the accompanying song relating to chivalry and courage.
Copyrighted material

Tribal and Folk Dances of Plains Plus Plateaux
The women folk dance the Lota-form in which a number of small
pitchers filled with water are balanced on their heads one upon the
other. Then there is lively Saundary dance. It can be enjoyed at any
time of the year like the Lota dance. The dancers form two rows
facing each other, come forward, clasp hands and dance swaying
and swinging back and forth and in circles while singing all the
time.
Bihar
Bihar shares India's international frontier with Nepal in the north
and is bounded by Bengal in the east, by Orissa in the south, by
Madhya Prasesh in the south-west and by Uttar Pradesh in the
west. About 1 9% of its total area comes under forest cover; there
are 1 2 protected areas of forest.
Bihar derives its name from "Vihara" which means a monastery.
Bihar indeed is a land of monasteries-Buddhist, Hindu, Jain,
Muslim and Sikh shrines dot the State. It is here that India's first
mighty empires rose and fell. Bihar was known as Magadha in
ancient days. From 6th century B.C. to 5th centry A.D. almost for a
millennium, Bihar remained the seat of great Indian empires.
Ajatsatru ruled from Rajgir. In the 4th century B.C. rose the
Mauryan Empire. Then Patliputra (modern Patna) became the seat
of administration. It was from here that Chandragupta Maury a
ruled over his vast empire and Ashoka the great, his grand son, sent
his messengers of peace, non-violence, international understanding
and mutual tolerance to the different parts of the country, and to the
foreign lands. With the rise of the Gupta Empire, Magadha rose to
glory and splendour again. The Guptas were suceeded by the Palas
of Bengal who ruled until the end of the 12th century when they
were overthrown by the Muslims. In 1764 the British annexed
Bihar and ruled until India's Indepdendence in 1947.
Bihar has been the cradle of two great religions of the world
'Buddhism' and 'Jainism'.
The exotic tribes of Bihar are excellent musicians and dancers.
They include the Santhals, the Hos, the Oraons, the Bhumijas. the
Kharias, the Savaras, the Karwals and a few others. In all, there are
Copyrighted material

Tribal and Folk Dances of Plains Plus Plateaux
about 15 tribal communities. By profession they are agriculturists,
shift cultivators, nomads, hunters, food- gatherers, professional
singers, dancers and craftsmen. Some of these tribes are common to
Madhya Pradesh, Orissa and West Bengal. They are concentrated
in the districts of Singh bum, Ranchi and Chhotanagpur.
Being passionate singers and dancers they have a veriety of
musical instruments. The drum among these occupies the pride of
place. The drum-beat has become one with their life and heart- beat
and they have tried successfully to convert it into a phonetic
expression. The fascinating drum range and variety includes the
madol or mandar, the nagara, the dholak, the tamak, the tumdak,
the brda, the dhak, the dhamaka and many others. Then there are
large metal cymbals (Jhal or kasa thai) stringinstruments. various
types of bamboo flutes called bansuris, horns and narsinghas.
The dances of Bihar tribals revolve round the religious beliefs, the
worship offered to deities, the change of seasons, marriage and
other social ceremonies, rites and rituals. Festivals accompanied by
dancers are an integral part of their life-style. There are a series of
dances connected with courtship, marriage, sowing, harvesting,
fertility, hunting and worship. The Magha dances performed in the
month of Magha (January) are complex and ritualistic. Its one form
called Anandi is performed on the time of marriage, the another
form known as Beha is connected with ancestral worship and the
sowing of the seeds. The dances are accompanied by drums, large
cymbals, flutes and nagaras. The men and women form separate
rows facing each other, interlock their arms at the back and dance
back and forth. They advance and retreat from each other, make
semi-circles swaying on one log and holding the bodyweight on the
other. All this while they sing and chant and never undo the
interlocking of their arms. These dance-forms of the Santhals of
Chhotanagpur are as thrilling as infectious.
The Karma dance is associated with fertility. On this occasion
young boys and girls dance together and the girls offer to the boys
sprouted barley seeds. A branch of the Karma tree, which
symbolises fertility, is cut and planted in the centre around which
the dance is performed. Accompanied by song, drums and flutes
Copyrighted

1328 Tribal and Folk Dances of Plains Plus Plateaux
they dance round and round. Planting of Karma saplings is an
essential part of the dance ritual.
On the occasion of Sarhul estival the Jadur dance is per formed.
Sarhul celebrates the union of Mother Earth and the Sun-god.
Amidst great rejoicing and festivity dances are held to the
accompaniment of songs, the assortment of drums, flutes and large
cymbals. Choreographically, this form of dance of Oraons is akin
to those of the Hos and involves interlocking of arms behind the
back, erect torsoes and swinging and swaying of legs to the likings
rhythm, and precision of footwork. It is performed both by men and
women folk together.
The San thai s are musicians and dancers par excellence and have
dances for every imaginable occasion. The martial
dances — Gollwari and Paikha are marked with vigour, virility and
a lot of jumping and leaping in the air. They carry bow and arrows
while doing martial dances and perform mock fights and attacks.
Their courtship and marriage dances are typical. These dances,
romantic and lively in nature, are performed on full moon nights.
The loud drumming, resembling thunder, calls the belles of the
community and they come dressed in their fineries, adorned with
flowers, feathers and assemble under a large banyan tree. The
young men come forward taking strides with drums and lilting
songs on their lips, and then the dance commences in two rows,
their arms interlinked in pairs. The rows surge forward like
rhythmic waves and then recede with supple footwork and swaying
heads and bodies. The boys in the row opposite play on flutes,
drums, large cymbals and sing songs in perfect harmony. After the
dance the boys and girls mingle and have a good chat.
They have their hunting and sowing dances. On Dassai festival
men-folk dance from one locality to another. Then there are the
Jhika and the Lagren type dances in which men and women dance
together. Men form the outer ring and the women the inner circle.
The Dhang and Langi are exclusively confined to women. The
Lagren has many forms and variations according to the occasion of
performance and it can be enjoyed on any occasion, be it a
marriage, a festival or social gathering. All these dances reflect
Copyrighted material

Tribal and Folk Dances of Plains Plus Plateaux
their collective nature, cohesion, community feeling and social
awareness. They are great spontaneous collective singers and
dancers. The Santhal women and girls can be seen singing and
dancing while engaged in their daily chore like sowing, plantation,
journeying to and from the forest. The work and sing
simultaneously and in between pause for a round of dance. They
use song and music as : convenient tool of dancing. Dance is a
superordinate and all the rest is subordinate. They are gay,
colourful tribe and enjoy every moment of the life. The Santhal
women use various ornaments as adorment. They are of silver,
brass, bronze, shell, glass or flowers. Their houses are also
decorated with beautiful coloured animal, and forest motifs. They
are very skilled painters as well, and their folk-paintings have
inspired many great artists.
The Oraons are equally colourful. They are skilled farmers and
excellent hunters. Their gaiety and jest of life is well reflected in
their hunting and socio-religious dances and music. The Oraon
women adorn themselves with ornaments of silver, bell- metal,
brass and shells. Their costume is no less colourful. Besides Karma
and Jadur these tribal people have Martial and Jatra dances. The
martial dances are done by men to the accompaniment of loud
drums alone. They wield and wave their weapons with much
ferocity, shout and shriek and dance in a circle marked with great
frenzy and solemnity. Sometimes they break the circle and run into
columns in imitation of battle formations.
The Chhau of Seraikela in Bihar is a unique semi-classical dance.
The term "Chhau" means a "mask". It is a mask-dance in which
many classical folk and tribal dance elements have been finely
blended. These elements are from the Bharata's Natyashatra and a
• number of from folk-tribal dances of Bihar and from Gotipua
dance-style of Orissa. The Chhau is also in vogue in Pnrulia in
West Bengal and Mayurbhanj of Orissa. Originally, it is a ritual
dance and has evolved in its present form as a result of synthesis of
so many folk and classical elements. Consequently, it lost much of
its rural and folk character and became a semi-classical
dance-form.
uopyn

1 330 Tribal and Folk Dances of Plains Plus Plateaux
The Chhau basically might have been a group performance but
now- a-days it is done as a duet or a solo performance. In it, masks
made of paper pulp, are put on. The theme of a Chhau revolves
round the myths and legends drawn from the Ramayana, the
Mahabharata and the Puranas. But occasionally secular themes are
incorporated specially for the rural audience and spectators. An
entire story can be related and danced through the vigorous limbmovements but there is no expressional abhinaya as the face is
covered with a mask. It is an open air performance done to the
accompaniment of shehnai, dhol, nagara and flutes. Its graceful
movements have been stylized, coddified and refined to the extent
that some people now like to categorize it as a classical dance.
Some of its great exponents like Guru Gopal Dubey have
successfully used its techniques in choreographing a famous Greek
play like Antigone. The use of masks in Chhau lends an element of
mysticism and an authentic touch to the legendary characters, the
gods, goddesses, the heroes and the heroines of the two sister epics
and the Puranas. The Tandava dance of Shiva as Ardhanarishvara
is one of the popular themes of the Chhau. Since in Chhau some
classical traditions are followed, it requires a strenuous training
from the young age. At least five years vigorous training is
essential to become and adept Chhau dancer. Performed by male
only, the Chhau dance involves virile, vigorous and precise
footwork consisting of a lot of complex patterns, leaps, rapid turns
and many gaits. In short it is a well thoughtout planned and
choreographed dance. The dancers wearing captivating and rich
gold and silver brocaded dresses in myriad colours, colourful bead
ornament around the neck and the exquisitely designed symbols
stitched on the costumes present a rich feast of colour, rhythm and
sound.
In the Jatra dance again the mock fights are danced and enacted
between the Oraons of two localities or villages. The opposing
parties enter into a friendly combat with long poles decked with
pennants, wielding large and thick sticks and clubs. They engage in
the mock combat with such enthusiasm that the fight gives the
impression of a real conflict and clash. The Harbori Jatra is
connected with the worship of the ancestors. Besides these, there
Copyrighted material

Tribal and Folk Dances of Plains Plus Plateaux 1 33 1
are other numbers of the Oraons performed by the young girls in
the streets, courtyards and the greens of their villages for the sheer
joy and exuberance of life Dancing is also a most common and
sane source of recreation and entertainment for the various tribals
of Bihar.
The Jata-Jatin dance, a typical form is in vogue in Mithila, it is
done by women alone on full moon nights in the rainy season. It
lasts from midnight till dawn to the accompaniment of a drum. It
involves a lot of mime in which the romantic tale of Jata and Jatin
is danced and interpreted. The young man Jata loved Jatin deeply,
but as the fate would have it, a boatman, wicked and villainous
kidnapped the girl. The boy and the girl had to suffer many
hardships and sorrows, before she was freed from the clutches of
the boatman and united with her lover Jata and lived happily
everafter.
Orissa
In Orissa one out of every four persons is an Adivasi or Tribal.
These tribals are heavily concentrated in the hilly tracts of Western
Orissa. In the coastal regions they constitute a small percentage.
They live there in a certain degree of seclusion and prestine form.
They must have settled there in obscure past long before the
coming of the Aryans.
The aboriginals still lead a simple, traditional and colourful life of
hunting and agriculture amidst deep woods, valleys, lush forests,
and primitive situations in spite of the inroads of so called modern
civilization and developmental programmes. Over 62 distinct tribal
groups live in Orissa, each one with its own culture and traditions
different from other. The main Adivasi Groups include Kondhs.
Bondas, Santals, Juangs, Parajas, Oraon, Godabas and Koyas. The
dormitory life among the Bonda youngs is quite fascinating. In the
evening unmarried boys and girls enjoy music, dance, frolic and
fun together and spend the night in dormitories until their mutual
intimacy develops into a marriage. The simple, gay, abundant and
colourful tribal life can be a great source of entertainment and
education to the visitors. Their life is most characterized by dance,
music, rituals, hunting, gaiety and wild ways.
Copyrighted material

Tribal and Folk Dances of Plains Plus Plateaux
The aboriginals and tribals of Orissa have several things in
common with those of Madhya Pradesh, Bihar, West Bengal and
Andhra Pradesh. By profession they are nomads, hunters,
craftsmen, agriculturists and cultivators. The dwell in hills and
valleys, hamlets, villages and towns. Like Santhals and Oraons of
the neighbouring states they also have the practice of the
dormitory. The dialects they speak are connected either to
Dravidian or Mundari group. Their festivals are directly linked
with the change of seasons, the cultivation activities, hunting and
religious rites and rituals in which the Hindu deities are worshipped
and propitiated.
The Magha Jatra and the Karma are agricultural festivals. The
Magha Jatra is celebrated in January on the occasion of Magha
Sakranti when a hut is erected and then set on fire. Its ashes are
used in ploughing the field. The occasion is marked by worship to
gram devatas and the Sun-god and a captivating community dance
in which all men and women participate. The* Karma festival is
shared by the tribals of such other states as Bihar and Madhya
Pradesh as well. Obviously, it is a fertility ritual. As usual a Karma
sapling is planted and then a community dance is performed both
by men and women-folk around it. Men and women form separate
rows facing each other, interlock their arms and begin with simple
shuffling of the feet to the accompanying music of drum and songs
in a chorus. Gradually the music increases to a crescendo and so
does the dance to higher and higher tempo. Different tribes perform
this same dance at different times and look upon it from slightly
different angles. The Bhumijas of Mayurbhanj do it in Bhadra and
the tribals of Sambalpur observe it in autumn. For the former it is a
harvest dance and signifies good fortune and rich harvest and for
the latter fertility. The dancers form lines and then circles and
dance bending, swaying and swinging in perfect harmony, and
imitate the harvesting activities like the cutting, reaping and
gathering of the harvest. Choreographically, these dances are
simple and not design-oriented.
These are many beautiful and fascinating community dances found
among the Orrisan tribes when men and women, boys and girls
dance for the sheer joy of it in spring season or during harvest. For
Copyrighted materia

Tribal and Folk Dances of Plains Plus Plateaux
example the Juangs have a number of animistic and imitative
dances in which the dancers make typical movements of a bird or a
beast. These animal and bird dances are quite captivating and
v amusing in their mime and dramatic quality. They Gonds do a
peacock dance with peacock feathers tucked in their head-dress.
They imitate the bird in its gait and dance looking at their own
shadows. Similarlv the pigeon the pantner, the bear, the tortoise
and the tiger dances "are per formed. Thus, they have a very rich
repertoire of animal dances.
The Paika dance among the Oraons of Orissa is a fine example of a
war or martial dance. Men arrayed smartly as warriors in their
colourful turbans and tight dhoties stand in two rows. They hold in
their hands wooden swords and shields and engage in a fierce
mock-combat. They come forward, slowly towards each other, but
suddenly the tempo is increased as the battle begins and they whirl
their swords and attack each other. The rows break and cross over
followed by, great leaps, jumps and acrobatics to the
accompaniment of drums and wind instruments. The Paika dance is
performed on the occasion of marriage also when the mock battle is
staged and the bride is, as if by force, carried away by the groom's
party.
In another number of the mentolk, the chhadiya, we find another
example bf a war dance. The men dressed in red-shorts and armed
with bows and arrows and chhadiyas (stick) per-form this dance
marked by swift and simple footwork, high leaps and jumps and
vigorous pirouettesJn the air to the accompaniment of drums and
wind instruments. It is a manly and virile dance.
Similarly the Bhatra tribe of southern Orissa perform a hunting
dance characterized by its revelry, liveliness, and virility. On the
occasion of Holi festival they set out for hunting in parties and on
return perform their community dance joined by their women-folk.
The men and women sing alternately in question-answer form.
Men recite stanzas describing their exploits of hunting and the
women in answer sing songs of praise or of ridicule as the case
may be. Women laud them if the hunting has been a success and
ridicule if it has been a failure. Men wear short dhoties secured
Copyri

Tribal and Folk Dances of Plains Plus Plateaux
well with coloured stripes of cloth, and colourful turbans topped
peacock feathers. In their hands they carry short bamboo staves
which they strike together to mark the time.
The Gfmmara dance of the Oraons of Orissa also deserves mention.
It assumes variious forms and shapes in different areas. Named
after the musical instrument and the song of the same name, the
Ghumara is performed to the accompaniment of a song, the scope
of the song is very wide in theme. It may relate to day-to-day life
and its problems, a barren bride's longing for a child or a lion or
tiger devouring a calf. In the Ganjam district it is performed by
boys noted for their skill for playing on the simple percussion
instrument. They play the instrument deftly while dancing
characterized by many complex rhythmical designs consisting of
leaps, spins, pirouettes, bending, sitting and standing stances and
movements. This dance-form done by the bodys reminds one of the
Gotipua temple dances of Puri and other cities and towns of Orissa.
Orissa has a rich and varied repertoire of dances— harvest, pastoral,
courtship, marriage, hunting, martial, community, ritual and
religious dances. The Khonds do many dances to the
accompaniment of a musical instrument called Pleka. The Khond
boys and girls come together and dance in gay abundance forming
two circles. The inner ore of the girls and the outer one formed by
the young men. The love-songs are composed on the spot
spontaneously and sung alternately by the boys and girls to the
simple but lively music of the threestringed Pleka. They dance
simply shuffling their feet and hands joined together in a circle,
swaying and swinging to the rhythm of the clappings and the
instrumental music. In the high hills of Koraput the Bondo Porajas
celebrate their spring festival by dancing on raised platforms
amidst the cluster of their huts and houses. The dancers are mostly
women, richly adorned with anklets of jingling bells, heavy brass
necklaces, circles of beeds and cowrie shells around their necks,
and armlets and bangles. The men keep company on the
instruments like dhol and tamak. The accompanying songs
delineate, the beauty of nature and end in a kind of invocation
seeking blessing of the deities.
Copyrighted material

Trivikrama
The Bhumijas perform a ritual dance called Jadur to propitiate their
god Bum Bonga. They celebrate the occasion on the nearest hill
top and offer a kind of rice beer to the Mother Earth followed by a
gay community dance by men and women down the hill to the
village. Such simple dances to propiuate the deities are common to
all the tribes. Dancing is a most convenient, satisfying and
recreative medium through which they can express their love of
rhythmic movement, commemorate their hunting expeditions or
invoke the blessings of the deities.
Trivikrama (taking three steps)
God. Hindu (Epic and Puranic). It may originally have been the
name of a sun god, but is taken as the incarnation of Vishnu which
strides the world in three steps in his dwarfish manifestation, and is
linked with the Hindu perception of the three parts of the
world-heaven, air and earth. His Sakti is Santi. Normally depicted
with the left leg raised. Attributes: arrow, bow, club, conch, knife,
lotus, noose, plough, prayer wheel, staff and sword.
Truth
Hinduism states Satyaineva Jay ate, meaning Truth Alone
Trimphs', "Being truthful to oneself is one of the most important
teachings of Hinduism. The greatest apostle of Truth in modern
times is none other than Mahatam Gandhi. His autobiography "My
Experiments With Truth" is just that. The greatest follower of
Truth in ancient times was King Harishchandra. It is said that this
great king gave up his kingdom his wife and only son for
upholding the Truth (his promise) to Sage Vishwamitra, According
to Narada Smriti, Truth is the best means of purification of the soul.
It says that if telling a truth and a thousand horsesacri flees are put
in the balance and weighed, it will be found that Truth weighs
more. Truth according to Manu. is the best austerity a human being
can perform and a man of truth attains the state of Godhead when
living in the doby. It is the lack of truth or uttering falsehood that
makes our lives miserable. Whenever we lie, we are actually
punishing ourselves for momentary gain of some object for which
we pay dearly in future with a multitude of problems. It is a style
on the part of many to tell lies and in their own mind they suffer
Copyrighted

1 336 Tvastar
with a guilty conscience.
There is no such thing as that you should always utter truth, even to
the extent of making others' lives miserable. For example, if you
see a mother with a very ugly child, you don't have to say to her,
"What an ugly child you have"! Here that truth is unnecessary.
Instead if you say: 4i pray to God to bless your child with health
and happiness," you are telling another truth and you avoid
unnecessarily hurting the feelings of the mother or you could avoid
any comment at all. If you are a car salesman, tell the people the
limitations of the car you are selling along with the good points of
the car. By telling truth, you, as a salesman, will be able to sell a lot
of cars as long as your cars have some positive points in them. If
you cheat people in your profession, always believe that others can
cheat you a thousand times in their professions also. For example,
an auto-mechanic can give you back your car with brakes half done
and that could result in a fatal accident. The baby-sitter who takes
care of you infant can be inattentive and that could even result in
the death of your infant. I admit that once in a while the truth will
hurt momen tarily but in the long run it will pay you well. For
example, if you do not like the behaviour pattern of one of your
friends, you are better off telling that truth than trying to cover it up
with lies and later suffer for that. So it is better on your part to tell
truth and live by it even if that will will result in your getting hurt
once in a while.
Tvastar (carpenter)
Creator god. Hindu (vedic). The 'divine builder* who fashions
living creatures on earth. The Hindu equivalent of the Roman god
Vulcanes. An aditya or sun god and the father of Saranyu.
Attributes: hotnajakalika (an uncertain fire device), ladle and two
lotuses. Also Tastar; Tvashtri; Visvakarman.
Copyrighted material

u
Udadhikumara
Generic name of a god. Jain [India], One of a group of deities
under the general title of bhvanavasi (dwelling in places). They
have youthful appearance. .
Ugracandika (violent Canda)
Distinct form of me goddess Durga. Hindu (Epic and Puranic). One
of a group of navadurgas, die nine durgas'.
Ugratara (violent Tara)
Goddess. Hindu (Puranic). A temble deity who carries a cup and a
corpse upon her head.
lima
A form of the goddess Parvati. Hindu (Puranic). Uma is identified
as die consort of Chandrashekhara. a form of Siva which includes
the moon amongst his attributes. The meaning of her nome is
unclear, but possibly has maternal connotations. As Uma
Maheshvara she fought with demons including Mahisha.
Attributes: lotus, mirror, rosary and water-jar. See also
Somas kands.
Untouchables
When the Aryans settled on the banks of the Indus, Ganges and
Brahmaputra, they were forced to divide their society into four
distinct groups based on labour, for the smooth functioning of
society. They were : 1. Brahmanas — priesdy class to work in
temples and study and propagate religion. 2. Kshatriyas — royal and
Copyrigl

Upulvan
fighter class to rule and defend society. 3. Vaishyas — business
class to see all commodities are properly distributed. 4 Shudras — to
help all other classes in their respective duties. According to Manu,
Brahma (God) ereated Brahmanas from his face, Kshatriyas from
his arms, Vaishyas from his thighs, and Shudras from his feet. The
division of labour was a very good idea, but in course of time, it
degenerated. Some say mat a fifth division of people emerged in
Hindu society in course of time, and these people were known as
outcastes or untouchables. Another group of historians says that it
was Shudras who became the untouchables in society. Mahatma
Gandhi called the untouchables by the name Harijans (children of
God) and fought for their emancipation. The Government of India
abolished the practice of untouchability and today, Harijans are
well taken care of in Government circles. Untouchability was a
curse on Hinduism. It stood against all Hindu ideals and principles.
It stood against all Hindu ideals and principles. It only helped
conversions from Hinduism to other religions.
Upakesini
Minor god. Buddhist. An attendant of Arapacana.
Upapattivasit (control offiness)
Minor goddess. Buddhist. One of a group of vasitas personifying
the disciplines of spiritual regeneration. Colour mixed. Attribute: a
creeper.
Upayaparamita [perfecting success against enemies)
Philosophical deity. Buddhist. Spiritual offspring of
Ratnasambhava. Colour, green. Attributes: jewelled staff and staff
on yellow lotus.
Upulvan (like the blue lotus)
Local god. Singhalese ISri Lanka]. The most senior of the four
great gods of the Singhalese panthenon. Identified with Vishnu,
according to one tradition this deity had the specific task of
protecting the culture of Sri Lanka from Buddhism. Conversely he
stood by Gautama Buddha against the Hindu Mara.
Copyrighted material

Usas
Usas
Goddess of the dawn. Hindu (Vedic). The daughter of Dyas and
according to some texts, the consort of the sun god Surya. An
auspicious deity. Usas brings the dawn, heralding Surya, and drives
away darkness. She is the all-seeing eye of the gods. In the Rg
Veda she is depicted as a beautiful young virginal figure who rides
in a hundred chariots. She sets all things in motion and can render
strength and fame to her devotees. In addition to being perceived as
a sky goddess, she is also drawn as a mother goddess in the guise
of a cow. Epithets include 'mother of the gods' and 'mother of
cows'. She is invoked to give the boon of longevity, but a more
malignan aspect reveals her as a huntress who wastes human life.
Usas sometimes enjoys a domestic worship as a guardian hearth
goddess who drives away darkness and evil spirits. She disappears,
however, from the later traditions of Hinduism.
Usnisa
God Buddhist A dikpala or guardian of the zenith direction. Also a
coleecuve term for a group of eight deities, including Usnisa, who
are perceived as extensions of the dhyanibuddhas.
Note the word describes, additionally, a type of curled hairstyle
fourn in the characteristic iconography of buddhas. Colour: yellow.
Attributes: jewel, lotus, prayer wheel and sword. Three- headed.
Usnisavijaya (victorious)
Primordial goddess. Buddhist (Mahayana). Form of Vairocana,
widely worshipped in Tibet. Regarded as a female bodhisaitva or
/?itfta/itf-designate, and a dikpala or guardian of the zenith direction.
Also a deification of literature. One of a group of dharanis. Colour:
white. Attributes: arrow, bow, image of the Buddha on a lotus leaf,
jewel, noose, prayer wheel, staff and water-jar. Three-eyed,
three-headed and with eight arms.
Uttarabhadrapada
Minor goddess of fortune. Hindu (Epic and Puranic). A moderate
naksatra; daughter of Daksa and wife of Candra (Soma).
Uttaraphalguni
Copyrighted

1340 Uttarasadha
Minor goddess of fortune. Hindu (Epic and Puranic). A moderate
naksatra; daughter of Daksa and wife of Candra (Soma).
Uttarasadha
Minor goddess of fortune. Hindu (Epic and Puranic). A benevolent
naksatra; daughter of Daksa and wife of Candra (Soma).
Copyrighted material

Vac (speech)
1. Goddess of the spoken word. Hindu (Vedic). In some texts she is
a daughter of Daksa and consort of Kasyapa. Alternatively she is
the daughter of Adbhrna. Also known by the epithet 'queen of the
goa". Vac is the personification of the phenomenon of speech and
oral communication. She gives the boon of hearing, speech and
sight and she can lead a man to become a Brahman. She also
personifies truth sustains soma — the liquid essence of vision and
immortality. She is said to have created the four Vedas, the basis of
the earliest Hindu mythology. Though she takes a prominent place
in die Rg Veda, Vac largely disappears from later Hindu traditions.
She may have became syncretized with the goddess of wisdom,
Sarasvati. She is generally depicted as an elegant womanly figure
dressed in gold, but in the secondary capacity of a mother goddess
she is also drawn as a cow. 2. God. Buddhist. An emanation of
Amitabha and a variety of Manjusri.
Vadali
Minor goddess. Buddhist (Mahayana). An attendant of Marici.
Attributes: flower, needle, noose and staff.
Vagisvara (lord of speech)
God of speech. Buddhist. The tutelary deity of Nepal. An
emanation of all dhyanibuddhas (spiritual meditation buddhas) and
a variety of Manjusri. Accompanied by a lion or seated upon a lion
throne. Attribute: blue lotus.
Copyri

1342 Vairotya
V ah guru
Creator god. Sikh Worshipped in the Golden Temple of Amritsar,
in northern India. He has no icons.
Vaimanika
Generic tile for a group of deities. Jain [India]. A class of gods said
to be borne by, or living within, a flying palace, and vimana.
V airocana {coming from the sun)
Origin Buddhist [India]. The first and oldest dhyanibuddha or
meditation buddha.
Known period of worship circa 500 BC to present.
Synonyms Buddhaheruka.
Centers) of cult pan- Asiatic. Art references metal and stone
sculptuers, paintings.
Literary sources Sadhanamala and Tantric ritual texts.
One of five mystic spiritual counterparts of human buddha in
Vajrayana Buddhism. A product of the Adibuddha whorepresents
the branch of the Adibuddha who represents the branch of the
cosmos concerned with bodily form. He originates from the white
mantra syllable OM and lives in the zenith paradise. His icon is
normally placed in the innermost part of a stupa or shrine. His Sakti
is Vajradhatvisvari and he is normally accompanied by a lion or
two dragons. Colour white. Attributes: three monkish robes and
prayer wheel. He is also taken as a tutelary deity in Lamaism
[Tibet] in which case his attributes include bell and prayer wheel.
Emanations include chielfy Samantabhadra bt also Cunda,
Grahamatrka. Mahasahasrapramardant. Marici, Namasangiti,
Silatapatra- Aparajila, Usnisavijaya and Vajravahi. See also
Aksobhya, Amitabha, Amoghasiddhi and Ratnasambhava.
Vairotya (having an axe and a good)
Goddess of learning. Jain [India]. One of sixteen vidyadevi headed
by the goddess Sarasvati.
Copyrighted material

Vaisnavi 1343
Vaisnavi
Mother goddess. Hindu (Epic and Puranic). Epic and Puranic). A
Sakti of Visnu, also regarded as a form of Laksmi. In later
Hinduism she became one of a group of mataras regarded as of evil
intent. Also one of a group of eight astamataras. In another
grouping one of nine navasakus who, in southern India, rank higher
than the saptamataras. Her vehicle is the hybrid beast Garuda.
Attributes: child, club, conch, lotus and prayer wheel.
Vajracarcika
Goddess. Buddhist (Mahayana). An emanation of Aksobhya, she
stands upon a corpse. Colour: red. Attributes: cup, image of
Aksobhya on the crown, jewel, lotus, skull with noose, staff and
sword. Three-eyed.
Vajradaka
God. Buddhist (Mahayana). An emanation of Aksobhya bearing
one, three or four heads.
Vajradhara
God! Buddhist. An epithet of the Adibuddha but also an allegory
for the highest buddha. Known particularly from Nepal and Tibet.
His Sakti is Prajnaparamita. Attributes: cup, hook, noose, regal
ornaments and staff. Three-headed.
Vajradhatvisvari (lady of the adamantine world)
Goddess. Buddhist. The Sakti of Vairocana and also a variety of
Marici. Attributes: many including an image of Vairocana on the
crown.
Vajragandhari
Minor goddess. Buddhist (Mahayana). Colour: blue or gold.
Attributes: arrow, axe, bell, bow, hook, image of Amoghasiddhi,
knife, noose, prayer wheel, staff, sword, and trident.
Vajragarbha (substance of a thunderbolt)
God. Buddhist (Vajrayana). A bodhisattva or buddha-designate.
Copyrighted material

Vajrasrnkhala
Colour: blue.Attributes; blue lotus, book and staff.
Vajraghanta
Minor goddess. Buddhist (Mahayana). A female dikpala or
guardian of the northern direction. Colour: green or white.
Attributes: staff with bell.
V ajramrta (immortal of the Vajra sect)
God. Buddhist (Mahanyana). An emanation of Amoghasiddhi His
vehicle is an animal of uncertain identity. Colour: green. Attributes:
beel, club, hook, prayer wheel, staff and sword.
Vajrapani
God. Buddhist [mainly Tibet]. An emanation of Aksobhya but also
sometimes identified with Adibuddha. Generally thought to reflect
the second dhyanibuddha or spiritual meditation buddha.
Sometimes depicted with a peacock. Alternatively considered to be
a counterpart of the Hindu god Indra. Colour: dark blue or white.
Attributes: noose, snake and staff. Also Acala- Vajrapani; AcaryaVajrapani.
Vajrapasi
Minor goddess. Buddhist (Mahayana). A female dikpala or
guardian of the southern direction. Colour: yellow: Attributes: staff
with noose.
Vajraspha
Goddess. Buddhist. A female dikpala or guardian of the western
direction. Attribute: staff.
Vajrasrnkhala (personification)
1. Minor goddess. Buddhist. One of the Mahayana deities said to
be an emanation ot Amoghasiddhi Some tests describe her as the
Attributes: arrow, bow, cup, mage of Amoghasiddhi on the crown,
mane, noose skin, and staff. Three-eyed and three-headed.
2. Goddess of learning. Jain. One of sixteen vidvadevi headed by
the goddess Sarasvati.
Copyrighted i

Vajratara
Vajratara
Goddess Buddhist (Mahayana). Considered to be an emanation of
all the dhyanibuddhas or spiritual meditation buddhas. Also
identified as a emanation of Ratnasambhava or form of Bhrkuti.
She stands upon a lotus. Colour: golden. Attributes: arrow, blue
lotus, bow, conch, hook, images of the five dhyanbuddhas on the
crown, noose and staff. Three-eyed.
Vajravarahi (diamond sow)
Goddess. Buddhist (Mahayana) and Lamaist [Tibet]. An emanation
of vairocana and sometimes identified as the Sakti of Hevajra. In
Lamaism she accompanies Vajradaka. She is depicted treading on a
man. Colour; red. Attributes: principally club, cup, image of
Vairocana on the crown and knife, but with an assortment of other
attributes from time to time. Three-eyed and three-headed.
Vajravidarani (tearing asunder)
Minor goddess. Buddhist (Mahayana). Attributes: arrows, banner,
bow, hook, noose, shield, staff and sword. Five-headed.
Vajrayogini
Minor goddess. Buddhist (Mahayana). She can sometimes be
identified carrying her severed head in her hand. Colour: yellow.
Attributes: club, cup, knife and staff. Three-eyed.
Vajrosnisa
God. Buddhist. Apparently connected with the guardian deities or
dikpalas in the easterly direction. Colour: white. See also
Padmantaka.
Valli
Goddess. Hindu. The second consort of Skanda, usually depicted
standing to his right. In its original context the word Valli may
mean 'earth'.
Varna na
Incarnation of the god Visnu. Hindu (Epic and Puranic). The fifth
avatara of Visnu which appears as a dwarf, symbolizing the puny
Copyrighted material

Varuna
state of mankind in the cosmos. According to legend, the god took
the guise in order to trick Bali, a great-grandson of Hiranyakashipu
(see Narasimha), whose prestige had begun to overshadow that of
Indra. To restore a proper balance Vamana requested from Bali a
plot of land three paces wide on which to meditate. Vishnu
returned to his proper stature and claimed heaven and earlth in two
steps. He declined to take the third which would have also claimed
the underworld, but instead gave its rule to Bali. The dwarfish form
bears two arms. Attributes: umbrella and water-pot.
Varaha (boar)
Incarnation of the god Vishnu. Hindu (Epic and Puranic). The third
avatara of Vishnu, which appears as a boar. According to legend,
he descends in this guise to the bottom of the primeval sea to
rescue the earth, which has been removed there by a demon. He
retrieves it in the shape of a girl. The avatara may be depicted in
wholly animal form or as a human with a boar's head. Epithets
include Adivaraha.
Varahi
Mother goddess. Hindu (Epic and Puranic). A Sakti who in later
Hinduism becomes one of a group of mataras regarded as of evil
intent. Also one of a group of eight astamataras. In another
grouping, one of nine navasaktis who, in southern India, rank
higher than the saptatnataras. She sits upon a boar, buffalo or
elephant. Attributes: boar's head, bow. club, cup, knife, noose,
plough, sword and trident.
Varahmukhi (having a boar's head)
Minor goddess. Buddhist (Mahayana), An attendant of Marici,
Attributes: arrow, bow, flower and staff.
Varali
Minor goddess. Buddhist (Mahayana). An attendant on Marici.
Colour: white. Attributes: flower, needle, noose and staff.
Varuna (coverer)
Origin Hindu (Vedic, Puranic and early Tamil) (India]. Major
Copyrighted material

Vasantadevi
guardian deity.
Known period of worship circa 1 700 BC until present.
Synonyms none.
Centre (s) of cult throughout India but as a rain god in the south.
Art references sculptures and reliefs in metal and stone.
Literary sources Rg Veda. etc.
Vamna is one of the major Vedic gods, concerned with the secure
operation of the world's systems and of water. Lord of the asura
class of deities, he is thought to equate with the Persian deity Ahura
Mazda. In later times, a dikpala or guardian of the western
direction. He is also regarded and in aditya or sun god, the son of
Kardama and consort of Gauri.
In southern India he is still worshipped during periods of drought,
particularly in coastal regions where he is thought to live in trees.
In Vedic times his sacred animal was the ram. He rides upon a or or
sea monster, or in a cheriot dawn by seven horses. Attributes
conch, parasol, sacred thread, snake noose, trident and water jar
with jewels. Pot-belliedand four-headed.
Vasantadevi
Goddess of spring. Buddhist-Lamaist [Tibet]. Particularly known
from tibet. where she appears in the retinue of Sridevi. Her animal
is a mule. Attributes: cup and sword
Vasita {willpower)
Generic title for a group of goddesses. Hindu. Twelve deities who
personify the disciplines which result in spiritual regeneration.
Vasu (s) {excellent)
Generic tile for a group of gods. Hindu (Vedic). Eight deities
attendant on the Vedic weather god India, comprising day, dawn,
fire, moon, pole star, sun, water and wind, Generanly carrying a
rosary and with a Sakti
Copyrigf

Vayu
Vasudeva
God. Hindu. The princely father of Krishna and Balarama.
Consorts include Devaki, Rohini, etc.
Vasudhara (treasurer)
1. Fertility goddess. Hindu (Epic and Puranic). The Sakti of
Kuvera. 2. Goddess. Buddhist. A female bodhisatva or buddhadesignate who is the Sakti of Vajrasattva and a form of Adsobhy a
or Ratnasambhava. Colour: yellow. Attributes: book, ear of rice,
images of Aksobhya and Ratnasambhava on the crown, parasol,
pearl and water-jar with jewels.
Vasumatisri (beautiful with on excellent mind)
Minor goddess. Buddhist (Mahayana). An attendant of Vasudhara.
Vasusri (beautiful one)
Minor goddess Buddhist (Mahayana). An attendant of Vasudhara.
Vasya-tara (the subjected Tar a)
Goddess. BuddhisK Mahayana). A emanation of Amoghasiddhi
and considered to be indistinguishable from Arya-Tara. Colour:
green. Attributes; blue lotus and image of Amoghasiddhi on the
crown.
Vata
God of wind. Hindu (Vedic) and Persian [Iran]. The name appears
in the Rg Veda as a deity of violent personality. According to
Asvestan tradition the god of victory, Verethragan, appeared to
Zarathustra in the guise of Vata.
Vayu (I) (the wind)
Origin Hindu [India]. God of the winds.
Known period of worship circa 1700 BC to present.
Synonyms Pavana.
Centre (s) of cult none specific.
Art references sculptures and carvings in metal and stone.
Copyrighted material

Vayukumara
ami
Literary sources the Vedic texts, including Rg Veda.
One of the most important deities of the Vedas. In later Hinduism
he evolves into a dikpala or guardian of the north-western quarter.
He is also depicted in some texts as a chariot-driver for the god
Agni. Colour: dark blue. Attributes: arrow, hook, prayer wheel,
staff and water-jar.
Vayu (2)
God. Buddhist. A dikpala guardian of the north-western quarter.
Vayukumara
God. Jain [India]. One of the groups under the general title of
bhvanavasi (dwelling in places). Of youthful appearance.
Vedas and Upanishads
What is known under the generic name of the Vedas are the ancient
most monuments of the Hindu religiophilosophic thought. They are
also the oldest human documents. By dint of their profound
wisdom, they could escape the ravages of time. They have
withstood the acid test of time all these centuries, and today form
an important part of the common heritage of mankind. They are a
whole body of literature, and the earliest source of our knowledge
about Hindu view and way of life. They are called "Srutis"
revelations, orally transmitted to the seers by God himself. They
were not composed or written down by the ancient seers and rishis.
The Vedas are considered "Apaurusheya", that is, their authorship
cannot be assigned to any prophet or human agency. They were
breathed out by God and heard and envisioned by the ancient sages
in the dim and pre-historic pas in India. Thus, they are impersonal
spiritual knowledge, and wisdom received by the seers. They were
not their authors individually or collectively, but were blessed with
the divine inner audience from him. They received this esoteric
knowledge of the Vedas in a state of mind which can be termed as
a state of supra-normal conciousness. This non-authorship of the
Vedas imparts them a peculiar universality of their own. Their
being non-personal in composition also means that in a sense
anybody who studies them, delves deep, and imbibes their spirit, is
Copyrighted

Vedas and Upani shads
their author.
These ancient most books of the Hindu lore and learning are four in
number. They are the Rigveda, the Samaveda, the Yajurveda and
the Atharvaveda. But they are generally spoken of as a "trayi", the
triple vidya or the threefold knowledge. It is because the last one,
that is, the Atharvaveda is referred to as the "Triple Eternal
Vedas'* (trayam brahm sanatanam). These four together form the
foundation of Brahmanic or Hindu religiophilosophic systems and
schools.
Broadly speaking, the Vedas consist of three parts, viz., Samhitas,
Brahmanas and Aranyakas. The Upanishads are also their part, but
they are treated separately because of their high speculative
contents. The Upanishads are also called the 'Vedanta*. The
Samhita portion of the Vedas contains "mantras" or hymns and
mark the earliest stage of the creation of the respective Vedas. A
Samhita literally means a collection. They are a kind of sacred
religious songs meant to be recited or sung in offering worship and
sacrifice to various gods and goddesses. The Brahmanas, which are
mostly in prose, describe how to perform various rites and rituals,
and thus form together with the hymns, the books of karmakanda.
The Brahmanas are actually the commentaries on the Samhitas.
The Aranyakas, or the forest treatises deal with meditation, while
the Upanishads deal with the highest spiritual knowledge. The
Upanishads, which are in rhythmic prose, contain secret or esoteric
knowledge of the supreme kind. The Upanishads, in fact, represent
the florescence and fruition of the speculative philosophy and
religious wisdom contained in the Vedas, and that is why they are
also referred to as the Veda ma. In the Vedas the emphasis on
rituals and prayer, and in the Upanishads the centre of gravity shifts
on contemplation, Atmajnana or Self-knowledge, mysticism and
morality. The word "Upanishad" literally signifies "setting at rest
ignorance by revealing the knowledge of the Supreme Spirit". The
Brahmanas interpret and comment upon the Samhita texts of the
Vedas, while the Upanishads interpret their philosophy. Thus, they
are all harmonious and homogeneous.
The Vedic literature is in Sanskrit. The Rigveda is the oldest and
Copyrighted

Vedas and Upanishads
also the most important. The Rigveda Samhita contains 10,000
verses in the form of mantras or hymns. These bymns were orally
transmitted from generation to generation in certain familes for a
considerable long period before they were written down, and in this
process they were subjected to many changes. The Rigvedic hymns
belong to Hotar priests and were sung at the time of sacrifices.
Samaveda belongs to the Udgatr priests and is meant to be chanted
at the time of sacrifice; the term 'saman' means of melody, and
designates a whole Samhita of the Samaveda, because it is
meterical. Except the 75 hymns found here, the rest are borrowed
from the Rigveda. Of these 75 hymns, some are partly found in
other Samhitas.
Yajurveda is the sacrificial prayer book of the Adhvaryu priests. It
is composed in verse of different metres and also in prose. They
represent the loftiest human sentiments that a man ever feel for his
god or goddess. Many of its mantras have been taken from the
Rigveda. Yajurveda is characterized by its division into two
collection of texts. The first is called Krishna or Black Yajurveda.
The second is known as Shukla or White Yajurveda. In the former
the Samhita and Brahmana portions are confused, but in the latter
Brahmana portion is collected separately in the Satpatha
Brahmana.
The Atharvaveda also shares many hymns in common with
Rigveda. It is comparatively of later date, but its many hymns are
as old as the Samhita mantras of the Rigveda. Atharvaveda will
ever remain one of the richest human heritages representing both
the secular and the intellectual aspects of the ancient Hinduism.
The term "atharvan" was associated from the earliest times with
intellectualism. Many of the hymns of Atharvaveda are highly
speculative. The three earlier Vedas represent mainly the aspects of
ancient Hinduism dealing with the goal of man's life to come, and
the Atharvaveda deals with the other aspect, that is, the life of man
in this world. This Veda deals with man, his daily life, his safety
from the enemy, destruction of the foe, polities, cures, curses,
atonements and such other things. But at the same time
Atharvaveda is intimately and deeply concerned with the question
of the Absolute.
Copyrighted material

Vedas and Upanishads
The Upanishads are great scientific works on metaphysics and
ethics. In the words of R.D. Ranade, "They mark the transition
from the Nature-gods to Self, from the hymnology to reflection,
from henotheistic polytheism to monotheistic mysticism. No longer
is there any fear of the wrath of the personified gods; and so, they
mark the transition from emotion and imagination of the Rigveda
to thought and reason of the post-vedic period. Hence, the guardian
of natural and moral order does not come from without, but springs
from the Atman who is the synthesis of what is both outside and
inside and who is veritably the ballast of nature."
But is does not mean that Upanishads mark a departure from the
Vedas. They have their roots in the Vedas. Here we find those
ideas in well-developed forms which were in the form of the seeds
in the Vedas. Thus, the Upanishads mark the natural and logical
growth of the Vedic thoughts. They are several, but only sixteen of
these are recognised as authentic and authoritative. These are,
Aitreya and Kaushitaki (Rigveda); Katha, Taittiriya, Kaivalya,
Svetasvatra and Narayana (Black Yajurveda); Isa, Brihadaranyaka
and Jabala (White Yajurveda). Prasna, Mundaka, Mandukya and
Nrisimhatapani belong to Atharvaveda. The Upanishads belong to
different periods of Indian history, and the earliest of these are
pre-Buddhistic, and are believed to have been composed between
1000 B.C. and 300 B.C. The Upanishads are called the Vedanta,
not only because they come at the end of Vedas, but also because
they mark the culmination and consummation of them. The
Upanishads presuppose the Vedas, and the latter anticipate the
UDanishads.
The Origins
When and how did the universe began? Whence did this
phenomenal world originate? By what do beings live and on what
established? These were the profound questions which engaged the
minds of the ancient Hindu sages and seers. The Hindu seers of old
were die first to penetrate the mystery of creation. The Vedic
literature is die first scientific and recorded attempt to explain the
evolution of the universe and life. These ancient texts underline the
restlessness and stirrings of the human mind to discern a certain
Copyrighted material

Vedas and Upanishads
meaning and essence of life and its relation with universe and its
creator. The inner urge and the great driving force of the rishis
made mem explore the beginnings of the existence, when nothing
existed, neither the sky, nor the earth, nor space in between, neither
God nor gods, because then God was not yet God having created
nothing. We find the Vedic rishi in Svetasvatra Upanishad enquire,
"What is the cause? Brahman? Whence do we originate? By what
do we live and on what established? Upheld by what in pleasure
and in reverse live we our respective lives, O Brahman Knowers?"
The same enquiry is repeated again and again in so many places.
The Rigveda asks, "Who verily knows and who can here declare it,
whence it was born and whence comes this creation? The gods are
later man this world's production, who knows then whence it came
first into being? And then doubtfully answers, "He, the first origin
of mis creation, whether he formed it all or did not form it, whose
eye controls this world in highest heaven, he verily knows it, or
perhaps he knows not".
The universe must have a beginning. In the beginning naught
existed. It was all darkness enveloped in darkness, far and wide,
nothing but absolute void, until one out of the void took birth. He
became self aware and felt alone, and so desired to be many,
wanted himself to be multiplied. He reflected and having reflected.
He projected it, He entered into it, that very thing, and became the
gross and the subtle. The Prasnopanishad explains the beginning of
the evolution thus—
"The Pursha then first of all created Prana; for, Prana it is who is
the inner Self of all the beings in the unni verse and the very support
of the organs of sense and action of them all. He then produced the
five elements as the material out of which the body was formed.
First he produced the element for space (akasha) with its specific
quality of sound: than out of akasha the wind, with its specific
quality of touch in addition to the quality ol sound, because of its
being a product of; men out of wind, the element of fire with the
specific quality of form and along with it the inherited qualities of
sound and touch; then again, out of fire the element of water with
its specific quality of flavour, along with the three earlier qualities
of sound, touch and form; and finally out of water, the element of
Copyrigf

Vedas and Upanishads
earth and its specific quality of smell, along with the four qualities
of the preceding elements, namely sound, touch, form and flour.
And further, again, in order to make possible the acquisition of
knowledge, and the doing of actions, He brought into being out of
the elements and their qualities, the five senses of knowledge, as
also the five organs of action. And in order that all mis should be
owned organs of action. And, in order that all this should be owned
and possessed by a master, as if, he produced the inner sense or the
mind."
This riddle of creation is again answered by means of the sacrifice
of Purusha. The Rigveda explains that, "all creatures are
one-fourth of him, three-fourths of eternal life in heaven. With
three-fourths Purusha went up: onefourth of him again was here.
Then he strode out of every side over what eats not and what eats.
When gods prepared the sacrifice with Purusha as their offering.
Its oil was spring, the holy gift was autumn; summer was the wood.
They balmed as victim on the grass Purusha born in earlier time.
With him the Deiues and all Sadhyas and Rishis sacrificed. From
that great general sacrifice the dripping fat was gathered up. He
formed the creatures of the air and animals both wild and tame.
From it were horses born, from it all cattle with two rows of teem.
The Moon was gendered from his mind, and from his eye the Sun
had birth, Indra and Agni from his mouth were bom and Vayu from
his breath. From his navel came mid air; the sky was fashioned
from his head; Earth from his feet, and from his ear the regions.
Thus they formed the worlds."
This cosmological question of creation, one of the most
philosophical ones, comes to the foreground again and again, and
the creator is named as Prajapati or Brahmanaspati, Vishvakarman
or Hiranyagarbha or gods in general, but it is emphasized again and
again that all plurality is apparent not real. The reality is one, but is
called by many names by the sages. When the question 4 'What God
shall we adore with our oblation?" is raised repeatedly, the answer
is one alone, the Creator Prajapati, who holdeth up this heaven and
earth, whose commandments all the gods acknowledge, the lord of
the whole world of that breathes and slumbers, the God of gods, the
universal germ.

Vedas and Upanishads
The problem of creation and evolution occurs in the Brahmanas, in
the Upanishads and again in the Gita and the Puranas, for example,
in the Satpatha Brahmana we find mat in the beginning Prajapati
tortured and mortified himself in penance and created beings, and
men out of his mind. Because men was created out of his mind, and
mind being the most vital organ, man is the first and foremost of
the beings. In other creation-legends the existence begins with
primeval water or with the Brahman. Brahman is the ultimate cause
of creation. From him all things are born, through him they live and
finally into him they return and merge in. He is one without
second and integral to the world of phenomena. From him the
universe has come forth as threads from the spider. Thus, Vedic
rishis were concerned not only with evolution but also with
involution. In this respect these rishis are still ahead of the modem
scientists. The involution or dissolution of the universe is in the
inverse order. In dissolution each succeeding elements dissolve into
its cause. Ultimately the universe is dissolved in the Purusha
him-self. And just as the rivers which run into the sea lose their
names and forms, and there remains one sea only, even so ail things
have no other destination except the Purusha, the only one
omniscient Being in whom they all merge and lose their names and
forms. What then remains is the eternal, immortal, timeless,
Purusha, the Brahman. The universe has emanated from Brahman,
a positive entity and ultimately returns to him. Herein we have the
genesis of the theory of evolution and involution.
The Mundakya Upanishad declares mat "As a spider projects and
withdraws its web, as herbs grow on earth or hair comes on a living
person, so does this universe here proceed from the immutable".
The creation and dissolution of the universe is an eternal lila, a play
of the Brahman. When we speak of the beginning of the universe,
we actually speak of the beginning of a cycle (kalpa). In this sense
the Vedas declare the origin of the universe beginningless, because
its origin cannot be traced.
Again in Kathopanishad this process of creation and dissolution is
described beautifully. The Lord of Death, Yama tells Nachiketa, a
great seeker of the truth, "Wonderful is this tree of wordly
existence which has its roots upwards in the form of Brahman, and
Copyrighted material

1 356 Vedas and Upanishads
which, though it might not last even till the dawn of tommorrow
and is therefore, known as the 4 Asvatha' (not tomorrow lasting, and
which also means the Pippala tree). The root being verily the
Brahman, is the support and the sustenance of all the worlds. None
can ever transgress its command."
"It comes out-jof Brahman, in it is sustained and in Brahman again
it is dissolved. It is due to the fear of the Brahman that all the
activities in the universe are going on smoothly, and without there
being any exception or delay of even a single minute. It is through
the fear of Brahman that fire burns, the sun shines, Indra rules over
the gods, and wind and the Lord of Death are in great haste to
perform their respective duties."
"He is within all beings and withoutMotionless, yet still moving, not discerned
For subtlety of instant presence; close
To all, to each; yet measurelessly far;
Not manifold, and yet subsisting still
In all which lives.
The light of lights, he is in the heart of dark
Shining eternally,"
This process of creation and dissolution or pralaya goes on
ceaselessly. Evolution and involution occur alternately as part of
the lila of the Brahman. In Atharvaveda, Brahman as a Cosmic
Pillar or Skambha is described as the source and support of all
creation. It is this Cosmic Pillar which holds all things together. It
is the source from which spring both being and non- being. The
repeated query of this mantra, is, "What is Skambha? From which
of his parts do the Fire, me Wind, the Moon, the Sun, the Earth and
the Sky come form? What is that support which sstains the days,
nights, the world and all the forms of life? And how much of
himself is there in the Skambha? By how much will be into the
future? That one limb he made thousand-fold, by how much of
himselt did he enter the Skambha? On whom the earth, the sky and
Copyrighted material

Vedas and Upanishads
the air are firmly set, on whom the fire, the moon, the sun and the
wind are firmly founded, each knowing his place? Tell me of that
Skambha — who for sooth is he? In whose one limb all the
thirty-three gods are set together, tell me of that Skambha, who
may he be?"
And then in reply the sages say that they who know this divine
Prusha, know the Supreme Being, the Lord of life, the Support and
frame of all creation, him, out of whose body were created the
verses, formuuias from his shavings, songs from his hairs. He alone
holds the Adityas, Rudras, Vasus, and the rest of the three and
thirty gods together, whose eyes are the sun and the moon, mouth
the fire, breath the wind. "A great wonder amidst creation strode in
penance on the surface of the sea. In him are set whatever gods
there are, like the branches of a tree round the trunk. Unto him the
gods continually render tribute unmeasured in a well-measured
place of sacrifice with their hands and feel, speech with hearing
and with sight. He who knows the Reed of gold standing in the sea,
is truly the mysterious Prajapati."
This theme of creation and dissolution recur in the Gita and the
Puranas in great detail as the Brahman's eternal lila. In the Gita the
same basic principles of evolution underline die process of
creation. It is He who manifests himself in and through the whole
of the universe, each being reflecting a portion of his splendour. He
is the beginning and the end, and also the in- between. 4i am the
origin of all; from me all things evolve. The wise know this and
adore Me with all their heart... I am the Self, () Gudakesa, seated in
the hearts of all beings. I am the beginning, the middle and also the
end of all beings... whatever being mere is. know that to have
sprung from a spark of My splendour. I stand supporting the whole
universe with a single fragment of Myself."
Brahman and At man
The question of Brahman or ultimate Reality, and its relation to
Atman or individual Soul, is fundamental to Hindu religious
thinking. Brahman of the Hindus is both the personal God and the
impersonal Reality, and they are not incompatible. This view of
God. in both his aspects, underlines the principle of "from the
Copyrighted material

Vedas and Upanishads
familiar and from concrete to abstract". It represents a sublime
synthesis of personal and impersonal, gross and subtle, microcasm
and macrocasm, saguna and nirguna. The paths to the
transcendental Reality pass through many stages. Paths may be
different, but they all converge on the same one point of Reality.
Brahman is both immanent and transcendant. That is why he has
been described in opposing terms and contradictory language.
Brahman, in his saguna aspect, as a personal Deity, is the lord of
all, omniscient, the cause of all. From him all beings originate and
ultimately in him they merge. He is the ruler of the universe; he
projects it, maintains it, and dissolves it at the end of the cosmic
sycle. As Ishvara, he is the sum total of all the bodies in the
universe, and the aggregate of the the minds. In the Rigveda, as
Aditi, the boundless, infinite and indivisible, she is mother of all
the gods. God is imagined here as one, immanent, indivisible
Reality, the proginitor of the gods and the phenomenal world,
* 'Aditi is the heaven, Aditi is mid- air, Aditi is the mother and the
Sire and Son. Aditi is all gods, Aditi is five-classed men, Aditi is all
that hath been born and shall be born."
The cosmic view of Reality holds God as saguna, the bearer of
attributes. In the Purusha-shukta of the Rigveda, he is described as
having a thousand heads, a thousand eyes and a thousand feet and
pervading the entire universe. It declares that all beings are only a
fourth of the Reality and that God and man are inseparable, and the
Supreme spirit as a Purusha or Cosmic Man involves
inter-relationship.
"A thousand heads hath Purusha,
a thousand eyes, a thousand feet.
On every side pervading earth
He fills a space ten lingers wide.
This Purusha is all that yet hath been
and all that is to be;
the Lord of immortality which
Copyrighted material

Vedas and Upani shads
Waxes greater still by food.
So mighty is his greatness;
Yea, greater than this is Purusha.
All creatures are one-fourth of him,
three-fourths eternal life in heaven.
With three-fourths Purusha went up,
one-fourth of him again was here.
Thence he strode out every side
over what eats not and what eats/'
In the Upanishads he is both personal (saguna) and impersonal
(nirguna). He is within and without, moving and unmobing. He is
the ultimate Reality and cannot be described even by pairs of
opposites. The Vedic bards are compelled to describe it in a dual
manner. Brahma is the sole Reality, and yet there is a place for
multitued of gods, goddesses and the phenomenal world as its
manifestation. The theory of immanence holds God and the
universe identical. The individual soul and the Supreme Soul are
also identical in essence. Brahman is the foundation of all the
manifestation. By knowing Brahman one becomes Brahman. The
diversity of the phenomenal world and its identity with the
Absolute is declared at many places in the Upanishads. From him
has this universe come and to him it will return. He created it out of
himself and then entered it. But mis "entrance" is not to be taken
literally. He does not enter like a builder, who builds a house and
then enters it. He is there in all the living beings and yet he is one
and undivided, immanent, all-pervasive and yet transcendent.
Brahman is the cause of all this manifestation. Just as gold can be
shaped into various forms without any change into its fundamental
nature, even so, Reality can manifest itsefl in diverse shapes and
forms of various splendour and grandeur and yet remain the same.
The different manifestiations of the Divine are real but they cannot
exist without the prior existence of That. In the words of
Mundakopanishad, "Brahman has caused the show of the creation
Copyrighted material

Vedas and Upanishads
of the vast universe, which is very helpful to have some idea of the
limitles magnitude, glory and the resplendent nature of the
transcendent, uncontaminated, and impersonal Being. Fire is the
form of him; heaven is his head; the sun and the moon are his eyes;
the quarters his ears; the Vedas his speech; the wind his prana; the
whole world his heart; the earth his feet. He is the infinite God,
known as Vishnu, the inner Atman of all beings. From him is born
the Sun, who is merely burning fuel in that great Fire; from him
come forth the rains which produce herbs, and corn and valour in
men and women from whom are born the various peoples".
Brahman is Sat, Chit and Ananda, that is, He is absolute existence
or being, absolute consciousness and absolute bliss.
Brahman being the sole Reality, the plurality of the world is unreal,
and the result of avidya, maya or nescience. It is this nescience
which is at the root of the experience of plurality. The Absolute is
in no way affected and altered by the phenomenal world. The
immutable Reality is ever the same. The Absolute is beyond
phenomenal world of names and forms. The world changes and
passes but the One remains. The acosmic doctrine regards the
Absolute as nirguna, attributeless and distinctionless. Its approach
is negative and it declares that Brahman never became the universe,
and the phenomental show is only an appearce. It states that
senseperceptions like touch, sound, smell, colour, taste and
spatial-temporal qualities, like beginning and end, above and
below, right and left, do not apply to the Absolute. The theory of
the universe coming out of the Brahman is not a reality. God
cannot be characterized as "this" or "that". An oft quoted passage
of Madukya Upanishad says, "Not internally conscious, not
conscious otherwise, not a mass of consciousness, not conscious,
not non-conscious, imperceptible, not amenable to impirical usage,
ungraspable, the essence of the knowledge of the one Self, that into
which all phenomenon get resolved, that which is non-dual bliss,
such they hold, is transcendent Reality."
They hold that the Absolute can be indicated only as "not this, not
that". In Brihadaranykopanishad the sage Yajnavalkya says that
Brahman cannot be defined by empirical categories. "It is not
gross, not subtle, not short, not long, not red, not adhesive, without
Copyrighted material

Vedas and Upanishads
shadow, without darkness, without air, without space, without
attachment, without taste, without smell, without eyes, without
ears, without speech, without mind, without light, wighout breath,
without mouth, without measure, and without either inside or
outside. It does not eat anything, nor is it eaten by anybody." He is
one without second, non-dual, where all empirical usages become
meaningless and futile.
In his impersonal, nirguna aspect, Brahman is the eternal witness.
He is negation of all attributes. God is the subtlest and most
transcendent, He is beyond senseperception and is not caused by
anything except himself. Bereft of attributes he is eternally one and
yet becomes many. "For, in him alone, like spokes in a wheel, all
the things in the Universe, this earth, the sky, and the intermediary
space, the mind, the prana, and the veins, and the arteries are
fixed". The concept of non-duality is reached by successive stages
and abstractions. The Upanishads were wary not to carry all to the
nirguna or attributeless Absolute, irrespective of their mental
capacity and spiritual progress. There are various ways for
realization for people in various stages of life. They begin with the
familiar things. To reach the Supreme Reality one has to pass
through many stages and planes. For example, there are personal
deities, their cosmic counterparts, than the immanent Brahman with
its attributes, and then finally the transcendent Reality, the nirguna
or nirupadhika Brahman. Thus, there is no contradiction. Because
of nescience the one and the same Reality appears as different and
many due to the upadhis or adjuncts. The very idea of plurality is
like a dream in which one sees oneself as many. As soon as the
dream vanishes, there remains, himself, the only reality in it. The
clay deer is not the clay lion, but when dissolved bom become clay
again. The differnces are mere in name and form, not in essence.
What is true of Brahman is also true of individual souls declares the
Chandogya Upanishad, "Just as my dear, by one piece of clay
everything of clay may be known, the modification is merely a
verbal distinction, a name, the reality is just clay".
God, bom in his aspects, as saguna and nirguna, is real and
essential for the spiritual progress. Both the aspects show that
Brahman is the cause and the universe the effect, and that we
Copyrighted material

Vedas and Upanishads
should concentrate on the cause so that we may be identified with
it. That is why Brahman is described both as personal and
impersonal, saguna and nirguna, dynamic and static, sopadhika and
nirupadhika. But the attributes and Upadhis are mutable, in the
sense mat they are dependent for their existence on the immutable
and nirupahdhika Reality. As long as we consider ourselves as
embodied beings, we are persons and have personal gods, but when
we realize that not only we are Brahman, but the whole creation is
Brahman, we transcend all such personal barriers and merge into
universal consciousness of transcendence. Then remains only
impersonal Reality of the attributeless Absolute.
The Sagunopsana or devotion to the personal God, is a potent
means in the ultimate realization of the impersonal Reality. In the
ultimate analysis, the Reality is nirguna, changeless and immutable.
To reach this highest Reality, one has to pass through lesser
indentities of personal deities and grosser, subtler and then to the
most subtle. The immence shows the path to transcendence. This
synthesis of personal and impersonal aspects of God is expressed in
more concrete form in the Bhagvad Gita. Here the immanent and
transcendent view-points are beautifully harmonized and
reconciled. Here Krishna is presented as personalization of the
Upanishadic impersonal Reality, and he is being described in the
same language that has been in the Upanishads to describe the
impersonal and immutable Brahman. It is in this context of the
cosmic and personal God that devotion, surrender, worship and
allegiance become relevant.
God is present in every being, but more so in a person who is
awakened, enlightened and godly. That is why it is aid that the
knower of Brahman is Brahman itself. It is the presence of the
virtues that make a man divine, righteous, godly or godlike. One is
god himself when godliness is fully manifested through oneself.
This marks the only difference between a man and an amoeba,
otherwise they stand on the same plane. The avatars of Rama and
Krishna are regarded the incarnation of God or ultimate Reality,
only because the divinity has found in them the greatest and fullest
possible expression. In the Gita Lord Krishna says, "I am the Self,
O Gudakesha, seated in the hearts of all beings. I am the beginning,
Copyrighted material

Vedas and Upanishads
the middle and also the end of all beings, of the Adityas I am
Vishnu; of the luminaries, the radiant Sun; I am Marichi of the
Maruts; of me astrisms the Moon am I. Of the Vedas I am Saman; I
am Vasava among the Devas; of the senses I am the mind and
among the living beings I am conciousness; of beasts I am the lord
of beasts, and Vainateya of birds. Of the wielders of weapon I am
Rama."
God is in everything, but more so in one person than another in
proportion to the manifiestation of his glories and divinity. Krishna
as incarnation of God is friend to all beings including the Kaurvas,
but more so to Arjuna, because through him divinity finds fuller
and better expression, because the Pandavas are virtuous and
righteous while Kauravas are not.
The Vedas, the Upanishads and later religious literature of the
Hindus are never dogmatic about the relation of the Brahman and
the individual Atman. At some places the individual soul is treated
as a different entity, but in most of the Hindu religious literature,
the identiy of both is declared categorically. There may be a
difference of opinion on this point, but they are unanimous about
die close and abiding relationship between die two, though this
relationship is quite subbtle and mysterious. They also declare in
unison that it is not the body, the senses, the intellect, or the mind
which is of supreme importance, but die soul, which is eternal,
self-existent, timeless and independent of body. The soul in essence
is ever the same and changeless. It is the body which evolves and
changes. That is why it is said there is a world of difference
between an amoeba and a Buddha on the level of die body, but
none whatsoever on the spiritual plane because the same spirit
pervades the both, though the degree of the manifestation differs.
In Buddha we find the expression of the essence far more greater
than in and through an amoeba, like the same water contained in
the ocean and a cup.
The Upanishads accept and declare the oneness of Atman, that
impersonal Reality and the personal soul are is essence identical.
Their diversity is apparent but not real. Their essential oneness is
sublimely expressed in die following passage from die
Copyrighted material

1364 Vedas and Upanishads
Mundakapanishad:
'Two birds, inseparable companions —
In the same tree dwell.
Of the two one eats the sweet fruits,
Uneating the other looks on.
Upon the same tree the soul, overhelmed,
Grieves at its impotence, bewildered.
When it percieves the Other the infinite Being,
And His splendour, he is freed from grief."
Atman is cosmic breath, not an individual entity, yours and mine,
•but universal, beyond senses, intellect and mind, which can be best
experienced in deep yogic state of being. The word Atman means
soul of the individual and the soul of the universe or cosmos. It is
the most subtle, the most transcend and imperceivable by the
senses. Atman or soul is self-effulgent and existent, and the senses,
depend on it for their existence as well as perception. The senses
borrow die power of conception only from the soul. Atman is not
altered or affected by what appears on it, just as the rope, the shell
and the sky appear respectively to be serpent, a silver and a
coloured expanse, even so the soul appears to be different on
account of the superimposition of the upadhis or adjuncts and
attributes, not its own.
Atman is fundamentally changeless, one, non-dual and allpervading as the bubbles, the foam and the waves are nothing else
but water, or die ornaments are nothing else but gold, and me
pitchers nothing else but the earth though they may be of various
forms, sizes and names. The name and the form can never alter the
essence of the soul.
The soul is of the nature of consciousness, and all that comes into
existence is nothing else but Atman. The individual soul
transmigrates in various ways on different planes of existence. The
oneness of the soul, the gods and the Supreme Soul is very well
expressed in many well-known hymns and passages, for example.
Copyrighted material

Vedas and Upanishads
in this hymn of the Rigveda:
"He is the Sun dwelling in the heavens,
the Vayu dwelling in the mid-region,
the priest beside the sacrificial altar.
He is guest in the house, consciousness
in men, the dweller in the noblest
place, dweller in the cosmic order,
born of flood, in the rays of the Sun.
The truth itself."
The existence of universe is based on the identity of the individual
soul and the Universal Soul. God is Purusha, and so is man. They
both are Purusha in embodied form, and freed from this
manifestation they become impersenal and nirguna Reality. Being
most subtle it is described in its negative and positive aspects even
in the same hymn. The opposite and self-contradictory terms used
in describing Atamn shows its indescribleness. In the Chandogya
Upanishad Atman is described thus— "This soul of mine within the
heart is smaller man a grain of rice, or a barley corn, or a mustard
seed, or a grain of millet.. .this soul of mine within the heart is
greater than the earth, greater than the atmosphere, greater than the
sky, greater than these worlds". The same thread of Atman runs
through and binds together all the beings. The same Atman is
manifested through various beings, but prominently so in those
beings who are good, godly and beautiful. The immortality of the
soul is emphasized in this passage of the Gita-
"The wise grieve not either for
the living or for the dead.
Never was there a time,
when I was not, nor you,
nor any of these princes,
nor is it we shall cease to be in
Copyrighted material

1 366 Vedas and Upanishads
the future.
The unreal has no existence.
The Real never ceases to be.
The truth about both has
been realized by the seers.
In the Kathopanishad we find Yama, the Lord of Death teaching
the young Nachiketas the nature of Atman and the method of its
realization. Nachiketas was yet a boy of sixteen; his father
Vajsravas performed a sacrifice and gave away in charity to the
priests and the Brahmans even such cows which were old, weak,
dry and useless. It made Nachiketas sad. He wanted to offer
himself in dakshina to undo the wrongful charity of his father and
to avoid the possible future misery and punishment to his father. He
made up his mind to save his father even at the cost of his won life,
and asked Vajsravas thrice to whom he was to go. Twice he did not
get any reply, but the third time the father got angry and said, "Go
to hell". The boy went to house of Death. Nachiketas remained
unattended for three days at the gate of Yama, because the latter
was not present there. To atone for this lapse, Yama offered him
three boons, and the boy asked Yama as a third favour to be
enlightened if after the death of a man there still remained or not
the Atman, who is said to be different from the mind, senses and
the intellect. Yama tried to dissuade him by offering limitless
riches, progeny, kingdom and such other things, but the boy,
without being tempted by these attractions, insisted on his boon.
And then Yama, finding him a fit and worthy disciple, instructed
him in Brahm-vedya or the knowledge of the Self.
"Notwithstanding the bodies being many, there is one universal
Atman who is all pervading and immanent in all. ...He is at once
one and all-pervading...He dwells in the city ol the human body.
The Atman who can never be menable to any change, who, being
bereft of birth and death, always remains uncontaminated, and as
equal to all like the Sun. He does not perish when the body is
destroyed. He is beyond the senses and their obects, beyond mind
and intellect. Man lives by the presence of Atman on whom depend
Copyrighted material

Vedas and Upanishads
the senses, the mind and the intellect for their very existence. The
Atman alone is the independent element of consciousness and life.
Know this Atman ever awake even while the Pranas and senses go
to sleep. Know him to be ever pure, impershable Brahman which is
the source and support of all. Just as fire trans forms the wood into
fire, and assmes itself the shape of the burnt wood even so, the
invisible Atman, who is the inner Self of all, becomes manifest and
transforms a being into a prototype of himself and assumes for
himself the personality and the embodied nature of the devotee, and
yet remains as the only transcendent Reality of all."
But the individual sheathed in a body forgets its real nature and
identity, and begins to regard itself as a separate soul. Imprisoned
in a body, the individual soul feels itself separated and estranged
from the Supreme Soul because ofnescience. By knowing mat there
is falling of all fetters, the cessation of the cycle of birth and death.
Therefore, the highest object of life should be to aim this
identification and union with the Brahman. This can be attained
only through knowledge and giving up of all works, good as well
as evil, for even good actions lead to new births and rebirths. As no
water remains attached to the lotus bloom, so no deeds cleave to
him who knows Atman. The Bhagvad Gita declares in the same
strain —
"He who holds Atman as slayer
and he who regards It as the slain
Both of them are ignorant.
It slays not, nor is It slain.
The Atman is neither born,
nor does It die. Coming into being
and ceasing do not take place in It.
Unborn, eternal, constant and ancient
It does not die when the body is slain.
Seek to perform your dharma.
Copyrighted material

Vedas and Upanishads
but seek not its fruits.
Be ye not the producer of
the fruits of karma nor lean towards inaction.
Perform action, O Dhananjaya, being
fixed in yoga, renouncing attachments,
and even-minded in success
and failure: equilibrium is very yoga.
The wise imbued with equanimity
of mind, renouncing the fruits
of their actions, freed from the fetters
of births, verily go to the stainless state.*'
In the Brihadarankya Upanishad rishi Yajnavalkya, being
questioned, tells on many occasions that Atman, like salt in water,
is immanent, all -pervading, and all things exist for Atman. Atman
is the dearest of all, and all things are dear for the sake of the
Atman. The Atman is the most precious, dearer than son, wealth
and dearer than all else. Therefore, one should meditate on Atman
alone for he is only deathless and contemplation on him leads to
liberation through dissolution of all desires and actions and the
fruits thereof. He who realizes the Atman knowing, "I am He'\ his
pranas do not migrate, they become merged in him, and so there is
no return for him Liberation consists in the realization of the unity
of the soul with the Universl Soul.
Liberation or Moksha
Moksha or liberation is the highest goal and ideal of Hindu life.
The three other ideals, viz.. dharma. artha and karma are secondary,
and a means to the summum bonum of the Hindu life, i.e., Moksha
or salvation. All the systems and schools of the Hinduism
decisively and unanimously declare that moksha, the final
liberation, is the loftiest and the ultimate goal of human life.
According to one's karma (actions) a person is reborn as a
particular person. This chain of births and deaths goes on
Copyrighted material

Vedas and Upanishads
ceaselessly till one obtains moksha by following his dharma
dutifully, and through the self-realization. Man is happy or sad
according to his past actions. Life is an opportunity for man's
spiritual growth and evolution, and the attainment of the ultimate
ideal of moksha is die state of identification of the individual soul
with the Brahman. It means release from the slavery of the senses
and mind. Essentially it is a state of bliss and peace and liberation
from the limitations of the phenomenal world. But it never means
nothingness or an eternal life of pleasures in heaven.
A jivanmukta, is a person who has already achieved liberation in
life itself. He is freed from desires; atman is his only desire. Such a
man is Brahman and goes to Brahman. He achieves immortality in
his very life and realizes the Brahman. There have been many such
realized souls in India. Oneness and identity with Brahman is
immortality, conquest of death and moksha. Plurality is death. This
idea is beautifully expressed in the following four lines from
Kathopanishad:
"Wherever he is known, there is truth;
wherever not known, destruction.
Seeing him in every being.
the sages, departing from here, become immortal."
Moksha is liberation; it is imortality. supreme bliss and eternal
peace. Bondage, confinement within limited body, space and time
is really death. It is a freedom from limitations, the four walls of
physical existence. The Hindu idea of moksha can be seen in the
following prayer of Brihadarankya Upanishad:
O Thou that are manifest, be Thou manifest to me.
From the unreal lead me to light,
From death lead me to Immortality.
Thus, moksha is a state of perfection and utmost fulfilment. It is
immortality and cessation of birth and death, and the
accompanying duality. It cannot be termed as dissolution or
destruction of the individual self. It is a state of transcendence and
perfection. In the words of Mundaka Upanishad, moksha is "just
like the merging of the rivers into the sea, where they lose their
Copyri

Vedas and Upanishads
name and form. Similarly, the wise, freed from name and form
attain the supreme Reality/* In Rigveda also we find the same
prayer of moksha and immoratality. "Just as cucumber is removed
from its stalk, so from the bondage of Death may I be removed, but
not from immortality."
Pointing the path to moksha Kaivalya Upanishad says:-
4 'He is all, what has been and what shall be,
Having realized him, one overcomes eternal death.
No other path leads to liberation.
When he sees the atman dwelling in all beings
and all beings within the atman, he departs
to the supreme Brahman. There is no other way."
It is the pathway of yoga, which leads an aspirant to final release.
Our embodied individual existence is the root of sufferings and
death. It is a kind of imprisonment, and the relization of life as one
indivisible organic whole, is the only solution of the problem.
Before one attains liberation, it is essential that one overcomes the
barriers of individual existence, separation and exclusiverness. The
final release from the bondage of mundance existence comes only
when one realizes the essential unity and divinity of life and atman:
"Only in oneness is to be seen,
the eternal atman, immeasurable
Free from stain is it, beyond space,
unborn, great, unwavering."
The Bhagvad Gita underlines how the performance of actions,
without attachment to their fruits, can pave the path to salvation.
This is the fundamental message of the Gita. Man cannot live
without doing actions, bt their fruits ought to be surrendered at die
feet of the Lord. It makes a deed devoid cf desire or nishkama.
Liberation and release is the enlightened state, it's the attainment of
the desired relationship with the Reality. Such an enlightenment
requires long and arduous training and practice. It involves a lot of
study, reflection, contempation and realization, preferably under a
competent guru. This is the path of yoga. The aim of yoga and
accompanying meditation is the realization of the truth by drawing
Copyrighted material

Vedas and Upani shads
mind from all other things and pinpointing it on the truth. Such a
course leads to the direct experience of identity of the soul with the
Brahman, and unity of all existence amidst diversity of
menifestation. Moksha is a state when all plurality and
exclusiveness disappear and all inclusive reality is experienced
which is mil of absolute peace, bliss and harmony. It is a condition
of moral, spiritual and intellectual perfection, and fulfilment, in
which all distinctions disappear.
" Where one does not see another, or hear another, or know
another, that is fulness. But where one sees another, hears another,
knows another, that is limitation. That which is fullness is
immortal; but which is limited is mortal." Such a state is attainable
in this very life. This is what the Hinduism preaches and urges the
aspirants to achieve. Moksha is not hereafter, it is here. Its
achievement makes one jivanmukta, a liberated man while still
living. There have been many jivanmuktas in ancient and in
modern times in Inida. They meditated on the Self, realised it and
became Brahma themselves while still living. King Janaka or
Mithila, the father of Sita was one of such jivanmuktas. He became
Brahman itself. The great sage Yajanavalkya was his priest and
adviser. It is said that they both prepared the way for Buddha. The
ignorance or nescience is at the root of bondage. When forgetting
our true identity with the Brahman, we begin to identify ourselves
eith the bodies and its senses and their desires, we are in deep
bondage. Our desires, and the actions done to satisfy them, chain
the soul. Birth and rebirth are due to desires and the accompanying
karma. Hinduism aims at removing the causes which constitute
bondage. Moksha is not a post-mortem ideal to be experienced
hereafter in the next world. It is to be obtained and experienced
here and now. Moksha is the very nature of the soul, and not
something to be achieved after death. What prevents the soul from
realizing this greatest ideal is avidya or ignorance. As soon as the
avidya is dissolved, one becomes videha or jivanmukta.
"When man's desires are dissolved
Whichchain his soul, then he
even here becomes immortal, realizing Brahman."
Copyrighted

Vedas and Upanishads
The Vedic and Upanishadic seers underline the desirability of
libration here and now, but it never means that if one tails to obtain
enlightenment in this birth can never do so. They firmly believe
that every man is bound ultimately to possess this state of supreme
bliss and peace. There is no room for despair and hopelessness. The
underlying message of hope and cheer, moksha and fulfilment
provides enough protection against pessimism. Hinduism is the
pathway of inspiring faith, confidence are robust optimism. Those
who follow the life of dharma and righteousness, though may not
attain final liberation in this life, because of some want in respect
of efforts and self-control, they are sure to achieve it in stages, and
sooner than later. The Hindu sages believe that bliss is the basis of
all existence. Ananda is an inherent quality of the Atman, and so
there is no need to be depressed by looking at the seamy side of
life.
Monotheism and Monism
The Vedas and the Upanishads preach and propagate neither
pantheism nor polytheism but monotheism and monism. There are
many gods like Indra, Varuna, Agni, Mitra, Yama, Brahma, etc.,
but they represent the different aspects of the same Reality and
share some common features and powers. The spirity that pervades
these gods is the same. Though One. He is called by many names,
such as Indra, or Agni or Mitra. "What is one, the sages call by
many names". These gods are lauded and praised in their
respective hymns, and it may give the impression that the Vedas
advocate pantheism and polytheism, but gradually the idea of one
Supreme God crystalizes, and he is seen as the common source of
the existence and power of all these gods. For example, Prajapati,
the lord of creatures is lauded in some particular hymns as the
highest godhead, representing the creative aspect of die supreme
Brahman, but later on. when he ceases to represent that aspect of
God, he is reduced to the secondary position. Thus, it is clear that
reality is one Brahman which is also all- pervading Atman. There
are several hymns and passages in the Vedas which may appear as
polytheistic, but men the omnipresence and omnipotence of the
supreme Brahman stressed and underlined explicity, remove this
impression, for example, take this hymn from the Rigveda:

Vedas and Upanishads
'This was not non-existent nor existent;
there was no realm of air, no sky beyond it.
What covered in, and where? And what gave shelter?
Wast water there, Unfathomed depth of water?
Death was not then, nor was there immortal;
no sign was there, aught days and night's divider,
That one Thing, breathless, breathed by
its own nature: apart from it was
nothing whatsoever.
All that existed then was void and formless;
By the great power of Warmth was born the unit."
In these sacred books we find monism and monotheism embracing
each other. There are many passages where the ulltimate Reality is
represented as immanent while in numerous others as transcendent.
The elements of monotheism blend with that of monism so well
that sometimes it is difficult to say which is which. But in the
Upanishads the trend of monism is more pronounced and
consipcuous. The monism doctrine of the Upanishads admits no
other reality except Braham or Atman. Brahma, the all-inclusive
first cause of the universe, and that which is the essence of man, are
one and the same. They stress that by knowing Brahman all will be
known. Brahman as the cosmic principle is the basis of all the
individual souls as well as of the whole of the universe. Thus,
Upanishads are more monisitc and absolutistic than the Vedas.
Monism concieves Brahman as the only efficient cause of all
existence, while Monotheism represents the personal form of
Brahman. But in actuality they are complimentary to each and
there is hardly any conflict and contradiction. Brahm in its nirguna
and impersonal aspect is one, but as sould and the universe,
Braham becomes many. The latter are also real in the sense that
they emerge from Brahma. But ultimately Brahman is the sole
reality, the ground and goal ol Vedic and Upanishadic teaching.
The later Vedantic definition of absolute Reality as Sacchidananda
is foreshadowed in the Upanishads. And that famous hymn of
Rigveda (X, 129) in which Reality is addressed as "That One"
(Tad Ekam), foreshadows the impersonal Brahman of the
panishads. This One, the only One. is both personal and
Copyrighted

Vedas and Upanishads
impersonal, immanent and transcendent and they enrich and make
each other more meaningful. In the present context the following
verses may be quoted:
"The sages call him Indra, Mitra, Varuna,
Agni, and he is divine nobly winged Garutman.
To mat is One, they give various names,
They call It Agni, Yama, Matarisvan."
(Rigveda 1.164.46)
"Its root is above its branches below;
This eternal pipal tree
That indeed is the pure, mat is Brahman
That indeed is called the Immortal;
On that do all the worlds rest;
And no one so-ever goes beyond it
This truly is that."
(Katha Upanishad VI.I)
"As a spider might issue forth with its thread,
as small sparks come forth from the fire,
even so from this Soul issue forth
all energies, all worlds and beings."
(Brihada 1 .20)
"Not by speech, not by mind
Not by sight can He be apprehended
How can He be apprehended
Otherwise than by one's saying
"He is".
(Kathopanishad VI. 12)
* He who thinks himself different
from God, the Lord of all,
goes along with the wheel of Brahman,
which is both the source and dissolution of
all creatures. When the mortal man
with right knowledge can realize
his own identity with Brahman
Copyrighted

Venda
he enjoy the eternal ananda
even in this very life."
(Svetashvataropanishad 16)
"In the beginning this world was merely non-being. It oecame
existent; it developed. It turned into an egg. It lay for a year
before it was split asunder."
(Chandogya Upanishad DL9. 1 )
"There are assuredly two forms of Brahma: Time and the timeless.
That which is prior to the sun is Timeless, without parts. But that
which begins with the sun is Time, which has parts."
(Maitri Upanishad VI. 15)
Venda
Creator god. Dravidian (Tamil) [southern India]. An ancient
vegetation deity. Worshipped in villages on the plains, throught to
live in trees and equated with Indra.
Venkata
Form of the god Visnu. Hindu (Epic and Puranic). According to the
Aditya Purana, Venkata is a deity-of considerable importance in
southern India. The name does not occur in the north. He is
worshipped extensively by Hindus but particularly in the Tamil
shrine of Tirupati where there is argument that the deity depicted is
Siva or Karttikeya. The image appears to carry attributes of Visnu
on the left and Siva on the right. Also Venkatesa.
Vidyadevi
Generic title for a group of goddesses. Jain [India]. Sixteen deities
led by Sarasvati who are associated with knowledge or learning.
Vidyesvara
Generic tile for a group of deities. Hindu. Eight liberated or
emancipated 'beings' who are considered to be aspects of Siva.
Vidyraja
Tutelary god. Buddhist (Mahayana). One of several deities who are
Copyrighted material

Vina
concerned with the implementation of the law.
Vidyujjbalakarili (tongues of five)
Goddess. Buddhist. A twelve-headed form of Akajata who is said
to have been formed in the Buddha* s sweat. She is often depicted
trampling the four Hindu deities Brahma, Indra, Siva and Vishnu.
Colour: blue or black. Attributes: many and varied.
Vidyutkumara
God. Jain [India]. Belonging to one of the groups under the general
title of bhvanavasi (dwelling in places). Of youthful appearance.
Vighnantaka {remover of obstacles)
God. Buddhist (Mahayana). An emanation of Aksobhya who may
equate with the Hindu god Ganesa. Colour: blue. He is also seen as
a dikpala or guardian of the northerly direction, in which case his
colour is green. Attributes: cup, drum, hook, knife, noose and staff.
Three-headed. Also Analarka.
Vijaya {victory)
God. Hindu (Epic and Puranic). An ekadasarudra (one of the
eleven Rudra deities). Hira) aksa is considered one of his
incarnations. Attributes, club, knife, rosary and staff. Vijaya is also
the name of the bow of Indra.
Vikalaratri (twilight night)
Minor goddess Buddhist (Mahayana). An attendant of
Buddhakapala.
Vimala {stainless)
Minor goddess, buddhist (Vajrayana). One of several deified
bhiunis recognized as different spiritual spheres through which a
disciple passes. Colour: white. Attributes: lotus and staff.
Vina
Goddess of music. Buddhist. The personification of a lute. Colour:
yellow. Attribute: a lute.
Copyrighted material

Vindhya
Vindhya
Mountain god. Hindu. Personification of the hills forming the
northern edge of the Deccan area of central India.
Virabhadra {great hero)
War god. Hindu (Epic and Puranic). Considered to be a form of
Siva, and occasionally of Vishnu, Virabhadra acts as a martial
aspect of Siva against the god Daksa, who according to some
accounts abused Siva's wife Sati and drove here to angry suicide
by self-immolation to avenge the slight. He is depicted bearing four
arms. Attributes: arrow, bow, shield and sword. He sometimes
wears a necklance of skulls. Three-eyed and three-headed.
Viraj
Primordial goddess. Hindu (Vedic).
Identified as the active female creative principle in the Rg Veda.
Viraratri (night of courage)
Hindu. See Chinnamastaka.
Virudhaka {sprouted)
God. Buddhist. A dikpala or guardian of the southerly direction.
Colour: blue or green, Attributes: skin from the head of an elephant
and sword. Also identified as the head of a group of demons, the
kumbhandas.
Vtrupaksa (misinformed eyes)
1. God Hindu. Epithet of Siva and one of the ekadasarudras or
eleven Rudra deities. Attributes: axe, bell, club, cup, drum, hook,
and sword. Three-headed. 2. God. Buddhist. A dikpala or guardian
of the western direction. God of snakes. Colour: red. Attributes:
jewel, snake and stupa or domed shrine.
Vishwakarma
According to Rig Reda, Vishwakarma is the divine architect of the
whole universe. He is the personification of the creative power that
welds heaven and earth together. He is the son of Brahma and is
Copyrighted material

Vishwakarma
the official architect of all the gods palaces. He is painted white,
has a club in his right hand, wears a crown, a necklace of gold,
rings on his wrists and holds tools in his left hand.
All the flying chariots of the gods, all their weapons are his
creation. It was Vishwakarma who built the golden city of Lanka,
over which King Ravan ruled. He built the city of Dwarka, the
capital of Lord Krishna after the later had left Mathura, it was again
Vishwakarma who made the Agneyastra (the weapons throwing
fairy flames) and it was he who revealed the Sthapatya Veda, or the
science of mechanics and architecture. Mahabharat describes him
as "The Lord of the arts, executor of a thousand handicrafts, the
carpenter of the gods, the most eminent of artisans, the fashioner of
all ornaments, on whose craft all menu subsist, and whom, a great
and immortal god, they continuously worship"
According to legends his daughter Sanjana was married to Surya,
the sun. As she was not able to endure the heat and light of the sun,
Vishwakarma placed Surya upon his lathe and cut away an eighth
part of his brightness. The fragments that fell on the earth due to
this operation were used by Vishwakarma to form "the discuss of
Vishnu, the trident of Shiv, the weapon of Kuvera, the god of
wealth, the lance of Kartekeya, the god of war and the weapons of
all other gods".
Vishwakarma is also reputed to have made the image of Jagannath
and left it icomplete due to an interruption. He is the god whose
blessings enabled NaL the monkey, to build the bridge over sea for
Lord Ram right from the coast in the south of India to Lanka of
Ravan.
According to Satpath Brahman, Vishwakarma per-formed a
Sarvmedha Yagya (a universal sacrifice) in which he offered up all
creatures and ultimately himself too. This process of ending the
universe also became the process of creating another new universe.
In this way every sacrifice is also a repetition of that first creative
act. This is a representation of the drama of the cyclic process of
destruction and renewal of all cosmic life and matter.
He is the presiding deity of all craftsmen. The architects and also
Copyrighted material

Vishnu 1379
the factory owners perform the worship of Vishwakarma when the
sun enters the Bhadrapada constellation; this ceremony is
performed in front of the implements of trade or a manufacturing
machine. The carpenter worships the chisel, the saw, etc., the
weaver prays before the shuttle while the potter worships the wheel
and so on. On this day an atmosphere of festivity is blended with
the rituals of prayers. As an independent god, Vishwakarma is still
worshipped in some parts of Bengal.
Origin Hindu (Vedic, Epic and Puranic) (India). One of a triad of
creator gods.
Known period of worship possibly from circa 1 700 BC until the
present day.
Synonyms appearing as ten major incarnations or avataras: Matsya,
Kurma, V arch a. Narashima, Vamana, Parasurama, Rama, Krsna or
Balarama. Buddha, and Kalki (n). Other epithets include Abjaja.
Agjayoni, Adhoksaja, Anantasayana, Aniruddha.
Centre (s) of cult many sanctuaries throughout the sub-continent.
Art references sculptures generally in bronze, but also in stone.
Reliefs.
Literary sources Rg Veda; Mahabharata and Ratnayana epics:
Puranic literature.
Vishnu began, according to the Vedas, as a minor cosmic deity
imagined striding the sky in three geant steps-rising, zenith and
setting. He was never a solar god, but became briefly associated
with the movements of the sun in the sky.
Vishnu's presuge developed with the Epics and of the three deities
making up the apex of the modern Hindu pantheon, he is the mosi
widely worshipped and pre-eminent (see also Brahma and Siva).
The keeper of civilized morality and order. In the Mahabharata, he
is partly identified with Krisna. According to one Puranic
legendary source. Vishnu was created from the left side of the
primordial creator force. The Puranas also provide complex
classifications for various aspects of Visnu: His most frequent
Copyrighted material

consort is the goddess of fortune, Laksmit with whom he is often
depicted standing or resting on a lotus. His sacred animal is
Garuda.
Vishnu is the preserver of the world. He rules real time, or history,
and through the concept of karma he maintains a moral balance
which he corrects occasionally in the guise of one of his
incarnations. He is a chief adversary of Yama, the god of the dead,
and has the power to repel death. He is also closely identified with
sacred water or nara, his presence pervading the Ganges. He is
believed to sleep for four months each year, resting on the serpent
Sesa with a lotus sprouting from his navel, after which he is roused
by a special rite.
The followers of Vishnu are the Vaisnavas and are mainly in the
north of India, though there exists a strong following amongst the
Tamils in the south. The Vaisnava caste mark is a V-shaped sign
identified with water which has a property of descending.
Vishnu is depicted with many heads or with four heads, generally
with four arms, typically holding a wide assortment of attributes
including conch and prayer wheel. He may also carry a discus,
which relects a destructive aspect, a mace of authority and a lotus.
Around his neck may be the sacred stone, the kausrabha, and
typically he has an obvious shock of chest hair.
Hindu gods and goddesses are phenomenal, but in due course of
time Vishnu, as God of all gods, acquired supremacy, which
continues till date. He is the central and the major diety of the
trinity, viz., Brahma, Vishnu and Shi v. Though technically amongst
these three chiefs gods known as creator, preserver, and destroyer,
Vishnu is the Preserver, for all practical purpose he is demmed to
be all-powerful, allknowing and all-present.
The name Vishnu comes from the root vish, which means "to
spread in all directions, to pervade* \ Hence Vishnu is Pervader. He
is the inner centre, the core, the nucleus, the cohesive point through
which everything exists. He swells in everything, owns everything
and overcomes anything.
According to scriptures, old and not so old, Vishnu is known under
Copyrighted material

Vishnu
innumerable names. Shankarachrya's commentary on the
VishnU'Sahastra-nama explains the meaning of a thousand names
of Vishnu.
At the dawn of Aryan religion's formative stage, Vishnu is found to
be a god amongst so many other gods. But his rise on the scale of
worship and prayer is very rapid and already before the end of the
Vedic times, he rises to the highest pedestal. The form and image
of Vishnu as well as its significance is explained in detail in Purans
and several other minor Upanishads.
The two most common representations of Vishnu show him either
sleeping over the waves of the ocean on the coils of the serpentdeity, named Shesh Nag, or standing on waves with for
hands — each hand holding one of his four chief attributes.
About the four arms of Vishnu, Gopal-uttartapani Upanishad says:
4 in my lower right hand, which represents the revolving or
creative tendency, I hold the conch, symbol of the five elements.
"In the upper right hand, which represents the cohesive tendency I
hold the discus, shining like an infant sun, symbol of the mind.
'in the upper left hand which represents the tendency towards
dispersion and liberation, 1 hold the lotus, symbol of the causal
power of illusion from which the universe rises.
4 in my lower left hand, which represents the notion of individual
existence, is the mace, symbol of primeval knowledge."
The Conch (Shankh) named Panchjanya is the fountain that
evolves the five elements, i.e., water, fire, air, earth and sky or
space. When blown it produces a sound that is associated with
primeval sound from which creation developed.
The Discus or wheel (Chakra) of Vishnu named Sudershan. Ii has
six spokes and symbolises six-petaled lotus. It represents the
limitless controlling all the six seasons and is the fearful weapon
that cuts off the heads of all demons.
The Lotus of Vishnu is named Padma. It is the symbol of purity
and represents the unfolding of creation. It is the truth (Sathva).
Copyrighted material

1382 Vishnu
The element from which emerge the rules of conduct (Dharma) and
knowledge (Jnana).
The Mace (Gada) of Vishnu is named Kaumodaki. It represents the
elemental force, from which all physical and mental powers are
derived.
In some images where in place of Mace, the Bow, Arrows and
Quiver are shown, the symbols represent as follows. The bow
called Sarnga represents the ego, origin of sensorial perception
which means that it is the symbol of the divine power of illusion
(Maya), while the numerous Arrows of Vishnu are the senses, the
fields of activity of the intellect and the Quiver is the store- house
of actions.
The worshippers of Vishnu, known as Vaishnavs, recognise in him
the Supreme Being, out of whom emerge Brahma, the active
creator, Vishnu himself the preserver, and Shiv or Rudra, the
destructor.
Vishnu's preserving, restoring and protecting powers have been
manifested to the world in a variety of forms, called 'Avatara's, in
which one or more portions of his divine attributes were embodied
in the shape of a human being or an animal or a human- animal
combined form, possessing great and sometimes supernatural
powers. All these Avtars of Vishnu appeared in the world either to
correct some great evil or to effect some great good on the earth.
These incarnations are ten in number, though Bhagvata Purana
increases diem to twenty two and adds further that they are
innumerable.
However out of the ten universally recognised incarnations, nine
are said to have appeared in the world while the tenth is yet to
descend here.
The first of these is Maisyu (fish) incarnation. According to Hindu
mythology the universe is subject to a cycle of periodical
destruction and thereafter new creation. Before the latest creation
of the present universe, the four Vedas (the holy books from the
mourn of the Supreme-Deity) remained drowned in the waters. It
was necessary to get hold of them to instruct Brahma about the
Copyrighted material

Vishnu
work of creation. Vishnu was therefore appointed to bring up the
Vedas from the deep. He took the form of a fish (Matsya),
descended into the waters and brought-up these sacred books.
The second is Kachyup or Kurma (tortoise) incarnation. In this
Vishnu assumed the form of a tortoises and took the newly created
earth upon his back in order to render this trembling globe a
stability. The belief is held that to this hour the earth is supported
on the back of this tortoise.
The third incarnation is that of Varah (boar). In periodical
destructions of the world, once the earth sunk into the deep waters,
Vishnu, the great preserver, taking the form of a boar descended
into the waters and drew up the earth with the help of his tusks.
The fourth incarnation is that of Narsingh (half-loin half-man
combine). This special form was adopted by Vishnu to kill a
demoniac ruler, named Hiranyakashyapu, who had pleased the god
Brahma by his religious sacrifices. Lord Brahma had given him the
blessing that no known man or animal born in the natural process
could kill him, that he could not die either in the day or in the night,
on the earth or in eavens, either by lire, by water or by any weapon.
It was to kill such a tyrant and to remove him from the earth that
Vishnu assumed the form of Narsingh, which was neither man nor
animal; came out of a broken pillar, laid hold of the demon-king by
its teeth, put him up on his thighs and tore him up in the middle by
his claws. It was evening time — neither day nor night. This
incarnation demands separate treatment in some detail because
Narsingh is stil worshipped as a full fledged deity in many parts of
India.
The fifth incarnation is that of Vaman (the dwarf). The fouth lineal
descendant of Hiranyakashyapu, named Bali, through his devotion
and penances defeated Indra. the god of the firmament, humbled
other gods and extended his authority over the three worlds. All the
gods appealed to Vishnu for protection and he became manifest in
his Dwarf Avtar of Vaman for the purpose of restraining Bali.
Once when this King was making a great religious sacrifice,
Vishnu in the form of Vaman appeared before him for gifts in the
company of other Brahmans. Bali was extremely pleased to see a
Copyrighted material

1384 Vishnu
holy man with so diminutive form and promised to give him
whatever he should ask. Vishnu asked only for as much land as he
could measure by three steps. Bali laughingly agreed to grant the
boon of three steps. Vishnu as dwarf stepped over heaven in first
stride and then on earth in second stride. Then out of respect to
Bali's kindness and his grandfather Prahlad's great virtues, Vishnu
stopped short and left to him Patal, the subterranian region. Bali's
capital was Mahapablipuram.
The sixth incarnation is that of Parsuram. Parsu is the name of an
axe-like weapon adopted by this incarnation. This incarnation was
as a Brahman, who manifested himself at the close of the satyayug
(the first great millenium of Hindu mythological time calculus).
This appearance was for the purpose of representing the tyranny of
the power-drunk Kshatriya-caste. This sixth Avatar of Vishnu
appeared in the world before Ram, the seventh Avatar, but they are
both represented to be living at the same time.
When the Kshatriya Kings of the earth and their ministers became
very corrupt and committed all sorts of sings, the goddess Prithvi
(Mother-Earth) went to Vishnu and prayed for relief. Her petition
was accepted and Vishnu appeared on the earth as a descendant of
great sage Bhrigoo. To avenge the gruesome murder of his father
by a Kshatriya King and the great oppression perpetrated by rulers
he is said to have cleared the earth of the Kshatriyas twenty-one
times and filled with their blood five large lakes. He is said to be
instrumental in colonising much of Southern India, where so many
shrines are dedicated to him.
The seventh and eighth Avatars of Vishnu are those of most
famous heroes of mythology, Ram and Krishna. Ram was the son
of Dashrath, king of Ayodhya, who appeared to destroy the
arch-demon Ravana, while Krishna, deemed to be the most perfect
Avatar of Vishnu, came to the world to kill evil doers and to
establish the rule of righteousness. These two incarnations are the
best known and most popular gods amongst the Hindus every
where and have been dealt with elsewhere independently.
The ninth Avatar is that of Balram, also known as Bala-bhadra or
Bala-deva, the elder brother of Krishna The story in Mahabharat
Copyrighted material

Vishnu
narrates that Vishnu took two hairs, a white and a black one, and
that these became Balram and Krishan, the two children of Devaki.
He was so powerful that he, single-handedly, at a very tender age
killed the great demon, Asur Dhenuka, who had the form of an ass.
Another demon tried to carry off Balram on his shoulders but the
young boy beat out the demon's brain with his fists. When Krishna
went to Mathura, Balram accompanied him and manfully
supported him till Kans was killed by his younger brother. He also
taught both Duryodhan and Bhim the use of the mace. His chief
weapon is ploughshare (hal) and he is therefore named Haldhar too.
Those who hold the view mat Balram is not the incarnation of
Vishnu but of the great serpent Sesha on whom Vishnu reclines,
claim that the ninth Avatar of Vishnu is Buddha. In this case the
phenomenal success of Buddha as a religious teacher seems to have
persuaded the Brahmins to adopt him as one member of their own
pantheon of gods.
The tenth and the last incarnation of Vishnu that is yet to appear in
the world at the end of the Kalyug or the Machine Age is that of
Kalki This Avatar shall appear seated on a white horse with a
drawn sword blazing like a comet. He shall come to finally destroy
the wicked, to restart the new creation and to restore the purity of
conduct in people's lives.
All the above incarnations are only the earthly manifestation of
Vishnu, who himself is eternal, unchangeable and immutable. He is
blue-skinned and in all pictures, images and reliefs be is seen in
rich ornaments and regal garments. His wife is Lakshmi or Sri, the
goddess of wealth and fortune. His place of abode is Vaikuntha
(heaven) and his vehicle is Garuda, a giant-sized eagle which often
is shown as a winged human-shaped figure having a break-like
nose. Vishnu is the infinite ocean from which the world emerges.
Hence his symbol is water (Nam) and he himself is called
'Narayan' — the one who dwells upon the waters. He is pictured
with the many-headed snake, as mentioned above, and this denotes
Anant Nag (the timeless or ageless snake). From his navel grows
the lotus out of which appears Brahman, the god who created the
universe.
Copyrighted material

1 386 Vitthali
Such is the Supreme God Vishnu, the all-pervading divinity, who
descends as an Avatar (incarnation) to establish the rule of law and
order of justice in each important age of die world's history.
Visnu Tri vikrama
Form of the god Visnu. Hindu (Epic and Puranic). Trivikrama is
the transformation into a giant from Visnu's dwarf avatara
Vamana, in order to confirm his dominance over the world by
covering it in three huge strides.
V isvakar man (architect of the universe)
Poorly defined creator god. Hindu (Vedic). Similar to Dyaus Pitar,
he is described as the artist of the gods who may be linked or
identified with Tvastar. He evolved, as the son of Prabhasa and
Yogasiddha, into an occasional consol of the mother goddess
Sarasvati.
Visvamitra
Minor god. Hindu (Purantc). According to legend, the father of the
god Narada.
Visvarupa
Lesser known incarnation of the god Visnu. Hindu. In Vedic
literature he is identified as the son of Tvastar. Vishnu took the
avatara at the request of Arjuna. His animal is Garuda. Attributes:
many. Also Viratapurusa.
VisYosnisa
God. Buddhist. An usnisa apparently connected with the guardian
deities or dikpatas is the southerly direction. Colour: green.
Vitthali
God. Hindu (Epic and Puranic). A lesser known incarnation of the
Visnu (or Krsna). The cult of Vitthali is centred mainly on
Panharpur, near Bombay, where he is the object of devotion by the
Varkari sect. Generally depicted standing on a brick, wearing a
fez-like hat and with hands on hips. Also Vithoba; Panduranga.
Copyrighted material

Vivasvan 1387
Vivasvan (shining)
Sun god. Hindu (Vedic and Puranic). The original Vedic list of six
descendants of the goddess Aditi or adityas, all of whom take the
role of sun gods was, in later times, enlarged to twelve, including
Vivasvan. One of his titles is the 'embodiment of ancestral law'.
His consort is Saranyu and he is identified as the father of Yama
and Yami, as well as Manu and the Asvins. Colour: golden.
Attributes: forest garland, two lotuses and trident. Also VivasvaL
Vrtra
Demonic god of chaos. Hindu (Vedic). A primordial being who
existed before the formation of the cosmos and who was slain by
the mother goddess Saras vati.
Vyasa
Minor incarnation of the god Visnu.
Hindu (Vedic, Epic and Puranic). Vyasa is said to be the author of
the Vedas, the Mahabharata epic and the Puranas. He ranks with
Hyagriva and Sarasvati as a lord of knowledge and wisdom, and is
responsible for dividing the Tree of Knowlege into parts. In the
texts he is depicted as dark-skinned and accompanied by four
students, Summanta, Palia. Vaisampayana and Jaimini. He may be
bearded. Also Vedavyasa.
Copyrighted material

w
Women Status in Hinduism
Actualiy, all Hindus, especially those who belong to the Brahmin
caste, are supposed to wear a dot on their foreheads. It is supposed
to be at the centre of the meeting point of the two eyes to protect
that important point. That important point is known as the
"Spiritual eye" or "third eye" or Ajna Chakra. There is a lot of
discussion about this center in books relating to Kundalini Power
(Tantric literature). These dots are made of herbal (turmeric)
powder or sandalwood paste.
Only a person who meditates on this point is upposed to see light.
Hindus believe mat Jesus Christ was referring to this point when he
said, "If therefore thine eye be single, thy body is full of light."
(Mathew 6-22). In India, Vaishnavites put this dot in an elongated
form, starting from the center between the eyes and going to the
topmost point on the head, known as Sahasrara, to smoothen and
protect the whole path of the flow of Kundalini power, which 1
have explained before. Anyway, in India as time went on, women
kept up the system of wearing dots and a red dot of herbal powders
meant that the woman is a respectably married lady. Widows are
not supposed to wear to a red dot. No particular attributes can be
given 10 this system today. Some women even go for different
colours of paint to match the colour of the sarees they waer!
i Women are kept on a pedestal in Hinduism, but at the same time
their freedon is curtailed for the sake of protection. In the Code of
Manu. it is stated that a woman should be protected by her father
during her childhood, by her husband during her youth, and by her
son during her old age. Manu also asked society to worship
Copyrighted material

Wrong With Hinduism 1389
woman, oecause she is the "light of the house". Hinduism believes
that a woman who devotes her ontire life to the well-being of her
husband is a Pativrata and she is endowed with numerous powers,
usually attained by Sages.
In Hinduism, Saraswati is the Goddess of Knowledge, Lakshmi is
the Goddess of Wealth, and Parvati is the Goddess of Power. At the
same time, they are the consorts of Brahma, Vishnu and Siva
respectively. The Mother God comes before the Trinity of Brahma,
Vishnu and Siva. So in mythology and in Sruti literature, women
are held in very high esteem. In the 'Brihadaranyaka Upanishad,
one of the persons asking grilling uqestions to Sage Yajnavalkya is
none other than a female saint named Gargi. The Saka Agamas or
Tantras glority the supreme as the Mother of the Universe under
one of the names and forms of Devi. In Tantras, the female aspirant
is looked upon as an embodiment of Shakti and she is worshipped
through rituals like Kumari Pooja (virgin worship) and Shakti
Upasana (Goddess worship).
Wrong With Hinduism
There is nothing wrong with Hinduism at all. Some people
misunderstand the essence of Hinduism and that creates problems
and misery among people.
1. For example, some run away from their duties and all call
themselves Sannyasins or Sadhus and lead beggar's lives. The Gita
specifically states that no one will reach the state of inaction
(Nishkarmata) by shunning duties because man by nature does
actions all the time. It is also wrong to believe that Hinduism can
be understood only if clothed in Kavi robe and never in a
three-piece suit.
2. Karma and Fate are the two most misused words among the
Hindus. Some refuse to use their free will at all and lead the lives
of earth-worms under the guise of total surrender to God. By not
using their free will, they become victims of their emotions and the
whole country pays for their laziness.
3. Doing wrong actions and then bringing in scriptures to support
them is another mistake some do.
Copyrighted material

Wrong With Hi
4. Some among the younger generation of Hindus look at Hinduism
as a taboo only to be touched when they hit 60. They perceive
Hinduism as being full of dogmas without even reading one line
from the Vedas and the Upanishads.
5. Some mix up mythology, Vedic and Upanishadri teachings. That
creates unnecessary arguments about scriptures. Arguing on
mythological stories is the most stupid act of all.
Copyrighted material

Y
Yajna {sacrifice)
God. Hindu. A minor avatara of Visnu and embodiment of the
Brahmanic ritual.
Yajurveda
The Vedas are the oldest known human documents in terms of
religion, philosophy and literature. The term 'Veda' signifies the
sacred knowledge and wisdom. These so valuable monuments of
Indian sacred lore and learning were composed in the dim hoary
past and show the path of ultimate release from human bondage
through righteousness, self-knowledge and surrender to the
Universal Soul. As such their teachings cut across ail the
imaginable boundaries of cast, creed, country, clime and age. In
their appeal and application they are universal and belong to all the
ages and to the entire humanity. They are four: Rigveda,
Samaveda, Yajurveda and Atharvaveda, but they are spoken as
Trayi\ the tiple vidya or the threefold knowledge because they
deal with jnan, bhakti and karma, and are in verse, songs and prose.
The rigveda underlines the path of jnan or knowledge, the
Yajurveda that of karma or action, and Samaveda the path of bhakti
or devotion and total surrender. Atharvaveda represents a synthesis
of these three. They are invariably referred to as the "Triple
Eternal Vedas' '..(uay am brahma sanatanam), probably because the
Atharvaveda, the last one, is relatively of quite a late origin. These
four together form the foundation of Indian religious, philosophical
and cultural systems of India-Indian civilization and culture has
survived the ravages of time and successive alien invasions all
these <*enturies only because it is based on the firm rock-foundation
Copyrighted material

Yajurveda
of the wisdom of the Vedas. In order to possess a proper
understanding and an insight into Indian culture, thought and
wisdom it is essential that one has a good grounding in the Vedas,
the supreme authority and knowledge of the people now called the
Hindus.
Yajurveda is a collection of sacred mantras or texts to be recited at
the time of ritual sacrifice. At such a sacrifice Brahman, the main
priest, would sit on the northern side of the altar, on the right side
would sit the udgatr, on the left would sit hotar, and on the right
side the adhvaryu. Brahman would recite the Atharvaveda, hotar
the Rigveda, Udgatr the Samveda, and adhvaryu would recite the
mantras from Yajurveda while pouring oblations into the sacrificial
fire. Thus Yajurveda is a kind of sacrificial prayer-book for the
adhvaryu priest, composed in sacred hymns in verse of different
metres and also in prose. These hymns are addressed to various
gods and goddesses. These hymns are esentially ritualistic but
embody the loftiest sentiments that man can ever feel for his god or
goddess. The recitation of these mantras is supposed to have a deep
spiritual impact on the aspirant. Thus Yajurveda is a book of
karamkanda.
The Yajurveda is characterized by its division into two collection
of texts. The first is the Taittiriya-samhita, also called 'Krishna' or
Black Yajurveda. The second is Vajasaneyi- samhita, also known
as 'Shukla' or White Yajurveda. In the former the Samhita and
Brahmana portions are confused and so k is called the 'Black'. The
latter contains only the mantras and its Brahmana portion is
collected separately in the Satpatha Brahmana. As is well-known
each of the four Vedas consists of the Samhita and Brahmana. The
Samhitas or collections contain original texts of the Vedas,
comprising collection of hymns, prayers, incantations, ritualistic
formulas and litanies. The Brahmanas form the commentary and
interpretation of the Samhitas or the original texts. The Brahmanas
are again divided into Brahtexts. The Brahmanas are again divided
into Brahmanas proper, the Aranyakas and the Upanishads. The
Aranyakas or foest texts are called so because they were composed
and studied in the forests. They contain the meditation and
contemplation of the forest hermits and ascetics on God. The
Copyrighted

Yajurveda
Upanishads or the Vedanta, attached to the Aranyakas, contain the
secret doctrine and much of the oldest Indian thought and wisdom.
The term 'Upanishad' literally means "setting at rest ignorance by
revealing the knowledge of the supreme spirit". They from the
fountain-head of Vedanta and Samkhya philosophies.
In the Shukla or White recension of Yajurveda there is a marked
orderliness and the confusion between mantras and Brahmana
portion has been cleared, however, the order of sacrifice in both the
recensions is similar. In size the Yajurveda is about two- thirds of
the Rigveda. As has already been mentioned, Yajurveda consists
partly of verses, and partly of prose passages. The measured and
rhythmic prose portions are called 'Yajus' and the Yajurveda takes
its name after it. The verses found in the Rigveda-samhita mostly
can also be found here. They have been dissected and rearranged
with additional texts for sacrificial purposes, but its prose formulas
and prayers are characteristically Yajurvedic. The Yajurveda
consists of 40 books, majority of which contain the prayers and
rites for the most important sacrifices. Some of these include new
and full moon sacrifices, sacrifices of the seasons the
Soma-sacrifice, prayers and formulas concerning the building of
sacrificial altar, Purushamedha and the great Horse- sacrifice
(Ashvamedha).
Another characteristic feature of Yajurveda is that its last chapter is
an Upanishad. It is the only Upanishad which forms a part of
Samhita portion of a Veda. Yajurveda is basically a book of
prayers and rituals but to conclude this Veda with an Upanishad
(Isa) gives it a new dimension. This marks the fusion of karma
(action) and jnan (knowledge). This little Upanishad comprising
only 1 7 verses is matchless in its spirit of synthesis with which it is
so richly imbued. This short but invaluable Upanishad which forms
a part of the Vajasaneyi Samhita or White Yajurveda is a real jewel
of religio-philosophic thought and wisdom. The fusion that it
signifies between desireless discharge of duty and excessive
ritualism and total obstinence from action is marvellous. The study
of Yajurveda is significant from many points of view. In die
opinion of Winternitz it makes an interesting reading "for die
student of religion, who studies it as a source not only for the
Copyrighted material

Yajurveda Samhita
Indian, but also for the general science of religion, whoever wishes
to investigate the origin, the development, and significance of
prayer in the history of religion — and this is one of the most
interesting chapters of the history of religion — should in no case
neglect to bcome acquainted with the prayers of Yajurveda.
"For the understanding of the whole of the later religious and
philosophical literature of the Indians, too, these Samhitas are
indispensable. Without the Yajurveda we cannot understand
Brahmanas, and without these we cannot understand the
Upanishads."
The Vedas are 'apanrusheya" or impersonal and as such they
signify that in a sense anybody who imbibes their spirit, prays with
them and contemplates through them can be their author. You are
their author if you read and recite them, if you assimilate their
essence you can also envision them as did our ancient seers and
Rishis. This renders these books of great wisdom ever living,
perennial and relevant. Even their mere recitation with proper
understanding is of great spiritual merit as they embody the loftiest
human sentiments that one can feel for his supreme God.
Yajurveda Samhita
To thee, O lord, we resort for food and vigour. May Savitar, the
god of creation, bliss and knowledge inspire us to perform the most
noble deeds. May the kine, never to be killed, be heathy and strong,
swelling with calves and free from disease. May a thief and an
evil-minded man be ever born amidst us rich is preogeny, free from
pain and sickness. May the lord of land and cattle by in constant
possession of these. May God guard the progeny, kine and wealth
of the Yajman (Sacrificer)!
Thou art the purifier of the sacrifices, thou art heavens, thou art
earth. Heal art thou of the being. Thou an sustainer of the universe.
May thou increase and stand secure and firm by the help of god and
never stumble, nor be the lord of thy sacrifice unsteady!
Thou, the thousand-streamed, art the purifier of the Vasus; thou art.
indeed the thousand-streamed purifier of the Vasus. May the
all-purifying, thousand-streamed god Savitar, cleansing, purify thee
Copyrighted material

Yajurveda Samhita
with that with which he purifies the Vasus. Which cow didst thou
milk?
Here is a wishfulfilling cow Vishvayushya of the full span of life.
Here is another, Vishvakarman and here is still another,
Vishvadhaya. Thee, as Indra's portion, I do increase and prosper
with Soma. O Vishnu, be thou protector of this oblation!
0 Agni, the lord of vows, I will observe the vow. May I have
strength for that. May I be successful in this my vow. New I enter
into the truth and renounce the untruth!
Who is it that impels thee to perform noble deeds? He inspires thee.
Why does he guide thee? For performance of noble deeds he guides
thee, he inspires thee two for doing good deeds, ye two for the
completion of the home.
Scorched are the devils, scorched are the niggards. Burnt down are
the fiends and the evil ones. Now, I roam at will in the vast spaces.
Thou art destroyer, destroy him who injures us. Harm him who
harms us. Destroy him whom we wish to destroy. Thou art gods
best conveyor, the best purifier, filled fullest, the most desirable,
and the best invoker of gods.
By the impulse of Savitar, the creator of all, I hold thee with arms
of Ashvins, with the hands of god Pushan. I take thee, dear to Agni,
dear to Soma!
1 have generated thee for abundance, not for niggardliness. May
mine eye look upon the light of self, may the doors remain safe and
secure. 1 travel at will through the vast spaces; upon the lap of the
boundless Aditi, on the navel of the earth I place thee. O god Agni,
protect this oblation!
Ye two bom of Vishnu's powers, are the source of purification. By
creator Savitar's impulse, with his flawless strainer, with the rays
of the Sun I purify ye completely. O bright waters, ever flowing
forth, thou art first purifiers, promote now this sacrifice and lead
forward the Yajman the god-devoted Sacrificer, the noble and
liberal donor.
Indra elected you in destroying Vritra, and you elected Indra in
uopyn

1396 Yajurveda Samhita
fighting with Vritra. You art sanctified. I consecrate thee, dear to
Agni; I purify thee, dear to both Agni and Soma. Be thou pure for
divine work, pure and holy for sacrificial rites to gods. Because
some of you have been defiled by the impure touch, hereby I make
you pure from all this pollution.
Thou art a source of bliss. The fiends have been swept away and so
have been the niggards. Aditi's skin art thou, may thou be well
received by Aditi. A wooded hill art thou. Thou art a firmly
founded stone. May the skin of Aditi receive thee!
Thou art the body of Agni, the releaser of speech. I accept thee for
the enjoyment of gods. Thou art a great stone formed out of wood.
Make thou ready the joy-giving oblation for gods, carefully make it
ready. O maker of oblation, come, O Havishkrit come, Havishkrit
come!
Thou art a speaker with the tongure sweet as honey, tell us about
manly vigour and sap. May we be victorious over our foes with thy
help, O thou ever increasing knowledge! May knowledge receive
thee. Swept away are fiends, swept away are nighards. Destroyed
are devils. May Vayu purify thee. May Savitar, the golden-handed
god, receive you with his flawaless arms.
Dauntless art thou. Remove the raw flesh eater away, O Agni. drive
off the fire that consumes corpses. Bring here the devotee of gods.
Steadfast art thou. Make the earth firm. I bring thee close for the
slaying of the foe, thou devoted to the priests, warriors and the
kinsmen.
O Agni. accept our oblations, thou art sustainer, keep the heavens
firm. I set thee close for the enemy's ruin, thou devoted to the
priests, warriors and kinsmen. Thou art sustainer, keep the heavens
firm. I set thee close for the sake of all directions. Be thou heated
with the lapas of Bhrigus and Angirases.
For progeny I unite with thee. This is Agni's, this is Agni's and
Soma's I join thee for food. Thou art heat, thou art full span of life,
vast art thou, spread thou art full span of life, vast art thou, spread
thou forth widely. May the Sacrificer be far-famed. May Agni
harm not thy skin, may the god Savitar perfect thee in the highest
Copyrighted material

Yajurveda Samhita
heaven!
I hold thee by the impulse of god Savitar, with the arms of Ashvins,
with the hands of Pushan, thee, who performs sacrifice to gods, I
hold. Thou art Indra's right arm. Thou art destroyer of thousands of
enemies, armed with thousand sharp spikes. Thou art foe-slaying
keen-edged wind!
O Earth, whereupon men perform the sacrifice for gods, may I not
harm the roots of the plants that grow here. Go thou to the kinestall. May heaven rain for thee. O Savitar, creator of all, bind him
on the earth with hundred fetters, him who hates us and whom we
hate. Do thou never release him.
Scorched art the fiends, scorched are the niggards. Burnt down art
the devils, burnt down art wicked ones. I travel at will in the vast
space. Unsha pened, still thou art slayer of the foemen! Thou art
mighty, for might I cleanse thee.
A girdle for Aditi thou art. Thou art an abode for all-pervading
Vishnu. 1 take thee for food and great might. I look upon thee with
an unblinking eye. Thou art tongue of Agni. Be thou a good
invoker of gods at every sacrifice, in every home!
By Savitar' s impulsion, with flawless strainer, with the rays of the
sun, I hereby purify thee. Thou art effulgence, thou art manly
strenght. Thou art amrit. Thou, verily, are sacrifice and god's
abode. Thou an beloved of gods and gods' inviolable sacrifice!
O Yajna. you are being performed in a well prepared place. You
attract all. I consecrate you devoted to Agni. You are the yajna and
its altar. 1 cleanse you for sacrifice. I purify you loving the
sacrificial ladles!
You give moisture to Aditi; you are a special creation of allpervading god. I spread you. soft like wool, the best seal for gods to
sit on. Praise be to the lord of the earth, to the lord of the world,
and to the lord of all beings!
For the weal of the world die Yajna is performed. For the
purification of speech Agni is adored. May Vishvavasu Gandharva
lay you round as a protection. You are the protector of the
Copyrighted

Yajurveda Samhita
sacrificer. To protect the world Agni is being lauded in the
sacrifice. You are sacrificer's protector and Indra \s right arm. May
Mitra and Varuna preserve you all around by their firm law!
O sage Agni, the giver of bliss and opulence to all, we enkindle you
in the sacrifice till you shine brightly.
You are a kindler. May the Sun preserve you from the front from
every curse. You are Savitar's arm. I spread you soft as the wool,
the best seat for gods to sit on. May Vasu, Rudra and Aditya, the
three gods sit on you!
You are giver of ghee. You are called Juhu (ladle) Set you down on
this pleasant seat with the dear home. You are giver of ghee. You
are called upabhrit. Sit you down on this pleasant seat with the dear
home. You are giver of ghee. You are called Dhruva. Sit you down
on this pleasant seat with the dear home. They have sat down at the
place of sacrifice in safety. Protect these, O Vishnu, protect the
yajna, protect the sacrificer, protect me the hotar priest.
O Agni, winner of corn, giver of food, hastening to the corn, I
purify you Salutations to the gods, libations to fathers, be both of
you an aid to me!
Today have I brought for oblation the unspoilt ghee. Let me not
transgress the sanctity of die sacrifice with my foot, O Vishnu, O
Agni, may I abide in your shelter abounding in store of riches. You
are yajna's home. Indra began his deeds of valour from here and so
the sacrifice became highly elevated.
0 Agni, be the hotar-priest, be an envoy of gods. May earth and
heaven protect you. May you guard the earth and heaven. May
Indra be, by this offering, maker of good oblation to gods. Svaha!
May light unite with light!
May Indra grant me the Indra-might. May wealth in abundance
gamer round us all. May all our desires by fulfilled, our blessings
come true. Svaha! have worshipped the mother Earth. May the
mother Earth make me shine like fire, I being the kindler of fire.
1 have rendered homage to the father Heaven. May lather Heaven
accept my homage. I feed upon the corn with the mourn of Agni. I
Copyrighted material

Yajurveda Samhita
feed on you by the impulse of Savitar, with the arms of Ashvins
and with both the hands of Pushan I consume you with the mouth
of Agni !
O god Savitar, this yajna of yours, they say, is performed for
Brihaspati. the Brahman priest. Therefore, protect the sacrifice,
guard the sacrificer, therefore protect me.
May your rapid mind enjoy the ghee. May Brihaspati extend this
yajna. May he preserve it from harm. Let all the gods enjoy here.
Let it be so. Om, fare forward!
O Agni, this fuel is for you. Increase by means of it and grow
mighty. May we also increase and grow in might. 0 Agni, you are
winner of corn, you produce corn, I cleanse you!
May I have the victory like the victory of Agni and Soma. May I
fare forward by the impulse of sacrificial food. May Agni and
Soma drive him away who hates us, drive off the man whom we
detest.
We offer you for the Vasus, for the Rudras, for the Adityas. May
Heaven and Earth bring you to light. May Mitra and Varuna
nourish you with rain. May the birds fly licking what is drenched.
Go with the speed of the spotted mares of the Maruts. Go to
heaven, having become a spotted cow thyself, and from there bring
the rain for us, O Agni, you are the guardian of eye, guard my eye!
Protect the two yoke-fellows, you rich in fatness. You are in grace
and conduct me unto grace. Glory to you yajna and increase. Be
auspicious to me, steadfast for my weal!
O all-devouring, unfeebled Gani. protect me gainst weapons,
protect from the lightning, protect me from snare and ruin, from
harmful food, render our food free from poison. Let me abide
happily in my house praying to you and performing noble deeds.
Svaha! This is our prayer to god of close embracements Agni, and
to Sarasvati, the sister of Fame!
O Veda, you are the knower of all. May you become knowledgegiving Veda for me just as you have become for gods their Veda. O
path-showing gods, knowing the pathway of truth, walk on it. ()
Copyrighted

Yajurveda Samhita
God, lord of mind, this sacrifice is for you, fix it rightfully like a
world in the air!
May Indra with the Adityas, the Vasus, the Maruts and the
Vishvadevas bless the sacred grass with ghee. Svaha! May all these
oblations reach the heaven.
Who liberates you from the bonds? He, the sustainer of subjects,
liberates you. Why does he iberate you? He does it for him, for
happiness of all. This is the allotted portion of the fiends.
We are united with glory, vigour, bodies, we are united with the
best mind. May Tvashtar, the bounteous giver, grant us riches of
many kinds. May he purge each and every fault and blemish from
our body.
O God, you are self-existent, self-effulgent and most exalted! You
are bestower of splendour. Grant me splendour! I follow the path
that Surya treads.
O Agni, lord of the home, may I become a good householder
through you, living with you, O Agni, master of the home. May
you be die excellent householder through my prayers, O Agni. May
the household affairs of both of us, the husband and wife be well
managed through hundred years. I follow the path that Surya
treads.
O Agni, the lord of vows. 1 have observed the vow. I was
successful in the vow I had taken, mil power was mine. Still am 1
he who observed the vow. I am verily he. and no other.
To you Agni. hail! who bears oblations to father. To you Soma
hail, accompanied by fathers. The fiends and demons who occupied
the sacred altar have now been destroyed.
May Agni drive these demons away who being nourished by the
oblations ottered to lathers, roam about freely in various guises,
whether they be disguised in thin or fat bodies.
O fathers, enjoy yourselves here, be nourished like bulls with each
of the allotted portions. The fathers have enjoyed themselves, and
here like bulls have grown healthy and strong with their allotted
portions.
Copyrighted material

Yajurvcda Sanihita
Salutations to you, O fathers, and to your genial sap. Fathers,
obeisance to you for you ardour. Fathers, salutation to you for your
longevity. Salutations to you for your life, O fathers, for your
righteous passion, obeisance to you, O fathers! O fathers, grant us
homes. Fathers, we offer you ever what we possess. O fathers, we
offer this raiment, clothe yourselves in it.
O fathers, grant us a baby son, a boy garlanded with a wealth of
lotuses, so that there may be a heroic man.
O waters, you are the bearers of ghee, corn, milk and dripping saps.
You are the best and immortat drink. You increase the sustaining
vigour. Satisfy my fathers.
Serve Agni with the fuel, with oblations of ghee, awake the guest
and then pay offerings to the gods.
Offer rich oblations of ghee to Agni, the well kindled Jatavedas.
O Angiras, we increase you with fuel sticks and sacred ghee. O
youthful Agni, grow brilliant with great flames!
O Agni, rich oblations, dripping with ghee may go unto you along
with fuel. Accept these my oblations with favour!
You are power, knowledge and bliss. I lay upon die back of the
Earth, the place of sacrifice to gods, this food-consuming Agni. for
obtaining food. May I become like heaven in plenty and like earth
in compass.
The Sun, the spotted Bull has come and sat before the mother
Dawn and is now advancing to his father Heaven.
His lustre penetrates within the space like inhalation and
exhalation. The Sun shines throughout the heavens.
The Sun rules supreme over the thirty worlds, all the days at break
of dawn. Hymns are showered on the Bird.
Agni is light and light Agni. Svaha! Surya is light and light Surya.
Svaha! Agni is brilliance and brilliance Agni. Svaha! Surya is
brilliance and brilliance Surya. Svaha! Light is Surya and Surya
light. Svaha!
Copyrighted material

Yajurveda Samhita
May this oblation reach unto Agni, who lives with effulgent god
Savitar and Night with Indra besides her. May Surya, living with
Indra with Dawn beside him, accept this oblation.
Performing yajna, may we pronounce the vedic texts in praise of
Agni who hears us even when afar from us.
Agni, the height and head of heaven, the lord of the earth, quickens
the vitality of waters.
I invoke you both Indra and Agni and please you both together
with oblation of corn. You both are bestowers of corn and riches.
You twain I call for obtaining food.
O Agni, this is your ordained place of origin, whence born you
shine forth. Knowing this, O Agni, rise up making our riches grow.
The learned priests made Agni the first invoker, the first to be
worshipped in sacrifice, and praised in rites. The seers Bhrigu and
Apanavana kindled the all-pervading Agni first in the forests for
the weal of mankind.
They, the learned priests, knowing his ancient splendour, have
drawn this milk from this cow-like Sage.
O Agni, you are our protector, protect my body. You are giver of
life, give me full span of life, O Agni! you are giver of splendour,
give me splendour, O Agni! you are giver of splendour, give me
splendour, O Agni! All that is lacking in my body, Agni, grant me
that!
O uninjured, effulgent, mighty, foe-slaying Agni, we, well
nourished with food and strong, shall enkindle you through
hundred years. O goddess Night, rich in shining lights, may I attain
you and end in safety.
O Agni. you have attained the glory of Surya. the praise of Seers,
and the abode dear to you. May I attain likewise to long life, to
glory, to offspring and to abundant wealth!
O kine, you are food, may I enjoy your nourishing food. You are
strength, may I have your strength. You are energy, may I have
your energy. You are abundant wealth, may I have your abundant
Copyrighted material

Yaiurveda Samhita 1403
wealth!
O wealthy kine, sport hero in these, places in this stall, in this
region, in this house. Remain here and go not away.
O cow, you are made of many forms and colours. May I attain the
ownership of such power-giving kine. To you, remover of the
gloom, O Agni, we approach with prayers, day by day, with
reverence do we come.
We do come to Agni, who is splendid, protector of holy rites,
illuminator of truth, effulgent One, increassinc in his own abode.
Just as a sire is to his son, so be you to us easy of access, O Agni,
be ever with us for our weal.
O Agni, be our close friend, our protector and our well-wisher,
dwelling with us. O effulgent one, come, dwell with us and grant us
glorious wealth.
O most radiant Agni, we approach you with prayers for happiness
and weal for our friends. So listen our prayers, befriend and guard
us against all wicked men.
O cow Ida, come, O cow Aditi, come here, O cows so much
desired by all, come here. May I obtain all my heart's desire
through you.
O Brahmanaspate, the lord of knowledge, make him glorious who
presses out Soma juice, even as you made Kakshivan, the son of
the seer Ushik.
Let him dewell ever with us who is rich, removes disease, increases
wealth, and is prompt in actions.
O Brahmanaspate, protect us, let not the foeman's curse, let not his
treachery approach us.
May we attain the divine, unassailable and great protection of the
three gods— Mitra, Aryaman and Varuna.
Neither in home nor on pathways nor in places perilous, has the
wicked foe power over these gods.
They the sons of Aditi, grant light for ever to a mortal man so that
Copyrighted

Yajurveda Samhita
he may live long.
O Indra, you are never fruitless, you are ever gracious to your
devotee. O Maghavan, your bounty as a biberal god is boundless.
We meditate on the excellent radiance of god Savitar, the generator
of all. May he inspire our minds!
May your unassailable chariot wherewith you protect your
devotees, be ever near us on every side!
O God may I be rich in subjects, well-manned with excellent
heroes and well-nourished with best food. O friend of man, protect
my subjects. O adorable, guard my cattle. O God, increasing all.
protect my food!
O effulgent Lord, giver of excellent wealth, all-knowing, we
approach you alone. O Agni grant us splendour with strength, O
imperial God!
This Agni, the Grihapatya, is the lord of the home, is the giver of
wealth to the subjects. O Lord of the home, O Agni, grant us
splendour with wealth. This Agni dwells on the earth, increases
riches and strength. O earth-dwelling Agni, grant us splendour with
wealth.
O house-dwelling man, fear not. nor tremble. I bearer of strength
come to you. I bearing strength, excellent wisdom and happy mind,
come to you, rejoicing in spirit.
The home on which the traveller ponders, staying far from it, there
dwell happiness and joy. We call that home to welcome us. May it
know us well who know it well.
Here in this our house may we have cows, goats, sheep and rich
food in abundance. I come to you for safety, and quietude. May we
possess mundane and divine joys and felicity!
We invocate the foe-slaying, the voracious, the loving Maruts who
take delight in their mess of meal.
We do expiate each sinful act that we have committed either in
village or the wild, in company or corporeal sense. Svaha!
Copyrighted material

Yajurveda Samhita
O ever-moving, purifying Bath, you move slowly on your path. I
wash out the sins that I have committed with my sense-organs, and
the sins done with men against mankind. O god, preserve me from
the foe who inflicts much injury.
Well have they feasted and rejoiced, the friends have risen and
gone away. The sages, effulgent in themselves have lauded thee
with their latest hymn. Now, Indra, yoke your two bay steeds!
O Maghavan, so fair to look upon, we reverence you. This lauded,
come to us as desired with richly laden car. Now, Indra, yoke you
two bay steeds!
O Rudra, this is your allotted share. Please take it with your sister
Ambika. Svaha! This is your allotted position, Rudra, the rat is thy
victim.
We have contented Rudra, who makes die foemen weep, the threeeyed god, so that we may grow wealthier, be more prosperous, our
dwellings better and may achieve greater success in our jobs.
We worship the three-eyed god Tryambaka who augments our
prosperity. As a ripe cucumber is released from its stem, so may I
be released from bonds of death by his grace and not be bereft of
immortality. We worship him, Tryambaka, the bestower of
hushand, full of sweet fragrance. Like a ripe cucumber from its
stem, may we be released from the bonds of death, and not be
bereft of immortality.
This, Rudra, is thy allotted oblation, with it depart beyond the
Mujavans with your bow unstrung and muffled in a clothe.
Deepart, O god, wearing skin garments, with auspicious mind and
without harming us.
May we attain the triple life, the triple life of Jamdagni, the triple
life of the sage Kashyapa and triple life of the gods. May ilie same
three-tlod life be ours!
Shiva, the gracious, is your name, the thunder is your sire,
salutations be to you, harm me not. I approach you for longevity,
for good food, for progeny, for wealth in abundance, for noble
children and for heroic strength.
Copyrighted material

Yajurveda Samhita
We have reached the earth's sacrificing spot wherein all gods take
delight. May we crossing by Rik, by Saman, and by Yajus the
miseries, rejoice in food and the growth of the wealth. May these
divine Waters be gracious to me. May these herbs protect me. O
weapon, forbear to harm the worshipper!
May these water purify us like mothers. May the purifiers of ghee
cleanse us with ghee. The divine waters remove all our physical
defilements. I emerge from them cleansed and purified. You are
embodiment of tapas and diksha. I bear you, gracious and blissful
ones, maintaining shining and happy appearance.
You are splendour-giving milk of kine. Grant me splendour. You
are pupil or Vritra's eye. You are giver of eyes. Give me the sense
of sight.
Purify me the lord of knowledge. Purify me the lord of speech.
Purify me, O lord Savitar, with flawless strainer and with the rays
of Surya! O lord God of die purified souls, may I with your grace
accomplish my lofty desire to purify myself.
O gods, we approach you for happy wealth, as the yajna proceeds.
O gods, we invoke you for blessings during this sacrifice.
-We perform the sacrifice with steadfast mind. Savaha! We perform
the yajna with the aid of heavens. Svaha! We perform the sacrifice
for the good of Heaven and Earth. Svaha! We perform it with the
grace of wind. Svaha! We perform it with full dedication.
For resolute and inspiring Agni is this offering, it is for that Agni
who develops intellect, the consecration bestowing Agni. This is
for Purban. Sarasvati and Agni. O divine, shining, great and
all-beneficial Waters, O Heaven and Earth. () vast mid-region
between them, we perform this sacrifice with oblations for
Brihaspati. Svaha! May all mortal men seek the friendship of the
all-guiding god Savitar. All pray to him for happy wealth. May all
acquire wealth and prosper thereby!
You are the art of Rik and Saman. I commence the yajna with this
art. May Rik and Saman protect me during the sacrifice. You are
refuge of all, grant me refuge. Salutations to you, forbear to harm
Copyrighted material

Yajurveda Samhita
me you Angirases vigour. You, soft like wool, grant me vigour.
You are the garment-knot of Soma. You are the all- pervading bliss
obtained from God. Give sacrificer this bliss. You are the source of
Indra's might. Make the crops abundant. O Tree, stand erect, and
guard me against sins till the sacrifice is over!
Observe the vow. Agni is Brahman, Agni is sacrifice, the fuel is
pure and fit for yajna. We meditate on divine intelligence for aid.
May that intelligence be within my control. May that intelligence
be within my control. May the gods, mind-born, endowed with
intellect and wisdom, prompt in action, protect us. Svaha! This
oblation is for mem.
May the waters that we have frunk become strength-giving,
become auspicious drink within our stomach. May they be pleasant
to our taste, free from disease, sin, sickness, remover of the fear of
death, full of divine qualities and strengthened of enternal laws.
This earth is your sachrificial hody. Waters I forsake but not the
off-spring. Freed from sin and sanctified by Svaha, may the waters
enter the earth. May they unite with the earth.
O Agni keep the vigil, we shall enjoy the most refreshing sleeep.
Guard us with watchful care. Awaken us again from sleep!
After rebirth I have regained my mind, I have regained my life,
breath and soul, eyes and ears. May Vaishvanara, the guardian of
your body, the unassailed Agni, protect us from sin and distress!
O radiant Agni, you are the guardian of sacred vows among men.
you are adorable in holy rites. O Soma, give us this much wealth
now and yet more later. Savitar, the god of creation, who gives
wealth has given us riches.
O Shukra, this is your body, this is your radiance. Unite with this
your form and gain splendour. You are active and impetuous,
sustained by mind and loved by Vishnu.
For you truth-oriented progress use this form as an instrument.
Svaha! You are pure and blissful, you are immortal and united with
the powers of gods!
You are knowledge, mind you are, intelligence, skill, imperial
Copyrighted material

Yajurveda Samhita
power, adorable and double headed Aditi. Be our aid in going forth
or in retreating back. May Mitra fasten you by the foot, may
Pushan guard your pathways for Indra, whose eye is over all !
May your mother permit you to go, your father and brother, and
your friend living in the same herd allow you to depart. O goddess,
go you to the god. to Soma, go for Indra* s sake. May Rudra send
you back. Return in safety with Soma as your friend.
You are Vasu's might, you are boundless Aditi, you are Aditya,
you are Rudra, Chandra you are, May Brihaspati grant you bliss
and rest. May Rudra with the Vasus look upon you auspiciously!
On boundless Aditi' s head, on the sacrificial sacred place I sprinkle
you. Rich in ghee you are Indra's footstep. Svaha! Rejoice in us,
we are your kinsmen. There are riches in you. May I possess riches.
May I Never by bereft of riches and nourishment. Yours are the
riches.
I adore him, the god Savitar, shining brightly between heaven and
earth, embodiment of truth, wealth-giving, beloved of all,
thoughtful, poet, and sage, to him whose effulgent self shines high
in the sky, the golden-handed, the most wise, creator of heaven.
May all living beings enjoy life in you. May you grant breath to all
living creatures!
I buy the splendid with splendid, the immortal with immortal and
you who are pure with what is pure. Let the cow be with the
sacrificer and these gold pieces with us. You are embodiment of
fervour and Prajapati's nature. With the best animal you are
bought. May I grow rich with thousand fold riches.
O friend, come unto us increasing the number of our friends. Be
you seated on the right of Indra desiring your own increase and
happiness of others. Eloquence, brilliance, enmity to evil,
dynamism dexterity, and friendship with the weak, these seven are
your gold pieces for the purchase of Soma Preserve these, let them
never fail you.
() Agni. establish me firmly in righteousness keeping me away
from sin and unrighteousness. May I attain beatitude and long life
Copyrighted material

Yajurveda Samhita 1409
by following a virtuous path of living!
Now we have attained the path which is free from sin and is full of
bliss, the path on which a man overcomes his foes and gathers
wealth.
O lord of die world, be my gracious aid, move forward on your
path to all the places. Let not thieves, let not robbers and malignant
wolves waiting your coming not find you. Fly away like a falcon,
go to the houses of sacrificer. That is the place specially cleansed
and purified.
Homage be unto Varuna and Mitra's eye, the great god, farsighted, omniscient and the ensign of gods. Sing hymns of praise to
Surya, to the son of heavens.
You are both seat and support of Varuna. You are Varuna's
sacrificial seat where he sits, Varuna's place of sacrifice. Sit you
down on Varuna's seat!
May you, O Soma, come to all those houses where you are
honoured with worship and poured oblauons. O wealth-giver,
advancer of heroes, slayer of the foes, sparing the brave, come to
our houses!
O Soma, you are body of Agni. I accept you for the completion of
the yajna. You are the body of the Soma-juice. I accept you for
Vishnu. Oh Soma, you are the source of reception of the guests,
you are for Vishnu, you are fast in speed like falcon, therefore, I
accept you for Vishnu. I accept you as bestower of abundant
wealth. I take you for Vishnu.
You arc the birth place of Agni. You are the cause of manly
strength. You are Urvashi, you are Ayu. You are Pururavas. I churn
you with the Gayatri metre. I churn you with the Trishtup metre
and with Jagaii metre.
Be you both of the same one mind for us, of one thought, free from
sin and blemish. Harm not the sacrifice, harm not the sacrifice's
lord and be kind to us this day!
Protector from the curse, son of the seers this Agni is active having
entered the invoked Agni. Here is this sacrifice for us, offer
Copyrighted material

Yajurveda Samhita
oblations to the gods without slackness and a happy mind.
O Agni, protector of the vow, may we be able to fulfil our vows
under you. May your form be ever with me and my form be with
you. O guardian of the vows, let our vows be united and one. May
the lord of consecration inspire me for initiation, may the lord of
forvour impell me to take a vow of fervour!
O Agni, your form which is present in iron, in the lowest depths,
has driven away the awful speech. Svaha! That same form is
present in silver in gold and in every object. Svaha!
O Agni for me you are an abode for the afflicted. For me you are a
gathering place of wealth. Protect me from the state of destitution.
Protect me from fear. I call you Nabhas, the space- born. Approach
us, O Agni, with the names of Angira and Ayu. You whom this
earth contains, I lay you down with each inviolate holy name which
you bear. I lay you down for gods* delight!
You are like foe-subduing lioness, be ready for gods' weal. You are
foe-subduing lioness, be sanctified for gods. You are foe- slaying
lioness, beautify yourself for gods!
May Indra with the eight Vasus guard you in the east. May Varuna
with the eleven Rudras protect you from the rear, and the swift like
thought guard you on the right with Fathers. May Vishvakarma
protect you on the left with the Adityas! I throw away this heated
water from this place of sacrifice.
The sages, skilled well in knowledge concentrate their soul, yea,
concentrate their mind and intellect in yoga. He, the only knower of
all functions, assigns their priestly tasks. Great is praise of the god
Savitar. Svaha!
The all-pervading God sustains this world. He has created the three
worlds of earth, heaven and the mid-region. In his feet abides the
whole world. We offer this oblation to him.
O earth, you are rich in sweet food, rich in good milch-kine, rich in
fertile pastures, and engaged in rendering service to mankind;
Vishnu has kept both Heaven and Earth apart and has firmly
established the latter with pegs around it.
Copyrighted material

Yajurveda Samhita
Now I will describe the mighty deeds of Vishnu who measured out
the earthly realms and propped the heavens above, taking three
mighty strides during this course.
O Vishnu, fill both of your hands full with riches from heaven,
from earth and from the vast wide air's mid-region and grant us
these riches from the right and the left hands. We worship you
through this sacrifice.
For his mighty deeds is Vishnu acclaimed. He dwells in the
mountains like a wild beast, roaming at will. In his three mighty
strides are set all the realms.
By impulse of Savitar I take you with arm of Ashvins and hands of
Pushan. You are woman to aid us. Hereby I cut the necks of
demons asunder. You are mighty and great, and mighty is the
sound that you utter. Utter your mighty sounding prayer to Indra.
You are self-effulgent and foe-conquering. You are king and
subduer of the enemies. Men's lord are you and the slayer of the
fiends. All-ruler are you and the killer of the foe-men!
Prop the heaven, fill the air full, make the earth firm. May the
effulgent Maruts establish you and Mitra-Varuna protect you. I
guard you with valour, knowledge and wealth. Strengthen the
Brahmanhood, increase the nobles, increase the life-span and
strengthen the offspring.
O wife of Sacrificer, firm established you are. Firm be your
husband die Sacrificer, with off-spring and cattle in this house. O
Heaven and Earth, by you rich in fatness. You are like Indra' s
shadow and me refuge of all people.
O Indra, worthy of adoration with lauds, may these our songs of
praise reach unto you. May they, vise like the aged, ever increasing
be dear 10 you.
You are vast like ocean, all-pervading and unborn. The entire
universe is within one part of your energy. You are eternal and
source of the universe. You are speech and the shed of sacrifice,
full of splendour. You two doors of the sacrifice do not distress me.
O lord and ruler of the pathways lead me forth. May I be happy on
Copyrighted material

Yajurveda Samhita
this God-reaching bath!
Look you upon me with the eye of a friend. O adorable mighty
Agnis, receiver of oblations, guard me with your blazing army. Fill
me with wealth, Agnis, be my guardians. My salutations to you,
harm me not!
Oh Soma, you are a light that wears all forms and figures and
serves the gods as illuminator. You withdraw your generous
protection from body-wounding enemies and those who practice
hatred. May this oblation reach you easily, O mighty one. May god
Soma graciously enjoy this my oblation of ghee.
May you, O Agni, grant us ample abode and comfort for our living
and go in front of us attacking the enemy. May you win spoil for
us. May you subdue our foes on your triumphant march!
O Vishnu, step forth thou widely in order to give us ample place for
our dwelling. O increaser with ghee, drink this ghee and grant
increase to the sacrificer. This offering is for you.
This Soma is for you, god Savitar, guard him well, let not demons
harm you. O Soma, now you have joined gods as a god. I have
joined here my fellow-men through abundant wealth. Offer this
oblation to Varuna and be free from Varuna's noose.
By impulse of God Savitar I accept you with the arms of Ashvins
and with the hands of Pushan. You are woman and 1 your husband
cut the necks of the fiends. You are the remover of our foes,
therefore, remove our haters and enemies. May the worlds where
dwell our fathers be pure. You are the abode of the fathers.
You are our leader. You establish on the path of rectitude even the
leaders of high caliber. Know this well. May god Savitar. who rules
over you, anoint you with sweet juices. You have touched the sky
wiih your top, has filled the air with your middle and has
strengthened the earth with your base.
Your abodes which we desire to visit are full of bright rays of light.
In those very places was imprinted the loftiest step of the
wide-striding Vishnu. I know you as the winner of riches, the
winner of Brahmans and the warrior class. Strengthen the
Copyrighted material

Yajurveda Samhita
Brahmans. strengthen the Nobles, strengthen the life of the
subjects, strenghten the subects!
O men, look you upon the mighty deeds of Vishnu whereby he, the
friend of Indra, has let his holy ways be known.
The learned evermore behold the lofties seat of Vishnu in the form
of heaven's splendour. Behold you ever that!
You are omnipresent. The learned people know you as such. May
the Sacrificer obtain riches from all sides. O Sacrificer, you are
lustrous son of the heaven. May all these people living on mis earth
be your friends and all the beasts of the forest be under you control !
You are protector and remover of distress of your subjects. May
you possess virtuous subjects and glorious, able and learned men.
May you be creative and as such enjoy all the pleasurable riches!
O wealthy subjects, enjoy. May Brihaspati protect our wealth. I
release you, O prince, from bondage of ignorance. Be bold and
struggle against ignorance to acquire knowledge.
May you both balmed with ghee preserve the cattle. O fortunate
woman be one thoughted with the Sacrificer and treat him lovingly
Protect him well as does the vast space the air. Perform yourself the
sacrifice with all the materials. Be united with his body to obtain a
son. O giver of hapiness, help him in this great and vast sacrifice,
and thereby establish him in the sacrifice. Welcome the learned
visitors who come first and also those who come next in the yajna.
Be not crooked like a serpent, be not poisonous like a viper or
violent like a wild beast. Obeisance be to you, O performer of
yajna. Progress you unhindred and accept the stream of water for
purification and folow the path of truth and righteousness.
0 Waters, convey this offering to gods, you pure, divine and well
provided waters. May we providers by well provided.
1 cleanse your speech, I cleanse your breath, your eyes, your navel,
your sexual organ, your rump and your whole conduct.
May your mind grow full, your breath grow in strength, your eyes
become fuller, your ears grow stronger. Whatever in you is shortcopy righted material

Yajurveda Samhita
tempered may that be removed, your desire be fulfilled and your
conduct be purified. Blessed be your days. O herb guard him and
do not harm. Weapons, you also protect him.
0 evil one, you are the devil's share, be expelled from here. Hereby
1 sweep away and repel the demons. I send the fiends to the nether
most dark region. 1 invest the heaven and earth with
yajna-sanctified sap. Let Agni enjoy the oblation of ghee, let Vayu
enjoy the offerings. Svaha! May consecrated Earth and Surya go to
Vayu, the offspring of the Maruts.
O Waters, wash away all my malicious deeds, sinful taints and
stains, any wrong that I have done to others, the lies 1 have uttered
and the curse of mine. May these Waters and Pavaman free me
from that sin!
May your mind be strengthened and you breath united with lifeforce. You are the slayer of foes. May Agni mature you, waters
impel you. May you be possessed of Vayu's speed and Surya's
heat so that the enemy reel and stumble under your pressure.
O you enjoyers of ghee, drink it, enjoy the gravy you drinkers of
gravy. You are heaven's oblation. We offer oblations to all the
directions, to fore-regions, the high-regions, the lower and middle
ones, to all the regions.
Sail on the oceans in the best ship, fly in the aeroplanes, go god
Savitar. Svaha! Go to Mitra and Varuna, know day and night, know
the Vedas, Rig, Yajur, Soma and Atharva with their constituent
parts. Possess the knowledge of heaven and earth, know the rites of
sacrifice, obtain knowledge of herbs, go to the divine ether. Know
Vaishvanara through science, grant me good mind and heart. May
the smoke of your sacrifice ascend to the sky, and your radiance to
heaven. May you fill the vast earth with the ashes of the yajna.
Harm not the waters, injure not the herbs, guard us at every place.
O Varuna, we take the vow not to kill the kine, unworthy to be
slain. Let waters be our best friends. Let the herbs be unfriendly
like foes to them whom we detest and who hate us.
These waters are full of saps and good food, rich in that food, one
Copyrighted material

Yajurveda Samhita
desires to have. May the sacrifice be rich in oblations and rich be
Surya in giving Sacrificer the abundant gift.
I set you down in the assembly of wise. You are Indra- Agni' s share
of all the gods. May the waters collected around the Sun, and those
wherewith the Sun has joined come hither to our yajna with speed.
O Soma, approach your people like a father and let people come to
you like sons. May Agni with his fuel hear my invocation. May
divine waters hear it, and you learned and steadfast people. May
god Savitar hear my prayers. Svaha!
O god Agni, whom you protect in the battle or urge to the fight, he
is the lord of abundant food.
By impulse of god Savitar, with the arms of Ashvins and with the
hands of Pushan I accept you. You are the best giver of gifts.
Perform this great yajna for Indra with most excellent sacrificial
things.
Satisfy my mind, satisfy my speech, satisfy my breath, my eyes,
my ears, my soul, satisfy my progeny, satisfy my kine, elephants,
horses and cattle, satisfy my men and followers, let my bands of
men never be sad!
We appoint you for Indra accompanied by the Vasus and the
Rudras, for Indra with the Adityas. For foe-slaying Indra, for
Soma- bringing and falcon-like foe-attacking Indra. You for
splendour- giving Agni!
O Soma, your light that extends in heaven, on the earth, that in
mid-region's vast space, with that help the Sacrificer in his
enrichment, bless you the giver!
O you immortal consorts, possessed of great might, foe-slaying,
bestowing wealth, devoted to your divine husband's grant success
to this sacrifice and enjoy Soma at our request!
O ladies, be not afraid, tremble not in fear, take courage. You twain
being firm, stay resolute taking courage so that your shortcomings
are removed and you be happy like the moon.
O Mother, let from the east, west, north, south, from every
Copyrighted material

Yajurveda Samhita
direction the regions rush to meet you. O Mother, let noble meet,
noble!
O Mightiest, O Maghavan, bless the mortal man. There is none but
you to bless with happiness. 1 repeat your words!
O man purify yourself for the lord of speech. Becoming pure by the
hands of the Sun, yourself a divine one, be pure for the gods whose
share you are.
0 Soma, sweeten our foods and drinks. What ever divine name you
have, life-giving, victorious, to that I pour out this libation of
Soma. Svaha!
Self-born you are from the powers that are in heaven and on earth,
for the good of senses, for the weal of learned and for all the
beings. I appoint you for divine beings who guard the light. May
you be of pure mind to win the Sun. I laud you for your virtuous
conduct. May your enemy who transgresses the law be ruined. I
appoint you for exhalation and breath diffused!
You are lord of yamas and niyamas. Therefore, control your vital
internal powers, guard your own splendour emanating from within.
Destroy all your distress with your yoga so that you may be rich in
all sorts of food and wealth.
1 place within you the spacious heaven and earth and also the vast
mid-region of air. The whole of boundless space is within you.
Living and rejoicing in the company of gods, gladden all your
subjects.
O Vayu, devourer of the pure, adorn us with thousands of virtues.
To you I pour out this rapturous juice, whose first draught, God,
you take as your portion.
These presed and poured out pleasant juices long for you both. O
Indra and Vayu. This is your home. This is for you both VayuIndra.
This Soma has been shed forth for you order-strengthening Varuna
and Mitra. Listen you to my invocation, O Soma, I offer you to
Mitra and Varuna in this vessel.
Copyrighted

Yajurveda Samhita
May we be delighted in much wealth just as gods are in oblation
and kine in pasture. O Indra O Varuna, give us for ever that
milch-cow who shrinks not from milking. This is milch-cow who
shrinks not from milking. This is your home, welcome you twain,
the righteous ones!
O Ashvins, with your honeyed speech and pleasant tongue fulfil
this sacrifice. We have accepted you for your yama and niyama.
This is your abode. This Soma is for you the sweet ones!
You, well-manned with heroes, beget heroes with abundant wealth
surrounding the sacrifices Be thus adored with glory conjoined
with heaven and earth. Let Sanda be expelled. You are are abode of
manliness and heroism!
0 sparkling Soma, may we be possessed of your chivalrous
strenght and never ending wealth. This is the first all bounteous
consecration. He the first king, guard, friend and leader.
He is the first sage and lord of speech. Offer you the Soma juice to
that effulgent Indra. May the sacrificers satisfy him with sweet
oblations those who become pleased having gained their due
offerings and are engaged in the sacrifice. May they approach
Agni.
May all the eleven majestic gods residing in heaven, the eleven
ones who dwell upon the earth, and those eleven dwelling in
waters, accept this our sacrifice, and be pleased.
This Soma is pressed out for the priest, for the nobles, this is
pressed out for the sacrificer, for increase of food and obtaining of
power, for the satisfaction of earth and heaven, for excellent life. I
accept Soma for all the gods. This is your home and refuge. You
are for all the gods.!
You are bound with righteous laws. I lake you for lord Indra of the
Brihat, O mighty one, lover of invocation. I take you for Indra. the
lord of might and vigour, for Vishnu, your home. I take you for
gods' protection and for long life of the sacrifice.
1 accept you for Mitra and Varuna, for the protection of gods, for
the long life of sacrifice, you for the learned men. for yajna. I take
Copyrighted material

Yajurveda Samhita
you as the protector of Indra, Agni and sacrifice you for Indra and
Brihaspati, for Indra and Vishnu.
The gods have generated Agni, the envoy of earth, head of the Sunt
the guest, the lord of men, a pure receptacle fit for their mouths, the
effulgent, born in holy order, the Vaishvanara.
Bound by laws you are firm, firmly established, the firmest of the
firm, the most stead fast of those who never have been shaken. This
is your home. I with a firm mind, with firm speech take you as the
leader of humanity. So now may Indra make our men of one heart,
one mind and free from enemies.
Who are you? Who amongst us all are you? Whose son are yo?
What is your name? We want to know your name so that to delight
you with our Soma juice. May I be possessed of the majesty of the
earth, the space and the sun, the lord of my subjects. May I be
possessed of heroic men to nourish thecountry to strength with the
help of these heroic warriors.
Come, Indra and Agni, unto us being pleased with our lauds, come
to the precious Soma-drink, Drink of this draught, impelled by our
songs. I take you for Indra, for Agni. This is your home. 1 place you
here for Indra and Agni.
Come here the learned men who kindle the sacred fire and offer
oblation with firm mind, whose friend is Indra, the ever youghful. I
take you for Indra and Agni. This is your dwelling. Having
accepted you we offer oblation to Indra and Agni through you.
O you all the gods, protector, bestower, cherishers of mankind,
come here to your devotee's offering. This is your dwelling. I offer
you to all the gods.
O Indra, accompanied by the Maruts, come here, guard and drink
the Soma as you did the juice in the yajna performed by Saryati. O
hero, the learned singers serve you ever under your guidance and
keeping in the sacrifice. You are the strengthener of the
strengthener of the law. I accept you for the love of Indra, girt by
the Maruts. This is your home. 1 take you for Indra' s sake.
The sages call Indra to secure new protection, him who is the lord
Copyrighted r

Yajurveda Sarnhita
of men, the mighty, whom the Maruts accompany, who is the best
bestower, remover of sorrows, the divine ruler, the subduer of the
foe and the winer of battles. You arc the strengthener of the law.
This is your dwelling. I accept you for Indra accompanied by the
Maruts, for the strength of the Maruts.
Surya's bright beams bear him high, the God who knows all that
breathes, so that all may behold him. Svaha!
Surya is the might of gods, die eye of Mitra, Varuna and Agni, the
sustainer of heaven, earth and space, die soul of all mat moves and
moves not. This oblation is for him.
O divine Agni, through righteousness lead us to riches, you the
knower of all the pathways. Remove from us the sin causing us go
astray and wander from the right path. We offer you rich adoration
and this oblation.
May Agni grant us ample room and comfort. May he march forth
before us to the battlefield destroying the foes. May he win spoilsfor us, and subdue the foemen. This is for him.
May 1 today honour a Brahman sprung from illustrious father and
grandfather, bown of Rishis, is himself a Rishi, the fit recipient of
priestly guerdon. May mis guerdon go the learned priests
established by the gods and satisfy them and enter into him who
gives.
Who bestows? Upon whom is it bestowed? Desire bestows, for
Desire it is bestowed. Desire is the bestower and Desire is the
bestowed. O Desire, to you, I give mis all!
The sacrifice is for gods' happiness. O Addityas. be gracious to us.
Send your favours here and be our kind liberator from distress. I
accept you for the love of Adityas.
O Adityas, this is your Soma-draught, enjoy it. O you men, believe
my speech, the wife and husband, the householders, achieve their
good by following the righteous path of duty and a manly son is
born to them who earn riches and leads a happy sinless life.
O Savitar, grant us bliss today, tomorrow, grant us happiness each
day of the life. May we, through our excellent wisdom, gain
Copyrighted material

Yajurveda Sa
splendour with happy and spacious dwelling, O god creator!
Bound by laws, you are Savitar's worshipper and giver of
happiness and food. Grant me joy and food, promote the sacrifice
and bestow riches or the Sacrificer. I take you for Savitar, the lord
of all riches.
Bound by law you are. Firmly established abode of bliss you are.
Homage be to you, O doer of great deeds. I appoint you for all the
gods. This is your home. You are for the universal gods.
Bound by yama and niyama you are. O god Soma, radiant,
pleasure- giving full of sustaining power, protector of wise speech,
impelled by the sages I strengthen all my body for you. May I ever
prosper whether far or near. May the heaven protect me.
May I behold the sun on both sides and also that resides in the
inmost heart of the sages, the absolute truth.
O Agni, full of affection for all, bcstower of bliss, drink this Soma
juice produced by the learned, truthful in speech. You are Prajapati,
strong manly imprcgner. May I obtain a heroic son, in connection
with you, the mighty impregnator, the lord of valour and the
protector of progeny!
You are atonement of sins committed against the gods. You are
atonement to sins done against mankind. You atone the sins done
against the fathers, done against oneself. You are atonement of sins
of every kind. You are atonement of all the sins, of those I have
knowingly committed, and also of those done unawares.
May we all be ever united with radiance, fine body, refreshing sap
and cheerful spirit. Let Tvashtar grant us wealth and remove our
bodily deficiency.
O Indra. lead us with the nobility of your mind to wealth, kine and
the sages, O Maghavan, to princes, lead us to divine deeds inspired
by the learned, and to devotion of gods who deserve our adoration.
May this oblation of our please Savitar, the generous Dhatr,
Prajapati, Agni, Tvashtar and Vishnu. May these gods grant the
Sacrificer the abundant wealth with offspring!
Copyrighted material

Yajurveda Samhita
O gods, we have made your seats smooth and comfortable, who
pleased with us, have come to this yajna. Enjoying and bearing
oblations, O gods, grant us abundant wealth!
O god Agni, the willing gods whom you have brought here in this
sacrifice send them to their espective abodes. As you all have
enjoyed food-offerings and libations, approach the air. the heat, the
light of the Sun. Svaha!
O Agni, at this place, in this sacrifice, we have elected you as our
presiding priest. You performed the sacrifice with your special
efforts, removing all the obstacles. Now the sacrifice being over
you may please go to your place. Svaha!
O gods, knower of the righteous paths, go along the righteous one
when you have discovered it. O god, lord of the mind and thought,
perform this sacrifice in the right spirit. Svaha!
O sacrifice, approach the sacrifice, seek the Sacrificer, seek your
won dwelling. Svaha! O Sacrificer, this your sacrifice has been
performed by many sages, uttering aloud the vedic hymns. Accept
it with Svaha!
Never be a serpent, never be a viper. God Varuna has made a
spacious pathway for Surya to travel. He has made the path smooth
and for easy walk where no path was. He has warned away the
fiends who distress the spirit. Homage be to such sin-removing for
Varuna. His fetters beneat our feet are crushed!
Your hear is in waters, in the oceans. May herbs and waters be
co-mingled with you. We worship the lord of Sacrifice with vedic
songs of praise and sacrificial offerings.
O divine Waters, this is your offspring. Portect him carefully,
dearly loved and so well nurtured O Soma, this is your home,
obtain bliss ther an and protect us by warding off all our distress.
Definitely he is possessed of the best protectors in whose place of
yajna the Maruts, the resplenden lords of the sky has drunk the
Soma juice.
May the vast Heaven and Earth, the mighty couple, shower riches
and ample food on this our sacrifice, and protect it from the foes.
Copyrighted material

1422 Yajurveda Samhita
Mount your car, O Vritra-slayer Indra, your bay steeds have been
harnessed by saying. May you, bound with yama and niyama, be
attracted to this sacrifice by the utterance of hymns. This is your
house. We establish you in this splace of sixteen aspects and full of
splendour.
O Soma-drinker Indra, yoke your pair of bay steeds of long mane,
strong in body and fast to conduct you to the desired place, then
come to listen to our lauds.
Both Indra and Varuna are chief lord and sovereign. They, the first
and foremost have made this draught. I drink after them. May she,
the Goddess of Speech, seated with Soma, rejoice herself.
Just as the bright rays of this Sun are beheld by all the human
beings, so are you bound by the laws of yama and niyama. I take
you for the resplendent Surya. This is your dwelling. I accept you
for Surya, the resplendent one. O Surya, you are the brightest of the
gods. May I be the brightest among men with your grace!
O mighty cow, smell this jar of Soma. May this Soma juice pass
into you. Then return to us with a rich store of milk. Pour forth
riches for us thousand fold in floods of your milk. May I grow rich
in milck-kine.
Adorable, delightful, loveable, splendid, full of milk and ghee,
most glorious, inviolable, the mighty one, these are your names O
cow. Teach me the righteous deeds of gods to follow.
O Indra, subdue or foremen, humble them who would challenge us
in battle. Cast him down to the gloom of the nether world who
seeks to harm us. We accept you for you are bound by the yamas
and niyamas, for Indra, the foe-dispel ler. This is your dwelling. I
take you for Indra who dispels our foes.
Lei us invoke today, to help us, the lord of speech, the doer of
noble deeds, Vishvakarman, the knower of our thoughts. May he
kindly hear deeds are righteous.
O Vishvakarman, the doer of noble deeds, you have made Indra
unassailable with your strength-giving oblations. The people make
obeisance to him because the Mighty one is specially adorable.
Copyrighted material

Yajurveda Samhita
I stir you for the shower from rain-hearing clouds. I stir you for the
shower from rain-bearing thunder-clouds. I stir you for the shower
from rain-bearing clouds that are pleasing to behold. I stir you for
rain from from the happy clouds. I stir you pure. In the form of pur
water. I stir you in the form of day, in the form of the rays of Surya.
O virtuous and radiant Soma, eagerly go to Agni's cherished food,
go willingly to Indra's well-loved food. Go as our friend to all the
gods, O virtuous and radiant Soma.
Dwell here in all delight, here is surety, live here with performance
of your virtuous acts. Produce a child suckling his mother. May he
maintain the increase of abundant wealth living among us.
You are the growth and promotion of the sacrifice. May we obtain,
with your aid, the light of wisdom and immortality. May we ascend
the heaven from earth. May we attain bliss, enlightenment and
heaven.
O Indra, O Parvata, slay with your fatal weapons the man, who fain
would war with us, O champions who march forward in the battle,
of the foemen approach us, drive mem away without fail, slay them
with the bolt. O you Render, render our foes on all sides, tear them
to pieces, O hero, in all the ways, so that we may grow rich in
heroic sons, rich in food to feed with everywhere, on the earth, in
ether and in the sky!
Here is Soma, brought with reverence on the hoicest chariot.
Varuna is seated on his seat, Agni is seated on the sacrificial
platform and Indra on the sacrificial barrow, and mere is nigh
Atharvan over ready to guard.
The sacrifice has gone to heaven, to gods, may riches thence come
to me. The sacrifice hsa gone to men, to clouds, may riches thence
come to me. To fathers, to earth, the sacrifice has gone, may riches
thence come to me! Whatever sphere the sacrifice reaches, may
bliss come thence to me.
May the four and thirty threads of the sacrifice made up of the eight
Vasus, eleven Rudras. welve Adityas, Indra, Prajapati and Nature,
estabish this our yajna with Svadha. I unify together of these that is
Copyrighted material

Yajurveda Samhita
broken. Svaha! May this sacrifice each all the gods!
The fruit of sacrifice has spread for and wide. It has extended in
eight directions in the sky. O sacrifice, pour down on my offspring
abundant wealth and prosperity. May I attain the full span of life
through righteous conduct.
O Soma, grant us gold, steeds and heroes. Svaha! Make us rich in
kine, corn and knowledge.
0 God savitar, promote well our sacrifice, increase the yajman's
portion of wealth. May the divine Gandharva, purifier of our
wisdom and will cleanse our mind and purpose. May Vachaspati,
the lord of speech sweeten our speech.
1 take the life-infusing essence of waters, that are gathered in the
Sun and spread in all directions. The essence of waters, the essence
so excellent for us, I accept for you.
You are foe-slayer like Indra's thunder bolt, May this man win the
wax with your aid, you so experienced in war. In gaining wealth we
laud the boundless mother Aditi on whom this whole world of life
has settled. May Savitar, sustain and establish it.
Immortality lies in waters, in them the healing medicine. O steeds,
grow you strong and fleet, having realized the qualities of waters.
O celestial waters, food-giving, whatever high and swift moving
waves are yours, therewith may this man attaing wayes are yours,
therewith may this man attaing the desired riches.
It were the wind, mind and twenty-seven Gandharvas who at first
harnessed the swift steeds. May they grant this man that speed.
O steed, you grow swift like wind and add to Indra' splendour
when harnessed at right in die chariot. May die enlightened Maruts
harness your may Tvastar render your feel swift.
O steed, what swiftness was laid in you in secret that resembles the
swiftness granted to the falcon, and the speed found in the air. With
that same swiftness be strong for us, O horse, wealth- winning and
victorious in war. Become you our winner Of riches and saviour in
the war. O steeds, winner of foods, going for food, smell you
Brihaspati's portion of food-offerings!
Copyrighted material

Yajurveda Samhita
May I rise to Brihaspati's loftiest heaven by got Savitar's
inspiration, the true impeller. May I attain Indra's highest heaven
by Savitar's inspiration, the true impeller. I have attained the
loftiest heaven of Brihaspati by Savitar's inviolable inspiration. I
have reached Indra's loftiest heaven by god Savitar's inviolable
inspiration.
O Brihaspati, win the battle. O men, lift up your songs of praise to
Brihaspati, make him win the prize. O Indra, win you the battle. O
learned men raise your lauds to Indra to make him win the prize.
May I win the battle under the control and inspiration of Savitar,
the giver of true knoledge O war-winning swift steeds, reach you
all that goal byond, blocking the enemy's path and winning the
quarters with your speed.
This vigourous courser bound in the mouth, bound, by the neck and
bound at the flanks, gathers new speed, passes by the milestones
along the winding paths and its rider hero hurls with speed his
weapons on the enemy.
He alone can conqure the foes who like a fleeting horse or a falcon
flying fast onward to its aim, marches forth speedily with firm
determination and valour fully equipped to the battle.
O fleet courser be auspicious unto us, while they steadily go to the
gods' assembly. May they crush the serpent, the wolf and the
wicked and quickly remove all distress!
May the heroes, riding the coursers, known for performing
sacrifices, the mighty ones, unassailable warrious, listen to my call.
They content thousands of people, perform yajna, and obtain food
in abundance. Such heroes win great spoil and splendour in the
battle.
() courser, intelligent, immortal, truth-knowing, make us ruch in
wealth and food. Drink this sweet juice and be satisfied and then
follow the path walked by the gods.
May food in abundance come to me. May both Heaven and Earth
approach me, the form of the universe. Let father and mother come
to me, may Soma with immortality approach me. You, heroes,
Copyrighted material

Yajurveda Samhita
winners of the battle, purified in heart, obey the behest of your
commander.
May our life increase through sacrifice, may our life-breath thrive
through sacrifice, may our eyes be strengthened through sacrifice,
may our eyes be strengthened through sacrifice, may our ears grow
strong through sacrifice. May our back be strengthened through
yajna. May sacrifice increases through sacrifice. May we ever live
as subjects of the Prajapati. May we be victorious, divine, virtuous
and lead a happy and long life.
O mother Earth, may we possess your might and manly strength,
may we have all your splendour and working strength. Salutations
to the mother Earth, homage be to her. This is your sovereignty.
You are controller, you are firm and unshaken. I accept you for
agriculture, for our welfare, for the good of the world, for increase
of wealth in the nation, for peace and calm, and for nourishment of
the subjects.
Let us worship Soma, the king, Agni, the twelve Adityas, Vishnu,
Surya the creator of all, Brahma, Brinaspati and above all the
Prajapati, who has generated all these gods for our protection.
Svaha!
Urge the mighty gods Aryaman, Brinaspati, Indra, Sarasvati, the
goddess of speech, Vishnu and Vak to grant us riches. Svaha!
O Agni, be auspicious to us and teach us good things in this
sacrifice! O winner of thousands, you being the giver of wealth,
give us wealth. Here is our oblation.
May Aryaman grant us wealth, god Pushan and Brinaspati. Let
goddess of speech Sarasvati grant us our desires. Here is the
oblation.
With penta-syllabic metre Pushan won the five directions, may I
also win mem. God Savitar won the six seasons with six-syllabic
metre, may I also win them. With hepta-syllabic metre the Maruts
won the seven domestic animals, may I also win them. With octosyllabic metre Brinaspati won the Gayatri, may I also win that!
With nine-syllabic metre Mitra won Trivrit Stoma, may I also win
Copyrighted i

Yajurveda Samhita
that. With deca-syllabic metre Varuna won proud go Viraj, may I
also win him. Indra won Trishtup with hendeca-syllabic metre, may
I also win that. And all the gods won Jagati with dodeca-syllabic
metre, my I also win that.
O Agni, overthrow the opposing forces and cleave into pices the
enemy. O invincible god, driving away the foemen, grant riches to
this sacriftcer.
By Savitar's impulsion, with Ashvins arms and hands of Pushan,
with the strength of the neares, I offer you this best oblation for the
destruction of the demons. As you have slain the demons so may
we also slaughter them. Just as we have slain them so may we
slaughter others!
May Savitar impel you for sacrifice. Let Agni of the householders,
Soma of the herbs, Brihaspati the lord of speech, Indra for lordship,
Rudra for cattle, Mitra for uttering truth, Varuna for the obeying of
the Law, urge you to sacrifice.
May gods anoint this mighty man to be without a rival, for mighty
rule, for mighty dominion and for great splendour. This man, son of
such a person, such a woman, of such a clan, is anointed king, O
you subjects. O you so and so kings, he is your lord, he is
joy-giving like Soma. He is also sovereign of our learned
Brahmans!
The gods drew water full of sweetness, refreshing sap, strengthgiving and sovereignty bestowing. Therewith they anointed Varuna
and Mitra, therewith they sprinkled Indra who drives away foemen.
These waters are majestic and joy-giving, inviolate, industrious and
investing. In these waters dwells Varuna making his home, he, the
son of waters, the best of mothers.
O king, you are the main stay of regal power, you are the strength
of princely power. Your are the womb and navel of princely power.
You are the foe-slaying arm of Indra, you are Mitra's mighty
weapon. You are Varuna' s possession. With your help may this
man subdue his foes. You are the render of forts, you are afflictor
of the foe like an arrow. You are the protector of the Law. O brave
Copyrighted material

Yajurveda Samhita
warrious, brotect this king from front, protect him from the rear,
protect him in the flanks, guard him from all sides.
Let all men protect him. Let Agni, the master of home, know him.
Let famed Indra know him, let Mitra and Varuna, the all-knowing
god Pushan know aim. May Earth and Heaven know him and also
the boundless Aditi, the giver of vast shelter.
The biting creatures who torment others are destroyed. You ascend
the east. May the Gayatri metre guard you. May the psalm
Rathantra, the triple song of praise, the spring season and riches of
knowledge protect you.
O king, march towards the south. May the tishtup verse, the Brithat
Sam, the fifteen fold praise, song, the summer season, riches and
power of the princes guard you.
Advance towards the west. May Jagti verse guard you, the psalm
Vairupa, the seventeenfold praise-song, the rainy season, the store
of riches and the people.
Advance towards the north. May Anushtup your guard and so be
the Viraja psalm, the twenty-one fold praise-song, the autumn
season and riches, the fruitage of sacrifice.
O king, ascend the zenith. May Pankti verse be your guard, the
twain psalms of Shahavari and Revati, the thirtythreefold
praise-song, the season autumn, three divisions of time, both
Winter and Dew seasons and splendour. Cast away the head of the
wicked.
You are Soma's brilliance, may my brillianc also shine like yours.
Preserve me from death. You are vigour, victory and life.
O Varuna, O Mitra, you rise on high with you golden bodies at the
flush of dawn and then mount your car to view the infinity and
limitation. Mitra you are friend to all, and you Varuna, the mighty
enough to ward off the enemy.
O king, I anoint you with the brilliance the moon, lustre of the fire,
splendour of the sun and power of Indra. Be the lord of princes and
guard your subjects.
Copyrighted material

Yajurveda Samhita
O Prajapati, you only comprehended all these created forms and
none besides. Give us our heart' desire when we invoke you. He is
father of so and so, he is son to so and so. Likewise we accept you
as our father. May we become lord of splendour through righteous
ways. O Rudra, your excellent name and form relieve us from
miseries, we worship you at home with oblation. All hail!
You are Indra' s thunderbolt. I yoke you at the direction of Varuna
and Mitra, the great directors and appoint you for alleviating the
sufferings of the people and for providing food. May you be
unassailable and victorious over the enemy with great might. May
we be united with you with mind and might.
O Indra, conqueror of the mighty foes, may we never fail to obtain
you through lack of devotion, may we never be without
enlightenment. O hero, mount your car. You control the reins and
the noble steeds with hands that bear thunder.
All hail to Agni, the lord of household! All hail to Soma, die lord of
herbs! All hail to die valiant Maruts! All hail die might of Indra! O
mother Earth, never harm me, and may I never harm you.
O Surya, throned in space, the Vasu in mid-region, the priest at the
sacrifice, the guest of the householder, you are adorable at all the
places. You are ubiquitous, present in space, in truth, creator of
waters and earth, mountains, trees and kine. You are mighty law in
yourself.
You are so great, you are life, give me life, you yoke all with
righteous deeds, you are splendours, give me splendour. You are
strength, give me strength. O Mitra and Varuna, you both are two
arms of mighty Indra. I draw you near him.
You are handsome, good to sit on, the source of regal power. Sit
you down on this pleasant seat, be seated on that which offers
comfort, sit you on this seat, the womb of royal power.
Varuna has sat down among his subjects, to administer law and
justice, the most wise for universal sway.
You are the subduer of the foes. May these five regions be
prosperous for you. You are greatly mighty, master of spiritual
Copyrighted

wisdom, and the example of righteous conduct. You are Varuna
whose might is real. You are Indra whose might is of the people.
You are auspicious and kind Rudra, doer of much, giver of wealth
and comforts. You, the source of abundant ruch, are bolt of Indra.
Therewith grant me success.
As the spacious Agni, servicable and devoted to duty, reverently
receives the oblation of ghee and diffuses them through the rays of
the sun, so should a king maintain sovereignty over his subjects.
I go forward urged onward by Savitar the giver of all spendour, by
Sarasvati's speech, by Tvashtar's created forms, by Pushan's cattle,
by Indra, by Brihaspati, by Vishnu the tenth.
Be you good preachers and teacher like the sun and moon, be
mature for Sarasvati, exert your best for protection through your
sovereign. Be pure like air, full of virtues to lead a righteous life.
Be friend unto him by practising yoga.
Like a farmer whose fields are full of barley, reap the ripe corn,
removing the chaff in order to offer food to the aged who deserve
respect. O wise king, full of splendour, we accept you for the
Ashvins, you for Sarasvati and for Indra, the excellent protector.
You Ashvins, lords of riches, drank mil draughts of Soma-juice and
helped Indra in his mighty deeds and killed Namuchi of demon
birth.
As the parents help a son, so helped the twain Ashvins, Indra in
distress, with their wonderful might and wisdom. O Maghavan, you
drank the draught that pleases Sarasvati and refreshed yourself
having lain the demon Namuchi.
God Savitar first of all having harnessed mind and thought, spread
the light from Agni on the earth and in the heaven.
Under the inspiration of god Savitar, having harnessed our mind,
we strive to acquire heavenly light for our bliss.
The all-creating and bliss-bestowing god Savitar, harnessed the
gods, possessed of celestial light and thought, and impelled them
on their way.
Copyrighted material

Yajurveda Samhita
The learned priests, well-versed in vedic knowledge harness their
mind, harness their holy thoughts. He alone, the all-knowing lord
of the law, assigns them their sacred tasks. Lofty is the praise of
God, the creator of all.
I yoke your mind to God with prayer and meditation. May the
hymns of both of you rise high and pervade the heaven. May all the
gods, sons of eternal Prajapati hear it, who dwell in heavenly
abodes.
He, the creator of all, the generator of all the worlds, is followed by
all the gods according to their might. He who pervades all and has
measured out the entire universe, is Savitar.
O all-creating Savitar, promote and advance our sacrifice, increase
the sacrificer's portion of splendour. O guardian of divine
knowledge, lord of speech, creator of all, cleanser of thoughts and
will sweeten our speech.
You are the excellent woman. May we possess the power by your
grace to increase Agni in his dwelling, as did Angiras with Jagti
verse.
Let Savitar, with a gold implement in his hand, raise Agni high
from the earth with Anustup verse is did Angiras.
O steed, the heaven is your loftiest place of birth, your navel is in
the mid-region of the space, your shelter is on the earth. Come you
running here, impelled to speed. O steed, along the vast space.
O horse, come running and trampling upon the wicked ones, come,
spreading gladness all around, come to Rudra. Speed along the vast
air with Pushan as your guardian.
The first and foremost Jatavedas illuminates the days before dawn
and also illuminates the rays of the sun. He alone illuminates both
earth and heaven.
Just as a fleet horse having started on his course, causes fear in the
enemy, and just as a householder longs to see with reverent eye
Agni kindled in a fine place, so should you.
O steed, having approached the earth, seek Agni with a deep desire
Copyrighted material

YajiirvedaSamhita
and trample on the ground and then instruct us where can we
search that learned and effulgent one.
Sky is your back, the earth your seat, the air your spirity the ocean
your place of birth. Assail and trample down the enemy looking
around you.
O wealth-giving Courser, rise high from this place for increase of
splendour. May we be established in excellent thought while
kindling Agni on the earth.
The wealth-giving and fleet Courser has come down on the earth.
He has rendered the world beautiful and sacred. May we kindle
Agni here on the earth, beautiful to look at, in order to ascend the
lofty heaven, the place of happiness.
O Agni, I kindle you reverently with ghee, you dwelling in all the
worlds, vast in splendour of great age, the most wide-spread,
mighty with food, conspicous and moving transversely.
O Agni, spread you fully in all directions, enkindle you with ghee
Accept this my ghee-oblation with grace. Agni, the adorable,
effulgent, moving in all directions, is not to be disrespected!
The lord of food, the wise, farsighted has walked round the
oblation, granting the sacrificer the splendid boons.
O mighty Agni, of varous forms, learned, victorious, heroic and
ever foe-slaying, we adore you from all sides.
O Agni, sovereign lord of men, being pure, you are generated from
waters, from stones, from forests, from medicinal nerbs and in the
house of the sacrificer.
By impulation of Savitar, the all-creating goh. I kindle the allpervading Agni on the earth as did Angiras in ancient days, with
the arms of Ashvins and the hands of Pushan. O Aeni luminous, be
autiful to look on, every radiant, engaged in the weal of the
subjects, peaceful, never injuring, splenderous. I produce you from
the womb of the earth as Angiras was to do.
O Agni, you are nourisher and support of the whole world.
Atharvan was the first to kindle you by rubbing the sticks well and
Copyrighted

Yajurveda Samhita
then he brought you of the world rubbed you to life reverently.
Dadhyach, the son of Atharvan, kindled you, O Agni, the slayer of
foes, the breaker of their forts.
Agni, the promoter of law, has seated himsen well in the seat of
Hotar-priest. He is invoker of the gods, splendid, dynamic,
resplendent, passing mighty, pure-tongued, and nourisher of
thousands.
O mighty Agni, beloved of the gods, adored by all, sit you down
here, be kindled with sacred oblations and men emit the smoke,
bright and beautiful to took on.
O pure, heavenly and sweet Waters, pour you down here so that
medicinal herbs with their goodly berries spring form for the cure
of diseases like consumption.
O Agni, nobly born with splendour, reside in comfortable nice
abode, and robe yourself in many-hued attire!
Arise erect like the lustrous Sun for our protection. You are lofty
and bestower of food. We invoke you with oblation-bearing bright
rays.
O Agni, you are are a fair child of Earth and heaven and dwell
among the herbs to nourish them. O brilliant child, you remove the
gloom of night and come forth roaring aloud from your mothers.
O courser, be steady and firm of limbs. Be strong and fleet of foot
and broad to bear all that which Agni needs to please himself.
O Agni, be you gracious to creatures of human rach. Scorch not
heaven and earth, nor air's mid-realm nor the plants and herbs.
We kindle and feed Agni, in himself the law and truth, as Angiras
was wont to do O herbs all. accord a warm welcome to Agni. the
gracious one who comes to see you here and be happy. O Agni.
you remove all our distress, diseases and evil tendencies by
dwelling here near us.
O herbs, laden with beautiful flowers and goodly fruit, welcome
you well this Agni. This seasonable child Agni has been here since
ancient times.
Copyrighted material

Yajurveda Samhita
O mighty and resplendent Agni, remove all the sorrows, sufferings
and the demons who detests us with your vast lustre. May I be
happy to engage myself in pleasing Agni, him who is invocable in
all holy rites.
May the Vasus form and kindle you with Gayatri verse like
Angiras. You are firm and steadfast, you are earth. Grant me, the
sacrificer, progeny, ownership of kine, riches, happy heroism and
kinsmen. May the Rudras like Angiras form and kindle you with
Trishtup. You are firm and steadfast, you are earth. Grant me, the
sacrificer, progeny, ownership of kinc, riches, happy heroism and
kinsmen. May the twelve Adityas form and kindly you like Angiras
with Jagati verse. You are ateadfast and firm, you are the Heaven.
May all the gods form and kindle you like Angiras with Anushtup
verse. You are stead fast and firm, you are Quarters. Grant me, the
sacrificer, progeny, ownership of kine, riches, happy heroism and
kinsmen.
Let the Vasusnarrate you like Angiras with Gayatri metre. Let the
Rudras narrate you like Angiras with Trishtup metre. Let the
Adityas narrate beloved of all men, narrate you like Angiras with
Anushtup verse. May Indra describe you, may Varuna describe
you, May Vishnu narrate you.
May all mortals seek your friendship, the guide of all. May all
solicit him for glory, riches and fame. May all of us prosper just as
you do.
O mother, wean us not from learning, injure us not. Accomplish
with firm mind the task undertaken. May you and your son Agni
finish this work with determination.
O goddess Earth, be steadfast for weal. May your sustaining power
and the power of life increase. May this oblation be acceptable to
gods. Emerge from this sacrifice unharmed!
Fed with wood and ghee, the ancient, the invoker of gods of
strength, wonderful in virtues, is Agni.
O Agni, in the fight with the foe-men, help is close to you, guard
the men with whom I stand.
Copyrighted

Yajurveda Samhita
O Agni, come here from the farthest place, O lord of the red
coursers. Come hither and subdue our enemies, O beloved of many,
renowned and ustrous!
O mighty Agni, whatever fuel we offer you, may that be like ghee
to you. Accept that most graciously, O youthful one.
The wood that termites have eaten away, from which emmet comes
out, may mat all be like ghee to you. O youthful god, accept that
lovingly.
Just as we feed carefully day after day a stable steed with fodder, so
may we enjoy food and our wealth ever increasing, unharmed, your
neighbours, offer you every fuel, O Agni.
Having enkindled Agni on earth's navel, we invoke Agni, ever
victor, conquering the battle, pleased with oblation, adorable and
much lauded, for increase in wealth.
Whatever, enemy hosts there are, attacking fiercely, charging all
around with weapons, drawn up in order with arms, whatever,
thieves and robbers there are, all these 1 consign to your mouth, O
Agni!
Devour the burgalars with both of your tusks, consume the robbers
with your teeth, with both your jaws, eat up the thieves and cheats.
Turn him to ashes who would seek to harm us, the man who detests
us, and the man who slanders and cheats us.
O lord of food, grant us a share of dood, that would invigorate us
and cause no sickness. Onward still onward lead the giver. Grant us
maintenance both for our quadrupeds and bipeds.
We ever adore Agni who has shone far effulgent, beaming,
immortal, of great manly might, remover of distress, bestower of
longevity and fame to the sages, him who exhibits diverse things
on this earth.
Night and Dawn, different in visage, accordant, meeting together,
suckle the same babe, the sun, which beaming shines between the
heaven and earth. The mighty and divine forces support the sun.
Savitar, worshipworthy, at dawn shapes and exhibits all objects
Copyrighted material

Yajurveda Samhita
with his radiance. He is the bringer of weal both for bipeds and
quadrupeds and removes their distress.
O Agni, you are goodly-pinioned eagle. Trivit stoma is your head
and Gayatri your eye, Brihat and Rathantar your two wings. The
yajna is your soul, all the verses your limbs and formulas your
names. Vamdevya Soma is your body, yajna yajniya Sama your tail
and the sacrificial altars your claws. Thus, O Agni, you are like a
goodly-pinioned eagle, soar into the sky, reach the heaven!
O Agni, come back again with power, return again with food and
life and protect us from sins.
Return Agni, with abundant wealth and drench us with your
flowing stream that nourishes all.
O Varuna, free us from the upmost bond, let down the lowest,
remove the midmost, so that we may be without sin in your holy
law and belong to boundless mother Aditi, O Surya!
The mighty Sun has risen high in the sky before the dawns,
removing away darkness with his radiance and light. The fairformed Agni with lustre has filled at birth with splendour all the
world.
He, the embodiment of purity, all pervading, dwelling in mid-air,
the hotar-priest, the guest and lord of home, imbiber of truth,
omnipresent, invoker of gods, present in the minds of the people,
creator of prana, kine, the holy law, floods, earth and mountains, to
the great Agni, we offer our prayers.
O Agni, knower of all the deeds, be seated in the lap of this your
mother. Do not scorch her with your heat nor burn her with your
flame. Shine with your pure lustre in her lap! 4
First Agni was born from out of heaven, then secondly from us was
born Jatavedas. Thirdly he, the most manly-souled appeared in the
waters whom the pious and learned sacrifices ever laud and kindle.
O Agni, we know your three powers in three stages and also your
diverse forms in many places. We know your most secret and
supreme name, we know die source from which you have emerged.
Copyrighted

Yajurveda Samhita
Varuna kindled you in the waters, Prajapati lit you amidst the
heavens. There as you stood in the third high region, the mighty
Maruts increased you amidst the floods.
The giver of splendour, source of glories, given of wisdom,
guardian of Soma, refuge of all, the son of strength, a king in the
floods, he shines enkindled in forefront of the dawns.
Germ of creation, ensign of the world sprang to life and pervaded
the heaven and earth with radiance. Even the dense clouds he cut as
under when passing over, as such he is offered sacrifice by the five
clans in unity.
Thus among mortal men immortal Agni was established, the
effulgent, purifier, wise, remover of the evil ones and envoy to the
gods. He emits the ruddy smoke above him and reaches the heaven
with his brislliance, the sustainer of the world.
The most adorable, man's best friend, the Soma's guard Agni, is
praised by the sages. We call gracious Heaven and benign Earth to
grant us hero-sons and abundant wealth.
Nurse Agni, your guest with fuel, enkindle him with oblations of
ghee and pour into it your sacred offerings.
O divine Water, accept the ashes and lay them safe in a freagrant
place. Just as th wedded ladies of noble minds bow down to their
husbands so do you before this Agni. Bear the ashes on waters as
does a mother her son.
O Agni, your home is in floods, into the herbs you force your way
and are born anew through the rubbing of fuel-sticks.
Agni, you are the womb of herbs, you are the womb of the trees,
you are the womb of all created beings and of all the waters.
O Agni, mark you well my speech. O divine and most youthful
god, one detests you and the other sings your laud. I, your devotee,
make my obeisance unto your form.
O lord of wealth, O Agni, you are the generous giver. Drive you
away our foemen. May you accept this our oblation graciously, O
best performer. Savaha!
Copyrighted

Yajurveda Samhita
Agni, let the Rudras, Adityas and the Vasus again kindle you, may
the priests rekindle you with their oblations, O bestower of riches.
Increase your form with the offered ghee and with it may the
sacrificed wishes be fulfilled.
May all the ancient guards and new protector depart and go away.
Yama has ordained this place of earth for the sacrificer. This place
for him the Fathers have given.
Agni, you are giver of the best knowledge, may your desires by
mine. In me be the fulfilment of your desires. You are the form of
Agni, you are the ashes.
Agni, your splendour which is in heaven, in earth, over all the
mid-air's vast space in the form of lightning, that is dynamic, the
seer of all the good and evil acts of mankind and is your own
radiance.
Agni, you reach the floods of heaven, you invoke the gods who
inspire thoughts. You are in the waters which are beyond the
resplendent sun, and those which are beneath the earth here.
This is your ordained source of being, O Agni, whence born you
shone forth. Knowing this, Agni, ascend high and make our riches
grow more.
Be you steady and firm, fill up the room, fill up the hole, Indra,
Agni, and Brihaspati have established you here in this place.
All the vedic hymns, the Rik, Yajus and Saman have magnified
Indra, vast as die ocean, the car-borne, best of the heroes, the lord
of corn, the lord of might.
Be you bom Jatavedas-Agni one-minded, one thoughted for us, free
from guile. Destroy not our yajna, injure not the sacrificer, be
auspicious to us today, you all-knowing ones.
Just as the mother bears her son in the womb so has Earth-Ukha
has borne in her womb Agni. May Prajapati, the creator of all,
accordant with all the gods and seasons release her from the bonds.
Nirriti, follow him who performs not the sacrifice, offers no
oblation, follow the thief, the robber. Seek the irreligious, to you be
Copyrighted material

Yajurveda Samhita
our obeisance!
I unfasten the binding noose which Niriti, the goddess of
destruction has fastened on your neck that none may loose. The
same I loose for you. Now eat this food which I offer you.
Obeisance be to that goddess by whose grace this has been
possible.
Establisher of the sacrifices protector of truth, gatherer of wealth,
Agni, reveals every form and sure with his might, and like Savitar
the god of violate laws, like Indra faces the enemy warriors the
battlefield.
Happily may the plough-shares turn up the and, happily follow die
farmers their oxen! May Vayu and Aditya, being pleased with our
oblation use our herbs and plants bear abundant fruit.
Let our furrows be moistened with sweet sap, opproved by the
Visvadevas and the Maruts. Be you furrows, succulent, full of com,
milk, ghee, etc. us.
The keen-shared plough, the bringer of bliss, producer of the Somadrink, shear out for me a fine cow, a sheep, a speedy drawer of the
car, and a blooming woman stout and plump.
The year together with its fortnights and other the dawn with its
ruddy kine, the Ashvins the their wonderous attainments. Surya
with his coppled courser, the Vaishvanara with corn and ghee
Svaha!
Herbs that sprang up in the beginning at the time of creation, earlier
than the gods, of these, which are brown and capable of nourishing
the world, will I proclaim the hundred and seven.
() Hervs, nourishing like mother, you are thous and-named,
thousand are your growths. You are possessed of thousand powers,
release this yajman of mine from disease.
Herbs that sprang up in the beginning, at the time of creation,
earlier than the gods, of these, which are brown and capable of
nourishing the world will I proclaim the hundred and seven.
O Herbs, be gracious to us, both bearing blossom and fruit and also
Copyrighted material

Yajurveda Samhita
those which would lead us to success with speed like fleet- footed
mares.
O Herbs, comforting like mothers, by this name I speak to you. O
God, may I gain a horse, a cow clothes and a body free from
disease with you favour!
This holy fig tree is your abode, you have made Prana tree your
home. Winners of cattle shall you be if you regain this sacrificer for
me.
He who goes to places where there are herbs as the kings go to the
battlefield, Physician is his name, the slayer of fiendish diseases
and chase of ailments.
Herbs rich in Soma-juice. rich in steeds, rich in nourishment, rich
in bestowing strength, all these I know that this may be freed from
the disease.
Let fruitful herbs and those fruitless, though that blossom and the
blossom-less, created by Brihaspati, relieve us from disease and
distress.
Relieve me from curse's evil, and the vow arising from Varuna,
release me from Yama's noose, from sin and violation done against
the sages.
The herbs descending from the heaven said: no disease shall assail
the man, whom, while he lives, we pervade.
May unharmed be he who digs you up, unharmed the man for
whom I didg. May our bipeds and quadrupeds be free from disease
by its use and application.
The Gandharvas dug you out from the earth, Indra and Brihaspati
did. King Soma knowing you, made himself free from consumption
by your use.
Long-lived be he who digs you out, and he for whom I dig you out.
May you also live long for hundred years and grow up with
hundred shoots.
O immortal Agni, bestow on us abundant wealth being enkindled
by us. Your brilliant form is beautiful to look on. vui promote our
Copyrighted

Yajurveda Samhita
sacrifice.
First of all they established you, O Agni, for sacrifice, truthful,
mighty, visible to all, so radiant friend of the gods, with ear to hear
prayers, most known and magnified by songs of praise.
O Soma, may many nourishing juices be with you, may you wax
mighty from every side to subdue the foe-men. May you, thus
progressing, win immortality and highest fame in heaven.
Increase you most pleasing Soma, grow, strong through various
means like the sun with its rays. Be you our friend for giving us
prosperity and vast happiness.
O Agni, your devotee, the sacrificer draws your mind away, even
from the highest abode of yours, with reverent speech and songs of
praise.
O Agni, all turn to you with prayers of diverse kinds for the
fulfilment of their wishes, as did Angiras.
You alone shine forth with brilliance, you royal lord Agni, in your
dear dwellings to fulfil the wishes of all that are and are to be in
future.
I, the sacrificer, first of all establish Agni within my home for
increase of wealth, good progeny an manly strength. May gods aid
me in this!
You are support of waters, the source of fire, and enveloper of
ocean as it swells and suges, the loftiest, resting on the lotus,
spreading out in amplitude in space and its own measure.
The famed Aditya at first appeared in the East and men filled the
worlds with his radiance, the womb of bom creation and noncreation.
Hiranyagarbha, the golden germ, spran up first of all, the only lord
of all created beings. He was also there before the creation of
things. He sustains this earth and heaven. Let us worship him, the
Prajapati with our oblation.
Surya sprang forth through this earth and heaven along this space
and that which existed before. I offer my seven oblations to Aditya
Copyrighted

Yajurveda Samhita
who travels to his own dwelling.
Homage bo to all enemies, like serpent in nature, who dwell on
earth, those dwelling in the air, and also to those dwelling in the
sky.
Homage be to those that are demons' darts, to those who dwell in
the trees like serpents, and to all of them who lie low in holes be
homage paid.
Homage be to all the serpents, to them that are in heaven's bright
realm, to them that abide in the sun's rays. Adoration be to them
that have their home in waters!
Increase and put on your vigour like a wide-spread net, attack the
foemen like a mighty king with your aids. Strengthening yourself,
shoot deadly arrows to transfix the demons and subdue them all.
O Agni, let your rapid flames riding the wind follow the fiends
with all their blazing fury and flaming weapons. Let the demons be
scorched with your tongues of flying flames, Agni, let your
firebrands rain all over the foe.
O unassailable Agni, send forth the army to destroy our enemy, be
he far or near. Be yourself the guardian of our people. May you be
ever unharmed and safe from the trouble sent by the foemen.
Rise and sweep away those who take up arms against us, O Agni,
burn down the enemy, you possessed of sharpened darts. Humiliate
and consume completely like dried-up stubble, him who creates
mischief by encouraging our foe!
Rise up, punish them all who fight against us, manifest your own
divine strength. Blunt the weapons of the fiends, slay the enemy
whether related to us or be he a stranger. I settle you with fire's
ardour!
Agni is lofty like the head of heaven, he, the sustainer of earth,
quickness the waters' seed. I settle you with mighty Indra' strength.
You are the lord of the sacrifice and the heaven. With your oblation
bearing flaming tongue, you sustain the Adityas in the sky and
attend the auspicious rites with your benign teams.

Yajurveda Samhita 1443
Firm you aret sustainer, established in your place by
Vishvakarman, O Earth. Let not ocean harm you, let not air injure
you, O you steadfast, unshakable earth!
May Prajapati settle you on the waters, on the ocean's surface, you
so spacious and vast. O vast one spread yourself wide.
You are bliss-giving Earth, god-mother Aditi, sustainer and
nourisher of all the beings of the world. Steady her, do you no harm
to her and look on her with an affectionate eye.
O Agni, your light which spreads out the sky in the form of the
beams of the sun, therewith help us and our children today to gain
splendour.
O Indra, Agni, Brihaspati, O gods, whatever your light is there in
the sun, or that in the kine and horses, with all that glorify us!
May honeyed Madhu (Chaitra) and Madhava (Baisakh), the two
spring months, sprung of heat, increase my prosperity. May heaven
and earth, the waters and the herbs, may Agnis help me, the
sacrificer in my progress. May all the Agnis between heaven and
earth one-minded, in accord, attend these two spring months as the
gods attend Indra. Be seated with this god firm in your seat like
Angiras.
You are invincible by the foes, O conqueror, conquer our foemen,
subdue them who fain would oppose us, you are possessed of a
thousand manly powers, so do you help and be gracious to me.
In spring the winds blow sweetly, the streams flow sweetly for him
who performs sacrifice. So may the herbs be sweet for us!
The nights are sweet, sweet are the days, sweet is the terrestrial
atmosphere. May sweet be the Heaven to us like our Fathers.
May trees be lull of sweet fruits for us. and full sweet the Sun. So
may our milch-kine be sweet for us.
Seat yourself firm in the deepness of waters, lest sun, lest heat
burning within, scorch you. Let the well -formed subjects be
surveyed. May the goodly rain that pours, aid you.
Steadfast you are, and sustainer of die world. So sprang forth he,
Copyrighted material

Yajurveda Samhita
Jatavedas from these wombs, the all -knowing one. May this Agni,
who knows his rights, convey to the gods these our oblations
offered with Gayatri, with Trishtup and with Anushtup verses!
O Agni, abide here in pleasure for long for granting us food,
wealth, power, fame, milk, ghee, saps and offspring. You are the
lord of earth and self-effulgent. May both the mind and speech of
Sarasvati protect you!
O radiant Agni, yoke your most excellent steeds, that bear you with
speed to the sacrifice.
Anoint Agni with milk, of diverse forms, the womb of gods, the
sustainer of animals, the creator of thousands, the lighter of the
world. Remove all the diseases with kindled Agni, obtain the boon
of living for hundred years and always avoid the pride!
O Agni, harm not the wind's impetuous rush, Varuna's navel, the
cloud, the stream's tawny child and, the steed sprung out from
waters, dwelling in the highest heaven, that can crush even stones
to powder by trampling.
The ruddly, unwasting, eager, pressing forward sustainer of all,
adorable by the sages, Agni, I worship with lauds. Harm you not
the cow, so ruch in milk.
O Agni, you dwell in the loftiest realms, you are of diverse forms,
Varuna's navel and Tvashtar's guardian. Harm her not, the great,
protector of the beings and the source of weal for thousands.
O Agni, may your fierce displeasure spare the sacrifices You have
your being from Agni or heat of the earth, or from the heat of the
sun, whereby the omnific lord has engendere creatures.
The Sun, the wonderous strength of the gods, has risen, the eye of
Mitra. Varuna and Agni. The spirit of all. the moving and
unmoving things. He has filled the heaven, earth and the air with
his splendour.
O Agni, injure not these biped and quadruped brought for the sake
of sacrifice. Be gracious to these corn-producing beasts, and guard
them. Therewith build your form and be well nourished. Let your
wrath be upon violent wild beast. Let the foe, whom we hate, be
Copyrighted material

Yajurveda Samhita
put to grief.
Injure not this one-hoofed animal, the beautiful horse, neighing in
the midst of horses. I offer to you the harmful forest deer, fair in
colour. Building your flames up with him be steadfast. May that
deer be your victim. Let your flame reach him. May he be injured
whom we hate.
Drive, O Agni, our known foemen, drive away from us the unborn
ones, O Jatavedas, graciously-minded, without anger bless us so
that we may live happily in the thrice-guarded home.
Drive away our enemies, O Agni, with your might, our known foes,
ward off those who would attack us secretly. O benebolent in
thought and spirit, bless us. May we live long, drive away our foes!
Stoma, the lady of sixteen arts, grants strength and wealth. The
Stoma of forty-four skills also grants splendour and riches. You are
complement of Agni. As such may all the gods greet you with
lauds. Enriched with songs of praise and butter, stay here and grant
us wealth and store of children.
This Agni is the head and height of heaven, he is the lord of the
earth. This same Agni quickens the waters' seed.
This Agni is the lord of thousand-fold pleasures, the master of
hundred-fold food and wealth, the sapient one.
Atharavan, the best of priests, brought you forth from the lotus by
rubbing, the head of the priest.
Leader of die sacrifice, you are end of the region to which with
your auspicious company you attend. You bear die light-giving
Aditya in the sky, making your tongue the conveyor of oblations to
gods.
People kindle Agni with their fuel. As a call is delighted to meet its
mother-cow so are people gladdened by seeing the Dawn appear,
just as the Branches of the young trees shoot up high so do Agni's
flames rising high in the sky.
We offer our songs of praise to Agni, the adorable sage, pure,
virtuous and strong. The sage has raised his hymn of praise to Agni
Copyrighted material

1446 Yajurveda Samhita
far-reaching as the Sun in the sky.
Agni was ordained to be the first invoker, the best in sacrifice, to be
lauded at rites. Him the Bhrigus with their offspring made to kindle
in splendour in the forest, spreading to every home.
Agni, the watchful guardian of the created beings has been born,
ever active, strong for fresh prosperity. Increasing with ghee, his
flames reaching high in the heaven, he shines radiantly enkindled
by the briests of sacrifice.
O Agni, dear to Angiras, they caused you to appear when you
remained hidden, fleeing back from wood to wood and plant to
plant. You are generated by attrition as conquering strength. People
call you the son of highly powerful strength.
O men, offer to Agni seemly oblations and your songs of praise to
him who is supreme, highly mighty, the son of strength.
O mighty Agni, the lord of all, you bestow all the fruits of the
sacrifice on the sacrificer, your friend. Bring us riches as you are
kindled at the place of yajna.
0 Agni, beloved of many, people invoke you in their homes as
most famed and wonderous one. They call on you, the bearer of
oblations whose hair is flames.
1 invoke Agni for you with this my reverent song, the son of
strength, beloved, the wisest envoy, immortal, adored with
oblations, the messenger of all.
We call on Agni, the immortal messenger, envoy and
representative of all. He yokes his two ruddy steeds, all cherishing.
He comes riding fast when invoked properly and reverently.
Let Agni be invoked and worshipped well. Let him be invited
reverently. Then has the sacrificer proper end and happy
performance and rich boons for the sacrificer.
O Agni, so of strength, all-knowing, lord of kine and wealth, grant
us great riches, O Jatavedas.
O Agni, brilliant, wise, good, worthy of laud with our hymns shine
on us, O of many forms, shine on us wealth.
Copyrighted material

Yajurveda Samhita
O radiant one, shining by day, by night and morning, burn the
wicked with your blazing flames you whose teeth are sharp like the
bolt.
O adorable Agni, bring us bliss, may the sacrifice and the gifts
bring us bliss, may our songs of praise bring us bliss, O invoked
Agni!
The determined mind wherewith you subdue the foes in the war,
show us that, that with which you conquer the enemy. May our
prayers bring us bliss.
0 Agni, wherewith you conquer the foe in the battle, therewith
slacken the strings and destroy the bows of the mighty enemy. May
we vanquish the foes with your aid.
1 recognise Agni, the good lord of home, the fire to which the kine
return, whom the courser seek as their home. Grant abundant food
to those who are your devotees.
1 laud god Agni, to whom the milch-kine return in herds, to whom
the princes of royal birth come, to whom the fleet-footed coursers
come. Grant abundant food to your devotees.
O pleasurable god Agni, you pour ghee within your mouth with
both the ladles. So fill us also full with riches, O lord of might.
Grant abundant food to your devotees.
Today we bring to offer you, O Agni, the things dear to you like a
disciplined horse with reverence.
0 Agni, you have ever been a great charioteer, full of pleasurable
intellectual and physical strength, high sacrifice and proper
judgement. So may we certainly be!
Being pleased with our hymns of praise come you unto us, O Agni,
well disposed with your various aspects as does die Sun in the
morning with all his rays.
1 hold Agni, the son of strength, as learned Brahman who knows all
the Vedas, the knower of all created beings, lord of sacrifice, a god
with erect form, envoy of die gods, charitably disposed and the
drinker of the sacred ghee offered in sacrifice.
Copyrighted material

Yajurveda Samhita
O Agni, be our closest friend, our guard, liberator and a gracious
friend. Come unto us, O god, with bliss and weal for our
household, give us renowned wealth and splendid riches. We
apporach you, O effulgent one, most radiant, with lauds for bliss
and wealth.
With whatever fervour the sages came obtaining knowledge and
kindled Agni at the place of sacrifice for bliss and true happiness,
with that I establish Agni in heaven whom the learned and
thoughtful men call as pervader of the atmospher.
O gods, let us adore Agni with our wives, sons, brothers, relatives
and wearing gold ornaments so that we may attain the blissful,
luminous realm of virtues,, the world of heaven, high on the third
height.
May this Agni, knower of the essence of the Vedic speech, lord of
the heroes, protector of the virtuous, established on the earth, ever
active, die effulgent one, cast under foot those who would fight
against us.
May this Agni, most manly, bearer of oblations, doer of thousands
of noble deeds, shining with never failing light, resplendent in the
midst of heaven, shine and attain the divine dwellings.
O you all men, come near this Agni from all sides and attend him
well. O Agni, light the pathways of godward travel and then
rejuvenating the Fathers with life's vigour, extend fully through die
sacrifice.
O Agni wake up and then keep the sacrificer awake and watchful.
May his desires meet fruition with you grace. All the gods and this
Sacrificer, in connection with you, may occupy the highest place
here and hereafter in the loftiest realm.
O Agnj bear our oblations and give them to the gods in heaven.
Wherewith you carry a thousand, wherewith, O Agni. carry mis our
offering to heaven among the gods.
O Agni, this is your ordained home of birth, whence born you
shone forth. Knowing this, Agni, rise you up and make our wealth
to grow in all the ways.
Copyrighted material

Yajurveda Samhita
Just as a horse desiring food neighs for fodder, so does Agni roar
having sprung out from the fuel sticks. Then the winds blow in his
wake. Black is the path that this splendrous Agni travels.
You illumine the heaven, the earth and the broad realm between
them. You are luminous, I set you in Ayu's seat, in the shadow of
the protector and in the heart, deep like the ocean.
O Agni, you are the measure of thousands of powers, you are the
embodiment of thousands of splendours. You are equivalent of
thousands of might. You are far better than the thousands. You are
the lord of the thousands. I set you on the thousands!
Salutations be to the Rudra' s wrath, salutations to your arrows,
homage be to your twain arms.
With your gracious form, O gentle Rudra, pleasant to look on, with
that most benign form look you on us, O Mountain-dweller!
O Mountain-dweller, whatever shaft you have in your hand to
shoot, render that auspicious, Mountain-god, harm not man nor
injure the moving things!
O Mountain-dweller, we salute you with our graceful hymns so that
all our world be free from disease and well-satisfied!
The first divine physician and advocate, Rudra has saved us by
crushing deadly serpents and by driving away fiends.
He, the most auspicious one, of coppery, red and brown hue, is
surrounded by thousands of Rudras. May the wrath of these Rudras
stationed on all sides be ever far removed from us.
May Rudra,. who travels in the form of the Sun, whose throat is
blue, whose hue is coppery-red, whom the herdsmen and maidens
carrying water have seen, may he be auspicious to us when beheld.
Salutations be to him, the blue-throated, die thousand-eyed, the
beautiful to look on, and also to his ministers, to them be our
homage!
Loosen your bow-string, slacken it at both the extremities of the
bow, put away the arrows that you hold in your hand, O lord of the
matted locks!
Copyrighted

1450 Yajurveda Samhita
O Lord of braided hair, let your bow be stringless, your quiver hold
no sharp arrows. May arrows be driven away and your sheath that
contained your sword be empty.
O blissful Rudra, protect us well on all sides with your weapon,
with the bow that you hold in your hand, the bow harmless to us.
O thoususand-eyed, thousand-quivered Rudra, having blunted the
points of your arrows, be benign and auspicious to us.
Obeisance be to your unstrung bow, homage be to your weapon.
Salutations be to your two arms, and to your bow homage be!
Harm not, O Rudra, our elders and young ones, injure not our
growing youths, harm not our children in the womb. Slay not our
rearing sires, slay not the mothers, and harem not our own dear
bodies.
Harm not our seed in embryo and our offspring, harm us not, our
kine and steeds. Kill not our heroes in the fury of your wrath. We
with oblations ever call on you.
Salutations to Rudra, the commander of the hosts, whose arms are
gold-ornamented Salutations to him who is the lord of entire
would. Homage be to him whose hair is green trees, whose sheen is
like green grass, the lord of beasts. Salutations be to the brilliant
lord of pathways, to the golden haired wearer of the sacred thread,
homage be to the ageless lord of the healthy people.
Salutations be to brown-hued Rudra, the piercer of the foes, to the
lord of food, to the lord protector of the world. Salutation to
Rudra's weapons, salutation to him whose bow is bent in readiness,
to the protector of the regions. Salutations to charioteer Rudra who
harms none, to the lord of forests be salutations!
Salutations to the red-architect, to the protector of the trees.
Salutations to Rudra, who expands the earth and giver of riches and
splendour. Salutation to the lord of riches and splendour. Salutation
to the lord of herbs and plants, to the sagacious tradesmen.
Salutations to the lord of the bushes of the forest, to him who
makes the wicked weep, to the shouting lord of hosts!
Salutations to Rudra. who rushes at the foe with the drawn bow for
Copyrighted material

Yajurveda Samhita
our protection, to the lord of all believers. Salutations to the
foe-conquering and enemy-slaying Rudra, to him who protects the
heroic army. Salutations to the sword-bearer against the fiends, to
the lord of persons serving in secret salutations be. Salutations to
the wandering robbers and the roamers, to the protector of forest be
salutations!
Homage to lord of assemblies and to the assemblies, homage to
horses, and to you masters of the horses. Homage to the warrior
hosts that pierce and slay the foe, to you killing armies with fine
bands be homage!
Salutation to the bringer of weal, to the guard of the beings.
Salutation be to the fierce and awe-inspiring. Salutations to him
who slays the foe in front, to him who slays the foe at a distance.
Salutations to the slayer and frequent slayer of the wicked.
Salutations to the green-tressed trees, to the deliverer from distress
be salutation.
Salutations to him who causes happiness, and to him who causes
light. Salutations to the source of bliss and the source of joy,
salutations to the auspicious one and to the most auspicious be
salutations!
Salutations to him who is beyond suffering, and to one who is
struggling for release. Salutations to him who crosses over and to
him who crosses back. Salutations to him who is the ford, to him
who dwells on the banks of rivers and shores of seas, to him who is
in the grass and to him who is in the foam.
O distresser of die foe, the lord of com, you cleaver, blue and red
Rudra, slay none of these our people and children, none of these
our people and children, none of these our cattle, nor make them
deseased. Let none of us be sick!
We oiler to the mighty Rudra of matted locks, these our songs of
praise, the lord of heroes so mat all our people and the cattle be
happy, well-fed, healthy and free from distress and disease.
O Rudra, with that your auspicious aspect which heals and causes
weal be gracious to us that we may be happy.
Copyrighted material

Yajurveda Samhita
O Rudra, spare us and keep away your weapons from us, save us
from your great fury of wrath. Turn aside your mighty bow from
us, O Bounteous lord, and be auspicious to seeds and progeny.
O most bounteous, most gracious Rudra, be you gracious and welldisposed towards us. Approach us here skin-robbed, bearing your
bow, and having laid down your weapon on some remotest tree.
O harm-remover, splendid and holy Rudra to you be salutations.
May all those of your thousand weapons strike dead another man
from us.
O lord of the splendour and the world, thousands and thousands are
the weapons ready in your hands, turn their points away from us.
Countless, thousands are the Rudras on the face of this earth. Of
these Rudras we send the weapons to places thousand leagues
away.
Homage to Rudras whose abode is the heaven, whose arrows are
floods of rain. To them ten east ward, southward ten, ten to the
south, ten to the north, ten to the realm uppermost! To them be
homage. May they protect and spare us. Within their jaws we put
the man who dislikes us and whom we dislike.
O M am is. so charitably disposed, grant us food and strength
contained in stone and mountain and saps obtained from waters,
herbs, plants and trees, mat food and strength. O all-deveouring
Agni, in the stone is your hunger, in me your food. Let that wrath
of yours strike the man whom we detest!
O Agni, may these brick be my milch-kine, one and ten, and ten
tens, a hundred, and ten hundred, a thousand and ten thousand and
a hundred thousand, a lac and ten lacs, a million, and ten millions, a
crore, ten crores, hundred crores, thousand crores, it is ten times
mahapadma. it is ten limes shankh. it is ten limes mahapadma, it is
ten times shankh, it is ten times samudra, it is ten times madhya, it
is ten times prardh. O Agni, may these bricks of this alter be a
source of bliss in this and the next world.
You are law-strengthening pleasant Spring season, set in the cycle
of seasons. You fortify truth and are ghee-giving, bestowing sweet
Copyrighted material

Yajurveda Samhila
sap, full of splendour, glorified, fulfiller of our desires and
imperishable.
With ocean's cool mantling we robe you, Agni, be our purifier and
auspicious to us.
We wrap you with snow's investing garb, Agni, be our purifier and
auspicious to us.
Come you down on the earth, take the support of reeds, take abode
in the rivers, because you are the essence of the waters. You also
come here with mem, female frog, and make mis sacrifice of ours
splendid and successful.
This place of Agni is the waters' meeting point, here meet the
floods. Let your flames burn others than us, be our purifier and
propitious to us!
O excellent cleanser, Agni, radiant one, bring here to our yajna and
adore the gods, O pleasant tongued!
O pure, purifying, splendid god Agni, bring the gods to this our
sacrifice, to our offerings bring the gods!
He who with purifying radiance has shone up on mis earth like
dawns with sun-light, who comes speeding like fleet coursers in the
battle, ageless, who in the heat of battle tolerates thirst.
O Agni, salutations to your flame that attracts all the saps,
salutations to your blazing fire. Let your flame burn others than us.
be you our purifier and propitious to us!
To Agni who abides in man, Hail! To Agni who abides in the holy
sacrificial grass. Hail! To him who abides in the trees, Hail. And
this Agni who is known as the Sun, to him, Hail!
O Agni, you are the giver of vital breath, of our breath and
diffusive breath. You are giver of wealth and power. Let your
weapons distress others than us. Be you our purifier and propitious
to us!
May Agni destroy all the devouring fiends with his sharp blazing
flames. May Agni grant us riches and splendour.
Copyrighted material

He who protects all, dissolves all the worlds at he time of final
dissolution, sat down as Hotarpriest, our Father, the sage, is every
present. With his grace he fulfils all our wishes, pervades the subtle
primordial matter and the world created therefrom.
What was the support before this creation? What was it that
propped him? What was its nature? Whence Vishvakarman, the
seer of all, creating the earth, with boundless power produced the
heavens?
He has eyes in all directions, mouths on all sides, arms and feet on
all sides. He, the only one, has produced heaven and earth with the
might of his arms and put them in motion.
Let the learned men enquire within their soul what was the cause,
what the resultant creation? From what the heaven and earth were
created? Whereupon he stood when he shaped all the objects?
Whatever your highest, lowest, midmost deeds and places are, O
Vishvakarman, the creator of the universe, reveal them all to us,
your friends at sacrifice and come yourself to our yajama.
O Vishvakarman be pleased with my oblation and come to the
sacrifice with heaven and earth, come to our worship. May our
enemies be ever in confusion and here may we have a rich and
generous portion 1
When the father Vishvakarman created both heaven and earth, and
extended for both of them fastening securely their eastern ends,
then he, the lord of eye and light, submerged these in saps.
V.ishvakarman, the creator of the whole universe, is all-seeing,
most excellent, full of deep know ledge, mighty, creator, disposer
and without second. In him the-sould, controlling their seven senses
including mind and intellect live in enjoyment according to their
desires. Let us all worship him.
He is our father, he created us. He as the sustainer knows all races
and all things existing. He is the name-giver of all the gods. He is
one, him alone all seek for knowledge.
The ancient seers and rishis offered him their treasures with their
their songs of praise sung in groups, him who in the highest, lowest
Copyrighted material

Yajurveda Samhita
and the raid-region created all things that have existence.
He was there before this earth and heaven, and before gods and
demons came into being. What was the first germ that waters
received, where the gods beheld that primeval element?
The waters received that primeval germ where the gods lived
together. Indeed there in the navel of the unborn is that supreme
primeval element from which all things spring up and in which
they exist.
O men, you know not him who has created all creatures and
worlds, he is different and another and yet pervades you all. You
are enwrapped is mist of ignorance, engaged in fruitless discussions
and controversies, preoccupied with fulfilment of carnal wishes,
hymn-singers, wandering, confused and discontent.
Firsts of all came the God, Vishvakarman, then secondly was the
Sun created, who sustains the kine and the earth. Thirdly was born
the cloud in succession, that quickened the germ in waters and
preserves the herbs.
Terrific like the bull, swift in striking the foes, who keeps his
weapons sharpened, who does not even wink, causer of distress to
the enemy, the sole hero. Indra subdued at once die hundred armies
the arouser of the people.
O warriors, with him as helper, the loud-roaring, alert, invincible,
ever victorious, rouser of battles, Indra, the mighty, bearer of
arrows, now win the opposing army.
Indra. the master of his passions, girl with arrow and quiverbearing warriors, foe-subduing, keeper of stores of arms and
weapons, strong in arms, the Soma-enjoyer. fond of battle with
sharp shafts, rulers over all.
O Brihaspte, you are the slayer of demons. Guard you our chariots,
O chariot-borne, destroyer, victor, breacher of enemy forces!
O Indra, master commander of the forces, experienced hero, lord
of all. passing mighty, conqueror of the foes, fierce in battle,
accompanied by the heroes, far-famed for strength, kine-winner.
mount your conquering chariot!
Copyrighted material

Yajurveda Samhita
O Indra, O Brihaspati, you are the warder and commander of these
foe-destroying, battle-winning divine armies. Let Soma and the
Maruts, the leaders of big bands, march in front of these heavenly
hosts that destroy and demolish.
Ours is the powerful army of mighty Indra, king Varuna, the
Maruts and the Adityas. The soaring roar of the winning gods, the
highly learned ones, has caused the worlds to quake.
O Maghavan, excite the spirit of our warring heroes, make their
weapons flourish, urge to speed the strong steeds, O Vritra- slayer,
and let the din of conquering cars soar skyward!
May Indra aid us when our flags flutter high in the battle, may the
arrows of our army be victorious. May our heroes enjoy triumph.
May all the gods protect us everywhere during the war!
The forces of our enemy that is coming against us with its full
might, O Maruts, meet and enwrap it in thick darkness of that they
may not recognise one another.
O Agni, well satisfied with ghee, lead mis man to high position,
grant him increase in riches and multiply his progeny!
Indra, lead this man to prominence. May he possess control over
his foes. Grant him glory, let him offer their due share to the god!
May Indra prosper him in whose house we perform sacrifice. May
the gods and Brahmanaspati bless and comfort him.
O Agni, all the gods bear and uplift you high according to their
wisdom. May you so famed, rich in splendour, be auspicious to us.
Surya, the golden-hued, flame-haired, preserver of all, the bright
fire, has appeared high in the east. He, the guardian of the
righteous, nourishing and knowing his own virtues travels
surveying all the worlds.
He sits in the midst of heaven, the measurer, flooding the earth, sky
and air's mid-region with light. He looks upon the far- extending
fertile pastures between the eastern and western limits.
The same Sun who pours down the rain, is red when rising in the
east, pervades the heaven, marches through the sky, is set amidst
Copyrighted material

Yajurveda Samhita
the space, lord of the innumerable rays, measurer of the sky, has
attained the abode of the Primeval Father.
All the sages glorify Indra, vast as the space the best of car-bone
heroes, the lord, the very lord of strength.
May Indra, the lord of food and riches lift me up through elevation,
and with his subjugating might keep my foemen down!
May the gods increase our powers of uprising and knowledge and
also the power of foe's depression and punishment. May Indra,
may Agni drive away my foe-men in every direction.
I have ascended the heaven from the earth, and from mid-region I
have mounted up the heaven. From heaven's high and happy region
I have attained the world to eternal light.
The sages attain God, the sustainer of the world, through the
sacrifice. On their march to heaven they look not round, but rise to
salvation that releases them from the cycel of birth and death.
0 Agni, you are thousand-eyed and hundred-headed. You are
possessed of hundred breaths and thousand through-breaths. To
you, the lord of thousand fold riches, we offer our oblations of
power.
You are a bird of fine wings and so well seated on the earth. Fill the
space with you light, and fill the sky with you glow. Flood the
quarters with your sheen.
1 solicit god Savitar's wonderous wisdom desired by all, good for
all mankind and cause of this world's creation. The sages like
Kanva milked this mighty thousand-streamed milch-cow of
Savitar.
We worship Agni of the loftiest birth and offer him oblation with
hymns of praise in his lower station. I worship the place whence
you have sprung out, and offer oblations having enkindle you well.
0 most youthful Agni, first enkindled with reverence, shine in front
of us constantly, never fading our and we shall offer you sacred
oblations without stop.
1 offer the oblation of shee with a contemplative mind so that the
Copyrighted material

Yajurveda Samhita
gods may arrive who love oblations, the strengthners of truth. I
pour oblations day after day to Vishvakarman, the lord creator of
all.
O Agni, you have seven kinds of fuel, seven tongues of flame, the
seven rishis have envisioned you, you have seven beloved
mansions of verse and seven priests in sevenfold sacrifice pay you
homage. Seven are your places of birth, fill these full with ghee,
Svaha!
Forth from the ocean sprung the watery wave of sweetness with the
stalk, it turned into Amrita, that which is ghee's secret title, which
truly gods' tongue and Amrit's navel.
We utter the name of ghee aloud in mis yajna and bear the sacrifice
with oblation. So let the four hotar-priests hear this praise of ghee
that expresses the fruit of sacrifice through oblation.
Udgatar, Hotar, Adhvaryu and Brahman, the four priests are the
four horns of this sacrifice, Rik, Yaju and Saman are his three feet,
his heads are two and his seven heads are the seven verses. Bound
in triple bond the Bull roars loudly. The most adorable god has
entered the world of mortals.
These many kinds of ghee-streams flow forth from the innermost
reservoie of heart which the foe does not behold. I look upon the
golden Agni amidst these streams.
Like streams flow together unceasingly our oblations, purifying
themselves in the innermost reservoir of heart. These streams of
oblations flow swifity to the sacrifice as do the wild beasts fly
before a hunter.
Just as the high-born ladies at a fair look on and gently smiling,
incline towards their husbands, so do these streams of holy ghee
reach the sacrificial fuel and latvedas happily receive them.
Just as maidens adorn themselves with gay ornaments to join the
bridal feast, so do the streams of sacred ghee flow down where
Soma is poured and sacrifice is performed.
O gods, send to our lands riches and cattle, and convey our
oblations of streaming ghee, pure and sweet to heaven.
Copyrighted material

Yajurveda Samhita
Oh Agnit this universe depends on your sustaining power,
Whatever your loftiest form is there within the ocean, within the
heart, within life and within sacrifice, that sweet, enlightening and
blissful wave of yours may we obtain!
May my corn and my wealth, my best efforts and my mind, my
thought and power of action, may my speech and my praise, my
power of hearing, and my light, my spiritual power prosper by this
sacrifice.
May my inhalation and exhalation, my through-breathing and my
other breaths, my thought power and my knowledge, my speech
and my mind, my eye and my ear, my skill and my strength prosper
by this sacrifice.
May my energy and my tolerance, my soul -power and my body,
my happiness and my armour, my limbs and my bones, my joints
and my members, my health and long life prosper by this sacrifice.
May my pre-eminece, and my ownership, my courage and my
wrath against the wicked, my seriousness and my life-force, my
victorious power and my importance, my dignity and my breadth,
my long life and my greatness, my old age and progress prosper by
this sacrifice.
May my truth and my faith, my cattle and my wealth, my portion
and my greatness, my plag and my pleasure, my son and my future
son, my hymn and my rites prosper by this sacrifice.
May my simple acts and my immortality, my freedom from
consumption and my health, my medicine and my long life, my
freedom from enemy and my fearlessness, my joys and my rest, my
fair dawn and fair evening and my fair day prosper by this
sacrifice.
May my leader and my supporter, my security and my patience, my
goods and my capability, my knowledge and discretion, my
command and my propagation, my plough and my harrow prosper
through this sacrifice.
May my Agni and my Indra, my Soma and my Indra, my Savitar
and my Indra, my Sarasvati and my Indra, my Pushan and my
Copyrighted material

Yajurveda Samhita
Indra, my Brihaspati and my Indra' s favour prosper by this
sacrifice.
May my Mitra and my Indra, and my Varuna and my Indra, and my
Indra, and my Dhatar and my Indra, and my Tvashtar and my
Indra, and my Maruls and my Indra, and my Vishvadevas and my
Indra prosper by this sacrifice.
May my vows and my seasons, and my fervour and my year, and
my day night and my thighs and knees and Rathantara Soma
prosper by this sacrifice.
May all the Maruts come unto us today. Let all guardian gods come
to our sacrifice to protect us. Let all the Agnis be kindled well. May
we gain all wealth and riches.
O Agni, with the milk of the earth and such other saps I unite me,
unite myself with waters and herbs. As such I gain nourishment
from herbs and waters.
The protector of all the subjects, creator of all the beings, mind is
the Gandharva. May he guard or Brahmans, and Nobles, Svaha!
The widh-fulfilling Richas and Samans, his Apasaras my protect
us, Svaha!
O Prajapati, lord of the world, you are the prop of the homes above
and here, grant protection to these our Brahmans and Nobles.
O Maruts, you are deep and Vapory like the sea, you are the source
of rain pouring down on the earth and the blessing arising
thereform. You are the heaven-wandering Maruts, blow on me
food, riches, weal and release from bonds. May I attain you from
all sides. Svaha!
O Agni, grant glory to our Brahmans, set lustre in our Kshatriyas,
lustre in our Vaishyas, and in our Shudras, and in me establish
lustre.
0 Varuna, with my songs of praise I beg this of you, your devotee
begs this of you with oblation. Abide with us and get not angry. Do
not decrease our age, O vast one!
1 unite Agni with ghee, the possessor of divine virtues, fair of
Copyrighted

Yajurveda Samhita
speed, great and mighty. Through him we shall reach the world of
Aditya and then sacen to the loftiest realm of heaven.
O Agni, both of these your wings are never wasting, wherewith you
fly ever and destroy the fiends. Through them may we fly to the
realms of the pious souls where have gone the first-borne Sages.
O Agni, fill the earth full with sap, fill the herbs with sap, fill the
heaven with sap, fill the space with sap, full with milk make all the
regions for me.
By the impulse of Savitar, with arms of Ashvins, with the hands of
Pushan, with the speech of goddess Sarasvati, with the law of
Prajapati and with Agni's sole dominion I anoint you.
Agni is maintainer of law, practiser of truth, the sustainer of earth,
destroyer of the foe, protector of priest and warrior classes. For his
pleasure we offer this oblation, may he accept it graciously. May
these herbs the Apsaras of Gandharva Agni, protect and guard us.
Svaha!
The Sun who conjoins day and night, lauded by the Saman,
sustainer of the earth, may protect our priest and warrior classes.
This oblation is for him. May his rays, the uniting and life-giving
Apsaras guard us well. Svaha!
The high-mined Moon, who receives light from the Sun, is the
Gandharava. May he protect our Brahmans and Kshatriyas. The
bright stars of constelation Asterism are his Apsaraa. May they
protect as. All hail to them!
All-pervading and quick-reaching Wind is the Gandharva. The
Waters and Saps which sustain life, are his Apsaras. May they
guard us. All hail to them!
O Agni. you are pleasurable like the moon, you are like falcon in
speed,righteous in conduct, fair-pinioned, mighty, firm, settled,
established in sacrifice and nourisher of all. Homage be to you
Harm us not!
O Agni, you are head and height of heaven, naval of the earth,
esence of the waters and of the herbs. Life of all the beings you are,
blissgiving, and omnipresent. Homage be to you, the path and
Copyrighted

Yajurveda Samhita
Destination of all.
O omnipresent you are placed at the head of the world, you heart is
in the sea, your life is in the waters. Guard us by giving waters.
Pour rain by cleaving the clouds.
May Agni, satisfied with oblations, fulfil all our desires. May this
oblation quickly reach the gods.
The knowledge which has arisen either from exertion or from
judgement, to obtained from soul-force, or from the meditation, or
from mind, eyes or ears, hold fast to it so that you may follow the
path of salvation along which have gone the first-born ancient
sages.
0 gods, dwelling in the loftiest heaven, to you I trust this sacrificer.
1 offer you the fruit of this sacrifice. After you will the Sacrificer
follow. Here know him in this vast and loftiest heaven.
Recognise this Sacrificer, O gods, dwelling in the loftiest heaven.
Know him well and his form. When he follows the gods' pathway,
reveal to him the fruits of righteous action!
May Agni, Vishvakarman's own, establish us among the gods in
heaven, where the streams of honey, milk and ghee flow unceasing.
Agni 1 am, the knower of all the created things, adorable in the
form of sacrifice, immortal. My eye is ghee, in my mouth is nectar.
I am the Rik, Yaju and Sama, the creator of the three realms,
immortal heat I am and conveyor of burnt offerings.
I am triple-vidya of the vedas in name. You are the best of the five
Agnis found among the five races of men for their weal. Speed us
on lengthened life.
O Indra, the slayer of the foes, conqueror of the armies, we call on
you again and again for power and strength.
Like a dreadful wild beast roaming in the mountains, you have
come unto us, O Indra, from the farthest land. Now encircle our
foes and crush the enemies, whetung your sharp thunderbolt, and
scatter all those who detest us!
Come, O Agni. come to guard us from the distant land. Come
Copyrighted material

Yajurveda Samhita 1463
Vaishvanara, to listen to our beautiful hymns of praise!
Agni has entered all, he has entered the sky, the earth, the air and
the sun All herbs he has entered. May that Agni, pervading all,
preserve us all day and night from harm.
O Agni, help us that we may have our desire fulfilled, obtain
hero-sons and the best riches, O wealthy one! Waging war with the
enemy may we be victorious and enriched. O Ageless, may we
attain your eternal glory!
O Agni, approaching you with folded and raised hands, we have
this day fulfilled your longing. With contemplative mind and
devoted spirits, with no unfriendly thought, O Agni, worship the
gods!
Sweet with the sweet, I mix you with Soma, strong with the strong,
Amirit with Amrit, the honeyed-sap with sap that is sweet as
honey. O Sura, you are Soma. Drass up yourself for the Ashvins,
dress up for Sarasvati, dress up for Indra, the protector!
Soma is the best sacrificial food. Pour you forth the flowing one,
the friend of human-beings, cleansed with the waters, and
expressed with stones.
Purified by Vayu's strainer, the swift flowing Soma is Indra's
intimate friend. Purified by Vayu's strainer, the Soma that has
passed away backward is Indra's intimate friend.
0 Soma, you are attainable through yamas and niyamas, mis my
heart is your place. You possess Ashvin's splendour, Sarasvat's
vigour and Indra's might. I take you for enjoyment, I take you for
delight and take you for greatness.
You are lustre, give me lustre. You are manly vigour, give me
manly vigour. You are strength, give me strength, you are energy,
give my energy. You are righteous wrath, give me righteous wrath.
You are foe-conquering strength, give me fore-conquerling
strength.
1 bruised my mother in delight when as a boy I sucked her breast.
With that debt I become free from my mother. May my parents be
unharmed and happy me. You are all my associates, as such unite
Copyrighted material

me with bliss, you are free from sin, let me be free from sin.
The divine physicians, the twain Ashvins, stretched out the healing
sacrifice, and Sarasvati the physician with speech invested Indra
with all hero-powers.
The twain Ashvins are the Soma-store, Sarasvati the sacred hearth.
For Indra there is his seat, the apacious hall, the Sacrificer's house.
The morning sacrifice is performed with the Ashvins, the mid-day
libation with Indra, the evening one with Sarasvati with oblations
very dear to the Vishvadevas.
The gods and the Brahmans have explained the form of sacrifice so
far. All mat one gains in the Sautramani rite when Soma is shed
and expressed.
The learned priests promote the sacrificial rite with food, sacred
grass, Some-juice, and host of heroes. May we also be happy,
doing righteous deeds and offering libations to Indra with gods.
The Soma-juice which the twain Ashvins brought from demon
Namuchi and which Sarasvati prepared and poured out for Indra,
that sweet, honeyed, brilliant juice I drink here in this sacrifice.
Whatever portion of this savoury juice is clinging here, what Indra
drank with his powers, I drink and feed on that sparkling juice, with
a pure mind.
O Agni, you prolong life, pour down on us food and vigorous
strength. Drive you afar from us the gang of evil-doers.
O learned ones, cleanse me, make my mind, intellect and spirit
clean. May all beings purify me. May Jatavedas, the all-knowing,
purify me!
0 Agni. effulgent one, purify me with your sacred bright fire and
then purify our sacrifice!
May Pavamana, the all-knowing, ever pure and purifying others,
cleanse us today, he who is purifier, render us pure.
O god Savitar, impeller of all, purify me from all sides with both of
your forms and through this sacrifice.
Copyrighted material

Yajurveda Samhita
I have heard the mention of tow pathways of mortal men, the way
of the Fathers and the way of gods. One of these two paths each
moving one travels, each being leaves its present parents and gets
new ones.
May this my oblation cause the birth of the best progeny. May this
bring ten brave sons, all fine things, physical strength, good
children, cattle, fearlessness, peace and power for our weal. O
Agni, confer on us food, milk and manly strength and render my
progeny abundant.
Our reverend ancient Fathers Angirases, Navagvas, Atharavans,
Bhrigus deserve Soma. May we follw the path of these adorable
ancients, and enjoy their loving gracious favour!
Our ancient Fathers, deserving Soma, may come again and again to
our sacrifice and with them let Yama happily enjoy our oblations at
his will.
O Soma, you are pre-eminent for wisdom. With your wisdom you
follow the st-aight path of gods as our leader. O Soma, our learned
ancient Fathers by your wisdom and guidance obtained the best
treasures among the gods.
Associating with the Fathers, O Soma, spread our yourself abroad
between heaven and earth. Therefore, let us serve you, O Indu. and
let us be lord of the wealth.
0 Fathers, sitting on best seats and the highest positions, these
oblations we offer you. accept them and come here to help us.
Come here unto us with auspicious favour, peace, happiness, and
protection. Remove whatever sin and distress are within us.
1 know the blissful Fathers, so knowledgeful and protector. I know
the all-pervading God's immortal varied creation. May those visit
ihis our place, who wholly dedicated to God, with their life force
enjoy the nectar of self-realization.
May the ancient Fathers, worthy of Soma, invited to their loved
sacrifice, come here and listen our speech. May they enlighten us
With their teachings and protect us.
0 you all F; thers. harm us not for any sin which we might have
Copyrighted material

Yajurveda Samhita
committed through human frailty. Bowing down with the bent
knees and seated on the right side we pay you homage. Accept our
homage with favour.
O Fathers, grant riches to the charitably disposed men and your
sons sitting beside their fair mothers. Give them a portion of your
riches so that they may thereby gain energy.
O kvyahana Agni, bearer of best things to the wise, grant us that
supreme wealth which you through praiseworthy speech consider
fit to be granted to the wise.
Now let us offer oblations to the Fathers, to those advanced in age
and wisdom and to those who followed them, to those who are
engrossed in the worldly affairs and to those who dwell among the
men of lofty character.
O Agni, as in the ancient days our Fathers, holy, devoted to truth,
spreading knowledge, sang hymns of praise and acquired radiant
wives and ground to live on, so should you remove ignorance and
cast away the darkness.
You are the birth-place of princely power, you are centre of royal
power. Let none harm you, do not harm me!
By the impulse of god Savitar. with arms of Ashvins, with the
hands of Pushan and with the healing powers of Ashvins, I anoint
you for splendour, and the glory of a Brahman. With the healing
ppwers of Sarasvati, I anoint you for gaining food and might. 1
anoint you by might of Indra for gaining wealth, fame and physical
strength.
Let my head be grace, my mourn be fame, my hair and bear full of
brilliant sheen, my breath be light and deathlessness, my eye the
king, my ear the prince.
May my tongue be bliss, my voice be power, my mind the
righteous wrath, my intellect self-illumined. May joy be my
fingers, delight my limbs and conquering strength my friend!
May my two arms be Indra's might, my hands be deeds of
heroisim, my soul and heart a shield against attack.
Copyrighted material

Yajurveda Samhita
My ribs by my government, my belly, shoulders, neck, hips, thighs,
elbows, knees and all other members of the body my subjects.
I take my stand on princely power and kingship, on horse I am
dependent, and on kine. On members I depend, on body I depend.
On vital breath I am dependent, on welfare, on heaven, on earth
and on sacrifice do I depend.
Whatever disrespect or fault of ours, those of others has caused
your wrath, O gods, may Agni set me free from all that iniquity and
fault.
If during the day or in the night I have done any act of sin, may
Vayu set me free from that iniquity and fault.
If when awake or in our sleep we have committed acts of sin, may
Surya set me free from that iniquity and fault.
Each fault done in a village or in forest, in society or mind, each
sinful act that we have committed to Shudra or Vaishya or by
preventing a religious act, even of that sin, you are the expiation!
May pure water cleans me from my acts of sin just as one released
from the stake, or a person is cleansed by bathing after toil, or as
ghee is purified through a sieve.
May we be weaned away from darkness by looking upon the loftier
light that is most excellent.
O Agni, today I have sought waters and have united with htir sap
and thereafter have come to you. O Agni, grant me glory, wealth
and progeny.
That society I regard as the perfect where work the Brahmans and
the Nobles in ideal harmony, and where the gods and Agni together
dwell.
Fain would I know the holy land where want and langour are not
known, where in complete harmony do move Indra and Vayu side
by side.
Let your soul be yoked with God, let each of your joints be full of
vigour. Let the imperishable joy be yours and let your noble nature
be the Soma's guard.
Copyrighted material

Chant your lofty lauds to Indra, to Maruts, to him, the best
Vritra-slayer, whereby the gods created the Sun of radiant light that
never fades.
He is the sovereign lord of all living beings upon whom the world
depends. He is mighty, the mighty king. I accept you by his might
and place you in my heart.
With the Sun kindled in forefront of the Mornings, with forward
light, ever active, growing strong, and with thirty-three gods, Indra,
the Thunder-wielder, passing mighty, may approach our sacrifice
rejoicing.
May Indra, lord of bay steeds, full of rays, vast in extent,
besprinkled by the Adityas and the Vasus, full, of expanse, occupy
his seat in the east on earth and accept our burnt offerings.
Just as the child-bearing, goodly dames apprach their heroic
husband through open portals moving swiftly, so should the armies
full of heroic warriors, yoked with might stand on all sides of Indra
of manly strength and subdue the foemen.
The fair and lovely Dawn and Night, full of sap, rich-yielding, lofty
ones, as they weave their long-extended thread of varied colour,
adore Indra, the great, mighty, go of gods.
May Indra lauded here, fearless and heroic come to us for our
protection, and be our friend. May he whose powers are diverse,
grow in strength, like the Sun to subdue the foes.
May Indra, come for protection from near or a far away place,
ful filler of desires, lord of the excellent might, guardian of
mankind, thunderbolt-wielder, slayer of the foes in the battles.
May Indra come to us riding his bay steeds, the gracious one, to
favour us with wealth and protection. May Maghavan abide by us
in our sacrifice and in this performance of Prajapati.
I invoke Indra, Indra the protector I call in every sacrifice. Indra the
mighty, worthy to be invoked reverently, Indra adored by many.
May Indra come to us and bless with riches and prosperity.
May Indra, the besi protector, accompanied by excellent heroes,
Copyrighted material

Yajurveda Samhita
lord of wealth, prosper us with food and happiness. May Indra, the
king grant food and happiness. May Indra, the king render us all
fearles and baffle the foemen and there by may we be the lords of
vigour.
The sage Vashishtha praised Indra with hymns, the mighty, the
thunder-armed. May he, adored and prayed, protect our kine and
heroes. O you gods, preserve us evermore with your blessings.
O you both Ashvings, the bright and radiant Agni has been kindled,
Soma has been pressed out and the milch-cow Sarasvati, the
bestower of the best things, has poured forth the sparkling juice,
Indra'sown.
Protect us by day O Ashvins, protect us by night, O you Sarasvati.
O divine priests, O physicians, both of you guard Indra in accord
when Soma is expressed.
The Ashvins and Sarasvati united together made Indra wax strong
with oblations, who slew demon Vala with Namuchi of Asura
birth.
Waxing him mighty with sacred oblations and burnt offerings,
Sarasvati and the twain Ashvins sang Indra' s songs of praise.
The great protector Indra snatched away by force power, strength
and wealth from Namuchi, and Savitar and Varuna bestowed boons
of strength and wealth on the liberal sacrificer.
May both the Ashvins, fair of form, the doer of righteous deeds,
knowledge-bestowing Sarasvati and the foe-slaying Indra, help us
in our sacrifices.
O Agni, we pour sacred oblation into your mouth as Soma into a
receptacle and ghee into a ladle. Vouchsafe us riches, strengthwinning, blessed with heroes, lofty wealth, full of glory lauded by
men.
O twain Ashvins, wedded to truth, O Rudra, come to mis house
with kine and horses, the sure protectors of this sacrificer.
O longed-for Ashivins, lead us on to wealth, full of shining gold
and service.
Copyrighted material

Yajurveda Samhita
May Sarasvati, pure and purifying, rich in food and wisdom,
promote our sacrifice.
She, the inspirer of truthful speech, awakener of the best intellect
Sarasvati, protects our sacrifice.
Sarasvati, rich in knowledge, illuminates the vast ocean of learning
and the pious thoughts.
O Indra, wonderously bright, come and enjoy these libations so
enjoyable, prepared and purified by these fingers.
Well-urged by the holy singer, sped by the sage, come here, O
Indra, to the hymns of oblation-offering priest!
O Varuna hear this my prayer, be ever gracious unto us. Longing
for help I yearn for you.
O all-knowing, most adored, Agni, oblation-bearer, effulgent, put
away far from us Varuna* s displeasure, god, remove from us far
away those who hate us.
Be you the closest unto us, O Agni, our bosom friend while now
this rich dawn is breadking. Reconcile Varund to us, be bounteous
and grant us your compassion and listen our prayers quickly.
We call on Mother Aditi. the womb of those who steadfastly
observe their vows, protector from various attacks, ageless, the
promoter of truth, the form of happiness, we invoke the boundless
Mother for our protection.
May we ascend mis vessel for our weal, flawless, divine, rowed
with fine oars, vast and all-accommodating, comfortable, never
leaking and built by master builders.
O Varuna, O Mitra, you gracious pair, sprinkle our pasturage with
rich sap, and with honey, the realms of the air.
O Mitra-Varuna, ever youthful, stretch your arms hearing my
prayer and let our span of life be extended, sprinkle the posture of
our cattle with sap and make me glorious in the world.
May Agni, well kindled with fuel, bright, excellent, and adorable,
and the Gayatri verse grant power, long life, kine and riches.
Copyrighted

Yajurveda Samhita
The two Dawns of great splendour, all the immortal gods, the
Trishtup verse and the bull that carries burden on his back, here in
this sacrifiece grant us strength and long life!
Agni and mid-Air, the two divine Hotar-priests, the twin
Physicians, Indra's own friends, agant us strenght and long life!
The Earth, Sarasvati and the three intellects, the Maruts, a
milch-cow, the metre Viraj and a bull grant us strength and long
life!
The eight Vasus, praised with triple Stoma, and Rathantara slong
with Spring season and gods, grant us long life and splendour in the
light of Indra!
May Rudras with Summer season, and gods, lauded in Panchadash
Stoma of fifteen verse Brihat grant us strength, long life and fame
in Indra!
May the Adityas with the Rainy Season and gods lauded in
Saptadash Stoma of seventeen verses Virupa with folk, grant us
manly strength, longevity and sacrifice in Indra!
May the Maruts with Autumn Season and gods, praised in a hymn
of twenty-seven verses, the Sakvaris, grant us longevity, strength
and sacrifice in Indra!
Sarasvati offered the seal of sacred grass to Indra, the divine and
virtuous, the two Ashvins gave Indra splendour, like brilliance of
the eyes, for gain of wealth, and performed sacrifice to honour
Indra, so should you perform the sacrifice.
The celestial Doors, the twain Ashvins, the Physicians and
Sarasvati gave breath into Indra's nostrils and manly strength for
gain of wealth and performed the yajna, so should you perform the
sacrifice.
Just as the beautiful Dawn and Night, the goddesses, the two
Ashvins and Sarasvati gave strength and speech in the mouth of
Indra for gain of wealth and performed yajna, so should you
perform the sacrifice.
Just as both the nursing goddesses Morning and Evenings, both the
Copyrighted material

1472 YajurvedaSamhita
Ashvins and goddess Sarasvati making Indra grow strong gave him
fame and power for gain of wealth and performed yajna, so should
you perform the sacrifice.
Just as the two goddesses, well yielding cows, divine Sarasvati, the
healing Physicians, the two Ashvins formed Indra' s guards and
from their breasts through sacrifice gave him strength and brilliant
light for gain of wealth, so should you by sacrifice.
Today this man, the Sacrificer cooking oblations, cooking
oblations, cooking sacrificial food, binding to the sacrificial post a
goat for the Ashvins, a ram for the Sarasvati, a bull for Indra' s love,
pressing out Soma-juice for the Ashvins, Sarasvati and Indra, the
best protector, has chosen Agni as his Hotar- priest.
Today the god of Herbs has rendered a good service to the Ashvins
with a goat, to Sarasvati with a ram and to Indra with a bull. The
gods have accepted the sacrifice, they have accepted the cooked
offerings and have grown strong with these oblations. They,
Sarasvati, Ashvins and Indra have enjoyed the Soma juices.
O Seer, foremost of the Seers, descendant of the seers, this
Sacrificer has you today, of the all the gods assembled here
together saying that you shall, O Agni, win for him by sacrifice the
choice- worthy treasures among the gods. O god Agni, whatever
gifts the gods have given, kindly you do approve and grant. O
Hotar Agni, you have been sent as a man, selected and sent for
benediction, for good speech, speak god words!
You are effulgence, you are splendour, immotal, and protector of
life, therefore, protect my life. I accept you by impulse of god
Savitar, with the arms of Ashvins and the hands of Pushan.
In this Soma-sacrifice is present with us this girdle, which our
ancient seers assumed in religious rites in the beginning, declaring
the relation between the Primordial Cause and the created things.
O God, you are famous, you are the universe, you are the
controller and sustainer of all the worlds. You, Sacrificer go and
consecrate by Svaha to Agni Vaishavanara of vast fame.
We contemplate the divine virtues of god Savitar with our mind so
Copyrighted material

Yajurveda Samhita
that he may stimulate our thoughts.
I invoice for protection the effulgent, all-creating god Savitar. He
knows all, stimulate all and is refuge of all the gods.
We invoke and praise the all-creating god Savitar, the all-seeing to
obtain the lofty wisdom wherewith to discriminate truth from
untruth.
Having eulogised Savitar, the creator of the universe, we seek his
gifts in riches, who knows all our desires.
I invocate the liberal-giver Savitar, protector of the men devoted to
the vows, full of splendour on all sides, the god Savitar, the cheerer
of the gods' feast.
The procimity of god Savitar cheers the company of the gods, with
prayer we desire riches from him.
Agni well kindled with hymns of praise conveys our oblations to
the gods. O Adhvaryu, awake Agni well, the deathless god!
The oblation-bearer, immortal, wise, messenger of the gods and
auspicious Agni, approaches us with the thought.
I place Agni in front, the oblation-bearer, envoy of gods and him
here I address. Here let him make the gods sit.
O all-prevading and purifying Pavamana, you have verily
generated the Sun and sustain waters with their strength and
abundant vivifying milk in the kine.
O horse, you are mighty by your mother, eminent by your father.
You are indeed a horse, you are a courser, giver of pleasure, slayer
of the foe, you are a yoke-horse, you are splendid, you are
manly-minded. You are called Vayu and Shishu. Follow the path of
the Adityas. 0 gods, possessed of divine virtues. O Guardians of
the Quarters, protect this sacrificial, anointed horse for the gods.
Here is delight, here is pleasure, here is contentment and here is
self-satisfaction.
Hail to Prajapati, hail to Prajapati the foremost, hail to Prajapati,
the supreme, this is for Prajapati, this is for the Adityas who know
our mind! Hail to Aditi, hail to bliss-giving Aditi! Hail to Sarasvati!
Copyrighted material

Yajurveda Samhita
Hail to puriffying Sarasvati! Hail to mighty Sarasvati! Hail to
Pushan! Hail to Pushan of the excellent objects! Hail to Pushan the
sustainer and noruisher of man-kind! Hail to Tvashtar! Hail to
Tvashtar, the guardian of speed! Hail to Tvashtar of many forms.
Hail to Vishnu! Hail to Vishnu, ever protected and ever protecting!
Hail to Vishnu who in subtle form pervades all!
O Brahman, let there be born Brahmans in the land, illustrious for
their Vedic knowledge, let there be born the Princes, heroic, skilled
archer, piercing the foemen with darts, mighty heroes, the kine rich
in milk, the ox good at carrying burden, the fleet courser, the
woman skilled in household work. Let Prajanya pour form rain as
we desire, let our fruit-bearing trees ripen, let acquisition and
preservation of property be secured for us.
Hail to Madhu, the month of Chaitra! Hail to Madhava, the month
of Vaisakh! hail to Shukra, the month of Purifying Jeystha! Hail to
Nabhas, the month of Ashadha! Hail to Nabhashya, the month of
Shravana! Hail to Isha, the month of Bhadrapada! Hail to Urija, the
month of Kartika! Hail to Sahas, the month of Agahan! Hail to
Sahashya, the month of Pausha! Hail to Tapas, the month of
Magha! Hail to Tapasya, the month of Falgun! Hail to amhasaspati,
the intercalary or the thirteenth month!
May life increase by sacrifice, Hail! May breath improve by
sacrifice, Hail! May downward breath, diffusive breath, upward
breath and breath digestive thrive by sacrifice, Hail! May vision,
hearing, speech, mind, soul, self-devotion, light heaven, hymns and
sacrifice succeed, all Hail!
Hail to the only One! Hail to the Two, Purusha and Prahriti! Hail to
Hundred! Hail to Hundred and one! Hail to Daybreak! Hail to
Bliss!
Who by his grandeur has become the sole Ruler and Sovereign of
the moving world that breaths and slumbers, he, the God is
Sovereign lord of these men and cattle. Let us adore with devotion,
him, the embodiment of bliss!
You are realisable by efforts, I accept you, O Prajapati as protector,
this is your piace. The Moon is your greatness. Your majesty can
Copyrighted material

Yajurveda Samhita
be seen reflected in the night and the year. This majesty can be
seen in the Earth and Agni, in the stars and the Moon. Hail to your
majesty, O Prajapati, and to the gods, all Hail!
They steadfast and free from anger, move about performing
sacrifice and yoke their mighty sun-like souls to God. The lights
shine in the sky.
Just as they yoke on both sides of the chariot two beautiful steeds,
tawny, stout, bearer of the rider from one place to another, so do
the sages yoke their sense-organs, soul and the vital breath to God.
When the horse, swift like wind, has reached the beautiful form
that Indra loves, and the waters, O singer of hymn, by this path
bring you back our Steed here.
May the Vasus besprinkle you with Gayatri verse, may the Rudras
anoint you with Trishtup Verse. May the Adityas besprinkle you
with Jagati verse. Eat you this food cooked from barley, from
cow's milk and its products, O Earth, Ether, Heaven and gods,
enjoy this food, O Prajapati!
Who moves singly and alone? Who is brought forth to life again?
What is the cure of cold? What is the great field for growing?
The Sun moves singly and alone, the Moon is brought forth to life
again. Fire is the cure of cold, Earth is that great field.
What was the thought in the beginning? What was the bird of the
mighty size? Who was she, the slippery matron? Who absorbs
light?
Heaven was the primary thought, the steed was the mighty bird.
The Earth is the slippery matron. Night absorbs all light and forms.
Agni was all-seeing, with him they performed sacrifice. He won
this world in which Agni is. This world shall be your place of
refuge, this you shall win. Drink these saps for this. Vayu was
all-seeing with him they performed sacrifice. He won this world in
which Vayu is. This shall be your place of refuge, this you shall
win. Breathe you these vayus. Surya was all-seeing, with him the
gods sacrificed. He won this world in which Surya is. This world
shall be you refuge, this you shall win. Enjoy you, these beams of
Copyrighted material

Yajurveda Samhita
the Sun!
We invoke you, troop-lord of troops. We invoke you the lord of the
beloved ones. We call you the lord of treasures, the lord of wealth.
0 God, all beings abide in you. You are ray precious wealth.
1 know you full well, the bearer of golden germ and sustainer of
nature for you keep the world safe as in a womb, you generate all.
I have magnified with songs of praise the Purusha white as curd,
ever winning, strong and fast like a Steed, Dadhikravan. May he
sweeten our mouth and prolong the life we have to live.
Who flays and dissects you? Who teaches you the various texts?
Who comforts your organs? And who imparts you peace?
May the Spring season, etc., in due course of time, giver of peace,
impart you necessary knowledge, and pacify you by means of the
splendour of the year.
May the Half-months, and the Months flay and dissect your age
and limbs. May day and night, and the maruts granting you felicity
remove your evil thoughts in order to give you peace.
May the learned Adhvaryu impart you special teaching and thereby
eradicate your faults. May they examine the joints of your limbs.
May the ladies in Your connection impart you similar teaching.
May the Sky, Earth, Space, Air, Sun and Moon with the Stars of
the heaven remove each of you faults and failings, and prepare a
nice, successful world for you.
Well be it with your upper organs, well be it with your lower
organs. Well be it with your bones and marrow and with all your
body.
What's the lustre like that of the Sun? What lake is equal to the
sea? What is more spacious than the Earth? What is that which is
beyond measure?
Brahma is lustre like the Sun. Heaven is a flood to match the ocean.
The Sun is vaster than the Earth. Beyond all measure is the cow.
O friend of the gods, I enquire for information, if you in spirit has
Copyrighted

Yajurveda Samhita
pervaded the universe? Is this whole universe contained in the three
strides in which Vishnu is worshipped?
I pervade those three strides of Vishnu in which is contained this
whole universe. The Earth and Heaven I circle in a moment with a
part of my strength, even beyond Heaven am I.
What are the things which Purusha has entered into? What are the
things which Purusha has contained within him? The riddle we
propose to you, O Brahman. Pray tell and unravel the mystery.
Within five things has Purusha found entrance. These things has
Purusha within himself established. This is the though I return in
answer and yet you are not supperior to me in wisdom.
Who knows the central point of the world? Who knows the heaven
and the earth and the vast mid-region between these? Who knows
the creator of the mighty Sun? Who knows the Moon and whence
she was engendered?
I know the centre of this world, I know heaven and earth and the
vast mid-region between them. I know the creator of the mighty
Surya. 1 know the Moon and whence she was engendered.
I ask you of the earth's most extreme limit. Where is the centre of
the world, I question you? I ask you of the strength of the mighty
Purusha? I ask of the loftiest heaven where Speech abides.
This altar is the earh's extremist limit. This sacrifice is the centre
and navel of the world. This Soma, the king of herbs, is the strength
of the mighty Purusha. This Brahman is the loftiest abode where
Speech abides.
God who has engendered the Sun, the mighy and self-exisieni One.
the first within the mighty flood. He laid down the timely embryo
from which Prajapati was born. You all should worship him.
By whose might these snow-clad mountains are standing, and men
call sea full of sap his possession? Whose are these stretched arms.
Whose are these heavenly quarters? What god shall we adore with
our oblation?
He who is the giver of vital breath, of strength and power, he
Copyrighted material

1478 Yajurveda Samhita
whose commandments all the gods obey, whose shade is life
immortal, the lord of death. What god shall we adore with
oblation?
May auspicious powers come to us from all directions, unhindered,
ceasselessly and ever victorious. May thereby the gods be with us,
day by day, our guardians, for our weal with their constant care.
May their auspicious favour be ours. May the bounty of the
righteous gods fill us with virtues. May we seek the friendship of
the gods with devotion. May they grant us longevity that we may
live.
We call the gods here with hymns composed by our ancientfathers.
We invoke Bhaga, the friendly Daksh, Mitra, Aditi, Aryaman,
Varuna, Soma and the Ashvins twain. May auspicious Sarasvati
vouchsafe us weal.
May the Wind blow to us happy medicines. May the mother Earth
and our father Heaven grant us these, and also the happy stones that
press out Soma juice. May both Ashvins give us bliss on hearing
this our prayer.
Him we call who reigns supreme, the lord of all that stands or
moves, inspires of the spirit. May Pushan, the nourisher of ail, our
keeper and guardian, infallible promote the growth of our wealth
for good.
May the mighty Indra, so illustrious and vast, give us prosperity,
may Pushan, the lord of wealth grant us prosperity. May the vast,
unassailable lord god prosper us. May Brihaspati grant us
prosperity.
May the Maruts, strong and fast like steeds, prevading the heavens,
the generator of the clouds, moving for the weal of the people,
whose tongue is Agni. their eye the Sun. come here for our
protection!
O gods, may we listen with our ears and see with our eyes what is
good! With limbs firm and bodies stout may we extolling you lead
a life appointed by the gods.
() gods, may we live in your company for full hundred years. Let
Copyrighted material

Yajurveda Samhita
not our bodies decay before that period, during which perioi. our
sons become fathers in their turn. Break you not in midst our
course of fleeting life!
Aditi is heaven, Aditi is the atmosphere, Aditi is the Mother of all,
the Sire and the Son. Aditi is gods, Aditi is the five tribes of men.
Aditi is all mat has been born and all that shall be born.
May not Varuna, Aryaman, Mitra, Ribhukshan, Indra, Ayu and
Mitra ever slight or desert us. We declare amid the congregations
the divine virtues of the gods, mil of splendour, strong like flying
steed and mighty ones.
When they lead thrice round the sacrificial steed, that is sent to
gods as proper oblation, a goat precedes him, the proper oblation of
Pushan, announaing the sacrifice to the gods.
Invoker, presiding Hotar-priest, atoner, Agni-kindler, Somaexpresser singer and sage, with.
O Brihaspati, grant us that which foe deserves not, which shines
splendid among the people, give that, O son of rita, you effulgent
with strength, that treasure splendid grant us.
O Indra, come Vritra-slayer, drink of this Soma, lord of hundred
sacrifices, pressed out with stones. I accept you for the love of
indra whose wealth is kine. This is your place. I accept you for him.
We pray to and Adore Vaishvanara, the immortal, the lord of light
and sacrifice, truthful, effulgent, protector of beings, the lord of the
world, you practise yama and niyama. 1 accept you for Vaishvanara
as the lord of kine. This is your home. I establish you for the
satisfaction of Vaishvanara.
May we ever enjoy the favour of Vaishvanara, the sovereign lord
of all living things. He. the refuge of all the world, sprung from this
earth he looks upon. He is engaged in the weal ol the world along
with the Sun.
Agni is Pavaman, Sage, Hotar-priest of all the five Races. To him
of great riches we pray. You are imbued with yamas and niyamas.
May Indra, the mighty and thunder-armed protect us well and slay
Copyrighted material

Yajurveda Samhita
the wicked who detest us. You are the lord of yamas and niyamas. I
accept you for Indra* s satisfaction. This is your home. I establish
you for the sake of Indra,
Just as the cows low in their stall for their calves so do we sing the
lauds of Indra, our lord and king, who removes affliction, the
checker of assault, who enjoys riches and food. Freedom from sin
may boundless Adiu' grant us. May this noble Steed with our
oblations gain us lordship!
With Indra and all these gods as our aid, we shall bring these
worlds under our rule. May the twelve Adityas, forty-nine Maruts,
Indra and all the gods grant us healing medicines. May Indra with
the Adityas make our sacrifice, our bodies and our sons virtuous.
O Brihaspati, grant us that which foe deserve not, which shines
splendid among the people, give that, O son of rita, you effulgent
with strength that treasure splendid grant us.
O Indra, come Vritra-slayer, drink of this Soma, lord of hundred
sacrifices, pressed out with stones. I accept you for the love of
Indra whose wealth is kine. This is your place. I accept you for
him.
We pray to and Adore Vaishvanara, the immortal, the lord of light
and sacrifices, truthful, effulgent, protector of beings, the lord of
the world. You practise yama and niyama. I accept you for
Vaishvanara as the lord of kine. This is your home. I establish you
for the satisfaction of Vaishvanara.
May we ever enjoy the favour of Vaishvanara the sovereign lord of
all living things. He, the refuge of all the world, sprung from this
earth he looks upon. He is engageed in the weal of the world along
with the Sun.
Agni is Pavaman. Sage. Hotar-priest of all the five Races. To him
of great riches we pray. You are imbued with yamas and niyamas.
May Indra, the mighty and thunder-armed protect us well and slay
the wicked who detest us. you are the lord of yamas and niyamas. I
accept you for Indra's satisfaction This is your home, establish you
for the sake of Indra.
Copyrighted material

Yajurveda Samhita
mm
Just as the cows low in their stall for their calves so do we sing the
lauds of Indra, our lord and king, who removes affliction, the
checker of assault, who enjoys riches and food.
Honour Agni. the king, the effulgent, who carries oblation with
speed. Like the chief queen of a king, riches and food stuffs
proceed from him!
O Agni, the Seasons spread your sacrifice, the Months guard your
offerings. May the Year strengthen your sacrifice and keep our
children safe!
In the seclusion of mountain slopes and the confluence of the
streams Indra manifests himself with a song.
O Soma, high is your birth, your seat is in heaven but you have
obtained a home and great renown on this firm earth.
O Soma, finder of home and freedom flow for Indra whom we
pray, flow for Varuna and the band of Maruts!
Struggling to win with Soma we obtain all the wealth from the
unrighteous foe we win all the glories of mankind.
May we be rich in strong, heroic sons, stout kine, strong, steeds,
cattle, each of our desires and blessings, in quadrupeds, in men
around us. May the gods protect and guide our sacrifice in seasons.
O Agni, bring you here the longing wives of the gods to enjoy
oblations and also Tvashtar to drink the Soma-craught!
O Nestar, the priest, leading the sacrificed wife, accept our
sacrifice, enjoy Soma according to the season, you are the giver of
wealth!
O Priest, being the river of wealth, drink the Soma draught
according to the season and so should you prepare the draught,
perform sacrifices and attain respect.
O Indra, come you here unto us, this Soma is for your, approach it.
Protect it ever and drink of it without stop. Sit you down on this
seat of sacared greass in the sacrifice, and take you down these
draughts into your stomach. O Indra!
Copyrighted material

Yajurveda Samhita
O invoked Dames of the gods, come here and sit on the sacred
grass to enjoy yourselves as at home. O god Tvashtar, enjoy
yourself the joyful draught in the gladsome company of gods and
goddesses.
O Soma, flow forth in most sweet and enjoyable stream. For you, O
Indra, is this juice pressed out to drink!
O Soma, fiend-queller, friend of all, you have in the vat attained
your iron formed home, safe and dignified!
O Agni, may years, seasons, half-years and the seers strengthen
you. Shine forth with your divine effulgence and illumine all the
four quarters of the heaven.
Shine you, O Agni, make this seeker after knowledge wake, rise up
erect for grand and great fortune. Be them uninjured who worship
you. Let your priests be glorious now beside them!
The priests present here elect you as their leader. Be you gracious
to them in this election. Subdue our foes, O slayer of the rivals.
Agni, be alert and watchful in your house and keep us also so with
never ceasing care.
Removing them who kill, removing the foe-men, removing the
thoughtless ones, remove those who detest us. Agni, sweep away
all our woe and distress and grant us opulence with heroic men
about us!
O Agni, invincible, effulgent, royal one. shine here unconquerable
Jatavedas! Illumine all the regions, chase away all our griefs.
Guard us well for prosperity!
O Brihaspati, O Savitar, give this man knowledge, sharpen his
intellect more and more. Raise him to high eflicity, in him let all
the gods rejoice in triumph.
O Brihaspati release us from the fruit of sins in the birth to come,
free us from the fear of Yamraj in this birth. May Agni, the two
Ashvins, the godsr physicians chase away the fear of death from
this man.
Splendid are the fuel-stickes, lofty and brilliant are the flames of
Copyrighted material

Yajurveda Samhita
Agni, splendid is Agni, so fair to look on.
Let Agni, the protector of bodies, all-possessing the best among the
gods, sprinkle our paths with ghee and sweet sap through rain.
Extolling, the bearer of knowledge, he, the Adhvaryu comes here.
While the sacrifice progresses he offers oblations to Agni with
ladles full of ghee.
Let this Adhvaryu pay homage to Agni's greatness, so daintily fed.
He, truly, is the giver of pleasurable things, the best wealth-giver
and the wisest protector.
May Night and Dawn, his heavenly consorts, protect in our home
this sacrifice of ours.
May bom the divine Hotars, Agni and Vayu, greet this our lofty
sacrifice, the tongue of Agni. May they conduct this sacrifice well.
May the three mighty goddesses, Ida, Sarasvati and Bharati, lauded
with hymns, be seated here on this sacred grass.
May Tvashtar pour forth on us the wonderous and productive
wealth full of strength, splendour and merits.
The god whom both the Heaven and Earth have brought forth for
the acquisition of wealth, whom celestial goddess has appointed for
our wealth, his yoked horses wait on Vayu, the splendid lord of
riches.
When the mighty waters containing the universal germ came into
being, generating the Sun, there was one Spirit present in all the
forces of nature. What god shall we adore with our oblation?
God with hight then surveyed the floods containing productive
force and generative germ. He among the gods is one supreme God
and none beside him. What god shall we adore with our oblation?
O Vayu, riding which teams of horses you seek him who offers
sacrifice within his house, riding that come to our sacrifice to grant
us pleasurable wealth, heroic son, and gifts of kine and horses.
Riding your harnessed teams in hundreds, in thousands come to our
sacrifice and solemn rite, O Vayu, to gladden yourself with our
Copyrighted material

Yajurveda Samhita
oblation. O gods preserve us evermore with proptious blessings!
Come here car-borne, O Vayu, come to us for receiving sweet
Soma juice offered in the sacrifice, visit you the house where Soma
has been pressed out.
Come you, O Vayu, riding your thousand cars, come to us chariotborne, to enjoy the Soma-draught.
Come you by one or two, three or ten, twenty or thirty chariots to
our sacrifice. Come unto us and unjoke your team of horses here.
O Vavy, lord of truth, Tvashtar's son-in-law, your means of
protection we elect, O god wonderous!
Like unmilked kine, we sing your praise aloud, O Hero, the lord of
animate and inanimate beings, and so beautful to look on.
O Maghavan, none other like you in heaven or on earth has been,
nor shall ever be. Desiring horses, kine and power we call you
offering libations, O Indra, lord of splendour.
O Indra, we, the poets and sacrifices call you alone. In war men
call on you the lord of heroes, in the race of the steeds we call on
you.
O wonderous lord Indra. thunder-armed, lauded as mighty, wielder
of thunderbolt, grant us kine, chariot horses, ever to be the
conqueror.
O ever prosperous and wonderful friend, with what potent
protection and with what mighty company will you come unto us?
O Indra, you are the guard of your friends who laud you, come unto
us, your devotees with your hundred means of protection.
Sing at every sacrifice the glory of Agni, for obtaining strength.
Come, let us praise with our hymns the wise and immortal Agni.
him, the well beloved friend.
O Agni, lord of might, giver of the best home, protect us through
the first hymn, protect us through the second one, protect us
through the third hymn. Guard us through three hymns, protect us
through your hymns, O god.
Copyrighted material

Yajurveda Samhita 1485
O Adhvaryu, let us adore agni, the son of strength, our friend, with
gifts of oblations. He is our well-wisher and aids us in battles, he is
the aviour of our bodies.
O Agni, you are Samvatsara, you are Parivatsara, you are Idvatsara,
Idatasa you are and Vatsara. Dawns may prosper you! May Day
and Night prosper you. May Half-months, Months, Seasons and the
Years prosper you! You arrange their coming and going hence and
send them forth on their ordered courses. You collect all the
sources of protection. With that divinity lie steady like Angiras.
On the earth* s centre, at the place of sacrifice, the Hotar worships
India with kindled fuel-sticks. Agni, the mighty lord is kindled on
the height of heaven.. May enjoy ablation of ghee in Hotar' s
worship. .
Him the Hotar worships, him the self-born, the mighty lord, the
guardian of our beings, Indra, ever invincible, the conqueror,
knower of himself and the heaven, virtuous, full of delight. Let him
enjoy oblation of ghee.
Let the hotar worship Indra, the thunder-wielder, render of the
enemy forts, mighty, immortal, lauded, and invoked by the gods.
Let him enjoy the oblation of ghee.
Let Hotar worship him, Indra, the Bull among gods who sits on the
sacred grass, doer of many deeds. May he sit down on the sacred
grass with the eight Vasus, eleven Rudras and twelve Adityas as
his friends. Let him enjoy the oblation of ghee.
The Hotar performed yajna to Night and Morning, the two milchcows of Indra, the mighty Mothers, they have strengthened their
calf Indra with nourishment of lustre like two mother-cows of a
common calf. Let him enjoy oblation of ghee.
The learned priest performed yajna to Ashvins. the divine
Physicians, friends of Indra, wise, the sages, far famed among the
gods who healed Indra with oblation and gave him mighty strength.
The learned priest performed sacrifice to the three goddesses Ida,
Sarasvati and Bharti with oblation of ghee. May these three, the
divine consorts of Indra enjoy oblations of ghee in this sacrifice.
Oopyn

The learned priest offered sacrifice to Tvashtar, full of opulence,
remover of diseases, good performer of yajna, of many forms,
handsome, mighty and lord of wealth. May Tvashtar who gave
Indra wonderful strength, enjoy this offered sacrifice of ghee.
The learned priest sacrificed to the Lord of Forests, the bringer of
peace, doer of many deeds, the wise and friend of Indra. May he
enjoying oblation of ghee, sweeten our sacrifice with savoury
butter and balm our paths in order to make them easy and smooth.
Morning and Night, the goddesses called upon Indra as the
sacrifice began, May they, well beloved, our well-wishers, make
the divine subjects come here. May they enjoy oblation of ghee for
enriching the Sacrificer in wealth and position.
Both the goddesses who give wealth and are gracious, have
increased radiant Indra* s strength. One removes sin and distress,
the other gives acceptable riches and wealth to the sacrificer. May
they enjoy oblation for the gain of wealth and position to the
Sacrificer.
Both the goddesses, giver of food and sap, the milch-cows have
nourished Indra with their milk. One gives food and energy, the
other feast and sap. They bring strength-giving sacrifice and give
many portions, blending old energy with the new and new with the
old. They are the givers of cherished wealth. May they enjoy
oblation for increasing the wealth and status of the Sacrificer.
Both the divine Hotars, increased radiant Indra's might. They have
brought wealth and gifts freed from the sinful thieves for the
Sacrifices. May they enjoy sacrifice for increasing the wealth and
status of the Sacrifcer.
The goddesses three have increased lord Indra' s strength. Bharati
has touched the heaven, Sarasvati. the companion of the Rudras.
has enriched the sacrifice with wealth, and Ida has touched the
earth.
The god Vanaspati with golden leaves, with honeyed bows and
with fine fruits has increased lord Indra's might. He has touched
the sky with his top, with mid-portion the firmament and with root
Copyrighted material

Yajurveda Samhita
has established the earth. May he enjoy this sacrifice tor increase of
the Sacri ficer's wealth and his firm establishment.
Bright Agni, the fulfiller of the best wishes has increased radiant
Indra's might. May he, also called Svishtakrit today, making fine
offerings, perform the sacrifice for us. May he enjoy the sacrifice
for Sacrirlcer's gain of wealth and promotion of his status.
The priest sacrificed to Agni, and Indra well-kindled, venerable,
giver of excellent strength, increasing his might, lending him the
Gayatri verse, a cow of one and half years and vigour. May the
Sacrificer with Indra enjoy ghee. So should you also perform the
sacrifice.
The priest sacrificed to him who rends forts, the germ that Aditi
conceived in her womb, Indra, the pure who gives life and strength,
lending him great strength, the Ushnish verse, a two- year old ox
and strength. May he enjoy butter. So should you also perform
sacrifice with oblation of ghee.
The priest sacrificed to Soma and Indra, laudable, praised,
Vritra-slayer, strength-giver, lending him strength, Anushtup verse,
a cow of thirty months and vigour.
The priest performed sacrifice to Indra, deathless, who sits on die
sacred grass, nourisher, strength-giver, immortal, dear, beautiful,
lending him strength, Brihati verse and a cow of thee years.
The priest sacrificed to the goddesses Night and Morning, beautiful
to look on. adorned well, of varied hue, to Indra, life-bestowing,
lending him strength, the Trishtup verse and a bullock four years
old able to carry burden.
Divine Agni. who makes fair rites, has lended strength to Indra. the
giver of strength. The god has strengthened the god giving him
Alichhandas verse, might and sway. May he enjoy oblation of shee
for the sake of the Sacrificer' s wealth.
O Agni, all-knowing, well-kindled, enjoying tasty and sweet butter,
fast moving, decking the minds of the learned, O Jatvedas, convey
to the gods, what is dear to them.
Sprinkling the paths with ghee that had to the gods, may the
Oopyn

Yajurveda Samhita
Courser go to the gods knowing their oblation. O Steed, may the
quarters of heaven attend you! Bestow food on this sacrificer!
O Steed, you are worthy of adoration and obeisance. You are swift
and sacred for the sacrifice. May Vasus and Agni in accord with
gods, take you, the contended bearer, to the abode of gods.
May Aditi, the boudless. vast, far-famed, seated on the widespread sacred grass, imbued with divine powers, bliss-giving,
accordant, grant strength and happiness.
0 priests, may these Doors of the hall of sacrifice, divine, full of
splendour, auspicious, of varied forms, lofty and wide, unfolding,
well fitted and sonorous, richly decorated, offer us easy entrance
and exit.
The two goddesses Dawn and Night, established between Vanina
and Mitra, rich in varied hue and wealth, intimate with the force of
Sacrificer, I establish here in mis sacrifice, the home of Truth.
1 have pleased both these divine Hotars, chariot-borne, faircomplexioned. who behold all the world. They, the ordainers of
sacrificial rules, inspirer of noble-acts, have spread the light in
every direction.
May goddess Bharati with the Adityas promote our sacrifice,
Sarasvati with the Rudras be our aid, and Ida protect our yajna. O
divine goddesses, establish our rite among the gods.
Mat the Sun, balmed with ghee, go himself, seeking his abode
among the gods in seasons. May Vanaspati. the lord of herbs,
convey our savoury oblation to gods, tasted by Agni.
O Agni, increased with Prajapati's brilliant fervour and born
immediately from the friction of fuel-sticks, you protect our yajna.
Precede you unto the gods and Sadhyas bearing consecrated
offering so that they may enjoy our oblation.
O fleet Steed, when you sprang to life neighing from the ocean or
from the vaporous atmosphere, you had limbs of the deer and
wings of the eagle. O Courser, you deserve applause for your high
birth.
Copyrighted materiaLl

YajurvedaSamhiia
The Steed with first harnessed by Trita and given by Yama and
Indra was the first to mount. Gandharva held his briddle. The Sun
fashioned forth the Courser.
O Courser, you are Yama, Aditya are you, Trita are you by three
secret operations. You are specially united with Soma, and it is said
that there are three bonds in heaven that hold you.
O Steed, it is said that Surya is your loftiest generator. Three bonds
are said to be there in heaven to bind you, three in the waters and
three in the atmosphere, O Courser of the loftiest birth.
O Courser, here I see the places where they groomed you, I behold
here the prints of your winning hooves. Here are the auspicious
reins that guide you. They guard you who protect this sacred rite.
0 Steed, I recognised your soul from distance, a Bird soaring up
from below. I saw your head soaring, striving upward by paths
untouched by dust and pleasant to travel.
1 behold here your beautiful, matchless form, eager to win the foe
and the food produced from the earth. Whenever one brings you
fodder, you swallow the herbs. O you most voracious eater!
O Steed, the car follows you, the bridegroom follows you and the
fortune of maidens comes after you. The people in groups follow
you seeking your friendship, the gods dwell upon your pattern of
strength.
Lustrous and golden are his horns, his feet are of iron. Even
thought swift Indra is less fleet than he. Gods come only to Indra's
sacrifice who first of all rode the Steed.
Thin bellied, symmetrical, with rounded haunches, mighty of
strength, the divine Steeds of Surya's chariot pur forth their mettie
like Hying swans when they obtained the heavenly pathways.
O Courser, your body is formed for flight, your spirit is swift like
the wind, your horns are spread wide on all sides, they move
restlessly like wild fire.
The fleet and dexterous Steed has come forth for sacrifice, with a
contemplative mind. He follows a goat, his kin, and the sages and
Copyrighted material

Yajurveda Samhita
the poets follow after.
He is come to the noblest abode, is come to his Parents. Today he
shall reach the gods, most welcome. He bestows best gifts on
liberal givers and sacrificers.
Agni, who preceded gods, prepared the sacrifice as soon as he was
born. May the gods enjoy our oblations made sacred according to
the law and guidance of the priest.
O men, giving light where no light was, and form where no form
was, Agni was born together with the Dawns.
When a warrior goes to battle with his mail on, he looks like a
thunderous rain-cloud O hero, be you victorious with unharmed
body. May the protection of your armour guard you.
The bow-string, close to the bow's ear, fain to speak whispers like
a woman holding her beloved in her close embrace, this bowsuing that preserves us in the battle.
' The bow and its string meeting together like a woman and her
husband bear like parents upon their bosom the arrow, their son.
May the two bow-ends in accord scatter asunder swiftly the foemen we hate.
Our fathers who gave us birth lived in harmony, patient and
powerful in distress, untired, armed with wonderful army and sharp
shafts, free, invincible and conquerors of the enemy hosts.
O Agni, this day enkindled in the house of man, invoke gods. O
Jatavedas, best observant, virtuous, envoy of gods, high spirited
and wise, bring the gods here in sacrifice!
Called upon, praise won thy, deserving worship, you are the invoker
of gods, best sacrifices perform this sacrifice to the gods, O Agni.
Let the vast Doors of the hall be widely opened, like virtuous wives
who decorate themselves with ornaments for their noble hushands.
O high, divine, all-inspiring Doors, admit all the gods and provide
them easy approach.
Let the Dawn and Night, respectively of bright and pale hue, close
to each other, be seated on their seats, the divine dames, high-born,
Copyrighted material

Yajurveda Sam*
decked in gold, sacrifice-worthy, great, fair and of lustrous beauty.
May both the divine Hotars, sweet-voiced, inducer of men in deeds
of sacrifice come to our site, the singers, knower of the Vedas, the
revealer of the light in the east with their direction.
May Bharti, Ida and Sarasvati come unto us speedily from all sides.
May all these three goddesses executors of fine deeds be seated on
the sacred grass.
O learned and wise priest, bring here quickly, now god Tvashtar
who knows that God who created heaven and earth, the generator
of various forms.
May the learned Brahmans and the Fathers worthy for Some
draughts, auspicious ones, matchless both in heaven and earth,
protect us against evil. May Push an, strengthens of order, protect
us. May the wicked never be our master.
Guard well in the battle where arrow and weapons are swift, let our
bodies be strong like stone. May Soma kindly instruct us, and Aditi
guard as well.
O lord of the wood, O Vanaspati, be strong, be a victorious hero
bearing us. Show forth your mettle, yoked with brave and let your
leader win all the booty of th$ battle.
Grant us the strength of the Sun and the Earth, the vitality of the
forest trees, the force of the saps and waters. Fill your chariot with
mighty weapons shining like the rays of the Sun.
O you Thunderbolt, Vanguard of the Marut hosts, yoked to Varuna
and son of Mitra, accept these our gifts we offer, receive like god
our oblations.
O you thundering Drum, send forth your roar through heaven and
earth, throughout the world along its breadth, and frive away a foe,
yea, very far, our enemies, accordant with gods and Indra.
O War-drum, thunder out strength and fill us full of vigour, drive
away all andgers and misfortunes. O you, Fist of Indra, render us
firm and steadfast, and make them weep who war against us.
O war-drum, drive hence away the enemy troops and bring here
Copyrighted material

Yajurveda Samhita
back our troops safe and victorious. The thundering war-drum
signals the waging of the war. O Indra, let our warriors riding
steeds and chariots return together in triumphs.
Purusha has a thousand heads, a thousand eyes, a thousand feet.
Pervading the earth on every side he transgress the universe.
Purusha in truth is all this, what has been and what yet shall be. He
is the lord of all that which grows still greater by food.
The visibleand the invisible worlds reveal his mighty grandeur, yet
he is greater than all this. All the worlds are but one- fourth of him,
three-fourths eternal lies within him.
With three-fourths of his grandeur Purusha sprang up. With onefourth of it he created the universe, and then he moved forth to
every side pervading all that is animate and inanimate.
He createed Virat from himself and then Purusha from Virat. When
born he spread out to west and east transgressing the boudaries of
the earth.
From that great venerable Purusha were generated curd and ghee.
He fashioned forth the animals and birds both wild and tame.
From that Purusha, unto whom people make sacrifice, were born
the Richas and Saman hymns. Therefrom then spraing up the spells
and formulas of Atharvaveda and the Yajus.
From Purusha were born horses, and from him were born all cattle
with two rows of teeth. From him were born kine, from him were
produced goats and sheep.
They embalmed the Virat Purusha as victim on the grass, him all
the gods, Sandhyas, and Rishis sacrificed.
When they sacrificed Purusha how many portions did they make?
What was his mouth? What were his arms? What were the thighs
and feet? '
His mouth was the Brahman, both of his arms was the Prince
created. His thighs produced the Vaishyas, from his feet the Shudra
was born.
Copyrighted material

Yajurveda Samhita 1493
From his mind come thee Moon, and from his eyes came the Sun,
from his ears were born Vayu and Prana, and from his mouth was
Agni born.
Mid-air was born from his navel, the sky was fashioned froth from
his head, the earth from his feet, and the quarters from his ears.
Thus the world was formed.
When the gods scrificed Purusha as offering in the yajna, Spring
was the ghee, Autumn the oblation, and Summer was the fuel.
The seven were the covering sticks and three timess seven were the
kindling ones, when gods performing sacrifice, bound Purusha as
their sacrificial victim.
These were the earliest holy ordinances when gods sacrificed
Purusha as their offering. The Mighty ones attained the highest
heaven, these were the Sadhyas and gods of old dwell.
In the beginning God created the world nourished by waters, earth
and sun. Fixing the form thereof the Sun proceeds' on his daily
course. This was the beginning of the mortals.
1 know this mighty Purusha, golden as the sun. beyond the reach of
darkness. By knowing him a man even now becomes immortal
leaving death behind. This is the path to attain him, there is none
other.
Prajapati, the all-creator pervades the being in the womb and the
beings that are born. Being himself unborn, he reveals himself in
various ways. The sages alone know his true nature. In him alone
exist all creatures.
The Sun who imparts light and heat to gods, stands first and
foremost among the gods, was born before the gods. Homage be to
him. the resplendent the holy One.
The gods in the beginning, when they generated the bright and holy
Sun said thus: The Brahman who thus knew you shall have the
gods in his control.
Grandeour and Fortune are your two wives, each side of you are
day and night. The constellations are your form, the Ashvins are
Copyrighted material

1494 Yajurveda Samhita
your open mouth. Wishing salvation, grant me yonder world so that j
the whole universe be mine with absorption into Brahman, the All.
Agni is That, the Sun is That, Vayu is Hiat, the Moon is That,
Shukra verily is that. Brahma is That, Apa is That, Prajapati is
That.
All divisions of time including the twinklings of the eyelids sprang
from the resplendent Purusha. No one has comprehended him from
above, across or in the midst.
There is no second of him whose glory verily is great. In the
beginning was generated Hiranyagarbha. May he not harm me. He
the unborn deserves our worship.
This Purusha pervades all the regions; yea, born afore time, in the
womb he dwells. He is born now, and shall be born hereafter to
meet his offspring, facing all directions.
Before whom naught whatever sprang to being, who with his
presence aids all beings. He, the Prajapati, rejoicing in his
offspring, maintains the three great lustres. He verily is Shodashi.
By him stand the heavens strong and the earth stands firmly. He
props the realm of light and the vault of sky. He is the measure of
all the regions. We worship that blissful God with our oblation.
Whom, the Sun and the Earth, propeed by his help, moving in their
orbits, do look with a yearning, in whom the Sun shines in mil. We
worship that blissful God with our oblation.
The sage behold that mysterious Being in the inmost recesses of the
heart, in whom all the worlds have found one only abode. In Him is
united the whole universe and thence it comes forth. Ubiquitous
That pervades all creatures like the wrap and woof.
The Gandharva. knowing the eternal, may describe Him, the anode
of release, hidden in the heart. His three steps are hidden in
mystery. He who knows them becomes the fathers's father.
He is our Brother, our Father and Begetter. He knows all beings
. and all worjds. In him the gods obtaining life immortal have risen
up to the third high heaven.
Copyrighted material

Yajurveda Samhita
God reveals himself pervading all the existing creatures, the
worlds, all the Qarters and Mid-quarters. The sages having
understood the holy order enter into God, the embodiment of truth.
Having pervaded the earth, the heaven, the worlds, the sky and
quarters, and having lengthened the thread of law, he views, and he
becomes, and is That Being.
To the wonderous God, the splendidfriend of the soul who bestows
wisdom, I have come closer in worship.
That wisdom which the gods and sages long, for, even with that
wisdom, O Agni, make me wise today, Svaha!
May Varuna grant me wisdom, may Agni and Prajapati grant it!
May Indra and Vayu grant it! May the Creator bestow it on me.
Svaha!
May these Brahmans and Kshatriyas enjoy the splendour and
wealth of mine. May the gods grant me the best wealth and
splendour. To you all that splendour. Svaha!
That which, divine, goes far, when man is waking, that which
returns to him when he is sleeping, That light is one light that goes
. to a distance, may that, my mind, be moved by right resolve.
Whereby the virtuous and wise in assemblies, and in sacrifices
perform their duties, the unique spirit abiding in living beings, may
that, my mind, be moved by right resolve.
That which is wisdom, intellect and firmness, eternal light, which
beings haw within, that without which man can do no action, may
that, my mind, be moved by right resolve.
Whereby all is comprehended, the past, present, future and
immortal gods, whereby spreads the sacrifice by seven Hotars, may
that, my mind, be moved by right resolve.
Wherein the Riches, Samans, Yajur-verses, like spokes within a
cart's na^ve, are included, and all the thoughts of human beings are
inwoven, may that, my mind, be moved with right resolve.
As a skilled charioteer controls and drives with reins the fleet
horses, so does the mind control and guide men. It dwells within

YajurvedaSamhita
the heart, is agile, most quick, may that my mind, be moved by
right intention.
Five rivers flowing forth speed onward to Sarasvati and then merge
into Sarasvati, a fivefold river in the land.
O Agni, you are the earliest friend of gods, the seer, effulgent, a
god. After your holy law, the Maruts, sages, wise and active with
their splendid weapons, were born.
O Agni, worthy of reverence, preserve our wealthy patrons and
ourselves. O god, with your succours. O god, guard are you of our
seed, offspring and kine, incessantly protecting in your holy law.
O learned priests, bring great offerings to Indra, the great one, and
chant the Saman hymn for strength, by whom our fathers, singing
lauds obtained the laud and kine.
O Indra, you are the source of all wisdom. The men who press out
and offer you Soma and other oblations, your friends, bear
unmoved, the cursing of others.
Not even distant places are far for you, O Indra. Come here, lord of
steeds, riding your Bay Courses. Pressed out are these juices for the
strong and steadfast. The press-stones are set, the tire is ready.
To him who adores Soma, he gives a milch-cow, a fleet steed, a
brave son, active in duties, skilled in council, dignified in the court,
the splendid reflection of his fathers.
These herbs, these milch-kine, these flowing streams, all these, O
Soma you have produced. You have expanded the spacious
firmament and with the light has removed the darkness.
O god Soma, with your godly spirit, win for us a share of riches.
You are the lord of valour, let none prevent you. Remove our
impediments both here and in the nexi world.
God Savitar, the radiant one, comes bestowing choice treasures on
his devotees. He has illumined the earth's eight directions, the three
regions and the seven rivers.
Savitar, die golden handed, fast moving travels between the heaven
and the earth, driving away diseases, and by setting he fills the
Copyrighted material

Yajurveda Samhita
atmosphere with dark night.
O Ashvins twain, grant us well protected homes, both of you,
where you may enjoy our libations.
O Ashvins, make our wisdom and speech effectual, and this our
hymn, O mighty ones. In lucky game 1 invoke you for help,
strengthen also, both of you, in the sacrifice.
Guard us well on all sides by day and by night with your
undiminished care, O Ashvins. May Varuna grant us this our
prayer, and Mitra, Aditi, Sindhu, Earth and Heaven.
The great Night has pervaded the earth, the atmosphere and the
mid-region. She has spread out on high through the seats of heaven.
Her terrific darkness has come.
O Dawn, enriched with ample weath, grant us that wondeiful boon
wherewith we may support our sons and sons' sons.
We call on Bhaga, the mighty, triumphant son of boundless Aditi,
the sustainer of the world. Thinking of whom the poor, impatieent,
even the king says, let me share his bounty.
0 Bhaga, be our guide, give us wealth, favour our prayer and grant
us forthful gits. Make us rich in horses and kine, O Bhaga. May our
store be full in men and cattle.
May the Dawns favour this our worship and come to our holy
sacrifice. As mighty steeds draw a chariot may they bring here
Bhaga, the giver of riches.
As the fine dames of heroic sons, possessed of steeds, milk the
kine, so may the Dawns, streaming with plenty, preserve us ever
more, with their wealth and blessings.
() Pushan. living ever under your guardianship, may we never be
ruined. Here we sing your piaise.
1 praise aloud god Pushan who protects all the pathways. He went
to Surya. impelled by his love for him. May he establish our
wisdom and make our prays fruitful.
Vishnu, the merciful, protector and pervader of all, took three
Copyrighted material

Yajurveda Samhita
strides and thenceforth established his sacred laws.
By Vai una's decree the Heaven and Earth, stand apart from each
other, full of sap, encompassing all created things, vest, spacious,
full of sweetness and beautiful in form.
May our enemies stand apart from us. With Indra and with Agni we
will drive them afar. The Vasus, Rudras, Adityas have exalted me,
made me pre-eminent, mighty, thinker and over-lord.
Came, O Nastyas, come, O Ashvins, with the thrice eleven gods to
enjoy the sweet Some-juice. Lengthen out our days of life wiping
out all our sins, be with us ever more and drive away our foemen.
This gold ornament which the learned bind on the kings of hundred
fold army, with benevolent thought, I bind on me for long life of
hundred years so mat I may live till ripe old age overtakes me.
Seven Rishis are established in the body, these seven protect it with
unceasing care. These seven enter into the soul of him who lies
asleep. Then two sleepless gods Prana and Apana, the guards of the
soul, keep vigil.
Arise, O Brahmanaspati, we yearning for you paray to you. May
those who give good gifts, the Maruts, approach us. O Indra, be
you quick with them.
Now Brahmanaspati does speak aloud the solemn hymn of praise,
wherein Indra and Varuna. Mitra, Aryaman and gods have made
their abode.
O Brahamanaspati, protector of the world, know our prayer and
prosper our offspring. He whom the gods favour is ever blessed
May we, possessed of heroic sons, speak aloud in the assembly.
God who is our guardian, may protect us well. O lord of the food,
grant us a good share of food!
Avaunt, hence away, you Pisachas, inimical to gods, rebellious!
This is the place for those who effuse the Soma-juice.
May Savitar grant a happy spot on this earth for your mortal
remains. May radiant Sun prove helpful in this!
Let Vayu purify you. let Savitar purify you with fire's glitter and
Copyrighted it

Yajurveda Samhit a 1499
sun's lustre. Let the rays release you!
God established you in this ephemeral world and made your abode
here ever changing like a leaf, therefore, worship the supreme God
alone and serve the cows !
May Savitar lay down your remains on the lap of mother Earth. O
Earth be gracious to this mortal man.
Here I lay you down, O man, in Prajapati, near this lovely place
full of water. May his light drive away sin from us.
Go hence, O Death, follow your special pathway apart from that
which gods are wont to walk. To you who hears and sees, I say it.
Touch not our children, harm not our heroes!
Pleasant be to you the wind and sun, and pleasant be to you the
bricks. Pleasant be to-you the terrestrial fires, let them not put you
to grief.
May the regions, the waters and the seas be most propitious.
Auspicious to you be the atmosphere. May all Quarters prosper
well for you!
On flows the stony river hold each other fast to cross it, keep
yourselves up and reach the other bank. Let us here abandon that
which is useless for us. May we attain the excellent foods.
O god, drive away sin, drive away evil, impurity and sorcery. O
Apamarga, drive the evil dreams away from us.
May the Waters and the medicinal herbs be friendly to us and
unfriendly to him who hates us and whom we hate!
We touch for our weal the ox, the son of Surabhi. May he be bearer
of gods and our deliverer as Indra is to gods.
May we ever looking upon the loftiest light, above the darkness,
effulgent, divine, the most excellent tight, the Sun attain the gods.
Here I raise this wall for the living. Let none of these, none other
cross this limit. May you following this law for a hundred
lengthened autumns and may you keep Death beneath this
mountain.
Copyrighted material

1500 YajurvedaSamhita
O Agni, you purify our life. Give us abundant strength and food
and drive away distress and misfortune!
0 Agni, balmed in ghee, with butter on your face, live long,
strengthened with sacrifice.
All these men have led about the cow, have led Agni round. They
have offered oblation to high gods. Then who will attack them with
success?
1 drive away the flesh-devouring Agni, sinful let them go to
Yama's abode. Here, may this other Jatavedas, foreknowing, carry
our oblation to the gods.
O Jatavedas, carry the portion of sacrifice to the Fathers, where, far
away, you know them established. May streams of sap flow there
for them. May their desires, so truthful, be fulfilled. Savaha!
O Earth, be you without morn and pleasant as our resting place.
Grant us spacious room full of comfort and happiness. May your
fire burn down all our sins.
O Agni, you have been kindled by this man, let him be again born
from you. For Heaven this man I name! All-hail!
This whole world, all that lives and moves on earth, is enveloped
by God. Seek joy in renouncing the transient. Do not covet another
man's wealth.
Only one performing actions with detachment, should desire to live
a hundred years. This is the only way for you so that your actions
do not cling to you.
There are infernal worlds, ever enveloped in the deepest gloom.
There go those when life here is done, who slay the self.
Motionless, the One is swifter than the mind. The gods fail to
overtake That speeding form before them. Standing stilL he
outstrips those who are running. Abiding in him life-force acts
through everything.
He moves and yet he moves not; he is far and yet near. He is within
all this and yet is without.
Copyrighted material

Yajurveda Samhita
The man who beholds all beings that are in the Self and the Self in
all beings, is never a prey of doubt.
When a man who knows well, all beings become one with the Self,
when he further sees that one alone in everything, then how can
distress or delusion touch him?
God is radiant, all-pervading, incorporeal, sans-scar or sinew,
invulnerable, pure, unpierceby evil. He is sage, seer, omnipresent,
self-existent, and has assigned to everything it's due prosperity
unto the everlasting time.
Into the depths of blinding darkness fall those who worship
ignorance, and into still deeper darkness sink they who enjoy
pleasures carnal.
One fruit, they declare, results from the knowledge, another from
ignorance. This we have heard from the sages who have revealed it
to us.
The man who knows simultaneously both knowledge and
ignorance, overcoming death through knowledge attains life
immortal.
Into blinding darknes fall those who follow Nescience or Avidya,
into blinder still those who pride themselves of their knowledge.
Different are the results, they say, of Nescience and knowledge.
Thus we have heard from the sages who have revealed it to us.
He who knows well both knowledge and Nescience
simultaneously, overcoming death by knowledge attains life
immortal.
Soul is a — material and immortal, but this body will be reduced to
ashes. O man, doer of actions, meditate and Universal Soul, the
protector of all. remember your deeds, remember your deeds!
O God, lead us along the righteous path to riches and prosperity; O
god you know all our deeds. Remove from us our sin that leads us
astray. To you then, we shall bring most ample and reverent
adoration.
The face of Truth is hidden over by a golden vessel. The spirit
Copyrighted material

Yam
yonder in the Sun, the spirit dwelling there, 1 myself am he! Om!
Yam
Yam is the god od death and is the lord of the infernal regions
visited by man after cessation of life. He is the embodiment of the
rule of law and imparts justice according to deeds. The word 'Yam'
means the restrainer, it is he who keeps the mankind in check.
Yam's mount is a fierce-looking black buffalo, a form which he
also adopts for himself on occasions. He has got a rope noose in
one hand, by which he is supposed to catch hold of his victims and
a mace in the other which represents the weapon of punishment.
He decides what are the actions of the living beings that bear or do
not bear fruits, when his messengers drag the dead before his
throne. In Vedas Yam is the First Ancestor and has the full
distinction of a god. He is shown as having a fearful and grim
appearance and he wears a glittering crown upon his head.
Yam is the son of Vivasat, the embodiment of social morality,
while his mother is Saranyu (clouds), who is the daughter of
Vishwakarma, the cosmic architect. Yam's twin sister is Yami,
who has the greatest affection for her brother. Yami later appeared
on this earth as the river Yamuna.
As being the judge of the dead, he is said to hold a court, in which
he is the presiding officer. He has another small god to assist him,
who is called Chitragupta. Chitragupta is supposed to keep an
account of the actions of men. If the actions of the deceased in his
life time have been wicked, he is sent to suffer in a particular part
of hell, while a man with noble deeds is sent to a part of heaven.
Yam is regent of the south quarter and as such is called
Dakshinasapati. His abode is named as Yamalya on the south side
of the earth and has an interesting leged around it. This account is
taken from the Mahabharat. The narration is that after Brahma had
created the three worlds, viz., earth, heaven and Patal (the
subterranean region), he recollected that a place for judgement and
punishment of the wicked was wanting. He therefore, asked the
architect Vishwakarma to prepare a suitable place for this purpose.
Copyrighted

Yam
Vishwakarma prepared a magnificent palace and opposite its south
door he created four pits to punish the wicked. Three other doors
were reserved for the entrance of die good so that they might not
see the place of punishment when they went to be judged. Brahma
named this palace Sanjeevani. Brahma ordered die architect to
form a vast trench around it and fill it with water, which came to he
called Vaitarnee. Brahma next ordered Agni (the fire god) to enter
this river so that the water might boil. After the death each person
is obliged to swim across this Vaitarnee river, which gives
harmless passage to good souls but the evil ones have to suffer
torments and pangs while crossing this river's boiling water.
This legendary place of heaven created for Yam by Vishwakarma
is 800 miles in circumference. At this place there is no fear of
enemies and sorrow of mind and body is non-existent. The climate
is mild and salubrious and each one is rewarded in kind according
to his deeds. He who has given much in charity receives very many
comforts of all kinds.
To the virtuous and to the sinner Yam appears in different forms.
To the virtuous he appears to be "like Vishnu. He has four arms, a
dark complexion and lotus-like eyes. His face is charming and he
wears a resplendent smile." In the case of die wicked, he is seen
with "limbs appearing three hundred leagues long. His eyes are
deep wells. His lips are thin, the colour of smoke, fierce. He roars
like the ocean of destruction. His hairs are gigantic reeds, his crown
a burning flame. The breath from his wide nostrils blows off die
forest fires. He has long teeth. His nails are like winnowing
baskets. Stick in hand, clad in skins, he has a frowning brow."
Yam has three wives, called Hema Mala (Golden-Garland),
Shushila (Good natured one), and Vijya (Victory). Yam has two
ferocious dogs, who were born to Sarama (The Fleet-one), which is
the bitch that guards the herds of Indra. These two dogs have four
eyes each and very wide nostrils. They guard the road to Yam's
abode and which the departed are advised to hurry past with all
possible speed. These dogs are said to wander about among men as
his messengers.
Numerous stories about Yam are scattered in religious books and
Copyrighted

Yam
specially Purans abound in them. One that shows Yam in a
different light and is known to every Hindu is inserted here just to
show that Yam is not without compassion. This is the story ot
Savitri Satyavan. This story from Mahabharat has stirred popular
imagination since centuries. It relates to a noble princes who
remains faithful to her husband unto death and even byond it.
The name of this beautiful princess was Savitri. Once she met in
the woods a beautiful young man, named Satyavan, son of an
exiled and blind king who had been living in a hut like a hermit.
She fell in love with this exiled prince and wanted to marry him.
The astrologers of her father's court warned that Satyavan was
destined to die within one year. But the princess was adamant and
married him.
On the fixed day Yam, the god of death, himself came on the
buffalo and took the soul of Satyavan. Savitri, his wife, did not beg
for his soul. She was very learned and just recited the beautiful and
relevant passages concerning this god from the holy scriptures.
Yam was pleased and asked Savitri to have any boon except her
husband's life. Savitri requested god Yam to give back eyesight to
Satyavan's father. She still continued her prayers and god agreed to
grant another favour. Savitri asked Yam to give back to her
father-in-law the kingdom lie had lost. This favour was also
granted. Yam went away holding Satyavan's soul, Savitri too
followed him. Yam agreed to grant her the third favour Savitri
replied, i wish to give birth to hundred sons'. Yam went away
holding Satyavan's soul. Savitri too followed him. Yam, in a hurry,
promised this boon without giving a second thought to its
implications. Savitri immediately said, "But how can I give birth
to them without my husband?" Yam was caught unawares and he
could no go back of his promise. He had to grant this boon also to
her.
Many other such legends are related concerning this god though the
wide-spread image of this deity is mat of a fearful rod- bearer bent
on punishing for deeds or misdeeds committed during life.
Copyrighted material

Yoga : The Science of Soul
Yoga : The Science of Soul
Yoga marks the culmination of the spiritual growth through rites,
rites, rituals, observances, puja, upasana, contemplation and
dhyana. It is the final stage when man realizes Tat tvamasi or
Aham Brahman'. It is characterized by the end of attachment to
things and sense-desires, leading to the identification of the knower
with the Self or Atman. Rites and religious practices are a means of
obtaining temporary gains and favours from gods, which man feels
he cannot acquire otherwise, but yogic state is the state of complete
fulfilment, bliss, peace, absolute knowledge and emancipation.
Yoga represents the highest grade and class in spiritual learning
and attainment. It is the final phase of religious and spiritual
evolution. External practices are like formalities observed because
one is still not intimate and united with the Reality. There are all
kinds of rites and rituals when one wantes gods to advance one's
interests, not so high and sublime, but merely mundane and
comparatively cheap.
The early Aryans exerted their best to propitiate various gods and
goddesses through sacrifice and laudatory hymns and such other
practices in order to gain their grace and avoid misfortunes and
adversities. They wanted to lead a life full of longevity, health,
pleasures, riches and laughter. They wished it to continue hereafter
in the heaven in the company of Indra, Varuna, Mitra, Soma and
other gods. That is why Vedic religion was more pantheistic and
polytheistic and less monistic. Those were the formative days and
the concept of yoga leading to final liberation and release through
jnana was then perhaps not known. It was in the Upanishadic times
that the ideal of heavenly joys and pleasures was replaced by
moksha and final release. Upanishadic seers aimed not at life of
joys here and a post- mortem existence of bliss in the paradise, but
sought after desireless jivanmukti here and perfect identification
with Brahman and cessation of the cycle of birth and death
hereafter.
The urge to realise the Reality is there alike in the observances and
Yoga, but later quickens the process of spiritual evolution by
expanding the aspirant's consciousness. It is a direct method which
Copyrighted material

Yoga : The Science of Soul
does away with intermediaries and such other things which obscure
the vision of God. Yoga is subtle, and therefore, for them who are
introvert and jnani. Karmakanda and rituals form the path trodden
by extroverts for the sake of material gains, sense- satisfaction and
removal of adversities. Rituals are useful at lower levels for gaining
favours and grace from God, for is bestows what he prayed for. A
great part of the Vedas is in the form of prayers, rituals and fire
sacrifices meant for different occasions for obtaining specific fruits
and desires, But in the Upanishads Karmakanda has been replaced
by knowledgge as a sure means of God-realization and moksha. It
is in this sense mat the Vedas represent the childhood of Hinduism
and Upanishads the maturity and adulthood. Upanishads have the
eye of archer Arjuna, and make their way directly to the goal
without looking right or left. There is no distraction, no deviation
and identification is perfect.
4 'This they consider as Yoga
The firm holding back of the senses.
Then one becomes undistracted.
Yoga, truly, is the origin and the end/*
-Kathopanishad. VI, II.
Distraction, lack of discipline and self-control, greed, glutony,
anger, lust, levity, discontent, etc., are ayoga or mental distraction.
Yoga is the sure panecea for all these and many more ill. Yoga
generates in the heart of a yogi the virtues of renunciation,
desirelessness, non-attachment, concentration, equanimity,
harmlessness, purity, peace and love for all. These virtues are
certainly far superior than the material gains and favours obtained
from gods through sacrifice, rituals, rites and observances. The
faculties of mind are weakened by attachment to things and desires
while non-attachment, desirelessness, freedom from the bondage of
sense-objects and constant communion with Universal Soul
strengthen and help in the unfoldment of latent potentialities.

Yoga : The Science of Soul
The origin of yoga can be traced back to Proto-Shiva of Indus
Valley Civilization. There were excaved many terracotta statuettes
of the three-faced god sitting in a yoga-posture and absorbed in
meditation or samadhi. He has his sight fixed on the up of his nose.
He is attended by a bull and surrrounded by many other animals.
This same god has been identified with Shiva of classical
Hinduism. Thus, the cult of penances, austerities, concentration and
yoga is originally pre-Vedic and non-Aryan. It was latter on
incorporated and assimilated into the classical hinduism. "The
Harappans knew the use of copper, but mere is little indication of
their use of iron. In contrast, the Aryan invaders were essentially
pastoral people. They used horses and chariots and had arrows of
iron. Thus they were both physically and militarily better endowed
than Harappans. Hence die Aryans conquered the Harappans and
other pre- Aryan Natives of India. But from the view point of
culture, religion and ascetic practices the Harappans and the
pre-Aryan natives of India were superior. Therefore, in due course,
the Aryan conquerors adopted a good deal of pre-existing Indians
culture and religion. For this reason, it has been said that the Aryan
God, Indra won the battles, but the non-Aryan God, Shiva
ultimately won the war/'
The Upanishads have rightly been designated as Vedanta or
culmination and consummation of the Vedas. The Upanishadic
seers and truth-seekers delved deep into the mysteries of evolution
and involution and analysed the thought process of yoga in great
detail. The Vedic thinkers sought to attain heavenly pleasures
through sacrifice and other ritualistic practices. But the Upanishads
declared the cessation of birth and death and the attainment of
moksha as the summum bonum of human life. They found that
post-mortem heavenly existence was a temporary phase which
would terminate as soon as the merits earned through sacrifice
were exhausted. The wanted a permanent solution to the problem
of misery and human suffering, and they found the answer in the
realization and identification of individual soul with the Universal
Soul through yoga. They tell, how through yoga, one can attain the
Copyrighted material

1 508 Yoga : The Science of Soul
state of samadhi or transcendental trance through the awakening of
bodily centres combined with constant mediation. The
yoga-practice helps in developing certain extraordinary powers, but
they are a sure hindrance in the attainment of final goal of
Self-realization, and can even be a source of fall and degeneration.
Yoga is not merely a system of thought, but a practical and
elaborate technique based on the steady and persisten meditation as
a means to God-realization.
Yoga is a very comprhensive them and may mean different things
in different contexts. In the present context, yoga means yoking,
joining together, communion application, concentration, and
mental abstraction. The term 4Yoga' is derved from Sanskrit 4yuj*
which means what have been stated above. Yoga is the common
foundation of all Hindu philosophic systems and practices. It is a
link, a union, which unites the individual soul with the Universal
Soul by consuming all the past accumulated k arm as and their fruits.
Yoga is a process which accelerates this union of the soul and the
Over-soul. One who practices yoga is a yogi. Yogi-path is a path of
total surrender, body, mind and soul to the will of the Supreme
Being. The thought process of yoga subdues the sense and desires,
stills the mind, burns the samskaras, and thereby imparts an
inexpressible equipoise. This balance and harmony help the spirit
soar high above the reach of illusions and duality, in the realm of
perfect bliss, rest, non- duality and fulfilment. It is a kind of
religious and spiritual experience which is regarded as the most
sublime ideal in Hinduism.
"When the five organs of perception are still, together with the
mind, when the reason does not function; this they ever to be the
highest state.
This they deem to be yoga-the steady concentration of the senses.
Man then becomes pure attention, or yoga is both origin and
extinction."
— Kathopanishad, IV, 10-11
Copyrighted material

Yoga : The Science of Soul
Yoga stands for complete union of the spirit with the Brahman or
Ishvara. As the practice of self-concentration, it is intimately
connected with Buddhism. It is an allinclustve awareness, a
fathomless deep consciousness where all thoughts, samskaras, etc.,
get themselves dissolved and fused into a perfect harmony and
equilibrium. Yoga as system of thought and technique is an integral
part of Hindu sadhana and God -realization. A yogi, having attained
this state of mental equipoise, continues to live as usual, but then
the karmas do not bind him with their fruits. He reaches a state
which is beyond bom good and evil deeds pleasure and pain, in
short, all duality.
'There a father becomes not a father; a mother not a mother;. ..He
is not followed by good, he is not followed by evil, for then he has
passed beyond all sorrows of the heart".
— Brihadaryanyakopanishad, IV, 3, 22.
"As water adheres not to the leaf of a lotus flower, so evil action
adheres not to him who knows this Brahman".
— Chhandogyopanishad, IV, 14, 3.
If a man has the sense withdrawn as in sleep and a perfectly pure
heart, he sees as if in a dream in the emptiness of the senses the
pranava (Om), the leader whose form is light, who is beyond sleep,
old age, death, and sorrow. Then he himself becomes the one who
is called pranava, the leader whose form is light, who is beyond
sleep, old age, death and sorrow. Thus it is said:
When the yogi unites his bream with Om
Or is united with the all in the manifold ways,
it is called yoga.
This oneness of breath, mind and senses,
the renunciation of ail existence—
this is termed yoga."
— Maitri Upanishad, VI, 25
Copyrighted

Yoga : The Science of Soul
The great sage and grammarian Patanjali, who lived in the second
century B.C., has defined yoga as "Chitravritti-nirodha". It means
that yoga as a metaphysical system and technique is nothing else
but the control and reorientation of mental modifications and
fluctuations. The term "chitta" stands for mind, and "vrtti"
denotes the fluctuations of mind or its restlessness. The term
'nirodha" signifies control or restraint of this restlessness. This
constant mental restlessness can be controlled and eradicated by
relentless regular yoga-sadhana. Thus, yoga symblizes awakening
of all the latent spiritual potentia lities in a man or woman. It is
meant for all men and women, without any distinction of caste,
creed, seed, sex or community. It paves the path-way going to
essential unity and oneness of all living beings, and their
identification with Brahman. By seeing every living being as a
partial expression of the Universal Soul, one realizes the oneness of
life through yoga. Then, there dawns a deep sense of universal
belonging, and one does not suffer from duality and division. It is a
kind of depth awareness which enables the aspirtant to acquire
discrimination (viveka), non- attachment (vairagya), peace and
equipoise.
Sankhya and Yoga
The man, who observe rituals and rites, are like children in the field
of religion, but a few of them might be potential spiritual giants,
who soon give up such religious observances and rites, and take to
yoga as a direct means to accelerate their evolution, and reach the
ultimate goal of salvation or moksha. The Sankhya and Yoga
schools of philosophy are closely related. These two systems of
metaphysics stress that salvation is to be attained not by rites and
rituals, but through self-discipline, exertion, mediation and
knowledge. Kapila was the earliest exponent of Sankhya and
Patanjali of Yoga. Their aim and methods of approach are so akin
that they are often known by a single name of "Sankhya Yoga".
The only difference being this mat Sankhya lays more stress on
jnana or knowledge and is atheistic while yoga lays stress on
meditation and has God or Ishvara over and above everything. The
Ishvare of yoga is not the creator of the universe in the ordinary
sense of the term. He is the perfect Purusha and an example to man
Copyrighted material

Yoga : The Science of Soul
to follow. Thus, God is one of the principles in Yoga for attaining
salvation. It is total surrender and devotion to Ishvara combined
with other disciplines which help die aspirant in achieving
self-realization and release from bonds of human existence. Ishvara
is not simply an ideal to be followed, but he is all mercy and
compassion, and he helps the aspirants if they meditate on him and
surrender at his feet. This God was symbolically represented in the
sacred syllable Om (Aum) or pranava. It is a mystic monosnyllable,
and an object of profound religious meditation. The highest
spiritual powers are attributed not only to the whole word, but also
to the sounds A, U, M, of which it is composed. Later on it began
to represent the Hindu Triad of Brahma, Vishnu and Shankar and
their union. Om has been the most sacred syllable, a mantra,
representing Supreme Reality. The sadhakas chant and meditate
upon it for self-realization, fulfilment and attaining of moksha. It is
regarded as the only syllable capable of symbolizing the ultimate
reality and Absolute Brahman.
The earliest work extant on Sankhya is the Karika of Ishvara
Krishna, and that on Yoga is the Sutra of Patanjali. Sankhya system
is based on the duality of Purusha and Prakriti or spirit and nature.
Prakriti is all pervasive and complex and the first cause out of
which this universe is evolved. Prakriti is possessed of die three
gunas or strands, the satrva, rajas and tamas, and therefore,
everything emanating from it possesses these three gunas. The
variety of the things is based on the different proportions of these
gunas. Sankhya believes in plurality of spirits instead of One
Atman. A Jivatma should gradually transcend these constituent
gunas, with the help of Viveka or discriminative knowledge.
Sankhya is called so because it is based on discriminative
knowledge, and also because it enumerates 25 Tattvas, 24 of which
are evolved out of Prakriti the First cause or Primordial Essence.
The 25th being Purusha, which is neither Producer nor Production,
but totally distinct from all other Tattvas. Sankhya aims at
liberation of Jivatma from the fetters caused by the creation being
produced by die contact of Purusha and Prakriti. Later on Prakriti
came to be identified with the wives of the gods, especially with
Shakti, the consort of Shiva. Purushas are innumerable. Through
Copyrighted material

Yoga : The Science of Soul
ignorance a Purusha begins to identify himself with the body, the
evolute of Prakriti. It is viveka which makes a soul realize its true
nature of being pure, uninvolved, unattached and devoid of any
activity. Age, death, suffering, pleasure, pain, etc., belong to the
body. Therefore, man can work out his own liberation by
possessing the jnana of the real nature of Purusha and Prakriti.
Sankhya helds that there are souls but no Oversoul or Ishvara. It
denies the existence of God and holds that he is not required at all
for the salvation of a soul. There is no necessity of Ishvara for the
universe is self-existent and things evolve from Prakriti without his
intervention. Thus, Sankhya, Buddhism and Jainism have much in
common. They all believe that bondage is because of avidya or
nescience. Bondage entails birth and rebirth, death, suffering and
pain, however, these can be overcome and salcation achieved by
man's own exertion through descriminative knowledge or viveka.
The Four Paths
Archaeologically the story of yoga can be traced back to the Indus
Valley Civilization, but it is Vedanta or the Upanishads which laid
the firm foundations of this science of soul and life. The
identification and unity of the soul with Oversoul or Brahman and
final release is central to all the yoga philosophies and systems.
After the Vedanta, the Bhagavada Gita is the best known of all the
treatises on yoga. Hinduism gives due consideration to the
difference in mental make up, aptitude, etc., found in men.
Therefore, there are four main paths of yoga to choose from,
according to one's temperament, inclination and approach. All
these paths ultimatley converge on that one and same centre. The
goal is one, paths may be different. The following are the four main
Yoga-Paths:
1. Karma Yoga.
2. Bhakti Yoga
3. Jnana Yoga.
4. Raja Yoga.
1 . Karma Yoga
Copyrighted

Yoga : The Science of Soul
Karma means any action done voluntarily. A karma as a cause
resulting in a definite effect, bad or good according to the action
performed. The doer has to enjoy or suffer the results of his good or
bad karma. He cannot escape it. Man enjoys the fruits of his past
karmas and sows new seeds of action to be reaped in the next birth.
Nobody can escape the karmas and their fruits. This creates an
unending cycle of births and deaths. Fruits of our actions are to be
consumed and exhausted. Thus, our karmas cause Samskaras and
ceaseless bondage and suffering. Samskaras are impressions on the
mind of acts done in a former state of existence. Work is natural to
man. Complete cessation of work at any stage of life is impossible.
As long as there is life and body there are actions. In the Gita Lord
Krishna declares, "None can ever remain really actionless even for
a moment, for everyone is helplessly driven to action by the Gunas,
born of Prakriti". Work is essential and obligatory, none can
dispense with actions:
"Engage yourself in obligatory work
for action is superior to inaction
and if inactive, even the mere
maintenance of your body would not be possible/'
—The Gita, III, 8,
Actions are essential in this sense also that they are imitated and
followed by others. Therefore, the people go by the example a great
man sets up. Krishna is an incarnation of God. He has nothing to
gain by performing acts. He has no desires to satisfy, no wish to
fulfil, but even then he works for the good of the world:
"There is nothing in the three worlds,
that has not been done by Me,
nor anything that might be attained;
still I engage in action.
If ever I did not work relentless,
O Partha, men would in every respect follow my path.
These worlds would perish if I
did not do action; I should be
the cause of confusion of species and should destroy these beings/'
—The Gita, III, 22-24
Copyrighted material

Yoga : The Science of Soul
In such a state of bewilderment, where actions and their bondage
are inevitable, Karma Yoga offers the only solution to the problem.
In it lies the greatest hope for mankind, engaged in various worldly
actions. It teaches how to attain worklessness in work, how to
perform action without their fruits or bondage. Nishkama Karma is
the only penance of this ubiquitous disease of bondage. In the
Bhagvad Gita, Shri Krishna urges Arjuna to perform his duty as a
warrior prince without any desire and egoism. A work done, not in
the capacity of a doer or an agent, but as an instrument in the hands
of God, without attachment, without desires and ego, without any
consideration of success or failure, is the real nishkama and nrivaui
karma. A work, done in this spirit, neutralize its binding effects. It
is the renunciation of the fruits that is desirable, and not the nonaction or renunciation of karma. Inaction in action is the ideal state.
Shri Krishna asks Arjuna to perform his dharma as a soldier
absorbed in yoga.
"Seek to perform your duty; but lay not
claim to this fruits. Be you not the producer
of the fruits of karma; neither
shall you lean towards inaction.
Perform action, O Dhananjaya, being fixed
in yoga, renouncing attachments,
and even-minded in success and failure;
equilibrium is verily yoga.
This wise, imbued with evenness of mind,
renouncing the fruits of their actions,
freed from the fetters of birth
verily go to the stainless stae."
Arjuna is urged to fight without identifying himself with it. Yoga is
equipoise, and it is obtained when man acts with his mind
established in the Self. It is really an illusion to consider oneself the
doer of actions because, in fact, they are performed by the
trigunatmika Prakriti. A karma yogi transcends three gunas by
keeping himself aloof and unattached. A work done selfiessly.
Copyrighted material

Yoga : The Science of Soul
without attachment to fruits thereof, becomes Nrivatti Karma. The
way to liberation lies in work without being identified with it. The
right action is one that does not bound, and hence it is detached and
desireless:
"But even these actions should be
performed giving up attachment
and the fruits, O Partha;
such is My certain and best belief."
—The Gita, XVIII, 6.
Non-action and lethargy is verily Tamasika. It is never proper to
give up one's obligatory duty. The work done in a spirit of
renunciation of its fruits is truly Sattvika, and so desirable:
"Whatever obligatory work is done,
O Arjuna, because it ought to be done,
abandoning attachment and also fruit,
That abandonment is deemed to be Sattvika.
The relinquisher imbued with Sattva
and a steady understanding and
with his doubts dispelled, hates not
a disagreeable work nor is attached
to an agreeable one.
— The Gita, XVIII, 8-10.
Renunciation and performance of action bom liberate man, but the
former is too difficult a path to tread, while the other is relatively
easier and best suited to the majority of the people. Giving up work
externally is not the aim, for them sense cravings continue resulting
in fresh bondage. Thinking is also an act. Therefore, what is
desirable is work willingly performed without any obsession and
attachment. A karma-yogi holds himself as a mere witness of the
doings of Prakriti. Then one achieves the state of worklessness in
work and one's actions lose their binding effects. A karma-yogi is
never disturbed by the possible success or failure or any kind of
duality in regard to his work, because he holds himself as a mere
willing instrument. In nishkama karma, knowledge and work are
perfectly harmonized, and hence his equipoise and calmness
Copyrighted material

Yoga : The Science of Soul
remains unaffected and unchanged.
"He who is free from the notion of egoism
and whose understanding is not tainted
though he kills the people,
he kills not, nor is he bound."
— TheGita, XVIII, 17,
Every action is inaction when done while established in yoga, and
such an action loses its binding effects. A yogi offers the fruits of
his action to the Lord. He knows well that he has a right to perform
an action, and not to the fruits of it. Karma Yoga is the pathway
leading to jnana and moksha. With the cessation of desires for
fruits, actions themselves become inaction and lose their potency to
bind. It is the path of purity, knowledge, peace, equipoise and true
renunciation. When a work is done as an offering to God, it gives
supreme purity and bliss but only the best is offered to God. Hence,
only the Sattvika actions, done dispassionately, without any touch
of ego, and with perfect mental equipoise, should be offered to the
Lord. A work done in this spirit evolves into a nishkama karma and
takes the instrument of it towards liberation. An obligation
discharged without involvement, attachment and hatred, without
any hankering after its fruit, is really Sattvika.
"An action which is ordained, which is free
from attachment, which is done without love
or hatred by one not desirious of the fruit that action is declared
Sattvika.
—The Gita, XVIII, 23.
But a work becomes Rajaskia when done with desires or with
egoism, or unwillingly with much efforts. The same work becomes
Tamasika if done from delusion and without consideration of the
consequences.
As we have already seen that all men are not alike in their mental
make up, aptitude and standard of mental achievemet, and so they
require different methods and techniques to evolve. The path of
karma yoga suits them best who are active. They, by following
Copyrigf

Yoga : The Science of Soul
their duties and dharma selflessly, dispassionately, and devoutly,
without any thought of success or failure, can sublimate and purify
their soul to the level of perfection and thereby obtain salvation.
2. Bhakti Yoga
All the Yoga-paths overlap one another and lead to die same and
one Reality. Bhakti is the path of devotion and total surrender to
personal God. Here the realization and final release is through
grace of God. Relatively this path is easier, and so its mass appeal
is obvious. Brahman in his personal aspect is immanent, has
attributes, adjuncts and a form. This aspect of God suits the great
majority of the Hindus in comparison to the impersonal, formless
and figurative absolute aspect, which appeals only to the
exceptionally, well cultivated few. In personal aspect all human
virtues are attributed to God, and yet he is free from all human
limitations. Human mind and knowledge are finite and they cannot
comprehend Brahman in all its infinity. Therefore, it is natural that
when man tries to comprehend God, he superimposes all the human
qualities on him, and he becomes personal, relative, possessed of a
form and adjuncts, active, creator, preservator and destroyer. For a
devotee he is the sole refuge, the father, mother, guru, brother,
friend, solace, support and ultimate goal. He incarnates himself in
human form at critical times when dharma is at its lowest ebb. He
descends on the earth to establish dharma and righteousness, to
preserve the noble and righteous and to destroy the wicked and
demonic.
4 'Whenever there is decay
of dharma and rise of adharma,
then I embody Myself, O Bharata.
For the protection of the good,
for the destruction of the wicked and
for the establishment of dharma
lam born age after age.'*
—The Bhagavad Gita, IV, 7-8
Bhakti cult, as such, is of later origin, but it has been a tremendous
force and religious movement since its inception. The ritualistic
Copyrighted

Yoga : The Science of Soul
propitation of gods in the Vedic times was later on replaced by the
concept of God realization and attainment of moksha through
intense devotion and Bhakti. Today its hold on the Hindu masses is
phenomenal, and innumerable temples dedicated to various gods
and goddesses and the worship offered to them mere and in the
houses, is a sure sign which indicates what a great religious
movement and living force Bhakti has been in India.
Bhakti Movement originated in Tamil country in South about first
century B.C. and since then its sweep and hold on the Hindus all
over the country, has been firm and constant. It was brought to
North India by Ramanuja in the eleventh century. Right from the
earliest the great Vaishnava Tamil saints (3rd to 8th century A.D.),
known as Alavars and Nayanars. to the present day, India has
produced great Bhaktas including Ramanuja, Madhva, Ramananda,
ICabir, Nanak, Ravidas, Dadu, Tukaram, Purandar Das, Chaitanya
Mahaprabhu, Surdas, Tulsidas, Meera, Samarth Ramdas, Swami
Ramkrishna and scores others. They were not only great devotees
but also great philosophers, hymnodists and authors, and have
produced rich and immortal Bhakti-literature. They were also great
reformers and servants of the society. The entire Hindu world
owes an incalcu labledebt to these great singers, saints and
philosophers.
In the words of Basham, * 'Ramanuja' s God was a personal being,
who was full of love for his creation. He could even override the
power of karma to draw repentant sinners to him. Unlike the
impersonal World Soul of Sankara, which made the illusory
universe in a sort of sport (lila), Ramanuja' s God needed man as
man needed God. By forcing die sense Ramanuja interpreted the
words of Lord Krishna, 'the wise man I deem my very self, to
imply that just as man could not live without God, so God could
not live without man. The individual soul, made by God out of his
own essence, returned to its maker and lived forever in full
communion with him, but was always distinct. It shared the divine
nature of omniscience and bliss, and evil could not touch it, but it
was always conscious of itself as am I, for it was eternal by virtue
of its being a part of godhead, and if it lost self- consciousness it
would cease to exist. It was one with God but yet separate, and for
Copyrighted r

Yoga : The Science of Soul
this reason the system Ramanuja was called visistadvaita, or
'qualified monism*. Ramanuja was not as brilliant a metaphysician
as Sankara, but Indian religion perhaps owes even more to him
than to his predecessor. In the centuries immediately following his
death his dieas spread all over India, and were the starting-point of
most of the devotional sect of later times.* '
In the Bhagvad Gita and the Narada Bhakti Sutras, the subject of
Devotion has been delineated in great detail in verses and terse
aphorisms. In the Gita Lord Krishna categorically states: "Neither
by the study of the Vedas, nor by austerity nor by gifts, nor by
sacrifice can I be seen in this form as you have seen Me. But by
unswerving devotion can I, of this form, be known and seen in
reality and also entered into, O scorcher of foes. He who does work
for Me, who looks on Me as the Supreme, who is devoted to Me
who is free from attachment, who is without hatred for any being,
he comes to me, O Pandava" (XI, 53-55). Intense love, devotion,
total surrender, incessant remembrance, renunciation, purity,
self-control, self-obnegation are the hall marks of true Bhakti.
Devotion is of two kinds: Para and Apara. Former is superior to the
latter in the sense mat it is totally desireless, there is no bargaining,
and the devotee sees. Him alone, hears Him alone, speaks of Him
alone and thinks of Him alone. It is devotion pure and unalloyed
devoid of any sense of separateness from the Godhead. In this
regard Gopi's love for Shri Krishna is cited as the best form of
dovotion and Bhakti. The following psalm from saint Tukaram
marvellously brings out the intense love, longing and phags of
separation suffered by a devotee's heart:
"An on the bank the poor fish lies
And gasps and writhes in pain,
Or as a man with anxious eyes
Seeks hidden gold in vain.
So is my heart distressed and cries
To come to thee again.
Thou knowest, Lord, the agony
Of the lost infant's wail,
Yearning his mother's face to see
Copyrighted material

Yoga : The Science of Soul
(How oft I tell this tale!)
O at thy feet the mystery
Of the dark world unveil!
The fire of this harassing thought
Upon my bosom preys.
Why is it I am thus forgot?
(O, who can know thy ways?)
Nay, Lord, thou seest my hapless lot;
Have mercy, Tuka says/'
In Bhakti, it is love, pure, intense, all-inclusive and ever constant
that forms the only measuring-rod:
' 'Thy nature is beyond the grasp
Of human speech or thought.
So love I've made the measure-rod,
By which I can be taught
Thus with the measure-rod of love
I meet the Infinit.
In sooth, to measure him there is
None other means so fit.
Not Yoga's power, nor sacrifice,
Nor fierce austerity,
Nor yet the strength of thought profound
Hath ever found out thee.
And so, says Tuka, graciously,
Oh Kesav, take, we pray
Love's service that with simple hearts
Before thy feet we lay."
The paths of karma, bhakti and jnana not only overlap and
gainfully intersect one another, but it is also desirable that they are
judiciously combined to reach the goal of salvation. The Bhagvad
Gita underlines and leaches 4 'a life of activism grounded upon
knowledge and centralized around the adoration of the Lord".
Ultimately the throe streams coalesce and form a kind of
confluence where the ecstatic union with Ishvara is realized by the
aspirant. There cannot be any watertight compartments and
Copyrighted material

Yoga : The Science of Soul
division of Yoga into various paths is owing to the difference in the
genera! mental make up and aptitude of the people. Even in Bhakti
cult itself the difference in individual inclinations and tastes is
given due consideration. Therefore, it is enjoined that one should
devout oneself to one's favourite deity, Vishnu, Shiva, Rama,
Krishna, Ganesha, Mother Goddess or any other manifestation of
God, but without any hatred and discrimination against any other
expression of divinity. Each cult has contributed in the growth and
development of another cult. Great exertion, attention, devotion
and intense eagerness are common to Bhakti, Jnana and Karma
alike. They differ initially to suit the different mental make ups and
temperaments, but in the ultimate consummation they are akin and
alike.
3. Jnana Yoga
Man's intense desire to seek release from bondage born of
ignorance, and search for the truth, leads him to Yoga. But one man
differs from the other in mental make up spiritual standard and
aptitude. Therefore, what path and technique suit one, may not suit
another. That is why there are different paths going to the same
goal. An intelligent man, possessed of contemplative bent of mind
would naturally take to Jnana Yoga, the path of knowledge and
discrimination, though it is said to be the most difficult one. But
then, man enjoys best achieving that which is most difficult to
attain.
Man is the most intelligent and national being. Rationality at its
best lies in the discrimination of the real and true from false, and
ephemeral. The Jnana Yoga is based on the rock- foundation of
unreality of everything except Atman or Brahman. The world of
names, forms and colours is a mere illusion. Since all appearances
are deceptive, they are unreal and not permanent. Only Atman is
the only Reality. Thus, unreality of things, and reality and eternity
of Atman is the article of faith with the seeker of truth, and yogi. A
jnana yogi exercises his faculties of reason, and treads the path of
wisdom. And it requires tremendous moral and intellectual strength
on the part of such an aspirant. He enquires into the nature of
everything, including himself, through discrimination and
Copyrighted

Yoga : The Science of Soul
determination. Self-realization and communion with Absolute,
demand persistent effors, relentless search and sadhana.
He knows, believes and realizes the essential underlying unity of
all the creation. He knows that he is Thta, he is Brahman, and all
others also are Atman. All are That; the Atman, the experiencer of
all beings, is verily That. He realizes that Atman is all -pervasive,
eternal, changeless, Sat-Chitta-Anand; Existence- Knowledge-Bliss
absolute. This he realizes by intense meditation and sadhana, by
raising himself to the level of super-consciousness, where there is
no duality. Then he becomes jivanamukta and attains liberation.
Thus, the state of release and moksha is not a post-mortem stage
but a reality here and now, in this very life. The belief terminates in
realization. This marks the end of the quest and sadhana; the centre
of gravity is now totally tranferred to the Self.
It is the most difficult of the four paths, but in the same proportion
does its desirability increase. Underlying this fact, the great saint
poet and bhakta Tulsidas says in his famous work, the Ramayana:
4 'In this manner is kindled the splendid lamp, ablaze with highest
wisdom, in which the gnat-like swarms of vanity and other vices
are consumed as soon as they approach it
"I am mat' — this unalterable persuasion (of the identification of
the self with God) is its pre-eminently brilliant flame, and the
happiness that results from this knowledge of self is the light it
diffuses, by which it destroys the erroneous distinctions which are
born of the world. Illusion and all the other forms of darkness that
attend upon tyrant Ignorance are utterly dispersed. Thus Reason
having procured a light sits in the chamber of the heart and tries to
loosen the knot; should he succeed in untying it, the soul obtains its
object. But when Maya, O Garur, sees him loosening the knot, she
creates many difficulties and sends forth, Brother, innumerable
elves and fairies to tempt the Reason to avarice. In some way or
other, by force or by fraud, they get near and try to put out the lamp
by a side puff. If Reason is altogether wise, he perceives their
hostile intent and will not look at them. Should he escape free from
this danger, the gods then proceed to attack him. The faculties of
sense are so many portals, at each of which a god sits on guard.
Copyrighted material

Yoga : The Science of Soul
When they see any sensual air stirring, they at once throw the doors
wide open. If the blast penetrates the chamber of the soul, it
forthwith extinguishes the lamp of knowledge. When its light is put
out, there is no untying the knot, for Intelligence is undone by this
blast of sensuality. Neither the senses nor the gods approve of
wisdom; they are always inclined to sensual enjoyment. When
Intelligence has been thus fooled by the breath of sensuality, who
can light the lamp again as before?
"Then, Garur, the soul is again subjected to all the manifold
miseries of transmigration. HarTs delusive power is a trackless
ocean that none can traverse. Wisdom is difficult to describe,
difficult to understand, difficult to master, and if by any lucky
chance a right judgement by formed, still many impediments block
the way.
"The way of knowledge is like the edge of a scimitar; for those
who fall on it, Garur, there is no escape. If any traverse the path in
spite of its difficulty, they attain to the supreme sphere of beatitude.
But this exalted felicity is immensely hard of attainment, as is
declared by the saints, the Puranas, the Vedas and all the
Scriptures." ,
It is easier to concentrate on personal God, who is with attributes
and adjuncts, but in Jnana Marga the aspirant meditates upon
formless, figurative absolute Brahman. It is a path of negation,
where the sadhaka negates every attribute, form and name in the
Upanishadic spirit of "neu, neti" (not this, not this), and thereby
arrives at the Reality, and true identity with it. The aspirant refuses
to accept any other thing, but the eternal Reality. Jnana is
knowledge, practice and realization, all rolled into one. It purifies
and consumes all the sins and samskaras. Lord Krishna urges
Arjuna in the Gita to seek this knowledge and enlightenment by
enquiry and service:
"Knowing this, you will not fall into this confusion;
by this you will see the whole of the creation
in yourself and Me.
Even if you be most sinful of all sinners,
yet shall you cross over all sin
Copyrighted material

Yoga : The Science of Soul
by the raft of knowledge.
As this blazing fire reduces fuel to ashes,
O Arjuna, so docs the fire of knowledge
reduce all karmas to ashes.
Verily there is no purifier in this world
like knowledge. He that is perfected
in yoga realizes it in his own heart
in due time."
—The Gita, IV, 35-38.
Pointing the path and technique of jnana Krishna says:
"With work absolved in yoga,
and doubts rent asunder by knowledge,
O Dhanajaya, action do not bind
him who is poised in the Self.
Therefore severing with the sword of knowledge
this ignorace-born doubt about the Self,
dwelling in your heart, be established
in yoga. Stand up, O Bharat!"
— The Gita, IV, 41-42
'With his intellect set in firmness
let him attain quietude little by little;
with the mind fixed on the Self.
Let him not think of anything.
By whatever cause the wavering
and unsteady mind wanders away,
let him curb it from that,
and subjugate it solely to die Self."
— The Gita, VI. 25-26
Thus, yoga entails constant, deep and prolonged sessions of
meditation till the desired depth experience and the insight leading
to Self-realization dawn. Control of senses and mind, coupled with
Vairagya (renunciation) and sradha, is basic to jnana yoga. When
the senses are not subjugated, the mind is led astray by the senses.
Copyrighted r

Yoga : The Science of Soul 1 525
and then man develops attachment to them; from it comes desire,
and from desire arise delusion, confusion and ruination leading to
damnation. A fickle-minded man can never acquire knowledge,
and so the question of contemplation and meditation does not arise
for him. 'Subjugation' here means control and sublimation, and
never suppression. Again the Gita shows the path:
"He who is unattached everywhere,
who is not delighted at receiving good
nor dejected at coming by evil,
is poised in wisdom.
Sense objects drop out for the abstinent man, though
not the longing for them. His longing also ceases when he intuits
the Supreme.
The excited senses, O son of Kunti,
impetuously carry away the mind
of even a wise man,
striving for perfection."
—The Gita, II, 59-60.
4. Raja Yoga
Yoga is a spiritual discipline, which enables a jivatma to identify
himself with, or be united to God or Brahman. In is a
discriminative knowledge with helps one in attaining salvation by
removing the bondage caused by ignorance or avidya. It is avidya
which causes the confusion of taking non self as Self and nonpermanent as permanent. The Yoga Sutras of Patanjali, consisting
of 185 sutras or terse aphorisms, has been the source book and
foundation of Raja Yoga. As already stated, Patanjali defines yoga
as the "Chitta-vritti nirodha", or restraint of the fluctuations and
modifications of the mind. In a yoga-state the mind, including
intellect and ego (ahamkara) are under control and free from
fluctuations, so that the mind rests in the spirit within, and
consequently a jivatma is then is communion with God. Then, the
state of an aspirant is like that of a lamp in a windless room without
any flicker. Spirit or soul is originally pure, peaceful, changeless
and non-doer, but because of ignorance and predominance of any
Copyrighted material

Yoga : The Science of Soul
of the three gunas, it begins to identify itself with body, ego,
intellect or mind and suffers pleasure, pain and such other
emotions. Moved and agitated by fluctuations of mind, it identifies
itself with the object with which it comes in contact and
experiences pain, sorrow, pleasure and joy.
Ashtanga Yoga {Eight Limbs of Yoga)
Final release or moksha is the end, and yoga is the means. Means
are as important as the end to be achieved. The means should be as
noble and just as is the end and object in view. Raja Yoga is an
invaluable aid in meditation leading to an insight into the real and
original nature of the soul, which is ever pure and changeless. Raja
Yoga is a pepth experience, a highly developed psycho-physical
technique, a practical wisdom which consists of eight stages or
limbs enumerated by Patanjali as under:
1. Yama or ethical principles of self-control, are five in number.
They are called ahimsa or noninjury, satya or truthfulness, asteya or
non-stealing, aparigraha or non- conveting, and brahmcharya or
continence.
2. Niyama or observances include saucha or purity santosh or
cotentment, tapas or austerity, svadhyaya or study of the holy
scriptures, and Ishvara pranidhana or dedication and devotion to
the Lord.
3. Asanas or body postures are 84 in number, but only a few of
them are essential as an aid to meditaion. An easy sitting posture
can be chosen by the aspirant to maintain the constant and steady
concentration. The most basic posture is Padmasana or the Lotus
Pose. This pose symbolizes man's spiritual growth, purity and
peace, and in this posture alone the rishis. gods and divinities are
commonly shown meditating.
4. P ran ay a ma or breath control leaches how to regulate breath and
thereby control the fluctuations and modifications of the mind.
5. Pratyahar or withdrawal of the senses.
6. Dharana or steadying the mind by concentrating on an object for
a stretch of time. The object may be the tip of your nose, the point
Copyrighted material

Yoga : The Science of Soul
between the eye-brow, a flowers, an idol or picture of a deity or
flame of a candle.
7. Dhyana or meditation is a state when a yogi's consciousness is
fully absorbed in the object of meditation.
8. Samadhi or state of trance is a condition of superconsciousness,
when the yogi becomes one with the object, that is, God, and his
body-consciousness is completely dissolved.
The first three stages of yama, niyama and asanas are called
external (bahiranga) sadhana. Yama-niyamas are the rules of
conduct which help an aspirant to be in harmony with his
environment and fellow-men by overcoming his passions and
emotions. Various body postures and poses keep the body fit and
elastic. Asanas, coupled with rhythirnic and regulated breathing,
make a perfect tonic for our radiant mental and physical health.
The next two stages, pranayama and pratyahara, teach how to
control breath and maintain steadiness of mind, and thereby
overcome the body-consciousness. Our mental activities are
intimately connected with our breaming. Regulated and rhythmic
breaming helps a lot in our sense- withdrawal and restraint of
mental fluctuations. Many of our ills are more mental than
physical. If man is mentally healthy, the body will take care of
itself without much efforts. These two limbs or stages of yoga are
known as internal (antaranga) sadhana.
The last three stages— dharna, dhyana and samadhi— are called the
innermost (antaratma) sadhana, and lead the aspirant to the highest
ideal of God or self-realization. During these final stages of
spiritual growth, the mind becomes purer in essence and ultimately
one with the Ishvara or Brahman, the object of contemplation and
meditation. Mind is the Monarch or Raja of the senses. A Raja
Yogi is one who has conquered his mind, the king of the senses.
Raja Yoga or the Royal Yoga teaches how to control mino and
withdraw the senses from the objects of their interst. When one has
conquered his passions, emotions, thoughts and mind, he becomes
a Raja Yogi, a fit person to be one and united with his Creator and
God. Raja Yoga aims at the sublimation and release of the spirit by
Copyrighted material

Yoga : The Science of Soul
balanced psycho-physical development. Body is a vehicle and an
in- strument, which must be brought to the level of perfection as a
preparation for spiritual evolution and illumination. In the final
stage of samadhi the knower, the knowledge, and the known lose
their separate identities and become inseparably one. This identity
and unity between sadhaka, sadhana, and sadhya is the
quintessence to be realized and perfected through yogic technique
discipline culminating in the state of samadhi or
super-consciousness.
Samadhi is the sumum bonum, the summit of the efforts and end of
the long quest. It is like the dreamless state of deep sleep when
there is no feeling of T or 'mine'. With it the sadhaka attain the
state of perfect peace, bliss, pure consciousness and rest, a state
which defies description and definition, a thing to be felt and
experienced and not to be described and uttered. The path to this
goal is narrow, difficult and sharp like the razor's edge. The path of
yoga is beset with difficulties. The storms of mental fluctuations
continue to agitate the water of mind, and then there is no mental
equipoise and peace. Then there are very many hindrances and
obstacles like laziness, diseases, doubts, indecision, indifference,
lack of proper motivation, sensual cravings, want of continuity of
efforts and score others. Keeping in view all these obstacles, our
rishis have prescribed these above aids, which should be constantly
used and assiduously practised. Ceaseless efforts and sadhana or
practice is the key factor in the progress on the path of spirit
Spiritual sadhana is a supreme endeavour and requires utmost
exertion and practice.
Between Ida and Fingla nadis flows the Sushumana nadi, the main
channel of psychic energy. It runs through the spinal column. It is
intersected by the two other nadis at different points, and at these
points are located the six chakras (plexus) or centres of psychic
energy. The lowest Chakra is called Muladhara, and is situated in
the pelvic region behind the genitals. Then comes the Svadhisthana
Chakra above it. Manipuraka Chakra is the third and is located at
the navel; Anahata Chakra is in cardiac region; Vishuddha in
pharyngeal region and Ajana Chakra is located at a point between
the eyebrows. Then there is Sahashrara, the thousand-petalled lotus
Copyrighted material

Yoga : The Science of Soul
Chakra, at the top of the Sushumana. It is the most powerful wheel
of psychic force and energy. The Ida and Pingla veins rise from the
base of the spine and terminate in the left and right nostrils. They
represent the lunar and solar energies respectively.
In Muladhara wheel, the lowest centre, lies dormant the Kundalini,
the 'serpent power' or the celestial cosmic force. The aim and
object of yogic practices is to awaken this latent psychic energy.
When it is aroused and made to reach the topmost Chakra of
Sahasrara, piercing through all the other Chakras, a tremendous
spiritual strength and energy is released within, and the yogi attains
salvation. This process of wakening the 'serpent power' and
making, it unite in the topmost wheel also results in the attainment
of many supernatural powers, but they are, in fact, obstacles in the
path of final release and moksha, and therefore to be eschewed and
avoided.
With the awakening of this cosmic power and its union in the
highest Chakra, one attains the state of super consciousness, where
the T and mine* cease to exist and God is no longer held as
personal. He is then experienced as the pure Consciousness. Then
all the dualities of personal and impersonal, absolute and relative,
pleasure and pain, immanence and transcendence cease, and one
becomes united with the Supreme Being.
Yoga Vasistha
It is one of the most important works in the Hindu philosophy. All
aspects of Darshanas (Hindu philosophies), right from Samkhya to
Vedanta are intricately woven into the Yoga Vasistha. The
principal figures in this book are Lord Rama and sage Vasistha.
Just like the Bhagavad Gita, this is a dialogue between sage
Vasistha and Lord Rama. Sage Vasistha advises Rama on all
aspects of life.
Yoga Vasistha contains 29,000 verses. Since this book emerged
from the epic Ramayana, it is believed that sage Valmiki wrote this
book also. Sage Vasistha is an important figure in Hinduism. Manu
refers to Vasistha as one of the exponents of Hinduism. Adi
Sankarchargy refers to him as the first sage of the Vedanta school.
Copyrighted material

Yuddha Kanda
It is believed that this book was written during the 7th century A.D.
One of the most important parts of the Yoga Vasistha is the
doctrine of mind. According to this book when the mind vibrates,
the world comes to existence, and when the wind stops vibrating,
the world is destroyed.
The language and style of the Yoga Vasistha is very poetic. It is
filled with fantastic stories and very philosophical discourses. Sage
Valmiki ends Yoga Vasistha with a statement that, he who listens
to the dialogue between sage Vasistha and Lord Rama will be
liberated and will attain knowledge of the Brahman.
Yuddha Kanda
The Great March
Rama heard with rapt attention and in detail about Sita, about
Hanuman's exploits in Lanka. Delighted then Rama said, "Indeed,
Hanuman's accomplishments are excellent. No one else can
achieve them. He has given me a new lease of life by bringing the
news of Sita. Would that, I could reward him adequately! Let this
affectionate embrace of mine be a testimony of my gratitude/'
With these words, he again embraced Hanuman and said to
Sugriva, "Now we know where Janaki is, but I don't quite know
how our army will across the sea before we siege Lanka?" But
Sugriva reassuring Rama said. "O hero! why this lamentation? We
are sure to cross over to Lanka and to destroy Ravana. The mighty
Vanara warriors are ready to lay down their lives for your cause.
Once we have devised the means of crossing the sea, victory is
ours."
Rama's spirits thus being revived by these inspiring words, he
asked Hanuman about the strength of the enemy, the defences of
the army. Thereupon. Hanuman said. "Lanka is a migthy city,
surrounded by an impregnable golden wall and then huge moat.
Ravana is a formidable enemy, yet we can defeat him once we
reach there. We have matchless heroes like Angada, Dwida,
Jambuvana, Nala and Neela. Defences of Lanka are nothing before
these warriors."
Copyrighted material

Yuddha Kanda
In very auspicious moments the huge army set out towards the
south. Neela went in advance leading a big army, examining the
route and looking out for the enemies in ambush. The army pressed
forward with speed like" an agitated ocean. At times Rama and
Lakshmana were carried on the shoulders by the mighty monkeys
to maintain speed. While marching ahead, Rama, Lakshmana,
Sugriva and Angada talked about the course of the future action.
They met with auspicious signs all the way to their destination. The
dust raised by the feet of the vast army covered the sun and the four
quarters. The Vanaras indulged in various sports. They uprooted
trees, ate fruits, flowers, roots and honey and did many
monkey-pranks.
Having crossed several hills, mountains, rivers, hills and forests,
they reached Mahendra mountain and from the top of the mountain
they saw the vast expanse of the sea, ever agitated by wind and
storm. The constant rising and falling hill- like waves produced a
roar which matched with that of monkeys. They got down the
mountain and reached the seashore. The troops camped in the
forest along the shore. Rama was again seized by sorrow and
dejection thinking of Sita's hapless lot in Lanka. Lakshmana then
said many a sweet and inspiring word to Rama to dispell his
doublts and fears.
Havana in Council
There in Lanka, Ravana alarmed at Hanuman's recent exploits
consulted his ministers, counsellors and friends to decide the future
course oof action, Many Rakshasha warriors then raising their
lethal weapons said. "We shall destroy Rama and Lakshmana and
cut into pieces the monkey who put Lanka on tire."
Whereupon Vibhishana, the younger brother of Ravana, said with
folded hands, ,<0 brother! hasty decisions are bound to lead us to
grief. War should be resorted to as a last course. War with Rama
will lead us to ruin. Rama has not done any harm to us. On the
contrary, the abduction of Sita is a great sin. He slew Khara and
others in Janasthana in self-defence. Before starting a war let us
ascertain the enemy's strength. We have already seen Hanuman's
valour and it cannot be dismissed lightly. I implore you, O king, to
Copyrighted material

Yuddha Kanda
return Janaki to Rama. My brother, don't take offence. It is for all
our good."
Ravana then adjourned the council for the next day and retired to
his palace. On the following day, Vibhishana again went to
Ravana. He had been thinking hard over the matter and had arrived
at certain firm conclusions. He said to his brother meekly, "O
king! many evil portents has been perceived since janaki's arrival
in Lanka. Restore her to Rama, lest it should be too late. Forgive
me for this plain speaking.* *
This sincere advice of wise Vibhishana enraged Ravana very much
and he said angrily, "There is nothing to be afraid of Rama. The
question of returning Sita does not arise at all. Now you may
leave."
Ravana one day came to the royal council hall and summoned all
the chiefs of Rakshashas and counsellors. Kumbhakarna, Ravana' s
brother, rose first and said, 4 'The time to decide has already gone
by the moment you kidnapped Sita. To abduct another's wife is a
crime and the present crists is a direct result of this. This is not the
way of doing things. However, I shall fight with Rama to finish and
confer victory on you. Hence be cheerful and enjoy yourself."
Other Rakshashas bragged and boasted of their strength and
cheered up Ravana. They were all slow of understanding and quite
foolish. Ravana's commander-in-chief Prahasta encouraged the
king of Rakshashas to enjoy himself freely with Janaki without any
fear, and the rest of the assembly, except Vibhishana, applauded
him.
Pious and noble Vibhishana then said to Ravana, "O king! Sita is a
deadly snake. Send her back to Rama. There is none among our
heroes who can slay Rama. You are being ill-advised. I tell you
frankly and for your good — return Sita to Rama." Indrajit (hen
said, 'Uncle! Don't be a coward. Even an ordinary person can slay
the two princes. I have conquered Indra and gods, what are these
two puny men? Shall I be ever afraid of these?" Vibhishana
returned, "My son! You do not know what you are saying. You
lack experience and maturity yet. O king! Return Sita even now. so
Copyrighted

Yuddha Kanda
that we all may live in peace.'*
Ravana now grew furious and said, "You are really my enemy in
the guise of a brother. I am well aware of the traitors like you, who
are to be feared most. You are jealous of my wealth, glory and
victories. You are a villian through and through. Had you not been
my younger brother, I would have at once beheaded you."
Vibhishana Seeks Refuge
These words full of insult and hatred were too much to bear for
Vibhishana. He rose, warned Ravana against his impending doom
and then realizing that there was hardly any toom for him in Lanka,
he repaird to the place where Rama was. He was followed by four
of his good friends.
Sugriva was the first to espy Vibhishana from a distance. He grew
apprehensive and pointed it put to Hanuman and others.
Vibhishana appeared before Sugriva and told him that he had come
to Rama to seek refuge, having abandoned everything in Lanka, the
city of wicked Ravana. The matter was reported to Rama and he
sought the advice of the Vanara chiefs, and they advised him
caution, considering Vibhishana to be an enemy spy. But Hanuman
did not agree with others and found Vibhishana above any
suspicious. He did not notice anything diplomatic about him.
Hanuman saw Vibhishana's sincerity and so advised Rama
accordingly. Having heard all the views from Vanara chiefs, Rama,
the magnimous, said, "Vibhishana has come as a friend seeking
shelter and I cannot say no.. It is against dharma not to protect a
supplicant. What does it matter that he happens to be Ravana or
Vibhishana." So saying Rama fell silent.
Vibhishana was brought into Rama's presence and Rama assured
him of his eternal protection and friendship. On being asked about
Ravana's strength Vibhishana said. "Ravana is indestructible
because of a boon. Heroic Kumbhakarna is his another brother and
Indrajit, the conqueror of Indra, his son. Prahasta is his general and
Mahodara, Akampana etc. his other commanders. They are as
valiant as Ravana himself. I am Ravana's youngest brother. I shall
render you help in Ravana's destruction as far as I can."
Copyrighted material

Yuddha Kanda
Rama was very much pleased with these words and embraced
Vibhishana. Then he ordered Lakshmana to fetch water from the
sea. Lakshmana brought water from the sea and Vibhishana was
instantly a anointed and crowned as the king of Lanka. Vibhishana
requested Rama to appraoch the sea to seek its help for going
across to Lanka. This gladdened Rama's heart and he prompdy
prepared himself for the task.
Meanwhile, Ravana the crafty sent a spy named Suka to seduce
Sugriva from his loyalty to Rama. Suka assumed die form of a bird
and approached Sugriva but he was caught by the Vanaras and was
about to be killed when Rama saved him hearing his pitiful cries of
supplication. Sugriva asked him to tell wicked Ravana mat he
would be killed very soon at Rama's hands. Being an enemy of
Rama, he was Sugriva' s enemy too. The spy flew back to his
master and delivered the message.
The Wonderful Causeway
Rama lay down on die grass, determined either to please the ocean
or to dry it up. For three nights and days he prayed to the ocean but
without any success. It angered Rama. He said to Lakshmana, 4 'Do
you see this haughty god of the sea? How proud he has been to
mistake my prayers and meekness as my weakness. I shall dry up
the ocean even now. Fetch my bow and arrow.;;
Rama then bending his tall bow discharged a very powerful arrow,
producing a thundering noise. Having entered the sea, the arrow
agitated the water to its depths and it began to boil and exhale
steam. The animals living in mis waters were sore distressed, and
the Sea-god could not stand it any longer. So the Sea-god appeared
and stood with folded hands before Rama and said, "O Rama! I
follow my nature. How can I give up bottomeless depth,
impassable vastness and restleness, which are part and parcel of my
eternal nature? But I can permit a causeway to be built over me.
Order the Vanaras and Bhalukas to bring the boulders, rocks and
trees for the purpose. I shall remain calm to allow the construction
and its maintenance. Vishwakarma's son, the monkey Nala, is in
your army. He is proficient in construction. Let him construct a
bridge over me and I shall support it on my surface. For your sake I
Copyrighted i

YuddhaKanda
shall not hesitate to be bound by a bridge." With these words the
Sea-god disappeared into its ocean depths.
Nala was as skillful as his father in construction. He came forward
and confirmed what the Sea-god had said. Nala had received a
boon from his father. Nala set to build the causeway and the
monkeys and bears brought huge rocks and tall trees. They
uprooted tall trees and huge boulders and carried them off in sport.
The heroic Nala, with the help of Vanaras, thus started building a
hundred-league-long bridge over the sea.
The continual hurling of rocks and trees mightily agitated the sea
and produced a deafening din. It took fivedays in all to construct
this mighty bridge to the other side of die sea. It was ten-leagues
wide and hundred long. The gods appeared in the sky to have a
look at this wonderful bridge. Vibhishana, with mace in hand,
guarded the southern end of the bridge. With him his four ministers
also stood guard. Then they went across the sea. Hanuman carried
Rama on his shoulders, and Angads took Lakshmana on his. Some
Vanaras went near the bridge, some flew through the sky and some
swam across. Hurrahing, "Victory to Rama!" the monkey army
gradually crossed the sea. The deafening noise thus produced
mingled with the thundering roar of the ocean, echoing all the
quarters.
Meanwhile, Ravana sent spies one after the other ascertain Rama's
real strength, the number of troops and their nature. But the
Rakshashas this sent were caught spying and belaboured by the
monkeys, but Rama the benefactor of all living beings, allowed
them to go unharmed. They came to Ravana and reported what
they had seen. They reported the completion of the wonderful
bridge, the arrival of the formidable army at the entrance of Lanka
and advised Ravana to return Sita or be prepared for the inevitable.
It made Ravana extremely worried and he held consultations with
his ministers. He called his wizard and ordered him to create the
head and bow of. Rama by his magic to delude Janaki. Ravana went
to Sita and said, "Be my wife, I have slain Rama. See for yourself
Rama's head and bow. My heroic general Prahasta has brought
these after slaying Rama."
Copyrighted material

Yuddha Kanda
Sita, seeing the served head of Rama before her, was overwhelmed
with grief. She broke forth into a flood of tears, lamented and rolled
in the dust. Then Sarma, a good Rakshashi, told Sita how she had
been deluded by magic. She said that Rama was alive and along
with Lakshmana and the monkey army had crossed the ocean and
was about to strike. Thus she revived Janaki, the woebegone, with
her sweet, soothing words. In the meantime, Rama's army
advanced further towards Lanka resounding the quarters with
trumpets and conches blowing. This was heard by Sita as well as
Ravana. It delighted Sita exceedingly but made Ravana nervous.
Ravana sat in war council, surrounded by his ministers and
warriors. Malyavan, the aged Rakshasha, then tried his utmost to
make Ravana understand his sin. He said, "O king! Return Janaki
and seek peace with Rama, he is more powerful than you because
he is virtuous." But the doomed Demon King could not tolerate
these words and snarled in frown, "How dare you speak like this?
Why do you think Rama formidable? Of course, Rama has reached
Lanka by building a bridge but that is a sheer accident and there is
nothing to be afraid of." Then Ravana made elaborate
arrangements for the defence of Lanka.
Rama, Sugriva, Hanuman, Jambavana and Angada held a war
council to decide the course of action. Then Vibhishana laid before
them die secret information gathered by his scouts about the
enemy. Marshalling the army, Rama gave his commanders detailed
directions. Nala was directed to challenge Prahasta in the east,
Angada was to engage Mahodera in the south. In the west,
Hanuman would meet lndrajit. Rama and Lakshmana were to meet
Ravana, and Sugriva and Jambuvana were assigned the task to
assist the main army. The army ascended the beautiful Suvela
mountain for night rest and on the following morning, they had a
full view of magnificent Lanka situated on the top of Trikuta Hill.
Ravana was clearly visible from there. He was standing at the city
gate. Seeing him Sugriva came down the hill and sprang upon
Ravana in anger. They wrestled together for a long time, bleeding,
beating each other with fists and slaps and finally they both rolled
on the ground. Ravana then tried to employ magic and heroic
Copyrighted material

Yuddha Kanda
Sugriva sprang up and returned to Rama. Rama was glad at
Sugriva' s safe return but then warned him never to repeat such an
exploit for it was not for a king to take such risks.
The Vanara army descending the Suvela mountain surrounded
Lanka on all sides in preparation to attack. The cloud-like
formation of Vanaras, their thundering noise and great number
astonished the Rakshashas. Rama then called Angada and said,
"Go as my messenger to Ravana and tell him your end is near.
You cannot escape death. It has been too long. Return Sita or come
out bidding farewell to your wives. I am waiting to kill you."
Angada flew fast and alighted beside Ravana and delivered Rama's
message, t4I am Angada, Van's son and Rama's envoy. Return
Janaki and surrender unto Rama's feet or it is time for you to be
liberated from this sinful life. Rama waits outside Lanka to
despatch you to Heaven."
Whereupon four terrible Rakshashas, at Ravana' s command,
immediately seized Angada and he jumped up on the roof and the
Rakshashas fell down. Angada in anger then attacked and broke
down a lofty tower into pieces and giving out a heroic yell returned
to Rama.
The Siege of Lanka
The information that Lanka has been besieged by Rama's army
exceedingly enraged Ravana. In anger Ravana got up a tower of his
palace and leaning on his hands along the ramparts surveyed the
enemy army. He saw the golden-haired Sugriva, the veteran hero
Jambuvana and near him long-haired young Angada busy in war
preparation. He saw Hanuman saying something to Rama and he
wondered how he could conquer that vast sea of Vanaras spread all
around Lanka?
Meanwhile, Rama looked at Lanka and found it well fortified and
protected. Then he thought of Sita and her grief and was filled with
pain. He ordered an immediate attack and the vanaras shouting.
"Victory to Rama!" uprooted huge rocks and tall tress and entered
Lanka in great numbers. They battered and made a breach in the
outer wall surrounding the city. Ravana ordered his army to attack.
Copyrighted material

Yuddha Kanda
The Rakshashas with a great cry and beating of drums and blowing
of conches and trumpets, fell upon the Vanaras and fierce battle
ensued. The Vanaras rushed upon the Rakshashas with boulders,
stones and trees. They used their sharp and nails to kill the enemy.
Innumerable warriors fell dead on either side, and the ground was
covered with blood, limbs and broken chariots. The battle
continued unabated throughout the day. Angada fought a duel
against Indrajit, Hanuman agaisnt Jambumalin, Lakshmana against
Virupaksha and Nala against Prapan and so on. Blood began to
flow in streams. Horses and warriors were slain, chariots smashed
and duels fought and won. Many Rakshashas in the body attacked
Rama but with a fatal arrow he cut off their heads.
At last, the sun went down and night fell, increasing the strength of
nightover Rakshashas. The battle grew fiercer and fiercer, and it
looked as if it was the night of final dissolution. Rakshashas
concentrated their attack on Rama. But he, with his flaming serpent
like arrows, destroyed them. Angada fighting with Indrajit,
destroyed his chariot, charioteer and the horses with great fifficulty
Indrajit made his escape good. Indrajit was greatly agitated at the
humiliation and he smote Rama and Lakshmana with deadly
arrows and bound both the horses with Nagapasa. They lay helpless
not knowing what to do. Alarmed and frightened, the vanara host
began to weep. Meanwhile, Indrajit remained hidden in the sky by
his magic and smote Vanara chiefs and finally returned trumphant
to Lanka and his father Ravana.
The Vanara host, defeated and downcast, thought that everything
was over. But Vibhishana encouraging and rallying them said,
"Don't lose heart. Rama and Lakshmana are not dead. They will
soon gain consciousness and resume fighting/*
In Lanka Ravana's had it proclaimed that the Rama and
Lakshmana have been killed by Indrajit. At Ravana' s behest behest
Rakshashis went to Sita and told her of Rama and Lakshamana's
death. They took her up in the Pushpak Vimana to show both the
princes lying unconscious on the field, with their weapons scattered
about them. Overwhelmed with grief, Sita cried in lamentation. She
thought it was all over. But then Trijata asked Sita to take courage,
Copyrighted material

Yuddha Kanda
"Worshipful lady! Don't weep. The princes are alive. Believe me,
I am not false. Look at them, at their faces. Is this how he dead
look? They have become inert and unconscious under the influence
of the magic weapons."
Gradually the charm of the Nagapasa weakened and Rama, being
the more powerful that Lakshmana, first opened his eyes. Seeing
Lakshmana prostrate beside him he broke down and uttered piteous
cries. Rama's lamentations made the Vanaras weep. Meanwhile,
Vibhishana came there and Vanaras taking him to be Indrajit fled
in fear. Then Jambuvana assuringly called them back.
While Sugriva, Vibhishana, Jambuvana and Sushena spoke
consoling words to one another and discussed future course of
action, the sky was overcast with clouds, and there was a storm
accompanied by thunder and flashes of lightning. And men the
great bird Garuda burst into sight. Seeing Garuda, the serpents,
which had turned into arrows by the magic of Indrajit and had
bound both the princes, ran away in fear, garuda softly stroked
Rama and Lakshmana and restored their former loveliness and
strength. The bruises and wounds were healed instantly at Garuda' s
touch and they rose up more resplendent then ever before. Rama
and Garuda embraced each other lovingly, and men the great bird
taking leave of Rama flew away. There was great rejoicing and
jubilation in Rama's camp and it sent a chill down Ravana's spine.
Thereupon, Ravana sent Dhumraksha with a big army to slay
Rama.
The heroic Dhumraksha found the Vaner sena like an agitated
ocean. Both the armies clashed and on either side numerous
warriors fell dead on the field. Gradually the conflict grew more
grim and fierce and Dhumraksha commenced butchering Vanaras.
Seeing this rout, Hanuman advanced with a huge rock and smashed
Dhumraksha's chariot and then with a large stone broke his head in
rage.
Then came Akampana, leading a big army of Rakshashas and
demons. A terrible conflict raged. Akampana smote Vanaras with
his deadly arrows and they took to their heels, but men Hanuman
grew into a formidable stature and uprooting a huge tree struck the
Copyrighted

1540 Yuddha Kanda
Rakshasha dead. Most of the demons were slain and the survivors
fled in panic to convey the grim news of Akampana's death.
The news of Akampana's death made Ravana cast a sorrowful
glance at his ministers but soon he took heart and went round the
city's defences, and then had discussions with his
commander-in-chief Prahasta. Prahasta got ready and his warriors
got upon their chariots, elephants and horses and stood around their
General. Prahasta rode a golden chariot accompanied by his
formidable troops. Seeing him coming forward, the Vanaras
uprooted trees and plucked huge stones and attacked the enemy.
Prahasta' s fierce attack sent Vanaras reeling. Then Neela rushed
forward in wrath and struck Prahasta with a tall tree and Prahasta
pierced it with sharp arrows. Neela then destroyed Prahasta' s
chariot and horses. Prahasta jumped down his chariot and a great
duel followed. Finally Neela killed Prahasta with a huge stone and
the Rakshashas fled to Lanka, leaderless, in panic. Victorious
Neela went to Rama and Rama praised him again and again.
Kumbhakarna is Awakened
General Prahasta' s death stunned Ravana and men he himself came
to fight riding a beautiful chariot and surrounded by grim- visaged
demons. He saw the Vanar sena, vast like the ocean, waiting for the
fight. Rama looking at the resplendent Ravana said, Today I have
the opportunity to wreak vengeance upon Ravana for kidnapping
Sita."
Thereupon a grim battle ensued.
Ravana then with a deadly arrow struck Sugriva and he fell
unconscious on the ground. Ravana killed many of the huge
Vanaras and the monkeys ran for shelter to Rama. To restrain
Ravana from spreading further havoc, Hanuman rushed forward,
and heroic Lakshmana too came forth. Ravana, engaging Hanuman
in a duel, dealt him a severe slap Hanuman reeled under its impact,
but then recovering replied with such a mighty counter-slap that
Ravana trembled like a hill in earthquake. It delighted Vanaras
exceedingly and they shouted with joy. Ravana grew furious and
struck Hanuman on chest with a powerful fist, making Hanumana
Copyrighted material

Yuddha Kanda
faint.
Leaving Hanuman there, he then engaged Neela in fight, and struck
him with arrow. Neela suddenly diminished his size and perched
himself on Ravana's flag staff to his great discomfiture and
Vanaras delight. Then Ravana in anger smote him with a deadly
weapon and he fell flat on the ground but somehow survived.
Then there began a fight between Ravana and Lakshmana. Ravana
used a dealy weapon to strike Lakshmana on the forehead and the
later fell unconscious on the field. Having recovered himself,
Lakshmana then pierced Ravana with his sharp arrows. Now,
Ravana used formidable Shakti against Lakshmana and Lakshmana
fainted. Ravana seized unconscious Lakshmana but could not raise
him even an inch from the ground. Hanuman then dealt a powerful
fist blow and Ravana reeled and fell unconscious from it for some
time.
Rama then twanged his mighty bow, got upon Hanuman's back and
challenged Ravana. Ravana struck Hanuman with arrows and
Rama destroyed Ravana's chariot, horses and all. Rama look pity
on exhausted and chariotless Ravana, and asked him to withdraw
from the battle and to come next day refreshed. And humbled
Ravana entered Lanka.
The ten-headed Ravana sat sad and humbled on his golden throne,
surrounded by his ministers. Then he said, "O Rakshashasl Go,
and awake giant Kumbhakarna, my younger brother. He has been
sleeping for six months. Roused from deep sleep, he will destroy
Rama, Lakshamana and Vanaras.*'
The heroic Kumbhakarna, under a curse, slept for six months after
every day he kept awake. The demons with carts loaded with
breakfast containing various kinds of steaming meat, viands and
vats of wine went to awaken him. He lay stretched in a large hall
like a mountain. The demons had difficulty in advancing to him
owing to the force of his respiration. He did not stir and looked
very dreadlful. Sukha entered the hall fighting the push and pull of
the giant's stormy respiration. He was followed by other
Rakshashas thousands in number. He could be roused with great
Copyrighted material

Yuddha Kanda
efforts.
Kumbhakarna awoke yawing and spread his python like mighty
arms. He stood up and started devouring heaps of meat and viands
and drank big quantity of wine and blood. Having somewhat
satisfied his hunger and thrst, Kumbhakarna asked, "Why have
you disturbed my sleep? is not everything well in Lanka? What
calamity has be fallen?" Then Yupaksha, a leader of the
Rakshashas, with joined palms said, "O prince, we have been
defeated. General Prahasta has been slain. Lanka has been besieged
by Rama and his troops.
"Rama? What Rama? Never mind, now I am awake," said he.
"Rama is a prince and monkeys and bears are his warriors. Ravana
himself went to fight but retired humbled."
This made Kumbhakarna mightly furious and he decided to kill
Rama and Lakj>hamana first before meeting his brother Ravana, but
at Mahodara's sdvice he agreed to meet Ravana first. He then
washed his face, drank several pots of wine and went to Ravana.
As he walked, the earth shook under his feet. Ravana greeted and
embraced Kumbhakarna and then said how Rama had surrounded
Lanka with his army affter constructing a bridge across the sea and
how so many brave Rakshashas had been killed. Ravana asked his
brother's help in that hour of great crisis. He wanted to kill Rama
and Lakshmana in the battle.
Hearing these words of full entreaty, Kumbhakarna said, "O king!!
The warning we gave you earlier has not been heeded. You
rejected the good counsel out of your lust and thoughtlessness. You
abducted Sita. Now what else do you expect? Better if you had
slain Rama before doing so. Vibhishana was right when he tried to
stop you and you wrongfully drove him out of Lanka. You have
begun from the wrong end. It is this wrong order which is at the
root of present crisis."
These words certainly made Ravana feel bad but controlling his
anger he said, "Past is past. What has been done is done. Now it is
useless to go into its discussion. Think of the present and do your
best. In my distress and present sorrows, however brought about by
Copyrighted material

Yuddha Kanda
my wrong policies, it is your duty to stand by me firm and loyal. 1
need your strength and help and not this lecturing.' *
Kumbhakarna was so moved by these words of his brother that he
promptly replied, "Brother! Never mind and do as you please.
Think Rama and Lakshmana slain and Vanaras destroyed. Banish
sorrow from your thoughts. Rama must slay me to get at you. I
shall smother the enemy even with my bare arms. I need no arms. I
shall consume them all in the fire of my anger. Drown your anxiety
in wine and in women so beautiful."
Ravana felt very happy. He was all smiles. He blessed
Kumbhakarna who donned his armour and helmet and wheeled
round his brother. Then he appeared on the battlefield like death
itself. He saw Vanaras, Rama and Lakshmana and yelled a war-cry
so loud and shuddering that the Vanaras felt it through the ground
under their feet too. This panicked the Vanaras, they broke the line
and either ran helter-skelter or fell down unconscious. Angada tried
to rally the fleeing monkeys but without success. They ran past him
crying, "Life is dear to us.*'
Kumbhakarna strode forward with a deafening roar and killed
several Vanaras. The Hanuman came jumping and challenged him
hurling huge rocks and trees on him. In return, he stunned
Hanuman by piercing his breast with a deadly lance. He smote
many other Vanara chiefs and blood flowed in strems. Then
Angada rushed forward and hurled a big rock on his head. It
enraged Kumbhakarna and he pounced upon Angada and sent
Vanaras fleeing. In the duel, Kumbhakarna dealt a severe blow and
Angada fell senseless.
Now Sugriva tried to stop him, but he loo failed and was captured
by his adversary. It was with great difficulty that Sugriva could
writhe himself free of Kumbhakarna' s clutches.
Lakshmana challenged him with a shower of sharp arrows, but
Kumbhakarna rushed at Rama past Lakshmana. Seeing the
death-like Kumbhakarna approching, Rama resounded the four
quarters with the twang of his bow and shot sharp arrows at him,
but wighout any harm to Kumbhakarna, who in great anger
Copyrighted material

Yuddha Kanda
whirling his formidable club smashed several Vanaras. Rama the
tore off Kumbhakarna's hand, which held the club, with a deadly
arrow. Meanwhile, uprooting a tall tree with his only hand,
Kumbhakarna rushed at Rama and Rama severed that hand too,
with another sharp weapon. With a terrible yell, the demon
pounced upon Rama but Rama cut-otY both his legs with a sharp
weapon. Then Kumbhakarna opened his cave like mouth and
rushed on his stumps to devour Rama, and Rama filled his cavity of
mourn with arrows. His throat was choked and he lost his speech.
Then with a flamming arrow, Rama cut off his head. The huge
head, carried by the force of the arrow, rose high in the air and
falling into the sea sank to the bottom.
When Ravana heard the sad news of Kumbhakarna's death he felt
as if his own life has left him and he fainted. After regaining
consciousness, he continued lamenting with grief-laden heart and
again fell in a swoon. When he came to his sense he cried, **0
hero! How could you be slain by Rama? Now, that I care for the
empire or for Sita? If I cannot avenge you upon Rama, then surely
death is my fortune. Alas, how shall I conquer the enemy without
you. Ah, why did I fail to listen to wise Vibhishana?"
The Conqueror of Indra is Slain
Ravana wept hot tears and lamented for his dead brother and sons
with his head hung down. He found the groans and wailings of
Rakshaska women too much for him. A terrific rage swelled within
his broad breast and he felt choked in all his ten throats. Then
seeing his father so drowned in grief, Indrajit said, "Oh father!
Why are you sad and downcast? So long live, you need not be
unhappy. I shall destroy Rama and Lakshmana with deadly
arrows."
Comforting Ravana, the heroic Indrajit got upon a fast and
beautiful chariot. Surrounded by a large number of tried and trusted
warriors, he issued forth for battle. On reaching out the walls of
Lanka, he commenced a victory sacrifice. He lighted the smokeless
sacrificial fire on an altar. He poured purified butter in the flames
and made other offerings besides that of a black goat. The
smokeless golden flames leapt up in splendour and then the god of
Copyrighted material

Yuddha Kanda
fire himself appeared to accept the offerings. Indrajit received
Brahma-weapons and charmed bow and arrows. He chanted
mantras and invoked Brahma by casting offerings into the
sacrificial fire.
Then he vanished in the sky upon his chariot armed with all the
celestial weapons and a fierce battle commenced. Encourged by
invisible Indrajit, the Rakstiashas began to cause havoc in the
Vanar sena. Vanaras hurled rocks and trees on Rakshashas. Indrajit
then struck such terror that monkeys and bears fled in fear and
were badly routed Indrajit with his flaming snake-like shafts struck
Nala, Sugriva and Angada. They fell unconscious on the ground.
He wounded Hanuman and Jambuvana with his lethal weapons and
then smothered Rama and Lakshmana with his Brahmastra. All the
while he remained invisible. Thus victorious, he returned to Lanka.
The battlefield wore the look of a huge slaughter-house. Dead
monkeys, apes, bears. Rakshashas and severed limbs lay scattered.
Somehow Hanuman got to his feet and came to Jambuvana.
Hanuman helped the latter to stand up and then there came
Vibhishana rallying the Vanaras with his words of hope and
encouragement. Jambuvana then said to Hanuman, "My son! This
is not the time to lament. Go instantly across the sea to Himalaya
mountains. Between Kailas and Rishabha peaks stands the hill of
life-herbs. Those herbs are potent enough to heal any wound and to
restore life of dead. Fetch them quickly so that Rama and
Lakshmana may be revived. Their wounds will be healed and they
will fight again tomorrow. Be quick. Only you are capable of
achieving this feat.
Like a comet, he flew straight over the sea and the land to die
Medicine Hill, and there he saw many shining medicinal plants, but
finding it difficult to identify the particular plants of die medicine,
he uprooted the whole peak and returned fast holding it over his
head in his hand. As soon as Hanuman arrived, the very fragrance
of those herbs healed the wounds and restored life to the dead.
Rama, Lakshmana and Vanaras got to their feet, strong, healthy
and ready to fight. Rama embraced Hanuman with his eyes wet
with joy.
Copyrigf

Yuddha Kanda
Sugriva and Hanuman, in consultation with each other, decided the
course of action. They attacked the city at midnight with some
chosen monkeys, apes and bears and set Lanka on fire. Before the
eyes of Rakshashas the fire was ablaze and thousands of mansions,
towers, turrets and palaces were reduced to ashes. The burning
Lanka kindled Ravana's wrath and he sent Kumbha, Nikumbha and
Yupaksha along with other Rakshashas to fight Rama. In the
terrible conflict mat ensued, Sugriva killed Kumbha and Hanuman
slew Nikumbha. Many more demon warriors fell dead to flaming
arrows of the Vanar sena. The death of Kumbha, Nikumbha and
Makraksha falared Ravana's wrath anew and he said to Meghnad,
"My son! Fight again for me. Slay Rama and Lakshmana by your
deadly weapons. Your prowess is matchless. You have defeated
even Indra, the king of gods."
"Yes, I will," replied Indrajit and Ravana embraced his darling
son and smelled his hair.
Indrajit issued forth Lanka in great splendour and flew before
Rama's Vanar sena. He created a life-like magic figure of Sita and
before Vanaras cut her two with his sword. Deluded, deceived,
stunned and horrified they cried weeping. "What good it is now to
fight? That ends everything." When Vibhishana came to know of it
he said, "Don't be deluded by an illusion. Take my word, it is all
false. This is only a trick of wizard Indrajit. He wants to get time by
this magic trick so that he may perform a sacrifice. Let Lakshmana
and others hurry to his place of sacrifice to obstruct it."
Lakshmana accompanied by Hanuman, Vibhishana and other
warriors reached the place where Indrajit was offering oblations to
a flame, burning bright on an altar. Indrajit was about to make the
final offering in the sacrificial fire when it was interrupted by a shot
from Lakshman's bow and then ensued a terrible battle. Indrajit got
upon his chariot, shot a thousand arrows. Lakshmana, standing on
Hanuman' s broad shoulders, cut them down to pieces. Both
Lakshmana and Indrajit were well-matched in their skill, strength
and swiftness. The battle continued for quite a long time. The
arrows covered the sky and made it darker. Lakshmana then took a
deadly arrow, put it on the bow string and pulled it back to his ear
Copyrighted material

Yuddha Kanda
and shot. Instantly, it severed Indrajit's head, which fell lifeless on
the ground with a loud thud and a flash. Apes and bears rejoiced
exceedingly and fell in each other's arms. Gods and Gandharvas
appeared in the sky, showered flowers shouting with joy.
As the news of Indrajit's death reached Ravana, he shed burning
tears in such profusion that they seared the ground where they fell.
From his mouth issued burning words, 4 'Alas my son! What! Gone
for ever! O conqueror of Indra and gods! Have you been
vanquished by death! O son, it does not belove you to leave me
disconsolate and downcast like this. Without you what remains, but
emptiness. The old should precede the young. Why, Oh why, I am
left behind to mourn and make your funeral."
4 'It is best to slay Sita," he said aloud to himself. "She is the root
of all the conflict. My son killed the false Sita, a creation of magic.
I shall kill the real one." With these words, he rushed towards
Ashoka Grove, with a sword in his hand. But then one of his
ministers saw it and was horrified. He blocked his way trembling
and appealed to his reason with folded hands. He appealed to him
to desist from killing a woman in captivity and reminded of its
accompanying sin. He said, "Slay Rama, direct your wrath at him.
Tomorrow is the new moon, and the night and darkest. Fight and
kill Rama." Then Ravana saw the reason, collected himself and
seathed his flaming sword.
The End of Ravana
Almost mad with anger at his son Indrajit's death, Ravana sent
forth a vast army to destory Rama and Lakshmana. The
Rakshashas struck the Vanaras with lethal weapons and they in
reply hurled rocks, stones and huge trees on demons. Rama with
lightning swiftness smothered the enemy host. Demons in thick
numbers lay dead and the survivors thus routed fled in terror to
Lanka.
The Rakshasha women in Lanka lamented piteously being
deprived of their husbands, sons and brothers. Their loud cries of
woe rent the sky and made Ravana exceedingly sad and worried. In
anger, he gnashed his twenty sets of teeth and bit as many lips
Copyri

Yuddha Kanda
Heaving long, deep sighs he ordered his army to be ready to march
for the battle. He donned his matchless protective armour and gold
crown and buckles his sword belt tight
Once again huge and dark warriors like hills and clouds, strong,
cruel, loyal, tried and tested thronged the streets and market places
of Lanka. They came on foot, rode upon elephants, horses, chariots
and camels, armed with various flaming weapons. When they
marched the earth shook under their heavy tread. Once again the
battlemented high gates threw open and the draw bridges dropped
with a deafening noise across the wide and deep moat surrounding
the city.
Ravana set forth mounted on celestial chariot drawn by beautiful
eight horses and filled with all kinds of deadly weapons. A large
army on chariots, elephants, horses and on foot accompanied him.
As he pressed forward, many ill-omens were observed, but he
hardly cared for them. Mahodara, Virupaksha and other generals
advanced swiftly at their lord's command. Both he sides excited
exceedingly clashed. Ravana continued pressing forward, battering
the Vanara line and smothered apes and bears with his sharp
hurning arrows. They fled in fear, chased by ferocious Ravana,
Sugriva, hampering Ravana's further advances, hurled huge stones
and boulders at him. Warriors on both sides were killed in large
number. The death of Virupaksha at Sugriva's hands grealty
enraged Ravana and he asked his charioteer to drive him where
Rama-Lakshmana were.
Ravana found Rama standing ready for the battle. Rama twanged
his mighty bow again and again. In the meantime, Lakshmana
showered arrows on Ravana. Ravana cut down those arrows and
then past Lakshmana came to Rama. The sky was overcast with
their arrows and it grew dark even at noon. They struck each other
with sharp weapons on forehead, breast, heart and shoulders. They
uttered mantras and discharged various sharp arrows of secret
power desirous of each other's destruction. Rama pierced Ravana
with many sharp arrows, yet he did not yield. Then Lakshmana and
Vibhishana together challenged Ravana and Ravana seeing his
brother got exceedingly enraged and hurled a formidable Sakti
Copyrighted material

Yuddha Kanda
weapon, but was intercepted by a shaft from Lakshmana. Seeing
Vibhishana*s life in danger. Lakshmana gave him cover and shot
mighty arrows on Ravana. Then Ravana flung a flaming Sakti at
Lakshmana. It come like a shooting meteor and pierced
Lakshmana*s breast violently and he fell on the ground
unconscious.
Rama overwhelmed with grief made up his mind to destroy Ravana
at once. First he plucked out that Sakti, which and pierced
Lakshmana through his breast, and then smothered Ravana with
sharp arrows but Ravana made his escape good. Rama, seeing
Lakshmana writhing and rolling on the ground with pain, was filled
with sorrow and burst forth in lamentations. Then Sushena the
physician of Ravana, brought from Lanka on Vibhishan*s advice
said to Hanuman, "O hero, go once again to that Hill of Life
Medicines in the Himalayas and fetch the medicinal plants quickly
to save Lakshmana.* *
Hanuman flew across the sea and over the plains and forests to the
Himalayas and then to that particular hill. But failing to identify
those medicinal plants, he uprooted the whole peak, placed it on his
palm and flew back fast to Sushena. Sushena plucked and crushed
the herbs and placed them before Lakshmana's nostrils. No sooner
did Lakshmana inhale that he got to his feet cured of all aches and
pains and then the ten directions resounded with hurrahing of
Vanara host
Meanwhile, Ravana got upon another resplendent car and rushed
back to fight. Then suddenly a celestial chariot drawn by ten white
horses landed near Rama from the sky. The charioteer came down
from his driving box and said to Rama with joined hands, 4 'I am
Matali, the celestial charioteer of Indra, and this is Indra's car. The
king of gods has sent me down with this chariot, this armour and
these weapons for your victory. Here I am at your service. Get on
the car/*
Rama went round the chariot and got upon it and said, "Drive it
straight before Ravana.** In no time Rama and Ravana stood facing
each other. These warriors of supreme strength and skill discharged
various powerful and explosive weapons and arrows on each other.
Copyrighted material

Yuddha Kanda
Ravana shot the cobra weapon and Rama intercepted it with the
Garuda weapon. Ravana then enraged pierced Matali with arrows
and cut down the golden flag staff. Being struck with arrows, Rama
was filled with wrath. His eyes grew red hot, and his visage
dreadful and the whole creation trembled in terror. With an
incantation Ravana then hurled a terrible Sula at Rama and Rama
in reply hurled the Sakti. The comet-like Sakti, clashed with the
blazing Sula and the latter broke down into pieces. Rama pierced
Ravana and his steeds with arrows. Ravana then wounded Rama
with his sharp shafts. But Rama recovered soon and struck Ravana
with renewed energy. Seeing Ravana exhausted and spent, his
charioteer hurried him away from the fields.
Regaining consciousness, Ravana returned to the battle and the
grim fight began again and weapons clashed anew. The formidable
duel between Rama and Ravana, the foremost of warriors, was so
amazing that, rest of the warriors stood watching the grim struggle,
with weapons in their hands, They forgot to attack one another and
looked in wonder at Rama and Ravana displaying their best skills
and prowess. The duel grew fiercer and more desperate by degrees
and then Rama cut down Ravana' s ten heads with a terrible arrow,
and the lifeless heads rolled down upon the earth bleeding. But the
heads grew again. Rama again promptly cut them off and they
again sprang up immediately. Thus hundreds of heads rolled down
but they were again there and Ravana never turned his back. The
struggle continued unabated day and night. They duelled with
arrows and weapons for a very long time. But Rama was intrigued
to see heads of Ravana spring up again and again. Then Matali, die
charioteer, reminded Rama, "Ravana's end is near, delay not. Now
is the time to discharge Brahmastra."
Rama took up and invoked the effulgent Brahmastra, which was
given to Rama by sage Agastya. Rama uttered a mantra, fixed the
Brahma-weapon his bow string, pulled it back to his ear, held his
breath for a moment and shot. The Brahmastra hitting Ravana's
heart pierced through it, killing him then and there, but it did not
stop, came out of his back and dived into the earth. The bow and
arrow Ravana held in his hands to ward it, slipped down and he
rolled down his car with a loud crash.
Copyrighted material

Yuddha Kanda
The survivors of Ravana's army fled for their lives behind the high
golden wall of Lanka and hid there. Vanaras rent the sky with their
shouts of joy and hurrahing, 4 'Victory to Rama!" Gods and
Gandharvas sang Rama's praise. They showered flowers on Rama
and played soft sweet music.
When the heat and jubliation of victory had somewhat subsided,
and Vibhishana saw his heroic brother's dead body lying on dust
mutilated, he burst forth in lamentations. He recalled his virtues,
victories, wisdom and learning. Seeing Vibhishana thus lamenting,
Rama consoed him, "Ravana was a great warrior, he fell fighting
and thus he attained Heaven. It required no lamentation. Perform
his funeral rites.
Afterwards came Mandodari surrounded by lesser queens. Being
overwhelmed with grief they all fell upon him like uprooted
creepers. Their piteous and loud lamentations filled everybody's
hear with sorrow.
After Ravana's funeral, Vibhishana was duly crowned by
Lakshmana and others with Rama's permission. This new king of
Lanka then came to Rama and bowed low before him in deep
reverence.
The Fire Ordeal
Being ordered by Rama, Hanuman, after seeking Vibhishana's
permission, flew to Ashoka Grove to see Sita. There sat Sita alone
under the golden Sinsipa tree. Greeting Sita with joined hands
above his head, Hanuman said, "O worshipful mother! Rama is
anxious to know about your well-being. Rama and Lakshmana are
well. Ravana has been slain by Rama with the help of Vanaras and
their king Sugriva. By your grace we have won." But Sita
remained silent lost in thoughts and Hanuman said, "Why? Why
do you not speak to your son?"
"The joy of Rama's victory has made me mute. I do not find words
to express myself. My son, how indebted I am to you! I have
nothing worthwhile to reward you suitably. My child, your prowess
is matchless. None in the world can equal you ever!
Oopyn

Yuddha Kanda
Go, tell Rama, my husband, I want to see him at the earliest."
hanuman bowed low and said with his voice wet with tears, 4 4 Yes
mother, I shall convey your message. Rama is waiting my return."
Then he leapt in the air and flew back fast like a dart to his master
Rama.
Rama sent Vibhishana, the new king of Lanka, to fetch Sita.
Thereupon Vibhishana went to Ashoka Grove preceded by his wife
and said with joined palms, "0 worshipful lady! Rama has sent me
to fetch you. Your husband wants to see you. Get upon the car
having decorated your person with new apparel, jewel and
ornaments.**
Sita immediately got up and with the help of Rakshashis took bam,
changed her clothes, wore jewels and ornaments and proceeded in a
palanquin.
Sita arrived but Rama did not take notice and remained adsorbed in
his thoughts. Vibhishana then approached Rama and announced
Sita's arrival. Rama startled and woke up form his contemplation.
His heart was overwhelmed with past memories, grief, anguish and
rapture. Sita's palanquin advanced towards Rama through the vast
concourse of Vanaras and bears, and monkey-chiefs pushed them
aside to clear a way. It created a commotion and confusion and a
great noise arose. It aroused Rama's anger and he exclaimed,
"Why do you disturb and put to inconvenience the Vanaras for a
woman? There is nothing wrong in Vanaras seeing her in my
presence.** These words of Rama pained the Vanara chiefs and
Vibhishana and they grew apprehensive of something ominous.
Sita got down from her palanquin and came towards Rama shrunk
and hiding herself in shame. Sita stood in full view of a vast
concourse of public resigned to her fate.
Rama then said, 440 lady! I have avenged upon Ravana and
fulfilled my promise. I have freed you and my efforts have been
crowned with success. Know it that all my effort has been to
maintain the honour of my great Solar Race, and not for any
personal satisfaction. Now, it is not our family tradition to take a
woman back as a wife who has lived all alone in another's house.
Copyrighted material

Yuddha Kanda
You cannot live with me and hence you are free to choose any of
these heroes. My object of freeing you has been fully achieved.* *
These words of accusation before the vast public stuned Sita with
grief. She felt the utter futility of her existence and wanted to wipe
it out. At these unheard of allegations, she broke down and wept
bitter hot tears. Then in sobs she addressed Rama, "Why do you
speak like an uncultured low man? Why do you accuse me like
this? I am not what you think me to be. How am I to blame if
Ravana abducted me or touched me while I was unconscious? Your
anger has overcome your discrimination. I am Janaki, the daughter
of Janaka, a great seer and king. The earth is my mother. You have
failed to understand me and my nature. Since it is so, only one
course is left to me." With these words, she again broke into a
flood of tears and then turning to Lakshmana said, "Lakshmana!
Prepare my funeral pyre. I have been falely accused and renounced
by Rama in public. Now, I shall put an end to my life.
Lakshmana agitated and enraged but helpless looked at Rama,
expecting that Rama would say *No' to it but Rama did not relent.
Lakshmana garnered faggots and made a big fire. Sita with her eyes
bent wheeled round her hushand, prostrated before the fire and
said, "O god of fire, you are witness to my purity. If I am chaste lei
Agni protect me.'* With these words, she fearlessly entered the
leaping flames. The women raised a piteous cry. Vanaras, bears
and others were stunned. And from the heart of the flames rose
Yama, Brahma, Mahadeva, Agni and other gods and testified to
Ska's purity and devotion to Rama. Agni, me great fire-god
appeared carrying Janaki on his lap and presented her to Rama
saying, "Sita is pure and chaste. 1 dwell within ever life. I am the
witness every present and in everything. Sita is innocent beyond
any reproach. Take back your wife, Narayana."
With these words, the fire-god placed Sita's hand in Rama's and
Rama pleased said, "O Agni! Purification was a must for public
good. I know she is pure and chaste. She was untouchable to
Ravana like a pure flame. She is inseparable from me as light is
from the sun." If pleased all the gods. Vanaras. bears and
Rakshashas. Night was about to set in and the gods disappeared in
Copyrighted material

Yuddha Kanda
mil
the thin air. Rama ordered everybody to retire for rest and then he
himself repaired to the cottage with Sita. The cottage was built by
Lakshmana specially for their rest.
Return to Ayodhya
On the following morning, Rama got up from his bed of leaves and
grass in a very happy frame of mind. Rama with Sita and
Lakshmana and others ascended that wonderful and grand aerial
chariot Pushpak. Pushpak could carry any number of persons any
where they wished. Rama rode with Janaki, Vibhishana, his four
ministers and a horde of Vanaras bears.
As they flew to Ayodhya, Rama pointing out below said to Sita,
"Look there my love, Lanka perched on Trikuta, which looks like
Kailas mountain. Look! that is the field where we fought and won
you back. See, there appears Kishkindha, the beautiful city of
Sugriva. There Vali was slain by me." At Kishkindha the Vimana
slopped at Sita's wish, for she wanted to take Tara and Sugriva's
consort and other Vanara women with her to Ayodhya.
As the Vimana approached Rishyamooka mountain, Rama pointed
out to Sita, "Look, there is lovely lake Pampa. Here I met
Hanuman and Sugriva. See there I wept in your separation while
searching you. See there still stands the beautiful cottage built by
Lakshmana. There flows the Godavari. Now we are over the
Vindhya Ranges and Agastya's hermitage. There is Chitrakuta.
There flows the Yamuna." The Vimana landed at the confluence of
the white Ganga and the dark Yamuna, where Rishi Bhardwaja
dwelt. Rama met the rishi and enquired about Bharata and other's
well-being in Ayodhya. Bhardwaja returned, "Rama, I know all
you have gone through. I know it through my yogic powers.
Bharata and everybody is fine there in Ayodhya but send the
message of your coming to Bharata."
Rama sent Hanuman to Ayodhya with the good news of his
victorious return. He said, "Hanuman, go immediately to Bharata
and tell him everything in detail. Ascertain his state of mind from
his talk and gestures. If you find Bharata wanting to keep Ayodhya
as his own, let him have it."
Copyrighted material

Yuddha Kanda
Hanuman flew to Nan dig ram and saw Bharata sitting in an
ascetic's garb beside the throne whereupon Rama's sandals were
placed. Shatrughna sat nearby on a mat. Hanuman got down from
the skyand saluted first to Rama's sandals and then Bharata.
Bharata was exceedingly glad to receive Hanuman and to know
about Rama's safe return. People caome in twos and threes and
surrounded Hanuman. Hanuman was given a nice treat. Royal
food, fruits and nuts were offered, and then Bharata requested
Hanuman to narrate in detail what had happened during the long
years of absence to Rama, Sita and Lakshmana. Beside Bharata sat
Shatrughna in a circle and then the ancient charioteer Sumantra and
others, devouring every word that dropped from Hanuman's
mourn, and they all felt exceedigly pleased and satisfied.
Word was sent to Ayodhya and the city awoke to a new life full of
gay abundance to receive her master Rama back home. Sweet
music was being played, people in their best apparels thronged the
city gates, bards recited Rama's praise and Brahmins chanted
Vedic hymns. The streets and markets were cleaned and sprinkled
with scented water, fried paddy and flowers were strewn. Ayodhya,
once agin, after fourteen dreary summers and winters, become the
city of dreams. Banners and flags of coloured silk streamed high in
the sky.
Pious Bharata, Shatrughna and Hanuman, followed by the
Kausalya, Kaikeyi and Sumitra in chariots, went outside the city.
Bharata was on foot carrying Rama's sandals on his head, beneath
a white umbrella of fine silk. Out through the battlemented gates,
horses, elephants and chariots and vast concourse of humanity
shouting with joy began to converge outside the city beyond
Nandigram. All the quarters resounded with rattling of elephants,
rumbling of chariots and the shrill sound of trumpets and conches.
Then in distance on the horizon above tall trees appeared the
Pushpak Vimana, resplendent like the full moon, and men a joyous
tumult rose rending the sky, 4 'Look, look, there is Rama and Sita
and Lakshmana." People got down from their mounts and looked
at Rama with a sense of great satisfaction and delight. Bharata,
beside himself with joy, prostrated before, Rama and then,
Copyrighted material

Yuddha Kanda
kneeling, slipped the sandals on Rama's feet. Rama embraced
Bharata and Shatrughna with joy. Then Bharata welcomed Sita,
bowing low with joined palms and embraced Lakshmana, Sugriva,
Vibhishana, Jambuvana, Angada and others. Talking to Sugriva,
Bharata said, "0 dearest friend! We were four brothers but we are
now five and you are one of us/* Addressing Vibhishana he said,
"How nice of you! You helped Rama in achieving his mission/'
Rama then met Kausalya and Kaikeyi and Sumitra. Rama men
worshipped the feet of Rishi Vasistha and enquired about his
welfare. Being directed by Rama, the Pushpak Vimana proceeded
in the north towards Alka where Kubera dwelt.
It was a happy reunion. At last die four brothers were walking
together through the markets and streets of Ayodhya after fourteen
years of exile. After fourteen years the coronation festivities again
commenced at full pace. After fourteen years, the first festival of
Ayodhya thus began, the best people had ever seen and enjoyed.
People from the country-side poured into the city to enjoy the
festivity to their hearts content. They danced, sang, whistled tunes
and feasted.
The Coronation
With Rama's happy return to Ayodhya, the time of trial, and
tribulations had come to an end. The night faded into a bright
morning, and Rama emerged from his palace wearing rich and
beautiful apparel, garlands and ornaments. Shatrughna himself had
dressed Rama with loving care. Sita was adorned with heavenly
appared, rich jewels and ornaments by the three queens for the
occasion.
Then Rama drove through die streets and markets of Ayodhya.
Bharata sat on die drive s box, Shatrughna held the royal umbrella
over Rama's head. Lakshmana and Vibhishana stood on either side
of Rama fanning him with snowwhite chowries, Sugriva and other
Vanaras in human form followed Rama on elephants and horses.
The public greeted Rama with folded hands and prayed for his
victory, and Rama responded with his winning smile or a kind
word. A tumultuous noise accompanied the procession all the way,
Copyrighted material

Yuddha Kanda
people shouting, "Glory to Rama!" The gods and Gandharvas in
their joy showered flowers and played sweet music.
In the meantime, all the articles required for the coronation
ceremony were obtained. The water of the our seas and the rivers
required for the investiture was collected in jewelled golden jars.
Rishi Vasistha and other Brahmins made Rama and Sita sit upon a
jewelled throne. Then they anointed Rama with the sacred water of
the rivers, seas and other auspicious liquids. Vasistha put on
Rama's head the resplendent crown, with which Rama's illustrious
predecessor had been crowned earlier in succession. The
magnificence of the ceremony and the delight the people beggar
description.
Rama gave to the Brahmins millions of cows with their horns
plated with gold and silver and also rich apparels and costly
ornaments. Rama offered a jewelled necklace to Sugriva. To Janaki
Rama offered a beautiful pearl necklace. As soon as Rama placed it
round Sita's neck, Sita looked at Rama and took it out and with
Rama's approval gave it to Hanuman. Hanuman knelt before Sita
and she put it around his neck with a smile. It was in recognition to
Hanuman' s matchless prowess, intelligence, high sense of service
and devotion. Hanuman with this ornament looked like a hill
encircled by white fluffy clouds. Rama called for more jewels,
apparels of honour and rich ornaments and offered mem to Vanara
chiefs, Jambuvana and Vibhishana. Gratified, they all returned to
their respecitve places taking leave of Rama.
Rama ruled for a very long period and performed many sacrifices,
several times. Under Rama's auspices all the world was full of joy.
People enjoyed perfect happiness, without any fear, sorrow and
disease. In his realm, no woman became a widow nor the aged had
to make funeral for the young. People enjoyed a long, prosperous,
healthy and pious life. No one told a lie or even dreamt of a sin.
There was sufficient rain and the land rich and ferule.
Copyrighted material

Sunil Sehgal is a seasoned researcher
in Hinduism. He did his M.A. in History. He
became Sadhu for a decade and visited many
temples, and holy places throughout India
and during mis period he compiled this
encyclopaedia. At present he is living in
Kangra and serving the poor.
Jacket Design — Tarun Raw at
Copyrighted material

s
arup ana Jons
1 PUBLISHERS
4740/23.ANSARI ROAD, DARYA GANJ, NEW DELHI - 1 10 002
