READABLE DATASET
================================================================================
Original file: hora_sara_of_prithuyasas_prof_r_santhanam.json
Dataset number: 134 of 455
Format: valid JSON
Structure: Object / structured dataset
Original size: 465,777 bytes
Top-level fields: 11
Title: Hora Sara of Prithuyasas - Prof R Santhanam 
Creator: —
Date: —
Description: <div>HORA SARA - Prithuyasas, translated by R. Santhanam</div><div><br /></div><div>Contents: Foreword by B.V. Raman; A few words beforehand; 1. Divisions of Rasis; 2. Planetary character; 3. Planetary strengths; 4. Conception & birth; 5. Evils at birth; 6. Longevity - special rules; 7. Longevity - again explained; 8. Dasa Phala Nirupana; 9. Effects of Sun's period; 10. Effects of Moon's period; 11. Effects of Mars' period; 12. Effects of Mercury's period; 13. Effects of Jupiter's period; 14. Effects of Venus' period; 15. Effects of Saturn's period; 16. Miscellaneous effects of periods; 17. Effects of Ashtaka Varga; 18. Effects of sub-period; 19. Chandra & Nabhasa yogas; 20. Raja yogas; 21. Planetary effects for bhavas; 22. Livlihood; Effects of two/three planets being together; 24. Horoscopes hindered; 25. Astrology for the fair sex; 26. End of life; 27. To trace lost horoscopes; 28. What the birth asterism means; 29. What the moon sign means; 30. What the navamsa means; 31. Nakshatra Jataka (hints on Udu dasa); 32. Some horoscopic canons.</div><div><br /></div><div>Comment: Prithuyasas was a son of Varahamihira. The book comprises 1209 Sanskrit slokas (included). This might be Santhanam's first published translation. In various places I wished I could read Sanskrit, or that the translation was more complete. Santhanam tends to omit the name of what the sloka is referring to, leaving us to guess. Such as the beginning of chapter 17, on Ashtakavarga. Santhanam gives the values of the dots, but only Sanskrit for what the dots are for. We might presume the first section is Sun, the second for the Moon, etc., but for each, there are eight divisions. For those of you who know Sanskrit, or who are determined.</div><div><br /></div><div>ankurnagpal108@gmail.com</div>

CONTENT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
METADATA AND OTHER FIELDS
  • title: Hora Sara of Prithuyasas - Prof R Santhanam 
  • creator: —
  • date: —
  • description: <div>HORA SARA - Prithuyasas, translated by R. Santhanam</div><div><br /></div><div>Contents: Foreword by B.V. Raman; A few words beforehand; 1. Divisions of Rasis; 2. Planetary character; 3. Planetary strengths; 4. Conception & birth; 5. Evils at birth; 6. Longevity - special rules; 7. Longevity - again explained; 8. Dasa Phala Nirupana; 9. Effects of Sun's period; 10. Effects of Moon's period; 11. Effects of Mars' period; 12. Effects of Mercury's period; 13. Effects of Jupiter's period; 14. Effects of Venus' period; 15. Effects of Saturn's period; 16. Miscellaneous effects of periods; 17. Effects of Ashtaka Varga; 18. Effects of sub-period; 19. Chandra & Nabhasa yogas; 20. Raja yogas; 21. Planetary effects for bhavas; 22. Livlihood; Effects of two/three planets being together; 24. Horoscopes hindered; 25. Astrology for the fair sex; 26. End of life; 27. To trace lost horoscopes; 28. What the birth asterism means; 29. What the moon sign means; 30. What the navamsa means; 31. Nakshatra Jataka (hints on Udu dasa); 32. Some horoscopic canons.</div><div><br /></div><div>Comment: Prithuyasas was a son of Varahamihira. The book comprises 1209 Sanskrit slokas (included). This might be Santhanam's first published translation. In various places I wished I could read Sanskrit, or that the translation was more complete. Santhanam tends to omit the name of what the sloka is referring to, leaving us to guess. Such as the beginning of chapter 17, on Ashtakavarga. Santhanam gives the values of the dots, but only Sanskrit for what the dots are for. We might presume the first section is Sun, the second for the Moon, etc., but for each, there are eight divisions. For those of you who know Sanskrit, or who are determined.</div><div><br /></div><div>ankurnagpal108@gmail.com</div>
  • subject:
    1.
      hora
    2.
      sara
    3.
      sar
    4.
      saar
    5.
      horasara
    6.
      horasaar
    7.
      horasar
    8.
      prithuyasas
    9.
      astrology
    10.
      jyotish
    11.
      kundli
    12.
      ankurnagpal108
    13.
      ankur
    14.
      nagpal
  • identifier: HoraSaraRSanthanamEng
  • source_folder: HoraSaraRSanthanamEng
  • total_pages: 339
  • total_words: 86961
  • text_quality:
    • ocr_word_validity_score: 0.912
    • quality_tier: good
    • note: —

FULL TEXT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
I ! 4ft tMtitwt: I I
HORASARA
ftTraiT:
by
PRITHUYASAS
son of
Varaha Mihlra
Translated in English (with comfnemuryj
ty
It SANTHANAM
^Translator of Nashta Jatakam of Mukunda Daivajna, Saravali
of Kalyana Varma, Garga Hora of Gargacharya and Brihat
Parasara-Hora Sastra of Maharashi Parasara)
RANJAN PUBLICATIONS
16, Ansari Road, Daryaganj,
NEW DELHI - 110002 (INDIA)

FOREWORD
Horasara is a great classic on astrology. The author Prithu
Yasas, as he acknowledges at the end of each chapter of this
book, is no other than the son of the immortal Varahamihira - Sri
Varahamihim Sutha.
The work, perhaps one of the best classics, as the name
implies, gives the essence of Hora or Astrology. In fact Hora is
generally equated with Mihira's Brihat fataka and the implication
is clear that the author gives the essence of Brithat Jataka in his
own inimitable style.
The English translation presented by Mr. R. Santhanam, is
not verbtaim but it conveys the spirit of the original author in
simple and easily understandable English language. I must say
that in this arduous task of translating a technical work from a
highly developed language like Sanskrit into a modem developing language like English Mr. Santhanam has aquitted himself
well.
Clarity and brevity have been well preserved.
This is not just a translation. Copious notes have been given
to elucidate doubtful or difficult stanzas so that the reader can
understand the subject without much difficulty.
The late Mr. V. Subrahmanya Sastri, an esteemed friend of
mine, has no doubt brought out a translation of Horasara as early
as 1949. But the presentation of Mr. Santhanam is more appealing for two reasons \«z, th£ translation is to the point and the
English terms are nearer to the original. For instance the word
Kalala (Ch. 4 St. 14) is translated by Mr. Sastry as foetus, whereas
Mr. Santhanam has used the word embryo which is more appropriate.
The Pancha Mahapurusha yogas have also been explained
elaborately.
Horasara is a classic of importance and more or less a complete text-book in itself meriting a place in all astrological library
ies.
Mr. Santhanam is planning to bring out English translations
of some other ancient classics. I wish him all success and increasing usefulness to the cause of astrology.
Bangalore B.V. RAMAN
20-9-1982 Editor, The Astrological Magazine.

A FEW WORDS BEFOREHAND
The blessings of Lord Ganesa have enabled us to place without any hindrance this monumental classic with my English
translation before the intelligentzia.
The author, Prithuyasas, was bom to the great and illustrious
Varaha Mihira. The astrological world has sufficient
acquiantance of Acharya Varaha Mihira and his yeomen service
in the fields of astrology and astronomy. Prithuyasas who dates
back to approximately 1400 years from now conceived that the
BRIHAT JATAKA, though beautifully compiled with 409 slokas
needed much more addition so that a fuller text was available to
the students and the savants. He grasped the quintessence of the
BRIHAT JATAKA and other works and deviced his own principles galore. He then compiled his present work in an enviably
scientific manner. There are 1209 slokas in the text, which number, it
seems to me, has a great inner meaning. There are 12 Rasis and 9
planets which form the basis of astrology. Without this '12' and without this '9', the light on Human Life is zero. Thus, these 1209 slokas
throw adequate astrological splendour on the life of a native.
Prithuyasas justified his birth of Varaha Mihira's loins and
disproved a witty, notorious and ill-formed adage that a
scholar's son is a stupid. His work, HORASARA, is a brilliant
enlightenment and intelligent development of the ideas of the
famous BRIHAT JATAKA and is considered a constituent of
Pustaka Panchaka in Jyotisha (Big Five), romaining in between
Parasara Hora and Brihat jataka on one side and Saravali and Jataka
Parijata, on the other side, in terms of chronology. Of course
there is no denial of equal supremacy of other famous works.
The Ashtaka Varga chapter in the present work is quite
voluminous and deals with clues to time events and methods to
work out the mechanism fully and ably. Various routes are
shown to us to unfold the secrets of longevity. The nodes have
been elaborately analysed and the use of Navamsa in

fi&RASARA
prognastication is well-taught. Raja Yogas, Nabhasa Yogas, longevity etc. are clearly expounded. The meanings of planetary
conjunctions have been conveyed effectively. Dasa Bhukti effects
are touched inimitably. In short, Prithuyasas has bejewelled the
astrological sky with the Moon ofHorasara ( while Brihat Jataka is akin
to the all-important and the light-imparting Sun).
On my part, I tried to make this English translation as true as
the author's original text. And I have not spared any essay to
give explanatory notes and examples. I have joined relevant
views and aphorisms from a host of other authoritative works.
The author observes that Kali days past should be known to
accurately calculate various aspects of horoscopic requirements
and the knowledge of the Moon's position in transit at the time of
beginning of a dasa is essential to know the otherwise transformed good or bad effects thereof. The reader will find interesting and sumptuous additions made by me in this regard also. I
have further added a comprehensive list of indications each
Bhava holds in it, apart from a much less known, but authentic
technique of Bhava evaluation.
My heart-|felt thanks are due to Dr. B.V. Raman for his kind
and encouraging Foreword for my present work.
Messrs Rahjan Publications deserve a high praise for their
missionary enthusiasm and single-minded dexterity in the fruition of bringing Out this rare and adorable classic, which, it is
hoped, will add mote riches to the extant astrological literature.
In the end, it is ardently believed that the astrological fraternity will kindly receive this work with the same spirit with which
it received our earlier contributions. Howsoever carefully one
attempts to be free from the grip of flaws, inborn ignorance is to
some extent incurable. Possibly I may have unwittingly done
some injustice to my mission which may kindly be forgiven by
the erudite wise. Lapses, if any, may be brought to our notice
which act will be gratefully acknowledged and such lapses will
be rectified in the ensuing edition.
New Delhi,
November 15, 1982
R. SANTHANAM

CONTENTS AT A GLANCE
1. Divisions of Rasis 1
2. Planetary Character 10
3. Planteary Strengths 22
4. Conception and Birth 33
5. Evils at Birth 43
6. Longevity - Special Rules 62
7. Longevity - Again Explained 75
8. Dasa Phala Nirupana 89
9. Effects of Sun's Period 107
10. Effects of Moon's Period 112
11. Effects of Mars’ Period 120
12. Effects of Mercury's Period 126
13. Effects of Jupiter's Period 132
14. Effects of Venus' Period 137
15. Effects of Saturn's Period 142
16. Miscellaneous Effects of Periods 147
17. Effects of Ashtaka Varga 158
18. Effects of Sub-Period 191
19. Chandra and Nabhasa Yogas 208
20. Raja Yogas 223
21. Planetary Effects for Bhavas 233
22. Livelihood 243

H0R4S/1RA Vii
23. Effects of Two/Three Planets Being Together 248
24. Horoscopes Hindered 266
25. Astrology for the Fair Sex 280
26. End of life 290
27. To Trace Lost Horoscopes 301
28. What the Birth Asterism Means 308
29. What the Moon Sign Means 315
30. What the Navamsa Means 320
31. Nakshatra Jataka (Hints on Udu Dasa) 325
32. Some Horoscopic Canons 329

I *|U\V1 RT TO I
Horasara
SftlWC:
CHAPTER 1
i' 3T7am§Tf5T'. ii
*TTFR) t^pft^r: 111 II
There flourishes the divine Sun, the lord of the day, who is
the sole cause and the soul of the Universe, who illumines all the
worlds and who daily brings Creation, Destruction and Protection.
Notes: This praise of the Sun indicates that the author was a
staunch worshipper of the Sun God. That apart, the Sun is the
most important body of the entire solar system.
»lf«MW>-§ Tjsf TTTtfy 1 1 2 II
The time measured from a second (required for winking the
eye once) upto a year and the duration of each Rasi (zodiacal
sign) have already been explained along with astronomical calculations and planetary characteristics.
Notes: A reference to works like Varaha Mihira’s Brihat
Jataka and Panchasiddhantika is made by this sloka.
^WTT^fFJ: Th I
fawifwiwmfa TWrT II 3

HORASAit\
Tn the section of Horoscopy, the various Dasa divisions have
(also) been dealt with. But those with lesser understanding capacity need more scientific explanation as they cannot grasp all
(from Brihat Jataka).
Notes: This implies that the present work has simplified
explanations based on Brihat jataka. Further additions are made
by the author. So an average student can grasp more.
In order that the effects which were declared by the old
masters, who were able to predict the future accurately, are
clarified lucidly, I shall state the gist of the ocean of the Science of
Astrology.
X. -O C
KF<=n TtfcRTHlft 115 II
The names of the twelve Rasis are: Aries, Taurus, Gemini
Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpio, Sagittarius, Capricorn,
Aquarius and Pisces in their order.
undue 4 )! VI^I'IIj 5 ! iHIUT) 41 4) I
TrfhsR' n 7 n
The sign Virgo is described thus: a virgin seated in a boat
with fire and corn in her hands. Libra is represented by a man
holding scales (Balance), while Pisces resembles a pair of fish.
The sign Capricorn is a deer-faced crocodile, while Sagittarius
looks like a man holding a bow and having a hip like that of a
horse. The signs Aries, Taurus, Led, Cancer and Scorpio respectively have the forms of a ram, ox, lion, crab and scorpion, true to
their (Sanskrit) names. Gemini is imagined to be a combination of
a male and a female (a couple) holding a staff and lute respectively.

CHAPTER 1
3tfrt$i<mi<hdUi ^tcTirwn fet?ftT:i
WetWTWg Tt^T: fwt ffr'JHf«'^TP4: 1
M wrofeiTOpmt 11 9 11
UlWt faspngift W*jfWRt trj# Tlf?T: I
WidOw-hOMI: ^RkT®n dftd'h’l fwl^l II 10 II
Scorpio, Pisces, Capricorn and Cancer are watery signs. Libra, Aquarius, Taurus and Virgo are water resorter signs. Remaining signs are land resorters,. Leo's abode is mountain's
caves. The habitations for Aries, Libra, Gemini and Sagittarius
are in their order: plateau, city, village and war-field. The signs
Cancer, Scorpio and Pisces are reptile signs, especially Scorpio,
tire scorpion sign.
WTTWt Wlfe4M^oil:Hmd<£HP J ll: I
TpTOin: Tg: II 11
Quadruped signs are: the second half of Sagittarius, the first
half of Capricorn, the whole portions of Aries, Taurus and 1 r -^
Biped or human signs are: Aquarius, Gemini, Libra, Virgo and
the first 15 degrees of Sagittarius.
eFd W7T few «Mlf-4d! T?(3FIR^PH: I
chid! <JTTcT f?M<i cffw; 1 1 |2 II
The biped signs are strong when they house the Ascendant.
Similarly strong are: the quadruped signs holding the 10th
house, the reptile signs having the 7th house and the watery
signs if resided by the 4th house.
wft wit sF^rrr
wi w MKoiidi 11 13 11
Two and a quarter of stars make one Rasi. Each of the 12
signs is constituted by two and quarter of stars or nine quarters
with Aswini in the start in Aries and Revati at the end in Pisces.
wfeawi: strafe : E^fll
Cs Cx
wtw 5? vwwrwft irfefe 11 14 11

HORASARA
One ghatika each at the junctions of Revati-Aswini, AsleshaMagha and Jyeshta-Moola is called Gandantha. This evil period
rules for four years; some say for six years.
Notes: According to Kasinatha's Lagnachandrika the first
three ghatis of Moola, Magha and Asvvini are called Ganda
Nadika. Similarly the ending five ghatis of each of Jyeshta,
Aslesha and Revati. Donation of gheefilled bronze vessel, black
cow, and gold are suggested to overcome the evil of this
Gandanadika. (See slokas 89-92 of Ch. I of Lagnachandrika).
Saravali simply says that the ending portions of Cancer, Pjsces
and Scorpio are called Gandantha. Also see Phala Deepika Ch. I,
sloka 4, which calls such portion as Bhasandhi. For more information, please see Balabhadra's Hora Ratna, Ch. II. The effects of
Gandantha may be seen in Ch. V. of the present work.
TdrisiiWiqi:
The first Navamasas of the 12 Rasis from Aries onwards are
respectively Aries, Capricorn, Libra and Cancer, repeating again
twice. The rulers of the Navamasas are the same as the Rasi
lords. The dwadasamsas begin from the same Rasi. The lords of
decanates for each Rasi are in their respective order: the lord of
the same sign, the 5th thereof and the 9th lord thereof.
Notes: For detailed calculations of divisions, see my English
translation of Saravali, unique classic of Predictive Astrology.
wrssrrc ^ hri ^ qm: jfftui fsrq^i
felMOdl: II 16 II
The Trimsas degrees allottted to Mars, Saturn, Jupiter, Mercury and Venus are 5, 5, 8, 7 and 5 respectively in odd signs. The
reverse is true in even signs, (i.e. 5, 7, 8, 5 and 5 respectively).
Notes: The division of Trimsamsa will be more useful to
assess the disposition of a female, her luck etc. These have been
elaborately dealt with in Chapter 25.
^H<j t rH4l l iH«h<i: H^ci l
II 17 II

CHAPTER 1
9ft<fc*TT fafosp: ^TT ^Tlf^T: MW I
^er ^t imq) n is u
The signs Aries, Taurus, Sagittarius, Capricorn and Cancer
ascend with hinder part and are known to be strong between Sun
set and Sun rise. The sign Pisces rises with its face in opposite
direction (in both ways) and is strong in twilight and the rest
without Gemini rise with their heads and are strong during day.
All the signs are strong if aspected by their own lords or Mercury
or Jupiter.
Notes: Brihat Jataka says that Cancer is a day sign and
Gemini is a night sign. Also see sloka 14 of Ch. I of Jataka
Parijata, and sloka 13, Ch. 7 of Sanketa Nidhi for details of night
signs and day signs.
Day signs and night signs can be profitably used in lost
horoscopy, as per my English translation of Nasta Jataka.
fosr ^ n 19 11
The 12 signs are classified as male and female one after the
other. These are also known as movable, fixed and dual signs in
their respective order, thus repeated four times from Aries onward.
Notes: The signs Aries, Gemini, Leo, Libra, Sagittarius and
Aquarius are male. The rest are female. Aries, Cancer, Libra and
Capricorn are movable signs. Taurus, Leo, Scorpio and Aquarius
are fixed signs. The rest are dual signs
The sign Aries and its trines are Kshatriyas. Brahmin signs
are Cancer and its trines. Gemini and its trines are Vaisyas.
Taurus and its trines are Sudras.
Notes: The 5th and the 9th form a sign are called its trines.
The Kshatriya signs are: Aries, Leo and Sagittarius. Brahmin
signs are: Cancer, Scorpio and Pisces. Vaisya signs are: Gemini,

HORASAHA
Libra and Aquarius. Sudra signs are: Taurus, Virgo and Capricorn. These divisions can be used profitably in Prasna, also.
'3FPT d't ,J ll[dfc1 II 21 II
Face, neck, arms, heart, stomach, groins, private parts,
thighs, knees shank and feet are respectively assigned to the
twelve signs commencing from Aries.
dHlfeR-d-iRl: sR^T
^PTT^ II 22 II
For a native, tlie twelve limbs mentioned above are to be
counted from Ascendant onwards.
Notes: For Kala Purusha, for example Aries is head, Pisces is
feet etc. Similarly in a natal horoscope, the Ascendant is head, the
12th house is feet etc.
The following 12 colours are assigned to the 12 Rasis in their
order: red, white, green, pink, brown, grey, variegated, black,
golden yellow, variegated and thick brown.
ei9b<H: l
■RTTfbsp^Wtr Thtf: WTCT II 24 II
Pisces and Aries are of short ascension. Crooked are Taurus
and Aquarius. Long ascension signs are Capricorn, Gemini, Cancer and Sagittarius. The rest are of medium length.
Notes: These can be used particularly to assess the form of a
person. If he has Capricorn on the second house, his face will be
long. Suppose Pisces or Aries ascends, the person will be short
statured.
3rr#rrfi n 25 n
The following are 12 different names given to the 12 Rasis

CHAPTER 1
commencing from Aries: Kriya, Tavuru, Jituma, Kulira, Leya,
Pathona, Juka, Kaurpi, Taukshika, Akokera, Hridroga and
Cheththa.
3#RTin^roM#Tfrffin ^ n 26 n
Scholars have given various names to Aries etc. Among
them, "Ali" indicates Scorpio while "Vanagiri" Leo.
y Pwd i ^ TTTft ^3:1
ifkTfaj #PTT: II 27 II
The twelve Bhavas from the Lagna are respectively called as:
Tanu, Artha, Sahaja, Bandhava, Putra, Ari, Kalatra, Nidhana,
Dharma, Kriya, Aya, and Vigama.
Notes: The meanings of the 12 synonyms given above are:
body wealth, co-born, relatives, children, enemies, wife, death,
righteousness or good work (one of the four ends of human
existence), action, income and loss. Vigama apart from meaning
loss, also means death or departure. The 12th bein'- the terminal
house of the horoscope is related to one's departure from the
world.
r THRATTRia ftfaurw nTR: n 28 n
Kendra, Panaphara and Apoklima divide the 12 houses in
three groups. Kendras are the 1st, the 4th and the 10th houses.
The 2nd, 5th, ‘8th and the 11th are called Panapharas. The
Apoklimas are the 3rd, the 6th, the 9th and the 12th houses.
Notes: Panapharas are the next houses to Kendras while
Apoklimas are the next ones to Panapharas.
^ftT 3ml | W:l
WHTW ^ 1 1 29 II
Kantaka and Chatushtaya are the other names given to
Kendras (angles) while Charama means Apoklima. Madhya
Kendra is Panaphara.

HORASARA
3it*)dlft 1 1 30
The 4th and the 8th houses are known as Chaturasra. The 6th
and the 11th houses are otherwise called Shatkona. The 3rd, the
6th, the 10th, the 11th houses are known as Upachayas.
wfrrwrawf gq qqrppq farwv ^31
u 31 li
Alternative names given to the 7th house are: Jamitra, Asta
Bhavana, Dyuna, Kama and Chitha. The 3rd house is called
Duschikya, Sahaja and Vikrama.
aiiWHMi wi ^ ^ -£npf
uei "3 "3 Hiaiei 3Tft a 1 1 32 II
Aspada (place), Ajna (command). Karma (livelihood),
Meshurana and Kha-madhya (zenith point of the firmament) are
all identical with the 10th house. The 4th house is called Hibuka,
Sukha (happiness), Vesma (residence), Pathala (underworld),
Vari (water) and Bandhu (relatives).
-J J
T^; qi ll 33 II
O
Trikona or trine notes the 5th and the 9th houses, while
Tritrikona (trine of the trine) indicates the 9th only. The other
names given to the 9th house are: Bhagya, Guru and Subha.
Notes: According to some astrologers, Lagna is also to be
considered as a trine, apart from being an angle. However, Phala
Deepika Ch I, sloka 17 and 18 list 1, 4, 7 and 10 as Kendras, and
specifically mention that the 5th and the 9th are trines. Same
view is found in Brihat Jataka (Ch. I), Saravali (Ch. I, sloka 27),
Lagnachandika (Ch. I, sloka 6), Jataka Tatwa (Ch. I, Rule 27) and
Jataka Parijata (Ch. 1). Thus from these references, only the 5th
and 9th are called trines and the 1st house is not.
ft “6 sTK?PT33 HWeqft oi i9 "3 ft R ten i
M 3T3^STFI ITWIT^ II 34 II

CHAPTER 1
The 12th house is called as Rippha, Lopa (void) and Vyaya
(loss) while the 2nd house is termed as Vitta (wealth), Kutumba
(family) , Vak (speech) and Mangala (auspiciousness).
f^R
ml H9R 1 1 35 II
Randhra Nidhana (death), Vinasa (destruction) and Dukha
(grief) are the other identifications of the 8th house. All the
names--Riksha Bhava, Kshetra, Rasi-mean one and the same
thing.
Notes: 'HI also means Rasi (Brihat | a taka, Ch. I, sloka 6).
Tmtamfwt ^hi?: 1 1 36 1 1
Udaya (rising), Prag lagna (the point rising in the east),
Lekha and Hora are the other names given to the Ascendant. The
various names as enumerated for the Rasis are given by the
ancient preceptors.
?Rl <?1<r1ie).<sl[r1 fftll
II 37 II
Hora means also half of a Rasi. Lalata Rekha. (the line on the
forehead or Brahma Lipi) also indicates Hora. Some astrologers
depend on the Hora for the knowledge of future.
Notes: The word TUtf indicates the present, past and future as
known by Trikala.
jfa h Pm rl iitutrt T ift tftmFTtgmr : tsht: i
Thus ends the First Chapter called Rasi Vibhaga in Horasara
of Prithuyasas, son of Varaha Mihira.

CHAPTER 2
The lords of the 12 Rasis and that of the 12 Navamasa
with the same identity are: Mars, Venus, Mercury, the Moon,
the Sun, Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Saturn and
Jupiter.
sftsfl fsnrit r-WlcM>li^|
II 2 II
The lords of the Horas in odd signs are the Sun and the Moon
while the reverse is true in the case of even Rasis. The lords of the
four directions viz East, South, West and North are Aries, Taurus, Gemini and Cancer respectively, with their trines repeating
again in the same order.
Notes: Each Rasi is divided in two equal parts of 15 degrees.
The first 15 degrees of odd Rasis are ruled by the Sun and called
Solar half. The second 15 degrees are ruled by the Moon and
called Lunar half. In the case of even sign, the arrangement is
reversed.
As regards directions these are dear for Rasis. See planetary
rulerships of the directions, as under:
The Sun East
Saturn West
Venus South East

CHAPTER 2
The Moon
North West
Mars
South
Mercury
North
Rahu
South West
)upiter
North East
(as per Brihat Jataka, Ch. II, sloka 6 and my English
translation of Saravuli.)
These can be profitably used in Horary Astrology also. In
this context, our English Translation of Brihat Parasara Hora
and Prasna Marga, slokas 7 to 9 in Ch. II have the following
account:
Aries-Taurus
East
Cancer-Leo
South
Libra-Scorpio
West
Aquarius-Pisces
North
Gemini
South East
Virgo
S. East
Sagittarius
N. West
Pisces
N. East
The exaltation houses for the (seven) planets from the Sun
onwards are: Aries, Taurus, Capricorn, Virgo, Cancer, Pisces and
Libra. In these houses, the respective planets have the highest
exaltation points at 10th, 3rd, 28th, 15th, 5th, 27th, and the 20th
degrees. The seventh sign from the exaltation sign is tire sign of
fall or depression for the respective planet and similar degree is
the point of deepest fall.

HORASARA
Notes: These can be tabulated thus:
Planet
Deep exaltation
Rasi and degree
Deep fall Rasi
and degree
Aries 10°
Libra 10°
Taurus 3°
Scorpio 3°
Capricorn 28°
Cancer 28°
Virgo 15°
Pisces 15°
Cancer 5°
Capricorn 5°
Pisces 27°
Virgo 27°
Libra 20°
Aries 20°
For Rahu and Ketu, please see notes sloka 8 of this chapter.
ki fifah <j fsitiqn II 5
In Virgo, the portion of 5 degrees following the exaltation
zone (i.e. from 15° T to 20°) is Moolatrikona for Mercury and
from 20 degrees onwards it is to be treated as his Swakshetra.
Thus it has triple role for Mercury.
Notes: For Mercury the sign Virgo is as under:
Upto 15 degrees Exaltation
15° 1' to 20° Moolatrikona
20° 1' to 30° Swakshetra
The first three degrees of Taurus are the Moon’s exaltation
portion, while the rest is her Moolatrikona. For Venus upto 20
degrees in Libra are her Moolatrikona and the rest is her own
house, (i.e. Swakshetra).
fat FT3oHch r w I
eg$r r^Vif-w) ifHrsrw tchfsn n7 ii
The first twenty degrees of Leo is the Sun's Moolatrikona.
The remaining portion is his own house. Saturn has the same
arrangement in the sign Aquarius, as the’ Sun has in Leo.

CHAPTER 2
3^ rnjfir 1 1 8 II
It is Moolatrikona upto twelve degrees in Aries for Mars,
while rest is his Swakshetra. For Jupiter, the first five degrees in
Sagittarius are Moolatrikona and the rest is Swakshetra.
Notes: Readers are referred to Saravali (Ch. 3) for
Moolatrikona, Swakshetra deep exaltation etc.
As Rahu, Ketu have not beep dealt with, I give below some
information in this regard: Vriddha Samhita and Jotishamrita
state that Aquarius and Scorpio are owned by Rahu and Ketu in
their order. Veemesaram, a Tamil work calls Aquarius as Rahu's
own house but nothing is allotted to Ketu, Both are exalted in
Scorpio and are in fall in Taurus as per Jatakalankaram (Tamil)
and Veemesaram. Jatakachintamani agrees with this, only for
Rahu while it mentions that Ketu is exalted in Gemini and is in
fall in Dhanus. Syama Sangraham says that Gemini and Sagittarius are exaltation and Neecha for Rahu and the reverse is true
for Ketu. Sarvartha Chintamani gives Taurus-Scorpio as exaltation and debilitation for Rahu and Scorpio-Taurus as exaltation
and debilitation for Ketu. Bhavartha Ratnakara states that Rahu
is exalted in Taurus and Ketu in Scorpio, and Rahu has Gemini
and Cancer as his Moolatrikonas while Ketu’s Moolatrikonas are
Sagittarius and Capricorn. Also see Uttara Kalamrita, slokas 1920 of Ch. IV, for more information. There are, thus, varied views
in this regard.
iftT: 119 II
3T%T USfilHIMllWd
WlfotfaVT W: II 10 II
Take the Moolatrikona house of a planet. The lords of the
3rd, 6th, 7th, 10th and 11th from that house are inimical to that
planet. This rule does not apply if the said house happens to be
the exaltation house. The rulers of other houses than the ones
mentioned above are friendly. There are three kinds of planetary
relationships, viz. friendly, inimical and neutral.
Notes: For example. Mars has his Moolatrikona in Aries.

HOIUSARA
The 10th from there is his exaltation house. Hence Saturn
is neutral to Mars.
Also see Phala Deepika, Ch. 2, sloka 21.
There is temporary friendship between planets if they are
mutually in 3rd and 11th, or 12th and 2nd or 4th and 10th.
yMKHl WTT SMlf-d'dl: tl 12 II
The eight quarters commencing from the East are serially
lorded by the Sun, Venus, Mars, Rahu, Saturn, the Moon, Mercury and Jupiter. These quarters have strength at all times.
Notes: See note given under sloka 2 of Chapter II for details
of directions with reference to Rasis.
TJI
fewfawl ■t^KHItfcIHHcl: fad u I HI ^ II 14 II
thlNfal MI iiyrnr^JM.tTT'JII: ^:l
The planets cast full aspect on the 7th from their position.
The aspect is 3 /4th on the 4th and the 8th houses. It is only half
on the 5th and the 9th houses. A quarter glance is made on the
3rd and the 10th houses. From Sun onwards, the planets have
rays thus: 20, 8, 10, 10, 12, 14 and 16. The 12 sign possess the same
rays as their lords do.
Notes: Mars has special full aspect on the 4th and 8th Jupiter
can effectively lend full aspect on the 5th and the 9th while
Saturn can fully aspect the 3rd and the 10th houses. These are
additional aspects allotted to these three planets. For more information, refer to Ch. II of Jataka Parijata, and shloka 14 of Ch. II
Brihat Jataka.
ifsppfNT: <pTT:
FT: II 15 II

CHAPTER 2
IB
f^rtr^rr: i
The Sun, Jupiter and Mars are masculine planets while Rahu,
Venus and the Moon belong to female group. Saturn and Mercury are eunuchs.
Notes: Ketu is also a eunuch, as per Phala Deepika, Ch. 2,
sloka 27.
vjtf.ijfc faShi) ^ fa? II 16 ll
4)«i) ‘H-sb-cq'JiifciR'^Rjj: I
TT|r#T%qW: sPCT: Tiql Tfsr: II 17 II
sjmj^TsFT: 4 * 31 : TpFl: ifaj: ?l?ft I
<MRi 4 ^iRcfSFT |hn: 1 1
18 II
if ^4 cnd^uff(h^ ^ n 19 11
?#Rl I
Brahmins are presided by Jupiter and Venus. The royal lot is
ruled by Mars. The Moon is Vaisya. Mercury is of mixed breed.
Saturn is considered to be a Sudra (i.e. the 4th caste) while Rahu
is an outcaste (i.e. the 5th caste). Rahu, Saturn, Ketu, Sim, Mars
and the dark fortnight Moon are malefics. Mercury, Jupiter, Venus and waxing Moon are said to be benefics. Mercury and
Venus have Rajoguna while Jupiter, the Sun and the Moon are
satvic planets. Mars, Saturn and Rahu possess Tamoguna. These
qualities are reflected in their actions. The following humours are
peculiar to the respective planets.
Bile Sun and Mars
Wind Moon and Saturn
Wind, Phlegm Venus and Moon
Mercury has a mixture of the three humours.
ifa: 1 1 20 II
■jolicfcK: tIN) ffcmrcnil ^hTT^ll
R^uff fcra) 11 21 11

HORASARA
The Sun is of dark red colour. The Moon is white. Deep red
is the complexion of Mars while Mercury is of green grass colour.
Jupiter is golden yellowish. Venus is whitish. Saturn's colour is
blue mixed with black.
Mandi, the son of Saturn, has many colours. Rahu's colour is
dark collyrium (blue mix). Although the Rasis have pleasing
colours, these are changed according to the occupants.
ll 23 II
Should a planet be alone in its own Rasi or Navamasa, the
effects revealed are according to its nature. This is true when it is
not aspected by or conjoined with others. If it be in other’s house
or be aspected by or conjoined with others, the results are influenced accordingly.
IRHjjfeleMH: 1 1 24 1 1
The Sim's body is square; his eyes are pink in colour and he
has sparse hair on his body and head. He does not live for a long
time in one place. He is of lazy disposition. His knees are weak.
He has pleasing face and delivers pleasing speech.
Note: He has stout legs (Saravali). Dasadhyayi suggests that
these can be profitably used in regard to diseases in Prasna: The
Sun causes damage to eyes, loss of hair, and thirst, fever etc. by
bilious temperament. See Phala Deepika, Ch. II, sloka 8, for more
information.
^cMlWi^l: y^rldj: II 25 II
The Moon is tall, tender-natured, brilliant in mental disposition, kind, skilled in policy or politics, and has mixed humour of
wind and bile. She wears white robes and ornaments. Her body
resembles a well-drawn circle. (Imagine the full Moon which is a

CHAPTER 2
perfect circle.)
Notes: According to Phala Deepika, she has a mix of both
youth and old age. She is mainly phlegmatic. She does not have
much hair. Vide Saravali, the Moon is fickle-minded, phlegmatic
and rheumatic in constitution.
fJtiktUtflWl fa-ftrUM 1 1 26 II
Mars is unsteady in mind. He is capable of wounding. He
has blood-reddish eyes. He is bilious and depicted with fire and
arms. His voice is rough. His belly is depressed. He is modest.
Notes: Mars is young. He has curly and shining hair. He is
liberal. He rules marrorw or the bones (P.D. Ch. II). According to
Saravali, Mars is short in stature, has green eyes, ever ready for
quarrels. Brihat Jataka has the words “aiey*” for Mars in Ch. II,
s. 9. Dasadhyayi interprets it is " Asubha Drishti" meaning "inauspicious in aspect".
Wot) -q^znOTT: tWuWlf E Z:l
Mercury's eyes are dark. He is well-versed in politics (or in
policy-making), is of medium height, sometimes firm and sometimes unsteady, jolly natured, in touch with all kinds of news,
witty, scholarly and has the composition mixd with the three
humours (i.e. bile, phlegm and wind)
Notes: See Phala Deepika, Ch. II: sloka 11. Mercury rules
skin and is full of veins, arteries and nerves. He has an even
body. According to Dasadhyayi, he is sweet spoken but stammering in speech.
^freri
Jupiter has stout and tall body; his eyes are neither big nor
small, he is intelligent, well-versed in politics or policy making,
has prominent billious composition, is a very eloquent speaker,
wears yellow apparels and jewels and is of noble dispoition.

HORASARA
Notes: Jupiter's voice resembles that of lion. He has broad
green eyes. He is mentally steady. He has a fleshy body,
(Saravali, Ch. 4). According to Dasadhyayi, he is of virtuous
disposition.
T£Rt: Wl: tfpA [^IlcWld: I
FJ-FPig: II 29 II
The body of Venus is very bright. He is fortunate, windy and
bilious in composition, broad-minded, stout bodied, has a tendency to submit to women, has crooked eyes and is of deceiving
nature.
Notes: Venus has a lustrous body. He is intelligent, broad
minded, broad eyed, passionate etc. (Saravali). According to
Phala Deepik, Ch. II, sloka 13, Venus has stout body, broad
eyes, wind and phlegm in costitution. He has achieved seminal
growth.
-Ararat
'<?raTW*: ^ inward: II 30
Saturn has hard nails, teeth and hair. He is deceptive. He has
long hands and feet. His constitution is bilious. He has prominent veins, is indolent and peaceless.
Notes: Saturn is lame, has deeply depresed eyes and is
lazy. He rules muscles. He has an emaciated body. (Phala
Deepika).
For description of planets, also refer to jataka Parijata, Ch. II.
elldl+Rl ‘‘fa:
TTfTR: 3 TI?t: TJ: I
Mars resembles a boy in appearance while Mercury looks
young. The age of Jupiter is 30, that of Venus is 16, that of the Sun
is 50 and that of the Moon is 70. Rahu is 100.
Notes: Similar view is found in sloka 14, Ch. II of Jataka
Parijata and in which it is additionally stated that Ketu is also

CHAPTER 2
100. According to Phala Deepika, Mars is 16 while Mercury is 20.
3m 3'tfrfe‘d) ^ tt^i i
The general rule is that a person acquires the nature and
appearance of the strongest planet at the moment of birth.
Notes: The strongest planet is the one that has the highest
rupas in Shadbala. It should be equally good in the 16 — Varga
Scheme.
Trfen WlR-il 1133 II
Aditya, Arka, Ravi, Bhanu, Bhaskara, Divakara, Marthanda,
Savita, Surya, Teekshnamsu and Ina are the other names denoting the Sun.
Notes: As Divakara, the Sun causes the day. He is
Teekshnamsu as he has hot rays.
See slokas 3 and 4 of Ch. II of Jataka Parijata for various
names given to various planets.
WfT? 1% r-hfll'H: I
Chandra, Sasi, Sasanka, Vidhu, Soma, Nisakara, Seethamsu,
Udunatha and Indu are synonyms of the planet Moon.
Notes: The Moon is Nisakara as she causes the night. She is
Seetamsu as her rays are cool and pleasant. The name Udunatha
is given to the Moon because the Moon married the 27 stars.
The planet Mars is otherwise called Aara, Vakra, Maheeja
Rudhira, Rakta, Angaraka and Krudradrik.
uIh-jiI <^lmoi > Mi I
T?r qqfqr; othr RT: 1 1 36 II

HORASARA
Mercury's other names are: Saumya, Vid, Jna, Budha,
Somaja, Bodhana, Kumara and Vidhusuta.
Notes: Mercury is the Moon’s son and hence known as
Somaja and Vidhusuta.
■sfr^tsffl; dM^fcIW^T I
Jupiter's synonyms are: Jeeva, Angirasa, Suraguru, Mantri /
Vachaspati, Arya, Brihaspati, Suri and Vageesa.
^ ’“rpfw wfe fereror i
ipjfc 1 1 38 II
Venus is called Bhrigu, Bhrigusuta, Asphujit, Sita, Usana,
Daitya Pujya, Kavya and Kavi.
TR: 44'£rl*Tf I
4ft: ^Tct?3Fn¥cf: 1 1 39 II
Kano, Manda, Sani, Krishna, Suryaputra, Yama, Pangu,
Sanaischara, Sauri, Kala and Chhayasuta: these are other names
by which Saturn is called.
WT3 #f<fr$!f*l rf W: I! 40 II
Rahu is indicated as Tamas, Asura, Swarbhanu, Vidhuntuda,
Pata, Sainhikeya, Bhujanga and Ahi.
RfKsTl mtf I
WTF^nhf TT?FTf ^ II 41 II
Ketu is called Sikhi, Dhvaja, Dhuma, Mrityuputra and
Anala. These different names (as in the above slokas) have been
given to various planets by the scholars of olden days.
Notes: Balbhadra in his Hora Ratna, quotes Suka Jataka in
this context, giving various names BIB) to planets as under:
The Sun-Surya, Bhanu, Aditya, Ravi, Prabhakara, Dinesa
(lord of the day), Tamohanata (destroyer of darkness), Dinakarta

CHAPTER 2
(cause of the day) and Dinamani.
The Moon— Seetagu, Chandrama, Soma, Rajanipathi,
Seetarasrm, Ratrisa, Sasi and Kumudinipathi.
Mars—Aara, Vakra, Mahisunu, Rudhira, Rakta, Angaraka,
Kruradhrik (inauspicious in aspect), and Krurakrit (evil doer).
Mercury— Saumya, Jna, Budha, Somaja (son of the Moon),
Bodhana, Kumara and Prabhasuta.
Jupiter-Guru, Jiva, Devamantri, Devapurohita, Devejya,
Angirasunu and Brihaspati.
Venus-Sukra, Bhrigu, Bhrigusuta, Asphujit, Sita, Usana,
Daityapujya, Kaama and Kavi.
Saturn— Kana, Manda, Sani, Krishna, Suryaputra, Yama,
Pangu, Sanaischara, Sauri and Chhayasuta.
Rahu-Tama, Asura, Agu, Svarbhanu, Vidhuntuda, Ghata,
Sainhikeya, Bhujanga and Bhujaga.
Ketu-Similar names as given by Prithuyasas. Dhuma of
course reads as Dhumra and Anala in Balabhadra's text.
Please also see Sarvartha Chintamani (Ch. I) and Jataka
Parijata (Ch. II) for more such infomation in this regard.
This information is supposed to help one to easily interpret
Sanskrit names given to different planets in different contexts by
different texts.
feHTO: I
Thus ends the 2nd Chapter entitled Grahalakshanas
Horasara of Prithuyasas, son of Varaha Mihira.
in

CHAPTER 3
3<nqUe4(l«4:
« aTTfe-rrnr : ii
ttw) ^Mwmstroi
*srf^ •qwT^i: mi ii
iifrwHisI iii-jcMciH ■qsnfticRg trrara^ ; i
wri «m#H: TRzrmf towi^ ^ 112 11
The Sun has strength in his Uttarayana (northerly) course,
when he occupies his own Rasi, exaltation Rasi, Navamsa,
decanate, or Hora and on Sunday. In a friendly sign, he has
medium strength . He is strong in the initial part of a Rasi; weak
in the end and moderately strong in the middle. He is devoid of
strength during twilights and eclipses.
Notes: The Shadbala of a planet should essentially be encouraging in order that good results are achieved.
The Sun is strong in his exaltation Rasi, Leo, own decanate,
solar Hora, on Sunday, while in northern declination, while entering in a sign, in the middle portion of the day, friendly Amsas
and the 10th from Lagna. (Jataka Parijata Ch. II.)
tfrc ^ra)
Tnfl TS# 3JtW: II 3 II
Israel: rfag: feel y$l
II 4 II
tHTcl: TdW TIFFTT Tl
tfrurp) ^| Sf\ T# 115 II
W4'rl rjyf: PNl-H TFfa 1 1 6 II

CHAPTER 3
The Moon has strength in Taurus and when in her southerly
course. She is strong in her Rasi, Hora, during night, in own
Navamsa, on Monday and in her own deeanate. She is said to
possess medium strength in the first ten days of the brigh half,
exceedingly strong during the next ten days and weak during the
remaining ten days. Should the Moon be in the north of the
planets, in clockwise motion around the planets, in the company
of or in aspect to benefics, she gets strength. She is weak in the
initial portion of a Rasi, has medium strength in the middle
portion and strong in the last part. The Full Moon is strong in all
signs.
Notes: See Jataka Parijata, Ch. II. The Moon is strong
in Cancer and Taurus, on Monday, in her own deeanate,
and Navamsa, at the end of a Rasi, when aspected by benefics,
in the 4th house in the case of a night birth, and in her
southerly course. The Full Moon, if not occupying any kind
of Sandhis (i.e. Rasi Sandhi, Nakshatra Sandhi, Lagna Sandhi
etc.), be strong and aspected by other planets, makes the native a
king.
iiiuiiiA -a ^ n 7 1 1
gw-feit <T 1 1 8 1 1
slHeWI Wfrqrfsja 1 ! I
TORTOTt r^dd^d II 9 II
Mars is strong when he wins a planetary war, while in retrograde motion, when brilliant {i.e. not combust), when in Capricorn, Aquarius, Pisces, in his southerly course, during night, in
his own Amsa, Rasi, on Tuesday, and in the deeanate ruled by
him. He has full strength when on the meridian or the 10th
house. He is strong in the beginning of a Rasi, weak in the middle
portion and moderately strong at the end.
Notes: Mars is strong on Tuesday, in his own Amsa,
deeanate Pisces, Scorpio, Aquarius, Capricorn and Aries, during
nights, in the South (i.e. the 10th house), in his retrograde motion.

MORASARA
in the initial portion of a sign and in Cancer. (See Jataka Parijata.
Ch. II)
Mars is strong even in his enemy's house. See "Bhaumarige
Va Bali" (Uttar Kalamrita).
TfaWRTW: felf
llfeiytsl t
wit «i#it ^ ^rg^i: n n u
Mercury regains strength as soon as he is past the combustion belt. He is strong in Dhanus, Virgo and Gemini as Rasi or
Navamsa and by day and night. He is also strong in his retrograde motion except when eclipsed by the Sun. Mercury is moderately good, excceedingly strong and weak respectively in the
first, second and third portions of a sign. He is strong in his own
decanate and Gemini.
Notes: Jatak Parijata in its Chapter II says the following in
this respect: Mercury is strong in Virgo, Gemini, on Wednesday,
in Sagittarius but not joining the Sun; in day and night, in his
own Vargas and in the Lagna coinciding with the middle of a
sign.
■jfk: ^ IWRiqj
wrft wft «lcM^ II 12 II
lifting ^rm: i
TWRt '•-ldffH‘1 II 13 II
Jupiter is exceedingly strong in Sagittarius, Pisces, Cancer,
Scorpio and during the time preceding mid day, in his northerly
course, in his own decanate, amsa and when he succeeds in
planetary battle. He has medium strength in the initial part of a
sign, quite strong in the middle and weak at the end. He is
considered to be strong in retrograde motion in all signs except
in the sign Capricorn where he is in fall.
Notes: Jupiter is strong in Pisces, Scorpio, Sagittarius, Cancer, own vargas, mid-day, his northerly declination, middle of a
Rasi, and Aquarius and he is strong even in his fall. He gives

CHAPTER 3
2B
plenty of money if in the ascendant or in the 10th house. (Jatak
Parijata, Ch. II).
Jupiter in Aquarius gives the same results as in Cancer
(Brihat Jataka, Ch. XVII, sloka 13,) and hence is considered
equally strong in Aquarius as in Cancer.
While some say that a debilitated planet in retrograde motion is equal to its being in exaltation, our author does not subscribe to such view as is evident from this sloka.
ftwwswtfl cra?t '*TRT: I
faf-nfa to: i
'ERWTOTTel II 15 II
Venus has strength if he occupies the 3rd, the 6th or the 12th
form the Ascendant. He is also strong when in retrograde motion, when ahead of the Sun, during the portion of the day that
follows mid-day, when in exaltation sign and in the north of
planets. Venus has no strength in the initial portion of a sign but
has it in the middle while at the end of a sign he is only of
medium strength. He is also strong in the company of the Moon
or when victorious in planetary war.
Notes: Venus is strong in his exaltation Rasi, his own vargas,
on Friday, in the middle of a Rasi, in the 6th, 12th, 3rd, the 4th, in
the last third part of day time, when victorious in war, while in
conjunction with the Moon, in retrograde motion and while
ahead of the Sim. (jataka Parijata Ch. II).
f=rfyi I
fMfa: It 16 II
WTOtl
The planet Saturn is strong during the dark fortnight, and
also from Sun-set to Sun-rise. He has strength when in retrograde motion, also when in Capricorn, Aquarius, Libra and in
southerly course. Similar is the case with Saturn in the rising

HORASARA
sign, in his slow movement, and when successful in planetary
war. He is weak in the initial portion of a Rasi, moderately strong
in the middle portion and strong at the end. But, some say he is
strong in all places.
Notes: According to Jataka Parijata Ch. II, Saturn is strong in
Libra, his own Rasi, in the 7th house, in southerly course, in own
decanate, on Saturday, in the end of a Rasi, in planetary war, in
dark half and in retrograde motion.
TT§: I
dci ci i "1 ii 18 ii
Rahu is said to be strong when posited in Aries, Taurus,
Cancer, Scorpio or Aquarius, or in the company of the Sim or the
Moon, during Parivesha and at the end of a Rasi i.e. when he
starts his journey in a sign).
Notes: Rahu is strong in Aries, Virgo, Taurus, Scorpio and
Aquarius. He is also strong in the 10th house. (Jataka Parijata
Ch. II).
ITS?) *3 II 19 II
Ketu has strength in the second portion of Sagittarius. He is
also strong in Pisces, Virgo and Taurus and in night or when a
rainbow or meteor is noticed.
Notes: Ketu is strong in Virgo, Pisces, and Taurus and Sagittarius and when a rainbow or a meteor is noticed (Jatak Parijata).
eiMil^t «wl
Wfr: II 20 II
The signs Aries, Leo, Sagittarius and Pisces give strength to
the Sun if they happen to rise or be on the meridian simultaneously. In other houses, he is weak.
Notes: Should the Sun be in the said houses which happen to
be Lagna or the 10th, he is strong. In other houses as Lagna or the
10th, he is not so good.

Ci/fPjEKJ
Slokas 20 to 29 deal with the strength of the planets in the
various Rasis, which should simultaneously be that particular
Bhava in the chart.
rfft (PlTdl^ tslTfafwg II 21 II
qicirdoiM i
22 II
The Moon is strong if she is in Gemini, Virgo or Sagittarius
coinciding with ascendant. She is strong in the 7th, if it is Pisces,
or the first half of Sagittarius. If she is in Taurus or in the latter
half of Sagittarius as the 7th house or the 10th house as the case
may be, she is strong. Similarly when in Cancer or in Gemini as
the 4th house, she has strength.
Notes: For Virgo Lagna, the Moon in the 7th in Pisces, for
Scorpio Lagna in Taurus in the 7th, for Gemini Lagna, in the 7th
in the first half of Sagittarius, for Pisces in the 4th in Cancer, is
said to possess strength.
HIM 1 *! i
FrftWH PFrfwt II 23 II
ddlf-dd: Fdfa+lu't II 24 II
Mars is strong in Lagna indentical with Aquarius; or in the
7th house if it be Cancer or Scorpio. He is strong in the 10th
house in the first half of Capricorn or in Gemini and in the 4th
house if in the second half of Sagittarius. He is similarly strong
when his brightness is not obscured or when he is in the 9th in his
own/mulatrikona house.
Notes: Mars, though in fall in Cancer, is good in the 7th in the
case of Capricorn natives. Should he in such a case join Saturn, he
blesses the subject with a beautiful and chaste wife. Further, the
4th and the 7th house placement of Mars as per the above sloka
shall not give rise to Kuja dosha. For Leo and Pisces Lagnas the
planet is good in the 9th and will not cause bad effects for the
father of the native.

HORASARA
M J | fa* 3 ft sj3T<?FR«t: Wflt iM: I
Mercury is strong in Ascendant if in Capricorn, Leo or Cancer. He is also strong in his own divisions. Should Sagittarius
hold Mercury in the 4th house, then too he is strong. Similarly in
Taurus as the 7th or in Pisces as the 10th house.
Notes: Should Makara be the Lagna and be occupied by
Mercury, his blemish of 6th lordship is mitigated, and similarly
the 12th lordship if in Cancer Lagna. For Gemini ascendant,
though he will be in fall in the 10th, he will prove auspicious.
Jupiter has strength in Leo, Taurus, Aries, Sagittarius, Scorpio and Pisces if one of these happens to be ascendant, or the 4th
or the 10th houses of the horoscope. Otherwise he is weak.
Notes: Jupiter rules the 8th for Taurus Lagna. Hence, he is
adverse for longevity if he is in Taurus when it rises in the
horoscope. In such circumstances Saturn should be strong lest
the native is short lived. Or otherwise, Venus should be stronger
than Jupiter.
Dr. B.V. Raman, a powerful astrologer has Jupiter in 10th in
Scorpio.
sjTifa:
Venus possesses strength in Leo, Aries, Aquarius and Scorpio if these happen to be Lagna; similarly in the 7th house if at the
end of Sagittarius or in (the whole of) Scorpio. He is strong in the
first half of Sagittarius in the 10th house. The 10th house position
in Pisces, Leo or Scorpio is also good. He is strong also in the 4th
in the second half of Capricorn. He is strong if he wins in a
planetary war.

CHAPTER 3
Notes: Venus in Lagna in his own sign is exceedingly good.
Additionally if he joins exalted Saturn, i.e. in Libra, it is greatly
potential. See the horoscope of King George VI whose Venus
dasa was momentous in his life, vide Dr. B.V. Raman's Notable
Horoscopes. Details of birth: 14th December, 1895 at 0305 hours,
Planetary positions: Jupiter in Cancer, Ketu in Leo, Lagna,
Venus and Saturn in Libra, the Moon, the Sun, Mercury and
Mars in Scorpio, and Rahu in Aquarius. The native passed away
in the early morning of 6th February, 1952.
Akbar, a great Moghul emperor too had his Venus and Saturn in Libra Lagna.
Saturn is strong in Aquarius or Libra if they happen to rise or
be the 4th house. Similarly he is strong in the 10th in Leo or in the
7th house in a Rasi that does not rise with hind part.
Notes: The rising of Rasis have already been explained in the
opening chapter. Now, I give below the details of Grahodaya or
planetary risings:
(1) The Sun, Rahu, Mars and Saturn rise with hind part and
hence called Prishtodaya Grahas.
(2) The Moon, Venus and Mercury rise with their heads and
hence called Sirshodaya Grahas.
(3) Jupiter rises in both ways and hence Ubhayodaya Graha.
The dasa of a planet in that particular class of Rasi will be
beneficial. Suppose a planet that rises with its head is in a
Sirshodaya Rasi, then the dasa concerned will be auspicious.
Saturn is strong if he be in Libra Lagna; see notes under
previous sloka.
iJJpRFTOrsreFBl II 30 II

wrofacir: ^ft
tKI WT: II 31 II
HORASARA
Mercury and Jupiter in the Ascendant, the Moon and
Venus in the 4th, the Sun and Mars in the 10th and Saturn in
the 7th enjoy digbala or directional strength. According to
Yavanas, all the planets are devoid of strength in Apoklima
houses (3rd, 6th, 9th and 12th); have medium strength in
Panaphara (2nd, 5th, 8th and 11th) and are strong in angles (1st,
4th 7th and 10th).
Notes: Directional strength makes a planet confer good
results during its Dasa Bhuktis. In the opposite house with
reference to such Rasis, the planet has no digbala. For example, the Sun has digbala is nil. For full details on such calculations, please see Dr. B.V. Raman's Graha and Bhava Balas or
Sripathi Paddhati, English translation by Shri V.S. Sastry.
32 II
fgrpt: I
^ fgjpi: (HtPidiM 1 1 33 II
The strength of Mars is double of Saturn's. Mercury is
four times strongr than Mars. Jupiter is eight times stronger
than Mercury. Venus has eight times more strength than that
of Jupiter. The Moon is sixteen times stronger than Venus,
the Sun twice of the Moon and Rahu's strength is twice of
the Sun's and hence Rahu is the strongest of the planets.
tlTd-rdl: II 34 II
Should the Sun and the Moon be exceedingly strong, all
other planets, though weak, will yield good effects in their periods.
Notes: The strength of the Sun is the most important factor
to lend strength to the entire chart. The Sun singly in deep

CHAPTER 3
fall, even though other planets may be strong, can reduce the
vitality of chart. Similarly the Moon's potentiality is all-essential,
as it has a notable bearing on the mind of the person. Should the
Moon be in deep fall, all other yogas become ineffective (see
Jataka Tatwa, Ch. Ill, Section IV). And of course, Lagna’s
strength forms foundational support. Thus, these are tripod of
the horoscope.
cmnu:
II 35 II
Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Sun, Venus, Mercury and the Moon:
This is the order of the planets starting with the distant-most
one as above (with reference to the earth). Rahu is at the topmost of earth's orbit. Planets are strong (i.e. more influencing
in nature) if they are on the lower position of zodiac. Rahu is
strong in the South, i.e. when he is on the meridian of the horoscope.
TT^rTTf^raT ^
^ II 36 II
Even if the planet derive strength in the ways mentioned
earlier, they become weak if eclipsed by the Sun. Such weak
planets do not give good results in respect of the bhavas, yogas
and Dasas they are connected with.
Notes: Benefic planets, if cmbust, do lose their potence, while
maefics become more mischievous. Saturn and Venus are said to
retain their rays even in combustion as per sloka 15, Ch. IV of
Uttara Kalamrita.
UMUMI
Strong benefics make a person fortunate, bright and beautiful. Malefics when stronger than benefics make a person sinful
and a simpleton.
Notes: It is to be noted that benefic planets should be
stronger than malefics for yoga purposes. In any case, the

HORASARA
strength of malefics is equally important as each has its own
karakatwas; for example Saturn though a natural malefic should
be strong for longevity. If he is weak, the subject cannot enjoy
longevity and all Rajayogas then will be equal to a painting sans
canvas.
Thus ends the 3rd Chapter entitled Evaluation
of Planetary Strengths in Horasara of Prithuyasas
son of Varaha Mihira.

CHAPTER 4
11 cji-jh i t2j |2^.' ) i
3^4l*HwW *TIct cTTOf^ cWII
Should the Moon in her transit pass through an Apachaya
house (i.e. other than 3rd, 6th, 10th and 11th) in a female's chart
and come in aspect to or conjunction with Mars, it leads to her
menses and is congenial for conception.
Notes: A girl can attain puberty if the Moon transits the
Lagna, 2nd, 4th, 5th, 7th, 8th, 9th or 12th from her natal ascendant and aspected by transit Mars. A sexual intercourse in appropriate time as above can also lead to conception. The Moon
and Mars signify water and fire in order and also blood and bile
respectively. Aries indicates pituitary glands and Scorpio rules
ovum; both signs are of Mars. When the Moon is in 3, 6, 10 and
11, ovum cannot cause conception and hence its position in
Anupachaya is indicated. A different condition for conception is
that the same Moon should be in 3rd, 6th, 10th or 11th from the
Lagna and aspected by a male benefic (i.e. only Guru). The
female, should of course be in a suitable condition as laid down
in the next sloka.
II 2
In respect of women, thirteen nights after (menstrual) bathing (from the 5th day of menses through the 17th day), they
become fit to conceive. This does not apply to female children
and old women (who have no menstrual course), sickly women
and barren women.

HORASARA
Notes: Sixteen nights after the menses are declared fit for
conception according to Ch. 3 of Jataka Parijata. First four days
are of course unfit when there will be menstrual flow. But western medical researchers feel that the week preceding a menstrual
course is more effective for purpose of conception.
II 3 II
To bear an issue, the sexual intercourse should take place
when the Moon is in an upachaya in reference to her birth chart
and aspected by a male benefic or ascend with it.
Notes: As per sloka 1, the transit Moon should be in
Anupachaya from natal Lagna and be in aspect to Mars, while as
per this sloka the Moon during intercourse should be in
upachaya and aspected by male benefic, Jupiter. The Sim and
Venus in own Navamsas and in upachaya from Lagna/Moon in
a male's chart and Moon and Mars in own Navamsa and in
upachaya from Lagna for a female can lead to conception.
WVRVll
gel ^rsfq 3#TT: Tgftil ipp: 1 1 4 1 1
Should sexual union take place when the Sim, the Moon,
Venus and Jupiter are in own Rasi or Navamsas, it leads to the
birth of a son. Similar result occurs if these planets be in the
ascendant (at the time of intercourse) and be aspected by or
conjoined with Mars.
Notes: Whatever is being stated in this chapter is with reference to Nisheka lagna unless otherwise mentioned to the contrary.
<*r ctr sptefi sn i
ii 5 II
Should Jupiter be in the ascendant, the 5th or the 9th or his
own Rasi or Navamsa and the week day auspicious, then the
conception obtained thus becomes exemplary.
■ Notes: In the above case, if Jupiter's Hora simultaneously

CHAPTER 4
exists, then the intercourse will definitely yield conception.
aft TOlWl 3T ^>11 ^ TgcTT: 1 1 6 1 1
eFf TJK31 g ^FFITTO: I
^ ^Tt HFTW^ff8M: 117 II
gn?l: FSHNWl: 3eft 3311
fawCTfTTFn: Fffit: 1 1 8 1 1
The undermentioned yogas (prevailing at the time of intercourse) lead to conception of a male child
(a) conjunction of Ascendant lord and the 5th lord; their
mutual aspect or exchange between them.
(b) Strong Saturn in odd houses other than Ascendant.
(c) Mercury in the 5th without being in the company of or in
aspect to others.
(d) All the male planets in the 6th house and or the 11th
house while the 5th ord is strong.
(e) All planets in odd signs.
Notes: The involvement of an odd Rasi as they are male
ones, so that a male issue is obtained, vide points (a) and (e)
above. The conceptional ascendant, Jupier, luminaries and Venus
being strong and in odd Rasi can also lead to birth of a son. As
the conception time is difficult to be obtained, one can safely
depend upon Prasna kundali or janmakundali. Should the Moon
and Venus be chiefly important, there will be birth of a female.
31 3I3fa MtoVn: 1 1 9 II
fct4<lc)o331 3f3l
^tfUlUrl ■g#; 31 thfa 3 II 10 II
The following combinations (at the time of intercourse) lead
to birth of a female issue:
(a ) The Moon and Venus be together in the 5th or the 1 0th.

HORASARA
(b) The Moon and Venus be in their own Rasis and or
Navamsa.
(c) Rahu rising and aspected by the Moon or vice versa.
(d) Venus in Moon's Hora or in angle from the Lagna.
Notes: Venus should preferably be in Taurus vargas, as it is
his female sign. Libra is a male sign.
Wf II 11 II
Should Mercury be in a dual Rasi coinciding with Lagna or
when a dual sign be Lagna and in aspect to Mercury or Mercury
be in the 10th house (at the time of intercourse), birth of twins is
indicated. The sex of the children can be guessed by the Rasi and
Navamsa involved.
Notes: Mercury is an important planet in the assessment of
twin birth. And Gemini sign ascending can lead to twin birth.
Further if the Sun and Jupiter be in Sagittarius or Gemini in any
bhava, especialy as the 5th, birth of twins is indicated. The Moon
and Mars in Pisces or Virgo aspected by Mercury lead to the
same effect. According to Ramadayalu's Sanketa Nidhi, Ch. II,
sloka 3, when the Sun is in a quandruped Rasi and other planets
in common signs with strength it indicates twin birth.
cfi W5 WTC: II 12 II
The following positions (at the time of intercourse) doubtlessly lead to birth of twins, (a) Both the Moon and Venus in even
Rasis or in dual Navamasas (in female Rasis like Taurus, Cancer
etc. or in Gemini navamsa and its angles); (b) Mercury in Lagna
while Mars and Jupiter are in odd Rasis.
Notes: The first combination can lead to birth of two female
issues as the Moon and Venus are female planets. The later
combination is capable of giving two male issues as Jupiter and
Mars are masculine planets.
Should tjie^Ascendant and the Moon be in even Rasis and be

CHAPTER i
aspected by a srong planet, then there are twins in the womb
(one female and one male). Similar results follow if the Moon and
Venus are in even Rasis while Jupiter, Mars, Mercury and Lagna
be in odd Rasis or in dual Rasis and be with strength, (slokas 21
and 22, Ch. 8 of Saravali, my English translation). Incidentally,
from the said chapter, we see below the planetary combinations
for birth of triplets:
The following yogas prevailing at the time of Adhana lead to
birth of triplets: (a) Mercury remaining in Gemini Navamsa
aspecting a planet who also falls in common Navamsa, (b) Mercury remaining in Gemini Navamsa aspecting a common sign
which ascends, (c) Mercury in Virgo Navamsa aspecting a planet
falling in common Navamsa, (d) Mercury in Virgo Navamsa
aspecting a common sign which ascends, (e) Mercury in Gemini
Amsa aspecting a planet in Gemini Amsa or Sagittarius Amsa, (f)
Mercury in Gemini Navamsa aspecting the Lagna which falls in
Gemini Navamsa or Sagittarius Navamsa, (g) Mercury in 7th
aspecting a planet in Virgo/Pisces Navamsa or aspecting such
Lagna Navamsa. Combinations (a) and (b) lead to birth of triplets-one female and two males. Combinations (c) and (d) cause
birth of triplets consisting of two females and one male. Combinations at (e) and (f) cause three male children while the ones at
(g) indicate birth of three female issues.
Jataka Parijata, Ch. Ill quotes more combinations for birth of
triplets which the reader may consult.
For birth of more than three issues, here is a combination:
Dhanurlagna in Vargothama while all planets with strength being in any Rasi but in Dhanumavamsa. The said Lagna should,
however, be aspected by Mercury and Saturn (see sloka 25,
Ch. III. Jataka parijata).
From the above, we can take a clue that Mercury and Saturn
are chief planets connected with birth of twins, triplets etc. If
one of them is strong and auspiciously posited in 5th or 9th at
birth, in exaltation, own house and the like, then twins etc. are to
be expected. If Saturn is adverse, in the 5th, it is not good for
issues.

HORASARA
ft^T uftl
<wi Ti^fr trrsftngU ^ ii n ii
Should the Sun and the Moon be in mutual aspect in day
time or if Mercury and Saturn be so in the night (during the time
of intercourse), the child bom will be neither male nor female.
Notes: According to Sastras, intercourse in day time is not
congenial for pregnancy. Saturn and Mercury both being neuters
will only push such a child.
WtoW ftui ft I
The (child-yielding) yogas mentioned will be futile for the
couple without virility, just as the blind are devoid of many
qualities (i.e. advantages).
Notes: The sloka is suggestive of the fact that irrespective of
promising planetary combinations at the time of intercourse, one
should have good 5th house/5th lord. Unless the promise for
progeny is from the natal horoscope, such indications from
Adhana are of no effect.
u«ft nrfcr nrarftmt *[$i
ftufa nrft ■'frrcg Tpf ; II 15 ii
wtTFi u-Rufaft 3j$:i
VPSft-SfaU: l( 16 II
U^s-ft tuft fttflg I
uft UFf uraiftH: ?lft: II 17 II
W) Urft I
vei^ilo^ tuft n is ii
sift trftftrcu nrcfrft Heft ?wfti
3TCjfo&ft tuft nft# «TT?^T; HHU: II 19 II
During the first month of conception the embryo will only
be in the form of cogulated blood and (the development) is ruled
by Venus. Mars presides the second month while it takes the

CHAPTER 4
form of a seed (like Pingaka or Pingaksha seed). In the third
month it transforms into a sprout and is ruled by Jupiter; marrow and bones are added in the 4th month ruled by the Sun;
development of skin, and blood takes place in the fifth month
under the rulership of the Moon; Saturn takes over the process of
growth of limbs in the sixth month; senses occur to the child
under the rulership of Mercury in the seventh month; hunger
and thirst are felt in the 8th month which process is controlled by
the Lagna lord of Nisheka (i.e. the planet ruling the moment of
intercourse that led to conception) and the Moon rules the ninth
month when the child develops excitement and moves in the
womb of the mother. The 10th month is ruled by the Sun preceding the delivery.
Notes: Similar notes are found in Brihat Jataka, Saravali,
Jataka parijata, etc. etc. where there is no difference of opinion
on this issue.
The growth at various stages will depend upon the position
of the concerned planet in transit. Also note the planet in the
birth horoscope that is capable of affecting child birth adversely.
Should that planet be in a state of affliction in transit, then also
evil should be expected. The combinations rega.ding child birth
should be weighed cautiously in preference to transits of planets
with reference to natal Lagna. For example if the 5th lord in the
natal chart is indicative of an issue being defective or loss by
abortion etc., then the Gochara effects should be carefully
analysed .
?TrSn ytiWftvH II
20 II
The foetus will progress according to the disposition of the
months concerned (i.e. the respective lords as mentioned in 4-15
to 4-19) and the delivery of the child should be predicted after
making a thorough study of all the conditions.
Notes: Should the planet concerned be afflicted in transit,
when the foetus is undergoing various developments, the particular process is not safely taking place. For example, if Mercury

HORASARA
is combust, be eclipsed by Rahu etc. in the fifth month, then the
child will not develop its intelligence well. Should the Sun be
afflicted in the 10th month, for example, be caught in an eclipse,
the delivery may be delayed beyong due date or it may be very
difficult as against a normal one (See sloka 21)
WTfcrtr ^ ^ti
-rt^t -crrflT ^ ^rf^rfcr 1121 11
Should any particular month’s lord be afflicted, or defeated
in planetary war or combust in the Sun, the particular process
will not progress and there may not be smooth delivery.
Notes: The Sun and Moon do not involve in war. So they
cannot affect this process on this account. However, they are
subject to other afflictions by which they can tell upon the growth
of the foetus in their respective months.
^ ircfl ^1*1 trrfa ipcli
fWt ^ 3K?t Wf: 1 1 22 II
If the Nisheka Lagna lord be in a movable Rasi, the child will
be bom in the 10th month; if it be in a fixed Rasi, the delivery will
be in the 11th month and a dual Rasi will delay the delivery to the
12th month.
Notes: The number of days in that particular month will
depend on the degrees traversed by the said Lagna Lord. Suppose the Nisheka (Prasna) Lagna Lord is Cancer 15° (a movabe
Rasi), then delivery may take place around the 15th day in the,
tenth month. However, Suka,Jataka says that delivery shall be in
9th, 10th or 11th month as the Lagna is movable, fixed or
dual.
^ -tlfluiHU^ fwrsfj) II 23 II
Whatever have been described earlier in connection with
Nisheka Lagna are equally applicable to the ascendant prevailing
at the time of a query (i.e. Prasna Lagna) regarding the child in

CHAPTER 4
the womb- If the Prasna Lagna falls in an odd Rasi and be in the
company 'of or in aspect to male planet, the child in the womb is
male.
tot
3RT*TT ptfyyjcl: RTT ^rltafl
Should the querist touch the right side of his body or touch
another man or utter words of masculine gender, then it can be
concluded that the child to be bom is male. Should Prasna Lagna
be aspected or occupied by female planets, it is a female child.
WiWIRrt TO! TT?f! 'Ml fRt! TOT: 1 1 26 II
Tftrpft fRc! ^jftT: I
&3T cRT XRTO: J I 27 1 1
T!f^R!f^ cTH^kl fRTTnfll
The following four principles may be noted.
( 1 ) Find out which is stronger between the Lagna and the
Moon at time of a query, and the related Dwadasamsa. When the
Moon (the month being appropriate for delivery) transists such a
sign as indicated by the number of dwadasamsas counted from
that particular Dwadasamsa position, delivery will take place.
(2) Alternatively, note the Navamsa occupied by the Moon at the
time of query. Should the Moon in transit reach the 7th house
thereof, delivery may take place. (3) Delivery may also take place
when she transits the house of such Navamsa lord. (4) Ascertain
the fraction of the Prasna Lagna with reference to its total duration and note whether it is a day sign or night sign. If it is a night
sign, delivery will take place in the day time after such a time of
fraction (past Sunrise) and if it is day sign, delivery will take
place after Sun-set after the lapse of such a fraction of time.
Should the 4th lord be endowed with strength at the time of
query and enjoy auspicious yogas, predict comfortable position

HORASARA
for the child in the womb.
Notes: Rule 1: Note which is stronger, whether Lagna or the
Moon (in Nisheka or Prasna). Suppose the Lagna is stronger and
in the 7th Dwadasamsa of Aries, i.e. between 15° 00’--17° 30’. It is
in Libra Dwadasamsa. Note the possible month of delivery as
mentioned in sloka 22 supra. When the Moon in transit reaches
Libra Rasi, delivery can be expected.
Rule 2: This is simple and is applicable to Prasna.
Rule 3: Same as Rule 2.
Rule 4: Instead of proceeding with fraction of duration the
Prasna Lagna has completed, we can easily proceed by the longitude the Prasna Lagna Sphuta has obtained. Suppose the Prasna
Lagna is 3 degrees of a certain Rasi. That is, it has completed one
tenth of the rasi. If it is a night sign, note the day duration on the
possible day of birth and predict birth to be afterone tenth of it
has passed from Sunrise. The reverse should be true for day sign,
i.e. birth will be after one tenth of the night following Sun-set.
Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer Sagittarius and Capricorn are
night signs and the rest are day signs (Sanketa Nidhi, Ch. 7, sloka
13.) Also see my English translation of Saravali.
Thus ends "Nisheka Janmadhyaya", the 4th Chapter in
Horasara of Prithuyasas, son of Varaha Mihira.

CHAPTER 5
3-rfe^w2Tpj[7 u
3w Tiidtfqnfi'ss wtbj
W^TTfo 3t?fl "3 II 1 II
The evils to the parents and the characteristics of birth time
along with circumstances leading to (infant) death are dealt in
this chapter.
ijsNzSWI ^ 3J*TSKT: I
^ II 2 II
The planet in the first six houses yield good results (directly
to the native) while those in the second half of the zodiac indirect
results.
fen ^ ^1
^TTr^T II 3 II
The Sun and the Moon represent father and mother respectively of the living beings. After assessing the strength and weakness of these two planets, predictions should be made about
parents.
Notes: According to Brihat Jataka, ch. IV, sloka 5, the Sun
and Venus indicate father and mother of the native for day birth
and Saturn and the Moon play these parts respectively for night
birth. Same view is expressed in Phala Deepika (Ch. II, slok 22)
and also in Saravali.
In this context, an important principle is to be noted from;'
Sanketa Nidhi, Ch. II, sloka 25. Note the pair of the planets ^
concerning the father and the mother in a day birth or night birth

HORASARA
as the case may be.The effect will be full if the birth is in the
beginning of day or night as the case may be; the effcts will be
medium if the birth is in middle portion and almost little in the
concluding portion. For example, a person bom in the beginning
of night or day will enjoy full results in regard to parents while a
person bom at the end of day or night will have little results in
the same respect. (This will also depend to an equal extent on the
planets concerned).
farfhe Prv^rq. n 4 n
Shoud the Sun be aspected by malefics and join them or *
remain in their clutches hemmed between them, then evil is
portended to the father of the child thus bom.
Notes: The Sun in general is Pitru Karaka and his connections with malefics yield bad results to the father of the native. In
this context, due attention is to be given to the 9th house and its
owner. The 5th house is also to be taken into account, as it is the
9th from the 9th.
Rnrfhe 1 1 5 1 1
If there are exclusively bad planets in the 6th and the 8th or
the 4th and 8th from the Sun, without help from benefics, then
evil is indicated to the father,
Notes: Malefics in the 12th from the Sun will also give adverse effects to the father of the native. Benefics in the Sun’s angle
will improve the situation.
'fam+fw?! fW^ti
UI'+wi-hh) Ftqfn: Rfi^jl: ftjj: 116 II
Should the Sun in Aries/Scorpio Navamsa be aspected by
Saturn (in the Rasi Chart), the elder brother or elder sister or the
father of the child is extinguished.
•£. Notes: The Sun in Libra in Visakha first quarter (i.e.
lories Navamsa) and aspected by Saturn will cause special

CHAPTER 5
effects in regard to father's death. Saturn or the Sun related to
the 11th house will have a telling effect on elder brother or
elder sister of the native, in the combination mentioned in the
verse.
(ift) ^ 117 II
The child will not see its father if Mars is in the 4th or in the
9th and falls in the Navamsa of Leo, (Capricorn or Aquiarius),
without receiving the aspect of Jupiter or Venus.
HI^IW *1ld=l 'jcfois^l
gfaERtfa qfa 7?farfa7fact: II 8 II
On the same lines, through the Moon, the evils to mother can
be known. Also, if the Moon be waning and has only malefics in
the 5th or the 9th from her, but be without benefic's association,
the child will be deprived of its mother.
tfaTTRrSft ^ faTtTRfqi
STfsn^^TcIl -qisfq fgwfa 71 ifafa 1 1 9 1 1
Saturn and Mars in angle of the Moon (either jointly or
separately) and in one Navamsa will give two mothers to the
child to live with.
Notes: "Two mothers" may be interpreted as one having a
step-mother. Alternatively, he may be brought up by another
lady who is equal to mother.
facWM'lffriM: I
fartfarfarnr wr: n 10 n
It is by the strength or weakness of Saturn and Mars that the
birth takes place in the house of the father or the mother
resectively. Should the Lagna Lord be strong, father's place will
be birth place.
Notes: It may further be noted that if Pitrukaraka Graha is
* Tfafar is another reading.

HORsXSARA
strong, birth would have been in father's place and if
Matrukaraka is strong, birth is in the place of the mother. Jataka
Tatwa (Vide II, B-21) says that delivery will take place in the
house of the father, mother or other relatives as indicated by the
strongest planet.
TOWii •qpfl wwsfeW i
Ftfl <HH H T T? z rfrf II 11 II
faifl flW ^ Wl: II 12 II
If the Sun occupies a movable sign in Rasi and Navamsa, the
father of the child was away (at the time of birth). Should the Sun
aspect the Lagna, it is not so. If the Moon is in a similar state, the
father should be declared to have been away at the time of the
birth of the child.
Notes: These combinations relate to the horoscope of the
native. If the Lagna has aspect of the Sun or the Moon, the father
was away at the birth of the child. Similar effects prevail, if (a)
Saturn is in Lagna, or (b) 7th is occupied by Mars or (c) Mercury
and Venus holding the Moon in their midst The first two rules
can also lead to rectification of Janma Lagna. The Sun in a movable Rasi or not occupying the 10th but be in the 9th or 11th etc.
gives clue to the effect that the father was away at the child’s
birth.
WM Hirin'**) ^ ^ t^wf-urti
^ WWnfocI: 1113 II
If Jupiter occupies his sign of fall, while the Moon is in a Rasi
Sandhi or Amsa Sandhi and other benefics join malefics, the child
born will be dumb and dullwitted.
Notes: Amsa Sandhi is the end of a quarter of Nakshatra.
That is the Moon's position should be at an area of 3°20’ (or close
to it) or multiples thereof, in any Rasi. The combination cited will
more aptly fit a Sagittarius native as Jupiter will fall in the 2nd,
while the other one of them joining Rahu will cause dumbness.
Should the 2nd lord in such a case be strong and well placed,

CHAPTER 5
then the defect will not come to pass. Note that the second house
rules one's speech.
faff M ^ct II 14 II
If the 9th and the 4th houses have malefic occupation while
the ascendant lord is weak and joining Mars or aspected by him,
the child's father was sick at the time of its birth.
aHfel+fWcr IWfatt!
fail jfa fWft: II 15 II
Should Saturn be in Leo Navamsa and be aspected by the
Sun, the father was in a miserable state at the time of the birth of
the child. Saturn in 8th or 12th and in Leo Navamsa simultaneously, gives the same results.
3 ^ efa ^ <H'4ld4>: II 16 II
^TrSr i
^ ii n ii
d-sRtl dR-d: I
TcfrWrT II 18 II
The child should be declared to have been bom of others'
loins, if the Moon or Lagna is without Jupiter's aspect. Should the
luminaries be in the company of malefics and aspect Jupiter, then
also the same result prevails. Jupiter or Moon in mutual vargas
or luminaries in exchange nullify these Yogas.
Notes: Apart from the above two combinations, indicating .
illegal birth (^TTR %]) the following rules may be noted, as taken
out from Parasara Hora (Tamil translation by C.G. Rajan),
Saravali, Jataka Parijata and Jataka Tatwa:
(1) If the Moon is in the 4th house from Lagna and aspected
by malefics or inimical planets. (2) Lords of 3, 6, 2 and 5 in Lagna
(birth through servants). (3) Malefics in Lagna, benefics in the 7th
and Saturn in the 10th. (4) Moon in Lagna, and Mars with Venus
in the third. (5) Sun in Lagna and Rahu in 4th. (6) Sun and Moon
in Lagna or Sun and Mars in 7th (7) Lagna with Mars and Rahu

HORASARA
while the Sun and the Moon are in 7th. (8) Angles without
planets. (9) All planets in 2, 6, 8 and 12. (10) Lords of Lagna and
7th together. (11) Exchange between Lagna Lord and 4th lord
(which should be considered otherwise a Rajyasabha.). (12) The
Lagna or the Moon not falling in the Vargas, of Jupiter. (13)
Anyone group of following prevailing simultaneously: (a) Sunday— 2nd tithi— Swati Nakshatra (b) Wednesday-7th tithi—
Revati, (c) Sunday-12th tithi-Dhanishta (14) The Sun, Moon and
Jupiter in fall, one of them being in Lagna. (15) Karakamsa related to only malefic planets.
These yogas stand cancelled if kendra has a planet or
benefics aspect Lagna or the Moon, or Lagna, Lord in Lagna, or
Jupiter in the 4th or Mars aspecting Jupiter.
TTfFPJ TT?fl ^J*TT: feral: l
m II 19 II
There will be moles or scars in the particular limb of
Kalapurusha corresponding to the Rasi occupied by benefics.
Notes: According to Jataka Muktavali, following combinations indicate moles, scars etc. on the body of the native: If the 7th
from Lagna is occupied by Venus or Mars or Jupiter, there will be
a scar o the head. Venus or Mars or Moon in Lagna leaves a mark
through fire at the age of 12. Rahu in the 8th while Venus is in
Lagna causes a scar on the left ear. Jupiter in Lagna and Rahu in
the 7th leave a scar on the left hand. Venus in the 10th or 12th and
Jupiter in Lagna indicate marks on both the hands. If Mars is in
3rd or 6th or 11th along with Venus, there will be a mark on the
side close to left hand. Should Mercury or Saturn be in Lagna
while the Sun is in the 10th, mark on the right side should be
noted. If Mars or Mercury is in Lagna while Rahu is in the 5th, or
6th or 9th, moleon genetal organ or anus may be found. Venus in
the 5th or the 9th, while the 7th or 8th or 4th is occupied by either
Jupiter or Mercury indicates a mark on stomach. Should there be
Venus or the Sun in the 2nd or 8th while the 10th has Rahu and
Saturn, declare a scar on the navel. A mark on the waist may be
found if the 10th is occupied by Jupiter while the Moon is in 2nd
and Rahu with Venus is in 3rd. On the anus will be found a mark

CHAPTER 5
if the 12th has Jupiter while Mercury is in 3rd or 6th or 9th and
Moon is in the 9th house. Should there be Venus and Rahu in 4th
while Lagna is occupied by Saturn and Mars, there will be a
symbol of fish in the palm or sole or ankles, (which according to
Samucjrika Sastra is a Rajalakshana— denoting a king).
Hamsayoga is supposed to give fish symbols in the palm or sole,
see notes under sloka 8, Ch. 16.
Tlie limbs of human body are divided by 36 decanates. Any
particular decanate occupied by a benefic indicates a mole and a
malefic an ulcer on the particular part of the physique, see sloka
26, Ch. 11 of Sanketa Nidhi. The 3 decanates in each Bahava
represent limbs respectively as under, vice Sanketa Nidhi:
(a) Lagna--1. Head, 2. Neck, 3. Pelvis.
(b) 2nd and 12th— 1. Right and left eyes, 2. Right and left
shoulders, 3. Genetal organs.
(c) 3rd and 11th — 1. Right and left ears, 2. Right and left
arms, 3. Right and left testicles.
(d) 4th and 10th-l. Right and left nostrils, 2. Right and left
sides (9T7^), 3. Right and left thighs.
(e) 5th and 9th— 1. Right and left cheeks, 2. Right and left
side of the heart, 3. Right and left knees.
(f) 6th and 8th-l. Jaws, 2. Right and left sides of chest,
3. Right and left calves.
(g) 7th-l. Mouth, 2. Navel, 3. Feet (according to some 12th
indicates feet).
The above is from Sanketa Nidhi, Ch. IV, slokas 124 and 125,
in which it is stated that the limb corresponding to the decanate
aspected by or conjoined with a benefic will have a mole or mark.
And a malefic in such a case causes its deformity or ulcer on it.
For example, if Rahu is in the house in first decanate, denoting
right ear, he can cause either deafness or an ulcer of right ear.
The reader is advantageously referred to slokas 24, 25 ad 26,
Ch. V of Brihat Jataka and also my English translation of
Saravali Ch. rV for relevant information.
Given below is a brief account regarding moles etc. from

HORASARA
Chapter FV of Mukunda Daviagna's Nashta Jataka (my English
translation): Note the Rasis occupied by the Sun and Moon. The
particular limbs as represented with reference to Kalapurusha ,
i.e. Aries etc. will have mole and other marks. The limb represented by the Rasi occupied by the Sun or Mars will have reddish
marks while Saturn and Rahu leave blue marks. Should Venus
aspect Rahu, the limb indicated by Rahu's sign will have moles
etc. Assume Rahu is in Gemini opposed to Venus in Sagittarius.
Gemini indicates arms of Kalapurusha and hence there will be
mole (or scar etc.) on the arms. More such information may be
obtained from Chapter IV of Nashta Jataka.
The information furnished above regarding moles etc. will be
helpful in rectification of natal Lagna in case of doubts.
W^ffrai: I (clf^T: I)
rTBT: BHTOtT: II 20 II
The Sastras listed various combinations causing instant or
sudden death of the child. Now only important ones are explained (below).
There are three kinds of infant deaths. Firstly the afflictions
due to parents; secondly due to Balagrahas and thirdly due to
evil planetary combinations.
Notes: Balagrahas are evil spirits which affect only children.
See sloka 130, Ch. 15 of Prasna Marga (J.N. Bhasin English rendering). It is also stated in Jataka Parijata, sloka 1, Ch 4, that till
the child crosses 12, it is affected by the fate of his mother and
father and by Balagrahas, i.e. evil spirits. This view is identical
with the one mentioned in slokas 4-6, Ch. 10 of Sarvartha
Chintamani. That is why all texts are unanimous that longevity
cannot be definitely decided till the 12th year of age. Now see the
following sloka of the present work.

CHAPTER 5
T^Tpnf!-^. I
It is only after a careful assessment of the above, the affliction
to the child should be pronounced. It is (however) not possible to
decide the longevity till it completes its 12th year of age. The
child should be protected (till such age) through Japas and
Homas.
Notes: According to C.G. Rajan's Tamil translation of
Parashara Hora, Ch. V, note that longevity cannot be decided till
the native is 24. But Jyotishamava Navaneetam (a Sanskrit work
with Telugu translation) suggests that upto 12, nothing definite
can be said about longevity. Phala Deepika (Ch. 13, sloka 3) and
Jataka Parijata (Ch. 5, slokas 1 and 2) which have similar verses
also say that upto 12, longevity cannot be decided. This is because, the child is covered by its mother's fate in the first four
years, by its father s fate in the next f our years and by its Poorva
Karma thereafter upto 12 as per Mantreswara..Only after 12, will
the child be governed by the effects of planets in its own horoscope as far as its longevity is concerned. Also, see slokas 4-6, Ch.
X of Sarvartha Chintamani.
hftrafcrj % 1 1 23 1 1
^fr <srsfq fawiMr wtri
II 24 II
Fft T R^TfjRTRf^T: I
The child bom when there is Lagna Sandhi is either bom,
dead or short lived (if born). Should such Lagna be aspected by
malefics, the said results are sure to follow. Birth in Gandanta
Nakshatra is destructive of the whole family. Should such a
child, however, live, then it becomes a king with an army of
elephants and horses.
Notes: For Gandanta Nakshatra, see sloka 14, Ch. 1 supra.
Apart from Lagna Sandhi, there are other Sandhis, as explained
in sloka 36, Ch. V, infra.
Sarvartha Chintamani, Ch. 10, s. 26-27, Uttarakalamrita,
Ch. 8, sloka 9 and Saravali also state that if a Gandanta native

HORASARA
survives, fie becomes a king with elephants, horses etc. forming
his army. Given below is the horoscope of Shri Ramakrishna
Dalmia, bom on April 7th, 1893 at 9.31 A.M.(LMT) 20 N56, 75E
55. Lahiri Ayanamsa:
Sun
Venus
Mercury
Rahu
Jupiter
Mars
Lagna
RASI
Moon
Ketu
Salurn
The Moon’s longitude as per Lahiri's Ayanamsa is 240° 25',
i.e. just in the very beginning of Moola nakshatra (in the junction
of Jyeshta and Moola in Scorpio-Sagittarius). The Neechabhanga
to Lagna Lord Mercury is also a strong reason that the native
without any rich inheritance rose to dizzy heights one could ever
dream. According to Jataka Marthanda, a popular Telugu work,
the Neechabhanga to Lagna Lord is the only kind of
Neechabhanga Rajayoga and not the ones caused to other lords.
Now, coming to survival in spite of Gandanta, this is one of the
two charts that we could pick from the ones in our possession.
There are various other superior combinations in the chart, like
Venus causing Malavya Yoga, both from the Moon and Lagna,
the Moon aspected by Jupiter, the Sun in the 10th, Lords of the
2nd both from the Moon and Lagna receiving highy beneficial
aspects, lord of the 11th Mars aspecting the 2nd lord Moon etc.
etc. Gandanta Nakshatra, which survived the native, made him a
big industrialist, who started the first Indian cement plant and
also Bharat Bank. He also managed newspapers like The Times
of India, and was connected with Indian National Airways,
Swadeshi Cotton Mills etc.
The most highly respected international figure, Mahatma

CHAPTER 5
Gandhi, was also bom in Gandanta Nakshatra. The saintly 'king’
also survived the Gandanta Nakshatra dosha and lived a long
life and commanded great respect from his countrymen. We
need not comment on his well-known achievements, but should
feel content with giving the planetary positions at birth which are
as under:
Bom on 2nd October, 1869 at 0745 hours L.M.T., 21N37,
Jupiter
RAl, CHART
Rahu
Moon
Ketu
Saturn
Ugna, Mars
Mercury
Venus
Sun
Note the Moon at 29° of Cancer (as per Lahiri Ayanamsa), i.e.
in the junction of Cancer-Leo and Aslesha-Makha.
Thus we can see the greatness and efficacy of Gandanta
Nakshatra and if one survives he leads a famous life.
grol chOH^rfl II 25 II
Luminaries in the 3rd house owned by a malefic and in the
company of malefics, make the child sick and live upto 3 years
only.
fjki'Mi: 1 1 26
If the Moon joins the 8th lord in Kendra, while the 8th house
is occupied by p planet, the child leaves this world soon after its
birth.

HORASARA
TT^t 7WT ^RT 31K»ll
Should the 7th from Moon be occupied by Mars and Sun
while Rahu is in Lagna, death of the child may be expected
within ten days of birth.
Notes: Should Rahu be in Aries, or Taurus or Cancer as
Lagna, he contributes good longevity. Refer to JatakadesaMarga
(Ch. 4), Saravali (Ch. 12, s. 10), Jataka Parijata (Ch. 4, s. 90),
Sarvartha Chintamani, (Ch. 11, s.16) and Jataka Marthanda, II
Part, (Ayurdayadhyaya). The slokas of Saravali, Jataka Parijata
and Sarvartha Chintamani are similar. So to say if Rahu is in
Aries or Taurus or Cancer in Lagna, while the rest of the combination as per the sloka under comment is present, there is good
longevity.
'nRTT: w ^tr ii 28 u
^ HlfoHiHini TfRR Tt I
7T# -iINt-'I
Malefics in the 4th, 8th, 2nd and 12th will cause sickness and
death in 10 days. Should a malefic be in the seventh house from
rising decanate (22nd decanate) while the waning Moon is in
Lagna the child faces immediate death.
anrrf^f fpttn: ■MHfcMPkii: it 30 n
’ermra <*r oh<mhi
°TlsW*l) 1131 II
viilfc(c| rqui-Hciyi'Ml I
When all the planets are weak and positioned in the 3rd, the
6th, the 9th and the 12th, the child lives either for 2 months or
6 months. While the lord of Lagna is in the sign of his fall or in the
8th or is combust, the child’s living becomes precarious and it is
equal to a dead one.
Ttfo ^ ^ ^RJ: 1132 II

CHAPTER 5
BB
A child bom under malefic muhurtas, or when Ketu is rising
followed by fall of meteors, thunders etc, it hardly lives.
cfarp (3) ^ twVn fgrf^di^i
rrg n 33 n
The persons who are born with severe yoga indicating adverse results as explained by Yavanas and others will only bring
harm to the family.
fond n 34 n
A person born under an eclipse is ominous. If the Lagna is
connected with many strong malefics by conjunction or association, then also, it is adverse for longevity.
Wf II 35 II
Should Lagna Lord, the lord of Moon-sign and the Navamsa
lord of Moon-sign are all eclipsed, the longevity is only or a few
days.
Notes: The combustion of three planets are indicated,
namely that of Lagna Lord, dispositor of the Moon and Navamsa
lord of the Moon. Such combustion will prove fatal to longevity
and the child’s life is only for a few days.
The four kinds of junctions or conjunction of the Moon with
malefics will cause death (infant) and similar results follow if the
Moon is in aspect to malefics without benefic’s aspect or company.
Note: The four junctions or Sandhi chathushtayas are:
(1) The twilight time,
(2) The point where two Rasis meet,
(3) The point where two stars meet,
(4) The time where two thithis meet.

HORASARA
rwwr ^ ^at r tri^ h 37 ii
Should the Moon be in the company of malefics only, or if
she is in the 1st, 5th, 7th, 8th, 9th or the 12th house and be with
malefics without benefic's aspect or association death of the native will occur.
Notes: The sloka seems to suggest infant death. The Moon if
connected with malefics should be helped by benefics so that
infant death does not occur.
cTTTfawrroft WiTOTfiTTift WW^ll
3TKif^ RlWl Tlferfhfcftsft 1 1 38 II
Should the Lagna Lord and the Moon's depositor be in the
6th, 8th or the 12th, or be combust, the death of the native may be
foretold in the year denoted by the Rasi occupied by the said
planets.
^ ?piT7jWt: RTsft tflSeRFj;: II 39 II
Should the Moon be in the 6th or the 8th while the Lagna is ‘
occupied by its lord or when the decreasing Moon is subject to
mixed influences of malefics and benefics, the native, if born in
day time has short life.
% cpOTTcff |
UfgA fi[ err Pm «ic«^ it 40 ii
If the lord-of Lagna is in Marana Pada along with the decreasing Ivfoon in the company of Rahu or aspected by Rahu, the
native dies in his seventh year.
Notes: When the issue of Marana Pada (P< ,r T R^) came in this
sloka, we should see what a Pada is, as detailed in Jaimini Sutras
(English translation by late Prof, B.S. Rao) and Uttarakalamrita.
Pada is also called Arudha. Take a Bhava and see where its
lord is posited with reference to that particular Bhava. Count so
many Rasis from that planet. The Rasi thus arrived is the Pada

CHAPTER 5
for that bhava. The Pada for the 7th house is specifically designated as Dara Pada or Dara Arudha. Again take the 12th house
of a Bhava. See where this 12th lord is. Count so many Rasis from
the house occupied by the said 12th lord. The Rasi thus arrived
becomes te Upapada for the Bhava (for which the 12th house
consideration is being made). Another simple clue is if a Bhava
lord is in that Bhava itself, then the same Bhava becomes the
Pada of that Bhava. In that case, the Bhava with two designations
will have more influence.
Take the example as under:
Born 21st May, 1944, at 1800 hours 1ST at Tirupati (Andhra
Pradesh), 79E25, 13N39.
Moon
Mercury
Venus
Sun
Saturn
RASI CHART
Rahu
Mars
Jupiter
Ketu
Lagna
Lagna is Vrischika. Its lord Mars is in the 9th. When we count
nine Rasis from Cancer, we get Pisces. This should be called Pada
Lagna or Arudha Lagna. (Arudha Lagna is Prasna Lagna in the
case of horary chart.) The Upapada for the natal Lagna of the
above horoscope is caclulated thus: The 12th from Lagna is Libra,
whose lord Venus is in the 7th therefrom in Aries. He is seven
Rasis away from Libra. When seven Rasis are counted from
Aries, we get Libra itself as Upapada for Lagna. This is otherwise
called Upapada Lagna. The counting should always be done in
terms of Rasis.
What is the use of these Padas? If benefics are connected with
any Pada or its Upapada, that particular Bhava becomes poten-

MORASARA
tial while malefics diminish the value.
Now coming to our sloka in question, Marana Pada is arrived thus. Note how many Rasis away is the 8th lord from the
8th house. Count so many signs from the 8th lord's position. The
resultant Rasi is called Marana Pada. In the horoscope given
above, the 8th lord Mercury is in the 11th from the 8th. So, from
the 11th (Aries), we count 11 Rasis and get Aquarius as Marana
Pada. Such calculations can give greater clues to longevity.
(However, some translators simply have translated Marana Pada
as 8th house).
MW *KT TTV'llW ■'Wsrg: WTtf: I
taWWmW Wt wt<^ ^ it 41 n
If the Moon is weak and aspected by Rahu associated with
malefics, or if the Lagna Lord (or the Moon sign lord) has set in
(i.e\ the 7th from Lagna) or occupies the 8th, the child lives upto
its 6th or 8th year.
Notes: The Lagna Lord in the 7th (a Marakasthana) or in the
8th is adverse for longevity unless well aspected. But Phala
Deepika says that the Bhava occupied by the Lord of Lagna
stands to gain. However, the position of Lagna Lord in the 8th
shakes the foundation of the horoscope.
■?)TTf<Trf^ Wr fwrcfei
The Lagna lord with Rahu in the 7th brings death in 21 years
or 21 months or (even) in 21 days.
Notes: We may infer that the above maximum (21 years)
longevity can be expected if other planets are considerably
strong. Should they be also weak, death may occur in 21 months,
and utterly weak ones bring death in 21 days. On the whole, the
combination of Rahu and Lagna Lord in the 7th should be assessed in the context of the whole horoscope.
fW fW W?: II 43 II

CHAPTER 5
Add the Rasi sphutas of the Sun and the Moon. If the particular Rasi, or its angle or the 9th house thereof be occupied by a
malefic, death comes to pass due to poison or water (i.e. drowning, rains, floods etc.).
Notes: Suppose the Sun's longtiude is 175° and that of the
Moon is 292°. Then the sum equals to 467° and after expunging
360°, we get 107°, i.e. Cancer 17°. The angles of Cancer are:
Cancer, Libra, Capricorn and Aries; and the 9th from Cancer is
Pisces. So, any malefic in any of these five signs (around 17° in
particular) will cause the said results.
fart II 44 II
If a malefic planet is in the 8th house, while the Ascendant
lord is in angle in the company of a malefic, without benefic's
aspect, death in the 7th year may be predicted.
Tfan rpft: Tlffat: fcHNWfd
If Mercury and the Sun be together and and aspected by
benefics the child will die in its eleventh year even if it were on
the laps of Gods.
Notes: There is apparently something wrong in this sloka.
We v t understand why the Sun and Mercury when aspected
by benerics should prove harmful to longevity. There are only
two other benefics, i.e. Jupiter and Venus. Venus cannot aspect
the combination of the Sun and Mercury. The only planet that
can thus aspect is Jupiter. His aspect cannot be considered adverse to l or \"evity.
^ fa*? ^r^HI'll: fartfa h 46 II
'3T3: fa? ^laMi^l
^ 5?fazi ‘rtl'0-fl •pfwsufafrt?!: II 47 II
From Aries onwards, the fateful degrees are: 8, 9, 22, 22, 25,
Y* @4. 23, 0) 20, 21 and 10. Births in these degrees invite death

HORASARA
soon. The same for the Moon from Aries onwards are: 26, 12, 13,
Notes: Phala Deepiks, Ch. 13, slokas 10 and 11 quote the
above degrees for Lagna and Moon. But it does not state that
birth will accordingly inflict death. Jataka Tatwa, (B-108) states
that the following degrees are respectively fateful for the Moon:
death will be caused in the year denoted by such degree. Saravali
(Ch. 10, slokas 111 to 113) give the following fateful degrees for
the Moon respectively from Aries onwards: 8, 9, 22, 22, 25, 1, 4,
FFTI w II 48 II
Should the Moon be in her fateful degrees, mentioned above
and be in the company of a malefic, without relief from benefics,
or be in the 8th house or in angle (in such a fateful degree), the
child not only dies itself but takes away its mother too.
Notes: The Moon should be in her fateful degrees along with
a malefic without benefic aspect. Alternatively she can be in the
8th, Lagna, 4th, 7th, or 10th. Either combination can cause death
of the child and the mother.
Fmhnt ^jfisffi cm
aifhz#) n 49 11
Should the Lagna Lord be strong and occupy an angle or
trine, even the Arishtayogas, indicating infant death can be overcome.
Notes: Following are some of the combinations that nullify
such evils: Jupiter not combust and in Lagna or Lagna Lord with
strength and in good aspects or all planets in their own Rasis or
the Moon in deep exaltation or own house or friendly Navamsa
and in good aspect or the Moon in a friendly decanate along with
a friendly planet or the Moon’s kendra occupied by Jupiter.
t: I

CHAPTER 5
A benefic planet with strength in angle, not joining the 8th
Lord, leads to nullification of Arishta yogas (causing death) in a
nativity or prevailing at the time of a query.
Notes: The 8th Lord should not join the benefic, so that the
evil yogas are cancelled.
Rift eJTt
Reft RFt 4t‘iifW foWd 1151 M
If a strong planet is in Lagna, the 4th or the 10th and be not
in the company of the Sun, the malefic yogas (for short life) will
vanish.
TfRRRftWmr ft
Many evil yogas (3lfo? RhT) make the sustaining of the child
difficult. But if the Moon or the ascendant receives the aspect of
all planets, these yogas disappear as darkness does before the
Sun.
Notes: The single aspect of Jupiter is enough on the Moon
which can act like a lion throwing away a thousand elephants
(see Jatakadesa Marga.)
Thus ends the 5th Chapter Arishtas in Horasara of
Prithuyasas, son of Varaha Mihira.

CHAPTER 6
"3^?t <mdiRi>d w4 «t$i
TRT fteq, n 1 u
The evils causing infant deaths have since been explained.
Now, the Arishtas (causing deaths), arising out of planetary
combinations are explained (i.e. for elders too) as below. During
the period of a planet capable of inflicting evils, if Balarishtas
simultaneously exist, then the evil is greater.
Should the Lagna Lord or the dispositor of the Moon join
Sun, and be without benefic's aspect, while malefics are angular,
the native dies in his 20th year.
^ •M'lfjhtf l
^li^l^fd; Hfl-^ efT TtngrBt 113 II
The rising of Mars in Lagna while the Sun and Saturn in
strength are angular, brings about the end of the native within 20
years. If, however, such death does not occur, there will be
danger to his limbs or he will become sick.
Notes: In the above case, if the Sun and Saturn are in the 7th/
4th in particular. Mars from Lagna can aspect the two. Saturn
also can return his special 10th aspect to Mars. Thus, the yoga
proves more fatal to the native.
^ II 4 II

CHAPTER 6
Should Mars and the Sun be in the ascendant which is a
movable sign, while Jupiter is in the 10th and the Moon in tire 5th
or the 9th, the native will die in his 20th year.
Notes: This combination can be exemplified thus: LagnaCancer with the Sun and Mars; the Moon in the 5th in Scorpio
(incidentally in fall) and Jupiter in the 10th in Aries. Note Jupiter
does not aspect the Lagna or the Moon. The 8th from the Moon
or from Lagna is not also blessed by Jupiter, while the Lagna
Lord and the Moon sign lord are both in fall.
&PT) ^ WTO: I
If the decreasing Moon is in the 8th house and in Scorpio
Navamsa the native’s death will take place. (The longevity span
is not mentioned here, but it is said to be short life yoga.) He will
at the maximum live upto 25 years if the Moon is aspected by
Saturn and Mars.
Notes: According to Bhattotpala, though the Moon may be in
the 6th or the 8th, if she is unaspected by other planets, there is
no Arishta.
^ iTWrg: 1 1 6 i I
Should malefics be in the 8th from the Moon, weak benefics
in 3rd, 6th, 9th or 12h, while the Moon herself is in the 6th or the
8th, the life span is at the most 25.
rV'l'SlfiU'lHrt) ‘t.-viaiq'eH 7T?:
If both the 8th lords from the Moon and Lagna occupy
angles, while the 8th (either from the Moon or Lagna) is occupied
by a planet, and the Moon and the ascendant be devoid of
strength, the native will not cross thirty.
wwtTTjt ^rrawg: i i 8 1 1

HORASARA
Should malefics occupy the 2nd and 12th along with Jupiter,
and Rahu and Moon be in 7th or the 8th, the longevity of the
person is not above thirty.
ft fftlcl 1 1 9 1 1
Should a malefic set along with the Sun (i.e. being in the 7th
from Lagna only and not from the Moon) and join Rahu and
Jupiter while the Moon is in the 6th or the 8th, the life span is 30.
Notes: There should be the Sun, Rahu and Jupiter in the 7th
along with another malefic and the Moon should be in the 6th or
8th.
fftl^ II 10 1 1
The yoga caused by the position of Venus and Jupiter in
Lagna while Mars and Saturn are in the 5th and the Moon is
waning produces a person with short life.
wftftlfilftl TO efcai: t
■spft ffttcTH, II H II
The Sun and the Moon in the company of Rahu will cause
death at the age of 28. It is more certain if Jupiter is also in the
12th.
Notes: The placement of Jupiter in the 12th at the time of
solar eclipse is evil for longevity.
ijrftft H< y i wn ft-tt 11 12 11
If the lord of the 8th from Lagna is in an angle along with the
Moon, while the 8th is occupied by a planet and angles be devoid
of benefic's aspect or occupation, the longevity is only 32.
fftftft qfti
TOIoft 'ft fftlcj ll 13 II
Should the waning Moon be in Cancer, while the lord of the

CHAPTER 6
8th is in a Kendra, the 8th in turn being occupied by a malefic
and the ascendant lord is devoid of strength, the span of life is
only 30.
P4 TPlp: wit f=PR
II 14 II
Note the longitudes of the lords of the Ascendant and the
8th. When added, if it results in an angle or in the 8th, and a
malefic occupy that resultant place, the end comes in 27th year.
Example: Assume that Lagna Lord is in Virgo 16° and the 8th
lord is in Sagitarius 24°. The sum total of these two is: 166 + 264
= 430. Expunging of 360, we get 70° i.e. Gemini 10°. If this is
identical with a Kendra or the 8th house and is simultaneoulsy
tenanted by malefic, then the native dies at 27.
ctraf? qojhl II 15 II
Should the 8th lord be in a trine while the 8th is occupied by
Lagna Lord who in turn be in aspect to or in conjunction with
malefics, the person lives upto 24, even though there is benefic
aspect on the Lagna Lord and 8th lord .
qrqt^r gnjft ttfoir qrici bhi
wi n 16 it
If Jupiter is aspected by Saturn or conjoined with Rahu
and malefic is in Lagna, while the 8th is occupied, the life span is
only 22.
^Tfil qirawr^:. 37 II 17 II
Should the Lagna be occupied by its lord while the Sun and
the Moon are in the 4th together with malefics, and the 8th lord
is in a Kendra, the end of life is at 30 .
ii is ii

HORASARA
If the 8th lord occupies an angle while the ascendant lord is
devoid of strength, the subject lives only upto 30 or 32.
’TFtfajcT II 19 II
Should tlie Moon and Lagna Lord be weak, aspected by
malefics and be in Apoklinia houses (i.e. 3, 6, 9, or 12) the life
span is just 40.
^ eFfrl: WfgcT:l
ailM%FPF*T: FWzjj ^M^lia TfaWJ 1 1 20 II
If Jupiter and Venus are in an angle while Lagna Lord is in
conjunction with malefics in an Apoklima house, a person bom
before nightfall lives only upto 36.
-m: FTT^mArSTrf: WlhJ ifowj 1 1 21 II
Should the Sun be in Lagna which is an inimical Rasi to him
and hemmed between malefics, the person will always be sick
and his end comes at his 36th year.
■'ilTffran^ ifawp 1 1 22 II
Should the Sun and the Moon be in Lagna and benefics be in
a house other than a Kendra or the 8th, one bom in Gulika's
Muhurta will live upto 36.
5Ft '*ii t )?l "T^l 4AJI
• wf 7 ^ 7tg4rf I! 23 II
If the Lagna falls in a fixed sign and the 8th lord is in Lagna
while the 8th has a benefic in it, the life span is only forty.
TFltl cF#
When the Lord of Lagna is in the 8th Navamasa and the 8th
lord is in Lagna Navamsa along with malefics, the life span is
only 50.

CHAPTER 6
Notes: Note the Lords of Lagna and the 8th in Rasi chart. If
tHese two are respectively in 8th and Lagna in the Navamsa chart
tfegether with malefics, the person lives upto 50.
^ Wife: I
Should the angles be devoid of planets and the Lagna Lord
be not associated with malefics while malefics are in the 5th
house, a life span of 60 should be declared.
wjcisfa °HI
rrfesmfarc 1 1 26 1 1
If the Lagnalord is weak and is in the 12th, the person lives
for 60 years, provided Jupiter is not in Lagna.
Notes: Jupiter in Lagna always increases the longevity except
in the case of Capricorn. We do not know why the author does
not want Jupiter in Lagna in this particular case.
^ ^ ¥R$Jrll
farawil 1 1 27 II
When the ruler of the 8th is in an angle. Mars is in the
Ascendant and the Sun along with Saturn is in the 3rd or the 6th,
the person will live upto 44.
■tmfcmi'l ^ rFTFf wtf^rll
SKSIKIINjJ'Jbiii 1 1 28 II
Should the Moon be in Vargothamamsa, aspected by
malefics and occupy Lagna while benefics are without strength,
the person lives upto 48 years.
tM: MNflJWiiM: 3^'lWni
-qhT: tM: 1 1 29 II
If benefics are in malefic Rasis and Navamasas other than
Kendras while malefics are in Kendras, the longevity is only
medium.

HORASARA
fgwft ^ <rofoi
sHIVR^fSf ^ 1 1 30 II
Saturn in a common sign which is rising while the Moon is in
the 8th or the 12th, the life span, is 52 years.
3TfeW*R>^ ^ RIRlfacI 7T?ft «FPT: I
W.fc?l ^ ¥Rtrg: II 31 II
Should the Sun be in the Ascendant, identical with Cancer or
Scorpio along with malefics while the Moon is in the 2nd and
Jupiter is in any sign other than an angle, the person lives for
50 years.
^jj<9i'ldl: Rihi )
RFP: 5 ^T5^>T: II 32 II
If malefics are in the 4th and the 8th from Lagna or the Moon
and be not aspected by or conjoined with benefics, the person has
only medium span of life.
WT^TKFt RNlfelct ^ ^1
II 33 II
Should Jupiter and Venus be together while malefics are in
the 4th and the 10th, and the Moon is in the 12th the life span is
medium.
cFF^Tl Fl t l'h , =Ke^r! I
Ofl ^raFl 1 1 34 ||
If the Ascendant lord is in a Navamsa of Saturn while the
Moon along with the 8th Lord is in the 6th/ 8th/ 12th, the native
so born will live 58 years of his life.
A Rajayoga is formed when all the planets are posited in the
6th, the 8th and the 12th houses. Such Rajayoga gives the native
a life span of 58 years.

CHAPTER 6
T Tm EFT ^ffarETTI
*tfr 1 4t n^KTRT?^: pttr( qfcnf 9 ^ 44 , 1 1
Should malefics be in the 6th, 8th or the 12th with reference
to the Ascendant lord while there are no benefics in the 8th the
native lives for 60 years.
37 II
When the lords of Lagna and the Moon sign are combust or
are in the 7th and the 8th, and Jupiter in a house other than a
Kendra (angle), the longevity of the person is 65 years.
^ oy^IrH^l T?T a RflfacT fejFJ 1 1 38 II
The yoga of the Sun, Mars and Saturn in the ascendant, while
Jupiter is devoid of strength and the Moon is in the 5th or the
12th, gives a longevity of 70 years.
Notes: We do not know, how weak Jupiter can partake in
long life combination.
^jJtllllf^Tbl <rlHfef4Wsll qftl
fallow* *TFPTFT*faFf ^ II 39 II
irw'J it
HdHir<3 cf: -3TRRF: 1 1 40 II
Should there be a minimum of four planets in the first four
houses commencing from the Lagna, the native is blessed with
long life, wisdom and wealth. If there are four or more planets in
the next four houses the longevity is sixty while a similar disposition from the 9th onwards in the last four houses makes the
person short lived.
Notes: Planets should not, however, be in the end of Rasi;
otherwise they contribute very little to longevity. See: SiPtiHWMdi:
W PcTT: (Rama Dayalu’s Sanketa Nidhi, 3rd Sanketa).
#4 f?T Rfenf ^ 1141 II

'HORASARA
If maiefics occupy houses owned by malefic planets, or
houses considered evil while benefics are in kendras, the
person's longevity will be 80 years. Should there be a mix, it is
only 60.
Notes: Benefics should be in angles so that longevity is promoted and maiefics may be relegated to 6th, 8th and 12th or
houses owned by maiefics. Such maiefics should not preferably
be in angles.
T4T1JI
44 wt ^ rereflfaartf ^ 1 1 42 1 1
When Jupiter and the Moon are in the 4th, the Lagna Lord is
in the 11th with strength and benefics (or Mercury) are in the
10th, the person lives upto 80.
sfcfftrsrratT Tt^rcRt: 4^ THU 3TR41
Should the Sun, Mars and Saturn are in angles obtaining
Sagittarius or Pisces Amsa while Jupiter is in the Ascendant
and the rest are in any house other than the 8th, the native lives
upto 85.
Notes: Saturn, Ayushkaraka, along with Mars and the Sun is
required to be in angle and in a Navamsa of Jupiter, who is also
Ayushkaraka, to boost longevity. Simultaneously, Mercury, Venus and Moon should not be in the 8th house from Lagna, while
Jupiter is essential in Lagna, so that the said effects come to pass.
fjftft ^ '5113: II 44 II
Should maiefics be in malefic houses and benefics be in
benefic houses while the lord of Ascendant has strength, long life
may be predicted.
Notes: Maiefics should be in the houses of maiefics while
benefics should be in the houses of benefics to give long life.
Their positions with reference to Lagna also stand for consideration.

CHAPTER 6
^ TlMt ^Hts^ '3'fWT 1 1 45 II
Mars in the 8th, the Sun in Lagna and Jupiter in an angle: this
yoga gives a longevity of 100 years.
^F#rq: pn ^^i
'ffrcfT fdfavifa ^ (fl) ^4+4
cfrff^ld ^ fay-STT'l: 1 1 46 11
Should the angles, trines and the 8th be not occupied by
malefics while the Ascendant lord and Jupiter are in angles, the
native lives upto 100. Such a person is free from diseases, enjoys
all kinds of happiness and strives for a common cause.
fwfershTzft
ThrrRj TpiftpyiTOf rafwcri 1 1 47 II
The Sun, Mars and Saturn be in movable Navamsas while
Jupiter and Venus are in fixed Navamsas and the rest of .the
planets are in dual Navamsas: This yoga gives a long lease pf life,
weapons and kingdom.
*#33 3lf3 Wn^PTctf ^ 1 1 48 II
A person lives for one hundred years remaining free from
diseases if in his nativity benefics are in the 4th or the 9th and in
odd Navamsas, malefics be in Lagna and in even Amsas and the
Moon is in Lagna with full rays (i.e. the Full Moon in Lagna).
Notes: For this yoga, the Full Moon should be in Lagna in
odd or even Navamsa, while simultaneously malefics should
also join her in Lagna, but be only in even Navamsas. The third
condition is that benefics should be in 4th /9th but in odd Amsas.

HORASARA
[f the Lagna lord has great strength, unaspected by malefics
but aspected by benefics only and be in an angle, the native has
long lease of life, and is of virtuous and royal disposition.
fTUTfcWPrfTT TT^:I
TTPTr^WT=ri
■^(WFfZg7TF?qhTT^tfh II 50 II
If the Lord of the 8th excels the ruler of Lagna in strength and
is in angle while malefics are in the 8th and 12th, the native is
short lived or in the case of medium life, it is with hardships.
Notes: The Lagna Lord should be stronger than the 8th lord
to confer good longevity and should be in angles. Should the 8th
lord be stronger than the Lagna lord, in normal circumstances, it
is adverse as Lagna is the foundation.
Now, the combinations for extraordinary span of life.
*Fff <UI*MI&J , mi^rd II 51
Should Mercury, Jupiter and Venus be in same Rasi or
Navamsa or occupy Lagna while Saturn is in the 9th, the native
lives for a yuga (JJT) with the help of chemical tonics or boosters.
Notes: The effects of combinations like the one under discussion are quite impossible these days. However, such yogas can
give a full lease of life.
Should Jupiter, Mercury and Saturn be disposed any where
in the 4th, 6th, 8th and 12th, but be together in one Navamsa, the
native lives for 2000 years.

CHAPTER 6
Notes: These three planets should be in the same Navamsa,
but be in any manner distributed in the 4th, 6th, 8th or 12th
houses in Rasi.
wat a?: wfaatssi oiTc^ ynramry^TiTFarautf 1 1 53 1 1
All the planets in the Navamsas of Sagittarius and Pisces and
in angles, 9th or the 2nd in Rasi make a person follow ascetic
course in the very boyhood, live for a full yuga and write
many sastraic works.
&3PWF1 thrift facFt y'lMHFJ: II 54 II
If the Sun, Mars and Jupiter be in a Navamsa owned by
Saturn and are posited in angles or the 9th in Rasi, while the
Moon is at the end of a sign in Lagna, the person lives for a yuga
with wealth.
aw ^ f?wft apaifti
y^i’lW yPPTl'Nld: ^TRTjtfd 1 1 55 II
If the lord of tire 9th is in the 9th in aspect to Mars while the
Moon is in Scorpio Navamsa or Aries Navamsa there obtains a
Muniyoga in the nativity and the person becomes a superior
sage, writes many works relating to Sastras and lives for a yuga.
waiter dHyii'i?i an
mffepl wftpl aratw 1 1 56 1 1
If the Moon is not decreasing (i.e. be waxing) and occupies a
friendly Rasi and friendly Navamsa coinciding with the 11th or
the 1st, while the 9th has Saturn in it, the person lives for uncountable years.
WlM) 1 1 57 II
If Saturn and Jupiter are together in the 2nd, the 9th or the
10th and in one Navamsa while the Sun and Mercury rise in
Lagna, the native is liked by the sages and has a long lease of life.

HORASARA
Notes: Saturn anti Jupiter should be in the 2nd, 9th or the
10th, in the same quarter of constellation so that they are in one
Navamsa.
■srr^i
■glw: ii
58 II
Those bom with the above-mentioned exraordinarily long
life combinations will be able to control their senses, just as the
sages, and chant religious hymns. They live in caves using divine
medicines.
%nr ^hNRvii TT^rftrrt:
4l , tltb9*H Ih^h. 1 1 59 II
I have thus explained these yogas as explained by Yavanas
with the help of my past deeds. The sum effects of these yogas be
decided in various dasa bhuktis after a careful analysis.
Thus ends the Sixth Chapter, entitled Arishta Yoga in
Horasara of Prithuyana*. son of Varaha Mihira.

CHAPTER 7
am ^TT ^'IWl^dHR-H-UliN % tm: I
cm ??irjprt w?! mmfo uReymm 1 1 l it
I shall now explain in a clear and careful way the method of
knowing the dasa periods for those that are bom under the yogas
stated earlier.
^pif mfaci: 1 1 2 1 1
The numerous methods of assessing longevity have been
clearly stipulated by old scholars Maya, Yavana, Siddhasena,
Prabodha, Mandavya and Vishnu Gupta.
^ 3 fof*iwn rarfnRvjn 1 1 3 1 1
fazilcWHi: UfP: 114 II
Should the planets commencing from the Sun onwards remain in their highest exaltation points, they contribute 19, 25, 15,
12, 15, 21 and 20 years for the total longevity of the native.
zawrf ^rn^PR it 5 it
The planet that is at its deepest debilitation degree contributes half of the above mentioned years. Should it be anywhere in
between, then the number of years will have to be found by
proportional calculations.

HORASARA
^rqfci 1 1 6
5T^nfeFftraT fw^dtei W cTCTT^:l
qhrcmfarf^n; ffcn^Ttfgcf w ciw^: • i ■ 1 1
Note the difference between a planet's actual position and
deep debilitation point and multiply this figure by the figure of
Pindayurdaya year (sloka 3 supra) and arrive at the planet's
contribution to longevity.
fPqrfq ?Tr^J ip.qbTq 1 1 8 1 1
Deduction for planets in combustion, inimical houses, and
the visible half, that are involved in planetary war or that are
close to Rahu etc. should be made only after being suitably
taught by a Guru.
ijcfcTTO UFFI 1 1 9 1 1
origin
qT^
3?«f ■qift! qrqpq qrq
2JI^-*'k^ fcfiftsOJi ^qf=T ^ II 10 II
Amsayurdaya calculations should be made as above and the
deductions for planets posited in the 12th, 11th, 10th, 9th, 8th and
7th should be made as under: 1, l/2,_l/3, 1/4, 1/5, l/6th respectively. This is in the case of malefics. For benefics, ony 50% of the
reduction as above applies. Planets lose half of their contribution
if in fall or in combustion. In the matter of Vyayadiharana (i.e
position in 12th, 11th, 10th, 9th, 8th, and 7th) if both malefics and
benefics are together in one house then no deduction applies to
benefics. If there are two planets in the same house, then the
deduction should be only through the strongest of the two.
^ieci ■q^s*Jt?< u i 7ifq?j5f°rjiqi

CHAPTER 7
f^Kmwrr
^ERT*Rtl: ?T^1^ H 11 II
The planets, leaving Mars, if occupy inimical houses, lose a
third of contribution. The eclipsed planets lose half of their
contribution except Venus and Saturn. Those that have lost in
planetary war lose one third. The lumenaries lose l/12th if they
join the nodes.
Notes: There is no reduction for Mars even if he be in an
enemy's house. The Sun is m the planet that combusts others.
Hence, the half reduction does not apply to him apart from
Venus and Saturn (as Venus and the Saturn do not lose their rays
even if they are combust vide Uttarakalamrita. Lastly, the Sun
and Moon do not involve in planetary war; as such no reduction
applies to them on this count. According to the saying “Mars is
strong even in his enemy's house."
3 fafirn qR^di ii 12 it
The contribution in number of years by ascendant equals to
the number of Navamsas it has passed, when counted from
Aries. If the Lagna is strong and occupied by benefic, the figure
should be multiplied by one fourth and if it be weak and occu->
pied by malefics, then the figure should be reduced by one
fourth. Thus, the period contributed by Lagna should be computed.
Notes: Suppose the Lagna (be it in any Rasi) falls in Scorpio
Navamsa, its contribution is 8 years, as the sign Scorpio is the 8th
from Aries. Further, this figure has to be modified thus: if
benefics are there or if the Lagna is strong (by way of Shadbala
calculations), the contribution 8 becomes 10, when one fourth is
increased. Should the Lagna be weak or malefic occupied, then
one fourth is to be reduced, i.e. the said figure becomes 6 only.
WfER II 13 II

HORASARA
The longevity will be exactly arrived at by assessing a
planet’s exact position from its exaltation and debilitation points,
if the planet has benefic company, or when the Lagna is strong
and falling in a benefic's house or when the 7th is occupied.
feWR 11 14 II
While the system of calculating longevity by exaltation and
debilitation process is common to all human beings, the difference between Dasa (i.e. periods) and Sanskara (i.e. process of
rectification by proper deductions) should be considered carefully.
II 15 II
The process of rectification or deduction from Dasa years
contributed should be made with the help of the strongest
Navamsa. A wise astrologer shall do so, after assessing the
strength of the two.
T|fcrai WhT5f:l
II 16 II
Note the longitudes of the planets in terms of sign, degrees
and minutes. Multiply this by 108 and divide by 12 and the
remainder will indicate the years contributed.
^ iyTfSRl i iftvfTTi? d if) ^ (
II 17 II
The multiplier is two if the planet is in its own Navamsa, or
decanate or Rasi or Vargothama Navamsa. It is to be trebled if it
is retrograde motion or in exalted state. It should be halved if the
planet is in fall.
The reductions for Mars should be done here too as explained for Pindayurdaya and while occupying inimical houses.

CHAPTER 7
Lagna will contribute the same number of years as the Navamsas
attained by it.
TT^RT -qt I I 19 II
nf:
WlPf: 1 1 20 II
Amsayurdaya shall be esorted to if the Lagna is the strongest. Should the Sun be the strongest, then Pindayurdaya is
recommended. Naisargikayu is adopted if the Moon is the strongest. If all the planets be in own houses, exaltation houses or in
such Navamsas, then also Amsayurdaya is recommended. Same
applies if the planets are not conjunct Lagna, Sun and the Moon.
3TO ^TTfPR FPFtwfa ^oRITqt^l
dWKiy<fq' 3$ fcmqy*r{ ^ ll 21 II
There is another method of Ayurdaya enumerated by
Jeevasarma. I now detail the same in he following verses.
-i-idiqt: mri ^r®^rr: i
TR •T<q '•TRT Tjfirrai rftof 1 1 22 II
Note the longitudinal distance between a planet's position
and its deep fall degree. Convert this into minutes and divide by
21600. The quotient will reveal the years contributed. The remainder should be multiplied by 12 and divide again by 21600;
the quotient is months. Again multiply the remainder by 30 and
divide by 21600. The days are represented by the quotient. Multiply the remainder by 60 and divide by 21600 the quotient will
yield ghaties.
Notes: If the planet is past its debilitation point and be towards its exaltation, then the longitudinal distance be calculated
from deep fall to its position.
Reduce 17y lm 22d 8gh and 34vi if the planet is close to its

HORASARA
exaltation. Should it be close to its debilitation, then add a similar
figure.
H ijljft'uf "4 1 1 24 II
The deductions do not apply to Venus and Saturn if they are
eclipsed, and also to Mars in his enemy's house.
FTOlt $ HA ^|i>PR?T^?l5^r ^ 1 1 25 II
Lagna’s contribution is equal to the number of Navamsas it
attained. A malefic therein reduces the figure by one fourth and
a benefic therein increases the figure by one fouth.
^ 'iilonipfaa *pzr T Titenji 1 [ 4T i i 26 1 1
^ WT n^UHlMyWIWdjWll't «H4ftdl^l
41^-4^ HH'IdWil 4T cKl Wl(7)fn T7TT M+rm II 27 II
According to Jeevasarma, planets in the 2nd and the 12th
from Lagna/the Moon, all planets near their debilitation point,
those that are devoid of strength and those in Lagna or in the 7th
will reduce the contribution to one seventh of the total life.
tlfitW* WFl ftfadte3l?FT "41
I^RWrethR 1 1 28 ll
Now about Trinal reduction (Trikona Sodhana) with reference to Ashtaka Vargas. First draw a chart of Rasis as usual,
Mark benefic dots of Ashtaka Varga of the planet required and
then Trikona reductions should be made.
Notes: The author now deals with the 4th system of assessing longevity. For detailed calculations of Ashtaka Varga system,
refer to works like Brihat Jataka, Saravali, Prof. P.S. Sastri’s
Secrets of Ashtaka Varga etc. Simultaneously Ch. 17 infra may
also be seen.
r*bluilfcj TJfal irafomt:
f44^4THWITT4 £rll4£44UIW«n II 29 II

CHAPTER 7
ii 31 ii Hi^r^rot
TTFrt ^ef I
For the purpose of deductions take the sets of Aries and its
trines, Taurus and its trines, Gemini and its trines and Cancer
and its trines. In each set, which ever is the least, put the same in
the other two. If one of the three is vacant, no change should be
made in the other two. If two Rasis are vacant, then the third one
. should also be made dotless. Lastly if all the three Rasis are equal
with dots, vacate dots in all the three Rasis.
II 32 II
wft F^ I
w II 33 II
W II 34 II
T FHlfs[^ ll^cl ^IFSlfFFT
wra?^ ^r=f Ff^KmnaiT 1135 11
^'I < lllf6u4l') -T TWhF 'ti'iin I
w^FiT^n end c^rr 1 1 36 11
FFT{ 1 1 37 II
The above is the method of trinal reductions. Now the
method of reduction to the pairs of Rasis which have common
lords is explained below. This is called Ekadhipathya Sodhana.
This reduction is applicable when there are benefic dots in both
the Rasis owned by a planet. Should there be less number of dots
in a sign while the other Rasi (of the same planet) is not occupied,
the smaller number of dots shall be used for both the Rasis. If the
unoccupied sign has more dots, than the occupied sign, then
make the dots nil in the unoccupied sign. (The occupation can be
by any planet). Similar reduction applies when there are equal
number of dots in both the Rasis owned by a planet, but one of
them should be free from occupation. Should both the Rasis be
occupied, no reduction shall be made. Should there be the same

HORASARA
number of dots in both the signs, which are not occupied, dots
should be made nil in both the Rasis. If one of the Rasis be vacant
in respect of dots, retain dots in the other Rasi. The rules for
Ekadhipatya Sodhana do not apply to Cancer and Leo.
Notes: The suggestions given in slokas 32-37 are for reductions applicable to two Rasis owned by one planet and are called
Ekadhipatya reductions which should be done after trinal reductions. Since the Moon and the Sim have each one sign only, there
is no Ekadhipatya Sodhana for Cancer and Leo.
3 Rzrtfi wRPhr "38 1 1
^ yft; n 39 n
#TT: ESTWSqPjfafl: imftr EqrU: I
Hie final figures in each sign, after effecting trinal reduction
as well as Ekadhipatya reduction as above be multiplied by the
concerned Rasi multipliers, and if a particular Rasi be occupied
the figure must be multiplied by the respective planet’s multiplier. The Rasi multipliers from Aries onwards are: 7, 10, 8, 4, 10,
5, 7, 8, 9, 5, 11 and 12 respectively.
sh^fuMI: U 40 1 1
frwiT tlftiyuil I
nyfHf JjUK,|^x) TJUTZ^ qzps || 41 II
The figures of multiplication for Jupiter, Mars, Venus and
Mercury are 10, 8, 7 and 5 respectively. The multiplier is 5 for
other planets (i.e. for the Sun, the Moon and Saturn), the multipliers for Rasis and planets should be treated separately. The
dots in the 12 Rasis, obtained after Trinal and Ekadhipatya reductions should be multiplied by Rasi multipliers individually.
Should a Rasi be occupied by a planet, the dots should be
multplied by Graha Gunakara.
Tjg 1 1 42 II
Hyfch*ird«' , i|4>lT|WI<rvi=>y ?[ ^ITO: I

CHAPTER' 7
fw rto ws 1 1 43 n
TOfa4TfT4qffu( to qfWlRd^ 1 1 44 h
tWiqifJSI: 4111(01 H«^<r1!fW<=lry<l:l
The Rasi figure and Graha figure (as obtained through process explained in slokas 38-40 1/2) should be added in respect of
each planet, together. (This can be called Sodhya Pinda). This
Pinda should be multiplied by 7 and divided by 27. The quotient
is years of longevity by the p lanet concerned. [Multiply the re- —
mainder by 27 to get months ! The next remainder is multiplied
by 30 and divided by 27 to get days. The latest remainder is
multiplied by 60 and divided by 27 to get ghatis. 27 years make
one Mandala and so the years in excess of 27 (for each planet)
should be rejected.
Notes: According to Sambhu ilura, if the contribution of
years is in excess of 27 but less than 54, then subtract the quotient
from 54. If the quotient is more than 54, subtract it f-om 81, and
if above 81 subtract from 108.
The contribution of each planet should be worked out as
explained in the slokas above.
cT4 4 iH^4I
fwto ITOT 1 1 46 II
The contribution of a planet should be halved if it is in the
company of another planet. Similar halving should be done if a
planet is debilitated or eclipsed. For a planet posited in enemy's
house, the loss is one third. This applies also to those in the
visible half of the Zodiac, those that have lost in planetary war
and those that are in the Pata range of the luminaries. When a
planet wants repeated deductions, then, only the highest should

HORASARA
be done. The figures for all the planets should be added together
and multiplied by 324 and divided by 365. The net longevity is
equal to the quotient in the process.
Notes: The above reductions are explained thus. Suppose
Mercury has contributed 12 years, the reductions are as under:
(a) If he is along with another planet, in the Rasi chart, then
his contribution is halved, i.e. only 6 years.
(b) If Mercury is combust or in Neecha, then also half is
deduced. (Combustion need not necessarily occur when
the Sun is in the same sign. Only the longitudinal distance counts. Suppose Mercury is in 28° of Leo while the
Sun is in 2° of Virgo. Even then Mercury is combust).
(c) If Mercury in the example is in his enemy's house,
then one third reduction should be made, i.e. 12 is
reduced to 8.
(d) If it is in the visible half of zodiac, then also 1 /3rd shoud
be rejected. Visible half means the area from Lagna
Bhavamadhya to 7th Bhavamadhya counted backwards.
According to Prof. P.S. Sastri, the reduction for malefic
planets in the visible half should be done as under:
12th house: Full, llth-l/4th, 10th»l/3rd, 9th~l/4th,
8th-l/5th and 7th-l/6th. He countinues to say that
for benefics 50% of the above should be applicable for the
6 houses.
(e) One third reduction is made if a planet is involved in
war. (War does not apply to the Sun and Moon).
(f) One third reduction should be made if a planet is involved in Rahugrasta Surya or Chandra Grahanas. Pata
means Rahu's path. Hence Pata range of the Sun and the
Moon is interpreted as above.
(g) Only the highest reduction shoud be enforced if a planet
attracts more than one reduction as mentioned from the
above. In such case, only half is reduced once. But according to Prof. Sastri , there is full reduction in the case
of a malefic in 12th from Lagna, which of course can be
done only once.

CHAPTER 7
rPR ^rn ^1
TJof TT?FTT t^T 47fi 4^ 4*147 II 49 II
The contribution by each planet in years etc. should be found
as above and total dasas should be known accordingly.
3rerf<7iraTr[ : TT^TTgrrqTtTR: I
arrjift =mMih$ 47hW[rt 1 1 50 1 1
Among all the systems of Ayurdaya, Ashtakavarga is the
best one. The longevity should be evaluated, through Ashtaka
Varga system, when the Moon is angular and in the company of
a planet while the 10th house has both benefics and malefics.
wmi Trfw^l
The benefic dots in the seven Ashtaka Vargas (i.e. considering the planets from the Sun to Saturn) should be added Rasiwise
to get the Sarvashtaka Varga figures and then only trinal reductions and Ekadhipatya reductions should be made.
3 ^ Trf?TJ II 52 II
If any Rasi has more than 12 bindus, then retain only 12. All
the Rasis should be reduced to such process.
Notes: When the Sarvashtaka Varga is subjected to what is
called Mandala Sodhana as explained in this sloka, we get corrected Sarvashtaka Varga chart.
SK5Mlf<’J«l ttrara *K4lfadH 1 1 54 II
The said figure (after reductions) should be multiplied by the
Rasi multipliers and Graha multipliers (as explained in 38 to
40 1/2 supra.) and the total should be multiplied by 7 and di-

HOR.4S.4R4
vided by 27. The quotient will give longevity in years.
^ ii 55 ii
Tnrr^'cr^rf <H®vi^f^'K' tra^i) 1 1 56 1 1
Should the quotient cross 100, expunge the multiples of 100
and if the native is of long life (as per the suggestions of the
horoscope) then retain only 100. The figure should be then multiplied by 324 and divided by 365.
■own jj twnsfa^FTfe^ arsqct i i 57 1 1
^Nhp ’ERfeni
^ m BfWTC FIN^ 1 1 58 II
f^T^^WrlT: I
^PT?RPlevW U?Wg#wftT 1 1 59 II
The rectified longevity of all the planets should be collected
together. The cotribution of each planet is arrived as under: The
dasa periods worked out as per Bhinashtaka varga method
should be added together and converted into ghaties. This figure
is to be kept as divisor. The Ashtaka Varga ghatis should be
multiplied by various Bhinashtaka Vargadasa figures and divided by the divisor referred to above. The quotient indicates the
years contributed.
r<HHWI«tM4-d wm ^cfcKMtcD
The days, months and years should be computed as above.
Thus exact periods of longevity contributed by each planet
should be calculated.
tra am 3W:I
■sreffa II 61 II
The method of the calculations of dasa periods, contributed
by each planet through Ashtaka Varga has already been ex-

CHAPTER 7
plained. When the Lagna is strong, the years contributed by
Lagna is equal to the figures signified by Lagna Rasi.
wrerft faiira cfktc farfrf^u
The years contributed by Lagna should be known only after
ascertaining by both the methods. The Ashtaka Varga Dasa system is found acceptable to all.
'vF'HiS yqihFtd
T?TI 1 1 63 II
Should there be any problem in working out Dasa periods
due to conjunction of planets, then a different method may be
adopted. The planet's exaltation or depression should be made
use of to find out the Dasa periods.
TfaTfhlFFTrRft: dMfcledh'l'Mjfal
If the planets occupy inimical or depression signs, Yavana's
school of thought should be followed to calculate the planetary
contribution.
mtnafKrT ^ I
arrg^hr n 65 n
Should the Moon be in conjunction with another planet and
be in a kendra while all other planets are out of Kendras, then
according to Manitha, the Samudayashta Varga system is to be
restored to.
rpj ^Jof: 4)-s4'V- t M I
atr^kfWfernTei Tiratt 1 1 66 1 1
Should all planets be in one house other than an angle, then
the effects of Dasa arising out of Ayurdaya contributions cannot
be estimated at all.
3trSfi<j4t , l'Ho|l 4 FpiT: I
rftT ’vtllfa'll^kl^lltj 4 7W4ci ' = J ; TT II 67 II

HOKASARA
w^wnicf: TI^qT^Tf^trT^:
If a person bom is of short life or long life (unduly long life?),
the longevity cannot be determined through the method of planetary Dasa periods. Malefics in the 6th, 8th, and 12th will make
one short lived. Benefics in the said houses will give long life.
Middle life should be predicted if there is a mix of good and bad
planets in these houses.
Thus ends the seventh chapter entitled Ayurdayadhyaya in
Horasara, of Prithuyasas, son of Varaha Mihira

CHAPTER 8
" f^iQxqmrfeUT^T'j u
hTTT <*>fa dl ^t?TT: I
TTT^ ?K^r OTnlftcteM 1 1 1
The dasa of the strongest comes first among the Lagna, the
Sun and the Moon. Then comes the dasa of the planet that is
angular while the third dasa is of that which is non-angular.
Should all the three be of equal strength, then the order is based
on larger number of years contributed. Should even the years be
rjot different, then the one rises after next conjunction will be
predominant. Finally if these risings are similar, then the dasa of
the one that has risen first will lead the scheme.
fas ^ ^T: f^HI'+U-AI
WRcl faqrofa^r fa fafift^ fa?IFf 112 II
Based on the strength of the above mentioned trinity, the
three various stages of life will be effective in order. The Strength
or otherwise of these three will decide the effects of the three
stages of life.
■rgfagffarat fwR:
FIFJ, II 3 II
Should the dispositor of the Moon be exalted, in a friend’S|
house, in his own Varga/Rasi and have no aspect of malefics
then she will powerfully reveal the qualities of Lagna Lord anc
prove auspicious to the native from the very birth.

HORASARA
a^r MI'^-^JrqrcKi'^ jPlTsfg^T t? *Rf% RR3T 1 1 4 1 1
Should all the benefics be in 3rd, 6th and 11th houses, the
subject will be happy in his early part of life. Malefics in these
houses will give wife, money and issues in the second part of
one's life.
HR-pq ^ a 5 xp*r cd-WII «T^r¥H|
cj W-a xft 3 1 1 5 II
Should the dasa of the Lagna not open at birth, then some
other dasa may occur. However, some do not subscribe to this
view point. The right way should be conceived per mercy of the
preceptor.
snrtfcwi wl^iyyihr^ ^ n 6 n
The dasa of a planet leaving its exaltation sign is called
Avarohi dasa and the {good) results gradually diminish. Similarly when a planet is approaching it s exaltation sign, its dasa is
called (Arohini) and it will give full effects.
Rsftl
3R1T feTTR ?RT II 7 II
As regards the dasa of a planet in exaltation, friend's Rasi or
own Rasi, such Amsa, its depression or inimical sign or is
eclipsed, it will give mixed effects and prove auspicious in the
second half.
Rfaai WFvTRf Umfeli ^?RT: WtaftRI
sn^rETERRTRT: cTHTWr 118 II
The Sun gives vitality to the dasa effects, while the Moon
regains the same. All other planets are known as starry planets
and remain under the influence of the Sun and the Moon.
«fWT) RMfcl? fTR ?pqi II 9 II
In the system of Naisargika dasa, the dasa of planets follows

CHAPTER 8
as under: Moon, Mars, Mercury, Venus, Jupiter, Sun and Saturn
and these prove auspicious in their turns.
ro&fq fwfafarar: tjto: i
TOT^ TO# fTOJfqhrrg MW: Tg: II 10 II
Though a planet may be in evil Rasi or evil Amsa or eclipsed
by the Sun, he will yield good results if he has potence to bestow.
If he is in enemy's house or Amsa, he will under the circumstances, yield kingdom.
Notes: "Nisarga" means bestowing or granting and hence a
liberal translation as above is made. It has also been translated as
Naisargika dasa elsewhere. The reader is the best judge.
TOT HTOTTOtn TOST TT?1 TORTOR! TORI
?TfWTTTO flTI TJjfrofTOTTT TORI TOR II 11 II
The planet placed in the Hora or Navamsa of the Sun will
give full effects while the one in the Moon's Navamsa or Hora, it
is only in a pipe dream that the results mature.
Notes: Refer to Brihat Jataka, Ch. XXI, slokas 4 and 5. Malefic
in solar horas in odd Rasis make one famous, engaged in big
undertaking; powerful, wealthy and bright. Similarly benefics in
lunar horas in even Rasi make the person mild in disposition,
brilliant in form, happy, lucky, intelligent and sweet spoken. If
malefics are in lunar horas in odd signs or benefics in solar horas
in even signs, the native is devoid of the respective effects.
wi TOTOl ## TO?} ff>TTTO# #1
TOT TOT RZTOTT ^ TORlfTOTR WTTOTT II 12 II
The dasa of a planet in the lagna, exaltation house, own rasi
or own drekkana will be fully beneficial. The effects of such a
planet placed in any navamsa as above will only be mixed.
roRTTj to<^ TOftrororfroft to to1%i
TOffafTOJTO: TOpTfrm 1 1 13 II
If at the start of a dasa, the Moon be in Cancer, the person
will be harmed by a lady and kill cattle. In the house of Mars, he
will kill the landlord.

HORASARA
Notes: The details to work out the starting movements of
Dasa or Bhukti are elaborately dealt with in the notes under sloka
18 of this chapter.
fqsrvrrfi<T i
faifct 1 1 w 1 1
Should the Moon (at the time of a commencement of dasa) be
in a Rasi owned by Mercury, learning, proficiency in sastras and
making new acquaintances are indicated. If it is Jupiter's Rasi,
one begets comforts, residence and respect.
MR"W4fHdiyird n 15 n
And in the house of Venus, she gives enjoyment of food and
drink galore, comforts and destruction too. Should Saturn be the
owner of such a house, the person derives pleasures through the
woman he married and does menial acts.
M TTfft on || 16 II
If the said Moon be in Leo, the native lives in impeccable
forests, feels inclined to torture others and quarrel with wife and
son.
wRsfq gii
MI<&>=A <prt ne+idf II 17 II
At the commencement of a dasa, if the dasa lord be in a
friendly house, or be exalted or in an upachaya house, trine or
the 7th, there will be generally good results.
wWlWlfa ^TT q yldvRddl II 18 II
If the Moon is in adverse house (at the commencement of a
dasa) the lord of the dasa, though placed in exaltation (in the
natal horoscope) will not give good affects.
Notes: Authors like Manithha, Kesava Daivagna, Mahadeva

CHAPTER S
etc. suggest that the Moon's good position at the moment of the
starting of a Dasa is necessary in order that the Dasa Lord,
Bhukti Lord etc. bestow good results. This is inspite of the fact
that the planet concerned in the nativity may not be that good.
Conversely, if the Moon is not well placed at Dasa Prarambha
Kala or Bhukti Prarambha Kala (i.e. commencement of Dasa or
Bhukti), with well placed Dasa Lord /Bhukti Lord with reference
to the nativity, only adverse results will be felt. Keeping this in
mind, Prithu Yasas also suggests that the Moon should be well
placed at the commencement of a planetary period. Unfortunately, direct and sufficient stress is not made in this work on
Udu dasa or Vimshottari Dasa, as the chapter concerned has only
a couple of slokas, and is placed at the end of the work. However, Mantreswara attaches more and due significance to Udu
dasa and places the particular chapter at the head of the various
dasas in his Phala Deepika. Does Prithu Yasas also feel otherwise
that Udu Dasa is the most reliable, vide ch. 31, sloka 11? As Udu
Dasa is found more useful and is very popular, we ought to
know the mechanism of dasa bhuktis and the method of finding
out dasa /bhukti prarambha kala. After finding out the exact
moment when a dasa or bhukti starts, a chart mapping the
planets should be erected to get more informative clues. Hence,
1 explain the same in this chapter itself, so that the reader can
couple it with instructions from all other sources. Without knowing commencing time of a period, one cannot arrive at exact
results.
The total period of Vimshottari dasa is 120 years. But the
details of bhuktis given in standard almanaces are only in Savana
mana (i.e. based on lunar months) whereas Manitha and Kesava
Daivajna suggest that Saura Mana (months and years based on
solar scheme). This reference is of couse to Vimshottari Dasa’s
context. Sensibly, even though it is not mentioned, Sauramana
year should be adhered to for all dasa schemes. Kesava Daivajna
in his Kesava Paddhati gives an elaborate group of tables for
various Dasas and Bhuktis for Udu dasa system. Mantreswara
in his Phala Deepika, Ch. 19, sloka 4 unequivocally instructs that
the year for Udu dasa equals to the Sun's full course to complete
one round of the zodiac. Kesava’s Saura Varsha as one year is
equal to 365 days 15 ghatis 31 liptas and 5 viliptas or 365d 6h 12m

HORASARA
36s. This is actually the time that the Sun requires to touch the
same zodiacal degree again in his transit.
Coming now to Kesava p addhati, we give in table I, the
correction factors which should be applied to Savana Mana
scheme of .the Dasa Bhuktis and the resultant scheme is
Saura Mana scheme of Vimshottari Dasa. In Table II, the actual
Dasa Bhuktis in Vimshottari Dasa system in Sauramana are
given. There are Various stages to go through in order that the
scheme is applied to a horoscope. The balance of opening dasa
should also be converted into Sauramana by applying the corrections shown in Table 1 to the Savana Mana balance usually
obtained at birth. Then the Savana Mana dasas in order can be
applied to know the beginning of a particular Dasa. For Bhuktis
in any dasa, similar system is adopted. The selection of
Ayanamsa is left to the choice of the reader. The best one, however, is Chaitra Shukla Paksha which is followed by Lahiri's
ephemeris.
In the process, we are concerned with the total duration of
the birth star. The indication of time given here are in ghaties or
hours from the zero hour of the day and not from Sun-rise. First
draw the dasa balance at birth in Savana Mana, as usual. After
noting the same in Sauramana duration, we can apply it to
Gregorian calendar conveniently in the way that is being explained herein.
Suppose a native is born on June 1, 1974 at 15h 45 m (i.e. 3.45
p.m.). Let us find out the beginning of Ketu dasa in Saura Mana.
The birth star is Chitra. The unexpired portion of Chitra at birth
is 1 hour. Refer to Lahiri's Ephemeris 1974. It is advisable to use
Savana mana at this stage as I mentioned earlier. Mars Dasa is for
2520 days. Thus we get a balance of 103d 23h 14m as per Savana
measure. Convert this into Sauramana with the aid of conversion
factors given in Table I and then add the Sauramana durations
shown in Table II straightaway for dasas of Rahu, Jupiter, Saturn
and Mercury, to get the beginning moment of Ketu Dasa, which
follows the ending moment of Mercury Dasa. Proceed with the
corrections as per the steps given below, with the Savana Mana
Mars balance at birth:

CHAPTER 8
Mars balance in Correction to obtain
Savana mana
Sauramana
Days
Gh
Vigh
Lipta.
100 days
3 days
58 ghatis
4 Vighaties
Correction to Savanamana to get Sauramana
Savana Mars balance
Saura mana Mars balance
Saura mana Rahu dasa
Saura mana Jupiter
Saura mana Saturn
Saura mana Mercury
Saura mana Ketu dasa
beginning from birth 256743
This is from the moment of birth, Ketu Dasa in Saura mana
starts after a lapse of 25673 days, 34 ghatis, 36 vighatis, 47 Liptas
and 34 Viliptas. One Lipta is made of 60 Viliptas; one Vighati is
made of 60 Liptas; one ghati is made of 60 vighatis and one day
consists of 60 ghatis. One ghati is equal to 24 minutes of modem
time.
To apply Saura mana
durations to Gregorian
calender we
ought to know the number of days elapsed from the beginning of
Kali Yuga. In Table III, Kali elapsed days are given for easy
reference as obtained from Lahiri's Advance Ephemeris (19512050 A.D.). As without this Table III, the reader may not be in a
position to profitably use the present discussions, the same is
given though it would consume luxurious and Valuable space.
Taking the Kali Savana calender (Table III), see the corresponding figures for the zero date of June, 1974 (the last moment

HORASARA
of May 31, 1974 and the beginning of 1st June, 1974). We get
5149y 3m 4d. This, when converted into number of days, yields
18,53,734 days. To this add 15 hrs 45 minutes (the difference
between midnight of 31.5.1974 to the time of birth, i.e. 37 gh
50 vi). Now apply as under:
d
-gh
vigh
li vili
Kali days elapsed
upto birth
Kali days from birth
to Ketu (Sauramana)
beginning ...
This is to say, Ketu dasa (Saura mana) begins after 18, 79,
408d 12gh 26 vigh 47 liptas and 34 viliptas from the beginning of
Kali Yuga.
With the help of 18,79,408 days (converted into years at the
rate of 360 days) we can find out from the Kali Savana calendar
that the period corresponding to Gregorian calendar is September 14, 2044 AD. The time of 12gh 26vigh 47 li and 34 vili is equal
to 4h 38 m. That is Ketu dasa Saura mana begins at 4 h 38m (from
the zero hour) of September 14, 2044. Tire planetary chart for this
moment is called Dasa Prarambha Kala Kundali. A word on table
of Kali Savana calendar. Die year here is based on 360 days. So,
multiplications or division in this context should be made on 360
day-per-year basis. Since the Gregorian calendar (NS) is appended simultaneously, Saura mana beginning/ending will not
be faulty.
What is the difference between the ordinary way of working
and this long exercise? Everything will go all right if round years
are added for the whole dasa simply and the Vimshottari dasa of
120 years will end simultaneously. But, if months for Bhuktis are
added one after the other, then it will mislead. And with our
present working, we can locate the exact minute when a period
begins or ends.
How this table of Saura mana is arrived? Manitha suggests
that the Savana mana figures should be converted into days (360

CHAPTER 8
days per year) and multiplied by 13 and divided by 890. The
resultant figure is the correction to be applied to Savana mana to
get Saura mana, For example, we take Moon bhukti Sun dasa as
6 months or 180 days whereas in Savana mana it is not so. An
addition of 2d 37 gh 45 vigh 15 li is to be made as can be seen in
Table II.
It is hoped that with so much of data before him, the reader
will make further research to get more clues to the results of
planetary combinations at birth with the help of a chart erected
for the moment a dasa or bhukti commences.
Now the tables are given below:
TABLE 1
SAURAMANA CORRECTION FACTORS FOR
SAVANAMANA DAYS
Savana
Saura
Corection
Factors
Days
D.
GH.
Vigh.
Lip.
Vilip.

HORASARA
TABLE II
SAURAMANA DURATIONS OF VIMSHOTTARI DASA
1. Sun's major period:
Sub period
Days
Ghatis
Vi ghatis
Liptas
Sun
Moon

CHAPTER 8
Mars
Rahu
Jupiter
Saturn
Mercury
Ketu
Venus
Total
2. Moon's
> major period
Moon
Mars
Rahu
Jupiter
Saturn
Merc
Ketu
Venus
Sun
Total
3. Mars major period
Mars
Rahu
Jup
Saturn
Merc
Ketu
Venus
Sun
Moon
Total
4. Rahu's
major period
Rahu
Jupiter

100 HORASARA
Saturn
mere
Ketu
Venus
Sun
Moon
Mars
Total
5. Jupiter's major period
Jup
Sat
Merc
Ketu
Venus
Sun
Moon
Mars
Rahu
Total
6. Saturn's major period
Sat
Merc
Ketu
Ven
Sun
Moon
Mars
Rahu
Jup
Total
7. Mercury's major period
Mete
Ketu

CHAPTER 8
Ven
Sun
Mon
Mars
Rahu
Jup
Sat
Total
8. Ketu's major period
(Same as Mars with suitable order)
9. Venus major period
Ven
Sun
Moon
Mars
Rahu
Jup
Sat
Merc
Ketu
Total
SAVANA CALENDAR
Kiliyuga Savana years, months and days-confd.
Year
Jan. 0
Mar 0
June
Sept 0
Dec 0
A.D.
.y
m
d
y
m
d
y
m
d
y
m
d
y
m
d

HORASARA
SAVANA CALENDAR
Kiliyuga Savana years, months and days-confd.
Year
Jan. 0
Mar 0
June 0
Sept 0
Dec 0
A.D.
y
m
d
y
m
d
y
m
d
y
m
d
y
m
d
is
SO
SI

CHAPTER 8
SAVANA CALENDAR
Kiliyuga Savara years, months and days-confd.
Year
Ian. 0
Mar 0
June 0
Sept 0
Dec 0
A.D.
y
m
d
y
m
d
y
m
d
y
m
d
y
m
d
SO
id

HORASARA
SAVANA CALENDAR
Kiliyuga Savana years, months and days-confd.
Year
Jan. 0
Mar
June
Sept 0
Dec 0
A.D.
y
m
d
y
m
d
y
m
d
y
m
d
y
m
d
IS
N.B.:
Feb.
17-18, Thurs-Friday midnight (Ujjain) is the zero date of
the series and Feb. 18 is the 1st day.

CHAPTER 8
TABLE-III
SAVANA CALENDAR
Kaliyuga Savana years, months and days.
Year
Jan. 0
Mar 0
June 0
Sept 0
Dec 0
A.D,
y
m
d
y
m
d
y
m
d
y
m
d
y
m
d
JO

HQRASARA
SAVANA CALENDAR
Kaliyuga Savana years, months and days.
Year
A.D.
Jan.O
y m
d
y
MarO
m d
JuneO
y m
d
SeptO
y m
d
DecO
y m
d
N.B.; The months of this calendar are of 30 days each and the year is of
360 days. The days are the Kali elapsed days at 24A (midnight) of the date.
■^cf: ycblt4^fh<0|*ll4 I
Only after analysis of the said rules, a wise person should
predict good or bad results.
ferfsiTt dy ii ihwPwMu iT tq iq taBdti : 1
Thus ends thfe 8th Chapter called Dasa Phala Nirupana in
Horasara of Pri thuyas as, son of Varaha Mihira.

CHAPTER 9
•WM t Wira :
H : Hq^Trq?n5astr 2 Tt ll
*v
^Ryrf^T: n 1 II
During the period of the Sun, the person lives in foreign
places, moves in forests and mountains and fortresses. Wealth
will be obtained through the sources of Brahmins, gods, fire,
kings, sastras and medicines.
The subject becomes proficient in pronouncing mantras, expert in obstruction, a king and heads an army. He will be intent
upon doing famous deeds; remains intelligent, has clear speech
and is undesirable. (3?fre) also means unlucky.
Wl#wil F1TT II 3
He becomes a killer of animals snakes etc. The dasa will
deprive him of his wife, son and place of dwelling. He is fickle
minded. Contracting of debts, being rash, eye disease, and disorders of abdomen, teeth and ears are indicated.
tlftird^UlPdd T^l' ^ 114 II
Danger from the king and thieves, enmity with relatives,
destruction of people of one's own sect, and of wealth are the
results of the dasa of the Sun. The consequences out of the Sun
occupaying various Rasis are explained below in the context of
his dasa.

HORASARA
7Rf%frf eTOt 115 II
Should the Sun be exalted, in such dasa, the person becomes
very courageous, intent upon doing such deeds as attributed to
his birth (i.e. suitable to his own religion), will be troubled by
king's men, inherits property from father and becomes popular
in the country.
^fTfeRT^TT #WI' ftlM'IH.I
fTETFrlfit II 6 II
When the Sun has departed from his exaltation, in such dasa,
he will cause abdomenal disorders, diseases in head, enemity
with one’s own people and danger from quadrupeds.
Notes: "Uchchatikranta" has been interpreted as above because the author has specifically covered all the signs.
"Neechatikranta" has been interpreted as "departed from the sign
of fall in sloka 13 of this chapter. We may take them as different
from deep exaltation and deep fall respectively.
■>Tr%^TT wt^i
tth) n7 n
When the Sun is in Taurus, his dasa will deprive the native of
agriculture, cattle, son and wife. It gives trouble to physical
heart, genetive organs, and eyes. Terms with relatives will be
strained. In any case, one's prestige will not be affected in such
dasa.
'HI ^|| ill I
ff^qFhTHlt: HTfaa) UTOlfa: II 8 II
The Sun in Gemini in his dasa will confer deep interest in
sastras, arts, poetry, and sculpture. The subject will be blessed
with agriculture, cattle, money and grains and wealth through
his cousins.
^THf 5 rM-fdifm n 9 1 1
When the Sun occupies of Cancer, his dasa will bring about

CKAl^TER 9
fame and royal money. He will be defeated by women feeding
himself on the wind, i.e. fasting, separated from father and relatives and sharp in speech.
Notes: e^lfaf'JKi can straight away mean a person addicted to
women. The Moon rules womanisers.
tew '
elTI
II 10 II
When the Sun is in Leo, his own sign, gives in his dasa all
kinds of wealth and equals the subject to king. The subject lives
in forts and forests, does agriculture, lives with children and wife
and earns fame in abundance.
fhfei
d’l+HRt^ II 11 II
The dasa of the Sun in Virgo gives income through cattle.
Brahmins and gods. Female issues are indicated. The subject
becomes world famous.
Notes: Female issues are specifically noted here, because the
sign Kanya is feminine.
vhFl f%m' Juhhoikto ii 12 11
Should the Sun be in his extreme depression, his dasa will
bring about destruction in agriculture, issues, friends, wealth
and wife. The subject will go to foreign countries. Fear from
thieves and fire are also indicated.
W ^pirTi
|:Tsf lUd^HI tHyifm^ n 13 II
The dasa of the Sun, that has departed from his fall, gives
wealth from kings and comforts thereof. Grief caused out of
woman's (wife's) enmity and acquisition of wealth of cheating
others will also follow.
3T^t TTCRWt

HORASARA
If the Sun is in Scorpio, in such dasa, there will be listlessness
(in all affairs), danger from poison, water and weapons and
restriction (inaccessibility) to reach one's own parents.
W!pKKir<lcil |
II 15 II
Should the said planet be in Sagittarius, such dasa begets
pleasure from one's children and wife and gives plenty of money.
The subject is worshipped by Brahmins and kings and is happy
through shastras, Vedas, music and musical instruments.
^ ^i^vinf »K4>i4h?i ^ n^pfli
U I U d I U il u'l f d vil pfl Hi c
The dasa of the Sun in Capricorn will make the person engaged in other's work, deprive of one’s money and children and
cause misery through wife's fault (or bad luck). The person suffers from jaundice and loses a limb.
Notes: The loss of limb will correspond to the one indicated
by Makara with reference to natal Lagna. For example, if the
Lagna is Sagittarius, the second sign Makara indicates face, eyes
etc.
^ ^TFJTJTFTT s&VWHf-cIfi’l f=H«yd: I
e^ict II 17 II
Heart diseases and loss of children will be caused by Sun in
Aquarius when his dasa operates. The native will also be a tale
bearer, eater of other's food and be hated by his wife and relatives.
4ft Wlyirill |
^if^MI-p || 18 II
If the Sun be in Pisces, his dasa will give respect, money and
comfort, through one’s wife's affection. The native will suffer
from remittent fever, will always think of children and live like a
king.
wtef ^rr n 19 n
The dasa of the Sun in the 8th for the Sim occurs only when

CHAPTER 9
Virgo ascends. For Virgo, the Sun is lord of 12th and his exaltation will increase his malefic tendencies.
^ T[wpr ^rrsfai
nnjf ^ wfe * i n 20 it
During the opening dasa for a man, the good or bad results
should be predicted (as it is). If, however, there are combinations
indicative of his death, the results for the dasa will not come to
pass.
f^H H 21 II
The results for the dasa are subject to variation because of the
malefic deeds of parents. It is only after careful evaluation of all
the yogs, should any predictions be given.
tn^Ti Fiiswli
eH4?Tl ^Jilchtt II 22 II
If the native's Sun is unfavourable to the parents the dasa of
Sun will cause paralysis to the native. Similarly with Lagna,
when unfavourable to the parents, grief is caused to the native in
Lagna dasa. Moon when unfavourable to the parents will obstruct the native's learning in Moon's dasa. This is true, only
when any of the said dasas is the first one to the native.
Notes: Take the case of a Kumbha Lagna native who has his
Sun in fall in 9th. This is unfavourable to the father. Such dasa of
the Sun, according to this sloka, will cause paralysis to the native.
Or a Leo native with Moon in 4th is adverse to his mother. Such
Moon's dasa will cause hindrance to the native's education. Or
one of the parents with Libra Lagna while the son has Scorpio
ascending are mutually incompatible. And such Lagna dasa will
cause grief. In any case, all he conditions in he chart should be
taken into consideration before asserting any results.
Thus ends the 9th Chapter on "Sun's Dasa" in
Horasara of Prithuyasas, son of Varaha Mihira

CHAPTER 10
4¥IHtuuiW:
3 Rter waji-r HfewrD: i
^=hHFI T?Tf ^H: II 1
^TT i||avV^t,-'|^?n I
^raf«R#fHTftT^ 7>Tf T?TT M|W II
atiilfeuilfo M<di fom<ki ^i<n<if5 u il t^irari
2 II
HMlT^dW % T?1T fifJRkftriptf ^fq<n 1)311
Sage Manitha and others have normally classified the dasa of
the Moon in six categories. It is called * (increasing) when the
Moon is poceeding from the first day of bright half. It is
Avarohini (or decreasing) when the period of second day of dark
half through New Moon prevails. Again it is Arohini when the
birth takes place if the waves of the ocean are rising. Should the
waves be depressed at the time of birth, such Moon's dasa is
Avarohini. It is also called -sncffevf) when the Moon has left his
sign of fall.
<J^TE3j?!Fr g <v?iio3clfe'4t felfelT sfifeR: I
tswtrrfc: 1 1 4 1 1
Should the Moon be departing from exaltation sign, it is
called dasa. The ancient people have shown three kinds
of difference between str)*? and
Notes: The three kinds each of Avaroha are already explained, from slokas 1 to 4. Simultaneously the three kinds of
Aroha dasas are also explained. Thus, six categories are made for
Moon's dasa.

CHAPTER 10
Br*f:
II 5 II
3^fr<?n r^tr ^qisfR srct ^rgfoi
^ uI<m«mu^ Trftr^TFrai wt: ii 6 u
?pr gl) Wl
^-^Wllf-cIcHK?) H-5fl '^TOR^sfHRpfl' RTt^l
^r^mi^H°nr-cH<lirRd: II 7 II
The three Aroha dasas will bring about all round success.
The person will become famous in the entire world. Tire three
kinds of Avaroha dasas will only cause destruction. When the
Moon has minimum strength while all theplanets are in Lunar
half of the signs (though malefics in nature),good results should
be predicted. The Sun in such a condition will prove auspicious.
The Moon’s dasa will make one a king's minister, and acceptable
to the king. He will be highly respected, and will acquire money
through Gods, Brahmins and Mantras. He will be modest and
become expert in arts.
Wl sftBTT 118 11
The native will acquire good and fragrant flowers, fruits and
trees (or fruit yielding trees), become famous, be very valorous,
will be on move at all times and acquire wife and children. He
will be intelligent and wealthy.
^Pg^-Url: qrtwft TJfRMRIRI
TRlf^^TTci: WfdRcBI || 9 II
He will worship gods and Brahmins, help others and have
good mentality. He will be expert in dance and other arts. He will
be phlegmatic and windly in constitution.
* v=mr=lM fclcTR rr^fRd: StRl
rRTsJR ^ II 10 II
The subject will have physical strength, will be hated by his
relatives, sleepy, lazy, intoxicated and without vigour. The foregoing are the results for the Moon’s position in various Rasis (in
her dasa).

HORASARA
r li 11 ll
The dasa of Moon in Aries, will give gains of wife and
children. The native is intent on serving in foreign countries. Loss
of brother, acquisition of money through fair means and disorder
of head are also indicated.
TsfalT ^Ptl II 12 II
If the Moon is exalted, such Moon's dasa leads to acquiring
kingdom. The subject will have sons, diamonds and be controlled by wife (or women). He will also possess elephants,
horses and cows.
Should, the Moon be in Moola Trikona portion, the native in
such dasa lives in foreign countries, gets money through agriculture or sales, hates his relatives and suffers from diseases arising
out of phlegmatic and windy defects.
TO) Wfl *K<5»II4I ^ SReIRd
II 14 II
If the Moon be in the middle area of Taurus, in such dasa
highest happiness and lot of wealth will obtain. The native will
be among Brahmins, gods and ministers and liked by his wife.
cpp) farfSrahf TOft RRl 1 1 15
In the first half of the dasa, death of mother will take place
and the native will indulge in sins. Should the Moon be in
V rishabha, in the second half of the dasa, death of father will take
place.
RTRTd WHRR 1116 II
In the dasa of Moon in Gemini, the person will be engaged in

CHAPTER 10
pleasing Brahmins and gods, will be intelligent, will acquire
money, clothes and enjoyments. He will move from one place to
the other.
-=K<WWI ^ rrafal
■jflJ+.'lldl cHiP^ItK: II 17
Should the Moon be in Cancer, in her dasa, the native will
earn through lands, water, agriculture, cows and grains. He will
become well versed in astrology, will suffer from diseases in
rectum and will roam in forests hills and forts.
fat xHWTruf inwnffafatfa eroti
II 18 II
When the Moon is in Leo, in such dasa, the native will
acquire knowledge and money. His desires will be fulfilled. He
will be considered superior among Ids men, and be intelligent.
He will have loss of limbs and will not acquire many children. He
will be fortunate.
Notes: Leo being a dry sign, the progeny is limited, depending on other conditions.
II 19 II
In Moon’s dasa, when she is in Virgo the native goes to
foreign countries. He acquires other women (or gains through
other women) and will become expert in literature and arts. He
will achieve his objects and have little money.
^ Wlft: FIT^I
VH'lrHIif) 1 1 20 II
When the Moon is in Libra, her dasa will cause afflictions
through wife or women and loss of self respect. There will be
obsturctions to his enthusiasm and he will become fickle minded.
He will suffer from poverty and grief.
3v5ct W^faMfWIMH II 21 II

HORAS,4JL4
Should the Moon be in her depression sign, may cause death
in her dasa, or various kinds of illness. The subject may also lose
his wife. His enthusiasm will be broken and he will regret for his
own thoughts.
When the Moon has just left her depression point, in such
dasa, the native will lord a woman who has limited wealth. He
will get money from sales and purchase. He will suffer from
diseases related to private parts. He will be attacked by paralysis.
HcifrstdHHHi^Tr wrat wft n 23 11
In the dasa of the Moon in Dhanus, the subject lords over
elephants and horses and acquires many dwelling places. Destructions to ancestral property will come to pass. The subject
will be happy in regard to his sons and become very rich.
The Moon's dasa, when she is in Capricorn, will make the
native jealous, poor, live in a dancer's house, and will deprive of
wife and land. The native will become learned in Vedas but he
will not have money and children.
-cK^lHI Weft sft'JFfftRWlftl
WTef II 25 II
In the dasa of the Moon placed in Aquarius, one will resort to
menial professions, incur lot of debts, be fickleminded and contact a woman of bad character. He will suffer from diseases in
anum and stomach.
wrwrl: ■qfcw: ll 26 II
When she is in Vargothamamsa, the Moon in her dasa will
cause enmity with a mighty person and loss. The native will
suffer from diseases relating to teeth, eyes and ears. He will be

CHAPTER W
deserted by his sons and wife.
Notes: In the above sloka, the Vargothamamsa refers to the
Moon in Kumbha ~Rasi and Navamsa because after dealing with
Meena Rasi, Vargothamamsa in Meena is referred to in slokas 27
and 28 infra.
MlfttftKH'j'T 1 1 27 II
In the dasa of the Moon in Pisces, the native will enjoy money
through products of river and sea. He will be always on the
move and will be intelligent. He will have cows and buffaloes
and be in the company of his wife and children. He will conquer
his enemies.
Notes: means the native will enjoy wealth through
products from sea etc. i.e. fish, pearls, salt etc. The native will
trade in such items.
ftftwifawlwr ftrfhmi? vr*fti
ii 28 ii
Should the Moon be in Vargothamamsa in Meena, in such
dasa, the subject will gather treasures and have comforts. He will
obtain daughters and get some limbs damaged and lose his
parents in childhood.
Notes: The treasures may be specifically hidden under water
as the sign Pisces is watery sign. Should the dasa occur in one’s
childhood, he will lose his parents. Mina is a feminine sign and
hence stress on female issues is made. For Scorpio Lagna natives,
more daughters are possible depending upon the conditions in
the chart.
nfciHl-t 1 1 29 II
In the dasa of the Moon who is in Vargothamamsa, the
desires relating to the previous sign will duly come to mature.
The subject will be chief of his men, intelligent, strong, virtuous
and very learned.

HORASARA
Notes: Suppose the Moon is in Vargothamamsa in Scorpio,
then the objects indicated by Libra, which is the previous Rasi,
will mature. So, the subject will become a merchant, poet etc. as
indicated by Libra. This is a very important clue and should be
made best use of wisely.
ftfb’) ipW+.ci II 30 II
Should the Moon be full and in 12th, in her dasa, money will
be acquired in all ways. If, however, she be waning, inimically
placed or depressed, the results mentioned will decrease every
moment.
Notes: Even though in 12th house, if the Moon is full, the
effects are good. Should she be in waning state or placed in
inimical house or in fall, the results mentioned will mature in a
little way. These two rules can be applied to not only Moon's
dasa, but to general predictive purpose.
II 31 It
Should the Moon be waning and in 8th house, in such dasa
the native will be troubled with diseases etc. Due to the lapses of
his wife (or women), he will face absolute penury.
*rrf<jjw?T: M 32 ll
In the period of the Moon in fall in the 8th house, the subject
will die or frequently be sick. Should the Moon as above be in the
company of malefics, the subject will die or be expelled from his
caste.
^TrT %wft
cnfhif n 33 n
Should the Moon be combust, (in such dasa) the subject is
deprived of his kingdom (or expelled from his country), faces
destruction and is subjected to grief. He suffers from diseases
like jaundice and is subject to danger from water.

CHAPTFR 10
W^TT MM ^TT W^-INN'm) I
flf «F#cf ^FT=rf?T T3g I^RT^ 1 1 34 II
If the sixth dasa belongs to waning (weak) Moon, the subject
destroys his own people. Should the said Moon be, however, full,
the person will get wealth only.
Notes: As per this sloka, the sixth dasa lorded by Moon, who
is full, will lead only to financial upliftment and nothing else.
Note the word ^"1 in the text.
cjcHoMH, 1 1 35 II
Should Moon occupy Lagna, in her dasa, the person acquires
kingdom. In 10th, the person is blessed with daughters and
wealth. These are the results of Moon's dasa. Same effects will be
revealed when she is in several Amsas.
cym: 1 1
Thus ends the 10th chapter entitled "Moon's Dasa and its
effects" in Horasara of Prithuyasas, son of Varaha Mihira.

CHAPTER 11
^ WPrtSwfopai: I
^ eiaysi: 1 1
1 II
Planets placed in the first six Rasis, counted from the Sun,
keep their faces downwards whilst those in the remaining six
Rasis keep their faces upwards. The latter are capable of yielding
good results.
^sf?[ qsjc|<lsl WWlsI ^fFT^sCT:!
rlKIllril'JII .-ST^T faWT 113 II
The dasa of Mars will yield, results in a medium way as
though in exaltation, notwithstanding having his face downwards or upwards or his being in retrograde motion or
(progressive). Results should be predicted after knowing
whether planet is Vakra or Anuvakra. For the five planets from
Mars to Saturn (i.e, starry planets) such evaluations should be
made.
Noes: We do not understand why Mars should reveal his
uchcha effects always irrespective of the said placements. Perhaps, the author wants to say that when Mars is in his exaltation
he will yield medium results in any of the above four states.

CHAPTER 1 1
'ffTTcT #4T^yrftf5ftTt a
fef^tfr «*!T^)j?lM^r^l'qT T ^ W: 114 11
In the dasa of Mars, the earnings will be through fire, lands,
conveyances, medicines, indulging in lies, cheating and carrying
out various cruel activities. The person will suffer from billious
diseases, bloody defects and fever. He will serve a mean lady
and be deserted by his sons, wife, relatives and preceptors. He
will have his eyes on the wealth of others.
Notes: Mars is essentially a criminal planet. Hence cheating,
telling lies etc. are indicated as source of one’s income.
wtpktt) Tfeftrq'i dimy ti 5
If Mars be in his Moola Trikona house, in his dasa, the native
will maintain to be in his caste (<*»diP«w) has been best translated
so) and will acquire wife, children and wealth, become valorous,
fond of sexual acts and intelligent.
w<\ Tfl I
When Mars occupies Aries, in his dasa, the native will become famous and enthusiastic. He will suffer from troubles
caused out of bile, will face risk of thefts and be subjected to
much mental anguish.
^TfTOcT: T 1 1 7
In the dasa of Mars occupying Taurus, one will lose his
position, will contract diseases, grief and be fond of talking. He
will concentrate on other's money and will have scant regards for
his preceptor and gods.
Notes: Planets in a sign of Venus may in their own way affect
one’s respect for gods, depending on the nativity. For Venus is
the Guru of demons, who had been at logger-heads with Devas.
II 8 II

HORASARA
In the dasa of Mars in Gemini one will live in foreign countries or cities, will be very libidinous, will hate his own relatives,
will be subjected to much mental strain and will have windy
complaints.
'fli-K?™ dl^tiHil'Hfsraoii^
'hell'll ciWqtf: 119 II
In the dasa of Mars in Cancer, the person will gain from
water, gardens and fire. He will be virtuous, deprived of wife,
son and relatives, lose his limbs and will cheat the public.
TT^^TRf 'J'JlirdUfdlsind: I
iJUFTraf W5TST*FT: II 10 II
When Mars emerges from his depression region (in Cancer),
in such dasa, the person will become famous for his singular
virtues. He will be strong and chief against his enemies. He will
suffer from diseases in anus. He will enjoy the wealth of elephants and horses.
IWTfeH'^Wri ^ 'jf-HI'Wi WtrWISHJ
thKHfewsM vm WTfhNtfei n 11 11
In the dasa of Mars posited in Leo, one will become leader of
masses and be enthusiastic. He will be deprived of sons, wife and
wealth and be troubled by weapons and fire.
c b"4ifeld'HlH < f : (ii h I ^ T*TR e<s( I
frfT) fwi II 12 II
In the dasa of Mars in Virgo, the native gets position, money
and comforts. He will be an expert in organizing yaganas etc. He
will be squint eyed, possess lands, wife and children.
=Tf II 13 II
When Mars is in Libra, in such dasa, the genetal organs will
develop ulcer and the subject loses money through wife or
women. He will have frequent tussles with his workers, will not
have elephants and horses and will lose his limb.

CHAPTER U
FTTc^ e«fflcqfashi: I
When Mars is in Scorpio, in such dasa, one will become
expert in knowing all facts and philosophies. He will get wealth
and grains from agriculture and will hate his friends. He will be
killed by poison, fire or weapons.
II 15 II
When the dasa of Mars posited in Dhanus starts, the person
gets wealth through Brahmins, gods, kings etc. He does undo
things, promotes quarrels and enjoys great respect.
II 16 II
In the dasa of Mars, occupying his deep exaltation area, the
native commands comforts through vehicles, kingdom and diamonds etc. His combat is not controllable (i.e. his eager of purpose will be forceful like that of a warrior) and he will be chief of
his folk.
<ftsi 1 1 17 II
If the dasa of Mars, who has departed his deep exaltation
zone and be in Capricorn, progresses, the subject will make
serious efforts to gather wealth, and he will have troubles from
reptiles, animals and weapons. He will help the downtrodden
and keep them happy.
II 18 II
When the dasa of Mars posited in Kumbha rules, the subject
will forsake his religious conduct, be proud, be subjected to
misery caused due to penury, take to bad ways and also lose his
issues.
«kwi M fa'idid^
WFf fai&WItfl r«Nfa*llkf<M II 19

HORASARA
Should Mars be in Pisces, in such dasa, the native will be
sick, lose children and be troubled by heavy expenditure. He will
fall into debts, live in foreign places and be afflicted by wounds
etc.
cnifWTR ^Tl eRtfiT -tfWsfWrffll
ilSrsrW fgfyjf II 20 II
When Mars occupies the same Rasi and Navamsa, the native
will become world famous. The results of the Bhava as occupied
by Mars will be doubly felt. He will be a noted person in the
army and become strong.
Notes: The idea of doubled results to the Bhava concerned
should be applied cautiously. For example. Mars in 11th in
Vargothamamsa may increase gains. If he be in 6th, it portends
relief from sickness, but does not make one doubly sick.
tWERjER 1 1 21 II
Mars if in debilitation Amsa, makes the native in his dasa
wander and unhappy. The good results that are likely to mature
will be burnt. The person will give up good things and run after
bad ones.
Notes: The goods that are likely to be delivered to the subject
by other auspicious combinations in the horoscope will turn into
bad, as per the sloka.
^RWIWIRI' fsRtfRfd: t
faatftr 1 1 22 1 1
In the dasa of combust Mars one will be worried with all
sorts of troubles and he will be intent on destruction. Should
Mars be otherwise (i.e. not eclipsed, not fallen etc.) or be in
houses relating to good yogas, the effects of the concerned sign
will come to pass.
Notes: can mean 7th also (i.e. the house of setting).
wemfcreq cjti
iHqfa ^ Rcffauf ^1 II 23 II

. CHAPTER U
Should Mars be in the 8th house, there will be misconception
with one's enemies, death and litigations. A11 kinds of hindrances
will occur and for the sake of relatives, one's prestige will be at
stake.
f? Tgti f^KTTftT TT^TH.1
f3Tc^T
In the dasa of Mars facing upwards, posited in exaltation or
10th or 11th house, the native acquires kingdom. He will gain
over his enemies, have many conveyances, army (or followers)
conquer neighbouring kingdoms and enjoy wealth.
Thus ends the 11th Chapter entitled "Effects of Mars Dasa"
in Horasara, of Prithuyasas son of Varaha Mihira

CHAPTER 12
3W
?wrr
W<jl««4*fc «MT<^tft 111 II
In the dasa of Mercury, one will distribute his knowledge
(i.e. engaged in teaching etc.)/ will be with relatives, earn wealth
through agriculture, yagna etc. and do his own profession (befitting his birth).
*iW[ i
II 2 II
He will be an expert sculptor and master other allied arts,
know music, enjoy vocal and instrumental music. He will acquire all domestic vessels (i.e. he will be well-equipped), conscientious and be an enthusiastic speaker.
^ThlffSPi) tVsi-f I
II 3 II
He will love his partner, be modest, learned, acceptable to
his preceptors and will suffer only to small extent from diseases.
He will be amidst his relatives and friends and be prone to
danger from weapons and the like.
Thrift ^ Wi(l
mIsi 'Jvtrcl tR iHtfm II 4 .ll
He will be fortunate, not have wealth amassed, be troubled
by wind, phlegm and bile and be distressed.

CHAPTER 12
Note: Mercury has a mix of all the three humours.
3T3 3T«*f hFRiwraifr tfiwiwi
Following verses explain the results of Mercury dasa with
specific reference to individual Rasi and Amsa as described by
tire masters of the yes ter years.
MwtTTPTI sfaT=[l
Should the dasa of Mercury who is in Aries be in progress,
the native will have enthusiasm towards science, be intelligent,
valorous, indulge in lies, have no wealth, but have an eve on
other's money.
4t^K?TFTf ^ ynif^d: ^IM:I
4vtlW4lf4dl 1 1 7 1 1
When Mercury is in Taurus, in such dasa, the person will
prove unfavourable to his mother (or he will prove unlucky to
his mother). He will enjoy wealth and fame. He will also incur
debts, for his relatives, will have ill disposed wife and children
and will suffer from throat diseases.
Notes: Mercury in the third hosue also can cause afflictions
to one's throat, unless the planet is well disposed. Mercury dasa
is particularly unfavourable to one’s mother who has the planet
in the 4th house. Debts will be severe if Mercury is in 6th and his
dasa be in operation.
Plltjl
filHId*) rfrqrr II
8 II
Should Mercury be in Gemini, in his dasa, the person acquires many kinds of wealth and enjoys various pleasures. He
will have many children and wives. He will have two mothers,
be dear to his cousins and intelligent.
I Id RhW, R I-LH : I
'pvfMi (T II 9 II

HORASARA
The person will be troubled by his relatives, keen to live in
distant countries and will have less comforts. He will acquire
money through poetry and arts. These are the results for Mercury dasa when the planet is in Cancer.
c -o o "
qjfttqT HptfhsR) qqfjr ii 10 ii
When Mercury is in Leo and his dasa is in progress, the
person will be deprived of wisdom and wealth, will have no
pleasure through his brothers and relatives, will hate women (or
wife) but be a celebrated person among the public.
qifTifr
11 ii
During the dasa of Mercury who is in exaltation, one will
acquire wisdom and wealth. He will become a writer and be
interested in poetry. He will know politics and overcome his
foes.
Notes: Tlfo also means policy and hence it can be interpreted
as "the person will make policies" etc. That is to say he will be
connected with policy making of an administration.
TJelMyiWl^lr§ TW W*l fd'sMWHJ
SR eHR) II 12 II
In the dasa of Mercury who is in Moolatrikona house, one
will be famous and be interested in living in foreign countries
and will acquire wealth by virtue and vigour.
When Mercury is in his own Rasi or Navamsa, the subject
will become defective of a limb, have enmity with his men, and
will be deprived of pleasures, cattle and wealth.
Notes: We do not know why evil results are attributed to a
planet that is in his own house and simultaneously in exaltation,
Sloka 11 of this chapter gives a different account when Mercury
is exalted.

CHAPTER U
fsf 1 <rM I (<4) 4> M4> ¥ I Hi fcIM'JiMlcft 'M^U^tagT: II 14 II
In the dasa of Mercury who is in Libra, the native will become a good speaker and will develop deformity of eyes. He will
not be peaceful. He will become an expert in sculpture etc. His
means of livelihood will be trading or marketing. He will be put
to grief by elephants and horses.
Notes; The words W*l have been interpreted as Libra to
suit the order of the slokas, while it otherwise means the 7th
house.
ToPT?rwfgft gfftgg n 15 11
When Mercury is in Scorpio, in such dasa, the subject will be
ready to accept whatever will be given (or donated). He will
develop illicit relationship with a domestic servant. He will have
troubles in his household and will suffer from penury.
gvitjbfcwwTTft wnggfoggr tftIi
gmgg -g wft 11 16 11
In the dasa of Mercury in Sagittarius, the subject will become
leader of a group and minister. He will acquire two names
ie.titles etc. He will gather money through agriculture, cattle and
grains.
rfrfWTfc II 17 II
Should Mercury be in Capricorn, the native will in such dasa
incur debts, be inclined to do other's work (i.e. at the disposal of
others), live in other countries, be on the move, be in the company of mean people, be illusioned and have physical pains.
Notes: The worldly life itself is called Maya or Mithya and
hence "Maya Mohen" can be interpreted as "the native will have
lustre to the worldly life" also.
gpeioaviini rtftlFrftftlrlTTlft I
n is n

HOR.4SARA
When Mercury is in Aquarius in such dasa, the brilliance of
the native will be affected, and he will have limited food. He will
be penniless and will be put to grief by his relatives. He will have
a wicked wife (or he may head a band of mean women) and will
live in distant places.
WRTOrN II 19 II
In the dasa of Mercury in Pisces the native will widely master the meanings of Vedas, be inclined to give donations and
gifts, and will be chief of men and be dear to them.
nielli
II 20 II
When Mercury is in his Neecha Rasi, in such dasa, one will
have mental agitation and will be deprived of his vitality and
relatives. He will earn his bread by husbandry, will live a trifling
life, be afflicted by diseases and will live in other’s abodes.
Notes: Since sloka 19 deals with Pisces which is Mercury's
sign of fall, the present sloka may be taken to be dealing with
deep debilitation zone of Mercury in Pisces.
nisi fie 4 ! •+ +) 4f-i t cfly.'M *1 I] () I : II 21 II
Should Mercury be in fall in the 8th sign, in such dasa, one
will be troubled by poison, weapons and quadrupeds. He will be
intent on causing harm to the public at all times and doing
vicious deeds and will have little vitality.
Notes: The word has several meanings like nature, essence, spirit, (one of the elementary substances among Earth, Air,
Fire etc.), strength, courage etc.
This sloka obviously refers to birth in Leo ascendant, only
when Mercury can be in fall in the 8th house. This position is
particularly adverse for one’s longevity, unless Jupiter or Saturn
is well disposed. Financial adversity will also be experienced as
Mercury rules two important related houses, viz. money (2nd)
4 juJ gains (11th) in the chart.

CHAPTER 12
aUrd'iiH^'vMI <[ £Hr4l'l ^F\T
■qpi^cnqq-qhW^: MTST ^rT tR$R ^ 1 1 22 II
In the dasa of combust Mercury one will give up his landed
property, be subjected to mental depression, suffer from jaundice, cough etc. and will destroy his wealth.
Notes: Combust Mercury is capable of giving Asthma, brain
diseases etc.
ilfawii ^TRp#! W%l
Should the planet Mercury be in his Vargothama position
there will be both auspicious and inauspicious events. These
effects may become two or three folds. Always there will be a
mixture of good and bad.
T?ni
et*T^ W^etrfh^t itFpTCtTOffaTpT 1 1 24 11
In the dasa of Mercury who is in the 10th, orllth or 4th, the
results will be mixed nature. The native will get the leadership
over his folkmen. He will possess knowledge, comforts, wealth
etc. The dasa of Mercury (notwithstanding his placement) will
produce mixed results.
Notes: In the last line of the sloka, indicates no reference
to particular position of Mercury, unlike in the first line of the
sloka.
5TT?T: II
Thus ends the 12th Chapter entitled 'The Effects of
Mercury Dasa" in Horasara, the work of Prithuyasas,
son of Varaha Mihira.

CHAPTER 13
^irfRorffBRn yuHdHdrd^sfdiiqrat 11 l n
In the dasa of Jupiter, one will be engaged in widely knowing
the meanings of the 4 Vedas, intent upon fulfilling the 4
Purusharthas (i.e. Dharma, Artha, Kama and Moksha), will be
the chief of men and be extremely intelligent.
^yWTCIdH iMM'lfd 1 1 2 1 1
During Jupiter's dasa, one will earn through education, worship of gods, medicines and performing yaganas. Due to the
effect of his birth, he will be blessed with the mercy of the king.
ipqr^Rrp TfrcR: 1
tfctdlfd: ddl^dl, ^jqfrlr^ 1 1 3 i I
He will acquire horses and other conveyances, lands, clothes,
wife and children, will be in the company of good men, chief in
his caste, and will get royal status.
O Cv O A v?
W7J 114 II
He will minutely think before acting, will be capable of
knowing the past, present and future, will be apt in doing wise
acts and will suffer from diseases of spleen, abscess etc. and also
diseases relating to upper limbs of the body.
Noes: "Urdhva Roga” broadly means diseases relating to

CHAPTER 13
upper portion of the body.
Trfyi i -h<rt rFRPjpf' OTf^lrFSI: i I 5 1 1
The foregoing results apply to Jupiter's dasa relating to his
position in various signs. Over and above, one should predict the
results after assessing individual Rasi positions of Jupiter.
■Jllel'v'IMl ^ M'JUlsJl M cjl-p I
When Jupiter is in Aries, in such dasa, one will lead a group
of men, be wise, a king and be moneyed.
wftfSTT)
wteWfi' tHHIMlfd II 7 II
Should the planet Jupiter be in Taurus, in such dasa, the
native will be troubled by his enemies and will suffer lot of grief.
He will live in countries other than his own, and his earnings will
be by means of little enthusiasm.
5ftcK?rraf fhrrap ffw: i
bit 118 II
When Jupiter is in Gemini in his dasa, one will hate women,
be wealthy and live through agriculture. He will hate his own
relatives, and will prove an evil to his mother. He will also
become disabled in regard to some limb.
mV < w fa fa Vi dH w i P-d d) rnfr fosTp n 9 n
In the dasa of exalted Jupiter, the native will undertake a
profession suitable to his birth, will be endowed with kingdom,
comforts, and pleasure in an increasing manner and will have a
spotless name. He will also be wealthy.
f'tdHId^WTT cf^A m jq m
In the dasa of Jupiter that has crossed his exaltation zone (i.e.
in Cancer itself), the native will always roam, have a wicked

HORASARA
wife, lie will be subject to parental grief, and the native will sell
away all his ancestral properties.
eTOrT 'rRfcT II 11 II
Should the dasa of Jupiter who is in Leo be ruling, the native
will become a religious head and acquire wealth through the
sovereign. Due to his singular qualities, he will get cattle, sons,
wife etc.
*F*nfacM'l<WII HKKtWrawi' *FSrll
TJlPmijr? II 12 II
hvmi Jw fasii^-u^iK'ii^ihciH II 13 II
During the dasa of Jupiter in Virgo, there will be money
through the king as well as one’s own wife. He will have quarrels
with Sudras (the 4th caste) etc. and will be displaced. He will
earn through cattle and increase his wealth. He will have education, clothes and conveyances.
WTO: I
J^ ftrama) n 14 n
In the dasa of Jupiter in Libra, one's enthusiasm will be
reduced, will destroy his own wife and children (i.e. he may not
protect his wife and children), will have severe ulcer and day by
day his eating will dwindle.
Notes: Libra is inimical sign of Jupiter. Hence in such dasa
the person will give up his wife and children, will have internal
ulcers particularly abdominal in nature and his days will be such
that even a square meal is a rarity, depending on other conditions in the nativity.
H# fawrtvl: II 15 11
During the dasa of Jupiter in Scorpio one will be engaged indivine work, be wandering, enthusiastic, indebted in several
ways, interested in public and principled.
Notes: has been interpreted as Scorpio to suit the order

CHAPTER 1 3
of the Rasis.This sloka means to say that the person may logage
himself in work relating to temple etc.
rrm elt !FKR7Ptt «Rt Ml II 16 II
Should the dasa of Jupiter placed in Moolatrikon sign be in
progress / one will be important in the public, wise minister, ruler
of an area, will acquire wealth through women and be happy.
4IM'ld«j wri WWT w eWtl
wfiPTw fro) ^ n n u
Should the dasa of Jupiter posited in Sagittarius be ruling,
one will get money through travels, be happy, be engaged in
yagnas, possess cows and will gather money from husbandry.
Notes: This position of Jupiter is good for travel agents as
Sagittarius is natural 9th house. Should he be aspected by Mercury from Gemini, then the yoga will be more effective.
^ iffawri i
>tt^i4'+<Rsi} fttt i i
18 II
In the dasa of Jupiter in his (deep) debilitation zone, one will
be grieved because of his relatives, or Vice Versa, will do others'
job, suffer from poverty and diseases relating to belly, ears and
private parts.
Notes: Jupiter rules the digestive system, particularly the
digestive fire of the stomach, gastric fluid etc. It may be inferred
that one will be subjected to digestive disorders in the dasa of
Jupiter in Capricorn. Jupiter also rules ear and the troubles relate
to internal ear.
YIHw4lo|<itll9l dHcHUrHtKKFMT'^tl
When the dasa of Jupiter in Capricorn is in progress one will
live in forests, and gain through hunters. He will also live by
agriculture and cheat Brahmins.
Notes: Rtok apart from meaning hunter, also means outcast,
fisherman, mountaineer, degraded tribe etc.

HORASARA
During the dasa of Jupiter in Aquarius, the native will earn
money by his own name and valour, will be a tale-teller, will live
by mean professions, hate his people and incur loss of wealth.
ui*tH i
fMtrru ii 21
During the dasa of Jupiter posited in Pisces, one will be
principal among his men, will earn through education, and religious discourses, be liked by women and be humble.
^r<rl £R yd<KHI 5 Pft f?TT^: ^ II 22 II
During the dasa of Jupiter in Vargothama Navamsa, one will
be worshipped by the public, acquire plenty of w'ealth and live in
the company of his wife and sons. He will have an emaciated
physique.
Notes: Jupiter being a big-bodied planet, his Vargothama
should give a stout physique. We do not know why the author
attributes an emaciated body in such a case.
T[S72r Tf^jrT JW <wn
| ^TTV-rM xbrj; ^ETipfr II 23 II
In the dasa of combust Jupiter, grief and happiness will be
equal. When the planet in question is in fall or is placed in
inimical signs, one will, in such dasa, lose children, wife and
wealth and suffer from many diseases.
Thus ends the 13th chapter entitled "The Effects of
the Jupiter Dasa" in Horasara, of Prithuyasas, son of
Varaha Mihira

CHAPTER 14
3TSJ
^pq WW W3&I
Now, the results of Venus dasa when the planet is occupying
anyone of the various Rasis. The person will in the dasa of Venus
acquire wife, ornaments, clothes, happiness, pleasure, respect,
honour and wealth.
HtHR'Iid+VkHl II
2 II
He will become expert in the science dealing witn sca, many
kinds of learning and be very intelligent. He will be adept in
dancing and singing, courteous in nature and be disposed to
poor feeding.
irhrrq Faisfcp i
■ynfeqra.- feqtora: n 3 u
He will be capable of buying and selling and have cows. He
will have many wives, sons and wealth, will enjoy ancestral
property and become famous for his virtues. He will keep engaged iit his work.
=!!ci'-+.4i^ti<i'il fl'si^TsFi I
’ft’Wc ■ < +i t e*HSTt v43Rfa: ylfci: 114 II
He will be disposed to diseases arising out of windy, phlegmatic and billious shortfalls. He will derive great worries out of
his association with his brothers and son. He will have enmity

HORASARA
with mean people and be pitiable because of his departure from
right path.
Trcfrrr ^r?fi
Now the effects of the dasa of Venus in each Rasi are described below. The auspicious results should be mentioned only
after knowing whether the Rasis/Navamsas are inimical or
fallen.
?j*wrr*ii ^ witp
e-itau 3) jeM ,j il «fl TFSptff^rat 1 1 6 II
When the dasa of Venus posited in Aries is in progress,
one will derive pleasure from his wife (or women). He will
lose money and honour. He will be on the move, intolerant,
live with little means, be of lordly nature, and a favourite of a
princess.
Wt JflsKWWI HfdHIil
II 7 II
The person, who has dasa of Venus posited in Taurus, will
be engaged in husbandry, possess cattle and wife and be intelligent. He will be versed in many Sastras (or sciences), a donor
to good causes, will get female issues and be favoured by the
king.
In the dasa of Venus who is posited in Gemini, one will
be busy with many activities and very enthusiastic. He will be
interested in surprising tales and living abroad. He will be
wealthy.
’Jiff&TT f^RT% WW4 3^R:I
During the dasa of Venus in Cancer, the subject will b6
engaged in his work, will have two wives, be virtuous, and will
have many kinds of living.

CHAPTER 14
M FT: I
TtfT?Ft[ fsRFTfci II 10 II
When Venus is in Leo, in such dasa, one will acquire wealth
through a distinguished woman, and aim at others' money. He
will be intelliget, have limited issues and his cattle will be destroyed.
FFTWTO: II 11 II
Should Venus be in Virgo, in such dasa, one will not have
happiness in pursuing his ancestral professions, and his enthusiasm will diminish. He will be fickle-minded, intent on living
abroad and will be given up by his wife.
HH^HdlSSJsiri: Wlcjj
3TF1FT1 fWOWT. FTFTt *R^frT 1 1 12
During the dasa of Vargothama Venus, one will be troubled
by kings and thieves. He will be unhealthy and weak. His food
will be by begging and he will be roaming.
Notes: The placement of the sloka in this order seems to refer
to the Vargothama of Venus in Virgo where he is in fall. This
conclusion is supported by the nature of results given. Otherwise, Venus in Vargothama will yield good results. In this
chapter, the Vargothama of Venus is referred to Pisces only at the
end.
rrrfW u 13 n
In the dasa of Venus in Libra, the native will acquire a name
of high order. He will gain through agriculture, cattle, grains etc.
and wealth from the wise.
srprimpfl wrt q'lKviwi ^ 1 1 14 1 1
In the dasa of Venus posited in Scorpio, the subject will be
wandering, uttering too much, interested in others' work, will
promote disputes and incur debts in large scale.

HORASARA
RHl&Mlft: Hi-fi I
^TTJSFFF^: II 15 II
When Venus is in Sagittarius, in such dasa, the native will
eradicate his enemies, become the chief among his castemen and
will be respected. He will be an adept poet, dear to the sovereign
and will be happy with his wife and sons.
fRWIl' fnjRrRT S
aianAmTffd: II 16 II
When the dasa of Venus posited in Capricorn opens, one will
have the forbearance to face any grief, be happy and overcome
his enemies. He will be disposed primarily to windy and phlegmatic bodily temperaments, have a wicked wife and will have a
condemned family.
Mid did 'II d1dMKbeMd>MT-Ud!M II 17 II
During the dasa of Venus posited in Aquarius, one will
be excited, sick, addicted to other women, will break his
religious discipline, will have mean habits and take to
mean deeds.
rmFit 7^ pqrroi ii 18 ii
During the dasa of Venus in Pisces, one will become a
principal person in his dynasty, earn wisdom, become a king
and be wealthy. He will acquire money through agriculture.
He will possess pleasing physique, and will come to prominence.
iw-PfPf-fd: i
^-IRrifdktlf^'Hdl tri: II 19 u
During the dasa of Venus who is Vargothama in Pisces, one
will possess self-respect, suffer from sickness and establish irrigation facilities for the public.
Notes: One may dig well, tanks etc. for the use of general
public.

CHAPTER U
feral
rarfcfa ■qmfcai i i
nwrr^niw^ ^rfrarairaf
trmri fayrrara^ral ft^raRRisi: 1 1 20 11
Should Venus be in his exaltation house, or 12th, 10th or
11th houses, and be not in he company of malefics, and be
free from such aspects, in such dasa the native will beget
various diamonds, be wise, have broad eyes and be chief of
his dynasty.
jfir «MWI>
^shnyn^eiiiyiya^vi: 11
Thus ends the 14th Chapter entitled "Effects of the
Venus Dasa" in Horasara of Prithuyasas,
son of Varaha Mihira

CHAPTER 15
3T6T
T?ri stm srf*ral tfran^K?nF 35 : i
3-<till.HH<! u ll ^rU !HdrlSfb4?t fo[fi|^!j-o| 111 II
C. O c.
During the dasa of Saturn, the native will acquire fame,
intelligence and knowledge of many Sastras. He will become
leader of a group, village or city. He will be more famous than his
father and will be versed with all religious commandments.
M^Ol'lN-tll): tl'-M"?! ^Illdtil <iRWp<t: I
He will have elephants, horses, cows and wealth, and obtain
the wealth of his cousins. He will have respect for Brahmins and
gods and live in an old house. He can be pleased with an iota of
things.
He will be drowsy in disposition and capable of hardwork.
He will be hated by his men and interested in women who are
older than him. He will like to be virtuous, be modest and be
interested in he jobs of gods i.e. temples etc.
Notes: The person likes more sleep. He works more to get
less. He will be disposed philosophically and become a priest.
These are some highlights of Saturn's period;
W PdchHI^l HTtlrl 311
wft 1 1 4 ii

CHAPTER IS
The subject will have windy and phlegmatic deficits. He will
incur defect in limbs and become weak. These results as aforesaid are only general in nature. For each Rasi and Amsa, the
following details may be noted.
Notes: Saturn generally gives rheumatic pains, deaf ear, dental deficiency etc. He will make a person lame.
Wi' ^ aifmfrol I
TTHTT^fr II 5 II
C O
During the dasa of Saturn in Aries, one will be dispositioned
of his residence, without a job, independent in nature, will suffer
skin diseases in foot etc., be cunning in nature, and will be
deprived of his coborn and relatives.
Notes: Saturn gives itch and such other skin diseases when
in fall.
McHliH: ThTOFfl lTT?FT?': 116 II
In the dasa of Saturn, who has just left his debilitation zone,
one will get grains through agriculuture, but will be grieved by
fall (from high places), be equal to the least and not enthusiastic.
u ■all <MUH| <+,d^hhr<it|4<cl: 1 1 7 II
Should Saturn be in Taurus, in such dasa, one will get titles,
he very intelligent, become a king or his equal, serve in a war and
will show too much of interest in doing virtuous acts.
Notes: Saturn's position in Taurus is a suitable combination
for warriors.
fori swiMhI tRKumf Scphihra: i
wOdUdlSsfcrft: ThFridl TTlf^l FT3T: II 8 II
During the dasa of Saturn in Gemini, the native will be
impatient, will enjoy children, wealth and happiness but will lose
through women and thieves. He will be keen to do the jobs .of
others and will be troubled through battles.

HORASARA
MM-ydcH-Ms?14l ^ciunr^dl II 9 II
During the dasa of Saturn in Cancer, one will be worried and
dependent upon others, will be deprived of mother, children and
relatives, will grow short of sight and hearing but be intelligent.
frr*T7t 1
#if^w«frf^ra'orPi i wfa 1 1 10 1 1
Should Saturn be in Leo Rasi or Navamsa, in such dasa, one
will be subjected to various diseases, will develop misunderstandings with sons, wife and relatives and will command
wealth through cows, buffaloes, horses etc.
tWR' SWir'tftmd
^3TeT5Fn«ft y*fe*IMl4«lPHI II 11 1 1
During the dasa of Saturn posited in Virgo, the native will
attain learning and will produce (money) by his labour. He will
have fear from Brahmins and water. But he will be dear to
preceptors, brahmins, yogis etc.
; «n t lRl T3'4Tsra|j sl -jf I T t ! cT4cl i I 12
During the dasa of Saturn, who is in his exaltation, one will
gain wisdom and wealth. People will regard his learning. Naturally money will come to him and he will have happiness.
ifWHLHdcll-il
‘PP'TT Hl^HI^^-Ml II 13 II
During the dasa of Saturn in Scorpio, one will kill or capture
insects, will wander aimlessly, speak untruth, will not be kind (to
others) and will remain at the mercy of mean people for his
livelihood.
^ 4-4,4l>II4l' 33^1 HWHt ^R) of! I
tJKTTrRfRal 1 1 14 II
In the dasa of Saturn posited in Sagittarius, one will enjoy
health, be respected by the sovereign or be a king himself, will

CHAPTER 15
acquire money through profession or creatures, will be with sons
and wife and will be active as though in a warfront.
Notes: also means independent, prosperous, comfortable, resolute etc.
win
II 15 II
When Saturn occupies Capricorn, in such dasa, one will have
money by putting abundant labour, will be fortunate dear to
barren or older ladies and lose money through the confidence he
reposes (in others).
Notes: Saturn related to the 5th house in female's horoscope
can cause barrenness. He can make them also look older. He
indicates barren or old ladies and hence the author mentioned
such ladies in the sloka.
II 16 II
Should Saturn be in his Moolatrikona house, in such dasa,
one will derive comforts. He will be chief among his castemen,
wise and wealthy through agriculture, cattle and grains. He will
have sons.
nft m n '-iTri farqfdi
gftdrfdlsfq TltiHWf li 17
Should Saturn be in Pisces, in such dasa, one will acquire
money only with slight enthusiasm. He will head a group of
villages in the city, and he will be desirous of young women, at
the same time final emancipation.
del^d rftfed) qsrfa II 18 II
Should the planet Saturn be combust, in such dasa, one's
income and expenditure will be in equal ratio, will be unhappy,
sometimes fraudulent, will be widely famous but be afflicted by
worries.

HORASARA
Notes: "Bhangura" apart from meaning fraudulent, also
means crooked, crafty, perishable, variable etc.
Saturn rules Aquarius, which is natural 1 1th house or Labha
Sthana. Hence his combustion, will deprive of gams.
TWT^PrRlT3i' WfCT || 19 n
The results for Rasi and Amsa positions have thus been said
and the predictions should be based on whichever is stronger.
Should they be equal in strength one should assume balanced
results.
h^RoiPi I
WIT twlh mrof WTF'TPf II 20 II
These are the results of various dasas of the planets. One
should fully understand the native before predicting the events
and predict accordingly.
Notes: The author hints at the fact that one’s nature will play
an important role in moulding his fate. And hence, the nature of
person should also be understood. One’s future depends on how
best the planetary indications and influences could be used. We
have the time old saying "Buddhih Karmanusarini” which means
that mind follows one’s own deeds.
?f?r %il i fi F uR i qdyiuy/-iy it I'd < ITh gKRt i t TT f^y ii ^Him i U :
Thus ends the 15th Chapter entitled "The Effects of Saturn’s
Dasa" in Horasara of Prithuyasas, son of Varaha Mihira

CHAPTER 16
qUviU^w:
3# llgdd'jkviHI wrcrai?lt «M*)HI: I
m-kUrdfagHN 111 II
If the planet be of a mixed nature, in such dasa, the results
relating to one's house or abode, happiness and money will only
be weak. He will have a tendency to live in other's houses, be
respected by the public and learned.
Notes: TO apart from meaning abode, also means condition
(i.e. the overall status of the native in this context), office, rank,
dignity, etc.
WIT WTFrMtoi) ^rf^TI
?TTOjt WtPdlkd: II 2 II
During the dasa of a planet that is in its retrograde motion,
one will have prestige and valour and be wealthy. Should the
planet be in a good Rasi or good Navamsa, avoiding 6th and 8th
houses, one will acquire a kingdom of his own.
Notes: If the position of Jupiter, Venus and Mercury be in 6th
or 8th, it constitutes Adhiyoga. Hence it is capable of giving good
results.
^'dd'lfSdlcMl fd^lRidUWd-dild 113 II
Should a planet be in debilitation or inimical houses, at the
same being in its retrograde motion, in such dasa, one will indulge in bad acts, will be reviled by his relatives, live in foreign

HORASARA
countries and be dependant upon others.
Notes: Bad results are attributed here to a planet in fall and
at the same time in vakra. According to Phala Deepika, sloka 20,
ch. 9, such a planet is considered to be equal to an exalted one.
This view is further supported by sloka 6, ch. 3 of the Uttara
Kalamrita. It further adds that if a planet be in (R) motion while
in exaltation, it is equal to a debilitated planet.
fin ii 4 ii
During the sub period of Rahu dasa, when Rahu is placed
between (malefic) planets, there will be extreme grief for 2 years.
Should a sub-period and an inter-sub-period be of two mutually
inimical planets, one will be deprived of his relations and suffer
from diseases.
ofl ySflHNSRl II 5 II
Even though a planet by nature be auspicious, it yields only
inauspicious results if it is in the company of Rahu. In the end of
such dasa, one will be exposed to diseases, grief and displacement.
cTOll
RRRRfa II 6 II
In the dasa of a planet that is inimical to Lagna lord or the
lord of Moon sign, one will be wandering, banned from his
country (or lose his kindgom) and will be insulted by enemies
when seeking their protection.
Even good planets will produce malefic results in their dasas
in the event of their occupying inimical or debilitational houses
or 6th or 12th from Lagna. The planets that are placed in inauspicious houses will also give bad results.

CHAPTER 16
fW 'hpf:
Mimfartl iRU[f^ *3^113^1
dWWCWhhNI 3^3 Thtft II 8 II
If Venus is in his own house identical with the 8th, he makes
one sick, should he also join malefics in such condition, at the end
of Venus dasa, death is caused. Should lagna lord be in 8th, in the
company of malefics, he inflicts death in his Antardasa.
Notes: Venus can be in 8th in own house only for Libra
natives. However, Saturn and Venus in 8th can only increase the
longevity. This is because Saturn in 8th is said to do so; moreover, he has friendly disposition to Libra Lagna.
frsRTfsNct: ^ TpKT W I
The dasa of the 8th lord posited in an angle will prove
auspicious Should he be, while being so, eclipsed or in the company of Rahu, according to the wise, death is inflicted upon the
native.
rl , -Re|<l.> i eH*3t 31 gft 3P3 <5!ll-df I
y|U|«-^H!Hlfd 'snfsRT II 10 II
Should there be doubts about the Ascendant lord or a planet
in the 8th house killing the native, it happens only at the end of
the dasa of the said planet.
371T3T2WT ityt: 1^*3^ Mm: II 11 11
Those tliat are in own Signs or exaltation signs, if in an angle
or 11th house to another planet, they become Karakas of the
latter. The planet which occupies the 10th house of the planet
referred to as latter, it assumes special importance.
Notes: Suppose Jupiter is in Cancer in exaltation, while Mars
is in Virgo. So, Jupiter is in 11th of Mars in Uchcha and becomes
Karaka planet for Mars.
In this context reference may also be made to Sloka 1 of

HORASARA
Chapter 22 in Brihat ]ataka which states planets in own signs,
exaltation or Moolatrikona signs if in kendra position to each
other, they become mutual signifactors or Anyonya karakas.
Parasara Hora (my English translation) and Saravali (my English
translation) may also be consulted.
^ fakft cF? II 12 II
If the lord of the 10th be in a kendra, he becomes a significtor
of the earlier mentioned planet. Lords of 10th and 9th if posited
in an angle give good results.
d^iiAM T II 13
The Karakatwa planet (as above) makes one a principal person in his caste. In such dasa without doubt, the native's desires
would be fulfilled.
dHlfarFRf! |
3: V <FT II 14 II
Should the lord of the Moon sign or the ascendant lord be in
an angle along with jupiter the native is happy in the middle
portion of his life.
WUSfel'h'vU'l ^ iTRfe'JTF fcFRiTI I
Witn'W^n ipfc H II 15 It
In the dasa of a planet posited in a malefic's navamsa, the
native faces hindrance to his education in the boyhood. Should
the said Navamsa be of a combust planet, the said effect is
undoubtedly certian.
Notes: Suppose Mercury is occupying Kumbha Navamsa,
owned by Saturn. Then in such Mercury’s period, coinciding
with boyhood, education will be disturbed. In another example,
suppose Mercury is in Libra Navamsa, when Venus is combust,
then in Mercury's dasa, education will be undoubtedly spoiled.
eql ^ e=i a) 3 1 i a 4 Pci fa :
*rs) ^ ITRTZI: ST?1 II 16 It

CHAPTER 16
Should the planets commencing from Mars onward be in
their respective exaltation signs or own Rasis, coinciding with
Kendras, and be strong, five kinds of yogas, viz. Ruchaka,
Bhadra, Harnsa, Malavya and Sasa yogas are produced.
■Mi'll 3}rff H I
Tdh'+.vMMHl Trn Tpzpp II 17 ||
If these are considered, not relating to other yogas, these are
capable of giving repeated and full effects to the persons born in
superior families.
1^^ yhK’VierMi'rM-i: ■il.-ii: I
^r|nwrT wn n is u
Those that are born with these yogas (i.e. any of the 5 yogas
mentioned above) enjoy wealth on a perennial basis, fame and
are illustrious, meritorious and become king of kings. Such men
command elephants, horses, various diamonds and long life.
Notes: The yogas and results dealt with in slokas 16 to 18 are
summed below with reference to to other classic works. These 5
yogas are called Pancha Maha Purusha yogas, which are considered to be of high order.
See chapter VI of Mantreswara's Phala Deepika. The person
bom in Ruchaka yoga has a long face, wealth obtained through
very valorous deeds, courage and destroys enemies. He has
strength, pride, praiseworthy qualities, commandership and success. Bhadra yoga native lives long, is sharpminded, dean slated,
praised even by the learned, is a king, exceedingly rich and an
expert in giving life to royal assembly. The one born in Harnsa
yoga, is praised by good men, a king, has symbols of conch, lotus
and fish in his palms and soles, beautiful body, eats sweet food,
and is generous. Malavya yoga native has strong limbs, is steadfast, wealthy, has wife and children, fortune, prosperity, comfortable food, good conveyances, learning and pleasing limbs.
Lastly, the one born in Sasa yoga is praised by all persons, has
servants, strength and is a head of village or a king, wicked,
addicted to other women, steals other's wealth and happy. These
yogas can be counted from the Moon or from Lagna.

HORASARA
See what Varaha Mihira states in Brihat Samhita, while dealing with Pancha Mahapurusha Yogas in chapter 69. (Refer Hindi
translation by Achyutananda Sharma). From Mars, note the
Satwa (courage) of the native; from Mercury his greatness (^TT);
from Jupiter his voice; from Venus his friendship and from Saturn his splendour. While we see Saturn as a 'dark planet’ in
oridnary parlance, mark Varaha Mihira’s great wisdom and
piercing insight in attributing brightness as Saturn's indicationleaving aside a brighter planet like Mercury. Then, Satwa allotted
to Mars indicates-apart from courage-existence, nature, essence, inborn disposition, life spirit, breath, mind, vitality, consciousness, substance, wealth etc. Now what Satwa means in
various contexts is to be wisely understood by us. Brihat Samhita
is suggestive of the fact that these Mahapurusha Yogas, apart
from being Rajayogas of great order, are indicative of the respective qualities, viz. Satwa, greatness, voice, friendship and
splendour in their order. That is to say, if Jupiter causes a powerful Hamsa Yoga, one will, inter alia, possess (mellifluous) voice.
A Malavya Yoga native will reveal friendship in his nature. Tire
nature of a person under Satwa, Rajas and Tamas are also meaningfully explained in Brihat Samhita.
How uniquely and inimitably does Varaha Mihira in Brihat
Samhia treat births under each of these Yogas can be noted from
the following:
(a) Malavya Yoga - The native has nostrils like that of a cobra
(or an elephant) ITH TSt:-, evenly placed shoulders, hands extending upto knees (when in erect posture), strong joints, even,
beautiful and slender body, 13" long space from chin to head, 10"
across from chin to the hole of the ear, bright face and bright
eyes, broad cheeks, even and white teeth and thin lips. He is a
king protecting the inmates of Saurashtra, Malava, Sindhu, Laata
etc. and is wise. He earns wealth with his own valour. He lives
upto seventy. He dies in a shrine.
(b) Bhadra Yoga - The native has strong, even, long and
round arms. His height is equal to the distance covered by horizontally his both arms. His semen is thick and pure (i.e. capable
of yielding immediate and healthy progeny). He has broad and
strong chest. He has predominant Satwa disposition, fixity of

CHAPTER 16
mind, is peaceful, liberal and grateful. He walks like an elephant.
He is well-versed in many sastras, has attractive forehead,
is expert in arts, is courageous, has beautiful belly and has
hands and feet resembling the 'womb' of a lotus. He is of yogic
disposition. He has attractive nose and even shoulders. His body
gives smell of the earth when sprinkled with fresh (rain) water,
of ichor exuding from the temples of an elephant, of sandal paste
and of saffron. He has black hair. His genetal oran is 'concealed’
in position like that of a horse or tusker. His palm has lines of
lotus, wheel, conch etc. Even others enjoy luxuries with his
wealth. He does not forgive his relatives. He is independent in
decision. He is 84 inches in height. His weight is like that of a
beam. He rules middle portion of the country. If he is 105 inch
long, he rules the whole world. He attains heaven at the age of 80
in a shrine.
(c) Sasa Yoga— The native has few protrudig teeth, few small
teeth, narrow nails, fleshy eye lids, is fast in walking, expert in
learning and in sale of minerals, has prominent chins, is leader of
army, fond of sexual acts, addicted toother women, respectful of
his mother and likes hills, rivers and fortresses. He is 92 inches in
height, of doubtful disposition and is not very stout. The
midportion of his body is weak. His soles and palms have superior lines resembling garland, trident etc. He lives upto 70.
(d) Hamsa Yoga-The native has reddish face, prominent
chin, elevated nose, golden splendour, round head, eyes like
honey, nails transparent showing blood, has soles and palms
with lines resembling lotus, pair of fish, conch, garland, pitcher
etc. His voice is mellifluous like that of a flemingo (or a nightingale). He is 95 inches in height. He rules over Nepal, Gandhara
and the area encircled by Ganges and Yamuna rivers. He dies at
90 near a forest.
(d) Ruchaka Yoga— The native has attractive eyebrows and
hair, is fair in complexion, and his neck is conch-shaped. He is
long-faced. He is a minister and a leader of robbers. The middle
portion of his stomach is as long as his face. He is not so splendorous. He destroys his enemies. He has lines of fish, moon,
rident etc. He respects preceptors, brahmins and the Almighty.
Te is 100 inch long. His weight is 1000 palas. He is expert in

HORASARA
Mantras and Abhichara. He rules Vindhya, Ujjain etc. and dies at
70 by fire.
The above explanations of Panchamahapurusha Yogas are
highly suggestive. Kalyana Varma in Saravali, chapter 37 (see
my English translation) proceeds more or less on similar
lines. Saravali, further states that if both husband and wife
have Bhadra Yoga, the man concerned rules over the whole
earth.
Manasagari (Sanskrit-Hindi) however, does not allow affliction from the luminaries in the case of a Pancha Maha Purusha
Yoga. In such instance, only ordinary results follow, states its
author.
There are still elaborate and relevant notes in
Rajayogadhyaya of jataka Parijata. The reader may refer the said
work.
Wl'nlHiRbnJt: Mt-M i : I
T rW W-ltOTWI: II 19 11
Those who have the Sun and the Moon weak, while others
from Mars are also weak, do not become kings. They shall have
only sons and money.
Notes: So to say, if these planets are weak, but still indicative
of some Rajayogas, they will only bless with wealth and issues,
but not a royal status. For such royal position, they should be
strong apart from producing some powerful yogas as good in
nature.
TTFPtFI ^IRn ^ rfof tifieR Wl%^l
fsrqfH 1 1 20 it
According to Brahma So'unda, one bom with superior yogas
lives with happiness and wealth. Adverse combinations will only
produce inauspicious effects.
¥TE3T?11 II 21 II
Anything started in the dasa of a planet that has been out of
its exaltation (i.e. in fall speak to broadly) will only not mature.

CHAPTER 16
The dasa of the planet ruling the 6th (or 8th) counted from the
house occupied by Lagna lord will cause, if the said planet is
debilitated.
Notes: In the second line, ffalfy'WU is another reading.
rtd fc’TT ?T^rwt)IHI*lrR 1
Should a malefic (untoward) planet be in the 6th or 8th,
unaspeced by planets posited in good houses, he brings death by
disease, travel etc.
wrar TTCjfatwwnW faster fqan 1 1 23 1 1
Tire planets Jupiter, Venus, Saturn, Mars and Mercury their
representative character of elements (i.e. Pancha Bhutas)
viz. Ether, Water, Air, Fire and Earth in their dasas through
wind, bile and phlegm. Planets mixed in nature yield mixed
results.
tjpn ?pn
eRSfl W^fl: I
Among men, animals and birds the lusture of the body,
indicating both inauspicious and auspicious effects and the
good qualities of the inner mind, the brilliant qualities etc. can
be seen by the learned as the flame of a lamp kept in crystal
vessel.
Tire Earthy element's lust gives teeth, skin, nail and hair,
adds fragrance, satisfaction, money, gain and upward status and
makes one virtuous.
fFPm fridi^Rd! wrrfarpcn

rtOKASARA
'dddH
tjpit ^ <Fpp ^pTWnffr ii 26 it
The element Water is glossy, white (like camphor) green (like
grass), pleasing to the eyes, and indicates amiable nature and
qualities, comforts, growth, protects like mother, and allround
prosperity.
ai i 'YAPd yrfrHi wi^qra fwi fiifs difejcinfw ^ 1 1 27 1 1
The element Fire is disposed to anger, is like lotus, gold and
burning fire, shining, capable of conferring success and fulfilling
of all desires.
field'd fdV+iif-Ti: HiM'i'qbfd'js)
71 ^clfd yidddl?!? 3 ! Slldra^ifd wttfqT Wf ^T: wft 1128 II
The element Air is non-white i.e. black, cloud of bad smell is
secretive, dusty, rough and capable of causing grief. It causes
sufferance, gives no wealth and destroys one’s parental properties.
?71*Tr^7Tfc?: M^sfddW: 1 1 29 II
One born under the influence of Ether, can know the words
and meanings and study those deeply. He is conscientious and
respected, has loose joints, weak hands and legs and the nature
of sky. He is full of stature.
Pd^ieciHi^ qftumfd
MS^q^i^qYxffsyiqi II 30 II
The effects produced by weak planets are only pipe dreams.
The effects of Pancha Maha Purusha Yogas, if the planets are
* weak, should be deduced similarly.
Notes: If weak planets cause such yogas, the good results
will only be in dreams but actually not to hand.

CHAPTER 16
Further according to Manasagari, ch. 4, in the case of a Maha
Parusha yogas if the Sun be conjunct Moon, great yoga does not
arise. On the other hand, only ordinary results will follow.
ii 31 ii
Only after estimating one's physical appearance, caste, qualities etc., the results should be declared according to family,
country, age etc., in the order of the dasas concerned.
?frT ^U ~ mA H^fU T el l K TI U :
Thus ends the 16th Chapter entitled "Miscellaneous Dasa
Effects" in Horasara of Prithuyasas, son of Varaha Mihira.

CHAPTER 17
cti^ifa q*4i<Hi WsPW^
The following are the Ashtakavarga places in the several
Ash taka vargas of the Sun and other planets:
(Total Benefic Dots-48)
•rj^:-7r^Rf:
^sKW-fafe:
?T%:-TT5TRil Thf=FF:
HHTM— 7
ch-aw-fwro krf7
wFT-qhir ^npFrw
7 TTh— T^OT ■ *il '4 ^
x5 O
(Total Benefic Dots— 49)

CHAPTER 17
«J«npI-jtrWt:
IJCt:— cf-BBTf:
'SpK'RT— iTfMf :
HHW-'SVr-lT'i ftrq
(Total Benefic Dots~39)
-TTHfe-54
(Total Benefic Dots--54)
T^:-yfRnfcR
’frtTOKl ^Tjch:
^51-^nTcral STTO
TJTt: — cKMl^t
yi%:-gT4r#^fTS:
-HHfe-56
(Total Benefic Dots-56)

riORASARA
■?T%: — ^ u ivrd^
^sb l :-Tmfe-52
T%:-FWt:
*TtWto
SRT:
•gftr-fT^TO^T:
¥ A:— mJfn? IKTFW:
^-4wwfe
^tpt— rRl^rw?
^sFTFT-tfFT#
HH^-^TgfcRTsf:
(Total Benefic Dots-56)
(Total Benefic Dots-52)
Notes: We now explain the meanings of the above benefic
dots in the Ashtaka Varga scheme.
For example, note the Rasi occupied by the Sun in the horo-

CHAPTER 17
scope. He gives auspicious dots in his place, 2nd, 4th, 7th, 8th,
9th, l()th and 11th. In the remaining four houses, he does not
contribute benefic dots. Nextly, mark benefic dots in the 3rd, 6th,
10th and 11th from the Moon. Then mark benefic dots in 1st, 2nd,
4th, 7th, 8th, 9th, 10th and 11th with reference to Mars. Similarly,
benefic dots should be marked as noted for Mercury, Jupiter,
Venus, Saturn, and Lagna. Then the dots of all the Rasis contributed with reference to Lagna and the seven planets should be
totalled and noted down to get the Sun's Ashtakavarga, which
should be 48 points in all. Then the Ashtakavargas of the Moon,
Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus and Saturn should be prepared as
above and the benefic places are detailed below.
(a) The Sun's Ashtaka Varga: The Sun's benefic dots are
marked in the 1st, 2nd, 4th, 7th, 8th, 9th, 10th and 11th from his
position. Mark dots in the same places for Mars and Saturn; the
5th, 6th, 9t and 1 1th from Jupiter; the 3rd, 6th, 10th and 1 1 th from
Moon; the 3rd, 5th, 6th, 9th, 10th, 11th and 12th from Lagna and
the 6th, 7th and 12th from Venus.The total benefic points in the
A.V. of the Sun is 48.
(b) The Moon's A. V.:The Moon is auspicious in the 3rd, 6th,
7th, 8th, 10th and 11th from the Sun; in the 1st, 3rd, 6th, 7th, 10th
and 11th from her; in the 2nd, 3rd, 5th, 6th, 9th, 10th and 11th
from Mars; in the 1st, 3rd, 4th, 5th, 7th, 7th, 8th, 10th and 11th
from Mercury; in the 1st, 4th, 7th, 8th, 10th, 11th and 12 from
Jupiter; in the 3rd, 4th, 5th, 7th, 9th, 10th and 11th from Venus in
the 3rd, 5th, 6th and 11th from Saturn and in the 3rd, 6th, 10th
and 11th from Lagna. The total benefic dots obtainable in the
Moon's A.V. is 49.
(c) The A.V. of Mars: Benefic points are marked in the 3rd,
5th,6th, 10th and the 11th from the Sun, in the 3rd, 6th and 1 1th
from the Moon in the 1st, 2nd, 4th, 7th, 8th, 10th and 11th from
Mars; in the 3rd, 5th, 6th and 11th from Mercury, in the 6th, 10th,
11th and 12th from Jupiter; in the 6th, 8th, 11th and 12th from
Venus; in the 1st, 4th, 7th, 8th, 9th, 10th and 11th from Saturn;
and in 1st, 3rd, 6th, 10th and 11th from Ascendant. The total
benefic dots obtainable in the A.V. of Mars is 39.
(d) The A.V. of Mercury: A total of 54 dots are obtainable as
under: In the 5th, 6th, 9th, 11th and 12 from the Sun, in the 2nd,

HORASARA
4th, 6th, 8th, 10th and 11th from the Moon; in the 1st, 2nd , 4th,
7th, 8th, 9th, 10th and lit h from Mars; in the 1st, 3rd, 5th, 6th,
9th, 10th, 11th and 12th from Mercury; in the 6th, 8th, 11th and
12th from Mercury; in the 6th, 8th, 11th and 12th from Jupiter;
the 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 5th, 8th, 9th, and 11th from Venus, the 1st
2nd, 4th, 7th, 8th, 9th, 10th and 1 1th from Saturn; and the 1st, 2nd
4th, 6th, 8th, 10th and 11th from Lagna.
(e) The A.V. of Jupiter: A total of 56 benefic dots are obtained
thus: In the 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 7th, 8th, 9th, 10th, and 11th from
the Sun the 2nd, 5th, 7th, 9th and 11th from the Moon; the 1st,
2nd, 4th, 5th, 6th, 9th, 10th and 11th from Mercury; the 1st, 2nd
3rd, 4t h, 7th, 8th, 10th and 11th from Jupiter; the2nd 5th, 6th,
9th, 10th and 11th from Venus; the 3rd, 5th, 6th, and 12th from
Saturn and the 1st, 2nd, 4th, 5th, 6th, 7th, 9th, 10th and 11th from
Lagna.
(f) The A.V. of Venus: A total of 52 benefic dots are noted
thus: In the 8th, 11th and 12th from the Sun; in the 1st, 2nd, 3rd,
4th, 5th, 8th, 9th, 11th and 12th from the Moon; the 3rd, 5th, 6th,
9th, 11th and 12th from Mars; the 3rd, 5th, 5th, 6th, 9th and 11th
from Mercury; the 5th, 8th, 9th, 10th and 11th from Jupiter; the
1st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 5th, 8th, 9th, 10th and 11th from Venus; the
3rd, 4th, 5th, 8th, 9th, 10th and 11th from Saturn and the 1st, 2nd
3rd, 4th, 5th, 8th, 9th nd 11th from Lagna.
(g) The A. V. of Saturn: A total of 39 benefic dots should be
got thus: In the 1st, 2nd, 4th, 7th, 8th, 10th and 11th from the Sun;
the 3rd, 6th and 11th from the Moon; the 3rd, 5th, 6th, 10th, 11th
and 12th from Mars; the 6th, 8th, 9th, 10th, 11th and 12th from
Mercury; the 5th, 6th, 1 1th and 12th from Jupitr; the 6th, 11th and
12th from Venus; the 3rd, 5th, 6th and 11th from Saturn and the
1st, 3rd, 4th, 6th, 10th and 11th from Lagna.
Thus a total of 337 benefic dots shall constantly be obtained
for any horoscope,
oRiNstv' 111 II

CHAPTER 17
Tprofr wf MfrfsTsrsratT: (
II 2 II
^KcftZef?^ T^TUTT ^ WS WFI
STWfsRT W3 t? 1 1 3 1 1
wrfXi T Tiri m?=tT w^i
^TFTf ^ 114 II
iX ^TRmj^: 115 II
^nft h»TTlf3 fg&TT tfX ^Hrqi)
u|^t||f4^^' ^JH II 6 II
Benefic dots from Lagna, Sun etc. should be marked on the
ground (now a days on paper) and added together. The dasa
effects arising out of the 12 rasis should be determined for the
several planets. In the dasas of planets which contain no benefic
dots; or placed in fall or in enemy's house will bring about
diseases, financial loss, grief etc. If there are 1, 2, or 3 dots only,
predict loss of money, grains and cattle. With four dots, the
effects are medium, i.e. not bad and not good. Should there be
five dots, all desires will be fulfilled.
Tpfewnfcr rdfaf^X II 7 II
The results relating to a planet in own house, exaltation
house or upachaya house should be deduced as told above. The
results arising out of benefic dots (in each Ashtaka Varga) should
be understood as mentioned earlier.
fgTpi <yJt-<wT *Xi
The good results delivered by good houses will be of twofold
auspicious. Should it be otherwise, the results are also otherwise.
In such manner, the results of the 12 houses commencing.from
Lagna should be deduced.
Ucd t^WqlciTi ^5 IX: 119 II

HORASARA
Fit Fvt fasFTC ^ mt ^ ^7«TFTI
W ■RT^rai ^ <|4i: II 10 II
FhTT^ ffefa'FiK: WW1R 5 T^*RJ
^7 WTFFm II 11 II
ijxr xitwlirmi i r ikiH<r*fpra 1 [ f^i
snffersErrfsr JhiMfeiHyM FfFisjcr it 12 11
'‘TF^TH TFFTH F^FTH F?T: W(l
cfiitMtgrg ^rqt W: 4lFi gfa: II 13 II
^ff^l W*lct <11 ^I^lfl^W^i
^FbMcIN ^ fa^Ul'Wl^li?^ || 14 II
SKTf (T ^FTFSTH 9NFJFf iFTOcll
II 15 II
The physical growth, possessing limbs or otherwise should
be known from the Lagna. Truthfulness, prudence and wealth
are to be known from the second house. One’s voice, strength,
courage and co-born should be estimated from the third house.
One’s comforts (happiness), relatives, mental disposition and
mother should be assessed from the fourth house. One's nature,
extent of mental calibre and sons are to be known from the 5th
house. The sixth house helps to know about one’s cousins, enemies, wounds etc. The 7th house should be consulted in respect
of one’s progenic ability, marital success etc. The 8th house reveals diseases, death etc. The next house to it, i.e. the 9th house is
called Bhagyasthana (luck). Guru Sthana (elders and preceptors)
and Dharmasthana (Virtues). The 10th house speaks of one’s
profession, living, courage, prowess, learning and fame (seen
and heard). One’s wealth, monetary gains etc. should be known
from the 11th house The 12th house is known as house of expenses and sins. This is, how a wise astrologer should assess the
12th houses.
Notes: Since these slokas give only few indications to be
deducted from the 12 Bhavas, it is essential to have more information in this respect. Accordingly given below is detailed possible account of the 12 Bhavas.
Lagna or first Bhava: Happiness and misery, old age, knowledge, hiy th place, fame, dream, strength, dignity, politics, Ion-

CHAPTER 17
gevity, hair appearance, pride, livelihood, gambling, stigma,
honour, skin, sleep, tendency to insult others, freedom from
diseases, discontent, blame from own people, natural disposition, head, present period, comforts, discomforts, maternal
grandfather, paternal grandmother, good behaviour, protection,
stomach, thinking, respect from others, prestige, caste, help that
can be obtained through relatives, etc.
Second Bhava: The nine gems, nine kinds of grains, livelihood through the courtesy of others, horses, family, steadiness
of mind, selling and buying, truth and untruth, income
through friends, ability to speak, capability to fulfil one's words,
right eye, the good and bad to eye-sight, Sasthras, the nine
worlds (Nava Lokas), death, enmity, metals, wealth, face,
speech, learning, belief in sacred traditions, nails, tongue,
robes, nose, liberal mind, eating, living power, self-earned
money etc.
Third Bhava: Courage, next brothers and sisters, war, ears,
(right ear as Phala Deepika), legs, roadside place, confusion of
mind, fitness, sorrow, dream, heroic valour, one's own relations,
friend, wandering, throat, eating pure food, virtue, learning,
partition of property, pastime, bodily strength, grain, noble descent, female servants, journey in small good vehicle, a large
undertaking, religious duty, army, melody of voice, strength to
perform carnal acts, arms of a person, mother’s paternal unde,
father's maternal uncle, journey to neighbouring countries,
father's death, employer, worries caused by mother, grains from
lands, carnal pleasures, longevity, ornaments of ears, music, raping women, gains from service, sinful acts, patience, entitlement
to earn food etc.
Fourth Bhava: Mother, scent, artistic ability, education, conveyances, milk-yielding caws, treasures hidden under the earth,
evils to father, home, relatives, comforts, lands, gardens, following rules of virtue, breasts of women, power in service, maternal
uncle, nephew, clothes, jewels, buffalo, kingdom, water, milk,
medicines of great efficacy, false allegations, father, wife,
mother's side, intellect, hoarding of one's savings, loss of residence, paternal property, celestial food, development of Vedic
and other sacred texts, horses, elephants, grain produced.

HOK.-1S.AKA
temples, dreams etc.
Fifth Bhava: Progeny, good acts of father, king, minister,
good morals, mechanical art, mind, learning, pregnancy, discretion, paternal property, foresightedness, property got through
wife’s luck, relationship with prostitutes, secret profoundity,
firmness, long literary production, engagement in business,
prayer by incantations, wealth like that of Kubera, cooked rice,
chanting of Vedic hymns, deep thinking, ways for earning
money, intense satisfaction, royal insignia, taxes, future,
memory, hand, physical heart (some say this is ruled by the 4th
house which is more appropiate), any plan, accomplishment of
objects through Mantras, worship of deities, mental/heart's
policy, Puranas, auspicious speech, Poorva Punya, ensuing birth,
scholarship, speech in public, teaching the disciples, modesty,
greatness, daughters, sons etc.
Sixth Bhava: Fear from enemies, war, hindrance to work,
grief, dejected mind, pains, sickness, untimely death, debts, fear
from poison, thieves, fire, wicked deeds, blames, doubts, grief
through women, trouble through water, loss, difficulty, loss of
honour, enmity with servants, difficulty to acquire meal, enmity
with cousins, urinary diseases, tuberculosis, forgetfulness, mental worries, position, step mother, imprisonment, navel, chest,
anxiety, vices, wounds, phlegm, swelling in body, insaniity, eye
troubles, receiving alms, dysentery, service, misunderstanding
with brothers, etc.
Seventh Bhava: Marriage, unchastity, wining of love, enmity
with debauched female, deviation from right path, good perfume, break in journey, purity of the spouse, pair of wives,
private organ, urine, anus, trade, sweet drink, gifts, destruction
of power, controversy, sexual union, adopted son, theft, wife,,
secret carnal pleasures, journeys, death of enemies, death, gambling, desire, sexy feelings, grandfather, arguments, litigations,
capacity to indulge in carnal pleasures, trade in clothes, urine,
flowers, listening to music, attracting others, obstacles to journey, food of liking, children through second wife, dance, bones,
quarrels with wife, success in litigations, etc.
Eighth Bhava: Longevity, disputes, defeat, death, sin, kind of
death, wounds, urinary diseases, cancer, loss, fear griefs, enmity

CHAPTER 17
with wife, fear from poison, warfield, fall from height diseases
that are long-lasting in nature (as against diseases of short duration as indicated by the 6th bhava), to be a source of trouble to
living beings, unnecessary expenditure, accidents, to oe beheaded, anger, loss of limb, mystery, boat, imprisonment, theft,
robbery, Mangalya, hole, mental distress, insult, servitude, giving loans, receiving donations, diseases in anus, amounts to be
received unintentionally and those to be received after death,
affliction to face, witchcraft, punishment from Government,
longstanding property, loss of money, misfortune, etc.
Ninth Bhava: Father, donation, virtue, foreign travels, dips
in holy water, penance, respect to elders, conduct, purity of
mind, divine worship, exertion for acquisition of learning,
splendour, conveyance, affluence, policy, politics, dignity, association with good people, paternal wealth,-daughter, son, circulation of money, regulating Brahminic faith, Vedic sacrifices,
Bhagya, preceptor, Poorva Punya, preceptor, grandsons, pilgrimage, charitable deeds, excessive mundane pleasures, etc.
Tenth Bhava: Profession, wisdom, fame of high order, greatness of residence great achievement in medical field, big position
with the king, good and bad of father, kindness, prestige, knees,
thighs, backbone, devotion to father, news from distant places,
rains, droughts, sky, kingdom, living in foreign countries, business, command, agriculture, science, athletics, adopted son, doctor, depositing of treasures etc.
Eleventh Bhava: Gain, all desires, bad desires, all kinds of
receipts, dependency, elder brother or sister, paternal uncle,
worship of deities, ornaments, pearls, wealth, ministership,
brother-in-law, fortune, shanks, skill in arts, right foot, left hand,
income, vehicles, palanquins, chariots, decoration, left ear, good
news, playful sexual acts, enemy's enemy, affection to mother,
regaining lost things, enjoying many wives, to live by dancing
and singing, gains through education, kitchen, goldsmithy, desire to bag other's money, blaming others, relief of mental duress
etc.
Twelfth Bhava: Expenditure, enmity with public, obstacles,
obscurity of mind, sleeping comforts, livelihood in other places
than native place, final emancipation, hell, expenditure through

HORASARA
king, secret intelligence, end, penury, left eye, imprisonment,
feet, punishment, urgent demands, loss of wife, liberation from
pain, loss by marriage, paternal wealth lost, renouncement,
physical injury, death, obstacles to parents and brothers, termination of appointment, enemy's imprisonment etc.
The above have been taken from Uttara Kalamrita, Fhala
Deepika, Jataka Parijata, Jataka Sagarm, Sanketa Nidhi and my
English version of Parasara Hora.
In the context of contents of the 12 Bhavas, 1 feel it worthwhile to put before the readers, an old though cumbersome but
reliable technique of the Bhava calculations which the readers
may use according to their own judgement.
The usual and popularly followed Bhava reckoning system
goes through the 12 rasis in the same order. But, Jyotisha
Pragnarta Deepika, an old Tamil classic, details, eight different
kinds of Bhava charts depending on the birth being in Sukla
Paksha or Krishna Paksha as under:
1. Sukla Paksha Savya,
2. SukJa Paksha Apasavya,
3. Sukla Paksha Savyapasavya,
4. SukJa Paksha Apasayyasavya,
5 Krishna PakshaSavya,
6. Krishna Paksha Apasavya,
7. Krishna Paksha Savyapasavya,
8. Krishna Paksha Apasavyasavya.
How to classify a particular chart in the above groups, is
explained below:
Rule 1-Sukla Paksha:
The nine planets from the Sun to Ketu contribute one auspicious point each, as tabulated below, by being in odd rasis like
Aries, Gemini etc. or by being in even rasis like Taurus, Cancer
etc Another set of maximum nine points is contributed by these
planets, each one point, by being angular /trinal from Lagna (no!
from the Moon), or by being in the 2nd, 3rd, 6th, 8th, 11th or 12th

CHAPTER 17
from Lagna, i.e. non-angular/non-frinal. If a planet does not
contribute a benefic point it should be treated as malefic point.
Simply, the contribution is malefic or benefic by being firstly in a
rasi like Aries etc. and secondly, malefic or benefic with reference
to its position numerically counted from Lagna. Thus, the total
contribution, both malefic and benefic, is only 18 points.
Planet
Odd
Even
Angular/
non-angular/
rasi
rasi
trinal
non-trinal
Sun
M
B
M
B
Moon
B
M
B
M
Mars
M
B
M
B
Mercury
B
M
B
M
Jupiter
B
M
B
M
Venus
B
M
B
M
Saturn
M
B
M
B
Rahu
M
B
M
B
Ketu
M
B
M
B
It is understood that if a planet does not contribute a benefic
point (represented by 'B' in the above table), it contributes a
malefic point (represented by "M' as above). As soon as the
contributions are found out, the results are to be evaluated thus:
When benefic points are 9, melafic points will also be 9, as the
total is 18. Then the chart of birth is classified as Sukla Paksha
Savya. With four maximum benefic points, the chart is called
Sukla Paksha Apasavya. If benefic points are above 5 but below
8, it is Sukla Paksha Apasavyapasavya. If malefic points be so, i.e.
between 5 and 8, it is Sukla Paksha Savyapasavya.
Rule 2-Krishna Paksha
Here, the reverse of the above table is to be followed. So to
say, wherever a benefic point is contributed by a certain position
in Sukla Paksha, the same position in Krishna Paksha contributes
a malefic point. For example, the Sun in odd sign for Sukla
Paksha contributes malefic point while he contributes a benefic
point in the same position for Krishna Paksha. For evaluation of
points for Krishna Paksha, again the reverse of Shukla Paksha is
true. The same is detailed below:

HORASARA
If malefic and benefic points are equal in Krishna Paksha it
becomes Apasavya chart. Upto four benefic points, it is Krishna
Paksha Savya. If the benefic points are between 5 and 8, the chart
is Krishna Paksha Savyapasavya. When the malefic points are
between 5 and 8 in Krishna Paksha it is Apasavyasavya.
Though the text has designated eight kinds of charts, the
actual number is only four as far as counting is concerned, which
are as under;
1. What is Krishna Paksha Savya is also Sukla Paksha
Apasavya. See chart 1 for both.
2. What is Krishna Paksha Apasavya is also Sukla Paksha
Savya. See chart 2 for both.
3. What is Krishna Paksha Savyapasavya is also Sukla
Paksha Apasavyasavya. See chart 3 for both.
4. What is Kristina Paksha Apasavyasavya is also Sukla
Paksha Savyapasavya. See chart 4 for both.
The charts are given below, assuming that the natal Lagna is
Aries:
CHART 1

HORASARA
While this scheme of bhava division is based on sound fooling, some guidelines are essential- For cakuk’ion ot Raja Yogas
like Adhi yoga, the original system be better adhered to. For
evaluation of Bhava results, through Karakattwas, the scheme
being discussed will give fairly good results. Remember that
Kendra, Kona etc. are again referred to only from Lagna and not
as per the present system so that the numerical order with reference to rising degree is not disturbed. In the course of these few
years, I have been able to use this school of thought to a great
advantage, coupled with the popular system of reckoning when
required.
The following may be added to the evaluation Savya,
Apasavya etc. Successful evaluation of the following can be
achieved only when Savya, Apasavya scheme is followed:
Under this scheme, each Bhava is divided into 12 zones
(sensitive points as we can call). We can understand that planets
connected with that 'zone' by way of occupation etc. will influence the particular indication greatly. For example, the zone of
'complexion' in the first Bhava, if connected with Saturn will
make the native black-skinned. If 'Kalatra' zone in the 7th Bhava
is connected with Venus, the spouse will be pretty very sensual
etc. Each 'zone’ is divided into 2° 30’ and thus each Bhava has 12
'zones' as noted below:
First Bhava: 1. Complexion 2. Physique 3. Head 4. Identity
marks on the person 5. Thinking 6. Grief 7. Fame 8. Devotion to
gods 9. Auspiciousness 10. Happiness 11. Age (longevity)
12. Next birth.
Second Bhava: . 1. Family 2. Wealth 3. Eyes 4. Education
5. Landed property 6. Truthfulness 7. Acquaintance with Sastras
8. Alertness 9. Notion 10. Possession of gold and the like 11. The
nine kinds of precious stones 12. Yogas.
Third Bhava: 1. Sensual pleasure 2. Servants 3. Singing
4. Courage 5. After-born 6. Diseases of the ears 7. Jewels of the
ears 8. Dining entitlements 9. Devotion to God 10. Success
11. Longevity 12. Incurring debts.
Fourth Bhava: 1. Mother 2. Education 3. Conveyances
4. Auspicious happenings 5. Business 6. Residence 7. Success

CHAPTER 17
8. Comforts 9. Spending 10. Addicted to other men or women as
the case may be 11. Milk yielding cattle 12. Temples (i.e. religious
achievements).
Fifth Bhava: 1. Maternal grandfather 2. Maternal uncle
3. Poorva Punya (good deeds of the previous birth) 4. Literature
5. Issues 6. Pregnancy (for women) (progeny for men also)
7. Mantras 8. Sense of judgement 9. Wisdom 10. Co-bom
11. Future birth 12. Yogabhyasa.
Sixth Bava: 1. Disease 2. Evils 3. Wounds by weapons
4. Enemies 5. Drowning by water 6. Enmity with cousins
7. Physical incapability and death inflicting pains 8. Debts
9. Thefts 10. Venereal diseases 11. Poison 12. Imprisonment.
Seventh Bhava: 1. Band of relatives 2. Capability to achieve
progeny 3. Spouse 4. Marriage of such auspicious undertakings
5. Litigations 6. Children through second wife 7. Recognition by
Government 8. Commanding others even without an assignment
9. Business 10. Subsequent wives 1. Death 12. Enmity with sons.
Eighth Bhava: 1. Death in warfield 2. Evils caused by society
3. Fall from height 4. Longlasting diseases 5. Obstacles in undertaking 6. Troubling debts 7. Expenditure on bad acts 8. death and
murders 9. Enmity 10. Poison 11. .Entry in jail 12. Defeat.
Ninth Bhava: 1. Father 2. Paternal inheritance 3. Religion
4. Bhagya or luck 5. Construction and promotion of choultries
and the like 6. School (i.e. educational institutions) 7. Divine acts
8. Teaching 9. Ashta Siddhi, like Anima, Mahima, etc. which
make one a Super Being 10. Construction of tanks etc. 11. Path of
God 12. Residing in forests, hilld etc.
Tenth Bhava: 1. many beneficial acts 2. Livelihood by virtuous means 3. Lands and agriculture 4. Kindness 5. Worship
6. Residential plot and living home 7. Devotion to gods 8. Courage 9. Fame 10. Abdominal disorder (for females: abortion or
miscarriage) 11. Clothes and ornaments 12. Wandering.
Eleventh Bhava: 1. Elder brother or sister 2. Evils and goods
to them 3. Enjoyment with many wives 4. Educational abundance 5. Abundant landed property 6. Conveyances 7. Relief
from distress 8. Clothes and ornaments 9. Livelihood through

HORASARA
dance, drama and singing 10. Wisdom 11. Writing on orders of
king 12. Journey by sea.
Twelfth Bhava: Going around the world 2. Service in other
country 3. Spending 4. All kinds of carnal and mundane pleasures 5. Sleeping 6. Litigation and legal punishments 7. Pleasures
and luxuries 8. Profession by Mantras etc. 9. Business through
ships 10. To ripe the fruits of Karma 11. To give away the credit
of one's good deed (Punya Dana) 12. Yagna and Yaga.
Again, the counting of these zones depend on the Savya,
Apasvaya etc. of the Bhava Kundali. In the case of Savya chart,
the counting is straight. That is the first, second, i.e. 12, 11, 10, 9
etc. That is the first 2°30' is the 12th zone as listed, the second
2°30' is the 11th zone etc. For Savyapasavya, the first zone will be
the one at S.No. 3, the second is at the S.No. 4 and the 12th will
be the one at S.No. 2. For Apasavya Savya, it starts from the zone
noted at S. No. 1, followed by the zones are already indicated for
the 12 Bhavas and the reader can make suitabe deduction accordingly.
MIMlPOdHd ^ 'TM: I
bW: Rifd'Mi farwisKi: u i6 n
Whichever houses are occupied by malefics, will yield unpleasant results. Benefics cause fruition of the Bhavas they occupy. Planets of mixed disposition will give mixed results.
ii 17 it
Even though a planet is bad by nature, should it be in a
friendly or exalted rasi, only auspicious results will be felt. Similarly benefics in inimical houses or in fall, will turn bad and give
bad effects.
Notes: From the above we can understand that placement of .
planets in good houses is essential for the prosperity of the
native. That is why Bhavartha Ratnakara praises Mars in the 7th
in Scorpio for Taurus Lagna and Venus in 7th in Taurus for the
opposite Lagna.
In contrast, though Venus is good for Capricorn Ascendant,

CHAPTER 17
he is not welcomed in 9th where he will be in fall. It adversely
affects one's father, children and above all profession. And Mars
though bad for Libra Lagna, if he be in exaltation in 4th, he will
promote one's happiness, education, maternal relationship etc.
Of course these positions are to be carefully assessed after thoroughly summarising and balancing the various principles and
combinations of astrology.
fotfcRt THt: TRH II 18 II
Only after assessing the effects as above, one should predict
the various events. One's own ability to influence (the matter in
this world) and about his father should be known from the Sun.
efferent Hldf^l R I
-o C
yi<i9rcl9U||'i , »Tfq g fafaRfX II 19 II
His mind, the extent of wisdom and about his mother should
be known from the Moon. Mars rules brother, Satwa Guna and
landed property.
ipn II 20 II
Awareness, speech, act and wisdom are under Mercury. His
physical soundness, wisdom, sons and wealth are governed by
Jupiter.
R RWJI
aiFjTFit wf r yi^Rirg n 21 11
Venus governs his marriage (and that which he is bound to
perform in his family) and the pleasures out of marriage and
conveyances. His longevity, means of livelihood and death are >
governed by Saturn.
WT ^ W wp
rHTOri tri #f fsmH 11 22 n
Should the planets be devoid of strength at birth, the effects
they generate will be equally weak. This does not, however,
apply to Saturn. The reverse holds good in his case.

HORASARA
Notes: Saturn's strength is essential for good longevity while
his weakness may not give rise to debts and the like.
The effects revealed by the various planets will be in proportion to the benefic dots in the houses occupied by them. The
results of the dasas cannot be estimated without such Ashtaka
Varga charts.
Tiff: TO: II 24 II
fray rarft n 25 11
TifTO, to! 3 w: i
?lff4+>l'lrl hTSfq ftTrT: =fT II 26 II
•O c
h< u I de*( ^1
Take the Ashtaka Varga chart of the Sun, and find out the
benefic dots. The Rasi which is ninth from the Rasi occupied by
the Sun is related to one's father. The Sodhya Pinda should be
multiplied by the said figure of benefic dots and the resultant
figure should be divided by 27. When Saturn transits the particular asterism as denoted by the remainder in the above process
will cause death of the native's father. The stars in Kona position
to the earlier mentioned star will also function similarly. It
should be a Chhidra Dasa (fest T?TT) to cause such an effect.
Notes: For detailed information regarding calculation of
Ashtaka Varga and its use, the readers are referred to Prof. P.S.
Sastri's “Secrets of Ashtaka Varga”
fos may be referred to Ja taka Parijata
^FSeFTT\ ‘jVWH raft w4ecl Ttfra 1 1 27 II
Im 3>1<^ rasrarl ■'W^-sfl: I
1 II 28 II
The transit of Saturn in the 9th rasi from the Moon sign may
also cause tire native lose his father. For this, either dasa of the

CHAPTER 17
Sun or of the Moon should also be in simultaneous operation.
Notes: This may be used without direct reference to Ashtaka
Varga. For example one is having transit Saturn in Leo in
the ninth from natal Moon placed in Sagittarius and simultaneously, having Sun’s dasa. Then it may prove fatal to one's
father.
Note the Lord of the Navamasa holding the 4th Lord. In the
dasa of the said Navamsa lord, the native's father may die.
Alternatively, death of father can occur in the dasa of the Lord of
the 4th house.
Notes: The 4th is considered in connection with father's
death, because 4th is 8th from 9th house.
feppwi! 'Jlld-kKIvil ^Tl
Note the owner of the 8th house from the 9th house (i.e. the
4th house). When such dasa of a planet posited in Lagna the
native shall, and at no time later than that, perform the last rites
of his father.
w fopmrjm n 31 it
The native's mother has the same fate (of passing away) in
the dasa of the 9th lord posited in the 1 1th or Lagna. It has special
effect if this counting is done from the Moon sign.
^ot TTtfsVl OTl^l
'did: fThHlfet: 1 1 32
Thus would the native complete the obsequies of his father
(and mother) if any undone. Should one be bom in the 3rd house
of the father’s Lagna, he will inherit paternal money.
Notes: The second part of the sloka is elaborated thus: SupposeHhe father is born in Scorpio and the son in Capricorn which
is the third from Scorpio, the son will acquire paternal money.

HORASARA
fq^Ppri^cT: I
rF^T^Sfq q^r^T: II 33 II
One born in a Lagna which is tenth from that of the fattier,
will acquire such qualities which are equal to his father's. Even if
the lord of such rasi occupy the Lagna, the native will be superior
to the father.
Notes: This sloka has two important clauses. Firstly, for
example, if the native has Capricorn rising as against his father
born in Aries, he will be similar to his father in qualities. For the
son's Lagna is the 10th from the father's Lagna. As per the second
rule, if the lord of father's Lagna, i.e. Mars, is in Capricorn, the
son's Lagna, then the native will excel his father.
(ddl*°dd3Klf< d^rt^t 1 1 34 II
Note the rasi which has no Bindus in Sun's Ashtaka
Varga.The month indicated by the particuar rasi should be
avoided for negotiating marriage and such other auspicious
functions.
Notes: The months are measured by the Sim's stay in each
rasi and are solar months.
^ Bfa fci
HdMlR'LH Blh II 35
Such months corresponding to the rasi without Bindus may
give rise to disputes, tiredness, grief etc. One should act after
knowning such effects.
fans' ifaFi TAmfar «nf^i
The Sodhya Pinda of Sun's Ashtaka Varga should be multiplied by the number of benefic dots in the 8th house and divided
by 12. The death of the native may take place in the month
counted from Mesha or its trine, as represented by the remainder.

CHAPTER 17
^pr^PlfftTT ^R^l
If the Moon is in transit in a rasi, without benefic dots, in her
Ashtaka Varga, such asterisms should be avoided for good
events.
Notes: Suppose there are no benefic dots in Aries in Moon’s
Ashtaka Varga, then the nakshatras in Aries, i.e. Aswini, Bharani
and Kritika should be avoided for marriage etc.
'RM U f^lM: II 38 II
37P7 r-H <5ZTTffeT5: wf=r TrWrf dTT WT:!
When the Moon transits tire constellations in the 8th from her
natal position, or its trines, she will cause worry, sickness and
grief.
^tlrf folRR^Xl
dfowWs 3T ^ 1 1 40 II
The Sodhya Pinda should be multiplied by the number of
dots in the 4th house from the natal Moon and divided by 27. The
remainder represents the asterism in which Saturn’s transit
proves unfavourable to the mother. Even the trinal stars may
cause the event. Should there be Dasa Chhidra at that time, the
event may take place.
^ ^1 rft rfc^*TT% II 41 It
'ST 'W^r^iTcTf^RW: I
Should Saturn be in the 4th from Natal Moon, or aspect it
(from 7th or 10th), at a time before noon, it indicates death of
native or travel to a distant place.
^w^ivd^ii^ fwrTtrt 1 1 42 n
fad<=Wdfa-dl4l 1 1 43 II
Note the Navamsas occupied by the Lords of the 4th and the

HOfl\SARA
8th from the Moon. Sun's transit in a trine thereof indicates
mother's death in that particular month. The same is to be deduced from the Lagna of the father. The issues related to one’s
mother should be evaluated in the same way as done for the
father.
Brother, wealth etc. are to be understood from the Ashtaka
Varga of Mars. Should Mars be weak, one acquires learning with
difficulty.
In the Ashtaka Varga of Mercury reductions should be made
(as suggested). The rasi indicated by the remainder when transited by Saturn will guide about loss of sons, friends and such
other events without any doubt.
’Khwi ^ TRUTHftT 4><r^<(l
iJTt: ipc#? ^ 1 1 46 II
SUfTRj: I
Ml II 47
The numbers of' issues one can have be guessed from the
A.V. of Jupiter. Note the benefic dots contributed by planets
posited in enemy’s house, and in fall. The net dots there after will
reveal the number of issues possible. Again the number of
Navamsas passed by Jupiter or the lord of 5th house.
Notes: This Sloka conveys clues to know the number of
issues that the native will have. Firstly, note the number of
benefic dots in the 5th house in Jupiter's A.V. in relation to his
natal position. Suppose the planet is in Sagittarius. Note the dots
in Aries in the A.V. and reduce the number of dots contributed
by the planets in Neecha and Satru rasis. This means one has to
work out the contribution accordingly. The final bindus will
equal the number of issues. Then the Navamsas passed by Jupi-

CHAPTER 17
ter or the 5th lord will indicate the issues possible. That is to say,
if planet is in 19 degrees of any sign, it would cover 5 navamsas
in full and 6th Navamsa is not covered, though it is in 6th Amsa.
The practice is only to take the Navamsas covered. Hence 5
children are possible.
^ t II 48 II
iRiftntwi Xiwwmm: warn
sjfalT % TRffcf: 1 1 49
Note the dots in total in the A.V. of Jupiter. The dots in the
rasis occupied by malefics should not be considered. The balance
left out equals the number of issues, while the dots in 12th, 8th
and 5th if occupied by malefics will indicate the number of
children to die.
rjikwJ
STeqirtR: ^ Tjft; cO 1 1 50 II
The 5th house from the Lagna and the 5th from Jupiter
should have more than 3 dots in the A.V. of Jupiter. Otherwise,
one will be issueless. However, if these houses are aspected or
occupied by their lords, this rule does not apply, and the native
will have children.
II 51 II
TTXwXi'l'’! 1RT OMlfeXl
f? II 52 U
With these guidelines, the question of issues can be answered. Should the chart be indicative of children being obtained, it will happen accordingly. The rules for destruction of
family i.e. issuelessness, are separately detailed.
■^iUcdcbcui IXy^ichTCMifttj ii 53 ii
X X Thrift ^ X ^ 1 1 54

HORASARA
Hfsq WTT' ^T: 1 1 55 II
Note the benefic dots {in Sarvashta Varga) of Venus contributed by various planets. Then trinal reduction should be done (as
per rules explained already) and after that Ekadhipathya reduction (for the planets owing two rasis each except for the Sun and
Moon) should be made. Time for obtaining lands, wife and
wealth should be predicted according to the rasis having benefic
dots. Wife in particular should be ascertained from the 7th house
with reference to the position of Venus (at birth).
fa^:l
Pntivfi on tfe 1 1 56 n
ol^l
mi-h f-o pF-iptIH!: 1 1 57 II
oPT): WFl^ ^ 4.^1^ ^Rl-f "58 II
The rasi occupied by the lord of the Navamsa in which the
7th lord is posited will denote the Moon sign of the native's wife.
It may also correspond to the exaltation or own house of the 7th
lord. Some Rishis mention that the 9th house counted from the
Moon or Lagna may indicate the Janma Rasi of the wife. The wise
should suitably understand the issue.
Notes: Only the first principle needs clarification, as others
are simple. Let us assume that Mercury is 7th lord at 15° of
Cancer. He falls in the Navamsa of Scorpio. Now note where
Mars, lord of Scorpio Navamsa is posited. The rasi holding Mars
will be the janma rasi of the native's wife.
-11 fw tH-eifci: I
fepit faj II 59 II
fTfHi ^ttfl thrown
Should the janma rasi of the wife be other than the ones
mentioned above, it is indicative of no progeny. (This is a very
important clue to match the horoscopes when issues are felt to be
an essential outcome to follow marriage). The dots in the 7th and
9th will indicate the number of women one will obtain. This is
trebled in the case of rasi and double in navamsa.

CHAPTER 17
TRJR’t WTg^T "CRiJr^Trr || 60 II
^eM'if^Ri i
■4wRT>Rt 7j£ II 61 II
tfl^ ^ c(T t R'F^'MVfftv«fa I
One will sexually gain low class women if Venus is in a
Navamsa of Saturn, or in such rasi or in the company of Saturn
or in Kanya Navamsa or in a malefic’s company. The person will
violate the marital bonds in regard to sexual union if Venus is in
rasi or Navamsa of Mars or in the company of or aspe'- 1 Mars.
ii 62 it
^PiT ?TFT Wif H u’sflM: I
Should the 7th house in Navamsa be that of Saturn or Mars
(i.e. Cancer, Leo, Taurus or Libra rising in the Navamsa chart)
the native's wife will be a prostitute or at least an adultress. This
is doubtless.
Note: This is a general principle.
°IT II 63 II
WETfTlf^
One will be displaced through a woman, if the Moon occupies the 7th house or 12th house, at the same time in the Amsa of
malefic planet, while Venus is conjoined with a malefic.
Vlsbl'VI^HHI c^MJjuiir-^i 1 1 64 II
MH^I^lM^I ’pilPoldl I
rRT ®ieii«te^«i '•TFlfaT HSJ 11 ! ^<1 1 1 65 II
U'tMIK'+.H I
The female of the native will be representative of the
Navamsa occupied by Venus, in complexion, appearance and
disposition, or the Navamsa occupied by the lord or the 9th or
the 7th will also give such clues. One should assess the strength
and weakness of such positions and predict about the wife of the
native.

HOKASAKA
^TWI II 66 II
iKlfteF-TC^ 1 1 67 II
^y‘te4WMHI<A ^nfa $11 'Wf^fll
dM'IWHHK Tfjpl TTET^ II 68 II
The A.V. of Saturn should be prepared by inserting the auspicious dots in all the 12 signs. Add the dots in the rasis between
Lagna and Saturn on one hand, between Saturn and Lagna on the
other hand. These two figures will reveal the age at which the
subject will have diseases and grief. When these two are totalled,
it indicates the possible year of death.
II 69 II
ttoi t^raT yfe+i^H y+e^di
^Tel nfFRT FFfff 7T?hl: 1 1 70 1 1
The reductions suggested should be done to arrive at the
Sodya Pinda of Saturn's A.V. This should be multiplied by the
number of dots in the 8th house and be divided 27. The quotient
will represent the longevity of the native in years. From the
remainder, one can work out the months, days, ghatikas etc.
Should there be Dasa chidra at the time so arrived, death is
certain.
TRiwj wfr a ^
aP-Hi ddel II 71 II
The rasis which have no dots in Saturn's A.V. are productive
of destruction. The Sodya Pinda mentioned in S.69 should be
divided by 12. When the Moon transits the sign represented by
the remainder, death of the native will take place.
tjcaf ^ ^ ^ji
ilMifdcdrfqMi) II 72 I
A diagram should be made by putting the various benefic

CHAPTER 17
dots together in their respective rasis (i.e. Sarvashta Varga chart)
and ascertaining from the rising degree the bad, good and neutral (i.e. not bad but not good) the results of the dasas and
s 'ggest suitable time for journey, marriage etc.
eicCJiHiu) IRt
o
O
eFTR:- 1 1 74 II
aPR-lT aen <j*hl 1 1 75 1 1
ifrTR 16

HORASARA
The effects of several kinds may be known through the
Sarvashtaka Varga etc. Otherwise, it is not possible to ascertain
good and bad of the effects
AAT (30) fAWdl ^ fW: I
AtATIa (25) Wfn (30) 7T7TA) AAT: II 76 II
The Rasis which have 30 or more dots are capable of giving
good results, while the ones having 25-30 dots are medium in
effects.
Notes: Suppose one has more than 30 dots in 4th house, his
education, mother, happiness etc. will be good.
vi'-htHI ^ Tg: WAT^oAAT: PAAT: I
^OfTPJ TTofffhi ^jMAilAtTA AiTC^ 1177 II
The rasis or Bhavas with very little number of dots will
yield very harmful results. All other rasis are good and auspicious acts should be performed (when related planets travel in
such signs).
AlA^rnfclRl-H I
AAA oAATfAAi rTR AWAR^AFI, 1 1 78 II
fAAAIrt 3 Alfont MfaiAfa A AT7TA: I
fATTAl ASATA ^ AR deni^sA A^t) 1 1 79 II
One should choose such rasis which have more benefic dots
for auspicious acts. Should Lagna have more dots than the 12th,
one will enjoy life and be wealthy. If it is otherwise, penury will
doubtlessly result. Upto 30, his life will have medium good,
afterwards it will be indeed good.
rjrqffA azrcqrfcl ^A ATARid I
The wise astrologer should assess the effects of the Bhavas
from Lagna through 12th. The more the benefic. dots, it is good.
If the dots are less, it will only inflict afflictions
WR£R5ARfAAA?AT
Barring the 6th, 8th and 12th will aggravate bad effects.

CHAPTER 17
However, the longevity aspect in 8th house should be cautiously
understood, while more dots in 6th will increase enmity and in
12th one's expenses will be astronomical proportion.
hHif^RT^rq wi ii 81 it
WW' TO OR -43 Rto Mtl^l
tl^5f WftR&I ll 83 ii
From Pisces to Gemini, it is called first Khanda while the
second Khanda starts from Scorpio and ends with Aquarius.
From Cancer to Libra, it is the third Khanda. These Khandas
(divisions) are to be kept separately as functions relating to age
will have to be effected at appropriate times.
Notes: For the sake of easy reference, these Khandas are
marked with respective figures in the diagram shown above:
3Tfe£ yihH' fcsitsft 3 3 1
Wr&ti ^IH-shmU^ II 84 II
qiWWlW 3^ TORI
jhi fR^»nv 5 f TOR 11 85 II
Whichever Khanda has more benefic dots will give auspicious results while the one with least number of dots will give
inauspicious results. Only after noting this, the dasa results

HORASARA
should be declared. (If a dasa lord is in a Khanda with maximum
dots, good results follow). The Khanda with more malefics will
give malefic results while the one with benefics will give benefic
results. If both malefics and benefics are there, mixed results will
be felt. Only after examining the 3 Khandas, the dasa results be
declared.
cFremfo Wxi wft 3 1 1 86 II
cTT il'WIMiirq 1 1 87
The total number of dots from Lagna to the Rasi occupied by
Saturn should be added together and multiplied by 7 and divided by 27. The remainder reveals the year which will cause
grief and sickness to the native.
OT:I
The same procedure should be applied for the positions as
under:
1. From Saturn to Lagna 2. From Mars to Lagna 3. From
Lagna to Mars. In such years as revealed by the remainders,
difficulties like grief, tiredness and diseases will surely follow.
fhrr U^lRdHMddRl^fd^I: ll 89 II
Add the Navamsas of Saturn and ascendant. The year represented by this figure will cause hurt by weapon.
Notes: Example: Where Saturn is 4s 10° 20' and Lagna is 8s
17° 15’. These two when added reveal 28° 5’ of Aries which is the
ninth Navamsa. At the age of 9, or in multiples of 12, i.e. 21, 33,
45, 57 etc. one will have to face such troubles.
II 90 II
fcnKFSW 1 J -l 1 JH & !<l ft fWlR^I
crqtr qra w:i

CHAPTER 17
In the way explained above process add the Navamsas of
Rahu and Lagna on the one hand, and Mars and Lagna on the
other hand. The years indicated thus will cause some accident,
wound by weapons, tiredness, grief etc. Thus Navamsa arrived
similarly between an auspicious planet and Lagna will give good
results like sons, wealth, happiness etc. in the particular years
without any doubt.
Notes: Examples can be deduced as given under slokas 89
and 89 Vi easily.
^ dffTTtRP) ijfcf <1*191^41^ II 93 II
ygifa fcHHh-lld
Note in what number of Navamsa is the 8th Lord. This figure
should be multiplied by the benefic dots in the 8th house
(Sarvashtaka Varga chart) and divided by 12. When the Sun in
gochara touches the house represented by the remainder, the
death of the native may take place or he will be attacked by
diseases. Similar results should be guessed from Pitrusthana and
Matrusthana (the 9th and the 4th) for father and mother, respectively.
Notes: Suppose the 8th Lord is in 22 deg 15' of Virgo which
indicates his position in the 7th Navamsa i.e. in Cancer
Navamsa. The figure 7 should be multiplied by the number of
dots in the 8th in S.A. chart and divided by 12. According to
some, the Navamsa rasi should be counted from Mesha in which
case, we have to multiply 4 (i.e. Cancer) by the number of dots in
the 8th house of the S.V. This view is not acceptable as in the text,
there is no reference to Aries.
Add the benefic dots in the 12 rasis, commencing from left to
right and group them in 4, according to the four directions. There
will be good from such direction indicated by group with maxi-

HORASAKA
mum dots. A benefic in such position will make the effects intensive. One should always avoid such direction with less dots.
Notes: Aries, Leo and Sagittarius-East; Taurus, Virgo and
Capricorn-South; Gemini, Libra and Aquarius-West; Cancer,
Scorpio and Pisces-North. The dots in the sign relating to each
direction should be separately added and thus we get four
groups of totals for the four directions. Additionally, if a benefic
posited in any sign of the three relating to that group, there will
be more gains. One should attempt to earn livelihood in the
direction with more dots and avoid the ones otherwise.
■nte W} 1 1 96 ii
VTTRP'n ^ fTRTRU
farfrcpTT} fadHIMlfd 1 1 97 II
f^OTP) TH‘<H Tt fonqfo I
Constitution of a cattleshed, dealing in lands, agricuture etc.
if done in a good rasi will prove beneficial. Any money invested
or deposited in an inauspicious rasi will only vanish. (These are
to indicate the Sun's travel in such rasis with more or less dots in
the A.V. chart). In the direction indicated by the lord of 2nd
house, there will be gain of wealth. In the 8th lord’s direction,
there is a bad luck only.
snwfavt ytsRj Ph^h rftnai n 98 n
The wise Siddhasena dealt with Ashtaka Varga in greater
length and 1 have presented this briefly.
Notes: The author gives direct acknowledgement to
Siddhasena even in preference to his father Varaha Mihira. In
Brihat ] a taka so much has not been enumerated about this system and hence Siddhasena is depended upon additionally by the
author. For details, refer "Secrets of Ashtaka Varga" by Prof.
P.S. Sastri.
Thus ends the 17th Chapter entitled "Effects of Ashtavarga”
in Horasara of Prithuyasas son of Varaha Mihira

CHAPTER 18
atmgytbw tiq:
rTFW^TRTK^n UTe^T 1 1 1 I '
While dealing with the results of sub-periods in a dasa,
it should be noted that the results differ from the ones stated
for dasas already. The results for dasas and antardasas (subperiods) should be studied before giving prediction on
events.
Notes: From sloka 2 onwards in this chapter, the author
deals with antardasa results as per Moola dasa OJfT T?n) scheme
upto sloka 50. For Moola dasa results, refer to Saravali ch. 41 to
43 (my English translation).
The present sloka has the words Toorvokta dasa phaleshu"
meaning "The dasa results as mentioned earlier". This means that
the results of dasas in ch. 9, ch. 15 all relate to moola dasa.
Chapter 31 exclusively deals with Vimshottari dasa. In my opinion, Vimshottari dasa is the most suited one. It is widely in
practice, particularly in the South India. In his Phala Deepika, Sri
Manteswara gives first place to Udu Dasa (Vimshottari) in chapters 19 and 21, while he deals with Kalachakra and Naisargika in
ch. 22 in a brief way. Parasara gives various dasas being the
Father of Astrology.
T TTgRt FSTOWR 112 II
Should the lord of the dasa be in the company of other

HORASARA
planet, the latter will possess half of the dasa of the former one.
The one in 5th or the 9th from the dasa lord will enjoy one third;
in the 7th from the dasa lord will have one seventh of the dasa
and the ones in 4th and 8th will get one fourth.
Notes: As this sloka does not complete the Moola dasa
scheme, I give below the relevant summary from Saravali.
Should only one house among 5 and 9 is occupied, the entire one
third goes to the lone occupant. Should one be in 5th and another
in 9th, then the one there is shared on 50: 50 basis. The same
procedure shall apply to the chaturasra houses i.e. the 4th and
8th. The planet with the lord of dasa gets the honour of ruling an
antardasa. Should there be more than one with the dasa lord,
only the strongest prevails and other planets are not considered
for antardasa lordship. For other houses, i.e. 5th, 9th, 4th, 8th and
7th also, only the strongest, if there be more than one in any of
the 5 signs, will get an antardasa. There are no sub-periods for
the occupants of 2, 3, 6, 10, 11 and 12.
T4 TTctT ^nftRmr^nqfctk: i
thl ^ TfJrlT 3 s ! ifa Iwfal ||3 ||
The planets placed as stated above with reference to the dasa
lord will only take part (in the rulership) in the whole of the dasa
scheme. If Rahu is in the ascendant, the effects of the dasa will be
marred.
Notes: Notes have already been given with reference to the
first line of this sloka, under the previous sloka. As far as Rahu’s
position in the Lagna is concerned, the dasa referred to is that of
the Lagna. That is to say, in Lagna dasa, if Rahu occupies the
Lagna, the good effects are imbalanced.
aw&nfWl TfafTfcHftct xrgyn Tutfty
If the luminaries (i.e. the Sun and Moon) are in the company
of Rahu, then their sub period is increased by another half. In
such case, the Sun and Moon give such results like Saturn and
none else. This is the view of some earlier writers.
Notes: According to this verse, the luminaries in the com-

CHAPTER 18
pany of Rahu will give such malefic results as Saturn and they
are no comparison to good planets.
^ =mr ^ (84) TfeTCT
■M i d i ^ i tffrM aehirt II 5 II
9 <%tbm WR^nw^Ti n?mT *3: 116 11
3i^K?n uspJif qraaflcft wra #^i
3TtJc( ^ tWcT *fW Wl hhc^sfq 117 11
The dasa period of a planet should be converted into ghatis
and multiplied by 84. The product should be increased in proportion to the longitude attained by the planet (in the partient or
house.) The results of Antardasas will be similar in nature as
applicable to the major lord, i.e. malefic, benefic and medium.
*n4l4l'4<(:'ir l tir! spllcp
Ttonm ^i^?fTRTqi i i s i i
The Antardasa results will depend on the dasa lords, when
these belong to Sun, Moon, Saturn and Jupiter. As for the rest,
the strongest from an angle will be a guiding factor.
Notes: The sloka suggests that the antardasas in any dasa of
Sun, Moon, Saturn and Jupiter, will depend on the dasa lord.
Regarding the bhuktis in the dasa of Mars, Mercury etc., tire
influence will be from the strongest from Kendra.
am i Pd^v n -djyT i d i H r rH 1 1
In the sub-period of the Moon in the dasa of the Sun, the
native wilt have friends, money, pleasures and wealth. Should
the dasa be adverse, one will face risks from water, and suffer
from white leprosy dysentery and consumption.
WMI <FP?T|
wnfmamm ftrTtfoFrafi -f fh rrtcth 11 10 11
In Sun's dasa when the sub-period of Mars rules, one will

HORASARA
acquire gold, gems etc. He will be famous and courageous, and
suffer from bilious diseases and also shortcomings of digestive
fire of the stomach,
^ *TT3:i
"RfTq TFHIVW: TTq 1 1 1 1 II
In Mercury’s sub-period of Sun's dasa, there will be skin
diseases. One will become famous and enthusiastic. Penury and
series of accidents will also follow.
tfcftiTt || 12 II
In the sub-period of Jupiter in the dasa of the Sun, the native
will be intent on acquiring knowledge, robes and food. He will
render service to gods and Brahmins and will become famous
and rich.
-xu MiklKi: "s^cFSTfl II 13 II
During the antardasa of Venus in the Sun's dasa, one will like
to be away from his homeland, do futile jobs and be argumentative in nature. He will develop diseases of neck (throat), eyes and
suffer from fever. He will be independent.
ii 14 ii
In Saturn's sub-period in the dasa of the Sun, one will have
troubles from base men, enemies and thieves. He will be discorded by friends. There will be declination in his wealth, profession and service.
3m l
v||hU-cU 4,M ^i4,UJd: I
II 15 II
In the dasa of the Moon, in the sub-period of the Sun, one
will be engaged in serving in bad countries (or places) and will
desire to be in the company of bad women. His wealth will

CHAPTER 38
decrease and he will quarrel with his own relatives.
M fst^TcR^t ^MF?) ^Hfd^dl II 16 ll
-o -o
In the sub-period of Mars in the dasa of the Moon, the subject
will be deprived of his sons and relatives. He will be sick and his
personal safety will be at risk. He will be of cunning disposition.
He will be displaced in this bhukti.
■ER^TPTf 'il'MWWUjH; |
WYcntrnl n 17 n
During the sub-period of Mercury in the dasa of the Moon,
the native will be wealthy with a fleet of cows, elephants and
horses, always be enthusiastic, and virtuous. He will derive happiness through cows and elephants (i.e. he will be comfortably
placed because of his having such animals at his command) and
will acquire sons etc.
■■d-iWIlili i|4-rK4>lA KmiJbUTKR: I
femA xfitcT; fs^TTCT: II 18 II
During the sub-period of Jupiter in Sun's dasa, one will be
virtuous (or he will be liberal in donating) and enjoy all luxuries.
He will be rich in knowledge and possess wealth, acquire fame
and live in foreign countries.
faotfai
^eltrMM^HpJiyldyyl'Idtsqhri: eTtfrl II 19 II
In the Antardasa of Venus, in Sun’s dasa, one will acquire
wealth through women (wife etc.) and will earn through wateragriculture, cattle, jewels, boats etc. and be happy.
ill’ll fa-WhcKU: I
eW) ^ HdMlfa diWlf 'Tjff: ll 20 II
During Saturn's Bhukti in Moon's dasa, one will lose money
through kings, thieves and thefts. He will be deprived of his
splendour and lose his wife and sons. He will be subjected to a
serious (uncurable) disease.

HORASARA
3W ofjR^TR^TO^Tn
cbelsyldlsRlHI-M^d II 21 II
During the dasa of Mars, in Sun’s bhukti, one will wander in
forts, get knowledge and acquire sovereign's money. He will be
given up by his father and relatives and will be happy to indulge
in disputes. But he will enjoy respect.
<£5ct II 22
During the sub-period of the Moon in the dasa of Mars, one
will have excess of bile and phlegm. He will be very enthusiastic
and will please many persons. He will have many kinds of livelihoods.
wspft ^lufed: II 23 II
During the said dasa, in Mercury's sub-period, one will be
troubled by enemies and diseases. He will receive encouragement from the sovereign. He will face defeats, and will not have
sons and wife.
itirpiT^yEf II 24 II
During the sub-period of Jupiter in the dasa of Mars, one will
be a principal person in the family, acquire learning and riches
from the king. He will be adored by his wife, sons, and relations.
He will have a fleet of cows. He will be intent upon giving
donations.
tl'iciir^Kd: i
MtlHoiKl ctr II 25 II
During the sub-period of Venus in the dasa of Mars, one will
fall sick, live in other country, hate women, be deceitful and will
be a shame to his family and will blame others.

CHAPTER 18
WR'SRTt Tjfasrfoft II 26
In the Dasa of Mars and in Saturn's Bhukti, one will be
always subjected to grief, will be deprived of his sons, wife and
relatives. He will be displaced and will even die.
3RI ^dV I l^l l lheflfd l I
^PJFTO: II 27 II
During Suns Antara in Mercury dasa, one will have sexual
pleasures throughout, will get unexpected money, will live close
to water and be devotee of God and preceptors.
Hdy ^ i
^ M^rfcrf: II 28 II
In Moon’s Antara in Mercury dasa, one will give birth to
dead children and be not happy. He will be after base women, be
sick, attacked by leprosy, and troubled by cousins.
II 29 It
During the sub-period of Mars in Budha dasa, one will have
troubles in rectum, and be without wife and sons. There will be
many afflictions to the upper limbs, and heavy outflow of
money. He will be happy with persons of mean castes.
4319^ bWt faTcRlfo: I
^rr °n tfi. ii 30 ii
In the sub-period of Jupiter in Mercury dasa, one will be with
his wife and sons. His sorrows will end.
Notes: He will be the minister of king or a leader himself and
will be abandoned by his parents.
^TTFfT Tpfcfawl Udlf-<tdl umptl
II 31 II

HORASARA
In the sub-period of Venus in Mercury's major period, one
will have money and be wise. He will command robes and jewels
and suffer from hunger. (May be there cannot be timely eating).
He will be pleased to serve gods.
<=eiWi ^MtHIflls-HMI'il-Rri: enig II 32 II
In the sub-period of Saturn, in the dasa of Mercury, one will
be equal to base men and be happy with an iota. He will be weak
in mental disposition and be soft. He will suffer from rheumatic
attacks. He will be fond of foods and drinks.
^h<VtlH^II'+>HirHM
3TclT y 4 "HHl'Tcl: I
II 33 II
During the dasa of (upiter, in the sub-period of the Sun, one
will be blessed with sons, wealth and pleasures. He will be
famous and will bag a title. He will be respected by all the
persons.
-m^P-idi t^r-G^rrai ■m^fvrrflT -ttificrwt 1 1 34
In the sub-period of the Moon in Jupiter's dasa, one will have
many wives, be learned and wealthy. He will be dear to the
sovereign, famous and gain through the king. He will be highly
enthusiastic.
J4 trd <1 1 1 ! cTTi
■qbj^bfl fcl4,c4) II 35 II
During the sub-period of Mars, in the dasa of Jupiter, one
will be subjected to diseases of the head (i.e. brain etc.) rectum
and eyes. He will live in the houses of others, be spiritless and
troubled by enemies.
H-clcui?n ■'■nidi fqqivl “3 1 1 36 II
During the Antara of Mercury in the dasa of Jupiter, one will

CHAPTER 19
leave good path, live in distant countries, be not enthusiastic, be
fickleminded, subject to accidents in water and be argumentative
in nature.
During the sub-period of Venus in the dasa of Jupiter, one
will be subjected to windy and phlegmatic complaints. He will be
troubled by deficiencies relating to digestive fire. He will like
very much to do virtuous deeds. He will be intent on acquiring
knowledge, robes etc.
jurntM II
38 II
In the Antara of Saturn, in the dasa of Jupiter one will acquire
money through husbandry and cattle. He will be addicted to
women. He will have a 'dilapidated 1 body. He will be troubled
by servants, poison etc.
•1 H'JtPlrl'H ^nfc^ Ui?| * 1 1 s'i'tfp? itlfrl 1 1 39 II
During the Sun’s Antara in the dasa of Venus, one will have
troubles in anus and eyes, growth of spleen to excess etc. He will
invite the displeasure of the sovereign, suffer through relatives
and lose his money.
“-KlMgcft t'TsRct T'KMte if 1 -tfarRh Wil: I
In the Moon’s Antara of the Venus dasa, there will be danger
from animals. The subject will suffer from sickness relating to
digestive fire of the stomach, bile etc. He will have uncontrollable
combat and acquire money through women.
O^dHIS: iTcrfo H 41
Duirng the sub-period of Mars in Venus dasa, one will have

HOR.ASARA
sexual union with base women; he will have defective teeth,
suffer from bilious disease and will lose his enthusiasm.
eTCr! 1 1 42 II
During Mercury's sub-period in tire dasa of Venus, one will
indulge in an unsuccessful business, become proud, acquire
money through cattle and trees yielding fruits, be fond of his
wife and remain very happy.
^FWTf rl T]T17^^ra W-ffafo: FTM.I
>^17*141-46: 'Jtsfl M^fci II 43 II
During the sub-period of Jupiter in the dasa of Venus, one
will get back lost wealth, become expert in performing sacrifices
etc. and will be happy with his sons and wife.
Notes: 1 M 5> ifhfe can also be interpreted as "success in an affair
lost earlier."
sishHKfWt fewrifa : i
'•J Cs
■jy-iffddh'iyifwi: SHI ijaid 1 1 44 n
In the sub-period of Saturn in the dasa of Venus, one will
acquire lands and wife. He will be of odd disposition, will acquire money through the soverign, be respected, valorous and
wealthy.
3TSJ 1 1
■M-wtiiqf Hi-?J<fyim^i>
II 45 II
In the Antara of the Sun in the dasa of Saturn, there will be
everything but happiness. One will see danger from foes, wildly
disposed with quarrelling mind, and be deprived of sons, wife
and his own country.
h=^?TPTT ^ TTran-pit
smfcjWT 1 1 46 II
During the bhukti of the Moon in the dasa of Saturn, one will

CHAPTER W
lose his mother, suffer from grief, his enthusiasm will be burnt,
be fickleminded be reduced to grief on account of his relatives
and will be unkind.
<tTSfq || 47 II
During the sub-period of Mars in the dasa of Saturn, one will
face death, diseases or grief. There will be destruction of one's
residence (position) cattle wealth, sons and wife.
fKp-Jci! 'Pifit II 48 II
During the sub-period of Mercury in the dasa of Saturn, one
will be with his wife and children, be wealthy and learned. He
will render service to good persons, be dear to the king, and be
troubled by rheumatic and phlegmatic diseases.
rppt ^FI^PIT5TR^FTh^ff |
ii 49 ii
During the sub-period of Jupiter in the dasa of Saturn, one
will be an expert poet and acquire money and be a king. He will
be respected by many people, enjoy all luxuries and be very
enthusiastic.
tbgTH faflTVffft SR1KRI: I
tnM ^«rrar«iTTi4?i ’trsrfHPt: n 50 11
During the sub-period of Venus in Saturn's dasa, one will
have wife and sons and be very rich. He will be virtuously
disposed, destroy his enemies, pursue Vedas (or will be a follower of Nyaya system of Philosophy) and become a preceptor
himself.
Notes: Upto this sloka, the various bhuktis of several dasas
are dealt with by the author. There is no specific mention of
the dasa system followed. As 1 stated under sloka 1 of this
chapter the dasa system comes under moola dasa, there is no
sub-period of the dasa lord in his dasa. This can be seen from
sloka 9 to 50.

HOKA$ARs\
ylAj'-Bri 9c*fa> ?44R3f <+>4Pd II 51 II
Should two, three or four planets be together in one rasi, the
results mentioned earlier are not revealed. In such case, only
difficulties follow.
Notes: As can be seen, slokas 5 to 72 of this chapter are of
miscellaneous nature, dealing with Dasa Bhuktis, Ashtaka Varga
etc. See also Saravali, ch. 41, Sloka 7 for further details.
^T&SRIPtsft s#R J|i4lP<fd mW II 52 II
Should these not be in their own houses or in exaltation, in
such dasa, one will have grief only. He will be deprived of his
courage and affluence and will become poor and sick.
f? TSTffemH m rhlrf II 53 II
The planets in trines will in their periods give happiness,
wife, sons and wealth. The ones posited in the 4th give friends,
health, happiness, and wealth.
q^'ll on I
yffd^ll-rU^II^HCld 1 1 54 II
The period of planet in 7th makes one hate women while that
of a planet in 8th will give death or sickness. The results of Dasa
Bhukti should be predicted in such a manner.
Lagna dasa results will be similar to its lord. The Dasa Bhukti
of Rahu will be like that of Saturn.
Idylie-M'l 1 1 56 II

CHAPTER IS
During Rahu Bhukti in the dasa of Sun or Moon or of Mars or
Saturn death will happen. Similar is the effect in Rahu dasa when
the bhuktis that of Sun or Moon or Mars or Saturn. In other dasas
or bhuktis, i.e. Contrary to the said order, there will be mixed
results by Rahu.
’H'MHI *4 id I
The dasa of the lord of the Navamsa occupied by the 7th lord
will bless the native with a wife.
umf ff ^ aRiel fr^' ii 58 ii
The mutual periods of the lords or 6 and 8 will cause death.
Of these two, whoever is stronger, will cause the death
flF? wi TT^RTfR^Te! 1 1 59 II
The dasa of Lord of Rahu's Navamsa may cause death of
native in a bhukti whose lord is inimical to him.
Notes: Assuming that Rahu is in Leo Amsa, the dasa of
the Sun (Lord of Leo) may prove fatal in a bhukti like that of
Saturn.
?Tj>ef r Tpq ti^i
In Lagna dasa, in a bhukti of an inimical planet (with references to lagna), the end of the subject may occur. However, a
benefic in lagna can prevent such an event.
'eVM'Hif’TOl: TP1I
trc=w*nfepl ^ ii 61 n
Note the Lords of Lagna and the Moon sign and the planets
that are inimical to these two planets. Should any rasi in the
ashtaka vargas of such planets be without benefic dots, death
will occur in the dasa bhuktis of such rasi lords.
Notes: Suppose in a horoscope Leo rises as Lagna and the

HOItaSAlta
Moon is in Sagittarius. The lords thereof are the Sun and Jupiter
and their enemies mainly are respectively Saturn and Venus.
Take the A.V. of the Sun, Jupiter, Saturn and Venus. Any rasi
lord, who has no bindus in his sign can cause death.
^ 565 PUlfacI 1 1 62 II
If the ascendant lord is in fall while a malefic is posited in
Lagna and Venus is in 8th, one will be troubled by sickness in
such dasa bhuktis.
iiwiujqo^ini
Tjftf bl4i>IH*Ffa 1 1 63 II
The longitudes of the lords of the 6th, 8th and 12th should be
added together. When Saturn comes in gochara to the sign thus
revealed, death of the native's brother will happen. Its trine also
should be similarly considered.
Notes: Assume that in a Gemini Lagna chart, the 6th, 8th and
12th lords are thus posited:
Mars (6th lord)-- 4s 10° 12'
Saturn (8th lord)- 7s 25° 19’
Venus (12th lord)- 9s 3° 27'
Sum total 21s 8° 58'
After expunging multiples of 360°, we get 9s 8° 58’ (i.e.
Capricorn 8° 58'). Whenever Saturn reaches this zone in Capricorn or its trines i.e. Taurus or Virgo, death of the native's
brother may be expected.
During the period Jupiter transits the 22nd decanate from the
lagna or the Moon sign or be trinai to such 22nd decanates in
gochara, the subject himself will die.
Notes: The 22nd decanates from lagna or from the Moon is
just 210-220 degrees away from the Sphuta concerned. Assume

CHAPTER JR
lagna is 42°. The said decanate is between 252°-262°.
*Tra) fRl (J5:l
CRT <T I^IT^ II 65 II
The Sphutas of Jupiter and Rahu at birth should be
added. When Jupiter in transit comes to the rasi thus revealed,
or be trinal in transit to such sign, death of the native
will happen.
Notes: Example worked out under sloka 63 holds good for
this principle also.
gi ^ rapTl?) II 66 II
Should the Sun in transit arrive in a sign (or its trines) represented by the dwadasanrsa rasi of the 8th lord death, of the
native will take place. Similar results can lie predicted when the
Sun in transit arrives the Rasi occupied by 8th lord or its trines or
when the Sun comes to the 12th house.
Notes: This sloka has three rules:
1 . The Sun should reach the dwadasama rasi of the 8th lord
or its trine. Suppose in a Virgo lagna chart. Mars (8th
lord) is in Leo 10° which is the 5th dwadasamsa i.e. in
Sagittarius.When Sun transits Dhanus or its trines, i.e.
Aries and Leo, death will take place.
2. The Rasi occupied by 8th lord, Leo and its trines when
affected by the Sun in gochara can cause death.
3. Tire last point is simple.
Trie <is<6Ri c bi£cl: 1
"asFfcTdT (21600) t'TTqiV-frf 1 1 67 II
Tjftf ^1
W II 68 II
The longitude of the Sun must be changed into minutes of
arc, and multiplied by Rahu’s longitude converted into minutes.
The product should be divided by 21600 and the quotient etc.,
should be added to the longitude of the Sun at birth. Should the

horasara
Sun in transit arrive such a sign or its trine, death of the native
will occur. This is Chanakya's school of thought.
Notes: Example: Whtre the Sun is in 76° 12’ and Rahu is
in 2 S 3° 5'. The longitude of the Sun when converted into
minutes becomes 12972 and Rahu yields 3785 minutes. These
should be mutually multiplied., and divided by 21600. Thus
(1297 X 3785) 21600 = 2273.1 and this product when converted
into degrees, yields 37° 53' i.e. Taurus 7° 53'. In appropriate
dasa bhuktis, when the Sun in gochara comes to 7° 53' of Taurus,
Gemini or Capricorn, it will be fatal to the native.
^13 fW) trataf 3FT 3T 1 1 69 II
When the Moon transits the house occupied by the 8th lord
counted from natal Moon (or its trines) death may occur. Alternatively add the longitudes of the 8th lord and the natal Moon.
Should the Moon in transit arrive such a sign revealed by the said
addition, death may happen, or if the Moon in transit arrives
such a Navamsa, the same event may occur.
^ o-udURiyil <rF=m^ || 70 II
Should the Moon in transit arrive at natal Lagna, natal Moon,
such Amsas, the 6th house or the 8th house, death will occur.
3TSf3 cW hfit: 1171 II
Should the 8th house from Lagna or Moon, or the Lagna or
the Moon or Lagna with a fallen planet in it be void of planets,
death of the native will take place.
TtmtWH ^ fhyhdl: I
Planets, though auspicious, if the indicative of such death
inflicting yogas, will only yield adverse results, in their periods.
Such planets cannot be pacified by Yagnas, donations, Homas
and Japas.

CHAPTER IS
Notes: The sloka implies that death and similar incidents cannot be averted with Japa, Homa, Dana, Yagna etc.
Even natural benefics will cause such Avayogas in their dasas
if they are disposed in such a way as per the foregoing
slokas.
Thus ends the 18th Chapter entitled "Effecs of
Planetary Dasas and Antardasas", in Horasara of
Prithuyasas, son of Varaha Mihira.
Prof. PS. Sastri’s
Excellent Worts
SECRETS OF
ASHTAKA VARGA
Ask for your copy:
Ranjan publications
16, Ansari Road, Darya Ganj,
New Delhi-110002

CHAPTER 19
1 1 am ^ET^iVnT: t i
aw crapft
^ng^j : gro ^%ro mny
ifoKfecl^r^pitn: ^VWRmAiRHe^: II 1
Should the 2nd, 12th, and both 2nd, 12th from the Moon be
occupied by planets excluding the Sun, the three resulting Yogas
are known respectively as Sunapha, Anapha and Durudhura
Yogas. Should the 7th, 8th, and 6th from tire Moon (or the Lagna)
be occupied by benefic, free from the Sun's company, Adhiyoga
results.
?TR^T«rRrOTqRtT MlRwfiM fIW( 11 2 11
One born with Sunapha Yoga will enjoy money earned by his
own exertion. He will be bestowed with wisdom, be dear to a
king and be a king himself. He will be rich in the knowledge of
sastras and be a commentator thereof, virtuous and famous.
S3
: WRfl “m'iUftwi'i) Wtf 113 II
One bom in Anapha Yoga will have political wisdom (3*1),
moral training (1°R3), be steadfast, know many sastras, and be
with enormous wealth. He will be capable of attracting the fair
sex and be honoured.
^rnfr nwvPTl <i“hRihRi:i
ii 4 n

CHAPTER 19
One born with Durudhura Yoga will enjoy luxuries, money
and wealth. An eloquent speaker, he will be fond of battles, and
himself become an army chief. He will be in a state of
bewilderness. He will be a king and will sacrifice his possessions.
He will have cattle.
Notes: Reference may be made to Manasagari's Rajayoga
chapter where detailed results out of the planets from Mars
onwards for the said three yogas are detailed. Also, see chapter
7 of Jathaka Parijata.
SlfsPTh) 'tRrfr? 3T) McMieifrIVA 'SfcmrT: I
wq r^fniT: n 5 1 1
One born with Adhiyoga will become a Minister, commander or a king. He will possess wealth, courage and have a
long lease of life. He will destroy his enemies.
Notes: Saravali also suggests that die Sun should not combust the participants of Adhiyoga.
Keeranur Nataraja’s famous Jatakalankaram in Tamil says
that such benefic planets should not be in the company or in
aspect to malefics. The 4th house should also avoid malefic connections. This view can also be found in Jataka Parijata, ch. 7
sloka 113.
Refer to Sri V.S. Sastri's Brihat Jataka (translation,) wherein
he has widely quoted Sruta Kirti, Badarayana etc, while dealing
with Adhiyoga.
Now a question arises as to why combustion in Adhiyoga is
specifically mentioned. Mercury's elongation from tlie Sun is at
its maximum 28 degrees and for Venus it is 48 degrees. Hence
when Mercury and Venus are participants of Adhiyoga, the
Sun's interference is more possible. (See slokas 17 & 18 also of
this chapter.)
WUftRll'Mkt faMtld'W 11 6 u
Should the Adhiyoa causing planets be benefic in nature, the
results will mature effortlessly. Malefics yield such results only

HORASARA
after efforts. One born in malefic-caused Adhiyoga will get only
adverse results.
TO TM ^ TO): TTfTTftl
^ fTOrl TfWTftTO 5 TOFirarft 1 1 7 1 1
The Moon's position with reference to the Sun if be in angles
etc. the effects will be bad, medium and fine respectively. In the
case of Sunapha Anapha and Durudhura Yogas, if the Moon be
decreasing the effects will be meagre.
Notes: The Moon in angle to the Sun yields bad results, in
Apoklima best results and in Panaphara neither bad not good
results.
These views have been conveyed by Mantreswara in Phala
Deepika ch. 9 in the names of Adhama Yoga, Sama Yoga and
Varishta Yoga when the Moon is in angles, Phanapharas and
Apoklimas from the Sun respectively.
The obtainment of wealth, conveyances, fame, education etc.
will be low, medium and best respectively. Also see Jataka
Parijata (ch. 7, 5.112) and Brihat Jataka (ch. 13).
■ztPtt ^ TjfTsrftrr ymrgigi i
^tsfq Swm) 1 1 8 1 1
The said yogas will not be put to effect if the Moon’s or
lagna's angles are not occupied. In such case, the Yoga arising is
called Kemadruma which makes even a king beg.
Notes: The absence of Sunapha, Anapha or Durudhura
Yogas will cause Kemadruma Yoga. That is, for obtaining
Kemadruma, the Moon should not have a planet on either sides
or with it. The Sun's presence (and of course that of the nodes)
will not nullify the Kemadruma Yoga. But if there is a planet in
any of the Moon's (other) angles, or from the angles of Lagna or
if the Moon herself is angular to ascendant, the said Arishta Yoga
does not exist.
Varaha Mihira quotes in Brihat Jataka some authorities i.e.
Srutakirti and Jeevasarma who state that only the 4th and jJOth

CHAPTER 19
from the Moon should be considered for Sunapha and Anapha
instead of the 2nd and 12th; secondly the 2nd and 12th and both
sides of the Moon's Navamsa are considered accordingly. However, Varaha Mihira does not agree with both these views. His
view is simply followed by Prithuyasa, Mantreswara and
Bhattotpala. Saravali in chapter 13 also corroborates such line of
thinking.
There are other kinds of Kemadruma Yogas mentioned in
Jataka Parijata (chapter 7) which are as follows:
(1) The Moon in Lagna or the 7th, but not aspected by Jupiter. (2) All the planets devoid of strength and with less Bindus in
Ashtaka Varga. (3) The Moon in the case of a night birth if in fall
or in enemy's Rasi/Navamsa and aspected by the 10th lord.
(4) The Moon in Scorpio Navamsa joining a malefic and aspected
by Lagna Lord. (5) The waning Moon in Neecha Rasi for a night
birth.
Jyotisharnava Navaneetha states that the 10th should essentially be occupied by a plenet, as otherwise the native will have
serious Daridra Yoga and be so greedy to feel that the whole
world should be his. The text allows even aspect to 10th to ward
off this Yoga. There are various Daridra Yogas (assimilated to
Kemadruma) in Vaidyanatha's Jataka Parijatam, which are not
being quoted here for fear of the work becoming unduly voluminous. For instructions, the reader is referred to accordingly.
In the context of various such sayings, Kemadruma Yoga is
formed when the Moon's angles, 2nd or 12th are unoccupied
(excepting the Sun) by planets. The Moon can also be in lagna
(aspected by Jupiter/Venus according to some texts) or in the
4th, 7th or 10th.
The 12th, the 2nd and both the 12th and the 2nd if occupied
by planets, with reference to the Sun, cause three yogas respectively called Vasi (^ifh) Vesi (°rtR) and Ubhayachari (T*WqR). For

HORASARA
Vasi and Vesi Yoga, the Moon is no consideration.
^TTH: F-fT^RF-it^fWi II 10 II
qrqrrraftj^TciF^i ^refti
rflfe uV}4chj4rl: i-HH: II 11 II
W^t ?Ft Wpil FH^I
f^rHI^ Wl II 12 11
A person bom in Vesi Yoga, will walk slowly, be soft-sopken,
have eyes revealing hopelessness, be dear to his men, and have
balanced income and outflow. Tine (^ifh) Yoga native will be
sinful, defective limbed, present himself sleepy, laborious if
malefics cause the yoga. In the case of good planets, which
should also be strong, the subject is blessed with all kinds of
comforts and wealth. The native born with Ubhayachari Yoga
will indulge in too much of utterances, be wise, strong, be a
leader among his men, and dear to king. He will be ever enthusiastic, eloquent and wise. These results follow if this yoga is
caused by benefics.
ii 3m ^ n
srcjsfRstf! FtTjhpWrp}: Wft HWM II 13 II
Should the 2nd, the 12th or both the houses, with reference to
Lagna be occupied by planets other than the luminaries, the
resulting Yogas are named as Sushubha, Ashubha and Karthari
respectively.
^ ftwrta: i
?Tfrl I
'iflwit' o?Fft II 15 II
arf^rft fMd4M^ui) tal?:l
^ h<^k4| II 16 II
One born in Sushubha Yoga will be wealthy, attached to
women, principled, ever active, fickleminded, luxurious, unrea-

CHAPTER 19
sonable or unintelligible and be the head of some monetary
transactions. Ashubha Yoga native will have strong body,x be
leader of his caste, very enthusiastic, able speaker, be helpful to
others, will sacrifice, be dear to all and very famous. One born in
Karthari Yoga will be dispersed to height of angry, grieved, will
hate parents and lack enthusiasm He will be intent on living in
other countries and be subjected to risk by poison, fire and
weapons. These results follow due to malefic participants in the
Yoga.
II 3m
Benefics in 6th, 7th and 8th from Lagna, free from the aspect
or company of a malefic, cause Lagnadhi Yoga. Malefics should
not be in the 4th house.
^5Rc#3FTt^ II 18 II
The person who has his birth in Lagnadhi Yoga will become
a minister, army chief or a king. He will have many wives, be
humble, will enjoy a long lease of life, be virtuously disposed and
be free from any enemies.
Notes: See slokas 5 and 6 of this chapter.
V: 3>fHH4M'ld) rrsfat 4TB II 19 II
Should there be planets in the 1st, 7th, 10th and the 4th, and
none in the 12th and tire 8th while the 9th has an occupant in it,
the resulting Yoga is called Parvatha (4^4) Yoga.
Notes: Jataka Parijata (ch. 7, slokas 128 and 129) has two
different kinds of Parvatha Yoga.
1. Benefics in the angles while the 8th and 12th are free.
2. The Lords of Lagna and the 12th in mutual angles and

HORASARA
aspected by a friendly planet or planets.
Phala Deepika has a different kind of Parvatha Yoga in ch. 6,
sloka 35: lagna lord in angle or trine and in own house or exaltation house. Sata Manjari Raja Yoga states: the dispositor of lagna
lord should be in own rasi or moola trikona rasi and in angle or
trine to cause this Yoga.
A Parvatha Yoga native will rule the earth, be virtuous and
modest. He will establish villages, towns and cities. He will have
his fame last till the Yuga (^n) ends.
If the planets are with strength and are placed severally, one
of them in another's rasi and one at least be posited in ascendant,
Dhwaja Yoga is produced.
Notes: According to Yavanas all planets in 10th and Lagna
produce Dhwaja Yoga.
According to Soma jataka, when all planets are in Aries,
Taurus and Pisces Dhwaja Yoga is formed. The results ascribed
are: palanquin, (royal) umbrella and positions. Even a base person gets palanquins; others become king's ministers and those of
royal scion undoubtedly become kings.
Dhwaja Yoga native will acquire wide fame, courage and
wisdom. He will be liked in royal circles and be rich. He will be
fickleminded.

CHAPTER 19
If two strong planets are in two different houses, with one or
two houses in between them, while others are in other houses,
Kundala Yoga results.
Notes: For example a strong Jupiter is in Aries while Saturn
is in Gemini (i.e. Taurus is in between them) or Saturn is in
Cancer (i.e. Taurus and Gemini are in between Aries Jupiter and
Cancer Saturn.) Other planets can be in other houses. Then
Kundala Yoga is formed.
WHW II 24 II
One born in Kundala Yoga, wilt live on other's money, be
easily irritated at the slightest pretext, and will remain satisfied
with little, be versed in literature and arts, shortlived and will
have limited number of children.
3m ^ h m i v i < i h m mrTTn Rr^fi yt » ^r~
All the planets (i.e. from Sun to Saturn) disposed in one
house cause Gola Yoga; in 2 signs-Yuga-Yoga; in 3 signs-SuIa
Yoga, in 4 signs-Kedara Yoga; in 5 signs-Pasa Yoga; in 6 signsDama Yoga and in 7 signs-Veena Yoga, causing wide fame.
Notes: Sula Yoga and Gola Yogas are not Raja Yogas while
the other 4 are auspicious Yogas promising prosperity. These
seven Yogas are caused by seven planets disposed in certain
number of houses. But the houses occupied need not be continuous. For example in Kedara Yoga, the 7 planets can be in any four
rasis. So to say, they can be in Aries, Cancer, Aquarius and Leo.
There is another kind of Yogas formed by group of planets
disposed in continuous signs from Lagna. These are known as
Mallika Yogas. For example, Lagna Mallika Yoga is formed if the
7 planets are in continuous rasis from Lagna. For more informa-

HORASARA
tion, refer to Sri Ramanujacharya's Bhavartha Ratnakara,
Vaidyanatha's Jataka Parijatha and Venkatesa Daivajna’s
Sathamanjari Raja Yoga. Of course Bhavartha Ratnakara includes
the nodes also, which however, cannot be practicable, because
the nodes fall mutually in the 7th. And six house involvement
and lesser than that is not possible. Only 7, 8 and 9 houses are
possible.
-rrfOTT fwqt Hlfrlfy^l 1 1 27 II
One born in Veena Yoga will be very learned and have
various kinds of wealth, luxuries etc. at his disposal. He will be
chief among his own men, wise and expert. He will love right
things, arid be very enthusiastic.
riTWft
viisiWHW'i ^ ii 28
A Dama Yoga native will be happy, kind and devoted to
public welfare (or their work) and a noted scholar. He will be
wise and rich and exhibit valour in wars.
■qiyt f'1H u ll ^|Hc(r^'it[o%i|UT^t I
efc^wt yrafed ormt n 29 n
One born in Pasa (W) Yoga, will be burdened with many
expenses, be an expert and dear to all. He will be great intellectual, enthusiastic and be liked in royal circles. He will engage in
activities relating to his house.
II 30 II
The native of Kedara Yoga will help his relatives, earn
money through agriculture, be dutiful, sluggish and honoured.
TTel WtJJ
FTTTfefl ll 31 II
The native with Sula Yoga will be intelligent and will have
many means of livelihood. He will be very sick, earn by pur-

CHAPTER 19
chases and sales, will have two wives but no child.
Notes: ^Tclf is interpreted here as livelihood instead of "news".
^ T tt 6h(^: H 32 II
One born with Yuga Yoga will be disabled, harsh in speech
and be shameless. He will have many debts, be shortlived and
will have limited relatives.
One born with Gola Yoga will have a short lease of life, be
not wealthy, be defective in some limb, and killer of his own
children. He will have no relations, sons and wife. He will be
always on the move and be hungry and be banished. The results
mentioned do not apply to the 10th, 11th, 1st and 9th houses.
11 3TO cfc^ijHlIfrldhHlPl ^
«34Ml II 34 II
H^rfWTTn I
^5%T1 ?il MHl I
Should all the planets (from Sun to Saturn) be angular to
lagna, Mangala Yoga is produced. Should they be (specifically)
confined to the 10th house, Madhya Yoga is produced. If the
planets be in 3rd, 6th, and 12th (disposed in any manner in these
Bhavas), a Yoga called Kleeba is produced. These three kinds of
Yogas are known as Kendra yogas and belong to Yavanas (Greek
astrologers).
Til jflit) f4t4 •4 >c'4I ij [<+iK , *>: I
crhI 1 1 36 II
Mangala Yoga nahve will be doing auspicious acts for ever.
He will be an able orator. He will have issues, be intelligent and
longlived.

HORASARA
arf^^svqgipR ^qfjf^mr^ng, n 37 n
Madhya Yoga native will live in other countries, be troubled
by relatives and timid in nature. He won't have lasting wealth,
will have few issues, and will die through bad ways.
yqiul ^ -Tliw-al'ticislyq: I
wfl ^7TF?ft TJtT: 1 1 38 II
Kleeba Yoga native will be grieved, will live in other countries, be in the company of mean women and fond of disputes.
He will have no long life and his death will be in a distant
country.
ii 3m < h hh c rifa ^ it
7-fcf: t'j-.jJilhl ffrt Wcf: I
Should all the planets (from the Sun to Saturn) be in Movable
rasis (i.e. Aries and angles) the resulting Yoga is Rajju. In fixed
rasis (i.e. Taurus and its angles) these produce Musala Yoga.
Lastly in Ubahya rasis (common sign) (i.e. Gemini and its
Kendras) Nala (TO) Yoga is produced by occupation of all the
7 planets.
Notes: In the above 3 kinds of yogas, the Sun, Venus and
Mercury will be in one rasi only. These yogas can be constituted
by the other six planets with reference to the Moon also.
aTOtfiHt 'tRs: I
W( Wiat jflqfcl 1 1 40 II
One bom with Rajju Yoga will not be industrious. He will be
poor and will join bad people. He has a medium span of life.
^ ^ii-Miy II 41 II
One born in Musala Yoga, will be energetic blesseed with
wife, sons and wealth. He will enjoy all kinds of wealth, be wise
and dear to his own men.

CHAPTER 19
^tnftcWt *RT^T3 ^fctfct II 42 II
The person who has Nala Yoga, will be intelligent. He will be
disabled and be with few issues. He will be intent upon doing
acts beneficial to others, be rich and will have a medium span of
life.
II 3W -sr II
tlMuS; H Tsirfl
If all the benefics be in Kendra houses, HRTI (Mala) Yoga is
formed. In a like position malefics cause Sarpa (W'f) Yoga.
Notes: In this context benefics and malefics are not with
reference to rising sign. Only natural disposition is counted here.
The native who has Mala Yoga will be learned and wealthy.
Should these benefics confine to the 10th and the 1st only, his
race does not descend.
^ fadWHlV^fSici: I
TRet&rg IrM || 45
One bom in Sarpa Yoga will talk too much and will leave his
paternal place. He will be a source of trouble to others, and
derive pleasure thereby. He will be shortlived.
Notes: Bhujaga is snake i.e. Sarpa and hence
"Bhujagodbhava' 1 means one bom with the said Sarpa Yoga.
II 3W "51 II
KRTWW: mw) II 46 II
When all the planets occupy the first six signs, Shatpada
Yoga is produced. The person born with this Yoga, will com-

HORASARA
mand leadership over money and gather the essence (of Sastras).
n sm «uij5iilhw^H xf ii
ilH cTqlr 3T4 WR: 1 1 47
If these planets be in 1st, 5th and 4th, Varaha Yoga follows.
Such a native will command land, wealth, happiness and wisdom.
II 3TSI ehUieh4)MWdbH rT II
Tit: tfVZ*
ct^ ^rrat erft fasn 1 1 48 1 1
All the planets in the 2nd, the 3rd and the 4th cause Kantaka
Yoga. One bom in such Yoga will be wealthy and learned but
shortlived. He will have no issue.
II 3m ^^fl<id^gJ|4l'nTfWic4!f=T ^ II
dHIW'IW ?PR
Hala Yoga is produced when the Lagna and 12th hold all the
planets. Should they be in lagna, the 5th and the 9th, Sringataka
Yoga is formed and when these be in Lagna and its opposite
house, Sakta Yoga is formed. Vihaga Yoga is produced when
such planets are all in the 4th and 10th houses.
s ppc<jt! m-. n so n
Hala Yoga native will be disposed to anger, very poor, disabled and shortlived. He will be a farmer. Sringataka Yoga native
will have wind as a predominant temperament and be angry. He
will be a great man but poor.
cl~4 ^ tkFcR i jj | i 1151 II
One born in Sakata Yoga will be moving like a cart. He will

CHAPTER 19
be bereaved by death of his son and wife. He will oe of wicked
mentality, idle and have defective sight.
STfTdrfcffaS'tfl 1 1 52 II
One born in Vihaga Yoga will be happy and engaged in
amassing wealth in several ways. His valour will be
unsurpassed. He will have many places to reside and he will be
loved when in others' places.
ii sm n
^ wldeeR: II 53 II
When all the planets occupy the 9th, the 1 1th, the 1st and the
4th houses, Sankha Yoga is produced. Should they occupy the six
odd houses, (i.e. Aries, Gemini, Leo etc.) Chakra Yoga is formed.
So have the sages mentioned. Should all the planets be ranged
from the 2nd house in six Rasis, intervened by planetless houses,
Samudra Yoga is formed. (That is planets should be in the 2nd,
4th, 6th, 8th, 10th and 12th with other houses having no planets
will cause Samudra Yoga,) When these planets in such condition
have two blank houses. Indraft) Yoga is formed, (see p. 242)
Moon
lagna
Mercury
Sun
SAMUDRA
YOGA
Venus
Saturn
Jup
Mars

HORASARA
Lagna
Sun
Mercury
Venus
Salum
Moon
INDRA YOGA
Jup Mar
Venus
Notes: In Samudra Yoga, there is one blank rasi between the
planets on either side. In Indra Yoga, there are two blank rasis on
either side of the planets. Both the yogas involve the second
house.
Mw: WRt
fateMId) M^X^: || 54 II
The effects of Sankha Yoga are: the native will be a repository
of virtues, brave and versed. The one who has Chakra Yoga will
be a repository of good qualities, king and will attain the throne
of a large kingdom. One bom in Samudra Yoga will be blind
right from birth, will be dear to all, miser, lord of money and will
have issues. One bom in Indra Yoga (or Mahendra Yoga as called
in this sloka) will be famous and will have many titles. He will be
wealthy and also a superior man.
Notes: There are four lines in this sloka, each line devoting to
Sankha, Chakra, Samudra and Indra (Mahendra) yogas, respectively. However, there is no mention of Samudra Yoga in the 3rd
line. The translation has been made suitably to fill the void and
with sense.
IT^Pdv i: 1 1
Thus ends the 19th Cahpter entitled "Chandra and Nabhasa
Yogas" in Horasara of Prithuyasas, son of Varaha Mihira.

CHAPTER 20
II TT^rarnT: II
gi'Htih'Ici
dRrH^lril M 1 II
Should the Moon or Lagna be in Vargothama Navamsa and
be in aspect to four or more planets, the person bom will be a
king.
Notes: See Phala Deepika, ch. 7, sloka 5. Lagna when in
Vargothama, if aspected by 4 planets, other than the Moon, will
make one king even though he may be of any order. However,
Brihat Jataka (ch. XI, sloka 3) is silent on the Moon as far as
Lagna is concerned. Jataka Parijata (Rajayogadhyaya, sloka 5)
gives a similar view as in Phala Deepika.
fdradKlfdH^d^ H 2 II
If Venus be in Aswini nakshatra identical with Lagna and is
aspected by all other planets, one will become a king conquering
the entire band of his enemies.
Notes: The sloka requires the Lagna also to be is Aswini (and
not the whole of Aries) along with Venus therein. The Lagna and
Venus can be in any of the 4th quarters of Aswini, i.e. they can
be in Aries Navamsa, or the next three Navamsas. The Sun and
Mercury cannot aspect Venus as laid down by the sloka. However, Phala Deepika. ch. 7, sloka 8, does not use the word "all"
thereby eliminating the need for the Sun and Mercury to be in
the picture. Jataka Parijatha ch. 7, sloka 6) of course uses

HOR.\SARA
which condition cannot be fulfilled. There is no reference to such Yoga in Saravali, which, however, refers to Venus in
Lagna in Aswini, Krithika, Pushyami, Swathi or Revati making
one a reputed ruler. (See ch. 35, sloka 149).
This view is accepted by Keeranur Nataraja’s Jatakalankara.
In other words, as per Jatakalankara and Saravali, Venus simply
in Aswini as Lagna is enough; Horasara and Jataka Parijata have
the same condition that cannot be fulfilled.
"STcff TFT 1 1 3 II
Should Venus be in the 2nd house, not being in the company
of a debilated or inimical planet, and join the Lagna lord with
strength the native rules over the earth.
Notes: According to Jataka Parijata the lagna lord need only
be strong and he need not be in the 2nd. (See ch. 7, sloka 7). Phala
Deepika, ch. 7, sloka 7 gives the same view as given by the sloka
under comment.
Should three or more planets be in own or exaltation houses,
without being in fall in Navamsa, one will become a king who
will win the band of his enemies.
Notes: Dundhiraja's Jatakabharanam in sloka 4 of
Rajayogadhyaya says that if four planets be exalted in a horoscope the native becomes such a king, whose band of elephants
will form a "bridge" themselves so that the armymen cross the
river. It further adds that 5 planets in exaltation make even an
ordinary person a king.
■ Hhm+ld I
If three or more planets be in their own or exlatation houses,
avoiding debilitation Navamsas, and at the same time being one
of them in the lagna, the person becomes a king.

CHAPTER 21
Notes: Refer to Jataka Parijata, ch. 6, s. 36 in which it is
clearly stated that a planet in exaltation rasi but in debilitation
Navamsa gives bad results and that too, quickly. In contrast, if it
is in neecha rasi and uchcha amsa, it only proves auspicious.
Thus, we should note the efficacy of Navamsa position of a
planet vis-a-vis its rasi position.
tpf 'dldl 1 1 6
Should the Moon and Mars be in lagna, 9th or 10th, while the
Sun and Jupiter are strong, the nat ive will become a king.
Notes: Mars alone in the 10th is capable of conferring a
Rajayoga, see the saying iUirnfi 77 did: and if the
entire combination is present as per tire sloka under comment, it
is still superior.
%WT ?TTfR cTW rjrxqhq 1 1 7 1 1
Should Jupiter aspect Mercury, the native will become a king
whose orders will faithfully be obeyed by other kings.
Notes: Similarly Mercury's aspect on Jupiter also brings out
a Raja Yoga. (Phala Deepika.) But if Mercury (from 8th) aspects
Jupiter in the 2nd according to Jataka Jambunadeeyam one becomes penniless spending away his earnings.
^ 41-hhOni
fmrcf TFq II 8 I i
Should the Moon, in the case of a night birth, occupy a
friendly navamsa, and be a spec ted by Venus, one will become
king, other planets aspects on such Moon will not make him a
king.
Notes: The Navamsa position should be noted and aspect
should be counted only in the rasi chart and not in navamsa
chart or any such other charts. For aspect is formed only by
longitudinal distance between planets. For day birth, please see
next sloka.

HORASAR.A
wt wWfa ^ 1 WPT: II 9 11
Should the Moon, in the case of a day birth, be in her own
navamsa or in exaltation navamsa, or in a friendly navamsa or be
aspected by Jupiter, the person will become a king.
Notes: There is difference in application between the previous verse and this one. In the first case, Venus should aspect the
Moon posited in a friendly amsa and in the second case Jupiter's
aspect on Moon can itself constitute a Yoga.
If Leo rises, at sunrise, avoiding a navamsa of Venus, when
Mercury is in Kanya, even a mean person will become a king.
Notes: Firstly, the Sun will be in iagna itself at the time of
Sunrise. In Leo, the 2nd and 7th navamsa belong to Venus, which
should not be in lagna. Mercury should be exalted in the 2nd,
Dhanasthana to complete the Yoga.
The same Yoga is found in sloka 43, ch. 7 of Jataka Parijata.
hft hi-iri^ <h0 ^
g ^ II 11 II
Should Venus be in Pisces in rasi and navamsa, while the
sign Pisces ascends in rasi and navamsa, one will become a king.
Mars and Saturn in the ascendant or 5th or 10th will give similar
results.
Notes: Jataka Parijata (ch. 7. sloka 44) has a Yoga of Mars and
Saturn joining in lagna, 5th or 10th. But an additional condition is
that full Moon should be simultaneously in a house of Jupiter. In
our view, the Yogas of Horasara and Jataka Parijata are both
good Rajayogas.
u I srmjTsJ) jiidi <mi ^ re w la i

CHAPTER 21
The Full Moon in the 9th causes the birth of a king. Pushkala
Yoga is formed if the lord of the Moon sign is in a friendly angle
along with lagna lord and aspects lagna. The dispositor of the
Moon should be strong in this Yoga.
Notes: Phala Deepika has Pushkala Yoga in ch. 6. The only
difference there is that a strong benefic should aspect lagna as
against Horasara's condition of Moon's dispositor aspecting
lagna. Both kinds of Yogas can be safely inferred as Raja Yogas
ignoring the conditional variance.
'5TTcH ’jfaWPFI ftWfl
ijqi: tl 13 II
Pushkala Yoga native will, as a rule, lord over the earth.
Should he be of royal scion, he will wear the regal crown and
adore a regal umbrella.
TM FIR II 14 II
Should the Moon sign lord be in an angle with strength, the
native will have an empire. If the said lord be in aspect to or be
in conjunction with a friendly planet, even a low bom person will
become a king.
Notes: See sloka 45, ch. 7 of Jataka Parijata. If the lord of
lagna is with strength and be angular, one becomes a king. According to Saravali, one bom with the ascendant lord in angle
and aspected by friendly planet while a benefic is in lagna becomes a king.
yfaflfcm II 15 II
Should the Lagna Lord be in his exaltation sign, aspecting
Moon, one will become a king to command a wide fleet of
elephants, horses and such other forces, destroy his enemies in
total and have at his disposal a great paraphemelia.
Notes: See Jataka Parijata, (sloka 46 ch. 7) where a similar
Yoga is noted. However, “ci'-iiPnfa” of the sloka of Horasara is
replaced by "*i'+iifW in Jataka Parijata. Pt. Gopesh Kumar Ojha in

HORASARA
his translation has interpreted as | a gna lord which is
not incorrect. However, in Horasara the author has specifically
chosen lagna lord for Lagnadhipathi and Janmadhipathi
as Moon sign lord. To us, the view of Prithuyasas is more
acceptable.
In sloka 12 of this chapter "Janmadhipa" and "Lagnadhipa"
are shown distinctly to mean "Moon sign lord” and "Lagna lord".
"Janmesa" and "Lagnapati” are similarly used in Phala Deepika,
ch. 6, sloka 19.
Saravali, ch. 35, sloka 109 (my translation in English, has
exactly the same sloka of Horasara under comment.
Wl ^ fafTHW: I
jv: wj n 16 n
Should the Moon, full of her digits, be in angle, other than the
lagna (i.e. in the 4th, 7th or 10th) and be aspected by Jupiter and
Venus, the native lords over the earth.
Notes: Jataka Parijata ( 7/47 ) has similar Rajayoga.
But Saravali and Phala Deepika do not involve Jupiter and
Venus.
eiichlhi c-ihiIMkI: 4i-3li
frrniJj 1 1 n 1 1
If the lord of the ascendant is exalted, at the same time not
being in inimical house or debilitation amsa, and when lonely
placed in an angle, will make one king of kings.
Notes: There are 5 conditions involved in this Sarva Bhauma
Yoga.
1. Lord of lagna should be uchcha.
2. He should not be in neecha amsa.
3. He should not be in amsa of enemy
4. He should be alone.
5. He should be in an angle.
See Jataka Parijatha, ch. 7, sloka 47 for a similar view.

CHAPTER 21
IRvfy Xj fqpT^Z: TJJcT^7^<TrtT5?TlS!.F II 18 II
Should Mars be in lagna, identical with Aries, Leo or
Sagittarius, and in aspect to a friendly planet, one will become
a king, who with the strength of his own hands destroys
the enemies.
Notes: The aspecting planet, if be Jupiter the Yoga will have
more effect.
The view of Prithuyasas can be found in sloka 12, ch. 7 of
) a taka Parijata.
fP-TTT: S J fa Mitt 'tffaoi Mfa;!
eFTC*! efT T^f 1 II 19 II
(3rf?SRrf ^ f^SRTr flfaMHtiqqtfqqj
^FTRtvnTefT tfM 3t3W:) II 19 II
Should Mars be in the 10th in the constellation of Aswini,
Anuradha or Dhanishta or if the Sun is in Lagna other than Libra,
the native will become a king.
Notes: For Mars to be in the 10th in Aswini, the Lagna
should be Cancer; for Anuradha— the Lagna should be Aquarius
and for Dhanishta the Lagna should be Aries. For all these 3 signs
Mars is an unsullied Yogakaraka and his position in 10th tor
these lagnas is a great blessing. Also see notes under sloka 6 of
this chapter.
For Cancer lagna Mars is the 10th in Aries in Aswini, for
Aquarius Lagna in 10th in Scorpio in Anuradha and for Aries
Lagna in 10th in Capricorn in Dhanishta, can prove highly auspicious. Dhanishta falls in Aquarius also. Hence for Taurus, he is
good in Dhanishta in Aquarius in the 10th house. Mars is the
Lord of 7th and 12th for Taurus, who otherwise will give mixed
results. In the case of Cancer, he should not be in Aswini 4th
quarter to avoid neecha navamsa (See notes for sloka 5 of this
chapter and also /a taka Parijata , ch. 6, sloka 36).
3ft Voifa cRJ TR1 U-Hiel 1 1 20 II

HORASARA
Counted from Mars, if Jupiter is in the 5th, the Moon in
the 3rd and the Sun in the 9th, the person will become a king
and equal himself to Kubera (the controller of Nava Nidhis for
gods).
Notes: In the above combination, Jupiter can throw his special aspect on the Sun and Mars simultaneously. This Yoga is
specially good for the natives of Aries, Scorpio, Sagittarius, Pisces and Leo, if formed in good houses. Should Mars be in the
8th, then the effect is not great.
Also see Jataka Parijata, ch. 7, sloka 12 and Saravali, (my
English translation) where views similar to the sloka under comment can be noted.
Even if one planet is in exaltation and aspected by a friend, a
king is bom. If the said planet be in the Lagna along with a friend,
one becomes a king with grains and wealth.
did u-jim rii'+iHfjid II 22 H
When even one planet is exhlted while Moon is in her own
house in Lagna, with strength, one bom in a royal family will
become a king and will be respected by the public.
■gil
*idPTdS}4 vuuf)?didRdl w II 23 II
Benefics in 3, 6, 10 and 11 while malefics are relegated to
Lagna and the Zenith, the native will surely become a king of the
earth and be saluted (by all). He will be also versed in politics.
ojjif detif-dci u^ppIi
H'W II 24 II
fcdi'kl ^rTLiH*) 'ey'll ddied'Hidl I
A king equal to devendra is born if Venus with strength
occupies the 11th or 12th, while Mars is cleanly posited in Lagna
(i.e. well posited) identical with Makara and Saturn is in the 9th

CHAPTER 21
or 12th. (The position of Venus as above can also be interpreted
independent of Mars /Saturn.) Should the Moon and the Sun be
in the 7th house, a fickleminded king is born.
Notes: The Rajayoga with reference to Makara Lagna is mentioned in Saravali (35/136, my English translation) and Jataka
Parijata (7/52).
WfR
vafa TTT tTWRl: WWftlkil: 1 1 25 H
If malefics are relegated to the 11th, the 3rd and the 6th,
while the lord of tire Moon sign is aspected by a benefic, one will
be a king, revered by all, and will be a virtuous man.
Notes: This view is supported by Jataka Parijata, ch. 7, sloka
51 as well as Saravali, ch. 35, sloka 174 (my English version).
i 'Jilted i : To; Tpb^T; fa<rF)l
js; wlorf ^FfcRtzrr n 26 n
Only males born in odd lagnas and females of even lagnas
enjoy the said yoga. In the case of a male, Bhagya Yoga is formed
in day birth, if all the planets are in odds rasis (i.e. Aries, Gemini
etc.) and the Moon be waxing. Similarly for females bom in night
time (i.e. after the sun-set and before the sun-rise.).
Notes: Phala Deepika has Maha Bhagya Yoga in ch. 6 which
is formed thus: For day births, males should have the ascendant, the Sun and the Moon in odd rasis and for night births,
female should have the ascendant, the Sun and the Moon in
even rasis.
wJii-iiHUhil stonily) 1 1 27 1 1
One born in Bhagya Yoga will be a scholar, intent on doing
auspicious things, know celestial music and possess elephants
and wealth. Bhagya Yoga will be more effective if there is additionally a benefic in Lagna.
Notes: The effects for Maha Bhagya Yoga of Phala Deepika
are: The native has palanquins at his disposal along with fly-flap

HORASARA
(insignia of royalty), musical instruments, and proclamations,
has everlasting wealth, is respected by great men, takes to virtuous path, worships forefathers, gods and Brahmins, is good
hearted and brings credit to his family.
IN 41*1^ ^ ^Icil h?T|'1IK1sIh I
II 28 II
Base men with Raja Yogas will become kings. And those
born in royal scion will rule the earth.
sficmgrufjstyd *Umi> TrsrahTTszjratf^T 1 1
Thus ends the 20th Chapter entitled "Raja Yogas" in
Horasara of Prithuyasas, son of Varaha Mihira.

CHAPTER 21
UchWvftWTKC
3m upTra^nPr
3m cTCTcft
h Tirat nifdyd) RTTvpfli
fg^ej'ntrsrw^r y^mvildl h^oI • 1 1 l 1 1
One bom at the time of sun-rise (i.e. with the sun in Lagna)
will not be quiet and calm, neither will he have many sons. He
will be unkind, be fond of war, weak sighted, will speak less, live
in other countries and be happy.
frt dVldlTtd fUlOTt «Rt faSHJ
ydiy^lHi ft:edyi4bfdTNd-><: 1 1 2 1 1
The person born with Sun in Aries will be famous, strong,
semi blind, wealthy and learned. Should the Sun be in Libra, the
native will be without valour and he will be poor for most part of
his life and will do base deeds.
dicTTnl tfi-iqi-HHlct: I
rfft d>-dldl ffdHVd 113 II
The native with the Sun in Leo will be head of his scion. One
with the Sun in Cancer will be intelligent and firm. The Sun in
Pisces will make one serve females. In Virgo, the Sun makes one
devoted to his wife. The person will be ungrateful.
| dad tl ill SRdTT, RfT^I
The native with the Sun in the 2nd will have facial diseases.
He will be wealthy and incur royal wrath and fear of theft. In the

HORASARA
3rd house. The Sun makes one irascible and strong. Such native's
death occurs among his relatives. He will be famous.
One who has the Sun in the 4th house will not have money of
his own, will be distressed, wise and valorous. The one who has
the Sun in the 5th house will be a fast speaker, will have sharp
memory, few sons, and be not wealthy.
31 3§^ct: tsOlfrhFf 3^1
When the Sun is posited in the 6th, one will be king’s minister, a leader, be learned and famous. Should the planet be in the
7th, one will be playful, be not attached to his wife and will have
an unquiet disposition.
fa cbtrl^ 'j?loirMe
Ulftrit qqfr facphft tl 7
Should the Sun be in the 8th house, one’s eye sight will be
defective. There will not be many children. Sickness and fame
will be both present in the life of the native. The Sun in 9th house
will make one virtuous. The native will have wife and sons will
dislike his father.
HT^r Tb53facPf3 1 1 8 I i
The person who has the Sun in the 10th house will attend to
royal duties at all times, be brave and like wars. He will be
widely famous. One with the Sun in the 11th house will become
very rich, will have amicable servants and be dear to the king.
^13 Wr fa^TTvi: I
%nfrvrpfT5rr«l qqft qr^ il 9 il
Should the Sim be in the 12th house one will not have money,
be disabled, afflicted and be in other countries. The Sun in debilitation amsa and inimical amsa will increase the affliction to the
Bhava concerned.

CHAPTER 21
aw ■sRfwsroPpnfa
^pgfefsrarf^r «FRf^t n 10 n
Should the Moon be in Aries, Taurus or Cancer as Lagna, the
native will be wealthy, happy and equal to a king. In other rasis
identical with the Lagna, the Moon does not give speech, wisdom, wealth and strength.
# fepft wl fwnf^ ?rf?rfT n 11 n
Should the Moon be in the 2nd house, one will be courageous, rich and dear to women and will be happy with little. In
the 3rd house, the Moon will give calumnating tendency,
kindlessness, and cunningness.
WFnjfhRfa: Wlr-fr*:
ii 12 ii
If the Moon is in the 4th house, one will have sweet food, be
modest, addicted to women and be happy. Should she be in the
5th house, one will possess wife, wisdom and strength. His
wealth will be hard earned.
TWkPlHl fa?THT$ II 13 II
The native who has the Moon in the 6th will be idle and poor
and will have many foes. He will curb or overpower his coboms. Should the Moon be in the 7th house, the native will be
close to his wife, be a leading person in the king's employ, will be
liberal.
'Mi'll JI'hI ydlM^el:
Wl KPTr«t^T: II 14 II
Should the Moon be in the 8th house, one will be wealthy,
will enjoy luxuries, will be wise and very courageous.In the 9th
house, she will make one virtuous, talkative, go after women,
and preside over money {i.e. be wealthy).

HORASARA
*Hl gfeiSFl fsi-fld^ II 15 II
The native who has the Moon in 10th will gather money by
all (fair) means. He will have an artful and clever wife. Should
the Moon be in the 11th house, one will be rich and a good
scholar. He will possess cows, be acceptable to the king and be
modest.
fsH'fl U<sfl SRt 'Mc([ri || 16 II
One who has the Moon in the 12th will have afflicted eyes,
defective limb, sufferings from women and he will be
fickleminded. Should, however, the 12th be the own or exaltation
house for the Moon, or she be waxing though in the 12th, happiness and wealth will follow.
3W
RlTKi'iiTitsel^l II 17 II
One having Mars in the Lagna, will have an injured limb, be
brave and strong. He will be respected and mighty. He will also
be fickleminded, short-lived, wild, idle and be troubled by bilious diseases.
fa'* <11^ PnwirTbUH Ste: I
’JT^ W^l <*rhlltf HHIIVirdtlcll^ TT^TH: II 18 II
The native who has Mars in the 2nd house will have high
incidence of expenses, a limb cirppled and be harsh in speech. He
will dislike his brothers and earn money with difficulty, become
rich and be lucky.
tHTferat
faWrl II 19 II
Mars in the 4th will make one desirous of living in others'
houses, sick and wealthy. In the 5th, it makes a person grieved,
ill-natured and quite intelligent.

CHAPTER 21
Fiftfacfl fa<vJKd: I
ftsft $T ^ II 20 II
Should Mars be in the 6th, one will be base and idle. If he be
in the 7th, the native will subdue to his wife and live in foreign
countries. The 8th house Mars will make one's existence difficult.
The person will be forsaken by his wife and sons,
RI'F?t RRRP)
FIT$ URt yuTrcS^ «Wl 'irddli^^lHl RT II 21 II
Should Mars be in the 9th, one will indulge in killing the
people on the way. If in 10th the subject will become dear to the
public and be highly intelligent. If in 11th, the native will have
excellent qualities, and in 12th the native will be a befallen person
and be disabled.
3m epMIdthHlPt
faSTT trft fatRl «RT Wl: I
Mercury in the Ascendant will make one learned, wealthy
and kind. In the second, it makes one rich and lucky. Should the
planet be in the 3rd, the subject will become rich on account of his
own good qualities. In the 4th he will be scholarly and learned.
mrrcft cnwpj fRijFR: i
Mercury in the 5th-very intelligent, sweet in speech, wise
and accepted even by scholars. In the 6th~the native will be of
argumentative nature, will hate the public and live in foreign
countries.
ViykKHrd: wrt F^l
<2^Kll UH I [R-tT*?t el ‘-‘l 1 1 24 II
One who has Mercury in the 7th will be a Mimamsaka knowing the right and wrong course of action, be liberal minded and
widely famous. In the 8th, Mercury makes one famous, lord of
money, king and wise.

HORASARA
’pVt[K' I
Should the planet be in tlie 9th house, one will be very brave,
will possess wealth and corn and be very enthusiastic, and in the
10th one will become lord of money, give donations, be intelligent and famous.
swt <|£r fyifafftfl n 26 II
Should Mercury be in the 11th house, the native will earn in
several (fair) ways and be rich, be dear to women and of good
qualities. If in the 12th house, one will be cruel, unkind and
spendthrift.
3T8T ^b'MId'bHlPl
vifh'M wswr-j 9 ^rtrfcrali
vr! IT^r 1 1 27 II
If Jupiter be in the 1st house, the native will be longlived,
wise and happy. This does not apply if the planet be in fall. In the
2nd house, it makes one wealthy, a good speaker, kind and
interested in worshipping the gods.
£R?hfl *^fTO:l
tpn) to! Ijqfl II 28 II
Jupiter in the 3rd will give bad disposition and no wealth.
The person will be ominous to his co-bom and relatives. In the
4th house, the planet makes one happy, and gives good wife. The
subject will have good food, residence, conveyances etc.
Notes: According to Bhavartha Ratnakara Jupiter in 3rd in
fall will give charitable mind.
3Tfh) SMjfsrflHl H-sJlpRfh ^ 1 1 29 II
Jupiter in the 5th house will give good wife and sons. He will
be fortunate, a scholar, and an able speaker. In the 6th, the planet
will give no enemies, make him a minister of the king and prudent.

CHAPTER 21
felijigi
RuiM RlW*) VWil ?Wig 'WlR'l"!: 1 1 30 II
The planet Jupiter in 7th will bless one with good wife and
sons, and make him a better scholar than ever before. In the 8th,
it contributes to long lease of life. The native will become a king,
be learned and have his force of enemies destroyed.
^rtTT<-ii4di
vHifM-n^Jf-ci n 31 n
Jupiter in the 9th will make one enjoy all kinds of happiness.
The native will be learned, splendorous, virtuous and wealthy. In
the 10th house, it will bestow wide fame, engagement in good
acts and make very wealthy.
(tIT*) chWuRnfci: <*difh<*l fastgi
When Jupiter is placed in the 11th house, the person will
have gains from various sources, become head of a treasury (i.e.
immensely rich), principal member of his clan and well versed.
In the 12th, it makes a person defective limbed and spend money
in charity and dances.
•ti-vfaifl ‘J u i«tig , ? T ft R(&igi
-HilRH^I ^TT^TT ^ II 33 II
Venus in Lagna gives such beauty equal to Manmatha and
also qualities. The person will be won by women, be wealthy,
and versed. When the said planet is in 2nd, one will be conscientious, wealthy, have cheerful face and be kind.
jjlV'i't*) famtRKfFUT'f I
gill swig witt 1 1 34 it
One will join base women for the sake of sensual pleasures if
Venus is in the 3rd house. He will not have wealth and luxuries.
If the planet Venus is in the 4th house, one will be happy and will
tend to pardon others. He will be kind and have wife and sons.

HORASARA
-q ilwp *rar*frp 1 1 35 1 1
Should Venus be in the 5th house, one will be a king's minister, or a leader. He will have female issues and be learned- In the
6th, it makes one be without enemies, be of cunning disposition
and sickly. He will also lose his wealth and sons.
FTCfwtt I
f=tqi\ M fT?RH<JT7q IHpj: 1 1 36 II
Should Venus be in the 7th, the person will be infatulated
with passion, will hate his friends and will be close to chief
persons. If it be in the 8th house, one will be of varied nature,
sick, will have wife and children and he will be delighted.
uhnfa'l'i^Tbl qqit ^wwi-p qfaft i
Should Venus be strong in the 9th, one will possess wisdom,
virtues, luxuries, wife and sons. In thelOth house-one will be
dear to women, become a king’s minister and will dig wells,
tanks etc. for the public.
w+4mR^>i ; n 38 n
Venus in the 11th gives superior knowledge, wealth, kindness, gains and satisfaction. If in 12th, it makes a person go after
women, otherwise righteous, but undutiful. If the 12th be the
own house or exaltation house of Venus one will be wealthy and
marry a famous lady.
3T2i Trfqirr^TKHTfq
«UWd<i-n hFci-iWi] 1 1 39 1 1
Sjhould Saturn be in Lagna, the native will be very sick in his
boyhood, be dirty and a wanderer. He will also be wicked in

CHAPTER 21
nature. He will not be loyal to the fair sex, be windy in-temperament, he will be disabled, if Saturn is in own house or is exalted,
in the Lagna, the person will be principal in his clan, wise,
welathy and be a king.
Zifas') -ll eiV-Rdlo-iKON II 41 II
If Saturn occupies the 2nd house, the native will not have any
money left by his father. He will have self respect, courage,
wealth and be learned. If he be in 3rd, one will be brave, unkind,
witty and disrespected.
sr*J**l 3 fall
•Htdiitififi'i nit 1 1 42 ll
If Saturn is in the 4th hosue, one will be troubled by his own
relatives, will not have many sons and will be unhappy. If he be
in the 5th house the native will be dun, will have limited number
of sons and suffer from eye diseases. He will be a wanderer.
il^*(4cil «t><\iwi: II 43 ll
If Saturn is in the 6th, the native will be helpful, be free from
enemies and diseases, and be very famous. Should he be in the
7th, one will be mean, fickleminded, grieved and will be fond of
his wife though she will be wicked.
44 II
If Saturn is in the 8th, one will be wealthy, sick, will not have
many sons, will be weak sighted and fickleminded. If in the 9th,
one will hold the flag of Dharma aloft, be a great expert, be
greatly wise and just and will have sons.
Should Saturn be in the 10th, one will have good mental
disposition, will be wealthy, chief of his caste, and happy. If it be
in the 11th the native will be of lordly disposition, famous, will be

HORASARA
a scientist and expert in use of weapons (and surgery).
<*N*it*) f^TTSfcll
^dlfa'I^d^ yWPei 1 1 46 It
If Saturn is in 12th, the native will blame others, be burdened
with heavy expenditure and be unhappy. Should Saturn be in a
house, along with its lord, the benef, ■ and malefic results will be
dependent on both.
eRTCfaf ^ II 47 II
A planet in fall or inimically placed will adversely affect the
Bhava in question. Whatever has been said in regard to the 12
Bhavas with reference to Lagna equally applies when counted
from the Moon.
^ WTf «Trf >s*f WjfHrPlJ
n^.iwrTTfl W?i II 48 II
yzTT^cR.hiri^iR^H i -H«4*rr«nfd i
The results of various Bhavas can be predicted from the
Moon and the Lagna. Such results for every rasi can be predicted
accurately. The results of Bhavas will be wider if three or more
planets be in one Bhava.
Notes: Prithuyasas does not prefer a cluster of planets in any
Bhava and feels that such combinations will not always yield
good results. Also see sloka 1 of chapter 23 of this work.
Garga Hora which exclusively deals with 2-7 planetary combinations as well as Jataka Parijatha ch. 8 and Saravali, ch. 15 to
ch. 19 may also be referred.
?frT 3 < I £ PM P(? < d 4 54 i| V ft Pctt Pd d ySVIWtflSSqPT
Thus ends the 21st Chapter entitled "Results of
planets in the several Bhavas" in Horasara
of Prihuyasas, son of Varaha Mihira

CHAPTER 22
SiftVilWHtI:
3TST SRilfate:
Wl T5mT5RpRf
'454iT^^Tq^^^^orf?wK*rar n l n
One's obtainment of wealth (i.e. one's livelihood) is the product of his own inner nature. Such wealth is acquired through the
planets posited in the 10th house counted from the ascendant,
the Moon and the Sun or the respective Navamsas.
Money comes through father, mother, brother, relative, elder
(or preceptor), wife and low class men according to the planet
concerned be Sun etc. as indicated by the position in the 10th
from Lagna the Sun or the Moon.
Notes: According to Jataka Parijata, ch. 15, sloka 43, the 10th
house from Lagna or the Moon, if occupied by Mars, notes
income through enemies, by Mercury through friends and by
Jupiter through brothers. For other planets, same view of
Horasara is found. The view of Jataka Parijata confirms to that of
Phala Deepika. However, all the three views are correct as these
are additional indications,
If the 10th be planetless, then the strongest among the Moon
or the Sun should be considered. The Lord of the sign in which

HORASARA
the 10th Lord is posited may also be considered. (That is the said
navamsas will denote the kind of livelihood.)
Notes: Also see sloka 1, ch. 5 of Phala Deepika. The lord of
navamsa occupied by the strongest 10th lord counted from
Lagna, Sun or Moon decides the profession factor.
W*! tl 4 II
Should the lord of such amsa be the Sun, the person earns
through fruits, trees, medicines, metals, sculpture, betting, falsehood, cheating and royal sources.
Notes: If the Sun is in 10th from Moon, the native achieves
professional success, financial status, kingly status and prosperity. ( Saravali , ch. 33, my English translation). The Sun in 10th
from Moon or Lagna is an attractive position for politicians and
is also good for liaison with or favours from Government.
hMi& erofn
The Moon's amsa in such case indicates: pearls, carriers run
in water, husbandry, water, clothes etc., cows, buffaloes, sugar,
female’s company, chanting mantras, hymns and the like and
worship of gods.
Notes: Full Moon in 10th from Lagna or simply the Moon in
10th from the Sun is indicative of maternal inheritance. This
position encourages dealings in jewels, ships, boats, fish etc.
II 6 II
Such amsa of Mars denotes: teaching, mantras, bravery,
weapons (or surgery etc.), fire, medicines, selling in market and
through Kshatriyas (i.e. persons of royal scion).
Notes: Mars in 10th from Lagna, Moon or the Sim is capable
of making one engaged in military services. One rises according
to the strength of Mars. Further, one will be engaged in selling
arms and ammunitions, or will have fair opportunity to shine in

CHAPTER 22
police service.
fdft el rl :
^trtfr htertft m 11
In such amsa of Mercury, the livelihood is through; writings,
drawings, literature, mathematics, bets, dancing, donations (i.e.
the person will receive donations in marriages, Sraddhas etc.),
education and loving speech.
Notes; If Mercury is in the 10th from Lagna or Moon (he
cannot be in the 10th from Sun as his maximum longation is 28°)
the native earns through astrology, magic, dance, drama, scientific research etc.
(Jilt?) II 8 It
Should such amsa be of Jupiter, the means of livelihood will
be from-education, worship of gods (he. temple priesthood).
Mantras, Japas, exposition of Mantras, knowledge of the three
periods (i.e. astrology), Shakunas and royal favours.
Notes: Jupiter in 10th is good for astrology, medicine, justice,
politics etc., dealing with sale of gold, jewels etc will give great
success.
Should Venus be the lord of such amsa, the livelihood will be
through: cows, buffaloes, horses, elephants etc, the company of
women, medicines, beautification, singing etc and one will be
happy through these.
Notes: Venus in the 10th from Lagna Moon is a congenial
position for running dairy, textile mills, such showrooms,
jewellery shops, operas, cinemas etc.
ii ii ii

HORASARA
Should the said amsa be of Saturn, the source of living will
be; fruits, roots, leaves, carrying loads, labour, base men, servants, sales of grain and inferior grains labour carrying
loads, base deeds, sesamum, salt, grains, vegetables, grass, firewood, water etc.
Notes: The third line has a few words missing. The repetition
of some words are hence unaccountable.
Saturn in 10th from lagna. Moon or Sun is capable of bestowing success in fields like steel, coal, minerals, black articles, buffaloes etc. Those who have Saturn in 10th can rise to high legal
profession. But this 10th house position of Saturn at some time or
the other can befall the person from dizzy heights, if it is adversely placed at birth.
fourth n 12 11
Should the planet owning the amsa to be very strong, one
will earn money effortlessly, and if in deep fall, the results mentioned will manifest in little proportion.
Notes: See notes under sloka 15 of this chapter.
dHOM TehTT^T II 13
The astrologer should advise (the means of livelihood) in the
direction of the country indicated (by a study of the horoscope)
or the country suitable to the 10th house from Lagna.
Notes: This aspect should be studied with reference to
ashtaka varga also.
The sages say that if the said houses are aspected by their
own lords, then the native will earn in his own country, and if
aspected by or conjoined with other planets, the livelihood will
be in other countries.

CHAPTER 22
cRtftfr ^3 croii
^f^n^'SR# flcfc?r t^rarffca: 11 15 11
If the lord of the said amsa be in a movable rasi or amsa, the
native earns even when in other countries /places and be happy;
if in fixed rasi or amsa, the earnings will be only in his native
country and if in dual rasi or amsa, the earnings will be anywhere.
Notes: If the lord of navamsa (occupied by 10th lord from
Moon, Lagna or Sun) be strong, one earns effortlessly. The direction of earning is indicated by the 10th house or the Navamsa
occupied by 10th lord. If the 10th house receives the aspect of its
lord or is occupied by him, or if the 10th is a fixed sign, one earns
in his native place. If tire 10th house is occupied or aspected by
others, the native's livelihood is in other places or other countries. (Phala Deepika, ch. 5, sloka 9).
II 16 II
Should the lord of said amsa be in retrograde motion, money
will be acquired in many ways. And one's earning will be proportionate to one's own luck. The results have already been
enumerated in full.
oR^II-iWlfci <1 eFW II 17 II
Even one strong benefic in 10th from the Moon, unaspected
by or unconjoined with malefics, is enough to make a person
enjoy fame for him and his family till the end of yuga. The
counting applies similarly to the Lagna also.
*Wiwff srftryTtacqnT: 1 1
Thus ends the 22nd Chapter in Horasara of Prithuyasas, son
of Varaha Mihira

CHAPTER 23
^ fitter s^qrqj
^ fsr^zn^^M fal ^t ^ n 1 ii
The combination of two or more planets always affects the
Bhava concerned. The effects of such combination may also yield
a poisonous mixture as honey and ghee together yield.
Notes: The author mentions in the following sloka that for
the above reason, the results of planetary combination, he would
explain special effects thereof. Thus, the present sloka means to
say that the effect of the conjunction of two or more planets with
respect to one bhava is different from a planet being alone.
Compare this with slokas 53 and 54 of this chapter.
cf5| tMUIS^ WFTf ^1
%*JTPef4Vl^H ^!T || 2 II
The brief results of such planetary combinations are explained infra. The results arising out of planetary transits should
be correlated by the astrologer before issuing predictions.
^ Krran^nr tfgat ii 3 ii
If the Sun and Mercury are together in the 4th house or in the
8th house from the ascendant, the person born will be equal to a
king in qualities and be wealthy. This conjunction in other houses
will make one virtuous.
Notes: The conjunction of Mercury and the Sun in 4th is not
praised by Vaidyanatha in Jataka parijata, ch. 8, for he says: he

CHAPTER 23
becomes a king and overpowers his enemies. He becomes famous but his mother is of questionable character. (Reference
Jataka Parijata)
See also sloka 15 of this chapter.
q'ipt 1 1 6 II
The combination of the Sun and Mars in the 10th, the 11th,
the Lagna or the 8th causes one's birth in a great family and
bestows great strength, whereas this conjunction in other houses
gives no wealth.
Notes: Saravali also corroborates the above view in toto
Refer Jataka Parijata: This yoga in Lagna makes one bilious,
brave in war, wounded, cruel and hard hearted. In the 4th, it
deprives of relatives, peace of mind etc. and people blame him.
In the 7th, one is bereaved of separation from wife, disrespected
by women, and is intent on living in foreign countries. In the
10th, all his undertakings are unfruitful and he serves a king but
remains over worried .
btti
'JTTiTT^: fl 7 II
If the Sun and Jupiter be together in the Ascendant, the 9th,
the 10th or the 11th, the native has strong command and fame
and will be inaccessible, (i.e. he will be too big a oerson *^-be
reached by all.)
Notes: Reference Jataka Parijata: This yoga in Lagna makes
one a minister or army chief. He may also take to ascetism. He is
learned, wealthy and happy. In the 4th, one is well versed in
Vedas, justice etc. He is surrounded by servants and is virtuous.
In the^th, one is a subordinate of women due to the predominance of Manmatha i.e. Love God, has an auspicious physique
(i.e. no defect in the body), and possesses gold, silver etc. But he
hates his father. In the 10th, one becomes a famous king and has
all comforts and wealth. These results out of the angular occupation of these two will be felt even by a low bom man.

HORASARA
But he remains unmarried or becomes a widower. If in 10th, he
becomes a king and overpowers his enemies. He becomes famous but his mother is of questionable character. (Reference
Jataka Parijata)
See also sloka 15 of this chapter.
The combination of the Sun and Mars in the 10th, the 11th,
the Lagna or the 8th causes one's birth in a great family and
bestows great strength, whereas this conjunction in other houses
gives no wealth.
Notes: Saravali also corraborates the above view in toto.
Refer Jataka Parijata: This yoga in Lagna makes one bilious,
brave in war, wounded, cruel and hard hearted. In the 4th, it
deprives of relatives, peace of mind etc. and people blame him.
In the 7th, one is bereaved of separation from wife, disrespected
by women, and is intent on living in foreign countries. In the
10th, all his undertakings are unfruitful and he serves a king but
remains over worried.
If the Sun and Jupiter be together in the Ascendant, the 9th,
the 10th or the 11th, the native has strong command and fame
and will be inaccessible, (i.e. he will be too big a person to be
reached by all).
Notes: Reference Jataka Parijata: This yoga in Lagna makes
one a minister or army chief. He may also take to ascetism. He is
learned, wealthy and happy. In the 4th, one is well versed in
Vedas, justice etc. He is surrounded by servants and is virtuous.
In the 10th, one is a subordinate of women due to the predominance of Manmatha i.e. Love god, has an auspicious physique
(i.e. no defect in the body), and possesses gold, silver etc. But he
hates his father. In thelOth, one becomes a famous king and has
all comforts and wealth. These results out of the angular occupation of these two will be felt even by a low bom man.

CHAPTER 23
tJzffirRPlfct-iJ Rbl ^ ^I|
H'UKVil fa^ldl <MciH^« farWWR: 1 1 8 1 1
The conjunction of the Sun and Venus occurring in the 10th,
the 8th or the 5th makes a person equal to a king, famous and
mighty. In other houses, these two together will give only penury
and unhappiness.
Notes: The combination of Sun and Venus in Lagna promotes quarrels, gives little common sense, much sorrow and
inharmonious married life. In the 7th, women hate him, and he
suffers poverty. The 10th house position is welcome in that the
native enjoys ministerial position, financial prosperity, conveyances etc. (See Saravali, ch. 31).
^TFT: WrwM Reft crftsfa cTT Rftl
o -o
gfeR ftftj fawiR ^ ii
Should the Sun and Saturn dwell in the 9th, the 2nd or the
6th together, they give widespread fame and happiness. In other
bhavas, their company leads to no wealth.
Notes: Should Saturn and Sun be together in Lagna, the
native is born to a blameworthy mother. The 4th house position
is not good for cordial relationship with the relatives. In 7th, they
do not promote marital harmony. Should they join in the 10th,
one serves the king and gathers money only to lose in theft. (See
Jataka Parijata, ch. 8.)
Saravali, ch. 31 has the same view.
Sun-Saturn combination is good for mineral trade. ( Phala
Deepika, ch. 18)
In actual practice, any relationship between these two
planets will tell upon the father. Some have lost their father early
in childhood, some have no good terms with father. Their combination in the 11th is of course superior and one becomes fortunate. Even a Sagittarius native is happy with the 2nd lord in
exaltation in 11th, not greatly affected by the Sun in fall simultaneously.

horasara
^ °it trfgsranl cni
Should Mars and the Moon be together in the 10th, the 9th,
the 5th or the 11th, one will become wealthy and be equal to a
king. In other Bhavas, one is deprived of his relatives and happiness as well.
Notes: The Moon-Mars yoga goes by the designation *tM«H
yoga, a financial boost. This is, however, inauspicious for
mother.
These two in the Lagna give blood disorder and bilious
complaints. In the 4th, they are adverse for children. Poverty
results if they join in 7th. (See Saravali ch. 31).
Mars in Lagna, 4th or 7th is not good for females, in the
matter of marriage, apart from 2nd and 8th. Should Moon join
Mars, it is further complicated. In order to mitigate such evil,
Jupiter, Venus, the 7th lord and the 8th lord should be strong.
The partner's 7th lord in strength and in good aspect is another
source of relief for the female concerned.
VFTclT^
The native will be learned in poetry and arts and be wealthy
if he has Mercury and the Moon together in the 3rd, 11th, 6th or
the 8th in his nativity. If in other houses, one will be fearless and
indigenent.
Notes: See Saravali, Moon-Mercury in Lagna: Happy, steady
mind, strong, liked by many, fluency in talk, intelligence etc. In
the 4th: has relatives, sons, friends, respect, gold, conveyances
etc . In the 7th: respect, reputation, soft body, proficient in writing
and liked by a well placed person. In the 10th: rich, ministerial
position, but at the end, separation from relatives follows.
The conjunction of Moon and Mercury makes one famous
and lucky. (Phala Deepika, ch. 18).
He wilt be sweet tongued, clever in interpreting, famous and
lucky ( Brihat Jataka, ch. 14).

CHAPTER 23
^fsf ^ I^RT gsRod H 12
Should Jupiter and the Moon be not in the 3rd or the 6th or
depressed, the native with a combination of these two, will be
wealthy. He will have wife and sons and be well-mannered.
Notes: The combination should not take place in the 3rd or in
the 6th or the rasi concerned should not be Capricorn or Scorpio.
Should these two join in Lagna, the native has broad and
prominent chest, and becomes a king with sons and relatives. If
in the 4th, one is equal to king and himself a minister. In the 7th
business man and dear to king. In the 10th— long hand, good
education and financial gains. ( Saravali and Jataka Parijata).
In a different context, Vaidyanatha forms Rajayoga in his
Jataka Parijata with debilitated Jupiter in Lagna in Capricorn
while the Sun is in Leo rasi or amsa. (ch. 7, sloka 15.) In our
opinion, the Sun be better in Cancer in 2nd Navamsa so that the
condition laid down is fulfilled.
MviWS'jsMl 1 ) ^ It 13 II
Should Venus and the Moon be together in the 10th house,
one will be an expert trader, will enjoy good robes and life and
will lord over money. If this combination be in the 12th house, he
will obtain money from foreign countries.
Notes: These two planets in Lagna give beautiful body and
enjoyment with whores and wife. Should they join in 4th, one is
happy with wife and issues and has earnings through ships etc. If
it is 7th house, one enjoys with many women and has little
wealth and few sons. In the 10th house, these two bless with
many servants, fame, royalty and ministerslup. (Jataka Parijata,
II 14 II
If Mars and Saturn be together in the 9th, the 5th, the 4th, the
10th or the 2nd, one will have sons, relatives, virtue and wealth.

HORASARA
One is unlucky and dirty if he has these two planets in other
Bhavas than those mentioned.
Notes: Mars and Saturn in Lagna curtail longevity. In the
4th, the native is a sinner and has no friend. In the 7th, one is
deprived of marital comforts. One gets money through king with
Mars and Saturn in the 10th house. (Jataka Parljata, ch. 8).
Mars and Saturn in the 7th in Cancer give a chaste and
beautiful wife an exception indeed, made by Mantreswara in
Phala Deepika, ch. 10, sloka 3, see Patni Sathi Sobhan. Saturn if
not well placed and be in the 7th gives an ugly wife with protruding teeth.
II 15 II
The Moon and Saturn together give an emaciated body. Such
native will be bent upon doing base deeds, will dislike his mo tire r
and will be a fool. In 3, 6, 10 and 11, the said planets together
bestow all kinds of wealth.
Notes: See notes under sloka 5 of this chapter.
hfcR: II 16 It
Should Mars and Mercury be in one hosue, the native has no
steady mind. He will be satisfied with little. He will be dirty and
like to eat others' food. Should these two planets be in an angle,
the native will get wealth and be happy.
Notes: If Mars and Mercury join in Lagna, the native is
expert in fire and mineral works, becomes an ambassador and
protects others' things. If they join in the 4th, he will have conveyances, friends, money etc., but will be deprived of relatives. If
in the 7th, the native loses his first wife, changes place and is
argumentative in nature. Should Mars and Mercury join in 10th,
the native becomes an army chief, brave and cruel. He earns
royal favour. (Jataka Parijata, ch. 8).
foiled I
li 17 II

CHAPTER 23
If Mars and Jupiter be in one house, the native will be long
lived, will obtain sons, will be well-behaved. Should these, however, be in evil houses, i.e. (6th, 8th or 12th), the person will be
addicted to vices, be sick and will have not much wealth.
Notes: If Mars and Jupiter are in Lagna, one acquires a chief
post, is always enthusiastic and interested in religious field. If
they join in 4th, the native is engaged in royal service. In the 7th,
their conjunction makes one brave, move in hills, forts etc., and
have good relatives. But this position is not congenial for marital
harmony. These two planets in 10th make one famous and very
wealthy. He will have a large family and is equal to a king.
(Jataka Parijata, ch. 8).
The conjunction of Jupiter and Mars is very good for Leo,
Aries, Sagittarius, Scorpio, Cancer and Pisces Ascendants.
<?KnfWt on i 18 n
If Mars and Venus are disposed in one house, the native will
be fickleminded, will be at his wife's disposal and will indulge in
wicked acts. Should the said conjunction be in the 1st, 4th or
10th, one will be chief of his caste or head of the village.
Notes: Should Mars and Venus be in Lagna, the native is of
bad disposition, does bad deeds, is addicted to prostitutes and
shortlived. He loses money through women. If they are in 4th,
the native is deprived of sons and friends and suffers mental
agony. Their conjunction in the 7th makes one addicted to
women. He will not hav* raiseworthy history. In the 10th, one
is famous, wealthy and a minister to king. (Jataka Parijata ch. 8).
II 19 II
Mars and Saturn in one house give windy troubles (i.e. rheumatism etc), and bilious complaints. Should they be in 3rd, 6th,
10th or 11th house, such effects cannot be anticipated; on the
other hand, the native will be equal to a king, liked by all and
famous.

HORASARA
fagl-f •TCl 43%l
Fffif ^*Fit feP^ntrf^: II 20 II
If Mecury and Jupiter are in one house, one will be deaf,
learned and will have eye diseases. If they be specifically in the
12th, 8th or 6th, one will be lucky, famous and virtuously disposed.
Notes: If the conjunction of Mercury and Jupiter is in Lagna,
the native has pleasing personality, is virtuous, learned and is
blessed with various pleasures. He is respected by the king.
Should it be the 4th house, where these two planets are together,
the native is recipient of regal favours, wealthy and has friends,
wife etc. If they join in the 7th house, the native has good wife, is
wealthy and excels his father. In the 10th, one is equal to a king
or is a minister, is wealthy and learned. ( Vide Jataka Parijata).
II 21
Should Mercury and Venus be in one house, the native will
be maimed (or spiritless); his welfare (or prosperity) will be
checkered. He will have mean wife and sons and yet he will be
affectionate to them. Should the conjunction be in the 9th, the 5th
or the 1st, he will earn titles and immense money.
Notes: Mercury and Venus and Lagna: beautiful, healthy
and learned and honoured by the king. In the 4th: pleasing
physique, friends, children and relatives. The native becomes a
king or minister. In the 7th: one enjoys the company of cute
dames. He is very wealthy and attached to a king. ThelOth house
combination makes the native wise in politics, a king, virtuous
and wealthy. He ompletes every undertaking successfully and ,
patronises good people. (Jataka Parijata, ch. 8.)
ii 22 ii
Should Mercury and Saturn be in the 10th, 1st or in the 9th,
one will have wealth, wife, sons and friends. Their conjunction in
other houses, will yield inauspicious results.

CHAPTER 23
Notes: If Mercury and Saturn join in Lagna, the native has
dirty appearance, is sinful and has no wealth and conveyances.
He is short lived and unlucky. In the 4th: the native is deprived
of food, friends, relatives etc. In the 7th: the native is very dirty,
not virtuous, not helpful etc. In the 10th: he wins his enemies, is
wealthy and has conveyances. (Jataka Parijata, ch. 8). Thus
Horasara praises the combination of Mercury and Saturn in
Lagna while Jataka Parijata does not. The view of Vaidyanatha is
mostly true. Moreover, their combination in Lagna promotes
sexual inability of the native. And in the 7th, the spouse receives
such results.
*1$: HirsaUra^WTcf: 1 1 23 It
If Jupiter and Venus join in the 1st, 5th, 9th or 8th, the native
will enjoy wife, wealth and sons. Should the conjunction be in
other houses, one will be troubled by diseases and be sorrowful.
Notes: Jupiter and Venus together in Lagna make one a king.
In the 4th many conveyances. In the 7th-good wife, wealthy
superior conveyances etc. In the 10th, many servants, abundant
wealth etc. (Jataka Parijata. ch. 8). Generally this combination is
good for wealth, luck, conveyances etc. Even Sagittarius natives
are well-placed with this combination, though Venus is 6th lord.
Similarly Libra natives also do well though Jupiter is the 6th lord.
'RHty-usl-i: l
If Jupiter and Saturn be in houses other then 3, 6, 10 and 11,
the native will have no self-respect and money. Should the combination occur in the 3rd, 6th, 10th and 11th, one will be famous
and be worshipped by the king.
Notes: Should these two be in Lagna, the native is lazy,
learned and has little comforts. In the 4th-good health, success
over enemies, dear to all and good relatives. In the 7th— not
atractive in appearance, dull headed and intent on gaining paternal property. In the 10th equal to a king, few children and many
conveyances, (/afaka Parijata, ch. 8.)

HOR.ASARA
The conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter is cogenial for medical
achievements, legal proficiency and mining etc.
As suggested by our present work, their conjunction in
Upachaya is a boon to the owner of the radix.
TJ5R3TI
f^rfT 1 1 25 II
Should Venus and Saturn be in Lagna, the 5th, the 9th, the
4th, 7th or the 10th, one will be commanded by his wife, be a
chief in royal service and wealthy. In other houses, this combination will deprive one of his strength and money.
Notes: At the outset, the combination of Venus and Saturn or
Venus and Mars is not at all practically good for a happy and
long married life, irrespective of the bhava which has this combination. The malefic results will pronouncedly be felt if they join
in Lagna, 2nd, 4th, 7th, 8th or 12th. Now see what Saravali says
regarding Venus and Saturn joining together: In Lagna: beautiful
and wealthy. In the 4th: gains through friends and relatives,
honoured by king and wealthy. In the 7th: good for money, wife,
fame etc. In the 10th: famous in the world, highly placed and
minister.
The conjunction of Venus and Saturn makes one a boxing
champion, an alchemist etc.
<,iqq-^?lH4l , i: hiTh^ eqw-Jiifcin I
With the conjunction of the Sun, the Moon and Mars the
native will be most sinfully disposed. His livelihood will not
have much progress. He will be without relative, wife and children. He will be disabled. He will be blamed by the public and be
a miser.
Notes: For Slokas from 26 to 52 of this chapter, notes appended are from Saravali , ch. 16.
Sun-Moon-Mars: shameless, sinful deeds, ability to make
and handle machinery, will eliminate the whole band of enemies,
courageous, clever in all things.

CHAPTER 23
^ft vufasW 1 1 27 it
Should the Sun, Mars and Mercury be in one house, the
native will be against righteous deeds. He will live in distant
countries, be a miser and be unkind. The wealth acquired by him
will vanish and he will be sorrowful.
Notes: Sun-Mars-Mercury in one house: reputed, daring
without care for consequences, cruel, shameless, bereft of wife
and children, wrestling ability.
I'TFl'il ^ 1 1 28 II
The combination of the Sun, Mercury and Jupiter in one
house will make a person intelligent, dear to a king, penniless at
the end and thus dependant on others even for a morsel of food.
The native will hurt others' feelings.
Notes: Sun-Mercury-Jupiter in one house--Eye disease, great
wealth, famous for scholarship, proficient writer, fluent talk.
Tf^ftTRhflrl ^RTjfr ftfol
If the Sun, Jupiter and Venus are in one sign, the person will
be intent upon giving donations, praised by the public and be a
king. He will be cheated by women and in gambling and thus be
devoid of his wealth. He will have trouble from enemies. He will
suffer from grief.
Notes: Sun-Jupi ter- Venus in one house: courageous, poor,
ophthalmic, dear to king and helpful.
7T<tRl^iri4t^5fCTkTONffl5fdcr3^1
3twfo*)4l M ^ r+f^KtfanFt: II 30 II
Should the Sun, Venus and Saturn be in one house, the native
will be devoid of religious codes, be a big cheat, and be miserable. He will not have any income. He will be sick. But in his old
age he will possess some money.

HORASARA
Notes: Sun, Venus and Saturn in one house: fear from his
enemies, no self respect, suffers leprosy, bad ancestrv and little
academic achievements.
faoHKlt Clta'jf'jwl
uruM strait ii 31
If the Moon, Mars and Mercury be in one house, the native
will become famous, be worshipped by the public, learned, eloquent in speech, kind and will be penniless in the middle of his
life.
Notes: Moon, Mars and Mercury in one house: mean habits,
no children, no relatives and friends.
fairer TOtl MM 1 1 32 II
If the Moon, Mercury and Jupiter be in one house, the native
will have a widely exalted status. He will be very learned, rich,
valorous and a king.
Notes: Moon, Mercury and Jupiter in one house: Rich, renowned, dear to king, many children, many brothers and high
status in life.
rei’pfpffafa resti 'tM reM i
reM II 33 II
The native will undoubtedly become a king if the Moon,
Jupiter and Venus be in one house. He will have elephants,
horses, conveyances, serving force, treasury etc., at his command.
Notes: Moon, Jupiter and Venus in one house: learned yet
devoted to mean acts, greedy and jealous.
MrereH WRt 'Ml
iktiM "I reafa 1 1 34 II
Should the Moon, Venus and Saturn be in one house, the
native will have self-respect, be rich and kind. He will have
luxuries at his disposal. His position in life will be neither great
nor insignificant. He will have sons and cattle and be respected

CHAPTER 23
by his relatives.
Notes: Moon, Venus and Saturn in one house: learned
teacher, astrologer and author.
^ II 35 II
If the Moon, Saturn and the Sun join in one rasi, one will not
acquire much riches. He will be accosted by diseases and be
aggrieved. He will go abegging and be disabled. His means of
livelihood will be service and dance.
Notes: Moon, Saturn and Sun in one house: passionate, foolish argumentative, pauper, serves others.
Should Mars, Mercury and Venus join in a single rasi, one
will be sick right from the childhood, to a small extent. He will be
in a position to remain jocularly disposed, be a prince, and be a
widely famed.
Notes: Mars, Mercury and Venus in one house-mean birth,
defective organ, fickle minded, cruel and sweet talk.
srr^ftgrnjfhr:
faomdl WT'ihft 1 1 37 II
Should Mars, Jupiter and Venus be in one house, the native
will have conveyances and attendants at his disposal. He will
attain great fame and wealth. He will possess issues and lands
and enjoy greatly.
Notes: Mars, Jupiter and Venus in one house— liked by king,
virtuous sons, enjoys company of beautiful girls, pleases all.
Should Mars, Venus and Saturn be in one house, it is ominous for the mother of the subject. He will wander in foreign

HORASARA
countries and be addicted to other ladies.' He will be base and be
insulted by royal circles.
FTC) M34K3W*lSeMI(J: I
fptf ^TTfcT fs^tl 1 1 39 II
Should Mars, Saturn and the Sun be in conjunction, the
native will be in a sinner. He will deceive others' wives. He will
have a short span of life. His end will occur in a foreign country
through poison, fire or jail.
Notes: Mars, Saturn and Sun in one house: diseases, defective organs and ignorance.
If Mars, the Sun and Mercury be in one house, one will ever
be roaming. From time to time, he will gather some grains and
cook them (i.e. he will have to make efforts for every square meal
on day-to-day basis.)
Notes: Refer to sloka 27, supra.
Wl I
+IR|<huhh n4i ||
The conjunction of Mercury, Jupiter and Venus will make the
native a king. His possessions will be plentiful. He will be modest. His fame will be spread in the (whole) region.
-KMIH+I tHIcJW I
fafemd) 5fHt II
Should Mercury, Venus and Saturn be in one house, the
native will be ruler of men, wealthy, steady in mind, famous,
longlived, acceptable to all and learned.
Should Mercury, Saturn and the Sun be together, one will
have a very bloody and bilious physique, will hate his own men,
be meanly disposed, will live in foreign countries, will have more

CHAPTER 23
veins and an emaciated body.
Notes: Sun, Mercury and Saturn in one house: Impotent,
lacks masculine qualities, poor.
■qigfqfiSRpnl: tfpit II 44 II
Should Mercury, the Sun and Venus be in one house, the
native will enjoy luxuries, wealth and the kind and be among his
parents and relatives. He will have respect and valour.
Notes: Mercury, Sun and Venus in one house— dissatisfaction, impolite, likes travels, leaves native place due to the wishes
of elders, sorrow on account of wife.
-$^cr n 45 ii
If the planets Mercury, Satum and Mars be together in one
house the native will be a prostitute's husband, be intent on
living in distant countries, be inimical to his men, aggrieved,
shortlived and loses his cattle and wife.
Notes: Mercury, Satum and Mars in one house— servitude,
black eyes, ugly personality, diseased mouth.
fatwjl fa<rqt»fi fateqid) cil+thkfi n 46 n
If Jupiter, Venus and Satum join in one house, the native will
be a principal member of his castemen, and be happy with his
family. He will have limited gains and luxuries. He will be famous and be liked by all.
Notes: Jupiter, Venus and Satum-highly praiseworthy habits, will reach royal position though low bom, wide spread reputation.
Jotnn^eJl
fbrttwRW: i i 47 1 1
Should Jupiter, Mars and the Sun be in conjunction, one will
be wealthy, worshipped by the people, learned and be free from

HORASARA
sickness and enemies. He will have every kind of happiness.
Notes: Jupiter, Sun and Mars-premier or commander,
wealthy, powerful, keeps up his word.
«rpR MIVyR'W HH?Mtl«lHH, II 48 II
Should Jupiter, Mars and Saturn be in conjunction, the native
will be a town's head and be strong. He will put up with difficulties. He will be wealthy, jealously disposed, respected and valorous.
II 49 II
Should Jupiter, Saturn and the Moon be together, one will be
after women. He will have issues and be happy. He will speak
sweetly and be friendly to the people. He will respect his parents,
preceptors and gods.
Notes: Jupiter Moon and Saturn in one house: well versed in
sacred sciences, addicted to women past their prime, free from
diseases, not angrily disposed, leader in society.
II 50 II
The native who has three or more planets either in the Ascendant, or the 10th or the 9th, will engage himself in multifarious
activities, will have numerous good qualities, will be extremely
intelligent and will enjoy like a lord of wealth.
9 lrl'4 Tfa I
%T^T II 51 II
Should the Moon, Jupiter and Mars be in one house, they
give vigour and wealth. This is not so in the case of one of them
being in depression, or their being in 6th, 7th or 8th houses.
Notes: Moon, Jupiter and Mars: soft body, passionate, stealing tendency, liked by women.

CHAPTER 23
dyiw-mfeal tosTtot tot tor n 52 h
Should Saturn, Moon, Mars and Venus join in 9th, 10th or the
Ascendant, one will not have any bonds of family and relatives,
will live in foreign places and be happy.
Notes: Moon, Mars and Saturn-wicked habits, loss of
mother in boyhood, mean status, mischievous and hated by
many.
The effects of two or three planets joining in houses are
subject to change according to Lagna at birth.
T'W'l’rl: ^4^:
4TWj|: to to to^ftorR 1 1 53 II
If benefics only join in a bhava, the effects produced will be
very superior. Inauspicious results will follow if malefics join
together. Combination of planets, if be mixed in nature then the
effects will be equally mixed.
44 4 Tri vj tow>ton
rPTf 'vlliy ftol 4><r1 1 1 54 II
If four or more planets join in a house, only mixed effects will
follow. The results will manifest in the major and subperiods,
depending on the good or bad disposition of the planets.
SillR'J^ifMlU.HItUlU: 1 1
Thus ends the 23rd Chapter entitled "Conjunctions of two or
more Planets and their Effects" in Horasara of
Prithuyasas son of Varaha Mihira

CHAPTER 24
am *r
-^<rl4l 1 I ts^lldl -n^TO?ftfilrrfg oldsl-i: Ill II
Should the Sun, the Moon and Mars join in 1st, 4th, 7th, 10th,
9th or 12th, being devoid of strength, the notorious Jalayoga is
produced.
Notes: In this chapter, powerful Avayogas are explained
which are capable of imbalancing the good yogas in a nativity.
Before analysing the possible goods from Rajayogas, these adverse combinations should be given equal consideration in order
to arrive at right and sensible conclusions.
The native who has the said ^ will be a dunce, unimportant and devoid of any wisdom and wealth. He will have no
fixity of mind. He will be stubborn (in the sense, he will not
accept any good thinking) and he will depend on others for food.
He will be subject to mental worries.
fETEFt
ta#: 113 II
Kemadruma yoga (of another kind) is produced when the
lord of the 9th is pushed to the 12th house while the 12th lord is
in the 2nd without strength. Simultaneously, the 3rd house shall
have placement of malefics.

CHAPTER 24
Notes: This Kemadruma is formed with a different planetary
set up as above while the commonly known Kemadruma is
produced thus: The Moon without planets on at least one side or
with her or in her angles. The angular occupation is known to
cancel Kemadruma yoga caused by the Moon without planets in
12th, 2nd or with her.
M«IUd1 ftcq <RR«KI^ |
'Thrift 114 I!
One born with the Kemadruma yoga (mentioned in the
above sloka) will be after others' housewives, will always look
upto others for his food, will indulge in bad deeds and will
contract several debts.
T n T Ff T T?t hWI ?ll
‘jR'idikdelcliMi tiTRt: H 115 II
Should the 7th and 8th be occupied by malefic planets, while
the Lagna Lord is in fall in rasi or navamsa, one born in Gulika
Kala, will destroy his family.
Notes: This yoga means, that his family will end with him
and not descend any further.
For calculation of Gulika, the following should be noted.
Gulika’s position will correspond to tire rising degree at the
moment noted below:
(A) For day birth, Sunday 26 ghatis, Monday 22 ghatis, Tuesday 18 ghatis, Wednesday 14 ghatis, Thursday 10 ghatis, Friday
6 ghatis and Saturday 2 ghatis. All calculations are from sun-rise.
(B) For night birth: From Sunday onwards respectively at 10,
6, 2, 26, 22, 18 and 14 from sun-set.
Gulika Kala is interpreted as Gulika in Lagna obviously.
Like Rahu Kala, there is Gulika Kala also which may also,
however, fit in this context.
entd: ^Tl
faSTTTFTt ^ ^1% II
6 II
If all the planets are in fall in Rasi and Navamsa or if they are

HORASARA
exalted in houses not happening to be the 9th/10th, the native
will only get his food by begging.
Notes: The fall of one time of all the planets in rasi is not
possible. Out of the 7, maximum 6 planets can be in fall. However, all can occupy neecha navamsas. The author allows the fall
to take place both in rasi and navamsas. Similarly, all planets (i.e.
leaving the nodes of course) cannot be again in exaltation in rasi.
Here also, additionally navamsa should be considered. The exaltation should essentially be in 9th or 10th for one planet at least
so that the Bhikshasana yoga does materealize.
#si straw) trIf
When the Ascendant lord is in the 12th, a malefic placed in
the 10th and the Moon is with Mars, Abhi yoga is formed
which makes one wander in distant places and suffer from
penury.
^TRT: FtW? FTT^ 1 1 8 1 1
Should the Sun and the Moon be in the 9th, the Lagna or the
5th while Jupiter is in the 3rd house or in a Kendra, one born thus
will become mad. In such a yoga, essentially, the Kala Hora TTTF
at birth shall be that of Saturn or Mars.
Notes: A day of 60 ghatis is divided into 24 horas, each of IVt
ghatis or one hour. The first hora after sun-rise is ruled by the
planet after whom the day is named. That is, on Thursday, the
first hora will be that of Jupiter; on Saturday, first hora is Saturn's
and so on. The next hora is ruled by the lord of the sixth day from
the first one. That is, the 2nd hora of Thursday is that of Mars.
Similarly the 3rd hora is ruled by the lord of the sixth day
counted from the 2nd hora lord. And the counting goes on in the
same way.
F II 9
Should the Moon and Mercury join in an angle, without the

CHAPTER 24
aspect or company of another planet Paisacha ('Wfa) yoga is
produced. Such person will be mad.
hWKJWcTttFR: h !l 10 II
If Venus and the Moon are in an angle, while malefics are in
either the 8th or the 5th, Maha Gada yoga l 1 !?! ^KT) is produced.
This results in insanity.
'iirVial ^1 4-»-c|ib*iqi PP) I
%tl II 11 II
This sloka is only a repetition of Sloka 10 above.
lift few*’} Cl'-Wl fWPTPl ^Rtl
^571^1 ThRli ^TftT II 12 II
If the Ascendant is occupied by Mars and Saturn, while its
lord is in the 2nd or the 8th along with the Moon and Mercury
and Venus are in a Kendra, even a person bom in superior caste
becomes a base man (i.e. he will not shine in life.)
<£-s0lc^ tf 1 ") TT|: IfpTI I
Astral n 13 n
Should Mars and Saturn be in an angle, Rahu in the Lagna
while benefics are in the 12th or the 6th, Chandala yoga is
formed. This yoga will make one shun the duties prescribed for
the family he succeeds.
<tS«viKii ^ Tlf'PT hf^ctl
^IcWl'l <S*W*\mh1 1? II 14 II
If Mercury, Venus and the Moon are relegated to angles
while Rahu is rising again Chandala yoga is produced. The person who has such yoga will take to mean acts.
IJhp) W3c( || 15
Epilepsy is caused to one bom in Parivesha kala, who has
simultaneously Saturn and Mars in the 6th or the 8th with Jupiter

horasa/la
not occupying the 1st, 5th or 9th houses.
-rift ri^fr fsrar^TFT^i
Should Saturn and Mars be in the ascendant while the lord
thereof is in the 2nd, the 8th or the 9th with benefics not being
angular, one will suffer from diseases throughout his life.
STftTCTfrajsR: oZfW'ft
II 17 II
Should the Moon, Saturn and Venus be in angles while the
Sun and Mars are in the 12th and the 8th, another kind of
Kemadruma yoga is produced. Such native will confine to his
birth place only, (for his livelihood).
9W88°WTc(T: 9TCT: 8lfdfwtl4J
If malefics are in 6th, 8th or 12th house, one is ousted from
his caste. Same is the result when these planets are in the 10th
and 2nd while auspicious rasis are not occupied by benefics.
31Tfl 9l4 9T9: fcfTOlJcRR: II 19 II
Should the lord of the 9th be posited in the 12th while the
lords of the Moon sign and Lagna are with malefics and combust
in the Sun, the person will damage the fame of his dynasty and
will lose his wife and sons.
4wi4 <7T ^rFTfa-fl 819 1 1 20 II
When angles are occupied by malefics and benefics and the
Moon is aspected by Lagna Lord or alternatively in Saturn’s
Amsa, there is formation of Kulapamsana yoga.
4°i f 4<f4j4 4*1 'Jiiri: II 21 II
The native who has Kulapamsana yoga will be deserted by

CHAPTER 24
his family members, will face accute penury, live in foreign countries, lose his wife and sons, and suffer blemishes galore.
trt: 1 1 22 II
If the lord of the 9th house is in the 2nd or in the 5th along
with the Sim, unaspected by benefics while the 3rd and 6th
are occupied by malefics, one will take to mean professions or
acts.
Should the Moon be in a house of Saturn, while Saturn is in
an angle and Jupiter is in the 12th, the person resorts to begging
as profession.
Notes: The latter two positions may be counted either from
the Moon or the Lagna.
The position referred in the sloka can be for example thus:
Moon in the Aquarius, Saturn in Leo and Jupiter in Capricorn in
fall.
HitaWl I
If there are malefic planets in the 8th, the 6th and the 12th
counted from the rasi occupied by Lagna Lord, one will leave his
native place. If such houses as reckoned from the rasi occupied
by the Lord of the Moon sign while the 9th is unoccupied by its
own lord, one will leave his native place by selling away his
possessions and because of blemishes of his own.
f^T%sfq n 25 II
Should Mercury, Jupiter (Moon) and Venus be in their inimical houses or in fall in rasi/amsa, while Saturn is in the Ascendant, one will suffer on account of blemishes of the family (i.e. his
ancestors) and be deprived of wife and sons. The same results
can be indicated by 8th house also.

HORASARA
Notes: As per the second principle, the said benefics should
be in the 8th rasi/amsa which are inimical. These can be in the
8th rasi but different navamsa in fall differently. For example, for
Dhanur lagna, these 3 planets can be in the 8th in Capcer, at the
same time Venus in Virgo navamsa, Jupiter in Capricorn
navamsa and Mercury in Pisces navamsa, aH in debilitation,
while Saturn can possibly rise in Sagittarius.
^ rRT '+>d<H' £ r^: II 26 II
The Sun singly in deep fall can nullify the good effects in the
horoscope, though the other planets may well be in their own,
Moolatrikona and exaltation hosues.
Notes: We give below various other Jataka Bhanga yogas,
which are capable of counter-acting Raja yogas:
(1) Moon in fall in 4th for Leo Lagna
(2) Mars in 28° of Cancer when Cancer rises.
(3) Mercury in 15° Pisces for Virgo Lagna.
(4) Jupiter in Capricorn 5° for Taurus.
(5) Venus in 27° in Virgo for Taurus.
(6) Saturn in 20° of Aries for Pisces.
(7) Lords of 9th, 10th and 11th in fall simultaneously. (This
is not possible for Sagittarius Lagna, Virgo lagna, Capricorn Lagna, and Leo Lagna.)
(8) If four planets are in inimical houses or Neecha
Navamsas, Rajayogas are defunct.
(9) Moon or Lagna not aspected by any planet.
(10) The 10th house without any occupation or aspect.
(11) Malefics in fall and angular.
(12) Benefics combust and non-angular and Rahu in Lagna
receiving Moon’s aspect while malefics are in 3, 6 and 11.
Ulol'flHeM #->14 1 1 27 It
Should the Sun be in Libra Navamsa, inspite of his being in
exaltation in rasi, even an emperor's son will be jettisoned down

CHAPTER 24
to a base position.
Notes: The Sun in Bharani 3rd quarter will cause such a
yoga.
According to Jataka parijata, the Sun as above should be
aspected by malefics. The condition of aspect by malefics is not
laid down by Horasara.
W'-l *11^1 fWcT: I
WS TrarahlHT 1 1 28 II
Should the Sun's position be in Libra 10 degrees, even 1000
Rajayogas are cancelled.
Should Venus be in Virgo navauisa, even an unparallel empire will decline.
ft*#
'dldl
II 30 II
The native, though belonging to a royal family if born at the
fall of a meteor, in Vyatipata, during a roaring thunder, or at tire
sight of comet will live on alms.
Notes: See Jataka Tatwa, principle No. 190.
i «l yiiTHT ^ i
^1^cj,(v|co(|Ph [iirHl e^f-dfedd *[Prfa: n 31 II
Should the Lagna fall in Mercury’s decanate and be aspected
by the Moon from an angle, even a person born in royal
family will become artisan without any doubt, as declared by
the sages.
TTtd II 32 II
Should Venus be in fall or in a navamsa of Saturn and
aspected by Saturn while the Moon and the $un are in the 7th
from Lagna, the native along with his mother serves others.

HOR.ASARA
Notes: Jataka Parijata, ch. 6 slokal3 also describes the above
yoga.
II 33 II
If the Moon is in the navamsa of the Sun and Vice Versa
while both of them are in one rasi, the native will have an
emaciated body.
Notes: The exchange of navamsas between the Sun and
Moon lets down all the Rajayogas in the horosocope and the
native suffers great poverty.
According to the Sun, the Moon, Mars and Saturn occupying
in their order the 8th, 6th, the 2nd and the 12th, loss of eye sight
should be predicted through the strongest of the planets, i.e.
defect concerning such planet's humour will cause loss of eye
sight.
wnfetlti 1 1 35 II
Should malefics be in 9th, 11th, 3rd and 5th unaspected by
benefics damage of hearing should be forecast. One’s teeth will
present unsightly look, if these planets are in the 7th (and not
aspected by benefics).
tll'-HK: 1 1 36 II
The person will be insane if Saturn is in Lagna while Mars is
in the 7th, the 5th or the 9th and Moon is decreasing. The same
results will occur if the Sun is in the 12th from the Moon.
Wdd^Vlri: yft
II 37 II
Should the 4th and the 8th houses from Venus be occupied
by malefics,j without being aspected by or conjoined with

CHAPTER 24
benefics, death of the native's wife shall take place by fire, confinement, poison etc.
qiWTMWFlcT ^
3ir<imV ^ u 38 u
Should be Venus placed in the midst of two bad planets, be
weak and in inimical or neecha amsa, the native's wife will die
for the reasons stated earlier, (i.e. as in sloka 37).
^ Wfl
If Venus is weak and is with the Sun in a trine while the
1st and 7th are occupied (by some planets), the natives will
have a disabled wife, will be sorrowful and addicted to others’
wives.
cf-^iinld^fd: I
^r^d II 40 II
If Saturn is in the ascendant, while the Moon and Venus are
in the setting house, i.e. the 7th house, one will have a barren
wife. Should the 1st, the 12th and 8th be occupied by malefics,
while the Moon is in the 5th house, the native will not have any
children.
eFTfTctRjfc'^'^piT: dyff-d 1 1 4] II
When the lord of the 7th is in the 5th, the native's wife is
destroyed and he will lose his children. Should malefics be in the
ascendant, the 5th, the 8th and the 12th, one's family is destroyed.
<=tWdl V II 42
Should Mercury and Venus be in the 7th house while the
4th house is occupied by a malefic planet and the Moon has
another malefic in her 8th the dynasty of the native is destroyed.
Even Jupiter in the 4th house cannot save one in such a circumstance.

HORASARA
Ml 4(1^ ?Rft RJSTC: I
TTcr>V?“[ «KH^ ^rat <f7W RTfcT 1 1 43 II
Should the lord of the 8th house occupy the 5th, while Lagna
has a malefic planet in it and the 4th has Moon therein, with the
5th lord being weak, there will be no descendancy after the
native.
Notes: In addition to the 5th lord being weak, the following
three conditions should prevail: The lord of the 8th in the 5th, a
malefic in Lagna and the Moon in the 4th house.
Tl 3TTR: FTTc(l
Should the 12th house be occupied by weak Moon or weak
Sun, one will be one-eyed. In case the Sun is in the 7th or the 8th
house, along with a malefic, there will be eye diseases and tooth
decay.
qtf aM ^ti
'‘TSTcq^T: 1 1 45 II
If the 4th and the 5th contain malefics, Jupiter posited in
the 12th while the Moon is in the 6th or the 8th without the
aspect or company of benefics, the native will doubtlessly
become blind.
f'ol+HI^ II 46 II
Should the Moon be on the meridian i.e. on the cusp of the
10th house. Mars be in the 7th house while Saturn is in the 2nd
from the Sun, the native will be disabled and be removed from
his caste. (He may change his religion also.)
■'4-5v MtH(f-c(vt IT 3R3) Wt(l
The native will incur leprosy if the Moon is in the navamsa of
Sagittraius, Capricorn or Pisces. Similar results will have to be
expected if the Lagna navamsa falls in Scorpio, Cancer, Aries or
Taurus and be in the company of a malefic.

CHAPTER 24
^ IT ^J?m: I
sAirv^f'Kt ^ WtTTpfc TF4l^ 1 1 48 II
The native will be affected as far as his private parts are
concerned if the Moon being in the company of aTnalefic, falls in
Cancer or Scorpio navamsa. Should the Moon be in the 4th
navamsa and be conjoined with a malefic planet, there will be
affliction to the native's chest, belly and ears.
TT|TTT^ MlV^rl 3TI
y\-TTI4'. II 49 II
If the Moon is shadowed by Rahu and be in the 12th along
with a malefic, the native will become insane, tend to quarrel or
be irritated.
Note: The combination is that of Moon, Rahu and another
malefic in the 12th from Lagna.
TTFI 'h qi'4f4*lH: gT^ITcJF?: II 50 II
Should Saturn, posited in an angle with strength, aspect the
lord of the Moon sign, the person will be disabled, unlucky and
become an ascetic.
3TTO^5?tcT7RTT: -HlFTIT Jwtfa^ T^:l
#?T fc&flfawl II 51 II
If the four planets, namely: Mars, the Sun, Jupiter and Saturn
be together, avoiding the ascendant, the 4th, the 7th the 10th, the
5th and 9th (i.e. join in the 2nd, the 3rd, the 6th, the 8th, the 11th
or thel2th) the native will be instrumental for the destruction of
his dynasty, will be devoid of wife, sons and money and live in
foreign countries.
»ito 4 eft I

HORASARA
Should one among Jupiter, the Moon and the Sun be in
the Lagna or the 10th while a malefic is in the 12th even
with ordinary brilliance and be aspected by an exceedingly strong Saturn, the native will lead men and obtain a holy
order.
Notes: The aspect of Saturn should be on the planet in the
Lagna or the 10th while a malefic is in the 12th even with ordinary brilliance and be aspected by an exceedingly strong Saturn,
the native will lead men and obtain a holy order.
Notes: The aspect of Saturn should be on the planet in the
Lagna or the 10th house, so that the holy order sustains.
^ tiTTO II 53 II
Should the Moon be in a benefic's rasi or amsa (of Mercury
in particular) and be in aspect to Saturn, who is with
strength, and going towards the meredian in own house or in
exaltation house, the native will become a Sanyasi and be not
happy.
Notes: For example, a Capricorn native with Moon in the
12th in the house of Jupiter and aspected by a strong Saturn
posited in the 10th cusp in Libra will take to ascetism.
afelWTfil:
II 54 II
When the Moon is waxing and is with exemplary strength
and the ascendant lord in aspect to Mars who is devoid of
strength, the native will take to penance, will be grief-stricken, be
devoid of wealth and followers and will obtain his food and
drink with difficulty.
Notes: The strength of the waxing Moon is with reference to
her varga bala etc.

CHAPTER 24
^ qrv^^l
cf? fts^t <*! <g*lfP^IRWfiRR faHm^H. II 55 II
Should the lord of the ascendant join the Sun and aspect the
Moon while Lagna is occupied by Venus or Jupiter and aspected
by a malefic, the native causes destruction to the nobility of his
birth.
Notes: This combination should be interpreted with caution.
The malefic planet aspecting Venus or Jupiter in Lagna should be
exceedingly strong, stronger than the aspected and simultaneously deadly inimical to the sign rising on the horizon. In such
case, the native resorts to ignoble means.
#^^riwral
rfF) yhPjfefft I
TMteR 1 1 56 II
Should Venus be in depression or inimical rasi and amsa, a
malefic planet in a trine and the Lagna without good aspect, the
native will give up his domestic responsibilities, be sagely in
disposition and throughout life will follow others in the matter of
principles (i.e. will not have any of his own).
Ttmj 5^ *WIIP? tlHlR^'rlM 1 1 57 II
The several yogas enumerated as above should be carefully
evaluated along with the planets’ strengths and weakness so that
the good or bad of the Dasa periods are rightly declared.
ffrT <jTl 1 * hif(? J qro l M ^ y 11 Pa f
Thus ends the 24th Chapter entitled "Adverse
combinations for a nativity" in Horasara of
Prithuyasas, son of Varaha Mihira.

CHAPTER 25
aw WUitWtx'iiPi
fjflHWq): WT #TTt^ WFcf ^ qqfacfHJ
w^qH c^whi^j 1 1 l 1 1
The effects of various combinations and Dasas should be
equally applied to both females and males. The effects applicable
to women as denoted by their horoscopes shall be restricted to
them alone if those are of such nature. The rest shall be applicable
to their husbands.
Notes: The general rules of Raja yogas and Ava yogas, longevity, Dasa Bhuktis are equally similar for both men and
women. Some rules like menstruation, carrying a child in the
womb, chastity of mind and physique (hRisui) and such others as
peculiar to women shall be restricted to the fair sex only. The
other common results like livelihood etc. may be interpreted for
men from their wives' natal charts.
^u°q qfiraWq ^<3 ^ifH^ i
^ II 2 II
The female's widowhood should be deduced from the 8th
house. Her husband's luck and happiness are noted from her 7th
house. Her appearance is indicated by her Lagna. Her children
and wealth depend on her 9th house.
Notes: Of the Moon and Lagna, whichever is stronger,
should be based for predictive purposes. A female's beauty,
chastity, etc. are deduced from Lagna or Moon. Some say that
9th house indicates good or bad of the husband.

CHAPTER 25
Tnj JJclT: ^rTlf^TI ^Ml: 1
3*1^ WfcrRl TKt faWJ 113 11
Benefic planets which are strong will produce auspicious
results if they are connected with the said houses. Malefics give
bad effects in such cases. The Bhavas that are not occupied by
their lords should be evaluated in such a manner.
jp# eF^l: wjwqfafan
^MIMipRllel^cll ^iMl'MIiUH^m Mt-mi II 4 II
Should both of the Lagna and the Moon fall in masculine
rasis and masculine amsas, and join malefics, she will have a
male's appearance, be unbecoming and unfit for her husband.
TTHtiyfl Wth)
TWjafWraf jpmT ^ faMMi 115 11
Should both the Lagna and the Moon be in even rasi/amsa
(i.e. female signs and amsas), the girl will possess-a true feminine
disposition. If benefics lend their aspects, or join Lagna/Moon as
above, she will be lucky, chaste and famous.
^rrsziHi
Trimsamsa effects should be declared with reference to the
stronger of the Moon and Lagna. The lord of such trimsamsa
should also be strong.
Notes: The trimsamsas in odd signs are ruled as under:
Mars 5, Saturn 5, Jupiter 8, Mercury 7 and Venus 5. In case of an
even sign: Venus 5, Mercury 7, Jupiter 8, Saturn 5 and Mars 5.
The 30 degree portion is alloted in the above proportion and
order.
HrWPcbbl TpWfall
HI Ml pel 'll ■JUT?) HfeHlMKI-irHJJMI 1 1 7 II
The female born in a sign of Mars and in the trimsamsa of
Mars will give birth to a dead child and will not be of good
qualities. Should the trimsamsa be that of Mercury (in Aries and
Scorpio), she will be cunning, will follow dirty principles and

HORASARA
have few issues.
9ldfiBil '3>-qTi
Should the trimsamsa (in Aries or Scorpio) at birth be that of
Jupiter, she will beget offspring, burdened by expenses galore
and be dear to her partner. Should the said trimsamsa be of
Venus, she will beget daughters and will indulge in secret
(unsanctioned) sexual pleasures.
FfT^Tfar stgfaqi
Being an Arien or Scorpion if born in a trimsamsa of Saturn,
the female will be a servant and be vicious in several ways. The
position of the Sun in trimsamsa in similar manner may also
yield similar results.
Notes: Apart from considering the Lagna and the Moon for
trimsamsa position, the Sun in the various trimsamsas can also
yield similar results. This is what is hinted at in the last line of
this sloka.
Should the birth in a sign of Mercury fall in Mars trimsamsa
area, the female will be addicted to another man. She will have
few issues. And in Mercury's trimsamsa she will be supreme of
the family and if in the trimsamsa of Venus, she will have cattle,
wealth and luxuries.
qfdfyqi
ddldooi cfj ^ oti n 12 n
In the trimsamsa of Jupiter, a female born in a Mercury's sign
will be devoted to her husband exclusively, be dear to him.
If Jupiter is in own house or in exaltation sign, same effects
will prevail. If she is bom in a Mercury's sign, in Saturn's
trimsamsa, she will equal a neuter, will give birth to dead
child (or her children will die) and she will not live with her
husband.

CHAPTER 25
ifo# 3 pm qfreift'Tt froirdii
'Jilcfi^l ^ Vi l <4^ I uHl*! trlW'jRsicll dcm II 13 II
«^ ,J i'wi qfdfy-Mi vnzfti
<T ^fer W<mPk< 1I T9T1J II 14 It
If a sign of Jupiter rules at birth, the female born in the
trimsamsa of Mars, will be a domestic servant, and will be
famous, if in the trimsamsa of Jupiter, she will be very rich and in
Mercury's trimsamsa, she will be adored by all. She will have
sons if the trimsamsa be of Venus. She will also be virtuous and
dear to her husband. The trimsamsa of Saturn will make her
poor, beget daughters and independent at all times.
^hrI «h<nefy«fl Mfd^i i
<+dRdi dii^di^^i^mg^T n 15 ii
wfcrai rpn^r i
7J3# *ihToRt r°K'M<=lfHdl ■SRftrar II 16 II
For birth in a sign of Venus in the trimsamsa of Mars: she
will be wicked, like quarrels, hate her husband, and will have a
bad history. If the trimsamsa is that of Mercury, she will take
pleasure in poetry, arts, singing and playing instruments, will be
beautiful and virtuous. She will be bestowed with husband, sons
and wealth, if the trimsamsa is that of Jupiter. Should the
trimsamsa belong to Venus, she will have all luxuries, be sharp
and dear to all. If the birth is in Saturn's trimsamsa, she wifi
remarry. She will beget dead children or lose children and be
always sick.
^RT3TI 3P3I II 17 II
’HHsMI ~n WfsRl^F!# I
fan 3 } wn ^Tc# II 18 11
^3# Uiplcll 3^zfT UlR^dlfl-fl orf^i
srfttti 1 1 19 11
Now a sign of Saturn at birth. Should the trimsamsa belong
to Mars, she will be a servant, an unchaste woman and will beget
dead children. Mercury's trimsamsa indicates that she will not

HORASARA
be loyal to her husband, be unchaste and cunning. She will be
dear to her husband, lucky and widely famous, if born in
Jupiter's trimsamsa. If bom in the trimsamsa of Venus, she will
be of lordly disposition, be barren and be devoid of good history.
She will take to bad traditions and will be very unlucky if bom in
Saturn's trimsamsa.
4Ni<nl 'M'Hi'i I
*i*fvrfhnl n 20 11
As regards those females born in Leo: In trimsamsa of
Mars-she will be very talkative, unchaste, be in distant places,
and will resemble men in appearance and qualities. In the
trimsamsa of Mercury, she will be devoted of her work but be
not chaste. She will be dear to king, will not have many issues
and be always sick if bom in trimsamsa of Venus. She will be
healthy and poor if Saturn is the ruler of trimsamsa. She will be
liked by the king if bom in Jupiter's trimsamsa.
sftarg## ftTfrrff 11 22 11
srzit yp# ^ jetmi
XP# II 23 II
Now the various trimsamsa in Cancer at birth: She will be
self-willed, sensual and will lose children if the trimsamsa is that
of Mars. The issues and longevity are limited by Jupiter's
trimsamsa. Mercury's trimsamsa will make her an artisan. She
will be either barren or have children dead if it is Venusian
trimsamsa. Saturn's trimsamsa will deprive of her husband and
she will take out her food with difficulty.
faWWel faPdR^dPII: 11 24 II
f^TRTW RPhR^^oII I
The astrologer should predict the effects of trimsamsa as
detailed above. Such trimsamsa effects should be predicted

CHAPTER 25
through the Moon and the Sun or through the Lagna and the
Moon.
Notes: Out of the Moon, Lagna and the Sun, whichever is
stronger, will yield results depending on the trimsamsa occupied.
*TWT:
I! 25 II
One's husband will be wretched if the 7th house is vacant, be
weak if aspected by malefics, but not benefics.
gr ^fntcnsfa tu ^ pMi
P# ^ WIT# II 27 II
# yd!t#H: ft*# P# #r[j
Should Mercury and Saturn be in the 7th house, she will
beget a husband equal to a neuter. She will be barren and unlucky. She will always be away. Should the 7th be a movable rasi
or its lord be in such navamsa, her husband will like to be away
from home and a fixed sign will make him stick to home.
ip# ^ Tfpfjfonstr foramen
ii 28 u
PT f#TT
# WWM TTOT ^f-RTf# II 29 II
Should the Sun be in he 7th, she will be given up by her
husband. Early widowhood is caused by Mars in the 7th. If
Saturn is in the 7th and aspected by malefics, she will remain
unmarried or she will become a widow and go to other men.
3HWM|c)K0-^ faW #^l
Another marriage to a woman is indicated if the 7th house is
occupied by both malefics and benefics. She will become a
widow if both Mars and Saturn are in the 7th house owned by
malefic.

HORASARA
c^rsff Ti#t g u 31 n
trjrf f^pqct ^ ii 32 ii
Should the Sun and Rahu be in the 7th house, the lady will
have many husbands. If a malefic is in the 7th house without
strength and benefic aspect, she will be given up by her husband
and if the said planet be also in depression, she will be inimical to
her husband.
Wt ^ hi ii 33 n
Should there be exchange of navamsas between Mars and
Venus, the female will be secretly addicted to other men. If she
has the Moon in her 7th house simultaneously, her husband also
will be so.
rpTOT faelHtsft Slfrojsrt *KT 1TOI
srafa m aifl T^ril *rrro^ i i 34 1 1
If the Moon and Venus be together in Lagna, belonging to
Mars or Saturn, while the 5th house is occupied by a malefic, the
woman in question will be barren.
in-ci npnl «f[i| ■srr i
^ ■sqrfepfrt^r^sf 5^ 11 35 11
If Mars aspected by Saturn is in the 7th rasi or navamsa or
Saturn aspected by Mars is similarly posited, the female will
have diseased vagina. She will also be unfortunate.
fiPTf 'itatreihT h 1 1 36 II
Should the 7th house be owned and aspected by a benefic
and similarly the 7th navamsa, the female will belong to a supremely classified lot and dear to her husband without any
doubt.
Notes: The writers on erotical science divided the women
into 4 classes. According to Rathi Manjari, they are: Padmini,

CHAPTER 25
Padmagandha, Charukesi and Krisangi. The first two kinds of
women possess soft speech, virtues, and be interested in songs
and dances. The other two kinds of females are said to possess
eyes like the petals of lotus, narrow and sharp nostrils, and big
and elevated pair of breast.
The lady who has a good 7th house will belong to one such
supreme classifications.
arcto wfto to to tort
toto toto to rj|: to: 1137 II
toto Wl'to fto: to: I
totto toto to ttor tot to 1 1 38 1 1
toto toto' aft to to to 1
tu? to u n 4H <to 1 1 40 ll
If the Sun is in own house in the 7th rasi/amsa, the husband
of such a lady will be sensually disposed and soft in speech. The
Moon in similar condition indicates a soft spoken husband who
will be at the disposal of another lady. Mars in such a case gives
a poor husband who is addicted to other women. Mercury in
similar position gives a learned and happy husband. A virtuous
husband who has five sense under control is indicated by Jupiter.
The female gets a lucky and happy husband who has Venus in
similar position. Saturn disposed thus gives an old man and a
dunce as husband, Thus should be guessed about the husband of
the female who has these planets in the 7th.
cHWtlftod to cWFI
to tor toPTf%?FTto to. ii 4i n
Whatever has been said about tire 7th house and the Lagna
should be combined with the various combinations in the horoscopes of the couple and results declared accordingly.
to to 171 tot 1
wsiitoi toito ftotototo n 42 n
If the ascendant is owned by benefic {also means Mercury)

HOR*^SARA
and occupied by the Moon and Venus, the female will be happy
but will hate her husband. She will always be on the move.
TpF# ^ cTR**?t ^*rTnpsTT chci|<^«hl 1 1 43 II
^tlRRF^fPRn ei'-l ^^ftew^3TI
#£f eP^iftfeKRl II 44 II
Should the Moon, and Mercury be in the ascendant, she will
be a supreme person of the race, and will be an exponent of
Vedas. If Venus and Mercury be in the Lagna, she will be lucky
and a supreme person of the race. Should Mercury, the Moon
and Venus be in the Lagna, the female will have abundant comforts and money. Jupiter in the Lagna gives her exceeding
wealth, prosperity and sons.
ou4 freprn^r i
Should a planet in Lagna be in own house or in exaltation
will prove auspicious, though it be malefic in nature.
Notes: According to this sloka, Saturn in Capricorn,
Aquarius or Libra as Ascendants is good. Similarly other
planets.
fhusrar i
ftd^Wlcl^TnTl f^PT ^ II 45 II
Should a malefic be in the 8th, widowhood is caused. An
aspect from another malefic thereto makes it all the more certain.
The dasa of the lord of the navamsa occupied by the lord of the
8th house will surely bring forth widowhood to a female.
TRfPJl *p|: ^
TtraWjl Hfapj 1 1 46 II
3<ni«<ci fajiHdl I
If a benefic planet is in the 8th house, the woman predeceases
her husband. Both the husband and wife quit the world at a time,
if the female has both benefic and malefic in the 8th house. The
strength and weakness of the planets should be wisely understood.

CHAPTER 25
felcl W>5^r|3^5fq eft 1 1 47 II
*Rjrppg4: 771*4 tfsf<ET<?f ^ ^Plfal
Though there be malefics in the 7th or the 8th, a benefic in the
9th in a female's nativity will give her happiness concerning her
husband and issues. She will along with her husband have a long
lease of life.
Should Sagittarius, Cancer or Pisces rise at the birth, the
female will be source of misery to her husband and issues.
^ fosfh T^ll
WtNMl ^ II 49 II
If the Moon is in the 5th house identical with Leo, Scorpio,
Taurus or Virgo, the female will have not many issues. This is
equally true in regard to males also.
Malefics posited in the Lagna, the 7th, the 8th and the 9th
will give only bad results. Should these houses be devoid of
benefics, the female will always be subjected to grievous effects.
Should a malefic be in the 4th, the female will deliver many
times. At the time of giving a girl away in marriage, whatever
ways have been laid earlier, should be consulted.
Notes: A malefic in the 4th will only cause frequent deliveries for the female. How long the children live will depend on the
9th house.
jfa #roicira :
TrsBrffcm: i
Thus ends the 25th Chapter entitled "Stree Jataka" in
Horasara of Prithuyasas, son of Varaha Mihira

CHAPTER 26
3W ^ilfftMehettyUllPl
SHIdHf ^ ^FfTT Wf ^Rfa^l
dPnfHTlHR^iH ^ Ml M
AH the creatures will face death for some reason or other. To
decide the reasons, the several indications are to be known thus:
Note the planet occupying the 8th house. If it is the Sun, the
death is through fire; the Moon-water, Mars-weapon, Mercuryfall, Jupiter-fever, Venus-indigestion and Saturn-hunger. Depending on the 8th house being a movable, fixed or dual sign,
death will be in foreign, own house or while on the move.
The death of a native will be due to so many afflictions as the
planets are many in the 8th house. The planets in the 8th house
from the stronger of Lagna and the Moon are to be considered
(for purpose of death.)
Tjfi fafngj
I 114 II
The death of a native may be expected through the humour
(wind, phlegm or bile) belonging to the 8th house or the navamsa
occupied by the 8th lord.

CHAPTER 26
Should the rasi or navamsa referred to above is Aries, death
will be caused by fever, poison, defects of digestive fire and bile.
The humour causing death will be according to the planet joining
or aspecting.
Wf W# cJT
Hldd<W II 6 II
Should such a rasi/navamsa be the Taurus death will be due
to the three humours, weapons, thirst etc. This is so when the
rasi/navamsa above is not occupied by any planet. If occupied,
the humour of the planet concerned will prevail.
<tr 4>l«!!diyluJltl'|!t]dl^:l
dld^KlfcA^rgrfa II 7 II
Should it be Gemini rasi or navamsa, death v. ,; ll be due to
cough, breathing troubles, diseases generated by heat, colics etc.
Tire rasi or the navamsa of the Moon indicates death due to
rheumatic pains, mental affliction, diarrhoea etc.
Middled di-tlldiq II 8 II
Should the rasi or navamsa be Leo, death will be through
tumour, poison, weapon etc., or fever. Virgo in such case will
cause death through defect in digestive fire or private parts*
disputes or fall.
W: I
*'dWf-dMid^v>i ^ll^ll^dcMf II 9 II
Should it be Libra death will be through the blunders committed by his thoughts, fever, delirium or the effects of the dasa
ruling at that time.
MlW-Jd II 10 II
Should it be Scorpio, death will be due to jaundice, and

HO.RAS.ARA
defective spleen etc. Should it be Sagittarius having a malefic
therein, death will be through a tree, water, weapon, wood etc.
If it is Makara rasi or navamsa, death is due to hit by spear or
while tilling lands or by mental aberration. Should it be conjoined with a malefic death is through wild animals like tiger,
fever, cough, consumption (pulmonary disease) and in unnatural
circumstances i.e. man-made.
Should it be Aquarius rasi or navamsa and be with malefic
death will be through tigers, weapons, snakes etc., and cough,
fever, consumption etc.
Hlfsfll ftRrf It 13 II
Should it be Pisces rasi or amsa, death will be due to snakes,
journey, wind, machinery, collition of a steamer in the midwaters or through the roaring thunders.
-qroRl n 14 ||
Death should normally happen due to dysentry, fever, thirst,
diseases of stomach, poison, lack of continued food, breakage,
and diseases in the body.
3W
7rf?rfo fad*-) <*i^3*raT ftb^i
II 15 II
Should the Moon be in her fateful degrees as mentioned
before identical with Lagna, 12th or 8th, death should be expected through water, machinery etc.
HmfoHm’ l-il^dri sjRTcj II 16 II

CHAPTER 26
If the Moon and the Sun be in Lagna in a common sign (i.e.
Gemini, Virgo, Sagittarius or Pisces) and be conjoined with or
aspected by a malefic planet, the native's life ends surely in the
midst of water.
Nates: Suppose Pisces rises with the Sun and the Moon along
with Rahu, there may be danger through water, like drowning,
being washed away in floods, death in torrential rains etc.
■*.HlP49dHI
urft on 1117 1
If Saturn is in the 4th while the Moon is in the 7th and Mars
in the 10th, death will take place by falling down from a tree or in
a well.
^RPIT f?*pfr II 18 II
If the Moon is in the Aries, Scorpio, Capricorn or Aquarius,
between two malefics and without any aspect from benefics,
death will be by ropes, thunderbolt, weapons, etc. Same result
follows if the Moon is in Virgo.
Should malefics be in the 4th and 10th and benefics in the 8th
or the Lagna, death will be by implement through a spear or
trident or by rheumatic, heart cardiac arrest etc. (SWJd)
Notes: Since malefics are involved in the 4th, diseases like
rheumatic, heart cardiac arrest etc. are indicated.
twfl ^ufoi
fhH cUftfrb*! 11 20 11
Should Saturn be in 12th, 6th, 8th, or the 4th along with the
Moon, the native's end occurs in the sea. Two malefics surrounding the 8th may also bring about such a death.
farR ftu^l II 21 II

HORASARA
If there are malefics in the trines from Lagna or the Moon or
if Rahu is in the 8th, death will be caused by hanging.
?ie^i II 22 II
If the Sun and Rahu are in the ascendant while the Moon is in
the 6th/8th and malefics be in the 12th, death will take place
through poison or weapon.
MlM^n °IT RER
II 23 II
If Rahu is placed in the 4th or the 8th and is aspected by the
Lord of the 8th, or if the 8th is occupied by malefic or aspected by
such a planet, death is indicated by poison, weapon or fire.
MlWil^ cl^Mcl ?^\«('^HlH?' t lrl ^<? tl l: 1 1 24
Death by hanging is indicated if the Sun is in the 7th house
along with Rahu or Ketu while Venus is in the 8th.
rfFIl
~Q: i i 25 it
Should the Lagna lord be in an angle and surrounded by two
malefics while the 8th is tenanted by a planet, death is caused by
one's own anger.
If the Sun is in Lagna while Saturn is in the 5th house and
Mars in the 2nd or the 9th the native's death is caused by a tree,
thunderbolt or a wall.
Death by fall of a log is indicated if decreasing Moon is in
the 8th house, the Sun is in the 4th, Saturn in the 7th, Mars in
the 2nd.

CHAPTER 26
lift TFft facF-K^I
n 28 it
If decreasing Moon is in the 10th house, while Mars is in the
9th, Saturn ascending and the Sun in the 5 th, death will be by fire
or remaining in bondage.
p^i Tftft farenit TOT ll 29 II
Should Mars be in Libra while the Sun is in Aries/Scorpio
and the Moon in one of the rasis of Mars or Saturn, death will
take place amidst filth.
W?U-7<!illgl II 30 II
The death of the native will be through royal displeasure or
one's own weapons if Mars is in the 4th, the Sun in the 7th,
Saturn in the 10th while 8th has some planet in it.
ftft bft 13RKP?:!
If Saturn is in the 2nd or 4th, while the Moon is in the 10th
and Mars in the 7th, death of the native will be caused by worms.
4IXR.Trl WT IPlRTWlMw 1 1 32 II
Should the 4th and 10th contain malefics while the decreasing Moon is in the 8th, 12th or the 6th, the native's end will occur
while he is on journey or through a thunderbolt.
TlflfKR? '+-5, 1
mreiqVdA 1 1 33 11
Should the Sun and Mars be in the 12th the Moon and Rahu
in the 7th, and Jupiter in angle the native will die in a distant
place or in a temple or garden.
atraifknlfffg: ll 34 II

HORASARA
Should the lord of the 8th be in the 8th, identical with a
watery sign or in the 6th, or 12th, the native's death will be
through cruel animals, snakes or falling in a well or while in his
own abode.
fttR 5qW^f#T?t I! 35 II
If Ketu is in the 8th house, while the 8th lord is in an angle,
malefics in the 12th and the Lagna Lord be devoid of strength,
the native's death will be due to his resorting to bad ways.
-3# ftuVcFt famfHKHrWl
frrifr faw) i i 36 1 1
Should the Lagna be in Visha Ghatika Muhurta while the 8th
house has a malefic in it, the death will be through poison, fire or
weapon. The same results can be expected if the 8th Lord is
fateful in degree joining a malefic.
it 37 it
Should Mars and Saturn exchange their rasis or navamsas,
be in fateful degrees (of those signs occupied by them) and be
angular (form Lagna), the native's death will be through sovereign wrath or by being impaled by a spear or some such killing
weapons.
Notes: The exchange of Saturn and Mars can only be (1)
Aquarius-Scorpio or (2) Capricom-Aries so that they can be in
Lagna's angle.
Tjgi) 3=1 Vh
TT^T ^ gj WRJ II 38 II
Should the Moon be in Lagna, the Sun in the 8th without
strength, Jupiter in the 12th while a malefic is in the 4th house.

CHAPTER 26
the native's death will take place following the removal of his
hands and eyes or through weapons by meain elements at night.
tfvJl ^ <K?1 1
^prf fmrf^HJVil: 1 1 39 II
If Mars and Mercury be in the 8th house while the Lagna
Lord is in the rasi or amsa of a benefic planet, the native's death
takes place through flies, venomous reptiles etc.
Should there be many planets in the 4th house while the 8th
lord and ascendant lord are together, the death of the native will
come to pass along with many persons.
Notes: This combination may be found in such cases of
earth-quakes, air/rail accidents which are major in nature, food
poison in public places etc.
vFT^TT^RHi yforA ^ ircfl cm
Wif SrR -cpruf ^ II 41 II
Should the Lagna lord be in the company of 5th and 8th lords
in any rasi, the native will die along with his son. If it is a
combination of Lagna lord, 7th and 8th lords, the native dies
along with his wife.
WK^IMd^ fTUHlft^H 1 1 42 ||
Naturally, if a dasa is at its end, the death will occur in
simple way (i.e. not by cruel or painful means) and the mid of an
untoward planet's dasa the death will be cruel corresponding to
the 8th house.
Tjfir fwfhn^i
The place of death will correspond to the rasi or navamsa of
the 8th lord. According to rasi and amsa the place, whether on
land or in water, and the direction of death should be guessed.

HORASARA
fH^'WfcR'lvfl e# WT ifo R<^Wd fo#l
wifot gfoF# h?# rri#r ii 44 n
If the Lagna is a sign which is strong in nights, death will
come to pass in a night. And day-signs at birth will bring about
the end in day time. If the Lagna is vacant, these results will come
to pass. If, however, there be a planet, the effects relating to that
planet shall also be weighed.
fRi# fopt: n 45 II
The state of unconsciousness preceding one’s death will correspond to the navamsas elapsed (i.e. the period in terms of
navamsas passed in particular natal lagna), if when a benefic is in
the lagna. If the 8th lord is in his own or exaltation rasi or
navamsa, it has to be trebled.
Notes: The person will be unconscious depending on the
reasons for death for a period equal to the time elapsed at birth
in Lagna. If, for example, one is born in Virgo in which 45
minutes have passed, he will be without consciousness for an
equal duration. If the 8th lord is in own rasi or exaltation rasi,
this period is multiplied by 3. And if it be so in both rasi and
amsa charts, the duration will be six-fold.
eF# aTeF#
srrfofo FgU: II 46 It
When the Ascendant lord is in a watery navamsa or watery
sign, the Moon or Venus aspecting tire 4th house and the 8th and
the 12th be occupied by malefics, the native will be killed in the
middle of water, i.e. mid-river etc.
W# for# r! RT RTS#
■RTF RFT^ RRifonT^ R# II 47 II
Should the lord of the Lagna be in the 8th in navamsa or be
combust or even in an enemy’s rasi, one will die in a country
where he has no relatives and in a natural course.
y O C
~ #T# RfofcrfH 1 1 48 II

CHAPTER 26
Note the lord of navamsa occupied by Lagna lord. If the said
navamsa lord be in Lagna in rasi kundali along with the Lagna
lord or aspected by Lagna lord death will occur in a place other
than the one of birth. The lagna and its Lord can also be replaced
with the Moon sign lord in the said combination.
Notes: There are two combinations suggested in the sloka.
Assume Lagna is Taurus and its lord Venus is in the Scorpio
navamsa. If Mars ruling the said amsa be in Taurus, which is the
rasi lagna and be with Venus or be aspected by Venus, the results
mentioned will come to pass. Similarly, assume the Moon is in
Sagittarius rasi, and its lord Jupiter is in Mercury's navamsa i.e.
Virgo or Gemini. Now if the said Mercury is in Sagittarius,
joining Jupiter or aspected by him can bring about identical
event. Another possible interpretation for the 2nd line is that the
lagna lord should aspect the navamsa lord of the Moon sign lord
to which, however, 1 do not subscribe.
nal ftrefa n 50 n
3ft
3ft 4TRm^R: II 51 II
Should the natal lagna be in a house of Jupiter or in such
Vargas, the soul attains heavens. If a rasi of Venus or the rasi of
the Moon be the lagna, the departed soul reaches the Mane's 1
world. If a Rasi of Mars or Leo be the natal Lagna, mortal's world
will receive the soul. Should Ketu ascend, the person goes to
Mrityu Loka, i.e. hell. Should Mercury and his rasi ascend, one
will assume the kind of a brutal animal. Should Saturn or Rahu
ascend or Saturn's rasi be lagna, the person is destined to take
rebirth as a devil etc.
Notes: In these slokas, the rasis of Jupiter, the Moon, Venus,
Mars and the Sun are referred. Ketu's position in lagna is also
..touched. Mercury's position as well as his rasis are discussed. As
far as Rahu is concerned, he is clubbed along with Saturn and
afterwards, the word kshetra i.e. rasi is mentioned. Though the
correct translation is “Saturn's house or Rahu's Lagna...", I have

HOKASARA
put the translation in a different way as done in the appropriate
context, only to have a sensible approach as Rahu has no house of
his own. Moreover, as regards Ketu, the author has been clear.
Of course there are different opinions about the nodes being
additional lords of certain houses. To avoid confusion, the rendering and clarification are placed before the readers who can
make judgement on the issue.
There is another method of ascertaining the status of the
departed soul. If the strongest of the Moon and the Sun be in the
decanate of Jupiter, the departed goes to heavens; in the decanate
of Moon or Venus Pitruloka, that of Sun or Mars, rebirth as
animals etc. and that of Mercury or Saturn, hell.
wft Tl*t:
Should a rasi be without any planet in it or unaspected by
planet, the effects arising out of the ownership of the bhava of the
planet (and the effects due to that planet's nature) will prevail.
Notes: This rule applies to any common circumstance and
not just this chapter alone.
Should Jupiter be at the end of Lagna or if the Sun be in the
Lagna owned by Jupiter, the native will attain final emancipation
i.e. the Lord's Lotus Feet.
HIM
HMffqx chlfrldH. 1 1 54 II
Whatever is stated in astrological works relating to auspicious effects has been stated here (in this work).
#FTt - W P n^ I g t iq : 1 1
Thus ends the 26th chapter entitled "On Death" in Horasara
of Prithuyasas, son of Varaha Mihira.

CHAPTER 27
am
wwwrft ^ ^ It 1 II
T ^T?l T^: I
^ ?f R?^hk<i4i
f^RT^ TEJlft ^mfftJT Y5^ ^ TM m II 3 II
If a querist does not have the knowledge of his birth year,
ayana, ritu, month etc. paksha, day, navamsa, dwadasamsa,
lagna, star and janma rasi, he can gain the information from an
astrologer. The querist should come to the astrologer when the
sky is clear (i.e. cloudless) with dakshina, flowers, fruits etc. and
declare such a purpose. The sky's clarity is a good augury for
prasna. One should not give predictions when there is a state of
cloud in the sky, rain, thunder etc. The offer of flowers etc. are
considered to be good omens.
Notes: One's natal data right from navamsa lagna to the year
and also planetary positions can be ascertained from the planetary chart cast for the time of question relating to such desire.
This is called Nashta Jataka Paddhati. This system has also been
discussed briefly in Varaha Mihira's Brihat Jatakam, my translation of Saravali etc. We have already brought out an exclusive
classic text's translation in English, entitled "Nashta Jatakam"
which the reader may procure from Ranjan Publication, 16,
Ansari Road, New Delhi-110002 (INDIA) for exhaustive information.
^l^-WHlOHIffd WTP4 ^1
rmift frifririiPt n 4 n

HOKASARA
y|«chll: 'W'f^l-cAl yte^fU: ll 5 II
The astrologer should work out the ascendant prevailing for
the time of query (which is called Arudha Lagna or Prasna
Lagna) after evaluating (the sincerity of) the querist and the
omens existing around. From these (i.e. from the chart cast for
the time of query) the birth year, ayana, month, nakshatra and
the rasi can be estimated through several principles.
4)4 j|[<iI -T WR;I
6 ll
Jupiter's navamsa position will correspond to the Arudha
Lagna Navamsa or the Udaya Lagna (strongest of the two) or the
triangles thereof.
Notes: This sloka can better be interpreted thus: The rasi
position of Jupiter will be similar to the navamsa, or triangles
thereof, of the stronger of the two, i.e. Udaya Lagna (the house
that ascended first on that day) or the Prasna Lagna. This is a
more logical interpretation.
'RTOfcl faynvq ^f^rariwi ii 7 n
Cs V
UTrH 3*7:1
All the above details can be guessed as explained below after
an estimation of the querist's age. Should the Prasna Lagna be in
the first half of that rasi, the birth should have been in
Uttarayana, i.e. when the Sun is in northern course. Should it be
the second half, the birth should have been in Dakshinayana, i.e.
during the Sun's southernly course. That is how an astrologer
should tell the querist.
^11 'llstil 71?: II 8 II
^fapf| !!lMel-4tol HT«n: TPTT^: ll 9 II
3 ?krm eni
Tth*) *n3 Jq'XH'J^Mi'^u^istii ^ II 10 ll

CHAPTER 27
S’lfj'W'Jt'fa: ftra^HfcRJ^3T: II 11 II
The Ritu of birth should be understood through the planet in
the Lagna or the decanate lord thereof. The three seasons of
uttarayana are ruled by Saturn, Venus or Mars while in
Dakshinayana the three lords are the Moon, Mercury and Jupiter. Should the Sun be in lagna or the hora or decanate rising at
the time of query, the querist was bom in Greeshma Ritu. This is
true when the same is not aspected by or conjoined with any
other planet. Should the Ritu not suit the Ayana, the Ritus of the
Moon, Mercury and Jupiter should be altered with that of Venus,
Mars and Saturn respectively.
^T'Tr;i ‘‘T^f TO: TO: I
q^Trcroal ^ ii 12 n
Ml¥Wl iT TOHlIiTt T WT:!
o -a
JtoJt WTO1 ^fgTOTOlf?J(T: 113 II
^«wiHI > v^4M‘'l T W:l
3TP: TOm TT: II 14 II
TT: wf ^TO?I
TO TTTO: II 15 II
Should the Prasna Lagna be in the first 5 degrees of the
decanate, the birth should have been in the first month of the
Ritu, if in the second half of the decanate, the birth was in the
second month of the Ritu. If the querist faces the north-east and
touches the right side of the body, the birth was in uttarayana
and if he touches the left side, it is Dakshinayana. The Ritu can be
guessed by the flowers touched in addition to the above. Similarly through the portion of the body touched by the querist, the
Ayana can be guessed. Should he touch the upper portion, it is
uttarayana and the lower portion indicates Dakshinayana. By a
repeated touch, the month can be guessed. If two estimations by
two different methods coincide, then it is only true.
TIlJ vJi-fl'Jildl T II 16 II
If the Prasna Lagna be Scorpio or Aquarius or Virgo or

HOH4SARA
Pisces, Leo or Libra, the birth should have been in the night.
f^T -g II 27 II
If the Prasna Lagna be among Taurus, Cancer, Gemini, Capricorn or Sagittarius, or Ravi Hora, it is a day birth.
Mltfl 31 Wtf^Xl
fcnrsfl -an wsqfe ii 18 n
If Pisces rises in rasi or navamsa at the time of query, the
birth should have been at Sun set, or at a time when day starts
(i.e. Sun rise), or mid-day or midnight.
MM TT?ft swlPeu^ M: 1
gfzM gran f^T n 19 II
The number of degree past in the Prasna Lagna or the degrees traversed by the Moon at the time of query will correspond
to the ghatis passed from Sun rise or Sun set at birth.
^1 II 20 II
The upper portion of the body represents a movable sign, the
middle portion a mixed sign and the lower portion a common
sign.
II 21 II
The Lagna at the birth can be determined according to the
part of the body, viz. head etc. touched by the querist, or based
on the eatables, if brought by the querist, or the appearances that
may be noted at that time or any hue heard at that time.
Notes: If the querist touches his head, the Lagna can be
Aries, foot Pisces etc. If the cry of a bull is heard, the birth can be
in Taurus. Regarding appearances on the scene, if a virgin is
found, it can be Virgo; a couple indicate Gemini; if a pot of water
is found it is Aquarius, and if fish are found, it is Pisces. Similar
decisions may be made befitting other astrological calculations.

CHAPTER 27
'/It'MlV+.dN'l qdIKl 1 T^ ?lct:l
TT-lqR II 22 II
Note the rasi occupied by the strongest planet and its position with reference to Prasna Lagna. So many signs away from
that planet will the natal lagna be.
Notes: For example, Leo rises at the time of query and the
strongest planet Mars is posited in Sagittarius, i.e. 5 signs away
from Leo. The natal lagna will be 5 signs away from Sagittarius,
i.e. in Aries. The distance be better measured in terms of longitudes.
dfo+Vrosiifo gu
graft rWft 1123 II
Possibly, the Prasna Lagna or its triangles can also correspond to natal ascendant or the rasi trom which a planet lends its
aspect to Prasna Lagna can also be natal ascendant. Alternatively
the Rasi owned by the planet in Prasna Lagna may coincide with
Janma Lagna.
gTRrr wiw i
qgjggg 3 ii 24 n
Note the number of rasis between Prasna Lagna and the
Lagna at Sun rise on the day of the query. So many stars counted
from Aswini will be the natal star.
Notes: The counting should be only from Prasna Lagna to
LJdaya Lagna and not vice versa. Suppose the Lagna at query is
Gemini while the Udaya Lagna is Pisces. The difference of rasis is
10. Counted from Aswini, we get Makha (the 10th from Aswini)
as birth star of the native.
ftrer cpiftditi
fu'Hdd: I
II 25 II
Multiply by 2 the difference of rasis between Prasna Lagna
and Udaya Lagna. To this product, add the number denoted by
the ruling asterism at the time of query. Divide the final product
by 27 and the remainder will represent the birth star counted
from Aswini.

HORASARA
Notes: As per the previous example, the difference between
Prasna and Udaya Lagna is 10. This multiply by 2 reveals 20.
Suppose Poorvabhadra rules on the day, which is the 26th star.
Now when 26 is added to 20, we get 46. And 46 divided by 27
leaves a balance of 19. Counted from Aswini, the 19th star is
Moola which is the birth star.
wif tot:
W II 26 II
The Prasna Matras (i.e. the value of the words uttered by the
querist) should be added twice and thrice and be divided by 27.
The remainder counted from Aswini will reveal the natal star.
Notes: The Kerala asans have laid down more than a dozen
methods to ascertain the natal Lagna through the word uttered
by the querist. These can be found in my English translation of
Nashta Jataka.
‘RHT irWfi' A fiFTOT: pg:
Ml: Pg: TO
II 27 II
II 28 II
The rays for the 12 rasis starting from Aries are 9, 8, 14, 8, 11,
9, 6, 7, 5, 10, 8 and 14 respectively. For the planets from the Sun,
these are 20, 18, 12, 14, 8, 18 and 10. Thus, ancient writers say.
Notes: These rays are useful for Nashta Jataka Paddhati and
are peculiar to it.
ariprsRrrPR^ JnftfgfiPTII
The figure denoted by the rays for Prasna Lagna (i.e. the rays
for the said sign) should be multiplied by the figure denoted by
the rays for the planet therein. Divide the product by 12. The
remainder will indicate the Janma rasi counted from Aries. Similar process to Udaya Lagna will yield Nakshatra at birth, when
divided by 27.
ptpp i i 30 ii

CHAPTER 27
If there is no planet in the said rasi, it should be multiplied by
the figure of rays of the planet and the resultant product be
divided by 27. The remainder left thus be treated as nakshatra.
Instead of 27 divide by 12 to get Janma Rasi.
frf^hTRI li 31 II
The figures of the Rasi which is lagna at the time of query
should be added to the planet concerned. The product should be
divided by 27; the remainder indicates birth star, when counted
from Aswini.
Thus ends the 27th chapter entitled "Lost Horoscopy" in
Horasara of Prithuyasas, son of Varaha Mihira
Exclusive Classic ^Translation & Notes
by R. SANTHANAM
IMASHTA JATAKAM
(Lost Horoscopy)
Price: Rs. 60/- only
Copy> available at:
Ranjan Publications
16, Ansari Road, Darya Ganj,
New Delhi-110002 (INDIA)

CHAPTER 28
awrf^Rn^
y?t mRihh ^T: <^<nifM«t>l BFftl
<ri^'Hl«i r iic>RiHi'4l B* 2 !: •wi'rififoi'ilM^'Ji: 111 II
The person born in Aswini nakshatra will be scholarly,
steady, expert, faithful to his duties and an important person of
his family. He will have self-respect and eat little. He will enjoy
high degree of respect and be of medium status.
WM 'Brlftra: WMH1 Brill
Bit BTfFpBBBBt II 2 II
One bom in the asterism of Bharani will have quietly disposed mind. He will be unsteady in thinking, be after women,
dear to his brothers, self-respected, courageous, helpful to
friends, longiived and with less number of sons.
BTBBt srgftc# II 3 II
The person at whose birth the star of Krittika rules will have
no ability to rectify wrong course, will be strong, fickle minded
will have various food stuffs at his disposal and be extremely
brilliant. He will have many dwelling places and be very talkative.

CHAPTER 28
Should Rohini be one's natal constellation, he will have
plenty of hair on the upper portion of the body, will head a folk,
have marks on his back, face and sides, will cheat others, be
ominous to his mother, be wealthy and learned.
R9# fa?TT<rl^ M ^
The person bom in Mrigasira star will be fickleminded,
broad-bodied, sickly, prone to several accidents in boyhood,
enthusiastic, and will have many enemies and miseries.
II 6 II
The native with Ardra as his natal star will have wavering
mind, be a cratfy speaker, and will steal others' money, be selfrespected, will have few sons, be long-lived and will have royal
money,
The native born in Punarvasu will be liberal in giving away
donations, be happy, of good qualities, a dunce, sick and suffer
from thirst. He will be satisfied with small income and be little
wise.
Rap fedRlfl ^ Wd-d*: ^118 11
The native of Pushya nakshatra will be very angrily disposed, be intelligent, bold, talkative, learned in many branches,
be helpful to his relatives, a thief, wealthy and independent.
difdudl c|-»^'+>!m 'flR^ 119 II
The native who has Aslesha as ruling star will be cruel (or of
malefic tendencies), fickleminded, eloquent, will lead men, be
bestowed with wisdom, will have lot of money, have income in
multiple ways, have few sons and be cunning.

horasara
"ifHt fa-fld^flcri: fw^Tl TT 3 ^: fgcl: sK3: I
«r|WR\ qhft ^frcpra) n 10 n
Should Makha be one's birth star, he will be wise, modest
have permanent enemies, be praised by virtuous people, cruel
have many persons to serve him, enjoy luxuries, respect gods
and his father and be very industrious.
The native who has Poorva Phalguni as his natal star will be
an affable speaker, liberal in donations, mean minded (or depressed), be burdened with varied expenses, have obedient servants, be famous, dear to king and will fear war.
^mi't fTRTOR: I
Should Uttara Phalguni be one’s natal asterism, he will be
liked by his wife (or women), fortunate, will lead men, be wise,
have income from the sovereign, many wives, liberal mind, be
luxurious and will talk much.
II 13 II
Should one be born in Hasta, he will be sensually disposed,
clever, good in speaking and be disposed thievishly. He will be
rich and be intent on living in foreign places. He will show
enthusiasm in war, be very expert and will destroy his enemies.
Wit fotfcw'lc+Hi?) faqwilci: HilciJ
rWl) ^ ftTFTH II 14
If Chitra should be one’s natal star, he will like bad women,
be sinful, enthusiastic in several ways, argumentative in nature,
will have luxurious robes, live in foreign countries and be
happy.
II 15 II

CHAPTER 28
One bom in Swati will be mild, happy, compassionate, affable, virtuous, will incur debts, live in foreign places, hatefully
disposed to his relatives, be simple in dress and will have few
sons.
qpft SfTaT: 1
*1 <tlH J ff)<ril5fenFP®l5HI<sll{l II 16 II
Should Visakha be one’s birth star, he will be jealously dis
posed, will utter too much, have sons, wife, money many wisdom and be respecful towards the learned, preceptors, and Brahmins and be liberal in donations. He will suffer from eye-diseases.
fcr^stTffl ^TFIrl II 17 II
The native who has Anuradha as his birth star will be
troubled by hunger and thirst, grievous, kind, virtuous and fortunate. He will wander and live in foreign places.
*§^fa*lNdhf6<Vl FTTcfl
II 18 II
The native of Jyeshta nakshatra will be satisfied, virtuous
have many sons and friends and be quite angrily disposed. He
will be troubled by relatives and be principally placed among his
own family.
^chnfd: until Ttt ii 19 II
One born in Moola will be wise, happy, rich, prone to diseases and be a big thief. He will be fortunate, unsteady in mind,
eldest among co-borns and be a king.
M uIhi-ij
, 4l J fl II 20 II
One born in Poorvashada star will be firm in friendship,
modest, will have many sons, lead men, be intelligent, will consume savoury food, will have pleasure from wife and will be
dear to the king.

HORASARA
3T7% SJ-Whlhf W'P) II 21 II
Should one be born in Uttarashadha star, he will like fun, be
modest, will have many enemies, be distressed, will have distinguished knowledge, will wander, will have many wives and be
kind.
9RMT fa^TSircft SRTfhffi: « I
WFqgi fsnj: ^ n 22 u
The native of Sravana nakshatra will have knowledge of
Vedas (or be proficient in sacred knowledge), will live in foreign
countries, will have an exalted wife, be wealthy and famous, will
have few sons, many enemies, be troubled by several expenses,
be a lord and be happy.
W: ydd'lld^d) hfdMIh II 23 It
One with Dhanishta as birth star will be wealthy, liberal
in donation, courageous, will lose his wife, be happy in
foreign countries, be a liar, be talkative and like dancing and
singing.
hoi) h-iifh'+iJMHel: 1
Wtl mdlfdtd) fbj?-dl ^ II 24 II
The person born in Satabhisha nakshatra will be foulmouthed or garrulous, be a cheat, a dependent, will lose his sons
and brothers, be wealthy and fickleminded. He will be of miserly
disposition, be cunning and will destroy his enemies.
f4lcHld!NHc(!h) pfelt 'iffWT fUWT: I
i§st: 3^ II 25 II
One born in Poorvabhadra will be adulterous, will have no
permanent residence, be difficult to be won over, will enjoy, will
get money from sovereign, base, dutiful and long-lived.
dddi no) fa'HlcRd I
<3®*^ 'd<dl*fpHd) fsoh'Hism 'JiiMri HJd: 1 1 26 II

CHAPTER 28
One bom in Uttarbhadra will be a good speaker, be happy,
will have children and permanent enemies, be virtuous, timid,
greedy and intent upon massing money.
Wlfg: wtl '3TR: wbm I
T=Ffftr WTTJf# Mlc-H^ycTl ^ 1 1 27 II
The native of Revati will enjoy full span of life, be fortunate,
be at the disposal of women, will have selfrespect and pride, will
be spiritful, very courageous and spiteful.
week ■‘refcr n 28
The two Pakshas, viz. Shukla and Krishna Pakshas, will yield
little results while the results obtained from the strength of the
constellations will confer goods on the native should these stars
be aspected by benefic planets, or be in their company, the extent
of good is full.
Notes: It is suggested that there will be insignificant results
when counted from the Paksha at birth, while the efficacy of birth
in a particular asterism will prevail. And the beneficence is
surely greater, if the birth star is well disposed in terms of aspect
or conjunction from and with benefic bodies in the heavens. For
example, one’s birth star being Rohini if aspected by or conjoined
with Mercury, Jupiter or Venus, there will be all round prosperity.
Tpft Frg few ^ifq fejRJ 1 1 29 II
A female bom in the following asterisms shall be avoided:
Aradra, Aslesha, Satabhisha, Pushya, Moola, Chitta, Jyeshta and
Krittika, as they bring about grief to one's brothers, sons etc.
cause death, consumption or quarrel.
Notes: The author suggests that such females will cause the
death of native, his brothers, sons etc. The native who accepts
such a girl will suffer consumption and be involved in quarrel.
The word "Vigraha’’ means also separation. Hence, there may be
separation between the couple.

HORASARA
^ II 30 II
Should the son be of the same asterism of his father, he will
promote the death of his mother. Similarly, sons with the
nakshatras of mothers will cause the death of fathers. Girls in
identical circumstances produce no such effect.
1% ■ftrmft
a y i l <h i ttAn RJ y t : 1 1
Thus ends the 28th Chapter entitled "Qualities of Constellations" in Horasara of Prihuyasas, son of Varaha Mihira.

CHAPTER 29
3W ^mf^ rf^lCFHTf^
srfrrat <2rarafcfl
srraT^Tt riytR'l: fill'll ?IPT1 tTNi^Tjid: I
fij t( 1 rM ( '^raT^T3?CROT: o^Wpqrfl
^T^CT: Jtlil^l|jld^>H IJ i: 4<rhTlf-^t?l 111 . J I
One who has the Moon in Aries will have round eyes, be
liked by people, very fickleminded, will have cows, be troubled
by expenses, will wander, be talkative, will eat not much, walk in
a crooked way, be wise, respected by a gathering, bilious, dear to
women, will have few sons, be angrily disposed, courageous,
eldest among the brothers, miserly, and be troubled by his relatives.
-i^elel Wall
3TT#f[ f'lfH-^ frptl TRl*k J H!W: I
W#Rfei: ^-iliy^c^
nwjR^r ^TcWj# ^Kfydl Tllw^ m 2 n
The native who has the Moon in Taurus will be tall, strong,
will have prominent thighs and face and enjoy pleasures. He
will be happy and wise. He will sit in mountains and caves. He
will be an able orator and know many meanings. He will be
given up by his sons and relatives. He will have many daughters.
He will be disposed to forgive others. From the middle part of
his life, he will be happy till the end. He will like his wife and be
brilliant.

HOJMSARA
cfT y^d'lnTy-4:
^f?£ wrfwji) #nit
?IWtfl ^T3: tttflkl tT§: II
3 II
Should the Moon be in Gemini, the native will look like a
cupid, will have grand face, clear voice, be fickleminded, will be
impotent, or otherwise highly sensual, will have few sons, will be
fond of betting and music, will hate his relatives, be phlegmatic,
windy, self-willed, fond of his wife, liberal in gifts, witty, fond of
eating and drinks and courageous.
i)UT5Tl T2RTSJ f^TJRT
cINldl ^vH:l
iMfet'l ytrsfFK tr): 1 1 4 it
One with the Moon in Cancer will be very intelligent, of good
qualities, superior of his relatives, will be troubled by windy
complaints and fire, be talkative, will possess a strong body, be
steady in quarrels, very strong, will have few issues, many
houses, will be an astrologer, will be fast (in action), happy, will
have declined wealth, will obtain secret sons (i.e. from women
other than his wife), be wise, be never lonely, will have lot to
speak and acquire wealth through kings.
l«i5hl<il *TT: 1 1 - 5 II
The native who has the Moon in Leo will be profound,
exalted, broadfaced, blessed with wisdom, virtues and pleasures, will be cunning, will have lovely appearance, be compassionate, will do his work without fear, will have anger lasting for
a short while, be lean, self-willed, very wealthy, dear to his
mother, stubborn, stronger than his enemies, be not with his
people, and will have few issues.

CHAFER 29
o
WsHF, + L WfHH' ! |d: ^mRt^qi?tR: I
fyi|i||iinj^ji!{Pud: TcT: 1 1 6 II
One bom with- the Moon in Virgo will be dirty, will have
limited happiness and little wealth, be very intelligent, virtuous,
will hate his relatives, be comfortable, phlegmatic and windy in
temperament, will have more daughters and few sons, will have
beautiful face, will like women, very fickleminded, dear to his
relatives, be wise, long lived, will talk sweetly, be intent on
gathering money, will end his life peacefully and will have an eye
on others' money.
Ernfcm famTet^i
^tl ?ifiM
^Ttsqt 117 II
The native who has the Moon in Libra be virtuous, will have
good qualities, will be broad minded, smilingly disposed, will
have wife, be distressed, expert trader, will like fun, will be wise,
will help his relatives, will have no sons, will not have a stout
body, be rich, will have a name after a god, will like liquid food
and be the last issue of the family.
The native who has the Moon in Scorpio will have honeycoloured eyes, be without preceptors, expert in arguments, longfaced, will indulge in vicious deeds, have peaceless end, be dear
to sovereign, sick in childhood, shortlived, will be unfavourable
to his relatives, be a poet, a religious advocate, strong, will suffer
troubles of blood tubes of the body and be attached to mean
people.

HORASARA
^RT: srqsqfoR; ^MgcT^q: I
fasfe lift'd: WcrfFlt 0 yft 4hfarTr*Trg: Wit TWTO Wl-SP^MM*) dT: 119 It
The native who has the Moon in Sagittarius will be longfaced, beautiful, will have many enemies, will be dark-eyed, will
have profound knowledge of Sastras, be self-controlled, will
have declined wealth, heavy expenses, will not be well-disposed
to his sons, will be highly respected by the leanjed, self-respected, virtuous, greatly strong, very long-lived, miser and will
not have wife and sons.
frpi: SRPTSJfrft
Trl#E| ^RtfSd: I
FrolT^il f°RfcRT iH^T: Tifafr:
d^fad^hlf^ hsFwT: II 10
Should Capricorn be having one's natal Moon he will be
short-statured, expert, very valorous, will have no wealth in the
middle part of his life, will be wanderer, will move for long
distances, be fickleminded, be subjected to calamities and
troubles, be greatly satwic in disposition, dear to people, have
defective organs related to the five senses (viz. touch, taste,
smell, sight and hearing), attached to women, will be troubled
by his sons, be rheumatic and will have the affection of older
ladies.
Ararat TT®) I
MidUIrMI ?T 3 :
•*l4l omvIhRi: ec|<t>4cR-l: dehl) TO^P-dd: 1111 II
One born with the Moon in Aquarius will have long body,
will have an appearance resembling the pot, will do sinful acts
covertly, will be talkative, will have many sons, be happy, will
not have any ancestral property, be a wanderer, be hated by the
virtuous, ha- deaf, will suffer cardiac diseases, be lazy and sensual, will be mentally deranged, will be inviting troubles through
his own acts and speeches and will have others’ money.

CHAPTER 29
TFft Ararat trt
Wl^dl tfUl 'y'HlH^Nrl: I
faM l # 44<K4 l -jM *rft Mlnlr^d: F^FRl
r^fHriidl'idfHHJjil II 12
One born with the Moon in Pisces, will be beautiful, strongspirited in speech, sick, will live in foreign places, win women,
and will have many wives.
wgfojfef^Ffi <ifeiwry'ffiray i >T
ii^Vteiui^ wfwrar: w ^ 1 1 13 11
The effects of the Janma Rasis will be as above when there is
no aspect or conjunction of any other planet. Should a planet
aspect or join the Janma Rasi, then the results peculiar to that
planet will come to pass.
Notes: If the Moon is conjunct another planet, the latter
changes the meaning of the combination to a great extent. For
example if the Moon and Saturn are together, the native aptly fits
Saturn. Should Jupiter join the Moon, the native reveals the
influence of Jupiter. Adverse Saturn gives foolhardiness while
well placed Saturn makes one phylosophical. Similarly good
Jupiter gives wisdom, inclination to justice etc. and if he is adverse these are opposite. Then the aspecting planet, apart from
showing its own influence will also reveal the qualities of its
dispositor.
T rifryite n miq
Thus ends of 29th Chapter entitled "Results of Moon Signs
at Birth" in Horasara of Prithuyasas son of Varaha Mihira

CHAPTER 30
Rfrllimui:
aw tora>i?fteiiPt
«£«3t 'sfltl 5 ^TFcTRItT:
ftnnrffcTt wfr ^Rcr nj?: n l n
5P5[$I Tssrtft ^Ntefcl
Wife f^l^nsfaim II 2 II
The native whose Lagna falls in Aries Navamsa will be mischievous, man, will be weak sighted, unpeaceful, bilious in temperament, and sensuously disposed. Birth in Aries Amsa will
confer malefic results or diseases in the 12th, 2th, 50th or 65th
year of age.
Notes: In my English edition of JVashta ] a taka, I have given
the effects of births in Navamsas for each of the 12 rasis. The
reader may refer to the said work accordingly, and understand
the 108 navamsas.
As regards birth in various navamsas, Prithuyasas reveals
interesting information. For example, he says that one born in
Aries navamsa will have diseases in 2th, 25th, 50th or 65th year
of age. In this way critical or adverse years are noted for all the 12
navamsa rasis. We can safely infer that if malefic dasa bhukti
rules simultaneously in those years, the effects mentioned will be
pronounced.
Tfafeqt II 3 II
5lM ^ chf ctT feUkkill
rnR?l$i}'i^ci «fr ii 4 ii

CHAPTER 30
The native with Taurus navamsa will be wise, will enjoy
pleasures, and will have a big stomach. He will be strong, longfaced, will walk awkwardly, will have moving eye-balls (from
one side to the other) and will possess many daughters. Difficulties and diseases can be expected in the 22nd, 10th, 23rd and the
72nd year of age.
^rjrqt WdNI
^ RmfUd^l
fafaMcj cIT 116 II
Should the birth be in Gemini navamsa, one will be brilliant
in appearance, eloquent, fickleminded, proficient in Sastras, will
enjoy pleasures, be modest, be unsteady about women, very
intelligent and will have no wife. Death can be expected in either
the 16th year or the 24th, 34th, 63rd or the 40th year.
slfcft I
e=M-i)fsW: 'fri'l’k'*#?) ^ 117
The native of the Cancer navamsa will be angrily disposed,
will have grotesque body, be wealthy, will possess crooked sight,
will be intent on living in foreign countries, will help his relatives
and be emotionally influenced by his own men. Death can be
expected in either the 18th, 22nd, 21st, 72nd or 80th year.
r<^if+*ldhfrfOr-fi eii«hu43i: I
3R33TT Iwiff -Jpicf 119 II
fo|'v)s<^ fWf M fwy+, I
q^ridWictiifW UURtX 11 10 11
The native who has Leo navamsa at birth will live in a
manless zone, be very self-respected, will have thin belly, will
have knowledge of everything in the world, will have weak
teeth, be strong and will be aggrieved. Mentionable evils should
be expected in the 20th year, 10th year, 30th year or the 60th year
of age.

HORASARA
sll^ +K3l <*<<rll jit -J)KISe t l4K e fl'l ThT 7 !: I
NLw4h! ^Tdl -wti II 1] II
wzri fsr?t <i4 tts^ wr4l
^tr 14 hlHVHK *1^3?: II 12 ii
One born in Virgo amsa wili be happy in his boyhood, will
have knowledge of arts, be impotent, thievish, have few sons, be
fortunate, attached to others’ works, iiberal and intent on living
in foreign places. There will be doubt about life in his 60th year,
or 20th year or the 5th year. He will, however, live upto 1 08, with
progressing wealth.
HlfrlHTdrT I
^TTcT: II 13 II
^ifa^l fep'l il^fel'i I
^ rcwHKsfre fctfdRiTid n 14 n
The native of Libra navamsa will like to move from one place
to the other, will have an emaciated body, will not have many
sons, be a miser, will hate his relatives, suffer from phlegmatic
diseases, and be poor. Evils shall occur in his 3rd year, 23rd year,
46th year, 27th year, 38th year and 76th year of age.
fkt4l 4hl4t sFT: I
tr^3TOHt 4t4t cWtidR ^raf^r II 15 II
Thrift if #i: n lo 1 1
One born in Scorpio navamsa will not have his elders, be
mischievous, wise, weak sighted, cruel, will indulge in sinful acts
secretly, long-bodied and round bellied. His 18th, 23rd, 8th, 13th,
70th or the 55th year will be doubtful about longevity.
WrfSidhdt 'pi I <441 I
trTTftrcfp n 17 u
Wmc^' 4'IMVlftl rW Jjlfpiprl HftdrtA II 18 II
One born with Sagittarius navamsa, will have self-earned
money, be virtuous, long-necked, lazy and be satisfied with any-

CHAPTER 30
thing small. He will have a big nose, will talk much, and be lord
of wealth. There will be danger to his life or sickness in his 16th,
9th, 4th, 36th or 72nd year of age.
Wl?) II 19 II
iichhlerf) 'si"] I
orBf tt# w?t n 20 n
Tlie native of Capricorn navamsa will be short bodied,
fickleminded, mischievous, less bold, unfortunate in regard to
wife and enjoy greatly. His 19th, 27th, 34th, 49th and 66th years
of age will bring diseases. So have said the sages.
fo?pl TITMbt! TRJTsft I
^flcl: Hlljjllsft II 21 II
^ sif^i^ iFiti^i
TTTFt: tHkWlfaj 1 1 22 II
One born in Aquarius amsa will be slanderous, not kind,
cunning, weak, long-bodied, a wanderer, always troubled by
expenses, and mentally depressed. At the age of 14, 20, 28, 32, 61
or 7, there will be doubt about his life.
kiMH: ^FTT^T 5T#^t fagHJ
Tqnj^rrft 1## || 23
■v(IH sHTRfl
-^wqr' ^inyORdH. II 24 II
The native of Pisces navamsa will be after women, will have
an emaciated body, will live through water (i.e. profession related to water), will be fish-bellied, scholarly and will live in
others' houses. He will be wealthy and possess many wives.
Death can be expected in his 10th, 12th, 21st, 52nd or the 61st
year of age.
i]*H M fvglHkl TTT I
Wl-Min ^?TWFWrf=fT f? 1 1 25 II
•o -o
According to sages, normally the 59th year, 32nd year and
the 8th year shall bring evils to a native.

HORASARA
Notes: This applies to general context, apart from what has
been stated earlier for the 12 navamsas.
■RTtrf 1 1 26 II
During the sub-period of a malefic planet, if it be also in an
evil rasi, death or serious disease should be predicted.
ii 27 n
Whatever results have been attributed to birth in various
rasis, shall equally apply to dwadasamsa also. Should a planet be
in Vargothama navamsa, happy and two-fold results are revealed.
jfit ifrrmft atv i vlWt i m i d l fkiyi : 1 1
Thus ends the 30th Chapter entitled "Effects of Birth
in the several Amsas" in Horasara of Prithuyasas,
son of Varaha Mihira.

CHAPTER 31
): HPT f^r ^rHTT:l
<*)dl: irrPhj’MsRirsi ^f^cnrc^p^nsj^itl^RT fsTT^fcT: WllHH: 111 II
The dasa periods (in the scheme of nakshatra dasa, otherwise
known as Udu Dasa or Vimshottari Dasa) are: 6, 10, 7, 18, 16, 19,
17, 7, and 20 years, respectively for the Sun, Moon, Mars, Rahu,
Jupiter, Saturn, Mercury, Ketu, and Venus. These dasas are
lorded by the planets in the above order, counted from the
Nakshatra Krittika.
■<yn<Wi}bc<V]'9 ^ ^ «wl-t|f*K HTPTTR_ II 2 II
The order of the dasas counts from one's birth star (i.e. the
one occupied by the Moon) or the star in which the Lagna rises at
birth. The ending periods of all the planets will be normally evil.
Notes: Satyacharya also suggests that dasa calculations
should be based on stronger of the two, i.e. Lagna and Moon. If
Lagna is strong, then the opening dasa will be the one indicated
by the asterism in which Lagna falls.
Jataka Parijata., ch. 18, sloka 33 adds two more for consideration of opening dasa: The nakshatra denoted by the name of the
native and the star at the time of query.
Satya's view is better and workable for there may not be a
query always in regard to dasa bhukti nor can the balance of dasa

HORASARA
be known with Janma nakshatra.
During the conclusion of the Dasa of the Sun, Mars, Saturn
and Rahu, there will be diseases, destruction of wealth, disputes
and evil incidents. The native's death can occur during the dasa
of a planet conjoined with a malefic or with the 8th lord.
WT1
The dasa of the particular asterism, which is occupied by a
malefic planet, will bring about sorrow. The extent traversed in
the said star by the said cruel planet will indicate the possible
time.
In the 3 groups of stars, if there is a weak malefic without
benefic's aspect, such dasa will cause death in its end.
Notes: Similar view is found in Jataka Farijata, ch. 18, 5, 26.
TTfwsft «nfa’
Iswsmh^Rt 1 1 6 1 1
In the dasa of a planet occupying rasi sandhi (i.e. the area
where one Rasi ends and the other one starts), there will be
diseases. In the end of the dasa of the planet that heads towards
the 30th degree of the rasi concerned, death will take place.
Note: See sloka 27, ch. 18 of Jataka Parijata.
W5JTftf TPef ^ II 7 II
The portion still to elapse in the janma nakshatra should be
multiplied by the dasa years {as mentioned in sloka 1 of this

CHAPTER V
chapter) and divided by 60. The quotient will indicate the years,
to lapse as yet, in the dasa concerned. Similar calculations should
be made through the remainder to ascertain the months etc.
Notes: Nowadays, the ephemeris give tables of dasa balance,
based on Moon's longitude. Hence no elaborate notes are required in this context.
fl+-Hlr3hH ,J l U-hY-R SVlIUlW-ficI
The dasa effects should be predicted in the same order (from
the balance of Janma dasa obtained as per sloka 17). To obtain the
bhukti period of one planet in the dasa of another, multiply the
figure of years mutually and divide by 120. The bhukti period in
years is revealed. The effects of antardasas, stated earlier, should
be applied.
ma-rfur'-i-H ^ ii io n
The results of Ketu will be like that of Mars while Rahu's
effects will be like Saturn's. The other planets produce even
effects, due to their nature. Thus the good and bad of the dasas
should be understood.
Notes: There is a common practice to straightaway compare
Ketu with Mars and Rahu with Saturn, for any purpose and any
context. This has no scientific approach in it. The present sloka, in
the context of Vimshottari dasa only conveys that Ketu is as
malefic as Mars in dasa effects. Similarly Rahu acts as cruelly as
Saturn can in his dasa. And the rest of the 5 planets have their
own way of acting in a balanced manner.
T3R ;il«l'K y)cKi tTsfal RRT a^iiH I
ifTRT II H II
The effects of the asterisms (i.e. Vimshottari dasa system) is
acceptable to all as stated. After very minutely examining these,
the dasa results should be predicted.

HORASARA
Notes: The words "Nakshatra Jatakam" relate to horoscope
effects derived through nakshatra dasa or Vimshottari dasa. This
can be observed from the heading given to this chapter and the
contents hereof. Thus Prithuyasas subscribes favourably to
Vimishottari dasa system as against the other dasas in vogue.
nfwt ^ fariMrfH. ii 12 it
Should the Sun in transit reach the sign occupied by the
bhukti lord at birth, the effects will be marked due to the particular dasa.
Notes: By way of an example, assume that one is having
Jupiter dasa, Moon bhukti and that the Moon is in Gemini at
birth. In transit, when the Sun reaches Gemini, the sign occupied
by Moon at birth, the effects due to Guru dasa will be markedly
felt.
cfl rTFRTrSJSjttt
II 13 II
The effects should be calculated from the stronger of the two,
i.e. Moon and Lagna at birth.
Notes: See notes under sloka 2 of this chapter.
Thus ends the 31st Chapter Entitled
“Nakshatra Jataka" in Horasara of Prithuyasas,
son of Varaha Mihira

CHAPTER 32
hmi 4 fo^i ^ ^°if\ ni ii
The astrologer should, in a clean, lonely place, where there is
no movement of people, comfortably be seated and salute his
preceptor, Ganesa and all the nine planets.
44 Mi-siMpd: i
srsT vi^hkIh.. ■mhi^ 1 1 2 1 1
He should maintain silence and have lofty notions. He
should face the Sun god. He should note all the omens as instructed by Siddhasena.
A weapon's hit, quarrel, fall, and cry, or grief are considered
ominous. Astrological calculations made at that time portend
death, separation and loss of wealth.
A snake, a camelion, an alligator, a skull of a naked person
are all evil if sighted. A mention about these will indicate evil and
danger.
MS II

HORASARA
The cry of a lizard on the left, and a sneezing on a side other
than left are indicative of evil. Death is hinted if the sound of a
fox, buffalo or a cow is heard in the nearby area.
TRroqfoR' (ft
°i4s'4i'vy II 6 11
The good and evil results should be judged with the help of
above omens and the queries can be correctly answered within a
limit of 2 years.
The astrologer should calculate the position of the planets,
after knowing the age, month, natal star, ascendant, hora etc. He
should also note the number of days elapsed (on the day of birth,
etc.) since the beginning of Kali Yuga.
Notes: How to use the number of days elapsed from
Kali beginning has been explained by me in the notes given in
chapter 8. Thus we can see the specific need to know the number
of days elapsed from the beginning of yuga upto a particular
day.
'‘ptljRhRcil 118 II
Pitamaha Siddhanta's calculations should be carefully
adopted to know the' slow and fast motions (preceding and
following their retrogressions), retrograde motion, combustion
in the Sun, (heliacal) rising, weather at war etc.
Notes: Varaha Mihira's Pancha Siddhantika deals with
paitamaha Siddhanta in regard to astronomical calculations. The
Siddhantas of Brahmagupta and Bhaskaracharya are improved
versions of Paitamaha Siddhanta. Varaha Mihira, however, does
not accept Pitamaha Siddhanta, but recommends Saura (Savitra)
Siddhanta as more accurate than Paulisa Siddhanta.
fJj-lftq'M l | ijJI<itl<9l , j IJ l I y ft- 1<1> ^ 119 1 1

CHAPTER 32
The astrologer should make calculations regarding the
decanates, navamsa, dwadasamsas, trimsamsas etc. after ascertaining the minutest details mentioned earlier.
WTcTtl ^5: t
3^TTFT vfltMTt: 3JTP1 TFT 'lldJ-Wm II 10 II
The results due to the Sun and Mars will be revealed in the
beginning itself, while Mercury, Jupiter and Saturn, give effects
at the end. The Moon reveals while rising and the effects of
Venus depend on its motion.
dem^ny^iit'ln'ldfol^l^'^ II 11 II
The position of Venus at the time of retrogression, and immediately before and after retrogression is not possible to be
exactly known. The astrologer should correctly work out the
same through the various systems and ascertain the placement of
Venus in the heavens.
5*2 FTZ r^fcMT
sPT7T:l
WT TTil II 12 II
To know the navamsa position of a planet, multiply its
longitude by 9 and divide by 12 and the navamsa position is
revealed.
JtZ: f'V-Ve TsPITt SKTPjfrTTT: TfT: I
Mui'Flgdlcirilnel TRTfTTFW; TfUT II 13 II
The longitude of a planet should be multiplied by 12. Add to
the product the longitude of the planet and divide by 12. The
process will reveal the rasi, Amsa sphutas of the planet.
Notes: In other words, the longitude should be multiplied by
13 and divided by 12. The remainder will only reveal the original
product. The purpose of this sloka is not thus clear. There can be
some omission possibly in the original sloka.
hmrrt i
•srrot frwrira n 14 n

HORASARA
^JsFSnfrfSgf'TTtT wRi
ti cpfo? trq'rcy ii 15
To the Moon's position, add one eleventh of the Sun's longitude and one fourth for other planets. If Venus and Mercury are
combust, or are rising after heliacal setting or are retrograde,
then addition or subtraction should be made by doubling the
Sun's longitude and not otherwise.
faure* Tercet
WT tqiM II 16 II
The Sun god should be worshipped by offering red flowers,
akshata and sandal with folded hands, and then the planets
should be worshipped. The querist, after doing so, shall honour
the astrologer according to his capacity.
(The querist should say): I want to ascertain the span of my
life, the past, the future and the present, the auspicious and
inauspicious events. I want to hear all these through your mercy.
*fT<TCfe<rl ^ IPS: II 18 II
The astrologer should begin in a good muhurta when the
Moon and her nakshatra are beneficially disposed and give a’
written account to the querist of his longevity etc.
Notes: Predictions should be made when the 2nd house at
that time is well-disposed. Jupiter shall be free from afflictions.
There should not be rains, dark clouds, eclipse, thunder etc.
Neither the consultor nor the astrologer should be confused at
that time and both should be of a happy disposition.
yu!!*k: I
^Tit: II 19 II
The rasi mandala (i e. the firmaments), the planets, and their
movements are well effective. The astrologer and the kala
purusha shall be duly presented.

CHAPTER 32
f? jfrfwwqc^
^ ^ H ^3^: ftfKffiT II 20 II
The entire work is constructed by me after studying the
several sastras of the ancestors. The essence has been abridged be
anything inconsistent, the noble may forgive me.
srtwrfs^TT
?nwmif ¥gf^ra : ii 21 11
Just as the Moon was taken out of the Milk ocean by churning with the Mandara mountain, I have produced this essence
after riddling the ocean of astrology.
Notes: At the time when the gods and demons churned the
Milk ocean, with the divine snake Vasukhi around the mountain
of Mandara in their mission to produce nectar to overcome
death, came out from the ocean were. Sri Maha Lakshmi, the
Moon, Kamadhenu, Kalpavriksha etc. Similarly our author after
churning the works of the great sages and his ancestors like
Satya, VARAHAMIHIRA etc. could compile the present work
HORASARA.
Just as Sri Maha Lakshmi (goddess of wealth), Kamadhenu
(the celestial cow that fulfills ail desires) and Kalpa Vriksha (the
celestial tree that fulfills all desires), may the science of astrology,
churned from various sources, be useful to the mankind in procuring wealth and leading a happy and virtuous life.
|frt s f tat 1 3 f~u fa tftg fr gltmA
Thus ends the 32nd Chapter entitled "Jataka
Lakshanas" in Horasara of Prithuyasas,
son of Varaha Mihira.
