READABLE DATASET
================================================================================
Original file: jaimini_sutras_b_suryanarain_rao_1949.json
Dataset number: 142 of 455
Format: valid JSON
Structure: Object / structured dataset
Original size: 269,824 bytes
Top-level fields: 11
Title: Jaimini Sutras - B Suryanarain Rao 1949
Creator: —
Date: —
Description: —

CONTENT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
METADATA AND OTHER FIELDS
  • title: Jaimini Sutras - B Suryanarain Rao 1949
  • creator: —
  • date: —
  • description: —
  • subject: —
  • identifier: —
  • source_folder: Sarvartha Chintamani XML
  • total_pages: 219
  • total_words: 47033
  • text_quality:
    • ocr_word_validity_score: 0.919
    • quality_tier: good
    • note: —

FULL TEXT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SRI
JAIMINISUTRAS
ENGLISH TRANSLATION
with
FULL NOTES AND ORIGINAL TEXTS IN SANSCRIT
AND TRANSLITERATION
By
Prof. B SURYANARAIN RAO. b.a., m.r.a.s., f.r.h.s..
Member of the Medico Lsgil Society of New York, Member
of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, Diplomei Bio-Chemist,
Author of the Never-To Be Forgotten Empire;
Haider Ali or Sultan of Mysore; The Astrological Self-Instructor; Astrological Mirror;
Astrological Primer ; Karma and Chemistry ; An Introduction to the
Study of Astrology in the
Light of Modern Sciences ;
English Translator of
Sarvarthachintam&ni
•- Brihat Jataka;
etc., etc.,
REVISED AND EDITED BY HIS GRANDSON
B* V. RAMAN,D.SC.» F.R.A.S..M.BAS
Editor, The Astrological Magtygl
THIRD E DITTO
All Bights Reserve L
RAMAN PUBLICATlIl
BANGALORE-# 5
Price per copy l ^ ip ostage Extra
Rit, 6 or Sh 12 J l

foreword
BY
B. V. RAM AN, d sc., f.r a.s., m.ra.s..
Editor , Tfo 4siro/^aea2 Magazine
I have the pleasure to present herewith the third and
revised edition of the English Translation of JA1MINISUTfiAS by my revered grandfather late Professor B. Suryanarain Rao.
Jaimini is held in very great esteem throughout India
not only for his philosophical aphorisms but for his astrologi -
cal writings also* hr iv
JAIMINI SUTRAS as presented in these pages deals
with a system of astrology that has no parallel in the
existing methods. The Sutras are hard nuts to crack and
Professor Rao has tried his almost to explain the aphorisms
as clearly and convincingly as possible.
I have not interfered with either' the translation or the
cotes as given by Prof. Rao for fear of affecting the sense #
I have however added my own remarks by way of annota.
tions wherever I felt that an aphorism or aphorisms required
further elucidation.
Professor Rao is the only scholar in India to have
attempted an English Translation of Jaimini. Therefore
the cultured public should feel grateful to him for having
enabled them to have access to a system of astrological
literature which is unique in its own way. My own public,
cation STUDIES IN JAIMINI ASTROLOGY is under preparation and it deals with the Jaimini system in an exhaustiv®
manner.
The Translation herewith presented has been thoroughly
revised by me and it is hoped readers will be J^ighly benefit*
ed by a careful study of hi * book. *
Bangalore.

CONTENTS
PAGES
Preliminary Observations
Geneology of Maharisbis by Vedavyasa — The
intellectual development of Maharisbis by Yoga
— Literature in Sanskrit — Definition of Sutra —
Difficulties in Translation — Perfect development of Sanskrit — Maharishi Jaimini.
Adhyaya 1, Pada 1— (Part I, Chapter I) ... 1 — 39
Meanings of Astrological terms defined — Aspects of Planets and Zodiacal Signs — Differences of Principles in Astrology and their reconciliation. — Necessity for a study of general and
special principles — Pneumonics in Sanskrit Mathematics, — Bad influences and their counteraction — Atmakaraka or Lord of Soul, Kalabrakaraka cr Lord of wife, Naisargikakaraka or
Permanent Lord — Lordships for Rahu and
Kethu— Results of Atmakaraka, Amatyakaraka
or Lord of minister Bhratrukaraka or Lord of
brother, Matrukarcka or Lord of mother,
Putrakaraka or Lcrd of son, Gnatikaraka or
Lord of cousins and Darakaraka or Lord of wife
— Signification of Planets, Rasi, Raii, Dasas or
Periods of Signs and their results — Arudha or
Pada Lagna, "Varnada Lagna, Ghatika Lagna,
Bhava Lagna. Chandra Lagna, Hora La'gna and
their uses.
Adhyaya 1, Pada 2— (Part 1, Chapter II)

JAIM1NISUTRAS
Atmakaraka in different Navamsas— Planets
with Atmakaraka — Gulikakala or Time of the
Son of Saturn— Lordships of Planets over different times m a day Hora Drekkana,Navamsa,
Dwadasamsa and the Thrimsamsa explained as
per Varahamihira— Planets* laspecting Atmakaraka Navamsa in Gulikakala— Effects of
Planets in [various [houses !from 'Karakamsas
and their significations — Kemadruma Yoga.
ADHYAYA 1, PAD A 3— (Part I, Chapter III) ... 86—105
Planets in various houses from Pada Lagna
and their results— Uchcha Graha Samanya —
Combinations for Royalty and Poverty.
Adhyaya 1, Pada 4— (Part I, Chapter IV) ... 105—125
Upapada Lagna and its results — Combinations
for various diseases Children -Death of brothers, sisters — Dumbness, stammering, complexion, religious tendencies, adultery, leadership in
community — 33 croresof Devatas— Nigraha and
Anugraba forms — Mahamantras or good V edic
Secrets— Kshudra Mantras or evil incantation.
Adhyaya 2, PADA 1 — (Part II. Chapter I) ... 125 — 155
Determination of Longevity Combinations for
Long, Middle and -.Short lives— Reconciliation
of “different Lsystems of Longevity— Karakayogas— Kakshya, Hrara or reduction or
degradation— Kakshya Vriddhi or increase —
Dwara Rasi, Dwarababya Rasi and Pakabhoga
Rasia explained — Increase of Life and. averting
death— Viparitas or Perverts *in meaning—

JAlMlNISUTRAb
Karakayogas and Kartariyogas detailed — Three
•kinds of Longevities — Alpayu, Madhyayu and
Purnayu — Explanation and results of Rudra,
Maheswara and Brahma Rasis — Different
kinds of Yogas.
Adhyaya 2, PAD A 2 — (Part II, Chapter II) ... 155—169
Planets causing Death of Mother and Father
in Shoola Dasas — Combinations for deaths due
to the displeasure of Governments — Different
kinds of diseases- Bites of insects and venereal
complaints*
Adhyaya 2, Pada 3 — (Part II, Chapter III) ... 169 — 180
Sthira Dasas, Navamsa Dasas and Prana
Dasas detailod — Combinations for deaths of
uncles, cousins and other relations? in Shoola
Dasas — Explanation of Shoola Dasas or periods.
Adhyaya 2, Pada 4— (Part II, Chapter VI) ... 180—187
Bhoga Rasis, Bhoga Dasas and Paka Dasas —
Combinations for Imprisonments and Deaths in
Purusha and Stri Rasis — Yogardha Dasa,
Drigdasa and Trikona Dasa.
Time of Completion of Translation of this
Work — A short sketch of Prof. B. S. Rao’s life.

PREFACE
The best Indian sciences, religion, philosophy, dramas
literature, politics and epics are the productions cff the
Maharishis. These are intellectual giants like the Himalayan Mountains and all others in the world are pigmies
before them. The why of this may not be known to us, but
the facts are there. Works, therefore, from the brains of
the Maharishis stand unrivalled and they are colossal in
nature. Maharishi Jaimini is a great intellect and his sutras
are very valuable- I make no apology to introduce them to
the public in the simplest, English garb. The sutras will and
have to speak for themselves. They are more than five
thousand years old and valuable to command attention and
respect from all classes of readers, Indian or Foreign. Those
which have stood brilliantly for 5 or 10 thousand years old
without losing their brilliancy are real intellectual gem^ which
everybody should covet to possess. These five thousand years
instead of diminishing their lustre, have added farther brilliancy to the sutras. The commentators have done invaluble
service and all their extensive interpretations and clear arguments, cannot be incorporated or embodied in short notes of
mme. If they are to be assimilated into the real explanations of the sutras, the bulk of the present volume would
inc'easeby ten-fold and cause tremendous discouragement to
the students who would like to pursue th* easiest way, and
learn something o f Jaimini sutras, which have been sealed
letters to the i‘*nglish knowing public. Even the great Sans,
krit scholars find the sutras ba r d nuts to crack and often
they give them up for want of patience* devotion and technical difficulties in the way. I have been only a student in
Astrology and kindred sciences, although I have had 55 years
of study and practice. Astrology is a grand ocean, contain*

IAJMINISUTRAS
ing four hundred thousand stanzas or verses, and require s
certainly centuries for its grasp and comprehension. After
all our brains can take in only a few stanzas from the extensive literature, but for brilliant intellects, a knowledge of the
few fundamental principles, will enable them to grasp the
sciences and make good progress in the course of a few
years. I have done my best in this English Translation,
and 1 leave the readers to judge of my honest labours in
propounding sutraic principles. Within my humble knowledge none of our learned scholars seem to have taken the
troubles or made attempts to translate these aphorisms of
Mahanshi Jaimini and I am proud to say I am the first in
the field of translation to La\e undertaken this difficult task*
Constructive criticisms are always welcome and I shall be
grateful to them who offer such observations. Destructive
criticisms must be treated with supreme contempt. One who
is not an adept in a subject will be a sorry critic. He can be
left alone.

INTRODUCTION
An Introduction to the valuable Jaiminisutras will be an
uncalled for luxury. The profundity and brevity of 'these
sutras have called forth the highest admiration from all
readers during the last fifty centuries. My pen is too
humble to do them justice or bring their majesty before the
public in that dignified form in which the original sutras
stand in Sanskrit. They eloquently speak for their intrinsic
value* To frame short sutras with comprehensive meanings, is not given to ordinary mortals Maharisbis of Arayavartba alone have framed sutras. None else could do themNo one has done them in the world. It requires not only the
command over the Satskrit language but it also requires
consummate scholarship in the Science of Astrology and
kindred subjects to frame sutras. The readers should particularly rekember that Jyothisha in Sanskrit means light and
'the sense which sees and feels the light, It is the clear
vision of the' Vedas. Of the Vedic shadangas this is the most
important. Without the help of Jyotisha, Vedas would be
blind. We want clear Light over all our events, past,
present, and the most desirable future. What other sciences
can pretend or hav e pi etended-to do..fchis service for mankind ?
From where and from what previous states of existence
have we come ? What will be our success and failures in the
present state and where are we going to live after the separation of fee rj from the Deha or the Life from the physical/
structure? What are our thoughts, deeds and aspirations in
this life* and how far do we succeed in our aims and in whafc
manner can we do so? Do the planets influence us and are
we directed under their command ? If not, what have they to
do with us ? How do they exercise their influences over us?
and how can we correctly calculate them - and ~gnide_.-Our

INTRODUCTION TO JAIMINISUTRAS
i*
destinies in their light, averting evils and enhancing good.
Whoare the mCSf famous writers on Astrology, and what
are their pretentions ? Are there any other sciences which
can help us in these directions ?
All these and many more pertinent and relevent questions
are asked, both by believers and non-believers of this science.
Such questions are no doubt very important and are to the
point. I am proud to say that almost all «such relevent or
irrelevent questions on Astrology and remedies prescribed
by Astrology and Dharmasastras, have been clear lv anj
convincingly answered by me in mv Introduction to the Study
o f Astrology tn the Light of Modem Sciences. The Introduction
extends over 78 pages of closely printed matter and I must
refer my readers to that for fuller details and information,
Jaimimsutras have not been translated into English by anybody in India, so far as my knowledge goes. Neither Is it
so very easy to translate sutras into proper English. The
meaning of a small sufcra, sometimes may be developed into
stout printed volume. English language is incapable of
framing sutras and much less for their being translated into
concise and short sentences. In its present form and c onstruction the English language is quite unfit for framin g
sutras. These sutras are profound, scholarly and unique in
their composition and defy all competition. They comprehend
a vast amount of knowledge in the shortest forms possible and
have been framed graciously by Maharishi Jaimini, for the
benefit of the world. He openly says so. In the end of th ese
sutras the author remarks that all that he has written is
quite t rue, as t hese truths have bee n propounded by the stil l
earlier Mahar-shis Pitamaha or Brahma, Vyasa, Parasara *
Vasista, Gtrgt, bnrtgq. bury a, li.iandri,"!? ihaspathi, Sukr*,

INTRODUCTION TO JAIMINISUTRAS
M aharishi has explained the . Astrolo gical principles, wil l
surely ma ke the stud ents masters in this line. ~«~
The sutras beingshort and sweet, can easily be committed
to me morv~ and this is the greatesr~i3'van tgge~'BariSkrit
sutras -possess over other languages in the world. I have
quoted the original sutras in the transliteration system so
that those who know Sanskrit may easily follow the sutras
and my translation ?nd cotes, and correct any mistakes,
which may hare crept into rny translations either through
ignorance or oversight. I h v-* given the original Sanskrit
words and have explained them ir. easy English as I have
understood them. Sanskrit done commands surras . We
have Brabmasutras or Uttara Mimamsa by Vyass, Jaiminisutras or Poorva Mimamsa, Grihyasutras, Vj akaranasutras,
and other sutras on various subjects by Mah.-r.shis. Such
wonderful display of sutras is quite peculiar to Sanskrit
and I have not heard of the existence of such a system of
sutras in any other language m the world.
Those who are better scholars than my t elf in Astrology,
Astronomy, Sanskrit and English may point out my inaccuracies, correct them, for the benefit of the world and thus
earn not only my gratitude but also of the cultured humanity in general* Since this translation is the first of its kind
in the field on Jaiminisutras, I recommend this work to alt
lovers in astrology. Those who do not believe in Astrology,
will do well to read the translation and apply the principl es
to their own h orosc opes and see bow beaut ifully the results,
agree with the positions o f planets. Duty to science and
'literature, requires every sensible mac, who has the good of
humanity at heart, not to neglect any branch of knowledge,
without fair and reasonable trials. We have no reason to

INTRODUCTION TO JAIMINISUTRAS
x\
M^ricbi, Pal&ha, Pulisa, Maya and ether eminent scientists.
The treatment cf the different Bhavas, Easts and Planets
v* ill be found a little confn si ngin the beginning but w ith some
p tience, diligence and practise the peculiarities of his sys tem
teaddy yield themselves to onr comprehension and enable us
to r:ad the full horoscopes in the light in which Jaimini has
explained them for our benefit. He gives various Lagnas,
litre. Lagna, Ghatika Lagna, Upapada Lagna, Varnada
Lagna ;-nd so forth. His Dasas are mostly found ed on Rasis
and Navsjnsas. . The calculations backwards and forwards for
odd and even signs trouble the reader to some extent. The
xtc-nt of Da«as differs from the ordinary conceptions as
explained by the general principles of Astrology. Constellations h -ve not bsen given prominence. Brahma, Rudra and
Va cs a D:-s*s are peculiar in these suiras. While the
laogu'-ge ;s graceful, tre ini. rpretations are taxing, difficult
and stiff. A vast amount of general knowledge is needed for
the proper interpretations and conip'ehension of these sutras,
It is asserted by sc. e that Jaiminisutras extend over 8
* 'p, rprs I have seen only four and ha ve not come across the
est I am cn ICclTruTfor their and by chance Imay have
t> gOid-’nci tc u.ct i tiu. ‘r '■ftre c’d p lac cr private
libraries* I shah translate th or’’ r two Adhyayas at an early
The two Adhyayas, I have now t?anshted, are complete
if, bvetrs-Tve^and wi il BeToupd to be oMfae highest ^ value t o
la e stuc'f Ms ip astrology The masterly way in which the
• * Pro 1 Sur anara:n lino tr ed V. s utmost to secure the other twt
c' terc b 't could not succe ec\ Hot*e\er I am on t v e ’ooli-ouf
and hope to be successful m my attempts I am meorperat ng a
lot of useful .niormation bearing on Jaiminisutras in my forth"
coming be ok Studies in Jatmmi Astrology.

INTRODUCTION TO JAIMINISUTRAS
Maha mhi has explained the . .Aslrak gieal pri nciples, will
surely m ake the students masters in this line.
The sutras being short and sweet, can easily be commi tted
to mem o ry and this is the greatest~~ad vanta ge Sanskrit
sutras ‘possess over other languages in the world. I have
quoted the original sutras in the transliteration system so
that those who know Sanskrit may easily follow the sutras
and my translation sr.d cotes, and correct cny mistakes,
which may have crept into my translations either through
ignorance or oversight. I hv- given the original Sanskrit
words and have explained them ir. easy English as I have
understood them. Sanskrit alcne commands su+r«s . We
have Brahmasutras or Uttara Mimamsa by Vyasa, Jaimini*
sutras or Poorva Mimamsa, Grihyasutras, Yjakaranasutras,
and other sutras on various subjects by Mahur-shis. Such
wonderful display of sutras is quite peculiar to Sanskrit
and I have not heard of the existence of such a system of
sutras in any other language m the world.
Those who are better scholars than myself in Astrology,
Astronomy, Sanskrit and English may point out my inaccu.
racies, correct them, for the benefit of the world and thus
earn not only my gratitude but also of the cultured humanity in general* Since this translation is the first of its kind
in the field on Jaiminisutras, I recommend this work to alt
lovers in astrology. Those who do not believe in Astrology,
will do well to read the translation and apply the princip les
to their own horoscopes' ant T see how beau tifully the results,
agree with the positions o f planets. Duty to science and
literature, requires every sensible man, who has the good of
humanity at heart, not to neglect any branch of knowledge,
without fair and reasonable trials. We have no reason to

INTRODUCTION TO JAIMINISUTRAS
M^ricfci, Palana, Pulisa, Maya and ether eminent scientists.
The treatment cf the different Bhavas, Hasis and Planets
y.il be found a little confo si ngin the beginning bat w ith some
p tience, d'ltgence and practise the peculiarities of his sys tem
isadily yield themselves to onr comprehension and enable ns
to r:ad the full horoscopes in the light in which Jaimini has
explained them for our benefit. He gives various Lagnas,
Ilrra Lagna, Ghatika Lagna, Upapada Lagna, Vaniada
Lagna j-.nd so forth. His Das as are mostly founde d on Rasis
and Nav&aisas. The calculations backwards and forwards for
odd and even signs trouble the reader to some extent. The
t xttnt of Da-as differs from the ordinary conceptions as
explained by the general principles of Astrology. Oonstell -
aMers b ”2 not be en ;n prom in ence. Brahma, Rudra and
Va' :s ma P:- ---s ar- pecu.tar in these sutras. While the
langu' pe is graceful the int. rpretations are taxing, difficult
and stiff. A vast atrunt of general knowledge is needed for
the proper interp'et .Pons and comp-ehension of these sutras.
It is ^ asserted by so., e that Jairricisutras extend over 8
rv~s I have seen nnlv four and have not come across the
est I anur H P ete f ut fer t’ srr anc by chance I may have
to- go jd lucl tc iLc, v t tWi. r '< rre c*d p lac* cr private
libraries* I shah translate th otr r two Adhyayas at an early
The two Adhyayas, I have now translated, are complete!
ttvews^lve* and wi ll Befound to be o* the highesl; " value t oj
tie stud? nts in astrology The masterly way in which the
Pi o' . S'jr anarau Ran tr ed Ms utmost to secure the other twt
c.' - terc bi‘ t coultl not succe ec 1 . Howeier lam on tte ^ook-out
e nd hoc? to be successful in my attempts lam mcorprrat.ng a
lot of useful .formation bearing on Jaiminisutras in my forth*
coming be oh Studies %n Jaimini Astrology.

INTRODUCTION TO JAtMINlSUTRAS
Zt'i
reject any science, without proper study and careful application. There are some persons who say “ I don’t believe in
this or that science .” Reflection shows they are unwise and
entirely wrong. I n the first place t hey do not represent the
sum- total of all knowledge in the w orld. The impo rtance
atta chedTsTheir Ef^ ^y the mselves, isnyS^ustT TTa^e^and
unt enable. I challengeTiTtEere Is" any man in this world
who knows all branches of knowledge or e\ en the A.B.C, of
them. Some scie ntists are more na rrow mind ed and bigoted ^
th an the^claredTngots of religion orjoci ^sus toms. When
the bestahd the most intellectual Mahatishis of India have
not only believed in Astrolcgy, but, have also written
four hundred thousand stanzas on Astrology, will it be un
reasonable to ask the readers to study the science, put it
into practise and then say, what they think about it. To the
sceptics, only one word of advice by me. Learn the element ary princip lesJtlk e your horscopes and of th ose who ar e
d ear and near to you. Bead them in the light of these sutras
and then say honestly what ycu think of this science. A
handful of experience is worth te n cartloadsj^ttieones. ""TF
iW wrong correcTme in the light of experience, you
are wrpng correct yourself like a noble soul. Can I be Jairer
than this in my advice ?
B. SURYANARAIN RAO,
B.A., M R A S ETC*

PRELIMINARY OBSERVATIONS.
T*he name of Maharishi Jatnini is held in high esteemand
reverence among the Sanskrit writers of eminence and
probably he is held only next to Maharshi Vedavyasa. Jai | -
mini is the disciple of Vyasa , and /fesides being a writer
of various treatises and the Epic Jaimini Bharata, he is th®
famous author o fPoorva Mimamsa Sastra , and these ablaphorisms in Astrology called after his name as the /aitntnisutras. The Maharishis, so far as their intelelectual devlopment was concerned, stood altogether on an unique pedastal
unapproacbed by any other authors in the world. They
expended their intellects not by ordinary study, patient labour
and devotion but by the mystic processes of Yoga. Thus
expanding their mental vision by seculiar process still
unknown to the greatest scholars of the present day, they
were able to grasp the causes and effects of the celestial and
terrestrial phenomena with the greatest ease and on a scale
of understai ding and compel ebensi on of facts at which the
present generations, stand surprised and wonde-struck. Take
Maharshi Vt davyasa the great grandson of Vasista, the
grandson of Sakti» the son of Parasara and the father of
Maharshi Shuka who is held in the highest esteem by the
great Raisis themselves for his piety, Brahmaguna, and
unnalloyed purity of life. Vyas has written 18 Putanas including the Mababharata, enclosing the immortal Bhagavadgita,
great Siddhanta after his name on Astronomy, several
works on Astrology and the most profound Brakma&utras *
called Uttara-Mimamsa. This colonial collection of literature
relating to all branches of human knowledge stands as a
monument to the grandeour of his glorious intellect and it will
be a real surprise to the cultured public, if any other name in
the world could be compared to this intellectual giant- In

JAI.MINISUTRAS
be the meaning ; and I can assure my readers that in the
translation of these difficult sutras I have taken the greatest
care to bring out the correct meaning of the Maharishi in his
inimitable work the Jaitnitus-'tras. Everyone cannot compose
a sutra, A sutra, to be a sound one, must have oertain
characteristic features and un’ess these cond'tions are satisfied
they cannot pass muster under the heading of a sutra. In
English, so far as my humble knowledge and practical
experience go, it looks impossible to frame a sutra as the
Sanskrit authors have composed and conceived it. The
defects of languages cannot be set right, by ordinary men
and it is hopeless to make such attempts Jaimini, through
his great sympathy and love for the people, framed these
sutras and they have to be interpreted on certain principles
which the Sanskrit writers have laid down for our guidance
and education. The brievity of a sutra is its distinguishing
feature, and it can easily be committed to memory even by
the ordinary students. Somehow or other, Sanskrit language
seems to have a close affinity to strengthen and improve
memory. Have we ever seen an advocate or a judge who is
able to repeat a few sections of any legal book? Is there any
English knowing person who can repeat a play of Shakespeare
or a few pages of any dictionary? In Sanskrit, Dasopanishads
are easily committed to memory. There are Dwivedis and
Thrivedis who easily c o mmit to memory on e, two and 'three
Vedas and repeat them with an ease which surprises the
hearers. There are many who have committed to memory the
Sanskrit lexicon "Amara M and quote its stanzas offhand
with the greatest ease. Bhagavata* Bharata, Ramayana and
other extensive works are easily committed to memory#
Kavyas and N a takas, Epics and Dramas form no exception*

JAJMINISUTBAS
a vi
Astrological literature, whether it be astronomical calculation or astrological Phalabhaga, has been committed to
memory and I can repeat more than 2 or 3 thousand slokas,.
without any paper or pencil. The discussion of the learned
Brahmin Pandits, is a source of grear delight to the audience
They bring neither books, nor notes, nor papers, nor anr
references when tfey come for great assemblies where theiy
knowledge in the several branches of Sanskrit will be tested
and where they receive due rewards. The greatest Indian
Tundit has hardly anything which deserves the name of a
hardly any thing which deserves the name of a library, where
as the poorest equipped English reader keeps up a decent
library. Are not then the heads of these Pundits mort
valuable than the heads of the greatest English scholars who
have to refer to books for constant renewal of their
memories ?

JAIMINISUTRAS
ENGLISH TRANSLATION
BY
Professor B. SURYANARAIN RAO, b.a„ m»r.a.s.
ADHYAYA 1— Pada 1.
ii n
So. 1. — Upadesam Vyakhyasyamah.
I shall now explain my work for the benefit of
the readers and shall give them proper instructions to
understand the subject,
NOTES
Upadesa means literally bringing one close to the
object and make him understand the truth* Upa samip
disanti cause to sit — taking one 'close to the 'true object
of his search, making him sit there and see clearly wi T t hib
mental vision, the truths of the Science. Ja imini observes
that he will take the subject of Astrology in Phalabhaga or
Predictive portion, introduce the readers and disciples to
the principles of Astrology and make them see the truths
and realise their grandeur by personal experiences. He
expands the subject in h's own inimitable style and tries his
best to put vast quantities of Astrological knowledge in the
fewest possible Aphorisms called the Sutras. This word Upa
occurs in Upanayana as making a man, see the grandeur of
Farabrahma, and Uptmtshad or taking one nearer to God and

jAIMINISUTRAS
Vfasana carrying the same idea’ and making the person see
the object of his search and bring him into closer, cQiitact
with it
w
Su. 2. — Abkipasyatiti rifakani.
The zodiacal signs aspect each other (in their
front).
St'. 3.— Parsioabhe cha.
Excepting the next zodiacal signs to them.
crisis* I)
Su. 4 — Thannishiliascha tadvai •
Those planets which occupv such signs will
also aspect the planets found in such houses.
NOTLS
Unless easy explanations are offered and illustrations are
given the meanings of these Sanskrit Sutras will not become
Intelligible and convincing to the readers.
The second Sutra can be explained thus* The zodiaca
signs aspect each other which arel in their front. I do cot
exactly understand whufc is meant by the word front. The
commentators who have done invaluable services to humanity by their lucid explanations and the removal cf all
reasonable doubts thus observe: Mesha has Vrischika,
Vrishabha has Thula, Mithuna has Kanya, Kataka has
Kumbha, Simha has Mak«n t Katya has Dhump, Thula hjs
Vrishabha, Vrischika has Mesha, Dhacus has Mena
Mi hate has S nrta. Kmfcbu ha^ KaUka atd Meena ha®

JAIMIXISUTRAS
Mithuna as the signs in froct a“ d aspect them. From the
3rd sutra it is signified that the zodiacal sign next to
Aries, riz., Vrishabha is not aspected, the sign Mithuna is
not aspected by Vrishabha, Kataka is not aspected by
Mithuna, Simha is not aspected by Kataka and so forth.
F ollowing this rule ail the Cha^arasis o r movable signs
a spect all the S'htra rasis or fixed signs excepting t hat
w hich is next to it and all the fix ed signs aspect the movable
si gns excepting that which is next to it. The diubTedoodied
si gns' ’aspect each oth er. In none of the curp&nt astrological
books is mentioned the fact of the aspecting of zodiacal
signs or the planets which are in them in this particular
manner. In the 4th "sufra, reference is made to planets
occupying those bouses, and exercising a=pectai influences
as the houses themselves are said to do. I will give a few
illustrations to exemplifyjfthe above enunciated principles.
*Chcira rasis aspect Sthira
rasis, Sthira rasis aspect
Char a rasis and Dioiswabhava rasis aspect the Dwismadhavas. Mesha is movable and Vrishabha next to it
is fixed. Mesha is said to
aspect the fixed signs except
the one which is next to it.
Mesha aspects the fixed signs*
Simha, Vrischika and Kumbha but not Vrishabha which
is close to it. Vrishabha, a
fixed sign aspects the movable signs Kataka, Thula and
* cf. Vnddha Karika.
sr rw fcrofai R?rr
3*4 R;Tf q
Meena
V esha Vrishabha
Mithuna
Kumbha
Diagram
Kataka
Makara
Simha
Dbanus
Vris- Thula
chika
Kanya

JAIMINISUTRAS
Makora butnctMesha which is close to it. Mithuna, Kanya,
Dhanus and Meena the fourdoubia-bodiedor common houses
a^p^c^eacl^ other, mid th ere j s no difficulty. _ab.Qiit_Jbsjn
Kataka, a movable sign, aspects Vrischika, Kumbha and
Vrithabha, but not Simha which is close to i*. Thula a
movable sign aspects Kumbha, Vrishabha and Simha but
not the fixed sign Vrischika next to it.
Vrischika a fixed sign aspects Makara, Mesha and
Kataka 1 ut not Thula which is close to it. Makara a
movable sign aspects these fixed signs Vrisbabha, Simha and
Vrischika but not Kumbha which is close to it. These
aspects cf Rasis have peculiar influences a nd they are take n
into consideration Tn t^es e JWh7f^is u^s>
According to the above
sutras and the explanations
as understood by me, the following aspects have to be
noted in the example marginally given, Ravi is in a
movable sign and does not
aspect Budha but aspects
Simha, Vrischika and the
planet Sani in it and Kumbha and Chandra in it. Budha
aspects Kataka, Thula and
Makara and Kuja who is in
that sign. As per above principles, Rasis asp ect each other
and also the planets in the m. The pl anets aspec t each other
a nd alfothe R asis menti o ned in the Sutras. In > the above
illustration Sukra aspects Kanya with Guru in it, Dhanus
and Meena and Guru aspects, Dhanus, Meena and Mithuna
with Sukra in it. As per general principles in use in astrology, the aspects of planets in the above diagram are thus
Ravi
Budha
Sukra
Chandra
Kuji
Example
| Svni
f
Guru

JAIMINISUTRAS
determined-Budha and Sani aspect each other, Sani aspects
Kuja and Simha, 3rd and 10th . Guru aspects Kuja, Meena
and Budha, the 5th, 7th and 9th, Kuja aspects Mesha with
Ravi in it, Kataka and Simba or the 4thi 7th and 8th houses
and planets in them. Chandra aspects Simba. These are
details which have to be borne in miqd by the readers, who
are anxious to master the technicalities of these Sutras.
Jaimini is very cautious in his statements. He asks his
readers to study the general principles cf astrology, and
along with their applications to the practical side of ; horos*
copes he directs them to remember the general and special
principles which he has explained in his learned work and
make predictions, taking both the influences mentioned in
the general works and also the principles he has explained
with particular f care and on his own responsibility, into
consideration. Ravi and Sani in the diagram according to
ordinary astrology do not aspect each other, but in making
predictions, we have not only to ascribe the gene, al 6th and
8th positions, of the Sun and Saturn from each other but
also the special aspect influences which Jaimini has named
here. For a novice in general astrology, these observations
of the Maharishi may appear quite novel but a little practice of these principles along with those of the general
principles current with the astrologers, will show that there
will be no difficulty and the predictions based on these
combined influences will be found to be more accurate and
to the point. The preliminaries should be carefully studied
and remembered and the readers should put them cautiously
into practice. Theory and practice will make a man
perfect.
K. <R^^nn'?st ft wtg? i t

JA1MINISUTBAS
Su* 5 — DarabJiagyasulasth zrgala nidliyituh.
The fourth, second and eleventh places, (or
planets in them) from the aspecting body, are Arqalas.
5. is
Su. 6.‘~Kam‘isthathu bhuyasa papanam.
Malefics in the third from the aspecting planet
give rise to evil Argala.
©. iVim: m
Su. 7. — Bihpha neecha Jeamastka virodhinah .
Planets in the tenth, twelfth and third from
A rgala cause ob struction to such Argala.
C. ^ ^ ftsBISf II
Su. 8. — Ida nyuna vihalascha.
If planets obstructing argala are fewer or less
powerful t han those causing^ Argala* then the power
ofjhe A rgaja . can not be affectedSu, 9. — Pragvaitri'kone.
The houses or planets in thribonas (5 and 9 )
similarly i nfluence the Argala^
?o. II
Su. 10. Vipareeiam hethoh.
In the case of Kethn the formation of Argala
and obstruction to it must be calculated in the reverse
order.

JAIMINISUTRAS
NOTES
These sutras require elaborate notes as they are
tighly technical in nature. Unless these are properly understood, further progress in Jaiminisutras will become difficult
md doubtful. In Sanskrit Mathematics, pneumonics of a
aeculiar kind are used and these must be properly mastered
In Sutras 22 and 33 of this Padj, Jaimini gives a clue
.o the decipherment of his Sutras. I have to anticipate a
few of the future Sutras here, for the great author himself
does so.
Su. 32. — Sarvatra savarna Bhava Rasayah.
Su. 33. — Ka grahah.
In the indication or designation of the Rasis and the
Uhavas, (Signs and Significations) the author has used, for
the sake of abbreviation vimas or single letters. Butin
the case of planets he has not done so, which means, he has
used the proper names of the planets and not any letters to
indicate them. I shall explain these differences in the
notes below. We have in Sanskrit a sulra called* Ka, Ta ,
Pa , Tadi These are also called the Vargas — Kavarga,
Tavarga, Pavarga and Yavarga, Kaverga contains Kadi
^Though Pr^f B. Survanaratn Rao has -elucidated ’the abbreviations used by Jaimini to imply numerals I propose to make some
observations for the benefit of the reader. The system of pneumonics
employed here is called Katapayadi system T he consonants of
the Sanskrit alphabet have been used m the place of the numbers
1 — 9 and zero to express numbers. There are different variants *of
this system but I shall explain the most commonly accepted method.
(n) and ^ (n) and t he %owels denote zero. The letters m succession beginning with Ka (3*) f Ta {Z) f Pa (*?) and Ya (3f) denote the
d lgits, in a conjoint consonant Kya (3PI) only the last one

JAIM1NISUTRAS
Nava or nine letters commencing from Ka thus Ka , Kha,
Ga t Gha, Jna, Oka, Chha , Ja,\Jha, or nine letters.
Tavarga or Tadinava"*“nine letters beginning .with
Ta — To, Tta, Da , 'Dha, 13a, Tha , Da, D&a, or
the nine letters of Ta verga. Paverga or* Padi Pancha
—five letters commencing ifrom Pa. They are Pa, Pha,
Ba , BAa, five letters. Yaverga yadyashtau or eight
letters from Ya. They are 7a, Ba, La, V a, Ssa, Ska, Sa
and Ba for the 8 letters of 7a verga. After having learnt
these the next sutra in Sanskrit Mathematics is Ankattam
Vdmato gatihi . AH figures in Astronomy* Inscriptions and
Mathematics should be read in the reverse order or as the
Mohammedans read from right to left. The explanations of
the following sutras make these aphorisms easy to understand.
denotes a number. According to this system therefore the letters. —
ka mta (Z)
denotes 1.
kha {^).
tta (3),
pha fU*.
ra (f)
ga (*I).
da (S\.
gha (9).
dha i%).
bha (?). i
nga (5),
na pi).
cha 0?)
tha {?).
sha (?)
chha {3). '
thha (*Ju
dha {*).
it 9.
A right
to left arrangement is
employed
m the formation
chronograms i.e , the letter denoting units figure is first .written,
then follows the letter denoting the tens fignre and so on e,g.,
ra ma
Jaimini divides the figure so obtained by 12 and tabes the remainder
as denoting a particular sign of the zodiac as reckoned from Mesba.

jaiminisutras
Jaimini uses the word A rgala to <mean a sort of ob*
struotiou or impediment for the free, flow of sign or planetary influences. A planet in a certain house from any desired
Bhava or signification or planet , prevents , ox .ob structs the
p rogress of the influen c e and th erebyjimi pishes its value an3
use fulne ss. These five Sutras give explanations abont these
Argala influences and obstructions and they must be carefully
treasured up.
There'are two varieties of Argila : shubha or beneficial,
andjpapj — or malefic.
Dctra contains two Sanskrit le'ters da and ra. Da according to Tacargd given above, represents th^.8th letter in
that group and hsnce stanh for the figure 8, Ra represents
the 2nd letter in the Yaotrga, and hence stands for the digit
2 — thus we have by the word d ara 82.
Reading this by the above mathematical Sutra in the
reverse order we get 28. There are 12 signs or rasis and
when 28 is divided b y 12 , we get 4 as the remainder.
Therefore (pg75"means the fourth house, representing the
Argala from any desired significance or planet Now the
peculiarity is this. Dara in Sanskrit language means wife
and in general astrology, when we say Daraot Darastana ,
we signify the 7th house from Lagna for a male horoscope.
But Dara in Jaimini by the rules he has laid down means
Four and not Seven.
Bhagya. By the letter interpretation process — Bha t is
the fourth in the Pavarga and stands therefore for 4. Qya in
Sanskrit is composed of Ga, and Ya the letter underneath
the former Ga t and in all compound or conjoined letters the
lower letter has to be taken into account and not the upper.
Thus we have here la and it is the first letter in Yavarga

to jaiminisutras
nod stands for 1, We have therefore 41. Reading in the
reverse order we get 14 and this divided by 12 will give us
a remainder of 2. Bhagya — 2, Therefore t he 2nd hous e or
Planet from any given Bhava also becomes an Argala planet,
of obstruction. Sula is composed of Ssa and La. In the
Yavarga, Ssa stands as the fifth letter and represents 5. La
represents ths 3rd letter in Yavarga and therefore stands
for 3. We thus get the figure 53. But reading in the reverse
order we have 35. Divided by 12 we get a remainder of 11
and therefore Sula stands for 11. Thos P— pl a n ets whioh are
in 4, 2/and 11 fron any Planet or Bhava in question or^
under consideration, become classifie d as Argala and obstru ct
their influences.
In Sutra 6 if many evil p’anets, more than two as the
plural is used, are found in Kama or 3rd house, they also
then become Argala. Ka stands as in Kavarga and Ma
stands as 5 in the Pavarga. Therefore we have 15. Reading
in the reverse order wa get 51. Divide this by 12 and we
have the remainder 3. Therefore Kama stands for the 3rd
bouse. Kama in Sanskrit means Cupid, passions, wife and
desires. In the general astrological literature, Kama means
the 7th house representing husband or wife as the horoscope
t»*y belong to % female or a male human being. But by the
interpretation by letters as "directed by the author, it means
the third. As it is stated he re the planets become Ar gala
i n the 3rd only when thereTlvfe"*?^ evil planetgjn
t he 3rd from the questioning planets or Bhava . But suppose
there is only one evil planet in the 3rd house, then by impli*
nation it does not become Argala for the planet or Bhava.
. 1 to Sutra 7, Ripka moans 10* Ra in Yavargq stands for
% tail to the. second totter from Ya and Pha is the second
totter in the Pm/arga and therefore represents 2, putting

JAIMINJSUTRAS tl
together wa get 22. Divide this- by 12 we have a balancse
of 10. Neacha stands for 12. Sa, represents O in -theTavarga as it stands as the 10th from Ta and therefore
represents a cipher. We have only 9 Ankas or digits and
the 10th shows a zero. Cha stands as the 6th letter from
Tavarga and represents 6, putting together we have 06.
Reading in the reverse order we have 60. Divided by 12
there will be no balance, but the author asks the readers to
take always the last balance and when 60 is divided by
12 it goes four times (48) and the last balance is 12. iTherefore Neecha stands for 12. Kama, we have already seen
means 3. Those planets which are in 10, 12 and 3 form an
obstruction to the Argala mentioned in Sutra 5. Here probably the meaning is that the Argala influences, formed
by planets mentioned in Sutra 5, good or bad, are themselves modified or obstructed by the planetary positions
mentioned in this Sutra . Those planets which are in the
5th and 9th or Thrikonas counteract the influences of the
Argala planets as explained before. It has been already
stated that certain planets in certain houses cause Argala
or obstruction and those which are in the 5th and 9th counteract these Argala influences.
Coming to Sutra 8, if fewer planets or powerless or
disabled planets cause obstruction m Sutra 7 to the Argala
generated in Sutrz 5, then they will not affect the power
of that Argala. Here it means that the obstructive Argala
created in Sutra 7, unless the planets are strong, will not be
able to obstruct the Argala influences caused by planetary
positions mentioned in Suit a 5,
Sutra 9 is clear and needs no further explanation. t ,
W4t’n n ref.ere9/:e to Kethu the order, must be re f y.ersgd
(Sutra 10.) The 9jtk froffl?3£Hhp becQipep 3 ftj*(the. fob

1* jAIMINISt3TRA&
from him becomes Pra Ubandhaka^ot^ obstruction. %he
massif Rahu is not mentioned” in the original, but some
commentators are of opinion that the mention jof JKetJbu_is_
enough to include^jRahu- Su l ras are short and certainly
require cleareFexplanabions. Those beneficial planets who
are in Dora Bhiqya 2, and Shuh 11 from JKethn do
pot f orm Argali, The m tlefijs in J3rd and 8th from Kethu
do not form Papxrgala or evil obstruction. Argala seems
to be a sort of force or energy, c mssd by certain positions
of the planets, and this energy may be beneficial or malicious. Power ma\ be good or bad as it is used.
Zn the case of Rahu and Kethu the Argala results
must be calculated in tbe reverse order. From the 11th
Sutra Jaimini gives the rules which will guide the student
In determining the lordship of the various relations and
events, which have to be taken iuto consideration, in the
career of an individual. ■
Su. 11 . — Atmadhikaha /mladibhir nablwgas-
.iapianamashtanamva. /
Of the seven planejs'from the Sun to Sattfrn,
or the eight planets from tbe Sun to Rahu, whichever gets the highest number of degrees becomes the
Atmakaraka.
NOTES
The word Ashtanamva is emphasised because Rahu,
instead of being mixed with other planets, seems to have
been separated for a certain set purpose. The meaning
becomes evident when we refer to Parasara according to
whom also, Rahu fills up the gap — when two planets (of the
Bern) possess the same number of degrees.

JAIMINISUTRAS
* If two or three planets obtain the same Katas or degrees
and minutes, they are all merged into one Earakd or Lordship over some event in the human life* The vacancies caused
by the merges of two or three planets into one have to be
supplied by Rahu in the reverse of order. The other Earaka
will be supplied by the j Naisargika Karakas or permanent
Lords. This is a difficult Sutra and requires some clear
explanations. While all the planets have got movement s
f rom left to right or direct, Kahu ard Ketu move i n
t he reverse order o r from right to left. The first is called the
Savy arn or Pradakshinam 'dextral) and the other is called
fSeApasavya m or A ppradak^hmam (sinisiral). Rahu and^
Kethu have no bouses but, Jaimini gives lordship-of Kumbha
to Rahu and Vrischika to Kethu. They have been given
lordships over some human events. ^Tn any horoscope, the
first duty of an honest astrologer is to find out, the exact
positions of all the planets. This implies a good knowledge
i n Astronomy and astrologico-m athematics. Then the degr ees,
minute s and seconds of t he positions of the pl anet are calculated and placed correctly, then the student will 'be able to
find out which planet has got the highest number of Kalas or
degrees in a horoscope. Whoever has got the highest number
of Kalas, becomes the Alma Enraka. These Karakaiwas or
Lordships, therefore can be acquired according to these
Sutras by any planet. Whereas in Naisargika, Karakas or
permanent lordships are fixed for ever. In Naisargika, the
Karakas or Lordships are thus detailed : —
In Brihat Jataka, Ravi, Chandra, Sani and Sukra are
given different Karakaships : Diva arkasukrow pitru , matru
soungnitou. This means that persons born during the day
have the Sun and Venus as lords of the father and mother

JAIMINISUTRAS
respectively. Sanaischa rendu nisi tadvifiaryayaf. For persons
bora during the nights, Sani becomes Matrukaraka and Indu
or Chandra becomes the lord of father. I have simply drawn
the attention of the readers to the various versions given by
the different authors Here we may have pitrukzraka (l)
Ravi in the tfaisnrjibi 'method, (2) Chandra as Pttrnkardka
for those who are born in the night and (3) any planet out of
the nine who gets or contains the largest number of degrees
in a horoscope. Then the question arises as to how a student
has to be guided in determining the prosperity and adversity of
a person's father. Suppose in the Jaimini system Sani becomes
piiruktrjka ; Chandra becomes Pitrnkarakz by the direction
of Brihat Jataka and by the general or Niisargika system
Ravi becomes the Pitruktraka. These three planets, viz.,
Ravi, t handra and Sani are thoroughly different in characteristics and these -variations, expounded by the learned in
Astrology, instead of helping a student in the progress of the
studies will confound him and launch him into greater doubts
and confusion. When different systems, apparently contradictory, ate enunciated by eminent Maharishis the wisest
thing would be, in my humble opinion and experience, to take
all of them into careful consideration, add'his own experience,
judge all of them with a diligent eye and make a harmonious
whole so that all of them 'may prove successful and satisfactory. Take half a dozen medical experts in remote corners of
the world. They experiment and hit upon certain herbs or
roots as efficacious for certain diseases. Each one succeeds
with a certain class, and thinks they may prove useful. If all
of them have succeeded and the results of their experiments
satisfactory, then a wise physician, carefully notes the char-
‘ aptenshics of such of these drugs and roots and he may
’ stfcceed even befterthan lan^ che'tif ; the / origln'aT'e'xp ( ePitf4i-

JAIMINISUTRAS 1 £
tors, by a judicious use of them suitable to times and con*
ditions of life. Maharishis, by their expanded vision, watched
and recorded their experiences from different mental visions,
and gave principles in all such sciences, which, though con*
tradictory on the surf .ce, will be found to be agreeable on a
deeper analysis. Different systems have mentioned different
periods for death and other important events of human life.
Bhattotpala, the great commentator of Varahamihira’s works,
hits on a nice system of reconciliation and I refer my readers
for clearer explanations on my notes to Dasantardasa chapter
in Brihat /at aka. A man may live up to 70 or SO years
and may have passed through various critical conditions.
He will be killed in the period of the siiongest death inflicting
planet and have critical dangers during other evil periods.
Take the longevity question. We have the CJdu Dasa
or length of life measured by the planets according to the
constellations ruling at birth. We have secondly Kalachakra
Dasas and the longevity given by them. Third, we have the
Graha Datta pindayuryogi or the term of life given by all
the planets to the Foetus at the time of conception. Fourth,
we have the Amsayurdaya recommended by Satyacharya
and followed by Varahamihira. Fifth, we have the longevity
determined by the Gochara movements of the planets. Sixth,
the longevity as determined by the Kendra Ayurdaya.
Seventh, we have the Dasantur Dasa Ayurdaya. Then,
eighthly, we have the Astakaverga Bmiusodkana Ayurdaya .
These eight systems certainly give divergent views and different terms. If so, what should the astrological student do
when all the eight systems give eight different periods.
Bhattotpala, than whom we have not seen a more learned
commentator on astrological works in recent times, reconciles
these different systems in the following manner : say a person

m JAIMINISUTRAS
lives for 60 years and gets various periods of longevity from
3' years to 50 years. The suggestion of Bhattotpala stands
to reason. Suppose the eight systems give the following
terms of life— 3, 10, 15, 20, 27, 35, 40 and 50, we are asked
to prescribe the longest term obtained as the longevity, and
fee terms indicated by the other systems will be periods in
tfee life of the person which will be very critical and during
Which he will suffer from severe diseases, dangers or accidents,
bat he will manage to get * over them and live up to the
longest term, viz., 50 years as shown by one of those isyg^jfigsi
Jaiminisutras offer the same explanations. In the typlfl
case of Sani, Chandra and Ravi, representing a father in the
case of a single person, then the age and prosperity of the
father will be determined by the most powerful among them.
It may also happen that by the three systems, Ravi may
heoome the lord of father. Then he will live longer and be
more prosperous and happy.
The merging of two or three planets into one karaka has
to be fully explained. Unless I give some illustration, the
readers will not be able to follow these sutras The sutra
says that whichever planet gets the highest number of
degrees, becomes the Atmakaraka. Suppose in a horoscope
two planets get the same number of degrees; then both of
them will become Atmakaraka Take Sani and Chandra in
a horoscope, and say they have got each 29 degrees and ten
minutes. As per the above sutra, both of them become mer.
ged into one, viz., Atmakaraka. When both of them become
representing one event, viz., Atmakaraka, there will be a
vacancy for some other karakatwa • say Chandra has merged
into Sani and his place, representing matrukaraka or some
other karaka, falls vacant. This, Jaimini says, will be sup-

JAIMINISUTRAS
plied by Rahu. As Rahu and Kethu move in the reverse, they
will be considered as getting the highest number of degrees
w hen they are at the beginning of a sig n. In the above illustration, suppose Sani has 29*^ and lo' in Aries as also Chandra.
Then they will naturally have travelled all over Mesha and
will be within fifty minutes from Vrishabha Sani and other
planets move from Mesha to Vrishabha, Mithuna, Kataka,
and so forth. Whereas Rahu moves in the reverse order, vtz.,
from Vrishabha to Mesha and Mesha to Meena. Rahu will
have obtaired 29° and 10* when he is 50' from Meena, for
Rahu gains each degree as he enters Mesha from Vrishabha
and moves on to the 1st degree of Mesha before he enters into
*he next sign Meena. Here as Chandra has merged into Sani*
Rahu takes that karakat which Chandra as a separate
planet wculd have taken Suppose Budha also gets the same
degrees, and these three represent one karakatwa or signification. Suppose now brothers have to be represented.
Then Jaimini says take the Nisarga Karaka, Kuja and give
him the control over brothers, etc , attributed to Kuja in
the general literature in Astrology.
sfirwsm ii
Su. 12 . — Saeeshtay bandha, MoJcshayoh .
Atmakaraka gives bad and 'good results by
virtue of malefic and benefic dispositions such as
debility, exaltation, etc,
NOTES
When the Atmakaraka is in exaltation or in beneficial
Rasis or conjunctions, though the person is imprisoned he
will be liberated, will live in holy places and will have
Moksha or final Emancipation. But when he is in Neecha

JAIMINISUTRAS
Rasi or with evil conjunctions and aspects he will be imprisoned, will suffer from chains and other tortures, and will
sot have Moksha. But if this debilitated planet has beneficial aspects or conjunctions, he will be liberated. The idea
seems to be the securing of final salvation. If the Atmakaraka is exalted and has beneficial aspects and conjunctions
without any malicious 1 influences the man will get the final
Bliss called Moksha, so ardently coveted by all devotees and
the yogis. They desire nothing more than this state of
Bliss. Here JBandha and Moksha may be interpreted as
malefic and benefic results.
Su. 1 3. — Thasyanusaranadamatyaha.
The planet who is next in kalas or degrees to
the Atmakaraka will become Amaiyalcaraka .
NOTES
By careful mathematical calculations t Hfe student should
first find out the positions of planets • correctly in degrees
and minutes. Then fix them up in the horoscope and place
the Lagoa also in degrees and minutes. It will be very
easy to fix all the planets and also the Lagna in their vergas
or minute divisions by proper calculations. Unless this part
of the wotk is done satisfactorily the application of the
principles of Astrology, enunciated by Jaimini or other
Maharishis will not be possible. And when the foundation
|s not well laid and solidly built, the superstructure can
never be durable or lasting. After the planets are placed
correctly in their degrees and minutes, it becomes easy for
a student to find out who gets the highest number of degrees
qt Kalas- Whoever gets the largest number take him as

JAIM1NISUTRAS
the Atmaharaka. The planet who gets the next highest
degrees will be Amatyakarafea. Probably when the Amatya
or Mantrikaraka is powerful and well combined and aspected
the person will become a great Minister or Councillor. But
when he is ill combined and badly aspected and debilitated
he becomes an evil councillor or an advisor who brings
disgrace on himself and also on those to whom he offers bis
counsel.
erst wrac ii
Su. 14 . — Tasya bliratha •
The planet who gets the highest number of
degrees next to Amatyakaraka becomes Bhrairuha*
raka or gets lordship over brothers.
NOTES
If the Bhrafctukaraka is debilitated, joins evil planets
and has malicious aspects then there will be ruination to
brothers. He^will have no brothers or, if he gets them,
they will die or become wretched, poor and disgraceful. If
on the other hand, the Bhratrukaraka is exalted, -well
combined and well aspected there .will be plenty of brother's
and prosperity and success will attend on them. In the
world we have experience of various sorts and all these are
indicated by the astrological authors.
W to M
Su. 15 . — Tasya matha.
The planet who gets the highest number of
degress next to Bhratrukaraka becomes lord of the
mother or Matrakaraka.

J AIMINISUTR AS
m p* w
Su. 16 . — Tasya putrahaThe planet who is next in power in degrees to
Matrnkaraka becomes the lord of the children or
Putrakaraka
NOTES
The'Sanskrit Sciences have attached the greatest impor
tance, to the birth of children. Without children a home is
designated as a burial ground or smasana or cemetry.
Aputrasya gatirnasii observe the Vedas. This means that a
man who has no children will have no heaven or Moksha
There is a special Hellish River called the Put One who.
has no Putra will not be able to cro=s this river Put. He is
called a Putra who enables the parents to cross this river. If
he does not cross it, he will have no salvation and he cannot
go to regions of bliss. In this world what can give a person
greater pleasure than the possession of healthy, intelligent %
obedient and prosperous children. What can dleight the
hearts of the parents more than the playing round about them
of their happy children. Can the work of creation continue
without children ? If there are no children then the human
Species must cease to exist and the world will be depopulated
Children thus become an absolute necessity, for the continuation of the human species* But in getting children, there is
a very great variety, Temperaments are v trious and curious.
It is no doubt a source of great pleasure for a mkn to have
children but what is the good of getting bad, deformed,
repulsive, ungrateful, depraved and rascally children who
are antagonistic to their parents, who are immoral, cheats
tipi otherwise quite undesirable to society, to the nation and
W tim family. Where the Putrakaraka is well situated.

jAlMINISUTRAS
exalted, in good Shadvergas, in beneficial conjunctions and
aspects, the children will be blessed with all the virtues
which make them agreeable, happy, prosperous and dutiful to
parents. The greatest Epic in India, viz., Ramayana teaches
the excellent duties of children towards their parents and Sri
Rama is the noblest conception and embodiment of the duties
towards the parents, relations, friends and the public citizens
under his royal care.
It is better to have no children than to have bad and
ungrateful ones.
sw lift: II
Su. 17 , — Thisya gnathihi.
The planet who gets less degrees than those of
Pulrakaraka ’becomes Gnathikaraka or Lord of the
cousins.
Among all the nations of the world, cousins form one
important item, m making the domestic circle happy or unhappy. This is specially so among the Hindus, whose laws
of inheritance and succession to property are peculiar and
very complicated. There are maternal and paternal cousins
and nephews. The last are the most forrmdible, when they
are adversely situated ard most 'favourable when they are
sympathetic and loving The condition of the planets who
become Gnathikarakts will determine the attitude of the
cousins and the rules for judging of these, have already been
laid down in the previous notes and explanations.
?<s. m skis? ii
Su IS. — Tkasya darascha
• The planet who gets less degrees than the gn&-
thiharaha becomes Darakaraka or Lord of wife.

ft JAIMINISUTRA8
NOTES
The use of cha in this sutra indicates plurality and
includes the examination of the various Bhavas or significations from Lagoa, Pada Lagna and Upapada Lagna, which
technicalities will be explained later on in the notes, Jaimini
suggests that the results should not be foretold simply by
the consultations of the kzrakas alone, but also by the
Bhavas from Lagna, Pada Lagna and Upapada Lagna, The
Science of astrology, specially the foretelling of the future is
highly complicated and requires the highest form of intelligence, and the most profound forms of analytical powers to
unravel its mysteries and make the future predictions
correct. This science as well as other sciences require
great intelligence and erudition, and this will be so specially
with astrology which deals with all the phenomena in the
world and which, therefore requires, the most comprehensive
and grasping intellect to understand its principles.
U. mi wmfa it
Su. 19. — MatrasahaputrameJce samamananthi ,
Some Acharyas or authors hold that the Matru
and putrakarakaSj may. be represented by one and
the same planet, that is these two Bhavas, lordship
of mother and children may be judged by the same
planet.
NOTES
Here this union may be interpreted in two ways, viz.
Hatrakaraka includes pufrakaraka, and therefore these
.two Bhavas may be foretold by the lord of mother or by the
lord of children. The planet next in degrees to Bhratru-

JAIMINISUTRAS
kar&ka' bceoraes Matrukaraka,and the planet next in degrees
to Matrukaraka becomes putrakar&ka. What Jaimini apparently means is that by the planet next in degrees to Bhratrukarak*, may be foretold about the prosperity and adversity
of the mothers and the .children. Since Jaimini gives pada,
ghatika and upapada Lagnas as also the Lagna for the consultation for results, difficulties and confusion have been
removed and the welfare and misfortunes of mother and children may be easily analysed and predicted.
^o, nftproaonet sppfi u
Stf. 20 . — Bhaginyaraihzssyalaha haniyajjananeecheti.
Some say that from Kuja should be ascertained
particulars regarding brothers and sisters, brother-inlaw, younger brothers and step-mothers. Some
others hold that predictions relating to step-mother
should be made from the 8th house. However this
latter view is not approve d by all.
NOTES
From Ara or Kuja the sisters, wife’s brothers, younger
brothers and mother must be examined. In Sutras 15 and 16
reference to find out the lord of mother has been made. Why
then again mention about mother. Here from Mars we have
to find elder and younger sisters, brothers of wife, younger
brother, step-mother and the maternal aunts. Ara or Kuja
is the permanent oi Naisargika Bhratrukaraka or lord of
brothers. Some authors by pronouncing Aratka in short A,
make it A —o, Ra —2 and Tha 6=o 26 and reading it in the-

JAIMINISUTRAS
reverse order we get 620. This 4 divided by Id will give* us
remainder 8. And ask the readers to find out the above events
from the 8th house from Lagna. Jaimini does not approve
of it
Su, 21 . — Mathuladayo bandhavo matru sajatiya iUyuiiaraiaha.
From Mercury should be ascertained details
relating to maternal uncles, maternal aunts and other
maternal relations.
NOTES
Take the planet next to Ara or Kuja and he will be
Budha. The’ order of the planets must always be remembered
as in the week days — Ravi, Chandra, Mangala, Budha, Guru,
Sukra and Sani. Therefore when the author says Uttarataha
or take the next planet, it clearly means Budha. From
Budha, maternal aunts, maternal uncles and other maternal
relations like step-mothers should be found out. Thus say
some others. This means that Jaimini is not in agreement
with the views of these writers. Like Kechti in Brihafc
Jataka, Ekeyin Jaimini is used to indicate other schools of
thought in Astrological predications.
* 3 . TOfufrra 555*?%
Su. 22 . — Pitamahou pathiputraviti gury>-
mukhadeua janiyyat .
From Guru the » paternal grand-mother and
grand-father, the husband and children must be found
out.

JAIMINISUTRAS
. 33. ^ifr irrawsi n
Su. 23 . — Patnipitarau sivzsurou matanuha,
ityante vasinaha .
From the next planet from .Guru, viz., ’Sukra,
the parents of the wife, or parents-in-law, paternal
and maternal aunts, maternal grand-father and
grand-mother, and Ante Vasina or disciples must be
found out
NOTES
If two or three planets get the lordship by gettirg the
same degrees, then find out who has got the greater nu r.ber
of minutes and seconds, and if the planets are equal in all
these degrees and minutes and ‘seconds then we are recommended to take the Nisarga or permanent lords for the
welfare of the particular events, I shall give here the Nai=argika lordships of planets.
Ravi — Atmaprabhavasakti or soul force, reputation,
vitality and father.
Chandra — Manas, Matru, Mani, or Mind, Mother and
Gems.
Knja — Bhumi, Satwa, Bhratru, or Lands, Strength and
Brothers.
Budha — Pragnya, Matula, Buddhi, Vacha or intelligence,
uncle, wisdom and speech.
Guru— Putra,Vidya, Dhana, Gnana, or Children, Educa.
tion, Wealth and Spiritual development.
Sukra— Kama, Indriasukha, Kalatra— passion, reuse
pleasures and wife.

JAIMINISUTRAS
Sani — Ayushyam, Jeevanopayam, Maranatn — longevity,
means of livelihood and death.
Baku — Matamaha or maternal grand-father, Vishakaraka or lord governing poisda.
Ketku — Pitamaha or paternal grand-father and Kaivalyakataka or one who gives final bliss.
I have given here only the mast salient points, and for
greater details I refer my readers to my English translation of SariDjrtkachintdmani.
all II
Su. 24- — Mandojjyain Graheshu.
Among all the planets, Ravi, Chandra, Kuja,
Budha, Guru, Sukra and Sani, Saturn is the least
powerful.
KOTES
Varaha Mihira observes in ascribing the Veeryabala
thus — Sa, Kn, Bu, Gn, Su, Cha, Ra meaning Sani is the
least powerful in Veeryabala ; next comes Kuja, then Budha,
then Gum, then Sukra, then Chandra and Ravi represents
the strongest in Veeryabala. Some writers and commentators give the following interpretation which may also be
acceptable. Mandcjjayan Myutiarataha. Next to Sukra
coupes Sani in Sutra 23. Therefore from Sani must be
Isaod out the prosperity and misfortunes of the elder brothers.
Vv it
So. 25* — Prachevruihhirvishama bheshu.
In all odd signs the counting must be in the
right direction.

I A IMINISUTR AS
NOTES
Mesh a, Mithuna, Sima, Thula, Dhanas and Kumbha are
odd $igns. In all these signs the counting must be from leffc
to right, I will explain in clearer terms. Say we want the
5th from Mesha. Than count as Me3ha, Vrishabha, Mithuna,
Kataka, Simha and so forth.’
Su. 26. — Paravrutyouttareshu .
In even signs the counting must be in the
reverse order.
NOTES
Take Vrishabha and we want the 6th from it. There
we get Vrishabha, Mesha, Meena, Kumbha, M ikara and
Dhanas. Take Thula. It is an odd sign, suppose we want
the 4th. Then Thula, Vrischika, Dhanas and Makara. Take
Vrischika and we want the 6th from it. Then we have
Vrischika, Thula, Kanya, Simha, Kataka and Mithuna, In
fact in all odd signs the procedure is in the right direction.
In even signs we count backwards like the movements of
Rahu and Kethu in reverse order. Then follows a short bat
very difficult Suira. Brevity may be the soul of composition,
but it will be the thorny path to the commentators and
readers, with ordinary intelligence and education.
Su. 27. — Nahvachit .
In some places or signs this does not apply.
NOTES
Here the brevity of the Sutra offers the greatest confusion. What are the places or signs where these rules do not

JAIM1NISUTRAS
apply. When a general principle is laid down why should
there b.e any exceptions. If we had not excellent commentators, • who were almost equal to the original authors atid
some of whom were even superior to their originals, many
of the Sanskrit Sciences would have been sealed letters and
none of the modern scholars though brilliant, have got that
spiritual capacity and concentration of mind to enable them ,
to go beyond the screens and find out the literary gems which
were hidden in the deep mines of Sanskrit Literature. If the
ancient authors have been held as great benefactors to the
literary world, the commentators for those works, should
be considered even as greater benefactors. What would have
been the use of the Vedas, if they had not been handled by
the renowned two commentators Bhatta Bhaskara and
Vidyaranya. Sanskrit Sciences are put in technical styles
and mtras and unless the commentators are scholars of great
genius and of equal capacity, the original works would have
remained almost and inaccessible unintelligible to the modem
generation. For in this sufra there are two words Na negatiVe and Kvachtt , at times or occasions. We have no clue
to when and how these two words have to be used or interpreted. Gathering information from the ancient commentators
this mtra signifies while the general rule is to count regularly
in all odd signs and in the reverse order in the even signs,
this rule does not apply to Vrishabha and Vriscbika and to
Kumbha and Simba. Here it means that in the eve* signs
of Vrishabha and Vrischika, instead of counting $a the
reverse order we have to count in the right way and in
Kumbha and Simha instead of counting in the right way, we
have to count in tfie reverse order. In other signs where such
exceptions obtain they will be pointed out in] their proper
plce% ;

JAIMINISUTRAS
Su. 28. — NathaantJiassa??ia,prayeiia .
Many of the writers are of opinion, that the
*Rasi Dasa (Period of the sign) extends over such
number of years which are counted from the Rasi to
the place where its lord is located.
NOTES
Take Mesha; its lord is Kuja. Say he is in Simha.
Count from Stesha to Simha we get 5. This will be the
number of years of Rasi Dasa given by Mesha. In all other
works, Dasas and Bhukties (Periods and sub-periods ) are
given only to planets but never to the zcdiacal signs.
Jaimini gives Rasi Dasas as a peculiar feature of his immortal works. I shall try to explain this sutra in full as otherwise my readers will be surrounded by many dcubts and difficulties and may understand the sutra altogether in a very
perverted sense. The number cf years of the Rasi Dasa is
determined by the number of Rasis which its lord has travelled from it at birth. Take a horoscope and follow the
reasoning.
We want to find out the
Dasa period of years given
by Mesha. Its lord is'.Kuja,
He is found in the 7tb house
from Mesha. Therefore Mesha Dasa extends for 7 years.
We want the Dasa period
given by Dhanas. Its lord is
Guru and he is in the 3rd
house from Dhanas ' and
therefore the length of Dasa
of Dhanas wi.l be 3 years.
This point is now clear. In
* I have discussed Rasi Dasa at considerable length in my book Studies
in Jaimim Astrology.
Chandra
Rahu
Lagna
Sani
Ravi
Budha
Guru
RASI
Sukra
Kuja |
Kethu |

JAIMINISUTRAS
Jaiministitras the lords of the houses are those whixh ^.re
recognised by the astrological works in general and I prssune
the possession of this elsmontxry knowledge in ny readers.
The lords of the 12 zodiacal signs are thefollowin { regalaily
from Mesha, viz-, KshitijvKuja, Sita-Sukra, Gna-Rudba,
Chandra-Moon, Ravi-Sun, Soumya-Budbi, Sita-Buk a,
Avanij i — Kuji, Suragunr^Jupiter, Manla-Sani, Sour -Sa’i,
Guru - *- Jupiter — Vide my translation ctf Br that J a: aic These
same planets are* also lords, of the Amsas or other minuter
divisions like Drckkana, Navamsx and Dwadasamsa. Dfferences of opinion obtain in all branches of knowledge.
These differences may arise from various causes* Wotld
presents such a complicated and comprehensive phenomena
tnat two observer trying in different directions may find
different results from the same research or one result from
different substiuc.s. Take one 'llustration. Two doctors,
men of high cult xre with ting-s of original genius, far le noved
from each other and quite strangers, may go on experimenting to find out tfa • best imtidote for fe^er. Each may deal
with different sets of articles and find a resultant, which will
have the efficacy of completely curing fever and all such
disorders. Sirail .rly in Astrology. Temperaments differ so
radically in some cases that those who watch them keenly
get puzzled aver them and fail to account for such strange
phenomena.
If the lord of the Rasi is in his own house, the sign gives
12 years of life. If he is in the 12th house the Rasi gives a
similar period. If he is in the second house he gives one year.
Some say he giws two years, Tne word prayena signifies a
great deal If the lord of the Rasi is in exaltation he will add

JAIMINISUTRAS
one more year to the number he gives by his position. Take
Vrischika and Kuja in Mak .rr. Here he is in the 3rd house
from Vrischika and therefore gives 3 years. But as he is in
exaltation ore more 3’ear is to be added and thus the Rasi
gives four y~ars. But if he is in debilitation he takes away
one year. " hus if we take Mesha and find Kuja in Kataka,
then ne v.ill have to give four years as Kataka
is the fourth from Mesha but his debilitation has taken away
one ye..r and instead of four years he gives only three years.
There are two signs according to Jaimini which have two
lords i -.stead of one granted by the rules of general astrology.
Vi sih’xahes two lords, vz., Kuja and Kethu and Kumbha
has Sc ni and R;d;u. in this case if the two lords are in the
sign, i 'en th: Rasi gives 12 years cf Dasa If one of them
is ret rare veil the presence of the other gives no years.
\V len oolh uf them are not in the Rasi, then find out tht
Dcsa years tv the stronger cf the two planet-;. Suppose oue
of these t\\ . cne is in his own house, aid the other in a
diterert hone, than count up and take the planet in his
owoheusei preference to the other who is in a different
horse. Tal Kumbha, It has two lords Rahu and Sani.
Sani is m M .va»-a and Rahu is in Mesbu'. Here we have tt
pre r er S ni i Rahu as he is l his own hous- and therefore
the lon t evife or Dasa given l y Kumbha wil be 12 years as
Mr tart, is ti 12th from Ku. bha.
If rut o .he two lords, i other houses -»ne is with another p anet >r planets, and > re second is no. -with a planet
the 1 tal 3 tht >lanet w-ho is in :on junction wit another pi met
Suf pns bot of them are wi' other planets. Then take the
lore vh r is i conjunction wi- r a 1; rger nui -er of planets
Suppose bote :f them are wit* tha same nuuber of planets.

JAIMINI SUTRAS
Then find out the strengh of the Rasi and whichever is more
powerful, take the planet in it. Here I shall explain what
is meant by the strength of the Rasi. The -fixed signs are
stronger than movable signs. The double bodied signs are
stronger than the fixed ones. If even here the strength
of the two lords is the same then take that lord who gives the
larger number of years. In this way we have to find out
who is the more powerful of the two lords and ascribe the
Rasi Dasa accordingly. If one of them is in exaltation he
should be preferred. In this way find out the causes of
strength to the planet and then prescribe the Rasi Dasa
years to it.
Su. 29 . — Yavadeesasrayam padamrulcshanam
Arudha lagna is the point obtained by counting
as many signs from the place of lord of lagna as the
lord of lagna is removed from lagna.
NOTES
Here Arudha or pada Lagna is explained. The lord of
the Lagna at birth must occupy some house. The sign which
measures from him in the same number as he is from the
Lagna will bs called Pada Lagna. Take an example.
Here we have to find, out
the Pads Lagna. The lord
of Lagna in Sukra. He is
in the 8th house from Lagna,
The 8th from Sukra becomes
pada. Here the 8 th from
Sukra is Kataka. Therefore
it becomes the Arudha or
Pada Lagna. The uses for
which these various Lagnas
are enumerated here will be
explained later on. Jaimini
makes his meaning clear in
the next two sutras*
Chan- |
dra Lagna
Rahu 1
Sam
Ravi
Bhdha
Gnru
RASI
Sukra
Kuja
Kethu

JAIMINISUTRAS
Su. 30. — Siv.is*he daraha.
If Lagnadhipathi is in 4, then the 7th becomes
Pada Lagna.
NOTES
Dara as we have seen is 28, divided by 12 giving a reraa*
i ider 4. If Mesha is Lagna and Kuja occupies Kataka, he
will be in the 4th from it. Tae 4th from Kataka, viz,, Thul*
will be the Pada Lagna.
3?. ga&ysni
Su. 31. — Sutastejanma.
If lord of Lagna is in the 7th from Lagna- then
Lagna itself becomes Arudha Lagna.
NOTES
Ha gives another example. If the lord of Lagna is in
the7th, the 7th from it will ba Lagna itself and this becomes
pada or Arudha Lagna. &uta—sz represents 7 and ta indicates 6. This will b3 67. Divided by 12 we get the remainder 7 and therefore the 7th house is iniicited. The h'Lharisbi gives these two examples so that his readers may make
no mistakes or misinterpretation about the Sutras. I hope
my readers now have fully understood what is meant by
Pada Lagna. In this sutra, as the lord of the Lagna is in
the 7th, the 7th from it will be Lagna itself. In this case
both Lagna and Pada" Lagna are one and the same.
dbrgpi? hitopsr: 11
£j. S 2 . — Sarvatrasavarna bhav.trdsay.1h2.

JAIMINISTJTRAS
All Rasis and Bhavas are studied by Varnada
Lagn i. Hence it will be explained in this aphorism.
NOTES
Raghavabhatta, Pantha, Nilakanta and other older
commentators have given the fullest notes and details on this
sutra and I have to take the readers along those intricate
paths. They have introduced Varrndz Ligm, Ghatika
Lagna, Hora Lagni and other details- The following is the
full exposition for all these. Readers are advised to have a
large fund of patience and devote some time to master these
details. In alt the following sutras of Jaimini, Varnas or
Kaiapayadi letters are used to ind'cate Bhavas and Rasis.
But for planets their various names are used and they should
not be interpreted with the help of such le'ters For those
who are born in odd signs count from Mesha in th8 regular
order, for those who are born in even signs count from
Meena backwards till we get to Bhava Lagna and keep these
figures on one side. Again count for those who are born in
,odd signs from Mesha to Hora Lagna in the regular order
and for those born in even signs count from Meena to Jantrfa
Lagna in the reverse order, and deduct the smaller figures
from the larger and counting again from Mesha for-wards to
the number of remainder, and fix that Rasi as the Varnada
Hard for oil signs and for persons born in even signs counting back from Meena to the number of Rasis given by the
figure, taka that Lagna as the Varnada Ltgni, This will
certainly be not iutelligibb, unhss a few examples are given
here to illustrate the principles involved. Varieties ©f
Lagnas will be explained here.
Bkam L ijna — used in Jaimini means the ordinary
Lagna as is mentioned in the ordinary books on Astrology.
The sign that rises at birth on any particular day.

Chandra Lagni — of the Janma Rasi, is that sign in
which Chandra is situated at the time of birth. This is
determined by the constellation ruling on that day.
Pada Lagna — mean's that sign in number again from the
position of the Lord of Lagna which hs occupies from Lagna.
Hora Laj na — Take the time of birth from the sunrise
and fix it in ghatis. Then divide this number by 2i which is
called a Hora and the nunbar thus obtained represents the
Hora Lagna. Take an example. A man was born on the
3rd of the solar month Kumbha at 144 ghifcis after sunrise.
Now 14| ghatis divided by 2J will give us 5 and 2 ghatis
as a remainder. Therefore the Hora Lagna fa'ls in the 6th
from Kumbha — Kanya. Take a person born on the 2nd of
the solar month Vrischika at about 29 ghatis after sunrise.
Dividing this by 2\ ghatis we get 11 and a remainder li
ghatis. That is, the H;ru Ligai will L e the 1 2th from the
sign occupied by the Sun, viz,, Vrischika or it falls in Thula
the I2th from it. If, suppose the man is born on that day at
48 ghatis after the sunrise then divide this by 2j ghatis. We
get 19 and a remainder of 4 glnti. There f ore the Hora Lagna
falls in the 20th. As there are only 12 signs, deduct this
figure from 20 and we get 3 Therefore the Sth from Vrischika will be the Hora Lagna and it falls in M’thuna. Here
also the order, already named for odd and even signs should
be observed.
Ghatiki Lagna — From the sunrise to the time of birth
find out how many ghatikas have passed and find out the
Risi which falls at the time, and this will be easy to understand. Say a man is born at 25 ghatis after sunrise on the
12nd of Yrisb^bha Mfasa Tnen take 25 gb .tis and couit from

JAIMINISUTRAS
Vrishabha ; whenever, the figure of ghatis is more than- 12
deduct or divide the number of ghatis and find out the remainder. 25 divided by 12 will give us a balance of 1 after going
twice. Thus in this case the ghatika Lagua falls in one and
therefore in Vrishabha itself.
Varnada Ligna^XVe have already explained this and
we will give clearer expUnations later on. As Jaimini
insists on Savya-right and Apasavya-left for odd and even
Bigns our readers must understand this point clearly and
keep before their vision in aU countings for the various
Lagnas. An Indian ghati means 24 minutes of English
time. An hour means Zi ghatis- A minute means 2£
vighitis. The minuteness of the divisions of time, reached
by the Indian astronomers is simply astounding. The
Europeans have no idea of them. I shall give them here for
ready referene?. The European conception of the minute
divisions of time is as follows. A d.iy is divided into 24
hours. An hour is divided into 60 minutes. A minute is
divided into 60 seconds. Here ends their conception of time.
24 X 60 X 60 or one day contains 86,403 seconds. This is the„
highest idea, of the European conception of the divisions of
time for a day.
Take the conception of the division of Time by the
Indian Astronomers. In the uttara qo^nhana or the release
of 4 the cattle, Arjuna went to effect their release, and Duryodana, Emperor of Histhinapura tikes objection to the appearance of Arjuna before the stipulated time for their Agna -
or incognita existence for 12 years. Bhishmi the
greatest Warrior, saint and philosopher in the whole of
Mahabharuti, exphins the astronomical details and calculations of and convinces Diryodhaaa, tbit the time o£

JAIMINISUTRAS
12 years imposed on the Pandavas pissed away the previous
day and Arjuna was justified in his appearance for the
release of the cattle. According to Aryan Astronomers a
day is div'ded into 60 ghafcis. Each gkati is divided into
60 vighaHs. Each vighati is divided into 60 Ltpias. Each
lipfca is divided into 60 Vihptas . Each vi'ipta is divided into
60 paras, and each para is divided into 60 Tat par as. The
figures when multiplied stand thus : one day 63 Gh. * 60 V.G
X60 LX60 VL.X60 P.X60 TP. or 60X60*6QX60X
60 X 60. My good readers, this humble figure when multiplied
will give you 46656000000.
Imagine here the conception of the minuteness of time
by the Maharshis and their intellect. A day in the calculation of Hindu astronomers contains the above number of
Tatparas. This can- possibly bs conceived by the highest
human intellect under the highest yogic and experienced
Diz>ya Dristt or Divine vision and can never be the work of
ordinary mortals however high their genius may be. I leave
my readers to judge of these facts with their own intelligence
and not be guided by the stupid theory of Hindus borrowing
their Astrology from the barbarous Greeks and Chaldeans.
Has any man irfr the world conceived divisions of time more
minute ? If so, who is he and where can we find him.
Su« 33. — NagrahahaVarnada is not to be applied for the planets but
only for Rasis.
In all the sutras of Jaimini, the Ki, Ta, Pu, Yadt sutra
of interpreting the Language should not be applied to the

JAI MINISUT RAS
planets. The author means that the grahas or the planets
are designated by their various name3 and never by the letter
system.
ti
Su. 34. — YavadmvehamavriUirbhanam,
Divide Rasi Dasas by 12 and distribute the
Same to the 12 Rasis in proporiion to the Rasi Dasa
periods to get sub-periods. The counting should be
from right to left if lagna is odd sign and vice versa
if even.
NOTES
Interpreting of Viveka — Va.-4 Va.-4 Ka-1— or 441 or
^reading in the reverse order we get 1 14. AU the Rasis put
together at 12 each will come up to 144. Take the Rasi
Dasa years and divide that into 12 bhagas, multiply the
Mesha Dasa Rasi by 12* Then divide the total by 12 and
the quotient will represent the Antardasa years. Even here
the readers are advised to count and follow the odd and even
.signs in the right and left directions as has been already
.explained. Sutra3 are meant really fojj those who have
bright Brains*
3V fK!S*n W£l! tl
Su. 55. — Horadz'tasiddaha
From the gcner d literature of Astrology learn
all the details about Hnra, Dreltlcana, Saptamsa^
ftavama, Dwadasimsa, Trimsamsz , Shastiamsa,
td<k

j AIM I NISU T R AS 39
NOTES
Where the Maharishi does not differ from the ordinary
iraies of Astrology, he says siddaha , meaning they are ready
aft hand from able astrologers. Wherever he cuts a new path
he indicates the lines of research on which be proceeds.
These commentaries are written by Neelakanta and go
trader the name of Suboix The term Su&odx means that
the commentaries are written in such an easy and convincing
style that even ordinary readers and students can easily grasp
the ideas explained by the learned commentator. I have also,
consulted other learned commentators.
End of First Pada of the First Adhyaya.
11 STOTOP »
U II
ADHYAYA 1— Pada 2.
So. . 1 — Athaswamsograhanam .
Having determined the Atmakaraka from
among the several planets, ascertain the results of
his Navamsa position.
NOTES
Among all the planets commencing from Ravi, find out
who gets the greatest number of degrees and minutes and
determine, as per p'ineiples already explained, who becomes
the Atmakaraka. In Sntra 11 of the first pada it has been
clearly enunciated that whichever planet gets the highest

JAIMISISUTRAS
number of degrees and minutes, be becomes the Atmakaraka,
Such a planet, whoever he may be among the nine planets,
must occupy some Navamsa. In all the future sutras, the
effects of such Navamsa occupied by the Atmakaraka, the
planets who are there .and the planets who aspect such
Navam a, will be clearly detailed. Find out by mathe nafcical calculations the position of all the planets in degrees and
minutes and then the results can easily be foretold in the
light of the following sutra \ Find out the Atmakaraka and
place him in the proper Navamsa. Prepare also the N avamsa
chakra correctly.
R. n
Su. 2 . — Pancha, mioshika mar jar aha,.
If the atmakaraka occupies Mesha Navamsa,
m
then the person will be subjected to the fears and
bites of rats, cats and other similar animals.
NOTES
. Pancha irnans one or Mesha, Pa stands for 1 in
Pavurga, Oha stands for 6 in the Tavarga. Thus we get
16, reading in the reverse order we get 6i. Divide this by 12
we get the remainder 1 and this stands for the first sign in
the Zodiac or Mesha Navamsa.
m 5 **f*n^ ii
Su. 3 . — Tathrachafushpadahx .
If Atmakaraka is in Taurus Navamsa, there
will be fear from quadrupeds.
NOTES
Ta means 6 and R % means 2 or 62 reversed we get 26,
divided by 12 we get 2 remainder which means the 2nd

2AIMINISU IRAS
house from Meshi or Vrishabha Navamsa. If Atirukaraka
occupies Vrishabha Navamsa the person will have gains
and happiness from quadrupeds like cattle, horses, elephants,
etc. Some commentators say he will have troubles and
worries through them. I think, when Atmakaraka is weak
or has evil aspects or associations troubles should be predicted.
Others write prosperity from them.
Su. 4. — Mrithyow kandnstoulyancha.
If Atmakaraka occupies Mithuna the person will
suffer from corpulence, itches and cutaneous eruptions.
NOTES
Met represents 5 and Ya represents 1 or 51 reading
inversely we get 15. Divided by 12 we have the balance of
3 and this represents the 3rd Navamsa from Mesba or
Mithuna.
Su. 5. — Durejalahisladi.
If the Atmakaraka occupies K itaka Navamsa,
dangers and troubles come from watery places and
leprosy.
NOTES
Da stands for 8 and JR<j represents 2 or 82. Reversing
it, we haye 28. Divided by 12 we get the balance of 4 and
this refers to Kataka as the fourth from Mesha. Dirty form
of leprosy or watery disease rises from blood corruption
and the use of filthy water.

JAIMIN1SUTKAS
mt fwft H
Su* 6. Seshaswapadani.
If the Atmakaraka joins Simha Navamsa, troubles will come through dogs and such canine animals.
NOTES
Ssa represents 5 and Sha indicates 6 or 56, reading backwards we have 65. Divided by 12 we get 5 remainder and
Simha counts as the 5th from Mesha. Here in all these
Sutras the class of animals or diseases is indicated and the
reader has to use his intelligence.
Su 7. MrithyuvajayagniJcanasc ha.
If Atmakaraka is in Kanya Navamsa, the native
will suffer from fire, itches, and corpulence.
NOTES
Ja represents 8 and ya denotes 1. We get 81, in the reverse order we get 18, divided by 12 we have the balance 6
and Kanya Navamsa represents the 6th from Me*ha. If the
Atmakaraka joins Kanya Navamsa the person will suffer
from the troubles indicated by the 3rd Basi or Mithnna and
also from fires. But in Mithuna the author only said that
suffering will come from corpulence and itches.
From this Sutra it means that in the Mithunamsa there
will also be trouble from fires.
<. II
Su. 8 Labhevanijjyam ,
If the Atmakaraka joins Thula Navamsa the
person will make much money by merchandise.

JAIMINISUTRAS
NOTES
La denotes 3 and Bha stands for 4, this stands as 34,
In the reverse order it is 43, divided by 12 we get 7 as the
remainder. Thula stands as the 7th Navamsa from Mesha.
The various kinds of articles in merchandise have to be found
out by the nature of the Rasi, its lord, the planets who are in
conjunction and the aspects they have.
m s rs g(iq< nt U
Su. 9. Atra jdlasarismpa sthanyahanischa.
If the Atmakaraka joins Vrischikamsa, the person
will have fears and dangers from watery animals,
snakes and he will also have no milk from his mother.
Atra-Aa O-Ra 2*02» reversed it means 20 divided by 12
we get a balance of 8 which signifies Vrischika counting from
Mesha Navamsa. When he is a child he will have to be
nursed and suckled by others for want of milk in his mother's
breast. There are some women who have plenty of milk in
their breasts and who nurse their children with their own
milk and sometimes the milk will be sufficient for even two
or three children. Their breasts may not be large or heavy
but their lacteal glands do make brisk work and secrete milk.
There are, on the other hand, a large number of women who
have Urge lumps of breasts without any milk, but full of flesh
and making the breasts attractive and heavy. The author
apparently considers that the absence of milk in the mother
will be a misfortune for the child. The artificial feeding of
children from nipples attached to feeding bottles has removed
this misfortune, to some extent. Remember it is not the
mother who feeds the infant. A rubber bottle is not a mother**

JAIMINISUTRAS
There will be troubles from Khetas. Grahas have two
important significations, vi z., planets and evil spirits: some
read the sutra as Bhuchara instead of Kheehara t and
include such wild animals as lions, tigers, boars and other
fierce animals found wandering on the earth. Planets and evil
spirits occupy the higher regions. Kha-means the sky or the
higher sphere.
Su. 12. Tatal'adayo dharmay.
If the Atmakaraka occupies Kumbha Navamsa,
the person will do charities in the shape of constructing wells, tracks, topes or gardens, temples and
dharmasalas or chatranns,
NOTES
D l ta stands for 9 and 5 la denotes 5, thus" we get 95,
reversing we get 59. Divided by 12 we get remainder 11*
denoting Kumbha, the Navamsa llth from Mesba.
Su. 13. Uckhe dharmavityata Jcaivalyamka .
If the Atmakaiaka occupies Meenamsa the person will be fond of virtuous deeds and charities, and
will take residence in Swargadi Logas or will attain
to the Final bliss or what is called by the Sanskrit
writers Moksha or final emancipation or freedom
from rebirths.
NOTES
U stands for 0, Cht denotes 6, we get 06, reading in tbn
reverse order 63. Divide this by U the biHiqe wili

46 JAIMINISUTRAS
be 12 and therefore Meena Navamsa is indicated by the
term uchcha.
Among the Yogis and real Vedantists their sole aim or
final goal is to get rid of these fiunarjanmas or constant
births and get final assimilation with ParaBrahma • The
old commentators have offered some valuable suggestions. I
shall quote them here for ready reference.
If the Atmakaraka is in a beneficial Navamsa or if
beneficial planets are in Kendras from the Navamsa he
occupies, the person will become very wealthy or a ruler. . If
the next planet to Atmakaraka occupies a beneficial sign or
Navamsa, or found in hia own house or beneficial sign or in
exaltation or in good Navamsas,*he will have residence, after
death, in Swargalokas according to merit. If both of them
are auspiciously situated the person will get good Bliss and
after a prosperous and happy career will go to Heaven. If
they have mixed positions, conjunctions and aspects, he will
have some good and some bad. If both of them are badly
situated, combined and aspected he will suffer miseries,
poverty and will take residence, after death, in various Hells
enumerated in the Hindu Sastras like Kumbhipatha, Andha,
Tamisra, etc. There are fourteen Lokas mentioned and principally three namely Swarga tenanted by the Devatas who are
headed by Indra, Bhuioha inhabited by mortals called Martya,
and Patala inhabited by special creatures called Nagas. A
person in Gasdharva or Siddhaloka is not so happy as one in
Indra Loka. One who resides in Brahmaloka enjoys superior
Bliss to that which he can have in Devaloka. When evil
planets predominate the temperment will be mixed and his
deeds will be bad and sinful. When benefics predominate
they produce favourable results bath here and also'ienhance

J AIMINI SUTRAS
his pleasure in Heaven after his death. As for the comparison
of pleasures, see Anandavalli Upmishad and also number 1 1
and 12 of Vol. 19 of The Astrological Magazine.
?». writ uswflrc: n
Su. 14. Tatra ravou rajalcaryaparahz.
If the San occupies the Karakamsa, the person
will be fond of public service and will work in political activities.
NOTES
Here it means, that Ravi must be in conjunction with the
Atmakaraka in the Navamsa. His success here may be
determined both by the nature of the Navams* and also by
his relation to the Atmakaraka who may change to be his
friend, bosom friend, neutral or enemy or bitter enemy. All
these different stages are suggested by the MaharishI in
compliance with the general principles of Astrology, which he
enumerates.
Su. 15. Poornendu suJcrayorbhogi vidya
jivicha
If Full Moon and Venus join Atmakaraka in the
Navamsa, the person will command great wealth and
all comforts attendant on wealth and he will also
earn money and live by the profession of education.
NOTES
In all these cases the strength, position and association
of Atmakaraka will have great influence in determining the

] AIM I NISU T R AS
rank and position in the lino. A school authority will be
great or small as he gets fat or low salary.
fifsM “st »n* ii
Su. 16. Dliaiuvadihountayudho v aim i
jeevi cha bhoume.
When Kuja joins Atmakaraka in the Navamsa,
the person becomes great in the preparation of various
medical mixtures, will bear arms Exe kuntayudha and
other weapons and live by profession involving preparations in or near fire.
NOTES
The gunners, cooks, engine drivers and those engaged in
various preparations in or near fire are indicated Alchemy
comes in this line of work,
Su, 17. Van ij atantwvayaha silpino vyavahara
vidascha soumye.
If Budha conjoins the Atmakaraka in the
Navamsa, the persons become merchants, weavers
and manufacturers of clothes, artists and persons
clever in preparing curios, and those well versed
in the affairs of social and political matters.
U. ^RfRHSt Sfi! II
Su* 18. Karma gnananista vedavidasoha jeevay
When Guru joins the Navamsa with Atmakaraka, the person will be well versed in Vedic or

jAIMINIStfTRAS *9
religious rituals^ will have religious wisdom; wellkngwn in the rules of sacrificial functions and will
have good knowledge in Vedanta and will be a religious man.
1 %. strain: 1% n
Su. 19. Bajakeeyaha Jcamimssatendryaschdsujere.
If Sukra joins, the Atmakaraka in the Navamsa
the person will become a great official or political
personage, will be fond of many women and will
retain vitality and sexual passions till he is a hundred
years old.
NOTES
He will be fond of women and sexual pleasures and in
spite cf these sexual excesses he will retain passions for a
very long period.
Sexual passions are as various and as curious as aBy
other phenomena. Some get prematurely old and lose their
sexual vitality. Others retain sexual vigour for more than a
hundred years.
Ro. sfa: 3 rt i
Su. 20. Prasiddhakarma jeevassanow.
If Sani joins Atmakaraka in the Navamsa, he
will produce a famous person in his own line of business.

&q }AlMlNlSUTRAS
NOTES
The author apparently means that when Sani join$ the
Atmakaraka in the Navamsa, a person will be able to
achieve greatness and reputation in whatever walk of life he
may be en gaged. T here are great writers, painters^ sculptors, speakers, merchants, warriors, statesmen, travellers,
inventers, discoverers, scientists, musicians and so forth, the
profession or line of work being determined by other combinations in the horoscope. Sani with the Atmakaraka in the
Navamsa lifts the person to a high position in that line and
gives him great reputation and name.
eupfceekqfara* nti 11
Su. 21. Dhanushkaschorascha jangalika loha
yantrinascha rakow .
If Rahu joins the Atmakaraka in Navamsa the
person will live by the skilful use of warlike instruments* he will earn bread as thief and dacoit ; he
becomes a doctor dealing in poisons, manufacturer
of gold, silver, copper and other metalic machinery.
Su. 22. Qoja tyavaharinasschorascha Jceihou,
’When Kethu joins the Atmakaraka in the
Navamsa the persons bom under such combination
trade in elephants or become thieves and robbers.
NOTES
Between thieves and dealers in elephants the line of
demarcation seems to be delicate.

JAIMINISUTRAS 51
ti
Su. 23- Ravirahubhyam s'irpa nidhanam.
If Ravi and Rahu join Atmakaraka in the
Navamsa the person dies by snake-bites,
NOTES
Snakes are of various kinds and the nature of the causes
will be determined by other planetary positions.
w* wm it
Su. 24. Subhadrishte thannivrithiki.
If benefics aspect the Yoga mentioned above
there will be no deaths from snake-bites.
NOTES
He may have snake-bites, but relief proper will be at
hand and the person will get over the danger.
ti
Su. 2*5. Subhzmatra sambandhaj-janguli -
JcdTld,
If Ravi and Rahu join Atmakaraka in the
Navamsa and have only bsneficiil aspects the
person will have no snake-bites, but will become a
doctor who deals solely in poisonous matters.
3 $. isnnm sf^swsfiru m 11
Su. 26. Knjamatm driste grihadakzlco
agnidova,
If Ravi and Rahujoin Atmakaraka ici the Navamsa) and have the evil aspect of Kuja, the person

52 JAIMFNISUTRAS
will burn houses or lend fire and other help to , the
incendiaries.
NOTES
There is some difference in the guilt of the person who
barns a house and one who helps him in his diabolical deeds.
^ Stfl II
Su. 27. Suhradristenadahaha •
If Ravi and Rahu join Atmakaraka in the Navamsa and have the aspect of Sukra, the person will
not burn the houses himself, but will lend fire to the
rogues who do it*
NOTES
The abettor is equally culpable in the eye of law and the
delicate difference *o£ burning the house and lending fire to
burn the house, seems to be a nice point for consideration of
the Dharmasastras and legal luminaries.
Su. 28. (xurudriste iwasamipagrihad.
If Ravi and Rahu join Atmakaraka in the Navamsa, but 'have the aspect of Guru alone the person
will burn houses at a distance from his own house.
NOTES
Apparently Sukra’s aspect will intensify the evil tendencies and aggravate the offences, by burning houses close to
ant’s own house.

IAIMINISUTRAS 53
m % r mm sr n
Su. 29 Sagulike vishado vishahatova .
If the Karaka Navamsa falls in Gulikakila or
the time governed by Gulika, the person will administer poison to others and kill them or be killed
by such administrations of poison by others.
NOTES
Here we have to learn what is meant by Gulikakala and
the time governed by him. Ravi* Chandi \ \uja, Budha,
Guru, Sukra and Sani are called Grahas. ev have Upagrahas or their sons. Sukra an . Chandra ... - net been given
any Upagrahas. The latter are Sani-G«:;kd GxXM-Yamagfiantaka , Kuja- Mrifya, Ravi -kala and Budha- Ardhaprahara,
Divide the duration of the day by 8 and proceed to count from
the lord of the day. Take Sunday and suppose the ' duration
of the day is 30 ghatis. Then each part gets V or 3± ghatis.
The first 3f ghatis are governed by Ravi the lord
of that day.
The second 3| ghati? are under the rule of Chandra.
The third 3f ghatis are governed by Kuja.
The fourth 3* ghatis are under the lordship of Budha
The fifth 3t ghatis are ruled by Guru.
The sixth 3* ghatis are under Sukra.
The seventh 3f ghatis are ruled by Sani.
* If tbj daratioa of day is more or less than 30 ghatis then each
part is i limited b/ the actutf duration ofday divided by 8.

54 JA IMINISUTR AS
The 8th 3f ghatis have no lord and Gulika who is next
to Sani becomes the lord. These 3f ghatis are called Gulikakala and if the Atmakaraka Navamsa falls in this time, the
results above named must be predicted. 3f ghatis is called a
Tama in Sanskrit.
Take CJhandrawara or Monday
First Chandra 3f ghatis. Fourth Guru 3| ghatis
Second Kuja 3f „ Fifth Sukra 3| „
Third Budha 3f „ Sixth Sani 3| „
All these sixth give 22$ ghatis
Seventh Gulika 3f ghatis
Eighth Ravi 3$ „
After this comes in Gulikakala extending from 22$ ghatis
on Monday and lasting up to 26$ ghatis. On Tuesday or
Kujawara we commence from Kuja thus. —
1* Kuja 3$ ghatis 5. Sani 8f ghatis.
2 Budha 3f „ 6. Gulika 3f ghatis.
3. Guru 3f „ 7. Ravi 3f „
4, Sukra 3| „ 8. Chandra 3| „
The first 5 yamas give us 18 i ghatis. From that time
till 22$ ghatis after Sunrise, there will be Gulikakala and if the
Atmakaraka Navamsa falls in this, the evil results; indicated
above will happen. The Gulikakala has been so stated by the
commentators. I have another authority for the Gulikakala.
Mattdapan wa'apariansam chatutQunyam Pwikinakam.
Tatkala Gultlcogmyaha Surva Icarya VtnasnJcriiur, Count
from Saturday to the week day required. Take the number
so obtained and multiply it by four. Then take or deduct

JAlMlNIStifRAS S3
2 from the number so obtained. Then Galikakala commences
at that time and continues up to 3f ghatis more* The
results differ in these two systems. Take Monday and find
out the Gulikakala as per the above rule. -Monday counts
as the 3rd from Saturday. Multiply this 3 by 4 and we get
12. Deduct two out of that and we get 10 ghatis, Gulika.
kala falls on Monday from $2$ ghatis to 26$ ghatis after
Sunrise. The process to find out the Gulikakala in the
night is thus stated by the old commentators. Take the fifth
planet from the lord of the week day and count from him
and then the 8th in the order given above will be Gulikakala.
Take for example Sunday, the 5th from him is Guru. Take
now Guru. Dropping Guru we have Sukra and Sani covering the first and second periods, and the 3rd period falls under
Gulika on Monday, the second period on Tuesday, the 8th
period on Wednesday, the 7th on Thursday, the 6th on Friday and the 5th on Saturday. When there are
differences of opinion on such matters among the old ^writers
we have to look to the opinion of the best among them, and
to verify and support the theory we must also bring our
large experience to help us in such interpretations. Take
Hora, Varahamihira and his school, say that in odd signs
the first hora is governed by Ravi and the second by Chandra. In the even signs the first is governed by Chandra and
the second by Ravi. But there is a different school. Some
say that the first Hora is governed by the lord of the house
and the second by the lord of- the 11th. In Drekkana more
than two systems are recommended. Varahamihira says the
lords of the three Drekkanas are the lords of 1st, 5th and 9th,
There are some others who say that the lords of the 3
Drekkanas are the lords of 1st, 12th and 11th houses. There

54 JAIMINISUTRAS
The 8th 3f ghatis have no lord and G-ilika who is next
to Sani becomes the lord. These 3f ghatis are called Gulikakala and if the Atmakaraka Navamsa falls in this time, the
results above named must be predicted. 3* ghatis is called a
Tama in Sanskrit.
Take Chandrawara or Monday
First Chandra 3f ghatis. Fourth Guru 3f ghatis
Second Kuja 3| „ Fifth Sakra 3| „
Third Budha 3| „ Sixth Sani 3| „
All these sixth give 22k ghatis
Seventh Gulika 3f ghatis
Eighth Ravi 3J „
After this comes in Gulikakala extending from 22k ghatis
on Monday and lasting up to 26| ghatis. On Tuesday or
Kujawara we commence from Kuja thus. —
Kuja
32 ghatis
5. Sani
8f ghatis.
Budha
6. Gulika
3$ ghatis.
Guru
7. Ravi
Sukra
8. Chandra
The first 5 yamas give us 18 1 ghatis. From that time
till 22| ghatis after Sunrise, there will be Gulikakala and if the
Atmakaraka Navamsa falls in this, the evil results! indicated
above will happen. The Gulikakala has been so stated by the
commentators. I have another authority for the Gulikakala.
Mandapzn t aa'apariamam chatur$unyam DwiJunakam,
Tatkxla Guhhognayaha Savva harya Vinasakritu;, Count
from Saturday to the week day required. Take the number
so obtained and multiply it by four. Then take or deduct

JAlMlNlSiJTRAS
2 from the number so obtained. Then Galikakala commences
at that time and continues up to 3f ghatis more. The
results differ in these two systems. Take Monday and find
out the Gulikakala as per the above rule. Monday counts
as the 3rd from Saturday. Multiply this 3 by 4 and we get
12. Deduct two out of that and we get 10 ghatis. Gulika.
kala falls on Monday fro m $2$ ghatis to 26i ghatis after
Sunrise. The process to find out the Gulikakala in the
night is thus stated by the old commentators. Take the fifth
planet from the lord of the week day and count from him
and then the 8th in the order given above will be Gulikakala.
Take for example Sunday, the 5th from him is Guru. Take
now Guru, Dropping Guru we have Sukra and Sani covering the first and second periods, and the 3rd period falls under
Gulika on Monday, the second period on Tuesday, the Sth
period on Wednesday, the 7th on Thursday, the 6th on Friday and the Sth on Saturday. When there are
differences of opinion on such matters among the old 'writers
we have to look to the opinion of the best among them, and
to verify and support the theory we must also bring our
large experience to help us in such interpretations. Take
Hora, Varahamihira and his school, say that in odd signs
the first hora is governed by Ravi and the second by Chandra. In the even signs the first is governed’ by Chandra and
the second by Ravi. But there is a different school. Some
say that the first Hora is governed by the lord of the house
and the second fcy the lord of thellth. In Drekkana more
than two systems are recommended. Varahamihira says the
lords of the three Drekkanasare the lords of 1st, 5th and 9th.
There are seme others who say that the lords of the 3
Drekkapas are the lords of 1st, 12th and 2 1th houses. There

ft JAIMINISUTRAS
are shall others who say that in chara or movable signs, the
lords cf the Drekkanasare the owners of the 1st; 5 th and 9th.
But in fixed and double bodied signs their order is quite
changed. In all such cases of difference of opinion among the
Maha Rishis I cannot pretend to say which is correct and
which is not. Both may be correct as the authors, by their
Divya Drishti, may have approached from different directions and may have found their observations proving quite
true. Heave the readers to judge of these differences in the
light of their intelligence, knowledge and personal experiences*
When two Maha Rishis differ I must frankly tell my readers
that I have no means at my command as to ascertain which
is better and more correct. Both of them are Mahatmas and
both looked into ihese d.-tails by their Divya Drishti or
expanded mental vision. 1 possess no such Divya Drishti
and therefore am not in a position to go beyond the phenomena and ascertain the true causes. I have to trust to the
learned commentators.
I®, m it
Su. 30 Ghandradrishtau chorapahritadhanasohorova.
If Chandra aspects the Atmakaraka Navamsa
falling in Gulikakala, the person will be ' a receiver
of stolen property or will become himself a thief.
NOTES
' 1 think there is not much difference between the moral
and spiritual ofLnces between these two worthies.
Su. 3 i . Budhamatmdrute brihad bijaha.

jAlMlNlSUTRAS
If the Atmakaraka Navamsa falls in Gulifeakala and possesses only the aspect of Budha the
person will have enlarged testicles.
NOTES
Here Budha alone must aspect the Navamsa without
the aspect of any other planets Hydrocele is a nasty form
of disease and disgusting before the public.
3*. %at toss ft u
Su. 32. Tathra Tcethowpapadrishte harnache *
daha Jcarna rcgova.
If Kethu joins the Atmakaraka Navamsa the
person will have his ears cut off or will have serious
ear complaints.
33. 3PR5 tf&s: ll
Su. 33- Sukradriste dilcshitaha.
If Atmakaraka and Kethu in the Navamsa
have the aspect of Sukra the person will become a
Dikshita or Performer of Yagnyas or religious
sacrifices.
NOTES
Formerly such persons were held in high esteem. They
had to lead scrupulously clean, simple and holy, lives.
38. pffilt II
Su. 34. Budhasanidnsie nirueeryaha,

$8 JAIMINISUTRAS
If the Atmakaraka with Kethu in the Navamsa
has the aspects of Badha and Sani, the birth of an
impotent or eunuch should be predicted.
NOTES
Virya is virility in a person and one who has no virya
i& impotent.
pgSRS fif: fi#3fi ft n
Su 35. Bud ha snJcra dristeij pounah puniho
dasiputrova-
■If the Kaiakamsa Rasi with Kethu has the
aspect of Sukra and Bud ha the person will .talk repeating and repeating the same ideas or will be the
son of a prostitute or dancing woman.
NOTES
Dasis are a special class of dancing won*en who were
devoted to the service of Gcds in the temples and had no
strictness m sexual matters.
tat ft ii
Su. 36. Sanidristay iapa&wi preyshyova.
If the Karakamsa with Kethu has the aspect of
Sani he will become a Tapaswi or recluse or be a
dependent and servant under somebody.
NOTES
There is a great gulf of difference between the position
$S a man devoting all his energies on the contemplation of

JATMINI SUTRAS
God a^pd one who is dependent on others. Why both the
results are ascribed to the same combination is not cleat.
^ *F*rmnn*n ii
Su. 37. Sanimatradriste sanyas abhasahaIf in the above combination there is only the
aspect of Sani and there is no other planetary aspect
he will put on the appearance of a sinyisi but will
not be a true or real sanyasi. He will be an
imposter*
- srcr mw&k mhm if
Su. 33. Tatra ravi$ukralri$*e raji-presh -
yah
If Ravi and Sukra aspect the Karakamsa the
person will be employed by royal or political per*
sonages to do their work. He will be their confident.
W fare's *tt 11
Su. 39. Bipphs bulhe 'badhulrisie va manda vat.
If the tenth from the Karaki Navamsa possesses the aspect of 3a Ihi, he will get similar results as
have been given by Sani.
NOTES
This means that the person will follow some notable
profession. Ripha means, Ra 2, pha means 2— 22 divided
by 12, will give us 10, ICth house is indicated by Ripha.'

$0 JAIMINlSUTRAS
Su. 40. Slwbha driste stay aha.
If in the 10th from Karakamsa there is beneficial aspect/thejperson will be one of great determination and never capricious.
NOTES
The other benefies are Guru and Sukra. It cannot
mean anything else.
Su. 41. Bavoiv gurumatra driste gopalaha.
If the 10th from the Karakamsa, there is Ravi
possessing only the aspect of Guru and no other
aspects, the person will have success through the
sales of cows,, bulls and other cattle.
Su. 42. Dare chandra sukra drigyogat
prasadaha.
If the lord of the 4th from the Karakamsa, is
joined or aspected by Chandra and Sukra, the person
will be blessed with storied houses.
NOTES
Da meats 8, Ba means 2=82, reversed it means 28,
divided by 12. we get 4 balance. This shows signs of wealth*
Frasada means houses with compounds.

JAIMINISUTRAS
M- rofcft i|
Su* 43, TJcchagraJiapi.
If the fourth from the Kirakamsa is occupied
by an exalted planet, the person will have many
fine and splendid houses.
Su. 44. Baku sanibhyam silagriham •
If the fourth from the Karakamsa is occupied
by Rahu and Sani, the houses will be constructed
with rough stones not smoothly and well plastered.
Su. 45. Kuja I'ethubhyamaishtilcam,
If the 4th from Karakamsa is occupied by Kuja
and Kethu the houses will be constructed of bricks,
lumps of earth.
Su. 46. Guruna daravam .
If the 4th from Karakamsa is occupied by Guru
wooden houses will be constructed by the native.
Win? #011 II
Su. 47. Tharnam ravina.
If the 4th is occupied by the Sun? the houses
will be constructed from thatch and grasses.

61 jaiminisutras
NOTES
The above three sutris give a n ide* of the a itura of the
house property possessed by different persons depending
upon the dispositions of planets with reference to Karakamst.
vc- gswsfii
Su. 48. Sama shubha yogaddharmanityaha
saiyavadi guru bhaJriaseha.
If the 9th from Karakamn is occupied or aspected by benefics the person will have truth as his
ideal and mctto. He will be righteous in conduct,
lover of truth, and will be faithful and dutiful to
elders, preceptors and Gurus.
NOTES
Sa stands for 7 and Va denotes 5-75, reversed it is 57,
ivided by 12, we get a remainder of 9. Sama means 9th
from Karakamaa. Ninth is the house of piety, and represents
devotion and faith in Gods and G odesses.
3T?*TO mx li
Su. 49. Anyatha papaihi.
If the 9th from Karakamsa has evil conjunction
or aspects he will be quite the reverse in character*
He will be a liar, uncharitable and sinful, and will
have no faith and respect for Gurus and elders.
H®. il
Su. 50. Sani rahublnjam gurudrohuha.
If Sani and Rahu occupy or aspect the 9th from

JAlMlNtSUtRAS 6d
Karakamsa, the person will become ungrateful to
Gttrtft and will prove a traitor to them.
NOTE?
Cheating is u sin. But there are many grades' and its
heinousness depends upon the nature of the paries
concerned.
Su. 51. Bavigurubhyam gurovavisvasaha.
If Guru and Ravi occupy or aspect the 9th
from Karakamsa, he will not love his parents, elders
and preceptors
HR, i
Su. 52. Tatra bhr igwangaraka varge paradarikalia.
If the 9th from Karakamsa falls in one of the
shadvergas of Sukra and Kuja he will be fond of
others’ wives.
NOTES
There are two classes of villians. One set taking sexual
gra‘ ifications with women of immoral terdenries and another
set always tempting the views of other persons, at d ruining
their families. Adultery is t inful, but even here there are
various grades of sins. ‘‘Sbadvtrgss are (l) Lagna, (2)Hora,
This* has been clearly described in joy -work “A Manual of Hinds
Astrology,”

to jaiminisutrAs
(3) Drekkana, (4)Navamsa, (5) Dwadasamsa, and (6) Thrimsamsa. Adultery with motherly relations, friends’ ttives,
spouses of Gurus and other prohibited relations is more sinful than adultery with other women. Corrupting family and
innocent women is a horrible form of sin.
M. ll
Si). 53, Drigyogabhyam adhikabhyam amara -
nam.
If Kuja and Sukra join or aspect the 9th from
Karakamsa the person will have the evil habit of
seducing and keeping illegal gratifications till the
end of his life.
NOTES
The conjunctions and aspects are more powerful than
‘the Shadvergas. In the latter he will keep up the vicious
habit for sometime, but in the former, this vice will continue
till the end of life. With some persons, males and females,
these morbid sensations of lust and sexuality will continue
for sometime and then they turn a new chapter in their lives,
but there are others, who do not give up the vicious habits
till their death. Some are rascals only for a time but there
are others who are rascals and cheats throughout their lives
even on death beds their thoughts run on unholy deeds.
%pr srifowi: ll
Su. 54. Kethuna pratibandaha.
If the 9th from Karakamsa has the conjunction
or aspect of Ketlm, he will be fond of women for
sometime and then give up the bad tendency.

jAtaNlSUTRAS 6$
HH. 3WT II
Su- 55. Guruna strinaha.
If the 9th from Karakamsa has the conjunction
or aspect of Guru he will be excessively fond of
other women.
KV U fHpjftfCfo H
Su. 56. BaTmnartthanivrithhi.
If the 9th from Karakamsa is joined oraspected
by Rahu, the person will lose all his wealth by
female excesses.
MOTES
Even in these vices there are some prudent men financially. Some get money by adultery, some enjoy for nothing, there are others who lose all their wealth and health by
such vices.
h«. aft n
Su. 57. Labhe chandragurubhyam sundari.
If Guru and Chandra occupy the 7th from the
Karakamsa the wife will be handsome and loving.
NOTES
La means 3, Bha denotes 4“34, reading backwards we
have 43, divided by 12. we have 7 remainder. Labha therefore means 7. It will certainly be a great blessing to have
handsome wife provided she is faithful. But when she is
fair and unfaithful the life becomes miserable. He will have
a Hell on Earth.

Id JAIMINISUTEAS
v. ^on fwt H
Su. 58. Kahuna mdhava.
If the 7th from the Karakamsa joins with Rahu
or has his aspect the person will have widows for
connection.
NOTES
There are some worthies who are extremely fond of
widows. They hunt after them. They like them in preference to others.
V*,. $iSrci jritfaw dfrofi n
Su. 59. Sanina vayodhika yoginee sapaswu
ni va.
If the 7th from Karakamsa is occupied or
aspected by Sani the wife will be older or will be
sickly or will be a tapaswini or a woman who will
be engaged in religious meditations.
NOTES
While some persons like younger people there are others
both males and females who hunt after old people* Temperaments are curious.
resssisfl il
Su. 60. Kujena vikalangi.
If Kuja joins or ^aspects the 7th from Karakamsa the wife will be deformed or there will be
defect in her limbs.

JAIMINISUTRAS 67
7RTI pi ^ II
Su. 61. *Ravitia swahile gapta chaIf Ravi occupies or aspects the 7th from Karakamsa the wife will be protected from the members
of the husband’s family and will have no defects in
her limbs.
iRsratff ii
Su. 62. Rudkena Jcalavati.
If Budha joins or aspects the 7th from Karakamsa the wife will be well versed in music, arts,
dancing and other fine accomplishments.
Su. 63. Chape chandrena anavrite dese.
If Chandra occupies the 4th from Karakamsa
the first sexual union of the wives, mentioned in the
above sutras will take place in an open place uncovered by roof or ceiling.
NOTES
Cha means 6 pa means 1—61, reversing we have 16
divided by 12, the balance 4 shows the 4th house from the
Karakamsa. There are some people who cannot control
their passions and who have sexual unions in open places.
* Another version reads os 'SavwA hula gvpthacha.

<8 JAIMINISUTRAS
5«. wftr <n^ II
Su. 64. Karmani pdpe shut aha
If the 3rd from the Karakamsa contains evil
planets the person becomes courageous and a
warrior.
NOTES
Ka meanB 1, Met means 5*= 15, reading backwards we
have 51, divided by 12, -we have the remainder 3. In general
astrology the third house from Lagna shows brothers,
sisters and courage.
Vv 3^ WRI II
Su. 65. Buhhehstaraha.
If the 3rd from Karakamsa has benefics the
person becomes a coward.
gtsMwis n
Su* 66, Mrityuchintyayoh pape karshajeaha .
If the 3rd and 6th from Karakamsa are occupied by malefics the person lives by ploughing and
agriculture.
NOTES.
iia 5, ya 51 ** , reversing we have 15. Cha 6, Tfid 6 =*
66, reversing we have 66. Divide them by 12, we get 3
end 6* Malefics are considered to give auspicious results in
3, 6 and 11* T krishadtjt^a gatahpapaka.
Su. 67, 8ame gurw vimhem.

JAIMINISUTRAS 69
If Guru occupies .the 9th from Karakamsa he
will * become a great agriculturist.
Su. 68. Ucche shubhe shitbha. lokaha .
If benches occupy 12 from Karakamsa the
person goes to superior Lokas.
NOTES
U 0, Chi 6 = 06, reversed we get 60, divided by 12,
we have 1 2. Indian sciences and religions mention many
Punya Lokas or happy regions in the universe.
Su. 69. Ketow Ttaivalyam.
If a benefic occupies Karakamsa, the person
will have Moksha or Final Bliss.
NOTES
Ka means 1, Ta signifies* 6 = 16. 16 reversed— 61.
Divided by 12, we get balance of 1. We may also take
veche from the previous Sutra and say that if Kettiu is
found in 12th there will be final Bliss.
Su. 70. Kriyachapayorvi&eskena.
If Karakamsa is Mesha or Dhanus with b§nefics
there, the subject gets Moksha. If Mesha or Dhanus
happens to be the 12th from Karakamsa and Kethu
is there the person will get Moksha,

JAIMINISUTRAS
NOTES
The commentators have put on two different kinds of
interpretations. I shall explain both of them. The splendid
power of sutras and their brevity capable of long interpretations are only possible in Smskrit. No other language in
the world possesses such facilities for brevity and at the
same time cantaining a world of meaning If Mesha or
Dh&nus becomes Karakamsa with a benefic there, there will
be the highest Bliss. If Mesha or Dhanus becomes the 12th
from Karakamsa and Kethu is there, there will be the
highest Bliss or Moksha. Kethu is not a full benefic.
Kethu becomes a benefic in Chara Dasa and not otherwise.
Therefore he cannot be classified as a suifiagrahv. But
astrology ascribes to him the highest spiritual power of
emancipation from all births and re-births and give man
Moksha.
Su. 71* PapairanyathaIf the 12th from the Karakamsa is occupied by
evil planets he will go to hell and will have no Bliss.
NOTES -
Heaven and Hell are not seen. But there is the universal belief in their existence and all religions lend support
to this faith.
e*. dMfcsFif ll
S 4 U. 72. Ravi-kethubkyam skive bkahiihi.
If Ravi and Kethu are in Karakamsa the
person will become a Saivjte or one who worships
Shiva,

JAIMiNlSUTRAS n
NOTES
Worship of Gods is as different as there are differences
in temperaments. Matha is a peculiarity of Mathi or mind-
\sv qfaiq; II
Su- 73. Ghandrena gaimjam.
If Chandra joins Karakamsa, the person will
worship Gouri, wife of Shiva.
'sa* w
Su- 74. Sukrena lakshmyam.
If Sukra joins Karakamsa, he will worship
Lakshmi, spouse of Vishnu.
Su. 75- Kujena skande.
If Kuja occupies Karakamsa, he becomes a
worshipper of Skanda or Shanmukha the warrior
son of Shiva.
fsraftwrf II
Su. 7f . Budhasanibhyam vishnow.
If Budha and Sani join Karakamsa, he will
worship Vishnu.
NOTES
Different temperaments have different tastes and their
selection of Gods follows their temperaments. As all rivers
fall into the ocean, so also all forms cf worship reach the
Almighty,

JAIMINISUTRAS
. If Sani occupies the Karakamsa falling in an
evil sign the person becomes a great devotee of
evil spirits.
NOTES
There are D^vil and Spirit worshippers ot various
grades. The existence of spirit-world ha* been proved by
the best intellects anl by personal experience. A, handful of
experience is worth ten cart loads of theories.
Su« 81. SuIckb aha.
If Sukra occupies the evil Kirakimsa, the person
will worship devils, spirits, etc.
NOTES
There are 56 varieties of Devils or Pisachas headed by
the powerful Bhetaia. See my notes in S-inoirtha Qhiniamcinu
Su- 82. Amatyadaszy Ghaivam.
If the 6th from Amatyakaraka joins evil Karakamsa, the person devotes himself to the worship of
evil spirits.
NOTES
The planet who gets the highest number of degrees
becomes the Atmakaraka. The planet who gets the next
highest number of degrees becomes the Amatyabaraka* If the

JAIMINISUTRAS
6th planet from Amatyakaraka counting from Ravi in f the
regular order* occupies the evil Karakamsa the person will
be devoted to evil spirits. Always the order of the planets
are as follows: — Ravi, Chandra, Kuja, Budha, Guru, Sukra
and Sani, the order of the week-days. Somebody must
become Amatyakaraka, suppose Sani becomes so. The 6th
from Ravi is Sukra and if Sukra joins the evil Karakamsa
the person devotes his time to evil spirits. These Mantras
are called Kshudra or Sahara and count as 9crores, a
bewildering number.
Su. 83- Thrilcone papadwaya mantriJcaha.
If the 5th and 9th from the Karakamsa are
occupied by evil planets the person becomes a
Mantrika or a magician and will be able to exorcise
devils and evil spirits.
Su. 84. Papadriste nigrahakaha
if the evil planets in the 5th and 9th from
Karakamsa, have evil conjunctions or aspectSj the
person becomes a great Mantraic and will be able to
root out all evil spirits.
<SK. it
Su. 85. 8hubha drnienugrahakiha.
If the evil planets in the 5th and 9th from Karakamsa have beneficial aspects or conjunction the
person will help the people and do them good.

JAIMINISUTRAS
!l
Su. 86* Sukrendou sukradriste rasavadi .
If Sukra aspects Karakamsa and the Moon, the
person becomes an alchemist.
m*; ii
Su. 87. Budhadriste bhishak.
If Karakamsa and Chandra have the aspect of
Budha, the person becomes a medical man.
NOTES
His eminence and capacity will depend upon the
strength of Budha.
Su. 88. Chape chandre sukradriste pandust
withtre
If Moon is in the 4th from Karakamsa and his
the aspect of Sukra, the person will suffer from white
leprosy.
NOTES
Cha 6 t Pa 1=61 reversed 16, divided by I2» will give a
balance of 4* Hence Ghap t means 4th house from the
Karakamsa.
f^r n
Sy* 89. Kujadmte maharogaha.

JAIMINISUTRAS
If Kuja aspects Chandra in the 4th house from
the Karakamsa, the man will have serious form of
leprosy.
Su. 90. Kethudriste neelakusiam .
If Chandra in the 4th from the Karakamsa is
aspected by Kethu, the person will have black
leprosy.
NOTES
There are many hideous and repulsive froms of this
loathsome disease.
\\ . m f srnjprt a
Su. 91. Taira mritow va kujarahubhyam kshayahk.
If the 4th or 5th from Karakamsa is joined by
Kuja and Rahu, tl e person will suffer from consumption or pthysis.
• VI- II
Su. 92. Chandradriste nischayena
If such Kuja and Rahu, stated in the above
sutra, have the lunar aspect, certainly the person will
have serious form of consumption.
NOTES
Sutra 91 : he will have a mild attack of disease*

JAIMINISUT RAS
^3. ft* m*\x% x n
Su. 93. Kitjena pitaJsadihi
If the 4th or 5th from the Karakamsa is occupied
by Kuja, the person will suffer from excessive sweating, cuts, iches or boils ani sores in the body.
W. mm 33dm m n
Su. 94. Kethuna grahani jalarogj va.
If Kethu joins the 4th or 5th from Karakamsa
the man will suffer from Grahani or a kind of
glandular disease and from watery diseases like
dropsy, diabetes, loose motions etc.
Vi. *ifgi%$i*'4 pfwfa II
Su. 95. Rahugulilcabhif'i m kskudravishari.
If the 4th or 5th from the Karakamsa is joined
by Rahu and Gulika, there will be suffering from the
poisonous effects of tats, cats, etc.
Su. 96. Tatra sanow dhanushlsaha.
If the 4th from the Karakamsa is joined by
Sani the person becomes an expert in inflicting
wounds. This means he will be skilled in the use of
deadly arms.
Su. 97. Kethuna ghatikayanthri.

J4IMINISUTRAS
If Kethu joins the 4th from Karakamsa the
person becomes skilful in preparing clocks, watches
and other time indicating machines.
NOTES
I have shown in the Introduction and also in the
prefatory remarks that Jaimini flourished 5,000 years ago.
He was a contemporary of Vedavyasa and was his worthy
disciple. Ghatika yantras or machines showing time were
in existence as this Sutra proves and confirms, Suryasiddanta
mentions many Yantras.
i sr m it
Su- 98. Badheni paramahamso lagudi va.
If the 4th from the Karakamsa is combined by
Budha, the person becomes a paramahamso, or a
great yogi, or one who bears * Palasa Dand-a , etc.,
showing Rrahmacharya or Sanvasayoga of particular
kind.
Vv H
Su. 99. Bahuna lohayaniri.
If the 4th from the Karakamsa is occupied by
Rahu he will become proficient in preparing machinery out of metals or a clever mechanic.
Su. ICO. Bavina hhadgi.
palasa means Butea Frondosa .

jaiminisutras
* If Ravi joins the 4th from Karakamsa, the
person lives by his sword.
NOTES
Many kinds of swords are mentioned in the ancient
works. Swords are terrible weapons then as well as now at
close quarters
Su. 101. Kujena Inmthi.
If Kuja joins the 4th from Karakamsa, he will
live by the profession of using Kuntayudhz, maces
and long sticks.
Su. 102. Matapiiroschandragurubhyam grand *
hakrit.
If Chandra and Guru are in the Karakamsa or ,
in the 5th from it, the person will become an author
and will live by writing books.
NOTES
Ma 5, Ta 6 — 56, reversing we get 65, divided by 12,
there is a balance of 5. Pa 1, Ta 6 — 16, inverse order 61
divided by 12, we have i. Fifth is the house of intelligence
in astrology as also of children.
Su. 103. 8 uhrena Mnchidoomm .

JAIMINISUTRAS
If Chandra and Sukra join Karakamsa or the
5th house from it, the person becomes an ordinary
author.
f«R wsft li
Su. 104. Budhena tatopi.
The person becomes still less famous than in
the above Sutra if Budha joins Chandra instead of
Sukra in Karakamsa or the 5th from it.
saw ii
Su. 105. SuTzrena kavirwagmi kavyagnaschaIf Sukra joins Karakamsa or the 5th from it
the person becomes a great poet, an eloquent speaker
and well versed in poetry and literature.
sp®n difat 11
Su. 106. Guruna sarvavit'grandhihascJia •
If Guru joins the Karakamsa or the 5th from it,
he will be an all round man and will know many
branches of knowledge, well read in sciences and
author of various works. He becomes a versatile
genius.
5f flWft II
Su. 107. Navagmi ,
I $ the above combination of Guru, though a
person becomes learned he will not become a good
speaker nor possess powers of eloquence.

JAIMINISUTRAS 81
NOTES
iSome have the gift of the gab while many*have it not.
\ot, ft&ratwTO oft 1 1
Su. r08. Visishya vyakarano vedavedantka
vichha ,
If Guru joins Karakamsa or the 5th from it,
the person becomes learned in Vyakarana or Grammar, Vedic literature and Vedangas.
NOTES
The last are named as Siksha, Vyakarana, Chandas,
Nirukta, Jyotisha and Kalpa. Without a proficiency in these
six Angas or limbs, no scholar can int-rpret the Vedas
properly.
Vedas simply mein repositories of knowledge useful
for all ages, claims and nations. Whatever might have
been the origin of these intellectual mines, there are no books
extant in the world, which can compare with these deep
mines of thought, knowledge and highest conceptions of human
intellectual flights. The commentaries of Bhatta Bhaskara
and Vidyaranya are the two eyes for the Vedas through
which we can approach the Vedas and see them to some
extent. The first and earliest commentator is Bhatta
Bhiskara and he must have flourished in the remote ages.
Vidyaranya’s age is fixed clearly by the inscription (s e
my History of Vtjuyavagar ) as 1258 Salivahana Saki or
1336 A. D. This illustrious intellectual giant not only foun>
dad the Empire of Vijiya nigar, bat was also the pontifical
Head of the Sringeri Mutt of Adi Saukaracharya. He
obtained Samadhi in 1386 after having seen Harihara

JAIMINISUTRAS
I, Bukka I and Harihara II, ruling the Empire founded by
him in great prosperity, peace and progress*
Practically there seems to be no difference in the
combinations given in Sutras 106 and 108. If in this
combination Guru is exalted or himself has beneficial aspects
or Shadvergas, the knowledge in the man may be more
profound, and the intellect more comprehensive and piercing.
The strength of the planet, of the Rasi, the power of the
Atmakaraka and combinations and aspects determine the
extent of the profficiency*
Su. 109. Sabhajadassanina
If Sani joins Karakimsa or the 5th from it, the
person becomes nervous in an assembly*
NOTES
“ He may be a learned man, but will feel shy and nervous
and thus cut an awkward figure, in a General Assembly cr
public discussion.
Su 110, Budkena meemamsakaha.
If Budha joins 1st or 5th of Karakamsa, he will
shine as a Mimamsaka.
NOTES
There are two principal divisions here. Poorvamimarasa by jairaim h'mself, explaining rituals of Karma and
their effects and Utturamimamsa or Brahmasutras by Vyasa
relating to Brahmagnana.
???• *viwk: ll

JAIMINISUTRAS
Su. 111. Kujena nayyayikaha.
If Kaja joins 1st or 5th of Karabamsa the person
will become a great logician.
W. aiflwir nr’FCTB
Su. 112. Ghandrena sznkhyayogagnaha sahityaqno gayakascha.
If Chandra joins 1st or 5th of Kirakamsa, the
person becomes clever in sankhyasastra, learned in
language, poetry, drama and attendant subjects, will
have great profficiency in music and other accomplish-:
ments.
NOTES
Sankhya is a portion of Sanskrit Science, which deals
with numbers and their interpretations. Sankhya also
means a- system of Philosophy.
? ifafs? ii
Su. U I- Jt'ivma ved'inta geetagmseha
If Ravi combines in 1st or 5th of Kirakamsa,
the person will become a great Veda mist and
musician.
Su. 114. Kethuna ginithagnalu
If Kethu combines in above houses the person
- becomes well versed in mathematics.

JAIMINISUTRAS
Su. 115. Qurusambandhena sampradaya
sidd ~ii% hi
If in the above combinations of planets? Guru
joins or aspects, the knowledge in the different
branches will be well founded and regularly -trained
as per principles of those sciences
Su. 116. Bhagyaich'iivam.
The results ascribed for the planetary positions
in the 1st and 5th from kirakamsa will also hold good
for similar positions in the 2nd from karakamsi.
? li
Su. 117. Sada chaivametyahe.
Bha stands for 4 and 7a denotes 1 =41, reversed we
get 14, divided by 12, the remainder is 2.
Si&a—Sa stands for 7, Di stands for 8=78, in the
inverse order we have 87, divided by 12, the balance is 3.
By this the author means, all those results from the positions
of the planets in the 1st an 1 the Karakamsa must or may be
predicted by the comSitmion of the abive planets in the 2nd
and 3rd houses from the Karakamsa.
Su. 118. Bkayye kithoio papadriste stabdivak.
Kethu in the 2nd from Karakamsa aspected
by evil planets, will make the person indistinct or
slow speaker.

JAIMINISUTRAS
NOTES
Second house denotes speech, eloquence, eyes, face and
riches.
wtof* %< rp:
Su, 119. Stoapitrupadadbhagyarogayoho papa
samyakernadrumaha
If evil planets are found in the 2nd and -8th
houses from Janma Ligna or the Arudha Lagna, the
person will suffer from Kermdruma Yoga or combination for great poverty.
The same results apply to the positions pf planets
in the 3rd from Knrakamsa.
NOTES
Bha 4, Ya 1 = 41 reversed 14, divided by 12, we get 2.
Ra 3 and Gt 3 ** 23, reading backwards we get 32, divided
by 12, we have 8 balance, therefore, Bhagya and Roga denote
2 and 8, respectively.
Compare Kemadruma as explained by Varahamihira
and others. ( Sse my translation of Brihat J at aka — Nabhasa
Yogas.) When there are no planets on either side of Ch mdra
the combination is called Kemadrutnt by him.
?*». 4s frit iwrnn it
Su. 120. Gkandradrislow viseshem.
If Chandra aspects the evil planets in the ab^ve
combination, the person suffers from abject poverty.
The majority consider poverty as a great curse.

JAIMINISUTRAS
Su. 121. Sarvesham chaim pake.
The results mentioned in all the combinations
above named, will be experienced during all the Dasas
of Rasis or in their Antardasas or periods and subperiods of the zodiacal signs.
n OTtflt ii ?n 3ii
End of Second Pada of the First Adhyaya.
aw a#roi5srtw ii ?« 3H
ADHYAYA 1— Pada 3.
Su. 1. Athapadam.
Results based on Pada .lagna will be describe
in this chapter.
NOTES
In Sutra 29 of the First Pada Jaimini has clearly
illustrated the meaning of Pada or Arudha Lagna,
In this chapter he will give the results of planets occupying
from Pada Lagna. In the previous chapter he gave the
results of planets in Swamsa and Karakamsi. Remembef
Karaka always has been used for Atmakaraka-

JAIMINISUTRAS
Su. 2. Vyaye sagrahe grah'idristeva sreemaniaha.
If the Ilth house from Paia Lagna is occupied
or- aspected by planets, the person becomes a
sreemanta or a wealthy man.
Take an example. Here
the lord of Lagoa is 'Sukra
and he is placed in the
8th house from Lagna. Th e
eighth from Sukra becomes
Pada or Arudha Lagna
and this falls in Kataka the
8th from Sukra. The Ilth
from Kataka is Vrishabha
and this is aspected by Kuja
and Kethu and therefore the person will be in affluent circumstances. The term Sreeimanta applies to one who has not
seen poverty from birth to death.
3- II
Su. 3. ShubhairnyayallabhaJia.
When the Ilth from Pada is aspected or joined
by bcnefics the wealth will coma from proper channels. The gains will be from fair and lawful means.
WWfa 11
Su.- 4. Papairamargena,
Chandra
Rahu
Lagna
Sani
.Ravi
Budha
Guru
RASi
Pada
Lagna
Sukra
Kuja
Kethu

JA1M1NIS0TRAS
If the aspecting or joining planets in the above
are evil, the*wealth will come through sinful and
illegal means.
NOTES
Unfortunately we have seven evil and only two good
planets.
K. It
Su, 5. TJcchadibhirviseshath.
If the 1 Ith from Arudha lagna is well combined
and aspected by benefics or those in exaltation,
moola thrikona> etc., the person will acquire plenty
of wealth through justifiable means.
NOTES
Here Uccha has two significations. U o, Oha 6 *» 06
reading reversely we get 60, divided by 12, the balance will
be 12 Ucha also means, the planets in exaltations, etc.
When the planets aspecting the 11th or joining it are exalted,
in good Vargas, in Moola thrikona, or in fcheir own houses
and are benefics in nature, the wealth will come in plenty
and will always be legally and rightly acquired bu.t w‘ en such
planets are malefics, the parson will get riches on a large
scale, bnt through unfair and illegal manner. In both cases
he will be rich but in the case of benefics he w II be a .good
man and will earn money .honestly and by labour, in the cases
of evil planets, the wealth will be thoroughly ill-gotten and
criminal. These Yogas will hippen when the 12th house is
not aspected by any planet.

lAIMINISUtRAS
Su. 6. Neeche grahadrigyogad. ynjayadhikyam*
If there are planets in the 12th house from
Lagna or Pada Lagna the person will spend more
than he earns.
NOTES
Na 0, Cka means 6 — 06 reversing we get 60, divided by
12, the balance is 12, and the 12th house Is indicated. If
evil planets occupy the 12th the expenditure will be on
immoral and sinful deeds. If there are benefics in the 12th
the expenditure will be on charitable and religious purposes
such as building temples or places of worship, tanks, wells,
charitable institutions and helping the poor and the dist*
ressed. But when the planets are bad the expenditure will be
on drinking, whoring, gambling, unjust litigation and other
sinful actions.
vs. it
Su. 7. Eavi rahu mkrairnmpath.
If Ravi, Rahu and Sukra occupy or aspect the
12th from Lagna or Pada Lagna the person will lose
money through kingly displeasure or fines and confiscations.
<J. II
Su. 8. Ghandradrisldau nischayena.

do
JA1MINISUTRAS
If in the 'combination in Sutra 7 there is -the
aspect of Chandra, the losses will certainly occur
through governing bodies.
fonsflsr ii
Su. 9. Budhena gnaihitho vivadadwa .
If Budha occupies the 12th house from Pada or
Lagna or aspects it, there will be losses from cousins,
relations and litigations.
pn^s^ii
Su. 10. Guruna karamoolatb
If Guru joins or aspects 12th from Pada Lagna
or Lagna, the man loses money by paying heavy
government taxes.
??• nafinKit n
Su. 1 1. Kujasmibhyam bhratrumuhhat.
If the I2th from Lagna or Pada Lagna is joined
or aspeeted by Kuja and Sani the person will suffer
losses through brothers.
Su. 12. Aetairvyaya aevam labhaha .
The. results have been given for the 12th house
from Lagna or Pada Lagna and the various sources
of losses have been indicated. If those planets
are in the 11th house, then instead of losing money

JAIMINISUTRAS
he will gain money through those source^ which have
been shown to the credit of planets. If the planets
are in the 12th house he will lose money, if they are
in the 11th house he will gain.
Su. 13. Labhe rahuhethubhyamudara rogahaIf the 7th house from Pada has conjunction or
aspect of Rahu or Kethu the person suffers from
stomach diseases.
?8. fcjpIT sftfo sq firf& n fa II
Su. 14. Tatra Jeethuna jjadithi jyanilingani.
If Kethu occupies the 2nd house from Pada
Lagna the person will display signs of old age, though
he may be young in years. He will show wrinkles
beyond his proper age. If in the 6th house from
Pada Lagna evil planets combine he will become a
thief. If the 2n l and 6th from Pa la Lagna are occupied by benefics without evil aspects, the person will
be a governor of many countries.
Su. 15. Chandragurusuhreshu sreemanthaha.
If Chandra, Guru or Sukra occupy the 2nd from
Pada Lagna he will become a rich mm. Here all
these planets may be in the second or any one of
them.

JAIMTNISUTRAS
So. 16. Uchhena va.
If the evil or good planets are in tne second
house from Pada in exaltation the person becomes
rich,
NOTES
He has already shown if the exalted planet is a benefic,
the person acquires wealth by lawful means but if an ev>l‘
planet is in the second exalted, the person becomes rich"
through unlawful and sinful ways.
ir
Su 17. Svamsavadanyafprayena.
All the results explained in the -above sutras will
have application and reference as thf y have had in
the Karakamsa.
?<J. ^ ftwr wr ii.
Su 18, Labhapade hendre thrihyne v% sreemantaha .
If the Aradha Lagna falls in the 7th froto'Janma
Lagna or Karakamsa or in the Kendras or Konas the
person becomes extremely rich*
3fw ii
Su. 19. Anyatha dusthe .

JAIMINISUTRAS
. If the Arudha Lagna does not fall in Kendra or
Thrikona from Lagna but falls in Dashkas 6, 8 and
12, the results will be bad.
NOTES
That is instead of becoming a Sreemem'fta the person be- .
comes a poor man. They are called Dustkas or Dusthanas
or bad places.
Ro. H
Su* 20« Kendra thrikonopachayeshu dwayormaitri.
If the Saptamiru lhi falls in Kendras, Thrikonas
or the Upachayas from Janma Lagna, excepting the
6th which is classified as a Dusthana there will be
great agreement between the wife and the husband.
NOTES
The couple will lead an agreeable life. A good wife is
Heaven on Earth. A bad one is the Hell on the Barth.
^ il
Su. 91. Ripu rogz ehintasu vairamIf the Arudha Bhavas fall in 6. 8 and 12 from
Lagna they denote evils to such Bhavas.
NOTES
Ra S f pa 1 - 21 =12. Ra 2, Get 3=23 = 32, divided by 12
we get 8. Gha 6, ta 6 = 65, divided by 12 we g_et 6 balance..

JAIMINISUTBAS
So. 22. Patnilabhayor dhishtya nirabhatar
rgaXaya .
If the Arndha Lagna and the 7th from it have
no obstructive Argalas, the person becomes fortunate.
NOTES
Pa 1, na 0, *■ 10, reversed it is 01, or it denotes the
first house. La 3, Bha 4—34 reversed we get 43, divided by
12, we get a balance of 7. For subha and papa Argalas see
my notes on Sutras 5 to 9 in Pada 1 of Adhyaya 1.
Su. 23. BJwbhargale dkanasamriddhi .
If Arudha Lagna and the 7th from it have
beneficial Argalas there will be plenty of money.
NOTES
If the Argala happens to be malicious there will be
ordinary wealth. If there is a mixture of subha and Papa
Argalas, the person will have financial ups and downs or he
will be tossed from wealth tto poverty and from poverty to
wealth.
Vi. 03TWJ II
Su. 24. J anmahilagliatikzsioeka drishtasu
rajanaha

JAIMINISUTRAS
If a planet aspects Hora Lagna, Gbatika Lagna
and Janma Lagna the person becomes a ruler or one
equal to him.
. NOTES
For an explanation of these various Lagnas see Sutra
32 of 1st Pada. What is meant here is that if one planet
aspects all these three different -Lagnas at the same time the
person attains to eminent position, if not he will become a
King. In some places Ministers are more powerful than Kings.
Su. 25. Patnilabh'iyoscka rasyamsalca drib'
anairva.
If Chandra Lagna, Navamsa Lagna, Drekkana
Lagna and the 7th houses from these three are
aspected by one planet, the person becomes a great
'ruler or a Maharaja.
NOTES
Some old commentators observe thus. If one has connection, conjunction or aspect, with Lagna, the 7th from
it, Chandra Lagna, Navamsa Lagna and Drekkana Lagna,
the person becomes a Maharaja or a great powerful ruler,
u
Su. 26. Theshweltasminnune nunam.
If out of the 6 Lagnas viz., Lagna, Ghatika
Lagna, Hon Lagna, Chandra Lagna, Navamsa
Lagna and Drekkana Lagna— one planet sees five

$6 jAIMINISUTRAS
and not all the six, the person will have ordinary
Rajayoga,
NOTES
This combination occurs only iu real Rajayogas or
royal combinations. If an exalted planet occupies tbe
Arudha Lagna or Chandra, Guru and Sukra are there and
evil obstructive Argalas are not there, where, while there
are beneficial Argalas, the person will attain to royal position.
Su. 27. J Emmamsato drihznatascha*
If the Navamsa, Hora and Ghatika Lagnas, or
Drekkana, Hora and Ghatika Lagnas, are aspected
by one planet there will be Rajayoga.
Some commentators are of opinion that 2£ ghatis exactly
in the middle of the Day and the Night are auspicious and
such times produce Kings and their equals The mid-day
goes under the name of Abhijit and is considered as very
auspicious for all work. It cuts away all evils, Abhijit
sarva doshagktutm.
Su. 28. Su krac hcmdrayormithodris May ok simhastayorva yanavaniaha.
If Sukra gmd Chandra aspect each other or if
they are in the 3rd house from each other the person
will be blessed with various, conveyances.

jAIMINISUTRAS
NOTES
Simha means 3, Sa denotes 7» Ha shows 8=78, reversed 87, divided by 12» gives 3 as remainder.
Su 29. SuJtra kuj^ kethnshu vaUkanikaha.
If Sukra? Kuja and Kethu have mutual aspects
or if they are in the 3rd house from each other the
person will have aristocratic surrounding from his
ancestors.
NOTES
He will belong to an old and respectable family which
has royal traditions and nmks of honour. Some commentators say that the person will be proficient in all the
details of religious sacrifices.
3°. swRiwtunwSs mrrat n
Su. 30. Swdhhagyadara matrubhavasameihu
suhheshu rajanaha.
If the 2nd, 4th and 5th Bhavas become equal
to the Karaki or if benefics occupy them, the person
becomes a Raja or his equal in position,

*v§8 jaiminisutr^
Bha 4 and Va 4 = 44, drvided,&y 12 will give us the re*
mainder as 8. 'They say that if the 2nd and 4th house? from
the'Karaka are' equal or If benefics occupy thpm or if the 5th
and 8th houses are equal dr' have beneficial planets in them
there will be Bajayogap ,
; Hi ww ll
fSu. 31- Karmadamyoh papayoscha.
If. the 3rd and 6th houses from Atmakaraka*
are equal or if they are joined by malefics there will
be Rajayogas.
NOTES
• K# l, Ma 5—15, reversed 51, divided by 12, the balance
•is 3?. - Da 8, Sa 7=87, reversed 78, divided by 12, we have
a balance of 6. When he says equal he means that the
sources hi strength and weakness must balance equally.
ftferailWw^ii
Su. 32. Pitru labhadkipasekaivam *
If -from the lords of Lagna or 7th benefics
occupy thfe .2nd, 4th? 5th and 8th, there will be
Rajayogas.
NOTES
Jatmini confuses his readers, unless they happen fcp be
V^ery intelligent,, by referring to Lagna, Pada, Lagija,
Ghatika, Hora Lagna, Atmakarakamsa and oV er. amsas
and unless, we have able onmn^ntories, the renders will be

JAIMINISUTRAS
W
launched in a rough sea of doubts. Fitu, Pa 1, Ta 6“ 16,
reversing we get 61, and divided by 12, have the first
house or Lagna. Labha 7, La 3, Bha 4— 34, reversed, we
have 43, divided by 12, we have a balance of 7 therefore the
7th house from Lagna is indicated.
33- urn n
Su. 33, Miser e Somalia-.
If there is a mixture of benefics and malefics in
the above combination the person will attain to ordinary position.
Su- 34., Daridro vipareethe.
If evil planets occupy benficial signs and
benefics, evil signs the person will be poor.
3^. mau su ^ ai n
Su* 35. Mataii garoiv sulkre chmctrera rajaTseeyaha.
If to the .Lord of Lagna or to the Lord of,.7th*
the 5th house is occupied by Guru, Sukra or Chandra,
the person becomes a high Government official and
wields political powers.
33. stir at qft li
Su. *6. Karimni daseva papa senamjaha t

top JAIMimSUTRAS
If evil planets occupy the 3rd and 6th from the
lords of Lagrdf or the lord of the 7th the person becomes a military commander.
NOTES
Karmani 3, Dasa 6# Ka 1, M* 5=35 reversed we
have 51, divided by 12 we have the remainder 3. Da 8, Sa
is 7=87, reading backwards we have 78, divided by 12 we
get thy balance 6.
Commanders, often lead their victorious armies agains,
their employers and become rulers themselves. Hydert
Nepoleao, Shivaji, Hindenberg, Wellington and others
became rulers*
^ ii
Su. 37* Swapitrubhyam karma dasasiha
dristya tadeesa dristya matru ?iatha dristya cha
dhetmaniaha.
If the lords of the 3rd and 6th from Lagna and
Atmakaraka aspect the latter or if the plane is in those
houses aspect them, and if the lord of the 5th aspect
them the person becomes extremely intelligent.
NOTES.
Piiru I, Swa 1 » Karma 3, Dasa 6, Matru 5. These have
already been explained in Ka, Ta, Pa. Yadi Sutia rules,
\ e . sRrb ii
Sv* 38. dridya mkh malm*

jAtlllNISUTfcAS 461
If Lagna and Karaka Lagna have the aspect
of the lord of the 4th the person will be Hapyy.
NOTES
Dara 4. f Happiness it mast be remembered, does not
entirely depend upon position or wealth. There are some
people who are extremely rich and powerful, but they are
most miserable. There are some who are very ordinary but
who are perfectly happy. Physical and mental conditions
have great deal to do with happiness and specially some
temperaments have the knack of making themselves agree*
able alronnd and create happiness for themselves.
3 ^. fmssn itfnflj 11
Su. 39. liogesa driiiya daridraha.
If the lord of the 9th from Lagna and Karaka
L&gna aspect than, the person suffers from poverty.
NOTES
Roga 8, Ra 2, Ga 3=23, reversed 23. divided by, v
have balance 8.
v®. it
SU- 40. Ripunatkadristya vyayaseelaha.
If the lord of the 12th from Lagna and Karai
Lagna aspect them then the person becomes a spent
thrift or extravagant.
Wlfoswr JR3K II
§U, 41, Swamidristya prahalaha.

102 jAIMtNIStTTRAS
If the lord of Lagna aspects the i^tgna and if
the lord fHeKtiraka 7 Lag nil aspects that Lagna
the person will have very good Rajayogas.
83- Wl5CSW , l < HS5*n*S TO*
»nftj n
SU, 42. P&cshadripu bhagyaorgraha samye
V&ftdkah konayd jHpujayayohe beetayugmayordara
riphgyoseha
If from Lagna— the 2nd and 12th or ,5th and
9th or 12th and 6th or 4th and 10th have the
same number of planets posited? the person will be
imprisoned.
NOTES
This s?ems to be tin longest Sutra I have had to-dea
Bince the commencement of this work and it requires a clear
explanation.
If any of these have- Grahasamya
Ripn— 12 then the person will have chains, beating,
imprisonment andthe displeasure of the
. -Bhagy — 2 governing authorities. If there is one
planet in the Snd^ there must one
plahet in the 12. ’ If ther^'ai'i’ 2 ‘planets
hiPtfie 2nd the tWeiffh irlso* inusti,We
Ripu—12 2 planets. If there ar2-3'$anfctsin'ihe
5th ? ^tbe 9th.
Jaya— 6 > This is Grahasamya or quality in
the number of planets, If there are evil
iW*

JAIMINISUTRAS m
Dara— 4 combinations or aspects tor these houses
or for their lords the punishment „are
Ripa — 10 Certain and the man will suffer. If there
are good pianetary combinations or
Kita — 11 aspects for these houses or their lords,
the person will have trials and troubles
Yugma— 3 and prosecutions, but will be let cff after
trials and persecutions. Here five sets
of houses have been named and the presence of planets, in
each' set) of equal number in each of the louses indicate
imprisonments and tortures. But I gather from the
commen tones that when the number of planets is not equal
or properly matched these troubles may not be indicated.
u|s hsrsi ii
Su* 43. SuJcradgouna j oadasto rahu, surga
dritio netraJia.
If the 5th from Arudha Lagna is occuiped by
hu and Ravi aspects him, the person will lose
sight;;
NOTES
Sukra 1, Sa means 5, Ra 'denotes 2 = 52, reversed 25,
divided -by. 12, we have -1, denoting Lagna. Gauna, 5, Ga
shows 3, Na» denotes 5 — 35, reversal 53, divided by 12, we
have the balance of 5, denoting the 5th house. Each Lagna
has its Arudha. Take the 5th in the undergiven horoscope*

JAIMimSUTRAS
Here the 5th is Kataka. Its
lord is in the 11th from the
5th. The 11th from Chandra
falls in Meena and if I understand the Sutra properly, it
means the fifth Arudha falls In
Meena, is occupied by Rahu
and Ravi aspects him, the person will lose his sight.
s«. wrwpiti wfasrft m\
it ?i% tareit?: Hmsfi H
Su 44. Swadaragayok su Jcrac handrayora -
todyam rajachinhaneechaIf Sukra and Chandra occupy the 4th from
Atmakaraka, the person will have the parapharnaJia
of royalty, viz , Nagara or drums, Noubahat, music,
Chair as or umbrellas, Chamaras or tufts of hair-fans
which attendants keep waving about the royal personage and other signs and emblems of royal state.
NOTES
We can easily infer that if Sukra and Chandra in this
combine ation are exalted, have good conjunctions and aspects
the person will have these royal insignia on a grand scale
aud if they are weak or have evil aspects and conLagua
Rahu
Sam
Chan- 1
draBudha
Ravi
Sukra
RASI
Kuja '
Guru
jKetbu

lAIMItfISUTRA$
junctions* the royal para^pharnalia will *be on small or
poos scale. There are Rajas with a few lacs j.nd emperors
with many crores.
There are Kings and Kings, rulers and rulers, emperors
and all these have different grades and different insignia.
In all these sotras, taking the original commentories and
my notes the readers will see that they have to shift through
a lot of conflicting evidence and confusing principles. I have
tried my best to make the explanations, notes, examples as
clear aAd convincing as possible. But in spite of all my
effort^ ffie readers may find doubts and difficulties. Here
in such nasas my sound advice to them would be that they
bhoahf read the sutra well twice or thrice, read the transla-
'tsbhiS I 'have given and examples by way of illustrations.
And after doing so, if they still have doubts they must think
over well, for a few days, read the previous and the future
stanzas and I may assure them, that suddenly they will
hit upon the correct idea or meaning and their doubts will
be solved and fresh and glorious mental light will flash en
tbeirbrains.
ADHYAYA 1— Pada 4.
Su. 1. JJpapadam padam ptiranucharatTake the 12th house from Lagna. Find out its
Pada Lagna or Arudha Lagna. This becomes
Vpwpada.

JAlMINlSUTfcAS
NOTES
For ordinary Pada we take the lord of Lagna and we
Tf the ® ame number of Rasis from Mm as he has
vanced from Lagna and this becomes Pada or Arudha
I-agna. For Upapada we have to take from the lord of the
£*5“ La f na a f d f oant again that number of Rasis from
iwrfnV 0,< / ,d i ! sign whicfa in tZ
5S ™ i be Up y ada - T** meaning will not be clear
lmlms I give one or two examples.
Upapada Lagna Sam
Lagna)
Pada [Lagna Sani . Vrishabha is Its
Lagna Lord Sukra joins Dhanus the
Ravi j 8th from Lagna. Counting
^ Bdha a gam the 8th from Sukra we
— — - RASI get Kataka and this is called
Pada or Arudha Lagna (see
Sntra 29 of pada 1 .) Now we
_ Knia ^ave to find Upapada. Take
Sakra Kethu fehe Iord o{ i2feh from
1 1 Lagna. The 12th from Lagna
§ s Mesha. Its lord is Kuja and he is found in the 7th from it.
The seventh from him is again Mesha and in this horoscope
Sukra
Kuja
Kethu
Rahu
JLagna
Sani
Chandra
RASI
Gum
Arudha Lagna falls in Kataka
and it goes under the name
[ of Pada, The Upapada will
Ravi fall in Mesha, and the results
in this Chapter will be
Budha predicted wi tii reference to
Sukra Upapada. Take another
Kethu j horoscope. Here calm l y the
pada ^ ada an( i the Upapada
Lagha | Lagnas. The lord of Lagna

lAlMlNISIJTRAS
is Sani and he is in the 4th from Lagna. The fourth from
him.or Simha will be Arudha or Pada Lagna, How calculate
the Upapada Lagna. Take the 12th from -Lagoa. This
falls in Makara. Its lord is Sani. He is in the 5th hawse
from it or Vrishabha. Now take the 5th from him, it will
fall in Kanya. For this person Pada Lagna falls in Simha
and Upapada falls in Kanya.
Take another example. In this horoscope the lord of
Lagna is .Guru. He is in Mithnna or the 4th. Connt from
him to the 4th we see that it fails in Kanya. This will be
the Pada Lagna for this native. Now take the 12th house
from Lagna. This will be Kumbha. Its lord is Sani. He
Is found in the 4th from that house in Vrishabha. Count
the 4th from him and it will be Simha and this will be his
UPapdda Lagna, All L&gnas and Bhavss have their Pdda
and Upafiada, and Jaitnini seems to pay great attention to
Atmdkarakamsa , Pada Lagna and Upapida Lagna. Some
eommentatora say — UPapadam Ldhhaditi. This means taka
the 7th from Lagna and find out the Arudha from it. This
becomes tbe Upapada Lagna. Take the horoscope given
below. Zafiha means, La 3, Bha 4 - 34, reversed it becomes
43, divided by 12, we get a remainder of 7, and therefore
the 7th house is meant by this sutra.
The 7th from Lagna
becomes Kanya, Its Lord
Budba occupies the 6th
house from it in Kumbha.
The 6th from Kumbha is
Kataka. Therefore for this
horoscope the Upapada
becomes Kataka according
to this sutra. Thus in this
horoscope according to one
Lagna
Ravi
Kethu
Sani
Guru
Budha
Knia
RASI
Upa- ,
pada !
Lagna!
Sukra
L_
Ruhu
Chan- !
dra

JAIMINISUTRAS
theory Upapada becomes Simha and according to the latter
Updpada bec^pies Kataka. This makes a great deal of
difference. I have indicated the differences and leave the
readers to follow their own judgment, experience and
personal reading.
wwi m w
Su. 2. Tatra papasya papayoge pravrajja da ra
nasova.
If the Upapada has evil conjunction or aspect
or if the 2nd from it has an evil planet, the wife will
die or he will embrace pravrajjya or sanyasa or
asceticism.
NOTES
Brihaspathi is quoted here. If there is a malefic planet
in the Arudha Lagna from the 7th or Jdmttra or an evil
planet in the 7th or 2nd or Rahu is found in the 9th, the
wife of the person will be destroyed.
to: ii
Su. 3, UpapadasyapyarudJiatwadeva naira
ravihi papaha.
If the second from the Upapada is occupied by
Ravi he does not become a malefic.
NOTES
Somehow all Astrological writers have classified Ravi
as mi evil planet. Jaimini says that Ravi is not an evil planet
When he is ia the 2nd house from Upapada.

JAIMINISUTRAS
v. h
Su. 4. Shubhadrigyoganna.
If* in the above combinations in Sutras 2 and 3,
here are beneficial aspects or conjunctions* the evil
esults should not be predicted.
NOTES
It means that his wife will not die or he will not take
anyasa. The wife must die some day or other. What is,
neant here is that during those evil times indicated by the
ilanets death will not happen,
H- 5ft% smwi II
Su. 5. NeecJiey daranasah *.
If the 2nd from Upapada' falls in Neechamsa or
ias the conjunction of a Neecha or debilitated planet
here will surely be death to wife in that evil period.
Su, 0. TJcchey bahudaraha.
If, in the 2nd from Upapada there is an exalted
)ianet or the second falls in an exalted Navamsa, the
ierson will have many wives.
NOTES
I do not know if many wives add pleasure or misery to
t, person.. His fust may be satisfied but he will be miserable.
Et is a question to be solved by each man for .himself.

JaiminiSutras
If Sukra aftd Kethu occupy or aspect the second
from Upapa&a the wife will suffer from bloody discharges or blood complaints.
NOTES
Females have these menstrual and bloody complaints
very often and they lead to consumption.
Su. 14. Astisravo budhaJcethubhyam.
If the second from Upapada has the aspect or
conjunction of Budha and Kethu the wife of the
person will suffer from a disease wherein her bones
will be melted and dropped down.
?K. si
Su, 15. Saniravirahubhirastijvaraha.
If Sani, Ravi and Rahu join or aspect the 2nd
house from Upapada the wife will suffer from chronic
or persistent low fever.
NOTES
In the Ayurvedic system, there is the Rakiasrita Inara
OK fever found persistent in blood and Asiigata Jwara or
fever which, has penetrated to the bones and which cannot
easily be eradicated. The first fever is milder while the
second is more serious. Fever is the monarch of all diseases
and brings in its train various complications*

JAIMINISUTRAS 113
?$. ffogwit II
So. 16, Budhahetkubhyam sthaulyam.
If the second from Upapada is aspected or conjoined by Ketfau and Budfaa, the wife becomes
clumsily corpulent.
NOTES
I believe great corpulence and accumulation of fat in the
body for man or woman is a great misfortune. There is a
limit to corpulence. When it is unwieldy it gives great
inconvenience,
Su. 17. Budhakshetre m.mdarabhyam nasikarotfaka.
If the second from Upapada falls in one of the
signs of Budha, viz., Mithuna or Kanya and possesses
the aspect or conjunction of Sani and Kuja the wile
will suffer from nasal diseases or complaints of the
nose,
^ II
Su. .18, Kujahshetre cha.
If the second house from Upapada falls in one
of Kuja's houses, viz., Mesha or Vrischika and has
the aspect of Kuja and Sani the same nasal disases
will trouble the man’s wife.

1*4 JAIMINISUTRAS
Su. * 19. Ghif^semibhywni harnarogo narahaJca
cha.
II the second from Upapadt s falls in any one of
the houses of Kuja or Budha and has the aspect or
conjunction of Guru and Sani the wife will have ear
complaints and also nervous diseases.
Su. 20. Guru rahubhyam dantarogaha.
If the second from Wpapada falls in any of the
houses of Budha or Kuja and has the aspect of Guru
and Rahu the wife will suffer from tooth diseases.
NOTES
Ja Sanskrit ifc is stated that four forms of diseases are the
most painful to endure, wiz„ Aksht -eyes, Kukshi -stomach,
Hira *» head and Danta ** teeth. These aches are very
painful.
m n
Su. 21. Banirahuihyam hanya thutayoho
p^Mgurmtmogo va.
If the second from Upapada fails in Kanya or
Thula and has the aspect of Sani and Rahu the .wife
^Riil he defective in limhs or will suffer from * wiridy
complaints.

JA1MINISUTRAS
NOTES
•Ayurveda says that when the three Dhat^s—Vata, Pitba,
»**£ Stebraa are properly distributed the body keeps good
health. When any one of them is excited diseases appear.
r*. ii
Su. 22. Subhadr igyogmna.
If in the combinations given above there are
beneficial conjunctions or aspects, the evils will
disappear and bad should not be predicted.
Su. 23. Siplamamno grakebhyaschaimm.
The above results may also be predicted by the
7th from Upapaia, by the Kalatra Karakamsa and
by the lords of those houses.
NOTES
This means that all the above results good and bad may
','fee predicted by the lord of the 7th from Upapada, and by the
7th house from Ufiaptda, by the Kalatra Karahdmsa *and
also by its lord. For each Bhava so many combinations
have to be examined that Astrological predictions are not
easy matters. Great devotion is needed.
W. it
Su. 24. Budko, smisuhreskwanapaiylm.
If the 7th from Upopodo and its lord and the
lord of the Kolodra Karakomsa and its lord —if all
these four are aspected or conjoined by Budha, Sani
and Sukra, the person will have no issues.

116 JAIMINISUTRAS
Su. 2$. PutresJw ravirahu gurubhirbalm
pdt aha.
If the 5th houses from the 7th, from Upcvpada t
its lord, the Kalatra Kamkamsa and its lord have
the aspects or conjunctions of Ravi, Rahu and Guru,
the person will have many children.
NOTES
Rahu seems to exercise very peculiar influences.
n
Su* 26. Chandrenaikapitraha.
If in the combination given in Sutra 25, the
fifth has only Chandra’s aspect or conjunction, the
person will have only one son.
Su* 27. Misre vilambathputraha
If the 5th in Sutra 25 has combinations and
aspects, both for many issues and no issues, then predict an issue later on in life.
NOTES
What the author means is, when there are combinations
for many children and no children, the person will have
issues later on in life. The problem of children i3 curious
and various. Some beget children very early in life and gej
as many as 20 or 25 by one wife Others get even SO to 35
children by two or three wives oa9 after the other or sinaul-

JAIMINISUTRAS 117
taneoariy by several wives. There are some who gel only a
beaked number. Some get as issue early iajife and gel no
more. Some get one child in the middle of their life and
there are others who get only one child towards the close of
their lives. God’s creation presents puzzles and confusion
all round us.
Su. 28. Kuj aianibhyam daiiapuiraha .
If the 5th house in the combinations given in
Sutra 23, has the aspect or conjunction of Kuja and
Sani, the person will have an adopted son.
NOTES
I have shown the importance of children in the previous
notes. There are 14 varieties of children mentioned by the
Hindu Law. *
3n% n
Su. 29. Ojt bahupuiraha.
If the 5th from the combinations mentioned in
Spbra 35 falls in an odd sign the person will have
many children.
3«. 3*fcc<nras n
Su. 30. Ugme alpaprajaha.
If the 5th sign in the above combinations falls
in even signs these will be few issues.
Ju. 31. QruhitkremaUuhshi tadeem panchainavnsa grahebhyaschaivam .

■m
JAIMINISUTRAS
Just as you find out from Janmalagna, particulars
about children, so also inquire into the 5th house*by
considering Upapada and its lord, and Putra Karakamsa rasi and its lord.
NOTES
In general Astrology the significations of the 12 Bhavas
have been well explained. As we take the Rasis, their lords,
the planets, who conjoin and aspect them and determine the
results in reference to them so also Jaimini advi c es the students to determine the various results with reference to
Upapada, its lord and the lord of the Putra Karakamsa and
the various aspects and conjunctions these houses have as
also their lords. In fact the same procedure should be
adopted^* in the examination of the 12 Bhavai. Only these
are taken with reference to birth Lagna and the author says
instead of the Janmalagna, take the UP&pada, its lord and
the Putra Karakamsa.
Su, 82. Bhrabrubhyam sani rahubhyam bhratrunasaha.
If Sani and Rahu occupy the lith or the 3rd
from Upctp'iaa and its lord? the elder and the
younger brothers die respectively.
NOTES
, The 11th house denotes elder brothers and elder sisters
t|ie 3rd. indicates the younger brothers and sisters* This
is well known in General Astrology. We take these from
Janmalagna. Hem Jaimini takes them from Upapada.

JAIMINISOTBAS ll®
g^pat^ro ^n^: il
Su. 33. SuJcrma vyavahita garha nasaka.
If Sukra joins the 3rd or the 11th from Upapada
and its lord, the younger and the elder brothers will
die.
NOTES
I have already shown that the 3rd indicates younger and
the 11th elder brothers and sisters.
fajw larclsft il
Su. 34. PUru bhave sukra dristepi.
If the Lagna or the 8th house from it has the
aspect ©f Sukra loss must be predicted for elder and
younger brothers.
Pitru One— Pa i t Ta means 6 = 16, reversed it becomes
61, divided by 12, we get the Lagoa or one. B/taxxt—8,
Bha stands for 4 and Fa stands for 4=44, divided by 12*
we have the remainder 8. The commentators refer simply
to Lagna and Astama and we have to take them from
Janma-lagna. How Astama or the 8th has anything to do
With eider and younger brothers, cannot be traced. Hie
Sutra is clear and we have to take it as given by the
Maharishi.
Vt. It
Su. 35. iTtt/a guruchdndm budhair b&fm
bratharaha.
If the 11th and 3rd from Tfpapada and its lord*
are joined by Kuja, Guru, Chandra and Budha, the

126 lAihiltllSUT&AS
person will hate many brothers, elder and younger
included.
JSFmrtwf sh H
Su* 36. Sanyarabhyam dritte - yatfwmcm
bkrathru nasaha.
If the 3rd and 1 1th from ITpapada have the
aspect of Sani and Kuja the person will have his
brothers destroyed.
NOTES
When the 3rd has evil aspects, the younger and when
the 11th has aspects, the elder brothers will die» If both have
evil aspects thea the younger as well as the elder brothers
will die. Sisters are included in brothers. Brethren refers
to those who are bora with a person, males and females
included.
Su. 37. S mina swamztra seskascha.
If the 3fd and 11th from Upzpida i and its lord
are as aspected by Smi the person will lose all bus
brothers and sisters and he will remain alone.
\ c - ii
Su* 38. . Kethau bhaginee bahulyam.
If the 3rd and llth from Upapadz and its lord
has the conjunction of Ketu, the person will have
many sisters*

JA1MINISUTRAS
sr»isiin*ifc mr ?ann* ii
Su. 39. Labhesadbhagyabhe rahau dounslravan.
If Rahu joins the 2nd from the 7th from
Upapada the person will have large teeth or no teeth
or will become dumb*
»®. spsrcn? 'i
Su 40. Kethau stabdavak .
If Kethu joins the 2nd house from the 7th from
Upapada, the person will be an indistinct speaker or
possesses bad pronunciation. He may also have
stammering.
Su. 41. Mandt Kurap ih%.
If Sani joins the 2nd house from the Lord of
the 7th house from Upapada the person becomes
ugly and repulsive.
Wraufcfisftafficwit ii
Su. 42. Swamsavasadgowra neelapitadivarn*
aha.
The colour or complexion of the person, yellow,
dark* golden or white must be predicted from the
nature of the Navamsa occupied by th e Atwahat aha*
NOTES
Similarly Jaitnioi hiufcs to find out the colors of the
various relations from the Navarasas occupied by their re-

122 JAWINISUTRA.S
spective Karakas t ^ Yaraiiamihira says Lagoa Navamsapa
Thulya Tanusy at. Judge the colors etc., of the person by the
Navamsa occupied by the lord of Lagna.
Su. 43- Amatijanucharadderata bhaMihi.
Take the planet next in degrees to Aniatyahciraha and find out from mm the religious tendencies
of the person.
NOTES
As per those rules the next planet m degrees to A maty abarak* will be Bralniiarau.i. If that planet happens to be
evil the man will be devoted to the worship of evil spirits,
|f he happens to be good, then he will worship good Gods.
In the all powerful Time are embedded 33 ctores of Devatas
or forces or Energies for purposes of creation, protection and
destruction. Eleven crores of energies are under the contro.
of Brahma and his Spouse Saraswathi, representing all
education, qnana and intelligence for creative or generative
’functions. Eleven crores of energies are under the rule of
Vishnu with Laksbmi, for functioning protection. Money
is needed for protection and Lakshmi’s grace is wanted.
Eleven crores of forces are under the control of Mahesvara
with Durga for destructive purposes. By tapas man gets
psychological energy. This enables him to issue orders to
the different forces, generative, protective and destructive as
he develops one of these three. Nigra ha and Armgraha
forms are different. The education department increases a
man’s knowledge, the District Magistrate has power' to offend ;
die Sessions Judge can hang a man or let him off .from the

JA1MINISUT R AS
gallows. The postal man cm transport new* and mone
tad small articles. The pohce mi the revalue have differet
functions. All are order? or cent i! f xrces but each has
different function. By ke?puu company with a scivang*
a man gets dirty stink. 3y a- c o:iatin.r with a scent merchar
he gets perfumes. All these 33 crore? of energies are calls
Dev&tas and by analogy God?. The nsvchology of a per30
differs considerably from others Whi’e one cultivates th
art of charity and philanthropy, another cultivates the art t
cruelty and destruction. In this sutra the man’s demotion i
shown by the planets. When they are bad he invokes ev
spirits or forces. When good, he invokes the beneficia
powers. I refer my readers to the wilderness of Mant:
Sastras. There are sap fa koti mahamarttras and navakot
kshu/ira mantras. The former enable a person to do benef
cial actions by the help of Mahamantras or beneficial force"
The latter enable the person to call evil powers and d
mischief to the people. We have Daishinach tra or goo
and Vamachara or bad.
Su. 44. Swamss 1c>r ill pipastmbxnihe par&
jaiaha.
If evil planets occupy Atmakarakam&a RasJ
the person will be born of adultery.
an. h
Su. 45. Natrapapath.
If the Atmakaraki is himself evil and other ev
planets are not with him, then the evil in the abov
sutra should not be attributed.

214 JAIMINISUTRAS
NOTES
This means lie will be legitimate and born to his father.
Su. 46. Sanirahu bhyam prasidhihi.
If Sani and Rahu are in conjunction with Atma -
karakamsa Rasi, the person will become a notorious
rake.
NOTES
People indulge in sexual embraces, but many do so with
some sense of honor. But there are many who are shameless
in such matters.
Su. 47. G-opanam anyebJiyha.
If in the Atmakarakamsa other evil planets than
Sani and Rahu are conjoined the person will not beborn to another’s seed, but his mother will be im
moral.
NOTES
A person's mother may be an immoral woman, but he
may be the product of legitimate embrace.
Su. 48. fihubhavarge apavada matram.
If shubha Shadwerga arise in the Atmakarakamsa in the above mentioned Togas there will be
scandal about his legitimacy but he will be really
horn of hjs fathe/s seed,

JAIMIN1SUTRAS 125
NOTES
There will be unfounded suspicions about his birth but
they will not be true.
8^. fofe i!
Su. 49. . Dvigrahe kttlamuJckyaha.
If there are two planets in the A tmahxrakamsa»
the person will become a leader in his community.
NOTES
Persons, males as well as females, have peculiar tern,
per aments. To be a leader in bis own community, family-
' religion, science, art, or sect, trade or line of profession is
a great ambition which they often try to emulate- Even in
vices there are leaders and sub-ordinates. The leader of a
dacoit gang will have hundreds or thousands of persons
under him and the leadership is courted by his followers and
admirers. Take any line of work, there are leaders and
those who follow them as menials and subordinates of
various grades- In this leadership, there is much good or
evil the leader can do. If there are two or more evil
planets in the Earakamsa the person will be cruel and sinful
in his deeds. If there are benefics we may expect the prominence in good and virtuous ways.
End of Fourth Pada of the First Mbyaya.
ADHYAYA II- Pada 1.
Su. 1, Aayuh pitrudineiabhyam-

126 JAIMINISUTRAS
Longevity of a person has to be determined
with reference to Lagna and the 8th from it*
NOTES
P;/ru- 1, Dina~ 8; Pa !, Ta means 6, 16 reversed will
61, divided by 12 we have a reminder 1. Therefore the
1st house, Di— 8, Na— 0, reversed we get 08. Therefore
8th house from Lagna is signified. ] itaka Chandrika, following Parasara, lays down 8th and 3rd as houses of longevity*
Su. 2. Prathaviayorutharayorva deergham .
If the lords of the 1st and 8th are in movable
or common signs or if one of them is in a movable
and the other in a common sign there will be
longevity
Su. 3. Prathamadivitiyyayorant.iyorva madkyan
If the lords of the 1st and 8th are found in
Onra and Sthira Rasis —movable and fixed — or if
both of them are in double bodied signs there will
be middle life.
a. frcq; II
Su. 4. Madhyayoradymtayorva hemam .
If the lords of 1st and 8th are found in fixed
signs of one in ^Chara and other in Dwiswabhava

JAIMINISUTRAS W
there will be short life. In the second sptra the last
portion repeats the same idea.
Su. 5. Euctm Mandachandrabhyam.
The rules he has given in the first four sutras
must also be applied to Chandra Lagna and the
Lagna.
notes
_ Mandat l, Mi 5, Da 3-58, reversed we have 85,
divided by 12, we get 1 or first house- Therefore apply the
above rules for Lagna and Cinndra. Here he drops the
lord of the 8th.
h TOCSTCHW It
Su. 6. PUruhalatascha.
Pooraa, Madhja, Alpa.
Long, middle
and short livfes
may also be ascer-
' tained from Lagna
and Hora Lagna.
1. Ohara — Movable.
2. Sthim— Fixed.
3. Dwi&mabham —
Common or Dcmble
bodied sign.
Long life is ensured when the above mentioned lords
H re
1 Long
1 Middle
1 Short
1 life
2 hfe
3 life
2 Long
2 Middle
2 Short
3 life
1 life
2 life
3 Long
3 Middle
3 Short
2 life
3 life
1 life

JAIMINISUTKA6
1 . In two movable signs.
2. In fixed*and common signs.
3. In common and fixed signs.
Middle life.
When the two lords are in —
1. Movable and fixed signs.
2. Fixed and movable signs.
3. Common and common signs .
Short life .
1. Movable and common.
2. Fixed and fixed.
3< Common and movable.
This table enables the reader to readily ascertain from
the lords of Lagna, Chandra and Hora Lagna and the lord
of the 8th, the term of life of a person.
vs. n
Su- 7. Samvadat pram any am:
Whichever longevity is determined by the greater number of combinations of planets, that term of
life should be predicted and it will happen certainly.
NOTES
This system of ‘calculation and comparison is called
sanwada. Three systems have been given, vtz.,
1. From the position of the lords of Lagna and the 8th
in the movable, fixed and common signs.
2> From the position of the lords of L^gna’and Chandra
Lagoa in the above Kasis,

JAIMMSUT&AS m
3 ' Fr0m the position of the Lagna an^Hora Lagoa in
the above signs. I have already explained what
is meant by Hora Lagna.
If the terms of life given by any of these two are opposed
to or vary from the term of life indicated by one system theft
fbe former will prevail If the calculations from these three
fystems agree then, certainly the person will have that term
which they show.
<£■ firaft? ii
Su. 8 Visamvade 'pitruhalathaha.
If three terms of life are indicated by the three
systems, then the terms obtained by the Lagna and
Hora Lagna should be preferred and accepted.
NOTES
If by one system we get long life, by another system
middle life and by the third short life, accept that term which
you get by the Lagna and Hora Lagna and rejecf the other
terms obtained by other calculations.
x. ftierait ^ ii
Su. 9. PUrulabh'tge chandre chandra matidabhyam.
If Chandra is in the 7th from Janma Lagna
then the longevity obtained from the lords of these
two must be taken as the definite term of a man’s
life.
Alpayu or short life extends from birth to 32 years^
Madhyayu or middle life extends from 33 to 66 years.
Paramayu or long life extends from 67th to 100 years,

JAIMINIStlTRAS
Rasi^has 30 Bhagas or 30 degrees and the positions
of planets and houses will have to be taken with reference
fco degrees and minutes they occupy. If the lords of Lagna
and 8th are in the first 10 degrees of the Rasis indicating long
life, the person will have the full benefit of pumayu. If they
are in the end of those Rasis, death must be predicted at the
commencement of longevity. If they are in the middle, then
the extent of the term in longevity must be found out by the
rule of three. The rule of three should be thu 3 applied. For
each degree of the Rasi we get 1 year and 36 days as per
explanations of the old commentators. If pumayu counts
34 years from 66th year to one hundred then this has to be
^iyided by 30 degrees composing a Rasi. We get 1 year and
48 days and not 36 as explained by them. A purnayu man
under that technical term may die from his 67th year’s age
to his 100th year. Find out the degrees passed by the lords
of Lagna and 8th in the respective houses they are and then
by rule of three find out how many degrees and minutes and
seconds they have passed in those Rasis and ascertain how
many years they give- Add this to 66 and the years so
obtained will be the term of life, the person will have in the
longevity period. Say they are in 1 6 degrees 20 minutes and
50 seconds. What would be the term of life ? We have
taken this in the purnayu. If each degree gets 1 year and
48 days, what will be the number of years, months and days
for 16 degrees, 20 minutes and 50 seconds ? This is simply a
question of the rule of three. We get 18 years, 6 months,
9 days and 40 ghatis. This added to 66 the term of middle
life, wo get 84-6-9-40. The longevity of the person will be
84 years, 6 months, 9 days and 40 ghatis and his death, must
be predicted after this age. Similarly the age must atsn be
ascertained by Hora as well as by Chandra Lagna. If there

JAlMfNISUTRAS Ul
are differences take the majority and decide. In the second
afid third divisions of Madhya and Alpayfts 0 r middle or
short lives the same procedure has to be followed. This
gives a clue to predict the correct time of death. The author
in the-.e sutras has not spoken anything about the Baiarista*
Madhyarista and Yogarista. A very large number of infants
dre before they are eight years of age and this is described
as death from Baiarista. Then Madhyarista extends from
8 to 2j years, and we have a large number of deaths. Then
we have the Yogarista extending from 20 to 32. Probably
aimini includes all these three different periods in the
Alpayuryoga which extends up to 32 years (see my notes in
BvAAft Jat<rki and Sarvarthaehmtamani on these various
t^a,«®f life). Unless we have a full knowledge of Baiarista
the calculation of Jaimini will not be found useful or accurate.
An infant dies in the womb, a few minutes after birth or
months— how can these Yogas apply to them- See PinMpathi or fcetal development given by me in Brihat JatakaSu, 10 Sanow yogahetou Jcakshya hrasahq.
If in the above combinations Sani causes the
Purnnynryoga then place it as Madhyayuryoga. If
he causes Madhyayuryoga then put it in Alpa and if
he causes Alpa then consider it as still less and
predict very early death.
??- mmmm 11
Su. 1.1. $ V ipareetamityanye.
Some, others are of opinion that when the longevity is caused by Sani there should be no Kakshva

JAIMINISUTRAS
Hrasa or deduction or degradation. They mean that
the term indicated by Sani should hold good.
w. * $r it
Su. 12. Na swarksha thungage mure.
If Sani causing longevity occupies his own or
exalted house, Kakshya Hrasa — or reduction should
not be applied.
lb ^ n
Su. 13. Kevakupapadrigyoginee chaIf Sani causing longevity, has many evil aspects
and conjunction then Kakshya Hrasa should not be
predicted.
iTORt n
Su. 14. PUrulahhage gurow kzvala shubha
drigyogini cha kakshya vriddhihi.
If Guru occupies the Lagna or the 7th has no
evil conjunctions or aspects, but beneficial aspects
and conjunctions, he will cause increase or Kakshya
Vriddhi.
NOTES
This means, if short life is revealed by the planetary
conjunctions, he will push it into middle life, if middle life is
demoted by the planetary positions he will cause long life, if
long Bin is indicated then he will grant the person life term
beyond a hundred years

JAIMINISUTRAS 133
?H« IRSR^2|
irfi&k ll
Su. 15. Moline dwarabahye navam.se nidha*
nam dwara dwaresayosckamalinye*
If * dwarabahya rasis are malefic signs or if
malefics occupy these dwarabahya rasis, or if the
lord of dwarabahya rasi is a malefic> death will
happen in the navamsa dasas of such dwarabahya
rasis.
NOTES
Dwara Rasi is the sign which commences the period for
a man. This will be some sign from the Lagna. Like the
Pada Lagna, that sign from it which bears the same number
from Dwara Rasi will be called Dwarabahya Rasi. Suppose
the 4th from Lagna, is the Dwara Rasi, which commences
the Dasa, the 4th from it or the 7th forms the Dwarabahya
Rasi. In the Jaimini Sutras later on will be explained the" Rasi Dasas or periods and sub- periods*
and ’when a man would be killed. This method of
attributing Dasas and Bhukties to Zodiacal signs is
not even hinted at in other books. There the Dasas and
Bhukties are attributed to planets and constellations. In the
Amaayurdaya of Satyacharya, Lagna in an y sign contributes
* The sutra is very tough and even the commentators have not come to
oar rescue It has reference to Marsha or death and has been
dealt with by me in my Studies in Jaimw t Astrology. The Rasi in which
a Dasa begins at birth is Dwara rasi. Suppose the lagna is Meena and
the Dwara rasi is the 5th from it, viz , Kataka Then the 5th from Kataka
vis., Vrischika will be called Bahya (Dwarabahya) rasi. Dwara rasi,
is also called Pakaraiji while Bahya rasi is also known as Bhoga rasi.

m
JAIMINISUTRAS
its own term of life. These Dwarabahya Basis are also
called Pakaikoya /casts. Paka means J>asa. If these two
Dwarabahya Basis are evil signs, death will result in the
period of an evil Navamsa in them. If the lords of these
two Rasis have evil aspects or conjunctions, death must be
predicted in the period of the evil Navamsa. Death always
happens under the greatest malefic planet and malefic Rasi.
S u. 16* Skubhadrigyoganna .
If to the Dwarabahya Rasis, and the Rasi occupied by Dwarabahya there are beneficial aspects
and conjunctions, there will be no death in the
Navamsa periods of those Rasis.
p? ii
Su 17. Rogese tunge navamsa vriddhihi.
If the lord of the 8 th from Lagna joins exaltation there will be increase of life in the Dasa of the
Navamsa thus averting the death indicated in the
abfrve combinations
n
Su* 18. Tairapi padesadasante padanavamsaaasayam pitrudinesatrihone v%.
If there is an increase of life as per Sutra 17
then death will happen in Navamsa dasa of the Rasi
occupied by Aroodhalagnadhipathi ; in the dasas of
Rasis. which are ia thnkona to lords of lagna and

Jaiminisutras 135
8th ; in the navamsa dasa of the RaSi containing
Aroodha lagna*
NOTES
Pitrv 1, Pa stands for 1, Ta denotes 6 = 16, reversed it
I 8 61 * dtV J ded by 12 > we ^ve 1 remainder, and it means
Lagna. Dina 8, Da stands for 8 and tfa 0 -80, reversed it
means 08, or the 8th house. If in the Vriddhi paksfaa named
m Sutra 17, the death does not happen then, when can the
person expect death. Jaimini here gives the periods when
eat may be expected. The Arudhadhipathi or the Lord of
Pada Lagna occupies some Rasi. Death may be predicted
th * Navamsa Rasi Dasa. Death may also happen in the
Dasas of the Trikonas from Lagna and the 8th or in the
Navamsa Dasa of the Arudfaa Rasi from Lagna. He has
given here three sets of combinations.
1. Death may occur in the Dasas of Trikonas from
Lagoa and the 8th.
2. Death may occur in the Nivamsa Dasa of the
Arudha Rasi.
3. It may happen in the Navamsa Dasa from the Ra*si
occupied by the lord of Arudha Lagna
firwi ii
Su. 19. Pitrulabha rogesa pranini kani&lkadiste sivataschaivam bhridha.
If the lord of the 8th from Lagna and the lord
of the 8th from the 7th, from Lagna are powerful
And occupy Kendras, Panaparas and Apoklimas,
&en they cause long, middle and short lives respectively.

136 JAIMINISOTRAS
NOTES
The lord of the 8th from Lagna and the lord of the 8th
from the 7th from Lagna must be powerful If they occupy
Kendras they give long life. If they occupy Panaparas
they produce middle life. If they occupy Aupoklimas they
produce short life*
Kendras are 1, 4, 7 and 10 from Lagna. Panaparas
are 2, 5, 8 and II from Lagna, Aupoklimas 3, 6, 9 and 12
from Lagna.
i»
Su. 20. Yogatsame siuasmin vipareetam .
If Atmakaraka joins the 7th from the 7th
(Lagna) the meaning conveyed in Sutra 19 vt ill have
to be differently interpreted.
NOTES
In this Sutra he is going to show some special results.
These are called Viparitas or perverts in meaning. The 7th
from the 7th will be Lagna itself. If by Sutra 19 longevity
is4ndicated, then call it Middle life, if they indicate middle,
call it short life, if short life is shown say there will be a
very little term of life. If it is long, say it will be short, if
it is short, say long, if it is middle then call it middle. Commentators give some more hints. If the lord of the 8th from
Lagaa is in exaltation then he will give one-half mors than
what could be expected from him.
If he oc cu pi es a debilitated Rasi then he will cut off onehalf of ; what be would have given under normal conditions.
Similarly when there are exalted and debilitated planets in
the 8th ure have to draw inferences and add or take away
from th^ teraas of life jadiefMted J>f them.

jAIMltflSUTRAS 1$>
\b n&m mi w
Su 21* Basiiaha pranaha.
The strength of the Rasis must be properly
ascertained*
NOTES
Jaimini gives particular strength to Rasis, other Shastras also attach importance to Rasis. He details Karakayogas shortly. He says that much strength need not be
attached to Amsa.
intern wr ft 11
Su* 22* * Rogesayoh siuata aikye yoge va
dhyam.
If the 8th houses from Lagna and the 7th, are
joined by their Karakas or if they happen to be thefcR
selves Karakas, if the lords of the 8th house from
Lagna and the 7th are occupying Kendras* Pana-
‘ paras or Aupoklimas, then the terms of life ascertained from the combinations shown in Sutra lft will
have to be reduced*
NOTES
If the life indicated is long then convert it into middle*
if it is middle, then reduce it to short, and if it is short, then
have not meddled with the English tendering of this sutra by
Prof, Hr Suryanarain Rao. I understand it thus * 4f If .the lord
of the 8th from Lagna or the 8th from the 7th is himself Afcraakaraka ; or are in conjunct ion with Atmakaraka the terms of life
mentioned in Sutra 19 are to be reduced The rest is dear
from Prof, Rao’s notes.

JAIMINISUTRAS
fix death very early. This kind of increase or decrease
depends on the particular positions of planets and the Rasfs
they occupy and these matters should be particularly and
carefully studied and the positions of the planets should be
properly understood.
Su* 23 Pitrulahhayoh papamadJujatwe hone
pmpayogem Kahshyahrasaha*
If Lagna and 7th from it lie between evil
planets, or if evil planets are in the Thrikonas from
Lagna and Saptama, Kakshyahrasa or deductions
and additions must be made for terras of life which
are obtained by planetary positionsSu. 24- Swassminnapyevam ,
If the Karaka is between the evil planets or evil
planets conjoin the Thrikonas from him Kakshyahrasa should be made.
V\. . sftFlfa =* ||
Su* 23. Thasminpape neechetungeshuhha •
* amyaUe cha*
If the Karaka joins Neecha or does not join the
exaltation or if he is not in conjunction with benefics,
Kakshyahrasa should be made.

JAIMINISUT&AS
NOTES
A house or planet is said to be between raafefics when
the 2nd and 12th from it are occupied by evil planets. When
two evil planets are on both sides of a L&gna or a planet, it
forms Kartariyoga and acts prejudicially to the Bhaya indicated by the Rasi or the planet.
C T mgu mm— II IIM m ft %
U
Su. 26. Anyadanyadha.
If Lagna and Saptama (7th) or if Karaka and
the 7th from him are between beneficial planets or
if the Thrikonas from Janma and Karaka Lagnas
are occupied by benefics, if the Karaka happens to be
a benefic, if he is in exaltation and not in debilitation
or has beneficial conjunction there should be no
Kakshyahrasa made.
^\s. gfr H
Su. 27. Gurou cha.
If Guru happens to be Karaka and has evil planets in 2nd, 12th, 6th and 8th and in the houses
forming Trikonas from him or has evil planets with
him or he is not in exaltation or joins Neecha Rasi
Kakshyahrasa should be made. And in cases where
these combinations are reversed increase must be
predicted.
Su 28. Purnendusukrayoreha rasi vriddhihh

140 JAIMINISUTRAS
If Purna Chandra and Sukra become Karakas
and .occupy the positions named in the above sutras
they, will give an increase of one Rasi Dasa.
NOTES
A certain Rasi Dasa becomes death inflicting but when
such a combination is present, this Dasa will pass off and the
next Dasa will cause death, This means they will increase
the longevity of the person.
v*.. ii
Su. 29. Sanau vipareetham.
- If Sani becomes Karaka and is found in the
.places named in the previous sutras he causes Kakshyahrasa in the earlier Dasa than the maraka.
NOTES
This means he will cut short the life by ooe. Dasa and
therefore earlier than the allotted time ; when Chandra, Sukra
mid Sani become powerful in these directions, we need not
take other planets into consideration and there will be no
decreases.
to . tow r*r^ii
Su. 80. StMradumyam yaddahKandam
nidhanam.
Three sections for Ayurbhava or longevity have
been explained. Long, middle and short lives. In
tie Stira Dasa suppose the term of life is settled as
middle. If a death inflicting planet or Dasa comes
IQ the^petfod of Ajpayu, the person will not die, but
'1® Stiffer* sickness and misery at the time.

JAIMINISOTRAS
NOTES
. For death he must wait lor the middle term and the
maraka there. Stira Dasas seem to prolong life to a certain
extent.
XI ir
Su. 31. TatmrMha viseshaM.
In the matter of death, note the peculiarity of
.the Rasi, , That is death will happen in the Dasa of
the Marana Karaka rash
NOTES
Divide the 12 signs into 3 Khandas or sretions and
predict the death for short life in the first Kbanda, for midfdle
life in the second Khanda* and for long life in the third
Khanda in that Rasi Dasa which is cruel or which possesses
the power to inflict death. Suppose a man gets Atpayu or
r shorfe life as the result of the planetary and sign' peculiarities
foreshadowed in the previous, sutra on longevity ; then his
death must be and will be caused by the most cruel in the
first khanda, dr the first four signs. Middie life will have
death in next foursigns and the long life will have an end in
the most cruel of- the last four Rasi Dasas
IR. to m ti
Su- 32. Papamadhye papalcone ripurogayoh
pape va.
If the Dasa is between malefics or has evil
Janets in its Thrikonas, or has evil planets in 12
and 6 such a Dasa will cause death to the person-

144 JAIMIN&U?RA$
If the powerful Rudra is aspected by benefics,
death may be* predicted in the Rudra Rasi, or in the
periods of its Thrikona Rasis 1, 5 and 9.
NOTES
First classify and find out under what heading the tern*
of life falls and then predict death at the end of the Dasa
which is cruel.
mm it
Su 38- , Tatrapi subkayogay.
Even, if the weaker of the planets, when he has
evil aspects get the name of Rudra, has beneficial
conjunctions or aspects he will extend the length of
life, to the Rudra Rasi Das! or the Dasas 5th and
§th from it.
NOTES
Trikona Dasas are what are technically called Shoola
Das&s. Thrikonas are I, 5 and 9.
SWIWWl * w
Su* 39 Vyarltapagpayoge rwt>*
The above results should PQt be predicted if
Other planets than the Sun, should be in the 5th and
9th from the two Rudras,
NOTES
If Ravi is there he will not obstruct ine results aopve
mentioned. In some Yogas the presence of the Sun does'
not count. In Sunapha, Ansn^t, Dhuradhura and Kemadnima, the presence of IRfi Sun is not taken into account.

jAlMI NISUTR AS
*+ WOT&Sft 31
*mm m li
Su. 4C. Mandarendu driste mbhayogmbfmw
papayogepi va shubhadrutow v a parataha.
If the two Rudris become evil, death will come
in the first Shoola Dasa, if one of them becomes
evil, death will happen in the second Shoola Dasa,
and if both of them are favourable death will come
in the last of the 3rd Shoola Dasa.
NOrES
This means that if both Rudras are bad early death, if
one of them is bad > longer life and if both of them are gobd»
the longest term of life will be enjoyed in the periods to be
determined by the principles already explained. Sutras are
un pardonably short, sweet, suggestive and comprehend a
great deal which the readers are expected to know, analyse
and remember. These general sources of knowledge and the
constructive capacity of the language enabled those intellectual giants of India, tn. t the great Maharishis to frame rules
and Sastras and Sutras with great ease and facility and bequeath to the later generations mines of intellectual treasures, whose depths have not yet been completely explored or
examined by the greatest cultured brains of the present
day. It is not possible for the greatest scholars in Sanskrit
"to frame a single Sutra, which can compare favourably
with the Sutras of the ancient Maharishis. They had the
Tapobala to their credit, led the most simple lives, developed
Hie brain power to the greatest conceivable extent and set
t&gsspples of devotion and contemplation on sublime subjects.

|46 JAIMINISUTRA^
which gave them vast mental resources, and made them writ
works, which are the admiration of the most profound scholars of the present age. This sutra requires lengthy explanation and I shall make no apology to do so for the benefit of
my readers. The commentators have culled the following
from ancient writers. Jaimini’s views and explantions so netimes differ considerably from Varahamihira and others.
Ravi, Kuja, Sani and Rahu are classified as evil planets, one
stronger than the other. Rahu is the most powerful malefic,
next to Sani, next to Kuja and then to Ravi; Guru, Kethu,
Sukra and Budha are benefics, one stronger than the other.
Guru is the most beneficial, next comes Kethu, next Sukra and
Bfidha comes last- If Chandra has the conjunction of Kuja he
is classified has evil, otherwise he is good. If Ravi and other
evil planets occupy evil signs they become more and more evil.
If they occupy beneficial signs they become good. If Guru
and other benefics occupy beneficial signs they become very
favourable. U they occupy evil signs they become bad.
Badha becomes a beuefic if he is in exaltation or is in an
independent sign. Guru and 3ukra in the house of Badha,
viz., Kanya and Mithuna become very beneficial so also in
other beneficial signs.
8?. swot II
Su* 41. Budrasrayepi prayena.
Death may happen sometimes in the Rasi Dasa
occupied by Rudra.
e
NOTES
The word prayena means death may happen in them
earlier or the later Dasa from the Rudra Data.

JA1MINISUTRAS
xm mn mm »
Su, 42. Kriye pitdri vimhemIf the Lagna falls in kriya or Mesha death
often takes place in the Rudn Dasa.
NOTES
Pitari means Lag^ia. Pj- 1 Ta 6=61, divided by 12
the balance ig 1, hence Janma Lagna.
Su. 43 Prathama madhyamothamesku va tat
tadayusham ■
To persons having short, middle anl long lives,
death happens in the first, second and third Shoola
Rasi Dasas.
NOTES
The sub-period, when the death happens will be the
Antar Dasa erf a cruel Rasi Dasa in their respective periods
or sections. I have already shown in tha previous chapter
how the rule of three should be applied to get the correct
date of death.
sa, mmm n
Su. 44. Swahhaveso maheswarahaThe lor 1 of 8th home from Atmakiraka goes
under the name of Maheswara.
NOTES
Atmakaraha has great significance in Jaimini Sutras

JAIMINISUTRAS
mm mv rpt^wt ii
Su* 45. Swochhe swabhe ripubhavesa pranee.
If the lord of the 8th from Atmakaraka is
exalted or is in his own house, then the stronger, of ,
the two? viz.-, the lords of the 8th and 12th from
the Karaka, will also go under the name of Mahes -
wara.
NOTES
If both of them are equally strong then both become
Maheswaras.
v\. qratwf sir? aro! tih n
Su, 40. Patahh-iam yoge swasya tayorva roge
tataha.
If Atmakaraka has conjunction with Rahu or
Kethu, or if the 8th from Atmakaraka has conjunction with Rahu or Kethu, then the 6th planet '
counting regularly from the Sun will become
Mahes wara.
NOTES
Thus we have 3 Maheswaras Counting the 6*h from
the Sun will be the Sun, Moon, Mars, Mercury, Jupiter .and
the 6fch wi 1 be Venus or Sukra. On the above combination
Sukra becomes Maheswara. Of the three varieties of Maheswaras, he alone becomes Mabeswara who is the strongest
amoi g these three. Rog in \this Sutra means 8, Patnbh\a
haa been rendered as Rahu and Kethu. I cannot understand
bow this has been interpreted as Rahu and Kethu by the

JA1MINISUTRAS
commentators — Pata l, Bha 2. Probably after the 7 planets,
Bhya"* Bhya the 1st is Rahu and the second is Kethu.
Pa&a may specially mean Rihu and Kethu.
ear u
Su. 47. Prabhuhhavavaireesa prani pitrulabha,
pranyanucharo visliamasio brahma.
Find out which is the stronger of the two Rasis,
Lagna and Saptami or 7th. Then find out which
of the lords of the 6th, 8th and 12th from it is
stronger, and if he occupies an odd sign in the
Parswa Rasts from the stronger of Lagna or Saptama
(7th) he will be named as the Brahma planet.
NOTES
He is going to explain in this sutra the planet who goes
under the peculiar signification of Brahma. The Pirvn i Rasis
or side signs are the 7th. 8th, 9th, lftb, 11th, and 12th from
Lagna. The 6 signs from Lagna, via , 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th,1>th
and 6th are denominated as Parsw* Rasis to the sifiiama
Parswds. Odd and even signs are weU-hnown and have been
explained in the earlier notes. This is rather a difficult
sutra and must be carefully studied and understood. One of
the two signs Lagna and Saptama will be stronger. Tatce
the lords of the three bouses, 6th, 8th and 1 2th from the
stronger of these two signs Lagna and 7th. Find out who is
strongest of these three lords. If he is in an odd sign frcftn
the Parswa Rasis, to the stronger Rasi in Lagna or Saptama*
he becomes the planet called Brahma. To my humble mind

jaiminisutraS
the procedure sopms to be very complicated. Jairaini is* a
Maharishi and he knows best. He bas made these sutras as
short and as sweet as possible and our intellects are not
competent even to understand them. Where is then the
justification to find fault with their composition or the interpretations put fcpon them by the ablest commentators.
Learned commentators are a great • boon to mankind,
without them many valuable works would have remained
sealed letters.
Su. 48, Brahmani sawiu paiayorva tataha.
If Sani, Rahu or Kethu becomes Brahma the
6th planet from him will be designated as. Brahmain which case the other three will not have the
Brahma power.
NOTES
The 6th planet must mean planet tak*»n 6th in the regular
order, Ravi, Chandra, Kuja, Budha, Guru, Sukra. Suppose,
Kethti becomes Brahma, the 6th from him would be Guru.
Similarly* for other pi mets. Thajtha= 6 Tha 6, Tka 6=66,
divided by 12. we get the remainder 6 and hence the 6th
house from the planet is meant.
Su. 49. Bahunam yoge swajat&eyaha.
If .many get the powers of Brahma, (say three
or fooc pfenets at a time) then, that placet becomes
Btafamfewbo is next ia d&gseesfeo A^Tfkataka,.

Jaiminisutras
NOTES
The next in degrees to Atmakaraka will become Amatyakaraka, Therefore in such cases Arrutyakaraka becomes
Brahma.
V>« ii
Su. 50. Bahuyoge vipareetam.
When Rahu also gets Brabmatwa, then the
conditions will be reversed.
NOTES
Tbis means that planet becomes Brahma who gets the
lowest number of degrees among the Brahmas- This is per*
fectly intelligible. Suppose Guru gets 29 degrees in Mesba,
then as per Jaimini rules he becomes * A traakai aka These
planets move forwards. But suppose in that horoscope,
Rahu has only 20 minutes to pass in Mesha instead of Guru
Rahu becomes the Atmakaraka. He has the backward
movement, and therefore has the largest number of degrees
to his credit in the inverse order. While Guru has 29 degrees
in the forward movement, Rahu has 29 degrees and 40
minutes in his backward motion. Therefore Rahu has a longer
number of degrees.
hu «wc wRmi »nw ii
Su. 51. Brahma twabhaveso bhava$taha.
The lord of the 8th from Atmakaraka as also
the planet who occupies that house becomes Brahma* *

JAlMINISUTRA§
NOTES
Thus many Brahmas have been enumerated and the
reader must carefully study these rules* Bhava 8, Bha 4,
Va i t 44, divided by 12, the remainder is 8.
w
Su, 52* Vivade ball
Between the two planets , the lord of the 8th
from Atmakaraka and the planet who joins the 8th#
the stronger of the two becomes Brahma.
NOTES
When there are many Brahmas, the strongest of the lot
will be the Brahma. The results flowing from the Brahma
and Maheswara planets will be explained hereafter. Students
must be very carefuf.
Su. 58. Brahmano yavanmaheswararksha
dasmtamayuhu.
The longevity extends through the; Rasis commencing from Brahma and counting up to the Rasi
containing Maheswara.
NOTES
Jaimini has explained how to fix the planets, Rudra
K&heswara and Brahma.'
KS- H
Su. 54 Tatrapi maheswara bUavesa trikonabde

Jaiminisutras
The period of death must be determined thus.
Maheswara will be in a sign. Take the'Dasa of this
Rasi, take the lord of 8th house from Maheswara.
Take the Trikonas from him, viz., 1, 5* and 9,
Predict death in the Antardasa of any one of these
Dasas which is strong enough to inflict death.
Su. 55. Swakarm achittaripu roga natha pra~
nee marakaha.
The strongest among the lords of 3, 6> 12 and
8 from the Atmakaraka will inflict death.
NOTES
First settle about the terms oi life* short, middle and
long. If all the four lords mentioned above are of equal strength, predict death in such period by the evil Dasa, which
intervenes at that time The lords of 6 and 8 are powerful
Marakas, of these two, lord of the 6th is more powerful in
causing death. Death will happen when the Dasas of 6* or 8
come. Death will occur in the sub-periods of the lords of
Trikonas from 8th and 6th houses, of these the Trikons periods
from the 6th are more powerful. If the lord of the 6th fs
powerful then the Dasas of Trikona Baas from him would
inflict death.
goKSw f n
Su 66. Thadruksha dasayam nidhanam,
go

154 jAIfiOfcJStJifcAS
Death will happen in the Rasi Dasa occupied
by the Maraka planet or in the Dasa of the Kasi of
which he is the lord,
Su. 57. Tatrapi kaladripuroga chitta natha -
pahare.
Take Atmakaraka* Find out the 7th from him.
Take Ripu, Roga, Chitta or 12, 8 and 6th from it.
The lords of these occupy some houses. Death may
happen in the Dasas of such signs or the Dasas of the
houses owned by these lords*
NOTES
After having ascertained such Marakagraha Rasis, he
directs his readers to 'find out the special sub-periods which
would cause death. Dasas of houses have to be counted
from Chara, Sthira and Dviswabhava in the particular order
named under that section. Some Rasi Dasa becomes Maraka.
If there are many Rasis which get the Maraka power, find
out the strongest among them and attribute death to it*
Suppose there is a sign without a planet, with a planet, with
a planet who is its lord and a house with benefics The last
will be the most powerful among the houses named above.
The first without a planet will be the weakest. The, potentialities of planets and the houses have been very elaborately
explained in the earlier Sutras. These principles may also
be learnt from the general study of Astrology. Taka Mesha
Without any planet, with Sani, with Ravi, with Chandra

JMMINISUTRAS
with Gam, with Sukra aad with Kuji, Raha or Kethu. It*
potentialities vary with the presence or absence of these
planet* and other aspects and conjunctions it has,
End ef Firit’Patfa *f Seeend Adhyifa,
ADHYAYA II— Pada 2.
?• mi I)
Su. 1. Ravimkrayoh pranee janaJcaha. *
Oat of Venus and the Sun, the stronger will
become the maraka for father.
NOTES
In the previous section Jaimini has explained about the
Maraka Dasa for a person, when he would die, and which
Dasa and Arasa Dasa would kill him, I must confess here
in spite of the elaborate explanations offered for the fixing of
the period of death, the system seems to be complicated and
cannot easily be grasped by the ordinary students. Even
intelligent students will have to pour long hours, and much
devotion to understand these complicated principles and fix
correctly the time of death For determining the terms of
longevity, the other systems are no doubt hard and laborious,
but it may be, they are simpler than the one illustrated by
the Maharishi in his inimitable sutras, which cannot easily
be deciphered by common men. In this section rules are
given to find out the deaths of father, mother and other
important relations. A man’s comforts and peace of mind
and happiness in the world depend greitly upon his relations,
his friends and his servants. When these are intr»’« ,M *. tfc*

JAIMINISUTRAS
mail certainly becomes miserable. Ravi and Sukra represent father in a horoscope. The stronger of .the two will
cause the death of father. In general astrology Ravi and
Chandra represent father and mother respectively. Varabamihira says Divarktsuhrau •pitrumalrusarngnitou ssnais.
ckarayndu nisitadw if a ryayat. For persons born during the
day, Ravi and Snkra represent father and mother respectively.
For those who are born during nights Chandra and Sani
denote father and mother respectively*
Su. 2. G handraarayorjananeeThe stronger of the two planets Chandra and
Ktija will kill the mother.
ararmft iraur: n
Su. 3. Apranyapi papadrislitah.
Among the four planets Ravi? Sukra, Chandra
and Kuja whoever is weak and possesses evil aspects
mil cause the death of father and mother.
NOTES
Praxty means strength* Aprany denotes want o$
sttengtb, viz., weakness.
». smSrft wnfont H
- Su. 4* Pranini shubhadrishte tatchule nidha -
nam maiapitroh.

JAl MlNISUTR AS
If, among the planets named above Ravi,
Sukra, Chandra and Kuja* whoever has got
beneficial aspects, the death of father and mother
most be predicted in the Shook Dasa — 1st, 5th or
9th Rasi Dasa from the powerful planet.
K. II
Su. 5 and 6. (5) Tadbhaveyte spzshta bide.
(6) Th'itchula ityanyeIf the lord of the 8th from the lords of father
and mother is powerful, then the period of the
Shook Rasis from him will inflict death on the
father and the motherNOTES
This opinion h-'. . by s<.ma writes. Two planets for
father and two for mother have been named, whoever is
stronger out of these two will hive the death arranged in
their Shoola Dasas.
Su. 7. Ayushi chany at.
As deaths have to be predicted for father and
mother by their Karakas similarly events have to be
predicted for others from their Karakas and the
Shoola Dasas from them
NOTES
This means for nil events in life there are Rasis and*

jAiMIfflStiTRAS 1&
iThe Dasas of 1st, 5th or 9th Rasis from the
position of Guru will cause the death of* his wife.
NOTES
He names three Dasas called Shoolas. The worst
among them will kill the wife.
Su- U. Thatkdtckoole tesham.
Death will happen tc children, uncles j etc., in
the Dasas of 1st, 5th and 9th Rasis from the Karakas who govern those events.
NOTES
Take the Putrakaraka and predict death to children in
the Shoola Dasas from him. Take the Matulakaraka. The
Shoola Dasas from him will kill uncles, etc.
Su. 12. Karmani papayutadrishte duthtam
maranam.
If the 3rd from Lagna or Karaka has the aspect
or conjunction of evil planets, death will be painful
and troublesomeNOTES
Death is a peculiar phenomenon about which people
have various conceptions. Some dread it, some welcome it,
and others are quite indifferent.

i£o
jaiminisutraS
Su. IB. Subham sub hadrishtiyute.
If the 3rd from Lagna or Karaka has beneficial
aspects or conjunctions death will be easy from
slight complaints.
NOTES
Some have prolonged and rmst painful complaints
before death, some have ordinary complaints and others have
very easy deaths.
fiR fiw? II
Su 14. Misre misram
If the 3rd from Lagna or Karaka has mixed
aspects and conjunctions, death will be neither very
difficult nor very easy.
3rri^ra ii
Su. 15 Adityena rajamulath.
If the 3rd from Lagna or the Karaka is connected with Ravi, death comes to the person through
th') kiagly or Government displeasure*
NOTES
He may be hanged, confined, beheaded or executed,
thrown into abysses from tops of forls or mountains or shot
at the cannon’s mouth.
§y. 16. Ghandrena yahshmUnah .

JAIMINISUTKAS
If Chandra occupies or aspects the 3rd from
Lagna or Karaka the person will die through consumption or Tuberculosis.
NOTES
Yakskma means consumption. It is no doubt a nasty
disease, but with some it takes years to bring their ruin,
with others it is quick and active.
f^t ii
Su. 17. Kujena vranasisiragni ddhadyiih .
If Mars occupies or aspects the 3rd from Lagna
or Karaka the person dies by wounds injuries, lire
and weapons.
NOTES
'Karaka in all these Sutras refer to Atmakaraki* Find
out the 3rd house from Lagna or Afmakaraki Lagna, whichever of these two is stronger, predict the results from it, by
tile 3rd house and the planet who is there. If Kuja is found
there, by wounds and injuries, by weapons, by fire and by
burning, he will meet death. Kuja is c tiled Anganhi or O'e
who robs and injures the bodily organs or Angus, L jhitanga
or bloody planet. Ara or who injures and burns thi limbs.
Bloody diseases and blood corruption lead to mmy piiufui
complaints.
Su, 18. Sanina natarogai.

JAIMINISUTRAS
If Sani is aspecting or combining with the 3rd
from Lagna or Karaka, death comes through windy,
complaints
NOTES
Ayurveda or Indian Medical Science mentions three
Dhatus or characteristics for ail physical constitution, viz x
Vata or wind, Pttha or bile and s/eshma or phlegm. No.
disease comes when these are working in their proper proportions. But when any ono of them is excited beyond its
normal quantity, ill health follows in various complications
and death will result when any one or more of them are
roused and proceed to work out of the normal conditions.
All diseases in the Indian medicine are attributable to the
excess or want of these in proportions.
Su. 19. Mandamadibhyam vis hasarpa jalodbandhanadibhih.
If the 3rd from Lagna or Karaka is occupied
by Sani and Gulika the person will die from the
effects of poison, from snakes* from chains and
shakles and from water*
NOTES
The latter meant drowning or watery diseases like dropsy
diabetes, etc.
R*. ii
Su. 20. Kethuna vkhuchee jalarogadyaih.

JAIMINISUTRAS.
If the 3rd from hgna or Kir.ika js occapied or
aspected by Kethu the person dies from contagions,
watery and epidemic complain*s.
NOTES
Vishncht is a comprehensive term and includes various
contageous and epidemic complaints such as small-pox,
cholera, plague, influenza, watery diseases or dropsy, diabetes
diarrhoea, etc. Here great margin and latitude are given to
the student* to use his brain, practical knowledge and the in
structions he gets from his Gurus. No principles ol sciences
can be explained without sutras. These sutras are the pleasures of tbe learned and the pains of the ignorant. In Sanskrit
adi is used often because all the events which a principle
governs or comprehends, cannot be explained, and if such an
attempt is ever made it would fill \o’umes after volumes and
there would be no end to writing. ’A direction has to be
shown to the intelligent student and they should follow the
Same with deligence and sometimes achieve hetter results
than the original principle intended or conceived. Brain
power has no limit. It is able to grasp, when properly developed and directed, the smallest and the largest objects.
3 ?sC»nfj^wif ’pufis.msRmtfat H
Su. 2l- ChanJrd m&ndibhyam poogamandanna kabaladibhi kshanikam.
If the 3rd from Ligni or Karaka has the conjunction of Chandra and Gulika, death will resfilt
immediately from eating hard meals, food and other
indigestable articles.

P*TT H
Su. 22. Guruna sopharuchi vimanadyaih.
If the 3rd from Lagna or Karaka is combined
by Guru, the death will be caused by dropsy, disgust
for food, melancholy and other complaints
NOTES
Dropsy and swellings of the body may be caused by various causes. The bites of insects are often causes fdr swellings of parts of body and through such swellings death may
occur.
Su. 23. SuTcrena mehat .
If the 3rd is aspected or joined by Sukra from
Lagna or Karaka# death will result from venereal
complaints.
NOTES
In the flush of passions, people commit all sorts of sexual
excesses and bring in their train a series of -complicated and
horrible diseases, some of which are loathsome, repulsive,
horrible, and excruciating. In painful tortures, the venereal
complaints take a prominent rank and punish the offenders
with very serious troubles and pains.
n
Su. 24. Misrs misrat.

JAIMINISCTRAS
If the 3rd from Lagna or Karaka has the conjunction or aspect cf many planets, then the death
will come from various diseases.
NOTES
Sometimes diseases are sharp and pronounced, bat of tea
they are complicated and throw the doctors on their wit’s
ends. The noses of the medical men will have to be expanded
before they correctly diagnose them.
Su. 25. Chandradrugycganvisehaena.
If Chandra aspects or joins the 3rd from Lagna
or Karaka along with other planets, death is certain
to happen from the causes named in the previous
sutras.
NOTES
In all deaths, Sani and Chandra must have a hand.
Death means the disruption of mind from the body and mind
is represented by Chandra. Vedas say Chandramamanasejatah.
If there are many evil planets in the 3rd, then death
happens under very painful circumstances. But when there
are many benefics in the 3rd, death will happen after slight
complaints or under easy surroundings.
3$: spi^r H
Su. 26. Subhaih subha desay
If the 3rd from Lagna or Karaka has beneficial
aspects or conjunctions, death happens in good or
holy places.

JAIMlNISUTtfAS
OTES
For various reasons, too numerous to be discussed in
short notes like these, people specially religiously inclined,,
covet death in holy places or happy sorroundings. This is
human aspiration.
<ms li
Su. 27. Papaih heekate.
If the 3rd from Lagna or Karaka has evil
aspects or conjunctions, death will happen in vicious
or sinful countries and places.
NOTES
- The commentators have interpreted Keekata Desa as
Magadha and other sinful countries. When benefics are in
the 3rd, death happens in holy places, like Kasi, Tirupathi or
other places held hq,ly by the followers of different religions
Mohamedans hold Mecca and Medina as holy. The Christians
consider Jerusalem as holy. The Buddhists hold Gaya as
holy. The Hindus have many places declared as holy lik e
I\asi. Rameswaram, Jagannath, Haridwara, Tirupathi, etc*
When evil planets are in the 3rd, death happens in vicious or
sinful places. There are some places which are full of vices
and sinful deeds. Death in such places will be considered as
a great misforture. Say a man dies, near a cess pool, in
night soil, in gambling or whoring dens, or in dirty wells or
dreary forests. Families, communi'ies, religious .sects, villages, towns, cities, countries and nations have ebbs and flows in
their fortunes, and also in their morals and spiritualities.
. Sodom and Gamora were destroyed on account of their abominable vices. ' We have also many e samples of destruction of

JAIMIMISCJTRAS
these by excesses in sins and vices. It will be a consolation
to tak$ birth in a virtuous place ar.J m the midst o* pood and
pious people. It will certainly be a misfortune to be born in
dirty and sinful surrour dings. To die in an agreeable place
and have the ceremonies performed as per their religious
principles will be a pleasure. To die in dirty and sinful
places and be neglected after death or the body exposed to
wild animals and vultures, will be a real misfortune which
every man tries to avoid.
Su- £8. Guru sukrabhyam gnana purvakam*
If the 3rd from Lagna or Karaka has the conjunction or aspect of Guru and Sukra the person
dies with consciousness unimpaired
NOTES
The word used in Guana. It may also mean that the
person will die, with the full thoughts of Para Brahma in his
mind.
Su. 29. Anyairanyatha •
If the 3rd from Lagna or Karaka is aspected or
joined by other planets unconsciousness prevails at
death*
NOTES
There are some miserable people who remain unconscious
before death for weeks and months together. They will
have no. holy thoughts in their heads.

JAIMINISUTRAS
Su. 30. Lepanakhapormadhye sanirahu'ketu -
bhih pitrarna samsharthaIf Sani and Rahu or Sani and Kethu are in
conjunction between the 1st and 12th houses the
person will not perform the obsequies of his parents.
NOTES
Lepa 1, Khapa~l% L 2 denotes 3, Pa shows 1—3 1,
reversed 13, divided by 12 we get I, and therefore denotes
the Lagna or 1st house, Kha 2, Pa 1 — 21, reversed we get
12. The performance of death ceremonies for parents is
held as a sacred duty. If a person does not do it, he will be
called an ungrateful wretch and generally , communities out
cast him.
3?, %'nR'pfsf 5 R*raw$ 11
Su. 31. Lepadi purvardhe janahadyapar
rardhe.
If Rahu and Sani are found in conjunction in
the first 6 houses from Lagna the death ceremonies
for the mother will not be performed. ‘ If they are
found in the next 6 houses, biz. from 7th to 12tl
houses the ceremonies to the father will not b<
performed.
NOTES
Sani and Rahu or Sani and Fethu are meant here. Thei
conjunction is necessary here in the houses indicated aboye

Jaiminisutras
Su. 32. SubhadrigyogannaIf Sani and Raha or Sani and Kethu have beneficial aspects or conjunctions, these evil results should
not be predicted.
NOTES
It means the person performs the death ceremonies
properly to his parents.
End if Secant Etta ef the Secant Mkyaya
ADHYAYA II— Pada 3.
Su, I. Vishame tadadirnavamamsah
If the birth falls in an odd sign the Navamsa
Dasas commence from it.
NOTES
Each Rast Dasa contains 9 Amsas or Navanflsas
and each Rasi Das i counts 9 years* Hence these Dasas are
called Navamsa Dasas* Mesha, Mithuna, Stmha, Thula
etc*, areodd signs.
apurEESJR! It
Su. 2. Anyadha darsadik.
In the even signs the Navamsa Dasas commence from the Abhimukha Rasisn

JAIMINISUTRAS
NOTES
The commentators explain thus. If a movable sign is
Lagna then the 8th Basi from Lagna becomes the commencement Dasa. If Lagna falls in a fixed sign the commencing
Dasa will be the 6th Rasi from it If Lagna falls in a
common sign the Dasa commences from the 7th Rasi from it.
These are called Abhimukha -Rasis and their explanations
have been given in the earlier sutras.
56*rRS?l: II
Su. 3. Sa&inanda pavakah Jcramadabdah
sthira dasayam.
In the Sthira or fixed sign Dasa, the movable
sign Dasa will be 7, the fixed Dasa will be 8 years and
the Dasa of the common Rasi will extend to 9 years.
Su. 4, Brahncbdireslia.
The Sthira Dasa commences from the Rasi
occupied by Brahma.
NOTES
Brahma has already been explained in Sutra 47 of Pada
1 of Adhyaya 2.
m mm w
Su. 5. At ha prdnah.
Jaimini now begins to explain the strength of the
lanets and the Rasis. Prana , here as well as in the

JAIMINISUTRAS 171
previous sutras, means sources of strength the planet
and the signs get.
WWW! uto ii
Su. 6. Ka rahaycgah prathamo hhanam.
That Rasi or sign becomes the strongest, which
has the conjunction of Atmakaraka.
NOTES
This combination is supposed to give greater strength
than even the Shadbalas recorded in the other astrological
works. This is the primary source of strength.
Su. 7. Saumye bhuyasa .
ff other sources of strength are equal then the
conjunction of larger number of planets gives greater
strength.
r. ii
Su. 8, Thathastungadih.
If these sources of strength are equal, then exaltation* friendly houses, and Moolathrikonas, give
them vitality.
Su. 9 . Nisargast hatha h •
Then the Nisarga or permanent sources of
strength must be considered,

lit JA1MINISUTRAS
NOTES
The chara fir movable signs are weaker than Sthlra
Kasis or fixed signs. These are weaker than the common or
Dviswabhava Rasis.
Su. 10. Thadabhave swamina ithham bhavah.
If the Rasi has none of the Karakadi sources of
strength then its power will be that which its lord
possesses from the associations of Karaka, etc.
NOTES
- The strength of the Rasi and the strength of its lord
should be taken into consideration.
U- arramt n
Su. 11. Agrayatto viseshath..
According to the Jaimini sutras the planet
which gets the highest number of degrees among
others will become the most powerful.
NOTES
This has been already explained in the earlier portion
and the most forward planet in a Rasi becomes the Atma.
karaka and most of the results previously named are based
upon his position and the relative positions of other Rasis
and planets taken with reference to him. According to this
work Atmakaraka supersedes all other planets in power and
potency.

jAlMlNlSUTRAS
. snfaafaa: 5RM It
Su. 12. Prativesikah purushe,
In the Odd sign, it gets strength from the
planets who occupy the 12th and 2nd from it.
NOTES
Planets in the 2nd and 12th from themselves or from
the Basis they occupy have special influences. The Rasi
will have Kartari Yoga, as also any planet which has on
both sides evil planets. Good planets may cause this Yoga
and probably the results will be beneficial.
Su. 13* Ithi prath'imih.
The sources of strength named in the abov<
sutras will be the first set of inquiry into the power
of a Rasi or its lord.
snfogwsw’ir flaw ii
Su. 14. Swami gurugmdrigyogo diviteeyah •
The second set of strength for a Rasi is derived
by the aspect of its own lord, Jupiter or Mercury.
NOTES
Now be names the second set of powers which a Rasi
can command to its credit. Varahamihira observes thus in
bis Bribat Jataka.
Horaswami Gurugnya Veehshitayuta Narnmischa Veeryolkatah ,

JAIMINISUTRAS
The Lagna or any Bhava or Rasi becomes strong when
ifc has the aspect or conjunction of its lord, Guru or Budha,
if not it well not be powerful. This stanza of Brihat jataka
is nothingr but a slavish imitation of this sutra of Jaimini.
The Maharishi Jaimini was the author of Poorvamitnamsa
Sutras, Jaimini Bharata and the invaluable sufcras 1 am
translating. He was the desciple of Veda Vyasa and was
therefore, contemporary of that great Maharishi. 1 have
proved, by indisputable authority, that the period of Maba
Bharata was more than 5,000 years from now. There are
four copper plate grants given by the Emperor Janamejaya
the son of Parikshit and the grandson of Abhimanyu, the
son of Arjuna, the great hero in that ruinous war and the
recepient of the Bhagavadgita instructions from Lord
Krishna himself and written by Veda Vyasa Varahaniihira, as per date given by himself in stanza 2 of his
Brihat Samhita, Chapter 31, lived in the court of Vikramaditya whose Era called Samvat Nripasaka is prevalent
all over India and counts now as 1988. Varahamihira says
that he borrowed all his ideas of Astronomy, Astrology and
Samhfta from the still more older writers and the abov e
quoted of his stanza certainly comes from Jaimini. Any
sign becomes strong when it has the aspect or conjunction of
its lord, Guru or Budha. Six varieties arise from this.
The lord aspecting or conjoining, it gives two. Similarly
for the other two planets Guru and Budha. This is the
second source or item of strength. Aspects and conjunctions
are different.
V\, It
Su. 15. Swaminastrutiyalh

JAIMINtSUTRAS
The third set of strength for the lord will be
the’one to be detailed below,
Su. 16. Swat steam in ah ha niahadishwapard dourbalyam
Those planets who are in Kendras, Panaparas
and Aupoklimas, from the Atmakaraka become
more and more powerless than him.
NOTES
This means those who are in the Kendras from the
Atmakaraka are powerless. Those who are in the next
houses from Kendras are still more feeble and those wh»
occupy the next houses are worse still in power. This
represents the 3rd source of strength.
Su. 17. Ghaiurtah purushs.
If the lord of the Rasi falling in Parasha Rasi
(odd signs) has evil conjunctions and aspects, this
will become the 4th source of strength to the Rasi.
Su, 18. Pitrulahha prathamapranyadi shu *
taddsa niryane.
Take the stronger out of the two 1st and 7th.
Then from the stronger of these two, take the
Shoola Dasas, viz., 1, 5 and 9. Find out which of

JAIMINISUTRAS
these Shook Rasis becomes the strongest. Then
ascribe the death period to it as certain.
mi n
Su. 19. Pitrulabha putra pranyadih pituh
Putra 9, Pa 1, Ba 2=12, reversed it means 21,
divided by 12, we have the balance 9, hence the 9th
house is meant. Take the Lagna and 7th and find
out the 9th houses from them, whichever is stronger
in these two ninth houses , take it and find out their
Shook Dasas and prescribe death to father in the
most unfavourable of these Shook Dasas, viz., 1, 5
and 9.
Su. 20. Adarsadirmatuh,
Take the most powerful in I or 7- Take the
•4&h from it and find the Shook Dasas from it,
whichever is the most powerful among the 1st, 5th
or 9th predict death to the mother in that Dasa.
NOTES
Darsa 4, Da 8, Ra -2^:82 reversed 28, divided by 12
we have the balance 4 and 4th house is meant here.
K\- n
Su. 21. Karmadir bhrathuh.

TAIMIN15UTRAS
Take the 3rd from Lagna or the 7 th whichever
is stronger, and ascribe death to brothers and sisters
in the most powerful cf the Shod* Disas from it.
RR- i!
Su. 2 2. Matradirbhagini put rayonTake the Lagna or the 7th whichever is
stronger, and find the 5th from it- Sons and sisters
will die in the most cruel cf the Snoola Dasas from
the above oth house.
NOTES
How 5th can have any connection with sisters, I cannot
guess. But the sutra is clear and we have to take it in tfcfe
sense he has given.
Su. 23. Yyayadirjyestasya.
Take the llth from Lagna or 7th whichever is
stronger, and predict death to elder brothers in the
most unfavourable Shoola Dasa from it.
1SOTES
The 3rd represents younger brothers and sisters and the
llth, the elder sisters and brothers in other works on
astrology.
W, it
Su. 24. Pitruvat pitruvarge •

JAIMINISUTRAS
Take the stronger of the two Lagnas and the
7th Find oht the 9th from it. From this take the
Shoola Dasas and predict death to paternal uncles,
etc., in the evil period among them.
mwv* 3 ^ *rt h
Su. 25. Brahmadipurushe sama dasanthah.
If the Lagna falls in a purusha or masculine
Rasi the Dasas or periods commence from the sign
occupied by the Brahma. The extent of the Rasi
Dasa is thus determined. Take the 6th from the
Dasa Rasi. Find out the number of the house the
“lord of it occupies and that number will be the extent
in years of that Dasa.
NOTES
Dasa 6, Da 8,-Sa 7=87 reversed it gives 78, divided by
12, the balance is 6, hence the 6th house is indicated by this
figure.
h
Su. 26- Sthana vyathikarak.
When the Janma Lagna falls in an odd sign,
the Dasas commence from the Rasi occupied by
Brahma in regular order* If the Lagna falls in an
even sign, then the Dasas commence regularly from
the 7 th house from Brahma.
NOTES
This means in odd signs the Dasas commence from the

JAIMINISCTRAS
Rasi occupied by Brahma, and in even signs the Dasas
commence from the 7th Rasi from the sign occupied by
Brahma.
Su. 27- Papadrigyogantungadigrakayogah,
The conjunctions and aspects of malefics are a
source of strength for the Rasis. So also is added
another source of strength to (the rasi) by planets
(situated there) being in exaltation, moola thrikona
and very friendly and friendly housesNOTES
Jaimini now gives the fourth source of strength to the,
Rasis. The conjunctions an I aspects of evil planets are a
source of strength to the Rasis. The states of such planets
which have aspects and conjunctions in the Rasis will also
he sources of strength, such states are exaltations, debilitations, friendly and unfriendly houses, Moolafchrikonas. Benefics influence the Rasis by aspects and conjunctions when
they are in exaltations and other favourable positions otherwise they do not exercise much influence, such is the opinion
of the commentators. This is the fourth source of strength.
Su. 28. Panohame pada hramat praltpratyaktuam.
If the 9th from Lagna happens to be incorporated in an odd sign take the Rasi Dasas in the
regular order. If it happens to be incorporated in

ISO
JAIMINISUTRAS
an even sign, take the Rasi Dasas in the inverse
order or badkwards. The commencement of the
D'asa should be from the Lagna. Kethu in these
cases is considered as a benefic.
End of Third Pada of the Second Adhyaya.
ADHYAYA II— Pada 4
fcfW n
Su. 1. JDwiteeyam bhavayhalam char a
navamse.
In the navamsa Dasa of Chara Rasi the significations of the second house must be explained in the
manner given in Sutra 14 of the previous section.
NOTES
All Bhavas get strength when they are aspected or conjoined by their lords, by Guru and by Eudha
Su. 2. Dasasrayo dwaram.
The Rasi which commences the Dasa or period
is called the Dwara Rasi or the door for the subsequent Rasi Dasas.
NOTES
This Dasa is called also Paka Rasi.
A. • <KRareni*i ii

1AIMI55’ SUTRAS
Su. 3. Thathastavatidkxm hahyam.
Count as many signs from Dwara f —
Dwararasi is removed from Ugna. This will be the
Bhoga RasiNOTES
He gives here the definition of whet is cil'.ed Bhoga Bast,
The commencement of Dasis is given and their differences in
Ohara, Sthira and Dviswabhawa Rasis have been shown.
The commencing Dasa falls in seme sign from Lagna.
Then count from that Rasi to a similar number and this will
be the Bahya Dasa or Bhoga Dasa. Suppose the commencing
Dasa falls in Mesha for a person whose Lagna is Dhanas. Then
it will be the oth from it. Mesha Dasa becomes the Paka or "
Dwara Dasa an I the 5th from it, i\\ s., Smhi becomes the
Bahya or Bhoga Dasa. Some commentators explain thus. If
Mesha beg; as the Dasa of the first s;unf then counting one
from it, the Bhoga Dasa or the second begins in Mesha alone.
Then the second Dasa begins in Vrishabha which will be
called Paka Dasa, and the second from it Mithuna becomes
Bhoga Dasa. The third Dasa commences in Mithuna and «it
becomes Paka Dasa. The third from it, viz-, Simha becomes
the Bhoga Dasa, Kataka becomes the 4th Dasa and becomes
Paka, while the 4th frem it, its , Thula, becomes Bhoga
Dasa. in this way Dasas mu t be calculated till the last
Dasa, which ends the man’s existence and kills him I think I
have made the meaning very clear and simple.
«. <nd ii
Su. 4. Tayoh pape bandharogadi.

182 JAIMINI SUTRAS
f
If evil planets are found in die Paka and Bhoga
signs, the person will suffer from imprisonment,
chains, diseases and other mentali and physical
troubles.
Su* 5. SwirMs isyathasminnopajMvatya,
If the evil planets in the two Rasis happen to
be in their own houses or are very close to Guru then
the evil results foretold in sutra 4 will not happen.
*njFn»iN it
Su* 6. Bhagrahayogohtam szrmmaimin.
The results in these Dasas will have to be foretold, by the strength of the planets and by the
sources of strength and weakness of the Paka and
Bhoga Rasis.
NOTES
, These hints are to bt taken not only here but throughout
the whole work. Suppose there are evil planets in debilitation
or without nearness to Guru.
1. These two Rasis have exalted evil planets.
2. There are beneficial planets with malefics.
3. There are pure benefic.
4. Benefics in exaltation.
5. Benefics in debilitatien.
. In all such cases, the results will certainly be, and must*
be different. The strength of the Rasis must also be carefully
considered. Then again, in the Rasi extending over 30

JAIMINISUTRAS
degrees the strength and weakness of the Rasi will not be
uniform. There is a radical difference between the general
astrologers and Jaimini Maharishi. All the astrological works
. have.lheir foundations laid in t ie writings of the Maharishis.
They alone were able to see the differences in planetary globes,
their influences on each other and the wonderful ways by
which they indicated the results of the karma to the credit o£
the person at the time of his birth. Jaimini gives great,
prominence to the planet w'-.o has advanced the Largest number
of degrees in a Rasi and calls him Atmakaraka The
Navamsa he occupies, plays a prominent place in the
delineation of characteristics and results. But 10 the Buptadi
Avastas t the planet who is in the last Navamsa of a Rasi gets
Pttda Avasta or the state of humiliation. No great prominence
is attached to him and on the other hand he becomes wea?
and powerless. Differences of opinion among the various
authors are found in large numbers. Take medicine, philosophy
religion, war, law, speculation and even .the so called most
exact science, mathematics. Here one plus one becomes two
and one and one both minus becomes two. Wegiveaseperate
value for plus and mi nus. To reach a place there may be one
^thousand and one ways* The differences in all these Fill
have to be carefully considered and reconciled. Approaching
from different places and directions and experiments and
experiences, two or more persons may reach the same
destination or results. A simple illustration will convince u«
about the truth of these observations* ,A, B and C are each
worth one lac of rupees. By whatever means they may have
acquired that wealth, the result is the same, and the money
power -of -one lac lies* with each of them. Take half a dozen
warriors of exactly equal physical and mental capacities*.

jAIMlNlSUTRAS
Bach may have taken different food, born in different
conditions, afid brought up under different circumstances,
but the results are one and the same. Similarly in astrological
sciences. Different Maharishis pursued different methods
and found out and idtntical results though those results were
produced from apparently different causes. The solar,
planetary and stellar radiations are working through the
various degrees of the zodiacal 'signs in mysterious .ways.
vs* ii
Su, 7. PitruHbJiapranithoyam. •
.These results have to be carefully predicted from
Lagna or the 7th, whichever is the stronger of the
two. For males preference should be given to Lagna
and for females the 7th should be preferred provided
it is strong.
c. n
Su. 8 . Prathame prakprathyakiram ,
If the Dasa commences, with a movable sign
or Chandra Rasi, then the order of the Rasi Dasas
will be regular in a horoscope.
Su. 9, Dwithiye ravitah.
If the Dasa commences in the. fixed sign or
"S&ua Rasi then the 6th and 7th, etc. 5 from .it will
be the successive Dasas.

JAIMINTSUTRAS
NOTES
These are called Padahrsma Dasas. Pad.i „s we knew
already means the number of a Rasi, aga n counted from t e
Lagna or any other Bhava.
Ravi 6, R i 2, Va 4 "24 inverted, 42, divided by Ig,
we have the balance of 6 and hence the 6th, tae 5:.; from it
and the 6th from it and so on.
SU 10. Pruthaki ameni thriteeye chatustayxdi.
If the Dasa Rasi commences in a common si&n,
then the successive Rasi Dasas w ill be determined
by the Kendra, Panapara and Aupckinna Rasis
from it
U* u
' • Su. 11* Swa kendrast had yah swamino navawisanam.
Those who are in Kendras, Panaparas and
Aupoklimas from the Karaka become the lords ■> of
the Kavamsa Dasas.
NOTES
Here we have to take the planets first in Kendras
according to their strength, then those who are in Panapara
and last those who are in Aupoklimas.

186 jAIMINISUTRAS
Su. 12- ' Pitruchatustaya vaishamya bala -
srayah stitah.
Those Rasis which are in Kendras from Ligna
furnish the first Dasa.
NOTES
Suppose there are many, then that sign which becomes
strong by the various combinations and aspects explained in
the previous sutras, becomes the first Rasi Dasa. The Dasa
years are 9 for each of the Rasis.
Su. 13. Sa tallabhayoravartate
The Karaka will be moving between the Lagna
and the 7 thNOTES
We have to find him from Lagna or the 7th whichever
is stronger, and count backwards or forwards as the Rasi he
occupies is even or odd. Then he gives the Dasa years as are
counted from Lagna or the 7tb, taking the Dasa always by
the larger number he obtains. This is the extent of Karaka
Dasa in years. For ether planets, count the number from
them to the Karaka, in the forward or backward reckoning
and ascribe such num' er of years to the planets.
m ^ ii
Su. 14* Stvami bala phalani cha pragvath .
The results of all these will be determined* as
detailed in the previous sutras, by the examination

jaimini Sutras
of the sources of strength and weakness t<} the planets,
to the lords of the Dasas and to the RasisNOTES
Jaimini has given various sources of strength and weak*
ness to the planets in general, to the Ra3is or signs and to
the lords of the Dasas. He advises his readers to take these
into careful consideration and having regard to times, circumstance and places, predict the results, so that they may turn
out correct and to the point.
Su. 15. Stuladarsa vaishamyasrayo manduJnstrikutah i.
As the Manduka or frog jumps from place to
place, the two systems of Dasas named by Jaimini
in the previous sutras viz., - Kendra, Panapara and
Aupoklima, and the movable, fixed and double bodied signs, also jump from house to house and hence
he calls them Manduka Dasas.
NOTES
As per instructions given in the previous chapters, the
Dasas both for planets and Rasis, jump from Kendras tc
Panaparas and from the latter to Aupoklimas. Similarly
they' tump from Charas to Sthiras and from Sthiras to Dwis
wabhavas. They also jump in Shoola Dasas.
mi'narmK $^511 <*=: u
Su. 16. Niryanalabhadi shooladasa phale ,

JAIMINISUTRAS
In predicting results, the 7th from the Niryanatoola Dasa should be taken into first account.
NOTES
Sbt>ola Dasas are marked as death inflicting. Takfe the
7th from the most powerful of these Niryana Rasis and begin
to make predictions from it. This Niryanashoola is of many
kinds, Rudrashoola, Maheswarashoola and Braamashoola
graFrot ii
Su. 17. Purushe samah samanyatah.
If the Arambha or commencing Dasa falls in
c Purusha Rasi or masculine sign then the subsequent
Rasi Dasas will be counted regularly and each Dasa
gets 9 years only.
NOTES
If the commencing Dasa falls in a feminine sign, then
the subsequent Dasas have to be counted from'the 7th sign
frOm it. In masculine horoscopes the Arambha Dasa commences from Lagna> In feminine horoscopes it commences
from the 7th.
Su. 13. Siddha udnd'iye.
Dasas counted from the constellations at birth,
have to be learned and taken from Parasara, Gargi,
Vyasa and other ^well-known writers.

JAIUINISUTRAS
NOTES
Jaimini says he has not given them in his work because
they can be learnt from other works and the Dasa periods
will .be as they are given there. We have 27 constellations
and they have to be counted from Krithika.
Krithika — Ravi Dasa
Years.
Rohini — Chandra Dasa
Mrigasira — Kuja „
Aridra— Rahu. „
Punarvasu — Guru „
Pushyami — Sani „
Auslasha — Budha »,
Makha — Kethu „
Poobha — Sukra »,
mmm
Then from star Uttara repeat the same
planetary Dasa
with the same number of years. These are called Udu Dasas,
from Udu meaning a constellation or star. Jaimini has made
no reference before to constellations. He mentions them only
in this sutra. Thus each planet gets 3 stars, with the same
number of yeirs. He uses the word Sid d ha meaning read}
from other works well-known in the woild.
Su. 19. J agatha stint shorardham yogardke
The extent of yogardhadasa will be half of the
two Dasas combined from the Chara and Sthirc
Rasis.
NOTES
The Yogardhadasa will have to the stronger of *
Ra$is, Lagna and the Saptama or the 7 th.

JAIMINISUTKAS
Su. 20. Stuladarsa vaishamyasrayam etat .
Yogardhadasa begins either from Lagna or the
7th house which ever is stronger.
NOTES
The sources of strength and weakness have been clearly
explained in the previous pages. Yogardhadasa commences
from the stronger of the two Lagna and the 7th. If the Rasi
which commences the Dasa be odd, then, take the subsequent
Dasas in the regular order. If it is even then count the
^Dasas backwards. St hula —'Lagna or 1 — Tha 7, la 3=73?
reversed 37, divided by 12, we get 1 or Lagna.
Su. 21. Kujadi strikuta pada kramena drig
data.
Drigdasas are formed commencing with the 9th
from Lagna, according to thrikonarupa pada.
NOTES
Jaimiui now speaks about Drigdasa- Kuja=9, Ka 1, Ja
18=reversed 81, divided by 12, we get 9. Take the 3 houses
from the Arambha Rasi, or commencing Rasi viz., 2nd, 5th
and 9th from the 2nd, the 4th and the 5th and 9th from the
4th, these three sets of combinations from the Arambha
' Dasa or the commencinsr sian form what is technically called
Drigdasa,

jAIMlNlSUTfiAS 191
Su. 22 & 23. M atrudhirmayoh samanyam
vipareethamoja Tcutayoh.
Yatha samanyam.
Those born in even signs will have the results
as described in the previous sutras about the Trtlton
Dasa
NOTES
Matru means 5. Dharma signifies 11. Mo 5, Ta 6=56,
reversed it will be 65, divided by 12, we have the remainder
5. D ha 9, Ma 5 “95, reversed, we get 59, divided'by 12, we
have the balance 11; coanting from 5th and 11th is considered
as samanyam or ordinary, counting from odd and even signs
is called Vyuikrama or special or peculiar.
Vt. li •
Su. 24 Pitrumatru dh% rmapranyadisirikone •
Among the Tnkonis, the Rasi Dasa commences with the strongest among them.
NOTES
The Thrikonas are 1, 5 and 9.
av rrcroPRtf 35^ H
Su* 25. Tatra dzoarabahyabhyam tadwat .
The results which have been ascribed to Dtoara
Bahya Basis should also be predicted to the Thri*
kona Das as

jAIMINISUTRAS
NOTES
If the Paka and Bnoga Rasis are aspected or joined by
evil pl-inets, the person will suffer from diseases, chains,
imprisonments* etc., similar results have to be predicted
for Thrikona Dasas whe 1 they have evil aspects and conjunctions. Carefully read my notes on Sutra 3 of pada four, on
Paba and Bhoga Basis and the different views explained by
the commentators. Dwara and Bahya Rasis are Paka and
Bhoga Rasis respectively.
Su. 25. Dhasagawikatpatneekarzt karakaih
phaladeszh.
Results must be predicted from the Karakas or
lords of events and also from the first, third, seventh
and the 9th Rasis. •
NOTES
About the person hunself, the results must be predicted
from the Atmakaraka, from the 7th about elder and' younger
brpthers and sisters, virtue and charities. These are well
known principles in the other works on Astrology.
R's. ii
Su 27. Tararkamse mmdadyo dasesih.
Divide the birth constellation into twelve equal
parts corresponding to twelve signs and find out to
which division the time, of birth corresponds. The
.lord of the Rasi corresponding to this division becomes the lord of the commencing Dasa.

JAIMINISUXRAS
NOTES
‘.Take the constellation of the day of- the hirth and divide
the whole duration cf the star by 12. Find out in which
division the ghatiba of birth fails from the Lagna. Then
count the Dasa from that, as per rules already given in the
previous sutras. The Dasas here also must be given as
9 years for each Rasi. Here the meaning is not very clear.
I understand thus : Janma Lagna* falls in some Rasi as a
matter of fact. Take the whole duration of the Stir, an3
divide it by 12. Then the birth Lagna falls in one of these
12 divisions. The lord of that Rasi becomes the lord of the
commencing Dasa. These Dasas have to be counted forwards
and backwards in ocd an l even signs. The sutra may also
ha interpreted like this. A is born at 14 ghatis afce r Sunrise
on the 20th of Kumbha. The balance of Kumbha Rasi
Sunrise will be li ghatis. I am only giving a rough example.
Kumbha is 1$ ghatis.
Meena and Mesha run for 8 ghatis. This makes ghatis.
Add Vrishabha ghatis. Thus 14 ghatis will conclude
Vrishabha and the person is bom in the end of Vrishabha.
Say the full extent of the star Bharani is 60 ghatis on that
day after Sunrise. Divided by 12, we get for each part 5
ghatis. Janmakala ghatis fail in the 3rd division and the
3rd Rasi from Lagna, tvz,, Kataka may be taken as the
commencing Rasi Dasa. This is taken with reference to
Qhandra and hence called Ghandra Dasa. I am very diffident
about this explanation.
«fm s s! ii

m jaiminisutras
Su. 28 > Tdsminnuohhe neeche va shreemantah
If, in the example given in the above sutra, the
lord of the Rasi Dasa is in exaltation or debilitation
the person becomes wealthy and influentialftflu n
Su. 29- Sivamitrabhe kinchitIf, in such a Lagna, its lord occupies a friendlysign, the wealth will be moderate,
Su. SO. Durgathoaparadha.
If' the lord of Lagna above mentioned is not as
stated previously, the person becomes poor and
wretched.
NOTES
This will be when he is debilitated, combined or aspected
by malefies and is found in unfriendly housesSu. 31. Swavaiskamye yathaswam lemma
vyuihhramau.
If the Raraka occupies the odd sign then proceed for the subsequent Dasas in the regular way* but
when he is in an even sign, then go backwards for

He has repeated this idea already in several sutras and
I suppose he wants to emphasize the principal point which
differs from other astrological principles.
Su, 32* Saumye vipareetam ,
If the Karaka Rasi falls in even signs then
count backwards.
NOTES
This is just opposed to the above sutra, where he refer*
to the planet and here he refers to the Rasi.
vwwrafo H
Su. 33. Thatkaisanavapiuditavyamitytske
ucharya vadanti *
Some Acharyas say that all the results which
have been ascribed to planets and signs in the previous sutras may also be predicted with reference to
Sani and his positi n.
NOTES
If this sutra is of Jaimini it speaks eloquently to some
facts. Previous to Jaimini, Maharisbis existed afcd Wrote
works on astrology and expounded principles, with some of
which Jaimini is not in agreement. Jaimini was a contemporary of Vedavyasa and hence he lived more than 5,000
years ago. This proves the great antiquity of sutras
also about Indian Astrology including astronomy an^

JAIMINISUTRAS
kindred sciences- # Crooked theories, ascribing to Iqdign
sciences centuries after A. D. may safely be lodged in the
perverted brains of their authors.
Su. 34- AntarbhuJdyamsayoretat*
These details above mentioned in the various
sutras should also be ascribed to the antar Dasas or
sub-periods among the major Dasas in the forward
and backward countings.
W. 5RT *n II
Su. 35. Shubha dasa shabhayute dhamnyuch
le va»
If the Rasi has beneficial aspects and conjunctions, or if its lord has similar sources of strength or
is exalted, then all the results will be beneficial.
NOTES
The person will prosper in every way during the portion
of such Rasis or lords. But otherwise he will suffer.
3FWSrq$n tl
Su. 36. AnyadhanyadhaWhen the above conditions are not present, the
results will be quite the contrary.

jaiminisutraS
. NOTES
When Rasis are evil, when they have evil aspects or
conjunctions, when debilitated planets occupy the Rasis or
when their lords are debilitated, the beneficial results will be
absent, and malicions results will trouble the person.
Su. 37* Siddhamanyat.
Jaimini says that all the principles explained in
this work are truth propounded in other works and
therefore they hold good in all calculations and predictions.
End of Fourth Pada of Second Adlyaya.
THE END

Short sketch * of the life of
B. .SURYANARAIN RAOB A., M R.A S-, F R H*S ,
Founder of The Astrological Magazine
It is but right, that my history should find a place in my
translations and books. I belong to the Mulakanadu sect of
the Andhra Community of Brahmins, and have the Gotra Of
the Venerable Vasista, the revered family Guru of Sri Rama
and the -Solar line of monarehs. Vasista, Parasara, Vyasa
and Suka are my first progenitors. My grandfather was a
military officer under Hyder and Tippu and changed the
career to civil in his later life. Venkataramanayya, my
grandfather was born in 1747 and died in 1828. He lost his
first wife Narasamma in his 59th year and married my grandmother Naranamma of Hegganahalli in his 6Cth year and got
7 children from her — two daughters and five sons of whom
my father Gopala .Rao was the 3rd son. My father was
bom on Friday 37 th July 1816, the 10th Lunar day of the
dark half of the month Ashadba in the Cyclic year
Dhatuatl5 ghatis after Sunrise under the constellation
Bharani with the period of Venus and he was only 12 years
old when his father died. My father was of slender build
energetic, strong and extremely active in work, qualities
which I have inherited to a large extent My mother
Rukminamma the daughter of Palamanda Subba Rao Pantulu
was an intelligent, handsome and quiet going lady and died in
her 39th year ,when I was about 13 years old. My father
“This sketch was written by Professor Rao in 1933 and it is
published without any alterations. For fuller details read Life of
B. Suryanarain Bao by Himself,

JAIMINISUTRAS
could speak and read about ten languages, and filled various
posts in the Ganjam District, Northern Cyrcars, and finally
became Manager or Dewan
ol Parlakimidi or Chinnakimidi Zamindari as it is call'
ed now* He Was an expert
in Mantrasastras, and highly
religious' and obligtiox. He
would never flinch from
doing an obliging and brought me up with great love
and care. The following is
bis horoscope. His tapobzla was so great that with a blade
of grass he was able to stop about 1,020 cattle and about 30
or 85 cow-herds under the Maha Astra of Sanmohana. All the
cattle and men lost their consciousness, and after an hour of
trial they began to move as if nothing had happened, when
my father threw away the blade of grass. "Mark the positions of planets in all the Kendras. In addition to his onerous duties, he completed the gigaatio task of finishing with
bis own hand, one crore and twenty-fiye lacs of Sri Ramanamas, and concluded the religious rites connected with them
four months before his death. Guru in Lagna and Sukra and
Ravi in the 10th made him a wonderful man in Mantrasastras and he used to perform miracles when he liked. He
died in his 76 year on the morning of the 27th August
1891, and was therefore 75 years and 40 days old according
to English calculations.
My mother bad some abortions and at the advice of a
$adhu in Cbicaco’e, after the performance of severe remedies
Moon
Rahu
Budha
RASI
Sukra
Ravi
Sani .
Kuja
Kethu
Lagne
Guru

.TAIiflNlSlTfRAS
he had four daughters and two sons, myself being the
younger son. ** My ‘elder brother Jagannatha Row entered
the Mysore service and retired as an Amildar or Tahsildaand died in December 1915. I was bom on Tuesday, Rathar
saptami in Magha of the Cyclic year Rakshasa, on 12th
February 1856, at about 14 ghatie after Sunrise or raidnooa
at Chicacole in the Ganjam District and the following is my
horoscope.
After my birth my father wanted to give me the name
of his father Venkataramaniafa, but it appears, on the fourth
day I became seriously ill and in the night God Surya or the
Sun appeared to nay father in a dream and ordered my fathe*
to name me as Suryanaraina, as I was bam at midnoon on the
Rathasaptami, a day held sacred to the Sun and the Moon
all over India. About 4 miles from Chicacole there is a village
called Arasavalli, where there is a complete Temple to the
Sun God and which is considered a sacred shrine by the
neighbouring people. My father most gladly accepted the a!”
tered name and to his surprise and that of my good mother, I
was alright on the 5th day of my birth. My father was called
Gopala Row. He completed 125 lacs of Ramanamas with his
own hand and died on Gokulastami he’d sacred to Sri KrishnA

JAIMINISUTRAS
and my mother was called Rukmini, the name of the sacred
wife of Krishna. At 12“’ clock in the noon, the* Sun is most
powerful and the time goes under the special name of Abhijin
Moohurta, and Abhijit Sarva Doshaghnam or that noon time
which cuts and cures all evil influences. A. notable incident
occurred to me in my 5th year, which has influenced all my
life to a considerable extent. My first Aksharabhyasa or
beginning of education began in my 5th year at Parlakimidi
where my father was Dewan to the Raja.
On that memorable night, I slept with my father, and
had a wonderful dream* I was taken to Suryaloka to the
presence of the glorious Sun, and made to sit on his lap.
His spouse Chayadevi gave me Payasam (wheat preparation*
with milk and sugar) and some fruits and msde me eat them.
After showing great love and kindness Surya put his hands
on my head, patted me on my back and pronounced the
blessing, that I would live krg, have many children, become
a learned and great man, would write . many books and
become an author, events which have been most wonderfully
verified. I am now in my *77th year, with a brain as clear
and vigorous as it was when I was 30 or 35 years, and I have
completed 67 books on various subjects, including my History
of Vtjayanagar, the Nn wTo-Be- Forgotten Empire, 1
awoke and related my dream to my father, who had already
anticipated some idea of my future greatness. In my boyish
days I was extremely intelligent, and possessed an admirable
memory, coupled with a strong and piercing intellect But as
it often happens with intelligent boys, I was irregular
•This was written in 1933 A. D.— Editor,

JAIMINISUTRAS
in attendance at scnool, careless of my studies, fond of running
jamping and other athletic exercises, and was mischievous to
a considerable extent. All the while I felt I would become a
great man and a scholar, and even challenged my teachers with
this idea when they found fault with my irregular attendance
and want of attention to my lessons. While I was in the
Senior B. A. class, in the Central College at Bangalore, Mr,
J, Cook, M. a., Principal, rebuked me for want of attention to
studies and for not copying notes, which he gave us copiously.
I was ready with my impertinent answer. I observed in a
determined tone that copying notes forms the part of dull
headed students, and superficial teachers and that bright
students, like myself, need no such process* He remarked that
he Was a student and amanuensis of Dr. Bain of Psychological
fame and that I should obey him, I told him that I wouldbecome a greater man, than both of them, with the result that
I was turned out of the class for a day. Mr. Cook was a gene
roas Scotch gentleman. He sent for me next day and questionedme whether my behaviour was right.
X replied that his treatment of students should* be
different as the intelligent and spirited could not bear camly
remarks which dull boys, consider as their inheritance. Both
being frank the reconciliati ;n was quick and smooth. When
I met him 20 years after publishing some of my works,
specially the Htstory of Vtfayanagar or the Never-to-B*
Forgotten Empire , be had the nobility to address me as a
greater man than himself, while I modestly, acknowledged his
valuable instructions as the basis for all my scholarship ia
English and Physical Sciences. I was intended to take up the
legal line and finished my legal studies, and practised for about
9 years as a Lawyer in Beilary. I kept up a decent establish-

JAIMINISUIRAS
ment, and my home w.ts open to a’.! cassas of professions
experts, the musicians, the Veena-men, the learned pandits,
the religious yogis, the ved3atists, the jugglers, buffoons aodl
other artistes would flock to my place* For fuller details, tha
readers are referred to my Autobiography. My astrological
instir cts were stirred up by Thogaray Ramasastry at Bangalore while I was in the F. A. class.
I picked up n:y knowledge in this science by reading
, books on this subject. The details are beautifully given in nay
Life I had no high opinion for English astrological publications
and never cared to read them. There is neither depth nor
inquiry, nor research in them. My first work on astrology
appeared in a dialect form, English and Kannada, in 1882*
My collegiate studies gave me no leisure for progress in my.*,
astrological researches and my A urological Self instructor
first appeared in 1892, the second, in 1898, and the 3rd in
1900, the interval being taken up by my legal practice.
Fourth, fifth, sixth and seventh, followed at longer intervals
and the 8th has to be printed soon.* An Ooriya astrologer,
in Farlakimidi by name Prahma, soon after my birth, foretold my future greatness I feel I am under the direct grace
of the glorious Sun at e\ ery important turn in my life, And
his presence in the 10th house from my Lagna, and 11th
from Chandra, with Budha and Guru has inspired me to bold
the view that I am destined to become a great man and
write valuable works, on a variety of interesting and instructive subjects.
I first married my maternal uncle’s daughter by
name Bhagiratamma and she bore ten children, of whom
* The 8th and 9th editions have also appeared aftei
death. Ed.

five died and f five are living. My father-in-law Palamonda
Punchanatha Row was an Assistant Commissioner in the
Mysore Service, earned a very good name as an officer. He
Jie'd 21 years ago. After the death of my first wife in 1903,
I married again Subbamma, daughter of Venkatramasastry.
She bore 5 children, two of whom died soon after birth. I
have now two daughters and one son by her. I have now
21 grandchildren and one great grandchild. I have built a
spacious bungalow at the side of a village named Hunsamarae
halli on the Nandi Road, 12 miles due 'north of Bangalore.
It contains 3 acres of compound, planted with varieties of
fruit and flower trees. I have kept up a decent establishment
with ten servants, and am leading a quiet, honorable and
religious life. My birthdays are celebrated on a grand scale,
and I am visited by all classes, creeds and nationalities of
people from all parts of the world and my home is open to
my friends and relations. My eldest son Nanjunda Row
helps me in my publication business. My second son B.
Lakshminarayana Row, B.A., is a Graduate of Philosophy
and Logic and is an Inspector of Schools in the Mysore
Service. My third son Somasekhara Row, was adopted by
late brother. My 4th son Chandrasekhara Row, aged 13
years is studying here. My grandson B. V. Raman, has
been trained by me and he is helping me in the editing of
The Astrological Magazine and other books. Three daughters
are married and happily ..settled in life. I have one little
daughter aged 11, to marry yet. God has -been graciously
pleased to keep ’me above want and in* comparatively goo<j
health for my advanced age.
t Now only two are living, ^the'eldest son .Mr. B. Nanjunda v-Rao
(the father of the_presentieditor of The Astrological Magazm*'
having died to September 1943,

JAIMINISUTRAS
Though my earnings have been great, exprases have
sot been small. I possess generous instincts and always
take delight in helping others ,when my aid is needed- I am
an admirer of all talents in any form in any man and my
company is always pleasant and instructive. I may be called
a jolly hearted fellow, as I never take miseries in a miserable
light. I possess fluent powers of speech and writing in almost
equal degrees aud this rare gift I attribute to the special
grace of the Goddess of learning Saraswathi. I always pray
to her devoutly and get my promptings through Her Divine
Grace. My familiarity with Western and Eastern Sciences
gives me great advantage to lead the people wherever I may
be I am a great lover of music and other fine arts, and my residence is generally kept in a fashionable manner, I have had
audiences with Viceroys, Governors and Maharajas, and all of
them were pleased with my behaviour, spirit of independence
and capacity in conversation and arguments. I have had
suitable khillats and presents from many Maharajas and
aristocrats and the National and individual predictions, ]
made about wars, famines, deaths of royal personages,
plagues, epidemics and other phenomena have been remarkably fulfilled and these facts are well-known to the public
who are in touch with my works. I predicted about th<
great Anglo German War, and the nations who would b<
involved in its deadly folds, six months before the war, in mj
March Magazine for 1914, and said, that the war woulc
begin in August of that year. The Magazines are before the
public, and they can judge of the truth of these statements
My lectures, conversations and works have been highly
appreciated by the cultured public. I have been leading i
religions life^iu this .age. of false allurements, of false civilisa

226 JAiMINlSUTFAS
tion and of false professions and have felt strongly in my
innermost heart that God protects all those, who entirely
sincerely and honestly place their faith and confidence, in
Him My own independent life is a great illustration of that
principle* which lays down complete devotion to God and
honest and sincere life under His gracious and omnipotent
guidance should be the highest ideal for human efforts. May
He shower His choicest Blessings on all and make the world
„ happy, cheerful and peaceful, have been my earnest daily
prayers to the Almighty. The aphorism, so beautifully and
. .aptly ordained on every holy Brahmin after bis Pujas, are
,* over, deserves to be reproduced here for the benefit of my
, readers : “Swasii Prajebhyah Paripolayamntam Nyayena
MArgma Mahtem Mahisah ; Go hr ah man aybhyassubhamasiu
Nityam t lokassamastak Svkhmo bhavantu ; Kalay Varshauu
Parjanyak Prukvisasyasaltnee ; Desoya m Kshohbharahitaah
Brahmanah santu Ntrbhayaha ; Afutrah Putrtnah santut
Putrinasihntu Pu&trinah ; Adhanah sanhanassantu jemanti
stiradassa/tim.'' Liberally translated the verse means — let
all the people live in happiness, let the rulers be just and
sympathetic in their rule, let the milky cows and Brahmins
fib blessed everyday, let all the worlds enjoy perfect happiness,
let seasonal rains enrich the lands, let earth be productive
let the countries enjoy freedom from epidemics, let Brahmins,
attend to their prayers, without any fear from evil minded
people, let those who have no children beget children, , let
those who have no grandchildren, be blessed with grandchildren, let those who have no money, get money and letall people hve till they are one hundred years old. This is a
prayer, as tolerant, as honest, as broad minded and as sympathetic as possible apd when really good. men send the a

JAIMINI SUTRAS
prayers constantly to God with faith and # devotion they will
never go in vain. I shall give you here a short sketch of my
ancestors and pedigree.
I am a direct descendant of the great Maharishis Vasista,
Parasara and Vedavyasa. The Pedigree of Vedavyasa is
thus given in our daily prayers.
1. Vasista-Brahma Mamsaputra or one evovled out of
the great mental energy power of Brahma.
2. Saktiison of Vasista and Arundhati.
3. Farasara son of Sakti.
4. Vedavyasa, Badarayana or Krishna Dwaipayana
son cf Parasara.
5. Shuka son of Vyasa.
