READABLE DATASET
================================================================================
Original file: jaimini_sutras_2.json
Dataset number: 141 of 455
Format: valid JSON
Structure: Object / structured dataset
Original size: 231,660 bytes
Top-level fields: 11
Title: JAIMINI SUTRAS
Creator: —
Date: —
Description: —

CONTENT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
METADATA AND OTHER FIELDS
  • title: JAIMINI SUTRAS
  • creator: —
  • date: —
  • description: —
  • subject: —
  • identifier: —
  • source_folder: JAIMINI SUTRAS - XML
  • total_pages: 99
  • total_words: 39307
  • text_quality:
    • ocr_word_validity_score: 0.906
    • quality_tier: good
    • note: —

FULL TEXT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
JAIMINI SUTRAS
Part 1
CONTENTS
Preliminary Observations : Geneology of Maharishis by Vedavyasa- The
intellectual development of Maharishis by Yoga Literature in SanskritDefinition of Sutra Difficulties in Translation- Perfect Development of
Sanskrit-Maharishi Jaimini.
Adhyaya 1, pada 1- (Chapter 1, Part 1) Meanings of Astrological terms
defined-Aspects of Planets and Zodiacal Signs-Differences of Principles
in Astrology and their reconciliation Necessity for a study of general and
special principles-Pneumonics in Sanskrit Mathematics -Bad influences
and their counteract! on-Atma karaka or Lord of Soul, Kalatrakaraka or
Lord of wife, Naisargikakaraka or Permanent Lord Lordships for Rahu
and Ketu-Results of Atma karaka, Amatyakaraka or Lord of minister,
Bhratrukaraka or Lord of brother, Matrukaraka or lord of mother,
Putrakaraka or Lord of son, Gnati karaka or Lord of cousins and
Darakaraka or Lord of wife-Signification of Planets, Rasi, Rasi Dasasor
Period: of Signs and their results Arudha or Pada Lagna, Varnada Lagna,
Ghatika Lagna, Bhava Lagna, Chandra Lagna, Hora Lagna and their uses.
Adhyaya 1, Pada 2-(Chapter 1, Part 2) Atmakaraka in different N avamsasPlanets with Atmakaraka-Gulikakala or Time of the Son of SaturnLordships planets over different times in a day-Hora Drekkana, Navamsa,
Dwadasamsa and the Thrimsamsa explained as perVaraha mihira-Planets
aspecting Atmakaraka Navamsa in Gulikakala-Effects of Planets in
various houses from Karakamsas and their significations -Kemadruma
Yoga.

Adhyaya 1, Pada 3-(Chapter 1, Part 3) Planets in various houses from
Pada Lagnaand their results-Uchcha-Graha Samanya-Cornbi nations for
Royalty and Poverty.
Adhyaya 1, Pada ^(Chapter 1, Part 4) Upapada Lagna and its resultsCombi nations for various diseases - Children - Death of brothers, sistersDumbness, stammering, complexion, religious tendencies, adultery,
leadership in community-33 crores of Devatas-Nigraha and Anugraha
forms-Mahamantras or good Vedic Secrets- Kshudra Mantras or evil
incantation.
Adhyaya 2, Pada l-(Chapter 2, Parti) . Determination of LongevityCombinations for Long, M iddleand Short I ives- Reconciliation of different
systems of Longevity-Karakayogas Kakshya, Hrasa or reduction or
degradation Kakshya Vriddhi or ' increase-Dwara Rasi, Dwarabahya Rasi
and Pakabhoga Rasis explained -Increase of Life and averting deathViparitasor Perverts in mean ing-Karakayogas and Kartari yogasdetailedThree kinds of Longevities A I payu, Madhyayu and Purnayu-- Explanation
and results of Rudra, Maheswaraand Brahma Rasis -Different kinds of
Yogas.
Adhyaya 2. Pada 2-(Chapter 2, Part 2) Planets causing Death of Mother
and Father in Shoola Dasas-Combi nations for deaths due to the
displeasure of Governments-Different kinds of diseases-Bites of insects
and venereal complaints.
Adhyaya 2, Pada 3-(Chapter 2, Part 3) 170-180 Sthira Dasas, Navamsa
Dasas and Prana Dasas detailed -Combi nations for deaths of uncles,
cousins and other relations in Shoola Dasas Explanation Shoola Dasas or
periods.
Adhyaya 2, Pada ^(Chapter 2, Part 4) 180-197 Bhoga Rasis, Bhoga Dasas
and Paka Dasas Combinations for imprisonments and Deaths in Purusha
and Stri Rasis-Yogardha Dasa, Drigdasa and Trikona Dasa.

PRELIMINARY OBSERVATIONS
The name of Maharishi Jaimini is held in high esteem and
reverence among the Sanskrit writers of eminence and probably heisheld
only next to Maharishi Vedavyasa. Jaimini is the disciple of Vyasa, and
besides being a writer of various treatises and the Epicjaimini Bharata, he
is the famous author of Poorva M imamsa Sastra, and these able aphorisms
in Astrology called after his name as the JAIMINISUTRAS. The
Maharishis, so far as their intellectual development was, concerned, stood
altogether on a unique pedestal unapproached by any other authors in the
world. They expanded their intellects not by ordinary study, patient
labour and devotion but by the mystic processes of Yoga. Thus expanding
their mental vision by a peculiar process still unknown to the greatest
scholars of the present day, they were able to grasp the causes and effects
of the celestial and terrestrial phenomena with the greatest ease and on. a
scale of understanding and comprehension of facts at which the present
generations stand surprised and wonderstruck.
Take Maharishi Vedavyasa the great grandson of Vasishta, the
grandson of Sakti, the son of Parasara and the father of Maharishi Shuka
who is held in the highest esteem by the great Rishis themselves for this
piety, Brahmagnana, and unalloyed purity of life. Vyasa has written 18
Puranas including the Mahabharata, enclosing the immortal
Bhagavadgita, great Siddhanta after his name on Astronomy, several
works on Astrology and the most profound Brahmasutras, called UttaraM imamsa. This colossal collection of literature relating to all branches of
human knowledge stands as a monument to the grandeur of his glorious
intellect and it will be a real surprise to the cultured public, if any other
name in the world could be compared to this intellectual giant. In
addition to all these works, he was able to systematise and putin proper
order the Four Vedas and thus earn the most envious title of Vedavyasa or
one who put the Vedas in their present form and sequence. Jaimini was a
worthy disciple of Vedavyasa and has bequeathed to humanity, many

valuable works among which stand foremost Jai mini Bharata, PoorvaM imamsa and the Jai mini sutras on Astrology.
In the various branches of the Sanskrit Sciences the sutras are a
wonder of Sanskrit literature. We do not know if there is any other
language in this world which has anything like the sutras. A sutra may
thus be defined as the shortest in form with the largest meaning possible.
JAIM IN ISUTRAS ere said to have been composed in eight chapters.
Though brief, they contain a large quantity of meaning. Many
technicalities are used throughout these sutras and I will try to explain
them as best as I could. In translations from a rich and comprehensive
language to a poor and ill-equipped tongue, it is extremely difficult to
bring out the force, the dignity, the sweetness, the majesty and theflow of
the original language. The translators, however learned they may be and
however brilliant their intelligence may be, have to remember the great
gulf which separates their intelligence with that of the great M aharishi
who is their original author.
At best the translator can only explain and illustrate what he
understands and conceives to be the meaning of the original author. It
may be the correct interpretation of the author or what may have been
understood to be the meaning by the translator. In the case of the works of
the Maharishis, I may not be very wrong if I say that none of the
commentators or the translators could ever hope to come up to their
standard. However, a man can do at best what he honestly knows to be
the meaning; and I can assure my readers that in the translation of these
difficult sutras I have taken the greatest care to bring out the correct
meaning of the M aharishi in his inimitable work theJAIM IN ISUTRAS.
Everyone cannot compose a sutra. A sutra, to be a sound one. must have
certain characteristic features and unless these conditions are satisfied
they cannot pass muster under the heading of a sutra. In English, so far as
my humble knowledge and practical experience go, it looks impossible to
frame a sutra as the Sanskrit authors have composed and conceived it. The
defects of languages cannot be set right by ordinary men, and it is
hopeless to make such attempts.
Jaimini, through his great sympathy and love for the people,
framed these sutras and they have to be interpreted on certain principles
which the Sanskrit writers have laid down for our guidance and
education. The brevity of a sutra is its distinguishing feature, and it can
easily be committed to memory even by the ordinary students. Somehow
or other, Sanskrit language seems to have a close affinity to strengthen
and improve memory. Have we ever seen an advocate or a judge who is
ableto repeat a few sections of any legal book ? Is there any English

knowing person who can repeat a play of Shakespeare or a few pages of
any dictionary? In Sanskrit, Dasopanishads are easily committed to
memory. There are Dwivedis and Thrivedis who easily commit to
memory one, two and three Vedas and repeat them with an ease which
surprises the listeners. There are many who have committed to memory
the Sanskrit lexicon "Amara" and quote its stanzas offhand with the
greatest ease. Bhagavata, Bharata, Ramayana and other extensive works
are easily committed to memory. Kavyasand Natakas. Epics and Dramas
form no exception. Astrological literature, whether it be astronomical
calculation or astrological Phalabhaga has been committed to memory and
I can repeat more than 2 or 3 thousand slokas, without any paper or
pencil.
The discussion of the learned Brahmin Pandits is a source of great delight
to the audience. They bring neither books, nor notes, nor papers, nor any
references when they come for great assemblies where their knowledge in
the several branches of Sanskrit will be tested and where they receivedue
rewards. Thegreatest Indian Pandit has hardly anything which deserves
the name of a library, whereas the poorest equipped English reader keeps
up a decent library. Are not then the heads of these Pandits more valuable
than the heads of thegreatest English scholars who have to refer to books
for constant renewal of their memories ?
ADHYAYA 1-PADA 1
SU. L- Upadesam vyakhyasyamah. I shall now explain my work for the
benefit of the readers and shall give them proper instructions to
understand the subject.
NOTES Upadesa means literally bringing one close to the object and
make him understand the truth. Upa samip disanti cause to sit-taking one
close to the true object of his search, making him sit there and seeclearly
with his mental vision, the truths of the Science. Jaimini observes that he
will take the subject of Astrology in Phalabhaga or Predictive portion,
introduce the readers and disciples to the principles of Astrology and
make them see the truths and realise their grandeur by personal
experiences. He expands the subject in his own inimitable style and tries
his best to put vast quantities of Astrological knowledge in the fewest
possible Aphorisms called the Sutras. This word Upa occurs in
Upanayana as making a man, see the grandeur of Parabrahma, and

Upanishad or taking one nearer to God and Upasana carrying the same
idea and making the person see the object of his search and bring himinto
closer contact with it.
SU. 2.-Abhipasyanti rikshani. The zodiacal signs aspect each other (in
their front).
SU. 3.-Parswabhecha. Excepting, the next zodiacal signs to them.
SU. 4.- ?ihann ishthascha tadvat. Those planets which occupy such signs
will also aspect the planets found in such houses.
NOTES Unless easy explanations are offered and illustrations are given
the meanings of these Sanskrit Sutras will not become intelligible and
convincing to the readers. The second Sutra can be explained thus. The
zodiacal signs aspect each other which are in their front. I do not exactly
understand what is meant by the word front. The commentators who have
done invaluable services to humanity by their lucid explanations and the
removal of all reasonable doubts thus observe : Mesha has Vrischika,
Vrishabha hasThula, M ithuna has Kanya, Kataka has Kumbha, Simha has
Makara, Kanya has Dhanus, Thula has Vrishabha. Vrischika has Mesha,
Dhanus has Meena, Makara has Simha, Kumbha has Kataka and Meena
has M ithuna as the signs i n front and aspect them.
From the 3rd sutra it is signified that the zodiacal sign next to Aries, viz.,
Vrishabha is not aspected, the sign M ithuna is not aspected by Vrishabha,
Kataka is not aspected by M ithuna, Simha is not aspected by Kataka and
so forth. Following this rule alt the Chara Rasisor movable signs aspect all
theSthira Rasisor fixed signs excepting that which is next to it and all the
fixed signs aspect the movable signs excepting that which is next to it. The
double bodied signs aspect each other. In none of the current astrological
books is mentioned the fact of the aspecting of zodiacal signs or the
planets which are in them in this particular manner. In the 4th sutra,
reference is made to planets occupying those houses, and exercising
aspectual influences as the houses themselves are said to do. I will givea
few illustrations to exemplify the above enunciated principles. Meena
Mesha Vrishabha Mithuna Kumbha I Kataka I DIAGRAM I Makara j
Simha Dhanus Vrischika Thula Kanya
*Chara Rasis aspect Sthira Rasis, Sthira Rasis aspect Chara Rasisand
Dwiswabhava Rasis aspect the Dwiswabhavas. Mesha is movable and
Vrishabha next to it is fixed Mesha is said to aspect the fixed signs except
theonewhich isnextto it. Mesha aspects the fixed signs Simha, Vrischika
and Kumbha but not Vrishabha which is close to it. Vrishabha a fixed

sign, aspects the movable signs Kataka, Thula and Makara but not Mesha
which is close to it. Mithuna, Kanya Dhanusand Meena the four doublebodied or common house; aspect each other and there is no difficulty
about them. Kataka a movable sign, aspects Vrischika, Kumbha and
Vrishabha, but not Simha which is close to it. Thula a movable sign aspect;
Kumbha, Vrishabha and Simha but not the fixed sign Vrischika next to it.
Vrischika, a fixed sign, aspects M akara, Mesha and Kataka but not Thula
which is close to it. Makara a movable sign aspects these fixed signs
Vrishabha, Simha and Vrischika but not Kumbha which is close to it.
These aspects of Rasis have peculiar influences and they are taken into
consideration in these Jai mini sutras. According to the above sutras and
the explanations a; understood by me, the foil owing aspects, have to be
noted in the example given on next page. Ravi is in a movablesign and
does not aspect Budha but aspects Simha, Vrischika and the planet Sani in
it and Kumbha and Chandra in it. Budha aspects Kataka, Thula and
Makara and Kuja who is in that sign. As per above principles, Rasis aspect
each other and also the planets in them. The planets aspect each other and
also the Rasis mentioned in the sutras. In the above illustration Sukra
aspects Kanya with Guru in it, Dhanusand Meena and Guru aspects
Dhanus, Meena and M ithuna with Sukra in it.
As per general principles in use in astrology, the aspects of planets in the
above diagram are thus Budha and Sani aspect each other, Sani aspects
Kuja and Simha, 3rd and 10th. Guru aspects Kuja, Meena and Budha, the
5th, 7th and 9th, Kuja aspects Mesha with Ravi in it Kataka and Simha or
the 4th, 7th and 8th houses and planets in them. Chandra aspects Si mha.
These are details which have to be borne in mind by the readers, who are
anxious to master the technicalities of these Sutras. Jaimini is very
cautious in his statements. He asks his readers to study the general
principles of astrology, and along with their applications to the practical
side of horoscopes he directs them to remember the general and special
principles which he has explained in his learned work and make
predictions, taking both the influences mentioned in the general works
and also the principles he has explained with particular care and on his
own responsibility, into consideration- Ravi and Sani in the diagram
according to ordinary astrology do not aspect each other, but in making
predictions, we have not only to ascribe the general 6th and 8th positions
of the Sun and Saturn from each other but also the special aspect
influences whichjai mini has named here.
For a novice in general astrology, these observations of the Maharishi may
appear quite novel but a little practice of these principles along with those
of the general principles current with the astrologers, will show that there

will be no difficulty and the predictions based on these combined
influences will be found to be more accurate and to the point. The
preliminaries should be carefully studied and remembered and the
readers should put them cautiously into practice. Theory and practicewill
make a man perfect.
SU. 5. - Darabhagyasulasthargala nidhyatuh. The fourth, second and
eleventh places (or planets in them) from theaspecting body areArgalas.
SU. 6.-Kamasthathu bhuyasa papanam. Malefics in the third from the
aspecting planet give rise to evil Argala.
SU . 7.-Rihpha neechakamastha virodhinah. Planets in the tenth, twelfth
and third from Argala cause obstruction to such Argala.
SU. 8.-Na nyun4 vibalascha. If planets obstructing Argala are fewer or less
powerful than those causing Argala, then the power of Argala cannot be
affected.
SU. 9.-PrQgvastrikone. The houses or planets in trikonas (5 and 9 )
similarly influence the Argala.
SU. 10. - yipareetQm ketoh In the case of Ketu the formation of Argala
and obstruction to it must be calculated in the reverse order. .
NOTES These sutras require elaborate N OTES as they are highly technical
in nature. Unless these are properly understood, further progress in
Jaiminisutras will become difficult and doubtful. I n Sanskrit Mathematics,
pneumonics of a peculiar kind are used and these must be properly
mastered. In, Sutras 32 and 33 of this Pada, Jaimini gives a clue to the
decipherment of his Sutras. I have to anticipate a few of the future Sutras
here, for the great author hi mself does so.
SU . 23. -Sarvatra savarna Bhava Sasayah.
SU . 33.-Na grahah. In the indication or designation of the Rasis and the
Bhavas (Signs and Significations) the author has used, for the sake of
abbreviation, varnasor single letters. But i n the case of planets he has not
done so, which means he has used the proper names of the planets and
not any letters to indicate them. I shall explain these differences in the
NOTES below. We have in Sanskrit a sutra called Ka, Ta, Pa, Yadi. These
are also called the Vargas - Kavarga, Tavarga, Pavarga

and Yavarga. Kavarga contains Kadi Nava or nine letters commencing
from Ka thus -Ka, Kha, Ga, Gha, Jna, Cha, Chha, Ja, Jha, or nine letters.
Tavarga or Tadinava-nine letters beginning with Ta-Tu, Tta, Da, Dha, Na,
Tha, Thha, Da, Dha, or the nine letters of Ta varga. Pavarga or Padi
Pancha-five letters commencing from Pa. They are Pa, Pha, Ba, Bha, Ma
five letters. Yavarga yadyahrau or eight letters from Ya. They are Ya, Ra,
La, Va, Ssa. Sha, Saand Ha, for the 8 letters of Ya varga. After having
learnt these the next sutra in Sanskrit Mathematics is Ankanum Vamato
ghtihi.
Though Suryanarain Rao has elucidated the abbreviations used by
Jaimini to imply numerals I propose to make some observations for the
benefit of the reader The system of pneu monies employed here is
called Katapayadi system. The consonants of the Sanskrit alphabet
have keen used in the place of the numbers 1-9 and zero to express
number:. There are different variant: of thissystem but I shall explain
the most commonly accepted method. • (n) and • (n) and the vowels
denote zero.
The letter: in succession beginning with Ka (•), Ta (•), Pa (q) and Ya
(•) denote the digits ; in a conjoint consonant, e.g., Kya (•) only the last
onedenotes a number According to this system therefore the letters ka
(•) ta (•) paC_) Ya (•) denotes 1 kha (•) tta pha (•) ra (•) " 2. 9a (•) da
(s) ba (•) la (•) " 3. gha (•) dha (•) bha (•) va (•) " 4. nga (•) na (•) ma (•),
ssa (•) " 5. cha (s) tha (_) sha (•) ., 6. chha (•) thha (•) sa (•) " 7. a (•) da (•)
ha (•) " 8. jha (•) dha (•) " 9. A right to left arrangement Is employed in
the formation of chronograms i.e., the letter denoting units figure is
first written, than follows the letter denoting the tens figure and so on,
e.g., ra me ' 2 6- 62. Jaimini divides thefigure so obtained by 12 and
takes the remainder as denoting a particular sign of the zodiac as
reckoned from M esha.
A 1 1 f i gu res i n A stronomy , I nscri pti ons and M athemati cs shou I d be read i n
the reverse order or as the M ohammedans read from right to left. The
explanations of the following sutras make these aphorisms easy to
understand. .Jaimini uses the word Argalato mean a sort of obstruction
or impediment for the free flow of planetary influences. A planet in a
certain house from any desired Bhava or signification or planet, prevents
or obstructs the progress of the influence and thereby diminishes its value
and. usefulness. These five Sutras give explanations about these A rgal a.
influences and obstructions and they must be carefully treasured up.
There are two varieties of A rgala : shubha or beneficial, and papa or
malefic.

Dara contains two Sanskrit letters da and ra. Da according 'toTavarga
given above, represents the 8th letter in that group and hence stands for
the figure 8. Ra represents the 2nd letter in the Yavarga, and hence stands
for the digit 2-thus we have by the word dara 82. Reading this by the
above mathematical Sutra in the reverse order we get 28. There are 12
signs or Rasis and when 28 is divided by 12, we get 4 as the remainder.
Therefore Dara means the fourth house, rep resenting the A rgal a from any
desired significance or planet. Now the peculiarity isthis Dara in Sanskrit
language means wife and in general astrology, when we say Dara or
Darasthana, we signify the 7th house from Lagna fora male horoscope.
But Dara in Jaimini by the rules he has laid down means Four and not
Seven. Bhagya. By the letter interpretation process-Bha isthe fourth in the
Pavarga and stands therefore for 4, Gya in Sanskrit is composed of Ga,
and Ya the letter underneath the former Ga, and in all compound or
conjoined letters the lower letter has to betaken into account and not the
upper. Thus we have here Ya, and it is the first letter in Yavarga and
stands for 1. We have therefore 41.
Reading in the reverse order we get 14 and this divided by 12 will give us
a remainder of 2. Bhagya-2. Therefore the 2nd house or planet from any
given Bhava also becomes an Argala planet or obstruction. Sula is
composed of Ssa and La. In the Vavarga, Ssa stands as the fifth letter and
represents 5. La represents the 3rd letter i n Y avarga and therefore stands
for 3. We thus get the figure 53. But reading in the reverse order we have
35, Divided by 12 we get a remainder of 11 and therefore Sul a stands for
11. Those planets which are in 4, 2 and 11 from any planet or Bhava in
question or under consideration, become classified as Argala and obstruct
their influences. In Sutra 6 if many evil planets, more than two as the
plural is used, are found in Kama or 3rd house, they also then become
Argala. Kastands as in Kavarga and Ma stands as 5 in the Pavarga.
Therefore we have 15. Reading in the reverse order we get 51. Divide this
by 12 and we have the remai nder 3.
Therefore Kama stands for the 3rd house. Kama in Sanskrit means Cupid,
passions, wife and desires. In the general astrological literature, Kama
means the 7th house representing husband or wife as the horoscope may
belong to a female or a male human being. But by the interpretation by
letters as directed by the author, it means the third. As it is stated here the
planets become Argala in the 3rd only when there are more than 2 evil
planets in the 3rd from the questioning planets or Bhava. But suppose
there is only one evil planet in the 3rd house, then by implication it does
not become A rgal a for the planet or Bhava. In Sutra 7, Ripha means 10, Ra
in Yavarga stands for 2 as it is the second letter from Ya and Pha is the
second letter .in the Pavarga and therefore represents 2, putting together

weget 22. Dividethisby 12wehavea balance of 10. Neecha stands for 12.
Na represents O in theTavarga as it stands as the 10th from Ta and
therefore represents cipher.
We have only 9 Ankas or digits and the 10th shows a zero. Cha stands as
the 6th letter from T avarga and represents 6, putti ng together we have 06.
Reading in the reverse order we have 60. Divided by 12 there will be no
balance, but the author asks the readers to take always the last balance
and when 60 is divided by 12 it goes four times (48) and the last balance is
12. Therefore N eecha stands for 12. Kama, we have already seen, means 3.
Those planets which are in 10, 12 and 3 form an obstruction to the Argala
mentioned in Sutra 5. Here probably the meaning is that the Argala
influences, formed by planets mentioned in Sutra 5, good or bad, are
themselves modified or obstructed by the planetary positions mentioned
in this Sutra.
Those planets which are in the 5th and 9th or Trikonas counteract the
influences of the Argala planets as explained before. It has been already
stated that certain planets in certain house cause Argala or obstruction
and those which are in the 5th and 9th counteract these Argala influences.
Coming to Sutra 8, if fewer planets or powerless or disabled planets cause
obstruction in Sutra 7 to the Argala generated in Sutra 5, then they will not
affect the power of that Argala. Here it means that the obstructive Argala
created in Sutra 7, unless the planets are strong, will not be able to
obstruct the Argala influences caused by planetary positions mentioned in
Sutra 5.
Sutra 9 is clear and needs no further explanation. With reference to Ketu
the order must be reversed (Sutra 10). The 9th from Ketu becomes Argala
and the 5th from him becomes P rati band haka or obstruction. The name of
Rahu is not mentioned in the original, but some commentators are of
opinion that the mention of Ketu is enough to include Rahu. Sutras are
short and certainly require clearer explanations. Those beneficial planets
who are in Dara 4, Bhagya 2, and Shula 11 from Ketu do not form Argala.
The maleficsin the 3rd and 8th from Ketu do not form Papargala or evil
obstruction. Argala seems to bea sort of force or energy, caused by certain
positions of the planets, and this energy may be beneficial or malicious.
Power may be good or bad as it is used. In the case of Rahu and Ketu the
Argala results must be calculated in the reverse order. From the 11 th
Sutrajaimini gives the ruleswhich will guide the student in determining
the lordship of the various relations and events, which have to betaken
into consideration, i n the career of an individual.

SU. ll.-Atmadhikaha kaladibhirna bhogassaptanamashtamva. " Of the
seven planets from the Sun to Saturn, or the eight pi anets from the Sun to
Rahu, whichever gets the highest number of degrees becomes the
Atmakaraka.
NOTES The word Ashtanamva is emphasised because Rahu, instead of
being mixed with other planets, seems to have been separated for a certain
set purpose. The meaning becomes evident when we refer to Parasara
according to whom also, Rahu fills up the gap- when two planets (of the
seven) possess the same number of degrees. If two or three planets obtain
the same Ka/ as or degrees and minutes, they are all merged into one
Karaka or Lordship over some event in the human life. The vacancies
caused by the merges of two or three planets into one have to be supplied
by Rahu in the reverse of order. The other Karaka will be supplied by the
Naisargika Karakasor permanent lords.
This is a difficult Sutra and requires some clear explanations. Whileall the
planets have got movements from I eft to right or direct. Rahu and Ketu
move in the reverse order or from rightto left. The first is called the
Savyam or Pradakshinam (dextral) and the Other is called Apasavyam or
Apradakshinam (sinistral). Rahu and Ketu have no houses but, Jai mini
gives lordship of Kumbha to Rahu and Vrischika to Ketu. They have been
given lordships over some human events. In any horoscope, the first duty
of an honest astrologer istofind out the exact positions of all the planets.
This implies a good knowledge in Astronomy and astrologicmathematics. Then the degrees, minutes and seconds of the positions of
the planet are calculated and placed correctly, then the student will be
abletofind out which planet has got the highest number of Kalas or
degrees in a horoscope. Whoever has got the highest number of Kalas,
becomes the Atmakaraka.
These Karakatwas or Lordships, therefore, can be acquired according to
these Sutras by any planet. Whereas in Naisargika, Karakas or permanent
lordships are fixed forever. In Naisargika, the Karakas or Lordships are
thus detailed : In Brihatjataka, Ravi, Chandra, Sani and Sukra aregiven
different Karakaships: Diva arkasukrow pitru. matru soungnitou. This
means that persons born during the day have the Sun and Venus as lords
of the father and mother respectively. Sanaischarendu nisi tadviparyayat.
For persons born during the nights, Sani becomes Matru karaka and Indu
or Chandra becomes the lord of father. I have simply drawn the attention
of the readers to the various versions given by the different authors. Here
we may havePitrukaraka (1) Ravi in the Naisargika 'method', (2) Chandra
as Pitru karaka for those who are born in the night and (3) any planet out

of the nine who gets or contains the largest number of degrees in a
horoscope.
Then the question arises as to how a student has to be guided in
determining the prosperity and adversity of a person's father. Suppose in
the Jaimini system Sani becomes Pitrukaraka : Chandra becomes
Pitrukaraka by the direction of Brihat Jataka and by the general or
Naisargike system, Ravi becomes the Pitrukaraka. These three planets,
viz., Ravi, Chandra and Sani are thoroughly different in characteristics
and these variations, expounded by the learned in Astrology, instead of
helping a student in the progress of the studies will confound him and
launch him into greater doubts and confusion. When different systems,
apparently contradictory, are enunciated by eminent Maharishis the
wisest thing would be, in my humble opinion and experience, to take all
of them into careful consideration, add his own experience, judge all of
them with a diligent eye and makea harmonious wholeso that all of them
may prove successful and satisfactory.
Take half a dozen medical experts in remote corners of the world. They
experi ment and hit upon certain herbs or roots as efficacious for certain
diseases. Each one succeeds with a certain class, and thinks they may
prove useful. If all of them have succeeded and the results of their
experiments satisfactory, then a wise physician carefully NOTES the
characteristics of such of those drugs and roots and he may succeed even
better than any one of the original experimenters, by a judicious use of
them suitable to times and conditions of life. Maharishis, by their
expanded vision, watched and recorded their experiences from different
mental visions, and gave principles in. all such sciences, which, though
contradictory on the surface, will be found to be agreeable on a deeper
analysis.
Different systems have mentioned different periods for death and other
important events of human life. Bhattotpala, the great commentator of
Varahamihira's works; hits on a nice system of reconciliation and I refer
my readers for clearer explanations on my NOTES to Dasantardasa
chapter i n Br i hat J ataka. A man may I i ve u pto 70 or 80 years and may
have passed through various critical conditions. He will be killed in the
period of the strongest death- inflicting planet and have critical dangers
during other evil periods. Take the longevity question. We havethe Udu
Dasa or length of life measured by the planets according to the

constellations ruling at birth. We havesecondly Kalachakra Dasas and the
longevity given by them.
Third, we havetheGraha Datta Pindayuryoga or the term of lifegiven by
the planets to the Foetus at the time of conception. Fourth, we have the
Amsayurdaya recommended by Satyacharya and followed by
Varahamihira. Fifth, we have the longevity determined by theGochara
movements of the planets. Sixth, the longevity as determined by the
kendra Ayurdaya. Seventh, we have the Dasantardasa Ayurdaya. Then,
eighthly, we havetheAshtakavarga Bindusodhana Ayurdaya. These eight
systems certainly give divergent views and different terms. If so, what
should the astrological student do when all the eight systems give eight
different periods.
Bhattotpala, whom we have not seen a more learned commentator on
astrological works in recenttimes, reconciles these different systems in the
following manner : say a person lives for 50 years and gets various
periods of longevity from 3 years to 50 years. The suggestion of
Bhattotpala stands to reason. Suppose the eight systems give the following
terms of life -3,10,15, 20, 27, 35, 40 and 50 we are asked to prescribe the
longest term obtained as the longevity, and the terms indicated by the
other systems will be periods in the life of the person which will be very
critical and during which he. will suffer from severe diseases, dangers, or
accidents, but he will manage to get over them and live upto the longest
term, viz., 60 years as shown by one of those systems.
Jai mini sutras offer the same explanations. In the typical case Sani,
C hand ra and Ravi , representi ng father i n the case of a si ngl e person, then
the age and prosperity of the father will be determined by the most
powerful among them. It may also happen that by the three systems, Ravi
may become the lord of father. Then he will live longer and be more
prosperous and happy. The merging of two or three planets into one
karaka has to be fully explained. Unless I give some illustration, the
readers will not be able to follow these sutras. The sutra says that
whichever planet gets the highest number of degrees, becomes the
Atmakaraka. Supposein a horoscope two planets get the same number of
degrees ; then both of them will become Atmakaraka. Take Sani and
Chandra in a horoscope, and say they have got each 29 degrees and ten
minutes.
As per the above sutra, both of them become merger into one, viz.,
Atmakaraka. When both of them become representing one event, viz.,
Atmakaraka, there will be a vacancy for some other karakatwa say
Chandra has merged into Sani and his place, representing matrukaraka or

some other karaka, falls vacant. This, Jai mini says, will be supplied byRahu. As Rahu and Ketu move in the reverse, they will be considered as
getting the highest number of degrees when they are at the beginning of a
sign. In the above illustration, suppose Sani has 29o and 10' in Aries as
al so C hand ra. Then they w i 1 1 natu ral I y have travel I ed al I over M esha and
will be within fifty minutes from Vrishabha.
Sani and other planets move from M esha to Vrishabha, Mithuna, Kataka,
and so forth, whereas Rahu moves in the reverse order, viz., from
V ri shabha . to M esha and M esha to M eena. Rahu will have obtai ned 29a
and 10' when he is 50' from Meena, for Rahu gains each degree as he
enters Mesha from Vrishabha and moves on to the ISt degree of M esha
before heentersinto thenextsign Meena. HereasChandra has merged
into Sani, Rahu takes that karakatwa which Chandra as a separate planet
would have taken. Suppose Budha also gets the same degrees, and these
three represent one karakatwa or signification. Suppose now brothers
have to be represented. Then Jai mini says take the N isarga Karaka, Kuja,
and give him the control over brothers, etc., attributed to Kuja in the
general literature in Astrology.
SU. 12.-Saeeshtay bandhamokshayoh. Atmakaraka gives bad and good
results by virtue of malefic and benefic dispositions such as debility,
exaltation, etc.
NOTES When the Atmakaraka is in exaltation or in beneficial Rasis or
conjunctions, though the person is imprisoned he will be liberated, will
livein holy places and will have Moksha or Final Emancipation. Butwhen
he is inNeecha Rasi or with evil conjunctions and aspects he will be
imprisoned, will suffer from chains and other tortures, and will not have
Moksha. But it this debilitated planet has beneficial aspects or
conjunctions, he will be liberated. The idea seems to be the securing of
final salvation. If the Atmakaraka is exalted and has beneficial aspects and
conjunctions without any malicious influences the man will get the final
Bliss called Moksha, so ardently coveted by all devotees and the yogis.
They desire nothing more than this state of bliss. Here Bandha and
M oksha may be interpreted as malefic and benefic results.
SU. 13,-Thasyanusaranadamatyaha. The planet who is next in kalas or
degrees to Atmakaraka will become A matyakaraka.
NOTES By careful mathematical calculations the student should first find
out the positions of planets correctly in degrees and minutes. Then fix
them up in the horoscope and place the Lagna also in degrees and
minutes. It will be very easy to fix all the planets and also the Lagna in

their vargas or minute divisions by proper calculations. Unless this part of
the work is done satisfactorily the application of the principles of
Astrology, enunciated byjaimini or other Maharish is, will not be possible.
And when the foundation is not well laid and solidly built, the
superstructure can never be durable or lasting. After the planets are
placed correctly in their degrees and minutes, it becomes easy for a
student to find out who gets the highest number of degrees of Kalas.
whoever gets the largest number take hi m as the Atmakaraka. The planet
who gets the next highest degrees will be Amatyakaraka. Probably when
theAmatyaor Mantrikaraka is powerful and well combined and aspected
the person will become a great M inister or Councillor. But when he is ill
combined and badly aspected and debilitated he becomes an evil
Councillor or an adviser who brings disgrace on himself and also on those
to whom he offers his counsel.
SU. 14, -Tasya bhratha. The planet who gets the highest number of degrees
next to Amatyakaraka becomes Bhratrukaraka or gets lordship over
brothers.
NOTES If the Bhratrukaraka is debilitated, joins evil planets and has
malicious aspects then there will be ruination to brothers. He, will have no
brothers or, if he gets them, they will die or become wretched, poor and
disgraceful. If, on the other hand, the Bhratrukaraka is exalted, well
combined and well aspected there will be plenty of brothers and
prosperity and success will attend on them. In the world we have
experience of various sorts and all these are indicated by the astrological
authors.
SU.15. - Tasya mriatha. - The planet who gets the highest number of
degrees next to Bhratrukaraka becomes lord of the mother or
Matrukaraka.
SU. 16. - Tasya putrahaThe planet who is next in power in degrees to
M atrukaraka becomes the lord of the children or Putrakaraka.
NOTES The Sanskrit Sciences have attached the greatest importance to
the birth of children. Without children a home is designated asa burial
ground or smasana or cemetery. Aputrasya gatirnasti observe the Vedas.
This means that a man who has no children will have no heaven or
Moksha. There is a special Hellish River called the Put. One who no Putra
will not be able to cross this river Put. He is called a Putra who enables the
parents to cross this river. If he does not cross it, he will have no salvation
and he cannot go to regions of bliss. In this world what can give a person
greater pleasure than the possession of healthy, intelligent, obedient and

prosperous children ? What can delight the hearts of the parents more
than the playing round about them of thei r happy children ?Can the work
of creation continue without children 1 If there are no children, then the
human species must cease to exist and theworld will be depopulated.
Children thus become an absolute necessity, for the continuation of the
human species. But in getting children, there is a very great variety.
Temperaments are various and curious. It is no doubt a source of great
pleasure for a man to have children but what is the good of getting bad,
deformed, repulsive, ungrateful, depraved and rascally children who are
antagonistic to their parents, who areimmoral, cheats and otherwise quite
undesirable to society, to the nation and to the family. Where the
Putrakaraka is well situated, exalted, in good Shadvargas, in beneficial
conjunctions and aspects, the children will be blessed with all the virtues
which make them agreeable, happy, prosperous and dutiful to parents.
The greatest Epic in India, viz., Ramay ana teaches the excel lent duties of
children towards their parents and Sri Rama is the noblest conception and
embodiment of the duties towards the parents, relations, friends and the
public citizens under his royal care. It is better to have no children than to
have bad and ungrateful ones.
SU . 17.-Thasya gnathihi. The planet who gets less degrees than those of
Putrakaraka becomes Gnathikaraka or lord of the cousins. Among all the
nations of the world, cousins form one important item, in making the
domestic ci rcle happy or unhappy. This is specially so among the H indus,
whose laws of inheritance and succession to property are peculiar and
very complicated. There are maternal and paternal cousins and nephews.
The last are the most formidable, when they are adversely situated and
most favourable when they are sympathetic and loving. The condition of
the planets w ho become G nathi karakas will deter mi ne the attitude of the
cousins and the rules for judging of these have already been laid down in
the previous N OTES and explanations.
SU. 18. - Thnsya darascha. The planet who gets less degrees than the
gnathikaraka becomes Darakaraka or lord of wife.
NOTES The use of cha in this sutra indicates plurality and includes the
examination of the various Bhavas or significations from Lagna, Pada
Lagna and Upapada Lagna, which technicalities will be explained later on
in the NOTES. Jaimini suggests that the results should not be foretold
simply by the consultations of the karakas alone, but also by the Bhavas
from Lagna; Pada Lagna and U papada Lagna. The Science of astrology,
specially the foretelling of the future, is highly complicated and requires
the highest form of intelligence, and the most profound forms of analytical

powers to unravel its mysteries and make the future predictions correct.
This science as well as other sciences require great intelligence and
erudition, and this will be so specially with astrology which deals with all
the phenomena in the world and which, therefore, requires the most
comprehensive and grasping intellect to understand its principles.
SU. 19. -Matra saha putramekesamamananthi. Some A charyas or authors
hold that the M atru and putrakarakas may be represented by one and the
same planet, that is these two Bhavas, lordship of mother and children
may bejudged by the same planet.
NOTES Here this union may be interpreted in two ways, viz,
Matrukaraka includes Putrakaraka, and therefore these two Bhavas may
be foretold by the lord of mother or by the lord of children. The planet
next in degrees to Bhratrukaraka becomes Matrukaraka, and the planet
next in degrees to Matrukaraka becomes Putrakaraka. What Jaimini
apparently means is that by the planet next in degrees to Bhratrukaraka,
may be foretold about the prosperity and adversity of the mothers and the
children. Sincejaimini gives pada, ghatika and upapada Lagnas as also
the Lagna for the consultation for results, difficulties and confusion have
been removed and the welfare and misfortunes of mother and children
may be easily analysed and predicted.
SU. 20.-Bhaginyurathassyalaha kaniyajjananeecheti. . Some say that from
Kuja should be ascertained particulars regarding brothers and sisters,
brother- in law, younger brothers and step-mothers. Some others hold that
predictions relating to step-mother should be madefrom the 8th house.
However this latter view is not approved by all.
NOTES From Ara or Kuja the sisters, wife's brothers, younger brothers
and mother must be exami ned . I n Sutras 15 and 16 reference to f i nd out
the lord of mother has been made. Why then again mention about
mother? Here from Mars we have to find elder and younger sisters,
brothers of wife, younger brother, step-mother and the maternal aunts.
Ara or Kuja is the permanent or Naisargika Bhratrukaraka or lord of
brothers. Some authors by pronouncing Aratha in short A, make it A =0,
Ra =2 and Tha 6 =0.26 and reading it in the reverse order we get 620. This
divided by 12 w i 1 1 give us remainder 8. And ask the readers to find out the
above events from the 8th house from Lagna. Jaimini does notapproveof
it.
SU. 21.-Mathuladayo bandhavo matrusojatiya ittyuttarataha. From
Mercury should be ascertained details relating to maternal uncles,
maternal aunts and other maternal relations.

NOTES Take the planet next to Ara or Kuja and he will be Budha. The
order of the planets must always be remembered as in the weekdays- Ravi;
Chandra, Mangala, Budha, Guru, Sukra and Sani. Therefore when the
author says Uttarataha or take the next planet, it clearly means Budha.
From Budha, maternal aunts, maternal uncles and other maternal
relations I ike step-mothers should be found out. Thus say some others.
This means that Jaimini is not in agreement with the views of these
writers. Like Kechit in Brihat Jataka, Ekey in Jaimini is used to indicate
other schools of thought in Astrological predictions.
SU. 22.-Pitamahou pathiputraviti gurumukhadeva janiyat. From Guru the
paternal grandmother and grandfather, the husband and children must be
found out.
SU. 23.-Patnipitarau swasurou matamaha ityante vasinaha. From the next
planet from Guru, viz., Sukra, the parents of the wife, or parents-in-law,
paternal and maternal aunts, maternal grandfather and grandmother, and
A nte V asi na or d i sci p I es mu st be f ou nd out.
NOTES If two or three planets get the lordship by getting the same
degrees, then find out who has got the greater number of minutes and
seconds, and if the planets are equal in all these degrees and minutes and
seconds then we are recommended to take the N isarga or permanent lords
for the welfare of the particular events. I shall give here the Naisargika
lordships of planets. . Ravi.-Atmaprabhavasakti or soul force, reputation,
vitality and father. , Chandra. -Manas, Matru, Mani-Mind, Mother and
Gems. Kuja.-Bhumi, Satwa, Bhratru-Lands, Strength and Brothers.
Budha.-Pragnya, Matula, Bud d hi, Vacha- intelligence, uncle, wisdom and
speech. Guru.-putra, Vidya, Dhana, Grtana-Children, Education, Wealth
and Spiritual development. Sukra.-Kama, Indriasukha, Kalatra-passion,
sense pleasures and wife. Sani.-Ayushyam, J eevanopayam, Maranamlongevity, means of livelihood and death. Rahu. -Matamaha or maternal
grandfather, Vishakaraka or lord governing poison. Keru.-- Pitamaha or
paternal grandfather and Kaivalyakaraka or one who gives final basis. . I
have given here only the most salient points and for greater details I refer
my readers to my English translation of Sarwarthachintamani.
SU. 24. - Monzdojyayan Grah eshu. Among all the planets, Ravi, Chandra,
Kuja, Budha, Guru, Sukra and Sani, Saturn isthe least powerful.
NOTES Varaha M ihira observes in ascribing the Veeryabala thus -Sa, Ku,
Bu, Gu, Su, Cha, Ra meaning Sani is the least powerful in Veeryabala ;
next comes Kuja, then Budha, then Guru, then Sukra, then Chandra and
Ravi represents the .strongest in, Veeryabala. Some writers and

commentators give the following interpretation which may also be
acceptable. Mandojyayan Ityuttarataha. Next to Sukra comes Sani in Sutra
23. Therefore from Sani must be found out the prosperity and misfortunes
of the el der brothers.
SU. 25.-Pracheevruttirvishamabheshu. In all odd signs the counting must
be in the right direction.
NOTES M esha, M ithuna, Simha, Thula, Dhanus and Kumbha are odd
signs. In all these signs the counting must be from left to right. I will
explain in clearer terms. Say we want the 5th from Mesha. Then count as
Mesha, Vrishabha, M ithuna, Kataka, Simha and so forth.
SU. 26. - Paravrutyottareshu. In even signs the counting must be in the
reverse order.
NOTES Take Vrishabha and we want the 6th from it. There we get
Vrishabha, Mesha, Meena, Kumbha, Makaraand Dhanus. Take Thula. It is
an odd sign, suppose wewantthe4th. Then Thula, Vrischika, Dhanusand
Makara. Take Vrischika and we want the 6th from it. Then we have
Vrischika, Thula, Kanya, Smha, Kataka and M ithuna. In fact, in all odd
signs the procedure is in the right direction, in even signs we count
backwards I ike the movements of Rahu and Ketu in reverse order. Then
follows a short but very difficult Sutra. Brevity may be the soul of
composition, but it will be the thorny path to the commentators and
readers, with ordinary intelligence and education.
SU. 27.-Nakwachit. In some places or signs this does not apply.
N OTES H ere the brevity of the Sutra offers the greatest confusion. What
arethe places or signs where these rules do not apply. When a general
principle is laid down why should there be any exceptions ? If we had
excellent commentators, who were almost equal to the original authors
and some of whom were even superior to their originals, many of the
Sanskrit Sciences would have been sealed letters and none of the modern
scholars, though brilliant, have got that spiritual capacity and
concentration of mind to enable them to go beyond the screens and find
out the literary gems which were hidden in the deep mines of Sanskrit
Literature. If the ancient authors have been held as great benefactors to the
literary world, .the commentators for those works should, be considered
even greater benefactors.

What would have been the use of the Vedas, if they had not been handled
by the renowned two commentators Bhatta ' Bhaskara and Vidyaranya.
Sanskrit Sciences are put in technical styles and Sutras and unless the
commentators are scholars of great genius and of equal capacity, the
original works would have remained almost inaccessible and
uni ntel I i gi bl e to the modern generation. For in this Sutra there are two
words Na negativeand Kvachit, at times are occasions. Wehave no clue
to when and how these two words have to be used or interpreted.
Gathering information from the ancient commentators this Sutra signifies
while the general rule is to count regularly in all odd signs and in the
reverse order in the even signs, this rule does not apply to Vrishabha or
Vrischika and to Kumbha and Simha. FI ere it means that i n the even signs
of Vrishabha and Vrischika, instead of counting in the reverse order we
have to count in the right way and in Kumbha and Simha instead of
counting in the right way, we have to count in the reverse order. In other
signs where such exceptions obtain they will be pointed out in their
proper places.
SU. 28:-Nathaanthahasamapruyenu. Many of the writers are of opinion,
that the *Rasi Dasa (period of the sign) extends over such number of years
which are counted from the Rasi to the place where its lord is located.
NOTES Take Mesha ; its lord Kuja. Say he is in Simha. . Count from
Mesha to Simha ; we get 5. This will be the number of years of Rasi Dasa
given by Mesha. In all other works, Dasasand. Bhuktis (periods and subperiods) are given only to planets but never to the zodiacal signs. Jai mini -
gives Rasi Dasasasa peculiar feature of his immortal works. I shall try to
explain this Sutra in full as, otherwise my readers will be surrounded by
many doubts and difficulties and may understand the Sutra altogether in
a very perverted sense. The number of years of the Rasi Dasa is
determined by the number of Rasis which its lord has travel led from it at
birth. Take a horoscope and follow the reasoning.
We want to find out the Dasa period of years given by Mesha. Its lord is
Kuja. Fie is found in the 7th house from Mesha. Therefore Mesha Dasa
extends for 7 years. We want the Dasa period given by Dhanus. Its lord is

Guru and he is in the 3rd house from Dhanus, and therefore the length of
Dasa of Dhanus will be 3 years. This point is now clear. In Jai mini sutras
the lordsof the houses are those which are recognised by the astrological
works in general and I presume the possession of this elementary
knowledge in my readers. The lords of the 12 zodiacal signs are the
following regularly*! have discussed Rasi Dasa at considerable length in
my book Studies in Jaimini Astrology. Chandra Rahu Lagna Sani Ravi
Budha Guru RASI Sukra Ketu from Mesha, viz., Kshitija-Kuja, Sita- Sukra,
Gna-Budha, Chandra-Moon, Ravi-.Sun, Soumya-Budha, Sita-Sukra,
Avanija-Kuja. Suraguru - Jupiter, Manda-Sani, Souri-Sani, Guru--Jupitervidemy translation of Brihatjataka: These same planets are also lordsof
the Amsas or other minuter divisions like Drekkana, Navamsa and
Dwadasamsa.
Differences of opinion obtain in all branches of knowledge. These
differences may arise from various causes. World presents such a
complicated and comprehensive phenomena that two observers trying in
different directions may find different results from the same research or
one result from different substances. Take one illustration. Two doctors,
men of hi h culture with tinges of original genius, far removed from each
other and quite stranger s, may go on experimenting to find out the best
anti dote for fever. Each may deal with different sets of articles and find a
resultant, which will have the efficacy of completely curing fever and all
such disorders. Similarly in Astrology. Temperaments differ so radically
in some cases that those who watch them keenly get puzzled over them
and fait to account for, such strange phenomena. If the lord of the Rasi is
in his own house, the sign gives 12 years of life. If he is in the 12th house
the Rasi gives a similar period. If he is in the second house he gives one
year. Some say he gives two years.
The word prayena signifies a great deal. If the lord of the Rasi is in
exaltation he will add one more year to the number he gives by his
position. Take Vrischika and Kuja in Makara. Here he is in the 3rd house
from Vrischika and therefore gives 3 years. But as he is in exaltation one
moreyear isto be added and thusthe Rasi gives four years. But if he is in
debilitation he takes away one year. Thus if we take Mesha and find Kuja
in Kataka, then he will have to g i ve fou r years as Kataka is the fourth from
Mesha but his debilitation has taken away one year and instead of four
years he gives only three years. There are two signs according to Jaimini
which have two lords instead of one granted by the rules of general
astrology. Vrischika has two lords, viz., Kuja and Ketu and Kumbha has
Sani and Rahu. In this case if the two lords are in the sign, then the Rasi

gives 12 years of Dasa. If one of them- is not there, then the presence of the
other gives no years. When both of them are not in the Rasi, then find out
the Dasa years by the stronger of the two planets.
Suppose of these two, one is in hisown house, and the other in a different
house, then count up and take the planet in hisown house in preference to
the other who is in a different house. Take Kumbha. It has two lords Rahu
and Sani. Sani is in Makara and Rahu is in Mesha. Here we have to prefer
Sani to Rahu as he is in his own house and therefore the longevity or Dasa
given by Kumbha will be 12 years as M akara is the 12th from Kumbha. If
out of the two lords, in other houses one is with another planet or planets,
and the second is not with a planet then take the planet who is in
conjunction with another planet. Suppose both of them are with other
planets, Then take the lord who is in conjunction with a larger number of
planets. Suppose both of them are with the same number of planets. Then
find out the strength of the Rasi and whichever is more powerful, take the
planet in it.
Here I shall explain What is meant by the strength of the Rasi. The fixed
signs are stronger than movable signs. The double bodied signs are
stronger than the fixed ones. If even here the strength of the two lords is
the same, then take that lord who gives the larger number of years. In this
way we haveto find out who isthe more powerful of the two lords and
ascribe the Rasi Dasa accordingly. If one of them is in exaltation, he
should be preferred. In this way find out the causes of strength to the
planet and then prescribe the Rasi Dasa years to it.
SU. 29. - Ya vadeesasrayam padamrzukshanam. Arudha Lagna is the
poi nt obtai ned by counting as many signs from the place of lord of Lagna
as the lord of Lagna is removed from Lagna.
NOTES Here Arudha or Pada Lagna is explained. The lord of the Lagna
at birth must occupy some house. The sign which measures from him in
the same number as he is from the Lagna will be called Pada Lagna. Take
an example. Chandra Rahu Lagna Sani . Ravi Budha Guru . RASI Kuja
Sukra Ketu Here we have to find out the Pada Lagna. The lord of Lagna is
Sukra. He is in the 8th house from Lagna. The 8th from Sukra becomes
pada. Here the 8th from Sukra is Kataka. Therefore it becomes the Arudha
or Pada Lagna. The uses for which these various Lagnasare enumerated
here will be explained later on. Jaimini makes his meaning clear in the
next two sutras.
SU. 30. -Swasthe daraha. If Lagnadhipathi is in the 4th, then the 7th
becomes Pada Lagna.

NOTES Dara as we have seen is 28, divided by 12 giving a remainder 4. If
Mesha isLagna and Kuja occupies Kataka, he will be in the 4th from it.
The 4th from Kataka, viz.,Thula will bethePada Lagna.
SU. 31.-Sutasthejanma. If the lord of Lagna is in the 7th from Lagna, then
Lagna itself becomes A rudha Lagna.
NOTES He gives another example. If the lord of Lagna is in the 7th, the
7th from it will be Lagna itself and this becomes pada or Arudha Lagna.
Suta-su represents 7 and ta indicates 6. This will be 67. Divided by 12 we
get the remainder 7 and therefore the 7th house is indicated. The
Maharishi gives these two examples so that his readers may make no
mistakes or misinterpretation about the Sutras. I hope my readers now
have fully understood what is meant by Pada Lagna. In this sutra, as the
lord of Lagna is in the 7th, the 7th from it will be Lagna itself. In this case
both Lagna and Pada Lagna are one and the same.
SU. 32.-Sarvatrasavarna bhavarasayaha. All Rasisand Bhavas are studied
by Varnada Lagna. Hence itwill be explained in thisaphorism.
NOTES Raghavabhatita, Pantha, N ilakanta and other older commentators
havegiven thefullestNOTES and detailson thissutra and I havetotake
the readers along those intricate paths. They have introduced Varnada
Lagna, Ghatika Lagna, Hora Lagna and other details. The following isthe
full exposition for all these. Readers are advised to have a large fund of
patience and devote some time to master these details. In all the foil owing
sutras of Jaimini, Varnas or Katapayadi letters are used to indicate Bhavas
and Rasis. But for planets their various names are used and they should
not be interpreted with the help of such letters. For those who are born in
odd signs count from Mesha in the regular order, for those who are born
in even signs count from Meena backwards til I we get to Bhava Lagna and
keep these figures on one side.
Again count for those who are born in odd signs from Mesha to Hora
Lagna in the regular order and for those born in even signs count from
Meena to Janma Lagna in the reverse order, and deduct the smaller
figures from the larger and counting again from Mesha forwards to the
number of remainder, and fix that Rasi as the Varnada Rasi for odd signs
and for person born in even signs counting back from Meena to the
number of Rasis given by the figure, take that Lagna as the Varnada
Lagna. This will certainly be not intelligible, unless a few examples are
given hereto illustrate the principles involved. Varieties of Lagnas will be
explained here. Bhava Lagna-used in Jaimini -means the ordinary Lagna as

is mentioned in the ordinary books on Astrology. The sign that rises at
birth on any particular day.
Chandra Lagna-or the Janma Rasi, is that sign in which Chandra is
situated at the. time of birth. This is determined by constellation ruling on
that day. Pada Lagna-means that sign in number again from the position
of the lord of Lagna which he occupies from Lagna. Hora Lagna-Takethe
time of birth from the sunrise and fix it in ghatis. Then dividethis number
by 2.5 which is cal led a Hora and the number thus obtained represents the
Hora Lagna. Take an example. A man was born on the 3rd of the solar
month Kumbha at 14.5 ghatis after sunrise. Now 14.5 ghatis divided by 2.5
will give us 5 and 2 ghatis as a remainder. Therefore the H ora Lagna falls
in the 6th from Kumbha-Kanya.
Take a person born on the 2nd of the solar month. Vrischika at about 29
ghatis after sunrise. Dividing this by 2.5 ghatis we get 11 and a remainder
1.5 ghatis. That is the Hora Lagna will be the 12th from the sign occupied
by the Sun, viz., Vrischika or it falls in Thula the 12th from it. If suppose
the man is born on that day at 48 ghatis after the sunrise then dividethis
by 2.5 ghatis. We get 19 and a remainder of 5 ghati. Therefore the Hora
Lagna falls in the 20th. As there are only 12 signs, deduct this figure from
20 and we get 8. Therefore thee 8th from Vrischika will be the Hora Lagna
and it falls in M ithuna. Here also the order already named for odd and
even signs should be observed.
Ghati ka Lagna-From the sunrise to the time of birth find out how many
ghatikas havepassed and find out the Rasi which fall sat the time and this
will be easy to understand. Say a man is born at 25 ghatis after sunrise on
the 2nd of Vrishabha Masa. Then take 25 ghatis and count from
Vrishabha; whenever, the figure of ghatis is more than 12 deduct or divide
the number of ghatis and find out the remainder. 25 divided by 12 will
give us a balance of 1 after going twice. Thus in this case the ghatika
Lagna falls in one and therefore in Vrishabha itself. Varnada Lagna-We
have already explained this and we will give clearer explanations later on.
Asjaimini insists on Savya-right and Apsasavya - left for odd and even
signs our readers must understand this point clearly and keep before their
vision in all countings for the various Lagnas.
An Indian ghati means 24 minutes of English time. An hour means 2.5
ghatis. A minute means 2.5 vighatis. The minuteness of the divisions of
time, reached by the Indian astronomers, is simply astounding. The
Europeans have no idea of them. I shall give them here for ready
reference. The European conception of the minute divisions of time is as
follows. A day is divided into 24 hours. An hour is divided into 60

minutes. A minute is divided into 60 seconds. Here ends their conception
of time. 24 x 60 x 60 or one day contains 86,400 seconds. This is the highest
idea of the European conception of the divisions of time for a day. Take
the conception of the division of Time by the Indian Astronomers.
In the uttara gograhana or the release of the cattle, A rjuna went ta effect
their release and Duryodhana, Emperor of Hasthinapura, takes objection
to the appearance of A rjuna before the stipulated time for their
Agnathavasa or incognito existence for 12 years. Bhishma, the greatest
warrior, saint and philosopher in the wholeof Mahabharata, explains the
astronomical detailsand calculations of time and convinces Duryodhana,
that the time of 12 years imposed on the Pandavas passed away the
previous day and A rjuna was justified in his appearance for the release of
the cattle. According to Aryan Astronomers a day is divided into 60ghatis.
Each ghati is divided into 60 vighatis. Each vighati is divided into 60
Liptas. Each lipta is divided into 60Viliptas. Each vilipta is divided into 60
paras and each para is divided into 60 Tatparas. The figures when
multiplied stand thus : one day 60 Gh. x 60 V.G. x 60 L x 60 V.L. x 60 P. x
60 TP. or 60 x 60 x 60 x 60 x 60 x 60. My good readers, this humble figure
when multiplied will giveyou 46656000000.
I magi ne here the concepti on of the mi nuteness of ti me by the M aharshi s
and their intellect. A day in the calculation of Hindu astronomers contai ns
the above number of Tatparas. This can possibly be conceived by the
highest human intellect under the highest yogic and experienced Divya
Drishti or Divine vision and can never be the work of ordinary mortals
however high their genius may be. I leave my readers to judge of these
facts with their own intelligence and not be guided by the stupid theory of
Hindus borrowing their Astrology from the barbarous Greeks and
Chaldeans. Has any man intheworld conceived divisions of time more
minute? If so, who is he and wherecan wefind him.
SU. 33. Nagrahaha. Varnada is not to be applied for the planets but only
for Rasis. In all the sutras of Jaimini, the Ka, Ta, Pa, Yadi sutra of
interpreting the language should not be applied to the planets. The author
means that the grahas or the planets are designated by their various
names and never by the letter system.
SU. 34.-Yavadwivekamavrittirbhanam. Divide Rasi Dasas by 12 and
distribute the same to the 12 Rasis in proportion to the Rasi Dasa periods
to get sub-periods. The counting should be from right to left if Lagna is
odd sign and vice versa if even.

NOTES Interpreting of Viveka-Va -4Va.-4 Ka-l-or 441 or reading in the
reverse order we get 144. A 1 1 the Rasis put together at 12 each will come
up to 144. Take the Rasi Dasa year and divide that into 12 bhagas,
multiply the Mesha Dasa Rasi by 12. Then divide the total by 12 and the
quotient will represent the Antardasa years. Even here the readers are
advised to count and follow the odd and even signs in the right and left
directions as has been already explained. Sutras are meant really for those
who have bright brains.
SU. 35.-Horadayaha siddhaha. . . From the general literature of Astrology
learn all the details about Hora, Drekkana, Saptamsa. Navamsa,
Dwadasamsa, T ri msamsa, Shashtiamsa, etc.
NOTES Where the Maharishi does not differ from the ordinary rules of
Astrology, he says siddaha, meaning they are ready at hand from able
astrol ogers. W herever he cuts a new path he i nd i cates the I i nes of research
on which he proceeds. These commentaries are written by Neelakanta and
go under the name of Subodha. The term Subodha means that the
commentaries are written in such an easy and convincing style that even
ordinary readers and students can easily grasp the ideas explained by the
learned commentator. I have also consulted other learned commentators.
End of First Pada of the First Adhyaya
J A I MINI SUTRAS
Part 2
ADHYAYA 1- PADA 2
SU. 1-Adhaswamsograhanam. Having determined the Atmakaraka from among
the several planets, ascertain the results of his Navamsa position.
NOTES Among all the planets commencing from Ravi, find out who gets the
greatest number of degrees and minutes and determine, as principles already
explained, who becomes the Atmakaraka. In Sutra 11 of the first pada it has been
clearly enunciated that whichever planet gets the highest number of degrees and

minutes, he becomes the Atmakaraka. Such a planet, whoever he may be among
the nine planets, must occupy some Navamsa. Inall the future sutras, the effects
of such Navamsa occupied by the Atmakaraka, the planets who are there and the
planets who aspect such Navamsa will be clearly detailed. Find out by
mathematical calculations the position of all the planets in degrees and minutes
and then the results can easily be foretold in the light of the following sutras.
Find out the Atmakaraka and place him in the proper Navamsa. Prepare also the
N avamsa Chakra correctly.
SU. 2.-Panchamooshikamarjaraha. If the Atmakaraka occupies Mesha Navamsa,
then the person will be subjected to the fears and bites of rats, cats, and other
similar animals.
NOTES Pancha means one or Mesha. Pa stands for 1 in Pavarga. Cha stands for
6 in theTavarga. Thus we get 16, reading in the reverse order we get 61. Divide
this by 12 we get the remainder 1 and this stands for the first sign in the Zodiac
or M esha N avamsa.
SU. 3.--Tathra chatushpadaha. If Atmakaraka is in Taurus Navamsa, there will
be fear from quad ru peds.
NOTES Ta means 6 and Ra means 2 or 62 reversed we get 26, divided by 1.2 we
get 2 remainder which means the 2nd house from Mesha or Vrishabha Navamsa.
If Atmakaraka occupies Vrishabha Navamsa the person will havegains and
happiness from quadrupeds like cattle, horses, elephants, etc. Some
commentators say hewill have troubles and worries through them. I think, when
Atmakaraka is weak or has evil aspects or associations troubles should be
predicted. Others write prosperity from them.
SU. 4. Mrithyow kandooh sthotilyam cha. If Atmakaraka occupies M ithuna the
person will suffer from corpulence, itches and cutaneous eruptions.
NOTES . Ma represents 5 and Ya represents 1 or 51 reading inversely we get 15.
Divided by 12 we have the balance of 3 and this represents the 3rd Navamsa
from M esha or M ithuna.
SU. 5. -Dure jalakushtadih. If the Atmakaraka occupies Kataka Navamsa,
dangers and troubles come from watery places and leprosy.
NOTES Da stands for 8 and Ra represents for 2 or 82. Reversing it, we have 28.
Divided by 12 we get the balance of 4 and thisrefersto Kataka as the fourth from
Mesha. Dirty form of leprosy or watery disease rises from blood corruption and
the use of fi Ithy water.

SU. 6. -Seshaha s wapadan i. If the Atmakaraka joins Simha Navamsa, troubles
will come through dogs and such canine animals.
NOTES Ssa represents 5 and Sha indicates 6 or 56, reading backwards we have
65. Divided by 12 we get 5 remainders and Simha counts as the 5th from Mesha.
Here in all these Sutras the class of animals or diseases is indicated and the
reader has to use his intelligence.
SU. 7. M rithyuvajjayognikanascha. If Atmakaraka is in Kanya Navamsa, the
native will suffer from fire, itches, and corpulence.
NOTESJa represents 8 and ya denotes 1. We get 81, in the reverse order we get
18, divided by 12 have the balance 6 and Kanya Navamsa represents the 6th from
Mesha. If the Atmakaraka joins Kanya Navamsa the person will suffer from the
troubles indicated by the 3rd Rasi or Mithunaand also from fires. Butin Mithuna
the author only said that suffering will come from corpulence and itches. From
thisSutra it means that i n the M ithunamsa there will also betroublefrom tires.
SU. 8. -Labhevanijyam. If the Atmakaraka joins Thula Navamsa, the person will
make much money by merchandise.
NOTES La denotes 3 and Bha stands for 4, this stands as 34. In the reverse order
it is 43, divided by 12 we get 7 as the remainder. Thula stands as the 7th
Navamsa from Mesha. The various kinds of articles in merchandise haveto be
found out by the nature of the Rasi, its lord, the planets who are in conjunction
and the aspects they have.
SU. 9.-Arrajalasareesrupaha sthanyachanischa. If the Atmakaraka joins
Vrischikamsa, the person will have fears and dangers from watery animals,
snakes and hewill also have no milk from his mother. Atra:Aa O-Ra 2-02,
reversed it means 20 divided by 12 we get a balance of 8 which signifies
Vrischika counting from Mesha Navamsa. When he is a child hewill haveto be
nursed and suckled by others for want of milk in his mother's breast. There are
some women who have plenty of milk in their breasts and who nurse their
children with their own milk and sometimes the milk will be sufficient for even
two or three children. Their breasts may not be large or heavy but their lacteal
glands do make brisk work and secrete mi Ik.
There are, on the other hand, a large number of women who have large lumps of
breasts without any milk, but full of flesh and making the breasts attractive and
heavy. The author apparently considers that the absence of milk in the mother
will be a misfortune for the child The artificial feeding of children from nipples
attached to feeding bottles has removed this misfortune, to some extent.
Remember it is not the mother who feeds the infant. A rubber bottle is not a

mother's holy breast Nor does it contain the natural milk of the mother with the
maternal love and affection pervading throughout its contents.
SU. 10. - Same vahanaducchaccha kramatpatanam. If the Atmakaraka joins the
Navamsaof Dhanus, the person will have sufferi ng and dangers from falls, .from
conveyances, horses, etc., and also from elevated places I ike trees, houses, hills
and mountains.
NOTES Sa denotes 7, M a shows 5, 75 reading reversely we have 57, divided by,
12 will give us a balance of 9 and Dhanus is the 9th N avamsa from M esha.
Aeroplanes may be safely included in these falls. Dangers are indicated by these
falls.
SU. ll.-Jalachara khechara kheta kandu dushtagranthayascha riphay. If the
Atmakaraka joins Makara the person will have troubles and sorrows from
aquatic animals from fierce birds, skin diseases, large wounds and glandular
expansions.
NOTES Ri 2 and Pha 2 = 22, divide this by 12 we have a remainder of 10,
meaning Makaramsa as it is the 10th from Meshamsa. There will be troubles
from Khetas. Grahas have two important significations, viz., planets and evil
spirits : some read the sutra as Buchara instead of Khechara, and include such
wild animals as lions, tigers, boars and other fierce animals found wandering on
the earth. Planets and evil spirits occupy the higher regions. Kha means the sky
or the higher sphere.
SU. 12.--Tatakadayo dharmay. If the Atmakaraka occupies Kumbha N avamsa
the person will do charities in the shape of constructing wells, tracks, topes or
gardens, temples and dharmasalasor chatrams,
NOTES D ha stands for 9 and M a denotes 5, thus we get 95 reversing we get 59.
Divided by 12 we get remainder 11, denoting Kumbha, the N avamsa 11th from
Mesha.
SU. 13.-Uchhe dharmanityata kaivalyam cha. If the Atmakaraka occupies
Meenamsa, the person will be fond of vinuous deeds and charities, and will take
residence in Swargadi Lokas or will attain to the final bliss or what is called by
the Sanskrit writers Moksha or final emancipation or freedom from rebirths.
NOTES U standsfor 0, Cha denotes 6, weget 06, reading in the reverse order we
get 60. Divide this by 12 the balance will be 12 and therefore M eena N avamsa is
indicated by the term uchcha. Among the Yogis and real Vedantists their sole
aim or final goal is to get rid of these punarjanmas or constant birth and get final
assimilation with Para Brahma. The old commentators have offered some

valuable suggestions. I shall quote them here for ready reference. If the
Atmakaraka is in a beneficial Navamsa or if beneficial planets are in Kendras
from the Navamsa he occupies' the person will become very wealthy or a ruler.
If the next planet to Atmakaraka occupies a beneficial sign or Navamsa, or found
in hisown house or beneficial sign or in exaltation or in good Navamsas, hewill
have residence, after death, in Swargalokas according to merit. If both of them
are auspiciously situated, the person will get good Bliss and after a prosperous
and happy career will goto Heaven. If they have mixed positions, conjunctions
and aspects, hewill have some good and some bad. If both of them are badly
situated combined and aspected, hewill suffer miseries, poverty and will take
residence, after death, in various H ells enumerated in the H indu Sastras like
Kumbhipatha, Andha, Tamisra, etc. There are fourteen Lokas mentioned and
principally three namely Swarga tenanted by the Devatas who are headed by
Indra, Bhuloka inhabited by mortals called Martya, and Patala inhabited by
special creatures called Nagas. A person in Gandharva or Siddhaloka is not so
happy as one i n I nd ra Loka.
One who resides in Brahmaloka enjoys superior Bliss to that which he can have
in Deval oka. When evil planets predominate the temperament will be mixed and
his deeds will be bad and sinful. When benefics predominate they produce
favourable results both here and also enhance his pleasure in Heaven after his
death. As for the comparison of pleasures, see A nandaval I i Upanishad and also
numbers 11 and 12 Of VOL. 19 Of THE ASTROLOGICAL MAGAZINE.
SU. 14.-Tatra ravou rajakaryaparaha. If the Sun occupies the Karakamsa, the
person will be fond of public service and will work in political activities.
NOTES Here it means, that Ravi must be in conjunction with theAtmakaraka in
the N avamsa. His success here may be determined both by the nature of the
Navamsa and also by his relation to theAtmakaraka who may change to be his
friend, bosom friend, neutral or enemy or bitter enemy. All these different stages
are suggested by the Maharishi in compliance with the general principles of
Astrology, which he enumerates.
SU. 15. -Poornendusukrayorbhogee vidyajeevee cha. If Full Moon and Venus
join Atmakaraka i n the N avamsa, the person will command great wealth and all
comforts attendant on wealth and he will also earn money and live by the
profession of education.
NOTES In all these the strength, position and association of Atmakaraka will
have great influence in determining the rank and position in the line. A school
authority will be great or small as he gets fat or low salary, li.

SU. 16.-Dhatuvadee kountayudho vahnijeevee cha bhoume. When Kuja joins
Atmakaraka in the Navamsa, the person becomes great in the preparation of
various medical mixtures, will bear arms like kuntayudha and other weapons,
and live by profession involving preparations in or near fire.
NOTES The gunners, cooks, engine drivers and those engaged in various
preparations in or near fire are indicated. Alchemy comes in this line of work.
SU . 17.-yanijatantuvayaha si I pi no vyavaharavidascha soumye. If Bud ha conjoins
the Atmakaraka in the Navamsa, the persons become merchants, weavers and
manufacturers of clothes, artists and persons clever in preparing curios, and
those well versed in the affairs of social and political matters.
SU. 18.-Kairmagnunanishta vedavidascha jeevay. When Guru joins the Navamsa
with Atmakaraka, the person will be well versed in Vedic or religious rituals,
will have religious wisdom, well known in the rules of sacrificial functions and
will havegood knowledge in Vedanta and will bea religious man. .
SU. 19.-Rajakeeyaha kaminaha satendriyascha sttkre. . If Sukra joins the
Atmakaraka i n the N avamsa, the person will becomea great official or political
personage, w i 1 1 be fond of many women and will retain vitality and sexual
passions til I he is hundred years old.
NOTES Hewill be fond of women and sexual pleasures and in spite of these
sexual excesses hewill retain passions for a very long period. . Sexual passions
areas various and as curious as any other phenomena. Some get prematurely old
and lose their sexual vitality. Other retain sexual vigour for more than a hundred
years.
SU. 20.-Prasiddhakarma jeevaha sanow. If Sani joins Atmakaraka in the
Navamsa, hewill produce a famous person in hisown line of business.
NOTES The author apparently means that when Sani joins the Atmakaraka in
the Navamsa, a person will be able to achieve greatness -and reputation in
whatever walk of life he may beengaged. There aregreat writers, painters,
sculptors, speakers, merchants, warriors, statesmen, travellers, inventors,
discoverers, scientists, musicians and so forth, the profession or line of work
being determined by other combinations in the horoscope. Sani with the
Atmakaraka in the Navamsa lifts the person to a high position in that line and
gives him great reputation and name.
SU. 21.-Dhanushkaschouvrascha jangalikalohayantrinascha rahow. It Rahu joins
the Atmakaraka in Navamsa the person will live by the skilful use of warlike

instruments, he will earn bread as thief and dacoit; he becomes a doctor dealing
in poisons, manufacturer of gold, silver, copper and other metallic machinery
SU. 22.--Gajavyavaharinaschourrascha kethau. 'When Ketu joinstheAtmakaraka
in the Navamsa the persons born under such combination trade in elephants or
become thieves and robbers.
NOTES Between thieves and dealers in elephants the line of demarcation seems
to be deli cate.
SU. 23. -Ravirahubhyam sarpanidhranam. If Ravi and Rahu join Atmakaraka in
the N avamsa the person dies by snake-bites.
NOTES Snakes are of. various kinds and the nature of the causes will be
determined by other planetary positions.
SU. 24. -Subhadrislhtethannivrittihi. If benefics aspect the Yoga mentioned
above, there will be no deathsfrom snake-bites.
NOTES He may have snake-bites, but relief proper will be at hand and the
person will get over the danger.
SU. 25.-Subhamatrasambandhajjjanagulikaha. If Ravi and Rahu join Atmakaraka
in the Navamsa and haveonly beneficial aspects the person will have no snakebites, but will become a doctor who deals solely in poisonous matters.
SU. 26-Kujarnatradrishtegrihadahako agnido va. If Ravi and Rahu join
Atmakaraka in the Navamsa, and have the evil aspect of Kuja, the person will
burn houses or lend fire and other help to the incendiaries.
NOTES There is some difference in the guilt of the person who burns a house
and onewho helps him in his diabolical deeds.
SU. 27.-Stukradrish te na dahaha. If Ravi and Rahu join Atmakaraka in the
N avamsa and have the aspect of Su kra, the person will not bu rn the houses
himself, but will lend fire to the rogues who do it.
NOTES The abettor is equally culpable in the eye of law and the delicate
difference of burning the house and lending fire to burn the house, seems to bea
nice point for consideration of the Dharmasastras and legal luminaries.
SU. 28.-Gurudrishtetwasameepagrihat. If Ravi and Rahu join Atmakaraka in the
Navamsa, but have the aspect of Guru alone, the person will burn houses at a
distance from his own house. N OT ES Apparently Sukra's aspect will intensify

the evil tendencies and aggravate the offences, by burning houses close to one's
own house.
SU. 29. - Sagulike vishado vishahato va. If the Karaka Navamsa falls in
Gulikakala or the time governed by Gulika, the person will administer poison to
others and kill them or be killed by such administrations of poison by others.
NOTES Here we have to learn what is meant by Gulikakala and the time
governed by him. Ravi, Chandra, Kuja, Budha Guru, Sukra and Sani are called
Grahas. They have Upagrahas or their sons. Sukra and Chandra have not been
given any Upagrahas. The latter are Sani - Gulika, Guru-Yamaghantaka, KujaMritya, Ravi-Kala and Budha-Ardhaprahara. Dividethe duration of theday by 8
and proceed to count from the lord of theday. Take Sunday and suppose the
^duration of theday is30ghatis. Then each part gets 30/ 8 or 3.75ghatis. The first
3.75 ghatis are governed by Ravi the lord of that day. The second 3.75 ghatis are
under the rule of Chandra. The third 3.75 ghatis are governed by Kuja. The
fourth 3.75 ghatis are under the lordship of Budha. The fifth 3.75 ghatis are ruled
by Guru. The sixth 3.75 ghatis are under Sukra. The seventh 3.75 ghatis are ruled
by Sani. The 8th 3.75 ghatis have no lord and Gulika who is next to Sani becomes
the lord.
These 3.75 ghati s are cal I ed G u I i kakal a and if the A tmakaraka N avamsa fal I s i n
thistime, the results above named must be predicted. 3.75 ghatis is cal led aYama
in Sanskrit. * If the duration of day is moreor less than 30ghatisthan each part is
indicated by the actual duration of day divided by 8. Take Chandrawara or
Monday. First Chandra 3.75 ghatis. Fourth Guru 3.75 ghatis Second Ku a 3 " Fifth
Sukra " .Third Budha 3.75 " Sixth Sani 3z " ..All these six give 22.5 ghatis Seventh
Gulika 3.75 ghatis Eighth Ravi 3.5 " After this comes in Gulikakala extending
from 22.5 ghatis on Monday and lasting upto 26.25 ghatis. On Tuesday or
Kujawara we commence from Kuja thus: 1. Kuja 3.75 ghatis 5. Sani 3.75 ghatis 2.
Budha 33 " 6. Gulika 3.75 " 3. Guru 3.75 " 7. Ravi 3.75 " 4. Sukra 3.75 " 8. Chandra
The fi rst 5 yamas give us 1 8.75 ghatis. From that ti me ti 1 1 22.5 ghati s after su nrise,
there will be Gulikakala and if the Atmakaraka Navamsa falls in this, the evil
results indicated above will happen. TheGulikakala has been so stated by the
commentators. I have another authority for the Gulikakala. Mandapan
watapariansam chaturgunyam dwihinakam.Tatkala gulikognayaha sarva karya
vinasakritu. Count from Saturday to the weekday required. Take the number so
obtained and multiply it by four. Then take or deduct 2 from the number so
obtained. Then Gulikakala commences at the ti me and continues upto 3.75 ghatis
more. The results differ in these two systems. Take M onday and find out the
Gulikakala as per the above rule. Monday counts as the 3rd from Saturday.

M ultiply this 3 by 4 and we get 12. Deduct two out of that and we get IQ ghatis.
Gulika kalafallson Monday from 22.5ghatisto 2G.25 ghatis after sunrise.
The process to find out the Gulikakala in the night is thus stated by the old
commentators. Take the fifth planet from the lord of the weekday arid count
from him and then the 8th in the order given above will beGulikakala. Takefor
example Sunday, the 5th from him is Guru. Now take Guru. Dropping Guru we
haveSukra and Sani covering the first and second period, and the 3rd period
falls under Gulika on Monday, the second period onTuesday, the 8th period on
Wednesday, the 7th on Thursday, the 6th on Friday and the 5th on Saturday.
When there are differences of opinion on such matters among the old writers we
have to look to the opinion of the best among them, and to verify and support
the theory we must also bring our large experience to help us in such
interpretations. Take H ora, Varahamihira and his school. Say, that in odd signs
the first Hora is governed by Ravi and the second by Chandra.
In the even signs the first is governed by Chandra and the second by Ravi. But
there is a different school. Some say that first Hora is governed by the lord of the
house and the second by the lord of the 11th. In Drekkana more than two
systems are recommended. Varahamihira says the lords of the three Drekkanas
are the lords of 1st, 5th and 9th. There are some others who say that the lords of
the 3 Drekkanas are the lords of 1st, 12th and 11 th houses. There are some others
who say that in chara or movable signs, the lords of the Drekkanas are the
owners of the 1st, 5th and 9th. But in fixed and double bodied signs their order is
quite changed. In all such cases of difference of opinion among the Maharishis I
cannot pretend to say which is correct and which is not. Both may be correct as
the authors, by their Divya Drishti, may have approached from different
directions and may have found their observations proving quite true.
I leave the readers to judge of these differences in the light of their intelligence,
knowledge and personal experiences. When two Maharishis differ I must frankly
tell my readers that I have no means at my command to ascertain which is better
and more correct. Both of them are M ahatmas and both looked into these details
by their Divya Drishti or expanded mental vision. I possess no such Divya
Drishti and therefore am not in a position to go beyond the phenomena and
ascertain the true causes. I have to trust the learned commentators.
SU.30. - Chandrudrishtau chorapahritadharnaschouro va. If Chandra aspects
the Atmakaraka Navamsa falling in Gulikakala, the person will be a receiver of
stolen property or will become himself a thief.
NOTES I think there is not much difference between the moral and spiritual
offences between these two worthies.

SU. 31- Budhamatradrishte brihadbeejaha. If the Atmakaraka Navamsa falls in
Gulikakala and possesses only the aspect of Budha, the person will have
enlarged testicles.
NOTES Here Budha alone must aspect the Navamsa without the aspect of any
other planets. Hydrocele is a nasty form of disease and disgusting before the
public.
SU. 32. -Tathra kethow papadrishte karnachchedaha kurnarogo va. If Ketu joins
the Atmakaraka N avamsa the person will have hisears cut off or will have
serious ear complaints.
SU. 33.-Sukradrishtedeekshitaha. If Atmakaraka and Ketu i n the N avamsa, have
the aspect of Sukra, the person will become a Deekshita or performer of Yagnyas
or religious sacrifices.
NOTES Formerly such persons were held in high esteem. They had to lead
scrupulously clean, simple and holy lives.
SU. 34.-Buidhasanidrishte nirveeryaha If the Atmakaraks with Ketu in the
Navamsa has the aspects of Budha and Sani, the bind of an impotent or eunuch
should be predicted.
NOTES Veerya is virility in a person and one who has no veerya is impotent.
SU. 35.-Btrdhasukradrishte pounah puniko dasipMreeva. If theKarakamsa Rasi
with Ketu has the aspect of Sukra and Budha, the person will talk repeating and
repeating the same ideas or will be the son of a prostitute or dancing woman.
NOTES Dasees are a special class of dancing women who were devoted to the
service of Gods in the temples and had no strictness in sexual matters.
SU. 36. -Sanidrishtetapaswee preshyo va. If the Karakamsa with Ketu has the
aspect of Sani, he will become a Tapaswi or recluse or be a dependent and
servant under somebody.
NOTES There is a great gulf of difference between the position of a man
devoting all hisenergieson the contemplation of God and onewho isdependent
on others. Why both the results are ascribed to the same combi nation is not clear.
SU. 3 7. - Sanimatradrish te sanyasabhasaha. If in the above combi nation there is
only the aspect of Sani and there is no other planetary aspect, he will put on the
appearance of a sanyasi but will not be a true or real sanyasi. He will be an
impostor.

SU. 38. -Tatra ravisukradrishte rajapreshyah. If Ravi and Sukra aspect the
Karakamsa the person will be employed by royal or political personages to do
their work. He will be their confident.
SU. 39. - Ripphe budhe budhedrishte va mandavat. If the tenth from the Karaka
Navamsa possesses the aspect of Bud ha, he will get similar results as have been
given by Sani.
NOTES This means that the person will follow some notable profession. Ripha
means, Ra 2, pha means 2 = 22 divided by 12, will give us 10, 10th house is
indicated by Ripha.
SU. 40.-Shzubhadrishte stheyaha. If in the 10th from Karakamsa, there is
beneficial aspect, the person will be one of great determination and never
capricious.
NOTES The other benefics are Guru and Sukra. It cannot mean anything else.
SU. 41.-Ravow gurumatradrishzte gopalahu. If the 10th from the Karakamsa,
there is Ravi possessing only the aspect of Guru and no other aspects, the person
will have success through the sales of cow, bullsand other cattle.
SU. 42.-Darechandrasukradigyogatprasadaha. If the lord of the 4th from the
Karakamsa is joined or aspected by Chandra and Sukra, the person will be
blessed with storeyed houses.
NOTES Da means 8, Ra means 2 =82, reversed it means 28, divided by 12 we get
4 balance. This shows signs of wealth. Prasada means houses with compounds,
SU. 43.- Ucchagrahe api. If the fourth from the Karakamsa is occupied by an
exalted planet, the person will have many fine and splendid houses.
SU. 44. - Rahusan ibhyam silagriham: If the fourth from the Karakamsa is
occupied by Rahu and Sani, the houses will be constructed with rough stones not
well plastered.
SU.45. -KujaKetubhyamaishtikam. If the 4th from Karakamsa isoccupied by
Kuja and Ketu, the houses will be constructed of bricks, lumps of earth.
SU. 46. -Guruna daravam. If the 4th from Karakamsa is occupied by Guru
wooden houses will be constructed by the native.
SU.47. - Tharnamravina. If the 4th is occupied by the Sun, the houses will be
constructed from thatch and grasses.

N OTES The above three sutras give an idea of the nature of the house property
possessed by different persons depending upon the dispositions of planetswith
reference to Karakamsa.
SU. 48.-Sameshubhayogaddharmanityaha satyavaadeegtinubhaktascha. If the
9th from Karakamsa is occupied or aspected by benefics, the person will have
truth as his ideal and motto. He will be righteous in conduct, lover of truth and
will be faithful and dutiful to elders, preceptors and Gurus.
NOTES Sa stands for 7 and M a denotes 5- 75, reversed it is 57, divided by 12, we
get a remainder of 9. Sama means 9th from Karakamsa. N inth is the house of
piety and represents devotion and faith in Gods and Goddesses.
SU. 49.-A nyatha papaihi. If the 9th from Karakamsa has evil conjunction or
aspects, he will be quite the reverse in character. He will be a liar, uncharitable
and sinful, and will haveno faith and respect for Guru sand elders.
SU. 50.-Sanirahubhyam gutrudrohaha. If Sani and Rahu occupy or aspect the 9th
from Karakamsa, the person will become ungrateful to Gurus and will prove a
traitor to them.
NOTES Cheating is a sin. But there are many grades and its heinousness
depends upon the nature of the parties concerned.
SU. 51.-Ravigurubhyam g*irovavisvasaha. If Guru and Ravi occupy or aspect the
9th from Karakamsa, he will not love his parents, elders and preceptors.
SU. 52.-Tatra bhrigwongaraka varge paradarikaha. If the 9th from Karakamsa
falls in one of the shad vargas of Sukra and Kuja, hewill be fond of others' wives.
NOTES There are two classes of villains. One set taking sexual gratifications
with women of immoral tendencies and another set always tempting the wives
of other persons, and ruining their families. Adultery is sinful, but even here
there are various grades of sins. 'Shadvargas are (1 ) Lagna. (2) Hora, (3)
Drekkana, (4) Navamsa, (5) Dwadasamsa, and (6) Thrimsamsa. Adultery with
motherly relations, friends, wives, spouses of Gurus and other prohibited
relations is more sinful than adultery with other women. Corrupting family and
innocent women is a horrible form of sin.
SU. 53.-Drigyogabhyamndhikabhyamamuranam. If Kuja and Sukra join or
aspect the 9th from Karakamsa, the person will have the evil habit of seducing
and keeping illegal gratifications til I the end of his life.

NOTES The conjunctions and aspects are more powerful than 'theShadvargas.
In the latter he will keep up the vicious habit for sometime, but in the former,
this vice will conti nuetill the end of life. With some persons, males and females.
*This has been clearly described in my work Manual of Hindu Astrology, these
morbid sensations of lust and saxuality will continue for sometime and then
they turn a new chapter in their lives, but there are others, who do not give up
the vicious habits til I their death. Some are rascals only for a time but there are
others who are rascals and cheats throughout their lives. Even on death-beds
their thoughts run on unholy deeds.
SU. 54.-Ketuna pratibandhaha. If the 9th from Karakamsa has the conjunction or
aspect of Ketu, he will be fond of women for some time and then give up the bad
tendency.
SU. 55.-Guruna strainaha. If the 9th from Karakamsa has the conjunction or
aspect of Guru, he will be excessively fond of other women..
SU. 56.-Rahunarthanivrittihi. If the 9th from Karakamsa is joined or aspected by
Rahu, the person will lose all his wealth by female excesses.
NOTES Even in these vices there are some prudent men financially. Some get
money by adultery, some enjoy for nothing, there are others who lose all their
wealth and health by such Vices.
SU. 57.-Labhechandragurubhyam sundaree. If Guru and Chandra occupy the
7th from the Karakamsa, thewifewill be handsome and loving.
NOTES La means 3, Bha denotes 434, reading backwards we have 43, divided
by 12., we have 7 remainder. Labha therefore means 7. It will certainly be a great
blessing to have handsome wife provided she is faithful. But when sheisfair and
unfaithful life becomes miserable. He will have a Hell on Earth. . .
SU. 58.-Rahuna vidhava. If the 7th from the Karakamsa joins with Rahu or has
his aspect, the person will have widows for connection.
N OTES There are some worthies who are extremely fond of widows. They hunt
after them. They I i ke them i n preference to others.
SU. 59.-Sanina vayodhika rogineetapaswinee va. . If the 7th from Karakamsa is
occupied or aspected by Sani, thewifewill be older or will be sickly or will bea
tapaswini or a woman who will be engaged in religious meditations.
NOTES While some persons I ike younger people there are others both males and
femaleswho hunt after old people. Temperaments are curious.

SU. 60. -Kujena vikalangee. If Kuja joins or aspects the 7th from Karakamsa, the
wifewill bedeformed or therewill bedefect in her limbs.
SU. 61.-*Ravina swakulegupta cha. If Ravi occupies or aspects the 7th from
Karakamsa, the wife will be protected from the members of the husband's family
and will have no defects in her limbs. (*Another version reads as Ravina kata
gutpthacl Ja.)
SU . 62.-Budhena kalavatee. If Budha joins or aspects the 7th from Karakamsa,
the wife will be well versed in music, arts, dancing and other fine
accomplishments.
SU. 63.-Chape chandrenanavrite dese. If Chandra occupies the 4th from
Karakamsa the first sexual union of the wives, mentioned in the above sutras,
will takeplacein an open pi ace uncovered by root or ceiling.
NOTES Cha means 6, po means 1=61, reversing we have 16 divided by 12, the
balance 4 shows the 4th house from the Karakamsa. There are some people who
cannot control their passions and who have sexual unions in open places. .
SU. 64.-Karmani pape shooraha If the 3rd from the Karakamsa contains evil
planets, the person becomes courageous and a warrior.
NOTES Ka means 1, Ma means 5 -15, reading backwards we have 51, divided by
12, we have the remainder 3. 1 n general astrology, the third house from Lagna
shows brothers, sisters and courage.
SU. 65.-Subhe kataraha. if the 3rd from Karakamsa has benefics, the person
becomes a coward.
SU. 66.-Mrityuchintyayoh pape karshakafha. .If the 3rd and 6th from Karakamsa
areoccupied by malefics, the person lives by ploughing and agriculture.
NOTES M a 5, ya 1=51, reversing we have 15. Cha 6, Tha 6 - 66, reversing we
have 66. Divide them by 12, we get 3 and 6. M alefics are considered to give
auspicious results in 3, 6and 11. Thrishedaya gatahpapaha.
SU. 67 : Samegurow viseshena. If Guru occupies the 9th from. Karakamsa, he
will become a great agriculturist.
SU. 68. - Uccheshurbheshubhalokaha. If benefics occupy 12 from Karakamsa,
the person goes to superior Lokas.

NOTES U 0, Cha 6 =06., reversed we get 60, divided by 12, we have 12. Indian
sciences and religions mention many Punya Lokas or happy regions in the
universe.
SU. 69.-Ketow kaivalyam. If a benefic occupies Karakamsa; the person will have
Moksha or Final Bliss.
NOTES Ka meana 1, Ta signifies 6 =16. 16 reversed - 61. Divided by 12, we get
balance of 1. We may also take ucchefrom the previous Sutra and say that if
Ketu isfound in 12th therewill be final Bliss.
SU. 70. -Kriyochapayorviseshena. If Karakamsa is Mesha or Dhanus with
ben efics there, the subject gets Moksha. If Mesha or Dhanus happens to be the
12th from Karakamsa and Ketu is there, the person will get Moksha.
NOTES The commentators have put on two different kinds of interpretations. I
shall explain both of them. The splendid power of sutras and their brevity
capable of long interpretations are only possible in Sanskrit: No other language
in theworld possesses such facilities for brevity and at the same time containing
a world of meaning. If M esha or Dhanus becomes Karakamsa with a benefic
there, therewill bethehighest Bliss: If Mesha or Dhanus- becomes the 12th from
Karakamsa and Ketu is there, there will be the highest Bliss or Moksha. Ketu is
not a full benefic. Ketu becomes a benefic in Chara Dasa and not otherwise.
Therefore he cannot declassified as asubhagraha. But astrology ascribes to him
the highest spiritual power of emancipation from all births and re-births and
gives man Moksha. .
SU. 71:-Papair Qnyatha. : If the 12th from the : Karakamsa is occupied by evil
planets, he will goto hell and will have no Bliss.
NOTESHeaven and Hell are not seen. But there is the universal belief in their
existence and all religions lend support- to this faith.
SU. 72.-Raviketubhyam shive bhaktihi. If Ravi and Ketu are in Karakamsa, the
person will become a Saivite or one who worships Shiva.
NOTES Worship of God is as different a8 there are differences in temperaments.
Matha is a peculiarity of Mathi or mind.
SU. 73. - Chandrena gauryam. If Chandra joins Karakamsa, the person will
worship Gouri, wife of Shiva. ,
SU. 74.-Sukrena lukshmyom. If Sukra joins Karakamsa, he will worship Lakshmi
spouse of Vishnu.

SU. 75.-Kujena skande. If Kuja occupies Karakamsa, he becomes a worshipper of
Skanda or Shanmukha the warrior son of Shiva.
SU . 76-Bud hasanibhyam vishnow. If Budha and Sani join. Karakamsa, he will
worship Vishnu.
NOTES Different temperaments have different tastes and thei r selection of Gods
follows their temperaments. Asall rivers fall into the ocean, so also all forms of
worship reach theAlmighty.
SU. 77.-Guruna sambasive. It Karakamsa is joined by Guru, he will worship
Sambasiva or Parvati and Paramesvara.
SU . 78:-RahurJa thamasyam durgayam cha. If Rahu joins Karakamsa, the person
will worship evil spirits end Durga.
NOTES There are about 56 varieties of evil spirits mentioned in the
Mantrasastras. There are two principal divisions among the Mantras. Kshudra
Mantras devoted to the invocation of evil spirits and actions: performed by them
and Maha Mantras or incantations to Divine and angelic spirits and work that
can be done by them. I shall mention a few names of evil spirits: Bhuta, Preta,
Pisacha, Sakini, Dhakini, Mohini, Jalini, Malini, Bhetala, etc. The Maha Mantras
invokeGayatri, Savitri, Saraswati, Brahma, Vishnu, Maheswara, Lakshmi, Lalita,
Durga, Ganapati, Skanda, Surya, etc.
SU. 79. - Ketuna ganese skande cha. z-lf Ketu joins Karakamsa, the person
becomes a devotee of Ganesa and Kumaraswami.
SU. 80.-Paparkshemandekshudradevata. If Sani occupies theKarakamsa falling
in an evil sign, the person becomes a great devotee of evil spirits.
NOTES There are Devi I and Spirit worshi ppers of various grades. The existence
of spirit-world has been proved by the best intellects and by personal experience.
A handful of experience is worth ten cart loads of theories.
SU.81- Sukrecha. If Sukra occupies the evil Karakamsa, the person will worship
devils, spirits, etc.
NOTES There are 56 varieties of Devils or Pi sachas headed by the powerful
Bhetala. See my NOTES in Sarwartha Cintamani.

SU. 82.-Amatyadasay chaivam. If the 6th from Amatyakaraka joins evil
Karakamsa, the person devotes himself to the worship of evil spirits.
NOTES The planet who Bets the highest number of degrees becomes the
Atmakaraka. The planet who gets the next highest number of degrees becomes
the Amatyakaraka. If the 6th planet from Amatyakaraka- counting from Ravi in
the regular order occupies the evil Karakamsa, the person will be devoted to evil
spirits. Always the order, of the planets are as follows i-Ravi, Chandra, Kuja,
Budha, Guru, Sukra and Sani, the order of the week-days. Somebody must
become Amatyakaraka, suppose Sani becomes so. .The 6th from Ravi is Sukra
and If Sukra joins the evil Karakamsa, the person devotes, his time to evil spirits.
These M antras are called Kshudra or Sahara and count as 9 crores, a bewildering
number.
SU. 83.-?i'rikone popadwaye mantrikaha. If the 5th and 9th from the Karakamsa
are occupied by evil planets,, the person becomes a -Mantrikaor magician and
will be able to exercise devil sand evil spirits.
SU. 84.-Papadrishte nigrahakaha. If the evil planets inthe 5th and 9th from
Karakamsa have evil conjunctions or aspects, the person becomes a great
Mantraicand will be able to root out all evil spirits.
SU . 85- Shubhadrishtenujgrahakaha. . If the evil planets in the 5th. and from
Karakamsa have beneficial aspects or conjunction, the person will help the
people and do them good.
SU. 86. -Sukrendou sukr Qdri.shte rasavadee. If Sukra aspects Karakamsa and
the M oon, the person becomes an alchemist.
SU. 87.-Budhadrishte bhishak. If Karakamsa and Chandra have the aspect of
Budha, the person becomes a medical man.
NOTES His eminence and capacity will depend upon the strength of Budha.
SU. 88.-Chapechandresukr.adrishte pandusswithee. If Moon is in the 4th from
Karakamsa and has the aspect of Sukra, the person will suffer from white
leprosy.
NOTES Cha 6, Pa 1= 61 reversed 16, divided by 12, will give a balance of 4.
H ence Chape means 4th house from the Karakamsa.

SU. 89. -Kujadrishte maharogaha. It Kuja aspects Chandra in the 4th house from
the Karakamsa, the man will have serious form of leprosy.
SU. 90.-Ketht*drishte r*eelaku,shtam. If Chandra in the 4th from the Karakamsa
isaspected by Ketu, the person will have black leprosy.
NOTES There are many h i d eous and repu I si ve forms of thi s I oathsome d i sease.
SU. 91. -Tata mritow va kujarahubhyam kshayaha. If the 4th or 5th from
Karakamsa is joined by Kuja and Rahu, the person will suffer from consumption
or pthysi s. :VOTES H e w i 1 1 have a mi I d attack of d i sease.
SU. 92.-ChQndradrishte nzschayena. If such Kuja and Rahu, started in the above
sutra, have the inner aspect, certainly the person will have serious form of
consumption.
SU. 93.-Kujena pitakadihi. If the 4th or 5th from the Karakamsa is occupied by
Kuja, the person will suffer from excessive sweating, cuts, itches or boils and
sores i n the body.
SU. 94.-Ketuna grahani jalarogo va. If Ketu joins the 4th or 5th from Karakamsa,
the man will suffer from Grahani ora kind of glandular disease and from watery
d i seases I i ke d ropsy , d i abetes, I oose moti ons, etc.
SU. 95.- Rahrugulikabhyam kshudra vfshuni. If the 4th or 5th from the
Karakamsa is joined by Rahu and Gulika, there will be suffering from the
poisonous effects of rats, cats, etc.
SU.96.-Tatra sanow dhanushkaha. If the 4th from the Karakamsa is joined by
Sani, the person becomes an expert in inflicting wounds. This means he will be
skilled in the use of deadly arms.
SU. 97.-Ketuna ghutikoyanthree. If Ketu joins the 4th from Karakamsa, the
person becomes skilful in preparing clocks, watches and other time indicating
machines.
NOTES I have shown in the Introduction and also in the prefatory remarks that
Jaimini flourished 5,000 years ago. He was a contemporary of Vedavyasa and
was his worthy disciple. Ghatikayantras or machines showing time werein
existence as this Sutra proves and confirms. Suryasiddanta mentions many
Yantras.
SU . 98. — Budhena paramahamso lagudee va. If the 4th from the Karakamsa is
combined by Bud ha, the person becomes a paramahamsa or a great yogi, or one

who bears *Palasa Danda, etc., showing Brahmacharya or Sanyasayoga of
particular kind.
SU. 99.--Rahuna lohayantree. *Palasa means Bl i tear frond osa If the 4th from the
Karakamsa is occupied by Rahu, he will become proficient in preparing
machinery out of metals or a clever mechanic.
SU. lOO.-Ravina khadgee. If Ravi joins the 4th from Karakamsa, the person lives
by his sword.
NOTES Many kinds of swords are mentioned in the ancient works. Swords are
terrible weapons then as well as now at close quarlers,
SU. I01.-Kujena Xunthee. If Kuja joins the 4th from Karakamsa, hewill liveby
the profession of using Kuntayudha, m_ aces and long sticks.
SU. 102. Matapitroschandragturubhyam grantha If Chandra and Guru are in the
Karakamsa or in the 5th from it, the person will become an author and will live
by writing books.
NOTES M a 5, Ta 6 - 56, reversing we get 65, divided by 12, there is a balance of
5. Pa 1, Ta 6 =16, inverse order 61 divided by 12, we have 1. Fifth is the house of
intelligence in astrology as also of children.
SU. 103.- ■ Sukrena kinchidoonam. If Chandra and Sukrajoin Karakamsa or the
5th house from it, the person becomes an ordinary author.
SU. I 04.-Bzidhena tato api. The person becomes still less famous than in the
above Sutra if Bud ha joins Chandra instead of Sukra in Karakamsa or the 5th
from it.
SU. 105.-Sukrena kavirwagmee kavyagnascha. If Sukra joins Karakamsa.. or the
5th from it, the person becomes a great poet; an eloquent speaker and well
versed in poetry and literature.
SU. l06.~Guruna s rvavid granthikascha If Guru joins the Karakamsa or the 5th
from it, hewill bean all-round man and will know many branches of knowledge,
well read in sciences and author of various works. He becomes a versatile genius.
SU. 107.-Na vagmee. In the above combination of Guru, though a person
becomes learned he will not become a good speaker nor possess powers of
eloquence.
NOTES Some have the gift of the gab while many have it not.

SU. 108.-yissishyavaiyyakarano vedavedanthavichha. If Guru joins Karakamsa
or the 5th from it, the person becomes learned in Vyakarana or Grammar, Vedic
literature and Vedangas.
NOTES The last are named as Si ksha, Vyakarana, Chandas, N irukta, Jyotishs
and Kalpa. Without a proficiency in these six Angas or limbs, no scholar can
interpret the Vedas properly. Vedas simply mean repositories of knowledge
useful for all ages, claims and nations. Whatever might have been the origin of
these intellectual mines, there are no books extant in the world, which can
comparewith thesedeep mines ol thought, knowledge and highest conceptions
of human intellectual flights. The commentaries of Bhatta Bhaskara and
Vidyaranya are the two eyes for the Vedas through which we can approach the
Vedas and seen them to. some extent.
The first and earliest commentators is Bhatta Bhaskara and he must have
flourished in the remote ages. Vidyaranya's age is fixed clearly by the inscription
(see my History of Vijayanagar) as 1258 Salivahana Saka or 1336 A. D. This
i 1 1 ustri ous i ntel I ectual gi ant not only fou nded the Empi re of V ijayanagar, but was
also the pontifical Head of theSringeri Mutt of Adi Sankaracharya. He obtained
Samad hi i n 1386 after havi ng seen H ari hara I , Bu kka I and H ari hara 1 1 , ru I i ng the
Empi re founded by him in great prosperity, peace and progress. Practically there
seems to be no difference in the combinations given in Sutras 106 and 108. If in
this combination Guru is exalted or himself has beneficial aspects or Shadvargas,
the knowledge in the man may be more profound, and the intellect more
Comprehensive and piercing. The strength of the planet, of the Rasi, the power
of the Atmakaraka and combinations and aspects determine the extent of the
proficiency.
SU . 109.-Sabhajadaha sanina. . . If Sani joins Karakamsa or the 5th from it, the
person becomes nervous in an assembly.
NOTES Hemay bea learned man, but will feel shy and nervous and thuscutan
awkward figure, in a General Assembly or public discussion.
SU. I10.-Bzidhena nmeemamsakaha. If Budha joins 1st or 5th of Karakamsa, he
w i 1 1 shi ne as a M eemamsaka.
NOTES There are two principal divisions here. Poorvameemamsa byjaimini
himself, explaining rituals of Karma and their effects end Uttarameemamsa or
Brahmasutras by Vyasa relating to Brahmagnana.
SU. lll.-Kujena nayyayikaha. If Kuja joins 1st or 5th of Karakamsa, the person
will become a great logician.

SU. 112. -Chandreana sankfjyayogagnaha sahityagno gayakascha. . If Chandra
joins 1st or 5th of Karakamsa, the person becomes clever in sankhyasastra,
learned in language, poetry, drama and attendant subjects, will have great
proficiency in music and other accomplishments.
NOTES Sankhya is a portion of Sanskrit Science, which deals with numbers and
their interpretations. Sankhya also means s system of Philosophy.
SU. I13.-Ravina vedanta geetagnascha. If Ravi combines in 1st or 5th of
Karakamsa, the person will become a great Vedanti stand musician.
SU. I14.-Ketuna ganithagnaha. If Ketu combines in above houses, the person
becomes well versed in mathematics.
SU . I15.--Gurusambandhena sampradayasiddhih. If in the above combi nations
of planets, Guru joins or aspects, knowledge in the different branches will be
well founded and regularly trained as per principles of those sciences.
SU. I16.-Bhagye chaivam. The results ascribed for planetary positions in the 1st
and 5th from Karakamsa will also hold good for similar positions in the 2nd from
Karakamsa.
SU. I17.-Sada chaiyamityeke. Bha stands for 4 and Ya denotes 1=41, reversed we
get 14, divided by 12, the remainder is 2. Sada =Sa stands for 7, Da stands for 8 =
78, in the inverse order we have 87, divided by 12, the balance is 3. By this the
author means, all those results from the positions of the planets in the 1st and the
Karakamsa must or may be predicted by the combi nation of the above planets in
the 2nd and 3rd houses from the Karakamsa.
SU. I18.-Bhagye kethowpapadrishte stabdhavak. Ketu in the 2nd from
Karakamsa, aspected by evil planets, will make the person indistinct or a slow
speaker.
NOTES Second house describes speech, eloquence, eyes, face and riches.
SU. 119. -Swapitrupadadbhagyarogayoho papasamye kemadrt*maha. If evil
planets are found in the 2nd and 8th houses from Janma Lagna or the Arudha
Lagna, the person will suffer from Kemadruma Yoga or combination for great
poverty. The same results apply to the positions of planets in the 3rd from
Karakamsa.
NOTES Bha 4, ya 1=41, reversed 14, divided by 12, we get 2. Ra 2 and Ga 3 =23,
reading backwards we get 32, divided by '12, we have 8 balance ; therefore,
Bhagya and Roga denote 2 and 8, respectively. Compare Kemadruma as

explained by Varahamihira and others (See my translation of Brihat Jataka -
Nabhasa Yogas). When there are no planets on either side of Chandra the
combination is called Kemadruma by him.
SU. 120.-C hand rad rishtow viseshena. If Chandra aspects the evil planets in the
above combi nation, the person suffers from abject poverty. The majority consider
poverty as a great curse.
SU. I21.-Sarvesham chaiva pake. The results, mentioned in all the combi nations
above named, will be experienced during all the Dasas of Rasis or in their
Antardasasor periodsand subperiods of the zodiacal signs.
End of Second Pad a of the First Ad hyaya.
ADHYAYA 1-PADA3
SU. l.-Atha padam. Results based on Pada Lagna will be described in this
chapter.
NOTES In Sutra 29 of the First Pada Jai mini has clearly illustrated the meaning
of Pada or Arudha Lagna. I n this chapter he will give the results of planets
occupying from Pada Lagna. In the previous chapter he gave the results of
planets in Swamsa and Karakamsa. Remember Karaka always has been used for
Atmakaraka.
SU. 2.- yyayesagrahegrahadrishteva sreemantaha. If the 11th house from Pada
Lagna is occupied or aspected by planets, the person becomes a sreemanta or a
wealthy man. Take an example. Here the lord of Lagna isSukra and he is placed
in the 8th house from Lagna. The eighth from Sukra becomes Pada or Arudha
Lagna and this falls in Kataka the 8th from Sukra. The I 1 th from Kataka is
Vrishabhaand this is aspected by Kujaand Ketu and therefore the person will be

in affluent circumstances. The term sreemanta applies to one who has not seen
poverty from bi rth to death.
SU . 3. -Shubhairnyayallabhaha. When the 11th from Pada is aspected or joined
by benefics the wealth will come from proper channels. The gains will be from
fair and lawful means.
SU. 4. - Papairamargena. If theaspecting or joining planets in the above are evil,
the wealth will come through sinful and illegal means.
NOTES Unfortunately we have seven evil and only two good planets.
SU. 5. - Ucchadibhirviseshath. If the 11th from Arudha Lagna is well combined
and aspected by benefics or those in exaltation, moola=thrikona, etc., the person
will acquire plenty of wealth through justifiable means.
NOTES Here Uccha has two significations. U 0, Cha 6 =06 reading reversely we
get 60, divided by 12, the balance will be 12. Uccha also means, the planets in
exaltations, etc. When the planets aspecting the 11th or joining it are exalted, in
good Vargas, in Moolathrikona, or in their own houses and are benefics i n
nature, the wealth will come in plenty and will always be legally and rightly
acquired but when such planets are malefics, the person will get riches on a large
scale, but through unfair and illegal manner. In both cases hewill be rich but in
the case of benefics he will be a good man and will earn money honestly and by
labour. In the case of evil planets, the wealth will be thoroughly ill-gotten and
criminal. These Yogas will occur when the 12th house is not aspected by any
planet.
SU. 6.-Neeche grahadrigyogadwayadhikyam. If there are planets in the 12th
house from Lagna, or Pada Lagna, the person will spend more than he earns,
NOTES Na 0, Cha means 6 =06 reversing we get 60, divided by 12, the balance
is 12, and the 12th house is indicated. If evil planets occupy the 12th, the
expenditure will be on immoral and sinful deeds. If there are benefics in the 12th,
the expenditure will be on charitable and religious purposes such as building
temples or places of worship, tanks, wells, charitable institutions and helping the
poor and the distressed. But when the planets are bad the expenditure will be on
drinking, whoring, gambling, unjust litigation and other sinful actions.
SU. 7.--Ravirahusukrairnrupath. If Ravi, Rahu and Sukra occupy or aspect the
12th from Lagna or Pada Lagna, the person will lose money through kingly
d i spl easu re or f i nes and conf i scati ons.

SU. 8.-C hand rad rishtau nischayena. If in the combi nation in Sutra 7 there is the
aspect of Chandra, the losses will certainly occur through governing bodies:
SU. 9.-Budhena gnathitho vivadadwa. If Budha occupies the 12th house from
Pada or Lagna or aspects it, there will belossesfrom cousins, relations and
litigations.
SU. lO.-Guruna karamoola th. If Guru joins or aspects the 12th from Pada Lagna
or Lagna, the man loses money by paying heavy government taxes.
SU. ll.-Kujasanibhyam bhratrumukhat. If the 12th from Lagna or Pada Lagna is
joined or aspected by Kuja and Sani, the person will suffer losses through
brothers.
SU. 12.-A etairvyaya aevam labhaha. The results have been given for the 12th
house from Lagna or Pada Lagna and the various sources of losses have been
indicated. If those planets are in the 11th house, then instead of losing money he
will gain money through those sources which have been shown to the credit of
planets. If the planets are in the 12th house, he will lose money ; if they are in the
11th house, he will gain.
SU. 13. -Labhe rahuKetubhyamudararogaha. If the 7th house from Pada has
conjunction or aspect of Rah u or Ketu, th e person suffers from stomach
diseases.
SU. 14.--Tatra Ketuna jhatithi jyanilingani. If Ketu occupies the 2nd house from
Pada Lsgna, the person will display signs of old age. though he may be young in
years. He will show wrinkles beyond his proper age. If in the 6th house from
Pada Lagna evil planets combine, he will become a thief. If the 2nd and 6th from
Pada Lagna are occupied by benefics without evil aspects, the person will be a
governor of many countries.
SU. 15. -Chandragurusukreshtt sreemantaha. If Chandra, Guru or Sukra occupy
the 2nd from Pada Lagna, he will become a rich man. Here all these planets may
be i n the second or any one of them.
SU. 16- Uchhena va. If the evil or good planets are in the second house from
Pada in exaltation; the person becomes rich.
NOTES It has already shown if the exalted planet is a benefic, the person
acquires wealth, by lawful means but if an evil planet is in the second exalted,
the person becomes rich through unlawful and sinful ways.

SU. 17.-Svamsavadanyatprayena. All the results explained in the above sutras
will have application and reference as they have had in the Karakamsa.
SU. 18.-Lnbhapade kendrethrikone va sreeman taha. If the Arudha Lagna falls
in the 7th from Janma Lagna or Karakamsa or in the Kendras or Konas the
person becomes extremely rich.
SU. 19.-Anyatha dusthe. If the Arudha Lagna does not fall in Kendra orThrikona
from Lagna but falls in Dusthas 6, 8and 12, . the results will be bad.
NOTES That is instead of becoming a sreemanta the person becomes a poor
man. They are cal led Dusthas or Dusthanas or bad places.
SU. 20.-Kendrathrikonopachayeshu dwayormaitree. . . If the Saptamarud ha falls
in Kendras, Thri konas or the Upachayas from Janma Lagna, excepting the 6th
which is classified as a Dusthana, there will be great agreement between the wife
and the husband.
NOTESThe couple will lead an agreeable life. A good wife is Heaven on Earth.
A bad one is Hell on Earth.
SU. 21. -Ripurogachintasti vairam, If the Arudha Bhavasfall in 6, .8 and 12 from
Lagna, they denote evils to such Bhavas.
N OTES Ra 2, Pa 1-21=12 Ra 2, Ga 3 =23 =32, divided by 12 we get 8. Cha 6, Ta 6
- 66, divided by 12 we get 6 balance.
SU. 22.-Patneelabhayordishtya nirabhasargalaya. If the Arudha Lagna and the
7th from it have no obstructive A rgalas, the person becomes fortunate.
NOTES Pa 1, Na 0-10, reversed it is 01, or it describes the first house. La 3, Bha 4
= 34 reversed we get 43, divided by 12, we get a balance of 7. For subha and papa
Argalas see my NOTES on Sutras 5to 9 in Pada 1 of Adhyaya 1.
SU. 23.-Shtibhargale dhanasamriddhihi. If Arudha Lagna and the 7th from it
have beneficial Argalas, there will be plenty of money.
NOTES If theArgala happens to be malicious, there will be ordinary wealth. If
there i s a mi xtu re of su bha and papa A rgal as, the person will have f i nanci al ups
and downs or he will be tossed from wealth to poverty and from poverty to
wealth.

SU. 24.-Janmakalaghatikaswekadrishtasu rajanaha. If a planet aspects Hora
Lagna, Ghatika Lagna andjanma Lagna, the person becomes a ruler or one equal
to him.
NOTES For an explanation of these various Lagnas see Sutra 32 of 1st Pada.
What is meant here is that if one planet aspects all these three different Lagnas at
the same time, the person attains to eminent position ; if not he will become a
King. In some places M ini sters are more powerful than Kings.
SU. 25.-Patneelabhayoscha rasyamsakadrikanairva. If Chandra Lagna, Navamsa
Lagna, Drekkana Lagna and the 7th houses from these three are aspected by one
planet, the person becomes a great ruler or a M aharaja.
NOTES Some old commentators observe thus : If one has connection,
conjunction or aspect, with Lagna, the 7th from it, Chandra Lagna, Navamsa
Lagna and Drekkana Lagna, the person becomes a M aharaja or a great powerful
ruler.
SU. 26.-Theshwekasminnyune nyunam. If out of the 6 Lagnas, viz., Lagna,
Ghatika Lagna, Hora Lagna, Chandra Lagna, Navamsa Lagna and Drekkana
Lagna- one planet sees five and not all the six, the person will have ordinary
Rajayoga.
NOTES This combi nation occurs only in real Rajayogasor royal combinations. If
an exalted, planet occupies the Arudha Lagna or Chandra, Guru and Sukra are
there and evil obstructive A rgal as are not there, while, where there are beneficial
Argalas, the person will attain to royal position.
SU. 27. -Evamamsa to drikanatascha. If the Navamsa, Hora and Ghatika Lagnas
or Drekkana, Hora and Ghatika Lagnas are aspected by one planet, there will be
Rajayoga.
NOTES Some commentators are of opinion that 2.5 ghatis exactly in the middle
of the Day and the Night are auspicious and such times produce Kings and their
equals. The mid-day goes under the name of Abhijit and is considered as very
auspicious for all work. It cuts away all evils. Abhijit sarva doshghnam.
SU. 28.-Sukrachandrayormitho drishtayoh simhasthayorva yanavantaha. It
Sukra and Chandra aspect each other or if they are in the 3rd house from each
other, the person will be blessed with various conveyances.
NOTES Simha means 3, Sa denotes 7, Ha shows 8 =78, reversed 87, divided by
12, gives 3 as remai nder.

SU. 29.-SukrakujaKetushu vaithanikaha. If Sukra, Kujaand Ketu have mutual
aspects or if they are in the 3rd house from each other the person will , have
aristocratic surround ings from his ancestors.
NOTES He will belong to an old and respectable family which has royal
traditions and marks of honour. Some commentators say that the person will be
proficient in all the details of religious sacrifices.
SU. 30.-Swabhagyadaramatrubhavasameshu subheshu rajanaha. If the 2nd, 4th
and 5th Bhavas become equal to the Karaka or if benefics occupy them, the
person becomes a Raja or his equal in position.
N OTES We have de facto and dejure rulers. We have Karakasfor all events. The
Bhavas and planets have to betaken with reference to the various Karakas or
lords of events. Some commentators i nterpret Bhava i n the above Sutra as Bha 4
and Va 4 =44, divided, by 12 will give us the remainder as 8. They say that if the
2nd and 4th houses from the Karaka are equal or if benefics occupy them or if the
5th and 8th houses are equal or have beneficial planets in them, there will be
Rajayoga.
SU. 31.--Karmadusayoh papayoscha. If the 3rd and 6th houses from Atmakaraka
are equal or if they are joined by malefics, there will beRajayogas.
NOTES Ka 1, Ma 5=15, reversed 51, divided by 12, the balance Da 8, Sa 7 =87,
reversed 78, divided by 12, we have a balance of 6. When he says equal he means
that the sources of strength and weakness must balance equally.
SU. 32.-Pitnulabhadhipaschaivam. If from the lords of Lagna. or 7th benefics
occu py the 2nd , 4th, 5th and 8th, there will be Rajayogas.
NOTESJaimini confuses his readers, unless they happen to be very intelligent,
by referring to Lagna, Pada Lagna, Ghatika, Hora Lagna, Atmakarakamsa and
other amsas and unless we have able commentaries, the readers will belaunched
in a rough sea doubts. Pitu, Pa 1, Ta 6 =16, reversing we get 61, and divided by
12, we have the first house or Lagna. Labha 7, La 3, Bha 4- 34, reversed, we have
43, divided by 12, we have a balance of 7 ; therefore the 7th house from Lagna is
indicated.
SU. 33- M isresamaha. If there is a mixture of benefics and malefics in the above
combination, the person will attain to ordinary positions.
SU. 34.-Daridro vipareethe. If evil planets occupy beneficial signs and benefics
evil signs, the person will be poor.

SU. 35. -M atari gttrow sukrechandre va rajakeeyaha. If to the lord of Lagna or to
the lord of 7th, the 5th house is occupied by Guru, Sukra or Chandra, the person
becomes a high Government official and wields political powers.
SU. 36.-Karmani daseva pape senanyaha. If evil planets occupy the 3rd and 6th
from the lords of Lagna or the lord of the 7th, the person becomes a military
commander.
NOTES Karmani 3, Dasa 6. Ka 1, Ma 5 -15, reversed we have 51, divided by 12
we have the remainder 3. Da 1, Sa is 7 - 87, reading backward we have 78,
divided by 12 we get the balance 6. Commanders often lead their victorious
armies against their employers and become rulers themselves. Hyder, Napoleon,
Shivaji, H indenberg, Wellington and others became rulers.
SU. 37.-Swapitrubhyam karmadasasthadrishtya tadeesadrishtya
matrtunathadrishtya cha dheemantaha. If the lords of the 3rd and 6th from
Lagna and Atmakaraka aspect the latter or if the planets in those houses aspect
them and if the lord of the 5th aspect them, the person becomes extremely
intelligent.
NOTES Pitru 1, Swa 1, Karma 3, Dasa 5, Matru 6. These have already been
explained in Ka, Ta, Pa, Yadi Sutra rules.
SU. 38.-Daresadrishtya sukhinaha. If Lagna and Karaka Lagna have the aspect of
the lord of the 4th, the person will be happy.
NOTES Dara 4. Happiness, it must be remembered, does not entirely depend
upon position or wealth. There are some people who are extremely rich and
powerful, but they are most miserable. There are some who are very ordinary
but who are perfectly happy. Physical and mental conditions have great deal to
do with happiness and specially some temperaments have the knack of making
themselves agreeable al round and create happiness for themselves.
SU. 39.-Rogesadrishtya daridraha. If the lord of the 8th from Lagna and Karaka
Lagna aspect them, the person suffers from poverty.
NOTES Roga 8, Ra 2, Ga 3 =23, reversed 32, divided by 12 we have balance 8.
SU. 40.-Ripunathadrislitya vyayaseelaha. If thelord of the 12th from Lagna and
Karaka Lagna aspect them, then the person becomes a spendthrift or
extravagant.

SU. 41. - Swamidrishtya prabalaha. If the lord of Lagna aspects the Lagna and if
the lord of the Karaka Lagna aspects that Lagna, the person will have very good
Rajayogas.
SU. 42.-Pacshadripubhagyayorgrahasamye bandhah konayo ripujayayoho
keetayugmayordarariphcyoscha. If from Lagna-the 2nd and 12th or 5th or 9th or
12th and 6th or 4th and 10th have the same number of planets posited, the
person will be imprisoned.
NOTES This seems to be the longest Sutra I have had to deal since the
commencement of this work and it requires a clear explanation. If any of these
have Grahasamya then Ripu-12 the person will have chains' beating
imprisonment and the displeasure of the Bhagya- governing authorities. If there
is one planet in the 2nd, there must be one Konayoho 5 and 9 planet in the 12th.
If there are 2 planets in the 2nd the twelfth also must have Ripu-12 2 planets. If
there are 3 planets in the 5th, there must also be 3 in the 9th. Jaya-6This is
Grahasamya or equality in the number of planets. If there are evil Dara-4
combinations or aspects for these houses or for their lords, the punishments are
Ripha- 10 certain and the man will suffer.
If there are good planetary combinations or Kita-11 aspects for these houses or
their lords, the person will have trials and troubles Yugma-3 and prosecutions,
butwill be let off after trials and persecutions. Here five sets of houses have been
named and the presence of planets, in each set, of equal number in each of the
houses indicate imprisonments and tortures. But I gather from the commentaries
that when the number of planets is not equal or properly matched, these troubles
may not be i nd i cated .
SU. 43.-Sukradgounapadastho rahuh suryadrishlo netraha. If the 5th from
Arudha Lagna is occupied by Rahu and Ravi aspects him, the person will lose his
sight.
NOTES Sukra 1, Sa means 5, Ra denotes 2 - 52, reversed 25, divided by 12, we
have 1, denoting Lagna. Gauna 5, Ga shows 3, N a denotes 5 = 35, reversed 63,
divided by 12, we have the balance of 5, denoting the 5th house. Each Lagna has
its Arudha. Take the 5th in the undergiven horoscope. Here the 5th isKataka. Its
lord is in the 11th from the 5th. The 11th from Chandra falls in Meena and if I
understand the sutra properly, it means the fifth Arudha falls in Meena, is
occupied by Rahu and Ravi aspects him, the person will lose his sight.
SU. 44.-Swadaragayoh suk rac_ handrayoratodynm rajachinhani cha. , If Sukra
and Chandra occupy the 4th from Atmakaraka, the person will have the
paraphernalia of royalty, viz., Nagara or drums, Noubhat, music Chatras

umbrellas, Chamaras or tufts of hair-fans which attendants keep waving about
the royal personage and other signs and emblems of royal state.
NOTES We can easily infer that if Sukra and Chandra in this combination are
exalted, have good conjunctions and aspects, the person will have these royal
insignia on a grand scale and if they are weak or have evil aspects and
conjunctions, the royal paraphernalia will be on small or poor scale. There are
Rajas with a few lakhs and emperors with many crores. There are Kings and
Kings, rulers and rulers, emperors and all these have different grades and
different insignia. In all these sutras, taking the original commentaries and my
NOTES the readers will see that they have to shift through a lot of conflicting
evidence and confusing principles.
I have tried my best to make the explanations, notes, examples as clear and
convincing as possible. But in spite of all my efforts the readers may find doubts
and difficulties. Here in such cases my sound advice to them would be that they
should read the sutra well twice or thrice, read the translations I havegiven and
examples by way of illustrations. And after doing so, if they still have doubts
they must think over well, for a few days, read the previous and the future
stanzas and I may assure them, that suddenly they will hit upon the correct idea
or meaning and their doubts will be solved and fresh and glorious mental light
will flash on their brains.
End of Third Pad a of the First Ad hy ay a
J A I MINI SUTRAS
Part 3
ADHYAYA 1 - PADA 4
SU. 1- Upapadam padam pitraitucharat. Take the 12th house from Lagna. Find
out - itsPada Lagna or A rud ha Lagna. This becomes upapad a.

NOTES For ordinary Pada wetakethe lord of Lagna and we count again the
same number of Rasis from him as he has advanced from Lagna and this
becomes Pada or Arudha Lagna. For Upapada we have to take from the lord of
the 12th from Lagna and count again that number of Rasis from the position of
its lord and the sign which falls in that number will be Upapada. The meaning
will not be clear unless I give one or two examples: Vrishabha is Lagna. Its lord
Sukra joins Dhanusthe8th from Lagna. Counting again the 8th from Sukra we
get Kataka and this is called Pada or Arudha Lagna (see Sutra 29 of Pada 1 ).
Now we have to find Upapada. Take the lord of the 12th from Lagna. The 12th
from Lagna is Mesha. Its lord is Kuja and he is found in the 7th from it. The
seventh from him is again Mesha and in this horoscope Arudha Lagna falls in
Kataka and it goes under the name of Pada. The Upapada will fall in Mesha, and
the results in this chapter will be predicted with reference to Upapada.
Take another horoscope. FI ere calculate the Pada and the Upapada Lagnas. The
lord of Lagna is Sani and he is in the 4th from Lagna. The fourth from him or
Simha will beArudha or Pada Lagna. Now calculate the Upapada Lagna. Take
the 12th from Lagna. This fal Is in Makara. Its lord isSani. Fleis in the 5th house
from it or Vrishabha. Now take the 5th from him, it will fall in Kanya. For this
person Pada Lagna falls in Simha and U papada falls in Kanya. Take another
example. In this horoscope the lord of Lagna is Guru. Fie is in M ithuna or the
4th. Count from him to the 4th ; we see that it falls in Kanya. This will be the
Pada Lagna for this native. Now take the 12th house from Lagna. This will be
Kumbha. Its lord is Sani. Fie isfound in the 4th from that house in Vrishabha.
Count the 4th from himand itwill be Simha and thiswill behisUpapada Lagna.
All Lagnas and Bhavas have their Pada and Upapada and Jai mini seems to pay
great attention to Atmakarakamsa, Pada Lagna and Upapada Lagna. Some
commentators say-Upapadam Labhaditi. This means-take the 7th from Lagna
and find out the Arudha from it. This becomes the U papada LagnaTakethe
horoscope given below. Labha means. - La 3, Bha 4- 34, reversed it becomes 43,
divided by 12, we get a remainder of 7, and therefore the 7th house is meant by
this sutra. The 7th from Lagna becomes Kanya (see chart on p.109). Its lord
Budha occupies the 6th house from it in Kumbha. The 6th from Kumbha is
Kataka. Therefore for this horoscope the U papada becomes Kataka according to
this sutra. Thus in this horoscope according to one theory Upapada becomes
Simha and according to the tatter upapada becomes Kataka. This makes a great
deal of difference. I have indicated the differences and leave the readers to follow
their own judgement; experience and personal reading.
SU. 2. - Tatra papasya papayoge pravrajya daranasova. If the upapada has evil
conjunction or aspect or if the 2nd from it has an evil planet, the wife will die or
he will embrace pravrajya or sanyasa or asceticism.

NOTES Brihaspathi is quoted here. If there is a malefic planet in the Arudha
Lagnafrom the 7th or Jamitra or an evil planet in the 7th or 2nd or Rahu is found
in the 9th, the wife of the person will bedestroyed.
SU. 3.- Upapadasyapyarudhatwadeva natra ravihi papaha. If the second from
the U papada is occupied by Ravi he does not become a malefic. .
NOTES Somehow all astrological writers have classified Ravi as an evil planet.
Jaimini says that Ravi is not an evil planet when he is in the 2nd house from
U papada.
SU. 4.-Shzubhadrigyoganna. If, in the above combi nations in Sutras 2 and 3 there
are beneficial aspects or conjunctions, the evil results should not be predicted.
NOTES It means that his wife will notdieor hewill not take sanyasa. The wife
must die someday or other. What is meant here is that during those evil times
indicated by the planets death will not happen.
SU. 5. -Neechedaranasaha. If the 2nd from u papada falls in Neechamsa or has
the conjunction of a Neecha or debilitated planet there will surely bedeath to
wife in that evil period.
SU. 6. - Ucchey bahudaraha. If, in the 2nd from upapada there is an exalted
planet or the second falls in an exalted Navamsa the person will have many
wives. N OT ES I do dot know if many wives add pleasure or misery to a person.
H is lust may be satisfied but hewill be miserable, l-t is a question to be solved by
each man for himself.
SU. 7.-=Yugmecha. . - If the 2nd from upapada falls in M ithuna, the person will
have many wives.
SU. 8.-Tatra swamiyukteswarkshevatadhhetazittnrayushi nirdaraha. If the 2nd
from upapada is combined by theAtmakaraka or by the lord of that 2nd sign, the
person will have no wife in the latter part of his life.
NOTES Here the conjunction of its lord seems to act prejudicially. .
SU. 9.- Ucchethasmin,nuttamakuladdrira labhaha. . If the lord of the 2nd from
upapada is found in exaltation hiswifewill come from a respectable family.
NOTES Family traditions and previous histories havegreat influence in social
circles. .

SU. 10.- Neeche viparyayaha. If the lord of the second from the upapada joins a
debilitated sign, thecasewill be reversed.
NOTES It means the wife will come from a despicableor mean family. Social
stigmas are often unpleasant.
SU. 11. -Shubhasambandhatsundaree. If the second from the upapada has
beneficial aspects or conjunctions, thewife will beavery beautiful woman. .
NOTES It is both a fortune and misfortune to have a very beautiful wife. Her
moral behaviour and the temperament of the husband should decide this
complicated problem.
SU. 12.-Rahusanibhyamapavadatyago naso va. If Sani and Rahu occupy or
aspect the second house from upapada, thewife will dieorwill be rejected by the
husband for social scandals.
SU. 13. -Sti kraketti bhyam raktapradaraha. It Sukra and Ketu occupy or aspect
the second from Upapada the wife will suffer from bloody discharges or blood
complaints.
NOTES Females have these menstrual and bloody complaints very often and
they lead to consumption.
SU. 14.-Astisravo budhaKetu bhyam. If the second from Upapada has the aspect
or conjunction of Budha and Ketu the wife of the person will suffer from a
disease wherein her bones will be melted and dropped down.
SU.15.=Saniraviruhubhirastijvaraha. It Sani, Ravi and- Rahu join or aspect the
2nd house from Upapada the wife will suffer from chronic or persistent low
fever.
NOTES In theAyurvedia system, there is the Raktasrita Jwara or fever found
persistent in blood and Astigata Jwara or fever which has penetrated to the
bones and which cannot easily be eradicated. , The fi rst fever is milder whilethe
second is more serious. Fever is the monarch of all diseases and brings in its train
various complications.
SU. 16- BudhaKetu bhyam sthau I yam. If the second from Upapada isaspected or
conjoined by Ketu and Budha, thewife becomes clumsily corpulent.
NOTES I believe great corpulence and accumulation of fat in the body of man or
woman is a great misfortune. There is a limit to corpulence. When it is unwieldy
it gives great inconvenience.

SU. . 17. -Budhakshetre mandarabhyam nasikarogaha. If the second from
Upapada falls in one of the signs of Budha, viz., M ithuna or Kanya and possesses
the aspect or conjunction of Sani and Kuja, the wife will suffer from nasal
diseases or complai nts of the nose.
SU. 18.-Ktijakshetrecha. If the second house from Upapada falls in one of Kuja's
houses, viz., Mesha or Vrischika and has the aspect of Kuja and Sani, the same
nasal diseases will troublethe man's wife.
SU. 19. -Gurusanibhyam karnarogo narahaka cha. If the second from Upapada
falls in any one of the houses of Kuja or Budha and has the aspect or conjunction
of Guru, and Sani, the wife will have ear complai nts and also nervous diseases.
SU. 20.-Gururahubhyam dantarogaha. If the second from Upapada falls in any of
the houses of Budha or Kuja and has the aspect of Guru and Rahu, the wife will
suffer from tooth diseases. .
NOTES In Sanskrit it is stated that four forms of diseases are the most painful to
endure, viz., A kshi = eyes, Kukshi = stomach, Sira =head Dants = teeth. These
aches are very pai nf u I .
SU. 21.-Sanirahubhyam kanyathulayoho Pangurvatarogo va. If the second from
Upapada falls in Kanya or Thula and has the aspect of Sani and Rahu, the wife
will bedefective in limbs or will suffer from windy complaints.
NOTES Ayurveda says that when the three DhatusVata, Pitta, and Sleshma-are
properly distributed, the body keeps good health. When any one of them is
excited, diseases appear.
SU. 22. -Subhadrigyoganna. If in the combinations given above there are
beneficial conjunctions or aspects, theevilswill disappear and bad should not be
predicted.
SU. 23. Saptamamsagrahebhyaschaivam. The above results may also be
predicted by the 7th from U papada; by the Kalatra Karakamsa and by the lords
of those houses.
NOTES This means that all the above results good and bad may be predicted by
the lord of the 7th from Upapada, and by the 7th house from Upapada, by the
Kalatra Karakamsa and also by its lord. For each Bhava so many combinations
have to be examined that astrological predictions are not easy matters. Great
devotion is needed.

SU. 24.-Budhasanisukreshwanapatyaha. If the 7th from Upapada and its lord
and the lord of the Kalatra Karakamsa and its lord-if all these four are aspected
or conjoined by BudhaSani and Sukra, the person will have no issues.
SU. 25.-Putreshu ravirahugurubhirbahuputraha. If the 5th house from the 7th,
from Upapada, its lord, the Kalatra Karakamsa and its lord have the aspects or
conjunctions of Ravi, Rahu and Guru, the person will have many children.
NOTES Rahu seems to exercise very peculiar influences.
SU. 26.-Chandrenaikaputraha. If in the combi nation given in Sutra 25, the fifth
has only Chandra's aspect or conjunction, the person will have only one son.
SU. 27. M isreyilambatnpuitraha. If the 5th in Sutra. 25 has combinations and
aspects, both for many issues and no issues, then predict an issue later on in life.
NOTES What the author means is, when there are combinations for many
children and no children, the person will have issues later on in life. The problem
of children iscuriousand various. Some beget children very early in lifeand get
as many as 20 or 25 by one wife. Others get even 30 to 35 children by two or three
wives one after the other or simultaneously by several wives. There are some
who get only a limited number. Some get an issue early in lifeand get no more.
Some get one child in the middle of their lifeand there are others who get only
one child towards the close of their lives. God's creation presents puzzles and
confusion all round us.
SU. 28.-Kujasanibhyam dattaputrahu. If the 5th house, in the combi nations given
in Sutra 25, has the aspect or conjunction of Kuja and Sani, the person will have
an adopted son.
NOTES I have shown the importance of children in the previous NOTES. There
are 14 varieties of children mentioned by the Hindu Law.
SU. 29.-Oje bahuputtaha. If the 5th from, the combi nations mentioned in Sutra
25 falls in an odd sign, the person will have many children.
SU. 30.-Yugme alpaprajaha. If the 5th sign in the above combi nations falls in
even signs, there will be few issues.
SU. 31. - Gruhakramatkukshitadeesapanchamamsagrahebhyaschaivam. Just as
you find out from Janmalagna, particulars about children, so also inquire into,
the 5th house by considering Upapada and its lord, and Putra Karakamsa Rasi
and its lord.

NOTES In General Astrology the significations of the 12 Bhavas have been well
explained. As wetakethe Rasis, their lords, the planets, who conjoin and aspect
them and determine the results in reference to them so alsojaimini advises the
students to determine the various results with reference to Upapad a, its lord and
the lord of thePutra Karakamsa and the various aspects and conjunctions these
houses have as also their lords. In fact the same procedure should be adopted as
in the examination of the 12 Bhavas. Only these are taken with reference to birth
Lagna and the author says instead of thejanmalagna, take the Upapada, its lord
and Putra Karakamsa. . .
SU. 32.-Bhratrubhyam sanirahubhyam bhralrunasaha. If Sani and Rahu occupy
the 11th or the 3rd from Upapada and its lord, the elder and the younger
brothers die respectively. , . .
NOTES The 11th house denotes elder brothers and elder sisters and the 3rd
indicates the younger brothers and sisters. This is well known in General
Astrology. We take these from Janmalagna. Here Jaimini takes them from
Upapada.
SU. 33-Sukrenavyavahitagarbhanasaha: If Sukra joins the 3rd or the 11th. from
Upapada and its lord, the younger and the elder brothers will die.
NOTES I have already shown that the 3rd indicates younger and the 11th elder
brothers and sisters.
SU. 34.-Pi tnubhavesukradrishtepi. If the Lagna or the 8th house from it has the
aspect of Sukra, loss must be predicted for elder and younger brothers. Pitru
One-Pa 1, Ta means 6 =16. reversed it becomes 61, divided by 12, we get the
Lagna or one. Bhava =8, Bha standsfor 4and Va standsfor 4 =44, divided by 12,
we have the remainder 8. The commentators refer simply to Lagna and Ashtama
and we have to take them from Janmalagna. How Ashtama or the 8th has
anything to do with elder and younger brothers, cannot be traced. The Sutra is
clear and we have to take it as given by the Maharishi.
SU. 35.-Xzujagurzichandrabudhalrbahu bhrataraha. , If the 11th and 3rd from
Upapada and its lord are joined by Kuja, Guru, Chandra and Budha, the person
will have many brothers, elder and younger included. .
SU. 36. - Sanyarobhyam drishteyathaswam bhratrunasaha. ~' . . . If the 3rd and
11th from Upapada have the aspect of Sani and Kuja, the person will have his
brothers destroyed.
NOTES What the 3rd has evil aspects, the younger and when the 11th has
aspects, the elder brothers will die. If both haveevil aspects, then the younger as

well as the elder brothers will die. Sisters are included in brothers. Brethren
refers to those who are born with a person, males and females included.
SU. 37.-Sanina swamatraseshascha. If the 3rd and 11th from Upapada and its
lord areaspected by Sani he person will lose all his brothers and sisters and he
will remain alone.
SU. 38 - Kethau bhagineebahti lyam. .If the 3rd and 11th from Upapada and its
lord has the conjunction of Ketu, the person will have many sisters.
SU. 39.-Labhesl dbhagyabheh rahau damstra van. If Rahu joins the 2nd from the
7th from Upapada, the person will have large teeth or no teeth or will become
dumb. .
SU. 40.-Kethau stabdhavak If Ketu joins the 2nd house from the 7th from
Upapada, the person will be an indistinct speaker or possesses bad
pronunciation. .He may also have stammering.
SU. 41. Mande Kuroopaha. If Sani joins the 2nd house from the lord of the 7th
house from Upapada, the person becomes ugly and repulsive.
SU. 42.-Swamsavasadgowraneelapeetadivarnaha. The colour or complexion of
the person, yellow dark, golden or white must be predicted from the nature of
the Navamsa occupied by theAtmakaraka.
NOTES Similarly Jai mini hints to find out the colours of the various relations
from the Navamsas occupied by their respective Karakas, Varahamihira says '
Lagna NavamsapaThulyaTariusyet. judge the colour, etc., of the person by the
N avamsa occupied by the lord of Lagna. .
SU. 43.-Amaryanucharaddevatabhaktihi. Take the planet next in degrees to
Amatya. karaka and find out from him the religious tendencies of the person, .
NOTES As per those rules the next planet in degrees to Amatyakaraka will be
Bhratru karaka. If that planet happens to be evil, the man will be devoted to the
worship of evil spirits, if he happens to be good, then he will worship good
Gods. In the all-powerful Time are embedded 33 crores of Devatas or forces or
Energies for purposes of creation, protection and destruction. Eleven crores. of
energies are under the control of Brahma and his Spouse Saraswathi,
representing a)l education, gnana and intelligence for creative or generative
functions. Eleven crores of energies are under the rule of Vishnu with Lakshmi,
for functioning protection.

Money is needed for protection and Lakshmi's grace is wanted. Eleven croresof
forces are under the control of M ahesvara with Durga for destructive purposes.
By tapas man gets psychological energy. This enables him to issue orders to the
different forces, generative, protective and destructive as he develops one of
these three. Nigreha and Anugreha forms are different. The education
department increases a man's knowledge ; the District Magistrate has power to
offend ; theSessionsJudgecan hang a man or let him off from the gal lows. The
postal man can transport news and money and small articles. The police and the
revenue have different functions. All are orders or mental forces but each has a
different functions. By keeping company with a scavenger a man gets dirty stink.
By associating with a scent merchant he gets perfumes. All these 33 crores of
energies are called Devatasand by analogy Gods. The psychology of a person
differs considerably from others.
While one cultivates the art of charity and philanthropy, another cultivates the
art of cruelty-and destruction. In this sutra the man's devotion is shown by the
planets. When they are bad he invokes evil spirits or forces. When good, he
invokes the beneficial powers. I refer my readers to the wilderness of Mantra
Sastras. There are sapta koti mahamantras and navakoti kshudra mantras. The
former enable a person to do beneficial actions by the help of Mahamantras or
beneficial forces. The latter enablethe person to call evil powers and do mischief
to the people. We have Dakshinachera or good and Vamachara or bad.
SU. 44.-Swaritse kevalapapasambandheparajataha. If evil planets occupy
Atmakarakamsa Rasi, the person will be born of adultery.
SU. 45.-Notrapapath. If theAtmakaraka is himself evil and other evil planets are
not with him, then the evil in the above sutra should not be attributed.
NOTESThis means hewill be legitimate and born to his father.
SU. 46.-Sanirahubhyam prasiddhihi. It Sani and Rahu are in conjunction with
Atmakarakamsa Rasi, the person will become a notorious rake. .
NOTES People indulge in sexual embraces, but many do so with some sense of
honour. But there are many who are shameless in such matters.
SU. 47.-Gopanamanyebhyaha. If in the Atmakarakamsa other evil planets than
Sani and Rahu are conjoined, the person will not be born to another's seed, but
his mother will be immoral,

NOTES A person 's mother may be an immoral woman, but he may be the
product of legitimate embrace.
SU. 48.-Shubhavarge apavadamatram. . If shubha Shadwarga arises in the
Atmakarakamsa in the above-mentioned yogas, there will be scandal about his
legitimacy but he will be really born of his father's seed. .
NOTESThere will beunfounded suspicions about his birth but they will not be
true.
SU. 49.-Dvigrahe kulamukhyaha. If there are two planets in the Atmakarakamsa,
the person will becomea leader in his community.
NOTES Persons, males as well as females, have peculiar temperaments. To be a
leader in his own community, family, religion, science, art, or sect, trade or line
of profession is a great ambition which they often try to emulate. Even in vices
there are leaders and subordinates. The leader of a dacoit gang will have
hundreds or thousands of persons under him and the leadership is courted by
hisfollowers and admirers. Takeany line of work, there are leaders and those
who follow them as menials and subordinates of various grades. In this
leadership, there is much good or evil the leader can do. If there are two or more
evil planets in the Karakamsa, the person will be cruel and sinful in his deeds. If
there are benefics, we may expect the prominence in good and virtuous ways.
End of Fourth Padaof the First Ad hyaya
ADHYAYA 2-PADA 1
SU. l.-Aayuh pitrudinesabhyam. Longevity of a person has to be determined
with reference to Lagna and the 8th from it.

NOTES Pitru -1, Oina =8 ; Pa 1, Ta means 6, 16 reversed will be =61, divided by
12 we have a remi nder 1. Therefore the 1st house. Di =8, N a =0, reversed we get
08, Therefore 8th house from Lagna is signified. Jataka Chandrika, following
Parasara, lays down 8th and 3rd as houses of longevity.
SU. 2.-Prathamayonittarayorva deergham. . If the lords of the 1st and 8th are in
movable or common signs or if one of them is in a movable and the other in a
common sign, there will be longevity.
SU . 3.-J Prathamadwiteeyayorantayorva madhyam. If the lords of the 1st and 8th
are found in Chara and Sthira Rasis- movable and fixed-or if both of them are in
double, bodied signs, there will be middle life.
SU. 4. --Madhyayoradyantayorva heenam. If the lords of the 1st and 8th are
found in fixed signs or one in Chara and other in Dwiswabhava, there will be
short life. In the second sutra the last portion repeats the same idea.
SU. 5. - Evam mandachandrabhyam. The rules he has given in the first four
sutras must also be, applied to Chandra Lagna and the Lagna.
NOTES Manda =1, Ma 5, Da 8=58, reversed we have 85 divided by 12, we get 1
or first house. Therefore apply the above rules for Lagna and Chandra. Here he
drops the lord of the 8th.
SU. 6. -Pitruka latascha. Poorna Madhya A I pa lLong 1M iddle IShort llife 21 ife
31 ife 2Long 2M iddle 2Short 31 ife llife 21 ife 3Long 3M iddle 3Short 21 ife 31 ife llife
Long, middle and short lives may also be ascertained from Lagna and Hora
Lagna. 1. Chara-Movable. 2. Sthira-Fixed. 3. Dwiswabhava-Common or Double
bodied sign. Long life is ensured when the above-mentioned lords are. 1. In two
movable signs. 2. In fixed and common signs. 3. In common and fixed signs.
M iddle life When the two lordsarein 1. Movableand fixed signs. 2. Fixed and
movable signs. 3. Common and common signs. Short life 1. Movable and
common. 2. Fixed and fixed. 3. Common and movable: This table enables the
reader to readily ascertain from the lords of Lagna, Chandra and Hora Lagna
and the lord of the 8th, the term of I ife of a person.
SU. 7.-Sam vadatpramanyam. Whichever longevity is determined by the greater
number of combinations of planets, that term of I ife should be predicted and it
will happen certainly.
NOTES This system of calculation and comparison is called samvada. Three
systems have been given, viz,. 1. From the position of the lords of Lagna and the
8th .,: in the movable, fixed and common signs. 2. From the position of the lords
of Lagna and Chandra Lagna in the above Rasis. 3. From the position of the

Lagna and H ora Lagna in the above signs. I have already explained what is
meant by Hora Lagna. If the terms of life given by any of these two are opposed
to or vary from the term of I ife i nd i cated by one system, then the former will
prevail. If the calculations from these three systems agree, then certainty the
person will have that term which they show.
SU.8. -yisamvade piitrukalataha. If three terms of I ife are indicated by the three
systems, then the terms obtained by the Lagna and Hora Lagna should be
preferred and accepted.
NOTES If by one system we get tong life, by another system middle I ife and by
the third short I ife, accept that term which you get- by the Lagna and Hora
Lagna and reject - the other terms obtained by other calculations.
SU. 9.-Pitrulabhagechandrechandramandabhyam. If Chandra is in the 7th from
Janma Lagna then the longevity obtained, from the lord of these two must be
taken as the definite term of a man's life. Alpayu or short I ife extends from birth
to 32 years. Madhyayu or middle I ife extends from 33 to 66 years. Paramayu or
long I ife extends from 67 to 100 years. Each Rasi has 30 Bhagas or 30 degrees and
the positions of planets and houses will have to betaken with reference to
degrees and minutes they occupy. If the lords of Lagna and 8th are in the first 10
degrees of the Rasi s indicating long life, the person will havethefull benefit of
purnayu. If they are in the end of those Rasis, death must be predicted at the
commencement of longevity. If they are i n the middle, then the extent of the term
in longevity must be found out by the rule of three. '
The rule of three should be thus applied. For each degree of the Rasi we get 1
year and 36 days as per explanations of the old commentators. If purnayu counts
34 years from 66th year to one hundred, then this has to be divided by 30 degrees
composing a Rasi. We get 1 year and 48 days and not 36: as explained by them. A
purnayu man under that technical term may die from his 67th year's age to his
100th year. Find out the degrees passed by the lords of Lagna- and 8th in the
respective houses they are and then by rule of three find out how many degrees
and minutes and seconds they have passed in those Rasis and ascertain how
many years they give. Add this to 66 and the years so obtained will be the term
of life, the person will have in the longevity period. Say they are in 16degrees 20
minutes and 50 seconds.
What would be the term of life ? We have taken this in the purnayu. If each
degree gets 1 year and 48 days, what will be the number of years, months and
days for 16 degrees, 20 minutes aid 5C1 seconds ? This is simply a question of
the rule of three. We get 18 years, 6 months, 9 days and 40 ghatis. This added to
66, the term of middle life, we get 84-6-9-40. The longevity of the person will be
84 years, 6 months. 9 days and 40 ghatis and his death must be predicted after

this age. Similarly the age must also be ascertai ned by Horaas well as by
Chandra Lagna. If there are differences, take the majority and decide. In the
second and third divisions of Madhya and Alpayus or middle or short lives the
same procedure has to be foil owed. This gives a clue to predict the correct time
of death.
The author in these sutras has not spoken anything about the Balarishta,
M ad hyari shta and Y ogari shta. A very I arge nu mber of i nf ants d i e before they are
eight years of age and this is described as death from Balarishta. Then
Madhyarishta extends from 8 to 20 years, and we have a large number of deaths.
Then we have the Y ogari shta extending from 20 to 32. Probably Jai mini includes
all these three different periods in theAlpayuryoga which extends upto 32 years
(see my NOTES in Brihatjataka and Sarvanhachintamani on these various terms
of life). Unless we have a full knowledge of Balarishta the calculation of Jaimini
will not be found useful or accurate. An infant dies in the womb, a few minutes
after birth or months-how can these Yogas apply to them ? See Pindotpatti or
foetal development as in Brihatjataka.
SU. 10. -Sanow yoga.hetou kakshyahrasaha. If in the above combi nations Sani
causes the Purnayuryoga, then place it as Madhyayuryoga. If he causes
Madhyayuryoga, then put it in A I pa and if he causes A I pa, then consider it as
still less and predict very early death.
SU. 11- y Jcpureetamityanye. Some others are of opinion that when the
longevity is caused by Sani there; should be no Kakshya H rasa or deduction or
degradation. They mean that the term indicated by Sani should hold good.
SU. 12.--Na. swarkshathungagesaure. If Sani causing longevity occupies his own
or exalted house, Kakshya H rasa-or reduction should not be applied. .
SU. 13.-Kevalpapadrigyogini cha. If Sani, causing longevity, has many evil
aspects and conjunction, then, Kakshya. H rasa should not be predicted. .
SU. 14.-Pitrulabhagegurow kevala shubhadrigyogini cha kakshyavriddhihi. If
Guru occupies the Lagna or the 7th has no evil conjunctions or aspects, but
beneficial aspects and conjunctions, hewill cause increase or Kakshyavridd hi.
NOTES This means, if short life is revealed by the planetary conjunctions, hewill
push it into middle life, if middle life is denoted by the planetary positions, he
will cause long life, if long life is indicated, then hewill grant the person life term
beyond a hundred years.
SU. 15. Mali ned warabahye na vamse n idhanam dwaradwaresayoscha malinye,
: If Dwarabahya Rasis are malefic signs or if malefics occupy these Dwarabahya

Rasis, or if the lord of Dwarabahya Rasi is a malefic, death will happen in the
Navamsa Dasas of such Dwarabahya Rasis.
NOTES Dwara Rasi isthesign which commences the period for a man. Thiswill
be some sign from the Lagna. Like the Pada Lagna, that sign from it which bears
the same number from Dwara Rasi will be called Dwarabahya Rasi.- Suppose the
4th from Lagna is the Dwara- Rasi; which commences the Dasa, the 4th from it or
the 7th forms the Dwarabahya Rasi. In the Jaiminisutras later on will be
explained the Rasi Dasas or periods and sub-periods and when a man would be
killed. This method of attributing Dasas and Bhuktis to Zodiacal signs is not even
hinted at in other books. There the Dasas and Bhuktis are attributed to planets
and constellations. In the Amsayurdaya of Satyacharya, Lagna in any sign
contributes its own term of life. These Dwarabahya Rasis are also called
Pakabhoga Rasis. Paka means Dasa. If these two Dwarabahya Rasis are evil
signs, death will result in the period of an evil Navamsa inthem. If thelordsof
these two Rasis haveevil aspects or conjunctions, death must be predicted inthe
period of the evil Navamsa. Death always happens under the greatest malefic
planet and malefic Rasi.
’The sutra is very tough and even the commentators have not come to our
rescue. It has reference to Maraka or death and has been dealt with by me in my
Studies in Jaimini Astrology. The Rasi in which Dasa begins at birth is Dwara
Rasi. Suppose the Lagna is M eena and tha Dwara Rasi is the 5th from it, viz.
Kataka. Than the 6th from Kataka, viz. Vrischika will be called Bahya
(Dwarabahya) Rasi. Dwara Rasi is also called Paka Rasi while Bahya Rasi is also
known as Bohga Rasi.
SU. 16. -Shubhadrigyoganna. If to the Dwarabahya Rasis, and the Rasi occupied
by Dwarabahya there are beneficial aspects and conjunctions; there will be no
death in the N avamsa periods of those Rasis.
SU. 17.--Rogese- tunge navamsavriddhihi. If thelord of the 8th from Lagna joins
exaltation, there wi 1 1 be i ncrease of I ife i n the Dasa of the N avamsa thus averti ng
thedeath indicated in the above combi nations.
SU. 18.-Tatrapi padesadasante padanavamsadasayam pitrudinesatrikone va. . If
there is an increase of; life as per Sutra 17, then death will happen in Navamsa
Dasa of the Rasi occupied by Arudhalagnadhipathi; in the Dasas of Rasis which
are in trikona to lords of Lagna and 8th ; in the Navamsa Dasa of the Rasi
containing Arudha Lagna.
NOTES Pitru 1, Pa stands for 1, Ta denotes 16, reversed it is 61, divided by 12,
we have 1 remainder, and it means Lagna. Oina 8, Da stands for 8 and Na 0 = 80,
reversed it means 08, or the 8th house. If in the Vriddhi paksha named in Sutra

17, the death does not happen then, when can the person expect death. Jai mini
here gives the periods when death may be expected. TheArudhadhipathi or the
lord of Pada Lagna occupies some Rasi. Death may be predicted in the Navamsa
Rasi Dasa. Death may also happen in the Dasas of the Trikonas from Lagna and
the 8th or in the Navamsa Dasa of the Arudha Rasi from Lagna. He has given
here three sets of combinations. 1. Death may occur in the Dasas of Trikonas
from Lagna and the 8th. 2. Death may occur in the Navamsa Dasa of the Arudha
Rasi. ' 3. It may happen in the Navamsa Dasa from the Rasi occupied by the lord
of Arudha Lagna.
SU. 19.-Pitrulobharogesapranini kantcrkadisthe swatoschaivam thridha. If the
lord of the 8th from Lagna and the lord of the 8th from the 7th, .from Lagna are
powerful and occupy Kendras, Panaparas and Apoklimas, then they cause long,
middle and short lives respectively.
NOTES The lord of the 8th from Lagna and the Lord of the 8th from the 7th from
Lagna must 6e powerful. If they occupy Kendras, they give long life. If they
occupy Panaparas, .they produce middle life. If they occupy Apoklimas, they
produce short life. Kendras are 1,4, 7 and 10 from Lagna. Panaparas are 2, 5, 8
and 11 from Lagna. Apoklimas 3, 6, 9 and 12 from Lagna. ,
SU. 20.-Yogatsameswasmin vipareetam. If Atmakaraka joins the 7th from - the
7th (Lagna), the meaning conveyed in Sutra 19 will have to be differently
interpreted.
NOTES In this sutra he is going to show some special results. These are called
Viparitas or perverts in meaning. The 7th from the 7th will be Lagna itself. If by
Sutra 19 longevity is indicated, then call it middle life, if they indicate middle,
call it short life, if short life is shown say there will be a very little term of life. If it
is long, say it will be short, if it is short, say long, if it is middle, then call it
middle. Commentators give some more hints. If the lord of the 8th from Lagna is
in exaltation, then he will give one-half more than what could be expected from
him. If he occupies a debilitated Rasi, then he will cut off one half of what he
would have given under normal conditions. Similarly when there are exalted
and debilitated planets in the 8th we have to draw inferences and add or take
away from the terms of life indicated 6y them.
SU. 21.--Rasitaha pranaha. The strength of the Rasis must be properly
ascertained.
NOTES Jaimini gives particular strength to Rasis, other Shastras also attach
importance to Rasis. H e detai Is Karakayogas shortly. H e says that much strength
need not be attached to A msa.

SU. 22.-*Rogesayoh swata aikyeyoge va madhyam. If the 8th houses from'
Lagna and the 7th are joined by their.: Karakas or if they happen to be
themselves Karakas, if the lords of the 8th house from Lagna and the 7th are
occupying Kendras, Panaparas or Apoklimas, then the terms of life ascertained
from the combi nations shown in Sutra 19 will have to be reduced.
* I have not meddled 'with the' English rendering of this sutra by Prof. B.
Suryanarain Rao. I understand it thus: "If the lord of tha 8th from Lagna or the
8th from the 7th is himself Atmakaraka; or are in conjunction with Atmakaraka,
the terms of life mentioned in sutra 19 are to be reduced." The rest is clear from
Prof. Rao’s NOTES.
NOTES If the life indicated is long, then convert it into middle, if it is middle,
then reduce it to short, and if it is short, then fix death very early. This kind of
increase or decrease depends on the particular positions of planets and the Rasis
they occupy and these matters should be particularly and carefully studied and
the positions of the pi anets should be properly understood.
SU. 23.-Pitrulabhayoh papamadhyatwe kone papayoge.va k,aksh..yahrasaha. If
Lagna and 7th from it lie between evil planets, or if evil planets are in the
Trikonasfrom Lagna arid Saptama, Kakshyahrasa or deductions and additions
must be made for terms of life which are obtained by planetary positions.
SU. 24. -Swasminnapyevam. If the Karaka is between the evil planets or evil
pi anets conjoin the Trikonasfrom him, Kakshyahrasa should be made.
SU. 25. — rhasminpope neeche-atunge-ashubhasamyuktechn. If the Karaka joins
Neecha or does not join the exaltation or if he is not in conjunction with benefics,
Kakshyahrasa should be made.
NOTES A house or planet is said to be between malefics when the 2nd and 12th
from it are occupied by evil planets. When two evil planets are on both sides of a
Lagna or a planet, it forms Kartariyoga and acts prejudicially to the Bhava
indicated by theRasi or the planet.
SU. 26. - Anyadanya tha. If Lagna and Saptama (7th) or if Karaka and the 7th
from him are between beneficial planets or if the Trikonas fromjanma and
Karaka Lagnas are occupied by benefics, if the Karaka happens to be a benefic, if
he is in exaltation and not in debilitation or has beneficial conjunction, there
should be no Kakshyahrasa made.
SU. 27. -Gurou cha. If Guru happens to be Karaka and has evil planets in 2nd,
12th, 6th and 8th and in the houses forming Trikonas from him or has evil
planets with him or he is not in exaltation or joins Neecha Rasi, Kakshyahrasa

should be made. And in cases where these combi nations are reversed increase
must be predicted.
SU. 28.--Purnendusukrayorekarasivriddhihi. If Purna Chandra and Sukra
become Karakas and occupy the positions named i n the above sutras, they will
give an i ncrease of one Rasi Dasa.
NOTES A certain Rasi Dasa becomes death inflicting but when such a
combination is present, this Dasa will pass off and the next Dasa will cause
death. This means they will increase the longevity of the person.
SU. 29.-Sanau vipareetham. If Sani becomes Karaka and is found in the places
named in the previous sutras, he causes Kakshyahrasa in the earlier Dasa than
tha maraka.
NOTES This means he will cut short the life by one Dasa and therefore earlier
than the allotted time; when Chandra, Sukra and Sani become powerful in these
directions, we need nottakeother planets into consideration and there will be no
decreases.
SU. 30. - Sthiradasayam yathakhandam nidha nam. Three sections for
Ayurbhava or longevity have been explained, viz., long, middle and short lives:
In the Sthira Dasa suppose the term of - life is settled as middle. If a deathinflicting planet or Dasa comes in the period, of Alpayu, the person will not die,
but will suffer sickness and misery at the time.
NOTES For death he mustwaitfor themiddleterm and the maraka there. Sthira
Dasas seem to -prolong life to a certain extent.
SU.. 31.-Tatrarkshaviseshaha: . In the matter of death, note the peculiarity of the
Rasi. That is death will happen in the Dasa of the Marana Karaka Rasi. -
NOTES Divide the 12 signs into 3 Khandas or sections and predict the death for
short life in the first Khanda, for middle life in the second Khanda, and for long
life in the third Khanda in that Rasi Dasa which is cruel or which possesses the
power to inflict death. Suppose a man gets Alpayu or short life as the result of
the planetary and sign peculiarities foreshadowed in the previous sutra on
longevity; then hisdeath must be and will be caused by the most cruel in the first
Khanda, or thefirstfour signs. M iddle life wilt havedeath in next four signs and
the long life will have an end in the most cruel of the last four Rasi Dasas.
SU. 32.-, Papamadhye papakone ripturogayoh papeva. . . If the Dasa is between
maleficsor has evil planets in itsTrikonas, or has evil planets in 12 and 8, such a
Dasa will cause death to the person.

SU. 33. -Tadeesayoho kevalaksheenendusukradrishtow va. If the lords of the
12th and 8th are aspected by Ksheenachandra and Sukra, the Dasa of the 12th or
8th will inflict death.
N OTES Ksheenachandra is powerless or New-Moon Sukra must also be weak --
or powerless. Herejaimini seems to hint that those lords should have no other
planetary aspects to kill the person. When a combination is given, there should
be no disturbing agencies to produce the result. *
*This is a rather tough stanza and Professor Rao's notes are not clear. Of the
several Rasi Dasas which are capable of causing maraka, death is likely to occur
(1) In the first Rasi Dasa (2) Find tha lord of the 6th from the Rasi whose Dasa is
the first. See what Navamsa this lord aspects. Death will take place in the subperiod of that N avamsa Rasi. Suppose Dhanus Is the first Rasi Dasa. Death will
happen either in this or the 6th from Dhanus. viz.. Taurus and the lord of Taurus
is Venus. Suppose he aspects Kanya in Navamsa. The death will happen in the
sub-period of this Kanya Navamsa Rasi.
SU. 34.-Tatrapyadyarksharinathadrisyannvabhagadva. Of the Rasi Dasas which
have the power to cause death, death is likely to happen in the first Rasi Dasa
and the sub-period of Rasi of the Navamsa Rasi which is aspected by the planet
who is lord of the 6th from the Rasi whose Dasa is the first.
NOTES As per principles explained in the previous sutras the author determines
the period of death. TheFirst Rasi which commences the Dasa and the Dasa
which its 6th sign furnishes, find out their lord and see what Navamsasthey
aspect, death will happen in the sub-period of that Navamsa Rasi which they
aspect. These are referred to in the Navamsa Kundali or Diagram.
SU. 35.-Pitrulabhabhavesapranee rudraha. Whoever is stronger among the lords
of the 8th from Lagna he gets the name, of Rud ra.
NOTES The symbol of Rudra will be given to the lords of the Rasis which are
stronger in the 8th houses from Lagna and Saptama or 7th.
SU. 36.-, Apranyapi papadrishtaha. If the weaker among the lords of the two
houses, 8th from Lagna and 7th, is aspected by malefics, he will also get the
name of Rudra.
NOTES Thus sometimes there may be two Rudras instead of one.
SU. 37.-Pranini subhadrishte rudrasulanthamvyuhu. If the powerful Rudra is
aspected by benefics, death may be predicted in the Rudra Rasi, or in the periods
of its T ri kona Rasi s 1, 5 and 9.

NOTES First classify and find out under what heading the term of life fall sand
then predict death at the end of theDasa which iscruel. .
SU. 38. -Tatrapi subhayogay. Even, if the weaker of. the planets, when he has evil
aspects get the name of Rudra, has beneficial conjunctions or aspects he will
extend the length of life, to the Rudra Rasi Dasa or the Dasas 5th and 9th from it.
NOTESTrikona Dasas are what are technically called Shoola Dasas. Trikonas are
SU. 39. - yyarkapapayoge na. The above results should not be predicted if other
planets than the Sun, should bein the 5th and 9th from the two Rudras.
NOTES If Ravi is there, he will not obstruct the results above mentioned. I n
some Yogas the presence of the Sun does not count. In Sunapha, Anapha,
Dhurdhura and Kemadruma, the presence of the Sun is not taken into account.
SU. 40.-Mandarendudrishtesubhayogabhave papayogepi va shubhadrishtow va
parataha. If the two Rudras become evil, death will come in the first Shoola Dasa;
if one of them becomes evil, death will happen in the second Shoola Dasa; and if
both of them are favourable, death will come in the last of the 3rd Shoola Dasa.
NOTES This means that if both Rudras are bad, early death, if one of them is
bad. longer life and if both of them are good, the longest term of life will be
enjoyed in the periods to be determined by the principles already explained.
Sutras are unpardonably short, sweet, suggestive and comprehend a great deal
which the readers are expected to know, analyse and remember. These general
sources of knowledge and the constructive capacity of the language enabled
those intellectual giants of India, viz., thegreat Maharishisto frame rules and
Sastras and Sutras with great ease and facility and bequeath to the later
generations mines of intellectual treasures, whose depths have not yet been
completely explored or examined by the greatest cultured brains of the present
day.
It is not possiblefor the greatest scholars in Sanskrit to frame a single Sutra,
which can compare favourably with the Sutras of the ancient Maharishis. They
had theTapobala to their credit, led the most simple lives, developed the brain
power to the greatest conceivable extent and set examples of devotion and
contemplation on sublime subjects, which gave them vast mental resources, and
madethem write works, which are the ad mi rati on of the most profound scholars
of the present age. This sutra requires lengthy explanation and I shall make no
apology to do so for the benefit of my readers. The commentators have cal led the
following from ancient writers. Jaimini's views and explanations sometimes

differ considerably from Varahamihira and others. Ravi, Kuja, Sani and Rahu are
classified as evil planets, one stronger than the other.
Rahu is the most powerful malefic, next to Sani, next to Kuja and then to Ravi ;
Guru, .Ketu, Sukra and Bud ha are benefics, one stronger than the other. Guru is
the most beneficial, next comes Ketu, next Sukra and Budha comes last. If
Chandra has the conjunction of Kuja, he is classified as evil, otherwise he is good.
If Ravi and other evil planets occupy evil signs, they become more and more evil.
If they occupy beneficial signs, they become good. If Guru and other benefics
occupy beneficial signs, they become very favourable. If they occupy evil signs,
they become bad., Budha becomes a benefic if he is in exaltation or is in an
independent sign. Guru and Sukra in the house of Budha, viz., Kanya and
M ithuna become very beneficial so also in other beneficial signs.
SU. 41. -Rtudrasrayepi prayena. Death may happen someti mes i n the Rasi Dasa
occupied by Rudra.
NOTES The word prayena means death may happen in them, earlier or the later
Dasa from the Rudra Dasa.
SU. 42.-Kriye pitari viseshena. If the Lagna falls in Kriya or Mesha, death often
takes place in the Rudra Dasa.
NOTES Pitari means Lagna. Pa ITa 6=61, divided by 12 the balance is 1, hence
Janma Lagna.
SU. 43.-Pratjhamamadhyamottanteshu va tattadayusham. To persons having
short, middleand long lives, death happens in the first, second and third Shoola
Rasi Dasas.
NOTES The sub-period, when the death happens, will be the Antardasa of a
cruel Rasi Dasa in their respective periods or sections. I have already shown in
the previous chapter how the rule of three should be applied to get the correct
date of death.
SU. 44.-Swabhaveso maheswvaraha. The lord of 8th house from Atmakaraka
goes under the name of M aheswara.
NOTES Atmakaraka has great significance in Jaimini Sutras.
SU. 45.-Swochhe swabhe ripubhavesap ranee. If the lord of the 8th from
Atmakaraka is exalted or is in his own house, then the stronger of the two, viz.,
the lords of the 8th. and 12th from the Karaka will also go under the name of
M aheswara.

NOTES If both of them are equally strong, then both become Maheswaras.
SU. 46.- Patabhyam yoge swasya tayor va roge tataha. If Atmakaraka has
conjunction with Rahu or Ketu, or if the 8th from Atmakaraka has conjunction
with Rahu or Ketu, then the 6th planet counting regularly from the Sun will
become M aheswara.
NOTESThus we have 3 Maheswaras. Counting the 6th from the Sun will be the
Sun; Moon, Mars, Mercury, Jupiter and the 6th will be Venus or Sukra. On the
above combination Sukra becomes M aheswara. Of the three varieties of
Maheswaras, he alone becomes M aheswara who is the strongest among these
three. Rog in this Sutra means 8, Patabhya has been rendered as Rahu and Ketu. I
cannot understand how this has been interpreted as Rahu and Ketu by the
commentators - Pata 1, Bha 2. Probably after the 7th planets, Bhya - Bhya the 1st
is Rahu and the second is Ketu. Patha may specially mean Rahu and Ketu.
SU. 47.-Prabhubhavavaireesapranee pitrulabhapranyanucltaro. vishamastha
brahma. Find outwhich isthe stronger of the two Rasis Lagna and Saptama or
7th. Then find out which of the lords of the 6th, 8th and 12th from it is stronger,
and if he occupies an odd sign in the Parswa Rasis from the stronger of Lagna or
Saptama, (7th), he will be named as the Brahma planet.
NOTES He is going to explain in this sutra the planet who goes under the
peculiar signification of Brahma. The Parswa Rasis or side signs are the 7th, 8th,
9th, 10th, 11th and 12th from Lagna. The 6 signs from Lagna. viz., 1st, 2nd, 3rd,
4th, 5th and 6th are denominated as Parswa Rasis to the saptama parswas. Odd
and even signs are well known and have been explained in the earlier NOTES.
This is rather a difficult sutra and must be carefully studied and understood. One
of the two signs Lagna and; Saptama will be stronger. Take the lords of the three
houses, 6th, 8th and 12th from the stronger of these two signs Lagna and 7th.
Find out who is strongest of these three lords. If he is in an odd sign from the
Parswa Rasis to the stronger Rasi in Lagna or Saptama, he becomes the planet
called Brahma. To my humble mind ' the procedure seems to be very
complicated. Jai mini isaMaharishi and he knows best. Hehas made these sutras
as short and as sweet as possible and our intellects are not competent even to
understand them. Where is then the justification to find fault with their
composition or the interpretations put upon them by the ablest commentators ?
Learned commentators are a great boon to mankind. Without them many
valuable works would have remained sealed letters.
SU. 48- Brahman i sanaupatayorva tataha. If Sani, Rahu or Ketu becomes Brahma,
the 6th planet from him will be designated as Brahma in which case the other
three will not have the Brahma power.

NOTES The 6th planet must mean planet taken 6th in the regular order, Ravi;
Chandra, Kuja, Budha,, Guru, Sukra. Suppose, Ketu becomes Brahma, the 6th
from him would be Guru. Similarly for other planets. Thatha- 6Tha 6, Tha 6- 66,
divided by 12 we get the remainder 6 and hence the 6th house from the planet is
meant.
SU. 49. -Bahurnam yoge swajateeyaha. If many get the powers of Brahma (say
three or four planets at a time), then that planet becomes Brahma who is next in
degree to Atmakaraka.
NOTES The next in degrees to Atmakaraka will become A matyakaraka.
Therefore in such cases A matyakaraka becomes Brahma.
SU. 50.~ Rahuyoge vipareetam. When Rahu also gets Brahmatwa, then the
conditions will be reversed.
NOTES This means that planet becomes Brahma who gets the lowest number of
degrees among the Brahmas. This is perfectly intelligible. Suppose Guru gets 29
degrees in Mesha, then as per Jai mini rule he becomes Atmakaraka. These
planets move forwards. But suppose in that horoscope, Rahu has only 20
minutes to pass in Mesha instead of Guru Rahu becomes the Atmakaraka. He
has the backward movement, and therefore has the largest number of degrees to
his credit in the inverse order- While Guru has 29 degrees in the forward
movement, Rahu has 29 degrees and 40 minutes in his backward motion.
Therefore Rahu has a longer number of degrees.
SU . 51.-Brahma swabhaveso bftavastlzaha. The lord of the 8th from Atmakaraka
as also the planet who occupies that house becomes Brahma.
NOTES Thus may Brahmas have been enumerated and the reader must carefully
study these rules. Bhava 8, Bha 4, Va 4-44, divided by 12, the remainder is 8.
SU. 52- yivade balee. Between the, two planets the lord of the 8th from
Atmakaraka and the planet who joi ns the 8th, the stronger of the two becomes
Brahma.
NOTES When there are many Brahmas, the strongest of the lot will be the
Brahma. The results flowing from the Brahma and Maheswara planets will be
explained hereafter. Students must be very careful.
SU. 53.- Brahmano yavanjnaheswararkshadasantamayuhu. The longevity
extends through the Rasis commencing from Brahma and counting up to the Rasi
containing Maheswara .

NOTESJaimini has explained how to fix the planets,- Rudra, Maheswaraand
Brahma.
SU. 54.-Tatrapi maheswarabhavesatrikonabde. The period of death must be
determined thus, M aheswara will be in a sign. Take the Dasa of this Rasi, take
the lord of 8th house from M aheswara. Take the Trikonas from him, viz., 1, 5and
9. Predict death in the Antardasa of any one of these Dasas which is strong
enough to inflict death.
SU . 55.-Swakarmachittari pu roganathapranee marakha. The strongest among the
lords of 3, 6,12 and 8fromtheAtmakaraka will inflict death.
NOTES First settle about the ter ms of life, short; middleand long. If all the four
lords mentioned above are of equal strength, predict death in such period by the
evil Dasa, which intervenes at that time. The lords of 6 and 8 are powerful
marakas, of these two, lord of the 6th is more powerful in causing death. Death
will happen when the Dasas of 6or 8come. Death will occur in the sub-- periods
of the lords of Trikonas from 8th and 6th houses, of theseTrikona periodsfrom
the 6th are more powerful. If the lord of the 6th is powerful, then the Dasas of
Trikona Rasisfrom him would inflict death.
SU. 56. - Thadrukshadasayam nidhanam. Death will happen in the Rasi Dasa
occupied by the maraka planet or in the Dasa of the Rasi of which heisthelord.
SU. 57. Tatrapi kaladripurogachittnnathapahare. TakeAtmakaraka. Find out the
7th from him. Take Ripu, Roga, Chittaor 12, 8 and 6th from it. The lords of these
occupy some houses. Death may happen in the Dasas of such signs or the Dasas
of the houses owned by these lords.
NOTES After having ascertained such Marakagraha Rasis, he directs his readers
to find out the special sub-periods which would cause death. Dasas of houses
have to be counted from Chara, Shtira and Dwiswabhava in the particular order
named under that section. Some Rasi Dasa becomes maraka. If there are many
Rasis which get the maraka power, find out the strongest among them and
attribute death to it. Suppose there is a sign without a planet, with a planet who
is its lord and a house with benefics. The last will be the most powerful among
the houses named above. The first without a planet will be the weakest. The
potentialities of planets and the houses have been very elaborately explained in
the earlier Sutras. These principles may also be learnt from the general study of
Astrology. Take Mesha without any planet, with Sani, with Ravi, with Chandra
with Guru, with Sukra and with Kuja, Rahu or Ketu. Its potentialities vary with
the presence or absence of these planets and other aspects and conjunctions it
has.

End of First Pada of Second Adhyaya
ADHYAYA 2-PADA 2
SU. l.-Ravisukrayoh praneejanakaha. Out of Venus and the Sun, the stronger
will become the maraka for father.
NOTES In the previous section Jaimini has explained about the M araka Dasafor
a person, when he would die, and which Dasa and Amsa Dasa would kill him. I
must confess here in spite of the elaborate explanations offered for the fixing of
the period of death, the system seems to be complicated and cannot easily be
grasped by the ordinary students. Even intelligent students will have to pour
long hours, and much devotion to understand these complicated principles and
fix correctly the time of death. For determining the terms of longevity, the other
systems are no doubt hard and laborious, but it may be, they are simpler than the
one illustrated by the Maharishi in his inimitable sutras, which cannot easily be
deciphered by common men. In thissection rules are given to find outthedeaths
of father, mother and other important relations.
A man's comforts and peace of mind and happiness in the world depend greatly
upon his relations, his friends and his servants. When these are ini mi cable, the
man certainly becomes, miserable. Ravi and Sukra represent father in a
horoscope. The stronger of the two will cause the death of father, in general
astrology Ravi and Chandra represent father and mother respectively.
Varahamihira says Divarkasukrau pitrumatrusamgnitou sanaischarayndu
nisftadwiparyayat. For persons born during the day, Ravi and Sukra represent
father and mother respectively. For those who are born during nights Chandra,
and Sani denote father and mother respectively.
SU. 2. -Chandraarayorjanee. The stronger of the two planets Chandra and Kuja
will kill the mother.

SU. 3.-Apranyapi papadrishtah. Among the four planets Ravi, Sukra, Chandra
and Kuja whoever is weak and possesses evil aspects will cause the death of
father and mother.
NOTES Prany means strength. A prany denotes want of strength, viz., weakness.
SU. 4.-Pranini shubhadrishte tatchule nidha nam matapitroh. If, among the
planets named above Ravi, Sukra, Chandra and Kuja, whoever has got beneficial
aspects, thedeath of father and mother must be predicted in theShoola Dasa-lst.
5th or 9th Rasi Dasa from the powerful planet.
SU. 5and 6. (5) Tadbhavesespashtabale. (6) Thatchuila ityanye. If the lord of the
8th from the lords of father and mother is powerful, then the period of the Shoola
Rasi s from him will inflict death on the father and the mother. -
NOTES This opinion is held by some writers. Two planets for father and two for
mother have been named, whoever is stronger out of these two will have the
death arranged in their Shoola Dasas.
SU . 7.--Ayushi chanyat. As deaths have to be predicted for father and mother by
their Karakas, similarly events have to be predicted for others from thei r Karakas
and the Shoola Dasas from them.
NOTES This means for all events in life there are Rasis and Karakas. Rules
governing the above for mother and father will also apply similarly for other
events.
SU. 8.-Arkagnayogetadasrithe kriyelagna. meshadasayam piturityeke: If the
12th house from Lagna falls in any one of these three signs, viz., M ithuna, Simha
or Kanya and has the conjunction of Ravi and Budha, death happens in the Dasa
of the 5th from it.
NOTES Kriya 12, Ka 2, Ya 1=21, inverted it denotes 12. Mesha means 5th, Ma 5.
Sha 6=56, reversed it gives 65 divided by 12, we have remainder 5, and fifth
house is meant by Mesha. Mesha in ordinary language means Aries. Butin
Jaimini it has to be interpreted by Ka, Ta, Pa, Ya sutra.
SU. 9.- yyarkapapamatradrish tayoht pitroh pragdwadasabdat. Whether the
lords of father and mother are powerful or powerless, if they have the aspects of
evil planets other than the Sun, thedeath of father and mother may be predicted
before the 12th year of a person's age.
SU. 10-Gurusule kalatrasya. The Dasas of 1st, 5th or 9th Rasis from the position
of Guru will cause the death of his wife.

NOTES He names three Dasas called Shoolas. The worst among them will kill
the wife.
SU. 11- Thattatchooletesham. Death will happen to children, uncles, etc., in the
Dasas of 1st, 5th and 9th Rasis from the Karakas who govern those events.
N OTES Take the Putrakaraka and predict death to children intheShoola Dasas
from him. Takethe Matulakaraka. TheShoola Dasas from him will kill uncles,
etc.
SU. 12.-Karmani papayutadrishtedushtam maranam. If the 3rd from Lagnaor
Karaka has the aspect or conjunction of evil planets, death will be painful and
troublesome.
NOTES Death is a peculiar phenomenon about which people have various
conceptions. Some dread it, some welcome it, and others are quite indifferent.
SU. 13. - Subham subhadrishtiyute. If the 3rd from Lagna or Karaka has
beneficial aspects or conjunctions, death will be easy from slight complaints.
NOTES Some have prolonged and most painful complaints before death, some
have ordinary complaints and others have very easy deaths.
SU. 14.-M isre misram. If the 3rd from Lagnaor Karaka has mixed aspects and
conjunctions, death will be neither very difficult nor very easy.
SU. 15.-Adityena rajamoolath. If the 3rd from Lagna or the Karaka is connected
with Ravi, death comes to the person through the kingly or Government
displeasure. -
NOTES He may be hanged, confined, beheaded or executed, thrown into
abysses from tops of forts or mountai ns - or shot at the cannon's mouth.
SU. 16.-Ghandrena yakshmanah. If Chandra occupies or aspects the 3rd from
Lagna or Karaka, the person will diethrough consumption or Tuberculosis.
NOTES Yakshma means consumption. It is no doubt a nasty disease, but with
some it takes years to bring their ruin, with others it is quick and active.
SU. 17.-Kujena.vranasastragnidahadyaihi. If Mars occupies or aspects the 3rd
from Lagna or Karaka, the person dies by wounds, injuries, fire and weapons.
NOTES Karaka in all these Sutras refer to Atmakaraks. Find out the 3rd house
from Lagna or Atmakaraka Lagna, whichever of these two is stronger, predict

the results from it, by the 3rd house-and the planet who is there. If Kuja is found
there, by woundsand injuries, by weapons, by fire and by burning, hewill meet
death. Kuja is called Angaraka or one who robs and injures the bodily organs or
Angas, Lohitanga or bloody planet, Ara or onewho injures and burns the limbs.
Bloody diseases and blood corruption lead to many painful complaints.
SU. 18.-Sanina vatarogat. If Sani isaspecting or combining with the 3rd from
Lagna or Karaka, death comes through windy complaints.
NOTES ' Ayurveda or Indian Medical Science mentions three Dhatus or
characteristics for all physical constitution, viz. Vata or wind, Pitta or bileand
Sleshma or phlegm. No disease comes when these are working in their proper
proportions. But when any one of them isexcited beyond its normal quantity, ill-
-health follows in various complications and death will result when any one or
more of them are roused and proceed to work out of the normal conditions. All
diseases in the Indian medicine are attribute to the excess or want of these in
proportions.
SU. 19. Mundamandibhyam vishasarpaja lodbandhanadibhihi. If the 3rd from
Lagna or Karaka is occupied by Sani and Gulika, the person will diefrom the
effects of poison, from snakes; from chains and shackles and from water.
NOTES ,The latter means drowning or watery diseases I ike dropsy, diabetes, etc.
SU. 20:-Kethtina vishucheejalarogadyaihi. If the 3rd from Lagna or Karaka is
occupied or aspected by Ketu, the person dies from contagious, watery and
epidemic complaints.
NOTES Vishuchi is a comprehensive term and includes various contagious and:
epidemic complaints such as small-pox, cholera, plague, influenza, watery
diseases or dropsy, diabetes diarrhoea, etc. Here great margin and latitude are
given to the student to use his brain, practical knowledge and the instructions he
get from his Gurus. No principles of sciences can be explained without sutras.
These sutras are the pleasures of the learned and the pains of the ignorant. In
Sanskrit adi is used often because all the events, which a principle governs or
comprehends, cannot be explained, and if such an attempt is ever made, it would
fill volumes after volumes and there would be no end to writing. A direction has
to be shown to the intelligent student and they should follow the same with
diligence and sometimes achieve better results than the original principle
intended or conceived. Brain power has no limit. It is able to grasp, when
properly developed and directed, the smallest and the largest objects.
SU. 21.-Chandramandibhyam poogamandannakabaladibh ih kshan ikam. If the
3rd from Lagna or Karaka has the con. junction of Chandra and Gulika, death

will result immediately from eating hard meals, food end other indigestible
articles.
SU. 22.-Gunina sopharuchivimanadyaihi. If the 3rd from Lagna or Karakais
combined by Guru, the death will be caused by dropsy, disgust for food,
melancholy and other complaints.
NOTES Dropsy and swellings of the body may be caused by various causes. The
bites of insects are often causes for swellings of parts of body and through such
swellings death may occur.
SU. 23. - Sukrena mehat. If the 3rd isaspected or joined by Sukrafrom Lagna or
Karaka, death will resultfrom venereal complaints.
NOTES In the flush of passions, people commit all sorts ol sexual excesses and
bring in their train a series of complicated and horrible diseases, some of which
are loathsome, repulsive, horrible and excruciating. In painful tortures, the
venereal complaints take a prominent rank and punish the offenders with very
serious troubles and pains.
SU. 24. -Misrem israt. If the 3rd from Lagna or Karaka has the conjunction or
aspect of many planets, then the death will come from various diseases.
NOTES Sometimes diseases are sharp and pronounced, but often they are
complicated and throw thedoctorson their wit's ends. The noses of the medical
men will have to be expanded before they correctly diagnose them.
SU. 25.-C hand rad rugyogannischayena. It Chandra aspects or joins the 3rd from
Lagna or Karaka along with other planets, death is certain to happen from the
causes named in the previous sutras.
NOTES In all deaths, Sani and Chandra must havea hand. Death means the
disruption of mind from the body and mind is represented by Chandra. Vedas
say Chandramamanasojatah. If there are many evil planets in the 3rd, then death
happens under very painful circumstances. - But when there are many benefics
in the 3rd, death will happen after slight complaints or under easy surroundings.
SU. 26. -Subhaihi subhadese. If the 3rd from Lagna or Karaka has.; beneficial
aspects or conjunctions, death happens in good or holy places.
NOTES For various reasons, too numerousto bediscussed in short NOTES like
these, people specially religiously inclined, covet death in holy places or happy
surroundings. This is human aspiration.

SU. 27.-Papaih keekate. If the 3rd from Lagna or Karaka has evil aspects or
conjunctions, death will happen- in vicious or sinful countries and places.
NOTES The commentators have interpreted Keekata Desa as Magadha and
other sinful countries. When benefics are in the 3rd, death happens in holy
places, like Kasi, Tirupathi or other places held holy by the followers of different
religions. Mohamedans hold Mecca and Medina as holy. The Christians consider
Jerusalem as holy. The Buddhists hold Gaya as holy. The H indus have many
places declared as holy like Kasi, Rameswaram, Jagannath, Haridwara,
Tirupathi, etc. When evil planets are in the 3rd, death happens in vicious or
sinful places. There are some places which are full of vices and sinful deeds.
Death in such places will be considered as a great misfortune. Say a man dies,
near a cess pool, in night soil, in gambling or whoring dens, or in dirty wells or
dreary forests.
Families, communities, religious sects, villages, towns, cities, countries and
nations have ebbs and flows in their fortunes, and also in their morals and
spiritualities. Sodom and Gamora weredestroyed on account of their abominable
vices. We have also many examples of destruction of these by excesses in sins
and vices. It will be a consolation to take birth in a virtuous place and in the
midst of good and pious people. It will certainly bea misfortune to be born in
dirty and sinful surroundings. To die in an agreeable place and have the
ceremonies performed as per their religious principles will bea pleasure. To die
in dirty and sinful places and be neglected after death or the body exposed to
wild animals and vultures, will be a real misfortune which every man tries to
avoid.
SU. 28.-Gurusukrabhyam gnanapurvakam. If the 3rd from Lagna or Karaka has
the conjunction or aspect of Guru and Sukra, the person dies with consciousness
unimpaired.
NOTES . The word used isGnana. It may also mean that the person will die with
the full thoughts of Para Brahma in his mind.
SU. 29.-A nyai ranyatha. If the 3rd from Lagna or Karaka isaspected or joined by
other planets, unconsciousness prevails at death.
NOTES .There are some miserable people who remain unconscious before death
for weeks and months together. They will have no holy thoughts in their heads.

SU. 30. -Lepantikhaparmadhyesanirahuketubhihi pitrorna samskartha. If Sani
and Rahu or Sani and Ketu are in conjunction between the 1st and 12 houses, the
person will not perform the obsequies of his parents.
NOTES Lepa 1, Khapa -12, La denotes 3, Pa shows 1- 31 reversed 13, divided by
12 we get 1, and therefore denotes the Lagna or 1st house. Kha 2, Pa 1=21,
reversed we get 12. The performance of death ceremonies for parents is held as a
sacred duty. If a person does not do it hewill be called an ungrateful wretch and
generally communities outcast him.
SU. 31.-Lepvdipurvardhe janakadyaparardhe. If Rahu and Sani are found in
conjunction in the first 6 houses from Lagna, thedeath ceremonies for the mother
will not be performed. If they are found in the next 6 houses, viz., from 7th to
12th houses the ceremonies for the father will not be performed.
NOTES Sani and Rahu or Sani and Ketu are meant here. Their conjunction is
necessary here in the houses indicated above.
SU. 32.-Subhadrigyoganna. If Sani and Rahu or Sani and Ketu have beneficial
aspects or conjunctions these evil results should not be predicted.
NOTES It means the person performs the death ceremonies properly to his
parents.
End of Second Pad a of the Second Adhyaya
ADHYAYA 2-PADA3
SU. 1- yishame tadadirnavamamsah. If the birth falls in an odd sign, the
N avamsa Dasas commence from it.
NOTES Each Rasi Dasa contai ns 9 A msas or Navamsasand each Rasi Dasa
counts 9 years. Hence these Dasas are called N avamsa Dasas. Mesha, Mithuna,
Simha,Thula, etc., are odd signs. 2.-Anya tha darsadihi. In the even signs the
N avamsa Dasas commence from theAbhimukha Rasis.

NOTES The commentators explain thus : If a movable sign is Lagna, then the 8th
Rasi from Lagna becomes the commence, ment Dasa. If Lagna falls in a fixed sign
the commencing Dasa will be the 6th Rasi from it. If Lagna falls in a common
sign, the Dasa commences from the 7th Rasi from it. These are cal led Abhimukha
Rasisand their explanations have been given in the earlier sutras.
SU. 3. -Sasinandapnvnkah kramadabdajz sthziraldasayam. In theSthira or fixed
sign Dasa, the movable sign Dasawill be 7. the fixed Dasawill be8yearsand the
Dasa of the common Rasi will extend to 9 years.
SU. 4 -Brahmadiresha. The Sthira Dasa commences from the Rasi occupied by
Brahma.
NOTES Brahma has already been explained in Sutra 47 of Pada lof Adhyaya 2.
SU. 5.-A tlza pranahz. Jaimini now begins to explain the strength of the planets
and theRasis. Prana, here as well as in the previous sutras, means sources of
strength the planet and the signs get.
SU. 6.-Karakayogah prathamo bihcrnclrmi. That Rasi or sign becomes the
strongest, which has the conjunction of Atmakaraka.
NOTES This combination is supposed to give greater strength than even the
Shadbalas recorded in the other astrological works. This is the primary source of
strength.
SU. 7.-- Saamye bh uyasa. If other sources of strength are equal, then the
conjunction of larger number of planets gives greater strength.
SU. 8.--Thathastungadih. If these sources of strength are equal, then exaltation,
friendly houses, and Moolatrikonas give them vitality.
SU . 9.-N isargasthathah. Then the N isarga or permanent sources of strength must
be considered.
NOTES The chara or movable signs are weaker than Sthira Rasis or fixed signs.
These are weaker than the common or Dviswabhava Rasis.
SU. lO.-Thadabhaveswamin ithham.bhavah. If the Rasi has one of theKarakadi
sources of strength, then itspowerwill bethatwhich its lord possesses from the
associations of Karaka, etc.
NOTES The strength of the Rasi and the strength of its lord should betaken into
consideration.

SU. ll.-Agrayatto visesliath. According to thejaimini Sutras the planets which
gets the highest number of degrees among others will become the most
powerful.
NOTES This has been already explained in the earlier portion and the most
forward planet in a Rasi becomes the Atmakaraka and most of the results
previously named are based upon his position and the relative positions of other
Rasis and planets taken with reference to him. According to this work
Atmakaraka supersedes all other planets in power and potency.
SU. 12.-Prativesikah purushe. In the odd sign, it gets strength from the planets
who occupy the 12th and 2nd from it.
NOTES Planets in the 2nd and • 12th from themselves or from the Rasis they
occupy have special influences. The Rasi will haveKartari Yoga, as also any
planet which has on both sides evil planets. Good planets may cause this Yoga
and probably the results will be beneficial.
SU. 13.-1 thi prathamah. ' The sources of strength named in the above sutras will
be the f i rst set of inquiry into the powers of a Rasi or its lord.
SU . 14.-Swami gurugnadrigyogo dwiteeyah. The second set of strength for a Rasi
is derived by the aspect of its own lord, Jupiter or Mercury.
NOTES Now he names the second set of powers which a Rasi Can Command to
its credit. Varahamihira observes thus in his Brihat Jataka : . Horashyami
Gzlrugnya yeekshitaytita Nanyaischa yeeryolkatah. The Lagna or any Bhavava
or Rasi becomes strong when it has the aspect or conjunction of its lord, Guru or
Budha, if not it will not be powerful. This stanza of Brihat Jataka is nothing but a
slavish imitation of this sutra of Jai mini. The Maharishi Jai mini was the author of
Poorvami mamsa Sutras, Jai mini Bharata and the invaluable sutras. I am
translating. He wasthediscipleof Veda Vyasa and was, therefore contemporary
of that great Maharishi. I have proved by indisputable authority that the period
of M aha Bharata was more than 5,000 years from now.
There are four copper plate grants given by the Emperor Janamejaya the son of
Parikshit and the grandson of Abhimanyu, the son of Arjuna, the great hero in
that ruinous war and the recipient of the Bhagavadgita instructions from Lord
Krishna himself and written by Veda Vyasa. Varahamihira, as per date given by
himself in stanza 2 of his Brihat Samhita, Chapter 31, lived in the court of
Vikramaditya whose Era called Samvat N ri pasaka is prevalent all over India and
counts now as 1988. Varahamihira says that he borrowed all his ideas of
Astronomy, Astrology and Samhita from the still more older writers and the
above quoted of his stanza certainly comes from Jai mini. Any sign becomes

strong when it has the aspect or conjunction of its lord, Guru or Budha. Six
varieties arise from this. The lord aspecting or conjoining, it gives two. Similarly
for the other two planets Guru and Budha. This is the second source or item of
strength. Aspects and conjunctions are different.
SU. 15. -Swuminastruteeyah. The third set of strength for the lord will be the one
to be detailed below.
SU. 16.-Swatswaminah kantakadislzw-aparaclourbalyam. Those planets who
are in Kendras, Panaparas and Apoklimasfrom the Atmakaraka become more
and more powerless than him.
NOTES This means those who are in the. Kendras from the Atmakaraka are
powerless. Those who are in the next houses from Kendras are still more feeble
and those who occupy the next houses are worse still in power. This represents
the 3rd source of strength.
SU. 17.-Chaturthah purushe. If the lord of the Rasi falling in Purusha Rasi (odd
sign) has evil conjunctions and aspects, this will become the 4th source of
strength to the Rasi .
SU. 18.-Pitrtilabhaprathamapranyadi shooladasa niryane. Take the stronger out
of the two 1st and 7th. Then from the stronger of these two, take the Shoola
Dasas, viz., 1, 5 and. 9. Find out which of these Shoola Rasis becomes the
strongest. Then ascribe the death period to it as certain.
SU. 19. -Pitrulabhaputrapranyadiht pitult. Putra 9, Pa 1, Ra 2 =12, reversed it
means 21 divided by 12 , we have the balance 9, hence the 9th house is meant.
Take the Lagna and 7th and find out the 9th houses from them. Whichever is
stronger in these two ninth houses, take that and find out their Shoola Dasas and
prescribe death to father in the most unfavourable of these Shoola Dasas, viz,, 1,
5 and 9.
SU. 20.-Adarsadirnmatuh. Take the most powerful in 1 or 7. Takethe4th from it
and find the Shoola Dasas from it, whichever is the most powerful among the 1st,
5th or 9th predict death to the mother in that Dasa.
NOTES Darsa 4, Da 8, Ra 2 =82 reversed 28, divided by 12 we havethe balance
4 and 4th house is meant here.
SU. 21.-Karmadirbhrathujt. Take the 3rd from Lagna or the 7th whichever is
stronger, and ascribe death to brothers and sisters in the most powerful of the
Shoola Dasas from it.

SU. 22. -Matradirbjhngirteeputr<ryolt. Take the Lagna or the 7th whichever is
stronger and find the 5th from it. Sons and sisters will die in the most cruel of the
Shoola Dasas from the above 5th house.
NOTES How 5th can have any connection with sisters, I cannot guess. But the
sutra is clear and we have to take it in the sense he has given.
SU. 23.- vyayadirjaishtasya. Take the 11th from Lagna or 7th whichever is
stronger, and predict death to elder brothers in the most unfavourable Shoola
Dasafrom it.
NOTES - The 3rd represents younger brothers and sisters and the 11 th; the
elder sisters and brothers in other works on astrology.
SU . 24. -Pitruvatpitruvarge. T ake the stronger of the two Lagnas and the 7th.
Find out the 9th from it. From this take the Shoola Dasas and predict death to
paternal uncles, etc., in the evil period among them.
SU. 25.-Brahmadih purushesama dasanthah. . It the Lagna falls in a purusha or
masculine Rasi, the Dasas or periods commence from the sign occupied by the
Brahma. The extent of the Rasi Dasa is thus determined. Take the 6th from the
Dasa Rasi. Find out the number of the house the lord of it occupies and that
number will be the extent i n years of that Dasa.
NOTES Dasa 6, Da 8, Sa 7 =87 reversed it gives 78, divided by 12, the balance is
6, hence the 6th house is. indicated by this figure.
SU. 26.-Stlzanavyatllikarah. When the Janma Lagna falls in an odd sign, the
Dasas commence from the Rasi occupied by Brahma in regular order. If the'
Lagna falls in an even sign, then the Dasas commence regularly from the 7th
house from Brahma.
NOTES This means in odd signs the Dasas commence from the Rasi occupied
by Brahma, and in even signs the Dasas commence from the 7th Rasi from the
sign occupied by Brahma.
SU. 27.-Papadrigyogastungadigrahayogah. The conjunctions and aspects of
malefics are a source of strength for the Rasis. So also is added another source of
strength to (the Rasi) by planets (situated there) being in exaltation, Moolatrikona
and very friendly and friendly houses.
NOTES Jaimini now gives the fourth source of strength to the Rasis. The
conjunctions and aspects of evil planets are a source of strength to the Rasis. The
states of such planets which have aspects and conjunctions in the Rasis will also
be sources of strength, such state are exaltations, debilitations, friendly and

unfriendly houses, Moolatrikonas. Benefics influence the Rasis by aspects and
conjunctions when they are in exaltations and other favourable positions
otherwise they do not exercise much influence, such is the opinion of the
commentators. This is fourth source of strength.
SU. 28.-Panchame padu kramat prakpratynktvam. If the 9th from Lagna
happens to be incorporated in an odd sign, take the Rasi Dasas in the regular
order. If it happens to be i ncorporated in an even sign, take the Rasi Dasas in the
inverse order or backwards. The commencement of the Dasa should be from the
Lagna. Ketu in these cases is considered as a benefic.
End of Third Pada of Second Adhyaya
J A I MINI SUTRAS
Part 4
ADHYAYA 2 -PADA 4
SU. l.-DWiteeyam bhavaphalam charanavamse. In the Navamsa Dasa of Chara
Rasi the significations of the second house must be explained in the manner
given in Sutra 14 of the previous section.
NOTES All Bhavas get strength when they are aspected or conjoined by their
lords, by Guru and by Budha.
SU. 2.~Dasasrayo dwaram. The Rasi which commences the Dasa or period is
called theDwara Rasi or the door for the subsequent Rasi Dasas.
NOTESThis Dasa. iscalled also Paka Rasi.
SU. 3.-Thathastavatitham bahyam. Count as many signs from Dwara Rasi as
Dwara Rasi is removed from Lagna. This will betheBhoga Rasi.
NOTES He gives here the definition of what is called Bhoga Rasi. The
commencement of Dasas is given and their, differences in Chara, Sthira and
Dviswabhava Rasis have been shown. The commencing Dasa falls in some sign
from Lagna. Then count from that Rasi to a similar number and this will be the

Bahya Dasa or Bhoga Dasa. Suppose the commencing Dasa falls in Meshafor a
person whose Lagna is Dhanus. Then it will be 5th from it. Mesha Dasa becomes
the Paka or Dwara Dasa and the 5th from it, viz., Si mha becomes the Bahya or
Bhoga Dasa.
Some commentators explain thus : If Mesha begins as the Dasa of the first sign,
then counting one from it, the Bhoga Dasa or the second begins in Mesha alone.
Then the second Dasa begins in Vrishabha which will be cal led Paka Dasa, and
the second from it M ithuna becomes Bhoga Dasa. The third Dasa commences in
M ithuna and it becomes Paka Dasa. The third from it. viz., Si mha becomes the
Bhoga Dasa, Kataka becomes the 4th Dasa and becomes Paka; whilethe4th from
it, viz., Thula becomes Bhoga Dasa. In this way Dasas must be calculated till the
last Dasa, which ends the man's existence and kills him. I think I havemadethe
meaning very clear and simple.
SU. 4.- pupe bandharogadi: If evil planets are found in the Paka and Bhoga
signs, the person will suffer from imprisonment Chains, diseases and other
mental and physical troubles.
SU. 5.-Swarksheasya thasminnopajeevasya. Iftheevil planets in the two Rasis
happen to be in their own houses or are very close to Guru, then the evil results
foretold in Sutra 4 will not happen.
SU. 6.-Bhagrahayogoktam sarvamasmin. The results in these Dasas will have to
be foretold, by the strength of the planets and by the sources of strength and
weakness of the Paka and Bhoga Rasis.
NOTES These hints are to betaken not only here but throughout the whole
work. Suppose there are evil planets in debilitation or without nearness to Guru.
l.Thesetwo Rasis have exalted evil planets. .2. There are beneficial planetswith
malefics. 3. There are pure benefics. 4. Benefics in exaltation. 5. Benefics in
debilitation. In all such cases the resultswill certainly be and must be different.
The strength of the Rasis must also be carefully considered. Then again, in the
Rasi extending over 30 degrees the strength and weakness of the Rasi will not be
uniform. There is a radical difference between the general astrologers and
Jaimini Maharishi.
All the astrological works have their foundations laid in the writings of the
Maharishis. They alone were able to see the differences in planetary globes, their
influences on each other and the wonderful ways by which they indicated the
results of the karma to the credit of the person at the time of his birth. Jaimini
gives great prominence to the planet who has advanced the largest number of
degrees in a Rasi and calls him Atmakaraka. TheNavamsa he occupies plays a
prominent place in the delineation of characteristics and results: But in the

Deepradi Avasthas, the planet who is in the last Navamsa of a Rasi gets Peeda
Avastha or the state of humiliation. No great prominence is attached to him and
on the other hand he becomes weak and powerless. Difference of opinion among
the various authors are found in large numbers. Take medicine, philosophy,
religion, war, law, speculation and even the so-called most exact science,
mathematics. Here one plus one becomes two and one and one both minus
becomes two.
We give a separate value for plus and minus. To reach a place there may be one
thousand and one ways. The differences in all these will have to be carefully
considered and reconciled. Approaching from different places and directions and
experiments and experiences, two or more persons may reach the same
destination or results. A simple illustration will convince us about the truth of
these observations. A, B and C are each worth one lakh of rupees. By whatever
means they have acquired that wealth, the result is the same, and the money
power of one lakh lies with each of them. Take half a dozen warriors of exactly
equal physical and mental capacities. Each may have taken different food, born
in different conditions, and brought up under different circumstances but the
results are one and the same. Similarly in astrological sciences. Different
Maharishis pursued different methods and found out the identical results
though those results were produced from apparently different causes. The solar,
planetary and stellar radiations are working: through the various degrees of the
zodiacal signs in mysterious ways.
SU. 7.-Pitrulabhapranithoyam. These results have to be carefully predicted from
Lagna or the 7th, whichever is the stronger of the two. For males preference
should be given to Lagna and for females the 7th should be preferred provided it
is strong.
SU. 8.- Pralhame prakprathyakt vamz. If the Dasa commences with a movable
sign or Chandra Rasi, then the order of the Rasi Dasas will be regular in a
horoscope.
SU. 9.-Diwiteeye ravitah. If the Dasa commences in the fixed sign or Sthira Rasi,
then the 6th and 7th, etc., from it will be the successive Dasas.
NOTES These are called Padakrama Dasas. Padaasweknow already means the
number of a Rasi, again counted from the Lagna or any other Bhava. Ravi 6, Ra 2,
Va 4 = 24 inverted, 42, divided by 12, we have the balance of 6, and hence the 6th,
the 6th from it and the 6th from it and so on.
SU. 10-Pruthakramenath.riteeyechatushtayadi. If the Dasa Rasi commencesin a
common sign, then the successive Rasi Dasaswill bedetermined bytheKendra,
Panapara and Apoklima Rasis from it.

SU. ll.-Swakendrasthadyah swamino navamsanam. . . Those who are in
Kendras, Pariaparas and Apoklimas from the Karaka become the lords of the
N avamsa Dasas.
NOTES H ere we have to take the planets first in Kendras according to their
strength, then those w ho are i n Panapara and I ast those w ho are i n A pokl i mas.
SU. 12.-Pitruchatushtayavaishambalastayah sthitah. - .. Those Rasis which are in
Kendras from Lagna furnish the first Dasa.
NOTES . Suppose there are many, then that ; sign which becomes strong by the
various combinations and aspects explained in the previous sutras becomes the
first Rasi Dasa. The Dasa years are 9 for each of the Rasis.
SU.: 13.- -Sa.tallabhayoravirrtate. The Karaka will be moving between : the
Lagna and the 7th.
NOTES We have to find him from Lagna or the 7th whichever is stronger, and
count backwards or forwards as the Rasi he occupies is even or odd. Then he
gives the Dasa years as are counted from Lagna or the 7th, taking the Dasa
always by the larger number he obtains. . .This is the extent of Karaka Dasa in
years. For other planets, count the number from them to the Karaka, in the
forward or backward reckoning and ascribe such number of years to the planets.
SU. 14.-Swamibalaphalani cha prugvnth. The results of all these will be
determined, as detailed in the previous sutras, by the examination of the sources
of strength and weakness to the planets, to the lords of the Dasas and to the
Rasis.
NOTES Jaimini has given various sources of strength and weakness to the
planets i n general, to the Rasis or signs and to the lords of the Dasas. H e advises
his readers to take these into careful consideration and having regard to times,
circumstances and places, predict the results, so that they may turn out correct
and to the poi nt.
SU. 15.-Sthuladarsa vaishamyasrayo mandukastrikutah. - As the Manduka or
frog jumps from place to place, the two systems of Dasas named by Jaimini in the
previous sutras, viz., Kendra, Panapara and Apoklima, and the movable, fixed
and double bodied signs, also jump from house to house and hence he cal Is them
Manduka Dasas.
NOTES , As per instructions given in the previous chapters the Dasas both for
planets and Rasis jump from Kendras to Panaparas and from the latter to

Apoklimas. Similarly they jump from Charas toSthiras and from Sthirasto
Dwiswabhavas. They also jump in Shoola Dasas.
SU. 16.-N iryanalabhadi shooladasa phale. In predicting results the 7th from the
N iryanashoola Dasa should betaken into first account.
NOTES Shoola Dasas are marked as death inflicting. Take the 7th from the most
powerful of these N iryana Rasisand begin to make predictions from it. .This
N iryanashoola is of many kinds. Rudrashoola, Maheswarashoola and
Brahmashoola.
SU. 17. - Purushesamah samanyatah. If theArambha or commencing. Dasa falls
in Purusha Rasi or masculine sign, then the subsequent Rasi Dasas will be
counted regularly and each Dasa gets 9 years only.
NOTES If the commencing Dasa falls in a feminine sign, then the subsequent
Dasas have to be counted from the 7th sign from it. In masculine horoscopes the
Arambha Dasa commences from Lagna. In feminine horoscopes commences
from the 7th.
SU. 18.-Siddha ududaye.*. Dasas counted from the constellations at birth haveto
be learned and taken from Parasara, Gargi, Vyasa and other well-known writers.
NOTES jai mini says he has not given them in his work because they can be
learnt from other works and the Dasa periods will be as they are given there. We
have 27 constellations and they haveto be counted from Krittika. Years KrittikaRavi Dasa - 6
Rohini-Chandra Dasa - 10
Mrigasira-Kuja - 7
Aridra-Rahu - 18
Punarvasu-Guru - 16
Pushyami-Sani - 19
Aslesha-Budha - 17
Makha-Ketu - 7
Pubba-Sukra- 20
Then from star Uttara repeat the same planetary Dasa with the same number of
years. These are called Udu Dasas, from Udu meaning a constellation or star.
Jaimini has made no reference before to constellations. He mentions them only in
this sutra. Thus each planet gets 3 stars, with the same number of years. H e uses
the word Siddha meaning ready from other works well known in the world.

SU. 19. -Jagattasthushorardham yognrdhe. .The extent of Yogard had asa will be
half of the two Dasas combined from theChara and Sthira Rasis.
NOTES The Yogardhadasa will have to be stronger of the two Rasis, Lagna and
the Saptama or the 7th.
SU. 20.-Sthuladarsa, vaishamyasrayametat. Yogardhadasa begins either from
Lagna or the 7th- house whichever is stronger.
NOTES The sources of strength and weakness have been clearly explained in the
previous pages. Yogardhadasa commences from the stronger of the two Lagna
and the 7th. IftheRasi which commences the Dasa be odd, then, take the
subsequent Dasas in the regular order. If it is even then count the Dasas
backwards. Sthula =Lagna or 1-Tha 7, !a 3 =73, reversed 37, divided by 12, we
get 1 or Lagna.
SU. 21.-Xujadi strikuta padakramena drigdasa. Drigdasas are formed
commend ng w ith the 9th from Lagna, accord i ng to tri konaru pa pada.
NOTES Jaimini now speaks about Drigdasa. Kuja =9, Ka 1, Ja 18, reversed 81,
divided by 12, we get 9. Take the 3 houses from t e Arambha Rasi, or
commencing Rasi, viz., 2nd, 5th and 9th from the 2nd, the 4th and the 5th and
9th from the 4th, these three sets of combi nations from the A rambha Dasa or the
commencing sign from what is technical ly called Drigdasa.
SU. 22& 23 :-Matrudharmayoh sajnantyam vipareethamoojiakutayoh.Yatha
samanyam.' Those born in even signs will havethe results as described in the
previous sutras about the Tri kona Dasa.;
NOTES Matru means 5: Dharma signifies 11. Ma5,Ta 6.= 56, reversed itwill be
65, divided by 12, we havethe remainder 5. Dha 9, Ma 5=95, reversed, weget 59,
divided by 12, we havethe balance 11; counting from 5th and 11th is considered
as samanyam or ordinary, counting from odd and even signs is called
Vyutkrama or special or peculiar. *v. • 11 SU. 24.-Pitni matru
dharmapranyadistrikone. Among theTrikonas, the Rasi Dasa commences with
the strongest among them.
NOTESTheTri konas are 1, 5 and 9.
SU. 25. - Tatra dwarabahyabhyam tpdwa t. The results which have been ascribed
to Dwarabahya Rasis should also be predicted to the Tri kona Dasas.
NOTES If the Paka and Bhoga Rasis are aspected or joined by evil planets, the
person will suffer from diseases, chains, imprisonments, etc., similar results have

to be predicted forTrikona Dasas when they haveevil aspects and conjunctions.
Carefully read my NOTES on Sutra 3 of padafour, on Paka and Bhoga Rasisand
the different views explained by the commentators. Dwara and Bahya Rasisare
Paka and Bhoga Rasis respectively.
SU. 26.-Dhasagairikatpatneekaratkarakaih phaladesah. Results must be
predicted from the Karakas or lords of events and also from the first, third,
seventh and the ninth Rasis.
NOTES About the person himself, the results must be predicted from the
Atmakaraka, from the 7th about elder and younger brothers and, sisters, virtue
and charities. These are well known principles in the other works on Astrology.
SU. 27. - Tararkamse rrmandaadyo dasesah. Dividethe birth constellation into
twelve equal parts cor responding to twelve signs and find out to which division
the time of birth corresponds. The lord of the Rasi corresponding to this: division
becomes the lord of the commend ng Dasa.
NOTES Take the constellation of the day of the birth and dividethe whole
duration of the star by 12. Find out in which division the ghatika of birth falls
from the Lagna. Then count the Dasa from that as per rules already given in the
previous sutras. The Dasas here also must be given as 9 years for each Rasi. Here
the meaning is not very clear. I understand thus : Janma Lagna falls in some Rasi
asa matter of fact. Take the whole duration of the star, and divide it by 12. Then
the birth Lagna falls in one of these 12 divisions. The lord of that Rasi becomes
the lord of the commencing Dasa. These Dasas have to be counted forwards and
backwards in odd and even signs.
The sutra may also be I nterpreted I ike this : A is born at 14 ghatis after sunrise on
the 20th of Kumbha. The balance of Kumbha Rasi at sunrise will be 1.5 ghatis. I
am only giving a rough example. Kumbha is 1.5 ghatis. Meena and Mesha run
for 8 ghatis. This makes 9.5 ghatis. Add Vrishabha 4.5 ghatis. Thus 14 ghatis will
conclude Vrishabha and the person is born in the end of Vrishabha. Say the full
extent of the star Bharani is 60 ghatis on that day after sunrise. Divided by 12, we
get for each part 5 ghatis. Janmakala ghatis fall in the 3rd division and the 3rd
Rasi from Lagna, viz., Kataka may betaken as the commencing Rasi Dasa. This is
taken with reference to Chandra and hence called Chandra Dasa. I am very
diffident about this explanation.
SU. 28 - Tasm innuchhe neecheva shreemantah. If in the example given in the
above sutra the lord of the Rasi Dasa is in exaltation or debilitation the person
becomes wealthy and influential.

SU. 29-Swamitrabhe kinchit. If in such a Lagna, its lord occupies a friendly sign
the wealth will be moderate.
SU. 30- Dugathoaparatah. If the lord of Lagna above mentioned is not as stated
previously, the person becomes poor and wretched. ,
NOTES This will be when he is debilitated or aspected by maleficsand is found
in unfriendly houses.
SU. 31.-Swavaishamyeyathaswam kramavyuthkramau. If the Karaka occupies
the odd sign, then proceed for the subsequent Dasas in the regular way, but
when he is in an even sign, then go back- wards for theRasi Dasas. .
NOTES He has repeated this idea already in several sutras and I suppose he
wants to emphasise the principal point which differs from other astrological
principles.
SU. 32.-Saumye vipareetam. If the Karaka Rasi falls in even signs, then count
backwards.
N OTES This is just opposed to the above sutra, where he refers to the planet and
here he refers to the Rasi .
SU. 33.-Thathatsanavapi veditavyamityekeacharya vadanti. SomeAcharyassay
that all the results which have been ascribed to planets and signs in the previous
sutras may also be predicted with reference to Sani and his position.
NOTES If this sutra is of Jaimini, it speaks eloquently to some facts. Previousto
Jaimini Maharishis existed and wrote works on astrology and expounded
principles, with some of which Jaimini is not in agreement. Jaimini was a
contemporary of Vedavyasa and hence he lived more than 5,000 years ago. This
proves the great antiquity of sutras and also about Indian Astrology including
astronomy and other kindred sciences. Crooked theories, ascribing to Indian
sciences centuries after A. D., may safely be lodged in the perverted brains of
their authors.
SU. 34 - Antarbhuktyamsayoretat. These details above mentioned in the various
sutras should also be ascribed to theAntardasasor sub- periods among the major
Dasas in the forward and backward countings.
SU. 35.-Shubha dasa shubhayutedhamnyuchhe If the Rasi has beneficial aspects
and conjunctions, or if its lord has similar sources of strength or is exalted, then
all the results will be beneficial.

NOTES The person will prosper in every way during the portion of such Rasisof
lords. But otherwise he will suffer.
SU . 36. — A nyathanyatha. When the above conditions are not present, the results
will be quite the contrary.
NOTES When Rasis are evil, when they have evil aspects or conjunctions, when
debilitated planets occupy the Rasis or when their lords are debilitated, the
beneficial resultswill be absent, and malicious results will trouble the person.
SU. 37.-Siddhamanyat.Jai mini says that all the principles explained inthiswork
are truth propounded in other works and therefore they hold good in all
calculations and predictions.
End of Fourth Pada of the Second Adhyaya
The End
