READABLE DATASET
================================================================================
Original file: jaimini_sutras_b_suryanarain_rao_1955.json
Dataset number: 143 of 455
Format: valid JSON
Structure: Object / structured dataset
Original size: 271,563 bytes
Top-level fields: 11
Title: Jaimini Sutras - B Suryanarain Rao 1955
Creator: —
Date: —
Description: —

CONTENT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
METADATA AND OTHER FIELDS
  • title: Jaimini Sutras - B Suryanarain Rao 1955
  • creator: —
  • date: —
  • description: —
  • subject: —
  • identifier: —
  • source_folder: Sarvartha Chintamani XML
  • total_pages: 225
  • total_words: 46999
  • text_quality:
    • ocr_word_validity_score: 0.937
    • quality_tier: good
    • note: —

FULL TEXT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
I «ft I
J AIMINISUTR AS
English Translation with Full Notes and Original Texts in
Devanagari and Transliteration
By
BANGALORE SURYANARAIN RAO
Revised and Annotated by
BANGALORE VENKATA RAMAN
Editor , The Astrological Magazine
IBH PRAKASHANA
Gandhinagar, Bangalore 560 009

JAIMINISUTRAS— English Translation with full notes and
original texts in Devanagarl and Transliteration by Bangalore
Suryanaraian Rao and revised and annotated by Dr. Bangalore Venkata Raman and published by Sri P. N. Kamat,
IBH Prakashana, Sth Main, Gandhinagar, Bangalore-560009,
Fifth Edition 1955
Printed by H. S. N. Rao, IBH Prakashana Printery, Banga-

CONTENTS
PAGES
Preliminary Observations :
Geneology of Maharisbis by Vedavyasa- --
The intellectual development of Maharishis
by Yoga — Literature in Sanskrit — Definition
of Sutra — Difficulties in Translation — Perfect
Development of Sanskrit—Maharishi Jaimini.
Adhyaya 1, Pada 1 — (Chapter 1, Part 1) 1 — 40
Meanings of Astrological terms defined—
Aspects of Planets and Zodiacal Signs —
Differences of Principles in Astrology and
their reconciliation. — Necessity for a study
of general and special principles — Pneumonics in Sanskrit Mathematics — Bad influences
and their counteraction — Atmakaraka or
Lord of Soul, Kalatrakaraka or Lord of
wife, Naisargikakaraka or Permanent Lord —
Lordships for Rahu and Kethu — Results of
Atmakaraka, Amatyakaraka or Lord of
minister, Bhratrukaraka or Lord of brother,
Matrukaraka or Lord of mother, Putrakaraka or Lord of son, Gnatikaraka or Lord
of cousins and Darakaraka or Lord of wife
— Signification of Planets, Rasi, Rasi Dasas
or Periods of Signs and their results — Arudha
or Pada Lagna, Varnada Lagna, Ghatika
Lagna, Bhava Lagna, Chandra Lagna, Hora
Lagna and their uses.

Adhyaya 1, Pada 2 — (Chapter 1, Part 2) 41 — 87
Atmakaraka in different Navamsas — Planets
with Atmakaraka — Gulikakala or Time of the
Son of Saturn — Lordships of Planets over
different times in a day — Hora Drekkana,
Navamsa, Dwadasamsa and the Thrimsamsa
explained as per Varahamihira — Planets aspecting Atmakaraka Navamsa in Gulikakala
—Effects of Planets in various houses from
Karakamsas and their significations — Kemadrunut Yoga.
Adhyaya I, Pada 3 — (Chapter 1, Part 3) 87 -106
Planets in various houses from Pada Lagna
and their results — Uchcha — Graha Samanya
- Combinations for Royalty and Poverty.
Adhyaya I, Pada 4 — (Chapter 1, Part 4) 106- -126
Upapada Lagna and its results — Combinations for various diseases — Children —
Death of brothers, sisters — Dumbness, stammering, complexion, religious tendencies,
adultery, leadership in community — 33 crores
of Dcvatas — Nigraha and Anugraha forms —
Mahamantras or good Vedic Secrets — Kshudra Mantras or evil incantation.
Adhyaya 2, Pada 1 — (Chapter 2, Part 1) 126 — 156
Determination of Longevity — Combinations
for Long, Middle and Short lives — Reconciliation of different systems of Longevity —
Karakayogas -Kakshya, Hrasa or reduction

or degradation — Kakshya Vriddhi or increase
— Dwara Rasi, Dwarabahya Rasi and Pakabhoga Rasis explained — Increase of Life and
averting death — Viparitas or Perverts in
meaning — Karakayogas and Kartariyogas
detailed— Three kinds of Longevities— Alpayu,
Madhyayu and Purnayu — Explanation and
results of Rudra, Maheswara and Brahma
Rasis — Different kinds of Yogas.
Adhyaya 2, Pada 2 — (Chapter 2, Part 2) 156- 169
Planets causing Death of Mother and Father
in Shook Dasas — Combinations for deaths
due to the displeasure of Governments —
Different kinds of diseases — Bites of insects
and venereal complaints.
Adhyaya 2, Pada 3 — (Chapter 2, Part 3) 170 — 180
Sthira Dasas, Navamsa Dasas and Prana
Dasas detailed — Combinations for deaths of
uncles, cousins and other relations in Shoola
Dasas — Explanation of Shoola Dasas or
periods.
Adhyaya 2 , Pada 4— (Chapter 2, Part 4) 180 — 197
Bhoga Rasis, Bhoga Dasas and Paka Dasas
— Combinations for Imprisonments and
Deaths in Purusha and Stri Rasis — Yogardha
Dasa, Drigdasa and Trikona Dasa.
A short sketch of Prof. B. Suryanarain Rao’s
life.

FOREWORD
By Bangalore Venkata Raman
Editor. The Astrological Magazine
I have the pleasure to present herewith the fifth and
revised edition of the English Translation of the first two
Adhyayas of JAIMIN1SUTRAS by my revered grandfather
late Professor B. Suryanarain Rao.
Jaimini is held in very great esteem throughout India
not only for his philosophical aphorisms but for his
astrological writings also.
JA1MIN1SUTRAS as presented in these pages deals
with a system of astrology that has no parallel in the
existing methods. The Sutras are hard nuts to crack and
Professor Rao has tried his utmost to explain the aphorisms as clearly and convincingly as possible.
I have not meddled with either the translation or the
notes as given by Prof. Rao for fear of affecting the
sense. I have however added my own remarks by way
of annotations wherever 1 felt that an aphorism or
aphorisms required further elucidation.
Professor Rao is the only scholar in India to have
attempted an English Translation of Jaimini. Therefore
the cultured public should feel grateful to him for having
enabled them to have access to a system of astrological
literature which is unique in its own way. My own
publication STUDIES in JAIMINI ASTROLOGY deals with
the Jaimini system in an exhaustive manner with
examples.
The Translation herewith presented has been thoroughly revised by me and it is hoped readers will be
highly benefited by a careful study of his book.
B. V. RAMAN

PREFACE
The best Indian sciences, religion, philosophy, dramas,
literature, politics . and epics are the productions of the
Maharishis. These aie intellectual giants like the Himalayan
Mountains and all others in the world are pigmies before
them. The why of this may not be known to us, but the facts
are there. Works, therefore, from the brains of the
Maharishis stand unrivalled and they are colossal in nature.
Maharishi Jaimini is a great intellect and his sutras are very
valuable. I make no apology to introduce them to the public
in the simplest, English garb. The sutras will and have to
speak for themselves. They are more than five thousand years
old and valuable to command attention and respect from all
classes of readers, Indian or Foreign. Those which have
stood brilliantly for 5 or 10 thousand years without losing
their brilliancy are real intellectual gems which everybody
should covet to possess. These five thousand years, instead of
diminishing their lustre, have added further brilliancy to the
sutras. The commentators have done invaluable service and
all their extensive interpretations and clear arguments
cannot be incorporated or embodied in short notes of mine.
If they are to be assimilated into the real explanations of
the sutras, the bulk of the present volume would increase by
ten-fold and cause tremendous discouragement to the students
who would like to pursue the easiest way, and learn something of Jaimini sutras, which have been sealed letters to the
English knowing public. Even the great Sanskrit scholars

find the sutras hard nuts to crack and often they give them
up for want of patience, devotion and technical difficulties
in the way. I have been only a student in Astrology and
kindred sciences, although I have had 55 years of study and
practice. Astrology is a grand ocean, containing four
hundred thousand stanzas or verses, and requires certainly
centuries for its grasp and comprehension. After all our
brains can take in only a few stanzas from the extensive
literature, but for brilliant intellects, a knowledge of the
few fundamental principles will enable them to grasp the
sciences and make good progress in the course of a few
years 1 have done my best in this English Translation, and
1 leave the readers to judge of my honest labours in
propounding sutraic principles. Within my humble knowledge none of our learned scholars seem to have taken the
trouble, or made attempts to translate these aphorisms of
Maharishi Jaimini and I am proud to say 1 am the first in
the field of translation to have undertaken this difficult task.
Constructive criticisms are always welcome and I shall be
grateful to them who offer such observations. Destructive
criticisms must be treated with supreme contempt. One who
is not an adept in a subject will be a sorry critic. He can be
left alone.
B. SURYANARAIN RAO.

INTRODUCTION
An Introduction to the valuable JAIMINISUTRAS will be an
uncalled for luxury- The profundity and brevity of these
sutras have called forth the highest admiration from all
readers during the last fifty centuries. My pen is too
humble to do them justice or bring their majesty before the
public in that dignified form in which the original sutras
stand in Sanskrit. They eloquently speak for their intrinsic
value. To frame short sutras with comprehensive meanings
is not given to ordinary mortals. Maharishis of Aryavartha
alone have framed sutras. None else could do them. No one
has done them in the world. It requires not only the
command over the Sanskrit language but it also requires
consummate scholarship in the Science of Astrology and
kindred subject to frame sutras. The readers should parti*
cularly remember that Jyothisha in Sanskrit means light and
the sense which sees and feels the light. It is the clear
vision of the Vedas. Of the Vedic shadangas this is the most
important. Without the help of Jyotisha, Vedas would be
blind. We want clear Light over all our events, past,
present, and the most desirable future. What other sciences
can pretend or have pretended to do this service for mankind?
From where and from what previous states of existence
have we come ? What will be our success and failures in the
present state and where are we going to live after the separation of Jeeva from the Deha or the Life from the physical
structure? What are our thoughts, deeds and aspirations in

this life, and how far do we succeed in our aims and in what
manner can we do so? Do the planets influence us and are
we directed under their command ? If not, what have they to
do with us? How do they exercise their influences over us?
and how can we correctly calculate them and guide our
destinies in their light, averting evils and enhancing good.
Who are the most famous writers on Astrology, and what
are their pretentions? Are there any other sciences which
can help us in these directions?
All these and many more pertinent and relevant questions
are asked, both by believers and non-believers of this science.
Such questions are no doubt very important and are to the
point. I am proud to say that almost all such relevant or
irrelevant questions on Astrology and remedies prescribed
by Astrology and Dharmasastras, have been clearly and
convincingly answered by me in my Introduction to the Study
of Astrology in the Light of Modern Sciences. The Introduction
extends over 78 pages of closely printed matter and I must
refer my readers to thai fui fuller details and information.
JAIMINISUTRAS have not been translated into English by anybody in India, so far as my knowledge goes. Neither is it
so very easy to translate sutras into proper English. The
meaning of a small sutra, sometimes may be developed into
stout printed volume. English language is incapable of
framing sutras and much less for their being translated into
concise and short sentences. In its present form and construction the English language is quite unfit for framing
sutras. These sutras are profound, scholarly and unique in
their composition and defy all competition. They comprehend
a vast amount of knowledge in the shortest forms possible and
have been framed graciously by Maharishi Jaimini, for the

benefit of the world. He openly says so. In the end of these
sutras the author remarks that all that he has written is
quite true, as these truths have been propounded by the still
earlier Maharishis, Pitamaha or Brahma, Vyasa, Parasara,
Vasishta, Garga, Bhrigu, Surya, Chandra, Brihaspathi, Sukra,
Marichi, Palaha, Pulisa, Maya and other eminent scientists.
The treatment of the different Bhavas, Rasis and Planets
will be found a little confusing in the beginning but with some
patience, diligence and practice the peculiarities of his system
readily yield themselves to our comprehension and enable us
to read the full horoscopes in the light in which Jaimini has
explained them for our benefit. He gives various Lagnas,
Hora Lagna, Ghatika Lagna, Upapada Lagna, Varnada
Lagna and so forth. His Dasas are mostly founded on Rasis
and Navamsas. The calculations backwards and forwards for
odd and even signs trouble the reader to some extent. The
extent of Dasas differs from the ordinary conceptions as
explained by the general principles of Astrology. Constellations have not been given prominence. Brahma, Rudra and
Maheswara Dasas are peculiar in these sutras. While the
language is graceful, the interpretations are taxing, difficult
and stiff. A vast amount of general knowledge is needed for
the proper interpretations and comprehension of these sutras.
It is asserted by some that JAIMINISUTRAS extend over 8
Adhyayas. I have seen only four and have not come across the
rest. I am on the look out for them and by chance I may have
the good-luck to discover them in some old palace or private
libraries. * I shall translate the other two Adhyayas at an early
*Prof. B Suryanarain Rao tried his utmost to secure the other two
chapters but could not succeed. However I have been able to secure the
HI and IV Adhvayas information from which has been incorporated in my
book Studies in Jaimini Astrology : An Eoglish translation of the III and
IV Adhyayas has been made by S. K. Kar.

XU
date. The two Adhyayas, I have now translated, are complete
in themselves and will be found to be of the highest value to
the students in astrology. The masterly way in which the
Maharishi has explained the Astrological principles, will
surely make the students masters in this line.
The sutras, being short and sweet, can easily be committed
to memory and this is the greatest advantage Sanskrit
sutras possess over other languages in the world. I have
quoted the original sutras in the transliteration system so
that those who know Sanskrit may easily follow the sutras
and my translation and notes, and correct any mistakes,
which may have crept into my translations either through
ignorance or oversight. I have given the original Sanskrit
words and have explained them in easy English as I have
understood them. Sanskrit alone commands sutras. We
have Brahmasutras or Uttara Mimamsa by Vyasa, Jaiminisutras or Poorva Mimamsa, Grihyasutras, Vyakaranasutras,
and other sutras on various subjects by Maharishis. Such
wonderful display of sutras is quite peculiar to Sanskrit
and I have not heard of the existence of such a system of
sutras in any other language in the world.
Those who are better scholars than myself in Astrology,
Astronomy, Sanskrit and English may point out my inaccuracies, correct them, for the benefit of the world and thus
earn not only my gratitude but also of the cultured humanity in general. Since this translation is the first of its kind
in the field on Jairainisutras, I recommend this work to all
lovers in Astrology. Those who do not believe in Astrology,
will do well to read the translation and apply the principles
to their own horoscopes and see how beautifully the results
agree with the positions of planets. Duty to science and

literature requires every sensible man, who has the good of
humanity at heart, not to neglect any branch of knowledge,
without fair and reasonable trials. We have no reason to
reject any science, without proper study and careful application. There are some persons who say ‘7 don't believe in
this or that science”. Reflection shows they are unwise and
entirely wrong. In the first place they do not represent the
sum total of all knowledge in the world. The importance
attached to their Ego, by themselves, is unjustifiable and
untenable. I challenge, if there is any man in this world
who knows all branches of knowledge or even the A B C of
them. Some scientists are more narrow-minded and bigoted
than the declared bigots of religion or social customs.
When the best and the most intellectual Maharishis of India
have not only believed in Astrology, but, have also written
four hundred thousand stanzas on Astrology, will it be unreasonable to ask the readers to study the science, put it into
practice and then say, what they think about it. To the
sceptics, only one word of advice by me. Learn the elementary principles, take your horoscopes and of those who are
dear and near to you. Read them in the light of these sutras
and then say honestly what you think of this science. A
handful of experience is worth ten cartloads of theories. If
I am wrong correct me in the light of experience. If you are
wrong correct yourself like a noble soul. Can I be fairer
than this in my advice ?
B. SURYANARAIN RAO.

PRELIMINARY OBSERVATIONS
The name of Maharishi Jaimini is held in high esteem and
reverence among the Sanskrit writers of eminence and probably
he is held only next to Maharishi Vedavyasa. Jaimini is the
disciple of Vyasa, and besides being a writer of various
treatises and the Epic Jaimini Bharata, he is the famous
author of Poorva Mimamsa Sastra, and these able aphorisms
in Astrology called after his name as the JAIMINISUTRAS. The
Maharishis, so far as their intellectual development was
concerned, stood altogether on a unique pedestal unapproached
by any other authors in the world. They expanded their
intellects not by ordinary study, patient labour and devotion
but by the mystic processes of Yoga. Thus expanding their
mental vision by a peculiar process still unknown to the
greatest scholars of the present day, they were able to grasp
the causes and effects of the celestial and terrestrial phenomena with the greatest ease and on a scale of understanding
and comprehension of facts at which the present generations
stand surprised and wonderstruck. Take Maharishi Vedavyasa the great grandson of Vasishta, the grandson of Sakti,
the son of Parasara and the father of Maharishi Shuka who
is held in the highest esteem by the great Rishis themselves
for his piety, Brahmagnana, and unalloyed purity of life.
Vysa has written 18 Puranas including the Mahabharata,
enclosing the immortal Bhagavadgita, great Siddhanta after
his name on Astronomy, several works on Astrology and the
most profound Brahmasutras, called Uttara-Mimamsa. This
colossal collection of literature relating to all branches of
human knowledge stands as a monument to the grandeur of
his glorious intellect and it will be a real surprise to the cultured public, if any other name in the world could be
compared to this intellectual giant. In addition to all these
works, he was able to systematise and put in proper order the

Four Vedas and thus earn the most envious title of Vedavyasa
or one who put the Vedas in their present form and sequence.
Jaimini was a worthy disciple of Vedavyasa and has bequeathed to humanity, many valuable works among which
stand foremost Jaimini Bharata, Poorva-M imamsa and the
Jaiminisutras on Astrology. In the various branches of the
Sanskrit Sciences the sutras area wonder of Sanskrit literature.
We do not know if there is any other language in this world
which has anything like the sutras. A sutra may thus be
defined as the shortest in form with the largest meaning possible.
Jaiminisutras are said to have been composed in eight
chapters. Though brief, they contain a large quantity of
meaning. Many technicalities are used throughout these
sutras and I will try to explain them as best as I could. In
translations from a rich and comprehensive language to a
poor and ill-equipped tongue, it is extremely difficult to bring
out the force, the dignity, the sweetness, the majesty and the
flow of the original language. The translators, however learned
they may be and however brilliant their intelligence may be,
have to remember the great gulf which separates their intelligence with that of the great Maharishi who is their original
author. At best the translator can only explain and illustrate what he understands and conceives to be the meaning of
the original author. It may be the correct interpretation of
the author or what may have been understood to be the
meaning by the translator. In the case of the works of the
Maharishis, I may not be very wrong if 1 say that none of the
commentators or the translators could ever hope to come up
to their standard. However, a man can do at best what he
honestly knows to be the meaning ; and I can assure my
readers that in the translation of these difficult sutras I have
taken the greatest care to bring out the correct meaning of
the Maharishi in his inimitable work the JAIMINISUTRAS
Everyone cannot compose a sutra. A sutra, to be a sound one,

must have certain characteristic features and unless these
conditions arc satisfied they cannot pass muster under the
heading of a sutra. In English, so far as my humble knowledge and practical experience go, it looks impossible to frame
a sutra as the Sanskrit authors have composed and conceived
it. The defects of languages cannot be set right by ordinary
men, and it is hopeless to make such attempts. Jaimini,
through his great sympathy and love for the people, framed
these sutras and they have to be interpreted on certain
principles which the Sanskrit writers have laid down for our
guidance and education. The brevity of a sutra is its distinguishing feature, and it can easily be committed to memory even
by the ordinary students. Somehow or other, Sanskrit
language seems to have a close affinity to strengthen and
improve memory. Have we ever seen an advocate or a judge
who is able to repeat a few sections of any legal book? Is
there any English knowing person who can repeat a play of
Shakespeare or a few pages of any dictionary ? In Sanskrit,
Dasopanishads are easily committed to memory. There are
Dwivedis and Thrivcdis who easily commit to memory one,
two and three Vedas and repeat them with an ease which surprises the listeners. There are many who have committed to
memory the Sanskrit lexicon “Amara” and quote its stanzas
offhand with the greatest ease. Bhagavata, Bharata, Ramayana and other extensive works are easily committed to
memory. Kavyas and Natakas, Epics and Dramas form no
exception. Astrological literature, whether it be astronomical calculation or astrological Phalabhaga has, been committed
to memory and I can repeat more than 2 or 3 thousand slokas,
without any paper or pencil. The discussion of the learned
Brahmin Pandits is a source of great delight to the audience.
They bring neither books, nor notes, nor papers, nor any
references when they come for great assemblies where their
knowledge in the several branches of Sanskrit will be tested
and where they receive due rewards. The greatest Indian
Pandit has hardly anything which deserves the name of a
library, whereas the poorest equipped English reader keeps
up a decent library. Are not then the heads of these Pandits
more valuable than the heads of the greatest English scholars
who have to refer to books for constant renewal of their
wo'jnories ?

SRI
J ATMINISUTRAS
ENGLISH TRANSLATION
ADHYAYA 1— PADA 1
II II
1. UIHHIUMM: II
Su. 1 . — Upadesam Vyakhya&yamah.
I shall now explain my work for the benefit of
the readers and shall give them proper instructions
to understand the subject.
NOTES
Upadesa means literally bringing one close to the object
and make him understand the truth. Upa samip disanti
cause to sit — taking one close to the true object of his search,
making him sit there and see clearly with his mental vision,
the truths of the Science. Jaimini observes that he will take
the subject of Astrology in phalabhaga or Predictive portion,
introduce the readers and disciples to the principles of Astrology and make them see the truths and realise their grandeur
by personal experiences. He expands the subject in his own
inimitable style and tries his best to put vast quantities of

Jaiminisutras
Astrological knowledge in the fewest possible Aphorisms
called the Sutras . This word Upa occurs in Upanayana as
making a man, see the grandeur of Parabrahma, and Upanl -
shad or taking one nearer to God and Upasana carrying the
same idea and making the person see the object of his search
and bring him into closer contact with it.
Su. 2 . — Abhipasyanti rikshani.
The zodiacal signs aspect each other (in their
front).
>9 II
Su. 3 . — Parswabhe cha.
Excepting the next zodiacal signs to them.
«. afirew ar ii
Su. 4 . — Thannishthascha tadvat.
Those planets which occupy such signs will also
aspect the planets found in such houses.
NOTES
Unless easy explanations are offered and illustrations are
given the meanings of these Sanskrit Sutras will not become
intelligible and convincing to the readers.
The second Sutra can be explained thus. The zodiacal signs aspect each other which are in their front. 1 do not
exactly understand what is meant by the word front. The
commentators who have done invaluable services to humanity
by their lucid explanations and the removal of all reasonable
doubts thus observe : Mesha has Vrischika, Vrishabha has

Jaiminisutras
Thula, Mithuna has Kanya, Kataka has Kumbha, Simha has
Makara, Kanya has Dhanus, Thula has Vrishabha, Vrischika
has Mesha, Dhanus has Meena, Makara has Simha, Kumbha
has Kataka and Meena has Mithuna as the signs in front and
aspect them. From the 3rd sutra it is signified that the zodiacal sign next to Aries, viz., Vrishabha is not aspected, the sign
Mithuna is not aspected by Vrishabha, Kataka is not aspected
by Mithuna, Simha is not aspected by Kataka afid so forth.
Following this rule all the Chara Rasis or movable signs aspect
all the Sthira Rasis or fixed signs excepting that which is next
to it and all the fixed signs aspect the movable signs excepting
that which is next to it. The double bodied signs aspect each
other. In none of the current astrological books is mentioned
the fact of the aspecting of zodiacal signs or the planets which
are in them in this particular manner. In the 4th sutra, reference is made to planets occupying those houses, and exercising
aspectal influences as the houses themselves are said to do. I
will give a few illustrations to exemplify the above enunciated
principles.
Meena
Mesha
Vrishabha
Mithuna
Kumbha
DIAGRAM
Kataka
Makara
Simha
Dhanus
Vrischika
Thula
Kan>a

Jaiminisutras
* Chara Rasis aspect Sthira Rasis. Sthira Rasis aspect Chara
Rasis and Dwiswabhava Rasis aspect the Dwiswabhavas. Mesha
is movable and Vrishabha next to it is fixed. Mesha is said
to aspect the fixed signs except the one which is next to it.
Mesha aspects the fixed signs Simha, Vrischika and Kumbha
but not Vrishabha which is close to it. Vrishabha, a fixed
sign, aspects the movable signs Kataka, Thulaand Makarabut
not Mesha which is close to it. Mithuna, Kanya, Dhanus and
Meena the four double-bodied or common houses aspect each
other and there is no difficulty about them. Kataka, a movable
sign, aspects Vrischika, Kumbha and Vrishabha, but not
Simha which is close to it. Thula a movable sign aspects
Kumbha, Vrishabha and Simha but not the fixed sign Vrischika next to it.
Vrischika, a fixed sign, aspects Makara, Mesha and Kataka
but not Thula which is close to it. Makara a movable sign
aspects these fixed signs Vrishabha, Simha and Vrischika but
not Kumbha which is close to it. These aspects of Rasis have
peculiar influences and they are taken into consideration in
these Jaiminisutras.
According to the above sutras and the explanations as
understood by me, the following aspects have to be noted in
the example given on next page. Ravi is in a movable sign and
does not aspect Budha but aspects Simha, Vrischika and the
planet Sani in it and Kumbha and Chandra in it. Budha
aspects Kataka, Thula and Makara and Kuja who is in that
sign. As per above principles, Rasis aspect each other and
* cf. Vriddha karika.
src fiSffir fatpj w fan i
3*4 ft*n 3*4 wttftwwmn : m

Jaiminisutras
Ravi
Budha
Sukra
Chandra
EXAMPLE
Kuja
Sani
Guru
also the planets in them. The planets aspect each other and
also the Rasis mentioned in the Sutras. In the above illustration Sukra aspects Kanya with Guru in it, Dhanus and Meena
and Guru aspects Dhanus, Meena and Mithuna with Sukra
in it. As per general principles in use in astrology, the aspects
of planets in the above diagram are thus Budha and Sani
aspect each other, Sani aspects Kuja and Simha, 3rd and 10th.
Guru aspects Kuja, Meena and Budha, the 5th, 7th and 9th,
Kuja aspects Mesha with Ravi in it Kataka and Simha or the
4th, 7th and 8th houses and planets in them. Chandra aspects
Simha. These are details which have to be borne in mind by
the readers, who are anxious to master the technicalities of
these Sutras. Jaimini is very cautious in his statements. He
asks his readers to study the general principles of astrology,
and along with their applications to the practical side of
horoscopes he directs them to remember the general and
special principles which he has explained in his learned work
and make predictions, taking both the influences mentioned in
the general works and also the principles he, has explained

Jaiminiratcu
with particular care and on his own responsibility, into consideration. Ravi and Sani in the diagram according to ordinary astrology do not aspect each other, but in making
predictions, we have not only to ascribe the general 6th and
8th positions, of the Sun and Saturn from each other but also
the special aspect influences which Jaimini has named here.
For a novice in general astrology, these observations of the
Maharishi may appear quite novel but a little practice of these
principles along with those of the general principles current
with the astrologers, will show that there will be no difficulty
and the predictions based on these combined influences will be
found to be more accurate and to the point. The preliminaries should be carefully studied and remembered and the
readers should put them cautiously into practice. Theory and
practice will make a man perfect.
H. ftwiTg: II
Su. 5 . — Darabhagyasulasthargala nidhyatuh.
The fourth, second and eleventh places (or
planets in them) from the aspecting body are
Argalas.
wtwig ttirth; ii
Su. 6.—Kamasthathu bhuyasa papanam.
Malefics in the third from the aspecting planet
give rise to evil A f gala.
®. ft: wftawiw II
Su. l.—Rihpha neechakamastha virodhinah.
Planets in the tenth, twelfth and third from Argala
cause obstruction to such Argala.

Jaiminisutras
c. h «^n farrow u
Su. 8 . — Na nyuna vibalascha.
If planets obstructing Argala are fewer or less
powerful than those causing Argala, then the power
of Argala cannot be affected.
arafewlfr ii
Su. 9. — Pragvastrikone.
The houses or planets in trikonas (5 and 9)
similarly infleunce the Argala.
l«. II
Su. 10 . — Vipareetam kethoh.
In the case of Kethu the formation of Argala and
obstruction to it must be calculated in the reverse
order.
NOTES
These sutras require elaborate notes as they are highly
technical in nature. Unless these are properly understood,
further progress in Jaiminisutras will become difficult and
doubtful. In Sanskrit Mathematics, pneumonics of a peculiar
kind are used and these must be properly mastered.
In Sutras 32 and 33 of this Pada, Jaimini gives a clue to
the decipherment of his Sutras. 1 have to anticipate a few of
the future Sutras here, for the great author himself does so.
Su. 23 — Sarvatra savarna Bhava Rasayah.
Su. 33 — Na grahah
In the indication or designation of the Rasis and the
Bhavas (Signs and Significations) the author has used, for the

Jaiminisutras
sake of abbreviation, varnas or single letters. But in the case
of planets he has not done so, which means, he has used the
proper names of the planets and not any letters to indicate
them. I shall explain these differences in the notes below.
We have in Sanskrit a sutra called *Ka, Ta, Pa, Yadi — These
are also called the Vargas — Kavarga, Tavarga, Pavarga and
* Though Suryanarain Rao has elucidated the abbreviations used by
Jaimini to imply numerals, I propose to make some observations for the
benefit of the reader. The system of pneumonics employed here is called
Katapayadi system. The consonants of the Sanskrit alphabet have been
used in the place of the numbers 1-9 and zero to express numbers. There
are different variants of this system but I shall explain the most commonly accepted method. ? (n) and (n) and the vowels denote zero.
The letters in succession beginning with Ka (3>), Ta (3), Pa (7) and Ya (?)
denote the digits ; in a conjoint consonant, e.g ., Kya (??) only the last
one denotes a number. According to this system therefore the letters. —
ka
ta (0
pa
ya
(?) denotes
kha
tta (?)
pha
OO
ra
ga
ba
la
gha
dha (?)
bha
va
nga
ma
ssa 00
cha
tha (?)
sha (?)
chha ( 3 )
thha (?)
sa
ja
da 00
ha
jha
dha OO
A right to left arrangement is employed in the formation of chronograms. i.e., the letter denoting units figure is first written, then follows the
letter denoting the tens figure and so on, e.g..
ra ma
Jaimini divides the figure so obtained by 12 and takes the remainderas
denoting a particular sign of the zodiac as reckoned from Mesha.

Jaiminisutras
Yavarga. Kavarge contains Kadi Nava or nine letters commencing from Ka thus — Ka, Kha, Ga, Gha, Jna, Cha, Chha,
Ja, Jha, or nine letters.
Tavarga or Tadinava — nine letters beginning with Ta—Tu,
Tta, Da, Dha, Na, Tha, Thha, Da, Dha, or the nine letters
of Ta varga. Pavarga or Padi Pancha — five letters commencing
from Pa. They are Pa, Pha, Ba, Bha, Ma five letters. Yavarga
yadyashtau or eight letters from Ya. They are Ya, Ra, La, Va,
Ssa, Sha, Sa and Ha, for the 8 letters of Ya varga. After having learnt these the next sutra in Sanskrit Mathematics is
Ankanum Vamato gatihi. All figures in Astronomy, Inscriptions
and Mathematics should be read in the reverse order or as the
Mohammedans read from right to left. The explanations of
the following sutras make these aphorisms easy to understand.
Jaimini uses the word Argala to mean a sort of obstruction
or impediment for the free flow of planetary influences. A
planet in a certain house from any desired Bhava or signification or planet, prevents or obstructs the progress of the
influence and thereby diminishes its value and usefulness.
These five Sutras give explanations about these Argala influences and obstructions and they must be carefully treasured
up.
There are two varieties of Argala : shubha or beneficial,
and papa — or malefic.
Data contains two Sanskrit letters da and ra. Da, according to Tavarga given above, represents the 8th letter in that
group and hence stands for the figure 8, Ra represents the 2nd
letter in the Yavarga, and hence stands for the digit 2 — thus
we have by the word dara 82.
Reading this by the above mathematical Sutra in the
reverse order we get 28. There are 12 signs or Rasis and

Jaiminisutras
when 28 is divided by 12, we get 4 as the remainder. Therefore Dara means the fourth house, representing the Argala
from any desired significance or planet. Now the peculiarity
is this Dara in Sanskrit language means wife and in general
astrology, when we say Dara or Darasthana, we signify the 7th
house form Lagna for a male horoscope. But Dara in Jaimini
by the lules he has laid down means Four and not seven.
Bhagya. By the letter interpretation process — Bha, is
the fourth in the Pavarga and stands therefore for 4, Gya in
Sanskrit is composed of Ga, and Ya the letter underneath
the former Ga, and in all compound or conjoined letters the
lower letter has to be taken into account and not the upper.
Thus we have here Ya, and it is the first letter in Yavarga
and stands for 1. We have therefore 41. Reading in the
reverse order we get 14 and this divided by 12 will give us
a remainder of 2. Bhagya — 2. Therefore the 2nd house or
planet from any given Bhava also becomes an Argala planet
or obstruction. Sula is composed of Ssa and La. In the
Yavarga , Ssa stands as the fifth letter and represents 5. La
represents the 3rd letter in Yavarga and therefore stands
for 3. We thus get the figure 53. But reading in the reverse
order we have 35. Divided by 12 we get a remainder of 11
and therefore Sula stands for 1 1 . Those planets which are
in 4, 2 and 11 from any planet or Bhava in question or
under consideration, become classified as Argala and obstruct
their influences.
In Sutra 6 if many evil planets, more than two as the
plural is used, are found in Kama or 3rd house, they also
then become Argala. Ka stands as in Kavarga and Ma
stands as 5 in the Pavarga. Therefore we have 15. Reading
in the reverse ordei we get 51. Divide this by 12 and we

Jaiminisutras
have the remainder 3. Therefore Kama stands for the 3rd
house. Kama in Sanskrit means Cupid, passions, wife and
desires. In the general astrological literature, Kama means
the 7th house representing husband or wife as the horoscope may belong to a female or a male human being. But
by the interpretation by letters as directed by the author, it
means the third. As it is stated here the planets become
Argala in the 3rd only when there are more than 2 evil
planets in the 3rd from the questioning planets or Bhava.
But suppose there is only one evil planet in the 3rd house,
then by implication it does not become Argala for the
planet or Bhava.
In Sutra 7, Ripha means 10, Ra in Yuvarga stands for 2 as
it is the second letter from Ya and Pha is the second letter in
the Pavarga and therefore represents 2, putting together we
get 22. Divide this by 12 we have a balance of 10. Neecha
stands for 12. Na represents O in the Tavarga as it stands
as the 10th from Ta and therefore represents a cipher. We
have only 9 Ankas or digits and the 10th shows a zero. Cha
stands as the 6th letter from Tavarga and represents 6,
putting together we have 06. Reading in the reverse order
we have 60. Divided by 12 there will be no balance, but the
author asks the readers to take always the last balance and
when 60 is divided by 12 it goes four times (48) and the last
balance is 12. Therefore Neecha stands for 12. Kama, we
have already seen, means 3. Those planets which are in 10, 12
and 3 form an obstruction to the Argala mentioned in Sutra 5.
Here probably the meaning is that the Argala influences,
formed by planets mentioned in Sutra 5, good or bad, are
themselves modified or obstructed by the planetary positions
mentioned in this Sutra. Those planets which are in the

Jaimmisutrai
5th and 9th or Trikonas counteract the influences of the
Argala planets as explained before. It has been already
stated that certain planets in certain house cause Argala
or obstruction and those which are in the 5th and 9th
counteract these Argala influences.
Coming to Sutra 8, if fewer planets or powerless or
disabled planets cause obstruction in Sutra 7 to the Argala
generated in Sutra 5, then they will not affect the power
of that Argala. Here it means that the obstructive Argala
created in Sutra 7, unless the planets are strong, will not be
able to obstruct the Argala influences caused by planetary
positions mentioned in Sutra 5.
Sutra 9 is clear and needs no further explanation.
With reference to Kethu the order must be reversed
(Sutra 10). The 9th from Kethu becomes Argala and the 5th
from him becomes Pratibandhaka or obstruction. The
name of Rahu is not mentioned in the original, but some
commentators are of opinion that the mention of Kethu is
enough to include Rahu. Sutras are short and certainly
require clearer explanations. Those beneficial planets who
are in Data 4, Bhagya 2, and Shula 11 from Kethu do
not form Argala. The malefics in 3rd and 8th from Kethu
do not form Papargala or evil obstruction. Argala seems
to be a sort of force or energy, caused by certain positions of
the planets, and this energy may be beneficial or malicious.
Power may be good or bad as it is used.
In the case of Rahu and Kethu the Argala results
must be calculated in the reverse order. From the 11th
Sutra Jaimini gives the rules which will guide the student
in determining the lordship of the various relations and
events, which have to be taken into consideration, in the
career of an individual.

Jaiminisutras
33. wrwnffc: gsgiftM timi qv re wwntu n 11
Su . 11 . — A tmadhikaha kaladibhirna bhogassaptanamashtanamva.
Of the seven planets from the Sun to Saturn, or
the eight planets from the Sun to Rahu, whichever
gets the highest number of degrees becomes the
Atmakaraka.
NOTES
The word Ashtanamva is emphasised because Rahu,
instead of being mixed with other planets, seems to have
been separated for a certain set purpose. The meaning
becomes evident when we refer to Parasara according to
whom also, Rahu fills up the gap — when two planets (of
the seven) possess the same number of degrees.
If two or three planets obtain the same Kalas or degrees
and minutes, they are all merged into one Karaka or Lordship
over some event in the human life. The vacancies caused by
the merges of two or three planets into one have to be supplied
by Rahu in the reverse of order. The other Karaka will be
supplied by the Naisargika Karakas or permanent lords.
This is a difficult Sutra and requires some clear explanations.
While all the planets have got movements from left to right or
direct, Rahu and Ketu move in the reverse order or from
right to left. The first is called the Savyam or Pradakshinam
(dextral) and the other is called the Apasavayam or Appradakshinam (sinistral). Rahu and Kethu have no houses but, Jaimini
gives lordship of Kumbha to Rahu and Vrischika to Kethu.
They have been given lordships over some human events. In
any horoscope, the first duty of an honest astrologer is to find

Jaimioisutnt
out, the exact positions of ail (he planets. This implies a
good knowledge in Astronomy and astrologico-mathematics.
Then the degrees, minutes and seconds of the positions of the
planet arc calculated and placed correctly, then the student
will be able to iind out which planet has got the highest
number of Kalas or degrees in a horoscope. Whoever has got
the highest number of Kalas, becomes the Atmakaraka.
These Karakatwas or Lordships, therefore, can be acquired
according to these Sutras by any planet. Whereas in
Naisargika, Karakas or permanent lordships are fixed for
ever. In Naisargika, the Karakas or Lordships are thus
detailed : —
In Brihat Jataka, Ravi, Chandra, Sani and Sukra are
given different Karakaships : Diva arkasukrow pitru, matru
soungnitou. This means that persons born during the day
have the Sun and Venus as lords of the father and mother
respectively. Sanaischarendu nisi tadviparyayat. For persons
born during the nights, Sani becomes Matrukaraka and Indu
or Chandra becomes the lord of father. I have simply drawn
the attention of the readers to the various versions given by
the different authors. Here we may have pitrukaraka (1)
Ravi in the Naisargika ‘method’, (2) Chandra as Pitrukaraka
for those who are born in the night and (3) any planet out of
the nine who gets or contains the largest number of degrees
in a horoscope. Then the question arises as to how a student has to be guided in determining the prosperity and
adversity of a person’s father. Suppose in the Jaimini system Sani becomes pitrukaraka: Chandra becomes Pitrukaraka by the direction of Brihvt Jataka and by the general or
Naisargika system, Ravi becomes the Pitrukaraka. These
three planets, viz., Ravi, Chandra and Sani are thoroughly

Jaiminisutras
different in characteristics and these variations, expounded
by the learned in Astrology, instead of helping a student in
the progress of the studies will confound him and launch
him into greater doubts and confusion. When different
systems, apparently contradictory, are enunciated by
eminent Maharishis the wisest thing would be, in my humble
opinion and experience, to take all of them into careful
consideration, add his own experience, judge all of them
with a diligent eye and make a harmonious whole so that
all of them may prove successful and satisfactory. Take
half a dozen medical experts in remote corners of the world.
They experiment and hit upon certain herbs or roots as
efficacious for certain diseases. Each one succeeds with a
certain class, and thinks they may prove useful. If all of
them have succeeded and the results of their experiments
satisfactory, then a wise physician carefully notes the characteristics of such of those drugs and roots and he may
succeed even better than any one of the original experimentors, by a judicious use of them suitable to times and conditions of life. Maharishis, by their expanded vision, watched
and recorded their experiences from different mental visions,
and gave principles in all such sciences, which, though
contradictory on the surface, will be found to be agreeable
on a deeper analysis. Different systems have mentioned
different periods for death and other important events of
human life. Bhattotpala, the great commentator of Varahamihira's works, hits on a nice system of reconciliation and
I refer my readers for clearer explanations on my notes to
Dasantardasa chapter in Brihat Jataka. A man may ' live upto
70 or 80 years and may have passed through various critical
conditions. He will be killed in the period of the strongest

Jfaiminisutras
death inflicting planet and have critical dangers during other
evil periods.
Take the longevity question. We have the Udu Dasa or
length of life measured by the planets according to the constellations ruling at birth. We have secondly Kalachakra Dasas
and the longevity given by them. Third, we have the Graha
Datta pindayuryoga or the term of life given by the planets
to the Foetus at the time of conception. Fourth, we have the
Amsayurdaya recommended by Satyacharya and followed by
Varahamihira. Fifth, we have the longevity determined by
the Gochara movements of the planets. Sixth, the longevity
as determined by the kendra Ayurdaya. Seventh, we have the
Dasantar Dasa Ayurdaya. Then, eighthly, we have the Ashtakavarga Bindusodhana Ayurdaya. These eight systems certainly
give divergent views and different terms. If so, what should
the astrological student do when all the eight systems give
eight diffeient periods. Bhattotpala, whom we have not
seen a more learned commentator on astrological works in
recent times, reconciles these different systems in the following manner : say a person lives for 50 years and gets various
periods of longevity from 3 years to 50 years. The suggestion
of Bhattotpala stands to reason. Suppose the eight systems
give the following terms of life — 3, 10, 15, 20, 27, 35, 40 and
50, we are asked to prescribe the longest term obtained as the
longevity, and the terms indicated by the other systems will
be periods in the life of the person which will be very critical
and during which he will suffer from severe diseases, dangers,
or accidents, but he will manage to get over them and live
upto the longest term, viz., 50 years as shown by one of those
systems. Jaiminisutras offer the same explanations. In the typical case of Sani, Chandra and Ravi, representing father in the

jaiminisutras
case of a single person, then the age and prosperity of the
father will be determined by the most powerful among them.
It may also happen that by the three systems, Ravi may become the lord of father. Then he will live longer and be
more prosperous and happpy.
The merging of two or three planets into one karaka has
to be fully explained. Unless I give some illustration, the
readers will not be able to follow these sutras. The sutra says
that whichever planet gets the highest number of degrees, becomes the Atmakaraka. Suppose in a horoscope two planets
get the same number of degrees ; then both of them will
become Atmakaraka. Take Sani and Chandra in a horoscope,
and say they have got each 29 degrees and ten minutes. As
per the above sutra, both of them become merget into one, viz.,
Atmakaraka. When both of them become representing one
event, viz., Atmakaraka, there will be a vacancy for some
other karakatwa say Chandra has merged into Sani and his
place, representing matrukaraka or some other karaka, falls
vacant. This, Jaimini says, will be supplied by Rahu. As
Rahu and Kethu move in the reverse, they will be considered
as getting the highest number of degrees when they are at the
beginning of a sign. In the above illustration, suppose Sani
has 29° and 10' in Aries as also Chandra. Then they will
naturally have travelled all over Mesha and will be within
fifty minutes from Vrishabha. Sani and other planets move
from Mesha to Vrishabha, Mithuna, Kataka, and so forth,
whereas Rahu moves in the reverse order, viz., from Vrishabha to Mesha and Mesha to Meena. Rahu will have obtained
29° and 10' when he is 50' from Meena, for Rahu gains each
degree as he enters Mesha from Vrishabha and moves on to
the 1st degree of Mesha before he enters into the next sign

Jaiminisutras
Meena. Here as Chandra has merged into Sani, Rahu takes
that karakatwa which Chandra as a separate planet would
have taken. Suppose Budha also gets the same degrees, and
these three represent one karakatwa or signification. Suppose
now brothers have to be represented. Then Jaimini says take
the Nisarga Karaka, Kuja, and give him the control over
brothers, etc., attributed to Kuja in the general literature in
Astrology.
Wh*Nn': II
Su. 12 —Saeeshtay bandhamokshayoh.
Atmakaraka gives bad and good results by
virtue of malefic and benefic dispositions such as
debility, exaltation, etc.
NOTES
When the Atmakaraka is in exaltation or in beneficial
Rasis or conjunctions, though the person is imprisoned he
will be liberated, will Jive in holy places and will have Moksha
or final Emancipation. But when he is in Neecha Rasi or with
evil conjunctions and aspects he will be imprisoned, will suffer
from chains and other tortures, and will not have Moksha.
But if this debilitated planet has beneficial aspects or conjunctions, he will be liberated. The idea seems to be the securing
of final salvation. If the Atmakaraka is exalted and has
beneficial aspects and conjunctions without any malicious
influences the man will get the final Bliss called Moksha , so
ardently coveted by all devotees and the yogis. They desire
nothing more than' this state of Bliss. Here Bandha and
Moksha may be interpreted as malefic and benefic results.

Jaiminisutras
H. u
Su. 13. — Thasyanusaranadamatyaha.
The planet who is next in kalas or degrees to
Atmakaraka will become Amatyokaraka.
NOTES
By careful mathematical calculations the student should
first find out the positions of planets correctly in degrees and
minutes. Then fix them up in the horoscope and place the
Lagna also in degrees and minutes. It will be very easy to fix
all the planets and also the Lagna in their vargas or minute
divisions by proper calculations. Unless this part of the work
is done satisfactorily the application of the principles of
Astrology, enunciated by Jaimini or other Maharishis, will
not be possible. And when the foundation is not well laid
and solidly built, the superstructure can never be durable or
lasting. After the planets are placed correctly in their degrees
and minutes, it becomes easy for a student to find out who
gets the highest number of degrees or Kalas. Whoever gets
the largest number take him as the Atmakaraka . The planet
who gets the next highest degrees will be Amatyakaraka.
Probably when the Amatya or Mantrikaraka is powerful and
weir combined and aspected the person will become a great
Minister or Councillor. But When he is ill-combined and
badly aspected and debilitated he becomes an evil councillor
or an adviser who brings disgrace on himself and also on
those to whom he offers his counsel.
i*. tret wrar it
Su. 14 . — Tasya bhratha.

JaiminisutraS
The planet who gets the highest number of
degrees next to Amatyakaraka becomes Bhratrukaraka or gets lordship over brothers.
NOTES
If the Bhratrukaraka is debilitated, joins evil planets and
has malicious aspects then there will be ruination to brothers.
He will have no brothers or, if he gets them, they will die or
become wretched, poor and disgraceful. If, on the other hand,
the Bhratrukaraka is exalted, well combined and well aspected
there will be plenty of brothers and prosperity and success
will attend on them. In the world we have experience of
various sorts and all these are indicated by the astrological
authors.
im. mst nrai ii
Su. 15 . — Tasya matha.
The planet who gets the highest number of
degrees next to Bhratrukaraka becomes lord of the
mother or Matrukarka.
Su. 16 . — Tasya putraha.
The planet who is next in power in degrees to
Matrukaraka becomes the lord of the children or
Putrakaraka.
NOTES
The Sanskrit Sciences have attached the greatest importance to the birth of children. Without children a home is

Jaiminisutru
designated as a burial ground or smasana or cemetery. Aputrasya gatirnasti observe the Vedas. This means that a man
who has no children will have no heaven or Moksha. There
is a special Hellish River called the Put . One who has no
Putra will not be able to cross this river Put. He is called a
Putra who enables the parents to cross this river. If he does
not cross it, he will have no salvation and he cannot go to
regions of bliss. In this world what can give a person greater
pleasure than the possession of healthy, intelligent, obedient
and prosperous children ? What can delight the hearts of the
parents more than the playing round about them of their
happy children ? Can the work of creation continue without
children ? If there are no children, then the human species
must cease to exist and the world will be depopulated. Children thus become an absolute necessity, for the continuation
of the human species. But in getting children, there is a very
great variety. Temperaments are various and curious. It is
no doubt a source of great pleasuie for a man to have
children but what is the good of getting bad, deformed,
repulsive, ungrateful, depraved and rascally children who are
antagonistic to their parents, who are immoral, cheats and
otherwise quite undesirable to society, to the nation and to
the family. Where the Putrakaraka is well situated, exalted,
in good Shadvargas, in beneficial conjunctions and aspects,
the children will be blessed with all the virtues which make
them agreeable, happy, prosperous and dutiful to parents.
The greatest Epic in India, viz., Ramayana teaches the excellent duties of children towards their parents and Sri Rama is
the noblest conception and embodiment of the duties towards
the parents, relations, friends and the public citizens under
his royal care.

Jaiminiautras
It . is better to have no children than to have bad and
ungrateful ones.
1®. TO snfa: H
Su. 17 . — Thasya gnathihi.
The planet who gets less degrees than those of
Putrakaraka becomes Gnathikaraka or lord of the
cousins.
Among all the nations of the world, cousins form one
important item, in making the domestic circle happy or unhappy. This is specially so among the Hindus, whose laws of
inheritance and succession to property are peculiar and very
complicated. There are maternal and paternal cousins and
nephews. The last are the most formidable, when they are
adversely situated and most favourable when they are sympathetic and loving. The condition of the planets who become
Gnathikarakas will determine the attitude of the cousins and
the rules for judging of these have already been laid down in
the previous notes and explanations.
%c. to *m*r ii
Su. 18 . — Thasya darascha.
The planet who gets less degrees than the gnathikaraka becomes Darakaraka or lord of wife.
NOTES
The use of cha in this sutra indicates plurality and includes the examination of the various Bhavas or significations
from Lagna, Pada Lagna and Upapada Lagna, which technicalities will be explained later on in the notes. Jaimini
suggests that the results should not be foretold simply by the

Jaiminisutras
consultations of the karakas alone, but also by the Bhavas
from Lagna, Pada Lagna and Upapada Lagna. The Science
of astrology, specially the foretelling of the future, is highly
complicated and requires the highest form of intelligence, and
the most profound forms of analytical powers to unravel its
mysteries and make the future predictions correct. This
science as well as other sciences require great intelligence and
erudition, and this will be so specially with astrology which
deals with all the phenomena in the world and which, therefore, requires the most comprehensive and grasping intellect
to understand its principles.
vm h? 11
Su. 19 . — Matra saha putrameke samamananthi.
Some Acharyas or authors hold that the Matru
and putrakarakas may be represented by one and
the same planet, that is these two Bhavas, lordship
of mother and children may be judged by the same
planet.
NOTES
Here this union may be interpreted in two ways, viz.,
Matrukaraka includes putrakaraka, and therefore these two
Bhavas may be foretold by the lord of mother or by the lord
of children. The planet next in degrees to Bhratrukaraka
becomes Matrukaraka, and the planet next in degrees to
Matrukaraka becomes putrakaraka. What Jaimini apparently
means is that by the planet next in degrees to Bhratrukaraka,
may be foretold about the prosperity and adversity of the
mothers and the children. Since Jaimini gives pada, ghatika
and upapada Lagnas as also the Lagna for the consultation

Jaiminisutrss
for results, difficulties and confusion have been removed and
the welfare and misfortunes of mother and children may be
easily analysed and predicted.
*o. yft gq WWIIg : II
Su. 20.— Bhaginyarathassyalaha kaniyajjananee
cheti.
Some say that from Kuja should be ascertained
particulars regarding brothers and sisters, brotherin-law, younger brothers and step-mothers. Some
others hold that predictions relating to step-mother
should be made from the 8th house. However this
latter view is not approved by all.
NOTES
From Ara or Kuja the sisters, wife’s brothers, younger
brothers and mother must be examined. In Sutras IS and 16
reference to find out the lord of mother has been made. Why
then again mention about mother ? Here from Mars we have
to find eider and younger sisters, brothers of wife, younger
brother, step-mother and the maternal aunts. Ara or Kuja
is the permanent or Naisargika Bhratrukaraka or lord of
brothers. Some authors by pronouncing Aratha in short A,
make it A- 0, Ra—2 and Tha 6=0.26 and reading it in the
reverse order we get 620. This divided by 12 will give us
remainder 8. And ask the readers to find out the above events
from the 8th house from Lagna. Jaimini does not approve
of it.

JaimJnisutrfts
* 1 . w q sw n fon u
Su. 21 . — Mathuladayo bandhavo matrusojatiya
ittyuttarataha.
From Mercury should be ascertained details
relating to maternal uncles, maternal aunts and
other maternal relations.
NOTES
Take the planet next to Ara or Kuja and he will be
Budha. The order of the planets must always be remembered
as in the weekdays — Ravi, Chandra, Mangala, Budha,
Guru, Sukra and Sani. Therefore when the author says
Vttarataha or take the next planet, it clearly means Budha.
From Budha, maternal aunts, maternal uncles and other
maternal relations like step-mothers should be found out.
Thus say some others. This means that Jaimini is not in
agreement with the views of these writers. Like Kechit in
Brihat Jataka, Ekey in Jaimini is used to indicate other
schools of thought in Astrological predications.
Su. 22 . — Pitamahou pathiputraviti gurumukhadeva janiyat.
From Guru the paternal grandmother and
grandfather, the husband and children must be
found out.
Su. 23 . — Patnipitarau swasurou matamaha
ityante vasinaha.

Jaiminisutras
From the next planet from Guru, viz., .Sukra,
the parents of the wife, or parents-in-law, paternal
and maternal aunts, maternal grandfather and
grandmother, and Ante Vasina or disciples must be
found out.
NOTES
If two or three planets get the lordship by getting the
same degrees, then find out who has got the greater number
of minutes and seconds, and if the planets are equal in all
these degrees and minutes and seconds then we are recommended to take the Nisarga or permanent lords for the
welfare of the particular events. I shall give here the Naisargika lordships of planets.
Ravi. — Atmaprabhavasakti or soul force, ieputation,
vitality and father.
Chandra. — Manas, Matru, Mani— Mind, Mother and
Gems.
Kuja. — Bhumi, Satwa, Bhratru — Lands, Strength and
Brothers.
Budha. — Pragnya, Matula, Buddhi, Vacha— intelligence
uncle, wisdom and speech.
Guru. — Putra, Vidya, Dhana, Gnana — Children, Education,
Wealth and Spiritual development.
Sukra.— Kama, Indriasukha, Kalatra — passion, sensepleasures and wife.
Sani. — Ayushyam, Jeevanopayam, Maranam — longevity,
means of livelihood and death.
Rahu . — Matamaha or maternal grandfather, Vishakaraka
or lord governing poison.

Jaiminisutras
Kethu . — Pitamaha or paternal grandfather and Kaivalya*
karaka or one who gives finat bliss.
I have given here only the most salient points, and for
greater details 1 refer my readers to my English translation
of Sarwarthachintamani.
Su. 24 . — Maridojyayan Graheshu.
Among all the planets, Ravi, Chandra, Kuja,
Budha, Guru, Sukra and Sani, Saturn is the least
powerful.
NOTES
Varaha Mihira observes in ascribing the Veeryabala
thus — Sa, Ku, Bu, Gu, Su, Cha, Ra meaning Sani is the
least powerful in Veeryabala ; next comes Kuja, then Budha,
then Guru, then Sukra, then Chandra and Ravi represents
the strongest in Veeryabala. Some writers and commentators give the following interpretation which may also be
acceptable. Mandojyayan Ittyuttarataha. Next to Sukra
comes Sani in Sutra 23. Therefore from Sani must be
found out the prosperity and misfortunes of the elder brothers.
Su. 25. — Pracheevruttirvishamabheshu.
In all odd signs the counting must be in the
right direction.
NOTES
,Mesha, Mithuna, Simha, Thula, Dhanus and Kumbha
are odd signs. In all these signs the counting must be from

Jaiminisutras
left to right. I will explain in clearer terms. Say we want
the 5th from Mesha. Then count as Mesha, Vrishabha,
Mithuna, Kataka, Simha and so forth.
Su. 26.— Paravrutyottareshu.
In even signs the counting must be in the reverse
order.
NOTES
Take Vrishabha and we want the 6th from it. There
we get Vrishabha, Mesha, Meena, Kumbha, Makara and
Dhanus. Take Thula. It is an odd sign, suppose we want
the 4th. Then Thula, Vrischika, Dhanus and Makara. Take
Vrischika and we want the 6th from it. Then we have
Vrischika, Thula, Kanya, Simha, Kataka and Mithuna. In
fact, in all odd signs the procedure is in the right direction.
In even signs we count backwards like the movements of
Rahu and Kethu in reverse order. Then follows a short but
very difficult Sutra. Brevity may be the soul of composition,
but it will be the thorny path to the commentators and
readers, with ordinary intelligence and education.
sprafo* II
Su. 27. — Nakwachit.
In some places or signs this does not apply.
NOTES
Here the brevity of the Sutra offers the greatest confusion. What are the places or signs where these rules do not
apply. When a general principle is laid down why should

Jaiminisutras
there be any exceptions? If we had excellent commentators, who were almost equal to the original authors and
some of whom were even superior to their originals, many
of the Sanskrit Sciences would have been sealed letters and
none of the modern scholars, though brilliant, have £ot that
spiritual capacity and concentration of mind to enable them
to go beyond the screens and find out the literary gems which
were hidden in the deep mines of Sanskrit Literature. If the
ancient authors have been held as great benefactors to the
literary world, the commentators for those works should
be considered even greater benefactors. What would have
been the use of the Vedas, if they had not been handled by
the renowned two commentators Bhatta Bhaskara and
Vidyaranya. Sanskrit Sciences are put in technical styles
and Sutras and unless the commentators are scholars of great
genius and of equal capacity, the original works would have
remained almost inaccessible and unintelligible to the modern
generation. For in this Sutra there are two words Na negative and Kvachit. at times or occasions. We have no clue
to when and how these two words have to be used or interpreted. Gathering information from the ancient commentators
this Sutra signifies while the general rule is to count regularly
in all odd signs and in the reverse order in the even signs,
this rule does not apply to Vrishabha and Vrischika and to
Kumbha and Simha. Here it means that in the even signs
of Vrishabha and Vrischika, instead of counting in the
reverse order we have to count in the right way and in
Kumbha and Simha instead of counting in the right way, we
have to count in the reverse order. In other signs where
such exceptions obtain they will be pointed out in thfir
proper places.

Jaiminisutrai
snuism: fWTOT^ni II
Su. 28. — Nathaanthaha samaprayena.
Many of the writers are of opinion, that the
*Rasi JDasa (period of the sign) extends over such
number of years which are counted from the Rasi
to the place where its lord is located.
NOTES
Take Mesha ; its lord is Kuja. Say he is in Simha. Count
from Mesha to Simha ; we get 5. This will be the number of
years of Rasi Dasa given by Mesha. In all other works,
Dasas and Bhuktis (periods and sub-periods) are given only
to planets but never to the zodiacal signs. Jaimini gives Rasi
Dasas as a peculiar feature of his immortal works. I shall
try to explain this Sutra in full as otherwise my readers will
be surrounded by many doubts and difficulties and may
understand the Sutra altogether in a very perverted sense.
The number of years of the Rasi Dasa is determined by the
number of Rasis which its lord has travelled from it at birth.
Take a horoscope and follow the reasoning.
We want to find out the Dasa period of years given by
Mesha. Its lord is Kuja. He is found in the 7th house from
Mesha. Therefore Mesha Dasa extends for 7 years. We
want the Dasa period given by Dhanus. Its lord is Guru and
he is in the 3rd house from Dhanus, and therefore the length
of Dasa of Dhanus will be 3 years. This point is now clear.
In Jaiminisutras the lords of the houses are those which are
recognised by the astrological works in general and I presume
* I have discussed Rasi Dasa at considerable length in my book
Studies in Jaimini Astrology.

Jaiminisutras
Chandra
Rahu
Lagna
Sani
Ravi «,
Budha
Guru
RAS1
Sukra
Kuja
Kethu
the possession of this elementary knowledge in my readers.
The lords of the 12 zodiacal signs are the following regularly
from Mesha, viz., Kshitija — Kuja, Sita — Sukra, Gna — Budha,
Chandra — Moon, Ravi — Sun, Soumya — Budha, Sita — Sukra,
Avanija — Kuja, Suraguru — Jupiter, Manda — Sani, Souri —
Sani, Guru — Jupiter — vide my transalation of Brihat Jataka.
These same planets are also lords of the Amsas or other
muniter divisions like Drekkana, Navamsa and Dwadasamsa. Differences of opinion obtain in all branches of
knowledge. These differences may arise from various causes.
World presents such a complicated and comprehensive phenomena that two observers trying in different directions may
find different results from the same research or one result
from different substances. Take one illustration. Two doctors,
men of high culture with tinges of original genius, far removed
from each other and quite strangers, may go on experimenting to find out the best antidote for fever. Each may deal
with different sets of articles and find a resultant, which will
have the efficacy of completely curing fever and all such dis-

Jaimlnisutras
orders. Similarly in Astrology. Temperaments differ so
radically in some cases that those who watch them keenly get
puzzled over them and fail to account for such strange
phenomena.
If the lord of the Rasi is in his own house, the sign gives
12 years of life. If he is in the 12th house the Rasi gives a
similar period. If he is in the second house he gives one year.
Some say he gives two years. The word prayena signifies a
great deal. If the lord of the Rasi is in exaltation, he will add
one more year to the number he gives by his position. Take
Vrischika and Kuja in Makara. Here he is in the 3rd house
from Vrischika and therefore gives 3 years. But as he is in
exaltation one more year is to be added and thus the Rasi
gives four years. But if he is in debilitation he takes away
one year. Thus if we take Mesha and find Kuja in Kataka,
then he will have to give four years as Kataka is the fourth
from Mesha but his debilitation has taken away one year and
instead of four years he gives only three years. There are
two signs according to Jaiminj which have two lords instead
of one granted by the rules of general astrology. Vrischika
has two lords, viz, Kuja and Kethu and Kumbha has Sani
and Rahu. In this case if the two lords are in the sign, then
the Rasi gives 12 years of Dasa. If one of them is not there,
then the presence of the other gives no years. When both of
them are not in the Rasi, then find out the Dasa years by the
stronger of the two planets. Suppose of these two, one is in
his own house, and the other in a different house, then count
up and take the planet in his own house in preference to the
other who is in a different house. Take Kumbha. It has two
lords Rahu and Sani. Sani is in Makara and Rahu is in
Mesha. Here we have to prefer Sani to Rahu as he is

J«uninisutras
in his own house and therefore the longevity or Dasa given
by Kumbha will be 12 years as Makara is the 12th from
Kumbha.
If out of the two lords, in other houses one is with another planet or planets, and the second is not with a planet
then take the planet who is in conjunction with another planet.
Suppose both of them are with other planets. Then take the
lord who is in conjunction with a larger number of planets.
Suppose both of them are with the same number of planets.
Then find out the strength of the Rasi and whichever is more
powerful, take the planet in it. Here 1 shall explain what
is meant by the strength of the Rasi. The fixed signs are
stronger than movable signs. The double bodied signs arc
stronger than the fixed ones. If even here' the strength of the
two lords is the same, then take that lord who gives the larger
number of years. In this way we have to find out who is the
more powerful of the two lords and ascribe the* Rasi Dasa
accordingly. If one of them is in exaltation, he should be
preferred. In this way find out the causes of strength to
the planet and then prescribe the Rasi Dasa years to it.
qrafcnw* T q q w TPir n , n
Su. 29 . — Yavadeesasrayam padamrukshanam .
Arudha Lagna is the point obtained by counting
as many signs from the place of lord of Lagna as
the lord of Lagna is removed from Lagna.
NOTES
Here Arudha or Pada Lagna is explained. The lord of
the Lagna at birth must occupy some house. The sign which
measures from him in the same number as he is from the
Lagna will be called Pada Lagna. Take an* example.

Jaimtaisutras
Chandra
Rahu
Lagna
Sani
Ravi
Budha
Guru
RASI
Sukra
Kuja
Kcthu
Here wc have to find out the Pada Lagna. The lord of
Lagna is Sukra. He is in the 8th house from Lagna. The 8th
from Sukra becomes pada. Here the 8th from Sukra is
Kataka. Therefore it becomes the Arudha or Pada Lagna.
The uses for which these various Lagnas are enumerated here
will be explained later on. Jaimini makes his meaning clear
in the next two sutras.
Su. 30 .—Swasthe daraha.
If Lagnadhipathi is in 4, then the 7th becomes
Pada Lagna.
NOTES
Dara as we have seen is 28, divided by 12 giving a remainder 4. If Mesha is Lagna and Kuja occupies Kataka, he will
be in the 4th from it. The 4th from Kataka, viz., Thula will
be the Pada Lagna.

Jaiminisutrtfs
*1. grot mu ii
Su. 31 . — Sutasthe janma.
If the lord of Lagna is in the 7th from Lagna,
then Lagna itself becomes Arudha Lagna.
NOTES
He gives another example. If the lord of Lagna is in the
7th, the 7th from it will be Lagna itself and this becomes
pada or Arudha Lagna. Suta — su represents 7 and ta indicates
6. This will be 67. Divided by 12 we get the remainder 7 and
therefore the 7th house is indicated. The Maharishi gives
these two examples so that his readers may make no mistakes
or misinterpretation about the Sutras. I hope my readers now
have fully understood what is meant by Pada Lagna. In this
sutr 'a, as the lord of Lagna is in the 7th, the 7th from it will
be Lagna itself. In this case both Lagna and Pada Lagna are
one and the same.
V*. whwwfa srmrem: ii
Su. 32 . — Sarvatrasavarna bhavarasyaha.
All Rasis and Bhavas are studied by Varnada
Lagna. Hence it will be explained in this aphorism.
NOTES
Raghavabhatta, Pantha, Nilakanta and other older
commentators have given the fullest notes and details on this
sutra and I have to take the readers along those intricate
paths. They have introduced Vamada Lagna, Ghatika Lagna,
Hora Lagna and other details. The following is the full exposition for all these. Readers are advised to have a large fund

Jaiminisutras
of patience and devote some time to master these, details.
In all the following sutras of Jaimini, Varnas or Katapayadi
letters are used to indicate Bhavas and Rasis. But for planets
their various names are used and they should not be interpreted with the help of such letters. For those who are born
in odd signs count from Mesha in the regular order, for those
who are bom in even signs count from Meena backwards till
we get to Bhava Lagna and keep these figures on one side. Again
count for those who are born in odd signs from Mesha to
Hora Lagna in the regular order and for those born in even
signs count from Meena to Janma Lagna in the reverse order,
and deduct the smaller figures from the larger and counting
again from Mesha forwards to the number of remainder, and
fix ' that Rasi as the Varnada Rasi for odd signs and for
persons born in even signs counting back from Meena to the
number of Rasis given by the figure, take that Lagna as the
Varnada Lagna. This will certainly be not intelligible, unless
a few examples are given here to illustrate the principles
involved. Varieties of Lagnas will be explained here.
Bhava Lagna — used in Jaimini- -means the ordinary Lagna
as is mentioned in the ordinary books on Astrology. The sign
that rises at birth on any particular day.
Chandra Lagna — or the Janma Rasi, is that sign in which
Chandra is situated at the time of birth. This is determined
by constellation ruling on that day.
Pada Lagna— means that sign in number again from the
position of the lord of Lagna which he occupies from Lagna.
Hora Lagna — Take the time of birth from the sunrise and
fix it in ghatis. Then divide this number by 2£ which is called
a Hora and the -number thus obtained represents the Hora

Jaiminisutra*
Lagna. Take an example. A man was born on the 3rd of the
solar month Kumbha at 14| ghatis after sunrise.
Now 14£ ghatis divided by 2\ will give us 5 and 2 ghatis
as a remainder. Therefore the Hora Lagna falls in the 6th from
Kumbha — Kanya. Take a person born on the 2nd of the
solar month. Vrischika at about 29 ghatis after sunrise.
Dividing this by 2\ ghatis we get 11 and a remainder 1$
ghatis. That- is, the Hora Lagna will be the 12th from the
sign occupied by the Sun, viz., Vrischika or it falls in Thula
the 12th from it. If, suppose the man is born on that day at
48 ghatis after the sunrise then divide this by 2\ ghatis. We
get 19 and a remainder of £ ghati. Therefore the Hora Lagna
falls in the 20th. As there are only 12 signs, deduct this figure
from 20 and we get 8. Therefore the 8tb from Vrischika will be
the Hora Lagna and it falls in Mithuna. Here also the order,
already named for odd and even signs, should be observed.
Ghatika Lagna — From the sunrise to the time of birth find
out how many ghatikas have passed and find out the Rasi
which falls at the time, and this will be easy to understand.
Say a man is born at 25 ghatis after sunrise on the 2nd of
Vrishabha Masa. Then take 25 ghatis and count from Vrishabha ; whenever, the figure of ghatis is more than 12 deduct
or divide the number of ghatis and find out the remainder.
25 divided by 12 will give us a balance of 1 after going twice.
Thus in this case the ghatika Lagna falls in one and therefore
in Vrishabha itself.
Varnada Lagna — We have already explained this and we
will give clearer explanations later on. As Jaimini insists on
Savya— right and Apasavya— left for odd and even signs our
readers must understand this point clearly and Jkeep before
their vision in all huntings for the various Lagnas. An Indian

Jaiminisutra*
ghati means 24 minutes of English time. An hour means 2$
ghatis. A minute means 2\ vighatis. The minuteness of the
divisions of time, reached by the Indian astronomers, is
simply astounding. The Europeans have no idea of them. I
shall give them here for ready reference. The European con*
ception of the minute divisions of time is as follows. A day is
divided into 24 hours. An hour is divided into 60 minutes. A
minute is divided into 60 seconds. Here ends their conception
of time. 24 x 60 x 60 or one day contains 86,400 seconds. This
is* the highest idea of the European conception of the divisions
of time for a day.
Take the conception of the division of Time by the Indian
Astronomers. In the uttara gograhana or the release of the
cattle, Arjuna went to effect their release and Duryodhana,
Emperor of Hasthinapura, takes objection to the appearance
of Arjuna before the stipulated time for their Agnathavasa or
incognito existence for 12 years. Bhishma, the greatest
warrior, saint and philosopher in the whole of Mahabharata,
explains the astronomical details and calculations of time and
convinces Duryodhana, that the time of 12 years imposed on
the Pandavas passed away the previous day and Arjuna was
justified in his appearance for the release of the cattle. According to Aryan Astronomers a day is divided into 60 ghatis.
Each ghati is divided into 60 vighatis. Each vighati is divided
into 60 Liptas. Each lipta is divided into 60 Viliptas. Each
vilipta is divided into 60 paras and each para is divided into
60 Tatparas. The figure? when multiplied stand thus : one day
60 x 60 x 60 x 60 x 60 x 60. My good readers, this humble figure
when multiplied will give you 46656000000.

Jaiminisutras
Imagine here the conception of the minuteness of time by
the Maharshis and their intellect. A day in the calculation of
Hindu astronomers contains the above number of Tatparas.
This can possibly be conceived by the highest human intellect
under the highest yogic and experienced Divya Drishti or
Divine vision and can never be the work of ordinary mortals
however high their genius may be. I leave my readers to
judge of these facts with their own intelligence and not be
guided by the stupid theory of Hindus borrowing their Astrology from the barbarous Greeks and Chaldeans. Has any man
in the world conceived divisions of time more minute ? If so,
who is he and where can we find him.
W U
Su. 33. — Nagrahaha.
Varnada is not to be applied for the planets but
only for Rasis.
In all the sutras of Jaimini, the Ka, Ta, Pa, Yadi sutra of
interpreting the language should not be applied to the planets.
The author means that the grahas or the planets are designated by their various names and never by the letter system.
V*. it
Su. 34. — Yavadwivekamavrittirbhanam.
Divide Rasi Dasas by 12 and distribute the same
to the 12 Rasis in proportion to the Rasi Dasa
periods to get sub-periods. The counting should be
from right to left if Lagna is odd sign and vice versa
if even. *

Jaiminisutras
NOTES
Interpreting of Viveka — Va.-4 Va.-4 Ka-1 — or 441 or reading in the reverse order we get 114. All the Rasis put
together at 12 each will come up to 144. Take the Rasi Dasa
year and divide that into 12 bhagas, multiply the Mesha Dasa
Rasi by 12. Then divide the total by 12 and the quotient will
represent the Antardasa years. Even here the readers are
advised to count and follow the odd and even signs in the
right and left directions as has been already explained. Sutras
are meant really for those who have bright brains.
V*. II
Su. 35. — Horadayaha siddhaha .
From the general literature of Astrology learn
all the details about Hora, Drekkana, Saptamsa,
Navamsa, Dwadasamsa, Trimsamsa, Shashtiamsa ,
etc.
NOTES
Where the Maharishi does not differ from the ordinary
rules of Astrology, he says siddaha, meaning they are ready
at hand from able astrologers. Wherever he cuts a new path
he indicates the lines of research on which he proceeds. These
commentaries are written by Neelakanta and go under the
name of Suboda. The term Suboda means that the commentaries are written in such an easy and convincing style that
even ordinary readers and students can easily grasp the ideas
explained by the learned commentator I have also consulted
other learned commentators.
End of First Pads of the First Adbyaya
jfil » w n«nfr WOT*: II

II II
ADHYAYA 1-PADA 2.
1 . «ry^ri«5iuiiH. II
Su. 1 . — Adhaswamsograhanam.
Having determined the Atmakaraka from among
the several planets, ascertain the results of his
Navamsa position.
NOTES
Among all the planets commencing from Ravi, find out
who gets the greatest number of degrees and minutes and
determine, as principles already explained, who becomes the
Atmakaraka. In Sutra 1 1 of the first pada it has been clearly
enunciated that whichever planet gets the highest number of
degrees and minutes, he becomes the Atmakaraka. Such a
planet, whoever he may be among the nine planets, must
occupy some Navamsa. In all the future sutras, the effects of
such Navamsa occupied by the Atmakaraka, the planets who
are there and the planets who aspect such Navamsa will be
clearly detailed. Find out by mathematical calculations the
position of all the planets in degrees and minutes and then
the results can easily be foretold in the light of the following
sutras. Find out the Atmakaraka and place him in the proper
Navamsa. Prepare also the Navamsa Chakra correctly.
V Wiftawwfills II
Su. 2. — Panchamooshikamarjaraha.

Jaiminisutnu
If the Atmakaraka occupies Mesha Navamsa,
then the person will be subjected to the fears and
bites of rats, cats, and other similar animals.
NOTES
Pancha means one or Mesha. Pa stands for 1 in Pavarga.
Cha stands for 6 in the Tavarga. Thus we get 16, reading in
the reverse ordei we get 61. Divide this by 12 we get the
remainder 1 and this stands for the first sign in the Zodiac or
Mesha Navamsa.
*. as it
Su. 3.—Tathra chatushpadaha.
If Atmakaraka is in Taurus Navamsa, there will
be fear from quadrupeds.
NOTES
Ta means 6 and Ra means 2 or 62 reversed we get 26,
divided by 12 we get 2 remainder which means the 2nd house
from Mesha or Vrishabha Navamsa. if Atmakaraka occupies
Vrishabha Navamsa the person will have gains and haypiness
from quadrupeds like cattle, horses, elephants, etc. Some
commentators say he will have troubles and worries through
them. I think, when Atmakaraka is weak or has evil aspects
or associations troubles should be predicted. Others write
prosperity from them.
». site* ii
Su. 4 . — Mrithyow kandooh sthoulyam cha.
If Atmakaraka occupies Mithuna the person will
suffer from corpulence, itches and cutaneous
eruptions.

Jaiminisutras
NOTES
Ma represents 5 and Ya represents 1 or 51 reading inversely we get 15. Divided by 12 we have the balance of 3 and
this represents the 3rd Navamsa from Mesha or Mithuna.
^ asygifr : ii
Su. 5 . — Dure jalakushtadih.
If the Atmakaraka occupies Kataka Navamsa,
dangers and troubles come from watery places and
leprosy.
NOTES
Da stands for 8 and Ra represents for 2 or 82. Reversing
it, we have 28. Divided by 12 we get the balance of 4 and
this refers to Kataka as the fourth from Mesha. Dirty form
of leprosy or watery disease rises from blood corruption and
the use of filthy water.
*. fat: II
Su. 6 . — Seshaha swapadani.
If the Atamakaraka. joins Simha Navamsa, troubles will come through dogs and such canine
animals.
NOTES
Ssa represents 5 and Sha indicates 6 or 56, reading backwards we have 65. Divided by 12 we get 5 remainder and Simha
counts as the 5th from Mesha. Here in all these Sutras the
class of animals or diseases is indicated and the reader has
to use his intelligence.

Jaimtaisutras
Su. 7. — Mrithyuvajjayagnikanascha.
If Atmakaraka is in Kanya Navamsa, the native
will suffer from fire, itches, and corpulence.
NOTES
Ja represents 8 and ya denotes 1. We get 81, in the reverse
order we get 18, divided by 12 we have the balance 6 and
Kanya Navamsa represents the 6th from Mesha. If the Atmakaraka joins Kanya Navamsa the person will suffer from the
troubles indicated by the 3rd Rasi or Mithuna and also from
fires. But in Mithuna the author only said that suffering will
come from corpulence and itches.
From this Sutra it means that in the Mithunamsa there
will also be trouble from fires.
Su. 8. — Labhe vanijyam.
If the Atmakaraka joins Thula Navamsa, the
person will make much money by merchandise.
NOTES
La denotes 3 and Bha stands for 4, this stands as 34. In
the reverse order it is 43, divided by 12 we get 7 as the
remainder. Thula stands as the 7th Navamsa from Mesha.
The various kinds of articles in merchandise have to be found
out by the nature of the Rasi, its lord, the planets who are in
conjunction and the aspects they have.
Su. 9. — Atra jalasareesrupaha sthanyahanischa.

Jafminisutras
If the Atmakaraka joins Vrischikartlsa, the person will have fears and dangers from watery animals, snakes and he will also have no milk from
his mother.
Atra-Aa O-Ra 2-02, reversed it means 20 divided by 12 we
get a balance of 8 which signifies Vrischika counting from
Mesha Navamsa. When he is a child he will have to be nursed
and suckled by others for want of milk in his mother’s breast.*
There are some women who have plenty of milk in their
breasts and who nurse their children with their own milk and
sometimes the milk will be sufficient for even two or three
children. Their breasts may not be large or heavy but their
lacteal glands do make brisk work and secrete milk. There
are, on the other hand, a large number of women who have
large lumps of breasts without any milk, but full of flesh and
making the breasts attractive and heavy. The author apparently considers that the absence of milk in the mother will be a
misfortune for the child. The artificial feeding of children from
nipples attached to feeding bottles has removed this misfortune, to some extent. Remember it is not the mother who
feeds the infant. A rubber bottle is not a mother’s holy breast.
Nor does it contain the natural milk of the mother with the
maternal love and affection pervading throughout its contents.
to. aft <mpn $ i w r u
Su. 10. — Same vahanaducchaccha kramat
patanam.
If the Atmakaraka joins the Navamsa of Dhanus,
the person will have suffering and dangers from
falls, from conveyances, horses, etc., and also

Jaiminiautras
from elevated places like trees, houses, hills and
mountains.
NOTES
Sa denotes 7, Ma shows 5, 75 reading reversely we have 57,
divided by 12 will give us a balance of 9 and Dhanus is the
9th Navamsa from Mesha. Aeroplanes may be safely included
in these falls. Dangers are indicated by these falls.
* i . srerq* ihu its n
Su. 1 1 . — Jalachara khechara kheta kandu dushtagranthayascha riphay.
If the Atmakaraka joins Makara the person will
have troubles and sorrows from aquatic animals,
from fierce birds, skin diseases, large wounds and
glandular expansions.
NOTES
Ri 2 and Pha 2-22, divide this by 12 we have a remainder
of 10, meaning Makaramsa as it is the 10th from Meshamsa.
There will be troubles from Khetas. Grahashave two
important significations, viz., planets and evil spirits : some
read the sutra as Bhuchara instead of Khechara, and include
such wild animals as lions, tigers, boars and other fierce
animals found wandering on the earth. Planets and evil spirits
occupy the higher regions. Kha means the sky or the
higher sphere.
Su. 12. — Tatakadayo dharmay.

JaiminUutras
If the Atmakaraka occupies Kumbha Navamsa
the person will do charities in the shape of constructing wells, tracks, topes or gardens, temples
and dharmasalas or chatrams.
NOTES
Dha stands for 9 and Ma denotes 5, thus we get 95 reversing we get 59. Divided by 12 we get remainder 11, denoting
Kumbha, the Navamsa 11th from Mesha.
Su. 13 .—Uchhe dharmanityata kaivalyam cha.
If the Atmakaraka occupies Meenamsa, the
person will be fond of virtuous deeds and charities,
and will take residence in Swargadi Lokas or will
attain to the final bliss or what is called by the
Sanskrit writers Moksha or final emancipation or
freedom from rebirths.
NOTES
U stands for 0, Cha denotes 6, we get 06, reading in* the
reverse order we get 60. Divide this by 12 the balance will be
12 and therefore Meena Navamsa is indicated by the term
uchcha.
Among the Yogis and real Vedantists their sole aim or
final goal is to get rid of these punarjanmas or constant birth
and get final assimilation with Para Brahma. The old commentators have offered some valuable suggestions. I shall quote
them here for ready reference.

Jaiminisutra*
If the Atmakaraka is in a beneficial Navamsa or if beneficial planets are in Kendras from the Navamsa he occupies,
the person will become very wealthy or a ruler. If the next
planet to Atmakaraka occupies a beneficial sign or Navamsa,
or found in his own house or beneficial sign or in exaltation or
in good Navamsas, he will have residence, after death, in
Swargalokas according to merit. If both of them are auspiciously situated, the person will get good Bliss and after a
prosperous and happy career will go to Heaven. If they have
mixed positions, conjunctions and aspects, he will have some
good and some bad. If both of them are badly situated combined and aspected, he will suffer miseries, poverty and will
take residence, after death, in various Hells enumerated in the
Hindu Sastras like Kumbhipatha, Andha, Tamisra, etc.
There are fourteen Lokas mentioned and principally three
namely Swarga tenanted by the Devatas who are headed by
Indra, Bhuloka inhabited by mortals called Martya, and
Patala inhabited by special creatures called Nagas. A person
in Gandharva or Siddhaloka is not so happy as one in Indra
Loka. One who resides in Brahmaloka enjoys superior Bliss
to that which he can have in Devaloka. When evil planets
predominate the temperament will be mixed and his deeds
will be bad and sinful. When benefics predominate they
produce favourable results both here and also enhance his
pleasure in Heaven after his death. As for the comparison
of pleasures, see Anandavalli Upanishad and also numbers 1 1
and 12 of Vol. 19 of The ASTROLOGICAL MAGAZINE
i«. m ramtat ii
Su. 14. Tatra ravou rajakaryaparaha.

Jaiminisutras
If the Sun occupies the Karakamsa, the person
will be fond of public service and will work in
political activities.
NOTES
Here it means, that Ravi must be in conjunction with the
Atmakaraka in the Navamsa. His success here may be determined both by the nature of the Navamsa and also by his
relation to the Atmakaraka who may change to be his friend,
bosom friend, neutral or enemy or bitter enemy. All these
different stages are suggested by the Maharishi in compliance
with the general principles of Astrology, which he enumerates.
fawr-ofaft * u
Su. 15 . — Poornendusukrayorbhogee vidyajeevee
cha.
If Full Moon and Venus join Atmakaraka in
the Navamsa, the person will command great
wealth and all comforts attandant on wealth and he
will also earn money and live by the profession of
education.
NOTES
In all these the strength, position and association of
Atmakaraka will have great influence in determining the rank
and position in the line. A school authority will be great or
small as he gets fat or low salary.
H. arffafrft * n
Su. 16 . — Dhatuvadee kountayudho vahnijeevee
cha bhoume.

Jaiminisutras
When Kuja joins Atmakaraka in the Navamsa,
the person becomes great in the preparation of various medical mixtures, will bear arms like kuntayudha and other weapons, and live by profession
involving preparations in or near fire.
NOTES
The gunners, cooks, engine drivers and those engaged in
various preparations in or near fire are indicated. Alchemy
comes in this line of work.
i®. qtSRRFjsnm: wwsufaqsr 11
Su. 17. — Vanijatantuvayaha silpino vyavahara -
vidascha soumye.
If Budha conjoins the Atmakaraka in the Navamsa, the persons become merchants, weavers and
manufacturers of clothes, artists and persons clever
in preparing curios, and those well versed in the
affairs of social and political matters.
vs. dft ii
Su. 18 . — Karmagnananishta vedavidascha jeevay.
When Guru joins the Navamsa with Atmakaraka, the person will be well versed in Vedic or
religious rituals, will have riligious wisdom, wellknown in the rules of sacrificial functions and will
have good knowledge in Vedanta and will be a
-eligious man.

Jaiminisutras
$tRH: ^R^JpTW gft II
Su. 19. — Rajakeeyaha kaminaha satendriyascha
sukre -
If Sukra joins the Atmakaraka in the Navamsa,
the person will become a great official or political
personage, will be fond of many women and will
retain vitality and sexual passions till he is
hundred years old.
NOTES
He will be fond of women and sexual pleasures and in
spite of these sexual excesses he will retain passions for a
very long period.
Sexual passions are as various and as curious as any
other phenomena. Some get prematurely old and lose their
sexual vitality. Otherr retain sexual vigour for more than a
hundred years.
after: sptV u
Su. 20. — Prasiddhakarma jeevaha sanow.
If Sani joins Atmakaraka in the Navamsa, he
will produce a famous person in his own line of
business.
NOTES
The author apparently means that when Sani joins the
Atmakaraka in the Navamsa, a person will be able to achieve
greatness and reputation in whatever walk of life he may be
engaged. There are great writers, painters, sculptors, speakers, merchants, warriors, statesmen, travellers, inventors,

jaiminisutraa
discoverers, scientists, musicians and so forth, the profession
or line of work being determined by other combinations in
the horoscope. Sani with the Atmakaraka in the Navamsa
lifts the person to a high position in that line and gives him
great reputation and name.
vugqwll'tw smFfessrhpifsGW wfl II
Su. 2\.—Dhanushkaschouvrascha jangalikalohayantrinascha rahow.
If Rahu joins the Atmakaraka in Navamsa the
person will live by the skillful use of warlike instruments, he will earn bread as thief and dacoit ; he
becomes a doctor dealing in poisons, manufacturer
of gold, silver, copper and other metallic machinery.
Su. 22 . — Gajavyavaharinaschourascha kethau.
When Kethu joins the Atmakaraka in the Navamsa the persons born under such combination
trade in elephants or become thieves and robbers.
NOTES
Between thieves and dealers in elephants the line of
demarcation seems to be delicate.
d frt ig wii aO Era a n; i
Su. 23 . — Ravirahubhyam sarpanidhanam.
If Ravi and Rahu join Atmakaraka in the
Navamsa the person dies by snake-bites.

Jaiminisutras
NOTES
Snakes are of various kinds and -the nature of the causes
will be determined by other planetary positions.
Su. 24 . — Subhadrishte thannivrittihi.
If benefics aspect the Yoga mentioned above,
there will be no deaths from snake-bites.
NOTES
He may have snake-bites, but relief proper will be at
hand and the person will get over the danger.
Vs. it
. Su. 25. — Subhamatrasambandhajjangulikaha.
If Ravi and Rahu join Atmakaraka in the Navamsa and have only beneficial aspects, the person
will have no snake-bites, but will become a doctor
who deals solely in poisonous matters.
fsnwwre^ *i ii
Su. 26 —Kujamatradrishte grihadahako agnidova.
If Ravi and Rahu join Atmakaraka in the Navamsa, and have the evil aspect of Kuja, the person
will burn houses or lend fire and other help to the
incendiaries.
NOTES
There is some difference, in the guilt of the person who
burns a house aad one who helps him in his diabolical deeds.

Jaiminisutras
Su. 27. — Sukradrishte na dahaha.
If Ravi and Rahu join Atmakaraka in the Navamsa and have the aspect of Sukra, the person will
not burn the houses himself, but will lend fire to
the rogues who do it.
NOTES
The abettor is equally culpable in the eye of law and the
delicate difference of burning the house and lending fire to
burn the house, seems to be a nice point for consideration of
the Dharmasastras and legal luminaries.
Su. 28. — Gurudrishe twasameepagrihat.
If Ravi and Rahu join Atmakaraka in the Navamsa, but have the aspect of Guru alone, the person will burn houses at a distance from his own
house.
NOTES
Apparently Sukra’s aspect will intensify the evil tendencies and aggravate the offences, by burning houses close to
one’s own house.
Su. 29. — Sagulike vishado vishahato va.
If the Karaka Navamsa falls in Gulikakala or
the time governed by Gulika, the person will admi-

Jaiminisutras
nister poison to others and kill them or be killed
by such administrations of poison by others.
NOTES
Here we have to learn what is meant by Gulikakala and
the time governed by him. Ravi, Chandra, Kuja, Budha,
Guru, Sukra and Sani'are called Grahas. They have Upagrahas or their sons. Sukra and Chandra have not been given
any Upagrahas. The latter are Sani -Gulika, Guru -Yamaghantaka, Ku]fL-Mritya, Ravi -Kala and Budha -Ardhaprahara.
Divide the duration of the day by 8 and proceed to count
from the lord of the day. Take Sunday and suppose the
•duration of the day is 30 ghatis. Then each part gets or
3|- ghatis.
The first 3J ghatis are governed by Ravi the lord of that
day.
The second 3£ ghatis are under the rule of Chandra.
The third 3| ghatis are governed by Kuja.
The fourth 3J ghatis are under the lordship of Budha*
The fifth 3| ghatis are ruled by Guru.
The sixth 3| ghatis are under Sukra.
The seventh 3| ghatis are ruled by Sani.
The 8th 3| ghatis have no lord and Gulika who is next
to Sani becomes the lord. These 3| ghatis are called Gulikakala and if the Atmakaraka Navamsa falls in this time, the
results above named must be predicted. 3| ghatis is called
a Yama in Sanskrit.
* If the duration of day is more or less than 30 ghatis then each part Is
indicated bv the actual duration of day divided by 8.

Jaiminisutras
Take Chandrawara or Monday.
First Chandra 3| ghatis. Fourth Guru 3| ghatis
Second Kuja 3| ,, Fifth Sukra ,,
Third Budha 3|- ,, Sixth Sani 3J ,,
All these six give 22\ ghatis
Seventh Gulika 3| ghatis
Eighth Ravi 3-^ ,,
After this comes in Gulikakala extending from 22\ ghatis
on Monday and lasting upto 26£ ghatis. On Tuesday or
Kujawara we commence from Kuja thus : —
Kuja
3| ghatis
Sani
3| ghatis
Budha
Gulika
Guru
Ravi
Sukra
Chandra
The first 5 yamas give us 18j ghatis. From that time
till 221; ghatis after sunrise, there will be Gulikakala and if
the Atmakaraka Navamsa falls in this, the evil results indicated above will happen. The Gulikakala has been so stated
by the commentators. I have another authority for the
Gulikakala. Mandapan watapariansam chaturgunyam dwihinakam. Tatkala gulikognayaha sarva karya vinasakritu. Count
from Saturday to the weekday required. Take the number
so obtained and multiply it by four. Then take or deduct
2 from the number so obtained. Then Gulikakala commences at the time and continues upto 3| ghatis more. The
results differ in these two systems. Take Monday and find
out the Gulikakala as per the above rule. Monday counts
as the 3rd from Saturday. Multiply this 3 by 4 and we get
12. Deduct two out of that and we get 10 ghatis. Gulika-

Jiaminisutras
kala falls on Monday from 22 ^ ghatis to 26|. ghatis after
sunrise. The process to find out the Gulikakala in the night
is thus stated by the old commentators. Take the fifth planet
from the lord of the weekday and count from him and then
the 8th in the order given above will be Gulikakala. Take
for example Sunday, the Sth from him is Guru. Now take
Guru. Dropping Guru we have Sukra and Sani covering the
first and second period, and the 3rd period falls under Gulika
on Monday, the second period on Tuesday, the 8th period on
Wednesday, the 7th on Thursday, the 6th on Friday and the
5th on Saturday. When there are differences of opinion on
such matters among the old writers we have to look to the
opinion of the best among them, and to verify and support
the theory we must also bring our large experience to help us
in such interpretations. Take Hora, Varahamihira and his
school. Say, that in odd signs the first Hora is governed by
Ravi and the second by Chandra. In the even signs the first
is governed by Chandra and the second by Ravi. But there
is a different school. Some say that first Hora is governed
by the lord of the house and the second by the lord of the
11th. In Drekkana more than two systems are recommended.
Varahamihira says the lords of the three Drekkanas are the
lords of 1st, 5th and 9th. There are some others who say
that the lords of the 3 Drekkanas are the lords of 1st, 12th
and 1 1th houses. There are some others who say that in
chara or movable signs, the lords of the Drekkanas are the
owners of the 1st, 5th and 9th. But in fixed and double
bodied signs their order is quite changed. In all such cases
of difference of opinion among the Maharishis I cannot
pretend to say which is correct and which is not. Both may
be correct as the authors, by their Divya Drishti, may have

Jaiminisutras
approached from different directions and may have 'found'
their observations proving quite true. I leave the readers to
judge of these differences in the light of their intelligence,
knowledge and personal experiences. When two Maharishis
differ I must frankly tell my readers that I have no means at
my command to ascertain which is better and more correct.
Both of them are Mahatmas and both looked into these details by their Divya Drishti or expanded mental vision. I
possess no such Divya Drishti and therefore am not in a
position to go beyond the phenomena and ascertain the true
causes. I have to trust the learned commentators.
V sn u
Su. 30. — Chandradrishtau chorapahritadhanaschouro va.
If Chandra aspects the Atmakaraka Navamsa
falling in Gulikakala, the person will be a receiver
of stolen property or will become himself a thief.
NOTES
I think there is not much difference between the moral
and spiritual offences between these two worthies.
Su. 3 1 . — Budhamatradrishte brihadbeejaha.
If the Atmakaraka Navamsa falls in Gulikakala
and possesses only the aspect of Budha, the person
will have enlarged testicles.
NOTES
Here Budha alone must aspect the Navamsa without the

Jaiminisutras
aspect of any other planets. Hydrocele is a nasty form of
disease and disgusting before the public.
TO TORI *IT II
Su. 32.— Tathra kethow papadrishte karnachchedaha karnarogo va.
If Ketu joins the Atmakaraka Navamsa the
person will have his ears cut off or will have serious
ear complaints.
gs&pS H
Su. 33 . — Sukradrishte deekshitaha.
If Atmakaraka and Kethu in the Navamsa, have
the aspect of Sukra, the person will become a Deekshita or performer of Yagnyas or religious sacrifices.
NOTES
Formerly such persons were held in high esteem. They
had to lead scrupulously clean, simple and holy lives.
V*. II
Su. 34 . — Budhasanidrishte nirveeryaha.
If the Atmakaraka with Kethu in the Navamsa
has the aspects of Budha and Sani, the birth of an
impotent or eunuch should be predicted.
NOTES
Veerya is virility in a person and one who has no veerya
is impotent.
Su. 35 . — Budhasukradrishte pounah puniko dasi -
putree va.

Jaiminisutras
If the Karakamsa Rasi with Kethu has the aspect
of Sukra and Budha, the person will talk repeating
and repeating the same ideas or will be the son of a
prostitute or dancing women.
NOTES
Dasis are a special class of dancing women who were
devoted to the service of Gods in the temples and had no
strictness in sexual matters.
Su. 36.— Sanidrishte tapaswee preshyo va.
If the Karakamsa with Kethu has the aspect of
Sani, he will become a Tapaswi or recluse or be a
dependent and servant under somebody.
NOTES
There is a great gulf of difference between the position
of a man devoting all his energies on the contemplation of
God and one who is dependent on others. Why both the
results are ascribed to the same combination is not clear.
Su. 37 . — Sanimatradrishte sanyasabhasaha.
If in the above combination there is only the
aspect of Sani and there is no other planetary
aspect, he will put on the appearance of a sanyasi
but will not be a true or real sanyasi. He will be
an imposter.

Jaimioisutras
TO u
Su. 38 . — Tatra ravisukradrishte rajapreshyah.
If Ravi and Sukra aspect the Karakamsa the
person will be employed by royal or political
personages to do their work. He will be their
confident.
V*. n
Su. 39 . — Ripphe budhe budhadrishte va mandavat.
If the tenth from the Karaka Navamsa possesses the aspect of Budha, he will get similar results
as have been given by Sani.
NOTES
This means that the person will follow some notable
profession. Ripha means, Ra 2, pha means 2 = 22 divided by
12, will give us 10, 10th house is indicated by Ripha.
Su. 40 . — Shubhadrishte stheyaha.
If in the 10th from Karakamsa, there is beneficial aspect, the person will be one of great
determination and never capricious.
NOTES
The other benefics are Guru and Sukra. It cannot mean
anything else.
vi. wV ii
Su. 41 . — Ravow gurumatradrishte gopalaha.

Jahninisutras
If the 10th from the Karakamsa, there is Ravi
possessing only the aspect of Guru and no other
aspects, the person will have success through the
sales of cow, bulls and other cattle.
Su. 42. — Dare chandrasukradrigyogatprasadaha.
If the lord of the 4th from the Karakamsa is
joined or aspected by Chandra and Sukra, the
person will be blessed with storeyed houses.
NOTES
Da means 8, Ra means 2 = 82, reversed it means 28,
divided by 12 we get 4 balance. This shows signs of wealth.
Prasada means houses with compounds.
Su. 43. — Ucchagrahe api.
If the fourth from the Karakamsa is occupied
by an exalted planet, the person will have many
fine and splendid houses.
v*. n
Su. 44. — Rahusanibhyam silagriham.
If the fourth from the Karakamsa is occupied
by Rahu and Sani, the houses will be constructed
with rough stones not well plastered.
fs&gwitffe'feH. ii
Su. 45. — Kujakethubhyamaishtikam.

Jaiminisutras
If the 4th from Karakamsa is occupied by Kuja
and Kethu, the houses will be constructed of
bricks, lumps of earth.
jppn ii
Su. 46. — Guruna daravam.
If the 4th from Karakamsa is occupied by Guru
wooden houses will be constructed by the native.
«®. uiflr rfom u
Su. 47. — Tharnam ravina.
If the 4th is occupied by the Sun, the houses
will be constructed from thatch and grasses.
NOTES
The above three sutras give an idea of the nature of the
house property possessed by different persons depending
upon the dispositions of planets with reference to Karakamsa.
Su . 48 . — Same shubhayogaddharmanityaha satya -
vaidee gurubhaktascha.
If the 9th from Karakamsa is occupied or
aspected by benefics, the person will have truth as
his ideal and motto. He will be righteous in
conduct, lover of truth and will be faithful and
dutiful to elders, preceptors and Gurus.
NOTES
Sa stands for 7 and Ma denotes 5-75, reversed it is 57,
divided by 12, we get a remainder of 9. Sama means 9th from

Jaiminisutns
Karakamsa. Ninth is the house of piety and represents
devotion and faith in Gods and Godesses.
qnh n
Su. 49. — Anyatha papaihi.
If the 9th from Karakamsa has evil conjunction
or aspects, he will be quite the reverse in character.
He will be a liar, uncharitable and sinful, and will
have no faith and respect for Gurus and elders.
h». gi ftngw ri II
Su. 50. — Sanirahubhyam gurudrohaha.
If Sani and Rahu occupy or aspect the 9th from
Karakamsa, the person will become ungrateful to
Gurus and will prove a traitor to them.
NOTES
Cheating is a sin. But (here are many grades and its
heinousness depends upon the nature of the parties concerned.
hi. »
Su. 51. — Ravigurubhyam gurovavisvasaha.
If Guru and Ravi occupy or aspect the 9th from
Karakamsa, he will not love his parents, elders and
preceptors.
h*. m Minify*: u
Su. 52.— Tatra bhrigwangaraka varge paradarikaha.

Jaimicisutras
If the 9th from Karakamsa falls in one of the
shadvargas of Sukra and Kuja, he will be fond of
others’ wives.
NOTES
There are two classes of villians. One set taking sexual
gratifications with women of immoral tendencies and another
set always tempting the wives of other persons, and ruining
their families. Adultery is sinful, but even here there are
various grades of sins. *Shadvargas are (I) Lagna, (2) Hora,
(3) Drekkana, (4) Navamsa, (5) Dwadasamsa, and (6) Thrimsamsa. Adultery with motherly relations, friends, wives,
spouses of Gurus and other prohibited relations is more sinful than adultery with other women. Corrupting family and
innocent women is a horrible form of sin.
Su. 53. — Drigyogabhyamadhikabhyamamaranam.
If Kuja and Sukra join or aspect the 9th from
Karakamsa, the person will have the evil habit of
seducing and keeping illegal gratifications till the
end of his life.
NOTES
The conjunctions and aspects are more powerful than
•the Shadvargas. In the latter he will keep up the vicious
habit for some time, but in the former, this vice will continue
till the end of life. With some persons, males and females,
* This has been clearly described in my work A Manual of Hindu
Astrology •

Jaminisutras
these morbid sensations of lust and sexuality will continue
for some time and then they turn a new chapter in their lives,
but there are others, who do not give up the vicious habits
till their death. Some are rascals only for a time but there
are others who are rascals and cheats throughout their lives.
Even on death-beds their thoughts run on unholy deeds.
'as. ii
Su. 54 . — Kethuna prcitibandhaha.
If the 9th from Karakamsa has the conjunction
or aspect of Kethu, he will be fond of women for
some time and then give up the bad tendency.
Su. 55 . — Guruna strainaha.
If the 9th from Karakamsa has the conjunction
or aspect of Guru, he will be excessively fond of
other women.
'a*. uf g nfl l Hfa : ii
Su. 56 . — Rahimarthcmivrittihi.
If the 9th from Karakamsa is joined or aspected
by Rahu, the person will lose all his wealth by
female excesses.
NOTES
Even in these vices there are some prudent men financially. Some get money by adultery, some enjoy for nothing,
there are others who lose all their wealth and health by such
vices.

Jaiminisutras
Su. 57 . — Labhe chandragurubhyam sundaree.
If Guru and Chandra occupy the 7th from the
Karakamsa, the wife will be handsome and loving.
NOTES
La means 3, Bha denotes 4 — 34, reading backwards we
have 43, divided by 12., we have 7 remainder. Labha therefore means 7. It will certainly be a great blessing to have
handsome wife provided she is faithful. But when she is
fair and unfaithful life becomes miserable. He will have a
Hell on Earth.
Tigon it
Su. 58 .--Rahuna vidhava.
If the 7th from the Karakamsa joins with Rahu
or has his aspect, the person will have widows for
connection.
NOTES
There are some worthies who are extremely fond of
widows. They hunt after them. They like them in preference to others.
hv *i£rt wtfqsr rrPtoft nqfspft *r u
Su. 59 . — Sanina vayodhika roginee tapaswinee
va.
If the 7th from Karakamsa is occupied or
aspected by Sani, the wife will be older or will be
sickly or will be a tapaswini or a woman who will
be engaged in religious meditations.

Jaiminisutras
NOTES
While some persons like younger people there are others
both males and females who hunt after old people.
Temperaments are curious.
Su. 60 . — Kujena vikalangee.
If Kuja joins or aspects the 7th from Karakamsa, the wife will be deformed or there will be
defect in her limbs.
Su. 61 . — *Ravina swakule gupta cha.
If Ravi occupies or aspects the 7th from Karakamsa, the wife will be protected from the members
of the husband’s family and will have no defects in
her limbs.
Su. 62 . — Budhena kalavatee.
If Budha joins or aspects the 7th from Karakamsa, the wife will be well versed in music, arts,
dancing and other fine accomplishments.
U. wfrmwnji ii
Su. 63 . — Chape chandrenanavrite dese.
If Chandra occupies the 4th from Karakamsa
the first sexual union of the wives, mentioned in
‘Another version reads as Ravim i kuta gupthacha.

Jaiminisutras
the above sutras, will take place in an open place
uncovered by roof or ceiling.
NOTES
Cha means 6, po means 1-61, reversing we have 16
divided by 12, the balance 4 shows the 4th house from the
Karakamsa. There are some people who cannot control their
passions and who have sexual unions in open places.
Su. 64 . — Karmani pape shooraha.
If the 3rd from the Karakamsa contains evil
planets, the person becomes courageous and a
warrior.
NOTES
An means 1, Ma means 5 — 15, reading backwards we
have 51, divided by 12, we have the remainder 3. In general
astrology, the third house from Lagna shows brothers, sisters
and courage.
5$ vm: II
Su. 65 . — Subhe kataraha.
If the 3rd from Karakamsa has benefics, the
person becomes a coward.
n
Su. 66 . — Mrityuchintyayoh pape karshakaha.
If the 3rd and 6th from Karakamsa are occupied
by malefics, the person lives by ploughing and
agriculture.

Jainnioisutras
NOTES
Ma 5, ya 1 =51, reversing we have 15. Cha 6, Tha 6 = 66,
reversing we have 66. Divide them by 12, we get 3 and 6.
Malefics are considered to give auspicious results in 3, 6 and
1 1 . Thrishadaya gatahpapaha.
Su. 67 . — Same gurow viseshena.
If Guru occupies the 9th from Karakamsa, he
will become a great agriculturist.
^presto: II
Su. 68. — Ueche shubhe shubhalokaha.
If benefics occupy 12 from Karakamsa, the
person goes to superior Lokas.
NOTES
U 0, Cha 6 06., reversed we get 60, divided by 12, we have
12. Indian sciences and religions mention many Punya
Lokas or happy regions in the universe.
Su. 69 . — Ketow kaivalyam.
If a benefic occupies Karakamsa, the person
will have Moksha or Final Bliss.
NOTES
Ka' means 1, Ta signifies 6 = 16. 16 reversed-61.
Divided by 12, we get balance of ] . We may also take ucche
from the previous Sutra and say that if Kethu is found in
there will be final Bliss.
♦Anou

Jaiminisutras
»o. fi OT - qwftfi g ft oi u
Su. 70. — Kriyochapayorviseshena.
If Karakamsa is Mesha or Dhanus with benefics
there, the subject gets Moksha. If Mesha or Dhanus
happens to be the 12th from Karakamsa and Kethu
is there, the person .will get Moksha.
NOTES
The commentators have put on two different kinds of
interpretations. I shall explain both of them. The splendid
power of sutras and their brevity capable of long interpretations are only possible in Sanskrit. No other language in
the world possesses such facilities for brevity and at the same
time containing a world of meaning. If Mesha or Dhanus
becomes Karakamsa with a benefic there, there will be the
highest Bliss. If Mesha or Dhanus becomes the 12th from
Karakamsa and Kethu is there, there will be the highest Bliss
or Moksha. Kethu is not a full benefic. Kethu becomes a
benefic in Chara Dasa and not otherwise. Therefore he cannot be classified as a sub ha gr aha. But astrology ascribes to
him the highest spiritual power of emancipation from all
births and re-births and gives man Moksha.
»7. qifcFsm it
Su. 71. — Papairanyatha.
If the 12th from the Karakamsa is occupied by
evil planets, he will go to hell and will have no
Bliss.

Jaiminisutras
NOTES
Heaven and Hell are not seen. But there is the universal
belief in their existence and all religions lend support to
this faith.
Su. 72. — Ravikethubhyam shive bhaktihi.
If Ravi and Kethu are in Karakamsa, the
person will become a Saivite or one who worships
Shiva.
NOTES
Worship of God is as different as there are differences
in temperaments. Matha is a peculiarity of Mathi or mind.
Su. 73. — Chandrena gauryam.
If Chandra joins Karakamsa, the person will
worship Gouri, wife of Shiva.
Su. 74. — Sukrena lakshmyam.
If Sukra joins Karakamsa, he will worship
Lakshmi, spouse of Vishnu.
Su. 75. — Kujena skande.
If Kuja occupies Karakamsa, he becomes a
worshipper of Skanda or Shanmukha the warrior
son of Shiva.

Jaimiflisutras
Su. 16.—Budhasanibhyam vishnow.
If Budha and Sani join Karakamsa, he will
worship Vishnu.
NOTES
Different temperaments have different tastes and their
selection of Gods follows their temperaments. As all rivers
fall into the ocean, so also all forms of worship reach the
Almighty.
jpson n
Su. 77 . — Guruna sambasive.
If Karakamsa is joined by Guru, he will worship
Sambasiva or Parvati and Paramesvara.
Su. 78 . — Rahuna thamasyam durgayam cha.
If Rahu joins Karakamsa, the person will
worship evil spirits and Durga.
NOTES
There are about 56 varieties of evil spirits mentioned in
the Mantrasastras. There are two principal divisions among
the Mantras. Kshudra Mantras devoted to the invocation of
evil spirits and actions performed by them and Maha Mantras
or incantations to Divine and angelic spirits and work that
can be done by them. I shall mention a few names of evil
spirits: Bhuta, Preta, Pisacha, Sakini, Dhakini, Mohini,
Jalini, Malini, Bhetala, etc.

Jaiminisutras
The Maha Mantras invoke Gayatri, Savitri, Saraswati,
Brahma, Vishnu, Maheswara, Lakshmi, Lalita, Durga,
Ganapati, Skanda, Surya, etc.
^ II
Su. 79 —Kethuna ganese skande cha.
If Kethu joins Karakamsa, the person becomes
a devotee of Ganesa and Kumaraswami.
co, qn$ n
Su. 80 . — Paparkshe mande kshudradevatasu.
If Sani occupies the Karakamsa falling in an
evil sign, the person becomes a great devotee of evil
spirits.
NOTES
There are Devil and Spirit worshippers of various
grades. The existence of spirit-world has been proved by the
best intellects and by personal experience. A handful of
experience is worth ten cart loads of theories.
c%. ^ II
Su. 81 . — Sukre cha.
If Sukra occupies the evil Karakamsa, the
person will worship devils, spirits, etc.
NOTES
There are 56 varieties of Devils or Pisachas headed by
the powerful Bhetala. See my notes in Sarwartha Chintamani.
Su. 82 . — Amatyadasay chaivam.

Jaiminisutras
If the 6th from Amatyakaraka joins evil Karakamsa, the person devotes himself to the worship
of evil spirits.
NOTES
The planet who gets the highest number of degrees
becomes the Atmakaraka. The planet who gets the next
highest number of degrees becomes the Amatyakaraka. If the
6th planet from Amatyakaraka counting from Ravi in the
regular order occupies the evil Karakamsa, the person will
be devoted to evil spirits. Always the order of the planets
are as follows : — Ravi, Chandra, Kuja, Budha, Guru, Sukra
and Sani, the order of the week-days. Somebody must
become Amatyakaraka, suppose Sam becomes so. The 6th
from Ravi is Sukra and if Sukra joins the evil Karakamsa,
the person devotes his time to evil spirits. These Mantras
are called Kshudra or Sahara and count as 9 crores, a
bewildering number.
flrchUl «n9Tg[^ n
Su. 83 . — Trikone popadwaye mantrikaha.
If the 5th and 9th from the Karakamsa are
occupied by evil planets, the person becomes a
Mantrika or a magician and will be able to exercise
devils and evil spirits.
Su. M.—Papadrishte nigrahakaha.
If the evil planets in the 5th and 9th from Karakamsa have evil conjunctions or aspects, the person

Jaiminisutras
becomes a great Mantraic and will be able to root
out all evil spirits.
Su. 85. — Shubhadrishtenugrahakaha.
If the evil planets in the 5th and from Karakamsa have beneficial aspects or conjunction, the
person will help the people and do them good.
Su. 86 . — Sukrendou sukradrishte rasavadee.
If Sukra aspects Karakamsa and the Moon, the
person becomes an alchemist.
Su. 87 . — Budhadrishtc bhishak.
If Karakamsa and Chandra have the aspect of
Budha, the person becomes a medical man.
NOTES
His eminence and capacity will depend upon the strength
of Budha.
■art ii
Su. 88 .— Chape chandre sukradrishte pandusswithee.
If Moon is in the 4th from Karakamsa and has
the aspect of Sukra, the person will suffer from
white leprosy.

Jaiminisutras
NOTES
• Cha 6, Pa 1=61 reversed 16, divided by 12, will give a
balance of 4. Hence Chape means 4th house from the
Karakamsa.
UtgHhl; II
Su. 89 . — Kujadrishte maharogaha.
If Kuja aspects Chandra in the 4th house from
the Karakamsa, the man will have serious form of
leprosy.
\o. n
Su. 90 . — Kethudrishte neelakushtam.
If Chandra in the 4th from the Karakamsa is
aspected by Kethu, the person will have black
leprosy.
NOTES
There arc many hideous and repulsive forms of this
loathsome disease.
<o. *t ssmgwrt a?*: \\
Su. 91 .— Tatra mritow va kujarahubhyam
kshayaha.
If the 4th or 5th from Karakamsa is joined by
Kuja and Rahu, the person will suffer from consumption or pthysis.
NOTES
He will have a mild attack of disease.

Jaimioisutras
Su. 92. — Chandradrishte nischayena.
If such Kuja and Rahu, started in the above
sutra, have the inner aspect, certainly the person
will have serious form of consumption.
f^T II
Su. 93. - Kujena pitakadihi.
If the 4th or 5th from the Karakamsa is occupied by Kuja, the person will suffer from excessive
sweating, cuts, itches or boils and sores in the
body.
Su. 94. — Kethuna grahani jalarogo \a.
If Kethu joins the 4th or 5th from Karakamsa,
the man will suffer from Grahani or a kind of glandular disease and from watery diseases like dropsy,
diabetes, loose motions, etc.
vi. npfowwri n
Su. 95.— Rahugulikabhyam kshudravishani.
If the 4th or 5th from the Karakamsa is joined
by Rahu and Gulika, there will be suffering from
the poisonous effects of rats, cats, etc.
U. wr srft 11
Su. 96. — Tatra sanow dhanushkaha.

Jaiminisutras
If the 4th from the Karakamsa is joined by
Sani, the person becomes an expert in inflicting
wounds. This means he will be skilled in the use of
deadly arms.
Su. 97 . — Kethuna ghatikayanthree.
If Kethu joins the 4th from Karakamsa, the
person becomes skilful in preparing clocks, watches
and other time indicating machines.
NOTES
1 have shown in the Introduction and also in the prefatory
remarks that Jaimini flourished 5,000 years ago. He was a
contemporary of Vedavyasa and was his worthy disciple.
Ghatika yantras or machines showing time were in existence
as this Sutra proves and confirms. Suryasiddar.ta mentions
many Yantras.
<u. rswjit sn n
Su. 98 . — Budhena paramahamso lagudee va.
If the 4th from the Karakamsa is combined by
Budha, the person becomes a paramahamsa or a
great yogi, or one who bears *Palasa Danda , etc.,
showing Brahmacharya or Sanyasayoga of particular
kind.
vt. TTfWTT II
Su. 99 . — Kahuna lohayantree.
*P&Iasa means Butea frondosa.

Jaiminisutras
If the 4th from the Karakamsa is occupied by
Rahu, he will become proficient in preparing
machinery out of metals or a clever mechanic.
Su. 100. — Ravina khadgee.
If Ravi joins the 4th from Karakamsa, the
person lives by his sword.
NOTES
Many kinds of swords are mentioned in the ancient works.
Swords are terrible weapons then as well as now at close
quarters.
Su. 101. — Kujena Kunthee.
If Kuja joins the 4th from Karakamsa, he will
live by the profession of using Kuntayudha, maces
and long sticks.
Su . 102. — Matapitroschandragurubhyam granthakrit.
If Chandra and Guru are in the Karakamsa or
in the 5th from it, the person will become an author
and will live by writing books.
NOTES
Ma 5, Ta 6-56, reversing we get 65, divided by 12, there
is a balance of 5. Pa 1, Ta 6-16, inverse order 61 divided

Jaiminisutras
by 12, we have 1. Fifth is the house of intelligence in
astrology as also of children.
Su. 103. — Sukrena kinchidoomm.
If Chandra and Sukra join Karakamsa or the
5th house from it, the person becomes an ordinary
author.
?reitsfo n
Su. 104. — Budhena tato api.
The person becomes still less famous than in
the above Sutra if Budha joins Chandra instead of
Sukra in Karakamsa or the 5th from it.
Su. 105. — Sukrena kavirwagmee kaxyagnascha.
If Sukra joins Karakamsa or the 5th from it,
the person becomes a great poet, an eloquent
speaker and well versed in poetry and literature.
Su. 106. — Guruna sarvavid granthikascha.
If Guru joins the Karakamsa or the 5th from
it, he will be an all-round man and will know many
branches of knowledge, well read in sciences and
author of various works. He becomes a versatile
genius.
* ainft ii
Su. 107. — Na vagmee.

Jaiminisutras,
In the above combination of Guru, though a
person becomes learned he will not become a good
speaker nor possess powers of eloquence.
NOTES
Some have the gift of the gab while many have it not.
W. II
Su. 108 . — Visishyavaiyyakarano vedavedanthavichha.
If Guru joins Karakamsa or the 5th from it, the
person becomes learned in Vyakarana or Grammar,
Vedic literature and Vedangas.
NOTES
The last are named as Siksha, Vyakarana, Chandas,
Nirukta, Jyotisha and Kalpa. Without a proficiency in these
six Angas or limbs, no scholar can interpret the Vedas
properly.
Vedas simply mean repositories of knowledge useful for
all ages, claims and nations. Whatever might have been the
origin of these intellectual mines, there are no books extant
in the world, which can compare with these deep mines of
thought, knowledge and highest conceptions of human intellectual flights. The commentaries of Bhatta Bhaskara and
Vidyaranya are the two eyes for the Vedas through which we
can approach the Vedas and see them to some extent. The
first and earliest commentators is Bhatta Bhaskara and he
must have flourished in the remote ages. Vidyaranya’s age is
fixed clearly by the inscription (see my History of Vijayanagar)

Jaiminisutras
as 1238 Salivahana Saka or 1336 A.D. This illustrious intellectual giant not only founded the Empire of Vijayanagar, but
was also the pontifical Head of the Sringeri Mutt of Adi
Sankaracharya. He obtained Samadhi in 1386 after having
seen Harihara I, Bukka 1 and Harihara II, ruling the Empire
founded by him in great prosperity, peace and progress.
Practically there seems to be no difference in the combinations given in Sutras 106 and 108. If in this combination
Guru is exalted or himself has beneficial aspects or Shadvargas, the knowledge in the man may be more profound, and
the intellect more comprehensive and piercing. The strength
of the planet, of the Rasi, the power of the Atmakaraka and
combinations and aspects determine the extent of the
proficiency.
CPflSIY; II
Su. 109. — Sabhajadaha sanina.
If Sani joins Karakamsa or the 5th from it, the
person becomes nervous in an assembly.
NOTES
He may be a learned man, but will feel shy and nervous
and thus cut an awkward figure, in a General Assembly or
public discussion.
n°. tforft r s ; n
Su. 110. — Budhena meemamsakaha.
If Budha joins 1st or 5th of Karakamsa, he will
shine as a Meemamsaka.

Jaimioisutras
NOTES
There are two principal divisions here. Poorvameemamsa
by Jaimini himself, explaining rituals of Karma and their
effects and Uttarameemamsa or Bfahmasutras by Vasya
relating to Brahmagnana.
m. ii
Su. 111.— Kujena nayyayikaha.
If Kuja joins 1st or 5th of Karakamsa, the
person will become a great logician.
Su. 112. — Chandrena sankhyayogagnaha sahityagno gayakascha.
If Chandra joins 1st or 5th of Karakamsa, the
person becomes clever in sankhyasastra, learned in
language, poetry, drama and attendant subjects,
will have great proficiency in music and other
accomplishments .
NOTES
Sankhya is a portion of Sanskrit Science, which deals
with numbers and their interpretations. Sankhya also means
a system of Philosophy.
rffcmrsr ii
Su. 113 . — Ravina vedanta geetagnascha.
If Ravi combines in 1st or 5th of Karakamsa,
the person will become a great Vedantistand
musician.

Jaiminisutras
m. %g*n nflra*; it
Su. 114. — Kethrna ganithagnaha.
If Kethu combines in above houses, the person
becomes well versed in mathematics.
hh. n
Su. 11 5.—Gurusambandhena sampradayasiddhih .
If in the above combinations of planets. Guru
joins or aspects, knowledge in the different branches
will be well founded and regularly trained as per
principles of those sciences.
m. *rofc%smii
Su. 116. — Bhagye chaivam.
The results ascribed for planetary positions in
the 1st and 5th from Karakamsa will also hold good
for similar positions in the 2nd from Karakamsa.
Su. 117. — Sada chaivamityeke.
Bha stands for 4 and Ya denotes 1 = 41, reversed we get
14, divided by 12, the remainder is 2.
Sada = Sa stands for 7, Da stands for 8 = 78, in the inverse
order we have 87, divided by 12, the balance is 3. By this the
author means, all those results from the positions of the •
planets in the 1st and the Karakamsa must or may be predicted by the combination of the above planets in the 2nd and
3rd houses from the Karakamsa.
n«. *n«l ii
Su. 1 18. — Bhagye kethowpapadrishtestabdhavak.

Jaiminisutras
Kethu in the 2nd from Karakamsa, aspected by
evil planets, will make the person indistinct or a
slow speaker.
NOTES
Second house denotes speech, eloquence, eyes, face and
riches,
m. n
Su. 119 . — Swapitrupadadbhagyarogayoho papa -
samye kemadrumaha.
If evil planets are found in the 2nd and 8th
houses from Janma Lagna or the Arudha Lagna,
the person will suffer from Kemadruma Yoga or
combination for great poverty.
The same results apply to .the positions of
planets in the 3rd from Karakamsa.
NOTES
Bha 4, Ya 1 = 41, reversed 14, divided by 12, we get 2.
Ra 2 and Ga 3 23, reading backwards we get 32, divided by
12, we have 8 balance ; therefore, Bhagya and Roga denote
2 and 8, respectively.
Compare Kemadruma as explained by Varahamihira and
others (See my translation of Brihat J at aka — Nabhasa Yogas).
When there are no planets on either side of Chandra the
combination is called Kemadruma by him.
Su. 120 . — Chandradrishtow yiseshena.

Jaiminisutras
If Chandra aspects the evil planets in the above
combination, the person suffers from abject poverty.
The majority consider poverty as a great curse.
?3? • nfoi u
Su. 121 . — Sarvesham chaiva pake.
The results, mentioned in all the combinations
above named, will be experienced during all the
Dasas of Rasis or in their Antardasas or periods
and sub-periods of the zodiacal signs.
ffh snrni«nft ffotta v K : nnra: n
End of Second Pada of the First Adhyaya.
u i ii * u
ADHYAYA 1— PADA 3
?. «W ii
Su. 1 . — Atha padam.
Results based on Pada Lagna will be described
in this chapter.
NOTES
In Sutra 29 of the First Pada Jaimini has clearly illustrated
the meaning of Pada or Arudha Lagna. In this chapter he
will give the results of planets occupying from Pada Lagna.
In the previous chapter he gave the results of planets in

Jaiminisutras
Swarasa and Karakamsa. Remember Karaka always has
been used for Atmakaraka.
38% I II
Su. 2 . — Vyaye sagrahe grahadrishteva sreemantaha.
If the 11th house from Pada Lagna is occupied
or aspected by planets, the person becomes a sreemanta or a wealthy man.
Chandra
Rahu
Lagna
Sani
Ravi
Budha
Guru
RASl
Pada
Lagna
Sukra
Kuja
Kelhu
Take an example. Here the lord of Lagna is Sukra and
he is placed in the 8th house from Lagna. The eighth from
Sukra becomes Pada or Arudha Lagna and this falls in
Kataka the 8th from Sukra. The 11th fiom Kataka is
Vrishabha and this is aspected by Kuja and Kethu and
therefore the person will be in affluent circumstances. The
term Sreemanta applies to one who has not seen poverty
from birth to death.
V h
Su. 3 . —Shubhaimyayallabhaha.

Jaiminisutras
When the 11th from Pada is aspected or joined
by benefics the wealth will come from proper
channels. The gains will be from fair and lawful
means.
«. Tmwfa ii
Su. 4. — Papairamargena.
If the aspecting or joining planets in the above
are evil, the wealth will come through sinful and
illegal means.
NOTES
Unfortunately we have seven evil and only two good
planets.
Su . 5. — Ucchadibhirviseshath.
If the 11th from Arudha Lagna is well combined
and aspected by benefics or those in exaltation,
moolathrikona, etc., the person will acquire plenty
of wealth through justifiable means.
NOTES
Here Vccha has two significations. U 0, Cha 6=06
reading reversely we get 60, divided by 12, the balance will
be 12. Vccha also means, the planets in exaltations, etc.
When the planets aspecting the 11th or joining it are exalted,
in good Vargas, in Moolathrikona, or in their own houses
and are benefics in nature, the wealth will come in plenty
and will always be legally and rightly acquired but when such

Jaiminisutra:
planets are malefics, the person will get riches on a large
scale, but through unfair and illegal manner. In both cases
he will be rich but in the case of benefics he will be a good
man and will earn money honestly and by labour. In the
case of evil planets, the wealth will be thoroughly ill-gotten
and criminal. These Yogas will occur when the 12th
house is not aspected by any planet.
Su. 6—Neeche grahadrigyogadwayadhikyam .
If there are planets in the 12th house from
Lagna, or Pada Lagna, the person will spend more
than he earns.
NOTES
Na 0, Cha means 6^06 reversing we get 60, divided by
12, the balance is 12, and the 12th house is indicated. If
evil planets occupy the 12th, the expenditure will be on
immoral and sinful deeds. If there are benefics in the 12th,
the expenditure will be on charitable and religious purposes
such as building temples or places of worship, tanks, wells,
charitable institutions and helping the poor and the distressed.
But when the planets are bad the expenditure will be on
drinking, whoring, gambling, unjust litigation and other
sinful actions.
». tftappfcforct ii
6u. 7. — Ravirahusukrairnrupath.
If Ravi, Rahu and Sukra occupy or aspect the
12th from Lagna or Pada Lagna, the person will

Jaiminisutras
lose money through kingly displeasure or fines
and confiscations.
c. n
Su. 8. — Chandradrishtau nischayena.
If in the combination in Sutra 7 there is the
aspect of Chandra, the losses will certainly occur
through governing bodies.
gnfrRh feiw ii
Su. 9. — Budhena gnat hit ho vivadadwa.
If Budha occupies the 12th house from Pada or
Lagna or aspects it, there will be losses from
cousins, relations and litigations.
* o . JppTT II
Su. 10. — Guruna karamoolath.
If Guru joins or aspects 12th from Pada Lagna
or Lagna, the man loses money by paying heavy
government taxes.
n. spasiftwrt ii
Su. 1 1 . — Kujasanibhyam bhratrumukhat.
If the 12th from Lagna or Pada Lagna is joined
or aspected by Kuja and Sani, the person will suffer
losses through brothers.
SU. 12. — Aetairvyaya aevam labhaha.

Jaiminisutras
The results have been given for the 12th house
from Lagna or Pada Lagna and the various sources
of losses have been indicated. If those planets are in
the 1 1 th house, then instead of losing money he will
gain money through those sources which have been
shown to the credit of planets. If the planets are in
the 12th house, he will lose money ; if they are in
the 11th house, he will gain.
U. sift yqftym gvfa f: u
Su . 13 . — Labhe rahukethubhyamudararogaha .
If the 7th house from Pada has conjunction or
aspect of Rahu or Kethu, the person suffers from
stomach diseases.
i*. to sftfa wnftfsfrnfa u
Su. 14 . — Tatra kethuna jhatithi jyanilingani.
If Kethu occupies the 2nd house from Pada
Lagna, the person will display signs of old age,
though he may be young in years. He will show
wrinkles beyond his proper age. If in the 6th house
from Pada Lagna evil planets combine, he will
become a thief. If the 2nd and 6th from Pada Lagna
are occupied by benefics without evil aspects, the
person will be a governor of many countries.
tftaRT: II
Su. 15. —Chandragurusukreshu sreemantaha.

Jaiminisutras
If Chandra, Guru or Sukra occupy the 2nd
from Pada Lagna, he will become a rich man.
Here all these planets may be in the second or any
one of them.
H- ii
Su. 16 .—Uchhena va.
If the evil or good planets are in the second
house from Pada in exaltation, the person becomes
rich.
NOTES
He has already shown if the exalted planet is a benefic,
the person acquires wealth by lawful means but if an evil
planet is in the second exalted, the person becomes rich
through unlawful and sinful ways.
Su. 17. — Svamsavadanyatprayena.
All the results explained in the above sutras
will have application and reference as they have
had in the Karakamsa.
Su. 18 . — Labhapade kendre thrikone va sree -
mantaha.
If the Arudha Lagna falls in the 7th from Janma
Lagna or Karakamsa or in the Kendras or Konas
the person becomes extremely rich.
WWW! 11
Su. 19 . — Anyatha dusthe.

Jaiminisutras
If the Arudha Lagna does not fall in Kendra or
Thrikona from Lagna but falls in Dusthas 6, 8 and
12, the results will be bad.
NOTES
That is instead of becoming a Sreemantha the person
becomes a poor man. They are called Dusthas or Dusthanas
or bad places.
*o. ii
Su. 20 . — Kendrathrikonopachayeshu dwayormaitree.
If the Saptamarudha falls in Kendras, Thrikonas
or the Upachayas from Janma Lagna, excepting
the 6th which is classified as a Dusthana, there will
be great agreement between the wife and the
husband.
NOTES
The couple will lead an agreeable life. A good wife is
Heaven on Earth. A bad one is Hell on Earth.
* ? . fturfarfasTg ii
Su. 21 .—Ripurogachintasu vairam.
If the Arudha Bhavas fall in 6, 8 and 12 from
Lagna, they denote evils to such Bhavas.
NOTES
we get 8. Cha 6, ta 6-65, divided by 12 we get 6 balance.

Jaiminisutras
Su. 22. — Patneelabhayordishtya nirabhasargalaya.
If the Arudha Lagna and the 7th from it have
no obstructive Argalas, the person becomes
fortunate.
NOTES
Pa 1 , na 0 = 10, reversed it is 01 , or it denotes the first
house. La 3, Bha 4_-34 reversed we get 43, divided by 12,
we get a balance of 7. For subha and papa Argalas see my
notes on Sutras 3 to 9 in Pada 1 of Adhyaya 1.
Su. 23. — Shubhargale dhanasamriddhihi.
If Arudha Lagna and the 7th from it have
beneficial Argalas, there will be plenty of money.
NOTES
If the Argala happens to be malicious, there will be
ordinary wealth. If there is a mixture of subha and papa
Argalas, the person will have financial ups and downs or he
will be tossed from wealth to poverty and from poverty to
wealth.
iWh: II
Su. 24. — Janmakalaghatikaswekadrishtasu rajanaha.
If a planet aspects Hora Lagna, Ghatika Lagna
and Janma Lagna, the person becomes a ruler or
one equal to him.

Jaiminisutras
NOTES
For an explanation of these various Lagnas see Sutra
32oflstPada. What is meant here is that if one planet
aspects all these three different Lagnas at the same time, the
person attains to eminent position; if not he will become a
King. In some places Ministers are more powerful than
Kings.
Su. 25 . — Patneelabhayoscha rasyamsakadrika -
nairva.
If Chandra Lagna, Navamsa Lagna, Drekkana
Lagna and the 7th houses from these three are
aspected by one planet, the person becomes a great
ruler or a Maharaja.
NOTES
Some old commentators observe thus: If one has connection, conjunction or aspect, with Lagna, the 7th from it,
Chandra Lagna, Navamsa Lagna and Drekkana Lagna, the
person becomes a Maharaja or a great powerful ruler.
Su. 26 . — Theshwekasminnyune nyunam.
If out of the 6 Lagnas, viz., Lagna, Ghatika
Lagna, Hora Lagna, Chandra Lagna, Navamsa
Lagna and Drekkana Lagna — one planet sees five
and not all the six, the person will have ordinary
Rajayoga.

Jaiminisutras
NOTES
This combination occurs only in real Rajayogas or royal
combinations. If an exalted planet occupies the Arudha
Lagna or Chandra, Guru and Sukra are there and evil
obstructive Argalas are not there, while, where there are
beneficial Argalas, the person will attain to royal position.
CTlWRHf II
Su. 27. — Evamamsato drikanatascha.
If the Navamsa, Hora and Ghatika Lagnas or
Drekkana, Hora and Ghatika Lagnas are aspected
by one planet, there will be Rajayoga.
NOTES
Some commentators are of opinion that 2h ghatis exactly
in the middle of the Day and the Night are auspicious and
such times produce Kings and their equals. The mid-day
goes under the name of Abhijit and is considered as very
auspicious for all work. It cuts away all evils. Abhijit sarva
doshaghnam .
Su. 28. — Sukrachandrayormitho drishtayoh
simhasthayorva ymavantaha.
If Sukra and Chandra aspect each other or if
they are in the 3rd house from each other, the person
will be blessed with various conveyances.
NOTES
Simha means 3, Sa denotes 7, Ha shows 8=78, reversed
87, divided by 12, gives 3 as remainder.

Jaiminisutras
Su. 29. — Sukrakujakethushu vaithanikaha.
If Sukra, Kuja and Kethu have mutual aspects
or if they are in the 3rd house from each other,
the person will have aristocratic surroundings
from his ancestors.
NOTES
He will belong to an old and respectable family which
has royal traditions and marks of honour. Some commentators say that the person will be proficient in all the details of
of religious sacrifices.
*o. traR: II
Su . 30 . — Swabhagyadaramatrubhavasameshu
subheshu rajanaha.
If the 2nd, 4th and 5th Bhavas become equal
to the Karaka or if benefics occupy them, the
person becomes a Raja or his equal in position.
NOTES
We have de facto and dc jure rulers. We have Karakas
for all events. The Bhavas and planets have to be taken
with reference to the various Karakas or lords of events.
Some commentators interpret Bhava in the above Sutra as
Bha 4 and Va 4 -44, divided, by 12 will give us the remainder
as 8. They say that if the 2nd and 4th houses frdm the
Karaka are equal or if benefics occupy them or if the Sth and
8th houses are equal or have beneficial planets in them, there
will be Rajayoga.

Jaiminisutras
qmtw u
Su. 31 . — Karmadasayoh papayoscha.
If the 3rd and 6th houses from Atmakaraka
are equal or if they are joined by malefics, there
will be Rajayogas.
NOTES
Kal,Ma5- 15, reversed 51, divided by 12, the balance
is 3. Dai, Sal- 87, reversed 78, divided by 12, we have a
balance of 6. When he says equal he means that the sources
of strength and weakness must balance equally.
Su . 32 . — Pitrulabhadhipaschai vam .
If from the lords of Lagna or 7th benefics
occupy the 2nd, 4th, 5th and 8th, there will be
Rajayogas.
NOTES
Jaimini confuses his readers, unless they happen to be
very intelligent, by referring to Lagna, Pada Lagna, Ghatika,
Hora Lagna, Atmakarakamsa and other amsas and unless we
have able commentaries, the readers will be launched in a
rough sea of doubts. Pitu, Pa 1, Ta 6- 16, reversing we get
61, and divided by 12, we have the first house or Lagna.
Labha7, La 3, Bha4~34, reversed, we have 43, divided by
12, we have a balance of 7: therefore the 7th house from
Lagna is indicated.
Su. 33 . — Misre samaha.

Jaiminisutras
If there is a mixture of benefics and malefics
in the above combination, the person will attain
to ordinary positions,
sfaft faqfft it
Su. 34 .—Daridro vipareethe.
If evil planets occupy beneficial signs and
benefics evil signs, the person will be poor.
V*. Trains n
Su. 35 . — M atari gurow sukre chandre va
rajakeeyaha.
If to the lord of Lagna or to the lord of 7th,
the 5th house is occupied by Guru, Sukra or
Chandra, the person becomes a high Government
official and wields political powers.
Su. 36 .—Karmani dase va pape senanyaha.
If evil planets occupy the 3rd and 6th from the
lords of Lagna or the lord of the 7th, the person
becomes a military commander.
NOTES
Karmani 3, Dasa 6. Ka 1, Ma 5=* 15, reversed we have 51,
divided by 12 we have the remainder 3. Da 1, Sa is 7-»87,
reading backward we have 78, divided by 12 we get the
balance 6.
Commanders often lead their victorious armies against
their employers and become rulers themselves. Hyder,

Jaiminisutras
Napoleon, Shivaji, Hindenberg, Wellington and others
became rulers.
V*- aa faragreqai mfarcswi wi^mir ai n
n
Su. 37. — Swapitrubhyam karmadasasthadrishtya tadeesadrishtya matrunathadrishtya cha dheemantaha.
If the lords of the 3rd and 6th from Lagna and
Atmakaraka aspect the latter or if the planets in
those houses aspect them, and if the lord of the 5th
aspect them, the person becomes extremely intelligent.
NOTES
Pitru 1, Swa 1, Karma 3, Dasa 5, Matru 6. These have
already been explained in Ka, Ta, Pa, Yadi Sutra rules.
Su. 38. — Daresadrishtya sukhinaha.
If Lagna and Karaka Lagna have the aspect
of the lord of the 4th, the person will be happy.
NOTES
Data 4. Happiness, it must be remembered, does not
entirely depend upon position or wealth. There are some
people who are extremely rich and powerful, but they are r
most miserable. There are some who are very ordinary but
who are perfectly happy. Physical and mental conditions
have great deal to do with happiness and specially some
temperaments have the knack of making themselves agreeable
abound and create happiness for themselves.

Jaiminisutras
V*. fl^ n ra tn n
Su. 39. — Rogesadrishtya daridraha.
If the lord of the 8th from Lagna and Karaka
Lagna aspect them, the person suffers from
poverty.
NOTES
Roga 8, Ra 2, Ga 3 - 23, reversed 32, divided by 12 we
have balance 8.
»o. ftMHwwam wragftgT: ii
Su. 40. — Ripunathadrishtya vyayaseelaha.
If the lord of the 12th from Lagna and Karaka
Lagna aspect them, then the person becomes a
spendthrift or extravagant.
’phIJw.wui sw$Ts ii
Su. 41. — Swamidrishtva prabalaha.
If the lord of Lagna aspects the Lagna and if
the lord of the Karaka Lagna aspects that Lagna,
the person will have very good Rajayogas.
Su. 42. - Pacshadripubhagyayorgrahasamye
bandhah konayo ripujayayoho keetayugmayordara -
riphayoscha.
If from Lagna— the 2nd and 12th or 5th or 9th
or 12th and 6th or 4th and 10th have the same

Jaiminisutras
number of planets posited, the person will be
imprisoned.
NOTES
This seems to be the longest Sutra 1 have had to deal
since the commencement of this work and it requires a clear
explanation.
If any of these have Grahasamya
Ripu — 12 then the person will have chains’ beating,
imprisonment and the displeasure of the
Bhagya — governing authorities. If there is one
planet in the 2nd, there must be one
Konayoho 5 and 9 planet in the 12th. If there arc 2 planets
in the 2nd the twelfth also must have
Ripu — 12 2 planets. If there are 3 planets in the
5th, there must also be 3 in the 9th.
Jaya— 6 This is Grahasamya or equality in
the number of planets. If there are evil
Dara — 4 combinations or aspects for these houses
or for their lords, the punishments are
Ripha— 10 certain and the man will suffer. If there
are good planetary combinations or
Kita — 11 aspects for these houses or their lords,
the person will have trials and troubles
Yugma — 3 and prosecutions, but will be let off after
trials and persecutions. Here five sets
of houses have been named and the presence of planets, in
each set, of equal number in each of the houses indicate
imprisonments and tortures. But I gather from the commentaries that when the number of planets is not equal or
properly matched, these troubles may not be indicated.

Jaiminisutras
Su. 43.- Sukradguunapadastho rahuh surya -
drishto netraha.
If the 5th from Arudha Lagna is occupied by
Rahu and Ravi aspects him, the person will lose his
sight.
NOTES
Sukra 1, Sa means 5, Ra denotes 2- 52, reversed 25,
divided by 12, we have 1, denoting Lagna. Gauna 5, Ga
shows 3, Na denotes 5 — 35, reversed 53, divided by 12, we
have the balance of 5, denoting the 5th house. Each Lagna
has its Arudha. Take the 5th in the undergiven horoscope.
Lagna
Rahu
Sani
Chandra
Bud ha
Ravi
Sukra
RASI
Kuja
Guru
Kethu
Here the 5th is Kataka. Its lord is in the 1 1th from the 5th.
The 11th from Chandra falls in Meena and if I understand the
sutra properly, it means the fifth Arudha falls in Meena, is
occupied by Rahu and Ravi aspects him, the person will lose
his sight.

Jaiminisutras
*». gnwqrfamHr w 11
Su. 44. — Swadaragayoh sukrachandrayoratodyam rajachinhani cha.
If Sukra and Chandra occupy the 4th from
Atmakaraka, the person will have the paraphernalia
of royalty, viz., Nagara or drums, Noubhat, music,
Chatras umbrellas, Chamaras or tufts of of hair-fans
which attendants keep waving about the royal personage and other signs and emblems of royal state.
NOTES
We can easily infer that if Sukra and Chandra in this
combination are exalted, have good conjunctions and aspects,
the person will have these ioyal insignia on a grand scale and
if they are weak or have evil aspects and conjunctions, the
royal parapharnalia will be on small or poor scale. There are
Rajas with a few lakhs and emperors with many crores.
There are Kings and Kings, rulers and rulers, emperors
and all these have different grades and different insignia.
In ail these sutras, taking the original commentaries and my
notes the readers will see that they have to shift through a lot
of conflicting evidence and confusing principles. I have tried
my best to make the explanations, notes, examples as clear
and convincing as possible. But in spite of all my efforts the
readers may find doubts and difficulties. Here in such cases,
my sound advice to them would be that they should read the
sutra well twice or thrice, read the translations I have given
and examples by way of illustrations. And after doing so, if
they still have doubts they must think over well, for n few
days, read the previous and the future stanzas and I may

Jaiminisutras
assure them, that suddenly they will hit upon the correct idea
or meaning and their doubts will be solved and fresh and
glorious mental light will flash on their brains.
5% Sfofhja Jwn«n^ tsfrrqr?: hjttm: m
End of Third Pada of the First Adhyaya.
snr*r: u
ADHYAYA 1-PADA 4
Su. 1. — Upapadam padam pitranucharat.
Take the 12th house from Lagna. Find out its
Pada Lagna or Arudha Lagna. This becomes
Upapada.
NOTES
For ordinary Pada we take the lord of Lagna and we
count again the same number of Rasis from him as he has
advanced from Lagna and this becomes Pada or Arudha
Lagna. For Upapada we have to take from the lord of the
12th from Lagna and count again that number of Rasis from
the position of its lord and the sign which falls in that number will be Upapada. The meaning will not be clear unless
I give one or two examples.
Vrishabha is Lagna. Its lord Sukra joins Dhanus the 8th
from Lagna. Counting again the 8th from Sukra we get

Jaiminisutras
Kataka and this is called Pada or Arudha Lagna (see Sutra
29 of Pada 1 ). Now we have to find Upapada. Take the lord
of the 12th from Lagna. The 12th from Lagna is Mesha.
Upapada
Lagna
Lagna
Sani
Ravi
Budha
Guru
RAS1
Sukra
Kuja
Kcthu
Its lord is Kuja and he is found in the 7th from it. The
seventh from him is again Mesha and in this horoscope
Arudha Lagna falls in Kataka and it goes under the name of
Pada. The Upapada will fall in Mesha, and the results in
this chapter will be predicted with reference to Upapada.
Take another horoscope. Here calculate the Pada and the
Upapada Lagnas. The lord of Lagna is Sani and he is in the
4th from Lagna. The fourth from him or Simha will be
Arudha or Pada Lagna. Now calculate the Upapada Lagna.
Take the 12th from Lagna. This falls in Makara. Its lord
is Sani. He is in the 5th house from it or Vrishabha. Now
take the 5th from him, it will fall in Kanya. For this person
Pada Lagna falls in Simha and Upapada falls in Kanya.
Take another example. In this horoscope the lord of
Lagna is Guru. He is in Mithuna or the 4th. Count from
him to the 4th; we see that it falls in Kanya. This will be the

Jaiminisutras
Rahu
Sani
Chandra
RASI
Ravi
Kuja
Budha
Sukra
Guru
Kethu
Upapada
Lagna
Pada Lagna for this native. Now take the 12th house from
Lagna. This will be Kumbha. Its lord is Sani. He is found
in the 4th from that house in Vrishabha. Count the 4th from
him and it will be Simha and this will be his Upapada Lagna.
All Lagnas and Bhavas have their Pada and Upapada, and
Jaimini seems to pay great attention to Atmakarakamsa, Pada
Lagna and Upapada Lagna. Some commentators say — Upapadam Labhaditi. This means — take the 7th from Lagna and
find out the Arudha from it. This becomes the Upapada Lagna.
Take the horoscope given below. Labha means. La 3, Bha
4-34, reversed it becomes 43, divided by 12, we get a remainder of 7, and therefore the 7th house is meant by this sutra.
The 7th from Lagna becomes Kanya (see chart on p. 109)
Its lord Budha occupies the 6th house from it in Kumbha.
The 6th from Kumbha is Kataka. Therefore for this horoscope
the Upapada becomes Kataka according to this sutra. Thus in
this horoscope according to one theory Upapada becomes
Simha ..and according to the latter Upapada becomes Kataka.

Jaiminisutras
Lagna
Ravi
Kethu
Sani
Guru
Budha
Kuja
RAS1
Sukra
Upapada
Lagna
Rahu
Chandra
This makes a great deal of difference. I have indicated the
differences and leave the readers to follow their own judgment, experience and personal reading.
m qi'ret stmw qmrcft u
Su. 2 . — Tatra papasya papayoge pravrajya
daranasova. ,
If the Upapada has evil conjun'f |on or aspect or
if the 2nd from it has an evil planet,, the wife will
die or he will embrace pravrajya or sanyasa or
asceticism.
NOTES
Brihaspathi is quoted here. If there is a malefic planet
in the Arudha Lagna from the 7th or Jamitra or an evil planet
in the 7th or 2nd or Rahu is found in the 9th, the wife. of the
person will be destroyed.

no
Jaiminisutras
V rfit: qrr: n
Su. 3.— Upapadasyapyarudhatwadeva natra
ravihi papaha.
If the second from the Upapada is occupied
by Ravi he does not become a malefic.
NOTES
Somehow all astrological writers have classified Ravi as
an evil planet. Jaimini says that Ravi is not an evil planet
when he is in the 2nd house from Upapada.
fprsnibmrii
Su. 4 . — Shubhadrigyoganna .
If, in the above combinations in Sutras 2 and
3, there are beneficial aspects or conjunctions, the
evil results should not be predicted.
NOTES
It means that his wife will not die or he will not take
sanyasa. The wif ^ must die some day or other. What is
meant here is that during those evil times indicated by the
planets death will not happen.
Su. 5. — Neechey daranasaha.
If the 2nd from Upapada falls in Neechamsa or
has the conjunction of a Neecha or debilitated planet
there will surely be death to wife in that evil period.
Su. 6. — Ucchey bahudaraha.

Jaiminisutm
If, in the 2nd from Upapada there is an exalted
planet or the second falls in an exalted Navamsa,
the person will have many wives.
NOTES
1 do not know if many wives add pleasure or misery to
a person. His lust may be satisfied but he will be miserable.
It is a question to be solved by each man for himself.
®. r ii
Su. 7 . — Yugme cha.
If the 2nd from Upapada falls in Mithuna, the
person will have many wives.
c. m u
Su. 8 . — Tatra swamiyukte swarkshe va tadhhetauttarayushi nirdaraha.
If the 2nd from Upapada is combined by the
Atmakaraka or by the lord of that 2nd sign, the
person will have no wife in the latter part of his life.
NOTES
Here the conjunction of its lord seems to act prejudicially.
Su. 9 . — Ucche thasminnuttamakuladdaralabhaha.
If the lord of the 2nd from Upapada is found in
exaltation, his wife will come from a respectable
family.

Jaiminisutras
NOTES
Family traditions and previous histories have great
influence in social circles.
1«. Gftnbi: H
Su. 10 . — Neeche viparyayaha.
If the lord of the second from the Upapada
joins a debilitated sign, the case will be reversed.
NOTES
It means the wife will come from a despicable or mean
family. Social stigmas are often unpleasant.
Su . 11 . — Shubhasambandhatsundaree.
If the second from the Upapada has beneficial
aspects or conjunctions, the wife will be a very
beautiful woman.
NOTES
It is both a fortune and misfortune to have a very
beautiful wife. Her moral behaviour and the temperament
of the husband should decide this complicated problem.
i*. smft si ii
Su. 12 . — Rahusanibhyamapavadatyago naso va.
If Sani and Rahu occupy or aspect the second
house from Upapada, the wife will die or will be
rejected by the husband for social scandals,
n. ii
Su. 13 . — Sukraketubhyam raktapradaraha.

Jaiminisutras
If Sukra and Kethu occupy or aspect the
second from Upapada the wife will suffer from
bloody discharges or blood complaints.
NOTES
Females have these menstrual and bloody complaints very
often and they lead to consumption.
Su. 14 . — Astisravo budhakethubhyam.
If the second from Upapada has the aspect or
conjunction of Budha and Kethu the wife of the
person will suffer from a disease wherein her
bones will be melted and dropped down.
glfttPU Tf ftufalgW t II
Su. 1 5.—Saniravirahubhirastijvaraha.
If Sani, Ravi and Rahu join or aspect the
2nd house from Upapada the wife will suffer from
chronic or persistent low fever.
NOTES
In the Ayurvedic system, there is the Raktasrita Jwara
or fever found persistent in blood and Astigata Jwara or
fever which has penetrated to the bones and which cairaot
easily be eradicated. The first fever is milder while thesecond is more serious. Fever is the monarch of all diseases
and brings in its train various complications.
Su. 1 6 . — Budhakethubhyam sthaulyam.

Jaiminisutras
If the second fiom Upapada is aspected or
conjoined by Kethu and Budha, the wife becomes
clumsily corpulent.
NOTES
I believe great corpulence and accumulation of fat m
the body of man or woman is a great misfortune. There is
a limit to corpulence. When it is unwieldy it gives great
inconvenience.
Su. 17 . — Budhakshetre mandarabhyam nasikarogaha.
If the second from Upapada falls in one of the
signs of Budha, viz., Mithuna or Kanyaand possesses the aspect or conjunction of Sani and Kuja,
the wife will suffer from nasal diseases or complaints of the nose
x. * ii
Su. 18 . — Kujakshetre cha.
If the second house from Upapada falls in one
of Kuja’s houses, viz., Mesha or Vrischika and has
the aspect of Kuja and Sani, the same nasal
diseases will trouble the man’s wife.
Su. 19 . — Gurusanibhyam karnarogo narahaka
cha.

Jaiminisutras
If the second from Upapada falls in any one
of the houses of Kuja or Budha and has the aspect
or conjunction of Guru and Sani, the wife will
have ear complaints and also nervous diseases.
v. II
Su. 20 . — Gururahubhyam dantarogaha.
If the second from Upapada falls in any of
the houses of Budha or Kuja and has the aspect of
Guru and Rahu, the wife will suffer from tooth
diseases.
NOTES
In Sanskrit it is stated that four forms of diseases are
the most painful to endure, viz., Akshi- eyes, Kukshi ~ stomach, Sira ~ head and Danla = teeth. These aches are very
painful.
*1. qfircigwri ***[ agwft: wrl afr ft <n ii
Su. 21.— Sanirahubhyam kanyathulayoho pan -
gurvatarogo va.
If the second from Upapada falls in Kanya
or Thula and has the aspect of Sani and Rahu,
the wife will be defective in limbs or will suffer
from windy complaints.
NOTES
Ayurveda says that when the three Dhatus — Vata, Pitta,
and Sleshma — are properly distributed, the body keeps good
health. When any one of them is excited, diseases appear.

Jaiminlsutras
ss. gprcwft nw r II
Su . 22. —Subhadrigyogarma.
If in the combinations given above there are
beneficial conjunctions or aspects, the evils will
disappear and bad should not be predicted.
Su. 23. — Saptamamsagrahebhyaschaivctm.
The above results may also be predicted by the
7th from Upapada , by the Kalatra Karalcamsa
and by the lords of those houses.
NOTES
This means that all the above results good and bad may
be predicted by the lord of the 7th from Upapada. and by
the 7th house from Upapada, by the Kalatra Karalcamsa and
also by its lord. For each Bhava so many combinations
have to be examined that astrological predictions are not
easy matters. Great devotion is needed.
y wft g ptew Tt ii
Su. 24. — Budhasanisukreshwanapatyaha.
If the 7th from Upapada and its lord and the
lord of the Kalatra Karakamsa and its lord — if all
these four are aspected or conjoined by Budha,
Sani and Sukra, the person will have no issues.
Su. 25 . — Putreshu ravirahugurubhirbahuputraha.

Jaiminisutras
If the 5th house from the 7th, from Upapada ,
its lord, the Kalatra Karakamsa and its lord have
the aspects or conjunctions of Ravi, Rahu and
Guru, the person will have many children.
NOTES
Rahu seems to .exercise very peculiar influences.
Su. 26. — Chandrenaikaputraha.
If in the combination given in Sutra 25, the
fifth has only Chandra’s aspect or conjunction, the
person will have only one son.
fi$r fare n q p t : n
Su, 27 . — Misre vilambathpuiraha.
If the 5th in Sutra 25 has combinations and
aspects, both for many issues and no issues, then
predict an issue later on in life.
NOTES
What the author means is, when there are combinations
for many children and no children, the person will have
issues later on in life. The problem of children is curious
and various. Some beget children very early in life and get
as many as 20 or 25 by one wife. Others get even 30 to 35
children by two or three wives one after the other or simultaneously by several wives. There are some who get only a
limited number. Some get an issue early in life and get no
more. Some get one child in the middle of their life and there

Jaiminisutras
are others who get only one child towards the close of their
lives. God's creation presents puzzles and confusion all
round us.
Su. 28. — Kujasanibhyam dattaputrahaIf the 5th house, in the combinations given in
Sutra 25, has the aspect or conjunction of Kuja and
Sani, the person will have an adopted son.
NOTES
I have shown the importance of children in the previous
notes. There are 14 varieties of children mentioned by the
Hindu Law.
. Su. 29.- Oje bahuputraha.
If the 5th from the combinations mentioned in
Sutra 25 falls in an odd sign, the person will have
many children.
gifcssqinr: ii
Su. 30. — Yugme alpaprajaha.
If the 5th sign in the above combinations falls
in even signs, there will be few issues.
Su. 3 1 .— Gruhakramatkukshitadeesapanchamam -
' sagrahebhyaschaivam.
Just as you find out from Janmalagna, parti*
culars about children, so also inquire into the 5th

Jaiminisutras
house by considering Upapada and its lord, and
Putra Karakamsa Rasi and its lord.
NOTES
In General Astrology the significations of the 12 Bhavas
have been well explained. As we take the Rasis, their lords,
the planets, who conjoin and aspect them and determine the
results in reference to them so also Jaimini advises the
students to determine the various results with reference to
Upapada, its lord and the lord of the Putra Karakamsa and
the various aspects and conjunctions these houses have as
also their lords. In fact the same procedure should be
adopted as in the examination of the 12 Bhavas. Only these
are taken with reference to birth Lagna and the author says
instead of the Janmalagna, take the Upapada, its lord and
Putra Karakamsa.
3.5*. WRpart VTOFtWT: II
Su. 32. — Bhratrubhyam sanirahubhyam bhratrunasaha.
If Sani and Rahu occupy the 11th or the 3rd
from Upapada and its lord, the elder and the
younger brothers die respectively.
NOTES
The 11th house denotes elder brothers and elder sisters
and the 3rd indicates the younger brothers and sisters. This
is well known in General Astrology. We take these from
Janmalagna. Here Jaimini takes them from Upapada.
U. II
Su. 33. — SuJcrenavyavahitagarbhanasaha.

Jaimfnisntras
If Sukra joins the 3rd or the 1 1th from Upapada
and its lord, the younger and the elder brothers
will die.
NOTES
I have already shown that the 3rd indicates younger and
the 11th elder brothers and sisters.
V*. gssr&sft u
Su. 34. — Pitrubhave sukradrishtepi.
If the Lagna or the 8th house from it has the
aspect of Sukra, loss must be predicted for elder
and younger brothers.
Pitru One — Pa 1, Ta means 6= 16, reversed it becomes 61,
divided by 12, we get the Lagna or one. Bhava = 8, Bha
stands for 4 and Va stands for 4 *=44, divided by 12, we have
the remainder 8. The commentators refer simply to Lagna
and Ashtama and we have to take them from Janmalagna.
How Ashtama or the 8th has anything to do with elder and
younger brothers, cannot be traced. The Sutra is clear and
we have to take it as given by the Maharishi.
V*. KK : I!
Su. 35. — Kujaguruchandrabudhairbahu bhrataraha.
If the 11th and 3rd from Upapada and its lord
are joined by Kuja, Guru, Chandra and Budha, the
person will have many brothers, elder and younger
included*

Jahniaisutras
Sl^ R TP iTt V& mm WFTTRT: II
Su. 36 . — Sanyarabhyam drishte yathaswam
bhratrunasaha.
If the 3rd and 11th from Upapada have the
aspect of Sani and Kuja, the person will have his
brothers destroyed.
NOTES
What the 3rd has evil aspects, the younger and when
the 11th has aspects, the elder brothers will die. If both
have evil aspects, then the younger as well as the elder brothers
will die. Sisters are included in brothers. Brethren refers
to those who are born with a person, males and females
included.
V ». tfftrcr qnrraftw u
Su. 37 . — Sanina swamatraseshascha.
If the 3rd and 1 1th from Upapada, and its lord
are aspected by Sani, the person will lose all his
brothers and sisters and he will remain alone,
laft tu ftdh ng wn u
Su. 38 — Kethau bhagineebahulyam.
If the 3rd and 11th from Upapada and its lord
has the conjunction of Kethu, the person will have
many sisters.
V*. s i i tan ynmil
Su. 39 .—Labhesadbhagyabheh rahau damstra •

Jaiminisutras
If Rahu joins the 2nd from the 7th from
Upapada , the person will have large teeth or no
teeth or will become dumb.
v*. ««wiqg ii
Su. 40. — Kethau stabdhavak.
If Kethu joins the 2nd house from the 7th from
Upapada, the person will be an indistinct speaker
or possesses bad pronunciation. He may also have
stammering.
Su. 41. — Mande Kuroopaha.
If Sani joins the 2nd house from the lord of the
7th house from Upapada, the person becomes ugly
and repulsive.
Su. 42. — Swamsavasadgowraneelapeetadivarnaha.
The colour or complexion of the person, yellow,
dark, golden or white must be predicted from the
nature of the Navamsa occupied by the Atmakaraka.
NOTES
Similarly Jaiinini hints to find out the colours of the various relations from the Navamsas occupied by their respective
Karakas. Varahamihira says Lagna Navamsapa Thulya
Tamsyai. Judge the colour, etc., of the person by the Navamsa
occupied by the lord of Lagna.

Jaiminisutras
**. «n?R«5Tg^ftwn(i%: n
Su. 43. — Amatyanucharaddevatabhaktihi.
Take the planet next in degrees to Amatyakaraka and find out from him the religious tendencies of the person.
NOTES
As per those rules the next planet in degrees to Amatya -
karaka will be Bhratrukaraka. If that planet happens to be
evil, the man will be devoted to the worship of evil spirits,
if he happens to be good, then he will worship good Gods. In
the all-powerful Time are embedded 33 crores of Devatas or
forces or Energies for purposes of creation, protection and
destruction. Eleven crores of energies are under the control
of Brahma and his Spouse Saraswathi, representing ail education, gnana and intelligence for creative or generative functions. Eleven crores of energies are under the rule of Vishnu
with Lakshmi, for functioning protection. Money is needed
for protection and Lakshmi’s grace is wanted. Eleven crores
of forces are under the control of Mahesvara with Durga for
destructive purposes. By tapas man gets psychological energy.
This enables him to issue orders to the different forces, generative, protective and destructive as he develops one of these
three. Nigraha and Anugraha forms are different. The
education department increases a man’s knowledge ; the
District Magistrate has power to offend ; the Sessions Judge
can hang a man or let him off from the gallows. The postal
man can transport news and money and small articles. The
police and the revenue have different functions. All are orders
or mental forces but each has a different function. By keeping
company with a scavanger a man gets dirty stink. By asso-

Jaminisutras
dating with a scent merchant he gets perfumes. All these 33
crores of energies are called Devatas and by analogy Gods.
The psychology of a person differs considerably from others.
While one cultivates the art of charity and philanthropy,
another cultivates the art of cruelty and destruction. In this
sutra the man’s devotion is shown by the planets. When they
are bad he invokes evil spirits or forces. When good, he
invokes the beneficial powers. I refer my readers to the
wilderness of Mantra Sastras. There are sapta koti mahamantras and navakoti kshudra mantras. The former enable a
person to do beneficial actions by the help of Mahamantras
or beneficial forces. The latter enable the person to call evil
powers and do mischief to the people. We have Dakshinachara
or good and Vamachara or bad.
Su. 44 . — Swamse kevalapapasambandheparajataha .
If evil planets occupy Atmakarakamsa Rasi,
the person will be born of adultery.
Su. 45. — Natrapapath.
If the Atmakaraka is himself evil and other evil
planets are not with him, then the evil in the above
sutra should not be attributed.
NOTES
This means he will be legitimate and born to his father.
V*. stftujwrt II
Su. 46 .— -Smirahubhyam prasiddhihi.

Jaiminisutras
IfSani and RahU are in conjunction with Atmakarakamsa Rasi, the person will become a notorious
rake.
NOTES
People indulge in sexual embraces, but many do so with
some sense of honour, fiut there are many who are shameless
in such matters.
Su. 47. — Gopanamanyebhyaha.
If in the Atmakarakamsa other evil planets than
Sani and Rahu are conjoined, the person will
not be bom to another’s seed, but his mother will
be immoral.
NOTES
A person’s mother may be an immoral woman, but he
may be the product of legitimate embrace.
Su. 48. — Shubhavarge apavadamatram.
If shubha Shadwarga arises in the Atmakarakamsa
in the above-mentioned yogas, there will be scandal about his legitimacy but he will be really born
of his father’s seed.
NOTES
There will be unfounded suspicions about his birth but
they will not be true.
W: n
Su, 49. — Dvigrahe kulamukhyaha.

Jaimtaisutras
If there are two planets in the Atmakarakamsa ,
the person will become a leader in his community.
NOTES
Persons, males as well as females, have peculiar temperaments. To be a leader in his own community, family, religion,
science, art, or sect, trade or line of profession is a great
ambition which they often try to emulate. Even in vices there
arc leaders and subordinates. The leader of a dacoit gang
will have hundreds or thousands of persons under him and
the leadership is courted by his followers and admirers. Take
any line of work, there are leaders and those who follow them
as menials and subordinates of various grades. In this leadership, there is much good or evil the leader can do. If there
are two or more evil planets in the Karakamsa, the person
will be cruel and sinful in his deeds. If there are benefics,
we may expect the prominence in good and virtuous ways.
End of Fonrth Padn of the First Adhyaya.
ADHYAYA 2-PADA 1
Su. 1 . — Aayuh pitrudinesabhyam.
Longevity of a person has to be determined
with reference to Lagna and the 8th from it.

Jaiminlsutras
NOTES
Pitru- 1 , Dina =8; Pal, Ta means 6, 16 reversed will
be — 61, divided by 12 we have a remainder 1. Therefore the
1st house. Di -8, Na- 0, reversed we get 08. Therefore 8th
house from Lagna is signified. Jataka Chandrika, following
Parasara, lays down 8th and 3rd as houses of longevity.
Su. 2 . — Prathamayoruttarayorva deergham.
If the lords of the 1st and 8th are in movable
or common signs or if one of them is in a movable
and the other in a common sign, there will be
longevity.
Su. 3 . — Prathamadwiteeyayorantayorva madhyam.
If the lords of the 1st and 8th are found in
Chara and Sthira Rasis — movable and fixed — or if
both of them are in double bodied signs, there will
be middle life.
v. w wwft w ra u ft ft flip* n
Su. 4 . — Madhyayoradyantayorva heenam.
If the lords of the 1st and 8th are found in fixed
signs or one in Chara and other in Dwiswabhava,
there will be short life. In the second sutra the last
portion repeats the same idea.
^ n« nn p wim n
Su. 5 . — Evam rmndachandrabhyam.

Jaiminisutras
The rules he has given in the first four sutras
must also be applied to Chandra Lagna and the
Lagna.
NOTES
Manda - 1, Ma 5, Da 8-58, reversed we have 85, divided
by 12, we get 1 or first house. Therefore apply the above
rules for Lagna and Chandra. Here he drops the lord of the
8th.
L II
Su. 6. — Pitrukalatascha.
Poorna
Madhya
Alpa
1 Long
1 Middle
1 Short
1 life
2 life
3 life
2 Long
2 Middle
2 Short
3 life
1 life
2 life
3 Long
3 Middle
3 Short
2 life
3 life
1 life
Long, middle and short lives may also be ascertained from Lagna and Hora Lagna.
1 . Chara — Movable.
2. Sthira — Fixed.
3. Dwiswabhava — Common or Double bodied sign.

Jaiminisutras
Long life is ensured when the above-mentioned lords are —
1 . In two movable signs.
2. in fixed and common signs.
3. In common and fixed signs.
Middle life
When the two lords are in —
1. Movable and fixed signs.
2. Fixed and movable signs.
3. Common and common signs.
Short life
1. Movable and common.
2. Fixed and fixed.
3. Common and movable.
This table enables the reader to readily ascertain from the
lords of Lagna, Chandra and Hora Lagna and the lord of the
8th, the term of life of a person.
®. i fa wj s t w i wm II
Su. 7. — Samvadcitpramanyam.
Whichever longevity is determined by the
greater number of combinations of planets, that
term of life should be predicted and it will happen
certainly.
NOTES
This system of calculation and comparison is called
samvada. Three systems have been given, viz.,
1. From the position of the lords of Lagna and the 8tb
in the movable, fixed and common signs.

Jaiminisutras
2. From the position of the lords of Lagna and Chandra
Lagna in the above Rasis.
3. From the position of the Lagna and Hora Lagna in
the above signs. 1 have already explained what is
meant by Hora Lagna.
If the terms of life given by any of these two are opposed
to or vary from the term of life indicated by one system, then
the former will prevail. If the calculations from these three
systems agree, then certainly the person will have that term
which they show.
c. fq^«Gl#a: u
Su . 8 . — Visamvade pitrukalataha .
If three terms of life are indicated by the three
systems, then the terms obtained by the Lagna and
Hora Lagna should be preferred and accepted.
NOTES
If by one system we get long life, by another system
middle life and by the third short life, accept that term which
you get by the Lagna and Hora Lagna and reject the other
terms obtained by other calculations.
Su. 9 . — Pitrulabhage chandre chandramandabhyam.
If Chandra is in the 7th from Janma Lagna then
the longevity obtained from the lord of these two
must be taken as the definite term of a man’s life.
Alpayu or short life extends from birth to 32 years.
Madhyayu or middle life extends from 33 to 66 years.

Jalminisutras
Paramayu or long life extends from 67 to 100 years.
Each Rasi has 30 Bhagas or 30 degrees and the positions
of planets and houses will have to be taken with reference to
degrees and minutes they occupy. If the lords of Lagna and
8th are in the first 10 degrees of the Rasis indicating long life,
the person will have the full benefit of purnayu. If they are
in the end of those. Rasis, death must be predicted at the
commencement of longevity. If they are in the middle, then the
the extent of the term in longevity must be found out by the
rule of three. The rule of three should be thus applied. For each
degree of the Rasi we get 1 year and 36 days as per explanations of the old commentators. If purnayu counts 34 years
from 66th year to one hundred, then this has to be divided
by 30 degrees composing a Rasi. We get 1 year and 48 days
and not 36 as explained by them. A purnayu man under that
technical term may die from his 67th year's age to his 100th
year. Find out the degrees passed by the lords of Lagna and
8th in the respective houses they are and then by rule of three
find out how many degrees and minutes and seconds they
have passed in those Rasis and ascertain how many years
they give. Add this to 66 and the years so obtained will be
the term of life, the parson will have in the longevity period.
Say they are in 16 degrees 20 minutes and SO seconds. What
would be the term of life? We have taken this in the purnayu.
If each degree gets 1 year and 48 days, what will be the
number of years, months and days for 16 degrees, 20 minutes
and SO seconds ? This is simply a question of the rule of
three. We get 18 years, 6 months, 9 days and 40 ghatis. This
added to 66, the term of middle life, we get 84-6-9-40. The
longevity of the person will be 84 years, 6 months, 9 days
and 40 ghatis and his death must be predicted after this age.

Jaiminisutnu
Similarly the age must also be ascertained by Hora as well as
by Chandra Lagna. If there are differences, take the majority
and decide. In the second and third divisions of Madhya
and Alpayus or middle or short lives the same procedure has
to be followed. This gives a clue to predict the correct time
of death. The author in these sutras has not spoken anything
about the Balarishta, Madhyarishta and Yogarishta. A very
large number of infants die before they are eight years of age
and this is described as death from Balarishta. Then Madhyarishta extends from 8 to 20 years, and we have a large number
of deaths. Then we have the Yogarishta extending from 20
to 32. Probably Jaimini includes all these three different
periods in the Alpayuryoga which extends upto 32 years (see
my notes in Brihat Jataka and Sarvarthachintamani on these
various terras of life). Unless we have a full knowledge of
Balarishta the calculation of Jaimini will not be found useful
or accurate. An infant dies in the womb, a few minutes after
birth or months — how can these Yogas apply to them? See
Pindotpatt i or foetal development given by me in Brihat
Jataka.
t*. uforitnV wru: ii
Su. 10 . — Sanow yogahetou kakshyahrasaha.
If in the above combinations Sani causes the
Purnayuryoga, then place it as Madhyayuiyoga. If
he causes Madhyayuryoga, then put it in Alpa and
if he causes Alpa, then consider it as still less and
predict very early death
n. u
Su. 11.— Vipareetamityanye.

Jaiminisutras
Some others are of opinion that when the longevity is caused by Sani there should be no Kakshya
Hrasa or deduction or degradation. They mean that
the term indicated by Sani should hold good.
Su. 12 . — Na swarkshathungage saure.
If Sani causing longevity occupies his own or
exalted house, Kakshya Hrasa — or reduction —
should not be applied.
•* ii
Su. 13 . — Kevalapapadrigyogini cha.
If Sani, causing longevity, has many evil aspects
and conjunction, then, Kakshya Hrasa should not
be predicted.
Su. 14 .—Pitrulabhage gurow kevala shubhadrigyogini cha kakshyavriddhihi.
If Guru occupies the Lagna or the 7th has no
evil conjunctions or aspects, but beneficial aspects
and conjunctions, he will cause increase or Kakshyavriddhi.
NOTES
This means, if short life is revealed by the planetary
conjunctions, he will push it into middle life, if middle life is
denoted by the planetary positions, he will cause long life, if

Jaiminisutras
long life is indicated, then he will grant the person life term
beyond a hundred years.
jciwIi n
Su. 15 . — Maline dwarabahye navamse nidhanam dwaradwaresayoscha malinye.
If *Dwarabahya Rasis are malefic signs or if
malefics occupy these Dwarabahya Rasis, or if the
lord of Dwarabahya Rasi is a malefic, death will
happen in the Navamsa Dasas of such Dwarabahya
Rasis.
NOTES
Dwara Rasi is the sign which commences the period for
a man. This will be some sign from the Lagna. Like the
Pada Lagna, that sign from it which bears the same number
from Dwara Rasi will be called Dwarabahya Rasi. Suppose
the 4th from Lagna is the Dwara Rasi, which commences
the Dasa, the 4th from it or the 7th forms the Dwarabahya
Rasi. In the Jaiminisutras later on will be explained the
Rasi Dasas or periods and sub-periods and when a man
would be killed. This method of attributing Dasas and
Bhuktis to Zodiacal signs is not even hinted at in other
'books. There the Dasas and Bhuktis are attributed to
* The sutra is very tough and even the commentators have not come to
our rescue. It has reference to Maraka or death and has been dealt with
by me in my Studies in Jaimini Astrology. The Rasi in which a Dasa
begins at birth is Dwara Rasi. Suppose the Lagoa is Meena and the Dwara
Rasi is the 5th from it, viz., Kataka. That the 3th from Kataka, viz.,
VrisChika will be palled Bahya (Dwarabahya) Rasi. Dwara Rasi is also
called Paka Rasi while Bahya Rasi is also known as Bhoga Rasi.

Jaiminisutras
planets and constellations. In the Amsayurdaya of
Satyacharya, Lagna in any sign contributes its own term of
life. These Dwarabahya Rasis are also called Pakabhoga
Rasis. Paka means Dasa. If these two Dwarabahya Rasis
are evil signs, death will result in the period of an evil
Navamsa in them. If the lords of these two Rasis have evil
aspects or conjunctions, death must be predicted in the
period of the evil Navamsa. Death always happens under
the greatest malefic planet and malefic Rasi.
U. ynwft f W II
Su. 16. — Shubhadrigyoganna.
If to the Dwarabahya Rasis, and the Rasi occupied by Dwarabahya there are beneficial aspects
and conjunctions, there will be no death in the
Navamsa periods of those Rasis.
Su. 17 . — Rogese tunge navamsavriddhihi.
If the lord of the 8th from Lagna joins exaltation, there will be increase of life in the Dasa of
the Navamsa thus averting the death indicated in
the above combinations.
Su. 18 . — Tatrapi padesadasante padanavamsa -
dasayam pitrudinesatrikone va.
If there is an increase of life as per Sutra 17,
then death will happen in Navamsa Dasa of the
Rasi occupied by Arudhalagnadhipathi ; in the

Jaimiaisutnu
Dasas of Rasis which arc in trikona to lords of
Lagna and 8th ; in the Navamsa Dasa of the Rasi
containing Arudha Lagna.
NOTES
Pitru 1, Pa stands for 1 , Ta denotes 6=16, reversed it
is 61, divided by 12, we have 1 remainder, and it means
Lagna. Dina 8, Da stands for 8 and Na 0 = 80, reversed it
means 08, or the 8th house. If in the Vriddhi paksha named
in Sutra 17, the death does not happen then, when can the
person expect death. Jaimini here gives the periods when
death may be expected. The Arudhadhipathi or the lord of
Pada Lagna occupies some Rasi. Death may be predicted
in the Navamsa Rasi Dasa. Death may also happen in the
Dasas of the Trikonas from Lagna and the 8th or in the
Navamsa Dasa of the Arudha Rasi from Lagna. He has
given here three sets of combinations.
1 . Death may occur in the Dasas of Trikonas from Lagna
and the 8th.
2. Death may occur in the Navamsa Dasa of the Arudha
Rasi.
3. It may happen in the Navamsa Dasa from the Rasi
occupied by the lord of Arudha Lagna.
Su. 19 . — Pitrulabharogesapranini kantakadisthe swataschaivam thridha.
If the lord of the 8th from Lagna and the lord
of the 8th from the 7th, from Lagna are powerful
and occupy Kendras, Panaparas and Apoklimas,

JaimJnisutras
then they cause long, middle and short lives respectively.
NOTES
The lord of the 8th from Lagna and the lord of the 8th
from the 7th from Lagna must be powerful. If they occupy
Kendras, they give long life. If they occupy Panaparas,
they produce middle life. If they occupy Apoklimas, they
produce short life.
Kendras are 1, 4, 7 and 10 from Lagna. Panaparas
are 2, 5, 8 and 11 from Lagna. Apoklimas 3, 6, 9 and 12
from Lagna.
*o. u
Su. 20 .— Yogatsame swasmin vipareetam.
If Atmakaraka joins the 7th from the 7th
(Lagna), the meaning conveyed in Sutra 19 will
have to be differently interpreted.
NOTES
In this Sutra he is going to shew some special results.
These are called Viparitas or perverts in meaning. The 7th
from the 7th will be Lagna itself. If by Sutra 19 longevity
is indicated, then call it middle life, if they indicate middle,
call it short life, if short life is shown say there will be a
very little term of life. If it is long, say it will be short, if
it is short, say long, if it is middle, then call it middle. Commentators give some more hints. If the lord of the 8th from
Lagna is in exaltation, then he will give one-half more than
what could be expected from him.

Jaiminisutra*
If he occupies a debilitated Rasi, then he will cut off onehalf of what he would have given under normal conditions.
Similarly when there are exalted and debilitated planets in
the 8th we have to draw inferences and add or take away
from the terms of life indicated by them.
TlftRl: fliwi: II
Su. 21 . — Rasitaha pranaha.
The strength of the Rasis must be properly
ascertained.
NOTES
Jaimini gives particular strength to Rasis, other Shastras also attach importance to Rasis. He details Karakayogas shortly. He says that much strength need not be
attached to Amsa.
^ m u
Su. 22 . — *Rogesayoh swata aikye yoge va
madhyam.
If the 8th houses from Lagna and the 7th are
joined by their Karakas or if they happen to be
themselves Karakas, if the lords of the 8th house
from Lagna and the 7th are occupying Kendras,
Panaparas or Apoklimas, then the terms of life
* I have not meddled with the English rendering of this sutra by
Prof. B. Suryanarain Rao. I understand it thus : “If the lord of the
8th from Lagna or the 8th from the 7th is himself Atmakaraka ; or
are in conjunction with Atmakaraka. the terms of life mentioned in
Sutra 19 are to be reduced.** The rest is clear from Prof. Rao*s
notes.

Jaiminisutrss
ascertained from the combinations shown in Sutra
19 will have to be reduced.
NOTES
If the life indicated is long, then convert it into middle,
if it is middle, then reduce it to short, and if it is short, then
fix' death very early. This kind of increase or decrease
depends on the particular positions of planets and the Rasis
they occupy and these matters should be particularly and
carefully studied and the positions of the planets should be
properly understood.
Su. 23 . — Pitrulabhayoh papamadhyatwe kone
papayoge va kakshyahrasaha.
If Lagna and 7th from it lie between evil planets,
or if evil planets are in the Trikonas from Lagna
and Saptama, Kakshyahrasa or deductions and
additions must be made for terms of life which are
obtained by planetary positions.
it
Su. 24. — Swasminnapyevam.
If the Karaka is between the evil planets or evil
planets conjoin the Trikonas from him, Kakshyahrasa should be made.
v*. uforpqrt * n
Su. 25 . — Thasminpape neeche-atunge-ashubha -
samyukte cha.

Jaiminisutras
If the Karaka joins Neecha or does not join
the exaltation or if he is not in conjunction with
benefics, Kakshyahrasa should be made.
NOTES
A house or planet is said to be between malefics when
the 2nd and 12th from it are occupied by evil planets. When
two evil planets are on both sides of a Lagna or a planet, it
forms Kartariyoga and acts prejudicially to the Bhava indicated by the Rasi or the planet.
Su. 26. —Anyadanyatha.
If Lagna and Saptama (7th) or if Karaka and the
7th from him are between beneficial planets or if
the Trikonas from Janma and Karaka Lagnas are
occupied by benefics, if the Karaka happens to be
a benefic, if he is in exaltation and not in debilitation or has beneficial conjunction, there should
be no Kakshyahrasa made.
Su. 27 . — Gurou cha.
If Guru happens to be Karaka and has evil
planets in 2nd, 12th, 6th and 8th and in the houses
forming Trikonas from him or has evil planets with
him or he is not in exaltation or joins Neecha Rasi,
Kakshyahrasa should be made. And in cases where

Jaiminisutras
Ml
these combinations are reversed increase must be
predicted.
Su. 28 . — Purnendusukrayorekarasivriddhihi.
If Purna Chandra and Sukra become Karakas
and occupy the positions named in the above sutras,
they will give an increase of one Rasi Dasa.
NOTES
A certain Rasi Dasa becomes death inflicting but when
such a combination is present, this Dasa will pass off and
the next Dasa will cause death. This means they will increase
the longevity of the person.
Su. 29 . — Sanau vipareetham.
If Sani becomes Karaka and is found in the
places named in the previous sutras, he causes
Kakshyahrasa in the earlier Dasa than the maraka.
NOTES
This means he will cut short the life by one Dasa and
therefore earlier than the allotted time; when Chandra, Sukra
and Sani become powerful in these directions, we need not
take other planets into consideration and there will be no
decreases.
V*. fewfwwt *wwi»> frsptq; u
Su. 30 . — Sthiradasayam yathakhandam nidhanam i.

Jaiminisutras
Three sections for Ayurbhavaor longevity have
been explained, viz., long, middle and short lives.
In the Sthira Dasa suppose the term of life is
settled as middle. If a death-inflicting planet or
Dasa comes in the period of Alpayu, the person
will not die, but will suffer sickness and misery at
the time.
NOTES
For death he must wait for the middle term and the
maraka there. Sthira Dasas seem to prolong life to a certain
extent.
Su. 31. — Tatrarkshaviseshaha.
In the matter of death, note the peculiarity of
the Rasi. That is death will happen in the Dasa of
the Marana Karaka Rasi.
NOTES
Divide the 12 signs into 3 Khandas or sections and
predict the death for short life in the first Khanda, for middle
life in the second Khanda, and for long life in the third
Khanda in that Rasi Dasa which is cruel or which possesses
the power to inflict death. Suppose a man gets Alpayu or
short life as the result of the planetary and sign peculiarities
foreshadowed in the previous sutra on longevity ; then his
death must be and will be caused by the most cruel in the
first Khanda, or the first four signs. Middle life will have
death in next four signs and the long life will have an end in
the most cruel of the last four Rasi Dasas.

I Jaimioisutras
<n<ra^ qrw tft ftsf ft wb nft *iu
Su. 32. — Papamadhye papakone ripurogayoh
pape va.
If the Dasa is between malefics or has evil
planets in its Trikonas, or has evil planets in 12
and 8, such a Dasa will cause death to the person.
U. gi w
Su. 33. — Tadeesayoho kevalaksheenendusukradrishtow va
If the lords of the 12th and 8th are aspected by
Ksheenachandra and Sukra, the Dasa of the 12th
or 8th will inflict death.
NOTES
Ksheenachandra is powerless or New-Moon Sukra must
also be weak or powerless. Here Jaimini seems to hint
that those lords should have no other planetary aspects
to kill the person. When a combination is given, there
should be no disturbing agencies to produce the result.
V*. u
•Su. 34. — Tatrapyadyarksharinathadrisyanava -
bhagadva.
* This is a rather tough stanza and Professor Rao*s notes are not clear.
Of the several Rasi Dasas which are capable of causing maraka, death is
likely to occur (1) in the first Rasi Dasa (2) Find the lord of the 6th from
the Rasi whose Dasa is the first. See what Navamsa this lord aspects.
Death will take place in the sub-period of that Navamsa Rasi. Suppose
Dhanus is the first Rasi Dasa. Death will happen either in this or the 6th
from Dhanus, viz., Taurus and the lord of Taurus is Venus, Suppose he
aspects Kanya in Navamsa. The death will happen in the sub-period of
this Kanya Navamsa Rasi.

Jaiminisutras
Of the Rasi Dasas which have the power to
cause death, death is likely to happen in the first
Rasi Dasa and the sub-period of Rasi of the Navamsa Rasi which is aspected by the planet who is
lord of the 6th from the Rasi whose Dasa is the first.
NOTES
As per principles explained in the previous sutras the
author determines the period of death. The First Rasi which
commences the Dasa and the Dasa which its 6th sign furnishes, find out their lord and see what Navamsas they
aspect, death will happen in the sub-period of that Navamsa
Rasi which they aspect. These are referred to in the
Navamsa Kundali or Diagram.
Su. 35 . — Pi trulabhabhavesapranee rudraha.
Whoever is stronger among the lords of the 8th
from Lagna he gets the name of Rudra.
NOTES
The symbol of Rudra will be given to the lords of the
Rasis which are stronger in the 8th houses from Lagna and
Saptama or 7th.
tt. s rapqft 'TTTO2: ii
Su. 36 . — Apranycipi papadrishtaha .
If the weaker among the lords of the two
houses, 8th from Lagna and 7th, is aspected by
malefics, he will also get the name of Rudra.

Jaiminisutru
NOTES
Thus sometimes there may be two Rudras instead of one.
X®. sifafir israjsspewngt 11
Su. 37 . — Pranini subhadrishte rudrasulantha -
mayuhu.
If the powerful Rudra is aspected by benefics,
death may be predicted in the Rudra Rasi, or in
the periods of its Trikona Rasis 1 , 5 and 9.
NOTES
First classify and find out under what heading the term
of life falls and then predict death at the end of the Dasa
which is cruel.
erarft gwfth ii
Su. 38 . — Tatrapi subhayogay.
Even, if the weaker of the planets, when he has
evil aspects get the name of Rudra, has beneficial
conjunctions or aspects he will extend the length of
life, to the Rudra Rasi Dasa or the Dasas 5th and
9th from it.
NOTES
Trikona Dasas are what are technically called Shoola
Dasas. Trikonas are 1, S and 9.
V*. uritaroft ii
Su. 39 . — Vyarkapapayoge na.

Jaiminisutras
The above results should not be predicted if
other planets than the Sun, should be in the 5th
and 9th from the two Rudras.
NOTES
If Ravi is there, he will not obstruct the results above
mentioned. In some Yogas the presence of the Sun does
not count. In Sunapha, Anapha, Dhurdhura and Kemadruma, the presence of the Sun is not taken into account.
v®. qmthsft st si <mt: ii
Su. 40 . — Mandarendudrishtesubhayogabhave
papayogepi va shubhadrishtow va parataha.
If the two Rudras become evil, death will come
in the first Shoola Dasa; if one of them becomes
evil, death will happen in the second Shoola Dasa;
and if both of them are favourable, death will come
in the last of the 3rd Shoola Dasa.
NOTES
This means that if both Rudras are bad, early death, if
one of them is bad, longer life and if both of them are good,
the longest term of life will be enjoyed in the periods to be
determined by the principles already explained. Sutras are
unpardonably short, sweet, suggestive and comprehend a
great deal which the readers are expected to know, analyse
and remember. These general sources of knowledge and the
constructive capacity of the language enabled those intellectual giants of India, viz., the great Maharishis to frame
rules and Sastras and Sutras with great ease and facility and

Jaimioisutras
bequeath to the later generations mines of intellectual treasures, whose depths have not yet been completely explored
or examined by the greatest cultured brains of the present
day. It is not possible for the greatest scholars in Sanskrit
to frame a single Sutra, which can compare favourably
with the Sutras of the ancient Maharishis. They had the
Tapobala to their credit, led the most simple lives, developed
the brain power to the greatest conceivable extent and set
examples of devotion and contemplation on sublime subjects,
which gave them vast mental resources, and made them write
works, which are the admiration of the most profound scholars of the present age. This sutra requires lengthy explanation and I shall make no apology to do so for the benefit of
my readers. The commentators have called the following
from ancient writers. Jaimini’s views and explanations sometimes differ considerably from Varahamihira and others.
Ravi, Kuja, Sani and Rahu are classified as evil planets, one
stronger than the other. Rahu is the most powerful malefic,
next to Sani, next to Kuja and then to Ravi ; Guru, Kethu,
Sukra and Budha are benefics, one stronger than the other.
Guru is the most beneficial, next comes Kethu, next Sukra
and Budha comes last. If Chandra has the conjunction of
Kuja, he is classified as evil, otherwise he is good. If Ravi
and other evil planets occupy evil signs, they become more
and more evil. If they occupy beneficial signs, they become
good. If Guru and other benefics occupy beneficial signs,
they become very favourable. If they occupy evil signs,
they become bad. Budha becomes a benefic if he is in
exaltation or is in an independent sign. Guru and Sukra
in the house of Budha, viz., Kanya and Mithuna become
very beneficial so also in other beneficial signs.

Jaiminisutras
sn^»i ii
Su. 41 . — Rudrasrayepi prayena.
Death may happen sometimes in the Rasi Dasa
occupied by- Rudra.
NOTES
The word prayena means death may happen in them,
earlier or the later Dasa from the Rudra Dasa.
Su. 42 . — Kriye pitari viseshena.
If the Lagna falls in Kriya or Mesha, death
often takes place in the Rudra Dasa.
NOTES
Pitari means Lagna. Pa 1 Ta 6-61, divided by 12
the balance is 1, hence Janma Lagna.
Su. 43.— Prathamamadhyamottameshu va tattadayusham.
To persons having short, middle and long lives,
death happens in the first, second and third Shoola
Rasi Dasas.
NOTES
The sub-period, when the death happens, will be the
Antardasa of a cruel Rasi Dasa in their respective periods
or sections. I have already shown in the previous chapter
how the rule of three should be applied to get the correct
date of death.

Jaiminisutras
Su. 44 . — Swabhaveso maheswaraha.
The lord of 8th house from Atmakaraka goes
under the name of Maheswara.
NOTES
Atmakaraka has great significance in Jaimini Sutras.
Su. 45 . — Swochhe swabhe ripubhavesapranee.
If the lord of the 8th from Atmakaraka is
exalted or is in his own house, then the stronger of
the two, viz . , the lords of the 8th and 12th from the
Karaka will also go under the name of Maheswara.
NOTES
If both of them are equally strong, then both become
Maheswaras.
v*. qraiwrt wft srer traWr otj.ii
Su. 46 . — Patabhyam yoge swasya tayorvaroge
tataha.
If Atmakaraka has conjunction with Rahu or
Kethu, or if the 8th from Atmakaraka has conjunction with Rahu or Kethu, then the 6th planet
counting regularly from the Sun will become
Maheswara.
NOTES
Thus we have 3 Maheswaras. Counting the 6th from
the San will be the San, Moon, Mars, Mercury, Japiter and

ISO
Jaiminisutna
the 6th will be Venus or Sukra. On the above combination
Sukra becomes Maheswara. Of the three varieties of Maheswaras, he alone becomes Maheswara who is the strongest
among these three. Rag in this Sutra means 8, Patabhya
has been rendered as Rahu and Kethu. I cannot understand
how this has been interpreted as Rahu and Kethu by the
commentators— Pata 1, Bha 2. Probably after the 7 planets,
Bhya-Bhya the 1st is Rahu and the second is Kethu.
Patha may specially mean Rahu and Kethu.
Su. 47 . — Prabhubhavavaireesapranee pitrulabhapranyanucharo vishamastho brahma.
Find out which is the stronger of the two Rasis,
Lagna and Saptama or 7th. Then find out which of
the lords of the 6th, 8th and 12th from it is stronger,
and if he occupies an odd sign in the Parswa Rasis
from the stronger of Lagna or Saptama (7th), he
will be named as the Brahma planet.
NOTES
He is going to explain in this sutra the planet who goes
under the peculiar signification of Brahma. The Parswa Rasis
or side signs are the 7th, 8th, 9th, 10th, Uth and 12th from
Lagna. The 6 signs from Lagna, viz., 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 5th
and 6th are denominated as Parswa Rasis to the saptama
parswas. Odd and even signs are well known and have been
explained in the earlier notes. This is rather a difficult
sutra and must be carefully studied and understood. One of
the two signs Lagna and Saptama will be stronger. Take

Jaimioisutras
the lords of the three houses, 6th, 8th and 12th from the
stronger of these two signs Lagna and 7th. Find out who is
strongest of these three lords. If he is in an odd sign from
the Parswa Rasis to the stronger Rasi in Lagna or Saptama,
he becomes the planet called Brahma. To my humble mind
the procedure seems to be very complicated. Jaimini is a
Maharishi and he knows best. He has made these sutras as
short and as sweet as possible and our intellects are not
competent even to understand them. Where is then the
justification to find fault with their composition or the interpretations put upon them by the ablest commentators?
Learned commentators are a great boon to mankind.
Without them many valuable works would have remained
scaled letters.
qra# trcr: n
Su. 48 . — Brahmani sanau patayorva tataha.
If Sani, Rahu or Kethu becomes Brahma, the
6th planet from him will be designated as Brahma
in which case*the other three will not have the
Brahma power.
NOTES
The 6th planet must mean planet taken 6th in the
regular order, Ravi, Chandra, Kuja, Budha, Guru, Sukra.
Suppose, Kethu becomes Brahma, the 6th from him would
be Guru. Similarly for other planets. Thatha — 6 Tha 6,
Tha 6-66, divided by 12 we get the remainder 6 and hence
the 6th house from the planet is meant.
Su. 49 . — Bahunam yoge swajateeyaha.

Jaiminiiutntt
If many get the powers of Brahma (say three or
four planets at a time), then that planet becomes
Brahma who is next in degree to Atmakaraka.
NOTES
The next in degrees to Atmakaraka will become Amatyakaraka. Therefore in such cases Amatyakaraka becomes
Brahma.
Su. 50 . — Rahuyoge vipareetam.
When Rahu also gets Brahmatwa, then the
conditions will be reversed.
NOTES
This means that planet becomes Brahma who gets the
lowest number of degrees among the Brahmas. This is perfectly intelligible. Suppose Guru gets 29 degrees in Mesha,
then as per Jaimini rule he becomes Atmakaraka. These
planets move forwards. But suppose in that horoscope,
Rahu has only 20 minutes to pass in Mesha instead of Guru
Rahu becomes the Atmakaraka. He has the backward
movement, and therefore has the largest number of degrees
to his credit in the inverse order. While Guru has 29 degrees
in the forward movement, Rahu has 29 degrees and 40
minutes in his backward motion. Therefore Rahu has a
longer number of degrees.
HI. mu WTfoft W: II
Su. 51. —Brahma swabhaveso bhavasthaha.

Jaiminisutras
The lord of the 8th from Atmakaraka as also
the planet who occupies that house becomes
Brahma.
NOTES
Thus many Brahmas have been enumerated and the
reader must carefully study these rules. Bhava 8, Bha 4,
Va 4- 44, divided by 12, the remainder is 8.
H
Su. 52 . — Vivade balee.
Between the two planets the lord of the 8th
from Atmakaraka and the planet who joins the 8th,
the stronger of the two becomes Brahma.
NOTES
When there are many Brahmas, the strongest of the lot
will be the Brahma. The results flowing from the Brahma
and Maheswara planets will be explained hereafter. Students
must be very careful.
Su. 53 . — Brahmano yavanmaheswararksha -
dasantamayuhu.
The longevity extends through the Rasis commencing from Brahma and counting upto the Rasi
containing Maheswara.
NOTES
Jaimini has explained how to fix the planets, Rudra,
Maheswara and Brahma.

Jaiminisutras
Su. 54. — Tatrapi maheswarabhavesatrikonabde.
The period of death must be determined thus ;
Maheswara will be in a sign. Take the Dasa of this
Rasi, take the lord of 8th house from Maheswara.
Take the Trikonas from him, v/z., 1, 5 and 9. Predict death in the Antardasa of any one of these
Dasas which is strong enough to inflict death.
Su. 55 . — Swakarmachittaripuroganathapranee
marakha.
The strongest among the lords of 3, 6, 12 and
8 from the Atmakaraka will inflict death.
NOTES
First settle about the terms of life, short, middle and
long. If all the four lords mentioned above are of equal
strength, predict death in such period by the evil Dasa, which
intervenes at that time. The lords of 6 and 8 are powerful
marakas, of these two, lord of the 6th is more powerful in
causing death. Death will happen when the Dasas of 6 or 8
come. Death will occur in the sub-periods of the lords of
Trikonas from 8th and 6th houses, of these Trikona periods
from the 6th are more powerful. If the lord of the 6th is
powerful, then the Dasas of Trikona Rasis from him would
inflict death.
Su. 56. — Thadrukshadasayam nidhanam.

Jaiminisutras
IS
Death will happen in the Rasi Dasa occupied
by the maraka planet or in the Dasa of the Rasi of
which he is the lord.
Su . 57. — Tatrapi kaladripurogachittanathapahare
Take Atmakaraka. Find out the 7th from him.
Take Ripu, Roga, Chitta or 12, 8 and 6th from it.
The lords of these occupy some houses. Death may
happen in the Dasas of such signs or the Dasas of
the houses owned by these lords.
notes
After having ascertained such Marakagraha Rasis, he
directs his readers to find out the special sub-periods which
would cause death. Dasas of houses have to be counted
from Chara, Slhira and Dviswabhava in the particular order
named under that section. Some Rasi Dasa becomes maraka.
If there are many Rasis which get the maraka power, find
out the strongest among them and attribute death to it.
Suppose there is a sign without a planet, with a planet with
a planet who is its lord and a house with benefics. The last
will be the most powerful among the houses named above.
The first without a planet will be the weakest. The potentialities of planets and the houses have been very elaborately
explained in the earlier Sutras. These principles may also
be learnt from the general study of Astrology. Take Mesha
without any planet, with Sani, with Ravi, with Chandra
with Guru, with Sukra and with Kuja, Rahu or Kethu.

Jaiminisutras
Its potentialities vary with the presence or absence of these
planets and other aspects and conjunctions it has.
End of First Pada of Second Adhyaya.
ADHYAYA 2 -PADA 2
1 . Tfogppft: srptft 5R$: II
Su. 1 . — Ravisukrayoh pranee janakaha.
Out of Venus and the Sun, the stronger will
become the makara for father.
NOTES
In the previous section Jamini has explained about the
Maraka Dasa for a person, when he would die, and which
Dasa and Amsa Dasa would kill him. I must confess here
in spite of the elaborate explanations offered for the fixing of
the period of death, the system seems to be complicated and
cannot easily be grasped by the ordinary students. Even
intelligent students will have to pour long hours, and much
devotion to understand these complicated principles and fix
correctly the time of death. For determining the terms of
longevity, the other systems are no doubt hard and laborious,
but it may be, they are simpler than the one illustrated by
the Maharishi in his inimitable sutras, which cannot easily
be deciphered by common men. In this section rules are
given to find out the deaths of father, mother and other
important relations. A man’s comforts apd peace of mind

Jaiminisutras
and happiness in the world depend greatly upon his relations,
his friends and his servants. When these are inimicable, the
man certainly becomes miserable. Ravi and Sukra represent father in a horoscope. The stronger of the two will
cause the death of father. In general astrology Ravi and
Chandra represent father and mother respectively. Varahamihira says Divarkasukrau pitrumatrusamgnitou sanaischarayndu nisitadwiparyayat . For persons born during the
day, Ravi and Sukra represent father and mother respectively. For those who are born during nights Chandra and
Sani denote father and mother respectively.
Su. 2. — Chandraarayorjananee.
The stronger of the two planets Chandra and
Kuja will kill the mother.
qwrest: ii
Su. 3 .—Apranyapi papadrishtah.
Among the four planets Ravi, Sukra, Chandra
and Kuja whoever is weak and possesses evil
aspects will cause the death of father and mother.
NOTES
Prany means strength. Aprany denotes want of
strength, viz., weakness.
«. snfa fa sipro£ smrfaat: ii
Su. 4.-r-Pranini shubhadrishte tatchule nidha -
nam matapitroh.

Jaiminisutras
If, among the planets named above Ravi, Sukra,
Chandra and Kuja, whoever has got beneficial
aspects, the death of father and mother must be
predicted in the Shoola Dasa— 1st, 5th or 9th Rasi
Dasa from the powerful planet.
ii n
Su. 5 and 6. (5) Tadbhavese spashtabale.
(6) Thatchula ityanye.
If the, lord of the 8th from the lords of father
and mother is powerful, then the period of the
Shoola Rasis from him will inflict death on the
father and the mother.
NOTES
This opinion is held by some writers. Two planets for
father and two for mother have been named, whoever is
stronger out of these two will have the death arranged in
their Shoola Dasas.
#. Wfft wrui; II
Su. 7 . — Ayushi chanyat.
As deaths have to be predicted for father and
mother by their Karakas, similarly events have to
be predicted for others from their Karakas and the
Shoola Dasas from them.
NOTES
This means for all events in life there are Rasis and
Karakas. Rules governing the above for mother and father
will also apply similarly for other events.

Jaiminisutras
c, wfegqft tppfaft fafr W&qq K rat ftgftslfc 1 1
Su. 8. — Arkagnayoge tadasrithe kriye lagnameshadasayam piturityeke.
If the 12th house from Lagna falls in any one of
these three signs, viz., Mithuna, Simha or Kanya
and has the conjunction of Ravi and Budha, death
happens in the Dasa of the 5th from it.
NOTES
Kriya 12, Ra 2, Ya 1 =21, inverted it denotes 1?.
Mesha means 5th, Ma 5, Sha 6 = 56, reversed it gives 65
divided by 12, we have remainder 5, and fifth house is meant
by Mesha. Mesha in ordinary language means Aries. But
in Jaimini it has to be interpreted by Ka, Ta, Pa, Ya sutra.
<t. ufaw w refl : faft: JtFjn^n^Pt II
Su. 9. — Vyarkapapamatradrishtayoh pitroh
pragawadasabdat.
Whether the lords of father and mother are
powerful or powerless, if they have the aspects of
evil planets other than the Sun, the death of father
and mother may be predicted before the 12th year
of a person’s age.
i*. vsnrcni
Su. 10. — Gurusule kalatrasya.
The Dasas of 1st, 5th or 9th Rasis $rom the
position of Guru will cause the death of his wife.

Jaiminisutras
NOTES
He names three Dasas called Shoolas. The worst
among them will kill the wife.
t 1 . it
Su. 11 . — Thattatchoole tesham.
Death will happen to children, uncles, etc., in
the Dasas of 1st, 5th and 9th Rasis from the
Karakas who govern those events.
NOTES
Take the Putrakaraka and predict death to children in
the Shoola Dasas from him. Take the Matulakaraka. The
Shoola Dasas from him will kill uncles, etc.
i*. §<sj rrmn 11
Su. 12 . — Karmani papayutadrishte dushtam
maranam.
If the 3rd from Lagna or Karaka has the aspect
or conjunction of evil planets, death will be painful
and troublesome.
NOTES
Death is a peculiar phenomenon about which people
have various conceptions. Some dread it, some welcome it,
and others are quite indifferent.
u. s* it
Su. 13. — Subham subhadrishtiyute.

Jaiminisutras
If the 3rd from Lagna or Karaka has beneficial
aspects or conjunctions, death will be easy from
slight complaints.
NOTES
Some have prolonged and most painful complaints
before death, some have ordinary complaints and others
have very easy deaths.
iv. fed few* ii
Su. 14 . — Mis re misram.
If the 3rd from Lagna or Karaka has mixed
aspects and conjunctions, death will be neither very
difficult nor very easy.
Su. 15 . — Adityena rajamoolath.
If the 3rd from Lagna or the Karaka is connected with Ravi, death comes to the person
through the kingly or Government displeasure.
NOTES
He may be hanged, confined, beheaded or executed,
thrown into abysses from tops of forts or mountains or shot
at the cannon’s mouth.
H. II
Su. 16 . — Chandrena yakshmanah .
If Chandra occupies or aspects the 3rd from
Lagna or Karaka, the person will die through consumption or Tuberculosis.

Jaimioisutras
NOTES
Yakshma means consumption. It is no doubt a nasty
disease, but with some it takes years to bring their ruin,
with others it is quick and active.
1®. mareaifirraift : ||
Su. 1 7 . — Kujena vranasastragnidahadyaihi.
If Mars occupies or aspects the 3rd from Lagna
or Karaka, the person dies by wounds, injuries, fire
and weapons.
NOTES
Karaka in all these Sutras refer to Atmakaraka. Find
out the 3rd house from Lagna or Atmakaraka Lagna, whichever of these two is stronger, predict the results from it, by
the 3rd house and the planet who is there. If Kuja is found
there, by wounds and injuries, by weapons, by fire and by
burning, he will meet death. Kuja is called Angaraka or one
who robs and injures the bodily organs or Angas, Lohitanga
or bloody planet, Ara or one who injures and burns the
limbs. Bloody diseases and blood corruption lead to many
painful complaints.
*1§RT 5T«fbTPT II
Su. 18 ,—Sanina vatarogat.
If Sani is aspecting or combining with the 3rd
from Lagna or Karaka, death comes through windy
complaints.
NOTES
Ayurveda or Indian Medical Science mentions three
Dhatus or characteristics for all physical constitution, viz..

Jaiminisutras
Vata or wind. Pitta or bile and Sleshma or phlegm. No
disease comes when these are working in their proper proportions. But when any one of them is excited beyond its
normal qantity, ill-health follows in various complications
and death will result when any one or more of them are
roused and proceed to work out of the normal conditions.
All diseases in the Indian medicine are attributable to the
excess or want of these in proportions.
Su. 19. — Mandamandibhyam vishasarpajalodbandhanadibhih.
If the 3rd from Lagna or Karaka is occupied by
Sani and Gulika, the person will die from the effects
of poison, from snakes, from chains and shakles
and from water.
NOTES
The latter means drowning or watery diseases like dropsy,
diabetes, etc.
Su. 20. —Kethuna vishucheejalarogadyaiah.
If the 3rd from Lagna or Karaka is occupied
or aspected by Kethu, the person dies from contageous, watery and epidemic complaints.
NOTES
Vishuchi is a comprehensive term and includes various
contageous and epidemic complaints such as small-pox,
cholera, plague, influenza, watery diseases or dropsy,

Jaiminisutras
diabetes diarrhoea, etc. Here great margin and latitude are
given to the student to use his brain, practical knowledge and
the instructions he gets from his Gurus. No principles of
sciences can be explained without sutras. These sutras are
the pleasures of the learned and the pains of the ignorant. In
Sanskrit adi is used often because all the events, which a
principle governs or comprehends, cannot be explained, and
if such an attempt is ever made, it would fill volumes after
volumes and there would be no end to writing. A direction
has to be shown to the intelligent student and they should
follow the same with diligence and sometimes achieve better
results than the original principle intended or conceived.
Brain power has no limit. It is able to grasp, when properly
developed and directed, the smallest and the largest objects.
Su. 21 . — Chandramandibhyam poogamandanmkabaladibhih kshanikam.
If the 3rd from Lagna or Karaka has the conjunction of Chandra and Gulika, death will result
immediately from eating hard meals, food and
other indigestible articles.
!P5°n u
Su. 22 . — Guruna sopharuchivimanadyaihi.
If the 3rd from Lagna or Karaka is combined
by Guru, the death will be caused by dropsy,
disgust for food, melancholy and other complaints.
NOTES
Dropsy and swellings of the body may be caused by
various causes. The bites of insects are often causes for

Jaiminisntras
swellings of parts of body and through such swellings death
may occur.
Su. 23 .— Sukrena mehat.
If the 3rd is aspected or joined by Sukra from
Lagna or Karaka, death will result from venereal
complaints.
NOTES
In the flush of passions, people commit all sorts of
sexual excesses and bring in their train a series of complicated
and horrible diseases, some of which are loathsome, repulsive,
horrible and excruciating. In painful tortures, the venereal
complaints take a prominent rank and punish the offenders
with very serious troubles and pains.
W^Wwi^ll
Su. 24. — Misremisrat.
If the 3rd from Lagna or Karaka has the conjunction or aspect of many planets, then the death will
come from various diseases.
NOTES
Sometimes diseases are sharp and pronounced, but often
they are complicated and throw the doctors on their wit’s '
ends. The noses of the medical men will have to be expanded
before they correctly diagnose them.
Su. 25.— Chandradrugyogannischayena.

Jaiminisutrai
If Chandra aspects or joins the 3rd from Lagna
or Karaka along with other planets, death is cartain
to happen from the causes named in the previous
sutras.
NOTES
In all deaths, Sani and Chandra must have a hand.
Death means the disruption of mind from the body and mind
is represented by Chandra. Vedas say Chandramamanasojatah.
If there are many evil planets in the 3rd, then death
happens under very painful circumstances. But when there
are many benefics in the 3rd, death will happen after slight
complaints or under easy surroundings.
gfc: n
Su. 26 . — Subhaihi subhadese.
If the 3rd from Lagna or Karaka has beneficial
aspects or conjunctions, death happens in good or
holy places.
NOTES
For various reasons, too numerous to be discussed in
short notes like these, people specially religiously inclined,
covet death in holy places or happy surroundings. This is
human aspiration.
<ri^s II
Su. 27 . — Papaih keekate.
If the 3rd from Lagna or Karaka has evil aspects
or conjunctions, death will happen in vicious or
sinful countries and places.

Jaiminisutras
NOTES
The commentators have interpreted Keekata Desa as
Magadha and other sinful countries. When benefics are in
the 3rd, death happens in holy places, like Kasi, Tirupathi or
other places held holy by the followers of different religions.
Mohamedans hold Mecca and Medina as holy. The Christians consider Jerusalem as holy. The Buddhists hold Gaya
as holy. The Hindus have many places declared as holy like
Kasi, Rameswaram, Jagannath, Haridwara, Tirupathi, etc.
When evil planets are in the 3rd, death happens in vicious or
sinful places. There are some places which are full of vices
and sinful deeds. Death in such places will be considered
as a great misfortune. Say a man dies, near a cess pool, in
night soil, in gambling or whoring dens, or in dirty wells or
dreary forests. Families, communities, religious sects, villages,
towns, cities, countries and nations have ebbs and flows in
their fortunes, and also in their morals and spiritualities.
Sodom and Gamora were destroyed on account of their abominable vices. We have also many examples of destruction of
these by excesses in sins and vices. It will be a consolation
to take birth in a virtuous place and in the midst of good and
pious people. It will certainly be a misfortune to be born in
dirty and sinful surroundings. To die in an agreeable place
and have the ceremonies performed as per their religious
principles will be a pleasure. To die in dirty and sinful
places and be neglected after death or the body exposed to
wild animals and vultures, will be a real misfortune which
every man tries to avoid.
gggs is rt tyregteq; 11
Su. 28 . — Gurusukrabhyam gnanapurvakam.

Jaiminisutras
If the 3rd from Lagna or Karaka has the
conjunction or aspect of Guru and Sukra, the
person dies with consciousness unimpaired.
NOTES
The word used is Gnana. It may also mean that the
person will die, with the full thoughts of Para Brahma in
his mind.
«r4t»r*nii
Su. 29. — Anyairanyatha.
If the 3rd from Lagna or Karaka is aspected or
joined by other planets, unconsciousness prevails
at death.
NOTES
There are some miserable people who remain unconscious before death for weeks and months together. They
will have no holy thoughts in their heads.
V». wwr u
Su.' 30 . — Lepanukhapormadhye sanirahuketubhihi pitrorna samskartha.
If Sani and Rahu or Sani and Kethu are in
conjunction between the 1st and 12 houses, the person will not perform the obsequies of his parents.
NOTES
Lepa 1, Khapa- 12, La denotes 3, Pa shows 1=31,
reversed 13, divided by 12 we getl, and therefore denotes
the Lagna or 1st house. Kha 2, Pa 1 -21, reversed we get

Jaiminisutras
12. The performance of death ceremonies for parents is
held'as a sacred duty. If a person does not do it, he will be
called an ungrateful wretch and generally communities outcast him.
Su. 31 . — Lepadi purvardhe janakadyaparardhe.
If Rahu arid Sani are found in conjunction in
the first 6 houses from Lagna, the death ceremonies
for the mother will not be performed. If they are
found in the next 6 houses, viz., from 7th to 12th
houses the ceremonies for the father will not be
performed.
NOTES
Sani and Rahu or Sani and Kethu are meant here. Their
conjunction is necessary here in the houses indicated above.
sptrrcfriTm ii
Su. 32. — Subhadrigyoganna.
If Sani and Rahu or Sani and Kethu have
beneficial aspects or conjunctions, these evil results
should not be predicted.
NOTES
It means the person performs the death ceremonies
properly to his parents.
End of Second Pads of the Second Adhyaya.

ADHYAYA 2— PADA 3
t . fiwft qq ift foriv : II
Su. 1 . — Vishame tadadirnavamamsah.
If the birth falls in an odd sign, the Navamsa
Dasas commence from it.
NOTES
Each Rasi Dasa contains 9 Amsas or Navamsas and each
Rasi Dasa counts 9 years. Hence these Dasas are called
Navamsa Dasas. Mesha, Mithuna, Simha, Thula, etc.,
are odd signs.
Su. 2 . — Anyatha darsadihi.
In the even signs the Navamsa Dasas commence
from the Abhimukha Rasis. •
NOTES
The commentators explain thus : If a movable sign is
Lagna, then the 8th Rasi from Lagna becomes the commencement Dasa. If Lagna falls in a fixed sign the commencing
Dasa will be the 6th Rasi from it. If Lagna falls in a
common sign, the Dasa commences from the 7th Rasi from it.
These are called Abhimukha Rasis and their explanations
have been given in the earlier sutras.

Jaiminisutras
fi»UyiWIH II
Su. 3. — Sasinandapavakah kramadabdah sthiradasayam.
In the Sthira or fixed sign Dasa, the movable
sign Dasa will be 7, the fixed Dasa will be 8 years
and the Dasa of the common Rasi will extend to
9 years.
«. II
Su. 4. — Brahmadiresha.
The Sthira Dasa commences from the Rasi
occupied by Brahma.
NOTES
Brahma has already been explained in Sutra 47 of
Pada 1 of Adhyaya 2.
H. «W SPI: II
Su. 5. — At ha pranah.
Jaimini now begins to explain the strength of
the planets and the Rasis. Prana , here as well as in
the previous sutras, means sources of strength the
planet and the signs get.
*. sr*mt u
Su. 6 . — Karakayogah prathamo bhanam ,
That Rasi or sign becomes the strongest, which
has the conjunction of Atmakaraka.

Jaiminisutraa
NOTES
This combination is supposed to give greater strength
than even the Shadbalas recorded in the other astrological
works. This is the primary source of strength.
Su. 7 . — Saumye bhuyasa.
If other sources of strength are equal, then the
conjunction of larger number of planets gives
greater strength.
«. ii
Su. 8. — Thathastungadih.
If these sources of strength are equal, then exaltation, friendly houses, and Moolatrikonas give
them vitality.
Su. 9. — Nisargasthulhuh.
Then the Nisarga or permanent sources of
strength must be considered.
NOTES
The chara or movable signs are weaker than Sthira
Rasis or fixed signs. These arc weaker than the common or
Dviswabhava Rasis.
i*. wrfN r* ii
Su. 10 .—Thadabhave swamina ithham bhavah.

Jaiminisutras
If the Rasi has one of the Karakadi sources of
strength, then its power will be that which its lord
possesses from the associations of Karaka, etc.
NOTES
The strength of the Rasi and the strength of its lord
should be taken into consideration.
n. wranmt fastornni
Su. 11 . — Agrayatto viseshath.
According to the Jaimini Sutras the planets
which gets the highest number of degrees among
others will become the most powerful.
NOTES
This has been already explained in the earlier portion
and the most forward planet in a Rasi becomes the Atmakaraka and most of the results previously named are based
upon his position and, the relative positions of other Rasis
and planets taken with reference to him. According to this
work Atmakaraka supersedes all other planets in power and
potency.
1*. pi II
Su. 12 .—Prativesikah purushe.
In the odd sign, it gets strength from the planets
who occupy the 12th and 2nd from it.
NOTES
Planets in the 2nd and 12th from themselves or from
the Rasis they occupy have special influences. The Rasi

Jaiminisutras
will have Kartari Yoga, as also any planet which has on
both sides evil planets. Good planets may cause this Yoga
and probably the results will be beneficial.
SWT; II
Su. 13 . — Ithi prathamah.
The sources of strength named in the above
sutras will be the first set of inquiry into the powers
of a Rasi or its lord.
f&fa: ii
Su. 14 . — Swami gurugnadrigyogo dwiteeyah.
The second set of strength for a Rasi is derived
by the aspect of its own lord, Jupiter or Mercury.
NOTES
Now he names the second set of powers which a Rasi
can command to its credit. Varahamihira observes thus
in his Brihat Jataka :
H or a swami Gurugnya VeeksRitayuta Nanyaischa
Veeryolkatah.
The Lagna or any Bhava or Rasi becomes strong when
it has the aspect or conjunction of its lord, Guru or Budha,
if not it will not be powerful. This stanza of Brihat Jataka
is nothing but a slavish imitation of this sutra of Jaimini.
The Maharishi Jaimini was the author of Paorvomimamsa
Sutras, Jaimini Bharata and the invaluable sutras I am
translating. He was the disciple of Veda Vyasa and was,
therefore, contemporary of that great Maharishi. I have
proved, by indisputable authority, that the period of Maha
Bharata was more than 5,000 years from now. There are

Jaiminisutras
four copper plate grants given by the Emperor Janamejaya
the son of Parikshit and the grandson of Abhimanyu, the
son of Arjuna, the great hero in that ruinous war and the
recipient of the Bhagavadgita instructions from Lord
Krishna himself and written by Veda Vyasa. Varahamihira,
as per date given by himself in stanza 2 of his Brihat
Samhita , Chapter 31, lived in the court of Vikramaditya
whose Era called Samvat Nripasaka is prevalent all over
India and counts now as 1988. Varahamihira says that he •
borrowed all his ideas of Astronomy, Astrology and Samhita
from the still more older writers and the above quoted of
his stanza certainly comes from Jaimini. Any sign becomes
strong when it has the aspect or conjunction of its lord,
Guru or Budha. Six varieties arise from this. The lord
aspecting or conjoining, it gives two. Similarly for the other
two planets Guru and Budha. This is the second source or
item of strength. Aspects and conjunctions are different.
in. wiffcrepfa: II
Su. 15.— Swaminastruteeyah.
The third set of strength for the lord will be the
one to be detailed below.
u.
Su. 16 . — Swatswaminah kantakadishwaparadourbalyam.
Those planets who are in Kendras, Panaparas
and Apoklimas from the Atmakaraka become more
and more powerless than him.

Jaiminisutras
NOTES
This means those who are in the Kendras from the
Atmakaraka are powerless. Those who are in the next
houses from Kendras are still more feeble and those who
occupy the next houses are worse still in power. This
represents the 3rd source of strength.
Su. 17. — Chaturthah purushe.
If the lord of the Rasi falling in Purusha Rasi
(odd sign) has evil conjunctions and aspects, this
will become the 4th source of strength to the Rasi.
Su. 18. — Pitrulabhaprathamapranyadi shooladasa niryane.
Take the stronger out of the two 1st and 7th.
Then from the stronger of these two, take the
Shoola Dasas, viz., 1, 5 and 9. Find out which of
these Shoola Rasis becomes the strongest. Then
ascribe the death period to it as certain.
is. fa3®wgwn<Hii{$: ii
Su. 19. — Pitrulabhaputrapranyadih pituh.
Putra 9, Pa 1, Ra 2- 12, reversed it means 21,
divided by 12, we have the balance 9, hence the 9th
house is meant. Take the Lagna and 7th and find out
the 9th houses from them. Whichever is stronger in
these two ninth houses, take that and find out their

J aim inisut ras
Shoola Dasas and prescribe death to father in the
most unfavourable of these Shoola Dasas, viz. , 1,
5 and 9.
Su. 20. — Adarsadirmatuh.
Take the most powerful in 1 or 7. Take the 4th
from it and find the Shoola Dasas from it, whichever is the most powerful among the 1st, 5th or 9th
predict death to the mother in that Dasa.
NOTES
Darsa 4, Da 8, Ra 2-82 reversed 28, divided by 12 we
have the balance 4 and 4th house is meant here.
Su. 21 . — Karmadirbhrathuh .
Take the 3rd from Lagna or the 7th whichever
is stronger, and ascribe death to brothers and sisters
in the most powerful of the Shoola Dasas from it.
Su. 22 . — Matradirbhagineeputrayoh .
Take the Lagna or the 7th whichever is stronger,
and find the 5th from it. Sons and sisters will die in
the most cruel of the Shoola Dasas from the above
5th house.
NOTES
How 5th can have any connection with sisters, I cannot

Jaiminisutras
guess. But the sutra is clear and we have to take it in the
sense he has given.
n. ww il frflsm ii
Su. 23. — Vyayadirjaishtasya.
Take the 11th from Lagna or 7th whichever is
stronger, and predict death to elder brothers in the
most unfavourable Shpola Dasa from it.
NOTES
The 3rd represents younger 'brothers and sisters and the
11th, the elder sisters and brothers in other works on
astrology.
Su. 24. — Pitruvatpitruvarge.
Take the stronger of the two Lagnas and the
7th. Find out the 9th from it. From this take the
Shoola Dasas and predict death to paternal uncles,
etc., in the evil period among them.
wn II
Su. 25 . — Brahmadih purushe sama dasanthah.
If the Lagna falls in a purusha or masculine Rasi,
the Dasas or periods commence from the sign occupied by the Brahma. The extent of the Rasi Dasa
is thus determined. Take the 6th from the Dasa
Rasi. Find out the number of the house the lord of
it occupies and that number will be the extent in
years of that Dasa.

Jaiminisutru
NOTES
Dasa 6, Da 8, Sa 7-87 reversed it gives 78, divided by
12, the balance is 6, hence the 6th house is indicated by
this figure.
WM*mQi<W: II
Su. 26 . — Sthana vyathikarah.
When the Janma Lagna falls in an odd sign,
the Dasas commence from the Rasi occupied by
Brahma in regular order. If the Lagna falls in an
even sign, then the Dasas commence regularly from
the 7th house from Brahma.
NOTES
This means in odd signs the Dasas commence from the
Rasi occupied by Brahma, and in even signs the Dasas
commence from the 7th Rasi from the sign occupied by
Brahma.
s*. n
Su. 27. — Papadrigyogastungadigrahayogah.
The conjunctions and aspects of malefics are a
source of strength for the Rasis. So also is added
another source of strength to (the Rasi) by planets
(situated there) being in exaltation, Moolatrikona
and very friendly and friendly houses.
NOTES
Jaimini now gives the fourth source of strength to the
Rasis. The conjunctions and aspects of evil planets are a

rso
Jaimlaisutras
source of strength to the Rasis. The states of such planets
which have aspects and conjunctions in the Rasis will also
be sources of strength, such states are exaltations, debilitations, friendly and unfriendly houses, Moolatrikonas. Benefics influence the Rasis by aspects and conjunctions when
they are in exaltations and other favourable positions otherwise they do not exercise much influence, such is the opinion
of the commentators. This is fourth source of strength.
Su. 2S. —Panchame pada kramat prakpratyaktvam.
If the 9th from Lagna happens to be incorporated in an odd sign take the Rasi Dasas in the
regular order. If it happens to be incorporated in
an even sign, take the Rasi Dasas in the inverse
order or backwards. The commencement of the
Dasa should be from the Lagna. Kethu in these
cases is considered as a benefic.
End of Third Pada of Second Adhyaya
ADHYAYA 2-PADA 4
i . timw ’SRsratfc it
Su. 1 . — Dwiteeyam bhavaphalam charanavamse.

JaiminisUtf&s
In the Navamsa Dasa of Chara Rasi the significations of the second house must be explained in
the manner given in Sutra 14 of the previous sectiort.
NOTES
All Bhavas get strength when they are aspected or con*
joined by their lords, by Guru and by Budha.
Su. 2 . — Dasasrayo dwaram.
The Rasi which commences the Dasa or period
is called the Dwara Rasi or the door for the subsequent Rasi Dasas.
NOTES
This Dasa is called also Paka Rasi.
qawwftrt mini u
Su. 3 . — Thathastavatiiham bahyam.
Count as many signs from Dwara Rasi as Dwara
Rasi is removed from Lagna. This will be the Bhoga
Rasi.
NOTES
He gives here the definition of what is called Bhoga Rasi,
The commencement of Dasas is given and their differences
in Chara, Sthira and Dviswabhava Rasis have been shown.
The commencing Dasa falls in some sign from Lagna.
Then count from that Rasi to a similar number and this will
be the Bahya Dasa or Bhoga Dasa. Suppose the commen-

JaiminUutrat
cing Dasa falls in Mesha for a person whose Lagna is Dhanus.
Then it will be Sth from it. Mesha Dasa becomes the Paka
or Dwara Dasa and the Sth from it, viz., Simha becomes the
Bahya or Bhoga Dasa. Some commentators explain thus :
If Mesha begins as the Dasa of the first sign, then counting
one from it, the Bhoga Dasa or the second begins in Mesha
alone. Then the second Dasa begins in Vrishabha which
will be called Paka Dasa, and the second from it Mithuna
becomes Bhoga Dasa. The third Dasa commences in Mithuna
and it becomes Paka Dasa. The third from it, viz., Simha
becomes the Bhoga Dasa, Kataka becomes the 4th Dasa and
becomes Paka, while the 4th from it, viz., Thula becomes
Bhoga Dasa. Jn this way Dasas must be calculated till the
last Dasa, which ends the man’s existence and kills him.
I think I have made the meaning very clear and simple.
«. mt; it
Su. 4 . — Tayoh pape bandharogadi.
If evil planets are found in the Paka and Bhoga
signs, the person will suffer from imprisonment,
chains, diseases and other mental and physical
troubles.
m. o f b w frw fr re r n
Su. 5 . — Swarksheasya thasmimopajeevasya.
If the evil planets in the two Rasis happen to be in
their own houses or are very close to Guru, then the
evil results foretold in Sutra 4 will not happen.
Su. 6 . — Bhagrahayogoktam sarvamasmin.

Jaiminisutrat
The results in these Dasas will have to be
foretold, by the strength of the planets and by the
sources of strength and weakness of the Paka and
Bhoga Rasis.
NOTES
These hints are to be taken not only here but throughout
the whole work. Suppose there are evil planets in debilitation or without nearness to Guru.
1. These two Rasis have exalted evil planets.
2. There are beneficial 'planets with malefics.
3. There are pure benefics.
4. Benefics in exaltation.
5. Benefics in debilitation.
In all such cases, the results will certainly be, and must
be different. The strength of the Rasis must also be carefully
considered. Then again, in the Rasi extending over 30
degrees the strength and weakness of the Rasi will not be
uniform. There is a radical difference between the general
astrologers and Jaimini Maharishi. All the astrological works
have their foundations laid in the writings of the Maharishis.
They alone were able to see the differences in planetary globes,
their influences on each other and the wonderful ways by
which they indicated the results of the karma to the credit
of the person at the time of his birth. Jaimini gives great
prominence to the planet who has advanced the largest number *
of degrees in a Rasi and calls him Atmakaraka. The
Navamsa he occupies plays a prominent place in the
delineation of characteristics and results. But in the Deeptadi
Avast has, the planet who is in the last Navamsa of a Rasi gets
Peeda Avastha or the state of humiliation. No great prominence

Jaimfnisutrai
is attached to him and on the other hand he becomes weak
and powerless. Difference of opinion among the various
authors are found in large numbers. Take medicine, philosophy,
religion, war, law, speculation and even the so-called most
exact science, mathematics. Here one plus one becomes two
and one and one both minus becomes two. We give a separate
value for plus and minus. To reach a place there may be one
thousand and one ways. The differences in all these will
have to be carefully considered and reconciled. Approaching
from different places and directions and experiments and
experiences, two or more persons may reach the same
destination or results. A simple illustration will convince us
about the truth of these observations. A, B and C are each
worth one lakh of rupees. By whatever means they may have
acquired that wealth, the result is the same, and the money
power of one lakh lies with each of them. Take half a dozen
warriors of exactly equal physical and mental capacities.
Each may have taken different food, born in different
conditions, and brought up under different circumstances,
but the results are one and the same. Similarly in astrological
sciences. Different Maharishis pursued different methods
and found out the identical results though those results were
produced from apparently different causes. The solar,
planetary and stellar radiations are working through the
various degrees of the zodiacal signs in mysterious ways.
SU. 7. — Pitrulabhapranithoyam •
These results have to be carefully predicted
from Lagna or the 7th, whichever is the stronger of
the two. For males preference should be giyea to

J&iminisutras
Lagna and for females the 7th should be preferred
provided it is strong.
<5. mwwpwq ii
Su. 8 . — Prathame prakprathyaktvam.
If the Dasa commences with a movable sign or
Chandra Rasj, then the order of the Rasi Dasas
will be regular in a horoscope.
ifimi ii
Su. 9 . — Dwiteeye ravitah.
If the Dasa commences in the fixed sign or
Sthira Rasi, then the 6th and 7th, etc., from it will
be the successive Dasas.
NOTES
These are called Padakrama Dasas. Pada as we know
already means the number of a Rasi, again counted from
the Lagna or any othpr Bhava.
Ravi 6, Ra 2, Va 4;=24 inverted, 42, divided by 12, we
have the balance of 6, and hence the 6th, the 6th from it
and the 6th from it and so on.
to. SVTOiN II
Su, 10 . — Pruthakramena thriteeye chatushtayadi .
If the Dasa Rasi commences in a common sign,
then the successive Rasi Dasas will be determined
by the Kendra, Panannra and Annklima Rasis from
it.

Jaiminisutru
1M
11. snfoit *wiuwiH, 11
Su. 11 . — Swakendrasthadyah swamino navamsanam.
Those who are in Kendras, Panaparas and
Apoklimas from the Karaka become the lords of
the Navamsa Dasas.
NOTES
Here we have to take the planets first in Kendras
according to their strength, then those who are in Panapara
and last those who are in Apoklimas.
1*. ffcra: II
Su. 1 2.—Pitruchatushtayavaishambalasrayah
sthitah.
Those Rasis which are in Kendras from Lagna
furnish the first Dasa.
NOTES
Suppose there are many, then that sign which becomes
strong by the various combinations and aspects explained in
the previous sutras, becomes the first Rasi Dasa. The Dasa
years are 9 for each of the Rasis.
U. « ii
Su. 13 . — Sa tallabhayoravartate.
The Karaka will be moving between the Lagna
and the 7th.
NOTES
We have to find him from Lagna or the 7th whichever

Jaiminisutras
is stronger, and count backwards or forwards as the Rasi he
occupies is even or odd. Then he gives the Dasa years as are
counted from Lagna or the 7th, taking the Dasa always by
the larger number he obtains. This is the extent of Karaka
Dasa in years. For other planets, count the number from
them to the Karaka, in the forward or backward reckoning
and ascribe such number of years to the planets.
Su. 14 . — Swamibalaphalani cha pragvath.
The results of all these will be determined, as
detailed in the previous sutras, by the examination
of the sources of strength and weakness to the
planets, to the lords of the Dasas and to the Rasis.
NOTES
Jaimini has given various sources of strength and weak*
ness to the planets in general, to the Rasis or signs and to
the lords of the Dasas. He advises his readers to take these
into careful consideration and having regard to times, circumstances and places, predict the results, so that they may turn
out correct and to the point.
Su. 15 . — Sthuladarsa vaishamyasrayo manduka -
strikutah.
As the Manduka or frog jumps from place to
place, the two systems of Dasas named by Jaimini
in the previous sutras, viz., Kendra, Panapara and
Apoklima, and the movable, fixed and double

Jaiminisutrat
bodied signs, also jump from house to house and
hence he calls them Manduka Dasas.
NOTES
As per instructions given in the previous chapters, the
Dasas both for planets and Rasis, jump from Kendras to
Panaparas and from the latter to Apoklimas. Similarly
they jump from Charas to Sthiras and from Sthiras to
Dwiswabhavas. They also jump in Shoola Dasas.
H. qgrap E n ii
Su. 16 . — Niryanalabhadi shooladasa phale.
In predicting results, the 7th from the Niryanashoola Dasa should be taken into first account.
NOTES
Shoola Dasas are marked as death inflicting. Take the
7th from the most powerful of these Niryana Rasis and begin
to make predictions from it. This Niryanashoola is of many
kinds. Rudrashoola, Maheswarashoola and Brahmashoola.
*TOT: sroi*rcr: II
Su. 17 . — Purushe samah samanyatah.
If the Arambha or commencing Dasa falls in
Purusha Rasi or masculine sign, then the subsequent
Rasi Dasas will be counted regularly and each Dasa
gets 9 years only.
NOTES
If the commencing Dasa falls in a feminine sign, that
the subsequent Dasas have to be counted from the 7th sigh

Jalminisutras
from it. In masculine horoscopes the Arambha Dasa
commences from Lagna. In feminine horoscopes it commences from the 7th.
Su. 18 . — Siddha ududaye.
Dasas, counted from the constellations at birth,
have to be learned and taken from Parasara, Gargi,
Vyasa and other well-known writers.
NOTES
Jaimini says he has not given them in his work because
they can be learnt from other works and the Dasa periods
will be as they are given there. We have 27 constellations
and they have to be counted from Krittika.
Krittika — Ravi Dasa
Years
Rohini — Chandra Dasa
Mrigasira— Kuja „
Aridra — Rahu ,,
Punarvasu — Guru „
Pushyami — Sani „
Aslesha— Budha
Makha — Kethu „
Pubba — Sukra „
Then from star Uttara repeat the same
planetary Dasa
with the same number of years. These are called Udu Dasas,
from Udu meaning a constellation or star. Jaimini has made
no reference before to constellations. He mentions them only
in this sutra. Thus each planet gets 3 stars, with the same
number of years. He uses the word Siddha meaning ready
from other works well known in the world.

JaiminisutTM
u. $frinl it
Su. 19 . — Jagattasthushorardham yogardhe.
The extent of Yagardhadasa will be half of the
two Dasas combined from the Chara and Sthira
Rasis.
NOTES
The Yogardhadasa will have to be stronger of the two
Rasis, Lagna and the Saptama or the 7th.
*«. writer ii
Su. 20 . — Sthuladarsa vaishamyasrayametat.
Yogardhadasa begins either from Lagna or the
7th house whichever is stronger.
NOTES
The sources of strength and weakness have been clearly
explained in the previous pages. Yogardhadasa commences
from the stronger of the two Lagna and the 7th. If the Rasi
which commences the Oasa be odd, then, take the subsequent
Dasas in the regular order. If it is even then count the
Dasas backwards. Sthula- Lagna or 1 — Tha 7, la 3-73,
reversed 37, divided by 12, we get 1 or Lagna. '
Su. 21 .—Kujadi strikuta padakramena drigdasa.
Drigdasas are formed commencing with the 9th
from Lagna, according to trikonarupa pada.

Jaiminisutras
NOTES
Jaimini now speaks about Drigdasa. Kuja ■= 9, Ka 1,
Ja 18, reversed 81, divided by 12, we get 9. Take the 3
houses from the Arambha Rasi, or commencing Rasi, viz.,
2nd, Sth and 9th from the 2nd, the 4th and the Sth and 9th
from the 4th, these three sets of combinations from the
Arambha Dasa or the commencing sign form what is
technically called Drigdasa.
Su. 22 & 23 . — Matrudharmayoh samanyam
vipareethamojakutayoh. Yatha samanyam.
Those born in even signs will have the results
as described in the previous sutras about the
Trikona Dasa.
NOTES
Matrumeans5. Dharma signifies 11. Ma 5, Ta 6 = 56,
reversed it will be 65, divided by T2, we have the remainder 5.
Dha 9, Ma 5=95, reversed, we get 59, divided by 12, we have
the balance 11 ; counting from 5th and 11th is considered as
samanyam or ordinary, counting from odd and even signs is
called Vyutkrama or special or peculiar.
Su. 24 . — Pitrumatru dharmapranyadistrikone.
Among the Trikonas, the Rasi Dasa commences
with the strongest among them.
NOTES
"he Trikonas are 1 , 5 and 9.

Jaiminisutras
m ^Rwnrpnit
Su. 25 . — Tatra dwarabahyabhyam tadwat.
The results which have been ascribed to Dwarabahya Rasis should also be predicted to the Trikona
Dasas.
NOTES
If the Paka and Bhoga Rasis are aspected or joined by evil
planets, the person will suffer from diseases, chains, imprisonments, etc., similar results have to be predicted for Trikona
Dasas when they have evil aspects and conjunctions. Carefully read my notes on Sutra 3 of pada four, on Paka and
Bhoga Rasis and the different views explained by the
commentators. Dwara and Bahya Rasis are Paka and Bhoga
Rasis respectively.
Su. 26 . — Dhasagairikatpatneekaratkarakaih
phaladesah.
Results must be predicted from the Karakas or
lords of events and also from the first, third, seventh
and the ninth Rasis.
NOTES
About the person himself, the results must be predicted
from the Atmakaraka, from the 7th about elder and younger
brothers and sisters, virtue and charities. These are wellknown principles in the other works on Astrology.
r®. oirofo R^iiit Tfon ii
Su. 27 . — Tararkamse mandaaadyo dasesah.

Jaiminisutras
Divide the birth constellation into twelve equal
parts corresponding to twelve signs and find out to
which division the time of birth corresponds. The
lord of the Rasi corresponding to this division
becomes the lord of the commencing Dasa.
NOTES
Take the constellation of the day of the birth and divide
the whole duration of the star by 12. Find out in which
division the ghatika of birth falls from the Lagna. Then
count the Dasa from that as per rules already given in the
previous sutras. The Dasas here also must be given as 9
years for each Rasi. Here the meaning is not very clear.
I understand thus : Janma Lagna falls in some Rasi as a
matter of fact. Take the whole duration of the star, and
divide it by 12. Then the birth Lagna falls in one of these
12 divisions. The lord of that Rasi becomes the lord of the
commencing Dasa. These Dasaa have to be counted forwards
and backwards in odd and even signs. The sutra may also be
interpreted like this : A is bom at 14 ghatis after sunrise on
the 20th of Kumbha. The balance of Kumbha Rasi at sunrise
will be l|j ghatis. I am only giving a rough example.
Kumbha is 1£ ghatis.
Meena and Mesha run for 8 ghatis. This makes ghatis.
Add Vrishabha 4 \ ghatis. Thus 14 ghatis will concludeVrishabha and the person is born in the end of Vrishabha.
Say the full extent of the star Bharani is 60 ghatis on that
day after sunrise. Divided by 12, we get for each part 5
ghatis. Janmakala ghatis fall in the 3rd division and the 3rd

Jaiminisutras
Rasi from Lagna, viz. . Kataka may be taken as the commencing Rasi Dasa. This is taken with reference to Chandra
and hence called Chandra Dasa. I am very diffident about
this explanation.
RC. sffc *T stoRI: II
Su. 28. — Tasminnuchhe neeche va shreemantah.
If, in the example given in the above sutra, the
lord of the Rasi Dasa is in exaltation or debilitation,
the person becomes wealthy and influential.
Su. 29. — Swamitrabhe kinchit.
If, in such a Lagna, its lord occupies a friendly
sign, the wealth will be moderate.
*o. giPTtSTTm II
Su. 30. —Dugalhoaparatha.
If the lord of Lagna above mentioned is not as
stated previously, the person becomes poor and
wretched.
NOTES
This will be when he is debilitated, combined or aspected
by malelics and is found in unfriendly houses.
Su. 3 1 . — Swavaishamye yathaswam kramavyuthkramau.
If the Karaka occupies the odd sign, then
proceed for the- subsequent Dasas in the regular

Jaiminisutras
way, but when he is in an even sign, then go backwards for the Rasi Dasas.
NOTES
He has repeated this idea already in several sutras and
1 suppose he wants to emphasize the principal point which
differs from other astrological principles.
forfom n
Su. 32 .— Saumye vipareetam.
If the Karaka Rasi falls in even signs, then
count backwards.
NOTES
This is just opposed to the above sutra, where he refers
to the planet and here he refers to the Rasi.
Su. 33 . — Thathatsanavapi veditavyamityeke
acharya vadanti.
Some Acharyas say that all the results which
have been ascribed to planets and signs in the
previous sutras may also be predicted with reference
to Sani and his position.
NOTES
If this sutra is of Jaimini, it speaks eloquently to some
facts. Previous to Jaimini. Maharishis existed and wrote
works on astrology and expounded principles, with some of
which Jaimini is not in agreement. Jaimini was a contemporary of Vedavyasa and hence he lived more than 5,000

Jaiminisutras
years ago. This proves the great antiquity of sutras and
also about Indian Astrology including astronomy and other
kindred sciences. Crooked theories, ascribing to Indian
sciences centuries after A.D., may safely be lodged in the
perverted brains of their authors.
V*. « l* q§ T W l 4fa * t II
Su. 34. — Anturbhukiyamsayoretat.
These details above mentioned in the various
sutras should also be ascribed to the Antardasas
or sub-periods among the major Dasas in the forward and backward countings.
Vs. 3pm *t u
Su. 35. — Shubha clasa shubhayute dhamnyuchhe
va.
If the Rasi has beneficial aspects and conjunctions, or if its lord has similar sources of strength
or is exalted, then all the results will be beneficial.
NOTES
The person will prosper in every way during the Dortion
of such Rasis of lords. But otherwise he will suffer.
b u. WRTOTS«raT II
Su. 36. — Anyathanyatha.
^ When the above conditions are not present, the
kramt^ s ^ ^ u * te t * ie contrar yIf NOTES
proc When Rasis are evil, when they hase evil aspects or

Faiminisutras
conjunctions, when debilitated planets occupy the Rasis or
when their lords are debilitated, the beneficial results will be
absent, and malicious results will trouble the person.
*». ft KSMq; IF
Su. 37. — Siddhamanyat .
Jaimini says that all the principles explained in
this work are truth propounded in other works and
therefore they hold good in all calculations and
predictions.
End of Fourth Pada of Second Adhyaya.

SHORT SKETCH* OF THE LIFE OF
B. SURYANARAIN RAO
It is but right, that my history should find a place in my
translations and books. 1 belong to the Mulakanadu sect of
tha Andhra Community of Brahmins, and have the Gotra of
the Venerable Vasishta, the revered family Guru of Sri Rama
and the Solar line of monarchs. Vasishta, Parasara, Vyasa
and Suka are my first progenitors. My grandfather was a
military officer under Hyder and Tippu and changed the
career to civil in his later life. Venkataramaniah, my
grandfather, was born in 1747 and died in 1828. He lost his
first wife Narasamma in his 59th year and married my grandmother Naranamma of Hegganahalli in his 60th year and
got 7 children from her — two daughters and five sons of whom
my father Gopala Rao was the 3rd son. My father was
born on Friday 17th July 1816, the 10th Lunar day of the
dark half of the month Asfiadha in the Cyclic year Dhatu
at I5ghatis after sunrise under the constellation Bharani
with the period of Venus and he was only 12 years old when
his father died. My father was of slender build, energetic,
strong and extremely active in work, qualities which I have
inherited to a large extent. My mother Rukminamma, the,
daughter of Palamanda Subba Rao Pantulu, was
an intelligent, handsome and quiet going lady and died in
her 39th year, when I was about 13 years old. My father
* This sketch was written by Professor Rao in 1933 and it is published
without any alterations.

Jaiminisutras
could speak and read about ten languages, and filled various
posts in the Ganjam District, Northern Circars, and finally
became Manager or Dewan of Parlakimidi or Chinnakimidi
Zamindari as it is called now. He was an expert in Mantra*
sastras, and highly religious and obliging. He would never
flinch from doing an obligation and brought me up with
great love and care. The following is his horoscope. His
Moon
Rahu
Budha
Sukra
Ravi
R AS?
Sani
Kuja
Kethu
Lagna
Guru
tapobala was so great that with a blade of grass he was able
to stop about 1,000 cattle and about 30 or 35 cow*herds
under the Maha Astra of Sanmohana. All the cattle and
men lost their consciousness, and after an hour of trial they
began to move as if nothing had happened, when my father
threw away the blade of grass. Mark the positions of planets
in all the Kendras. In addition to his onerous duties, he
completed the gigantic task of finishing with his own hand,
one crore and twenty-five lacs of Sri Ramanamas. and
concluded the religious rites connected with them four
months before his death. Guru in Lagna and Sukra and
Ravi in the 10th made him a wonderful man in Mantra-

Jaiminisutras
sastras and he used to perform miracles when he liked. He
died in his 76th year on the morning of the 27th August 1891,
and was therefore 75 years and 40 days old according to
English calculations.
My mother had some abortions and the advice of a
sadhu in Chicacole, after the performance of severe remedies
he had four daughters and two sons, myself being the
younger son. My elder brother Jagannatha Row entered
the Mysore service and retired as an Amildar or Tahsildar
and died in December 1915. I was born on Tuesday, Rathasaptami in Magha of the .Cyclic year Rakshasa, on 12th
February 1856, at about 14 ghatis after sunrise or midnoon
at Chicacole in the Ganjam District and the following is my
horoscope.
Chandra
Rahu
Lagoa
Sani
Lagna
Guru
Rahu
Ravi
Budba
Guru
RASI
Diagram
NAVAMSA
Diagram
Sukra
Kuja
Kethu
Budha
Kethu
Ravi
Sukra
Sani
Kuja
Chandra
After my birth my father wanted to give me the name
of his father Venkataramaniah, but it appears, on the fourth
day I became seriously ill and in the night God Surya or the
Sun appeared to my father in a dream and ordered my father
to name me as Suryanaraina, as I was born at midnoon on the

Jaiminisutras
Rathasaptami, a day held sacred to the Sun and the Moon
all over India. About 4 miles from Chicacole there is a village
called Arasavalli, where there is a complete temple to the
Sun God and which is considered a sacred shrine by the
neighbouring people. My father most gladly accepted the
altered name and to his surprise and that of my good mother,
I was alright on the 5th day of my birth. My father was called
Gopala Row. He completed 125 lacs of Ramanamas with his
own hand and died on Gokulashtami held sacred to
Sri Krishna and my mother was called Rukmini, the name of
the sacred wife of Krishna. At. 12 o’clock in the noon, the
Sun is most powerful and the time goes under the special
name of Abhijin Muhurtha, and Abhijit Sarva Dashaghnam or
that noon time which cuts and cures all evil influences. A
notable incident occurred to me in my 5th year, which has
influenced all my life to a considerable extent. My first
Aksharabhyasa or beginning of education began in my 5th
year at Parlakimidi where my father was Dewan to the Raja.
On that memorable night, I slept with my father, and had
a wonderful dream. I was taken to Sufyaloka to the presence
of the glorious Sun, and made to sit on his lap. His spouse
Chayadevi gave me Payasam (wheat preparation with tnilk
and sugar) and some fruits and made me eat them. After
showing great love and kindness Surya put his hands on my
head, patted me on my back and pronounced the blessing,
that I would live long, have many children, become a learned
and great man, would write many books and become an
author, events which have been most wonderfully verified. I
am now in my *77th year,, with a brain as clear and vigorous
as it was when I was 30 or 35 years, and I have completed 67
•This was written in 1933 A.D.— Editor.

Jaiminisutras
books on various subjects, including my History of Vijayanagar or The Never-To-Be-Forgotten Empire. I awoke and
related my dream to my father, who had already anticipated
some idea of my future greatness.
In my boyish days I was extremely intelligent, and
possessed an admirable memory, coupled with a strong and
piercing intellect. But as it often happens with intelligent
boys, I was irregular in attendance at school, careless of my
studies, fond of running, jumping and other athletic exercises,
and was mischievous to a considerable extent. All the while
I felt I would become a great man and a scholar, and even
challenged my teachers with this idea when they found fault
with my irregular attendance and want of attention to my
lessons. While I was in the Senior B. A. class, in the Central
College at Bangalore, Mr. J. Cook, M.A., Principal, rebuked
me for want of attention to studies and for not copying notes,
which he gave us copiously. I was ready with my impertinent answer. I observed in a determined tone that copying
notes forms the part of dull headed students, and superficial
teachers and that bright students, like myself, need no such
process. He remarked that he was a student and amanuensis
of Dr. Bain of Psychological fame and that I should obey
him. I told him that I would become a greater man, than
both of them, with the result that I was turned out of the
class for a day. Mr. Cook was a generous Scotch gentleman.
He sent for me next day and questioned me whether my
behaviour was right.
I replied that his treatment of students should be different as the intelligent and spirited could not bear calmly
remarks which dull boys consider as their inheritance. Both
being frank the reconciliation was quick and smooth. When

Jaiminisutraa
I met him 20 years after publishing some of my works,
specially the History of Vijayanagar or The Never-To-Be
Forgotten Empire, he had the nobility to address me as a
greater man than himself, while 1 modestly acknowledged his
valuable instructions as the basis for all my scholarship in
English and physical Sciences. I was intended to take up
the legal line and finished my legal studies, and practised for
about 9 years as a Lawyer in Bellary. I kept up a decent
establishment, and my house was open to all classes of
professional experts, the musicians, the Veena-men, the
learned pandits, the religious yogis, the vedantists, the juglers, buffoons and other artistes would flock to my place.
My astrological instincts were stirred up by Thogaray
Ramasastry at Bangalore while I was in the F.A. class. I
picked up my knowledge in this science by reading books on
this subject. I had no high opinion for English astrological
publications and never cared to read them. There is neither
depth nor inquiry, nor research in them. My first work on
astrology appeared in a dialect form, English and Kannada,
in 1882. My collegiate studies gave, me no leisure for
progress in my astrological researches and my Astrological
Self Instructor first appeared in 1892, the second, in 1898, and
the 3rd in 1900, the interval being taken up by my legal
practice. Fourth, fifth, sixth and seventh followed at longer
intervals.- An Oriya astrologer, in Parlakimidi by name
Brahma, soon after my birth, foretold my future greatness.
I feel I am under the direct grace of the glorious Sun at
every important turn in my life, and his presence in the 10th
house from my Lagna, and 11th from Chandra, with Budha
and Guru has inspired me to hold the view that I am destined

Jaiminisutras
to become a great man and write valuable works, on a
variety of interesting and instructive subjects.
I first married my maternal uncle’s daughter by name
Bbagiratamma and she bore ten children, of whom five
died and *five are living. My father-in-law Palamonda
Punchanatha Row an Assistant Commissioner in the
Mysore Service, earned a very good name as an officer. He
died 21 years ago. After the death of my first wife in 1903,
1 married again Subbamma, daughter of Venkatramasastry.
She bore 5 children, two of whom died soon after birth. I
have now two daughters and one son by her. I have now
21 grandchildren and one great grandchild. 1 have built a
spacious bungalow at the side of a village named Hunsamaranahalli on the Nandi Road, 12 miles due north of Bangalore.
It contains 3 acres of compound, planted with varieties of
fruit and flower trees. I have kept up a decent establishment
with ten servants, and am leading a quiet, honorable and
religious life. My birthdays are celebrated on a grand scale,
and I am visited by all classes, creeds and nationalities of
people from all parts of the world and my home is open to
my friends and relations. My eldest son Nanjunda Row
helps me in my publication business. My second son
B. Lakshminarayana Row, B.A., is a Graduate of Philosophy
and Logic and is an Inspector of Schools in the Mysore
Service. My third son, Somasekhara Row, was adopted by
my late brother. My fourth son Chandrasekhara Row, aged 13
years, is studying here. My grandson, B. V. Raman, has
been trained by me and he is helping me in the editing of
The Astrological Magazine and other books. Three
daughters are married and happily settled in life. I have one
*Now only one is living.

Jaiminisutras
little daughter aged 11, to marry yet. God has been
graciously pleased to keep me above want and in comparatively good health for my advanced age.
Though my earnings have been great, my expenses have
not been small. I possess generous instincts and always
take delight in helping others when my aid is needed. I am
an admirer of all talents in any form in any man and my
company is pleasant and instructive. I may be called a
jolly hearted fellow, as I never take miseries in a miserable
light. I possess fluent powers of speech and writing in almost
equal degrees and this rare gift I attribute to the special
grace of the Goddess of learning Saraswathi. I always pray
to Her devoutly and get my promptings through Her Divine
Grace. My familiarity with Western and Eastern Sciences
gives me great advantage to lead the people wherever I may
be. 1 am a great lover of music and other fine arts, and my
residence is generally kept in a fashionable manner. I have
had audiences with Viceroys, Governors and Maharajas and
all of them were pleased with my behaviour, spirit of independence and capacity in conversation and arguments. I have had
suitable khillats and presents from many Maharajas and
aristocrats and the National and individual predictions, I
made about wars, famines, deaths of royal personages,
plagues, epidemics and other phenomena have been remarkably fulfilled and these facts are well known to the public,
who are in touch with my works. I predicted about the
great Anglo-German War, and the nations who would be
involved in its deadly folds, six months before the wat, in
my March Magazine for 1914, and said, that the war would
begin in August of that year. My lectures, conversations
and works have been highly appreciated by the cultured

Jaiminisutras
public. I have been leading a religious life, in this age of
false allurements, of false civilisation and of false professions
and have felt strongly in my innermost heart that God
protects all those, who entirely, sincerely and honestly place
their faith and confidence in Him. My own independent life
is a great illustration of that principle, which lays down
complete devotion to God and honest and sincere life under
His gracious and omnipotent guidance should be the highest
ideal for human efforts. May He shower His choicest
Blessings on all and make the world happy, cheerful and
peaceful, have been my earnest daily prayers to the Almighty.
The aphorism, so beautifully and aptly ordained on every
holy Brahmin after his Pujas are over, deserves to be reproduced here for the benefit of my readers ; “ Swasti Prajabhyah Paripalayamntam Nyayena Margena Maheem Mahisah ;
Gobrahmanebhyassubhamastu Nityam, Lokassamastah Sukhino
Bhavantu ; Kaley Varshantu Parjanyah Prithvisasyasalinee ;
Desoyam Kshobharahitaah Brahmanah Santu Nirbhayaha;
Aputrah Putrinah Santu Putrinassantu Poutrinah ; Adaanah
Sadhanassantu Jeevanti Saradassatam . " Liberally translated
the verse means — let all the people live in happiness, let the
rulers be just and sympathetic in their rule, let the milky
cows and Brahmins be blessed everyday, let all the worlds
enjoy perfect happiness, let seasonal rains enrich the lands,
let earth be productive, let the countries enjoy freedom from
epidemics, let Brahmins attend to their prayers without
any 'Tear from evil minded people, let those who have no
children beget children, let those who have no grandchildren
be blessed with grandchildren, let those who have no money,
get money and let all people live till they are one hundred
years old. This is a prayer, as tolerant, as honest, as

Jaiminisutras
broad-minded and as sympathetic as possible and when
really good men send these prayers constantly to God with
faith and devotion they will never go in vain.

Paper used for printing this book was made available by the
Government of India at concessional rate
