READABLE DATASET
================================================================================
Original file: jyotish_applications_of_cuspal_interlinks_part_2_baskaran_banned.json
Dataset number: 224 of 455
Format: valid JSON
Structure: Object / structured dataset
Original size: 270,192 bytes
Top-level fields: 11
Title: Jyotish_Applications of cuspal interlinks part 2_Baskaran_banned
Creator: —
Date: —
Description: —

CONTENT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
METADATA AND OTHER FIELDS
  • title: Jyotish_Applications of cuspal interlinks part 2_Baskaran_banned
  • creator: —
  • date: —
  • description: —
  • subject: —
  • identifier: —
  • source_folder: Surya Siddhanta XML
  • total_pages: 299
  • total_words: 45628
  • text_quality:
    • ocr_word_validity_score: 0.947
    • quality_tier: good
    • note: —

FULL TEXT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
K B’s
APPLICATIONS
OF CUSPAL
INTERLINKS
GENERAL STUDY PART - 2
Author:
Prasanna Jothidamani
K.B ASKAR AN
( Late S/o Shri.S.Krishnan Naidu )
Translator:
S.GNANASAMBANDAN
J.RAMA SUBRAMANIAM

CONTENTS
1 . Note of Translators XII
2. Acknowledgements Xv
3. Chart 1
4. VI House 6
5.. VII House 40
6. VIII House 78
7. IX House ...113
8. X House 153
9. XI House 197
10. XII House 230
11. DBAS & TRANSIT 262
13. BHUKTHI 271
14. ANTARA 272
15. CONCLUSION 276
16. POINTS TO PONDER 278

OUR SINCERE
THANKS TO
shriS.P.KHULLAR,ITS.
RETD. G.M; TELECOM
NEW DELHI
In Formatting This Book

Shri VALAMPURI JOHN
“ SANDHANAM “
I have the privilege of knowing Shri
K.Baskaran of Madurai, for a few years. I have
watched him making good predictions through his
wonderful system of Interlinks theory in Modern
Astrology which has its roots in the well known
Krishnamoorthy Pathathi method of Sublord theory.
He has propagated hundreds of interesting
points to substantiate his conviction that only the 12
cusps with their interlinks are responsible to carry out
the events in one's life rather than the planetary
significations as many of the traditional astrologers
believe.
I am sure that this work will be well received
in the world of astrologers of the new Millennium as a
useful tool for successful predictions.
I wish Shri K.Baskaran all the very best in his
keen research works in this field.
CHENNAI
VALAMPURI JOHN

Sri Maha Ganapathaye Namaha
Dr. D.G.R.Sharma
UNITEN
FOREWORD
Astrology has deep roots in the history of
mankind and we hear many success stories of
the ability of the astrologers to predict the future
events with great precision. However, for every
successful prediction that we hear, there are
many dozens of inaccurate predictions. Then
we hear that in addition to the knowledge of the
rules of astrology (I do not know how many
hundreds are there), one should have divine
grace to give predictions. If it is based on
divine grace, then the doubt arises whether it is
a scientific method.
While, I was interested in astrology only
as a bystander, a few years ago I had an
opportunity to meet Sri K. Baskaran of Madurai
and get exposed to the enchanting world of
astrological predictions. In fact, with his
guidance, I was able to make accurate
predictions for the simple questions like "When
can I meet a person?" and to the more advanced
questions like "What is the nature of disease?"

etc. His method is unique and the rules are much
simpler. He blended the concepts of Kalapurusha
Thathva and the Placidus system of house
divisions elegantly into his basic theory of Cuspal
Inter Links. When one applies cuspal interlinks
directly, one is bound to meet situations where
the same planet is connected to more than a
single cusp. This gives rise to "complex effects".
Death of child on the day of inauguration of a
new house, birth of child and death of mother,
etc., are examples well known to all of us. The
cuspal links, which cause such effects, are clearly
brought out by studying compound links and I
think this prompted him to bring out the present
book.
Mr Baskaran is a person who is willing to
share his knowledge unlike many others. With
his love for the subject of astrology, his years of
experience in studying and carrying out research,
he has written this excellent book " Applications
of Cuspal Interlinks" 1 had an opportunity to
go through this book and I see that he has
presented such a complicated subject in a very
lucid manner by taking a sample horoscope.
While the possible number of combinations is
extremely large, the style of presentation helps
one to evaluate new cases with confidence and
develop explanations for new combinations and
situations.

/ am very confident that this book,
along with its previous two companion
books, is going to be a handy reference
book for all serious students of astrology
who are interested in giving accurate
predictions. I am confident that this book
will certainly get the same great reception
from fellow astrologers as his previous
books did.
Mr. S.Gnanasambandan who is also a
personal friend of mine, deserves all the praise
for doing a great job of translating the text into
English.
Kajang, Malaysia. Dr. D.G.R.Sharma.
21 January, 2002

Om Mahaganapathaye Namaha
TO THE READERS
Shri A. R. B ALAN
Jeevet Nagar I St,
Jaihindpuram,
Madurai -625 Oil.
Friends,
We have just entered into the new
millennium with new questions and challenges
placed before astrology. This science of
futurology, has to prove its validity and
credibility as with any other science. The
science of calculation in astrology Was made
to perfection by Prof Shri K.S.K. But still
something was required to be appended as
astrologers have been facing certain difficulties
in predictions with the usual significators.
Some of them even went to the extent of
substituting with the tradition based ideas for
predictions. But, Shri K.Baskaran, with his
faithful study, has proceeded for solutions to
complicated and complex questions of modern
day life with the use of Cuspa! interlinks based
on the prime concepts of Prof Shri K.S.
Krishnamoorthyto evolve a new and novel
system of astrology as " Krishnamoorthy •
Baskaran" (KB system ).

I feel proud about my disciple Shri
K.Baskaran all the time, and this present work
is really going to glitter as a jewel in the crown.
He has indeed opened a floodgate for all the
modern thinking astrologers to delve in
gleefully to quench their thirst in this great
science. It is my desire now to request all the
dear readers to take up and carry on with this
research work for the benefit of humanity in
general. It is with great appreciation that I must
herewith record about the support, suggestions
and able guidance of Mr S.P.Khullar in the
format of this book.
I should also appreciate the efforts
of Shri S.Gnanasambandan, Senior
Announcer, AIR, Madurai and Shri J.Rama
Subramaniam for their commitment in
bringing out this translation work. They have
properly understood the inner meanings of
what Shri K.Baskaran intended to say and
elaborated the same according to the point
of view of readers. I pray God Almighty to let
the spirit of this team to continue in all their
future efforts.
Good luck.
IYIadurai-11 Shri A.R.Balan,

NOTE OF TRANSLATORS
Dear friends,
Astrology is amidst the recent
controversies for its possible inclusion as a
branch of study in universities. It has been
condemned by its critics as an act of saffronizing
the education system with Hindu
fundamentalism. If we know what had happened
to other empricial sciences, we ourselves would
not demand for such a dogmatic inclusion of
Astrology as a subject of study, as it could only
defeat the very purpose and the significance of
astrology.
But our concern here is the scienceworthiness of astrology as rightly questioned by
its critics. Though it is painful to admit, it is a fact
that the present day astrology could never
withstand before the specifications for
deeming it as a science. Even if Astrology could
succeed in finding a place as a faculty of study
in universities due to the political patronage that
it may possibly gain, we don't believe that the
traditional astrologers would be generous enough
to award due credit to Shri R.Gopalakrishna
Rao(Meena) & to the Jothida Marthand Shri
K.S.Krishnamoorthy. What is more painful to
us is the fact even the so called followers of Shri
K.S.K have not rendered due justice to his

teachings. "The objectives are often defeated
when they are institutionalized", is the prime
propogation of Shri J.Krishnamoorthy, the
popular philosopher of our times. Unfortunately
this was what had happened also to the
teachings of Shri K.S.K,. The non-availability of
calculators and computers and lack of needed
proofs to withdraw courageously and
scientifically from the remains of a set of
traditional concepts like aspects, retrogression
etc., have limited Prof K.S.K., to leave certain
shortcomings in his methodology.
Only in this context, Shri K.Bhaskaran,
the author of this book, is to be appreciated for
his contrubitions for the enlightenment of the
teachings of his guru, Shri K.S.K by innovating
the theory of "Cuspal Interlinks". At this
moment, we feel really very proud for being the
associates of this unique astrological work,
"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks". We are
aware that this book would stand as a milestone
in the history of astrological researches. There
were a few such attempts, in the footsteps of Late
Shri K.S.K,. The basic differernce between such
earlier attempts and this book lies in the
scientific, the complete and the rational approach
in applying the principles of astrology with the
use of “Kaalamsas or Sublords".

After the release of the previous book,
"Principles of Cuspal Interlinks", there were
a few murmurs by a set of KP followers who
preferred to show themselves as the saviours of
the sanctum sanctity of KP system rather than
upholding it as a system of science. We believe
that the god of times would make them to accept
and realize the contributions of Shri
K.Bhaskaran, in the times to come. We are
confident that the readers would find this book
as a completely different and thoroughly useful
one on astrology.
Good Luck
Madurai:
S. GNANASAMBANDAN, J. RAMA SUBRAMANIAM,

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Om MaViaganapathaye Namaha
OM gurubyo Namaha
I would like to thank Shri.
T. Ramesh kumar, Mother
mera Publications,
Madurai, for providing me
with this golden opportunity
in bringing out this book on
"Applications of Cuspal
interlinks".
I have my special regards
to my Guru Shri A.R.Balan, who has moulded
me with the inner meanings of astrology. I convey
my thanks- to Shri S.Gnanasambandan,
Senior Announcer, AIR, Madurai & Shri J.Rama
Subramaniam, Madurai for their efforts in
translating this book from its Tamil original.
I should also thank Shri Maharishi
Dayananda Jyothi the author of the leading
Tamil Monthly on astrology, "Gnana Sinthamani"
and its readers for their response to my articles
on astrology. I would like to convey my sincere
thanks to Shri C.Subramaniam, Editor, "Jothida
Bhoomi\ also a leading Tamil Monthly on
astrology for the publication of many of my
articles. I must thank Shri Valampuri John,
former MP, a great Tamil scholar and a renowned

astrologer for providing me a valuable foreword
to this book. I thank Prof A.Vaithiyalingam,
Salem, and his students for providing me
platforms to share my research experiences.
Above all, l am highly thankful to Shri
S.P.Khullar I.T.S., Retired GM, Telecom, New
Delhi, for his useful Suggestions in Formatting
this book. But for his helps, I could not have
dreamt about publishing this voluminous book.
He has indeed helped us by posing more number
of doubts and suggestions to add more simplicity
to this book.
Of course, I should also thank my parents,
wife, children, brothers, sisters, relatives, friends
Especially Shri. Dr. D.G.R. SHARMA Of
MalasyiaShri.S.GNANASAMBANDAN Air
Madurai, Shri K.A.D.SARAVANARAJ Dindugul,
and Shri. BALASUBBARAMANI (vasiyoki)
Madurai, and STUDENTS for their timely help
and Financial Assistance without which I could
not have completed this book.
Good luck to all
Madurai
K.Baskaran

'Applications of Cuspal litter (in^s"
CHART
(Please refer to the Example Chart)
In studying the Ascendant-dependant
matters of every house, first of all, it is
mandatory to assess the potential of the
ascendant before analyzing the strength of any
house. Note the starlord of the sublord of each
cusp and study its position of favour to the asc
and not to themselves. Only to the matters of
their own entity, the position of favour is to be
studied to themselves.
Personal capacity to think and act, gain
or loss of energy, attraction, pleasures and
character are the prime significations of the 1 house,
the Asc.
DATE
DAY
TIME
PLACE
STATE
COUNTRY
LAT.
LONG.
AYANAMSA
DASA BAL SUN
ENDS ON
SUNDAY
BODINAYAKANOOR
TAMIL NADU
INDIA

'Applications of Cuspal Interlinks1

" Applications of Cuspal Inter links" 3

"Applications of Cuspal Interlines" 4

"Applications of Cuspal Interlines" 5

"Applications of Cuspal Interfiles"
VI HOUSE
HOUSE OF SUCCESS
Service, Servants, Pet animals, Loans,
Debts, House for rent, Herbal Plants, Success
or Favourable scope in speculations, Sports and
Games, Gamblings, Hurdles and problems,
Theft, Dangers, Prison, Handicrafts etc are some
of the significations of the 6th house, that are
unrelated to the Asc.
To simplify, the above significations are
being re-classified and listed below, as the
significations that are meant to link with the
remaining houses:
I: Diseases, Success, Self-endeavours
II: Money raised through- Loans
III: Litigations
IV: Purchases
V: Compromise in Litigations, Cure from
diseases, Feasts
VI: Service, Servants and Subordinates,
Separation
VII: Excessive Food, Bank Loans
VIII: Worries caused by Loans, Litigations &
Diseases, Hard labour
IX: Success in research, Financial crisis

"Applications of Cuspal Interfiles"
due to loans, Break-down in profession
due to servants
X: Service as Profession, Promotion
XI: -Success in Litigations
XII: Allergy, Inactive, Clearing debts, Divorce,
Investment by acquiring loans, Changes
in service conditions
The VI house is a house of favour to
nouses 2, 4, 6, 8 & 10, while it remains neutral to
houses 1,5 & 9; and would unsettle the
significations of houses 3,7,11 &12. This could
be experienced when the sublord of the
respective houses remain in the star or the sub
of the sublord of the VI cusp. In return these
houses would stand as means to execute the
significations of the 6th house and would
perform as follows:
I onVI: Diseases caused by one's own
thoughts and acts
II onVI: Diseases in Eyes & Throat
III onVI: Diseases in Blood Veins, Nerves and
Sensory organs
IV onVI: Diseases in Heart, Lungs, Kidney and
Glands
V onVI: Diseases in Blood cells or Uterus, Viral

"Applications of CHSpaf THterfittlb"
fever
VI onVI: Diseases caused by Food, Dress,
Medicines and Labour
VllonVI: Contagious Diseases, Climatic &
Veneral Diseases
VlllonVI: Sudden diseases, Blocks and Death
IXonVI: Genetical disorders, Malfunction or
changes in organs, Swelling
X onVI: Professional diseases, Excessive
production inside body.
XI onVI: Viral fever, Improper care and attention
XllonVI: Secret diseases, Coma
In reverse, houses 1 , 5, 9 & 1 2 would deny
the prospects of the 6th house as they happen
to be 8,1 2, 4 & 7 to the 6th house; houses 2, 4,
6, 8 & 10 would favour the functioning of the 6th
house whereas houses 3, 7, 11 would remain
as neutral to the 6th house. The above could be
possible when the sublord of the 6th cusp
remain in the star or the sub of the sublord of
the respective houses. In return the 6th house,
while acting as a carrier of the significations of
the concerned houses, would register its
reactions in executing the same, which are as
follows:

'Applications of Cuspal Interfm^s"
VI onAsc:
VI on II:
VI on III:
VI on IV:
VI on V:
VI on VI:
VI on VII:
VI on VI 1 1 :
VI on IX:
VI on X:
VI on XI:
VI on XII:
Diseases caused by Food Habits
Resistance to Diseases
Deficiency in Energy
Prolonged Illness
Cure from diseases by Prayers
Diseases caused by workload
Steady increase in diseases
Sudden developments in diseases
and damages to organs
Changes in Appearance and
Structure, Medical science
Excessive Production by organs
Temporary diseases, Medical
Research
Diseases leading to Hospitalization
Generally the VI house is a house of
diseases. While it is linked with the VIII house,
the diseases would lead to damages in the
organs of the body. Houses 6, 8 & 1 2 would give
stress, pain and hospitalization; houses 3, 6, 8
& 12 would jointly denote the removal of such
parts of the body or amputations and 1 , 3, 6, 8 &
12 would make a person as a handicapped
person. 1, 4, 6, 8 & 12 would make a person to
become handicapped by way of accidents.

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 10
POTENTIAL of the VI HOUSE:
In this chart, the sublord of the VI house
Sun is in the star of Venus, the sublord of the
12th house and in the sub of Rahu, the sublord
of 7th house. Sub negates the star; Hence, the
6th house as it is linked to the 7th house,
becomes stronger to its own significations.
Planets Moon & Mars are in the star of
Sun, to become the permanent carriers of the
6th house. Rahu is in the sub of Sun, to be a
second line significator of the 6th house.
PLANETARY SIGNIFICATIONS:
SUN: 12: Troubles and Hardships from
Govt, Tax dues, Uncleared debts, Controls by Govt.
5: Awards by Govt,. Agreements with
Govt, Statusful Son, Lack of needed interests in
love makings.
1 1 : Gifts from govt, Friendship with civil
servants, Gains and success in public life etc.
Moon and Mars are the tow planets which
reside in the star of Sun, the 6th sublord.
MOON: Diseases caused by water and

'Applications of Cuspal Interlinks"
blood, Speedy loans and successes.
MARS: Diseases in muscles and blood
red cells, Troubles caused by heat, Interest in
pungent foods
While the significations of Sun remains
permanent as the sublord of the 6th house, the
significations of Moon and Mars would come to
the forefront during their respective DBA periods.
ASC on VI:
Asc is a house of danger to the 6th house.
In this chart, Mars, the sublord of the Asc,
remains in the star of Sun, the 6th sublord and in
the sub of Rahu, the 7th sublord, to stand for
the combined significations of houses 1,6 & 7 or
of houses 8,1 &2 to the 6th house, and thus to
render a favourable scope for the unrelated
significations of the 6th house to the Asc.
Principles of the interlinks of the Asc, when
happen to link with the 6th house are listed below:
6,2: Considerable progress in financial
conditions, Money through self efforts
6,3: Diseases in Audio-visual sensory organs,
Litigations, Leaving the native place

"Applications of Cnspa( Interlines" 12
6,4: Landlord, Service in House, Vehicles and
Lands, Agriculture
6,5: Compromise in problems, Medi-Cure,
Temporary Jobs
6,7: Separation from Wife/Husband
6,8: Hard labour, Sudden failure of organs
6,9: Change of profession, Living with the
2nd Wife/Husband after Separation/
Divorce
6,10: Statusful job, Permanent job
6,11: Bold and courageous efforts .
6,12: Hospitalization, Separation of the partner,
Secret acts
In this chart, since the Asc is linked with
6 & 7, a favourable linkage to the significations
of the 6th house, the Asc would increase the
diseases and would bring success in
litigations etc., during the DBA periods of Mars
while it also transits in the star of Sun, the 6th
sublord. When an Asc is linked with the 6th
house, it is in such a position to receive the
unfavourable results of the 6th house and would
also denote taking medicines and wearing new
dresses etc,.

"Applications of Cnspal Interlinks"
VI on ASC:
General principles of linkage of the VI
house with the Asc are as follows:
1,1: status in service
1,2: Status and income through service
1,3: Status and popularity in service
1,4: Status and production skills in service
1,5: Status as supervisor
1,6: Status for managerial skills
1,7: Status in administrative skills
1,8: Status through hard labour
1,9: Status in management
1,10: Status in responsible capacities
1,11: Status in legal affairs and knowledge
1,12: Status in capital management
VI house, a neutral house to the Asc, by
carrying 12, 5 & 11 in its bag, becomes an
unfavourable house to the Asc and would give
temporary diseases and troubles of loans etc
during the DBA periods of Sun, while it transits
in the star of Mars, the Asc sublord.

'Applications of Cuspal Interlines
II on VI:
II house is a house of favour to the 6th
house. In this chart, Mercury the II sublord
transits in the star of Venus, the 12th sublord
and in the sub of Rahu, the 7th sublord, to stand
forthe combined significations of houses 2, 12
& 7 or of houses 9, 7 & 2 to the 6th house, and
thus would retain its scope of favours to the VI
house.
Principles of the interlinks of the II house,
when happen to link with the 6th house are listed
below:
6,1 : Spendings with money in hand
6.3 : Interests on deposits
6.4 : Converting money as properties
6.5 : Income through service in Arts and
Culture
6.7 : Bank loans
6.8 : Increasing loans
6.9 : Financial troubles by way of loans
6.10 : Gains in Profession/Service
6.11 : Immense Wealth
6.12 : Lending own money
In this chart, since the II sublord is linked

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 15
to houses 12 & 7, would enable the native to
avail loans from banks, to get back the money
lent or the valuables lost, during the DBA
periods of Mercury, while it also transits in the
star or the sub of Sun, the 6th sublord.
Vlon II:
General principles of linkage of the VI
house with the II house are as follows:
2,1: Borrowings for self-needs
2,2: Borrowings for purchase of ornaments
2,3: Borrowings for registrations
2,4: Borrowings for house-hold appliances
2,5: Borrowings for gamblings
2,6: Borrowings to clear debts
2,7: Borrowings to assist others
2,8: Borrowings for addictions to bad habits
2,9: Borrowings subsequent to financial crisis
2,10: Borrowings for professional requirements
2,11: Borrowings for pleasures and romance
2,12: Borrowings for investments
VI house as a favourable house to the
II house, by carrying 12, 5 & 11 in its bag,
would enable the native to make investments
by raising loans during the DBA periods of Sun,

"Applications of Cuspal Interlines" 16
while it transits in the star of Mercury, the II
sublord.
Ill on VI:
III house is neutral the 6th house. In this
chart, Mars, the sublord of the III house,
remains in the star of Sun, the 6th sublord and
in the sub of Rahu, the 7th sublord, to stand for
the combined significations of houses 3,6 &7 or
of houses 10,1 &2 to the 6th house, and thus to
render a favourable scope to the 6th house.
Principles of the interlinks ofthe III house,
when it happens to link with the 6th house are
listed below:
6,1 : Courage and Confidence
6,2: Profits through Agreements and
Negotiable Instruments
6.4 : Inclination to study the tricks of Stocks,
Service in Machines
6.5 : Mutual talks and compromise in litigations
6,7: Secret activities of Wife/Husband,
Temporary separation of W/H
6.8 : Signing Promissory Notes to acquire loans
6.9 : Success in Negotiations
6.10 : Promotions in Profession
6.11 : Success in Lotteries and Playing Cards

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 17
6,12 : Losing energy by way of illness, Change
of place due to Profession
111 house, as it is linked with houses 6 &
7, would enable the native to steadily borrow
loans through negotiations, writings and
agreements etc during the DBA periods of Mars
while it also transits in the star of Sun, the 6th
sublord.
VI o n HI:
General principles of linkage of the VI
house with the III house are as follows:
3,1 : Favours to the Status of the native through
Litigations
3,2: Financial gains in Litigations involving
Prestige
3,3: Rights through favourable Judgements
3,4: Withdrawal of the opponent in Litigations
3,5: Compromise initiated by the native in
Litigations
3,6: Appealing in the Higher Courts
3,7: Oppositions in Litigations
3,8: Winning Litigations after a prolonged
struggle
3r9: Mutual Agreements in Litigations

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 18
3,10: Prolonged Court Cases
3,11: Compromises initiated by the other party
in Litigations
3,12: Punishments or paying Penalties in Court
cases
VI house, an unfavourable house to the
III house, by carrying 12, 5 & 11 in its bag,
becomes a favourable house to the III house
and would enable the native to gain through
negotiations and communications during the
DBA periods of Sun, while it transits in the
star or the sub of Mars, the III sublord.
IV on VI:
IV house is favourable to the 6th house.
In this chart, Mercury, the sublord of the IV
house, transits in the star of Venus, the 12th
sublord and in the sub of Rahu, the 7th sublord,
to stand for the combined significations of
houses 4, 1 2 & 7 or of houses 1 1 , 7 & 2 to the
6th house, and thus would retain its scope of
favours to the VI house.
Principles of the interlinks of the IV house,
when it happens to link with the 6th house are
listed below:

"Appficdtitms of Cuspal Interfiles" 19
6,1 : Chronic diseases, Landlord, Efficient in
handling Machines, Doctor
6,2: Gains through Land, Vehicles and
Dwellings
6,3 : Purchase of a new Plot/House/Land by
mortgaging the existing Properties
6,5 : Losing the second property
6.7 : Treating the servant as one among the
family, Excess body weight
6.8 : Increase in worries and loans due to
purchase of Properties
6.9 : Scholarships to Higher Education
6,10: Industrial Loans, Loan on Constructed
House
6.11 : Litigations on Properties
6.12 : Investing on Properties by acquiring Loans
IV house, as it is linked with houses
12 & 7, would enable the native to purchase
vehicles, properties, machineries, household
appliances or equipments through borrowings
during the DBA periods of Mercury while it also
transits in the star of Sun, the 6th sublord.
VI on IV:
General principles of linkage of the VI

'Applications of , Cuspal Interlines"
house with the IV house are as follows:
4,1 : Statusful service in Industries
4,2: Income through service in Industries
4,3: Sale of Industrial tools
4,4: Manufacturer of Machineries
4,5: Consultancy for Industrial Products
4,6: Purchase of Industrial Materials
4,7: Industrial Dealership
4,8: Industrial Reprocessings
4,9: Industrial Research
4,10: Industrial Management Centres
4,11: Operators of Machineries
4,12: Temporary service in Industries
VI house, a favourable house to the IV
house, by carrying 12, 5 & 11 in its bag, would
induce the native to invest in movable or
portable properties or to purchase machineries
during the DBA periods of Sun, while it transits
in the star of Mercury, the IV sublord.
Von VI:
V house is a house of negation to the 6th
house. In this chart, Jupiter, the sublord of the V
house, transits in the star and the sub of
Mercury, the sublord of houses 2, 4& 10 to stand

"Applications of Cuspal Interlines" 21
for the combined significations of houses 5, 2, 4
& 1 0 or of houses 12,9,11 & 5 to the 6th house,
and thus get changed to carry the scope of
favours to the 6th house.
Principles of the interlinks of the IV house,
when happen to link with the 6th house are listed
below: s
6,1: Deficiency in Resistance Power, Viral
fevers, Success in Sports, Games, Arts
and Culture, Entertainments etc
6,2: Income through Prostitution, Income
through Sports, Games, Speculations etc,
Loss of Sight due to blood cell disorders
6,3: Service in the field of Arts and Culture or
through Speculations
6,4: Loss of Child, Dejection in love, Prolonged
diseases caused in blood cells
6,7: Blood Cancer
6,8: AIDS
6,9: Changes in body structure due to blood
cells
6,10: Denial of scope for Romance, Disease
due to increase in production of Blood
Cells
6,11 : Success in Sports and Games

"Applications of Cuspal Interlines" 22
6,12: Inactiveness due to Diseases in Blood
Cells
5th house, as it is linked with 2, 4, & 10
would bring monetary gains through lands,
vehicles and buildings during the DBA periods
of Jupiter while it also transits in the star of Sun,
the 6th sublord.
VI on V:
General principles of linkage of the VI
house with the.V house are as follows:
5,1: Cure from Diseases due to "Increase in
Physical Strength
5,2: Cure from Eye Diseases
5,3: Cure from Neuro Diseases
5,4: Cure from failures of production parts of
body
5,5: Cure from Viral Fever
5,6: Cure due to change in Food Habits,
Dieting
5,7: Cure through Physical Pleasures
(Marriages)
5,8: Cure from the Present Disease but
changing into a New Disease
5,9: Cure through Pilgrimage or by the Grace

'Applications of Cuspal Iwterfmfo"
of God
5,10: Cure from Professional Involvements
5,11: Cure from increasing the Resistance
Power
5,12: Cure from Diseases subsequent to
Medical Treatment
VI house, favourable to the V house, by
carrying 12 & 7 in its bag, would enable the
native to get cured from diseases, to clear the
debts and to undertake jobs or service of
easy natures and to arrive at a compromise
in disputes, during the DBA periods of Sun, while
it transits in the star of Jupiter, the V sublord.
VI on VI:
General principles of linkage of the VI
house to itself are as follows:
6,1: Inactiveness subsequent to Food Habits
6,2: Eye Diseases subsequent to Food
Habits, Diabetes
6,3: Loss of Energy subsequent to Food
Habits
6,4: Increase in Body Strength due to Food
Habits
6,5: Steady maintenance of Physical Strength

"Applications of Cnspal iKterfiwb"
due to Food Habits
6,6: Diseases caused by Food Habits
(Ulcer etc.,)
6,7: Infections caused by Food Habits
6,8: Malfunctioning of Organs due to Food
Habits
6,9: Physical changes in the body subsequent
to food habits
6,10: Chronic diseases in Food Habits
6,1 1 : Immune Deficiency due to Food Habits
6,12: Unconsciousness and failure of Organs
due to Food Habits
VI house, a favourable house to itself, by
carrying 12, 5 & 11 with it, would increase the
loans and diseases during the DBA periods of
Sun, while it transits in its own star as the sublord
of VI house.
VII on VI:
VII house is neutral to the 6th house. In
this chart, Rahu, the sublord of the VII house,
transits in its own star, and in the sub of Sun,
the 6th sublord, to stand for the combined
significations of houses 6 & 7 or of houses 1 &2
to the 6th house, and thus to change the VII
house as a house of favour to the 6th house.

"Applications of Cuspat Interlinks" 25
Principles of the interlinks of the VII
house, when happen to link with the 6th house
are listed below:
6,1: Contagious Diseases
6,2: Contagious Eye Diseases
6,3: Contagious Throat Infections, Eczema
6,4: Contagious Diseases like T.B, Diseases
in the production parts such as Liver,
Kidney etc.,
6,5: Venereal Diseases
6,7: Aggravation of Contagious Diseases
6,8: Contagious Latrine Diseases
6,9: Contagious Diseases leading to Swellings
6,10: Contagious Professional Diseases
6,11: AIDS
6,12: Malfunctioning of Parts caused by
Contagious Diseases
VII house, as it is linked with houses 7 &
6, would lead to differences in opinion with wife
leading to separations during the DBA periods
of Rahu, while it also transits in the star of Sun.

'Applications of Cuspal Interfiles"
VI on VII:
General principles of linkage of the VI
house with the VII house are as follows:
7,1: Status as a Social Worker
7,2: Income as a Social Worker
7,3: Popularity as a Social Worker
7,4: Service in a Social Trust
7,5: Social Service in a Trust for Arts and
Culture
7,6: Service in a Social Employment Centres
7,7: Service in Marriage Trusts
7,8: Service in Accident Relief Works
7,9: Service in Educational and Religious
Trusts
7,10: Social Service for the National cause
7,11: Social Service for integrity among
different communities
7,12: Social Service in Hospitals
VI house as a house of negation to the
VII house, by carrying 12, 5 & 11 in its bag,
would steadily increase the loans and would
enable the native to avail bank loans and to raise
the wages of his servants during the DBA
periods of Sun, while it transits in the star of Rahu,
the VII sublord

Applications of Cuspal Interlines'
VIII on VI:
VIII house is favourable to the 6th house.
In this chart, the sublord of the VIII house,
Saturn transits in the star of Mars, the sublord of
houses 1 & 3 and in the sub of Jupiter, the
sublord of houses 5 & 1 1 , and stands for the
combined significations of houses 8,1 , 3, 5 & 11
or houses 3, 8,10,12 &6to the 6th house. Hence
the VIII house becomes an unfavourable house
to the VI.
Principles of the interlinks of the VIII
house, when it happens to link with the 6th house
are listed below;
6,1: Sudden Diseases
6,2: Unexpected Gains through Loans
6,3: Part payments of Insurance Claims,
Unexpected success in Negotiations
6,4: Diseases subsequent to Accidents, Gifts
to Education
6,5: Sudden Relief from Prolonged Illness
6,7: Sudden developments of Diseases
6,9: Changes in Organs due to the sudden
developments in Diseases
6,10: Unexpected Promotion, Unexpected
Bribes

"Applications of Cuspal Interfiles" 28
6,11: Unexpected Success
6,12: Sudden Medical Expenditure, Starting a
New Venture all of a sudden
VIII house as it is linked with houses 1, 3,
5 & 1 1 , would affect the health of the native,
would bring disputes to a higher plane on
litigations and may provide a scope for acquiring
loans unexpectedly during the DBA periods of
Saturn, while it also transits in the star of Sun,
the 6th sublord.
VI on VIII:
General principles of linkage of the VI
house with the VIII house are as follows:
8,1: Death caused by diseases; Chronic
Diseases; Sufferings due to Food Habits
8,2: Unexpected Profits due to service,
Unexpected Loans, Indigestion
8,3: Sudden Diseases, Sudden Death,
Sudden Failures
8,4: Damages to Organs caused by Diseases
8,5: Cure from Diseases subsequent to the
increase in the Intensity of the Diseases
8,7: Diseases and Loans are getting
increased day-by-day

"Applications of Cuspal Interfiles"
8,9: Diseases caused by the pressure of an
organ on the other, Transplantation of
Organs; Changes in the functioning of
organs
8,10: Labourer on Daily Wages or Bribe money
in service
8,11: Winning Litigation subsequent to
strenuous efforts, Inability to repay the
Excessive Loans
8,12: Difficulties by way of increase in Loans
and Borrowings
VI house, a favourable house to the VIII
house, by carrying 12,5 &11 in its bag, would
give troubles by way of pains and stress in
diseases, multiplication of loans and litigations
and excessive workload during the DBA periods
of Sun, while it transits in the star of Saturn, the
VIII sublord.
IX on VI:
IX house is an unfavourable house to the
6th house. In this chart, Moon, the sublord of
the IX house, transits in the star of Sun, the 6th
sublord and in the sub of Rahu, the 7th sublord,
to stand for the combined significations of houses
9, 6 & 7 or of houses 4, 1 & 2 to the 6th house,
Hence the IX house becomes favourable to the

"Applications of Cuspal Interlines'
6th house.
Principles of the interlinks of the IX house,
when happen to link with the 6th house are listed
below:
6,1: Genetical disorders, Success in
Research, Medical Treatment to Diseases
6,2: Foreign Aid
6,3: Diseases caused after Transplantation,
Transfer order
6,4: Continuing Higher Studies by strenuous
efforts while in service, End of life in a
Foreign Land, Purchasing properties in
Foreign countires
6,5: Cure from Illness by Grace of God,
Retirement
6,7: Marrying servant subsequent to Illegal
Affairs
6,8: End of Foreign Service, Foreign Loans
6,10: Service suited to Higher Education,
Permanence in service through Illegal
Affairs
6,11: Multiple Illegal Affairs, Success and Gains
in Negotiations with Foreigners
6,12: Troubles by way of Ancestral Loans

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 31
IX house, as it is linked with houses 9, 6
&7 would enable the native to gain job orders
and agreements and to raise loans through
agreements but in fine to suffer torture through
financial crisis during the DBA periods of Moon
while it also transits in the star of Sun, the 6th
sublord.
VI on IX:
General principles of linkage of the VI
house with the IX house are as follows:
9,1 : Research Experience in Service
9,2: Financial Crisis in Service
9,3: Tours in Service
9,4: Training in Service
9,5: Service in Leave Vacancy
9,6: Service as suited to Academic Qualifications
9,7: Practical Apprenticeship in Service
9,8: Completion of Training in Service
9,9: Learning Skills in Service
9,10: Service in Training Centres
9,11: Service in Research Institutions
9,12: Service at Foreign Places
VI house, a neutral house to the IX house,
by carrying 12, 5 & 1 1 in its bag, would increase
the pressure to clear debts and the problems in

"Applications of Cuspal Interlines" 32
the professional life, would lead the native to
undertake journeys for availing medical
treatments and would induce irregularities in
his food habits or change the appearance or
the body structure of the native during the DBA
periods of Sun, while it transits in the star or the
sub of Moon, the IX sublord.
X on VI:
X house is a house of favour to the 6th
house. In this chart, Mercury the sublord of
the X house, transits in the star of. Venus, the
12th sublord and in the sub of Rahu, the 7th
sublord, to stand for the combined significations
of houses 10,12 & 7 or of houses 5, 7 & 2 to the
6th house, and thus would retain its scope of
favours to the VI house.
Principles of the interlinks of the X house,
when it happens to link with the 6th house are
listed below:
6.1 Respectful Profession
6.2 Permanent Job
6.3 Change of Residence for Profession
6.4 Jealousy in Office
6.5 Problems in Service
6,7 Co-operation with Colleagues in Office

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 33
6,8: Accepting Bribes in Service
6,9: Lesser Wages in Service
6,10: Promotion in Profession
6,11: Good Salary with Job Satisfaction
6,12: Multiple natures in Service or Profession
(Ex: Telephone Operator Cum Receptionist)
X house would favour the second
profession of the native as it is linked with houses
12 & 7, during the DBA periods of Mercury, while
it also transits in the star of Sun, the 6th sublord.
VI on X:
General principles of linkage of the VI
house with the X house are as follows:
10.1 Statusful Service
10.2 Service with Higher Wages
10.3 Service on Contract basis
10.4 Service in Stores
10.5 Service in Recreation Clubs
10.6 Service in Canteen
10.7 Service at Enquiry Counters
10.8 Service for Daily Wages
10.9 Temporary Service
10,10: Permanent Service

"Applications of Cuspal Interlink,*" 34
10,11: Service with Professional Scopes
10,12: Secret Service
VI house, a favourable house to the X
house, by carrying 12, 5 & 11 in its bag, would
improve the professional life, lead to
dissatisfactions in married life and prolong his
diseases further, during the DBA periods of Sun,
while it transits in the star of Mercury, the X
sublord.
XI on VI:
XI house is a neutral house to the 6th
house. In this chart, Jupiter, the sublord ofthe
XI house, remains in the star and the sub of
Mercury, the sublord of houses 2, 4& lOto stand
for the combined significations of houses 1 1 ,2,
4 & 1 0 or of houses 6, 9, 11 & 5 to the 6th house.
Hence the 11th house becomes a highly
favourable house to the significations of the 6th
house.
Principles of the interlinks of the XI house,
when it happens to link with the 6th house are
listed below:
6.1 Success through Self-endeavours
6.2 Immense flow of Money
6.3 Satisfying jobs. Expected transfers in

Applications of Cuspal Interlinks"
Service
6,4: Hire-Purchase of Properties or Vehicles
of own choice
6,5: Clearing Debts as planned, Voluntary
Retirements
6,7: Increasing Scope of Success
6,8: Expected Bribes
6,9: Illegal Affairs with Lover
6,10: Service through Friends or upto
expectations
6,12: Sharing the losses for the sake of Friends
or Partners with a Generous attitude
XI house as it is linked with houses
2,4 &. 10,' would enable the native to get
assistance from friends and multiply the
scope of success to the satisfaction of the native
in his profession during the DBA periods of
Jupiter, while it also transits in the star of Sun,
the VI sublord.
VI on XI:
General principles of linkage of the VI
house with the XI house are as follows:
11,1: Status and Success
11,2: Finance and Success

"Applications of Cuspal Interfiles" 36
11,3: Success in Litigations
1 1 ,4: Property and Success
11,5: Pleasure and Success
11,6: Success in Service
11,7: Success in Winning Social Relations
11,8: Success after Strenuous Efforts
11,9: Success in Tenders
11,10: Record-breaking Efforts and Success
11,11: Glorious Success
11,12: Secret Activities subsequent to Success
VI house, an unfavourable house to the
XI house, by carrying 12, 5&11 in its bag, would
enable the native to get discharged from
hospital after successful medical care or to gain
success in litigations or speculations and
competitions etc., during the DBA periods of Sun,
while it transits in the star of Jupiter, the XI
sublord.
XII on VI:
XII house is an unfavourable house to
the 6th house. In this chart, Venus, the sublord
of the XII house, transits in the star of Moon,
the 9th sublord and in its own sub to stand for
the combined significations of houses 9 & 12 or
of houses 4 & 7 to the 6th house. Hence the
12th house remains as an unfavourable house.

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 37
Principles of the interlinks of the XII
house, when it happens to link with the 6th house
are listed below:
6,1: Secret Diseases, Diseases out of
Diagnosis
6,2: Profits through 2nd Profession
6,3: Redeeming Cheques or DDs that were
lost
6,4: Loan on Investments
6,5: Cure after Medical Treatment
6,7: Seizure of Hidden Properties by others
6,8: Loan due to Secret Activities, Secret
pressures and Tortures to repay Loans
6,9: Pressures to repay Loans by Servants
6,10: Income in mutliple sources, Promotion
due to Secret Activities
6,11: Liquidation of Capital or Return of
Investments
XII sublord as it is linked with houses 9 &
1 2, would force the native to face pressures to
clear debts and problems arised out of illegal
activities and may give success in research works
during the DBA periods of Venus, while it also
transits in the star of Sun, the 6th sublord.

'Applications of Cuspal Interlines
VI on XII:
General principles of linkage of the VI
house with the XII house are as follows:
1 2,1 : Hospital Service at Head Injury Wards
12,2: Service at Eye Hospitals
12,3: Service at ENT Clinics
12,4: Service at Kidney Centres
12,5: Service at Maternity Homes
12,6: Service at Gastro-Entreomology Centres
12,7: Service at Wards for Infectious Diseases
12,8: Service at Operation Theatres, Accident
Wards
12,9: Service at Medical Research Centres
12,10: Service at First-Aid centres of Industries,
ESI Clinics
12,1 1 : Service at Vaccination Wards
12,12: Service at Emergency Wards
VI house, an unfavourable house to the
XII house, by carrying 12, 5 & 11 in its bag,
would enable the native to clear part of his loans
by acquiring further loans, make him suffer losses
in litigations or by way of servants, to remain
inactive due to diseases and give changes in
profession etc., during the DBA periods of Sun,
while it transits in the star of Venus, the XII

'Applications of Cuspal Interlines
sublord.
To the significations of the VI house,
the planets would stand as follows:
SUN..
MOO.
MAR,
MER.
JUP. .
VEN.
SAT. . .
RAH..
KET. .
Though the planets Sun, Moon and Mars
are the permanent significators of the 6th house,
the remaining planets during their respective
DBA periods would contribute to the
significations of the 6th house, while they
happen to transit in the star of Sun, the 6th
sublord-

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks " 40
VII BHAVA
HOUSE OF SPOUSE
Marriage, Wife/Husband, Business
Partners, Society, Persons whom we happen
to meet in our Personal and Professional life,
Litigations, Opponents, Lease, Divorce,
Reputation and Influences in Foreign Nations,
Redeeming things that were lost, Enquiring the
thief, War, External Affairs, International Trade,
Public meetings are some of the 7th house
significations, that are unrelated to the Asc.
VII house karakas can be reclassified as
due to the 12 houses, as listed below:
1. Dependance of the life partner on the
native, Partner, People whom the native is
happened to meet at his business place,
Cordiality with Wife/Husband
2. Longevity of the Partner, Income
through Partner, Dowry, Quarrels with Wife/
Husband, Troubles to Wife/Husband
3. Stout body of Wife/ Husband, Satisfying
Wife/Husband, Frequent Journeys, Temporary
Separations, Education of Partner etc,.
4. Profession and Status of Wife/Husband

"Applications of Cuspal Interlines" 41
Properties through W/H, Unpleasant married life,
Increasing troubles from Relatives
5. Happy and Harmonious married life,
Selfish W/H or Partner, Sexual pleasures of
partner, Organ or Character of W/H, that attracts
the native.
6. Separation and Divorce, Problems,
Troubles and Litigations in married life, Debtor,
Secret activities of W/H .
7. Ego and Pride of W/H or Business
Partner
8. Worries in married life, Mental agony,
Greediness of native
9. Marriage with a Stranger, Polygamy,
W/H satisfied by native, Lean structure of W/H,
Frequent Journeys, Affectionate with relatives
10. Disharmony and Dissatisfaction in
married life, Properties of Wife/Husband, Sterility
11. Sexual Pleasures of the native, Organ
or Character of native that attracts the partner,
Harmonious married life
12. Troubles from Partner, Expenditures

"Applications of Cuspal Interlines" 42
in married life, Opposition by partner, W/H,
Surveillance of W/H over the native
VII house, is favourable to houses 3, 5,
7, 9 & 11 and unfavourable to houses 1 , 4, 8
&12 while it remains neutral to houses 2, 6 &
1 0. When the sublords of the respective houses
while they remain in the star or the sub of the 7th
sublord, the following reactions on the 7th house
would be registered:
AsconVIl: Marriage with one of the Associates
II onVIl: Marriage within the Family of the
native
III onVIl: Marriage with a Person from nearby
Street or Place
IV onVIl: Marriage with a Relative or at native
place
V onVIl: Love Marriage
VI onVIl: Marriage with a Colleague or Servant
VII onVIl: Legal or Registered Marriage
VIII onVIl: Sudden and Unexpected Marriage
IX onVIl: Legitimate 2nd Marriage or Marriage
with a person from a distant Place or
State
X onVIl: Marriage with a Person at the place of
work

"Applications of Cuspal Interfinfes"
XI onVIl: Marriage with a Friend or from the
Family of a Friend
XII onVIl: Secret Marriage or Marriage abroad
Flouses 3, 5, 7, 9 & 11 would stand
favourable to the 7th house, while houses 1,2,
6 &10 would stand against the 7th house. Houses
4, 8, 12 would remain as neutral to the VII house.
While the sublord of the 7th cusp remain in the
star or the sub of the concerned cusps, it tends
to register its reactions on them, which are as
follows:
VII on I:
VII on II:
VII on III:
VII on IV:
VII on V:
VII onVI:
VII onVIl:
VllonVIll:
VII on IX:
VII on X:
VII on XI;
VII onXIl:
Subservient W/H
Quarrelsome W/H
Immoral W/H
Dissatisfaction to W/H
Satisfaction and Pleasures with W/H
Problem-ridden married life with W/H
Subordination of the native
Unhappy married life of native
Affairs of Adultery by native
Dissatisfactions to the native
Satisfaction and Pleasures of native
Losses and troublesome Married
life of native

"Applications of Cuspal iMterfiM^s"
POTENTIAL OF THE VII HOUSE:
In this example chart, Rahu, the sublord
of the VII house is in its own star but in the sub of
Sun, the sublord of the 6th house to weaken the
potential of the VII house.
6 is a house of denial to the 7th house;
Does it mean here that the native could not marry
at all? As far as the matter of marriage is
concerned, only if both the Asc and the VII house
are denied with their opposing houses of
marriage and sexual pleasures {Houses 4, 6,
10 & 12} we have to presume that the event of
marriage would be denied. Here the Asc sublord
Mars is in the star of Sun, the 6th sublord but in
the sub of Rahu, the 7th sublord to gain a favour
for the event of marriage.
However, in this chapter, we have to
confine ourselves to the study of the prospects
of the VII house with the remaining 11 houses;
Hence, the principles to marriage and the
procedures to time the event of marriage would
be dealt in PART II of this book with the use of
few other examples.
Since the potential of the VII house is very
weak, the married life of the native is not going
to be a bed of roses for him.

"Applications of Cusval Interlinks" 45
RAH: High frequency in sexual contacts,
Relationships with other social groups
[community, to be specific] Contagious Diseases,
Gains through strangers and foreigners etc
(PCI:RN 33)
Planets which are in the star or sub of
Rahu are: Moon, Mars & Mercury.
MOON: Young partner, Speedy copulation,
Perturbed mind, Flexibility etc. (PCI:P.N 23)
MARS: Perverted and Abnormal interest
in sexual contacts, Troubles caused by enemies
(PCLP.N 25)
MER Secret notes, Repetitive in copulation
etc (PCLP.N 27)
While the significations of Rahu would
remain permanent during the entire life span of
the native, the significations of Moon, Mars and
Mercury would come to the forefront during2 their
respective DBA periods.
ASC on VII:
Asc is an unfavourable house to the 7th
house. In this chart, Mars, the sublord of the
Asc is in the star of Sun, the 6th sublord, but in

"Applications of Cuspal Interlines" 46
the sub of Rahu, the 7th sublord. Now Asc
becomes 12 & 1 to the 7th house. Though the
star indicates a house of negation to the 7th
house, the sub favours the 7th house; Hence in
this chart, Asc becomes neutral to the 7th house.
Principles of interlinks when Asc is linked
to the 7th house:
7,2: Murder or Harassment to W/H, Expecting
Dowry
7,3: W/H to the likes of the native
7,4: Lack of Attachment causing an unhappy
atmosphere to W/H
7,5: Abound in love and affection to satisfy W/H
7,6: Inclination to leave and troubles caused to
W/H
7,8: Doubting nature and Quarrels
7,9: Thoughts about Bigamy, Temporary
separations
7,10: Disharmony caused by W/H
7,11: Love and Affection by partner to satisfy
native
7, 12: Sickness of W/H, Tendancy of W/H to leave
the native, Troubles caused by W/H
In this chart, Asc as it carries 6 & 7 or 12

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 47
& 1 to the 7th house, would render the native
troubles in married life and misunderstandings
with wife and would force him to be away from
his wife during the DBA periods of Mars, while
Mars also transits in the star of Rahu, the 7th
sublord.
VII on ASC:
General principles of linkage of the VII
house with the Asc are as follows:
1,1: Cordial and Loving Attitude of W/H
1,2: Cordial Attitude of W/H with short life
1,3: W/H as per the likings of the native
1,4,: Attachment of W/H towards the joint
family of native
1 ,5: Affectionate W/H
1,6: Loathsome Attitude of W/H
1,7: Counselling nature of W/H
1,8: Troubles and Tensions created by W/H
1,9: Native suited to the likings of W/H
1,10: Dissatisfaction of native towards W/H
1,11: Happy and Harmonious partner
1,12: Expenses incurred and losses by W/H
VII house as an unfavourable house to
the Asc, as it carries the combined
significations of houses 7 & 6 with it, would drag

"Applications of Cuspal Inter fines''
the native into ego clashes with his wife or the
people whom he happens to meet during the DBA
periods of Rahu, while it is also in transit of the
star of Mars, the sublord of the Asc; This
combination would also enable the native to win
over his partners or wife.
Hon VII:
II house is a house of danger to the VII
house. Mercury, the sublord of the II house is in
the star of Venus, the 12th sublord and in the
sub of Rahu, the 7th sublord. Houses 12 & 7
are houses 6& 1 to the VII. Now the II house
becomes an unfavourable house to the
health-related matters of the VII house but would
stand as favourable to the materialistic benefits
of the 7th house.
Principles of interlinks when II house is
linked to the 7th house:
7,1: Welcoming Financial Assistance from
others
7,3: Improvement in Financial Status with the
Assistance of others
7,4: Increasing Communications & Assistance
within the Family
7,5: Joint family, Cordial atmosphere in the

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 49
Family
7,6: Troubles to W/H caused by the members
of the Family
7,8: Problems in Family caused by lack of
flexibility among members of the Family
7,9: Bigamy with the Financial strength,
Illegal affairs, Financial crisis
7,10: Business partnership with members of the
same Family
7,11: Friendly attitude of the Family to render
needed helps and co-operation to the
native
7,12: Leaving W/H as persuaded by the
members of the Family
Since the II house is 12 & 7 in this chart,
wife of the native would be quarrelsome in
nature in spite of the financial assistance
provided by the native. This signification also
refers to the secret problems caused by his wife.
Dangers to the life of wife and illhealth caused
to wife could also happen during the DBA
periods of Mercury, the sublord of the II house,
while it also transits in the star of Rahu, the
sublord of the VII house.

'Applications of Cuspal Interlines
VII on II:
General principles of linkage of the VII
house with the II house are as follows:
2,1 : Quarrelsome W/H
2,2: Short life of W/H
2,3: Temporary separation of W/H due to
Quarrels
2,4: Dissatisfaction in married life to W/H
subsequent to differences in opinions
2,5: Harmonious life with W/H with occassional
differences of opinions
2,6: Departure of W/H resulting from
differences of opinions
2,7: Suicide of W/H
2,8: Troublesome W/H to create Mental
Tensions
2,9: Second marriage subsequent to the death
of first W/H
2,10: Dissatisfaction to the native due to the
Tense Nature of W/H
2,11: Happy Married life to the native though
W/H is prone to Mental Tensions
2,12: Greedy and lllhealth-ridden W/H

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks"
VII house, a neutral house to the II house,
as it carries the combined significations of
houses 7 & 6 with it, would enable the native to
gain through partner or wife during the DBA
periods of Rahu, while it is also in transit of the
star of Mercury, the sublord of the II house.
Ill on VII:
III house, a house of favour to the VII
house. Mars, the sublord of the III house is in
the star of Sun, the 6th sublord and in the sub
of Rahu, the 7th sublord. Hence the III house
turns into an unfavourable house to the 7th
house, by becoming 12 & 1 to the 7th.
Principles of interlinks when the III house
is linked to the 7th house:
7,1: Lack of Financial interests by W/H,
Possible Illegal Affairs of W/H
7,2: Troubles to W/H, Breaching the Illegal
Contacts of W/H
7,4: Giving Dissatisfaction to W/H, though
married as per the choice of the native
7,5: Marriage as per the choice of the native
with a person, living at the backside of
native's house.

"Applications of Cuspal Interfiles" 52
7,6: Separation from W/H, though married
as per the choice of the native
7,8: Troubles and Mental agony to native by
W/H, though married as per the choice of
the native
7,9: Immoral Acts by both the native and
Spouse
7,10: Getting dissatisfied by living in the joint
family of W/H though married as per the
choice of the native.
7,11: Happy and Harmonious family life than the
expected level with W/H, married as per
the choice of the native.
7,12: Losing the properties to W/H, though
married as per the choice of the native.
This combination of 3, 6 & 7 or 9, 12 & 1
to the 7th house, by being an unfavourable
combination to the significations of the 7th house,
would force the native to leave his belongings or
properties with his wife during the DBA periods
of Mars while it also transits in the star of Rahu,
the 7th sublord.
VII on III:
General principles of linkage of the VII
house with the III house are as follows:

"Applications of Cusnal Interlinks" 53
3, 1 : W/H to the likings of the native
3,2: W/H to the likings of the native with
Monetary Gains through them
3,3: Cordial Marital Relationship
3,4: Hostile Marital Relationship
3,5: Happy Married Life
3,6: Separation of W/H due to Employment
3,7: Attachments in Married Life
3,8: Dejections in Married Life
3,9: Frequent Temporary Separations of W/H
3,10: Separation from the Joint Family
3,11: Happy and Harmonious Married Life
3,12: Separation of W/H by Eloping away
VII house, a favourable house to the II!
house, as it carries the combined significations
of houses 7 & 6 with it, would force the native
to undertake journeys and to leave his wife
temporarily during the DBA periods of Rahu,
while it is also in transit of the star of Mars, the
sublord of the III house.
IV on VII:
IV house, a neutral house to the VII
house. In this chart, Mercury, the sublord of the
IV house, is in the star of Venus, the 12th sublord
and in the sub of Rahu, the 7th sublord to

'Applications of Cuspal Interlinks"
become unfavourable to the VII house.
General Principles of interlinks when IV
house is linked to the VII house:
7,1: Defeating Motives and Jealousy on
native, as he/she is married to a relative
7,2: Harrassments by in-laws and by the
members of the family of W/H, even
though the native has married a Relative.
7,3: Separation from Joint Family, though
married to a relative
7,5: Love Marriage among Relationships
7,6: Separation from W/H, though Married to
a Relative
7,8: Troubles, Worries and Enmity from
Relatives due to W/H
7,9: Second affair with a Relative or marriage
with the Sister/Brother of W/H
7,10: Dissatisfactions in Married Life, though
Married to a Relative
7,11: Cordial and Happy Atmosphere in
Married Life, by Marrying a Relative
7,12: Though Marriage was among Relatives,
separation by W/H subsequent to Mental
Worries, Troubles and Agony.

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 55
The combination of 12 & 7 by the IV house
to the 7th house would lead the native to
purchase properties and household articles to
satisfy his wife during the DBA periods of
Mercury, while it transits in the star of Rahu,
the 7th sublord.
VII on IV:
General principles of linkage of VI I house
with the IV house are as follows:
4,1: Dissatisfied married life to the Spouse
subsequent to the Egoistic attitude of the
native
4,2: Dissatisfied Spouse due to Financial
Matters
4,3: Changing from dissatisfaction to
satisfaction to Spouse in married life
4,4: Prolonged dissatisfaction to the Spouse
4,5: Increased dissatisfaction to the Spouse
4,6: Divorce due to dissatisfied Spouse
4,7: Dissatisfaction to Spouse due to his/
her ego
4,8: Dissatisfaction and disrespect caused by
Spouse
4,9: Dissatisfaction to the native in marital life
and worries about illegal affairs

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 56
4,10: Dissatisfaction to both Wife and Husband
4,11: Dissatisfaction to the spouse though the
native is satisfied
4,12: Divorce by the native due to
Dissatisfactions
VII house, an unfavourable house to the
IV house, as it carries the combined
significations of houses 7 5 6 with it, would
bring mental agony and dissatisfactions to the
native along with differences of opinions in his
married life during the DBA periods of Rahu, while
it is also in transit of the star of Mercury, the
sublord of the IV house.
V on VII:
V house, a house of favour to the VII
house. Jupiter, the sublord of the V house is in
the star and sub of Mercury, the sublord of houses
2, 4 & 10. Hence it stands as 8, 1 0 & 4 to the 7th
house to transform into an unfavourable house.
General Principles of interlinks when the
V house is linked to the VII house:
7,1: Ego-clashes subsequent to Love Marriage
7,2: Suicide or Death of Spouse, though it is
a Love Marriage

plications of Cuspal iHterfinks"
7,3: Separation of native from her/his family
as persuaded by W/H, subsequent to
Love Marriage
7,4: Dissatisfactions to W/H subsequent to
Love Marriage.
7,6: Separation of Spouse, though it is a
Love Marriage
7,8: Spoiling native's own Reputation due to
Love Marriage
7,9: Separation of W/H from her/his family
as persuaded by the native, subsequent
to Love Marriage
7, 1 0: Dissatisfactions to the native subsequent
to Love Marriage
7,11: Happy and Harmonious Married Life
after Love Marriage
7,12: Separation by the native, though it is a
love Marriage
The combination of 8, 5,10 & 4 to the VII
house by the 5th house would cause for
accidents to wife; This combination would also
enable the native to honour his partners or wife
through gifts during the DBA periods of Jupiter,
while it also is in transit of the star of Rahu, the
7th sublord.

"Applications of Cuspal Interlines" 58
VII on V:
General principles of linkage of the VII
house with the V house are as follows:
5,1 : Harmonious Married Life to Spouse due
to the Admirable Character of the native
5,2: Harmonious Married Life to the Spouse
due to the Financial Status of the native
5,3: Harmonious Married Life to the Spouse
due to the Mental Attitude of the native
5,4: Hurdles in the Harmonious Married Life
of the Spouse
5,5: Prolonged Happy and Harmonious
Married Life
5,6: Steady increase in the Romantic life of the
couple
5,7: Affectionate and loving Spouse with
self-satisfactions
5,8: Financial Gains of the Spouse for Happy
Married Life
5,9: Native suited to the likings of the Spouse
5,10: Properties of the Spouse leading to Happy
Married Life
5,11: Romance and Sexual pleasures in
Married Life

"Applications of Cuspal Interlines" 59
5,12: Profession of the spouse leading to a
Happy Married Life
VII house, a favourable house to the V
house, as it carries the combined
significations of houses 7 & 6 with it, would
enable the native to settle petty issues with his
wife and to bring an end to temporary
separations with his wife during the DBA
periods of Rahu, while it is also in transit of the
star of Jupiter, the sublord of the V house.
VI on VII:
VI house, a house of negation to the VII
house. Sun, the sublord of the VI house is in the
star of Venus, the sublord of the 12th house
and in the sub of Jupiter, the sublord of houses
5 & 11. The combination of 12, 5 & 11 is a
favourable combination to the VII house.
Principles of interlinks when VI house is
linked to the 7th house:
7,1: Ego-clashes between the couple due to
Litigations and Loans
7,2: Troubles and disrespect to W/H due to
Excessive Borrowings
7,3: Separation from Partner due to

"Applications of Cuspal Interlines
Professional Requirements
7,4: Marrying a Colleague or a subordinate to
render dissatisfaction to her/him in
Married Life
7,5: Love Marriage with a Colleague or a
subordinate
7,8: Loss of properties in the name of W/H due
to Excessive Borrowings to suffer from
Disrespect and to get separated from W/H
7,9: Illegal Affairs with a Colleague or a
subordinate
7,10: Dissatisfactions in life after .Marrying a
Colleague or a subordinate
7,11: Happy Married Life with a Colleague or a
subordinate
7,12: Loss of Properties of the native after
Marrying a Colleague or a subordinate
In this chart, this link of 1 2, 5 & 1 1 would
render mutual satisfaction and would ensure
cordial atmosphere in the family; It would also
enable the native to take his wife to feasts,
festivals and occassions during the DBA
periods of Sun, while it also transits in the star of
Rahu, the sublord of the VII house.

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 61
VII on VI:
General principles of linkage of the VII
house with the VI house are as follows:
6,1 : Divorce proposed by the Spouse due to
the Egoistic Attitude of the native
6,2: Separation due to the Death of the Spouse
6,3: Separation of Spouse without
Communication
6,4: Divorce subsequent to dissatisfaction of
Spouse
6,5: Reunioun of the Spouse after Separation
6,6: Divorce due to Secret Activities of the
Spouse
6,7: Spouse living as Incognito
6,8: Divorce subsequent to Quarrels
6,9: Divorce of the Spouse due to the
Illegal Affairs of the native
6,10: Divorce of the Spouse due to lack of
satisfaction of the native
6,11: Refusal to the Divorce Proposal of the
Spouse by the native
6,12: Mutual Consent for the Divorce
VII house, a neutral house to the VI house,
as it carries the combined significations of

"Applications of Cuspctl Interlines"
houses 7 & 6 with it, would force the native to
temporary separations from his wife subsequent
to disputes during the DBA periods of Rahu, while
it is also in transit of the star of Sun, the sublord
of the VI house.
VII on VII:
General principles of linkage of the VII
house to itself are as follows:
7.1 Congenial Married Life
7.2 Death of Spouse
7.3 Illegal Affair of the Spouse
7.4 Professional Pride of the Spouse
7.5 Selfish Spouse
7.6 Secrecy of the Spouse
7.7 Self-Pride of the Spouse
7.8 Financial pride of the Spouse
7.9 Courageous Spouse
7,1 0: Pride of the Spouse as Owner of
Properties
7,1 1: Happy Married Life with full of Romance
7,1 2: lllhealth of the Spouse
VII house, a favourable house to itself, as
it carries the combined significations of houses
7 & 6 with it, would put the native to submit
himself to the partner's domination during the

"Applications of Cuspal Iwterfmta" 63
DBA periods of Rahu, while it is also in transit of
its own star.
VIII on VII:
VIII house, neutral to the VII house.
Saturn, the sublord of the VIII house is in the
star of Mars, the sublord of houses 1 & 3 and in
the sub of Jupiter, the sublord of houses 5 & 11 .
the 7th, to modify into a favourable house to the
7th house.
Principles of interlinks when VIII house
is linked to the 7th house:
7,1 : Sudden Ego clashes with W/H
7,2: Sudden Income through W/H
7,3: Dejections caused by W/H
7,4: Unexpected Arrival of relatives
7,5: Sudden Love Affair and Marriage
7,6: Sudden developments of issues as
separation from W/H
7,9: Sudden Second Affairs and Marriage,
Temporary separations from W/H
7,10: Sudden Anger and Frustrations caused
by W/H
7,11: Favourable Attitude of W/H, Sudden
changes to Cordiality in disputes

"Applications of Cuspal Interlines"
7,12: Sudden Separation by W/H
In this chart, the favourable combination
of 5, 7, 9 & 1 1 by the 8th house to the VII house
would bring sudden atmosphere of cordiality in
the family during the DBA periods of Saturn,
while it is also in transit of the star of Rahu, the
sublord of the VII house.
VII on VIII:
General principles of linkage of the VII
house with the VIII house are as follows:
8,1: Spouse driving the native to commit
Suicide
8,2: Quarrelsome Couple
8,3: Threatening and Harassing Spouse
8,4: Quarrels by Spouse with the Relatives of
the native
8,5: Disrespects caused by Spouse
8,6: Litigations and Borrowings of the Spouse
8,7: Avaricious Spouse
8,8: Threatenings of the Spouse
8,9: Exposing the family problems to draw the
attention of the Public and causing
Defamation for the native

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 65
8,10: Complaining about the native at his/her
office by the Spouse
8,11: Litigations raised by the Spouse on the
properties of the native
8,12: Disclosure of the Secret Activities of the
native by the Spouse
VII house, an unfavourable house to the
VIII nouse, as it carries the combined
significations of houses 7 & 6 with it, would
render difficulties and aggravate the problems
and misunderstandings with his wife during the
DBA periods of Rahu, while it is also in transit of
the star of Saturn, the sublord of the VIII house.
IX on VII:
IX house is a highly favourable house to
the VII house. Moon, the sublord of the IX house
is in the star of Sun, the sublord of the 6th house
and in the sub of Rahu, the sublord of the 7th
house to mean 12, 1 & 3 to the VII house.
Principles of interlinks when IX house is
linked to the 7th house:
7,1: Negotiations through Illegal Affairs
7,2: Mental Agony and Frustration of W/H

"Applications of Cuspal iHterfin^s" 66
caused by the Illegal Affairs of the native
7,3: Illegal Affairs of both the native and the
Spouse
7,4: Suicide of the person with whom the
native has an Illegitimate Affair
7,5: Happy and Harmonious Married Life with
two W/H
7,6: Separation from the first W/H after 2nd
Marriage
7: Legitimate Second Marriage
7,8 : Separation from the Second W/H,
subsequent to troubles
7,10: Dissatisfaction to the 1st W/H in Married
Life, Status and Respect gained after 2nd
Marriage/ Illegal Affair
7,11: Polygamy but a Happy Life
7,12: Secret life subsequent to 2nd Marriage/
Affairs
In this chart, since it is 12, 1 & 3 to the
VII house by the IX house, cordial atmosphere
would remain in family life and the opinions of
his wife would be subject to favourable changes
during the DBA periods of Moon while it also
transits in the star of Rahu, the sublord of the 7th
house.

"Applications of Cuspal Interlines" 67
VII on IX:
General principles of linkage of the VII
house with the IX house are as follows:
9,1: Illegal affairs of the native through Spouse
9,2: Financial Gains in Illegal Affairs of the
native through Spouse
9,3: Illegal Affairs by both the couple
9,4: Dissatisfactions to the Spouse due to
Illegal Affairs of the native
9,5: Illegal Affairs of the native though it is
known to the Spouse
9,6: Separation of the Spouse due to the
Illegal Affairs of the native
9,7: Living with Two Wives
9,8: Discontinuity of Illegal Affairs due to the
Spouse
9,9: Affectionate towards the person with
whom the native has an Affair Illegally
9,10: Improving the Status through Illegal
Affairs
9,11: Polygamy
9,12: Secret Illegal Affairs
VII house, a favourable house to the IX
house, with its link of 7 & 6 , would enable the

"Applications of Cuspal Interlines"
native into change his opinion and thoughts and
to undertake journeys with wife during the DBA
periods of Rahu, while it is also in transit of the
star of Moon, the sublord of the IX house.
X on VII:
X house is an unfavourable house to the
VII house. In this chart, Mercury, the sublord of
the X house, is in the star of Venus, the 12th
sublord and in the sub of Rahu, the 7th sublord
to remain as an unfavourable house to the VII
house.
Principles of interlinks when the X house
is linked to the 7th house:
7,1: Ego-clashes in Profession
7,2: Professional helps to Income
7,3: Change of Places and Agreements
reached in Business Affairs
7,4: Leaving the Partnership Ventures to the
Partner
7,5: Profits of the Partner, Romancing at work
place
7,6: Winning Competitions in Profession,
Winding up Partnerships
7,8: Leaving the Financial holds to the

'Applications of Cuspal Intcr(i«^i"
Partner in Partnership Deeds
7,9: Difficulties in Profession due to Illegal
Affairs
7,11: Friendships and Co-operations from
Partners in Business
7,12: Loss in Second Profession, a Partnership
Firm
The combination of 10, 6 & 1 by the X
house to the 7th house would lead the native to
adjust himself in his professional life as suited to
the requirements of business partners or wife
during the DBA periods of Mercury, while it
transits in the star of Rahu, the 7th sublord.
VII on X:
General principles of linkage of the VII
house with the X house are as follows:
10,1 : Status attained through Spouse
10,2: Respect and Monetary Gains attained by
Spouse
10,3: Respect and Popularity attained through
Spouse
10,4: Respect through the Properties of the
Spouse

"Applications of CmsjmjI iHterlin^s" 70
10,5: Professional Hazards due to the Spouse
10,6: Promotions in Service due to the Spouse
10,7: Spouse becoming a Professional Partner
as well
10,8: Demotions due to the Activities of the
Spouse
10,9: Breaks in Profession due to the Spouse
10,10: Professional Status and Respect due to
the Spouse
10,11: Happy Professional and Married Life due
to the Spouse
10,12: Assistance from Spouse to the
Professional Developments or to the
Second Venture
VII house, a neutral house to the X house,
as it carries the combined significations of
houses 7 & 6 with it, would force the native to
get dejected and to have a loathsome attitude in
married life during the DBA periods of Rahu, while
it is also in transit of the star of Mercury, the
sublord of the X house.
XI on VII:
XI house is a house of favour to the VII
house. .Jupiter, the sublord of the XI house is in

"Applications of Cuspal iHterfmfcs" 71
the star and sub of Mercury, the sublord of
houses 2, 4 & 10. Hence it stands as 8, 10 & 4
to the 7th house to change into an unfavourable
house.
Principles of interlinks when XI house is
linked to the 7th house:
7,1: Drawing others to suit to the motives of
the native
7,2: Disrespect caused by friends to W/H
7,3: Marrying a person of native's choice
7,4: Dissatisfactions caused by friends to W/H
7,5: Immoral Affairs of Friends, Elder Brother,
Son-in-law in the case of Wife; Friends,
Elder Sister, Daughter-in-law in the case
of Husband.
7,6: Separation of W/H due to Friends &
Elder Brother
7,8: Quarrels with W/H instigated by Friends
& Elder Brother
7,9: Illegal Relationships with Friends
7,10: Dissatisfaction in Married Life caused by
the interferences of Friends
7,12: Leaving W/H as instigated by Friends and
Elder Brother

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 12
The combination of 8, 5, 10 & 4 to the
VII house by the XI house would cause for
dissatisfaction in his family life and enable the
native to render gifts of his choice to his wife
during the DBAperiods of Jupiter, while it also is
in transit of the star of Rahu, the 7th sublord.
VII on XI:
General principles of linkage of the VII
house with the XI house are as follows:
11,1: Happy and Joyous Life due to-the Spouse
11,2: Happy and Prosperous Life due to the
Spouse
11,3: Happy and Satisfactory Married Life with
Popularity due to the Spouse
11,4: Happy life due to the Properties of the
Spouse
1 1 ,5: Happy and Sexually Satisfied life due to
Spouse
11,6: Happy and Successful Life due to the
Spouse
11,7: Happy and Harmonious Life with Social
Recognition due to the Spouse
11,8: Happy Life due to the Unexpected Gains
of the Spouse

''Applications of Cusval Interlinks" 73
11,9: Happy Life due to the Spouse in
providing Assistance to the Higher
Studies of the native
11,10: Happy Life due to the Professional
Assistance of the Spouse
11,11: Happy Life due to the Dedication of the
Spouse
11,12: Happy Life due to the Sexual Pleasures
provided by the Spouse
VII house as a favourable house to the
XI house, as it carries the combined
significations of houses 7 & 6 with it, would
force his wife to come to terms with the native
to ensure, a cordial atmosphere in the
married life during the DBA periods of Rahu,
while it is also in transit of the star of Jupiter, the
XI sublord.
XII on VII:
XII house is a neutral house to the VII
house. Venus, the sublord of the XII house is in
the star of Moon and in its own sub to mean the
combination of 9 & 12 a favourable combination
to the VII house.
Principles of interlinks when the XII house
is linked to the 7th house:

"Applications of Cusval Interlines" 24
7, 1 : Secret Threats & Ego clashes
7,2: Money at the hands of Binami
7,3: Illegal contacts of the Spouse with
Servants
7,4: Secret Plans
7,5: Love Marriage with a Foreign Citizen
7,6: Separation of the Spouse in protest
against the Secret Activities of the native
7,8: Blackmails and Threatenings by Secret
Enemies
7,9: Secret and Illegal Affairs
7,10: Losses due to Second Profession
7,11: Making the Partner or Spouse to
co-operate with the native through Secret
Activities
The combination of 9 & 12 by the 12th
house to the VII house would mean the forced
atmosphere of co-operation that is prevailing in
the family with a fear of separation caused by
the illegal affairs of the native during the DBA
periods of Venus, while it also transits in the
star of Rahu, the 7th sublord.

"Applications of Cuspal Interfiles" 75
VII on XII:
General principles of linkage of the VII
house with the XII house are as follows:
12,1 : Expenses Incurred by the native due to
the Diseases of the Spouse
1 2,2:' Expenses Incurred due to Aggravation of
the diseases of the Spouse
1 2,3: Loss of Properties due to the Diseases of
the Spouse
12,4: Unhappiness due to the lllhealth of the
Spouse
12,5: Expenses incurred for the Diseases of the
Spouse caused by Immunity Deficiencies
12,6: Expenses Incurred for the Hospitalization
of the Spouse
12,7: Expenses Incurred due to the
Inactiveness of the Spouse by way of
Diseases
12,8: Expenses and mental agony due to the
Diseases of the Spouse
12,9: Financial Crisis arised out of the expenses
incurred for the medical treatment of the
Spouse
12,10: Expenses incurred for the treatment of

'Applications of Cuspal Interlines"
Chronic Diseases of the Spouse
12,11 : Expenses incurred in getting the Spouse
discharged from the Hospital after having
cured from the ailments
12,12: Loss of Investments for the Medical
Treatment of the Spouse
VII house as an unfavourable house to
the XII house, as it carries the combined
significations of houses 7 & 6 with it, would
aggravate the secret problems in his married life
leading to separations during the DBA
periods of Rahu, while it is also in transit of the
star of Venus, the sublord of the XII house.
PLANETS: (To the VII house)
While the planets Rahu, Mars, Mercury
and Moon remain as the direct significators of
the 7th house, the remaining planets, during their

"Applications of Cuspal Int erfinfes"
respective DBA periods would act as above
during their transit in the star of Rahu, the 7th
sublord.
In this chapter only a few significations
of the 7th house have been used for the
general study of the 7th house. However, I
sincerely hope that the readers can gain
success in predicting the remaining
significations by extending the same
methodology used in the above example.

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 78
VIII BHAVA
HOUSE OF SUDDENNESS
Preparing Wills or Charters, Scholarships,
Wordy Quarrels, Losses, Delays, Accidents,
Damage to Reputations, False allegations and
Litigations, Crossing Rivers, Theft and Robbery,
War, Dowry, Unexpected Profits, Unearned
Money, Dividends, Medical staff, Slaughter
House, Butchery, Private Places, General
Deaths, Flood and Famine, Fire, Earthquakes,
National Imports and Exports, Deficit, Rate of
Interest, Gift Cheques, Money of the,Deceased
Person are some of the significations that are
unrelated to the Asc.
VIII house is a favourable house to houses
4, 6, 8,10 & 12while it remains neutral to houses
3, 7 & 1 1 . It would stand unfavourable to houses
1, 2, 5 & 9. In reply, these houses, as their
respective sublords remain in the star or the sub
of the sublord of the VIII house tend to react on
the VIII house.
The significations of the 8th house can
be reclassified as the significations meant to link
with the 12 Bhavas, as under:
I:
Loss of thoughts, Unconsciousness,
Inactive, Forgetful, Damages in Organs,

"Applications of Cuspal Interlines" 79
Stress and Pains, Inflammation
II: Damages to the Right Eye, Money
locked-up at other's hands, Wordy
Quarrels, Slandering language
III: Mental distress, Damages in Blood veins,
Nerves and ears
IV: Accidents or Sudden Failure of Lungs,
Heart and Organs that tend to
Malfunction
V: Damages to Blood cells, Troubles arised
out of Love Affairs, Disrespect etc
VI: Diseases that render Excessive and
Abnormal Stress and Pains, Litigations
that cause Disrespect
VII: Arguments, Threats and Blackmails,
Quarrels with Enemies and Troubles
caused by Wife
VIII: Longevity, Sudden solutions to
unexpected Troubles and Worries
IX: Hurdles in continuing Higher Education,
Accidents during Research Works, Break
in Journeys, Difficulties faced in Foreign
Countries, Worries, Sleepless Nights,
Inclination to Higher Education etc.
X: Hard labour/increase in workload, Loss

"Applications of Cuspal iHterfmfo" 80
of Respect, Tension in service
XI: Difficulties through Friends, Greediness,
Committment and hard work to reach the
Goal
XII: Disrespect arised out of Secret
Activities, Worries, Troubles, Mental
agony, Punishments
Houses 4, 6, 8, 10 & 12 are favourable to
the significations of the VIII house while houses
2, 3, 7 & 1 1 remain unfavourable to the VIII house;
Houses 9, 1 & 5 would remain neutral to the VIII
house. If the sublord of the VIII house-happen to
be in the star or the sub of the sublord of the
concerned houses, the VIII house would
register its reactions which are as follows:
VIII on I: Ensuring Longevity
Villon II: Unexpected Income
VIII on III: Unexpected Threats to Life
'/III on IV: Accidents
VIII on V: Unexpected Romance
Vlll on VI: Unexpected Success
VIII onVIl: Unexpected Relief from Worries
Vlll on IX: Unexpected Multiplication of Troubles
VIII on X: Unexpected Changes in Life
VlliunXI: Unexpected Recognition to Hard

"Applications of Cuspal interfiles" 81
Labour
VIII onXIl: Unexpected Troubles or Losses
POTENTIAL of the VIII house:
In this example chart, Saturn, the sublord
of the VIII house, is in the star of Mars, the
sublord of the Asc and the 3rd house and in the
sub of Jupiter, the sublord of houses 5 & 1 1 .
Though houses 1 , 5 are neutral to the 8th house
and houses 3 & 11 are unfavourable to the VIII
house. Hence the VIII house is not favourably
linked to keep its potential alive and the VIII house
is very weak in this chart.
The Planetary Significations of Sat (P.N 3lofPCI)
Asc: Pessimistic, Lack of Confidence,
Cowardice, Lazy, Doubting, No faith in
others
III: Cowardliness, Mental Depression, Fear in
Expressions, Slow and Sluggish in
Involvements, Delays
V: Sad Relations, Immoral Sex, Worries,
Love affairs with people of lower strata
XI: Hiding the Motives, Friendships with
people of Immorality and lower in status

"Applications of Cusoal iHterfmfo"
While the significations of Saturn remain
permanent, the significations of Sun {to a limited extent as it is in the subsub of Saturn}
would come to the forefront during the DBA periods of Sun.
SUN {VIII} insurance, Legal punishments,
Troubles and Mental Agony, Donations from
Government
ASC on VIII
Asc is neutral to the VIII house. In this
chart, the Asc sublord Mars is in the star of Sun,
the 6th sublord and in the sub of Rahu, the 7th
sublord; Houses 6 & 7 become 11 & 12 to the
VIII house to get modified into an unfavourable
house to the VIII .
Principles of linkage of Asc with the VIII house:
8,2: Unexpected Income through self thoughts
and ideas
8,3: Unexpected Death
8,4: Unexpected Failure of Productive Organs
8,5: Sudden Disrespect and Loss of
Reputation
8,6: Sudden increase in Diseases
8,7: Sudden Difficulties caused by Enemies

"Applications of Cuspal Interlines" 83
8,9: Break in Onward Journey, Difficulties in
Foreign Life
8,10: Unexpected Difficulties in Profession
8,11: Safe in Life by Winning Unexpected
Threats upto the level of smelling the
flavour of Death
8,12: Confusion and Unexpected Ruins in Life
In this example chart, the Asc is 6, 1 1 &
12 to the VIII house to mean that the native would
suffer from unexpected troubles, stress, pain
and mental tensions during the DBA periods
of Mars, the sublord of the Asc, while it is also in
transit of the star of Saturn, the VIII sublord.
VIII on ASC:
General principles of linkage of the VIII
house with the Asc are as follows:
1.1 Longevity
1.2 Ensuring Longevity
13 Sudden Death
1.4 Death at Residence
1 .5 Death at a Happy Moment
1^6 Unexpected Illness
1,7 Fear of Death

"Applications of Cusval Interlines"
1,8: Suicide
1,9: Suicide Attempts
1,10: Noble Death
1,11: Return from the Edge of Death
1,12: Unidentifiable Death
VIII house is a naturally unfavourable
house to the Asc. But in this chart, it carries 1,3,
5 & 11 to become favourable to the Asc. Hence,
the native would suffer from unexpected mental
tensions, confusions, fear of death, loss of
memory and misplacement of belongings
during the DBA periods of Saturn, the VIII sublord,
while it is also in transit of the star of Mars, the
sublord of the Asc.
II on VIII
II house is an unfavourable house to the
VIII house. In this chart, Mercury, the sublord of
the II house is in the star of Venus, the 12th
sublord and in the sub of Rahu, the 7th sublord;
Houses 12 & 7 mean as houses 5 & 12 to the
VIII house to remain as an unfavourable house
to the VIII house.
Principles of linkage of the II house with
the VIII house:

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 85
8,1: Tendancy to ignore the Significance of
Money, Spendthrift
8,3: Threat on Life, caused by the Money in
hand, Money that is left outstanding
8,4: Difficulties arised out of Investments made
on Properties and Valuable Articles
8,5: Seizure of Money by others
8,6: Unexpected Loans and Borrowings
8,7: Unexpected Wordy Quarrels in Financial
Matters
8,9: Unexpected Troubles arised out of
Financial Crisis
8,10: Accepting Bribes in Profession
8,11; Gifts and Gains through Insurance Claims
8,12: Unexpected loss of Money, Robbery or
Theft
In this example chart, the II house is 7, 5
& 12 to the VIII house to mean that the native
would suffer as his money would get locked-up
with others as outstanding or his money would
be stolen or his properties would be seized by
force during the DBA periods of Mercury, the
sublord of the II house, while it is also in transit
of the star of Saturn, the VIII sublord.

"Applications of Cuspal iHterfiH^s" 86
VIII on H:
General principles of linkage of the VIII
house with the II house are as follows:
2,1: Unexpected Financial Status
2,2: Unexpected Improvements in Financial
Conditions
2,3: Unexpected Financial Documentation
2,4: Unexpected Purchase of LVP
2,5: Unexpected Gains through Gamblings
2,6: Unexpected Salary Increments
2,7: Unexpected Social Help in financial
Matters
2,8: Unexpected Outstandings of Money
2,9: Unexpected Financial Worries
2,10: Unexpected Bribe Money
2,11: Unexpected Gains and Profits
2,12: Unexpected Investments
Vlil house is an unfavourable house to the
II house. But in this chart, it carries 1,3, 5 & 11,
which are 12, 2,4 & 10 to the II house to remain
neutral to the II house. Hence, the native could
get money unexpectedly during the DBA
periods of Saturn, the VIII sublord, while it is also
in transit of the star of Mercury, the sublord of

"Applications of Casual Interlines" 87
the II house.
Ill on VIII
III house is a house of danger to the VIII
house. In this chart, Mars the sublord of the III
house, is in the star of Sun, the 6th sublord and
in the sub of Rahu, the 7th sublord; Houses 6 &
7 mean as houses 11 & 12 to thevill I house to
remain as an unfavourable house to the VIII
house. Principles of linkage of ill house with the
VIII house:
8,1: Mental Agony and Stress, Break in
Return Journeys
8,2: Unexpected Benefits out of Cheques or
through Agreements
8,4: Litigations in Properties, Distress caused
by Relatives
8,5: Disrespect caused by Letters or
Agreements
8,6: Winning Litigations after passing
through great Difficulties
8,7: Troubles arised out of Agreements
8,9: Breach of Contracts, Break in Journeys,
Missing Letters
8,10: Difficulties caused by Transfer, Difficulties
caused by Mortgaged House

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 88
8,11: Unexpected favourable Agreement
8,12: Waverings in thoughts, Loss of
Belongings by Forgetful Mind
In this example chart, the III house is 8,11
& 12 to the VIII house to mean that the native
would suffer from mental tensions, tortutres,
worries and fear of death during the DBA
periods of Mars the sublord of the III house, while
it is also in transit of the star of Saturn, the VIII
sublord.
VIII on III:
General principles of linkage 'of the VIII
house with the III house are as follows:
3,1: Sudden Death
3,2: Unexpected Gains through Documents
3,3: Fear of Death
3,4: Unexpected Litigations in Agreements
3,5: Unexpected Happy News
3,6: Unexpected Failure in Functioning of Body
3,7: Unexpected Threats
3,8: Unexpected Tensions and Dejection
3,9: Unexpected Journey
3,10: Unexpected Transfer
3,11: Unexpected Agreements

"Applications of Cuspal Interlines"
3,12: Unexpected Loss of Possessions
VIII house is a neutral house to the III
house. But in this chart, it carries 1, 3, 5 & 11 to
become favourable to the III house. Hence, the
native would undertake unexpected journeys and
would suffer from loss of memory and fear of
death and may change his ideas and views
during the DBA periods of Saturn, the VIII sublord,
while it is also in transit of the star of Mars, the
sublord of the III house.
IV on VIII:
IV house is a favourable house to the VI 1 1
house. In this chart, Mercury, the sublord of the
IV house is in the star of Venus, the 12th sublord
and in the sub of Rahu, the 7th sublord; Houses
12 & 7 become as 5 & 12 to the VI II house to get
modified into an unfavourable house to the VIII
house.
Principles of linkage of the IV house with
the VIM house:
8,1: Damages to Organs in Accidents
8,2: Unexpected Profits in Transactions of
House, Vehicles, Lands
8,3: Unexpectedly leaving the House, Hurdles

"Applications of Cuspal lHterfinfcs" 90
in Education, Loss of belongings, Failure
of Productive Organs
8,5: Properties would be seized by others,
Problems in Properties, Loss of
Reputation among Relatives
8,6: Increase in Borrowings due to Lands and
Properties, Undertaking Medical
Treatment to get cured from failures of
Productive Organs
8,7: Problems in Married Life, though married
to a Relative
8,9: Scholarship to Higher Education,
Continuing Higher Education by crossing
over the Hurdles
8,10: Problems caused by Tenant, Excessive
Labour in manufacturing works; Accidents
caused by Machineries
8,11: Litigations in Properties, Problems in
Continuing Education
8,12: Problems caused by Adulteration,
Secret Plans and Issues
In this example chart, the IV house is 9,
5 & 12 to the VIII house to mean that the native
would suffer due to problems in profession and
by accidents; he would have to face problems

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks"
created by neighbours and his money would
remain outstanding during the DBA periods of
Mercury, the sublord of the IV house, while it is
also in transit of the star of Saturn, the VIII
sublord.
vm on IV:
General principles of linkage of the VIII
house with the IV house are as follows:
4,1: Accidents
4,2: Gains in Will or Charter
4,3: Documents of Rights through Will
4,4: Uncultivated Lands through Will
4,5: Temple Properties through Will
4,6: Hotels, Textiles through Will
4,7: Common Trust with Relatives
4,8: Insurance Claims as per Will
4,9: Ancestral Properties as per Will
4,10: Industries as per Will
4,1 1 : Properties with Litigations as per Will
4,12: Secret Possessions as per Will
VIII house is a favourable house to the IV
house. But in this chart, it carries 1 , 3, 5 & 1 1 or
10, 12, 2 & 8 to the IV house to get modified as
an unfavourable house to the IV house. Hence,
the native would gain unexpectedly and could

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 92
purchase properties, he could also improve his
profession by purchasing professional
equipments during the DBA periods of Saturn,
the Vill sublord, while it is also in transit ofthe
star of Mercury, the sublord of the IV house.
V on Vllh
V house is a neutral house to the VIII
house. In this chart, Jupiter, the sublord ofthe
V house is in the star and sub of Mercury, the
sublord of houses 2, 4 & 10; Houses 2, 4 & 10
mean as houses 7, 9 & 3 to the VIII house to
get modified as a favourable house 4o the VIII
house.
Principles of linkage of the V house with
the VIII house:
8,1: Becoming an Addict to Alchohol,
Prostitution, Drugs and Gamblings,
Decays in Blood Cells
8,2: Unexpected Profits by way of Arts, Music
and Culture.
8,3: Mental Depression in Love Affairs
8,4: Damages to organs due to Child Birth,
Loss of needed interest in Sexual
Pleasures

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 93
8,6: Diseases in Stomach, Excessive tabour
in the field of Arts and Culture, Income
through Commission
8,7: Problems due to love affairs, Problems
due to birth of twins; Mis-matching of
Blood groups of Wife & Husband {Rh
problems}
8,9: Spoiling the Reputation due to Illegal
Affairs, Problems due to closure of
Business
8,10: Loss of Profession or Job, Temporary
Service, Profession in Liquor Shops,
Places for Prostitution, Casinos etc
8,11: Coming out of problems to get back
Reputation in Love Affairs
8,12: Loss and Worries in the field of Arts,
Culture
In this example chart, the V house is 10,
7, 9 & 3 to the VIII house to mean that the name
and fame of the native would be damaged in love
affairs, the native would show excessive
interests in sexual pleasures and would suffer
from damages to the tissues and cells in the body
during the DBA periods of Jupiter, the sublord of
the V house, while it is also in transit of the star
of Saturn, the VIII sublord.

"Applications of Cusval lHterfinfa"
General principles of linkage of the VIII
house with the V house are as follows:
5,1: Unexpected Romance
5,2: Unexpected Gains in Gamblings
5,3: Unexpected Gambling Involvements
5,4: Unexpected Purchase of Artistic Goods
5,5: Unexpected Love Affairs
5,6: Unexpected Viral Fever
5,7: Unexpected Love Marriage
5,8: Unexpected Damages to Respect &
Authority
5,9: Unexpected Illegal Affairs, Pilgrimage
5,10: Unexpected Demotion or Revertion to the
Previous Post
5,11: Unexpected Cordial and Mutual
Relationships
5,12: Unexpected Sexual Pleasures and Bed
Comforts
VIII house is an unfavourable house to the
V house. But in this chart, it carries 1 , 3, 5 & 1 1
or 9, 11,1 & 7 to the V house to get modified as
a favourable house to the V house. Hence, the
native would enjoy unexpected sexual pleasures,

"Applications of Cuspal Iwterfinfes" 95
or meet with friendships to keep the flourishing
mood of the mind at new heights during the DBA
periods of Saturn, the VIII sublord, while it is
also in transit of the star of Jupiter, the sublord of
the V house.
VI on VIII:
VI house is a favourable house to the VIII
house. In this chart, Sun, the sublord of the VI
house is in the star of Venus, the sublord of 1 2th
house and in the sub of Jupiter, the sublord of
houses 5 & 1 1 . Houses 12, 5 & 1 1 become as 5,
10 & 4 to the VIII house to get modified as a
neutral house to the VIII.
Principles of linkage of the VI house with
the VIII house:
8,1: Suicides subsequent to Diseases
8,2: Death due to Tortures of Debtors
8,3: Death due to Mental Dejections in
clearing debts
8,4: Death due to Litigations arised out of
Loans on Properties
8,5: Death caused in Disrespect arised due to
Borrowings
8,6: Death due to Failures of Civil Court Cases
8,7: Death due to Threatenings of Debtors

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 96
8,8: Death due to Cheatings in Borrowings
8,9: Death due to Financial Crisis arised out
of Borrowings
8,10: Death due to Disrespect caused
Excessive Borrowings
8,11: Death due to Seizure of Properties in
Litigations of Debts
8,12: Death subsequent to Heavy Losses in
-spite of Borrowings
In this example chart, the VI house is 1 1 ,
5,10 & 4 to the VIII house to mean that the
native would face problems caused by the
increase in loans and diseases during the DBA
periods of Sun, the sublord of the VI house, while
it is also in transit of the star of Saturn, the VIII
sublord.
VIII on VI:
General principles of linkage of the VIII I
house with the VI house are as follows:
6.1 Unexpected Illness
6.2 Unexpected Borrowings
6.3 Unexpected Mortgages
6.4 Unexpected Purchases through
Borrowings

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 97
6,5: Unexpected Disposal of Loans
6,6: Unexpected Additional and Excessive
Borrowings
6,7: Unexpected Assistance to Borrowings
6,8: Unexpected Loans through Multiple
Sources
6,9: Unexpected Troubles in Acquiring Loans
6,10: Unexpected Loans in Service
6,11: Unexpected Success in Litigations
regarding Debts
6,12: Unexpected Investments through
Borrowings
VIII house is a favourable house to the VI
house. But ih this chart, it carries 1, 3, 5 & 1 1 or
8, 10, 12 & 6 to the VI house to get modified as
an unfavourable house to the VI house. Hence,
the native would have to suffer from unexpected
diseases and litigations but could get loans
unexpectedly during the DBA periods of
Saturn, the VIM sublord, while it is also in transit
of the star of Sun, the sublord of the VI house.
VII on VIII :
VII house is a house of negation to the
VIII house. In this chart, Rahu, the sublord of
the VII house is in its own star and in the sub of

"Applications of Cusval Interlinks" 98
Sun, the sublord of the 6th house. Houses 7 & 6
mean as houses 12 & 1 1 to the VIII house to
get modified as a favourable house to the VIII
house.
Principles of linkage of the VII house with
the VIII house:
8,1: Murder by Wife/ Husband/ Partner/
Enemies
8,2: Problems caused by W/H/P/E
8,3: Rumors and Threats by W/H/P/E
8,4: Accidents caused by Opposite Sex,
Damages in Reproductive Organs
8,5: Loss in Reputation caused by W/H/P/E
8,6: Litigations by W/H/P/E. Contagious
Diseases and Sexually Transmitted
Diseases
8,9: Problems caused by 2nd Marriage,
Problems in Journeys by co-passengers
8,10: Difficulties in Partnership Ventures, Hard
labour, Problems in Professional life
8,11: Unexpected Assistances from W/H/P
8,12: Unexpected Problems caused by W/H/P
In this example chart, the VII house is 12
& 11 to the VIII house to mean that the native

"Applications of Cuspal Interlines" 99
would face difficulties caused by wife or partner
during the DBA periods of Rahu, the sublord of
the VII house, while it is also in transit of the star
of Saturn, the VIII sublord.
VIII on VII:
General principles of linkage of the VIII
house with the VII house are as follows:
7,1: Unexpected defeating motives of the
Opponent
7,2: Unexpected Death of Partner or Spouse
7,3: Unexpected Temporary Separation of
Partner or Spouse
7,4: Unexpected Arrival of Partner or Spouse
7,5: Unexpected cordiality with Partner or
Spouse
7,6: Unexpected divorce of Partner or Spouse
7,7: Unexpected Marriage or Partnership
7,8: Unexpected Threatenings by Enemies or
Being Murdered
7,9: Unexpected Second Marriage
7,10: Unexpected Partnership Deeds, or
Dissatisfaction of Spouse
7,11: Unexpected Pleasures rendered by
Partners or Spouse

"Applications of Cuspal Interlines" 100
7,12: Unexpected Troubles caused by Partners
or Spouse
VIII house is a neutral house to the VII
house. But in this chart, it carries 1 , 3, 5 & 1 1 or
7,9,11 & 5 to the VII house to get modified as a
favourable house to the VII house. Hence, the
native would get new contacts and friendships
unexpectedly during the DBA periods of Saturn,
the VIM sublord, while it is also in transit of the
star of Rahu, the sublord of the VII house.
Vm on VIII:
General principles of linkage of the VIII
house to itself are as follows:
8,1: Strength to Life
8,2: Unexpected Quarrels
8,3: Unexpected Communications
8,4: Unexpected Accidents
8,5: Unexpected Damage to Respect
8,6: Unexpected Diseases
8,7: Unexpected Threatenings from Partners
8,8: Unexpected and cruel death
8,9: Unexpected threatenings by strangers
8,10: Unexpected workload
8,11: Unexpected litigations in properties

"Applications of Cuspal Interfiles" 101
8,12: Unexpected loss
VIII house is a favourable house to itself.
But in this chart, it carries 1, 3, 5 & 11 or 6,
8,10 & 4 to itself to get modified as an
unfavourable house to itself. Hence, the native
would suffer from mental worries, depression and
fear of death, damages to reputation but would
also unexpectedly get relieved (11) from the
above during the DBA periods of Saturn, the VIII
sublord, while it is also in transit of its own star.
IX on VIII:
IX house is a neutral house to the VIII
house. In this chart, Moon, the sublord of the IX
house is in the star of Sun, the 6th sublord and
in the sub of Rahu, the 7th sublord. Houses 6 &
7 mean as houses 11 & 12 to the VIII house to
get modified as an unfavourable house to the
VIII house.
Principles of linkage of the IX house with
the VIII house:
8,1: Suicides or Mental Depression caused by
Illegal Affairs & Failures in Research or
Higher Education
Profits through Ancestral Means

wAm>ficatioHS of Cuirwf iHterfiM^s" 102
8,3: Hurdles in Negotiations and
Communications
8,4; Accidents in Long Journeys, Flight
Accidents, Litigations in Ancestral
Properties, Discontinuation of Higher
Education
8,5: Damages to Reputation by Illegal
Affairs or through Misinformation
8,6: Malfunction of organs or lllhealth, Loans
through Illegal Affairs
8,7: Forced Marriage subsequent to Illegal
Contacts
8,10: Adverse remarks in Service Registers to
negate Promotions
8,11: Unexpected Success in Research Works
8,12: Cancellation of Foreign Journeys,
Dejections caused by Clauses of
Agreements
In this example chart, the IX house is 1 1
& 12 to the VIII house to mean that the native
would suffer from troubles out of illegal contacts,
hurdles in research works, problems in journeys
etc, during the DBA periods of Moon, the IX
sublord, while it is also in transit of the star of
Saturn, the VIII sublord.

"Applications of Citspal Interfiles" 1 03
Vffl on IX:
General principles of linkage of the VIM
house with the IX house are as follows:
9,1: Unexpected Research
9,2: Unexpected Gains in Negotiations
9,3: Unexpected Agreements
9,4: Unexpected Breach of Agreements
9,5: Unexpected Compromise in favour of the
other party
9,6: Unexpected Success in Negotiations
9,7: Unexpected Invitation to Negotiations
9,8: Unexpected Disputes in Negotiations
9,9: Unexpected Judgements
9,10: Unexpected Refusal to Negotiations
9,11: Unexpected Compromise in Negotiations
in favour of the native
9,12: Unexpected Change of stand in
Negotiations
VIII house is a house of negation to the IX
house. But in this chart, it carries 1 , 3, 5 & 1 1 or
5, 7, 9 & 3 to the IX house to get modified into a
favourable house to the IX. Hence, the native
would undertake unexpected long journeys and
research works; the native would also commit

"Applications of Cusml Interlines" 1Q4
into illegal affairs during the DBA periods of
Saturn, the VIII sublord, while it is also in transit
of the star of Moon, the IX sublord.
X on VIII:
X house is a favourable house to the VIII
house. In this chart, Mercury, the sublord of the
X-house is in the star of Venus, the 12th sublord
and in the sub of Rahu the 7th sublord; Houses
12 & 7 mean as houses 5 & 12 to the vill house
to get modified into an unfavourable house to
the VIII house.
Principles of linkage of the X house with
the VIII house:
8,1: Damages to Reputation in Profession;
Suicides by Dejection
8,2: Bribe Money in Profession
8,3: Problems due to Transfer or Changes in
the Nature of Job
8,4: Faults or Break-Downs in Machineries,
Industrial Accidents
8,5: Spoiling Reputation in Business and
subsequent Loss of Profession
8,6: Hard labour, Moderate Income, No Scope
for Promotions

"Applications of Cuspal Interlines" 105
8,7: Problems caused by Professional
Competitors
8,9: Difficulties in Profession Losing
Opportunities
8,11: Hard Labour and Meaningful Income
8,12: Illegal Approaches in the Second
Profession, Punishments in Profession
In this example chart, the X house is 3, 5
& 12 to the VIII house to mean that the native
would suffer from mental agony and tortures in
his professional life during the DBA periods of
Mercury, the sublord of the X house, while it is
also in transit of the star of Saturn, the VIII
sublord.
VIII on X:
General principles of linkage of the VIII
house with the X house are as follows:
10,1: Unexpected Status and Respect in
Profession
10,2: Unexpected Gains in Profession
10,3: Unexpected Transfer in Job
10,4: Unexpected Profession suited to
Academic Qualifications
10,5: Unexpected Worries in Service

"Applications of Casual Interlinks" 106
10,6: Unexpected Promotions or getting into
Sen/ice
10,7: Unexpected Self Ventures
10,8: Unexpected Tensions due to Workload
10,9: Unexpected Break in Service
10,10: Unexpected Status in Profession
10,11: Unexpected Professional Satisfaction
10,12: Unexpected Multiple Professional
Opportunities
VIII house is a favourable house to the X
house. But in this chart, it carries 1 , 3, 5 & 1 1 or
4, 6, 8 & 2 to the X house to get modified as an
unfavourable house to the X house. Hence, the
native would gain unexpectedly in profession,
purchase machineries, and to construct
dwellings during the DBA periods of Saturn, the
VIII sublord, while it is also in transit of the star of
Mercury, the X sublord.
XI on vm
XI house is an unfavourable house to the
VIII house. In this chart, Jupiter, the sublord of
the XI house is in the star and sub of Mercury,
the sublord of houses 2, 4 & 10; Houses 2, 4 &
1 0 mean as houses 7, 9 & 3 to the VIII house to
get modified as a favourable house to the VIII

'Applications of Cuspal Interlines
house.
Principles of linkage of the XI house with
the VIII house:
8,1: Death caused by sudden Failures in
Fulfilments of desires {Dasaratha, in the
great Hindu epic, Ramayana}
8,2: Expected Bribe Money, Seizure
8,3: Deviations from the Expected Trends in
Negotiations to cause Dejection
8,4: Problems in Houses or Lands or Failures
in Vehicles, purchased as per the choice
and likes of the native
8,5: Damage to Reputation in the Romantic
Life as desired by the native
8,6: Winning Litigations as desired by the
native
8,7: Dissatisfactions from the Expected
Quarters, Ingratitude
8,9: Discontinuation of Changes in Life as
desired by the native
8,10: Difficulties in the Profession of native's
choice
8,12: Difficulties in Fulfilments of Secret Acts
against the desires of the native

"Applications of Cusnal Interlinks" 108
In this example chart, the XI house is 7,
9 & 3 to the VIII house to mean that the
reputation of the native would get spoilt in love
affairs by his friends or in the fields of arts and
culture, during the DBA periods of Jupiter, the
sublord of the XI house, while it is also in transit
of the star of Saturn, the VIII sublord.
VIII on XI:
General principles of linkage of the VIII
house with the XI house are as follows:
11,1: Unexpected Immense Personal
Satisfaction
11,2: Unexpected Immense Money
11,3: Unexpected Immense Courage and
Mental Strength
11,4: Unexpected Immense Properties
11,5: Unexpected multiple Love Affairs
11,6: Unexpected Great Success
11,7: Unexpected multiple Social Affairs
11,8: Unexpected Worries and Tensions to the
Maximum
11,9: Unexpected Satisfaction in Illegal Affairs
to the Maximum
11,10: Unexpected Breaks in Happiness

“Avvlkatiom of Cusyal Interlinks" 109
11,11: Unexpected Satisfaction to the Maximum
Desires
11,12: Unexpected Expenditure for Pleasures
VIM house is a neutral house to the XI
house. But in this chart, it carries 1 , 3, 5 & 1 1 or
3, 5, 7 & 1 to the XI house to get modified into a
favourable house to the XI house. Hence, the
native could win new friendships unexpectedly
during the DBA periods of Saturn, the VIII sublord,
while it is also in transit of the star of Jupiter, the
sublord of the XI house.
XII on VIII
XII house is a favourable house to the VIII
house. In this chart, Venus the sublord of the XII
house is in the star of Moon, the 9th sublord and
in the sub of Venus, the 12th sublord. Houses 9
& 12 mean as houses 2 & 5 to the VIII house to
remain as a favourable house to the VIII house.
Principles of linkage of the XII house with
the VIII house:
8,1 : Sufferings due to Secret Activities
8.2: Unexpected Profits through Secret
Activities, High return on Investments
8,3 : Dejection and Litigations due to Secret

"Applications of Cusval Interlinks"
Activities
8.4 : Seizure of Binami Properties, Problems
in Secret Investments
8.5 : Loss of Reputation in Secret Activities
8.6 : Borrowings for Investments
8.7 : Threats to life by Secret Activities
8,9 : Financial Crisis caused by low Turnovers
and Block of Capital, Losses in new
Ventures
8,10: Difficulties due to Commitments of the
Second Profession
8,11: Litigations in binami properties, Secret
Disturbances caused by Friends
In this example chart, the XII house is 2
& 5 to the VIII house to mean that the native
would face problems caused by secret activities
and incur losses in the second profession during
the DBA periods of Venus, the sublord of the IX
house, while it is also in transit of the star of
Saturn, the VIII sublord.
Villon XII:
General principles of linkage of the VIII
house with the XII house are as follows:

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 111
12,1: Unexpected Secret Activities
12,2: Unexpected Liquidation of Capital
12,3: Unexpected and Secret Sales
12,4: Unexpected and Secret Investments on
Properties
12,5: Unexpected Secret Sexual Pleasures
12,6: Unexpected Secret Diseases
12,7: Unexpected difficulties in Secret
Investments
12,8: Unexpected Worries and Troubles in
Secret Activities
12,9: Unexpected Illegal Affairs and Research
12,10: Unexpected Investments in Profession
12,11: Unexpected Success through Secret
Activities
12,12: Unexpected Loss in Secret Activities
'VIII house is a favourable house to the
XII house. But in this chart, it carries 1 , 3, 5 & 1 1
or 2, 4, 6 & 12 to the XII house to get modified
into an unfavourable house to the XII house.
Hence, the native would suffer unexpected losses
during the DBA periods of Saturn, the VIII
sublord, while it is also in transit of the star of
Venus, the sublord of the XII house.

"Applications of Cuspal interlinks"
PLANETARY SIGNIFICATIONS of the VIII
VEN 2 &5
While the DBA periods of Saturn and
Rahu {Resident of 8th house} would directly
denote the significations of the VIII house, the
DBA periods of the remaining planets would
indirectly signify the VIII house matters while
these planets get to transit in the star of Saturn,
the VIII sublord.

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 1 1 3
IX HOUSE
HOUSE OF ILLEGAL AFFAIRS
Publication of Religious Materials,
Fortunes, Capitalization, Law and Justice,
Sacred Law, Temples, Mosques, Churches,
Shipping Industry, Science, Universities,
Internal and International Transports, Short
wave radio, Telecommunications, Wireless,
Horses, Elephants, Buffalos, Royal court,
Money Transactions, Branch Offices or
Agencies, Wells, Ponds and Lakes are some
of the significations of the 9th house that are
unrelated to the Asc.
The above significations of the 9th
house can further be classified for the 12
bhavas as matters of links to them as follows:
I: Research, Physical changes, Swellings,
Growths, Confidence and hopes,
Honesty, Sound Health
II: Ancestral Money, Gold or Valuables,
Subsidies and Scholarships offered by
the Government
III: Communications, Agreements, Lease,
Tender, Changes in the nature of
Profession, Losses incurred due to

"Applications of Cusval iKterffw^s"
Financial Crisis
IV: Education, House obtained by
Mortgage, Graveyard, Ponds, Ancestral
Properties
V: Worships, Service in the field of Arts,
Priest, Spiritual Study, Religious Faiths
VI: Physical Changes, Transplantation of
Organs, Successful Negotiations, Crisis
to clear Debts
VII: Second Marriage, Illegal Contacts,
Foreign Contracts, Introduction and
Contacts with persons of Opposite Sex
VIII: Unexpected changes in Life-styles,
Addicted to bad habits, Punishment by
Government
IX: Research, Long Journeys, Legal
Actions, Pilgrimage, Higher Education
X: Self-prestige, Retirement, Financial
crisis in business, Inability to continue
the Professional Activities
XI: Respect through Higher Education and
Researches, Universities, Satisfactions
attained through Illegal Affairs
XII: Financial crisis due to Secret Activities
or due to increase in Investments,

Applications of Cusval iMterfml
Imprisonments, Findings and Inventions
IX house is a house of favour to houses
1 , 5, 7, 9 & 1 1 while it would act against the
houses 2, 3, 6 & 10; It would remain neutral to
houses 4, 8 & 12. When the sublords of these
houses remain in the star or the sub of the
sublord of the IX house, the above effects of
the 9th house could be studied in a chart. In
reply, such houses, as the agents of the 9th
house tend to register their reactions which are
as follows:
I on IX: Status and Respect through Higher
Education
II on IX: Study of Voice and Speech in
Education, Linguistics
III on IX: Study of Communications in
Education
IV on IX: Study of Machineries
V on IX: Study of Religions, Arts, Music &
Culture
VI on IX: Study of Food, Dress and Diseases
VII on IX: Study of Society, Country etc
Villon IX: Study about Secrets or Secret parts
IX on IX: Study of Education, Philosophy &
Law

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 116
X on IX: Professional & Vocational Studies
XI on IX: Master in the fields of Education
XII on IX: Research Studies
HIGHER EDUCATION & IX HOUSE:
Higher education is an Asc related
karaka of the IX house. Whether a person may
get educated or not could be studied with the
use of the potential of the IX cuspal sublord to
the Asc. In this example chart, the IX sublord
is Moon which is in the star of Sun, the 6th
cuspal sublord and in the sub of Rahu, the 7th
cuspal sublord. Houses 6 & 7 would remain as
houses 6 & 7 to the Asc. Hence, the potential
of the IX house, to its Asc related significations,
remains only as neutral or moderate!
For the study to identify the specific field
of education, we can use our usual format. The
professional courses are meant for providing
professional opportunities to students. Only a
small percentage of people choose different
professions that are not related to their higher
studies. Generally to study a professional
course, the sublord of the 9th house must
remain in the star or the sub of houses VI
{Service} or the X house {Profession} or the
XII house {II profession}.

"Applications of Cuspal Interlines" 117
1. Ill: Certificate holder in the fields of
EngineeringX Medical
2. IV: Diploma holder in E\M fields
3. VI: Unskilled but works in E/M fields
4 VII: Experience in E/M fields
5. IX: Degree holder in E/M fields or
Practicioner of Traditional Medicines
6. XI: Master in E/M fields
7. XII: Researcher in E/M fields
The above indicate the nature and the
quantum of the technical knowledge that a
person would hold as qualification. Let us once
again use the bhava karaka or the cuspal
significations in further re-classification of the
engineering field:
II: Sound Engineering
III: Electrical, Electronics and
Communications, Computer science,
Printing Technology
IV: Agricultural Engineering, Civil or
Automobile Engineering, Mechanical
Engineering
V: Architecture, Film Technology, Atomic
Energy and Nuclear Science
VI: Geologist, Textile or Leather Technology,

"Applications of Cusval Interlines" 118
Petro Chemical Engineering, Medical
Radiology and Electrology
VIII: Surgical Equipments, Sanitary
Engineering
IX: Aeronautical or Marine Engineering,
Space Technology
X: Production Technology
XI: Polymer Technology
XII: Mines Engineering
Thus, when the 4th or the 9th house is
linked to the VI or the X or the XII house, the
educational qualification would standas means
of career.
i) Let us note down the planets which
are in the star or the sub of 4th or the 9th house
as the case may be.
ii) Now let us note down the cusps,
wherein the said planets appear as lords of star
or sub or subsub.
Say, if a planet A is the sublord of the
6th house; also let us say that the native gets
to study medical science or science about
diseases.

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 119
iii) The Dasa period of the planet A,
which is sublord to the 6th house alone and is
in the star or the sub of the 9th house, would
enable the native to study medical science as
per its planetary significations.
If Planet A is SUN : The Skeletal system
MOO: The Circulatory system
MAR: The Muscular system
MER: The Neuro system
JUP: The Reproductive system
VEN: The Glands in the body
SAT: The Excretory system
RAH: The Respiratory system
KET: The Digestive system
iv) If the said planet A happens to be
the starlord or the sublord or the subsublord to
houses other than the 6th house, then a set of
combined significations of all those houses that
are linked, is to be derived. For example
Psychiatry. 1 &3
Ophthalmology. 2&-3
Dentist 2
ENT Specialist . 3
Neurology 3

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 120
Thoracic & Chest 3,4
Hepatology 4,6
Orthopaedics 4,6,8
Physio Therapy 3,4,9
Cardiology 4
Cardio Surgery. 4,8
Paediatrics 5
Gynecology and Obstetrics 5 or 11
Gastro-Entreomology 2,6
Dermotology 6 or 8 or 12
Asthma & Allergy 4,6
Sexology 5,7
General Physician 3 or 5 & 7
Venereal Diseases. 7, 8 or 12
General Surgery 8
Nephrology 4&7
Urology. 8
Oncology 9,8
Radiological Diagnosis. 4,12
Radio Therapy 9,3,5
Colorectal Surgeon. 9
Genetical Disorders. 9
Test tubes & Cloning 4, 5&9
Professional Diseases. 10

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks”
Laproscopic Surgery. 8 & 11
Anaesthesia 3,8
Plastic & Cosmetic Surgery ... 5,8
Facial Surgery 2,5,8
v) Generally the II house would denote
eyes, houses 2, 3 & 6 are to be related to the
IX house to become an Ophthalmologist. But
within the field of Ophthalmology itself, we
could find a variety of doctors in any popular
eye hospital.
Eye Disorders Squint ...
Cornea
Cataract
Glaucoma
General Eye Disorders
Spectacles, IOL
Loss of Sight
Eye Transplantation
vi) Only after this stage, we can start
studying the planetary significations of the lords
of the current DBA, for the precise prediction
about the field of study by native. Higher
studies would also get varied according to the
changes in the DBA periods. Now-a-days, a

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 122
person, who has initially joined in a particular
course, all of a sudden {8th house ?}
discontinues it and joins in a different course
and subsequently gets qualified. These
changes are subject to the changes in the DBA
periods.
vii) There may be more than a single
planet in the star or the sub of the sublord of
the IX house. These planets would naturally
be lords of the star or the sub of different cusps.
If planet A is lord to 2 & 6 and planet B is lord
to 1 & 5, then the native would naturally study
two different courses in the respective bhukthi
periods of planets A & B. In medical science,
the degree of MBBS {6th house alone} is a
common course offered to all the students. But
after successfully completeing the MBBS
degree, doctors opt for specialisation in
different fields, as per the cuspal interlinks of
the Bhukthi lord or the DASA lord in the case
of intersection of two different dasas.
viii) In the case of a qualified doctor in
traditional medicine the 9th house must get
linked to the 9th house itself. In the case of
unqualified practicioners of Indian medicines,
the 8th house will have a link with the 10th
house, { 8th by being 12th to the 9th house,
negates legal recognition to their medical

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 123
knowledge}
ix) The linkage of the IX house to the X,
makes a person a doctor; linkage to the IV
house limits a person to a nurse. Thus we have
to apply principles of cuspal interlinks suitably
with common sense in determining about the
education and profession.
Houses 1 ,5,7,9 &11 would be favourable
to the 9th house, while houses 12,3,4 & 8 stand
unfavourable to the significations of the IX
house. The remaining houses 2, 6, 10 would
remain neutral to the IX house. This could be
possible when the sublord of the IX house
remain in the star or the sub of the respective
houses. In reply, as an agent to the respective
houses, the IX house would register its
reactions on the respective houses. {Please
refer the table Of classification of significations
of the 9th house as meant to link with the 12
houses}
POTENTIAL OF THE IX HOUSE:
In this example chart, the IX sublord is
Moon, which is in the star of Sun, the 6th
sublord and in the sub of Rahu, the 7th sublord.
Houses 6 & 7 would become houses 10 & 11
to the 9th house to favour the IX house. Hence

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks'' 124
in this example chart, the IX house is
potentially strong.
Here, the readers may raise their eye
brows in a doubt as how this native had been
denied with higher education. Houses IV, IX &
XI combinedly denote the education of a
person; IV renders basic education; IX renders
higher education while the XI makes one to
excel in education. XI follows what the IX has
rendered while the IX would improve what the
IV has rendered. Moreover, education is an Asc
related signification of these houses. Hence the
favour is to be calculated only to the Asc { 6 &
7, in this example, not a favourable
combination to the Asc}.
Also in this chart, the IV house is weak
to give him the basic education. As the basic
education has been denied, naturally the IX
house would be limited to act for the
remaining significations only.
Moon is the 9th sublord. The karakas of
the Moon, meant for the IX house are.
Research capabilities, Speedy
Journeys, Status inherited from Mother,
Wisdom through listening etc,.

"Applications of Cuspal Interlines" 125
In this example chart, Venus is the only
plane* which is in the star of Moon.
By being the 12th sublord Venus would
render financial difficulties and troubles caused
by women, research in the fields of arts and
culture etc,.
While the significations of Moon remain
permanent during the entire life span of the
native, the significations of Venus would come
to the fore- front during its DBA periods on the
IX house matters.
ASC on IX:
Asc is a naturally favourable house to
the IX house. In this chart, the sublord of the
Asc is Mars which is in the star of Sun, the 6th
sublord and in the sub of Rahu, the 7th sublord.
Houses 6 &7 combinedly would neutralize the
IX house matters. Hence in this chart, the Asc
is a neutral house to the IX house.
The principles of linkage of the Asc with
the IX house are:
9,2: Financial Troubles by way of Illegal
Affairs
9,3: Long Journeys, Communications

"Applications of Cuspal Interlines"
9,4: Education, Problems in Journeys,
Problems caused by persons of recent
acquaintance
9,5: Friendship and co-operation with new
Friends, Deep Thoughts
9,6: Changes in the Body and subsequent
diseases
9,7: Excessive Interests in Sexual Pleasures,
Dependance on others
9,8: Worries and problems caused by Illegal
Affairs, Break in Journeys,
Discontinuing Higher Studies, Troubles
in Foreign Life
9,10: Professional Education and Educating
oneself to Professional Requirements
9,11: Success in Research works,
Satisfactions
9,12: Life Abroad, Secret Research,
Investigations, Absconding from the
native place
In this example chart, the Asc is 6 & 7
or to say, 10 & 1 1 to the 9th house. Hence the
native would undertake journeys with his wife
or partner or friends and would communicate
through wife or partner or friends during the

"Applications of Cyrsyai lHtertitih" 1 27
DBA periods of Mars, while it is also in transit
of the star of Moon, the 9th sublord.
IXon ASC:
General principles of linkage of the IX
house on the Asc are as follows;
1.1 Judges
1.2 Treasurers of temples, Religious
Centres
1.3 Spy of Foreign Countries
1.4 Respectable Teachers
1 .5 Priests
1.6 Finance Controllers
1.7 Administrators
1.8 Investigators
1.9 Politicians and National leaders
1,16: Holders of Honorary Posts
1,1 'I : Research Professors
1,1 2: Exporters
IX house, a house of favour to the Asc,
as it carries 6 & 7 with it, would become a
neutral house to the significations of the Asc.
Hence the native would face problems like
illhealth, contagious diseases, and food
poisoning while undertaking long journeys

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 128
during the DBA periods of Moon, while it
transits in the star of Mars, the sublord of the
Asc
II on IX:
II house is a neutral house to the IX
house. In this chart, the sublord of the II house
is Mercury, which is in the star of Venus , the
12th sublord and in the sub of Rahu, the 7th
sublord. Houses 12 & 7 combinedly would
favour the IX house matters, in this chart.
The principles of linkage ofthe II house
with the IX house are:
9,1: Financial crisis caused by
Misadventures of the native
9,3: Mortgaging the Gold, Valuables or
Properties
9,4: Conversion of Money into Properties
and subsequent Financial Crisis
9,5: Severe Crisis in Finance, Living in
Platforms
9V6: Financial Troubles caused by undue
Expenditure on Medical Treatment or by
Excessive Borrowings. Labour without
Salary or Wages
9,7: Living with the Financial Assistance of

'Applications of Cuspal Interlinks"
others
9,8: Financial Crisis caused by outstandings
9,10: Financial Crisis in Business Ventures
9,11: Not exposing the Financial Crisis and
acting as a financially sound person
before others
9,12: Financial Crisis by Excessive
Investments or by the Second
Profession
In this example chart, the II house is 12
& 7 or to say, 4 & 11 to the 9th house. Hence
the native would face financial crisis by
excessive investments and in second
profession and could manage the affairs with
social assistance during the DBA periods of
Mercury, while it is also in transit of the star of
Moon, the 9th sublord.
IX on II:
General principles of linkage of the IX
house with the II house are as follows:
2,1: Man of Fortunes and Rich by Birth
2,2: Financial in-charge of Temple Funds
2,3: Collector of Donations to Temples
2,4: Maintenance of Temple Properties

"Applications of Cusyal Interlinks"
2,5: Organizer of Temple Festivals
2,6: Financial Controller of Temples
2,7: Temple Committee
2,8: Accountant in Temples
2,9: Donator to Temples
2,10: Recognized Religious Institutions
2,11: In-charge of Temple Properties and
Valuables
2,12: Auditor of Temple Accounts
IX house, an unfavourable house to
the II house, as it carries 6 & 7 with it,
would become a favourable house to the
significations of the II house. Hence the
native would be able to gain through
ancestral properties, illegitimate activities,
communications etc during the DBA periods
of Moon, while it transits in the star of Mercury,
the II sublord.
Ill on EX:
III house is an unfavourable house to
the IX house. In this chart, the sublord of the
III house is Mars which is in the star of Sun,
the 6th sublord and in the sub of Rahu, the 7th
sublord. Houses 6 & 7 combinedly would
neutralize the IX house matters. Hence in this
chart, the III house is neutral to the IX house.

"Applications of Cuspal interlinks" 131
The principles of linkage of the III house
with the IX house are:
9,1: Arbitrator, Negotiator, Broker, Lease
holder
9,2: Hurdles in Return Journeys, Profit
through Communications and
Negotiations
9,4: End of Journey, Inclination towards
Knowledge and Education
9,5: Voluntary Retirement, Negotiations
through Illegal Affairs
9,6: Diseases in Sensory Organs, Changes,
Loans through Correspondence
9,7: Temporary separation between
Husband and Wife, Journeys
9,8: Loss of Memory, Faults in Accounts,
Mental Depression, Changes in mind,
Change in the Faith and Religion
9,10: Tender, Negotiations and
Communications in Profession, End of
Journey or Fulfilment of Contractual
Obligations
9,11: Cordial and Smooth Negotiations,
Illegal contacts, Electricity & Telephone
Connection

"Applications of Cuspal Interfiles" 132
9,12: End of Agreements, Exports, Agency in
Transports and Travels
In this example chart, the III house is 6
& 7 or to say, 1 0 & 1 1 to the 9th house. Hence
the native would gain through journeys,
communications and illegal affairs and contacts
during the DBA periods of Mars while it is also
in transit of the star of Moon, the 9th sublord.
IXon III:
General principles of linkage of the IX
house with the III house are as follows:
3.1 International Relations
3.2 International Financial Transactions
3.3 International Communications
3.4 Multinational Products
3.5 International Ties
3.6 International Service or Borrowings
3.7 Foreign Embassies
3.8 International Police
3.9 International Trade
3.10 International Profession
3.11 International Agreements
3.12 International Exports and Imports

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks"
IX house, an unfavourable house to the
III house, as it carries 6 & 7 with it, would
become a favourable house to the
significations of the III house. Hence the
native would be able to communicate with the
help and assistance of others during the DBA
periods of Moon, while it transits in the star of
Mars, the sublord of the III house.
IV on IX:
IV house is a house of danger to the IX
house. In this chart, the sublord of the IV house
is Mercury which is in the star of Venus, the
12th sublord and in the sub of Rahu, the 7th
sublord. Houses 12 & 7 would combinedly
favour the IX house matters, in this chart.
The principles of linkage of the IV house
with the IX house are:
9,1: Teacher, Head Master, Professor,
Educated persons
9,2: Financial Crisis by way of Properties
9,3:- Agreements of Mortgage of Properties
9,5: Obstructions in the flow of Production
9,6: Changes or Diseases in the Productive
Organs, like Kidney, Liver etc of the body
9,7: Second Marriage with a Relative

"Applications of Cuspal lHterfi'nfa" 134
9,8: Obstructions in Higher Education,
Litigations in Properties, Failures in
Holdings
9, IQ: Education as means of Profession,
Teacher, Profession in Manufacturing
Fields
9,11: Negotiations in Litigations or Seizure of
Ancestral Properties
9,12: Financial crisis caused by the Excessive
Investments in Machineries and
Appliances
In this example chart, the IV house is
12 & 7 or to say, 4 & 11 to the 9th house. Hence
the native would negotiate for an amicable
settlement on the litigations of his ancestral
properties during the DBA periods of Mercury,
while it is also in transit of the star of Moon,
the 9th sublord.
IX on IV:
General principles of linkage of the IX
house with the IV house are as follows:
4.1 Excellence in Education
4.2 Education in Finance
4.3 Education in Stock-Exchange

"Applications of Cuspal Interlines"
4,4: Education of Productions
4,5: Education of Arts
4,6: Education of Food-Processing,
Agriculture
4,7: Education of Commercial Studies
4,8: Education of Re-processing
4,9: Education about Education
4,10: Industrial Education
4,11: Educational Kits
4,12: Education about Exchanges
IX house, a neutral house to the IV
house, as it carries 6 & 7 with it, would remain
a favourable house to the significations of the
IV house. Hence the native would succeed in
litigations of ancestral properties, and in
negotiations during the DBA periods of Moon,
while it transits in the star of Mercury, the
sublord of the IV house,
V on IX:
V house is a favourable house to the IX
house. In this chart, the sublord of the V house
is Jupiter, which is in the star and the sub of
Mercury, the sublord of houses 2, 4 & 10, which
combinedly would not favour the IX house
matters, in this chart.

"Applications of Cuspal Interfmfcs" 136
The principles of linkage of the V house
with the IX house are:
9,1: Deep Thoughts and Wisdom, Faith in
God
9,2: Financial crisis caused by Artistic
Ventures
9,3: Agreements in Artistic Performances
9,4: Education and Knowledge in Arts and
Culture
9,6: Diseases in Blood Cells leading to
structural changes, Change In Sex
9,7: Love Affairs and Marriage
9,8: Dismissal from Service, Spoiling
Reputation because of Illegal Affairs
9,10: Priest, Trustee, Service in Temples/
Mosques/ Churches, Arts and Crafts
teachers, Mediator
9,11: Multiple Illegal Affairs, Talks on
Compromise
9,12: Losses and worries caused by Illegal
Affairs
In this example chart, the V house is 2,
4 & 10 or to say, 6, 8 & 2 to the 9th house.
Hence the native would suffer from financial
crisis and hazard' in professional life during

"Applications of Cuspal Interfiles"
the DBA periods of Jupiter, while it is also in
transit of the star of Moon, the 9th sublord.
IX on V:
General principles of linkage of the IX
house with the V house are as follows:
5,11: Traditional Dances
5,12: Spiritual Research and Studies
IX house, a favourable house to the V
house, as it carries 6 & 7 with it, would remain
as a neutral house to the significations of the

"Applications of Cuspal Interlines" 138
V house. Hence the native would enjoy all kinds
of pleasures during the DBA periods of Moon,
while it transits in the star of Jupiter, the sublord
of the V house.
VI on IX:
VI house is a neutral house to the IX
house. In this chart, the sublord of the VI house
is Sun, which is in the star of Venus, the 12th
sublord and in the sub of Jupiter, the sublord of
houses 5 & 11. Houses 12, 5 & 11 combinedly
would favour the IX house matters.
The principles of linkage of the VI house
with the IX house are:
9,1: Records in Performances, Guinness
Records
9,2: Service with lower Wages
9,3: Talks on Profession and on Loans
9,4: Owning a House Hired, on Mortgage by
Conversion
9,5: Cure from Diseases by God's Grace,
Benedictions of Priests and Gurus
9,7: Steady increase in Loans, 2nd Marriage
with Servant
9,8: Steady increase in Diseases leading to
mutiple diseases

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 139
9,10: Malfunction of body parts, Obesity
9,1 1 : Success in Research Works, Cure to a
long standing disease while taking
medicine for some other disease
9,12: Medical treatment abroad,
Transplantation of organs, Professional
Opportunities abroad
In this example chart, the VI house is
Hence the native would suffer from swellings
in the body, face financial crisis because of
excessive borrowings, and would undergo
changes in his food habits during the DBA
periods of Sun, while it is also in transit of the
star of Moon, the 9th sublord.
IXon VI:
General principles of linkage of the IX
house with the VI house are as follows:
6,1: Medical Knowledge about Head
6,2: Opthalmology
6,3: Neuro-studies and Sensory Organs
6,4: Study of Lungs and Production Organs
6,5: Study of Blood Cells and Pregnancy
6,6: Study of Digestive System

"Applications of Cuspal Interlines" 140
6,7: Study of Contagious Diseases
6,8: Study of Surgery
6,9: Study of Physical Changes
6,10: Study of Transplantation of Organs
6,11: Study of Immunity and General
Medicines
6,12: Medical Research
IX house, an unfavourable house to the
VI house, as it carries 6 & 7 with it, would
become a favourable house to the
significations of the VI house. Hence the
native would be able to gain through
success in research works and by undertaking
journeys and would be able to raise loans
through illegitimate means during the DBA
periods of Moon, while it transits in the star of
Sun, the VI sublord.
VII on IX:
VII house is a house of favour to the IX
house. In this chart, the sublord of the VII house
is Rahu and which is in its own star and in the
sub of Sun, the sublord of the 6th house.
Houses 7 & 6 combinedly would favour the IX
house matters, in this chart.

"Applications of Cuspal Interlines" 141
The principles of linkage of the VII house
with the IX house are:
9,1: Becoming a Suitable Partner to Spouse
9,2: Mentally retarded Wife/Husband, Death
of Spouse, Financial Crisis caused by
Partners
9,3: Temporary separations from Partner,
Journeys
9,4: Marriage with a Stranger, but belongs
to the same native place
9,5: 2nd Marriage or Illegal Affairs with Lover
9,6: 2nd Marriage after getting Divorced from
Wife
9,8: Divorce from Wife after 2nd Marriage
9,10: Troubles to Professional life caused by
Spouse
9,11: Mutiple Affairs but Cordial Life with
Spouse
9,12: Illegal Affairs kept secret to Spouse
In this example chart, the VII house is 7
& 6 or to say, 11 & 10 to the 9th house. Hence
the native would be able to have sexual
pleasures through illegal contacts during the
DBA periods of Rahu while it is also in transit
of the star of Moon, the 9th sublord.

"Applications of Cuspal Interlines"
IX on VII:
General principles of linkage of the IX
house with the VII house are as follows:
7,1: Legal Social Relations
7,2: Legal Social Financing
7,3: Legal Social Communications
7,4: Legal Social Education
7,5: Legal Social Arts
7,6: Legal Social Borrowings
7,7: Legal Mediators
7,8: Lawful Social Punishments
7,9: Legal and Social Education
7,10: Legal and Social Technical Know-How
7,11: Legal and Social Integration
7,12: Legal and Social Classifications
IX house, a favourable house to the VII
house, as it carries 6 & 7 with it, would
become an unfavourable house to the
significations of the VII house. Hence the
native would face problems in the family life
during the DBA periods of Moon, while it
transits in the star of Rahu, the VII sublord.

of Cuspal Interlines
VIII on IX:
VIM house is a house of negation to the
IX house. In this chart, the sublord of the VIII
house is Saturn which is in the star of Mars,
the sublord of houses 1 & 3 and in the sub of
Jupiter, the sublord of houses 5 5 11. Houses
1, 3, 5 & 11 combinedly would favour the IX
house matters, in this chart.
The principles of linkage of the VIII
house with the IX house are:
9,1: Journeys Undertaken in connection with
Research Works
9,2: Unexpected Thunders in Financial
Climate
9,3: Unexpected Agreements
9,4: Unexpected Training or Education
9,5: Unexpected Illegal Activities
9,6: Sudden Changes in the Body caused by
Diseases
9,7: Marriage with a Person from Unknown
Place
9,10: Sudden Obstructions in Business
9,11: Multiple Illegal Affairs
9,12: Unexpected Foreign Journeys

"Applications of Cuspal Interlines"
In this example chart, the VIII house is
house. Hence the native would undertake
unexpected pleasure trips during the DBA
periods of Saturn, while it is also in transit of
the star of Moon, the 9th sublord.
IX on VIII:
General Principles of Linkage of the IX
house with the VIII house are as follows:
8,1: Legal Punishments
8,2: Legal Penalty
8,3: Legal Seizure of Properties
8,4: Legal Demolishments of
Encroachments
8,5: Legal Demotions
8,6: Legitimate Suit on Damages to
Reputation
8,7: Legal Custody
8,8: Criminals as per law (Goondas,
POTO Act)
8,9: Sessions Judges
8,10: Legal Stay-orders in Profession
8,1 1 : Proceedings in the High Courts
8,12: Punishment to Criminals who are
Foreign Nationals

"Applications of Cuspal Interfiles" ] 45
IX house, a neutral house to the VIII
house, with its 6 & 7, would enable the native
to discontinue his illegal affairs, to break
journeys and to breach agreements during the
DBA periods of Moon, while it transits in the
star of Saturn, the VIII sublord.
X on IX:
X house is a neutral house to the IX
house. In this chart, the sublord of the X house
is Mercury, which is in the star of Venus, the
12th sublord and in the sub of Rahu, the 7th
sublord- Houses 12 & 7 combinedly would
favour the IX house matters, in this chart.
The principles of linkage of the X house
with the IX house are:
9,1: Difficulties in Profession caused by
attempts to raise the Image and
Prestige
9,2: Financial Crisis in Profession
9,3: Difficulties in Profession caused by
recent changes
9,4: Problems in Manufacturings
9,5: Problems and Break in Profession
9,6: Problems of Salary and Promotions in

Applications of Cuspal Interfiles"
Profession
9,7: Break in Profession caused by Partners
9,8: Obstructions in Profession caused by
False Prestige
9,11: Problems in Profession caused by
Alteration of Business Places
9,12: Closure of I Profession and beginning
of 2nd Business
In this example chart, the X house is 12
& 7 or to say, 4 & 11 to the 9th house. Hence
the native would face problems in both his first
and second professions during the DBA
periods of Mercury, while it is also in transit of
the star of Moon, the 9th sublord.
IX on X:
General principles of linkage of the IX
house with the X house are as follows:
10.1 Head of Educational Institutions
10.2 Cashier in Education Department
10.3 Clerk in Education'Department
10.4 Teachers
10.5 Physical Education Teacher & Crafts
Master

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 147
10,6: Administrative Staff
10,7: Information and Public Relations
(Education)
10,8: Sanitary Staff in Educational
Institutions
10,9: Inspector of Schools
10,10:Higher Posts in Educational
Institutions
10,1 1 :Correspondent of Educational
Institutions
10,12:Part-time Teachers
IX house, a house of negation to the X
house, with its 6 & 7, would remain a neutral
house to the significations of the X house.
Hence the native would face changes in his
professional life during the DBA periods of
Moon, while it transits in the star of
Mercury, the X sublord.
XI on IX:
XI house is a favourable house to the IX
house. In this chart, the sublord of the XI house
is Jupiter, which is in the star and the sub of
Mercury, the sublord of houses 2, 4» 10, which
combinedly would not favour the IX house
matters, in this chart.

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks'' 148
The principles of linkage of the XI house
with the IX house are:
9,1: Research in interested Fields, Excessive
Weight in the body
9,2: Profits and Gains as desired
9,3: Satisfation in Negotiations as desired
9,4: Litigations in Ancestral Properties
9,5: Illegal Contacts introduced by Friends
9,6: Success in interested Researches,
Success in Agreements
9,7: Marriage with the Assistance of Friends
9,8: Spoiling reputation of Partner through
Illegal Affairs
9,10: Obstructions in Professional Life caused
by Illegal Affairs
9,12: Resigning the First Job after getting a
Second Job as desired
In this example chart, the XI house is 2,
4 & 10 or to say, 6, 8 & 2 to the 9th house.
Hence the native would undertake research
works and journeys with friends and would
depart from the first profession during the DBA
periods of Jupiter, while it is also in transit of
the star of Moon, the 9th sublord.

'Applications of Cuspal iHterfiM&s"
IX on XI:
General principles of linkage of the IX
house with the XI house are as follows:
11,1: Legal Status
11,2: Legally Valid Immense Wealth
11,3: Legally Valid Agreements
11,4: Legally Valid Properties
11,5: Legally Valid Compromises
11,6: Success in Litigations
11,7: Legally Valid Rights
11,8: Legally Vaild Reduction of Punishments
11,9: Legally Valid Orders
11,10: Legally Valid Recruitment
11,11: Legally Valid 3rd Marriage
11,12: Lawful Release after Punishments
IX house, a favourable house to the XI
house, as it carries 6 & 7 with it, would modify
into an unfavourable house to the significations
of the XI house. Hence the native would be
troubled through illegitimate affairs and remain
stagnant in research works during the DBA
periods of Moon, while it also transits in the
star of Jupiter, the XI sublord.

"Applications of Cuspal Interlines" 150
XII on IX:
XII house is an unfavourable house to
the IX house. In this chart, the sublord of the
XII house is Venus which is in the star of Moon,
the 9th sublord and in its own sub, the 12th
sublord. Houses 9 & 12 combinedly would not
favour the IX house matters, in this chart.
The principles of linkage ofthe XII house
with the IX house are:
9, 1 : Changes in the Body due to the Process
of Medical Treatment
9,2: Financial Crisis caused by Secret
Activities
9,3: Foreign Life, Running away from the
native, Research Education
9,4: Obstructions caused by Second
Profession
9,5: Illegal Affairs in Foreign Countries
9,6: Transplantation of Organs
9,7: Secret 2nd Marriage
9,8: Losing Credibility by way of Secret
Activities
9,10: Professional obstructions caused by
Illegal Affairs

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 1 5 1
9,11: Break in both the Professions caused
by Excessive Interest in Second
Profession, Success in Secret Activities
In this example chart, the XII house is 9
& 12 or to say, 1 & 4 to the 9th house. Hence
the native would face financial crisis due to
inactive second profession during the DBA
periods of Venus, while it is also in transit of
the star of Moon, the 9th sublord.
IX on XII:
General principles of linkage of the IX
house with the XII house are as follows:
12,1: Investigation Departments
12,2: Income-tax Departments
12,3: Secret Investigations, Traffic
Inspectors
12,4: Properties Scam
12,5: Inspector of Cinema Halls, Prohibition
Cells
12,6: Labour Inspectors
12,7: Pollution Control Inspectors
12,8: Sanitary Inspectors, Jail
Superintendents

"Applications of Cuspal Interlines" -|52
12,9: International Trade Authority, Law
& order
12,10:lnspector of Factories
12,11 :Reserve Police
12,12:Deep Criminal Investigations
IX house, a neutral house to the XII
house, as it carries 6 & 7 with it, would
become an unfavourable house to the
significations of the XII house. Hence the
native would be able to gain success through
research but the expenditure would get
increased due to illegal activities during the
DBA periods of Moon, while it transits in the
star of Venus, the XII sublord.
PLANETARY SIGNIFICATIONS:

"Applications of Cuspal Interlines" 153
X HOUSE
HOUSE OF PROFESSION
Status and Prestige through Profession,
Agriculture, Doctors, First Profession of a
person, Creating Treasures, Magical Shield,
Rules of Holy Books, Medicine, Thighs,
Improvements and Developments, National
Leaders, Wealth stolen by Theives etc are some
of the significations of the X house that are
unrelated to the Asc.
The above significations of the X cusp
could be reclassified as the significations that are
meant to link with the 12 cusps as listed below:
Asc: Self thoughts, Wisdom and
Knowledge, Imagination, Counselling, Plans,
Confidence, Status, Competitions, Struggles,
Social responsibility etc,.
II: Oratorical Skills, Voice, Financial
status, Gold and other valuables, Metals, Public
expenditure, Shares, Costly goods, Receipts of
deposits, Financial institutions, Pawn brokers,
Bankers etc
III: Communications, Press and
Information, Media, Posts and Telegraphs,
Accounts and Mathematics, Clerk, Typist,

"Applications of Cuspal Interfi^s"
Contractor, Registration, Travels, Document
Writer, Speaker, Warriors, Sports Agencies,
Exchanges, Business people, Brokers, Pipelines,
Electrician and Wireman, Households etc,.
IV: Agriculture, Houses, Lands and
Vehicles, Education, Industry, Hardware,
Stationery, Furniture, Brick Chambers,
Machineries, Paints, Mines, Masonry works,
Manufacturing Industry, Teachers, Drivers,
Agriculture, Iron works, Wood Works and
Carpentry, Godown, Engine Operators,
Mechanic, Spare Parts, Cement Manufacturers,
Oil mills, Boats, Water and Water sheds,
Computers etc
V: Arts, Music, Cinema, Drama & Culture,
Politicians, Astrologers, Spiritualists, Hermits,
Priests, Magicians, Pediatrician, Prostitutes,
Feasts and Festivals, Commission
agents, Laboratory, Medical Scan Centres,
Supervisor etc.
VI: Food, Dresses, Medicine, Health,
Litigations, Loans, Service, Food products,
Textiles, Tailoring, Embroidery, Medical,
Pharmaceuticals, Chemicals and Fertilizers,
Hotels, Dyes, Weavers, Industry, Cotton,
Herbals, Gas, Recruitment Boards, Lawyers,
Sellers of Pet Animals, Money Lenders, Oil wells,

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks"
Daily Labourers, Hospitals, Doctors etc
VII: Marriage, Partner, Government
Contacts, Bank officials, Marriage brokers,
Marriage Halls, Lodges, Organiser of Fstivals,
Contractors, Tenders, Binami, Lease holders etc
VIII: Taxes, Budgets, Accidents, Surgery,
Insurance, Robbery and Theft, Riots, Forgery,
Criminals, Relief Departments, Flood, Famine,
Cyclone, Police Officials, Violence, Murderer,
Professional Killers, Anti-Social Elements,
Suicide Squads, Striking force, Butcher, Military,
Professions wherein blood is involved etc,.
IX: Long Journeys, Communications,
Higher Education, Colleges, Educational
Institutions, Professor, Imports and Exports,
Ambassador, Lease holder, Priest, Trustees,
Religious Institutions, Justice, Lawyers,
Transport, Unions, Associations, Registration
Offices, Treasury, Law and order, Aviation,
Broadcasting Stations, Railways, Shipping,
Passports, Library, Political Leaders, Traffic
Control, Research Institutions, Publishers,
Horses, Elephants, Branch Offices etc,.
X: Status, Respects, Higher posts,
National service, Honorary Posts, Achievements,
Highly Valuable Articles, Sellers, Government

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 156
Documents, Agricultural Farms, Lords, Persons
who stand as examples to others, Great
Personalities etc,.
XI: Casinos, Guesthouses, Entertainment
Halls, Famous Doctors, Counselleors,
Supporters, Fans, Delegates, Parliament and
Assembly, Constitutional Bodies, Co-operations,
Exhibitions, Irrigation, Agriculture, Silk &
Garments, Contacts with foreign Nations,
Financial Corporations, Charities, Mediators,
Marriage brokers, Honorary posts, Works with
less labour.
XII: Secret Plans, Adulterations,
Revenges, Research Institutions, Mines,
Purchases, Investors, Investigations, Doctor,
Underground Activities, Magics, Poisons,
Smugglings, Unconstitutional and Illegal
Activities, Outrages, Ingratitude to the Nation,
Archaeology, Exporters, Investments in Foreign
Countries, Judges, Punishments, Authority to fine
others, Interest Collectors, Laboratories,
Income-taxes, New Plans and Proposals etc,.
X house would be a favourable house to
houses 2, 6, 8, 1 0 & 1 2 while it would negate the
prospects of the houses 3, 4, 7 & 1 1 ; it would
remain neutral to the houses 1, 5 & 9. This may
happen when the sublord of the concerned

"Applications of Cuspal Interfiles" 157
houses remain in the star or the sub of the sublord
of the X cusp. In reply, these cusps tend to
register their reactions on the X cusp according
to their respective significations, as mentioned
above.
Houses 2, 6, 8, 10 &12 would stand as
favourable to the X house while houses 4, 5 & 9
would be unfavourable. Asc is an exception as
far as to the significations of the X house is
concerned. Houses 3, 7 & 11 would remain
neutral to the X house, in reply, the X house
provides reactions on these houses, which are
as follows:
X on 1:
X on II:
X on III:
X on IV:
X on V:
X on VI:
X on VII:
X on VI 1 1 :
X on IX:
X on X:
X on XI:
X on XII:
Status through Profession
Income through Profession
Transfer or Assistance from others
in Profession
Motives and Jealousy in Profession
Suspension or Dismissal
Promotion and Recruitments
Partnership Business
Hard labour with large workloads
Retirements, Closure of Business
Developments in Profession, Honesty
Higher Posts
Second Profession

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 158
"POTENTIAL" of the X HOUSE:
The sublord of the X house would always
remain in a star and a sub. This starlord and the
sublord may appear as cuspal sublords of a few
houses. In this example chart, the X sublord is
Mercury, which is in the star of Venus, the 12th
sublord and in the sub of Rahu, the 7th sublord.
Houses 1 2 & 7 would be houses 3 & 1 0 to the X
house, not an unfavourable combination. But
houses 12 & 7 are not favourable to the Asc.
Hence, the profession would not bring
reputation or status to the native.
10th sublord when it is connected to the
12th house, would multiply the scope of
professional opportunities and would lead the
native to start a second venture. Since the link is
also with the 7th house, the native either could
do self-ventures or could act as a free-lancer and
would suffer in the end. The native could never
be in service as the 6th house, the house of
service, is not linked by the X house.
The sublord of the X house, Mercury
signifies Contracts, Accounts, Agencies,
Brokerage etc
Now, can we study the second angle of
the question of profession? In this example chart,

"Applications of Cuspal litter (info" 159
Jupiter is the only planet, which is in the star and
the sub of Mercury, the X sublord. Jupiter is the
sublord of houses 5 & 1 1 . Hence houses 5 & 1 1
are in direct linkage with the X house.
5th house, would enable the native to
choose a feather from the numerous fields of arts
as his profession. 11th house would enable the
native to get due satisfaction in his profession.
Jupiter: Devotion and God-fearing,
Brilliance, Faithful (5 & 11) friends, Scholar
While the pre-settings of the X sublord
Mercury is permanent during the entire life-span
of the native, the planet Jupiter, the resident in
the star and the sub of Mercury would enable
the native to reach professional heights during
its DBA periods.
ASC&X
Asc is an unfavourable house to the X
house. But Asc, because by being so, is an
exception by not doing any misfavours to other
houses. The Asc sublord Mars, in this example
case, is in the star of Sun, the 6th sublord and in
the sub of Rahu, the 7th sublord. Houses 6 & 7
would become houses 9 & 1 0 to the X house, to
mean that the Asc would become a favourable

'Applications of Cuspal Interlinks"
house to the matters of the X house.
The principles of linkage of the Asc on the
X house are as follows:
10,1: Profession as per Self-Thoughts
10,2: Profession in which Voice is used
10,3: Profession in Communication Fields
10,4: Profession suitable to Education
10,5: Profession in the fields of Arts and
Culture
10,6: Profession in the fields of Medical
Science, Foods
10,7: Profession in the field of Management
10,8: Profession in the field of Criminology
10,9: Profession by holding Honorary Posts
10,10: Profession and personality with Status
and Respect
10,11: Profession as a Leader of a Team
10,12: Profession in the fields of Inspection
and Research
Here Asc is not directly linked with the X
house. But the planet Mars, must sail across the
stars of Mercury for about 20 days in every
semester. Hence the sublord of the Asc, Mars
would have to render something or the other to

"Applications of Cuspal Interlines" 161
the X house to justify its Gochara or Transit
linkage. 6th house means permanency, success
and assistance from others; 7th house means
social contacts and self ventures. Hence during
the DBA periods of Mars, when it happens to
transit in the star of Mercury, the X sublord, would
enable the native to take initiatives to gain
success and assistance from others and would
mould the character of the native as suited to
receive new social relations.
X on Asc
General principles of linkage of the X
house with the Asc are as follows:
1,1: Status through Profession
1,2: Status and Finance through Profession
1,3: Status through Courageous Efforts in
Profession
1,4: Statusful Profession wherein Company
Quarters and Vehicle would be provided
1 ,5: Statusful Posts in the field of Arts and
Culture
1,6: Statusful posts in the field of Medical
Science
1,7: Statusful Social Service as Profession
1,8: Notorious Militant and Terrorist

"Applications of Cuspal In ter finks"
1,9: Honesty and Respect in Profession
1,10: Adviser in the field of his own Profession
1,11: Status and Job Satisfaction in Profession
1,12: Status but crooked thoughts in Profession
Generally X house is a neutral house to
the Asc. But in this example, the X sublord
Mercury, because it is in Venus star, the 12th
sublord and in the sub of Rahu, the 7th sublord
and thus being a significator for houses 12 & 7,
not a holy combination to the significations of the
Asc, would disable the native to capitalize on his
professional opportunities, during the DBA
periods of Mercury, while it also transits in the
star of Mars, the Asc sublord.
II on X:
General principles of linkage of the II
house with the X house are as follows:
10,1: Statusful Profession in the fileds of
Finance
10,2: Profession in the fields of Jewellery
and Finance
10,3: Profession in the fileds of Mortgage
and Finance
10,4: Profession in the fields of Vehicles and

"Applications of Cuspal Interfm^s"
Housing Finance
10,5: Professional Gambler
10,6: Professional Money Lender
10,7: Profession in Stocks and Speculation
10,8: Professional Money Lender with no
hesitation to use criminal methods
10,9: Fund Raiser
10,10: Cashier
10,11: Collector of Taxes
10,12: Professional Investors
II house is 5th to the Xth house. Hence it
is generally a favourable house to the X house.
But in this example chart, the sublord of the II
house Mercury is in the star of Venus, the sublord
of the 12th house and in the sub of Rahu, the
sublord of the 7th house. Houses 12 & 7 are
houses 3 & 10 to the X house to remain a
neutral house. Since Mercury is supposed to
cause difficulties and losses to the native during
its DBA periods, would do the same by way of
professional ventures during its transit in its own
star. Excessive investments, attempts to do
second ventures would bring losses for him.

Applications of Cuspal Interfiles"
X on II
General principles of linkage of the X
house with the II house are as follows:
2,1: Status and Financial Gains in
Profession
2,2: Financial Gains in Profession
2,3: Financial Gains & Confidence in
Profession
2,4: Financial Gains and Accumulation of
Assets
2,5: Financial Troubles in profession
2,6: Consistent Financial Gains and Success
in Profession
2,7: Social Assistance and Financial Gains
in Profession
2,8: Bribes and Illegal Money in Profession
2,9: Financial difficulties in Profession
2,10: Respect and Financial Gains in
Profession
2,11: Cashier (Receipts)
2,12: Cashier (Payments)
Generally X house is favourable to the II
house. But in this example, the X sublord
Mercury, because it is in Venus star, the 12th

"Applications of Cuspal Interlines" 165
sublord and in the sub of Rahu, the 7th sublord
and thus being a significator for houses 1 2 & 7,
or to say houses 6 & 1 1 to the II house, would
enable the native to professional income or gains
during the DBA periods of Mercury, while it
transits in own star.
Ill & X
Ml house is neutral to the X house. Mars,
the sublord of the III house is in the star of Sun,
the 6th sublord and in the sub of Rahu, the 7th
sublord. Houses 6 & 7 would become houses 9
& 10 to the X house, to mean that the III house
would become a favourable house to the
matters of the X house.
General principles of linkage of the III
house with the X house are as follows:
10,1: Statusful Profession in the fields of
Information and Communication
10,2: Mortgage House and Purchaser of
Cheques for Commission
10,3: Clerk cum Typist
10,4: Profession in Stock Exchanges
10,5: Profession in Commission Agencies
10,6: Profession in Shopping Complexes and
Business Houses

"Applications of Cuspal Interlines"
10,7: Self-Enterprise
10,8: Forgery in Business
10,9: Tender and Lease Holders
10,10:Trader
10,11: Profession in the fields of
Communications and Document Writer
10,12: Businessman
Here III house is not directly linked with
the X house. But the planet Mars, must sail across
the star of Mercury for about 20 days in every
semester. Hence the sublord of the III house,
Mars would have to render something or the other
to the X house to justify its Gochara or Transit
linkage. 6th house means permanency, success
and assistance from others; 7th house means
social contacts and self ventures. Hence during
the DBA periods of Mars, when it happens to
transit in the star of Mercury, the X sublord, would
enable the native to communicate for success
and assistance from others and would enable
him to undertake short journeys for professional
purposes.

Applications of Cuspaf Interlinks1
X on m
General principles of linkage of the X
house with the III house are as follows:
3,1 : Publicity and Status in Profession
3,2: Publicity and Income in Profession
3,3: Publicity in Profession
3,4: Publicity and Professional Competitions
3,5: Controversial Advertisements and
Publicity
3,6: Publicity and Success in Profession
3,7: Communicating Skills to Customers'
Satisfaction
3,8: Exaggerated Propoganda of own
Products
3,9: Advertisements about Latest Changes
3,10: Professional Gains through
Advertisements
3,11: Professional Advertisements &
Counsellors
3,12: Publicity for the Second Venture or for
Branch Offices
Generally X house is a house of danger
to the 111 house. In this example, the X sublord
Mercury is in Venus star, the 1 2th sublord and in

"Applications of Cuspal inter/infa"
the sub of Rahu, the 7th sublord and thus being
a significatorfor houses 12 & 7, or to say 10 & 5
to the III house, would give needed mental
courage and ability to communicate and express
to avail professional opportunities during the DBA
periods of Mercury, while it transits in the star of
Mars, the III sublord.
IV on X:
General principles of linkage of the IV
house with the X house are as follows:
10,1: Statusful Landlord and Farmer
10,2: Industrial Financing
10,3: Manufacturer cum Seller
10,4: Producer and Manufacturer
10,5: Producer of Artistically valued goods,
Craftsman
10,6: Manufacturers of Chemicals and
Fertilizers
10,7: Manufacturer of Sanitary Goods
10,8: Manufacturer of Reprocessing of Scraps
10,9: Manufactuer of Educational and Research
Instruments
10,10: Industrialist
10,11: Industrial Management

'Applications of Cuspal iHterfiwfcs"
10,12: Industrial Marketing
IV house is unfavourable to thelOth
house. But in this example chart, the sublord of
the IV house Mercury is in the star of Venus, the
sublord of the 12th house and in the sub of Rahu,
the sublord of th^ 7th house. Houses 12 & 7 are
houses 3 & 10 to the X house to get confined to
a neutral house. Since Mercury is supposed to
cause difficulties and losses to the native during
its DBA periods, would do the same by way of
purchasing machineries or vehicles or
properties in connection with professional needs
during its transit in its own star. Excessive
investments and attempts to do second ventures
would stand as means of incurring losses for him.
X on IV
General principles of linkage of the X
house with the IV house are as follows:
4.1 Statusful Industrialist
4.2 Finance Department in an Industry
4.3 Stores Department (Raw Materials)
4.4 Production Department in an Industry
4.5 Product Packaging Department
4.6 Personnel or Purchase Department
4.7 General manager of an Industry

"Applications of Cuspal Interlines" 170
4,8: Quality Controller of an Industry
4,9: Stores (Finished good*1* or R& D of an
Industry
4,10: Manager of an Industry
4,11: Administrative Staff
4,12: Sales Department
Generally X house is unfavourable to the
IV house. But in this example, the X sublord
Mercury, because it is in Venus star, the 12th
sublord and in the sub of Rahu, the 7th sublord
and thus being a significator for houses 12 & 7,
or to say houses 9 & 4 to the IV house, would
enable the native to make professional income
or gains by way of properties or machineries
during the DBA periods of Mercury while it
transits in its own star.
V on X:
General principles of linkage of the V
house with the X house are as follows:
10,1: Genius in the field of Arts and Culture
(Astrologer, for example)
10,2: Income in the fields of Arts and Culture
10,3: Artist on Contracts
10,4: Teacher and Producer of Artistic Skills

"Applications of Cuspal iHterfwfcs" 171
10,5: Struggling in the field of Arts
10,6: Service in the fields of Arts and Culture
10,7: Public relationships in the fields of Arts
and Culture
10,8: Poor life in the fileds of Arts and Culture
10,9: Researcher in the fields of Arts and
Culture
10,10: Artistic Profession
10,11: Satisfaction in the Profession of Arts
and Culture
10,12: Innovations in the fields of Arts and
Culture
V house is house of danger to the 10th
house. Hence it is generally an unfavourable
house to the X house. But in this example chart,
since the sublord of the V house Jupiter is in the
star and sub of Mercury, the cuspal sublord of
houses 2,4& 10, ortosay houses 5, 7& Itothe
X house, it gets modified into a favourable house.
Hence, the native could purchase properties with
the income from profession during the DBA
periods of Jupiter, the 5th sublord while it is also
in transit in the star of Mercury, the X sublord.

'Applications of Cuspal Interlines
X on V
General principles of linkage of the X
house with the V house are as follows:
5,1: Status through Profession in the fields
of Arts and Culture
5,2: Singer by Profession
5,3: Writer by Profession
5,4: Producer of Artistic Goods
5,5: Patronage to Artists
5,6: Service in the fields of Arts and Culture
5,7: Troupe of Artists
5,8: Profession in Cheap and Notorious Arts
5,9: Performing Arts in the Streets
5,10: Superemo in the fields of Arts and
Culture
5,11: Dancer and Entertainer
5,12: Branches in the fields of Arts and
Culture
Generally X house is a neutral house to
the V house. But in this example, the X sublord
Mercury, because it is in Venus star, the 12th
sublord and in the sub of Rahu, the 7th sublord
and thus being a significatorfor houses 12 & 7,
or to say houses 8 & 3 to the V house, would

"Applications of Cuspal Interlines" 173
force the native to incur losses in artistic
profession, to face breaks in profession, and
expenditure by way of children during the DBA
periods of Mercury, while it transits in the star of
Jupiter, the V sublord.
VI on X:
General principles of linkage of the VI
house with the X house are as follows:
10,1: Status through Service
10,2: Income through Service
10,3: Satisfaction in Service
10,4: Service in the fields of Production
10,5: Troubles in Service
10,6: Permanent Service
10,7: Social Service
10,8: Excessive Labour or Hardwork in
Service
10,9: Service with Lesser Income
10,10: Respects and Recognitions in Service
10,1 1 : Successful Service
10,12: Multiple Services
VI house is a favourable house to the 10th
house. In this example chart, since the sublord
of the VI house Sun is in the star of Venus, the

"Applications of Cuspal Interfiles"
1 2th sublord and in the sub of Jupiter, the sublord
of houses 5 & 11 , or to say houses 3, 8 & 2 to the
X house to remain as a favourable house. Hence,
the native could succeed in developing his
professional opportunities and could maintain a
higher degree of cordiality in profession during
the DBA periods of Sun, the 6th sublord while it
is also in transit in the star of Mercury, the X
sublord.
Xon VI
General principles of linkage of the X
house with the VI house are as follows:
6,1: Statusful Medical Services
6,2: Financial Services
6,3: Communication Services
6,4: Agricultural Services
6,5: Dissatisfying Services
6,6: Services in the fields of Medicines,
Foods & Chemicals
6,7: Sanitary Services
6,8: Surgeons, Cleaners
6,9: Research Laboratories
6,10: Nursing Services
6,11: Medical Advisers and Counsellors
6,12: Wardens of Hospitals

"Applications of Cuspctl Interlinks" 175
Generally X house is favourable to the VI
house. In this example, the X sublord Mercury,
because it is in Venus star, the 12th sublord and
in the sub of Rahu, the 7th sublord and thus
being a significator for houses 12 & 7, or to say
houses 7 & 2 to the VI house, would enable the
native to get assistance from others and could
employ servants and could make gains out of
his second profession during the DBA periods of
Mercury, while it also transits in the star of Sun,
the VI sublord.
VDon X:
General principles of linkage of the VII
house with the X house are as follows:
10,1: Professional Status through Social
Contacts
10,2: Social Assistance of Finance for
Profession
10.3 Professional Publicity
10.4 Partnership Profession
10.5 Recreation Clubs
10.6 Recruitment Organisations
10.7 Strained Relationships with Customers
10.8 Dividends to Share Holders
10.9 Co-operative Societies
10,10: Self-Enterprises

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks " 176
10,11: Business Advisers
10,12: Self-Enterprises with Branches
VII house is neutral to the 10th house. But
in this example chart, since the sublord of the VII
house Rahu is in its own star and in the sub of
Sun, the 6th sublord, or to say, houses 10 & 9 to
the X house to get modified into a favourable
house. Since it is 7 & 6, it would negate the Asc
to have frequent social relationships. Hence, the
native could have only a limited scope in his
profession during the DBA periods of Rahu, the
7th sublord while it is also in transit in the star of
Mercury, the X sublord.
X on VII
General principles of linkage of the X
house with the VII house are as follows:
7,1: Breaks in Profession due to
misunderstandings between Partners
7,2: Break in Profession due to the Death of
Partner
7,3: Break in Profession due to change of
Partners
7,4: Break in Profession due to the
commissioning of a Branch in the same

"Applications of Cuspcil Interlinks" 111
fields by the Partner
7,5: Break in Profession due to the Partner
7,6: Break in Partnership
7,7: Break in Profession due to the
Domination of Partner
7,8: Break in Profession due to the
Misappropriations by the Partner
7,9: Break in Profession due to the
Misconduct of the Partner
7,10: Continuing the Profession by depending
on the Partnership
7,11' Cordial Partnerships in Profession
7,12: Incurring Losses due to Partners
Generally, X house is unfavourable to the
VII house. But in this example, the X sublord
Mercury, because it is in Venus star, the 12th
sublord and in the sub of Rahu, the 7th sublord
and thus being a significator for houses 12 & 7,
ortosay houses 6 & 1 to the VII house, would
enable the native to have frequent visits of
customers and gains during the DBA periods of
Mercury, while it also transits in the star of Rahu,
the VII sublord.

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks” 178
VIII on X:
General principles of linkage of the VIII
house with the X house are as follows:
10,1: Status and Respect in the fields of
Insurance and Criminology.
10,2: Cashier in Insurance Companies.
10,3: Clerk in Insurance Companies
10,4: Services in Accident Wing of Insurance
10,5: Services in Children's Insurance
Schemes.
10,6: Medical or Labour Insurance.
10,7: Social or Group Insurance
10,8: Services in the Life Insurance Companies
10,9: Services in Transport, Travel Insurance
Companies.
10,10: Services in Industrial Insurance
Companies.
10,11: Services in Insurance/Pension of Senior
Citizens
10,12: Services in Foreign Insurance
Companies.
VIII house is favourable to the 10th house.
But in this example chart, since the sublord of
the VIII house Saturn is in the star of Mars, the

"Applications of Cuspal iHtertmfcs" 179
sublord of houses 1 & 3 and in the sub of Jupiter,
the sublord of houses 5 & 11, or to say houses 4,
6, 8 & 2 to the X house to become a neutral
house. Though the native would unexpectedly
be able to meet more number of customers and
satisfy them, he could not gain too much in his
profession during the DBA periods of
Saturn, the 8th sublord while it is also in transit in
the star of Mercury, the X sublord.
X on VIII
General principles of linkage of the X
house with the VIII house are as follows:
8,1: Status in Profession earned by Hard
Labour
8,2: Bribes in Profession
8,3: Illegal Profession, Profession in Mental
Asylums
8,4: Profession in Accident Wards
8,5: Profession in Illegal and Banned Arts
8,6: Profession in General Health Department
8,7: Profession in Environmental Protections
8,8: Profession in Public Services Department
for Managing Disasters
8,9: Public Profession, Religious Endowments
8,10: Profession in Prevention of Public

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 180
Corruption and Vigilance
8,11: Job Satisfaction through Hard Work,
Unexpected recognition in Profession
8,12: Profession in Investigation Departments
Generally X house is favourable to the VIII
house. But in this example, the X sublord
Mercury, because it is in Venus star, the 12th
sublord and in the sub of Rahu, the 7th sublord
and thus being a significator for houses 12 & 7,
or to say houses 5 & 1 2 to the vi 1 1 house, would
force the native to render hard labour in winning
his daily bread in professional life during the DBA
periods of Mercury, while it also transits in the
star of Saturn, the VIII sublord.
IX on X:
General principles of linkage of IX house
with the X house are as follows:
10,1 : Status and Respect in the field of Politics
10,2: Income in the field of Politics
10,3: Courageous Politician
10,4: Hurdles in Political Life
10,5: Popular Politician
10,6: Successful Political Life
10,7: Social Recognition in Political Life

"Applications of Cusval Interlinks" 181
10,8: Loss of Status in Political Life
10,9: Honorary Posts in Political Life
10,10: Respected Politician
10,11: Satisfaction in Political Life
10,12: Political Imprisonments
IX house is a house of negation to the 10th
house. But in this example chart, since the
sublord of the IX house Moon is in the star of
Sun, the 6th sublord and in the sub of Rahu, the
7th sublord, or to say as significator of houses 9
& 10 to the X house, the IX house becomes a
favourable house. Hence, the native could
carry-out research in his profession and could
gain reasonably in his professional life during the
DBA periods of Moon, the 9th sublord while it is
also in transit in the star of Mercury, the X sublord.
X on IX
General principles of linkage of the X
house with the IX house are as follows:
9,1: Resigning the Post due to False
Prestige
9,2: Resigning the Post subsequent to
Wordy Quarrels
9,3: Submitting the Resignation Letter

"Applications of Cuspal Interfiles" 182
9,4: Resignation subsequent to Sabotage
9,5: Being expelled from the Post
9,6: Shifting Political Loyalty for Personal
Gains
9,7: Being isolated by the Political Friends
9,8: Expulsion from Political Posts due to
loss of Integrity
9,9. Disrespect due to Isolation in Political
Life
9,10: Reinstatment to the same Political Post
9,11: Counsellor to the Successors
9,12: Change of Political Posts
Generally X house is neutral to the IX
house. But in this example, the X sublord
Mercury, because it is in Venus star, the 12th
sublord and in the sub of Rahu, the 7th sublord
and thus being a significatorfor houses 12 & 7,
or to say houses 4 & 1 1 to the IX house, would
force the native to face losses from unknown
persons in his professional life and would
educate himself out of his personal
experience and make gains in his research
activities during the DBA periods of Mercury, while
it also transits in the star of Moon, the IX sublord.

'Applications of Cuspal interlinks"
X onX:
As detailed in the paragraph for the
potential of the X house, the X house when linked
temporarily to the X house, by way of transit,
would further weaken the professional life of the
native; It would induce the native to make
excessive investments and would make him
incompetent to face his professional opponents.
XI on X:
General principles of linkage of the XI
house with the X house are as follows:
10,1 : Status and Respectful Post, as desired
10,2: Making expected Gains through
Profession
10,3; Getting transfered as desired
10,4: Installation of Industry as desired
10,5; Getting due Commissions as desired
10,6; Geting the desired Post
10,7; Entering into desired Professional
Partnership
10,8; Accepting Bribes as desired
10,9; Leaving the Profession as desired
10,10; Expected Respects gained in Profession

"Applications of Cuspal Interlines" 184
10,11 ; Respects & Expected Progress in
Profession
10,12; Satisfaction through Expansion of
business
XI house is neutral to the 10th house. But
in this example chart, since the sublord of the XI
house Jupiter is in the star and sub of Mercury,
the cuspal sublord of houses 2, 4 & 10, or to say
houses 5, 7 & 1 to the X house, it modifies into a
favourable house. Hence, the native could gain
satisfaction in professional ventures during the
DBA periods of Jupiter, the 11th sublord while it
is also in transit in the star of Mercury, the X
sublord.
X on XI
General principles of the linkage of the X
house with the XI house are as follows :
11,1; Status and Satisfaction in Profession
11,2; Income and Satisfaction in Profession
11,3; Satisfaction through Transfer
11,4; Win over Opposition in Professional
Ventures
11,5; Supervisory Professions
11,6; Success in Professional Career

"Applications of Cuspal Interfiles" 185
Customers
11,8; Regaining the Confidence in Professional
Life
11,9; Failures in Professional Expansions
11,10; Developments Subsequent to
Professional Expansion
11,11; Immense Growth in Professional Career
11,12; Development of Profession by Additional
Investments
Generally X house is a house of negation
to the XI house. But in this example, the X sublord
Mercury is in Venus star, the 12th sublord and in
the sub of Rahu, the 7th sublord and thus being
a significator for houses 12 & 7, orto say houses
2 & 9 to the XI house, would force the native to
incur losses by way of excessive spendings in
company of friends and in professional process
during the DBA periods of Mercury, while it
transits in the star of Jupiter, the XI sublord. It
would also bring litigations on properties and
would put him into financial troubles.

'Applications of Cuspal Inter (inks'
XII on X:
General principles of linkage of the XII
house with the X house are as follows :
10,1; Status and Respect through 2nd
Profession
10,2; Income through the 2nd Profession
10,3; Changing the place of the First
Profession because of the needs of the
2nd Profession
10,4; Manufacturing as the nature of 2nd
Profession
10,5; Problems in the First Profession due to
2nd Profession
10,6; Re-installation of the First Venture with the
Gains earned from the 2nd Profession
10,7; Returning to the First Profession
subsequent to the hurdles faced in the 2nd
Profession
10,8; Excessive Labour and Mental Strains in
managing both the Professions
10,9; Winding up the First Venture subsequent
to commissioning of the 2nd Profession
10,10; Enhancement of Status and Respect to
the First Profession through the 2nd

"Applications of Cuspal Interfiles" 187
Profession
10,11; Winding up the 2nd Profession due to the
Capital Requirements of the First
Profession
10,12; Professional Successes in both the
Ventures
XII house is favourable to the Xth house.
Here in this example chart, since the sublord of
the XII house Venus is in the star of Moon, the
9th sublord and in the sub of Venus, the 12th
sublord, or to say houses 1 2 & 3 to the X house
to remain as a favourable house. Hence, the
native could succeed in his researches by way
of applying them to the practical purposes to cater
new professional opportunities during the DBA
periods of Venus, the 12th sublord while it is also
in transit in the star of Mercury, the X sublord.
X on XII
General principles of linkage of the X
house with the XII house are as follows :
12,1; 2nd Venture by using Self-thoughts.
12,2; Financing as the 2nd Venture
12,3; Trading as the 2nd Venture
12,4; Production as the 2nd Venture

"Applications of Cuspal Interlines" 188
1 2,5; Commission Business as the 2nd Venture
12,6; Servicing as the 2nd Venture
12,7; Unexpected Hurdles in the 2nd Venture
12,8; Excessive Hard Labour in the 2nd
Venture.
12,9; Financial Troubles due to the 2nd
Venture
12,10; Respects earned by way of the 2nd
Venture
12,11; Hurdles in the Attempts for the 2nd
Venture
12,12; Excellence in both the Ventures.
Generally X house is favourable to the XII
house. But in this example, the X sublord
Mercury, because it is in Venus star, the 12th
sublord and in the sub of Rahu the 7th sublord
and thus being a significator for houses 12 & 7,
or to say houses 1 & 8 to the XII house, would
force the native to face the threat of lock-outs
and breaks in his profession during the DBA
periods of Mercury, while it also transits in the
star of Venus, the XII sublord.

"Applications of Cusyctl Inter (i'h^s" 189
PLANETS: (to the X house)
While Jupiter and Mercury, the planets that
happen to have a direct linkage with the X house,
would act for the X house significations during
their entire DBA periods, the remaining planets
also would act for the X house significations
whenever theyhappen to transit in the star of
Mercury, the X sublord as mentioned above
cuspal interlinks.
MORE on X:
There are 12 Bhavas. What are all the
possible permutations and combinations of
interlinks of these 12 bhavas? Linkage { Sublords
of houses to remain in the star or the sub of the

"Applications of Cuspal Interlines"
sublord of the X house} of all the 12 houses
combinedly or individually with the X house would
possibilities.

"Applications of Cuspal iHterfin&s"
1,2,10 S, I & Respect
1, 2, 11 S, I & Satisfaction
1, 2, 12 S, I & Research
1, 2, 3, 4 S, I, Communications and
Production
1,2, 3, 5 S, I, C & arts & culture
1, 2, 3, 9 SIC & in educational institutions
1 , 2, 3 & 1 0 SIC and Respect
(Public relations officer)
1 , 2, 3 & 1 1 SIC with Respect and Authority
as desired
1, 2, 3 & 12 SIC in Research Organisations
1 , 2, 3, 4 & 5 SIC in Manufacturing fields as
a designer
1,2, 3, 4 & 6 SIC in M fields to render

Applications of Cuspal Interlinks"
service
1,2,3, 4&7 SICM& society
1, 2, 3, 4 & 8 SICM& Investigations, Audits
1, 2, 3, 4 & 9 SICM& Imports and Exports
1,2, 3,4 & 10 SICM with due respect
1 , 2, 3, 4 & 1 1 SICM with satisfaction
1,2, 3, 4 & 12 SICM in a foreign country
1 , 2, 3, 4, 5 & 6 SIC as doctor in chronic
diseases
1, 2, 3, 4, 5 & 7 SICM as a social designer
1, 2, 3, 4, 5 & 8 SIC in Insurance sector with
easy labour(5 ?)
1 , 2, 3, 4, 5 & 9 SICM foreign trade & winding
ups
1 , 2, 3, 4, 5 & 1 0SICM, Arts & Culture with
respect
1, 2, 3, 4, 5 & 11 SICM and social relations,
Arbitrator
1, 2, 3, 4, 5 & 1 2 SICM+ Cultural Research

"Applications of Cuspal Interlines" 193
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 & 7 .. {Various types of Doctors ?)
social sector)
criminals)
respectable persons}
brasses of a nation)
who makes history]
It is humanly impossible to provide details
for all these combinations. I would be thankful to
people who could spend much of their time and
efforts in compiling these classifications of
approximately 40 million interlinks. Then alone
we can single out or identify the profession of
each and everyone of the 6000 millions of people
who are presently living in our globe with the use
of 40 million options.
The questions which are generally asked
by a person about profession can broadly be
classified as follows:

Applications of Cuspal iHterfiH^s"
Category 1 :
a) Will I be in service or business?
b) Can I attain financial, social or
administrative status in my profession?
c) Will I continue in the same profession?
d) Will I face difficulties in my professional
career?
Catergory 2:
a) Will I serve in Education Department,
Health Department, Defence services,
Communica tion department,
Journalism, Information technology,
Banking etc.,?
b) Will I run my own manufacturing unit or
will I remain as a trader only ?
c) Will I be carrying out my profession as a
commission agent?
Questions of category I are related to the
potential of the X cusp, i.e., they can be answered
by studying the linkage of the X cuspal sublord
with the other cusps. { PI. refer PCI -paqes

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" .
i) Study of the sign, star and sub in which the
starlord of the sublord of the X cusp is placed.
ii) Study of the placement of the starlord of the
X cusp as either the starlord or the sublord
of other cusps.
iii) Of course, we also need to study, especially
for financial and other status, the potential of
the Asc, II house, the VI house or the VII
house etc.,
Questions of category 2, can be answered
by studying the linkage of other cusps with the X
house and also the planets which are placed in
the star or the sub of the X cuspal sublord.
As studied in the earlier chapter for the
"IX house1, educational qualifications would stand
as means of professional opportunities only if the
IV or the IX or the XI house is related to the X
house. So, 75 % our present day population
would not be doing jobs that are related to their
educational qualifications.
Only if the Asc or the X house is linked to
the X house, then one could become a
respectable person in his profession. (Just 17 %
of the population)

"Applications of Cuspal iHterfiM^s" 196
Only if the XI house is linked to the X
house, then one could gain job satisfaction. (Only
8.3 % of the population)
One may not be running a Dasa that is
related to the X Bhava. We need not jump into a
hasty conclusion that the professional life of the
person would remain in dark. Find out if there is
a possibility of relief by studying with the use of
subsublord or the starlord of the X cusp and its
residents; It is enough if the Dasa remains
somehow neutral to the X house to permit the
respective bhukthies of planets that are
favourable to the X house to provide success and
much needed relief to the person.
Eventhough the potential of the X house
and the potential of the current Dasa and the
subsequent Dasa are unfavourable to render
professional success, we may opt for the the
study of the 12th house for a possible relief.
Whatever be it, as astrologers, we must always
be good to give hopes and confidence to our
clients as doctors would do to their patients. It is
better not to reveal the truths of unfavourable
potentials to our clients as I feel that it is our
social responsibility to keep the spirit of our
clients alive. Our wisdom is only a drop of ocean
before the all pervasive Almighty.

"Applications of Cusval Interlinks" 197
XI BHAVA
HOUSE OF DESIRES
Wealth, Fortune, One's Influences,
Elected Representatives, Society, Litigations,
Business and Commerce, Writings, Profit,
Accumulation of Money, Capital and Interest,
Profit through Easy Means, Happy News,
Effects of Fortune, Parliament, Constitutional
Bodies, Corporations, District Councils,
Panchayats, Government Policies and
Plannings, Co-operation with Countries,
Exchanges, Companies, Archives, Granary,
Clubs, Discharge from Hospital, Lucky Numbers
etc are some of the unrelated significations of
the XI house to the Asc.
The above significations could be
re-classified as follows as the significations
meant to link with all the 12 houses:
Asc: Self efforts, Cure from physical disorders,
Happiness and Romance
II: Cleverness and Abilities in Speech,
Immense Money, Purchase of desired
Goods and Properties
III: Success in Agreements, Expected
information, Completion of Documentation
IV: Higher Education, Unearned Money,

"Applications of Cuspal Ihterfin(?s" 198
1 Purchase of Household articles
V: Love Affairs, Interested field of Sports
and Games, Artistic Interests
VI: Success in Litigations, Getting Loans
as expected, Job Opportunities
VII: Partnership Agreements, Marrying the
person suited to his/her choice, Affinity
and Cordiality with Business or Life
Partner
VIII: Unexpected Scope of Success, Receipt
of Donations, Accidents
IX: Transfer of Job, Gains in Agreements,
Winning Tenders, Lease, House through
Mortgage
X: Expected uptrends in Service, Winning
Reputation and Status, Developing the
Scope of Professional Opportunities
XI: Success in Self Efforts, Satisfactions from
Personal Desires
XII: Success in Secret Activities, Undue
Profits through more Investments, Secret
Pleasures
XI house is favourable to houses 1, 3, 7,
9 & 1 1 and would remain neutral to houses 2, 6
& 10, It would defeat the significations of houses

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks"
4, 5, 8 & 12. This could be possible only when
the sublords of these houses reside in the star
or the sub of the XI house. In reply, these houses
tend to register their mark on the XI house as
mentioned above.
Houses 1 , 3, 7, 9 & 1 1 would be favourable
to the XI house while houses 4, 8 & 12 would
remain neutral to the XI house, However,
houses 2, 5, 6 & 10 would act against the XI
house. The above could happen when the
sublord of the XI house happens to reside in the
star of the sublord of the concerned houses. In
reply, the XI house would make a mark on the
significations of the respective houses as follows:
XI on I: Providing needed Confidence to
Success in Self-Efforts of the native.
XI on II: Immense flow of Money in Transactions,
Gold and Valuables, Expressing his
own Opinions and thoughts
XI onlll: Desired results in the Process of
Negotiations, Agreements to reach an
Accord, Expected Transfers
XI onlV: Construction of House as per his own
wishes, Purchase of household
Properties, Joining in a desired
Educational Course, Unexpected

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks''
Properties
XI onV: Winning the Love of the Girl of his
choice and vice versa. Bringing-up
children to own Expectations,
Involvements in the field of Arts and
Science to his tastes
XI onVI: Success in Interested fields, Getting
Loans as Expected
XI onVI I: Affinity towards the person of his Choice
and depending and supporting for the
cause of said person. Pleasures of Soft
Touches
XI onVI 1 1 : 1 n it'rati ve to Commit and Solve Issues,
Facing Troubles and Losses by
Voluntarily committing to Issues
XI onIX: Illegal Contacts, Higher Education,
Researches, Expected changes and
turns in the trend of Issues
XI onX: Profession as per the Choice of the
native, Honorary Posts, Service in high
and sophisticated social fields
XI onXIl: Involvements in Secret Activities to his
choice, Thoughts around Physical
Pleasures and Comforts

"Applications of Cwspal Inter links"
POTENTIAL OF THE XI HOUSE
In this example chart, Jupiter, the XI
sublord resides in the star and sub of Mercury,
the cuspal sublord of houses 2, 4 & 10. Houses
2, 4 & 10, respectively would become houses 4,
6 & 12 to the 11th house to mean that the
potential of the XI house is very weak in this
chart.
XI house, with its link to the houses 2, 4
& 10 would try to satisfy through income, lands,
vehicles and profession etc., to the expected level
of Asc; Since it is potentially weak, these
satisfactions would remain only as an illusion as
they would be limited to the favours of the DBA
periods and Transit.
No planet is in the star of Jupiter.
Sun and Saturn are in the sub of Jupiter.
Sun is the 6th sublord.
6 on 1 1 would mean that the native could
get loans as expected, could get assistance from
partners as expected, and could win over
litigations, if any.
Saturn is the 8th sublord.
8 on 1 1 would mean that the vehicle of

the native would meet with accidents; The
native will have a scope to receive donations and
unexpected success.
Planetary significations:
Jupiter (2): Gold products, Improvement in
financial status
(4): Educational Institutions
(10): Status and Respect
Sun: Friendship with civil servants, Gains and
success in public life
Saturn: Hiding the motives, Friendship with
immoral and people of lower strata.
Asc on XI
Asc is a naturally favourable house to the
XI house. In this example, the sublord of the Asc,
Mars is in the star of Sun, the 6th sublord and in
the sub of Rahu, the 7th sublord. Houses 6 & 7
would respectively become houses 8 & 9 to the
XI house to modify into an unfavourable house.
General principles of linkage of the Asc
with the XI house are:

11,1: Depending on the friends, Concern on
self-desires
11,2: Financial assistance from friends
11,3: Communications through friends
11 ,4: Visit of friends to the residence
11,5: Love affair with a friend
11,6: Scope for success and loans through
friends
11,7: Marriage or Business partnership with
friends
11,8: Getting out of troubles with the help of
friends
11,9: Illegal affairs through friends
11,10: Status and Respect gained through
friends
11,11: Friends with integrity
11,12: Expenditure and losses through friends
Since the Asc is carrying a combination
of 6 & 7 with it to act on the XI house, the native
would gain success, would improve social
contacts and could get into love affairs during
the DBA periods of Mars, the Asc sublord
whenever it happens to transit in the star of
Jupiter, the XI th sublord.

" Applications of Cuspai Interlines"
XI on Asc:
The following are the principles of the
linkage of the XI house with the Asc:
1,1: Selfish person, Self thoughts and efforts
1,2: Income through self endeavours
1 ,3: Well-structured body
1 ,4: Landlord
1,5: Happy and sociable person
1,6: Success in efforts
1,7: Social relations
1 ,8: Success through hard efforts
1,9: Honest, Educated person
1,10: Higher status through self efforts
1,12: Sincere in security and safe-guarding
XI house is favourable to the Asc. In this
chart, the sublord of the XI house, since it
carries 2, 4 & 10 with it, would provide a
favourable scope to the native to improve his
financial conditions, to gain through savings, to
attain status through lands and properties or
through profession during the DBA periods of
Jupiter, the XI sublord, while it also happens to
transit in the star of Mars, the Asc sublord.

II on XI
II house iS unfavourable to the XI house.
In this example, the sublord of the II house,
Mercury is in the star of Venus, the 12th sublord
and in the sub of Rahu, the 7th sublord. Houses
12 & 7 would respectively become houses 2 & 9
to the XI house to get modified into a favourable
house.
General principles of linkage of the II
house with the XI house are:
11,1: Money saved for self-desires
11,2: Multiplication of money
11,3: Developments of financial status in a
phased manner
1 1 ,4: Immense growth of properties and money
11,5: Gamblings
11,6: Lending money to others
11,7: Financial assistance through friends
11,8: Donations or outstanding money
11,9: Financial worries
11,10: Status through financial business,
Jewellery Marts, Seller of Diamonds
11,11: Greed for money
11,12: Reinvestments of returns

"Applications of Cuspai Inter finks" 206
Since the II house is carrying a
combination of 12 & 7 with it to act on the XI
house, the native would- gain through
investments and mutual relationships during the
DBA periods of Mercury, the II sublord whenever
it happens to transit in the star of Jupiter, the
11th sublord.
XI on II:
The following are the principles of the
linkage of the XI house with the II house:
2,1 Enjoying his own savings
2.3 Conversion of income as deposits and
valuables
2.4 Conversion of money intb properties
2.5 Spending income for entertainments
2.6 Money lender
2.7 Saving money with others
2.8 Donating
2.9 Gifts
2,1 0: Building a Profession out of personal
savings
2,1 2: Investments through income
XI house is neutral to the II house. In this
chart, the sublord of the XI house, since it
carries 2, 4 & 10 with it, would provide a

tremendous scope to the native to enrich his
financial conditions, to earn hrough lands,
properties or through professions during the
DBA periods of Jupiter, the XI sublord, while it
also happens to transit in the star of Mercury,
the sublord of the II house.
Ill on XI
III is favourable to the XI house. In this
chart, the sublord of the III house, Mars is in the
star of Sun, the 6th sublord and in the sub of
Rahu, the 7th sublord. Houses 6 & 7 would
respectively become houses 8 & 9 to the XI
house to modify into an unfavourable house.
General principles of linkage of the III
house with the XI house are:
11,1: Self-courage and self-confidence
11,2: Gains and brokerage in communications
11,3: Versatile in writings
1 1 ,4: Contractor
1 1 ,5: Lottery agent
1 1 ,6: Lawyer
11,7: Labour contractor
11,8: Collector of Taxes
11,9: Judge

11,10: Tender assistant
11,11: Man of courgae, Iron man
1 1,12: Investigators
Since the III house is carrying a
combination of 6 & 7 With it to act on the XI
house, the native would gain a favourable
scope in mutual agreements and negotiations
and would get cured from ENT problems during
the DBA periods of Mars, the III sublord when it
happens to transit in the star of Jupiter, the 11th
sublord.
XI on III:
The following are the principles of the
linkage of the XI house with the III house:
3,1 : Courageous and clever
3,2: Monetary gains through Cheques/DDs
and agreements
3,4: Litigations through sale of goods
3,5: Mutual benefits in communication and
agreements
3,6: Courageous and successful personality
3,7: Co-operative partner and understandings
with wife
3,8: Maturity of insurance policies
3,9: Favours in agreements

3,10: Promotions and transfers
3,12: Return of lost goods
XI house is favourable to the IN house.
But in this chart, the sublord of the XI house,
since it carries 2, 4 & 10 with it, would make the
native to change his residence or place of
profession, would force him to mortgage the
valuables and to get a house through mortgage
and would enable him to get needed assistance
from others during the DBA periods of Jupiter,
the XI sublord, while it also happens to transit in
the star of Mars, the III sublord.
IV on XI
General principles of linkage of the IV
house with the XI house are:
11,1: Filing suits to get back his own properties
11 ,2: Immense wealth and growth through LVP
11,3: Agreements regarding LVP
11,4: Purchase of properties with
encumbrances
11,5: Love marriage with a family member,
Artistic involvements
11,6: Purchases
11,7: Marriage within relationsships

1 1 ,8: Accidents caused to the native and the
vehicle
11,9: Study of Agricultural science
11,10: Professional education
11,11: Abduction of properties by others
11,12: Investments on preferred properties
IV house is neutral to the XI house. In this
example, the sublord of the IV house, Mercury
is in the star of Venus, the 12th sublord and in
the sub of Rahu, the 7th sublord. Houses 12 & 7
would respectively become houses 2 & 9 to the
XI house to get modified into a favourable house.
Since the IV house is carrying a
combination of 12 & 7 with it to act on the XI
house, the native would have a chance to learn
and to get educated, to maintain affinity and
cordiality with members of his family during the
DBA periods of Mercury, the IV sublord
whenever it happens to transit in the star of
Jupiter, the 11th sublord.

XI on IV:
The following are the principles of the
linkage of the XI house with the IV house:
4,1: Pleasures through owning properties
4,2: Immense income through properties
4,3: Monetary benefits through brokerage
4,5: Building lodges and cinema halls
4,6: Rental income from properties
4,7: Confiscation of properties by relatives
4,8: Accidents in vehicles
4,9: Excellence in higher education
4,10: Manufacturing industries
4,12: Income through investments
XI house is a house of danger to the IV
house. In this chart, the sublord of the XI house,
since it carries 2,4 & 10 with it, would provide a
favourable scope to the native to own vehicles
and properties during the DBA periods of
Jupiter, the XI sublord, while it also happens to
transit in the star of Mercury, the sublord of the
IV house.

Von XI
V house is an opposite house to the XI
house. In this example, the subiord of the V
house, Jupiter is in the star and sub of Mercury,
the sublord of houses 2, 4 & 10. Houses 2, 4 &
10 would respectively become houses 4, 6 &12
to the XI house to remain as an unfavourable
house.
General principles of linkage of the V
house with the XI house are:
11,1: Name and fame in artistic fields
11,2: Immense monetary income from Artistic
fields
113 Popularity in Artistic fields
11,4 Leaving the field of politics
113 Pleasures in romantic life
11.6 Success in sports and games
11.7 Love marriage
113 Coming out of disrespectful situation
11.9 Illegal affairs through lover
11.10 Status and respect in artistic fields
11,11: Self-satisfaction in pleasures
1142 Secret activities in love affairs

Since the V house is carrying a
combination of 2, 4 & 10 with it to act on the XI
house, the native would be denied a romantic
life during the DBA periods of Jupiter, the V
sublord, whenever it happens to transit in its own
star as the 11th sublord.
XI on V:
The following are the principles of the linkage of the XI house with the V house:
5,1: Attractive towards opposite sex
5,2: Immense flow of money through
Speculation, Brokerage
5,3: Income through commission, Writings and
artistic skills
5,4: Impotency, Purchase of artistic goods
5,6: Success in Sports and games
5,7: Love marriage
5,8: Troublesome love affairs
5,9: Multiple partners for sexual pleasures
5,10: Success in artistic fields
5,12: Immense sexual pleasures from secret
partners
XI house is an opposing house to the V
house. In this chart, the sublord of the XI house.

since it carries 2, 4 & 10 with it, would cause for
illhealth of the children and would deny romantic
life during the DBA periods of Jupiter, the XI
sublord, while it also happens to transit in its
own star as V sublord.
VI on XI
VI house is a house of danger to the XI
house. In this example, the sublord of the VI
house, Sun is in the star of Venus, the 12th
sublord and in the sub of Jupiter, the sublord of
houses 5 & 11. Houses 12, 5 & 11 would
respectively become houses 2, 7 & 1 to the XI
house to get modified into a neutral house.
General principles of linkage of the VI
house with the XI house are:
11.1 Great success
11.2 Immense inflow of borrowings
11.3 Numerous agreements
11.4 Numerous properties
11.5 Miraculous cure from diseases
11.6 Excellent professional opportunities
11.7 Marriage with the best servant
11.8 Success through struggles
11.9 Excellence in higher studies

"Applications of Citspai Interlinks"
11,10: Status and successful profession
11,11: Reaching the goals and aims in life
11,12: Loss of something to acheive a new
thing, in a grand manner
Since the VI house is carrying a
combination of 12,11 & 5 with it to act on the XI
house, the native would succeed in litigations
and get the repayment of his lendings; It would
also be possible for him to clear-off his debts and
to get cured from diseases during the DBA
periods of Sun, the VI sublord whenever it
happens to transit in the star of Jupiter, the 11th
sublord.
XI on VI:
The following are the principles of the
linkage of the XI house with the IV house:
6,1: Success in litigations, Discharge from
hospital
6,2: Immense flow of money through
borrowings
6,3: Contract for job, Recruitments
6,4: Scholarships
6,5: Cure from diseases
6,7: Marriage with a colleague or servant
6,8: Unexpected bribe money

"Applications of Cuspai Interlinks"
6,9: Sudden increase in body weight
6,10: Permanent jobs, promotions
6,12: Success in secret plans
XI house is neutral house to the VI house.
In this chart, the sublord ofthe XI house, since
it carries 2, 4 & 10 with it, would put the native in
a position to get troubles from well known
persons and sabotage by friends; his love
affairs would get discontinued; he could get
loans from his friends during the DBA periods of
Jupiter, the XI sublord, while it also happens to
transit in the star of Sun, the sublord of the VI
house.
VII on XI
VII house is favourable to the XI house.
In this example, the sublord ofthe VII house,
Rahu is in its own star and in the sub of Sun,
the sublord of the 6th house. Houses 7 & 6 would
become houses 9 & 8 to the XI house to get
modified into an unfavourable house.
General principles of linkage of the VII
house with the XI house are:
11.1 Status through partner, Cordial relations
11.2 Immense gains through partner
11.3 Courage and confidence through friends

"Applications of Cuspai Inter/inks" 217
11,4: Visit and affinity of relatives
1 1 ,5: Pleasures with wife
11,6: Winning the opponent, Bank loans
11,7: Turning the enemy into a friend
11,8: Unexpected success against opponents
11,9: Illegal affairs or second marriage
11,10: Cordial and reliable business partner
11,11: Public relations
11,12: Expenditure for public health
Since the VII house is carrying a
combination of 7 & 6 with it to act on the XI
house, the native would have a chance to find
new friends and a swing of love and hate in his
romantic life during the DBA periods of Rahu,
the VII sublord whenever it happens to transit in
the star of Jupiter, the 11th sublord.
XI on VII:
The following are the principles of the
linkage of the XI house with the VII house:
7.1 Satisfying wife or partner
7.2 Immene money from wife or partner
7.3 Social nature of wife or partner
7.4 Joint family
7.5 Happiness and satisfaction from wife

"Applications of Cuspai Interlinks”
7,6: Success over enemies
7,7: Wife or partner with self-pride
7,8: Favourable conditions created by enemies
7,9: Polygamy
7,10: Partnership deeds
7,12: Excessive sexual pleasures through wife
XI house is favourable to the VII house.
In this chart, the sublord of the XI house, since
it carries 2, 4 & 10 with it, would induce the
native to fall in love with a lady who is already
known to him during the DBA periods of Jupiter,
the XI sublord, while it also happens to transit in
the star of Rahu, the sublord of the VII house.
VIII on XI:
VIII house is neutral to the XI house. In
this example, the sublord of the VIII house,
Saturn is in the star of Mars, sublord of houses 1
& 3 and in the sub of Jupiter, the sublord of the
houses 5 & 11. Houses 1,3, 5 & 11 would
respectively become houses 3, 5, 7 & 1 to the
XI house to get modified into a favourable
house.
General principles of linkage of the VIII
house with the XI house are:

"Applications of Cuspai Interlinks" 219
11,1: Unexpected status
11,2: Unexpected insurance claims or bribe
money
11,3: Unexpected and successful agreements
1 1 ,4: Unexpected possession of highly valuable
properties
11,5: Unexpected love affairs and happiness
11,6: Unexpected great success
11,7: Unexpected marriage
11,8: Unexpected worries caused by greedy
nature
11,9: Unexpected illegal activities and higher
studies
11,10: Unexpected promotions and prestige
11,11: Unexpected success in self-efforts
11,12: Unexpected expenditure for good cause
Since the VIII house is carrying a
combination of 1 , 3, 5 & 1 1 with it to act on the XI
house, the native would have a chance to have
unexpected illegal romantic affairs and could
receive happy news during the DBA periods of
Saturn, the VIM sublord whenever it happens to
transit in the star of Jupiter, the 11th sublord.

"Applications of Cuspai Interlines" 220
XI on VIII:
The following are the principles of the
linkage of the the XI house with the VIII house
are:
8,1 : Unexpected success of self efforts
8,2: Unexpected flow of immense money
8,3: Unexpected change in thoughts
8,4: Unexpected properties with
encumbrances
8,5: Unexpected romance
8,6: Unexpected donations
8,7: Unexpected meetings and sudden
marriage
8,8: Return to life from the clutches of death
8,9: Unexpectedly continuing higher education
8,10: Sudden developments in profession
8,11: Iron man
8,12: Unexpected change of losses into profits
XI house is unfavourable to the VIII house.
In this chart, the sublord of the XI house, since it
carries 2, 4 &10 with it, would put the native to
get ashamed and get spoilt with his name, fame
and reputation caused by the illegal affairs and
friendships with people of lower strata during the

"Applications of Cuspai Interfiles" 221
DBA periods of Jupiter, the XI sublord, while it
also happens to transit in the star of Saturn, the
VIII sublord.
IX on XI :
IX house is favourable to the XI house. In
this example, the sublord of the IX house, Moon
Is in the star of Sun and in the sub of Rahu, the
sublords of the 6 & 7, which would become
houses 8 & 9 to the XI house to get modified into
an unfavourable house.
General principles of linkage of the IX
house with the XI house are:
11,1: Name and Fame through education
11,2: Immense flow of money through
ancestral properties
11,3: Satisfaction in Communications and
negotiations
11,4: Numerous ancestral sources for
properties
11,5: Happiness and joy through illegal affairs
11,6: Success in higher studies or in Courts
11,7: Success through practical experiences
11,8: Unexpected changes in higher studies
1 1 ,9: Polygamy, Research studies
11,10: Profession as suited to educational

"Applications of Cuspai Interlinks”
qualifications
11 r1 1 : Great success in researches
11,12: Innovations and revealing great secrets
Since the IX house is carrying a
combination of 7 & 6 with it to act on the XI
house, the native would face financial difficulties
and would be urged to clear debts during the
DBA periods of Moon, the IX sublord whenever
it happens to transit in the star of Jupiter, the
11th sublord.
XI on IX:
The following are the principles of the
linkage of the XI house with the IX house:
9,1: Higher education, Polygamy, Responsible
capacity
9,2: Undue profits from ancestral properties
9,3: Passport, Visa, Electricity connections,
Water and Gas links
9,4: Litigations on ancestral properties
9,5: Pilgrimage, Trusteeships
9,6: Problems with wife due to polygamy
9,7: Legitimate second marriage
9,8: Continuing higher education after
passing through obstacles

"Applications of Cuspai lHter[infe>" 223
9,9: Excellence in higher education
9,10: National leader, Honorary posts,
Professors etc
9,1 1 : Taking oath of office
9,12: Success in research works, Troubles in jobs
XI house is favourable to the IX house. In
this chart, the sublord of the XI house, since it
carries 2, 4 & 10 with it, would induce the native
to have illegal romantic affairs with persons who
are already known to him during the DBA
periods of Jupiter, the XI sublord, while it also
happens to transit in the star of Moon, the sublord
of the IX house.
X on XI :
X house is a house of negation to the XI
house. In this example, the sublord of the X
house, Mercury is in the star of Venus, the
12th sublord and in the sub of Rahu, the 7th
sublord. Houses 12 & 7 would respectively
become houses 2 & 9 to the XI house to get
modified into a neutral house.
General principles of linkage of the X
house with the XI house are:
11,1: Higher Status through profession
11,2: Higher Income through profession

"Applications of Cuspai Interlinks" 224
11,3: Satisfaction in professional publicities
11,4: Corporations and Industries
11,5: Easy job such as a Supervisor
11,6: Excellence in profession
11,7: Self-entrepreneur
11,8: Hard worker
11,9: Higher professional education abroad
11,10: Doing interested things in profession
11,11: Fulfilment of professional desires
11,12: Secret agenda in profession
Since the X house is carrying a
combination of 12 & 7 with it to act on the XI
house, the native would face cordial relationships
with his wife during the DBA periods of Mercury,
the X sublord whenever it happens to transit in
the star of Jupiter, the 11th sublord.
XI on X:
The following are the principles of the
linkage of the XI house with the X house:
10.1 Status and respect through profession
10.2 Immense income through profession
10.3 Changes and transfers in profession
10.4 Profits and gains through lands and
properties

"Applications of Cuspai iHterfinfo" 225
10,5: Comfortable jobs, Supervisor, Artistic
fields
10,6: Income through permanent job
10,7: Partnership deeds with customers
10,8: Accepting bribes in profession
10,9: Learning professional education
10,11: Developments in profession
10,12: Discontinuing the Second Profession
XI house is neutral to the X house. In this
chart, the sublord of the XI house, since it
carries 2, 4 & 10 with it, would lead to the
failures in love affairs and would denote the
illhealth of his children during the DBA periods
of Jupiter, the XI sublord, while it also happens
to transit in the star of Mercury, the X sublord.
XI on XI:
As discussed in the paragraph of
"Potential of the XI house", the sublord of the
XI house Jupiter, whenever it happens to
transit in its own star would enable the native to
succeed in self efforts and make him to commit
in the fields of lands, vehicles and properties etc,.
11,1: Progress in life as desired
11,2: Money and materials as desired

"Applications of Cuspai Interlines"
11,3: Happy news and agreements
1 1 ,4: Education in the desired institution
11,5: Sexual pleasures with lover
11,6: Success in desires
1 1 ,7: Marriage with person of his choice
1 1 ,8: Relief from worries
11,9; Higher education as desired
11,10: Progress in the professional fields of his
choice
11,11: Touching the peaks of fortunes
11,12: Developing the desires and inability to
succeed
XII on X I :
XII house is neutral to the XI house. In
this example, the sublord of the XII house,
Venus is in the star of Moon, the sublord of the
9th house and in its own sub. Houses 9 & 12
would respectively become houses 11 & 2 to the
XI house to get modified into a favourable house.
General principles of linkage of the XII
house with the XI house are:
11.1 Status in secret activities
11.2 Higher monetary gains in secret activities
11.3 Satisfaction in binami properties
1 1 .4 Purchase of numerous properties, secretly

'Applications of Cuspai Interlines"
11,5: Secret pleasures
11,6: Great Success through secret activities
11,7: Winning opponents through secret
activities
11,8: Unexpected satisfaction in secret
activities
1 1 ,9: Satisfaction in research education
11,10: Status and respect in secret profession
11,11: Satisfaction of self-desires by secret
savings
11,12: Secret expenditures for self-desires
Since the XII house is carrying a
combination of 9 & 12 with it to act on the XI
house, the native would have a chance to
increase his knowledge and wisdom and would
get an involvement in research works and could
find him amidst happiness and joy during the
DBA periods of Venus, the XII sublord whenever
it happens to transit in the star of Jupiter, the
11th sublord.
XI on XII:
The following are the principles of the
linkage of the XI house with the XII house:
12,1: Reaching the peak of name and fame
12,2: Immense profits through investments and

"Applications of Cuspai Interlinks'' 228
capital
12,3: Secret information, Sudden recovery to
normal functioning by organs that have
failed recently
12,4: Binami properties, Litigations in properties
12,5: Cure from diseases
12,6: Secret success, Discharge from hospital
without getting cured
12,7: Marriage with a foreign citizen
12,8: Escaping from punishments, Inability to
remove the damaged parts of body
12,9: Success in research, Return from foreign
nations
12,10: Losing the second profession by
reinvesting the capital in the first
profession
12,1 1 : Relieved from secret disturbances
12,12: Masturbation, Comfortable beds
XI house is a house of negation to the XII
house. But in this chart, Jupiter, the sublord of
the XI house, since it carries 2, 4 & 10 with it,
would induce the native to succeed in research
works and to gain from profitable investments
during the DBA periods of Jupiter, the XI sublord,
while it also happens to transit in the star of
Venus, the XII sublord.

"Applications of Cuspai Interfiles"
PLANETARY SIGNIFICATIONS
(to the XI House)
The planets Sun and Saturn are in the sub
of Jupiter, the 11th sublord. Hence Sun and
Saturn are permanently tied with the XI house.
So during their respective DBA periods they
would act for the significations of the XI
house. The remaining 6 planets, during their
respective DBA periods, though they are not
linked to the XI house directly, at the time when
they happen to transit in the star of Jupiter, the
XI sublord, would act on the XI house,
accordingly.

"Applications of Cuspai Interlinks" 230
XII BHAVA
HOUSE OF INVESTMENTS
Wastes, Conspiracy, Co-ordination with
Trusts and Voluntary Organisations, Capturing
Foreign Criminals, Contacts with people of lower
strata, Secrets and Privacy, Second Profession,
Medical Research, Investigation, Cruel Plans,
Inventions of New Chemical Methods, Dangers
caused by Animals, Degradations, Return of the
Wicked People, Secret House, Completion,
Recruitment, Bed Comforts, Unexpected
Requests, Financial Troubles, Undue
Expenditures, Dacoits and Robbery, Rapes,
Poisoning, Smuggling, Threatenings, Riots and
Anti-Establishments etc., are some of the
unrelated significances of the 12th house from
the Asc.
The above could be re-classified as
follows as the matters to link with all the 12
houses:
Asc: Keeping Secrecy, Secret Activities,
Punishment, Inactiveness, Secret
Disturbances, Amputation of Organs
etc.,
II: Getting Repayment of the Outstanding
Money

"Applications of Cuspai Interlines" 231
or Articles, Return from Foreign Journey
III: Permanent Loss of Properties, Loss of
Organs, Death, Breach of Agreements
IV: Investments on House, Buildings, Lands,
Vehicles and Household Articles.
V: Discontinuing Romantic Affairs,
Separation of the Child from Mother, Child
with Lesser Span of Life
Vi. Medical Treatment in a Hospital, Clearing
Debts by Borrowings, Troubles caused by
Food, Withdrawal of Legal Proceedings
VII: Profits of the Partner, Separation from
Wife, Troubles and Worries arising out of
the Second Profession
VIII: Unexpected Troubles, Losses, Difficulties,
Getting Cheated, Being Punished
IX: Losses caused by Financial Crisis,
Difficulties caused by changes in
Profession, New Researches, Illegal
Affairs, Changes in the course of Research
Activities
X: Second Profession, Adulteration, Secret
Professional Activities, Investments for
Profession
XI: Investments in Interested Fields, Hiding
things

"Applications of Cuspai Interfiles"
XII: Researches, Secret things of Life and
Articles that are hidden, Investments,
Sabotage, Secret Sexual Pleasures etc.,
XII house would be favourable to houses
2,4,8,10 & 12 and would remain neutral to houses
3,7 & 1 1 . 12th house would be unfavourable to
houses 1,5, 6 & 9. The same could be possible,
when the sublord of the concerned cusps
happen to remain in the star or the sub of the
sublord of the XII house. In return, these houses
would react on the XII house as per their
significations cited above {Refer paragraph of
reclassifications}.
favourable to the XII house, while houses 1 , 5 &
9 would remain neutral. However, houses 3, 6,
7 & 11 would deny the significations of the XII
house. This could be possible when the sublord
of the XII house happen to remain in the star or
the sub of the sublord of the concerned cusps.
In return, the XII house would register its mark
on the concerned cusps, which are as follows:
XII on I: Secrecy in Life
XII on II: Secret Money
XII on III: Secret Informations
XII on IV: Secret Properties

"Applications of Cuspai iMterfin^s"
XII on V: Secret Affairs or Secret Arts
XII on VI: Secret Diseases, Secret Service,
Secret Enemies
XII on VII: Secret Partner
XII on VIII: Secret Troubles, Dangers
XII on IX: Secret Journey
XII on X: Secret Profession
XII on XI: Secret Satisfactions
POTENTIAL OF THE XII HOUSE:
In this example chart, the sublord of the
XII is Venus. It resides in the star of Moon, the
9th sublord and in its own sub (12). Hence,
potentially, the XII house is strong to itself in this
chart.
VENUS: Troubles and Expenses caused
by Women, Research in the field of arts, Secret
intrests etc
SUN, MERCURY and KETU are the
planets, which are in the star of Venus.
SUN: Diseases in Bone, Government
Loans, Subsidies, Heat-borne body, Litigations
MERCURY: Clarity in Expression, Utility
Instruments, Double-toned Voice

"Applications of Cuspai Interlinks" 234
KETU: Robbery and Theft, Subversive
and Secret Plannings, Underground Acts etc,.
While the significations of Venus remain
permanent during the entire life-span of the
native as far as to the significations of the 12th
house is concerned, the significations of SUN,
MERCURY & KETU would also come to the
fore front during their respective DBA periods.
Asc on XII
Asc is neutral to the XII house. But to draw
specifications of this general rule to this example
chart, we start studying the Asc sublord, Mars. It
resides in the star of Sun, the 6th sublord and in
the sub of Rahu, the 7th sublord. Houses 6 & 7
would become houses 7 & 8, the opposing
houses to the 12th house.
The general principles of linkage of the
Asc with the XII house are as follows:
12,1: Secret Activities with the use of SelfPrestige
12,2: Secret Investments
12,3: Secret Documents
12,4: Secret Property
12,5: Secret Gamblings

"Applications of Cuspai Interlines" 235
12,6: Secret Loans
12,7: Secret Communications
12,8: Secret Threatenings and Troubles
12,9: Secret Illegal Affairs
12,10: Secret Second Profession
12,11: Happiness in Secret Activities
12,12: Secret Worries, Secret Labour
Hence, in this chart, the sublord of the Asc,
Mars, whenever it happens to transit in the star
of Venus, the 12th sublord, would lead to
clear-off his debts by acquiring further loans
during its DBA periods.
XU on Asc:
The significations of the 12th house while
it happens to link with the Asc are, as follows:
1,2: Money and Materials through Self-Efforts
1,3: Living at a Far-off Place by leaving the
native
1,4: Profession in Lands, Vehicles and
Properties at native place
1,5: Breaks and Hurdles in Romantic Life
1,6: Expenditure on Diseases
1,7: Problems and Troubles from by Partners,

"Applications of Cuspai Interlinks"
Wife
1,8: Fear of Death, Attempt to Suicide,
Unexpected Troubles
1,9: Long Journeys, Research Education
1,10: Branches of Ventures through Self Efforts
1,11: Expenses or Investments on interested
Fields
1,12: Terrorism, Absconding from native,
In this example chart, the 12th house, a
house of negation to the Asc, through its sublord
Venus, carries 9 & 12 with it. Hence, during the
DBA periods of Venus, when it also transits in
the star of Mars, the sublord of the Asc would
enable the native to take up long journeys or
foreign travels.
II on XII
II house is favourable to the XII house.
Mercury, the sublord of the II house in this chart,
resides in the star of Venus, the sublord of the
12th house and in the sub of Rahu, the 7th
sublord. Houses 12 & 7 would become 1 & 8 to
the 12th house to become an unfavourable
house.
The General principles of linkage' ofthe II
house with the XII house are as follows:

"Applications of Cuspai Interfiles"
12,1: Expenditure on Secret Savings for Self
Needs
12,2: Repayments through Investments
12,3: Sale or Disposal of Valuables
12,4: Secret Conversion of Savings into
Properties
12,5: Loss in Gamblings with own Money and
Repayment of Loans by getting more
Loans
12,6: Lending Money to others
12,7: Theft of Money
12,8: Unexpected Losses
12,9: Financial Worries in Investments
12,10: Profession in Financial Sector
12,11: Financial Investments
12,12: Savings Secretly in Foreign Banks
Hence, in this chart, the sublord of the II
house, Mercury, as it carries 6 & 7 or to say 7 &
8 to the 12th house, would draw the native to
mortgage hisvaluables and jewels whenever it
happens to transit in the star of Venus, the 12th
sublord, during its DBA periods.

"Applications of Cuspai Interlinks"
XII on II:
The significations of the XII house while it
happens to link with the II house are cited as
follows:
2,1: Expenses out of Savings
2,2: Standing on own Investments
2,3: Sale of Costly Articles
2,4: Conversion of Money into Properties
2,5: Spendings on others
2,6: Savings out of Hard Labour
2,7: Seizure of Money by others
2,8: Troubles Related to Savings
2,9: Troubles out of Financial Crisis
2,10: Branches of Financial Institutions
2,11: Immense Growth of Income from
Investments
2,12: Further Investments
In this example chart, the 12th house,
house of favour to the II house, through its
sublordVenus, carries 9 & 12 with it. Hence,
during the DBA periods of Venus, when it also
transits in the star of Mercury, the II sublord, would
enable the native to get repayment of
outstanding money or articles that were lent.

"Applications of Cuspai Interlines
III on XII
III is an unfavourable house to the XII
house. But to draw specifications of this general
rule to this example chart, we start studying the
III sublord. Mars, the sublord of the III house,
resides in the star of Sun, the 6th sublord and in
the sub of Rahu, the 7th sublord. Houses 6 & 7
would become houses 7 & 8, the opposing
houses to the 12th house.
General principles of linkage of the III
house with the XII house are as follows:
12,1: Secret Oaths
12,2: Capital Documents or Share Certificates
12,3: Cheques, Certificates and Documents
12,4: Receipt of Documents of Properties
12,5: Learning Secret Arts
12,6: Mortgage
12,7: Binami Documents
12,8: Forgery Documents
12,9: Changes in the Clauses of Agreements
12,10: Second Profession - a Business Venture
12,1 1 : Return of Mortgaged Property
12,12: Sale of Mortgaged Property

"Applications of Cuspai Interfiles" 240
Hence, in this chart, the sublord of the III
house, Mars, as it carries 6 & 7 with it, whenever
it happens to transit in the star of Venus, the 12th
sublord, would lead to loss of properties and
holdings during its DBA periods.
XII on III:
The significations of the XII house while it
happens to link with the III house are cited as
follows:
3,1: Rejecting Information and
Communications
3,2: Investments through Agreements and
Negotiations
3.4 Failure of Talks on Lands and Properties
3.5 Difficulties in Child Birth
3.6 Success and Failures to mark a BreakEven in Negotiations
3.7 Favours to the Opponents in Negotiations
3.8 Loss and Troubles due to Negotiations
3.9 Changes and Amendments in
Agreements
3,10: Transfer in Profession
3,11: Undue Expenditure for the cause of
Pleasures

'Applications of Cusnai Interlinks1
3,12: Sale of Properties
In this example chart, the 12th house,
house of neutrality to the III house, through
itssublord Venus, carries 9 & 12 with it. Hence,
during the DBA periods of Venus, when it also
transits in the star of Mars, the sublord of the III
house would enable the native to reach an
accord to sell properties or liquidation of
investments.
IV on XII
IV house is a favourable house to the XII
house. Mercury, the sublord of the IV house in
this chart, resides in the star of Venus, the sublord
of the12th house and in the sub of Rahu, the 7th
sublord. Houses 12 & 7 would become 1 & 8 to
the 12th house to modify into an unfavourable
house.
General principles of linkage of the IV
house with the XII house are as follows:
12,1: Status and Respect through Investments
in Properties
12,2: Profits through Investments in Properties
12,3: Disposal of Properties
1 2,4: Purchase of a Property by selling another
Property

"Applications of Cuspai Interfm^s"
12,5: Multiplication of Investments in Properties
12,6: Investments in Building Hospitals
12,7: Troubles caused by the Relatives
12,8: Litigations and Troubles in Properties
12,9: Research Education
12,10) Second Profession in the fields of LVHPs
12, 11:' Constructing a house with Difficulties
12,12: Reinvestments in LVHPs
Hence, in this chart, the sublord of the IV
house, Mercury, as it carries 6 & 7 or to say 7 &
8 to the 12th house, would enable the native
tomake investments in properties, lands and
household articles etc, whenever it happens to
transit in the star of Venus, the 12th sublord,
during its' DBA periods.
XII on IV:
The significations of the XII house while it
happens to link with the IV house are cited as
follows:
4,1: Secret Plans
4,2: Investments for Lands and Properties
from Savings
4,3: Sale of Properties
4,5: Test-tube Child, Poultry

"Applications of Cuspai inter/itt^s"
4,6: Purchase of Housing Materials
4,7: Undue Expenditure caused by Relatives
4,8: Litigations and Losses in Properties
4,9: Higher Education in Foreign Countries
4,10: Purchase of Constructed House
4,11: Problems and subsequent Expenses in
Land and Properties
4,12: Conversion of Capital into Assets
In this chart, thel 2th house, favourable
to IV house, through Venus, carries 9 & 12 with
it. Hence, during the DBA periods of Venus, when
it also transits in the star of Mercury, the II sublord,
would enable the native to make further
investments in the properties that were
purchased already.
V on XII
V house is neutral to XII house. Jupiter,
the sublord of the V house in this chart, resides
in the star and sub of Mercury, the sublord of
houses 2, 4 & 10. Houses 2, 4 & 10 would
become 3, 5 & 11 to the 12th house to modify
into a highly favourable house.
General principles of linkage of the V
house on the XII house are as follows:

"Applications of Cuspai Interlinks" 244
12,1: Secret Sexual Pleasure
12,2: Income through Secret Arts
12,3: Publication of books on Secret Arts
12,4: Secret activities in the fields of Arts
12,5: Losses in the Investments in the field
of Arts
12,6: Service in Artisitic fields
12,7: Secret Love Marriage
12,8: Loss in Gamblings or in Artistic fields
12,9: Secret Worships and Illegal Affairs
12,10: Two different types of Profession in the
field of Arts
12,11 : Success in Secret Arts
12,12: Losses incurred in Secret Arts
Hence, in this chart, the sublord of the V
louse, Jupiter, as it carries 2, 4 & 10 or to say 3,
5 & 1 1 to the 12th house, would spoil the health
)f his child and would enable the native to select
he field of arts as second profession, whenever
: happens to transit in the star of Venus, the 12th
ublord, during its DBA periods.

"Applications of Cns pal Interlinks"
XII on V:
The significations of the XII house while it
happens to link with the V house are cited as
follows:
5,1 : Undue interest in Romance, Expenditures
caused by Children
5,2: Spendings for Bad Habits, Gamblings
and Arts
5,3: Losing Energy in the Involvement in Love
Affairs and the field of Arts
5,4: Children with Lesser Life Span
5,6: Viral fever, Loans for Romance
5,7: Problems developed after Love Marriage
5,8: Loss of reputation in Love Affairs
5,9: Deep thoughts and Wisdom, Research
Works
5,10: Arts and Culture as Profession
5,11: Extravagance for False Prestige
In this example chart, the 12th house,
though a house of danger to the V house, through
its sublord Venus, carries 9 & 12 with it. Hence,
during the DBA periods of Venus, when it also
transits in the star of Jupiter, the sublord of the V
house would enable the native to gain

'Applications of Cuspai Interlinks"
commissions through investments.
VI on XII
VI house is a house of opposition to the
XII house. Sun, the VI sublord in this chart,
resides in the star of Venus, the sublord of the
12th house and in the sub of Jupiter, the sublord
of houses 5 & 1 1 . Houses 12, 5 & 1 1 would become 1, 6 & 12 to the 12th house to remain as
an unfavourable house.
General principles of linkage of the VI
house with the XII house are as follows:
12,1: Incurable Disease
1 2,2: Investments by Borrowings ( Debentures)
12,3: Cheque Disbursements for Borrowings
12,4: Acquisition of Properties through
Borrowings
12,5: Clearing-off debts by Additional
Borrowings
12,6: Borrowings in Capitals
12,7: Excessive Borrowings subsequent to
Heavy Investments
12,8: Difficulties in Clearance of Debts by
Borrowings
12,9: Troubles caused in Investments by

"Applications of Cuspai Interfiles"
Borrowings
12,10: Finance as Profession
12,11: Commutation of Pension
12,12: Investments by Borrowings
Hence, in this chart, the sublord of the VI
house, Sun, as it carries 12, 5 & 11 or to say 1,6
& 12 to the 12th house, would enable the native
to dispose the loans, to undertake medical
treatments to get cured from diseases and would
provide better service conditions whenever it
happens to transit in the star of Venus, the 12th
sublord, during its DBA periods.
XII on VI:
The significations of the XII house while it
happens to link with the VI house are, as
follows:
6.1 Medical Treatment
6.2 Investments through Borrowings
6.3 Loss of Properties for Loans
6.4 Purchase of Properties through Loans
6.5 Gamblings and Speculation with Loans
6.6 Loans from Investments
6.7 Medical Treatment to Wife by acquiring
Loans

"Applications of Cuspcii Interlinks" 248
6,8: Losses due to Excessive Loans
6,9: Difficulties due to change in Profession
6,10: Two different natures of Profession
6,11: Hard labour in interested fields of
Profession
In this example chart, the 12th house,
house of opposition to the VI house, through its
sublord Venus, carries 9 & 12 with it. Hence,
during the DBA periods of Venus, when it also
transits in the star of Sun, the VI sublord, would
increase the loans of the native and the workload
of the 2nd profession further to severing the
diseases due to improper medical treatment.
VII on XII
VII house is a house of danger to the XII
house. Rahu, the sublord of the VII house in this
chart, resides in its own star, but in the sub of
Sun, the sublord of 6th cusp. Houses 7 & 6 would
become 8 & 7 to the 12th house to remain as an
unfavourable house.
General principles of linkage of the VII
house with the XII house are as follows:
1 2,1 : Secret Disturbances through Enemies
12,2: Financial Assistance by Life/Business

"Applications of Cuspai Interfm^s"
partner for Investments
12.3 Separation of Spouse from the Residence
12.4 Problems caused by Relatives
12.5 Increased Strength of Enemies
12.6 Separation of LVB partners
12.7 Secret Troubles caused by Life Partner
12.8 Quarrels and Fights
12.9 Illegal Activities
12,10: Partnership problems in the 2nd
Profession
12,11: Pleasures through Life Partner
12,12: Troubles caused by Binami Persons
Hence, in this chart, the sublord of the VII
house, Rahu, as it carries 7 & 6 or to say 8 & 7 to
the 12th house, would render difficulties from
opposite sex, cause for disharmony in family life
and would lead to health problems to wife
whenever Rahu happens to transit in the star of
Venus, the 12th sublord, during Rahu DBA
periods.

Applications of Cuspai Interlinks
XII on VII:
The significations ofthe XII house while it
happens to link with the VII house are cited as
follows:
7,1: Troubles caused by Opponents
7,2: Undue expenditure for Opposite Sex
7,3: Loss of holdings to Opponents
7,4: Purchase of Binami Properties
7,5: Social Relations with Opposite Sex
7,6: Separation of Partner or Wife
7,8: Losses caused by Enemies
7,9: Secret Illegal Affairs
7,10: Joint Ventures
7,11: Secret Assistance from Opposite Sex
In this chart, the 12th house, a neutral
house to the VII house, through its sublord
Venus, carries 9 & 12 with it. Hence, during the
DBA periods of Venus, when it also transits in
the star of Rahu, the sublord of the VII house
would trouble the course of the 2nd profession
added to a favourable atmosphere to the
partners or the other parties.

'Applications of Cuspai Interlinks"
VIII on XII
VIII house is a house of favour to the XII
house. Saturn, the sublord of the VIII house in
this chart, resides in the star of Mars, the sublord
of houses 1 & 3 and in the sub of Jupiter, the
sublord of houses 5 & 11. Houses 1, 3, 5 & 11
would become 2, 4, 6 & 12 to the 12th house to
become an unfavourable house.
General principles of linkage of the VIII
house with the XII house are as follows:
12,1: Unexpected Threats
12,2: Unexpected Investments
12,3: Unexpectedly missing the Documents
12,4: Sudden Investments on Constructions
12,5: Being cheated in Gamblings
12,6: Sudden Clearance of Debts by
Borrowings
12,7: Sudden Loss in Investments
12,8: Unexpected Loss of Outstanding Money
12,9: Unexpected Financial Troubles
12,10: Unexpected Additional Investments
in Profession
12,11: Unexpected Liquidation of Investments
12,12: Unexpected Misplacement of Money

"Applications .of Cuspai Interlines'' 252
Hence, in this chart, the sublord of the VIII
house, Saturn, as it carries 1,3, 5 & 11 or to say
2, 4, 6 & 12 to the 12th house, would lead to
change of residence, loss of properties and
holdings whenever it happens to transit in the
star of Venus, the 12th sublord, during the DBA
periods of Saturn.
xii on vm
The significations of the XII house while it
happens to link with the VIM house are cited as
follows:
8,1: Unexpected Punishment
8,2: Unexpected Loss of Money
8,3: Unexpected Loss of Properties
8,4: Unexpected Purchase of Properties
8,5: Troubles caused by Sudden Affairs of
Love
8,6: Unexpected Pressures to Repay Loans
8,7: Submission to Opponents
8,8: Sudden Failures in Life
8,9: Unexpected Long Journeys
8,10: Two Different Professions through hard
labour
8,1 1 : Litigations on Properties
8,12: Being Kidnapped
In this example chart, the 12th house,

"Applications of Cuspai InteWiK^s" 25 3
house of favour to the VIII house, through its
sublord Venus, carries 9 & 12 with it. Hence,
during the DBA periods of Venus, when it also
transits in the star the of Saturn, the sublord of
the VIII house would call for secret troubles and
agony.
IX on XII
IX house is a neutral house to the XII
house. Moon, the sublord of the IX house in this
chart, resides in the star of Sun, the 6th sublord,
and in the sub of Rahu, the 7th sublord. Houses
9, 6 & 7 would become 10, 7 & 8 to the 12th
house to become an unfavourable house.
General principles of linkage of the IX
house with the XII house are as follows:
12,1: Status and Respect through Research
Works
12,2: Loss of money in Illegal Affairs
12,3: Foreign Journeys
12,4: Research Education
12,5: Offerings to Deities
12,6: Genetical Disorders
12,7: Secret Second Marriage
12,8: Losses and Troubles due to Illegal Affairs,
Break in Higher Studies

''Applications of Citspai Interlinks” 254
12,9: Research Education at Foreign Places
12,10: Two different types of Research
Profession as suited to Education
12,11: Completion of Ph.d
12,12: Imports and Exports
Hence, in this chart, the sublord of the IX
house, Moon, as it carries 9, 6 & 7 or to say 1 0, 7
& 8 to the 12th house, would lead to disharmony
with wife caused by the illegal affairs of the
native and would enable the native to succeed
in his research efforts and long journeys
whenever it happens to transit in the star of
Venus, the 12th sublord, during its DBA periods.
XII on IX:
The significations of the XII house while it
happens to link with the IX house are cited as
follows:
9,1: Life at a Foreign Country
9,2: Investments by Liquidating Ancestral
Properties
9,3: Foreign Agreements, Visa, Passports
9,4: Research in Education or in Automobiles
9,5: Lay off in Business
9,6: Missing the Cheques

"Applications of Cuspai Interlinks" 255
9,7: Secret Second Marriage
9,8: Problems in Foreign Life
9,10: Two Different Professions as per
Educational Qualifications
9,1 1 : Success in Research Fields
In this chart, the 12th house, an
unfavourable house to the IX house, through its
sublord Venus, carries 9 & 12 with it. Hence,
during the DBA periods of Venus, when it also
transits in the star of Moon, the IX sublord would
enable the native to discover hidden things of
life and to undertake long journeys.
X on XII
X house is a favourable house to the XII
house. Mercury, the sublord of the X house in
this chart, resides in the star of Venus, the sublord
of the 12th house and in the sub of Rahu, the
7th sublord. Houses 12 & 7 would become 1 & 8
to the 12th house to modify into an unfavourable
house.
General principles of linkage of the X
house with the XII house are as follows:
12,1: Improving the Status through 2nd
Profession

'Applications of Cuspai Interlinks"
12,2: Multiple Professions
12,3: Business Ventures
12,4: Industrial Profession
12,5: Troubles caused by the Reinvestment of
the Capital of the First Profession in the
2nd Profession
12,6: Dual Responsibilities in Profession
12,7: Difficulties of the 2nd Profession
12,8: Mental Worries caused in the 2nd
Profession
12,9; Closure of the 1st Profession and
Installation of the 2nd Profession
12,10: Return to the 1st Profession alongwith
the 2nd
12,11: Closure of the 2nd Profession
12,12: Investment Business as the 2nd
Profession
Hence, in this chart, the sublord of the X
house, Mercury, as it carries 12 & 7 or to say 1 &
8 to the 12th house, would force the native to
incur losses by way of initiating a second
profession whenever it happens to transit in the
star of Venus, the 12th sublord, during its DBA
periods.

"Applications of Cuspai Interlinks" 257
XII on X:
The general principles of linkage of the
XII house with the X house are as follows:
10,1: Higher Posts in Investigation Departments
10,2: High Income through 3 Different
Professions
10,3: Vendor, Clerk, Typist
10,4: Two Professions in Manufacturing fields
10,5: Moving to the 2nd Profession by closing 1 st
1 0,6: Reaching Status through Two Professions
10,7: Break in Second Profession
10,8: Hard Labour in both the fields of
Professions
10,9: Leaving the I Profession and leading to
the II
10,10: Opening Branches of Profession
10,11: Breaks in the Attempts to initiate the
2nd Profession
In. this chart, the 12th house, a house of
favour to the X house, through its sublord
Venus, carries 9 & 12 with it. Hence, during the
DBA periods of Venus, when it also transits in
the star of Mercury, the sublord of the X house
would enable the native to to suffer through

"Applications of Cuspai Interlinks" 258
financial hurdles in his second line of business.
XIonXTI
XI house is a house of negation to the XII
house. Jupiter, the XI sublord in this chart,
resides in the star and sub of Mercury, the sublord
of houses 2, 4 & 10. Houses 2, 4 & 10 would
become 3, 5 & 11 to the 12th, to modify into a
totally favourable house.
General principles of linkage of the XI
house with the XII house are as follows:
12,1: Status and Respect earned as desired,
through Secret Activities
12,2: Profits in Investments as Planned
12,3: Breach of Agreements as Planned
12,4: Purchase of Properties as Planned
12,5: Learning Secret Arts, as desired
12,6: Gaining something at the Cost of the other
as Planned
12,7: Assistance to Others as desired
12,8: Losses and Troubles caused by Selfish
Motives
12,9: Illegal Affairs
12,10: Disappointments of Desires
12,11: Expenses incurred for Fulfilment of

"Applications of Cuspai interlinks"
Desires
12,12: Secret Involvements in the fields of
Interests
Hence, in this chart, the XI sublord
Jupiter as it carries 2, 4 & 1 0 or to say 3, 5 & 1 1
to the 1 2th house, would enable the native to get
good returns from the investments made
whenever it happens to transit in the star of
Venus, the 12th sublord, during the DBA periods
of Jupiter.
XII on XI:
The general principles of linkage of the
XII house on the XI house are as follows:
11.1 Keeping himself at Guess before others
11.2 Immense Money
11.3 Breaching the Agreements in the
Interests of the native
11.4 Purchase of Properties as per his choice
11.5 Romance as per Secret Desires
11.6 Clearing Debts through Additional Loans
as Planned
11.7 Separation from Partner as Planned
11.8 Investments on Insurance as Planned
11.9 Research as per Interests
11,10: Second Profession in Expected field

"Applications of Cuspai Interlines" 260
. 11,11: Maintaining Secrecy
11,12: Secret Investments
In this example chart, the 12th house, a
neutral house to the XI house, through its sublord
Venus, carries 9 & 12 with it. Hence, during the
DBA periods of Venus, when it also transits in
the star of Jupiter, the sublord of the XI house
would render troubles to the first profession by
way of the process of installation of the 2nd
profession.
XII on XII
As discussed in the para of "Potential of
the XII house", the XII sublord Venus is very
strong to itself to assure the prospects of the
second profession alongwith increased
investments and expenditures during its DBA
periods at the time when it also transits in its own
star.
Principles:
12.1 Secret Person
1 2.2 Reinvesting the Returns from Investments
12.3 Sale of Investments
12.4 Keeping Treasures in his Premises
12.5 Diseases in Blood Cells
12.6 Increasing Investments by Borrowings
12.7 Separation of Partner

"AppficatioHS of Cuspal Inter links"
12,8: Loss and Troubles through Investment
12,9: Senior Research Fellow
12,10: Return to the Previous Profession
12,11: Success through Secrecy
12,12: No Savings
PLANETARY SIGNIFICATIONS:
Venus is the cuspal sublord of the 12th
house. The planets Sun, Mercury and Ketu are
in the star of Venus; Hence these planets are
directly linked to the 12th house and they, in some
or the other way would act for the significations
of the 12th house whereas the remaining 5
planets, during their respective DBA
periods, would also actforthe 12th house, when
they happen to transit in the star of Venus, the
12th sublord.

"Applications of Cuspai Interlinks"
DBAS & TRANSIT
We have come to the last chapter of
PART-1 of "Applications of Cuspai Interlinks". So
far we have studied the applications of cuspai
interlinks with its three dimensions, such as the
Natal Potential, the Dasa Potential and the
Transit. These three are the inseparable
components of a Triangle to render results.
A: In every chapter, the Paragraph of
"Potential of ...House" has detailed the natal
strength of that house.
For example:

"Applications of Cusyai Interlinks'1
Only Houses 3, 9 & 12 are Strong.
Houses 2, 4 & 10 are Neutral (Average)
B:ln Planetary significations we have
studied the strength of each planet to that
particular house as per the following table.

"Applications of Cuspai interlinks" 264

"Applications of Cuspai Interlines" 265
C: Every planet always transits in a star
and a sub. The said planet through its starlord
and the sublord obtains linkage to the houses of
significations of the concerned starlord and the
sublord. Please remember that the starlord
shows the involvement and the sublord shows
the result.
For example, Sun as the 6th sublord
(12,5,1 1) in this chart, if it transits in the stars of
KET 2 : Earned income
VEN 12 ; Investments through borrowings
SUN 6 : Loans
MOO 9 : Financial crisis arising out of
excessive borrowings
MAR 1,3 : Diseases
RAH 7 : Disputes with wife
JUP 5,1 1 : Assistance from friends and
agreements
SAT 8 : Increase in loans and diseases
MER:2,4 &10: Professional success
These are only the trend and the involvement but the actuals are rendered only by the
sublords.

"Applications of Cusvai Interlinks"
STAR .... SUB
KET VEN .
KET SUN .
KET MOO
KET MAR.
KET ....... RAH.
KET JUP..
KET. SAT..
KET MER..
and it would go on upto the Venus-Ketu.
With its significations of 6, 12, 5 & 11 while in
Ketu star, Venus sub acts on 2 & 1 2 to mean the
native making reinvestments by acquiring loans.
However, Sun, during its transit in the star of Ketu,
would restrict and confine its involvement only to
the II house. If the native is not running the DBAS
periods of Sun then we need not bother about
the transit of Sun at all.
However, there may arise a situation when
we would have to concern about the transit of
Sun for predicting the lesser important events of
life, i.e., during Sun star days.
Also that Moon, during the course of its
transit in the stars of the remaining 8 planets other
than that of Sun, would transit in Sun bhukti,

"Applications of Cuspai Interlines" 267
i.e., almost once in every day. Moon would
transit in Sun antara for 9 times ( approximately
for not more than 1 2 minutes) in a star day and
in Sun sookshmafor 81 times (approximately for
not more than 2 minutes) in a starday. It is more
than enough for the planet Sun, to cater through
these 81 opportunities to register its role as the
6th cuspai sublord in the daily life of the native,
by influencing on his food habits, dressing sense,
receiving assistance from friends, petty
differences with his wife etc.,
This is how all the 9 planets act on the
daily life of a person through the transit of Moon
in their respective star and sub.
Some daily routines and Cuspai significations:
Leaving the Bed . ... 8
Brushing the teeth 2,3
Face washing 3,5
Taking a cup of coffee 2,6
Smoking a cigarette ... 3,8
Toilet 1,8,12
Reading News paper . 1,3,9
Listening to Radio 3, 5, 11
Taking Bath.. 3,5,12
Daily prayer 5,9

"Applications of Cuspai Interlines"
Break-fast with family :5> 6, 11
Making' telephone calls :3, 9
Costumes :1, 5,6
Footwear ;1, 3, 12
Vehicle :1, 3,4
Dropping child at the school.... :3, 5,8
Office :1 , 3,10
Meeting persons :7, 10
Chating about politics :5, 10
Joy and Happiness...-. :3, 5,9, 11
Scoldings by Boss. :7, 8
Mental tensions :3, 8
Taking medicines :6, 5
Return back home : 1 , 4
Purchase of fruits :4, 6
Playing for a while with child ... : 1 , 5 ,9
Listening to parents :2, 4,7,9
Viewing TV :3, 5, 11
Home works of profession :4, 10
Dinner at a hotel with friends .. :1 , 5 ,1 1 ,6
Romance with wife :1, 5, 7, 12
Sleeping :3, 9, 12
Dreaming :9, 12

"Applications of Cuspai Interfin^s" 269
Thus, all the 9 planets as agents of the
12 Bhavas act at every moment of our life. Or in
other words, every small event of life would come
to stage only when all the 9 planets combinedly
act for the same.
Since "PART I” has been conceived as a
book of general study, we have not discussed
much about the noteworthy events of life, such
as date of marriage, child birth, death of a
parent, major accidents, professional success etc
of the native through this example chart. Of
course, I hope that the readers would also
understand the fact that these things could not
be meaningfully explained with only one example
chart. Hence, with your co-operation, I would like
to reserve my explanations about these details
for PART II of this book, "Applications of Cuspai
Interlinks - Specific studies" with various example
charts.
However, let us analyze this chart in a
different angle. We have so far studied this
horoscope from "IN to OUT1 method, i.e., from
natal potential we have derived the predicitions
for all the DBAS periods. We can also study this
horoscope from the other way too, i.e., "OUT to
IN", from the current DBAS to predictions.
For example, on 01 .01 .2002, at about 7

"Applied tioHS of Citsvai InteAwh" 270
am, the native would be running
1. RAH DASA
2. MOO BHUKTHI
3. VEN ANTARA
4. JUP SOOKSHMA
DASA:
Dasa lord Rahu is the sublord of the 7th
house and transits in its own star and in the sub
of Sun. By being the cuspai sublord, the Dasalord
Rahu would Signify the matters of the 7th house
and would drive the native to commit and involve
in the significations of the 7th house. But due to
its residence in the sub of Sun, the sublord of
the 6th house, being the 12th to the 7th, these
involvements would face hurdles and difficulties:
Does it mean that, the Dasalord would
always be troubling the native? Here comes the
answer from TRANSIT.
DL-Rahu: 02 D 28 Min Gemini: MAR star
Rahu, the 7th sublord, as a carrier of 7 &
6 with it always, is at present transiting in the
star of Mars, 1 & 3 and in the sub of Ketu, the
resident in II Bhava.

"Applications of Cuspai interlinks" 271
There would be communication problems
between husband and wife, as signified by the
Dasalord.
BHUKTHI:
Bhukthi lord is Moon, the sublord of the
9th house and is in the star of Sun, the 6th sublord
and in the sub of Rahu, the 7th sublord.
Bhukthi lord, by being the 9th sublord, a
favourable house to the 7th house, which is
being strongly signified by the Dasalord, favours
and stands in accordance with the Dasalord for
a collective execution of involvements in the 7th
house matters. Since Moon resides in the star of
Sun, the 6th sublord, it is also going to trouble
like Rahu to the 7th house matters. The sublord
of Moon is Rahu, the 7th sublord. Here 7th
becomes the II house to the 6th to strengthen
the 6th house matters.
These results are common for 18 months.
But drawing this general nature to specify events
of a day, we have to study the transit of the
Bhukthi lord, Moon. It transits in PUSHYA &
ASHLESHA stars, the stars of Saturn and
Mercury on 01 .01 .2002. Saturn denotes the 8th
house. 8th house is favourable to 6th house to
favour the natural potential of the planet Moon.

"Applications of Cuspai Interlinks" 212
Since the 9th sublord Moon transits in the
star of 8th sublord, he is destined to face
disagreements with others.
ANTARA:
Venus is the Antara lord. It is the 12th
sublord and resides in the star of the 9th sublord.
Hence houses 9 & 12 would be operated during
Venus Antaras. Houses 9 & 12 become houses
4 & 7 to the 6th house, the combined
signification of the Rahu Dasa & the Moon
Bhukthi. So the Antara would try to put a break
on the combined effects of the DB lords.
Venus Antara would run for about 3
months in Rahu Dasa, Moon Bhukthi. During
these 90 days, Venus would nearly transit in 6 to
7 stars. On 01 .01 .2002, the planet Venus is in
13 D 21 M in SAGITTARIUS. It is very strong
with its natal natures, as it is in its own star and
sub. Hence the planet Venus would reflect its
natural and natal strength for the native in secret
and illegal involvements.
SOOKSHMA:
Jupiter is the sookshma lord. It is the
sublord of houses 5 & 1 1 . Houses 5 & 1 1 would
become 12 & 6 to the 6th house, the

"Applications of Cuspai Interlinks "273
signification of the DB lords; Houses 5 & 1 1 would
become 9 & 3 to the 9th house, the
signification of the Antara Lord. Hence Jupiter
tends to be on the side of Venus , the AL. Jupiter
sookshma would last for 1 2 days in Venus Antara.
On 1.1. 2002, the planet Jupiter is in 16D47Min
GEMINI, to stay in Rahu star, Venus sub. Jupiter
is in the star of DL and in the sub of AL. Sub is
stronger than the star and hence Jupiter would
stick to its standings with Venus.
DL Rahu & BL Moon are on the one side
and AL Venus & SL Jupiter are on the other side
to the 6th house significations.
Sookshma forces the native to suffer with
disharmony in his family life.
STAR DAY:
Let us put aside for sometime the fact that
Moon is the Bhukthi lord. In the series of DBAS
periods, stardays are the minute parts. Here on
01 .01 .2002, Moon transits in Saturn star from the
early morning and enters into Mercury star at
around 9 pm. So the whole day is in the control
of Saturn.

DASALORD ofthe DAY:
Saturn is the cuspai sublord of the 8th
house and it always carries 1 , 3, 5 & 1 1 with it.
Saturn, is in the star of Moon (9) and in
the sub of Jupiter (5 & 11) would enable the
native to gain new acquaintances.
BHUKTHI LORDs:
During these periods the general trend
would be according to their natural significations,
provided their current transits also favour their
natal natures. Let us see about the transits on
Star Sub
KET is in KET VEN (2&12) -Strong
VEN is in VEN VEN (12*) -Strong

"Applications of Cusyai iHterfmfo" 275
Transit-wise, Venus is the strongest
planet. Events that happen during Venus bhukthi,
that is from 6.57 to 10,37 am are the events to
mark in the diary of the native's life for
Thus we can also extend our study to the
ANTARAS of the DAY and to the SOOKSHMAS
of the day.
LAGNAS ( Ascendants ) :
The earth revolves about itself once a day
to mean that there would arise all the twelve signs
as ascendants of each day. These ascendants
also denote a point or two in our life.
In this example chart
Vrischiga/Scorpio is the... Ascendant sign
Dhanus/Sagittarius II
Makara/Capricorn Ill
Kumbha/Aquarius IV

Meena/Pisces .V
Mesha/Aries VI
Rishabha/Taurus VII
Mithuna/Gemini VIII
Kataka/Cancer IX
Simha/Leo X
KanniA/irgo XI
Thula/Libra XII
For the matters of the daily routine, the
sign, that is rising as Ascendant in the east would
denote the significations of that concerned
Bhava. If the planet Moon coincides with the
series of lords of the Ascendant, then the event
matures into a reality.
CONCLUSION
About PART II:
Part II of the "Applications of Cuspai
interlinks" would contain the study of different
charts for a single question. For example we may
have to study the prospects of marriage,
married life and children or the prospects of
employment opportunities and professional
success etc., As you know, these are not easy
questions to answer. For these questions, only
when we .become familiar with a set of
horoscopes, we can easily formulate a uniform

"Applications of Cnspai Interlinks” 277
methodology of applications of Cuspai Interlinks.
About PART III:
In my early days of astrological studies, I
was more interested in the study of smaller
events of life and the daily routines. There are
more than a few hundred questions before us
for the study of our day-to-day life.
1 . Will the person turn-up ?
2. Could I meet her ?
3. Could I get loans ?
4. When will the expected person return back ?
5. Will I receive the expected message ?
6. When will I catch the bus ?
7. When will I reach the destination ?
8. Will I get my lunch in time ?
9. When could I finish the work?
1 0. When will I receive the payment? and so on.
As you know, these things could be
studied by the Natal Chart also. But drawing a
specification by narrowing down the DBAS
periods, and study of the Star of the Day and
Bhukthies, antaras, sookshmas and the
corresponding sign, star and sub of the
Ascendant, is laborious and time-consuming. For

"Applications of Cuspai Interfiles" 278
these cases of daily routines, we may opt for the
study of horary charts. In Part III, I have opted to
detail the study of the horary charts alone.
Points to ponder:
The Principles of Zodiac or Kalachakra
gain an importance in denoting the style of an
event. The planets and kalachakra unitedly
determine the various types and kinds of
persons and events whom the native happens
to meet in a single day. From this example chart,
on 1 .1 .2002, since it is a Saturn star day, 1 , 3, 5
& 1 1 would be in operation for him. It means
that the matters such as communication,
happiness, short journeys, mutual agreements
and harmony are due to happen. What kind of
joy and with what kind of persons would also be
determined by the corresponding Ascendant and
the sign TAURUS, the sign in which
Saturn, the starlord of the day of transit of Moon
is positioned.
Presume that the the native is a small
vendor. If so, why should a person who has
travelled more than a thousand kilometres across
the country happen to meet him to buy a packet
of cigarettes? Why should a retired officer of
ITS cadre and a famous astrologer of our times
converse through telephone at a particular time?

"Applications of Citspai Interlines" 279
Why at all do we receive wrong calls sometimes?
It is due to the rise and fall of not only the
12 signs, but also due to all the 27 stars and 243
“Kaalamsaas”orsubs in a single day. Every sign
or star or sub has its own style. These factors
should also be taken into account for accurately
pinpointing the details of an event.
The native lives with his wife for nearly
three quarters of his life; The native gains a few
friends and maintains their friendship for more
than half of his life period. The native enters into
a successful business agreement with a partner
for a few years. The native establishes a
business contact with a person for a few months.
The native enjoys the company of a person for a
few days. The native co-travels occassionally with
an outstanding personality or a VIP for a
duration of a few minutes. The native buys a pair
of bananas from a street vendor within a few
seconds. The native meets with a pedestrian, in
accidents for a few micro-seconds. All these
persons and the personalities are generally
denoted by the VII Bhava. Howto distinguish or
to differentiate each one with the other?
VII Bhava - Permanent and legal ties
IX Bhava - Illegal ties with unknown persons
XI Bhava - Persons who come to share the

"Applications of Cuspai Interfiles" 280
joy of the moment
III Bhava - Persons as commercial contacts
IV Bhava - Artistes and others
i) Persons, who had their birth in the stars
of the 7th cuspai point establish permanency in
relations. For example, in this chart, the 7th house
is "VEN-MOO-RAH-MER". Mercury borns and
Rahu borns would prolong their relations with this
native for a longer period.
ii) The native is currently running Rahu
dasa. Persons born in Rahu star would sail along
with the native for almost during this Rahu dasa.
iii) Persons born in Moon star would come,
meet and may live with the native till the end of
this current bhukthi period.
iv) Current Antara is that of Venus. The
native would meet the Venus borns, of course to
stand as means for the wasteful expenditures of
the native (12).
v) Current Sookshma lord is Jupiter and
the Jupiter borns would also be met by the
native.
vi) Current starday(01 .01 .2002) is Saturn.

"Applications of Cuspai Iwter/iw^s" 281
People born in Saturn star or of lower strata would
be met by the native on 01.01.2002.
vii) Between 10.30 am to 11.40 am on
01.01.2002, the native would meet with persons
born in Sun stars, or with civil servants or
orthopaedicians etc.
Why do these persons carry a chance to
meet with the native? Because they would also
be running their own respective and matching
DBAS.
Imagine that the native travels in a bus
and he occupies the middle seat of a three seater.
The person who sits on his right side is denoted
by the II house. That is why in Hindu marriages
wife is asked to stand or sit on the right side of
the husband. The person who sits on his left side
is denoted by the XII house. The person who is
sitting on the left side leaves his seat and finds a
better seat in the bus after a few minutes. It is
so, because the sub, the star and the sign of the
Asc have moved in this duration.
The co-author and the driving force of this
book, Shri S.P.Khullar, I.T.S., used to ask this
author to attempt to detail the astrological mode
of distinction between the younger brother and
the father-in-law as both fall in the category of

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 282
the III house, between the wife and the second
child (VII house), between the second wife and
the third child or the grandchild (IX house), etc.,
It is not generally advisable to study the
details of these relatives with the use of the
horoscope of a person under study. Readers
would have noticed that in all the preceding
chapters, we had never attempted to make
separate predictions for anybody other than the
native himself. For example, even in the chapter
for the VII house, we have only discussed the
prospects and problems to be experienced only
by the native, rendered by the wife, the partner
or the society.
But, as a part of our study of astrological
concepts and cuspai interlinks, I know that, I have
an obligation to share some of my experiences
and views, though they are subject to certain
limitations.
All the social relationships of a person
could be classified into two catagories :
1. Relationship of the Asc, as acquired
directly by the native: Father, Mother, Brothers
and Sisters, Sons, Daughters and Wife or Wives.
These relationships, are denoted by Asc and the
respective houses.

"Applications of Cusvai Interlinks" 283
2. Second tier of relationships such as
in-laws, are acquired relationships through the
prime tier of relatives. For example, Fatherin-law is a relationship acquired through wife that
is the 7th house. While 1 & 3 are in operation, it
stands for younger brother. While 7 & 3 are in
operation, it denotes about his father-in law. 1 &
9 denotes either father or the second wife while
5 & 9 denotes the grandson.
Now even in the prime-tier of relationships,
the 7th house denotes wife and the second child.
Many people live with their second child even
after the death of their wives. In our modern times
quite a few people abort the second pregnancy
and live happily with their wives and first child.
How could it be? When the Dasa denotes 1 & 7
and a set of unfavourable results to 1 & 7, then it
is due to wife. When the DASA denotes 1 , 5 & 7
and a set of unfavourable results, it is due to the
second child. Ifit is 1 , 3 then it is younger brother.
If it is 1 , 3 & 5, then it is second younger brother.
If it is 1 & 5 it is the first child. If it is 3, 5 & 1 1 ,
then it is wife of the second younger brother.
When it is 5 & 11 , it is first daughter-in-law. When
it is 7 & 5, it is elder brother in law. 4 & 6 denote
aunty while 7 & 10 denotes mother-in-law. 9 &
11 denotes sister of the father while 5 & 11
denotes the second grandchild.

These complexities could better be
handled with the use of current DBAS and
transit and not with the Natal potentials; Of
course, astrologers of the 21 st century would not
find these kinds of troubles in the coming future
as the Indian joint family system is slowly made
to wither by small and compact family norms.
I would once again like to remind the
readers that I have only multiplied the scope of
distinctions of events with the use of cuspai
interlinks and I am aware that nothing is
complete in itself. I would like to advocate the
readers to confine the use of principles of cuspai
interlinks as a means and a way to proceed
further in a scientific and rational direction.
GOOD LUCK

The following books in K B System by
Shri K. Baskaran can also be had from us :
1. Secrets of R.P & The Birth Time Rs 100
2. Principles of Cuspai Interlinks Rs 165
3. Bhava Munai Thodarbukalin
Rahasiyangal Part 1 ( Tamil ) Rs . 75
4. Bhava Munai Thodarbukalin
Rahasiyangal Part 2( Tamil ) Rs . 75
5. K.B's Panchangam 2002 Rs 125
6. K.B's Panchangam 2003 Rs 125
7. Astrological Tables
as Ready-Reckoner ( Part 1 Tamil ) . Rs 125
8. Astrological Tables
as Ready-Reckoner ( Part 2 Tamil ) . Rs 125
9. Applications of Cuspai Interlinks
10. Applications of Cuspai Interlinks
