READABLE DATASET
================================================================================
Original file: jyotish_kp_year_book_2010.json
Dataset number: 242 of 455
Format: valid JSON
Structure: Object / structured dataset
Original size: 202,251 bytes
Top-level fields: 11
Title: Jyotish_KP year book 2010
Creator: —
Date: —
Description: —

CONTENT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
METADATA AND OTHER FIELDS
  • title: Jyotish_KP year book 2010
  • creator: —
  • date: —
  • description: —
  • subject: —
  • identifier: —
  • source_folder: Surya Siddhanta XML
  • total_pages: 159
  • total_words: 37527
  • text_quality:
    • ocr_word_validity_score: 0.89
    • quality_tier: good
    • note: —

FULL TEXT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SI.No.
CONTENTS
ARTICLE HEADING
PAGE NO.
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

MERCURY DENOTES
MULTIPLE BUSINESS
By K. SUBRAMANIAM
When I visited Mumbai recently I happened to meet one of my clients who is also a follower of
K.P. Method.
Being a qualified Doctor in abroad, he is also having a lots of business activities in India and
overseas countries.
According to his horoscope, this gentleman is born in Patna, in a very decent family and his
father is a great scholar and was a Head Master of a school. By his father’s wishes he has got faith
in religion and worship Lord Ganesh and Lord Shiva. He finished his lower education in India and
higher education in overseas in the medical field. Initially he had interest to do a textile business
but faced lot of problems and difficulties in it.
When he was in overseas, during the 9th and 12th house operation he was thinking about his
profession and its existence in India as well as in abroad.
He entered into the following fields which are,
a) Pharmaceutical : Medicines, Marketing and distribution business in overseas countries.
b) Manufacturing of tablets in India, c) Diamond Business d) Film, Telefilm and Finance.
Let us see how one can do so many business at a time?
According to KP we have to refer the houses II, VI, X and IX for business activities in India.
House XI is for fulfillment of ambition and XII is for overseas.
Jupiter is a Karaka for finance. Mercury for the purpose of cash flow. He is also the planet of
pharmacy and business.
The native’s star is Jyeshta (Kettai). Normally a person born in this star can easily show the
talents in business which means it is the planet Budha’s power.
In his horoscope II house is Jupiter and is in cuspal position which is in the constellation of Rahu
and sub of Rahu. The II house shows the source of income. This person is a Hindu and his source
of income is mostly from Muslim countries. Considering the VI and X houses, the VI house lord is
Mars which is in the constellation of Moon in the sub of Moon. X house lord is Sun and he is in the
constellation of Ketu sub of Saturn.
Coming to the IX house, the lord is Venus which is in the Sun star, Jupiter sub. So in his horoscope,
signification of II, VI, X & IX are all clearly denoting Mercury, Jupiter, Venus, Sun & Saturn.
A special feature is that Moon is in Mercury Star and Mercury sub. So Moon indicates sharpness
and Mercury indicates Medical & pharmacy field. Now we can analyse the dasa, bukthi & anthara
positions.
Upto 2-10-2011, the person will have Venus dasa, Kethu bukthi. Then he is entering into Sun
dasa after that Moon dasa and so on.
This person is interested in Occult science also because Uranus & Mercury are strong. Venus
is Karaka for gems and diamonds and luxury items.
The V house lord is Mars who is in the constellation of Kethu sub of Kethu, in his horoscope
which is an abortive planet. In 2-12-2008 he entered Venus dasa Mercury bukthi.This denotes
that after so many years God has blessed him with female triplets in 2008.
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

Sun happened to be in the constellation of Kethu/sub of Saturn. Now kindly see the planetary
position of Kethu. I have come across in several triplet cases this as the main factor, I request all
KP followers to do research on this matter.
CUSPAL POSITION
PLANET POSITION
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

TABLE OF SIGNIFICATOR
VIMSOTTARI DASA BHUKTHI
GOOD LUCK
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

HEALTH-TRANSIT OF PLANETS IN 2010
By
ARUDHRA
Dear Sir,
1 enclose a horoscope. Kindly let me know whether his health will be affected in 2010,
as the planets are moving in the signs detrimental to the placements at the time of birth,
and he is sick for over 10 years.
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

The horoscope is taken for
discussion on a Sunday when moon is
moving through Swathi star in Thulam.
Hence Sukra, Rahu, Sun must be ruling
planets at birth.
As per the horoscope submitted by
you, the native is bom inThula Lagna ruled
by Sukra, in Arudhra star owned by Rahu
in Mithuna Rasi. From 12-11-2009 he is
running Sukra Dasa, Rahu Bhukti, Rahu
anthra. His lagna is in Rahu star, Moon in
Rahu star. Hence the horoscope presented
by you is correct and there is no need for
any correction of horoscope.
For longevity the following houses are
to be discussed.
3rd and 8th houses are considered
for longevity. 6th house portends ailments
(Rohasthana) 12th house denotes
hospitalization, expenses due to treatment.
(Mokshasthana). 11th house for cure,
which happens to be Bhadhakasthana for
Thula Lagna. Houses 2 and 7 are Maraka
houses.
The Badakasthana as per lagna, also
should be considered in addition to the
above. Sani Ayul Karaka. In the chart
presented SaniAyul Karaka is aspecting
11th house, which also happens to be
Bhadhakasthana for Thula lagna, which
promises Poorna Ayul i.e. above 72 years
with ailments now and then.
Sevvai, lord of 2 and 7
(Marakasthanas lord), is in 8, in Guru's sub,
aspects 11th house by 4th aspect, 2nd
house by 7th aspect and 3rd house by 8th
aspect (house of longevity)
11th house sub is Guru which is
deposited in 12th Bhava in Sukra’s sub.
Sukra, lord of lagna sign, is in 7
(Marakasthana) aspects lagna. Sukra is
the sub lord of 2,6,8 and 12 in birth chart,
Sukra is in its own star, Rahu sub.
This native will be running Sukra
Dasa, Rahu Bhukti Rahu anthra Sani
Sookshma, between 27-12-2009 to 23-12010 when he will have breathing problem,
allergy due to some medicine which will
create red marks in body, and have
treatment as Sani is in an airy sign.
will be operating Sukra Dasa, Rahu Bhukti,
Rahu antra, Budha Sookshma. Rahu and
Budha are in SastaAstama.
Sani will be in Vakra in Kanni in
Hastham star from 14-1-2010 and be in
Sasta Astama to its radical position at
birth. (Sani in Kumba at birth and in Kanni
by transit)
Guru will be in Kumba in Sathabisha
star owned by Rahu and in SastaAstama
to its radical position (At birth in Kanni and
by transit in Kumba)
In transit Rahu will be in Dhanur rasi
in Uthrashada star owned by SunBhadhakasthana lord. Rahu will be in 12th
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

house to its radical position and in the 3rd
house to Janma lagna which denotes
longevity and aspects Moon at birth.
Sun lord of 11 will be in Makara in
Sravana star from 24-1-2010. Sewai will
be in Vakra in Aslesha star till 11-3-2010.
From 21-1-2010 Budha will be in
Dhanus (3rd house) in Poorvashada ruled
by Sukra which is deposited in
Marakasthana.
Sukra will be in Makara rasi owned
by Sani, in Sravana star owned by Moon,
which was in Rahu’s star at birth.
Now he will be depressed, worried
due to people around him for many
reasons.
Hence during this sub period of
Rahu, this native will have treatment and
feel better, even though he will continue to
suffer due to heavy breathing, gassping
and problem but when he steps into Sukra
Dasa. Rahu Bukthi, Budha antra from
9-3-2011 he will get relieved off the
suffering in this world, and have
comfortable journey to paradise, as Guru
is aspecting 8th house to lagna he wilt
enjoy providential blessings and the end
will be sudden due to breathing problem.
At 29-1-2010 Friday Moon in
Punarpushya star he should be over careful
regarding his health and while taking
medicines or going out atone to avoid
unnatural heath.
GOOD LUCK
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

TWO MARRIAGES
(For K.P. Students only)
Dr. N.S. VISHWAPATHY SHASTRY,
Professor of Astrology
Sri Kalabyraveswara Samskirta
Veda Agama Maha Vidyalaya
SriAdichunchanagiri Kshetra-571811
Mandy District-Karnataka. Mobile : 9448018711
1 am herewith analysing three charts who went two Marriages at early age.
1)Boy Date of Birth 13-8-1979
Timeof Birth 1.10AM 1ST
Place of Birth Mysore
K.P. VPAyanamsa used : 23°33'42”
Sun Dasa from 18-3-06
Sat Bhukti upto 6-1-2010
Girl-1 Date of Birth 24-11-1981
Time of Birth 6.26 PM
Place of Birth Bangalore
Nirayana Positions
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

Girl-ll Date of Birth 18-12-1982
TimeofBirth 1.18PM
Place of Birth Mysore
Guriji Prof. KSK. has clearly explained in Book IV Marriage, Married life & children Pages
Let us examine and analyse
1. Boy’s Chart
7th lord is Mars, he is in dual house, Sub Lord is Jup. deposited in Mer star, all planets are
in between Rahu and Ketu
2. Girl-1 Chart
7th lord is Mars, Sublord is Mercury. AH planets are in between Rahu & Ketu
3. Girl-ll Chart
7th lord is Mer who is in dual house posited in Venus Star, who is also in 3rd house sublord
is Mer posited in Venus Star who is also in dual house. All planets are in between Rahu
Ketu.
Planets who are in between Rahu and Ketu is said to be Kalasarpa Yogam.
What Happend?
Boy and Girl (I) first got married on 23-9-07 and diversed in a short period. The Boy got
married again on 30-8-09 with the Girl-ll who also married and diversed in a short period.
Pranams to Guruji Sri KSK
Good Luck
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

ABROAD TRAVEL
K.P. SUB AND AYANAMSA VERIFIED
JYOTHIDA GNANAS1ROMANI KATAKAM RAMASAMY
45, Sri Vigneshwara lllam, Mahalikudi, Samayapuram (po)
Trichy Dt. Phone : 0431-2670392
Our Guruji K.S.K. says that mark who is the Sub lord of a particular cusp. Further
notice whether any planet is posited in its constellation. If so that planet will be a very
strong significator, because according to K.P. it is the Sub and Sub alone which decides a
particular matter.
In this article it has been my sincere endeavour to high light this consideration.
Astrological AnalysisThis chart is to be studied from the point of view of Foreign Travel (or) overseas
To ascertain whether one will have the opportunity to go overseas or not the houses
3,7,9,12 to be considered (K.P. Vol. II, page 276)
First of all, let us consider 3rd house. 3rd house is occupied by Kethu, Sun and
Venus. No planet is in Kethu Star and Sun star.
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

Kethu, Sun, Venus and Mars all are in the purvashada constellation ruled by Venus.
So let us take Kethu, Sun, Venus and Mars.
Let us consider 7th house, Mars is the occupant of 7. No planet in Mars star. Hence
take Mars.
Now consider 9th house. It is ruled by Rahu, No planet in Rahu Star. Hence take
Rahu.
Now consider 12th house. It is occupied by none. Mercury is lord of 12. Only Mercury
in Jyeshta. So take Mercury.
As in all six significator have come to surface, we must start the process of elimination
by diving deep into the subject Matter.
Kethus who is the significator from the analysis of third Bhava is in no way connected
with house 7,9, 12. Hence eliminate Kethu. Similar is the case with Sun. So also eliminate
Sun.
Venus is in the Sub of Mercury who is the lord of 9 and 12. Hence Venus is a strong
Significator. But more stronger than Venus is the planet posited in its constellation and
sub. That planet is Mars alone. One may say that Kethu is also in the constellation and sub
of Venus. So Kethu should not be eliminated but Kethu has got no connection with any of
the houses 7,9,12. Whereas Mars is the sole occupant of 7th Bhava, hence Mars is stronger.
So forget Kethu and Venus and take Mars as a strong significator.
Rahu is posited in Gemini, a sign ruled by Mercury who is lord of 9 and 12 and a
significator. Further Rahu is a node, hence prominent. More further it is posited in the sub
of Mercury hence Rahu is a very strong significator.
Mercury is posited in its own constellation, hence strong. Further it is in the sub of
Saturn and in association with Saturn. Hence Mercury is decidedly a significator. Let us be
more considerate in our approach. According to K.R if a node occupies the sign of
significator it will depuise for that planet in all respects. In this case, Rahu as a node is
posited in the sign Gemini ruled by Mercury. So forget Mercury take Rahu as a strong
significator. Hence from the analysis our strong significators are Rahu and Mars alone.
3rd, 7th, 9th cusps fall in the sub of Saturn. Hence Saturn is very prominent. Saturn rules
pushyam, Anusham, Utharapathra pada only. Saturn is in Anusham. Hence take Saturn
too as a very strong significator.
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

Please mark that Saturn has come as a significator from the analysis of the houses,
but as it is in association with Mercury and in its own constellation it will act as an agent of
Mercury and will do what Mercury promises to do.
12th cusp falls in the sub of Jupiter. Jupiter is not one of our significator at all. No
planet is in Jupiter star. Hence eliminate Jupiter.
Hence from this analysis most strong significator are only Saturn Rahu and Mars.
CONFIRMATION :
Actually the native of the chart during Saturn dasa Rahu Bhukti and MarsAnthra left
to U.K. on 3-10-1951 . That day is ruled by Mercury moon’s sign Libra ruled by Venus and
Moon’s Star is Swati ruled by Rahu.
It is to verify the K.P. Ayanamsa and Sub-lord theory. The way Mr. K.S.K. attaches
importance to the constellations and subs of different cusps and their proper application in
any particular chart is really Marvellous. Hence cusps must be given their due importance
in analysis of any chart.
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

SUICIDE BY A MOTHER OF TWIN
DAUGHTERS - K.P. EXPLAINS
K.P. KUPPII GANAPATHI, ASTROLOGER (K.P)
NO.G/12, SECOND FLOOR, DDASFS FLATS, POCKET-2,
NILGIRI APARTMENTS, (BEHIND SARASWATHI BAL MANDIR)
NARAINAVIHAR, NEW DELHI. 110 028 (PH)®011-2579 4140
I am discussing a case where a Mother who gave birth to Twins commits suicide due
to some misunderstanding with her husband. Here 1 would like the readers to understand
the dicta of the Medical Faculty that in twin births, the first born is taken as younger to the
later born since the later born is conceived first and the first born is conceived later. Normally
every one of the K.P. followers check the correctness of the given birth time with the help of
RULING PLANETS and then verify the birth time with some of the events given to them,
looking into the period Lords operating at that time i.e., Dasa, Bukthi, Antharand Sookshma
respectively. In this connection 1 would like to draw the attention of all K.P. followers to an
article written in ASTROLOGY AND ATHRISHTA by the well known Mathematician and
GREAT K.P. SCHOLAR, SRI M.G.G.NAIR, who introduced the concept of looking into the
Cuspal links and also the ANNUAL SOLAR RETURN CHART for the year in which the
event has happened. I am giving below an extract from this article for the benefit of those
who have not read it so far,
I quote - “Followers of K.P. will do well to test the chart erected from the recorded
birth time cautiously with the help of Ruling Planets before thinking in terms of rectification.
After checking with ruling Planets the Chart should also be tested thoroughly with the known
events in the life of the Native or the Native’s Parents and so on. MARRIAGE OR
PROMOTION OR DEATH OF FATHER OR MOTHER TAKING PLACE IN A CERTAIN
DASA. BHUKTI AND ANTHARA DOES NOT VOUCH FOR THE ABSOLUTE
ACCURACY OF THE CUSPS WHICH IS A NECESSITY IN K.P. The Subs of the
Cusps themselves have, therefore, to be brought into play in such tests. More than the
Lagna Sign and the Planets, if any, therein, it is the Sub Lord of the Cusp of the Lagna and
the Constellation it occupies that describe the Characteristics of the Native correctly. If the
Native is exceptionally rich, the Sub Lord of the 2nd Cusp should necessarily signify strongly
6 and 11. Knowing the pathogenic effects of Signs and Planets, any notable diseases the
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

Native or, say, his Parents might have suffered from could be tested with reference to the
Sub on the 6th Cusp counted from the house representing the person concerned. The Sub
Lord of the 10th Cusp, its constellation Lord and the Sign in which the latter is placed
together with the houses Signified by these Planets fix the occupation of the Native and so
on. The ruling Planets fix the job of the Native (if employed) and so on. The ruling Planets
(viz.,) the Lord of the Janma Nakshatra, Janma Rasi, Lagna and so on) of the Native's
Parents could be tested on the relevant Cusps. One should venture on prediction only after
satisfying oneself about the accuracy of the Cusps in this manner." - unquote.
In this article I am using this concept for this particular event. For this I am using the
Birth Charts of the Twins and also their ANNUAL SOLAR RETURN CHARTS for checking
the event of death of their beloved Mother by suicide. For this, the two sets of Charts, one
the Birth Charts of the Twins and the other the ANNUAL SOLAR RETURN CHARTS,
separately for each one of them, have been given at the end.
EVENT MOTHER COMMITS SUICIDE ON 28-04-2001.
As usual let me first place before the readers the Rules as K.R Principles for anyone
to commit suicide. For this they may refer to my article on this subject published in the
Annual Issue of this magazine for the Year 2004- Page 15 onwards. There I have discussed
about a case of ATTEMPTED SUICIDE. In that only an attempt was made which has not
ended in suicidal death. But in the case under discussion Suicide and Death due to that
has happened. Therefore in this case apart from the Rule I have mentioned earlier in that
Article, one should also see whether Kethu is in any way associated with the Maraka or
Bhadaka houses since he is the Karaka forgiving Moksha. In this connection the readers
may also refer to page 93 of the HAND BOOK OF ASTROLOGY - PART -II, by Sri.
K. Hariharan, K.P. Astrologer and another Son of our GREAT GURUJI SRI
K.S. KRISHNAMURTI wherein this principle has been given.
Keeping the above in mind let us now examine the charts of the Twins. Miss. ‘X' is the
Chart of one of the twins born later and Miss.'Y’whowas bom earlier. Since I am examining
the case from the Charts of the Children of the women who committed suicide, we have to
rotate the Chart, keeping the 4th house as Ascendant (denoting Mother) and examine.
First let us see the Chart of Miss. 'X1 the eldest of the Twins as per the rules indicated by
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

me above. In this Chart houses 5 and 10 (2 and 7) are maraka houses of the Mother and
house 12 (9) become the Bhadaka house since the Ascendant of the Mother has fallen in
a Fixed Sign Scorpio. Apart trom this 3rd becomes the 12th house indicating Moksha.
The 11th Cusp Sub Lord (i.e., 8th Cusp Sub Lord for Mother) is Jupiter is in his own Star
and Sub. He strongly signifies 5 i.e., his own house which is 2nd house for the Mother
indicating Maraka and he is also occupying 3rd, the house of Moksha. This Jupiter is in
the Sign of Venus, owner of 10th i.e., 7th for her Mother which is another Marakasthan.
Mars is occupying the Ascendant of the Mother and also aspecting the 7th i.e., 10th in this
Chart which is a Marakasthan and also 11th i.e.. 8th house from the Ascendant of the
Mother. Mars is in the Sub of Rahu representing Jupiter since Jupiter is aspecting
(Traditional) this Rahu with his 9th aspect. Kethu the Karaka for Moksha is occupying the
2nd i.e., 5th in this Chart which is a Maraka House for her Mother. Jupiter is also aspecting
Saturn by the slightly favourable Vigintile aspect (Western) and also Kethu occupying the
2nd from the 4th (representing her Mother) which is a maraka house by a slightly favourable
Degree 54 aspect.
Let us now take up the examination through the Cusps concerned in this Chart i.e.,
5(2), 10(7) 11(8)12(9) and 3(12). The figures given in the bracket are the houses counted
from the 4th which is the Ascendant for the Mother.
The 5th Cusp Sub Lord Saturn is occupying the 2nd, but conjoined with the 3rd and
is aspecting the 12th which is 9th (Bhadagasthan) for her Mother, with his 10th aspect
(Traditional). He is also aspecting the 5th i.e., 2nd for her Mother through his 3rd aspect
(Traditional)
The 10th Cusp Sub Lord is Venus and is signifying houses 3 and 10 which are 12th
and 7th from the Ascendant of the Mother.
The 11 th Cusp Sub Lord is Jupiter strongly signifying 5 the Marakasthan for her
Mother and also the 11th which is 8th for her Mother.
The 12th Cusp Sub Lord is again Venus, discussed above.
Finally, the 3rd Cusp Sub Lord is Rahu who has been discussed earlier.
Thus the relevant Cusp Sub Lords in the Chart of the daughter dearly confirms the
death through suicide.
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

I am now taking up for examination the ANNUAL SOLAR RETURN CHART of the
daughter for the year in which the suicide has taken place to confirm that this should have
happened in that year only. For this I will limit my examination of the event through the
relevant Cusps only.
The 5th Cusp Sub Lord in this Chart is Rahu representing Mercury is a strong
significator for 10 which is 7th for her Mother, a Marakasthan as well as Bhadagasthan.
The 10th Cusp Sub Lord is Mars is a strong significator for 3 which is 12th to her
Mother, the Mokshasthan. Further, the Karaka for Moksha i.e., Kethu is occupying the 10th
which is 7th for her Mother.
The 11th Cusp Sub Lord is again Rahu already dealt with above.
Finally the 3rd Cusp Sub Lord is Sun in the Star of Mars discussed above.
Thus both the Birth Chart of Miss. ‘X’ and also her ANNUAL SOLAR RETURN CHART
confirms the event of the Death of her Mother by Suicide in the year i.e., 2001 . However
since we are habituated to verify events with the position of Period Lords, let me examine
them also for the benefit of the readers. On the date of the incident, i.e., 28-04-2001 in her
Birth Chart Rahu / Venus / Saturn / Rahu were operating as Dasa, Bukthi, Anthar and
Sookshma Lords respectively. As already discussed above the following houses should
represent this event viz., 5, 10,11,12 and 3. Rahu represents Mars, Mercury and Jupiter.
Mars is in the Sub of Rahu, the Dasa Lord occupying 8th (i.e., 11th in this Chart) and
representing Mercury he signifies 8th. Mercury is also the significator for houses 1 2 and
11. Jupiter is a strong significator for 5 occupying 3 and also by his aspect (traditional)
signifies 8th also. Thus Rahu the Dasa and Sookshma Lord fully confirms this event. Venus
is also in the Sub of Rahu needing no further explanation. Saturn is in the Sub of Mercury
whose contribution for this event has already been seen, Thus the period Lords also fully
confirms the event on this date,
As per the ANNUAL SOLAR RETURN CHART the periods of Saturn, Mars and Mars
were operating as Dasa, Bukthi and Anthara Lords respectively. Both Saturn and Mars
are in the Sub of Mercury (NO PLANETS IN MERCURY’S STARS) strongly signifying 10
(7) which is both Maraka and Bhadaka house.
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

Having thus completed the examination of the Charts of Miss. 'X’ let us now take up
for examination in a similar manner her Twin sister Miss. 'Y' who was born earlier to her.
There are no changes in the Cusps and position of Planets in this Chart. They are the
same as found in Miss. ‘X’ Chart. But it may be seen that Cusp Sub Lords are completely
changed from that found in Miss. ‘X’ Chart. THIS PROVES THE THEORY OF K.P.
SYSTEM WHICH WAS PRIMARILY BORN OUT OF SUCH CHANGES NOTICED BY
OUR GREAT GURUJI LATE SRI K.S.KRISHNAMURTIJI WHICH PROMPTED HIM
TO INVENT HIS SYSTEM PROVING THAT K.P. ASTROLOGY IS AN EXACT SCIENCE.
Now let us examine the chart of Miss. ‘Y* in a similar way as was done for chart of
Miss. ‘X” earlier Since I am examining the case from the Charts of the Children of the_
women who committed suicide, we have to rotate the Chart, keeping the 4th house as
Ascendant (denoting Mother) and examine. In this Chart also houses 5 and. 10(2 and 7)
are maraka houses for the Mother and house 12 (9) become the Bhadaka house since the
Ascendant of the Mother has fallen in a Fixed Sign Scorpio. Apart from this, 3rd becomes
the 12th house indicating Moksha. In this Chart the 11th Cusp Sub Lord is Rahu representing
Mars, Mercury and Jupiter. Mars is occupying the 4 (1) i.e., the Ascendant of her Mother
and aspecting 10 (7) the Marakasthan by his 7th aspect (traditional) and also 1 1 (8) through
his 8th aspect. Mercury is connected to 1 1 and 12 (8 and 9). Jupiter is the owner of 5(2)
and connected to 11(8) through his 9th aspect (traditional).
As earlier done Let us now take up the examination through the Cusps concerned in
this Chart i.e., 5 (2), 10(7) 11(8) 12(9) and 3(12). The figures given in the bracket are the
houses counted from the 4th which is the Ascendant for the Mother.
The 5th Cusp Sub Lord is Jupiter owner of 5(2) and is also connected to 1 1 (8) through
his 9th aspect (traditional).
The 10th Cusp Sub Lord is Kethu the GHYANA AND MOKSHA KARAKA, occupying
5 (2) and representing Jupiterthe owner and hence also connected to 3 (1 2) where
Jupiter is occupying, Kethu also represents Saturn which is conjoined with the 3 (12) This
Saturn is the 12th (3) Cusp Star Lord with NO PLANETS IN HIS STARS and- hence strongly
connected to 3(12). There are no PLANETS IN KETHU’S STARS ALSO.
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

The 11th Cusp Sub Lord is Rahu representing Mars, Mercury and Jupiter, Mars is
connected to 10(7) and 1 1 (8). Mercury is connected to 11(8) and 12(9). Jupiter is connected
The 12th Cusp Sub Lord is Venus connected to houses 3(12) and 10(7).
Finally the 3rd Cusp Sub Lord is Moon connected to 12(9) the Bhadagasthan.
Thus the relevant Cusp Sub Lords in the Chart of the daughter clearly confirms the
death through suicide.
I am now taking up for examination the ANNUAL SOLAR RETURN CHART of the
Miss.'Y’, the other Twin daughter for the year in which the suicide has taken place to confirm
that this should have happened. For this I will limit my examination of the event through the
relevant Cusps only.
In this Chart the 4th house representing her Mother has fallen in Gemini Sign and all
the examination will be made keeping this as Ascendant. The figures within the brackets
will show the position from the 4th which is the Ascendant of her Mother.
The 5th (2) Cusp Sub Lord is Mars connected to 3(12)
The 10th (7) Cusp Sub Lord is Moon connected to 5(2).
The 11th (8) Cusp Sub Lord is Rahu representing Mercury and also Jupiter. Mercury
with NO PLANETS IN HIS STARS is a strong significator for 1 0(7) which is both Maraka
and Bhadaka house. Jupiter is the owner of 10(7) and he is also aspecting this house
through his 9th aspect from 2nd.
Finally the 3rd Cusp Sub Lord is Venus strongly connected to 10(7) and also 3(12).
Thus both the Birth Chart of Miss. T and also her ANNUAL SOLAR RETURN CHART
confirms the event of the Death of her Mother by Suicide in this year i.e. , 2001 . However
since we are habituated to verify events with the position of Period Lords, let me examine
them also for the benefit of the readers. On the date of the incident i.e., 28-04-2001 in her
Birth Chart Rahu / Venus / Saturn / Rahu were operating as Dasa, Bukthi, Anthar and
Sookshma respectively. Rahu the Dasa and Sookshma Lord is occupying the Ascendant
of her Mother and he is in the Sub of Kethu occupying the 10th, both the Maraka and
K.R YEAR BOOK - 2010

Bhadaka house for her Mother and he is also the GHYANAAND MOKSHA KARAKA. He
(Rahu) also represents Mercury in whose Sign (Mercury) he is posited. Mercury is in the
Star and Sub of Jupiter owner of 10 i.e., 7th for her Mother. He (Jupiter) is also aspecting
the 1 0th with his 5th aspect (Traditional). Venus is in the Sub of the Dasa and Sookshma
Lord Rahu himself which has been explained above. He is also in the Star of Jupiter owner
of 10(2) and also aspecting it (traditional) from 2nd. Saturn is in the Sub of Mercury needing
no further explanation. He is also in the Star of Sun which is aspecting (Western) 10(7)
through Biquintile aspect.
Let us now take up the period Lords operating on 28-4-2001 in the ANN UAL SOLAR
RETURN CHART for examination. They are Saturn / Moon / Venus / Saturn as Dasa,
Bukthi, Antharand Sookshma respectively. Saturn, the Dasa and Sookshma Lords is in
the Sub of Mercury a strong significator for 10 (7) which is both Maraka and Bhadaka
house for her Mother. Moon is in the Sub of Venus a strong significator for 1 0(7). Venus is
in the Sub of Rahu representing Mercury already discussed above.
Thus we have analysed the incident of death by suicide by the Mother of the Twins
threadbare using the immortal K.RSystem invented by our GREAT GURUJI JYOTISH
MARTHAND, SOTHIDAMANNAN LATE SRI K.S.KRISHNAMURTIJI, proving once again
that K.R is the only true and scientific system In Astrology which is to be followed by those
practicing Astrology so that the Clients who are consulting them get the full benefit of this
GREAT SYSTEM in guiding correctly and solving the problems which they bring to the
Astrologer.
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

MISS. ‘X’ - BIRTH CHART
Sun Rise
Sun Set
Dasa Days
Dasa Summary
Moon 20- Nov-1986 Mars 02-Jun-2004 Rahu 25-Jan-2019
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

Cuspal Positions
Magha{3)
U.Phalguni(3)
Swati (1)
Anuradha(2)
U.Ashada(4)
Satabhisha(l)
|Aswini (3)
12 Pushyam(2)
Significators - Planets View
Rahu acts as agent for : Ma, Me, Su
Ketu acts as agent for : Ju,Sa,
(A) - Planets in Occupants stars
(B) - Occupant of house
(C) - Planet’s in Owner’s stars
(D) - House Owner
+ These planets do not have any planets
in their stars
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

MISS X -ANNUAL SOLAR
RETURN CHART
Sun Rise : 05-33-23 AM
Dasa Days : 365-25 D
Name: MISS 'X1
Gender: Female
Date : Monday. 16/0ct/2000
(KP Ayanamsa)
Bal. Dasa : Sun 0 Y, 0M, ID
DASASUMMARY
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

PLANETARY POSITIONS
Planet |Star(Pada
Krittika(4)
PPhalguni(4
Visakha(1 )
Ju(R) Rohim(3)
Visakha(4
Sa(R) Krittika(3)
Punarvasu(2)
P.Ashada(4)
Visakha{4)
SIGNIFICATORS - PLANETS VIEW
Planet
Su
Rahu acts as agent for : Me
Ketu acts as agent for : Ju
(A) - Planets in occupant's stars
(B) - Occupant of house
(C) - Planets in Owner’s stars
(D) - HouseOwner
+ These planets do not have any planets in their stars
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

MISS. ‘X’ WESTERN ASPECTS FOR BIRTH CHART
The ORBs used in this model are as described in KSK’s First Reader.
PLANETARY ASPECTS
HOUSE ASPECTS
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

MISS/Y’-BIRTH CHART
Sun Rise: 05:33:34 AM
Dasa Days: 365.25 D
Name: MISS. X
Gender: Female
Date: Sunday, 1 7-1 8/Oct/I 982
(KP Ayanamsa)
Bal.Dasa: Mars 4 Y, 8 M, 10 D
Dasa Summary
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

CUSPAL POSITIONS
SIGNIFICATORS - PLANETS VIEW
Rahu acts as agent for : Ma.Me.Ju
Ketu acts as agent for : Ju,Sa.
(A) - Planets in occupant’s stars
(B) - Occupant of house
(C) - Planets in Owner's stars
(D) - House Owner
+ These planets do not the and planets in their stars.

MISS. T- ANNUAL
SOLAR RETURN CHART
Sa(R
Ju(R
Dasa Summary
Name: MISS. ‘Y’
Gender: Female
Date: Monday,16/0ct/2000
(KP Ayanamsa)
Bat. Dasa: Sun 0 Y, 0 M, 1 D
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

Aridra (4
Pushyam(3)
Visakha(2)
P.Ashada(l)
Sravana(2
St! Sbl Ssl
Me Ve Me
Ve Ke Ma
Mo Ve Sa
Ra Ve Sa
Sa Ma Me
Ve Ve Ve
Mo Ve Ma
Ju Me Ra
Me Su Ve
Ve Mo Ju
Mo Ra Sa
Ra Me Mo
PLANETARY POSITIONS
Planet
Su | Chitra(2)
Krittikaf4
P.Phalguni(4
Visakhafl
Rohini(3
SIGNIFICATORS - PLANET’S VIEW
Planet
Rahu acts as agent for : Me
Ketu acts as agent for : Ju
(A) - Planets in occupant's stars
(B) - Occupant of house
(C) - Planets in Owner's stars
(D) -House Owner
+ These planets do not have any planets
in their stars.

MISS.’Y’ WESTERN ASPECTS FOR BIRTH CHART
The ORBs used in this model are as described in KSK’s First Reader.
PLANETARY ASPECTS

POWER OF SUB LORD - V
Jyothish Visharath V.S. MAHESH IYER,
176, 6th Main, 1st Cross, 4th Bfock, BSK 3rd Stage,
Email : ssavsm@rediffmail.com
In continuation of series of articles
under the above caption, you will
notice how the stellar positions of the
Dasa Lord tells the matters that native
may suffers or enjoys in that particular
period. Let us proceed with few
horoscopes and see how sub alone
decides if the matter shown by the
stellar position gets fruitified or not.
Dasa Bal. Sun. 1 Y, 67 Days
Case Study - 1
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

We shall analyse how current Dasa,
Bukthi shall going to help the native to
prosper in his career both at stellar level
and sub level of signification.
For prosperity in career as per K.P.
Theory the concerned house are 2-6-1 011 houses.
In the above example chart, Guru, the
Dasa Lord is commencing from
Analysis of Dasa Lord Guru through
Stellar Level
Guru being a Dasa Lord is in the Star of
Moon, Moon is being Lord of IV. There are
no planets in IV house and IV house
becomes a strong signification for Guru,
Guru being Lord of 9 and XII in X. Guru
becomes a weak signification for IX, X and
XII since there are planets in its star and in
IX house moon is posited there.
So, through stellar level Jupiter is
signifying IX, IV strongly and XII and X as
weak signification.
Analysis of Guru the Dasa Lord as
well as Bukthi lord through Sub-level.
Guru Dasha, Guru Bukthi starts from 2608-2009 till 14-10-2011. Guru the Bukthi
Lord as well as Dasa Lord being in the sub
of Mercury. Mercury in the star of Jupiter in
X, being Lord of IX and XII. Here IX house
becomes a weak signification since
planets are there and XII house becomes
a strong signification.
Mercury himself in III house being Lord
of III and VI, there are no planets in III and
VI house. So Mercury himself becomes
strong signification for both 111 and VI house.
So Mercury is a strong signification for
X, VI and III respectfully. Here III, VI and X
are very supporting and encouraging house
for uplifting in career and professional life.
So during this Dasa the native of this chart
shall going to enjoy a good career.
Guru Bukthi shall also be encouraging
factor pertaining to career and also there
shall be good flow of money can be
forseen.
Case Study - 1 - Analysis of Marriage
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

Marriage :
The Native of this chart got married
during Guru Dasa, Sukra Bukthi Saturn
First Step is to ascertain whether
marriage is promised or not. Here we have
to consider the Vil sub lord and if it is a
significator of either 2 or 7 or 11. Then
during the conjoined period of Dasa/
Bukthi/ Antara of -2-7-1 1 the marriage shall
be celebrated.
In the above example chart, the seventh
cuspal sub lord is Jupiter, Jupiter is in the
star of Sun, Sun in XI lord of I, Jupiter in II
being lord of V and VIII. here Jupiter the
seventh cuspal sublord is signifying 2,11,5
and 8 along with 1st house. Here 7th cuspal
sub lord is promising the marriage and also
it is signifying 5th house, the supporting
house for romanting affairs. If the V cuspal
sub lord is signifying 2 or 7 or 11, then it
will turn into a Romantic Marriage.
In the above chart 7th Cuspul Sub. Lord
is signifying 5th House and 5th Cuspal Sub
lord Saturn is signifying 2 and 7. So the
girl had a romantic marriage.
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

Analysis of dasa Lord Jupiter
through Stellar Level.
Guru the Dasa lord being in the star of
Sun, Sun in XI, lord of I. Jupiter in II house
lord of V and VII. Su Jupiter is signifying II,
XI, I & VIII through stellar level. In the stellar
level itself Jupiter is signifying II and XI the
required houses for celebration of
marriage.
We shall see how Jupiter the dasa Lord
supporting through Sublevel.
Analysis of Jupiter the dasa lord
through sublevel
Guru in the sub of Venus, Venus in the
star of Mercury, Mercury in X being lord of
Hand XI. Here II, XI is good for celebration
of marriage, venus in XII lord of III and X.
So dasa Lord Guru through sublevel has
given a support for the marriage.
Analysis of Bukthi Lord Venus
through Stellar Level
Venus, the Bukthi Lord is in the star of
mercury. Mercury in X Lord of II and XI.
Venus is XII Lord of III and X. Here II and XI
are required house for marriage. We shall
see how Venus is supporting 2-7-11 for
marriage through sublevel.
Analysis of Bukthi Lord Venus
through Sub Level
Venus in the sub of Ketu, Ketu in the
star of Sun, Sun in XI, Ketu in V, Ketu as a
node represent Saturn, Saturn in II being
lord of VI and VII, So Ketu is signifying II,
V, VI, VII and XI house. Ketu through sub
lord for Venus has supported for
celebration of marriage for this native.
Actually this girl got married in the month
of April 2009 and it was a Romantic
marriage. .
I Kindly thank the editor. Mr.
K.Subramaniam for giving the space to
present my papers on Sub-Lord in his
esteemed magazine K.P. &Astro!ogy. My
pranams to our Guruji.
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

In continuation of my article K.P. made easy which appeared in K.P. & Astrology
2003 annual issue. I give below three examples to justify my theory.
In a nutshell I give below the formula of my system. Add the value of sign lord, starlord
and sublord according to the Vimshottaridasa. The last digit and its corresponding sublord
indicates the year of fructification. Add all the numbers and its corresponding sub lord
indicates the month of fructification. The first number indicates the date.
EXAMPLE 1 : When will be my daughters's marriage?
Horary Number 195 (Between 1 and 249)
The chart and cusps are adjusted taking 5th house as lagna cusp.
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010 33

According to K.P. System add the sign lord, star lord and sub lord according to
Vimshottari system. Here Venus, Moon and Saturn are sign lord star lord and sub lord.
Venus 20
Moon 10
Saturn 19
The last digit indicates the year of fructification. Here the last digit is 9. 9th cusp sub
lord is Moon. So the year 2009. (Moon represents according 1 numerology)
The total indicates the month. Here it is 4. 4th cusp sub lord is Ven. Venus is in the
star of Sun. Sun represents Ketu. So July (Ketu represents 7 according to numerology.
The first digit is also 4. So the 4th cusp sub lord is Venus. Venus is 6 according to
numerology. So the date is 6.
Actually the date of marriage is 6*7-2009.
Another important tips to check up the Sun transit is given below.
Note the time of judgement. Suppose if it is 1 take Mars. This is according to the
sign position. 1 is Mars, 2 is Venus, 3 is Mercury and so on. Here in this example the time
of judgement is 7.56 p.m. Take it as 7. 7 means Venus. Then take the signlord, star lord
and sublord of Venus.
Here Venus is in Mercury sign. Sun star and Venus sub.
Merc-Sun-Ven.
Merc is in the star of Mars.
Sun is in the star of Jup.
Ven is in the star of Sun.
So Merc, Mars, Sun, Jup, Venus are the significators.
The sun should transit in the sign, star and sub lord of the above significators.
Here in our example Sun transits in Mercury sign Jupiter star and Jupiter sub when
the marriage is celebrated.
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

EXAMPLE 2 : When will my wife come from market?
Horary number : 69 (Between 1 and 249)
Take the First Cusp.
Sign lord Star lord Sub lord
Moon Saturn Venus
The last digit is 9. 9th cusp sub lord is Mercury. So 5’o’ Clock. The total is 4.
4th cusp sub lord is Rahu. Rahu is 4.
4th Cusp sub lord is Rahu. Rahu is 4..
Again first digit is 4. Again Rahu comes. Rahu represents Saturn. Saturn is in
the star of Ketu. Ketu is 7.
The actual arrival of my wife is 5.47 p.m.
EXAMPLE 3 : When will my brother come to Chennai?
Horary number 167 (Between 1 and 249)
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

This is somewhat confusing, because we have to judge the year, month and date
from the one digit i.e. 3,
Third Cusp sub lord is Mercury. Mercury is in the star of Sun. Sun is 1.
So 2008 (year)
Third cusp sub lord is Mercury. Mercury is 5.
So May (month)
To fix date take 3 as Jupiter, Jupiter is in the star of Sun. Jupiter 3 Sun 6. (according
to Vimshothari) So 9 (date)
Actually to arrived on 9-5-2008
TRANSIT
The time of judgement is 5.35. Take it as 5. 5 is Sun according to Sign position.
Sun is in the Mars sign. Venus star and Mars sub.
Whenever Mercury or No. 5 appears we have to work hard and do many works.
Because Mercury always represents dual.
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

Here when he arrives Sun transits in Mars sign Venus star Mercury sub. Here Mercury
is not arrived as significates even in the star position. But we have to take No. 5 as Mercury.
More over there is no planet in the star of Mercury.
There are many enquiries regarding this system all over India. Many Astrologers
informed me they succeeded by applying this system. Many thanks to
Mr. K. Subramaniam, Editor, K.P. & Astrology for allowing me to write continuously in this
magazine.
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

MARRIAGE AND LOVE AFFAIR - KP GUIDES
Jyothida Rathna N. Mylvaganan,
B. Sc., Officer-State Bank of India-Retd,
New No. 68, Ramalingam Colony, Coimbatore -641043
New thoughts, new dimensions and
new research ideas have become the
order of the day, and this attitude of
research-oriented thinking is possible,
because of the emergence of KP theory!
Hence, we can boldly declare that the era
of Indian astrology can be divided as “an
era before KP and after KP”. That much
of leaps and bounds have taken place in
the field of prediction, only after the
formulation of KP formula! Thousands and
thousands of unanswerable, confused
theories were categorically answered with
logic and scientific proof, that has
attracted the attention of the scientists,
educationists and officials of the
government, that a thinking has started as
to why astrology on KP should not find
place in the syllabus of astro science !
As a staunch follower of KP for the past
3 decades, I declare that, in the available
system of astrological books, KP only gives
successful/useful guidance to the so many
complicated queries raised by the
consultants! This is true.
The following is the chart of a person,
whose marriage is delayed, due to love affair
and the subsequent family problems.
Date of birth: 20-05-1982
Time of birth : 3.20 am
Place of birth : Kollam (kerala)
Balance of Budha dasa at the time of
birth : 1 2 years 6 month 1 7 days.
HOROSCOPE AS PER
KRISHNAIVIURTI PADHDHATI
(Placidlan House Division)
Marriage and love affair
I have gone through good number of
charts for analysing the marital status.
Only after the emergence of KP, a clearcut formulae for ascertaining the status of
marriage was defined! Recent
unimaginable, gigantic leap in the IT
(information technology), have generated
lot of financial growth, as well as marital
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

TABLE OF PLANETS
TABLE OF CUSPS
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

VIMSOTTARI DASA BUKTHI TABLE
40 K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

tensions, leading to separation and
divorce! There were days, when people
will hesitate to discuss on matters of love
affairs of their children, but, now-a-days,
the situation has changed that they openly
discuss about the love affairs (if any) of
their children!
In a country like India, where, culture at
values are more respected, the changing
trends, as described above, have posed
a great threat to the basic values of life. In
these circumstances, parents are
helpless and the sole remedy lies in
knowing the reality as it is. And this is
possible only with the help of KP system!
Marriage and 7th cusp sub-lord
If the 7th cusp sub lord is a significator
of 2nd and 11th bhavas, then the marital
life will be happy.
Here, 7th cusp sub-lord, Kethu is
posited in 10th, in the star of Venus (lord
of 3 and 8th) in lagna (negating the 2nd)
along with Moon (lord of 5 - matters of love)
and in the sub of Saturn (lord of 11th in
7th) which indicates some problems in
marital life and the aspect of saturn and
venus confirms that there will be love affair.
Also, note, that there is no planet in the
star of Kethu and hence its starlord Venus
plays a vital role in marriage and this is
also a significator of 2.6, and 10 bhavas.
Role of 5th cuspal sub-lord
If the 5th cusp sub lord is a strong
significator of 11 and 7 houses, then love
affairwill materialize. Here, the sub lord of
the 5th cusp, is Rahu, (representing
Mercury-7th lord) in the star of Jupiter (in
7th bhava) and in the sub of Saturn in 7th.
HENCE LOVE AFFAIR WILL
MATERIALISE. The position of Saturn in
7th has indication that the girl whom he
likes may be elder than him. Really, here,
the girl is elder than the boy by three years!
Research :
My past experience in KP proves that if
the sub lord of 5th and 7th happens to be
the same, and also signifying marriage,
the love affairwill lead to marriage, or
if the sub lord of 5th and 7th are inter
connected, then also the chances for
materialisation of love affair is confirmed,
provided that they signify the houses of
marriage.
Conclusion :
The native is running Venus dasa and
Rahu bukthi (note Rahu is the sub lord of
Hence I boldly declared that the love
marriage will materialise!
GOOD LUCK.
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

ASTROMETEOROLOGY
SUN’S INGRESS IN SCORPIO
(A RESEARCH ARTICLE)
By Smt. V. Bhanumathi, m.a. & V.V.Ravi, MA.(Ph.D) in Astrology.
H.No. 9-1-33/A/21 , Prashanth Nagar, Langer House, Hyderabad
After going through the chart erected while sun entering Scorpio the planets are posited
In the chart as below.
1. Mars a malefic placed in lagna (Scorpio).
2. Uranus another malefic placed in 4th house.
3. No planet is posited in 7th house.
4. Saturn another malefic is placed in 1 0th house.
It clearly shows that all kendras are spoiled. This is an indication that “Rabi’ crops will
get destroyed in most of the parts of our country especially in southern India. But here I would
like to put forward my research experience in the field of astrometeorology. As Jupiter is placed
in Sagittarius conjoined with Venus who is karaka for Agriculture. This shows that in total the
yield of the crops will be average.
The above analysis confirms Bhattothpla’s principle which is mentioned below.
'At the time of sun's ingress into Scorpio, the kendras from him are occupied by benefics
or if he is aspected (or conjoined with) by strong benefics, summer crops will flourish.’
Another ancient Scientist who laid down many principles, out of which the following one
is very important for verification.
'When Venus and Mercury or both posited in the second or twelfth house from the sun
in scorpio summer corn will grow’.
• The above principle is called Baadarayana’s principle. Now applying the principle of
Baadarayana
When sun is in ‘Scorpio’, Jup, Venus are in 2’nd house. Here, second house is Jup's
sign Sagittarius and Jup-Ven are in this which is second house from sun. This house is also
called as kutumba sthana of Lagna’ The lagna lord Mars is in lagna which is his own house so
no danger to crops (though Mars is malefic). So, Mars will not harm sasyas
(crops) as lagna lord will not spoil or damage lagna i.e. Crops.
Sun and Mars are in scorpio indicating good and favourable situation to the crops. Mercury
in Thula is indicating weather will be favorable i,e. winds will be favorable, relative humidity will
be favorable for crop growth.
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

In this chart it is evident that Jup-Ven are aspecting Moon in Gemini by 7’th aspect
indicating temperature (heat) Wind, air moisture will also be favourable. The aspect of Saturn
ftom Leo on Mercury is indicating the winds are moderate i.e. indicating the winds are neither
completely dry nor completely wet.
Analyzing the planetary positions in depth (K.P. Stellar System)
1. 'Sun” is in the star ofJ up -Mars sub
2. Moon is in the star of Jup- Jupsub
3. Mars is in the star of Sat- Merc sub
4. Saturn is in the star of Ven - Ketu sub
5. Merc is in the star of Jup- Merc sub
6. Jupiter is in the star of Ven - Merc sub
7. Venus is in the star of Ketu - Sat sub
Also studying the case very seriously in depth it could be forecasted in this way-?
Thus, the seven radiations ftom the sun ‘VIBGIYOR’’ are distributed in the Atmosphere
favoring the agricultural products i.e. rice, wheat etc. in the country . Hats off to our ancient
seers for their incompatible research work giving astonishing results till date. But, one thing is
sure neither the forecasters nor the leaders are sincere in their work. If all the forecasters are
sincere we will get 1 00% accurate results. I humbly request the beloved readers of our beloved
Magazine to respond to our research articles going to be published in this magazine. Once
again 1 humbly request the chief editor and all the staff members of this great Magazine to give
some space to our research articles for the act of which we will be ever grateful to all of them .
GOOD LUCK
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

Fate of Mr. Lalu Prasad in
Lok Sabha Election 2009
Pankaj Himvan Jyotish Visharath 8. Com. L.L.B.
Chandpur Bela - 800001
In India the election of 15th Lok sabha took place in April - May 2009 . Mr. Lalu
Prasad the then Railway Minister and RJD supremo, a candidate was contesting against
BJP Orator Mr. Rajiv pratap Rudi from Saran Lok Sabha, seat. There was a rumour
spreading in Bihar that Mr, Lalu Prasad is going to lose the Saran Lok Sabha seat.
Now in the light of astrology I wanted to know the fate of Mr. Prasad in Lok Sabha
election . There was a tough contest between Mr. Lalu and Mr. Rudi . I took the horary
number 55 on 14.05.09 at 2.35 p.m. at Gaya and took the IXth cusp as ascendant for
Mr. Lalu because I do not know him personally.
First of all I have check. ed the query from the position of Moon, as Moon always
reflects the mind of the querist. Here Moon is owner of II inVIlth. Moon is in the star of sun
owner of III inXIth. Moon is in its own sub. So the query is correct .
To win in any election the house to be judged are I ,VI ,IX ,X and XI. The I house
indicates determination to succeed in his attempts, Vlth house indicates victory over rival,
IXth house stand for luck in the victory, X th house indicates popularity, reputation and
profession , Xlth house indicates desirefulfilment.
For victory in any election the Vlth cusp sublord must be a signification of XI th or Vlth
house . Besides this if Vlth cusp is connected with I, IX, X houses the result is deemed to
befavourable.
Vlth Cusp Sublord is Moon owner of Vlth in Xlth. Moon is in the Star of Sun owner
of Vllth in lllrd Moon is in its own sub. So Vlth cusp sublord Moon is ready to give
victory in the election.
Now what is in the hands of Xlth cusp. Xlth cusp sublord is Rahu in Xlth . Rahu is
in the star and sub of Moon . Moon is owner of Vlth in Xlth . So Xlth cusp sublord Rahu
is also supporting success of Mr. Lalu in election.
Vlth cusp and Xlth cusp is welfortified and Vlth and Xlth cusp is welconnected.
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

Planet Details :
Moreover, Sun major dasa is running. Sun is in the sub of Rahu Which is
significator of Vlth and Xlth. Moon antra dasa is running. Moon is also significator of
Vlth and Xlth. So dasa period is also indicating Victory of Mr. Lalu in election of Saran
Lok Sabha seat in Bihar.
All the winning factor of election directly showing victory to Mr. Lalu Prasad from
Saran Lok Sabha seat. The result was declared in favour of Mr. Lalu Prasad.
It is only K.P. System of astrology which helps in solving any problem and can
predicts true picture of the future. I conclude this article with pranam to our beloved
Guruji Late prof. K.S. Krishnamurti.
Good Luck
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

MISSING WIFE-WHEN WILL RETURN?
Jyotish Visharath
PANKAJ HIMVAN, B Com L.L.B
Chandpur Bela, Patna - 800001
A gentleman, whose wife was missing for over ten days consulted me and asked
when will she return back? The K.P. Number furnished by him is 9. 1 erected the horary
chart for 18.08.2008 at 7.54 p.m. at Gaya. The lagna came in 11° 26' 40" in Aries.
Let us have a lookoverthe rules regarding missing person in K.P. System profounded
by our Guruji Late Prof. K.S. Krishnamurti and other K.P experts are as follows
(1) In case of missing person, the house II, III, IV, VII, VIII and XI are to be investigated.
Ilnd house stand for reunion with kith and kin , III rd house denotes the journey of missing
person to his place of residence, IVth house denotes journey from place to place aimlessly
. VI llth house causes worry , difficulties . separation etc . Xlth house indicates
desirefulfilment.But for return of missing person II, III, IV and Xlth house are important, so
the investigation should be emphesised on 11,111, IV and Xlth house.
(2) The Lagna always indicate the querist in horary astrology. If the query is about his
son by the first conception, the Vth house from the horary lagna will be the lagna of the
missing person. If it is the second son the Vllth house will be the lagna , if it is the
lllrd son, IXth house will be the lagna and soon. If the missing person is wife of the querist,
the Vllth house will be her lagna, If the query is about the father or stranger, take the IXth
house as the lagna of the missing person. If the missing person is the elder brother of the
querist the Xlth house will be the lagna. If the missing, person is the younger brother of the
querist, the third house will be the lagna.
(3) When the sublord of lagna of missing person is connected to the VI th house the
missing person is ill.
(4) When the sublord of the lagna of missing person is conjoined with VI llth house
then it is deemed to be missing person has got injured in accident.
(5) When the sublord of lagna of missing person is conjoined with Xllth house then it
is deemed that the missing person is in hospital.
(6) When the sublord of lagna of missing person is conjoined with the VIII &XII both in
maraksthan orbadhaksthan then be sure that the missing person has been killed in accident.
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

(7) If the sub lord of lagna of missing person is connected to fiery sign, he received
injuries and died consequently. If in watery sign, he is drowned and if in earthy sign, he had
natural death .
(8) If lagna of missing person is connected to Xlth house and mars is connected with
XI th house, Police will be helpful to trace him or he may be found in the police station .
(9) If the sublord of the lagna of missing person is connected II & IVth houses, it is to
be deemed that missing person had already returned home.
(1 0) If the sublord of the horary lagna is in direct motion and in the star of a planet in
the direct motion and at the same time the sublord signifies II, III, IV and Xlth houses
(counted from the lagna of the missing person), the missing person will be get back.
(11) If the sublord of lagna of missing person is in the star of a planet, which is the
significatorof maraksthan orbadaksthan, it indicates that the missing person is dead.
(12) If the sublord of lagna of missing person is neither in maraksthan or badlaksthan
nor the significator of that houses representing the missing person is so placed.) or if the
sublord is not in the star or sub of significator of the VI 1 1 th house or XII th house, the missing
person is alive.
(13) When lagna cusp sublord of missing person shows that the native is dead and
XI th cusp sublord for the querist shows desirefulfilment , then the missing person return
back to fulfil the desire of the querist .
(14) When the lagna cusp sublord of missing person shows the missing person is
dead and Xlth cusp sublord for the querist shows that the desire of the querist will not be
fulfilled, the missing person will not return back.
(1 5) When the sublord of lagna of missing person shows that the missing person is
alive and Xlth cusp sublord for querist shows that the desire will be fulfilled then the missing
person will be return back.
(16) When the sublord of the Xlth cusp for the querist is retrograde then desire will not
be fulfilled and then the missing person will not get back .
(17) If it is promised that the missing person will get back to his house then he will
return in the conjoined period of significators of II, III, IV and Xlth house.
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

The sublord of lagna cusp of missing person and XI th cusp sublord for querist are
two important point to be investigated properly in the case of missing person . It will reveal
the position of missing person, whether he will return back or not.
Now let us discues the real case study:-
Whether the question is clear in the mind of the querist or not ? Let us study the
position of Moon .
Cusp Details :
Planet Details :
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

Moon is owner of IV, V in Xlth. Moon
is in the star of Jup owner of IX, XII in IX .
Moon is aspected by Ven owner of II, VII.
This clears that he has desire to get back
his wife. So the question is clear in the
mind of the querist.
For desirefulfilment, see the Xlth
cusp sublord, which is retrograde Jup.
Jup is owner of XII. So there is doubt in
the desirefulfilment as Jup is owner of
Xllth and aspected by mars owner of VIII.
One thing is noted here that Moon
is in the sub of sat and sat is in the sub
of Moon. This combination creates
punarphoo and it also confirms that there
is doubt about the desirefulfilment .
Now the sublord of lagna for wife
will be seen. The sublord of the Vllth
house which is the lagna of missing wife
is Sat. Sat is conjoined with Ven owner
of VIII (accident) and Mer the owner of
XII (Mokshasthan). Sat, the sublord of
lagna cusp of missing lady is in Xlth
which is the badhaksthan of a Libra born.
Sat isin firy sign Leo. So it clearly shows
that the missing lady has been killed in
accident.
At the time of Judgement Jup dasa
and sat bhukti is running. Jup is
retrograde. Jup is in the star of Ven owner
of VIII in XI a badhaksthan. Bhukthinath
Sat is in Xlth and conjoined with Ven
owner of VIII and Mer,owner of XII. So
there is no hope to get back of the
missing lady.
It has been reported that the
missing lady was killed in railway
accident.
It is K.P. System of astrology which
can be applied to solve any type of
problem. I am ending this article with
pranam to our beloved Guruje Late Prof.
K.S.Krishnamurti.
GOOD - LUCK
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

FED UP WITH MARRIAGE-A KP
APPRAISAL
Effort By Shri. Vi jay Kumar,
Senior Manager, C-DOT,
Electronic City, Phase-1, Hosur Road, Bangalore-560 100.
E-mail : v_kumar@cdotb.ernet.in
One of my of my colleague had his marital life in trouble for a long time and he was fed
up with it. His spouse was doing job out of city and they were not in amicable talking terms
for a long time and there seemed to be a stalemate of mutual understanding.
Out of visible frustration, he approached me on May 08, 2009 and informed me that he
was totally frustrated and was seeking a break-off.
In order to see the prospects of his settlement in marital life, I prepared the time chart
on 08-05-2009 at 1 6-25-06 Hrs 1 ST at Bangalore for analysis.
The time chart at the time of query is shown as below.
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

The chart is being analysed as follows :
The Query
In the horary chart, Moon falls in the Lagna aspecting 7th house, indicating native’s
concern about himself in the scenario of marriage. As 11th lord, he might have the desire
of setting things right. Since, Moon falls in the star of Rah u placed in 4th house, the matter
of stalemate seems to be bothering the mind of the native and causing mental turmoil.
Moon also falls in the 3-9-1 1th cusps, which suggest that the desire of the native seems
to be settling the issues (11th House) byway of mutual dialogue (3-9th cusps).
Looking to the position of the Moon linking to the factual situation of the native, it was
sufficient to consider the horary chart OK and thus I proceeded with the analysis of the
query.
The co-ordinates for judgment
In a prashna chart, the harmonious life with spouse is promised if Lagna, 5th and 7th
cusps get linked with the 11th house in anyway. The healthy marital life shall be realized
only if the 11th cusp indicates its linkage with the Lagna, 5th and 7th house without getting
linked to the adverse houses, The marital discord starts from the 6th and 1 2th house involving
the 7th house.
Analysis of the chart
Primarily, the query seeks if the harmony may be established between the querist and
his spouse. The analysis is attempted as follows.
1 . Assess the Lagna
Lagna is assessed through the disposition of lagna sub-lord Mars.
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

Mars as the lord of 3rd and 8th house is placed in the star of retro Mercury placed in 8th
house. Note that the Mars is the strong lord of 3rd house and being placed in the star of
retro Mercury may not allow the native to express himself before his spouse. Since, Mars
falls in the sub of retro-Mercury, the stellar indications only do prevail more firmly and perhaps,
he would never be able to press his point.
Thus, the initial assessment suggests that the issue of marital discord is due to some
ego issues instigated from the native’s side (Retro Mercury being Lagna lord).
2. Assess the 7th cusp to assess the indications from spouse’s side
Mars is again the 7th cuspal sub-lord.
By way of Mars being the 3-8th lord placed in the 6th house and being in the star and
sub of retro Mercury (lord of 1-1 Oth house) placed in the 8th house, Mars thus signifies
8-6-1 -1 0-3rd houses. Looking from the 7th house, the Mars signifies 2-1 2-7-4-9th houses.
While, the indications of Mars make the native pained (8th house signified primarily),
the same Mars does not pose any such scenario to the spouse.
Thus, the spouse may have been taking the present scenario very easily without being
tensed. Since, the sub lord of 1 -7th cusps fall in the star of retro planet, there does not
seem to be any possibility for ice breaking between themselves.
3. Look at the 3-9th cusps.
It is important to assess about what may have been going on between the native (lagna)
and the spouse (7th cusp) causing the discord. Note that the 3rd cusp decides the
deliberations from the native’s side and that from the spouse’s side are indicated from the
9th cusp.
3rd cusp has Moon as the sub-lord. Moon in the star of Rahu placed in 4th house and its
sub Venus placed in 6th house as the lord of 2-9th houses suggests that the scope of
negotiations may have been stagnated (4th house) and the native may have come to the
conclusion of seeking a break off (6th house).
Look to the side of spouse's deliberations through 9th cusp. Sun is the 9th cuspal
sub-lord which being the 12th lord gets placed in the star of Venus placed in 6th house.
Sun lords 12th house and Venus lords 2-9th houses. Thus, the sub-lord Sun signifies 6-82-9-1 2th houses indicating that the native sincerely desires the break off (6-8-1 2th house)
from his marital ties.
Thus both native and his spouse desire a break off.
4. Assess the 11th cusp to assess the final outcome
The 11th cusp decides the overall fructification of the desire of the querist.
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

Moon is the sub-lord of the 11th cusp and the analysis of Moon done at #3 above holds
good which indicates the break off sometimes in the future to come. Thus, an amicable
patch up was not evident and the destiny seemed to be pointing for a possible break off.
5. Analyze Fortuna
Fortuna falls in the 6th house that supplements in principle the expected outcome of a
break off of marital ties over the time.
Fortuna falls in the star of retro Saturn placed in the 11th house and by virtue of its
placement in Saturn; the break off may take considerable time to take effect and is not
warranted immediately.
It was noted that Rahu-Venusdasha was in operation till August 2010.
Rahu as dasha lord causes results as per its own stellar related and as per Saturn to
whom it strongly disposes.
Rahu falls in the star and sub of Moon placed in Lagna as weak 11th lord and thus he
causes the native to stick to his issues strongly for upholding his desire for a break-off and
not allowing any scope for a change. Saturn as the disposed planet falls in the star of
Venus placed in 6th house as 9th lord, causing the spouse’s dictates to matter finally.
In view of this, Rahu dasha may settle the issue towards a break off with in 2014.
Venus as the antar-dasha lord falls in the star of retro Saturn placed in 11th house,
hence does n<?t hold any promise for break off till Aug 2011.
The next antar-dasha of Sun falls in the star of Venus placed in 6th house and its sublord Mercury placed in 8th house may see the tension growing towards break off.
I did not analyze further but advised the native of keeping cool within himself for the
time being and wait sufficiently before his desire is materialized for a formal break off
from his marital ties.
Facts of the case
I indicated my findings to my colleague who responded only with his long silence, though
I had observed his moist eyes.
I thank KP methodology to show the light whenever approached.
K,P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

PILGRIMAGE IN K.P
G. Subramanian,
19, West Road, West C.l.T. Nagar, Chennai-35)
In India, especially amongst Hindus, it is
customary to undertake pilgrimage to holy
places and take dip in sacred rivers during
religious festivals and also when advised
by astrologers. Such a step, it is believed
results in earning of ‘punyam’ and wards
off all sins. It is also suggested as a remedy
to certain unfavorable configurations in the
natal chart. Our religious scripts also enjoin
us to do good deeds and also lay stress
on pilgrimages as a way of purifying the
mind and developing devotion. So the
importance of pilgrimages in the life of an
Individual should not be under rated.
As the horoscope of a native is the map of
his life, naturally there should be an
indication there as to whether one will
undertake pilgrimages and if so in which
periods of his life.
Also certain houses in the horoscope
should be of relevance to consider this
subject. Broadly the following houses
indicate the undertaking of pilgrimages for
the reasons stated therein.
Third House
The third house indicates, among other
things, about mental inclination, leaving the
permanent residence, making of short
journey
Fifth House
House of ‘Poorva Punya’ showing the
meritorious deeds done in the past, power
of intelligence, religious mindedness,
chanting of Vedas and mantras and
spiritual practice
Ninth House
The ninth house, among other things,
indicates divine worship, religious and
philosophical beliefs, Pilgrimage to sacred
places, long journey, faith in God, etc. It is
called Bhagyasthanam, viz showing the
fruits of good deeds done in the past life.
Tenth House
Some authors feel that this house also
stands for pilgrimages, religious functions,
moral values ‘Karmasthanaflast rites)
Tweleth House
House of moksha- final emancipation from
the chain of births and deaths: divine
worship and religious inclination are also
to be studied from this house.
Out of the nine planets, Jupiter symbolizes
religion, divinity, meritorious acts, etc and
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

Saturn is said to aid concentration,
meditation and prayers. Therefore these
two planets are also to be taken into
account when considering the question of
pilgrimage.
The main house standing for pilgrimage
and religious tour being nine, we can say
that if the 9th subiord in any way signifies
3-5-9-10-12, then the concerned native will
proceed on pilgrimage to sacred places
for divine worship, A similar checking of
the 1 0th sub lord will confirm this position.
Appended herewith is a horoscope for
illustrating the above rule.
9th sublord of the. horoscope is Mercury,
who signifies 7,10 and 12. Mercury is
aspected by Saturn, signifying 3 and 12.
Hence the native will definitely undertake
pilgrimages frequently.
When?
Note the significators of the houses
referred to above.
3 - Sun and Saturn
5 -Moon, kethu, Mars
9 - Sun
10- Moon, Kethu, Mars, Mercury
12 - Mercury, Sun, Saturn, Mercury, Rahu,
Jupiter, Moon, Kethu, Mars.
Some of the important pilgrimages and
visit to religious places are listed
hereunder showing the Periods and the
Dasa-Bhukthi - Anthara running at that
time.
1. 27th April 1997 to 30th April 1997
Navagrahasthalas in Tamilnadu and
Chidambaram.
Period -Mercury-Sun-Mars
Sirkali, Chidambaram, Vaitheeswaran
koil.
Period Mercury- Jupiter - Saturn
Trissur and Guruvayur in Kerala
Period- Mercury-Jupiter-Venus
4. 1 9th April 2006 and 20th April 2006Dharshan of Baghavan Sri Sathya Sai
Saba at Kodaikanal. Period: MercurySaturn-Kethu
5. 28th November to 1st December 2006Sringeri, Subramanya, Dharmasthala,
Udipi And Kollur. Period : Mercury -
Saturn- Moon
Hardwar, Rishikesh, Dehra Dhun
Period: Kethu -Venus-Saturn.
This is just an elementary example to
demonstrate the well-known K. P dictum that
the significators of the various houses do
in fact act in such a way as to bring about
the fructification of events indicated by the
respective houses during their Dasa
BhukthiAntharams.
Long Live K.P.! May Lord Uchishta
Ganapathy guide us and bless us All.
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

Cuspal Positions
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

Planetary Positions
Significators of Houses
Planet Signification
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

KP HORARY- THE ULTIMATE
ASTROLOGICAL GUIDE - III
T. RAJENDRA KUMAR
27-15-2, Nehrupet, Bhimavaram-534202. AP.
astromasters@gmail.com
In the previous articles I tried to prove
how horary charts depict better pictures
than natal Charts. The Karma committed
in the present life, after the birth can
influence our destiny. There can be certain
Karmas that can affect a native faster than
other karmas. Troubling pious women,
pious Brahmins and people in the spiritual
path can culminate into results within a short
time. Similarly insulting Deities and pious
priests can affect an individual much
faster. Spiritual adulteration can show
adverse effects on the lives of children,
even though their horoscopes are quite
clean.
As horary charts are made only short
time before the events, they generally give
accurate results. I never tried other traditional
ways of erecting prashna charts, but I have
seen quite a good number of learned
astrologers failing with those systems. I try
only KP and it give generally good results
depending upon your ability to read the
charts.
Case 1 :
During the election time someone from
the TDP office at Hyderabad called to find
out if Mr. Chandra Babu Naidu will become
the CM and she gave number 54. She claims
direct access with the leader and calls him
Chandranna (brother) and hence I took XI
house as the lagna and casted the chart,
which is as follows.
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

The X cusp is in Capricorn under Moon’s
star and Rahu’s sub. Rahu is in moon’s star
and Moon's sub. Moon is in I st house and
owns 4th. Rahu is in 9th house. It is less than
3 degrees behind the X cusp but it is still in
9th house. 9th is 12th to 10th clearly negating
the power in the immediate future after the
elections. The XI cuspal sub lord Sat is
retrograde and is in 5th though it owns 10th
house. So I called her to announce that his
chances of becoming CM immediately are
bad. But I told her that Rahu bhukti ends with
the advent of Jupiter which is in 1 0th and no
planet is in Jupiter star. Hence I said that first
10 months of 2010 should be good for him.
Case 2 :
After the advent of Mr. Chiranjeevi into
politics, with his meetings pulling huge crowds,
people around us are quite confident that he
will become the CM. A news paper published
its opinion poll stating that he will get around
30 to 40 assembly seats and 3 to 4
parliamentary seats only. I was quite surprised
and wanted to check this out. My question was
‘will Chiranjeevi become the CM?' I opened a
book and got the number 3. The horoscope
casted was as under. As I don’t know
Chiranjeevi personally. I have taken the IX cusp
as the Ascendant.
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

The X cusp from the new ascendant falls
in Leo in venus star and ketu sub, Ketu is
in the star of retrograde Saturn which is in
IX which is 12th to X. Even the XI. cusp
sub venus is in retrograde Saturn star in
9th house. So both the sublords indicating
negative houses and also in retrograde
Saturn stars, indicate a bad performance,
I told my friends that Mr.Chiranjeevi will get
far less seats than we expect.
Case 3 :As people got my predictions
about Mr. Chandra Babu Naidu and Mr.
Chiranjeevi, they wanted to know whether
Mr. Raja Sekhar Reddy shall continue as
CM for the next term. So one of them gave
number 1 23 and the question was ‘will Mr.
Rajasekhar Reddy continue as CM for the
next term?’
I casted the chart as follows. As he is
the CM then, X cusp is to be taken as the
ascendant and remaining houses counted
from there.
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

The X cusp falls in Pisces in Mercury
star and Jupiter sub. We can see that there
is ucha venus in Pisces, and Sun the planet
of power is in the x house. The XI cusp
sublord Mercury happens to be the sublord
of the Ascendant as well. Hence they are
well connected. This Mercury is in the star
of sun in X house. It is placed in XI house,
So this fortification of the XI house
indicates electoral success.
The sublord of X cusp Jupiter owns X
house. But it is in the star of Mars which is
in the IX house. IX house which is XII to X
is showing that the X house aspects are ill
affected. So I declared that Mr. Rajasekhar
Reddy will get the majority and shall be
sworn as CM but shall not complete his
term of 5 years.
Case 4 :
On 2-9-09 my systems administrator
who went for lunch called me and said that
our beloved CM is missing with his
chopper, the news was that there was
some emergency landing some where in
the Nallamalla forests. Then the news
channels announced the central minister of
civil aviation has announced that the CM
was traced. Some news channels
speculated and spread further stories. The
chopper had an emergency landing, the
CM walked few kilometers and then the
district collector and the SP met him and
moved him to a safe guest house..
Then people started calling me to cast
a horary chart and find out if the CM is really
safe. I said that the CM should be safe as
per the news that various channels' are
giving and there is no need for the chart.
But more people started worrying as the
minister of civil aviation declared that their
ministry has no information about the CM.
Now even I started to worry and decided
to cast a chart. I opened a book, got the
number 223 and casted the chart as
follows. As we are talking about the CM.
the X cusp is to be taken as ascendant.
The sublord of the ascendant is Rahu
which is in 2nd house, the marakasthana.
Rahu is aspected by Venus which is the VII
lord, a maraka. Venus is in VIII, the house
of accidents. So Rahu gets the
significations of VII the maraka house and
VIII the house of accidents.
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

Rahu is in Sun’s star which is in 9th which
happens to be badhakastana. Rahu is in
star of sun which is in Leo indicating forests
and steep hills. Leo is also a firy sign. So
the chopper should have caught fire and fell
in forests, or should have crashed into hilly
forests and caught fire. I was very upset with
the chart. I called my friends and and
announced that the horary chart is telling
that our beloved CM’s chopper might have
crashed and taken him away from all of us.
I sincerely wished that my reading should
go wrong. Till night news channels are
speculating that CM should be safe in the
forest and that the officials have found him
but keeping this a secret as these forests
are the territory of Naxals. Next day morning
also news channels said that the CM was
located and ministers along with doctors
are reaching to the spot. But after 2 hours
the government officially announced that
one of the most popular and powerful CMs
of Andhra Pradesh Hon. Mr. Rajasekhar
Reddy is no more.
Thus again and again KP horary proves
to be a miracle. Even experienced
astrologers get surprised by the accuracy
of its readings. If one studies the rules
established in KP and applies them with
an unbiased mind, it is most probable that
we get the right results. The only area I found
not satisfied with KP horary is about finding
out 'Whether one is speaking truth or not.
The results of the experiments I conducted
indicate that the established rules about the
second cusp sublord are not enough and
further research may be necessary.
GOOD LUCK
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

STELLAR ASTROLOGY &
ASHTOTTARI DASA SYSTEM
By M.G.G. NAYAR, B.Sc.,(Hons)
Unlike in western Astrology, timing of
events is done in Hindu Astrology with the
help of the Dasa system (the system of
planetary periods). The Vimsottari dasa
system attributed to the venerable sage
Parasara is the one in most common use
in Hindu Astrology and is found to be
simple, scientific and most accurate. The
amazingly accurate nature of the
Vimsottari system (otherwise known as
Udu dasa) has even evoked the admiration
of gifted western Astrologers like
Sepharial, who has written a book on the
subject.
In Krishnamurti Padhdhati the
constellations are divided into subs in the
proportion of the dasa periods of planets
as envisaged in Sage Parasara’s
Vimsottari System. The subs of Housecusps and the subs occupied by planets
are found to be unfailing guides in
prediction.
Sage Parasara himself refers to many
dasa systems other than the Vimsottari
only. Of them, theAshtottari Dasa system
and the Kalachakra dasa system are in
common use. The ashtottari system
(otherwise known as Mahadasa) is widely
followed in the Northern parts of India,
especially in Bengal. This system is said
to give excellent results in the case of
natives born in Sukla Paksha (the period
of waxing Moon).
As the K.P. sub is based on Vimsottari
system and its proportion, the sublord of
K.P, as it will not fit in with the Ashtottari
system. For the purpose of application of
the sublord theory to theAshtottari system,
the subs have to be worked out in the
Ashtottari proportion according to the
ownership of Nakshatras and the order of
the dasas as in the Ashtottari system.
However, house-cusps & planets can be
analysed with reference to the constellation
positions and timing of events done with
the aid of the Ashtottari system. An
illustration of such a limited application of
theAshtottari system to stellar Astrology
will be of interest to the followers of K.P.
The Veda speak of man as living a
hundred years (Satayurvai Purusha). In
Astrological reckoning, however, figures
other than 100 are adopted to represent
the maximum span of human life. In the
Ashtottari dasa system, as the name itself
suggests, the span of human life is taken
as 108 years.
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

In the system, as in Muhurta (Electional)
Astrology, the total number of Nakshatras
(Constellations) is 28. A Nakshatra by
name Abhijit is introduced between
Uttarashada and Sravana. The last 15
ghatis or the last quarter (one Nakshatra
is taken to be 60 ghatis extent) of
Uttarashada together with the first 4 ghatis
of Sravana (i.e. the first 1/1 5th part of the
first 0°52'20” of Sravana) forms Abhijit.
That is to say Uttarashada would be from
to 280°53’20” and sravana from
The rulership and the planetary periods
in respect of the Nakshatras which differ
from those in the Vimsottari system are
as shown below. As in the case of Muhurta
Astrology, Ketu is disregarded as a planet
in the Ashtottari system also :
Arudra, Punarvasu, Pushyam, Aslesha:
Sun 6 years.
Makam, Pooram, Utram : Moon 15 years.
Hastham, Chitra, Swati, Visakham : Mars
8 years.
Anurasha, Jyeshta, Moola : Mercury 17
years.
Poorvashada, Uttarashada, Abhijit,
Sravana : Sat. 10 years
Dhanishta, Satabhishag, Poorvabhadra :
Jupiter 19 years.
Uttarabhadra, Revati, Aswini, Bharani :
Rahu 12 years.
Krithika, Rohini, Mrigasira : Venus 21
years.
Sun’s dasa is followed by Moon's which
is followed by Mars’ and so on in the above
order. The Bhukti and Antara periods are
worked out in the above proportion in the
same manner as in the Vimosattari
system.
Now let us discuss the horoscope of a lady
born at Lat 11°45’ N : Long 75°32’ E on
Poorvabhadra Nakshatra in Suklapaksha
Dwiteeyai. The value of Ayanamsa for the
day of birth would be 23°1T37" as per the
Universal Tables of Houses. The Nirayana
chart casted using from Krishnamurti
ephemeris and the Universal Tables of
Houses in the manner of K.P. adopting the
above value of Ayanamsa would be as
below :
BALANCE OF JUPITER DASAAT BIRTH
2 years 9 months 18 days. The 7th cusp
is in the sub of Venus the lord of 2 who
occupies the constellation of Moon, the
lord of 11. Hence marriage is promised.
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

Marriage actually came off on
Thursday the day of Jupiter, the lord of
The native was then running Mercury
Dasa, Ketu, Bhukti, Mercury Antara,
Saturn Sookshama. Mercury owns the
constellation on the cusp of 7. Mercury
is aspected by Ketu from 1 1 . Mercury
is in the constellation or Rahu who
represents Saturn by sign position.
Saturn is aspecting 7 and is under the
strong aspect of Jupiter, the lord of 7 in
7 in swakshetra'(own sign) and also of
Moon the lord of 11. Saturn is, in
addition, in the constellation of Moon
and the sub of Venus, the lord of 2, Ketu
is in its own constellation and the sub of
Rahu. It is significant that the
significators represent also the lagna
and the 5th house which are the 7th and
the 11th from the partner's lagna Viz. 7.
On the day of marriage Sun was
transiting the fag end of the 7th house in
the constellation of Venus (the lord of 2 and
the sub lord of the cusp of 7) and the sub
of Jupiter the lord of 1 in 7. Moon was
transiting the 2nd house in the
constellation of Saturn, the
Sookshmanatha. Mercury, the dasanatha
was transiting the constellation and sub of
Venus Ketu the Bhukthinatha was
transiting the 7th house in the constellation
of Mercury the dasanatha (who owns the
constellation, on the 7th cusp) and the sub
of Saturn the sookshamanatha. Saturn
was transiting the constellation and sub of
Mercury the dasanatha. Jupiter, the lord
of 7 was transiting the constellation of
Moon, the lord of 11 , and the sub of Rahu.
Now let us apply the ashtottari system
to the chart. For this purpose, we shall
mark the actual constellations occupied by
the cusps and planets.
CUSP CONSTELLATION
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

Moon at birth was in Poorvabhadra,
which in the Ashtottari system also is
governed by Jupiter. The dasa period of
Jupiter is 1 9 years, and the balance to be
traversed by Moon in Poorvabhadra, is
2°20’ or 140”. The balance of Jupiter Dasa
at birth would be.
A Af\
x 1 9 years = 3 years, 2 months and
Jupiter Dasa would, therefore, run from
dasa for 12 years upto 23-6-1967. Venus
Dasa commences on 23-6-1967.
Venus Bhukti would be
■ 'or4 years 1 month 0 days.
Sun’s Bhukti :
or 1 year 2 months 0 days.
Moon’s Bhukti :
or 2 years 1 1 months 0 days.
total 9 years 8 months 1 0 days.
The next Bhukti in Venus Dasa, which is
that of Mercury commences on 1 3-3-2977.
Mercury Bhukti would be
21x17 years
and Mercury Antara therein 21x1 7x1 7_years
or 6 months and 7 days
Venus Dasa, Mercury, Bhukti, Mercury
and the marriage took place during this
period.
Now let us see how Venus and Mercury
signify marriage. Venus owns 2 and is in
the constellation Sravana owned by Saturn.
Saturn is aspecting 7 and is aspected by
Jupiter the lord of 7 in 7 and by Moon, the
lord of 11, Mercury is in the constellation
satabhisa owned by Jupiter, the lord of 7 in
swakshetra.
Now let us examine the planetary transit
on the day of marriage. Sun was transiting
the constellation Bharani owned by Rahu.
Rahu is thus a strong significator of.
marriage. Moon was transiting the
constellation Anuradha owned by Mercury,
the lord of the Bhukti and Antara Venus, the
“ Dasanatha was transiting the constellation
Uttarabhadra owned by Rahu who has
already been discussed. Mercury, the lord
of the Bhukti and Antara was transiting the
constellation Bharani owned by Rahu again.
Jupiter, the lord of 7 was transiting the
constellation Rohini owned by Venus, the
Dasanatha.
Thus the fundamental principles of stellar
Astrology as propounded by the late
revered prof. Krishnamurti our Guruji are
basically sound and scientific.
GOOD LUCK
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

IT HAPPENS FOR IT IS WRITTEN
IN THE CUSP
KP’S 7th CUSP SUB LORD
Kastoori S. Ravi Kumar (Student of K.P.)
2I4C, West Sasi Nagar, Madurai - 625 017. T.N. South India.
E-mail : kpastroravi@yahoo.com
The Holy Scripture says 'It happens for
it is written' Lord Krishna says The
happenings are already destined' Elders
say 'It should be written in the fore head’
Our Guruji says ‘It should be written in the
cusp’.
He says it is the cusp sub lord which
carries the message. Planets are
executing what is dictated by the sub lord.
Dasa bukthi periods are only ‘time
segments’ through which the results are
happening. They don’t determine the
results. Instead, they deliver the results.
Our Guruji says ih cusp sub lord
determines the marriage and the marital
status. If the 7th sub lord has any
connection with 2, 7 & 11 th houses
according to the stellar theories of K.P,,
then marriage is possible.
■ 7th house is for marriage, and legal
partnership
■ 2nd house is for family status
(children)
■ 11 th house is for satisfaction and
harmony between the couple.
5th cusp sub lord supports for all the
matters concerned by the 7th cusp sub
lord, because love and pleasure brings
nearness and dearness, love can nullify the
disparities created by other cusps.
If the 2nd house connection is weak then
the family bliss may be muted. If the 1 1 th
house connection is weak then the
harmony between the couple is muted. If
the 7th house connection is weak then the
chances for marriage are less.
We cannot expect all the houses [2, 7,
11 &5] could have strong connections with
7th sub lord, but it is good to have little bit
connections here and there for successful
married life.
But the 6th & 12th house connections
are really very dangerous for marital life.
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

CHART - 1
The native is a lady 43 yrs. old and has an 1 8 yrs old daughter, maintaining a high social
stat us, but divorced.
The seventh cusp sub lord is Jupiter; Jupiter is in 7th house itself, so marriage was
possible.
Rahu is conjoined with Jupiter, so he represents Jupiter, and situated in sixth house, it
can be taken as if the 7th cusp sub lord is in 6th house, it is not a good sign for healthy
married life.
Rahu represents Venus and situated in 6th house and it can also be taken as if the 7th
lord is in 6th house and it is also not good for married life.
Rahu is in the star of Sun and sub lord of Mercury, Sun and Mercury are in the 4th house
along with Saturn and Mars, the natural malefics. 4th house is meant for secrets and hidden
things which will always diminish the activities siowly.
Jupiter is in the star of Mars and sub lord of Saturn. Mars is the lord of 6th and 1st,
both 1 st & 6th houses are not supportive for sound married life so divorce took place.
Here it is obvious, the scope is written in the cusp sub lord.
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

CHART - 2
The native is a iady from a respectable family of 32 yrs old. First marriage was broken, but
the Second marriage is successful, but no child.
The 7th cusp sub lord is Sun. Sun is the lord of 7th house, so first marriage was possible,
but divorced later!
The Sun is in the star of Mars and sub lord of Mercury. The Sun, Mars, Mercury all the
three planets are situated in the 1 2th house. The 1 2th house lord Saturn is also present in
the 6th house so there is no escape from the legal separation.
For second marriage, 2nd house sub lord has the power to determine. Ketu is the sub
lord of 2nd cusp he is in the 2nd house, so second marriage also was possible. But no
child!
5th cusp sub lord is Moon, which is the owner of 6th and posited in 10th house, 6th is a
natural negator and 10th is 12th to 11th which denies child birth.
Moon is in the star of Mercury, Mercury is present in the 1 2th house, Moon is in the sub
lord of Rahu who is in the 8th house, and all these houses (6th, 8th & 1 2th) conclude there
is no chance of child birth.
Here it is obvious, the scope is written in the cusp sub lord.
K.R YEAR BOOK - 2010

CHART - 3
In this case the native is a lady Doctor, who is well known for her profession of 43
yrs of age.
Very recently three months ago she got married, but married life lasted only for two
weeks, now she is almost separated. Actually, her marriage was done on heavy
compulsion.
Her 7th cusp sub lord is Venus, which is the lord of 7th & 1 2th houses. Only because
of the 7th house connection the marriage somehow happened for the name sake.
Venus is in the star of Mercury and in the sub lord of Sun, both are situated in the
1 1 th house, of course 1 1 th house is good for marriage.
Rahu represents Venus, he is in the 6th house. This can be considered as if Venus
is present in 6th, this is not good for 6th house matters.
Again Rahu is in its own sub lord so 6th house is strongly emphasized, so separated.
Here it is obvious, the scope is written in the cusp sub lord.
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

CHART - 4
In this horoscope the native is a girl of 23 yrs old. Five months ago she got married, but
before marriage she ran away with her lover, disappeared quite for a month...
After, all the police and legal formalities were over they got married, now living with
her husband, but facing lot of problems.
Her 7th cusp sub lord is Moon, Moon is the lord of 7th house and also aspecting its own
house, this is good for marriage.
Moon is in the 12th house, 12th house is meant for disappearance and also Moon is
aspected by the malefic Saturn. So she disappeared.
The 5th house sub lord is Jupiter, he is in the 2nd house, so love marriage was possible
to her.
Now, she is facing lot of problems, because the 7th sub lord Moon is in the star of Sun.
Sun is the owner of 8th and situated in 6th, along with 6th house owner, the Mercury.
Now she is pregnant, it is because of 5th sub lord Jupiter is in the 2nd house.
Here it is obvious, the scope is written in the cusp sub lord.
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

CHART- 5
it is a chart of a jolly man of 44 yrs old, not yet married, but having all the vices and
enjoying all the pleasures available, except legal married status.
His 7th cusp sub lord is Moon. Moon is the owner of 11 th, situated in the ascendant. Of
course, 1 1 th is good for marriage.
Moon lies in its own star and Saturn sub lord. Saturn is the owner of 3rd and 4th houses
and. posited in the 4th house. Here, the Moon does not have any connection with the 7th
house.
The 5th house sub lord (the sub lord of love) is Rahu, he is in 9thhouse. Rahu is sitting
on Moon’s star and its own sub lord. Here also there is no 7th house connection.
The 11th cusp sub lord (the sub lord of satisfaction) is Mars. Since 11th house brines all
the expectations satisfied and if the Mars is connected somehow with the 7th house then
we can expect the legal life partner. But Mars does not have any connection with the 7th
house. So, the possibility of marriage is not strong.
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

In all the cases seen above, we have taken the stellar theories of K.P only.
We did not take the Dasa Bukti periods, because as we said earlier
Dasa Bukti periods are only time segments which deliver the results what is
written in the cusp sub lord.
Mere the relationships between the Dasa Bukti lords and the houses are not enough
but it should be written in the cusp.
“PRANAMS TO GURUJI”
K.P. theories are very interesting ones. It is expandable and wide like the sky, it always
invites exploration and proliferation.
However, we extend the theories by applying the sub lords in all possible directions we
could realize, still it extends like the horizon, all the extensions of horizon belong to the sky.
HAIL K.P. The Keen Prediction.
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

CHILD BIRTH AND K.P.STELLAR SYSTEM
by E. Sara van an
Jyothish Ratna, Jyothish Bhushana, K.P.Astrologer,
5(1 -B) First Street, S. A. Colony, Sharma Nagar,
Vyasarpadi, Chennai - 600 039.
My interest in K.P. system started very
much earlier in 1995 and due to the
blessings of KSK, I learned this stellar
system and it changed my entire
perceptions of Astrology to a new
dimension. I always link K.P. Stellar
system into my predictions to see the
results are coming perfectly.
Once I had a SMS received from my
student and the message was as follow:-
“ Sir, I had a child today (date) at
...(time) (place) And I want your
blessings.”
When I read the message, I was
surprised to note that the student has
failed to furnish the sex of the child.
I took the time of birth and opened the
computer.
Step 1 I have taken the Sub Lord of
the Lagna.
Step 2 1 have noted the Sub Lord’s
Sub Lord details.
Step 3 1 have noted the position of
Sub Lord’s Sub Lord in the Chart
displayed and decided the sex of the child.
When I confirmed the fact with the
student, he was thrilled to know the same.
Since it is possible only with K.P.Stellar
system, I want to share the same with the
readers of K.P. Year book.
Case No.1
04.05.2006 Thursday 06.50 Cell phone
message seen. Baby born and safe - from
student.
Lagna Taurus -Venus Sun Mercury
Mercury was in Aries -Mars Ketu
Sun Sun was in Aries - Male sign-Male
baby.
I had my own doubt whether this would
be verified with all cases. I immediately
took my Date of birth and details to check
up whether the same could be confirmed.
The acid test is necessary for any
science to withstand its success.
K.P.Stellar system is a science which
withstand Time to prove that the
methodology applied will prove to any Test.
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

My date of Birth 05.07.1952
Chennai 23.55
Lagna Pisces 019.09,00
Jupiter Mercury Ketu
Ketu Leo 000,22.00
Sun Ketu Ketu
Ketu was in Leo sign - Male Sign.
I could not resist my temptation in
verifying the same with some VIPS. I
had the details of Smt. Indra Gandhi, our
Late Prime Minister.
Date of Birth 19.11.1917
Sign.
I immediately started to apply
with all my students. In some cases I
had failure. But I don’t mind all these
failures, because they are the steppingstones of success in prediction.
When I had the details of a Male
Student of my class, I had the difficulty
to overcome and my success in
overcoming the same by rectification of
Birth time is also given for the benefit of
readers.
Date of Birth 16.09.1935
Pollachi 12.15
Lagna Scorpio 025.58.00
Mars Mercury Rahu
Rahu Sagittarius 025.36.00
JupiterVenus Mercury
Mercury Virgo is a Female Sign.
Having known that the native is a
Male, I tried my level best to change
time by working prior to 12.15. It was
not successful. Change of time of Birth
from 12.14 to 12.09 - No change in
Rahu Sub.
But at the same time, when I
changed the time to 12.16, I got the
result successfully. Even though it is not
advisable to rectify the Time of birth
based on this factor alone it can also
be used as a guiding factor for the
same, when needed.
Change the time of Birth 12.16
Lagna Scorpio 026.12.00
Mars Mercury Jupiter
Jupiter Leo 026.26.00 Sun
Mercury Ketu Ketu Gemini is
a Male sign.
Long Live KSK and his Stellar
system of predictive technique.
Good Luck
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

MANGESH MAHALAXMI PRASSANNA
EXACT DATE OF MARRIAGE
PREDICTED WELL IN ADVANCE
L.Y. RAO
La-Vista, 132 Shivaji Park Road.2 Mumbai - 400 028
TEL : 2446 7314 ; Cell : 9820 600 875 email : lyastro1@yahoo.co.in
QUERIST Ms. Kanan Doshi
REF NO. Personal query
QUERY : Will I marry the person I love ? Will the marriage be success
Will our parents approve ? Will it be a court marriage? Hor
HOR.No174
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

TRADITIONAL RASI CHART -
PLANETS WITH + ARE RETROGRADE
NAKSHATRA : REVAT PADA - 1
DASA BAL. MERC, 14 Y. 143 DAYS ENDS ON 24 6 2023
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

WESTERN ASPECTS
ORBS Conj, Opp = 8.Sq. Trine 6, SEXT 6, Semis 2, Rest 2 deg.
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010 79

DASA BAL. : Merc 14 Y. 143 Days
BHK. Bal. : Ketu OY 269 days
ANT. Bal. : Ven. 9 Days
SOOK Bal. : Merc 5 Days
HOR.No. 174 : Asc. for RP 132 Deg 19 Min
LORDS : Sun, Ket, Mer, Moo
RULING PLANETS
ASC STL : Ket
ASC SGL : Sun
MOON STL : Mer
MOON SGL : Jup
DAY LORD : Sat
SIGNIFICATORS OF HOUSES
SIGNIFICATORSARE SHOWN IN THE FOLLOWING ORDER OF IMPORTANCE
A-Planets in Star of Occupants of House : B-Planets in House
C-Planets in stars of House Lord : D-House Lord : E-Planets
Apected byA,B,C,DTrad aspects BY SIGN: F-Sub Lord
Check B: planets near cusps within 3deg 20m OF CUSP THEY WILL ACT ALSO AS
B CORRECT IN THE TABLE, ALSO IN TABLE BELOW
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

HOUSE
ASC NERMOO
RAHU will ACT asAGENT for Sat.Moo also Jup.
KETU will ACT as AGENT for Moo , Sat also
Planets EXALTED or in OWN house Strongly signify the house owned.
Planets DEBILITATED are WEAK
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

VIMSOTTARI DASAS BHUKTIES
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

MERC DASA 22.06.2006 TO 22.06.2023- KETU Bhk. 19.11.2008 TO 16.1 1 .2009
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

ANALYSIS & JUDGEMENT :
1) The sub-lord of V is Rahu, posited in Moon star, Jupsub, Moon owns VIII, and in posited in
VIII, and Jup (the best benefic) is conjoined with Sun & Jup...this indicates the certainty of
the marriage.
2) The s/I of VII is Jup, who signifies III, II, VIII, I & IV... Marriage is thus promised... and as the
Xlth cusp is in Libra, an Airy sign, it will be quick... Most probably when the Dasa-lord Mercury,
transits the Vllth cusp.. .on or about SUNDAY the 5th of JULY 2009. It will not be a court
marriage...
3) The s/I of the Xlth cusp is a significator of VII hence the marriage will be a successful
one...
4) Will our parents approve ? The Dasa-lord Merc signifies IX...
5) The significators of marriage are :
II - Mars, Merc, Sat, Sun, Jup.Rahu.Ven.Kethu, VII - Moon, Mars, Jup
XI-Ven,Moon, V- Mars, Rahu
Probable date of marriage is during Merc Dasa-Kethu Bhukti-Jup Anthara-Ven sookshma...
between 05/07/2009 to 13/07/2009, most probably on Sunday the 5th July 2009, on Merc starday...
THE OFFICIAL WEDDING AND RECEPTION TOOK PLACE ON 5th March, after a private
wedding at Mumbai,
AT JAIPUR ON THE DATE AS PREDICTED.,,,
(ALTHOUGH INITIALLY BOTH, THE BOY'S AND GIRLS PARENTS WERE NOT IN FAVOUR)
GOOD LUCK
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

MARITAL STATUS OF
SRI. SWAMI VIVEKANANDA
V.S.N. Murthy, K.P. Astrologer,
404, Teja Garden Apartments, Prakashnagar, KURNOOL-518004.
Email : vsnm_vdl@yahoo.co.in
Every one knows well about Sri. Swami
Vivekananda Ji, who lectured on our Hindu
Philosophy spontaneously in Chicago. He
is the main disciple of Sri Rama Krishna.
Parama Hamsa. Now let us discuss about
his marital status astrologically. His birth
particulars are astollows
(1 ) Date of Birth : - 1 2th January 1 863.
(Monday)
(3) Place of Birth : - Shimla Pally, West
Bengal, India.
Latitude : 28-33-00 N :
Longitude: 84-33-00 E
Natal Chart is furnished at the end of my
analysis for the benefit of the Readers so
as to enable them to understand clearly.
I have used the following options for casting
this horoscope.
(1) New K.P. Ayanamsa.
(2) Placid us House System.
(3) Mean Nodes.
(4) 365 days/year Vimshottari Dasa.
(5) Geographic latitude.
(6) ORBApplication. (3.333).
In the natal chart of Sri. Swami
Vivekananda ji, the 7th cusp co-rulers are
Mercury/Jupiter/Mercury/Jupiter/Jupiteras
Sign lord/ Star lord/Sub lord/Sub-Sub lord/
Sub-Sub-Sub lord respectively.
Rule (1):- If the 7th cusp sub lord is a
significator of houses 2 or 7 or 11, then
marriage is promised.
In this natal chart, the 7th cuspal sublord
is Mercury. He is the owner of 7th. So
marriage is promised to this native.
Rule (2):- When a planet holds the
constellation on certain cusps without being
sublord of any cusp, that planet can be
deemed to be a strong significator for the
cusps concerned. (Astrology for
Begin ners-Vol.V. Page No. 761)
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

In this chart, Jupiter holds the
constellation ship of 7th without being
sublord of any cusp. So Jupiter becomes
a strong significator for the 7th cusp,
Rule (3):- Second Marriage is indicated
if the following two conditions are
simultaneously satisfied:-
(a) The sublord of the 7th cusp is
deposited in a dual sign (or) in the
constellation of a planet in (or) owning in a
dual sign (or) if the sublord of the 7th cusp
is Mercury and
(b) The sublord of the 7th cusp is also a
significator of either of the houses 2 or 11.
If any one of the above two conditions
is not satisfied, then second marriage is
denied. (Reader No. 6. H ora ry Astro logy -
Page No. 165)
In this example birth chart, the sublord
of the 7th cusp is Mercury and Mercury is
in the sub of Rahu who is a strong
significator for 11th house. (Rahu is the
occupant of 11th and there is no planet in
its stars). Thus the above two mentioned
conditions are fully satisfied.
Rule (4):- If the sublords of 7th cusp and
6th cusp are the same, this is an indication
of more than one marriage. (Advance
Theory of K.P.- 4 Step theory written by
Prof. Sunil Gondhalekarji - Page no. 38)
As per this rule Mercury holds the
sublordshiip of both 7th and 6th. So It is an
indication of more than one marriage.
The above said 4 Rules indicate
promising of marriage and also more than
one marriage to this native. But he was
unmarried.
Rule (5):- If the Sublord of the 7th cusp
be the significator (in the star of the
occupant or owner) of 1, 6, or 10; or
connected with 1, 6 or 10; also Saturn,
Rahu or Ketu; Barren or sterile signs (Aries,
Gemini, Leo, Virgo, and Capricorn) it
denies. (Further Lights on Nakshatra
Chintamani - Page No. 178 written by
Chandrakanth R. Bh'att) The 7th cusp
sublord Mercury is the occupant of Astd,
and also the owner of the 6th house.
Mercury is in the sub of Rahu. This Rahu is
in the star of Mercury who is the occupant
of the Astd. and also the significator of 6th
as Rahu is in the star of Mercury who is the
owner of 6th. Thus Mercury signifies both
1 st and 6th houses through star wise and
sub wise.
The 7th cusp sublord Mercury is in the
sign of Capricorn which is a barren sign.
Mercury is in the star of Moon and in the
sub of Rahu. Moon is in Virgo (barren sign).
Rahu’s constellation lord Mercury and it’s
sublord Moon are in Capricorn and Virgo
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

respectively. Both Capricorn and Virgo are
barren signs.
Jupiter is the 7th cusp constellation lord.
He is in the star of Mars and in the sub of
Venus. Both Mars and Venus are in Aries
and Capricorn. These two houses are also
barren signs. Thus all the 7th cusp co-rulers
are all connected to the barren signs. Moon
is conjoined with Saturn.
Rule (6):- Punarphoo dosha is also one
of the causes for the detrimental of
marriage. In this chart, both Saturn and
Moon are associated in Virgo. Saturn
aspects 11th and 7th bhavas with its
special aspect (i.e.) with 3rd and 10th
aspect. Moon is in the sub of Saturn and
Saturn is in the star of Moon. So Punarphoo
is also present in this natal chart.
Rule (7):- If Badhakasthanadhipathi
(Badhakaadheesha) signifies 2, 7 or 11,
and then marriage is denied.
In this chart, Mercury is the
badhakasthanadhipathi as the Lagna is
Sagittarius. Mercury is the owner of 7th and
also conjoined with Venus (natural karaka
for marriage) in a barren sign Capricorn.
Still let us examine this natal chart
deeply.
Balance of Moon dasa at birth is 4 years
- 2 months -5 days. If we add 7 years of
Mars dasa to it, we will get 11 years- 2
months - 5 days. All right this period is
Bafyadasa.This is not marriageable age
to this native. OK. If we add 18 years of
Rahu dasa, we will get 29 years- 2 months
- 5 days. This is an appropriate age for
marriage. Let us see the signification of
Rahu which is a node and a planet of
seperative tendency.
Rahu is the occupant of 11th. He is in
the star of Mercury who owns 6th, 7th &
9th.and also the occupant of 1 st. Thus Rahu
signifies 1 = AGrade, 11 = B grade. 6, 7, 9
- C grade, respectively. (Vide table of
significators -Planet view.) Moreover Rahu
is not having any planet in its stars. Even
though he signifies 11th and 7th, he did not
give marriage in his dasa. WHY?
Point (1):- Rahu is in the sub of Moon
who signifies 9th strongly. (OurGuruji said
only the sub decides the matter.)
Point (2):- When a planet holds the
constellation on certain cusps without being
sublord of any cusp, that planet can be
deemed to be a strong significatorforthe
cusp concerned. (Astrology for Beginners
-Vol.V. Page no.761). As per this rule, Rahu
becomes a strong significatorforthe 10th
cusp. 10th cusp signify good name, fame,
reputation in the society, house for dwelling
will be given, but it is 1 2th house to the 11th.
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

(i.e.) 10th is a negation house for 11th.
Thus Rahu strongly signifies the 10th
house.
Point (3):- If a planet is the significator
of 7th house and happens to be the
strong and single significator of 6th
house, it will not give marriage.
Rahu is only the strong and single
significator for 6th along with 7th also. As
per this rule, 6th is also negation for
marriage. No other planet is signifying the
6th as it is in the star of Mercury.
Rahu, the dasanatha is in the star of
Mercury who is badhakasthanadhipathi
placed in 1 st house (i.e.) in Makara sign
which is a barren sign. Rahu is in the sub
of Moon who is associated with Saturn in
Kanya (barren sign) causes Punarphoo
dosha. This P.P. Dosha is also one of the
causes of marriage detrimental. Saturn
aspects Rahu and the 7th house. As the
running dasanatha is well connected to
badhakasthana or to
badhakasthanadhipathi and to barren
signs, it is an indication of marriage
denial.
The connection in between the 7th
cuspal sublord and Badhaka house, (or)
to it’s lord and also to the barren signs is
an indication of marriage denial.
By taking into consideration the above
mentioned three points, we can boldly say
that Rahu is not capable for giving
marriage in his dasa completely.
Alright. O.K. Then what about the next
coming Jupiter dasa. Let us examine the
Jupiter. What he signifies?
Jupiter having no planets in its stars is
signifying 3 =Agrade; 9 = Bgrade; 4&11
= C grade; 1,3,12 = D grade (vide Table
of significators- Planets view). Even
though Jupiter signifies 11th, Rahu will be
the strong significator for 11th. But he also
fails to give marriage to this native.
Already explained in the previous paras
about Rahu very clearly.
As per the 2nd Point cited above,
Jupiter holds the constellation ship of 7th
cusp without being sublord of any cusp.
So Jupiter can be deemed to be a strong
significator for the 7th cusp. If so then why
did not Jupiter give marriage at least in
his dasa? Jupiter is in the star of Mars
and in the sub of Venus. Both are placed
in the barren signs. Venus the sub lord of
Jupiter is associated with Mercury who
is the badhaka-lord. Thus Jupiter is
connected to barren signs as well as
badhakadheesha. Therefore Jupiter is not
capable to give marriage in his dasa
also.
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

The cuspal sublord of 3, 5, 8,9 &12
happens to be Venus and there are no
planets in Venus stars. So Venus
becomes a strong significator for 3-5-89 & 12. 3rd house indicates leaving his
native land and also short journeys. 9th
indicates long journey to foreign countries
and also Philosophy. 5th and 9th
indicates our traditions and custom.
Package of 3-9-12 indicates going
abroad. 8th indicates Secrets, (i.e.) to say
in simple, Swamiji preached the secrets
of Indian Philosophy as well as our
traditions and customs throughout the
world.
SPECIAL HINT : - (1 ) In this natal chart
all the 12 cuspal sublords are well
connected to 1-4-6-10 & 12 or to barren
signs and also to malefic like Saturn,
'Rahu and ketu. So we can conclude
boldly that this native was not married.
(2) 2nd and 11th cuspal sublord is Ketu
(malefic). He is conjoined with Uranus. He
is in the star of Moon and in the sub of
Venus. Star lord Moon is conjoined with
Saturn (malefic) in a barren sign Virgo.
Ketu acts as an agent for Venus (Natural
karaka for marriage). Venus signifies
predominantly 1-8-10. Ketu’s sublord is
Venus. Venus’s sublord is Ketu. (i.e.)
Mutual exchange of sublords of Ketu and
Venus. As mentioned above the sublords
of 2-7- 11 are well connected to 1-4-6-10
and 12 or to barren signs and also to the
malefic like Saturn, Rahu, ketu. Hence it
is confirmed that this native was
unmarried.
In this article seven rules regarding to
marriage are clearly mentioned Rules (1 )
and (2) indicate marriage to this native.
Rules (3) and (4) indicate more than
one marriage.
Rules (5), (6), and (7) indicate the
denial of marriage.
I would like to convey my pranams and
regards to Lord Maha Ganapathi and to
our Guruji Late. Prof.K.S.K. I shall be
highly grateful to the respected editor Sri.
K.Subramaniam, and also thankful to his
staff-members for their kind co-operation
in all activities connected with this
publication for accepting my article to
include the same in this K.P. & Astrology
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

S WAMY VIVEKAN AN DA
Cusi
Planet
Su
Mo
Ma
Me
Ju
Ve
Sa
IRa
Ke
Uf[R]
Ne
Eim
Ch
Fo
P.Ashada (4)
Dhanishta (3)
Aswini (4)
Krittika (4)
WIEIM
Magha (1)
U.Phalguni (4)
Swati (2)
Anuradha (2)
Moola (1)
Star (Pada)
U.Ashada f4
Hasta (2)
Jyeshta (2)
MtTOiTT71W{31
Mrigasira (1)
U.Bhadra (2)
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

Swamy Vivekananda
Signified tors - Planets View
C D
HIM!
bihiihb
kk&i
Sianificators - House View
+ These planets do not have any planets in their stars. Rahu acts as agent for: Ma, Sa.
A - Planets in Occupant’s stars B - Occupant of house C - Planets in Owner's stars
E - Planets aspected by A, B, C and D, and planets aspecting that cusp
D- House Owner F - Cuspal Sublord
In both the tables, A represents the strongest signification and E represents the weakest
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

DATE OF DELIVERY AND TIME OF
DELIVERY K. P. REVEALS.
By. M.R.Prasad, 24-2-651, Saraswathi Nagar,
Near : Lady Polytechnic College,
A friend of mine from Mumbai has given me a ring on 10-07-2009 and informed that her
daughter-in-law who is in the 8th month of pregency is admitted in the hospital and the doctor
has informed that the position is critical, so there may be a possibility for the premature Delivery.
Under these circumstances he requested me to predict when the delivery will take place and
whether it is normal or critical. His daughter-in-law has given No. 3 between 1 to 249, the details
of the case is furnished here under.
CUSPAL POSITIONS
PLANETARY POSITIONS
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

Accordingly the chart is prepared for the above No. and found the Lagna is fallen in
Mesha Rasi. K.P. followers are well known that for the above query the houses 2nd -5th -
11th houses should be examined. Why because?
2nd house represent the family or Kutumba Sthanam and also growth in the family
i.e. adding one more member family thorough child birth.
5th house represents children or puthra Sthanam and progeny.
1 1 th house represents fulfillment of desire of the querent.
So, the significators of the above houses will give the clue when the delivery will took
place and 5th house will reveal the sex of the child.
Significators for the 2nd -5th- 1 1th houses
2nd house : Moon-Mars-Jupiter-Venus-Saturn
5th house : Moon-Venus-Saturn-Kethu
11th house : Sun-Moon- Jupiter-Venus-Saturn-Kethu
So the significators of the above houses are Sun-Moon-Jupiter-Venus-Saturn-Kethu.
Note :
Mercury with Sun in the 3rd house. So Mercury.
Rahu is in the Makara Rasi. So Rahu being the agent of Saturn.
All the 9 Planets are appeared as the significators of the 2nd - 5th -1 1 th houses.
Of the above we have to select strong-favourable-fruitful significators with the help of
Ruling planets.
Lagna Sub Lord-Rahu : Lagna Star Lord-Saturn : Lagna Rasi Lord-Mars
Moon Sub Lord-Jupiter : Moon Star Lord-Mars: Moon Rasi Lord-Saturn
Day Lord-Venus
Hence the Ruling planets are Rahu-Satrun-Mars-Jupiter- Venus
Note :
The Jupiter is aspecting the Sun and Mercury with his 5th aspect. So Sun and Mercury.
The Moon is in association with Jupiter in the 11th house. So Moon.
The Rahu in the Makara Rasi. So Rahu being the agent of the Saturn.
First we will find out the sex of the child. For this purpose we have to examine the 5th
house and its Sub Lord,
The 5th house fallen in the Karkataka Rasi, the rasi Lord is Moon-Star Lord is Mercury
and Sub Lord is Rahu.
So the Sub Lord Rahu will give the clue about the sex of the child.
Rahu is a female planet.
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

He is in the Makara Rasi, a female rasi.
He is in the Star of Sun a male planet.
Sun is in the Midhuna Rasi a male rasi.
He is in the Star of Jupiter, A male planet.
But the Saturn being a female Eunuch.
Now we will also examine the position of the Jupiter the Puthra karaka.
He is in the Kumbha rasi, A male rasi.
He is in the Star of Mars, A male planet.
More important is the Jupiter from Kumbha rasi is aspecting the 5th house with his 7th
aspect.
Summing up the influence of males on the 5th house is more than females.
Hence I predicted that the querent is going to be blessed with Male child.
But the placement of the Saturn in the 5th house will cause some Worry - Tension -Mental
agony and Troubles. And more important is he will cause DELAY in delivery. As predicted
the parents of the querent including my friend and his spouse has faced lot of worry -
tension etc. as predicted.
Now we will find out the time of delivery.
At present Mars dasa - Jupiter Bhukthi and Moon anthara dasa is running from 1 0-07-2009
The dasa Lord Mars isthesignificatorofthe2nd house i.e. Kutumbha Sthanam.
The Bhukuti Lord Jupiter is the significator of 2nd and 11th houses and
The anthara dasa Lord Moon is the significators of all the required houses i.e. 2nd-5th and
11th houses.
Hence all the relevant houses are represented by the dasa - bhukthi - anthara dasa lords.
Hence the child birth will be between 10-07-2009 to 03-08-2009.
Now we have to find out in which Sooshama dasa the delivery will take place.
Before finding out Sooshama dasa, we have to examine one more important point, i.e.
In general practice, for the child birth houses 2nd -5th and 11th should be examined.
But at the same time the 3rd - 6th -12th houses should also be examined. Why? because
3rd house is the 12th house to the 4th house and the 4th house represents the womb of the
mother and
Hence the 3rd house reveals when the child will come to the outer world from the womb of
the mother.
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

6th house represents the labour pain of the querent at the time of delivery.
12th house rules over hospital - hospitalization.
Therefore at the time of delivery the dasa - Bhukthi - anthara dasa - Sooshma dasa lords
should also be connected to the 3rd - 6th, 12th houses.
Now we will examine whether the said lords are connected to the above houses also.
Mars dasa - Jupiter Bhukthi - Moon anthara is running from 10-07-09 to 03-08-09.
In Moon anthara dasa the Sooshma dasa of Saturn will commence from 17-07-09 to
The Sooshma dasa of Kethu will start from 26-07-2009 to 28-07-2009.
Saturn is the significator of the 2nd - 5th -11th houses, besides 7th and 12th houses.
Kethu is the significator of the 5th and 11th houses, besides 7th and 12th houses.
So both Saturn and Kethu are capable of yielding the favourable results.
Now we have to find out which one will give the results.
The Saturn is in the 5th house itself. He is in the Star of Venus. Who is in the 2nd house
being the significator of the 2nd - 5th -11th houses and the Venus is in the Star of Moon the
Lord of the 5th house and posited in the 11th house i.e. the house of fulfillment of the desire
ofthequerent.
Hence the Saturn is so powerful and favourable to yield the results.
Now we will examine the position of the Kethu also.
Kethu is in the 4th house in the Star of Saturn who is in the 5th house being the significator
of the 2nd -5th- 11 th-12th houses.
Kethu being a Node i.e. the Chaya graham is more powerful than Saturn and his placement
in the Saturn Star he acquired ownership over 2nd - 5th -11th and 12th houses automatically
which is signified by Saturn.
Further, Kethu is aspecting the Saturn with his Semi- Square aspect. So Kethu will dominate
the Saturn.
Moreover Kethu is the A grade significator of the 5th house but none others.
And more important is no planets are in the Star of Kethu.
Further the said Kethu is in the Sub of Mercury who is in the 3rd house being owner of this
house.
Hence the Kethu through sub position has possessed the ownership over the 3rd house
an important house which indicates the delivery of the child i.e. when the child comes to
the outer world from the womb of the mother.
Hence, Kethu is more powerful than the Saturn when compared.
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

So I have selected the Sooshama dasa of the Kethu which will operate from 26-07-2009
to 28-07-2009 and the child birth will take place above period provided the Transit of the
Moon is agreed or tallied. (As the event will take place with in a day i have to consider the
Transit of Moon alone.)
On 27-07-2009 Moon is in Mercury rasi Kanya in her own Star Hasta.
The day is Monday.
Due to my curiosity and interest I want to know the time of the birth also.
It is predicted that when the Moon transit in Kanya rasi in her own Star Hasta the event will
take place when the 11th house significance is operated.
In the chart Sun-Moon-Jupiter-Venus-Saturn and Kethu are signifying 11th house. Hence
when the Moon transit on the sub of the planet who signifies the 11th house, then the
delivery will take place, and at the same time the position of the Lagna will also be tallied.
On 27-07-2009 Moon is in the sub of Saturn, the significator of 11th house from
5-QOA.Mto 7.15A.M.
In the chart the role of Kethu is very important as he is the controlling authority the birth
time of the child, being the A grade signifcator of 5th house besides 3rd-4th-11th-12th
houses.
So the Lagna should be in the Star of Kethu when the child birth will takes place.
In Simha rasi the Lagna in the Kethu star will be from 8-00A.Mto 8-45 A M. at Mumbai.
But by the time the Sub Lord of the Moon is Mercury, the significator of 3rd -4th -10th but
not 11th. So I rejected this Lagna period.
Again the Kethu star is in the Dhanur rasi i.e. Moola.
On 27-07-2009 at Mumbai the Dhanur Lagna will arise from 4-25 P.M. onwards.
So the delivery will take place only after 4-25 p.m. only.
In this juncture I would like to mention that the Kethu is a deciding factor for child birth. We
have already predicted that there is a possibility of Suzerain operation and Mars is the
governor of surgical instruments.
Hence the involvement of Mars will also be necessary at the time of the delivery.
In the chart, Mars is aspecting in the Kethu with his Textile aspect. As a result Mars will
come under the dictum of Kethu.
Hence I have selected the Mars sub in Kethu Star in Dhanur rasi.
The said position will start from 4-46 p.m to 4-49 p.m.
Finally I predicted that the delivery will be in the above period and informed to my friend
that the time of delivery will be between 4-00 p.m to 5-00 p.m on 27-07-2009, particularly
between 4-30 p.m to 5-00 p.m.
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

On 27-07-2009 ! have received a call from my friend from Mumbai at 5-1 5 p.m stating that
the delivery took place at 4-49 p.m.
As predicted the Suzerain operation will be needed at the time of delivery, and the health
condition of both child and mother is normal.
But the shocking news is that, the sex of the child is female but not male as
predicted. How and why my prediction went wrong regarding the sex of the child?
I have once again verified the chart and the calculations made and cross checked the
analysis made. Evey thing is O.K. Then where I commited the mistake. No doubt that I
have commited mistake not actually a mistake, but it must be blunder.
When lam struggling with my thoughts the lines pronounced by the great K.P. astrologer
Sri.M.P.Shanmugam of Coimbatore in his bookAstrosecrets&Krishnamurtipadhdhati Part
one (2003 April Edition) in page No. 295 under para 3 has flashed in my mind. For the
benefit of the K.P. followers I reproduced the same here under.
5th sub lord will be in a star and in that star in a sub. Planets related to this sub, if
it is a male planet, then it will be a Male child; if it is a female planet, then the birth
will be a female child. This dictum will not change, in case, there is to be a change,
it will be on account of Rahu/Kethu only. For example, in this chart, 5th sub lord is
Saturn, this sub lord Saturn stationed in Makara, in the star of Moon and in the
sub of Mars.
This sub lord Mars, stationed in the male sign(Simha) without any connection to
Rahu/Kethu byway of conjunction, aspect etc. but is only deposited in the star of
Kethu, Therefore, the birth will be a male child is now confirmed.
The same sub lord Mars had it been occupying Meena or Karkata and connected
to Rahu by conjunction or aspect and the Rahu if aspected by Mars, then the birth
will be a female child, without a doubt.
In our case the sub lord of the 5th house is Rahu. He is in the Makara rasi i.e. Saturn
sign-Sun star and in the sub of Mercury.
Mercury in the Midhuna rasi a male sign. He is in association with Sun a male planet. So
we can confidently declare that the sex of the child is Male, provided there is no connection
with Rahu or Kethu as per the words of Shanmugam garu.
Now we will examine whether the Mercury is having any connection with Rahu or Kethu.
Mercury is in the Midhuna rasi at 1 9-59-02 and Rahu is in the Makara rasi at 6-58-47 and
Kethu in the Karkata rasi at 6-58-47.
There is no connection with Rahu through aspect.
But Mercury is aspecting the Kethu with his Vigintile aspect.
So the sub lord ie Mercury is connected to the Kethu through his Vigintile aspect.
GOOD LUCK
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

KP & PREDICTION OF MARRIAGE
ByS. N. SARDAR •
CHAKTHAKURANI, P.O.-R.C.THAKURANI, ,
THAKURPUKUR, KOL KATA-700 104, Mobile 9330978910. ^
Everybody wants peace, pleasure and
smooth life, but nobody gets. To enjoy
peace of mind, so many factors have to
contribute. Out of them, marriage is a great
problem. Life with a .healthy wife, never'
facing difficulties in the married period, is
very rare. Though ‘Marriage is made in the
Heaven’ and it is impossible to dodge the 1
fate, yet one can satisfy oneself by making
efforts to reduce the worries and anxieties,
to avoid disappointments and dispute, by
knowing his or her weaknesses and trying
to adjust.
'Krishnamurti Paddhati' is the only
Paddhati / Method by which one can
understand howto conduct oneself. Even
though we pray to God whenever we expect
certain adversities, yet one should' not
forget that neither gem nor Guru can
guarantee the cure. Prayer has a limitation.
It depends on you and your Karma. None
can dodge fate. None can hoodwink
destiny. None can bribe the God or
Goddess or Planets. The nature's divine
plan will go on unchanged. Therefore, we
should try to correct ourselves.
For marriage, Houses are to be
considered 2,7 and 11 in Krishnamurti
Paddhati. In traditional Hindu astrology, only
7th house and the planets ruling and
occupying it are taken into account. But
Krishnamurti Paddhati goes further and tells
us that apart from the 7th house which is
kalathrasthana, the 2nd house and the -11th
• house should also be examined: The 2nd
house denotes ‘kutumba’ -the family, all those
members closely allied to the native by birth
, or by connection . Further, 1 2nd- house.: also
? denotes ‘acquisition’: and acquisition to the
family by marriage. The 7th house denotes
legal bondage with another and, the partner
with whom one is to leadfamjlyjife, she who
legally shares the property, possessions, etc.
though she mayor, mayvnpt:.sharer,gur
sorrows. The ,11th house; shows, long
standing love, pleasure, permanent tie -of
friendship and partnership in life, fulfillment
of desires, marital bliss etc. The person who,
by the bond of, marriage, enters; into, jegal
partnership with us has to partake in our pain
and pleasure. Who else, can, be a lasting
friend than our, life partner? That is why
Houses 2.7 and 11 are" considered for
marriage. ' ’’ v‘"^
1 red \ i : 'ri/z- ' riVv
In the 1st week of January, 2008 one of
my colleagues Mr, Subrata Basu requested
me to analyze as per K P System whether
his daughter would get married andjf so
when. His daughter was born on 3rd
June, 1985 at 5^45 A.M. in Kolkata, Lat-22°-
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

Balance Mercury Dasa ,16. Years 10
Months 25 Days.
16r10-25 Merc dasa balance
■ 04 - 27 Ket/Mars
1-00-18 Ket/Rah
41 - 16 Ket/Jup
1-01-09 Ket/Sat
1 2 - 03 Ket/Sat/Sat
1-27 Ket/Sat/Merc ■
- ; 0-23Ket/Sat/Ket
. 2-06 Ket/Sat/Ven
00 -20 Ket/Sat/Sun
00 - 23 Ket/Sat/Mars
02- 00 Ket/Sat/Rah
01 -23 Ket/Sat/Jup
Let us see whether the marriage is
promised or not in the light of K P laws. 7th
Cuspal sublord is the guide. If sublord of the
7th Cusp signifies either 2 or 7 or 1 1 house,
marriage is promised. In this chart under
consideration, 7th Cusp sublord is Ketu and
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010 ;

Ketu posited in 5th (love). Ketu is in the
star of Jupiter, lord of 7 and 11 . Therefore,
marriage is promised.
Now, let us find out the significators of
houses 2 and 7 and 11 who are willing to
participate to celebrate the marriage
ceremony.
A. 2nd House There is no planet in
2nd House. Lord of 2nd House is Mercury.
Moon is in the star of Mercury. Therefore,
Mercury and Moon are the significators of
2nd House.
B. 7th House There is no planet in 7th
House also. Lord is Jupiter. Saturn and
Ketu are in the stars of Jupiter. Therefore,
Jupiter, Saturn and Ketu are the
significators of 7th House.
C. 11 th House Venus and Rahu are
in 11th House. Rahu is in the star of Venus.
Lord of 1 1th is Jupiter. Saturn and Ketu are
in the stars of Jupiter. Therefore, Rahu,
Venus, Saturn, Ketu and Jupiter are the
sig indicators of 11th House.
Therefore, significators of houses 2, 7
and 11 are Sun, Moon, Mercury, Jupiter,
Venus, Saturn, Rahu and Ketu.
The chart was analysed on 1 3th January,
2008 at 7-30 AM in Kolkata. The Ruling
planets were as follows
Rahu is in the Sign of Saturn and Ketu
is in the Sign of Sun. Therefore, Rahu and
Ketu are ruling Planet. None of the Ruling
Planets is retrograde or in the star of a
retrograde planet. The common planets
amongst the significators and Ruling
planets are as follows
Sun, Moon, Jupiter, Saturn, Rahu and
Ketu.
At the time of judgement, Ketu Dasa,
Saturn Bhukti and Mars Anthra was going
on. Ketu is in 5 and in the star of Jupiter,
Lord of 7, 8 and 11 and posited in 9. Ketu
is in the sub of Saturn in 6 and Lord of 9,
1 0 and Saturn is in the star of Jupiter, Lord
of 7 and 1 1 . So Dasa Lord Ketu is fruitful.
Bhukti Lord Saturn is in 6 and lord of 9
and 10. Saturn is in the star of Jupiter in 9
and lord of 7, 8 and 1 1 . Saturn is in the sub
of Moon in 6 and lord of 3 and Moon is in
the star of Mercury in 12 and lord of 1 ,2
and 5. But Mercury is not able to give the
1 st and 1 2th houses result as occupant is
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

stronger than the lord of the house and
there are planets in the stars of Mercury. It
is obvious that Saturn must create
obstacle but not deny though it is posited
in 6. In this connection, it may be mentioned
here that if a planet happens to be the
significator of anyone of the houses 2, 7
and 11 and it itself happens to be the strong
and single significator of the 6th house, it
will not give the marriage even though it is
a signifieator of 2 or 7 or 11 as the 6th
house is separation from wife. Therefore,
Saturn as Bhukti Lord is fruitful.
Anthra Lord Mars is neither a
significator of 2, 7 and 11 nor in R P. So
marriage can not take place in Mars
Anthra. Next Anthra is Rahu. Rahu is in 11
and is in the star of Venus in 11, lord of 6.
Rahu in the sub of Saturn and Saturn is in
the star of Jupiter in 9 and lord of 7,8 and
11. So Rahu, the Anthra Lord is fruitful.
Rahu Anthra starts from 08-01-2008 to
08-03-2008. So I told Mr. Basu that his
daughter's marriage would be celebrated
very soon and the period would be between
8th January, 2008 to 8th March, 2008.
Actually the marriage was celebrated on
8th March ,2008 and it was a love marriage.
At that time, Dasa Lord Ketu was transiting
in Leo in its own star, a significator of 7 &
11, Bhukti Lord Saturn was transiting in
Leo also in the star of Dasa Lord Ketu
and Anthra Lord Rahu was in Aquarius,
sign of Saturn who is a significator of 7 &
11, and in the sub of Mercury. Sun, the
most exciting planet was in Aquarius in
the star of Mars and in the sub of Mercury,
a significator of 2 & 5. Moon was then in
Pisces in the star of Saturn and in the sub
of Rahu. The day of marriage was On
Saturday. Thus, Saturn played a vital role.
At the end of this article, I would like to
convey my pranams and regards to Lord
Uchchishta Maha Ganapathy and to our
great Guruji Late Prof. K. S. Krishnamurti.
I would also like to convey my regards to
my Guru, Shri P. Roy Choudhuri, Principal,
Academy of Stellar Astrology, Kolkata. I
shall be grateful to the respected Editor,
Sothidamamani K, Subramaniam if he
provides a little space in his esteemed
magazine.
Long live Krishnamurti Padhati.
ini
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

ADOPTION
JYOTISH VACHASPATHI, JYOTISH ACHARYA, HORARATNA,
S.A. KOTESWARA RAO, K.P. ASTROLOGEFL ,, ...
E-mail : sakoteswararao@rediffmail. com j
According to K.P. -to find out-whether
a native is destined for ‘ADOPTION'-the
rule is- 4th Cusp sub-lord should be
connected to 8th house and MERCURY
in some way or other or a dual sign. Let
this be Rule No. 1.
But in my experience while scrutinizing
the charts for the same-whether it is
Adoption or property got through will a
valid and concrete rule is “Jupiter as 8th
lord having 2,11 connection will berta inly
entrust the luck of having other’s property
through will i.e. legally, of course, 5th
connection will play its role, as 5th bhava
denotes-children. Let this be Rule 2. ,
I here under give the example chartstaken from my records-analysing-with the
application of both rules.
Example 1 : (As per Rule 2} In this
ch art Jupiter is lord of 8 & 1 1 placed in 4th
house and he is in the constellation of Ketu
who represents 2nd house along with 5th
house. So Jupiter’s connection with
2,8,11, 5 is verified.
Here Rahu, the Dasanatha is the agent
of Jupiter by his occuaption of sign and very
close to 8th Cusp thereby as a node gives
the result of Jupiter in his Dasar(Major
period). The.sub period (Bhukti) of Ketu
who represents 2 & 5 as node granted the
result which ran between 17-11-2004 to
5-12-2005 and the native was adopted on
Here Ketu is starlord of Jupiter and
agent of Mercury-Mercury being stationed
in. ITth along with. lord of 11 & '6 which
confirms gains to the native. 3 T
: Analysis as per, Rule»1 :-:c4th cusp
sublord is Mars who is in the constellation
of Jupiter lord of 8th and a dual planet
owninga dual house. Hence the reuslt
proved. • •' lyiiQ.Ltn :>•

Here we can further observe that
Jupiter, Rahu, Ketu all 3 planets connected
to the result are in the sub of Saturn p laced
ip 9th being lord at 9th. u ,, v
■ 9th shows' gather & Poorvapunyam as
5th to 6th. So -5th connected to 9th
confifrhs-^^Son-Father' relation
establishment, r ' i I ( ‘ 1 ’ ‘ - - »
At the same time these three planets are
well connected to the cusps of 2,4,5^8,11
either star wise sub wise and Jupiter sign
EXAMPLE 2 : ANALYSIS AS PER
In this chart Jupiter is lord of 8th, and
stationed in 8th house itself. He is in the
constellation of Mercury, lord of 2,11.
Jupiter aspects 2nd and 4th cusps from
his own house, being in his own sub- by
which he gains full strength to give the
result. The native was adopted at his 4th
month.
The birth star of the native is Punarvsu
4th Qr. (Punarpusam) and Guru Dasa
balance at “ birth is upto
12-03-1978 and the bhukti of Rahu, the
last bhukti was upto 12-3-1978. Again
here we can see the power of bhukti lord
to cooperate with Guru, the dasa lord as
he is in the constellation of Jupiter and
sub of Saturn in 11th, being lord of 6 in
own star own sub.
ANALYSIS AS PER RULE I : Here 4th
sub lord is Venus who stationed in Dhanus
a dual sign of Jupiter and he conjoined
Mercury who is also in the same 5th
bhava. Here the striking feature is Rahu
as Bhukti lord represents Venus by sign
occupant of Tula and aspecting 11th
house and lagna lord Sun thereby
strengthening Venus in execution of the
result.
It can be seen that all planets
connected with the result are inter related
star wise & sub wise.
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

Example 3 :
The native of this chart was picked up
from a Government General Hospital,
after his mother left him there itself and
slipped away from hospital for the
reasons best known to her.
After 4 or 5 days, the now step father
and mother in search of a boy for
adoption-contacted the Hospital
authorities for one of the above situation,
and came across to find him, decided
positively, and had taken home with the
authoritative formalities completed.
Analysis as per Rule 2 :
Here, Lagna being Tarus, Jupiter lord
of 8 & 11, placed well in 11th itself.
Jupiter is placed in Mercury star who is
lord of 2 and 5 and in his own sub.
The Jupiter Dasa balance at birth is
12y 3m 4 days. By the time he was taken
for adoption, Saturn Bhukti was running.
Saturn is in Ketu star and Ketu
represents Mercury lord of 2 & 5. Rahu
conjoined Jupiter, the Dasa lord and
such Rahu is in Saturn star and Sat sub
there by fortifying the Dasanatha
connecting with Bhuktinatha Saturn to
give result in Sat Bhukti. Saturn and
Budha are placed in Saggitarius a dual
sign. Hence the rule is 100% verified.
Analysis as per Rule 1 :
Saturn, the 4th cusp sub lord is in
Ketu Star and Ketu represents 2 & 5 by
occupying Virgo, So the 4th sub lord is
connected to Mercury as the owner of
Virgo and more over Saturn is placed in
Dhanus a dual Sign, conjoined with
Mercury thereby fulfilling the required
rule to give the result as Saturn is in 8th
house (Rasi wise).
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

Example 4 :
The native of this Chart last his father
at the age of 4, and was brought up by
his grand-mother-to whom his mother
was the only daughter.
Initially he was rejected to get his
legal share of property from his grand
father (father’s father). He got the
property of his grand mother through a
will to his possession when he was
running. Rahu Dasa-Sani Bhukti i.e.
she expired in Septemberl 98 1 .
Analysis as per Rule 2 :
Actually Rahu is not directly
connected to Guru but Rahu represents
Sun the sign lord as he stationed in Leo,
and this Sun is in Jupiter star, which
Jupiter is lord of 8 & 1 1 as house owner
and stationed in 2nd bhavam in Cancer,
his exalted Rasi in his own star in
Vargottamamsa quite a strong position
to give the results endorsed to him.
Guru dasa started from 27-12-1992 and
ran upto 27-1 2-2008. As per his extreme
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010
4 nc

strength acquired he again gave the ;
chance of getting property of the sister
of her grand mother (who already 1
gave her property) who; was also i
childless. ! 1
The possession of property was
executed in Sep: 1999 when she
expired - when Guru dasa |Budha
Bhukti was running and Bud ha in Rahu.
star. So 2,8,11,5 combination worked
out to endorse Him with luck again. ; '
Analysis as per Ru le 1
f 4th cusp su^ lord is Saturn Saturn
aspects Guru Idrd of 8 & 11 and he is
in Moon Star own sub. Moon is placed
i ►'A.-'Vt • i'r-VV J.<
rHn 8th bhava ineaggitarius whichHs a;
L! dual sign. 'fterice the resultrfI " Adoption means to. have a
I selected of hi Sjdwn choice as’ he was;
j-— not gifted by God; hence the Vthcusp;
: connection is a must and we can;
§_. ob.se rve this i n..the. given examples. |
i He in ; 'rM-ir./tf ; HoKysS |
p K. P satisfying my consultants with the)
j— divine science of K.P. propounded byj
[.. Late Prof. K ri sh n a m u rti : • rf- - - ~ l
I — ~ |^ o j'- - y ted I y t h a h k our
esteemed editor of K.P. & Astrology
for giving me encouragement by
providing ,, a ,>l:it 1 1 e s p a c e J m ( h i s
esteemed magazine,^, V; o ; ; 3 n •, * ?.
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 201 0 ,

f
Om Ganeshaya Namah!
EFFECT OF PARALLEL ASPECT
Jl . 1 . ‘ By SUBHASH NAIR
Uma C-l, Mandakini CHS, Opp Model town. Mulund (w),
- Email: siibhafihnair@live.com
The concept of Parallel aspect
’ When Planets are within the same
degree, in same signs they are said to be
in conjunction. But if they are within the.
same degree but in different signs then
they are said to be in parallel aspect. It may
not be proper to call it an aspect but it can
be, argueci .that it’s only a .position / The
results in a parallel positioning are same
as that when planets are in conjunction.
When both or all planets in a parallel
positioning are benefic's they give good
results during their Dasa-Bhukti-antara
(DBA) periods. Similarly, when the planets
in parallel are malefic’s then
complications, difficulties or obstacles can
be predicted. When either of them is a
benefic, moderate complications are
seen.
In parallel aspects the events in the
persons birth chart are brought to light in
a more prominent manner during their
conjoined Dasa periods. So, the result is
neither harmonious nor discordant and the
effect depends on the planets so involved.
The relative strength of two planets depends
on its proximity to its point of exaltation,
mooltrikona position, swakshetra, its
positioning in the friends quarter or if the
planet is in the nakshatra of a benefic planet
orsignificator. " ~ <
Important houses of marriage ,-v
2nd house indicating addition of a
memberto the family (Kutumbshana)
5th house of Love affairs n r 1 .
7th is the main house of marriage and
partnership (kalathrasthanam)
.,1.1th house of fulfillment, (Bhagyasthana)
Below is the natal chart of a male native
whose love affair culminated in marriage
with much opposition from his parents. This
example, I believe shall prove to be very
helpful to KP students in analysis of natal
charts especially. in understanding the effect
of parallel aspects between planets.
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

Analysis of Cuspal sub lords2nd and 11th cuspal sublord is
Budh in 9th bhava. Budh owns 5
(the house of affairs) and 8
(mangalyasthanam). Budh is in own star
and sub.
5th and 7th cuspal sublord is Sani
in the 7th bhava, in the star of Sukr in 8
Sukr is lord of 9 and 4. Sani also owns
1 and 1 2. Sani being connected to 7 and
deposited in enemy’s sign will delay
matters connected to marriage but will
not deny. Sani connected to 7 shows
unconventional sort of a marriage.
Looking at the sfgnificators we see
all planets are significators of either
2 - 5 -7 - 1 1 . So here the prediction part
becomes a bit complicated.
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

Sani in the 7th bhava aspects the Dasa
lord sukr, also karaka for marriage. So it
was cent percent evident that marriage has
to take place in sukr Dasa itself.
Under Sukr Dasa only two more Bhukti
period were left, mercury and Ketu Bhukti.
When the chart was taken for analysis and
calculation, the native was running Bhukti
of Budh until 20 Jan 2010 and Ketu
Bhukti unto 21 Mar 2011.
Analysis of Ketu Bhukti
Ketu in the lagna bhava is in the star of
Guru and also aspected by it from the 6th
bhava. Again, Ketu is in the sub of moon,
lord of the 6th bhava. Ketu signification to
6th bhava, the negative house for marriage
is a key indicator that it will never promote
a marriage scene.
So we drop Ketu from the Bhukti
list.Analysis of Mercury Bhukti
Budh is lord of 5th house and also the
8th. Both are positive houses to promote
a love affair. Budh is deposited in 10th,
the house of profession. This clearly
indicates that it can promote a love affair
at the place of work with a colleague. Also,
Budh is in its own star and sub. The next
factor we see is that Budh is aspected by
the 5th aspect of Guru. Guru is lord of 2nd
and 11th (positive houses for marriage).
Though Guru is deposited in the 6th, and
indicates opposition it can’t deny as it is in
the star of Sani in 7. Finally, Budh by
ownership, tenancy and aspect signifies 2So we conclude that mercury Bhukti will
definitely give the results of marriage.
Parallel Aspect
Dasa lord Sukr, is at 18.59° in thula rasi,
own house, Antara lord Budh is at 18.12°
in vrischika rasi and Bhukti lord Sani is at
18. 51 0 in Leo. A clear parallel aspect is
seen between the 3 planets Sukr, Budh
and Sani at a position where each is at
about 18°. This clearly indicates the co
relation between them to shape and signify
the matter.
The marvel of KP is great
Sukr is the Dasa lord. Budh and Sani
are cuspal sub lords of 2, 11 and 5, 7
respectively. Here the Dasa lord and the
cuspal sub lords are sharing a parallel
aspect or position. At the time of marriage,
the Bhukti and Sookshma lord is again
Budh and the Antara lord is Sani.
Dasa / Bhukti / Antara analysis
Date of marriage celebration, 13th Sept
2009 in DBA of Sukr - Budh - Sani and
Budh Sookshma period.
“PRANAMS TO GURUJI”
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

DIEHARD
DR. SAMARENDRA DAS
Abirampur, 3rd Lane, Malda-732103.
' Those persons , who prefer to call “Di” instead of “Diana”, do not believe that she
was died by car accident during her sojourn in France on August 31 , 1997, rather assert
.strongly that “Di” was assasinated by some heartless unscrupulous men or a group of
conspirators; who did not like hob-nobbing of “Di" with Dodi AIFyed, the son of a business
Tycoon of Eng land. ■ ''
The gentle man who sat opposite to my table on December 1 5,: 2006 afternoon was
such’ a person. After completion of introduction, the gentleman placed a daily English news
paper of Calcutta, named The Statesman, dated 15.1 2.2006 in front of me and requested
me to go through the lines at the last column in page number 3, where was a news about
Diana under the title of “Conspiracy theories scotched”, which was thus :
LONDON, Dec. 14 : Athree year inquiry into the death of Princess Diana and Dodi
AIFyed has concluded that allegations of murder were unfounded and that the paris car
crash that killed the two in 1997 was a "tragic accident", a senior police officer said today.
.The inquiry, which largely confirmed previous findings by French investigators, said
there was no reason for suspecting the involvement of the royal family, that the princess
was not pregnant when she died and nor was she engaged to marry her companion, Dodi
“Our conclusion is that, on all the evidence available at this time, there was no
conspiracy to murder any of the occupants of the car, This was a tragic accident", said
Lord stevens, former chief of the Metropolitan Police, who led the investigation^ the
deaths of Diana, 36 and her companion Fyed 42.
,t “There was no conspiracy, and no cover-up”, Lord stevens added. The couple were
killed along with chauffeur Henry Paul when their Mercedes crashed in the point d'Alma
tunnel in Paris on 31 August, 1997, while they were being chased by paparazzi. The inquiry
said that blood samples taken from Paul showed his blood alcohol level was twice the
legal limit. ’-“We know that car travelled at excessive speed during the final part of the
K.P, YEAR BOOK - 2010

journey while beingTdllowed by the paparazzi. We can say certainly the car-hitthe curb
before the 13th pillar of the central' reservation in Alma under pass’*. !
When I raised my eye from the news paper and looked at him, he wanted to know
astrologically whether there was a shred of truth in what the former chief of the Metropolitan
Police reported; especially in the matter of Di’s death Which was quite bardto believe in
by her uncounted fans. < . \
“Please mention any number between 1 and 249". I said him calmly.
“79, Sir”. He said abruptly^. f
He said so at:3:38' pmrbri,15. 12.2006.
A horoscope was made instantly atAbhirampur, English Bazar, District-Malda, West
Bengal, India, the longitude and latitude of which were 25.5" north and 88°9’ east, analysed
and foretold that it was not based on fact.
“I wonder how Lord stevens dared say such things before the press”.
“Have you not gone through the vital point in his report ?"
He said. |
1 “What isvit; Sir?" Heiblurtednif nil'" j bic.j duct I cauO o-suoH- i
? “Go through the 3rd paragraph of the news. Read carefully what he stated. He said
that they reached the co ncl usion' *on atljhe evidence available at this time”. So what he
stated that time was correct upon the available evidence. If it were inadequate, you can’t
blame him”j a;-. \ I ; j
r “Then, Sir?
j “Truth may only combs to light if further investigation is made in future by the authority
concerned or the Chief or his associate investigator, who knewithe fact well makes a
confession or reveals the truth like the “Deep Throat” alias latej Marc Felt, theformer
Associate Director of F.B.L.U.S.A., who was fully aware of the fact Or an active instrument
of the conspiracy related to the "Water Gate” the most remarkable U.S. scandal of 1974,
with which the then most powerful U.S. President Nixon was compelled to resign his post;
at the fag end of Felt’s life in the year of 2005, roughly 31 years after the incident. Gentleman,
what I have Prognosticated to you on good faith as per rule js correct. Let the matter, be
kept in time. Time speaks the truth”.
K.P. YEAR BOOK :- 2010

"You are right, Sir”. The gentleman said, “Mahammed AIFyed, the father of Dodi,
dose associate of Di, was highly annoyed with the report. He did not give any credence to
the report. He said that how could he accept the report as true, when none but he alone
knew the truth",
HOROSCOPE :
ANALYSIS : The third house in the horoscope is related to information, rumour,
revelation, report etc. If the sub lord of the 3rd house Cusp is in any manner connected with
Saturn or Mars or both, the revelation, report or information is not based upon true fact.
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

For example, suppose the relevant house cusp’s sub lord is Mars, which is deposited
in the constellation of Saturn, then the information, rumour or report is not true, but false
one as the 3rd house cusp’s sub lord is connected with Saturn.
There is an exception. If the constellation lord is associated with Jupiter, then the
report, or revelation is true.
Here the 3rd house cusp’s sub lord is Saturn,one of the malefrc planets in the heavenly
bodies, which is treated in astrology as a planet of diplomacy, cunningness, deception
etc. is posited in the constellation of Dragon’s tail i.e. Ketu, in Leo that traverses backwardly
towards Saturn which happens to be deposited in the same sign of Leo.
So the constellation lord is connected with Saturn. Moreover the constellation lord
Ketu in traditional astrology is depicted as a planet similar to Mars. Above all the
constellation lord Ketu is in no manner connected with Jupiter. What it indicates readers
understand well. So further comment is unnecessary.
Let Diana live in the hearts of her followers till the fact comes to light.
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

VOICE OF THE UNSEEN
Jyothisha Vachaspati
N,V. SUDHAKARASHERMA, M.Sc, MA(Sans), MA(Astr),
Vedanta Vidvan H.No. 3-16-5/A, Nehrunagar, Ramantapur,
HYDERABAD - 500 013, AP, India.
Email:- Sudhakara_shermaa @yahoo.co.in,
sudhakara@shermaagmail.com
ASATOMA SADGAMAYA
TAMASOMA JYOTIRGAMAYA.
MRTYORMA AMRTAMGAMAYA.
-BRIHADARANYAKAUPANISHAD.
Lead me from the asat to sat.
Lead me from darkness to light.
Lead me from death to immortality.
Such enlightening teachings abound upanishads. upanishads are the treasures of
true knowledge regarding the ultimate truth.the brahman.
The above message is a prayer made by the demigod vayjj when all the gods seek the
guidance of the lord vayu,whois ever pure &untouched by the fetters of this worldly bondages.
CHART - 1
P.O.B. : KAKINADA
K.P. Ayanamsa : 23D, 24M, 31 Se.
ASC KETU , MOON, SAT
JUP
VOICE OF THE
UNSEEN
FOR
RAHU SUN, MARS
NEPT MER.VEN,
URAN
TRADITIONAL NAVAMSA CHART
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

Let us examine the chart from the point of view of parashara Maharshi, seventh
house is spoiled by the presence of four planets, sixth lord Mercury, eighth lord Mars, and
the natural malefic Sun are present in the seventh house along with the lord of the house,
the V&nus. Venus is closely conjoined with Sun & lost its power. Fourth house signifies
domestic happiness. Moon, the fourth lord is conjoined with saturn (SAT). Jup the lord of
the twetth house throws its seperating aspect on the seventh house.
Rahu’s position is in the eighth, position of Rahu in the eighth is quite undesirable. Such
natives like breaking of traditions.
K.P ANALYSIS Seventh cusp falls in the star of Jupiter, a seperating planet by
ownership. Jupiter throws its aspect on the house. Venus is the significator of both sixth &
seventh house. The sublord of the seventh cusp, Venus is in the grip of Moon signifying XII
th house. Her marriage might have taken place in Merc dasa. The dasa is quite unfavourable
&the native, aTemale working in a company, divorced her husband.
CHART-2
P.O.B ELURU(A.P)
K.P.AYANAMSA : 23 Deg 23 Min. 28sec
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010
IIS

TRADITIONAL RASI CHART
ASC MARS FOR. SAT, KETU
TRADITIONAL NAVAMSA CHART
SUN, MERC
SUN, SAT
MEN. FOR,
Planet
SUN
MOON
MARS
MERC '
JUP-RVEN
SAT
RAHU
KETU
URAN
NEPT-R
FOR
The seventh lord is conjoined with the sixth lord Sun & is receiving the malefic rays of
Mars. The seventh house in navamsa is severely afflicted by Rahu & Ketu.
K.P ANALYSIS:- The seventh sub lord Sun signifies sixth, eleventh, & fifth houses. The
marital bond broke. It was a love marriage, They will unite after few years roll down in their
life.
I thank Mr.K.Subramaniam and other members of the editorial board for publishing this
article. May lord Krishna's path enlighten us.
Cusp
ASC
2nd
3rd
4th
5th
6th
7th
8th
9th
lOt
Sgl
51 Jup
43 Mar
49 Mer
58 Moo
26 Sun
51 Mer
IMS
Stl Sbl Ssl
Mer Moo Ket
Ven Mer Sat
Mar Mar|Mar
Rah Moo
Sat Jup Mer
Ven Moo Sat
Moo Sun Sat
Ven
Mer Mar
m
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

WHEN CAN I GET A TENANT FOR
MY FIRST FLOOR PORTION?
P.P. J^AMACHCHANDRA UPADHYAYA
1074, 6th ifoain, Ex. F-Block. NearAndolata Circle,
Ramakrishna Nagar, Mysore-570022.
E-mail : ramachandrapp@gmait.com
Sun Rise
NithyaYoga
Sun Set
Hora
Dasa Days
Karma
Vaidhrti
Jupiter
Gar
Star : Krittika Pada 4
Star Lord : Sun
Rasi : Taurus
Lagna : Aries
Tithi : Shukla Paksha
Sapthami
Balance of Dasa : Sun QY,8M,20D
Ruling PlanetsMYSORE, KARNATAKA, India
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

DASA SUMMARY
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

CUSPAL POSITIONS
Rohini{2)
Andra(l)
Pushyami(1}
Magha(2)
U.Bhadra(2
PLANETARY POSITIONS
SIGNIFICATORS - PLANETS VIEW
Rahu acts as agent for : Me
Ketu acts as agent for : Ju,Ma.
(A) - Planets in occupant's stars
(B) - Occupant of house
(C) - Planets in Owner’s stars
(D) - House Owner
+ These planets do not have any planets in their stars.
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

HORARY NO. 64/249
Sun Rise :06:12:39 PM
Nithya Yoga : Shkula
Hora : Jupiter
SunSet :06:15:15PM
Dasa Days : 306.25 D
Horary No. 64
Karma : Chatushpad
Question : When can 1 get a tenant
to my First Floor Portion?
Star : U.Phalguni Pada 2
Star Lord : Sun
Rasi : Virgo
Lagna : Cancer
Tithi : Amavasya
Balance of Dasa : Sun 3Y.6M.5D
Ruling Planets
MYSORE, KARNATAKA, India
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

DASA SUMMARY
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

CUSPAL POSITIONS
Cusp Star(Pada)
Punarvasu{4)
Ashlesha(4)
U.Pha!guni(1)
Chitra{2)
Mrigasira(3)
PLANETARY POSITIONS
Planet
Hasta(l)
BaBBS
rarirn—
Swati(2)
P.Phalguni{3)
Dhanishtafl)
Ashlesha(3)
Bharani{2)
SIGNIFICATORS - PLANETS VIEW
Planet
Rahu acts as agent for ; Ma.Sa
Ketu acts as agent for : Mo
(A) - Planets in occupant's stars
(8) - Occupant of house
(C) - Planets in Owner’s stars
(D) - House Owner
+ These planets do not have any planets in their stars
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

I was informed by my tenant, occupying the first floor portion of my residence on the
morning of Sunday, the 21st September 2008 that, for reasons beyond his control, he had
decided to vacate my house by the end of November 2008 and shift to Bangalore, I was a
bit surprised at this sudden announcement made by the tenant as, at the time when he
came on the 29th December 2007 to have a look at my residence, he informed me that he
was desirous of staying in the house for at least three to four years and wanted me to give
my consent for the same. I, therefore, wanted to find out whether this development was as
per my current dasa bhukti antara period.
2. Before proceeding further, I would give below details of the planets which are signifying
VI, which represents, among others, my tenant, in my horoscope. VI cusp falls in Mercury
Sun Venus, i.e. Mercury sign, Sun constellation and Venus sub. Rahu is VI, in the
constellation of Sun, in XI. Mercury, lord of III & VI, is untenanted and is in XI, in the
constellation of Rahu. Venus, lord of II & VII, is also in XI, in the constellation of Rahu, in VI.
Untenanted Mercury, ford of VI, as also Venus, in the constellation of Rahu signify VI.
Since Rahu is the sub lord of VIII, which is 3rd from VI, Mercury, in the constellation and sub
of Rahu, also signifies 3rd from VI, i.e. change of residence for VI. Jupiter, inLagnahas
exchanged signs with Mars, in IX, i.e. 4th from VI . Mars is untenanted. As VI represents the
tenant, 4th from VI, i.e. IX would represent his residence, i.e. the portion of my house,
which has been rented out to him. IX cusp in my chart falls in Jupiter Kethu Saturn. For my
tenant to vacate, the significators of VIII, which is 3rd from VI and V, which is 12th to VI, in
my horoscope should operate. Venus, in the constellation of Rahu, by stellar signification,
signifies VIII &VI. It is in the sub of Jupiter, which can act like Mars, because it exchanges
signs with the latter. 3rd house is also for communicating.
3.1 . Since the 5th September 2008, Rahu, the bhukti lord had commenced its transit in
the Constellation, Sravana, ruled by Moon, lord of the sign, where the IV cusp in my
horoscope falls. Since then, I was anticipating developments concerning matters relating
to my residence. Venus antra in Rahu bhukti was on from the 2nd May 2008 and on the
21st September, thesookshma of Mercury was operating, On Sunday, the 21st September,
the dasa lord Saturn, which is also the sub lord of IX, was transiting in the sign of Sun in the
constellation of Venus, in the sub of Jupiter. Dasa lord, Saturn, by transiting in the constellation
of Venus, was signifying matters connected with my tenant. The tenant spoke to me on
that day at 7 hrs, 30 mts. The lagna cusp at that time was transiting the sign of Mercury.
(Kanya), in the Constellation of Moon (lord of the sign where my IV cusp, representing my
residence) and in the sub of Sun, which in my chart is in the constellation and sub of
Jupiter. Moon, at that time, was transiting its own constellation.
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

Rohini, in the sign of Rishabha, ruled by Venus, in the sub of Mercury. Thus, the antara
lord Venus and sookshma lord Mercury both signify my tenant and the Lagna cusp and
Moon were both transiting the signs representing my tenant and in the constellations
representing my residence. It is interesting to note that Sun, at that time, was transiting the
sign of Mercury in the constellation of Sun, in the sub of Saturn, sub lord of IX, suggesting
that the matter is concerning his residence. It is also interesting to note that both Venus
and Mercury, in their respective signs, were in the constellation of Mars, lord of VIII, in IX.
Dasa lord Saturn, which is also sub lord of IX, was transiting the sign of Sun. in the
constellation of Venus, in the sub of Jupiter, while Rahu, the bhukti lord was transiting in the
sign of Makara, ruled by Saturn, in the constellation of Moon and in the sub of Venus. While
informing me of his intention, he also told me that he would be vacating my residence at
the end of November 2008.
3.2. I wanted to see the planetary positions on the 30th November 2008, the day when
my tenant would vacate. The day, a Sunday, falls during Saturn dasa, Rahu bhukti, Sun
antara and Mercury sookshma. Saturn, on that day, would be transiting in Sun sign, in Sun
star and Sun sub, Sun, in the constellation of Jupiter, lord of IX (exchanging signs with
Mars, lord of VIII, in IX), signifies the tenant vacating his residence. Bhukti lord Rahu would
be transiting the star of Moon, which signifies V, i.e. the 12th from VI, meaning change of
residence for the tenant. Rahu would be transiting the sub of Mercury, signifying the tenant.
The antra lord Sun would be transiting the sign of Mars in the star of Saturn, in the sub of
Rahu Mercury, the sookshma lord would be transiting in its own star and sub. Moon, on that
date, would be transiting in Jupiter’s sign in the star of Kethu, acting for Jupiter, which we
know represents 4th from VI, besides acting for Saturn sub lord of the 4th cusp from VI.
Thus, the transit of planets on the 30th November clearly reveal that the tenant would be
vacating the leased portion of my residence on that date.
4.1. I then proceeded to ascertain on the 28th September 2008, through horary
•approach, the period by which I could let out my residence. The exercise was undertaken
at Mysore at 18 hrs. 23.5 mts and chose a random number thrown by my software, which
was 64. The horary horoscope cast for the number is attached. The horary lagna cusp falls
in a fruitful sign and the sub lord of lagna Mars is in its own star Mrigasira in the IV, suggesting
that the exercise is regarding my residence. Mars, by its 4th aspect, aspects Rahu, which’
being in the Sign of Saturn, acts for Saturn, in the star of Venus, sub lord of VI & IX, which
are relevant to letting out my house. Moon, on the other hand, is in the sub of Jupiter, lord of
VI, in IV, signifying IX as it is also in the star of Venus. It can be seen that both Lagna sub
lord and Moon clearly indicate the nature of the exercise.
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

4.2 Sub lord XI cusp is Jupiter, which is in VI, signifying IX. This is a clear indication that
my desire concerning letting out my first floor portion would be fulfilled. However, Saturn,
as lord of IX and signifying VI, is aspecting IX & XI indicating delay in fulfillment of my
desire as also delay in the prospective tenant occupying theportion to be let out. The
Ruling Planets at the time of analysis were as under:-
Rahu in the sign of Saturn and Kethu in the star of Mercury also qualify for being RPs. At
the time of analysis, thedasa of Sun, a RP, was operating. Sun, it can be seen, was in the
sub of Mars, signifying matters connected with my residence. In the dasa of Sun, the bhukti
of Jupiter was operating. 1 did not expect my house to be let out during Jupiter bhukti
because. Saturn, the star lord of lagna at the time of analysis, was lord of IX and in the sub
of Jupiter in VI and it was aspecting IX, which represents the residence of the tenant. This
meant that letting out my residence would be after the commencement of Suturn bhukti.
Saturn bhukti was to commence on 11-2-2009. During Saturn bhukti, I chose Mercury
antara for the fructification of the event, which was to operate from 5-4-2009 because
Mercury, besides being lord of IV, strongly signified IV as it was in the star of Mars in IV.
More importantly, Mercury was in the sub of Jupiter. I did not try to arrive at the date of
letting out the residence but wanted to find out whether this period agrees with the dasa/
bhukti/antara/sookshma period as per my birth chart.
4.3 I was running Saturn/Ra hu/Moon from 17-12-2008 to 13-3-2009. Although Moon is
lord of IV in my chart, which is 11th from V! and Rahu is in the VI itself the transit of both
Saturn, the dasa lord and Rahu, the lord of bhukti were not favourable during Moon antra.
Mars is in IX, which is the 4th from VI. From the 9th April 2009, Rahu commenced its transit
in Moon’s star in the sub of Mars. At the same period. Saturn was transiting in the star of
Venus, signifying VI , in the sub of Saturn, which is the sub lord of IX. From the 1 3th March
2009, the bhukti of Mars in Rahu antara was in operation. As the dasa/bhukti/antara period
and the transit of the significators for the expected event agree during this period, I expected
my prospective tenant to get in touch with me for taking the first floor portion of my residence
on rentafterthe 13th March 2009. On Saturday the 11th April, when Saturn sookshma in
Mars bhukti was operating, a gentleman approached me and paid advance for taking the
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

portion on rent. He informed me that he would take it on rent from the 1 5th April 2009 but
added that he would occupy the portion with effect from the 1 st May as, in the meantime,
he was required to make arrangements for shifting his family from Gujarat, where his family
members were residing. Eventually, the tenant occupied the first floor portion of my
residence on the 1st May 2009. As per my chart, on the 1st May 2009, I was running
Satum/Rahu/MarsA/enus.
The transits of the relevant planets on the 1st May were as under:-
The transits of the relevant planets on the 15th April were as under:
5. It would be interesting to see that the No. 64 does, in fact, reveal the nature of my
query. For, as per my chart, Moon is the lord of the IV, which is also 11th from VI, representing
my tenant. Jupiter is lord of IX and it is the star lord for the cusp represented by 64. Mars,
the sub lord is in IX in my chart. Kethu, in the star of Saturn, which is also the sub lord of IX
in my chart, is in Lagna in the horary chart. It does represent the tenant as per my chart
because it is in the star of Mercury in the horary chart and it can be seen that Mercury
represents VI in my natal chart. It dose not appear to be a coincidence that Moon was
transiting Sun at the time of undertaking the exercise. For, Sun in my natal chart, being in
the star of Jupiter, signifies IX. Further, Sun and Moon are both in each other’s star in the
horary chart and hence, it can be taken that Sun represents matters connected with my
house.
6. We should be immensely grateful to our Guriji for his advanced stellar theory of
astrology, as by applying the broad principles and guidelines lucidly explained in his
Readers, we are able to analyse the future events in our day to day life. I bow my head in
reverence to this great genius.
GOOD LUCK
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

FATE OF DR. MANMOHAN SINGH’S
CENTRAL GOVERNMENT
By Sahhasra Saagara “Brahmananda”
No. 86, “Sagars Vastu, ‘Nidhi'", New Building Lane,
Mariyappana Paalya, Rajaji Nagar, Bengaluru-560021.
Mob : 9844007883, email : ssagar86@yahoo.co.in
Hotary No. : 13
The above said subject came to my
mind on 13th February 2006, I have
erected a horary chart on 13th February
2006 at 12-5. Hrs. with the help of Horary
For H. Number 13 lagna will fall at
Aries 17-20' and my question was about
Central Government, hence Xlth cusp
Aquarius 08-33' will bje the Central
Government’s Lagna.
Lagna sub lord Rahu in the 2nd cusp
is good, in the star of Saturn in 6th cusp is
very good, Rahu in the sub of Mars in 3 rd
is very bright.
Tenth cusp sub lord is Jupiter in the
9th lord of 2nd and 11th, Jupiter in his own
star signifies 2,9, 1 1 is vety fine and Jupiter
is in the sub of Mercury in lagna cusp in
Rahu star in the 2nd is very bright.
Now for Horary chart Ketu dasa is
running and from 28th April 2008 Rahu
bhukti in Ketu dasa will start. In fact this
period will be little hardship for Mr. M. Singh
as Rahu is placed in 2nd in the star of
Saturn, lord of lagna and 12th in 6th and
Rahu in the sub of lord of 3rd and 1 0th in
the 3rd in the star of the Sun, lord of 7th in
the 1 2th cusp signifies sudden fall but very
feeble rays of hope as it signifies 6th and
2nd as well as Rahu in the sign of Jupiter
signifies 2nd and 11th as well as 9th house
strongly.
If Mr. Manmohan Singh’s Union
Government survives then there will be
possibilities of becoming Prime Minister
of India for the second term in the next
coming Lok sabha polls held in May 2009
as Ketu dasha Jupiter bhukti will run which
signifies 2nd and 11th as well as 9th
through stellar and thro" sub it signifies
lagna, 2nd strongly denotes he will continue
as PM of India from.
As per the schedule Lok sabha polls
to be conducted around April/May 2009
and from 16th May 2009 Ketu Dasa Jupiter
bhukti will run to the H.chart.Jupiter is strong
significator of 2,9 and 11 as well as 1 and
2 denotes he will be elected for the second
term I feel astro logically.
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

H.No. 13 (1-249): Question : Fate of Dr.Manmohan Singh’s Central Government
Mr, Lai Krishna Advani, Ms.Mayavati, Mr. Laaloo Prasad Yadav, Mr. Muiayam Singh Yadav, Mr.
H.D. Devegowda will not get the chance of becoming Prime Minister of India in 2009 as Mr. Man
Mohan Singh’s Jupiter placed in the 9t and indicating the 11th denotes promotion as well as
successful of ambition. This time some Congress ! seats will get increased because of Mr. Man
Mohan Singh’s Ketu dasa and Jupiter Bhukti from 16th May 2009 for Horary Chart.
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

Beneficdots of Jupiter
Taurus month May 14, 2009: 10-03: pm.
Jupiter contributed 4 benefic dots for the 1 1 th house of Parliament, hence UPA will be able
to secure 50% i.e., 272 the magic number out of 543 for farming the Government in Taurus
month as per my knowledge.
Note r Aries month will bestow only 37.5% i.e., 203 seats, but Taurus month counting
month bestow 50% i.e.. 272 seats.
Note : On 1 4th March 2009 atl 2:22 PM I have drafted a Press Release with very much
disguise on both God and Government but I dint post the same as I know that press will
not come forward to publish the same hence I didnt post the same. The below given press
release matter for vourkind reference.
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

Aji' r rilrioM e
Press Release
r
y'lUDISlvl - HUO
LokSabha Election 2009 j
As I have been observing irujij^as well as opposition parties til! (jlate who shares
only booty equally and oppose dach'otier in public meetings.
National parties losttheircharisjria (Congrgssraijl BJP) epd&QitiBJP depend on
NDA and Congress;dependon-UPAwj}efeas-smaW-anQ-leeaJ-partie&-Gi:eam to acquire
i A
these poftical parties, but
prd^tngi^h^ \^^^u§me^of^009r!M^atytikpotlsreiairbaseiri on my method
j 'isi/5 ,f!u2
pfe^arfa§tto[^f<^p|es|5nt I am unable td eradicate
“Benefic dots and percentage pf [Votes and Seats”.
isiiqiJl
j A$ pi^de^^and^Tai^J^ month fhej Rujfjjgt go^er^mept at center will retain the
ruling power with 272 seats Majority for UPA and the opposition majdr party NDA will
secure 129 foil 3 5. ‘seafs where as tile third front ^11 gg cure 137 10743 seats.
i j j j 1 j uriert
i Dr.Manmohan, Singh will become BrimeMinister ol Iqdia -on-ot after 16th May
2009 which c'an not bentled ouf. Jril ,LM i ib2r-Aj 1 had predicted on 1 6th Mpy 2009 Dr.Manmohan Singh will tekeu^tfjei^Wlsp^r^dia.
I had predictedlhis-date based on the prashna chartsiertedjad: KStb^rebruarySOOSi as
I found Ketu dasa’J u pite r bhuktl wiir bestow ;nim 5uccess‘and ttgntfir beeome~PMjOf I nd ia
for the second termr
f
Countin g stated on 16th May 2009 and around 18-00 hrs . Med] a declared the;U PA
will farm the 1 5th Ldk ISabha and the verdict ts in favor of Congrdssand Manmohan Singh.
K.fWEAR<B©aK3'201 W

ANALYSIS FOR MARRIAGE POINT
By Dr. J.R.K. RAO
Arundhati Nilayam Street, # 3, Shanti Nagar,
Natal chart is for analysing all the required aspects. Now I am taking marriage aspect
only as per the request of the native.
At the outset let us see whether marriage is promised or not as per this chart. 7th
house sub-sublord is Mars lord of 2,7th houses. Moon is in his star. So he is less significant of
lagna. Mars is in the star of Jupiter{9) as per FI. Jupiter is in the sub-sub of Rahu. Rahu as a
node signifies 3,4,5 houses. So marriage is promised"
Analysis of this chart step by step to show the might nature of CST.
STEP 1 II HOUSE MARS SATURN" JUPITER
VII HOUSE MARS KETHU MARS
XI HOUSE SUN KETHU MERCURY
COMMON AMONG THESE HOUSES ;
MARS, KETHU, JUPITER, MERCURY, SATURN, SUN
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

PLANETS IN THE STAR OF THE PLANETS
MOON, RAHU
MARS.
MERCURY, KETHU
SUN
No planet in the stars of kethu and sun
STEP I 2nd house is occupied by MERCURY, SUN.
MERCURY AND KETHU ARE IN MERCURY’S STAR, SUN’S STAR
IS VACANT.
NO PLANETS IN KETHU (NODE) STAR.
7TH IS OWNED BY MARS
MOON AND RAHU ARE IN MARS STAR.
JUPITER IS IN RAHU STAR (A NODE)
XI IS OWNED BY SUN.
So the significators of 2,7,11 houses are
MERCURY, SUN, KETHU, MARS, MOON, RAHU, JUPITER, SUN.
STEP III PICK THE COMMON SIGNIFICATORAND JUDGE THEM AS PER
FI AND F3.
MOON, RAHU, KETHU, MARS, SUN, MERCURY AND JUPITER.
MOON IS IN THE SUB-SUB OF RAHU TO SINGIFY 3,4,5 HOUSES WITH 2,7
RAHU IS THE SUB-SUB OF MERCURY TO SIGNIFY 2ND (9, 1 2 HOUSE FEEBLE)
KETHU IN SUB-SUB OF MERCURY TO SIGNIFY 2ND WITH 1 0, 1 2 HOUSES.
MERCURY IN THE SUB-SUB KETHU TO SIGNIFY 10,12 AND (2FEEBLE)
MARS IN THE SUB-SUB OF SATURN TO SIGNIFY 3,8TH HOUSES
SUN IS IN THE SUB-SUB OF RAHU TO SIGNIFY 1 ,2,7 WITH 3,4,5 AND
2.11TH HOUSES
NOW DASA SYSTEM OF RAHU IS RUNNING, SUN BUKHTI ENDED IN MARCH
2008. THOUGH SUN IS VERY GOOD SIGNIFICATOR OF 2,5,7,11 HOUSE
MARRIAGE COULD NOT HAPPEN DUE TO MARS IN LAGNAAND SUB-SUB OF
SATURN. PRACTICE TELL MARS BUKHTI IN THIS DASA SHOULD PASS. IT ENDS
IN OCTOBER 2010. THEN RUNS JUPITER DASA. JUPITER IS MARRIAGE
KARAKAAND SIGNIFICATOR OF 2ND HOUSE. IN HIS BUKHTI, SUN ANTHARAA
IS GOOD PERIOD FOR MARRIGGE. THIS PERIOD RUNS IN MARCH 2012.
MARRIAGE IS PROMISED PROVIDED TRANSIT SUPPORTS. I HAVE PICKED
JUPITER DASA BECAUSE JUPITER IS SUB-SUBLORD OF 2ND HOUSE.
This article is dedicate to my reverted Guruji and his almighty blessings to all K.P. Followers.
OM TAT SAT
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

CUSPAL & PLANETARY POSITIONS
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

HOW TO CALCULATE THE 7TH SUB LORD OF THE
PARTNER FROM THE HOROSCOPE OF EACH OTHER..
(Research Study)
C H AN DERBH AN-NARN AU Li
DIRECTOR GOVT. OF INDIA
MINISTRY OF CIVILAVIATION
RAJIVGANDHI BHAWAN, NEW DELHI
Through this article, I want to say that, we can easily calculate the sub lord of partner. Partner
means husband and wife. This is tested and correct method. From this method we can easily
pick up the horoscope of partner, with which he or she will marry, In traditional astrology, matching
the horoscope is based only on moon of both the partners. Moon means moon sign and moon
star of each other. Broadly we can say, in traditional astrology there is matching of two moons
only. This system thus not match all the twelve houses system. So that, when 24 or 25 or 30 or
35 guna matched then there does not guarntee whether he or she will marry each other or not.
This is probable when marriges are fixed in heaven than charts of both the partners match or
not marriage will happened definetly with a person whereever he stay.
The clue about the partner with which he/she will marry, the 7th sub lord of the chart, will give.
I have given the name to this method as four step method. How to calculate the 7th sub
lord from each other chart of the both the partners.
The four step method is
1 . Take the 7th sub lord.
2. Take the star lord of 7th sub lord.
3. Take the sign lord of star lord of 7th sub lord.
4. We will find the 7th sub lord of partner,
NOTE :
1. By the way Rahu or Ketu is star lord of 7th sub lord. Then take sign lord of Rahu or Ketu for
example Rahu is in capricorn then take star lord of saturn.
2. By the way the star lord of 7th sub lord is the same planet as star lord then take sub lord.
3. By the way the, star lord of the sat. is also the sat, then take sub lord of the sat and proceed.
4. By the way it happened to be the same planet in the second or 3rd number then take sub
lord.
5. We should take care of aspect and conjunction/association also.
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

For example
Husband A
.sem & b'-o! •l-.n. rij't
1-v>7.th subjord is mars, ieM ;; Mol 1S1£ erlt tud ;n,n rn bio! wars srii *A$j ouoria ow wort
2. ln2ndstep.We should ta6e "the1 Star -ford "of mar SPThd star lord of Mar is Ma rsl 0 ' do e
So,we take the sub lord as. Rahuifseejn note, pointy): Gis 9;iSj D!uor|? 9Vv on oisdl m
3. In third step we -should staH^ th^s^tfilprd .of^abupbut the;Star:|ord..;of Rahp r.is |Wer*rfr
4. The partner’s 7th sub lord is mer.
tCn PLANETARYPOSITION
<K.fS YEAR-BOOK - 2010

WIFE A
1. 7th sub lord is mer.
2. Now we should take the star lord of mer, but the star lord if Mer is Mer then we will take
sub lord of the Mer. (See in note point-3) The sub lord of Mer is Mars.
3. In third no. we should take star lord of mars i.e. Rahu.
4. The partner’s 7th sub lord is Mars and Mars is aspected by the Rahu.
LAGNA CHART
NIRYAN BHAVA
PLANETARY POSITION
CUSPAL POSITION
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

The Partner's 7th sub lord is Mer
Husband B
1 . 7th sub lord is Vens
2. Star lord of Ven is Moon.
3. Star lord of Moon is Kt.
4. Kt is the 7th sub lord of Partner.
PLANETARY POSITION
CUSPAL POSITION
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

WiFEB
1 . 7th Lord is kt.
2. Star lord of kt is Sun,
3. Star lord of sun is Ven.
4. Ven is the 7th sub tord of partner.
LAGNA CHART
\Ma.Sat l/\ 9 >
12N^.Me.S^X^
NIRYAN BHAVA
PLANETARY POSITION
XII Ve
SSL Dir.
Ve
* Me ne
i Ra a"
Mei:
Cusp
CUSPAL POSITION
K.PJYEAR BOOK - 2010

Husband C
1. 7th sub lord is Sat.
2. Sat Star lord is Moon.
3. Moon Star lord is Mer.
4. Partner’s 7th sub lord should be Mer, or the planet aspected or associated by mer. Mer &
Sun is not in association, but Mer is aspeting Jup. So, Jupiter is the partner’s 7th sub lord.
PLANETARY POSITION
CUSPAL POSITION
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

WIFE C
1. 7th Lord is Jup.
2. Jup Star lord is Rahu.
3. Rahu Star lord is Rahu, Rahu representing Sat, so
4. Partner 7th sub lord Sat.
LAGAN CHART NIRYAN BHAVA
PLANETARY POSITION
CUSPAL POSITION
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

Husband D
1. 7th sub ford is Jup.
2. Jup Star lord is Kt.
3. Kt Star lord is Ra.
4. Partner 7th sub lord is Ra.
PLANETARY POSITION

WIFED
1. 7th Lord is Ra.
2. Ra Star lord is Rahu.So, took Ra sub lord is Suo
3. Su star lord kt. Kt representing Jup.
4. Partner 7th sub lord is Jup.
PLANETARY POSITION
MOITIBOR J/vic:UO
jd;
— — CUSPAL POSITION
?ii -J
K.P.’YEAR BOOK 3 '201.0!

SUB-SUB-A MARVEL IN K.P.
By
Prof. K. BALACHANDRAN
This ia a marriage query relating to the undermentioned horoscope
of a female.
Horoscope is given below.
Miss ‘X’
The analysis was done strictly according to the sub-sub theory evolved by the late Shri.
K.R. Kar of Bolani, Orissa, duly modified
research findings on transits.
by me wherever necessary along with my own
K.R YEAR BOOK - 2010

I have always opined that if the sub-sub lord of the principal cusp is directly related to the
other beneficial cusp and if the ‘C’ of ‘D’ planet of the cuspal S/S/L of the principal cusp in
VIST Formula F3, F4, DF3, DF4 becomes the cuspal S/S/Lords of the other beneficial cusps,
then the cuspal S/S/L of the principal cusp is a strong significatorforthe event/matter for
which the principal cuspal lord stands. So my approach and analysis of MSTis as indicated
in the succeeding paras.
ANALYSIS :
Since this is a marriage query, sub-sub lord of the 7th cusp is examined by the above
formula. To start with, s/s/I is examined by MST F-3. Here Saturn is the s/s/I of the 7th cusp.
So by F-3 'O’ of Saturn is Moon which is not the s/s/I of the reqd. marital cusp 2 or 7 or 11.
So go to F-4. By F-4, ‘D’ of Saturn is Kethu, s/s/I of 11th cusp. So marriage is definitely
promised but there will be lot of delay on account of Punarphoo Dhosha. Here Saturn in
Moon Star in Saturn s/s. Though Sun & Saturn are in lagna, there is no cancellation of
P.P.Dosha because Sun and Satrun are in different signs. Also Kethu 11th c/s/s/I is duly
aspected by Rahu c/s/s/I of 2nd cusp by 7th aspect. So c/s/s/I of 7th cusp Saturn is duly
connected to the two martial cusps 2 & 11 . Examine all the other planets by the M.S.T.
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

As regards Jupiter, if you apply F3 to Jupiter, then ‘C’ of Jupiter is Sun which is not the d
s/s/I of 2 or 7 or 1 1 . But if you adopt the theory of substitutions for Rahu=Saturn then Jupiter
would be found beneficial too, (By theory of substitution: Rahu occupies Saturn sign. So
Rahu=Satum
By F4 Jupiter is in the s/s of Rahu (c/s/s/I of 2) (Replace Rahu by Saturn)
Then ,
Jupiter is in the s/s of Saturn (c/s/s/I of 7)
Saturn in Moon Star.
Moon in Kethu star (c/s/s/I of 11th)
So Jupiter is also found beneficial.
Also by MST F2
Jupiter (A) in Venus (B) star.
Venus (B) in Rahu (C) star & Rahu is c/s/s/I of 2nd cusp. Also by TOS Rahu=Saturn & so
Rahu represents the 7th c/s/s/I Saturn.
So Jupiter is fruitfully connected to 2nd and 7th cusp & also to 11th cusp.
Also Jup. is in Venus star.
Venus isastrongsignificatorof2, 7,11.
So Jupiter is stronger than Venus for the matters of 2,7, 1 1 ie marriage.
Infact the girl’s marriage came in Jupiter Sookshma.
Jupiter by MST DF4 using T.O.S. for Rahu=Saturn.
Jupiter (A) in the s/s of Rahu (B) c/s/s/I of 2nd.
Rahu (B) in the s/s of Rahu (C)=Sat. (Replace Rahu by Sat)
Sat (C) in Moon Star (D)
Moon (D) in Kethu (E) c/s/s/I of 11 .
So clearly Jup is connected to the cuspal sub sub lords of 2,7,11 like Venus in the
horoscope.
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

Of all the planets, Venus is the strongest for marriage as it is directly related to all the
three cusps 2,7,11 in one stretch.
See Venus in Kethu Star (c/s/s/I of 1 1 ) in the s/s of Saturn, c/s/s/I of 7.
But Saturn=Rahu (byT.O.S) & Rahu is c/s/s/I of 2.
So Venus is connected to 2,7,11.
Since Saturn=Rahu, Rahu is also beneficial for marriage on account of Saturn.
As regards Kethu, it will not be found beneficial by F3 since ‘C’ of Kethu is Sun which is
not the c/s/s/I of 2 or 7 or 1 1 , but by DF3 Kethu is beneficial as shown below.
By DF3, Kethu is in the s/s of Sun.
Sun is in the s/s of Mercury.
Mercury is in Kethu Star c/s/s/I of 11th. So all the planets are beneficial.
Though the girl attained the marriageable age in Sun Dasa, the whole of that Dasawent
barren. Here though Sun is with Saturn in Lagna, while Sun is in Aries, Saturn is in Taurus,
the next sign. Only when Sun & Saturn occupy the same sign will there be cancellation of
RR Dosha. So here PP. was not mitigated. On account of P.P. Dosha No marriage in Sun
Dasa. Next Moon Dasa. Moon tenants the star of Kethu c/s/s/I of 11th House of fructification and Kethu occupies Moon Sign. So byT.O.S. Kethu=Moon. So marriage os promised
in Moon Dasa. As there is P.P, on account of involvement of Saturn & Moon, cyclic order
rule has to be followed to fix Bhukthi/Anthra lord.
In Moon Dasa, last Bhukthi is that of Sun. Sun is Saturn-connected and beneficial. Planet
in Sun Star is Rahu also Saturn-connected by occupation of Saturn Sign & beneficial. Now
see who are all in Rahu star. Venus alone in Rahu star. So drop Rahu and take Venus. As
stated before, Venus is the strongest planet directly connected to 2,7,11 cusps. Though
Jupiter is in Venus star. Jupiter is nor directly connected to Saturn. So stop with Venus. So
marriage would take place in Venus Bhukthi.
Again apply cyclic-order rule to Venus to fix the anthara period. Last Anthara planet in
Venus Bhukthi is Kethu, “Saturn-connected”, because Kethu is in Saturn star and Kethu
receives the 3rd aspect of Saturn. But see who are all in Kethu star Moon & Mercury are in
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

Kethu star. So drop Kethu and take Moon & Mercury. On Venus Bhukthi, Moon anthara
comes first and then only Mercury anthara. Here Moon has already come as Dasa Lord.
So consider only Mercury Anthara. No planet in Mercury Star and Mercury is a strong
significatorfor marriage. Mercury is in the s/s of Saturn c/s/s/I of 7th cusp. So select Mercury Anthara for marriage.
In Mercury Anthara, the last Sookshma planet is Saturn. But Kethu in Saturn Star. So
drop Saturn and take kethu. Planets in Kethu star are Moon & Mercury both of which have
already come as Dasa lord and Anthara lord. So we go to the planet preceding Saturn. It is
Jupiter. Jupiter is indirectly connected to Saturn How? Jupiter is in the s/s of Rahu but
Rahu occupies Sat sign.
So replacing Rahu by Saturn by T.O.S., Jupiter is indirectly connected to Saturn via
Rahu. No planet in Jupiter star and Jupiter aspects both Moon & Mercury by 5th aspect.
Moreover Jupiter with no planet in its star is cuspal sublord of 7th cusp. So Jupiter
Sookahama in Mercury Anthara will be the period of marriage of this girl i.e. between
19-8-2008 and 1-9-2008. The girl actually got married on 21-8-2008.
Another Method of Extracting strong signification
7th c/s/s/I is Saturn. Apply MST F3/F4 or DF3/DF4 backwards to Saturn. Then the 'A'
planet in the formula will become the strongest significator.
F3 backwards to Saturn c/s/s/I of 7th cusp.
Planet in Sat Star : Kethu
Planet in Kethu s/s : None.
So F3 is not possible for backward application to Saturn. When F3 is not possible, DF3
is also ruled out
So try F4. .
Planet in Saturn Star : Kethu
Planet in Kethu Star : Moon. Mercury
Planet in Moon s/s : None.
Planets in Mercury s/s : Sun, Moon, Mars. This is backward application of F4 to Saturn.
For backward application of DF4 to Saturn, note the s/s planets occupying the sub sub of
Sun.
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

Kethu is in the s/s of Sun, Moon, Mars.
None in the s/s of Moon.
None in the s/s of Mars.
Consider Rahu c/s/s/I of 2nd cusp. Rahu occupies Sat sign. So by TOS Rahu=Sat.
Since Jupiter is in the s/s of Rahu and also star lord of 7th cusp. Jupiter will also come
as a strong significator. Also by backward application of MST F2 G6 to Rahu c/s/s/l of 2nd,
Jup will come.
So the most powerful significators for marriage are : Moon, Sun, Mars, Venus, Kethu,
Mercury & Jupiter.
Saturn connected planets due to P.R Dosha are : Sun, Kethu, Mercury, Venus, Moon
and Jupiter (indirect connections via Rahu)
So common between the two above : Sun, Kethu, Venus, Moon, Mercury, Jupiter.
So marriage came in
Moon Dasa/Venus Bhukthi/MercuryAnthara/JupiterSookshma.
Multi Stellar Transit Formula
As a result of sustained research for the last 2 years, I have evolved 4 formula for
working out the transits. I have christened this, 4 formulae as “REVERSE REACTION
FORMULA” abbreviated as “RRF1,RRF2 etc. They are as below.
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

While applying any of the above formula the Theory of Substitutions/Theory of Conjuction
Aspects etc, should betaken in to account.
Let us consider the transits of various planets on the date of marriage of the girl on
21-8-2008 in the light of the above formula.
1. Transit of Moon
Here Moon is not only an important significator for marriage but also the Dasa Lord.
By RRF4 :-
Moon in Kethu Star. ByTOS
(A) (B) Kethu=Moon.
ie Moon in Moon
Moon in Mercury s/s
Mercury in Saturn
s/s/ s/s(D)
Apply T.O.S. to Saturn
By T.O.S, Sat=Rahu since Rahu occupies Sat sign.
Again Jup with no planet in its star tenants the s/s of Rahu in Venus Star. So replacing
Saturn by Jupiter, the transit combination for Moon is Mercury - Jupiter, ie Jupiter sign
Pisces in Mercury star Revathy.
Note that in the sample formula Dasa lord Moon, Bhukthi lord Venus. Anthara Lord
Mercury and Sookshma lord Jupiter have come in transit.
Again applying RRF, to Moon
Moon in Moon(Because by TOS Kethu=Moon)
, Moon
(B) is in the s/s of Mercury.
Both Moon & Mercury aspected by Jupiter & so Jupiter-Mercury combination for Moon’s
transit.
K.P, YEAR BOOK - 2010

(2) Transit of Bhukthi / Lord Venus.
In the horoscope (applying RRPto Venus)
Venus in Rahu Star.
Rahu (B) = Saturn (C) (since Rahu occupies Sat sign)
Sat (C) is in the s/s. Sat (D)
But Sun & Saturn are conjunct in Lagna,
So by TOC Sat (D) = Sun.
So for Venus's transit the combination is Venus-Sun. Sun sign Leo in Venus star.
Note there is no planet in Venus star.
3. Mercury’s transit through RRF3 (Anthara Lord)
Mercury in Kethu
(A) (B) Star
Kethu in Saturn Star
Saturn is in the s/s of Saturn
Now apply T.O.C/TO.S. to Saturn (D).
Rahu occupies Sat sign. So take Rahu for Saturn. Note the planet in Rahu Star. Venus
is in Rahu Star. So Venus will take the place of Saturn (D) in the above formula. Also Saturn
(D) in conjunction with Sun. So substitute Venus-Sun for Saturn ‘D’ in the formula.
So mercury transited Sun sign Leo in Venus Star.
4. Sat’s transit on 21-8-2008. Leo sign Venus star.
In the horoscope
Sat in Moon
(A) (B) star.
Moon in Kethu Star
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

Kethu in Sat Star in Sun s/s/
Rahu occupies Sat sign in the horoscope and Venus is in Rahu Star,
So byTOS Sat=Rahu=Venus
So Saturn’s transit in Leo in Venus star.
When Venus come use of Theory of Substitution / Conjunction are neccessary.
5. Rahu’s transit on 21 -8-2009
(Capricorn in Mars Star)
Apply RRF2 to Rahu along with TOS.
Rahu in Sun Star
Sun is in the s/s of Mercury
Mercury is in the s/s of Saturn
Rahu being a node by TOS occupies Sat Sign.
So Sat (D)= Rahu. Venus in Rahu Star and Mars in conjuction with Venus.
So Rahu by TOC /TOS=Mars.
So Rahu’s transit in Capricorn in Mars Star.
6. KethiTs transit in Cancer in Mercury star.
Apply RRF2 to Kethu
Kethu in Sat Star
Sat in Moon Star
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

Moon (C) is in the s/s of Mercury
So for transit of Kethu, combination is Moon-Mercury
(7) Transit of Jupiter (Sookshma Lord!
On 21-8-2008, Jupiter transited our sign Sagittarius in Venus Star. How?
Apply RRF1 to Jupiter
Jupiter in Venus Star
Venus is in the sub-sub of Saturn
No planet in Jupiter Star or Jupiter s/s. So Jupiter transited Venus star in its own sign.
Thus the transits are in full accord with the formula evolved alone.
I dedicate this article to the fond memory of the Late Dr. KP. KAR, Bolani, Orissa, who
was my best friend, Philosopher and guide.
GOOD LUCK
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

YAGYAS AND POO J AS
K,P, KUPPU GANAPATHI,
ASTROLOGER (K.P)
NO.G/12, SECOND FLOOR, DDASFS FLATS, POCKET.2,
N1LG1RI APARTMENTS, ( BEHIND SARASWATH I BALMANDIR)
NARAINA V1HAR , N E W DELHI- 1 1 0 028
Yagyas and Poojas.are traditional
forms of Vedic worship to specific Deities
or Planets, This method of astrological
remedy is emphasized on the classical
Jyotish scriptures. God is the ultimate
controller of the Planets and dispenser of
karma, and everything is possible under
his/her grace. There is a very advance
knowledge in the Vedic tradition about
how to invoke a specific Deity or one of
the manifestations or powers of God
through the proper ritual and mantras. By
this act, the Deity representing the Planet
is invoked, invited to come and is served
by offerings of a special seat, foods,
flowers, clothing, water, milk, ornaments,
jewels, light, fire, incense, and other
sacred objects. There are specific
powerful mantras in the form of Vedic
hymns for invoking those energies. The
sincerity of the worshipper in wanting to
purify his mind and ego is very important
The Pooja is’ a simpler ritual that any
person with a little training and sincere
intention can do, whereas the Yagyas are
more sophisticated and elaborate rituals
which should be conducted by a traditional
Vedic Priest, who does the offerings and
rituals in the name of the worshipper. Is
important to say that from the Yogic point
of view, the highest form of worship is when
the intention is to surrender totally to God’s
will, without expecting anything. In the
Bhagavad Gita, Krishna says that the
worship of gods with the sole purpose to
fulfill the material personal desires is done
by people of “small intelligence” The
highest devotee prays: “Thy will be done,
my lord”, please give me that which is for
my highest good and not just what my
ignorant mind wants!
AUSTERITIES AND FASTS
One way of astrological remedy is to
do certain form of austerities. Austerities
or “tapas" is a form of accepting voluntarily
a penance or self-restraint, in order to pay
a karmic debt, Tapas strengthens the
mind, will power and capacity to endure
any difficulty in life. It takes the mind away
from the duality of "likes and dislikes",
Raga and Dhwesha. Tapas activates the
“Tejas” or fire element in the mind and
body, which bestows inner strength, sharp
mind and the capacity to achieve any
desired situation and overcome any
difficulty in life. Instead of trying to avoid
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

any form of pain at all means, which is what
the mind usually does, the Yogi takes upon
himself some challenge to become
stronger. Tapas can be especially powerful
to counteract any negative influence from
Saturn or to strengthen the Mars or Sun
energies if weak on the birth chart The most
recommended Tapas are: Doing service
to the poor, the sick, the personal teacher
or the wise people, refrain from pleasures
that are not healthy and make the mind
scattered and attached, observing a pure
simple moderated diet, occasional fasts,
keeping silence or only speaking what is
absolutely necessary and beneficial,
getting up early in the morning to do Yoga,
meditation or other spiritual practices,
assuming and maintaining a steady
posture without movement for meditation,
sleeping on a hard bed, sitting on the floor.
One of the highest (and most difficult, but
recommended) tapas is: “Bear insult and
injury”, not responding with aggression or
negativity towards an offender, not
identifying with the ego. But tapas don't
mean torturing the body by extreme or
“masochist” means, which harm the
physical body. Some people cut, burn,
beat, pierce their bodies. This kind of
extreme Tapas is considered as ‘Tamasic”
or born out of ignorance and delusion. The
Bhagavath Gita clearly explains that:
“Worship of God, the brahmanas, the
teachers, the wise, purity, straight
forwardness, celibacy and non-injury are
called the austerities of the body". "Speech
which causes no excitement, which is
truthful, pleasant and beneficial and the
study of the Vedas are called austerity of
speech”. Serenity of mind, good
heartedness self-control, purity of nature,
this is called mental austerity”. The
austerity which is practised with the object
of gaining good reputation, honor and
worship, and with hypocrisy is here said
to be .of a "Rajasic", unstable and
transitory”. “That austerity which is
practiced out of a foolish notion, with selftorture or for the purpose of destroying
another is declared to be “Tamasic” or
ignorant" Ch 17, v14-19. Fasting is
regarded as an efficient way of physical,
mental, spiritual and karmic purification.
During fasting the toxins from the body are
released and that allows the negativity of
the mind to be released too. The mind and
will power becomes strong. Karmic debts
can be purified too. The Prana or vital force
usually occupied in digesting the food can
be engaged in healing the body and
flowing to the higher Chakras during
fasting. When there is an afflicting Planet
on the birth chart, or during a difficult
“Dasha”, Planetary period or difficult transit
of that Planet, the austerities and fast
should be performed on at least the whole
day of the week ruled by the Planet for at
least 6 consecutive weeks.
(EXTRACTED FROM THE WRITINGS
OF "KRISHNA WIUKER”)
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

K.P. ASTROLOGY IS A PURE
SCIENCE
JYOTHISHYA RAMAKRISHNA KORNGlNNAYA, B.Com.
Behind Sathyanarayana Katyama Mantapa,
Kadri Temple Road, Mangalore-575 002.
In the whole world Astrology is relegated to the background by scientists naming it pseudo
science. But the reality is otherwise. Deep experiments by appling the ruling planets together
with fortuna at the time of judgement in horary, will prove to the hilt, that divine astrology is
nothing but pure science.
At the time of last parliament election held in the months of April and May 2009, A query is
worked out much in advance, to find out the exact number of MPS of different political parties
coming together in the formation of Government in the final count.
The most significant point of fortuna in the chart revealed crystal clear that 322 mps
would be support base in the formation of Central Government thereby confirming the veracity
of prediction in this regard based on the horary chart.
How this exact number is arrived at is shown hereunder.
360 degree of zodic represents total number of MP seats in Parliament 543.
Fortuna's placement 4M9’ in “SCORPIO SIGN” that is 214 1/3 degree of the ZODIAC
when worked out = 543*214 1/3 comes to figure 322 of mps.
The support base of the central government, proved correct, hence astrology is nothing
but a pure science.
This is not mere coincidence because the longitude of fortuna is arrived at by adding and
subtracting longitudes of Moon and Sun from that of ascendant in a horary chart or natal.
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

DATE AND TIME OF EVENT WITH SUN TRANSIT
CHANDER BHAN NARNAULI
DIRECTOR GOVT. OF INDIA
MINISTRY OF CIVIL AVIATION, RAJIV GANDHI BHAWAN
I was having some urgent work with Mr. Gupta, but every time he was not able to pick up
my phone. By chance one day on 26th June, 2009 at 12.45 PM he met me and told that he was
verybusynow-a -days, because his son and daughter-in-law came from Bangalore.
Hisdaughter-in-lawwas expecting a baby. He was upset because of the health of his daughterin- law. He was praying for normal delivery and good health of her. Doctor has given a delivery
date on 7th July, 2009. He said that he will be free after 7th July.
He told me, “as l know that you have knowledge of K.P. astrology. In astrology systems,
K.P. is able to predict date and time of event, please tell me the correct date of child’s delivery.
The 7th July given by the doctors is good or normal". He want to give me her date of birth and
time and place of birth.
I told him, that I have no need of date of birth etc. I assured him that by the evening of
today i.e. on 26th June, 2009 I will tell him when she will deliver the child. I draw a chart of
negotiation time i.e. 26th June, 2009 at 12.45 PM.
There are two types of events, one is, when the event is due with in fixed period and
another is where time period is not fixed. Where time period is not fixed, we should take Dasa,
Bhukti andAnthra, after calculating the significators of related houses and on the basis ruling
planets. In the second number, where the time period is fixed for the event, there is no need to
take significators. In fixed events we apply sun transit only. We can predict the date and time of
event with the help of sun transit and ruling planets.

The child birth is fixed event. For fixed event we prepare a simple lagna chart only, no
need of Nirayan Bhava chart. I took up the ruling planets of 26th June, 2009 at 1 2.45 PM. The
Ruling planets of the movement are as
When Mr Gupta spoke to me at 12.45 PM on 26th June, 2009 that time sun was transiting
in Gemini sign. The event of child birth was due with in July, 2009, but doctors has given the date
as 7th July. The date given by the doctors has no value for KP astrologers.
A good KP astrologer should think astrologically.
At the time of talking about the event, that time, sun was in Gemini sign. First we should
check whether the event will happen with in the sun transit in Gemini or not. For this, Gemini lord
Mercury should be in ruling planets. If the sign lord is available in ruling planet then there is
possibility only of the event. For certainty we should check the stars fallen in Gemini sign. Among
the three stars in Gemini. One star lord should be available in ruling planets. Then we can say
that during the sun transit in Gemini sign the event will take place. In Gemini sign there are three
stars - one is Mrigasira (Mars star), Second is Arudra (Rahu star) third is Punarvasu (Jupiter
star).
In our ruling planet Rahu is available because Moon is in our ruling planets. Rahu is aspected
by Moon. So, Rahu also will be in our ruling planets. Every year the sun transits in Gemini sign,
Rahu star from 21 st June to 6th July.
So, I find that sun was transiting in Gemini sign, Rahu star from 21st June to 6th July, So, it is
decided that the child birth will take place before 7th July.
Now we will select the sub lord and sub sub lord of Rahu Star in Gemini sign. For calculating
the sub and sub sub in Gemini sign, Rahu star i used the attached sub sub lord chart of Gemini
sign. This falls between 6°-40.00 to 20°-00-00. In Gemini sign, Rahu star Ra, Ju, St, Me, Kt, Ven,
Sun, Mn - sub lords are available. In our ruling planets, Ju, Sat, Sun are not in ruling planets. So,
I ignored the Jup, Sat and Sun. They are useless, because they are not appeared in ruling
planets. So, only Kt, Mn, Ven is availble for our consideration.
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010

Now-d-days in transit Kt is transiting in Moon Sign, So we will take Ketu in place of Moon.
Now only two ruling planets Kt and Ven is available for our consideration. Kt is the senior most
ruling planet, but it has no connection with family/Kutumb bhava of the chart. Second bhava
indicates family.Second bhava lord is venus. So, I took Venus as sub lord in Rahu star,
In Gemini sign, Rahu star, Venus sub comes between 15o-30-20 to17°-26-40, In Gemini
sign, Rahu star, Ven sub, Rahu sub sub comes at 1 6°-21 . So, I predicted, that when Sun enters
in 16°-21-07. then child birth will take place i.e. on 2nd July.
After calculating all the above planetry position and date. I phoned Mr. Gupta that the
child birth will take place on 2nd July, not on 7th July.
On 3rd July Mr. Gupta phoned me that the prediction was turned 1 00% correct, the child birth
took place on 2nd July.
After calculating the date of child birth, we can easily calculate the correct time of child birth
with hours, minutes and seconds with the help of above mentioned method and ruling plantets.
For calculating the time of birth, the lagna lord in which child birth will take place, should be
present in our ruling planets. After finding out the lagna then one should check, one star should
be present in lagna sign, present in ruling planets or whether one star lord is present in our ruling
planets. After deciding the lagna sign and lagna, we can decide the sub lord and the sub sub lord
of lagna with the help of above mentioned method and attached sub sub lord chart. This way we
can easily calculate the date, time with seconds of the child birth before 5-6 month of birth time.
For the help of readers, howto fix the lagna sign, lagna star, lagna sub, lagna sub sub and
more over for the date also, I am furnishing the sub sub lord charts of all the twelve zodic signs.
With the help of above method and sub sub lord chart we can predict the date, time with in
seconds of the event. This chart is applicable in calculating the correct time of event, even in
Dasa, Bhukti and Anthra also.
K.P. YEAR BOOK - 2010
