READABLE DATASET
================================================================================
Original file: jyotish_how_k_p_pinpoint_events_prasna_k_hariharan.json
Dataset number: 227 of 455
Format: valid JSON
Structure: Object / structured dataset
Original size: 131,921 bytes
Top-level fields: 11
Title: Jyotish_How K.P. pinpoint events_prasna_K. HARIHARAN
Creator: —
Date: —
Description: —

CONTENT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
METADATA AND OTHER FIELDS
  • title: Jyotish_How K.P. pinpoint events_prasna_K. HARIHARAN
  • creator: —
  • date: —
  • description: —
  • subject: —
  • identifier: —
  • source_folder: Surya Siddhanta XML
  • total_pages: 116
  • total_words: 23569
  • text_quality:
    • ocr_word_validity_score: 0.956
    • quality_tier: good
    • note: —

FULL TEXT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
HOW
KRISHNAMURTI PADHDHATI
PIN POINT THE EVENTS ?
including Prasna
Author:
Sothicki Chakravarthy
jyothish Sironmani
Ln. K. HARIHARAN
S/o Sothidamannan, Jyothish Marthand
Prof. K. S. KRISHNAMURTI
Director
K.P. STELLAR ASTROLOGICAL RESEARCH INSTITUTE
MADRAS.

CONTENTS
Page
1. Astrology and Acquisition of immovable property 1
2. Events in Professional Career 9
3. Outcome of Tamilnadu Assembly and Parliamentary
Elections 23
4. Mismatched marriage caused by malefic Mercury 28
5. Time of marriage 42
6. Will I borrow? 49
7. Seventh house and its significance 54
8. Twin births and significance of the sub 59
9. When will the first child be bom? 54
10. The miracle that is K.P. 68
1 1 . Educational qualification and a suitable Job 74
12. Return of missing son 82
13. When can I pay the balance? 87
14. Can I have a child? 93
15. Change of residence and transfer 95
16. Higher studies 97
17. Success in medical examination and voyage
overseas 103
18. Labour problem 108
19. Foreign assignment 111

ASTROLOGY AND ACQUISITION OF
IMMOVABLE PROPERTY
Astrology in old India occupied prime place in the hearts
of the people in the land as the only science of human
understanding. They had reached dizzy heights in this subject as
records reveal. They had a complete understanding of the
essence of time in relation to the individual and the universe
around him and built up a predictive method of uncanny
accuracy which was passed on, from age to age, by guru-sishya
parambara by word of mouth. This continuity was broken at later
times and consequently we were completely deprived of the
prophetic utterances of our great personages in this field. Due to
the protracted efforts of the late Prof. Krishnamurti and the
research scholars around him, many impurities accumulated in
middle ages and unwarrantably added into their texts by omitting
true principles taught were removed by and by and presented in
a codified manner. The conventional Indian Astrology having
nothing in common with the best methods for which the ancient
savants were renowned and having become sterile and useless is
waiting to be given a decent burial. Why ? Because it lost sight
of the I uni-solar concept of nakshatras and its innumerable parts
and substituted it stealthily with undesirable and useless things.
Astrology’s growth can be ensured only by careful cleansing of
the dirt of unscientific knowledge.
I was called upon, in the latter half of 1983, to prepare a
correct chart of a child using the scientific method of casting
adumbrated in KRISHNAMURTI PADHDHATI which I did by
consulting the best reference book of Prof. S. Balasundaram, his
UNIVERSAL TABLES OF HOUSES, and the excellant 10-year

MAHABALA PLANETARY EPHEMERIS. The chart I made
is presented for discussion here.
Birth date: 18th September 1983
Time of Birth : 9 - 10 a.m. Indian Standard time shown by the
watch
Place : Coimbatore, long. 76° - 58' East and 11° - 00
North
(A) Birth Horoscope :
Balance of Moon Mahadasa (major period) in Vimsboctari Mabadasa :
5 years 7 months 26 days.
The heavenly connections forged between children and
their parents are also revealed from a reading of their respective
birth maps in astrology. From a perusal of innumerable
horoscopes of individuals, we have also been led to believe that
the birth time is correct if the planets conjointly ruling the lagna
point have, in some manner, such relationship with the Moon.
For this, the Moon's location by sign nakshatra, sub etc. and the

aspect it receives from others are taken into account. The sub
and inter lords of the fagna are very material for the purpose. The
truth of this deduction has been verified.
In the chart taken up for dealing here, Rahu, Ketu and
Venus have been observed to control the lagna point as
nakshatra, sub and inter portion. Rahu is in Venus sign Rishaba
and Mars' nakshatra Mrigasira, Ketu is placed in the sign of Mars
and the nakshatra of Mercury. Venus, on its part, is in the sign
of the Moon and nakshatra of Mercury. Venus is also rapliy
conjoined with Mars in Moon's sign and both are in Saturn's sub
in excellent trinal or 1 20° aspect with Ketu, Mars and V enus are
found, by aspect, to have connection with the Moon and Salum.
The planets coruling the cuspal point on the lagna have thus
established, according to the KP scheme, connection with the
Moon, thus confirming the correctness of the time of ushering
in of the child.
[Although, according to Astrology's dictum, heredity is
not the only factor leading to birth but an important factor which
determines the biological make up of a person, it has been seen
that there is a correlation between the birth sky of a child and
that of his parents. Birth ensues, as Astrology avers, because
every person comes into the world physically only at such lime
when the cosmic conditions concur with the child's
predetermined karma. The vehicle for such expression is
provided by the parents who are destined, by their own
individual karma, to inherit only such a child at that time, thus
creating a sort of earthly interconnection between them. In fact,
the inseparable bond of relationship must have been laid right at
the time of coition and conception nine months earlier for birth

(B) Cuspal house positions in detail :
Located in Zodiacal part of planet controlling

(C) PLANETARY SIGNIFICATIONS
Houses) ruled
Chandra
Mercury Bod ha
Asa Node Rahu
Des. Node Ketu
Uranus
(Herscbel)
ne
(Rj = Retrograde (Vakra gathi)

itself is only the outcome of the act of impregnation. It must be
borne in mind, however, that the root cause of birth is not
physical heredity alone as may be wrongly supposed. Were it so,
really speaking, why are all persons not being able to satisfactorily account for wide differences between children bom of the
same parentage ? And if the heredity factor is exaggerated out
of all proportion, it holds good only for the present life and not
for future births in every case. As the discoveries of modem
science have themselves testified, the cosmic rays from the
distant stars and planetary bodies apparently affect heredity too
even creating new species.
Conception being the generation of human seed of which
the birth is the finished product, astrology has always held
strongly to the belief in the existence of an inter-relationship
between the former and the latter, provided by the interchange
o f the places of the ascendant at epoch and the Moon at birth and,
likewise, of the Moon at epoch and the Ascendant at birth. This
will throw many possibilities, as to what connection the Moon
at birth (corresponding lo the lagna point at epoch) has with the
mother's birth chart, for instance whether her chart points a clue
lo I he Moon longitude of the child and many such factors. The
lagna stands for the child in question in his early days and this
corroborates that Ihe 9ih house represents one's father because
the lagna becomes the 5th reckoned from the 9th denoting him;
can we apply this maxim to the 5th house from the 4th (the 8th)
which indicates her and see what connection it bears to the
Moon? Taking this horoscope, il is found that Venus, Moon,
Rahil and Mars corule the 8th cusp. Venus and Mars are in
Moon's sign wiih Mars aspecling Ihc Moon in Saturn's sign and
Moon's nakshatra and Saturn in Venus sign and Rahu’s
nakshatra. This requires to be tested in many other charts.
Theoretical enunciations, however, must be constantly tested on

the touchstone of practice and accepted only when proved.
Quoting fromthis book and that can go on for endless years but
such knowledge is not coupled with wisdom. Wisdom comes
only from practical application alone.
An examination of the subs of the 4 th house and of the 9th
which have to do with the mother and father shows Rahu and
Mercury respectively as such lords. Rahu, in the chart illustrated
occupies Mars nakshatra. It was explained that mother's
nakshatra was Mrigasira of Mars and of the father's nakshaslra
was mentioned as Mercury. This point also requires to be probed
more closely so that there is clarity beyond the shadow of all
doubts.
What struck me immediately after the map was made by
me was that before the end of Saturn bhukti in the Moon's
mahadasa the family of this child must acquire a ready built
house. To this prediction, the grandfather of the child
commented that there was no such idea in their mind at all as
they already have a house in their possession. What however
happened was that they purchased a house, as exactly predicted
by me, in January 1985 when the dasa was of Ihe Moon, the
bhukti of Saturn and anthara of Jupiter was in force and thanked
me for my outstanding prediction.
Coming events cast their shadows before, as the wise
rightly say. On first glance, I noticed that the Moon was lord of
the 4th by nakshatra and it was seen in the 4th house almost near
the cusp of the house. Saturn who also ruled the 4th was no doubt
in the 12th. the main house for expenditure or investment, but in
its exaltation with aspect from Mars from Kataka, a Moon sign
again. Saturn is controlled by Rahu as the nakshatra lord and by
Jupiter as the lord of the sub as well as inter portion. Jupiter is

almost near the 2nd cusp in Saturn’s nakshatra and Moon's sub
(Saturn and Moon have strong 4th house connection and also
ruled the bhukti and dasa running). The 4th was co-ruled by the
Moon, Rahu and Saturn and the 12th was presided over by the
Moon, Jupiter and the Moon again as the nakshatra, sub and inter
lords in that order. Expenditure shown by the 12th, in the final
analysis, comes only through the planet posited in the nakshatra
of Saturn in 12. Jupiter is the only planet stationed in the
nakshatra of Saturn, lord of 4 in 12. It is almost an axiom in
KRISHNAMURTI PADHDHATI that the so called dus sthanas
6, 8 and 12, even when tenanted by so called malefics, are not
unable to offer desirable results if posited in the nakshatra, sub,
inter etc. of planets beneficial to the chart under consideration.
Saturn is in 12 but in Venus sign, Rahu’s nakshatra, and Jupiter's
sub and inter divisions. Venus is in the 10th, Rahu is an agent of
Venus by being placed in Venus' sign all alone in Mars’
nakshatra, and Jupiter is powerful by standing near the 2nd
house. In KRISHNAMURTI PADHDHATI scheme, a planet in
the nakshatra of another is stronger than the latter to affect the
former’s house affairs. So, Jupiter was stronger than Saturn, lord
KRISHNAMURTI PADHDHATI is clearcut in its
precepts and practices. How can it afford to fail by following
true principles ?

EVENTS IN PROFESSIONAL CAREER :
HOW STELLAR ASTROLOGY PINPOINTS
Everyone has to engage in some calling in order to
establish his place in society and achieve social status or to earn
a livelihood. The tenth house in any individual's chart the trigon
of houses consisting of the 10th, 2nd and 6th represent the
temporal status of the native embracing his actions, honour and
credit, business or professional standing and position in society
(10th), the service rendered by him, his health comforts and
subordinates (6th), and money earned by such personal effort
(2nd) shows the focus of that individual’s external situation in
society, indicating his place as expressed in the keyword
'honour*. It represents goodwill, general or established credit,
and every possible manifestation of honourable condition among
men together with all efforts to establish prestige. It also
designates authority — the power established by the successful
individual in building a high degree of personal integrity, or in
developing a superior professional place for himself, but it is no
less the social compulsion to which the specialist as well as
everyone else must submit. The 10th designates all those in
authority over the native, that is to say, those who issue orders
to which Ihe individual must conform, not only superiors placed
above him in rank but also the sociopolitical entities for which
they speak, that is the Government, the corporations or business
concerns. This mansion also identifies vocation which is
Tequently the result of the individual’s ambition and is the
determinant, to a great extent, of his social status.

Vocation is not, however, determined from the 10th house
alone. The 2nd and the 6th houses have also some 120 degree or
trinal relation in regard to this matter. The sixth house indicates
the degree or phase of worldly attainment conceived to arise
from native's own work or labour or from servants or persons
employed by him or those placed in positions subordinate to h im.
Its keyword is 'service' ruling as il does ‘work* and 'toil' of all
sorts. In so far as an individual subordinates himself to anything,
whether it is a person or an ideal, his activities are identified here.
Labour or work, properly speaking, is movement towards an
achievement in social status. The sixth- house service, most
certainly, is of a voluntary kind rendered for a consideration, that
is done with a motive such as wages or commission. The sixth
house has been found to have its primary rulership over the
adjustments that must be made by each individual as he creates
his social place in life or as he works to maintain or improve it
This not only indicates the process of readjustment as such, but
the need for it, or maladjustment in general, so that the sixth
embraces every activity in which anyone participates as a
conscious misfit
The 2nd house reveals the potentials of the native's
general social position, being Ihe house of finance. It shows the
native's state of riches or poverty. Of all tangible things, money
is probably the most spiritual or social, since it is the most
general or universal medium of community experience. It is
necessary to fulfil all our lawful pleasures. Money does
everything and everyone needs it, even those who despise it "It
is not money that is the root of all evil", as a wise man puts it,
"but the love, the excessive selfish, covetous love of money".

The 2nd is also related to trade or business dealings. The 2nd
house, thus, has as much connection with an individual's
vocation as the other two, namely the 10th and the 6th. And so,
in considering matters concerning occupation, the houses 2, 6
and 10 should be associated and considered in combination. In
accordance with the principle which lays down that the bhava
which stands in twelfth (yjraya) to any bhava tends to destruct
the affairs falling within the latter's purview, the 5th and 9th
houses which become the twelfth reckoned from the 6th and the
10th would seem to show changes in conditions of service such
as transfers spells of absence from the work place and so on. If
the 3rd house, which is the twelfth to the 4th representing one's
home or residence, is also involved, it may necessitate change
of residence and change of place along with transfer to a new
surrounding.
In analysing a horoscope for ascertaining the time when
one will enter into employment or get advancement or change
from one position to another a gainful, it is essential to consider
the various houses connected in combination. Not only the
planets who signify these houses by lordship or sign occupation
should be taken into account but also all those who tenant their
constellations, the latter being even more imporant than the
former according to the findings of the author of Krishnamurli
Padhdhali More than all, the cusps of these bouses need to be
paid special attention, the planets presiding over these as lords
or co-lords such as nakshatra, ‘sub\ ‘inter1 (or sub-sub).
The horoscope of a person who was once placed in
employment under government is presented below with the
purpose of acquainting the readers with the way the stellar

astrologicafrnpptethod enunciated in the masterpieces known as
‘Krisbnamurti Padhdhati’ and how accurately it minors the
Course of events in the career history of the possessor of the chart.
Balance of Rahu Dasa at birth : 10 years, 8 months 2 days.

n
III. Planetary significations
@ by association with
Venus in the same
sign and by aspect
from Jupiter
SS Rahu is not only in Sun's
sign all alone but is also in Sun’s
star and sub. Rafauis thus a
powerful agent of the Son.
IV. Planets co-ruling the cusps

The Sub-lord of the 10th cusp is Mercury. It is the 6th sign
lord, placed in the 3rd and in the constellation of Saturn, lord of
The lord of the constellation tenanted by the lord of
the sub on the cusp of the 10th not only aspects the 6th house but
is also himself the 6tb lord. The sublord of 10 Mercury, is also
conjoined with the Sun, chief governor for profession,
Every house embraces certain affairs and these are
activated when the conjoint period of planets related to the house
operates in due time as per Vimshottari dasa and when the
ephemeral transits at that point of time work in harmony. A
friendly or benef ical planet to an individual can render help only
when his period ensue in Vimshottari dasa etc. Similarly a
planetary foe cannot render harm unless its period, subperiod
and so on operates for that individual according to his birth
indication.
According to the middle-lime Indian astrological texts, a
bhava *s prosperity is inferred from the bhava lord, the planets
associated the bhava lord, the planets aspecting it, the planets
actually posited in the bhava, the planets aspecting the bhava,
the planet ruling the navamsa occupied by the lord of the bhava
and so on and so forth. In the crystal clear scheme of
Krishnamurli Padhdhati, the method of reckoning Ihe planetary
signification is clear and simple and follows a set pattern free
from any ambiguity. The main finding of Krishnamurti
Padhdhati is that planets promote not only the affairs of the
houses signified according to their sign lordship, occupation or
aspect but also those of the houses signified by occupation and
ownership by the lord of the constellation tenanted. In addition
to all these, every planet has a singular significance related to
the matters of that house over which it has control by virtue of
co-ru!inj*lhal house cusp as lord of the ’nakshatra’, ‘sub’ and

’inter’ etc. In this view, Krishnamurti Padhdhati enumerates the
principles for ascertaining the significators of a house as follows:
A) Planet tenanted in the nakshatra of the occupant
of the bhava.
B) Planet is posited in the bhava in question.
C) Planet tenanting the nakshatra of the bhava sign
lord.
D) Planet tenanting the nakshatra of the bhava star
lord.
E) Planets owning the bhava by sign and nakshatra
on the cusp.
F) Planets conjoined with or aspecting the
significators and/or the bhava.
The nodes, Rahu and Ketu, affect not only the bhava
occupied and the bhavas signified by the lord of the constellation
tenanted but also those owned by the planet they are in
association with or those signified by the planet in whose sign
they are placed without any association. The proof of the
pudding is in the eating, as they say, and the principles of the
Padhdhati have been proved right whenever applied to various
horoscopes.
Applying these principles to the hososcope illustrated, the
various significators are :
2nd House : Saturn governs this mansion, and Mercury is
situated in one of Saturn's nakshatras. Ketu and
Venus are stationed here with no planets in any of
their nakshatras. Jupiter from the 10th aspects the
2nd house as well as Ketu and Venus there.
6th House : There is no planet found here. Its lord is Mercury
in whose constellation Sun is placed. Jupiter from

the 10th and Saturn from the 9th aspects the 6th
house.
10th House : The tenth is occupied by Jupiter and owned by
Venus. Jupiter and Ketu are in Jupiter's
nakshatras, with no planets in Venus nakshatras.
Of course, Ketu is conjoin jed \Vith Venus.
5th House : This Segment is under the governance of Venus.
There are no planets in this part and no one in
V enus ' constellations.
9th House : Saturn occupies this house which is owned by
Mercury. Moon is also in the 9th. Mercury is seen
in Saturn's nakshatra and Sun in Mercury's. Rahu
is Sun's agent being in Simha all alone, and also
in Sun's star. Sun also occupies the 3rd. Rahu also
receives aspect from lord of 5, Venus, so that Rahu
is a strong sign l i icator of the 9th as well as the 5th.
3rd House : Sun and Mercury tenant this mansion. Rahu is in
Sun's star and Sun itself in Mercury's. Jupiter who
occupies this is also its owner, and Ketu is in
Jupiter's star and is also aspected by Jupiter.
The native took up employment for the first time when the
dasa of Jupiter, bhukti of Ketu and anthra of Jupiter was running.
On the day of entry into service - 12-6-1947, Thursday ruled by
Jupiter dasa and antbra lord, the Moon was transiting the 2nd
house in Jupiter's star in conjunction with Ketu, bhukti lord and
in trine (120 degree) to the radical position of Jupiter. Mercury,
lord of the 6th was transiting the 6th house, the Jupiter's star and
sub in trine (120degree) aspect to both Jupiter and Ketu
radical. Sun was transiting the constellation of lord of 11, Mars,
and sub of Jupiter placed in 1 0th at birth, in trine 120 degree to
natal Jupiter as well as natal Ketu. (As the Sun was lord of the
8th, an evil house, at birh, its inharmonious aspect should be

favourable. Lord of 2, Saturn, then transited in its own star in
Kataka in trine 120 degree aspect to the radical position of
Mercury, lord of 6, as well as to the cusp of the 11th at birth.
What is more important, the dasa and anthra lord was in
retrograde motion in transit as at birth, but Jupiter ws conjunct
his radicalposition and was in its own star and sub of Ketu, bhukti
lord. At birth, both Jupiter and Ketu were in harmonious trine
aspect and by transit also Jupiter formed the same aspect to Ketu.
Bhukti lord, Ketu, transited the 10th house in the constellation
of lord of 2, Saturn, and sub of lord of 10, Venus.
On 2-8-1948, a day ruled by the Moon, the person was
transferred on promotion. He was then undergoing Jupiter dasa,
Venus bhukti and Moon anthra. Jupiter and Venus are occupant
and owner repectlvely of the lOthhouse. Moon is associated with
Jupiter in the same sign and is in close trine aspect with Venus,
lord of 10, and the cusps of the 6th house and the 2nd house.
Besides, the Moon tenants the nakshatra of Rahu (Star lord of
houses 2, 6 and 10. Venus, bhukti lord, is also placed in Rabu's
nakshatra. Moon is the asterism lord of house 5 and 9 and is also
a significator of the 9th by occupation. So, Moon’s anthra saw
the transfer of the person along with the promotion involving rise
in emoluments and status. By transit, the dasa lord Jupiter was
retrograding in the 1 1th house in the star of Mercury, lord of 6,
and Jupiter's sub. Bhukti lord as well as lord of the 10th, Venus,
transited in Rahu's Star trine to its natal position and Moon's.
Bhukti lord was also in conjunction with anthra lord. The Sun
transited the sign of anthra lord, Moon, the star of lord of 2,
Saturn and sub of Jupiter.
On 10-7-1960, when the gentleman was running the
conjoint period of Saturn, Mercury and Rahu, he was promoted
for a second time. The dasa lord, Saturn, owned the 2nd and was
placed in the constellation of Mars, lord of 11, at birth. The

bhukti lord, Mercury, ruled the 6th and was stationed in the
constellation of lord of the 2nd and the dasa, Saturn. Again, both
Saturn and Mercury were in the sub of anthra lord, Rahu, at birth.
It must be emphasized here that Rahu was the constellation ruler
of the cusps of the 2nd, 6th and 10th at birth and by dint of this
connection Rahu becomes a powerful significator of houses 2, 6
and 10.
By transit, the dasalord, Saturn, was in the constellation
of the 10th lord, Venus and the sub of Jupiter, an occupant of the
10th. Transiting Saturn was in trine aspect to the transit position
of Mars, lord of 11, and within the orb of trine to the radical
Rahu's position. The bhukti lord, Mercury, was transiting
through the 6th in the dasa lord's constellation. The anthra lord,
Rahu, was conjunct his natal position by transit, wherefrom it
was within the orb of trine to transiting Saturn as well as
transiting Mars, lord of the 1 1th at birth. In this case again, as at
the time of entering into service, the Sun is in evil asp io the
dasa lord, Saturn. At the same time the Sun is also sextile, a
beneficial aspect, to Rahu, anthra lord. The subject of aspects is
interesting and has eluded many lending astrologers. Some hold
that the square and opposition are evil, others hold that it is not
so much the quality of the aspect the produces influences,
favourable or therwise as Ihe sign from which, and the planet by
which, the aspect is made. In practical horoscopy, I have found
that the square, quincunx and apposition are by no means
unfavourable, and also that strong aspects (all multiples of 30
degree) are exciting influences. In the present case, the Sun
transits in the 6th, a connected house, in the star of Jupiter
occupying the 10th and in the sub of Mercury, lord of the 6th, in
conjunction with the 10 lord. Venus, the 10th lord was transiting
the 6th in the constellation of Jupiter placed in the 10th in the
radis.

On 19-6-1964, the native was transferred At that time, the
dasa of Saturn, the bhukti of Venus and the anthra of Mercury
was in operation. The dasa lord, Saturn, was a significatorof the
9th at birth by occupation. Venus ruled the 5th, the twelfth to the
6th, and occupied the constellation of Rahu, agent of a planet
placed in the 3rd. Mercury signifies the 9th house by lordship
and the 3rd house by occupation. No wonder in the conjoint
period of Saturn, Venus and Mercury the event of transfer
materialised. Remember also that the planets co-ruling the dasa,
bhukti and anthra periods were lords of 2, 6 and 10 by sign.
By transit, the dasa lord, Saturn, was in its own sign,
constellation of Rahu and Saturn's sub conjunct the radical
position of Venus, bhukti lord Lord of 3 and 12, Jupiter,
transited the star of Venus, bhukti lord, and sub of Saturn, dasa
lord, in Ihe 4th house. The transfer involved change of duties and
place. Both the bhukti lord, Venus and anthra lord, Mercury,
transited through the 5th house, both these planets in harmonious
trine aspect to the planets placed in the 9th at birth- Venus to
Moon and Mercury to Saturn. Venus and Mercury, it may be
remembered, ruled the 5th and 9th houses at birth.
On 20-6-1966, the native was transferred back to his
original position. He was then running the dasa of Saturn, bhukti
of the Sun anthra of Saturn. The Sun was a significator of the
3rd and 9th houses at birth, the former by occupation and the
latter by constellational position in Mercury's stars. The Sun at
birth was also aspected by Saturn from the 9th.
By transit, the dasa lord was in its own constellation and
sub of Mercury, lord of 9. The bhukti lord, Sun, transited the 5th
house, square to the transiting position of the dasa lord.

On 10-6-1967, during the dasa of Saturn, bhukti of Moon
and anthra of Jupiter, the person was again transferred Saturn
and Moon are occupants of the 9th and Jupiter ruled the 3rd at
birth.
By transit, Saturn was in the constellation of the 9th lord,
Mercury, and in Mercury's sub in the sign of anthra lord, Jupiter.
Moon, bhukti lord, transited Jupiter's constellation Punarvasu in
conjunction with Mercury, lord of the 9th. Anthra lord Jupiter
was in the sign of bhukti lord and the star of dasa lord, by transit.
On 1.10.1970, during the conjoint period of Saturn
Rahu-Satum- Jupiter, he had another marked rise in career. The
dasa lord transited in retrogression in harmonious aspect to the
bhukti lord, Rahu's natal position. The bhukti lord, Rahu,
transited the sign of dasa lord and its own star and sub in trine
to the radical 10th cusp. Lord of the 6th, Mercury, transited over
the radical position of bhukti lord, Rahu, in trine aspect to the
transiting position of the dasa lord. The Moon transited the
radical position of the dasa lord, Saturn, in Mars' star. Jupiter
was exactly over the cusp of the radical 10th house in Rahu's
star. Significantly, the 10th lord transits in the 10th itself and
over the radical position of Jupiter.
The person had promotion again on 28-3-1973, At this
lime, Saturn, Jupiter and Mercury co- ruled the vimshottari
period as dasa, bhukti and anthara lords respectively.
Saturn, dasa lord, transited the asterism (constellation) of
lord of the 10th, Venus, and the sub of Saturn and in mutual
aspect with Jupiter in the 10th house. Transiting Jupiter was in
conjunction with Mars, lord of the 10th and was himself aspected
by transiting Saturn. Mercury had just then turned direct, by
transit of course, and it was in the dasa lord's sign and the bhukti

lord's nakshatra and sub.On its part, the Sun transited the natal
position of the lord of the 6th, Mercury, the lord of the anthara,
in dasa lord's nakshatra and bhukti lord's sign in trine (120
degree) to the radical 11th cusp. The lord of the 10th bhava,
namely Venus, too transited the dasa lord's star in the bhukti
lord's sign.
The foregoing discussion serves to show the complete
validity and truth of the principles of the stellar theory lucidly
expounded in Krishna mu rti Padhdhati book series available with
Messrs. Krishnamurti Publications, Madras i as also the
other invaluable books available with them. Years back, I was
about to give up astrology as of hopeless value when, even after
a patient and persistent study and analysis of the astrological
scheme taught in the numerous Indian traditional texts
(apparently) incorrect middle- time interpolations of true
astrological sayings learnt by people, centuries after century
from their preceptors who, in turn, got them from sages of yester
years by word of mouth spread over 25 years or more, my
predictions failed both as to the nature and lime of events. At this
juncture, by a quirk of benevolent fate, I had the privilege of
bumping unexpectedly on the distinguished scholar Prof.
Balasundaram at New Delhi who kindled my flagging interest
and lighted the torch in me, truly speaking. From then on, I had
evinced greater and greater interest, thoroughly studying and
applying only the principles of KP for predictive purposes and
found it yielding, surprisingly, about 80 to 85 percent success
as against barely 15 to 20 percent achieved earlier by me by
recourse to traditional ways. I am gratified, no doubt, by the
results obtained by using the Krishnamurti Padhdhati
astrological method, but still these are less than enough. As a

research scientist myself, 1 should endeavour to advance KP still
further and see the loopholes in the predictive art still remaining
to be plugged. Relentless zeal and effort are called for in the
direction of perfecting and enriching the soil of stellar astrology
further for the benefit of human kind. No science is ever fully
perfect at any stage, astrology being no exception, but while all
other sciences advance as a consequence of relentless research
done day in and day out, would it be prudent on our part to allow
the divine science of stellar system known as Krishnamurti
Padhdhati to stagnate and eventually wither away merely for
want of sustained research efforts on the part of KP scholars ?
Certainly not

OUTCOME OF TAMILNADU ASSEMBLY AND
PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS
Elections to the state Assembly of Tamilnadu and Indian
Parliament are scheduled to be held in last week of May 1991
and all are watching with interest as to which party would form
the Government at the centre and in our state. In this context, we
were furnished with the birth details of Ms. Jayalalitha, the
supremo of AIADMK by an AIADMK follower. Though we
could not vouch for the birth lime, the ruling planets worked out
for the time of analysis of the chart and some of the past events
of her life testify to the accuracy of the birth time. Hence, an
analysis is made based on this chart as to the scope of her electro I
victory. At the outset, we would like to stress that we have no
bias for any political party and this analysis is purely in the
academic interest of our followers. The birth details, as stated,
are as follows:-

House Cusps : Star lord Sublord Planets :Starlord Sublord
In, the horoscope erected for study by me, the lagna
sublord, Venus, is in 10 in exaltation in her congenial sign, Pisces
(Meena). Lagna sublord in such a high position always assures
high status in life. Ketu, her nakshafra lord, deputises for Venus
-8$ it is in the sign of Venus (Thulam). Venus is in the star of
Mercury associated with Sun, the sublord of Venus.
Her 5th lord, Venus is in 10 indicating correctly her status
as popular cinema star, as indicates cinema, drama, opera,
entertainment etc. Venus in the star of Mercury in 8 and Ketu in
5 indicates her break with the cinema line and switching over to

politics. 5th house indicates politics and the position of Venus
also confirms her entry to politics. Sublord of the 5th cusp, Ketu
deputises for. Venus in 10 indicating leadership, and Ketu is also
in 5 showing clearly her career as a movie artist and politician
of fame. Ketu is in the star of Jupiter in 6 indicating success in
these lines, as Jupiter is in bis own house, aspecting the 11th, the
house of success, and the lords of 2 and 11, the houses of finance
and net gains. Jupiter indicates that she has to contend w^th
Strong enemies in her political life. Sub lord of the 10th cusp,
Moon, isTn semi-square with Neptune in Kanya, a planet for
cinema career. Moon is also aspected by J up iter. Lord of 7 (fine
arts). Moon is in the star of Ketu in 5 (cinema) and sub of Rahu
in 1 1, denoting grand success as i\ represents Mars, lord of 6 and
11 in 3. Rahu connects all the upachayasthanas in one stroke,
due to its placement in the star of Venus in 10.
For a successful politician, houses 1, 2, 3,5, 6, 9, 10 and
11 should be well fortified with the planets Mars, Mercury,
Jupiter, Venus and 'Saturn being well connected with them. In
this dhart, Mars is lord of 6 and 11 in 3. It is in the star of Ketu
in 5, acting for Venus in 10. Mercury, the winged celestial
messenger, is lord of 1 and 4 in 8 but in the star of Mars,
discussed above. Jupiter is lord of 7 and 10 in 6 in the star of
Ketu in 5. Venus is lord of 5 and 12, in 10 in the star of'Mercury
in 8 and in the sub of Sun, lord of 3 in 9. Saturn is lord of 8 and
9 in 2 in the star of Mercury in 8 but in the sub of Rahu in 9.
Hence, except Venus and Saturn which are weak, almost all
other planets are placed strongly showing successful political
life.

She is now running the Vimshottari Das a of Mars and
Bukthi of Mercury from 31-3-1991 to 26-3-1992. Mars in the
star of Ketu in 5 (acting as an agent of Venus in 10 and in the
sub of Venus well posited) promises a highly favourable period.
Though bukthi lord Mercury is in 8, it is in the star of Mars and
sub of Venus. As elections are going to be held during this
bukthi, this lady is destined to come out victorious in the electro!
battle ahead. She is likely to witness the resounding victory of
her alliance in the impending poll, if we take cue from the
position of Fortuna. She will form the Government in the state.
She has already suffered a vehicle accident in February
1990 during Saturn bukthi, Saturn anthra in Mars Dasa. Saturn,
as lord of 8, in the star of Mercury in 8, has caused this accident.
Since the sublord Rahu is in 11, acting on behalf of Mars, lord
of 11 in 3, show escaped with some injuries. Mars is aspecting
her lagna sub lord Venus as well as her 6th house, the house of
injuries. Her 8th cusp starlord is Moon without any planets in
her constellation, thus being a strong significatorof houses 2 and
8 Moon is in association with Mars in 2. Sublord of 8th cusp,
Rahu is in the beneficial 11th house receiving the aspect of
benevolent Jupiter but he is in the constellation of Venus and sub
of Mercury. Both Venus and Mercury are receiving Die aspect
of Mars. Venus is also in the constellation of Mercury in 8. These
formidable combintions indicate accidents and even attempts on
her life. In this context, the position of Uranus in 8 from AIM
Lagna and Neptune in 12 (the house of treachery and deception)
are important. Even now, recently, it was reported in the press
that her vehicle used for election propaganda was damaged due
to and accident. Mercury, lord of 4 , indicating vehicles, in the

star of violent Mars in a fiery sign is the cause of this type of
mishaps in her life till Mercury's bukthi is over. Hence it is
advisable to take utmost care during her vehicular journeys.

MISMATCHED MARRIAGE CAUSED BY
MALEFIC MERCURY
The niceties of KP. are brought to the fore in Ihe case of
the tragic marriage of a youngman and I would like to dwell on
the principles of K.P. for denial of a smooth married life in this
article. The unfortunate youngman, who is well-mannered and
was strictly a bachelor till his marriage, was bora on 9-2-1954
at 8-40-0 Hours 1ST. in Badula (Sri Lanka) Lat 6° N 59' & 81 °
E 5'. In this age when sexual morals are very loose with younger
generation, this youth was meted out a cruel treatment by fate
though he was not contaminated by the vices of sex till his first
night I knew him for the past four years and he also has some
knowledge of traditional astrology and he also analysed the
horoscope of his would be wife and compared it with his own
chart besides the astrologers who showed green signal for this
marriage. But it is an undeniable fact that when bad time is
running for a person, he will not be able to contact an astrologer
and gel proper advice to ward off the evil impending. This
proved to be correct fully in his case. Though he wanted to meet
me and discuss about ibe marriage alliance, he did not do so as
I was away from Coimbatore at that time and till the marriage
was over, 1 had no news of it at all. But, alas, he lived with his
newly wedded wife for about 2 months only. He could not
tolerate her manners and way of thinking and he found her most
incompatible with his wavelength of thinking. According to him,
she was highly materialistic and had an overdose of sexual urge,
which was abominable to him. Hence she left this youth about 2
months after marriage, taking all her jewels. The horoscope of
the male, cast through K P , h 25 foil* iw ^

Lagna — Saturn star, Saturn sub :
7th Cusp — Sun star, Saturn sub.
7th Lord Mercury — Rahu star, Mercury sub.
11th Cusp — Sun star, Jupiter sub.
Let usanalyse the 7th cusp. It is in Sun star (lord of 6th)
and Saturn sub (lord of 11 in 8). Though Venus is in 11, she is
only 2° away from Sun, thus attaining combustion. Sublord
Saturn in 8 aspecting Rahu and in the star of Rahu, thus being a
strong significator of 10 can cause such a havoc in marital life.
11th Cusp sublord Jupiter is in 3, in the star of Moon, 5th lord
in 2. Moon in 2 is good but he is a strong significator of 4 (being
in the star of Ketu) and further the full malefic aspect of Saturn
from 8 brings the influencible Moon under the control of Saturn.
These are clear indications of the rough weather in conjugal life.

I had already indicated to my friend somewhere in 1987 that his
marital life will not be a bed of roses.
The wife of this young man was bom on 16-4-1965 at
6-6-0 Hours I.S.T, at 9* N 58, and 78° E 10*. She is endowed
with high educational qualifications and is bom in Chithirai star
in Thulam Rasi and Mesha Lagna. Her horoscope is as follows:
Looking at the chart of the lady, 1 came to the conclusion
that the birth time of my friend is wrong. It is not enough if the
chart is erected strictly according K.P., but the correctness of the
chart should be verified with the help of sub lords of the various
cusps, which are the unfailing indices of the fate. The Lagna sub

lord should he connected with the Janma Rasi and Janma
Nakshatra Lord, by conjunction, aspect, stellar position or even
by significant western angular aspects like trine, sex tile, square
etc. Thus the Janma Nakshatras of all blood relatives will tally
when analysed in this manner with the sub lords. Similarly the
7th cusp sub lord clearly indicates the Janma nakshatra Lord and
Rasi lord and sometimes the Lagna Lord of the partner. Though
I use the method of Ruling Planets to correct the birth time of
the person at the time of casting the chart, as the beginners in
K.P. think it is not an easy job to fix the Lagna and other cusps
with Ruling Planets alone. After checking the ruling planets of
the close relatives, the life events, disease of the native or his
parents, etc., should also be checked with the help of sub lords.
In such an analysis, lagna sub lord may prove correct but the 7th
Cusp may not respond to the Janma Nakshatra of the partner and
in such cases, the birth times should be rectified and adjusted to
tally. If the right sub lord on the relevant cusp is not caught, then
the predictions will be off the mark. A person was predicted by
me while analysing his chart that his recently bom child would
be having some deformity and he admitted it and narrated that
the child's right hand had only two fingers and also it fell short
of the normal length. When the child's chart was cast through
Computer at Jupiter Astro- Computer Center, Coimbatore, the
lagna was found to be Cancer (Kataka) and Lagna sub lord was
Mars in 11 in the star of Moon in 11 also in exaltation. The Mars
did not have any malefic aspects etc. The child was stated to be
born at 2-20 p.m, and this time was given by the surgeon of the
hospital, where Ihe delivery look place. I altered the birth time
to be 2-21 p.m. and the Lagna sub lord happened to be now Rahu
in Rumba, in the 7th Bhava. Though Rahu is 7, as he is
representing Saturn, 8th lord, such a congenital defect is possible
only when bom when Rahu is the sub lord of Lagna. Such minute
analysis through sub lords is the sheet-anchor of K.P., which is

not available in any other system. To illustrate this type of
analysis more in detail, let us take the horoscope of our Guruji
K.S.K. His 7th Cusp sub lord is Moon situated at 7° 52' in
Capricorn, the Lagna being in 11° in the same sign. His wife was
bora in Jyeshta Nakshatra (Sign owned by Mars and star owned
by Mercury). His Moon was in the sub of Moon in Mercury’s
sign. The connection is self-explanatory.
Analysing this way, for the birth time of my friend, the 7th
Cusp sublord Saturn is not connected with Mars, the Janma
Nakshatra Lord and Mars is also the Lagna, lord, thus making
Mars the primary Ruling Planet of his wife. If the sublord of 7th
Cusp is Mercury, then Mars is aspecting Mercury. Note that
Mars is also lord of 2 (family) in 8th Bhava, though in his own
sign, thus giving 9th house results also to some extent One
important point which strikes anyone accustomed to this way of
analysis is that Mercury and Venus have no planets in their
constellations. This has to be noted first in any KP. chart to
assess the potency of planets. Now the fate of this young man is
portrayed more aptly. Sub-lord of the 7th Cusp, Mu^iy is in
12 As Mercury is having no planets in its constellations, he is a
significator of 7 and now the rule that significator of 7 also being
significator of 12 correctly indicates the havoc in marital life.
Here the coincidence is that Mercury is also lord of 7 and thus
doubly strong to offer 12th house results. As the significator is
in 12, it is my friend who is the cause of separation. Actually he
asked her to go to her parents' home to allow him peace of mind.
If the significator had indicated 6, then his wife would have gone
out in a huff. Whenever sublord of 7th Cusp is also lord of 7 and
if there is no planet in the constellation of such a planet, then the
position of this planet in 6, 12 or 4 or 10 will cause — separation.
Hence ihe birth time of my friend was altered as 8-45-0
Hrs. t,S.T. and Ihe revised K. P. Chart is given below •—

I checked up with many life events. He is getting a
substantia] salary, for his average education. The sublord of the
2nd Cusp is Jupiter in 3 in the star of Moon in 2 and in the sub
of Sun in 1 1. Saturn's aspect to Moon may rise a doubt as to the
inflow of the income, but this only indicates entangle LicAi of
money, arrears not being paid in time etc., Jupiter being lord of
10 (exalted in Navamsa) shows the receipt of income through
salary. Sublord Sun is the star of 3 and 11th Cusp. His sublord
of the 8th Cusp is Rahu, who is in the star of Sun (lord of 6) in
11. The position of Sun in 11 will save him from any accident
But whether there will be any accident in his life has to be
checked and in this connection, the sublord of 8th Cusp, being a
malefic, in the constellation of lord of 6 (injury to body, ailment
etc.) is not good and hence he is destined to meet with some
severe accidents. He admitted that he had one worst accident in
which he narrowly escaped. Rahu is an agent of Jupiter in 3t
which is again aspected by Mars from 8th. This confirms an
accident in life. With reference to his job, he is connected with
exploration of oil in the sea and for the time 8-40 a.m. the sublord
of 10th Cusp Moon, whereas now the sublord is Mars. As he is

to check and maintain the electrical installations in the place
where he works, Mars correctly indicates the department he
works. See that Mars, strong in his own and watery house,
posited in the star or Saturn (oil) and sub of Mercury (far of
places). He is regularly going to his work place which is about
1000 miles from his residence and perhaps due to the sublord
Mercury in an airy sign, he goes by flight for his job and returns
home by the same mode of conveyance. The aspect of Mars, the
sublord to Mercury indicates the line of his duties (electrical
work). See that 10th lord Jupiter is also getting the aspect of Mars
from a watery sign. He is virtually floating on the ocean
throughout a month.
According to this revised chart, the mischief of 7th Cusp
sublord Mercury was analysed above. Further this Mercury is
also in the star of Rahu in 10, which is again aspected by Saturn,
as lord of 1 1, from the evil 8th house. Mercury strongly signifies
7, 12 and 10 which are all detrimental to the smooth marital life.
The lady's Moon is in Ltbra-Thulam and that of the male
in Mesha. This is what is known as the Sama-Sapthama position,
acording to traditional system, a configuration showing beautiful
mental agreement between the partners. When many poruthams
do not agree, if there is Sama-Sapthama, the lack of agreements
are compensated by the Samasapthama alone. If the poruthams
are analysed, most of them agree and even those not agreeing
come under the exception of Sama-Sapthama and thus they also
agree. But see the effect of Sama-Sapthama!
Let me digress here to the German system of Astrology
called Mid-Point System, propounded by the famous German
Astrologer Herr Ebertin. His system is known for the half-sums
i.e., adding the planetary longitudes or sensitive points like
Lagna and 10th Cusp and dividing them by two. The resultant

oo
degree is called the midpoint of the two longitudes. For instance,
instead of the usual Lagna, we can take the longitude of Lagna
and 10th Cusp, add them and divide the sum by two. This is
known as Ascendant/Meridian or A/M Lagna, a subsidiary
Lagna from which we can analyse the chart as we do usually. In
practice, this A/M lagna offers brilliant results which are not
visible in the usual analysis. In this chart, Lagna in the revised
chart is 355° 10* 52" and 10th Cusp is at 245° 31’ 38\ Adding
the two, we get 600° 42' 30". Halving this amount, we get the
A/M Lagna at 300° 21 ’ 15" or 0° 22' Kumba. Now we can
analyse the chart If this is to be analysed in K.P., then the cusps
of the other houses should be found out for the Lagna 0° 22*.
Otherwise mere star positions of planets will indicate the events
to a good extent See as per this analysis that the Lagna Lord
Saturn is in 9 in exaltation in the star of Rahu in 1 1. 10th Lord
Mars in a watery sign in his own sign in domal dignity.
According to this analysis, 7th lord Sun is in 12 with Venus, lord
of 4 and 9. Venus is from Sun by 2° 26 ' only, and thus her
combustion at the hands Sun is really effective. Though it is sa id
that Venus and Saturn do not lose their powers on account of
combustion, 1 find in practical experience that the karakatwa and
the matters denoted by Venus suffer to some extent Here she is
the kalathrakararka and a general indicator of marital happiness.
The combustion seems !o have really worked. In analysing the
chart with A/M Lagna, only the traditional rules should be
applied as mentioned by Maharishi Parasara. But analysis
through Placidian or Topocentric method of House Division with
A/M. Lagna should be given a fair trial — extensively to come
to definite conclusions.
In the methods of Herr Ebertin, he used only Lagna and
the 10th Cusp (Meridian) and no other houses were recognised.
He recognised multiples of 45° aspects as having great powers

to ignite some results, depending upon the nature of the planets
involved in such aspects, without considering the planets
involved in such aspects, without considering the ownership of
them. But I find that considering the ownership of planets pays
rich dividends. For instance, in his system of Mid-Points,
Mars/S a turn indicates death and grievous injuries etc., and I find
that for one person bom in Simha Lagna, when Jupiter crossed
this point in his chart, he got married, because Saturn is lord of
7 and Mars, lord of 4 and 9 (auspicious events).
Now coming to the topic of poruthams, Mr. Herr Ebertin
has devised a system known as Contact Cosmogram, with a disc
with 90° circle to see the suitability or otherwise of two parties
intending to get married etc. In this disc the 45° aspects, which
are known as hard-angle aspects, are seen clearly and it is easier
to find out which planets are in 45° aspects with others. But if a
circle is drawn and explained, it may not be easily —
comprehensible for the readers, particularly for those who are
not acquainted to this method of interpretation by circular
diagrams. Mr. KM. Kharegat, the late celebrated Astrologer,
who explained this method, took the liberty of slightly altering
the Circles into liner graph lines. As the aspects are multiplies
of 45° like 45, 90, 135 and 180, the 360° Zodical circle of our
usual chart should be reduced to a 45° Zodical circle. For this,
he gives the following advice : —
1. If a planet is in aries (Mesha), Cancer (Kataka),
Libra (Thulam) or Capricorn (Makara), the actual
degree held by the planet is to be retained.
2. If a planet is in Taurus (Rishaba), Leo (Simha),
Scorpio (Vrischika) or Aquarius (Kumba). Then if
the degree of the planet is less than 1 5°, add 30° and
if more than 15° then subtract 15° from it

3. In the remaining four signs, uniformly add 15° to
the degree of the planets found in it
1 will illustrate with the example chart of my friend. His
Sun in the natal chart is at 20° 44 ' in Makara. As it is in Makara,
no modification is needed. Next take Moon. It is in 10° 42'. As
it is in Mesha, no modification of the degree held by it Coming
to Mars, it is at 6° 31' in Vrichika. As per the rules of Ebertin,
as Mars is having its degree, less than 15, add 30° and Ihus its
revised or new degree = 36° 31 ’.Mercury is at 13° 45' in Kumba,
hence its degree also becomes 43° 45'. Rahu is at 26D 32' and as
per the rules, 15° is to be added, hence its new degree becomes
41° 32*. If you work out the new degrees for all the planets, they
are as follows for Ihe young man (on the left hand side) and for
his wife (on the right hand side): —
(10th Cusp)
Now if a scale is taken and allowing 1 inch for 5 degrees
and a line is drawn for 8.5 inches for 45s and the new degree are

plotted on it marking the planets also, then you get one person's
chart in this new method ready for analysis. Similarly draw
another line below this and note ihc new degrees of planets
beneath this line, wh ile the new planets' position are noted above
the first line for male. The contacts between planets assume
significance in this method and the meanings of the contacts are
given by Mr. Herr Ebertin in his book "Combinations of Stellar
Influences". The contacts between Venus and Uranus, Neptune,
Saturn, Mars etc., are unfavourable. Similarly the MC or Lagna
of one party should not have any contact with malefic planets of
the other. For instance, the contacts between the planets in our
two example charts are as under t
Most of the contacts are batL There is not even one good
contact indicating amicability and lasting love between the
partners. Neptune always stands for cheating, disappointment,
illusion, mystery, drugs, drama, dreams, crooks, tricksters etc.
Note Sun (individual) of female is in contact with Neptune of
the male and Neptune of the female contacts the Sun of the male,
with an interchange. Moon and Venus also of the female contact
Neplune of the male. Rahu's contact of Jupiter is the only
moderately good conduct Rahu signifies sexual union, union
with other persons, blood relations partnership, friendship,

courtship and things where a team-work is involved. The
Mercury and Jupiter of the female contact the Mars of the male,
which is bad. Again the M.C. (10th cusp) of the female contacts
the Uranus of the male. Uranus is the karaka for sudden changes
and actions, revolution, reforms, anarchists, revolutionists etc.
Mr. K. M. Kharegat makes a subtle distinction between the
Ascendant and M.C. The former represents personality,
environment and relations with others by a person and the M.C.
signifies the individual I, ego consciousness and Ihe aim in life.
But the ascendant or Lagna is Ihe person as others see him or the
personality he has presented to others in society but the M.C. is
the person is really in his inmosl being. Hence the contacts of
MC are very important and see the MC of the female contacts
Uranus of the male, igniting a sense of revolt in the mind of ihe
husband.
I would like to emphasize here (hat the new planetary
positions that arc meeting at the same point make 45° aspects.
Such experimentation with new methods of prognostication are
really rewarding.
Whether my friend will have two marriages is to be probed
now. He was married on 7-9-1989 around 10 a.m. whenhe was
running Moon dasa, Venus Bukthi and Venus anthra. Moon is
lord of 5 in 2 (family) in the star of Ketu in 4, representing
Mercury, lord of 7. Moon is Salum sub in 8. Though Saturn is
in 8, he is aspecting 2 and is in Ihe star of Rahu, an agent of
Jupiter, who is a strong significator of 2 (family), and II as there
is no planet in the constellation of Jupiter. Venus is in the
constellation of Mars, 2nd lord in 9th sign in his own house.
7-9-1989 is a Thursday, ruled by Saturn’s star Anurada. Venus
was in the sign Thula in the star of Mars (2nd lord) and sub of
Mercury (7th Lord).

K.P. lays down that there are two or more marriages fora
person, when the sub lord of 7th Cusp is Mercury and/or posited
in the star of Mercury or a planet in the star of Mercury or a dual
sign and also when the 7th cusp sub lord is a significator of 2.
The second condition is most often given the go-by by many KP.
followers. So it is more important that the second condition is
satisfied to have two marriages. Here the 7th Cusp sub lord is
Mercury and he is in the star of Rahu and sub of his own. Mercury
is aspected by Mars, lord of 2. Rahu is an agent of Jupiter, who
is the sub lord of 2nd cusp. Hence this indicates a second
marriage. 2nd Cusp sub lord should also be probed in this aspect.
It is Jupiter in the constellation of Moon, lord of 5 in 2. If this
sub lord is appreciably connected to 1 1 only, then it indicates a
keep and not a legal wife. Hence my inference is that he will love
a lady known to his family already and marry her again.

TIME OF MARRIAGE - HOW STELLAR
ASTROLOGY EFFECTIVELY EXPLAINS ?
I. Introduction
Marriage signifies the unison of two souls together. Years
pass after marriage, but still the sweet memory of the first day
of conjugal meeting lingers on. Honey-moon is in ever green
memory even in old age. Astrology must record this sweet
experience and must be able to say when the happy time of
marriage will come in the life of a man. Krishnamurti Padhdhati
records this aspect of life with more accuracy than any other
astrological system exlanl in the modem times. How truly K.P.
reflects the event is illustrated here,
II. Chart

B. Nirayana Rasi Chart : —
Balance of Sun Dasr* atthe time of birth 3 years 4 months 20 days
Table of Cusps : —

X Cusp — Sagittarius 22. 19
XI Cusp — Capricorn 18.19
XU Cusp — Aquarius 20.19
D. Vimshottari Dasa —
Dasa Bhukti Anthra Sookshnta From To

F. Bhava Chart —
VI Bhava
Ascendant : Pisces 28°. 46’
I Bhava Sun VII Bhava
II Bhava Mercury XII Bhava
Mars
Rahu
Moon .
Saturn (R)
Jupiter (R)
Ketu
V enus
Planetary significations —
Note Rahu deputises for Sun due to its occupation of
Leo sign, ruled by Suit ; Similarly Ketu represents
Saturn as it is in Aquarius, a sign ruled by Saturn.
111. Analysis
Marriage means an addition to the family, hence the
second house steps into Consideration. Conjugal relationship is
denoted by the seventh house.

The 7th also rules contractual relationship. The 11th house
indicates permanent tie of friendship. Marriage includes all these
three. Hence let us consider the houses 2, 7 and 1 1 together.
The second house is occupied by Meeury and Mars.
Mercury governs Ashlesha, Jyeshta and Revathi. Mars governs
Mrigasira, Chitrai and Dhanishta. No planet is in the
constellations. So let us analyse the lord of the second house.
Venus is lord of 2. Venus governs Bbarani, Pooram and
Pooradam. Rahu is in Pooram and Sun is in Bharani. Take Rahu
and Sun.
The seventh house is occupied by Jupiter(R). A retrograde
planet delays; hence delay in marriage is indicated. Jupiter
governs Punarvasu, Visakam and Poorvapathra. Jupiter in
Visakam and Ketu is in Poorvapathra. Take Jupiter and Ketu.
The eleventh house is not occupied by any planet. Saturn
is lord of 11. Saturn governs Pushyam, Anusham and
Uthrapathra. Only Venus is in Uthrapathra. Take Venus.
Therefore Rahu, Sun, Jupiter, Ketu and Venus are the
significators for marriage of this native.
Of all these planets, Rahu, being a node is very strong
more so because it has assimilated single handed the effect of all
the three bouses to be judged for marriage. How ? Rahu is in sign
of Sun a significator for marriage. Moreover it is in the
constellation of Venus, lord of 2, who is a strong significator,
being in the constellation of lord of 1 1 , especially when there is
no occupant of llthBhava. Rabu is further in the sub of Mercury,
occupant of 2 and lord of 7 and in the sub sub of Jupiter, who is
occupant of 7th Bhava and a significator, because of its position

in Visakam, a constellation ruled by itself. Hence it is deduced
that Rahu is very strong and that the native will be married in
Rahu Dasa. The longitudinal distance between Sun and Rahu is
131°-28* which is applying sesqui-quadrate (135°) ; therefore
Sun will not co-operate with Rahu in giving the effect of
marriage. Similarly the longitudinal distance between Rahu and
Ketu is 180°, which amounts to opposition, and which is
decidedly bad ; hence Ketu also will not co-operate with Rahu
in their conjoined period to give the effect of marriage. (Please
refer to 1 Reader — Casting the Horoscope, page 1 12 ;Evil aspect
among two planets who are the significators of the same matter
do not co-operate — join hands to give a particular effect). The
longitudinal distance of Venus and Rahu is 166° 26', hence
good ; therefore it will co-operate with Rahu in giving good
effect, especially when both are the strong significators for
marriage.
The native ran the Dasa of Rahu from 18-9-1943, but
marriage materialised only when Venus Bhukti ran from
6-4-1955 to 6-4-1958. Only Venus is in the sub sub of Rahu and
Rahu is in the constellation of Venus ; hence it can be easily
deduced that Venus will co-operate with Rahu to give the effect
of marriage.
The marriage took place on 22-5-1956, when the native
was running the Dasa of Rahu, Venus Bhukti, Rahu Anthra and
Rahu Sookshma. Rahu came thrice' because of its strong
influence. The day was ruled by Mars, occupant of 2 in the
radical chart On this day Sun was transitting Krilhikai, a
constellation ruled by Sun, who is a significator for marriage.
Moreover it was trasiling in 2nd Bhava from the radical chart

Moon was transitting Swath i, a constellation ruled by Rahil, a
strong significator for marriage. Moreover it was also transitting
in the 7th, Bhava from the radical chart The marriage began in
Sagittarius ascendant, ruled by Jupiter, a significator for
marriage ; it lasted upto Aquarius ascendant, at the peak point of
marriage (12 midnight), Ascendant was rising in Capricorn
28a-l5\ which is again 11th Bhava from the radical chart Then
thereafter ascendant also trasnsited Sathayam constellation,
ruled by Rahu.
Hence the accuracy of Krishnamurti Padhdhati in regard
to pinpointing the date and time of marriage is verified.

WILL I BORROW ?
It was on 6-9- 1990 morning when a bosom friend of mine
peeped in. I received him and when at ease, he narrated his
problem. He wanted to book a house in Lucknow Development
Authority. He was running pennyless these days whereas the last
date for registration was only upto 8-10-1990. Within this date
he had to manage registration fee i.e. either Rs. 30,000 or 20,000
or 10,000 for HIG/MIG/LIG bouse respectively. He had innate
longing to book a H.I.G. House, for which he intended to borrow
the sum i.e. Rs. 30,000 from either of his three friends.
Since he wanted an answer in yes or no, I exploited
Gulbarga Theory. He gave me No. 32 out of 249 for friend
number one. 32 falls in Taurus, Moon Star, Jupiter sub. The
ruling planets on 6-9-1990 at 8-59 a.m. at Lucknow were
Day Lord Jupiter
Ascendant Libra, Mars star, Mercury Sub
Moon Pisces, Saturn Star, Saturn Sub.
Here the sublord of 32/249 Jupiter is neither starlord of
ascendant nor of Moon. Hence the answer was in negative - that
I hold him.
For the friend number two, he gave me No. 157/249.
157 falls in Scorpio, Saturn R Star, Jupiter Sub.

Ruling planet on 6-9-1990 at 9-13 a.m. l.S.T. at Lucknow.
wereDaylord Jupiler
Ascendant Libra, Mars, Star, Venus Sub
Moon Pisces, Saturn R.Star, Saturn R. Sub
Again, the sublord of 157/249. Jupiter was neither starlord
of the ascendant nor of Moon. Negation was conveyed to him.
For third friend, he gave me number 115/249.
Ruling planets on 6-9-1990 at 9.19 A.M. I.S.T. Lucknow.
Day lord Jupiter
Ascendant Libra, Mars, Star, Moon Sub
Moon Pisces, Saturn R. Star, Saturn R sub.
This time too, the Jupiter could not happen to be either
a sc. starlord or Moon star lord. I told him the final negation.
A bit frustrated, he went back and emerged the very next
day with a face, hovered by fresh air of expectations. He told that
the thirty thousand repees loan from one person might be a heavy
amount, so he had modified his query that time. Now his query
was, shall I be able to borrow the sum i.e. 30 or 20 or 10 thousand
rupees from any of the three persons.
The query was slightly complicated, hence 1 thought it
belter to cast a horary chart for which he gave the No. 204/249.

Moon 18.06
Rabu
1U
Mars 09-33
23.37 Ayanamsa
Horary chart :
Krisbnamurti Padhdhati
Jupiter 10.26
Ketu 11.38
Venus 6.10
Mercury
PLANET
Sun
Moon
Mars
Mercury
Jupiler
Venus
Saturn
Rahu
Ketu
Fortuna
Uranus
Neplune
STAR
Mars
Saturn
Ketu
Sun
Mars
Jupiter
Mercury
Sun
Ratal
Saturn
Ketu
Venus
Mars
Saturn
Jupiter
Mercury
Mercury
Mercury
Mars
Saturn
Rahu
Mercury
Ketu
Mercury
For analysis, I took the sublord of the VI cusp. It was
Mercury. Mercury was retrograde which disappointed me at first

instance, but since it was quick moving of small planet that
frequently became direct within 16 days, I proceeded. Mercury
was lord of VI th the house of loans. Mercury was in the star of
Venus. Venus gave results of 7,4,9 firstly, and being in Kelu star
who conjoined with Jupiter, it also gave results of houses 6
(position) 2, 11 and 12 (cusp lordship) and 3, 6, 11 (cusp star
lordship).
Required houses 2, 6and 1 1 were signified, but as per K.P.
sub decided. Mercury was in Saturn's sub where Saturn as lord
of 1 and as starlord of 2 and 10 was tenanted in 12. Further,
Saturn was retrograde and was about to become stationary and
of September. Mercury was to take the direct course on
Mercury signifies correspondence, sending agent and
borrowing in instalment. I told him that he would have to
correspond or send agent and he might gel the loans frommore
than one person because Mercury shows plurality. Again,
Mercury being in Saturn's sub caused punarphoo, but since
Saturn also signified 2nd cusp as starlordship, it favoured by
getting the loans from one Saturnian too. Mercury showed that
one or two Mercurian will give him the loans. About time, I told
him that before 18.09.1990, he must correspond and after
24.09.1990, when Saturn would take a direct course, he might
expect some favour. Also, I told him that Saturn's XII house
signification would also bring its unfavourable result He was
off with some uncertain mood.
He visited me on 22.10.1990 in a gay mood. After
thanking me he told that he had sent letters to all the three. The
first one had not responded till the day, the second one had called
him whose letter reached only after 18.09.1990 and the third one
had sent a sum of ten thousand rupees on 28.09.1990 i.e. after

24.09.1990 when Satom took a direct course. He visited the
second one on 03.10.1990 who gave him ten thousand rupees on
06.10.1990. Thus, he had received twenty thousand repees, he
easily got himself registered in L.D.A. for a MIG house on
08.10.1990. About the first one, who had not replied even after
getting the letter, my friend snapped all ties with him by sending
him a second letter.
It may be amazing as to bow only the VI cusp sublord told
all this ; but for an honest K.P. Student, this is very simple and
easy thing.

SEVENTH HOUSE AND ITS
SIGNIFICANCE
In July 1987, a friend of mine wanted to know when the
marriage of his sister-in-law (bis wife’s cousin sisler) would take
place. I asked him to get a number between 1 and 249 to be given
by the girl. He obtained the number 105 given by the girl, by post
as she was slaying at her native place Vizianagaram.
Taking the number, I have prepared the following Horary
Chart as per K.P. System (advanced stellar astrology) on
4-8-1987 at 1.03 p.m. at Hyderabad and predicted that her
marriage would lake place in March 1988.
KP. Ayanamsa : 23-34-49 Saturn Dasa Balance 13 y. 11 m. 04 days.

I have taken 2, 7, 1 1 bouses for consideration, as the 2nd
house represents addition of a family member, 7th house is the
house of matrimony and 1 1th bouse is for fulfilment of her
desire.
House position

A. Significators
2nd House
1. There are no planets occupied in the 2nd house.
2. Bhava Lord is Mercury.
3 . Sun, Mars, Saturn are in the constellations of the Bhava
Lord, Mercury.
7th House
L Rahu is deposited in the 7th house.
2. There are no planets in the constellations of the
occupant, Rahu.
3. Bhava Lord is Saturn.
4. Venus, Moon, Rahu arc in the constellations of the
Bhava Lord, Saturn.
5. The 7th cusp is strongly aspected by Mars by eighth
sight
1 1th House
1 . Mercury. V enus, Sun, Marsare the occupants in the 11 th
house,
n Sun, Mars, Saturn are deposited in the constellations of
Mercury. There are no planets in the constellations of
the other occupants, Venus, Sun, Mars.
3. Bhava Lord is Mercury.
4. Sun, Mars, Saturn are deposited in the constellations of
Mercury.

B. Ruling planets at the time of judgement .
Therefore Venus, Jupiter, Mars, Saturn, Mercury arc the
Ruling Planets. As Jupiler is not a significator (directly) he is
rejected and the Venus, Mars, Saturn and Mercury arc Che
common planets in (A) & (B).
C. Judgement .
According to Krishnamurti Padhdhati if the Sub-Lord of
the 7th cusp or Ihe Lord of the constellation in which the
Sub-Lord of the 71h cusp is deposited is the significator of 2 or
7 or 1 1 Ih house, marriage is promised.
In Che present case. 7th cusp sub- lord, Sun is deposited in
the 11th house in the constellation and sub of Mercury is also
deposited in the lllh bouse and is the Lord of 2nd and 11th
houses. Mercury is not only the occupant of the 1 1 th house but
also the lord of 2nd and 1 1th houses and posited in the sub of
Rahu who is occupant of 7th house. Thus Mercury is the
strongest significator. So marriage is promised.
D. Timing of the event .
At the time of the judgement, the Dasa running is Saturn
Dasa, Mercury Bhukti, Jupiter anthara upto 17-10-1987. As
Jupiter is not a significator, his Anthara period is not considered.

Next Saturn *s Anthara which runs upto 20.3. 1988 has been taken
into consideration and it is predicted that the marriage would take
place in March, 1988 as the transit of Dasa, Bhukti and Anthara
Lords also agrees by that time.
Eventhough the Dasa Lord and Anthara Lords, Saturn is
in retrogration at the time of judgement, he is a strong
significator of 2, 7 and 11 houses and is posited in the star of
Bhukti Lord, Mercury who is another strong significator of 2 and
11 houses and is in direct motion. Our guruji has pointed out
emphatically that Saturn whenever he is a strong significator, no
doubt he delays and drag the matter but tends to take the credit
for himself and gives fruitful results during his Bhukti or Anthara
periods. This is found to be true in all predictions. In this case
Saturn comes into direct motion from 20-8-1987 onwards and
the marriage will take place after this date only.
The prediction came hue and the marriage took place on
11-3-1988 and her parents felt very happy for my prediction as
the girl was aged 30 years and they have seen many matches
which have not materialised earlier and were worried about her
marriage.

TWIN BIRTHS AND SIGNIFICANCE OF
THE SUB
When we study twin births charts within a few minutes
difference at the same place, a lot of difference will be recorded.
The following case of twin births bom at Jeypore on 3.1.1990
with a difference of 10 minutes whose birth charts are prepared.
The lagna, the planetary position remain same in both charts but
one suffered from ill health, the other passed away shortly after
birth. Why is it so 7 A study of the following charts will reveal
that the diametrically opposite effects experienced are due to the
cuspal changes and the planet holding sway over cusps as as sub
lord.
Here I am furnishing the both the charts.
A comparative study of the two charts will reveal that the
sub lords of the cusps of houses in the two births are different.
Otherwise the horoscope especially the planetary position, the
sign the lagna and other house cusps and constellations as the
different houses are the same. As Moon position in birth charts
has not varied very much, the Vimshottari Dasa, Bhukti and
Antara in both the cases also remains almost the same.
ANALYSIS :
The sub lord of the ascendant in Chart 'A’ is Venus, who
is lord of XI th house, which is Bhadhakastana to (moveable sign
boms) and stationed in VII the marakastana. So the sublord is
evil to span of life, but the constellation ten en ted by Venus is
Moon and sublord is Rahu, the constellation lord Moon is lord
of lagna in IXth house, and the sublord Rahu through occupant

in* Vllth (Marakastana), but signifiator of Vth and Xth being
occupant in Mars Star.
Hence the Venus signifying the houses I and IX , the
sublord signifying V and Xth. The bouses I, V, IX and Xth are
very good for longevity, even though the Venus
Bhadhakaslanadhipathi in Marakastana is very bad, but here the
Venus itself cannot give the results of VII and XJ as there are
planetes in Venus Star. According to Krishnamurti Padhdhati the
Planets will give results as per their stellar positions. Hence
Venus is a bencfic to the native, though the child is to suffer with
so many complications, but he will survive.
Chart No. ‘Bf
(i) The sign lord of ascendant is Moon occupant in VIII Ih
house (a house of Danger) in the star of Saturn in Vllh
Disease and lord of Vllth death, and lord of VIII th, all
the 3 houses arc detrimental to health and longevity and
Ihe lord of lagna Moon is in the sub sub of Ketu occupant
in Hnd Marakasthana. The Ketu being occupant in Leo,
all alone, lake the agency of Sun who has gone in Vlth
and conjoined with lord of VII and VIII Saturn. Here the
signification of Sun also not good as Sun is tenanted in
Venus star Rahu Sub, both are on Vllth cusp. Hence the
sub lord Ketu in whose sub the lagna lord occupied is
spoiled. Hence the Moon lord of lagna cannot protect
the child from death.
(ii) The star lord of lagna is Saturn a natural malefic and
being lord of VII and VI I llh in Vlth in the star of Venus
occupant in Vllth and lord Bhadhakastana XI th, Hence,
Saturn is number one malefic to close the life of the
child.

(iii) The final and deciding factor for span of life is the sub
lord of lagna cusp. The sub lord is Mars. Let us see the
strength of Mars. Mars is lord of V and X in Vth. It is
very good to promote the span of life of the native, but
as per Krishnamurti Padhdhati the stellar position will
reveal the facland deciding factor. The Mars is not able
to give the results of V and Xth houses as there is planet
in Mars star (namely Rahu). So Rahu will give the
results of V and X, Mars can give the results only in
which constellation andsub Mars tenanted. The Mars is
in Mercury star and sub and sub sub of Rahu. The
Mercury lord of Xllth Mokshaslhana in Vlth Disease
and conjoined with Venus lord of Bhadhakastana on
Vllth cusp. Hence the Mars can give the results of VI,
VII and X. th and also aspecting Vllltb (Danger) XJ
Bhadhakastana XII Mokshaslana, with above
signification Mars is very strong enough to close the life
of his child. It is promising infant death.
The child passed away on 29/30.5.1990 night at 3 a.m. at
the time of Dasa of Saturn Bhukti and Antara of Venus and
Sukshma of Jupiter is running. The day being Tuesday (Mars).
The star was Ashlesha (Mercury), the lagna was al 10 degrees
of Mesha, the sign lord is Mars and star lord Ketu.
Now let us see how these planets ruling at the time of
demise are connected with death.
The Dasa lord Saturn is in Vlth lord of VI 1 and VII in
Venus star lord of Xlth Bhadhakastana on Vll cusp. The bhukti
and antara lord Venus is in Vllth cusp lord of Xlth both Maraka
and Bhadhaka houses. The Sukshma lord is Jupiter, lord of VI
in Xlth in Rahu star in Vllth in the sub of Saturn lord of VII and
VIH in Vlth. The day lord Mars is significator of Vt, VII and

Xllth houses. The star lord on the day of death is Mercury lord
of Xllth Vlth conjoined with Venus lord of Xlth in Vllth cusp
lagna lord Mars already discussed and star lord Ketu is occupant
in (1 house and agent of sun a significatorof VII and V] and Xlth
houses. All the above planets are Karakas for death and jointly
operated to close the life of the child.
The lime of death will be indicated by the lord of Vlllth,
the lord of Vlllth is Saturn, who is in Jupiter sign Dbanus in
Venus star. Hence the combination of Saturn, Venus, Jupiter are
connected with lord of Vlllth. The period of death also Saturn
dasa Bhukti and antara of Venus Sukshma of Jupiter operated.
Transit at the time of demise of the child.
Lagna rising in Mcsha (Mars) star lord of Ketu.
Moon is in mercury star Jeyshta.
Sun in Venus sign (Taurus) Moon star, Jupiter sub in Xlth
house.
Mars Jupiter sign Saturn star and sub.
Jupiter Mercury sign in Xllth house, Rahu star.
Venus Ketu star Rahu sub.
Saturn Sun star Jupiter sub
Ail the planets arc transitting at the time of demise in the
signs, stars and sub of signification of 2, 7, 1 1 and 12th houses
only.
The difference between the preparation and analyse of the
horoscope on traditional system and krishnamurti Padhdhati
stellar system is to be well understood by the readers. On the

traditional system, the Lagna and the planetary position in the
above 2 birth charts would be the same, whereas in the
Krishnamurti Padhdhati stellar system, the Lagna sublord is
different causing one die and the other to survive, owing to Lag.
sublord’s connection within the star and sublord in which it is
deposited. It goes without saying such minute factor which
brings about varying results in a short space of time can be
predicted and the principles of Krishnamurti Padhdhati stellar
system only.

WHEN WILL THE FIRST CHILD BE
BORN?
People come across happy occasions in their lives with the
blessings of God. One such occasion^ is marriage. The purpose
of marriage is living in the company of another person with a
permanent tie of friendship in sharing the ups and downs of life.
The sanctity of marriage lies in total understanding between the
couple and leading a religious and holy life. Marriage is
otherwise termed as legal bondage.
Life does not stop with marriage. Man finds happiness in
having a child or children to make life enjoyable, Whether the
couple want a child or not they are answerable to several
questions from relations and elders in the family regarding their
having a child soon after marriage.
As days and months pass by, especially when the couple
desire to have a child, they become anxious when conception
does not occur. Thus they begin going to doctors to check up
their fertility.
The subject querent was anxious to know when would be
her first child delivered ? Smt. M. Uina, my colleague was
married in February 1990. The question was put to me on
25-5-1990, and I took up the investigation of the same on
25.5.1990 itself at 11.23 a.m. 1ST at Madras. The number given

between 1 -249 was 197. The euspal and planetary positions were
as follows

We have to judge the V cusp for the birth of a child. Here
the V cusp sub Lord is Mercury. Mercury is in the III in the star
of Venus in III. Mercury is in the sub of Moon in the V. Moon
is in its own star and thus becomes a powerful significator of the
V. Sint. M. Uma will certainly have a child.
XI cusp sub Lord is also Mercury and hence consolidates
the birth of a child by way of strongly signifying the V and also
fulfilment of the desire.
The H house tells of additions in the family. Here the H
cusp sub Lord is Venus, posited in the HI. Venus is in the star
of Ketu representing Moon in V. Venus is also in the Sub of Ketu
again representing Moon in V. Hence the H cusp sub Lord
assures addition in the family by way of progeny signified by the
H Cusp Sub Lord Venus is in the Sub of Ketu is in the star
of Mercury in the HI. Ketu is also in the Sub of Mercury in the
HI. Mercury by tenanting a Venusian star again signifies the HI.
Being XT to the V fosters the birth of a child.
It is heartening to note that the query is easily answered
through Krishnamurti Padhdhati.
Let me at this stage prostrate to the memory of our living
GURUJI late Sri K.S. Krishnamurti, who has handed down to us
his unfailing Krishnamurti Padhdhati in a lucid manner.
Coming back to the query at hand, WHEN will the first
child be bora? Our Guruji has taught us to use the Ruling Planets
for the TIME of fructification of an event. The Ruling Planets at
11.23 A.M. were as follows :

Lagna Moon (Cancer)
Lagna Star Mercury
Moon Star Moon
Moon Rasi V enus
Day Lord Venus
Lagna lord Moon in the sub of Saturn denotes delay. In
the horary figure Saturn is retrograde and posited in the XII and
confirms the delay.
In the horary figure the V cusp sub Lord is connected to
Moon, the fastest planet, while the Lagna cusp sub Lord is Saturn
in the Ruling planets which is the slowest.
Hence I took the transit of Sun in Taurus in the star of
Moon and in the sub of Mercury for the birth of the child, i.e. on
Result
Readers will be happy to note that Smt. Uma has been
declared pregnant by her doctor, and the delivery is expected in
June 1991.
As the Ruling Planets are Moon, Venus and Mercury,
especially the V strongly connected with Moon indicates a
female child.
May lord Mahaganapathy bless Smt. Uma’s family, and
everyone of the readers.
I thank Sri. K. Hariharan, who on behalf of all of us is
leading in promoting this Divine science.

THE MIRACLE THAT IS KRISHNAMURTI
PADHDHATI
Where medical science fails, Krishnamurti Padhdhati
succeeds, and it not only shows miracles but serves as an
eye-opener to all those groping in the dark regarding the
wonderful accuracy of advanced stellar astrology contained in
Krishnamurti Padhdhati.
One of the top officials (who is also my best friend)
wanted me to predict the correct date and time when his wife
would give birth to a child as she was in the family way. I
immediately wanted to put the principles of Krishnamurti
Padhdhati to test and asked him to give a number within 249. He
(a) the number *245* mentioned shows the lagna in Pisces
sign, Revathi nakshatra, i.e., between 22-13-20 and 23-20. This
area is ruled by Guru as the sign lqjd, Budha as the star lord and
Moon as the sub lord.
(b) the Moon at the time of query was also passing over
Cancer (Kataka) 28° 1 *, which area is ruled by Moon as the star
lord, Mercury as the lord of the nakshatra and Saturn as sub lord.
(c) The day was Tuesday, its lord being Mars, which at
that moment was in 28° 52' Vrischika, Mars sign, Mercury
nakshatra and Saturn sub.
Summing up (a), (b) and (c), the positions of the planets
functioning as significators were :
(a) Jupiter, Mercury and Moon.
(b) Moon, Mercury and Saturn.
(c) Mars, Mercury and Saturn.

The above significators immediately gave me the clue that
the strongest among them were Mercury, Moon and Saturn and
the date of birth of the child would be on the day when Sun will
pass over Virgo sign, Hasta nakshatra, i.e., 15-40 to 17-46-00 =
Mercury sign, Moon nakshatra and Saturn sub which will be only
on the night of Saturday, the 4th October, 1969 and before
Sun-rise on Sunday.
Accordingly, I asked the gendeman to reserve a cabin in
the Nursing Home, from the 4th October, 1969 and shift his wife
there on the afternoon of that date. He was not prepared to heed
to my advice on the ground that his family physician and the lady
doctor treating bis wife for the last eight months had
emphatically told him the date of birth as 27-9-1969 and
accordingly all his arrangements in the Nursing Home were
finalised. His family physician was also present at the party and,
on hearing of my prediction, he came to argue with me. He
confirmed again that the date calculated was 27-9-1969 on the
basis of medical science and could not fail. I simply smiled and
told the gentleman who put the query that if he could easily
afford to bear the charges of the nursing home for one week
unnecessarily, he could do so. I further informed him that after
an hour when I would go backhome, even the correct time of
birth could be given to him by me, after a detailed calculation.
He accompanied me to my place and, after detailed
working, 1 told him that the date of birth would be 4/5-10-1969
(Saturday night) and the time would be 2-50 a.m. (1ST). He
profusely thanked me for my labours.
Under medical guidance, he shifted his wife to the Nursing
Home on 25-9-1969 and kept her there till 29-9-1969 but without
any avail. He then came to my place on 30-9-1969 to get my
confirmation again. I held to the same opinion.
According to my advice, he again admitted his wife in the
Nursing Home on 4-10-1969. The next morning at 6 a.m. he

came this time to congratulate me on my prediction - he was
blessed with a son at 2-50 am. on Saturday night, i.e. on
4/5-10-1969, precisely as was predicted 26 days in advance.
Is it not a miracle of Krishnamurti Padhdhati ? How
wonderfully the result came correct while the calculations of
medical science utterly failed ?
Now, for the information of the students of Krishnamurti
Padhdhati I am giving below the details of my calculations on
the basis of which the prediction was made.
Question : When is the birth of the child expected ?
Number : 245.
Time of Judgment: Tuesday, 9-9-1969.
Place of Judgment : Calcutta.
The number ”245” represents the area in the zodiac
between 22° 13* 20” and 23° 2(T 00" in Pisces (Meena), i.e.,
Jupiter sign, Mercury star, Revathi, and in that the sub of Moon
(Chandra).

Note : The nodes, firstly, give the results of the planets with
which they are conjoined and, secondly, the results of
the lord of the sign occupied by them. Thus, Rahu
represents Saturn ; Ketu is a substitute for Sun.
For the birth of children, houses 2, 5 and 1 1 are to be taken
into account. The second stands for "Kutumba" or family,
addition to the number of family members, etc. The fifth house
rules progeny; the 11th house, its opposite, also indicates as it is
in 5 counted from the seventh house (wife or husband).
Common significators : Mars, Moon, Venus, Mercury, Saturn and Sun

Ruling Planets
The planets who rule at the moment of judgment are :
(i) Lord of the day Mars
(ii) Lord of the rasi
occupied by MoonMoon
(iii) Lord of the nakshtra
where Moon Ira ns its Mercury
(iv) Lord of the lagna at
the time of the judgment V enus
(v) Lord of the constellation
occupied by lagnaMoon
Therefore, the ruling planets are Mars, Moon, Mercury,
Venus, Moon and Sun.
The significators of houses 2, 5 and 1 1 were considered
as Mars, Moon, Mercury, Venus and Saturn.
(a) Mercury, Saturn and Rahu are in the sub of Mercury ;
(b) Mercury is in the nakshatra of Moon ;
(c) Rahu represents Saturn ; and
(d) Sun, Moon and Mars are in the sub of Saturn.
As such, the strongest significators are Mercury, Moon and
Saturn. It was therefore calculated that the delivery will take
place when the Sun transits over Mercury sign, Moon nakshatra
(Hastha) which was possible on the 4th/5th October night.
Regarding the correct tirrte of birth, the position of the Moon on
4th/5th October, 1969 wa^considered, i.e., when it would pass
over the Moon sign Kataka, Saturn nakshatra Pushyam, Saturn
sub and Mercury sub sub, i.e., 3° 41 * Kataka, which will be only

at 2-50 a.m. (1ST). The Ascendant at that lime will be 10° 56’ in
Simha, in Sun sign, Ketu nakshatra and Saturn sub. The horoscope of the child was also prepared in advance, based on the
calculated data given to my friend on 9-9-1969.
It is now for the learned reader to judge the merits of
"KRISI INAMURTI PADHDHATIM as it is absolutely beyond
the scope of any traditional method of astrology to arrive at such
a surprisingly correct result. The proof of Ihe pudding, verily, is
in the eating.

EDUCATIONAL QUALIFICATION AND
A SUITABLE JOB
A. Birth Details :
1. Date of birth : 15th July 1941.
on 16th July, 1941.
3. Place of birth : Lat. 23.15 N. : Long. 87.54 E.
4. Day of birth : Tuesday.
B. Nirayana Rasi Chart :
1. Sidereal Time adopted for moment of birth 19hours 47
minutes 47 seconds.
2. Ayanamsa 22.56.

^ Table Of Cusps:

F. Bhava Chart :
Bhava 1 - Saturn
Bhava I) -Jupiter
Bhava III - Mercury, Sun
Bhava IV - Venus
Bhava V - Rahu
Bhava XI - Ketu
Lord of
Sub
Jupiler
Mercury
Mercury
Moon
Moon
Jupiter
Rahu
Rahu
Mars
Rahu
Rahu
Mercury
Rahu
Saturn
Jupiler
Bhava XII - Mars, Moon

equivalent to Jupiter as it is posited is Pisces, a sign
ruled by Jupiter.
II. The Query
The native asks two questions
1. Will my educational qualification be increased V
2. Will I get a suitable job befitting my qualification ?
III. Astrological analysis
Answer to QuestionNo. 1 .
According to Krishnamurti Padhdhati, the educational
qualifiations, especially the degrees, attained by any person are
to be judged from 4 th house. 9th house stands for higher studies,
deep insight and an element of research too. As it amounts to
realisation or fulfilment of desire, 11th house should also be
considered.

At the time of judgment, i.e., on 8tb July, 1967 at 12-15
a.m., the day is Saturday, ruled by Saturn, lord of 11 in the radical
chart Jupiter, kataka for education, is transiting in the 4th
Bhava, and that too in the constellation of Saturn, lord of 10 and
1 l.Moon is also transiting the constellation of Jupiter, lord of 9,
indicating higher studies and the SUB of Saturn, again lord of
10 and 11 in the radical chart Ascendant falls in aries 1° 21*,
thus posited in the constellation of Ketu, the sole occupant of
1 1th Bhava and in the SUB of Venus, occupant of 4th Bhava and
lord of 2, one of the houses concerned with income. Hence it is
deduced that the native will realise his ambition.
Now let us analyse houses 4, 9 and 11 in the radical chart
to come to a definite conclusion.
4th house is occupied by Venus. Venus rules Bharani,
Poorva Palguni and Poorvashada. No planet is in these
constellations. Similarly no planet is in the sub of Venus. Hence
Venus is weak.
Moon is lord of 4. Moon rules Rohini, Hastham, and
Sravanam. Only Jupiter is in Rohini, so take Jupiter. But as
Jupiler is occupying the sign Taurus, ruled by Venus, his natural
enemy, he is also weak.
9th house is occupied by any planet Jupiter is lord of 9.
Jupiter rules Punarvasu, Visakam and Poorvapathra. Ketu is in
Poorvapathra and Sun is in Punarvasu. So take Ketu and Sun.
Ketu, being a node, is powerful. Moreover, it is also posited in
the sign Pisces, ruled by Jupiter. So accept Ketu. But Sun is
posited in 3rd. Bhava, which is 12th from 41h, hence it cannot
give increase in academic qualified inn. So reject Sun.

Rahu and Saturn are in the SUB of Jupiter. So take Rahu
and Saturn. Rahu, being a node, is powerful, so accept Rahu.
Saturn is posited in the sign Taurus, ruled by Venus, his natural
friend, hence powerful. So accept Saturn too.
Hence finally take Ketu, Rahu and Saturn.
11th house is occupied only by Ketu. Ketu rules Aswini,
Makam and Moolam. No planet is in these constellation. No
planet is in the sub of Ketu. But Ketu is already a significator
and is also posited in the constellation Jupiter, lord of 9, and in
the sub of Rahu, another sign if icator. Hence Ketu is a very strong
significator for increase in academic qualification and
realisation of ambition.
4th Cusp (Cancer 2°4’) falls in the constellation of Jupiter,
lord of 9 and SUB of Rahu, a significator. Similarly 9th Cusp
(Sagittarius 7° 04') also falls in the constellation of Ketu and
SUB of Rahu, both signifieators. Hence the above-mentioned
deductions are further confirmed.
Therefore, Rahu, Saturn and Ketu are the strong
signifieators for increase in academic qualification for the
native.
At present the native is running Venus Dasa, Jupiter
Bhukti and Saturn Anthra from 13-3-1967, which will last up to
15-8-1967. Venus and Jupiter are weak signifieators, hence the
period is not so good for the increase in academic qualification,
but Saturn Anthra is decidedly belter, because Saturn is a strong
significator. The native has to appear al an examination during
this period. Due to the benefic influence of Saturn (Please mark
that the traditional astrologers will always call Saturn a strong
malefic, they cannot conceive that Saturn can also act as a
benefic), it is predicted that he will surely get through and secure

good marks. Moreover the longitudinal distance between Saturn
and Jupiter is 15° 23 \ which amounts to applying vigintile
aspect, which is good. Hence il is confirmed that it will give good
results.
Similarly Venus Dasa, Jupiter Bhukti and Ketu Anthra
from 1-1-1968 to 27-2-1968 and Rahu anthra under the same
period from 11-2-1969 to 5-7-1969 will be equally good. The
native will be successful in increasing his academic
qualifications during these periods.
Answer to question No. 2 .
For answering this question, we must judge houses 2, 6,
tOand 11.
2nd house is occupied by Jupiter. Jupiler governs
Punarvasu, Visakam and Poorvapathra. Ketu is in Poorvapathra
and Sun is in Punarvasu. Rahu and Saturn are in the SUB o f
lupiter So take Rahu, Ketu, Saturn and Sun. But Saturn is
posited in 1st Bhava, which is 12th from 2nd. Hence eliminate
Saturn. Similarly Sun is posited in 6th Bhava from 10th Cusp
(M.C, the Cusp of profession), hence eliminate Sun loo. Rahu
is applying to the 6th Cusp (Rahu is at 2° 53* in Virgo and 6th
Cusp falls in 3° 04' in the same sign), and Kelu is posited in 11th
Bhava in the sign of Jupiter hence finally take Rahu and Ketu.
6lh house is unoccupied by any planet. Mercury is lord of
6, but again il is also posited in 6th Bhava from 10th cusp,
indicating profession, so it is weak. Hence eliminate Mercury.
10th house is also unoccupied by any planet. Saturn is lord
of 10, but as we have already eliminated Saturn, Saturn cannot
come as a signifies tor.

11th house is occupied by Ketu. No planet is posited in
either constellation or sub of Ketu, but Ketu, being a node, is
powerful and it is already a significator. Moreover, Ketu is in the
constellation of Jupiter, occupant of 2nd house, and in the sub
of Rahu, a strong significator. Therefore finally take Ketu as a
very strong significator for the employment of this native.
At present the native is running Venus Dasa, Jupiter
Bhukti from 5-11-1966, which will last upto 5-7-1969. Venus,
although in no way connected with the houses concerned with
service is aspecting 10th and 11th. Bhavas from the degree
position. and Jupiter is lord of 2, hence this period is good for
service and income but not very srong, as the two prominent
significators Rahu and Kelu are not operating II is confirmed,
as the native ran Venus Dasa, Jupiter Bhukti and Jupiter anthra
from 5-11-1966 to 13-3-1967 and during this period he got
employment, although in low category on 6-2-1967. On this day,
Moon was passing through Poorvashada, a constellation ruled
by Venus, as Venus is a weak significator, it gave low grade in
service.
But due to the benefic influence of Rahu and Kelu, the
native will get a suitable job according to his qualification with
rise in status and increase in income, during 1-1-1968 to
27-2-1968 (Ketu anthra under Venus Dasa, Jupiler Bhukti) and
1 1-2-1969 to 5-7-1969 (Rahu anthra under Venus Dasa Jupiter
Bhukti). There is no doubt about it

RETURN OF MISSING SON
The above is the query of the mother and she says that he
is, the eldest son missing from 7-5-1963 ; Number given by the
anxious mother is 9.
Time of judgment : 5-38 p.m. 25-12-1967.
Horoscope is as follows :
Jupiler (R) in 12 to 5 ; Moon in the 1st Bhava to 5 ; Kelu
in 2 to 5 ; Venus in 3 to 5 ; Mercury and Sun in 4 to 5 ; Mars in
6 to 5 ; Saturn in 7 to 5 ; Rahu in 8 to 5.
Mars Dasa balance 6 years 1 1 months 23 days.
To leave one’s home, to go away and live in an unknown
quarters is indicated by the houses 3 and 12.

3rd house is occupied and owned by Venus but Ketu, a
node is in that sign owned by Venus. Hence lake Kelu and judge.
Ketu governs Aswini, Makam and Moolam : Rahu, Jupiler,
Mercury and Sun are in Ketu star.
121h house occupied by Jupiter : owned by Moon. Venus
is in Jupiter's star whereas none is in Moon’s star. So Venus and
Moon indicate 12th house matters. Jupiter, Mercury, Sun, Rahu,
Ketu, Moon, Venus are significators.
People who leave the house without any aim or any
programme or notice, will be, naturally, going from one place to
the other and hence the 7th house also needs judgment. During
the period and sub period of the significatorof the 7th house and
the 3rd house, one will be making many short journeys and one
will be breaking journey on the way. Tlh house counted from
the 5th (Leo) representing son, is occupied by Saturn as the 7th
house extends from 26-40-30° 00'. Aquarius to 26°-40/30° of
Pisces. Saturn alone is in its Star Uthrapalhrapada.
Now, if we calculate when Die boy had ran away, and work
backwards it is Moon Dasa Saturn Bhukti Rahu Amhra
Moon is lord of 12 : Saturn is the significator of 7 and
Rahu by occupying Mars sign Aries, denotes 9th house matters
and by being in Ketu constellation and Venus sub, indicates that
he had been going aimlessly from one place to the other from Ihe
above evil period. It was Tuesday. Rahu star day in Venus sign.
The question is about the return of the boy and not about
the time of his missing.
Judge the houses 2, 8 and 1 1 . 2nd house is occupied by
Ketu. Rahu, Jupiter, Mercury and Sun are in Ketu star. 8th house
is occupied by Rahu and none in Rahu star. 11th house and no

planet is in Mercury star. Therefore Rahu, Mercury (Rahu
indicates Mars) conjoined sub period will bring him back, i.e.,
Mars dasa Rabu Bhukti Mercury anthra, i.e., between 3rd
Consider the ruling planets at this moment Today it is
Monday ruled by Moon. Chilhra governed by Mars, represented
by Rahu. Lagna is Gemini owned by Mercury. Therefore, he will
return in Moon shookshma when the lagna is in Arudhra, and
Mars dasanatha transits Moon's position at the time of query,
Return to native tend : The following is the horoscope
of an intelligent student who is now in America. When he will
come back and settle down in India is the question ?
Overseas : Houses 3, 9 and 12 to be judged.
Occupants : In 3 none : in 9 Mars : in 12 none ; Mrigasira,
Chitra and Dhanishta ruled by Mars. Rahu in Chitra : Mars in
Dhanishta.

Mars sign occupied by Ketu - stronger than Mars Satump
Ketu are in Ketu constellation Aswini ; Owners : Moon, Saturn
and Venus : None in Moon's and Venus stars ; Moon and Venus
are in Saturn's star.
Venus sign occupied by Rahu : No planet is in Rahu's
constellation. So, take Rahu. Therefore the planets connected
with the houses 3, 9 or 12 are Mars, Rahu, Kelu, Saturn, Moon
and Venus : They are called the significators of these houses.
This student left India on 6-9-1962. When he had been running
Ketu Dasa Ketu Bhukti Rahu Anthra when Moon transitted in
Scorpio which is also represented by Ketu. As Ketu was
conjoined with Saturn ; it was an Anuradha star day, Ketu and
Saturn conjoined together in Moon's star Sravanam. Rahu was
in Moon's sign Saturn star.
He returned to India on Monday, Satbabhisha star day —
24-1-1966. At that time he was running Kelu Dasa Rahu Bhukti
Ketu Anthra. One should note that for return journey also, houses
3, 9 and 12 are to be judged, because the same long journey is
to be undertaken.
Again he left on 24-2-1966 when Ketu Dasa Rahu Bhukti
Venus Anthra was running
When he will come back is the query. The answer is Ketu
Dasa Mercury Bhukti Rahu Anthra. It will be on Arudhra star
day in February 1969. 12th house shows separation also.
Reunion is shown by the 11th house and the 4th house.
4th house is vacant : II is ruled by Mercury : Ashlesha,
Jyeshta and Revathi are governed by Mercury. Mercury alone is
in its star. 11th house is owned by Mars. Ketu is posited in 11 ;
Ketu Dasa brings the native back. Rahu in Mars star will give
the journey as M s in 9 and Rahu representing 12th house can

give separation and in the constellation of lord of 11 can give
reunion.
So, Ketu Dasa Mercury Bhukti Rahu anthara is predicted.
At the lime of judgment, 29-11-1967 it was Wednesday and the
star is Swath i ruled by Rahu, Thulam, occupied by Ketu on
29-11-1967. This gives the confirmation.

WHEN CAN I PAY THE BALANCE ?
"An agreement was signed with the contractor on
14-10-1967 requesting him to construct a building for my use at
a cost of Rs. 50,000.
Rs, 10,000, thirdly on 21-12-1968 Rs. 7,000. The balance is to
be paid. Source and date of repayment, God alone knows” says
one student.
"Why do you say that God alone knows. Cannot our Guruji
tell you when and how you will repay and regain peace.”
”Yes. He can help us by prediction."
Then what do you expect from an astrologer. Our
classmate may consult when he will get married. Since he is
depressed and dejected as he remains unmarried and he had his
37th birthday, only yesterday. Will the astrologer relieve his
worry or satisfy him by giving any of his aged daughter in
marriage to him. Or if 1 go and say that (here is pressure for
money etc., which you arc aware of, will he issue a cheque and
help me. If our room-mate requests him to find out when he can
get accommodation, will he make a search for him. Astrologer
can give only this much relief ; That is he can remove Ihe worry.
How ? He will predict when the matter will materialise. "Alright
let us meet him”.

Horoscope is as under :
Venus Dasa balance : 15 years, 9 months, 27 days.
It is verified, an intelligent student, without a single
mistake has calculated and erected the chart according' to
Krishnamurti Padhdhati.
"The chart is perfectly alright. Give me few minutes".
Two minutes passed. I made all calculations and 1 wrote
the dates of repayment in a slip of paper.
"Mesh started at 9-38 a.m. Sir. so it is mesh."
"Who is the owner of Mesh ?"
"Mars, sir."
"What is your day of birth ?"

’’Tuesday.”
"Who governs Tuesday ?M
"Mars."
"Next, where is Moon now ?”
”ln Taurus.”
’’Who is its Lord ?”
"Venus.”
"What is your birth star ?"
’Poorvashada."
’’Who rules Poorvashada 7”
"Venus, Sir.”
"You are the third person visiting, now.”
"Do you see that your lord of Jana is Mars, lord of your
star is Venus. ”
"Yes, Sir."
"What did I teach you in the class ?”
"You said that one can consult an astrologer only at such
a lime so that the ruling planets at that moment agrees with the
ruling planets at his or her birth moment ”
'Are you satisfied with correctness of your char I ?’
"Yes, Sir."

’’Now, let me tell you, the next date of repayment will be
"How did you arrive at it in 2 minutes, Sir."
"If l explain it will take 15 minutes f any how let me
oblige, you both."
"What do you mean by an agreement with contractor.
Does il not mean that you and another person sign a document
wherein both agree. So which houses are we to judge. 3rd house
counted from your lagna and the 3rd counted from 7th7 i.e.
houses 3 2nd 9 in your chart.”
3rd house is vacant : Owner is Mercury. It has no planet
in its stars Ashlesha, Jyeshta or Revalhi. So Mercury is one of
Ihe signifieators.
What was the period running al the time of signing the
contract. Moon Dasa Venus Bhukti Salurn anthra Venus
shookshma. The day was a Saturday. The star was Saturn star.
The lime of signing the contract was Makara sign, Moon star.
Next you paid first instalment. Houses 8 and 12 indicate
Die repayment, just like 2 and 6 when judged together denote
borrowing.
You repaid during the Moon Dasa, Sun Bhukti Saturn
Anthra on a Saturday when Moon was in Cancer owned by
Moon.
Nexl payment was made during Mars dasa Mars Bhukli
Mars anthra, Rahu shookshma on a Monday in Rahu
constellation in Mercury sign.

The third was paid on 21-12- 1 968 during Mars Dasa, Mars
Bhukti, Saturn Anthra on a Saturday when Moon was in Makar,
ruled by Saturn.
"How is it, Sir, that Saturn gives me money and also
makes me part with it ?"
In your chart, Saturn owns both 1 1th and 12th houses : No
plane; is in 12 : Saturn alone is in 1 1 . No planet is in Saturn star.
Hence Saturn gives due to 11th house. Saturn dispenses due to
12th house result So, on the days governed by Saturn you get
cheques. You issue cheques.
"Can 1 pay in full ?"
"No."
’’Whenever Saturn rules, all payments will be made only
iv instalments.11
"Why, Sir."
II Saturn indicates disease, Saturn gives a chronic one.
If we gel or give, Saturn prolongs the period by way of
instalments. It is a delaying planet to fulfil one'sdesirc whereas
il is not denying or disappointing one.
"When will I clear off the loan ?"
"Mars Dasa Rahu Bhukti Sun Anthra -January 1970."
"Will he give me time to that extent ?"
"Whether he gives or nol, you clear off only when the
:onjoined period of planets deposited in the constellation of

planet in 2 operates ; to clear off your dues. Judge the house
"Two".
"Thanks' Sir ?"
"Both go smilingly and with the hope that he can repay
and clear off in January 1970 and with a decision to lake lime
from the contractor".
"Is your worry over ?" asks the classmate, while they are
putting on shoes sitting in the outside verandah.”
"What doubt is there ? He deals with the subject so
quickly, explains it in meticulous detail so lucidly and
encourages with bis convincing arguments so confidently". So
saying they go on and on and I can’t hear any more what they
talk.

CAN I HAVE A CHILD ?
2nd Cusp Pisces 3° 33.'
3rd Cusp Aries 7° 33 \
4th Cusp Taurus 6° 33 \
51h Cusp Gemini 3° 33' in Mars star, Venus sub.
6th Cusp Gemini 29° 33'.
To judge the time of birth of a child one has to select the
significators connected with the houses 2, 5 and 1 1 and predict
the time during the conjoined period of the significators.

But, first of all, one should ascertain whether the person
will have a child at all. [As 1 have to give the rules, whatever is
given within brackets is not intended to speak ill of this native.]
Whenever this question is put, it is advisable to judge the 5th
Cusp of the husband in the husband's chart and the 5th Cusp of
the wife in her chart If either of the horoscope alone is available
and the other is not available, l ben the 5th cusp shows whether
his or her health is all right and he or she is capable of having a
child or incapable of producing one. The 11th Cusp in that chart
shows whether the partner is promised children or not If die 5th
cusp shows that he can have and the 1 1th shows that the partner
cannot have, then he will have natural children outside. If the
lllh Cusp shows that the partner can have and the 5th cusp
denotes lhat he cannot have, then the wife can bring forth a child
to call him as father, though God knows that he is not It both
the 5th and 11 th Cusps promise progeny then they will both have:
the children bom may or may not be to the husband and ihe
husband also can have outside other than what ho havt
through his wife. If both the 51h and Ihe lllh cusps are nol
favourable, they will both be denied children, they need nol use
contraceptive methods.
In this case the 5th Cusp is in the sub of Venus and the
1 1th Cusp is in the sub of Sun. Both Venus and Sun are in the
8th house. 8th house is unfavourable. Therefore both are sterile.
No child can be had al all.
[In a few cases, the 5th Cusp will promise child birth. But
even for 10 years after marriage, they could not have had the
dasa and bhukti of the significators. When they conjointly
operate, they will have.]

CHANGE OF RESIDENCE
AND TRANSFER
Horoscope is as follows
Budha Dasa Balance 16 years 2 months 9 days.
Moon dasa started on 18-12-1968.
For transfer judge houses 3, 9 and 12 which includes
change of residence also. They should be connected with house
6 or 10. If connected with 11th house, it shows increase in
income and improvement in status.
Third house is vacant It is owned by Saturn; Pushy a,
Anuradha and Uthrapadra are governed by Saturn-Rahu is in
Afiuradha.
Ninth house is occupied by Jupiter, Mars, Saturn and
Venus. No planet is in Jupiter star. Mercury is in Mars star.

Rahu is in Saturn star : Saturn and Venus are in Venus star.
Rahu is in 12. No planet is in Rahu star. Rabu is the
strongest
When majority of planets denote a particular matter, how
to eliminate many and select those which will act. Mr.
Krishnamurti has said that a matter may be indicated by any
number of planets. That particular affair may be one which
repeats now and then in one's life, just like birth of child,
purchase of jewel, transfer, change of residence, journeys, etc.
Then the significators at the moment of judgment clearly shows
the immediate next repetition of the matter. In one's life birth
and death alone happen only once. Other affairs repeat
themselves according to one's horoscope.
Today it is Tuesday, ruled by Mars. Lagna is in Cancer,
owned by Moon, star is Poorvapadra governed by Jupiter, in
whose sign, at the time of judgment, Rahu is deposited who
represents Jupiler. Rasi is owned by Saturn. Hence Moon, Mars.
Rahu, Jupiter and Saturn are the significators. Lord of lagna is
the strongest and his dasa is on. Lord of star is represented by
Rahu. So, take Rahu Bhukti. Next select Jupiter, lord of the star,
i.e., Jupiter Anthra Saturn shookshma is the last sub sub period
(that is) it will be around 17lh August, 1970.

HIGHER STUDIES
The horoscope is as follows :
Moon Dasa balance 7 years 4 months 20 days.
For high school and college studies which need regular
attendance to leam the subjects by hearing the lecturers from the
beginning to the end, one is to judge the houses 4 and 1 1 . If one
has to work himself, do research, submit thesis etc., or if one is
to leave his native place, remain in a hostel in Ihe foreign land,
leaving his kith and kin and enjoying new surroundings and
environments, one is to judge the houses 9 and 12 and to come
out successful. 11th house significator should also be the
significator of either 9th or 12th house.

Here lagna is 3°42’ Scorpio. 9th house extends from 5°
40’ cancer to 8° 40’ Leo. Occupant is stronger than owner,
according to Krishnamurti, occupant of a constellation is
stronger than the lord of the constellation, constellation is
stronger than the sign. Occupant of a sign is stronger than the
lord of the sign. Planets conjoined with or aspected by a planet
gains the strength to offer those results which those planets
signify, thus a planet becomes the significator of a few matters,
the source of the result is shown clearly by the Bhava-house
occupied by the planet and the house or bouses which it owns
(owner of a house means owner of the sign where the cusp or
cusps of a bhava or bhavas fall).
Rahu is the occupant of the 9lh Bhava. Its constellations
are Arudhra, Swathi and Sathabisha. Sun and Ketu are in Rahu's
star (star, nakshathxa asterism, constellation are one and the
same).
Moon is the lord of the sign where 9th cusp falls. Kohini.
Hastham and Sravanam are governed by Moon. Moon, Sani and
Mercury are in Moon 's star.
When so many planets indicate a result, it means that they
are connected with this, 9th house results. If they happen also to
be the significator of 7th house also, it means, it is the 11th to
tbe 9th. 9th house indicates the father of the native ; hence the
7th house, which is the 11th to 9th indicates success in father's
attempts, cure from the disease and realisation of his ambition
also other than what it denotes the native, i.e. to have a partner
in life or to enter into a contract with another. Moon is in 7. It is
in its own constellation, so Moon indicates 9th and 7th house
matters. Saturn is in 7. Saturn is in Moon's star which occupies
7th house. So Saturn presages matters signified by 7th and also
the 9th house matters. Therefore during Moon and Saturn sub

periods not only the native will enjoy 7th and 9th houses matters,
but the native's father will achieve his aim.
As regards overseas, judge the house 12 as it promises,
separation from family, living in new surroundings and
environments. 12th house extends from 8° 40' Libra to 3° 40'
Scorpio. Sun is deposited in the 12th bouse.
Now one should remember that in everybody's horoscope
there are the houses 3, 9 and 12. there must be the significators
of 3, 9 and 12 at least two. Why ? any one planet may own the
houses 3 and 12 or 9 and 12 and the other can own the third house,
these two planets may not have any planet in their constellations
and also no planet in these 3 Bhavas. then only these two planets
will be the owners and significators. When every individual have
got at least 2 planets, why should not everybody make long
journeys go overseas and stay in the foreign land during their
conjoined periods and sub periods. Majority do not go overseas,
simply to satisfy themselves, just like what I did when I was very
young, they can take a big world map, spread it on the ground,
then stand where Africa is shown. Say, I am in Africa. Take away
the footsteps, keep them in Australia map and say "I am now in
Australia". lift your legs and keep where America is drawn. Say
"I am now in America". That is all. But the surrounding and
environments remain the same. One can go only when the sub
lord of the 12th cusp is connected in any manner with 3rd of 9th
house: preferably 9th house.
In this chart, 12th cusp is in 8 40' in Libra, the
constellation is ruled by Rahu; the sub is also governed by Rahu.
Rahu is in the 9th Bhava. If he would have been bom one minute
later, the sub lord will be Jupiter who is in the 8th Bhava, in the
constellation of the planet in which is Vyaya to the 9th house, in
which case he cannot go overseas.

If twins are born one with Rahu, as the sub lord of the 12th
house cusp and the other twin with the sub lord of the 12th cusp
as Jupiter, then even (hough
1. The planets are in the same bhava.
2. Dasa and Bhukti same.
3. Gochara same.
One enjoys and the other is disappointed.
(Guruji has discovered this truth, and he has handed down
most dimple sure, successful and scientific method for Ihe
benefit of those readers who make honest attempts with open
mind.)
Now let me request who had been writing, publishing or
talking in vain, to give out a method, Nadiamsas are those for
post-mortem - What can you predict ? Where is the cogent
Science ? Who is bene fitted by the sub division of a sign to
innumerable ones, where is the Science ? Now, al least, why
should not that learn and be useful to the querists instead of
offering vague and general tendencies. Let me tell such people
that many English- knowing traditional astrologers have
switched off traditional astrology and switched on to
Krishnamurti Padhdhati.
When two people have the same chart with less than 1/2
a degree differences in lagna position how can one differentiate,
without applying the useful Krishnamurti Padhdhati. As Rahu is
the lord of the sub of the 121h cusp, this native will and must live
in a foreign place.

When Rahu is the occupant of the 9th house in the
constellation Ketu in 3 it rs connected with land journeys, and
long journeys.
Hence this native has got the opportunity to go overseas.
Now comes the question of finding out the time of event.
1 1 will be Rahu Dasa Moon Bhukti Saturn Anthra.
How did I arrive al it? Here also guruji has given an
unfailing clue which has been discovered by him.
Now, consider the ruling planets at the momenl of
judgment.
Today it is Thursday, it is ruled by6 Jupiter. As a
node-Rahu- representative Jupiter by occupying his sign, take
Rahu Dasa.
Now the lagna that is rising in the East is 12 30’. It is
Saturn’s sign and moon constellation as the time is 6-51 a.m. on
Thursday 23-1-1969 at Madras.
Hence, Rahu acting as an agent of Jupiter, Saturn and
moon are the significators (Star is also Uthrapadra where Moon
transits and it is Jupiter sign Saturn star).
Hence you will go overseas during Rahu Dasa Moon
Bhukti Saturn Anthra, third week April 1973.
Health
The sub lord of the ascendant denotes whether one can
have good health or one is susceptible for diseases and will be a
weakling. Here the ascendant is 3 42y scorpio. It is in Saturn
constellation and Saturn sub. It shows that you are a chronic

patient, as Moon and Saturn are conjoined in the constellation of
Moon in Taurus in the 7lh house, you will suffer from troubles
in the throat and intestines. You take Vitamin* Unizyme etc.,
till your Rabu Dasa Mars Bhukti is over as Mars is in Mars
constellation, as Mars is in 1 1 also, during Mars Bhukti as the
significatorsof 6th house il will cause disease; as the significator
of 1 1th, it will give the cure. Generally people may think that the
period when Die operation is done especially successfully is a
bad period as it causes anxiety. They forget that the operation is
the main cause for cure. Only from the time of operation, the
disease disappears, normal health is regained. If sowing a seed
to bear good fruits is evil then operation is evil. Planets
connected with 6 and 8 bouses show danger. Planets connected
with 6 and 12 show confinement to bed, hospitalisation, isolation
etc. Planets connected with 6 and 1 1 promise ailment followed
by cure, as Mars indicates disease and cure and since Jupiter
Dasa follows, which is not connected with 6th house (to tall ill),
you will be cured during Rahu Dasa Mars Bhukti Venus Anthra
and thereafter, you will pick up health.

SUCCESS IN MEDICAL EXAMINATION AND VOYAGE OVERSEAS
Medical examination means that one medical officer or
more than one medical officer will examine you before issuing
a certificate, declaring that you are absolutely fit, that you are
not suffering from any bodily infirmity or incurable diseases
which are unfavourable for the nature of the work you have to
carry out or to go to a foreign country to work there, etc.
(Luckily, such a medical examination is not carried out on either
of the sexes before marriage, If such a bill is introduced, I am
sure many will remain unmarried due to congenital diseases like
rheumatic heart, enlarged heart, etc.): therefore, we have to
examine the 4th house to know whether there will be the medical
examination as you desire; then we have to see whether il will
be favourable or not ! 7th house represents the medical officer
whomsoever he is and the 10th to the 7th, that is the 4th house,
indicates his job which means yourself being examined; the 1 1th
house shows whether you will be given a good certificate to
make further attempts.
’’Please give a number within 249. H
”147 comes to my mind, Sir.”
’’What is the time now, please ?”

The following is the horoscope for judgment :
The 4th cusp falls in Aquarius 6 45' 20M, that is, it is in
Rabu sLar and Rahu sub. Rahu is not conjoined with any planet
but it is aspected by Venus who is the significator of the 11th,
the 7th and the 12th. Therefore, Rahu as the significator of Die
11th will allow you to appear before the medical officer for the
medical examination, as Rahu is in Saturn sign, you have to
appear more than once, since Saturn gives success after a few
attempts or examination.
Disease indicated by 6th; danger by 8th; defect by 12th.
Here, 12th house is not occupied by any planet but Venus is its
owner. Therefore, if it all, there is any defect it should be in the
vision especially in the left eye, since Venus is in the
constellation of Sun and sub of Moon; really, there should be
something wrong with your eye. But luckily Sun, Moon and
Jupiter are in the 11th house. Moon is in its own constellation
and Sun. It is in 11; Jupiter is in the constellation of Moon in 1 1
and sub of Sun 11. Sun is in the 1 1th house, in the constellation

of Mars and sub of Rahu. All planets are connected with the 10th
and 11th houses. Therefore, eventhough there is the defect in the
eye, yet you will get through the medical examination and your
desire will be fulfilled.
"Will 1 go overseas”? (Horary)
"Number 127.”
It means the lagna will be in Libra and its exact position
will be 2 40“ in Libra.
The other 11 cusps are calculated and are shown in the
horoscope given below :
The houses 3, 9 and 12 are to be judged to find out the
signifieators for going overseas ; and the sub lord of the 12th
cusp is to be judged to find out whether you will go at all to a

foreign land. The 12th cusp falls in Sun’s star and Venus sub;
Venus is in the constellation of Sun, sub of Moon; both Sun and
Moon are in the 12th house; Venus is to give the results of the
lord of the constellation Chandra which is in 12. Hence both the
lord of constellation and also the lord of the sub are connected
with 12th house. Hence life in a foreign place is sure; you must
As regards the signifieators of 3, 9 and 12, the 3rd house
is occupied by mars. 9th house is unoccupied; and 12th house is
occupied by Moon, Jupiter and Sun; when you find out the
signifieators, it will be seen lhat Sun is in the constellation of
Mars and Rahu is in the constellation of Jupiter and Jupiter is in
the constellation of Moon; whereas, Venus and Mercury are in
the constellation of Sun. Thus majority of the planets are
connected with the 12th house indicating that you must go.
’’Then when” is the nexl query.
At the time of the judgment, Moon Dasa balance is 9 years,
7 months, 2 days. Now Moon dasa Moon Bhukti is operating; in
that, you will get pass, visa, etc., during Moon dasa Moon Bhukti
Mercury anthra, lhat is after 7th November, 1969 and before
22nd December, 1969; your journey will be during Moon dasa
Moon Bhukti Ketu Anthra. Ketu is occupying Sun's sign, Venus
star; it is conjoined with Venus. Therefore, Ketu is stronger than
Venus and it has to give in its sub period, instead of Venus.
Therefore, Moon Dasa, Moon Bhukti, Ketu Anthra. You must
go. That is within 10th January, 1970.
Ruling planets:- Today, it is Venus day, Friday. Virgo
sign is passed by Moon; it is owned by Mercury; star is governed
by Moon, and according to the horary horoscope also these three
planets are Ihe strongest signifieators and so your going to

foreign is certain. You will leave Delhi on 28th December, 1969,
early morning. It will be a Sunday and the star also Aslesha ruled
by Mercury in Moon sign. The lagna will fall in Purvashada
Nakshatra which will be at the time of Sun rise. According to
transit, Sun will be in Ketu star Mercury sub ; Moon in Mercury
star, and Ketu will be in Venus star Sun sign.
Thus the two numbers which you have given one for
medical examination and the other* for stay in the overseas,
promise success and fulfilment of desire.

LABOUR PROBLEM
"Can I have peace of mind ? While applying for a job, the
servants commit in writing" I shall carry out the orders of my
superiors to their entire satisfaction. I am your most obedient and
faithful servant etc.". After some months, they join the union,
lead it and shout "Down with the Boss", "the officer must quit"
and so on. It has come to a stage that the life of the boss is in
danger. He cannot walk into his own office and enjoy my
freedom. "This is my situation" says an Industrialist.
So, to find out when the officer can enjoy peace of mind
and the subordinates will carry out the instructions, will be
disciplined and will run Die show with peace of mind, having
their enthusiastic co-operation, one is to judge in the following
manner.
Servants are indicated by the sixth house, when once the
union is formed, one is to take the 7th house to represent the
union as the proprietor is to transact with the union, a few
subordinates will continue to obey whereas a few will disobey.
This is shown by 6th house.
fulfilment of the desire of the union is indicated by the 5th
house; loss to the boss is shown by 5 and 12. Union loses its
claim if the houses 6 and 1 1 operate, as it will be the 12th and
5th to 7Ui house.
Let us take an example :
The following is the horoscope of a gentleman who is
running a show; let us judge why he has to face troubles now and

find out when it will be over. It was running peacefully all along.
The strike has come up nowadays.
Mars Dasa balance 0 year 10 months 3 days, entered into
Saturn Dasa Moon Bhukti on 4-6-1967. Jupiter sub sub period
will operate from 20-11-1967 and 6-2-1968.
Union is shown by the 7th house. It is occupied by Moon.
No planet is found in any of the three stars Rohini, Hastham and
Sravanam governed by Moon. Hence Moon indicates the union.
Moon is the opponent when it fights or claims more like a partner
in a business whereas the union, while co-operating is similar to
wife. (7th house denotes wife and also partner in business.
Will the union cause troubles or will it co-operate? Union
will non-co-operate if the signifieator of the 7ih house is
connected with 12th house. Moon in 7 is in the constellation of
Mars who owns the houses 5 and 12 : Mars is lord of 6 and 11
to 7th house and is in the 8th. Therefore during Moon Bhukti,
there should be trouble through the union especially during the
sub sub periods of Mars and planets or node in the constellation

of Mars, i.e. Rahu in Chithrai. These sub periods continue to run
till 20-11- 1967. Therefore there should be worry, headache and
suspicion.
Next sub sub operiod is ruled by Jupiter who is in the
constellation Sun, lord of 9 in 9 and is in the sub of Rahu. 9th
house indicates the Government and Sun also denotes
Government. Therefore the Government, i.e. the labour
Department will interfere and as Jupiter is in the sub of the node
in the 10th house, favourable orders will be passed and the
servants will realise the truth.
Normal conditions will prevail when Mercury sub sub
operates in Jupiter’s sub period, i.e. after 13-12-1967.
Discontentment and lack of enthusiasm will be found in
the servants, again, during Saturn sub sub period between
Thereafter, Mercury sub sub will once for all end the
troubles. Smooth running and satisfactory progress will be
enjoyed from 6-5-1968.
According to Western system, aspect of Jupiler lo the 6th
house and Venus in the 8th house show that the servants will be
faithful. Hence one can expect the sub ordinates lo be reliable
and helpful during Jupiter and Venus periods. The same ruler of
6 afflicted by Mars brings trouble and the servants will not
behave alright during Mars and Venus conjoined periods. Mars
spoils.

FOREIGN ASSIGNMENT
Birth of a native at Bangalore on 14/15-11-1917
Wednesday /Thursday al 21 Leo Lagna. Horoscope submitted is
as follows :
Uranus
Vmus
Rahu
Jupiler
Jupiler dasa ’
Balance j
3 years 1 1 months 12 days
Kelu
Neptune
Saturn
Mars
j Lagna 2 1
Moon
Mercury
QX Any foreign assignment?
Judge houses 2, 6, 10, 11 forpromoiion. the signifieators
must also be the signifieators of 9 and 12
No planet is in 2 or 6. But in 10, Ketu is posited in Gemini.
None in 1 1 .

Ketu also indicates the second and 11th house matters, as
it is lo represent Mercury who owns the houses 2 and 11. Ketu
is the lord of Aswani, Makha and Moola. Rahu is in Moola.
Lords of 2, 6, 10 and 11 are Mercury, Saturn and Venus.
Saturn is in Mercury star. Mercury is in Saturn star. Saturn will
give the results of both the 12th and the lord of 6, aspecting
houses 2, 6 and 9. Saturn is a strong significator for foreign
assignment Venus has Mars in its star and it is also posited in
its own constellation. Yet Rahu conjoined with Venus is
stronger.
Mars is lord of 9. It is in 12 and it is in the constellation
of lord of 10.
Moon is lord of 12 and is in the constellation of the planet
Therefore Rahu, Saturn, Moon and Mars are the strong
significators.
At the lime of birth Jupiter Dasa balance was 3 years 11
months 12 days.
So, from 27-10-1964, Venus Dasa is running.
To fix the time, note the ruling planets at the moment of
judgment Now the lagna is in Sravanam star on 13-11-1967 and
the constellation occupied by Moon is Uthrapadrapada ruled by
Saturn.
Therefore Moon Bhukti Saturn Anthra Rahu shookshma
will give the foreign assignment. Neither of them is retrograde.
So, it must happen. The actual time will be between 23-1-1970

and 6-2-1970 : mostly on 31-1-1970 you will have a foreign
assignment with increase in income and improvement in Status.
Q. 2. Any change In the immediate future?
As you are at present running Sukra Dasa Sukra Bhukti
upto 27-2- 1968, Ketu anthra will operate from 1 7-12-1967. Ketu
is in Gemini. It indicates the results of Rahu and Budha :
Therefore you will be given additional work, greater
responsibility and additional charge. It means that you will be,
as usual carrying on with ourpresent nature of work and you will
be asked to take up some other work also. Rahu behind Venus,
Mercury in the 12th sign to Venus may suggest a change
according to traditional system. But, it is not a change, as long
as you are attached to the original work also.
During Sun Bhukti, which is in die constellation of Jupiter
in the 9th house and Sun occupying a movable sign indicates
change in the nature of work during Venus Dasa Sun Bhukti
Jupiter Anthra in July 1968. This change is only in the nature of
allotment of the work. Only during Venus Dasa Moon Bhukti,
as mentioned above, promotion and foreign assignment are
indicated.
Wife's health: Uranus in 7 : Nervous and arthritis. Lower
abdominal region surgical aid ?
7th house shows wife : 61h therefrom indicates ailment ;
8th danger : 12th hospitalization. 6th is occupied by Saturn : It
owns the 12th house and aspects the 8th house. Mercury, lord of
5 and 8 is in Saturn star. Therefore wife's health is afflicted by
Saturn and Mercury i.e., the houses 1, 5, 8 and 12. Saturn shows
chronic ailment and wearing out of the system indicated by 5 and

8 houses due to Mercury. Hence generative system and the
rectum are affected.
Cure is indicated by the planet in 5 to your lagna which is
11 to the 7th. Venus is in its own star and is in 1 1 to 7. Venus
Dasa started on 27-10-1964. So, at once, you had it operated and
attempted to give a cure. (Dale of operation, November 1964.)
When Venus Dasa Sun Bhukti (in the constellation of lord
of 1 1 to 7) Jupiter anthra operates i.e., from July 1968, she will
have good health.
