READABLE DATASET
================================================================================
Original file: jyotish_your_true_horoscope_kp_rectification_s_p_khullar.json
Dataset number: 245 of 455
Format: valid JSON
Structure: Object / structured dataset
Original size: 352,922 bytes
Top-level fields: 11
Title: Jyotish_your true horoscope_KP rectification_S.P. Khullar
Creator: —
Date: —
Description: —

CONTENT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
METADATA AND OTHER FIELDS
  • title: Jyotish_your true horoscope_KP rectification_S.P. Khullar
  • creator: —
  • date: —
  • description: —
  • subject: —
  • identifier: —
  • source_folder: Surya Siddhanta XML
  • total_pages: 418
  • total_words: 63749
  • text_quality:
    • ocr_word_validity_score: 0.974
    • quality_tier: good
    • note: —

FULL TEXT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Your T rue Horoscope
(Birth Time Rectification)
Revised and Enlarged
S.P. Khullar
I.T.S.
G.M. Telecommunications (Rtd.)

Acknowledgment
The revised and enlarged edition of the book on "Your True
Horoscope" has been written, like my earlier books on Astrology,
under the spell of inspiration and guidance of the Supreme
Intelligence. The effort has consumed lot of my vitality and
affected my health adversely. However, I remained focused in
my approach due to sincere and awe-inspiring devotion of my
wife, friends and students of True Astrology. I sincerely thank
them all. My special thanks to my senior students Mr RS Chani
and Mr Roopeshwar Gupta. Both of them had worked on the
manuscript with full dedication to ensure that the book is released
without any technical error.
I am equally grateful to Mrs Sandy L Crowther of USA and
Mr Ron Gaunt of Brisbane, Australia.They have always provided
me the required motivation to undertake this work.
Sagar Publications has shown the skill and professionalism
they have attained during the years. They have brought the
revised and enlarged edition of my book "Your True Horoscope"
in amazingly short time without sacrificing quality. I express my
sincere thanks to the
S.P. Khullar
I.T.S.

Contents
S. Title Page
No. No.
Acknowledgement v
Introduction ix
Preface to Second Edition xra
1. Human Being and Astrology 1
• Modern Gynecologists opinion on Human Birth
• Human Being and the view point of Vedanta
• Human Being and Astrology
2. Theories of Rectification of Birth Time 20
• Tattva Sidhant or Nadi Theory of Rectification
• The Pre-Natal Epoch Theory
• Varaha Mihira and Others Views on Lost
Horoscopes
3. The Ruling Planets and Construction 42
of Horoscopes
• Ruling Planets and Schools of Thought
• Application of Ruling Planets and Construction
of Horoscope
• Calculation of Moon's period in a day

Your True Horoscope (Birth Time Rectification)
4. Construction of True Horoscope 91
• Formation of Ascendant
• Formation of other cuspal positions
• Rectification of Cuspal positions to reflect genetical
connections
• Composite Approach to Rectification of Chart
5. Advanced Technique of 252
Birth Time Rectification
Use of RFfe
Promise of Various Aspects of Life
Promise of Execution of Events
Timing Significant Events
Role of Dasa Period Lords for Significant Events
Role of Transit
Fixing Dasa period lords and Transit for specific
events
Conditions for Immediate Death
Moment of Event-Formation of ascendant
Rectification of Birth Charts of Twins 340
• Special Conditions for Twins Charts
Index 403

Introduction
The sacred science of Astrology is based
on the doctrine of reincarnation and laws of
Karma. It essentially recognizes that the human
being consists of body, mind and soul. To the
Astrologer the heavens form the Macrocosm
and man the Microcosm. Man is an exact copy
of the universe, a little world or miniature of the
great world around him. Astrology believes in s.P. Khullar
the three great truths as stated by the Author
of "The Idyll of the White Soul" as follows:
The Soul of man is immortal.
The principle, which gives life dwell in us and without us, is
undying and eternally beneficent.
Each man is his own absolute lawgiver.
The concept of human being as body, mind and Soul has
been expressed not only by the Astrologers or the metaphysists
but also found expression in the writing of all the evolved souls in
the universe. The poet Longfellow has beautifully expressed his
belief in the existence of the soul in the famous poem, 'A psalm of
life'.
Tell me not, in mournful numbers,
Life is but an empty dream!-
Forthe soul is dead that slumbers,
And things are not what they seem.

Your True Horoscope
Life is real! Life is earnest!
And the grave is not its goal,
Dust thou art, to dust retunes,
Was not spoken of the soul....
John Greenleaf Whittier has expressed his belief in rebirth in
Raphael as under:
The Tissue of the Life to be
We weave with colors of our own,
And in the field of Destiny
We reap as we have sown.
To understand the true purport of Astrology, it is imperative
that we should understand how the human being is born. This
has been explained in the first chapter. The time that the
incarnating soul chooses to take possession of a particular body
in a particular family, in particular socio-economic, natural
environment based on its past Karmas and Sanskans (tendencies)
is called the Astrological Birth Time. It defies the capability of the
doctor to note it. However, it has to be closely linked with
the first breath the child takes when it conies out of the
womb of the mother.
It is the responsibility of the Astrologer to fix it and construct
the true horoscope of the native. The true horoscope has to be
unique for each individual. It should simulate conditions to reflect
the native's heredity, individuality, personality, state of health,
longevity, name and fame, virtues, capacity to face struggle of
life, social, financial, marital, educational, and professional status.
It is, therefore, imperative that we need to place the correct
degree, minutes and seconds on each of the twelve cuspal
positions. Howto do this has been explained in this book.

Introduction
x\
The reader's dedication, devotion and the open-minded
approach will bring rewards. However, let us not forget that our
success in efforts to construct true horoscope is largely
dependant on the accuracy of the software, which we use for
the calculation of planetary and cuspal positions. It may be noted
that the author has used True position of Rhau and Ketu
in constructing the horoscopes. Programme is set to
convert Latitude to geo centric values.
No doubt blessed ones alone can discover what is hitherto
unknown. I have only made a sincere and dedicated attempt to
dig out and revive our true concepts of Astrology. The aspiring
reader will doubtlessly find the methods of rectification of birth
chart elaborated in this book as an exposition of sound techniques
based on scientific analysis.
S.P. Khullar
I.T.S.

Preface to Second Edition
Two new chapters have been added namely advanced
techniques of birth time rectification, and rectification of birth
charts of Twins. These chapters are written taking into
consideration the research findings of the author regarding the
concept of promise for various aspects of life and the execution
of promises based on the concept of progression. The concept
of progression is based on the philosophy of Vimsottary Dasa
progression. Theory of timing events defines clearly that an event
happens when Dasa period lords of fruitful significators run, transit
supports and the progressed ascendant and progressed chart
confirms the event. .In addition to the new chapters author has
also briefly discussed the views of Varah Mihira and others on the
subject of casting horoscopes for those who have no known
birth details.
Index has also been added. It may be noted that charts in
Chapter V and VI are cast using T rue Astrology Software Version
4.3 using Khullar (Hourly) Ayanamsa.
S.P. Khullar
I.T.S.
G.M. Telecommunications (Rtd.)

Chapter 1
Human Being and Astrology
Every human being is a unique person born with a particular
psychophysical constitution. According to modern biology
heredity and environment are the two principal factors in the
origin and development of an individual. The metaphysists on
the other hand recognize the existence of body, mind and soul.
According to them each man has his own personal consciousness
entrenched in his body and gets into touch with his surroundings
only through his body and senses, and the mind using the senses.
If Astrology has to be a true science, the horoscope of each
individual has to be unique and it must simulate conditions that
can account for his heredity and genetical connections, and also
what the metaphysists have to say about human birth and cause
for individual differences and also the life pattern of each individual.
Modern Gynecologists Opinion of Human Birth
Human body, according to the modern biology, consists of
innumerable minute cells that are responsible for its structure
and function. As noted by Dr. Ville, "The cell theory includes the
concept that the cell is the fundamental unit of both function
and structure - the fundamental unit that shows all the
characteristics of living things." Each living cell contains a number
of component parts, one of which is called protoplasm; in the
nucleus of the cell are threads like structures, called chromosomes.
There are a definite or fixed number of chromosomes in every

Your True Horoscope
cell of a creature and the number of chromosomes in every cell
varies from species to species.
For example, every human cell contains forty-six
chromosomes. Flowever, the germ cell of every species contains
only half the number of chromosomes in any other cell so that
when the chromosomes of the male and female germ cells unite,
a new cell is formed that contains the correct total number of
chromosomes for the species. For example, each germ cell of
man and woman, carries twenty-three chromosomes and when
those unite, their total number in every cell of a human body
becomes forty-six. Further, each one of the chromosomes is
composed of a large number of entities, called genes. Each gene
is supposed to control some characteristics in the individual.
Embryology of Man
Prof. Otto Grosser in his book "Outline of Fluman
Embryology" has divided embryology of man into three phases:
1 . Progenesis or Primordial Development: It comprises the
maturation of sex cells and the process of fertilization.
2. Blastogenesis or Embryonic Development: It comprises
the embryonic development from fertilization to the
development of primitive organs.
3. Organogenesis: It is the development of individual organs
in the embryo.
How Conception Takes place?
The reproduction cell in the male body is called the sperm
and the reproduction cell in the female body is called the ovum
or egg. For the birth of a human being, the fertilization of the
ovum and sperm is a pre-requisite. In female just one egg (Ovum)

Chapter 1 : Human Being and Astrology
ripens every month and is released from one of the ovaries
(alternately from each ovary). This happens in the middle of the
menstruation cycle i.e. from 13 to 18 days from the day of
menstruation. After the release the Ovum remains alive for 1824 hrs. The sperm, on the other hand, is contained in the semen
released by the male at the time of orgasm. There is about 100300 million sperms in each ejaculate and only one meet the ovum
to cause conception. Fig 1 .1 explains how conception takes place.
FERTILISED
EGG DIVIDES
FERTILISED
EGG
FALLOPIAN TUBE
OVARY
Fig 1.1
After intercourse the sperms ascend the uterus and enter
the fallopian tubes to meet the ovum travelling in the opposite
direction. The fertilization (meeting of sperm and ovum) has taken
place in the left fallopian tube. The fertilization brings about a new
cell called zygote, the fertilized egg, which develops into an
individual in due course.
Thus, according to current biology the starting point of an
individual's life is the zygote produced by the fusion of the nuclei
of the male and the female reproduction cell. The fertilized egg
contains twenty-three chromosomes from the male parent and
twenty-three from the female parent. The heredity units, the
genes, of both lies within. The chromosomes and genes function
as a single unit. Dobzhansky in his book "The Biology of Ultimate
Concern" says, "A child receives one half of the genes of his
father and one-half of the maternal ones; which particular

Your True Horoscope
maternal and parental genes are transmitted to a given child is a
matter of chance. Which mutations occur, and when and where,
is also a matter of chance." Julian Huxley supports the theory of
chance when he says/ "Egg and sperm carry the destiny of
generations. The egg realizes one chance combination with
millions of pairs of sperms, each one actually different in the
combination of cards which it holds". It is, according to him, only
a chance that a particular sperm fertilizes the ovum to produce a
genius or a moron.
Sex of the Child: According to the biologists, the sex
chromosomes in man (sperm) carry x y- chromosomes while in
a woman (egg or ovum) it is only x x- chromosomes. The sex of
the baby depends upon which sperm fertilizes the egg. When an
x-carrying sperm fertilizes the egg, the baby will be x or a girl.
And if a y-carrying sperm fertilizes the egg, the baby will be x y or
a boy. Since the female only carries x x-chromosomes, it would
appear as if the father were the sex determining factor, although
it is not impossible that the power of attraction present in the
ovum give preference to one or the other. Biologists, however,
have no clue and attribute it to a chance factor only.
Critical Review of Biologists Opinion of Human
Birth
The biologists opinion is based on the principle that 'like begets
like'. As you sow, so shall you reap? Humans are born of human
parents. The tendency of the individuals to resemble their
progenitors is called heredity. This resemblance, however, does
not exclude individual variations. Heredity, in a wide sense, is
inclusive of both similarity and divergence. Every creature despite
the resemblance it bears to its progenitors retains its individuality.
Modern geneticist has not been able to find a satisfactory solution

Chapter 1 : Human Being and Astrology
of the problem of variations. Neither heredity nor
environment, not even their interaction, can explain the
birth and growth of an individual. This theory also fails to
account for the birth of geniuses out of mediocre parents
or the birth of morons of normal parents. The birth of a
genius or a prodigy cannot be termed as a chance. The geneticists
have, in fact, now come to the conclusion that life cannot be
synthesized by the synthesis of genes. Szent-Gyorgi, the Nobel
Prize winning chemist, has rightly said, "In search for the secret
of life, I ended up with atoms and electrons which have no life at
all. Somewhere along the line, life has run out through my fingers.
So, in my old age I am now retracing my steps".
Human Being and the viewpoint of Vedanta
The Vedantic concept of human birth is based on the doctrine
of reincarnation that is a complement to the doctrine of Karma.
According to this philosophy death is not the end of an individual
nor is birth the beginning of him. Man is not just a physical, or a
biophysical, or a psychophysical being. Man has a body, mind
and soul. An individual functions as an organized system because
of the co-ordination of these three primal constituents. The real
man is the knowing self, the central principal of consciousness,
which is the unchanging witness of the changing condition of
the body, organs, the mind and the external world. An individual's
mind is distinct from the self and the body as well, although closely
associated with both.- It is the identity of the mind that maintains
one's individuality beyond death and rebirth. Hence the child's
mind cannot be a fragment of the parental mind. Neither it can
arise from either parent's body or self, being different by nature
from both. According to this philosophy every individual brings
his own mind and develops his own way.

Your True Horoscope
How is an Individual Born?
The Vedantic view of human birth, as already said above, is
based on the theory of reincarnation. So birth accordingly is
considered only as a rebirth of one of the many individuals who
died somewhere some time back. At death, the self, the real
man, leaves the physical body, but retains the subtle and
the casual body. The mind with all its content belongs to
the subtle body. In Gita, Lord Krishna explains that manifestation
or descent of a soul in a particular body, family and environment
depends upon the soul's earlier impressions or predispositions,
resulting from its past births. The next life of a being is determined
by what resolves he has at the time of its death i.e. according to
those impressions (volitional actions, experiences, and thoughts)
that become prevalent in the mind of the dying man. Very fine
physical vesture for the subtle and the casual body is
formed at the time of his departure from the gross body.
This fine garb carries the potencies of the next gross body
he assumes. Through food, he enters the body of the male
parent suitable for his purpose. There he gets into the requisite
sperm, which turns into potent seed for his development as an
individual. This is the seed that being united with the appropriate
ovum in the female parent turns into zygote and becomes ready
for germination. These are the two specialized male and female
reproductive cells that are responsible for the birth of the offspring
out of countless sperms and ova that are brought into play in
sexual reproduction. In other words, we say that led by its Karma
the transmigrating soul gets into the requisite sperm and ovum
out of countless reproductive cells. The fusion of the sperm and
the ovum required for its physical body is by no means a matter
of chance. It is, as a matter of fact based on the law of cause and
effect in the form of the law of Karma.

Chapter 1 : Human Being and Astrology
Heredity cannot logically explain the difference in the inborn
aptitudes of the individuals. The doctrine of reincarnation,
sequence to the law of Karma, alone provides the satisfactory
explanation of the inequalities of life. An individual's weakness and
excellences, knowledge and ignorance, rise and fall depend
primarily on his own past thoughts and deeds. No external
agency, parentage or divine dispensation, chance or fate, is
responsible for them. It is the interplay of the body, the mind,
and the self (soul) in human personality that accounts for the
development of the individual. According to Vedanta, the
development means unfoldment of inherent potency.
What lies latent in the cause becomes manifest as the
effect. Heredity and genetical connections account only
for the physical aspects of the individual like colour, shape,
and resistance to various diseases etc.
Human Being and Astrology
Astrology is based on the doctrine of reincarnation and law
of Karma as declared by the metaphysists. It recognizes that the
human being essentially consist of body, mind and soul. Our
ancients found that the planets & the zodiac accounts for the
reincarnation of the soul, its selection of the body and
environment and its evolution in the material universe. The
ancients declared the significations of the planets, the zodiacal
degrees and the houses of the horoscope on the basis of the
three cosmic principles viz law of polarity, law of elements and law
of mode of action. It is believed that "The universe proceeds
from thetattvas; it goes into the tattvas; it vanishes into
the tattvas". The zodiac as a limiting circle of the earth's aura is
the field and storehouse of all that was, is, and is to be. It is the
battlefield of Arjuna, the playground of the Logos, and the stage
upon which the great drama of life is enacted. The planetary

Your True Hordscope
spirits are the players, and the principal actors in the drama. Even
the minutest part of the zodiac represents firstly a particular state
of matter, secondly a characteristic mode of motion and thirdly a
coordinated type of consciousness or self. These three, the matter,
the motion and the consciousness, correspond and agree. They
are connected with the fundamental classification of Self, Notself, and the relation between them. The creative life proceeds
from the self and runs through the other two, and upon this fact
all the laws of Astrology are based.
Astrological Explanation of Human Birth
At the time of death, the Astral Body (The Etheric
Double) leaves the physical vehicle and returns to a
condition more similar to its own nature but carries with
it its wishes, choices and aspirations. Human being is a
"Divine Fragment", a center within the universal divine
consciousness, inseparably united with every other center, and
all blended in one ultimately by the universal life and consciousness
in which they are centered. When the spiritual impulse towards
fresh experience and unfoldment becomes potent once more,
then it will descend into a body at a time when the celestial
conditions resemble itself, its wishes, choice and aspirations. The
soul brings its various faculties with it when it is born upon this
earth, but its possibility of using them effectively depends upon
the kind of body that is given to it; and because character
determines fate to a very large extent, the type of body decides
what the man's career will be, his good and evil fortune, his success
and failures. The plan of body, therefore, varies according to the
kind of character to be expressed by the soul and the kind of
experience it is destined to pass through during its lifetime in the
body. Lords of karmas decide the plan of the body and the
environment into which it will be born. It may be remembered
that the casual body is the only vehicle that is permanent

Chapter 1 : Human Being and Astrology
throughout the whole cycle of the human pilgrimage. It
continues life after life and contains all the seeds, good
and bad, of each earthly existence, and upon the entry
into each new physical life these seeds awaken out of
latency and give forth their vibratory powers, aroused into
activity by the stimulation of the Ego. Astrology, the sacred
science, takes this into consideration and offer the satisfactory
explanation of human birth.
Selection of Time of Conception
Astrology treats the problem of conception and maternity
both in the light of modern gynecological knowledge and the
metaphysists view of human birth. Led by its Karma the
transmigrating soul gets into the requisite sperm and ovum out
of countless reproductive cells. The fusion of the sperm and ovum
required for its physical body is by no means a matter of chance.
The time of fertilization of the egg, the selection of sperm
and ovum has to account for the plan of body that the
soul has to use as its vehicle. Conception takes place at a
time represented by the most minute division of the rising sign at
the place of conception and the planets co-ruling this minute
division of the rising sign accounts for the seed cast in the cosmic
soil or Ether to unfold its latent qualities, of which the individual
then born is supposed to absorb more or less according to the
powers of response and stage of soul-evolution. The selection of
the time of the epoch is controlled by the planets as per their
position in the zodiac to simulate the plan for the body as per the
lords of Karma. What the planets represent are indicated below:
i) The planet Sun symbolizes cosmic life or consciousness or
spark of divinity (self), which afterwards becomes the
separated life of body, mind and soul. It supplies Prana or
vital force.

Your True Horoscope
ii) The planet Moon represents the Not-self. It represents in the
body the lower part of the brain, the spinal cord and the
sympathetic system and is closely connected with the senses.
It denotes the interaction between thought and feeling, or
the psychic nature with all its rapid and fluctuating moods
and changes of consciousness. In its Sub-influence under
Jupiter, it represents the Etheric Aura. Moon governs the
whole of personality and the etheric double of the physical
body and may be said to act as the vehicle for influence
handed down from the astral and mental planes. Moon rules
over the Water tattva that affects the Etheric double upon
which the physical cells are built.
iii) The planet Jupiter is called the seed planet of the physical
plane. When the physical body is dropped at death, all that
is latent in the earthy signs is preserved in the influence of
the planet Jupiter and carried upward to the next vehicle of
manifestation, so that on the astral plane we have the
influence of its own triplicity plus that of Jupiter.
iv) Mercury represents the cerebral-spinal nervous system.
v) The planet Saturn is called the Antha Karana. The whole fate
of an incarnation depends on whether Antha Karana (Saturn)
will be able to restrain the Kama-Manas (Mars) or not. Saturn
rules over the tattva Vayu that is often spoken of as the
Auric Egg, the preserver of every Karmic record. This Auric
Egg itself, regarded as vehicle, is under the dominant influence
of Jupiter.
vi) Mars governs the personal feelings, the animal soul, and the
consciousness of our emotional body as the sum total of all
our varying moods, sensations and feelings.
vii) Venus is often linked with Kama -Rupa, which is the vehicle
of desires and passions.

Chapter 1:
Human Being and Astrology 1 1
The element ruling at the moment of conception
decides the sex of the child as per the wishes of the
incarnating Soul.
Development of Embryo
It is believed that the soul does not enter into the fertilized
egg but remains in touch with it unconsciously and various
currents of energy flowing down the soul that plays a part in the
shaping of the body or what we call the development of Embryo.
Thus the moment of epoch truly speaking is the moment
at which the Ego is prepared to enter into this world.
During the period of Gestation only the plastic forces, the etheric
body, are active in the body in a state of development. During
this development, there are three factors at work upon the
embryo. These are:
A. The forces of heredity, contained in the fertilized ovum.
B. The plan given by the lords of Karma in accordance with
which the artificial elemental builds the body.
C. The influence of the incoming soul, generally exercised
unconsciously.
Gestation and Planetary Influence
The average length of human gestation is 40 weeks (280
days), but a good deal of variation from this is possible. A week is
one quarter of the Moon's revolution. The birth of human being
is regulated by Moon. The following synodical revolutions, if taken
in simple proportions, measure close to the period of gestation,
280 days.

Your True Horoscope
A synodical revolution is the time intervening between two
conjunctions with the Sun, or the time that elapses before the
return to the same relative position in the zodiac with regard to
Sun, as seen from the earth. The table shows that 9 Vi mean
synodical revolutions of the Moon measure 281 (280.54 days
exactly) or within one day of the normal period of gestation. 2
V2 synodical revolutions of the Mercury measures 290 days. Half
the period of Venus gives 292 days. The other planets give either
a little more or little less than normal; the average of the whole
being 281 days, a very close approach to the 280 days
demanded by medical science.
If the column headed "Synodical Revolution" is added up
and an average taken, it will amount to 376.514 days. Three
fourth of this average is 282.386 days, which is again a very
close approach to the average of 280 given by medical men.
The fact speaks loudly of the close connection between heavenly
bodies and the period of gestation.

Chapter 1:
Human Being
and Astrology 13
Role of planets in Gestation Period
The planets that control the period of gestation or
pregnancy are indicated below;
First Month: Venus rules it. The embryo continues to be in
a fluid state.
Second Month: Mars governs it. Embryo solidifies.
Third Month: Jupiter rules over it. Limbs are formed.
Fourth Month: Sun governs it. Bones are formed.
Fifth Month: Moon supplies the skin.
Sixth Month: Saturn allows hairs to grow.
Seventh Month: Mercury develops nervous system.
Eight Month: Lord of the Epoch Ascendant rules over it.
Umbilical cord takes food to the Child.
Ninth Month: Sun governs it. Fetus feels thirst and hunger.
Tenth Month: Moon rules it. Ready for delivery.
From the above, it should be clear that the development of
the embryo into the child is under the influence of planets, which
alone according to their position in the zodiac at the time of epoch
will account for the normal or defective growth.
Astrological Birth Time and Formation of
Horoscope
The Astrological moment of birth is that moment at
which the soul takes possession of the body. It is difficult
to measure but is closely related to the first breath the
child takes after coming out of the mother's womb. The
selection of the time of birth is controlled by the life giving planet

Your True Horoscope
Sun (Self) and Moon (Not-self) and the position of planets in the
various but specified degrees of the zodiac. As Varahamihir said,
"The planets offer a lawful channel for the outward operations of
cause-effect equilibrium that man has set into motion in the past
as a free agent." Corresponding to the birth time a particular
degree, minutes and seconds will rise in the eastern
horizon at the place of birth. This we call as Ascendant.
Based on the zodiacal degree of the Ascendant and the latitude
and longitude of the place of birth, other Cuspal positions are
formed. The planets occupy specific positions in the Zodiac as
they ought to occupy according to the predetermined plan based
on lords of Karma and under the guidance of Supreme
Intelligence. Our soul or inner mind is carrier of our Kaunas, both
past and present but it is our body, which is responsible for the
execution of Karma or bear the fruits of our past and present
Karmas, The formation of the horoscope has to be such that it
explains completely the pattern of unfoldmentof the incarnated
soul in the material universe. The zodiac represents the
storehouse of cosmic energy. The planets according to their
position in the zodiac attain the necessary energy content and
their linkages through Star, Sub & Sub-Sub etc. with the various
cuspal positions in the horoscope indicate the manner in which
they are going to provide results as per the lords of Karma. Cuspal
positions that are formed corresponding to the position of the
Ascendant are the concrete expressions of mundane affairs of
life in the physical body. The houses may be equated to matterthe body-which operates under the law of ultimate dissolution
and the zodiacal degrees rising on the Ascendant and other cuspal
positions may be equated to represent the real man. The concept
of Destiny or Fate is based on the fact that the birth of
human beings takes place according to the theory of
incarnation. There has been ample proof for this concept of
incarnation. However, we safely forget that the theory of

Chapter 1:
Human Being and Astrology 15
incarnation has also an inbuilt and latent element. This element
specifies that each new incarnation is step forward in the evolution
of the soul. If we were to enjoy the fruits of past Karmas alone
then how could evolution take place?
The record of past karmas is contained in the physical-etheric
nucleus called "permanent particle' by Charles Leadbeater and
Annie Besant. It is analogous to DNA in the bio-molecular body.
The physical-etheric body provides an electromagnetic matrix
which plays a critical role in the morphogenessis of the physical
bio-molecular body. The physical-etheric nucleus enables the
transfer of information from one body to another body during
the death process.
Unfortunately in the recent past the emphasis in astrology
has been based only on the physical concept of human being.
We know that human being is a composite being of
spirit(Purusha,the spark of Divinity, a part of Universal
consciousness, soul or causal body). the subtle' body
(Antakaran.the etheric double and astral body), the gross physical
body. It has been discovered by Prof.Czizivyeski of Moscow that
surrounding our physical body there is an electrostructure which is called as the etheric double e.t.c. The
subtle bodies are as much a part of our reality as are the
physical ones. The subtle body, in fact, is in the real sense
our functional body. It is electrical in nature and has lines of
' force which act as channels for the flow of energy received from
the causal body to the physical body.
The laws of true Astrology were based on this concept of
human being, This theory if studied in detail clearly points out
the role of past karmas and future dispositions. The quantum
and quality of energy apportioned to the native at the time of
incarnation is indicated by the zodiacal degree rising at the Ascdt.
Its channelizing is indicated by the linkages established by the

Your True Horoscope
SSL of the various cuspal positions. The nature of the SSLs as
modified by the signs in which they are placed in the chart indicates
the limiting factors for the growth of the native. Let me refer to
James Hillman " AcornTheory
Hillman's central thesis, illustrated by several fine biographical
sketches, is that "remarkable" peopie, ranging from serial killers
to renowned artists, are born, not made. This flies in the face of
conventional psychological wisdom which says that early
childhood conditioning is the greatest determinant of what a
person will make of himself years down the road. To the contrary,
Hillman asserts that it is "neither nature nor nurture" (neither
genetics nor environment) that dictates the outcome of a life.
Rather, it is an innate quality possessed by each person, the spark
of individuality that, like a master code for a person's life,
determines the direction in which he will pursue his destiny.
Hillman favors the Greek term daimon as a substitute for the
complementary notions of "guardian angel", spirit, or soul, all of
which imply an over-arching intelligence that provides a road
map for the life. This is the "soul's code". Thanks to the daimon,
the adult's true fate is already known to the child, and it is this
knowledge that guides the child unerringly, despite all the obstacles
imposed by parental and societal norms, in the inevitable direction
of its fate.
Hillman calls this his "acorn theory", which proposes that
each life is animated by a particular image that calls it to its destiny.
Plant an acorn in a corn field; it produces an oak, not a corn
stalk. Let mother encourage or discourage, it makes no matter,
the little child-soul knows where it's going and will have its way in
time. The daimon is in the driver's seat,
Readers with an appreciation for astrology might well wonder
whether the "soul's code", this animating image conferred by

Chapter 1:
Human Being and Astrology 17
fate, could be an academic euphemism for the astrological birth
chart. Although Hillman never gives his readers an explicit nod in
this direction, his occasional references to astrology encourage
us to believe that he is familiar with its basic principles and practices.
He is perhaps even sympathetic when he says, "There is in each
of us a longing to see beyond what our usual sight tells us. A
revelation of the invisible in an intelligible form leads us to the
astrologer." That the soul's code is indeed locked in the chakra of
the birth chart
The physical Constitution (structure and size) and
colour of a person is controlled by one's genes. The
selection of one's genes is the prerogative of one's soul
(casual body). But unfortunately some Astrologers puttoo much
emphasis on the Ascendant to declare- the physical aspects of
the native like colour etc. This has been my concern. The colour,
size and structure of the body are under the control of DNA
theory. DNA and hereditary, however, play role in the formation
of the horoscope too, How could we predict about the diseases
due to genetical disorder or what we call hereditary diseases?
The casual body first creates the Astral and etheric body
as per karmic code. This etheric body is implant in the
womb of the selected mother. The development of the
child in the womb of the mother and also after birth is as
per the quality of this etheric body. The etheric body, in
fact, is our real functioning body. The modern scientist has
explained it by the concept of electro-structure surrounding the
physical body of each living organism. Its function is best explained
by the concept of Chakras or psycho spiritual centers. There
are seven chakras and each chakra is linked to a particular
endocrine gland. Any imbalance in any chakra creates an
impact on the functioning of a particular gland and these
results in the malfunctioning of a particular system in the

Your True Horoscope
body. In the horoscope each cuspal position represents certain
aspects of the individual's life. The Ascendant stands for one's
individuality, personality, temperament, physical body, state of
health, longevity, name and fame, virtues, capacity to face
struggles of life, direction and aspects of life in which the native
will channelise his energies; proneness to accidents or untoward
happenings. Ascendant, in other words, reflects the quality and
quantum of energy apportioned to the native according to which
he executes the Karma or bears the fruits of the Karma. In
Astrology energy content is a concept that defies qualitative or
quantitative measurement as is understood by a student of
Physics. To understand this concept one needs to understand
the theory of Human birth based on the Theory of Incarnation.
Horoscope is a map which depicts the Karmic potential of the
soul that incarnates. Monad (single celled micro organism)
contains information of previous lives of the soul that incarnates
in an electromagnetic matrix. Karmic potential is the balance sheet
of native's past karmas and future dispositions. This is what we
mean by energy content. To an Astrologer its measure is nothing
but the sum total of the static and dynamic significations of the
Planets that co-rule the Ascdt. Nature of Planets is studied against
the backdrop of the Zodiac.
Planets play the role of actors according to the script
written by Supreme Intelligence and under the direction
of the Divinity within him. The innate quality of these
Actors i.e. Planets is defined by their zodiacal degree
positions and the nature of their role is as per their house
significations. Study of the Ascendant, therefore, is the
study of the whole horoscope in brevity.
In the horoscope, the houses 1, 4, 7 and 10 are called
Angular houses. These are directly connected with the physical
and external world, and represent outgoing activities originating

Chapter 1:
Human Being
and Astrology 19
in the Self but affecting the Not-Self very directly. They generally
show the nature of things that must be openly expressed, and
therefore denote the name, reputation, public position, and
general activities more clearly and definitely then any of the other
houses.
The houses 2, 5, 8 and 1 1 are called the Succedent houses.
These are connected with desire, feeling, and emotion and with
the guna Tamas. Experiences and characteristics based upon
planets linked to these houses tend to continue unchanged or
with the minimum of alteration for long periods, sometimes all
through the life.
The houses 3, 6, 9and 1 2 are called Cadent or Mental houses.
These houses show how thought guides and directs both action
and desire.
Each incarnated soul has its own secret. It stands
revealed only by the minute divisions of the Zodiac that
rise on each of the twelve cuspal positions and the minute
divisions of the Zodiac, which influence each planet. The
horoscope cast and analysed on cuspal interlinks basis
will simulate and reveal conditions to represent the unique
life pattern of the individual.

Chapter 2
Theories of Rectification of
Birth Time
Birth time is the foundation of any radical (natal) chart. No
matter how correctly a given birth time has been stated by a
doctor, it is no guarantee for the exact astrological moment of
birth of the native. The horoscope of the native has to be a
unique portrait that should clearly simulate the conditions to
represent the native's individuality, personality, temperament,
state of health, longevity, field of education, professional activities,
genetical connections etc. Since each individual is unique, the
Astrological moment of birth has to be fixed to produce a unique
horoscope. This moment may be intimately related to the
physical moment of birth (the first breath), but is of a
spiritual nature that determines the quality and quantum
of energy apportioned to the native according to which
he executes the Karma or bears the fruits of the Karma.
To fix the Astrological moment of birth forms a primary and
essential process in the field of astrology. It is a vexed problem
and defies easy solution. Astrologers have used various theories
to fix the correct birth time. Some of the important theories are:
1. Tattva Sidhant or Nadi Theory of Rectification
2. Pre-Natal Epoch Theory of Rectification
3. Varaha Mahira's Views on Lost Horoscopes
4. The Ruling Planets and Construction of Horoscope

Chapter 2: Theories of Rectification of Birth Time 21
5. Rectification to Match genetical connections, Promise of each
cusp and Dasa and Transit potential of planets to justify
events
In this chapter we will explain Nadi Theory of Rectification,
PNE Theory of Rectification and Varaha Mihira's Views on Lost
Horoscopes. Theories at SI. Nos.4 and 5 are dealt in detail in
chapter 1 1 1 and chapter IV respectively.
Tattva Sidhant or Nadi Theory of Rectification
This Theory is based on the following fundamental concepts:
1 . The regular intervals of time in any weekday from Sunrise
are governed by the one or the other five Tattvas (Elements)
viz. Earth, Water, Fire, Air and Akash. These Tattvas follow a
definite and pre-ordained order dependent upon the
weekday and the time of Sunrise.
2. The sex of the child is dependent on the inherent nature of
the particular Tattva governing the moment of birth.
3. The moment of birth is related to Moon's Star at the time of
birth, the nature of the Ascending Sign as Moveable, Fixed
or Common; and the weekday.
Human births take place by the Soli-Lunar energy coupled
with the planet ruling the weekday.In other words, this theory
postulates that the Sun sends at regular intervals of time from
the moment of Sun rise cosmic energy that contains Gama-Rays,
X-Rays, Ultra Violet Rays and other rays which are necessary for
birth, growth and development and evolution of human beings.
In astrological language we say that Sun represents the spark of
Divinity or the life force. Moon while passing over a Nakshatra
each day receives this energy and transforms it into a medium,
the embryo, which later on develops into a physical body. The
Tattva of the planets ruling the particular moment on a day

Your True Horoscope
determines the sex of the embryo and even accounts for his
genetical connections and heredity.
Tattvas Duration and Cyclic Order:
The five Tattvas follow a definite cyclic order. They repeat
the order after every 90 minutes starting with the Tattva at
Sunrise in accordance with the weekday lord. The following Table
shows the cyclic order, duration of each Tattva and the Planets
ruling the Tattva.
Tattva
The Astrologers following the hints from the Upanishads
believed that each Tattva, in fact, includes the characteristics of
other Tattvas also. As such they divided each Tattva into Antara
Tattva or Sub Tattva in the same proportion as they are allotted
in the complete cycle of 90 minutes. The complete Table of Antara
Tattva is shown below:

Chapter 2: Theories of Rectification of Birth Time
Application of Tattva Sidhant or Nadi
Rectification.
The application of this theory for correctly fixing the Birth
time requires the use of Table A and Table B. In Table A, the Star
lord in place of the Star is used. The data required for rectification
is listed below:
1 . Date, place and noted time of birth.
2. The time of Sunrise on the day and place of birth.
3. Day of birth (From Sunrise to Sunrise).
4. Ascendant in the chart under consideration.
5. Moon's Star at the time of birth.
Table A
Contd.

Your True Horoscope
Table A
Contd.

Chapter 2: Theories of Rectification of Birth Time
Table A
Contd.

Your True Horoscope
Table A

Chapter 2: Theories of Rectification of Birth Time
Table B
Contd.

Your Tru&ioroscope
Table B
Contd.

Chapter 2: Theories of Rectification of Birth Time
Table B
Contd.

Your True Horoscope
Table B
Procedure: Note the interval of time between Sunrise on
the day of birth and 6.00 A.M. If the Sunrise is before 6.00 A.M.
add the difference to the noted time of birth. If the Sunrise is
after 6.00 A.M. subtract the difference from the noted time of
birth. This will give us the Derived Time.
Match the Derived Time, Ascendant rising, Moon's Star,
Weekday and sex of the child in Table A & Table B to determine
the correct birth time. It is explained through an example below:
Example:
Date of Birth: 7.9.1972, Sex: Male,
Noted Time: 8.50 P.M Day: Thursday,
Sunrise: 06.7.18 A.M, Ascendant: Aries,
Star Lord: Venus.
Since Sunrise is 7 minutes 18 seconds after 6.00 A.M, our
derived time comes as 8.50-7.18 = 8.42.42 P.M. We find that
this derived time matches data at SI. No. 27 corresponding to
which the time is 8.51 P.M. This is one minute ahead of our derived
time. Therefore the corrected birth time will be 8.51 P.M.

Chapter 2: Theories of Rectification of Birth Time 31
Critical Review of the Theory: The tables only afford to
correct the time within a few minutes only. Matching the birth
time with the sex of the native causes serious doubt about the
truthfulness of its application. The sex of the native is decided
right at the time of conception. It does not depend on the time
of delivery. Since the Nakshatra repeats only after 27 minutes in
the table, the corrected time may vary significantly from the
noted time. This poses a serious problem.
The Pre-Natal Epoch Theory: Epoch means the moment
of conception when fecundation takes place in the mother's
womb. This generally happens, in normal cases, about nine
months before the moment of birth, depending on the Moon
and Lunar rhythm. We find reference to Epoch in the 51st
Centiloquy of the Tetrabiblos as translated by J. M. Ashmad as
under:
"Make the sign occupied by the Moon at the time of birth
the ascending sign at the conception, and consider that in which
she may be posited at the conception, or the opposite one, as
the sign ascending at birth."
This rule, said Pegius (1570), can be traced back to the
legendary Hermes Trismegistus of Egypt, and is generally known
as the Trutina Hermetis. According to this theory, for the epoch,
1 . take the radical Moon for the Ascendant of the epoch, and
2. take the Moon at the time of the epoch for the radical
Ascendant or Descendant.
Middle Epoch: It is believed that the Moon transits over its
radical position nine months before the birth. The day of this
transit is called the middle epoch.

Your True Horoscope
According to this theory, the day of the epoch, it self depends
on the position of the Moon with respect to the horizon, but not
on its position with respect to the Sun. The complete rule for
deciding the day of the epoch is stated below:
"Ifthe radical Moon is above the horizon, it will have to travel
in a forward direction from its middle epoch position to reach the
position of the radical ascendant."
Should the radical Moon (i.e. Moon in the Rashi chart at the
time of birth) be below the horizon, then it has already transited
over the radical ascendant and we must count backward in order
to find the day of the epoch.
Thus, according to this theory, on the day of the epoch we
take the radical Moon
i) For the ascendant of the epoch, or
S) For the descendant of the epoch.
Flaving fixed this position, we have to note the exact position
of Moon at that time on the epoch day. This position of Moon
has to be put as the Ascendant degree, minutes and seconds for
the correct horoscope.
Amendment of Trutina Hermetis Theory:
A German Astrologer Chiwa, in his book 'Die Epoche1 has
stated on the basis of his research that 75% of births in 500
cases studied took place between the 9m and 10m lunation; in
the remaining number of cases pregnancy lasted for a longer or
shorter period. Chiwa has amended the rules governing the epoch
astound in the Trutina Flermetis.

Chapter 2: Theories of Rectification of Birth Time 33
He states:
"The duration of the epoch is x lunations plus y days, the
epoch representing the period which the Moon requires to return
to its radical position."
He came to the conclusion that the radical Moon could be
a) the Ascendant of the epoch; or
b) the Descendant of the epoch.
There is a possibility that the radical Moon may become
c) the radical M.C. or
d) the radical I.C.
Sepharial's Pre-Natal Epoch Theory:
Towards the end of the 19th century, the late Sepharial
expounded the theory that the rules laid down by Hermes
Trismegistis had a close affinity to the principles of Hindu Astrology
relating to lunar mansions. Sepharial believed that
1. The general period of intra-uterine life is 9 solar, or 10 lunar
months,
2. This period is subject to an increase or decrease, according to
the position of the Moon in regard to the Sun, and the
horizon of the place of birth.
We may put Sepharial's theory in a succinct form as follows:
1 . When the Moon at birth is increasing in light, and above the
earth, or decreasing, and below earth, the period is less than
the lunar revolutions by one day for every 12 degrees of
the Moon's distance from the horizon to which it next comes

Your True Horoscope
after birth. But, when the Moon at birth is increasing and
below the earth, or decreasing and above the earth, the
period is by the same measure more than ten lunar
revolutions counted backward from the day of birth.
2. When the Moon at birth is increasing in light, its place will be
the Ascendant at the epoch, and the Moon's place at the
epoch will be the ascendant at birth. But, when the Moon at
birth is decreasing in light, then its place will be setting at the
epoch, and the Moon's place at the epoch will be the
descendant at birth.
Sepharial also indicated how to decide the sex of the child.
According to him the sex of the child is determined as follows:
1 . If the Ascendant of the epoch be in a male degree the sex of
the birth will be male, and vice versa.
2. If the Moon be in a critical degree and the Ascendant not in
a critical degree at all, then the Moon's position controls the
sex, according to whether its degree of longitude is male or
female.
3. When both the Ascendant and Moon are in critical degrees
of the same sex, the birth will be of that sex.
4. When neither the Moon nor Ascendant is in a critical degree,
then the quadrant the Moon occupies will determine the sex.
5. When the Ascendant and the Moon are in critical degrees of
opposite sexes, the quadrant the Moon occupies will
determine the sex.
The critical degrees and the quadrants are given in the
following diagrammatic table C for ready reference.

Chapter 2: Theories of Rectification of Birth Time
Sex of Child
Nadir
Table C

Your True Horoscope
This theory appears to be based on the sound cosmic laws.
Its application, however, does not often give accurate results
because the chart for the epoch has to be cast as per the latitude
and longitude of the place at which the lady was at the time of
the epoch. In most of the cases it is difficult to confirm this. This
theory expects the astrologer to put the degree of Moon at the
time of epoch to be placed on the ascendant or descendant or
mid-heaven or nadir. If the place of birth's latitude is such that it
causes the time of rising of the Signs to vary significantly then
the corrected time may show significant variation from the noted
birth time. This raises a doubt in the mind of the Astrologer about
the veracity of the theory.
Varaha Mihira and Others Views on Lost Horoscopes
Varaha Mihira in chapter 26 of his book Brihajjatkam deals
with the procedure to cast the horoscope of a person who has
no birth details. According to him we can cast the chart using
the concept of Horary or Instant (Prasna) chart by using the
following steps.
Step 1 : Cast the Horary chart,
Step 2: Fixing the Sign position of Sun: First decide the
course of Sun and then the season. Sun remains in Northern
Path or Winter Solstice or Uttarayana when Sun transits in any
Sign from Capricorn to Gemini; it remains in Southern Path or
Summer Solstice or Daksinayana when Sun transits in any Sign
from Cancer to Sagittarius. According to Varaha Mihira and others
if the ascendant is within the first 15 degrees range of Rashi,
then the birth is in Uttarayana. If the Ascendant is in the latter
half of the Sign that rises in the Ascendant then the birth is in
Daksinayana.
There are six seasons in a year. The winter season (15tf1
January to 15th March) when the Sun transits in Capricorn and

Chapter 2: Theories of Rectification of Birth Time 37
Aquarius, the Spring Season (15th March to 15th May) when Sun
transits in Pisces and Aries, the Summer Season (from 15th May
to 15th July) when Sun transits in Taurus and Gemini, the Rainy
Season (from 15th July to 15th September) when Sun transits in
Cancer and Leo, the Autumn (from 15th Sep to 15th November)
when Sun transits in Virgo and Libra, the Cold Season (from 15th
Nov to 1 5m January) when Sun transits in Scorpio and Sagittarius.
According to Varaha Mihira the strongest Planet placed in the
Ascendant in the Horary Chart decides the season. If no Planet is
placed in the Ascendant the ruler of the rising Decanate decides
the season.
Sun rules the hot summer season when it transits in Taurus
and Gemini; Saturn rules the winter season; Venus indicates the
spring; Mars rules the summer; Moon indicates the Rainy season;
Mercury rules autumn; and Jupiter indicates the Cold season.
Suppose the Horary Chart rises in 15 degree 26 minutes in
Gemini. Since the Ascendant is in the second half of the Sign Sun
will be in Sothern Path that is in signs from Cancer to Sagittarius.
Since the second Dacanate rises in the Ascendant we need
to take 5th sign from Gemini to decide the lord of the Dacanate.
It is Libra and as such Venus rules it. Suppose Venus in the chart
rises in second Dacanate of Pisces then its ruler will be Cancer
that is Moon. Here we will say that Moon decides the season
which is rainy season when Sun transits in Cancer or Leo. To
decide between Cancer and Leo we need to note whether the
degree rising in the ascendant is in first half or second half of the
Decanate. Here in this example the rising degree indicates the
second half and as such Sun should be in Leo.
Note: If the ascendant degree indicates Northern Path but
the planet placed in the ascendant indicates a season which occurs
only when Sun is in Southern Path then Moon, Mercury and
Jupiter should be respectively exchanged by Venus, Mars and

Your True Horoscope
Saturn. Take an example when the horary ascendant rises in Leo
25 degree and 18 minutes. Here the longitude of ascendant is in
excess of 15 degrees suggesting birth in Summer Solstice or
Daksinayana. Third Decanate of Leo falls in Aries whose lord is
Mars indicating summer season at birth. Daksinayana and
summer season cannot coincide and hence the season of Mars
should be replaced by the season of Mercury. As such autumn
season should have prevailed at birth. In this example since the
second part of Decanate prevails, the birth should have been in
the second month of autumn that is when Sun will be in Libra.
Step 3: Fixing the Sign Position of Jupiter: Some
authors feel that the position of Sign occupied by Jupiter at birth
is determined by the lord of the rising Decanate in the Horary
Chart. If the first Decanate rises Jupiter will be in the same Sign as
the ascendant Sign. Second Decanate means fifth and third
Decanate means 9th sign from the ascendant sign. Other authors
say that Jupiter's sign position should be fixed by multiplying the
longitude of the rising sign by 2 and then dividing it by 5. The
quotient will represent the Jupiter's natal position. For example
let the ascendant longitude be 8 degrees 33 minutes and 36
seconds in Libra. If we multiply the longitude of the ascendant
by 2 and divide the product by 5 it gives a quotient of 3 and 1 as
remainder. This means that the sign of Jupiter at birth will be 4th
from Libra. Age of the person can then be ascertained from the
appearance of the person. Suppose Jupiter Sign comes to be
Virgo (6) then the age of the person could be 6 or 18 or 30 or 42
or 54 like that.
Step 4: Fixing the Lunar Day of Birth: According to
Varaha Mihira, the ruling Tithi at birth would be equal to the
longitude obtained by the Sun in the sign occupied by him in the
horary chart. Suppose Sun occupies 6 degree 30 minutes in a
Sign then it is indicative of Saptami Tithi (of Shukla Paksha).

Chapter 2: Theories of Rectification of Birth Time 39
The lunar month commences from the first lunar day of the
bright fortnight. Suppose the Sun to occupyl8th degree of the
sign Capricorn at the time of birth. The lunar day or Tithi during
birth is the 18th day that is 3rd day of the dark fortnight.
Another method of calculating the lunar day is from the
proportion of semi-Decanate that has risen above the Horizon.
Semi Decanate is of 5 degrees representing 30 days; so that 10
minutes of the rising Decanate represent a lunar day. Suppose
the ascendant rises in Libra 8 degrees 33 minutes and 36 seconds.
Reduce 5 from the longitude of ascendant and we get 3 degrees
33 minutes and 36 seconds which should be multiplied by 60
and divided by 30. We will get a quotient of 7 with remainder 3
degrees 36 which indicates that 7 tithis have passed at birth.
This means Astami tithi.
Step 5: Fixing the Ascendant: If the Day Sign (Leo, Virgo,
Libra, Scorpio, Aquarius and Pisces) rises in the ascendant then it
should be expected that the birth had taken place at night. If the
Night Sign (Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Sagittarius and
Capricorn) rises in the ascendant it indicates that the birth should
have taken place in daytime. Knowing the length of the day or
night from the rising sign we can fix the time of birth for fixing
the ascendant position by the proportion of the degrees that
have already risen in the horary chart. Suppose the iength of
the day is of 30 ghatikas and the portion of the sign risen above
is 5 degrees then the birth time will be 5 ghatikas from the
morning.
According to some authors the rising Navamsa in horary
chart will be the ascendant that has risen at birth. Or note the
total number of Decanates between the rising one and the one
occupied by the Sun. So many Decanates counted from the
Sun will the natal ascendant be.

Your True Horoscope
The birth time can be ascertained by another method also.
Find out the duration of the day and that of night for the day
the query is raised. The duration (of the day or the night as the
case may be) should be multiplied by the longitude of the horary
ascendant and divided by 30. The quotient thus obtained
represents the duration passed in the night or day at birth as the
case may be. If the ascendant rises in Libra 8 degrees33 minutes
and 36 seconds then since Libra is a day sign the birth would
have taken place at night. Let Day duration be 32 ghatis and
night duration be 28 ghatis. If the Longitude of ascendant be
multiplied by 28 and the product then is divided by 30 we will get
the resultant figure as 7-56 which means 7 ghatis and 56 vighatis
have passed in the night at the time of birth.
Step 6: Fixing the Sign Position of Moon: The sign
occupied by Moon at the time of birth will be the same sign that
rises in the horary ascendant or 5th from there or 9th from there
whichever is most powerfulAccording to some authors the other method to fix the Moon
sign is by ascertaining how far horary Moon is away from the
horary ascendant. So much will be the distance of natal Moon,
counted from horary Moon. If however the horary ascendant is
in Pisces, then the natal Moon will also be in Pisces.
Step 7: Fixing the Date of Birth: Once the season is
ascertained, its actual duration must be known, for a season is
not exactly sixty days as a rule. We may look into the Ephemeris
and find out how long Sun actually remains in the two signs of
the season. The sum of the two should be used to work out the
date of birth by the semi-Decanate proportion. For simple
explanation we may assume that the duration is 60 days. One
Decanate is of 10 degrees. Thus each degree will be equal to 6
days. If the rising Ascendant longitude is in the second part of

Chapter 2: Theories of Rectification of Birth Time 41
the Decanate it would mean that Sun will be in the second sign of
the season and Sun's entry in the sign will be after the number of
days calculated by multiplying the degrees of the portion of the
Decanate. Suppose the longitude of the ascendant is 7 degrees
and 30 minutes then Sun's entry in the sign would be after 15
days from the time Sun enters in the beginning of the Sign.
From the above data we may cast the horoscope of the
native.

Chapter 3
The Ruling Planets and
Construction of Horoscope
Astrology, says Mr. Astrologer, is not only for the blessed
ones whose parent sincerely kept records of their birth time.
Astrologer is a friend and a counselor of humanity! So am I told?
He possesses the Jupiterian optimism and foresight; he is always
under the Saturnian's spell that provides him caution, calculative
and meditative skills. Mr. Astrologer is; thus, always ready to
construct the horoscope for all those who do not possess correct
birth data. His venture is based on certain sound techniques of
Astrology.
The edifice on which astrology is based is time personified.
There is continuum between past, present and future. Even Albert
Einstein in his Theory of Relativity amply makes this clear. It is an
accepted belief that no event happens in the life of the native
unless Sun and Moon occupy particular positions in the Zodiac.
Moon knows no rest and every moment it occupies a different
degree, minute and second in the Zodiac. An observer on earth
finds every momenta different Zodiacal Arc rising in the Eastern
horizon. Planets co-ruling the Moon's position and the ascendant
i.e. the degree rising in the eastern horizon at the moment of
judgement are called the ruling planets. It is believed that the
ruling planets at the moment of judgement are the ruling planets
at the fructification of the event in past or future. This belief is
based on the spiritual concept of Time continuum that is Past,

Chapter 3: The Ruling Planets and Construction of Horoscope 43
Present and future co-exist. Astrologers make use of this dictum
to construct horoscope for an individual who has doubt about:
1 . Date, Month, Year of birth
2. Time of birth
Ruling Planets and Schools of Thought
There are two schools of thought. The followers of one school
of thought were inspired, probably, by the Nadi theory of birth
rectification using Tattva Sidhanta. According to this theory
human births take place only at certain intervals and the sex of
the child is dependent on the inherent nature of the element
governing that moment. The birth time is inviolably interrelated
to the star of the Moon on any given day and to the nature of
the ascendant sign and the day lord. Accordingly this school of
thought declared that the following planets should be used as
ruling planets to construct the horoscope:
1. Day lord.
2. Ascendant sign and star lord.
3. Moon sign and star lord.
The followers of second school of thought probably had their
conviction based on the philosophy of Adhana Lagna for birth
rectification as pronounced by the Indian sages or the philosophy
of Pre- Natal Epoch formulated by Ptolemy and later on developed
by Speherial in the 19th century. Both these theories clearly
emphasize that the position of Moon at the moment of
Epoch represents the degree, minutes and seconds to
be put on the ascendant at the time of birth. The position
of the ascendant at the time of Epoch takes the position
of Moon at the time of birth. With this view the followers of
this school of thought declared that:

Your True Horoscope
i) The planets co-ruling the ascendant at the moment of
judgement should be used to fix the position of Moon or
any planet in the horoscope about which there is a doubt.
ii) The position of Moon at the moment of judgement should
be used to correct the position of ascendant or any cusp
about which there is a doubt.
Application of Ruling Planets and Construction
of Horoscope
First School of Thought: According to the followers of
first school of thought, a horoscope can be constructed or
rectified by using the principle that the ruling planets at the
moment of judgement should be the ruling planets at the time
of birth. If any ruling planet at the time of birth does not agree
directly with the ruling planets at the moment of judgement,
that planet may at the time of judgement be transiting in the
star or sub of one of the ruling planets at the moment of
judgement. That is any planet can be taken as the ruling
planet if it is in the star or sub of a ruling planet. Ascendant
sign star, sub and sub-sub lords of the horoscope under
consideration should agree with the ruling planets at the time of
judgement.
However, late Mr. Krishnamurthy, one of the pioneers who
used this theory of ruling planets to construct or rectify horoscope
declared that we should reject the ruling planet, which is in the
star or sub of a planet that is retrograde at the time of judgement.
It is not clear why a person who believed that retrogression of
planets play no part in the predictive techniques as used for Natal
chart analysis could make such a decision. Moreover, in the recent
past the followers of this school have realized the importance of
sub lord or Kalamsa lord of the ascendant and Moon and have
thus included them in the list of ruling planets. But the confusion

Chapter 3: The Ruling Planets and Construction of Horoscope 45
about retrogression is still prevalent among them. I am sure
planets do not make choices for their behaviour as per
natal chart or horary chart. They behave according to
their longitudinal position only. The followers of this school
include Rahu and Ketu in the list of ruling planets if they happen
to represent any ruling planet. This technique of rectification can
be explained as follows:
Suppose, an astrologer is presented a horoscope of a person
born on Sunday when Capricorn 12 degree 25 minutes was rising
in the eastern horizon and the Moon was in Pisces at 21 degree
49 minutes. The ruling planets of this horoscope are Sun, Saturn,
Moon, Jupiter and Mercury. If the Astrologer wants to check the
correctness of the horoscope, he has to cast the chart for the
moment of judgement. Let us say, he does it on Monday when
the ascendant Virgo 8 degree 41 minutes rises and Moon is in
Cancer 9 degree 58 minutes. Therefore the ruling planets at the
time of judgement are Moon, Mercury, Sun, and Saturn. Let us
say, at the time of judgement Rahu is in Aquarius and Ketu is in
Leo. Therefore, Rahu and Ketu will also become the ruling planets
at the moment of judgement.
If we examine the ruling planets at the time of birth and at
the time of judgement, all agree except Jupiter. Now, if Jupiter at
the time of judgement is in the star of any of the ruling planet,
the chart is taken as correct. That is any planet is as good as a
ruling planet if it is in the star or sub of a ruling planet.
We can also check the correctness of the planets co-ruling
the ascendant at the time of birth, Here, the ascendant Capricorn
12 degree 25 minutes is co-ruled by Saturn-Moon-Rahu-Jupiter
as sign, star, sub and sub-sub lord respectively. All these planets
as stated above agree with the ruling planets at the time of
judgement. The horoscope is thus taken to be correct.

Your True Horoscope
In a horoscope, there may be doubt about time, day or
year and let us try to understand the use of this technique to
construct or rectify charts through following examples:
Example 1 : Doubt about time - A young lady comes to
Mr. Astrologer and requests for the construction of an accurate
horoscope for the following birth data.
P.O. Birth -Agra (India).
T.O.Birth - Between 16 hrs to 16.30 hrs.
Mr. Astrologer took up the job for the construction of the
horoscope on 30.1 .2002 at 08.29 AM. The planetary and cuspal
positions at the time of judgement are shown in Figure 3.1 .

Chapter 3: The Ruling Planets and Construction of Horoscope

Your True Horoscope
Fig. 3.1 Contd.
Nirayana Cusps
Planetary Position

Chapter 3: The Ruling Planets and Construction of Horoscope 49
The ruling planets at the time of judgement were:
Day lord = Mercury (Wednesday)
Ascendant = Aquarius 10 degree 1 minutes 30 seconds.
Saturn-Rahu and Jup rule that sign, star and
sub-lord respectively.
Moon = Leo 2 degree 32 minutes 47 seconds that is
ruled by Sun, Ketu and Venus as sign, star
and sub Lord respectively.
Procedure to Rectify the Chart: The astrologer cast the
chart as per the given data using the mid position of the time
period given by the native. He then confirms what Planet position
in the ascendant is prone to change during the time period. He is
assured that the sign and star lord of the ascendant is not
showing any proneness to change. As such he is not bothered
whether these are the RRs at the time of judgement or not.
The emphasis of the Astrologer is to fix the sub and sub-sub
lord of the ascendant using the Planets from the RPs. The
astrologer found that at 16.16 hrs on 21.3.1979 at Agra the
ascendant is ruled by Sun-Ketu-Jup-Sat. All these planets of the
ascendant agree with the ruling planets at the time of judgement.
Correspondingly, the Moon position is also ruled by all the ruling
planets at the time of judgement. The Astrologer thus fixes the
time of birth as 16.16 hrs. The corrected horoscope of the Lady
is shown in Fig. 3.2.

Your True Horoscope
Lagna Chart Bhava Chart

Chapter 3: The Ruling Planets and Construction of Horoscope
Fig. 3.2 Contd..
Nirayana Cusps
Planetary Position

Your True Horoscope
Doubt about Morning or Evening: The Astrologer may
have to construct the horoscope of a person who is sure of the
date of birth but says that the time of birth is between a certain
period of the day may be in the morning or evening. In such
cases the Astrologer fixes firstly, the Moon position as per the
ruling planets at the time of judgement that corresponds to the
vicinity of the time period and then fixes the ascendant to match
the ruling planets.
Example 2:
A young man gave the following particulars and wanted that
his correct horoscope should be drawn:
T.O. Birth: Between 02.30hrsto 04.00hrs.
P.O. Birth: Jalandhar city (India)
The Astrologer on 5.10.2004 took up the Job at 16.30.11
hrs at Noida (India). The planetary and cuspal positions at the
time of judgement are shown in Fig. 3.3. The ruling planets at
the time of judgement were as follows:
Day Lord: Mars (Tuesday)
Ascendant: Aquarius 17 degree 34 minutes 37 seconds. It is
ruled by Saturn-Rahu-Sun as sign, star and sub lord respectively.
Moon: Gemini 8 degree 6 minutes 25 seconds. It is ruled by
Mercury-Rahu-Ftahu as sign, star and sub lord respectively. Rahu
being in Aries represents Mars.

Lagna[e] 17:37
fig 3-3
Tuesday October 05 2004
Tughlakabad, Delhi, India,
KP(New) Ayanamsha 23:50:0

Your True Horoscope
Fig. 3.3 Contd.,
Ni ray ana Cusps
Planetary Position

Chapter 3: The Ruling Planets and Construction of Horoscope 55
At 02.30 hrs on 22.1 .1 974 at Jalandhar City, Moon's position
is in Sagittarius in Venus star, Jupiter sub and Mercury sub-sub.
The Jupiter sub remains during the time period that the native
has given. As such the Astrologer has to fix the sub-sub of Moon.
Moon is in the sub-sub of Mercury at this time. Mercury is a ruling
planet. But corresponding to this position of Moon, ascendant
rises in Libra and Jupiter star. Both Venus and Jupiter are not the
direct ruling planets. The earliest sub-sub, which the Astrologer
can thus choose from the ruling planets at the time of judgement,
is Sun, which occurs at 03.23.04 hrs. Corresponding to this
position of Moon, the ascendant rises in the sign of Mars, star of
Saturn but sub of Venus. Mars and Saturn are the ruling planets
at the time of judgement but Venus is not the ruling planet. The
next sub is Sun which is a ruling planet corresponding to birth
time 03.25. llhrs.The birth time of the native is thus fixed as
03.25. llhrs.The corrected horoscope of the native as per this
Astrologer, is shown in Figure. 3.4.

Your True Horoscope
Lagna Cha it Bhava Chart

Chapter 3: The Ruling Planets and Construction of Horoscope
Fig. 3.4 Contd..
Nirayana Cusps
Planetary Position

Your True Horoscope
Example 3:
Doubt about Date: A gentle man requested an Astrologer
to confirm his date of birth. He gave the following data:
P.0 Birth: Moradabad, India.
TO. Birth: 07.29 AM
When there is a doubt about the date, the astrologer
has to match the position of Moon on the respective dates
with the ruling planets at the moment of judgement.
The astrologer took up the job at 20.06 hrs on 5.10.2004
at Noida. The planetary and cuspal positions at the time of
judgement are shown in Fig. 3.5. The ruling planets were as under:
Day lord: Mars (Tuesday)
Ascendant: Aries 29 degree 51 minutes 27 seconds. It is
ruled by Mars-Sun-Rahu as sign, star and sub Lord respectively.
Moon: Gemini 09 degree 53 minutes 06 seconds. It is ruled
by Mer-Rahu-Jup as sign, star and sub Lord. Rahu being in Aries
represent Mars.

Chapter 3: The Ruling Planets and Construction of Horoscope

Your True Horoscope
Fig. 3.5 Contd..
Nirayana Cusps
Planetary Position

Chapter 3: The Ruling Planets and Construction of Horoscope 61
Nowon 03.9.1959 Moon is in Venus star and on 4.9.1959 it
is in Sun star at 07.29 hrs. Venus is not the ruling planet and as
such the astrologer declares that the correct date of the
gentleman is 4-9-1959. The position of Moon at 07.29hrs on
4.9.1959 is Mer-Sun-Rahu that completely matches with the ruling
planets at the moment of judgement. The corrected horoscope
as per this astrologer is shown in Figure 3.6 as under:

uur True Horoscope
Lagna Chart Bhava Chart

Chapter 3: The Ruling Planets and Construction of Horoscope
Fig. 3.6 Contd..
Nirayana Cusps
Planetary Position

Your True Horoscope
Doubt about Year: Similarly this method can be used to
check the correctness of the month or the year of birth by
matching the ruling planets with the position of Sun or Jupiter
respectively.
Second School of Thought: The followers of 2nd school
of thought divide the ruling planets in two parts as follows:
1. R.P. (Ascendant): The planets co-ruling the ascendant at
the time of judgement. That is sign, star, sub and sub-sub
Lords.
2. R.P. (Moon): The sign, star, sub and sub-sub lord of Moon
at the time of judgement.
RP, (Ascendant) series is used to rectify the position of planets
and R.P. (Moon) series is used to correct the Cuspal positions.
Followers of this school of thought have rightly
decided not to use seven day week lord as an RP.
The planetary week, came in vogue as early as the 2nd
century BC. It is ostensibly of Mesopotamian or Syrian origin.
The days of the week, in most of the Indo-European languages,
have names associated with the planets: Mon-day (day of the
Moon) ... through Sun-day (day of the Sun). Even though this
"astrological" legacy may be firmly anchored in our vocabulary
and culture, these attributions have no strict astrological value,
since they occurred through a simple arithmetic process without
any physical foundation. The science of astrology has its origin
much before 2nd century BC. The ancient sages were of the firm
opinion that any event in the life of the native happens in
accordance with the promise of that event in the native's chart
and at a time when Moon transits in a particular Nakshatra and
its minute divisions. In other words the day of happening of the
event is related to the Moon's star lord. There was no concept of
the planetary week in vogue at that time.

Chapter 3: The Ruling Planets and Construction of Horoscope 65
Calculation of Moon's Period in a Day
Before we use this technique to construct or rectify charts
on the basis of doubtful birth data, let us try to understand how
to calculate Moon's Period in a Day.
If we observe the movement of Moon on daily basis, we find
that Moon covers a Nakshatra, on an average, in about 24 hrs.
The movement of Moon in a particular Nakshatra can be divided
into sub and sub-sub periods on 24 hr basis in the same
proportion as it is done in calculating sub and sub-sub periods in
Vimsottari Dasa.
Let us assume that Moon enters in Poorvashada Nakshatra
at a particular time on a particular day. It takes approximately 24
hrs 2 minutes to complete its movement in Poorvashada. Now
we want to know when Moon will complete its movement in Venus
sub, Sun sub etc. It is calculated as follows:
Venus Sub in
Poorvashada = 20/120 x 24 hrs 2 mins. =4 hrs 0 mt 20 sec
Sun Sub =06/120 x 24 hrs 2 mins. = lhr 12mins 06 sec
Moon Sub = 10/120 x 24 hrs 2 mins. = 2 hrs 0 min 10 sec
Mars Sub =07/120 x 24 hrs 2 mins. = 1 hrs 24 mins 07 sec
Rahu Sub = 18/120 x 24 hrs 2 mins. = 3 hrs 36 mins 18 sec
Jup Sub =16/120 x 24 hrs 2 mins. = 3 hrs 12 mins. 16 sec.
Sat Sub = 19/120 x 24 hrs 2 mins. = 3 hrs 48 mins. 19 sec.
Ketu Sub =7/1 20 x 24 hrs 2 mins. = 1 hr 24 mins. 07 sec.
Similarly we can calculate the sub-sub periods in various sub
periods when Moon is transiting in Poorvashada. For example,

Your True Horoscope
Rahil sub-sub period in Rahu sub can be calculated as follows:
Rahu Sub-Sub period = 18/120 x 3 hrs 36 minutes 18 seconds
= 32 minutes 24 seconds approximately
The following examples illustrate the use of RPs as
followed by many astrologers. However the detailed
procedure and philosophy of Birth Time Rectification as
practiced by the author is explained in the next chapter.
We may use the ruling planets as per second school of
thought to construct or rectify horoscope from doubtful data.
This is explained through examples as follows:
Example 1 :
Doubt about Time of Birth - Suppose a person is sure
about the date of birth and there is a slight doubt about the
time, may be of a few minutes only. In such cases, we need only
to match the ascendant of the native with the planets co-ruling
the Moon position at the time of judgement. For example, a
young girl came to Mr. Astrologer and asked to correct her
horoscope. She gave the following birth data:
Date of Birth: 26.07.1981
Place of Birth: Jaipur. (India).
Time of Birth: 15.20 hrs to 15.30 hrs.
Mr. Astrologer took the job at 17 hrs 39 minutes 52 seconds
on 10.1.2005 at Noida (U.P) India. The planetary and cuspal
positions at the time judgement are shown in Fig. 3.7 as under:

Chapter 3: The Ruling Planets and Construction of Horoscope 67

Your True Horoscope
Fig. 3.7 Contd.
Nirayana Cusps
Planetary Position

Chapter 3: The Ruling Planets and Construction of Horoscope 69
The ruling planets at this time were
Mr. Astrologer fixed the birth time at 15 hrs 27 minutes 36
seconds when the ascendant position was Scorpio 15 degree 39
minutes 47 seconds. The planets co-ruling the ascendant were
Mars-Sat-Jup-Ket as sign, star, sub, and sub-sub lord. Since the
doubt was only of a few minutes, changing the ascendant sign
was not needed. The corrected horoscope of the native is shown
in Figure 3.8.

Your True Horoscope
Lagna Chart Bhava Chart

Chapter 3: The Ruling Planets and Construction of Horoscope 71
Fig. 3.8 Contd..

Your True Horoscope
Example 2: A young lady came to Mr. Astrologer and
wanted her horoscope to be constructed as per the following
data:
Date of Birth: 18.10.1971
Place of Birth: Madurai (India)
Time of Birth: Between 16 hrs and 18.30 hrs.
In such cases when the native has no doubt about the date
but the doubt about the time period of birth is significant, the
following procedure should be adopted.
Step 1 : Prepare the horoscope as per the date of birth and
place of birth at time midway the time period. Check if the Moon
star at that time is likely to change during the time period or not.
Step 2: If the star Lord of Moon is not likely to change in
the vicinity of the time period, then we need not bother to change
it to match the RP (Ascendant) series of planets. If the star lord
changes in the given time period, then the star lord also has to
be fixed in accordance with the planets co-ruling RP (Ascendant)
Step 3: Having decided the star lord of Moon, we need to
fix sub and sub-sub lords of Moon using the planets co-ruling RP
(Ascendant).
Step 4: After fixing the Moon's star, sub and sub-sub, we
need to fix the ascendant to match the planets co-ruling the RP
(Moon).
In this example, Moon star on 18.10.1971 during the period
16 hrs to 18.30 hrs remains Moon only. Hence we need only to
fix the sub and sub-sub of Moon.
Mr. Astrologer took up the job on 3.2.2002 (Sunday) at
12.25 hrs at Noida (U.P), India. The planetary and cuspal positions
at the time of judgement are shown in Fig. 3.9.

Chapter 3: The Ruling Planets and Construction of Horoscope
Lagna 3:43:33
Sunday February 03 2002
Tughlakabad, Delhi, India, 77:12:0
KP(New) Ayanamsha 23:47:46

Your True Horoscope
Fig. 3.9 Contd..
Nirayana Cusps
Planetary Position

Chapter 3: The Ruling Planets and Construction of Horoscope 75
The ruling planets were as follows:
At the time of judgement Ketu was in Sagittarius sign and
hence represented Jupiter.
At 16.00 hrs on 18.10.1971, Moon is in Moon star, Ven sub
and Mars sub-sub. Mars, Ra, Jup do not appear in RP (Ascdt)
series. Thus we need to fix the sub-sub of Moon as Sat which
occurs at 17 hrs 22 minutes and lasts up to 18 hrs 4 minutes.
Corresponding to this position of Moon, we have to set the
ascendant that matches the planets co-ruling the RP (Moon). At
17 hrs 22 minutes, Pisces 21 degree 6 minutes 49 seconds rises
in the ascendant. That is the star lord of ascendant comes as
Mercury, which does not appear in RP (Moon) series. Moreover,
Mercury is also not in the star or sub of a planet that appears in
RP (Moon) on the date of judgement. Hence the native's
ascendant as Pisces is ruled out. The correct ascendant for the
native has to be fixed as Aries 0 degree 4 minutes 52 sec, which
occurs at 17 hrs 53 minutes. The planets co-ruling the ascendant
of the native will be Mars-Ket-Ket-Ven as sign, star, sub and subsub lords. The Moon position corresponding to this time of birth
is Moon star Ven sub, Sat sub-sub and Rahu sub-sub-sub. Rahu
does not appear in RP (ascendant) series. But Rahu is in Mercury
sign and Mars star in RP chart. Mercury is in Sun star who is RP
(ascendant series). Thus Rahu qualifies to be Ruling planet and
can come as sub-sub-sub lord. The correct horoscope of the
native is shown in Fig. 3.10.

Your True Horoscope
Lagna Chart Bhava Chart

Chapter 3: The Ruling Planets and Construction of Horoscope
Fig. 3.10 Contd.,
Nirayana Cusps
Planetary Position

Your True Horoscope
Example 3:
Doubt about both Date and Time of Birth - We may
construct the horoscope of a person who has doubt both about
date as well as time of birth by using the procedure indicated in
the following steps.
Step 1 : Match the Moon position on the respective dates
and approximate time of birth with the planets co-ruling the RP
(Ascendant) at the time of judgement. The date for which the
Moon position matches with the planets co-ruling the RP
(Ascendant) should be taken as the correct date of birth.
Step 2: Having fixed the Moon star, fix its sub and sub-sub
using planets co-ruling RP (Ascendant).
Step 3: As per this Moon position, fix the ascendant to match
the planets co-ruling RP (Moon).
A gentleman came to Mr. Astrologer and wanted his
horoscope to be constructed. He gave the following birth data.
Date of Birth: 4 or 5.9.1959
Time of Birth: Morning between 6 to 8 AM.
Place of Birth: Moradabad
Mr. Astrologer took up the job on 11.1.2005, Tuesday at
07.49.19 AM at Noida. The planetary and cuspal positions of RP
chart are indicated in Figure 3.11.

Chapter 3: The Ruling Planets and Construction of Horoscope

Your True Horoscope
Fig. 3.11 Contd..
Nirayana Cusps
Planetary Position

Chapter 3: The Ruling Planets and Construction of Horoscope 81
Mr. Astrologer compared the Moon position on 4.9.1959 at
6 Am and found that it is in Mer sign, Sun star and Rahu sub.
Since Rahu on the date of Judgement represents Mars, the
position of Moon in the star of Sun and sub of Rahu are taken as
correct. The sub-sub of Moon could be Saturn or Mercury. It is
found that when we keep Saturn as the sub-sub of Moon we are
not able to match the planets co-ruling the ascendant with the
RP (Moon) series. Keeping the sub-sub of Moon as Mercury we
are able to fix the position of the ascendant at Virgo 3 degree 41
minutes 22 seconds. The sub-sub lord of the ascendant is fixed
as Ketu that represents Venus. The planets co-ruling the
ascendant are Mer- Sun-Sat- Ket that totally agrees with the
planets co-ruling the RP (Moon) position. The planetary and
cuspal positions of the corrected chart are indicated in figure

Your True Horoscope
Lagna Chart Bhava Chart

Chapter 3: The Ruling Planets and Construction of Horoscope
Fig. 3.12 Contd.
Nirayana Cusps
Planetary Position

Your True Horoscope
Example 4:
Doubt about Month and Time of Birth - Let us consider
the case for constructing the horoscope when the native has a
doubt about the month of birth as well as time of birth. The
gentleman gave the following data:
Place of Birth: Delhi (India)
Time of Birth: 15.00 hrs to 17.00 hrs.
The astrologer took the job on 11.1.2005 (Tuesday), at
12.45 hrs. The planetary and Cuspal positions of RP chart are
indicated in Fig. 3.13.

Chapter 3: The Ruling Planets and Construction of Horoscope
Fig-3-13

Your True Horoscope
Fig. 3.13 Contd.,
Nirayana (Cusps
Planetary Position

Chapter 3: The Ruling Planets and Construction of Horoscope 87
Step 1 : Since there is a doubt about the month of birth, we
need to match the planets co-ruling the RP (Ascdt) with the
planets co-ruling the position of Sun on 29.8.1 948 and 29.9. 1948
.The Planets co-ruling the RP (Ascdt) are Mars-Ket-Mer-Jup. The
planets co-ruling the position of Sun on 29.8.1948 at 15.00hrs
are Sun-Ket-Mer-Jup and the planets co-ruling the position of
Sun on 29.9.1948 at 15.00 hrs are Mer-Mo-Ra-Ket. This clearly
establishes that the date of birth of the gentleman has to be
Step 2: Having fixed the date of birth, we have to fix the
position of Moon and Ascdt as we did in example 3. The corrected
horoscope of the native is shown in fig. 3.14.

Your True Horoscope
Lagna Chart Bhava Chart

Chapter 3: The Ruling Planets and Construction of Horoscope
Fig. 3.14 Contd..
Nirayana Cusps
Planetary Position

Your True Horoscope
Special Cases: Sometimes the native is sure of the date of
birth and time of birth, but not sure whether the time is before
Noon or after Noon. Taking the Ruling planets can solve this
problem. The sign in which the star of the sub-sub lord of the RP
(Ascendant) is deposited provides the clue as per below:
Star Lord of S-S lord deposited in Time Period
Moveable Sign 0 to 8 hrs
Fixed Sign 8 to 1 6 hrs.
Common Sign 16 to 24 hrs.
We may sometime check the day lord, Moon Rashi lord and
Moon star lord by noting the sub-sub lord of RP (Ascendant), its
star lord and the lord of the sign in which the star lord is deposited.
These three planets will indicate the Day lord, star lord and Rashi
lord.
Important Note: Rectification of a horoscope by using
Ruling Planets whether as per first school of thought or as per
second school of thought can at best provide an approximately
correct horoscope? For absolute rectification of the horoscope,
we need not only to place the correct degree on the ascendant
but also on all the cuspal positions. This is explained in next chapter.
We may also remember that the accuracy of the ruling
planets and as such of the horoscope depends upon the
accuracy of the software that you use for constructing
the horoscopes.

Chapter 4
Construction of True Horoscope
The true horoscope of a native is a simulation of the total life
pattern of the individual. It recognizes the fact that each human
being consists of body, mind and soul which are unique for each
individual i.e. each person has his own personal consciousness
entrenched in his body. The true horoscope has, therefore, to
reflect the quality and quantum of energy that has been
apportioned to the incarnated soul. The interplay of body, mind
and soul sets the pace for the development of the native's life
pattern. In other words, the true horoscope has to be a true
portrait of the native that should clearly reveal all facets of his life
i.e. his individuality, personality, temperament, state of health,
longevity, name and fame, virtues, capacity to face struggles of
life, social, financial, marital, educational, and the professional
status. It is, therefore, imperative that we need to place the
correct degree, minutes and seconds on each of the twelve cuspal
positions. This chapter explains the various techniques to correct
all the cuspal positions of the native's horoscope.
Philosophy behind Theory of Birth Time
Rectification
Why the soul has chosen a particular moment of time on a
particular day, month and year to incarnate in the form of a
human being? It is so because this particular moment or the
ascendant has to reflect the very being of the individual. The

Your True Horoscope
person's nature, his capacity to enjoy the pleasures and struggles
of life; his /her style of functioning; what is destined for him in this
incarnation as per the wisdom acquired from earlier lives is depicted
by the significations of planets co-ruling the ascendant. We know
that other cuspal positions are set, using a particular house
formation system, in accordance with the degree, minutes and
seconds that rise in the ascendant at the time and place of birth.
Ascendant, in fact is the epitome of the whole horoscope. The
native experiences only those events in life that are promised by
the dynamic significations of the planets that co-rule the
ascendant.
The birth of a human being is an event in the life of a person
who has fathered the native. And we know that the fundamental
postulate of Astrology is that no event takes place unless Sun
and Moon occupy particular positions in the Zodiac. The planets
that co-rule these positions have to be significators of the houses
that take part in enacting the event. The formation of the
ascendant, therefore, has to have a close relationship with the
Sun and Moon's" position at the time of birth. We also know that
each human being has specific fatherhood and motherhood.
Mother is represented by the fourth house and father by the 9th
house in the horoscope. The sub sub lord of these cusps should
establish relationship with their Moon stars respectively. We must
remember that heredity plays significant role in the formation of
the horoscope.
The 9th house in the chart represents father. The ascendant
is the 5th house from the 9th house. The birth of an individual will
take place only when the Sun and Moon's position are closely
linked with 2, 5 and 1 1 houses from the 9th house i.e. the planets
co-ruling the positions of Sun and Moon at the time of birth has
to be linked with 1 0th, 1 st and 7th house in the native's chart. We
need to remember that the native's chart, in fact, is an event or

Chapter 4: Construction of True Horoscope 93
transit chart for father. Planets co-ruling ascendant have to be
significators of houses 2(addition in the family), 5(Progeny) and
1 1 (fulfillment of desire or successful completion of the event) as
per the theory of transit as explained in my Books Kalamsa and
Cuspal Interlinks and Key to Learn.
Since the birth is only at a particular moment, we have, taking
into consideration the limitations of the software's, selected the
sub-sub lord of the ascendant to represent the moment of birth.
As such, the sub-sub lord of the ascendant has to be fixed so as
to clearly reflect Moon's star lord. This can happen in the following
three ways:
1 . The sub-sub lord of the ascendant itself may be the Moon's
star lord. The sub-sub lord may or may not have the
positional status. If the sub-sub lord of the ascendant does
not have the positional status, it only means that this subsub lord is not contributing to the significations of the
ascendant but during its dasa period, it provides the results
of the houses linked through its star iord by the conscious
efforts of the native.
2. The star lord, the sub lord or the sub-sub lord of the subsub lord of the ascendant can be the star lord of Moon. That
is the sub sub lord of the ascendant may be a planet whose
star or sub or sub sub lord is the same planet as the star lord
of the moon. If Moon itself comes as the sub sub lord of the
ascendant then it always establishes relationship.
3. The star lord of Moon can be in the star or sub or sub-sub of
the sub-sub lord of the ascendant. If X is the star lord of
, Moon in a horoscope in which Y is the sub sub lord of the
ascendant then if X is in the star of y or sub of y or sub sub
of Y we say that the relationship is established?

Your True Horoscope
4. In a similar way we verify the relationship of 4th cusp sub sub
lord with Moon star of Mother and the 9th cusp sub sub lord
with the Moon star of Father.
These three ways of checking the Moon's star lord's
relationship with the sub-sub lord of the ascendant have been
derived from the following principles:
A. A planet during its transit gives the result of the houses to
which it is linked through its star lord.
B. The star lord of the planet may itself appear in the relevant
cusps that take part in enacting the event.
C. The planet's star lord may be responsible for giving the results
of the relevant cusps that take part in enacting the event.
Let us try to check the veracity of the ways we have declared
to fix the sub-sub lord of the ascendant for a correct horoscope
through examples.
Example 1: Figure 4.1 is the chart of a child born on

Chapter 4: Construction of True Horoscope
Lagna Chart Bhava Chart

Your True Horoscope
Fig. 4.1 Contd.,
Nirayana Cusps

Chapter 4: Construction of True Horoscope 97
In this chart, we find that the sub-sub lord of the ascendant
is Mercury, and the Moon's star lord is Sun. Since Sun in the
chart is in the sub of Mercury, we assume that the sub-sub lord
of the ascendant bears the relationship with the Moon's star lord.
The Moon at the time of birth of the child is moving in Jupiter
Sign, Sun star, and Sun sub, Sat sub-sub, Jupiter sub-sub-sub,
and Sat sub-sub-sub-sub lord. All these planets per force have
to bear relationship with the cuspal positions 2, 5, 11 from the
9^ cusp or 10th, 1st and 7th cusps in the chart.
Jupiter the sign lord of Moon itself is the star lord of 1 st, sub
lord of 7th and 10th cusps. Moreover Jupiter is in the star of Sun,
which is the star lord and the sub-sub lord of the 7th cusp. Jupiter
is in Mercury sub that has appeared as the sub-sub lord of the
ascendant.
The star lord and sub-lord of the Moon is Sun that itself is in
its own star and appears as the star lord and sub-sub lord of the
7th cusp. Sun is in the sub of Mercury that is the sub-sub of the
ascendant. Sun is in the sub-sub of Jupiter that appears in cusps
The sub-sub and the sub-sub-sub-sub lord of the Moon is
Saturn. It is in Jupiter star that appears in cusps 1,7 & 10. The
sub lord and sub-sub lord of Saturn is Rahu that appears as sub
lord of the ascendant. Since Rahu represents Venus (being in
Ketu star that represents Venus); it is linked with 7th and 10th
cusps also.
Jupiter the sub-sub-sub lord of Moon at the moment of birth
is linked with cusps 1,7 and 10 because Jupiter is in Sun star that
appears as star lord and sub-sub lord of 7th cusps; it itself is the
star lord of the ascendant and sub lord of the 7th & 10m cusps.

Your True Horoscope
The above clearly reveals that the planets co-ruling the
Moon's position have to establish relationship with the relevant
cusps that take part in enacting an event.
Similarly we know that the exact moment of happening of
an event is reflected by the ascendant at that moment. The
planets co-ruling the ascendant should also be the planets that
can cause that event. Hence the planets co-ruling the ascendant
of the native should also bear the relationship with 1 st, 7th and
10th houses i.e. 2, 5, 11 from the 9th house. Here the ascendant
sign lord is Mars. Mars in the chart is in the star of Sun that appears
as the star lord and sub-sub lord of the 7th cusp and is resident of
10th house. Jupiter appears as the star lord and Rahu as the sub
lord of the ascendant. We have seen above that they are linked
with the relevant cusps. The sub-sub lord of the ascendant is
Mercury that is in Venus star, Ketu sub and Rahu sub-sub. All
these planets appear in relevant cusps 7, 10 and 1 .
From the above discussion, it should not be concluded that
the planets co-ruling the ascendant will and should only be linked
with 1, 7 and 10. The ascendant represents the total being of
the native and the linkages of the planets co-ruling the ascendant
. fixes the destiny of the native and as such will have other linkages
too.
Formation of other Cuspal Positions
Having fixed the ascendant position up to sub-sub lord, we
have to play around the time, may be in seconds to fix the subsub lords of other cuspal positions so that the horoscope clearly
reveals the following:
A. Genetical connections of the Native. This means that the
sub sub lords of cusps representing father, mother, younger
and elder co-boms, and children should establish relationship
with their Moon stars.

Chapter 4: Construction of True Horoscope 99
B. The promise in respect of all 12 cuspal positions i.e. the subsub lords of all the cuspal positions should justify what is
destined for the native in respect of all facets of his life viz.
1 . Mental characteristics, health, vitality and vigour, habit
of thinking, success or failure in attempts, longevity,
general, social, financial, administrative status.
2. Money matters, fortune & favours, capability to express,
vision & right eye, voice & tongue, nose, teeth, cheeks
&jaws.
3. Communication, writings, documents & agreements,
courage, fairness, short travel, accounting, mathematics,
telephone, journalism, change of residence, contracts.
4. Mother, education, property, inheritance, vehicle,
domestic environment, rare articles.
5. Progeny, intelligence, sports, game, fine arts, drawing,
creative pursuit, gambling, lottery, shares.
6. Service, servants, pet animals, loans, debts, success,
disease.
7. Marriage, business partners, socialization, litigation,
opponents, divorce, reputation & influence in foreign
Nations.
8. Mode of death, delays, accidents, false allegation,
unexpected gain/loss, unearthed money, dejections,
sorrow & strife etc.
9. Fortune, law and justice, father, higher education, second
marriage, long journey.
10. Status and prestige through profession, honour, dignity
and public esteem, name & fame, authority.

Your True Horoscope
1 1 . Wealth, fortune, influence, society, accumulation of
money, fulfillment of desires, litigation, speculation.
12. Loss and impediments, research, foreign travel,
investments, imprisonment, deception, secrecy, secret
enemies.
C. We know that a promised event happens in the life of the
native during the joint period of planets those are fruitful
significators of the Primary and Supporting cusps that enact
the event. At the same time dasa period lords, Jupiter, Moon
and Sun should in transit also justify the happening of the
event. Thus dasa period lords and transit potential of each
planet should justify all events that happen in the Native's
life.
But we also know that each event happens only at a
specified time as destined. Destiny enfoldment is indicated
by the progressed position of the ascendant. That is when
the progressed ascendant is co-ruled by planets those
are strong significator of the event
Each cusp and each planet progresses from its position
at the time of birth as per Vimsottari dasa rules. At the
time of happening of the event the progressed chart
should also justify the event. True Astrology Software
developed by Mr Mukesh Gupta has the provision to
calculate the progressed chart.
Thus we need to be sure that the rectified chart meets
these requirements also.
Rectification of Cuspal Positions to reflect Genetical
Connections.
By genetical connections we mean that the relevant cusps
that represent the native's father, mother, younger and elder

Chapter 4: Construction of True Horoscope 101
co-born, and children should reveal their Moon's star lord as well
as ascendant. Relationship is checked in the same way as
described above for the sub sub lord of the ascendant.
Let us explain this through an example. Figure 4.2 is the
chart of a young man born on 13.01.1983 at 15.46.20 hrs at
Delhi, RIVL Hospital.
Figure 4.3 and Figure 4.4 represent the chart of his father
and mother respectively.
Step I: The ascendant of the young man is correctly fixed
with Jupiter as the sub-sub lord because it establishes the
relationship with the Native's Moon star Venus, because Jupiter is
in Venus sub.
Step II: Let us check the genetical connection with father
from the 9th cusp. The Moon's star of the father (Ref. Figure 4.3)
is Mars. In the chart of the young man Mars is in the sub of Venus
that is sub as well as the sub-sub lord of the 9th cusp. Now for
complete genetical connection, the ascendant of the father should
also be ruled by the planets co-ruling the 9th cusp of the young
man or by the planets that are in the star or sub or sub-sub of
the planets co-ruling the 9th cusp of the young man. Planets
Mars-Sat-Ven-Jup rules the ascendant of the father as seen from
Figure 4.3. The planets co-ruling the 9th cusp of the young man
are 5at-Moon-Ven-Ven. It can be seen that Sat and Venus appears
in the ascendant of the father directly. Now Mars and Jupiter can
appear only in the ascendant of the father to confirm fatherhood
if these planets are in the star, sub or sub-sub of the planets coruling the 9th cusp of the young man. Now we find that Mars in
the chart of the young man is in the sub of Venus and Jupiter is
in the star of Saturn and sub of Venus. Thus we assume that
there is a complete genetical connection between the father and
the child.

Your True Horoscope
We can also check the genetical connection between the
father and the child from the 5th cusp of the father's chart. The
sub-sub lord of the 5th cusp in the Figure 4.3 is Mercury that is in
Venus star. The Moon's star of the young man is Venus. The
planets Jup-Mer-Ket-Mer rule the 5m cusp. The ascendant of the
young man (Ref. Figure 4.2) is ruled by Mer-Mars-Ven-Jupiter. In
the father's horoscope, Mars and Venus are both in the sub of
Jupiter. Flence we assume that the planets as per the 5m cusp of
the father's horoscope rightly represent the ascendant of the
young man.
Step III: We may now check the genetical connection of
the young man with his mother from the 4th cusp in the chart.
The sub-sub lord of the 4th cusp is Jupiter that is the Moon's star
lord in the mother's chart (Refer Figure 4.4). Now the 4th cusp in
the young man's chart is ruled by Sun-Venus-Rahu-Jup.
The ascendant of the mother is Mercury-Moon-Mars-Rahu.
Now Mercury in the young man's chart is in the star of Sun, and
Moon and Mars are in the star or the sub of Venus. As such we
assume the planets co-ruling the ascendant of mother are related
to the planets co-ruling the 4th cusp of the young man.
In the same way, we may check the correction of the
horoscope for genetical connections with the younger or the
elder co-born.

Chapter 4: Construction of True Horoscope
Lagna Chart Bhava Chart

Your True Horoscope
Fig. 4.2 Contd.
Nirayana Cusps
Planetary Position

Chapter 4: Construction of True Horoscope
Lagna Chart
Bhava Chart
Cusp Chart

Your True Horoscope
Fig.4.3Contd..
NirayanaCusps
Planetary Position

Chapter 4: Construction of True Horoscope
Lagna Chart
Bhava Chart
Cusp Chart

Your True Horoscope
Fig.4.4Contd.,
Nirayana Cusps
Planetary Position

Chapter 4: Construction of True Horoscope 109
Composite Approach to Rectification of Chart without
use of Progression Concept
We have already explained that for constructing a true
horoscope we need to correct all the 1 2 cuspal positions to justify
the genetical connections, the promise of each cusp and also
the dasa potential of each planet to justify events in the life of
the native. We will discuss this approach through examples.
Example 1 : Figure 4.5 is the chart of a business man who
gave the following birth data:
T.O Birth: 09.30 A, M
P.0 Birth: Jaipur, (India)

Your True Horoscope
Figure 4.5
Lagna Chart Bhava Chart
Cusp Chart

Chapter 4: Construction of True Horoscope
Fig.4.5Contd.,
Nirayana Cusps
Planetary Position

Your True Horoscope
The gentleman also gave the following important events of
his life and requested that his chart should be rectified if needed.
S.No. Date and Time
3. Death of Father 5.3.1991
04.00 AM approximately.
4. Death of Wife 27.5.1994
5. Date of 2nd Marriage 11.2.1 997.
Let us first check the correctness of the chart constructed
as per the recorded time.
Step I: For a horoscope to be correct, the ascendant subsub lord should reveal the Moon's star lord. In this chart the subsub lord of the ascendant is Venus and the Moon's star in the
chart is Ketu that does not represent Venus. There appears no
relationship of Venus with Ketu directly. However if we take Ketu
to represent Moon and Jup, we do find that there is a relationship
between the Moon's star and the sub-sub lord of the ascendant.
Step 1 1 : Verification of the Event of Marriage: Generally
the Vedic Astrologers consider the 7th house as the primary house
for marriage. The other relevant houses are taken as:
Second House: It is the house of family. Marriage is taken
as an addition in the family. Here I would like to suggest to the
reader to ponder a little bit. The marriage may be an addition in
the family if the marriage partner joins the family. Moreover, the
2nd house is in fact, a house of danger, and death to the 7th
house.
Fifth House: It is the house of magnetic attractions, socially
accepted forms of courtship, romantic affairs and progeny.

Chapter 4: Construction of True Horoscope 1 13
Eleventh House: It is the house of fulfillment of one's desires
and personal needs. It is also the fifth house from the 7th House.
Twelfth House: It is considered as the house of pleasures
of bed. How far we need to take 12th house to analyse marriage
is a question for debate. One can enjoy bed comforts outside
wedlock. This house is the house of self-undoing and is generally
regarded as a house of loss.
Fourth House: No doubt it is considered as the house of
domestic happiness but why should it need to take part in enacting
marriage is questionable. This house being 1 2th to the 5th house
can detail for disturbed married life.
From the above discussion it is clear that the houses that
should take part in enacting marriage are 5, 7 and 1 1 .
The promise or denial of marriage should be decided as
follows:
1. Marriage is promised if:
a) The sub-sub lord of the ascendant is linked directly or
indirectly with the 7th cusp.
b) The sub-sub lord of the 7th cusp is linked with 7th cusp
directly or indirectly.
Direct linkage means the star lord of the sub sub is in the
primary cusp and its sub lord comes in the supporting cusp.
Indirect linkage means that the star lord of the sub sub lord
appears in one of the supporting cusps and its sub lord
appears in the primary cusp.
2. Marriage is denied if both the following conditions exist in the
horoscope.

Your True Horoscope
a) The sub-sub lord of the ascendant is linked to 4, 6, 10
and 12 without involving 5 or 7 or 1 1 cusps or the sub
sub lord involves 7th cusp and commits to only 2, 4, 6,
10 without committing to 5 or 7 or 1 1 .
b) The sub-sub lord of the 7m cusp is linked to 2, 4, 6, 10,
& 12 cusps through its star lord without being linked to
5 or 1 1 or 7th cusp sub sub lord involves 7th cusp and
commits only to 2, 4, 6, orlO and does not commit to
The native of this chart got married on 20.6.1978 in the
joint period of Sun-Ra-Mo-Sat-Ven as DIBIAISIP lords.
The sub-sub lords of the ascendant and the 7th cusp show
promise of marriage. Here Venus is the sub-sub lord of both the
ascendant as well as the 7th cusp. It is in its own star and sub and
sub sub Moon. Moon is placed in the llthBhava. The chart thus
clearly promises marriage.
Now Marriage takes place only in a specific Bhukti in a dasa
which is either favourable for marriage or at least is neutral to the
relevant cusps that take part in marriage. The specific Bhukti has
to meet one of the following conditions:
1 . The Bhukti lord may appear as one of the planets co-ruling
the 7th cusp and has positional status but should not be in
the sub that appears in the 6th cusp.
2. If the Bhukti lord that appears in the 7th cusp has no positional
status then its star lord should appear in 5 or 7 or 1 1 and
sub lord should appear in the 7th cusp.
3. The Bhukti lord's star lord may appear in 5m or 11m cusp
and sub lord should appear in 7m cusp.
a) The sub-sub lord of the Bhukti lord should preferably be
connected to 5 or 7 or 1 1 or neutral houses.

Chapter 4: Construction of True Horoscope 115
b) Here in this chart the Bhukti lord appears as the sub lord
of the 7th cusp but has no positional status because
Mars and Saturn are in its star. But Rahu is in Sun's star
that appears in 5th cusp as sub-sub lord and Rahu being
in its own sub, the Bhukti lord meets the relevant
condition. More over Rahu is in Venus sub-sub that is
the sub-sub lord of the 7th cusp.
Similarly we can check whether all the planets that have taken
part in enacting the event of marriage have the right to do so or
not. Antara, Sookshma and Prana lords are both strongly linked
with favourable as well as unfavorable houses. The Sookshma
lord Saturn has the positional status and is appearing as the subsub lord of the 6th and 1 0th cusp and as such causes a doubt
whether it can enact marriage or not especially when through its
star and sub also it is linked with 6th and 12th cusps. Saturn's
transit in Ketu star on the day of marriage further complicates
the problem.
Step III: Birth of Female Child: The native should be
potent and should have the procreative power to produce a
child. If the sub-sub lord of the 5th cusp is linked through its star
lord with favourable houses with respect to 5th cusp, and also
supported by its sub lord and the sub-sub lord, we generally
declare that the native is potent. A person lacks potency if the
sub-sub lord establishes links with only unfavourable houses like
4th and 12th cusp (i.e. 12th and 8m from 5th) and 10m which is 12m
to 11th.
Potency of the native, however, does not ensure child birth.
The person is said to be destined to have a child or is said to have
the procreative power, if the sub-sub lord of the 5m cusp
establishes links, through its star lord and sub lord as shown below:

Your True Horoscope
Star lord in Sub lord in
The appearance of sub lord in 4 and 12; or 4 or 12 indicates
delay in child birth
The sub-sub lord of the sub-sub lord of the 5th cusp should
be in cuspal positions, which are favourable to 5th and 2nd cusps.
If the sub lord of the sub-sub lord of the 5th cusp is linked
simultaneously to 4th and 12th cusp, it indicates loss of first
conception. It is termed as abortion in case of female nativity.
Lack of potency automatically results in lack of procreative
power. For the potency and procreative power of the partner
we have to analyse the 11th cusp. For child birth, both the
partners need to have the procreative power.
Sex of the Child: To be honest, this area needs still much
research to provide a foolproof prediction. Flowever, the various
methods that are used are listed below:
1 . Analyse the planets co-ruling the 5th cusp and the signs in
which they appear in various cuspal positions. If the planets
are placed in cusps, which rise, in male signs, the chance of
getting a male child is more.
2. The sub-sub lord of the sub-sub lord of the 5th cusp if it is in
male sign, one gets a male child. In case all the planets are in
female signs in a horoscope, we should look to cuspal positions
of the sub-sub lord. If it appears in male signs predominantly,
we may predict a male child.
3. Another method, which is used by some astrologers, is that
if the sub-sub lord of the 5th cusp or its star lord is in Sun
hora, one will get a male child.

Chapter 4: Construction of True Horoscope 117
4. Research minded astrologers could use the Nadi concept of
former or later part of the sub-sub lord of the 5th cusp as
follows:
Each sub-sub arc is of a particular length. If the sub-sub arc
is inlst half of this space in male signs or 2nd half of the space in
the female signs, one may get a male child. For example; suppose
in a male chart the 5th cusp rises at 12 degree 22 minutes46
seconds in Virgo. Jupiter will rule it. The sub-sub of Jupiter starts
from 12 degree 11 minutes 20 seconds and ends at 12 degree
27 minutes 20 seconds. Thus, the sub-sub arc rising on the 5th
cusp is in the 2nd part. Virgo being a female sign, the 2nd part
indicates male child.
My recommendation is only for the methods explained in
para 2 and 4 combined.
Timing Child Birth: If the native is promised progeny, he/
she will get the child during the joint period of the planets that
are linked with cusps 2, 5 and 11 through their star lords and
supported by their sub lords and sub-sub lords. The transit of
dasa periods, Sun and Moon must agree. Simultaneous links of
the dasa periods with unfavourable houses indicates problems in
pregnancy period. The sub-sub lord of the 5th cusp will indicate
the Moon star of the child. The planets co-ruling the 5th cusps or
planets in their star, sub or sub-sub will decide the ascendant of
the child.
In the chart of the native Figure 4.5 we notice that Sun is
the sub sub lord of the 5th cusp. Sun that is in Venus star that
appears in 1 1 th cusp and Sun is in Rahu sub that represents
Saturn which appears in 2. Thus we find that the native has the
procreative power and is capable to produce a child,
The native of this chart got his first female issue on 1 1 .7, 1979.
The chart of the girl is shown in the Figure 4.6

Your True Horoscope
Cusp Chart

Chapter 4: Construction of True Horoscope
Fig. 4.6 Contd..
Nirayana Cusps
Planetary Position

Your True Horoscope
Let us check the genetical connection of the girl from the 5th
cusp of the native (Figure 4.5). The sub-sub lord of the 5th cusp
is Sun and the girl's Moon star is Moon. Neither Sun has any
connection with Moon nor does Moon have any connection with
Sun in Figure 4.5. This indicates that Sun cannot come as the
sub-sub lord of the 5th cusp.
Step IV : Death of Father: let us first discuss the Criterion
for fixing Markesh Dasa
1 . Dasa Lord should be a co-ruling planet in 1 st cusp or 8th
cusp or Badhaka. Planets placed in 1 or 8 are to be treated
as co-ruling planets with PS or no PS.
2. In case of Rahu/Ketu either they themselves should be coruling planets in 1 or 8 or the planets they represent should
be co-ruling planets.
3. Dasa lord should justify necessary and essential condition
for death both as per PS and Stellar status. Dasa lord should
be linked with the sub sub lord of the 8m cusp.
4. In case of Rahu or Ketu dasa, Rahu as Rahu or Ketu as Ketu
as well as the planets Rahu/Ketu represent all should fulfill
necessary & essential conditions for death.
Fixing Transit Position of Sat, Jup, Rahu, Ketu for Timing
Death
a. Note the SSL of 8th cusp and the planets placed in 8m house.
b. Note the planets that are in the star of SSL of 8th cusp (planets
placed in 8th house may betreated as virtual SSL of 8th cusp)
c. Reject the planets that do not justify death (Both necessary
& essential condition)

Chapter 4: Construction of True Horoscope 121
d. Note the star lord of SSL of the 8th cusp. Note whether it
justifies death or not.
e. Reject those planets that do not justify death.
f. Sat will transit in the sign & star of those planets those are
strongest significator of death from the above list.
The native lost his father in the joint period of Mo-Ve-RaMo-Ve. Here the Death has taken place in Moon Dasa
that does not satisfy the necessary conditions.
Step V: The native lost his wife due to death on 27.5.1994
in the joint period of Mars-Jup-Ket-Jup-Jup. The death of wife
takes place in the dasa of a planet that is simultaneously linked
with 7th and 2nd cusp. Here the dasa lord Mars appears to have
no direct connection with the 2nd cusp. But since Mars is in Rahu
star, it is as good as in Saturn's star also because Rahu represents
Saturn. Thus dasa lord appears to have connection with 7th and
2nd cusp (because Saturn is the star lord of the 2nd cusp). The
other planets that have caused death are Jup and Ketu. Here
Ketu represents Jupiter also. Jup is strongly linked with the
ascendant i.e. both maraka and badhaka.But both Jupiter and
Ketu do not have much connection with the other maraka house
i.e. 2nd from the 7th cusp..
Step VI: Second Marriage: The concept of second
marriage is subjective. To some it means re-marriage after the
death of the first wife or after a legal divorce. Some enjoys the
legal or religion sanctity to have a second wife while the first wife
is alive and also lives with the native. Astrologers quote a number
of planetary combinations or yoga's that cause for second
marriage. There are astrologers who believe that the planets
Mercury and Jupiter being lords of the dual signs play significant
role in causing second marriage. According to them, if the sub

Your True Horoscope
lord of the 7th cusp is either Mercury or any planet occupying a
dual sign or deposited in the constellation of a planet in a dual
sign, there will be more than one marriage. If we seriously apply
these rules, we will perforce have to believe that a very large
number of persons have to have second marriage.
In Cuspal Interlinks Theory, the problem is analysed as
follows:
The ninth house is taken as the house of plurality of sexual
relations being 3rd from 7th. It is thus taken as the primary house
for second marriage. If the ascendant sub-sub lord maintains
relationship with 9th cusp through its star lord and with cusps 5
or 7 or 1 1 through its sub or sub-sub lord, the native is promised
the enjoyment of plurality of sexual relationships. The ascendant
sub-sub lord can also establish link with the 9th cusp through its
sub lord when it is linked to 1 1 th cusp through its star lord. The
sub-sub lord of the 7th cusp if linked with the 9th cusp through its
star lord and to cusps 5 or 1 1 through its sub or sub-sub lord it
promises plurality of sexual relations.
If the above two conditions exist and also if the 9th cusp
sub-sub lord maintains link with the 7th cusp through its star lord
and is supported by its sub and sub-sub lord, or if the star lord of
9th cusp sub sub lord appears in 1 1 and its sub lord appears in 7
then second marriage can be said to be promised. All about the
second marriage and life partner need to be analysed by taking
the 9th cusp as the primary cusp.
The second marriage will take place in the Bhukti period of
the planet that is strongly linked with 9th cusp.
The native had the second marriage on 1 1 .2.1 997. A person
can have a second marriage when the following conditions exist
in the horoscope.

Chapter 4: Construction of True Horoscope 123
1 . The sub-sub lord of the 7th cusp should be linked through its
star lord with the 9th cusp or its star lord may appear in 5th
or 1 1 th cusp and sub lord in 9th cusp to indicate plurality in
sexual relationship.
2. The sub-sub lord of the 9th cusp should link itself through its
star lord with the 7th cusp or its star lord may appear in the
1 1 th cusp and sub lord in the 7th cusp.
Here in the Figure 4.5, the sub-sub lord of the 7th cusp is
Venus who is in its own star. Venus appears in 9th cusp. Venus is in
the sub of Venus and sub sub of Moon that appears in 7. This
promises the possibility of plurality of sexual relationships. Rahu
is the sub sub lord of 9th cusp. Rahu is in Sun star that does not
appear in 7. Thus it does not promise second marriage.
The above discussion in step I to step VI clearly points out
that the horoscope needs rectification.
Rectification of the chart in such cases when the time of
birth is recorded as correctly as possible should be done in the
following ways so as to justify the life pattern of the individual.
1 . Take the RFb at the time of judgement and put the sub-sub
lord of Moon as the possible sub-sub lord of the ascendant.
Check that this planet bears a relationship with the Moon's
star lord in the native's chart. If not try other planets
appearing in the RP (Moon) series.
2. Analyse the planetary positions in the native's chart and select
the planets that bear relationship with the Moon's star lord.
Try those planets one at a time as the sub-sub lord of the
ascendant and check the accuracy for various cuspal
positions.

Your True Horoscope
Note: In latter examples we will talk about the theory
of rectification based on latest research findings.
To rectify the horoscope, the ruling planets were taken on
18.1 .2005 at 17.22.2 7 hrs at Noida, (UP), India. The RFfe was as
follows:
Day Lord: Mars
RP (Ascdt): Mer-Jup-Moon-Rahu
RP (Moon): Mars-Ven-Ra Jup.
So Jupiter has come as the sub-sub lord of RP (Moon). From
the analysis of the native's chart also we find that Moon's star
lord Ketu is in Jupiter star.
Hence it was decided to put Jupiter as the sub-sub lord of
the ascendant in the native's chart. The sub-sub arc of Jupiter
sub sub in Rahu sub begins at the time 09.26.23 hrs and lasts up
to 09.27.15 hrs. So we have to play around this time gap to fix
the other cuspal positions to justify all the events and promise of
various cusps in the life of the native. The rectified horoscope
occurred at 09.27.10 hrs as is shown in Figure 4.7.

Chapter 4: Construction of True Horoscope
Lagna Chart Bhava Chart
Cusp Chart

Your True Horoscope
Fig. 4.7 Contd..
Nirayana Cusps
Planetary Position

Chapter 4: Construction of True Horoscope 127
Verification of the Rectified Chart
Step 1 : The sub-sub lord of the ascendant Jupiter is linked
with the Moon's star lord Ketu because Ketu is in Jupiter's star,
Planets co-ruling ascendant, Moon and Sun establish desired
relationship with 1, 7and 10.
Step 2: Promise of Marriage: Jupiter the sub-sub lord of
the ascendant as well as the 7th cusp is in Mars star that appears
as the star lord of the 5th cusp. It is in Rahu sub that appears as
the sub lord of the 7th cusp. It is in Venus sub-sub that appears
as the sub lord of the 1 1th cusp. Thus marriage is promised.
Marriage took place on 20.6.1978 in the joint period of Sun-RaMo-Jup-Sat. Here the Bhukti lord and all other planets are primarily
linked with 5, 7 and 11 cusps.
Step 3: Sub sub lord of 5th cusp is Jupiter that is. in Mars
star that appears in 5. Jupiter is in the sub of Rahu that represents
Saturn as sign lord. Saturn appears as star and sub lord of 2.
Thus the native is procreative and has the capability to produce
a child. Birth of 1st child took place on 11.7.1979 (Ref Figure
4.6). The 5th cusp of the native clearly ensures the genetical
connection. The sub-sub lord of the 5th cusp is Jupiter and the
Moon's star lord of the child is Moon. Moon in the chart is in Ketu
star. Ketu represents Jupiter being in its star. More over Moon is
in Jupiter sub.
Step 4: Death of Father - Death of native's father took
place on 5.3.1991 in the joint period of Moon-Ven-Ra-Mo-Ra.
Now in the rectified chart Moon is in Ketu star that appears as the
sub lord of the 4th cusp and sub-sub of the 9th cusp. Thus the
dasa lord is simultaneously linked with the ascendant of the father
(9th house) and the 8th house from the 9th house i.e. the 4th
house. Dasa lord is linked to Jupiter that is placed in the 8th Bhava.
Moon is in Ketu star that is the sub sub lord of 9 and sub lord of
4. Moon is in the sub of Jupiter that is the sub sub lord of Badhaka
with respect to the 9th house. Dasa period lords are significator
of the houses of death with respect to 9th cusp.

Your True Horoscope
Step S: Loss of Wife - The native lost his wife in the joint
period of Mars-Jup-Ket-Mo-Sat. In the rectified chart Mars is in
Rahu star that is the sub lord of the 7th cusp and as Rahu
represents Saturn, Mars is said to be in Saturn's star. Thus Mars is
linked simultaneously with 7th and 2nd cusp. We may check the
potential of Jup, Ket, Mo, and Saturn for causing the death of
the wife. All are related to death inflicting houses.
Step 6: Second Marriage Promise - The sub-sub lord of
the 7th cusp is Jupiter. It is in the Mars star that appears as the
star lord of the 5th cusp and is placed in the 9th Bhava. It is in
Rahu sub that appears as the star lord of the 9th cusp. Thus it
indicates plurality of sexual relationship. The sub-sub lord of the
9th cusp is Ket. It is in Jupiter star that appears as the sub-sub
lord of the 7th cusp. Hence 2nd marriage is promised. Now the 2nd
marriage takes place in the joint period of the planets that are
linked with 5, 9 and 1 1 . The Bhukti lord has to be linked with the
primary cusp i.e. 9th for the 2nd marriage in the same way as the
Bhukti lord should be linked with the 7th cusp for the 1 st marriage.
Now the 2nd marriage was held on 1 1 .2.1997 in the joint period
of Mars-Ket-Sun-Sat-Mer. Here the Bhukti lord Ket itself appears
as the sub-sub lord of the 9th cusp. It is in the Jupiter star that is
the sub sub lord of the 5th cusp and sub Lord of 9. Ketu is in Mars
sub that appears in 5. Hence the Bhukti lord meets the required
condition to enact second marriage. The potential of the planets
i.e. Sun, Sat and Mer can also be verified. All are strongly linked
Thus the correctness of the chart is verified.
Note: The chart may need microscopic rectification in
the light of the author's advanced research techniques
of timing events. This will be explained in some examples
latter on.
Example 2: Figure 4.8 is the chart of a female. She died on

Chapter 4: Construction of True Horoscope
Lagna Chart Bhava Chart
Cusp Chart

Your True Horoscope
Fig.4.8Contd..
NirayanaCusps
Planetary position

Chapter 4: Construction of True Horoscope 131
For such a short life, the sub-sub lord of the ascendant should
be strongly linked with Maraka and Badhaka houses through the
star lord and its sub lord should not negate the signification of
the star lord. Let us verify the chart.
Step 1 : The sub-sub lord of the ascendant is Saturn. It has
positional status. As such it is a strong signif icator of the ascendant
i.e. the house of longevity. Saturn is in Rahu star which appears
in cusps 2, 5, 7, 8 and 3 (resident position of Rahu). Now Rahu
represents Jupiter and Ketu. Therefore Saturn is as good as in
Jup and Ketu stars also. Alt those cusps in which Jup and Ketu
appear will also be involved. Sat is in its own sub. Since Sat appears
in 1 st and 6th cusps it negates 2nd and 7th cusp signification of
Saturn. The ascendant sub-sub therefore does not promise too
short longevity.
Moreover, the sub-sub lord of the ascendant i.e. Saturn also
1 does not establish any relationship with Moon's star lord Mars.
Step 2: The sub-sub lord of 3rd cusp is Venus. It is in Rahu
star. Thus Venus, like Saturn, will also be in Jupiter and Ketu star.
Venus is in the sub of Mer that appears in 3, 7, 8, 9 and 11 cusps.
The significations of 2nd cusp thus stand negated. The sub-sub
lord of the 3rd cusp also does not promise too short longevity.
Step 3: The sub-sub lord of the 8th cusp is Mercury that is
in Moon star. Moon appears in 1 st and 9th cusp as star lord. This
also does not promise short longevity.
The above discussion clearly proves that the chart needs
rectification. Figure 4.9 shows the rectified chart.

Your True Horoscope
Lagna Chart
Bhava Chart

Chapter 4: Construction of True Horoscope
Fig. 4.9 Contd.,
Nirayana Cusps
Planetary Position

Your True Horoscope
Analysing the planetary positions, it appears that Moon, Mars,
Ven, Sun or Rahu can come as the sub-sub lord of the ascendant
to establish relationship with Moon's star lord. The first planet
that can be tried before Saturn is Rahu. Since Rahu is in Ketu
star and Ketu being the resident of the 9th cusp will not cause for
short life. Next we can use Mars as the sub sub lord of the
ascendant. The horoscope with Mars as the sub-sub lord accounts
for short life (Refer Figure 4.9). Mars is in Venus star and Sun sub.
Venus appears in 2, 4, 5, 7, 8, 11 and 12. However, it can be
seen that Sun the sub lord of Venus does not appear in any
cuspal position as star or sub or sub-sub lord but is the resident
of 12th house. This negates the 5th house signification being in
the 8th house from the 5th house. The significations of ligand
12th houses are supported by the sub lord Sun, But what does it
mean? It only means fulfillment of desire by death because of
12th house commitment. Thus the ascendant sub-sub lord Mars
promises short life. Now Mercury appears as the sub-sub lord of
the 3rd and the 8th cusp. It is in Moon star and Jupiter sub and
Rahu sub-sub. This clearly proves short life.
Death of the native occurred in the joint period of Mar-RaKet-Mer-Mer. Dasa lord appears as the sub-sub lord of ascendant
and sign lord of 8. It is in Venus star that appears as the star lord
of the 8th cusp and is placed in the ascendant. Thus the dasa lord
is simultaneously linked with 1 and 8. Its sub Lord Sun with
positional status is placed in the Maraka house 12.The Bhukti lord
Rahu itself appears as the sub lord of the 8th cusp and is in Ketu
star that appears as the sub lord of the ascendant. Since Ketu is
in Rahu star it can be assumed that Rahu is in Rahu star. Thus
Rahu has the capability to inflict death.

Chapter 4: Construction of True Horoscope 135
It may be remembered that if the sub-sub lord of the
ascendant promises short life then the joint period of the
planets that co-rules the 8th cusp or the ascendant and if
these planets have the capability to inflict death, their joint
period is dangerous. Her death has taken place in the joint
period of the planets Mars, Rahu, Ket and Mercury. Mars, Rahu
and Mercury co-rule the 8th cusp directly. Ketu is the sub lord of
the ascendant and represents Rahu. As such all the dasa period
planets co-rule the 8th cusp and have the capacity to inflict death
being significators of Maraka and Badhaka.
Now the question that we need to analyse is why death has
not occurred in the Antaras of Saturn and Mercury.
Saturn as discussed above has not the capability to inflict
death because it is in its own sub that appears in the 6th cusp.
Mercury Antara runs from 28.9.73 to 20.1 1 .73. Mercury no
doubt is linked with 2 and 7 but is also strongly linked with 9th
cusp through star lord and is also committed to the 9th cusp by
its sub lord Jup.
Here another question arises. Why then Mercury appears
as the Sookshma and Prana lord at the time of death. It should
be remembered that for fixing the death we need to fix
the Bhukti and Antara lords which are strongly linked with
, Maraka and Badhaka houses. But the Sookshma and
Prana lords are fixed as per the cause of death which is
decided by the sub-sub lord of the 8th cusp. In this chart
Mercury is the sub sub lord of the 8th cusp. As such Mercury can
appear as Sookshma and Prana lord.

Your True Horoscope
Another doubt that comes in the mind of the reader is why
Rahu Bhukti should give death when it is in the sub of Saturn
that appears in the 6th cusp. Here we should note that Rahu is in
Ketu star that is the sub Lord of ascendant. Since ketu represents
Mercury and Rahu is as good as in Mercury star that is the sub
sub lord of the 8th cusp. Thus Rahu involves both the ascendant
as well as the 8m cusp. Its sub lord does not negate either of the
involved houses. More over Rahu is in the sub sub of Venus that
appears in 7 and 8.Rahu thus has the full power to enact death
of the native.
Thus we may conclude that the horoscope of Figure 4.9 is
the true horoscope of the native. The transit of planets at the
time of death can be analysed from Figure 4.10.
Fig. 10 Planetary Position
It can be seen that transit agrees with the dasa period to
allow the planets to cause death of the native. Saturn transits in
Gemini ruled by Mercury that is the sub sub lord of the 8th cusp.

Chapter 4: Construction of True Horoscope 137
Example 3: A gentleman born on 13.1.1964 at Gwalior
(M.P), India at 19.25 hrs. He requested fora true horoscope. He
gave the following details:
1. Education: B.E. Electronics.
2. Served as Lecturer in an Engineering college from August
3. Joined NTPC on 18.2.1987.
4. Joined DOT on 20.2.1989 as class I officer.
5. Marriage Engagement on 24.4.1992.
7. 1st Promotion 1.1.1993
8. First female child 5.1 .1994 at 04.24.28 hrs.
9. Transfer 7.7.1994
13. Second promotion with transfer 16.12.1997
14. Challan in court 24.1.1999
16. Unfavourable court decision 30.7.2003
17. Appeal admission 19.8.2003
18. Suspension 23.9.2003
Figure 4.11 shows the chart of the native as per recorded
birth data. Let us analyse the chart for its accuracy.

Your True Horoscope
Lagna Chart Bhava Chart

Chapter 4: Construction of True Horoscope
Fig. 4. 1 1 Contd..
NirayanaCusps
Planetary Position

Your True Horoscope
Step I: Check the relationship of the sub-sub lord of the
ascendant with Moon's star. Here in this chart the sub-sub lord of
the ascendant is Ketu and the Native's Moon star is Venus. Since
Ketu in the chart is in Venus star we take it that it establishes
relationship with Moon's star lord. More over Venus itself is in
Ketu sub. Planets co-ruling ascendant, Moon and Sun also link
with houses 1 , 7 and 10.
Step 1 1 : Check the linkages of the ascendant sub-sub lord
for the following:
i. Educational prospects.
ii. Dignified profession in service.
iii. Promise for marriage
iv. Loss of reputation due to CBI case
v. Suspension in service.
Educational Prospects: For achieving qualification by
attendance in a school or college the ascendant sub-sub lord
should establish relation with 4th or 9th cusp. Here Ketu the subsub lord of the ascendant is in Venus star that appears in 4 as well
as in 9. Ketu is in sub of Mars that does not appear in any of the
houses which are detrimental to the 4th or the 9m house. Thus
the chart promises good educational prospect.
Dignified Profession in Service: Fora person to achieve
excellence in profession, the ascendant sub-sub lord should
establish relationship with the 1 0m cusp either directly through
its star lord or its star lord may appear in 1 or 1 1 and the sub
should appear in 10m cusp. In this chart Ketu, the sub-sub lord
of the ascendant is directly linked with the 10m cusp through its
star lord Venus that appears as the star lord of the 10m cusp.
The sub lord of the sub-sub lord of the ascendant is Mars. It
appears as the Sign lord of 5m and the 10m cusp and is itself

Chapter 4: Construction of True Horoscope 141
resident of 6th cusp but without PS. Commitment to the 5th cusp
causes adverse affects to the house of profession being 8th from
it. This indicates that the native will have to face problems in
profession. The fact that native was placed under suspension
confirms the promise.
Promise for Marriage: The ascendant sub-sub lord Ketu
is directly linked with 5, 7, and 11 cusps through its star lord. It
clearly promises marriage.
Loss of Reputation due to CBI: First house in the
horoscope stands for Status and reputation of the individual. By
status we mean the standing of the native in society. Reputation
means the views that are generally held about the native or the
generally accepted estimation of the native as having particular
qualities or attributes. A noble man has a reputation and so does
a Don of the underworld. Twelfth house to any house is the
house of dissolution of the attributes of the house. Thus twelfth
house takes the responsibility of the primary house to reveal the
promise of any loss of reputation.
What for a Person Loses Reputation: Broadly speaking
a person loses his reputation due to:
1 . Imprisonment
2. Raids conducted by investigating agencies like C.B.I, C.I.D,
Anti Corruption Bureau, and Revenue Departments.
3. Any type of misconduct.
4. False Allegations.
Let us discuss about Raids by C.B.I. A person suffers trauma
due to raid when any investigating agency comes to a conclusion
after analyzing preliminary investigation report that a man might
have committed an unlawful act. This act may be
misappropriation of funds, forgery of document, forgery of

Your True Horoscope
negotiable instrument, disproportionate assets, fraudulent salepurchase of shares, unlawful professional activities like prostitution,
gambling, speculation, or criminal acts etc. The trauma due to
raid is indicated by the 8th cusp. The person will suffer the trauma
as per the cause for which his premises is raided. This is indicated
by the linking cuspal position whose sub-sub lord involves the
12th cusp through its star lord and commits to 8th cusp through
its sub lord. This is explained below:
Linking Cause for Raid
Cusps
1 Involvement in secret activities
2 Non-disclosure of true income, spurious currency
3 Forgery of documents
4 Disproportionate assets.
5 Fraudulent sale-purchase of share, gambling,
speculation, entertainment place used for unlawful
activities
6 Sale-purchase of stolen goods or spurious drugs.
7 Secret troubles caused by partner.
8 Criminal acts, forgery of father's will, bribe, taxes not
paid as per rules etc.
9 Plagiarism in research work, treachery and deception
to newly acquainted person
10 Misconduct or misuse of official position to cause loss
to the government
11 Misappropriation of funds, criminal acts of elder coborn or friend.
12 Secret activities

Chapter 4: Construction of True Horoscope
Promise of Raid : We need to analyse the chart as follows:
The sub-sub lords of ascendant and 12th cusp should
establish linkages through their star lords and sub lords as below
to promise raid.
Star lord in Sub lord in
The sub-sub lords of the sub-sub lords of the ascendant
and 1 2th cusp should be in favourable cuspal positions with respect
to 1 2th cusp.
Invariably the raid is conducted by the government agencies.
Thus 1 0th cusp sub-sub lord should also establish linkages through
its star lord with 12th cusp and the sub lord of the sub-sub lord
will indicate what for the native is put to the trauma of raid. The
nature of agency will depend upon the nature of the sub-sub
lord of the 10th cusp.
In this chart sub sub lord of the ascendant is Ketu that
represents Jupiter and Venus. Ketu is in Venus star does not
appear in 12. But it does appear in 1 . Ketu is in the sub of Mars
that does not appear in 12. Thus we find that the ascendant
does not promise loss of reputation. Thus horoscope needs
rectification.
Suspension in Service:
In legal terms suspension is not regarded as punishment. It
is only a means to disallow a person to do his duty for a period till
some investigation is carried out for any misconduct. In practical
life suspension attaches a stigma and the person suffers
from trauma due to loss of reputation and also loss of
emoluments.

Your True Horoscope
The person is suspended or may be suspended if the following
conditions exist in the natal or horary chart. The sub-sub lords
of the ascendant, 1 0th cusp and 1 1 th cusp should establish
linkages' as shown below:
Star Lord In Sub Lord In
The sub-sub lords of the sub-sub lords should not appear in
favourable positions with respect to 10.
In this chart the sub sub lord of ascendant is linked to 10
and 8 simultaneously. It only indicates continuous mental agony.
Step 3: The native achieved the degree of B.E.
Electronics. Let us analyse the chart to see whether it promises
this qualification or not. For achieving the degree in Electronics
Engineering, the native has to first study physics, chemistry and
mathematics in his school. For this the planet Sun, Venus, Mercury,
Mars and the cusps 2, 3, and 6 should maintain relationship with
4th cusp. In this chart Sun, Venus and Mars do not have any
signification of the 4th house. Now let us examine the linkage of
2nd, 3rd and 6th cusp with the 4m cusp. The sub-sub lord of the
2nd cusp, 3rd cusp and 6m cusp is Saturn. It is in Mars star, Saturn
sub and Mercury sub-sub. As such none of these cusps are linked
to the 4m cusp. This raises serious doubts about the accuracy of
the horoscope.
Step 4: Areas of concentration of professional
activities: Let us first understand howto determine the nature
of profession of a person as per KCIL. This is briefly explained
below:

Chapter 4: Construction of True Horoscope 145
Procedure to determine Profession:
Step 1 : Analyse the Ascendant - Natural inclination of
the native need to match with the promise of the 1 Om cusp. If
the ascendant sub-sub lord establishes strong relationship i.e.
through its star lord with 6th and the 10th house, the person is
more likely to be a service person. If the ascendant is strongly
connected with 7m and the 1 0th house, he is likely to adopt
business as his profession. Strong connection with 5th and 9th
without having any connection with 6, 7, and 10 indicates that
the native is likely to live his life without any professional status.
For the success in service or business the ascendant sub-sub
lord should be linked with cusps 2, 6, 10 and 1 1 through its star
lord and should be supported by its sub and sub-sub lord.
Step 2: Analyse the Tenth House - It is the principle
house for analysing profession. It forms the apex of the
materialistic triplicity. The other two houses, which we study, are
second and sixth. The analysis of the 10th cusp to determine
profession is done as follows:
a. Analyse the sign, star, sub, and sub-sub lord rising on the
10m cusp. The sum total of the attributes of the planets coruling the cusp will show in general the nature of the
Profession of the native.
b. The linkages that the sub-sub lord of the 10m cusp makes
with other cusps through its star lord will indicate the promise
of the 10m cusp and the area of concentration of activities
of profession of the native. The sub and the sub-sub lord of
. the sub-sub lord of the 10m cusp will qualify or specify the
area minutely. The broad areas where the native will like to
concentrate his activities as per the star linkages are shown
below:

Your True Horoscope
Linked Area of Professional activities
House
1 Psychiatrist, a specialist in treating cerebral cases,
neuralgia, coma, head injuries, a yoga practitioner,
physical instructor, professor of psychology, selfventure, advisor in his own field.
2 Professional in financial institutions, revenue
department, economists, accounts department, dental
or E.N.T.clinicS/acoustics, gastro-entomologist section,
jeweller, gems dealer, money lenders.
3 Communication department, print media, information
centers, professionals in E.N.T department, news
correspondent, physiotherapist, anesthetist, neurology
department, commission agencies.
4 Production unit, education institutions, cardiology,
lungs or chest specialists, building construction
organisation, real estate dealers, agriculture farms,
veterinary department, dairy farming, furniture houses.
5 Stock exchange, sports organisations, art and culture,
cinema, places of amusement, manufacturing units of
toys for children, pediatrics or gynecology department,
nuclear science or atomic energy department, clergies.
6 Public health department, chemists, repairing units in
a factory, poultry farms, law department, dealers in
leather, medical profession, labour oriented jobs, dealers
in plastics.

Chapter
Construction of True Horoscope 147
7 Judge in a court of Law, Public relations officer, embassy,
marriage bureaus, advocate dealing divorce cases or
marital problems, Nephrologists, public administration
departments, employment in private companies,
brothels, prostitution, sexologists, doctors dealing in
venereal diseases, private business.
8 Historians, archaeologists, geologists, personnel's
working in insurance, mining, tax collection, Auditing,
CID, CBI Departments, pension cells, surgeons, ONGC
department, death and estate duty collectors,
advocates practicing criminal cases or cases dealing
with legacies and wills, urologists.
9 Research organisations, university, religious
organisations, honorary posts, export houses, pilot,
travel agents, politicians, aeronautical department,
space technology organisations, and advocates.
10 Govt, organisations, production houses, politics, selfventure, managers.
11 Computer hardware, general physicians, charitable
institution, commercial houses, Journalists.
12 Jail department, hospitals, investigating agents,
detectives, research organisations, asylums, foreign
countries.
Step 3: The native will carry out the activities of profession
as per the influence of other cusps sub-sub lords that maintain
relationship through their star lords with the 10m cusp. The sub
lord and the sub-sub lord of the linking planet will qualify or specify
the nature of profession.

Your True Horoscope
Step 4: Eleventh House - The linkage of the sub-sub lord
of this house with ascendant and 10th House through its star
lord represents the success of the native in his profession. This
linkage can also be established as follows:
a. The sub-sub lord of the 1 1 th cusp can link it-self to the 10th
cusp through its star lord and to the 1 st cusp through its
sub lord.
b. The sub-sub lord of the 1 1 th cusp can link to the ascendant
through its star lord and to the 1 0th cusp through its sub
lord.
The native had his first stint in profession as a teacher in an
Engineering college. To be in teaching profession the 4th or 9th
cusp should maintain relationship with the 10th cusp. Here the
sub and sub-sub lord of the 4th cusp is Moon that establishes
direct relationship with the 1 0th cusp and as well as with the 6th
cusp through its star lord Venus that appears as the star lord of
the 1 0th cusp and as well as the star lord of the 6th cusp. Later on
the native joined Govt. Service. This also can be justified through
the sub-sub lord of 10th cusp Rahu that is in its own star and Sun
sub.
Step 5: Birth of a daughter: Let us analyse the 5th cusp.
The sub-sub lord of the 5th cusp is Saturn. It has positional status
and as such causes for the potency of the native. Since Saturn is
also the sub-sub lord of the 2nd cusp, it indicates the native has
the procreative power. Now Saturn is in the sub-sub of Mercury
that occupies a male sign. Moreover the sub-sub arc of Saturn in
the 5th cusp rises in Scorpio sign at 20 deg 55 minutes and 24
seconds. The span of the sub-sub arc of Saturn in Venus sub
starts at 20 deg 45 minutes and 33 secs and ends at 21 deg 06
minutes and 40 seconds. Thus the sub-sub arc of Saturn in the
5th cusp is in the 2nd half and as such cannot account for the
birth of the female child.

Chapter 4: Construction of True Horoscope • 149
Step 6: Genetical Connection -The native got his 1st
female child on 5.1.1994 at 04.24.28 hrs on a Moon's star day.
Since Moon bears no connection with the sub-sub lord of the 5th
cusp, we may assume that the chart shows no genetical
connection.
The above discussion reveals that as far as the chart's
accuracy in respect of promise of various aspects is concerned,
it appears that it needs rectification though in many aspects it
justifies accuracy. Let us now examine the accuracy of the chart
with respect to dasa potential of planets to justify the events
that has happened in the life of the native. We may take first his
marriage.
Step 7: The native got married on 8.7.1992 when he
was running the joint period of Mo-Sat-Sat-Ve-Mo. Here Saturn
has appeared both as the Bhukti lord as well as the Antara lord.
This indicates Saturn should be very strongly linked with 5, 7
and 1 1 under the conditions that we have indicated in example!..
Now Saturn has the positional status in this chart. Saturn appears
as the Sign lord of the 7m cusp. If a planet has PS we treat the
planet as if it is in its own star. Saturn is in its own sub and Mercury
sub-sub. We may say that Saturn is in Saturn star, Saturn sub
and Mercury sub sub. Mercury appears in 5. Thus we find Saturn
has a weak power to enact marriage as per its PS. Let us see
what Saturn offers as per its stellar status.
It is in Mars star. Mars appears as sign lord of 5. Saturn is in
the sub of Saturn that appears as Sign lord of 7. This involvement
and commitment is of relevant cusps but very weak. This type
of weak signification of a planet cannot ensure repetition of the
planet in dasa period sequence. This further confirms that the
chart needs rectification.

Your True Horoscope
Construction of True Chart of the Native
To rectify this chart an Astrologer took ruling planets on
They were as follows:
Day lord: Mercury (Wednesday)
RP (Ascdt): Mer- Mars-Ven-Sat in Gemini sign.
RP (Moon): Mars-Sun-Ra-Jup in Aries sign.
Astrologer assumed that the time given by the native is a
certified time. Thus the astrologer was mainly interested to put
the right sub sub lord of the ascendant.
The sub-sub lord of RP Moon is Jupiter. Since the Moon's
star lord Venus in the native's chart is in the sub of Ketu that
represents Jupiter, it establishes a relationship with the Native's
Moon star. More over in the natal chart Jupiter is in the sub of
Ketu that represents Venus. He decided to put Jupiter as the
sub-sub lord of the ascendant for the rectified chart. Keeping
Jupiter as the sub-sub lord of the ascendant, he only decided to
play around time in seconds to correctly fix the sub-sub lords of
other cusps to justify the promise of each cusp as per the events
of the native's life. The true horoscope as rectified by the
Astrologer is shown in figure 4.1 2.

Chapter 4: Construction of True Horoscope
Lagna Chart Bhava Chart
Cusp Chart

Your True Horoscope
Fig.4.12Contd..
Nirayana Cusps
Planetary Position

Chapter 4: Construction of True Horoscope 153
Let us now verify the corrected chart.
As stated above, the sub-sub lord of the ascendant
establishes relationship with the Moon's star lord Venus.
Let us now check the linkages of the ascendant for other
aspects.
I. Educational Prospects: Jupiter, the sub-sub lord of the
ascendant is in Mercury star that appears as the sub-sub
lord of the 4th cusp. Jupiter has the positional status and is
the sub and sub-sub lord of the 9th cusp. This ensures very
good prospects for education.
I I . Dignified Profession in Service: Jupiter sub-sub lord of
the ascendant is in the star of Mercury and sub of Ketu.
Mercury is the star lord of the ascendant and Ketu is the sub
lord of the 1 1 * cusp. Since Ketu represents Venus, the
ascendant sub-sub lord is linked with 10th cusp also because
Venus appears as the star and sub-sub lord of the 1 0th cusp.
III. Promise for Marriage: Jupiter, the sub-sub lord of the
ascendant is in Mercury star and Ketu sub. Mercury is the
star lord of the 5* cusp and Venus (represented by Ketu) is
the sub lord and sub-sub lord of the 7* cusp. Ketu itself is
the sub lord of the 1 1 th cusp. Thus it clearly promises
marriage.
IV. Loss of Reputation due to CBI case: Jupiter being in
Mercury star and Ketu sub that represents Jupiter and Venus.
Thus Jupiter involves ascendant (status) and commits to
12.This indicates that the native by its own conscious efforts
will cause for the loss of prestige or reputation. Sub sub lord
of 1 2 is Moon that is in Venus star, Venus sub and Jupiter sub
sub. It can be read as that Moon is in Venus star and Jupter

Your True Horoscope
sub. Venus appears in 1, 8and lO(Government) and Jupiter
appears in 12. It justifies that the native may lose reputation.
V. Suspension in Service: Here the sub-sub lord of the
ascendant involves the 1 st and 5th cusps through star lord
and commits to the 8* as well as the 1 0* cusp.
Subjects of Study
As stated above, the native achieved the degree of B.E
Electronics. In the rectified chart, we note that the sub sub lord
of 2 is Jupiter whose star lord is the sub sub lord of 4. Jupiter is
also the sub lord of cusps 3 and 6. The sub sub lord of 3 is
strongly linked with 4.
Areas of concentration of Professional activities:
Mercury the sub-sub lord of the 4* cusp is in Ketu star that
represents Venus that appears in 10. This justifies the native's
stint as a lecturer. Since Venus is the sub-sub lord of the 3rd cusp
and its star lord appears in 10 this indicates the native will use his
knowledge of communication to carry out his professional
activities. The native does more than one type of profession if
the sub sub lord of the 10* cusp is linked with the 12* cusp
directly or indirectly. Here the sub sub lord of 1 0* cusp is Venus
that is placed in 6* Bhava (Service) and 10 (profession) and
commits to the 12th cusp through its sub lord Ketu that
represents Jupiter.
Birth of Female Child: The sub-sub lord of the 5th cusp is
Mars that is in the sub-sub of Saturn. Since Saturn is in Capricorn,
it justifies the birth of the female child.

Chapter 4: Construction of True Horoscope 155
Marriage of the Native: The native got married on
8.7.1992 in the joint period of Mo-Sat-Sat-Mer-Mo. Now the Bhukti
lord and the Antara lord possess the necessary capability to cause
the event of marriage to happen. Saturn having the positional
status is in the 7* cusp and is in the star of Mars that is the subsub lord of the 5* cusp. It is in its own sub and sub-sub of Mercury
that is the star lord of the 5th cusp. Thus Saturn is strongly linked
with the 5th and 7th cusp without having any link with the 6*
cusp.
Birth of Daughter: The native got his first child on 5.1.1994
in the joint period of Mo-Sat-Jup-Jup-Mercury. We have already
indicated that Sat is linked to the 5th cusp. Now Jupiter has
positional status and is in Mercury star that appears as the star
lord of the 5* cusp. Jupiter is in the sub of Ketu that is the sub
lord of the 1 1 * cusp. Thus Jupiter is simultaneously linked with 2,
5 and 11 cusps and thus has appeared both as Antara and
Sookshma lord. The Prana lord Mercury is the star lord of the 5*
cusp. It is in Ketu star that is the sub lord of the ll^cusp. Since
Ketu represents Venus, which appears as the star lord of the 2nd
cusp and sub lord of the 5* cusp, Mercury is linked with the
relevant cusps 2, 5 and 1 1 to ensure the birth of the child. The
horoscope of the child is shown in Figure 4.13.

Your True Horoscope
Lagna Chart
Bhava Chart

Chapter 4: Construction of True Horoscope
Fig. 4.1 3 Co ntd..
Nirayana Cusps
Planetary Position

Your True Horoscope
The 5th cusp of the native's chart is ruled by Mars-Mer-VeMa. The ascendant of the girl is Mars-Sat-Ra-Ra. Here Mars and
Ra that represents Mercury (figure 4.12) have directly appeared
and Sat is in the star of Mars in the native's chart. Hence the 5*
cusp of the native's chart accounts for the ascendant of the
daughter.
Joining First Service: The native joined his first service in
August 1985 when he was running Sun dasa, Saturn Bhukti.
Now Sun Antara is up to 1 1 .8.1 985 and then Moon Antara starts.
Since Moon is strongly linked with 2, 6, 10, through its star lord,
it isexpected that the native should have joined after 1 1 .8.1985.
Leaving the First Job : The native leftthe job on 31 .1 .1987
in the joint period of Sun-Ket-Jup-Sat. A person leaves the job in
the joint period of planets linked with 1, Sand 9. Here the Antara
lord Jupiter is strongly linked with 1 , 5 and 9. Ketu the Sookshma
lord is linked with 5 being in Venus star and Mars sub. Ketu
represents Jupiter and as such it has to give the result of Jupiter
also. Saturn Prana lord is linked with 5 and 9 being in Mars star
and its own sub.
Joining Second Job: The native joined the 2nd job on
18.2.1987 in the joint period of Sun-Ket-Sat-Ven-Rahu. A person
joins the job in the joint period of planets linked with 2, 6 and 10.
The Antara lord Saturn and Sookshma lord Venus being in Mars
star that appears as the sub-sub lord of the 5* cusp should not
allow the native to join the job. It only is justified because Mars is
resident of the 6th cusp and Saturn is the sub-sub lord of the 2nd
cusp.

Chapter 4: Construction of True Horoscope 159
Joining of Third Job: The native joined DOT on 20.2.1 989
in the joint period of Mo-Mars-Ra-Ven-Sun. This joining was
almost as a promotion. The Antara lord Ra being in its own star
and Sun sub is linked with ligand 2nd cusp. Venus is in Mars star,
Ketu sub and Rahu sub-sub. Venus is thus linked with 5, 6, 2, 10
and 1 1 . Sun being in its own star, Mars sub and Venus sub-sub is
also linked with 2, 5, 6 and 10 cusps. This justifies leaving the
earlier job and joining the new job,
First Promotion: The native got his first promotion in DOT
on 1.1.1993 in the joint period of Mo-Sat-Ket-Jup-Ra. The planets
are strongly linked with houses 2, 6, 10, and 11 cusps.
Second Promotion: The native was again promoted on
16.12.1997 in the joint period of Mo-Sun-Sat-Sat-Ra. All these
planets are strongly linked with 2, 6, 10 and 11 cusps.
Suspension: The native was placed under suspension on
23.9.2003 when he was running the joint period of the planets
Mars-Ven-Jup-Sat. The Antara lord Jupiter is, as we have seen
earlier, linked with 3, 5, 8 and 9 cusps. Saturn is in the star of
Mars and as such is strongly linked with the 5m cusp. It is in the
sub of Saturn itself and Saturn appears as the star lord of the 9th
cusp, Thus Saturn is linked with the 9m cusp also. The linkage of
Saturn with 2 and 6 ensures that the native during suspension
do get part of the salary. Saturn has given the result of the 5m
and 9m cusps in consonance with the Antara lord Jupiter. The
transit of planets on 23.9.2003 is indicated in Figure 4.14. The
native received the orders at 1 6.08 hrs.

Your True Horoscope

Chapter 4; Construction of True Horoscope

Your True Horoscope
The ascendant at the time of receipt of orders is ruled by
Sat, Mars, and Venus. All these planets are the joint rulers of dasa
periods. Moon at that time was transiting in Ketu star, Ketu sub,
Mercury sub-sub, Ven sub-sub-sub and Moon sub-sub-sub-sub.
All these planets rule over 3, 5, 8, 10 houses. Sun at that time is
in the sub of Mer and sub-sub of Mars. Mercury is the star lord of
5th cusp and Mars is the sub-sub lord of the 5th cusp. Saturn
transits in the sub of Moon and the sub-sub of Rahu. Both Moon
and Rahu appear in the 8th cusp. Moon also appears in 3 and 12.
Jupiter transits in Mercury sub and Venus sub-sub. Thus all the
dasa period rulers' transit is related to relevant cusps.
We may conclude that the horoscope of Figure 4.12 may
be taken as the correct horoscope.
Example 4: Figure 4.15 is the chart of a gentleman and
Figure 4.16 is the chart of his wife as per their recorded times.
The couple married on 6.6.1976 but got separated on 25.1 .1977.
This separation ultimately resulted in divorce on 22.7.1979.

Chapter 4: Construction of True Horoscope
Lagna Chart
Bhava Chart
Cusp Chart

Your True Horoscope
Fig. 4.1 5 Contd..
Nirayana Cusps
Planetary Position

Chapter 4: Construction of True Horoscope 165
Let us analyse charts to see if the chart promise marriage
between these and also separation and divorce.
Analysis of Figure 4.15
Step 1: Check the sub-sub lord of the ascendant's
relationship with Moon's star. Here the sub-sub lord is Mercury
that does not establish any relationship with Moon's star Jupiter.
Step 2: Promise for Marriage - The sub-sub lord of
ascendant is Mercury. It is in its own star that does not appear in
5 or 7 or 1 1 . Thus we find ascendant does not promise marriage.
The sub-sub lord of the 7th cusp is Moon that has the positional
status. It is in Jupiter star that appears as the star lord of the 7th
cusp. But Moon is in the sub of Rahu that represents Venus.
Venus appears in 5 as well as 6. We may say that the promise of
marriage indicated by the sub sub lord of 7 is very weak.
Step 3: Promise for Divorce - Divorce means the ending
of a marriage by an official decision in a court of law. In other
words it means breaking away from the marriage partner.
Divorce is promised if the following conditions exist in the
chart:
The sub- sub lords of the ascendant and 7th cusp should be
linked with cusps 4, 6, 10 and 12 through their star lords and the
sub lords. The sub-sub lords of the sub-sub lords of these cusps
should not appear in cuspal positions which negate these cusps.
The other possible linkage that the ascendant and the 7th cusp
sub-sub lord can establish for promise of divorce is that their star
lords appear in 7th cuspal position/ Bhava and sub lords should
If the ascendant sub-sub lord does not promise divorce but
the 7th sub-sub lord promises, even then the event will not take

Your True Horoscope
place. If the ascendant promises but 7th cusp does not promise,
even then the event will not take place.
These conditions for divorce are not seen through the subsub lords of the ascendant and the 7th cusp in this chart.
Step 4: Check of Compatibility
1 . The sub-sub lord of the 7m cusp should reveal the Moon's
star lord of the partner. Here the sub-sub lord of the 7th
cusp is Moon that does not establish any relationship
with Mercury that is the Moon's star in Figure 4.16.
2. The planets co-ruling the 7th cusp should maintain
relationship with the planets co-ruling the ascendant of
the partner.
7th cusp in Figure 4.15 Ascendant in Figure 4.16
Ven-Jup-Sun-Moon Mer-Mars-Mer-Ven
If we analyse the planetary positions in Figure 4.15 we find
the planet Mercury appearing prominently in the ascendant of
Figure 4.16 bears no relationship with the planets appearing in
the 7th cusp of the Figure 4.15.
Above all clearly indicates that the sub-sub lords of both
ascendant and 7m cusp do not justify the events that have
happened in the life of the native of the Figure 4.15.
Let us also check the accuracy of the horoscope as per
dasa potential of the planets to cause marriage & separation etc.
The native got married on 6.6.1976 when he was running
the period of Mer-Mo-Mer-Sun. Here the Bhukti lord meets all the
requirements but the Antara lord Mercury cannot allow the
marriage to take place.
This further confirms that the chart of Figure 4.15 needs
rectification.

Chapter 4: Construction of True Horoscope
Lagna Chart Bhava Chart

Your True Horoscope
Fig. 4.1 6 Contd..
N iray ana* Cusps
Planetary Position

Chapter 4: Construction of True Horoscope 169
Analysis of Figure 4.16
Step 1 : The sub-sub lord of the ascendant is Venus that is
in the sub of Mercury that is the native's Moon star. Moreover
Mercury itself is in Venus star.
Step 2: The sub-sub lord of ascendant is Venus that is in its
own star. Venus appears as sub lord of 5. Venus is in the sub of
Mercury that appears as star lord of 1 1 . Thus we find that the
ascendant sub sub lord is not linked to the 7th cusp directly or
indirectly. The sub-sub lord of the 7th cusp is Jupiter that is in
Mercury star and Ven sub. Mercury is the star lord of the 1 1th
cusp and Venus is the sub lord of 5. Thus we feel that the
horoscope needs rectification.
Step 3: Promise of Divorce: The sub-sub lord of the
ascendant Venus being in its own star and is linked with 6th cusp.
The sub-sub lord of the 7th cusp is Jupiter that is in Mercury star
and Venus sub. Jupiter has the positional status and is the star
lord of the 6th cusp. These conditions do hint at problems in
marital life but they do not necessarily cause for divorce. Since
the chart does not promise marriage we need not analyse the
chart for divorce.
Step 4: Check of compatibility:
A. The sub-sub lord of the 7th cusp is Jupiter and the Moon
star of Figure 4.15 is Jupiter.
B. The planets co-ruling the 7th cusp of Figure 4.16 are
Jup-Ketu only. The planets co-ruling the ascendant of
Figure 4.15 are Mars-Sun-Mars-Mer. In Figure 4.16, Ketu
represents Sun, and Mercury is in the sub of Jupiter.
Flowever the planet Mars has no relationship with Jupiter
and Ketu.

Your True Horoscope
Let us check the accuracy of the horoscope from dasa
potential of the planets. The native's marriage on 6.6.1976 took
place in the period of Ven-Ra-Jup-Sat. The Bhukti lord Rahu does
not meet the necessary conditions to cause marriage. But since
Rahu represents Saturn and can cause marriage because it is in
Sun star that is the sub lord of the ll^cusp. Saturn is in the sub
of Ketu that appears as the sub lord of the 7th cusp.
The above discussion reveals that this horoscope i ,e. of Figure
4.16 also needs rectification.
Rectified horoscopes for both are shown in Figure 4.17 and
Figure 4.18 respectively.

Chapter 4: Construction of True Horoscope
Lagna Chart Bhava Chart
Cusp Chart

Your True Horoscope
Fig. 4.17 Contd..
Nirayana Cusps
Planetary Position

Chapter 4: Construction of True Horoscope 173
Verification of Correctness of Figure 4.17
Step 1 : The sub-sub lord of the ascendant is Jupiter that is
also the Moon's star lord.
Step 2: Promise of Marriage - Jup, the sub-sub lord of
the ascendant is in its own star that is the star lord of the 7th
cusp. Jupiter is in the sub of Rahu that appears as the sub sub
lord of the 5th cusp and star lord of 11 th cusp. The sub-sub lord
of the 7* cusp is Mercury that is in its own star. Mercury is in the
sub of Mars that appears in 5 and 1 1 . Thus marriage is promised.
Step 3: Promise for Divorce - The sub-sub lord of the
ascendant is Jupiter that is in its own star and Rahu sub. Rahu
also represents Venus. Rahu is the sub-sub lord of the 1 2th cusp
and Venus is the sub lord of the 6th cusp. Thus ascendant also
promises divorce along with the promise of marriage.
Mercury, the sub-sub lord of the 7th cusp is in its own star.
Mercury appears as the sub-sub lord of the 6th cusp and star lord
of the 12th cusp. All this proves that the ascendant and 7th cusp
sub-sub lords promise marriage as well as divorce.
Step 4: Check of compatibility:
A. The sub-sub lord of the 7th cusp is Mercury that is the
Moon's star lord of Figure 4.18.
B. The planets co-ruling the 7th cusp of Figure 4.17 are
Ven, Jup and Mercury. Flere we find that Venus and
Mercury have direct appearance and Mars being in
Mercury star in Figure 4.17 is quite appropriate for its
appearance in the ascendant of Figure 4.18.
There is, thus, complete compatibility between the two
horoscopes.

Your True Horoscope
Let us verify the accuracy of the chart for dasa potential of
the planets to causes events.
Marriage: The native's marriage on 6.6.1976 took place in
the joint period of planets Mer-Mo-Mer-Ven. The Bhukti lord Moon
is in Jupiter star and Rahu sub. Jupiter is the star lord of 7th cusp
and Rahu is the sub-sub lord of the 5th cusp and star lord of ll1*1
cusp.
Mercury, the Antara lord is in its own star that is the subsub lord of the 7th cusp. Mercury is in the sub of Mars that is the
sub lord of the 5th cusp and is placed in the 1 1 tn cusp.
Venus, the Sookshma lord has the positional status and is
the sub lord of the 7th and the 1 1 th cusp. Venus is in Saturn star
that appears in 1 1 . Venus is in Venus sub that appears in 7 and
1 1 . Thus the dasa potential of planets also justifies the event.
Separation between the couple: The native separated
from his partner on 25.1.1977 when he was running the period
of Mer-Mars-Rahu and Sat.
I have serious doubts about the contention of the
astrologers who say that the event of divorce happens in
the joint period of planets that are significators of houses
1, 6, 10 and 1 2. We should remember that the event of
divorce means breaking away from the partner i.e. the
partner has to be involved in the activity of separation.
Thus, I feel while the dasa, Bhukti and Antara lords may
be significators of 4, 6, 10 and 12 (I do not take the
second house for matters of marriage), the Sookshma
and Prana lords, which will ensure the completion of the
activity of breaking away from the partner, must involve
the seventh cusp in enacting the event of divorce. This

Chapter 4: Construction of True Horoscope 175
involvement can take place if the Sookshma lord is one of
the planets appearing in the 7th cuspal position (preferably
the sub-sub lord of the 7th cusp) or any planet that
involves the 7th cusp through its star lord and commits
to 6 and 12 through sub lord.
The separation takes place when the planets are linked with
1, 6 and 10. Here the dasa lord Mercury is in its own star and
appears in 4, 6, 7, 8 and 12 cusps. Mars the Bhukti lord has the
positional status and appears in 1 , 2 and 5. Mars is in Mercury
star and as such is linked to A, 6, 7, 8 and 12. The Antara lord
Rahu has the positional status. It appears in 1, 5, 10, 11 and 12.
Rahu is in Sun star that appears in 12 (resident position). The
Sookshma lord is Saturn that is in its own star and appears in the
1 0th cusp as the sub lord. Ket that represents Saturn is placed in
7* Bhava. Thus we treat that Saturn is placed in 7. Saturn is in
the sub of Venus that appears in 6. Thus Saturn involves the 7m
cusp and commits to 6 causing separation from the partner.
Thus the planets justify the event of separation.
Divorce: The native got divorce on 22.7.1 979 when he was
running Mer-Ra-Ket-Sat-Jupiter period. Divorce is permanent
disconnection with the partner and happens in the joint period
of planets linked with cusps 1, 6, 12 when transit agrees. We
have already discussed above the linkages of Mer, Ra and Saturn.
Now Ketu is in Saturn star and Venus sub. Saturn is the resident
of the 3rd cusp and is the sub lord of the 10m cusp. Venus is the
sub lord of the 6th cusp. Moreover, Ketu has to give the results of
Mars and Saturn also that are linked with the relevant cusps 1, 6,
12. Jupiter the Prana lord is in its own star and Rahu sub. Thus it
is linked with 1, 6 and 12 because Rahu represents Venus. The
chart's accuracy stands verified.

Your True Horoscope
Lagna Chart
Bhava Chart

Chapter 4: Construction of True Horoscope
Fig. 4.1 8 Contd..
Nirayana Cusps
Planetary Position

Your True Horoscope
Verification of correctness of Figure 4.18
Step 1 : Venus, the sub-sub lord of the ascendant is in
Mercury sub that is the native's Moon star. Moreover Mercury
Itself is in Venus star. Thus the sub-sub lord of the ascendant
maintains relationship with the Moon's star lord.
Step 2: Venus, the sub-sub lord of the ascendant is in its
own star; Venus appears as the sub lord of the 5th cusp. The
sub-sub lord of the 7th cusp is Jupiter that has the positional
status. It is in Mercury star and Venus sub. Mercury is the star
lord of the 1 1th cusp. Thus marriage is promised,
Step 3: The sub-sub lord of the ascendant and the subsub lord of the 7th cusp also promise divorce. Venus is in Venus
star. Venus appears as the sub lord of the 6th cusp and sub-sub
lord of the 12th cusp. Jupiter, the sub-sub lord of the 7th cusp is in
the sub of Venus.
Step 4: The sub-sub lord of the 7th cusp is Jupiter that is
the Moon's star lord of Figure 4.17. The planets co-ruling the 7th
cusp of Figure 4.18 are Jup and Ketu. The ascendant of Figure
4.1 7 is ruled by planets Mars, Sun and Jupiter. Now Sun is in Ketu
star and Mars is in Venus sub that represents Ketu. Thus the
horoscope shows compatibility with Figure 4.17.
Let us verify the accuracy of the chart from the dasa potential
of planets.

Chapter 4: Construction of True Horoscope 179
Marriage: The native got married in the joint period of the
planets Ven-Rahu-Jup-Sat-Jup. Rahu represents Saturn that is in
Sun's star and Ketu sub. Thus Rahu gets the required qualifications
to cause marriage. All other planets have the required linkages
with the cusps 5, 7 and 1 1 to cause marriage event
Separation: The native separated from her husband on
25.1 .1977 in the joint period of the planets Ven-Rahu-Sat-RahuRahu. Here also it can be seen that the planets ruling the dasa
period are linked with 1, 6 and 12.
Divorce: The native got divorce on 22.7.1979 in the joint
period of planets Venus-Jup-Sat-Rahu-Mercury, which are linked
with 1 , 6 and 12.
Both the horoscopes, thus, stand verified for accuracy. The
charts can further be verified by taking transit of planets on the
day of marriage etc.

Your True Horoscope
Lagna Chart
Bhava Chart

Chapter 4: Construction of True Horoscope
Fig. 4.1 9 Contd..
Nirayana Cusps
Planetary Position

Your True Horoscope
Example 5:
Figure 4.19 is the chart of a gentleman as per his recorded
birth data. The main events that happened in his life are listed
below:
1. Purchased land on 4.10.1962 and constructed his house
that he occupied in October 1 963.
2. The right eye of the native was operated for cataract on
3. The native's father died on 6.8.1930.
4. The native's mother died on 30.1.1932
5. The native joined his first service as a teacher on 1 .6.1 940.
6. The native was appointed as a professor in a college on
7. The native was promoted to the post of the principal of the
college on 1.5.1964
8. The native retired from service on 1.9.1978
9. The native got married on 21.1.1942.
10. The native passed his B. Com on 28.5.1940 and M.Com in
June 1946 and got his PhD in June 1959.
11. On 13.7.1948 he got a daughter and on 15.11.1950 he got
son.
Let us analyse the chart to assess its accuracy for the promise
of all events and also the dasa potential of planets that allowed
the events to happen in his life.
Step 1 : Since Moon is sub-sub lord of the ascendant, it
maintains relationship with Moon's star lord. Planets co-ruling the
positions of Sun, Moon and ascendant are linked with 1 , 7 and

Chapter 4: Construction of True Horoscope 183
Step 2: Promise of Marriage: The ascendant sub-sub lord
Moon is in Rahu star that appears as the sub lord of the 7th as
well as 1 1 th cusp. The sub-sub lord of the 7th cusp is Ketu. It is in
Mars star that does not appear in 5 or 7 or 1 1 . However, Ketu
represents Venus that is in Jupiter star that appears as the star
lord of both 7th and 1 1 th cusp. Thus we may say that marriage is
promised.
Step 3: Promise of Children: The sub-sub lord of the 5th
cusp is Saturn. It is in Mercury star and Rahu sub. Since Mercury
is the sub lord of the 2nd cusp and Rahu is the sub lord of the 11th
cusp. It promises children. However since Mercury is also the
sub-sub lord of the 4th and the 10th cusp it indicates delay. Since
Saturn is in the sub-sub of Venus that occupies Cancer sign, it
promises female child.
Step 4: Educational Prospects: The native specialized in
the subject of commerce. For this the 2nd and 1 1 th cusp should
maintain relationship with 4th and 9th cusp. The sub-sub lord of
the 2nd cusp is Jupiter. It is in Rahu star and Mercury sub. Thus
the 2nd cusp establishes relationship with the 4th cusp through
the 1 1th cusp i.e. the house for fulfillment of desires. Mercury is
also the sub-sub lord of the 9th cusp. Thus the 2nd cusp also
maintains relationship with the 9th cusp. The sub-sub lord of the
1 1 th cusp is Moon that is in Rahu star. Since Rahu represents
Mercury as its star lord, Moon is linked with both 4th and 9th cusp.
Thus the choice of commerce as the subject of education is
justified.
Step 5: Professional Activities - Since the native served
in an educational institution, the sub-sub lord of the 10th cusp
should establish relationship with 4th or the 9th cusp either directly
through its star lord or the star lord may appear in 1 1 th cusp and
sub lord in the 4th or 9th cusp or the sub-sub lord of the 1 0th cusp

Your True Horoscope
should itself appear in 4th or 9th cusp. Here Mercury is the subsub lord of the 10th cusp that is in Venus star that appears as the
sub lord of the 4th cusp. This justifies the native's working in an
educational institution. For teaching the native has to use his
oratorical skill, communication skill and intellectual capability. Fa
this the 2nd, 3rd and the 5th cusp should establish relationship with
the 1 0th cusp. The 2nd sub-sub lord Jupiter is in Rahu star and
Mercury sub. Rahu is sub lord of 11th cusp (house of fulfillment of
desire) and the Mercury is the sub-sub lord of the 1 0th cusp.
Thus the second cusp stands linked with the 1 0th cusp. The subsub lord of the 3rd cusp is also Jupiter and as explained above
Jupiter is linked with the 10th cusp. The sub-sub lord of the 5th
cusp is Saturn that is in Mercury star and as such 5th cusp is also
linked with the 10th cusp. Thus the horoscope appears to justify
his professional activities.
Step 6: Cataract In Right Eye - The native developed
cataract in the right eye, which was operated. Defect in the right
eye occurs if the sub-sub lord of the 2nd cusp or Sun or Venus
maintains relationship with 8th and 12th cusp. The sub-sub lord of
the 2nd cusp is Jupiter that is in Rahu star. Rahu represents Mars
that is only the Sign lord of the 8th cusp. Jupiter is in the sub of
Mercury that neither appears in 8th nor in the 12th cusp. The
planet Sun maintains relationship with the 12* cusp. Venus,
however, is the sub lord of the 8th cusp and its star lord Jupiter
appears in 2nd cusp. It is in the sub of Moon that is the sub-sub
lord of the 8th cusp. This justifies the appearance of cataract in
the right eye.
Step 7: Genetical Connection - The native got his first
daughter on 13.7.1948. On this date Moon's star lord was Moon
up to 09hrs.l0 minutes 28 seconds and then it was Mars star
lord. The sub-sub lord of the 5m cusp is Saturn. It is in Rahu sub.
Rahu represents Mars. So if the child is born after 09hrs.l0

Chapter 4: Construction of True Horoscope
minutes 28 seconds this establishes the genetical connection with
the 5th cusp sub-sub lord of the native. But if the child is born in
Moon star then Moon does not maintain any relationship with
Saturn the sub-sub lord of the 5th cusp.
The native got his 2nd child, a Son, on 15.11.1950. On this
date the Moon was in Sun star up to 08hrs.llminutes 13 seconds
and then it was Moon's star day. The sub-sub lord of the 7th cusp
is Ketu. It is in the sub-sub of Moon. Ketu represents Venus that
is in the sub of Moon and sub-sub of Sun. It appears that the
Moon's star of the son should be Moon.
Thus the horoscope accurately reveals the genetical
connections also. Now let us try to analyse the accuracy of the
horoscope for the dasa potential of the planets for causing various
events in the life of the native.
A. Marriage: The native got married on 21.1.1942 when he
was running the period of Jup-Mer-Sun-Ketu-Sat. The dasa
lord Jupiter is the star lord of 7th and 1 1 th cusp. It is in Rahu
star that is the sub lord of the 1 1th and 7th cusps. It is in the
sub of Mercury that does not appear in the 6th cusp. Thus
the dasa lord is favourable for the event of marriage. The
Bhukti lord is Mercury. It does not appear in 5, 7 or 1 1 cusp.
It is in the star of Venus that also does not appear in 5, 7 or
11 cusps. Rather it is appearing in 4, Band 10 cusps. This
raises a serious doubt about the potential of Bhukti lord to
cause the event of marriage. The horoscope thus needs to
be rectified to allow Mercury to cause marriage.
B. Birth of Daughter: The native got daughter on 13.7.1948
when he was running the joint period of Jup-Mo-Sat-RaMercury.AH planets except Mercury are clearly linked with 2,
5 and 1 1 and justifies the event. Mercury is the sub lord of
the 2nd cusp and is in the star of Venus and sub of Saturn.

Your True Horoscope
Mercury does not have the positional status. Its linkage does
not clearly justify the event.
C. Joining 1 st Job: The native joined his first employment on
1 .6.1940 when he was running the joint period of the planets
Jup-Sat-Ra-Ra-Ra. The native joins service in the period of
planets linked with 2, 6, and 10. The Bhukti lord Saturn is in
Mercury star and Rahu sub. Mercury is the sub lord of the
2nd cusp and Rahu is the sub lord of the 1 1 th cusp. Since
Rahu represents Mars that is the star lord of 2, 6 and 10
cusps, the Bhukti lord strongly justifies the event Rahu is in
Mercury star, Jupiter sub and Moon sub-sub. Mercury is the
sub sub lord of 10 and Jupiter is sub sub lord of 2. Rahu also
has to give the result of Mars. Now Mars is in its own star and
Venus sub. Thus Rahu completely justifies the event.
D. Cataract Operation: The right eye of the native was
operated for cataract on 28.7.1979 when he was running
the period of the planets Mercury-Moon-Mercury-Sat-Jupiter.
The dasa and Antara lord Mercury is in Venus star that appears
in 6th & 8th cusp. It is in the sub of Sat that is the sub-sub
lord of the 12m. Thus Mercury has already set the stage for
- the deterioration of vision being the sub lord of the 2nd cusp.
The Bhukti lord Moon is in Rahu star, Rahu sub and Rahu
sub-sub. Rahu represents Mars and Mercury and has thus
to give the same results as are given by Mercury. The planet
Saturn, the Sookshma lord is the sub-sub lord of the 12m
cusp, the house of hospitalization, has the positional status
and thus has to offer the result of the 12m house. It is in
Mercury star, Rahu sub and Venus sub-sub. This prepares

Chapter 4: Construction of True Horoscope 187
the scene for hospitalization and promise recovery of vision
being related to both 5th and 1 1 * cusp. Jupiter the Prana
lord however cannot account for surgery because it
maintains no relationship with the 8th and the 12* houses.
This also indicates that the horoscope needs rectification.
Rectification of horoscope can be attempted as
follows:
To enable the planet Mercury to acquire the necessary
qualifications to cause marriage, the sub-sub lord of the 7th cusp
need to be changed by moving around the noted birth time in
seconds.
Can we put Mercury as the sub-sub lord of the 7* cusp?
No, because Mercury does not have the positional status
and as such can't itself provide results of the 7th cusp. Mercury is
in Venus star that does not appear in 5, 7 or 1 1 but appears in 4,
6 and 8 which are not the relevant house to enact the event of
marriage. The only alternative left with us is to fix the sub-sub
lord of the 7th cusp as Venus that is in Jupiter star that appears as
the star lord of the 7th and ll^cusp. Venus is in the sub of Moon
and sub-sub of Sun that provides the necessary condition to
account for the genetical connection with the 2nd child.
The True Horoscope and Its Verification: Figure 4.20
is the rectified chart.

Your True Horoscope
Lagna Chart Bhava Chart

Chapter 4: Construction of True Horoscope
Fig. 4.20 Contd,
Nirayana Cusps
Planetary Position

Your True Horoscope
Comparing this chart with the chart of Figure 4.19, we find
that the sub-sub lords of cusps 3, 6, 7, 8, 10 and 12 have
changed. The changes in the cuspal positions of 3, 6 and 10
should meet the promises in respect of professional activities of
the native. Let us see if the sub-sub lords now maintain relationship
with the 10th cusp or not.
Third cusp sub-sub lord is Saturn that is in Mercury star.
Mercury appears as sign lord of 10. It enables the native to carry
out his professional activities using 3rd house significations.
The 6* sub-sub lord has changed from Mars to Rahu. But
as Rahu itself represents Mars, this change has not affected any
significant difference as far as the professional activities are
concerned.
The sub-sub lord of the 1 0* has come as Venus. Since Venus
is in the star of Jupiter that is the sub lord of the 9m cusp, the
native's serving in an educational institution viz. a college is justified.
Seventh sub-sub lord is now Venus. Mercury is in its star and
thus gets the required qualification to cause marriage and .the
genetical connection with the second child.

Chapter 4: Construction of True Horoscope 191
Change of the 8* sub-sub lord and the 12* sub-sub lord
allows for cataract operation. In the rectified chart, the native
got operated in the joint period of the planets Mer-Moon-KetKet-Mars.
Now Ketu has the positional status and is the star lord of 8th
and the 1 2* cusp. It is in Mars star that is the star lord of 2nd cusp
and sub-sub lord of the 8* cusp. Ketu is in the sub of Jupiter that
is the sub lord of ascendant and sub-sub lord of the 2nd cusp.
Ketu is in the sub-sub of Moon that is the sub-sub lord of the 11th
cusp. This clearly sets the scene for operation on the right eye
and restoration of vision. The Prana lord Mars on the day of
operation is in its own star and is thus linked to 2 and 8. It is in the
sub of Venus that is the sub lord of 8* cusp. This indicates surgery
on the part of the body represented by the 2nd cusp i.e. right
eye. Mars is in the sub-sub of Ketu that is the star lord of the 12th
cusp that indicates hospitalization.

Your True Horoscope

Chapter 4: Construction of True Horoscope
Fig. 4.21 Contd.
Nirayana Cusps
Planetary Position

Your True Horoscope
Figure 4.21 shows the chart to represent the transit of
planets on 28.7.1979. On the day of operation, assuming it has
taken place at about 09.00 AM, Moon transits in Leo in the star
of Venus, sub of Mercury and sub-sub of Rahu. Now Venus is the
sub lord of the 8* cusp and Mercury is the sub-sub lord of the
12* cusp and also the sub lord of the 2nd cusp (in fig. 4.20),
Rahu is the sub lord of the 1 1 * cusp that indicates successful
operation. Mars transits in its own star Mars, Saturn sub and
Venus sub-sub.Thus transit fully agrees to cause the Event to
happen.
Retirement from Service: The person retires on the day
when the planetary period is linked with 5* and 9th cusps. On
1.9.1979 the native was running the period of the planets MerMoon-Mars-Rahu-Rahu. Rahu is in Mercury star that appears in
9 and 10.lt is in Jupiter sub that appears in 9. Rahu represents
Mercury that is in Venus star, the sub lord of the 6* and 1 0*
cusp. Mercury is in the sub of Saturn that appears in 5* cusp.
This justifies the dasa potential of the planets to cause the event.
Moon on the day of retirement is in Mercury star. Thus transit
also agrees.
Purchase of Land: The native purchased land on 4.10.1962
when he was running the period of planets Sat-Sun-Jup-JupJup. Jupiter in the Figure 4.20 is in Rahu star and Mercury sub.
Rahu is the sub lord of the 1 1 * cusp and Mercury is the sub-sub
lord of the 4* and 1 2* cusp. This fully justifies the linkage for the
purchase of land. Moon on the day of purchase was transiting in
Mercury star. The transit also agrees because Mercury is the subsub lord of 4* and 12* cusp.
We may verify other events also. The horoscope thus stands
verified and is the true horoscope of the native.
Example 6: Figure 4.22 is the chart of a person that suffered
from the fatal disease Leukemia i.e. blood cancer. The native died

Chapter 4: Construction of True Horoscope
Lagna Chart Bhava Chart
Cusp Chart

Your True Horoscope
Fig. 4.22 Contd..
Nirayana Cusps
Planetary Position

Chapter 4: Construction of True Horoscope 197
Leukemia is a malignant growth of white corpuscles in blood,
which is commonly known as cancer of blood. A native usually
suffers from such a disease when the ascendant sub-sub lord is
simultaneously linked to 6* 8* and 12* cusps. Also the 6*/8*
cusp should be simultaneously linked with 6*, 8* and 1 2* cusps.
Rahu and Jupiter are important planets known for causing cancer.
Mars and Moon cause diseases of blood. Diseases due to blood
cells are caused if the sub-sub lord of the 5th or the 1 1 * cusp
links with 6/8 cusps.
Let us analyse the chart to find out whether it promises that
the native was destined to suffer that fatal disease or not.
Step 1 : The sub-sub lord of the ascendant is Saturn and
the native's Moon star is also Saturn.
Step 2: Analysis of Ascendant for Promise of Disease
- The sub-sub lord of the ascendant is in Moon star, Venus sub
and Moon sub-sub. Moon does not appear in 6th or 8* cuspal
position but is resident of the 8* cusp in the Bhava chart. Venus
the sub lord of the Saturn appears in 8th and 1 2* cusps. The
ascendant sub-sub lord has thus made simultaneous relationship
with 8 and 12 only. It maintains no relationship with the 6* cusp.
Step 3: Study of the 8th cusp - The sub-sub lord of the
8* cusp is Jupiter. It is in. Moon star, Sun sub and Venus sub-sub.
Moon is placed in the 8th Bhava. sub lord of Jupiter is Sun that
appears in 6. The sub sub of Jupiter is Venus that appears in 6 as
well as in 12.
Step 4: Promise for Blood Cancer: For this the 5* or the
1 1 * cusp sub-sub lord should be linked to 6*/8* cusp. Here the
sub-sub lord of the 5* cusp is Mercury that is linked with 6th, 8*
and 12* cusp through its star lord Jupiter.

Your True Horoscope
Step 5: Check of Longevity - The ascendant, the 3rd and
the 8* sub-sub lords are at best Connected with only one Maraka
house or the Badhaka house and as such the longevity of the
native cannot be assumed to be medium. Moreover for the
disease to be fatal the 8* cusp sub-sub lord should establish links
through its star lord with Maraka and Badhaka houses or its star
may appear in 6* or 8* cusp and sub in Maraka and Badhaka
houses.
The horoscope has, therefore, to be rectified to ensure the
following:
1 . Simultaneously linkage of the ascendant sub-sub lord with
the 6*, 8* and 12* house.
2. Simultaneously linkage of the 8* cusp sub-sub lord with 6*,
8* and 12* house as well as with Maraka and Badhaka
houses.
To rectify the chart, the ruling planets were taken to decide
the cuspal position of the 6* cusp. The RP chart is shown in
Figure4.23.

Chapter 4: Construction of True Horoscope

Your True Horoscope
Fig. 4.23 Contd..
Nirayana Cusps
Planetary Position

Chapter 4: Construction of True Horoscope 201
Since Moon has come as the sub-sub lord in RP (Moon), it
was decided to put it as the sub-sub lord of the 6* cusp. This
also resulted in changing the sub-sub lord of the 8* cusp from
Jupiter to Rahu. The rectified chart is shown in Figure 4.24.

Your True Horoscope
Lagna Chart
Bhava Chart

Chapter 4: Construction of True Horoscope
Fig. 4.24 Contd.
Nirayana Cusps
Planetary Position

Your True Horoscope
Verification of the rectified Chart
Step 1 : Analysis of Ascendant: The sub-sub lord of
ascendant is Saturn. It is in Moon star and Venus sub. Moon is
the sub-sub lord of the 6* cusp and Venus is the sub-lord of 8th
and sub-sub lord of 12th cusp. Thus the ascendant sub-sub lord
is simultaneously linked to 6, 8, 9, and 12. Saturn is in the subsub of Moon, which also appears in ll^cusp. We can verify that
the planets co-ruling ascendant, Moon and Sun satisfy the
necessary conditions.
Step 2: Analysis of 6th Cusp - Moon is the sub-sub lord of
the 6* cusp. It is in Saturn star and Jupiter sub and Rahu subsub. Moon thus involves the ascendant and commits to 6, 8, 12,
where Jupiter appears. The natural significations of the planets
co-ruling the degree rising on the 6* cusp do not indicate the
disease the native suffered. But if we analyse their signification as
per chart, it reveals everything. The nature of the disease is
indicated by the sub sub lord of the 6* cusp as per its own
nature as modified by the star lord in which it is placed in the
horoscope. Moon is placed in Saturn star (Pushya). If we read
page 121 of the revised edition of the book Basics and Traditional
concepts we notice that the person is liable to suffer cancer. Since
Moon is Karaka for blood it may be blood cancer. We can study
other planets that are the co-ruling planets of 6* cusp.
Venus the sign lord is in Ketu star, Rahu sub and Rahu subsub completely controlling the 5* cuspal position and linking with
8* & 12* cusps. Sun the star lord of the 6th cusp is in Mercury
star and Moon sub i.e. Sun involves the 5* house and commits
to 6* house. Jupiter the sub lord of the 6* cusp is in Moon star
and Sun sub.
Step 3: Study of the 8th Cusp - For serious sickness or
fatal diseases we need to analyse 8* cusp. Here the sub-sub lord

Chapter 4: Construction of True Horoscope 205
of the 8th cusp is Rahu that also represents Saturn and Jupiter.
Rahu is in Jupiter star and as such is linked to 6, 8, 12 cusps
simultaneously. The sub-sub lord of the 8* cusp is also linked
with 2 and 7 cusps.
Rahu is in Aquarius the Sign that rules over the circulatory
System. It is in Jupiter star (Purvabhadra). If we read the above
referred book for determining the nature of the disease we get
an idea that the native is likely to suffer serious disease relating to
the circulatory system.
Step 4: For diseases due to blood cells, 5* or 1 1 * house
should be linked to 6*/ 8* cusp, The 5* cusp is co-ruled by Ketu
as star lord, Rahu as sub lord and Mercury as sub-sub lord. All
are linked with 6* or 8th cusp.
Eleventh cusp is co-ruled by Mars as star lord, Moon as sub
lord and Venus as sub-sub lord. All these planets are linked with
6* and 8* cusp.
Thus the linkage of ascendant and 8* cusp with 6,8,12
indicates that the native had to suffer some serious disease.
Linkages of the planets Mars and Moon from the 11th cusp reveal
the nature of disease as blood cancer.
The native died on 5.1.1969 in the joint period of MoonSat-Mercury-Mercury-Ketu. Dasa lord Moon is placed in the 8*
Bhava and as such it is considered to be a co-ruling planet in the
8* cusp. Moon is in Saturn star. The sub sub lord of 8* cusp is
Rahu that represents Saturn. As such Moon is related to the sub
sub lord of the 8th cusp. Now Moon is in Saturn star that is the
sub sub lord of ascendant. Moon is in the sub of Jupiter that
appears in 2, 7, 8 and 12. Moon is in the sub sub of Rahu that is
the sub sub of 8* cusp. Moon thus satisfies all conditions to be
declared as Markesh dasa Lord.

Your True Horoscope
The Bhukti lord Saturn has PS. It is the sub sub lord of
ascendant and as such signifies 1 . It is in the sub of Venus that
appears in 8. Thus Saturn is fully competent to cause death of
the native.
Mercury is both Antara and Sookshama Lord. Mercury is in
Jupiter star that appears in 1 and 8. It is in Mercury sub that also
appears in 1 and 8. Mercury is in the sub sub of Moon that is
placed in 8 with PS. Thus we find that Mercury also is fully
competent in causing death of the native.
The death of the native took place in the Prana of Ketu that
is placed in Badhaka with PS (exchange of Nakshatra). Ketu is in
Venus star that appears in 8. Ketu is in the sub of Saturn that is
the sub sub lord of 1 . It is in the sub sub of Saturn that is the sub
sub lord of the 7* cusp, These significations of Ketu fully justify
the event of death. Ketu represents Sun and Venus. Sun appears
in 6 (disease). It is in Mercury star that appears ini. It is in the
sub of Moon and sub sub of Rahu. Both Moon and Rahu appears
in 8. This accounts for the cause of death.
Example 7: Figure 4.25 is the chart of a female as per her
recorded birth data. The lady made an attempt to commit suicide
by pouring kerosene over her body on 25.12.1 971 . She suffered
severe burns but her life was saved.

Chapter 4: Construction of True Horoscope
Lagna Chart Bhava Chart
Cusp Chart

Your True Horoscope
Fig. 4.25 Contd..
Nirayana Cusps
Planetary Position

Chapter 4: Construction of True Horoscope 209
Let us analyse the chart to find out whether it promises this
event to happen in her life or not.
Step 1 : The ascendant sub-sub lord is Venus. The Moon's
star of the native is Ketu. Since Ketu is in Venus star, the ascendant
sub-sub lord has established relationship with the Moon star.
Step 2: Attempt to commit suicide - Suicide is a deliberate
or conscious effort of the native to kill him or herself. This happens
at a time when the native is in a state of depression which may
be caused by the native's own actions which ruins his or her
career, position in society or other things which he or she values
in life. It may be caused when the native feels incapacitated to
face the struggles of life,
Since suicide is self-undoing, the ascendant sub-sub lord
should link itself with the 12* cusp through its star lord and
commits to the 8* cusp through its sub lord. Here the sub-sub
lord of the ascendant is Venus that is in Mercury star and Saturn
sub. Mercury appears in the 1 2* cuspal position. It is resident of
8th house. This linkage only promises mental agony and
proneness to accident.
Step 3: Mode of committing suicide - The mode of
committing suicide if it has to result in death has to be indicated
by the sub-sub lord of the 8* cusp. Suicide is an unnatural death.
For unnatural death, the following conditions should exist in the
chart.
1 . 8th Cusp sub- sub lord should be significator of 8* and 1 2*
house.
2. 8* Cusp sub-sub lord and its star lord should be in cardinal
and violent signs Aries, Taurus, Scorpio, Leo, Sagittarius or
Capricorn.

Your True Horoscope
3. Ascendant sub-sub Lord should also be connected with 8
and 12 houses to promise unnatural Death.
Here, the sub-sub lord of the 8* cusp is Saturn, that is in
Rahu star and Saturn sub. Since Rahu is in Gemini sign and
Jupiter star. Rahu represents Jupiter that is in Virgo. It thus does
not promise death due to burning. However, Saturn has the
positional status. It occupies the sub-sub arc of the 2nd cusp that
rises in Leo. It is also the star lord of the 5* cusp that rises in
Scorpio. This may justify the attempt of the native to burn her.
Step 4: Failure to commit suicide: The native's span of
life is determined from the sub-sub lord of the ascendant. Here
Venus, the sub-sub lord of the ascendant shows long life because
of the absence of its links with the Maraka and Badhaka houses.
Step5: Depression and Abnormal Behaviour: A person
undergoes periods of depression when the sub-sub lord of the
3rd cusp maintains simultaneous relationship with 8* and 12th
cusp. Here Jupiter is the sub-sub lord of the third cusp that is in
Sun star and its own sub and sub-sub. Thus Jupiter does not
establish relationship with 8* and 12* cusp.
The native under the following conditions shows the abnormal
behaviour:
A. The ascendant sub-sub lord should maintain relationship with
5, 8 and 12 cusps.
B. The sub-sub lord of the 5* cusp should maintain relationship
with 8 and 12 cusps,-
Here the sub-sub lord of the ascendant is Venus, that is in
Mercury star and Saturn sub. Mercury appears in the 5* cusp as
sub-sub lord and Saturn appears in the 8* cusp as sub-sub lord
and as sub lord of the 1 2* cusp. Thus the condition as stipulated
by (A) above is justified.

Chapter 4: Construction of True Horoscope 211
The 5* cusp sub-sub lord is Mercury that is in Rahu star and
Saturn sub. Rahu appears as the star lord of the 1 2* cusp and is
also the resident of the 1 2* house. Saturn is the sub-sub lord of
the 8* cusp. The condition set by (B) above is also justified.
Step 6: The native attempted to commit suicide at 21.15
hrs on 25.12.1971 when she was running the joint period of
Sun-Mer-Venus-Sat-Mercury.
As the dasa lord Sun does not maintain simultaneous
relationship with 1 and 8 it ensures that the native cannot meet
death during Sun dasa.
The Bhukti lord Mercury being in Rahu star, Saturn sub and
Jupiter sub-sub is connected with 4, 8 and 12 cusps. This sets
the scene for accident.
The Antara lord Venus being in Mercury star, Saturn sub and
Venus sub-sub is linked with 3, 5, 8 and 12 and thus accounts
for depression and abnormal behaviour.
The Sookshma lord Saturn is the sub-sub lord of the 8*
cusp, and appears in 3, 5 and 12 cusps also. It has the positional
status and is thus linked to the relevant cusps for depression and
abnormal behaviour and accident.
The Prana lord Mercury, we have already discussed above is
linked with the relevant cusps to allow the event to happen.
The transit of planets Sun and Moon agrees with the dasa
periods. The transit position of planets at 21 .15 hrs on 25.12.1971
is shown in Figure 4,26.

Your True Horoscope
Saturday December 25 1971
Jhabua, Madhya Pradesh, India,
KP(Straight Line) Ayanamsha
Lagna[e] 25:5:9

Chapter 4: Construction of True Horoscope
Fig. 4.26 Contd.
Nirayana Cusps
Planetary Position

Your True Horoscope
From the above discussion, it appears that the cuspal
positions of various cusps do justify the native's behaviour except
for the fact that it fails to account for the native's undergoing
periods of depression and suicidal tendencies. The horoscope
thus needs rectification. The rectified horoscope is shown in Figure

Chapter 4: Construction of True Horoscope
* Chart is constructed after applying War Time Correction.
Lagna Chart Bhava Chart
Cusp Chart

Your True Horoscope
Fig. 4.27 Contd..
Nirayana Cusps
Planetary position

Chapter 4: Construction of True Horoscope
Verification of the Rectified Chart
Step 1 : The sub-sub lord of the ascendant is Ketu that is
itself the Moon's star lord.
Step 2: Ketu is in Venus star, Mercury sub and Ketu subsub. It shows medium life. The native makes attempt to commit
suicide if the ascendant sub-sub lord involves the 12th cusp
through its star lord and commits to the 8th cusp through its sub
lord. Here the star lord of Ketu appears as the sub-sub lord of
the 12th cusp and its sub lord Mercury is the resident of the 8th
cusp.
Step 3: Depression and Abnormal Behaviour: The subsub lord of the 3rd cusp is Rahu. It represents Mercury that
maintains relationship with 8th and 12th cusps through its star
lord and sub lord. Since Mercury is also the sub-sub lord of the
5th cusp it justifies the native's abnormal behaviour also.
Step 4: The event of attempt to commit suicide happened
in the joint period of Sun-Mer-Venus-Saturn-Saturn. The
Sookshma and Prana lord Saturn justifies the attempt as well as
safety of life being linked with the 5th cusp by its sub-sub lord
Mercury. The end result of the event is always as per the subsub lord of the planet.
The horoscope of Figure 4.27 is, thus the true horoscope of
the native.
Example 8: Figure 4.28 is the chart of a gentleman that
was doing internship in B.D.S at Banglore. He met with an accident
while riding on a two-wheeler on 15.7.2004 at about 16.00 hrs
and died on the spot.

Your True Horoscope
Lagna Chart
Bhava Chart

Chapter 4: Construction of True Horoscope
Fig. 4.28 Contd.
Nirayana Cusps
Planetary position

Your True Horoscope
If the horoscope of the native is correct it should reveal the
following:
1. Short Life.
2. B.D.S as the field of education.
3. Death in journey at a far off work place.
4. Dasa and Transit potential of planets to cause the event of
death.
Let us check the accuracy of the horoscope of Figure 4.28
Step 1 : The sub-sub lord of the ascendant is Sun. It is in
Saturn star and Mars sub. Since Mars is the Moon's star lord, the
sub-sub lord of the ascendant maintains relationship with Moon's
star.
Step 2: Short Life: The sub-sub lord of the ascendant
should be linked with Maraka and Badhaka house through its
star lord and its sub lord should not negate the significations of
Maraka and Badhaka houses. Here the sub-sub lord of the
ascendant is Sun that is in Saturn star that appears as the star
lord of the 2nd cusp and the sub-sub lord of the 7m cusp and is
placed in the Badhaka house. It is in Mars sub that does not
negate 2 or 7 or Badhaka. Thus we may assume that the
ascendant sub-sub lord promises short life.
Step 3: B.D.S as field of Education: To have regular
attendance in a college, the ascendant sub-sub lord should
maintain relationship with 4th or 9th cusp. Here the sub-sub lord
of ascendant is Sun whose star lord Saturn appears as the sub
lord of the 4th cusp. Sun is in the sub of Mars that appears as the
sub-sub lord of the 9th cusp.

Chapter 4: Construction of True Horoscope 221
The native studies medicine in the field of B.D.S when the
planets Sun, Saturn, Mars and the sixth cusp maintain relationship
with 4th or 9th cusp. We have already seen that Sun maintains
relationship with the 4th and the 9th cusp. Saturn is in Sun star
and Rahu sub. Sun is resident of 9th house and Rahu represents
Moon and Mercury. Both these planets appear in the 4th cusp.
Rahu and Mercury appear in the 9th cusp also. Mars is the subsub lord of the 9th cusp and is in Moon star and Saturn sub. Thus
Mars is linked with 4th cusp. The sub-sub lord of the 6th cusp is
Rahu that is in Mercury star that appears as the sub-sub lord of
the 4th cusp and sub lord of the 9th cusp. All these justify his field
of education.
Step 4: Mode and Place of Death: Death occurs due to
accident and by getting bruised and mashed by a vehicle leading
to respiratory failures, if the star lord of the sub-sub lord of the
S'11 cusp resides in Gemini. Here the sub-sub lord of the 8th cusp
is Jupiter that is in Venus star. Venus resides in Gemini. The sub
lord of the sub-sub lord of the 8th cusp will specify the place of
death due to accident. Here Jupiter is in Mars sub that appears
as the sub-sub lord of the 9th. This justifies death at far off work.
Step 5: The native met with an accident on 15.7.2004 at
Banglore at about 16.00 hrs when he was running the joint period
of Jup-Sat-Mars-Sun-Mercury/Ketu. The transit of planets at the
time of accident and death is shown in Figure 4.29.

Your True Horoscope
Thursday July 15 2004
Bangalore, Karnataka, India,
KP(Straight Line) Ayanamsha
Lagna[e] 20:3f|

Chapter 4: Construction of True Horoscope
Fig. 4.29 Contd..
Nirayana Cusps
Planetary Position

Your True Horoscope
Death has taken place in the dasa of Jupiter, which do not
show a very strong connection with the 1 st and the 8th cusp.
Figure 4.30 Represents the True Horoscope. Took the
RFfe on 24.1 .2005 at 10.20 at Noida and rectified the horoscope.
Figure 4.31 shows the RP chart. Since Venus came as sub and
sub-sub of RP (Moon) the sub-sub lord of the ascendant was
fixed as Venus and the time was moved around a few seconds to
ensure the promise of each cusp as well as the dasa potential of
planets to cause the event of Death by accident.

Chapter 4: Construction of True Horoscope
Lagna Chart Bhava Chart
Cusp Chart

Your True Horoscope
Fig. 4.30 Contd.,
Nirayana Cusps
Planetary Position

Chapter 4: Construction of True Horoscope

Your True Horoscope
Fig. 4.31 Contd..
Nirayana Cusps
Planetary Position

Chapter 4: Construction of True Horoscope 229
Verification of the Chart
Step 1 : The sub-sub lord of the ascendant maintains
relationship with Moon's star.
Step 2: The sub-sub lord of the ascendant and 3rd cusp is
Venus that shows short life.
Step 3: The sub-sub lord of the 8th cusp still remains Jupiter
and accounts for the Mode and place of death.
Step 4: The linkage of the planets Sun, Saturn, Mars and
the 6th cusp justify the field of education.
Step 5: The native met with the fatal accident during the
joint period of 3up-Sat-Ven-Sun-Mercury. Now the dasa lord
Jupiter has established the required relationship with 1 and 8.
The Prana lord Mercury is in Jupiter star that is the sub-sub lord
of the 8th cusp (accident) and 11th cusp (Badhaka) and is in Saturn
sub. Thus Mercury is related to 1, 4,8,11 to cause accident while
driving his own vehicle. T ransit of planets also agrees. Moon transits
in Jupiter star, Venus sub and Venus sub-sub. Jupiter is the subsub lord of the 8th and 1 1 th cusp and is also the dasa lord. Venus
is appearing in 1 st, 3rd and 11th cusp. Moreover Venus in the Chart
4.30 is linked with 1, 4, and 1 2 being in the sub of Mercury. Sun
transits in Moon star, Moon sub and Jupiter sub-sub. Moon in the
chart 4.30 is the star lord of 4th and 1 2th cusp and Jupiter is the
sub-sub lord of 8th and 1 1th cusp. Thus transit of planets Sun
and Moon is in consonance with the nature of the event. Transit
of dasa planets also justifies the event.
Example 9: Figure 4.32 is the horoscope of a child as per
his noted birth time. The child was born with the following defects:
1 . Deformed shape of head.
2. Cannot speak.
3. Legs too weak to allow him to walk.

Your True Horoscope
Lagna Chart Bhava Chart

Chapter 4: Construction of True Horoscope
Fig. 4.32 Contd.,
Nirayana Cusps
Planetary Position

Your True Horoscope
A child is born with a defect in his body parts when the
following conditions exist in the horoscope.
A. The sub-sub lord of the ascendant should establish a link
with 12th cusp through its star lord.The sub lord of the subsub lord of the ascendant will indicate the defective part as
per its position in the cusp. If the sub-sub lord of the
ascendant sub-sub lord is linked to cusps 5 or 1 1 , the defect
is curable. Linkage of the sub-sub lord of the ascendant subsub lord with 6th, 8th, or 12th cusp indicates no hope for
cure.
B. The sub-sub lord of the cusp that represents the defective
part should be linked with 8 or 12 through its star lord. If the
star lord appears in 8th cusp and the sub lord in the 12th or
the star lord appears in 1 2th and sub lord in the 8th cusp, this
indicate permanent danger or defect in that part.
Check of Accuracy of Figure 4.32
Step 1 : The sub-sub lord of the ascendant is Jupiter. The
Moon's star lord at the time of birth is Mars. There is no relationship
between the two.
Step 2: The Moon's star lord Mars maintains no relationship
with the cusps 1, 7 and 10. (Refer Example 1 for reasons).
Step 3: The sub-stfb lord of the ascendant is Jupiter. It is in
Moon star. Moon does not appear in the 12th house, which is the
house of defect.
Step 4: The child is born when he was running the period of
planets Mars-Jup-Ra-Ra-Jup. The dasa potential of planets also
does not promise birth with defective parts.
All the above factors indicate that the horoscope needs
rectification. For this the ruling planets were taken on 28.1 .2005
at 12.25 hrs at Noida. The RP planetary and cuspal positions are
shown in Figure 4.33.

Chapter 4: Construction of True Horoscope

Your True Horoscope
Fig. 4.33 Contd.
Nirayana Cusps
Planetary Position

Chapter 4: Construction of True Horoscope 235
The sub-sub lord of RP Moon was Saturn. Since Saturn does
not establish any relationship with the Moon's star at birth it was
rejected. The sub of RP Moon was Sun. As the Moon's star at
birth is Mars, it bears relationship with it because Mars is in Sun
star. It was decided to put Sun as the sub-sub lord of the
ascendant. The rectified horoscope was obtained by moving
around in seconds to ensure that other cuspal positions are fixed
to match the promise of the horoscope. The rectified horoscope
is shown in Figure 4.34.

Your True Horoscope
Lagna Chart
Bhava Chart
Cusp Chart

Chapter 4: Construction of True Horoscope
Fig, 4.34 Contd..
Nirayana Cusps
Planetary Position

Your True Horoscope
Step 1 : As stated above the sub-sub lord of the ascendant
maintains relationship with the Moon's star lord at the Time of
Birth.
Step 2: The Moon's star lord Mars itself appears as the subsub lord of the 10th cusp. It is in the star of Sun that is the subsub lord of the ascendant.
Step 3: The sub-sub lord of the ascendant is Sun. It is in
Mercury star.that appears as the sub-sub lord of the 12th cusp.
It is in Venus sub that appears in the 3rd as well as in the 8th cusp,
Third cusp indicates the child is not able to communicate. Sun is
in the sub-sub of Mars that appears as the star lord of the 12th
cusp and sub-sub lord of the 4th and the 10th cusp. The cure
looks to be difficult.
Step 4: 3rd cusp SSL is Mercury, that is in Ketu star. Since
Ketu represents Saturn being in its star, Mercury is as good as in
Saturn star that is the sub lord of the 1 2th as well as the 6th cusp.
Mercury is in the sub of Jupiter that is resident of 3rd cusp. Mercury
is in the sub-sub of Moon that is the star lord of the 8th cusp but
also the sub lord of the 5th cusp. Since Mercury is also the subsub lord of 12th cusp and it is in the star of Saturn (12th cusp)
and sub of Jupiter that appears in 9th and 10m cusp, it justifies
defect in legs also.
Step 5: The child was born when he was running the period
of Mars-Jup-Mars-Venus-Venus, The Sookshma and Prana Lord
Venus is in Mercury star and Venus sub. Mercury is the sub-sub
lord of the 1 2m cusp and Venus is the sub lord of 3 and 8. The
dasa periods also justifies the native's agony and defects at the
time of birth.

Chapter 4: Construction of True Horoscope 239
The horoscope thus is rectified to be the correct horoscope.
ExampielO: Figure 4.35 is the chart of a gentleman as per
his recorded birth time. The gentleman gave the following details
of his life and wanted a correct horoscope.
1 . Date of Marriage: 7.5.1 981 . The wife's Moon star is Ketu.
2. Date of birth of the first female child: 10.4.1982 at 04.42
A.M.
3. Transplantation of Kidney: 4.12.1997.

Your True Horoscope

Chapter 4: Construction of True Horoscope
Fig. 4.35 Contd.,
Nirayana Cusps
Planetary Position

Your True Horoscope
Check of Accuracy of the horoscope of Figure
Step 1 : The sub-sub lord of the ascendant is Sun. The
Moon's star lord at the time of birth is Saturn that is in Sun star.
Thus the sub-sub lord of the ascendant maintains relationship
with the Moon's star lord.
Step 2: The native married on 7.5.1981 when he was
running the joint period ofVen-Ven-Rahu-Venus-Mars/Rahu. The
planet Venus has shown prominence in enacting the event. Now
Venus is in Saturn star that appears in 4, 5, 7, 10, 11 and 12
cuspal positions. However Venus is in the sub of Venus that
appears in 2, 3,9,10, 11 and 12 cuspal positions. The sub lord's
linkages of dasa and Bhukti lord have the potential to cause the
event of Marriage but with problems.
Step 3: The native got a female child on 10.4.1982 in the
dasa period of planets Ven-Ven-Saturn-Moon-Mercury. The dasa
potential of the planets justifies the event. The sub-sub lord of
the 5th cusp is Saturn. It is in the sub-sub of Sun that occupies
female sign Taurus. We may say that the native got the female
child as promised by the sub-sub lord of the 5m cusp. The female
child was born in the Moon's star of Rahu. Since Rahu represents
Saturn, the 5m cusp sub-sub lord justifies the genetical connection
also.
Step 4: Transplantation of Kidney: The native faces a
serious disease of such a nature when the following conditions
exist in the chart.

Chapter 4: Construction of True Horoscope 243
A. The sub-sub lord of the ascendant should be linked to 6th,
8th or 12th cusp through its star lord. The sub-lord of the
ascendant sub-sub lord indicates the part of the body likely
to be affected due to disease.
B. The 6th and the 8th sub-sub lords should be linked through
star lords to 6 or 8 or 12 cusps. Their sub-lords will indicate
the part of the body affected.
C. For Transplantation of an organ, the sub-sub lord of the 9^
cusp should be linked to 6 or 8 or 12 through its star lord.
The sub lord of the sub-sub lord of the 9th cusp will show the
part due to which the change in the structure of the body
occurs. The sub-sub lord of the sub-sub lord of the 9th cusp
if connected with 1, 5 or 11 it shows recovery after
transplantation. If the sub-sub lord of the sub-sub lord of
the 9th cusp is linked to Maraka and Badhaka houses, it
promises death after surgery.
D. The dasa potential of the planets at the time of transplantation
and their transit along with the transit of Sun and Moon should
justify the event.
In this chart, the sub-sub lord of the ascendant is Sun that is
in Mars star. Mars does not appear in 6 or 8 or 12.
The sub-sub lord of the 6th cusp is Ketu that is in Venus star,
Venus appears in the 1 2* cusp. Ketu is in the sub of Jupiterthat
appears in 7th and 8th cusp. Ketu also represents Venus that is in
Saturn star and its own sub. This linkage justifies kidney problem.

Your True Horoscope
The sub-sub lord of the 8th is Rahu that is in Jupiter star and
Jupiter sub. This also establishes link with 7, 8 and 12 cusps.
Rahu is in the sub-sub of Mercury that appears as the star lord of
the 1 st and the 5th cusp. The linkages of 8th and 9th sub-sub lord
justify the native's undergoing successful kidney transplantation,
The sub-sub lord of the 9th cusp is Jupiter that is in Saturn's star
and Jupiter sub. The linkages of the 9th sub-sub lord also justify
Kidney transplantation.
The Kidney transplantation was carried on 4.12.1997 when
the native was running the period of Ven-Mer-Mars-Jup-Jup. It
can be seen that the dasa potential justifies the event.
Above discussion indicates that the horoscope needs
correction especially to justify the native's suffering from serious
kidney problem by the sub sub lord of the ascendant.
To rectify the horoscope, the RP char): was prepared as per
the date and time of judgement Figure 4.36 shows the planetary
and cuspal positions of RP chart.

Chapter 4: Construction of True Horoscope

Your True Horoscope
Fig. 4.36 Contd.,
Nirayana Cusps
Planetary Position

Chapter 4: Construction of True Horoscope
We notice that Sun has appeared as the sub-sub lord of the
RP (Moon). Since Sun placed as the sub-sub lord of the ascendant
of the native's chart does not justify the nature of serious disease,
we have to reject it. The sub lord of RP (Moon) is Mercury that
does not maintain any relation with the Moon's star lord Saturn
at the time of birth. This was also rejected. The next planet in the
RP (Moon) series is Venus. Since Venus maintains relationship with
the Moon's star lord Saturn, it was decided to put Venus as the
sub-sub lord of the ascendant of the Native. The corrected chart
of the native is shown in Fig. 4.37.

Your True Horoscope
Lagna Chart Bhava Chart

Chapter 4: Construction of True Horoscope
Fig. 4.37 Contd..
Nirayana Cusps

Your True Horoscope
Verification of the Accuracy of Figure 4.37
Step 1 : The sub-sub lord of the ascendant Venus is in the
star of Saturn that is the Moon's star lord.
Step 2: The native married on 7.5.1981 in the joint period
of Ven-Ven-Rahu-Ven-Rahu. Now Venus being in its own sub that
has come as the sub-sub lord of the 7m cusp and sign lord of 1 1
allows marriage to take place in its Bhukti. Venus is the sub-sub
lord of the 7th cusp and being in the sub-sub of Rahu also justifies
marriage with a lady born under Rahu star.
Step 3: The native got the female child on 10.4.1982 in the
dasa period of planets Ven-Ven-Saturn-Moon-Mercury. The 5th
cusp sub-sub lord remains Saturn in the corrected chart and
also the birth of the child has appeared in the same dasa periods,
which was running as per the recorded time chart (Figure 4.35).
We have already seen above that this completely justifies the
event.
Step 4: Kidney Transplantation: In the rectified chart
the sub-sub lord of the ascendant is Venus that is in Saturn star,
Venus sub and Rahu sub-sub. Saturn appears in the 12m cusp as
sub-sub lord and is the Sign lord of the 8m cusp. The sub lord of
Venus is Venus that appears in the 7th cusp. The sub-sub lord of
Venus is Rahu that represents both Saturn and Jupiter. These
planets are linked with 8m and 1 2m cusps but also with the 5m
and 1 1 th cusp. Serious disease and possibility of recovery through
surgery is indicated.
The sub-sub lord of the 6m cusp is Ketu that is in Venus star,
Jupiter sub and Saturn sub-sub. This also justifies that the native
has to undergo serious health problems. Since Ketu is in Venus
star that appears as the sub-sub lord of the 7m cusp, Kidney
disease looks prominent.

Chapter 4: Construction of True Horoscope 251
The sub-sub lord of the 8th cusp and the 9th cusp are Rahu.
We have seen above this justifies the Kidney transplantation.
The native had the kidney transplant on 4.12.1997 when
he was running the joint period of Ven-Mer-Mar-Jup-Jup, which
justifies the event.
The horoscope of Figure 4.37 therefore stands corrected.

Chapter 5
Advanced Technique of Birth
Time Rectification
Research findings of the astrologer have lead to carry out
certain amendments in the basic technique of rectification. The
amendments are listed below:
1 . Use of RPs: RFb should be taken up to the Prana level that
is SSSS level. This is needed because invariably we find that
the position of Sun may not change during the Antara or
sub- sub level and we may take it as the final position of Sun.
But even during a small change in time sometimes the position
of Sun changes at Sookshama (SSS Level) or Prana (SSSS
Level) level which may be the actual position of Sun for the
correct chart. Ruling planets are used to correct the position
of planets which are liable to change during the interval of
time period in which we are seeking to fix the correct chart.
Cast the chart as per given data. Set the position of Sun.
Look for the time at which Sun's position show a change at
SSS or SSSS level. Here we have to take a decision whether
to retain the changed position or the previous one. This is
done by comparing the changed position planet and the
previous planet with the RPs ascendant planets. Select the
planet which is a ruling planet and reject the other. If both
happen to be RPs then select the stronger one. Remember
strength of the RFfe is from the SSSS position to the Sign
lord.

Chapter 5: Advanced Technique of Birth Time Rectification 253
Having set the Sun's position we fix the Moon position in
similar fashion.
This will give almost a correct position of ascendant. We may
however have to do micro adjustment to satisfy necessary
conditions for the SS lord of the ascendant. This is done by
using planets from RP (Moon) series.
2. Promise of Various Aspects of Life: We need to amend
the technique of deciding the promise of significant aspects
of life. It is observed that an aspect is said to be promised if
the SS lord of ascendant and SS lord of the Primary cusp of
the aspect gets related to the Primary cusp directly or
indirectly. Direct linkage means the star Lord of SS lord is in
the primary cusp and the sub lord appears in one of the
supporting cusp. Indirectly related means that the star lord
of the SS lord is in one of the supporting cusp and the sub
lord appears in the Primary cusp.
3. Promise of Execution of Events: An event is promised
to happen only at a specific time what we call as when destined
to happen. Destiny wheel is related to the concept of
Progression. Each cusp and each planet progresses from its
position at the time of ascendant at the rate fixed by the
philosophy of Vimsottary Dasa. In other words we may say
that the natal chart SS lords of ascendant and the relevant
cusp declares the promise of various aspects of life but it is
the progressed position of the ascendant that declares the
destined time of the execution of the promised event.
Planets co-ruling the progressed ascendant at any
time reveal the promise of the events likely to happen
at that time as per their significations in the natal
chart.

Your True Horoscope
Progressed chart at any day an event happens
confirms the execution of the promised event as per
the significations of Dasa period lords in the
progressed chart.
4. Timing Significant Events: The statement that a promised
event happens in the joint period of planets those are fruitful
significators of the houses that take part in enacting the event
when transit agrees appears to be incomplete. Many a times
we find that the native was running the period of fruitful
significators and transit also agreed but the event did not
take place. This has necessitated extending the above
statement. We need to say that a promised event
happens in the joint period of planets those are fruitful
significators of the houses that take part in enacting
the event provided transit and progressed position
of ascendant. Primary cusp, Sun and Moon agree.
Progressed chart should also justify the event.
We also need to remember that there are some specific
conditions for Dasa period lords that need be satisfied. For
example events of death take place only in specific Dasas. Criterion
for Markesh Dasa may be stated as below:
1 . Dasa Lord should be a co-ruling planet in 1 st cusp or 8m
cusp or Badhaka. Planets placed in 1 st or 8m cusp are to be
treated as co-ruling planets with PS or no PS. Dasa lord should
be related to the SS lord of the 8m cusp or planets placed in
8th Bhava. A planet is said to be related to another planet
when both the planets are in the same star. This concept is
in addition to other methods which we have stated in earlier
chapters.
2. In case of Rahu/Ketu either they themselves should be coruling planets in 1 st or 8th or Badhaka or the planets they
represent should be co-ruling planets.

Chapter 5: Advanced Technique of Birth Time Rectification 255
3. Dasa lord should justify necessary and essential conditions
for death both as per PS and Stellar status.
4. In case of Rahu or Ketu Dasa, Rahu as Rahu or Ketu as Ketu
as well as the planets Rahu/Ketu represent all should fulfill
necessary & essential conditions for death.
Role of Dasa Period Lords for Significant
Events:
Dasa should permit the event.
Bhukti should be linked to primary cusp directly or indirectly.
If, however, Bhukti lord appears as a co-ruling planet of
primary cusp and signifies supporting cusps, then it can allow
the event to happen.
Antara: Same as for Bhukti Lord.
Sookshma & Prana lords should satisfy above conditions
as well as some specific conditions.
Example: If a person commits suicide the Prana lord has to
be one of the co-ruling planets in the ascendant. In other words
Prana Lord's cuspal position indicates how the event happens.
Role of Transit
1 . Dasa Period lords should also signify event in transit.
a) They should excite the cuspal positions of relevant cusps
fruitfully.
b) They should transit in sign/star/sub and sub sub that
should be independently significator of relevant cusps.
2. T ransit of Jupiter, Sun & Moon should in addition to the above
conditions 'a' & 'b' meet some specific conditions. For
example Moon's star Lord on the day of happening of the

Your True Horoscope
event should be related to the SS lord of the Primary cusp
and should be significator of the event. Similarly the Sub
Lord of Sun at the time of happening should be strong
significator of the event and invariably be related to the SS
lord of the Primary cusp.
Fixing Dasa period lords and Transit for
specific events
1. Planets placed in a Bhava with PS or without PS may be
treated as virtual SS lord of the Bhava.
2. Dasa period lords should be reiated to the primary cusp
directly or indirectly.
3. Transit of Jup, Sun & Moon etc. has to be decided by the
SSL of the Primary cusp or its star lord (if they signify relevant
event).
4. Relation with SSL of the primary cusp can be established as
follows:-
a) Planet may be in the star of the planet that is either itself be the SSL of the primary cusp or its star lord if they
signify the event.
b) A planet may involve the supporting cusp and is in the
sub of the planet that is the SSL of the primary cusp.
c) Or both planets are in same star.
Conditions for Immediate Death
1. Dasa period lords should be co-ruling planets of ascendant
or 8th cusp.
2. Dasa lord should justify the criterion for Markesh Dasa.

Chapter 5: Advanced Technique of Birth Time Rectification 257
3. Planets co-ruling ascendant especially the SSL of ascendant
should involve and commit to 1 st & 8th or Badhaka.
4. Transit of Saturn should meet the necessary criteria. The
lord of the Sign in which Saturn transits should be a
co ruling planet in 8th cusp or Badhaka. It should be
related to the SS lord of the 8th cusp and be a strong
significatorof death. This criterion applies to all events
of death.
5. Transit of Jupiter, Sun, Moon & Dasa period lords should
agree.
Moment of Event-Formation of ascendant
1 . Planets co-ruling ascendant need to be significator of the
event in the natal chart.
2. Planets co-ruling the ascendant need also signify the relevant
cusps as per their transit positions.
We will explain the use of the advanced technique through
examples.
It may be noted that charts in this chapter are cast
using True Astrology Software version 4.0.3 and using
Khullar (hourly) Ayanamsa, Geocentric Latitude, Nutation
Apply, and True Nodes.
Example 1 : A Mumbai KCIL follower was asked to rectify
the chart of a person. The following data was provided to the
Astrologer:
Date of birth: 23rd July 1973 at Berhampur, Orissa, 84 E 47;
Birth time: It is reported to be between 12-15 Hrs and 1225 Hrs.

Your True Horoscope
Moon star of: Father- Venus; Mother-Mars; Elder sister-Mars.
Profession: The native is in service.
The Astrologer decided to do the rectification of the chart
on 10th Jan, 2011 at 0700 hrs. at his place of residence (Long
073.11.16 E); Latitude 019.11.37). The ruling planets of
ascendant and Moon were as follows.
RP (Ascendant): Jupiter-Venus-Jupiter-Sun-Venus-Mars
RP (Moon): Saturn-Jupiter-Sun-Saturn-Ketu-Mercury
The Astrologer followed step by step the procedure as laid
down above. He casted the Horoscope using the given data and
time of birth as 1 2.1 5hrs. He noticed that the position of Sun
does not change from 12.15 to 12.25 which was the given range
of time of birth. Next he found that Moon's position remains in
SS of Mercury up to 12.20.26 hrs. Since Mercury is not coming
in RP (ascendant) series it was decided that birth of the native
could not have taken place before 12.20.26 hrs. After this time
Moon enters in Ketu SS. Since Jupiter appears two times in RP
(ascendant) and Ketu represents Jupiter on that day he decided
to keep Ketu as Moon's SS. Next since Venus appeared two times
in RP (ascendant) he decided to place Venus as SSS of Moon.
This position corresponds to 12.22 hrs and gave the ascendant
as Libra in Rahu star Mercury Sub and SS.
The Astrologer then started to do micro rectification to fine
tune the position of ascendant and other cuspal positions by
using the planets from the RP (Moon) series. To do this he followed
the following steps:

Chapter 5: Advanced Technique of Birth Time Rectification 259
Fix the sub sub lord of ascendant to establish link with the
Moon's star lord at the time of birth.
1 . Check that the planets co-ruling the positions of Sun, Moon
and ascendant are related to 1 ,7,10. Since the native's chart
is an event chart with respect to 9th cusp the relationship of
planets has to be verified using the concepts of transit theory
as explained in KCIL.
2. Having done this he had to ensure that sub sub lords of
relevant cusps establish relationship with the Moon stars of
Mother, Father and elder sister.
3. Since heredity plays a significant role in the formation of the
horoscope the astrologer has to adjust the sub sub lord of
the 9th cusp so that it establishes relationship with father's
Moon star as well as is related to cusps 3, 6 and 9. Father of
the native is child of his father who is represented by 5th
cusp.
This exercise ultimately resulted in fixing the chart at time
12.22.34 hrs. This gave an ascendant of Libra 12.49.48 degree
with Ketu as the sub sub lord of the ascendant. Fig 5.1 is the
rectified horoscope. Correct longitude and latitude at place of
birth has been used.

Your True Horoscope
Rashi Chart Bhava Chart
T

Chapter 5: Advanced Technique of Birth Time Rectification
Fig. 5.1 Contd.,
Planetary Position
Cuspal Position

Your True Horoscope
Verification of the Accuracy of the Chart:
Accuracy of Sun, Moon and Ascendant: It can be verified
that the planets co-ruling the positions of Sun, Moon and
ascendant are related to 1st, 7th, and 10th cusps.
It may be remembered that it is not a must that
planets should be related to 1st, 7th and 10th all
simultaneously. Planets may be related to 1st and 7th,
7th and 10th like that.
Sub-sub lord of ascendant is Ketu that is the Moon star of
the native. Sub-sub arc of Ketu is in first half. Since male Sign
rises on the ascendant it justifies the sex of the native,
Genetical Connections: Sub sub lord of 4th cusp is
Mercury. Moon star of mother is Mars that is in Mercury star. Sub
sub lord of 1 1 th cusp is Jupiter. Moon star of elder sister is Mars
that is in the sub of Jupiter. Moon star of father is Venus that is in
Ketu star. Since Ketu is placed in the 9th Bhava it satisfies the
linkage of Moon star of father with 9th cusp. Planet placed in a
Bhava acts as virtual sub sub lord of the cusp.
Service as Profession: Sub sub lord of the 6th cusp is
Saturn. It is also available in 1 0th cusp, Saturn is in Mars star that
is placed in 6 and also appears as Sign lord of 2. Saturn is in the
sub of Sun that is the sub sub lord of 2. This justifies earning of
the native through service.
Since no significant event details were provided the native
took it to be the right horoscope.
Example 2: Ms Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis is no more
with us but the study of her horoscope provides a lot to learn for
astrologers. Her birth details as notified are as follows:

Chapter 5. Advanced Technique of Birth Time Rectification 263
P.O.B: Southampton, New York (Long 072.23,24; Latitude
Genitical Connections: Moon stars of relative's are shown
below:
First Husband -Venus; first child (female)- Moon; second child
(male)-Rahu; third child (male)- Rahu
She had a younger sister born in the year 1 933.
She published books.
Significant Events:
First Marriage: 12th September 1953
She had a miscarriage in 1 955. She delivered a still born child
First child (female): 27.11.1957
Second child (male): 25.11.1960
Third child (male): 07.08,1963
Death of third child: 09.08.1963
Death of first husband: 22.11.1963
Second marriage: 20.10.1968
Death of second husband: 28.07.1974
Figure 5.2 indicates the chart of the native cast as per the
given data.

Your True Horoscope

Chapter 5: Advanced Technique ot Birth Time Rectification
FIg,5.2Contd..
Planetary Position
Cuspal Position
On a casual look the chart appears to satisfy conditions for
Genitical connections and also the planets co-ruling Sun, Moon
and ascendant appears to satisfy the necessary linkages with 1 st,
7th, and 10th cusps. However detailed analysis of the chart for

Your True Horoscope
various events, promises of various aspects of life reveals that
the chart needs micro rectification. As such the ruling planets
were taken on 13.07.201 1 at 07.50.53 hrs at Noida (Long 77.21.6
E; Latitude 28.33.50 N).
These were as follows:
RP (Ascendant): Moon-Mercury-Rahu-Mercury-MarsVenus
RP (Moon): Mars-Mercury-Saturn-Moon-Sun-Rahu
On this day Rahu represented Mars and Mercury. Ketu
represented Venus and Mars.
The chart was rectified by first fixing the position of Sun and
then of Moon. It was observed that at 14.28,02 hrs Sun is in the
SSSS of Mars and Moon is in the SSS of Mars and SSSS of Venus.
Both Mars and Venus are planets that appear in position of strength
in RP (ascendant). series. Corresponding to this position of Sun
and Moon we get the ascendant with Mercury as sub lord and
Moon as the SS lord. Both Mercury and Moon appear in RP
(Moon) series.
Figure 5.3 represents the rectified chart of the native.

Chapter 5: Advanced Technique of Birth Time Rectification 267

Your True Horoscope
Fig. 5.3 Contd..
Planetary Position
Cuspal Position
Verification of the rectified Chart:
Accuracy of Sun, Moon and Ascendant positions: It
can be verified that the planets co-ruling Sun, Moon and

Chapter 5: Advanced Technique of Birth Time Rectification 269
ascendant are showing required relationships with the houses 1 ,
7 and 10. It may be remembered that it is not a must that
planets should be related to 1st, 7th and 10th cusps all
simultaneously. Planets may be related to 1 st and 7th, 7th
and 10th like that.
Sub sub lord of the ascendant is Moon which establishes
relationship with the Moon star of the native. Moon is in the SS of
Mercury that is placed in female sign Cancer. More over the"
ascendant rises in male Sign Libra and SS arc of Moon is in second
half. This justifies the sex of the native.
Genitical Connections:
The sub sub lord of 7th cusp is Moon that is in Ketu star and
Venus sub. Husband's Moon star is Venus.
Sub sub lord of the 5th cusp is Rahu and Moon is placed in
the 5th bhava (since Moon is placed in 5th bhava, it acts as virtual
sub sub lord of 5th bhava). Moon is the Moon's star lord of the
first child.
Rahu is the Moon star of second child. Rahu itself is placed in
7th bhava and becomes virtual sub sub lord of 7m bhava.
The Moon star of third child is Rahu. Mercury is the sub sub
lord of the 9m cusp. Rahu is in Mercury sub which justifies the
Moon star of the third child.
Verification of Various Aspects:
Promise of younger co-born: A person gets a younger
co-born when the sub sub lord of the ascendant is linked through
its star lord with the 3rd cusp. Sub sub lord of ascendant is Moon
that is in Ketu star. Since Ketu represents Jupiter we say Moon is
as good as in Jupiter star. Jupiter appears in the 3rd cusp. Thus it
justifies the promise of younger co-born.

Your True Horoscope
Promise of Marriage: Moon is the sub sub lord of the
ascendant as well as of the 7th cusp. It is in Ketu star and Venus
sub. Ketu appears in 5 and 11 and Venus appears in 7. Thus
marriage is promised.
Promise of Second Marriage: Moon the sub sub lord of
ascendant and 7th cusp is in Ketu star. Ketu represents Jupiter
which appears in 9. Sub sub lord of 9th cusp is Mercury that has
PS and it appears as sub lord of the 7th cusp. Thus by PS Mercury
establishes link between 9 and 7. Mercury is in Venus sub that
appears in 7. Thus the chart promises second marriage.
Promise of Children: Sub sub lord of the 5th cusp is Rahu
that has PS. It is the sub lord of second cusp. Rahu is in the sub
of Mercury that appears as the sub sub lord of 1 1 . Thus the
native is procreative.
The native can produce more than one child if the sub sub
lord of 5th cusp is linked with 7th cusp which is 3rd from 5th. In
Astrology we say that the third house to any house is the house
of multiplications of the significations of that house. Here sub sub
lord of 5th cusp Rahu itself is placed in 7th house with PS. Thus
the native can produce more than one child.
Sex of the child is not controlled by the mother. As such no
verification of this aspect is done. However 1 1 th cusp that is 5th
from 7 (spouse) rises in Virgo and the SS arc is in the first half.
This may account for the first child as daughter.
Promise of Loss of Pregnancies: Sub sub lord of 5th is
Rahu that is in Venus star. Venus is the sub sub lord of 4 (1 2m to
5m) and sub lord of 12m (8th to 5th). This promises loss of
pregnancies,
Publishing Books: A native can be an author and get his/
her books published if 3rd cusp sub sub lord is linked with 3, 9 and

Chapter 5: Advanced Technique of Birth Time Rectification 271
1 1 . Sub sub lord of 3rd cusp is Rahu that has PS. As such it
signifies 3 (writing capability). It is in the sub of Mercury that is
the sub sub lord of 9 (publication) and 1 1 . We have already
indicated above that sub sub lord of ascendant (Moon) is linked
with 3. Moon is also establishing relationship with 9 because its
star lord Ketu represents Jupiter that appears in 9. Moon is in
Ketu star that is the sub Lord of 1 1 . Thus the sub sub lord of
ascendant also promises that the native has the writing capability
and ensure publication of his works.
Verification of Significant Events:
Marriage: The native got married on 12.09. 1953 when she
was running the period of Venus- Mercury-Saturn-Venus-Venus.
We notice Venus appears as Dasa, Sookshma and Prana
lord. A planet repeats in Dasa periods only when it is strongly
related to the primary and supporting cusps. In the chart Venus
is in Mars star that is the star lord of 7. Rahu that represents Mars
is placed in 7. Thus Venus is as good as in the star of the planet
that occupies the primary house. Venus is in the sub of Saturn
that appears as the star lord of 5th cusp. Saturn does not appear
in 6 or 12. Venus is in the SS of Venus that appears in 7, 6 and
12. Thus this hints for short married life.
Bhukti lord Mercury is the sub lord of 7 and sub sub lord of
1 1 . Mercury has PS and thus by its PS it signifies 7 and 1 1 .
Mercury is in the sub of Venus that appears in 7. At Stellar status
also Mercury is a strong significator of Marriage. It is in Saturn
star that is the star lord of 5. It is in Venus sub that appears as
star lord of 7. It should be noticed that Rahu represents Venus.
As such Venus is considered to be the occupant of 7* Bhava. It
has PS through exchange of Nakshatra with Mars. Mercury is in
the SS of Saturn that is in 5th cusp.

Your True Horoscope
Antara Lord Saturn is in Ketu star that is the sub Lord of 5
and 1 1 . Saturn is in the sub of Venus that appears in 7.
Thus we find that the Dasa period lords justify the event of
marriage. Figure 5.4 represents the transit position of planets on
the day of Marriage,
Fig. 5.4 Transit on 12.09.1953
Planetary Position
Jupiter transits in Mercury-Mars-Mercury-Saturn. Mercury is
the Bhukti lord and Saturn is the Antara Lord. Mars is in Venus
star (7) and Saturn sub and SS that is the star lord of 5. Similarly
we can verify the transit position of other planets.
Marriage was celebrated on Rahu star day. Rahu is placed in
7 with PS. It is in the sub of Mercury that is the sub lord of 7 and
sub sub lord of 11. Rahu is in the SS of Moon that is the sub sub
lord of 7.
This discussion indicates that the promised event of marriage
happened in the joint period of fruitful significators of marriage
when transit agreed. Let us study the progressed chart to confirm
that the event has happened as destined. Figure 5.5 represents
the Progressed chart on 12.09.1953.

Your True Horoscope
Fig. 5.5 Contd.,
Planetary Position
Cuspal Position
Progressed ascendant on 12.09.1953 was co ruled by MarsSaturn-Rahu-Rahu. We have seen above that all these planets
are strong significators of the event of marriage in the natal chart.

Chapter 5: Advanced Technique of Birth Time Rectification 275
Let us study the progressed chart independently. The event
of marriage happened when Moon was progressing in Mars-VenusMercury-Saturn-Venus-Venus.
Dasa, Sookshma and Prana lord Venus in the progressed
chart is in Jupiter star Jupiter sub and Rahu 55. Jupiter appears
in 5 and 11 as sub sub lord of these cusps. Rahu is the sub lord
Bhukti Lord Mercury in the progressed chart is in Mercury
star that appears as star lord of 5, as Sign lord of 1 1 and placed
in 7 (through Rahu that represents Mercury). Mercury is in the
sub of Jupiter that is the sub sub lord of 5 and 1 1 .
Antara Lord 5aturn in the progressed chart is in Venus star
(7) and sub of Mercury (5, 7 and 11). Saturn is in the SS of
Jupiter (5 and 11).
1 Thus we find that the event of marriage is confirmed by the
analysis of the progressed chart.
The marriage was celebrated on Rahu star day. Rahu in the
progressed chart is in Mars star that is the star lord of 11. Rahu is
placed in 7 and represents Mars. Thus Mars is assumed to be
placed in 7. Thus Rahu signifies 7 and 1 1 . Rahu is in the sub of
Venus (7). Rahu is in the S5 of Jupiter (5 and 1 1 ). Thus we find
the chart justifies transit also.
Birth of First Daughter: The native was blessed with the
birth of first daughter on 27.1 1 .1957 when she was running the
period of Sun-Jupiter-Rahu-5aturn-Saturn.
Sun in the chart has P5 and being the star Lord of 1 1 signifies
1 1 . 5un is in Saturn star (2 and 5) and in the sub of Mars that
appears in 2. Sun is in the SS of Jupiter that appears in 5.

Your True Horoscope
Bhukti lord Jupiter acquires the PS because Jupiter is in Moon
star and Moon is in Ketu star that represents Jupiter. Thus Jupiter
signifies 2 and 5. Jupiter is in the sub of Saturn that appears as
the star lord of 5.
Antara Lord Rahu has PS and appears as sub Lord of 2 and
sub sub lord of 5. It is in the sub of Mercury that is the sub sub
lord of 1 1 .
Sookshma and Prana lord is Saturn that is in the star of Ketu
that is the sub lord of 5 and 1 1 . Since Ketu represents Jupiter we
may say that Saturn is in Jupiter star that appears as the sub
sub lord of 2 and Sign lord of 5. Thus Saturn signifies 2, 5 and
1 1 . It is in the sub of Venus that appears in favourable as well as
unfavourable cusps. This accounts for related problems at the
time of delivery.
Thus we see that the Dasa Period justifies the enactment of
the event of birth of first daughter.
Figure 5.6 indicates the transit position of planets on

Chapter 5: Advanced Technique of Birth Time Rectification
Fig. 5.6 Transit on 27.11.1957
Planetary Position
It can be verified that transit supports the event. Jupiter
transits in Mercury-Mars-Saturn-Jupiter. All these planets signify
2, 5 and 1 1 . Similarly we can check the transit position of other
planets.
Figure 5.7 is the progressed chart for the event of birth of
first daughter.

Your True Horoscope
Fig. 5.7 Progress on 27.11.1957.
Name Fiq 5.7 Place Southampton
Lonqitude 72-23-24-W Latitude 40-53-3-N
Sidereal Time 10-02-12 Date 28/7/1929
Day Sunday Geocentric Latitude 40-41-38-N
Nakshatra Ashwini- 1 Qtr. Time 14:28:02
Lunar Nodes T rue Tithi Krishna Paksha -
Saptami
Time Zone -4:0:0 DST 00:00
Ayanamsa 22-51 -.46 House System Placidus

Chapter 5: Advanced Technique of Birth Time Rectification
Fig.5.7Contd.,
Planetary Position
Cuspal Position
Progressed ascendant was co-ruled by planets Mars-SaturnJupiter-Venus. We have seen above that these planets signify 2,
5 and 1 1 in the natal chart. Let us study the progressed chart
independently.

Your True Horoscope
Birth of first child took place when Moon was progressing in
Sun-Jupiter-Rahu-Sat-Sat.
Sun in the progressed chart is in Ketu star (star lord of 5).
Ketu represents Mars and Saturn. Thus Sun can be assumed to
be in Mars star (1 1 ) and also in Saturn star (2). Sun is in Saturn
sub that is the sub sub lord of 5.
Jupiter is in Rahu star (sub lord of 2, and as Mercury sub sub
lord of 2). Jupiter is in Moon sub that appears in favourable as
well as unfavourable positions. But Jupiter is in the SS of Mercury
that is sub sub lord of 2.
Rahu represents Mercury that is in Ketu star (star lord of 5)
and in the sub of Venus (2 and 11). It is in the SS of Saturn that
is the sub sub lord of 5.
Saturn is in Sun star (sub lord of 5) and in Jupiter sub that
appears in 2. Saturn is in the SS of Saturn that appears as sub
sub lord of 5.
Thus the analysis of progressed chart confirms the
enactment of the event of birth of first daughter.
Death of First Husband: Native lost her first husband on
22.11.1963 when she was running the period of Moon-RahuMoon-Jupiter-Venus.

Chapter 5: Advanced Technique of Birth Time Rectification 281
Dasa and Antara Lord Moon: Moon is the sub sub lord of
7th cusp that represents the first husband. Moon is in Ketu star.
Since Ket represents Jupiter we say Moon is in Jupiter star that is
the sub sub lord of 2 which is 8th from 7. Moon is in the sub of
Venus that is the star lord of 7. Moon is in the SS of Mercury that
appears in 2. Thus we see that the Dasa lord justifies all conditions
for Markesh Dasa.
Bhukti Lord Rahu: Rahu has PS. It is the sub lord of 2 and
is placed in 7. Thus by PS it signifies houses 1 and 8 with respect
to 7. It is in the sub of Mercury that appears in 2 and 7 (8 and 1
from 7). Rahu is in the SS of Moon that appears in 1 (7th from 7).
Even as per its stellar status Rahu is in Venus star (7) and Mercury
sub (2). Thus Rahu justifies the role of Bhukti lord in causing the
death of the first husband.
Sookshma Lord Jupiter: Jupiter is in Moon star and Saturn
sub. Moon is the sub sub lord of 7 (ascendant of spouse) and
Saturn is the star lord of 5 that is Badhaka house for 7. Jupiter is
in the SS of Venus that appears in 1, 6 and 8 (Maraka houses for
Prana Lord Venus: Venus is in Mars star that appears in
house 1, 2, 8, and 12 from 7(only relevant positions shown).
Venus is in the sub of Saturn that is the star lord of Badhaka
house. These linkages of the Prana lord not only justify death
but also clearly indicate un-natural death.
Figure 5.8 indicate the Progressed chart for the event of
death of the first husband.

Your True Horoscope
Fig. 5.8 Progressed chart 22.1 1 .1963.
Name Fig 5.8 Place Southampton
Longitude 72-23-24-W Latitude 40-53-3-N
Sidereal Time 10-02-12 Date 28/7/1929
Day Sunday Geocentric Latitude 40-41-38-N
Nakshatra Ashwini- 1 Qtr. Time 14:28:02
Lunar Nodes T rue Tithi Krishna Paksha -
Saptami
Time Zone -4:0:0 DST 00:00
Ayanamsa 22-51-46 House System Placid us

Chapter 5: Advanced Technique of Birth Time Rectification
Fig. 5.8 Contd.,
Planetary Position
Cuspal Position
Planets co-ruling the Ascendant of progressed chart for the
event of death of first husband are Mars-Mercury-Venus-Jupiter.
All these planets in the natal chart are strong significators of the
event of death of the first husband.

Your True Horoscope
Let us study the progressed chart independently. The event
happened when Moon was progressing in Moon-Rahu-MoonJupiter-Venus,
Dasa and Antara Lord are Moon that is in Moon star (sub
sub lord of 2 that is 8th from 7) and sub of Rahu that has PS and
is placed in 7 (the ascendant for husband). Moon is in the SS of
Moon that is sub sub lord of 8 with respect to 7.
Bhukti lord Rahu is in Rahu star. Rahu is placed in 7(ascendant
of husband) and Mercury sub that is the sub lord of 2 (8 for
husband).
Sookshma Lord Jupiter is in Jupiter star that is placed in the
7th house and is also the sign lord of 2. It is in the sub of Saturn
that is the sub sub lord of 3 which is Badhaka house for 7 in the
progressed chart.
Prana lord Venus is in Jupiter star that is placed in 7 and sub
of Moon that is the sub sub lord of 2.
Thus we see that the analysis of the progressed chart
confirms that the event of death of first husband happened as
destined.
On the date of death Saturn was transiting in Sat-Mars-MarsVenus. Saturn in the progressed chart is in Moon star that is the
sub sub lord of 8th cusp with respect to the ascendant of first
husband. It is in Rahu sub that has PS and is placed in the
ascendant of husband. Thus transit of Saturn in Saturn Sign
meets all the necessary conditions. Mars and Venus are strong
significators of death both in the natal and progressed chart.
Death took place on the day when Moon was in Moon star
that is the sub sub lord of 8 with respect to ascendant of husband.
We have seen above that Moon is both the Dasa as well as the
Antara lord on the day of death.

Chapter 5: Advanced Technique of Birth Time Rectification 285
Second Marriage: It is said that the native celebrated her
second marriage on 20.10.1 968 when she was running the period
of Moon-Ketu-Sat-Sat-Mercury. The second marriage takes place
in the joint period of planets those are fruitful significators of 5, 9
and 1 1 . Remember the Primary cusp for second marriage is 9th
house. All the planets that are the Dasa period lords have to be
linked with 9th cusp directly or indirectly. Readers can verify that
in the natal chart Moon-Ketu-Sat-Sat-Mercury satisfy the
necessary conditions to enact the promised event of second
marriage. The analysis of the progressed chart, however, does
not confirm this. It could not have been her second marriage. I
would not venture to discuss this further.
We feel that the step by step analysis of the chart certifies
the correctness of the chart.
Example 3: A person approached the author with a request
to fix his chart. He gave the following details:
D.O.B: 26.02.1949. P.O.B: Karolbagh, Delhi, India T.O.B:
Between 11 hrsand 16 hrs
Genetical Connections:
Moon stars of:
Wife — Mars, Father— Saturn/Mercury, First daughter— Venus,
Second daughter— Rahu, Third child son— Rahu, Immediate elder
sister— Jupiter/Saturn, Immediate younger sister— Ketu/Venus
Significant Events:
Death of Mother— 23.01.1954 about 04 to 05 hrs
Death of Father— 27.12.1998 at 22 hrs
Date of Marriage— 23.05.1971

Your True Horoscope
First child (female) -07.06.1974 at 18.39.1 6 hrs in Holy Family
Hospital, Delhi. India
Second child (female)— 11.08.1978 at 14.55.57 hrs in Holy
Family Hospital, Delhi. India
Third child (male)— 17.05.1981 at 18.03.14 hrs in Holy Family
Hospital, Delhi. India
Recent Foreign Journey: -From 01.04.2011 to
18.04.201 1 departure time 01 hrs. Native in fact had many foreign
journeys.
The author took up the job of rectification on 09.07.201 1
at 04.00.13 at Noida.
The ruling planets at that time were as follows:
RP (ascendant): Mercury-Mars-Mercury-Jupiter-JupiterMercury
RP (Moon): Venus-Mars-Mercury-Rahu-Venus-Rahu
Rahu on this day represented Mars and Mercury. Ketu
represented Venus and Mars.
The correct chart was fixed by following step by step
procedure as illustrated below:
The chart was cast as per the given data using time of birth
as ll.Ohrs. This chart shows thatthe Sun was in the SS of Saturn.
The time of birth was then changed to 16.0 hrs. We noticed that
Sun still remained in Saturn SS. Thus we had to believe that the
Sun's position in SS has to be accepted though it is not a RP. We
shifted the time of birth back to ll.Ohrs and tried to put the SSS
position of Sun using planets from RP (ascendant) series. Since

Chapter 5: Advanced Technique of Birth Time Rectification 287
Mercury is the strongest planet in RP we decided to put Mercury
as the sub sub lord of Sun's position. This occurred at 1 1 .37 hrs.
Corresponding to this we noticed that Moon is in Jupiter sub and
Saturn SS. Saturn is not a co-ruling planet in RP (ascendant)
series. Since Mercury appeared three times in RP we decided to
keep Mercury as SS of Moon. This comes at time 11.56.09.
Corresponding to this time we notice that Sun is in the SSSS
of Venus that is not a ruling planet in RP (ascendant) series. The
earliest planet that can come as SSSS of Sun is Mars. This occurs
at time 12.06.43 hrs and next position is Rahu. Both these planets
are strong RPs. Thus we decided that keeping Mars or Rahu as
the SSSS of Sun we should adjust the position of Moon.
At 12.15.33 we found that Sun is in Rahu SSSS and Moon is
in Rahu SSS and Mercury SSSS.
Having set the position of Sun and Moon we need now to
set the position of sub and SS of ascendant using planets from
RP (Moon) series. At 12.15.34 we noticed that Rahu is the sub
lord and Venus is the sub sub lord of ascendant. Both these
planets are strong in RP (Moon) series. At 12.15.34 we get SSS
and SSSS of ascendant as Rahu. This appeared to be the most
accurate position of ascendant.
However this indicated that the SS arc of the sub sub lord of
ascendant is in the first half when female Sign rises in the
ascendant. But as Venus the sub sub lord of ascendant is in the
SS of Saturn that is placed in male sign Leo it was accepted that
this justifies the sex of the native.
Figure 5.9 represents the rectified chart.

Your True Horoscope
Fig. 5.9 Natal Chart
Cusp Chart

Chapter 5: Advanced Technique of Birth Time Rectification
Fig. S.9 Contd.,
Planetary Position
Cuspal Position

Your True Horoscope
Verification of the Accuracy of the Rectified
Chart:
Accuracy of Sun, Moon and Ascendant Positions: It
can be verified that the planets co-ruling the positions of Sun,
Moon and ascendant are related to 1 , 7 and 10.lt may, be
remembered that it is not a must that planets should be
related to 1, 7 and 10 all simultaneously. Planets may be
related to 1 and 7, 7 and 10 like that.
Sub sub lord of the ascendant is Venus that is in Mars star
that is the star lord of the native.
Genetical Connections:
Seventh cusp sub sub lord is Venus that is in Mars star which
is the star lord of the wife. More over Mars is in Rahu star that
represents Venus through Ketu. Note Rahu is the Moon star of
the Second child. Thus the sub sub lord justifies the Moon star of
wife as well as the second child.
Fifth cusp sub sub lord is Rahu that is in Ketu star that
represents Venus that is the Moon star of the first child.
Ninth cusp sub sub lord is Jupiter that is in Rahu sub which is
the Moon star of the third child. More over Rahu is in Ketu star
that represents Venus that is placed in the 9th Bhava. Thus this
justifies the Moon star of the third child. It is stated by the native
that the Moon star of his father could be Saturn or Mercury. Now
Saturn is in Ketu star that represents Venus that is placed in the
9th Bhava. Mercury itself is placed in 9th Bhava. Thus the chart
justifies the linkage with the Moon star of the father.
Eleventh sub sub lord is Venus and Rahu is placed in the 1 1 tn
Bhava. It is stated that the Moon star of the immediate elder
sister could be Jupiter or Saturn. Now Jupiter is in the sub of

Chapter 5: Advanced Technique of Birth Time Rectification 291
Rahil and Saturn is in Ketu star that represents Venus. Thus the
relationship of 11th cusp with the Moon star of the immediate
elder sister is established.
Third sub sub lord is Saturn that is in Ketu star that represents
Venus. It is stated that the Moon star of the immediate younger
could be Ketu or Venus. Thus the sub sub lord of the 3rd cusp
establishes relationship with the Moon star of the immediate
younger sister.
Promise of Aspects of Life:
Marriage: Venus is the sub sub lord of 1 and 7. It has PS
and appears as sub sub lord of 7 and 11. It is in the sub of
Mercury that appears in 5 & 7. More over Venus is in the star of
Mars that appears in 7. Thus marriage is promised.
Birth of Children: Sub sub lord of 5th cusp is Rahu that is
in Ketu star that represents Venus. Notice Venus appears as the
sub sub lord of 2 and 1 1 . Rahu is in the sub of Sun that does not
negate 2. Rahu is in the SS of Venus that appears in relevant
cusps 2 and 1 1 . This shows that the native has the necessary
procreative power to produce children.
A native can produce more than one child if the sub sub lord
of 5m cusp is related through its star lord with 7 that is third from
5. In Astrology, we say that third house to any house is
the house of multiplications of the significations of that
house. Rahu the sub sub lord of 5m cusp is in Ketu star that
represents Venus that is the sub sub lord of 7th cusp. This shows
that native could produce more than one child.
Since Rahu is linked with 4 and 12 which are negative houses
with respect to 5m cusp this indicates delay or the possibilities of
loss of some pregnancies.

Your True Horoscope
Promise of Foreign Travels: Ascendant sub sub lord is in
Mars star that appears in 3 and 12. It is in Mercury sub that
appears in 9. Thus the chart promises that native could make
foreign travels.
Promise of Execution of Events and Progression: The
natal chart sub sub lords of ascendant and the relevant cusp
declares the promise of various aspects of life but it is the
progressed position of the ascendant that declares the destined
time of the execution of the promised event,
Native is born in Taurus ascendant and then it enters in Gemini
around 6.7.1951 . It means the native lost his mother when the
ascendant was progressing in Mercury sign Gemini. The necessary
conditions for the Progressed sign lord to declare the execution
of death events that the native may have to experience are:
a. Mercury in the natal chart should signify 12 (Loss), and 8
(Death). Here in this chart we find that Mercury with PS
appears as the sub sub lord of 8. It is in the sub of Saturn
that appears as SSSS of 12. Thus it shows that the native
will experience some death events during the time ascendant
progresses in Mercury Sign.
b. To decide whose death will occur we have to notice in which
cusp Mercury appears. Death will take place of a person for
whom it appears in the 8th cusp or the ascendant. Mercury
also has to have the power to inflict death of the concerned
relative. Here Mercury is the SSS lord of the 1 1 th cusp which
is 8th from 4 (Mother). Mercury is a co-ruling planet in 8th
• house from 4. Mercury is in Moon star that is the sub lord of
11 (8th from 4) and sub of Saturn that is placed in 4
(ascendant for mother). Mercury is in the SS of Rahu that
appears in Maraka houses with respect to 4, Thus the chart
clearly indicates the possibility of death of mother.

Chapter 5: Advanced Technique of Birth Time Rectification 293
c. Ascendant progresses to Gemini sign and remain there up
to 5.1.1985. During this period the native experienced the
events of marriage, and birth of three children. This means
Mercury in the natal chart should be related to the relevant
cusps which take part in enacting these events.
Mercury has PS and appears in 2, 5, 7, 8,9, and 10. Mercury
is in the sub of Saturn that also has PS and appears in 3, 4,
6, 9, 10, and 1 1 . Thus by PS alone it promises the execution
of Marriage (5, 7 and 11), birth of first child (2, 5, and 11),
birth of second child (2, 7, and 11), birth of 3rd child (2, 9
and 11). Thus we find the progressed ascendant Sign lord
justifies the execution of these events.
Verification of Events:
Marriage: Native got married on 23.05.1971 when he was
running the Dasa period of Rahu-Mars-Rahu-Jupiter-Moon.
Rahu is Dasa as well as Antara lord. Rahu is in Ketu star that
represents Venus that is the sub sub lord of 7 and 11. Ketu itself
is in 5. Rahu is in Sun sub that does not negate 7. Thus we say
that the Dasa lord allows the event of marriage. Bhukti lord Mars
is in Rahu star (5 and 7) and sub of Moon that is the sub lord of
1 1 . Mars is in the SS of Rahu that is in 5 and 7.
Sookshama Lord Jupiter has PS and is the Sign lord of 1 1 . It
is in the sub of Rahu that is the sub and sub sub lord of 5 and
sub lord of 7. Rahu is in the SS of Jupiter that is in 11.
Prana lord could be Moon or Mars. Both these planets promise
the execution of the event of marriage.
Figure 5.10 shows the transit position of planets at 23 hours
on 23.05.1971 . Study of transit clearly indicates that it supports
the event.

Your True Horoscope
Fig 5.10 transit on 23.05.1971
Planetary Position
Figure 5.11 represents the Progressed chart for the event
of Marriage. We notice that the progressed ascendant is co-ruled
by Mercury-Rahu-Moon-Mercury. All these planets are strong
significators of the event of marriage in the natal chart.
In the progressed chart Moon was progressing in Sat-RahuMars-Rahu-Jup-Moon/Mars. All these planets are strongly related
to 5, 7 and 11 in the Natal chart.

Chapter 5: Advanced Technique of Birth Time Rectification
Fig. 5.11 Progress
Rashi Chart Bhava Chart

Your True Horoscope
Fig. S.llContd.,
Planetary Position
Cuspal Position
Let us study the Progressed chart independently.
Dasa and Antara Lord Rahu is in Venus star and Mercury
sub. Venus is the sub sub lord of 5 and star lord of 7. Rahu
represents Venus and it is placed in 11. Thus we take that Venus

Chapter 5: Advanced Technique of Birth Time Rectification 297
is placed in 1 1 . Thus Rahu involves all the relevant houses and its
sub lord supports the event.
Bhukti Lord Mars is in Saturn star that is the sub sub lord
of 7 and sub lord of 5 and 1 1 . Mars is in the sub of Mercury that
is placed in 9 and has PS. 9th house is a favourable house with
respect to 5, 7 and 1 1 .
Sookshama Lord Jupiter is in Rahu star Rahu sub and
Jupiter SS. When a planet is in the star and sub of the
same planet we treat it as a case of bunching and treat
the planet as if it is in the star of that planet and the sub
sub lord of the planet takes upon the role of sub as well
as SS.
Thus Jupiter is taken in Rahu star and Jupiter sub. Rahu
appears in 5 and 7 and Jupiter is the sub sub lord of 1 1 .
Prana lord Moon is in Rahu star (5 and 7) and in Mars sub
that appears in 1 1 .
Thus we find that a promised event of marriage has
happened in the joint period of fruitful significators of 5, 7 and 1 1
when transit agreed. It also clearly illustrates that the event
happened only as destined which is shown by the progressed
chart.
We may also note the progressed position of the primary
cusp 7 for the event of marriage. We notice that the 7m cusp
has progressed to Jupiter-Venus-Rahu-Venus. All these planets
are strong significators of 5, 7 and 1 1 . We need to look for the
progressed position of 7m cusp independently and not from the
progressed chart.
Death of Father: The native lost his father on 27.12.1998
at 22.0 hrs approximately. At that time he was running Dasa
period of Saturn-Sun-Mercury-Mars-Mercury.

Your True Horoscope
Dasa Lord Saturn has PS and is placed in 4 (8th from 9).
Saturn is in Ketu star (star lord of 4) and sub of Jupiter that is the
sub sub lord of 9. Thus we find Saturn satisfies all the conditions
for a Markesh Dasa.
Bhukti Lord Sun is in Rahu star that is the sub sub lord of 4
and sub lord of 7 (Badhaka for 9) and 9. Sun is in the sub of
Mercury that is placed in 9 with PS. Sun is in Saturn SS that is in
Maraka houses.
Mercury the Antara and Prana Lord is placed in 9 with PS. It
is in the sub of Saturn that is placed in 4 with PS. Thus as per its
PS it is a very strong significator of death of father. Mercury is in
Moon star and Sat sub. Moon appears as star lord of 9 and Sat is
the resident of 4 with PS. Thus at stellar level also Mercury is a
strong significator of death of father.
Sookshama lord Mars is in Rahu star that is the sub sub lord
of 4 and sub lord of 9 and 7. Mats is in the sub of Moon that is in
9. Mars is in the SS of Rahu. Thus Mars has the power to inflict
death of father.
Figure 5.12 represents the transit position of planets on the
day of Death of the Father.

Chapter 5: Advanced Technique of Birth Time Rectification
Fig. 5.12 Transit chart on 27.12.1998 at 22 hrs.
Planetary Position
We notice that Saturn was transiting in Mars sign Aries and
in Ketu star, Venus sub and Ketu SS. The Sign Lord Mars is related
to the sub sub lord of 4 that is sub sub lord of 8 with respect to
9 because Rahu the sub sub lord of 4 represents Mars. We have
already seen that Mars has the potential to cause the death of
the father of the native. Ketu represents both Venus and Mars.
As such we find that transit of Saturn fully justifies the event of
death. Similarly we can verify that transit position of other planets
support the event.
Let us discuss the Progressed chart for the event of death
of the native's father. Figure 5.13 represents the progressed chart.

Your True Horoscope
Fig. 5.13 Progress on 27.12.1998 at 22 hrs.
Name TH Fiq 5.9 Place Karolbaqh Delhi
Longitude 77-11-0-E Latitude 28-40-0-N
Sidereal Time 22-17-27 Date 26/2/1949
Day Saturday Geocentric Latitude 28-30-18-N
Nakshatra Dhanishtha-2 Qtr. Time 12:15:34
Lunar Nodes True Tithi Krishna Paksha -
Chaturdasi
Time Zone +5:30:0 DST 00:00
Ayanamsa 23-08-09 House System Placidus

Chapter 5: Advanced Technique of Birth Time Rectification
Fig.5.13Cont<±,
Planetary Position
Cuspal Position

Your True Horoscope
We notice that the progressed position of ascendant is coruled by planets Moon -Sat- Sun-Sun. Death of father has taken
place in Saturn Dasa and Sun Bhukti. Moon is also a strong
significator of father's death. Moon is placed in 9, ascendant of
Father. It is in Mars star that is in 7 (Badhaka for 9) and in Jupiter
sub that is the sub sub lord of 9 and sub lord of 4th.
We can also check that during the progressed position of
ascendant in Moon sign the native will experience some death
event or not. Moon is in Mars star (12) and Jupiter sub (8). This
shows that the native is destined to experience some death event.
We may analyse the progressed chart independently. Dasa
lord Saturn is placed in 4 in the progressed chart. Saturn acquires
the positional status because of exchange of Nakshatra with
Mercury through Rahu. Saturn is in Rahu star that is the sub sub
lord of 4 and 9. Saturn is in the sub of Jupiter that is in 9 as well
as in 3 (both Maraka and Badhaka for 9). Saturn thus satisfies
necessary conditions to be the Markesh Dasa. Similarly we can
verify that all planets in the Progressed position of Moon justify
death in the Progressed chart also.
We can study the progressed chart along with transit chart.
For example Saturn in transit was in Aries ruled by Mars. In the
progressed chart Mars is in Mercury star that is placed in 9. Mars
is in the sub of Jupiter that is in Badhaka.

Chapter 5: Advanced Technique of Birth Time Rectifica tion 303
Birth of First Daughter: The native was blessed with the
birth of his first female child on 07.06.1974 at 18.39. 16 hrs when
he was running the period of Jupiter-Jupiter-Rahu-Moon-Rahu.
Dasa and Bhukti lord Jupiter has PS and appears in ll.Itis in
the sub of Rahu that appears in 2 and 5.
Antara and Prana lord Rahu is in Ketu star that is placed in 5.
Since Ketu represents Venus we may say that Rahu is in Venus
star that is the sub sub lord of 2 and 1 1 . Thus we notice that
Rahu involves all three relevant houses. Rahu is in the sub of Sun
that does not negate 2. Rahu represents Mars and thus has also
to cause results of Mars. Mars is in Rahu star (2, 5 and ll)-and
Moon sub that is the sub lord of 2 and 1 1 and star lord of 5. Mars
is in the SS of Rahu that appears in all the relevant cusps. Thus
we find that Rahu is a very strong significator of the event of
birth of the first child.
Sookshama lord Moon is in Mars star and Jupiter sub. We
notice that in this chart both Rahu and Ketu represent Mars.
Ketu is placed in 5 and Rahu is placed in 11. Thus we find Moon
involves 5 and 1 1 . Moon is in the sub of Jupiter that appears in
1 1 . Moon is in the SS of Mercury that appears in 2.
Figure 5.14 shows the transit position of planets at the time
of birth of the child.

Your True Horoscope
Planetary Position
The native got the child in Venus Moon star. An event
happens when the Moon star is related to the sub sub
lord of the primary cusp and it signifies the relevant
houses. In this case Rahu is the sub sub lord of the 5th cusp that
represents Venus through Ketu. Venus is in Mars star. Both Ketu
and Rahu represent Mars and Venus. Thus Venus involves 2, 5
and 1 1 . Venus is in the sub of Mercury that appears in 2.
We can check transit of all planets and confirm that transit
supports the event.
Figure 5.15 represents the Progressed chart at the time of
birth of the first daughter.

Your True Horoscope
Fig. 5.15 Contd..
Planetary Position

Chapter 5: Advanced Technique of Birth Time Rectification 307
The progressed ascendant is co-ruled by planets MercuryJupiter-Jupiter-Sun. We have discussed earlier that Mercury
promises the execution of the first child birth. Jupiter is Dasa and
Bhukti lord at the time of birth of the child. Sun in the natal chart
is in Rahu star (2, 5 and 1 1 ) and sub of Mercury that is in 2. Thus
we find that the co-ruling planets of progressed ascendant are
strong significators of the event.
We can study the progressed chart independently.
Refer page 303, Dasa and Bhukti lord Jupiter is in Rahu star
that is the sub sub lord of 1 1 , sub lord of 2 and star lord of 5.
Jupiter is in the sub of Jupiter that appears in 9 and 1 and thus
supports the houses 5 and 1 1 but negates 2. This accounts for
the reason that Jupiter could not enact the event in its Antara.
Antara and Prana lord Rahu represents Mars and Sun. Both
these planets are strong significators of 2, 5 and 1 1 . Rahu is in
Sun star Sun sub and Mercury SS. It will be considered that Rahu
is in Sun star and Mercur sub. Sun as Rahu is placed in 1 1 and
Mercury appears in 2.
Sookshama lord Moon is in Jupiter star and Rahu sub. Ketu
which represents Jup is placed in 5. Thus Moon involves 5 and its
sub lord Rahu appears in 2 and 1 1 .
Thus the Progressed chart justifies the event.
We can see that the event happened when the 5m cusp
progressed to the planets co ruled by Ven-Rahu-Mercury and
Jupiter that are all strong significators of the event. Note we
have to see the progression of 5th cusp independently
and not the 5th cusp as it appears in the progressed chart.

Your True Horoscope
Foreign Travel: The native went overseas on 01 .04.201 1
when he was running the period of Mercury-Venus-Sun-RahuSaturn and Moon star at the time of departure was Rahu. All the
Dasa period lords are significators of 3, 9 and 12.
Moon star Rahu is Sookshama lord. Rahu is in Ketu star that
represents Venus which is placed in 9 and is the sub sub lord of
12. Ketu also represents Mars that is the sub lord of 3.
Thus we find that the chart justifies the event as per Dasa
and transit potential.
Figure 5.16 represents the Progressed chart at the time of
start of the Journey.

Chapter 5: Advanced Technique of Birth Time Rectification
Fig. 5.16 Progress on 01 .04.201 1 at 01 hrs.
Rashl Chart Bhava Chart

Your True Horoscope
Fig. 5.16 Contd..
Planetary Position
Cuspal Position
The Progressed ascendant is co-ruled by Moon-MercuryKetu-Saturn. All these planets are strong significators of 3, 9 and
1 1 . See Saturn that is ruling the sub sub lord position of the
progressed ascendant. It is in Ketu star (Mars and Venus-3, 9

Chapter 5: Advanced Technique of Birth Time Rectification 311
and 12) and Jupiter sub (sub sub lord of 9) and Rahu SS (3, 9
and 12). (Refer natal chart fig. 5.9)
We can verify the event by studying the progressed chart
independently. Let us take the Sookshama lord Rahu. It is in
Rahu star (3 and 12). Prana lord Saturn is in Rahu star (3 and
12) and Mars sub (sub sub lord of 9).
Thus we say that the execution of the event is justified by
the progressed chart.
From the above discussion we can say that the
rectified chart is the true horoscope of the native.
Example 4: A female provided the following details with a
request to fix the correct chart.
My DOB: 25 decl973
Time of Birth: 08.50 Hrs.
Place: Amarjain Hospital, Rajasthan, India
Longitude: 75 deg 49 min 15 sec-East
Latitude: 26 deg 55 min 17 sec-North
Qualification: BA (1995); M.B.A.( 1997)
Death of father: 19th Dec. 1991 approx time: 1.30 hrs. in
Jaipur
Death of mother: 10th Sep. 2008 approx time: 15.50 hrs
Delhi
Younger sister: DOB-lstOct 1975 at 19.30 hrs.
Younger brother: DOB-28th May 1977 at 02.15 hrs.
Elder daughter: DOB-lOth Oct 2002; TOB- 1.41.26 p.m. at
Noida

Your True Horoscope
Younger son: DOB-lst Mar 2006; TOB-10.15 a.m. at Noida
My wedding ceremony date: 19th Nov 1999
My husband's DOB- 23rd June 1973; in Delhi
Date of joining of first job: 1st June 1997
First Foreign Travel: 15th May 2010 Time of departure 5
a.m.
The job of rectification of this chart was taken on 18.07.201 1
at 18.55.57 at Noida. The ruling planets at that time were as
follows:
RP (Ascendant): Jupiter-Venus-Ketu-Mercury-JupiterMercury
RP (Moon): Saturn-Rahu-Jupiter-Rahu-Jupiter-Saturn
On this date Rahu represented Mars and Mercury. Ketu
represented Venus and Mars.
The process of rectification was done by following the step
by step procedure as discussed above. It was found that at
08.48.02 hrs the positions of Sun, Moon and ascendant match
the ruling planets. The rectified horoscope is represented by Figure

Chapter 5: Advanced Technique of Birth Time Rectification
Fig. 5.17 Natal

Your True Horoscope
Fig. 5.17 Contd.
Planetary Position
Cuspal Position

Chapter 5: Advanced Technique of Birth Time Rectification 315
Verification of Accuracy of the Chart:
Planets co-ruling the positions of Sun, Moon and ascendant
establish links with 1 , 7 and 10. It may be remembered that
it is not a mustthat planets should be related to 1, 7and
10 all simultaneously. Planets may be related to 1 and 7,
7 and 10 like that.
Moon star of the native is Venus that is placed in ascendant
with PS. More over Venus is the sub sub lord of the ascendant.
Thus the Moon star lord establishes relationship with the sub sub
lord of the ascendant.
Verification of Promises:
Marriage: Sub sub lord of ascendant is Venus that is in Moon
star (5 and 7) and Saturn sub (7 and 11). Sub sub lord of 7th
cusp is Saturn that is in Rahu star (5, 7 and 11) and sub of
Mercury (1 1 ). Thus the chart promises marriage.
Birth of Children: Sub sub lord of 5 is Venus that is in
Moon star (5 and 2) and Saturn sub (2 and 11). This promises
that the native is procreative and could produce children.
A native can produce more than one child if the sub sub lord
of 5 is linked with 7. Here Venus is in Moon star that appears in 7.
Thus the native could produce more than one child.
Since sub sub lord of 5th cusp Venus has PS and thus gets
connected to 4 and 12. This promises possible loss of pregnancies.
Promise of Higher Education: Sub sub lord of 4th cusp is
Mercury that has PS and appears in 9th cusp. This promises that
the native could have higher education. Since 7th cusp sub sub
lord is Saturn that has PS and it appears as sub lord of 9th cusp;
it justifies that native could do MBA.

Your True Horoscope
Genitical Connections: It can be verified that the sub sub
lords of 3, 5, and 7 relates to the Moon stars of the younger
sister, first daughter, second child and husband.
Promise of Execution of Events and Progression: The
natal chart sub sub lords of ascendant and the relevant cusp
declares the promise of various aspects of life but it is the
progressed position of the ascendant that declares the destined
time of the execution of the promised event.
The native took birth in Capricorn ascendant ruled by Saturn.
The ascendant will then progress to Aquarius which is also ruled
by Saturn. This indicates that up to approximately May 2024
the native will experience all those events which are indicated by
Saturn.
The native has already experienced the events of deaths of
Parents, birth of children, marriage and service as profession,
and could travel abroad. Let us see does Saturn promise all this?
Saturn has PS and appears in 1 , 2, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 and 11. It is in
the sub of Rahu that appears in 2, 5, 6, 7, 10, 11, and 12. Rahu
represents Mars through Ketu that is placed in 3 with PS. Thus
we find Saturn is linked with all the 12 houses directly or indirectly
and justifies the execution of all events.

Chapter 5: Advanced Technique of Birth Time Rectification 317
Verification of Events:
Marriage: The native got married on 19. 11. 1999 when she
was running the period of Moon-Rahu-Sun-Saturn-Mars. All these
planets are linked with 5, 7 and 1 1 .
Dasa Lord Moon has PS and appears in 5 and 7. It’is in the
sub of Venus that is the sub sub lord of 5. Moon is in Venus star
Venus sub and Mercury SS. We may say that Moon is in Venus
star (5) and Mercury sub that is placed in 1 1 with PS. Similarly we
can check that Bhukti, Antara and Sookshma lord justify the
enactment of the event.
It can be verified that transit of planets on that date support
the event. Let us take the case of Moon. Moon was transiting on
that date in Jupiter-Saturn-Rahu-Mercury.
Jupiter in the natal chart is in Moon star (5 and 7) and in
Mercury sub (1 1 ). Saturn in the Natal chart is in Rahu star Rahu
sub (5, 7 and 11) and Mercury SS (11). Rahu is the sub lord of 7.
It is in Ketu star (5) and Mars sub 11. Mercury is placed in 1 1 with
PS. It is in Venus sub that is the sub sub lord of 5.
Similarly we can verify the transit of other planets.
Verification of the event of Marriage from Progressed
Chart: Figure 5.18 represents the Progressed chart on the day
of Marriage.

Your True Horoscope
Fig. 5.18 Progression on 19.11.1999 at 23 hrs
Rashi Chart Bhava Chart

Chapter 5: Advanced Technique of Birth Time Rectification
Fig. S.ISContd..
Planetary Position
Cuspal Position

Your True Horoscope
We notice that the Progressed ascendant is co-ruled by the
planets Saturn-Rahu-Saturn-Saturn. We have already discussed
above that Saturn and Rahu allows the enactment of the event
of marriage in the natal chart.
Let us study the progressed chart independently. The event
of Marriage happened when Moon was progressing in Moon ~
Rahu-Sun-Saturn-Mars. In the Progressed chart Moon is the sub
sub lord of 7th cusp. It is in Rahu sub that appears in 5. Rahu the
Bhukti lord is in Sun star (7 and 11) and in Rahu sub (5). Sun the
Antara lord is in Sun star (7 and 11) and Mercury sub (5 and 11).
Sookshama lord Saturn has PS and is the sub lord of 7 and is
placed in 5. Saturn is in the star of Jupiter that is the sub sub lord
of 1 1 . It is in Venus sub that does not negate 5 and 1 1 . Prana
lord Mars is in Sun star (7 and 11) and in Jupiter sub that is the
sub sub lord of 1 1 . •
Thus we find Progressed chart justifies the event of marriage.
Death of Father: The native lost her father on 19.12.1991
at about 01.30 hrs. She was at that time running the period of
Sun-Moon-Venus-Saturn-Sun.

Chapter 5: Advanced Technique of Birth Time Rectification 321
Dasa Lord Sun is a co-ruling planet in the ascendant. It is in
Ketu star that represents Mercury the sub sub lord of the 4th
cusp (8th from 9). Sun is in the sub of Saturn that is the sub lord
of 9. Sun is in the SS of Mercury that appears in 4. Thus the Dasa
lord meets all the conditions of a Markesh Dasa.
Bhukti lord Moon has PS and appears in 9. Moon is in Venus
star and Venus sub and Mercury SS. We may Say that Mercury
takes the role of sub lord. Thus Moon in 9 and Mercury is the sub
sub lord of 3 & 4 that is the Badhaka & 8th for father.
Antara lord Venus, Sookshma lord Saturn and Prana lord
Sun are all significators of father's death.
On the date of father's death Saturn was transiting in SaturnMoon-Moon-Mercury. Saturn is in Rahu star Rahu sub. Rahu
represents Mercury through Ketu. Mercury is the sub sub lord of
4 (8th from 9). Saturn signifies death of father. Moon is the Bhukti
lord. Mercury has PS. It is in the sub of Venus that appears in 10
(2nd from 9th). Thus we find that Mercury is linked with Maraka
and Badhaka house and justifies the death of father. ■
We can notice that death of father took place when Moon
was transiting in Sun star that meets all the conditions for father's
death as stated above.
We can anlyse the progressed chart of the event. Figure
5.19 represents the progressed chart.

Your True Horoscope
Name Fig 5.19 Place Amarjain
Hospital1
Lonqitude 75-49-15-E Latitude 26-55-17-N
Sidereal Time 14-35-19 Date 25/12/1973
Day Tuesday Geocentric Latitude 26-45-59-N
Nakshatra P.Ashadha-1 Qtr. Time 08:48:02
Lunar Nodes True Tithi Shukla Paksha -
Pratipada
Time Zone +5:30:0 DST 00:00
Ayanamsa 23-28-56 House System Placidus
Rashi Chart Bhava Chart

Chapter 5: Advanced Technique of Birth Time Rectification
Fig. 5.19 Contd.,
Planetary Position
Cuspal Position

Your True Horoscope
The event of death of father happened when Moon was
progressing in Sun-Moon-Venus-Sat-Sun.
Dasa and Prana lord is Sun that is a co-ruling planet in 7
which is Badhaka for 9.Sun is in Venus st^r that appears in 4 and
9. Sun is in Mercury sub that appears in 8 that is 1 2th from 9. It
can be seen that Sun is significatorof Maraka and Badhaka houses.
Bhukti lord Moon is in Sun star (7th Badhaka house for 9)
and sub of Moon that is the sub sub lord of 9. Thus Moon satisfies
all conditions to cause death of father.
Antara lord Venus is in Rahu star that appears in 4 and 9. It
is in the sub of Saturn that is the sub sub lord of 4.
Sookshma lord Saturn is the sub sub lord of 4. It is in Venus
SS that assumes the role of sub lord because Saturn is in Jupiter
star and Jupiter sub. Venus appears in 9. Thus Saturn justifies its
role of causing death of father.
Thus the analysis of progressed chart confirms the
enactment of the event.
Event of Joining First Job: A native joins first job in the
joint period of significators of houses 2, 6 and 10 when transit
and progressed ascendant allows the event to happen. It is stated
by the native that she joined the first job on 01 .06.1 997. On this
date the native was running the period of Moon-Moon-RahuVenus-Mars.

Chapter 5: Advanced Technique of Birth Time Rectification 325
Dasa and Bhukti lord Moon has PS and SSL of 2. Moon is in
Venus star and Venus sub and Mercury SS. Venus appears in 10
and Mercury appears in 6 and 1 1 .
Antara lord Rahu represents Jupiter, Ketu, Mars and Mercury.
Jupiter is in Moon star (sub sub lord of 2) and sub of Mercury (6
Shooksma lord Venus is in Moon star (2) and Saturn sub
that is the sub sub lord of 10.
Prana lord Mars is in Ketu star that represents Mercury (6
and 11), and in sub of Rahu (2, 6 and 10). Since Rahu also
appears in 5 this indicates that the job is of temporary nature.
It can be seen that on that date Moon was transiting in
Jupiter Sign and Mercury star. Jupiter is in Moon star (2) and
Mercury sub (6 and 1 1 ) and Saturn SS that is the sub sub lord of
10 and star lord of 1 1 . Mercury is in Ketu star that represents
Mercury (6 and 11). Mercury is in the sub of Venus that is the
sign lord of 10.
It can be verified that transit supports the event. Let us see
if the Progressed ascendant allows the event or not. On this date
the Progressed ascendant was co-ruled by Sat-Rahu-JupiterJupiter. All these planets signify 2, 6 and 10.
Let us study the Progressed chart at the time of the
happening of the Event. Figure 5.20 represents the Progressed
chart.

Your True Horoscope
Rashi Chart Bhava Chart

Chapter 5: Advanced Technique of Birth Time Rectification
Fig. 5.20 Contd.,
Planetary Position
Cuspal Position

Your True Horoscope
Dasa and Bhukti lord Moon in the Progressed chart is in Moon
star and Moon sub and Rahu SS. Moon appears in 6 and Rahu is
the sub sub lord of 2 as well as 10.
Antara lord Rahu has PS (exchange of Nakshatra with Venus).
It is the sub sub lord of 2 as well as 1 0. Rahu is in the sub of Ketu
that represents Jupiter and Mercury. Mercury appears in 2, 6
and 10.
Thus we see that the Progressed chart clearly justifies the
event. Even transit as seen in Progressed chart also supports
the event.
The discussion indicates that the chart can be taken as the
true chart of the native.
Example 5: A Person provided the following data to one of
my students with a request to get a true horoscope.
D.O.B: 14.08.1969, T.O.B: 05.30 hrs. (From memory of
mother), P.O.B: Ajmer, Rajasthan, India.
Genitical Connections:
Moon stars of:
Father: Ketu , Mother: Sun/Moon, Elder Sister: Jupiter, Wife:
Mars, First Daughter: Saturn, Second Daughter: Moon, Third
Daughter: Jupiter

Chapter 5: Advanced Technique of Birth Time Rectification 329
Significant Events:
Marriage: 25.01 .2000
First daughter: 11.04.2001 at 10 hrs.
Second Daughter: 14.07.2005 at 02:55 hrs
Third daughter: 04.04.2008
Profession: Heart Specialist
Married life is disturbed.
The student Astrologer took up the job of rectification on
15.07.2011 at 08.08.14 hrs at Noida. The ruling planets at that
time were as follows:
RP (Ascendant): Sun-Ketu-Ketu-Saturn-Mercury-Saturn
RP (Moon): Ju piter- Ve n us-Ketu -Ra h u -Sa t- M ercu ry
On that day Rahu represented Mars and Mercury. Ketu
represented Venus and Mars.
The chart was rectified by the student following step by step
procedure as illustrated in the advanced theory of Birth Time
Rectification as stated above.
The chart was cast as per the given data. It was noticed by
him that Sun's and Moon's position matches with the ruling
planets.
This meant that the chart only needs to be corrected for
the correct position of sub and sub sub lords of the ascendant
and other cuspal positions to ensure matching of genetical
connections and promise of various aspects of life.
The chart was fixed by the student at 05.29.58 hrs. Figure
5.21 is the rectified chart.

Your True Horoscope
Fig. 5.21 Natal Chart

Chapter 5: Advanced Technique of Birth Time Rectification
Pig. 5.21 Contd.
Planetary Position
Cuspal Position

Your True Horoscope
Verification of the rectified chart:
Accuracy of Sun, Moon and Ascendant Positions: It
can be verified that planets co-ruling Sun, Moon and ascendant
are linked with 1, 7 and 10. It may be remembered that it is
not a must that planets should be related to 1, 7 and 10
all simultaneously. Planets may be related to 1 and 7, 7
and 10 like that.
The native's Moon star is Ketu that is in Sun star. Since Sun
is placed in the ascendant it justifies the linkage of the Moon's
star with the SS of the ascendant. Remember planets placed
in a Bhava acts as virtual sub sub lords of that Bhava.
Genetical Connections:
It is stated that the Moon star of the mother could be Sun
or Moon. In the chart we find sub sub lord of 4th cusp is Moon.
Fifth cusp sub sub lord is Mars that is in Saturn star which is
the Moon star of the first daughter.
Moon star of wife is Mars that is in Saturn star the sub sub
lord of 7th cusp. Moon star of the second daughter is Moon that
is in Rahu sub. Since Rahu represents Saturn that is the sub sub
lord of the 7th cusp we say it justifies the Moon star of the second
daughter.
Moon star of elder sister is Jupiter. Sub sub lord of 1 1 th cusp
is Rahu that represents Jupiter. More over Venus is placed in the
ll^Bhava. Venus is in Rahu star that represents Jupiter.
Moon star of Father is Ketu. The sub sub lord of 9th cusp is
Saturn that is in the SS of Ketu.

Chapter 5: Advanced Technique of Birth Time Rectification 333
Promise of Aspects of Life:
Marriage: Sub sub lord of ascendant is Venus that is in
Rahu star (sub sub lord of 1 1 ) and sub of Moon (star lord of 7
and 11). Sub sub lord of 7th cusp is Saturn that is in Venus star
and Venus sub and Ketu SS. We may say that Saturn is in Venus
star (placed in 11) and Ketu sub (sub lord of 5). Thus the chart
promises marriage.
Promise of Disturbed Married Life: The sub sub lord of
the 7th cusp Saturn in addition to its linkages with 11 and 5 also is
strongly linked with 2, 4, 10 and 6. This accounts for disturbance
in marriage life.
Birth of Children: Sub sub lord of 5th cusp is Mars that has
PS. It is in the sub of Jupiter that is the sub sub lord of the
second cusp. This indicates that the native has the procreative
power to produce children.
Since Mars is in Saturn star that is the sign as well as the sub
sub lord of the 7th cusp it indicates that the native can have
more than one child.
Promise of Education: Moon is the sub sub lord of the 4th
cusp. It is in Ketu star that appears in 8 (serious diseases). Mars
has PS and is placed in 4th house and will act as virtual sub sub
lord of the 4* cusp. Mars is in Saturn star that is the sub sub lord
of the 9th cusp and is also placed in the 9th house. This promises
higher education.
Promise of Profession as Heart Specialist: 5th cusp
(Heart) sub sub lord is Mars that is in Saturn star which is the sub
sub lord of the 10th cusp.
Promise of Execution of Events and Progression: The
natal chart sub sub lords of ascendant and the relevant cusp

Your True Horoscope
declares the promise of various aspects of life but it is the
progressed position of the Ascendant that declares the destined
time of the execution of the promised event.
The native took birth in Cancer ascendant. Around
23.10.1982 the ascendant enters in Leo Sign and would remain
in Leo till around April, 2011. During the period ascendant
progressed in Leo the native got married, produced three children
and got higher education. This could happen only if in the chart
Sun is linked to those houses which are capable of enacting these
events.
Sun in the chart is in Mercury star (1, 2, 3, 5, 7, 11, and 12)
and Jupiter sub (2, 6, 9, and 12). Sun promises the execution of
marriage (5, 7 and 11); disturbance in marriage (7, 2 and 6);
birth of first daughter (2, 5 and 11); birth of second daughter
(2, 7 and 11); birth of third daughter (2, 9 and 11); higher
education (11 and 9).
Verification of Events:
Marriage: The native got married on 25.01.2000 when he
was running the period of Moon-Moon-Venus-Saturn-Rahu.
Dasa and Bhukti lord Moon is in Ketu star (2, 5) and Rahu
sub (1 1 ). It is in the SS of Mars (5). This shows that Moon is not
a very strong significator of marriage.
Antara lord Venus is in Rahu star (11) and sub of Moon (7).
Venus is in the SS of Mercury (5, 7 and 11).
Sookshama Lord Saturn is the sub sub lord of 7 and is in
Venus star and Ketu sub. When a planet is in the star and
sub of the same planet we treat it as a case of bunching
and treat the planet as if it is in the star of that planet and

Chapters: Advanced Technique of Birth Time Rectification
the sub sub lord of the planet takes upon the role of sub
as well as SS.
Venus is placed in 1 1 and Ketu is the sub lord of 5.
Prana lord Rahu represents Saturn and as stated above allows
the marriage event to be enacted.
Figure 5.22 represents the transit position of Planets on the
day of marriage.
Figure 5.22 Transit chart 25.01 .2000 at 23 hrs.
Planetary Position
It can be verified that transit supports the enactment of the
event. Let us verify the transit position of Jupiter. The planets
co-ruling the transit position of Jupiter are Mars-Ketu-Sun-Saturn.
Mars is in Saturn star that is the sub sub lord of 7. Mars is in the
sub of Jupiter that is in 6, 9 and 12. Thus transit of Jupiter in
Aries also hints that the chart needs rectification.
Verification of the event of Marriage from Progressed
Chart: Figure 5.23 represents the Progressed chart on the day
of Marriage.

Your True Horoscope
Fig. 5.23 Progress on 25.01.2000 at 23 hrs

Chapter 5: Advanced Technique of Birth Time Rectification
Fig. 5.23 Contd.
Planetary Position
Cuspal Position

Your True Horoscope
We notice that the Progressed ascendant is co-ruled by the
planets Sun-Venus-Jupiter -Jupiter. We have already discussed
above that Sun allows the enactment of the event of marriage in
the natal chart. Venus in the natal chart is placed in 1 1 . It is in
Rahu star that is sub sub lord of 1 1 . It is in the sub of Moon that
appears in 7. Venus is in the SS of Mercury that appears in 5, 7
and 1 1 . Jupiter is in Moon star that appears in 7. Jupiter is in the
sub of Mars that is the sub sub lord of 5. Jupiter is in the SS of
Jupiter that is in 6, 9 and 1 2. Thus we notice that the progressed
position of ascendant on the date of marriage does not confirm
the accuracy of the chart without any doubt.
Let us study the progressed chart independently. Figure 5.23
represents the Progressed chart. The event of marriage
happened when Moon was progressing in Moon star and Moon
sub. In the Progressed chart Moon appears in 1 , 2, 6, 9, 10 and
12. None of these houses is a relevant house for the event of
marriage. This clearly indicates that the chart needs rectification.
The student Astrologer had an illusion that the chart fixed by
him using the theory of ruling planets is the true chart of the
native.
This case study has been presented to let the
Astrologers know that the use of ruling planets to fix a
correct horoscope requires that the astrologer should be
completely focused when he takes the job of rectification.
Ruling planets require deft handling by the astrologer.
Any lack of concentration can result in erroneous
rectification of the chart.
Let us discuss what mistake the student astrologer made in
following the step by step approach of rectification.
The student Astrologer should have noticed that the given
time of birth is out of memory and the true birth time may not

Chapter 5: Advanced Technique of Birth Time Rectification 339
be very close to it. Venus the Sookshma lord of Sun starts at
05.06.16 hrsand ends at 05.32.11 hrs. After this the Sookshama
of Sun starts that is also a ruling planet. Sun Sookshma ends at
05.39.56 hrs. Thus the time of birth of the native could be
between 05.06.16 and 05.39.56 hrs. The student was advised
to re-fix the correct chart using the same ruling planets.
We need to remember that the chart is said to be
properly rectified if it justifies the happening of the events
not by Dasa period lords or transit but also by progressed
charts for the events.

Chapter 6
Rectification of
Birth Charts of Twins
A twin is one of two offspring produced in the same
pregnancy. Twins can either be identical (in scientific usage,
"monozygotic"), meaning that they develop from one zygote
that splits and forms two embryos, or fraternal ("dizygotic")
because they develop from two separate eggs that are fertilized
by two separate sperms. The twin birth rate is about 35 live
births per 1000. It becomes imperative for the Astrologers to fix
correct position of ascendant and other cuspal positions for
twins to ensure that the individual charts satisfy all conditions
which we have stated in earlier chapter under the title Advanced
techniques of rectification of Birth Chart. In addition we need to
look for special conditions that need to be satisfied for Twins charts.
These conditions are specified below.
Special Conditions for Twins Charts
One born a little earlier than the other is called elder twin and
the other born a little latter is called the younger one. The sub
sub lord of each chart should establish link with the Moon star
that is common for both. The sub sub lord of ascendant of both
may be different to indicate two different persons. Sub sub lord
of ascendant and SS arc of ascendant of each twin should indicate
the sex of the individual twin.

Chapter 6: Rectification of Birth Charts of Twins 341
The sub sub lord of the ascendant of the elder twin should
be linked with the third cusp to promise the birth of the younger
co-born. Similarly the sub sub lord of 1 1 th cusp should be linked
with ascendant to promise the birth of elder co-born.
In the chart of the elder co-born the sub sub lord of the 3rd
cusp should be linked with the planet that is the common Moon
star for the twins. Similarly the SSL of 11th cusp in the chart of
the younger twin should be linked with the planet that is the
common Moori star for both the twins.
We will explain the fixation of correct charts of twins through
following examples.
Note: Charts in the following examples are cast using
True astrology Software version 4.0.3 using Khullar
(hourly) Ayanamsa.
Example 1 :
"I am one of twins born 5 minutes after my elder sister", said
very intelligent and dedicated student of Astrology. The Astrologer
was interested in getting his chart rectified using KCIL birth time
rectification technique. He furnished details as below:
Find below my details
Self: (Twin-2)
DOB- 30 April 1978, TOB-ll.OOA.M (1ST), POB- Madurai
Education:
Bachelor of Engineering in Electronics and Instrumentation
(1995-1999), MB4 in Marketing and IT management (20062008), Diploma in Sanskrit

Your True Horoscope
Profession:
1 . First Job started as a T rainee Engineer in MNC (tea factory) :
2. Second job as Software Engineer (trainee): 07 Mar 2001 to
06 Apr 2002 (resigned)
3. Third job started carrier as Maintenance Engineer in Riyadh
(food related factory manufacturer of cheese, chocolate and
butter): 25 April 2002 till now.
4. Did export business in India with my friends during 2004 to
2005. It was going good, difficult to manage from foreign
countries so we closed.
Marriage: Was celebrated on 21 March 2011 in the
morning.
Foreign journeys: 24 Apr 2002 - 9.30 A.M (Mumbai Airport
to Riyadh), Bahrain crossing border at night (from Dammam
50E6, 26N25 -3.00 East GMT) on 01 Nov 2005, Singapore and
Malaysia tour (from Chennai) (I forget the date 5 or 6) on 05/06
Operations: Hernia operation 26 Jun 2006 at Riyadh at
around afternoon, next day my mother's elder sister died.
Elder sister: (Twin-1)
DOB: 30 April 1978, TOB: 10.55 A.M (1ST), POB: Madurai
Education :
Bachelor of commerce: 1995-1998, MBA: 1998-2000.

Chapter 6: Rectification of Birth Charts of Twins 343
Profession:
She worked as a college lecturer. Now she is working in ERP
Solution (I don't know the date of joining of post etc.)
Marriage: 13.12.2007
Common for Twin 1 &Twin 2:
Genetical connection:
Moon Stars of:
Mother- Moon, Father- Saturn, Younger sister- Rahu
Father's Death: On 22 April 2001 in Erode (around
This case study appeared as rectification exercise on
Astrology Research forum on 19.12.2008. On 28.12.2008 Mr.
A, a very capable astrologer fixed the following time of births for
the twins. He followed step by step instructions of BTR using CIL
principles.
Twin-1 TOB = 10:56:08. At this time, in ascendant, Gemini
sign is rising at 26-1 9-20.
Twin-2 TOB = 11:02:35. At this time, in ascendant, Gemini
sign is rising at 27-47-53.
Twin 2 who is an astrologer of repute raised the following
doubts:
1 . In twin 2 chart, 4th SSL is Venus and it in star of Sun. Father's
death took place in Mercury star. Here Mercury is in Mercury
star. Venus and Sun are not relating to Mercury. Am I correct?
2. Similarly in twin lchart, 4th SSL is Ketu and it denotes Jup
and Sat, Mercury is not relating?

Your True Horoscope
3. In twin 2 chart, 10th cusp SSL is Venus who is in star of Sun
that appears in cusps 3,5,6,7,10,11,12. Cheese
Manufacturing is dairy related so it should link 4th house.
Here it is not relating and also food relating so may be it also
involves 2nd cups.
Please clarify, if any other way we have to analyze. Your
input will facilitate me to learn CIL fast.
To this Mr A replied as follows:
"Mr. Khullar has clearly mentioned in his books that the death
of a person happens when Sun and Moon in transit appears in
the Star of a planet which should either bear relationship with 8th
SSL or its Star Lord. He has also made it clear that the Star lord
on the day of death could be a planet which signifies 1 and 8 with
respect to 9th Cusp/House (for father). In both charts (Twin 1 &
2) Mercury is in Mercury Star which appears in 4th and 9th Cusp.
Thus the Moon's Star Lord on the day of death of father is as per
the principle enunciated by Mr. Khullar.
Regarding profession please note that the 1 0th SSL Venus
has PS (Venus in Sun Star and Sun in Venus Star - Exchange on
Star Level). Venus is also the 4th SSL which means native's area
of work may be related to manufacturing unit. Dairy products
are generally related to 6th House (already given in his books).
Thus, the chart fully justifies the profession also.
However in February 2011 twin 2 informed the author that
he is going to celebrate his marriage on 21.03.2011. Author
looked into the chart and found that the event is not justified by
the time fixed by CIL follower. It necessitated fixing the correct
chart for twin 2 using the advanced techniques of rectification as
illustrated in Chapter V.
Figure 6.1 represents the rectified chart. The astrological birth
time is fixed as 1 1 .02.07 hrs,

Your True Horoscope
Fig. 6.1 Contd..
Planetary Position
Cuspal Position

Chapter 6: Rectification of Birth Charts of Twins 347
Verification of the accuracy of the chart:
Accuracy of Sun, Moon, and Ascendant: The Planets
co-ruling the positions of Sun, Moon, and Ascendant justify the
necessary conditions of linkages with cusps 1 , 7 and 10.
Jupiter is the sub sub lord of the ascendant. It is in Rahu star
that represents Moon which is the Moon Star of the native. Male
sign rises on the ascendant and sub sub arc of the sub sub lord
of the ascendant is in the first half. This justifies the sex of the
native.
Promise of Elder Twin: Sub sub lord of 11th cusp is
Mercury. Mercury is in Mercury star. Mercury appears in the
ascendant. This satisfies the necessary condition. Sub sub lord
of 1 1 th cusp also establishes the relationship with the common
Moon star of the twins because Mercury is in the sub of Moon.
Promise of Aspects of Life:
Marriage: Sub sub lord of ascendant and 7th cusp is Jupiter
that has PS. Jupiter is the star lord of 5 and sub sub lord of 7.
Jupiter is in own sub. Jupiter is in Rahu star that represents
Mercury and Moon. Moon is the sub lord of 7. Mercury is the sub
sub lord of 1 1 . Jupiter is in Jupiter sub which appears in 5 and 7.
Thus the chart promises marriage.
Since the sub sub lord of 7th cusp Jupiter is in Rahu star that
represents Mercury we may say that Jupiter is in Mercury star
that also appears as the star lord of 6 in addition to its appearance
as the sub sub lord of the 1 1 . Jupiter is in Jupiter sub which also
appears in 4, 10 and 12. These linkages of sub sub lord of the 7m
cusp accounts for the delayed marriage.

Your True Horoscope
Genitical Connections: Moon star of mother is Moon that
is in the sub of Venus which is the sub sub lord of the 4th cusp.
Saturn is the Moon star of father, Saturn is in Ketu star that is
placed in 9th cusp. Rahu is placed in the 3rd Bhava and it represents
the Moon star of the younger sister.
Promise of Younger Sister: Jupiter the sub sub lord of
ascendant is in Rahu star which is placed in 3rd cusp. This satisfies
the necessary condition.
Promise of Educational Status: We notice that the 3rd
cusp sub sub lord is Sun which is strongly linked with the sub sub
lord of the 4th cusp. Third cusp signifies electronics and
instrumentation. MBA is signified by the 7th cusp. Sub sub lord of
the 7th cusp is Jupiter that is strongly linked wjth the 9th cusp.
Thus the chart justifies the educational prospects of the native.
The readers may feel that the sub sub lord of the 4th cusp is not
promising higher education. Incidentally if we use True Astrology
software version 5 we will notice that the SSSS level of 9th cusp is
also ruled by Venus that has PS.
Since the 5th cusp sub sub lord Rahu is in Moon star that is
the sub sub lord of the 9th cusp it justifies natives learning the
subject of astrology.
Area of Concentration of Professional Activities: Sub
sub lord of 10th cusp is Venus that has PS. Notice that Venus is
the sub sub lord of 4 (manufacturing unit) and also the sub sub
lord of 6 (food items). Thus the chart justifies his profession.
Since Venus is also the sub sub lord of the 1 2th cusp it promises
that the work place may be in a foreign country.

Chapter 6: Rectification of Birth Charts of Twins 349
Promise for Foreign Travels: Sub sub lord of ascendant
is Jupiter that is linked with 3, 9 and 1 2. This justifies the native's
foreign journeys.
Promise of Hernia Operation: Sub sub lord of the 8th
cusp is Saturn that has PS. It is also the sub lord of the 6th cusp.
Thus the native is bound to have problems in the lower abdominal
region.
Verification of Events:
Marriage of the native: The native celebrated his marriage
on 21 .03.201 1 . On the day of marriage the native was running
the period of Jup-Mer-Mars-Jup-Moon. Dasa and Sooksma lord
is Jupiter which is a strong significator of marriage as stated above.
Bhukti lord Mercury is the sub sub lord of 1 1. Mercury is in Mercury
star and Moon sub and Moon sub sub. Moon is the sub lord of 7th
cusp. Moon is also placed in 7 with PS. Antara lord Mars has PS
and appears in 1 1 . Mars is in the sub of Rahu that is the sub sub
lord of the 5th cusp. Since Rahu represents Moon, Mars is
considered to be in the sub of Moon which appears in 7.Mars is in
the sub sub of Ketu which represents Jupiter (5 and 7). Prana
lord Moon is placed in 7 with PS. It is in the sub of Venus that
appears in 5 and 1 1 .
Thus the Dasa period lords justify the happening of the event
of marriage.
Figure 6.2 represents the transit position of planets on the
day of marriage.

Your True Horoscope
Planetary Position
Moon on the day of Marriage was transiting in Mer-MarsRahu. All these Planets are strong significators of the event of
Marriage. Similarly we can verify the transit of other Planets.
Figure 6.3 represents the progressed chart on the day of
marriage. We can notice that the progressed ascendant was co
ruled by planets Moon-Mer-Moon-Moon. Both Moon and Mercury
are strong significators of the event of marriage in the natal chart.
Let us study the progressed chart independently.

Your True Horoscope
Fig. 6.3 Contd..
Planetary Position
Cuspal Position

Chapter 6: Rectification of Birth Charts of Twins 353
The event of marriage happened when Moon was
progressing in Jup-Mer-Mars-Jup-Moon.
Jupiter in the progressed chart is in Saturn star and Saturn
sub and Rahu sub sub. Saturn appears in 7 and Rahu is the sub
sub lord of 5 and 1 1 . Mercury is in the star of Venus that is placed
in 1 1 and is the sub lord of 7. Mercury is in Mercury sub that is the
sub sub lord of 7 and star lord of 5. Mars is in Venus star (7 and
11) and Moon sub (star lord of 7). Moon has PS in the progressed
chart. It is the star lord of 7. Moon is in the sub of Mercury that
appears in 5 and 7.
Thus we notice that the progressed chart confirms that the
event of marriage has taken place as destined.
Marriage of Elder Twin (1 ) : The event of marriage of elder
twin took place on 13.12.2007 when the native was running the
period of Jup-Sat-Mer-Mer-Jup. Let us see whether the chart of
twin 2 promises the execution of the marriage of elder twin or
not.
Figure 6.4 represents the native's rotated chart with respect
to the 1 1 th cusp.

Your True Horoscope
Fig. 6.4 Rotated chart with respect to 11th Cusp as
Ascendant

Chapter 6: Rectification of Birth Charts of Twins
Fig. 6.4 Contd..
Planetary Position
Cuspal Position

Your True Horoscope
Dasa lord and Prana lord Jupiter has PS and signifies 7 and
1 1 . Jupiter is in Rahu star that is the sub sub lord of the 7* cusp
and resident of 5th cusp. Jupiter is in Jupiter sub that appears in
7 and 1 1 . Bhukti lord Saturn is in Ketu star and Ketu Sub and
Venus sub sub. Ketu is placed in 1 1 and Venus appears in 5 and
7. Antara and Sookshma lord Mercury is in Mercury star (5 and
11) .It is in the sub of Moon that is the sub sub lord of 1 1 . Since
the sub sub lord of 7th cusp is Rahu that represents Mercury we
feel that Mercury fully justifies the enactment of the event of
marriage of the elder twin.
We can study the progressed chart on the day of the event.
Figure 6.5 represents the rotated progressed chart starting with
11th cusp.

Chapter 6: Rectification of Birth Charts of Twins
Fig. 6.5-Progress chart of 13.12.2007 at 10 hrs.
Name Fiq 6.5 Place Madurai
Lonqitude 78-7-50-E Latitude 9-56-8-N
Sidereal Time 01-15-53 Date 30/4/1978
Day Sunday Geocentric Latitude 09-52-13-N
Nakshatra Shravana-4 Qtc Time 11:02:07
Lunar Nodes T rue Tithi Krishna Paksha -
Asthami
Time Zone +5:30:0 DST 00:00
Ayanamsa 1 23-32-35 House System Placidus

Your True Horoscope
Fig. 6.5 Contd..
Planetary Position
Cuspal Position

Chapter 6: Rectification of Birth Charts of Twins 359
The event happened when Moon was progressing in JupSat-Mer-Mer-Jup. It can be verified that all these planets are
significators of the event of marriage.
Death of Father: The native lost his father on 22.04.2001
at 10 hrs. Death took place in the town Erode in Tamil Nadu,
India. On this day native was running the period of Rahu-VenusSat-Jup-Sun. Figure 6.6 represents the rotated chart starting
with 9m cusp.

Your True Horoscope
Fig. 6.6 Rotated chart of 9th Cusp as Ascendent

Chapter 6: Rectification of Birth Charts of Twins
Fig. 6.6 Contd.,
Planetary Position
Cuspal Position

Your True Horoscope
Dasa lord Rahu represents Mercury and Moon those are
appearing in the ascendant of father. Rahu is also the sub sub
lord of 9th cusp in the rotated chart. Ninth cusp is Badhaka for
father. Eighth cusp sub sub lord is Venus. Rahu as Moon is in the
sub of Venus. Thus we may say that Dasa lord establishes
relationship with the sub sub lord of 8th cusp. Rahu is in Moon
star that is the sub sub lord of father's ascendant. Rahu is in
Rahu sub and sub sub. Rahu is the sub sub lord of Badhaka.
Thus we notice that Dasa lord satisfies all conditions to be the
right Markesh Dasa. Bhukti lord Venus is in Sun star (7 and 9
Badhaka) and sub of Venus (2 and 8).
Similarly we can verify that all Dasa period lord planets signify
the event of death of father.
On the day of death Moon was transiting in Jup-Mer-VenusSat. We may notice that Jup, Venus and Sat appear in Dasa
period which caused death of father. Mercury is in Mercury star
(1 and 8) and in Moon sub (sub sub lord of ascendant).
On the day of death the progressed ascendant was co-ruled
by planets Moon-Sat-Rahu-Moon. Figure 6.7 represents the
progressed chart.

Your True Horoscope
Fig. 6.7 Contd..
Planetary Position
Cuspal Position

Chapter 6: Rectification of Birth Charts of Twins 365
In the natal chart Moon is in Moon Star (sub sub lord of
ascendant of father) and Venus sub that is the sub sub lord of 8th
cusp. Saturn is in Ketu star ketu sub and Venus sub sub. Ketu is
placed in ascendant of father and Venus is the sub sub lord of 8th
cusp. Rahu is in Moon Star (sub sub lord of ascendant) and Rahu
sub that is the sub sub lord of Badhaka. Thus we find that planets
co-ruling the progressed ascendant are strong significators of
father's death.
We can study the progressed chart independently. The
event of death of father happened when Moon was progressing
in Rahu-Venus-Sat-Jup-Sun.
Dasa lord Rahu in the progressed chart is the sub sub lord
of 8th cusp. It is in Rahu star and Saturn sub. Rahu appears in 1 ,
7(Badhaka), 8. Saturn appears in 1 and 7. Thus we see that
Dasa lord is a very strong significator of death of father. It satisfies
all the conditions for Markesh Dasa. Similarly we can check that
all Dasa period planets signify death houses.
Death took place in Mercury star. Sub sub lord of 8th cusp in
the progressed chart is Rahu that represents Venus. Since Rahu
is placed in Badhaka house we can assume that Venus is placed
in Badhaka. Mercury is in Venus star and Mars sub. Mars appears
From the above discussion we may say that the astrological
birth time of the native has been correctly fixed.
Example 2: A learned Astrologer approached the author
with the given data and requested for a correct chart as per
KCIL theory of birth time rectification.
Male
DOB: 08 March 1946

Your True Horoscope
POB: Mathura (UP), India. Long 77:41 :48E, Lat 27:28:21 N
Life events
1. The twin sister born after 45 minutes of native's birth died
within three months of birth
4. Promotion in service 01.07.1972
5. First child (female) 25.1 1 .1 971 at 1245 hrs. Delhi
6. Daughter's marriage 18.01.1998
7. Second Daughter 08.11.1974 at 09.30 hrs.
8. Death of Father 20.04.2003 at about 03.30 hrs,
9. Death of Mother 29.11.2008 at about 14.30 hrs,
Moon star of:
1. Wife- Ket
2. 1 st daughter Mars
3. 2nd Daughter Sun
4. 3rd daughter Flahu
5. Younger sister(Twin) Sun
Figure 6.8. Shows the chart of the native cast as per given
data. Let us first check the accuracy of the chart.

Chapter 6: Rectification of Birth Charts of Twins
Fig. 6.8 Natal chart at 17.30 hrs

Your True Horoscope
Fig. 6.8 Contd.,
Planetary Position
Cuspal Position

Chapter 6: Rectification of Birth Charts of Twins 369
Accuracy of Ascendant: Saturn is the sub sub lord of the
ascendant and the Moon star of the native is Sun. There is a
relationship between Sun and Saturn because both are in the
same star Jupiter.
Genitical Connections: Sub sub lord of the 7th cusp is Venus
that is in Jupiter star. Moon's star lord of wife is Ketu that
represents Jupiter. Sub sub lord of the 5th cusp is Moon that
does not establish any relationship with the Moon's star lord of
the first daughter. Similarly we notice that the sub sub lord of the
7th cusp is Venus that does not establish any relation with the
Moon star of the second daughter which is Sun. Thus the chart
needs rectification.
Promise for younger twin : Sub sub lord of the ascendant
is Saturn that is in Jupiter star which appears as sub lord of third
cusp. The chart thus satisfies the necessary condition for the
birth of the younger co-born.
Moon Star of Twin Sister: The sub sub lord of the 3rd
cusp is Rahu that represents Mercury and Mars. Rahu itself does
not establish any relationship with Sun the Moon star of the
younger co-born. But we can always replace the sub sub lord of
a cusp in case of Rahu or Ketu by the planets it represents for
the purpose of studying promise. Thus we can assume that 3rd
cusp's sub sub lord is Mercury. Sun is in Jupiter star and Mercury
sub. Thus the 3rd cusps lord establishes relationship with the
common Moon star of the twins.

Your True Horoscope
Verification of Promises:
Marriage: Sub sub lord of ascendant is Saturn that is in
Jupiter star and Mercury sub. Jupiter appears in 5 and Mercury
appears in 7Thusthe ascendant promises marriage. 7th sub sub
lord is Venus that has PS and appears in 7 and 5.Venus is in the
sub of Rahu that appears in 7 and 1 1 . Thus the chart promises
marriage.
The native got married on 08.12.1970 when the ascendant
was progressing in Virgo ruled by Mercury. Marriage could happen
only if Mercury in the natal chart is linked with relevant cusps 5, 7
and 1 1 . Mercury in the natal chart is in Saturn star and Mars
sub. Saturn appears in 7 and 1 1 . Mars appears in 1 1 . Thus the
progressed position of ascendant allows the event to happen.
First child (female): Sub sub lord of 5 is Moon. Moon is in
the SS of Saturn that is placed in male Sign Gemini. More over
the SS arc of Moon is in first half and male sign rises on the 5th
cusp. This promises a male child. Thus this also indicates that the
chart needs rectification.
Promise of Death Events: The native lost his mother on
29.11.2008 when the progressed ascendant was in Libra ruled
by Venus. If the native had to experience a death event when
the progressed ascendant sign lord is Venus then the following
two conditions should exist in the natal chart:

Chapter 6: Rectification of Birth Charts of Twins 371
Venus should be linked with 12 (loss) and 8 (death).
Venus should be a co ruling planet in the 8th cusp with respect
to concerned relative and should be a significator of death of the
concerned relation.
In the chart Venus has PS and appears in 8 as well as in 12.
Venus is in the sub of Rahu that appears in 12. Thus the chart
satisfies the first condition. The second condition is not satisfied
because Venus does not appear in 1 1 th cusp even up to SSSS
level. 1 1 th cusp is 8th from 4.
Thus the chart needs rectification.
Native lost his mother when he was running Dasa period of
Sat-Ketu-Rahu. Dasa lord Saturn is in Jupiter star and Mercury
sub. As such Saturn does not appear to have the power to inflict
death of mother. This also shows that the chart needs rectification.
From the above analysis it was decided that this cannot be
the correct chart of the native.
Let us study the chart at time 18.05hrs. Analysis of this chart
indicated that this chart needs micro rectification. Figure 6.9
represents the rectified chart. This chart is cast using the True
Astrology software version 5 which provides the position of planets
and cusps up to SSSS level. The analysis of the chart for various
events is limited to the SS level but fixing the positions of cusp
for promise use of SSS and SSSS positions have been accepted.

Your True Horoscope
Fig 6.9 time 1 8.05.21 hrs. Version 5

Chapter 6: Rectification of Birth Charts of Twins
Fig. 6.9 Contd.,
Planetary Position
Cuspal Position

Your True Horoscope
Let us verify the Accuracy of the Chart.
Accuracy of Sun, Moon and Ascendant: It can be seen
that the planets co-ruling the positions of Sun, Moon and
ascendant relates to the cusps 1, 7 and 10. Sub sub lord of
ascendant is Venus that appears to establish no connection with
the Moon star Sun as per the conditions stated in the earlier part
of this book. However it is experienced that the two planets are
said to be related if they are in the same star. In this chart we
note that Sun is in Jupiter star and Venus is also in Jupiter star.
More over Sun appears in the SSS level in the ascendant and
Jupiter appears in the SSSS level.
Promise of younger twin: Sub sub lord of ascendant is
Venus that has PS. Venus also appears in the 3rd house. This
satisfies the necessary condition for the birth of the younger
twin.
Sub sub lord of the 3rd cusp is Mercury that is the sub lord of
Moon's star lord Sun. Thus the condition that the sub sub lord of
the 3rd cusp should establish link with the common Moon star is
also satisfied.
Genetical Connections: It can be verified that the sub sub
lord of 5, 7, and 9 establish relationship with the Moon star of first
child, second child, wife and third child.

Chapter 6: Rectification of Birth Charts of Twins 375
Promise of Aspects of Life:
Marriage: Sub sub lord of ascendant and 7th cusp is Venus
that has PS and is placed in 7. Venus also appears in 5. Thus
Venus signifies 5 and 7. Venus is in the sub of Rahu that represents
Mercury that appears in 7 and 1 1 . Venus is in Jupiter star that
appears in 5, 7 & 1 1 . Venus is in the SS of Venus that as stated
above appears in 5 and 7. Thus the chart promises the aspect of
marriage.
Birth of Children: Sub sub lord of 5th cusp is Saturn that
is in Jupiter star (2 and 5) and in Mercury sub (2 and 11). This
shows that the native has the necessary procreative power and
can produce children.
Since Saturn's star lord Jupiter appears in 7 also this indicates
that the native is promised more than one, child.
Birth of First Child as Female: We have.stated that there
is no foolproof method to determine the sex of a child. However
we feel that the following two rules if used judicially give fairly
correct results. These rules are:
SS arc of the sub sub lord of the fifth cusp (in male charts)
decide the sex of the child as per its placement in relevant half. If
male sign rises on the 5th cusp then the first half indicates male
child. If the female sign rises on the 5m cusp then first half indicates
the female child.
If the sub sub lord of the sub sub lord of the 5th cusp is
placed in male sign it indicates male child. If it is placed in female
sign it indicates female child.

Your True Horoscope
In this chart SS arc of the sub sub lord of the 5th cusp is in
first half. Since male sign rises on the 5th cusp it would lead the
astrologer to think that the first child should have been male.
Sub sub lord of the 5th cusp is Saturn that is in the SS of
Rahu that represents Mercury. Rahu itself is placed in male sign.
If we look at the Rashi chart we notice that there are only two
planets Mercury and Venus that are placed in female signs. We
know that the planet Rahu tries to align itself with the planets it
represents if those planets appear in the preceding position. Here
Saturn is in the sub of Mercury that is represented by Rahu.
Thus we may say that Saturn is in the sub and SS of Mercury
that is placed in female sign. This accounts for the birth of the
female child.
Promise of Execution of Events and Progression: The
natal chart sub sub lords of ascendant and the relevant cusp
declares the promise of various aspects of life but it is the
progressed position of the ascendant that declares the destined
time of the execution of the promised event.
The native was born in Leo ascendant. Progressed ascendant
will remain Leo till about 15.02.1956 and then it enters in Virgo. It
would have remained in Virgo up to 15.02.1974. According to
the concept of progression of ascendant, native could experience
all those events which are promised by Mercury as per its
signification in the natal chart. During ascendant's progression in
Virgo native experienced the death of father, marriage, joined
first job. Let us see that Mercury in the natal chart promises
these events or not.
Mercury in the natal chart is in Saturn star (5, 6, 7, 8, 9 and
11) and Mars sub (4, 9, Hand 12. Mercury has PS and it appears
in 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 10, and 12. Mercury signifies 2, 5 and II. This
promises birth of first child.

Chapter 6: Rectification of Birth Charts of Twins 377
Linkages with 8 and 12 promises death experience, 5, 7 and
11 (marriage) and 2, 6 and 10 (joining Job).
After 15.02.1974 the native's ascendant progresses to
Cancer sign. During the period ascendant progresses in Cancer
sign the native will experience all that is promised by the
significations of Moon in the natal chart.
Verification of Events:
. Birth of First daughter: The native was blessed with first
daughter on 25.11.1971 when he was running Dasa period of
Rahu-Jupiter-Mercury-Mercury-Venus.
Dasa lord Rahu is in Mars star that is placed in 1 1 . Rahu is in
the sub and sub sub of Venus that appears in 2 and 5.
Bhukti lord Jupiter is in Mars star and Venus sub. As stated
above Mars appears in 1 1 and Venus appears in 2 and 5. Jupiter
is in the sub sub of Moon that appears in 2.
Antara and Sooksshma lord Mercury is in Saturn star (2 and
5) and in Mars sub (placed in 1 1 with PS). Mercury is in the sub
sub of Saturn (2 and 5).
Prana lord Venus that has PS and signifies 2 and 5 by PS. It
is in the sub of Rahu that represents Mercury and Mars. Mercury
appears in 2 and 1 1 .
Venus is in Jupiter star that appears in 2, 5 and 1 1 . Thus at
stellar level also Venus justifies the enactment of the event.
Fig 6.10 represents the transit position of Planets on that
day.

Your True Horoscope
Fig 6.10 Transit Chart 25.11.1971
Delhi
Shukla Paksha -
Asthami
Placidus
Rashi Chart Bhava Chart

Chapter 6: Rectification of Birth Charts of Twins 379
Moon was transiting in Sat-Mars-Venus-Jupiter-Sun-Sun. We
have seen above that Jupiter and Venus signifies the relevant
houses for the event. Sun in the natal chart is in Jupiter star (2,
5 and 11) and in Mercury sub (2 and II). Saturn is in Jupiter star
(2, 5 and 11) and Mercury sub (2 and 11). Mars is in Jupiter star
(2, 5 and 11) and Saturn sub (5 and 1 1 ). Thus transit of Moon
fully supports the event. Similarly we can verify that transit of
other Planets agree with the event.
Figure 6.11 represents the progressed chart for the event
of birth of first daughter.

Your True Horoscope
Rashi Chart Bhava Chart

Chapter 6: Rectification of Birth Charts of Twins
Fig. 6.11 Contd.,
Planetary Position
Cuspal Position
It can be seen that on 25.11.1971 progressed ascendant
was co-ruled by Planets Mercury-Mars-Rahu-Sun. We have seen
above that all these Planets are strong signif.^ators of the event
of birth of first daughter.

Your True Horoscope
Let us study the progresses chart of the event independently.
Dasa lord Rahu is in Jupiter star (placed in 2) and Mercury
sub (2, 5, and 11) and in Moon sub-sub (11).
Bhukti lord Jupiter is in Jupiter star (placed in 2) and Mercury
sub (2, 5, and 1 1 ) and in Rahu sub sub that represents Mercury
and Jupiter.
Antara and Sookshma lord Mercury is Ketu star that
represents Jupiter. Thus Mercury is as good as in Jupiter star
(placed in 2). Mercury is in the sub of Mars that appears in 5.
Prana lord Venus is in Mercury star (sub lord of 2, sub sub
lord of 5 and 1 1 ). Venus is in the sub of Venus that is the sub sub
lord of 2. Venus is in the sub sub of Mercury (2, 5 and 11).
Thus we see that the analysis of progressed chart fully
confirms the execution of the event of birth of first daughter.
Death of Father: The native lost his father on 20.04.2003
at 03.30 hrs when he was running the Dasa period of Sat-SatMer-Jup-Ven.
Potential of Dasa and Bhukti Lord Saturn: Saturn
appears as sub sub lord of the ascendant of father. Ketu is placed
in the 8th Bhava with respect to 9th cusp. Ketu represents Jupiter.
Saturn is in Jupiter star (8 and sub lord of Badhaka for 9) and in
the sub of Mercury that is the SSS of ascendant of father. Saturn
is in the sub sub of Rahu that is the sub sub lord of 8 with respect
to 9. Thus the Dasa lord satisfies the necessary conditions to
cause death of father.
Antara lord Mercury is in Saturn star (sub sub lord of father's
ascendant and sign lord of Badhaka) and Mars sub that appears
in 1 and 8. Mercury is in the sub sub of Saturn that appears in
Badhaka and 12 from father's ascendant.

Chapter 6: Rectification of Birth Charts of Twins 383
Sookshma lord Jupiter is in Mars star (1 and 8 with respect
to 9) and Venus sub (sub lord of 8 and sub sub lord of Badhaka
with respect to 9). Jupiter is in the sub sub of Moon that appears
in 2 and 7 with respect to 9.
Prana lord Venus is in the star of Jupiter that appears in
Badhaka. It is in the sub of Rahu that appears in the ascendant
and 8th cusp of the father. It can be seen that Venus has PS and
strongly signifies the houses of death with respect to 9.
Thus we find that Dasa potential justifies the death of father.
It may be noted that on the day of death of father Saturn was
transiting in Mer-Mars-Mer-Mars. Mercury is a co-ruling planet in
the 8th cusp from 9th. Sub sub lord of 8th cusp from 9th is Rahu
that represents Mercury. We have seen above that Mercury has
the power to inflict death of father. Thus transit of Saturn fully
supports the event.
Figure 6.12 represents the progressed chart of the event of
death of father. We notice that the progressed ascendant is coruled by planets Ven-Jup-Ketu-Sat. All these planets are strong
significators of death of father. Let us study the progressed chart
independently.

Your True Horoscope.
Fig. 6.12 Progress on 20.04.2003

Chapter 6: Rectifica tion of Birth Charts of T wins
Fig. 6.12 Contd..
Planetary Position
Cuspal Position

Your True Horoscope
Dasa and Bhukti lord Saturn: We notice that Ketu that
represents Saturn is placed in the 8th Bhava with respect to 9.
Sub sub lord of 8th cusp with respect to 9 is Rahu that represents
Moon. Since Moon is in Saturn star we feel that the Dasa lord is
related to the sub sub lord of the 8th cusp. Saturn is in Venus star
(1 ) and sub of Sun in 7 (Badhaka tor 9). Saturn is in the sub sub
of Mercury (8). Thus Saturn justifies the necessary conditions to
cause the death of father.
Antara lord Mercury is in Moon star that is placed in the
ascendant of father and is also the sub lord of 7 with respect to
9. It is in the sub of Mars that appears in 7, 12, and 8 with respect
to 9. Mercury is in the sub sub of Jupiter that is the sub sub lord
of 7 with respect to 9.
Sookshma Lord Jupiter is in Mercury star (1 and 8 with
respect to 9) and in the sub of Saturn that appears in 8 with
respect to 9.
Prana Lord Venus is in Venus star (1 with respect to 9) and
Saturn sub that appears in 8 with respect to 9. Venus is in the
sub sub of Mercury that appears in 8 with respect to 9.
Thus the progressed chart confirms the execution of the
event of death of father.
Heart attack and Angioplasty: The native suffered a mild
heart attack on 30.11.2010 around 19 hrs. He had to undergo
angioplasty on 01.12.2010 around 61 30 hrs. It may be noted
that the native was running the period of Sat-Ven-Jup-Jup-Sat

Chapter 6: Rectification of Birth Charts of Twins 387
Jupiter is a co-ruling Planet in the 5th cusp (heart). It is in
Mars star that is placed in 1 1 (circulatory system) and sub of
Venus that appears in 6 (disease). Mars is also the sub sub lord of
12* cusp (hospitalisation).
Prana Lord Saturn is the sub sub lord of the 5th cusp (Heart)
and also sub sub lord of 8 (surgery). Saturn is in Jupiter star (5,
8) and in the sub of Mercury that is the sub lord of 8 and star
lord of 12. Thus we find Antara, Sookshma and Prana lord justifies
the event.
At the time of heart attack Moon was transiting in Mercury
sign, Sun star, Mercury sub and Saturn sub sub. All these Planets
are related to the houses that are capable to cause the heart
disease.
At the time of surgery Moon was transiting in Moon star,
Moon sub and Rahu sub sub. In the chart Moon appears in 6
(minor surgery) and 12 (hospitalization). Moon in the chart has
PS. Thus we will treat Moon to be in Moon star, Moon Sub and
Venus sub sub. Applying the principle of bunching we will say
Moon is in Moon star and Venus sub that is the star lord of 5.
Thus transit of Moon justifies surgery,
Figure 6.13 represents the progressed chart of the event of
surgery. Let us study it independently.

Your True Horoscope
Fig 6.13 Progress on 01.12.2010 at01.30 hrs
Rashi Chart Bhava Chart

Chapter 6: Rectifica tion of Birth Charts of T wins
Fig. 6.13Contd.,
Planetary Position
Cuspal Position

Your True Horoscope
Prana lord Saturn is in Venus star that is placed in 6. It is in
the sub of Jupiter that appears in 1 and 5 and 12. Thus we find
that progressed chart also confirms the execution of the event.
From the above discussion we can say that the chart cast
as per time of birth 18.05.21 hrs is the true chart of the native.
Example 3: An interesting case study was provided on Nov
22, 2008 by Mr Ron Gaunt the administrator of Astrology
Research Forum.
"The First of our Interesting Charts (ICs) is the case of female
twins born at 6:25 am and 8:00 am 28 March 1869 near Bath in
England. The co-ordinates for Bath are 51N23 002W22 and the
TZis UT 00:00.
On 1 May 1889 these twin sisters went out driving. As the
bit slipped between the horse's teeth one of the sisters decided
to adjust it. The horse bolted when she removed the head piece,
and she was killed instantly.
Which sister, the younger or the elder, do you think was
killed and why"?
Ron Gaunt
On Nov 23, 2008 the author wrote," The chart can be
rectified by setting the ascendant to satisfy necessary conditions.
The chart should promise short life and also unnatural death.
Third cusp SSL in case of elder twin should also establish link with
the Moon star which in this case is Moon.
Dasa potential and transit clearly helps to arrive at the answer
On death day Moon and Sun star needs to be related to the SSL
of the 8th cusp".

Chapter 6: Rectification of Birth Charts of Twins 391
It was observed by the author that some members were
not feeling confidant in fixing the correct charts of the twin sisters.
On Nov24, 2008 the author wrote," I have tried to rectify the
charts of twin sisters. The Astrological Birth time and ascendant
degrees are indicated below:
Elder Twin: TOB 06.23.56 hrs with ascendant Pisces
29.32.03(Khullar Ayanamsa).
Younger Twin TOB: 08.00.21 hrs with ascendant Taurus
Please note that I have used Latitude of Bath as 51 N23 05".
Using the rectified charts some members provided correct
answer. Oh Nov26, 2008 Mr Ron Gaunt wrote, "This was a great
start to our 'Interesting Charts' Section. Congratulations to all
that got the correct answer, which was that it was the younger
twin that died. I suspect Mr Khullar made it easier after he posted
rectifications for both charts. It shows that even with minimum
data, that it is possible to get good rectification".
Let us try to verify the accuracy of the Charts using the
concepts of Advanced Techniques of BTR.
Figure 6.14 represents the rectified chart of elder twin. The
chart was cast using Khullar Ayanamsa.

Your True Horoscope
T

Chapter 6: Rectification of Birth Charts of Twins
Fig. 6.14 Contd.
Planetary Position
Cuspal Position
Accuracy of the Positions of Sun, Moon and
Ascendant: It can be verified that the planets co-ruling the

Your True Horoscope
positions of Sun, Moon and ascendant are related to 1 , 7 and
10. Sub sub lord of ascendant is Rahu that represents Moon and
Mercury. We can always replace the sub sub lord of a cusp in
case of Rahu or Ketu by the planets it represents when we are
checking the promise of some aspect of life from that cusp. We
can thus assume that Moon is the sub sub lord of ascendant.
Thus the sub sub lord of ascendant establishes relationship with
the Moon's star lord which is Moon.
Promise of Younger co-born: Sub sub lord of ascendant
is Rahu that has PS. It is in the sub of Mars that appears in 3. Sub
sub lord of 3rd cusp is Venus. Moon the star lord of Moon is in the
sub of Venus. Thus 3rd sub sub lord establishes relationship with
the common Moon star Lord.
Promise of Longevity: Short, medium or long life of the
native is declared by analyzing the relationship which the 1 , 3
and 8 houses sub sub lords make with Maraka and
Badhakasthana.
Short Life (i.e. up to 33 Years): If the sub sub lords of 1 ,
3 and 8 houses become the fruitful significators of 2nd and 7th
and Badhaka house the life of the native is short.
Long Life (beyond 66 Years): If the sub sub lords of 1, 3
and 8 houses become significators of 1, 3, 5, 8, 9 (not for fixed
ascendant's), and 11 (notfor Moveable ascendants), the native
is destined to live long.
Medium Span of Life (i.e. between 33 to 66 years): If
the SS lords of 1 , 3 and 8 houses become significators of both
Maraka houses as well as houses of Longevity, the native is
destined to have medium span of life.
In this chart we find that sub sub lord of ascendant is Rahu
that is in Mercury star that appears in 1,4, 5, 7,9, 11 and 12.
Rahu is in the sub of Mars that appears in 3, 7, 8 & 9. It is placed

Chapter 6: Rectification of Birth Charts of Twins 395
in 5 but it has no PS. Thus the sob sub lord does not promise
shortlife.
Promise of Unnatural Death: For unnatural death the
following conditions should exist in the chart.
1 . Eighth Cusp sub sub lord should be significator of 8th and
12th house.
2. Eighth cusp sub sub lord and its star lord should be in cardinal
and violent signs Aries, Taurus, Scorpio, Leo, Sagittarius or
Capricorn.
3. Ascendant sub sub lord should also be connected with 8
and 12 houses to promise unnatural death.
Sub sub lord of 8th cusp in this chart is Sun that is in Pisces
which is not a violent sign. However Sun is in Saturn star that is
placed in Scorpio which is a violent sign. Saturn appears in 1 , 8
and 12. Thus 8th sub sub lord does indicate the possibility of
unnatural death.
Let us see what is promised by the sub sub lord of ascendant.
Fiahu is in Mercury star which is placed in 12 and Rahu is in the
sub of Mars that appears in 8.
We may say that the chart does promise unnatural death.
But the native cannot meet death on 01 .05.1889 because chart
does not promise short life. More over on that date the native
was running Dasa of Rahu that represents Moon. Rahu Dasa
becomes Markesh only if Rahu as Rahu and the planets which
Rahu represents simultaneously show the power to inflict death.
Here Moon has no power to cause the death of the native.
This indicates the accuracy of the chart because the elder
twin did not meet death on 01.05.1889.
Figure 6.15 represents the chart of the younger twin. Let us
check the accuracy of this chart.

Your True Horoscope
Cusp Chart
T

Chapter 6: Rectification of Birth Charts of Twins
Fig. 6.1SContd.,
Planetary Position
Cuspal Position

Your True Horoscope
Accuracy of Sun, Moon and Ascendant: It can be
verified that planets co ruling the positions of Sun, Moon and
ascendant satisfies the necessary conditions. Sub sub lord of
ascendant is Rahu that represents Moon. Thus the sub sub lord
of ascendant establishes relationship with the Moon's star lord.
1 1 th cusp sub sub lord is Rahu that represents Moon. Thus
the sub sub lord of 1 1 th cusp establishes relationship with the
common Moon star lord of twins.
Rahu has PS. As such sub sub lord of 1 1 th cusp is linked with
the ascendant. This promises birth of younger co born.
Promise of Longevity: Sub sub lord of ascendant is Rahu
that is in, Mercury star. Mercury appears as sub sub lord of 9
(Badhaka) and Sign lord of 2 Maraka). Rahu is in the sub of Mars
that appears in 7 (Maraka). Thus the sub sub lord of ascendant is
a fruitful significator of Maraka and Badhaka houses.
Sub sub lord of 3rd and 8th cusp is Venus that has PS. Venus
appears in 2, 7 and 9. Venus is in the sub of Saturn and SS of
Mars. Both Saturn and Mars appear in 7 and 2. Thus Venus is a
fruitful significator of Maraka and Badhaka houses.
Above discussion clearly reveals that the native's life span is
short.
Promise of unnatural Death: Sub sub lord of 8m cusp is
Venus that is placed in Pisces but Venus is in Saturn star that is
placed in violent sign Scorpio. Venus has PS and as such it signifies
8.1t is in the sub of Saturn that appears in 12. Thus 8m sub sub
lord indicates the possibility of unnatural death.
Note: Kindly note as stated above Rahu the dasa lord along
with the planet which Rahu represents (Moon & Mercury) in this
case should simultaneously show the power to inflict death. Here
Rahu does not operate 8th cusp.

Chapter 6: Rectification of Birth Charts of Twins 399
Sub sub lord of ascendant is Rahu that represents Mercury
and Moon. It may be observed that both Rahu and Mercury
signify 12 and Moon strongly signify 1 and 8. This not only
indicates unnatural death but also points out that the native
himself may become cause of her death.
Verification of the Event of Death: The native died on
01.05.1889 in the morning when she was running Dasa period
of Rahu-Venus-Venus-Mercury-Verius. All these planets have the
potential to cause the death of the native. It is worth noting that
the Prana lord is Venus that is the sub sub lord of the 8th cusp.
Thus it accounts for unnatural death as discussed above.
Let us check whether the progressed chart confirms the
event or not. Figure 6.16 represents the progressed chart for
the event of death.

Your True Horoscope
Fig. 6.16 Progress on 01.05.1889

Chapter 6: Rectification of Birth Charts of Twins
Fig. 6.16 Contd.,
Planetary Position
Cuspal Position
The native's death took place when Moon was progressing
in Rahu-Vens-Venus-Mercury-Venus.

Your True Horoscope"
Rahu in the progressed chart is in Venus star that is the star
lord of 8. Rahu is in the sub of Moon that is the sub sub lord of 1.'
Rahu is in the SS of Jupiter that is sub sub lord of 8 and star lord
of 2 and Sign lord of 7.
Venus is in the star of Mercury that appears in 1 . Venus is in
the sub of Ketu that is sub sub lord of 7 (Badhaka) and sub lord
Mercury is in the star of Saturn that is placed in 7 (Maraka
and Badhaka) and sub of Mercury that appears in 1 and 2.
Thus we find that the event is confirmed by the analysis of
progressed chart.
We may say that the chart was correctly rectified.

Index

Your True Horoscope
• Child birth, timing 242
• Child, born with defects 229,117
• Child, geniture, connection to father 120,184
• Child geniture 149,184,242
• Child, second, seventh cusp 185
• Child, sex of 183
• Child, first daughter 115
• Child, second son 185
• Children, delayed 183
• Commerce, education subject 183
• Commits to 204
• Compatibility 166, 169
• Conception, element ruling decides sex 1 1
• Correct Horoscope, conditions for 112
• Cusp, link not shown and negated, exception to 158
• Cusp, signification, negation of 131
• Cusps, linking influence of 183
• Cusps, natal Moon and events 98
• Cusps, not in relationship with dasa lords 21 1
• Dasa, at birth and body defects 232
• Dasa, fathers death 120
• Dasa lords, appearing in cusps 134, 183
• Dasa lords, not in relationship with cusps 210
• Dasa, planets in cusp positions 135
• Dasa, wife's death 121
• Daughter, birth of 115,155 148,185
• Death 135
• Death, after surgery 243
• Death, by burning 210

Index
• Death, cause of 135
• Death, dasa indications 135
• Death, mode and place 221
• Death, of father 121, 127
• Death, of wife 121
• Death, place 221
• Death, promise of 198
• Death, short life and sub sub lord of Ascendant links
with Maraka and Badhaka, etc. 1 31
• Death, short life, planets co-ruling eighth cusp or
Ascendant 135
• Death, unnatural 221
• Death, vehicle accident 221
• Defect, in body parts and house concerned 232
• Deformed, at birth 229
• Depression, and abnormal behavior 210 217
• Disease, blood 197
• Disease, cancer 1 97
• Disease, cuspal indications 204
• Disease, fatal & serious sickness 198 204
• Disease, kidney transplant 243
• Disease, promise 197
• Divorce, example of
• Divorce, promise 173, 175, 179
• Doubt, about date 58
• Doubt, about both date and time 78
• Doubt, about time 46
• Doubt, about' month and time 84
• Doubt, about morning or evening 52

Your True Horoscope

Index
• Life short 131,239
• Lifespan 210
• Life span, long 210
• Longevity 1 98
• Longevity, assessing 131
• Longevity, simultaneous linkages for 198
• Loss, of father 120
• Loss, of wife due to death 120
• Markesh Dasa, conditions 120
• Marriage, and bhukti lord 114
• Marriage compatibility shown in charts 166,169,173
• Marriage, dasa 114
• Marriage, dasa lords sub lord not appearing
in sixth cusp 183
• Marriage, delayed 185
• Marriage, event 149, 155, 185
• Marriage, matching two horoscopes 169
• Marriage, promise 127,141,153
• Marriage, second 128
• Marriage, seventh cusp links to partner's chart 250
• Marriage, sub lord negates 292
• Medicine, study of 221
• Mental, suffering 209
• Moon's, nodes in each others Stars 134
• Moon's star lord, and relationship with Ascendant
sub sub lord 112
• Mother, genital connection 102

Your True Horoscope
Nadi, rectification table 23
Operation, cataract 186
Operation, transit indications 194
Organ, transplant 242
Period lords, and positional status 115
Planet, committing to 204
Planet, in own star shows the promise 173
Planet, location of as house link 197, 220
Planets, relationship to cusps 184
Planets ruling 6th house do not indicate disease 204
Planets, what they represent 9, 10
Positional status, 186
Positional status, and period lords 115
Positional status, none 93
Pre Natal, Epoch Theory 33
Procreation, ability 148
Profession, dignified in sen/ice 140, 153
Profession, problems in 190
Professional, activities 154, 183, 190
Progressed chart, application 254
Progression, role 253
Promise, new concept 253
Promise, shown by planet in own Star 1 90
Rahu and Ketu, as star and sub lords 121
Rahu and Ketu, contrary indications 136
Rahu and Ketu, gives result of represented planets . 186
Rahu and Ketu, in dasas represents planet for linking 186
Rahu and Ketu, proxy for linking cusps 97
Rectification, by Ascendant lords 93, 97

Index
• Rectification, by houses sub sub lords 98
• Rectification, by Moon's star lord and house cusps 232
• Rectification, by ruling planets sub sub lord of Moon 123,
Rectification, composite approach 109
Rectifying, from father's (eighth) house 93
Rectifying, morning or evening? 52
Rectification, ofcuspal positions 100
Rectification, of cusps from relatives charts 100
Rectification, of date 58
Rectification, of date and time 78
Rectification, of month 84
Rectification, of year 64
Rectification, when time of birth is recorded
as correctly as possible 123
Rectified Chart, example of verification 127
Rectifying, time of birth 46, 123
Reputation loss of 141, 153
Retirement, from service 194
Ruling planets 43, 123
Ruling planets, and Construction of the Horoscope 43-90
Ruling planets, taken as if in stars or sub of
ruling planets 45
Second, marriage . 121, 128
Separation, of couple 174
Service, suspension of 143, 154
Sex, determination, at time of conception 31
Sex, of child, element ruling at conception 11

Your True Horoscope
